CORNELL 

UNIVERSITY 

LIBRARY 


Cornell  University 
Library 


The  original  of  this  book  is  in 
the  Cornell  University  Library. 

There  are  no  known  copyright  restrictions  in 
the  United  States  on  the  use  of  the  text. 


http://www.archive.org/details/cu31 9241 01 1 04895 


THE 


PULPIT    COMMENTARY, 


EDITED   BY  THE 

VERY   REV.  H.  D.  M.  SPENCE,  D.D., 

DEAN  OF  GLOUCESTER  ; 

AND   BY  THE 

REV.  JOSEPH  S.  EXELL,  M.A. 

WITH 

INTRODUCTIONS 

BY  THE 


VEN.  ARCHDEACON  F.  W.  FARRAR,  D.D.,  F.R.S.— RT.  REV.  H.  COTTERILL,  D.D.,  F.R.S  E. 

VERY  REV.  PRINCIPAL  J.  TULLOCH,  D.D.-REV.  CANON  G.  RAWLINSON,  M.A. 

REV.  A.  PLUMMER,  M.A.,  D.D. 


FUNK    &    WAGNALLS    COMPANY 
New  Yokk  anp  Toeonto, 


THE 


PULPIT    COMMENTARY 


EDITED   BY  THE 


VERY  llEY.  H.  1).  M.  SPENCE,  D.D., 


DEAN  OF  GLOUCESTTSR  : 


AND   BY  THE 


llEV.  JOSEPH    S.   EXELL,   M.A. 


I.    PETER. 

({Exposition  avib  f  omilctics : 
By   rev.    B.    C.    CAPFUN",    M.A., 

VICAR   OF  HOKTHALLERTON,    AND   RURAL  DEAN  ; 
LATE  FELLOW  AND  TUTOR  OF  WORCESTER  COLLEGE,   OXFORD. 

fomilies  b])  barioits  i^uthors: 

REV.  A.  MACLAREN,  D.D.  •  REV.  C.  NEW. 

REV.  PROF.  J.  R.  THOMSON,  M.A.  REV.  U.  R.  THOMAS. 

REV.  R.  FINLAYSON,  B.A. 


FUNK    &    WAGNALLS    COMPANY 
New  Yokk  and  Toronto. 


,' :(. 


THE 

FIEST  EPISTLE  GENEEAL  OP  PETEE. 

INTRODUCTION 


I.  Ar"HBimoiTT  OF  THi  Epibtu. 

Thebb  are  modem  writers  wh©  describe  the  teaching  of  this  Epistle  as  "  an 
insipid  Panlinism."  To  the  belie»«r  it  is  one  of  the  most  precious  parts  of 
Holy  Scripture.  It  is  characterized  hs  b,  depth  of  conviction,  a  vivid  reali- 
zation of  the  spiritual  blessings,  the  living  hope,  the  abiding  J07,  which 
spring  from  a  true  faith  in  Christ ;  by  a  firm  grasp  of  the  necessiiy  of 
reality  in  the  Christian  life,  of  resolute  self-denial  and  patient  obedience  ; 
by  a  deep  and  true  sympathy  with  suffering  Christians ;  by  a  steadfast  faith 
in  the  Lord's  atonement  and  the  power  and  preciousness  of  his  example  ;  by 
an  earnest  presentation  of  the  duties  of  humility,  brotherly  love,  endurance, 
trustfulness,  perseverance ;  by  a  calm  and  holy  wisdom,  worthy  of  the  first 
of  the  apostles,  worthy  of  him  to  whom  the  Lord  had  gpiven  the  signi- 
ficant name  of  Peter,  who  "  seemed  to  be  a  pillar  "  (Gal.  ii.  9)  of  t^  9  rising 
Ohuroh. 

1.  Internal  Evidence. 

The  writer  describes  himself  as  "  Peter,  an  apostle  of  Jesns  Christ."  The 
Epistle  itself  bears  witness  to  the  truth  of  the  superscription.  He  places 
the  great  word  "  elect  "  in  the  forefront  of  his  Epistle.  St.  Peter  had  heard 
that  word  three  times  from  the  Lord's  lips  in  the  solemn  prophecy  of  coming 
judgment  (Mark  xiii.  20,  22,  27).  He  was  present  when  Christ  pronounced 
his  blessing  on  those  who  had  not  seen,  but  yet  had  believed  (John  xz.  29)  ; 
he  almost  echoes  the  Saviour's  words  in  ch.  i.  8.  The  Lord  had  said,  "  Let 
your  loins  be  girded  about,  and  your  lights  burning ; "  St.  Peter  bids  us 
"  gird  up  the  loins  of  your  mind  "  (ch.  i.  13).  The  Lord  told  his  apostles 
that  he  came  "  to  give  his  life  a  ransom  for  many ;  "  St.  Peter  reminds  us 
"that  we  are  redeemed  .  .  .  with  the  precious  bi*J9d  of  Christ"  (ch.  i.  18). 
I.  raru.  t 


INTRODUCTION  TO 


The  description  of  Christ  in  ch.  i.  19  as  "  a  Lamb  -without  blemish  and  with- 
out  spot,"  reminds  us  that  Andrew,  Simon  Peter's  brother,  who  first  bronght 
him  to  Jesns,  was  one  of  those  two  disciples  of  John  the  Baptist  who  heard 
their  master  say,  "  Behold  the  Lamb  of  God  !  "  The  words  ayaXXiSiaOe  and 
wapaKvij/ai  in  ch.  i.  6  and  12  remind  ns  of  Matt.  y.  12  and  Luke  xxiv.  12. 
The  Lord  had  spoken  of  the  kingdom  prepared  from  "  the  foundation  of  the 
world  ; "  he  had  said,  "This  is  my  commandment,  that  ye  love  one  another ; " 
St.  Peter  repeats  his  Master's  words  in  ch.  i.  20,  22.  The  Lord  had  applied 
to  himself  the  words  of  the  hundred  and  eighteenth  psalm,  the  prophecy 
of  the  stone  which  the  builders  rejected ;  St.  Peter  quotes  the  same  psa^m 
in  ch.  ii.  7,  and,  as  if  his  thoughts  went  back  to  that  solemn  hour  when, 
immediately  after  his  great  confession,  he  incurred  through  his  mistaken 
affection  the  Lord's  severe  rebuke,  he  reproduces  the  word  which  was  then 
applied  to  himself,  a-KcivSaXov,  "  an  offence  "  (ch.  ii.  8).  The  Lord  had  told 
him  that  he  was  Peter,  a  stone ;  he  had  spoken  of  his  Church  which  he 
would  build  upon  the  rock  ;  St.  Peter  describes  all  Christ's  faithful  people 
as  "living  stones,  built  up  a  spiritual  bouse"  (ch.  ii.  5).  The  Lord  had 
spoken  of  "  the  day  of  visitation  "  of  Jerusalem  (Luke  xix.  44)  ;  St.  Peter 
echoes  his  words  in  ch.  ii.  12.  In  Mark  i.  25  and  iv.  39 — the  Gospel  which 
was  in  all  probability  written  under  St.  Peter's  direction — we  read  the 
remarkable  word  ipifjiovv  {<t>iii<a6r}Ti,  ire^t/uoo-o)  ;  the  apostle  uses  the  same  word 
in  ch.  ii.  15.  In  ch.  ii.  19  "  this  is  thankworthy  "  seems  an  echo  of  Luke 
vi.  32,  and  "  suffering  wrongfully  "  of  Matt.  v.  39.  The  Lord  had  said,"  Then 
are  the  children  free,"  and  yet  had  consented  to  pay  the  half-shekel  for  the 
service  of  the  temple,  in  accordance  with  St.  Peter's  promise ;  the  apostle 
teaches  that  Christians  are  free,  and  yet  that  they  should  submit  to  every 
ordinance  of  man  for  the  Lord's  sake.  He  had  seen  the  Lord  Jesus  gird 
himself  with  a  towel,  and  wash  the  apostles'  feet ;  he  bids  his  readers  gird 
themselves  with  humility,  to  tie  it  round  them  like  a  close-fitting  apron 
(ch.  V.  5).  The  Lord  bad  said  that  he  had  given  the  apostles  an  example 
(John  xiii.  15)  ;  he  had  again  and  again  bidden  them  to  come  after  him,  to  , 
follow  him ;  St.  Peter  tells  us  that  Christ  left  "  us  an  example,  that  ye 
should  follow  his  steps"  (ch.  ii.  21).  St.  Peter  may  have  seen  the  mocking 
and  the  scourging  when  the  disciple  whom  Jesus  loved  took  him  into  the 
high  priest's  hall ;  he  speaks  of  the  reviling  and  the  stripes,  using  a  remark- 
able word  (jxiakwtf/),  which  seems  to  picture  the  bloody  weals  rising  under 
the  cruel  lash.  In  ch.  ii.  25  he  speaks  of  "  sheep  going  astray,"  and  of  "  the 
Shepherd  of  your  souls,"  and  in  ch.  v.  4  of  the  chief  Shepherd,  as  if  the 
Lord's  words  in  Matt.  ix.  36  and  xviii.  12,  13,  and  the  precious  allegory  of 
the  Good  Shepherd  recorded  afterwards  by  St.  John,  were  still  fresh  in 
his  memory.  In  ch.  iii.  9,  14  we  seem  to  see  two  allusions  to  the  sermon 
on  the  mount  (comp.  Matt.  v.  39,  10).  The  Lord  had  dwelt  on  the  solemn 
warnings  of  the  Deluge  in  Matt.  xxiv.  37,  38 ;  St.  Peter  does  the  same  in 
ch.  iii.  20,  where  his  statement  that  only  "  few  were  saved  "  seems  also  a 
reminiscence  of  Luke  xiii.  23.    The  words,  "  as  good  stewards,"  in  ch.  iv.  10, 


THE  FIKST  EMSTLE  GENERAL  OF   PETER.  Ill 

bring  to  our  thoughts  Luke  xii.  42.  In  vers.  11,  13,  14  of  the  same  chapter 
we  again  see  three  allusions  to  the  Lord's  great  sermon  (comp.  Matt.  v.  16, 
12,  10)  ;  while  in  ver.  19,  where  the  apostle  bids  the  suffering  GhristianB 
to  commit  (iropaTi^eV^oxrav)  the  keeping  of  their  souls  to  God,  we  seem  to 
hear  the  Saviour's  dying  words,  "  Father,  into  thy  hands  I  commend  (irapa- 
xlOefLox)  my  spriit."  When  in  ch.  v.  2  St.  Peter  urged  the  presbyters  to 
"  feed  the  flock  of  God,"  he  must  have  had  in  his  thoughts  the  solemn 
words  addressed  to  himself  by  the  risen  Lord  (John  xxi.  16).  Ver.  3  of 
the  same  chapter,  "neither  as  being  lords  over  God's  heritage,"  reminds 
us  of  Matt.  XX.  25.  And  in  vers.  7,  8,  9  we  seem  to  see  reminiscences  of  the 
sermon  on  the  mount  (comp.  Matt.  vi.  25,  28  ;  v.  25 ;  and  vii.  25). 

These  and  other  similar  coincidences  with  the  Lord's  words  as  reported  in 
the  Gospels  are  so  simple  and  unaffected,  they  seem  to  come  so  naturally 
to  the  writer's  tViougbts,  that  we  are  led  at  once  to  infer  that  that  writer 
must  be  one  who,  like  St.  John,  could  declare  to  others  that  which  he  had 
heard,  which  he  had  seen  with  his  eyes.  Some  of  them  point  in  an  especial 
manner  to  the  Apostle  St.  Peter  as  the  writer  of  the  Epistle.  The  argument 
is  strengthened  by  the  resemblances  which  exist  between  the  language  and 
teaching  of  the  Epistle  and  the  speeches  of  St.  Peter  recorded  in  the  Acts 
of  the  Apostles.  The  first  of  those  speeches  begins  with  a  reference  to 
prophecy  (Acts  i.  16)  ;  the  great  Pentecostal  sermon  in  Acts  ii.  is  full  of 
prophecy  ;  so  is  the  speech  in  Solomon's  porch,  reported  in  Acts  iii. ;  in  Acts 
X.  43  St.  Peter  ag^in  refers  to  the  witness  of  the  prophets.  This  constant 
appeal  to  prophecy  comes  naturally  from  the  mouth  of  the  apostle  who  took 
the  view  of  Old  Testament  prophecy  which  we  have  in  ch.  i.  10—12  of  our 
Epistle.  In  ver.  17  of  the  same  chapter  St.  Peter  warns  his  readers  that 
God  judgeth  according  to  every  man's  work  without  respect  of  persons ;  he 
had  said  long  before  when  he  received  Cornelius  the  centurion  into  the 
Christian  Church,  "Of  a  truth  I  perceive  that  God  is  no  respecter  of 
persons  "  (Acts  x.  34).  In  ver.  20  the  word  "  foreknown  "  (7rpoeyv(i)a-iJi,evov) 
recalls  the  expression  used  by  St.  Peter  on  the  great  Day  of  Pentecost,  "  The 
determinate  counsel  and  foreknowledge  (ir/ooyvuo-et)  of  God  "  (Acts  ii.  23). 
And  in  the  latter  part  of  the  same  verse  the  words,  "  in  these  last  times," 
remind  us  of  "  the  last  days,"  St.  Peter's  variation  of  the  Prophet  Joel's 
words,  in  Acts  ii.  17.  la  vers.  3,  21,  as  also  in  ch.  iii.  21,  St.  Peter  dwells  on 
the  resurrection  of  Christ  as  he  had  done  in  his  speeches  (Acts  ii.  32 — 36 ; 
ui.  15 ;  iv.  10).  In  ch.  ii.  4  he  quotes  Ps.  cxviii. ;  he  had  used  tho  same 
quotation  in  his  speech  before  the  Sanhedrin  (Acts  iv.  11).  The  words, 
"  whereunto  also  they  were  appointed,"  of  ch.  ii.  8  remind  us  somewhat  of 
Acts  i.  16.  The  precept,  "  Honour  all  men,"  of  ch.  ii.  17,  finds  a  parallel  in 
Acts  X.  28.  The  somewhat  uncommon  word  o-KoXidg,  used  in  ch.  ii.  18, 
occurs  also  in  St.  Peter's  speech  (Acts  ii.  40).  In  the  same  chapter  (ver. 
24)  St.  Peter  speaks  of  the  cross  as  the  tree  (to  ivXov) ;  he  had  done  so  in 
two  of  his  speeches  (Acts  v.  30;  x.  39).  Ch.  iii.  18,  where  he  insists  on  the 
righteousness  of  Christ,  brings  to  our  thoughts  his  words  in  Acts  iii.  14.     In 


k»  INTEODtJOTlON  TO 


oh.  iy.  5  the  words,  "  to  judge  the  quick  and  the  dead,"  remind  us  of  Acta 
X.  42.  In  ch.  T.  1  he  descrihes  himself  as  a  witness  of  the  life  and  death  of 
Christ,  as  he  had  done  in  Acts  iii.  15  and  x.  41.  He  uses  the  word  kA.'^pos  in 
oh.  V.  3  and  also  in  Acts  i.  17;  viii.  21.  The  words  "  exhorting  and  testify- 
ing," in  ch.  V.  12,  remind  us  of  the  description  of  St.  Peter's  addresses  in 
Acts  ii.  40.  St.  Peter  described  the  Law  as  a  yoke  "  which  neither  our 
fathers  nor  we  were  able  to  bear "  (Acts  xv.  10)  ;  we  notice  that  he  never 
mentions  the  Law  in  his  Epistles.  There  is  also  a  general  resemblance  in 
style  between  the  speeches  and  the  Epistles. 

St.  Peter's  style  is  such  as  we  might  expect,  full  of  vivacity,  testifying  to 
a  sta:ong  character,  warm  affections,  and  a  deep  assured  conviction.  But  in 
the  Epistle  the  original  impetuosity  and  self-confidence  of  the  apostle  is 
seen  softened  by  years,  by  the  lessons  of  experience,  by  sustained  effort  to 
follow  the  example  of  the  Saviour  whom  he  loved  so  dearly,  by  the  gracious 
help  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  given,  as  it  always  is  given,  in  answer  to  faithful 
prayer.  He  speaks  with  the  authority  of  an  apostle,  but  with  the  gentle- 
ness of  one  who  knew  the  power  of  temptation  and  the  difSculty  of  stead- 
fastness, with  the  humility  of  one  who  well  remembered  how  he  himself 
had  fallen.  His  words  are  forcible,  but  simple ;  he  has  no  trains  of  reasoning, 
nothing  of  the  subtle  logic  of  St.  Paul,  bat  goes  straight  to  the  point.  On 
the  other  hand,  his  style  is  less  sententious  than  that  of  St.  James;  his 
sentences  are  connected  by  relatives  or  particles ;  in  particular  the  particle 
As  is  of  very  common  occurrence;  the  frequent  use  of  the  participle  in 
an  imperative  sentence  should  also  be  noticed  (see  especially  ch.  ii.  18; 
iii.  1,  7,  9,  16;  iv.  8).  He  has  a  few  leading  thoughts,  which  be  enforces 
again  and  again  with  intense  earnestness.  His  whole  mind  is  evidently 
filled  with  recollections  of  the  Old  Testament;  he  uses  its  words  con- 
stantly; often,  it  seems,  almost  unconsciously,  without  marks  of  quotation — 
he  has  by  long  study  so  assimilated  the  sacred  words  that  they  have  become 
the  natural  expression  of  his  thoughts. 

2.  External  Evidence. 

The  external  evidence  for  the  authenticity  of  the  Epistle  is  veiy  strong. 
The  Second  Epistle  is  allowed,  even  by  those  who  question  its  Petrine  author- 
ship, to  be  a  writing  of  the  second  century,  and  it  bears  witness  to  the  First. 

The  earliest  Christian  writers  were  not  accustomed  to  quote  the  books  of 
the  New  Testament  by  name,  or  to  reproduce  the  words  with  exactness. 
Hence  we  do  not  expect  to  find  formal  quotations  of  our  Epistle  in  the 
apostolic  Fathers.  But  in  Clement  of  Rome  there  are  more  than  fifteen 
references  to  it ;  some  clear  and  certain,  such  as  "  his  marvellous  light;" 
others  less  marked.  In  Polycarp's '  Epistle  to  the  Philippians  '  (and  Polycarp 
was  bishop  of  one  of  the  Churches  addressed  by  St.  Peter)  there  are  so 
many  undoubted  quotations  from  this  Epistle  that  the  modem  assailant/S 
of  its  authenticity  have  no  resource  but  to  attack  (without  any  sufficient 


THE   FIRST  BPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  PETER. 


grounds)  the  gennineness  of  Polyoarp's  epistle.  Eueebins  tells  ns  that  the 
Epistle  was  nsed  by  Papias.  There  are  manifest  traces  of  it  in  the '  Shepherd ' 
of  Hermas,  in  Jnstin  Martyr,  and  Theophilus  of  Antiooh.  Irenasua,  Clement 
of  Alexandria,  and  Tertallian  quote  it  expressly,  often  by  name.  Origen  refers 
to  it  frequently,  and  says  expressly  that  it  was  accepted  by  all  as  genuine. 
Eusebina  places  it  among  those  canonical  Scriptures  which  are  universally 
acknowledged.  It  is  contained  in  the  Peschito  and  the  Old  Latin  rersions. 
The  Muratorian  Canon  mentions  only  an  Apocalypse  of  Peter,  "  which  some 
will  not  have  read  in  the  Church."  But  that  document  is  so  fragmentary 
that  little  weight  can  be  attached  to  its  omission  of  St.  Peter's  Epistles. 

The  genuineness  of  the  Epistle  has  been  questioned  by  certain  modem 
critics,  as  Eichhom,  De  Wette,  Baur,  Schwegler,  Hilgenfeld,  etc.,  chiefly  on 
the  following  grounds :  (1)  Its  resemblance  to  the  Epistles  of  St.  Panl ;  (2) 
its  Supposed  want  of  originality ;  (3)  because  the  description  of  the  persecn* 
tions  is  regarded  as  indicating  a  later  date ;  (4)  the  supposed  absence  of  a 
sufficient  occasion. 

In  answer  to  these  objections,  it  may  be  urged :  (1)  It  is  true  that  this 
Epistle  has  many  points  of  contact  with  St.  Paul's  Epistles,  especially  the 
Epistles  to  the  Homans  and  Ephesians,  as  well  as  with  that  of  St.  James. 
But  -why  should  not  apostles  study  the  writings  of  other  apostles,  as  Daniel 
had  studied  the  writings  of  other  prophets  (Dan.  ix.  2)  ?  St.  Luke  was 
acquainted  with  earlier  Christian  records.  St.  Peter,  when  he  wrote  (as 
we  fully  believe  he  did  write)  the  Second  Epistle,  had  read  the  Epistle  of 
St.  Jude,  as  well  as  several  of  St.  Paul's  letters.  St.  Paul  had  communi- 
cated his  gospel  to  "  them  which  were  of  reputation  "  at  Jerusalem.  St. 
Peter,  who  was  one  of  them,  would  be  sure  to  take  the  deepest  interest  in 
such  writingfs  of  St.  Paul  as  might  at  any  time  become  known  to  him 
through  Silvanus  or  any  other  source;  he  would  be  sure  to  make  use  of 
them  when  writing  to  Churches  which  had  beeja  founded  through  the 
instrumentality  of  St.  Paul.  The  many  admitted  coincidences  furnish  no 
argument  against  the  genuineness  of  the  Epis£le,  except  to  those  who,  like 
Baur,  regard  the  Olementine  Recognitions  and  Homilies  as  giving  a  true 
account  of  the  state  of  things  in  the  early  Church,  and  exaggerate  the 
original  difEerences  between  the  two  apostles  into  an  irreconcilable  opposi- 
tion. But  it  is  by  no  means  correct  to  describe  the  teaching  of  this  Epistle 
as  "insipid  Paulinism."  St.  Peter's  mode  of  presenting  Christian  doctrine 
is  not  that  of  St.  Paul.  He  does  not  insist,  as  St.  Paul  does,  on  the  doctrine 
of  justification  by  faith  only;  he  contemplates  the  death  of  Christ  from  a 
somewhat  different  point  of  view;  his  teaching  on  the  subject  of  baptism 
has  not  a  Pauline  colouring.  The  great  truths  are  the  same ;  they  are 
regarded  in  a  somewhat  different  aspect. 

(2)  There  is  no  want  of  originality.  The  writer  is  evidently  a  man  of 
independent  thought;  he  has  several  conceptions  which  are  specially  his 
own.  Such  are  the  Lord's  preaching  in  the  spirit- world ;  the  priesthood  of 
all  Christians,  which  is  also  characteristic  of  the  Revelation  of  St.  John ; 


INTRODUCTION  TO 


the  view  of  the  Deluge  as  a  fignre  of  Christian  baptism ;  the  reference  to 
Sarah  as  an  example  to  Christian  wiyes ;  the  presentation  of  ancient  pro- 
phecy ;  the  interest  taken  by  the  angels  in  the  work  of  redemption ;  the 
enforcement  of  holiness  as  a  means  for  convincing  the  heathen.  The  many 
words  peculiai"  to  the  Epistle  (there  are  about  sixty  such,  several  of  them 
picturesque  and  unusual)  furnish  another  indication  of  originality. 

(3)  It  is  true  that  believers  are  described  as  suffering  as  Christians  ;  but 
the  Epistle  does  not  exhibit  any  systematic  effort  of  the  Roman  magistrates 
to  extirpate  Christianity.  There  is  no  mention  of  formal  trials  ;  for  the 
oiroXoyia  of  eh.  iii.  15  is  not  a  defence  before  a  court  of  law,  or  an  apology 
offered  to  an  emperor  or  magistrate,  but  simply  an  answer  such  as  any 
true  Christian  ought  to  be  able  to  give  to  those  who  ask  for  the  reasons  of 
his  hope  in  Christ.  Again,  there  is  no  evidence  in  the  Epistle  of  actual 
martyrdom ;  the  sufferings  mentioned  in  it  do  not  seem  to  have  reached 
unto  death.  The  apostle  even  speaks  as  if  blamelessness  of  life  might 
soften  the  enemies  of  the  faith  (ch.  ii.  12,  15 ;  iii.  16).  On  the  whole,  the 
Epistle  indicates,  not  a  systematic  persecution  like  that  under  Trajan,  but 
such  a  state  of  things  as  might  be  expected  to  exist  in  the  provinces  after 
the  Neronian  persecution  of  A.D.  64.  The  fury  of  that  persecution  was 
limited  to  Rome.  The  Christians  were  accused  of  the  definite  offence  of 
having  caused  the  great  conflagration,  and  were  punished  for  their  supposed 
guilt.  It  is  morally  certain  that  the  outburst  of  hatred  kindled  in  the 
imperial  city  must  have  spread  in  various  degrees  over  the  provinces,  and 
that  Christian  provincials,  though  not  formally  brought  to  trial  and 
punished  for  the  crime  falsely  laid  to  the  charge  of  their  Roman  brethren, 
mnst  have  been  exposed  to  many  indignities  and  much  suffering  from 
popular  violence,  and  from  the  tendency  of  the  provincial  authorities  to 
follow  the  example,  and  the  wish  to  win  the  favour,  of  the  Roman  persecutors. 

(4)  There  was  a  sufficient  occasion.  St.  Peter  had  heard  of  the  suffer- 
ings of  the  Christians  of  Asia  Minor,  perhaps  from  Silvanns ;  it  may  be 
also  from  Mark,  who,  when  'St.  Paul  wrote  his  Epistle  to  the  Colossians, 
was  intending  to  visit  Asia  Minor  (Col.  iv.  10),  and  may  have  joined  St. 
Peter  at  Babylon  after  fulfilling  his  design.  St.  Peter  wrote  to  encourage  and 
comfort  his  suffering  brethren,  taking  care  to  recognize  and  to  stamp  with 
his  apostolic  authority  the  teaching  which  they  had  received  from  St.  Paul 
(see  ch.  i.  12,  25),  and  purposely  incorporating  much  of  that  teaching  into 
his  Epistle.  Thus  the  Epistle  is  not,  as  some  say,  an  effort  of  some 
unknown  Christian  early  in  the  second  century  to  reconcile  the  supposed 
controversies  between  the  Petrine  and  the  Pauline  parties,  but  a  spontaneous 
outflow  of  St.  Peter's  sympathy  for  the  suffering  Churches. 

IL   To   WHOM   THE    EpISTLK    IS   IDDBESSBD. 

St.  Peter  addresses  his  Epistle  to  "  the  straugei's  scattered  thronghoat 
Fuutus,  Galatia,  Cappadocia,  Asia,  and  Bithynia."    The  question  at  onc« 


THE   FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PETER.  vli 

arises — Is  he  writing  to  all  the  Christians  in  those  provinces,  or  to  Jewish 
believers  only  ?  St.  Peter  is  regarded  as  the  apostle  of  the  circumcision ; 
there  was  an  understanding  (see  Gal.  ii.  9)  that  James,  Cephas,  and  John, 
"  who  seemed  to  be  pillars,"  should  go  to  the  circumcision,  and  that  Paul 
and  Barnabas  should  go  unto  the  heathen.  It  has  been  thought  that  St. 
Peter  would  have  been  interfering  with  the  province  of  St.  Paul  if  he  had 
written  to  the  Gentile  Christians  of  the  Churches  founded  by  St.  Paul  or 
his  com.panions.  The  words  also  of  the  address  mean,  literally  translated, 
"to  the  sojourners  of  the  dispersion;"  and  "the  dispersion"  (Stao-n-opa) 
was  the  name  current  in  Judgea  for  the  Jews  who  lived  outside  the  limits  of 
the  Holy  Land.  On  the  other  hand,  if  St.  Peter  was,  as  compared  with 
St.  Paul,  an  apostle  of  the  circumcision,  yet  God  had  made  choice  (as  he 
himself  said  in  the  council  at  Jerusalem)  that  the  Gentiles  by  his  mouth 
should  hear  the  word  of  the  gospel,  and  believe.  "  He  did  eat  with  the 
Gentiles  "  at  Antiooh,  and  "  lived  after  the  manner  of  the  Gentiles  "  (Gal. 
ii.  12,  14),  although  for  a  time  "he  withdrew  and  separated  himself,  fearing 
them  which  were  of  the  circumcision."  St.  Paul,  the  apostle  of  the  Gentiles, 
was  wont  to  offer  the  gospel  first  to  the  Jews,  and  preached,  whenever  it 
was  possible,  in  the  synagogues.  It  is  not  likely  that  St.  Peter  at  any  time 
confined  his  ministrations  entirely  to  the  Jews  ;  nor  would  the  supposed 
interference  with  St.  Paul's  field  of  labour  be  altogether  removed  if  the 
Epistle  were  addressed  to  Jewish  Christians  only  rather  than  to  the  whole 
Christian  population.  The  word  "  sojourners  "  (irapeirtSiy^uoi)  is  used  meta- 
phorically, in  oh.  ii.  11,  for  Christians  generally;  it  is  probable  that  in 
ch.  i.  1  St,  Peter  was  adapting  Jewish  words  to  Christian  thoughts,  as  he 
often  does,  and  meant  by  the  "  sojourners  of  the  dispersion  "  all  the  citizens 
of  the  heavenly  country  who  were  then  sojourning  upon  earth,  dispersed 
among  the  unbelievers.  It  is  plain,  from  the  narrative  in  the  Acts  of  the 
Apostles,  that  the  Gentile  element  was  predominant  in  the  Churches  of 
Asia  Minor;  it  would  be  strange  if  St.  Peter  had  addressed  his  Epistle 
exclusively  to  the  small  minority.  The  Epistle  itself  witnesses  to  the 
Catholic  character  which  its  title  suggests.  Though  it  is  saturated  with 
Hebrew  thought,  and  crowded  with  quotations  from  the  Old  Testament, 
there  is  no  allusion  to  the  Law  of  Moses;  the  word  vo/tos  does  not  once 
occur  in  it — an  omission  which  would  be  singular  indeed  if  the  Epistle  were 
addressed  exclusively  to  Jewish  Christians,  but  not  surprising  as  coming 
from  one  who  once  described  the  Law  as  a  yoke  "  which  neither  our  fathers 
nor  we  were  able  to  bear"  (Acts  xv.  10).  Again,  such  passages  as  ch.  i. 
14;  ii.  10;  iv.,  3,  and  perhaps  also  ch.  i.  18,  could  scarcely  have  been 
addressed  exclusively  to  Jewish  Christians ;  nor  could  St.  Peter  say  of 
Jewish  matrons  that  they  became  (eyevT^Oryre)  the  daughters  of  Sarah  if 
they  did  well  (ch.  iii.  6).  There  are  no  traces  at  aU  of  a  distinction  of  Jews 
and  Gentiles  in  the  Churches  of  Asia  Minor  such  that  an  Epistle  could 
be  written  by  an  apostle  to  one  section  of  the  Church  to  the  exclusion  of 
the  other.     We  conclude,  therefore,  that  the  readers  contemplated  by  this, 


»ui  INTRODUCTION  TO 


as  by  all  the  writings  of  the  New  Testament,  are  Christians  generally  of 
whatever  origin.  "There  is  neither  Greek  nor  Jew,  circumcision  nor 
nncircamcision  .  .  .  bat  Christ  is  all  and  in  all." 

III.  Pbobable  Date. 

Though  we  cannot  fix  the  exact  date  of  the  Epistle,  there  are  inclications 
which  help  us  to  determine  the  limits  of  time  within  which  it  must  have 
been  written.  In  the  first  place,  the  writer  was  evidently  well  acquainted 
with  the  Epistle  to  the  Ephesians,  which  was  written  about  the  year  68, 
towards  the  end  of  St.  Paul's  first  Roman  imprisonment.  St,  Peter  cannot 
have  written  till  some  little  time  after  that  date,  for  the  Epistles  to  the 
Ephesians  and  Oolossians — the  former  of  which  was  probably  a  circular 
letter  addressed  to  several  of  the  Churches  of  Asia  Minor — give  no  hints  of 
such  sufferings  as  those  mentioned  by  St.  Peter.  But  he  must  have 
written  before  the  outbreak  of  any  systematic  attempt  to  crush  out  Chris* 
tianity,  or  any  legalized  persecution  such  as  that  under  Trajan.  Judgment 
was  about  to  begin  at  the  house  of  God  (ch.  iv.  17)  ;  for  the  present  there 
was  a  possibility  that  Christians  might  disarm  the  fury  of  their  persecutors 
by  an  innocent  and  upright  life  (oh.  iii.  13)  ;  there  was  room  to  hope  that 
their  good  conversation  in  Christ  might  shame  their  accusers  (ch.  iii.  16) ; 
even  that  some  of  those  accusers  might  be  won  to  the  faith  by  beholding 
the  good  works  of  their  Christian  neighbours.  It  was  still  possible  to 
describe  the  Roman  governors  as  sent  "  for  the  punishment  of  evil-doers, 
and  for  the  praise  of  them  that  do  well"  (ch.  ii.  14).  All  this  seems  to 
point  to  the  time  of  the  Neronian  persecution.  Before  that  date,  we  gather 
from  St.  Paul's  Epistles,  there  was  no  actual  persecution  in  Asia  Minor ; 
there  are  allusions  here  and  there  to  sufferings  (see  Gal.  iii.  4;  vi.  12),  but 
apparently  not  nearly  so  severe  as  the  sufferings  of  the  Macedonian  Chris- 
tians (see  Phil.  i.  28,  30;  1  Thess.  ii.  16;  iii.  4;  2  Thess.  i.  4;  iii.  2), 
Even  then,  it  seems,  there  were  no  formal  laws  against  Christianity ; 
probably  it  had  not  yet  become  a  religio  iUieita,  though  Tertullian,  appa- 
rently without  sufiBcient  evidence,  asserts  the  contrary.  The  Christians  of 
Rome  were  accused  of  burning  the  city ;  the  fury  excited  against  them 
doubtless  extended  to  the  provinces ;  the  heathen  would  naturally  catch 
the  infection  of  cruelty  from  the  imperial  city ;  Christians  would  be  accused 
of  disloyalty,  of  contempt  of  law,  of  those  supposed  crimes  that  Tacitus  lays 
to  their  charge  ('Ann.,'  xv.  44).  The  persecutions  would  be  irregular,  inter- 
mittent, perhaps  illegal,  caused  rather  by  tumultuous  violence  than  by 
formal  accusations ;  bat  often  severe  and  all  the  harder  to  bear  because  it 
was  the  first  outburst.  Christians  regarded  persecution  as  a  strange  thing 
(ch.  iv.  12) ;  the  Church  had  to  become  inured  to  the  fiery  trial. 

Again,  we  read  in  ch.  v.  13  that  "  Marcus  my  son  "  was  with  St.  Peter  at 
Babylon.  In  all  probability  common  opinion  is  right  in  identifying  this 
Marcus  with  the  "  John  whose  surname  was  Mark "  of  the  Acts  of  the 


THB  rraST  EPISTLE  GENEBAL  OF  PETER. 


Apostles.  Now,  we  know  from  Col.  It.  10  tbat  St.  Mark  was  at  Borne  when 
St.  PanI  wrote  the  Epistle  to  the  Golossians,  but  was  thinldiig  of  goings  into 
Asia  Minor ;  while  St.  Pant's  Second  Epistle  to  Timothy  (It.  11)  makes 
it  probable  that  he  was  at  Ephesns  abont  the  year  67.  He  may,  therefore, 
have  spent  some  portion  of  the  interval  between  the  dates  of  the  two 
Epistles  at  Babylon  with  St.  Peter.  The'  alternative  hypothesis,  that  Mark 
joined  St.  Peter  after  the  death  of  St.  Panl,  is  scarcely  possible ;  for  St. 
Peter  himself  in  all  probahility  suffered  martyrdom  at  Borne  under  the 
Emperor  Nero,  and  room  must  be  left  for  the  writing  of  the  Second  Epistle 
before  his  journey  to  Borne.  It  seems,  therefore,  most  probable  that  the 
First  Epistle  was  written  about  the  year  65. 

rV.  Whbrb  thk  Epistle  was  written. 

Erom  oh.  v.  13  we  infer  that  it  was  written  "  at  Babylon."  It  has, 
however,  been  held  by  many  writers,  ancient  and  modem,  that  St.  Peter 
is  using  the  word  "  Babylon  "  metaphorically,  as  a  cryptograph,  and  that  he 
was  really  writing  at  Eome.  This  was  the  opinion,  according  to  Eusebins 
('  Hist.  Ec<il.,'  II.  zv.  2),  of  Papias  and  Clement  of  Alexandria.  Jerome  and 
CEcumenius  took  the  same  view,  which  was  generally  accepted  up  to  the 
time  of  the  Beformation.  It  is  also  urged  that  there  is  no  historical 
evidence  of  the  existence  of  a  Christian  Church  at  Babylon,  and  that  the 
large  Jewish  population  which  was  once  settled  there,  and  to  which  St. 
Peter,  as  the  apostle  of  the  circumcision,  would  probably  address  his 
ministrations,  had  been  destroyed  or  had  migrated  about  A.D.  40  (see 
Josephns,  '  Ant.,'  xviii.  9). 

In  answer  to  the  last  two  arguments,  it  may  be  urged  that  the  absence 
of  any  notice  of  a  Babylonian  Church  does  not  prove  that  the  gospel  had 
never  been  preached  at  Babylon :  St.  Peter's  preaching  may  have  been 
unsuccessful  there.  The  apostle  did  not  confine  his  ministrations  to  the 
Jews ;  he  may  have  preached  to  Babylonian  Gentiles ;  though,  indeed,  it 
is  quite  possible  that  many  Jews  may  have  returned  to  Babylon  by  the 
time  of  his  visit.  It  may  seem  presumptuous  to  disregard  the  consent  of 
the  older  writers ;  but  the  really  ancient  testimony  is  not  very  strong ;  the 
authorities  are  but  few ;  the  desire  to  find  scriptural  evidence  of  St.  Peter's 
residence  at  Bome  led  subsequent  writers  to  follow  those  few  authorities 
and  to  exaggerate  the  weight  of  their  testimony.  In  a  mystical  book  like 
the  Bevelation  of  St.  John,  in  such  works  as  the  Talmud  or  the  Sibylline 
Oracles,  we  expect  to  find  words  and  names  used  metaphorically.  But  in 
the  New  Testament  generally,  and  more  especially  in  a  writing  like  this 
First  Epistle  of  St.  Peter,  remarkable  for  its  simplicity  and  directness,  wa 
see  no  sufficient  reason  for  supposing  that  one  word  is  used  in  a  symboUoal 
sense,  while  all  else  is  plain  and  literal.  Such  a  use  of  the  word  would  be 
unintelligible  to  the  Christians  of  Asia  Minor.  Even  if  we  were  to  accept 
the  eftrliest  date  usigned  to  the  Apocalypse,  it  is  very  improbable  that  th*t 


INTRODUCTION  TO 


book  could  have  been  generally  known  in  the  Church  at  the  date  of  St, 
Peter's  Epistle.  In  that  case  St.  Peter  would  probably  have  mentioned  it, 
especially  as  the  seven  epistles  of  Rev.  ii.  and  iii.  are  addressed  to  some  ol 
the  Churches  to  which  he  was  writing.  Neither  would  there  be  sufficient 
reason  for  using  a  cryptograph  in  this  Epistle.  Babylon  is  mentioned  only 
once,  and  that  incidentally,  in  a  salutation,  with  no  terms  of  reproach  or 
condemnation. 

There  seem,  therefore,  to  be  no  sufficient  grounds  for  importing  a  figura- 
tive meaning  into  St.  Peter's  words.  If  he  was  writing  from  Rome,  it  seems 
strange  that  he  should  make  no  mention  of  St.  Paul,  who,  if  not  then  present 
at  Rome,  was  so  closely  connected  with  the  Roman  Church,  and  so  well 
known  to  the  Christians  of  Asia  Minor ;  while  the  order  in  which  the 
provinces  are  mentioned  in  ch.  i.  1  furnishes  at  least  some  slight  support 
to  the  hypothesis  that  the  apostle  was  enumerating  them  as  they  would 
naturally  occur,  one  after  another,  to  a  person  writing  fronj  the  East.  It  is 
true  that  we  have  no  historical  evidence  of  a  journey  to  Babylon ;  but  then 
we  have  no  certain  records  of  the  apostle's  history  after  the  date  of  his 
leaving  Antioch  (Gal.  ii.  11).  We  may,  amid  the  confusion  of  romance  and 
legend,  see  sufficient  reason  for  accepting  the  ancient  tradition  of  his  preach- 
ing and  martyrdom  at  Rome ;  but  it  cannot  be  said  that  even  this  belief 
rests  on  sure  historical  grounds.  There -was  a  Babylon  in  Egypt,  a  fortress 
mentioned  by  Strabo,  bk.  xvii.  But  if  St.  Peter  had  been  writing  from  a 
place  so  little  known,  he  would  surely  have  described  it  as  the  Egyptian 
Babylon. 

V.  Objects  of  the  Epistlb. 

St.  Peter  is  often  called  the  apostle  of  hope.  He  begins  his  Epistle  with 
a  thanksgiving  for  the  living  hope  which  God,  in  his  abundant  mercy,  has 
granted  to  his  chosen.  Evidently  the  grace  of  hope  was  a  living  power  in 
the  heart  of  the  apostle  ;  he  is  constantly  dwelling  upon  it ;  it  occupies  that 
central  place  in  this  Epistle  which  faith  has  in  the  writings  of  St.  Paul,  and 
hve  in  those  of  St.  John  (see  especially  oh.  i.  3,  7,  9,  13 ;  ui.  9 — 15  ; 
iv.  13 ;  V.  4).  Throughout  the  Epistle  his  eye  seems  fixed  on  the  glorious 
hope  which  lies  before  the  true  Christian ;  he  employs  that  hope  as  the 
principal  topic  of  consolation  in  the  prospect  of  the  afflictions  which  were 
coming  upon  the  Church.  This  is  just  what  we  should  expect  from  the 
sanguine  character  of  the  apostle.  Indeed,  that  character  was  not  what 
it  had  been  when  he  said  to  Christ,  "  Behold,  we  have  forsaken  all,  and 
followed  thee ;  what  shall  we  have  therefore  ?  "  It  had  been  chastened 
and  refined ;  the  old  impetuosity  and  forwardness  had  been  subdued ;  but 
there  was  still  the  same  natural  temperament,  the  same  sanguine  hope, 
not  now  directed  to  self-exaltation  and  pre-eminence  above  his  brethren,  but 
guided  by  the  refining  influences  of  the  Holy  Spirit  to  dwell  on  the  glorious 
prospects  open  to  all  faithful  souls.  One  object  which  St.  Peter  had  in 
view  when  writing  this  Epistle  was  evidently  to  comfort  the  Chriatiana  of 


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PETER. 


A-sia  Minor  ty  directing  tteir  thonglitB  away  from  the  Bufferings  which 
were  gathering  round  them,  to  dwell  in  holy  hope  upon  the  inheritance 
reserved  for  them  in  hearen.  Another,  not  the  primary  ohjeot,  bat 
secondary  and  incidental,  was  to  show  his  entire  sympathy  with  the 
teaching  of  his  brother  apostle.  There  had  been  differences  bet-vieen 
them ;  those  differences  may  probably  have  been  greatly  exaggerated  in  the 
apostolic  times,  as  they  certainly  have  been  by  modem  writers.  St.  Peter 
seems  bent  on  showing  that  the  two  apostles  held  the  one  faith. 

He  fills  his  Epistle  with  thoughts  apparently  taken  from  St.  Paul's 
Epistles,  especially  from  the  Epistle  to  the  Ephesians  (which,  as  a  circular 
letter  addressed  to  several  Churches  of  Asia  Minor,  must  have  been  well 
known  to  his  readers)  and  from  the  great  Epistle  to  the  Romans  (also,  in 
the  opinion  of  some  scholars,  sent  with  various  endings  to  several  Churches, 
one  of  which  was  probably  the  Church  of  Ephesus).  He  shows,  too  (ch.  ii. 
16  compared  with  Gal.  v.  13),  that  he  was  acquainted  with  the  Epistle  to 
the  Galatians.  Writing  now  to  the  Churches  of  Galatia,  where  St.  Paul's 
authority  had  been  questioned  and  his  teaching  controverted,  the  apostle 
of  the  circumcision  sides,  not  with  the  Judaizers,  but  with  St.  Paul.  The 
agreement  between  the  two  great  apostles  is  complete.  They  present  the 
same  truths,  sometimes  with  a  different  colouring,  sometimes  from  differ- 
ent points  of  view.  Their  early  training,  their  mental  characteristics,  their 
habits  of  thought,  were  not  the  same ;  but  the  truths  are  the  same — the 
writers  are  in  perfect  accord  with  one  another.  St.  Peter  had  received 
from  the  Lord  the  solemn  charge,  "  When  thou  art  converted,  strengthen 
thy  brethren,"  He  was  converted — his  old  forwardness,  self-reliance, 
impetuosity,  were  all  subdued;  he  was  not  only  an  apostle,  but  a  saint, 
sanctified  by  the  abiding  presence  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  He  was  now  fulfill- 
ing the  commandment  of  the  Saviour ;  he  was  strengthening  his  brethren 
in  the  prospect  of  fiery  trial.  He  had  begun  his  ministry  with  that  great 
sermon  on  the  Day  of  Pentecost,  when  "  with  many  words  he  did  testify 
and  exhort "  (Acts  ii.  40)  :  he  does  the  same  now ;  he  writes  "  exhorting  and 
testifying  that  this  is  the  true  grace  of  God  wherein  ye  stand  [or,  '  stand  ye 
fast  therein ']."  This  is  the  great  object  of  his  Epistle.  It  is  full  of  exhor- 
tation— the  earnest  exhortation  of  one  who  knew  from  his  own  experience 
the  certainty  of  the  Christian's  faith,  and  the  sure  unshaken  foundation  of 
the  Christian's  hope.  It  is  full  of  comfort — the  comfort  which  only  a  true 
Christian,  rich  in  faith  and  rich  in  love,  can  give  to  the  suffering.  And  the 
apostle  bears  his  testimony,  with  the  full  weight  of  his  apostolic  authority, 
with  the  sure  knowledge  of  an  eye-witness  who  had  received  his  commission 
from  the  Saviour's  lips,  who  had  seen  the  risen  Lord,  had  witnessed  his 
ascension,  had  felt  the  mighty  presence  of  the  Holy  Ghost  sent  down  from 
heaven ;  he  bears  his  testimony  that  the  teaching  which  the  Christians  of 
Asia  Minor  had  received  was  the  true  gospel  of  God,  that  the  grace  which 
they  felt  working  within  them  was  the  true  giace  of  God :  he  bids  them 
"  stand  fast  therein." 


JcH  INTRODUCTION  TO 


VI,  Analysis  of  thk  Epistlk. 

The  Epistle  begins  with  doctrine  and  ends  with  practice.  The  first  part 
treats  of  the  privileges  of  Christians ;  the  second  (beginning  at  eh.  ii.  11), 
of  the  duties  which  grow  out  of  those  privileges.  The  apostle  begins  by 
greeting  the  "  sojoamers  of  the  dispersion ; "  he  describes  them  as  elect 
through  the  choice  of  the  Father,  the  sanctification  of  the  Spirit,  the 
redemption  of  the  Son.  Next  comes  the  thanksgiving ;  the  apostle  blesses 
God  for  his  mercy  shown  in  the  gift  of  the  new  birth,  and  the  living  hope 
which  issues  out  of  that  new  birth  through  the  resurrection  of  Christ  from 
the  dead ;  he  dwells  upon  the  glory  of  the  heavenly  inheritance  which  is 
the  object  of  that  hope,  and  the  safety  of  those  who  are  kept  by  the  power 
of  Qod  for  the  salvation  whioh  is  ready  to  be  revealed  in  the  last  day.  This 
hope,  he  says,  fills  the  Christian  heart  with  an  abiding  joy  even  amid 
troubles  snoh  as  those  which  were  now  thickening  round  the  Christians  of 
Asia  Minor.  Those  sufferings  were  necessary,  or  they  would  not  have  been 
sent.  They  would  issue  in  the  strengthening  and  refining  of  their  faith ; 
they  would  end  in  praise  and  honour  and  glory,  when  Christ's  faithful 
followers,  who  now  believe  though  they  have  not  seen,  shall  see  him  face  to 
face.  Such  are  even  now  beginning  to  receive  the  salvation  of  their  souls ; 
a  salvation  so  great  and  blessed  that  the  prophets  of  old  searched  diligently 
into  the  revelations  which  anticipated  it;  that  the  Holy  Ohost  was  sent 
down  from  heaven  to  give  power  and  wisdom  to  those  who  preached  it ; 
that  the  angels  in  heaven  desire  to  stoop  and  gaze  into  the  mysteries 
which  surround  it.  Then  follows  an  exhortation  to  holiness:  their  pre- 
sent blessings  being  so  great,  the  grace  that  is  to  be  brought  to  them 
being  so  unspeakable,  they  must  be  earnest  and  active,  sober  and  full  of 
abiding  hope.  They  must  be  holy,  because  Ood  is  holy;  they  must  pass 
the  short  time  of  their  sojourning  here  in  fear,  because  they  call  on  the 
Father,  who  judgeth  according  to  every  man's  work,  because  they  were 
redeemed  with  the  precious  blood  of  Christ.  They  must  love  one  another 
from  the  heart  fervently  ;  for  unfeigned  love  is  the  mark  of  the  children  of 
God  who  have  been  bom  again  of  the  incorruptible  seed.  That  new  birth  was 
wrought  through  the  Word  of  God ;  that  Word  liveth  and  abideth  for  ever ; 
it  had  been  preached  to  them  with  its  glad  tidings.  Therefore  (ch.  ii.)  as  new- 
bom  babes  they  must  lay  aside  all  that  is  inconsistent  with  Christian  love, 
and  long  for  spiritual  milk  that  they  may  grow  thereby.  That  growth 
implies  union  with  Christ.  They  must  come  to  him  ;  he  is  the  living  Stone 
whioh  men  rejected,  but  whioh  is  chosen  of  God  and  precious  ;  thus  coming, 
they,  as  living  stones  themselves,  are  built  up  upon  him,  the  chief  Comer- 
stone.  That  Stone  is  laid  in  Zion ;  the  faith  of  the  believer  leads  to  honour; 
to  the  unbelieving,  the  living  Stone  must  become  a  stumbling-block  and  a 
rock  of  offence.  But  believers  are  not  only  living  stones,  built  up  a 
spiritual  house ;  they  are  also  a  holy  priesthood  to  offer  up  spiritual  sacri- 
fices ;  they  are  now  the  spiritual  Israel,  the  covenant  people  of  God. 


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PETEB.  »iil 

Here  (oh.  ii.  11)  begins  the  practical  part  of  the  Epistle.     Men  who  have 
these  high  privileges  and  those  lofty  hopes   must   live   as  pilgrims  and 
strangers  here.     They  must  abstain  from  fleshly  Insts ;  their  life  should 
exhibit  a  moral  beauty  which  might  attract  the  heathen  to  follow  their 
example.     St.   Peter  singles  ont   the   duty  of  submission  to  constituted 
authority  (often  in  those  times  a  very  difficult  duty),  and  draws   it  out 
into  its  details.    Subjects  should  obey  their  rulers,  servants  should  obey  tbeir 
masters,  for  the  Lord's  sake.    And  when  this  duty  is  especially  difficult, 
when  Christians  are  called  to  suffer  for  well-doing,  they  must  fix  the  eye  of 
faith  steadfastly  on  the  great  Example,  and  learn  of  him  to  suffer,  remem- 
bering always  that  by  his  death  he  took  away  our  sin,  and  by  his  stripes 
he  healed  the  diseases  of  our  souls  (ch.  iii.).     Christian  wives,  too,  must 
obey  their  husbands  ;  they  must  be  modest  and  retiring,  wearing  the  orna- 
ment of  a  meek  and  quiet  spirit.     Christian  husbands  should  give  honour 
to  their  wives ;  the  weaker  vessel  should  be  treated  with  delicate  care,  not 
with  roughness.    All"  have  their  duties  one  to  another ;  those  duties  centre 
in  brotherly  love.     Remembering  the  blessings  assured  'to  them,  they  must 
bless  others ;  there  must  be  no  cursing,  no  thought  of  revenge.     If  they  are 
called  to  suffer  for  righteousness'  sake,  they  must  think  that  the  eyes  of  the 
Lord  are  upon  them,  and  it  may  be  that  their  patient  and  holy  endurance 
will  win   the   souls   of  their  persecutors.     It  is  better  to  suffer  for  well- 
doing than  for   evil-doing ;    the   Lord    Christ  set   the   high   example — he 
suffered  for  sins,  the  Just  for  the  unjust ;  he  did  not  render  evil  for  evil ; 
he  preached,  even  in  the  under-world,  to  those  who  once  were  disobedient ; 
they  perished  in  the  waters  of  the  Flood,  which  was  a  type  of  that  baptism 
through  which  Christians  (if  they  continue  in  grace,  inquiring  after  God) 
were  to  die  unto  sin.     He  was  tiow  ascended  into  heaven ;  all  power  was 
his ;  he  could  succour  those  w:ho   suffered  for  him.      Therefore  (ch.  iv.) 
they  must  arm  themselves  with  the  holy  resolve  of  Christ ;  they  must  take 
suffering  patiently;  tbey  must  regard  it  as  a  means  of  destroying  the  power 
of  sin  ;  they  must  break  off  altogether  their  old  heathen  life,  not  heeding  the 
taunts  or  the  wonder  of  men ;  for  believers  and  unbelievers  alike  must  stand 
before  the  judgment-seat  of  God,  whose  gospel  was  preached  both  to  the 
living  and  to  the  dead,  that  they  might  be  judged  in  the  flesh,  but  might 
live  in  the  spirit.     In  view  of  the  coming  judgment,  they  must  watch  and 
pray,  and  keep  their  love  towards  one  another  intense,  and  use  all  such 
gifts  as  God  had  given  them  to  his  glory.      The  apostle  returns  to  the 
approaching  persecution.    It  would  be  a  fiery  trial ;  but  they  must  not  think 
it  strange ;  like  St.  Peter  and  the  other  apostles,  they  should  rejoice  that 
they  were  counted  worthy  to  suffer  shame  for  the  Name  of  Christ  (Acts  v. 
41).     Judgment  must  begin  at  the  house  of  God  ;  even  the  righteous  would 
•scarcely  be  saved  :  what,  then,  would  be  the  lot  of  the  unrighteons  ?     Let 
those  who  are  called  to  suffer  commit  their  souls  to  God  (ch.  v.).     The 
apostle  proceeds  to  exhort  the  presbyters  of  the  Church ;  they  must  feed 
the  Bock  of  God,  looking  for  the  glory-crown  which  the  chief  Shepherd 


tiv    INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  FIBST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PETER. 

shall  give,  as  their  reward.  Younger  Christians  must  submit  themselves 
unto  the  elder ;  all  must  be  clothed  with  humility,  and  cast  all  anxious  care 
npon  God,  trusting  in  his  providence.  Yet  they  must  also  watch,  for  the 
evil  spirit  is  ever  seeking  to  destroy  them ;  they  must  resist  him,  steadfast 
in  the  faith.     The  Epistle  ends  with  blessing  and  greetings. 

VIL   COMMENTABIBS. 

Bengel'a  '  Gnomon  Novi  Testament! ; '  Luther's  '  Exposition  of  the  First  Epistle 
of  St.  Peter;'  the  Commentaries  of  Gerhard,  Steiger,  Buther,  De  Wette,  Wiesinger, 
Fronmiiller ;  Archbishop  Leighton's  '  Commentary ; '  the  notes  of  Deaa  Alford,  Bishop 
Wordsworth,  Dean  Pliunptre ;  those  contained  in  the  '  Speaker's  Commentary '  and  in 
Bishop  Ellicott's  '  Commentary  j '  Archdeacon  Fariar's  '  Early  Days  of  Christianity.' 


THE 


FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OE  PETER. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  L 


Ver.  1.— Peter.  It  is  the  Greeh  form  of 
the  name,  which  the  Lord  Jesus  himself 
had  given  to  the  gi'eat  apostle;  first,  by 
anticipation,  in  the  spirit  of  prophecy  (John 
i.  42) ;  and  again  when  the  prophecy  was 
already  in  a  measure  fulfilled,  and  Simon 
was  proving  himself  to  be  indeed  a  stone, 
built  upon  tho  Ea*k  of  Ages,  which  is 
Christ  (Matt.  xvi.  18).  It  was  his  Christian 
name;  he  must  have  prized  that  name  as 
the  gift  of  Christ,  reminding  him  always  of 
his  confession  and  of  the  Saviour's  promise, 
urging  him  to  maintain  throughout  life  that 
rock-like  steadfastness  which  was  indeed 
characteristic  of  him,  but  in  which  he  had 
more  than  once  very  sadly  failed.-  The  use 
of  the  Greek  form  seems  to  indicate  that 
the  Epistle  was  originally  written  in  Greek, 
and  gives  some  slight  support  to  the  view 
that  it  was  addressed  to  Gentile  converts  as 
well  as  to  Hebrew  Christians.  An  apostle 
of  Jesus  Christ.  He  does  not  add  any  asser- 
tion of  the  truth  of  his  apostlesliip,  as  St. 
Paul  often  does ;  his  apostnlic  dignity  had 
tot  been  questioned ;  the  false  brethren,  who 
so  often  disputed  the  authority  of  St.  Paul; 
had  never  assailed  St.  Peter.  He  does  not 
join  other  names  with  his  own  in  the 
address,  though  he  mentions  at  the  close  of 
his  Epistle  Marcus — probably  the  John  Mark 
who  accompanied  St.  Paul  in  his  first  mis- 
sionary journey — and  Silvanus  —  probably 
the  Silas  of  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  and 
the  Silvanus  whom  St.  Paul  associates  with 
Ijimself  in  addressing  the  Church  of  the 
Thessalonians.  He  describes  himself  as  "an 
apostle  of  Jesus  Christ."  All  Christians 
who  knew  the  gospel  history  knew  that  St. 
Peter  was  one  of  the  first-called  apostles, 
one  of  the  three  who  were  nearest  to  the 
Lord,  one  who  had  received  the  apostolic 
commission  in  •  marked  and  special  manner 
I.  PETEB. 


direct  from  Christ.  But  he  calls  himself 
simply  an  apostle,  not  the  prince  of  the 
apostles ;  he  claims  no  superiority  over  the 
rest  of  the  apostolic  college.  The  impulsive 
forwardness  which  had  once  been  the 
prominent  defect  in  his  noble  character  had 
passed  away ;  he  had  learned  that  difficult 
lesson  which  the  Lord  had  impressed  upon 
the  apostles  when  he  set  the  little  child 
among  them  as  their  example ;  he  was  now, 
in  his  own  words, "  clothed  with  humility." 
To  the  strangers  scattered ;  literally,  to  the 
elect  eojournen  of  the  dispersion  of  Pontus, 
etc.  "  The  dispersion  "  (Siaa-n-opd)  was  the 
recognized  term  (oomp.  Jas.  i.  1 ;  John  vii. 
35 ;  2  Maco.  i.  27)  for  the  Jews  who  were 
scattered  over  Gentile  countries.  The  gos- 
pel of  the  circumcision  was  committed  unto 
Peter  (Gal.  ii.  7) ;  Paul  and  Barnabas  were 
to  go  unto  the  heathen  ;  James,  Cephas,  and 
John  unto  the  circumcision  (Gal.  ii.  9).  But 
St.  Peter  had  been  taught  to  call  no  man 
common  or  unclean  ;  he  did  not  forget  that 
God  had  made  choice  that  the  Gentiles  by 
his  mouth  should  hear  the  word  of  the 
gospel,  and  believe  (Acts  xv.  7) ;  he  can 
scarcely  have  intended  to  maintain  in  this 
Epistle  that  exclusiveness  into  which  he 
once  relapsed,  and  for  which  he  was  rebuked 
by  St.  Paul  (Gal.  ii.  11—14).  He  certainly 
uses  the  word  here  rendered  "strangers" 
(7ra/)E7riS)i|Uois)  metaphorically  in  oh.  ii.  11 
(oomp.  Heb.  xi.  13);  and  we  cannot  but 
think  that,  by  "  the  sojourners  of  the  dis- 
persion," he  means,  not  merely  the  Jewish 
Christians  of  Asia  Minor,  but  all  Christian 
people  dispersed  among  the  heathen.  W» 
shall  see,  as  we  proceed  in  the  study  of  tho 
Epistle,  that  the  writer  contemplates  Gen- 
tile as  well  as  Jewish  readers.  ThosA 
readers  were  sojourners  for  a  brief  time  on 
earth  (perhaps  the  preposition  napd  marks 
the  passing  character  of  their  sojourn): 
"  Here  have  we  no  continuing  city,  but  w« 


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PETER,     [on.  i.  1--25 


seek  one  to  come;"  they  were  dispersed 
here  atid  tliere  among  the  unbelievers,  but 
tliey  were  one  body  in  Christ.  Compare 
Ben^el's  biief  comment,  "  Advenis  in  terra, 
in  ccelo  electis."  Throughout  Pontus,  Gala- 
tia,  Cappadooia,  Asia,  and  Bithynia.  Bengel 
says,  "He  mentions  the  five  provinces  in  the 
order  in  which  the  names  naturally  occurred 
to  one  writing  from  the  East."  This  is  not 
precisely  accurate,  for  Cappadocia  lies  to 
the  south-east  of  Galatia,  and  Bithynia  to 
the  north-east  of  Proconsular  Asia;  but  yet 
the  general  arrangement  of  the  names  seems 
to  furnish  a  slight  argument  in  favour  of 
the  view  that  the  Babylon  from  which  St. 
Peter  wrote  was  the  famous  city  on  the 
Euphrates.  The  Churches  of  Galatia  and 
Asia  (by  "Asia"  St.  Peter  means  Procon- 
sular Asia,  that  is  Mysia,  Lycia,  and  Caria ; 
Phrygia  also  was  commonly  reckoned  as 
belonging  to  it,  but  not  always,  see  Acts  il. 
9, 10;  were  founded  by  St.  Paul  and  his 
companions;  those  of  Pontus  possibly  by 
Aquila,  who,  like  the  other  Aquila  who 
translated  the  Old  Testament  into  Greek, 
was  a  Jew  of  Pontus  (Acts  xviil.  2).  Of 
Cappadocia  all  that  we  know  froni  the  New 
Testament  is  that  dwellers  in  Cappadooia, 
as  well  as  in  Pontus  and  Asia,  were  in 
Jerusalem  at  the  Pentecostal  outpouring  of 
the  Holy  Spiiit,  and  heard  tlie  great  sermon 
of  St.  Peter,  by  which  three  thousand  souls 
were  added  to  the  Church.  The  Cappadocian 
Churches  may  have  owed  their  origin  to 
some  of  these  men,  or  to  some  of  St.  Paul's 
converts  from  Galatia  or  Lyoaonia.  St.  Paul 
himself  had  once  "  assayed  to  go  into  Bithy- 
nia, but  the  Spirit  suffered  them  not "  (Acta 
xvi.  7);  that  province  may  have  received 
the  word  of  God  from  Troas;  the  famous 
letter  of  Pliny,  written  about  the  year  110, 
shows  how  widely  the  faith  of  Christ  had 
spread  throughout  the  district.  We  notice 
that  the  missions  of  the  Church  in  Asia 
Minor  had  now  covered  a  field  considerably 
larger  than  that  reached  at  the  date  of  the 
Acts  of  the  Apostles.  We  notice  also  that 
many  of  the  Churches  addressed  by  St. 
Peter  were  founded  by  St.  Paul  or  his 
converts.  There  was  no  rivalry  between 
the  two  great  apostles.  There  had  been 
jealousies  among  the  twelve  (Matt,  xviii.  1 ; 
XX.  24,  etc.);  there  had  been  difftrences 
between  St.  Peter  and  St.  Paul  (Gal.  ii.  11); 
but  they  were  children  no  longer — they 
were  fullrgriiwii  Christians  now. 

Ver.  2.— Elect.  This  word,  in  the  Greek, 
is  in  the  first  verse ;  the  Greek  order  is  "  to 
the  elect  sojourners  of  the  dispersion."  We 
begin  already  to  notice  coincidences  with 
the  teaoljing  of  St.  Paul.  St.  Paul  insists 
strongly  on  the  doctrine  of  election  ;  St. 
Peter  holds  it  no  less  clearly.  Holy  Scrip- 
ture constantly  ascribes  all  that  is  good  in 


ns  to  the  choice  or  election  of  God.  The 
sacred  writers  do  not  enter  into  the  many 
difficulties  which  lie  around  this  central 
doctrine ;  they  do  not  attempt  to  explain 
its  relations  to  that  other  great  truth, 
taught  in  Scripture  and  revealed  in  con- 
sciousness— the  freedom  of  the  human  will ; 
their  statements  of  the  two  apparently  con- 
flicting doctrines  balance,  but  do  not  ex- 
plain, one  another;  they  seem  to  recognize 
the  fact  that  we  are  in  the  presence  of  an 
inaolubte  mystery ;  and  they  teach  us  by 
their  silence  that  the  proper  attitude  of  the 
Christian,  when  brought  face  to  face  with 
mystery,  is  rest  in  the  liord,  humble  child- 
like confidence  in  his  love  and  wisdom. 
According  to  the  foreknowledge  of  God  the 
rather.  St.  Peter  sets  in  the  forefront  of 
his  Epistle  the  mystery  of  the  blessed 
Trinity  and  the  Divine  plan  of  human  sal- 
vation. .  It  is,  however,  a  question  whether 
the  words  just  quoted  should  be  taken,  at 
in  the  Authorized  Version,  with  "  elect "  or 
with  "apostle."  Many  ancient  authorities 
take  the  latter  view.  Thus  we  should  have 
a  description  of  St.  Peter's  apostleship,  such 
as  we  often  read  at  the  opening  of  St.  Paul's 
Epistle.  He  was,  lik^t.  Paul,  called  to  be 
an  apostle,  separated  unto  the  gospel  of 
God ;  he  was  chosen  before  the  foundation 
of  the  world  to  be  holy  and  without  blame ; 
like  St.  Paul,  he  had  received  grace  and 
apostleship  for  obedience  to  the  faith  among 
all  nations  (comp.  Eom.  i.  1,  5).  Tliere  is 
much  to  be  said  in  favour  of  this  connection. 
But,  on  the  whole,  the  balance  of  the  sen- 
tence, and  the  general  usage  of  similar  lan- 
guage in  the  New  Testament,  lead  us  to 
prefer  the  common  view,  and  to  regard  St. 
Peter's  words  as  a  description  of  the  orifrin, 
progress,  and  end  of  God's  election.  The 
origin  is  the  grace  of  God  the  Father.  He 
chose  his  elect  before  the  foundation  of  the 
world.  He  predestinated  them  unto  the 
adoption  of  children ;  and  that  according 
to  the  good  pleasure  of  bis  will  (Eph.  i.  4, 
5).  It  is  interesting  to  note  that  the  sub- 
stantive "  foreknowledge  "  {irpoyvuffis)  occurs 
nowhere  else  in  Holy  Scripture  exuept  in 
St.  Peter's  Pentecostal  spieoh  (Acts  ii.  23). 
We  mark  tho  agreement  of  St.  Peter  and 
St.  Paul  (comp.  Kom.  viii.  29,  "  Whom  he 
did  foreknow,  he  also  did  predestinate  to  be 
conformed  to  the  image  of  his  Son ; "  comp 
also  Eom.  xi.  2  and  2  Tim.ii.  19).  Election 
ia  "  according  to  the  foreknowledge  of  God 
the  Father;"  but  not  simply,  as  the  Ar- 
minians  taught,  ex  prxvisis  mentis;  for  we 
cannot  aepaiate  foreknowltdge  and  predes- 
tination ;  the  foreknowledge  of  an  Almighty 
Creator  must  imply  the  exercise  of  choice 
and  will;  what  he  knoweth,  that  he  also 
willeth;  eligendoa  facit  Deut  (in  the  well- 
known  words  of  St.  Augustin*),  non  invemt 


OH.  L  1—26. J     THSl  FIRST' EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PETER. 


Thus  in  rer.  20  "foreknown,"  the  mow 
exact  lendering  of  the  Revised  Version  must 
imply  the  "  foreoi'dained  "  of  the  old  trftiig- 
lation.  But  that  foreknowledge  is  the  fort- 
knowledge  of  God  the  Father,  the  Father  of 
our  Lord  Jesus  Olirist,  but  our  Father  also. 
He  oar'eth  for  his  childi'en ;  we  must  trust 
in  liim.  The  potter  makes  one  vessel  for 
honour,  another  for  dishonour;  but  he 
makes  none  for  destruction.  A  veil  of  awful 
mystery  hangs  round  the  relations  which 
exist  betweeii  the  Almighty  and  his 
creatures ;  but  "  God  is  Love."  Through 
■anotification  of  the  Spirit ;  rather,  in,  as  in 
the  Revised  Version.  We  have  the  same 
words  in  2  Tliess.  li.  13.  The  -word  £7100'- 
Ii6s,  which  St.  Peter  uses  here,  is_  almost 
peculiar  to  ^t.  Paul ;  it  occurs  eight  times 
in  his  Epistles;  once  in  the  Epistle  to  tlie 
Hebrews ;  but  elsewhere  only  here  [in  the 
New  Testament.  Like  other  verbals  of  the 
same  form,  it  may  have  eitl  ler  an  active  or 
a  passive  meaning.  Perhaps  the  former  is 
the  more  suitable  here.  God's  election 
places  the  Christian  in  the  sphere  of  the 
sanctifying  influences  of  the  Holy  Spirit ; 
he  lives  la  the  Spirit,  he  walks  in  the 
Spirit,  he  prays  in  the  Holy  Ghost;  and 
the  blessed  Spirit  sanctifieth  the  elect 
people  of  God:  he  worketh  in  them  that 
holines*  (a.'yiaa-ij.6v)  without  whicli  they  can- 
not see  God  (Heb.  xii.  14) ;  tliey  have  their 
fruit,  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit,  unto  holioesB 
(a.ymirfj.61',  Rom.  vi.  22).  The  fundamental 
idea  of  tlie  Hebrew  ii''np,,  which  is  repre- 
sented by  tlie  Greek  word  a-yios,  seems  to  be 
"separation,  purity,"  though  some  connect  it 
with  ty'in,  and  regard  it  as  meaning  origin- 
ally "fresh,  new,  young,"  and  so  "  pure,  shin- 
ing, bright"  (see  Delitzsch,  on  Heb,  ii,  11). 
By  the  word  "  spirit"  we  might,  if  we  took 
the  words  apart  from  the  context,  understand 
the  spirit  of  man,  whicli  is  sanctified  by  the 
Holy  Spirit  of  God;  but  the  context  shows 
that  St.  Peter  is  thinking  of  the  work  of 
the  three  blessed  Persons  of  the  Holy 
Trinity,  TTi  to  obedience.  Obedience  is  the 
work  of  the  Spirit;  tor  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit 
is  love,  and  "  if  a  man  love  mei  he  will  keep 
my  woids."  Thus  election  has  its  origin  in 
the  foreknowledge  of  the  Fathir;  it  is 
wrought  out  in  the  sanctifying  influences 
of  tlie  Spirit  as  its  sphere,  and  it  issues  in 
active  obedience.  Obedience  is  the  sign  and 
test  of  God's  election :  "  By  their  fruits  ye 
shall  know  them."  The  end  of  election  is 
obedience  first,  then  everlasting  life.  And 
sprinkling  of  the  blood  of  J'ssus  Christ. 
The  word  iaPTttr/idi,  spriflkling,  occurs  also 
in  Heb.  Xii.  24  (comp.  also  ix,  19).  In  both 
plaees  there  is  an  evident  reference  to  the 
events  related  in  Exod.  xxiv.  8,  where  we 
read  that  "Moses  took  the  blood,  and 
'prinkled  it  on   the  people,  and  said.  Be- 


hold the  blood  of  the  eovenant,  which  the 
Lord  hath  made  with  you."  We  observe 
that  in  this  place  also  ceremonial  sanotiflca- 
tion  (Bxod.  xix.  10)  and  the  promise  oi 
obedience  (Exod.  xXiv.  3)  preceded  the 
sprinkling  of  blood.  "  The  blood  of  sprin- 
kling" is  called  by  the  Lord  himself  the 
blood  of  the  new  covenant  (Matt.  xxvi.  28 ; 
Mark  iiv.  24),  the  blood  by  which  the 
covenant  of  grace  was  ratified  and  inaugu- 
rated. Moses  sprinkled  the  blood  of  the  old 
covenant  once  upon  the  people;  the  blood 
of  the  new  covenant  was  shed  once  for  all 
upon  the  cross ;  but  it  is  ever  fresh  in  its 
efficacy  and  jower ;  still  we  have  boldness 
to  enter  into  the  holiest  by  the  blood  Of 
Jesus ;  still,  if  we  abide  in  him,  we  liave 
our  "hearts  sprinkled  from  an  evil  con- 
science ; "  still,  "  If  we  walk  in  the  light,  as 
he  is  in  the  light,  .  .  the  blood  of  Jesus 
Christ  his  Son  is  cleansing  us  from  all  sin." 
Tliose  who  are  elect  unto  obedience  are 
elect  unto  the  sprinkling  of  the  blood  of 
Jesus  Christ ;  the  loving  obedienee  of  faith 
keeps  them  in  the  presence  of  the  cross, 
within  the  cleansing  range  of  the  one  all- 
suffloieiit  sacrifice.  Thus  we  have  in  this 
verse  the  concurrunce  of  the  three  blessed 
Persons  in  the  scheme  of  salvation — the 
choice  of  the  I'^ather,  the  sanctiflcation  of 
the  Spirit,  the  redeeming  work  of  the  Son. 
Grace  unto  you,  and  peace,  be  multiplied. 
St.  Peter  uses  tbe  familiar  salutation  of  St. 
Paul;  possibly  he  quotes  it,  for  he  was 
plailily  familiar  with  St.  Paul's  Epistles— he 
refers  "to  them  expressly  in  2  Pet.  lii.  15, 16, 
and  Sylvanus,  the  old  companion  of  St. 
Paul,  was  now  with  him.  He  unites  into 
one  expression  the  Greek  and  Hebrew  salu- 
tations, the  xtdpem  Of  the  Greeks  under  its 
Christian  aspect  of  x^'/"^>  ^^^  favour  of 
God;  and  the  DiW  of  the  Hebrews — the 
peace  which  is  the  fruit  of  grace,  wliich  ig 
the  blessed  possession  of  tliose  on  whom  the 
favour  of  God  abideth.  That  grace  aud 
peace  is  granted  to  all  ihe  elect  of  601I.  St. 
Peter  prays  that  it  may  be  multiplied,  that 
his  readers  may  be  blessed  with  an  ever- 
inorensing  measure  of  that  heavenly  gift. 
He  uses  the  same  form  of  salutation  in  his 
Second  Epistle.  It  is  interesting  to  observe 
that  the  phrase,  "  Peace  be  multiplied  unto 
you,"  occurs  also  in  the  proclamation  of 
Nebuchadnezzar  (Dan,  iv.  1),  and  in  that  of 
Darius  (Dan.  vi.  25), both  written  in  Babylon, 
the  city  from  which  St.  Peter  now  sends  the 
message  of  peace.  Tlie  anarthroueness  of 
tlitse  two  verses  is  remarkable;  in  the 
original  there  is  not  one  article  in  vers.  1,  2. 
Yer.  3. — Blessed  be  the  God  and  Father  of 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  The  Greek  word' 
rendered  "blessed"  (€uA.0717t<!s)  is  used  by 
the  New  Testament  writers  only  of  God ;  the 
participle  (ihoyvh^yot  is  ■'.id  of  men.     St 


THE  PIEST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  PETER,     [ch.  i.  1—25. 


Peter  adopts  the  doxology  used  by  St.  Paul 
in  writing  to  the  Churolies  at  Corinth  and 
Ephesus  (2  Cor.  i.  3 ;  Eph.  i.  3),  the  last 
being  one  of  those  to  which  this  Epistle  is. 
addressed.  It  is  a  question  whether  the 
genitive,  "of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ," 
depends  on  both  substantives  or  only  on 
the  last.  The  Greek  will  admit  either 
view,  and  there  are  high  authorities  on 
both  sides.  On  the  whole,  the  first  seems 
the  most  natural  interpretation.  The  Lord 
himself  had  said,  "I  ascend  unto  my  Father, 
and  your  Father ;  and  to  my  God,  and  your 
God"  (John  xx.  17).  He  could  not  say, 
"our  God,"  for  the  relations  are  widely 
different ;  he  could  say,  "  my  God,"  as  he 
had  said  upon  the  cross ;  for,  in  the  well- 
known  words  of  Theophylact,  "  he  is  both 
the  God  and  the  Fatheriof  one  and  the  same 
Christ;  his  God,  as  of  Christ  manifest  in 
the  flesh ;  his  Father,  as  of  God  the  Word." 
So  St.  Paul,  after  using  this  same  form  of 
salutation  in  Eph.  i.  3,  speaks  of  God  in  the 
eeventeenth  verse  as  "  the  God  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  the  Father  of  glory "  (comp. 
also  Bom.  xv.  6 ;  2  Cor.  xi.  31 ;  Col.  i.  3). 
wnich  according  to  bis  abundant  mercy 
bath  begotten  us  again  unto  a  lively  hope, 
by  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ  from  the 
dead;  rather,  begat,  as  in  the  Bevised 
Version.  St.  Peter  refers  our  regeneration 
back  to  tlie  great  fact  of  the  resurrection  of 
Christ.  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  "  the  First- 
begotteu  of  the  dead"  (Bev.  i.  5);  we  are_ 
"  buried  with  him  in  baptism,  wherein  also 
ye  are  risen  with  him  through  the  faith  of 
the  operation  of  God,  who  hath  raised  him 
from  the  dead  "  (Col.  ii.  12).  The  Church, 
"  which  is  his  body  "  (Eph.  i.  23),  died  with 
him  in  his  death,  rose  with  him  in  his  resur- 
rection. Christians  individually  are  baptized 
into  his  death,  "that  like  as  Christ  was 
raised  up  from  the  dead  by  the  glory  of  the 
Father,  even  so  we  also  should  walk  in 
newness  of  life  "  (Bom.  vi.  4).  The  resur- 
rection of  Christ  was  in  a  real  sense  the 
birth  of  the  Church.  Therefore  St.  Peter, 
who  in  ch.  iii.  21  speaks  so  strongly  of  the 
effect  of  holy  baptism,  here  refers  our 
regeneration  to  that  without  which  baptism 
would  be  an  empty  ceremony,  the  resur- 
rection of  cur  Lord.  God's  great  mercy 
(comp.  Eph.  ii.  4.  5,  "God,  who  is  rich  in 
raercy,  .  .  .  hath  quickened  ua  togethsr  with 
Christ ")  is  the  first  cause  of  our  new  birth, 
Christ's  resurrection  is  the  means  through 
which  it  was  accomplished.  St.  Peter  alote 
of  the  New  Testament  writers  uses  the 
word  here  rendered  "  hath  begotten  again  " 
(Ayayew^Tas) ;  it  occurs  also  in  ver.  23. 
But  our  Lord  himself,  and  his  aposlles  St. 
James  and  St.  Paul,  teach  the  same  truth 
in  similar  words  (see  John  iii.  S ;  Jas.  i.  18 ; 
Titus  iii.  5).  Some  commentators,  as  Luther, 


Bengel,  etc.,  oonneot  the  words,  "  by  the 
resurrection,"  etc.,  not  with  "  hath  begotten 
us  again,"  but  with  the  word  "  lively  "  or 
"living" — a  hope  that  liveth  through  the 
resurrection  of  .Tesus  Christ.  This  connec- 
tion is  grammatically  possible,  and  gives  a 
good  and  true  meaning :  it  is  the  resurrec- 
tion of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  which  makes 
the  Christian's  hope  living  and  strong ;  but 
the  other  explanation  seems  more  natural, 
and  is  supported  by  such  passages  as  Bom. 
iv.  25,  and  ch.  iii.  21  of  this  Epistle.  The 
heavenly  inheritance  is  the  ultimate  end  of 
our  regeneration ;  the  hope  of  that  inheri- 
tance is  the  present  joy  of  the  Christian 
life.  St.  Paul  reminds  the  Ephesian 
Christians  that  when  tliey  were  without 
Christ  they  had  no  hope  (Eph.  ii.  12);  but 
God  according  to  his  great  mercy  begat  ui 
again  into  a  new  life,  and  one  ira^jortant 
aspect  of  that  new  life  is  hope,  the  hope  of 
ever-deepening  fellowship  with  God  now, 
of  everlasting  life  with  God  in  heaven. 
That  hope  is  living;  it  is  "pervaded  with 
life,  carrying  with  it  in  undying  power  the 
certainty  of  fulfilment  (Bom.  v.  5),  and 
making  the  heart  joyful  and  happy." 
(Huther);  "it  lias  life  in  itself,  and  gives 
life,  and  has  life  as  its  object "  (De  Wette). 
And  it  liveth,  it  doth  not  perisli  like  the 
hopes  of  this  world,  but  it  lives  on  in  ever 
fuller  joy  till  it  reaches  its  consummation  in 
heaven;  even  there  "hope  abideth,"  for 
ever  in  heaven  there  wUl  be,  it  seems,  • 
continual  progress  from  glory  to  glory, 
nearer  and  nearer  to  the  throne.  St.  Peter 
is  the  apostle  of  hope.  "  He  loves,"  says 
Behgel,  "the  epithet'living.'and  themention 
of  hope." 

Ver.  4. — To  an  inheritance  incorruptible, 
and  nndefiled,  and  that  fadeth  not  away. 
The  Christian's  hope  maketh  not  ashamed. 
The  inheritance  is  sure;  it  is  better  than 
the  inheritance  promised  to  Abraham;  tor 
it  is  (1)  incorruptible.  All  things  earthly 
have  in  themselves  the  seeds  of  decay  and 
death ;  but  "  when  this  corruptible  shall 
have  put  on  incorruption,"  the  redeemed  of 
the  Lord  shall  receive  a  kingdom  tiiat 
cannot  be  moved,  where  "  neither  moth  nor 
rust  doth  corrupt."  (2)  It  is  undefiled. 
The  inheritance  of  Israel  was  defiU  d  (Lev. 
xviii.  27,  28),  but  into  the  heavenly  inheri- 
tance entereth  not  "  anything  that  defiletli " 
(Se?.  xxi.  27).  (3)  It  fadeth  not  away. 
"The  graas  withereth,  the  flower  falletU 
away ; "  it  is  not  so  in  the  "  land  that  is 
TBry  far  off."  The  B?o";?a  reserved  for  its 
biassed  inhabitants  is  an  amaracth  wreath 
(comp.  Wisd.  vi.  13  and  ch.  v.  i,  where  see 
note).  There  are  no  tendenoiea  to  eewuption 
there,  no  possibilities  of  defilement,  ncs  e^ai 
that  fading  which  must  pass  over  !is  liii's^i 
things  of  earth.     Beaerved  in  heaven  lo. 


CH.  I.  1—25.]     THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  PETER. 


you.  The  many  mansions  in  our  Father's 
house  have  been  kept  from  the  beginning, 
Bud  still  are  kept  for  his  elect ;  Satan  cannot 
rob  them  of  it,  as  he  robbed  man  of  the 
earthly  paradise.  Some  of  the  Greek  com- 
msutators  find  in  the  words, "  in  heaven,"  an 
argument  against  the  millenarians.  Some 
manuscripts  read  "for  us,"  but  the  received 
reading  is  best  supported.  St.  Peter  passes 
from  one  person  to  another,  as  St.  Paul 
often  does,  sometimes  addressing  his  readers 
directly,  sometimes  including  himself  among 
them. 

Ver.  5. — "Who  are  kept  by  the  power  of 
God.  "  Hereditas  servata  est,"  says  Bengel, 
"  heredes  cuetodiuntur."  The  verb  ippovpeiv 
is  a  military  word.  "The  governor  under 
Aretas  the  king  Tcept  [guarded]  the  city  of 
the  Damascenes  "  (2  Cor.  xi.  32) ;  the  peace 
of  God  shall  keep  ("guard,"  Phil.  iv.  7)  the 
hearts  of  those  who  trust  in  him, — they  are 
guarded  by  a  heavenly  host ;  "  The  angel  of 
the  Lord  encampeth  around  them  that  fear 
him ; "  they  are  guarded  by,  or  rather, 
according  to  the  exact  rendering,  in  the 
power  of  God.  His  power  ii  all  around 
then\;  it  is  the  sphere  in  which  they  live 
and  move ;  no  harm  can  reach  them  in  that 
all-embracing  shelter.  Throughfaith.  Faith, 
the  evidence  of  things  not  seen,  realizes  the 
presence  of  the  heavenly  guard,  and  gives 
courage  and  con6dence  to  the  Christian 
when  assailed  by  temptations  and  dangers ; 
the  servant  of  Elisha  feared  no  more  the 
hosts  of  Syria,  when  he  saw  the  mountain 
full  of  chariots  and  horses-  of  fire  round 
about  his  master.  Faith  is  the  instrument 
by  means  of  which  we  grasp  the  Divine 
strength,  so  that  it  is  made  perfect  in  our 
weakness.  Unto  salvation  ready  to  be 
revealed  in  the  last  time.  By  "  salvation  " 
St.  Peter  means  not  merely  present  deliver- 
ance from  sin,  but  everlasting  life,  the  joy 
of  our  Lord,  the  deep,  full  blessedness  of  his 
elect  in  heaven.  Eye  hath  not  seen  it  yet, 
it  hath  not  entered  into  the  heart  of  man. 
But  it  is  ready  to  be  revealed;  the  veil 
which  now  hides  it  from  us  will  be  with- 
drawn in  the  last  time,  when  the  last  page 
of  this  world's  history  shall  have  been 
written,  when  the  number  of  the  elect  shall 
be  accomplished,  and  the  eternal  purpose  of 
God  shall  have  been  fulfilled. 

Ver.  6. — Wherein  ye  greatly  rejoice.  Is 
the  word  "  wherein  "  {iv  (^)  to  be  referred  to 
the  whole  sentence,  and  to  be  understood 
of  the  Christian's  present  privileges  and 
hopes?  or  is  it  to  be  taken  in  a  temporal 
sense  with  the  words  immediately  preceding 
it,  "in  the  last  time"?  Authorities  are 
divided.  Of  those  who  take  the  latter 
view  some  regard  "  the  last  time " — as  the 
object  of  the  Christian's  joyful  hope — he 
rejoices  now  in  the  hope  of  the  glory  of 


God;  others  give  the  verb  a  quasi-future 
sense — "wherein  ye  will  greatlyrejoioe."  But 
the  former  connection  seems  more  natural ; 
the  Christian  rejoices  in  his  present  and 
future  blessings — in  the  new  birth,  in  the 
hope  of  the  heavenly  inheritance,  in  the 
assured  protection  of  God.  The  verb  (fi-yaX- 
KtaffBe)  is  a  strong  expression  ;  it  means  "  to 
exult,  to  leap  for  joy."  St.  Peter  may  have 
had  in  his  thoughts  the  well-remembered 
sermoQ  on  the  mount,  where  the  same  word 
occurs  (Matt.  v.  12),  and,  as  here,  in  connec- 
tion with  sorrows  and  persecutions.  It  is 
used  of  our  Lord  himself  in  Luke  x.  21,  of 
the  Philippian  gaoler's  joy  in  his  new-born 
faith  (Acts  xvi.  31),  as  well  as  of  the  joy  of 
the  blessed  in  heaven  (Rev.  xix.  7).  Thdre 
is,  therefore,  nothing  unsuitable  in  taking 
the  verb  in  its  proper  present  signification ; 
the  Christian's  experience  is  often,  like  St. 
Paul's,  "sorrowful,  yet  always  rejoicing." 
Some  commentators,  following  St.  Augus- 
tine, regard  the  verb  as  imperative.  Though 
now  for  a  season,  if  need  be,  ye  are  in 
heaviness  through  manifold  temptations. 
The  word  rendered  "  for  a  season "  (0X1701', 
a  little)  may  mean  that  the  present  suffer- 
ing is  but  little  compared  with  the  future 
glory ;  it  may  cover  both  meanings  (camp. 
2  Cor."  iv.  17,  "  Our  light  affliction,  which 
is  but  for  a  moment").  St.  Peter,  like  St. 
Paul,  enforces  the  lesson  that  that  light 
affliction,  which  seems  sometimes  lo  heavy, 
is  sent  in  love  and  wisdom ;  the  words,  "  if 
need  be,"  imply  bis  belief  that  these  trials 
were  necessary  for  his  readers'  salvation — 
they  would  work  for  them  "  a  far  more 
exceeding  and  eternal  weight  of  glory." 
The  words,  "  ye  are  in  heaviness,"  represent 
the  aorist  participle  XuxTjfleWes,  having  been 
put  to  grief;  it  refers  to  definite  afflictions, 
known  to  St.  Peter,  which  had  been  suffered 
by  those  to  whom  he  is  vraiting.  The 
words,  "manifold  temptations,"  remind  us 
of  Jas.  i.  2. 

Ver.  7.— That  the  trial  of  your  faith.  The 
words  of  ver.  6,  "  if  need  be,"  point  to  the 
purpose  and  end  of  the  temptations.  St. 
Peter  proceeds  to  develop  his  meaning.  The 
word  rendered  "  trial "  (fioKlfuov  or  SomjueioK) 
means  rather  "test  or  proof;"  it  is  explained 
by  Dionysius  of  Halicamassus  ('  Rhet.,'  11) 
as  that  at  which,  when  one  looks,  he  is  able 
to  form  a  judgment.  Cremer  says  it  is  "  not 
only  the  means  of  proof  itself,  e.g.  the 
touchstone,  but  also  the  trace  of  the  metal 
left  thereon.  Hence  here  and  in  Jas.  i.  3 
ri  SokI/uov  rJis  Triareas  is  the  result  of  the 
contact  of  faith  with  temptations,  that  in 
virtue  of  which  faith  is  recognized  as 
genuine — the  verification  of  faith."  Dr. 
Hort  ('  Notes  on  Select  Readings')  prefers  the 
reading  rh  S6kihov,  which  is  given  by  two  of 
the  better  cursives.    He  «ays,  "  t^  toKiMw 


THE  FrRST  BPISTLB   GENERAL  OF  PETER,     [oh.  1. 1— 2S 


U  the  initrament  of  trial,  not  even  the 
pTOcesB  of  trial,  much  less  the  thing  tried ; 
while  it  is  only  the  thing  tried  that  can  he 
compared,  as  here,  to  gold  refined  in  the 
fire."  Compare  the  use  of  the  cognate  word 
SoKt/j.'h  in  2  Oor.  ii.  9  j  Eom.  v.  4  j  Phil.  it. 
22.  Being  much  more  precionB  than  of  gold 
that  perisheth,  though  it  be  tried  with  fire  i 
rather,  aa  in  the  Revised  Version,  more 
preeiout  than  gnjd.  Golil  is  the  most  precious 
of  metals,  faith  is  more  precious  far ;  the 
proof  of  faith  is  more  momentous  heyond  all 
oomparieon  than  the  proof  of  gold.  Gold 
perishes ;  "  Consumitur  annulus  usu,"  says 
the  poet !  "  Aurum  cum  mundo  perit,"  says 
Bengel ;  but  "  Now  abidetb  faith,  hope, 
charity,"  says  the  apostle.  Gold  is  tried 
with  fire;  as  by  the  purifying  flre  gold 
is  purged  of  dross  (Isa.  1.  25),  so  by  the 
refining  flre  of  temptations  the  faitiiful  are 
cleansed  from  pride  and  self-reliance  and 
the  pollutions  of  sin.  Sight  be  found  onto 
praif  e  and  honour  and  glory  at  the  appearing 
of  Jesus  Christ ;  "  might  he  found  "  at  the 
judgment,  in  the  searching  investigation  of 
the  great  d;iy.  Praise;  in  words,  "Well 
done,  good  and  faithful  servant."  ffonour ; 
in  the  distinctions  granted  to  the  faithful — 
the  crown  of  righteousness,  the  whit^  robe, 
-  the  palm.  Glory ;  the  glory  which  was 
Ohrist's  before  the  world  was,  which  'he 
giveth  to  his  chosen  (John  xvii.  22).  At  the 
appearing ;  rather,  revelation.  Now  we  see 
him  only  by  faith ;  then  his  elect  shall  see 
him  as  he  is— the  veil  will  be  withdrawn 
(see  ver.  5), 

Yer.  8. — Whom  having  not  seen,  ye  love. 
Bome  ancient  manusoripts  read  ouk  ciSiiTct, 
"  although  ye  know  him  not ; "  but  the 
reailing  iSdi/res  is  best  sup|  ortcd,  and  gives 
tlie  bettiT  sense.  The  Oliristians  of  Asia 
Minor  had  not  seen  the  grarinus  face  of  the 
Lord,  as  St.  Peter  lifld.  But  though  they 
had  never  known  liim  after  the  flesh,  they 
knew  him  by  the  inner  knowledge  of 
spiritual  communion,  and,  hnving  learned 
to  love  him,  had  attained  the  blessing 
promised  to  those  who  had  not  seen,  liut  yet 
had  believed.  St.  Ptter  may  possibly  be 
thinking  of  lils  well-remembered  interview 
with  the  risun  Lord  (Julm  xxi.  15.— 17).  He 
has  here  the  word  a7mr5i',  expressive  of 
reverential  love,  which  Christ  had  used  in 
his  first  two  questions;  not  the  word  of 
warm  human  affi-'otion  (<j>t\(7ii)  which  he 
liimself  had  employed  in  his  three  answers. 
In  whcsi,  though  now  ye  see  him  not,  yet 
telieving,  ye  rejoice  with  joy  unspeakable 
and  full  of  glory.  The  words,  "  in  whom  " 
(tis  S;*, literally,  "on  whom  now  not  looking, 
but  believing "),  are  to  be  taken  with  the 
partioiploe  "seeing"  ami  "believing,"  not 
with  "  ye  rejoice."  8t.  Potcr  insists  on  the 
'ipcessity  and  blessedness  of  faith  as  earnestly^ 


SI  St.  Paul  does,  though  with  him  the 
antithesis  is  rather  between  faith  and  sight 
than  between  faith  and  works.  As  a  fact, 
St.  Peter's  readers  had  never  seen  the  Lord ; 
now,  though  not  seeing  him  with  the  out- 
ward eye,  they  realized  his  presence  by 
faith,  and  in  that  presence  they  rejoiced. 
The  verb  is  that  used  In  ver.  6— they  rejoiced 
greatly,  they  exulted,  and  that  though  they 
saw  him  not.  Human  love  needs  the  seen 
presence  of  the  beloved  one  to  complete  the 
fulness  of  its  joy  (2  John  12);  but  their  joy 
was  even  amid  afflictions  unspeakable  —like 
all  our  deepest  and  holiest  leelings,  not  to 
be  expressed  in  words ;  and  it  was  glorified 
by  the  unseen  presence  of  Christ.  His  chosen 
behold  even  now,  as  in  a  glass,  the  glory  of 
the  Lord,  and,  beholding,  are  changed  into 
the  Same  image  from  glory,  to  glory.  Joy 
in  the  Lord  is  a  foretaste  of  the  joy  of  heaven, 
and  is  irradiated  by  glimpses  of  the  glory 
that  shaU  be  revealed.  Others,  as  Huther 
and  Alford,  again  give  to  the  verb  AtoX- 
\ia<T6e,  "ye  rejoice,"  a  quasi-future  sense. 
The  word  for  "  unspeakable  "  (4>'eKXo\ijT(Js) 
is  found  only  here. 

Ver.  9.— Eeeeiving  the  end  of  your  faith, 
even  the  salvation  of  your  souls.  The 
present  participle  "  receiving"  (_KoiiiC6ij,ei>ot) 
implies  that  the  believer  realizes  the  deep 
blessing  of  salvation  gradually  while  he  is 
being  saved  as  one  of  uf  irf<)^<(;ue>>oi  (Acts  ii. 
47).  Salvation  is  present  ais  well  as  future. 
"By  grace  ye  are  saved  through  faith" 
(Eph.  11.  8) ;  "  According  to  his  tneroy  he 
saved  us  "  (Titus  iii.  5).  God's  elect  receive 
it  in  various  measures  now;  in  its  blessed 
fulness  it  will  be  manifested  hereafter.  It 
is  the  end  which  faith  ever  holds  in  view, 
pressing  towards  it  as  the  prize  of  the  high 
calling.  It  is  the  salvation  especially  of 
souls ;  for,  as  Bengpl  says, "  Anima  prseoipue 
salvatur ;  corpus  in  resuirectione  partioipat." 

Ver.  10. — Of  which  salvation  the  prophets 
have  inquired  and  searched  diligently; 
rather,  prophett  iwiuiri'd  and  tearched. 
There  is  no  article,  and  the  verbs  are  aorist. 
St.  Peter  illustrates  the  glory  and  greatness 
of  our  salvation  (mark  how  he  loves  to  repeat 
the  word)  by  showing  that  it  was  the  subject 
of  the  searching  study  of  prophets  and  of  the 
contemplation  of  angels.  St.  Peter  was  a 
dilifjent  student  of  the  prophetic  books,  and 
constantly  quotes  them,  both  in  his  Epistles 
and  in  hig  speeches  recorded  in  the  Acts. 
Here  he  gives  us  a  very  remarkable  glimpse 
into  the  conditions  of  the  prophetic  con- 
sciousness. The  scheme  of  otir  salvation 
was  in  some  way  revealed  to  the  prophets ; 
the  mode  of  the  revelation,  whether  by  vision 
or  otherwise,  is  not  made  known  to  us. 
Every  point  of  contact  between  the  infinite 
and  the  finite  is  enveloped  in  mystery  i  we 
can  only  know  the  fact — there  was  such  • 


OH.  1. 1—26.]     THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GBNEBAL  OP  PETER. 


(evelation.  That  salvation  was  bo  magnifl- 
oent  a  prospect  that  It  conoentfated  upon 
itself  the  rapt  attention  and  deepest  interest 
of  those  to  whom  the  promise  was  revealed. 
Prophets  inquired  and  searched  diligently. 
The  revelation  was  real,  but  it  was  not  com- 
plete, not  distinct  in  its  details.  God  revealed 
BO  much  of  the  coming  salvation  as  was 
sufficient  to  iupport  his  servants  in  their 
trials, .  and  to  quicken  their  faith  in  the 
Messiah.  Prophets  searched  diligently,  as 
miners  seeking  treasure ;  they  prayed,  and 
thought,  and  meditated,  and  exercised  all 
their  intellectual  eoergies  in  tlie  effort  to 
comprehend  the  revelation  which  had  been 
vouchsafed  to  them.  Daniel  was  a  remarkable 
example  of  this  searching  (Dun.  vii.  16:  ix. 
2,  8).  The  revelation  came  to  the  propliet 
from  God ;  the  prophet  received  it,  but  could 
not  comprehend  it  in  all  its  depth  and 
height-^hd  searched  diligently. 

"  Thoughts  beyond  their  thought! 
To  those  high  bards  were  given." 

('Christian  Year.*) 

(CJompare  the  song  of  Zacharias,  Luke  i.  68 — 
79.)  Who  prophesied  of  the  grace  that  should 
come  unto  you.  He  defines  the  prophets,  of 
whom  he  speaks  as  those  who  prophesied  of 
the  favoiir  of  God  manifested  in  the  redemp- 
Kon  of  mankind  through  his  blessed  Son. 
"Grace  and  trutli  came  by  Jesus  Christ" 
(John  i.  17).  St.  Paul  loved  to  dwell  on  the 
grace  of  God ;  so  did  St.  Peter. 

Yer.  11.— Searching  what,  or  what  manner 
oi  time  the  Spirit  of  Christ  which  was  in 
them  did  signify ;  or,  as  the  Revised  Yersion, 
did  point  unto.  The  Authorized  Version 
neglects  the  preposition  eis.  The  apostle 
Siiya  that  the  Spirit  of  Ohiist  dwelt  in  the 
prophets.  The  words  rrfeOjua  Xpiarov  cannot 
mean  "  the  Spirit  which  bears  witness  of 
Christ,"  as  Bengel  and  others.  The  Holy 
Spirit  is  the  Spirit  of  Christ  (see  Bom  viii. 
9 ;  Gal.  iv.  6).  He  is  not  only  sent  from  the 
Father  by  the  Son,  but  he  prnceedeth  fiom 
the  Patlier  and  the- Son.  This  important 
statement  involves  also  the  pre-existenee 
and  the  Divinity  of  Christ  (comp.  John 
viii.  56, 58 ;  1  Cor.  x.  i ;  Jude  5,  in  the  best- 
supported  reading).  The  prophets  felt  with- 
in them  the  working  of  the  Spirit.  They 
knew  that  the  mysti  rions  voice  which  filled 
their  souls. was  his  voice.  Its  utterances  were 
not  always  clear;  they  were  sometimes 
obscure  and  mystical,  but  the  heart  of  the 
prophets  was  stirred  to  the  utmost;  they 
sought  with  earnest  prayer  and  devout 
thought  into  the  purposes  of  God  announced 
in  the  revelation.  Especially  they  asked, 
as  the  apostles  asked  the  Lord  on  the  Mount 
of  Olives,  "  When  shall  these  things  be,  and 
what  shall  be  the  sign  of  thy  coming?  "  At 
what  time  would  the  Meisiah  be  revealed? 


What  would  be  the  distinctive  character,  the 
marks,  the  signs,  of  that  time  ?  "  Propheta 
ab  ipso  habentes  donum  in  ilium  pro- 
phetarunt "  ('  Ep.  Barnab.,'  c.  5).  When  it 
testified  beforehand  the  sufferings  of  Christ, 
and  the  glory  that  should  follow;  rather, 
the  sufferings  for  Christ  (destined  for  Christ), 
and  the  gUtries  after  these.  Compare  St. 
Peter's  speech  (Acts  iiu  18),  "  Those  things 
which  God  before  had  showed  by  the  mouth 
of  all  his  prophets,  that  Christ  should  suffer, 
he  hath  so  fulfilled."  So  St.  Paul,  in  his 
speech  before  King  Agrippa  (Acts  xxvi.  22, 
23),  asserts  that  he  had  said  "  none  other 
things  than  those  which  the  prophets  and 
Moses  did  say  should  come:  that  Christ 
should  suffei',  and  that  he  should  be  the  first 
that  should  rise  fiomthe  dead."  The  doctrine 
of  a  suffering  Messiah  was  a  stumbling-block 
to  the  Jews.  The  apostles  could  not  under- 
stand it  till  after  the  Saviour's  resurrection ; 
Peter  himself  had  recoiled  from  it  with 
horror,  and  had  been  rebuked  by  the  Lord 
(Matt.  xvi.  22,  23);  now,  taught  by  the 
Spirit,  he  Understands  the  foreshaduwings  of 
the  sufferings  of  Christ,  which  the  Spirit  of 
Christ  had  testified  to  the  prophets.  The 
Lord  himself  had  expounded,  on  the  day  of 
his  resurrection,  the  things  concerning  him- 
self, beginning  at  Moses  .and  all  the  prophets: 
"  Ought  not  Christ,"  he  said,  "  to  have 
suffered  these  things,  and  to  enter  into  his 
glory  f  "  (Luke  xxiv.  26).  Some  think  that 
St.  Peter  is  referring  mainly  to  the  prophets 
of  the  New  Testament,  and  Ihat  the  words, 
"  the  sufferings  of  Christ,"  are  to  be  under- 
stood mystically  of  Christ  suffering  in  his 
Church,  as  "the  afBlctious  of  Christ"  in 
Col.  i.  24.  But  the  context  does  not  require 
this  explanation,  and  the  parallel  passages 
quoted  above  seem  to  preclude  it. 

Yer.  12. — TTnto  whom  it  was  revealed,  that 
not  tmto  themselves,  hat  nnto  us  they  did 
minister  the  things.  It  was  revealed  to  them, 
whether  in  nnswer  to  their  search  as  in  the 
case  of  Daniel,  or  as  part  of  the  original 
revelation  made  to  them,  that  the  vision 
Was  for  many  days  (Dan.  x.  14).  Compare 
St.  Peter's  quotations  from  the  prophetic 
Scriptures  in  Acts  ii.'  17, 31 ;  iil.  24.  The  best 
manuscripts  read  here,  "unto  you."  The 
prophets,  doubtless,  like  Abraham,  rejoiced 
to  see  the  day  of  Clirist;  they  saw  it  by 
faith,  and  were  glad  (John  viii.  56);  but 
they  saw  it  In  the  far  distance;  they  desired 
to  see  and  hear  what  tlie  apostles  s,iw  and 
heard,  but  the  time  was  not  yet  (see  Matt. 
Xiii.  16,  17).  They  did  minister  the  things; 
i.e.  they  were  made  the  instruments  of  reveal- 
ing them ;  they  presented  them  to  the  devout 
for  their  spiritual  food  and  support  Which 
are  now  reported  unto  you  by  them  that 
have  preached  the  gospel  nnto  yon  with  the 
Holy  Ohost  Bent  down  from  heaven ;  ratliei , 


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  PETER,     [oh.  1. 1— 2& 


which  were  now  reported  to  yott  through  them 
that  preached  the  gospel  unto  you  (literally, 
evangelized  you)  liy  the  Holy  Ghost,  St. 
Peter  claims  for  those  who  evaugelized  Asia 
Minor  (St.  Paul  and  Mb  companions)  the 
game  authority  which  was  possessed  by  the 
ancient  prophets ;  they  preached  as  fulfilled 
the  great  truths  which  the  prophets  foretold 
as  future.  The  Spirit  of  Christ  was  in  the 
prophets ;  the  same  Spirit  worked  and 
preached  through  the  apostles ;  nay,  he 
dwelt  in  them  in  fuller  measure,  for  he  hiid 
been  sent  down  from  heaven  on  the  great 
Day  of  Pentecost,  and  it  was  by  his  aid  that 
the  apostles  and  evangelists  preached. 
Whioh  things  the  angels  desire  to  look  into. 
The  salvation  whioh  God's  elect  receive  is 
so  full  of  glory  and  mysterious  beauty,  that 
not  only  did  the  prophets  of  old  search 
diligently.but  even  angels  (there  is  no  article) 
desire  to  look  into  it.  The  verb  irapUK^^j/at 
means  "  to  stoop  sideways ; "  it  is  used  of 
persons  standing  outside  a  place  who  stoop 
in  order  to  look  in.  "The  irapa  of  the  verb, 
says  Huther,  "indicates  that  the  angels  stand 
outside  the  work  of  redemption,  inasmuch 
as  it  is  not  for  them,  but  for  man  (cf.  Heb. 
il.  16)."  The  same  verb  occurs  in  Jas.  i.  25 ; 
John  XX.  5,  11 ;  Luke  xxiv.  12,  in  which 
last  place  It  is  used  of  Peter  himself,  when 
he  stooped  to  look  into  the  empty  sepulchre  on 
the  morning  of  the  Lord's  resurrection.  St. 
Paul  has  a  similar  thought  in  Eph.  iii.  10, 
"To  the  intent  that  now  unto  the  princi- 
palities and  powers  in  heavenly  place  s  might 
be  known  by  the  Church  the  manifold 
wisdom  of  God."  The  attitude  of  the  golden 
oherubim,  whose  wings  covered  the  mercy- 
seat  and  whose  faces  were  toward  it  (Exod. 
xzv.  20),  seems  to  imply  the  same  rapt, 
reverent  attention. 

Ver.  13. — Wherefore  gird  up  the  loins  of 
your  mind.  St.  Peter  sums  up  in  the  word 
"wherefore"  all  the  blessiiigs,  privileges, 
and  hopes  which  he  lias  enumerated;  on 
these  he  founds  his  exhortations.  Gird  up. 
The  word  avaCaa-d/nvot  (literally,  "  girding 
up,  tucking  up  long  garments  by  the  help 
of  a  girdle  ")  oo^urs  in  no  other  place  of  the 
New  Testament.  But  the  same  metaphor, 
expressed  in  similar  words,  is  common.  St. 
Peter  alludes,  doubtless,  to  the  Lord's  ex- 
hortation, "  Let  your  loins  be  girded  about;" 
perhaps  also  the  solemn  words  of  John  xxi. 
18,  "  signifying  by  what  death  he  should 
glorify  God,"  were  present  to  his  thoughts. 
The  loins  of  your  mind.  St.  Peter  often 
explains  a  metaphor  by  adding  a  genitive  or 
adjective ;  so  "  milk  of  the  Word ; "  "  hidden 
man  of  the  heart ;  "  "  amaranthine  wreath  of 
glory."  J^idvoia,  translated  "mind,"  is  the 
reflective  faculty.  The  Christian  must  reflect 
and  that  with  iatense  exertion  of  thought, 
on  the  gleiy  of  bis  hopes,  on  the  greatness 


of  his  responsibilities ;  he  must  seek  to  love 
God  with  all  his  mind  (SAp  rp  Siavoiif),  a» 
well  as  with  all  his  heart  and  soul.  Be 
sober.  The  Christian  must  be  sober  in  his  use 
of  the  gifts  of  God  ;  he  must  be  sober  also  in 
his  habits  of  thought ;  he  should  preserve  a 
calm,  collected  temper.  Christian  enthusiasm 
should  be  thoughtful,  not  excited  and  dis- 
orderly (comp.  2  Thess.  ii.  2;  iii.  11,  12). 
And  hope  to  the  end  ;  rather,  perfectly,  .with  a 
full,  unwavering,  constant  hope.  It  is  better 
to  take  the  adverb  re\elws  with  the  verb 
"hope"  than  with  y^(povT€s,  "be  perfectly 
sober."  For  the  grace  that  is  to  be  brought 
unto  you  at  the  revelation  of  Jesus  Christ. 
The  Christian's  hope  must  be  directed  to,  get 
towaida  (^iirl  with  accusative),  the  continual 
growth  in  grace  ("  He  giveth  more  grace," 
Jas.  iv.  6).  That  grace  is  being  brought 
now,  being  borne  in  upon  the  soul  in  the 
present  revelation  of  Jesus  Christ.  "  It 
pleased  God,"  says  St.  Paul  (Gal.  i.  16^  "to 
reveal  his  Son  in  me."  So  now  the  Lord 
manifests  himself  to  those  who  walk  in  the 
path  of  loving  obedience.  Each  gift  of  grace 
kindles  the  hope  of  a  nearer  manifestation, 
a  fuller  revelation;  grace  is  continually 
brought,  till  at  length  the  full  unspeakable 
gift  of  grace  is  realized  at  the  glorioni 
revelation  of  Jesus  Christ  at  his  second 
advent.  This  seems  better  than  to  give  the 
present  participle  (peponeyr\v  a  future  sense, 
and  to  understand  the  revelation  of  Jenia 
Christ  only  of  his  final  coming  in  glory. 

Ver.  14. — As  obedient  children;  rathet, 
children  of  obedience  (comp.  Eph.  ii.  2,  3 ; 
T.  8;  also  2  Pet.  ii.  14;  2  Thess.  ii  3  s 
Luke  xvi.  8).  Winer  says  ('  Grammar,'  iiL 
xxxiv.;  'Kern.,'  2),  "This  mode  of  expression 
is  to  be  traced  to  the  more  lively  imagination 
of  the  Orientals,  by  which  the  most  intimate 
connection  (derivation  from  and  dependence 
on) — even  when  the  reference  is  to  what  is 
not  material — is  viewed  under  the  image  of 
the  relation  of  son  or  child  to  parent.  Hence 
'children  of  disobedience' are  those  whobelong 
to  disobedience  as  a  child  to  his  mother — dis- 
obedience having  become  their  nature,  their 
predominant  disposition."  Not  fashioning 
yourselves  according  to  the  former  lusts  in 
your  ignorance.  The  remarkable  word  (rvaxn- 
lxaTi^6piivoi  seems  to  be  an  echo  of  Kom.  xii- 
2,  the  only  other  place  where  it  occurs.  It 
implies  that  men  who  live  in  sensual  lusts  take 
up  the  likeness  of  those  lusts  into  themselves, 
and  are  made,  not  as  man  was  at  first,  after 
the  likeness  of  God,  but  after  the  likeness 
of  those  lubts  of  the  flesh  whioh  are  not  of 
the  Father,  but  are  of  the  world.  The  word 
"  ignorance "  is  to  be  taken  closely  with 
"  lusts  " — "  the  former  lusts  which  were  in 
the  time  of  your  ignorance."  It  seems  to 
imply  that  St.  Peter  is  addressing  Gentilei 
as  well  as  Jews;  for,  though  ignoianoa  is 


cB.tl— 26.]     THK  PIEST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  UP  PETER. 


attributed  to  the  Jews  (Acts  iii.  17 ;  Rom.  x. 
8 ;  1  Tim.  i.  13),  it  was  ignorance,  not  of  the 
moral  law,  as  here,  but  of  the  Person  and 
office  of  Christ.  The  Jews  had  the  oracles  of 
God;  they  knew  his  will  (Rom.  it.  17;  iii. 
2;  comp.  also  Eph.  iv.  18  and  Acts  zvii. 
30). 

Ver.  15. — But  as  he  which  hath  called 
you  is  holy ;  rather,  after  the  pattern  of  the 
Holy  One  who  called  you.  The  calling  is 
the  fulfilment  of  the  election  :i  "  Whom  he 
did  predestinate,  them  be  also  called."  The 
Christian's  effort  must  be  to  fashion  himself, 
by  God's  grace,  after  the  likeness  of  God,  not 
according  to  the  former  lusts  (comp.  Matt. 
T.  45,  48;  also  Col.  iii.  10;  Eph.  iv.  21). 
So  be  ye  holy  in  all  manner  of  conversation. 
In  the  whole  course  of  your  daily  life,  in  all 
its  details,  as  you  move  hither  and  thither 
among  men,  take  the  holiness  of  God  for 
your  pattern :  "  Be  not  conformed  to  this 
world."  (For  the  word  "  conversation " 
(,ava<rTpo(pi)),  comp.  Gal.  i.  13 ;  Eph.  iv.  22 ; 
1  Tim.  iv.  12;  Heb.  xiii.  7.) 

Yer.  16. — Beoanse  it  is  written,  Be  ye  holy; 
for  I  am  holy ;  literally,  according  to  the 
best  manuscripts,  ye  shall  be  holy — future 
for  imperative.  The  words  occur  five  times 
in  the  Book  of  Leviticus.  God  had  called 
the  Israelitea  to  be  his  peculiar  people,  a 
kingdom  of  priests  and  a  holy  nation  (Exod. 
six.  5,  6).  Ho  has  called  us  Cliristinns  to 
be  "  a  chosen  generation,  a  royal  priesthood, 
a  holy  nation,  a  peculiar  people"  (ch.  ii. 
9).  He  is  iMly,  awful  in  holiness ;  in  his 
Kght  "  the  heavens  are  not  clean."  We  who 
are  his  must  strive  to  be  holy,  separated 
from  all  that  ia  impure,  consecrated  to  his 
service. 

Yer.  17. — ^And  if  ye  call  on  the  Father. 
"  If"  does  not  imply  doubt ;  it  introduces  an 
hypothesis  which,  being  taken  for  granted, 
involves  a  duty.  Apparently  there  is  here 
a  reference  to  the  Lord's  Pmyer,  as  in  2  Tim. 
iv.  18.  You  call  on  God  as  your  Father;  then 
pass  your  time  in  fear  (eomp.  Mai.  i.  6,  "  If 
1  be  a  Father,  where  is  mine  honour?  ").  He 
called  you  first ;  now  ye  call  on  him.'  The 
translation  of  the  Revised  Version  is  more 
exact  than  the  Authorized  Version,  "  If  ye 
call  on  him  as  Father."  Who  without 
respect  of  persons  judgeth  according  to 
every  man's  work.  The  adverb  airpoaw 
voKiinTus,  rendered  "without  respect  of 
persons,"  occurs  nowhere  else  in  the  New 
Testament;  but  the  thought  is  familiar. 
St.  Peter  himself  had  said,  when  he  was  sent 
to  receive  Cornelius  into  the  Church,  "  Of  a 
truth  I  perceive  that  God  is  no  respecter  of 
persons  "  (Acts  x.  34).  The  disciples  of  the 
Pharisees  had  said  the  same  of  our  Lord 
(Matt.  xxii.  16;  comp.  also  Bom.  ii.  11; 
Gal.  iL  6;  Jas.  u.  1—4).  The  Lord  said 
(John  V,  22),  "  The  Father  jndgath  no  man. 


but  hath  committed  all  judgment  to  the 
Son."  But  the  Father  is  "  Funs  judicii,"  as 
Didymus  says  (quoted  by  Alford), "  judicante 
Filio,  Pater  est  qui  judicat,"  for  the  Son 
judges  as  his  Delegate ;  as  it  was  through 
the  Son  that  the  Father  made  the  worlds. 
He  judges  according  to  every  man's  work, 
regarding,  not  distinctions  of  lank,  or  wealth, 
or  nationality,  but  only  the  character  of  the 
work.  Observe  that  the  word  "  work"  (jpyoii) 
is  in  the  singular  number,  as  irpa^m  in  Matt, 
xvi.  27.  God  judges  according  to  every 
man's  work  as  a  whole,  accordins;  to  the 
whole  scope  and  meaning  of  his  life  as 
issuing  from  the  one  governing  principle, 
whether  faith  or  selflahness.  So  Bengel, 
"Unius  hominis  unum  est  opus,  bonum 
malumve."  Pass  the  time  of  your  sojourning 
hire  in  fear.  The  verb  here,  a.va.aTpi,<pT)Ti, 
corresponds  with  the  noun  i.va<rTpa^  ("  con- 
versation ")  of  ver.  15 ;  both  might  be  rendered 
(as  Dean  Plumptre  suggests)  by  "  oanduet " 
(noun  or  verb) — "in  all  your  conduct"  in 
ver.  15 ;  and  here,  "  conduct  yourselves." 
The  word  "  sojourning  "  reminds  us  of  ver.  1 
of  this  chapter  and  of  ch.  ii.  11,  in  which 
last  place  we  have  the  corresponding  Greek 
word.  We  are  sojourners  liere,  life  is  sliort ; 
but  the  character  of  that  short  life  determines 
ou.r  eternal  condition ;  therefore  live  in  fear. 
St.  John  says,  "Perfect  love  casteth  out 
fear;"  but  there  is  no  contradiction,  as 
some  have  said,  between  the  two  holy 
apostles  ;  for  the  fear  which  cannot  coexist 
with  perfect  love  (it  may  in  various  measures 
coexist  with  imperfect  love)  is  slavish  fear, 
selfish  fear  of  death  and  punishment.  The 
fear  which  St.  Peter  and  St.  Paul  (Phil.  ii. 
12)  commend  is  holy  fear — the  fear  of  a  son 
for  a  loving  father,  the  fear  of  displeasing 
God  before  whom  we  walk,  God  who  gave 
his  blessed  Sou  to  die  for  us,  God  who  will 
judge  us  at  the  last.  This  fear  is  not 
cowardice.  Our  Lord  said  (Luke  xii.  4), 
"  Be  not  afraid  of  them  that  kill  the  body. 
.  .  .  Fear  him,"  etc.  'J'hey  who  thus  fear 
God  need  fear  nothing  else  but  God. 

Ver.  18. — Forasmuch  as  ye  know ;  lite- 
rally, Icnowing,  considering.  That  ye  were 
not  redeemed  with  corruptible  tMugs,  as 
silver  and  gold.  The  order  in  the  original 
gives  more  emphasis :  "  That  not  with  cor- 
ruptible things,  silver  and  Kold,  were  ye 
redeemed."  Alford  notes  here  that  the 
diminutives  ^apyvpitf  ^  xP""'"?)  stand  gene- 
rally (not  always)  for  the  coined  or  wrought 
metal.  The  word  iXvTpdiB-riTe,  "ye  were 
ransomed,"  seems  to  point  back  to  the  great 
saying  of  our  Lord,  "  The  Son  of  man  came 
...  to  give  his  life  a  ransom  for  many 
{Kirpoii  avrX  iroAASj/)"  (Matt.  XX.  28 ;  Mark  X. 
45 ;  comp.  1  Tim.  ii.  6).  Doubtless  no  human 
language  can  adequately  express  the  mys- 
<PTy  nf  t^p  ntouPTtient.      That   stupsndous 


10 


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PBTBB.     [oh.  1. 1-26. 


fact  tranaoenda  human  reason,  and  oannot 
be  exactly  defined  in  human  worde.  But 
the  Lord  himself  describes  it  as  a  ransom—^ 
"  a  ransom  for  many,"  given  in  their  stead, 
Beverenoe  keeps  us  from  pressing  the  illus- 
tration in  all  its  details.  It  may  be  tliat  the 
correspondence  between  the  atonement  and 
the  redemption  of  a  slave  from  an  earthly 
master  is  not  exact  in  all  puints.  But  the 
illustration  comes  from  the  Lord  himself, 
who  is  the  Truth ;  it  must  be  true  as  far  as 
human  language  permits,  as  far  as  human 
reason  caa  comprehend.  It  teaches,  as 
plainly  as  words  can  express,  the  doctrine 
of  .vicarious  satisfaction :  he  gave  his  life, 
not  only  in  behalf  of  us,  but  also  instead  of 
us — a  ransom  for  our  sins.  Compare  the  use 
of  the  word  ayopd^eiv  (1  Oar.  vi.  20),  "  Ye 
are  bought  with  a  price ; "  snd  (2  Pet.  ii. 
1),  "  The  Lord  that  bought  them  ; "  also 
iiayapd^eiy  (Gal.  iii.  13),  "  Christ  hath  re- 
deemed us  from  the  curse  of  the  Law."  From 
your  vain  oonversation  received  by  tradition 
from  your  fathers ;  literally,  out  of  your 
Dain  manner  of  life  or  conduct.  The  word 
liere  rendered  "  vain  "  is  used  of  idolatry  in 
Acts  xiv.  15,  and  also  the  corresponding 
verb  in  Bom.  i.  21.  St.  Peter  seems  to  be 
thinking  mainly  of  Gentile  Ohristiang;  he 
would  Bcircely  describe  the  sinful  conversa- 
tion of  Israelites  as  "  handed  down  from 
your  fatliers"  (Revised  Version)  without 
some  qualification.  Habits  are  transmitted 
from  fathers  to  children  j  habitual  custom 
is  made  an  excuse  for  many  shortcomings, 
but  "unus  Pater  imitandus  "  (Bengel). 

Ver.  19.— But  with  the  precious  blood  of 
Christ,  as  of  a  Iamb  without  blemish  and 
without  spot ;  rather,  as  in  the  Revised 
Version,  but  with  precious  blood,  ae  of  a 
lamb  without  blemish  cmd  without  spot,  (even 
the  bloody  of  Christ.  Pre6iuua,  as  Qpposed 
to  thi;  "  corruptible  things  "  of  ver.  18  ;  it  is 
precious,  because  it  is  the  blood  of  Christ. 
Ohiist's  holy  body  saw  not  corruption ;  gold 
and  silver  must  perish  at  last ;  the  precious 
blood  in  its  virtue  and  efficacy  abideth  ever- 
more. The  blood  of  Christ  is  compared  with 
that  of  a  lamb.  The  lumba  and  otijer 
animals  offered  as  sacrifices  were  to  be 
without  blemish  (Exod.  xii.  5 ;  Lev.  xxii, 
19,  20,  21);  Christ  was  without  sin,  pure, 
harmless,  undBfiled.  The  blood  of  animals 
could  never  take  away  sin;  yet  it  is  written, 
"  The  life  of  the  flesh  is  in  the  blood  :  and  I 
have  given  it  to  you  upon  the  altar  to  make 
an  atonement  for  your  souls:  for  it  is  the 
blood  that  maketh  atonement  for  the  soul " 
(Lev.  xvii.  11).  That  blood  prefigured  the 
precious  blood  of  Christ,  which  cleanseth 
from  all  sin.  The  sacrifices  of  the  Law 
directed  the  faith  of  the  pious  Israelite  to 
the  one  great  Sacrifice,  the  Propitiation  for 
the  slna  of  the  whole  world.    Probably  St. 


Peter  derived  the  oompaiisOn  ftom  the  well- 
remembered  wordi  of  the  Baptist,  reported 
by  his  brother  Andrew,  "  Behold  the  Lamb 
of  Godl"  The  reference  may  be  to  the 
Paschal  lamb  ("  Christ  our  Passover  is  sacri- 
ficed for  Us,"  1  Cor.  v.  7)— the  blood  of  that 
lamb  cannot,  indeed,  be  regarded  as  a  ransom 
from  Egyptian  bondage,  but  it  saved  (he 
Israelites  from  the  destroying  angel — Or  to 
any  sacrificial  lamb.  The  apostle  seems 
to  be  passing  from  the  idea  of  ransom  or 
price  to  that  of  expiation.  The  verb  "  ye 
were  redeemed,"  the  silver  and  gold,  direct 
the  thoughts  to  price ;  the  blood  and  the 
lamb,  to  ex  piation.  The  t  wo  ideas  are  olosely 
connected ;  the  two  illustrations  combined 
give  a  fuller  view  of  the  blessed  meaning  of 
the  Saviour's  death  than  either  of  them 
alone  could  do. 

Ver.  20. — Who  verily  was  foreordained 
before  the  foundation  of  the  world ;  rather, 
as  in  the  Revised  Version,  who  was  fore- 
known indeed  ;  literally,  who  hath  been  fore- 
Jcnown.  But  the  forelmowledge  of  God 
implies  the  exercise  of  hii  wilU  therefore 
the  "  foreordained  "  of  the  Authorized  Ver- 
sion, though  not  here  an  exact  translation, 
is  true  in  doctrine.  St.  Peter  had  assorted  the 
same  great  truth  in  his  sermon  on  the  Day 
of  Pentecost  (Acts  ii.  23 ;  comp.  also  iii.  18 
and  iv.  28).  He  had  heard  the  words,  "  be- 
fore the  foundation  of  the  world,"  again  and 
again  from  the  lips  of  Christ;  he  may  pos- 
sibly have  read  them  in  the  Epistle  to  the 
Bphesia,nB  (i.  4).  The  incarnation,  death, 
and  resurrection  of  Christ  were  not  the 
result  of  fi  change  of  purpose  to  meet  un- 
foreseen circumstances;  they  were  foreseen 
and  foreordained  in  the  eternal  counsels  of 
God.  Those  counsels  are  wholly  above  the 
range  of  our  understanding;  we  cannot  see 
through  the  veil  of  mystery  which  surrounds 
them  i  we  cannot  fathom  the  awful  necessi- 
ties which  they  imply.  But  was  manifest 
in  these  last  times  for  you ;  rather,  as  in  the 
Revised  Version,  with  the  best  manuscripts, 
was  manifested  at  the  end  of  the  times  for 
your  sake.  The  aorist  ((pavepwSiyTos)  marks 
the  Incarnation  as  an  event  wliich  took 
place  in  time;  the  purpose  of  God  was 
eternal,  before  all  time.  For  the  phrase, 
"  at  the  end  of  the  times  "  (iV  eirx"''!"/  rtiv 
xpoyav),  compare  the  reading  of  the  most 
ancient  manuscripts  in  Heb.  i.  1  (eir'  eV- 
xirou  ray  ^ixep&v  roiraiy,  "  at  the  end  of 
these  days ") ;  also  in  Jude  8  (iv'  iaxirou 
Xp6yov),  "  This  is  the  last  time,"  St.  John 
says;  or,  rather,  "the  last  hour  (iaxirt]  ffipo)  " 
(1  John  ii.  18) ;  the  last  period  in  the  de- 
velopment of  God's  dealings  with  mankind 
is  the  time  which  intervenes  between  the 
first  and  the  second  advents  of  Christ. 

Vei.  21.— Who  by  him  do  believe  in  God  j 
or,  aooording  to  two  of  the  most  ansient 


OH.  1. 1—25.]     THE  FIRST  EPISTLB  GENERAL  OP  PETER. 


11 


manuscripts,  who  through  him  are  faithful 
towardt  God.  Through  himself,  not  only 
thTough  his  incaniation  and  atoning  death, 
but  tlirough  his  grace  and  abiding  presence. 
He  was  manifested  for  your  sake  who 
through  him  are  faithful ;  for  all  the  faith- 
ful, whether  Jews  or  Gentiles;  "for  your 
glory,"  St.  Paul  says  (1  Cor.  ii.  7).  The 
thought  shows  the  greatness  of  God's  love 
for  his  elect.  The  eternal  Son  was  mani- 
fested for  their  sake ;  it  gives  an  additional 
stimulus  for  Christian  eifort.  That  raised 
him  up  from  the  dead,  and  gave  him  glory. 
St.  Peter  returns  to  the  "after-glories," 
which  ho  had  mentioned  in  ver.  11.  The 
death  of  Christ  is  tlie  atonement  for  sin; 
his  resurrection  and  ascension  are  the 
grounds  of  our  oonfldenoe  and  hope.  They 
throw  back  a  halo  of  Divine  glory  upon  the 
awful  cross;  they  bring  out  the  beauty  and 
the  dignity  of  the  atoning  sacrifice;  they 
show  that  it  is  accepted,  that  the  work  of 
our  redemption  is  complete.  The  Eesuriec- 
tiou  held  a  very  prominent  place  in  the 
preaching  of  St.  Peter,  and,  indeed,  of  all 
the  apcistles  (Acts  ii.  32—36 ;  iii.  1 5 ;  iv.  10 ; 
comp.  also  Acts  iv.  33 ;  Bom.  i.  4,  etc.).  That 
your  faith  and  hope  might  be  in  God; 
rather,  so  that  your  faith  and  hope  are  in 
God — directed  towards  God  (eij  &i6v);  or 
perhaps,  as  Weiss,  Huther,  and  others,  "  so 
that  your  faith  is  at  the  same  time  hope 
towards  God."  The  resurrection  and  the 
glory  of  Christ  not  only  inspire  the  Christian 
■with  confidence  in  God,  but  they  also  give 
his  faith  the  character  of  hope ;  they  fill  it 
witli  hope.  Christ  had  promised  that  where 
he  is  there  should  his  servant  be ;  he  had 
prayed  that  those  whom  the  Father  had 
given  him  should  be  with  him  where  he  is, 
to  behold  Ids  glory.  He  is  in  heaven,  on 
the  right  baud  of  God.  Thus  the  Christian's 
faith  assumes  the  attitude  of  hope ;  he  hopes 
to  be  wheie  Christ  is,  to  see  him  as  he  is,  to 
be  miuie  like  unto  him.  This  is  "  the  hope 
of  glory"  for  which  we  offer  our  thanks- 
givings.    St.  Peter  is  the  apostle  of  hope. 

Ver.  22. — Seeing  ye  have  purified  your 
Bouls;  literally,  having  purified.  The  verb 
iiyvi^ai  is  used  of  ceremonial  purification 
in  John  xi.  55,  and  in  Acts  xxi.  24,  26 ; 
xxiv.  18.  St.  James  and  St.  John,  in  their 
Epistles,  give  it  the  spiritual  sense  in  which 
St.  Peter  uses  it  here  (Jas.  iv.  8;  1  John  iii. 
3).  In  this  sense  it  implies  consecratiim  to 
God's  service,  and  an  Inward  cleansing  of 
the  heart  from  all  that  defiles— from  seiisual 
desires,  from  hypocrisy,  from  selfishness. 
The  tense  shows  that  this  inward  purifica- 
tion must  precede  the  love  to  which  the 
apostle  exhorts  us;  there  can  be  no  true 
love  in  an  unclean  heart.  In  obeying  the 
truth  through  the  Spirit;  literally,  in  the 
dbedienee  of  the  Iruth.     Obedience  is  the 


condition  of  purification.  God's  people  are 
elect  unto  obedience  and  sprinkling  of  the 
blood  of  Jesus  Christ.  While  they  walk  in 
the  path  of  obedience  they  are  walking  in 
the  light,  the  li^'ht  of  truth,  the  light  of 
God's  presence,  and  then  the  blood  of  Jesus 
Christ  is  cleansing  them  from  all  sin  (1 
John  i.  7).  The  genitive  (t^s  ctAriSeias) 
seems  to  be  objective,  "  obedience  to  the 
truth,"  rather  than  obedience  wrought  by 
the  truth.  The  truth  is  God's  truth,  the 
truth  revealed  in  his  Holy  Word.  So  the  Lord 
himself  said,  "  Sanctify  them  through  thy 
truth ;  thy  Word  is  truth  "  (John  xvii.  17). 
The  words,  "  through  the  Spirit,"  are  not 
found  in  the  best  manuscripts ;  they  may  be 
a  gloss,  but  a  true  one.  Unto  unfeigned 
leva  of  the  brethren.  St.  Peter  had  not  for- 
gotten the  new  commandment,  "  That  ye 
love  one  auother,  as  I  have  loved  you,  that 
ye  also  love  one  another."  The  word  ren- 
dered "love  of  the  brethren"  ^<l>i\aSeK<l>la) 
is  scarcely  found  except  in  Christian 
writings.  St.  Peter  uses  it  again  in  his 
Second  Epistle  (i.  7),  and  also  St.  Paul 
(Bom.  xii.  10 ;  1  Tliess.  iv.  9).  It  must  be 
unfeigned,  without  hypocrisy,  not  in  word, 
but  in  deed  and  in  truth  (1  John  iii.  18). 
Our  hearts  must  bo  purified  in  the  obedi- 
ence of  the  truth  before  that  unfeigned  love 
can  dwell  in  them  (eomp.  1  Tim.  i.  5,  whioh 
is  an  exact  parallel).  See  that  ye  love  one 
another  with  a  pure  heart  fervently ;  lite- 
rally, love  one  another  from  the  heart.  The 
word  "  pure  "  is  omitted  in  two  of  the  most 
ancient  manuscripts ;  it  may  be  a  gloss,  but 
it  is  most  true  and  suitable.  Christian  love 
must  be  from  the  heart,  true  and  pure.  The 
word  rendered  "fervently"  (^KTevfis)  means, 
literally,  "intensely,"  with  all  the  energies 
strained  to  the  utmost.  It  is  interesting  to 
observe  that  the  only  otlier  place  where  the 
adverb  occurs  is  in  Acts  xii.  5  (according 
to  the  reading  of  the  most  ancient  manu- 
scripts), where  it  is  used  of  the  prayer 
oifered  up  for  St.  Peter  himself. 

Ver.  23. — Being  born  again ;  rather,  having 
been  begotten  again.  St.  Peter  repeats  the 
verb  used  already  in  ver.  3.  It  is  the  highest 
argument  for  brotherly  love ;  the  children  of 
the  one  Father  are  all  brethren  ;  they  should 
"  love  as  brethren "  (oh.  iii.  8).  Not  of 
corruptible  seed,  but  of  incorruptible,  by  the 
Word  of  God,  which  liveth  and  abideth  for 
ever.  The  word  used  here  ((nropii)  means,  pro- 
perly, "sowing;"  but,  like  ffTriSpos  (Luke  viii. 
11),  it  stands  also  for  the  seed ;  and  here  the 
epithets  "corruptible"  and  "incorruptible" 
seem  to  necessitate  this  second  meaning.  In 
the  passu ge  quoted  from  St.  Luke,  tbe  seed 
(_a~n6pos)  is  identified  with  the  Word,  "The 
seed  is  the  Word  of  God."  Here  there  seems 
to  be  a  distinction.  God's  eloct  are  begotten 
again  of  inoom'ntible    seed    through   th? 


12 


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  PETER,     [oh,  1.1— 25. 


Word.  The  use  of  different  prepositions,  ix 
and  Sta,  apparently  implies  a  difference  be- 
tween the  seed  and  the  Word.  In  the  con- 
versation with  Nieodemus  the  Lord  had 
said,  "  Except  a  man  be  bom  of  water  and 
of  the  Spirit,  he  cannot  enter  into  the  king- 
dom of  God."  And  he  continues,  "  That 
which  is  born  of  the  flesh  [en  ttjs  aapxds, 
which  seems  to  correspond  with  the  iK 
mopas  ipBafTov  of  St.  Peter]  is  flesh;  and 
that  which  is  born  of  the  Spirit  is  spirit; " 
where  the  Greek  words,  rb  yeyevvi\^4vov  4k 
Tov  UvevfiaTos,  "  that  which  is  begotten  of  the 
Spirit,"  correspond  very  nearly  with  kvayfyev- 
VTjfievoi  ^K  fftropas  cLtpBdproVf  "  those  who  are 
begotten  again  of  incorruptible  seed."  Then 
the  incorruptible  seed  is  the  Holy  Spirit  of 
God,  the  Source  of  all  spiritual  life ;  it  is  the 
Spirit  that  "  beareth  witneis  with  our  spirit 
that  we  are  the  children  of  God  ;  "  "  To  be 
spiritually  minded  is  life."  ^Comp.  1  John 
iii.  9,  "  Whosoever  is  born  of  God  (i  7C76J'- 
yTftlxivQs  Ik  tov  ©eoB)  doth  not  commit  sin : 
for  his  seed  (avipim)  abideth  in  him :  and 
he  cannot  sin  because  he  is  bom  of  God  "). 
There  is  a  different  explanation  of  this  last 
passage :  "  God's  seed,  that  is,  his  children, 
abide  in  liim."  But  on  the  whole,  it  seems 
to  be  parallel  with  this  verse,  and  to  teach 
the  same  doctrine,  that  the  first  gift  of  the 
Spirit  is  the  germ  of  spiritual  life,  and  that 
that  precious  germ,  abiding  in  the  true 
children  of  God,  lives  and  energizes  "  till  we 
come  .  .  ,  unto  a  perfect  man,  unto  the 
measure  of  the  stature  of  the  fulness  of 
Christ "  (Eph.  iv.  13).  But  if  the  Holy 
Spirit  of  God  is,  in  the  deepest  sense,  the 
Seed  of  the  new  birth,  the  Word  is  the  in- 
strument. God's  elect  are  begotten  again 
through  the  Word,  the  Word  preached,  heard, 
read,  pronounced  in  holy  baptism.  The 
Word  preached  by  St.  Peter  on  the  great 
Day  of  Pentecost  was  the  means  by  which 
three  thousand  souls  were  led  to  be  baptized 
in  the  Name  of  Jesus  Christ  for  the  remis- 
sion of  sins,  and  to  receive  the  gift  of 
the  Holy  Ghost  (oomp.  Jas.  i.  18,  "  Of  his 
own  will  begat  he  us  with  the  Word  of 
truth  ").  Again,  the  Word  preached  derives 
its  power  from  the  personal  Word,  from  him 
who  is  the  Word  of  God.  "  All  things  were 
made  through  him  "  (John  i.  3 ;  Heb.  i.  2) ; 
and  as  the  first  creation  was  through  him, 
so  ia  the  new  creation.  He  is  "  the  Begin- 
ning of  the  creation  of  God  "  (Eev.  iii.  14) ; 
for  he  is  our  Life,  tlie  life  hidden  in  the 
heart.  He  ia  the  Word  of  life :  "He  that  hath 
the  Son  hath  Ufe  "  (1  John  v.  12)  j  «  Through 


hira  we  both  have  access  in  one  Spirit  to 
the  Father  "  (Eph.  ii.  18).  It  is  through  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  that  we  receive  the  grace 
of  the  new  birth.  The  words,  "  which  liveth 
and  abideth,"  may  be  connected  with  the 
Divine  Name :  "  God,  who  liveth  and 
abideth ;  "  or,  as  in  our  version,  with  "  the 
Word."  The  last  connection  aeems  most 
suitable  here  (comp.  ver.  23,  "The  Word 
of  the  Lord  abideth  for  ever ; "  and  Heb.  iv. 
12,  "  The  Word  of  God  is  quick  and  power- 
ful ").  The  most  ancient  manuscripts  omit 
the  words,  "  for  ever." 

Ver.  24. — ^For  all  fleah  is  as  grass,  and  all 
the  glory  of  man  as  the  flower  of  grass.  The 
,  grass  withereth,  and  the  flower  thereof 
falleth  away.  St.  Peter  quotes  laa.  xl. 
6 — 8,  in  illustration  of  his  aaaertion  that 
the  Word  of  God  abideth  for  ever.  The 
quotation  is  from  the  Septuagint.  St. 
Peter  follows  that  version  in  omitting  part 
of  ver.  7;  but  he  slightly  varies  the  words, 
writing  (according  to  the  most  ancient 
manuscripts),  "  all  the  glory  thereof,"  in- 
stead of  "all  the  glory  of  man;"  and  in 
the  next  verse,  "  the  Word  of  the  Lord," 
instead  of  "the  Word  of  our  God."  The 
first  variation  shows  an  acquaintance  with 
the  original  Hebrew.  St.  James  refers  to 
the  same  passage  from  Isaiah  in  Jas.  i. 
10,  11. 

Ver.  25.— But  the  Word  of  the  lord  en- 
dureth  for  ever.  And  this  is  the  Word  whioh 
by  the  gospel  is  preached  unto  you.  In 
this  verse,  both  in  the  quotation  and  in  the 
apostle's  comment,  the  Greek  equivalent  for 
"  word  "  is  not  \6yos,  as  in  ver.  23,  but  p^^o. 
'Pfljiio  is  "  an  utterance,  the  word  uttered," 
more  concrete  than  \6yos ;  yet  in  some  pas- 
sages, as  Eph.  vi.  18;  Heb.  vi.  4  and  xL  3, 
it  seems  to  be  used  as  equivalent  to  \6yos^ 
and  the  variation  here  may  possibly  be 
owing  to  the  quotation.  Compare  tlie  tran- 
sition from  K6yos  to  ^ij/ita  in  St.  Peter's 
speech  recorded  in  Acts  x.  36,  37.  The 
Revised  Version  renders  the  last  half  of  the 
verse.  And  this  is  the  Word  of  good  tidings 
which  was  preached  unto  you  ;  literally,  This 
is  the  Word  whioh  was  preached  as  good 
tidings.  Here  St.  Peter  recognizes  the 
gospel  whioh  had  been  preached  in  Asia 
Minor  as  the  Word  of  the  Lord  which 
abideth  for  ever.  St.  Paul  and  his  com- 
panions were  the  missionaries  from  whom 
those  provinces  had  heard  the  Word  of  God. 
St.  Peter  gives  his  formal  testimony  to  the 
teaching  of  St.  Paul,  as  he  had  already 
Jone  at  Jerusalem  (Gal.  ii.  1 — 9), 


E0MILETI08. 

Vers.  1,  2. — J7ie  address.    L  St.  Peteb's  dbsoriptioh  of  himself.    1.  His  nam*. 
When  his  brother  Andrew  brought  him  first  to  Jesus,  the  Lord  who  calleth  his  own 


OH.  1. 1—25.]     THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENEEAL  OP  PETEB.  13 

sheep  by  name  said  to  the  son  of  Jona,  "  Thou  art  Simon."  He  knew  him  by  name, 
and  he  knew  his  character;  he  gave  him  a  new  name  descriptive  of  that  character 
when  matured  and  strengthened  in  the  faith.  He  had  been  a  hearer;  he  was  to  he 
a  stone,  a  living  stone  in  the  spiritual  temple,  built  upon  that  Eock  which  is  Christ. 
That  new  name  was  destined  to  be  famous  in  the  world ;  but  Peter  had  learned  to 
rejoice  not  in  earthly  fame,  but  because  his  name  was  written  in  heaven.  2.  Sis  office. 
He  is  an  apostle  of  Jesus  Christ ;  he  is  sent  by  the  Lord ;  he  has  a  message  from  him. 
He  feels  his  own  responsibilities ;  he  impresses  upon  his  readers  theirs ;  he  must  speak, 
for  he  has  a  message ;  they  must  listen,  for  that  message  is  from  Jesus  Christ.  The 
consciousness  of  being  sent  gives  earnestness,  weight,  and  dignity  to  the  words  of 
Christ's  faithful  ministers ;  if  we  do  not  feel  that  we  have  a  message  to  deliver,  our 
utterances  are  forced,  unreal,  unprofitable.  His  readers  must  receive  his  message  with 
reverence  and  obedience,  for  it  was  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  who  gave  him  the  apostolic 
commission,  and  the  Lord  had  said,  "  He  that  heareth  you  heareth  me."  He  thinksi 
of  the  responsibilities  of  his  ofBce,  not  of  its  grandeur.  His  name  stands  first  in  all 
the  lists  of  the  apostles;  he  describes  himself  simply  as  a  fellow-presbyter  (ch.  v.  1). 
The  true  minister  of  Christ  knows  the  dignity  of  his  calling;  it  will  keep  him  humble 
in  the  deep  consciousness  of  his  own  unworthiness. 

II.  His  DESCRIPTION  OP  HIS  EBADEB8,  1.  They  ate  strangers.  God's  people  are 
"«trangers  and  pilgrims  on  the  earth"  (Heb.  xi.  13,  where  the  word  rendered  "pil- 
grims" is  the  same  with  that  translated  "strangers"  here).  Here  they  have  no  con- 
tinuing city;  they  are  sojourners — sojourners  of  the  dispersion,  dispersed  here  and  there 
in  an  unbelieving  world.  But  they  have  a  city  which  hath  foundations;  it  seems 
afar  off,  but  faith,  like  a  telescope,  brings  it  within  the  range  of  vision.  They  must 
lay  up  their  treasures  there ;  their  hearts  must  be  there ;  they  must  be  "  not  of  the 
world,"  a*  their  Lord  and  Master  Jesus  Christ  was  not  of  the  world.  This  word 
"  strangers "  first  strikes  the  key-note  of  the  Epistle,  which  is  hope — the  hope  of  the 
inheritance  reserved  in  heaven.  2.  They  are  elect.  The  strangers  on  earth  are  God's 
elect  in  heaven.  The  fact  that  they  are  in  a  true  sense  strangers  here,  that  their 
governing  principles,  hopes,  motives,  are  not  of  this  world,  proves  their  election  of 
God.  We  cannot  read  the  names  written  in  the  book  of  life;  but  we  can  read  our 
own  hearts,  and  if  our  heart  condemn  us  not,  if  the  holy  name  of  Jesus  is  written 
there,  if  his  love  is  constraining  us  to  live  no  longer  to  ourselves,  but  to  him  who  died 
for  us  and  rose  again,  then  have  we  confidence  toward  God.  (1)  Their  election  is 
according  to  the  foreknowledge  of  God  the  Father.  The  first  source  of  our  salvation 
lies  in  the  electing  love  of  God  our  heavenly  Father.  In  the  beginning,  when  God 
only  was,  and  there  was  none  but  God ;  before  the  ages  were,  while  yet  there  was  no 
Toioe  of  angel  or  man  to  break  the  awful  silence  with  words  of  prayer  or  praise,  even 
then  each  ransomed  spirit  was  known  unto  the  everlasting  Father;  for  to  the  Eternal 
time  is  not;  all  the  long  vista  of  future  ages  lies  clear  and  open  before  the  glance  of  the 
Omniscient.  "  The  Lord  knoweth  them  that  are  his ; "  he  chose  them  in  Christ  before 
the  foundation  of  the  world.  He  chose  them  not  because  he  foresaw  that  they  would 
be  worthy  apart  from  his  choice  (which  is  impossible) ;  rather  by  his  choice  he  made 
them  worthy.  He  decreed  by  his  counsel  secret  to  us  to  deliver  them  from  curse  and 
damnation,  and  to  bring  them  to  everlasting  glory.  Thus  much  is  clearly  taught  in 
Holy  Scripture;  it  follows  also  from  the  conception  of  God  as  infinite  in  power  and 
knowledge.  Our  diflficulties  arise  when  we  try  to  reconcile  this  teaching  with- the  fact 
of  free  agency  given  in  the  human  consciousness,  or  when  we  confront  the  tremendous 
fact  that  there  is  evil  in  the  world  which  God  made  and  governs.  Unbelievers,  alas  1 
say  he  cannot,  the  world  being  what  it  is,  be  both  all  good  and  almighty.  But  we 
know  that  he  is  our  Father.  We  are  children  now.  We  know  only  in  part,  very  imper- 
fectly. The  child  wonders,  but  it  does  not  doubt.  We  must  cultivate  the  childlike 
spirit;  we  must  believe  in  humble  faith  our  Father's  words;  we  shall  hereafter  reach 
the  point,  now  high  above  us,  where  these  apparently  conflicting  truths  meet  in  perfect 
harmony ;  we  shall  know  even  as  also  we  are  known.  And  now,  in  our  ignorance, 
"the  godly  consideration  of  our  election  in  Christ  is  full  of  sweet,  pleasant,  and 
unspeakable  comfort  to  godly  persons,  and  such  as  feel  in  themselves  the  working  of  the 
Spirit  of  Christ."  Those  who  know  the  power  of  God's  grace  knowalso  the  plague  of 
their  own  hearts,  their  exceeding  sinfulness  and  weakness.    What  joy,  then,  to  know 


14  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  PETER,     [oh.  1. 1—25. 


that  it  is  God  who  saves  us,  and  not  we  ourselves  1  All  that  is  really  good  within  ui 
comes  from  his  grace.  Then,  if  there  be  any  sense  of  sin  in  us,  any  yearning  for 
forgiveness,  any  hunger  after  righteousness,  we  may  humbly  and  hopefully  look  upon 
these  as  indications  of  the  work  of  God's  good  Spirit  in  our  hearts ;  we  may  trust  that 
he  who  hath  begun  the  good  work  within  us  will  complete  it  unto  the  coming  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ.  "  By  grace  are  ye  saved  through  faith,  and  that  not  of  yourselves , 
it  is  the  gift  of  God."  Thus  if  we  approach  the  mysteries  of  God's  election  from  the 
practical  point  of  view,  as  the  Scripture  leads  us,  rather  than  from  the  speculative,  in 
which  case  we  get  at  once  beyond  our  depth,  these  awful  and  blessed  truths  should 
help  to  produce  in  us  a  childlike  spirit,  and  teach  us  to  live  in  loving  trustfulness  and 
humble  dependence  upon  God.  (2)  Their  election  is  in  sanctiflcation  of  the  Spirit. 
This  is  the  sphere  in  which  God's  election  works,  the  form  of  life  in  which  the  elect 
must  necessarily  walk  ;  for  God's  Holy  Spirit  sanctifieth  the  elect  people  ol  God — they 
are  "  scaled  with  that  Holy  Spirit  of  promise,  which  is  the  earnest  of  our  inheritance." 
The  1  ible  tells  us  that  "without  holiness  no  man  shall  see  the  Lord;"  and  these  woras 
are  full  of  awfiil  meaning,  for  holiness  is  the  sum  of  all  Christian  graces ;  it  is  that 
heavenly  mindedness  which  ever  (urns  to  things  Divine  and  spiritual  with  a  love  so 
strong  and  deep  that  it  rules  the  life  and  fiUs  the  soul,  leaving  but  liltle  room  for  this 
present  world  ol  sense.  No  power  of  man  can  effect  tWs  complete  change  of  heart; 
it  is  the  peculiar  work  of  God  the  Holy  Ghost.  The  still  small  voice  of  the  Spirit 
whispering  in  the  heart  hath  a  power  beyond  all  human  effort,  working  sweetly,  but 
with  a  still  and  quiet  strength  that  draws  God's  people  out  of  this  lost  world,  as  the 
voice  of  God  called  Abram  from  his  country  and  his  father's  house.  The  Holy  Spirit 
brings  vividly  before  our  hearts  the  teaching  and  the  Person  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 
He  reveiils  unto  the  chosen  the  fair  beauty  of  the  Saviour,  so  that  the  heavenly  vision 
kindles  in  the  soul  the  flame  of  that  Divine  love  which  constrains  a  inan  to  live  no 
longer  to  himself,  but  unto  Christ.  That  love,  once  awakened,  spreads  itself  through 
the  heart,  and  draws  the  whole  man  within  the  range  of  its  sanctifying  influences, 
driving  out  all  low  and  earthly  desires,  and  lifting  up  the  soul  to  God.  This  is  the 
sanctiflcation  of  the  Spirit,  the  pledge  and  earnest  of  our  election.  For  (in  the  words 
of  Archbishop  Leighton)  "  if  men  can  read  the  characters  of  God's  imaze  in  their  own 
souls,  they  are  the  counterpart  of  the  golden  characters  of  his  love  in  which  their 
names  are  written  in  the  book  of  life.  ...  He  that  loves  God  may  be  sure  that  he 
was  first  loved  of  God,  and  he  that  chooses  God  for  his  delight  and  portion  may  con- 
clude confidently  that  God  hath  chosen  him  to  be  one  of  those  that  shall  enjoy  him, 
and  be  happy  in  him  for  ever ;  for  that  our  love  of  him  is  but  the  return  and  reper- 
cussion of  the  beams  of  his  love  shining  upon  us."  (3)  Their  election  is  unto  obedience. 
God's  election,  drawing  his  chosen  to  himself  through  the  sanctifying  influences  of  his 
Spirit,  must  issue  in  obedience.  "If  we  live  in  the  Spirit,"  says  St.  Paul,  "let  u« 
also  walk  in  the  Spirit."  He  whose  daily  life  is  irradiated  by  the  indwelling  grace  of 
the  Holy  Spirit,  must  walk  with  God  like  Enoch,  before  God  like  Abraham,  in  the 
consciousness  of  God's  presence;  and  when  we  feel  that  God's  eye  is  on  us,  and  God's 
jiresence  with  us,  it  must  become  more  and  more  the  great  effort  of  our  life  to  please 
liim  in  all  things,  and  to  do  his  blessed  will.  "Thy  will  be  done"  is  the  constant 
prayer  of  his  elect,  filling  their  hearts  more  and  more,  fashioning  their  lives  more  and 
more  after  the  example  of  their  Lord.  They  are  made  righteous  by  his  obedience,  for 
his  obedience  is  their  pattern ;  and  it  is  their  strength,  for  he  is  theirs,  they  are  one 
with  him;  and  his  obedience,  revealed  into  their  hearts  by  the  Holy  S|-irit,  works  in 
them  obedience  unto  life.  (4)  And  sprinkling  of  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ.  At  Sinai 
Moses  sprinkled  with  the  blood  of  the  covenant,  not  only  the  altar,  but  the  people 
also.  The  blood  of  the  Lord  Jesus  was  shed  once  upon  the  cross ;  but  Holy  Scripture 
says  of  all  believers,  "Ye  are  come  .  .  .  unto  the  bloud  of  sprinkling"  (Heb.  xii.  24). 
"Without  shedding  of  blood  there  is  no  remission."  The  precious  blood,  once  shed 
for  the  sins  of  the  whole  world,  must  be  applied  individually  to  each  believer's  soul. 
Therefore,  St.  Peter  says  that  election  is  "  unto  the  sprinkling  of  the  blood  of  Jesus 
Christ."  The  Spirit  sprinkleth  the  heart  with  the  blond  of  Christ  through  the  energy 
of  faith,  revealing  to  the  believer  his  exceeding  love  in  dying  on  the  cross  for  us. 
Then  the  cross  fills  the  believer's  soul,  and  gathers  round  itself  his  best  affections; 
then  he  walks  in  the  li^ht  which  streams  from  the  cross;  and  while  be  iit  w!illin<! 


TO.  1. 1—25.]     THE  TmST  EPISTLE  GEHEEAL  OF  PETER.  15 

in  the  light,  the  Mood  of  Jesus  Christ  is  exerting  its  living  power,  cleansing  him  daily 
and  hourly  from  every  stain  of  »Bln.  Thus  we  may  well  pray  that  the  grace  of  our 
■Lord  Jesus  'Ohrast,  and  the  love  of  Grod,  and  the  fellovcship  of  the  Holy  Ghost  may 
be  with  us  all,  and  that  for  evermore;  for  the  love  of  God  first  called  us  into  a 
istate  of  salvation,  the  connmnilon  of  the  Holy  Ghost  is  the  only  source  of  that  holiness 
without  which  ■weicaiwiot  'see  God,  and  the  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  i;brist  alone  can 
cleanse  us  from  ouv  sinsianrl  keep  nsin  the  way  of  o'bedience. 

III.  The  salutation.  1.  i&race.  It  is  the  favour  of  'God,  the  source  of  every 
hlessing,  the  origin  of 'our  salivation:  "By  grace  are  ye  saved."  It  comes  'from  God  ; 
it  is  not  earned  ty  any  meritof  em's ;  we  pray  for  it  for  ourselves  and  for  ow  friends ; 
we  can  ask  fonnothiug  'hotter.  2.  Peace.  When  the  grace  of  God  ahideth  on  a  soul 
there  is  peace  within  the  heart';  he  must  be  at  peace  with  God  and  with  himself  who 
lives  in  the  light  of  'grace.  Peace  is  twofold :  (1)  admission  into  covenant  with  'God 
fhrciugh  theiatoning  blood;  and  (2)  the  rest  of  the  believing  soul  in  God's  love  and 
mercy  (see  homiletics  on  'PMl.  i.  2).  3.  St.  Peter's  addition.  "Grace  and  peace"  is 
St.  Paul's  oidinaiy  form  of  salutation ;  St.  Peter  adds  the  prayer  that  it  may  he  multi- 
plieil.  "The  path  of  the  just  is  as  the  shining  light,  shining  more  and  more  unto  the 
perfect 'day."  The  "(race  ■(«  God  is  apower;  it  draws  the  Christian  onward '"from  grace 
to  grace."  As  he  grows  in  grace,  the  gift  of  peace  "becomes  'fuller  and  more  blessed, 
passing  all  understainding.  The  'Mfe  of  faith  is  a  progress ;  we  cannot  stand  still ;  if 
we  are  not  ^adivanoisg,  we  must  'be  receding.  Our  prayer  must  'be  to  increase  more  and 
more. 

Lessons.  1.  Christ's  people  are  strangers  here;  they  must  lift  up  their  hearts  to 
their  everfastimg  home.  2.  T%ey  are  the  elect  of  God ;  they  shall  he  his  when  he 
(Diafceth  up  his  jewels.  3.  They  must  live  a  consecrated  life,  keeping  themselves,  by 
the  grace  of  God,  "wiitbin  the  sphere  of  the  blessed  Spirit's  influence.  4.  They  must 
walk  always  in  the  path  of  holy  obedience;  so  ihall  the  blood  of  sprinkling  continually 
cleanse  them  from  their  i^n. 

Vers.  3 — 12. —  Thanksgiving.  I.  iPoR  the  hope  of  the  Chbistian.  1.  ne  ground 
«f  that  'hope.  It  is  the  mercy  of  'God.  We  need  to  pray  constantly,  "Bave  mercy 
upon  us,  miserable  sinners ;'"  for,  indeed,  we  are  sinners,  and  sinners  must  be  miserable, 
unless  God  .is  pleased  to  forgive  them  and  to  Teconoile  them  to  himself.  But  God  did 
more  than  forgive;  in  his  meicy  he  begat  us  again.  The  heavenly  inheritance  is  ours 
by  right  of  the  new  birth;  we  hope  for  it  because  we  are  children  of  God.  We  were 
by  naJtureohildTen  of  wrath  (Eph.  ii.  3),  but  God  begat  us  again;  and,  if  we  are  chil- 
dren, then  are  we  heirs,  heirs  of  God.  2.  The  character  of  that  hope.  It  is  a  living 
hope.  It  is  the  hope  of  life,  and  it  is  full  of  life;  it  is  bright,  active,  dheerful;  it 
springs  up  ever  ifresh  and  iclear  in  the  Christian's  heart,  giving  calm  peace  and  inner 
joy  e*en  in  tlie  xaidst  of  troubles.  And  it  diet;h  not;  worldly  hcpes  perish  and  die; 
tihey  muck  us  with  a  deluding  expectation,  but  they  end  in  disappointment,  and  leave 
us  sad  and  hopeless.  "The  'hope  of  unjust  men  perisVeth "  (Pruv.  xi  7),  often  while 
they  live,  always  when  they  die.  Btit  "the  righteous  "hath  hope  in  his  death"  (Prov. 
adv.  32);  =for  his  hope  liveth  even  in  death.  "The  world,"  says  Archbishop  Leighton, 
"  dares  say  no  more  for  its  flevioe  than  Biim  spiro  spero ;  "but  the  children  of  God  can 
■add  by  virtue  of  this  Jiving  hope.  Bum  exspiro  spero."  3.  The  means  hy  which  we  are 
begotten  again  Anto  that  hopt.  it  was  'by  the  resurrection  Of  Jesus  Christ  from  the 
dead.  Tlie  new  birth  is  sometimes  ascribed,  says  Archbishop  Leighton,  "to  the  suh- 
ordinate  means — to  fcapiiism,  called  therefore  1ihe  laver  of  regeneration  (Titus  iii.  5) ; 
to  the  Word  of  iGod  j( Jas.  i.  18) ;  to  the  min  i  sters  of  this  Word,  as  1  Cor.  iv.  15, '  For 
tliough  you  have  ten  thousand  instructors  in  Christ,  yet  have  ye  not  many  fathers ; 
for  in  Chnist  .Jesus  have  I  begotten  you  through  the  gospd."  But  these  subordinate 
imeans  derive  their  efficacy' from  the  mercy  of  God  saving  us  thi-oiigh  the  incnrnation, 
death,  and  resurrection  of  the  only  begotten  Son.  His  resurrection  was  in  some  sense 
•  birth  into  a  new  life  of  mediation  and  intercession.  Compare  St.  Paul's  application 
of  Pa.  ii.  7,  '  '1  hou  art  my  Son ;  this  day  have  I  bej:otten  thee'  to  our  Lord's  Tesur- 
rection  (Acts  xiii.  -38).  And  it  is  the  cause  of  our  new  birth.  St.  Paul  speaks  of 
rising  with  Christ  in  baptism  (Col.  ii.  12);  'hut  we  can  only  rise  with  Christ  through 
his  resurrection.     That  resurrection  is  '  not  only  the  exemplar,  but  the  eflScient  cause' 


M  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  PETER,     [oh.  1. 1— 2«. 

•f  the  living  hope  on  which  St.  Peter  loves  to  dwell"  (Leighton).  4.  The  object  of  that 
hope.  It  is  the  heavenly  inheritance.  It  ia  God  who  fills  his  people's  hearts  with  the 
tope  of  that  inheritance.  He  enlightens  the  eyes  of  their  understanding,  that  they 
may  know  "what  is  the  hope  of  hia  callins;,  and  what  the  riches  of  the  glory  of  his 
inheritance  in  the  saints"  (Eph.  i.  18).  That  inheritance  is  (1)  incorruptible;  like 
the  peace  of  God  which  is  its  foretaste  on  earth,  it  passeth  understanding ;  it  hath  not 
entered  into  the  heart  of  man ;  we  can  only  describe  it  by  contraries ;  we  know  rather 
what  it  is  not,  than  what  it  is.  It  is  not  corruptible.  Here  we  are  "inter  peritura 
perituri  "  (Leighton) ;  we  perish,  our  best  possessions  perish.  There  they  die  no  more ; 
their  inheritance  of  gladness  is  like  themselves,  incorruptible.  Here  the  very  heaven* 
■hall  perish ;  they  shall  wax  old  as  a  garment  (Heb.  i.  11) ;  the  new  heavens  and  the 
new  earth,  which  are  the  inheritance  of  the  saints,  abide  for  ever.  (2)  It  is  undefiled. 
Hera  the  trail  of  the  serpent  is  over  all  things ;  men's  hearts,  lives,  conversation,  bear 
the  taint  of  evil ;  the  earth  has  been  marred  by  the  sin  of  man ;  there  is  no  earthly 
beauty,  no  earthly  possession,  free  from  blemish.  The  heavenly  inheritance  is  wholly 
pure ;  "  the  street  of  the  city  is  pure  gold,  as  it  were  transparent  glass ; "  nothing  that 
deflleth  can  enter  there.  (3)  It  fadeth  not  away.  The  lapse  of  time  doth  not  affect 
it,  for  it  is  timeless,  eternal.  There  is  no  old  age  there,  but  perpetual  youth.  The 
best  joys  of  earth  fade  into  weariness ;  there  is  no  weariness  in  heaven ;  the  new  song 
never  wearies  the  blessed.  The  joy  of  God's  presence  is  never  obscured  there.  God's 
saints  sometimes  have  "  sweet  presences  of  God  here,  but  they,  are  short,  and  often 
interrupted;  but  there  no  cloud  shall  come  betwixt  them  and  their  Sun;  they  shall 
behold  him  in  his  full  brightness  for  ever"  (Leighton).  5.  The  certainty  of  that 
inheritance  which  is  the  ohfect  of  our  hope.  (1)  It  is  reserved  in  heaven  for  God's 
elect.  Its  preciousness  is  shown  by  its  being  in  heaven,  and  by  its  being  reserved  for 
God's  chosen.  He  reserves  it  for  them ;  therefore  none  can  take  their  crown,  none  can 
spoil  them  of  their  reward,  for  God,  who  hath  reserved  it  for  them  from  the  beginning, 
is  able  to  keep  it  unto  that  day.  (2)  They  are  guarded  unto  salvation.  The  inheri- 
tance is  reserved  for  them;  they  are  guarded  from  the  evU  (John  xvii.  15).  God 
c«reth  for  them;  his  angels  by  his  appointment  succour  and  defend  them.  Their 
Ghiardian  is  almighty.  "  Pear  not,"  he  saith,  "  for  I  am  with  thee."  They  need  only 
faith  to  look  above,  to  grasp  the  promises,  to  cling  to  the  Saviour's  strength.  (3)  That 
salvation  is  ready  to  be  revealed.  It  is  veiled  from  us  now ;  but  the  veil  shall  be 
withdrawn  in  the  last  time.  Then  shall  "  thine  eyes  see  the  King  in  his  beauty ;  they 
shall  behold  the  land  that  is  very  far  off"  (Isa.  xxxiii.  17).  Now  we  must  live  in 
hope,  blessing  God  for  that  living  hope  which  is  the  anchor  of  the  Christian  souL 

II.  Fob  the  jot  of  the  Cheistian.  1.  It  is  great.  He  rejoices  in  hope;  he 
exults  when  the  blessed  hope  lives  clear  and  bright  in  his  heart ;  he  strives  to  "  hold 
fast  the  rejoicing  of  the  hope  firm  unto  the  end  "  (Heb.  iii.  6).  But :  2.  That  joy  u 
amid  tears ;  for  man  is  born  to  sorrow ;  suffering  is  the  lot  of  all  men,  and  Christians 
have  their  own  peculiar  trials:  "Ye  must  through  much  tribulation  enter  into  the 
kingdom"  of  God.  Those  to  whom  St.  Peter  wrote  were  suffering  a  great  trial  of 
affliction :  the  apostle  comforts  them,  bidding  them  look  away,  as  far  as  might  be, 
from  their  earthly  troubles  to  the  joyful  hope  of  everlasting  life.  3.  2%e  joy  of  the 
Lord  is  strength  in  the  time  of  trouble.  (Neh.  viii.  10.)  It  helps  the  Christian  to  dis- 
cern the  meaning  of  his  afflictions ;  they  are  but  for  a  moment,  for  a  season,  and  they 
•re  necessary ;  they  come  from  our  Father  in  heaven,  and  he  doth  not  willingly  afflict 
nor  grieve  the  children  of  men;  he  sends  them  "for  our  profit,  that  we  might  be 
partakers  of  his  holiness"  (Heb.  xii.  10).  They  would  not  be  trials  if  they  were  not 
felt :  the  Christian's  cross  must  sometimes  be  sharp  and  heavy,  or  it  would  not  make 
him'  partaker  of  his  Saviour's  suflerings.  The  Christian  is  often  sorrowful,  but  he 
ought  to  be  "always  rejoicing"  even  in  sorrow;  for  these  trials,  so  hard  to  bear,  are 
as  necessary  for  the  purifying  of  our  faith  as  fire  is  for  the  refining  of  gold.  Gold  is 
counted  precious  among  men;  faith  is  precious  in  the  sight  of  God.  Gold  perisheth; 
faith  abideth.  The  proof  of  faith  is  of  infinitely  greater  importance  than  the  proof  of 
gold.  Temptations  try  the  Christian's  faith.  God  tried  the  faith  of  Abraham  and 
Job;  temptation,  resisted  and  overcome,  proves  faith  to  be  real  and  true.  And 
temptation  refines  faith;  temptation  borne  meekly  and  patiently  purifies  faith  from 
the  taints  which  cling  about  every  human  character ;  it  helps  ua  to  overcame  pride 


OH.  1.1— 25,]     THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PETER.  IT 

and  self-confidence  and  worldliness,  and  keeps  us  humble,  distrustful  of  ourselves, 
trusting  only  in  God.  The  joy  of  the  Lord,  realized  amid  sorrow,  helps  the  Ohristian 
to  believe  that  these  trials,  so  grievous  now,  will  be  found  unto  praise  and  honour  and 
glory  at  the  appearing  of  Jesus  Christ.  4.  It  springs  out  of  the  love  of  Christ.  Love 
implies  knowledge.  We  see  not  the  Lord  Christ  with  the  bodily  eye;  but  the  vision 
of  faith  is  more  precious  far  than  sight ;  many  who  saw  him  did  not  believe.  "  Blessed 
are  they  that  have  not  seen,  and  yet  have  believed ; "  for  faith  brings  the  Lord  very 
near  to  the  soul,  yea,  into  the  heart ;  faith  opens  (he  door  to  him,  and  then  he  entereth 
in,  and  maketh  his  abode  within  the  heart  that  in  faith  receives  him.  Therefore  we 
may  know  him  with  a  real  knowledge,  with  that  knowledge  which  is  eternal  life,  with 
the  knowledge  with  which  the  true  sheep  know  the  good  Shepherd — the  knowledge 
which  he  himself,  in  the  wonderful  words  of  John  x.  14,  15,  compares  with  the  know- 
ledge with  which  he  himself,  the  Son  of  God,  knows  the  eternal  Father.  It  is  a 
knowledge  of  love,  of  intimate  spiritual  communion.  "  Truly,"  says  St.  John,  "  our 
fellowship  is  with  the  Father,  and  with  his  Son  Jesus  Christ.  And  these  things  write 
we  unto  Tou,  that  your  joy  may  be  full."    The  joy  of  God's  saints  is  imspeakable. 

"  No  tongue  of  mortal  can  express, 
No  pen  can  write  their  blessednest; 
He  only  who  hath  proved  it  knows 
What  bliss  from  love  of  Jesus  flows." 

It  were  a  poor  thing,"  says  Leighton,  "  if  he  that  hath  that  joy  could  tell  it  all  out 
Pavperit  est  numerare  pecus.  And  when  the  soul  hath  most  of  it,  then  it  remains 
most  within  itself,  and  is  so  inwardly  taken  up  with  it,  that  possibly  it  can  then  least 
of  all  express  it.  It  is  with  joys  as  they  say  of  cares  and  griefs,  Leves  loquuntwr,  ingentes 
etupent.  The  deepest  waters  run  stillest.  '  Res  severa  est  verum  gaudium,'  says  Seneca. 
True  joy  is  a  solid,  grave  thing ;  it  dwells  more  in  the  heart  than  in  the  countenauce ; 
whereas,  on  the  contrary,  base  and  false  joys  are  but  superficial,  skin-deep  (as  we  say) ; 
they  are  all  in  the  face."  And  it  is  full  of  glory,  glorified  with  a  foretaste  of  the  glory 
that  is  to  be  revealed ;  for  they  who  have  that  joy  are  spoken  of  as  evea  now  receivings 
the  end  of  their  faith,  the  salvation  of  souls.  That  precious  gift  of  salvation  is  not 
only  negative,  deliverance  from  the  guilt  and 'power  of  sin;  it  is  much  more  than  this — 
it  is  Christ  himself  manifested  into  the  believer's  heart.  He  is  our  Jesus,  the  Salva- 
tion of  Jehovah  to  his  chosen ;  his  presence  sheds  a  glory  round.  "  The  glory  which 
thou  gavest  me,  I  have  given  them."  In  such  measure  as  that  presence  is  realized, 
is  the  blessing  of  salvation,  the  end  of  our  faith,  received.  His  saints  as  they  grow  in 
grace,-are  ever  receiving  a  fuller  and  deeper  salvation — ^the  salvation  of  souls  now. 
Hereafter  he  "  shall  fashion  anew  the  body  of  our  humiliation,  that  it  may  be  conformed 
to  the  body  of  his  glory"  (Phil.  iii.  21,  Revised  Version). 

III.  The  deep  inteebst  taken  in  toat  hope  and  jot.  1.  By  the  prophets. 
Christians  are  often  apathetic :  they  do  not  realize  the  exceeding  glory  and  grandeur  of 
the  joy  that  is  set  before  them;  their  hearts  we  dull  and  cold.  It  was  not  so  with  the 
prophets.  They  saw  not  what  the  apostles  saw ;  but  the  Spirit  of  Christ  was  in  them ; 
it  testified  of  the  sufferings  of  Christ  and  his  after-glories.  They  inquired  and  searched 
diligently  by  prayer  and  devout  thought,  like  Habakkuk  (ii.  1)  and  the  psalmist 
(Pb.  Ixxxv.  8) ;  or  sometimes  by  study  and  reading,  like  Daniel  (ix.  2).  We  should 
imitate  them ;  we  should  search  the  Scriptures,  we  should  meditate  and  watch  and  pray. 
We  should  everyday  fix  our  hearts  in  devout  contemplation  on  the  sufferings  of  Christ; 
we  should  lift  up  our  souls  to  behold  in  thankful  adoration  the  glories  of  the  risen, 
ascended  Lord.  Very  sacred  and  precious  must  be  the  mysteries  of  our  salvation  which 
attracted  the  concentrated  attention  of  those  holy  men.  They  saw  the  facts  of  our 
Lord's  life  and  death  afar  off;  we  have  received  the  gospel  ftom  eye-witnesses  speaking 
by  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost  sent  down  from  heaven.  That  Holy  Ghost,  the  Com- 
forter, once  sent  by  Christ  from  the  Father  (John  xv.  26),  abides  for  ever  with  the 
faithful ;  he  will  guide  us  into  all  truth;  if  we  search  for  it  like  the  prophets,  he  will 

lead  us  nearer  and  nearer  to  the  Saviour.  2.  By  the  angels.  But  higher  intelligences 
than  the  prophets  are  interested  in  the  scheme  of  our  salvation.  The  blessed  angels 
long  to  look  into  these  things,  and  that  with  rapt  fixed  attention.  The  mystery  of  god- 
liness, manifest  in  the  flesh,  was  seen  of  angels  (1  Tim.  iii.  16).  They  watched  the 
L  PBTia.  " 


18  THB  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PETER.     [<«.  1. 1— 25. 


great  facts  in  the  history  of  redemption;  they  delight  to  contemplate  the  progress  of 
the  gospel  now.  They  watch  with  intensest  interest  the  great  struggle  between  good 
and  evil  in  the  worid,  and  as  each  ransomed  soul,  drawn  by  the  power  of  the  cross,  turns 
to  God,  "  there  is  joy  in  the  presence  of  the  angels  of  God."  How  strange  that  men,  for 
whom  the  Lord  Jesus  died,  should  be  so  cold  and  listless,  while  angels,  of  whom  he 
took  not  hold  as  he  taketh  hold  of  the  seed  of  Abraham  (Heb.  ii.  16,  Revised  Version), 
look  so  eagerly  into  the  great  truths  of  our  redemption  I  They  are  our  fellow-servants 
(Rev.  xxii.  9) ;  we  shall  be  their  fellow-students,  if  we  take  example  from  them,  and 
study  with  love  and  awe  and  reverence  the  life,  the  death,  the  resurrection,  of  him  who 
loved  us  even  unto  death. 

Lessons.  1.  Cherish  the  Christian's  hope;  earthly  hopes  are  but  castles  in  the  sir, 
delusive,  unsubstantial ;  the  living  hope  abideth.  2.  Thank  God  for  the  hope  of  glory ; 
it  comes  only  from  his  mercy ;  it  cheers  us  in  our  troubles,  in  the  approach  of  death ;  in 
everything  give  thanks.  8.  The  heavenly  inheritance  is  kept  for  God's  elect ;  they  are 
kept  for  it;  let  them  rejoice  evermore.  4.  Their  trials  are  precious ;  they  issue  in  praise 
and  honour  and  glory ;  let  them  rejoice  even  in  sorrow.  6.  The  love  of  Christ  gives  the 
holiest  joy ;  let  us  seek  that  joy  in  seeking  to  love  him  more  and  more.  6.  PropheU 
and  angels  love  to  gaze  into  the  mysteries  of  our  redemption ;  let  us  do  the  like. 

Vers.  13 — 25. — PracUcal  exhortations.  I.  To  progress  Df  holikess.  1.  The 
necetsity  of  earnest  effort.  Christians  are  pilgrims  and  strangers ;  they  must  not  loiter 
on  their  way,  they  must  press  toward  the  mark.  Tho  journey  is  long  and  laborious; 
they  must  gather  up  their  robes,  for  there  are  many  miry  places,  there  is  much  pollution 
in  the  world,  and  "blessed  are  they  that  have  not  defiled  their  garments;  they  shall 
walk  with  the  Lord  in  white."  They  must  gird  them  up  round  their  loins  lest  they 
hang  down  and  impede  their  progress.  They  must  lay  aside  the  sin  which  doth  so 
easily  beset  them,  and  keep  their  affections  and  desiies  closely  girt  in,  that  they 
become  not  loose  and  hinder  them.  They  must  not  allow  their  mind  to  be  listless 
and  apathetic ;  they  must  keep  their  thoughts  active,  fixed  on  their  journey  and  on 
its  end.  (1)  To  do  this  they  must  be  sober.  Excess  of  meat  and  drink  weighs 
down  the  soul  and  sinks  it  into  a  deadly  lethargy.  The  intemperate  use_  of  any 
of  this  world's  good  things  or  enjoyments  interferes  with  spiritual  exertion,  and 
lowers  the  tone  of  the  spirit.  The  Christian  must  be  temperate  in  all  things,  in  all 
his  habits  and  modes  of  thought;  he  must  be  calm,  quiet,  thoughtful,  zealous  hut 
collected,  full  of  high  enthusiasm  but  wise  and  free  from  excitement.  (2)  And  they 
must  hope,  and  that  perfectly.  Hope  urges  the  traveller  onward ;  he  heeds  not  the 
discomforts  of  the  way  while  the  hope  of  the  joy  that  is  set  before  him  is  fresh 
and  bright  in  his  heart.  The  Christian's  hope  is  sometimes  mixed  with  doubts  and 
fears;  but  this,  the  psalmist  says,  is  "mine  own  infirmity"  (Ps.  Ixxvii.  10),  He 
must  lift  up  his  eyes  to  the  hills  whence  cometh  his  help;  for  the  grace  which  is 
the  object  of  his  hope  ("  grace,"  says  Leighton,  "  is  glory  begun,  and  glory  is  grace  com- 
pleted") is  being  brought  to  him.  Grace  comes  from  God;  it  is  his  free  favour;  he 
gave  the  first  gift  of  grace ;  "  he  giveth  more  grace."  It  is  his  bounty,  not  deserved  by 
any  merits  of  ours :  "  dona  sua  coronal  Deus,  non  merita  tua,"  says  St.  Augustine.  That 
grace  is  being  brought  now ;  as  men  gird  up  their  loins  and  hasten  towards  it,  it  is 
brought  nearer  to  them ;  when  the  prodigal  arose  and  came,  his  father,  while  he  was 
yet  a  great  way  off,  ran  and  came  to  meet  him.  So  God's  grace  is  being  brought  in  con- 
tinually increasing  measure  as  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  reveals  himself  in  nearer  vision 
to  the  believing  soul ;  it  will  be  brought  in  perfect  glory  when  his  saints  shall  see  him 
as  he  is  in  his  kingdom.  2.  Old  htsts  must  he  forsaken.  The  assnred  hope  of  salvation 
will  urge  the  Christian  to  follow  after  holiness :  "  He  that  hath  this  hope  in  him  puri- 
fleth  himself."  Holiness  is  separation  from  all  that  defileth.  Christians  must,  as 
obedient  children,  forsake  the  world,  the  flesh,  and  the  devil ;  they  must  not  fashion 
themselves  after  the  likeness  of  the  kisls  of  the  flesh,  and  the  lust  of  the  eyes,  and 
the  pride  of  life ;  for  the  image  of  Christ  cannot  be  traced  upon  the  soul  that  bears  the 
impress  of  these  evil  things.  The  heathen  had  the  excuse  of  ignorance ;  we  Christians 
have  the  light;  let  us  beware  lest  any  of  us  incur  the  awful  condemnation  of  those 
who  love  darkness  rather  than  light  because  their  deeds  are  evil.  3.  The  pattern  to  h$ 
tei  liefore  us.     It  is  the  all-holy  God  himself.     "  Summa  religionis  est  imitari  quern  ctdia. 


OH.  1. 1—26.]     THE   FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PETER.  19 

The  essence  of  religion  consists  in  the  imitation  of  him  we  won  hip  "  (Leighton).  The 
^ods  of  the  heathen  were  represented  as  actuated  by  human  passions  and  stained  with 
hateful  sins;  their  character  must  have  reacted  upon  their  ignorant  worshippers;  their 
worship  was  degrading.  Our  God  is  the  most  Holy  One,  awful  in  holiness.  He  has 
not  called  us  unto  imcleanuess,  but  unto  holiness ;  he  has  set  us  apart  for  himself,  tkat 
we  should  be  holy  to  him.  "  Holiness  unto  the  Lord  "  was  inscribed  upon  the  mitre  of 
the  high  priest ;  it  should  be  written  in  the  hearts  of  Christians,  who  are  a  holy  priest- 
hood, dedicated  to  the  service  of  God.  Holiness  lies  in  the  imitation  of  God.  "  Be  ye 
followers  [literally, '  imitators']  of  God  as  dear  children,"  says  St.  Paul.  It  is  the  high 
pattern  for  the  Christian,  very  high  indeed  above  us,  but  yet  set  before  us  by  God  him- 
self. We  must  make  it  our  constant  effort,  by  the  promised  help  of  his  Holy  Spirit,  tc 
become  "  partakers  of  his  holiness ; "  we  should  follow  after  holiness  in  all  things,  in  all 
the  circumstances  of  our  lives,  iu  all  manner  of  conversation.  If  we  earnestly  desire  it 
with  a  strong  sustained  longing,  with  hunger  and  thirst,  then  we  know — for  we  have  hii 
gracious  word — we  shall  be  filled. 

U.  To  HOLT  FEAB.  1.  The  first  reason :  the  Judgment.  St.  Peter,  the  apostle  of 
hope,  dwells  much  on  the  deep  and  hidden  joy  which  is  vouchsafed  to  the  faithful 
Christian.  St.  Paul,  the  apostle  of  faith,  again  and  again  urges  upon  us  the  same  duty, 
the  same  privilege,  of  joy  in  the  Lord.  But  both  apostles  bid  us  fear  God ;  "  pass 
the  time  of  your  sojourning  here  in  fear ; "  "  work  out  your  own  salvation  with  fear  and 
trembling."  Theu  faith  and  hope  and  joy  are  not  inconsistent  with  fear.  Nay,  there 
can  be  no  true  faith  and  hope  and  joy  without  fear ;  for  God's  grace,  out  of  which 
flow  faith  and  hope  and  joy,  produces  also  holy  fear;  without  reverence  and  godly  fear 
we  cannot  serve  him  acceptably  (Heb.  xiL  28).  True  religion  implies  a  deep  sense  of 
God's  presence ;  and  that  presence,  realized  by  faith,  must  inspire  a  solemn  awe  into  the 
heart  to  which  it  is  granted.  He  who  lives  very  near  to  God,  as  Abraham  did,  must 
feel,  as  Abraham  did,  that  it  is  a  solemn  thing  for  one  who  is  but  dust  and  ashes  to 
speak  unto  the  Lord  (Gen.  zviii.  27).  Flesh  and  blood,  conscious  of  uu  worthiness, 
must  have  something  of  that  awful  dread  which  led  St.  Peter  himself  once  to  say, 
"  Depart  from  me ;  for  I  am  a  sinful  man,  0  Lordl "  The  first  petition  in  the  prayer 
which  the  Lord  himself  hath  taught  us,  the  prayer  which  St.  Peter  apparently  had  iu 
his  thoughts  when  he  wrote  these  verses,  is,  "  Hallowed  be  thy  Name."  Our  first 
approach  to  the  throne  of  grace  must  be  made  with  deep  and  solemn  reverence. 
The  very  seraphim  covered  their  faces  when  they  chanted,  "  Holy,  holy,  holy,  is  the 
Lord;"  and  we  sinful  men  must  learn  reverence  from  the  blessed  angels  when  we 
draw  near  to  God.  We  call  him  our  Father;  that  precious  name  tells  us  of  his 
love,  but  it  reminds  us  also  of  the  honour  due  to  such  a  Father.  We  are  but 
sojourners  here ;  this  life,  with  all  its  cares  and  excitements,  will  soon  be  gone.  Be 
not  over-onxioiu ;  fear  not  earthly  troubles  and  trials ;  think  of  the  end,  the  jurlg- 
ment  which  is  coming,  and  live  in  the  holy  fear  of  God.  He  "  judgeth  according  to 
every  man's  work."  Is  our  work  so  thorough  that  we  have  no  need  to  fear  ?  Gtod's 
holiest  servants  feel  their  unwurthiness  the  most ;  they  are  conscious,  not  only  of  many 
great  sins  in  the  past,  but  of  much  frailty  and  inconstancy  always.  There  are  strange 
inconsistencies  and  vacillations  and  falterings,  even  in  the  holiest  lives.  The  sense  of 
weakness  keeps  God's  people  in  the  holy  fear  of  God,  and  that  fear  makes  them  vigilant 
and  circumspect.  They  think  often  of  the  judgment ;  they  think  of  themselves  stand- 
ing before  the  throne.  They  have  hope,  a  blessed  hope  through  their  Lord's  atoning 
blood ;  but  that  hope  must  be  mingled  with  fear  even  in  saints.  "  My  flesh  trembletli 
for  fear  of  thee,"  said  the  psalmist,  "  and  I  am  afraid  of  thy  judgments."  2.  The  second 
reason :  the  great  price  with  which  we  were  bought.  There  is  another  reason,  higher  and 
holier,  for  godly  fear— the  ransum  given  for  our  souls.  The  fear  of  judgment  may  have 
much  of  selfishness  in  it;  the  thought  of  Christ's  exceeding  great  love  is  the  high 
Christian  motive.  If  a  dear  friend  had  given  his  silver  and  gold  to  redeem  us  from 
shame  and  punishment,  we  should  regard  him  with  reverent  gratitude,  and  fear  to 
displease  him.  But  Christ  gave  himself;  he  shed  his  precious  blood.  The  sacrifice  was 
exceeding  precious;  the  sacred  Victim  was  without  blemish  and  without  spot,  and  fore- 
ordained before  the  foundation  of  the  world.  These  thoughts  ought  to  fill  us  with  holy 
fear  frhen  we  gaze  upon  the  cross.  The  cross,  as  it  reveals  the  blessed  love  of  Christ, 
throw*  an  awful  light  on  the  guilt  of  sin  and  on  its  tremend»>us  conse()^ueucea.    Theu 


20  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PETER,     [oh,  i,  1—25 

there  is  need  of  fear.  Indeed,  "  perfect  love  casteth  out  fear,"  but  (1)  our  love,  »las!  ii 
not  perfect,  and  Imperfect  love  must  be  more  or  less  accompanied  with  fear.  And  (2) 
the  fear  which  love  casteth  out  is  that  servile  fear  which  simply  dreads  the  punishment, 
heeding  neither  the  guilt  of  sin  nor  the  love  of  Christ.  The  Christian  fears  to  offend 
God,  who  spared  not  his  own  Son ;  he  fears  to  dishonour  the  cross  of  Christ ;  he  fears  t3 
grieve  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God.  "  This  fear  is  not  cowardice ;  it  doth  not  debase,  but 
elevates  the  mind ;  for  it  drowns  all  lower  fears,  and  begets  true  fortitude  and  courage  to 
encounter  all  dangers  for  the  sake  of  a  good  conscience  and  the  obeying  of  God.  The 
righteous  is  as  bold  as  a  lion  (Pro v.  iiviii.  1).  He  dares  do  anything  but  offend  Godj 
and  to  dare  to  do  that  is  the  greatest  folly  and  weakness  and  baseness  in  the  world. 
From  this  fear  have  sprung  all  the  generous  resolutions  and  patient  sufferings  of  the 
saints  and  martyrs  of  God  ;  because  they  durst  not  sin  against  him,  therefore  they  durst 
be  imprisoned,  and  impoverished,  and  tortured,  and  die  for  him.  Thus  our  Saviour 
says,  '  Pear  not  them  that  kill  the  body ;  but  fear  him  which,  after  he  hath  killed, 
hath  power  to  cast  into  hell.'  Pear  not,  but  fear;  and  therefore  fear,  that  you  may 
fear  not"  (Leighton).  3.  Consider  farther  (1)  from  what  we  were  redeemed.  Out  ot 
(lie)  our  former  vain  conversation.  We  were  bought  out  of  our  old  unconverted  life, 
and  that  by  no  less  a  ransom  than  the  precious  blood.  He  who  bought  us  will  give  us 
power  to  escape  out  of  that  old  life ;  he  will  strengthen  us  with  all  might  by  his  Spirit 
in  the  inner  man ;  then  let  us  fear  to  look  back  upon  Sodom,  to  return  to  our  sins  and 
carelessness.  It  may  be  the  traditional,  the  conventional  mode  of  life ;  we  are  tempted 
to  do  as  others  do,  to  go  with  the  multitude.  But  that  blood  was  shed  to  redeem  vm 
out  of  the  worldly  life :  let  us  fear.  (2)  The  purpose  of  that  redemption.  That  our 
faith  and  hope  might  be  in  God.  The  sacrifice  of  Christ  was  foreordained  from  all 
eternity.  Christ  was  manifested  in  due  time,  and  that,  the  apostle  says,  "  for  you,  who 
by  him  do  believe  in  God."  All  this  was  for  us,  if  we  believe.  God  provided  for  our 
salvation  before  the  world  was.  He  then  determined  to  give  up  his  own  Son  for  us  all. 
This  thought,  almost  too  great  to  take  into  o\ir  minds,  gives  us  some  insight  into  the 
momentous  importance  of  that  salvation,  the  exceeding  value  of  our  souls.  Again, 
Christ  was  manifested  for  us ;  God  raised  him  up  from  the  dead,  and  gave  him  glory ; 
and  it  was  all  for  us.  Christ's  manifestation,  his  death,  his  resurrection,  his  ascension, 
it  was  all  for  ns  sinful  men,  that  our  faith  and  hope  might  be  in  God.  We  are  not 
worthy,  we  feel ;  we  are  utterly  unworthy  of  this  unutterable  love,  this  tremendous 
sacrifice.  But  he  loved  us  so,  he  coimted  it  not  too  great  a  price.  Then  let  us  fear  to 
offend  him  who  loved  us  so  deeply ;  let  us  fear  to  lose  the  salvation  for  which  so  great 
a  price  was  paid;  let  us  fear  lest,  a  promise  being  left  us  of  entering  into  his  rest,  any 
of  us  should  seem  to  come  short  of  it.  Then  "  pass  the  time  of  your  sojourning  here 
in  fear,"  When  that  time  is  past,  and  God's  elect  are  sojourners  no  more,  but  at  home 
in  the  many  mansions  of  the  Father's  house,  there  will  be  no  more  room  for  fear ;  for 
they  shall  have  everlasting  rest,  and  perpetual  peace  will  shine  upon  them. 

IJL  To  BROTHERLY  LOVE.  1.  Charity  is  the  end  of  the  commandment.  (1  Tim.  i.  5,) 
St.  Peter  is  the  apostle  of  hope;  but,  like  St.  Paul  the  apostle  of  faith,  he  joins  with 
St.  John  the  apostle  of  love  in  his  earnest  exhortations  to  follow  after  charity.  He 
presses  that  high  duty  upon  us  in  words  of  intense  earnestness.  He  knows  how  hard 
it  is  for  our  selfish  hearts  to  love  as  Christians  ought  to  love — he  knows  how  essential 
it  is  for  our  salvation,  for  our  happiness,  for  the  happiness  of  others,  that  we  should 
exercise  that  heavenly  grace.  He  calls  it  Philadelphia,  brotherly  love — a  word  which, 
except  as  the  name  of  one  of  the  seven  Churches  of  Asia,  we  find  only  in  St.  Peter 
(here  and  2  Pet.  i.  7)  and  St.  Paul  (Rom.  xii.  10;  1  Thess.  iv.  9)  and  in  Heb.  xiii.  1. 
The  Lord  Jesus  had  said,  "  All  ye  are  brethren ; "  the  holy  apostles  remembered  his 
words.  (1)  That  brotherly  love  which  is  the  badge  and  test  of  Christ's  true  disciples 
must  be  unfeigned.  St.  Paul  uses  the  same  word  (Rom.  xii.  9,  a»wT6KpiTos),  where  it 
is  translated  "  without  dissimulation."  The  world,  ir^  its  ordinary  forms  of  courtesy, 
counterfeits  the  grace  of  charity;  the  Christian  must  learn  to  love,  not  in  word  or  in 
tongue,  but  m  deed  and  in  truth.  And  that  we  can  learn  only  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  the  one  Teacher  of  all  true  disciples,  through  the  help  of  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God. 
(2)  It  must  be  "out  of  a  pure  heart."  The  word  "pure"  is  somewhat  doubtful  her«; 
but  St.  Paul  certainly  has  it  in  the  parallel  passage  (1  Tim.  i.  5).  Christian  love  must 
issue  from  the  heart,  and  that  heart  must  be  pure.    Alas  1  impure,  unholy  passioof 


ofi.  L  1—25.]     TfiE  PIRSt  EPiStLE  GENERAL  Oi"  PETEll.  21 

often  nsurp  the  sacred  name  of  love;  but  these  are  only  forms  of  selfishness;  there  is 
love  on  the  tongue ;  there  is  only  lust,  loathsome  and  wicked,  in  the  heart.  True  love 
is  a  very  beautiful  and  holy  thing ;  it  springs  only  out  of  a  pure  heart.  (3)  It  must 
be  fervent,  intense.  For  it  must  be  like  the  love  of  Christ :  "As  I  have  loved  you." 
His  love  was  unto  death  j  his  apostle  tells  us  that  the  measure  of  our  love  should  be  the 
same:  "We  ought  to  lay  down  our  lives  for  the  brethren"  (1  John  iii.  16).  How  very 
far  we  are  from  this  height  of  self-sacrificing  love  1  It  should  be  the  aim  of  our  holiest 
ambition.  2.  Whence  that  charity  must  spring.  (1)  Prom  a  purified,  a  consecrated 
soul.  Christian  love  is  a  product  of  spiritual  religion ;  the  soul  must  be  consecrated  to 
God's  service  that  is  to  love  the  brethren  with  a  pure  heart,  fervently.  And  the  con- 
secrated life  moves  in  the  path  of  holy  obedience — obedience  to  the  truth.  The  truth 
makes  God's  people  free — free  from  the  bonds  of  sin,  free  from  the  entanglements  of 
sensual  lusts,  free  from  selfishness.  While  they  walk  in  truth  they  walk  in  obedience, 
seeking  to  obey  God  in  all  things,  not  only  in  their  outward  lives,  but  by  bringing 
every  thought  into  captivity  to  the  obedience  of  Christ.  While  they  walk  in  truth 
they  are  walking  in  the  light,  and  then  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  is  cleansing  them 
firom  all  sin.  Only  by  the  grace  of  God  the  Holy  Ghost  can  they  thus  purify  their 
souls.  (2)  A  consecrated  life  implies  a  new  birth.  St.  Peter  returns  to  the  doctrine  of 
the  new  birth,  because  it  ia  that  new  birth  which  makes  us  children  of  God  and 
brethren  one  of  another.  Here  is  the  Christian's  highest  privilege  :  "  Behold  what 
manner  of  love  the  Father  hath  bestowed  upon  us,  that  we  should  be  called  the  sons  of 
Gtodl"  We  are  begotten  again  of  incorruptible  seed.  That  incorruptible  seed  abideth 
in  the  faithful  child  of  God,  who  hath  been  made  partaker  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  hath 
not  received  the  grace  of  God  in  vain.  He  doth  not  grieve  the  Holy  Spirit ;  he  doth 
not  by  wilful  resistance  quench  the  Spirit.  "  He  that  is  bom  of  God  sinneth  not."  So 
far  as  the  seed  of  the  new  life  abideth  in  him,  that  life  dieth  not ;  it  lives  and  energizes, 
for  it  is  the  life  of  Christ.  "  Not  I,  but  Christ  liveth  in  me."  And  that  new  life  must 
show  itself  in  love,  in  love  unfeigned,  pure,  and  fervent.  For  "  he  that  loveth  not, 
knoweth  not  God;"  but  "every  one  that  loveth  is  born  of  God,  and  knoweth  God," 
(3)  That  new  birth  is  through  the  Word.  The  Word  of  God  liveth ;  it  is  quick  and 
powerful ;  it  is  the  cause  of  life.  "  Man  doth  not  live  by  bread  alone,  but  by  every 
word  that  proceedeth  out  of  the  mouth  of  God."  God  said  once,  "  Let  there  be  light ; 
and  there  was  light."  God  hath  said,  "  Except  a  man  be  bom  of  water,  and  of  the 
Spirit,  he  cannot  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God ; "  and  men  are  bom  of  water  and  of 
the  Spirit,  and  do  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God.  Whatever  virtues  the  sacraments 
possess  come  through  the  Word  of  God.  And  when,  alas  I  men  have  forgotten  their 
regeneration,  when  they  have  neglected  to  stir  up  the  grace  of  God,  and  it  has  well-nigh 
died  out  of  their  souls,  it  is  the  Word  of  God  that  stirs  them  again  into  life.  "  This 
my  son  was  dead,  and  is  alive  again."  For  the  Word  is  not  merely  the  letter;  the 
Word  liveth ;  the  Word,  in  the  deepest  sense,  is  the  voice  of  God  speaking  through  those 
letters  and  syllables,  speaking  to  the  hearts  of  men.  And  it  is  by  his  Son  that  God 
hath  in  these  last  days  spoken  unto  us.  He  is  the  Word  of  God,  the  Word  made  flesh. 
He  calls  us  by  his  Spirit :  "  Awake  thou  that  sleepest,  and  arise  from  the  dead,  and 
Christ  shall  give  thee  light."  He  is  the  Life  of  the  world,  the  Resurrection  and  the 
Life ;  when  he  speaks  the  word  of  power,  then  dead  souls  "  hear  the  voice  of  the  Son  of 
God,  and  they  that  hear  shall  live."  3.  Charity  abideth.  The  seed  whereof  we  are 
bom  again  is  incorruptible ;  and  the  Word  of  God,  which  is  the  instrumeot  of  our  new 
birth,  abideth  for  ever ;  therefore  charity,  the  love  of  the  brethren,  which  springs  out 
of  our  common  birth  into  the  family  of  God,  never  faileth.  It  is  the  flower  of  the 
Christian  life,  bright  and  beautiful  and  fragrant.  It  fadeth  not  like  the  flowers  of  this 
world,  "  All  flesh  is  grass,"  said  the  prophet,  and  the  holy  apostle  repeats  his  words. 
"  The  grass  withereth ; "  generations  of  men  come  and  go ;  one  after  another,  like  the 
leaves  of  each  successive  year,  they  perish  and  decay.  And  if  some  men  are  conspicuous 
among  the  multitude,  distinguished  by  rank,  or  riches,  or  learning,  or  great  deeds 
and  triumphs  and  successes,  all  these  glories  are  no  more  abiding  than  the  beauty  of  a 
flower.  The  rare  flower,  delicate  or  gorgeous,  shines  in  its  brightness  above  the  common 
weeds;  but  it  has  no  more  permanence,  no  longer  lease  of  life;  it  droops  and  fades 
and  faileth  away.  So  is  it  with  that  human  life  which  seems  most  brilliant,  most 
gloriou*.    "  The  rich  man  also  died,  and  was  buried."    The  dust  of  Cwsar  is  uo  better 


la  THB  FIRST  EPISTLB  GEKEBAL  OF  PBTEB.     [«h.  i,  1— 25. 

than  the  dust  of  Lazaroa;  both  mingle  with  the  earth  from  which  they  came.  "A shea 
to  ashes,  dust  to  dust,"  is  said  over  the  grave  of  kiog*  and  of  beggars.  "  But  the  Word 
of  the  Lord  abideth  for  ever."  That  Word  u  the  iDstrumeDt  of  our  new  birth.  There* 
fore,  if  only  we  abide  in  him  who  is  the  Word  of  Oud^  who  hath  the  words  of  eternal 
life,  and  by  his  apostles  hat  declared  them  unto  us;  if  we  abide  in  him  as  faithful 
branches  abiding  in  the  vine,  then  we  can  never  perish,  none  can  pluck  us  out  of  his 
hand ;  for  "  be  is  able  to  save  to  the  uttermost  all  who  come  unto  God  by  him."  And 
that  Word  is  the  gospal,  the  glad  tidings  which  we  have  heard.  Let  us  welcome  it  as 
good  tidings  of  great  joy,  let  us  treasure  it  in  our  hearts ;  it  will  bring  forth  fruit — 
the  fair  fruit  of  holy  deeds,  "  the  white  flower  of  a  blameless  life,"  fruit  that  dieth 
not,  a  flower  that  falleth  not  away. 

Lbssons.  1.  The  journey  i»  long,  the  way  is  steep;  be  active,  sober,  bopefuL  2. 
The  end  is  before  the  throne;  without  holiness  none  can  stand  in  that  presence;  follow 
after  holiness.  3.  "  Work  out  your  own  salvation  with  fear  and  trembling ; "  think  of 
the  judgment ;  think  of  the  precious  blood,  i.  "  God  is  Love ; "  "He  that  loveth  not 
knoweth  not  God ; "  see  that  ye  love  one  another.  6.  "  All  the  glory  of  man  is  as  the 
flower ; "  it  fadeth,  it  falleth  away ;  holy  love  fadeth  not ;  it  is  the  fairest  flower  in  tho 
amaranthine  wreath. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHOBa 

Ver.  1. — Tk«  three/old  condition  of  a  Christian.  "To  the  strangers  scattered 
f'  sojourners  of  the  dispersion,'  Bevised  Version]  throughout  Pontus,  Galatia,  Cappadocia, 
Asia,  and  Bithynia."  "  The  dispersion  "  was  unquestionably  the  designation  of  Jewish 
residents  in  Gentile  covmtries  (John  vii.  35 ;  Jas.  L  1).  "  Strangers  "  means  temporary 
residents  in  a  foreign  country.  But  the  question  whether  this  letter  is  really  addressed 
to  Jewish  Christians  is  not  necessarily  answered  in  the  affirmative  by  this  superscription. 
For  it  is  quite  possible  that  the  Gentile  Christians  in  the  countries  named  may  be 
intended  by  "  the  sojourners  of  the  dispersion,"  the  description  properly  belonging  to  the 
Jews  being  transferred  to  them  as  in  a  profounder  sense  true  of  them,  just  as  many  other 
terms  applicable  to  them  are  transferred  in  other  parts  of  the  letter.  This  possibility 
seems  to  be  raised  to  a  very  high  probability,  at  least  by  many  expressions  in  it  which 
appear  to  imply  that  the  persons  addressed  were  Gentiles.  Such,  for  instance,  as  ch.  L  14, 
"  the  former  lusts  in  your  ignorance ; "  ch.  ii.  10,  "  in  time  past  were  not  a  people ; " 
ch.  iv.  3,  "The  time  past  may  suffice  to  have  wrought  the  desire  of  the  Gentiles."  If, 
then,  we  may  fairly  take  these  words  as  addressed  to  all  Christians,  they  bring  before  us 
the  familiar  but  ever-neglected  truth  that,  if  Christians  are  faithful  to  their  calling  and 
to  their  true  affinities,  they  will  cherish  a  sense  of  belonging  to  another  order  of  things 
than  that  with  which  they  are  outwardly  connected.  The  word  here  rendered 
"  stranger,"  or,  as  in  the  Revised  Version,  "  sojourner,"  implies  both  residence  in  • 
forei<;n  land,  and  temporary  residence ;  and  if  we  add  to  it  the  remaining  word,  we  have 
a  threefold  view  of  the  condition  of  a  Christian,  as  an  alien,  a  passing  visitant,  an 
isolated  man. 

I.  He  is  an  alien.  He  does  not  belong  to  the  polity,  the  order  of  things  in  whiclf 
he  lives.  No  people  on  earth  should  understand  that  metaphor  better  than  Jews  and 
Englishmen ;  both  belonging  to  nations  scattered  over  the  whole  world,  and  accustomed 
to  cherish  a  keen,  proud  sense  of  belonging  to  another  nationality  than  that  under  whose 
flag  they  may  be  living.  Tliese  Jews  of  the  dispersion  wandered  all  over  the  Roman 
world ;  but  wherever ,  they  went,  among  the  cold  storm-swept  uplands  of  Cappadocia 
and  Galatia,  in  the  rude  villages  of  Pontus,  or  the  luxurious  cities  and  busy  seaports 
of  Asia  MiDor,  they  felt  the  mystic  tie  which  bound  them  to  Jerusalem  on  her  hills, 
and  the  temple  gleaming  on  its  rock.  So  Christians  are  here  members  of  another 
nationality,  and  foreigners  in  time.  St.  Paul  gives  us  the  same  idea  under  •  slightly 
ditterent  metaphor  wlen  he  bids  the  Philippians  live  as  citizens  of  heaven.  PhilippS 
was  a  Roman  "  colony,"  that  is,  it  was  regarded  a  pieoe  of  Bome  Itself  in  Macedonia, 
governed  by  Roman  law,  not  by  provincial  codes,  having  the  names  of  its  citizens 
enrolled  among  the  Roman  tribes.  So  we,  if  we  are  Christians,  are  colonists  here;  our 
mother-country  is  beyond  the  stars.    This  is  an  honour  and  a  privilege.    Peter  does  no» 


OR.  L  1— 2&]     THE  FIBST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PETER.  23 

utter  these  words  with  a  melancholy  face  and  a  ugh,  as  so  many,  of  ns  do  whose  hearts 
hanker  after  the  world,  and  would  fain  have  it  for  our  own.     The  Jew,  the  Pliilippian 
colonist,  the  roving  Englishman  were  and  are  proud  of  their  nationality,  and  knew  that 
it  was  a  descent  to  he  naturalized  in  their  places  of  residence.    Let  us  glory  in  our 
belonging  to  the  city  which  hath  the  foundations,  and  not  sorrow  that  we  are  strangers. 
We  have  ceased  to  belong  to  the  present  material  order,  because  we  have  been  taken 
up  into  the  higher.     We  rise  to  be  aliens  to  earth  and  the  race  of  men  whose  hopes  and 
views  are  limited  by  it,  just  as  some  peasant's  son  may  be  educated  out  of  the  narrow 
surroundii^s  and  torpid  life  of  his  native  village,  and  come  to  feel  that  he  has  little  in 
common  with  relatives  and  friends,  because  a  wider  horizon  expands  before  his  mental 
vision.    So  then  a  prime  duty  is  to  keep  separate  from  the  order  of  things  in  which 
we  dwell,  and  to  keep  vivid  the  consciousness  that  we  do  not  belong  to  it.    Think  of 
the  tenacious  individuality  of  the  Jewish  people,  eagerly  mingling  in  tlie  commercial 
life  of  every  nation,  and  often  having  a  large  share  in  its  intellectual  life,  and  yet 
keeping  apart,  as  oil  from  water.    If  Cliristians  would  learn  the  lesson,  it  would  be  well 
for  them  and  for  the  world  1    Thiuk  of  Abraham  pitching  his  tent  outside  the  cities  of 
Canaan,  mingling  on  friendly  terms  with  the  people,  compelling  their  respect,  but  yet 
refunng  to  enter,  and  "  dwelling  in  tabernacles,  because  he  looked  for  the  city."    Now- 
adays Christians  seem  to  be  trying  how  far  into  the  city  of  the  Caaaanites  they  can  go, 
and  how  handsome  a  house  they  can  build  themselves  there.     It  is  never  well  wHh  the 
Church  unless  the  world  describes  it,  as  Haman  did  the  Jews,  "a  certain  {"eople, 
scattered  abroad,  and  their  lives  are  diverse  from  all  people."    It  is  never  well  with  a 
Christian  soul  which  does  not  hear  ever  sounding  in  conscience  the  voice  wliioh  says, 
"Come  ye  out  and  be  separate."     The  world  has  got  into  the  Church,  and  tlie  Church 
has  struck  up  a  friendship  with  the  world ;  and  never  was  there  more  need  to  press 
upon  every  Christian  that,  in  the  measure  in  which  he  belongs  to  Christ,  he  is  an  alien 
here,  and  that  if  he  feels  quite  at  home  among  material  things,  that  is  because  he  has  lost 
his  nationality,  and  has  stooped  to  the  degradation  of  being  naturalized  in  his  place  of  abode, 
II;  EvBBY  TBtTB  Chbistian  bblonqs  TO  THE  DISPEE8I0N.    Each  human  heart,  even 
in  the  closest  human  love,  has  to  live  alone.    But  those  who  love  Ji.sus  Christ  will  often 
have  to  bear  a  peculiar  solitude  which  comes  from  their  necessary  association  with  those 
who  do  not  love  him.    The  loneliness  of  outward  sc^itude  does  not  pain  in  comparison 
with  the  loneliness  of  enforced  and  uncongenial  companionship.     A  Christian  is  least 
alone  when  alone,  for  then  God  comes  to  keep  him  company.    He  is  most  alone  when 
pu.shed  close  against  those  who  do  not  share  his  faith,  for  then  all  the  holy  thoughts 
which  come  to  his  soul  in  quiet,  as  birds  will  light  on  the  grass,  take  flight  and  hide  in 
the  trees  at  the  noise  of  tongues.     The  isolation  is  for  high  purposes.    Leaven  has  to  be 
diffused  among  the  inert  mass.     Seed  stored  on  a  barn  floor  in  heaps  is  of  little  use, 
and  likely  to  rot.     It  is  scattered  that  it  may  grow.    Salt  is  rubbed  into  the  meat 
which  is  to  be  preserved.     Chri-stians  are  spread  abroad,  as  brands  are  carried  from  a 
fire,  to  carry  light  into  dark  corners.    The  same  Providence  which  sent  the  Jews  of 
the  dispersion  as  missionaries  throughout  the  Roman  world,  sends  us  to  bear  abroad 
the  Name  of  Jesus.     The  more  we  are  surrounded  with  uncongenial  associates,  tlie 
more  imperative  the  duty,  and  the  more  hopeful  the  opportunity,  of  our  witnessing  for 
our  King.     We  have  to  represent  our  country  among  strangers.    Its  honour  is  in  our 
hands.     We  carry  its  flag.    Wandering  Englishmen  of  doubtful  character  make  the 
name  of  England  abominable,  and  men  like  Gordon  and  many  an  unknown  missionary 
hero  make  it  fragrant,  in  lands  where  they  are  the  only  known  specimens  of  the  race. 
Men  judge  of  Christianity  very  largely  by  the  specimens  of  it  which  they  see.     We  are 
each  sent  among  a  circle  of  associates  that  they  may  learn  what  the  gospel  can  do  for 
men  by  what  it  iias  done  for  us.     Are  we  such  specimens  as  to  inspire  onlookers  with 
a  respect  for  the  religion  which  has  made  us  what  we  are  ? 

III.  Christians  abb  bot  passing  visitants.  The  colonista  will  be  called  to  the 
mother-city.  Native-bom  Australians  think  of  coming  to  England  as  going  home, 
though  they  have  never  touched  our  shores.  The  outlying  posts  which  have  been  held 
for  the  king  amid  swarms  of  alien  enemies  will  be  relieved,  and  the  garrisons  welcomed 
to  their  true  country.  We  too  often  speak  and  think  of  the  transiency  of  this  present 
and  the  coming  of  deatli,  with  sadness,  or  at  the  best  with  resignation.  But  if  we 
rightly  understood  t^t  our  deepMt  affinities  connect  ua  with  that  other  order  into 


24  THE  First  epistle  GENEBAL  op  peter,     [ch.  i.  1—26 

which  death  introduces  us,  and  that  repose  from  weary  effort,  congenial  companionship 
instead  of  isolation,  and  all  the  sweet  satisfaction  and  freedom  of  home,  are  death's  gifts 
to  the  Christian  soul,  we  should  think  of  our  departure  hence  with  hope.  "Were  the 
happiness  of  the  next  world  as  closely  apprehended  as  the  felicities  of  this,  it  were  a 
martyrdom  to  live."  It  becomes  us  to  be  "  glad  "  when  they  say  unto  us,  "  Let  us  go 
into  the  house  of  the  Lord."  Two  men  may  embark  in  one  ship— the  one  full  of  good 
cheer  as  the  ropes  are  loosened  and  the  first  turn  of  the  screw  begins  to  move  her  from 
the  pier ;  the  other  sad  because  he  leaves  all  that  is  familiar  and  dear.  The  one  is  going 
home  from  exile ;  the  other  is  being  borne  into  banishment  in  a  strange  land,  whose 
speech  be  does  not  know,  whose  king  he  does  not  serve.  Which  shall  I  be  when 
death  comes  ? — A.  M. 

Ver.  4. — Hie  inheritance  reserved  for  the  heirs.  The  reference  to  the  inheritance  is 
especially  appropriate,  as  following  the  designation  of  Christians  as  "  strangers  of  the 
dispersion,"  homeless  wanderers  in  a  foreign  land.  The  prospect  which  made  Abrabara 
dwell  in  tabernacles,  and  which  shone  before  Israel  during  the  weary  years  in  the 
desert,  is  held  forth  to  them  here.  They  have  been  "  begotten  . . .  unto  an  inheritance." 
Eegeneration  points  to  and  issues  in  the  possession  of  it.  If  children,  they  are  heirs. 
The  new  life  from  Christ  makes  them  "strangers,"  throwing  them  out  of  harmony  with 
the  existing  order,  and  it  makes  them  "  heirs,"  giving  them  a  present  possession  and  a 
future  heritage  in  the  unseen. 

I.  The  substance  of  the  inheeitance.  There  is,  no  doubt,  a  reference  to  Canaan 
as  the  promised  possession  of  the  wandering  Israelites.  The  true  meaning  of  the  word 
is  that  of  a  portion  obtained  by  lot.  There  is  no  .reference  to  bequest  or  succession. 
No  doubt  the  inheritance  is  here  represented  as  future,  but  not  exclusively  so.  The 
next  verse  obviously  takes  "  salvation  "  as  equivalent  to  the  "  inheritance  "  of  this  verse. 
The  two  Words  represent  the  same  reality  in  two  different  aspects — ^the  one  mainly 
under  the  negative  idea  of  deliverance  from  evil,  healing  from  sickness,  safety  from  .peril, 
though  it  does  not  altogether  exclude  the  positive  element ;  the  other,  under  the  positive 
idea  of  a  possession  which  enriches  spirit,  heart,  mind,  and  all  tastes  and  faculties  of 
a  perfected  humanity.  The  underlying  reality  which  brings  about  both  is  God.  He 
himself  is  become  our  Salvation.  He  is  our  Portion,  the  oiJy  Heritage  which  enriches 
the  soul.  We  are  "  heirs  of  God."  Possibly  that  deepest  thought  is  not  to  be  pressed 
here,  but  certainly  it  is  not  to  be  omitted.  To  keep  it  ever  clearly  before  ns  saves  us 
from  murmuring  at  the  darkness  in  which  the  glories  of  heaven  are  wrapped,  and  from 
degrading  them  by  taking  the  emblems — such  as  pearly  gates  and  golden  streets,  harps, 
and  crowns — as  more  than  symbols.  Both  the  inheritance  and  the  salvation  belong 
alike  to  the  present  and  the  future.  The  one  is  represented  here  and  now  by  an  earnest ; 
the  other  is  begun  to-day,  though  perfected  in  heaven.  The  earnest  is  of  the  same 
nature  as  the  inheritance.  The  partial  salvation  of  to-day  is  essentially  the  same  as 
the  complete  salvation  of  eternity.  The  faintest  streak  of  morning  twilight  is  the  same 
light  from  the  same  sun  which  at  noon  floods  the  sky. 

II.  The  ohabaoteribtics  of  the  iHnBRiTANCB,  Our  means  of  forming  conceptions 
of  what  it  is  are  analogy  and  contrast  with  the  things  of  earthly  experience.  If  a 
chrysalis  could  think  of  its  butterfly  state,  it  could  only  picture  it  as  like  or  unlike  its 
preseiit.  So  we  can  only  paint  the  future  with  colours  supplied  by  the  present.  And 
to  paint  it  as  the  negation  of  all  imperfection,  transiency,  and  limitation,  makes  it 
brightest  to  eyes  which  smart  with  weeping,  and  ache  with  looking  for  a  good  which 
comes  not,  or  a,fter  a  vanished  joy.  It  is  "  incorruptible."  All  outward  possessions  have 
the  seeds  of  dissolution  and  decay  in  themselves,  or  can  be  decomposed  and  destroyed 
by  external  forces.  Perhaps  Peter  remembered  "  where  moth  and  rust  do  not  corrupt.' 
Our  true  treasure,  which  is  truth,  righteousness,  a  full  influx  of  God  himself  into  our 
hearts,  cannot  decay.  It  is  "  undefiled."  Some  spot  of  evil  is  on  all  beauty,  some  flaw  in 
every  precious  thing,  some  taint  of  imperfection  or  at  best  .some  limitation  which  is  a 
blemish  on  all  that  we  have  or  love  here.  But  this  is  whiter  than  the  driven  snow  and 
purer  than  the  sunlight  which  flashes  on  it.  It  "  fadeth  not  away."  The  sad  stern  law 
that  it  must  droop  and  shed  the  glory  of  its  petals  mles  each  fair  flower  which  wa 
gather,  and  some  of  them  fade  all  the  faster  because  of  the  grasp  of  our  hot  hands. 
"But  this  is  •  flower  which  cannot  wither"    What  of  God  we  possess  is  not  parted 


Ott.  Ll— .26.]     THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  PETER.  25 

from  its  source,  but  lives  his  life  still,  though  it  dwells  in  us.  Therefore  it  is  woven  into 
an  amaranthine  garland  (ver.  4),  which  makes  the  brow  on  which  it  is  twined  immortal 
as  itself. 

III.  The  bbseevation  of  thb  inheritanoe.  It  is — or  rather  it  has  been  from  of  old 
— ^laid  up  in  the  heavens.  A  remarkable  expression,  evidently  implying  that  future 
blessedness  is  more  than  "  a  state,"  and  that  it  has  objective  elements  which  are  already 
in  existence  in  the  heavens,  even  while  we  who  are  one  day  to  possess  them  are  toiling 
and  moiling  here.  We  cannot  think  without  incongruity  of  our  "  salvation  "  as  being 
thus  stored  with  God,  but  we  can  naturally  regard  the  objective  constituents  of  our 
future  blessedness  as  being  so.  The  metaphor  would  be  too  violent  unless  the  inheritance 
is  a  real  something  which  is  now  in  existence,  and  which  is  in  so  far  separate  from 
ourselves  that  we  shall  one  day  have  it  as  well  as  be  it.  The  main  idea  is  that  of  the 
security  of  the  inheritance.  The  Divine  hand  is  working  on  that  side  of  the  veil  to 
keep  the  inheritance  for  the  heirs,  and  on  this,  as  the  next  verse  tells  us,  to  keep  the 
heirs  for  the  inheritance.  Guarded  by  his  hand,  it  is  safe.  "  Being  in  heaven,  that  calm 
abode  of  peace,  where  changes  never  come,  nor  foes  climb,  nor  thieves  break  through 
and  steal,"  it  is  safe.  The  heirs  of  earthly  inheritances  have  not  seldom  found  their 
patrimony  wasted  when  they  came  to  claim  it,  and  their  treasure-chests  empty  when 
opened.  But  kept  by  God,  and  lodged  in  heaven,  our  riches  cannot  perish.  He  himself 
is  our  Portion.  So  if  we  have  him  for  our  Treasure,  and  count  his^nowledge,  his  love, 
his  likeness,  our  heaven  on  earth  and  our  heaven  in  heaven,  we  shall  not  be  without  a 
sufficient  allowance  to  live  on  as  the  earnest,  nor  fail  to  be  "  satisfied,"  when  we  pass 
into  the  higher  life,  with  the  wealth  which  will  pour  into  our  souls  in  the  full  possession 
of  God.— A.  M. 

Ver.  5. — The  heir$  kept  for  the  inheritance.  The  power  of  God  works  on  both  sides 
of  the  veil — preserving  the  inheritance  for  the  heirs,  and  here  keeping  the  heirs  for  the 
inheritance.  Both  forms  of  the  Divine  energy  are  needful  if  either  is  to  be  effectual. 
It  were  little  joy  to  know  how  secure  the  riches  of  the  future  lay  in  God's  treasure- 
chambers  unless  we  know  that  he  will  also  help  our  weakness  and  bring  us  to  possess 
them.  So  every  source  of  fear  is  dried  up  by  this  double  assurance  of  the  one  mighty 
hand  preserving  us  for  our  heritage  and  it  for  us.  There  is  another  double  truth  here 
in  the  brief  words, "  by  the  power  of  God  through  faith."  On  the  one  hand,  the  Divine 
grace  which  sustains ;  and  on  the  other  hand,  the  human  faith  which  takes  the  grace — 
the  one  being  the  condition  and  the  other  the  real  cause.  These  two  have  been 
wrenched  apart  and  been  regarded  as  contradictory,  and'Christendom  has  been  divided 
into  two  camps,  with  these  two  for  their  war-cries ;  and  here  they  lie  harmoniously  in 
one  sentence,  and  complete  each  other. 

I.  What  the  heirs  are  kept  by.  The  military  metaphor  in  the  word  "  kept "  is 
not  to  be  passed  by.  We  have  the  same  word  in  its  literal  use  in  2  Cor.  xi.  32  ("  kept 
with  a  garrison  "),  and  employed  figuratively  as  here  in  Phil.  iv.  7  ("  the  peace  of  God 
shall  keep  your  hearts  and  minds  ").  Our  weak  natures  are  garrisoned  as  it  were  by  rein- 
forcements of  Divine  strength.  Not  by  providences  acting  on  our  outward  lives  only,  or 
by  any  forces  upholding  us  as  with  external  help,  but  by  pouring  power  to  resist  anito 
overcome  into  our  souls  does  God  keep  us  in  our  conflicts  with  evil.  His  grace  within 
ns  is  yet  more  blessed  than  his  hand  around  us.  "I  can  do  all  things,"  said  Paul, 
"  through  Christ  strengthening  me  within."  An  indwelling  Lord  is  our  security.  The 
hard-pressed  fort  is  relieved  by  fresh  troops  joining  the  feeble  defenders.  We  have  the 
right  to  expect  an  actual  communication  of  Divine  strength  breathed  into  our  weak- 
oess.  As  the  prophet  laid  his  bands  on  the  king's  hands  ere  he  drew  the  buw,  in 
token  of  strength  infused,  so  the  touch  of  Christ's  tender  and  strong  hand  will  teach 
our  "  hands  to  war,"  so  that  a  "  bow  of  steel  will  be  bent  by  our  arms."  We  are  "  kept 
by  [literally, '  in ']  the  power  of  God."  It  may  not  be  fanciful  to  keep  the  local  meaning 
of  the  preposition  here,  and  to  think  of  that  power  as  lying  around  us  like  some  fortress, 
whose  massive  walls  keep  the  feeblest  in  safety.  If  we  keep  within  our  castle,  no  harm 
shall  befall.  'The  enemy  may  prowl  round  the  base  of  the  fortress  reared  high  on  the 
cliff,  but  they  cannot  climb  to  it,  and  their  fire  cannot  shake  a  stone  in  its  walls.  It 
we  dwell  in  God,  we  dwell  in  safety,  and  whatever  storms  of  war  rage  without,  deey 
peace  abides  trithin. 


26  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  PETER,     [oh.  x.  1— 2& 

II.  What  wb  are  kept  through.  Paith  is  the  condition,  the  neeessaiy  condition, 
on  which  Go<l's  power  works  in  and  on  us.  The  garrison  which  God  sends  to  hold  our 
hearts  cannot  enter  unless  we  open  the  gate  and  let  down  the  drawbridge  to  receive 
them.  Our  faith  has  no  power  in  itself,  but  as  our  receptivity  for  Divine  influences  it 
is  omnipotent.  It  is  only  a  channel — the  pipe  which  conveys  the  water,  the  hand 
which  grasps  God's  hand,  the  open  door  through  which  angels  can  enter  and  encamp  in 
our  pojr  heiirts.  They  cannot  come  to  our  help  without  it.  They  will  certainly  enter 
if  we  exercise  this  faith.  Its  elements  are  conscious  need,  lowly  sense  of  our  own 
weakness,  and  self-distrust,  absolute  dependence  on  God  in  Christ,  and  a  calm  confidence 
and  expectation  of  victory,  which,  when  based  on  God,  is  reasonable  and  self-fulfilling. 
The  measure  of  our  faith  will  be  the  measure  of  our  possession  of  the  Divine  power.  If 
we  open  the  gate  but  partially,  we  hinder  the  marching  in  of  the  celestial  warriors 
whom  God  sends  to  our  help.     "  Open  thy  mouth  wide,  and  I  will  fill  it." 

III.  What  we  are  kept  foe.  The  "  salvation  ready  to  be  revealed  "  is  equivalent  to 
the  "  inheritance  "  spoken  of  in  ver.  4.  "  Salvation  "  here  is  of  course  used  in  its  fullest 
meaning — complete  and  eternal  deliverance  from  all  the  ills  that  flesh  is  heir  to,  and 
all  the  sins  that  mar  the  spirit,  and  complete  and  eternal  possession  of  all  the  perfection 
and  blessedness  possible  to  glorified  humanity.  That  complete  flooding  out  ofevil  by, 
the  inrushing  tide  of  glory  is  the  goal  alike  of  regeneration  (ver,  3)  and  of  the  sedulous 
guardianship  of  Go(),'s  grace.  It  is  but  the  completion  of  the  begun  salvation  of  earth, 
as  the  full  com  in  the  ear  which  gladdens  the  golden  harvest-time  is  of  the  tiny  shoot 
peeping  above  the  furrows  in  bleak,  windy  March.  It  is  "  ready  to  be  revealed,"  says 
Peter.  Possibly  the  meaning  may  be  that  this  "  salvation  "  is  conceived  of  as  lying  hidden 
beneath  much  sin  and  imperfection  in  the  hearts  of  Christians,  as  the  full-spread  beech- 
life  lies  wrapped  up  in  the  brown  cone  that  braves  the  winter.  The  ultimate  com- 
pleted form  of  any  germ  may  be  said  to  lie  ready  to  be  revealed  in  its  earliest  form,  and 
so  may  the  remotest  glories  of  the  perfect  saWation  of  the  future  be  said  to  lie  hid  in 
the  present,  waiting  for  "  the  revelation  of  the  sons  of  God."  But  perhaps,  with  more 
probability,  we  may  regard  this  expression  as  in  a  general  way  parallel  to  the  reservation 
of  the  inheritance,  and  as  being  a  strong  metaphor  intended  to  convey  the  certainty  of 
our  possession  of  it,  if  we  on  our  parts  are  faithful.  Nor  must  we  forget  that  Christ 
has  gone  "  to  prepare  a  place "  for  us ;  his  entrance  into  the  heavens  making  heaven 
ready  for  us  in  mysterious  manner,  and  his  abiding  there  making  our  entrance  there 
possible.  That  other  order  of  things  is  close  around  us,  enfolding  this  visible,  touching 
it  at  every  point.  The  separation  is  thin  and  filmy,  nothing  solid,  only  a  veil.  A 
touch  of  God's  hand  on  the  curtain,  and  it  runs  back  rattling  on  its  rings,'  and  all  the 
glory  blazes  out.  All  is  ready — ^ready  from  all  eternity  in  the  Divine  counsels,  made 
ready  once  for  all  in  time  by  Christ's  death  and  ascension,  being  made  ready  in  our 
hearts  day  by  day  by  his  gracious  discipline  and  indwelling  life.  At  last  the  veil  will 
be  done  away  and  the  salvation  revealed.  What  an  apocalypse  that  will  be  I  If  we 
open  our  hearts  wide  for  the  entrance  of  Christ's  healing  and  upholding  power,  we  shall 
be  made  ready  to  go  in  with  him  to  the  feast  prepared  for  believing  hearts  from  of  old. 
Trusting  to  his  death  and  sharing  his  life,  the  heirs  will  be  kept  for  the  inheritance,  and 
the  inheritance  for  the  heirs. — A.  M. 

Ver.  6. — Uie  paradox  of  the  Christian  lift — -joy  subsisting  with  sorrow.  When  he 
was  young,  Peter  had  been  peculiarly  impatient  of  sorrow,  and  blind  to  its  necessity 
and  worth.  He  had  forgotten  bis  reverence  for  Christ  in  his  refusal  to  believe,  even  on 
his  Master's  authority,  that  sorrow  could  touch  so  dear  a  head.  Years  and  experiencs 
had  taught  him  the  deep  meaning  of  the  prophetic  contrast  which  Christ  had  drawn 
between  his  early  self-willed,  unhindered  action,  and  his  later  days,  when  his  will 
should  be  crossed  and  unwelcome  compulsion  should  lord  it  over  him.  This  Epistle  is 
remarkable  for  the  clearness  of  its  insight  and  the  frequency  of  its  references  to  suffer- 
ing as  an  imlispensable  factor  in  the  Christian  life.  When  he  was  old,  he  had  learned 
the  lesson  which  had  been  so  foreign  to  his  hot  youth.  Well  for  us  if  our  past  sorrows 
lie  transfigured  and  illuminated  by  a  beam  of  light  like  this  in  the  text  1 

L  The  joy  of  the  Christian  life.  We  have  first  the  source  of  the  joy.  "  Wherein 
ye  greatly  rejoice."  The  complex  whole  of  the  blessings  spoken  of^the  lively  hope, 
the  reserTttd  ioharitance,  the  guarding  power,  the  prepared  salvation,  its  future  apoca- 


«H-Ll— 25.J     THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  PETER.  27 

lypse — ^these  are  the  golden  threads  from  which  the  bright  tissue  is  woTen.  So  this  is 
the  first  distinction  between  the  majestic  Christian  joy  and  the  lighter-winged  fluttering 
mirths  and  pleasures.  It  flows  from  no  surface-pools,  but  from  deep  fountains,  and  is 
fed  from  everlasting  fields  of  pure  snow  high  on  the  mountains  of  God.  Then  we  have 
the  depth  and  calm  rapture  of  the  joy  in  the  strong  word  of  the  original,  which 
expresses  a  high  degree  of  exultation.  Peter  was  possibly  quoting  our  Lord's  words  to 
his  persecuted  people,  "Rejoice  and  be  exceeding  glad."  At  all  events,  Christian  joy 
should  be  no  pale  and  feeble  thing,  but  full-blood<ed  and  full-voiced.  It  is  far  unlike 
boisterous  mirth,  which  is  noisy  like  the  thorn-bushes  which  crackle  and  flare  in  flame 
for  a  moment.  "The  gods  approve  the  depth  and  not  the  tumult  of  the  soul."  A 
present  salvation,  fellowship  with  a  present  Christ,  the  large  and  sure  liope  of  his 
appealing,  the  exercise  of  faith  and  lov«  and  obedience,  the  immunity  from  fear,  and 
the  escape  from  the  miseries  of  8elf-will,  should  all  combine,  like  so  many  streams 
pouring  down  the  hillsides,  in  this  one  deep  and  smooth-flowing  stream  of  calm  and 
equable  gladness.  Religion  does  us  good  only  as  it  makes  us  glad.  Any  Arm  and 
adequate  grasp  of  the  facts  and  relations  which  the  gospel  brings  will  certainly  make  a 
man  joyfiS.  The  average  religion  of  this  day  does  not  believe  in  its  own  creed  heartily 
enough  to  find  in  it  support  against  temptations  or  joy  in  sorrow.  If  our  Christianity 
has  not  the  power  to  bless  us  with  gladness  in  our  hearts,  there  is  something  ,wrong 
either  in  the  completeness  of  our  surrender  to  it  or  in  the  ariioles  of  our  belief.  If  our 
religion  is  largely  self-ftspection,  or  if  it  dwells  on  the  sterner  side  of  truth,  or  is 
mainly  a  prohibitory  law  keeping  us  from  doing  what  we  would  like,  or  if  it  is  a 
languid  emotion  not  half  so  powerful  as  common  appetites,  we  cannot  expect  to  get 
sweet  juice  of  gladness  from  such  shrunken  fruit.  The  coexistence  of  this  joy  with 
sorrow  is,  further,  brought  into  prominence  here.  This  paradox  of  Christian  experience 
has  seemed  so  startling  that  the  future  tense  has  been  proposed  as  the  true  rendering ; 
but  a  much  deeper  and  grander  sense  results  from  adhering  to  the  present  tense.  It  is 
possible  that  joy  should  live  side  by  side  in  the  same  heart  with  sorrow,  and  neither 
converting  the  other  wholly  into  its  own  substance,  and  each  made  more  noble  by  the 
presence  of  its  opposite.  "Central  peace"  may  "subsist  at  the  heart  of  endless 
agitation."  Greek  fire  will  burn  under  water.  Flowers  bloom  on  the  glacier's  edge. 
The  depths  of  the  sea  are  still,  while  winds  rave  and  waves  heave  and  currents  race 
above.  In  the  darkest  night  of  sorrow  and  loss,  starry  and  immortal  hopes  will 
brighten  in  our  sky,  and  the  heart  that  is  united  to  Christ  will  have  an  inward  solemn 
blessedness  which  no  tempest  of  sorrow  can  extinguish. 

II.  Thk  bobhow  of  the  Cheibtian  life.  There  is  much  unreality  and  consequent 
powerlessness  in  the  one-sided  pictures  of  the  religious  life  so  often  drawn.  To  listen  to 
some  people,  one  would  fancy  that  religion  was  meant  to  abolish  all  trial  and  sorrow. 
A  picture  without  shadows  is  unlike  anything  on  earth.  The  true  Christian  view 
neither  portrays  an  imjwssible  paiadi^e  nor  preaches  a  hardening  stoicism.  Here  we 
have  in  half  a  dozen  words  a  theory  of  the  meaning  and  uses  of  pain  and  grief,  suffi- 
cient to  live  by  and  to  alleviate  many  a  pang.  1.  Notice  the  insight  into  the  true  nature 
and  purpose  of  aiU  sorrow.  It  is  temptalion,  or,  more  properly,  trial  It  is  intended  as 
a  test,  a.  proof,  to  reveal  us  to  ourselves  and  so  to  better  us.  We  do  not  get  to  the  bottom 
of  our  sorrows  till  we  look  at  the  moral  purpose  which  they  serve,  and  regard  them  as 
discipline  rather  than  pain.  They  take  a  shallow  view  who  contemplate  only  the 
smart  of  the  woimd  and  leave  out  of  sight  the  surgeon's  purpose.  They  take  as  Ehallow 
a  view  who  dispute  or  deny  the  benefit  of  sorrow,  and  assert  that  happiness  tends  to  a 
sweeter  virtue  tlian  it  does.  There  is  a  lowly  self-distrust  quickly  passing  into  calm 
faith  which  only  sorrow  can  produce.  The  will  is  never  bowed  into  submission  without 
being  softened  in  the  furnace,  and  there  is  no  real  goodness'  but  from  a  submissive  will. 
The  props  round  which  the  heart  twines  its  tendrils  have  to  be  cut  down,  that  it  may 
fasten  itself  on  the  only  true  support.  Only  when  we  have  nothing  else  to  lean  on  do 
we  lean  all  our  weight  on  him.  2.  Observe,  too,  the  recognition  of  the  wise  adaptation  oj 
our  sorrows  to  our  need.  They  are  not  .'eut  unless  "need  be."  They  are  sent  as  need 
is.  In  the  great  Surgeon's  iustrument-case  are  many  shining  blades,  all  for  cutting  and 
paining.  He  chooses  the  right  knife,  and  cuts  where  wanted,  and  close  beside  the 
sharp  instrument  lie  bandage  and  balm.  It  is  hard  to  believe  that  a  sorrow  which 
strikes  many  is  at  the  same  time  proportioned  in  its  force  to  each.     But  faith  know* 


28  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PETER,     [oh.  i.  1—25. 


that  Providence  neither  forgets  the  general  mass  in  care  for  the  individual,  nor  loses 
sight  of  the  wants  of  the  individual  in  the  crowd,  hut  is  at  once  special  and  general. 
3.  Finally,  observe  the  transiency  of  sorrow.  It  is  for  a  season.  That  is  the  highest 
attainment  of  faith,  to  see  how  short  are  the  long  slow  hours  which  pain  and  grief 
lengthen.  They  seem  to  creep,  as  if  the  sun  and  the  moon  stood  still  as  of  old,  that  the 
storm  may  have  time  to  break  on  us.  But  we  have  to  take  Heaven's  chronology  in  our 
sorrows,  and,  though  their  duration  seems  interminable,  to  feel  that  after  all  it  is  but  a 
little  •while.  The  long  hours  as  they  appear  of  a  dream  are  but  moments  in  reality, 
and  seem  so  when  the  sleeper  awakes.  His  anger  b  but  a  moment ;  his  favour  lasts 
all  the  life.  Weeping  may  come  to  lodge  with  us — a  sombre  guest — for  a  night ;  but 
when  the  bright  morning  dawns  Joy  comes  with  a  shout,  radiant  as  the  morning, -and 
at  his  coming  the  black-robed  visitant  steals  out  of  sight.  Then  the  joy  that  coexisted 
with  sorrow  shall  survive  alone,  and  "  sorrow  and  sighing  shall  flee  away." — A.  M. 

Yer.  8. — The  unique  love  to  an  unseen  Saviour.  Peter  doei  not  include  himself  among 
those  who  loved  the  Christ  whom  they  had  never  seen.  To  him  belonged  the  blessing 
of  those  who  had  believed  because  they  had  seen,  and  who  had  loved  before  they  had 
fully  believed.  But  he  will  not  think  that  he  and  his  fellows,  who  had  been  Christ's 
companions,  love  him  "more  than  these"  who  inherit  the  blessing  pronounced  by 
Christ  himself  on  those  who  have  not  seen  and  yet  have  believed.  Perhaps  some 
echo  of  that  benediction  may  be  heard  among  the  antithesis  of  this  verse,  blending 
with  some  tones  caught  from  the  question  which,  as  with  triple  point,  had  pierced  his 
heart,  " Lovest  thou  me?  " 

I.  Wb  have  heeb  brought  nrro  peominbncb  a  usiqub  fact,  namely,  love  to  an 
unseen  Christ.  Thousands  in  every  age  since  have  cherished  a  passionate  attachment 
to  Jesus,  wholly  unlike  what  is  evoked  by  any  one  else.  Time  and  distance  seem  to 
be  powerless  to  diminish  it.  It  is  no  tepid  affection ;  it  is  no  idle  sentiment.  Those 
who  cherish  it  aver  that  it  lies  at  the  foundation  of  their  lives.  It  rules,  guides, 
stimulates.  It  is  the  mother  of  heroisms  and  of  patience.  It  sheds  light  on  all  dark 
places.  It  mates  and  masters  the  fear  of  death.  The  stake  and  the  gibbet,  the 
dungeon  and  the  rack,  are  powerless  to  repel  those  whom  it  attracts.  It  brings  peace 
and  hope,  holiness  and  wisdom.  It  conquers  the  soul,  and  makes  it  conqueror  of  sin, 
time,  and  the  universe.  And  all  this  passionate  ardour  of  love  which  transforms  the 
heart  it  enters  is  called  out  by  and  lavished  on  a  Man  who  died  nineteen  centuries  ago  1 
There  is  no  other  fact  the  least  like  that. 

II.  What  IS  THE  EXPLANATION  OF  THIS  UNEXAHPLBD  PHENOMENON?      IfJeSUSlsbut 

one  among  the  great  names  of  the  past,  however  high  and  pure;  if  whilst  he  lived  he 
had  no  thoughts  of  us,  and  now  sleeps  in  the  dust  and  does  nothing  in  the  world  but 
by  the  record  of  his  past, — admiration  rising  to  reverence  may  be  his  due,  but  anything 
worth  calling  love  is  impossible.  It  was  not  such  a  Christ  who  kindled  the  hearts  of 
these  Asiatics,  who  had  never  seen  Peter's  Master.  But  if  I  can  believe  that  Jesus 
Christ  died  for  me,  that  I  had  a  place  in  his  Divine-human  love  when  he  bore  our  sins, 
and  that  he  lives  to-day  to  love  me  and  to  succour  and  to  save,  and  that  he  knows 
when  I  love  him,  and  delights  to  accept  and  to  return  my  love, — ^then  I  do  not  need  the 
ordinary  helps  to  love.  AH  other  benefactors  and  mighty  names  in  the  past  stand  in 
different  relation  to  us.  Praise  and  admiration  are  their  guerdon.  But  One  alone  is 
loved  though  unseen,  because,  and  only  because.  One  alone  died  for  each  of  us  and  lives 
to  bless  us.  There  are  some  mutilated  forms  of  Christianity  which  present  a  Christ 
without  a  cross.  They  result  in  a  Church  without  love  enough  to  keep  it  warm.  The 
Christ  whom  Peter  preacheiJ  was  the  Christ  to  whose  transcendent  love,  as  manifest  in 
his  death,  the  uttermost  fervour  of  human  love  was  the  fitting  and  yet  all-inadequate 
return.  Is  there  any  other  conception  of  him  and  of  his  work  which  really  has  power 
to  kindle  through  all  the  ages  and  in  all  hearts  the  flame  of  all-conquering  love  ? 

III.  There  is  no  real  Christian  life  without  this  lovb.  At  bottom  there  is 
only  one  bond  which  unites  spirits  to  spirits,  men  to  men,  or  men  to  God.  Love  is  the 
one  uniting  force.  "  Cords  of  love"  must  fasten  us  to  Christ,  or  we  are  not  fastened  to 
him ;  and  that  love  must  flow  from  the  faith  which  recognizes  him  for  Saviour  by  hii 
cross,  and  trusts  him.  Love  is  second,  not  first ;  but  bo  second  that  wherever  and  as 
soon  as  faith  i«  exercised,  love  oomei  to  life.     Imperfect  conceptions  of  Christ's  work  as 


OH.  1. 1—25.]     THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  PETEB.  29 

Teacher,  Example,  and  the  like,  do  not  really  unite  us  to  him.  They  may  lead  on  to 
loftier  and  truer'thoughts  of  him,  but  tiU  we  are  united  to  him  there  will  be  no  real 
love,  and  therefore  no  real  union.  Faint  and  feeble  our  love  may  be,  unworthy  of  him 
it  ever  is;  but  if  we  have  none  we  are  not  Christians.  We  shall  have  none  unless  our 
faith  grasps  him  as  our  Saviour  by  his  incarnation,  cross,  and  resurrection.  The  ques- 
tion for  us  all  is — Do  we  trust  to  Christ  who  died  for  us?  Do  we  therefore  love  him 
because  he  loved  us,  and  gave  himself  for  us?  Confidence  and  love  have  always  been 
the  bonds  of  union  between  men,  which  alone  have  made  human  society  better  than  a 
den  of  hyenas.  They  are  the  bonds  which  unite  us  to  God.  Christ  asks  no  more  of  ua 
than  that  we  should  transfer  to  him  the  emotions  and  affections  which  we  have 
lavished  on  one  another,  and  let  the  tendrils  which  we  have  twined  round  rotten  boughs 
and  dead  stumps  clasp  his  cross,  that  there  we  may  cling  and  climb,  and  grow  and 
bear  fruit.  Prom  his  cross,  from  his  throne,  he  asks  of  each,  "Lovest  thou  me?" 
Though  our  eyes  have  not  seen  him,  our  hearts  need  not  falter  in  the  answer,  "  Thou 
knowest  that  I  love  thee." — A,  M. 

Vers.  8,  9. — Christian  joy.  There  are  better  things  than  joy.  A  life  framed  on 
purpose  to  secure  it  is  contemptible,  and  foredoomed  to  failure.  Like  sleep,  it  comes 
most  surely  unsought,  and  that  angel  of  God  meets  us  as  we  travel  on  the  way  of  duty. 
It  is  not  a  worthy  motive  to  urge  for  loving  Jesus  Christ  that  wa  shall  be  happy  if  we 
do,  and  much  harm  has  been  done  by  preaching  a  kind  of  gospel  which  winged  its 
exhortations  mainly  with  such  calculations.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  it  would  be  over- 
strained to  take  no  account  of  the  fact  that  joy  follows  faith  in  Christ  as  surely  as 
fragrance  is  breathed  from  opened  flowers.  A  pure  and  sober-suited  gladness  is  one  of 
the  "virgins  following"  that  queen.  If  it  were  not  so,  if  there  were  no  connection 
between  goodness  and  happiness,  there  would  arise  a  far  greater  difBculty  in  vindicating 
the  ways  of  God  than  comes  &om  the  apparent  absence  of  connection  batween  goodness 
and  prosperity.  The  strong  words  of  this  text  assert  that  connection  in  the  broadest 
way. 

L  The  depth  and  height  of  Ohbistian  jot.  It  is  a  melancholy  testimony  to  the 
meagre  and  shallow  nature  of  the  ordinary  type  of  Christian  life,  that,  in  deflance  of 
plain  grammar,  the  words  here  have  been  often  taken  to  refer  to  the  future.  They  have 
been  felt  to  be  a  world  too  wide  for  the  experience  of  most,  of  us.  They  speak  of  an 
exuberant  joy  which  might  be  called  a  jubilant  leaping  up  of  the  heart,  of  a  joy  far  too 
great  to  be  shut  up  in  the  bounds  of  speech,  and  which  h»s  been  glorified,  transfigured, 
as  if  already  clothed  upon  with  the  light  of  heaven.  No  wonder  that  men  whose 
highest  experience  of  Christian  gladness  fell  far  below  this,  should  escape  from  the 
questions  which  the  contrast  suggests  by  throwing  this  joy  into  the  future.  But  it  is 
clearly  meant  to  be  realized  in  the  present.  Such  joy  is  possible,  and,  if  it  be  not 
actual  in  us,  we  should  be  wiser  to  look  for  the  reason  than  to  wrap  ourselves  in  the 
comfortable  excuse  that  it  was  never  meant  to  be  ours  here.  1.  The  trvsjoy  is  silent. 
It  is  but  a  shallow  heart  that  can  tell  its  treasures.  "  He  is  a  pOor  man  who  can  count 
his  flock,"  says  a  proverb.  All  deep  emotions  pass  beyond  speech.  The  deepest  love 
can  but  "  love  and  be  silent."  The  great  river  slides  along  with  equable  and  noiseless 
motion,  while  the  brook  chatters  among  its  pebbles.  The  Christian  joy  is  not  in  need 
of  laughter,  nor  of  words,  nor  of  any  outward  signs.  Mirth  is  noisy ;  deep  joy  is  calm, 
grave,  still.  It  sits  at  the  Master's  feet,  and  moves  not  in  its  deep  restfulness ;  only  the 
light  in  the  eyes  and  the  holy  glow  on  the  still  face  tell  the  depth  of  the  blessedness. 
Earth's  joys  are  the  crackling  of  thorns ;  Christian  joy  bums  steadily.  2.  It  is  "glorified." 
It  already  partakes  of  the  glory  which  is  to  be  revealed,  and  thereby  is  elevated  and 
transfigured.  Joy  may  easily  become  frivolous.  Most  of  our  earthly  joys  are  but  light- 
winged  and  painted  buttesflies  in  summer  skies.  But  the  emotion  may  be  heightened 
and  ennobled  and  changed  from  the  short-lived  fliitterer  among  flowers  to  a  strong- 
pinioned  son  of  light,  gazing  on  and  rising  to  God.  Instead  of  the  iridescent  bubble 
that  bursts  at  a  touch,  it  may  become  solid  and  permanent.  Touched  by  the  glory  of 
that  on  which  it  is  nourished,  joy  is  glorified,  even  as,  infected  by  the  foulness  of  that 
on  which  it  gorges,  it  may  be  debased.  As  is  its  object,  so  is  it — ^varying  from  dignity 
to  degradation.  A  man  may  have  his  face  flushed  with  wine,  or  may  turn  to  gaze  on 
the  sun,  and  be  irradiated  by  the  light  to  which  he  looks,  as  Stephen's  face  glowed 


30  THE   FIRST   EPISTLE   GENERAL  OF  PETER,     {ch.  1.1— 25. 

Kko  an  angel's  from  the  reflected  light  of  tlie  open  heavens.  In  our  joy  lofty  and 
touched  with  Heaven's  own  light,  the  commoo  emotion  heing  transfigured  into  likeness 
to  the  lofty  hopes  and  visions  on  which  it  is  nourishtd? 

II.  The  UNFATLiNa  fountains  of  the  Christian  jot.  Two  conditions  are  «et  forth 
in  thetwo  pnrtioipial  clauseson  which  our  true  joy  depends.  Of  the  two  the  former  biinus 
about  the  latter.  Believing  in,  or  rather  tnisting  to,  the  unseen  Christ,  we  receive  the 
consequence  of  that  trust — the  salvation  of  our  souls.  And  the  exerciseof  faith  Mid  the 
possession  of  the  resulting  salvation  pour  a  flood  of  joy  into  the  heart,  even  though  it 
dwell  in  a  waterless  land.  1.  The  exercise  of  faith  in  the  unseen  Ohri-si  hringe  joy. 
The  very  attitude  of  trust  breathes  calm  gladness  over  the  heart.  It  is  always  blessed 
to  lean  on  one  whom  we  love.  There  is  rest  in  casting  the  burden  on  another.  Anxiety 
and  care  darken  the  face  and  sadden  the  soul,  when  we  have  none  hut  ourselves  to 
rely  on.  But  trust,  even  in  human  helpers  whom  we  can  trust,  makes  us  gJad,  as  a 
child  safe  on  its  mother's  breast,  or  a  wile  guarded  by  her  husband's  arms.  The  more 
permanent  and  sufficient  the  object  of  our  trust,  the  more  joyful  we  shall  be.  If  Christ 
be  our  Trust,  we  rely  on  absolute  perfection  and  permanence  and  power ;  so  our  joy  may 
be  full,  and  may  abide.  To  occupy  mind  and  iieart  with  him  is  joy.  A  waim  thrill 
of  gladness  fills  loving  souls  parted  from  one  another,  as  they  think  of  each  other.  And 
a  bright  light  of  joy  should  be  kindled  at  every  remembrance  of  Christ,  and  will  be  it 
we  are  trusting  to  him.  Faith  is  self-dtstrust,  and  that  is  joy.  Faith  is  self-surrender, 
and  that  is  joy.  Faith  is  the  yielding  of  the  will,  and  that  is  joy.  Faith  is  the 
consciousnessofimionwith  Divine  love  and  power,  and  that  is  joy.  Faith  turns  its  back 
on  earth's  fever  and  falseness,  and  that  is  joy.  Faith  rises  to  walk  in  heavenly  places, 
and  that  is  joy.  Faith  unites  the  soul  with  Jesus,  and  that  is  joy.  The  Christian  joy 
is  cotemporaneous  with  active  exercise  of  our  faith.  If  that  falls  asleep,  it  fades  away. 
It  is  like  the  note  of  a  piano,  which  ceases  to  sound  as  soon  as  the  finger  is  lifted  from 
the  key.  Therefore  is  Objistian  joy  so  seldom  up  t»  the  ideal  set  forth  here,  becaus* 
faith  is  so  spasn.odic,  so  intermittent,  and  so  feeble.  If  we  would  "  rejoice  evermore," 
we  must  "  trust  in  the  Lord  for  ever."  2.  The  sahition  which  is  the  consequence  of  faith 
brings  joy.  The  language  clearly  co-ordinates  "  believing  "  and  "receiving  "  as  cotem- 
poraneous. Both  are  regarded  as  continuous,  not  single  acts,  done  and  done  with,  but 
as  the  standing  characteristics  of  the  Christian  life.  If  continuous,  they  will  be  pro- 
gressive ;  faith  will  become  stronger,  and,  as  it  groiira,  salvation  will  be  more  fully 
possessed.  For  faith  is  receptivity,  the  opening  of  the  door,  and  its  degree,  the  width 
of  the  opening,  settles  how  much  "  salvation  "  will  enter.  Salvation  is  past,  present,  and 
future — and  in  all  epochs  one  in  essence,  however  vanous  in  degree  and  form.  Here 
and  now  we  may  possess  the  beginning  "  of  the  end  of  our  faith,"  even  the  salvation  of 
our  souls,  though  the  full  salvation  of  body,  soul,  and  spirit  has  to  be  waited  for  till 
the  coming  of  the  Lord.  Surely  that  present  salvation  may  well  put  into  our  hands 
a  full  cup  of  gladness.  The  consciousness  of  forgiveness ;  the  sense  of  friendship  with 
Christ ;  the  assurance  that  all  the  sky  is  clear,  and  .nowhere  in  the  universe  of  things 
piesent  or  to  come  any  cloud  that  can  ever  break  in  storm  on  our  heads ;  the  growing 
possession  of  holy  desires,  pure  thoughts,  and  Christ-like  character ;  the  refining  of  the 
nature ;  and  the  hopes  full  of  immortality  which  spring  from  present  communion  with 
him,  and  conquer  death,  and  pour  a  great  light  of  peacefulness  into  the  grave ; — surely 
these  precious  pearls,  melted  in  the  draught  which  the  hand  of  faith  receives  from  Chrisl^ 
may  well  make  sad  hearts  fcaget  their  misery,  and  rejoice  aa  they  drink,  "  with  Joy 
unspeakable  and  full  of  glory." — A.  M. 

Vers.  10 — 12. — The  work  of  Christ  the  central  fact  of  the  universe.  The  salvation 
which  is  secured  by  the  woik  of  Christ,  and  the  work  which  secures  it,  are  the  centre- 
point  of  the  creation.  "  They  that  go  before  and  they  whoJoUow  after  cry,  Hosanna  I 
blessed  be  he  that  cometh  I "    The  calendar  of  civilized  nations  proclaims  that  he  is  the 

Lord  of  the  ages — which  are  to  be  reckoned  as  "  before  Ohrist"«r  as  "  years  of  the  Lord  " 

preparatory  to  or  the  development  of  his  work.  As  for  all  time,  so  for  all  orders  of 
being,  the  cradle  and  the  cross  are  the  centre.  There  were  angels  in  the  heavens  when 
there  where  shepherds  in  the  fields,  and  not  only  Wise  Men  from  the  East  but "  bright 
harnessed  "  seraphs  came  as  pilgrims  to  Bethlehem.  There  were  angels  in  the  tomb 
while  weeping  women  stood  without.     Prophets  heralded  his  coming ;  evangelists  told 


8H.  1. 1—25.]     THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  PETER.  31 

that  he  had  come;  and  hoth  were  taught  hy  the  Spirit,  whose  chiefest  office  in  the 
past  and  in  the  present  is  to  take  of  the  things  of  Christ,  and  to  show  them  to  us. 
Thus  round  hira  move  all  ages ;  to  him  turn  all  eyes ;  of  him  speaks  all  revelation ;  for 
man's  salvation  is  the  crowning  work  of  God,  and  Christ  effects  man's  salvation.  Note, 
then,  in  this  grand  utterance  four  sets  of  persons,  all  concerned  in  that  great  work. 

I.  This  pkophet-heralds.  It  has  become  fashionable  now  to  speak  doubtfully  of 
Messianic  prophecy.  But  any  one  who  believes  that  Christ  is  what  Peter  knew  him  to 
be,  the  Son  of  God  who  died  for  all  men,  will  feel  it  fitting  that  he  should  be  heralded 
by  the  long  series  of  predictions,  and  that  before  the  King's  chariot  should  be  many 
outriders.  The  view  of  Old  Testament  prophecy  given  here  is  remarkable.  Its  main 
theme  is  declared  to  be  the  sufferings  which  were  destined  for  the  Messiah,  and  his 
anbsequent  glories.  Precisely  that  suffering  Messiah  which  had  been  such  a  difflculty 
to  Peter  himself  and  has  ever  been  so  to  his  nation,  and  which  so  many  scholars  now 
cannot  see  in  the  Old  Testament,  is  here  regarded  as  the  centre  of  prophecy ;  not  that 
the  whole  body  of  Jewish  prophecy  is  concerned  with  him,  but  that  "  the  testimony 
of  Jesus  is  the  spirit  of  prophecy."  The  stratum  crops  out  at  many  points,  but  is 
continuous,  even  where  not  exposed.  The  whole  system  has  a  forward  look.  Insti- 
tutions and  persons,  ritual  and  kings,  the  very  nation  itself  in  its  high  vocation  and 
its  many  sorrows,  witnessed  of  One  to  come,  whose  personality  should  be  all  and  more 
than  all  which  these  shadowed.  And  all  this  light  of  prophecy  is  gathered  into  certain 
bright  points,  such  as  Isa.  liii.  and  Ps.  xxii.,  in  which  that  mystery  finds  speech,  of  the 
Messiah  who  suffers  and  then  conquers  and  reigns.  That  thought  is  the  centre  of 
the  Old  Testament  The  criticism  which  does  not  group  it  all  round  the  suffering 
Messiah  has  missed  the  shaping  principle  which  moulds  it  all,  and  in  its  perplexity 
has  turned  order  into  chaos.  Again,  the  relation  of  the  prophets  to  their  message  is 
taught  here  in  a  remarkable  fashion.  It  is  an  axiom  with  some  critics  that  prophecy 
must  be  interpreted  in  the  sense  in  which  the  speaker  and  his  hearers  understood  it. 
But  Peter  thinks  that  the  prophetic  inspiration  sometimes  left  the  speaker  ignorant  of 
the  full  meaning  of  his  own  predictions,  so  distinctly  was  it  the  utterance  of  a  higher 
power.  The  period  of  fulfilment,  in  its  date  ("what")  and  characteristics  ("what  manner 
of  time"),  were  aot  necessarily  known  by  the  prophet.  Another  axiom  of  modern 
philosophizers  upon  prophecy  is  that  predictions  must  have  had  a  hearing,  consolatory 
or  menacing,  upon  their  first  hearers.  But  Peter  thinks  that  a  prophecy  may  have 
been  spoken  which  was  only  to  be  fulfilled  long  centuries  after,  and  could  only  have 
gladdened  the  hearers  with  a  far-off  hope.  Yet  the  prophet  was  not  a  mure  machine 
or  pipe  through  which  the  breath  of  insjiiration  blew.  His  heart  throbbed  in  sympathy 
with  his  messnge,  and  he  pondered  it  with  all  his  force  of  thought.  Peter's  theory  of 
prophetic  inspiration  is  equally  far  from  the  naturalistic  and  from  the  mechanical 
theories, 

II.  Thb  answerino  choir  of  evansbltsts.  The  same  truths  were  the  theme  of 
prophet  and  of  preacher.  The  word  *'  reported "  and  that  rendered  "  preached  the 
gospel "  are  both  compounds  of  one  root.  To  tell  that  message  which  prophets  fore- 
told is  to  preach  the  glad  tidings  to  the  world  ;  and  the  whole  business  of  the  Christian 
teacher  is  to  proclain  the  joyful  facts.  So  we  have  here :  1.  The  full  identity  of  the 
message  of  the  prophet  and  the  preacher.  The  main  difference  is  in  the  tense  of  their 
verbs.  The  one  speaks  in  the  future;  the  other,  in  the  present;  but  the  verbs  are  the 
same  and  the  nominative  is  the  same.  The  bud  and  the  flower  are  one.  Prophecy  is 
condensed,  outlined  gospeL  Gospel  is  expanded,  specialized  prophecy.  Bays  which 
were  parted  in  the  prophet's  utterance  are  united  in  the  evangelist's  message.  Antici- 
pations are  ever  less  definite  than  realities.  But  the  theme  is  one,  though  prophecy 
touched  with  but  a  light  hand  the  mysterious  nature  of  4he  Messiah  whom  it  pro- 
claimed. 2.  The  essential  substance  of  the  gospel  is  the  proclamation  of  historical 
facts.  It  is  not  a  philosophy,  nor  directly  a  theology,  still  less  is  it  a  system  of 
morality.  It  is  the  record  of  what  has  happened  on  this  solid  earth.  Philosophy  and 
theology  and  morality  will  all  be  evolved  from  these  facts,  hut  the  first  form  of  the 
gospel  is  history.  Only  it  is  to  he  remembered  that  the  fact  that  Jesns  has  lived  and 
died  is  not  the  gospel ;  but  the  fact  that  Christ  has  died  for  our  sins  is.  The  more  plainly 
Christian  teachers  deliver  their  message,  not  as  the  product  of  their  own  thoughts,  but 
W  the  message  given  to  them,  and  the  more  they  centre  their  energy  on  setting  forth 


32  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PETER,     [oh.  1.1—25. 

the  fact  of  Chriifs  Bufferings  In  the  past  and  glories  in  the  present,  the  better  for  their 
Buccesa  and  for  the  worid. 

in.  The  tisTENiNQ,  GAZiNO  ANOBLB.  "  To  look  into  "  is  literally  "  to  bend  the  body 
so  as  to  gaze  upon  an  object,"  as  the  apostles  did  at  the  sepulchre.  This  graphic  figure 
may,  perhaps,  be  a  remimsceuce  of  the  quiet  forms  which  sat  the  one  at  the  head  and  the 
other  at  the  foot  where  the  body  of  Jesus  had  lain,  as  gazing  upon  a  mystery  and  guarding 
a  holy  place,  or  it  may  even  recall  the  cherubim  bending  with  outstretched  and  meeting 
wings  above  the  mercy-seat.  At  all  events,  it  speaks  of  the  remoter  and  yet  earnest 
interest  which  other  orders  of  beings  in  other  worlds  take  in  the  story  of  redemption. 
Men  have  the  honour  of  proclaiming  it,  whether  as  prophets  or  evangelists.  To  them 
it  belongs.  He  helped  not  angels,  but  he  helped  the  "  seed  of  Abraham."  Therefore 
they  do  not  speak  of  it,  but  stand  around,  like  spectators  in  some  great  arena,  all  silent 
and  all  eyes.  Three  great  truths  concerning  angelic  natures  are  here.  They  are  capable 
of  learning.  They  too  know  God  by  his  work  which  excites  in  them  wonder  and 
interest  as  it  unfolds.  The  life  and  death  of  Christ,  with  the  resulting  salvation,  are  a 
revelation  of  God  to  angels  no  less  than  to  men,  and,  though  they  have  no  share  in  the 
redemption,  they  hare  a  share  in  the  knowledge  which  the  cross  brings  to  them  as  to 
us.  From  it  far-darting  beams  of  light  shoo*  earthwards  and  upwards.  It  is  the 
crowning  manifestation  of  the  Divine  nature  for  all  worlds  and  orders  of  being,  as  for 
all  ages. 

IV.  The  one  Spirit  dwelling  in  prophets  and  evangelists.  Not  only  is  the 
theme  the  same,  but  the  animating  irap>>lse  also.  The  power  by  which  the  prophet 
saw  all  the  wonder  that  should  be  is  the  same  as  the  power  which  sat  in  cloven  tongues 
of  fire  on  the  heads  of  all  the  Church  on  Pentecost,  and  has  ever  since  been  the  strength 
of  every  evangelist  and  of  every  Christian.  Inspiration  is  not  a  past  phenomenon,  but 
the  permanent  possession  of  the  Church.  Nay,  the  Spirit  which  of  old  came  for  special 
purposes  on  selected  men  and  tarried  not  with  them,  is  now,  as  it  were,  a  denizen  of 
earth,  for  it  is  "  sent  down  from  heaven  "  once  for  all,  to  abide  among  us,  touching  all 
lips  which  humbly  and  prayerfully  speak  Christ's  Name  among  men.  And  it  was  the 
"Spirit  of  Christ"  which  dwelt  in  the  prophets,  and  which  they  ever  called  "the 
Spirit  of  the  Lord."  From  the  beginning  the  Word  was  God ;  the  manifested  Jehovah 
of  the  old  covenant  is  the  Jesus  Christ  of  the  new.  He  is  the  Lord  and  Sender  of  that 
Spirit  which  spoke  through  all  the  prophets ;  he  is  the  Medium  of  all  revelation,  the 
Self-manifestation  of  God  from  eternity.  It  is  Christ  who  binds  all  the  ages  into  one, 
filling  the  past,  the  present,  and  the  future.  It  is  Christ  who  binds  all  worlds  and 
beings  into  one,  revealing  and  ruling  for  angels  and  men.  It  is  Christ  who  is  the 
Theme  and  the  Inspiration  of  all  prophets  and  all  teachers.  To  him  cherubim  and  sera- 
phim turn  with  eager  gaze.  The  goodly  fellowship  of  prophets  speak  of  him ;  of  him 
speak  the  great  company  who  publish  the  Word.  Let  us,  too,  yield  to  the  attraction  of 
the  cross,  which  binds  all  things  in  heaven  and  earth  in  golden  unity.  Let  tis  gaze  on 
those  wonders  of  Divine  pity  and  righteousness  and  love  which  have  given  to  heaven 
a  new  conception  of  God.  Let  us  open  our  spirits  to  that  Spirit  of  Christ  whose 
dwelling  in  our  hearts  shall  set  us  free  from  sin  and  death.  Let  us  cleave  to  that 
message  which,  in  the  history  of  his  incarnation,  death,  and  royal  glories,  brings  to  our 
hearts  the  good  news  that  sheds  light  over  all  the  darkest  places  of  our  human  expe- 
rience, and  endows  us  with  full  salvation. — A.  M. 

Ver.  IS.— The  Christian^  hope.  The  grammatical  structure  of  this  verse  marks 
out  the  principal  command  as  being  that  to  hope,  while  two  subsidiary  participial 
clauses  give  subordinate  exhortations  to  girding  up  the  loins  of  the  mind,  and  to  being 
sober,  as  accompaniments  of  and  helps  to  this  Christian  hope.  The  true  meaning  of 
the  injunction  is  given  in  the  Bevised  Version,  which  substitutes  "  hope  perfectly  "  for 
"  hope  to  the  end."  Peter  is  not  encouraging  to  persistence  but  to  completeness  in 
our  hope.  The  characteristic  which  he  would  have  all  Christians  cultivate  refers,  not 
to  its  duration,  but  to  its  degree.  Such  a  perfect  hope  is  the  only  one  corresponding 
to  the  perfect  object  on  which  it  is  fixed — the  grace  that  will  be  ours  when  Christ  shall 
come.  The  more  clearly  that  object  is  discerned,  the  more  vigorous  will  be  the  joyotis 
•Btioipation  which  grasps  it.  But  such  strength  of  hope  will  not  come  of  itself.  It 
needs  efiort  and  diseipliae,  self-stimulating  and  self-restraint. 


OH.  1. 1—25.]     THE  PIEST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  PETER.  S8 

L  We  have  to  consider  the  peefbot  object  ot  Chkistian  hope.  There  are 
three  striking  ideas  suggested  by  the  remarkable  language  here.  1.  We  have  a  very 
unusual  designation  for  that  object,  namely,"  grace."  Usually  the  future  blessings  are 
called  "  glory,"  and  in  common  religious  language, "  grace  "  and  "  glory  "  are  contrasted, 
as  belonging  to  earth  and  heaven.  Here  clearly  "  grace  "  means  the  whole  sum  of  the 
blessings  to  be  bestowed  in  another  life,  and  is  equivalent  to  the  "  salvation  ready  to  be 
revealed"  spoken  of  in  an  earlier  verse.  The  unusual  expression  teaches  us  that  the 
glories  of  our  ultinaate  exaltation  in  all  their  splendour  are  purely  gratuitous  and  the 
product  of  the  undeserved  love  and  liberality  of  our  God.  The  whole  Christian  career 
from  first  to  last  owes  all  it  enjoys,  possesses,  or  hopes  to  "  grace."  The  substantial 
identity  of  the  Christian  character  here  and  there  is  also  implied.  Glory  Is  but  grace 
perfected ;  grace  is  incipient  glory.  The  gift  is  one  here  and  there,  only  the  measure 
varies.  What  is  a  spark  now,  almost  smothered  sometimes  under  green  wood,  flames 
out  ruddy  and  triumphant  then.  2.  That  ultiTnate  grace  is  on  its  way  to  us.  It  is 
"  being  brought,"  or,  as  Leighton  puts  it, "  a-bringing."  The  same  word  is  used  to  describe 
the  onward-moving  rush  of  the  mighty  wind  of  Pentecost.  It  is  as  if  Home  strong 
angel-choir  had  already  begun  their  flight  with  this  great  gift  in  their  hands,  and  were 
hasting  with  all  the  power  of  their  majestic  pinions  to  this  small  island  in  the  deep. 
The  light  from  fixed  stars  may  take  centuries  to  reach  us,  but  is  speeding  through 
space  all  the  while.  So  that "  great  far-off  Divine  event "  is  coming  steadily  nearer,  as  if 
some  star,  at  first  a  point  in  the  distance,  should  take  motion  towards  us  and  at  last 
pour  all  its  splendour  on  our  eyes.  A  solemn  but  invigorating  thought,  fitted  to 
brighten  hope  and  kindle  desire  that  "  now  is  our  salvation  nearer  than  when  we 
believed."  3.  This  approaching  grace  is  wrapped  up  in  the  revelation  of  Jesus  Christ. 
We  may  render  "  at,"  as  the  Revised  Version  does,  and  yet  give  full  force  to  the  preposi- 
tion in  the  original.  The  grace  is  included  in  the  revelation  of  Jesus  Christ,  as  a  jewel 
in  a  case.  The  manifestation  of  Christ  in  his  glory  shall  be  the  participation  in  that 
glory  of  all  who  love  him.  It  overflows,  as  it  were,  into  us,  partly  because  the  sight 
of  him  in  his  glory  shall  work  transformation  into  his  likeness,  as  a  light  falling  on  a 
mirror  makes  a  brightness ;  but  chiefly  because  he  and  we  shall  be  so  truly  one  in  deep 
mystic  union  that  all  this  is  ours,  and  the  glory  which  streams  from  him  shall 
brighten  us.  All  which  he  shows  to  a  wondering  world  we  shall  share.  This  is  the 
perfect  object  of  Christian  hope.  How  different  from  paltry,  perishable  earthly  hopes  I 
Why  let  this  great  faculty  trail  along  the  ground,  when  it  might  climb  to  heaven 
by  the  trelliswork  of  God's  promises?  Why  limit  it  to  days  and  years,  when  it 
might  expand  to  lay  hold  on  eternity?  Let  hearts  and  hupes  mount  to  fix  on  Christ, 
and  they  shall  not  be  ashamed  nor  confounded  world  without  end. 

IL  The  perfect  hope  which  grasps  the  perfect  object.  There  is  no  doubt  that 
"hope  perfectly  "  is  the  injunction  here.  It  is  more  needful  to  exhort  to  perfectiou  in 
degree  than  to  permanence  in  duration,  which  will  follow  naturally.  Hope  may  exist 
in  all  degrees  from  a  tremulous  "  perhaps"  up  to  " I  am  sure."  Usually  it  is  le.ss  than 
certainty.  "  Hopes  and  fears  that  kindle  hope  "  are  "  an  unextihguishable  hope.  A 
look  of  doubt  slumbers  in  her  fair  eyes.  How  can  that  be  firm  which  is  built  on  a 
quagmire?"  But  it  is  possible  for  a  Christian  to  have  this  perfect  hope.  God's  fixed 
and  faithful  Word  gives  us  certainty  of  future.  Nor  need  our  own  sin  or  weakne.ss  dash 
our  confidence,  for  his  promises  are  made  to  the  sinful  and  weak.  We  have  roL-k  on 
which  to  build.  Why  should  our  hope  cast  its  anchor  on  some  floating  island  which 
may  drift  and  melt  away,  when  it  may  be  fastened  within  the  veil  ?  It  is  a  duti/  tc 
hope  perfectly,  because  only  such  hope  corresponds  to  facts.  Not  to  hope  is  unbelief 
Some  good  people  Bay  "  I  hope  "  in  such  tremulous  melancholy  tones  that  it  sounds  liket 
"  I  fear."  Joyous  confidence  becomes  those  who  have  God  to  lean  on.  "  I  am  persuaded,' 
"  we  know,"  are  the  words  with  which  Paul  and  John  heralded  their  hopes ;  and  we 
should  be  bold  to  use  the  same.  It  is  blessedness  to  hope  perfectly.  So  we  escape  the 
alternations  which,  like  the  hot  and  the  shivering  fits  of  ague,  rack  others,  and  the 
bitterness  of  disappointment  when  some  gleaming  vision  collapses,  and,  instead  of  the 
rainbow-hued  bubble,  we  are  left  with  a  drop  of  dirty  water.  He  who  lives  by  eartlily 
hopes  is  in  danger  of  dying  by  earthly  disappointments.  A  fulfilled  hope  is  often  a 
disappointed  one.  We  may  have  a  pillar  of  fire  to  guide  us  in  all  the  darkness,  which  will 
glow  brighter  as  we  draw  near  the  end.  It  is  strength  to  hope  perfectly.  Hope  is  often 
I.  pktkb.  * 


84  THE  FIEST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  PETER,     [oh.  1  1-2*. 

k  trifler,  robbing  us  of  energy,  tnaWng  tbe  present  flat,  and  withdrawing  us  from  work- 
ing in  order  to  dream.  But  Christian  hope  is  an  armed  warrior,  grave  and  calm,  ready 
for  conflict  because  assured  of  victory.  It  will  be  as  wings  to  lift  us  above  care  and 
sorrows,  and  as  cords  to  bind  us  to  duty  and  toil. 

III.  The  self-discipline  which  keeps  the  perfect  hope.  It  has  two  parts — ^"gird- 
ing up  the  loins,"  and  "  being  sober."  These  two  are  somewhat  difficult  to  distinguish. 
But  the  former  enjoins  determined  effort,  the  bracing  up  of  all  one's  powers,  or,  as  we 
say.  "  pulling  one's  self  together."  Travellers,  servants,  soldiers,  have  to  tighten  their 
belts  and  confine  loose  robes.  A  slackly  braced  mind  has  not  force  enough  to  cherish  a 
perfect  hope.  There  are  many  difficulties  in  its  way,  and  vigorous  effort  is  needed  to 
concentrate  the  mind  and  heart  on  the  truth  which  warrants  it.  All  Christian  virtue 
needs  determined  effort.  Earthly  hopes  will  not  be  vigorous  unless  the  intrusive 
present  is  shut  out  by  resolute  effort,  and  the  attention  kept  fixed  on  the  future.  How 
can  a  strong  Christian  hope  be  preserved  on  easier  terms  ?  Again,  for  the  completeness 
of  Christian  hope,  rigid  self  control  and  repression  are  needed.  "  Be  sober  "  means  "  ke»p 
a  tight  hand  on  all  desires  and  tastes,  especially  on  animal  passions  and  appetites. 
There  is  no  possibility  of  clear  vision  of  the  future  if  the  mists  that  steam  up  from  thes* 
undrained  marshes  hide  it,  nor  can  the  soul  whose  desires  turn  earthwards  go  out  in 
keen  expectation  to  the  more  ethereal  joys  above.  If  the  plant  is  allowed  to  throw  out 
side  shoots,  it  will  not  run  high.  Our  hopes  are  regulated  by  our  desires.  We  have  a 
limited  amount  to  expend,  and  if  we  bestow  it  on  things  of  time  and  sense,  we  shall 
have  none  to  spare  for  the  unseen.  If  we  pour  the  precious  ointment  on  the  heads  of 
earthly  loves,  there  will  be  none  with  which  to  anoint  our  true  Lover  and  King.  A 
great  possibility  is  set  before  us  weary  sons  of  men,  whose  hearts  have  been  so  often 
torn  by  disappointment  that  we  know  not  whether  it  is  sadder  to  hope  or  to  despair.  We 
may  have  the  future  made  as  certain  as  the  past,  and  be  made  conquerors  over  sorrow 
and  the  dread  of  to-morrow  and  the  apathy  which  does  not  look  forward,  by  a  calm  hope 
which  knows  that  it  wiU  be  fnlHlIed.  We  need  not  build  on  peradventures,  but  on 
"  Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto  you."  Do  not  build  on  sand  when  you  may  build  on  ruck, 
even  on  "  Christ,  who  is  our  Hope  "—and  you  will  not  be  confounded. — ^A.  M. 

Vers.  14 — 16. — Christiana  God-like  men.  Probably  wo  are  not  to  see  in  the  first  words 
of  these  verses  any  reference  to  the  filial  relation  which  Christians  bear  to  G(od,  tempting 
as  the  view  is  which  would  make  them  parallel  to  Paul's  exhortation,  "  Be  ye  imitators 
of  God,  as  dear  children."  The  literal  rendering  is,  "children  of  obedience,"  which  is 
plainly  a  Hebraism,  and  means  simply  "  persons  whose  characteristic  is  obedience,"  like 
"  sons  of  light,"  or  "of  earth,"  or  "of  thunder."  Submission  to  the  Divine  will  in  the 
twofold  form  of  resignation  to  its  appointments  and  of  obedience  to  its  behebts  is  the 
very  life-element  of  the  believing  soul.  This  obedience  is  to  express  itself  in  the  order- 
lug  of  the  outward  life.  There  was  a  time  when  self-will  shaped  their  lives.  They 
moulded  themselves  according  to  their  own  desires,  but  all  that  must  be  at  an  end  now. 
A  new  pattern  is  set  before  them.  They  are  now  to  fashion  themselves,  not  afte'r  the 
ideal  framed  by  their  own  tastes  or  inclinations,  but,  as  we  might  read  the  words, 
•'according^ to  the  Holy  One  who  hath  called  you."    So  we  have  here — 

I.  The  mould  or  pattern  fob  the  Christian  life.  Can  that  infinitely  perfect 
Divine  nature  be  proposed  as  a  pattern  for  men  with  any  good  results?  Is  imitation 
possible?  Will  not  the  snowy  whiteness  of  the  far-off  peak  dazzle  rather  than  attract, 
and  its  steep  height  seem  to  counsel  rest  in  the  valleys  below  rather  than  the  toilsome 
climb  to  the  summit  ?  How  can  human  virtue  in  its  highest  form  be  analogous  to  the 
holiness  of  a  Being  who  has  no  weakness,  no  passions,  no  temptations,  no  changes,  no 
limitations?  But  love,  gentleness,  goodness,  righteousness,  must  be  so  far  identical  in 
God  and  man  that  we  know  what  they  are  in  him  by  what  they  are  in  ourselves.  A 
riewdrop  is  rounded  by  the  same  law  which  moulds  a  planet,  and  its  tiny  rainbow  is 
the  same  as  the  arch  which  spans  the  heavens.  Power,  wisdom,  cannot  be  limited,  but 
righteousness  may.  To  be  like  God  morally  is  the  sum  of  all  religion.  Worship  pre- 
supposes that  the  character  of  the  being  worshipped  is  regarded  with  admiration  and 
aspiration.  The  worshippers  make  their  gods  as  embodiments  of  their  ideals,  and  then 
the  gods  make  the  worshippers.  "  They  that  make  them  are  like  unto  them  "  is  the  law 
foi  heathenism,  end  explains  many  strange  perversions  of  conscience.    In  Glulstianitf 


HH.  1. 1—25.]     THE  FIRST  fiPISTLB  GENERAL  OP  PETER.  3S 


the  end  of  all  the  grand  manifestations  of  Divine  love  and  power  is  just  this — to  make 
men  like  God.  What  is  all  revelation  for?  Not,  surely,  that  men  may  know  about 
God,  nor  that  they  may  feel  devout  emotion  towards  him.  We  know  that  we  m  ly  feel, 
and  we  know  and  feel  that  we  may  be  and  love  like  God  and  do  his  will.  A  holy  God- 
like character  is  the  crown  of  all  religion  and  the  highest  purpose  of  all  reveUition. 
That  model  is  comprehensive,  so  as  to  include  the  wbole  round  of  conduct.  "  All 
manner  of  conversation  "  is  included  within  its  great  sweep.  And  it  is  homely,  so  as  to 
fit  tight  to  and  regulate  the  smallest  duties.  The  commonest  things  may  be  done  in 
imitation  of  the  holy  God.  The  plan  of  the  poorest  kitchen  garden  cannot  be  made 
without  celestial  observations.  In  our  pettiest  affairs  we  can  bring  the  mightiest 
principles  to  hear.  Indeed,  the  only  way  to  make  life  great  is  to  apply  great  principles 
to  small  duties ;  and  every  deed  of  the  humblest  career  may  he  glorified  by  not  only 
being  done  as  unto  God,  but  in  being  done  like  his  own  acts,  of  which  love  is  the 
.motive  and  righteousness  the  characteristic. 

II.  The  pbooess  of  copying  the  pattern.  The  language  of  the  text  suggests  very 
clearly  these  points.  1.  We  ourselves  are  to  be  the  a/rtificers  of  oar  own  holy  characters, 
God  gives  his  grace,  and  implants  his  Spirit,  which  transforms ;  but  all  these  Divine 
powers,  how  numerous  and  strong  soever  they  may  be,  do  not  reach  their  end  without 
our  own  strenuous  effort.  They  are  the  tools  put  into  our  hands  to  fashion  the  fabric 
of  a  holy  life ;  but  we  must  use  them,  and  put  our  strength  into  the  use  of  them,  or  the 
fabric  will  not  be  built.  God  makes  no  man  holy  by  magic,  without  the  man's  own 
hard  work.  2.  The  process  is  slow.  We  fashion  ourselves  by  repeated  efforts  and 
gradually  build  up  a  character  like  his.  Emotion  may  be  quickly  excited,  but  miking 
character  is  always  slow  work.  It  cannot  be  struck  out  at  a  blow  as  sovereigns  are 
struck,  but  has  to  be  patiently  elaborated  like  some  delicately  chased  golden  cup. 
Actions  often  repeated  make  habits,  and  habits  make  character.  It  is  formed  slowly, 
as  the  sedimentary  rocks  are  laid  down  at  the  bottom  of  the  sea,  by  an  unseen  process 
lasting  for  long  aeons.  More  than  "forty  and  six  years  is  this  temple  in  building." 
3.  It  is  aaxympanied  by  a  painful  destructive  process.  The  character  already  formed 
after  another  model  has  to  be  recast.  Formerly  they  had  been  moulded  according  to 
their  own  "  lusts."  Each  man's  own  desires  had  shaped  him.  He  did  as  he  liked  best. 
That  is  sin.  That  is  human  nature — not  in  absolute  exclusion  of  sense  of  law  and 
duty.  Yet  still,  on  the  whole,  self-will  moulds  men's  lives.  Negatively,  then,  the  false 
tendency  of  pleasing  self  must  be  thwarted.  The  character  already  formed  must  be 
fought  against  and  subdued.  The  old  man  has  to  be  put  off.  The  old  metal  has  to  be 
thrown  into  the  melting-pot,  and  to  be  run  into  a  new  mould.  And  tiiat  cannot  be  done 
without  self-denial  and  pain,  to  which  the  bodily  tortures  of  crucifixion  are  compared 
by  St.  Paul.  Tears  and  blood  are  shed  with  less  pain  than  accompanies  tearing  off  this 
worser  selfc  It  is  like  tearing  the  very  skin  from  the  quivering  flesh.  But,  hard  as  it 
is,  it  has  to  be  done,  if  we  are  ever  to  be  holy  as  he  is  holy.  4.  The  command  is  made 
blessed  by  the  motive  which  enforces  it.  "  He  has  called  us.''  Then,  if  he  has  called  us 
to  holiness,  we  may  be  quite  sure  that  we  shall  nut  aim  at  it  in  vain.  The  thought 
that  we  are  working  in  the  line  of  the  Divine  purposes,  and  obeying  a  Divine  call, 
inspires  a  hope  which  mightily  strengthens  us  for  the  task,  and  goes  far  to  fulfil  it.-self. 
God's  commands  are  promises.  If  he  has  called  us  to  be  holy,  certainly,  if  we  try  to 
obey  him,  we  shall  be  so.  He  never  summons  to  tasks  which  he  does  not  give  power 
to  perform.  He  has  called,  and  that  makes  it  certain  that  he  will  perfect  that  which 
concerneth  na.  Therelore  we  may  set  ourselves  with  good  heart  to  the  glorious  task 
of  copying  the  Divine  holiness,  assured  that  to  do  so  is  not  presumption,  but  simple 
obedience,  and  that,  however  slow  may  appear  our  progress  upwards  to  the  shining, 
snowy  summit,  it  is  verily  his  will  that  we  shall  one  day  stand  there,  and  be  satisfied, 
when  we  awake,  in  his  likeness. — A.  M. 

Ver.  17. — 2%e  Father  and  Judge.  The  injunction  here  «nd  the  reason  for  it  are 
equally  strange.  Both  seem  opposed  no  less  to  the  confidence,  hope,  and  joy  which 
have  been  glowing  in  the  former  part  of  this  chapter  than  to  the  general  tone  of  th» 
New  Testament.  "  Live  in  habitual  fear,  for  God  is  a  strict  Judge,"  strikes  a  note 
which  at  first  hearing  sounds  a  discord.  Is  not  Christianity  the  religion  of  perfect  love 
which  casts  out  lear  ?    Is  not  its  very  promise  that  he  who  believes  shall  not  come 


36  THE  PIEST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  PETER,    [oh.  i.  1—26. 

into  judgment  ?  Is  not  itg  cential  revelation  that  of  a  Father  who  hath  not  dealt  with 
us  according  to  our  sins,  nor  rewarded  us  according  to  our  transgressions  ?  Yes ;  God 
lie  thanked  that  it  is!  We  cannot  too  earnestly  assert  that,  nor  too  jealously  guard 
these  truths  from  all  tampering  or  weakening.  But  these  solemn  words  are  none  the 
less  true. 

I.  The  twofold  bbvblation  of  God  as  Father  and  Judqb.  If  we  adopt  the 
translation,  "call  on  him  as  Father,"  we  shall  catch  here  an  echo  of  the  Lord's  Prayer, 
and  recognize  a  toslimony  to  its  early  and  general  use,  independent  and  confirmatory  of 
the  Gospels.  Wu  need  not  dwell  upon  the  thought  that  God  is  our  Father.  There  is 
little  fear  of  its  heing  lost  sight  of  in  the  Christian  teaching  of  this  day.  But  there  is 
much  danger  of  its  being  so  held  as  to  obscure  the  other  relation  here  associated  with  it. 
Men  have  often  been  io  penetrated  with  the  conviction  that  God  iB  Judge  as  to  forget 
that  he  is  Father.  The  danger  now  is  that  they  should  be  so  occupied  with  the  thoujiht 
that  he  is  Father  as  to  forget  that  he  is  Judge.  What  do  we  mean  by  "judgment"?  . 
We  mean,  first,  an  accurate  knowledge  and  estimate  of  the  moral  quality  of  an  action ; 
next,  a  solemn  approval  or  condemnation ;  and  next,  the  pronouncing  of  sentence  which 
entails  punishment  or  reward.  Now,  can  it  be  that  he  who  loves  rigliteousness  and 
hates  evil  should  ever  fail  to  discern,  to  estimate,  to  condemn,  and  to  chastise  evil,  who- 
ever does  it?  The  eternal  necessity  of  his  own  great  holiness,  and  not  less  of  his 
own  almighty  lovo,  binds  him  to  this.  Our  text  distinctly  speaks  of  a  present  judgment. 
It  is  God  who  judgeiA,  not  who  will  judge  ;  and  that  judgment  is  of  each  man's  work 
as  a  whole,  not  of  his  works,  but  of  his  work.  There  is  a  perpetual  present  judgment 
going  on.  God  has  an  estimate  of  each  man's  course,  solemnly  approves  or  disapproves, 
and  shapes  his  dealings  with  each  accordingly.  The  very  fact  of  this  Fatherhood,  so 
far  from  being  inconsistent  with  this  continual  judgment,  makes  it  the  more  certain. 
He  is  not  so  indifferent  to  his  children  as  to  let  their  deeds  pass  unnoticed,  and,  if  need 
be,  unchastised.  "  We  have  had  fathers  of  our  flesh  which  corrected  us,  and  we  gave 
them  reverence."  They  would  have  deserved  little  of  it  while  we  were  children,  and 
Would  have  almost  deserved  our  malediction  when  we  became  men,  if  they  had  not. 
Our  Father  in  heaven  knows  and  loves  us  better  than  they.  Therefore  he  judges  from 
a  loftier  point  of  view.  Standing  higher,  he  looks  deeper,  and  corrects  for  a  nobler 
purpose — "that  we  should  be  partakers  of  his  holiness."  To  the  Christian  God's 
judgments  are  a  sign  of  his  love.  So  we  should  rejoice  in  and  long  for  them.  Do  we 
wish  to  be  separated  from  our  sin,  to  be  drawn  nearei'  to  him  ?  Then  let  us  be  glad  that 
"the  Lord  will  judge  his  people,"  and  while  in  penitent  consciousness  of  our  sins  we 
pray  with  the  psalmist,  "Enter  not  into  judgment  with  thy  servant,  0  Lord!"  let  us 
also  cry  with  him,  "Judge  me,  0  Lord;  try  my  reins  and  my  heart!"  Abundance  of 
Scripture  teaching  insists  on  the  fact  that  there  is  a  future  judgment  for  Christians  as 
for  others.  _  "  We  must  all  appear  before  the  judgment-seat  of  Christ."  True,  "  in  the 
course  of  justice  none  of  us  should  see  salvation."  But  though  we  are  saved,  not 
accoiding  to  works  of  righteousness  which  we  have  done,  it  is  also  true  that  our  place 
in  heaven,  though  not  our  entrance  into  heaven,  is  determined  by  the  law  of  recompense, 
and  that,  in  a  very  real  sense, "  whatsoever  a  man  soweth,  that  shall  he  also  reap."  A 
saved  man's  whole  position  will  be  affected  by  his  past.  His  place  will  be  in  proportion 
to  his  Christian  character,  though  not  deserved  nor  won  by  it.  Let  us  ponder,  then, 
the  solemn  words,  almost  the  last  which  come  to  us  from  the  enthroned  Christ, "  Behold, 
I  come  quickly ;  and  my  reward  is  with  me,  to  give  every  man  according  as  his  work 
shall  be." 

II.  The  fbab  which  consequently  is  an  element  in  the  child's  love.  Perfect 
love  casts  out  ihe  fear  which  has  torment,  but  it  deepens  a  fear  which  is  blessed.  By 
feai-  we  oftenest  mean  an  apprehension  of  and  a  shrinking  from  dangers  or  evils,  or  a 
painful  recoil  from  a  person  who  may  inflict  them.  Such  fear  is  wholly  inconsistent 
with  the  filial  relation  and  the  child's  heart.  But  the  fear  of  God,  which  the  Old 
Testament  so  exalts,  and  which  is  here  enjoined  as  a  necessary  part  of  Christian 
experience,  is  not  dread.  It  has  no  trembling  apprehension  of  evil  disturbing  its 
serenity.  To  fear  God  is  not  to  be  afraid  of  God.  It  is  full  of  reverential  awe  and  joy, 
and,  so  far  from  being  inconsistent  with  love,  is  impossible  without  it,  increases  it  and 
is  increased  by  it.  It  is  a  reverent,  awe-stricken  prostration  before  the  majesty  of  holy 
love.     Its  opposite  Is  irreverence.     It  is,  further,  a  lowly  consciousness  of  the  heinous- 


OH.  1, 1—25.]     THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  PETER.  87 

iiess  of  Bin,  and  consequently  a  dread  of  offending  that  Divine  holiness.  Ha  who  thus 
fears,  fears  to  sin  more  than  anything  else,  and  fears  Grod  so  much  that  he  fears  nothing 
hesides.  The  opposite  of  that  is  presumptuous  self-confidence,  like  Peter's  own  earlier 
disposition,  which  led  him  into  so  many  painful  and  humbling  situations.  "  A  wise 
man  feareth  and  departeth  from  evil."  The  fear  enjoined  here  is,  primarily,  then,  a 
reverential  regard  to  the  holy  Father  who  is  our  Judge,  and,  secondarily  and  con- 
sequently, a  quick  sensitiveness  of  conscience,  which  knows  our  own  weakness,  and, 
above  all  else,  dreads  falling  into  sin.  Such  sensitive  scrupulousness  may  seem  to  be 
over-anxiety,  but  it  is  wisiiom ;  and,  though  it  brings  some  pains,  it  is  blessedness. 
This  is  no  world  for  unwary  walking.  There  are  too  many  enemies  seeking  admission 
to  the  citadel  for  it  to  be  safe  to  dispense  with  rigid  watchfulness  at  the  gates.  Our 
Father  is  our  Judge,  therefore  let  us  fear  to  sin,  and  fear  our  own  weakness.  Our 
Judge  is  our  Father,  therefore  let  us  not  be  afraid  of  him,  but  court  his  pure  eyes  and 
perfect  judgment.  Such  fear  which  has  in  it  no  torment,  and  is  the  ally  of  love,  is  not 
the  ultimate  form  of  our  emotions  towards  God.  It  is  appropriate  only  to  '*  the  time  of 
our  sojourning  here."  The  Christian  soul  in  this  world  is  as  a  foreigner  in  a  strange 
land.  Its  true  affinities  are  in  heaven  ;  and  its  present  surroundings  are  ever  seeking 
to  make  it  "  forget  the  imperial  palace  "  which  is  its  home.  So  constant  vigilance  is 
needed.  But  when  we  reach  our  own  land  we  can  dwell  safely,  having  neither  locks 
nor  bars.  The  walls  may  be  pulled  down,  and  flower-j;ardens  laid  out  where  they  stood. 
Here  and  now  is  the  place  for  loins  girt  and  lamps  burning.  There  and  then  we  can 
walk  with  flowing  robes,  for  no  stain  will  come  on  them  from  the  golden  pavements, 
and  need  not  carefully  tend  a  flickering  light,  for  eternal  day  is  there. — A.  M. 

Vers.  18, 19. —  The  scope,  meant,  and  purpose  of  redemption.  The  immediate  con- 
nection of  tliese  words  is  with  the  solemn  exhortatiou  to  habitual "  fear" — a  reverential 
awe  of  our  Father-Judge,  and  a  consequent  dread  of  sin  which  disturbs  our  filial 
relation  and  incurs  his  judicial  displeasure.  The  consciousness  of  the  purpose  and 
price  of  our  redemption  is  here  urged  as  a  motive  to  such  fear.  Love  and  thankfulness, 
joy  and  confidence,  are  its  fruits.  But  none  the  less  certainly  will  the  adequate  sense  of 
that  great  sacrifice  in  its  costliness  and  its  purpose  lead  to  our  passing  the  time  of  our 
sojourning  here  in  fear.  The  gospel  of  redemption  is  not  meant  to  produce  carelessness, 
or  a  light  estimate  of  the  holiness  of  God  or  of  the  heinou!<ness  of  sin,  but  to  make 
conscience  more  sensitive,  and  to  lead  to  anxious  scrupulousness  in  avoiding  all 
conduct  which  would  be  condemned  by  the  judgment  of  God.  The  apostle  appeals  to 
that  consciousness  as  familiar  and  certain.  He  presupposes  the  distinct  and  developed 
teaching  of  the  sacrificial  death  of  Christ,  and  of  its  redemptive  efBcacy,  as  well  known 
and  universally  received.  The  tone  of  his  reference  establishes  the  existence  of  that 
teaching  as  the  fundamental  doctrine  of  the  gospel  in  all  the  Churches  to  which  his 
letter  was  addressed.  And  the  use  which  he  makes  of  that  truth,  as  the  great  motive  to 
practical  holiness,  is  in  accordance  with  all  New  Testament  teaching,  which  ever  regards 
Christ's  sacrifice  in  its  practical  aspect  as  the  foundation  in  us  of  all  goodness.  We  have 
here  three  great  aspects  of  redemption — what  it  is  from  ;  what  it  is  by ;  what  it  is  for. 

I.  What  we  are  bbdeemed  from.  The  original  idea  of  "  redemption"  is,  of  course, 
purchase  from  slavery.  Here  we  have  no  reference  to  what  is  prominent  in  other  places 
of  Scripture — the  deliverance  by  Christ's  blood  from  guilt  and  condemnation.  That 
aspect  of  redemption  is  involved  in  more  than  one  place  in  this  Epistle,  and  underlies 
it  all.  It  must  first  be  experienced  before  we  can  be  redeemed  from  the  love  and 
practice  of  evil.  But  the  purpose  which  the  apostle  has  here  in  view  leads  him  to 
dwell  on  the  other  side  of  the  complex  idea  of  redemption — the  deliverance  from  the  bon- 
dage of  sin,  holding  will  and  afleotions  in  thraldom.  "  Ye  are  redeemed,"  says  he,  "  from 
your  vain  conversation  received  by  tradition  from  your  fathers."  Now,  that  expression 
is  a  pregnant  description  of  the  whole  course  of  godless  life.  "  Conversation,"  we  perhaps 
need  not  observe,  is  equivalent  to  "  conduct."  1.  The  implication  that  all  godless  life  is 
slavery  lies  in  the  very  word  "redemption."  If  we  consider  how  sin  masters  a  man, 
fetters  his  will,  and  binds  him  with  iron  chains  of  habit,  which  hold  him  in  spite  of 
conscience,  and  in  mockery  of  resolutions  and  efforts,  we  can  understand  the  deep  truth 
in  our  Lord's  paradoxical  words,  "  lie  that  committeth  sin  is  the  slave  of  sin."  Do  a 
wrong  thin_,  and  it  !•  your   master,  as  jou  will  soon  discover  if  yon  try  to  effaifi  its- 


88  THB  FIRST   EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  PETER,     [oh.  l  1  -25. 

consequences  And  to  break  away  from  its  dominion.  But  besides  this  implication  that 
all  sin  is  slavery,  which  lies  in  the  idea  of  redemption,  we  have  here,  secondly,  the 
thought  that  all  sin  is  empty  and  profitless.  2.  There  is  a  whole  world  of  meaning  in  that 
epithet  "  vain."  It  ia  the  condensation  into  one  little  monosyllable  of  the  experience 
of  all  the  generations.  All  sin  is  empty.  As  one  of  the  Hebrew  words  for  it  literally 
means,  it  is  a  missing  of  the  mark.  It  is  always  a  blunder — no  man  gets  the  gscd 
which  he  expected  by  his  sin,  or,  if  he  does,  he  gets  something  else  which  spoils  it. 
"  It  is  as  when  a  hungry  man  dreameth,  and,  behold,  he  eateth;  but  he  awaketh,  and  is 
faint."  Sin  is  vain,  for  it  yields  no  results  correspondent  to  the  nature  of  man,  and  so 
does  not  satisfy  him.  It  produces  none  corresponding  to  his  obligations,  and  so  in  the 
eyes  of  God,  or  what  is  the  same  thing,  in  reality,  a  godless  life  is  a  wasted  and  barren 
life,  however  full  of  fruit  it  may  appear.  It  produces  none  that  abides.  All  are  annihi- 
lated by  the  judgment  of  God,  and  survive  only  in  remorse  and  pain.  The  devil  always 
plays  with  loaded  dice.  A  godless  life  is  a  vain  life.  "  The  man  who  lives  it  sows 
much  and  brings  home  little,"  and  "  the  harvest  shall  be  a  heap  in  the  day  of  grief  and  of 
desperate  sorrow."  3.  This  vain  life  is  the  fatal  gift  from  generation  to  generation.  A  two- 
fold application  of  the  fact  that  it  is  transmitted  from  father  to  son  may  be  made.  This 
godless  course  of  life  has  no  higher  source  and  sanction  than  men's  notions.  It  is  a 
poor  miserable  account  for  a  responsible  being  to  give  of  his  moral  conduct  and  judg- 
ments to  say,  "  My  father  did  so  and  thought  so  before  me."  In  that  view  this  clause 
exposes  the  hoUowness  and  weakness  of  the  foundation  on  which  many  a  godle.^s  life  is 
unthinkingly  and  almost  mechanically  built.  Or  the  apostle's  purpose  may  rather  bo 
to  signalize  the  strength  of  evil  derived  from  that  solemn  fact  of  its  transmission  from 
parent  to  child.  "  Heredity "  is  a  new  word  to  express  an  old  truth.  A  man's 
ancestors  live  again  in  him.  Moral  qualities  descend  as  plainly  as  physical  pecniiarities. 
And  besides  the  strain  iji  the  blood  which  affects  the  moral  nature,  example  and  habit 
tell  in  the  same  direction.  Thus  the  evil  becomes  generic  and  wraps  the  whole  race  in 
its  folds.  Hence,  too,  the  need  for  a  new  power  acting  from  without  if  men  are  to  be 
redeemed  from  it.  There  must  be  a  new  beginning  from  an  untainted  source  if  the 
bitter  watA-s  are  to  be  healed.  He  who  is  to  redeem  the  race  must  come  from  outside 
the  race,  and  yet  must  work  within  it. 

II.  So  we  have  here,  what  we  akb  eedbbmbd  bt.  The  apostle  employs  his 
favourite  epithet  in  speaking  of  the  blood  of  Glirist.  It  is  "  precious."  What  a 
profound  sense  of  the  worth  of  that  wondrous  sacrifice  lies  in  that  one  simple  word, 
more  eloquent  and  full  of  feeling  than  a  crowd  of  superlatives !  Our  Lord's  death  is 
evidently  regarded  here  as  sacrificial.  The  "  lamb  without  blemish  and  without  spot " 
distinctly  refers  to  the  requirement  of  the  Mosaic  Law  in  reference  to  the  sacrifice.  It 
is  not  merely  the  sinless  purity  of  our  Saviour's  life,  but  that  purity  as  fitting  him  to 
be  the  Sacrifice  for  the  world's  sin,  which  comes  into  view  here.  We  cannot  do  justice 
to  the  thought  unless  we  recognize  the  sacrificial  character  of  Christ's  death  as  the 
teaching  of  this  passage.  At  the  same  time,  we  have  to  remember  that  redemption 
here  is  regarded  as  deliverance  from  the  love  and  practice  of  evil  rather  than  from  its 
guilt  and  punishment.  But  while  this  is  true,  these  two  aspects  of  redemption  are 
inseparable.  Christ  redeems  ns  from  the  former  by  redeeming  us  from  the  latter. 
The  sense  of  guilt  and  the  fearful  looking  for  of  judgment  bind  men  to  sin,  and  the  only 
way  to  wean  them  from  it  begins  with  the  assurance  of  pardon  and  the  removal  of  the 
burcen  of  guilt.  Unless  we  have  a  pospel  of  atonement  to  preach,  we  have  no  gospel 
of  deliverance  from  the  bondage  of  sin.  Christ  makes  us  free  because  he  dies  for  us, 
and  in  one  shedding  of  his  blood  at  once  annihilates  guilt  and  brings  pardon  and 
destroys  the  dominion  of  sin.  That  death,  too,  is  the  one  means  for°so  influencing 
men's  hearts  that  they  shall  no  longer  love  evil,  but  delight  to  do  his  will,  and  by  love 
and  fellowship  grow  like  their  Lord.  Sin's  reign  has  its  fortress  in  our  will  and  affec- 
tions, and  Christ's  death  believed  and  trusted  changes  the  set  and  current  of  these,  casts 
out  the  usurper,  and  enthrones  Jesus  as  our  rightful  Lord.  A?ain,  Christ's  death 
procures  for  us  the  Divine  Spirit  who  dwells  in  our  hearts,  and  by  his  presence  "  makes 
us  free  from  the  law  of  sin  and  death."  So  by  setting  us  in  new  relations  to  the 
Divine  Law,  by  taking  away  the  sense  of  guilt,  by  bringing  to  bear  a  new  motive,  by 
procuring  a  Spirit  to  gve  a  new  life,  the  sacri'isial  death  of  the  sinless  Christ  redeems 
us  from  the  power  of  b.u. 


OH.  L 1—26.]     THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  QENEKAL  OF  PETER.  8S 

in.  What  wb  abb  redeemed  fob.  The  text  is  a  motive  urged  by  the  apostle  to 
enforce  his  previous  exhortation ;  "  Pass  the  time  of  your  sojourning  here  in  fear."  The 
consciousness  of  our  redemption  and  the  fact  of  our  redemption  should  lead,  not  to 
easy  confidence  or  indifference,  but  to  reverential  awe  and  dread  of  "  receiving  the  gr  ice 
of  God  in  vain."  The  more  clearly  the  purpose  of  our  reilemption  to  be  our  completa 
emancipation  from  all  sin  be  seen,  and  the  more  profoundly  we  value  the  tremendous 
price  at  which  God  has  thought  it  worth  while  to  buy  us  back  for  his  own,  the  more 
we  shall  dread  every  sin.  Surely  no  motive  can  so  powerfully  commend  the  solemn 
comprehensive  command,  "  Be  ye  holy  as  I  am  holy,"  or  so  strongly  impel  to  that 
wholesome  fear  without  which  it  can  never  be  obeyed,  as  the  contemplation  of  the 
precious  blood  shed  for  our  sakes.  That  awful  sacrifice  is  in  vain  so  far  as  we  are 
concerned,  the  blood  of  Jesus  has  poured  out  for  nought,  unless  it  has  not  only 
availed  to  still  our  fears  and  bring  us  pardon,  but  also  to  "  cleanse  us  from  all  sin," 
and  make  us  love  and  do  righteousness.  We  are  redeemed  from  sin  by  the  blood  of 
Christ,  that  we  may  be  the  lambs  of  his  flock  without  blemish  and  without  spot,  like 
the  Shepherd-Lamb. — A.  M. 

Ver.  8. — Faith,  love,  and  Joy.  Peter  had  seen  Jesus  constantly  during  the  course  of 
his  ministry,  had  known  him  intimately,  and  had  loved  him  well.  But  most  of  thuse 
to  whom  he  wrote  this  Epistle  had  not  been  brought  into  such  association  with  the  Son 
of  man.  The  apostle's  aim  in  communicating  with  such  professed  Christians  as  those 
to  whom  he  addressed  his  letter  was  to  encourage  and  stimulate  their  spiritual  life. 
It  was  his  privilege  to  bear  the  testimony  which  it  was  their  privilege  to  receive  and 
to  act  upon.  They  were  in  a  position  to  experience  and  enjoy  the  blessing  pronounced 
upon  those  who,  "  not  having  seen,  yet  believe." 

I.  It  is  distinctive  of  the  Christian  that  hb  has  faith  in  the  unsees 
Savioub.  This  faith  has  a  human  side — it  is  prompted  and  justified  by  the  witness  of 
those  who  beheld  Christ's  glory,  and  who  wrote  the  things  which  they  had  seen  and 
heard  in  order  that  others  might,  by  their  evidence,  be  led  to  believe  on  Jesus.  This 
laith  has  a  Divine  side ;  for  Christ  is  his  own  witness  to  the  heart,  which  finds  in  him 
the  realization  of  its  loftiest  and  its  purest  aspirations.  It  is  the  Divine  provision  and 
appointment  that  the  life  of  the  Christian  should  be  a  life  of  faith.  And  this  is  a  wise 
and  merciful  arrangement,  evidently  calling  forth  the  best  feelings  of  our  nature, 
supplying  us  with  the  highest  motive  and  aim  to  a  new  and  better  life,  and  calling  ua 
away  from  absorbing  interest  in  self  r.nd  in  earth. 

II.  The  Christian's  faith  m  Christ  PBonnoES  love  towards  Christ.  Faith  in 
an  unseen  Being  seems  more  natural  than  love  towards  him.  The  earthly  friends  whom 
we  love  we  have  seen  and  known;  Christ  we  have  not  listened  to  or  looked  upon. 
Yet  what  surpassing  and  all-sufBcient  motives  we  have  to  love  him  I  1.  Bec.iuse  he  first 
loved  us.  2.  Because  of  our  gratitude  for  his  interest  in  us  and  his  willing  sacrifice  on 
our  behalf.  3.  Because  we  aidmire  his  peerless  character,  his  blameless  and  benevolent 
life.    i.  Because  our  fellowship  with  him  develops  sympathy  and  congeniality. 

III.  Jot  is  the  propeb  bbsult  of  the  Christian's  faith  and  love.  This  assertion 
doubtless  appears  to  some  minds  enthusiastic  and  ridiculous.  Yet  it  is  a  reasonable 
assertion  in  itself,  and  it  is  justified  by  Christian  experience.  1.  This  joy  is  altogether 
different  from  the  pleasures  sought  and  prized  by  the  unspiritual  and  worldly.  These 
rejoice  in  the  gratification  of  sense,  in  the  excitement  attending  the  quest  of  pleasure, 
in  the  attainment  of  favourite  objects  of  desire.  But  Christians  rejoice  in  quite  other 
delights.  2.  This  joy  is  awakened  by  the  Spirit  of  God  in  the  heart.  It  is  a  fountain 
(pringing  up  within,  when  the  rock  is  smitten  by  Divine  grace  and  power.  For  this 
cause  it  is  largely  independent  of  circumstances.  3.  This  joy  is  characterized  as 
unutterable,  because  it  is  deep  and  calm,  and  not  by  any  means  noisy  and  demonstrative. 
Its  infinite  side — that  towards  eternity  and  heaven  and  God — is  inexpressible  in  human 
language.  4.  This  joy  is  "  full  of  glory,"  or  glorified,  both  because  of  the  transcendent 
character  of  the  Christian's  pure  delights  even  in  the  present,  and  because  of  his  justifiable 
anticipations  of  future  and  imperishable  bliss. 

Oh  that  Christian  people  could  appreciate  their  privileges,  shake  off  the  melancholy 
characteristic  of  the  age  in  which  wo  live,  and  enter  into  the  possession  of  ihij 
primeval  joy  I — ^J.  R.  T. 


40  THE  FIEST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PETER,     [oh.  1. 1—25. 


Vers.  10  -12. — Salvation  a  matter  of  universal  interest.  Christ  is  given  in  order  to 
awaken  faith,  and  faith  is  exercised  with  a  view  to  the  possession  of  salvation.  This 
being  so,  it  must  be  impossible  to  over-estimate  the  importance  of  a  blessing  to  secure 
wh  oh  is  the  purpose  of  this  great  and  Divine  economy.  In  these  verses  the  interest  in 
•alvation  is  represented  as  extending  through  the  past  ages  of  time  and  through  the 
whole  universe  of  God. 

I.  Salvation  was  matter  of  pbophetio  study.  The  prophets  were  not  so  occupied 
with  the  repetition  and  enforcement  of  the  Law  which  had  been  given  by  Moses  as  to 
be  uninterested  in  a  future  dispensation.  The  grace  that  was  to  come  engaged  their 
thoughts.  The  Spirit  of  Christ  led  them  to  anticipate  the  sufferings  and  the  glory  of 
the  Messiah.  The  very  time  of  the  coming  dispensation  and  age,  was  of  the  deepest 
interest  to  these  inspired  men,  who  looked  forward  to  the  further  manifestation  of  the 
purposes  of  God. 

II.  Salvation  was  matter  or  apostolic  report.  What  the  prophets  had  looked 
forward  to,  the  apostles  looked  back  upon.  Peter  and  his  colleagues  had  a  gospel- 
good  tidings  to  proclaim.  To  benevolent  minds  no  employment  could  be  more  con- 
genial than  to  convey,  upon  Divine  authority,  declarations  of  God's  favour,  promises  of 
Divine  mercy,  to  the  sinful  and  pitiable  sons  of  men. 

III.  Salvation  is  matter  or  angelic  inquiry.  The  present  is  not  the  only  passage 
in  which  it  is  intimated  that  the  unfallen  intelligences  who,  not  having  sinned,  need 
for  themselves  no  salvation,  are  nevertheless  students  of  the  Divine  plan  for  the  recovery 
of  sinful  men.  It  is  through  the  Chvuch  that  principalities  and  puwers  iearn  additional 
lessons  concerning  the  wisdom  and  the  love  of  God. 

IV.  Salvation  is  fob  the  appropriation  and  rejoicing  of  individual  believers. 
The  grace,  says  the  apostle,  comes  unto  you;  unto  «s  these  things  were  ministered.  It 
is  instructive  to  know  how  prophets,  apostles,  and  angels  have  been  affected  by  the 
gospel  of  God's  grace.  Yet  that  gospel  is  for  the  hearers  of  the  Word — for  men  of  every 
rank  and  every  character.  And  surely  it  deserves  and  demands  that  those  who  may 
most  benefit  by  it  should  give  it  their  most  reverent  and  grateful  attention.  If  the 
gifted  and  the  holy  find  a  sacred  joy  in  pondering  the  provisions  of  God's  love  and 
mercy,  how  urgently  does  it  become  the  sinful  and  the  helpless  to  give  heed  to  tidings 
which  offer  to  them  n  gracious  pardon,  a  spiritual  cleansing,  and  a  deathless  life ! — J.  B.  T. 

Ver.  11. — Sufferings  and  glory.  Peter  did,  indeed,  in  the  course  of  his  Master's 
ministry,  see  something  of  Christ's  proper  and  Divine  glory.  He  was  with  him  en  the 
Mount  of  Transfiguration,  and  bore  testimony  to  what  he  theie  saw  and  heard  of  the 
majesty  of  the  Son  of  man.  But  Peter  had  disapproved  of  Christ's  humiliation  and 
suffeiings.  When  Jesus  foretold  the  ignominy  and  woe  that  were  awaiting  him,  he 
exclaimed,  "That  be  far  from  theel"  And  when  the  hour  of  suffering  came,  Peter 
drew  his  sword  to  defend  his  Master.  Yet,  immediately  after  the  Lord's  ascension, 
Peter,  enlightened  by  the  Spirit,  proceeded  to  preach  that  Christ's  sufferings  were  a 
fulfilment  of  Old  Testament  predictions,  and  a  condition  of  the  participation  by  man- 
kind in  spiritual  blessings.  And  in  this  Epistle  he  taught  that  the  sufferings  of  Christ 
and  the  glory  alike  were  necessary  parts  of  the  Divine  plan  of  redemption. 

I.  The  sufferings  of  Christ.  It  was  involved  in  Christ's  taking  our  nature  that 
he  should  suffer ;  as  Son  of  man  he  accepted  the  human  lot.  But  there  were  pains  and 
griefs  peculiar  to  himself;  he  was  the  "Man  of  sorrows."  1.  His  mental  sufferings. 
These  were  many  and  sore,  and  only  partially  comprehensible  by  us.  They  arose  from 
the  contact  of  the  Holy  One  with  sin  and  sinners ;  the  misunderstanding  of  his  character 
and  mission  even  by  his  own  beloved  and  trained  disciples ;  his  rejection  by  his  couatry- 
men,  who  should  have  been  foremost  in  welcoming  him.  They  arose  from  the  unique 
burden  which  he  bore  for  us,  the  unique  sacrifice  which  with  tears  and  blood  he  presented 
as  our  High  Priest.  2.  His  lodily  sufferings.  Jesus  shared  throughout  his  humiliation 
the  sinless  infirmities  of  those  whose  lot  he  accepted  with  the  view  of  securing  their 
salvation.  But  the  reference  in  this  and  similar  passages  is  unquestionably  to  those 
pathetic  and  awful  experiences  which  our  Saviour  deigned  to  undergo  during  the  last 
hours  of  his  life,  when  his  form  was  bruised  and  pierced,  when  his  blood  was  ihed  for 
ui.  3.  The  moral  aspects  of  Christ's  sufferings.  He  endured  them,  in  expressioi;  m^A 
proof  of  his  obedience  to  the  Father ,  in  the  maintenance  of  his  hostile  attitude  toward.- 


CH.  1. 1—25.]     THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  PETER.  41 


Bin;  in  compassion  to  the  human  race  he  came  to  save;  in  achieving  the  redemption 
which  it  was  his  aim  and  mission  to  effect.  The  humiliation,  the  cross  of  our  Saviour, 
were  endured  for  the  highest  purpose ;  they  give  no  countenance  to  the  ascetic  notion 
that  pain  is  in  itself  a  good ;  but  they  show  us  how  it  may  be  the  means,  under  the 
moral  government  of  God,  of  good  of  the  very  highest  order. 

II.  The  globt  op  Christ  following  upon  his  bufpbbings.  1.  This  glory  was 
partly  personal  to  our  Lord  himself.  So  viewed,  the  reference  is  to  his  resurrection  and 
ascension.  The  glory  which  he  had  before  the  world  was,  by  the  events  which  swiftly 
followed  the  Crucifixion  was  enhanced.  2.  Glory  accrued  to  Jesus  in  the  establishment 
of  his  Church.  The  Holy  Spirit  descended,  and  the  signs  which  accompanied  the  Word 
were  the  incidents  of  a  triumphal  progress.  The  Conqueror,  the  King,  apjieared,  and 
a  kingdom  was  set  up  excelling  in  majesty  and  splendour  all  the  powers  of  the  world, 
and  even  the  empire  itself.  3.  The  world  itself  became  the  scene  of  the  Saviour's  glory. 
A  new  moral  principle  was  introduced  into  our  humanity ;  it  was  se(  n  that  weakness 
and  Buffering  might  lead  to  moral  dominion.  The  very  conception  of  glory  itself  was 
glorified  through  the  cross.     Spiritual  glory  was  shown  to  excel  all  beside. 

III.  The  connection  between  Christ's  suffbeings  and  gloey.  1.  It  was  a 
connection  predicted  in  Old  Testament  Scripture,  e.g.  in  passages  in  Isaiah  and  in 
Daniel.  2.  It  was  a  connection  foreseen  and  expected  by  Christ  himself.  It  is  notice- 
able that,  in  announcing  beforehand  the  events  about  to  happen  to  himself,  Jesus 
associated  his  crucifixion  and  resurrection  as  parts  of  one  purposed  whole.  3.  Though 
the  sufferings  and  the  glory  were  in  striking  contrast,  the  former  were  the  means  to 
which  the  latter  was  the  end.  The  one  made  the  other  possible,  and  indeed  brought 
it  about.  The  crown  of  thorns  blossomed  into  •  crown  of  empire  and  of  majesty 
—J.  E.  T, 

Ver.  13. — Practical  Ohristicmity,  The  apostle  has  been  speaking  of  the  loftiest  and 
most  celestial  themes — of  faith,  love,  and  joy  ;  of  revelation  and  salvation :  of  prophets 
and  angels;  of  Christ  and  of  God  himself.  But  he  would  not  have  his  readers  lost  in 
thoughts  so  sublime;  he  recalls  their  attention  to  the  plain  and  practical  duties  of 
this  earthly  life.     He  shows  that  every  true  Christian  is  called  to  be — 

I.  Sober  as  to  lifis's  pleabubes.  As  a  reasonable  man  and  a  wise  teacher,  he  does 
not  take  the  attitude  of  the  ascetic.  He  does  not  say,  "  Denounce  pleasures  1  despise 
pleasures  1  abstain  from  and  abjure  pleasures ! "  but "  Be  sober  1  "  Not  only  in  food 
and  drink,  but  in  the  various  enjoyments  and  pursuits  of  life,  it  behoves  the  follower 
of  Jesus  to  practise  moderation,  self-restraint,  and  prudence.  He  should  not  lie  down, 
stretching  himself  by  the  stream,  and  taking  his  fill  of  the  waters  of  enjoyment ;  he 
should  be  satisfied  to  quaff  the  refreshing  draught  as  from  the  hollow  of  his  hand. 

XL  Diligent  ab  to  life's  duties.  Flowing  garments  are  all  very  well  for  times 
of  ease  and  festivity ;  but  they  must  be  girded  when  a  journey  is  to  be  undertaken, 
when  a  work  is  to  be  performed,  when  a  warfare  is  to  be  waged.  If  this  precaution 
be  not  taken,  the  raiipent  may  be  trodden  upon,  soiled,  and  torn,  and  the  wearer  may 
stumble  and  be  hindered.  So  the  Christian  is  bidden  to  look  upon  his  life  as  some- 
thing serious  and  earnest.  He  must  gird  up  the  loins  of  his  mind,  and  set  about  the 
business  to  which  his  Lord  has  called  him.  What  his  hand  findeth  to  do,  he  is 
required  to  do  with  his  might. 

III.  Hopeful  as  to  life's  aim.  Peter  has  been  called  the  apostle  of  hope,  so 
great  is  the  stress  he  lays  upon  this  Christian  virtue.  1.  The  object  of  hope  is  grace, 
i.e.  a  free  gift  of  God.  He  who  comes  for  streams  of  refreshment  and  blessing  brings 
with  him  nothing  but  his  thirst.  2.  The  occasion  of  the  satisfaction  and  fulfilment 
of  this  hope.  This  is  the  expected  and  promised  revelation  of  Jesus  Christ.  3.  The 
quality  of  this  hope.  The  expression  is  a  remarkable  one,  "Set  your  hope  perfectly." 
The  hope  recommended  is  sure,  enduring,  joyful,  purifying.  And  as  the  hope  is  well 
grounded,  it  may  fairly  be  expected  to  possess  this  quality,  and  to  exercise  according!) 
II  a  elevating  and  purifying  power.    Such  a  hope  lends  cheerfulness  to  toiL 

••  Work  without  hope  draws  water  in  a  sieve. 
And  hope  without  an  object  caunot  live." 

J.  R.  T 


42  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  PKTER.     [oh.  1. 1—25. 

Ver.  17. — Christian  fear.  Fear  is  an  emotion  which  is  much  misunderstood  and 
misrepresented.  It  is  sometimes  denounced  as  something  radically  and  necessarily  bad. 
But  tbis  is  not  the  ease ;  all  depends  upon  what  is  feared,  for  this  determines  whether 
the  emotion  is  justifiable  and  capable  of  tending  to  some  good  result. 

I.  The  chakactbr  op  Christian  fbab.  1.  It  ia  quite  different  from  the  fear  of 
the  unbelieving  and  irreligious.  Such  persons  fear  to  lose  their  worldly  possessions, 
and  to  lose  life  itself.  Tliey  may  have  a  certain  fear  of  God,  for  even  the  devils  believe 
and  tremble.  2.  It  is  inculcated  in  Scripture.  Not  only  does  the  Old  Testament  bid 
UB  "  serve  the  Lord  with  fear,"  "  fear  God,  and  keep  his  commandments ; "  the  New 
Testament  records  Christ's  admonition,  "Fear  him  who  is  able  to  destroy,"  and  the 
apostolic  injunction  ti  "perfect  holiness  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord,"  and,  "Be  not  high- 
minded,  but  fear.''  3.  The  grounds  for  the  Christian's  fear  are  evident.  He  fears  lest 
he  should  yield  to  temptation,  lest  he  should  be  defeated  by  his  spiritual  adversary. 
He  feai'S  God,  not  with  the  abject  terror  of  the  slave,  but  with  the  reverence  and  awe 
due  to  the  All-holy,  the  infinitely  Just.  4.  Fear  is  not  the  all-absorbing  emotion  in  the 
Christian's  breast.  Its  presence  is  not  incompatible  with  love  and  hope  and  a  measure 
of  joy.    Fear  mingles  as  an  element  in  Christian  experience. 

II.  The  motives  to  Chkistian  feab.  1.  Our  state  as  one  of  sojourning  and 
pilgrimage.  We  are  not  yet  "  at  home ; "  we  are  in  the  wilderness.  The  season  of 
desert-wandering  is  appointed  by  Divine  wisdom  ;  yet  it  is  a  probation  not  to  be 
avoided.  How  can  we  do  other  than  fear,  when  we  think  of  our  weakness,  and  of  the 
might  of  our  foe  ?  Indeed,  had  we  not  the  assurance  of  our  Captain's  spiritual  pre- 
sence and  aid,  fear  might  well  become  the  predominant  emotion  in  our  mental  life. 
2.  The  anticipation  of  judgment  will  not  suffer  fear  to  be  quelled.  Is  our  "  work  "  fit 
for  the  Master's  inspection  ?  However  our  fellow-men  may  regard  us,  we  know  that 
we  must  appear  before  him  who  is  "  no  respecter  of  persons,"  and  who  will  estimate  ug 
and  our  service  with  justice  and  impartiality.  That  we  may  not  fear  then  it  is  well 
for  us  to  fear  now.  3.  The  recognition  of  God's  Fatherhood  gives  the  true  character 
to  the  Christian's  fear.  Tliis  is  a  paradox.  Men  would  say,  "If  God  be  a  Father,  and 
not  merely  a  Judge,  then  he  need  not  be  feared."  This  is  not  the  apostle's  view.  On 
the  contrary,  the  holy  fear  which  becomes  us  is  made  gracious  and  purifying  by  our 
knowledge  that  a  Father's  eye  is  upon  us,  that  a  Father's  heart  ceases  not  to  cherish 
us.— J.  R.  T. 

Ver.  21. —  The  Divine  meant  to  faith  and  hope.  In  admonishing  his  readers  to  holi- 
ness and.  obedience,  Peter  supported  his  injunctions  by  appeals  to  the  highest  motives. 
He  placed  his  reliance  upon  especially  Ciiristian  principles.  He  brought  before  the 
mii.ds  of  his  brethren  the  preciousness  and  the  power  of  the  Saviour's  resurrection. 

I.  Man's  need  ov  taith  and  hope  is  implied.  If  man  have  a  higher  than  a 
merely  animal  life,  he  requires  higher  principles  by  which  the  higher  life  may  be 
sustained.  He  must  be  related  to  the  unseen  in  the  present  and  in  the  future.  Faith 
must  have  an  object,  and  hope  a  ground  and  aim.  If  we  were  without  these  we  should 
be  left  sinful,  ignorant,  and  helpless ;  without  a  Divine  law  for  Hfe,  without  a  Diviae 
assurance  of  pardon,  without  a  Divine  prospect  of  immortality.  The  unseen  present 
and  the  eternal  future  being  alike  unknown,  self-indulgence  or  brutal  apathy  would 
take  the  place  of  a  spiritual  life.  But  in  fact  we  have  a  nature  capable  of  infinite 
aspiration,  and  the  Creator  has  not  set  us  narrow  limits  or  appointed  for  us  inevitable 
poverty  of  spirit. 

II.  God's  raising  op  Christ  from  the  dead  is  declared.  There  is  in  this  state- 
ment of  Peter,  that  God  raised  his  Son  from  the  dead,  nothing  opposed  to  Christ's 
declaration,  "I  take  it  Ji.e.  'my  life']  again;"  and  nothing  inconsistent  with  the 
assertion  that  Christ  was  "  quickened  by  the  Spirit."  The  New  Testament  is  one 
continuous  witness  to  our  Lord's  resurrection.  The  Gospels  circumstantially  record 
it ;  the  Book  of  the  Acts  represents  it  as  the  chief  theme  of  apostolic  preaching ;  the 
Er'istles  base  upon  it  the  whole  of  Christian  doctrine  and  life.  If  Christ  was  not  raised, 
the  New  Testament  is  full  of  misstatements,  our  Lord's  own  predictions  were  unful- 
filled, the  apostles'  witness  was  deceptive,  the  Lord's  day  and  Easter-tide  had  nc 
historical  origin,  and  Christianity  itself  remains  unaccounted  for.  Further,  God,  who 
raised  Jesus  frcm  the  deid,  gave  him  glory.     It  was  in  obedience  to  the  Father  tha) 


OH.  1. 1—26.]     THE  PIEST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PETER.  41 


Christ  endured  pain,  humiliation,  and  death.  But  it  was  also  by  the  will  of  the  Father 
that  Christ  partook  of  glory.  This  glory  was  partly  external  and  palpable,  yet  chiefly 
spiritual. 

III.  The  means  of  faith  and  hope  ake  by  this  biseh  Saviouk  thus  arscbed 
TO  MEN.  It  is  not  asserted  that,  before  and  apart  from  Christianity,  faith  and  hope 
were  unknowo  on  earth ;  but  that  Christianity  imparts  to  humanity  a  firmer  confidence 
in  God  and  a  livelier  anticipation  of  heaven.  1.  More  especially,  a  risen  Christ 
encourages  and  justifies  faith  in  a  personal  God,  a  righteous  Ruler,  a  gracious  and  for- 
giving Father.  They  who  believe  that  God  raised  Jesus  from  the  dead  have  faith  in 
the  supreme  Lord  as  interested  in  us,  as  caring  for  us,  as  sending  and  commissiooing 
his  own  Son  to  make  himself  known  and  to  bring  himself  near  to  us.  They  have  faith 
in  the  just  moral  government  of  the  world,  and  they  do  not  doubt  this  even  when  they 
see  the  good  oppressed  and  in  some  cases  persecuted  and  slain.  They  have  faith  in 
the  fatherly  affection  of  the  Eternal,  and  are  assured  that  "  all  things  are  theirs."  2.  A 
risen  Christ  awakens  and  sustains  hope.  For  themselves.  Christians  have  hope  of  indi- 
Tidual  salvation;  for  the  world,  they  have  hope  of  the  victory  of  the  good;  for  the 
Church,  of  final,  reciprocal,  and  immortal  communion. — J.  R.  T. 

Ver.  2. — The  elect  of  Qod.  This  is  no  mere  Jewish  title,  for  there  are  passages  itt 
the  Epistle  which  forbid  the  idea  that  it  was  addressed  exclusively  to  Jews  (ch.  i.  18 ;  ii 
10;  iv.  3,  4).  It  is  the  title  of  the  universal  Church  and  the  individual  believer.  The 
verse  is  a  summary  of  the  most  important  and  difficult  points  of  Christian  doctrine ; 
hardly  a  word  in  it  but  is  inexhaustible. 

I.  The  fact  of  Divine  election  stated.  Perhaps  no  greater  mystery  in  Scripture, 
and  none  more  perverted;  but  if  it  is  revealed  from  heaven  we  need  not  be  af  aid  of  it; 
if  it  comes  from  God  who  would  draw  all  men  unto  him,  only  by  misunderstanding  it 
can  it  repel  them  from  him ;  if  it  be  in  this  book,  we  cannot  withhold  it  from  ourselves 
without  spiritual  loss.  What  is  the  Divine  election  t  It  is  used  in  Scripture  in  different 
connections — of  election  to  an  ofiice  (John  xt.  16);  of  election  to  certain  privileges,  as 
the  Jews  (Ps.  cxxxv.  4) ;  but  in  a  large  class  of  passages  it  clearly  refers  to  the  bless- 
ings of  salvation  (Rom.  viii.  28—30;  Bph.  i.  4,  6,  11;  2  Thess  iL  13;  2  Tim.  L  9; 
ch.  1.  2).  This  is  not  election  of  a  community,  for  it  refers  to  matters  necessarily 
personal ;  e.g.  "  As  many  as  were  ordained  to  eternal  life  believed ; "  "  All  that  the 
Father  giveth  me  must  come  to  me,  and  him  that,"  etc. ;  "  sanctification  of  the  Spirit ; " 
"  belief  of  the  truth ; "  "  sprinkling  of  the  blood ;  "  "  conformed  to  his  Son."  It 
must  be  the  Divine  election  of  individuals  to  eternal  salvation.  There  are  certain 
serious  prejudices  to  this  doctrine — ^such  as  that  it  is  opposed  to  the  goodness  and  justice 
cf  Qod.  But  that  prejudice  is  unwarranted  if  the  doctrine  be  really  here,  for  God  cannot 
break  the  bounds  of  his  nature,  and  these  must  harmonize  in  some  way,  though  a« 
yet  we  see  not  how.  At  the  same  time,  notice  that  it  is  election  to  salvation,  not  to  ■ 
perdition ;  we  are  saved  by  the  sovereign  grace  of  God,  we  are  lost  because  of  our  own 
nn  ("  Come,  ye  blessed  <jf  my  Father  I "  but  it  is  only,  "  Depart,  ye  cursed  1 ").  Why 
does  not  grace  save  all  ?  All  we  know  ii  that  it  does  not,  and  that  "  the  Lord  is 
righteous  in  all  his  ways,"  and  what  we  know  not  now  we  shall  know.  "  What  time  I 
am  afraid,  I  will  trust  in  thee."  Another  prejudice :  It  seems  opposed  to  the  freedom  and 
responsibility  of  man.  Certainly  man  is  free;  he  is  commanded  to  repent  and  believe, 
and  held  responsible  for  not  obeying,  and  is  reasoned  and  pleaded  with  by  God ;  and 
"  How  often  would  I,  but  ye  would  not  I "  We  cannot  harmonize  that  with  election,  yet 
they  may  both  be  true.  If  we  make  an  objection  in  this  to  seeking  salvation,  it  is  not 
as  we  act  in  other  matters ;  we  know  that  our  recovery  from  sickness  is  amongst  what 
God  has  determined,  yet  we  use  means  for  recovery,  and  are  hopeless  otherwise ;  so,  as 
though  there  were  no  foreordination  to  eternal  life,  we  are  responsible  for  employing  the 
means  to  secure  it.  If  we  are  lost,  it  will  not  be  because  of  foreordination,  but  because  in 
our  freedom  we  failed  to  use  the  necessary  means.  Another  prejudice  is  tluit  the  doctrine 
teems  opposed  to  the  universal  offer  of  salvation.  Salvation  is  offered  to  all ;  "  God 
willeth  not  the  death  of  a  sinner ; "  all  are  commanded  to  believe,  and  are  condemned  for 
not  believing.  Then  election  is  not  out  of  harmony  with  that,  and  closes  the  door  to  the 
salvation  of  none.  We  may  not  see  the  harmony,  but  God's  secret  purposes  cannot 
contradict  his  declared  purpose*. 


44  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PETER,     [oh.  i.  1—26. 


IL  Certain  pabticulars  RESPEOTrsG  this  Divine  election.  Father,  Son,  and 
Spirit — the  whole  Godhead,  so  to  speak,  combine  to  the  redemption  of  a  single  soul.  1. 
Tht  source  of  election :  "  TJie  foreknowledge  of  God  the  Father."  The  word  "  to  know  " 
in  Scripture  is  often  used  for  "  to  know  with  favour  "  (Matt.  vii.  23 ;  Bom.  xi.  2 ;  viii. 
29).  God  knows,  foreknows  all,  so  that  the  idea  of  foreknowledge  with  favour  is 
involved  in  the  expression  in  these  passages.  So  here ;  the  same  word  as  is  translated 
"foreordained"  in  ver.  20 — the  foreknowledge  of  purpose,  favour,  as  in  Bph.  i.  5,  9,  11. 
Our  salvation  is  entirely  on  a  Divine  basis ;  we  are  not  elect  because  of  anything  in  our- 
selves; we  choose  him  because  he  first  chose  us  (Eph.  i.  4).  2.  The  working  out  oj 
dection  .•  '•  The  sanctification  of  the  Spirit."  Sanctification  in  the  sense  of  separation, 
something  that  comes  before  "the  sprinkling  of  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ;"  separation 
to  God,  equivalent  to  the  new  birth ;  for  only  thus  are  we  called  out  from  the  world,  from 
its  joys,  and  sorrows,  and  principles,  and  attitude  towards  God.  This  is  the  seal  of 
election — the  elect  are  the  separated;  the  Spirit  separates  for  God  those  whom  God 
chooses  for  himself.  And  this  separation  is  carried  on  to  faith  and  every  Christian 
grace,  and  final  perfection  in  heaven.  3.  The  end  of  election :  "  Ohedience  and  sprin- 
klivg  of  the  Mood  of  Jesus  Christ"  "Obedience"  here  can  hardly  mean  "submission  to 
law ; "  it  probably  stands  for  the  full  expression,  "  the  obedience  of  faith,"  as  in  Rom.  i. 
8  (comp.  with  xvi.  19;  x.  16;  2  Thess.  i.  8;  ch.  iv.  17).  The  passage,  then,  is  a 
striking  parallel  to  2  Thess.  ii.  13.  The  end  of  election  is  faith,  and  the  consequent 
application  of  the  atoning  blood.  Because  of  what  the  sprinkling  of  that  blood  does  for 
us :  justifies  (Eom.  iii.  9) ;  cleanses  (1  John  i.  7) ;  seals  to  us  the  blessings  of  the  covenant 
(1  Cor.  xi.  25);  heaven  (Heb.  x.  19). 

III.  The  benefits  of  the  Divine  election.  "  Grace  and  peace  multiplied."  The 
fact  of  election  can  only  be  stated  because  there  is  untold  good  in  it.  It  is  essentially 
the  believer's  doctrine.  For  such  it  is  full  of  encouragement  and  support.  1.  It  assures 
us  of  the  certainty  of  multiplied  grace.  If  God  chose  us  to  all  the  blessings  of  perfect 
salvation,  it  is  certain  we  shall  have  them.  Nothing  can  be  more  sure  than  God's 
eternal  purpose.  2.  And  this  assurance  produces  peifect  peace.  None  can  be  afraid 
who  have  (in  the  separation  of  the  Spirit)  the  seal  that  they  are  divinely  elected  to 
grace  multiplied  without  end. — 0.  N. 

Vers.  3 — 5. — The  key-note  of  the  Epistle — the  heliever's  hope.  The  "  sojourners  of  the 
dispersion"  were  now  entering  on  a  season  of  severe  trial;  one  purpose  of  the  apostle, 
therefore,  was  to  send  them  encouragement  and  support;  and  the  purport  of  these 
chapters  may  be  snmmed  up  in  the  word  "  hope."  Paul  was  pre-eminently  the  apostle  of 
faith  ;  John,  of  love ;  Peter,  of  hope.  This  passage  has  additional  interest  as  written  by 
the  Peter  of  the  Gospels.  He  was  one  of  those  who  had  "thought  the  kingdom  of  God 
should  immediately  appear,"  and  a  party  to  the  question,  "  Lord,  wilt  thou  at  this  time 
restore  the  kingdom  unto  Israel  ?  "  In  those  early  days  they  were  captivated  by  the 
thought  of  an  earthly  heritage.  How  different  now!  Here  his  eye  is  fixed  on  the 
"  inheritance  reserved  in  heaven."  We  remember,  too,  that  we  here  listen  to  him  who, 
on  that  never-to-be-forgotten  morning,  whilst  it  was  yet  early,  came  breathless  to  the 
Bepulchre,  and  looking  in,  saw  the  linen  clothes,  etc.,  and  was  assured  that  the  place  was 
empty,  and  how  the  sudden  conviction  of  the  Resurrection  flashed  on  his  mind  with  all 
the  w  onderful  hope  this  would  impart  to  the  troubled  heart  of  the  Lord's  denier.  What 
he  sa\  s  here  is  what  his  whole  consecrated,  joyous  life  had  been  saying  ever  since  that 
day  and  because  of  it:  "Blessed  be  the  God,"  etc. 

I.  The  Chbistian's  HOPE.  "  The  lively  hope  .  .  .  of  an  inheritance."  1.  It  is  that  of 
the  inheritance  of  sonship.  "  God  hath  begotten  us  "  unto  it ;  that  is,  God  hath  made  us 
children  a  second  time — by  regeneration.  "  And  if  children,  then  heirs ; "  the  inheritance 
is  ours  because  we  are  God's  sons.  That  brings  its  glory  before  us  prominently.  Father- 
hood does  its  very  best  for  the  children  ("Let  thy  work  appear  unto  thy  servants,  and 
thy  glory  unto  their  children" — we'll  do  the  work,  if  they  see  the  glory).  Apply' that 
to  the  heavenly  Faiher  and  the  heritage  he  prepares  for  us.  Prepares.  "I  go  to 
prepare  a  place  for  you ; "  that  will  be  God's  best !  What  must  that  be  which  is  pro- 
portionate to  his  resources  and  love?  2.  This  inheritance  is  permanent.  "Incor- 
ruptible, undefiled,  and  that  fadeth  not  away"  (three  almost  synonymous  words, 
characteristic  of  Peter's  energy).    They  all  include  the  idea  of  permanence,  but  they 


OH.  1. 1—25.]     THE  PIKST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  PETER.  46 


treat  it  in  different  aspects.  "  Incorruptible ; "  that  is,  spiritual,  not  material.  The 
blessedness  of  that  state  will  not  depend  an  anything  that  can  decay.  The  blessed- 
ness of  heaven  will  be  in  the  development  of  our  spiritual  nature.  "  Undefiled ; "  that 
is,  untainted,  unblemished.  Hera  our  spiritual  blessings  have  some  taint;  there 
will  be  activity  without  weariness,  love  without  coldness,  hope  without  fear,  purity 
without  doubt,  songs  without  sighs,  light  without  shade.  "  That  fadeth  not  away ; " 
that  is,  all  this  to  be  everlasting;  the  beauties  of  that  state  will  never  diminish,  its 
tasl^s  never  be  monotonous,  nor  its  tastes  insipid,  nor  its  feliowsui^  ended. 

••  There  the  eye  grows  never  dim. 
Gazing  on  that  mighty  sua." 

8.  This  inheritance  is  certain.  "Reserved  in  heaven  for  you  who  are  kept"  for  it. 
It  is  kept  where  waste  or  diminution  cannot  be  known,  and  we  are  kept  for  iis  enjoy- 
ment. No  earthly  heritage  is  sure,  but  this  is.  "  Reserved  in  heaven  for  you."  Then 
that  is  safe.  "  You  who  are  kept  by  the  power  of  God  for  it."  Then  you  are  safe ; 
the  child  of  God  is  as  sure  of  heaven  as  if  he  were  there.  We  should  be  surprised  if  it 
were  not  so;  for  "as  for  God,  his  way  is  perfect."  The  word  "kept"  literally  menns 
"  garrisoned."  There  is  a  picture  in  the  word :  "  The  angel  of  the  Lord  encampeth," 
etc.  Garrisoned  by  the  power  of  God,  not  by  his  wealsness.  Left  to  ourselves,  we 
should  lose  it;  but  we  cannot  lose  it  thus.  4.  T/ri's  inheritance  is  the  object  of  lively 
hnpe  to  God's  children.  Equivalent  to  "  life-giving."  This  hope  is  life.  What  can 
animate  us  to  fight  like  the  assurance  of  victory  ?  what  make  us  steadfast  in  pilg]  image. 
like  the  certainty  of  reaching  the  goal  ?  what  destroy  the  fascination  of  the  present  like 
the  conscious  possession  of  better  things?  what  solace  us  in  grief  like  the  knowledge 
that  we  are  on  the  way  to  the  eternal  home  of  tearless  eyes?  This  hope  brings  with 
it  a  new  being. 

II.  This  hope  is  justified  by  the  resueeection  of  ottr  Lord.  1.  Christ's  resur- 
rection is  the  proof  of  immortality.  Man  asl^s,  "If  a  man  die,  shall  he  live  again?" 
The  natural  heart  thinks  so,  but  cannot  prove  it.  The  Old  Testament  rather  dimly 
hints  it.  Christ's  resurrection  is  the  assurance  of  it.  He  died — his  enemies  admitted 
that ;  he  lay  for  three  days  in  the  grave;  but  then  he  rose,  and  that  with  undiminished 
powers  and  unchanged  affection.  The  risen  Saviour  was  the  proof  that  death  was  but 
like  the  plunging  of  the  swimmer  into  the  wave,  from  which  he  emerges  on  the  other 
side  essentially  unchanged.  2.  Christ's  resurrection  is,  further,  the  assurance  of  the 
believer's  justification.  It  settled  the  question  with  his  foes  as  to  who  he  was.  He  said 
he  was  the  Son  of  God  ;  they  said  he  made  himself  eqiial  with  God,  and  they  asked  lor 
some  sign  by  which  they  could  know  it,  and  he  replied  that  they  should  have  the  sigu 
of  the  Prophet  Jonas.  He  was  declared  to  be  the  Sun  of  God  with  power  by  the  resurrec- 
tion from  the  dead.  The  Resurrection  was  the  Divine  endorsement  of  the  claims  of 
Jesus,  another  voice  from  heaven :  "  This  is  my  beloved  Son ;  hear  him ! "  Thus  Christ's 
teaching  was  endorsed  (John  iii.  16),  and  the  sufficiency  of  his  atoning  work.  "God 
raised  him  from  the  dead  and  gave  him  glory,  that  our  faith  and  hope  might  be  in  him." 
3.  And  Ohrisfs  resurrection  is  the  pledge  of  the  believer's  preservation.  For  he  has  risen 
into  the  inheritance,  and  that  as  our  Representative.  Before  he  rose  he  said,  "Because 
I  live  ye  shall  live  also;"  "Where  I  am  there  shall  also,"  etc.;  "Father,  I  will  that 
they  whom,"  etc.  But  not  only  so.  What  is  he  doing  there  ?  He  is  there  still  as 
Saviour,  to  keep  by  his  intercession  those  for  whom  by  his  cross  he  atoned.  "  Who  is 
he  that  condemneth  ?  It  is,"  etc. ;  "  Wherefore  he  is  able  to  save  to,"  etc.  How  surely, 
then,  we  are  "begotten  to  lively  hope  by  the  resurrection,"  etc.  I 

III.  The  certainty  of  this  hope  constrains  the  Christian  to  bless  God.  As 
the  apostle  thinks  of  all  this,  he  exokinis  with  fervour,  "  Blessed  be  the  God,"  etc. !  1. 
3%e  note  of  joy  is  here.  Grasp  the  hope  revealed  in  the  resurrection  of  Christ,  and  life 
loses  its  gloom,  and  songs  rise  in  the  desert,  2.  And  this  is  also  consecration.  For  to 
bless  God  is  to  glorify  him.  When  we  realize  what  thus  he  gives  to  us,  we  shall 
already  begin  the  heavenly  life  where  from  love  and  gratitude  they  praise  him  night 
and  day. — G.  N. 

Yers.  6 9. — The  saints'  joy  notwithstanding  heaviness.     In  the  previous  verses  the 

apostle' describes  the  state  of  salvation;  he  then  says  here,  "  Wherein,"  etc.     So  the 


48  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PETER.      [oh.  1. 1—25. 


experience  recorded  here  is  the  possible  experience  of  the  believer.  Comp.  Tor.  6, 
"  Kept  by  the  power  of  Goil  through  laith  unto  salvation  ready  to  be  revealed  in  the  last 
time,"  with  ver.  9,  "  Receiving  [noiu]  the  enJ  of  your  faith,  even  the  salvation  of  your 
souls; "  ».«.  salvation  is  not  a  future  matter  only.  We  can  receive  the  end  of  our  faith 
now ;  heaven  is  only  fully  revealed  hereafter,  but  it  is  already  possessed.  And  here 
the  apostle  tells  them  how.  Heaviness  may  minister  to  it ;  out  of  heaviness  may  grow 
ouch  joys  as  shall  be  the  salvation  which  is  the  goal  of  their  hopes.  Heaviness — joy 
— salvation ;  that's  the  order  here.  Sometimes  when  the  sun  is  setting  behind  the 
hills,  making  the  peaks  glow  like  burnished  gold,  the  beauty  is  repeated  on  the  peaks 
opposite,  eastern  and  wi'stern  both  aglow ;  but  the  valleys  between  are  already  in 
twilight  or  darkened  with  mist.  That  is  an  emblem  of  many  a  Christian  life;  the 
beginning  and  the  end  are  radiant,  but  the  years  between  are  filled  with  shadows.  Now, 
that  need  not  be.  The  Light  of  the  world  is  a  sun  which  no  more  goes  down,  and  when 
he  has  risen  on  our  hearts  henceforth  east  and  west  horizons,  the  summits  of  our  history, 
but  no  less  the  broad  plain,  and  every  little  glen  and  lowly  place  that  comes  between, 
may  lie  in  the  soft  full  glow  of  perp3tual  noon.  The  hindrance  to  this,  we  say,  is  the 
"  heaviness  through  manifold  trials,"  which  will  come ;  but,  says  Peter,  there  is  a  secret 
by  which  out  of  these  may  grow  "joy  unspeakable  and  full  of  glory."  Not  only  not- 
withstanding these,  but  because  of  these,  the  believer's  life  may  be  a  continuous  chastened 
joy;  and  to  have  that  is  to  anticipate  heaven. 

L  Thk  saints'  heaviness  through  manifold  trials.  The  trials  must  be ;  they 
are  part  of  the  necessary  discipline  of  sonship.  If  "man  is  born  unto  trouble  as  the 
sparks  fly  upward,"  more  still  is  the  new  man.  But  for  our  help,  then,  consider :  1. 
The  necessity  for  the  heaviness.  "  If  need  be."  Only  "  if  need  be ; "  that  is  assured  by 
the  paternal  love  of  God.  It  is  a  witness  to  his  love  that,  when  trial  canuot  be  avoided 
consistent  with  our  good,  he  is  willing  to  bear  the  pain  of  inflicting  it.  It  does  not 
follow  that  we  can  see  the  "  need  be ; "  it  may  be  the  needs  be  of  preparation  for  some 
exceptional  blessedness  rather  than  that  of  chastisement.  Perhaps  the  "  need  be  "  is 
implied  in  the  text :  "  Ye  are  kept  .  .  .  through  faith  unto  salvation ; "  but  "  ye  are  in 
heaviness  .  .  .  that  the  trial  of  your  faith  might  be  found,"  etc.,  equivalent  to  "we  are 
kept  in  the  state  of  salvation  only  through  faith,  and  affliction  is  one  of  the  means  by 
which  alone  faith  is  maintained."  The  love  of  God,  however,  assures  us  that  there  is 
a  needs  be  for  the  afifliction  which  would  satisfy  even  us  could  we  see  it.  2.  The 
manner  of  the  heavinesa.  "Manifold  trials,"  and  these  like  the  "fire"  of  the  refiner. 
Gud's  trials  are  not  all  of  one  pattern,  but  are  "afflictions  sorted,  anguish  of  all  sizes." 
Loneliness,  weakness,'  a  nervous  temperament,  discordance  in  the  home,  responsibility, 
or  duty,  may  be  as  real  a  trial  to  us,  though  no  one  detects  it,  as  the  more  manifest 
sorrows  of  others.  Does  it  burn  ? — that's  the  question ;  is  it  to  the  soul  what  fire  is  to 
the  body — deep,  searching,  consuming  pain ?  If  so,  it  is  the  "  heaviness"  of  the  text, 
and  may  issue  in  joy  unspeakable.  And  if  it  be  fire,  we  know  who  presides  at  the 
crucible,  who  regulates  the  heat,  and  blows  aside  the  blr.e  flume  to  see  if  the  dross  be 
gone,  and  waits  to  see  his  face  mirrored  in  the  clear  liquid  metal.  "  He  shall  sit  as 
a  refiner,"  etc.  3.  The  duration  o/  the  heaviness.  "Now  for  a  season."  Only  "for 
a  season."  If  a  continuous  line  from  hero  to  the  sun,  and  beyond  the  sun  as  far  again, 
and  beyond  that  as  far  again,  re|ire8ont  only  a  (lart  of  our  immortal  history,  the  season 
of  Buffering  would  be  represented  by  the  smallest  point  you  can  make  on  that  line. 
"  Our  light  affliction,  which  is  but  for  «  moment,  is  not  worthy,"  etc.  Presently  wt 
shall  say— 

"  Now  the  crucible  is  breaking, 

Faith  its  perfect  seal  is  taking, 
Like  the  gold  in  furnace  tried. 

Through  the  test  of  sharp  distreRses, 

Those  whom  Heaven  most  richl)'  blessM 
For  its  joys  are  purified. 

"  Sighs  and  tears  at  last  are  over. 
Breaking  through  its  fleshly  covei, 

Soars  the  soul  to  light  away. 
Who  while  here  below  can  measure 
That  deep  eea  of  heavenly  pleasura, 

Spreading  there  so  bright  for  ay«?" 


OH.  1. 1—26.]     THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PETER.  47 

11.  The  SAruTs'  jot  obowing  out  of  Tras  heaviness.  Sorrow  and  joy  at  the 
same  time  I  The  believer  ouglit  to  be  "  always  rejoicing,"  and  that  is  a  puzzle  to  many. 
But  there  is  great  diflferenoe  between  always  rejoicing  and  only  rejoicing.  The  idea  that 
the  believer  ought  only  to  rejoice  is  as  foolish  as  it  is  false.  But  it  is  possible  always  to 
rejoice — "  as'sorrowful,  yet  always  rejoicing."  Here  we  have  some  of  the  grounds  of  this 
joy.  They  concern  faith,  hope,  love.  1.  Heavinest  it  said  to  he  the  proving  of  our  faith. 
"Trial,"  equivalent  to  "trying,  testing,  proving."  Is  it  not  ?  Is  it  not  just  in  darkness 
that  our  faith  is  tested?  That  gives  a  new  aspect  to  heaviness.  Heaviness  is  the 
time  when  we  show  what  we  are.  Then  we  are  being  watched.  Heaven  and  earth  are 
gathered  around  us  then,  God  and  Satan  looklag  on,  and  the  Divine  honour  and  joy  are  at 
stake.  What  a  solemn,  sublime  moment  that !  2.  It  is  also  said  to  be  the  enlargement 
of(mr  hope.  "  That  the  trial  of  your  faith  might  be  found,"  etc.  That  carries  our  thought 
forward.  Our  present  life  is  often  unbearable  because  we  live  as  though  it  were  alL 
In  almost  every  other  departtnent  we  are  cheered  on  through  difficulty  by  hope.  So  in 
this.  See  what  the  angel  of  hope  did  for  Paul  on  the  wrecking  ship,  when  all  hope  that 
they  should  be  saved  had  been  taken  away  :  "  Be  of  good  cheer,  fear  not,  thou  must  be 
brought  before  Caesar."  Hope  ever  points  to  the  blessed  end,  and  whispers,  "Be  of  good 
cheer."  Moreover,  the  heaviness  is  going  to  minister  to  our  enrichment  then.  We 
shall  not  only  escape  the  storm,  but  be  stronger  because  of  it.  3.  Heaviness  is  said  to 
be  the  quickener  of  our  love.  "  Whom  having  not  seen,  ye  love ;  in  whom,  though,"  etc. 
A  kind  of  tender  pity  in  the  words,  as  though  Peter  said,  "  Oh  that  you  had  but  seen  him, 
and  how  you  would  have  loved  him  I  "  The  sentence  is  equivalent  to  "  love  to  Christ 
imparts  to  heaviness  an  unspeakable  joy."  Does  it  not?  This  for  the  Lord's  sake.  By 
this,  too,  I  get  nearer  to  the  Lord  I 

III.  The  saints'  salvation  in  this  jot.  "  Ye  rejoice  with  joy  .  .  .  receiving  the," 
eta  1.  Salvation  is  a  mystery  to  be  revealed  in  heaven.  He  has  said  that.  "  iSalvation 
ready  to  be  revealed  at  the  last  time."  However  much  is  revealed  of  it  here,  "  eye 
hath  not  seen,  nor  ear,"  eta  2.  But  the  unfolding  of  this  mystery  begins  in  Divine  Joy  a 
on  earth.  It  is  possible  to  anticipate  heaven,  to  receive  now  the  salvation  of  our  souls, 
and  heaviness  may  be  the  means  to  this.  Then  blessed  heaviness!  the  storm  may  bring 
us  to  the  very  shore  of  eternal  bliss,  and  though  as  yet  we  cannot  land,  its  sacred 
chimes  may  be  our  music  even  now. — 0.  N. 

Vers,  10 — 12. — The  certainty  and  greatness  of  Divine  salvation.  The  tone  of  the 
whole  letter  shows  that  its  readers  were  entering  on  a  season  of  severe  trial  (vers,  6,  7 ; 
oh.  ii.  19 — ii3 ;  iii.  13 — 18 ;  iv.  12 — 14 ;  v.  10),  and  one  object  of  the  writer  was  to  sustain 
and  encourage  them.  Now,  what  is  his  method  ?  what  is  the  Divine  way  of  consolation  ? 
How  weU  should  we  be  able  to  ministoi"  to  the  tried  if  we  knew  how  Qx)d  would  minister 
to  them  I  His  method  is  to  bring  before  them  the  wonderful  blessings  of  that  salvation 
of  which,  in  Christ,  they  partake.  That  is  what  we  have  here.  As  we  read  from  th« 
third  verse,  we  seem  to  hear  the  apostle  saying  the  blessings  of  salvation  are  the  true  solace 
for  the  distressed  believer.  He  begins  with  an  outburst  of  praise  for  their  great  hope  j 
but  he  goes  on  to  say  their  joy  is  not  in  the  future  only ;  then  comes  this  paragraph  on 
the  sub>tance  of  their  salvation  in  Christ. 

1.  Salvation  THRonan  Christ  the  subject  of  Old  Testament  preparation.  The 
work  of  the  prophets  was  not  so  much  for  their  own  day  and  dispensation  as  for  this; 
they  knew  there  was  a  deeper  meaning  in  what  they  were  impelled  to  say  than  they 
were  conscious  of  intending ;  it  was  clear  to  them  that  they,  centuries  beforehand,  were 
really  working  for  New  Testament  times.  That  is,  Christianity  is  no  modern  inven- 
tion ;  it  is  not  a  step  in  the  upward  movement  of  the  race  dating  back  to  Jesus  of 
Nazareth,  and  now  to  be  left  behind  as  the  race  advances  beyond  it ;  to  say  nothing 
of  appearances  being  against  such  a  theory,  for  there  are  no  traces  that  Christianity  is 
not  still  inflnitely  above  what  any  of  the  race  has  reached,  its  fundamental  idea  is  false  j 
Christianity  dates  from  the  beginning,  its  basis  is  a  Divine  work  of  preparation  carried 
on  through  all  the  ages  that  were  before  it,  and  "  when  the  fulness  of  the  time  was  come, 
God  sent  forth  his  Son."  Our  text,  however,  does  not  take  us  further  than  this — that 
Ea'  vation  w  is  the  subject  of  Old  Testament  preparation.  It  is  no  heresy  of  the  modem 
Church;  it  did  not  originate  wiih  Paul;  it  is  not  an  idea  of  Jesus;  it  dates  back  through 
•11  tlie  Old  Tostaaiint  that  the  wurld's  redemption  should  spring  from  a  Saviour  suffering 


i8  THE   FIRST   EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PETEB.     [oh- 1. 1—26. 

and  then  glorified.  L  Old  Testament  eventt  were  hut  steps  leading  up  to  it.  Promised 
in  Eden,  again  to  Noah,  again  with  additions  to  Abraham  and  to  Isaac  and  to  Jacob, 
etc.  Prepared  for  in  the  work  of  Moses,  in  the  calling  out  and  training  of  Israel,  to 
the  choice  of  their  land,  in  their  being  made  the  depositary  of  Divine  truth,  in  the  lives 
of  David,  Solomon,  and  the  prophets,  in  the  scattering  of  the  Jews,  in  their  connection 
with  Roman  power  and  Greek  literature ;  all  these  were  but,  like  the  Baptist,  preparing 
tlie  way  of  the  Lord.  2.  Old  Testament  prophecies  were  hut  the  heraldn  of  salvation 
through  Christ.  Whatever  the  origin  of  sacrifice  by  blood,  it  goes  bacl^  to  the  first 
family ;  and  since  they  were  accepted  by  God — and  it  would  be  strange  indeed  for  man 
to  anticipate  this  great  method  of  salvation — we  regard  them  as  prefigurings  of  the 
sacrifice  of  the  Lamb  of  God.  Later  on  they  were  developed  in  the  elaborate  Jewish 
ritual — atonement,  high  priest,  mediation,  entrance  into  the  holiest,  sprinkling  of  blood, 
etc.  In  the  psalmists  and  prophets  there  is  a  yet  further  development  of  this — the 
nature,  the  date,  the  birthplace,  the  character,  the  work,  the  death,  the  resurrection,  the 
universal  reign  of  the  Messiah,  are  drawn  in  outline,  so  that  "  beginning  at  Moses  and  all 
the  prophets,"  etc.  Salvation  in  Christ,  therefore,  is  the  termination  of  a  wondroug 
system  promoted  from  the  beginning,  and  was,  after  being  worked  out,  "  the  mystery 
which  from  the  beginning  hath  been  hid  in  God  according  to  the  eternal  purpose  which 
he  purposed  in  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord." 

II.  Salvation  thbough  Christ  the  subject  or  Divine  bevelation.  The  prophets 
taught  through  "  the  Spirit  of  Christ  which  was  in  them."  So  much  for  the  Old 
Testament.  The  apostlesr— "  them  that  have  preached  the  gospel  unto  you" — have  done 
this  "  with  the  Holy  Ghost  sent  down  from  heaven."  So  much  for  the  New  Testament. 
1.  The  Spirit  of  Christ,  therefore,  is  the  author  of  Sacred  Writ.  Inspiration  was  the 
operation  of  the  Divine  Spirit  on  the  minds  of  men  so  that  they  were  led  to  utter 
infallible  truth.  It  sometimes  consisted  simply  in  power  to  narrate  facts  and  discoiu^es 
accurately ;  but  sometimes  it  included  the  suggestion  of  the  very  thoughts  they  should 
express,  and  of  the  very  words  they  should  use.  So  in  listening  to  prophets  and 
apostles  we  listen  to  God  himself.  2.  Consider  the  evidence  of  tlue  Divine  inspiration 
of  Scripture.  The  great  central  witness  to  this  is  Christ.  The  Old  Testament  of  hjj 
time  and  ours  is  identical ;  he  always  regarded  it  as  the  authoritative  voice  of  Ood ; 
we  accept  its  Divine  inspiration  because  we  accept  him.  As  to  the  New  Testament, 
the  apostles  claim  an  inspiration  equal  to  that  of  the  Old,  e.g.  1  Cor.  ii.  12,  13.  And 
unless  that  claim  be  true,  how  can  Christ's  words  be  fulfilled  ?  as  e.g.  to  Peter  as  the 
representative  of  the  twelve, "  I  will  give  unto  thee  the  keys,"  etc.,  or  after  his  resurrection, 
"  As  the  Father  hath  sent  me,  so  send  I  you ;  .  .  .  receive  ye  the  Holy  Gbost :  whose- 
soever sins  ye  remit,"  etc.  Thus  "  the  Church  is  built  on  the  foundation  of  the  apostles 
and  prophets,  Jesus  Christ,"  etc.  3.  Then  tn  Scripture  we  have  the  infallible  declaration 
of  the  most  high  Ood.  In  all  Scripture.  We  must  take  the  whole,  or  we  have  no  Divine 
warrant  for  any  part.  There  is  no  power  which  can  be  trusted  to  discriminate  between 
what  therein  is  Divine  and  what  not ;  those  who  affirm  such  discrimination  to  be  needful 
differ  among  themselves  as  to  the  test.  Here  God  has  deigned  to  speak ;  what  is  here 
is  certain  truth ;  here  God  has  declared  salvation ;  then  that  salvation  is  reaL 

III.  Salvation  thbough  Cheist  the  sdbjeot  or  angelic  rbseakch.  "  Which 
things  the  angels,"  etc.  Another  evidence  of  the  sublimity  of  the  salvation  offered  in 
this  book.  The  word  is  a  graphic  one,  descriptive  of  the  idea  of  bending  down  and  fixing 
an  intense,  searching  gaze  on  something,  as  when  John  stooped  down  and  looked  into 
the  sepulchre ;  Peter  may  have  been  thinking  of  that.  1.  Ihr  angels  have  vast  privileges, 
yet  they  seem  to  envy  the  knowledge  granted  to  us.  They  have  all  the  bletsings  of  a 
sinless  state  in  God's  presence,  but  they  look  down  on  the  mysteries  of  grace  revealed  to 
us,  as  though  coveting  the  revelation.  2.  Theangels  havegreatacquiintance  with  Ood, 
yet  apparently  they  discern  the  greatest  revelation  of  him  here.  They  are  familiar  wit 
nature  and  heaven,  but  ^ 

"  God  in  the  person  of  his  Son 
Hath  all  his  mightiest  works  outdone." 

"  To  the  principalities  and  powers  Id  heavenly  places  may  be  known  by  the  Church 
manifold  wisdom  of  God."     3.   The  angels  haoe  wondeiful  facvMes  of  insight,  yet  thei 
ti  more  here  than  they  can  fathom.    Such  is  the  liUness  of  the  gospel  that  thev  are  gtiU 
l<tr  from  comprehending  it — C.  N. 


OH.  I.  1—25.]       THE  FIEST  EPI3TLE  GENERAL  OP  PETER.  49 

Vers.  13 — 16. — Salvation  by  Christ  issmng  in  fioliness.  The  modem  demand  for 
a  religion  which  is  practical  is  but  an  echo  of  the  demand  of  Scripture.  Bight  being 
and  doing  are  the  aim  and  proof,  yea,  the  very  substance,  of  Christianity.  But  Scripture 
adds  that  on  which  the  moralists  are  silent — how  this  right  living  can  be  acquired. 
Redemption  first,  then  holiness.  Holiness  grows  out  of  redemption  as  its  natural 
result.  To  say  we  do  not  want  the  doctrines  of  grace,  but  rather  a  setting  forth  of 
God's  requirement  of  holy  character,  were  as  reasonable  as  to  insist  that  the  roots  in 
the  garden  should  be  dug  up,  because  we  want,  not  roots,  but  fruit.  Holy  character 
is  the  outcome  of  a  knowledge  of  free  redemption  through  the  Son  of  God.  So  much 
is  involved  in  the  word  "  wherefore  "  here.  The  paragraph  has  to  do  with  practical  life ; 
it  holds  up  the  loftiest  ideal :  "  As  he  who  hath  called  you  is  holy,  so  be  ye  holy,"  etc., 
and  this  is  set  forth  as  the  necea.sary  sequence  to  the  preceding. 

I.  Spiritual  redemption  is  herb  spoken  of  as  "  the  qracb  that  is  bbino  brought 
TO  us  in  the  revelation  of  Jesub  Christ."  Revised  Version  margin, "  Greek,  Is  being 
brought."  "At"  is  the  ordinary  preposition  signifying  ."in."  We,  therefore,  take  the 
expression  as  covering  all  that  the  apostle  has  spoken  of  from  the  third  verse.  The  nature, 
certainty,  sublimity  of  redemption ;  redemption  beginning  here,  perfected  in  heaven  ;— 
that  has  been  his  theme,  and  he  now  sums  it  up  in  the  beautiful  and  comprehensive 
phrase,  "  The  grace  that  is  being  brought  unto  you  in  the  revelation  of  Jesus  Christ" 
Think  of  salvation  under  this  title.  1.  It  is  God's  free  gift.  "The  grace."  It  is 
gratuitous.  One  of  its  marvellous  features  is  that  it  is  for  "  whosoever  will."  A 
salvation  we  had  wrought  for  ourselves  could  not  have  rectified  our  relation  to  God ;  it 
\vould  have  freed  us  from  condemnation,  but  not  have  opened  to  us  the  Father's  heart, 
nor  constrained  us  to  his  service.  There  is  a  priceless  power  in  God  himself  dis- 
charging our  liabilities  by  the  atonement  of  his  own  blood,  and  thus  saving  tha 
unthankful  and  evil,  the  outcast  and  lost,  for  nothing.  2.  It  is  possessed  hy  us  in  a* 
todroAyrdinary  degree.  There  is  evident  stress  on  the  words,  "  to  you."  The  expression 
seems  to  look  back  to"  vers.  10 — 12.  Divine  truths  were  in  their  dawning  in  the  Old 
Testament,  but  they  are  brought  to  light  in  the  New.  Compared  with  what  has  to  b» 
revealed,  it  is  darkness ;  for  that  which  is  the  expression  of  God's  boundless  love,  and  the 
full  reward  of  the  atonement,  will  need  enlarged  capacities  for  its  perception,  and  all 
eternity  for  its  reception ;  but  compared  with  what  was  revealed  before  New  Testament 
times,  it  is  brightness.  Very  touching  is  it,  forinstance,  to  think  of  Isaiah  sitting  down 
and  pondering  the  prophecies  he  was  given  to  utter,  and  vainly  trying  to  understand 
their  mysteries.  "  The  Spirit  was  not  yet ; "  but  he  has  come  now,  and  in  his  light  we 
see  light.  Now  we  may  "  comprehend  with  all  saints  what,"  etc. ;  now  "  the  eyes  of  ouc 
understanding  being,"  etc. ;  now  "  eye  hath  not  seen,  nor  ear  . .  .  but  God  hath,"  etc. : 
"  Verily  I  say  unto  you,  many  prophets,"  etc.  3.  It  is  continuous  and  increasing  with 
the  revelation  of  Jesus  Christ.  "That  is  being"— it  is  a  prolonged,  unceasing,  ever- 
enlarging  bestowment.  What  we  received  when  we  first  knew  Christ  as  Saviour  was 
far  surpassed  by  what  came  with  glowing  knowledge  of  him ;  and  this,  in  turn,  shall  be 
immeasurably  surpassed  when  we  shall  see  him  as  he  is.  What  is  the  joy  on  the  face 
of  the  young  disciple ;  what  the  calm  of  the  saintly  heart  as  it  comes  forth  from  the 
closet;  what  the  growing  likeness  to  the  Saviour  in  the  good  man's  character;  what 
the  holy  peace  of  the  aged  believer;  what  the  glory  of  the  redeemed  in  heaven, — but 
"  the  grace  that  is  being  brought  to  us  in  the  revelation  of  Jesus  Christ "  ? 

II.  The  possession  of  this  grace  claims  that  we  clearly  apprehend  its 
FULNESS.  "Gird  up  the  loins  of  your  mind,  be  sober,  and  hope_  to  the  end  for  this 
grace ; "  equivalent  to  "  God  would  have  us  see  how  great  salvation  is ;  if  it  is  to  work  Id 
us  its  proper  work,  we  must  have  adequate  views,  and  a  firm,  personal,  intelligent  grip 
of  it."  1.  There  must  be  activity  of  thought  concerning  it.  To  gird  up  the  loins 
is  the  preparation  for  activity.  In  Scripture  we  have  the  thoughts  of  God,  but  they  are 
not  revealed  to  the  careless  reader;  they  only  yield  to  patient  study  under  the  illumi- 
nation of  the  Divine  Spirit.  The  absolutely  needful  truths  of  Scripture,  like  the  corn  on 
the  surface  of  the  earth,  are  easily  gathered,  but  for  the  gold  and  gems  we  must  dig. 
Some  Christians  know  so  little  of  God's  grace  because  they  have  no  systematic,  leisurely, 
deliberate,  prayerful  study  of  Scripture.  "Search  the  Scriptures;  "  Then  shall  we 
know  if  we  follow  on  to  know  the  Lord."  2.  There  must  he  freedom  from  what  woutd 
dim  our  vision  of  it.    "Be  sober."   Sobriety  is  self-restraint  from  what  intoxicates.    The 

I.  pbtbb.  ' 


60  THE  FIRST   EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PBTEB.      [ch.  i.  1—25 

intoxicated  man  lias  no  clear  perception  of  anything;  he  sees  nothing  as  it  is.  Thera 
is  an  intoxication  of  sonl  which  operates  thus  on  spiritual  perceptions.  We  may  1)6 
intoxicated  with  business,  worldly  pleasure,  pride  of  intellect,  etc.  To  understand  God's 
grace,  a  restraining  hand  must  be  put  on  this.  3.  There  must  be  confident  anticipation 
of  it.  "  Hope  perfectly  [Revised  Version]  for,"  etc.  Hope  is  beyond  faith.  Faith 
reveals  somewhat,  then  nope  anticipates  it.  Hope  expects,  ponders,  yearns  for. 
"Perfectly;"  eqmvalent  to  "without  any  admixture  of  doubt."  To  make  the  blessings 
promised  in  Christ  a  subject  of  hope  would  make  them  grow  before  our  vision,  and 
intensify  the  cousciousness  that  they  are  ours.  It  does  not  impress  us  to  know  that 
a  vast  multitude  of  stars  fill  the  sky,  but  to  go  into  the  observatory  ^nd  single  out  one 
star  for  observation,  and  fix  our  mind  on  that,  ensures  one  new  beauty  after  another 
gleaming  out  of  the  darkness,  and  where  we  thought  was  but  a  star,  a  galaxy  is  discerned. 
III.  The  appebhension  of  the  fulness  of  Divine  grace  will  lead  to  holiness. 
Man  says,  "  Be  holy,  then  you  will  have  hope ;  do  your  duty,  then  you  will  find  rest."  God 
»ays,  "  Salvation  free  through  Christ  first;  then  holiness  aa  the  result."  Vers.  14 — 16  are 
the  sequel  to  ver.  13.  A  fable  tells  of  a  stream,  which  made  those  that  drank  of  it  new 
beings ;  so  to  drink  of  the  blessings  which  flow  from  Calvary  is  to  find  ourselves  new 
creatures.  None  can  know  what  redemption  is,  and  that  it  is  his,  and  fashion  himself 
according  to  his  former  lusts  in  his  ignorance;  it  rather  creates  a  desire  to  be  "  holy  in 
all  manner  of  living."  1.  It  is  so  because  of  the  filial  love  redemption  evokes.  Without 
redemption  we  have  no  sufficient  motive  to  holiness ;  that  comes  with  love  to  God  in 
Christ.  2.  And  it  is  so  because  of  the  high  purpose  of  Ood  redemption  reveal*.  As  we 
apprehend  what  redemption  is,  we  see  it  includes  God's  purpose  of  likeness  to  him. 
Then  this  likeness  can  be  reached,  for  what  God  wills  can  be.— 0.  N. 

Vers.  17 — 21. — The  holiness  in  which  salvation  consists  a  reason  for  Christian  fear. 
The  order  of  thought  in  the  first  twenty-one  verses  may  be  summed  up  in  salvation 
(vers.  3 — 12),  holiness  (vers.  12 — 16),  fear  (vers.  17 — 21).  This  last  paragraph 
contains  one  long  reason  why  those  who  have  salvation  through  Christ  should  live  in 
fear.  It  is  remarkable  that  the  demand  for  fear  should  follow  what  has  been  already 
said.  The  apostle  has  spoken  strongly  of  the  certainty  of  their  redemption  to  whom 
h«  writes ;  he  calls  them  "  elect  according  t(^'  etc. ;  he  blesses  God  that  they  have  an 
inheritance  reserved  for  them,  and  that  they  are  kept  for  it ;  he  says  that  loving  Christ 
they  have  now  the  salvation  of  their  souls ;  he  adds  that  the  revelation  of  this  salvation, 
being  given  through  the  Holy  Ghost,  is  infallibly  true ;  but  after  all  that,  he  bids  them 
pass  the  time  of  their  sojourning  here  in  fear — an  emphatic  contradiction  of  the  idea 
that  the  doctrines  of  grace  foster  a  spirit  of  carelessness.  Fear  is  the  natural  result  of 
God's  free  salvation. 

I.  The  fact  of  bedemftion  necessitates  holiness.  The  seventeenth  verse  is  based 
on  the  eighteenth  and  following  verses.  1.  BtdemptUm  is  from  the  vain  manner  oj 
life  received  from  our  fathers.  "  Conversation ; "  equivalent  to  "  manner  of  life."  Christ 
died  to  deliver  us  from  the  sinful  manner  of  life  received  from  our  fathers.  From  hell ; 
yes,  that  is  clear.  "  The  Lord  hath  laid  on  him  the  iniquity  of  us  all ;  "  "  He  bore  our 
sins  in  his  own  body  on  the  tree ; "  "  There  is  therefore  now  no  condemnation,"  etc. 
But  that  is  not  the  end  for  which  he  died,  only  a  means  to  an  end.  Holiness  in  us  was 
the  purpose  of  the  atonement,  so  much  so  that  if  we  can  imagine  one  getting  no  furthei- 
than  the  cancelling  of  his  sins,  we  should  have  to  say  that  Christ  died  for  him  in  vain 
(ee  2  Cor,  v.  15;  Gal.  L  4;  Eph.  i.  4;  v.  25—27;  Titus  ii.  14).  Redemption  by 
Chiist  is  from  the  life  of  the  natural  man ;  "  If  any  man  be  in  Christ  Jesus,  it  is  a  new 
creation."  2.  Redemption  is  only  effected  at  unspeakable  cost.  "  Not  with  corruptible," 
etc.  An  emphatic  testimony  that  redemption  is.  through  our  Lord's  death — not  through 
his  life,  or  example,  or  holiness,  or  mediation,  but,  as  Scripture  invariably  says  with 
unwavering  consistency,  by  "  his  blood."  God  himself  bore  the  penalty  of  human  guUt 
that  he  might  righteously  extend  his  mercy  to  the  guilty.  Nor  can  we  imagine  any 
method  which  so  glorifies  his  grace  and  reveals  himself.  Think  of  the  worth  of  our  Lord's 
offering.  The  universe  were  as  nothing  compared  with  the  Son  of  God.  What  unfathom- 
able meaning  is  in  the  words,  "  the  precious  blood  of  Christ"  I  Now,  this  stupendous 
price  was  paid  for  nothing  less  than  that  we  might  be  holy.  In  that  we  see  how 
imperative,  how  inilispensable,  holiness  is.     3.  Redemption  is  to  faith  and  hop*  in  Ood. 


OH.  L  1—25.]     THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  PETER.  61 

(Vers.  20,  21.)  Characteristic  of  Peter  to  emphasize  the  foreordination  of  Christ.  It 
occuvs  here  naturally  when  we  see  that  it  is  a  point  in  perhaps  all  his  recorded  sermong. 
What  a  redemption  this  is  which  is  based  on  God's  eternal  purpose  1  and  what  a  hope 
which  goes  back  through  all  time,  and  finds  its  foundation  in  the  everlasting  thought  of 
GK>d  1  But  the  point  is  that  Christ  was  appointed  to  this  work  by  the  Father,  manifested 
by  the  Father,  raised  up  by  the  Father,  given  glory  by  the  Father — Redemption  is  the 
working  out  by  the  Father  of  his  own  plan,  quite  contrary  to  the  idea  that  Calvary  was 
to  appease  him.  The  text  says  that  God  did  all  this  that  we  might  be  believers  in  him, 
not  stop  short  at  Jesus,  but  go  on  to  rest  in  the  Father.  Alienated  man  drawn  to  act  in 
faith  and  hope.  Then  as  the  stream  flows  from  the  fountain,  so  by  the  constraint  of 
conscious  obligation  and  loving  petition,  consecration  to  God  will  flow  from  this  faith 
and  hope,  and  thus,  if  redemption  is  to  faith  and  hope,  it  necessitates  holiness. 

IL  This  necessitt  calls  the  pkofessino  Christian  to  feab.  (Ver.  17.)  The  mor« 
Christian  life  we  have,  tbe  more  we  find  that  fear  is  one  of  its  characteristics.  Not 
that  which  hath  torment,  and  repels;  but  that  which  is  the  opposite  of  carelessness, 
presumption,  self-confidence,  disobedience.  1.  For  a  filial  spirit  toward  Qod  lead*  to  th» 
fear  of  his  disfavour.  Perfect  love  produces  fear — fear  of  dittressing  him  we  love.  The 
word  "father  "tells  of  tender  relationship,  mutual  happiness,  reciprocated  affection;  that 
either  would  shrink  from  paining  the  other ;  and  that  any  barrier  coming  between  them 
is  unbearable.  He  on  whom  we  call  as  Father  must  have  holiness.  Then  we  cannot 
help  going  through  life  with  this  element  of  fear;  he  who  does  not  fear  does  not  love. 
2.  Then,  a  remembrance  of  his  impartiality  leads  to  a  fear  of  his  judgments.  "The 
Father,  who  without  respect  of  persons  judgeth,"  etc.  The  kind  Father  is  also  the  impartial 
Judge,  and  he  will  judge  us  by  our  works.  We  are  saved  by  faith ;  we  are  judged  by 
holiness  ;  we  are  redeemed  to  holiness.  Then  if  we  are  amongst  the  redeemed,  we  ar« 
holy.  What  should  we  like  to  be  tested  by — experiences,  profession,  creed,  charity,, 
opinions  of  others  ?  God  will  judge  us  impartially  by  our  works.  "  Show  me  thy  faith 
by  thy  works."  Is  not  that  something  to  make  us  foar  ?  3.  ^  consideration  of  the 
brevity  of  life  leads  to  th*  fear  of  losing  eternal  hlessing.  "  Pass  the  time  of  your 
sojourning  here  in  fear."  We  are  here  but  for  a  short  time ;  the  perfected  blessings  ot 
redemption  are  yonder,  and  what  they  are  no  tongue  can  tell.  But  redemption  !■ 
holiness,  and  therefore  apart  from  holiness  we  have  no  right  to  anticipate  these.  Witk« 
out  holiness  there  is  no  redemption,  that  is,  no  heaven.  Is  not  this  calculated  to  create 
fear,  to  destroy  spiritual  indifference,  carelessness  about  conformity  to  Christ,  light 
heartedness  respecting  inconsistency  ?  Does  it  not  compel  us  to  examine  heart  and  life 
with  anxiety,  and  press  forward  to  better  things  with  something  of  the  feeling  of  the 
racer  lest  he  lose  the  prize  ? 

in.  This  fear  is  consistent  with  jot  unspeakable  and  full  of  qlobt.  This  must 
be  remembered  to  avoid  misapprehension.  The  fear  the  apostle  urges  is  not  that  which 
clouds  life,  but  that  which  harmonizes  with  the  joy  he  has  spoken  of.  Yes ;  this  feai 
contributes  to  the  joy.  1.  It  leads  to  a  correct  knowledge  of  our  Christian  position. 
Making  us  search  to  the  foundations  of  our  hope,  it  enables  us  to  say,  "  1  know."  2.  It 
compels  us  to  a  simpler  dependence  on  the  Saviour.  For  looking  for  holiness  as  an  evidence! 
of  redemption,  we  discover  how  little  we  have,  and  are  compelled  to  fall  back  on  Christ 
the  more  entirely — than  which  what  is  more  blessed  ?  Blessed  fear,  which  makes  iia 
know  better  how  perfect  a  Saviour  Jesus  is  I  3.  It  glorifies  even  our  trials  as  a  mearu 
of  keeping  us  holy.  For  if  holiness  be  essential,  we  can  welcome  that  as  a  friend  whiob 
tends  to  deepen  it,  and  makes  us  thank  God  for  our  very  sorrows. — 0.  N. 

Vers.  22^—25. — Christian  love  the  test  of  the  possession  of  salvation.  Christian  kr  '• 
is  the  subject  of  this  paragraph.  There  are  no  words  here  to  show  why  that  is  dealt  with 
in  this  particular  place,  but  as  the  preceding  verses  treat  of  fear  lest  we  should  ful  of 
the  fruits  which  prove  the  possession  of  redemption,  we  may  assume  that  the  apos  tie 
here  gives  them  a  test  by  which  this  fear  may  be  removed  or  confirmed,  and  no  bet>tel 
test  could  be  suggested  than  that  of  love.  For  love  is  such  a  test  (John  xiiL  84; 
I  Cor.  xiii.  1—3 ;  1  John  iii.  14).  Peter  might  have  chosen  some  other  test.  Possibly 
be  had  reason  for  anxiety  on  this  particular  ground,  for  the  Epistle  contains  several 
hints  on  the  proper  mutual  relation  of  these  Christians ;  e.g.  ch.  i.  22 ;  A.  17 ;  ilL  8 — 10 , 
iv.  8 1  V.  6, 


«2  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  PETER,     [ch.  1. 1— 25. 


I.  Salvation  is  here  spoken  or  as  the  ptjeifioation  of  the  soul  in  obeying  thb 
TB0TH.  "  Seeing  ye  have  purified  your  souls  in  obeying  the  truth  ; "  only  another  way 
of  saying,  "  Seeing  you  have  received  this  salvation  of  which  I  speak,  which  issues  in 
holiness."  For  :  1.  This  is  a  suitable  and  comprehensive  expression  of  the  fact  ofsaivaUon, 
"  Obeying  the  truth  "  is  a  synonym  for  "  believing  the  gospel ; "  e.g.  2  Thess.  i.  8 ;  Eom. 
■n.  17 ;  Heb.  v.  9 ;  Bom.  x.  16,  in  all  of  which  "  obey  "  is  evidently  equivalent  to 
"  believe."  The  word  is  used  by  Peter  in  that  sense  in  this  Epistle  (ch.  iiu  1  and  iv. 
17).  Link  that  with  the  other  word,  "  purifying  the  soul ;  "  and  whether  that  refers  to 
the  cleansing  by  the  atonement  or  by  the  work  of  the  Spirit,  we  have  the  essential 
elements  of  redemption.  2.  Hits  expression  with  this  meaning  harmonizes  well  with 
what  has  gone  before.  The  last  two  paragraphs  from  ver.  13  dealt  largely  with  purifi- 
cation resulting  from  faith.  3.  This  particular  way  of  speaking  of  salvation  bears 
doiely  on  the  subject  in  hand.  In  each  of  the  epistles  to  the  seven  Churches,  our  Lord 
gives  himself  a  different  title,  according  to  the  special  condition  of  each  Church.  So 
here  the  apostle  speaks  of  their  redemption  under  this  aspect  of  it,  because  this  aspect 
of  it  bears  on  the  duty  of  Christian  love  he  is  about  to  enforce. 

II.  Salvation  natuballt  issues  in  Chbistian  love.  "  Ye  have  purified  your 
(ouls  in  obeying  the  truth  unto  unfeigned  love  of  the  brethren."  1.  Love  a  necessity 
where  salvation  is.  That  is  shown  as  follows :  "  See  that  ye  love  one  another, 
.  .  .  being  born  again,  not  of  corruptible  seed,  but  of  incorruptible,  by  the  Word  of 
God."  (1)  Love  a  necessity  because  the  Christian  has  a  new  nature.  We  are  to  love 
every  man ;  but  the  love  we  are  here  called  to  is  love  of  the  brethren.  But  no  power 
can  make  us  love  as  a  brother  one  who  is  not  a  brother ;  for  that  there  must  be  a 
common  fatherhood,  and  where  that  is  it  must  be  felt.  Children  of  the  same  father, 
•nimated  by  the  same  principles,  influenced  by  the  same  Divine  Spirit,  sharing  the  same 
hopes,  joys,  sorrows,  conflicts, — these  cannot  help  being  drawn  together.  (2)  But  this 
is  also  spoken  of  as  a  Divine  nature.  "  Incorruptible."  The  relation  between  Christ's 
people  is  not  a  union  after  the  flesh,  such  as  connects  Abraham's  children.  They  ara 
born,  not  of  man,  but  of  God ;  God's  nature  inspires  them.  Think  of  the  love  God  has  to 
his  children  1  Then  where  God's  nature  is,  love  of  the  brethren  must  be.  (3)  This  is 
also  an  ever-living  nature.  The  human  nature  fades,  its  strongest  principles  and  closest 
bonds  may  last  but  a  little  while ;  even  the  mother  may  forget  the  child.  But,  said 
Isaiah,  "  the  word  of  the  Lord  endureth  for  ever ; "  and  Peter  adds,  "  This  is  the  word 
which  has  been  preached  to  you."  That  is,  this  new  life  of  ours  does  not  die  out ;  that 
which  has  produced  it  liveth  and  abideth  for  ever,  and  is  a  living,  operative  power  in 
us.  What  God  has  thus  implanted,  he  does  not  sufiFer  to  die.  "  He  will  perform  it  till 
the  day  of  Jesus  Christ ;  "  he  will  develop  its  hidden  possibilities.  Then  is  it  not  certain 
that  the  redeemed  man  will  love?  God  cannot  impart  and  train  a  nature  of  love  which 
does  not  love.  2.  This  love  is  of  a  very  high  order.  (1)  "  Unfeigned."  Peter,  Paul, 
•nd  John  all  speak  of  this  feature  of  Christian  love.  "  Let  love  be  without  dissimula- 
tion ; "  "  Let  us  not  love  in  word,  neither  in  tongue,  but  in  deed  and  in  truth  " — as 
though  an  assumed  affection  were  common.  But  that  is  not  Christian  love.  (2)  "  Love 
out  of  a  pure  heart."  That  is  holy.  Christian  love  is  holy  love.  Holiness  is  its  basis. 
Contrary  to  loving  all  men,  bad  and  good,  as  brethren.  There  must  be  charity  to  all,  but 
true  brotherly  love  towards  those  who  turn  from  Christ  there  cannot  be.  Or  does  "  pure  " 
mean  "  unmixed"? — a  love  that  rises  from  purely  spiritual  causes,  and  not  because  others 
are  good  to  us,  or  give  us  pleasure,  or  belong  to  our  Church.  The  publicans  and  sinners 
have  that  love.  Christian  love  is  due  to  love  of  God,  and  loves  others  because  God 
does.  (3)  "  Fervent."  The  opposite  of  coldness.  A  love  that  lights  up  the  features  and 
makes  the  hand-grasp  warm  and  kindles  happiness.  It  consumes  selfishness,  and  sets 
our  thoughts  to  work  for  others'  good.  Fed  from  a  heavenly  source, "  many  waters  can- 
not quench  it "  (waters  of  infiriaity,  neglect,  jealousy,  injury,  yea,  even  wrong) ;  that  is 
Christian  love — very  different  from  bare  courtesy.  How  can  one  feel  coldly  where  the 
father  loves  divinely  ? 

III.  Salvation  is  tubbbfobb  tested  by  the  possession  op  this  love.  Where 
the  life  is,  the  love  is ;  where  the  life  is  low,  so  is  the  love.  1.  Have  we  sympathy  with 
the  people  of  Qod — true  fellow-feeling  that  helps  ?  "  Whoso  hath  this  world's  good," 
etc.  We  should  if  we  loved.  2.  Do  we  delight  in  fellowship  with  them  f  Love  must  be 
with  its  beloved.  Is  it  so  with  us  ?  do  we  love  the  house  of  God,  the  brotherhood,  etc,  i 


OH.  1.  1—25.]       THE  FraST  EPISTLE  GENEAAL  OP  PETER.  sa 

We  should  if  we  loved.  8.  Are  our  judgmentt  concerning  them  tender  and  charitahU  f 
"  Love  covers  a  multitude  of  sins ; "  "  Love  thinketh  no  evil,"  etc.  Is  it  so  with  us  ?  Do 
we  find  ourselves  trying  to  put  a  favourable  construction  on  evil  reports,  hushing  them 
up,  sorrowing  over  them,  talking  to  God  about  them?  We  should  if  we  loved,  4.  Art 
we  ashamed  to  call  them  Irethren  t — G.  N. 

Vers.  1 — 3. — The  introductory  greeting.  Here  is  for  our  consideration,  as  introductory 
and  preparatory  to  an  intelligent  study  of  this  letter,  some  suggestions  about — 

I.  Thb  grebtbb.  "  Peter."  The  allusions  to  incidents  in  his  life,  and  the  checkered 
light  thrown  upon  his  character,  which  are  found  in  this  Epistle,  are  in  harmony  with 
what  we  gather  from  the  Gospels  and  the  Acts  concerning  him.  Fur  instance :  1.  Eii 
name.  The  Bock-man.  What  a  reminiscence  of  the  giving  of  that  name !  What  it 
tells  (1)  of  his  former  character ;  (2)  of  Christ's  knowledge  of  him ;  (3)  of  the  ideal  at 
which  he  is  to  aim  I  2.  Bis  vocation.  "  An  apostle."  Here  is  a  hint  of  (1)  his  dignity ; 
(2)  his  brotherliness,  not  the,  but  "  an  apostle ; "  (3)  bis  allegiance,  "  Jesus  Christ." 
As  Keble  sings — 

"  Friend  thrice  denied  and  thrice  beloved — 
Master,  Bedeemer,  King." 

IL  The  desckiption  of  those  he  greets.  Who  were  these?  Here  at  once  we 
open  the  vein  of  sadness  which  runs  through  this  Epistle,  and  again  and  again  rises  to 
the  surface.  "  Sojourners  of  the  Dispersion."  Homeless  through  persecution.  Jewish 
and  Gentile  Christians,  carried,  as  seed  on  the  wings  of  the  storm,  to  many  lands  where 
they  would  fertilize  and  multiply.  Where  were  they?  Widely  scattered,  from  under 
the  shadows  of  the  mountains  of  Galilee  to  the  shores  of  the  Black  Sea.  This  fisherman 
is  casting  bis  net  in  a  deep  and  wide  ocean.  What  are  they?  Divinely  chosen  to  per- 
fection of  character.  1.  They  are  being  made  holy.  2.  They  are  being  made  holy  by 
the  Spirit.  3.  Tbey  are  being  made  holy  by  the  Spirit  in  the  fruits  of  obedience.  4. 
And  this  by  self-sacrificing  consecration.  6.  And  all  this  through  the  power  of  the 
sacrifice  of  Christ. 

III.  The  sdbstanob  of  the  grebttno.  "  Grace  and  peace."  The  highest  ideal  of  both 
Greek  and  Hebrew  as  to  true  blessedness.  "  Grace  " — the  thought  in  Greek  sculpture, 
architecture,  and  oratory,  the  very  name  and  charm  of  Greek  divinities,  and  signifying 
the  beauty  of  gentleness  in  strength,  the  favour  of  the  high  to  the  lowly,  and  all  its 
effects  in  the  lowly.  "  Peace " — the  salutation  of  Hebrew  prophet  and  patriarch,  the 
wish  for  the  city  in  the  midst  of  enemies,  for  the  soul  in  its  relations  to  QoA  and 
man.  And  both  these  combined,  and  both  these  multiplied  tenfold,  a  thousandfold, 
on  and  on  indefinitely  and  infinitely,  for  of  such  blessing  a  soul  cannot  have  too 
much.— U.  E.  T. 

Vers.  3 — 5. — An  outburst  of  praise.  "  Blessed  be  the  God  and  Father,"  etc.  So 
the  writer  passes  from  himself  and  from  his  readers  up  to  God ;  and  with  this  elevation  of 
theme  there  is  an  outburst  of  praise.  Meditating  on  this  outburst  of  praise,  we  note 
itis— 

I.  Praise  to  God.  He  traces  the  great  joy  he  is  describing  up  to  its  Fountain — 
God ;  he  sees  the  gift  of  which  he  almost  seems  to  be  singing,  in  the  open  hand  of  the 
Giver — God.  "  Blessed  be,"  etc.  1.  Here  is  reverent  praise.  "  Blessed."  The  word 
is  consecrated  to  God  alone,  and  is  completely  different  to  the  word  in  the  Beatitudes. 
The  Hebrew  meaning  is  "  speaking  him  well."  2.  Here  is  loving  praise.  It  is  not  alone 
to  God  as  God,  the  infinitely  Good  One  of  transcendent  perfection,  but  the  insertion  of 
this  conception  of  Father,  and  Father  of  Jesus,  makes  him  nearer  and  dearer  to  the  heart 
than  the  old  description, "  God  of  Israel."  3.  Here  is  intelligent  praise.  "  Father  of  our 
Lord  Jesus."  How  vividly  Peter  could  recall  the  form  and  voice  and  countenance  of 
Jesus  1  It  was  his  Father  he  would  have  men  praise.  No  vague,  dim,  unrelated,  infinite 
essence  and  origin  of  all  things  do  we  worship,  but  the  Father  of  Jesus,  revealed  to  us 
in  the  face  of  Jesus  Christ.  4.  Here  is  grate/id  praise.  It  is  praise  for  great  mercy. 
Pity  is  love  to  the  weak ;  mercy  is  love  to  the  undeserving — ^is  therefore  the  climax  and 
crown  of  love.  This  is  God's  Ice  to  man.  St.  Bernard  had  a  familiar  saying  to  the 
effect  that  "  great  sins  and  great  miseries  need  great  mercy,  and  many  sins  and  many, 


54  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  PETER,     [oh.  1. 1—26, 

miseries  need  many  mercies."  Hence  we  have  revelations  of  God's  mercy,  as  great  mercy, 
abundant  mercy,  plenteous  mercy,  tender  mercies,  mtdtitude  of  mercies,  mercy  tliat 
"  endureth  for  ever."  The  heart  of  man  may  well  glow  with  gratitude  as  he  vows,  "  I 
will  sing  of  mercy,"  etc. 

II.  Praise  to  God  for  a  bright  hope  or  a  otoRiona  fdtcre.  1.  Here  is  praise  to 
God  /or  a  hope.  This  is,  indeed,  part  of  the  praise  of  every  heart  which  thanks  God 
for  Christianity.  For  Christianity  does  not  profess  to  satisfy  all  the  aspirations  of  the 
heart  here.  Much  yearning  for  koowledge,  for  pardon,  for  grace,  is  met  now,  but  much 
remains  as  unfulfilled  hope,  and  for  that  hope, we  praise  God.  What  hope?  (1)  Hope 
is  expectant  desire.  What  we  wish  for  and  what  we  count  on  having  are  the  two 
ingredients  of  hope.  (2)  Living  hope,  (a)  This,  in  contrast  to  the  dead-alive  sur- 
mises, vague  guesses  at  the  future,  the  pagans  had,  and  above  which  Jews  scarcely 
rose.  (&)  This  in  contrast,  as  Leighton  says,  to  lying  hopes  and  dying  hopes  about 
things  in  the  world — hopes  that  die  before  us  or  die  when  we  die.  (c)  This  is  a  hope 
that  makes  life  a  life  of  hope,  an  anchored  life  that  does  not  drift,  a  brightened  Ma 
that  does  not  darken  into  despair ;  eager,  expectant  vision ;  who,  though  "  sojourners 
of  the  Dispersion,"  with  a  vast  sense  of  weariness  enfolding  all  things,  were  truly 
pilgrims  whose  faces  and  whose  feet  were  set  towards  the  land  of  sunrise,  not  of  sunset. 
2.  Here  is  praise  to  God  for  a  future.  What  future  ?  St.  Peter  describes  to  them  a 
plan  that  is  (1)  a  contrast  to  their  present  lot  as  "  sojourners  of  the  Dispersion,"  who 
had  lost  inheritance  in  Palestine;  and  (2)  a  completion  of  what  inheritance  Palestine 
might  have  been  and  what  their  Christian  character  already  was.  "  Inheritance."  It 
can  only  be  known  negatively,  and  there  is  no  actual  description  of  what  is  beyond 
apprehension  and  understanding.  But  we  can  know  what  it  has  not — that  which  mars 
and  spoils  best  things  here.  A  possession  secured,  surely  awaiting  them.  A  state  and 
a  condition  of  the  soul  and  its  surroimdings.  (o)  "  Incorruptible."  No  tendency  in 
it  to  decay  and  to  destruction.  Substance  imperishable.  The  tenure  not  to  expire  as 
in  Palestine.  (&)  "  Undefiled."  Not  to  bo  spoiled  by  defilement  or  pollution,  as  their 
old  inheritance  in  Palestine,  by  idolatries  and  tyrannies,  (c)  "  Fadeth  not  away."  Its 
beauty  immortal.     No  winter  to  wither  it. 

III.  Praise  to  God  fob  his  wondbrfui  methods  of  inspiring  the  hope  and 
■NBUBiNQ  THE  FUTURE.  The  future.  Peter  is  here  praising  God  both  as  Trustee  of 
such  a  future,  and  Ouardia/n  of  those  who  inherit  it  by  hope.  1.  God  has  that  future 
reserved.  "  In  heaven " — ^in  safe  keeping.  2.  God  will  in  due  time  let  it  be  reveaied. 
"  Salvation."  3.  God  has  that  future  for  his  bestowal  as  an  inheritance.  He  gives 
heaven  to  man  as  a  gift  of  love — free  love.  Righteously,  and  according  to  their  fitness 
for  it ;  but  graciously,  and  not  as  measnred  by  their  merits.  A  heaven  we  merited 
wonld  be  a  poor,  meagre  heaven  in  contrast  with  what  is  here  described ;  and  so  might 
it  not  be  a  hell  t  The  heir  does  not  buy,  does  not  win,  does  not  by  battle  secure 
inheritance ;  he  simply  grows  up  to  the  age  that  claims  it.  So  with  heaven.  Wlien 
John  at  Runnymede  asked  the  barons  assembled  about  him  there,  by  what  right  they 
held  their  lands,  hundreds  of  swords  flashed  like  lightning  from  their  sheaths,  and 
defiant  tones  pealed  like  a  thunder -clap  on  the  king's  ears,  "  By  these  we  won  them, 
and  by  these  we  hold  tliem."  But  let  any  inquiring  lips  ask  multitudes  above,  in 
blessed  possession  of  the  inheritance  of  heaven,  by  what  right  they  hold  those  high 
and  priceless  possessions ;  and,  taking  crowns  of  dignity  and  glory  from  their  brows, 
and  casting  them  before  the  Lamb  that  was  slain,  their  adoring  exclamation,  is,  "  Unto 
him  that  loved  us,  and  washed  us  from  our  sins  in  his  blood,"  etc.  Nay,  not  only 
when  the  redeemed  are  in  heaven  do  they  realize  that  it  is  an  unbought,  unmerited 
inheritance,  but  even  when  good  men  tread  the  frontier  of  that  kingdom,  and  step  on 
the  threshold  of  that  home,  they  feel  the  same.  When  Bossuet,  perhaps  the  most 
illuotiious  of  French  preachers  and  prelates,  lay  dying  in  great  suffering  and  prostration, 
one  who  was  present  thanked  him  for  all  his  kindness,  and,  using  the  court  language 
of  the  day,  begged  him  when  in  another  world  to  think  of  the  friends  that  were  so 
devoted  to  his  person  and  reputation.  At  this  last  word  ("reputation"),  Bossuet,  who 
had  almost  lost  the  power  of  speech,  raised  himself  from  the  bed,  and  gathered  strength 
to  say,  not  witho  t  indignation,  "  Don't  talk  like  that  I  Ask  God  to  forgive  a  sinner 
his  sins."  Yes;  that  is  the  Christian's  attitude,  that  the  Christian's  spirit,  even  entering 
k«*vea. 


OH.  1. 1—26.]     THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GBNBBAL  OP  PETER.  5i 

"  When  I  dra^r  this  fleeting  breath, 
When  my  eyelids  olora  in  death  .  .  . 
Book  of  Ages,  cleft  for  me. 
Let  me  hide  myself  in  thee." 

IV.  How  DOES  God  inspihb  and  presbbve  thb  hopb?  1.  It  Is  a  hope  that  is  horn 
with  man's  new  birth.  A  ujan  is  an  heir,  by  birth,  of  hia  father's  patrimony ;  a  CKiibtian 
is  an  heir,  by  regeneration,  of  heaven.  (1)  The  godly  man  is  horn  again.  (2)  The 
godly  man  is  born  again  by  the  power  of  Ood.  "  He  begat  ub  again."  (3)  The  godly 
man  is  born  again  by  the  power  of  GoA  through  the  resurrection  of  Christ.  Christ's 
resurrection  is  not  only  a  parable  of  the  higher  life  you  live,  but  it  is  the  power  of  i  t. 
2.  It  is  a  hope  that  is  continued  by  Ood  in  connection  with  a  man's  character.  G"fl, 
as  we  saw,  is  Trustee  of  the  future;  so  is  he  Guardian  of  the  heirs.  They  are:  (1) 
Guarded  by  the  power  of  Ood.  Kept  as  with  a  garrison.  (2)  Guarded  by  the  power 
of  God  through  faith — fidelity  on  man's  part.  Peter  had  at  length  learned  implicitly 
to  trust  Jesus  Christ,  and  to  be  brave  in  fidelity  to  him.  This  is  the  twofold  thought 
of  the  word  "  faith  "  here,  namely,  trust  and  fidelity.  God,  who  is  reserving  heaven  for 
the  redeemed,  is  by  their  faith  training  them  for  heaven.  So  that  the  old  saying  is 
wise  and  good,  "  Heaven  is  a  prepared  place  for  a  prepared  people."  "  It  a  good  land : 
let  us  go  up  and  possess  it." — U.  B.  T. 

Vers.  6,  7. — The  testing  of  religious  faith.  As  we  saw  in  our  exposition  of  the  pre- 
ceding verses,  Peter  taught  that  a  man's  faith,  i.e.  trust  in  Christ  and  fidelity  to  Christ, 
is  a  pledge  of  and  preparation  for  the  heavenly  inheritance.  It  is  a  pledge.  The  example 
of  Columbus  sailing  westward  in  search  of  unknown  America  is  often  and  rightly  quoted 
as  an  instance  of  faith.  The  Christian  man  is  a  spiritual  Columbus,  whose /ai<A  alone 
leads  him  across  mysterious  seas  of  time  to  shores  of  eternity.  Moreover,  faith  ii  a 
preparation  for  that  inheritance ;  for  it  has  been  well  said  that  Faith  and  Hope  and  Love 
are  so  related  that  if  Faith  dies — as,  indeed,  it  does  often  die  first — Hope  and  Love  are 
very  prone  to  say, "  Let  us  also  die  with  her."  Indeed,  the  three  often  perish  hand-in- 
hand.  Therefore  a  man's  faith  is  of  profound  importance  to  him — "precious  faith ;  * 
hence  Peter  touches  here  with  a  strong  hand  the  question  of  tht  testing  of  religious  faith. 

L  That  the  pbocess  of  testing  a  man's  faith  involves  much  pain.  Peter 
gees  souls  rejoicing  in  the  hope  of  heaven — "  wherein  ye  greatly  rejoice  " — and  yet,  by 
this  very  process  of  testing  their  fiiith,  meanwhile,  in  much  pain.  How  much  pain  we 
gather :  1.  From  the  use  of  the  word  that  describes  the  process ;  i.e.  "  temptations  " — 
"  trials."  A  word  that  really  means  "  testing,"  but  that,  because  of  the  usual  nature  of 
testing,  is  a  synonym  for  "  affliction."  Does  not  the  word  "trial"  contain  in  itself 
tears,  battles,  persecutions,  martyrdom,  even  death?  2.  From  the  spirit  in  which 
Peter  says  the  tried  are.  In  heaviness,  in  grief,  sorrowful,  dejected,  heavy-hearted.  3. 
J%e  nature  of  the  element  employed  in  the  process.  Compared  to  fire.  No  material 
element  causes  so  much  pain  as  fire. 

II.  The  process  of  testing  a  man's  faith  is  of  such  untold  worth  as  to 
COMPENSATE  FOE  ALL  SUCH  PAIN.  1.  The  testing  is  only  temporary.  "  For  a  season  "— 
even'  if  lifelong,  the  days  dwindle  to  hours,  etc.  Already  Peter  uses  words  of  retrospect : 
"  ye  have  been,"  etc.  2.  The  worth  of  the  soul  for  which  testing  is  designed.  'J'hough 
not  grammatical,  this  is  application.  "  Much  more  precious  than  gold."  This  is  implied 
that  gold  loses  lustre  and  becomes  worn  out  with  hourly  use.  The  soul  is  imperishable  1 
3.  The  purposes  of  the  process.-  "If  need  be;"  deep,  inevitable,  necessary.  (1)  Try  I  he 
genuineness  of  faith.  OtoA  knows  whether  it  is  genuine.  Men  may  not ;  we  do  not 
frequently.  Chaff  looks  like  wheat ;  hence  the  threshing-floor — the  tribulttm.  GKlt 
locks  like  gold ;  hence  the  crucible.  Devoutness  of  ceremonial,  orthodoxy  of  creed, 
decorum  of  conduct,  look  like  faith ;  and  yet  it  may  be  absent.  (2)  Tend  to  purifi- 
cation. That  is  even  more  merciful.  Remove  alloy  and  dross.  Not  only  detect,  but 
refine.  As  Elizabeth  Browning  says,  "purification  being  the  joy  of  pain."  This  is  the 
Christian  woman's  echo  of  the  conviction  of  the  old  patriarch  of  Uz, "  When  I  am  tried, 
I  shall  come  forth  as  gold."  (3)  Train  for  highest  uses.  Higher  purposes  for  which 
metal  is  designed — keener  furnace,  etc.  The  most  durable  and  precious  metal  in 
ancient  art  was  Corinthian  bronze,  which  was  said  to  have  been  first  obtained,  at  least 
discovered,  by  the  fusing  of  all  precious  metals  when  the  city  of  Corinth  was  burned, 


M  THB  FIRST  EPISTLE  QENERAL  OF  PETER,     [oa.  1. 1— 23. 

Joseph,  David,  Peter,  our  blessed  Lord,  were  most  blessed  products  of  the  experience 
reached  by  the  fiies  of  suffering.  (4)  Lead  to  highest  dtttiny.  Praise ;  honour ; 
glory.— U.  R.  T. 

Ver.  8: — Love — trust — joy.     Here  Is — 

I.  Love  fob  the  nNSBEM.  1.  This  appears  difflctdt.  Many  say, "  If  we  could  only 
hear,  see,  touch  Christ,  we  could  love  him ;  but  it  is  now  beyond  our  power."  Never- 
theless, this  is :  2.  Very  common.  What  is  all  love  for  the  absent  but  love  for  the  unseen  ? 
3.  This  is  possible  to  all  the  highest  forms  of  love.  We  have  historic  heroes  whom  we 
love  (such  as  Melancthon,  Howard,  Henry  Martyn,  Frederick  Robertson)  with  a  much 
higher  form  of  love  than  the  self-seeking  thing  that  often  goes  by  that  name  among 
men.  4.  This  is  a  m^st  blessed  reality  when,  as  with  Christ,  there  can  be  communica- 
tions with  the  Beloved,  even  though  he  be  unseen.  The  unseen  stands  calm  amid  all 
our  rush  of  life,  changeless  amidst  all  our  transition  and  decay.  To  love  him  in  his 
bodily  presence  must  ever  be  to  have  a  love  that  is  limited,  partial,  accidental,  tem- 
porary.   Not  so  if  we  love  "  Christ  in  us  the  Hope  of  glory." 

II.  Tbust  in  the  Beloved.  It  is  certain  there  must  be  some  faith  before  there 
is  any  love,  but  it  is  equally  certain  that  where  there  is  much  love  there  will  be 
increasing  faith.  Love  is  the  basis  of  a  new  and  stronger  faith.  The  vision  of  the  soul 
rises  from  its  affections.  The  anchor  of  faith  has  the  firmest  hold  on  the  shores  of  love ; 
the  roots  of  faith  draw  their  richest  nutriment  from  the  soil  of  love.  Love  Christ  more, 
and  you  will  believe  him  n;ore. 

III.  Jot  m  the  Believkd  akd  the  Beloved.  The  joy  that  Paul  as  well  as  Peter 
knew,  and  that  multitudes  have  pottsessed  as  they  trusted  in  Christ  and  cleaved  to 
Christ  with  their  affections,  is  (1)  the  joy  of  rest ;  (2)  the  joy  of  intercourse.  And  it  is : 
1.  A  joy  that  is  "  unspeakable."  Even  song  cannot  utter  it.  2.  A  joy  noble  now, 
and  destined  to  perpetual  nobleness.  "  Full  of  glory."  There  is  no  mean,  or  base,  or 
decaying  element  in  it.  The  casket,  the  human  heart,  is  indestructible ;  and  the  jewel, 
this  Christly  joy,  is  imperishable. — U.  R.  T. 

Vers.  9 — 12. — Soul-salvaiion.  The  thought  of  soul-salvation  in  these  verses  is  at 
once  deeper  and  broader  than  that  contained  in  ver.  6  of  this  chapter.  There  it  was 
mainly  deliverance  from  evil,  and  deliverance  from  evil  of  the  individual  soul.  Here 
there  is  the  reaching  a  blessed  destiny,  and  that  by  many. 

I.  The  great  woeth  of  soul-salvation.  This  is  seen;  1.  From  the  illustrious 
beings  interested  in  it.  (1)  Prophets.  (2)  Angels.  (3)  Apostles.  (4)  The  Holy  Spirit. 
From  this  it  follows,  first,  that  soul-salvation  is  no  modern  invention,  it  was  known  to 
ancient  prophets ;  no  mean  conception,  it  was  the  theme  of  exalted  angels ;  no  obscure 
drea/m,  it  was  proclaimed  by  well-known  apostles;  no  earth-bom  scheme,  it  was  a 
revelation  of  the  Holy  Spuit.  But  the  worth  of  soul-salvation  is  seen:  2.  By 
our  knowledge  of  the  Saviour  by  whom  salvation  came.  Christ  is  Christianity.  The 
Saviour  is  the  revelation  of  the  worth  of  salvation.  (1)  In  his  sufferings  (ver.  11).  (2) 
In  his  foUowing  glories  (ver.  11) :  his  conquest  of  temptation ;  his  resurrection ;  his 
ascension ;  his  triumphs  by  his  Church ;  the  restitution  of  all  things. 

II.  The  qbadual  development  of  the  revelation  of  soul-salvation.  It  has 
dawned  upon  us  who  now  have  its  noontide  brightness,  just  as  every  day  brightens 
to  noon — gradually.  In  this  passage  we  are  reminded  how  it  was :  1.  Predicted.  By 
prophets  who  were  taught  (I)  gradually  and  separately  j  (2)  often  unconsciously ; 
but  (3)  divinely.  We  have  it  as :  2.  Fully  declared.  It  was  plainly  "  announced " 
and  is  widely  "  preached." 

III.  The  simple  means  or  attaining  soul-sal vation.  "  Faith  "  (ver.  9).  Salvatim 
is  the  thing  we  trust  for,  and  to  which  trust  tends.  It  is  not  only  assent  of  the  mind, 
though  it  is  that.  Nor  only  consent  of  the  heart,  though  it  is  also  that  But  it  is 
response  of  the  will.    "  Believe,  and  be  saved." — U.  B.  T. 

Vers.  13 — 16. — The  call  to  holiness.  Peter  sums  up  as  the  conclusion  from  what  he 
has  just  written  as  to  prophets,  apostles,  angels,  the  very  Spirit  of  Christ  being  deeply 
concerned  in  our  soul-salvation,  "Be  holy."  Holiness  is  salvation.  Just  as  there  is  no 
salvation  for  a  sick  man  but  to  give  him  health,  so  there  is  no  salvation  for  a  ainfu] 


OH.  I.  1—26.]     THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  PETER.  67 


man  but  to  ensure  him  holiness.  Holiness  is  the  supreme  purpose  of  religion.  So 
now,  in  his  own  direct,  glowing,  practical  manner  the  apostle  voices  the  call  of  Gcxi— 
"  Be  holy."     And  in  doing  this  he  sets  forth — 

I.  The  one  Model  and  Motive  of  tkue  holiness.      Does  he  not,  however,  in 

passing,  show  what  is  not  a  standard  of  true  holiness  t     For  he  guards  his  readers 

against  shaping  their  character  by  their  own  past  habits  of  life.     He  gently  recalls  the 

sad  fact  to  them  that  they  had  led  lives  of  vice  and  of  ignorance.     He  warns  them  that 

auch  living  is  altogether  bad ;  it  was  a  life  according  to  lusts,  coarse  and  dark,  of  men, 

not  laws  of  God.     And  he  suggests  to  them  by  the  very  use  of  the  word  "  fashioning," 

which  denotes  what  is  fleeting  and  on  the  surface  (as  when  he  says,  "  the  fashion  of 

this  world,"  the  scenery  of  it,  "  passeth  away  "),  that  a  life  moulded  according  to  the 

vicious  and  ignorant  lusts  of  men  is,  transient,  decaying,  perishing.     Do  not  so  degrade 

<ind  so  destroy  human  nature.     Then  again,  in  passing,  he  shows  what  the  manifes- 

lation  of  true  holiness  will  be.     The  body  of  holiness  is  described  by  Moses  in  the 

Decalogue — the  breath  of  it  is  breathed  by  Jesus  in  the  sermon  on  the  mount.    But 

where  wiU  this  holiness,  this  breathing  body  of  Christian  holiness,  show  itself?    Peter 

answers,  "  Holy  in  all   manner  of  living."     The   word   "  conversation "   means  a 

'•  turning  about,"  and  the  thought  is,  wherever  that  life  turns  in  the  revolutions  of 

daily  history  it  will  be  holy.     Holy  not  in  its  moods,  sentimejits,  religious  rites  alone; 

but  in  its  "  behaviour."     The  holy  man  is  a  revolving  light — a  Ught,  not  with  six 

sides  darkened  and  the  seventh  flashing  some  special  lustre,  but  wherever  he  turns 

translucent  with  the  virtues  of  the  indwelling  Christ.     Of  such  holiness  the  passage 

before  us  gives  the  one  model  and  motive — ^namely,  God.     God  is  the  Model  of  true 

holiness.     "He  which  called."     God  is  the  great  "Caller."    He  cares  to  call,  and  is 

^ver  oallino;.     And  he  is  holy.     And  we  are  called  to  be  holy  like  as  he  is  holy. 

Moreover,  God  is  the  Motive  of  true  holiness.    Not  only  like  as  he  is  holy,  but 

hecause  he  is  holy,  we  are  to  be  holy.     We  notice :  1.  Because  of  God's  nature  it  u 

right  that  man  should  resemble  him.     2.  Because  of  man's  nature  it  is  possible  for 

him  to  resemble  Ood.    And  the  fact  that  we  are  God's  offspring  may  indicate  some 

hope  of  our  having  the  capacity  of  resembling  him.     But  the  incarnation  of  the  Son  of 

Gud  declares  that  man  is  like  God;  and  that  incarnate  life  of  Jesus,  where  the  life  of 

God  was  lived  in  a  human  frame,  its  thoughts  scintillating  in  a  man's  brain,  its 

emotions  vibrating  in  a  man's  heart,  its  character  revealed  in  a  man's  conduct,  is  the 

one  great  warrant  for  the  appeal  made  from  the  nature  of  God  to  the  duty  of  man. 

The  almighty  Ood  says,  "  Be  ye  holy ;  for  I  am  holy."    All  the  forces  of  the  universe, 

all  the  energies  of  God,  are  in  battle  against  sin  and  in  league  with  holiness.     The  oM- 

wise  God  says,  "  Be  ye  holy ;  for  I  am  holy."     He  who  knows  what  man  is  and  what 

man  can  be,  and  what  are  all  the  possibilities  of  woe  or  of  blessedness  throughout 

creation — the  heart-searching,  man-knowing,  hell-knowin;i,  heaven-knowing  God  calls 

us  to  holiness.     The  all-loving  God  says,  "  Be  ye  holy ;  for  I  am  holy."    There  is  no 

true  love  without  holiness,  and  he  who  is  the  Holy  One,  who  is  Love,  yearns  for  us  to 

be  like  him.     Yes,  it  is  written,   "Be  ye  holy."     Peter  was  quodng  Leviticus  or 

Exodus,  or  both,  for  there  it  was  written.     In  that  the  music  of  the  Old  and  New 

Testaments  is  in  unison,  and  not  merely  in  harmony.     But  it  is  written  in  the  stones 

of  Sinai,  and  in  the  flres  of  Sodom,  and  with  the  blood  of  Calvary.   It  is  still  echoing  in 

messages  of  prophets  and  apostles  and  in  the  deathless  words  of  Christ.   It  is  written 

in  all  the  laws  of  nature  which  give  pain ;  and  in  the  moral  realm,  where  is  violence  of 

remorse ;  it  is  written  as  with  pen  of  iron  in  man's  reason,  and  point  of  diamond  dn  bis 

conscience,  "  'Ye  shall  be  holy,  as  I  am  holy." 

II.  Some  of  the  essentials  in  the  puesttit  of  true  holiness.  We  say  "  some," 
because  it  is  not  the  habit  of  Peter  to  deal  exhaustively,  and  we  should  not  expect 
all  to  be  set  out;  and  because  cleaily  all  essentials  are  not  here, though  certainly  those, 
such  as  the  working  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  are  implied.  But  those  that  are  distinctly 
enumerated  are :  1.  Vigorous  intelligence.  "  Gird  up  the  loins  of  your  mind,"  2.  Firm 
self-control.  "  Be  sober."  3.  Thorough  ho^ie.  "  To  the  end ; "  reserved  perfectly  to 
the  limit  of  hope.  (1)  Thorough  in  itself.  To  the  bound  of  hope  ;  no  anxious  dodbt, 
no  fitfulness.  (2)  In  its  object.  The  "grace."  The  gift  of  grace  which  is  being 
brought  to  us  at  the  revelation  of  Christ.  Every  unveiling  of  Christ  brings  grac«  | 
the  last  apocalypse  perfects  the  gift    4.  Filial  obedienos. — U.  B.  T. 


68  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  PETER,     [oh.  i.  1—25. 

Vers.  17 — 21. —  The  awe  of  the  redeemed.  The  one  iujunction  of  this  passage  is, 
"  Pass  your  time  in  fear " — "  the  time  of  your  sojourning."  Peter  had  already 
addressed  them  as  sojourners  as  to  country ;  now  he  addresses  them  as  Bojournerg  in 
this  world  altogether.  "  la  fear"  does  not  mean  in  dread  or  in  terror  ;  that  meaning 
is  contradicted  hy  the  whole  tenor  of  this  Epistle,  and  by  the  very  name  of  God  in  this 
yerse,  "  Father."  "Fear  "  is  synonymous  with  "  piety  "  in  Old  Testament  language, 
and  might  be  rendered  "  reverence,"  or  better  still  by  the  less  frequently  used,  but  fine 
Saxon  word  "  awe."  You  are  in  the  midst  of  great  things,  of  stupendous  realities ; 
cherish  awe.  This  is  not  to  be  a  passing  paroxysm,  but  an  abiding,  settled  habit  of 
soul.     Notice — 

L  The  awe  of  the  bedebmbd  towakds  the  rbdebmino  God.  "If  ye  call  on 
him  as  Father;"  the  call  being,  not  simply  an  appeal,  but  a  claim  of  kindred,  an 
acknowledgment  of  close,  tender,  and  withal  solemnly  responsible  relationship.  The 
relationship  is :  1.  To  the  supremely  impartial  Father.  (Ver.  17.)  2.  To  the 
supremely  omniscient  Judge.  (Ver.  17.)  The  twofold  thought  is  gathered  up  in 
Christ's  cry,  "  0  righteous  Father  1 " 

II.  The  awe  of  the  bedef.med  in  eeoollbotion  of  the  evil  from  which  thbt 
HAVE  been  delivered.  Out  of  what  have  they  been  bought'  and  brought  1  1.  A 
course  of  conduct.  "  Conversation ; "  not  only  the  circle  of  behaviour,  but  centre  of 
motive.  2.  A  course  of  conduct  that  was  evil.  "  Vain."  Frivolous,  empty,  unworthy. 
3.  A  course  of  conduct  that  was  inherited.  "Handed  down."  The  legacy  of  evil  is 
with  some  unchastity,  with  some  insobriety,  with  all  sia.  We  are  the  sons  of  a  slave 
race,  and  tendency  and  imitation  continue  us  in  bondage. 

III.  The  awe  of  the  redeemed  because  of  the  cost  at  which  they  have 
BEEN  emancipated.  Not  silver  and  gold,  that  may  redeem  from  the  brigands,  that 
may  be  the  ransom  of  the  Crusader  king.  But  see  the  cost :  1,  As  revtaled  in  Christ 
Jesus.  "But  with  precious  blood."  The  pouring  forth  of  a  priceless  life.  "As  of  a 
lamb,"  etc.  And  that  priceless  life  the  life  of  a  Spotless  One.  That  mystic  blood 
detaches  us  from  the  dominion  of  sin.  2.  As  felt  by  the  heart  of  the  infinite  Ood. 
"  Foreknown."  Raised  by  God,  who  with  unspeakable  care  felt  that  part  of  himself 
was  there. 

IV.  The  awe  of  the  redeemed  because  of  the  blessedness  to  which  thbt 
ABE  destined.  Faith  and  hope.  Faith  now  in  the  invisible;  hope  of  perpetual 
glory  in  the  Eternal.— U.  R.  T. 

Vers.  22 — 25. — The  life  of  the  Tnte,  and  the  Word  of  truth.  The  direct  precept  of 
this  passage  is,  "  Love  one  another."  Many  other  duties  are  implied  in  the  words  that 
surround  these,  but  the  kernel  of  duty  here  is,  "  Love  one  another." 

I.  Mutual  lovb  a  duty  of  the  pure  and  the  obedient.  "  Seeing  ye  have 
purified  your  souls,  in  your  obedience  .  .  .  unto  unfeigned  love."  The  very  end  and 
purpose  of  becoming  pure,  which  is  only  by  obedience,  is  not  to  be  safe  or  hnppy,  but 
to  be  able  in  the  highest  sense  and  for  ever  to  love,  and  to  live  a  life  of  love  when  it  is 
the  life  of  God.  This  love  is  to  be  unfeigned.  Dissemble  anywhere  rather  than  in  the 
region  of  love.  It  is  counterfeiting  the  coin  of  the  Divine  mint.  This  lovo  is  to  be 
deep — "  from  the  heart ; "  not  of  hand  only,  or  of  purse  only,  or  of  life  only,  but  of  the 
fontal  source  whence  all  activities  and  gifts  will  flow.  This  love  is  to  be  intense — 
"  fervently."  The  powers  are  to  be  on  stretch.  The  harp  only  yields  music  when  itg 
strings  are  tightened  to  their  fullest  tension. 

II.  This  love  and  purity  and  obbdibnoe  are  the  signs  of  a  new  life  which 
EVERT  Christian  is  living.  1.  The  life  is  indeed  new,  for  it  has  o  wondrous  origin. 
"  Begotten  again."  No  stronger  figure  could  tell  of  loftier  thought  and  nobler  affection 
of  the  Christly  man  in  contrast  with  the  meaner  views  and  selfish  aims  of  his  old  life. 
2.  The  life  has  a  wondrous  Originator.    The  quickening  is  from  God. 

III.  The  forces  out  of  which  this  new  life  are  developed.  The  life  of 
holiness  is  developed  from  seed.  It  has  its  origin  in  forces  that  (11  appear  insigni- 
ficant; (2)  are  often  hidden;  (3)  are  vital. 

IV.  The  Word  of  God  re  the  means  by  which  these  forces  operate  on  the 
BBART  OF  MAN.  "  Through  the  Word  of  God."  The  Word  of  God  is  not  the  seed,  but 
(he  vehicle  by  which  the  seed  ia  communicated  to  man.    The  seeds  are  the  thought! 


OB  I.  1—26.]     THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF   PETER.  69 

of  God,  the  truth  of  God ;  and  they  are  seeds  out  of  which  the  life  of  holiness  must 
burst  and  grow.  But  even  the  Word  of  God  that  conveys  these  is  imperishable.  "  It 
liveth  and  abideth."  It  lives  and  continues  to  live,  though  men,  like  the  grass,  perish 
and  pass  away.  This  word  of  "  go«<l  tidings  "  is  preached  to  men.  Amongst  those  to 
whom  it  is  preached,  the  penitent  who  receives  its  pardon,  the  mourner  who  receiveg 
its  consolation,  the  dyins;  who  is  strengthened  by  its  hope,  all  witness  to  us  with 
clear,  convincing  tone,  "  The  Word  of  the  Lord  endureth  for  ever." — U.  B.  T. 

Vers.  1,  2,— Introduction.  I.  Address.  1,  Writer.  "  Peter,  an  apostle  of  Jesua 
C!hrist."  The  name  is  chosen  which  was  most  familiar  to  the  readers.  It  is  also  the 
name  which  belonged  to  him  as  an  apostle.  He  was  commissioned  by  Jesus  Christ  to 
do  imiwrtant  work  for  the  Church,  including  the  composition  of  this  letter.  2.  Readers. 
(1)  The  elect  circumstanticUly,  "  To  the  elect  who  are  sojourners  of  the  Dispersion  in 
Pontus,  Giilatia,  Cappadocia,  Asia,  and  Bithynia."  It  is  in  a  Jewish  mould  that  the 
apostle's  thought  is  cast.  "  Elect,"  "  sojourners,"  "  Dispersion,"  derive  their  meaning 
from  their  application  to  the  Jewish  nation.  There  was  a  national  election  to  the 
occupation  of  the  land  of  Canaan.  Latterly  many  Jews  were  resident  on  foreign  soil, 
while  regarding  Canaan  as  their  fatherland.  In  their  sojourning  condition  they  were 
not  in  close  neighbourhood,  but  were  scattered  among  the  nations.  Christians  have 
inherited  the  title  of  the  "  elect  people."  They  are  in  the  condition  of  dwelling  on 
earth  and  not  in  the  heavenly  Canaan.  As  away  from  home  they  are  often  far  sepa- 
rated from  each  other,  and  not,  as  they  will  be,  brought  together  and  gathered  round 
Christ  above.  The  Christians  addi'essed  by  Peter  belonged  to  Aiia  Minor.  In  this 
region  there  were  many  Christian  communities,  in  which  the  preponderating  element 
was  Gentile.  In  Galatia  there  were  Churches  founded  by  Paul,  to  which  he  addressed 
one  of  his  Epistles.  In  Proconsular  Asia  were  Iconium,  Derbe,  Lystra,  Antioch  (Pisi- 
dian),  Miletus,  Laodicea,  Hierapolis,  Colossae,  Philadelphia,  Sardis,  Thyatira,  Ephesug 
(the  capital),  Smyrna,  Pergamos,  Troas,  where  (probably)  Churches  were  formed  under 
Paul's  influence,  and  to  three  of  which  he  addressed  letters.  Neither  in  Pontus,  nor 
in  Cappadocia,  nor  in  Bithynia  do  we  read  of  Christian  work  (showing  how  much  there 
is  of  unrecorded  Christian  work).  We  may  think  of  Peter  writing  to  Pauline  Churches 
in  Asia  Minor  when  Paul  is  dead.  (2)  The  elect  fundamentally.  Thought  connected 
with  the  Father.  "  According  to  the  foreknowledge  of  God  the  Father."  Our  election 
is  conformed  to  the  foreknowledge  of  Ood,  i.e.  to  his  thinking  of  us  beforehand  for 
himself.  What  led  him  thus  to  think  of  us  beforehand  was  his  being  the  Father,  ijt. 
his  being  essentially  love.  Execution  connected  with  the  Spirit.  "In  sanctification 
of  the  Spirit."  Sanctification  points  to  our  being  fit  for  lellowshii)  with  the  Holy 
One.  This  the  Father  had  in  his  mind  when  he  thought  of  us  beforeland  for  himself. 
The  Spirit  (often  called  the  Holy  Spirit)  carries  out  the  Father's  thought  in  com- 
mencing, advancing,  preserving,  the  holy  life  in  our  souls.  End  connected  with  Jesus 
Christ.  "Unto  obedience  and  sprinkling  of  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ."  The  Spirit 
works  in  us,  on  the  one  hand,  not  that  our  wills  should  be  crushed,  annihilated,  but 
that  they  should  be  brought  into  a  state  of  obedience  (which  is  their  true  freedom). 
He  works  in  us,  on  the  other  hand,  that  there  should  be  applied  to  us  the  hlood  of 
Jesus  Christ,  without  which  he  cannot  sanctify  those  whose  starting-point  is  a  state 
of  sin. 

II.  Salutation.  "  Grace  to  you  and  peace  be  multiplied."  The  introduction  is 
constructed  so  as  to  throw  the  description  of  the  readers  into  prominence  as  fore- 
shadowing the  thought  of  the  Epistle.  Like  his  description  of  himself,  his  salutation 
is  brief.  Lot  them  be  graciously  dealt  with  by  God,  and,  as  the  blessed  fruit  of 
gracious  dealing,  let  them  have  peace,  even  under  flery  persecutions.  They  had  grace 
and  pcface  already ;  let  there  be  not  only  continuance,  but  increase. — R.  P. 

Vers.  3—12. — Salvation  in  its  completion.  I.  The  subject  of  a  doxoloot.  1. 
Ood  praised.  "  Blessed  be  the  God  and  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  Peter  may 
have  seen  the  same  form  of  words  in  Paul's  opening  doxologies  in  2  Corinthians  and 
Ephesians.  Having  called  up  his  reaflers  before  his  mind  and  saluted  them,  he  here 
bursts  forth  in  an  ascription  of  praise  to  God.  To  praise  God  is  with  becoming  feeliTi?!! 
to  acknowledge  what  he  is  or  li;\-  done.      As  this  is  (.hariiiig  to  Gud  (Ps  1.  23),  >c  ulsu. 


60  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  PETER,     [oh.  i.  1—25. 

if  we  are  much  exercised  oa  what  God  is  or  has  done,  it  is  a  relief  and  delight  to  u». 
It  is  not  the  God  of  Christ  (as  the  language  might  seem  to  imply)  that  is  here  praised, 
but  God  generally.  It  is  the  exalted  Kame  that  is  fitte"!  to  call  forth  all  sacred  feel- 
ings. But  there  is  added  the  Christian  interpretation.  "We  praise  "  the  Father  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ."  We  praise  Jesris  Christ,  who,  according  to  Divine  appointment, 
did  saying  work  for  us.  We  praise  him  as  our  Lord  who  receives  our  service  for  God 
End  dispenses  to  us  the  Divine  blessings  of  salvation.  We  praise  not  only  him,  but  his 
Father,  who,  in  the  incarnation  of  the  Son  and  atonement  made  by  him  in  his  death, 
has  shown  us  Fatherly  love.  2.  God  praised  for  his  mercy.  "  Who  according  to  his 
great  mercy."  The  Pauline  expression  is  "  God  who  is  rich  in  mercy "  (Eph.  ii.  4). 
Mercy  has  been  called  the  internal  impulsive  cause  of  salvation.  It  was  mercy  which 
moved  God  to  come  to  our  help  in  our  misery.  Mercy  up  to  the  measure  of  the 
human  would  have  been  insufhcient  as  a  cause.  For  we  rose  up  before  his  mind  as 
those  who  had  rebelled  against  his  authority  and  brought  on  our  own  misery.  But 
"  let  us  fall  now  into  the  hand  of  the  Lord ;  for  his  mercies  are  gi'eat :  and  let  me  not 
fall  into  the  hand  of  man."  It  was  mercy  up  to  the  measure  of  the  Divine — great 
beyond  all  measurement — that  led  to  our  being  rescued.  3.  Qod  praised  for  his 
mercy  in  legetting  us  again  unto  a  life  of  hope.  "  Begat  us  again  unto  a  living  hope." 
Ptter  appears  here  as  the  apostle  of  hope,  as  Paul  is  the  apostle  of  faith  and  John  the 
apostle  of  love.  Regeneration  has  been  called  the  formal  cause  of  salvation.  The 
mercy  of  God  moved  him  to  put  forth  creative  power  upon  us  so  as  to  bring  us  into  a 
new  relation  to  himself,  and  give  us  the  commencement  of  a  new  life  (Eph.  ii.  5). 
This  life  is  meantime  a  life  of  hope.  What  we  were  born  out  of  was  a  state  of  hope- 
lessness (Eph.  ii.  12)  ;  what  we  are  born  into  is  a  state  of  hope,  and  a  state  in  which 
hope  is  "living,"  i.e.  instinct  with  life,  fuU  of  energy,  able  to  bear  up  the  spirit,  able 
to  resist  decay.  4.  God  praised  for  his  thus  begetting  us  hy  means  of  the  resurrection 
of  Christ.  "  By  the  resunection  of  Jesus  Christ  from  the  dead."  Peter  goes  beyond 
the  meritorious  cause  of  our  salvation  in  Christ's  death,  and  sees  the  power  which  can 
regenerate  in  his  resurrection  (efficient  cause).  Because  he  rose  again  after  being  dead, 
therefore  God  can  pwt  forth  power  upon  dead  hearts,  and  upon  dead  bodies  too,  to 
raise  them  to  newnes.1  of  life.  It  is  not  only  in  the  power  of  Christ's  resurrection  that 
we  live,  but  also  that  our  life  is  a  life  of  hope.  We  see,  in  the  fact  that  our  Head  lives 
with  a  full  and  glorious  life,  what  can  make  our  life  full  and  glorious  too.  5.  God 
praised  for  his  thus  begetting  its  with  a  view  to  an  inheritance.  (1)  The  inheritance 
in  its  peculiar  nature.  "  Unto  an  inheritance  incorruptible,  and  undefiled,  and  that 
fadeth  not  away."  The  inheritance  is  the  final  cause  of  salvation.  It  is  the  objective 
appointment  corresponding  to  the  subjective  hope.  "  As  long  as  we  journey  we  have 
the  living  hope ;  when  the  journey  is  finished  the  living  hope  becomes  the  promised 
Inheritance."  Here  again  the  Jewish  colouring  of  Peter's  thought  appears.  As  the 
elect  people,  we  have  an  inheritance  (an  apportioned  possession),  such  as  the  land  of 
Canaan  was  to  look  forward  to.  The  Canaan  condition  represented  rest,  satisfaction, 
in  comparison  with  the  wilderness  condition.  In  describing  the  antitype  of  the  land 
of  Canaan,  Peter  proceeds  not  jrositively,  but  hy  negation.  It  is  an  inheritance  not 
subject  to  corruption.  The  fruits  of  the  earthly  Canaan,  however  good,  perished  with 
the  using ;  not  so  the  fruits  of  the  heavenly  Canaan.  It  is  an  inheritance  not  suscep- 
tible of  defilement.  The  earthly  Canaan,  though  sacred,  could  be  defiled  (Jer.  ii.  7) ; 
not  so  the  heavenly  Canaan.  It  is  an  inheritance  that  fadeth  not  away.  The  flowers 
of  the  earthly  Canaan  soon  faded  away ;  not  so  the  beauty  of  the  heavenly  Canaan. 
Thus  by  three  negatives  does  he  magnify  the  inheritance.  (2)  The  inheritance  in  its 
present  relation  to  us.  The  inheritance  reserved  for  the  heirs,  "  Reserved  in  heaven 
for  you."  Far  separated  from  us,  it  is  beyond  the  perils  of  earth,  and  is  inalienable 
from  us.  The  heirs  guarded  for  the  inheritance.  "  Who  by  the  power  of  God  are 
guarded  through  faith  unto  a  salvation  ready  to  be  revealed  in  the  last  time."  We 
are  safe  guarded  as  in  a  citadel.  That  which  guards  us  is  the  power  of  God,  so  that 
it  b  active  toward  us.  That  by  means  of  which  the  power  of  God  guards  us  is  our 
faith,  so  that  we  are  not  to  be  inactive  toward  God.  That  toward  which  the  power  of 
God  guards  us  is  our  salvation  in  its  completion,  which  is  not  the  inheritance,  but 
rather  tbe  condition  of  the  inheritance  (to  be  interpreted  by  reference  to  the  Israelites, 
who,  when  their  salvation  was  c-on'.pleted,  enjoyed  the  possession  of  the  land  of  Canaan). 


OH.1. 1— 25.]     THE   FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF   PETBB.  61 

This  Balvation  is  viewed  as  hidden,  but  already  In  existence,  only  wwting  Qod'g  tinie 
for  its  revelation,  which  is  not  to  be  till  the  last  time  (also  hidden). 

II.  The  soueoe  of  jot  in  its  completion.  1.  The  last  time  is  associated  with 
joy.  "  Wherein  ye  greatly  rejoice."  Peter  has  a  way  of  moving  from  one  section  to 
another  by  catching  up  the  last  word.  The  preceding  section  concluded  with  the 
words  "  in  the  last  time ; "  this  section  commences  with  the  words  "  in  which,"  i.e. 
in  which  last  time.  If  "  in  "  retains  the  same  force  (which  is  only  natural),  then  the 
present  tense  following  comes  to  have  (as  it  sometimes  has)  the  force  of  a  future. 
This  view  greatly  helps  to  clear  up  the  thought  in  this  section.  The  use  of  the 
present  in  this  way  has  the  effect  of  "emphasizing  the  certainty  of  the  future  joy." 
In  the  last  time  we  are  greatly  to  rejoice  (originally,  "  dance  for  joy  ").  We  are  to 
have  a  joy  which  cannot  be  repressed,  but  must  find  expression  in  outward  signs  of 
triumph.  2.  The  present  time  may  be  associated  with  being  put  to  grief.  "  Though  now 
for  a  little  while,  if  need  he,  ye  have  been  put  to  grief  in  manifold  temptations." 
Instead  of  rejoicing  (as  we  shall  do  in  the  future),  we  may  now  be  put  to  grief.  The 
being  put  to  grief  is  regarded  as  iirom  without.  The  grief  arises  within  us  from  temp- 
tations, which  we  may  think  of  as  events  of  an  inverse  nature.  Those  make  an 
assault  on  us,  and,  from  our  imperfect  spiritual  life,  would  lead  us  into  sin.  It  is  said 
in  2  Tim.  iii.  12,  "  Yea,  and  all  that  would  live  godly  in  Christ  Jesus  shall  suffer  per- 
secution." There  are  events  in  the  lives  of  us  all  that,  instead  of  making  us  sad, 
make  us  glad.  But  none  of  us  are  exempted  from  the  comiog  on  us  of  sorrowful  events. 
If  they  do  come,  there  is  a  "  need  be  "  for  them.  As  our  needs  are  manifold,  so  tha 
temptations  appointed  for  ns  as  suited  to  them  are  manifold  too.  The  view  that  the 
apostle  has  rsfeience  to  future  joy  is  confirmed  by  the  language  here.  For  first, 
the  being  put  to  grief  in  manifold  temptations  is  regarded  retrospectively.  Looking 
back  fi'om  the  time  of  rejoicing,  it  is  said,  "  Ye  have  been  put  to  grief."  Again,  the 
"  little  while  "  has  its  due  force  only  when  compared  with  the  length  of  the  future  joy. 
3.  I%e  end  sought  in  our  now  being  put  to  grief  is  the  joy  ^future  recognition. 
"  That  the  proof  of  your  faith,  being  more  precious  than  gold  that  perisheth  though 
it  is  proved  by  fire,  might  be  found  unto  praise  and  glory  and  honour."  We  are  not 
to  think  here  of  the  putting  to  proof,  nor  of  the  means  of  proof  (untoward  events), 
but  of  the  approving  that  comes  out  in  the  result.  What  comes  out  in  faith,  when 
brought  into  contact  with  temptations,  is  its  sincerity  and  its  strengthening.  Faith 
thus  sincere  and  strengthened  is  more  precious  than  perishable  gold :  are  we  to  wonder 
at  the  treatment  being  similar  ?  GK>ld  is  subjected  to  fire  for  the  purpose  of  being 
tested  and  purified :  shall  not  imperishable  faith  be  similarly  tested  and  purified  ? 
"  Gold  is  committed  to  the  fire,  not  for  its  destruction,  but  for  glory; "  so  our  faith, 
after  having  passed  through  "  fiery  trial,"  as  the  result  of  judicial  investigation,  is  to 
be  "  found  unto  praise  and  glory  and  honour."  There  b  an  accumulation  of  words  to 
bring  out  what  there  will  be,  in  contrast  with  the  present  needful  fire,  to  make  us 
glad.  4.  Our  joy  will  be  completed  at  the  revelation  of  Jesus  Christ.  (1)  What  there 
is  in  the  revelation  of  Jesus  Christ  to  give  us  Joy.  "  At  the  revelation  of  Jesus  Christ." 
In  2  Tim.  i.  12  there  is  reference  to  the  first  "  appearing  of  our  Saviour  Christ  Jesus ; " 
the  reference  here  is  to  his  second  appearing,  for  which  Peter  uses  what  Trench  calls  the 
grander  word  (grand  as  "  appearing  "  is).  There  was  revelation  in  his  first  appearing. 
There  was  a  bringing  out  into  accomplished  fact  of  the  hidden  counsel  of  God.  It  was 
made  clear  how  God  was  to  proceed  in  laying  the  foundation  of  human  salvation.  In 
the  Incarnation  we  have  the  essential  revelation.  But  even  in  revealing  Jesus  Christ 
was  hidden.  It  was  not  known  what  depth  of  love  there  was  in  his  heart,  and  what 
glory  properly  belonged  to  him.  His  revelation  will  be  a  joyful  event,  because  it  will 
be  the  full  disclosure  of  his  grace,  with  such  glorious  accompaniment  as  is  fitted  to  exalt 
Urn  as  Saviour.  (2)  The  foregoing  conditions  of  joy  at  the  revelation  of  Jesus  Christ. 
{a)  Love.  "  Whom  not  having  seen  ye  love."  Peter  was  not  among  those  who  had 
not  seen  Christ ;  he  therefore  does  not  include  himself.  We  are  told  of  one  who  had 
three  wishes — that  he  had  seen  our  Lord  in  the  flesh,  that  he  had  heard  Paul  preach, 
and  that  he  had  seen  Some  in  its  glory.  There  is  a  certain  advantage  to  our  loving  in 
our  standing  at  a  distance  from  our  Lord's  day.  We  stand  dear  of  prejudices  con- 
nected with  our  having  seen  him ;  and  we  have  all  the  facts  before  us,  so  that  we  can 
form  an  accurate  conception  of  what  he  was  and  did.     If  we  get  at  th«  meaning  of 


«2  THE   FTRST  EPISTLB  GENERAL  OF  PETER,      [ch.  1. 1— 25. 

these  facts,  and  have  our  hearts  touched  with  love  to  him,  then  the  first  condition  is 
fulfilled  of  our  havin^;  joy  at  his  revelation.  (5)  Faith.  "  On  whom,  though  now  ye 
see  him  not,  yet  believing."  A  point  hai  been  raised  regarding  love  coming  here 
before  belief.  "  Why  is  the  natural  order  of  things  rever.sed  ?  How  can  we  love  before 
we  believe?  Must  we  not  first  feel  convinced  of  the  reality  of  Christ  and  the  genuine- 
ness of  bis  claims?  Must  we  not  on  this  conviction  trust  him,  and  so  have  love 
generated  in  our  souls?"  The  answer  given  is  that  "in  the  history  of  a  soul's  coming 
to  Christ  we  are  touched  by  the  narrative  of  his  sufferings,  or  stirred  by  an  appeal,  or 
moved  by  the  grandeur  of  "some  utterance,"  and  thus  are  led  on  to  .the  more  difficult 
exercise  of  trust.  It  may  be  said  that  love  is  mentioned  first  as  lying  near  to  our 
rejoicing  as  it  ever  will  do.  It  would  be  an  advantage  if  (prejudice  aside  and  an 
imperfect  conception  aside)  we  saw  the  Object  of  our  love.  The  present  substitute  foi 
seeing  is  believing.  We  are  to  have  Uving  intercourse  \dth  an  unseen  Saviour  until, 
to  the  great  advantage  of  our  love  and  also  of  our  joy,  our  faith  becomes  sight.  (3) 
ffow  ow  Joy  at  the  revelation  of  Jesus  Christ  is  characterized,  (a)  As  transcendently 
excellent,  "  Ye  rejoice  greatly  with  joy  imspeakable  and  full  of  glory."  The  present 
tense  is  again  used  with  the  force  of  a  future.  When  at  the  revelation  of  Jesus  Christ, 
with  hearts  full  of  love  to  him,  we  see,  our  joy  will  be  unspeakable.  "  For  I  know 
that  my  Redeemer  liveth,  and  that  he  shall  stand  at  the  latter  day  upon  the  earth : 
and  though  after  my  skin  worms  destroy  this  body,  yet  in  my  flesh  shall  I  see  God  : 
whom  I  shall  see  for  myself,  and  mine  eyes  shall  behold,  and  not  another."  What  a 
joy  to  look  upon  him,  then,  in  the  human  nature  which  he  took  upon  him  I  to  look 
upon  him  with  the  marks  testifying  to  the  mysterious  sufferings  through  which  he 
came  1  to  look  upon  him  finally  triumphing  over  sin  and  death !  It  will  be  unspeak- 
able experience  of  joy  added  to  experience  of  joy  beyond  all  power  of  expression.  It 
will  be  as  if  the  joy  of  a  lifetime  were  concentrated  into  a  moment.  It  will  also  be 
full  of  glory,  the  joy  of  a  glorified  spirit  in  a  glorified  body  in  presence  of  the  glory  of 
the  Redeemer.  (6)  As  faith's  retoard  in  the  soul's  experience.  "  Receiving  the  end  of 
your  faith,  even  the  salvation  of  your  souls."  The  revelation  of  Jesus  Christ  is  to  be 
the  time  for  distributing  rewards.  What  we  are  to  receive  as  our  reward  is  not  apart 
from  our  foregoing  faith ;  it  is  its  goal.  Faith  is  the  principle  of  life :  the  soul  is  the 
subject  of  the  life,  which  is  to  be  saved  or  lost.  When  Christ  makes  our  faith  issue  in 
our  emancipation  from  all  sin  and  imperfection  and  in  the  vigorous  exercise  of  all  our 
powers,  our  joy  will  be  complete. 

III.  Thb  subject  of  nnjuiBT  bt  prophets  and  anoels.  1.  Prophets.  (1)  Their 
private  desire  and  public fimction.  "  Concerning  which  salvation  the  prophets  sought 
and  searched  diligently,  who  prophesied  of  the  grace  that  should  come  unto  you." 
Salvation,  carried  forward  from  the  preceding  section,  must  continue  to  have  the  sense 
of  completed  salvation.  It  is  a  magnifying  of  this  salvation  that  prophets  had  to  do  with 
privately  and  publicly.  They  are  mentioned  here  as  a  great  order.  They  had  their 
private  exercises.  Concerning  the  salvation  they  "sought  and  searched  diligently." 
There  is  the  idea  of  intensified  search  in  both  verbs.  If  there  is  a  distinction,  the  one 
may  refer  more  to  the  enrf,  and  the  other  to  the  means.  They  eagerly  tried  to  grasp 
what  the  full  salvation  was  to  be.  The  remarkable  thing  is  that  their  private  desire 
was  in  connection  with  their  public  function,  which  is  here  defined  as  a  telling  before- 
hand of  the  grace  that  was  to  come  to  men  in  Christian  times.  What  they  were  eager 
to  find  out  was  the  Christian  elements  contained  in  the  salvation.  This  is  pointed  to  in 
grace,  which  is  to  be  referred  to  that  on  which  salvation  depends,  and  by  which  also  it 
is  eharactered.  There  was  a  display  commencing  with  the  incarnation  of  the  Son  of 
God  on  our  behalf,  which  certainly  was  not  due  to  our  merit,  but  only  to  grace.  There 
is  additional  grace  in  our  living  in  Christian  times.  (2)  To  what  their  inquiry  was 
directed.  "  Searching  what  time  or  what  manner  of  time  the  Spirit  of  Christ  which  was 
in  them  did  point  unto,  when  it  testified  beforehand  the  sufferings  of  Christ,  and  the 
glories  that  should  follow  them."  The  latter  of  the  verbs  is  here  continued  (not  in  the 
Intensive  form).  Their  search  was  directed  to  two  connected  points — time  and  manner 
of  time.  This  must  be  referred  to  Messianic  time  and  circumstance  as  giving  a  gracious 
character  to  the  salvation.  How  were  they  led  to  think  of  a  salvation  connected  with 
Christian  facts  ?  In  a  very  direct  way — ^the  Spirit  of  Christ  was  in  them.  It  was  this 
that  made  the  prophets  a  great  order ;  and  yet  in  this  respect  they  were  not  entirely 


OH.  1.1— 25.]     THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PETER.  63 

removed  from  ua,  for  in  Bom.  tUL  9  it  is  said  of  ua  that  we  have  the  Spirit  of  Christ. 
The  Spirit  of  Christ  was  in  them  to  fit  them  for  their  prophetic  function.  The 
language  is  remarkable  as  pointing  to  the  pre-existence  of  Christ,  and  also  to  the  Spirit 
in  the  prophets  as  proceeding,  not  directly  from  the  Father,  but  from  the  Son,  and  the 
Son  that  was  to  be  incarnate.  The  language  is  also  to  be  noted  as  explaining  the 
private  desire  of  the  prophets.  If  they  had  been  uttering  their  own  thoughts,  they 
would  have  understood  them ;  but  as  they  were  uttering  the  thoughts  of  the  Spirit  of 
Christ,  they  had,  as  well  as  other  men,  to  set  themselves  to  understand  them.  Tlie 
matter  of  revelation  was  closely  related  to  the  Revealer.  It  was  a  testifying  beforehand 
to  the  sufferings  of  Christ  (destined  for  Christ),  and  the  glories  that  should  follow  them. 
There  was  a  time  when  Peter  did  not  see  what  he  here  sets  down.  His  mind  was  full 
of  the  triumphs  of  the  Messiah,  but  not  of  the  triumphs  as  founded  on  sufferings.  "  Be 
It  far  £rom  thee.  Lord;  this  shall  not  be  unto  thee."  Since  that  time  he  had  read 
prophecy  in  another  light.  "0  fools,  and  slow  of  heart  to  believe  all  that  the  prophets 
have  spoken  1  Ought  nut  Christ  to  have  suffered  these  things,  and  to  enter  into  his 
glory  ?  And  beginning  at  Moses  and  all  the  prophets,  he  expounded  unto  them  in  all 
the  Scriptures,  the  things  concerning  himself."  The  sufferings  of  Christ  reached  their 
climax  in  his  death ;  the  glories  of  Christ  began  witli  his  resuriection,  and  cannot  be  s  dd 
to  have  yet  reached  then-  climax.  The  plural  indicates  that,  as  there  was  a  plenitude 
of  suffering,  so  there  will  also  be  a  plenitude  of  glory.  Our  salvation  cannot  be  appre- 
hended aright  apart  from  lx>th  Christ's  sufferings  and  glories.  Both  enter  into  it  to 
give  it  character.  We  are  saved  not  only  in  virtue  of  Christ's  death,  but  also  in  virtue 
of  Christ's  trinmph.  (3)  Favoured  position  of  men  in  Christian  times.  As  ministered 
to  hy  prophets.  "  To  whom  it  was  revealed,  that  not  unto  themselves,  but  tmto  you, 
did  they  minister  these  things."  It  was  revealed  to  prophets  that  the  things  which 
they  announced  beforehand  would  not  be  fulfilled  in  their  day.  They  had  application 
not  to  themselves,  but  to  others.  This  was  not  altogether  repressing  so  far  as  they 
were  concerned.  It  set  their  mind  at  rest  for  their  own  day ;  and  for  the  future 
they  could  still  closely  examine  their  own  words,  and  try  to  form  some  conception 
of  what  gospel  realities  were  to  be.  Picturing  the  gospel  day  as  well  ai  they  could, 
they  would  look  forward  to  it  with  longing  desire.  It  was  honouring  so  far  as 
Christian  l)elievers  were  concern'-d.  Prophets,  in  what  they  said  of  the  gospel  day, 
had  been  ministering  unto  them.  A$  ministered  to  by  apostles.  "  Which  now  have 
been  announced  unto  you  through  them  that  preached  the  gospel  nnto  you  by  the 
Holy  Ghost  sent  forth  from  heaven."  The  same  things  which  had  been  annourced 
beforehand  had  then  been  announced  as  fulfilled.  The  announcers  were  the  apostles. 
They  also  are  a  great  order  having  to  do  with  salvation — "  the  glorious  company  of 
the  apostles."  Their  function  was  to  preach  the  gospel,  i.e.  the  message  of  salva- 
tion, but  connected  with  the  facts  of  Christ  having  come  into  the  world,  having 
suffered,  and  thereafter  passing  into  heaven.  They  were  fitted  for  their  work  Aot  other- 
wise than  were  the  prophets.  It  is  not  said  that  the  Spirit  of  Christ  was  in  them ;  but 
the  Holy  Spirit  by  whose  influence  they  were  moved  in  their  preaching  is  represented 
as  sent  forth  iiom  heaven,  i.e.  as  following  on  Christ's  going  into  heaven.  As  thus 
endowed,  they  could  preach  the  gospel  with  proper  unction,  and  unerringly.  We  have 
not  the  presence  of  the  apostles;  but  we  have  many  of  those  statements  of  truth 
which,  under  the  guidance  of  the  Spirit,  they  omitted.  2.  Angels.  "  Which  things 
angels  desire  to  look  into."  This  is  a  third  great  order  connected  with  salvation.  The 
things  announced  by  apostles  which  before  had  been  predicted,  i.e.  gospel  facts  which 
give  meaning  to  salvation,  angels  desire  to  look  into.  "  God  manifest  in  the  flesh  "  was 
"  seen  of  angels."  While  the  mystery  was  being  evolved  they  were  held  in  rapt  wonder. 
What  is  here  said  has  reference  to  an  after-period.  After  Christ  has  undergone  "  the 
sufiering  of  death,"  and  passed  into  glory,  they  are  still  occupied  with  inquiring  into  th« 
meaning  of  the  facts.  The  language  is  remarkable.  Angels  desire  to  bend  aside, «'.«.  from 
matters  properly  belonging  to  them,  to  examine  into,  i.e.,  matters  belonging  properly  to 
men.  Whatever  happens  under  the  government  of  God  cannot  but  be  interesting  to  tliem. 
They  are  profoundly  interested  in  the  facts  pertaining  to  human  salvation  as  throwing  a 
new  and  powerful  light  on  the  character  of  God,  and  opening  up  to  them  therewith  a  new 
and  higher  life.  For  although  they  cannot  undergo  the  saving  change,  yet  they  can  take 
the  great  facts  of  the  gospel  into  them  for  their  spiritual  nourishment  and  growth. — B.  F. 


64  THE  PIEST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PETEB.      [oh.  1. 1— 2& 


Vers.  13 — 25. — The  pOgrim-life.  I.  Peeparedness.  1.  Unity  of  the  energies. 
"  Wherefore  girding  up  the  loins  of  yoar  mind."  The  apostle  has  been  dwelling  on  the 
bright  future  before  the  people  of  God,  We  are  pilgrims  on  our  way  to  our  inheritance. 
It  becomes  us  there/ore  to  gird  up  the  loins  of  our  mind.  It  belongs  to  the  richness  of 
our  endowment  that  there  are  strong  forces  in  our  nature.  But  these  are  naturally  in 
a  state  of  dispersion.  We  are  like  travellers  with  loose  flowing  robes  which  form  an 
impediment  in  walking.  We  need  to  gird  up  the  loins  of  our  mind — ^to  gather  up  our 
scattered  energies,  to  unite  them  in  a  common  bond  for  the  accomplishment  of  a  com- 
mon end.  For  this  there  is  needed  a  vigour  of  will  which  is  by  no  means  common. 
There  is  a  Chinese  proverb  which  says,  "Most  men  have  passions,  strong  men  have  wills." 
We  are  not  to  allow  ourselves  to  be  swayed  by  alternate  passions,  which  counteract 
one  another  and  involve  loss  of  force.  We  need  all  the  vigour  we  can  command  for 
sustaining  us  in  the  accomplishment  of  our  arduous  journey,  in  the  execution  of  our 
difficult  plan.  It  has  been  pointed  out  that  even  for  success  in  an  evil  undertaking 
there  is  needed  an  haxmonious  character,  or  agreement  of  the  powers.  And  men  have 
sometimes  failed  in  their  evil  schemes  just  because  they  have  not  been  bad  enough ; 
there  has  been  some  better  feeling  of  their  nature  drawing  them  back  (Macbeth).  For  all 
success  we  must  be  able  to  say  with  Pavd,  "  This  one  thing  I  do."  It  is  to  be  observed 
that  the  language  here  comes  with  a  special  appropriateness  from  Peter,  to  whom 
were  spoken  the  words  of  destiny,  "  When  thou  wast  young,  thon  ^dedst  thyself,  and 
walkedst  whither  thou  wouldest :  but  when  thou  shalt  be  old,  thou  shalt  stretch  forth 
thy  hands,  and  another  shall  gird  thee,  and  carry  thee  whither  thou  wouldest  not."  2. 
Sobriety.  "Be  sober."  "Peter  commands,"  says  Calvin,  "not  merely  moderation  in 
eating  and  drinking,  but  spiritual  sobriety  rather,  when  we  shut  in  all  our  senses,  that 
they  do  not  intoxicate  themselves  with  the  unlawful  things  of  this  world."  The 
sobriety  here  enjoined  has  a  natural  association  with  wakefulness,  being  a  condition  of 
wakeftuness.  Hence  Paul  says,  "  Let  us  watch  and  be  sober."  As  thus  associated 
with  wakefulness,  it  naturally  follows  on  girding  up  the  loins.  Hence  the  Master  says, 
"  Let  your  loins  be  girded  about,  and  your  lamps  burning."  We  are  not  to  allow  the 
pleasures  of  the  world  to  bring  us  into  a  state  of  unnatural  excitement  or  of  stupor ;  but 
we  are  so  to  sober  ourselves  with  all  sobering  thought  (such  as  the  vanity  of  worldly 
pleasure,  the  shortness  of  time)  as  that  with  a  dear  head  we  can  discern  the  way  we  are 
taking,  and  the  end  to  which  it  leads.  3.  Ebpe.  "  And  set  your  hope  perfectly  on  the 
grace  that  is  to  be  brought  unto  you  at  the  revelation  of  Jesus  Christ."  Stress  is  laid  in 
this  verse  on  the  exercise  of  hope.  There  are  various  degrees  in  which  it  maj'  exist. 
We  are  to  aim  at  exercising  it  perfectly.  One  aspect  of  the  perfectness  is  brought  out 
in  the  old  translation, "  Hope  to  the  end."  To  be  thus  enduring  it  must  be  vigorous,  con- 
quering. The  ground  of  hope  on  our  part  is  grace  on  the  part  of  God.  Grace  has 
already  been  brought  unto  us  in  our  election  (ver.  1) ;  it  is  to  be  signally  brought  unto 
as  at  the  revelation  of  Jesus  Christ.  What  we  hops  for  from  grace  is  our  inheritance. 
When  Christ  is  to  be  glorified  then  are  we  also  to  be  enriched  from  grace.  In  order 
that  our  hope  may  be  perfect  or  abundant  (Rum.  xv.  13),  we  must  not  only  realize  the 
inheritance  as  well  merited  for  us,  but  must  form  some  distinct  conception  of  its  nature. 
This  is  what  Paul  teaches  when  he  thus  prays  for  his  Ephesian  converts,  "  That  the 
God  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  Father  of  glory,  may  give  iinto  you  a  spirit  of  wisdom 
and  revelation  in  the  knowledge  of  him,  having  the  eyes  of  your  heart  enlightened,  that 
ye  may  know  what  is  the  hope  of  his  calling,  what  the  riches  of  the  glory  of  his  inhe- 
ritance in  the  saints."  When  gathering  up  our  energies,  and  sobered  against  the 
blandishments  of  the  world,  we  are  also  sustained  by  hope,  we  are  prepared  for  the 
journey  of  life. 

II.  Fashion.  1.  Not  after  self .  "As  children  of  obedience,  not  fashioning  yourselves 
according  to  your  former  lusts  in  the  time  of  your  ignorance."  The  apostle  proceeds  on 
our  being  children  of  obedience  (ver.  2).  We  are  naturalized  in  obedience,  so  that  we 
have  it  as  our  father.  The  dignity  of  our  nature  lies  in  this,  that  we  are  character- 
making.  We  have  the  power  of  fashioning  ourselves,  leaving  our  own  mark  on  our  nature 
—a  power  not  possessed  by  the  lower  creatures.  We  have  not  the  power  of  adding  any 
new  principle  or  eradicating  any  that  there  is;  for  we  do  not  stand  to  our  nature  as 
creators ;  but  we  can  lead  to  such  a  change  in  ourselves  as  amounts  to  a  second  nature. 
As  children  of  obedience,  we  are  not  to  £uhion  ourselves  as  we  please.    There  is  a  nega- 


OH.1. 1— 25.]     THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  PETER.  65 

tiving  here  of  luBts,  wliich  are  just  self  in  some  fonn  or  other.  If,  like  many  of  thosa 
addressed  in  this  Epistle  (GeutUe  converts),  lusts  once  had  the  fashioning  of  us,  that 
belonged  to  oui  former  life  when  we  were  in  ignorance  of  Divine  things.  Now  that  we 
are  enlightened,  let  them  not  have  the  fashioning  of  us  any  more.  Let  there  not  be 
the  slightest  impress  on  us  from  sensuality,  from  avarice,  from  falseness,  from  pride,  from 
worldhness,  from  ambition,  from  injustice,  from  hatred.  2.  After  Qod.  "  But  like  as  he 
which  called  you  is  holy,  he  ye  yourselves  also  holy  in  all  manner  of  living ;  because  it  is 
written,  Te  shall  be  holy ;  for  I  am  holy."  We  are  to  have  the  Divine  impress  on  us. 
We  are  to  fashion  ourselves  according  to  the  character  of  him  who  called  us  to  be  his 
people.  This  held  under  the  old  covenant.  The  command  laid  repeatedly  on  the 
people  of  God  then  was,  "  Ye  shall  be  holy ;  for  I  am  holy."  As  belonging  to  God  and 
enjoying  many  tokens  of  the  Divine  favour,  it  was  their  duty  to  take  the  fashion  of 
their  life,  not  from  the  heathen  around  them  and  their  pollutions,  but  from  God  and  his 
absolute  holiness.  We  have  come  into  their  privileges,  and  also  their  obligations.  As 
called  by  God  to  a  rich  inheritance  in  the  future,  there  is  for  us  a  Bhall  be,  a  must  It 
holy  in  the  holiness  of  God.  We  are  bound  to  approve  what  he  approves,  to  condemn 
what  he  condemns.  This  obligation  extends  to  every  part  of  our  life.  We  are  to  be 
holy  in  all  manner  of  living.  Whatever  holy  form  there  is  (purity,  generosity,  sin- 
cerity, humility,  spirituality,  earnestness,  honourableness,  gentleness),  we  are  to  impress 
it  on  all  we  think,  and  feel,  and  say,  and  do. 

III.  Feab  ACOOMPANYiNa  THE  piLGKiM-STATE.  1.  FtOT  of  judgment.  "  And  if  ye 
call  on  him  as  Father,  who  without  respect  of  persons  judgeth  according  to  each  man's 
work,  pass  the  time  of  your  sojourning  in  fear."  The  fear  enjoined  here  is  not  the 
feeling  of  reverence  which  we  are  for  ever  to  cherish  toward  God  as  infinitely  exalted 
above  us.  It  is  the  fear  connected  with  our  state  of  sojourning — otir  being  away  for 
a  time  from  the  Father's  house,  the  fear  of  sin  endangering  the  happiness,  if  not  the 
certainty,  of  our  home-going.  "  It  is  not  fear  alone,  or  fear  supreme,  or  fear  thwarting 
or  limiting  love  and  hope  and  joy  that  the  Word  of  God  enjoins,  but  fear  surrounded, 
intertwined,  and  subservient.  Fear  must  be  like  the  sentinel — always  awake,  always 
on  the  alert,  always  faithful,  but  always  aware  that  he  is  neither  general  nor  leader  of 
•ny  kind.  Although  fear  in  itself  and  by  itself  cannot  produce  truly  good  or  spiritually 
right  action,  it  yet  performs  a  vital  function  in  keeping  the  soul  awake.  Fear  rings 
the  alarm-bell  and  rouses  the  conscience.  It  blows  the  trumpet  of  warning.  Where 
the  sense  of  right  is  growing  numb  the  smart  blows  of  fear  bring  it  back  to  conscious- 
ness again.  It  creates  pause  and  opportunity  for  all  better  and  nobler  things  to  make 
themselves  heard.  To  be  regardless  of  dangers  is  to  cut  the  sinews  of  effort"  (Leckie). 
Fear  is  represented  as  springing  out  of  oiu-  view  of  God  as  judging.  His  essential 
relation  to  each  man  (believer  or  not  believer)  is  that  of  Judge.  _  He  judges  without 
respect  of  persons,  i.e.  not  by  appearances,  but  by  the  actual  realities  of  the  case.  He 
judges  according  to  each  man's  work,  i.e.  all  in  which  character  is  displayed.  His  judg- 
ment is  ever  going  forward  along  with  our  work ;  it  is  to  culminate  in  a  pronounced 
judgment  on  our  work  as  completed.  It  is  fitted  to  inspire  us  with  fear,  that  the 
Divine  judgment  accompanies  every  deed.  It  is  fitted  by  itself  to  overwhelm  us  with 
fear,  that  the  Divine  judgment  is  to  be  pronounced  on  our  deeds  as  a  whole.  But  then 
as  believers  we  call  on  (in  our  prayers  acknowledge)  this  Judge  as  our  Father.  That 
does  not  make  his  judgment  free  from  fear.  "  The  judgment  of  a  King  does  not  feel 
half  so  searching  and  painful  as  that  of  a  Father.  It  is  dreadful  to  feel  that  even  love, 
that  even  a  Father's  love,  condemns  me.  But  still  Father  is  Father,  and  the  heart  that 
clings  to  the  word  will  find  enough  in  that  to  keep  the  fear  from  paralyzing  or  even 
depressing  "  (Leckie).  Let  us,  then,  pass  the  time  of  our  sojourning  in  the  fear  of  judg- 
ment. Let  us  not  lull  ourselves  into  a  feeling  of  security.  Let  us  realize  that  there 
are  perils  by  the  way,  and  that  we  must  never  for  a  moment  relax  our  efforts  until  we 
actually  possess  the  inheritance.  2.  Fear  of  redemption.  Two  points  in  analoav 
founded  on.  "  Knowing  that  ye  were  redeemed,  not  with  corruptible  things,  with 
silver  or  gold."  The  first  point  in  the  analogy  is  suggested  in  words  which  follow 
(«  Tain  manner  of  life  ").  The  life  of  a  captive  is  a  vain  manner  of  life,  i.e.  empty  of  the 
activities  and  therefore  the  pleasures  which  belong  to  a  life  of  freedom.  The  second 
point  in  the  analogy  is  brought  out.  The  usual  way  of  redeeming  a  captive  is  by  silver 
or  gold  being  paid  for  him.    The  capti^x  who  has  thus  been  redeemed  has  reason  t» 


ee  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PETER,      [oh.  1. 1—25. 

fuar  first  when  he  thinks  of  the  life  he  has  escaped,  and  also  when  he  thinks  of  the  cost 
of  his  redemption.  (1)  The  fear  of  the  life  escaped.  "  Prom  your  vain  manner  of  life 
handed  down  from  your  fathers."  The  life  of  sin  is  a  vain  manner  of  life,  i.e.  empty  o< 
the  holy  actirities  and  pleasures  which  are  the  contents  of  a  true  life.  The  life  of  sin 
is  here  viewed  as  inherited.  When,  as  in  heathenism,  wrong  ideas  and  customs  are 
handed  down  from  generation  to  generation,  deliverance  presents  appalling  diflSoulty. 
The  redeemed  to  whom  Peter  wrote  had  reason  to  fear,  when  they  saw  in  the  heathen 
around  them  what  they  once  had  been.  When  the  man  rescued  sees  the  bridge  or 
ledge  on  which  he  lately  stood  toppling  into  the  abyss,  his  first  feeling  is  that  of  fear. 
So  have  we  not  reason  to  fear  when  we  think  of  the  life  of  sin  in  which  we  were  once 
involved,  or  when  we  iee  in  the  sinful  lives  of  men  around  us  what  we  might  have 
been  ?  (2)  The  fear  of  the  manner  in  which  redemption  has  heen  effected.  The  cost 
of  redemption.  "  But  with  precious  blood,  as  of  a  lamb  without  blemish  and  without 
spot,  even  the  blood  of  Christ."  We  were  redeemed  not  with  corruptible  things,  but 
with  preaious  Mood  (which  therefore  is  to  be  ranked  with  incorruptible  ihings  and 
marks  incorruptibility  as  a  chief  element  of  the  preciousness).  "  Precious  blood  "  is 
a  description  of  the  blood  of  Christ,  i.e.  of  him  who  was  the  Anointed  of  God  for  his 
redeeming  work.  He  is  here  represented  as  offering  himself  a  sacrifice  in  the  way  of 
redeeming.  The  main  point  in  which  his  sacrifice  differed  from  all  previous  sacrifices 
was  that  it  was  no  mere  prefigurement,  but  was  the  real  transaction  with  God  on  behalf 
of  man.  It  was  no  unconscious  victim,  but  conscious,  free,  morally  characterized  life 
in  the  nature  identified  with  the  sin.  There  is  also  the  representation  of  the  innocent 
being  offered  for  the  guilty  and  vile.  There  are  two  words  used  to  express  innocence. 
Bengel  is  probably  right  in  the  distinction — has  not  blemish  in  itself,  nor  has  con- 
tracted spot  from  without.  As  applied  to  Christ  as  a  sacrifice,  the  meaning  is,  that  he 
had  DO  pollution  in  hiniself,  neither  did  he  take  pollution  from  without.  In  his 
sacrifice  we  see  the  required  physical  immaculateness  of  the  animal  sacrificed  risitig 
into  moral  immaculateness.  "  That  he  who  sought  to  give  himself  as  a  sacrifice  to 
free  the  world  from  sin  should  have  heen  conscious  of  being  himself  a  sinner,  or  felt 
himself  to  be  in  any  one  respect  unclean  before  God,  would  have  been  not  merely 
a  contradiction,  it  would  have  heen  a  gross  impiety  "  (Ullmann).  The  two  epithets 
used  are  negatives ;  but  we  must  for  a  full  conception  think  of  there  being  on  the 
positive  side  absolute  excellence.  He  yielded  complete  obedience  to  the  Law  of  God 
under  which  he  was  placed,  and,  in  the  result,  carried  our  nature  forward  into  a  state 
of  perfection.  It  was  only  by  his  offering  life  on  which  God  could  look  with  the 
highest  satisfaction  that  our  redemption  could  be  effected.  Have  we  not,  then,  reason  to 
fear  when  we  think  of  the  precious  blood,  the  incorruptible  reality,  that  has  obtained 
redemption  for  us  ?  "  You  have  felt,  when  some  blessing  came  to  you,  a  sort  of  pain  at 
the  thought  of  your  own  unworthiness.  The  kindness  of  God  has  made  you  ashamed. 
It  did  not  make  you  glad,  as  you  expected.  It  rather  made  you  sad  and  afraid  lest  you 
should  prove  unworthy  of  it  all.  So  it  is  with  redemption.  It  shows  so  grandly  and 
tenderly  the  love  of  God ;  it  shows  so  powerfully  God's  desire  to  have  you,  his  deter- 
mination to  win  you  by  love,  his  resolution  that  no  barriers  shall  be  allowed  to  stand 
between  you  and  him.  It  shows  a  God  so  intensely  in  earnest,  both  for  happiness  and 
holiness,  that  you  feel  afraid.  He  is  so  much  in  earnest,  and  I  so  careless ;  he  so 
intent  on  my  salvation,  and  I  so  dull  and  indifferent.  He  so  anxious  for  me,  lie  the 
Infinite  One  so  intent  on  having  me,  and  I,  poor  worm,  so  cold  about  him  who  is  in 
himself  all  wealth  and. glory  and  blessedness.  Such  love,  such  intensity,  such  sacrifice 
for  me.  I  am  ashamed  and  I  fear — I  fear  lest  1  should  not  respond  to  all  this.  What 
a  devotedness  and  thoroughness,  what  a  living  existence  it  would  take  to  be  at  all  in 
harmony  vrith  such  love  I  And  I,  shall  I  he  able  to  come  even  near  to  such  a  course  ?  " 
(Leckie).  TJie  sphere  of  its  operation.  Redeemer  provided  from  eternity.  "Who  was 
foreknown  indeed  before  the  foundation  of  the  world."  There  is  similar  language  in 
Eev.  xiii.  8,  "  The  Lamb  slain  from  the  foundation  of  the  world."  The  purpose  was 
farmed,  and  the  fact  taken  into  account  from  eternity,  that  the  Second  Person  of  the 
Godhead  was  to  be  sent  forth  as  Redeemer.  And  therefore,  when  the  world  was 
fpunded,  it  was  not  without  respect  to  redemption.    God  planned  and  acted  beforehand, 

2  though  redemption  had  taken  place — throwing  a  splendour  over  material  creation, 
ving  a  4ay  of  grace  to  men,  sending  forth  redeeming  power  upon  men's  souls  and,  Id 


OH.  1. 1—26.]     THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  PETER.  67 

some  Instances,  upon  men's  bodies.  In  redemption  reaching  in  its  operation  through 
preceding  times  far  back  into  the  eternal  counsels  of  God,  is  there  not  reason  for  fear-« 
the  fear  that  we  do  not  sufficiently  endeavour  to  appreciate  what  has  entered  so  long 
and  so  deeply  into  the  thought  of  God  ?  Manifested  in  time.  "  But  was  manifested 
at  the  end  of  the  times."  The  Eedeemer  was  provided  from  eternity ;  he  was  also  the 
subject  of  prophecy  from  a  very  early  time  (Gen.  iii.  15) — he  was  manifested,  we  are 
told  here,  "  at  the  end  of  the  times."  Time,  according  to  the  idea,  is  divided  into  varioui 
times.  At  the  beginning  of  the  last  of  the  times  Christ  was  manifested.  It  was  then 
made  clear  what  the  thought  of  God  was.  The  Incarnation  burst  forth  (not  to  the 
carnal  eye)  in  all  its  wonderfulness.  And  when  we  think  of  the  "  strong  Son  of  Gfod, 
immortal  Love,"  dwelling  in  our  nature  and  in  it  redeeming,  have  we  not  reason  to  fear 
— to  fear  lest  by  our  sin  we  dishonour  the  nature  upon  which  so  much  love  and  honour 
have  been  bestowed  ?  Persons  henefiting  hy  the  manifestation.  "  For  your  sake,  who 
through  him  are  believers  in  God,  which  raised  him  from  the  dead,  and  gave  him 
glory;  so  that  your  faith  and  hope  might  bo  in  Gk)d."  Peter's  readers  were  many  of 
them  benefited  to  a  very  great  extent  in  relation  to  the  time  of  the  manifestation. 
From  being  idolaters,  by  one  bound  they  had  got  into  the  position  of  Christian 
believers.  We  are  also  greatly  benefited,  as  having  our  lifetime  on  earth  connected 
with  the  last  of  the  times.  Now  that  Christ  has  been  manifested,  we  have  presented 
to  us  what  in  its  essential  elements  is  the  highest  conception  of  God.  This  conception 
embraces  not  only  God  providing  the  precious  blood  of  Christ  for  redeniption,  but, 
beyond  that,  showing  Christ  triumphant  in  raising  him  from  the  dead  and  giving  him 
glory.  Thereby  God  compels,  not  only  our  faith,  but  our  hope — our  faith  in  the  proof 
that  is  given  of  the  redeeming  virtue  of  the  blood,  and  our  hope  in  the  pledge  that 
is  given  of  our  full  redemption,  which  is  a  being  raised  and  glorified  with  our  Head. 
When  we  think  of  our  having  been  brought  into  a  position  in  which  our  prospects  are 
so  great,  have  we  not  reason  for  fear — fear  lest  we  should  prove  unworthy  of  what 
redeeming  love  has  in  store  for  us? 

IV.  RcLB  BETWEEN  FELLOW-PILGRIMS.  1.  Prerequisite  to  brotherly  love.  "  Seeing 
ye  have  purified  your  souls  in  your  obedience  to  the  truth  unto  unfeigned  love  of  the 
brethren."  What  we  are  to  aim  at  is  love  of  the  brethren,  t.e.  Christian  brethren ;  and, 
since  love  is  so  often  and  so  easily  feigned,  we  are  to  see  to  it  that  it  is  love  not  in 
appearance,  but  in  reality  (1  John  iii.  18).  With  a  view  to  this,  we  are  to  purify  our 
souls,  i.e.  ourselves  in  our  individual  life.  We  cannot  do  this  from  ourselves ;  it  is  only 
the  truth  that  has  the  power  to  sanctify  (John  ivii.  17).  The  way  in  which  we  are  to 
bring  ourselves  within  the  sanctifying  influence  of  the  truth  is  by  our  living  in  the 
element  of  obedience  to  the  truth,  t.e.  believing  what  the  truth  proclaims,  and  realizing 
what  the  truth  requires.  We  are  to  think  especially  of  the  truth  of  the  gospel.  When 
we  grasp  what  God  is  in  redemption,  and  allow  ourselves  to  be  swayed  by  the  love  of 
redemption,  we  are  prepared  for  loving  the  brethren.  2.  Statement  of  the  duty  of 
hrotherly  love.  "  Love  one  another  from  the  heart  fervently."  Cremer  remarks  on  the 
expression,  "loving  from  the  heart,"  that  it  denotes  "  the  love  of  conscious  resolve."  It 
is  love  which  is  here  viewed  as  depending  on  ourselves.  We  are  to  see  to  it  that  it 
comes  from  the  depths  of  our  being.  "  Fervently,"  which  should  be  translated 
intently,"  points  to  the  energetic  way  in  which  we  are  to  give  our  heart's  affections 
free  play.  We  are  to  allow  nothing  to  come  between  them  and  their  object.  We  are 
to  allow  nothing  to  stop  them  in  the  steadiness  of  their  course.  We  must  not  think 
that  we  only  require  to  be  passive  to  love ;  to  love  rightly,  our  energies,  as  we  are  here 
taught,  must  be  on  the  stretch.  3.  Ground  of  hrotherly  love  in  regeneration.  (1) 
Connection  of  the  Word  with  regeneration.  "Having  been  begotten  again,  not  of 
corruptible  seed,  but  of  incorruptible,  through  the  Word  of  God,  which  lireth  and 
abideth."  As  regenerated,  we  are  capable  of  attending  to  the  duty  of  loving  one 
another.  Stress  is  laid  on  the  way  in  which  we  have  been  regenerated.  We  have 
been  begotten  again,  not  of  corruptible  seed,  but  of  incorruptible.  By  the  seed  we  are 
to  understand  the  Word  which,  lodged  in  the  soul  ("implanted  Word,"  J  as.  i,  21),  is 
the  beginning  of  a  new  and  incorruptible  life.  This  Word  is  also  viewed  as  the  outward 
means  by  which  regeneration  is  effected.  And,  as  the  seed  which  is  tbe  beginning  of 
the  new  life  is  said  to  be  incorruptible,  so  the  Word  of  the  Lord  by  which  the  new  life 
is  effected  is  said  to  live  and  abide.    Though  its  earthly  form  is  not  to  remain,  it  has 


68 


THE  FIEST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PETER,    [oh.  n.  1—25. 


a  living,  actire  power  in  it  whicli  can  never  fail.  The  bearing  of  this  is  tliat,  being 
alike  in  having  been  bom  into  the  new  abiding  life,  we  are  plainly  intended  for  loving 
one  another.  As  on  thfe  way  to  the  same  inheritance,  we  are  to  keep  up  good  brother- 
hood. (2)  Confirmation  of  the  abiding  power  of  the  Word.  "  For  all  flesh  is  as  grass, 
and  all  the  glory  thereof  as  the  flower  of  grass.  The  grass  withereth,  and  the  flower 
falleth :  but  the  Word  of  the  Lord  abideth  for  ever."  That  with  which  grass  is  com- 
pared is  all  flesh,  i.e.  man  on  the  earthly  side  of  his  life.  That  with  which  the  flower 
of  grass  is  compared  is  all  the  glory  of  flesh — beauty  of  form,  strength  of  muscle, 
greatness  of  intellect,  riches,  honours.  The  image  sets  forth  the  transitoriness  of  human 
life  and  glory.  Grass  has  only  a  certain  amount  of  vitality,  and,  when  a  certain  stage 
is  reached,  it  withers;  it  is  not  otherwise  with  the  flower — ^it  falleth.  The  language  19 
graphic — the  grass  we  looked  upon  withered  and  the  flower  felL  So  the  life  of  man  on 
its  earthly  side  has  only  a  certain  amount  of  endurance,  which  is  soon  exhausted,  and 
its  greatness  soon  comes  to  its  decadence.  It  is  otherwise  with  the  Word  of  the  Lord — 
it  abideth  for  ever.  The  language  in  this  verse,  which  is  from  Isa.  xl.  6 — 8,  is  not 
formally  introduced  as  a  quotation,  and  is  quoted  freely.  It  gives  us  an  exalted 
conception  of  the  Word  as  that  by  which  we  are  introduced  into  a  life  that  is  never  to 
end.  (3)  Means  of  recognizing  the  Word.  "  And  this  is  the  Word  of  good  tidings 
which  was  preached  unto  you."  The  Word,  in  this  as  in  the  preceding  verse,  is  appro- 
priately the  spoken  Word.  It  is  thought  of  as  the  Word  of  glad  contents.  It  is  the 
Word  which  had  been  preached  to  Peter's  readers  by  Paul  and  others,  so  that  they  could 
have  no  difficulty  in  understanding  what  was  meant  by  it.  "  This,  therefore,  also 
instructs  us  where  we  must  seek  for  the  Word  of  God,  viz.  in  the  authentic  originals  of 
the  apostolic  preaching  "  (Stager). — R.  F. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  U, 


Ver.  1. — Wherefore  laying  aside.  Those 
who  would  wear  the  white  robe  of  regene- 
ration must  lay  aside  the  filthy  garments 
(Zeoh.  iii.  3)  of  the  old  carnal  life.  So  St. 
Paul  bids  us  put  off  the  old  man  and  put  on 
the  new  (Eph.  iv.  22,  24;  Col.  iii.  8,  10; 
comp.  also  Bom.  xili.  14,  "  Put  ye  on  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ."  The  metaphor  would 
be  more  striking  when,  at  baptism,  the  old 
dress  was  laid  aside,  aud  the  white  chrisom 
was  put  on.  St.  Paul  connects  the  putting 
on  of  Christ  with  baptism  in  Gal.  iii.  27,  and 
St.  Peter,  when  speaking  of  baptism  in  ch. 
iii.  21,  uses  the  substantive  (oTrcifleffis)  cor- 
responding to  the  word  here  rendered  "  lay- 
ing aside  "  (i.iToee/j.evoi).  All  malice,  and  all 
gmle,  and  hypocrisies,  and  envies,  and  all 
evil-speakings.  The  sins  mentioned  here 
are  all  offences  against  that  "  unfeigned 
love  of  the  brethi'en"  which  formed  the 
subject  of  St.  Peter's  exhortation  in  tlie 
latter  part  of  ch.  i  St.  Augustine,  quoted 
here  by  most  commentators,  says,  "  Malitia 
malo  deleotatur  alieno ;  invidia  bono  cruoi- 
aturalieno;  dolus  duplioat ;  adulatio  dupli- 
cat  linguam;  detrectatio  vulnerat  famam" 
(comp.  Eph.  iv.  22 — 81);  the  close  resem- 
blance between  the  two  passages  proves  St. 
Peter's  knowledge  of  the  Epistle  to  the 
Ephesians, 

Ver.  2. — ^Ai  new-bom  babes.  The  words 
looii  back  to  ch.  L  3.  23.    God  begat  them 


again  ;  they  were  new-bom  babes  in  Christ ; 
they  must  remember  their  regeneration. 
The  rabbis  used  the  same  metaphor  of  their 
proselytes ;  but  the  apostle  was  doubtless 
thinking  of  the  Saviour's  words  (Matt.  xviiL 
3 ;  Mark  x.  14, 15).  Besire  the  sincere  milk 
of  the  Word.  Desire,  long  for  it  eagerly 
(^iriTo^^iraTc),  as  babes  long  for  milk,  theii 
proper  food,  the  only  food  necessary  for 
them.  It  seems  that  in  the  adjective  KQiyu<6v 
(paraphrased  in  the  Authorized  Version  "  of 
the  Word,"  rendered  "  spiritual "  or  "  reason- 
able" in  the  Revised  Version)  there  must 
be  a  reference  to  the  Word  of  (}od  {\6yos 
eeou),  mentioned  in  ch.  i.  23  as  the  instru- 
ment of  regeneration,  and  called  by  our  Lord 
(Matt.  iv.  4,  from  Deut.  viii.  3)  the  food 
of  man  (but  the  Greek  in  Matthew  is  ^ijjua, 
as  in  ch.  i.  25).  The  paraphrase  of  the 
Authorized  Version  gives  the  general  mean- 
ing; but  the  adjective  means  literally, 
"  reasonable  "  or  "  rational."  The  apostle 
is  not  thinking  of  natural  milk,  but  of  that 
nourishment  which  the  Christian  reason  can 
regard  as  milk  for  the  soul — spiritual  food, 
pure  and  simple  and  nourishing,  capable 
of  supporting  and  strengthening  those  new- 
bom  babes  who  not  long  ago  had  been 
begotten  again,  not  of  corruptible  seed,  but 
of  incorruptible,  through  the  Word  of  God. 
The  adjective  occurs  only  in  one  other  place 
of  Holy  Scripture  (possibly  St.  Peter  may 
have  read  it  there)— Eom  xii.  1,  tJ)» 
KoytK^v  Karpelay  i/tuy,  where  it  means  the 


OH.  n.  1—26.]   THE  FIB8T  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  PETER. 


69 


eerrice  of  the  sanctified  leason  as  opposed  to 
the  mecbanical  observance  of  formal  rites. 
It  is  explained  by  Chrysostom  as  oftSev 
^Xovirav  ffufiaruthv,  ovSev  irax^i  oiiBhif  iilaBri' 
$i6y.  Thus  it  seems  nearly  to  oonespond  with 
the  use  of  the  word  wveviiaTtRis,  spiritual, 
by  St.  Peter  in  ver.  5  of  this  chapter,  and 
by  St.  Paul  in  1  Cor.  x.  3,  4.  St.  Paul  also 
speaks  of  milk  as  the  proper  food  of  babes 
in  Christ  (1  Cor.  iii.  2 ;  comp.  also  Heb.  y. 
12),  though  the  thought  is  somewhat 
different;  for  St.  Peter's  words  do  not 
convey  any  reproof  for  want  of  progress. 
This  spiritual  milk  is  KSaAay,  pure,  un- 
adulterated (comp.  2  Cor.  ii.  17;  It.  2). 
That  ye  may  grow  thereby;  literally,  therein, 
in  the  use  of  it.  All  the  most  ancient 
manuscripts  add  the  words, "  unto  salvation." 
The  soul  which  feeds  upon  the  pure  milk  of 
the  Word  groweth  oontinually  nnto  salva- 
tion. 

Yer.  3. — If  so  be  ye  have  tasted  that  the 
Lord  is  gracious ;  rather,  if  ye  taated.  If  ye 
once  tasted  the  good  Word  of  God  (Heb.  vi. 
4,  5),  if  ye  tasted  of  ■  the  heavenly  gift 
which  comes  through  that  Word  (oh.  i.  23), 
long  after  it  that  ye  may  grow  therein.  The 
"if"  does  not  imply  doubt;  the  apostle 
supposes  that  they  have  once  tasted,  and 
urges  them,  on  the  ground  of  that  first 
taste,  to  long  for  more.  The  first  experiences 
of  the  Christian  life  stimulate  God's  people 
to  further  efforts.  The  words  are  a  quota- 
tion from  Ps.  xxxiv.  8,  "  Oh  taste  and  see 
that  the  Lord  is  good  I "  This  makes  it  less 
probable  that  St.  Peter  is  intentionally  play- 
ing, as  some  have  thought,  on  the  similarity 
of  the  words  xfl^''^^  ^^d  Xpiffros.  The  con- 
fusion was  common  among  the  heathen ;  and 
Christian  writers,  as  Tertullian,  sometimes 
adopted  it ;  Christua,  they  said,  was  chreetui, 
"  Christ  was  good ; "  and  Christians, 
followers  of  the  good  Master,  followed  after 
that  which  is  good.  But  St.  Peter  is  simply 
quoting  the  words  of  the  psalm,  and  apply- 
ing them  to  the  metaphor  of  milk.  It  is 
possible  that  there  may  be  an  under-current 
of  allusion  to  the  Lord's  teaching  in  John 
vi.  The  Lord  himself  is  the  Bread  of  life, 
the  food  of  the  soul.  The  epithet  xpi'Tiis 
is  not  uufrequently  used  of  food  (see  Luke 
V.  39). 

Yer.  4. — To  whom  ooming  as  unto  a  living 
stone.  Omit  the  words,  "as  unto,"  which 
are  not  in  the  Greek,  and  weaken  the  sense. 
The  participle  is  present;  the  Christian 
must  be  ever  coming  to  Christ,  not  only 
once  for  all,  but  always,  every  day.  The 
"living  Stone"  is  Christ;  the  "Lord"  of 
Fi.  xxxiv.  8  is  Jehovah.  St.  Peter  passes 
from  the  figure  of  milk  to  that  of  a  chief 
comer-stone.  So  St.  Paul,  in  1  Cor.  iii., 
after  saying  that  he  had  fed  his  Corinthian 
converts  "  with  milk,  and  not  with  Eseat-'' 


passes  first  to  the  figure  of  labourers  on  the 
land,  and  then  to  that  of  builders  upon  the 
one  foundation  "which  is  Jesus  Christ." 
This,  like  so  many  other  coinsidences,  indi- 
cates St.  Peter's  knowledge  of  St.  Paul's 
Epistles.  8t.  Peter  may  have  been  thinking 
of  his  own  name,  the  name  which  Christ  gave 
him  when  Andrew  brought  him  to  the  Lord; 
though  the  Greek  word  here  is  not  Trdrpa  or 
TeVpos,  but  \t9os — not  the  solid  native  rook 
on  which  the  temple  is  built,  nor  a  piece  of 
rock,  an  unhewn  stone,  but  a  stone  shaped 
and  wrought,  chosen  for  a  chief  corner-stone. 
But  the  apostle  does  not  mention  himself; 
he  omits  all  reference  to  his  own  position  in 
the  spiritual  building ;  he  wishes  to  direct 
his  reailers  only  to  Christ.  He  is  plainly 
referring  to  the  Lord's  own  words  in  Matt, 
xxi.  42,  where  Christ  applies  to  himself  the 
language  of  Ps.  cxviii.  He  described  him- 
self as  a  Stone ;  St.  Peter  adds  the  epithet 
"  living  "  (\leoii  CavTo).  The  figure  of  a  stone 
is  inadequate,  all  figures  are  inadequate,  to 
represent  heavenly  mysteries.  This  stone 
is  not,  like  the  stones  of  earth,  an  inert 
mass ;  it  is  living,  full  of  life ;  nay,  it  gives 
life,  as  well  as  strength  and  coherence,  to 
the  stones  which  are  built  upon  it :  for  the 
Lord  hath  life  in  himself — he  is  risen  from 
the  dead,  and  is  alivs  fDr  evermore.  Dis- 
allowed indeed  of  men.  St  Peter  slightly 
varies  the  quotation,  and  attributes  to  men 
in  general  the  rejection  ascribed  in  the 
psalm  and  in  the  Gospel  to  the  "  builders." 
"  He  was  despised  and  rejected  of  men."  In 
his  speech  before  the  Sanhedrin  (Acts  iv. 
11),  he  had  directly  applied  the  prophecy  to 
the  chief  priests.  But  ohosen  of  Ood,  and 
precious;  rather,  as  the  Bevised  Yersion, 
loilh  God  elect,  precious,  or  perhaps  better, 
honoured  ;  a  reference  to  Isa.  xxviii.  16. 
He  was  rejected  of  the  builders,  but  chosen 
of  God ;  despised  of  men,  but  with  God  held 
in  honour.  The  adjective  is  not  the  same 
as  that  rendered  "precious"  in  ch.  i.  19: 
Tifuos  there  marks  the  precionsness  of  the 
blood  of  Christ  in  itself;  lyrijctos  here,  the 
honour  with  which  God  "hath  highly 
exalted  him." 

Yer.  5. — Ye  also,  as  lively  stones ;  rather, 
liviiy  itonee.  The  word  is  the  same  as  that 
used  in  ver.  4.  Christians  are  living  stones 
in  virtue  of  their  union  with  the  one  living 
Stone :  "  Because  I  live,  ye  shall  live  also." 
Are  built  up  a  spiritual  house ;  rather,  be  ye 
built  up.  The  impeititive  rendering  seems 
more  suitable  than  the  indicative,  and  the 
passive  than  the  middle.  The  Christian 
comes;  God  builds  him  up  on  the  one 
Foundation.  The  apostle  says, "  Come  to  be 
built  up;  come  that  ye  may  be  built 
up."  The  parallel  passage  in  Jude  20, 
"But  ye,  beloved,  building  up  yourselves 
on    your   most   holy  faith,"    might   seem 


70 


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PETER,    [oh.  n.  1—26, 


to    point   to  ft   reflexive    rendering    here; 
but  tlie  verb   used   by  St.  Jude  is  active, 
iKoiKoSoiiovvTts.      St.   Jude    is  apparently 
thinking  of  the  human  side  of  the  work, 
St.  Peter  Of  tbo  Divine;    in   the  deepest 
uense  Christ  is  the  Builder  as  well  as  the 
Foundation,  as  he  himself  said  in  words 
doubtless    present    to    St.    Peter's    mind, 
"  Upon  tills  rock  I  will  build  my  Church." 
That  Church  is  the  antitype  of  the  ancient 
temple — a  building  not  material,  but  spiri- 
tual, consisting,  not  of  dead  stones,  but  of 
sanctified    souls,    resting    on    no    earthly 
foundation,  but    on    that    Book  which    is 
Christ    (oomp.    Eph.    ii.    20—22;    1    Cor. 
iii.  16,  17 ;  2  Cor.  vi.  16).     An  holy  priest- 
hood;   nttiier,  /or  (literally,   into)    a    holy 
prieithood.    The  figure  again  changes ;  the 
thought  of  the  temple  leads  to  that  of  the 
priesthood.     The  stones   in    the   spiritual 
temple  are   livitig    stones;    they  are   also 
priests.    According  to  the  original  ideal  of 
the  Hebrew  theocracy,  all  Israelites  were  to 
be    priests:    "Ye    shall    be    unto    me    a 
kingdom  of  priests,  a  holy  nation  "  (Exod. 
six.  6).    This  ideal  is  fullilled  in  the  Chris- 
tian Cboroh ;  it  is  a  holy  priesthood.    Here 
and  in  ver.   9  the  Church   collectively  is 
called  a   priesthood;   in   the   Book  of  the 
Bevelation  (i.  6;   v.  10;   xx.  6)  Christians 
individually    are    called    priests.      Bishop 
Lightfoot  says,  at  the  opening  of  his  disser- 
tation  on    tne    Clirihitian    ministry,   "The 
kingdom  of  Christ  ,  .  .  has  no  sacred  days 
or  seasons,  no  special   sanctuaries,  because 
every  time  and  every  place  alike  are  holy. 
Above  all,  it  hag  no  sacerdotal  system.    It 
interposes    no    sacrificial    tribe    or    class 
between  God   and    man."     He   continues, 
"  This  conception  is  strictly  an  ideal,  which 
we  must  ever  hold  before  our  eyes  .  .  .  but 
which   nevertheless   cannot   supersede  the 
necessary  wants  of  human  society,  and,  if 
crudely  and  hastily  applied,  will  lead  only 
to  signal  failure.    As   appointed  days  and 
set  places  are  indispensable  to  her  efficiency, 
so   also  the   Church  could   not   fulfil   the 
purposes    for    which    she    exists    without 
rulers  and  teachers,  without  a  ministry  of 
recuncillation,  in  short,  without  an  order  of 
men  who  may  in  some  sense  be  designated 
~  priesthood."    The  whole  Jewish  Church 
was  a  kingdom  of  priests  ;  yet  there  was  an 
Aaronio  priesthood.     The  Christian  Church 
is  a  holy  priesthood ;  yet  there  is  an  order 
of  men  who  are  appointed  to  exercise  the 
functions    of    the    ministry,   and    who,  as 
representing  the  collective  priesthood  of  the 
whole  Church,  may  be  truly  called  priests. 
To  offer  np  spirituaJ  sacrifices,  acceptable  to 
God  by  Jesus  Christ.     The  priest  must  have 
somewhat    to    offer    (Heb.    viii.    '6).     The 
sacrifices  of  the  ancient  Law  bad  found  their 
fulfilmvnt  in  the  one  all-sufficient  Sacrifice, 


offered  once  for  all  by  the  great  High 
Priest  upon  the  altar  of  the  cross.  But 
there  is  still  sacrifice  in  the  Chiistian 
Church.  That  one  Sacrifice  is  ever  present 
in  its  atoning  virtue  and  oleansing  power ; 
and  through  that  one  Sacrifice  the  priests 
of  the  spiritual  temple  offer  np  daily  spi- 
ritual sacrifices — ^the  sacrifice  of  prayer  and 
praise  (Heb.  xiii.  15),  the  sacrifice  of  alms 
and  oblations  (Heb.  xiii.  16),  and  that 
sacrifice  without  which  prayer  and  praise 
and  alms  are  vain  oblations,  the  sacrifice  of 
self  (Bom.  xii.  1).  *  These  spiritual  sacrifices 
are  offered  np  through  Jesus  Christ  the 
great  High  Priest  (Heb.  xiii.  IS);  they 
derive  their  value  only  from  &ith  in  his 
sacrifice  of  himself;  they  are  efiicacious 
through  his  perpetual  mediation  and  inter- 
cession ;  through  him  alone  they  are  accept- 
able to  God.  They  are  offered  through 
him,  and  they  are  acceptable  through  him. 
The  Greek  words  admit  of  either  connection; 
and  perhaps  are  intended  to  cover  both 
relations. 

Ver.  6. — Wherefore  also  it  is  contained  in 
the  Scripture ;  literally,  because  it  eontairw 
in  Beriptiire.  There  is  no  article  according 
to  the  best  manuscripts;  and  the  verb 
(ircaiExci)  is  impersonal ;  it  is  similarly  used 
in  Josephus, '  Ant.,'  xi.  7.  Compare  the  use 
of  the  substantive  rfpioxh  in  Acts  viii.  32. 
St  Peter  proceeds  to  quote  the  prophecy 
(Isa.  xxviii.  16)  to  which  he  has  already 
referred.  -  Behold,  I  lay  in  Ziou  a  chief  Corner- 
stone, elect,  precious.  The  passage  is  taken 
from  the  Septuagint,  with  the  omission  of 
some  words  not  important  for  the  present 
purpose.  St.  Paul  quotes  the  same  prophecy 
still  more  freely  (Bom.  ix.  33).  The  rab- 
binical writers  understand  it  of  Hezekiah, 
but  the  earlier  Jewish  interpreters  regarded 
it  as  Messianic.  And  he  that  believeth  on 
him  shall  not  be  confounded.  The  Hebrew 
words  literally  mean  "shall  not  be  in 
haste;*'  the  Septuagint  appears  to  give  the 
general  meaning.  He  that  believeth  (the 
Hebrew  word  Yt?^!l  means  "to  lean  upon, 
to  build  upon,"  and  so  "to  trust,  to 
confide  ")  shall  not  be  flurried  and  excited 
with  vain  fears  and  trepidation;  his  mind 
is  stayed  on  the  Lord. 

Ver.  7. — Unto  yon  therefore  which  believe 
he  is  precious;  rather,  unto  you  there/ore 
lehieh  believe  it  tlte  honour.  The  apostle 
applies  the  last  clause  of  the  prophecy  to  his 
readers :  they  believe,  they  are  built  up  by 
faith  upon  the  chief  Corner-stone ;  therefore 
the  honour  implied  in  the  words  of  the 
prophet,  "He  that  believeth  on  him  shall 
not  be  confounded  "  is  theirs.  There  may 
also  be  in  the  word  ri/i^,  honour,  an  echo  of 
the  ivTi/ios  ("  precious,"  literally,  "  held  in 
honour")  of  ver.  6;  and  thus  the  further 
meaning  may  be  implied,  "The  w  >rth  which 


OH.  n.  1—25.]    THE  FIBST  Ei-lSTLJfi  GBNERAL  Oif  PETER. 


71 


the  Btone  has  it  has  for  you  who  believe '' 
(Wiesinger,  quoted  by  Huther).  But  the 
first  explantition  is  nearer  to  the  Greek. 
But  Tuito  them  which  be  disobedient,  the  stone 
which  the  builders  disallowed,  the  same  ia 
made  the  Head  of  the  comer;  rather,  as 
in  the  Revised  Version,  far  $ueh  at  dii- 
believe.  St.  Peter  repeats  the  words  of  the 
hundred  and  eighteenth  psalm,  quoted  by 
our  Lord  in  Matt.  xxi.  42,  and  by  himself 
in  Acts  iv.  11.  The  builders,  the  priests 
and  teachers  of  the  Jewish  Church,  rejected 
the  living  Stone ;  but  it  became,  and  indeed 
through  that  rejection,  the  Head  of  the 
corner.  "  He  became  obedient  unto  death 
.  .  therefore  God  also  highly  exalted 
him."  If  this  psalm  is  post-Exilic,  as  most 
modem  critics  think,  the  comer-stone,  in 
its  first  application,  may  be  Israel  regarded 
as  a  whole.  The  great  builders,  the  rulers 
of  Assyria,  Babylon,  Persia,  had  despised 
that  stone ;  but  it  was  chosen  of  God,  and 
now  it  was  set  in  Zion.  It  is  possible,  as 
Hengstenberg  and  Delitzsch  suggest,  that 
the  building  of  the  second  temple  may  have 
recalled  to  the  mind  of  the  psalmist  Isaiah's 
prophecy  of  the  chief  Comer-stone. 

Ver.  8. — And  a  stone  of  stumbling,  and  a 
rock  of  offense.  St.  Peter  combines  Isa.  viii. 
14  with  his  first  quotations,  as  St.  Paul  also 
does  (Bum.  ix.  33),  both  apostles  quoting 
/rom  the  Hebrew,  not  from  the  Septuagint, 
which  is  quite  different,  inserting  two 
negatives.  The  living  Stone  is  not  only 
made  the  Head  of  the  corner  to  the  confusion 
of  the  disobedient,  but  becomes  also  to  their 
destruction  a  Stone  of  stumbling ;  they  fall 
on  that  Stone,  and  are  broken  (Matt.  xxi.  44). 
That  Stone  is  a  Bock  (veTpa),  the  Bock  of 
Ages,  the  Rock  on  which  the  Church  is  built  j 
but  to  the  disobedient  it  is  a  Bock  of  offence 
(irerpa  CKiwSiKov).  2K<fi'SaAoc(in  AtticGreek 
<TKavSiKriBpov)  is  properly  the  catch  or  spring 
of  a  trap,  which  makes  animals  full  into  the 
trap;  then  a  stumbling-block — anything 
which  causes  men  to  fall.  We  cannot  fau 
to  notice  how  St.  Peter  echoes  the  well- 
remembered  words  of  our  Lord,  recorded  in 
Matt.  xvi.  18,  23.  Peter  was  himself  then  a 
irerpa  (TKavSaKov,  a  rock  of  offence.  Even  to 
them  which  stumble  at  the  Word,  being 
disobedient;  literally,  toho  being  disobedient 
stumble  at  the  Word — the  relative  referrmg 
back  to  "  them  which  be  disobedient "  in 
ver.  7.  This  seems  better  than  (with 
Huther  and  others)  to  take  t^  \6yif  with 
aireiSoviires,  "  who  stumble,  being  disobedient 
to  the  Word."  'AireiflouiTej,  litemlly, "  unbe- 
lieving," contains  here,  as  frequently,  the 
•  idea  of  disobedience,  wilful  opposition.  St. 
Peter  sofcms  to  come  very  near  to  St.  John'i 
use  of  Atiyos  for  the  personal  Word,  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ.  Whereunto  also  they  were 
appointed.     "Whereunto"   (cu  8)   eaniiot 


refer  back  to  ver.  S ;  God  had  appointed 
them  to  be  built  up  in  his  spiritual  house, 
but  they  were  disobedient.  It  must  refer 
either  to  kirntovvTM — sin  is  punished  by 
sin ;  for  sin  in  God's  awful  judgment 
hardens  the  heart;  the  disobedient  are  in 
danger  of  eternal  sin  (Mark  iii.  29,  according 
to  the  two  oldest  manuscripts) — or,  more 
probably,  to  Trpo(rK6irTou(nv ;  it  is  God's  ordi- 
nance that  disobedience  should  end  in 
stumbling';  but  that  stumbling  does  not 
necessarily  imply  condemnation  (see  Bom. 
xi.  11).  The  word,  the  preaching  of  Ohrist 
crucified,  was  to  the  Jews  a  stumbling-block 
(1  Cor.  i.  23).  But  not  all  stumbled  that 
they  might  fall.  Nevertheless,  perseverance 
in  disobedience  must  end  in  everlasting 
death. 

Ver.  9. — But  ye  are  a  chosen  generation. 
The  pronoim  "  ye  "  is  emphatic.  St.  Peter  ia 
drawing  a  contrast  between  the  disobedient 
and  unbelieving  Jews  and  Christian  people 
whether  Jews  or  Gentiles ;  he  ascribes  to 
Christians,  in  a  series  of  phrases  quoted  from 
the  Old  Testament,  the  various  privileges 
which  had  belonged  to  the  children  of  Israel. 
The  words,  "  a  chosen  generation "  (y4vos 
ixKeKriy),  are  from  Isa.  xliii.  20,  r4vos  uou 
ri  iK\tKT6v.  The  Corner-stone  is  elect, 
precious ;  the  living  stones  built  thereupon 
are  elect  likewise.  The  whole  Christian 
Church  is  addressed  as  an  elect  race,  one 
race,  because  all  ite  members  are  begotten 
again  of  tiie  one  Father.  A  royal  priest- 
hood. Instead  of  "  holy,"  as  in  ver.  5,  St. 
Peter  has  here  the  epithet  "royal."  He 
follows  tbe  Septuagint  Version  of  Exod. 
xix.  6;  the  Hebrew  has  "a  kingdom  of 
priests."  The  word  "royal"  may  mean 
that  God's  elect  shall  sit  with  Christ  in  his 
throne,  and  reign  with  him  (Bev.  iii.  21 ;  v. 
10),  and  that  in  some  sense  they  reign  with 
him  "now  over  their  lower  nature,  their 
desires  and  appetites;  or,  more  probably, 
the  priesthood  of  Christians  is  called  "royal" 
because  it  belongs  to  the  King — "  a  priest- 
hood serving  Jehovah  the  King,  just  as  we 
speak  of  'the  royal  household'"  (Weiss, 
quoted  by  Huther).  An  holy  nation.  Also 
nom  Exod.  xix.  6.  The  Israelites  were  a 
holy  nation  as  separated  from  the  heathen 
and  consecrated  to  God's  service  by  circum- 
cision. Christians  of  all  nations,  and 
kindreds,  and  people,  and  tongues,  are 
one  nation  under  one  King,  separated  t» 
his  service,  dedicated  to  him  in  lioly  baptism. 
A  peculiar  people.  Tbe  Greek  words,  lyahs 
lis  ireptirolriffiy,  represent  the  words,  nhfo  Dg, 
of  Deut.  vii.  6,  translated  by  the  LXTL'xaip 
irfptoiirav,  "  &  special  people"  (Authorized 
Version).  St.  Paul  also  hag  this  translation 
In  Titus  ii.  14.  The  Hebrew  word  n^jij  in 
MaL  iii  17  is  rendered  by  the  LX.^.  cis 


72 


THE  PIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  PETER,    [cm.  n.  1—25 


Tiepmobtaiy,  by  the  Authorized  Version  "  my 
jewels."  The  ohildren  of  Israel  are  called 
nin;  rh^,  as  the  peeulium,  the  private, 
special,  treasured  possessiou  of  God.  God 
says  of  them,  ia  Isa.  xliii.  21,  *'  This  people 
have  I  formed  for  myself;  they  shall  show 
forth  my  praise;"  rendered  by  the  LXX. 
AatJv  iiov  %v  TrepieTronjffifirtv  rits  apertis  /lov 
SirrYt'<r9ai.  God  hath  now  chosen  us  Chris- 
tians  to  be  the  Israel  of  God ;  the  Christian 
Church  is  his  peeulium,  his  treasure,  "a 
people  for  God's  own  possession  "  (Revised 
Version).  The  literal  meaning  of  the  Greek 
ivords  used  by  St.  Peter  is  "a  people  for 
acquisition,"  or  "  for  keeping  safe,"  the  verb 
haTing  the  sense  of  "  gaining,  aeqniring," 
and  &o  that  of  "preserving,  keeping  for 
one's  self "  (comp.  1  Thess.  T.  9 ;  aUo  Acts 
XX.  28,  "The  Church  of  God,  which  he 
purchased  C^v  irepteiroi^iroTo)  with  his  own 
blood").  That  ye  shonld  show  forth  the 
praises  of  him.  That  ye  should  tell  out, 
publish  abroad.  The  verb  is  found  no- 
where else  in  the  New  Testament.  The 
word  translated  "  praises  "  {ipeTds,  literally, 
"  virtues "),  so  very  common  in  classical 
writers,  occurs  in  the  New  Testament  only 
here,  2  Pet.  i  3,  5,  and  Phil.  iv.  8.  Here 
St.  Peter  ia  quoting  from  the  Septuagint 
Version  of  Isa.  xliii.  21  (the  word  is  similarly 
used  in  Isa.  xlii.  12  and  Uiii.  7).  Perhaps 
the  best  rendering  is  that  of  the  Revised 
Version,  "  excellencies."  Who  hath  called 
yon  out  of  darkness  into  his  marrelloTis 
light.  He  had  chosen  them  before  the 
foundation  of  the  world;  he  called  them 
when  they  received  the  gospel :  "  Whom  he 
did  predestinate,  them  he  also  called."  He 
called  them  ont  of  the  darkness  of  ignorance 
and  sin.  The  Gentiles  walked  in  utter 
darkness,  in  less  measure  the  Jews  also. 
The  light  of  his  presence  is  marvellous, 
wonderful;  those  who  walk  in  that  l.ight 
feel  something  of  its  irradiating  glory. 

Ver.  10. — Which  in  time  past  were  not  a 
people,  bat  are  now  the  people  of  God.  St. 
Peter  quotes  the  prophecy  of  Hosea  (ii.  23), 
as  St.  Paul  also  does  in  Rom.  ix.  25,  26. 
And  as  St.  Paul  applies  the  prophet's  words 
(said  originally  of  the  Jews)  to  the  Christian 
Church,  to  those  called  "not  of  the  Jews 
only,  but  also  of  tlie  Gentiles,"  so  apparently 
does  St.  Poter  here.  They  were  not  a  peopi  e ; 
"  Ne  populus  qnidem,"  saysBengel,  "  nedum 
Dei  populus."  It  is  the  calling  of  Grod 
which  gives  a  unity  to  the  Church  gathered 
out  of  all  races  and  all  lands,  and  makes  it 
the  people  of  God.  Which  had  not  obtained 
mercy,  but  now  have  obtained  meroy.  The 
aorist  participle,  i\eit6ims,  implies  that 
that  mercy  had  been  obtained  at  a  definite 
time,  at  their  conversion. 

Ver.  II. — Dearl;  beloved,  I  beseech  yoa  as 
itrangers  and  pUgrims.    St.  Peter  retains 


to  practical  topics :  he  begins  his  exhortation 
in  the  affectionate  manner  common  in  Holy 
Scripture.  He  calls  his  readers  "  strangeri 
and  pilgrims."  The  word  here  rendered 
"  strangers  "  (napoiitoi)  is  equivalent  to  the 
classical  ixitomoi,  and  means  "  foreign  set- 
tlers, dwellers  in  a  strange  land."  The  second 
word  (wapeirlSniioi,  translated  "  strangers  "  in 
oh.  i.)  means  "  visitors  "  who  tarry  for  •  time 
in  aforeign  oountry.not  permanently  settling 
in  it.  It  does  not  contain  the  ideas  associated 
with  the  modem  use  of  "  pilgiim ; "  though 
that  word,  derived  &om  the  lisMaperegrinui, 
originally  meant  no  more  than  "  sojourner." 
St.  Peter  ia  plainly  using  the  words  meta- 
phorically— his  readers  were  citizens  of  the 
heavenly  country;  on  earth  they  were 
sojourners.  Both  words  occur  in  the  Sep- 
tuagint Version  of  Ps.  xxxix.  12  (xxxviii. 
13  in  the  Greek),  with  the  same  metaphorical 
meaning.  Abstain  from  fleshly  lusts,  which 
war  against  the  sonL  Strangers  and  pil- 
grims should  remember  their  distant  home, 
and  not  follow  the  practices  of  the  strange 
land  in  which  they  sojourn.  The  lusts  of  the 
flesh  are  all  those  desires  which  issue  out 
of  our  corrupt  nature  (comp.  Gal.  v.  16 — 21). 
They  "  war  against  the  soul."  "  Non  modo 
impediunt,"  says  Bengel,  '*  sed  oppugnant ; 
grande  verbum  "  (oomp.  Bom.  vii.  23).  St 
Peter  uses  the  word  "soul"  here  for  the 
whole  spiritual  nature  of  man,  as  in  ch.  L  9^ 
22. 

Ver.  12.  —  Having  yonr  conversation 
honest  among  the  Gentiles.  If  we  read 
dtiextaOai  in  ver.  11  (some  ancient  manu- 
scripts have  airexfirie),  there  is  a  slight 
irregularity  in  the  construction,  as  the  par- 
ticiple Exoi/Tes  is  nominative ;  it  gives  more 
force  and  vividness  to  the  sentence  (comp. 
in  the  Greek,  Eph.  iv.  2 ;  Col.  iii.  16).  The 
conversation  {avaxiTpotpij,  mode  of  life  or 
behaviour)  of  the  unconverted  is  described 
as  "  vain  "  in  ch.  i.  18 ;  the  conversation  of 
Christians  must  be  seemly  (xaKii),  exhibit- 
ing the  beauty  of  holiness.  The  Churches 
to  which  St.  Peter  wrote  were  in  Gentile 
countries ;  they  must  be  careful,  for  the 
honour  of  their  religion,  to  set  a  good  ex- 
ample among  the  heathen — a  warning,  alas  I 
too  often  neglected  in  modem  as  well  as  in 
ancient  times.  That,  whereas  they  speak 
against  yon  as  evil-doers ;  literally,  wherein, 
in  the  matter  in  which  they  speak,  i.e.  in 
reference  to  manner  of  life.  Christians 
were  commonly  accused  of  "  turning  the 
world  upside  down  ;  "  of  doing  "  contrary  to 
the  decrees  of  (Msar,"  as  at  fhessalonica 
(Acts  xvii.  6,  7);  of  being  atheists  and 
blasphemers  of  the  popular  idolatry,  as  at 
Ephesus  (Acts  xix.  87).  Suetonius  calls 
them  a  "  genus  hominura  superstitionia 
novae  et  maleflcra  "  ('  Vit.  Neron.,'  oh.  xvi.). 
Probably  the  grosser  accusations  of  Thjeit 


Oft.  n.  1—26.]   THE  FIRST  BPISTLB  GENERAL  OF  PETER. 


78 


tean  banquets,  etc.,  oame  later.  They  may 
by  your  good  works,  which  they  shall  be- 
hold, gloiify  God  in  the  day  of  visitation. 
The  word  rendered,  "  whioh  they  shall  be- 
hold "  QiTOTrreicraiiTes,  or,  according  to  some 
of  the  older  mannscriptB,  iiroirTeiovTes, 
beholding),  occurs  only  here  and  in  oh.  iii. 
2.  It  implies  close  attention ;  the  Gentiles 
watched  the  conduct  of  the  Christians, 
narrowly  scrutinizing  it  to  discoTer  faults 
and  inconsistansies.  The  use  of  the  corre- 
sponding substantive,  4Tr6irTris,iD.  2  Pet.  i.  16 
is  a  coincidence  to  be  noticed.  It  is  not 
probable  that  there  is  any  reference  to  the 
heathen  use  of  the  word  in  connection  with 
the  Eleusinian  Mysteries.  St.  Peter  hopes 
that  this  close  observation  of  the  lives  of 
Christian  people  would  lead  the  Gentiles 
to  glorify  God ;  he  was  thinking,  perhaps, 
of  our  Lord's  words  In  the  sermon  on  the 
mount :  "  Let  your  light  so  shine  before 
men,  that  they  may  see  your  good  works, 
and  glorify  your  Father  which  is  in  heaven." 
Perhaps  in  the  following  clause  also  we  may 
trace  an  echo  of  the  Saviour's  words  in 
Luke  xix,  41,  "Because  thou  knewest  not 
the  time  of  thy  visitation"  (iirurKoiriis,  as 
here).  St.  Peter  hopes  that  the  holy  lives 
of  Christians  may  be  made  the  means  of 
laving  many  Gentile  souls  in  the  time  of 
visitation ;  that  is,  when  God  should  visit 
the  heathen  with  his  converting  grace,  seek- 
ing to  draw  them  to  himself,  whether  by 
gracious  chastisement  or  by  the  preaching 
of  his  servants.  This  seems  more  natural 
than  to  understand  the  words  of  God's 
visitation  of  the  Christians  in  the  persecu- 
tions which  were  impending ;  though  it  is 
true  that  many  Gentiles  were  won  to 
Christ  by  the  calm  and  holy  bearing  of 
suffering  Christians. 

Ver.  13. — Submit  yourselves  to  every 
ordinance  of  man.  The  aorist  passive 
(uiroTi^TJiTe)  is  used,  as  often,  in  a  middle 
sense.  The  word  for  "  ordinance  "  is  ktIvis, 
whioh  in  classical  Greek  means  "founda- 
tion," as  of  a  city ;  but  in  the  New  Testament 
is  used  elsewhere  only  of  the  works  of  God, 
in  the  sense  of  "  creation,"  or  "  a  creature  " 
(see  Mark  xvi.  15 ;  Col.  i.  23,  etc.).  Hence 
some,  as  De  Wette,  translate  the  words,  "  to 
every  human  creature,"  supporting  their 
view  by  ch.  v.  5.  But  on  the  whole  this 
seems  unlikely ;  avdpairliiri  ktIitis  is  a  strange 
and  awkward  periphriisis  for  ivSpanros.  It 
is  better  to  understand  it  as  meaning  a 
human  creation  or  foundation.  Certainly 
"  there  is  no  power  but  of  God  "  (Eom.  xiii. 
1) ;  but  the  form  which  that  power  assumes 
is  a  human  institution.  St.  Peter  bids  his 
readers  to  submit  themselves  to  the  de  facto 
form  of  government.  7or  the  Lord's  sake. 
Not  from  human  motives,  as  fear  of  punish- 
ment :  but  for  the  Lord's  sake,  because  "  the 


powers  that  be  are  ordained  of  God,"  and  in 
obeying  them  we  obey  the  ordinance  of  God. 
Christians  were  commonly  accused  of  in- 
subordination, of  doing  "contrary  to  the 
decrees  of  Csssar"  (Acts  xvii.  7) ;  they  must 
show  by  their  conduct  that  these  accusa- 
tions are  false,  that  the  progress  of  the 
gospel  be  not  hindered.  Whether  it  be  to 
the  king,  as  supreme.  By  "the  king"  is 
meant  the  Koman  emperor,  who  was  fre- 
quently so  described  in  the  Greek  writers. 
Nero  was  emperor  when  St.  Peter  wrote. 
Christians  were,  to  obey  even  him,  wicked 
tyrant  as  he  was ;  for  his  power  was  given 
him  from  above,  as  the  Lord  himself  had 
said  of  Pilate  (John  xix.  11). 

Ver.  14. — Or  unto  governors,  as  unto 
them  that  are  sent  by  him ;  literally,  through 
him.  Some  commentators,  following  Calvin, 
understand  the  prunoun  of  the  Lord.  Cer- 
tainly, governors  are  sent  through  him  ;  he 
"ordereth  all  things,  both  in  heaven  and 
earth."  But  it  seems  more  natural  in  thie 
place  to  refer  the  proaoun  to  the  nearer 
substantive,  the  king;  it  was  through  the 
Boman  emperor  that  the  various  governors, 
legates,  etc.,  were  sent  from  time  to  time 
(as  the  Greek  present  participle  implies)  to 
administer  the  provinces.  For  the  punish- 
ment of  evil-doers,  and  for  the  praise  of 
them  that  do  well.  Observe  the  close 
resemblance  to  Bom.  xiii.  3,  4.  St.  Peter 
recognizes  the  Boman  sense  of  justice  which 
we  see  in  men  like  Festua  and  Gallio.  At 
first  the  Jews  were  the  persecutors  of  the 
Christians;  the  Boman  magistrates  were 
their  protectors.  St.  Peter  wrote  before  the 
great  outbreaks  of  Boman  persecution ;  he 
was  himself  to  suffer  under  that  emperor 
whose  authority  he  upheld. 

Ver.  15. — 7oT  so  is  the  will  of  Ood,  that 
with  well-doing  ye  may  put  to  silence  the 
ignorance  of  foolish  men.  The  Gentiles 
speak  against  the  Christians  as  evil-doers  ; 
they  are  to  put  their  accusers  to  silence  by 
well-doing ;  this  is  to  be  their  answer  rather 
than  indignant  self-vindication.  The  Greek 
word  rendered  "  put  to  silence "  ((f i/ioSi') 
means  literally  "  to  muzzle  "  (comp.Matt.xxii. 
12 ;  Mark  iv.  39 ;  1  Cor.  ix.  10).  The  word 
for  "ignorance"  (i.yvoxria)  occurs,  basides 
this  passage,  only  in  1  Cor.  xv.  34,  where  it 
evidently  means  "  culpable,  self-caused  ig- 
norance." The  word  for  "  foolish  "  (&ippa>y) 
is  a  strong  one — it  means  "  senseless  "  (comp. 
1  Cor.  zv.  36).  Here  it  has  the  article,  "  the 
foolish  men,"  t.e.  those  "  who  speak  against 
you  as  evil-doers." 

Ver.  16. — As  free.  This  verse  is  n  -^t  to  be 
taken  with  what  follows,  for  it  does  not  well 
cohere  with  the  contents  of  ver.  17 ;  but 
either  with  ver.  14  (ver.  15  being  regarded 
as  parenthetical)  or  with  ver.  15,  notwith- 
standing the  ohauijie  of  case  in  the  original. 


74 


THE    FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  PETER,    [oh.  n.  1—26. 


which  presents  no  real  difficulty ;  the  mean- 
ing being  that  Christian  fieedom  must  show 
itself,  not  in  licence,  but  in  willing  obedience 
to  constituted  authorities :  "  Not  only  for 
wrath,  but  for  conaoience'  sake  "  (Rom.  xiii. 
5).  Those  whom  the  truth  makes  free  are 
free  indeed,  but  true  freedom  implies  sub- 
mission to  legitimate  authority.  And  not 
using  your  liberty  for  a  cloke  of  malicious- 
ness; literally,  not  having  your  liberty  as  a 
cloke.  The  word  rendered  "cloke"  (^iri- 
KtiKvfifiia)  is  used  in  the  Septnagint  (Exod. 
xxvi.  14)  for  the  covering  of  the  tabernacle. 
The  pretence  of  Christian  liberty  must  not 
be  made  a  covering,  a  concealment,  of 
wickedness.  But  as  the  servants  of  God. 
The  truest  liberty  is  tliat  of  the  servants  of 
God ;  his  service  is  perfect  freedom  (comp. 
Bom.  vi  16—23). 

Ver.  17. — Honour  all  men.  St.  Peter 
illustrates  the  well-doing  which  he  enjoins 
in  ver.  15,  drawing  out  his  general  exliorta- 
tion  into  four  rules  of  conduct.  First,  he 
bids  us  give  honour  to  all  men.  The  Chris- 
tians of  Asia  Minor  saw  heathenism  and  vice 
all  around  them ;  they  heard  of  the  abomi- 
nable life  of  Nero  and  las  conrtiers  at  Rome. 
They  were  conscious  of  a  great  and  elevating 
change  which  had  passed  over  themselves ; 
St.  Peter  has  just  been  enumerating  the 
dignities  and  privileges  of  the  Christian 
life.  But  they  must  not  be  lifted  up ;  they 
must  despise  no  one,  but  honoiu  in  all  men 
the  handiwork  of  God,  created  after  God's 
own  image,  though  sadly  marred  and  de- 
faced by  sin.  Respect  is  due  to  all  men,  of 
course  in  varying  degrees  and  to  be  shown 
in  different  ways;  but  in  some  sense  it  is 
due  to  all,  to  the  humblest  and  even  to  the 
worst.  The  aorist  imperative  (ri/t^iroTe) 
seems  to  lay  down  this  principle  as  a  sharp, 
definite  rule,  to  be  accepted  at  once,  and 
to  be  applied  as  need  arises,  according  to 
the  circumstances  of  each  case.  Tlie  three 
following  imperatives  are  present ;  the 
duties  which  they  presciibe  are  viewed  as 
continuous,  recognized  elements  in  well- 
doing. There  was  something  new  and 
strange  in  the  command  to  honour  all  men; 
it  is  expressed  forcibly,  once  for  all,  by  the 
aorist  imperative.  Love  the  brotherhood. 
The  word  aS(\<(iiT'rjs,  brotherhood,  is  peculiar 
to  St.  Peter ;  it  stands  for  the  aggregate 
of  Christian  brethren  regarded  as  one 
body  in  Christ.  The  Lord  bids  us  "love 
our  enemies."  St.  Peter's  rule  does  not 
weaken  the  force  of  the  Saviour's  precept. 
But  love  must  vary  in  depth  and  degree 
acooriling  to  the  varying  relations  of  Ufe; 
and  the  love  which  true  Christians  feel  for 
the  like-minded  must  be  one  of  its  strongest 
I'orms.  Fear  God.  Honour  the  king.  The 
oly  fear  of  Cod  is  the  beginning  of  wisdom. 
!'lie  fear  of  God  as  the  King  of  kings  will 


lead  us  to  give  due  honour  to  earthly  princes, 
who  rule  by  his  controlling  providence.  It 
was  especially  necessary  to  urge  the  fear  of 
God  as  a  motive,  when  the  king  to  b« 
honoured  was  such  as  Nero. 

Ver.  18. — Servants.  The  word  is  not  SovAsi, 
slaves,  but  olxdrai,  household  servants,  domes- 
tics. St.  PeteV  may  have  used  it  as  a  less 
harsh  term,  in  Christian  kindliness  and 
courtesy;  or  he  may  have  cliosen  it  pur- 
posely to  include  the  large  class  of  freedmen 
and  other  dependents  who  were  to  be  found 
in  the  houses  of  the  great.  The  frequent 
mention  of  slaves  in  the  Epistles  shows  that 
many  of  the  first  Christians  must  have  been 
in  a  condition  of  servitude  (comp.  1  Cor.  vii. 
21—23 ;  Eph.  vi.  5—8 ;  Col.  iu.  22 ;  1  Tim. 
vi.  1,  2,  etc.).  It  was  only  natural  that  men 
should  feel  uneasy  and  irritable  under  the 
yoke  of  slavery  as  they  came  to  learn  the 
equality  of  all  men  in  the  sight  of  God,  and 
to  understand  the  blessed  privileges  and  the 
high  hopes  of  Christians.  The  apostles 
oouuselled  submission  and  resignation  to  the 
will  of  God.  '  Slavery  was  an  unnatural 
institution ;  it  must  in  time  disappear  under 
the  softening  influences  of  the  gospel.  But 
Christian  slaves  were  to  wait  in  faith  and 
patience.  The  sacred  writers  use  language 
of  studied  moderation,  carefully  avoiding 
any  .expressions  which  might  be  regarded  as 
excitiug  to  violence  or  revolutionary  out- 
breaks. Be  subject  to  your  masters  with  all 
fear.  The  participle  iicoraff06^evoi  seems 
to  look  back  to  the  imperative  imndyiiTe  in 
ver.  13;  the  relation  of  slaves  to  their  lords 
being  one  of  the  ordinances  of  man  alluded 
to  there  (comp.  Eph.  vi  5,  where  St.  Paul 
bids  slaves  to  be  obedient  to  their  masters 
"  with  fear  and  trembling,  in  singleness  of 
your  heart,  as  unto  Christ ").  The  holy  fear 
of  God,  by  whose  providence  they  were  set 
in  that  lowly  station,  would  involve  the  fear 
of  failing  in  their  duty  to  their  masters. 
All  fear;  not  only  fear  of  punishment,  but 
also  fear  of  neglecting  duty.  Not  only  to 
the  good  and  gentle,  but  also  to  the  froward. 
Servants  must  not  make  the  character  of 
their  masters  an  excuse  for  disobedience  ;  if 
their  masters  are  ftoward  (irKoMoi,  literally, 
"crooked,  perverse"),  still  they  must  be 
submissive  to  the  will  of  God. 

Ver.  19. — For  this  is  thankworthy;  lite- 
rally, this  it  grace  (comp.  Liike  vi.  32,  Iloia 
i/uv  x^P'^  i<rTl;  "What  thank  have  ye?" 
where  the  parallel  passage  in  St.  Matthew 
is  Tiva  iiiaShv  ex*'"  f  "  What  reward  have 
ye?").  A  comparison  of  these  passages 
seems  to  show  that  x^P'^  and  furBos  are  used 
in  a  similar  sense  as  expressive  of  God's  con- 
descending love.  In  his  gracious  tenderness 
he  speaks  of  reward,  though  we  deserve  only 
punishment;  he  even  speaks  of  thanks, 
though  we  deserve  only  condemnation.  Otbei 


OH.  n.  1—26.]   THE  FIRST  EPISTLK  GENERAL  OP  PETER 


75 


poesible  explanations  are,  "  This  ib  the  work 
of  God's  grace; "  or,  "This  is  lovely;"  or, 
"  This  is  favour ; "  or  "  Tliis  implies"  or  "This 
causes  favour  with  God."  If  a  man  for 
oonscienoe  toward  God ;  literally,  /or  con- 
Ksienee  of  Ood ;  that  is,  consciousness  of  God's 
presence,  of  his  will,  of  our  duties  to  him. 
This  is  better  than  to  take  the  genitive  as 
subjective,  and  to  interpret, "  because  of  the 
consciousness  of  God,"  because  he  sees  and 
Inows  all  that  we  do  and  say  and  think 
(uomp.  1  Cor.  viii.  7,  where  "  conscience  of 
the  idol"  seems  to  mean  a  belief  or  half- 
belief  in  the  real  existence  of  the  god  sup- 
posed to  be  represented  by  the  idol).  Endure 
grief,  snfiering  wrongfully;  literally, ^rt'e/s, 
\iTras  (comp.  KvmiBevTis,  oh.  i.  6).  St.  Peter 
echoes  our  Lord'i  teaching  in  the  sermon  on 
the  mount  (Matt.  v.  39). 

Ver.  20. — ^For  what  glory  is  it  ?  The  word 
translated  "  glory  "  (nAeos),  common  in  Greek 
poetry,  occurs  nowhere  else  in  the  New 
Testament.  It  means,  first,  "rumour,  re- 
port; "  then  "fame,  renown."  If,  when  ye 
be  buffeted  for  your  faults,  ye  shall  take  it 
patiently;  literally,  if  sinning  and  being 
buffeted.  The  word  translated  "buffeted" 
(KoAa((>ifd/xei'oi),  used  by  St.  Matthew  and 
St.  Mark  in  describing  our  Savioui's  suffer- 
ings, has  a  figurative  meaning  in  1  Cor.  iv. 
11 ;  2  Cor.  xii.  7.  It  is  probably  used  lite- 
rally here ;  blows  were  a  common  occurrence 
in  the  life  of  slaves.  To  be  patient  when 
Buffering  deserved  punishment  is  often  diffi- 
cult, but  it  is  no  more  than  a  simple  duty ; 
it  would  not  be  for  the  glory  of  religion. 
Christian  slaves  ought  to  do  their  duty  to 
their  masters,  and  not  deserve  punishment. 
But  if,  when  ye  do  well,  and  suffer  for  it.  ye 
take  it  patiently ;  literally,  but  if  doing  well, 
and  suffering.  The  words  "  for  it "  are  not 
in  the  Greek.  This  is  acceptable  with  Ood. 
If  we  read  "  for "  (toSto  7etp),  with  some  of 
the  best  manuscripts,  we  must  supply 
"  there  is  glory  "  after  the  last  clause.^  « If, 
doing  well  and  suffering,  ye  take  it  patiently, 
there  is  glory  (icXc'os),  for  this  is  thank- 
worthy (x^pii)  with  God."  Such  conduct 
will  bring  honour  to  Christianity,  for  it  is 
thankworthy  even  in  the  sight  of  God. 
When  Christian  men  and  women  took  cruel 
sufferings  patiently  and  joyfully,  as  the 
apostles  did  (Acts  v.  41 ;  xvi.  25),  that  was 
more  than  a  mere  recognized  duty — that 
showed  the  power  of  Christian  motives,  that 
brought  glory  to  Christianity,  and  was  held 
to  be  thankworthy  (such  is  God's  gracious 
condescension)  even  in  the  sight  of  God. 
The  word  for  "acceptable"  here  is  that 
translated  "  thankworthy  "  in  ver.  19,  where 
see  note. 

Ver.  21. — For  even  hereunto  were  ye 
called;  that  is,  to  do  good  and  to  suffer 
patiently  (comp.  1   Thess.  iii  8).     Omit 


"even,"  for  which  there  is  no  authority. 
St.  Peter  is  speaking  of  slaves,  but  what  he 
says  of  slaves  is  true  in  some  sense  of  all 
Christians  (comp.  Acts  xiv,  22).  Because 
Ohrist  also  suffered  for  us;  ratheir, /or  j/ou, 
with  the  oldest  manuscripts.  You  do  not 
suffer  alone ;  Christ  also  suffered,  and  that 
for  you  slaves,  on  your  behalf.  "Olirist 
himself,"  says  Bengel,  "  was  treated  as  a 
slave ;  he  deigns  to  exhibit  his  own  conduct 
as  an  example  to  slaves."  Leaving  us  an 
example,  that  ye  should  follow  his  steps. 
The  oldest  manuscripts  have  the  second 
person  here  in  botb  places.  Leaving (yiroM/i.- 
nivwv),  leaving  behind ;  Bengel  says,  "  in 
abitn  ad  patrem."  The  Greek  for  "ex- 
ample "  is  v7rtrYpanfi6s — a  word  which  occurs 
nowhere  else  in  the  New  Testament.  It 
means  a  copy  set  by  a  writing  or  drawing 
master,  which  was  to  be  exactly  reproduced 
by  his  pnnils  (see  2  Mace.  ii.  28,  in  the 
Cfreek).  'The  life  of  Christ  is  our  model. 
In  particular  St.  Peter  urges  ns  to  imitate 
the  Lord's  patience  in  suffering  undeserved 
afflictions.  In  the  last  clause  the  figure  is 
changed  to  that  of  a  guide  along  a  difficult 
route,  BO  difficult  that  those  who  follow  must 
put  their  feet  in  his  footprints.  We  should 
follow  his  steps,  one  by  one,  closely  follow- 
ing him,  as  the  word  iiraKo\ou6^a-riTe  means 
(comp.  Mark  xvi.  20  ;  1  Tim.  v.  10,  24). 

Ver.  22. — Who  did  no  sin,  neither  was 
goile  found  in  his  month.  St.  Peter  is 
quoting  the  Septuagint  Version  of  Isa.  liii. 
9,  almost  exactly,  the  word  a/iapTtav,  sin, 
being  substituted  for  ivqulav,  lawlessness 
("  violence  "  in  our  version).  We  shoul  d  no- 
tice that  the  Messiah,  whose  example  is  here 
set  before  Christian  slaves,  is  called  by  the 
prophet  "the  Servant  of  Jehovah"  (Isa. 
Iii.  13).  Slaves  were  often  tempted  to  de- 
ceit and  guile  ;  they  must  look  to  the  Lord 
Jesus,  and  strive  to  copy  bis  innocence  and 
his  truth.  The  verb  EupiVxca-flai,  to  be 
found,  is  sometimes  said  to  be  used,  by  a 
Hebraism,  for  the  simple  verb  "  to  be." 
Winer  says,  "  Between  these  two  verbs, 
however,  there  is  always  this  distinction, 
that,  whilst  tTcai  indicates  the  quality  of  a 
thing  in  itself,  cvplffKeadai  indicates  the 
quality  in  so  far  as  it  is  discovered,  de- 
tected, recognized,  in  the  subject"  ('Greek 
Grammar,'  Ixv.  8). 

Ver.  23. — Who,  when  he  was  reviled, 
reviled  not  again;  when  he  suffered,  be 
threatened  not  (comp.  Isa.  liii.  7).  The 
Lord  again  and  again  denounced  the  hypo- 
crisy and  unbelief  of  the  Pharisees;  he 
bade  Caiaphas  remember  the  coining  judg- 
ment. But  that  was  the  language  or  pro- 
phetic warning,  the  sternness  of  love.  He  ■ 
sets  before  them  the  impending  punishment, 
that  they  may  take  heed  in  time  and  escape 
from  the  wrath  to  come.    In  the  midst  ol 


76 


THE  FIRST   EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PETER     [<«•  n.  1— 25 


his  strongest  mveotive  against  the  sins  and 
hollow  unreality  of  Pharisaism  there  is  an 
outburst  of  tlie  deepest  love,  the  tenderest 
concern  (Matt,  xxiii.  27).  But  committed 
himself  to  him  that  jndgeth  lighteonsly. 
The  verb  "  committed  "  (TrapeS/Sou)  is  with- 
out an  object  in  the  original.  Most  com- 
mentators supply  "himself,"  or  "his  cause;" 
others,  "his  sufferings;"  some,  as  Alford, 
"those  who  infiicted  them."  Perhaps  the 
last  explanation  is  the  best :  he  left  them  to 
Ood,  to  God's  mercy,  if  it  might  be ;  to  his 
judgment,  if  it  must  be.  Tliere  may  be  a 
reference  to  his  prayer,  "Father,  forgive 
them."  Compare  by  contrast  the  language 
of  Jeremiah,  speaking  in  the  spirit  of  the 
Old  Testament  (xi.  2U  and  xx.  12).  There 
is  a  curious  reading,  entirely  without  the 
authority  of  existing  Greek  manuscripts,  re- 
presented by  the  Vulgate,  Tradebatjudicanti 
««  injuete,  as  if  the  words  were  understood  of 
the  Lord's  submitting  himself  "  to  one  who 
judged  umighteously,"  that  is,  to  Pilate. 

Ver.  21. — Who  his  own  self  bare  our  sina 
in  his  own  body  on  the  tree.  St.  Peter  has 
thus  far  spoken  of  our  Lord  as  our  Example 
of  patient  endurance ;  but  he  seems  to  feel 
that,  although  this  is  the  aspect  of  the 
Saviour's  sufferings  most  suitable  to  his 
present  purpose,  yet  it  is  scarcely  seemly 
to  dwell  upon  that  most  momentous  of  aU 
events,  the  death  of  Christ  our  Lor  J  upon 
the  cross,  without  mentioning  its  more 
solemn  and  awful  import.  A  martyr  may 
be  an  example  of  patient  suffering;  he 
cannot  bear  our  sins.  The  apostle  proceeds 
to  unfold  the  contents  of  the  iirhp  iimv  in 
ver.  21.  The  Lord  died /or  us :  but  what  is 
the  meaning  of  the  preposition?  Was  it 
that  his  example  might  stimulate  us  to 
imitate  liis  patience  and  his  holy  courage  ? 
This  is  a  true  view,  but,  taken  alone,  it 
would  be  utterly  inadequate.  The  death 
of  the  Son  of  God  had  a  far  deeper  signifi- 
cance. The  mtip  used  here  and  elsewhere 
is  explained  by  the  more  precise  dvri  of 
Matt.  XX.  28  ;  Mark  x.  45 ;  1  Tim.  ii.  6,  in 
which  last  passage  both  prepositions  are 
combined.  The  Lord  died,  not  only  in  our 
behalf,  but  in  our  stead.  He  gave  "  his  life 
a  ransom  for  many ; "  "  he  is  the  Propitia- 
tion for  our  sins."  St.  Peter  exhibits  here, 
with  all  possible  emphasis,  this  vicarious 
aspect  of  the  Saviour's  death.  "  He  bore  our 
sins  himself."  The  pronoun  is  strongly  em- 
phatio ;  he  bore  them,  though  they  were  not 
his  own.  They  were  our  sins,  but  he  bore 
them — ^he  alone ;  none  other  could  bear  that 
awful  burden.  He  hare  (Ji.viiveyK(v).  The 
apostle  is  evidently  quoting  Isa.  liii.  12, 
where  the  Hebrew  verb  is  Kfc'j,  and  the  Sep- 
tuagint  Version  is  Kal  avrhs  a/uoprtej  iroWSiv 
kirliveyKe ;  comp.  vers.  4  and  11  (in  ver.  1 1 
there  is  another  Hebrew  verb)  of  the  same 


chapter.    In  the  Old  Testament  "to  bear 
sins  "  or  "  iniquity  "  means  to  suffer  the  pu- 
nishment of  sin,  whether  one's  own  sin  oi 
the  sin  of  others  (see  Lev.  v.  1, 17,  and  many 
similar  passages).    In  the  description  of  the 
ceremonial  of  the  Day  of  Atonement  in 
Lev.  xvi.  it  is  said  (ver.  22)  that  the  scape- 
goat "shall  bear  upon  him  [the  Hebrew  ia 
I'^j;  T?&n  tib-J ;  the  Greek  is  K^erai  i  x^l"V" 
i^i'  4aiiTw]  all  their  iniquities  unto  a  land  not 
inhabited,"  where  the  scapegoat  is  repre- 
sented as  bearing  the  sins  of  the  people  and 
taking  them  away.     Compare  also  the  great 
saying  of  the  Baptist,  "Behold  the  Lamb 
of  God,  which  taketh  away  the  sin  of  the 
world!"  where  the  Greek  (i  dlpuvy  may 
be  rendered  with   equal  exactness,   "who 
beareth,"  or  "who    taketh    away."     The 
Lord  took  our  sins  away  by  taking  them 
upon  himself  (comp.  Matt.  viii.  17).     As 
Aaron  put  the  sins  of  the  people  upon  the 
head  of  the  scapegoat  (Lev.  xvi  21),  and 
the  goat  was  to  bear  them  upon  him  unto  a 
land  not  inhabited,  so  the  Lord  laid  on  the 
blessed  Saviour  the  iniquity  of  us  all,  and 
he  bare  our  sins  in  his  own  body  on  to  the 
tree,  and,  there  dying  in  our  stead,  took 
them  away.    He  bare  them  on  himself,  as 
the  scapegoat  bare  upon  him  the  iniquities 
of  Israel.     It  was  this  burden  of  sin  which 
made  his  sacred  body  sweat  great  drops  of 
blood  in  his  awful  agony.    He  bare  them 
on  to  the  tree  (<irl  ri  ^iMv) ;  he  carried  them 
thither,  and  there  he  expiated  them  (comp. 
Heb.  ix.  28,  "Christ  wag  onoe  offered  to 
bear  the  sins  of  many,"  where  the  same 
Greek  word  is  used — i.vft>tyKfiv).    Another 
interpretation  takes  iva(pepety  in  its  sacri- 
ficial sense,  as  in  Heb.  vii.  27,  and  regards 
the  cross  as  the  altar:  "He  bore  our  sins 
on  to  the  altar  of  the  cross."    The  Lord  is 
both  Priest  and  Victim,  and  the  verb  is  used 
in  the  sacred  writings  both  of  the  priest 
who  offers  the  sacrifice  and  of  the  sacrifice 
which  bears  or  takes  away  sin.     But  the 
sacrifice  wliioh   the  Lord   offered  up   was 
himself,  not  our  sins;  therefore  it  seems 
best  to  understand  ivatpeptiv  here  rather  of 
victim  than  of  priest,  as  in  Heb.  ix.   28 
and  the  Greek  Version  of  Isa.  liii.  12.    The 
thought  of  sacrifice  was  doubtless  present 
to  tlie  apostle's  mind,  as  it  certainly  was 
to  the  prophet's  (see  ver.  10  of  Isa.  liii.). 
The  word  ^i\op  is  used  for  the  cross  twice 
in  St.  Peter's  speeches  in  the  Acts  of  the 
Apostles  (V.  30 ;  x.  39).    It  is  also  so  used 
by  St.  Paul  (Gal.  iii.  18).    That  we,  being 
dead  to  sins,  should  live  nnto  righteousness. 
The   Greek  word   li.TToyev6ii.ivoi  occurs  no- 
wliere  else  in  the  New  Testament.    Bengel 
understands  it  differently.     He  says  that  as 
yev4a6ai  Ttv6s  means  "  to  become  the  slave 
of  some  one-"  so  ivoyev4(rBat  may  mean  to 
cease  to  be  a  slave.    But  this  womd  require 


OH.  n.  1—25.]   THE  FIBST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  PETER. 


71 


the  genitive,  not  the  dative,  rats  afiaprtais ; 
and  the  ordinary  translation  is  more  suitable 
to  the  following  context.  -The  word  is 
several  times  nsed  in  Herodotus  in  the  sense 
of  "having  died;"  more  literally,  "having 
ceased  to  be."  i?he  tense  (aorist)  seems  to 
point  to  a  definite  time,  as  the  time  of  bap- 
tism (cornp.  Eom.  vi.  2,  11 ;  Gal.  ii.  19,  20). 
Kighteousness  here  is  simply  the  opposite 
of  sin— obedience,  submission  to  the  will  of 
Ood.  Bengel  says,  "  Justitia  tota  una  est ; 
peccatum  multiplex."  By  whose  stripes  ye 
were  healed.  The  apostle  is  quoting  the 
Septuagint  rendering'  of  Isa.  liii.  5.  The 
Greek  ixdha^  means  the  mark  or  weal  left 
on  the  flesh  by  a  scourge  (comp.  Ecclus. 
xxviii.  17,  nA7j7)?  fiAffTiyos  voiei  /xc^Aafiras). 
The  slaves,  whom  the  apostle  is  addressing, 
might  perhaps  not  unfrequently  be  sub- 
jected to  the  scourge;  he  bids  them  re- 
member the  more  dreadful  flagellation  which 
the  Lord  endured.  They  were  to  learn 
patience  of  him,  and  to  remember  to  their 
comfort  that  those  stripes  which  he,  the 
holy  Son  of  God,  condescended  to  suffer  are 
to  them  that  believe  healing  and  salvation. 
Faith  in  the  crucified  Saviour  lifts  the 
Christian  out  of  the  sickness  of  sin  into  the 
health  of  righteousness. 

Ver.  25. — ^Tor  ye  were  as  sheep  going 
astray;  rather,  with  the  best  manuscripts, 
for  ye  were  going  aetray  like  sheep.  The 
apostle  is  probably  still  thiuking  of  the 
great  prophecy  of  Isaiah,  and  here  almost 


reproduces  the  words  of  the  sixth  verse, 
"  All  we  like  sheep  have  gone  astray."  He 
who  had  been  thrice  charged  to  feed  the 
sheep  and  the  Iambs  of  Christ  would  think 
also  of  the  parable  of  the  lost  sheep,  and  of 
the  people  of  Israel  who  were  "as  sheep 
having  no  shepherd "  (Matt.  ix.  36).  But 
are  now  returned  unto  the  Shepherd  and 
Bishop  of  your  souls;  literally,  but  ye  re- 
turned (the  verb  is  aorist);  that  is,  at  the 
time  of  their  conversion.  The  aorist  passive, 
iitfirTpik^r\v,  is  so  frequently  used  in  a  middle 
sense  that  the  translation,  "ye  were  con- 
verted," cannot  be  insisted  on  (comp.  Mark 
V.  30 ;  Matt.  ix.  22 ;  x.  13).  Christ  is  the 
Shepherd  of  our  souls.  The  quotation  from 
Isaiah  doubtless  brought  before  St.  Peter's 
thoughts  the  sweet  and  holy  allegory  of  the 
good  Shepherd,  which  he  had  heard  from 
the  Saviour's  lips  (comp.  also  Isa.  xl.  11; 
Ezek.  xxxiv.  23;  xxxviL  24;  also  Ps. 
xxii.).  The  word  "  bishop  "  (4irf<rKoiras)  is 
used  in  a  similar  connection  in  Acts  xx.  28, 
"  Take  heed  ...  to  all  the  flock  over  the 
which  the  Holy  Ghost  hath  made  yon  over- 
seers (ciri(rK<iirouj) ; "  comp.  also  Ezek.  xxxiv. 
11,  "  I  will  both  search  my  sheep,  and  seek 
them  out,"  where  the  Greek  word  for  "  seek 
them  out"  is  eiriffKe^ouai.  The  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  is  the  chief  Shepherd  (ch.  v.  4).  He 
is  also  the  chief  Bishop  or  Overseer  of  those 
souls  which  he  has  bought  to  be  his  own 
with  his  most  precious  blood. 


flOMILETIOS. 

Vers.  1 — 10. — TOe  regenerate  life.  I.  Its  orowth.  1.  What  must  le  shunned.  St. 
Paul  bids  us  work  out  our  own  salvation.  The  new  birth  is  the  beginning ;  that  comes 
from  God — from  his  free  grace.  "  Not  by  works  of  righteousness  which  we  have  done, 
but  according  to  his  mercy  he  saved  us,  by  the  washing  of  regeneration,  and  renewing 
of  the  Holy  Ghost."  But  the  new  man  must  grow ;  and  that  growth  is  not  spon- 
taneous ;  it  will  not  evolve  itself  without  effort  from  the  "  incorruptible  seed."  Progress, 
growth  in  grace,  requires  earnest  prayer,  watchfulness,  constant  self-denial.  St.  Peter 
bids  us  "grow  in  grace"  (2  Pet.  iii.  18).  We  do  not  bid  a  plant  to  grow;  we  watch 
its  growth,  we  assist  it.  But  Holy  Scripture  bids  the  Christian  grow ;  the  command- 
ment implies  the  power.  Our  Father  doth  not  mock  us  with  precepts  which  we  cannot 
obey.  And  growth  in  free  agents  implies  effort.  They  must  avoid  all  peruicious 
influences,  everything  which  might  check  the  growth  of  the  precious  germ.  Especially 
they  must  avoid  all  offences  against  the  law  of  love ;  for  love  is  the  very  pulse  of  the 
regenerate  life;  those  who  are  bom  again  of  the  incorruptible  seed  must  love  one 
another  with  a  pure  heart  fervently.  There  can  be  no  such  things  as  malice  and  guila 
and  envy  in  the  heart  wherein  the  holy  seed  abideth ;  for  these  things  come  of  Satan ; 
they  have  the  taint  of  hell.  Christians  must  not  speak  evil  of  one  another;  it  is  Satan 
who  is  the  accuser  of  the  brethren.  Christians  must  be  true  and  real.  The  Lord  Jesui 
hates  hypocrisy ;  he  condemned  it  sternly  in  the  Pharisees  ;  it  is  more  hateful  still  in 
those  who  are  called  by  his  holy  Name.  The  Christian  must  lay  aside  all  these  evil 
things ;  he  must  strip  them  off.  .They  are  the  garments  of  the  old  man ;  he  must  put 
on  the  new.  2.  What  must  be  desired.  "  The  sincere  milk  of  the  Word,"  the  spiritual 
nourishment  of  the  soul.  They  who  cherish  malice  and  envy  in  their  hearts  have  bo 
appetite  tot  the  heavealj  food.    They  who  have  not  holy  love  within  themselves 


78  THE  FIEST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  PETER,    [ch.  n.  1— 25. 

cannot  desire  the  Word  of  him  who  is  Love.  But  all  who  answer  to  the  apostle's 
description  will  long  for  it.  Those  to  whom  he  wrote  had  not  been  Christians  very  long ; 
some  of  them  probably  only  a  very  short  time — they  were  new-bom  babes.  But  the 
true  Christian  will  always  regard  himself  as  a  mere  child  in  Christ ;  he  will  feel  what 
little  progress  he  has  made  in  spiritual  growth ;  and,  feeling  this,  he  will  long  for 
spiritual  nourishment.  The  Word  of  G-od  is  the  food  of  the  soul ;  it  is  the  suitable 
food,  the  food  divinely  provided  for  the  soul,  as  milk  is  for  infants.  It  is  pure,  una- 
dulterated. The  soul  that  desires  it  will  assimilate  it,  will  grow  by  its  nourishing 
influence  unto  salvation,  unto  the  measure  of  the  stature  of  Christ.  The  Christian  wiU 
desire  the  Word,  that  he  may  grow  thereby ;  not  simply  for  present  pleasure  and  excite- 
ment, not  simply  for  knowledge,  or  for  facility  in  preaching  and  theological  controversy ; 
but  above  all  things,  that  he  may  grow  thereby.  The  Word  of  Gkid  is  sweet  to  hear, 
knowledge  is  precious,  religious  eloquence  is  a  great  gift ;  but  this  pleasure  and  this 
knowledge  are  little  worth  in  comparison  with  growth  in  holiness  of  heart  and  life. 
The  Scriptures  are  able  to  make  us  wise;  the  wisdom  which  we  shouM  seek  there  is 
that  wisdom  which  cometh  from  above,  which  is  unto  salvation.  3.  What  leads  us  to 
desire  it.  Experience,  the  taste  of  its  sweetness.  The  psalmist  says,  "  How  sweet  are 
thy  words  to  my  taste !  yea,  sweeter  than  honey  to  my  mouth  1 "  And  in  another 
psalm,  which  St.  Peter  quotes  here,  we  are  invited  to  "  taste  and  see  that  the  Lord  is 
good."  His  Word  is  sweet,  but  it  derives  its  sweetness  from  him  whose  Word  it  is.  We 
do  not  realize  the  sweetness  of  the  Word  of  God  till  we  have  felt  something  of  the 
sweetness  of  the  Saviour's  presence.  For  he  himself,  who  is  in  the  highest  sense  the 
Word  of  God,  is  the  true  food  of  the  soul.  He  bids  us  feed  on  him  by  faith ;  he  giveth 
food  and  drink  to  the  soul  that  hungereth  and  thirsteth  after  righteousness ;  and  that 
food  and  drink,  which  is  himself,  he  giveth  in  the  blessed  sacrament  and  in  the  daily 
life  of  faith  to  those  who  lift  up  their  hearts  to  him  with  earnest  longing  and.  strong 
desire.  Those  who  have  known  how  gracious  the  Lord  is  will  long  more  and  more  for 
increasing  nearness  unto  him. 

II.  Its  centre,  which  is  Chbist  ;  and  oub  relations  to  him.  1.  ITie  Church  is 
a  spiritual  temple,  of  which  Christ  is  the  chief  Corner-stone.  The  whole  imiverse  is  in 
a  sense  the  temple  of  God :  he  fills  it  with  his  presence.  The  heaven  and  the  heaven 
of  heavens  cannot  contain  him ;  he  inhabiteth  eternity.  Yet  he  vouchsafed  to  manifest 
his  presence  in  the  ancient  temple — it  was  "  the  habitation  of  his  house,  the  place  where 
his  honour  dwelt."  But  that  temple  was  the  figure  of  a  holler  temple.  God  is  a 
Sinrit ;  his  temple  in  the  highest  sense  must  be  a  spiritual  house.  It  is  built  up  of 
living  stones.  Christian  men  and  women,  living  with  the  life  of  Christ,  who  come, 
drawn  by  the  attracting  force  of  love  (as,  the  fable  said,  the  stones  of  Thebes  were 
drawn  by  the  lyre  of  Amphion)  to  the  one  living  Stone  which  was  once  disallowed  of 
men,  but  is  chosen  of  God  and  precious,  and  range  themselves,  or  rather  are  built  up 
by  the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  as  chosen  stones  upon  the  one  Stone  first  chosen, 
which  is  at  once  the  Foundation  on  which  the  building  ret>ts,  and  the  chief  Corner-stone 
that  holds  the  walls  together,  so  that  the  whole  building  fitly  joined  and  compacted  in 
all  its  parts  groweth  unto  a  holy  temple  in  the  Lord.  The  whole  building  is  a  temple; 
so  in  a  true  sense  is  each  living  stone  therein,  for  the  bodies  of  Chiistians  are  temples 
of  the  Holy  Ghost  (1  Cor.  vi.  19) ;  but  in  the  fullest  sense  the  whole  Christian  Church 
is  the  spiritual  temple  of  God — it  is  a  corporate  unity,  knit  and  framed  together  into 
one  building  by  the  chief  Corner-stone,  the  principle  of  unity  on  which  it  rests,  which 
binds  its  various  parts  into  one  whole.  The  closer  Christians  are  bound  by  spiritual 
union  with  that  one  Comer-stone,  the  closer  will  they  be  bound  together  in  the  com- 
munion of  saints,  though  they  may  be  set  as  living  stones  in  widely  distant  parts  of  the 
spiritual  building.  And  God  dwelleth  in  this  temple,  which  is  the  holy  Catholic 
Church,  the  whole  congregation  of  Christian  people  throughout  the  world.  He  fills  it, 
all  and  in  every  part,  with  his  sacred  presence.  For  this  temple  is  very  precious  it 
his  sight ;  each  living  stone  is  precious,  and  precious  above  all  price  is  the  chief  Corner- 
stone which  holds  the  whole  together.  "  For  this  purpose  chiefly  did  he  make  the 
world,  that  in  it  he  might  raise  this  spiritual  building  for  himself  to  dwell  in  for  ever. 
,  .  ,  And  from  eternity  he  knew  what  the  dimensions  and  frame  and  materials-  of  it 
shouW  be.  Tfce  continuance  of  this  present  world,  as  now  it  is,  is  but  for  the  service  of 
his  work,  like  the  scaffolding  about  it;  and  therefore,  when  the  spiritiul  building 


OH.  n.  1—25.]    THE  FIBST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF   PETER.  T9 

shall  be  fully  completed,  all  the  present  frame  of  things  in  the  world  and  in  the  Church 
itself  shall  be  taken  away,  and  appear  no  more "  (Leighton).  2.  The  Church  is  a 
tpiritual  priesthood.  As  Christ  is  in  a  transcendent  sense  the  Temple  of  God,  and 
yet  Christians  individually  and  the  Christian  Church  as  a  whole  are  temples  also 
through  his  grace,  so  Christ  himself  is  the  one  great  High  Priest ;  but  though  that 
high  priesthood  is  his  aloue  and  incommunicable,  yet  his  saints  thank  him  because 
he  has  made  the  Christian  Church  to  be  a  holy  priesthood,  and  individual  Christians  to 
be  priests  unto  God.  Under  the  ancient  Law  the  priests  only  entered  into  the  templo, 
the  high  priest  alone  into  the  holy  of  holies,  and  that  but  once  a  year ;  but  now  the 
veil  which  hid  the  holiest  place  is  rent  in  twain,  and  all  true  Christiana  may  enter  as 
priests  into  the  immediate  presence  of  God,  "  having  boldness  to  enter  into  the  holiest 
by  the  blood  of  Jesus "  (Heb.  x.  19).  Through  him  (Bph.  ii.  18)  we  have  access  to 
the  Father,  we  come  having  our  hearts  sprinkled  from  an  evil  conscience,  having 
with  ug  the  blood  of  sprinkling,  pleading  the  atoning  power  of  the  one  great  Sacrifice. 
For  as  the  Lord  Jesus  is  Temple  and  Priest,  so  is  he  also  the  one  true  Sacrifice.  Yet 
we,  if  we  are  priests,  must  have  something  to  offer  :  "  Wherewith  shall  I  come  before 
the  Lord?"  St.  Peter  tells  us  that  our  offerings  must  be  spiritual  sacrifices.  Such 
sacrifices  are  the  prayers  of  the  saints.  "  Let  my  prayer  be  set  forth  before  tb'-e  as  the 
incense ;  and  the  lifting  up  of  my  hands  as  the  evening  sacrifice  "  (Ps.  cili.  2).  These 
prayers  are  presented  before  the  throne  in  "  golden  vials  full  of  odours  "  in  the  sacred 
imagery  of  the  Revelation  (v.  8).  Prayer  is  a  sacrifice  when  it  issues  from  the  heart,  when 
its  sweet  odour  is  wafted  upwards  with  the  fire  of  hoiy  love.  And  praise  is  a  sacrifice: 
"  Offer  unto  God  thanksgiving ; "  "  Whoso  offereth  praise  glorifieth  me  "  (Ps.  1. 14,  23) ; 
but  to  be  a  sacrifice  it  must  be  that  sweet  and  holy  melody  which  the  thankfCd  heart 
singeth  unto  the  Lord.  Almsgiving,  too,  is  a  sacrifice  (Heb.  xiii.  16),  when  the  Chris- 
tian offers  willingly,  out  of  a  thankful  heart,  seeking  not  the  praise  of  men,  but  only 
the  glory  of  God.  God  accepts  our  poor  gifts  when  they  are  brought  to  him  in  faith, 
as  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  accepted  the  two  mites  of  the  poor  widow.  But  the  chief 
sacrifice  that  we  can  ofter  is  the  sacrifice  of  ourselves.  "  My  son,  give  me  thy  heart," 
is  the  Lord's  requirement.  If  we  give  him  that,  we  give  him  all :  it  is  a  poor  gift, 
worthless  in  itself,  but  yet  precious  in  his  sight  because  he  first  loved  us,  made  mor^ 
precious  still  by  tlie  precious  blood  of  Christ  which'was  shed  that  these  hearts  of  oura 
might  be  cleansed  and  purified  for  a  holy  offering.  It  is  all  he  asks,  and  all  we  have 
to  give;  if  we  give  it,  we  shall  be  all  the  richer,  for  he  giveth  in  return  the  unspeak- 
able Gift — the  gift  of  himself,  to  abide  for  ever  in  the  heart  that  is  given  to  him.  "  Wo 
ofiier  and  present  unto  thee,  0  Lord,  ourselves,  our  souls  and  bodies,  to  be  a  reasonable, 
holy,  and  lively  sacrifice  unto  thee."  We  offer  these  our  offerings  through  Jesus  Christ, 
(Heb.  xiii.  16),  pleading  his  merits,  his  atonement ;  and  through  him  they  are 
acceptable  unto  God.  In  themselves  they  are  very  mean  and  imperfect;  not  without 
blemish,  as  an  offering  should  be ;  defiled  with  lingering  taints  of  selfishness  and 
earthliness ;  but  if  they  are  offered  through  him,  in  the  faith  of  him,  they  are  acceptable. 
For  the  priests  of  the  spiritual  temple  are  also  living  stones  in  that  temple,  incorporated 
into  the  mystical  body  of  Christ,  and  thus  their  spiritual  sacrifices  are  consecrated  by 
his  one  prevailing  Sacrifice,  and  through  that  Sacrifice  are  acceptable  unto  God.  3. 
What  Christ  is  to  true  Christians.  The  apostle  confirms  his  teaching  by  an  appeal  to 
the  prophets :  "  It  is  contained  in  the  Scriptures,"  he  says.  Search  the  Scriptures ; 
they  testify  of  Christ ;  we  shall  find  treasures  there,  if  only  we  search.  The  evangelical 
prophet  testified  of  Christ  long  before  he  came  in  the  flesh ;  he  spoke  of  him  as  the 
chief  Corner-stone ;  he  speaks  in  the  Name  of  God,  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God,  Behold 
I  lay  in  Zirn  for  a  foundation  a  Stone,  a  tried  Stone,  a  precious  Corner-stone,  a  sure 
Foundation."  God  the  Father  is  the  Master-builder ;  it  was  he  who  laid  the  Corner- 
stone :  "  This  is  the  Lord's  doing;  it  is  marvellous  in  our  eyes."  It  is  laid  in  Zion,  in 
the  Church,  to  be  its  one  Foundation,  the  Book  on  which  it  is  built,  which  gives  it 
strength  and  solidity ;  its  chief  Corner-stone,  which  gives  it  unity,  without  which  it 
would  fall  to  pieces.  And  that  chief  Corner-stone  is  elect,  chosen  of  God  from  all 
eternity,  chosen  in  the  eternal  purpose  of  God  the  Father  to  be  the  Foundation  of  the 
Church.  And  it  is  precious  exceedingly,  held  in  high  honour  of  God,  worthy  of  his 
love,  for  it  is  faultless  in  beauty  and  in  strength — a  polished  Corner-stone  without  flaw 
and  without  blemish.    He  that  restetb  on  that  Corner-stone,  built  up  in  faith  upon  it, 


80  THE  FIBST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PETER,   [oh.  n.  1—25. 

ihall  not  be  put  to  shame.  "  For  God  hath  laid  this  precious  Stono  in  Zion  for  this  very 
purpose  that  weary  souls  may  rest  upon  it "  (Leighton) :  and  he  that  so  resteth  need 
not  make  haste ;  he  need  not  run  hither  and  thither  for  help,  for  his  soul  is  established, 
his  mind  is  stayed  upon  God.  Nothing  can  shake  bim  from  that  sure  Foundation,  while 
he  rests  on  it  in  faith,  "  neither  death,  nor  life,  ,  .  .  nor  things  present,  nor  things  to 
come,  .  .  .  shall  be  able  to  separate  us  from  the  love  of  God,  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus 
our  Lord."  "  Such  honour  have  all  his  saints."  This  honour  is  for  them  that  believe ; 
they  have  the  honour,  high  above  all  other  honour,  of  indissoluble  union  with  Christ ; 
they  rest  on  him,  they  are  his  and  he  is  theirs :  "  My  beloved  is  mine,  and  I  am  his." 
They  know  the  exceeding  preciousness  of  that  living  Stone,  for  they  feel  its  strong 
support  beneath  them ;  its  preciousness  is  for  them ;  for  their  sakes,  for  their  salvation, 
God  laid  that  elect,  that  precious  Stone  in  Zion.  How  precious  faith  is  (2  Pet.  i.  1)  I 
it  is  faith  that  binds  us  firmly  to  that  precious  Comer-stoue.  4.  What  he  is  to  the  dis- 
obedient ;  or  to  such  as  disbelieve  (Eevised  Version) ;  for,  as  Leighton  says,  unbelief 
itself  is  "  the  grand  disobedience ; "  "  This  is  the  work  of  God,  that  ye  believe  on  him 
whom  he  hath  sent"  (John  vi.  29).  Unbelief  lies  at  the  root  of  all  disobedience;  all 
disobedience  flows  from  it ;  he  cannot  be  disobedient  who  realizes  by  faith  the  power, 
the  love,  the  presence,  of  God.  The  builders  were  disobedient ;  the  priests  and  scribes 
disallowed  the  stones  which  God  had  chosen.  So,  alas  I  now  too  often  the  great  men  of 
the  world,  the  builders  of  its  policy, "  leave  out  Christ  in  their  building ; "  and  not  only 
they,  but  sometimes  "  the  pretended  builders  of  the  Church  of  God,  though  they  use 
the  name  of  Christ,  and  serve  their  turn  with  that,  yet  reject  himself,  and  oppose  the 
power  of  his  spiritual  kingdom.  There  may  be  wit  and  learning,  and  much  knowledge 
of  the  Scriptures  amongst  those  that  are  haters  of  the  Lord  Christ  and  of  the  power  of 
godliness,and  corrupters  of  the  worship  of  God.  It  is  the  spirit  of  humility  and  obedience 
and  saving  faith  that  teaches  men  to  esteem  Christ,  and  to  build  upon  bim"  (Leighton). 
But  the  unbelief  and  disobedience  of  men  cannot, turn  aside  the  purpose  of  God ;  the 
living  Stone  that  was  once  disallowed  is  become  the  Head  of  the  corner.  He  is  exalted 
high  above  all  the  power  of  the  enemy.  "  The  kings  of  the  earth  may  set  themselves, 
and  the  rulers  may  take  counsel  together  against  the  Lord,  and  against  his  Anointed. 
.  ,  .  But  he  tliat  sitteth  in  the  heavens  shall  laugh,  ...  he  shall  speak  vmto  them  in 
his  wrath,  .  .  .  Yet  have  I  set  my  King  upon  my  holy  hill  of  Zion."  He  is  the  Head 
of  the  corner  now, "  Head  over  all  things  to  his  Church."  "  He  must  reign  till  he  hsth 
put  all  enemies  under  his  feet ; "  then  shall  the  King  sit  upon  the  throne  of  his  glory, 
and  they  who  have  rejected  him  shall  to  their  confusion  see  him  raised  "  far  above  all 
principality,  and  power,  and  might,  and  dominion,  and  every  name  that  is  named,  not 
only  in  this  world,  but  also  in  that  which  is  to  come."  But  he  is  to  the  disobedient 
not  only  the  Head  of  the  corner  to  their  confusion,  but  also  a  Stone  of  stumbling  and  a 
Rock  of  offence  to  their  destruction.  It  is  no  light  thing  to  reject  the  Son  of  God,  to  set 
the  cross  at  nought,  to  despise  the  love  of  him  who  died  upon  the  cross  for  us.  Such 
sinners  against  their  own  souls  must  fall.  He  tasted  death  for  every  man;  and  to  every 
man  the  death  of  the  Son  of  God  is  full  of  momentous  results — everlasting  life  to  the 
believer,  but  to  the  wilful  and  impenitent  sinner  what  can  it  be  save  utter  death  ?  The 
living  Stone  is  the  Foimdation,  the  Head  of  the  comer ;  "  this  is  the  Lord's  doing,''  and 
who  can  stand  against  the  Lord  ?  The  Stone  becomes  a  Stumbling-block  to  the  dis- 
obedient ;  they  fall  upon  it.  One  day  it  must  fall  on  them,  as  in  the  vision  of  Nebu- 
chadnezzar it  fell  on  the  great  image  which  represented  all  the  empires  of  the  world. 
"  Whosoever  shall  fall  on  this  stone  shall  be  broken  ;  but  on  whomsoever  it  shall  fall,  it 
will  grind  him  to  powder."  For  this  is  the  Lord's  appointment.  That  Stone  must  become 
a  great  mountain  and  fill  the  whole  earth ;  and  resistance  to  the  decree  of  the  Most 
High  can  only  end  in  ruin  and  destruction ;  those  who  reject  the  living  Stone  must  in  the 
end  be  cnished  beneath  it.  5.  What  true  Christiana  are  to  Christ.  (1)  They  are"p 
chosen  generation,"  an  elect  race.  As  the  Israelites  were  one  race,  descended  from  one 
ancestor,  so  Christian:,  in  virtue  of  their  new  birth,  are  the  children  of  the  heavenlj 
Father,  a  regenerate  r«ce.  And  they'  are  chosen,  the  elect  people  of  God,  chosen  ii 
Christ  Jesus  before  the  foimdation  of  the  world ;  a  high  and  sacred  dignity.  (2)  "  A 
royal  priesthood."  Not  only  a  priesthood,  as  St.  Peter  had  said  in  ver.  5,  but  a  royal 
priesthood.  Royal,  because  the  priests  of  the  spiritual  temple  serve  the  King  of  kings ; 
they  are  his  attendants ;  they  belong  to  "  the  household  of  God," — the  royal  household 


OH.  11.1— 26.]    THE   FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  PETER.  81 

of  the  great  invisible  King.  And  they  reign  upon  the  earth ;  for  they  have  given  their 
hearts  to  Christ  to  be  his  kingdom  j  and  "  this  is  the  benefit  of  receiving  the  kingdom 
of  Christ  into  a  man's  heart,  that  it  makes  him  a  king  himself.  All  the  subjects  of 
Christ  are  kings,  not  only  in  regard  of  that  pure  crown  of  glory  they  hope  for,  and 
shall  certainly  attain;  but  in  the  present  they  have  a  kingdom  which  is  the  pledge  of 
that  other,  overcoming  the  world,  and  Satan,  and  themselves,  by  the  power  of  faith  " 
(Leighton).  The  true  Christian  has  a  royal  heart ;  he  reigns  with  Christ  the  King  over 
the  passions,  affections,  and  desires  of  his  lower  nature.  The  free  Spirit  of  God  dis- 
penses to  the  contrite  "  the  princely  heart  of  innocence "  ('  Christian  Year :  Si  , 
Sunday  after  Trinity ').  (3)  "  A  holy  nation."  One  nation,  though  living  in  different 
lands,  under  different  forms  of  earthly  government ;  but  all  citizens  of  the  one  heavenly 
country,  all  subjects  of  the  one  Almighty  King.  And  holy,  because  they  are  his,  separated 
to  his  service,  bound  by  that  dedication  to  follow  after  holiness  of  heart  and  life.  (4) 
"  A  peculiar  people."  The  children  of  Israel  were  to  be  God's  "  peculiar  treasure 
above  all  people "  (Exod.  xix.  5).  The  Christian  Church,  the  Israel  of  God,  is  his 
treasure  now,  his  special  possession.  He  spared  not  his  own  Son,  but  delivered  him  up 
foT  them ;  and  that  Church,  purchased  at  such  a  price,  is  very  precious ;  "  They  shall  be 
nsine,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts,  in  that  day  when  I  make  up  my  jewels;  "  or  rather,  as  in 
the  Revised  Version,  "  in  the  day  that  I  do  make,  even  a  peculiar  treasure."  6.  What 
is  their  iounden  duty.  All  these  high  and  holy  dignities  are  theirs.  The  estate  of 
Christians  is  very  lofty ;  they  are  the  children  of  the  Most  High,  heirs  of  God,  and  joint- 
beirs  with  Christ.  They  should  maintain  a  greatness  of  mind,  a  holiness  of  life  suitable 
to  their  exalted  station ;  they  "  should  show  forth  the  praises  of  him  who  bath  called 
them  out  of  darkness  into  his  marvellous  light."  For  they  were  once  not  a  people ;  they 
had  no  centre  of  unity,  no  part  in  the  heavenly  kingdom,  no  hope ;  for  they  had  not 
obtained  mercy.  But  now  God  hath  called  them,  "  Say  ye  unto  your  brethren,  Ammi ; 
and  to  your  sisters,  Ruhamah"  (Hos.  ii.  2);  they  are  his  people;  they  have  obtained 
mercy.  "  Ammi,  my  people."  There  is  a  treasure  of  holy  meaning  in  that  word.  We 
are  his ;  he  cares  for  us ;  we  belong  to  him.  Then  we  must  show  forth  his  praises,  and 
that  not  only  with  our  lips,  but  in  our  lives.  We  must  proclaim  to  others  the  blessed- 
ness of  religion.  He  has  called  us  out  of  the  darkness  of  sin  and  ignorance  into  the 
light  of  bis  presence.  That  light  is  wonderful.  Christians  never  cease  to  wonder  at 
the  glory  and  blessedness  of  that  light  which  in  times  of  near  communion  with  God 
stream's  into  their  hearts.  If  they  walk  in  that  light,  it  must  kindle  a  holy  flame  in 
their  own  souls ;  they  must  become  a  light  also  ("  Ye  are  the  light  of  the  world," 
the  Saviour  said  to  his  chosen) ;  they  must  let  their  light  shine  before  men,  that  men 
may  see  their  good  works,  and  glorify  their  Father  which  is  in  heaven. 

Lessons.  1.  "  Taste  and  see  that  the  Lord  is  good."  Having  once  tasted,  you  will 
long  for  his  presence,  you  will  desire  the  heavenly  food.  2.  Seek  to  be  built  up  in 
Christ ;  not  loose  stones  lying  round  the  one  Comer-stone,  but  resting  upon  it,  joined 
as  living  stones  to  the  one  Foundation.  3.  Be  faithfiil  priests  unto  the  Lord.  Offer 
every  day  the  daily  sacrifice  of  prayer  and  praise;  renew  every  day  the  sacrifice  of  self. 
4.  Consider  the  great  dignity  of  Christians;  be  full  of  thankfulness ;  rejoice  in  the 
Lord ;  show  forth  his  praises. 

Vers.  11 — 17. —  Various  exhortations.  I.  To  purity  of  life.  1.  The  ground  of  the 
exhortation.  St.  Peter  has  been  dwelling  on  the  high  dignities  and  privileges  of  the 
Christian  life.  They  who  are  living  stones  in  God's  spiritual  temple  must  remember 
their  close  union  with  Christ,  the  chief  Corner-stone ;  they  who  belong  to  the  holy,  the 
royal  priesthood  must  remember  that  "  Holiness  to  the  Lord "  is  the  badge  of  those 
who  are  consecrated  to  his  service  (Exod.  xxviii.  36).  The  living  stones  in  the 
spiritual  temple  are  to  become  pillars  in  the  heavenly  temple  (Rev.  iiL  12),  the  priests 
in  that  spiritual  temple  are  to  be  priests  of  God  and  of  his  Christ  in  the  glory  of  the 
Resurrection  (Rev.  xx.  6).  They  must  remember  their  high  destiny.  Here  they  are 
sojourners  and  strangers ;  they  must  not  follow  the  example  of  those  among  whom  their 
■  lot  is  cast  during  the  time  of  their  sojourning.  Fleshly  lusts  are  of  the  earth,  earthy. 
"  The  lust  of  the  flesh,  and  the  lust  of  the  eye,  and  the  pride  of  life,  are  not  of  the 
Father,  but  are  of  the  world."  Aud  God's  people  are  not  of  the  world;  they  are 
sojourners  and  strangers  in  it  for  a  little  time ;  they  must  not  imitate  its  modes  of 

I.  PETEB.  a 


83  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL .  OP  PETER,    [on.  iL  1— 2& 

thought  and  life ;  they  must  live  as  citizens  of  the  heavenly  country.  2.  The  necessity 
of  the  exhortaticm.  (1)  For  the  salvation  of  the  souL  Fleshly  lustB  are  not  only 
beneath  the  dignity  of  God's  peculiar  people ;  they  are  full  of  danger,  for  they  war 
against  the  soul ;  they  are,  as  it  were,  the  dark  host8  of  the  evil  one  sent  to  vrage  a 
deadly  warfare  against  the  souls  of  men.  It  is  the  soul  against  which  they  fight — the 
soul  which  was  first  brenthod  into  man  by  God ;  the  soul  for  which  the  Lord  Jesua 
died.  To  lose  one's  soul  is  to  lose  one's  all ;  no  apparent  gain  can  compensate  for 
that  tremendous  loss.  (2)  For  the  glory  of  God.  If  the  inward  life  be  pure,  the 
outward  life  will  be  blameless.  If  fleshly  lusts  are  indulged  in  the  heart,  they  will 
appear  somewhere  or  other  in  the  life.  The  outward  life  cannot  be  uniformly  fiiir  and 
seemly  unless  the  heart  is  pure.  But  the  Christian  must  for  the  glory  of  God  let  his 
light  shine  before  men.  Unbelievers  will  narrowly  scan  the  lives  of  Christians ;  they 
will  watch  for  any  little  inconsistencies,  and  magnify  them,  and  turn  them  to  the 
dishonour  of  their  religion.  The  Gentiles  spoke  against  the  Christians  of  the  ancient 
Church;  they  caricatured  their  sacraments,  their  worship;  they  accused  them  of 
atheism,  of  exciting  seditions.  Still  the  lives  of  Christians  are  watched.  Therefore 
they  should  have  their  ''  conversation  honest,"  that  is,  their  life  should  be  fair  and 
beautiful ;  and  as  the  "beauty  of  a  Christian's  life  consists  ih  symmetry  and  conformity 
to  the  Word  of  God  as  its  rule,  he  ought  diligently  to  study  that  rule,  and  to  square  hii 
ways  by  it ;  not  to  walk  at  random,  but  to  apply  this  rule  to  every  step  at  home  and 
abroad,  and  to  be  as  careful  to  keep  the  beauty  of  his  ways  unspotted,  as  those  women 
•re  of  their  faces  and  attire  who  are  most  studious  of  comeliness  "  (Leighton).  And  their 
object  in  all  this  should  be  the  greater  glory  of  God,  We  are  bidden  not  to  seek  the 
praise  of  men ;  we  might  take  no  heed  to  their  blame,  to  calumny  and  misrepresenta- 
tion, were  it  not  that  we  must  care  for  the  souls  of  the  slanderers,  and  for  the  glory  of 
God.  For  those  ends  Christians  must  try  to  exhibit  the  beauty  of  holiness  in  their 
outward  lives,  that  men  may  see  their  good  works,  and  glorify  their  Father  which  is  in 
heaven.  It  is  from  him  that  all  holiness  comes ;  all  spiritual  beauty  is  his  gift.  Men 
will  see  it  in  the  lives  of  true  Christians;  they  will  feel  its  reality,  its  true  loveliness; 
they  know  that  such  beauty  is  not  of  the  earth ;  they  may  by  God's  grace  be  led  to 
recognize  it  as  coming  from  God,  and  to  glorify  him  by  seeking  themselves  to  imitate 
the  holy  lives  of  Christians,  that  they  too,  in  the  day  of  visitation,  may  be  ready  to 
attend  the  heavenly  Bridegroom  in  the  wedding  garments  of  holiness. 

II.  To  OBBDiENCfi  TO  CIVIL  AUTHOEiTiBS.  1.  The  extent  of  that  obedience.  "  The 
powers  that  be  are  ordained  of  God  "  (Rum.  xiii.  1) ;  "  The  Most  High  giveth  the  king- 
doms of  the  earth  to  whom  he  will ; "  "  By  him  kings  reign,  and  princes  decree  justice." 
Therefore  the  Christian  must  be  loyal  to  the  government  under  which  God's  providence 
lias  placed  him.  One  form  of  government  may  be  better  than  another ;  but  any  regular 
government  is  better  than  anaichy.  St.  Paul  bids  us  pray  "for  kings,  and  for  all  that 
are  in  authority ;  that  we  may  lead  a  quiet  and  peaceable  life."  Government  is  from 
God ;  the  form  of  it  is  determined,  under  God's  overruling  providence,  by  man.  St.  Peter 
bids  us  obey  every  ordinance  of  man,  every  human  creation — ail  rulers,  whether  the 
sovereign  or  those  who  are  set  in  authority  under  him ;  and  that  because  orderly  govern- 
ment is  necessary  for  the  well-being  and  the  very  existence  of  society,  "  for  the  punish- 
ment of  evil-doers,  and  for  the  piaise  of  them  that  do  well."  On  the  whole,  the  strong 
rule  of  Rome  had  worked  for  the  good  of  mankind,  for  the  peace  and  order  of  that  vast 
empire.  Roman  governors  and  officers,  like  Festus  and  Gallio  and  Claudius  Lysias,  had 
been  on  the  side  of  right  against  the  violence  of  Jewish  mobs  ;  even  Felix  and  Pilate 
showed  some  traces  of  the  Roman  sense  of  justice.  The  reigning  emperor,  indeed,  was 
a  monster  of  vice;  he  had  treated  the  Christians  of  Rome  with  atrocious  cruelty;  the 
persecution  would  soon  spread  into  the  provinces.  But  hitherto  the  Roman  authorities 
had  generally  protected  the  infant  Church.  The  institutions  of  civil  government 
work  for  the  good  of  society ;  Christians  must  be  loyal  and  peaceable  citizens.  2.  The 
ground  and  limits  of  that  obedience.  It  should  be  "  for  the  Lord's  sake."  His  pro- 
vidence has  set  us  where  we  are ;  we  must  not  rebel  against  his  will.  He  ruleth  all 
things  bot^  in  heaven  and  in  earth,  and  he  will  make  all  things  work  together  foi 
the  eternal  good  of  his  chosen.  It  is  enough  for  us;  our  duty  is  to  say,  "  Thy  will  be 
done,"  and  for  his  sake,  in  the  consciousness  that,  in  obeying  those  ^who  are  set  over  us, 
we  are  obeying  the  King  of  kings,  to  submit  ourselves  to  every  human  ordinance.    BttI 


OH.  n.  1—26.]    THE  FIBST  EPISTLE  GENEBAL  OF  PETER  89 

that  obedience  is  for  his  sake ;  therefore  It  cannot  extend  to  unlawful  commands.  St.  Peter 
himself  had  once  said  to  the  high  priest,  "  We  ought  to  obey  God  rather  than  man  " 
(Acts  T.  29  ;  comp.  also  Acts  iv.  19) ;  and  the  time  was  coming  when  brave  Christlaa 
men  and  women  would  have  to  choose  between  renouncing  Christ  and  the  death  of  mar- 
tyrdom. The  disobedience  would  ba  "  for  the  Lord's  sake."  The  higher  duty  would 
overrule  the  lower.  To  "  fear  God  and  to  keep  his  commandments  is  the  whole  duty  o/ 
man ; "  this  highest  rule  will  guide  the  Christian  under  ordinary  circumstances  to  obey 
human  law  aud  government,  sometimes  under  exceptional  circumstances  to  obey  God 
ralher  than  man.  As  a  rule,  Christians  must  be  subject  to  the  higher  powers.  Indeed, 
they  are  free ;  Christ  hath  made  them  free  from  the  yoke  of  bondage.  But  they  are 
the  servants  of  God ;  his  will  should  be  the  law  of  their  lives ;  and  his  will  is  that 
Christian  liberty  should  be  orderly  and  sober.  The  soul  is  free  from  the  bondage  of  sin ; 
the  outward  life  should  be  regulated  by  obedience  to  authority  and  law ;  and  that  for 
the  glory  of  God,  that  the  well-ordered  lives  of  Christian  people  may  put  to  silence  the 
ignorance  of  foolisli  men.  3.  Fvwr  rules  for  the  guidance  of  Christians  in  todal  life. 
(1)  "  Honour  all  men."  The  apostle  has  just  enjoined  a  dutiful  submission  to  kings 
and  magistrates.  He  extends  his  precept ;  all  men  are  to  be  treated  with  honour.  St.  Paul 
had  said,  "Bender  therefore  to  all  their  dues;  .  .  .  honour  to  whom  honour  is  due" 
(Bom.  xiii.  7).  Though  we  owe  not  the  same  measure  of  honour  to  every  one,  yet  in 
some  sense  honour  is  due  to  all  men ;  for  all  men  are  God's  creatures,  made  originally 
in  the  likeness  of  God.  The  Jews,  Leigbton  reminds  us,  would  not  tread  on  any  chanc« 
piece  of  paper,  lest,  they  said,  the  name  of  God  might  be  written  ou  it.  So  the  Chris- 
tian may  not  despise  any  one,  however  base  in  his  outward  condition,  in  body,  or  in 
mind,  or  even  however  much  fallen  from  God  and  goodness.  The  name  of  God  may  be 
written  on  that  soul ;  low  in  all  earthly  things,  it  maybe  high  in  grace ;  the  Lord  Jesus 
died  for  that  poor  fallen  soul ;  it  may  be  restored  and  won  back  and  forgiven  like  the 
Rinlul  woman  who  washed  the  Lord's  feet  with  her  tears,  and  wiped  them  with  the  hair 
of  her  head.  Therefore  the  Christian  must  treat  all  men  with  consideration  and  respect ; 
scorn  and  contempt  are  utterly  out  of  place  in  the  disciples  of  the  lowly  Saviour.  (2) 
"  Love  the  brotherhood,"  Christians  are  not  only  brethren,  but  a  brotherhood,  one  body 
in  Christ ;  they  are  knit  together  by  the  one  Spirit  into  one  communion  and  fellowship ; 
they  must  regard  one  another  with  fraternal  atfection.  The  nearer  they  draw  to  Christ, 
who  loved  them  and  gave  himself  for  them,  the  more  fully  will  they  learn  of  him  ihis 
high  and  holy  lesson  of  Christian  love.  (3)  "Fear  God."  This  great  principle  must  guide 
the  Christian  in  all  the  relations  of  life.  "  Behold,  the  fear  of  the  Lord,  that  is  wisdom." 
He  who  has  the  fear  of  God  before  his  eyes  will  do  his  duty  towards  his  neighbour ;  for 
to  fear  and  to  obey  God,  the  preacher  says,  is  "  the  whole  of  man  "  (Eccles.  xii.  13) — it 
covers  the  whole  sphere  of  his  life  and  conduct.  Other  rules  are  subordinate  to  this 
central  rule.  We  must  honour  all  men,  because  all  men  are  the  creatures  of  God  j  we 
must  honour  most  those  in  whom  the  image  of  God  is  best  reflected.  We  must  lov«  the 
brotlierhood,but  so  that  we  love  God  first  above  alL  We  must  honour  the  king,  because 
all  power  is  of  God.  (4)  "  Honour  the  king."  That  king  was  Nero.  It  was  hard  to 
honour  such  a  one,  a  monster  stained  with  every  infamy.  But  Christians  were  to  see 
in  him  the  representative  of  law  and  order,  and  they  were  to  respect  his  authority  while 
they  could  not  but  loathe  his  crimes. 

Lkssons.  1.  Let  us  always  remember  that  we  are  strangers  here,  and  that  the  citizens 
of  the  heavenly  country  should  be  "  not  of  the  world."  U.  The  Christian  must  evet 
strive  to  adorn  the  doctrine  of  God  our  Saviour  in  all  things,  seeking  always  the  glory 
of  God.  3.  He  must  yield  a  loyal  obedience  to  human  law  for  the  Lord's  sake.  4.  The 
law  of  liberty  is  not  licence ;  Christian  fi'eedom  is  the  service  of  God. 

Vers.  18 — 25. — Special  address  to  tervants.  L  Thbib  duties.  1,  Buhnlssion  to 
their  masters.  Beligion  touches  every  condition  of  life ;  none  is  left  out.  And  uone 
may  make  the  circumstances  of  their  life  an  excuse  for  neglecting  religion.  G(xl  set 
them  where  they  are ;  their  station,  their  circumstances,  are  such  as  he  was  pleased  to 
appoint.  He  "will  have  all  men  to  be  saved;"  therefore  we  may  be  sure  all  men 
may  be  saved,  whatever  may  be  their  outward  circumstances.  It  is  for  them  to  do  their 
duty  to  God  and  to  man  in  that  station  to  which  God  has  been  pleased  to  call  tliem. 
Th«re  are  many  compensation!  in  life;  riches  have  their  care*;  high  rank  has  Ita 


tH  THE   FIEST  EPISTLE   GENERAL  OP   PETEB.    [oh.  ii.  1—25. 

responsibilities.  Men  must  not  fret  and  cbafe  against  the  toils  and  privations  of  their 
lot ;  they  must  do  their  duty  in  it,  and  they  will  find  peace  and  inward  satisfaction. 
"  Brethren,"  says  St.  Paul,  speaking  to  slaves  (1  Cor.  vii.  24),  "  let  every  man,  wherein 
he  is  called,  therein  abide  with  God."  God  has  a  message  for  servants.  Their  lot  was 
very  hard  under  the  stern  rule  of  slavery,  when  even  men  of  wide  views  like  Aristotle 
regarded  slaves  as  "  living  tools."  But  Christian  slaves  were  to  take  comfort ;  they 
were  the  Lord's  freed  men  (1  Cor.  vii.  22);  they  were,  equally  witli  the  highest  in  rank, 
living  stones  in  the  Lord's  spiritual  temple;  they  might  gain  for  themselves  a  high 
place  there  by  the  quiet,  faithful  discharge  of  the  humblest  duties.  Then  let  them  serve 
their  masters  with  all  respect  and  reverence ;  and  that,  not  simply  out  of  gratitude,  if 
they  happened  to  have  kind  and  indulgent  masters,  but  out  of  submission  to  the  holy  will 
of  God,  whatever  might  be  the  character  of  those  under  whom  they  were  placed.  Thixe 
Is  a  lesson  here  for  all  who  occupy  Bubordiniite  positions  of  any  sort — let  them  pay 
proper  reverence  and  obedience  to  their  superiors.  It  is  their  duty,  not  only  to  those 
superiors,  but  to  God.  2.  The  motive  of  that  submission.  Consciousness  of  God.  This 
high  motive  dignifies  the  humblest  position  in  life,  and  makes  the  respect  and  submission 
which  Christian  servants  yield  to  their  masters,  or  Christians  in  any  condition  to  their 
superiors,  a  beautiful  and  holy  thing.  They  recognize  the  great  truth  of  the  presence  of 
God;  they  try  to  live  in  the  habitual  consciousness  of  that  presence;  they  try  to  think 
of  God  all  the  day  long,  in  all  the  little  details  of  their  daily  occupations,  and  to  perform 
each  duty,  great  or  small,  as  unto  the  Lord.  Thus  Christians  in  the  humblest  positions 
may  "  adorn  the  doctrine  of  God  our  Saviour  in  all  things  "  (Titus  ii.  10).  These  words 
of  St.  Paul  were  spoken  of  Christian  slaves.  Slaves  might  adorn  the  Church  of  God,  and 
bring  honour  to  Christ.  Through  the  grace  of  God,  the  last  are  often  first,  the  lowest  in 
this  world  highest  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  3.  2%e  reward  of  that  submission.  It  is 
thankworthy ;  it  is  acceptable  with  God.  The  master  might  be  much  beneath  his  slave ; 
the  superior  may  be  much  beneath  his  official  inferiors  in  all  that  constitutes  true 
greatness ;  it  has  often  been  so,  it  must  be  so  sometimes  still.  The  Christian,  in  what- 
soever state  he  is,  must  be  content ;  if  he  has  to  suffer  wrong,  injustice,  cruelty,  he  must 
take  it  patiently.  To  submit  to  deserved  punishment,  to  own  our  fault,  and  to  accept 
the  consequence,  is  hard  to  our  proud,  selfish  nature ;  yet  it  is  but  a  plain  duty ;  it 
merits  no  praise.  But  when  Christians  submit  to  undeserved  suffering ;  when  in  the 
ancient  times  tbey  endured  stripes  and  the  prison  and  the  death  of  martyrdom ;  when 
now  Christian  men,  or  women,  or  children  endure  persecution,  sometimes  very  hard  to 
bear,  from  those  in  various  ways  above  them,  or,  it  may  be,  from  fellow-servants  or 
school-fellows ; — when  they  take  it  patiently  in  the  consciousness  of  God's  presence, 
this  is  the  work  of  God's  grace ;  this  is  lovely  in  the  sight  of  God ;  and  the  Scripture 
saith  in  God's  great  condescension,  this  is  thankworthy  with  God. 

XL  The  orbat  Example.  1.  Christians  are  called  to  imitate  Christ.  Christians 
are  called  to  suffeiing ;  the  cross  is  the  badge  of  their  profession ;  without  the  cross 
they  cannot  be  disciples  of  the  crucified  Lord.  This  was  the  meaning  of  your  calling, 
St.  Peter  says ;  you  knew  it  when  you  became  Christians ;  you  must  not  forget  it  in  the 
hour  of  trial.  Christ  suffered  for  you,  yes,  for  you  slaves ;  he  left  behind  him,  when  he 
ascended  into  heaven,  an  example  for  you  to  imitate,  a  sketch  for  you  to  fill  up  in  detail. 
Try  by  the  grace  of  God  the  Holy  Spirit  to  renew  the  likeness  of  God  in  your  hearts ; 
look  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  as  your  Model ;  copy  one  by  one  the  features  of  that 
Divine  loveliness ;  fill  up  the  portrait,  little  by  little,  touch  by  touch,  looking  with  fixed 
attention  on  the  great  Original.  And,  to  change  the  figure,  follow  him;  he  goeth  before 
you.  Climb  the  steep  ascent  of  heaven,  stepping  in  the  very  footprints  of  the  Divine 
Guide.  He  will  lead  you  safe.  But  there  is  only  one  way — the  way  which  he  trod  himself, 
the  royal  way  of  the  most  holy  cross.  2.  The  innocence  of  Christ.  He  did  not  sin,  yet 
he  suffered.  We  have  sinned,  yet  we  murmur  under  our  chastisements.  We  fret  and 
complain  all  the  louder,  if  we  think  that  our  afflictions  are  not  the  direct  result  of  sin ; 
all  the  more  if  we  think  that  they  are  wrongfully  inflicted.  We  fancy  that  there  are 
none  so  hardly  dealt  with,  none  so  unjustly  treated ;  we  magnify  our  distress ;  we  will 
not  be  comforted;  we  refuse  to  see  any  alleviation,  any  ray  of  light,  any  evidences  of 
mercy.  But  we  should  think  of  our  sins,  our  unworthiness,  our  need  of  chastisement 
for  our  profit  in  holiness.  Above  all,  we  should  think  of  the  innocent  Saviour.  "  He 
did  no  sin,  neither  was  guile  found  in  his  mouth."    We  have  ginned  in  thought,  word, 


ea.  II.  1—25.]   THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENEEAt  OP  PETEB.  8t 

•nd  deed  ;  let  us  not  complain.  3.  The  patience  of  Christ,  He  was  buffeted  and  spat 
npoa  and  cruelly  mocked,  yet  he  opened  not  his  mouth ;  he  was  scourged,  he  was  nai  led 
to  the  cross ;  he  suffered  through  all  those  six  hours  the  intensest  agony ;  he  threatened 
not,  he  did  not  call  for  the  twelve  legions  of  angels.  He  committed  all,  himself,  his 
cause,  his  torturers,  to  him  that  judgeth  righteously — he  left  it  all  to  God.  He  is  our 
high  Example.  We  should  learn  of  him ;  we  should  pray  for  those  who  despitefully 
use  us :  "  Father,  forgive  them,"  Here  is  the  Christian's  comfort  when  he  is  unjustly 
treated.  God  judgeth  righteously;  he  knoweth  them  that  are  his;  he  knows  their 
prayers,  their  self-denials,  their  temptations.  If  the  world  judge  them  harshly,  it 
matters  little ;  God  judgeth  righteously ;  they  leave  all  to  him.  And  when  men 
speak  evil  of  them,  when  they  impute  unworthy  motives  and  accuse  them  falsely, 
they  think  of  Christ  mocked,  reviled,  blasphemed,  and  try  to  learn  of  him  meekness 
and  patience.  4.  Eow  Christians  are  enabled  to  foUow  that  example.  Christ  is  our 
Example ;  hut  he  is  more — he  is  the  Propitiation  for  our  sins.  It  would  be  vain  to 
set  before  us  miserable  sinners  an  example  of  perfect  holiness,  were  it  not  that  he 
bare  our  sins  in  his  own  body  on  to  the  tree.  None  other  than  the  holy  Son  of 
God  could  bear  that  awful  burden.  The  Lord  "  laid  on  him  the  iniquity  of  us  all." 
He  bare  that  tremendous  load  of  human  sin  in  his  own  body  on  to  the  tree,  and 
there  he  took  our  sins  away,  dying,  as  he  did,  for  all  men,  in  our  stead,  suffering 
our  punishment.  Men  think  sin  a  light  matter;  true  Christians  know  that  it  is  a 
heavy  burden,  too  heavy  for  them  to  bear.  It  was  a  heavy  burden  to  Christ;  it 
made  him  sweat  those  great  drops  of  blood;  it  made  him  ciy,  "  My  God,  my  God,  why 
hast  thou  forsaken  me?"  He  only  could  bear  that  tremendous  load.  The  Lord  laid 
it  on  him;  he  took  it  on  himself  in  his  gracious  mercy.  He  came  to  give  his  life  a  ran- 
som for  many ;  he  was  made  sin  for  us,  though  he  was  without  sin ;  the  Lord  made  his 
soul  an  offering  for  sin.  And  the  end  of  that  stupendous  sacrifice  was  that  we,  being 
dead  to  sin,  should  be  enabled  to  copy  that  Divine  Example,  and  should  live  unto 
righteousness.  Buoh  an  event  as  the  death  of  the  Son  of  God  must  involve  great  and 
far-reaching  consequences;  it  requires  of  us,  for  whom  he  died,  not  merely  an  outward 
change,  not  some  slight  improvement  in  our  lives,  but  a  death  unto  sin.  When  we  look 
upon  the. cross,  and  think  who  it  was  that  suffered  there  for  us,  we  see  the  intense  guilt 
of  sin,  we  see  the  great  love  of  God;  and  we  draw  from  the  death  of  Christ  a  hidden 
source  of  strength  which  helps  us  to  crush  sin  out  of  our  hearts,  though  the  effort  be 
like  a  death-struggle  and  the  agony  like  a  deatb-pahg;  for  by  his  death  he  broke 
the  power  of  Satan,  giving  himself  in  bis  deep  holy  love  to  suffer  our  punishment 
and  to  take  away  our  sins.  Therefore  we  must  be  unto  sin  as  though  we  were  not, 
as  though  we  had  departed,  as  though  the  sinful  "I"  was  gone,  and  Christ  was 
there  instead:  "Not  I,  but  Christ ;  "  "To  me  to  live  is  Christ;"  he  who  knows  the 
meaning  of  those  words  is  dying  unto  sin.  As  he  dies  unto  sin,  he  lives  unto  right- 
eousness ;  a  new  life  dawns  into  his  soul,  new  aspirations,  new  emotions.  He  is  full 
of  the  energy  of  a  vigorous  life ;  but  it  is  not  the  old  life — that  is  gone ;  it  is  a  new  life 
which  only  they  can  know  who  die  with  Christ  unto  sin.  It  is  his  death  which  gives 
them  life ;  his  stripes  heal  their  souls.  They  tortured  and  lacerated  his  holy  body,  but 
they  heal  the  sickness  of  our  souls ;  for  it  was  for  our  sins  that  he  submitted  to  that 
dreadful  outrage.  Each  blow  shows  us  the  guilt  and  misery  of  sin;  each  drop  of  blood 
most  precious  cleanses  the  souls  that  turn  to  him  in  faith.  He  has  borne  our  punish- 
ment, and  we  are  free  if  we  are  his  indeed,  he  abiding  in  us  and  we  in  him.  Let  us 
contemplate  his  sufferings  with  awe  and  reverence  and  gratitude,  mourning  for  those 
sins  of  ours  which  added  to  his  agony,  killing  them  out  of  our  hearts  by  the  power  of 
his  death  ;  thanking  him  in  adoring  love  for  his  exceeding  great  love ;  bearing  our  little 
griefs  patiently  and  cheerfully  in  the  remembrance  of  his  bitter  cross  and  passion. 
6.  What  they  were ;  what  they  are  now,  "  All  we  like  sheep  have  gone  astray." 
All  have  wandered  from  God,  some  in  one  direction,  some  in  another,  each  turning  to 
his  own  way.  We  flatter  otirselves,  in  our  folly,  that  we  have  not  sinned  like  this  or 
that  neighbour.  It  may  be  so ;  his  temptation  was  not  our  temptation ;  but  our  sia 
may  be  greater  in  the  sight  of  God.  All  without  exception  have  gone  astray.  But  th« 
Lord  came  in  his  mercy  to  seek  and  to  save  that  which  was  lost.  Happy  those  lost 
ones  whom  he  has  found,  who,  drawn  by  his  grace,  have  returned  to  the  Shepherd  and 
Bish  op  of  th«ir  souls  1    For  he  is  the  good  Shepherd  j  he  knows  hla  sheep,  and  cares  for 


86  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PETER,    [ch.  ii.  1— 25. 

them ;  and  those  sheep  that  have  returned  to  him  shall  never  perish,  none  can  pluck 
them  out  of  his  hand.  He  is  the  Bishop,  the  Overseer,  of  our  souls.  He  thinks  of  all 
our  spiritual  wants,  our  temptations,  our  distresses.  He  watches  for  our  souls  j  ha  pro- 
vides for  our  present  necessities,  for  he  feeds  us  with  the  sincere  milk  of  the  Word,  with 
the  bread  of  life ;  for  our  future  welfare,  for  he  is  gone  to  prepare  a  place  for  us  in 
heaven. 

Lessons.  1.  Christ  took  upon  him  the  form  of  a  servant;  let  Christians  in  humble 
positions  be  content.  2.  Let  them  do  their  duty,  taking  sUgtits  and  injustice  patiently, 
as  in  the  presence  of  God.  3.  Let  them  fix  their  thoughts  upon  the  great  Example. 
He  did  no  sin ;  yet  he  snfTered ;  he  reviled  not  again.  4.  He  is  more  than  our  Example ; 
he  is  our  Strength  He  bore  our  sins.  He  gave  us  power  to  die  unto  sin  and  to  live 
unto  righteousness.  We  can  do  all  things  (if  we  abide  in  him)  through  him  that 
■trengthenetb  us. 


HOMILIES  BY   VARIOUS   AUTHORS. 

Ver.  2. — Infanta' food.  There  has  just  been  a  reference  to  regeneration  as  effected 
by  the  incorruptible  seed  of  the  Word.  The  metaphor  is  carried  oq  in  these  words, 
which  speak  of  the  nourishment  and  growth  of  the  regenerate.  There  does  not,  how- 
ever, tippear  to  be  any  limitation  of  the  injunction  of  our  text  to  Christians  in  an  early 
■tage.  For  all  stages  of  the  Christian  life  on  earth  the  food  which  nourishes  is  the 
same.  All  should  be  growing,  and  the  most  mature  is  still,  when  his  attainments  are 
contrasted  with  what  he  will  be  in  the  future,  and  when  the  brief  span  of  earthly  life 
is  measured  against  eternity,  but  as  a  new-born  babe.  So  we  have  here  the  universal 
food;  the  appetite  which  all  should  cultivate;  and  the  growth  which  all  may  attain. 

I.  The  tbue  food  of  the  Christian  boul  in  all  stages.  It  is  impossible  to 
preserve  the  force  of  the  Greek  in  an  English  translation.  The  two  adjectives  which 
qualify  "  milk  "  are  both  ambiguous.  That  rendered  "  sincere  "  in  the  Authorized  and 
"  without  guile"  in  the  Revised  Version  is  evidently  suggested  by  the  mention  of  guile 
in  the  previous  verse,  and  may  either  mean  "guileless"  in  tlie  sense  of  having  no 
by-ends  to  serve,  or  more  probably  "  unadulterated."  The  other  epithet  may  either  mean 
"  belonging  to  a  word,"  or  (as  it  means  in  Rom,  xii.  1)  "  spiritual,"  that  is,  figurative,  not 
material.  The  latter  is  no  doubt  its  meaning  here.  But  that  spiritual,  unadulterated 
milk  is  certainly  the  Word  of  God,  and  probably  the  expression  was  chosen  because  of 
the  very  ambiguity.  At  all  events,  Peter's  thought  is  plainly  that  the  Christian  soul's 
true  food  is  the  Word,  which  is  at  once  the  instrument  of  regeneration  and  the  support 
of  life.  Of  course,  he  intends  by  •'  the  Word  "  the  truths  which  that  Word  brings  to 
men.  We  are  more  accustomed  to  speak  of  Christ  as  being  the  Food  of  the  soul,  la 
it  possible  that  Peter  here  is  speaking  as  his  brother  John  would  have  spoken,  and  has 
fioating  before  his  mind  in  this  context  the  thought  of  that  Incarnate  Word  who  liveth 
for  ever,  and  in  his  holy  humanity  was  without  guile  ?  This  is  improbable,  aiad  not 
necessary  in  order  to  give  full  force  to  the  text.  "The  Word  of  the  truth  of  the 
gospel "  is  the  life  of  our  souls,  because  it  proclaims  and  brings  to  us  Christ,  who  ia 
truly  their  Life.  The  only  way  by  which  he  can  eater  the  soul  to  give  and  to  sustain 
a  better  being  is  by  means  of  the  truth  concerning  him  received  and  meditated  on. 
Physiologists  tell  us  that  milk  contains  all  the  constituents  needed  for  healthy  life. 
The  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus  has  no  admixture  of  deleterious  matters,  is  unspoiled  by 
men's  errors,  and  has  in  it  all  which  the  soul  needs.  As  much  cannot  be  said  of  any 
other  "  word." 

II.  The  appetite  which  all  Cheistianb  should  oultivatb.  "Long  for"  i* 
nearer  the  intensity  of  the  original  than  "  desire."  There  is  no  bodily  craving  more 
vehement  and  tyrannous  than  that  of  hunger.  We  all  Tcnow  how  an  infant  cries  for 
food.  Such  keenness  of  appetile  ought  to  mark  every  Christian.  But  the  very  fact 
that  this  hunger  has  to  be  enjoined  is  a  sad  confessidu.  "Infants  do  not  need  to  be 
told  to  seek  the  mother's  breast."  But  we,  alas  I  have  to  acknowledge  languid  indiffer- 
ence and  often  positive  distaste  for  the  wholesome  food  which  God  gives.  So  this 
appetite  has  to  be  cultivated.  And  that  it  may,  other  appetites  have  to  be  restrained 
•ud  starved.    We  are  like  chilaren  who  eat  sweetmeats,  and  so  do  not  care  for  our 


OT.  II.  1—25.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PETER.  87 

meftls.  If  we  gorge  ourselves  on  the  gugared  delights  of  earth,  or  on  the  rank  "leeks 
and  garlic  "  of  Egypt,  how  can  the  manna  but  taste  insipid  to  our- palates  ?  Therefor* 
abstinence  from  these,  and  a  tight  hand  on  our  desires  and  passions,  are  essential  if  we 
are  to  have  any  healthy  hunger  for  wholesome  food.  Again,  the  appetite  will  in  this 
case  secure  its  being  satisfied.  This  hunger  is  unlike  all  other  hunger,  in  that  it  will 
certainly  be  filled.  So  the  apostle  does  not  even  say  drinh,  but  he  only  says  desire. 
For  he  knows  that  if  there  be  the  longing  there  will  be  the  fruition,  as  certainly  as 
the  air  flows  into  expanded  lungs,  or  the  sunshine  into  opened  eyes.  Other  longings 
are  often  pain,  and  often  vain.  This  is  blessed  in  itself,  and  blessed  in  its  sure  fulfil- 
ment. He  who  can  say,  "  I  long  for' thy  Word,"  will  always  be  able  to  say, "  I  did  eat  it, 
and  it  was  the  joy  and  rejoicing  of  my  heart."  Is  this  eager  appetite  for  the  Word  of 
God  the  characteristic  of  our  Christianity  ?  Does  the  neglect  of  Scripture,  the  prefer- 
ence of  almost  any  book  to  the  Bible,  which  so  many  of  us  must  confess,  look  like  it? 
Does  the  utter  disuse  of  meditation  by  such  multitudes  of  professing  Christians  look 
like  it?  Can  anybody  suppose  that  people  who  scarcely  ever  occupy  their  minds  with 
Divine  truth,  except  when  they  languidly  sit  out  a  sermon,  are  thirsting  for  the  pure 
milk  of  the  Word? 

III.  Thk  growth.  "  Unto  salvation  "  Is  now  usually  admitted,  as  in  the  Bevised 
Version,  at  the  close  of  the  verse.  Of  course,  that  word  is  here  used,  as  it  is  in  ver,  9 
of  the  previous  chapter,  for  the  complete  deliverance  from  evil  and  investiture  with 
good,  which  waits  the  believer  in  heaven.  The  whole  Christian  life  on  earth,  then, 
is  to  be  a  continuous  growth.  Here  we  are  all  but  as  infants  at  the  best,  and  w^  only 
como  to  maturity  in  another  life.  Salvation  is  the  possession  of  "  the  measure  of  the 
B*;&ture  of  the  fulness  of  Christ."  It  is  not,  as  some  caricature  the  Christian  doctrine, 
a  mere  escape  from  an  outward  hell,  but  is  the  attainment  of  the  full  height  of  man- 
hood made  God-like.  That  is  the  p:oal  set  before  the  Christian — an  ever-progressive 
approximation  to  the  unreachable  God,  an  ever-increasing  appropriation  of  infinite 
perfection  into  his  indefinitely  expanding  being.  And  towards  that  endless  growth 
and  eternally  increasing  knowledge  of  and  likeness  to  the  revealed  God  in  Christ,  we 
may  be  steadily  advancing  here.  If  we  will  only  use  the  amply  adec|;uate  means 
provided  for  us,  and  let  our  souls  feed  on  the  Word  of  God,  we  shall  grow  as  certainly 
as  the  child  passes  from  infancy  to  boyhood  and  adolescence.  But  in  order  to  feeding 
on  that  Word  there  must  be  rigid  self-restraint,  and  many  a  struggle  with  lower  appe- 
tites. Chiistian  growth  is  no  natural  process.  The  painless,  uncuuscious,  spontaneous 
growth  of  the  infant  at  the  breast,  or  of  the  corn  in  the  field,  does  not  tell  us  all  the 
facts.  There  are  other  symbols  of  Christian  progress.  It  is  a  pilgrimage  often  to  be 
trodden  with  bleeding  feet.  It  is  a  building  which  does  not  "  rise  like  an  exhalation," 
but  tasks  strength  and  skill  to  lay  its  courses.  It  is  a  fight  often  desperate,  always 
real,  and  in  which  that  Word  of  God  which  is  milk  for  the  growing  babe,  is  the  sword 
for  the  warrior-hand.  We  have  to  fight  that  we  may  have  room  to  grow ;  and  of  our 
conflict  and  of  our  growth  the  instrument  is  the  Word  of  God. — A.  M. 

Vers.  4,  5  (to  "built  up"). — Living  stones.  We  have  here  incidentally  a  plain  proof 
that  to  Peter,  Jesus  Christ  was  Divine.  He  has  just  been  quoting  Old  Testament 
words  which  speak  of  "  the  Lord  "  as  "  gracious,"  aud  he  goes  on,  "  to  whom  coming, 
as  unto  a  living  Stone."  He  therefore  regards  Christ  as  standing  in  the  place  of  the 
Jehovah  of  the  old  covenant,  and  has  neither  scruple  in  asserting  that  he  is  the 
"  gracious  Lord  "  of  the  psalm,  nor  thought  that  he  need  pause  to  explain  or  vindicaite 
the  assumption.  Obviously  such  a  tone  indicates  that  the  truth  of  our  Lord's  Divinity 
was  familiar  to  the  recipients  of  the  letter.  We  have  here,  in  broad,  general  outline, 
the  great  ofBce  which  Christ  sustains;  the  highest  gift  which  he  bestows;  and  the 
condition  on  which  we  receive  it  from  him. 

I.  Christ's  great  oFrioE — the  Poundation-stone  fob  all  men's  lives  and 
HOPES.  In  this  metaphor  many  Old  Testament  references  unite.  The  Shepherd,  the 
Stone  of  Israel  had  been  celebrated  in  ancient  poetry.  Isaiah  had  spoken  of  the  tried 
Foundation  laid  by  God's  own  hand  in  Zion,  which  yet  should  be  a  Stone  of  stumbling 
to  those  who  refused  to  build  on  it.  A  psalmist  of  a  later  period  had  sung  amidst  the 
ruined  walls  of  Jerusalem,  and  the  efibrt  to  rear  again  the  temple,  of  the  Stone  rejected 
by  the  builders  beeeming  the  Head  of  the  corner.    A  prophet  of  the  same  epook  hs4. 


83  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  PETER,    [oh.  n.  1—26. 

seen  in  vision  the  head-stone  of  the  completed  and  transfonned  theocracy  brought 
forth  with  triumphant  acclaim.  Daniel  had  prophesied  of  a  Stone  cut  out  without 
hands,  which  should  crash  among  the  kingdoms  of  the  earth  Yike  a  boulder  hurled  by 
an  ar^lanche  among  peasants'  cottages  and  gardens.  And  all  these  streams  of  pre- 
diction had  been  gathered  into  one,  in  the  words  which  Peter  so  well  remembered, 
with  which,  in  those  last  days  of  hand-to-hand  conflict,  his  Master  had  silenced  his 
antagonists,  and  claimed  to  be  at  once  the  tried  Foundation,  and  the  ponderous  Rock 
which,  when  it  was  set  in  motion,  would  grind  opposition  and  opposers  to  powder. 
The  echoes  of  these  mighty  words  sound  here,  as  they  have  been  interpreted  to'  the 
apostle  by  all  that  has  passed  since  he  first  heard  them.  He  understands  now  better 
than  he  did,  even  when  he  fronted  the  Sanhedrin  with  the  bold  proclamation,  "  This 
is  the  Stone  which  is  set  at  nought  of  you  builders."  He  has  learned  that  his  Lord 
is  not  merely  meant  to  be  the  Foundation  on  which  Israel  may  build,  but  that  on 
which  "strangers  scattered  abroad  may  be  gathered  into  one."  In  all  aspects  and 
relations  Jesus  Christ  is  the  Foundation-stone.  The  whole  universe  rests  on  him.  He 
is  "the  Firstborn  of  every  creature,"  the  Agent  of  creation,  the  Mediator  through 
whom  all  things  came  to  be,  and  based  upon  whom  the  mighty  whole  of  the  material 
creation  continues  to  exist.  He  is  the  Foundation  of  humanity,  the  Root  from  whom 
it  springe,  the  Head  in  which  it  is  gathered  into  one.  He  is  the  Foundation  on  which 
the  individual  soul  must  build  all  hope,  joy,  and  goodness.  He  is  the  Foundation  of 
the  highest  and  purest  form  of  social  life,  in  which  ultimately  all  others  shall  merge, 
and  men  be  one  in  him.  He  is  the  Basis  of  all  true  thoughts  of  God,  man,  immortality, 
and  duty.  He  is  the  Motive  and  Inspiration  of  the  purest  life.  His  Person,  work,  and 
teaching  underlie  all  being,  all  peace,  and  all  nobleness.  He  is  the  "  living  Stone," 
inasmuch  as  in  him  is  essential  life,  and  he  ever  lives  to  be  the  Source  of  life  to  aU 
who  build  on  him. 

II.  Cheist'b  great  gift,  that  op  assimilation  to  himself.  Coming  to  him, 
we  become  Uving  stones.  One  can  scarcely  avoid  seeing  here  some  allusion  to  the 
apostle's  own  name,  as  if  he  would  share  whatever  honour  there  was,  with  all  hia 
brethren,  and  disown  any  special  prerogative.  "'Thou  art  Peter'  was,  indeed,  said  to 
me ;  but  you  are  all  living  stones.  '  On  this  rock '  was,  indeed,  said  to  me ;  but 
Christ  is  the  only  Foundation."  Peter's  own  imderstanding  of  these  much-controverted 
words  is  no  bad  guide  to  their  meaning.  The  image  here  but  puts  under  one  aspect 
the  wide  general  principle  that  transformation  into  Christ's  likeness  is  the  great  end 
of  his  work  on  us.  Is  he  a  Son  ?  Through  him  we  becom,e  sons.  Is  he  "  the  Light 
of  the  world"?  Illumined  by  him,  we  too  become  lights.  Is  he  anointed  with  the 
Spirit?  Through  him  we  too  receive  that  unction  which  invests  us  with  his  three- 
fold office  of  prophet,  priest,  and  king.  We  are  one  with  him,  and  participate  in  his 
relation  to  God ;  we  are  one  with  him,  and  receive  of  his  fulness,  are  clothed  with  his 
righteousness,  and  growingly  conformed  to  his  image.  We  are  one  with  him,  and  shall 
be  one  in  destiny.  "  As  he  is,  so  are  we  in  this  world."  "  We  shall  be  like  him,  for 
we  shall  see  him  as  he  is."  And  the  deep  truth  which  underlies  all  these  representations 
is  the  actual  communication  of  the  life  of  Christ  to  us.  That  life  rises  up  from  the 
foundation  through  all  the  courses  of  the  building.  This  truth  is  more  obviously 
suggested  by  the  kindred  metaphors  of  the  vine  and  the  branches,  and  the  head  and 
members;  but  it  is  clearly  intended  here  also,  and  is  conveyed,  though  with  some 
incongruity,  by  the  expression,  "  living  stones."  The  life  which  is  in  us  is  Christ's  life. 
Therefore  it  unfolds  itself  in  us  in  a  form  like  his,  and  the  vital  contact  with  the  living 
Stone  makes  us,  too,  living  stones. 

III.  The  condition  of  assimilation.  It  is  expressed  in  grand  simplicity  by  that 
one  pregnant  phrase,  "to  whom  coming."  The  original  word  implies,  by  the  force  of 
a  compound,  a  very  close  approach.  We  must  be  so  near  him  as  to  touch  him,  if  his 
transforming  power  is  to  flow  into  our  hearts.  A  hair's  breadth  of  separation  is  enough 
to  stop  the  passage  of  the  electric  current.  The  thinnest  film  of  distance  between  the 
soul  and  Christ  is  thick  enough  to  be  an  impenetrable  barrier.  There  must  he  a  leal 
living  contact  if  his  life  is  to  pour  into  my  veins.  And  if  we  ask  how  this  close 
approach  is  to  be  effected,  our  Lord's  own  words  are  the  simplest  answer,  "  He  that 
Cometh  unto  tne  shall  never  hunfter,  and  he  that  believeth  on  me  shall  never  thirst." 
We  come  in  the  act  of  faith.    To  trust  him  ia  to  draw  near  to  him.    Faith  is  th« 


OB.  n.  1—26.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GBNEBAL  OF  PETER.  "" 

approach  of  the  eonl  to  Christ,  and  we  touch  when,  with  the  reliance  of  our  whok 
nature,  we  grasp  his  cross,  and  him  wlio  died  on  it,  as  our  only  Foundation.  But  that 
act  of  faith  must  be  continuous,  if  we  are  to  draw  life  from  him  in  an  unbroken  stream. 
The  form  of  expression  in  the  Greek  shows  that  the  "coming"  is  not  an  act  done  once 
for  all,  but  one  constantly  repeated.  The  grace  drawn  from  Christ  in  a  moment  of 
active  faith  cannot  be  stored  up  for  use  in  a  time  when  faith  has  fallen  asleep.  As 
soon  as  we  cease  to  draw  near  to  him,  the  flow  stops.  There  must  be  a  present  faith 
for  a  present  blessing.  Let  us,  then,  rely  on  no  past  acts  of  devout  emotion,  but  hourly 
renew  our  conscious  faith,  and  seek  to  nestle  closer  to  his  side,  from  whom  all  our  life 
and  all  its  hopes  and  joys,  with  all  its  goodness  and  power,  proceed.  So  shall  there 
rise  up  into  us,  from  the  living  Root,  the  sap  which  shall  produce  in  us  flowers  and 
abiding  fruit.    So  shall  there  be  one  life  in  him  and  in  us. — A.  M. 

Ver.  5. — Temple,  priest,  sacrifice.  Temple,  priest,  sacrifice — these  three  are  the  con- 
stituents  of  worship,  as  the  world  knew  it  before  Christ.  He  is  the  reality,  felt  after 
by  heathenism  in  its  rites,  shadowed  by  Judaism  in  its  ceremonies.  A  universal  want  is 
unconsciously  confessed  by  the  former ;  a  Divine  satisfaction  of  it  is  prophesied  by  the 
latter.  But  not  only  does  Christ  in  his  own  Person  and  work  supply  these  three  to 
men ;  he  also  makes  those  who  come  to  him  by  faith  all  these  in  a  real  though  derived 
and  subordinate  manner ;  they,  too,  become  temple,  priest,  and  sacrifice.  Christianity 
lifts  the  externals  of  sacrificial  religion  into  a  higher  sphere,  and  does  away  with  the 
symbols,  because  it  brings  the  realities.  Whether  the  first  readers  of  this  letter  were 
Jewish  or  Gentile  Christians,  they  must  have  felt  the  bareness  of  their  new  worship 
as  contrasted  with  the  elaborate  rituals  of  their  former  faiths,  and  have  especially 
needed  the  Insight  into  their  real  dignity  which  these  words  lupply.  Perhaps  this 
age  needs  the  lesson  not  less,  though  for  different  reasons.  Let  us  simply  look  at  these 
three  aspects  of  the  ideal  Christian  character. 

L  Christ  is  the  true  Temple;  we  become  a  temple  through  him.  The  temple 
i«  the  dwelling-place  of  Deity.  The  need  for  it  arises  from  man's  weakness,  which 
cannot  grasp  the  pure  spirituality  of  the  Divine  nature,  but  has  to  aid  its  conceptions 
by  localizing  God,  and  still  more  from  man's  sin,  which  to  his  own  consciousness  has 
profaned  the  world,  and  cannot  bear  the  thought  of  God's  dwelling  among  the  foulness 
of  everyday  abodes.  Christ  is  all  which  temples  shadowed.  The  temple  was  the 
dwelling-place  of  Deity,  and  in  him  dwells  all  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead  bodily.  It 
was  the  place  of  meeting  between  God  and  man,  and  in  him  we  draw  near  to  the  God 
who  in  him  has  drawn  near  to  us.  It  was  the  place  of  sacrifice,  and  in  his  flesh  the 
one  propitiation  has  been  offered  for  sin  for  ever.  It  was  the  place  of  Divine  manifes- 
tation, and  in  him  the  whole  glory  of  the  Divine  nature  has  been  flashed  upon  the 
world  with  a  brightness  before  which  the  light  that  shone  between  the  cherubim  pales 
its  fires.  The  burden  of  the  context  here  is  that  by  coming  to  Christ  we  become 
partakers  of  his  life,  and  are  therefore  assimilated  to  him.  So  the  whole  aggregate 
of  the  scattered  strangers  to  whom  Puter  writes,  and  all  the  solitary  souls  who,  one  by 
one,  draw  near  to  Jesus,  are  builded  up  into  one  great  temple,  the  true  sanctuary,  con- 
sisting of  all  redeemed  humanity,  in  which  God  dwells.  All  Churches  are  but  chapels 
in  its  side  aisles.  Its  ample  roof  covers  them  all,  and  will  shelter  new  iorms  of 
Christian  fellowship  as  yet  undreamed  of  Through  the  ages  it  is  being  slowly  builded, 
like  fome  great  cathedral  unfinished  for  centuries,  each  of  which  has  added  soiviething 
to  the  pile.  And  as  the  Church  as  a  whole  is  the  temple,  so  its  members  in  detail  are 
temples  of  God.  By  a  real  though  mysterious  indwelling,  more  real  if  one  may  say 
BO,  and  less  mysterious  than'  that  by  wliich  he  inhabits  eternity  or  dwells  in  the 
material  universe,  God  comes  and  makes  his  abode  in  every  believing  soul.  A  Divine 
Spirit  can  fill  and  penetrate  the  human  spirit,  as  the  sunshine  drenches  and  saturates 
some  poor  film  of  mist,  till  every  particle  is  suffused  with  the  fiery  brightness.  We 
are  too  apt  to  water  down  that  most  solemn  and  blessed  truth  of  God's  indwelling  into 
the  mere  presence  of  an  influence  on  our  spirits.  We  need  to  rise  to  the  height  of  the 
wonderful,  awful,  gladsome  thought  that  God  himself  dwells  in  every  soul  that  comes 
to  Christ. 

XL  Christ  ib  the  true  Priest  ;  we  are  priests  through  him.  The  priest,  like 
the  temple,  has  his  origin  in  mau'a  consciousness  of  unworthiness  to  draw  near  to  hia 


90  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PETER,     [oh.  11.I— 2& 

God.  Therefore  he  takes  one  of  his  tribe^  and  sets  him  apart  to  stand  between  him 
and  his  deity.  The  priest  has  to  represent  man  to  God  and  God  to  man.  His  chief 
function  is  sacrifice,  and,  in  addition  to  it,  he  has  to  be  intercessor  and  mediator — ^to 
bring  the  messages  of  the  god  to  his  worshippers,  to  represent  the  worshippers  before 
their  god.  Jesus  is  all  this  in  himself,  by  no  external  appointment,  "  not  by  the  law 
of  a  carnal  commandment,  but  by  the  power  of  an  endless  life."  He  is  all  this  in 
solitary  incommunicable  manner.  He,  and  none  but  he,  brings  God  to  men,  and  men 
to  God.  He  alone  is,  in  real  essential  unity,  man's  Representative  and  Intercessor. 
He  alone  offers  the  sacrifice  for  the  world.  He  stands  the  sole  Priest,  his  office  unique, 
his  Person  sole  and  supreme,  having  and  tolerating  no  companions  in  his  solemn 
entrance  within  the  veil,  and  having  neither  beginning  of  days  nor  end  of  life.  But 
the  consecrating  oil  flows  firom  him  to  us,  and  we  too,  by  derivation  from  him,  become 
priests  to  God.  His  hand  laid  on  us  sets  us  apart  for  sacred  functions  which  are  not  all 
unlike  his  own,  but  are  their  consequence  and  carrying  out.  We  too  have  to  represent 
God  to  men,  because  Christ  has  given  God  to  us.  We  have  to  move  among  our  fellows, 
showing  to  them  something  of  the  splendour  of  the  Divine  love,  the  reflection  of  which 
in  us  some  weak  eyes  may  bear,  which  would  be  dazzled  by  the  direct  beams.  We  have 
to  intercede  for  men  with  God,  and  are  invested  with  the  solemn  privilege  carrying 
with  it  a  heavy  responsibility,  of  free  access  to  the  secret  place  of  the  Most  High,  and 
of  prayer  that  prevails  with  him.  There  is  but  one  Priest  in  the  Church.  There  are 
no  priests  in  the  Church.    All  are  priests  in  the  Church. 

HI.  Chbist  offers  and  is  the  onb  Saobifioe;  wb  become  acoeftablb  sacri- 
fices THBonGH  Bin.  There  are  two  elements  in  the  idea  of  sacrifice — surrender  and 
expiation.  The  great  work  of  Jesus  Christ  embraces  both.  "Not  my  will,  but 
thine,"  is  the  inmost  meaning  of  his  whole  life.  He  offered  himself  in  the  perfect, 
unbroken,  joyful  surrender  of  his  will  to  the  Father.  That  sinless  Being,  perpetually 
yielding  itself  in  meek  obedience,  undisturbed  by  self-will,  and  spotless  in  its  purity, 
attains  the  highest  form  of  surrender,  and  stands  alone  as,  in  that  aspect,  the  fulfilment 
of  the  ideal  of  sacrifice.  All  the  life,  which  was  thus  perfect  surrender  to  the  Father's 
will,  was  also  expiation.  Himself  bare  our  sins  in  his  lowliness  and  sorrows,  in  the 
sympathy  which  wrung  his  heart,  as  well  as  in  the  awful  solitade  when  he  experienced 
the  utmost  penalty  of  the  sin  which  he  had  never  committed,  in  the  consciousness  of 
separation  from  God,  which  is  eternal  death,  and  in  the  physical  death  which  is  but 
the  pictured  shadow  of  that  awful  reality.  His  sacrifice,  as  surrender,  stands  alone  in 
degree,  as  being  absolute  and  stainless.  His  sacrifice,  as  expiation,  stands  alone  in 
kind,  incapable  of  repetition  or  imitation,  and,  bleRsed  be  God,  needing  none.  But  if 
we  have  come  to  him  and  partaken  of  his  life,  we  shall,  in  the  measure  of  our  partici- 
pation, become  sacrifices  too — not  indeed  expiatory,  but  euoharistic.  For,  touched  by  his 
leva,  and  possessing  his  Spirit,  we  shall  joyfully  give  up  ourselves.  Our  true  sacrifice  is 
the  surrender  of  our  wills  to  the  Divine  will.  We  have  to  lay  ourselves  upon  the  altar 
which  sanctifies  and  glorifies  giver  and  gift ;  so  shall  we  receive  back  again  a  better 
self,  ennobled  and  purified.  Life  should  be  one  long  sacrifice,  being  all  lived  with 
continual  reference  to  him,  and  continual  suppression  of  self.  By  him,  too,  we  should 
ofier  the  sacrifice  of  praise  continually,  and  present  the  "  much  incense"  of  prayer.  By 
him,  too,  we  are  to  bring  the  sacrifices  of  doing  good  and  imparting,  with  which  God 
is  well  pleased.  And  by  him  we  may  at  last  offer  the  libation  of  pouring  out  our  souls 
unto  death,  and  complete  the  sacrifices  of  a  life  of  faith  by  a  death  of  submission.  The 
dignities  and  prerogatives  of  the  Christian  life,  expressed  in  the  grand  truths  that  we 
are  temples  and  priests,  are  granted  to  us,  not  for  honour,  but  for  service.  We  are 
temples  and  priests  that  we  may  be  sacrifices.  All  lofty  gifts  are  ours  with  a  view  to 
this  highest  end,  that  we  may  yield  ourselves  wholly  to  God,  and,  losing  ourselves  in 
utter  surrender,  may  have  our  poor  sacrifice  accepted  through  him  who  alone  has  offered 
the  one  perfect  sacrifice  for  sins  for  evermore. — A.  M. 

Ver.  7. —  The  Bead  of  tfie  corner;  or,  the  Stone  of  stumhlirig.  The  Authorized 
Version's  rendering  of  these  words  has  been  felt  by  many  devout  souls  to  contain  a 
truth  which  their  deepest  experience  joyfully  confirmed.  The  true  meaning  is  no  less 
great  and  beautiful.    Literally,  they  read,  "  Unto  you  who  believe  is  [or, '  belongs '] 


CH.  a  1—26.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PETER.  n 

the  preciousness."  What  preoiouaness  ?  The  definite  article  points  us  back  to  the 
attribute  of  the  "  Oorner-stone  "  in  the  previous  verse.  It  i»  "  elect,  precious."  Peter's 
thought,  then,  is  that  all  in  Christ  which  makes  him  precious  belougs  or  passes  on  to 
us  by  faith.  That  is  a  profound  thought  put  in  very  simple  and  homely  vrords.  Faith 
mak'38  UB  owners  of  all  Christ's  infinite  worth, 

I.  The  trahsfkrencb  to  vb  of  the  preciousness  of  the  Fodndation.  There 
are  two  possible  meanings  of  this  phrase,  and  probably  both  are  included  in  the 
apostle's  thought.  It  may  either  be  that  the  qualities  which  make  Christ  precious 
pass  over  to  us  and  become  our  qualities  and  character,  or  that  the  qualities  which 
make  Christ  precious  become  available  for  our  benefit.  The  first  of  these  thoughts  is 
in  acoordanoe  with  the  immediate  context,  for  we  find  the  same  idea  expiessed  in 
several  aspects  in  ver.  5,  where  the  living  Stone  is  said  to  make  those  who  come  to 
him  also  living  stones,  and  Christians  are  represented  as  being  like  their  Lord,  living 
temples,  consecrated  priests,  and  acceptable  sacrifices.  The  idea  that  vital  union  with 
Clirist  brings  about  a  communication  of  qualities  from  him  to  his  followers,  as  if  the 
virtue  of  the  Foundation  rose  through  all  the  building,  is  surely  taught  in  a  hundred 
plnces  in  Scripture,  and  is  the  very  olitnas  of  the  gospeL  He  that  is  joined  to  the 
Lord  is  one  spirit.  He  that  is  grafted  into  the  true  Olive  Tree  partakes  of  its  root 
and  fatness.  We  share  our  Lord's  life;  and  his  character  shall  growingly  become  ours. 
Whatever  makes  him  precious  in  the  sight  of  God  we  may  partake  of,  and  so  be 
accepted  in  the  Beloved,  and  be  found  in  him,  not  having  our  own  righteousness,  but 
clotlied  with  his.  We  may  hope  for  progressive  assimilation  to  his  character,  which 
will  not  cease  till  entire  conformity  has  been  realized,  and  we  have  absorbed  all  the 
preciousness  of  his  infinitely  worthy  and  spotlessly  pure  nature.  Water  stands  at  the 
same  level  in  two  communicating  vessels,  and  if  our  hearts  are  open  to  the  infiux  of 
Christ's  life,  the  flow  will  not  cease  till  all  his  is  ours,  and  his  fulness  has  filled  our 
emptiness.  Looking  at  the  other  asiiect  of  the  thought,  it  implies  that  the  precious- 
ness 3f  the  Foundation  is  available  for  us  rather  than  communicated  to  us.  The 
"  therefore  "  of  our  text  suggests  that  it  is  substantially  equivalent  in  meaning  to  the 
closing  words  of  the  previous  verse,  "  He  that  believeth  on  him  shall  not  be  con- 
founded." So  that  part  of  the  meaning,  at  all  events,  is  the  security  of  building  on 
that  Foundatiori.  The  preciousness  of  a  foundation  is  its  solidity  and  power  to  bear 
the  superincumbent  pressure  without  yielding.  That  steadfast  capacity  to  sustain  all 
our  weighit  if  we  build  ourselves  on  him  is  available  to  benefit  and  bless  us.  There- 
fore we  need  never  fear  that  our  Foundation  will  Settle  or  give.  We  need  not  fear  to  pile 
upon  it  all  the  pressure  of  our  cares  and  sorrows,  or  to  rear  on  it  the  fabric  of  our  hojies 
and  security.  It  will  stand.  Those  who  have  reared  their  lives  on  other  foundations 
will  stand  aghast  when  they  feel  them  crumbling  away  in  some  hour  of  supreme  need. 
They  will  have  to  flee  with  the  haste  of  despair  from  the  falling  ruins.  But  if  we 
have  built  on  Christ,  we  shall  have  no  need  for  haste,  and  no  pale  confusion  need  ever 
blanch  our  cheeks.  The  steadfastness  of  the  Foundation  will  avail  to  make  us  builded 
upon  it  steadfast  too,  and,  if  we  believe,  all  its  preciousness  will  be  ours  and  for  us. 

II.  How  THIS  PRECIOUSNESS  BECOMES  OUBB.  The  Order  of  the  sentence  in  the 
original  puts  emphasis  on  "  who  believe."  The  purpose  of  the  clause  is  to  mark  the 
persons  to  whom  alone  the  preciousness  belongs,  in  sharp  and  solemn  contrast  with 
another  class,  to  whom  none  of  the  saving,  but  only  the  destructive,  powers  which  lie 
in  the  Foundation  pass  over.  The  worth  of  Christ  is  ours  on  one  condition,  but  that 
condition  is  inexorable;  faith,  simple  trust,  which  takes  him  for  what  he  is  and  rests 
the  whole  being  on  Jesus  as  incarnate  Son  of  God,  Sacrifice  for  my  sin  as  for  all  men's, 
Inspirer  of  all  my  goodness,  Pattern,  Friend,  my  Life,  my  All  in  all, — is  the  simple,  sole, 
and  indispensable  condition  of  receiving  his  blessings  and  being  enriched  by  his  pre- 
ciousness. There  is  nothing  arbitrary  in  such  a  condition.  It  arises  necessarily  from 
the  very  nature  of  the  case.  How  can  Christ's  sacrifice  benefit  me  if  I  do  not  believe 
in  it?  What  possible  connection  can  be  established  between  him  and  me,  except 
through  my  trust  in  him  ?  Faith  is  but  stretching  out  the  hand  to  grasp  his  extended 
hand.  How  can  he  hold  me  up,  or  give  me  the  blessings  of  which  his  hands  are  full, 
if  mine  hang  listless  by  my  side,  or  aie  resolutely  clenched  behind  my  back?  Faith 
it  the  opening  of  the  heart  for  the  inflow  of  his  gifts.  How  can  the  sunshine  entei 
the  house  if  doors  are  barred  and   windows  shuttered?     Faith   ia  but  the  cbauQuJ 


93  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENEEAL  OP  PETER,    [oh.  n.  1—25. 

through  which  his  grace  pours.  How  can  it  enter  if  there  be  no  channel  ?  Faith  is 
the  sole  condition.  Let  us  learn,  then,  how  much  and  how  little  it  takes  to  put  us  in 
possession  of  the  preciousness  of  Christ.  How  much?  Nothing  less  than  the  sur- 
render of  our  hearts  to  him  in  entire  self-distrust  and  abasement,  and  in  absolute 
reliance  on  his  aU-sufSciency  for  our  every  need.  How  little  ?  No  external  conrieotion 
with  Churches  or  Church  ordinances  ;  no  efforts  of  ours  after  self-improvement  nor 
fragmentary  and  partial  goodness;  but  simply  trust  in  the  Christ  whom  the  gospel 
reveals.  That  faith  must  be  a  continually  active  faith.  It  is  "you  who  believe,"  not 
"  you  who  believed,"  to  whom  the  preciousness  belongs.  The  transference  is  continual, 
if  the  faith  be  continual.  Every  interruption  of  the  latter  causes  a  cessation  in  the 
former,  and  is  marked  by  breaks  like  those  on  a  telegraphic  ribbon  where  the  contact 
was  suspended.  Builders  put  a  film  of  pitch  between  the  foundations  and  the  upper 
courses  to  keep  the  damp  from  rising.  How  often  Christians  put  a  film  of  impenetrable 
unbelief  between  Christ  and  themselves,  so  that  his  grace  cannot  rise  in  their  hearts ! 

IIL  The  geim  alternative.  If  the  condition  of  possession  be  as  the  apostle 
declares  it,  then  the  absence  of  the  condition  means  non-possession.  The  freeness  and 
•impUcity  of  the  gospel  of  salvation  by  faith  has  necessarily  a  dark  under  side,  and  the 
more  clearly  and  joyfully  the  one  is  preached  the  more  clearly  and  solemnly  should 
the  other  be.  Therefore  Peter's  message  would  not  be  complete  without  the  awfid 
"  but "  which  follows.  Christ  is  something  to  every  man  to  whom  he  is  preached,  and 
does  something  to  him.  Mark  how  signiHcantly  the  following  clause  varies  the  state- 
ment of  the  condition,  substituting  "  disobedient "  as  the  antithesis  of  "  believing," 
thereby  teaching  us  that  unbelief  js  disobedience,  being  an  act  of  the  rebel  will,  and 
that  disobedience  is  unbelief  But  observe,  too,  that  while  faith  is  the  condition  of  all 
reception  of  Christ's  blessings,  unbelief  does  not  so  isolate  from  him  as  that  he  is 
nothing  to  the  man.  Unbelief,  like  some  malignant  alchemy,  perverts  all  Christ'i 
preciousness  to  harm  and  loss,  as  some  plants  elaborate  poison  in  their  tissues  from 
sunshine  and  sweet  dewi  One  thing  or  other  that  great  Saviour  must  he  to  us  all. 
We  cannot  stand  wholly  unaffected  by  him.  We  cannot  make  ourselves  as  if  we  had 
never  heard  of  him.  There  is  a  solemn  alternative  offered  to  each  of  us — "either  .  .  . 
or."  Either  our  life,  being  received,  or  being  rejected — our  death.  There  will  come  to  ua 
from  him  either  the  gracious  influences  which  save,  or  the  terrible  ones  which  destroy. 
He  is  either  the  merciful  Fire  which  cleanses  and  transforms,  or  the  awful  Fire  which 
consumes.  Faith  builds  on  him  as  the  Foundation,  and  is  secure.  Unbelief  pulls  down 
that  Rock  of  offence  on  its  own  head,  and  is  ground  to  powder  by  the  fall. — A.  M. 

Ver.  9  (last  clause). —  What  the  Church  is  for.  "This  people  have  I  formed  fox 
myself,"  says  the  Divine  voice  through  the  Prophet  Isaiah ;  "  they  shall  show  forth  my 
praise."  The  Revised  Version  gives  the  latter  clause  as  the  purpose  of  the  former, 
"  that  they  might  set  forth,"  thus  showing  still  more  distinctly  a  verbal  correspond- 
ence with  the  text,  which  is  evidently  quoted  from  the  prophet.  The  apostle's  mind 
is  full  of  the  Old  Testament  representations  of  the  sacred  office  and  dignity  of  Israel 
as  a  royal  priesthood  and  God's  chosen  possession,  and  he  transfers  the  whole  without 
hesitation  to  the  Christian  Church,  which  he,  like  all  the  New  Testament  writers, 
regards  as  the  heir  of  Israel's  forfeited  position.  The  remarkable  word  rendered 
"  praise  "  in  the  Authorized  Version  makes  the  quotation  from  Isaiah  unmistakable,  as 
it  is  found  in  the  Septuagint  rendering  of  the  verse,  from  which  the  apostle  is  quoting. 
It  literally  means  "  virtues,"  or,  if  that  word  is  felt  to  be  inappropriate  to  the  Divine 
nature,  the  translation  of  the  Revised  Version,  "  excellencies,"  may  be  adopted.  In 
either  case  the  meaning  is  that  the  great  end  of  the  Church's  existence  is  to  manifest 
the  glories  of  the  Divine  character,  and  so  to  praise  him.  We  praise  God  best  when 
we  set  forth  what  he  ia.  The  act  of  praise  follows  on  the  exhibition  of  the  Object  of 
praise.  * 

I.   We   have   HEBE  A   EBMAEKABLB   VIEW  OF    THE   GEEAT   PURPOSE    OF   GoD   Df   HIS 

HIGHEST  woEKiNO.  The  manifestation  of  his  own  character  that  his  creatures  may 
see  it  and  magnify  him,  is  his  end,  so  far  as  we  can  speak  of  God  as  having  ends  which 
he  reaches  by  his  acts.  Self-manifestation  to  creatures  who  can  somewhat  feel  the 
infinite  beauty  and  bow  adoring  and  blessed  before  it,  is  his  supreme  purpose  in  all 
his  acts.     Such  an  end  alone  is  fully  congruous  with  and  worthy  of  God.     For  this 


OB,  iL  1—25.]    THE  FIRST  KPISTLB  GENERAL  OF  PETER.  <J3 

end  creation  came  into  being,  that  it  might  be  a  mirror  of  God,  and  eyes  were  made 
that  in  the  mirror  they  might  behold  him  and  rejoice  in  the  vision.  Every  creature 
has  this  for  its  highest  end,  to  glorify  God,  because  that  was  God's  end  in  its  creation. 
Of  creatures  man  is  the  highest  revelation  of  the  Divine  character;  and  among  men, 
man  redeemed  is  the  highest.  This  great  thought  as  to  God's  supreme  end  being  the 
manifestation  of  himself  has  often  been  stated  so  as  to  repel,  and  to  make  God  almighty 
selfishness.  "  For  a  man  to  seek  his  own  glory  is  not  glory,"  and  the  same  thing  is 
true  about  some  forms  into  which  this  truth  has  been  thrown.  But  rightly  under- 
stood, it  is  but  another  way  of  saying,  "  God  is  love."  For  the  impulse  and  need  to 
impart  one's  self  is  the  very  life  of  love,  and  he  seeks  in  all  his  acts  to  reveal  himself, 
because,  being  love,  he  delights  to  give  himself  to  his  creatures,  and  because  their 
highest  blessedness  and  their  eternal  life  stand  in  the  knowledge  of  his  Name. 

II.  We  have,  second,  an  impressive  thought  as  to  the  manner  in  which  this 
GBBAT  PURPOSE  IS  EFFECTED.  It  is  largely  entrusted  to  the  members  of  the  Christian 
Church,  who  are,  as  George  Herbert  says  of  mankind  as  a  whole,  "  the  secretaries  of 
his  praise."  And  there  are  three  ways  in  which  they  are  and  should  be  so.  1.  The 
very  existence  of  the  Church  proclaims  Ood's  excellencies.  Its  founding,  in  the  one 
wondrous  act  of  Christ's  death,  proclaims  his  wisdom,  power,  aud  love,  all  in  superlative 
degree.  All  his  character  shines  forth  there  with  brightness  before  which  the  reve- 
lation of  him  in  creation  pales  and  dwindles,  and  is  as  a  nebula  to  u  sun.  Its  preser- 
vation, notwithstanding  the  imperfections  and  sins  of  its  members  and  the  opposition 
of  its  enemies,  shows  forth  his  guarding  and  sustaining  power  no  less  than  his  long- 
suffering.  If  the  Church  had  less  than  almightiness  to  preserve  it,  the  faults  oi 
Christians  would  have  destroyed  it  long  ago,  and  would  have  provoked  him  to  destroy 
it  if  he  had  not  been  infinite  in  patience.  The  great  evidence  of  Christianity  is  Christ, 
and  the  second  is  the  Church.  2.  The  characters  of  Christian  men  proclaim  God's  excel- 
lencies. They  are  "  called  out  of  darkness,"  as  the  text  says,  "  into  his  marvellous 
light."  That  implies,  as  part  of  its  meaning,  that  Christian  men  do  in  some  measure 
enter  into  and  walk  in  that  light  in  which  he  is.  The  process  of  conversion  is  their 
passage  from  the  darkness  of  self,  which  is  ignorance,  and  sin,  and  sadness,  into  the 
possession,  in  part  at  least,  of  his  light,  which  brings  knowledge  and  goodness  and  joy. 
The  black  thunder-clouds  are  borne  into  the  sunlight,  which  pours  on  their  ebon  masses 
and  touches  them  into  lustre  or  thins  them  away.  Thus  we  may  and  should  become 
means  of  making  God  visible  and  lovely  to  dim  eyes  which  could  not  bear  to  look  on 
his  brightness  except  as  reflected  in  the  mirror  of  our  characters.  All  the  beauty  of 
self-sacrifice  which  has  ever  irradiated  a  saint,  all  the  heroism  of  the  martyr,  all  the 
wisdom  and  eloquence  of  the  teachers,  all  the  prudence  of  the  leaders,  all  the  charity 
and  benevolence,  are  but  the  reflex  of  his  excellencies.  All  these,  which  gleam  so 
brightly  in  the  dark  world,  are  but  diamond  dust,  microscopic  fragments,  as  it  were, 
from  the  solid  rock  of  his  infinite  perfection.  They  tell  of  him,  as  the  stream  of  its 
source.  How  profound  the  depth,  how  wide  the  expanse,  how  pellucid  the  waters  of 
that  great  lake  which  pours  through  the  ages  that  broad  stream  of  human  goodness 
that  flows  between  the  banks  of  the  Christian  Church!  3.  We  should  proclaim  Ood's 
excellencies  by  direct  words,  as  occasion  serves.  Every  Christian  is  bound  both  to 
witness  for  God  by  a  life  made  fair  by  communion  with  him,  and  by  speech,  when 
speech  may  be  used.  It  is  not  enough  to  show  forth  his  Name  in  our  lives,  for  some- 
times life  needs  a  commentary,  and  a  Christian  will  often  have  to  avow  the  principles 
which  guide  his  actions,  in  plain  words,  if  the  actions  are  to  be  intelligible  or  he  to  be 
faithful.  Common  honesty  requires  it.  Loyalty  to  our  Lord  requires  it.  Ordinary 
humanity  requires  it.  God  has  entrusted  all  Christian  men  with  the  treasure  of  his 
love  in  Chri.st,  not  that  they  may  themselves  be  enriched  only,  but  also  that  by  them 
it  maybe  ministered  to  others;  and  the  dumb  Christian  who  has  never  opened  his 
mouth  to  press  the  gospel  on  others  incurs  a  worse  "  curse  "  than  that  which  falls  on 
him  who  "  withholdeth  bread "  from  starving  lips.  Alas  1  for  the  many  professing 
Christians  who  do  their  best  to  thwart  the  Divine  purpose  in  their  conversion  by 
cowardly  indolent  silence  I  Their  duty  cannot  be  delegated,  their  responsibility  cannot 
be  evaded,  nor  the  punishment  which  comes  in  their  feeble  hold  of  the  concealed  truth 
eluded. 

III.  Wk  have  herb,  too.  an  exhibition  of  some  of  the  motives  impellino  thb 


94  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  PETER,    [ch.  n.  1— 25. 


mscHAsoE  OF  THIS  DDTT.  The  greatness  of  the  blessing  is  suggested  by  the  emphatio 
words  which  describe  God  as  calling  us  out  of  darkness  into  his  marvellous  light.  His 
love  and  his  power  have  summoned  us  into  light  which  is  his  own,  thus  giving  us  to 
participate  in  the  very  element  of  his  own  being,  and  which  is  marvellous,  as  being 
bestowed  by  processes  beyond  nature  which  may  well  call  forth  wonder,  and  as  in  its 
own  lustre  so  far  transcending  all  other  light  A  gift  so  wondrous  is  meant  to  call 
forth  gratitude,  and  that  gratitude  should  express  itself  in  a  continual  offering  up  of 
self  to  manifest  God's  glory.  Thankfulness,  then,  to  him  who  has  called  us  is  the  first 
motive  to  which  the  apostle  appeals.  It  is  a  poor  gratitude  which  never  mentions  the 
name  of  its  benefactor.  Dumb  thankfulness  is  no  thankfulness.  If  his  praises  die  on  our 
lips,  gratitude  must  be  dead  in  our  hearts.  A  second  motive  is  a  sense  of  responsibility 
arising  from  possession  of  the  gift.  If  we  have  the  light,  and  are  walking  in  it,  how 
can  we  bear  to  know  that  there  are  poor  souls  stumbling  in  the  dark  I  Put  the  candle 
in  your  window.  It  may  light  home  some  lost  wanderer  on  the  dreary  moor.  A  third 
motive  arises  from  the  consideration  of  God's  purpose  to  which  we  have  already  referred. 
Surely  his  purpose  should  be  our  aim.  Our  own  happiness  or  salvation  is  not  all  God's 
meaning  in  his  mercy  towards  us. 

"  Heaven  doth  with  ns,  as  we  with  torches  dcs 
Not  light  them  foi  themselves," 

We  have  received  Christ  that  we  may  impart  Christ.  "  God  hath  shlned  In  our  hearts, 
that  we  might  give  to  others  the  light  of  the  knowledge  of  the  glory  of  God  in  the  face 
of  Jesus  Christ."  Let  us  see  to  it  that  we  fulfil  that  Divine  purpose.  Let  us  not  be 
silent  recipients  of  his  grace,  like  the  sand  that  sucks  up  the  rain  and  bears  no  flowers ; 
but  let  us  give  back  in  praise  and  witness  what  his  meroy  gives  to  us.— A.  M. 

Ver.  21. — Chrisfs  PaisUm  our  peace  and  pattern.  Christianity  brings  its  highest 
principles  to  bear  on  the  lowliest  duties.  If  it  did  not  regulate  these,  what  would  there 
be  for  it  to  regulate  ?  Life  is  made  up  of  a  great  many  little  things  and  a  very  few  great 
ones.  The  clock  only  strikes  twelve  twice  in  the  twenty-four  hours.  The  apostle  is 
engaged  In  exhorting  a  handful  of  Christian  slaves  to  patience  and  submission,  and  he 
points  to  the  solemn  mystery  of  the  cross,  and  bids  them  look  to  it  amid  their  squalid 
miseries,  and  take  pattern  from  the  infinite  meekness  and  unmurmuring  submission 
seen  there.  The  supreme  truth  of  revelation  is  fitly  used  for  so  lowly  a  purpose. 
Further,  note  how  here  the  two  views  of  Christ's  work  which  have  been  often  held 
•part,  and  even  made  antagonistic,  are  united — suffering  for  us,  and  example  to  us. 

I.  The  surFBBiNGs  of  Christ  oue  gain.  It  is  interesting  to  notice  the  change  in 
the  apostle's  insight  into  the  meaning  of  Christ's  sufferings.  At  first,  it  was  he  espe- 
cially to  whom  they  were  a  stumbling-block.  The  very  intensity  of  his  belief  that  his 
Master  was  "  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  the  living  God,"  made  him  recoil  from  the  thought 
of  his  violent  death  as  an  inconceivable  contradiction.  "Be  it  far  from  thee.  Lord. 
This  shall  not  be  unto  thee!"  expressed  with  characteristic  vehemence  at  once  his  blind- 
ness and  his  love.  Even  after  the  Resurrection,  Peter's  earlier  preaching,  as  recorded 
in  the  Acts,  does  not  go  beyond  putting  in  contrast  the  two  things — the  death  as 
man's  crime,  the  rising  again  as  God's  seal.  He  does  not  seem,  in  these  first  days  of 
transition,  to  have  reached  the  harmonizing  thought  of  the  purpose  of  the  suffeiings. 
But  in  this  Epistle  these  sufferings  have  become  the  very  keystone  of  the  arch,  The 
references  to  them  are  continual.  The  whole  fabric  of  his  theological  and  moral  teach- 
ing is  built  on  them.  T}ie  black  thunder-cloud  has  been  discerned  to  be  the  source  of 
all-refreshing  rains  and  the  cause  of  fruitfulness,  and  the  inexplioible  anomaly  has  bcrn 
unfolded  as  the  deepest  truth  on  which  faith  and  hope  and  soul-transforming  love,  the 
mother  of  all  practical  obedience,  may  fasten  and  feed.  The  one  thought  which  has  thus 
illuminated  the  darkness  is  the  recognition  of  Christ's  sufferings  as  for  us.  The  world 
has  admitted  that  the  Sufferer  had  no  sin  of  his  own.  Unless  we  see  in  them  Buffering; 
on  behalf  of  others,  his  life  becomes  the  great  indictment  of  God's  providence.  Only 
when  we  see  that  he  was  wounded  for  our  transgressions  do  we  undeistaml  the  mystery 
of  the  cross.  The  text  does  not  define  the  manner  in  which  these  sufferings  work  on 
our  liehalf.  "  For  us"  is  not  necessarily  "  instead  of  us."  But  there  can  be  no  doubt 
KM  to  wh»t  that  manner  was  in  the  view  of  the  apostle.     "His  own  self  bare  our  sins  in 


OH.  a  1—25.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLK  GENERAL  OF  -fBTER.  95 

his  own  body  on  the  treft,**  feayS  the  context.  His  denth  was  a  sacrifice;  by  the  sprin- 
kling at  his  blood  we  are  hallowed.  No  other  view  does  justice  to  the  plain  itapoft  of 
those  and  other  passages  than  that  Which  takes  Christ's  Sufferings  to  be  substitutionary 
in  their  character  and  propitiatory  iti  their  operation,  and  therefore  to  be  lot  our 
advantage.  Note,  too,  that  the  apostle  dwells  on  the  suffering!?,  the  actual  mental  and 
physical  pain,  and  not  only  on  the  fact  of  death.  The  losing  memory  of  the  eye-witness 
of  his  Lord's  Passion  retains  each  incident  of  the  slow  torture,  the  buffeting,  the  mock- 
ing, the  livid  weals  of  the  cruel  scourge,  the  fainting  form  bearing  the  heavy  cross,  and 
the  unmoved  meekness  in  it  all.  Sensuous  reptesentatious  of  Christ's  sufferings  have 
often  been  carried  too  far,  but  surely  there  is  a  danger'  of  going  to  the  other  extreme ; 
and  every  Christian  life  needs  for  its  vigour  a  believiilg  and  realizing  contemplation  of 
the  sufferings  of  Christ  endured  for  and  instead  of  us. 

II.  The  sufpErings  of  Christ  our  pattern.  We  are  familiar  with  the  idea  that  our 
Lurd':j  life  is  our  pattern.  But  here  we  have  his  Passion  presented  not  only  for  our  faith, 
but  for  our  imitation.  1.  Note  the  Special  fofrce  of  the  two  metaphors  here.  "  Example" 
is  Only  used  here  in  the  New  Testament.  It  means  a  copy  of  writirig  set  to  a  scholar  to 
be  traded  oVei:  by  his  unacdtiStottied  hand.  Think  of  tne  clear  firm  characters  below, 
and  the  wavering  clumsy  ones  Scrawled  over  them.  Huw  the  figure  speaks  of  careful 
observance  of  the  example,  of  laborious  effort  after  reproducing  it,  and  of  the  hope  of 
constant  gradual  improvement!  The  view  of  tlie  whole  Christian  life  wliich  is  involved 
in  the  figure  is  that  in  it  all  we  are  like  schoOlbbys  writing  our  copybooks,  which  have 
to  be  examined  by  the  Master  one  day.  What  we  have  written,  we  ha\  e  written.  Let 
us  live  as  rememberihg  that  we  have  to  take  up  otir  books  to  the  Master's  desk  when 
school  is  oveir!  The  other  metaphor  is  remarkable  on  Peter's  lips.  Did  he  remember 
how  rashly  he  had  asked,  "  Why  cannot  I  follow  thee  how  ?  "  and  the  last  solemn  com- 
mand by  the  fire  of  coals  on  the  lake-Side  ?  The  word  employed  has  the  force  of  "  follow 
closely."  We  are  to  take  Christ  for  our  Guide,  as  men  walking  across  a  glacier  might 
do  by  their  guide,  stepping  in  the  prints  of  his  footsteps,  and  keeping  very  near  him. 
2.  Notice  the  solemii  thought  that  Chtist's  sllfferinja  dan  he  imitated  hy  us.  They  stand 
alone  in  their  bearing  on  man's  salvation,  and  in  Certain  respects,  in  tiieir  severity  and 
awfulness.  We  have  but,  at  the  most,  to  go  a  little  *ay  down  the  awful  descent  which 
he  travelled  to  its  depths,  to  drink  a  little  of  the  ciip  which  he  drained  to  its  dregs,  tu 
stand  on  the  edge  of  the  storm  through  the  worst  of  which  he  passed.  But-  yet  the 
same  spirit  and  temper  may  be  oUrs.  Not  the  mdckiug  but  the  meekness,  not  the 
scourging  but  the  subtnissioii,  not  the  dread  desertion  by  the  Father's  love  but  the  Son's 
cry  to  the  Father,  may  be  copied  by  each  of  us  in  our  lighter  griefs.  Complete  surrender 
to  the  will  of  God  and  njeek  endurance  of  the  enmity  of  men  are  to  be  our  patterns. 
The  highest  ideal  of  human  character  is  the  Christ  who,  when  he  was  reviled,  reviled  not 
again.  How  utterly  opposed  to  it  are  the  so-called  virtues  of  high-spirited  resistance, 
and  the  whole  practice  of  most  of  us  ill  regard  to  slights,  insults,  and  injuries!  We  call 
ourselves  Christians,  and  say  that  we  take  Christ  for  our  Example  ;  do  w°  ever  remem- 
ber that  his  cross  is  not  Only  the  ground  of  all  our  peace  and  hope,  but  the  la*  of  our 
lives?  or  bethink  ourselves  that  whatever  more  "  being  made  comformable  to  his  death" 
may  mean,  it  means  that  "when  we  do  well  and  suffer  fot  it,  we  take  it  patiently," 
and  let  no  anger,  or  revenge,  ot-  bitterness  to  our  worst  enemy  ever  rufSe  the  Clear  waters 
of  our  hearts? 

III.  The  suffeeinos  ot  Christ  otra  powbb.  The  world  has  plenty  of  examples. 
Men  do  not  go  wrong  for  want  Of  patterns.  The  worst  man  knows  more  of  goodness 
than  the  best  than  does.  Models  make  us  neither  willing  tior  able  to  Copy  them. 
What  is  the  use  of  a  headline  in  a  copy,  be  it  ever  so  beautifully  written,  if  the  scholar 
has  no  will  to  imitate  it,  has  a  lame  hand,  and  a  bad  pen  with  no  ink  in  it  ?  We  want 
something  more  than  examples  if  we  whose  disesise  is  that  we  know  the  good  and  choose 
the  evil  are  ever  to  be  better.  So  all  types  of  Christianity  Which  merely  take  Christ  as 
an  Example  fail  to  get  his  example  imitated.  We  must  begin  with  "  Christ  suffered  for 
us  "  if  We  are  to  live  like  Christ.  Only  when  I  look  to  his  cross  as  the  great  act  of  Lis 
love,  by  which  he  gave  himSelf  wholly  for  me  and  bore  the  burden  of  my  sin,  do  I 
receive  the  power  to  follow  him  and  live  as  he  lived.  That  death,  if  I  look  to  it  with 
faith,  opens  the  deepest  springs  of  love  in  my  heart,  which  make  obedience  to  and 
imitation  of  him  necessary  and  delightful    It  joitu  me  to  him  in  a  utii6n  so  close  that 


96  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PETER,    [ch.  ii.  1— 25. 

in  him  I  am  crucified  to  the  world,  and  a  new  life,  the  life  of  Christ  himself,  is  implanted 
within  me.  It  hrings  to  me  a  new  power  of  holiness  in  the  Spirit  which  he  gives. 
Unless  the  sufferings  of  Christ  are  to  us  the  propitiation  for  our  sins,  they  will  never  be 
to  us  the  pattern  for  our  lives.  Unless  they  are  the  pattern  for  our  lives,  it  is  vain  to 
fancy  that  they  are  the  propitiation  for  our  sins.  What  God  has  joined  together  let  not 
man  put  asunder.  "Christ  has  suffered  for  us" — there  is  the  whole  gospel ;  "leaving 
us  an  example  " — there  is  the  whole  Law. — A.  M. 

Ver.  25. — The  Shepherd  and  Bishop  of  souli.  This  letter  is  addressed  to  scattered 
strangers.  But  though  locally  separated,  over  wide  lands,  a  handful  here,  a  single  soul 
there,  they  were  in  spirit  united,  and,  seen  truly,  were  a  flock  gathered  round  the  one 
Shepherd.  Long  ago  Peter  had  heard  the  great  words,  "  Other  sheep  I  have  .  .  .  them 
also  I  must  bring,  .  .  .  and  there  shall  be  one  flock,  and  one  Shepherd."  And  in  these 
Gentile  Christiaus,  thinly  sown  over  the  Asiatic  peninsula,  he  sees  the  beginning  of  their 
fulfilment.  They  had  been  wandering  sheep.  They  are  now  a  flock;  for  the  real 
dividing  influence  is  sin,  which  drives  us  apart  into  the  awful  solitude  of  a  self-absorbed 
life,  and  the  real  uniting  power  is  Christ,  in  their  common  relation  to  whom  men  the 
most  widely  apart  in  place,  race,  condition,  or  culture,  are  brought  into  close  union  with 
each  other.  There  is  one  flock  because  the  sheep  cluster  round  the  one  Shepherd.  These 
two  expressions — "  Shepherd"  and  "  Bishop"  of  souls — cover  very  much  the  same  ground, 
but  they  set  forth  our  Lord's  relation  under  somewhat  different  aspects,  each  blessed, 
and  suggesting  different  phases  of  encouragement  and  exhortation. 

I.  The  Shepherd  of  souls.  It  is  needless  to  trace  this  metaphor  through  the  Old 
Testament,  where  it  is  employed  to  express  the  relation  of  Jehovah  to  Israel.  The  most 
familiar  of  all  the  psalms  shows  us  a  single  devout  soul  appropriating  the  whole  rest  and 
bleasednpss  of  the  thought  for  the  nourishment  of  the  individual  life  of  trust.  Isaiah's 
great  proj/hecy  of  the  Servant  of  the  Lord  proclaims  the  coming  of  Jehovah  to  feed  his 
flock  like  &  Shepherd.  Ezekiel  brings  out  more  plainly  still  that  not  only  Jehovah,  but 
Jehovah's  "  servant  David,"  is  to  be  the  Shepherd  in  a  golden  future.  Zechariah's 
mysterious  words  add  dark  shades  to  the  picture,  and  set  forth  Jehovah's  Shepherd  as 
smitteu  by  Jehovah's  appointment.  And  all  these  foreshadowings  are  interpreted  and 
the  scattered  beams  focussed  in  the  words  which  were  as  vivid  in  Peter's  memory  as 
when  first  spoken,  and  far  better  understood  than  then :  "I  am  the  good  Shepherd.  The 
good  Shepherd  giveth  his  life  for  his  sheep."  It  is  remarkable  that,  with  all  this 
prophecy  and  teaching  from  our  Lord  himself,  this  text  and  one  verse  in  Hebrews  are 
the  only  places  where  the  name  is  applied  to  him  in  the  New  Testament,  especially 
when  we  remember  how  early  and  how  universally  the  figure  came  to  be  employed  in 
the  succeeding  periods.  What  aspects  of  our  Lord's  relation  to  us  does  it  present? 
The  ancient  application  of  the  metaphor,  not  only  in  Israel,  but  in  other  lands,  was  to 
kings  and  rulers;  but  we  cannot  confine  the  meaning  thus.  The  twenty-third  psalm 
and  the  tenth  chapter  of  John  give  far  deeper  and  tenderer  thoughts  than  rule.  There 
are  mainly  three  ideas  expressed.  1.  The  first  is  guidance.  The  shepherd  leads. 
"  When  he  puts  forth  his  sheep  he  goeth  before  them."  And  under  that  thought  is 
included  all  the  shaping  of  outward  life,  for  Christ  is  the  Lord  of  providence,  and  the 
hands  that  were  pierced  for  us  hold  the  helm  of  the  universe.  But  our  text  does  not 
add,  "  of  souls,"  without  a  deep  meaning.  It  would  have  us  see  the  operation  of  our 
Shepherd's  care,  not  only  nor  chiefly  in  outward  life.  And  therefore  we  mnst  think  of 
his  guidance  as  mainly  his  leading  of  our  souls  in  paths  of  righteousness,  and  "  show- 
ing us  that  which  is  good."  His  recorded  example,  the  touch  of  his  hand  on  our  wills, 
the  sweet  constraint  of  his  love,  the  wisdom  which  directs  breathed  into  the  soul  which 
lives  in  fellowship  with  him,  and  has  silenced  the  loud  voice  of  self  that  his  voice  may 
be  heard, — these  are  the  Shepherd's  guidance  of  the  sheep.  His  sceptre  is  a  sim|ile 
shepherd's  staff.  He  says, "  Gome,  follow  me ; "  and  his  sheep  walk  not  in  darkness,  but 
have  the  light  of  life.  2.  The  second  thought  is  guardianship.  David  lear.ied  to 
trust  his  Shepherd's  care  over  him  in  dangers  by  meditating  on  his  own  hazarding  his 
life  against  the  "  lion  and  the  bear."  Our  Shepherd  gives  his  life  to  drag  us  from  the 
mouth  of  the  lion.  Body  and  soul  are  under  his  care.  Himself  may  sometimes  strike 
a  straying  sheep  with  his  merciful  rod,  but  he  will  let  no  foe  touch  us,  and  our  sorrows 
are  tokens  of  his  care,  not  of  their  power.    If  we  keep  within  hearing  of  his  voice,  tin, 


OH.  II.  1—25.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PETER.  97 

whioli  is  our  only  real  enemy,  will  not  harm  us.  Our  docile  submission  is  the  corre- 
lative of  his  guidance,  and  our  trust  should  answer  to  his  defence.  If  he  guard,  let  ua 
press  close  to  the  shelter  of  his  presence,  and  ever  look  for  the  benediction  of  his  eye. 
3.  The  third  thought  is  provision.  He  will  not  lead  where  we  must  starve,  but  even  in 
the  most  unpromising  situations  will  show  his  flock  some  scattered  blades  of  grass 
which  they  may  crop.  "  Their  pastures  shall  be  in  all  high  places,  the  very  bareness  of 
the  mountain-tops  yielding  food.  He  himself  is  the  Pasture  as  well  as  the  Shepherd  of 
the  soul,  and  ever  gives  himself  to  satisfy  the  hunger  of  the  human  heart,  which  needs  a 
changeless  and  perfect  love,  a  personal  truth,  an  all-commanding  will  to  feed  upon,  else 
it  aches  with  hunger.  And  for  outward  wants  these  too  he  remembers,  and  on  the  low- 
liest shore  will  kindle  a  fire  of  coals,  and  himself  prepare  food  for  his  servants.  So  let  us 
wait  on  the  Shepherd  of  our  souls,  assured  that  his  sheep  never '  look  up,  and  are  not  fed.' " 
IL  Christ  the  Bishop  op  our  souls.  Undoubtedly  the  allusion  here  is  to  the  bishop 
or  elder  of  the  early  Chnrch,  with  distinct  reference  to  the  etymological  meaning  of  the 
word  as  well  as  to  the  functions  of  the  ofiScer.  Looking  to  the  later  development  of 
these,  and  to  the  associations  which  they  have  connected  with  the  word,  the  marginal 
rendering  of  the  Revised  Version  ("  overseer  ")  is  perhaps  better  than  "  bishop."  How 
closely  the  two  ideas  of  "shepherd"  and  Church  "overseer"  are  connected  is  clear  from 
Paul's  address  to  the  elders  at  Ephesus  (Acts  xx.),  and  from  the  exhortations  in  this 
Epistle  (ch.  v.  1,  7)  to  the  elders  to  feed  the  flock,  as  well  as  from  the  universal  use  of 
"  pastor  "  as  a  synonym.  What  aspects  of  Christ's  relation  are  thus  presented  ?  1.  We 
have  the  great  truth  that  he  is  himself  the  Source  from  which  all  Church  officers  draw  at 
once  their  authority  and  their  faculty.  He  gives  all  gifts  to  men,  and  sets  them  in  his 
Church.  If  they  forget  that,  and  use  their  offices  for  themselves,  or  fancy  that  they  origi- 
nate the  gifts  which  they  "but  receive,  they  are  usurpers.  From  him  are  they  all.  To 
him  should  they  all  live  and  serve."  There  is  but  one  Authority  and  one  Teacher  in  the 
Church ;  the  rest  are  delegates.  There  is  but  one  Fountain ;  the  others  are  cisterns. 
"  One  is  your  Master,  and  all  ye  are  brethren."  2.  The  original  meaning  of  the  word  it 
"  overseer"  and  that  suggests  the  vigilant  inspection  which  he  exercises  over  his  Church. 
The  good  Shepherd  knows  each  sheep  by  name,  and  his  watchful  eye  is  on  every  one  of 
the  flock.  The  title  is  the  condensation  into  one  word  of  the  solemn  clause  in  the 
apocalyptic  vision  of  the  Christ  in  the  midst  of  the  golden  lamps,  which  tells  how  "  hif 
eyes  were  as  a  flame  of  fire,"  and  of  the  sevenfold  "  I  know  thy  works,"  which  heralds 
each  message  to  the  Churches.  The  thought  has  many  sides,  according  to  the  spiritual 
condition  of  each.  To  Ephesus  which  has  left  its  first  love,  to  Sardis  ready  to  die,  to 
Laodioea  sinking  from  lukewarmness  to  ice,  it  comes  monitory,  rebuking  and  putting  to 
shame,  though  even  in  these  the  clear  eye  sees  for  the  most  part  something  to  commend. 
To  Smyrna,  threatened  with  persecution  and  martyrdom,  it  brings  courage  and  the 
assurance  of  a  crown  of  life.  To  Philadelphia,  which  has  kept  his  Word,  it  seals  the  joy  of 
his  approbation,  which  is  reward  indeed.  So  to  us  all,  the  thought  that  we  walk  ever  in 
the  light  of  his  countenance  and  are  searched  by  the  flame  of  those  eyes  may  be  a  glad- 
ness, as  bringing  the  assurance  of  his  perfect  knowledge  who  loves  as  he  knows,  and  is 
guided  by  it  in  all  his  care  for  us  and  gifts  to  us.  "  Search  me,  0  Lord,  and  know  my 
heart."  3.  'i'he  thought  that  Christ  discharges  for  each  soul  an  office  of  which  the 
elders'  in  the  Church  is  a  shadow,  may  also  be  suggested.  He  teaches  and  he  rules.  All 
authority  over  and  all  illumination  in  our  souls  are  his.  And  that  not  merely  through 
men,  nor  only  by  the  influence  of  his  past  life  and  death  as  recorded,  but  by  a  present 
and  continual  operation  on  our  spirits.  We  have  not  only  a  Christ  who  lived  and  died, 
and  so  declared  the  Father,  but  a  Christ  who  lives,  and  from  his  throne  in  ttie  heavens 
is  still  declaring  him  to  all  listening  loving  hearts.  The  present  activity  of  Christ  is 
plainly  implied  here.  Nor  have  we  to  think  of  him  as  only  helping  and  teaching  the 
cullective  body,  but  single  souls.  He  is  not  here  spol^en  of  ais  the  Shei)herd  of  the  flock 
and  the  Overseer  of  the  Church,  blessed  as  that  truth  is ;  but  he  is  held  forth  as  Shepherd 
and  Bishop  of  each  unit  in  the  Church,  for  he  sustains  these  relations  to  the  indi- 
vidual, and  will  draw  near  to  each  of  us,  solitary  and  small,  if  we  w  11  only  believe 
that  by  his  stripes  we  are  healed,  and,  conquered  by  his  dying  love,  turn  from  our 
wanderings  and  couch  trustful  at  his  feet. — A.  M. 

Vers.  4 — 6. — The  spiritual  temple,  priesthood,  and  sacrifices.    A  Jew,  writing  to 

I.  PKTBB.  H 


99  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PETER,    [oh.  n.  1—26. 

Jews,  ytrj  naturally  made  use  of  language  and  of  metaphors  based  upon  the  usages 
and  practices  of  the  Jewish  religion.  Peter  knew  well  that  the  temple  offices  and 
observances,  the  building  and  its  purposes,  to  which  he  here  referred,  had  all  their 
meaning  in  their  relation  to  the  Saviour  in  whnm  he  and  his  fellow-Christians  believed, 
in  their  relation  to  the  gospel  which  he  preached. 

I.  Christians  abb  the  material  of  the  true  and  BPiRiTnAL  temple.  1,  They 
are  built  in  and  upon  the  divinely  chosen  Corner-Stone^Christ  himself.  Cephas, 
Peter,  "  the  rock,"  thus  witnesses  to  the  Bock  of  Ages,  whose  perfect  qualifications  to 
occupy  this  position  were  well  known  to  the  apostle  who  enjoyed  his  intimacy  and 
friendiship.  His  nature,  his  character,  his  mediatorial  work,  all  concurred  to  fit  our 
Lord  to  be  the  Support,  the  uniting  and  central  Force,  of  the  spiritual  edifice.  None" 
other  could  have  constituted  the  living  unity ;  none  other  could  hdve  served  as  the 
Comer-stone,  and  at  the  same  time  the  Foundation-stone,  of  the  new  humanity.  2. 
They  are  ini^vidually  living  stones ;  in  this  differing  from  the  fair  and  costly  masonry 
employed  in  the  temple  at  Jerusalem.  An  intimation  this  of  the  dignity  of  each 
Christian's  vocation,  who  has  his  own  place  to  fill,  his  own  work  to  do,  in  the  spiritual 
sanctuary ;  and  at  the  same  time  a  summons  to  that  life,  that  conscious  and  voluntary 
fulfilment  of  tervicej  which  distinguishes  the  living  from  the  lifeless  material.  3. 
They  constitute  in  concert  the  "  spiritual  house,"  which  is  the  glory  of  the  "  new 
dispensation ; "  the  idea  of  which  is  in.  the  mind  of  the  Divine  Architect,  and  which  is 
gradually  being  brought  to  realization  and  perfection  under  his  superintendence,  and 
through  the  concurrence  of  those  who  can  only  very  partially  comprehend  the  bearing 
of  their  life  upon  the  glorious  whole  which  is  in  due  time  to  be  consummated.  The 
whole  edifice  ia  based  by  faith  upon  Christ ;  the  several  stones  are  cemented  by  mutual 
love. 

n.   ChRISTIANB  ABE  THE  PEIB8TH00D  OF  THE  TRUE  AND  BPIBITtJAL  TEMPLE.      1.  Thii 

is  asserted  of  the  whole  body  of  the  faithful.  There  are  indeed  special  ministries  im 
the  Church — bishops,  presbyters,  deacons,  etc. ;  but  there  is  one  general  ministry  to 
trhich  all  Christians  are  called,  and  that  is  the  priesthood.  2.  The  character  of  this 
priesthood  is  stamped  as  "  holy."  From  the  Book  of  Leviticus  and  other  parts  of  the 
Old  Testament  we  learn  what  were  the  marks  of  the  Hebrew  priesthood — their  descent, 
their  equipment,  their  qualifications,  their  office.  But  the  one  all-pervading  ides  in 
these  regulations  was  the  inculcation  of  "holiness  unto  the  Lord."  Under  the  new 
covenant  the  holiness  prescribed  is  holiness  of  spirit  and  of  life ;  not  merely  puri^  of 
vesture^  separateness  of  function,  etc.  3.  The  office  of  this  priesthood  is  specified ; 
epiritual  sacrifices  are  to  be  offered.  What  these  are  is  not  here  specified,  but  other 
passages  of  New  Testament  Scripture  leave  us  in  no  doubt  upon  this ;  the  Christian 
eacrifices  are  comprehended  under  these  two  headings— obedience  and  praise.  4.  The 
acceptance  of  such  service  is  assured  through  the  intercession  of  the  great  High  Priest, 
Jesus  Christ. 

Thus  the  apostle,  at  the  expense  of  combining  metaphors  scarcely  consietent,  sets 
forth  more  fully  the  dignity  and  the  duty,  the  fellowship  and  the  happiness,  belonging 
to  all  those  who  are  faithful  and  consecrated  members  of  the  living  Church  of  Christ. 
—J.  R.  T. 

Ver,  4. — Elect  and  precious.  Our  Lord  Jesus  was  both  despised  and  rejected  by 
men.  But  theirs  was  the  judgment  of  the  fallible  and  the  conduct  of  the  sinful.  Very 
different  was  the  esteem  in  which  our  Saviour  was  held  by  the  Divine  Father,  and  by 
those  whcm  the  Father  enlightened  to  discern  as  he  himself  discerned.  In  the  view 
of  the  Eternal,  who  "  judjjeth  righteously,"  Christ  was  and  is  "elect  and  precious." 

I.  Declarations  or  this  estimation  qt  Christ.  1.  Prophetical  declarations,  such 
as  these ;  " The  Lord  said  unto  my  Lord,  Sit  at  my  right  hand  j "  "I  have  set  my 
King  upon  my  holy  hill ; "  and,  "  Behold  my  Servant  whom  I  uphold,  mine  Elect 
in  whom  my  soul  delighteth."  2.  Evangelical.  The  Lord  Jesus  was  conscious  of  the 
Father's  favour  ;  he  declared  that  "  the  Father  loveth  the  Sod,"  and  desires  "  that  all 
men  should  honour  the  Son."  The  forerunner  received  the  witness  concerning  Jesus: 
"  This  is  my  beloved  Son,  in  whom  I  am  well  pleased."  The  multitude  were  present 
when  the  voice  came  from  heaven  testifying  from  the  Father:  "I  have  both  glorified 
it,  wad  will  glorify  it  again."     3.  Apostolical.    When  the  inspired  and  commiisioued 


08,  n,  1—25.]    THE  FIRST   RPFSTLE  GENERAL  OF  PETEB.  99 

preachers  of  the  gosptil  proclaimed  Obrret,  tljey  represented  him  as  "approved  of 
God,"  who  bad  raised  and  exalted  him,  and  had  "  get  him  at  his  own  right  hand," 
In  the  Epistles,  as  for  example  in  the  first  chapter  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Hehrews,  the 
approval  and  favour  of  the  Father  are  mentioned  with  the  view  pf  inspiring  a  just 
conception  of  the  dignity  of  the  Divine  Son. 

II.  Gboujjds  of  this  estimation  of  Chkist,  1,  His  Divine  Sonship.  2.  Hi« 
•ympathy  with  the  Father's  purposes  pf  redemption-  3.  His  constant  and  perfect 
Qhedience  to  the  Father's  will.     4.  His  devotion  to  the  Father's  glory. 

III.  PnooFS  OP  THIS  ESTIMATION  OF  Christ,  ThesB  are  in  some  instances  intelli- 
gihle  to  reason,  hut  in  other  instances  they  are  only  to  be  apprehended  by  faith.  1. 
This  accounts  for  the  appointment  of  Jesus  as  the  Pounder  and  Head  of  the  Church. 
3.  And  for  the  supernatural  indwelling  of  Christ  by  his  Spirit  in  his  Church,  3.  And 
for  the  assurance  that  the  kingdom  of  Christ,  in  contrast  to  all  others,  shall  be  uni- 
Tersal  and  everlasting.  4.  And  also  for  the  appointment  of  Christ  as  the  one  great 
Judge  of  all  mankind. 

IV.  Pbactical  inferenobb  from  this  ESTIMATION  OF  Cheist.  It  IS  uot  8  matter 
of  doctrine  only.  All  hearers  of  the  gospel  and  all  sincere  and  fiiitliful  Christians  have 
reason  to  rejoice  that  their  Saviour  Jesus  is  "  elect  and  precious."  1.  There  is  on  this 
account  hope  for  the  future  of  humanity.  If  God  the  Father  sets  such  honour  upon 
Christ,  there  is  encouragement  to  believe  that  Christ's  work  shall  not  fail.  2.  There 
is  for  each  friend  and  follower  of  the  Saviour  a  sure  prospect  of  individual  salvation. 
God,  who  loves  and  honours  the  Shepherd,  will  not  suffer  the  sheep  of  his  flock,  for 
whom  he  died,  to  suffer  death  and  destruction,  Their  security,  dignity,  and  happinew 
are  assured.  They  are  chosen  in  the  Chosen ;  they  are  precious  for  the  sake  of  the 
Precious.  3.  Most  obvious  are  the  sin  and  the  peril  of  those  who  despise  and  reject 
the  Elect  and  Chosen  One,  the  Honoured  of  God  himself.  If  Christ  he  what  he  is  her* 
declared  to  be,  how  clear  and  cogent  is  the  statement  pf  Inspiration,  "  Neither  is  there 
salvation  in  any  other"!— ^,  B.  T. 

Vers.  13 — 15. — The  Christian  eitissen.  The  religipn  of  the  Lord  Jasus  entered 
practically  into  all  the  relations  and  interests  pf  human  life.  The  condition  of  the 
world,  politically  regarded,  when  the  Roman  empire  exercised  universal  sway,  was 
indeed  very  difierent  from  that  which  obtains  at  the  present  time.  But  the  principles 
inculcated  in  the  first  century  of  our  era  are  adapted  to  guide  and  govern  the  conduct 
©f  Christ's  people  through  all  time, 

I.  The  Christian  view  or  pivii,  oovbrnment.  1,  Regarded  in  itself,  it  is  a  human 
institution,  but  it  is  nevertheless  prdained  by  God.  In  this  respect  it  is  in  the  same 
case  as  the  family.  To  believe  in  a  Divine  Ruler  and  a  divinely  appointed  order,  is 
to  accept  the  state  and  its  ordinances  as  appointed  by  the  wisdom  of  God  himself.  2. 
The  Christian  recogniaes  the  Divine  principle  of  government  as  personified  in  civil 
rulers.  These  are  supreme — as  kings ;  or  persons  commissioned,  and  exercising  dele- 
gated power,  as  governors.  3.  The  Christian  perceives  the  necessity  of  those  functions 
which  rulers  are  bound  to  discharge.  There  is  no  gpvernment  worthy  pf  the  name 
which  does  not  punish  evil-doers,  and  protect,  favour,  and  praise  those  who  do  well. 

II.  The  Christian's  duty  towards  crvn,  government.  1.  Generally  speaking, 
that  duty  Is  submission,  loyalty,  and  cheer/id  obedience.  When  laws  are  promulgated, 
the  Christian  respects  and  observes  them ;  when  taxes  are  levied,  the  Christian  pays 
them ;  when  service  is  required,  the  Christian  renders  it.  2.  He  acknowledges  that 
this  course  of  conduct  is  supported  alike  by  the  example  and  by  the  teaching  of  Christ. 
3.  Yet  this  obedience  is  within  certain  limits,  and  is  subject  to  certain  reservations. 
No  man  is  under  obligation  to  obey  an  ordinance  of  the  civil  power  which  is  contra- 
dictory to  the  express  and  unmistakable  law  of  God*  And  when  the  ruler  himself  is 
disloyal,  and  violates  the  constitution  to  which  ruler  and  suuject  alike  are  subject, 
there  are  cases  in  which  even  resistance  is  allowable,  if  not  binding. 

III.  The  Christian's  motives  to  obey  the  civil  government.  He  does  not  act 
limply  in  his  own  interest,  to  avoid  penalties,  to  secure  place.  1.  He  obeys  for  the 
Lord's  sake,  i.e.  with  a  Christian  aim  before  him.  2.  He  obeys  because  such  is  the 
will  of  God  himself.  3.  He  obeys  in  order  to  remove  hindrances  from  the  way  ol 
the  progress  of  Christianity  among  men.    Scandals  are  avoided,  prejudices  are  over- 


100  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  PETER,    [oh.  n.  1—25. 

come,  good  will  is  conciliated ;  and  the  path  ts  made  clear  for  the  progress  of  the  gospel.. 
Loyalty  to  the  state  and  to  the  sovereign  is  loyalty  to  Christ,  to  God. — J.  B.  T. 

Ver.  16. —  True  frtedom.  The  change  was  great  which  even  an  enlightened  and 
pious  Jew  passed  through  when  he  received  Jesus  as  the  Messiah.  Finding  in  Chris- 
tian doctrine  and  privilege  the  substance  of  which  he  had  so  long  been  conversant  with 
the  shadow,  his  mind  expanded  and  his  best  feelings  were  touched  with  a  brightness 
of  joy  and  hope.  The  moral  horizon  widened  around  him.  Human  life  must  have 
seemed  a  grander  and  more  glorious  thing.  Much  more  must  this  have  been  the  case 
with  a  heathen,  who,  if  sincere,  had  been  encompassed  with  the  chains  of  a  ceremonial 
religion.  Both  to  the  Jewish  and  the  Gentile  convert  the  predominant  experience  in 
Christian  faith  and  fellowship  must  have  been  an  experience  of  liberty.  It  was  a 
justly  founded  delight  which  they  thus  came  to  share.  Yet  it  was  not  without  its 
dangers,  as  the  Apostle  Peter  well  knew.  Hence  his  admonition  to  his  readers  to  take 
and  practically  to  adopt  a  fair  and  balanced  view  of  the  new  liberty  <upon  which  they 
had  entered. 

I.  The  Cheistiah'b  spiritual  freedom.  1.  He  enjoys  freedom  in  relation  to  God. 
Apart  from  the  great  redemption,  man  is,  as  sinful,  exposed  to  the  Pivine  displeasure 
and  righteous  condemnation.  From  this  he  is  delivered,  i.e.  set  free ;  and  that  by  an 
act  of  God's  own  clemency  and  interposition.  2.  He  is  emancipated  from  the  slavery 
to  which  sin  formerly  subjected  him.  The  Scriptures  everywhere  represent  the  service 
of  sin  as  serfdom,  not  as  honourable  and  worthy  of  such  a  being  as  man.  And  experi- 
ence shows  that  this  view  is  just,  that  the  servant  of  sin  is  the  slave  of  sin.  Now, 
from  this  bondage  Christ  liberates  his  people.  Sin  has  not  dominion  over  them.  No 
created  power  could  effect  this  great  enfranchisement;  it  is  the  work  of  the  Divine 
Saviour  clothed  with  the  omnipotence  of  Heaven.  3.  He  is  also  freed  from  subjection 
to  the  authority  of  man.  As  the  soul  recognizes  the  right  of  Deity,  the  power  claimed 
by  humanity  recedes  and  diminishes.  Another  and  a  higher  standard  than  human 
authority  claims  profoundest  reverence ;  and,  where  there  ia  a  conflict,  the  Christian 
spirit  realizes  freedom  from  the  created  yoke. 

II.  The  Christian'b  renunciation  of  the  oountebfbit  of  libebtt.  No  doubt 
many,  under  the  guise  of  Christianity,  have  adopted  antinomian  principles;  it  was  so 
in  apostolic  days ;  it  is  so  now.  Against  this  error  Peter  faithfully  warns  those  lately 
emancipated  from  bondage  to  sin  and  death.  We  are  warned  in  this  language  :  (1) 
that  it  is  possible  for  men  nominally  Christian  to  be  in  bondage  in  respects  in  which 
they  ought  to  be  free ;  and  (2)  to  be  exercising  freedom  where  they  ought  to  submit 
to  restraint.  The  history  of  Christendom  assures  us  that  there  is  a  tendency,  on  the 
part  of  those  who  realize  their  new  and  sacred  privileges,  to  despise  the  safe  way  of 
scrupulous  and  watchful  obedience.  And  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  found  that  tra<litiunal 
chains  are  retained  and  cherished  which  should  be  cast  off  with  indignation  and  hatred. 

III.  The  Christian's  spieitual  bondage.  All  the  while  that  he  is  free,  the  Chris- 
tian is  the  true  servant  and  bondman  of  the  Lord  Christ.  Of  this  service  it  may  be 
said  that  it  is :  1.  Voluntary,  because  adopted  and  accepted  deliberately,  upon  a  con- 
sideration of  the  claims  of  Christ,  and  the  true  duty  and  interest  of  his  emancipated 
ones.  2.  Practical,  being  the  service  not  only  of  the  heart,  but  of  the  bodily  nature 
and  outward  life.  3.  Honourdble.  In  the  slavery  of  sin  is  disgrace ;  but  to  serve 
Christ  is  higher  honour  than  for  a  minister  of  state  to  serve  a  good  and  mighty  king, 
than  for  a  pupil  to  serve  a  master  of  power  and  genius.  4.  Happy  and  advantageoiu. 
The  Christian  does  not  serve  for  the  sake  of  the  reward;  but  he  does  not  serve  without 
a  reward.  Christ  has  it  in  his  power  to  recompense,  and  he  exercises  this  power  for 
the  benefit  of  his  faithful  adherents  and  friends.  There  is  no  joy  like  that  of  serving 
Christ,  and  no  lecompense  such  as  that  which  he  does  and  will  confer.  In  a  word,  it 
is  the  experience  of  the  Christian  that  true  service  and  true  liberty  are  united  in  his 
life,  and  in  his  life  alone. — J.  R.  T. 

Ver.  17. — "Honour  all  men."  The  common  tendency  of  mankind  is  towards 
rendering  honour  to  the  great,  those  possessing  political  power,  those  endowed  with 
signal  gifts  of  body  or  mind,  those  [jossessed  of  vast  wealth.  Much  of  basoness  in 
human  character,  of  meanness  in  human  conduct,  may  be  attributed  to  this  tendency, 


cH.n.  1— 25.]   THE  FIEST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  PETER.  101 

Christianity  sets  itself  to  oppose  this  current  of  opiaion  and  action,  as  is  most  remark- 
ably proved  by  this  inspired  admonition,  "  Honour  all  men." 

I.  The  oboundb  upon  which,  humanitt  is  to  be  honoubed.  1.  Natural  grounds. 
All  men  are  creatures  of  God's  almighty  power.  Not  only  so ;  all  are  made  in  the 
image  of  God,  however  that  image  has  been  defiled  and  jiartially  effaced  by  sin. 
Hence  the  capacity  for  great  things,  for  a  holy  and  self-denying  life,  for  fellowship 
with  God.  2.  Supernatural  grounds.  The  revelation  of  God's  love  and  pity  is  for 
the  benefit  of  mankind  at  large.  God  is  "  the  Saviour  of  all  men,  specially  of  those 
thit  believe."  Christ  died  for  all,  and,  as  the  Son  of  man,  partook  the  common 
nature,  lived  the  common  life,  died  the  death  which  is  the  common  lot,  that  he  might 
"  draw  all  men  unto  himself."  The  provision  of  the  gospel,  the  grace  of  the  Holy 
Spirit,  are  for  all,  irrespective  of  nation,  of  rank,  of  any  adventitious  distinction.  How, 
then,  can  the  Christian  do  other  than  honour  those  for  whom  God  himself,  the  Foun- 
tain of  all  honour,  has  done  so  great  things  ? 

II.  The  ways  in  which  humanitt  is  to  be  honoubed.  1.  By  a  watchful  cherish- 
ing of  a  spirit  respectful  and  considerate,  and  by  the  avoidance  of  a  contemptuous 
disposition.  2.  By  a  sympathetic  demeanour  towards  fellow-Christians,  whatever 
their  position  in  society.  3.  By  efforts  for  the  enlightenment  and  evangelization  of 
men  of  every  nation  and  every  condition  in  life. — J.  R.  T. 

Vers.  18 — 25. — Servitude  and  subjection.  Writing  to  slaves,  Peter,  like  Paul — who 
was  himself  a  Roman  citizen  and  a  Christian  freeman — exhorts  to  patient  endurance 
of  the  ills  and  wrongs  too  often  inflicted  by  irresponsible  power  upon  the  unprotected 
and  despised.  Beside  the  specially  Christian  motives  to  which  the  apostle  here 
appealed,  he  knew  that  there  were  other  and  more  obvious  motives.  There  was  neces- 
sity.  The  power  lay  with  the  master,  and  the  bondslave  must  needs  submit.  There 
was  expediency.  Resistance  and  rebellion  on  the  part  of  the  slave  would  only  bring 
upon  him  punishment  and  increase  of  suffering.  But  Paul  relies  upon  the  distinc- 
tively Christian  motives  to  produce  patience  and  suHmission. 

I.  Chbist's  own  example  op  patient  endubanob  of  wbono.  Our  Saviour,  though 
sinless,  suffered  the  contradiction  and  the  contumely,  the  agonies  and  the  death, 
inflicted  by  unjust  and  unfeeling  men.  And  he  did  this  without  even  reviling  his 
enemies.  The  apostle,  in  vers.  21 — 24,  paints  in  impressive  colours  the  figure  of 
the  meek  and  much-enduring  Redeemer,  and  holds  up  this  incomparable  figure  for 
the  admiration  and  imitation  of  the  Redeemer's  followers  and  friends. 

II.  Christ's  express  command  that  his  people  should  befbain  from  betalia- 
TiON.  His  precepts,  preserved  In  tlie  sermon  on  the  mount,  expressly  forbade 
revenge,  and  inculcated  brotherly  kindness,  and,  more  than  this,  the  return  of  good  for 
evil.  And  when  Jesus  himself  was  seized  by  the  agents  of  those  who  plotted  against 
his  life,  he  forbade  his  friends  to  draw  the  sword  in  his  defence. 

III.  The  consciousness  of  enjoying  a  hioheb,  a  spibitual,  libebty.  The 
meanest  bondman  who  found  Christ  found  fn  edom.  He  may  have  been  treated  with 
contempt  and  even  harshness  and  cruelty ;  but  he  knew  within  himself  that  he  was 
the  Lord's  freedman.  He  could  endure  bondage  to  an  earthly  master,  for  Christ  bad 
set  him  free  from  sin  and  spiritual  slavery  and  death.  Carrying  tliis  conviction  in  his 
breast,  he  could  joyfully  endure  insults,  injustice,  and  ill  treatment. 

IV.  The  hope  and  prospect  of  liberation.  His  view  might  be  gloomy  as  far 
as  the  earthly  horizon  extended.  But  he  looked  forward  to  "  death,  which  sets  the 
captive  free."  He  was  the  free  citizen  of  the  heavenly  Jerusalem,  and  his  prospect  in 
the  life  to  come  was  bright.  A  Stoic  slave,  like  Bpictetus,  was  conscious  of  possessing, 
in  the  power  of  suicide,  the  means  of  freeing  himself  from  a  yoke  which  became  insup- 
portable. But  this  power  extended  only  to  release ;  the  Christian  bondman,  for- 
bidden'self-destruction,  had  before  him  a  brighter  hope — a  hope  not  only  of  release, 
but  of  liberty  and  glory. 

V.  The  desire  to  pboduib  an  impbession  favourable  to  the  Christian  faith. 
Submission  was  not  only  "  thankworthy,"  and  "  acceptable  with  God ;  "  it  might  well 
prove  profitable  to  fellow-men.  When  masters  met,  not  with  a  sullen  acquiescence, 
not  with  a  surly  defiance,  not  with  a  stolid  insensibility,  but  with  uncomplaining, 
cheerful  obedience,  a  favourable  impression  was  prodoced  upon  their  minds.     They 


103  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PBTBB.    [oh.  n.  1—26. 

could  not  but  inquire  into  the  cause  wbich  produced  fruit  so  unusual  and  so  admirable. 
And  they  could  not  but,  in  many  instances,  examine  into  the  religion  which  intro- 
duced into  human  society  an  element  so  new,  so  impressive,  and  so  beneficial. — J.  B.  T. 

Vers.  21 — 24. — The  purpose  of  the  Saviour's  sufferings.  One  thing  must  be  observed 
and  admired  in  the  religious  life  and  the  religions  teaching  of  the  inspired  apostles — 
everything  they  did  and  everything  they  said  led  their  minds  to  the  Lord  Jesus.  If 
Christ  be  the  Son  of  God  and  the  Saviour  of  mankind,  this  is  not  to  be  wondered  at. 
He  is  not  only  the  central  figure  of  human  history ;  he  is  at  the  core  of  each  Christian's 
heart,  at  the  spring  of  each  Christian's  life.  The  Christianity  which  is  apart  from 
men's  thinking  and  duty  and  interest  has  no  likeness  to  the  Christianity  of  the 
apostles.  Every  subject  they  treated  was,  in  their  view,  related  to  the  Lord  Jesus. 
Especially  did  they  look  at  every  relationship  of  society,  and  every  duty  of  man,  in 
the  light  of  Christ's  Deity,  Christ's  humanity,  Christ's  cross!  It  was  natural  to  them 
to  think  thus.  Their  hearts  were  full  of  Christ,  and  whatever  path  of  inquirj-,  instruc- 
tion, or  action  they  took,  it  was  sui'e  to  lead  them  to  him.  And  this  was  not  vain 
enthusiasm;  it  was  most  reasonable  and  right,  ^e,  too,  cannot  see  things  as  they  are 
in  God's  sight,  we  cannot  act  as  he  would  have  us,  unless  we  connect  all  our  expe- 
rience and  all  our  duty  with  him  who  has  brought  God  to  us,  who  has  brought  us  to 
God.  Peter  was  a  -very  practical  man.  When  he  wrote  his  Epistle,  he  wrote  it  to 
actual  living  men  and  women.  God  be  praised  that  we  are  taught  our  doctrines,  not 
in  theological  treatises,  but  in  letters  which  were  the  outpouring  of  soul  to  soul. 
Certain  superfine  religionists  think  the  real  occupations  and  relations  of  life  as  some- 
thing quite  beneath  their  notice.  So  did  not  the  apostle.  For  instance,  he  knew  that 
some  of  the  Christian  people  who  would  read  his  letter  were  slaves;  and  accordingly 
he  wrote  to  them  as  to  slaves.  There  is  no  doubt  that  Christianity  introduc<;d  among 
mankind  principles  which  first  ameliorated,  and  then  abolished,  slavery.  But  Peter 
had  to  deal  with  facts  as  they  were.  Christianity  was  to  help  men,  not  only  to  rise 
above  slavery,  but — whilst  slavery'still  endured  as  an  institution — to  make  the  best  of 
it.  So  Peter  told  these  slaves  that  there  was  a  work  for  them  to  do,  a  witness  for  them 
to  oflisr,  whilst  they  were  still  slavis.  He  bade  them  remember  how  their  Master 
Christ,  who  was  at  the  same  time  their  Sedeemer,  had  borne  himself  amidst  injustice, 
false  accusation,  contumely,  and  suffering.  And  he  brought  to  bear  the  willing 
sacrifice  of  Christ  for  them  upon  their  hearts,  as  a  Divine  motive  to  endurance  and 
patience.  They  were  not  so  ill  treated  as  their  great  Saviour  had  been ;  and,  whilst  he 
was  perfectly  innocent  and  good,  they  were  not  free  from  human  infirmities.  It  was 
certainly  their  duty  to  display  the  spirit  of  their  Lord,  to  do  what  he  had  done,  to 
endure  as  he  had  endured.  Thus  they  should  honour  him.  Thus  they  should  be  in 
the  way  of  reaping  some  wholesome  fruit  of  blessing  for  themselves.  Thus  they  should 
win  others  to  the  faith  which  none  could  help  admiring.  And  thus  they  should  secure 
for  themselves  a  sure  recompense  of  reward. 

I.  Look  at  the  fact  of  Christ's  suFFEBma.  That  the  Founder  of  our  religion 
should  suffer  is  itself  an  astonishing  and  instructive  fact.  Suffering  and  shame,  sul> 
mission  to  violence  and  cruelty, — these  are  not  usually  associated  with  power  ind 
victory.  Yet  the  Author  of  the  religion  which  has  the  greatest  influence  over  man- 
kind, and  is  moulding  the  history  of  the  world,  was  pre-eminently  a  Sufferer.  We 
believe  that  this  was  loretold.  It  cannot  be  questioned  that  the  first  Christian  preachers 
and  writers  proclaimed,  without  any  reserve,  the  humiliation  and  the  woe  of  their 
great  Lord.  They  even  gloried  in  the  cross.  Fetet  was,  perhaps  better  than  any  man, 
able  to  witness  to  the  sufferings  and  to  the  demeanour  of  Jesus  Christ.  He  was  "  with 
him  in  the  garden ; "  and  al  though  he  fell  asleep,  yet,  on  waking,  he  saw  on  his  Master's 
brow  the  "  bloody  sweat,"  and  read  upon  his  Master's  features  the  agony  of  soul 
through  which  he  had  passed,  with  no  human  sympathy,  with  none  to  share  his  awitil 
watch.  Peter  was  there  when  Judas  betrayed  the  Loid  with  a  kiss,  and  beheld  the 
meekness  with  which  he  yielded  himself  into  the  hands  of  his  foes.  It  was  Peter  who 
drew  the  sword  in  defence  of  his  Master,  and  who  heard  that  Master's  rebuke,  and  hit 
language  of  pathetic  resignation,  "  The  cup  w  hich  my  Father  hath  given  me,  shall 
1  not  drink  it?"  The  same  Peter  followed  Jesus  iuto  the  judgment-hall,  and  saw  the 
Lord  whom  heluved  bound  and  reviled,  and  witnessed  his  meekness  under  insult  anj 


OB.  n.  1—25.]    THE  FIEST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP   PETER.  103 

iDJustice.  Upon  himself  Jesus'  had  turned  the  glance  of  affectionate  reproach,  which 
smote  him  to  the  heart,  and  opened  the  fountain  of  his  tears.  It  was  Peter  who  entered 
the  empty  grave  of  the  risen  Immanuel,  It  was  Peter  who,  when  forgiven  his  faith- 
lessness and  fear,  was  assured  hy  the  Lord  of  a  share  in  the  humiliation  and  agony  of 
the  cross.  Who,  then,  so  fit  as  Simon  Peter — ^both  by  his  opportunities  of  observing 
the  Lord's  sorrow  and  anguish,  and  by  his  warm  and  tender  love  for  Christ — to  speak 
of  the  Redeemer's  woes,  and  to  testify  of  his  bearing  and  his  spirit,  when  he  "  endured 
the  contradiction  of  sinners  against  himself"?  The  witness  of  this  companion  and 
friend  of  Christ  Jesus  is  that  he  suffered.  That  our  Lord  endured  weariness,  hunger, 
and  thirst ;  that  acutest  pain  was  suffered  by  him  in  the  closing  hours  of  his  life ; — this 
the  whole  record  abundantly  proves.  And  his  mental  sufferings  were  made  evident  by 
the  tears  he  shed,  the  sighs  he  heaved,  the  groans  and  cries  he  uttered.  His  soul  was 
"exceeding  sorrowful;"  it  was  "troubled."  Keenly  susceptible  to  human  emotions, 
he  was  distressed  at  his  rejection  by  his  countrymen,  at  his  desertion  by  his  friends, 
at  his  betrayal  by  one  disciple,  his  denial  by  another.  A  yet  further  and  a  more 
mysterious  woe  was  that  which  he  endured  when  he  bare  the  burden  of  the  sins 
and  sorrows  of  mankind,  and  "  tasted  death  for  every  man."  As  the  Son  of  man,  the 
Head  and  Representative  of  the  race  whose  nature  he  assumed,  Christ  Jesus  shared 
our  lot  in  more  than  all  its  grief  and  anguish.  Great  stress  is  laid  upon  the  fact  that 
Jesus  was  reviled.  It  was  woe  enough,  so  it  might  be  thought,  to  suffer  in  our  stead ; 
but  what  shall  be  said  of  the  endurance  of  the  taunts  and  mockery  of  those  for  whom 
he  came  to  die,  whom  he  came  to  save  ?  This  was  the  bitterest  earthly  ingredient  in 
the  bitter  cup  which  Jesus  drank.  Now,  all  these  sufferings  were  undeserved.  The 
apostle  observes  upon  Christ's  innocence.  He  "did  no  sin."  With  a  reference  to 
Isaiah's  prediction,  he  boldly  proclaims  his  Master's  guilelessness.  Whatever  afflictions 
befall  us  in  this  life,  candour  constrains  us  to  admit  that  we  deserve  all,  and  more  than 
all,  that  we  endure.  If  they  are  punishment,  the  strokes  inflicted  are  lighter  than 
the  gnilt  they  chasten.  But  nothing  of  this  kind  can  be  said  of  our  Saviour's  pains. 
His  very  enemies  could  substantiate  no  charge  against  him,  and  in  this  their  testimony 
supports  the  assertions  of  his  friends.  And  Paul  says,  "  He  knew  no  sin."  "  In  him 
is  no  sin,"  says  John.  And  Peter's  witness  is  in  the  text,  "He  did  no  sin."  To  com- 
plete the  picture,  we  must  observe  the  demeanour  of  our  Saviour  when  enduring  these 
afflictions.  Men  too  often  complain  and  murmur,  whilst  some  rebel  against  the  trials 
appointed  for  them.  No  one.  here  is  perfected  in  patience.  But  we  are  well  reminded 
of  the  meekness  and  the  patience  of  Christ.  He  endured  more  than  we  are  ever  called 
upon  to  suffer,  yet  he  uttered  no  word  of  impatience.  He  endured  his  sufferings  at 
the  hands  of  injustice,  and  was  cruelly  and  unpardonably  wronged ;  yet  he  had  only 
submission— no  resentment — to  return  to  his  injurers,  and  a  prayer  to  offer  for  their 
forgiveness.  "  He  was  reviled,  but  he  reviled  not  again."  The  impenitent  malefactor 
by  his  side  joined  in  the  jeers  of  the  rulers  and  the  people  around  the  cross.  But  Jesus 
held  his  peace.  When  his  sufferings  were  acute,  he  gave  way  to  no  impulse  of  revenge 
against  his  persecutors.  Although  he  might  have  come  down  from  the  cross,  or  have 
summoned  legions  of  angels  to  his  rescue,  "  he  threatened  not."  He  was  content  that 
the  will  of  God  should  be  done.  Men  might  judge  unjustly.  God.  is  he  who  judgeth 
righteously.  To  him,  accordingly,  the  Lord  Jesus  committed  all — himself  and  his  cause. 
What  a  picture  is  this  of  superhuman  self-forgetfulness  and  self-sacrifice!  As  we  con- 
template the  sinless  Sufferer,  first  in  the  garden,  then  before  his  judges,  and  finally 
upon  the  cross,  we  are  constrained  to  acknowledge  with  the  centurion,  "  Certainly  this 
was  a  righteous  man  1  Truly  this  was  the  Son  of  QoA  I "  The  scene  surpasses  all 
that  man  has  invented.  The  character  exhibited  is  one  beyond  the  attainment  of 
human  virtue.  We  cannot  wonder  that  the  name  of  Jesns  has  become,  and  must  ever 
remain,  the  symbol  of  love  and  meekness,  patience  and  long-suffering,  submission  and 
self-restraint  and  self-deniaL 

II.  The  apostle,  however,  does  more  than  state  a  fact — hb  exhibits  the  pubposb 
for  which  our  Saviour  thus  suffered.  It  was  "for  us" — for  our  advantage,  on  our  behall 
It  was  certainly  not  for  his  own  sake.  Jesus  neither  deserved  to  suffer,  for  he  was 
faultless,  blameless;  nor  did  he  stand  in  need,  as  we  do,  of  the  discipline  of  affliction, 
for  tliere  was  no  dross  to  purge  iiway,  and  no  gain  could  accrue  to  the  pure  gold  by  Iti 
being  cast  into  the  furnace.     The  end  for  which  our  blessed  Redeemer  consented  Is 


134  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  PETER,    [ew  n.  1— 2& 

endure  the  humiliations  of  his  life  and  the  agonies  of  his  death  was  no  personal  end  ; 
he  suffered  "  for  our  sake."  There  were  two  distinct  and  yet  closely  related^  purposes 
which  the  Saviour  had  before  him  in  his  sufferings.  Both  are  stated  in  this  passage 
very  explicitly.  There  are  some  minds  that  look  only  at  the  one  of  these  purposes ; 
there  are  different  minds  that  regard  only  the  other.  But  the  sober  and  attentive 
student  of  Scripture  cannot  fail  to  recognize  the  necessity  of  both,  and  their  harmony 
with  each  other.  Christ's  endurance  of  sufferings,  being  exemplary,  furnishes  us  with 
the  model  of  our  patience  and  submission ;  and  the  same  endurance  of  sufferings,  being 
sacrificial  and  substitutionary,  supply  us  with  our  highest  motive.  That  Christ  is  an 
Example  for  our  imitation  is  not  only  taught  in  Scripture;  it  is  a  truth  seized  upon 
by  every  Christian  whose  Christianity  is  not  merely  nominal — who  is  by  the  Holy 
Spirit  awakened  to  spiritual  life.  When  he  said,  "  Learn  of  me,"  "  Follow  me,"  Jesus 
sanctioned  this  view  of  the  religious  endeavour  and  prayerful  aim  of  his  disciples. 
And  the  apostles  frequently  admonish  their  converts  to  imitate  the  conduct,  to  share 
and  display  the  spirit,  of  the  Divine  Leader  and  Lord.  His  obedience  to  the  Father, 
his  holy  life,  his  benevolent  disposition,  his  self-denying  labours,  are  all  put  before  us 
as  a  model  which  we  are  to  study  and  to  copy.  In  this  passage  the  especial  point 
selected  for  imitation  is  the  meekness  and  long-suffering  of  our  Lord.  This  is  repre- 
sented as  a  "copy  "  which  he  has  left  behind,  that  we  may  place  it  before  our  eyes, 
and  try  to  produce  a  good,  correct,  well-studied  imitation  of  it.  We  are  told  to  fciUow 
in  his  steps;  he  is  the  Guide,  to  whom  we  entrust  our  way,  in  whose  wisdom  we  have 
confidence ;  where  he  treads  it  is  for  us  to  follow,  placing  our  feet  in  the  footmarks 
he  has  left  behind  him.  By  these  two  simple  and  beautiful  figures  it  is  shown  how 
we  should  lay  to  heart  the  perfect  example  of  our  Lord,  and  seek  to  make  it  ours. 
Human  examples  are  so  faulty,  and  human  characters,  even  when  noble,  so  lacking  iu 
sympathy,  that  hero-worship  (as  it  has  been  called)  is  a  very  perilous  proceeding.  The 
young  are  more  likely  to  emulate  the  questionable  side  of  a  great  man's  character,  if 
that  side  be  dazzling.  Thankful  should  we  be  that  our  Creator,  who  has  implanted 
within  us  the  principle  of  imitation,  has  made  provision  for  calling  out  that  principle, 
and  giving  it  full  scope.  The  imitation  of  Christ  is  the  lifelong  practice  and  discipline 
of  every  pupil  and  learner  in  the  spiritual  school  of  God.  The  Divine  Spirit  must  be 
the  Teacher,  revealing  ajid  applying  the  lesson  to  the  scholar's  heart,  filing  that  heart 
with  a  holy  ambition  to  be  conformed  to  the  sacred  likeness  of  the  Lord.  But  this  is 
no  such  easy  matter.  Our  gracious  God  and  Father,  who  knows  our  nature  perfectly, 
knows  that  it  would  be  vain  to  set  before  men  a  perfect  example  of  holiness  and  of 
patience,  and  then  bid  them  and  leave  them  to  aspire  to  conformity  thereto.  Hence 
the  further  purpose  of  the  Saviour's  sufferings.  We  are  happily  familiar  with  the 
great  and  precious  truth,  so  strikingly  exhibited  in  the  twenty-fourth  verse,  "who  his 
own  self  bare  our  sins  in  his  own  body  on  the  tree."  When  Christ  suffered  as  he  did, 
it  was  not  simply  as  an  illustration  of  the  grace  of  patience.  It  was  both  to  secure  to 
us  the  pardon  of  our  sins,  and  to  provide  us  with  a  motive  of  holiness,  in  the  experience 
of  his  sacrificial  grace.  Without  himself  becoming  a  sinner,  he  nevertheless  took  the 
sinner's  place,  entered  into  the  case  of  the  sinner,  and  took  upon  him  the  sinner's 
burden,  dying  the  death  of  the  cross — appropriate,  indeed,  to  the  siuner,  but  only 
appropriate  to  the  holy  Christ  as  the  sinner's  Representative  and  Saviour.  By  "bear- 
ing our  sins"  we  are  to  understand  a  sacrificial,  and  therefore  a  redemptive,  act. 
Whilst  many  popular  teachers  are  insisting  that  sin  can  never  he  forgiven,  and  that 
every  man  must  bear  to  the  uttermost  the  consequences  of  his  sins,  the  gospel  comes 
with  the  good  news  of  the  remission  of  sins,  and  the  favour  of  God  for  those  who 
leceive  the  Christ  as  their  Mediator  and  Redeemer,  in  humility,  faith,  and  penitence. 

III.  The  apostle  traces  the  operation  op  this  Divine  pbinoiple.  It  is  not  enough 
to  tell  that  Jesus  died,  and  died  for  us  sinners.  We  need  to  show  what  is  the  result 
of  Christ's  sacrifice — that  is,  upon  the  heart  and  life  of  Christians.  For  whilst  it  has 
a  relation  to  God  and  his  government,  it  has  also  a  relation — and  one  naturally  more 
comprehensible  by  us — to  our  own  moral  life  and  conduct.  "  That  we,  being  dead  to 
sins,  should  live  unto  righteousness."  Now,  you  need  not  to  be  told  that  these  poor 
Galatian  and  Cappadocian  bondmen  must  have  been,  before  their  conversion,  in  a 
position  very  unfavourable  for  the  formation  of  a  just  and  pure  character,  for  living 
a  blameless  and  benevolent  life.      They  must  have  been  alive  to  sin  and  dead  to 


0H.n.  1— 25.J    THE  FIRST   EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF   PETER.  lOfi 


righteousness.  No  power  but  that  of  the  cross  could  be  "the  power  of  God  unto 
salvation"  to  such  men.  And  in  this  they  were  representatives  of  mankind.  The 
gospel  of  Christ  both  kills  and  makes  alive.  It  slays  the  principle  of  sin  ;"it  quickens 
the  principle  of  obedience  to  God.  Those  wh)  are  pardoned  and  justified  by  the  grace 
of  God,  and  through  faith  in  that  Christ  who  '  loved  us,  and  gave  himself  for  us,"  are 
brought  under  the  power  of  new  and  spiritual  motives — the  motives  of  gratitude, 
devotion,  and  love.  Rii^hteousness  thus  becomes  the  atmosphere  the  Christian 
breathes,  the  element  in  which  he  lives.  It  is  for  Christ's  sake  that  he  aspires  to 
participation  in  Christ's  character.  And  by  fellowship  with  Christ  he  grows  into  what 
his  Lord  would  have  him  be.  The  two  motives  thus  coalesce.  Believing  in  Jesus,  the 
Christian  comes  to  live,  as  a  ransomed  being,  a  life  of  devotion  to  his  Redeemer  and 
Liberator.  Honouring  Jesus,  pondering  his  character,  studying  his  will,  he  is  "  changed 
.  into  the  same  image,  from  glory  to  glory,  even  as  by  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord."  Thus  is 
verified  the  exquisite  and  figurative  language  of  Peter,  "By  whose  stripes  ye  were  healed  " 
He  walked  in  darkness,  that  you  might  walk  in  the  light.  He  was  vanquished,  that 
you  might  conquer.  He  suffered  and  stooped,  that  you  might  reign.  He  tasted  the 
gall  and  the  wormwood  of  the  crucified,  that  you  might  drink  the  wine  of  the  kingdom 
and  share  the  banquet  of  the  blessed.  He  entered  the  prison-house,  that  you  might  go 
forth  into  glorious  liberty.  He  died,  that  you  might  live.  He  gave  himself  up  to  the 
blows  and  stripes  of  the  smiter,  that  your  wounds  might  be  healed,  that  you  might 
come  to  spiritual  strength  and  soundness.  Christian  people!  the  practical  lesson  of  the 
text  is  plain  for  you  to  read.  Whether  by  persecution,  or  by  opposition  and  enmity, 
or  by  misunderstanding  or  calumny,  you  must  needs  have  something  to  bear  in  this 
world  of  probation  and  discipline.  Remember  what  this  Apostle  Peter  says,  "  This  is 
thankworthy,  if  a  man  for  conscience  toward  God  endure  grief,  suffering  wrongfully." 
"  If  when  ye  do  well,  and  suffer  for  it,  ye  take  it  patiently,  this  is  acceptable  with 
God.  For  even  hereunto  were  ye  called."  When  distressed  by  the  treatment  you 
receive  from  wicked,  unjust,  or  unreasonable  men,  forget  not  this.  Then  is  the  time 
to  prove  the  reality  of  your  religious  principles.  Flee  to  the  mediation  and  sympathy 
of  Christ.  Ponder  the  example,  and  cultivate  the  spirit  of  Christ.  Act  as  a  friend, 
a  slave,  of  Christ.  Revile  not  again.  Conmiit  yourselves  to  him  that  judgeth  right- 
eously. Fret  not  yourselves  because  of  evil-doers.  Trust  in  the  Lord.  He  shall 
bring  out  your  righteousness  as  the  light,  and  your  judgment  as  the  noonday.  Hearers 
of  the  gospel!  the  principles  of  life  now  unfolded  must  appear  to  you  the  noblest, 
the  purest,  and  the  best  in  the  universe  of  God.  Yet,  as  sinners,  you  have  not  acted 
under  the  influence  .of  those  principles.  Understand  that  you  are  in  need  of  the  bless- 
ings of  that  redemption  which  Jesus  wrought,  in  order  that  you  may  die  unto  sin,  and 
live  unto  righteousness.  It  is  good  news  for  you  that  Christ  died  for  you,  that  the 
past  of  sin  and  anger  and  hatred  may  be  slain,  and  that  yours  may  be  the  new  creation, 
which  is  the  incorruptible  seed  of  the  new,  spiritual,  and  endless  life. — J.  R.  T. 

Ver.  25. — TJie  strayed  sheep  recovered.  For  the  inspired  apostle,  and  for  every 
Christian  teacher,  no  duty  or  relation  of  life  ia  too  low  to  be  considered ;  and  at  the 
same  time,  no  motive  is  too  high  to  be  urged.  Peter  is  urging  bondservants  to  sub- 
mission and  patience.  Their  character  and  conduct  were  not  beneath  his  regard.  In 
order  to  influence  them  aright,  he  reminds  them  of  the  spirit  and  the  example  of  Christ 
himself,  and  exhorts  them,  remembeiing  their  indebtedness  to  his  humility  and  self- 
denial,  to  imitate  his  conduct. 

I.  A  PICTURE  OF  THE  FLOCK.  1.  What  Were  those  for  whom  the  good  Shepherd 
suffered  and  died?  They  were  strayed  sheep,  who  had  wandered  from  the  pastures  of 
obedience  in  different  directions,  but  all  into  positions  of  danger  and  beyond  power  of 
return.  2.  What  are  they  now  that  God's  mercy  has  in  Christ  followed  and  found 
them ?  They  have  returned  from  their  wanderings,  and  have  re-enteied  the  enclosure 
of  safety ;  they  are  enjoying  the  favour  of  the  Shepherd,  the  abundance  of  the  pasture, 
the  security  of  the  fold.  How  true  was  this  of  Peter  himself,  of  those  to  whom  he 
wrote,  of  every  Church  gathered,  whether  from  Judaism  or  from  heathenism,  to  the 
love  and  care  and  fellowship  of  Christ ! 

II.  A  PICTURE  OF  THE  Shephebd  AND  OvEKSBEH  07  TH«  FLOCK.  1.  He  is  repre- 
sented as  seeking  and  recovering  the  lost.    Thus  early  Christian  art  delighted  to  dejaot 


106  THE   FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF   PETER,    [oh.  n.  1— 25, 

him — as  on  the  walls  of  the  catacombs.  Christ  not  only  pitied  the  lost  sheep,  he 
actively  interposed  on  their  behalf,  to  save  them  from  destruction.  In  carrying  out  his 
purpose  of  mercy  he  suffered  on  their  behalf  and  in  their  stead;  ho  laid  down  his  life 
for  his  sheep.  2.  He  is  represented  as  the  Overseer  of  those  whom  he  has  recovered. 
As  such,  he  controls  and  governs  them ;  he  guides  them  into  green  pastures  and  paths 
of  rii^hteousness ;  he  supplies  their  wants  from  the  abundance  of  his  bounty ;  he 
delivers  and  protects  them  from  all  their  foos. — J.  R.  T. 

Vers.  1 — 3. —  The  poiseasion  of  Ohriatian  life  summoning  to  spiritual  growth.  The 
argument  so  far  is  as  follows :  Redemption ;  this  issuing  on  holiness ;  that  leading  to 
the  fear  that  they  should  prove  to  be  without  redemption ;  that  fear  being  excited, 
the  test  of  love  is  suggested.  They  are  regarded  as  bearing  that  test,  and  proving  their 
possession  of  life.     The  next  idea  i.s  obviously  that  of  growth. 

I.  Wb  have  herb  the  idea  op  spiritual  aBOWTH.  1.  T?tat  implies  life.  Only  , 
living  things  can  grow.  Peter  can  speak  of  growth  because  he  calls  them  "  new-born 
babes."  Spiritual  life  is  not  a  mere  change  or  reformation,  but  an  entirely  new  prin- 
ciple of  being.  Not  only  is  that  implied  in  such  words  as,  "  Ye  must  be  bom  again ; '' 
"  If  any  man  be  in  Christ  Jesus,  it  is  a  new  creation ;  "  "  Tou  hath  he  quickened  who 
were  dead ; "  but  entire  arguments  are  based  on  the  use  of  those  words  in  this  sense. 
It  is  as  impossible  for  the  natural  heart,  which  is  enmity  against  God,  to  bear  fruit  to  God , 
as  for  grapes  to  grow  on  thorns ;  for  Divine  fruit  there  must  be  a  Divine  nature.  This 
is  implanted  by  the  Holy  Spirit  through  the  Divine  Word.  The  cry,  ''Father,  Father!'' 
is  the  birth-cry  of  a  new  life ;  from  that  moment  we  are  of  God's  family.  2.  Also  that 
this  life  is  immature.  That  truth  is  helpful  to  those  who  have  followed  the  apostle  so 
far,  to  their  discouragement,  and  are  inclined  to  say,  "  If  holiness  is  the  proof  of  salvation, 
and  holiness  is  measured  by  Obristian  love,  and  I  have  so  little  of  this,  is  it  possible 
that  I  am  a  Christian  at  all  ?  "  These  words,  however,  assume  that  there  may  be  life 
without  perfection.  We  are  all  born  babes,  and  have  to  reach  a  fiUl-grown  manhood 
stage  by  stage.  Only  Adam  came  from  God's  hand  perfect.  "  A  babe  "  is  equivalent  to 
weakness,  helplessness,  ignorance,  rudimentariaess.  Who  could  guess  what  a  babe 
could  become,  or  see  in  the  new-born  child  of  God  the  perfected  spirit  bowing  in  the 
eternal  glory  before  his  throne  ?  3.  Also  that  it  is  natural  for  the  lift  to  progress.  It 
never  occurs  to  us  to  wonder  if  a  child  will  grow;  we  know  it  will  unless  it  dies. 
Disease  may  retard  growth,  only  death  can  pernuincntly  stop  it  till  maturity  is  reached. 
Growth  ii  part  of  life ;  naturally,  silently,  steadily,  the  babe  increases  in  stature  and 
strength.  Then,  since  spirituality  Is  a  life,  it  only  needs  that  we  fulfil  the  ordinary 
conditions  of  life  to  ensure  that  it  advances  from  strength  to  strength.  Growth  ii 
spontaneous;  no  man  by  anxious  thought  can  add  to  his  stature  one  cubit ;  give  it  but 
the  right  conditions,  and  life  cannot  help  growing.  Moreover,  growth  should  naturally 
affect  all  parts  of  our  spiritual  nature,  as  of  our  physical ;  it  is  only  by  disuse  that  some 
faculties  advance  alone— faith,  or  hope,  or  patience,  etc.  There  is  provision  in  what  wo 
are  for  growth  up  to  him  who  is  the  Head  "  in  all  things." 

n.  The  means  by  which  spibitual  gkowtb  rs  secured.  Is  not  this  simpler — 
not  easier,  but  simpler — more  reasonable  and  possible  than  many  suppose  ?  How  do 
we  treat  a  babe  that  it  may  grow?  let  us  treat  the  spiritnal  babe-life  in  the  same  way 
1.  There  must  be  the  avoidance  of  what  is  antagonistic  to  life.  "  Laying  aside  all  malice, 
and  all  guile,  and  hypocrisies,  and  envies,  and  all  evil-speakings."  These  are  but  a 
selection  of  the  evils  that  are  hurtful  to  the  Divine  nature ;  they  are  probably  mentioned 
here  rather  than  others,  because,  judging  from  the  frequent  exhortations  in  the  Epistle 
to  love,  to  subjection  to  one  another,  etc.,  they  represent  a  class  of  sins  to  which  these 
Christians  were  specinlly  prone ;  these  were  the  sins  which  most  easily  bes-et  them.  As 
in  homes  where  there  are  children,  there  are  many  devices  to  keep  them  from  harm,  so 
the  spiritual  life  of  the  young  believer  must  be  jealously  guarded  from  what  would  che^k 
its  progress.  2.  And  there  must  be  the  partaking  of  suitable  food.  "  Desire  the  sincere 
[pure,  unadulterated]  milk  of  the  Word."  It  is  the  invariable  teaching  of  Scripture  that 
Christian  growth  depends  on  the  proper  use  of  the  Word  of  God  (Ps.  i.  2,  3 ;  xxxvii.  31 ; 
John  vi,  63  ;  xvii.  17 ;  Acts  xx.  32 ;  1  Tim.  iv.  6 ;  2  Tim.  iii.  17).  Christ  is  the  food 
of  the  soul,  but  he  is  imparted  through  his  Word.  The  Word  of  God  has  for  its  sub. 
•tance  God  the  Word.     Spiritual  feeblenes!:  is  probably  spiritual  starvation. 


OH.  n.  1—25.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PETER.  107 


in.  The  AnauMENT  bt  which  the  soul  is  persuaded  to  use  these  means, 
"  If  so  be  ye  have  tasted,"  etc.,  that  is,  seek  this  spiritual  growth  :  1.  Because  your 
experience  of  Divine  grace  has  been  only  a  taste  of  what  is  possible.  We  are  predes- 
tiaed  to  be  conformed  to  the  image  of  God's  Son.  Think  what  that  involves  of  charac- 
ter and  blessedness ;  and  of  this  most  of  us  have  as  yet  had  only  a  taste  1  But  that 
taste  makes  us  long  for  more-  2.  Because,  also,  by  growth  you  prove  your  reception  of 
Divine  grace,  "  If  so  be."  Then  is  there  doubt  about  it  ?  Let  spiritual  growth 
destroy  that  doubt.  Growth  is  a  sure  proof  6f  life,  A  deeper  sense  of  sin ;  a  more 
earliest  desire  for  holiness  ;  a  greater  joy  in  God,  his  prfisenci*,  service,  will ; — are  the 
clear  proof  that  we  have  tasted  of  Divine  grace.  But  if  there  be  no  growth,  if  the  means 
of  grace  are  no  more  useful  to  us  than  rain  is  to  a  rock,  Divine  life  within  us  is 
not  yet.^-^3.  N. 

Vers.  i^~^V).—(yhristian  life  crowned  with  wonderful  honour.  This  is  the  last 
paragraph  of  the  doctrinal  section  of  the  Epistle.  (Peter's  doctrinal  teaching  covers 
much  less  ground  than  that  of  Paul,  and  confines  itself  here  to  personal  Christian  life.) 
The  key-words  of  the  argument  so  far  (see  preceding  homilies)  have  been  "  redemption," 
"  holiness,"  "  fear,"  "  love,"  "  growth,"  each  of  which  comes  in  natural  sequence.  Now, 
what  remains  to  be  said  may  be  gathered  up  in  the  word  "honour."  The  central  state- 
ment of  this  paragraph  is  in  ver.  7,  "  Unto  you  therefore  who  believe  [is]  the  precious- 
ness."  But  "  preoiousuess  "  does  tiot  harmonize  with  the  tenor  of  the  passage.  And 
as  the  Greek  word  equally  means  "  honour,"  and  is  often  so  rendered  ("  No  man  taketh 
this  honour  unto  himself  j"  "Hath  not  the  potter  power  to  make  one  vessel  unto 
honour  ?"  "  Hold  such  in  reputation  [t.e.  'honour']  because,"  etc.),  we  so  read  it  here. 
The  apostle  contrasts  their  position  in  Christ,  first  with  theirs  who  reject  him,  and 
then  with  their  own  former  position  out  of  liim,  both  of  these  being  positions  of 
shamcj  the  contrast  to  which  is  honour.  Shame  out  of  Christ,  honour  in  Christ— 
that  is  the  idea  :  "  Unto  you  who  believe  there  is  honour." 

I.  Consider  The  high  honour  of  the  people  of  God.  Not  unnatural  for  this  to  be 
emphasized  to  the  "  sojourners  of  the  dispersion,"  who  were  exposed  to  suffering  and 
shame  for  the  gospeh  There  are  many  illustrations  in  the  Acts  of  the  bitterness  of  the 
Unbelieving  Jews  to  their  Christian  brethren ;  from  the  Gentle  world,  moreover,  the 
first  mUtterings  of  Nero's  persecution  of  the  Church  were  beginning  to  be  heard.  The 
Epistle  contains  several  references  to  a  condition  of  reproach  (vers.  12,  15,  19—23; 
ch.  iii.  9,  10  J  iv.  13—16).  Peter,  therefore,  reminds  them  that,  though  scorned  by  men, 
they  are  crowned  with  great  honour  by  God.  And  mark  how  he  illustrates  that. 
As  a  Jewi  writing  mainly  to  Jews,  he  fixes  on  what  was  most  honoured  in  Judaism — 
the  temple  with  its  priesthood  and  sacrifices.  Then  he  turns  to  their  Scriptures,  and 
shows  that  God's  Elect  One,  who  should  come,  and  who  would  bo  despised  of  the 
peOplOj  would  be  for  a  Foundation-stone  of  a  spiritual  temple,  on  and  into  which  all  who 
believe  should  be  built;  the  honour  of  the  Jewish  temple  was  to  pass  over  to  the 
Christian  Church.  For  instance :  1.  The  Church  is  Ood^s  chosen  dwelling-place.  Of 
the  temple  it  was  said,  "This  is  my  rest  for  ever.  Here  will  I  dwell,  tor  I  have 
desired  it."  The  symbol  of  his  presence  was  there.  But  of  the  Church  founded 
on  Jesus,  he  said,  "  Ye  are  the  temple  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  aud  the  Spirit  of  God 
dwfilleth  in  you; "  "  Where  two  or  three  are  gathered  together"  etc.  God's  dwelling! 
the  place  of  his  most  glorious  manifestation  1  Elsewhere  we  see  him  as  Creator, 
SovereigUj  Judge;  here  he  is  at  home.  2.  The  Church  is  Qod's  peculiar  possession. 
Over  the  pOrtal  of  the  temple  the  eye  instinctively  reads  the  unwritten  inscription, 
"  Holiness  unto  the  Lord."  "  My  Father's  house,"  said  Jesus.  But  so  the  Church  : 
"  Te  are  a  chosen  generation,  a  royal  priesthood,  a  people  peculiarly  his  own."  The 
Churoh  is  his  as  nothing  else  is — his  peculiar  treasure  j  the  object  of  his  delight, 
thought,  care,  on  which  he  lavishes  himself  so  that  it  shows  forth,  as  the  text  says, 
**  the  excellences  of  God."  .  3.  The  Church  is  Cod's  means  of  making  himsdf  known 
to  the  world.  Like  the  temple,  the  depository  of  sacred  truth  and  influende,  which 
therefrom  are  to  stream  into  the  world's  darkness  like  the  light  of  dii} ,  Ye  Chris- 
tians are  "  the  light  of  the  world."  Think  what  a  Church  is  in  a  cits- — that  to 
which  the  weary,  the  tempted,  the  dark,  the  sorrowful,  come  for  healing ;  to  which, 
through  the  weekly  toil,  tired  hearts  look  with  loUging,  and  in  which  men  with  all  their 


lOH  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL^ OP  PETER,    [oh.  n.  1—25. 


w»nt8  find  God.  Such  a  sanctuary  is  the  Church  of  Christ,  the  world's  one  temple, 
through  which  alone  can  flow  from  God  the  healing  for  its  woes.  The  Church  is  the 
fulfilment  of  the  ancient  predictions  of  the  temple  that  should  rise  on  Ziou  in  the  latter 
days,  to  which  alt  nations  should  flow,  and  from  which  all  should  be  blessed.  Well 
majr  Peter  write  to  the  Church,  "  Unto  you  who  believe  there  is  honour." 

n.  Thb  means  by  which  this  honoub  becomes  theirs.  "Unto  whom,  coming 
as  unto  a  living  Stone,  ye  also  as  living  stones  are  built  up  a  spiritual  house  " — the 
Church  a  fabric  of  "  living  "  souls.  1.  By  coming  to  Christ  as  a  Foundation.  Peter 
said,  "  Thou  art  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  the  living  Grod."  Christ  answered,  "  Upon 
this  rock  will  I  build  my  Church."  Rome  speaks  of  Peter  as  the  foundation  of  the 
Church,  but  this  same  Peter  speaks  of  Christ.  The  Church,  thus,  are  all  those  who 
have  come  to  Christ  as  God^i  Foundation-stone.  And  what  is  that  but  to  come  to 
Christ,  to  build  on  him — all  our  hopes  on  Jesus,  Sacrifice,  Revealer  of  the  Father, 
Intercessor,  Lord ;  not  on  personal  experiences,  etc.,  but  on  him  ?  2.  That  is  coming  to 
Christ  as  the  Foundation  of  a  holy  temple.  For  many  build  on  him  who  do  not 
build  to  this  end.  Just  to  rest  on  Clirist  as  an  insurance  against  penalty,  or  to  satisfy 
conscience  whilst  still  belonging  to  the  world,  is  not  to  be  of  the  Church ;  for  that  we 
must  80  build  on  him  as  to  become  part  of  that  spiritual  house  in  which  Gotl  lives,  and 
walks,  and  reveals  himself,  and  works.  3.  And  this  coming  to  Christ  as  a  Foundation 
of  a  holy  temple,  of  which  all  his  people  form  a  part.  Not  to  be  isolated  stones, 
but  to  be  fiimly  knit  together  with  the  whole.  Only  thus  is  the  idea  of  the  temple  ful- 
filled. God  requires  "  the  building  up  of  the  body  of  Christ,  till  we  all  attain  unto  the 
unity  of  the  faith,  .  .  .  unto  a  full-grown  man,  unto  the  measure  of  the  stature  of  the 
fulness  ol  Christ,  . .  .  from  whom  the  whole  body  fitly  framed  and  knit  together  through 
that  which  every  joint  supplieth,  according  to  the  working  in  due  measure  of  each 
several  part,  maketh  the  increase  of  the  body  unto  the  building  up  of  itself  in  love." 

III.  The  contrast  between  this  honour  and  their  former  shame.  The  apostle 
heightens  the  honour  of  the  Church  by  reminding  them  of  their  once  different  position, 
of  theirs  who  still  have  no  part  in  him.  This  gives  a  rave  impulse  to  joy,  gratitude, 
and  service.  "  Unto  you  who  believe  there  is  honour,  but  for  such  as  disbelieve,  the 
Stone  which  the  builders  disallowed,  the  same  is  made  the  chief  of  the  corner  [not 
'  head,'  as  though  topstone,  but  foundation-stone],  and  a  Stone  of  stumbling,  and  a  Rock 
of  offence;  for  they  stumble  at  the  Word,  being  disbelieving  [same  word  as  ver.  7],  where- 
unto  also  thev  were  appointed" — ^ap[iointed  not  to  disbelief,  but  to  find  him  a  Stone  of 
stumbling  and  Rock  of  offence  if  they  refused  to  believe.  Hurt,  maiming,  destruction, 
are  the  appointed  consequences  of  rejecting  Christ,  as  salvation  is  for  those  who  believe 
on  him.  Brethren,  build  on  Christ,  Peter  seems  to  say,  "  Remember  what  you  were, 
what  you  have  escaped,  and  what  you  are. — C.  N." 

Vers.  11,  12. — The  demand  for  a  life  hecoming  the  Christian  name.  The  doctrinal 
part  of  the  Epistle  is  now  followed  by  a  series  of  practical  exhortations  on  the  working 
out  of  the  redemption  of  which  it  has  spoken.  And  the  apostle  here  begins  these  as 
close  as  can  be  to  the  man's  own  self;  he  has  to  speak  about  right  citizenship,  and 
neighbourliness,  etc.;  but  before  he  comes  to  these  he  starts  with  the  man's  own 
self.  "Fleshly  lusts;"  not  to  be  undeistood  of  desires  for  physical  gratification  only. 
"  Fleshly  "  is,  in  Scripture,  the  opposite  of  "  spiritual."  "  Works  of  the  flesh  "  are  the 
antithesis  of  "  works  of  the  Spirit."  "  Now  the  works  of  the  flesh  are  these,"  etc.,  and 
the  list  includes  "idolatry,  hatred,  wrath,  strife,  envyings "— not  physical  qualities  at 
all.  So  the  expression  refers  to  all  desires  that  are  wrong.  "  Having  your  conversation 
honest" — "Having  your  behaviour  seemly"  (Revised  Version).  "The  day  of  visi- 
tation." Any  crisis  in  which  God  draws  near  to  a  man  with  a  view  to  his  redemption, 
and  which  results  in  grace  or  judgment — the  apostle  thinks  here  of  that.  So  the  idea 
of  the  paragraph  is,  "  You  Christians,  so  regulate  your  desires  that  your  life  will  be 
becoming,  and  thus  the  heathen  around  you,  prejudiced  against  Christ,  will  be 
prepared  to  receive  the  gospel  when  it  is  urged  upon  them."  This  is  a  timely  subject 
when  the  Cliurch  wonders  at  the  little  power  of  the  gospel,  and  seeks  new  means  to 
"  evangelize  the  masses."  Gospel-preaching  must  be  supported  by  gospel-living. 
Next  to  the  inborn  ungodliness  of  the  natural  heart,  the  great  hindrance  to  Christ's 
kingdom  is  the  Church's  own  ungodliness. 


OH.  n.  1—25.]    THE  PIB8T  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  PETER.  109 

L  Thb  deuand  fob  a  bbcomino  life  on  the  pakt  of  the  Ohdkch.  There  is  a 
certain  behaviour  which  becomes  God's  people,  if  only  because  they  are  closely 
observed  by  the  ungodly ;  the  world  has  a  standard  of  character  it  expects  the  Church 
to  reach.  We  may  discourao;e  ourselves  by  overestimating  that  standard  (probably 
they  do  not  look  for  perfection),  but  we  must  beware  lest  we  underrate  it.  What 
is  this  character?  (Let  us  remember  that  it  is  character ;  that  they  care  nothing  for 
creed,  nor  for  habits  of  devotion,  nor  for  our  statements  as  to  religious  experience,  but 
demand  a  certain  life  from  the  people  of  God,  and  watch  for  it  as  with  an  eagle's  glance.) 
1.  It  must  he  an  exemplification  of  righteousness.  Straightforward,  above-board, 
strictly  upright  action,  come  what  may — ^nothing  less  becomes  the  children  of  the  Holy 
One.  Social  and  commercial  morality  are  not  enough.  Christian  morality,  which  the 
world  has  a  right  to  expect  in  us,  is  action  from  right  principle  at  any  cost.  2.  It 
m,ust  he  an  exhibition  of  peace.  The  Christian  says,  "  God  loves  and  cares  for  me ;  he  is 
my  Father;  for  me  he  laid  down  his  life;  to  me  he  has  given  all  blessing  in  his  Son  ; 
and  I  trust  him."  Then  the  world  looks  in  him  for  that  rest  of  soul  which  writes  itself 
on  the  face,  silences  impatient  utterance,  and  restrains  the  hasty  deed.  Nothing  less 
becomes  such  profession,  3.  It  must  he  animated  hy  kind  consideration  for  others. 
Even  righteousness  will  not  satisfy  the  world ;  there  must  be  also  love.  Less  cannot 
become  those  who  have  his  Spirit  of  whom  it  is  said,  "  And  God  is  Love."  On  the  top 
of  the  pillars  of  uprightness  there  must  be  the  lily  work  of  love ;  yea,  those  pillars, 
hard, and  cold,  must  be  wreathed  from  base  to  capital  with  love's  sweet  fluwers  and 
fruit,  or  onlookers  will  refuse  to  believe  they  are  pillars  of  God's  temple. 

II.  The  reason  for  this  demand.  Three  powerful  reasons  are  suggested  here. 
1.  The  Christian  is  essentially  different  from  the  world.  "  Strangers  [in  another  place 
transbited  '  foreigners ']  and  pilgrims."  "  Ye  are  not  of  the  world ; "  "  Ye  are  come  to 
the  heavenly  Jerusalem ; "  citizens  of  another  country,  subjects  of  another  King, 
passing  through  this  world  to  that  to  which  the  Heaven-born  nature  aspires.  We  are 
more  than  others  (we  are  bom  again) ;  we  have  more  than  others  (the  all-sufficient 
grace  of  the  Spirit);  we  owe  more  than  others  (redeemed  with  the  precious  blood  of 
Christ);  then  we  ought  to  be  more  than  others.  2.  The  world  regards  the  Chris- 
tian with  some  prejudice.  "They  speak  against  you  as  evil-doers."  The  history 
of  the  period  confirms  that ;  Christian  writings  of  the  second  century  constantly 
refute  false  charges  of  the  immorality  of  Christianity.  These  false  charges  are  likely 
to  be  perpetual ;  for  "  if  they  have  called  the  Master  of  the  house  Beelzebub,"  etc.,  then 
so  much  the  more  reason  for  becoming  conduct  on  our  part.  We  cannot  reason,  but  we 
can  live  down,  this  prejudice.  Each  line  of  life  is  credited  with  certain  evils;  by 
living  above  those  evils  the  Christian  must  roll  this  prejudice  against  Christianity  away. 
3.  The  influence  of  Christian  character  on  the  world  is  incalculable.  "  By  your  good 
works  which  they  shall  behold,  they  may  glorify  God  in  the  day  of  visitation."  An 
unspeakably  solemn  word.  It  implies  that,  when  they  are  visited  by  God's  mercy, 
their  acceptance' of  that  mercy  depends  largely  on  the  previous  influence  of  the  lives  of 
God's  people.  Before  Lazarus  could  come  forth  from  his  grave  at  Christ's  word,  men 
must  roll  away  the  stone.  So  the  stone  of  prejudice  against  Christ.  By  unbecoming 
conduct  we  may  harden  men  in  sin  and  unbelief;  by  becoming  conduct  we  may  prepare 
the  way  of  tho  Lord. 

III.  The  means  of  fulfilling  this  demand.  "  Abstain  from  fleshly  lusts,  which 
NaT  against  the  soul."  1.  Becoming  cftoracter  begins  with  the  heart.  "  Out  of  the  heart 
are  the  issues  of  life."  Only  that  can  come  from  us  which  is  first  put  in  us.  Christian 
lives  are  not  produced  by  laying  aside  this  blemish  or  taking  up  that  excellence,  but 
by  prolonged  and  secret  heart-work.  "  As  a  man's  heart  is,  so  is  he."  2.  This  heart- 
work  requires  abstinence  from  whatever  wars  against  the  soiU.  Not  necessarily  bad 
things,  but  anything  that  militates  against  spiritual  life.  Every  wish  must  be  crucified 
which  may  be  a  hindrance  to  me  or  to  others.  3.  This  abstinence  comes  from  a 
remembrance  of  our  obligation  to  God.  Some  trees  only  lose  their  leaves  when  new 
ones  come  and  push  them  off;  thus  only  by  the  incoming  of  new  desires  and  affec- 
tions do  we  lose  the  old  ones.  The  eleventh  verse  follows  the  ninth  and  tenth  verses. 
Abstinence  from  evil  desires  follows  as  a  matter  of  course  a  remembrance  of 
what. God  has  done  for  us,  and  an  appropriation  of  the  sublime  blessings  it  gives. 
—O.N. 


no  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PETER,    [ch.  ii.  1—25. 

Vers.  13 — 17. — Tht  Christian's  duty  to  the  state.  We  might  regafd  vers,  ll  and  12 
as  the  (est  of  which  the  rest  of  the  Epistle  is  the  sermon.  The  apostle  first  writes 
at  length  on  their  possession  of  personal  redemption,  and  then  says,  "  Now  for  the 
hfe  that  becomes  it."  And  he  begins  with  that  citizenship  which  becomes  the 
Christian.  Very  striking  is  it  that  ihe  heavenly  and  the  earthly  citizenship  should 
be  brought  here  into  such  close  connection ;  it  is  when  the  apostle  has  the  highe-t 
conception  of  our  relation  to  th;  spiritual  kingdoln  (as  in  vers.  9,  10)  that  he  -proceeds 
tB  speak  of  the  lofty  position  we  are  to  take  as  citizens  of  earth.  Probably  there  was 
Special  reason  for  emphasis  on  this ;  he  was  writing  to  Jews,  who  had  rather  lax  ideas 
of  their  obligations  to  human  institutions  in  the  Gentile  world,  and  were  chatged  by 
the  empire  with  being  "bad  subjects j"  that,  for  example,  was  the  ostensible  reason  for 
the  persecution  by  Nero.  The  subject  is  timely.  Christians  are  often  in  doubt  as  to  the 
part  they  should  take  in  public  affairs.    Here  w6  have  Divine  teaching  respecting  this. 

L  The  duty  or  Christian  citizenship.  "Submit  yourselves  to  everjr  bunaan 
institution,  .  .  .  whether  it  be  to  the  king,  as  sUpreUe;  or  unto  governors,  as  unto  them 
that  are  sent  by  him  for  the  punishment  of  evil-doers,  and  for  the  praise  of  them  that  do 
well" — that  includes  all  human  institutions  for  the  well-being  of  the  nation  at  large, 
whether  in  the  wider  circle  of  imperial,  or  the  narrower  circle  of  local,  matterg,  and, 
says  the  apostle,  "  Submit  yourselves  to  that."  1.  What,  then,  U  the  submission  which 
the  Christian  owes  to  the  state  f  The  only  submission  possilile  to  those  to  whom  Peter 
wrote  was  that  of  tribute  and  obedience ;  under  the  despotic  policy  of  the  empire  they 
could  do  no  more ;  they  had  no  power  to  ameliorate  the  laws  nor  to  choose  their  rulers. 
With  us  it  is  not  so.  If  we  only  pay  the  taxes  and  obey  the  authorities,  we  do  not 
submit  ourselves.  "  Submit  yourselves  unto  God  "  means  "  give  yourselves."  So  rend 
the  word  "submit"  here.  The  Christian  is  bound  to  give  not  only  his  substance  and 
doings  to  these,  but  himself.  As  Christians,  nothing  ought  to  be  alien  to  us  which 
concerns  the  world  our  Lord  loved  and  died  for.  2.  WhiU  are  ihe  limits  Of  this  «Mi- 
nission  t  We  must  rfead  this  with  the  limitation  everywhere  implied.  "  Fearing  God  " 
comes  before  "  honouring  the  king."  Peter  was  himself  an  illustration  of  that,  when 
he  told  the  rulers  "-We  must  obey  God  rather  than  man."  But  the  text  refers  to 
submission  of  ourselves;  we  must  do  that  as.  far  as  we  are  to  do  all  else  that  in 
right — that  is,  as  far  as  our  opportunities  and  talents  permit.  Opportunity  and  talent 
are  the  limit  of  duty.  Health,  home-claims,  higher  claims,  natural  aptitude,  etc.,— o 
these  show  us  where  and  how  far  we  may  go.  God's  barriers  are  always  plain  to  him 
who  fears  God.  3.  What,  then,  it  the  objection  to  this  submission  f  We  are  told  that 
Christians  are  citizens  of  another  woridj  and  should  have  no  part  in  this.  But  it  is 
mean  to  get  all  the  good  out  of  the  world  we  can,  and  refuse  to  do  it  all  the  good  we 
can.  We  are  told  that  Christ  lived  in  the  midst  of  political  cOi-rliplion,  and  did  not 
raise  his  voice  against  it.  But  he  was  ever  pfopslgating  those  principles  which 
undermine  corruption,  and  his  healing  miracles  show  that  his  heart  was  set  on 
ameliorating  physical  woe.  We  are  told  that  we  should  come  out  of  the  world,  and  be 
separate.  But  that  cannot  mean  that  the  Christian — the  Christian  physician,  say^is 
to  refusft  to  help  the  world.  If  the  world  chooses  to  help  me  to  do  a  good  work,  I  know 
no  command  which,  because  of  their  co-operation,  bids  tne  stand  aloof. 

II.  The  lofty  puinoiplbs  on  which  this  duty  ib  to  be  FtJliPiLLED.  What  is 
wanted  is,  not  so  much  that  Christians  should  take  these  things  up,  as  that  they 
should  do  so  from  sacred  conviction,  and  "  as  becomes  the  jxoSpel  of  Christ."  1.  27tJs 
must  be  done  "for  the  Lord's  sake."  "  The  earth  is  the  Lord's  ...  the  world  add 
they  that  dwell  therein."  How  much  does  he  care  for  men,  who  for  them  became 
incarnate,  and  endured  the  death  of  the  cross  I  Then  everything  that  tends  to  thcli 
development  and  enfranchisement  is  dear  to  him.  2.  This  must  be  done  that  "  with 
well-duivg  ye  may  put  to  silence  the  ignorance  of  foolish  men."  If  the  world  come  to 
regard  Christianity  as  having  to  do  mostly  with  beliefs  alid  emotions,  they  will  look 
upon  it  as  unreal  and  worthless.  It  is  not  by  fighting  "more  or  less  extinct  Sataus" 
that  we  secure  the  worid's  respect  for  Christ,  but  by  earnestly  grappling;  for  his  sake, 
with  the  real  evils  of  the  day.  3.  This  must  be  done  "  as  servants  of  Cod"  This  duty 
is  not  without  peril  to  personal  Spiritual  life ;  it  often  calls  the  Christian  to  associate 
with  those  who  have  no  fear  of  God,  and  work  accordingly,  and  exposes  him  to  the 
danger  of  falling  to  their  leveL    The  political  atmosphere  is  often  morally  deadening 


OH.  n.  1—25.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  PETER  111 


Our  safety  is  in  going  into  this  deliberately  as  God's  seirants,  to  do  his  will,  and  that 
at  any  cost,  wearing  heaven's  livery,  and  making  heavenly  Influences  tell  upon  our 
fellows. 

III.  The  Divtse  warntno  against  the  danger  in  the  fulfilment  of  this  butt. 
"As  free,  and  not  using  your  liberty  for  a  cloak  of  evil  [kok(o,  equivalent  to  'evil  of 
any  kind']."  The  Christian  public  man  needs  anxiously  to  look  beneath  his  activity, 
and  see  if  any  evil  thing  is  concealed  and  fostered  there.  1.  There  is  the  evil  of  sAf- 
leeking.  Of  doing  this  unconsciously,  not  for  Christ,  but  for  personal  ends.  2.  And 
there  i$  the  evil  of  love  of  the  world.  Public  life  has  a  terrible  tendency  to  foster  a 
spirit  of  worldllness,  and  to  counteract  this  we  need  plenty  of  heart  and  closet  work. 
There  is  no  peril  in  this  if  we  put  "  fear  of  God  "  before  the  "honour  of  the  king  " — ^if, 
whilst  we  "  render  to  Caesar  the  things  that  are  Caesar's,"  we  "  render  to  God  the  things 
that  are  God's ; "  if,  whilst  submitting  ourselves  "  to  every  human  institution,"  etc.,  we 
maintain  the  lofty  feeling  and  character  of  "the  chosen  generation,  the  royal  priesthood, 
the  people  peculiarly  God's  own." — C.  N. 

Vera.  18 — ^25. — Servants  urged  to  patient  endurance  of  undeserved  suffering.  Having 
dealt  with  the  character  becoming  the  Christian  citizen,  he  passes  to  that  becoming 
the  Christian  servant.  Probably  the  Churches  addressed  were  composed  largely  of 
that  class,  who,  however,  were  scarcely  above  the  rank  of  slaves ;  and  these  are  here 
called  mainly  to  endurance  because,  probably,  they  were  exposed  to  considerable 
oppression.  Paul  gives  a  more  complete  teaching  on  the  duty  of  the  Christian  servant. 
Peter  here  contemplates  him  rather  as  a  sufferer — from  overwork,  unreasonable  demands, 
the  jealousy  of  fellow-servants,  misrepresentation,  cruelty ;  and  he  says  in  effect,  "  As 
to  work,  your  master's  treatment  of  you  is  to  make  no  difference  to  your  fidelity  ; "  as 
to  suffering, '  this  is  thankworthy,' "  etc.  This  passage  is  characteristic  of  Peter.  Com- 
pare what  he  records  in  his  own  Gospel  (Mark  xiv.  53 — 66).  Are  not  both  these  events 
hidden  beneath  the  text  ?  The  events  of  that  solemn  night  when  he  heard  Jesus  say, "  I 
have  given  you  an  example,"  were  burned  into  his  memory.  Uppermost  in  his  thought 
of  Jesus  would  be  that  of  patient  endurance,  as  when  he  answered  the  high  priest 
nothing,  and  his  servant's  denial  by  a  look. 

I.  Thr  persons  addressed.  "  Servants."  That  is :  1.  In  hwly  life  there  may  he  the 
working  out  of  noblest  principles.  Remember  that  the  apostle  has  taken  ver.  12  for 
his  text  in  this  second  section  of  the  Epistle.  What  more  could  the  cultured  and 
influential  do  than  he  there  requires,  but  which  he  urges  here  on  slaves  ?  At  any  rate, 
it  ranks  high  in  Christian  service.  The  greatest  principles  of  grace  can  be  exemplified  in 
the  humblest  position.  As  the  Son  of  God  was  in  the  Babe  of  Bethlehem  as  truly  as 
he  is  on  the  eternal  throne,  the  love  of  God  may  inspire  us,  the  will  of  God  be  done 
by  us,  and  the  glory  of  God  secured  by  us,  in  the  humblest  ranks  and  tasks  as  in  the 
highest.  2.  Where  no  great  deed  is  apparent,  there  may  be  the  greatest  victories.  These 
servants  were  not  called  to  prominent  places  in  Church  life,  nor  to  activity  in  public 
events,  nor  to  anything  the  world  counts  great,  but  to  patient  endurance.  Yet  is  any- 
thing harder,  and  therefore,  greater?  It  reqnins  greater  force  of  Christian  character  to 
suffer  than  to  act ;  many  eyes  are  fixed  on  action,  in  suffering  we  are  cast  almost  wholly 
on  the  unseen.  Was  not  Christ's  power  in  his  sufferings?  Not  before  his  miracles, 
but  before  his  cross,  the  world  bows  with  awe.  Just  as  his  own  nine  beatitudes  reach 
their  highest  point  in  "  Blessed  are  ye  when  men  shall  revile,"  etc.  Let  the  sufferer, 
him  with  few  talents,  him  who  is  oppressed,  know  that  in  enduring  well  he  may  rank 
with  Jesus  Christ's  nobility.  3.  Untoward  circumstances  may  be  used  to  the  highest  resiUt*. 
It  seems  a  misfortune  to  be  oppressed,  but  these  verses  show  how  much  is  possible 
bv  endurance.  Then  we  can  exemplify  Divine  grficc,  '*  for  this  is  grace,  if  a  man  for," 
etc. J  we  can  constrain  others  to  "glorify  God  in  the  day  of  visitation;"  we  can  in  this 
important  point  follow  Christ;  and  we  can  secure  much  of  that  personal  godliness 
which  was  the  end  for  which  he  died — "  that  we  might  live  unto  righteousness."  There 
IS  no  abiding  satisfaction  without  travail  of  soul ;  life's  storms  may  oast  up  rare  treasure 
to  our  feet. 

II.  The  duty  bnfoecbd.  Patient  endurance  of  undeserved  suffering.  1.  Notice 
that  the  endurance  must  be  undeserved.  Scripture  consolations  are  often  taken  by 
sufferers  who  have  no  right  to  them.     Much  of  our  suffering  is  deserved — e.g.  bad 


H2  THE  FIEST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PETER,    [ch.  n.  1—25 

treatment  from  others,  which  is  often  due  to  our  moral  unloveliness.  The  apostle, 
however,  thinks  of  that  which  is  unmerited — suffering,  e.g.,  for  right  doing.  There  is 
a  mystery  in  this,  but  it  is  something  that  Scripture  recognizes  this,  yea,  even  says  it  is 
this  "  whereunto  ye  are  called."  2.  This  endurance  is  due  to  a  consciousness  of  Qod. 
"  This  is  grace,  if  a  man  for  conscience  toward  God,"  etc.  All  endurance  is  not 
Christian.  We  may  endure  because  we  are  not  sensitive,  or  because  we  are  stoical. 
That  is  not  the  endurance  that  needs  Christianity  for  its  existence,  or  that  is  followed 
by  Christian  blessing.  Aim  at  the  endurance  which  is  only  possible  through  taking 
God  into  account :  "  God  is  in  my  trouble,  and  God  is  with  me  in  my  trouble."  "  He 
endured  as  seeing  him  who  is  invisible."  3.  This  is  the  endurance  which  is  fulfilled 
after  the  manner  of  Christ.  It  is  possible  to  endure,  but  with  impatience  and  repining. 
Christian  endurance  is  of  a  higher  order ;  it  is  like  Christ's,  who  had  no  unkind  feelinj 
for  his  persecutors.  At  the  feast  they  said  he  had  a  devil,  but,  nothing  daunted,  bt 
stood  and  cried,  "  If  any  man  thirst,"  etc. ;  he  rejected  the  suggestion  to  call  down  fire 
on  the  inhospitable  village ;  he  called  Judas  in  the  moment  of  his  treason,  "Friend ;" 
he  healed  Malchus's  ear  who  was  binding  him;  he  forgave  Peter's  denial ;  he  prayed 
for  his  murderers.     We  are  here  summoned  to  endurance  like  that  (vers.  22,  23). 

III.  The  motives  applied.  How  can  we  rise  to  endurance  like  this  ?  Three  motives 
are  suggested  here.  1.  This  patient  endurance  is  pleasing  to  Ood.  "  If,  when  ye  do 
well,  and  suffer  for  it,  ye  take  it  patiently,  this  is  acceptable  [literally, '  grace ']  with  God." 
He  regards  it  as  grace,  or,  if  you  will,  as  thanks.  It  is  the  utterance  of  the  submissive 
spirit  which  says,  "  Not  my  will,  but  thine  be  done."  It  is  wonderful  that  we  can  give 
pleasure  to  God ;  yet  every  token  of  loving,  trustful,  obedient  submission  must  please 
the  Father.  Think  of  him  saying,  "For  my  Name's  sake  thou  hast  borne,"  etc.  2. 
This  patient  endurance  is  following  Christ.  "Leaving  us  an  example."  There  is  much 
comfort  in  knowing  we  put  our  feet  into  his  footprints,  and  that  he  knows  what  we 
suffer,  since  be  has  experienced  it  6rst.  It  is  much  to  have  indications  that  we  are  on  the 
right  track.  "  If  any  man  will  come  after  me,  let  him  take  up  his  cross,  and  follow  me ; " 
"  If  ye  were  of  the  world,  the  world  would  love  its  own,  but,"  etc.  But  best  of  all,  to 
follow  him  is  to  ensure  his  presence.  His  servants  serve  at  his  side,  as  Peter  did.  To 
follow  is  to  follow  him  close.  "  To  go  forth  without  the  camp,  bearing  his  reproach," 
is  to  go  forth  "  to  him."  3.  This  patient  endurance  is  a  working  out  of  redemption. 
"  Who  his  own  self  bare  our  sins  in  his  own  body  on  the  tree,  that  we  being"  etc. 
Since  Christ  by  his  sacrifice  has  freed  us  from  sin's  condemnation  that  we  might  become 
righteous,  it  becomes  us  to  welcome  anything  by  which  that  righteousness  may  be 
attained.  If  for  our  righteousness  he  would  endure  the  cross,  we  may  not  shrink  from 
the  discipline  of  his  love  to  that  end. — C.  N. 

Vers.  1 — 3. — Spiritual  childhood.  In  this  "therefore "(Revised  Version)  our  apostle 
gathers  up  the  argument,  perhaps,  of  all  the  preceding  part  of  the  letter,  certainly  of  the 
passage  immediately  preceding  this ;  viz.  it  we  as  Christians  have  begun  to  live  this 
higher  life,  how  will  its  early  stage  manifest  himself?     So  we  naturally  note — 

I.  Some  of  the  signs  op  spiRiTUAli  childhood.  One  of  the  signs  that  Christian 
men  and  women  are,  what  Peter  had  heard  the  Lord  say  they  ought  to  he,  like  little 
children — growing  children — is  in  what  they  lack.  This  whole  group  of  evils  are  most 
unchildlike  evils.  "  Putting  away  "  implies  that  they  had  been  wrapped  in  them, 
swaddled  as  it  were  in  them.  "  Wickedness,"  or  malice.  Perhaps  the  wider  meaning 
of  wickedness  is  intended  here.  Leighton  says,  "  All  is  one  garment,  or  parts  of  one, 
for  sometimes  some  are  mentioned,  and  sometimes  others."  "  Guile,"  "  hypocrisies  " — 
the  first  being  the  spirit  of  deceit,  the  second  the  acting  a  part  as  on  a  stage.  "  Envies ; " 
"  evil-speaUings."  Here  again  thu  first  describes  the  malign  spirit,  the  second  the  speech 
that  spirit  inspires. 

II.  The  chief  nocbishment  of  spiritual  childhood,  "  Spiritual  milk."  Milk 
is  a,  good  standard  of  all  food;  it  contains  all  the  con.stituents  of  food.  So  does  the 
Word  of  God  contain  all  elements  of  spiritual  nutrition.  "There  is  a  natural  body, 
and  there  is  a  spiritual  body."  Similarly,  there  is  a  natural  alimem,  and  there  is  a 
spiritual  aliment.  "  Without  guile  ;  "  that  food  is  to  Uj  simple,  unadulterated.  Milk 
when  impure  is  a  terrible  source  of  disease ;  so  the  Word  of  God,  when  mixed  with  error, 
works  deadly  mischief.     "  Long  for ;  "  have  a  keen  appetite  for  the  Word  of  God,  not. 


CH.  n.  1— 25.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PETER,  113 


for  the  Bugar-plnms  of  sentiment  or  the  stimulants  of  sensationalism,  but  the  milk  of 
the  Word.     A  true  appetite  is  at  once  a  sign  of  health  and  a  means  to  health. 

III.  The  true  development  of  spimtual  childhood.  "  Grow."  The  bud  that 
does  not  become  a  flower  is  a  failure.  So  the  Christian  that  does  not  grow  is  a  failure. 
Piety  is  the  art  of  right  growing.  "  Unto  salvation."  That  is  the  ideal — not  mere 
rescue  from  guilt,  but  attainment  of  holiness ;  not  mere  emancipation,  but  citizenship, 
"  If  ye  have  tastedr  that  the  Lord  is  gracious."  This  implies  that  the  Christian  oharactei 
is  developed,  even  in  its  eaily  stages,  from  a  solid  experience.  Only  tasted,  but  surely 
tasted.  Luther  puts  it  well  for  us :  "  To  them  who  with  the  heart  believe  the  word, 
'Christ  has  been  sent  for  me  and  is  become  mine  own;  my  miseries  are  his;  his  life 
in  mine,' — ^that  word  is  sweet," — U.  B.  T. 

Vers.  4 — 8. — The  soul-temple,  and  soul-service.  The  critic  may  read  these  verses  and 
simply  complain  that  he  finds  here  a  confusion  of  metaphors — that  Christian  souls  are 
here  described  as  builders  and  a  building.  But  in  truth  these  figures  illustrate  twu 
sides  of  one  great  fact,  namely,  that  the  worth  of  life,  whether  it  be  life  in  its  progress 
or  in  its  result,  depends  upon  its  relationship  to  Christ, 

I.  The  Builder  a  type  op  man.  Paul  in  detail  uses  the  same  figure  as  Peter,  and 
doubtless  Peter  learned  its  use  as  he  listened  to  his  Lord's  parable  of  the  mere  hearer 
and  doer.  These  verses  remind  us :  1.  That  every  man  is  incessantly  building.  He  is 
placing  stone  on  stone,  layer  on  layer,  in  the  structure  of  his  character.  2.  That  cha- 
racter (the  thing  he  is  building)  has  at  once  an  outward  aspect  and  an  inward  relation. 
In  the  first,  i.e.  his  reputation,  it  is  a  monument ;  in  the  second,  i.e.  actual  character, 
it  is  a  habitation.  3.  Man  builds  well  or  ill  as  he  regards  or  disregards  the  Divine 
Architect.  "Coming  to,"  i.e.  having  close,  constant  contact  with  "a  Jiving  Stone,"  i.e. 
Christ,  who  is  a  Foundation  that  is  more  than  the  stone  on  which  all  rests ;  he  is  the 
Foundation  out  of  which  life  proceeds,  and  the  Corner-stone  by  which  that  life  is  held 
together  and  manifested. 

II.  The  temple  a  type  of  the  Christian  man.  He  is  a  structure  as  well  as  a 
builder.  And  what  a  structure  !  All  characters  are  structures — some  are  markets,  some 
but  pig-sties ;  the  Christly  are  temples.  He  is  a  temple :  (1)  on  the  right  Foundation ; 
(2)  with  glory  of  completeness ;  (3)  destined  to  permanence;  (4)  and  this  strength  and 
beauty  not  according  to  man's  standard,  but  God's. 

III.  The  priesthood  ib  also  a  type  of  CHRiSTrAN  men.  Here  is  further  change 
of  figure;  but  the  truth  taught  is  the  same.  Is  he  builder?  he  must  build  according 
to  God's  plan.  Is  he  temple?  he  must  be  dedicated  by  God's  presence.  Is  he 
worshipper?  he  must  be  utterly  consecrated  to  God's  service.  All  Christians  are  part 
of  the  temple ;  all  Christians  are  part  of  the  priesthood.  For  all  we  turn  to  Christ  for 
Model,  Motive,  and  Merit.— U.  B.  T. 

Vers.  9, 10. — The  glory  of  the  Church  as  a  commonwealth.  To  the  apostle's  vision 
the  Church  was  a  whole.  Its  unity  did  not  depend  upon  geography,  or  upon  chrono- 
logy, but  on  character,  temper,  spirit. 

I.  The  glory  of  the  Christian  commonwealth  in  its  characteristics.  "  An  elect 
race ; "  "  a  race,"  i.e.  descendants  from  one  stock  and  kindred  one  to  another.  "  Elect ; " 
that  is,  at  once  choice  and  chosen.  Chosen  to  be  blessed,  and  to  be  made  a  blessing. 
"  A  royal  priesthood."  A  kingdom  of  priests.  "  Thou  hast  made  us  kings  and 
priests."-  What  is  the  true  conception  of  a  king  or  of  a  priest  ?  One  who  lives  for 
others ;  the  king,  if  you  will,  in  open  field ;  the  priest  in  sacred  retirement.  We  are 
both.  "A  holy  nation;"  i.e.  consecrated  to  religion,  Rome  may  be  a  martial  nation, 
Greece  a  cultured  nation,  Babylon  a  commercial  nation.  Israel  was  nothing  if  not 
religious.  The  Christian  commonwealth  is  to  be  the  Israel  of  to-day.  "  A  people  for 
God's  own  possession,"  or  for  special  reservation.  "  Peculiar,"  a  word  used  to  describe 
the  earnings  of  the  slave  in  his  overtime — his  "  very  own."  We  are  the  "  very  own  " 
of  God.     "  He  gave  himself  for  us,  that  he  might  redeem,"  etc. ;  "  bought  with  blood." 

II.  The  glory  of  the  Christian  commonwealth  in  its  mission.  "  That  ye  may,"  etc. 
This  throws  us  back  on  the  word  "  elect."  We  are  chosen  for  this  purpose.  "  Ye  may 
show  forth ; "  tell  out  to  those  without  what  has  taken  place  within.  "  The  excellences 
of  him  " — virtues,  glories,  of  God.     What  a  boundless  theme !    "  Who  hath  called  you 

I.  PETER.  I 


114  IHB  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PETEa    [oh.  it  X— 25 

out  of  darkness  into  his  marvellous  light."  God's  call,  by  his  Spirit,  through  his  Word, 
through  the  conscience,  through  the  ministry,  through  the  sacraments,  through  provi- 
dential events,  reaches  all  of  us.  But  "the  called"  usually  denotes  those  who  have 
responded  to  the  call.  The  call  is  from  "  darkness,"  t.e.  ignoraace,  error,  misery,  sin, 
helplessness,  to  "  light,"  truth,  joy,  purity,  activity ;  from  the  sepulchre  to  the 
garden,  from  the  dungeon  to  the  temple,  from  midnight  to  noon. 

III.  These  glories  of  the  Christian  commonwealth  akb  in  stbikISg  contbast  with 
THE  PAST  HISTORY  OF  ITS  MEMBERS.  "  Which  in  time  past."  The  reference  is  doubt- 
less (1)  to  quicken  humility ;  (2)  to  kindle  gratitude ;  (3)  to  awaken  watchfulness. 
"  Were  no  people ; "  isolated,  each  self-centred ;  a  chaos,  not  a  commonwealth.  "  But 
are  now  the  people  of  God ; "  not  merely  a  commonwealth,  but  a  sacred  commonwealth, 
a  theocracy.  "  Which  had  not  obtained  mercy,"  etc. ;  had  not  realized  it  as  their 
own.  Pity  is  care  for  the  weak.  Compassion  is  care  for  the  suffering.  Mercy  is  care 
for  the  undeserving.  And  it  is  mercy  that  has  met  the  Christian  man,  and  made  him 
what  he  is.— U.  R.  T. 

Vers.  11, 12. — The  three/old  plea  against  disorderly  passions.  What  is  meant  here 
by  "fleshly  lusts"?  Not  alone  the  desires  and  appetites  that  are  gratified  through 
the  flesh — "  sensuality,"  as  we  sometimes  say.  No ;  for  three  reasons.  1.  The  flesh 
in  itself  is  neither  good  nor  bad ;  it  has  no  moral  qualities.  2.  The  category  of  evils 
here  enumerated  includes  envying,  pride,  heresies.  3.  The  "flesh"  is  used  figura- 
tively, and  is  a  symbol  of  the  old  and  lower  nature  of  man.  The  phrase  points  to  the 
disorganized,  disproportioned,  disordered  desires  of  man,  and  so  includes  intemperance, 
gluttony,  voluptuousness,  bad  temper,  false  ambitions,  covetousness,  all  of  which  are 
included  in  the  accursed  trinity  of  St.  John,  "  The  lust  of  the  flesh,  the  lust  of  the 
eye,  the  vain-glory  of  life."    We  are  here  taught  that — 

I.  InDTTLBBNCE    in    these    DISORDEllLT    PASSIONS    IS    BECOMIHO     NEITHER    TO     OUB 

PRESENT  CONDITION  NOB  TO  OUR  DBSTINT.  We  are  "  sojourners ; "  foreigners,  not 
staying  here.  But  more,  we  are  "  pilgrims,''  bent  on  a  higher  destination.  "  Arise 
ye,  and  depart ;  for  this  is  not  your  rest." 

II.  The   INFLUENCE  OF   THESE  DISOBDBELT  PASSIONS  IS  HOSTILE  TO  OTTB  OWN  INWABD 

LIFE.  "Which  war  against  the  soulj"  war  against  all  the  garrisnn  and  inmates  of 
the  soul — against  reason,  defying  and  dishonouring  it ;  against  memory,  burdening 
and  crushing  it ;  against  hope,  darkening  it  and  turning  it  into  terror ;  against  imagi* 
nation,  polluting  and  degrading  it ;  against  conscience,  cutting  and  maiming,  though 
they  cannot  kill  it ;  against  the  affections,  ravaging  and  spoiling  them ;  in  a  word, 
against  "  the  soul." 

III.  Freedom    from   these    disorderly   passions,    besides    deliverino    from 

INTERNAL   STRIFE,   WILL   MAKE   OUR   OUTWARD    LIFE  A   SOCIAIr  BLESSING.        Four   facts 

are  here  suggested  on  this  point.  1.  Outward  life  scrutinized.  They  "behold"  it. 
2.  Outward  life  readily  calumniated.  *'  They  speak  evil  of  you."  Slanders  brought 
against  early  Christians  were  many,  foul,  and  baseless.  It  was  a  king  who  said,  "  It 
is  kingly  to  do  good,  and  to  be  evil  spoken  of  is  kingly."  Paul,  James,  Peter,  and 
our  Lord  teach  that  to  do  gond  and  be  evil  spoken  of  was  the  lot  of  a  Christian.  3 
Outward  life  should  he  beautiful.  "  Good  works ; "  i.e.  beautiful  works.  No  scenery 
can  be  or  should  be  so  fascinating,  so  awe-inspiring,  as  the  scenery  of  souls.  They 
may  show  forth  most  of  the  beauties  of  holiness,  the  beauty  of  God.  4.  Such  outward 
life  leads  to  God  heing glorified.  "They  may  glorify. God."  Many  a  man  has  found 
some  noble  or  gracious  life  of  kinsman,  or  of  friend,  or  of  hero  to  be  "  the  gate  Beau- 
tiful," by  which  he  has  gone  into  the  temple  of  the  fellowship  and  service  of  God. 
— U.  R.  T. 

Vers.  13,  14. — 7%«  kigJiest  motive/or  a  loyal  life.    This  passage  teaches — ' 

I.  The  necessity  of  loyalty.  In  our  present  condition  there  must  be  the  ruled 
and  rulers.  It  may  be  well  to  seek  a  change  of  rulers ;  it  certainly  is  olten  well  to 
seek  a  change  of  laws ;  but  while  rulers,  whether  "  kings  or  governors,"  are  for  "  ven- 
geance OR  evil-doers,  and  a  praise  to  them  that  do  well,"  it  is  the  duty  of  the  true 
eitizen  to  be  loyaL 

II.  The  frequent  charge  of  disloyalty   brouout    bv   thb  foolish  against 


en.  iL  1—25.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP   PETER.  115 

BEFORMBES.  Such  men  as  St.  Paul  was  addressing  were,  as  Christians  are,  of  necessity, 
reformerg.  There  was  all  the  more  need  that  they  should,  by  fitting  loyalty,  put  to 
shame  the  ignorance  of  foolish  men  who  calumniated  them.  Even  their  very  freedom, 
%a  being  under  a  higher  than  mere  human  law,  might  seem  to  be  used  as  "  a  cloke  of 
wickedness."     Therefore  they  were  to  be  the  very  bondser7ants  of  God. 

III.  Loyalty  ib  incomplete  unless  it  includes  honoob  for  all  men,  lovb  for 
THE  Christian  brotherhood,  as  well  as  obedibnob  to  the  bulbb.  The  true 
loyalist  is  no  recluse,  but  a  philanthropist  and  a  Ghurph-member. 

IV.  The  sufficient  and  ABiDiNct  uotivb  roil  buoh  loyalty  is  Divinb.  "  For 
the  Lord's  sake."— U.  R.  T. 

Vers.  18 — 25. —  The  Christian  as  a  servant.  As  the  sun  extracts  no  sweeter  odours 
than  when  its  rays  fall  on  the  tiny  lily  of  the  valley  or  the  modest  violet,  so  the  truth 
of  Christ  never  fills  the  air  with  more  fragrance  than  when,  as  here,  it  is  addressed  to 
men  and  women  of  lowly  station  and  occupation — to  "  bondmen." 

I.  The  duty  of  the  Christian  as  a  servant.  "  Be  in  subjection."  Obedience 
is  the  essential  virtue  of  servitude.  Fulfil  commands.  Discbarge  tasks.  "  With  all 
fear."  Not  terror,  but  proper  awe.  The  craven  is  not  the  product  of  Christianity,  but 
the  respectful  man  is.  Widen  the  application  to  all  employes.  How  this  teaching  oils 
the  wheels  of  the  social  machine  I 

II.  Thb  difficulties  of  the  Christiak  ab  a  suFFERiNa  SERVANT.  There  is  no 
one-sided  view  of  social  duty  here.  It  is  implied :  1.  Difficulties  often  arise  from 
the  character  of  employers.  There  is  an  exquisite  ideal  for  masters  here — "  good  and 
gentle."  But  many  a  servant  "  endureth  griefs,  suffering  wrongfully."  Some  masters 
are  "  froward,"  i.e.  like  a  crooked  stick  you  do  not  know  bow  to  hold.  Some  are 
rough.  Their  servants  are  buffeted — tongue,  fist,  temper,  strike.  2.  Such  difficulties, 
when  rightly  met,  bring  honour  and  Divine  praise.     This  leads  to — 

III.  The  dignity  of  thb  Christian  as  a  suffering  servant.  1.  Dignity, 
inasmuch  as  »  suffering  servant  may  resemble  the  blessed  Saviour.  Follow  his  steps 
who  was  (1)  perfect,  yet  wronged ;  (2)  reviled,  yet  ucreviling ;  (3)  suffering,  yet 
not  vindictive.  2,  Dignity,  because  inasmuch  as  for  our  salvation  our  Lord  became  a 
Buffering  Servant.  Burdened,  we  are  relieved  by  him ;  dead,  we  are  quickened  by  him ; 
diseased,  we  are  healed  by  him ;  wandering,  w«  are  restored  by  him ;  and  that  by  hii 
being  burdened  and  dying. — U.  B.  T. 


Vers.  1—10.— Newborn  babes  arid  the  higher  Israel.  I.  Newborn  babes.  1.  Duty 
eonditioning  appetite  fw  the  Word.  "Putting  away  therefore  all  wickedness,  and  all 
guile,  and  hypocrisies,  and  envies,  and  all  evil.speakings."  This  duty  is  connected 
with  the  foregoing  ("  therefore  "),  as  coming  under  it.  As  the  regenerate,  we  are  to 
put  away  all  dispositions  and  manifestations  that  offend  against  good  brotherhood. 
We  are  to  put  away  first,  as  being  the  radical  vice,  all  malice  (as  we  should  read,  with 
the  old  translation),  t.e.  the  desire  to  hurt,  from  the  sli<jhtest  beginnings  up  to  the 
most  deadly  passion.  We  are  also  to  put  away  all  guile,  i.e.  want  of  openness,  of 
straightforwardness,  also  in  the  whole  compass  of  the  idea.  With  all  guile  we  are  to 
put  away  its  manifestations  in  hypocrisies,  i.e.  all  attempts  to  personate,  especiallyto 
make  ourselves  appear  better  than  we  really  are.  We  are  also  to  put  away  envies,  i.e. 
pinings  on  account  of  the  good  estate  of  others.  Finally,  we  are  to  put  away  mani- 
festations of  envy  in  all  evil-speaJcings,  i.e.  attempts  to  injure  the  good  name  of  others. 
From  the  way  in  which  this  duty  is  brought  in,  it  is  evident  that  it  has  a  bearing  on 
what  follows,  which  is  probably  this— that  unbrotherliness  is  a  bar  to  our  life  being 
properly  sustained.  2.  Appetite  for  the  Word.  "  As  newborn  1  abes,  long  for  the 
spiritual  milk  which  is  without  guile,  tliat  ye  may  grow  thereby  unto  salvation." 
The  apostle  seizes  upon  the  fact  of  his  readers  having  been  lately  regenerated,  and 
calls  them  "newborn  babes"  in  relation  to  God.  Babes  have  suitable  nourishment  pro- 
vided for  them  in  their  mother's  milk;  as  (whether  lately  or  long  ago  regenerated)  we 
have  suitable  nourishment  provided  for  us  in  what  in  the  spiritual  sphere  is  milk, 
viz.  the  Word  (without  any  reference  to  the  distinction  of  weaker  or  stronger  in  it). 
Babes  have  a  pure  provision  ("  without  guile  "  is  another  unhappy  change) ;  so  what 
is  provided  for  us  in  the  Word  is  pure  as  mother's  milk.     Babes  have  a  strong  natural 


116  THE  PIEST  KPISTLB  GENERAL  OP  PETER,    [ch.  n.  1— 25. 

craving  for  milk ;  bo  we  are  to  have  a  strong  craviug  for  the  Word.  Babes  are  con- 
stituted with  a  strong  craving  for  milk,  that  their  growth  may  go  forward ;  so  we  are 
to  have  a  strong  craving  for  the  Word,  that  our  higher  development  may  go  forward, 
vhich  is  to  issue  in  salvation  (both  the  elimination  of  all  evil  elements  and  the  acqul- 
■ition  of  all  good  elements).  From  the  connection  the  teaching  is  that  we  are  thus  to 
see  to  our  individual  development  for  the  sake  of  the  society  to  which  we  belong.  We 
owe  it  to  Christians  collectively  that  we  grow  individually.  3.  Appetite  for  the  Word 
encouraged.  "  If  ye  have  tasted  that  the  Lord  is  gracious."  The  language  is  based 
on  Ps.  xzxiv.  8.  It  is  to  be  observed  that  "  the  Lord  "  of  the  psalmist  is  here  taken 
to  be  Christ  (as  appears  from  the  following  verse).  There  is  kindness  displayed  in 
the  nourishment  that  is  provided  for  babes ;  so  there  is  the  kindness  of  Christ  dis- 
played in  what  is  provided  for  us  in  the  Word.  As  the  Word,  or  Divine  Eevealer, 
Christ  is  also  the  Divine  Nourisher.  Christians  are  those  who  know  this,  not  merely 
by  report,  but  by  experience.  They  have  "  tasted  that  the  Lord  is  gracious."  And 
Peter  goes  upon  the  supposition  that  those  who  have  tasted  once  will  desire  to  taste 
•gain,  and  will  not  be  easily  satisfied. 

II.  Thb  bioheb  Isbakl.  1.  Gharacterixation  under  temple  imagery  in  relation  to 
Christ.  (1)  Way  in  which  we  are  related  to  Christ.  "  Unto  whom  coming."  With 
this  there  is  transition  to  new  imagery.  The  language  is  general ;  yet  it  was  frequently 
associated  with  the  going  up  of  worshippers  to  the  temple.  We  are  to  make  our  approach 
to  Christ  for  union  to  him  and  communion  with  him ;  and  our  approach  to  him  is  to 
be  habitual,  that  with  stronger  union  there  may  be  closer  communion.  (2)  Representa- 
tion that  is  given  of  Christ.  "  A  living  Stone,  rejected  indeed  of  men,  but  with  God 
elect,  precious."  This  is  a  very  striking  though  homely  image  applied  to  the  most 
wonderful  event  or  series  of  events  in  history.  Let  us  call  up  the  scene  from  which 
the  language  is  taken.  A  building  is  being  erected  amid  dust  and  rubbish  and  confascd 
noises.  The  builders  are  ever  wanting  stones  for  each  new  place  as  it  arises  in  the 
building,  and  search  about  among  what  are  laid  down  for  them.  One  stone  they  all  pas's 
by  because  of  some  defect  or  blemish  that  it  has  in  their  eyes.  You  can  see,  from  the 
way  in  which  they  treat  it,  that  it  is  not  deemed  worthy  to  have  even  an  obscure  place 
in  the  building.  But  the  architect  comes  and  sees  to  this  stone,  which  was  to  have  no 
place,  being  put  into  the  place  of  honour.  It  becomes,  as  we  shall  see  afterwards  from 
its  designation,  the  most  important  stone  in  the  building.  Now,  the  great  archetypal 
building  which  is  being  erected — that  of  which  every  building,  common  or  sacred,  is  a 
type,  that  of  which  the  Jewish  temple  was  in  a  special  manner  a  type— is  the  Church. 
The  Jewish  rulers  were  employed  by  God  in  carrying  out  his  purposes  of  love  and  mercy 
toward  the  race.  They  were  the  builders,  having  subordinately  the  selecting  and  pre- 
paring of  the  stones  and  the  putting  them  into  their  places.  In  this  first  introduction 
of  the  imagery  they  are  not  directly  referred  to;  it  is  simply  men  that  are  mentioned. 
But  in  accordance  with  Ps.  cxviii.  22,  afterwards  quoted,  we  must  think  of  men  repre- 
sentatively, i.e.  io  the  builders.  Christ  was  a  Uving  Stone,  Le.  he  was  absolutely  in  living 
significance  all  that  a  stone  can  be  in  a  building.  He  came  before  the  eyes  of  the 
builders  with  extraordinary  claims,  with  most  exalted  ideas,  with  a  most  wonderful 
manifestation  of  love.  He  was  as  a  stone  laid  down  for  them,  and  they  could  not  but  pass 
some  judgment  upon  him.  What  they  did  (and  not  merely  in  their  own  name,  but 
as  representing  men)  was  to  reject  him  even  to  crucifying  him.  We  see  him  the 
"  despised  and  rejected  of  men  "  in  being  a  Stone  rejected  of  the  builders.  He  was  to  be 
of  no  use  in  the  Church  or  theocracy  with  which  these  had  to  do.  Ay,  they  thought 
that  they  were  relegating  him  in  God's  name  to  a  different  fate  altogether.  But  what 
was  despised  among  men  was  highly  esteeined  with  God.  So  in  striking  contrast  with 
the  human  judgment,  it  is  said  here — "  with  God  elect ;  precious,"  i.e.  he  was  the  great 
Object  of  electing  love,  and  had  all  the  qualities  on  which  the  Divine  approbation  could 
rest.  And  God,  having  allowed  men  tc»  go  so  far,  takes  things  out  of  their  hands,  and, 
Ib  accordance  with  his  ancient  design  as  to  the  ordering  of  things  in  his  Church, 
instates  Christ  in  the  place  of  highest  honour  and  serviceableness,  making  him,  as  we 
•re  now  to  see,  the  Stone  in  which  we  are  built  up.  (3)  What  we  are  in  relation  to 
Christ.  "  Te  also,  as  living  stones,  are  built  up  a  spiritual  house,  to  be  a  holy  priest- 
hood, to  offer  up  spiritual  sacrifices,  acceptable  to  God  through  Jesus  Christ."  Very 
beautiful  is  the  way  in  which  we  are  called  "living  stones"  along  with  Christ.    W< 


OS.  u.  1—25.]    TfiE  FIRST  EPISTLfi  GENERAL  0?  PETER.  11? 

also  are  living  stones,  only  with  this  difference,  that  we  derive  all  our  living  consequence 
in  the  building  from  Christ.  A  stone,  according  to  the  general  idea,  is  not  meant  to  be 
by  itself;  it  is  meant  to  be  placed  along  with  others  in  a  building.  So  we  rise  to  the 
idea  of  our  being  as  living  stones  built  up  a  spiritual  house.  Ancient  Israel  had  a  temple; 
the  hoightening  consideration  is  that  we  as  Christiana  are  the  temple.  Whereas  also 
material  elements  (such  as  in  the  Jewish  temple)  can  only  in  a  very  restricted  way  be 
used  for  the  glorifying  of  God,  there  is  far  greater  freedom  and  capability  when  we  coma 
to  the  spiritual  elements  that  exist  in  the  Church.  "  To  the  intent  that  now  unto  the 
principalities  and  the  powers  in  the  heavenly  places  might  be  made  known  through  the 
Church  the  manifold  wisdom  of  God  "  (Eph.  iil.  10).  But  that  is  not  all ;  for  ancient 
Israel  the  complete  conception  was  broken  up.  They  had  a  temple,  and  they  had  also, 
distinct  from  it,  a  priesthood.  The  heightening  consideration  is  that  we  combine  the 
two  ideas.  We  are  the  temple  and  the  priesthood  in  one.  The  Jewish  priests  had  a 
lacred  character.  "  Once  a  priest,  always  a  priest."  They  could  not  take  to  trading ; 
God's  service  required  their  undivided  attention.  So  even  in  trading  we  are  to  have  a 
sacred  character,  abjuring  self  and  referring  all  to  God.  Our  feet  are  always  to  be  found 
in  the  path  of  God's  commandments — which  cover  things  both  temporal  and  spiritual. 
The  Jewish  priests  offered  up  fruits,  animals ;  the  heightening  consideration  is  that  we 
offer  up  spiritual  sacrifices.  These  are  only  acceptalle  to  &od  through  Jesus  Christ; 
and  therefore  wo  require  to  remember  that  his  sacrifice  comes  first.  After  it,  founded 
upon  it,  and  deriving  all  their  virtue  from  it,  come  our  sacrifices,  which  are  distinctively 
eucharistic,  i.e.  they  are  forms  of  giving  thanks.  They  are  this  even  when  we  begin, 
as  we  must  do,  by  offering  up  ourselves.  Gratitude,  especially  for  what  has  been  done 
for  us  in  redemption,  prompts  us  first  to  offer  up  ourselves,  and  then  ourselves  in 
good  thoughts,  in  earnest  prayeis,  in  loving  deeds.  2.  Scriptural  foundation  for  the 
characterization.  "  Because  it  is  contained  in  Scripture,  Behold,  I  lay  in  Zion  a  chief 
Corner-stone,  elect,  precious :  and  he  that  believeth  on  him  shall  not  be  put  to  shame." 
This  is  a  free  quotation  from  Isa.  xxviii.  16.  Attention  is  called  to  the  declaration  of 
the  eternal  counsel.  It  is  "  the  Lord  God  "  who  says,  "  I  lay ; "  but  there  is  not  excluded 
laying  by  human  agents.  From  the  temple  in  Zion  we  are  to  pass  in  thought  to  the 
Church.  The  chief  comer-stone  is  the  most  important  stone  in  the  building,  both  com- 
bining as  being  in  the  corner,  and  supporting  as  being  the  foundation-stone;  such  is 
Christ  to  the  Church,  with  the  epithets  formerly  applied  to  him.  The  prophet  goes 
beyond  this  to  the  consequence  of  believing.  As  it  stands  in  the  prophecy,  the  language 
is,  "  He  that  believeth  shall  not  make  haste,"  i.e.  shall  go  on  his  way  calmly.  As  altered 
here,  it  is,  "  He  that  believeth  on  him  [Christ  as  the  Stone]  shall  not  be  put  to  shame." 
Believing,  in  builders'  language,  is  taking  Christ  as  the  Foundation.  If  Christ  ii  the 
Foundation,  it  must  be  designed  that  stones  should  be  laid  upon  him  or  in  relation  to 
him.  That  is  the  design  of  any  foundation — the  design,  then,  of  Christ  as  the  Founda- 
tion. If  we  are  laid  upon  Christ  as  the  Foundation,  we  shall  never  be  put  to  shame; 
i.e.  shall  never  have  the  shame  connected  with  the  foundation  proving  insufficient. 

3.  Consequence  of  helieving.  "  For  yon  therefore  which  believe  is  the  pieoiousness." 
It  is  better  to  translate,  "  is  the  honour."  This  is  the  positive  side  of  the  conception 
that  we  have  just  noticed.  Laid  upon  Christ  as  the  "  chief  Coruer-stone,  elect,  precious," 
there  is  the  corresponding  honour;  i.e.  the  honour  of  having  a  definite,  abiding  place 
in  the  building,  with  a  share  in  the  glory  that  is  communicated  to  it  by  Christ. 

4.  Consequence  of  not  helieving.  "  But  for  such  as  disbelieve.  The  Stone  which  the 
builders  rejected,  the  same  was  made  the  head  of  the  corner ;  and,  A  Stone  of  stumbling, 
and  a  Roc  I;  of  offence;  for  they  stumble  at  the  Word,  being  disobedient :  whereunto 
also  they  were  appointed."  The  statement  of  consequence  is  preceded  by  a  statement 
of  wonderful  fact  from  Ps.  csviii.  22,  which  by  our  Lord  himself,  and  by  Peter  in 
his  speech  before  the  Sanhedrin,  is  connected  with  the  action  of  the  Jewish  rulers. 
The  blindness  of  the  builders.  The  position  which  these  Jewish  rulers  occupied  was  a 
very  honourable  one.  They  were  appointed  to  build.  It  is  of  the  greatest  impor- 
tance that  those  who  lead  the  thought  or  action  in  any  way  should  be  really  builders, 
clearly  and  boldly  grasping  the  principles,  and  earnestly  and  vigorously  carrying  forward 
the  work.  It  is  an  incalculable  evil  when  any  take  advantage  of  their  gifts  or  position 
to  promiilsate  opinions  which  are  fitted  to  sap  the  foundations — to  do  the  work  of  him 
who  ha»  be«n  a  destroyer  from  the  beginning.    There  are  some,  not  only  in  other 


118  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PETER.    foH.  ii.  1— 25. 

countries,  but  in  this  country,  who  da  not  see  that  it  is  necessary  to  build.  They  are 
levellers,  not  builders.  They  would  pull  down,  not  merely  the  wrongs  of  past  centuries, 
but  the  rights  of  all  centuries ;  not  merely  church  establishments,  but  the  Church 
itself;  not  merely  human  speculations,  but  the  everlasting  truths  of  the  Bible.  It  is 
a  gigantic  mistake.  A  natioa's  greatness  will  soon  be  shown  to  be  hollow,  if  there  ia 
no  buildinc;  up  in  family  piety ;  no  just  and  generous  dealing,  as  between  all  classes, 
and  toward  other  nations.  A  sad  havoc  some  of  our  destructives  would  make,  if  there 
were  not  some  honourable  public  men,  and  many  who  are  quietly  building  away  in  their 
own  homes  and  in  their  own  neighbourhoods^  as  they  see  to  be  right  before  God.  But 
those  Jewish  rulers  were  further  appointed  to  build  up  the  Church.  They  had  to 
deliberate  and  to  devise  regarding  all  that  greatly  pertained  to  the  ecclesiastical  life 
of  the  nation.  And  the  honourableness  of  their  position  at  that  time  appears  in  this, 
that  they  might  have  had  the  placing  of  Christ  in  the  building.  It  was  something  more 
honourable  than  had  fallen  to  Moses,  who  merely  introduced  the  types  of  Christ.  It  fell 
to  them,  as  the  representatives  of  the  Church  at  the  time,  to  single  out  and  introduce 
Christ  himself.  But  there,  also,  lay  their  great  responsibility.  They  might  do  a  great 
service,  putting  Christ  into  the  place  intended  for  him;  or  they  might  do  a  great  dis- 
service, setting  him  aside,  and  putting  him  in  a  false  light  before  the  nation— who  were 
appointed  to  lead  when  the  times  were  becoming  full  of  most  profound  interest.  It 
depended  on  how  they  used  their  responsibility.  It  unhappily  turned  out  in  the  latter 
way.  Their  crime  is  represented  as  a  refusing  of  him  whom  God  meant  to  be  chief 
Corner-stone.  What  made  their  conduct  so  criminal  was  that  they  acted  against  the 
light.  True,  there  were  others  who  rose  up  about  that  time  claiming  to  be  the  Messiah. 
But  they  were  there,  as  the  appointed,  trained  representatives  of  the  nation,  to  sift  the 
evidence.  And  the  damaging  circumstance  was  that  they  had  evidence  more  than 
enough,  as  full  as  the  conditions  allowed,  presented  to  them  by  Christ;  and  yet 
they  rejected  him.  He  had  a  wonder-working  power  greater  than  was  possessed  by 
their  great  ancestor  Moses — which  was  a  clear  mark  of  God  on  him.  And  as  remark- 
able as  his  forth-puttiiig  of  power  was  his  range  of  knowledge,  extending  beyond 
earth  to  the  things  which  he  had  seen  with  the  Father — which  was  another  mark  ol 
God.  And  then  the  whole  tone  of  his  life  was  in  keeping,  and  fitted  to  remove  all 
honest  doubt.  But  these  builders  were  blind.  They  could  not  distinguish  Messiah- 
ship  when  they  saw  it.  They  would  not  even  give  him  credit  for  ordinary  goodness. 
They  could  have  got  as  much  from  the  old  as  would  have  enabled  tliem  to  slide 
easily  into  the  new.  Had  they  truly  appreciated  the  types,  they  would  have  known 
the  Antitype.  Had  they  been  apt  students  of  prophecy,  they  would  have  known  him 
to  whom  prophecy  bears  witness.  But  they  had  not  even  the  right  Old  Testament 
point  of  view.  They  were  falsely  conservative.  They  had  substituted  authorized  but 
outward  and  temporary  forms  and  ceremonies  for  the  living,  eternal  ideas,  and  rabbinical 
traditions  for  the  decisive  words  of  inspiration.  And  their  conservatism  would  have 
been  most  destructive.  If  they  had  got  their  way,  they  would  have  kept  Christ  from 
having  his  proper  place  or  any  place  in  the  building.  And  thus  there  would  have  been 
no  salvation  for  man,  but  bhick,  terrible  destruction.  No  teir  )le  would  have  risen  up 
in  this  world,  each  stone  a  sa\  ed  soul.  That  would  have  been  the  consequence  of  the 
conservatism  of  those  Jewish  leaders.  What  they  thought  was  building  up,  and  keeping 
to  the  truth,  and  resisting  innovation,  would  have  been  in  its  results  the  pulling  down 
of  all  to  the  depths  of  ruin.  So  blind  were  these  builders.  They  are  not  the  only 
destroy  ers  who  would  raze  to  the  foundation;  but  those  also  are  making;  work  for  destruc- 
tion who  build  narrowly,  who  do  not  take  the  breadth  of  the  Word  of  God  for  them- 
selves, nor  will  allow  it  for  others.  Had  these  Jewish  builders  been  loyal  to  the  truth, 
reverencing  the  old  which  had  fairly  stood  the  test,  and  welcoming  also  the  new  which 
seemed  to  promise  larger  development,  they  would  not  have  made  the  mistake  which  they 
did.  Had  they  even  had  some  spiritual  affinity  to  the  Messiah,  they  would  have  been 
carried  out  beyond  their  narrowness.  Israelites  indeed,  in  whom  there  was  no  guile,  they 
would  have  been  carried  on  from  a  glorious  living  past  to  a  more  glorious  and  widen- 
ing, living  future.  But  this  is  their  condemnation,  that  light  came  into  thd  world  ; 
and  they  loved  the  darkness  rather  than  light,  because  their  deeds  were  evil.  Let  ua 
beware  of  self-deception.  These  rulers  thought  they  were  doing  Gud  service  in  what 
they  did  to  Chiist.     If  they  could  so  for  deceive  themselves  who  occupied  to  pro- 


OH.  n.  1—25.]    THE   FIRST  EPISTLE  GENEBAL  OF   PETER.  US 

miaent  a  position  in  the  Church, haye  we  not  reason  to  be  on  our  guard?     The  huilderi 
as  overruled  hy  the  great  Architect.    It  has  always  been  matter  for  surprise,  how  bad 
men  get  into  power.    Job  makes  it  matter  of  complaint  in  his  day,  that  the  earth 
wag  given  over  into  the  hand  of  the  wicked.     There  are  some  who  go  great  lengths 
in  sin  without  having  much  in  their  power.     But  when  men  get  a  long  line,  as  it 
were,  and  go  the  whole  length  of  it,   cruelly  trampling  on  the  most  sncred  lights 
and  tenderest  feelings  of  their  fellow-men,  the  evil  seems  so  great  as  to  call  loudly 
for  Divine  interference.    Think  of  Nero,  for  his  amusement  setting   fire  to   Rome, 
and  then,  to  screen  himself,   glutting  his  soul  with  the  slaughter  of  God's  saints. 
But  never  did  God  allow  men  to  go  such  lengths,  while  sitting  by  and  refusing  to 
interfere,  as  when   he   allowed  those   builders   to  refuse  him  on   whom  the  wnole 
building  up  of  a  Church  in  this  world  depended.     Never  was  human  liberty  brought 
into  such  antagonism  to  the  Divine  sovereignty.     Those  who  were  in  power  at  the 
time,  finding  Christ  troublesome,  were  permitted  to  crucify  him.     They  laid  his  dead 
body  in  a  tomb,  and  rolled  a  stone  against  the  mouth  of  it,  and  sealed  the  stone,  and 
set  a  watch,  and  thought  they  had  done  with  him.     It  would  have  been  a  sad  thing  if 
their  conduct  had  prevented  the  building  up  of  a  Church  in  the  world.   That,  we  know, 
could  never  be.    This  may  be  put  on  the  ground  of  the  Divine  purpose.    Christ  was 
the  living  Stone,  elect.     He  was  linked  to  the  Divine  purpose,  the  great  object  of  the 
Divine  election.     And  we  are  accustomed  to  think  that  the  purposes  of  God  must  travel 
on  securely  through  all  to  their  accomplishment.   In  the  place  that  God  intended  forChrist 
must  he  nufailingly  be.    Bat  deeper  than  the  purpose  itself  is  the  ground  of  the  purpose 
in  the  character  of  God,  and  the  fitness  of  the  Stone  for  the  place.   Divine  love  struggled 
for  gratification  in  the  building  of  us  up  out  of  the  ruins  of  sin  ;  that  was  the  deepest 
ground  of  the  purpose.     It  must,  however,  have  been  for  ever  pent  up,  if  no  path  had 
been  found  for  its  egress.     But  when  God  really  formed  the  purpose,  he  must  have  seen 
his  way  to  the  desired  end  all  clear.     To  begin  to  build  without  knowing  how  to  finish 
is  foolishness,  with-  which  only  man  is  chargeable.     "  Every  house  is  builded  by  some 
man ;  he  who  built  all  things  is  God."     He  must  have  had  the  conception  of  this  uni- 
verse in  his  mind  before  he  brought  forth  those  worlds  and  this  earth  of  ours  in  all  their 
wonderful  order ;  he  had  the  conception  beforehand  of  the  tabernacle  (Exod.  xxv.  40),  and 
also  of  the  temple  (1  Chron.  xxviii.  II — 19).    So  when  the  great  Architect  had  planned 
the  Church  from  all  eternity,  and  had  for  ages  been  making  preparations  for  it,  and 
directing  utones  to  be  put  into  it,  he  must  have  known  how  the  Foundation-stone  was 
to  be  laid.    Christ  was  a  fitting  Stone  for  the  place.    He  was  not  chosen  blindly  without 
regard  to  qualifications.    He  was  not  only  elect,  but  also  a  tried  Stone ;  and,  what  is  the 
same  idea,  precious,  proved  to  be  precious  by  trial.     One  great  strain  there  was  that 
made  trial  of  him,  occasioned  by  our  sin ;  but  he  stood  the  test,  he  was  shown  to  be  a 
precious  Stone,  sufficient  for  the  purpose  of  God,  and  so  he  was  put  into  the  foundation- 
place.     Those  builders  had  not  the  placing  of  him  there.     He  was  a  Stone  refused,  dis- 
allowed by  them.    But  God  was  independent  of  them,  and  got  others  more  humble 
than  they,  but  more  in  sympathy  with  the  purpose,  to  do  what  they  should  have  done. 
Ay,  even  they  were  taken  up  into  the  purpose  as  unconscious,  involuntary  instruments. 
For  it  was  in  the  very  refusing  of  him  in  his  death  that  he  became  chief  Corner-stone. 
They  were  thus  doing  what  they  did  not  intend  to  do.     And  he  rose  triumphant  out  of 
their  hands  when  they  thought  they  had  effectually  secured  him  in  the  tomb.      Let  us 
admire  the  placing  of  Christ  as  chief  Corner-stone.  "  This  is  the  Lord's  doing ;  it  is  mar- 
vellous in  our  eyes."    The  Lord  had  his  purpose  of  mercy  to  men  and  of  honour  to  Christ 
carried  out  notwithstanding  the  criminal  conduct  of  the  builders.     And  in  the  history 
of  these  latter  times  the  same  triumph  will  be  repeated.     All  schemes  that  leave  out 
Christ  will  prove  abortive,  and  those  that  build  by  them  will  be  left  behind  an  advanc- 
ing tide  of  Christianity.     And  at  last  it  will  be  shown,  by  a  clear  and  abundant 
indnction  of  facts,  that  Christ  is  the  only  Stone  in  whom  men  can  be  built  up  into 
a  glorious  temple  of  God.    What,  then,  is  the  consequence  to  them  that  disbelieve,  i.e. 
refuse  to  believe?    The  Stone  so  honoured  of  God  becomes,  in  the  language  of  another 
prophecy  (Isa.  viii.  14), "  a  Stone  of  stumbling,  and  a  Rock  of  offence ; "  *.«.,  in  accordance 
with  our  Lord's  comment  on  Ps.  ex  viii.  22  (Matt.  xxi.  44),  on  which  they  are  broken. 
They  who  disbelieve  are  broken  in  their  spiritual  nature ;  that  is  their  shame.     Tha 
Foundatioa-iton«  which  is  honour  to  believers,  becomes  to  them  the  stone  of  punish- 


iiiO  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GfiNEBAL  OF  PETER,    [oh.  n.  1—25 

meot,  the  stone  of  Tengeance.  They  are  broken,  as  if  yon  took  a  pillar  of  the  temple, 
and  broke  it  into  a  thousand  pieces.  They  thus  stumble  to  their  hurt  and  shame, 
because  they  disbelieve  the  Word  (as  we  sliould  translate),  i.e.  refuse  to  believe  what 
God  says  about  the  Stone.  It  is  God's  appointment  that  they  who  thus  disbelieve 
should  in  their  fall  be  broken.  5.  Further  characterization  under  Old  Testament 
designations  in  relation  to  Qod.  (1)  Qod's  elect.  "  But  ye  are  an  elect  race."  This 
is  after  Isa.  xliii.  20.  We  are  not  to  lay  stress  upon  ancient  Israel  being  of  one  stone 
(race),  but  upon  their  Divine  election,  as  being  the  reason  of  their  existence.  We  owe 
our  existence  as  the  successors  of  Israel  to  the  fact  that  we  have  been  chosen  by  God 
out  of  the  world.  (2)  God's  ministers.  "  A  royal  priesthood."  This  is  after  Exod. 
xix.  6,  where  the  expression  is  "  kingdom  of  priests."  This  language,  applied  to  ancient 
Israel,  pointed  to  all  being  priests  (in  token  of  which  the  heads  of  families  acted 
personally  as  priests  in  the  yearly  offering  up  of  the  Paschal  lamb) ;  it  also  pointed  to 
their  being  priests  under  a  great  King.  The  idea  was  only  fully  exhibited  in  the 
separate  yet  representative  priestly  class.  They,  in  a  special  manner,  acted  as  priests, 
and  had  a  royal  character  as  belonging  to  the  royal  household.  This  full  idea  is  taken 
up  by  us  as  Christians.  We  have  sacred  ofiSces  to  perform,  and  we  have  the  honour 
which  comes  from  our  being  even  here  in  the  "King's  palace."  (3)  Qod^s  saints. 
"  A  holy  nation."  This  is  also  after  Exod.  xix.  6.  The  leading  word  is  here  again 
the  second  in  the  original — holy.  "This  had  to  be  filled  and  coined  afresh  with 
a  new  meaning,  and  thus  is  one  of  the  words  wherein  the  radical  influence,  the 
transforming  and  newly  fashioning  power,  of  revealed  religion  is  most  clearly  shown  " 
(Gremer).  As  to  the  Homeric  age,  Kagelsbach  says,  "  Holiness,  as  a  constituent 
element  of  the  Divine  viewed  in  itself,  or  only  perceived  in  the  intercourse  of  the 
gods  among  themselves,  is  never  mentioned.  Never  is  there  a  title  given  to  the 
godhead  indicating  a  consciousness  limilar  to  that  in  which  the  Bible  speaks  of 
the  true  God."  According  to  the  conception  of  ancient  Israel,  we  are  to  be  a 
community  permeated  with  Bible  ideas  of  God's  holiness,  and  conformed  to  it  in  osr 
customs.  (4)  Oq^s  possession.  His  right  in  us.  "  A  people  for  God's  own  possession." 
The  idea  is  contained  in  Exod.  xix.  5,  "  Ye  shall  be  a  peculiar  treasure  unto  me 
above  all  people."  The  language  is  after  Isa.  xliii.  21  (following,  or  race-elect).  We 
are  already  acquired  by  God;  only  not  fully  redeemed  (Epb.  i.  14).  In  so  far  as  the 
thought  of  peculiarity  is  to  be  associated  with  the  language,  it  is  to  be  referred  to 
Qoi's  right  in  us,  which  is  peculiar  in  being  supreme.  What  his  right  in  us  involves. 
"  That  ye  may  show  forth  the  excellences  of  him  who  called  you  out  of  darkness  into 
hii  marvellous  light."  It  involves  that  we  have  been  redeemed.  We  became  the 
objects  of  an  efiectual  and  glorious  calling.  We  were  at  the  pole  of  darkness — away 
from  God  in  the  darkness  and  chill  of  our  own  thoughts.  We  are  now  at  the 
opposite  pole  of  light — near  to  God  in  the  marrellons  light  and  exhilaration  of  what 
he  is  and  what  he  thinks  especially  about  us  in  redensption.  It  involves  that,  as 
redeemed  by  God,  we  show  forth  his  praises,  or  excellences.  Steiger  is  wrong  in  saying 
that  the  object  of  this  is  the  conversion  of  those  who  still  disbelieve.  The  thought  is 
rather  of  what  has  been  gained  by  God.  Having  effected  for  us  a  change  of  state,  the 
thought  of  which  is  oppressive  in  its  vastness,  he  has  gained  this,  that  we  show  forth 
his  excellences ;  i.«.  as  our  tribute  to  God,  we  tell  out  from  the  depths  of  our  heart  the 
excellences  which  he  has  displayed  in  our  blessed  experience.  Huther  remarks  tliat 
the  word  is  for  the  most  part  employed  without  definite  application  to  telling  abroad 
what  happens  indoors.  Doxology  comes  in  similarly  in  Eph.  i.  14.  Heightening  of 
doxology.  "Which  in  time  past  were  no  people,  but  now  are  the  people  of  God: 
which  had  not  obtained  mercy,  but  now  have  obtained  mercy."  This  is  after  Hos.  ii.  23. 
The  words  here,  as  in  Rom.  ix.  25,  seem  to  be  applied  to  the  calling  of  the  heathen. 
Before  their  conversion  they  had  no  true  corporate  life.  Rome  could  not  give  them 
that;  they  were  no  people.  Now  they  were  the  people  of  Ood,  with  a  unity  of  life  in 
Christ,  and  inheriting  all  the  titles  and  privileges  of  ancient  Israel.  They  had  a  special 
call,  then,  to  tell  out  the  excellences  of  God.  What  were  they  to  tell  out?  His 
excellent  power,  his  excellent  wisdom,  his  excellent  righteousness.  Yes,  these,  but 
especially  his  excellent  mercy.  Once  not  in  the  possession  of  mercy,  that  condition 
was  now  ended.  By  circumstances  over  which  they  had  no  control,  the  gospel  had 
been  brought  to  them  in  their  heathen  atate.    The  message  of  Divine  love  had  touched 


OH.  n.  1—25.]   THE  FIEST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  PETER.  ^21 

their  hearts.  By  God's  mercy  they  were  numbered  among  his  people — pardoned  and 
cleansed.  Well,  then,  did  it  beconie  them  to  pay  their  highest  tribute  of  praise  to  the 
excellence  of  that  mercy  that  had  found  them  in  their  forlorn  heathenism.  And  have 
we  not  all  reason  to  praise  the  mercy  that  has  ordered  our  circumstances,  that  has 
broken  dowa  the  hardness  of  our  hearts,  that  has  admitted  us  to  glorious  privileges  ? 

— li.  F. 

Vers.  11, 12. — Chrintians  in  the  world.  I.  Aspect  nNDBR  which  thbt  are  adbbessed. 
"  Beloved,  I  beseech  you  as  sojourners  and  pilgrims."  There  is  here  a  well-marked 
transition  to  a  new  section.  It  is  introduced  by  a  word  which  gives  an  earnest,  affection- 
ate tone  to  his  exhortation.  He  addresses  them  under  the  aspect  of  "  sojourners  and 
pilsrims."  The  language  is  based  on  Ps.  xxxix.  12,  "  For  I  am  a  stranger  with  thee 
and  a  sojourner,  as  all  my  fathers  were,"  where,  in  the  Greek  translation,  the  same  two 
words  are  used  as  here.  The  two  words  strengthen  the  idea ;  there  is  very  little  differ- 
ence in  sense.  The  first  word  points  to  our  not  leing  at  home ;  the  second  word  points 
to  our  not  leing  among  our  own  people.  We  are  not  at  home  on  earth  where  there  is  so 
much  evil,  where  especially  we  have  not  the  immediate  presence  of  our  Father.  To 
this  is  added  that  we  do  not  live  among  our  own  people ;  for,  though  we  have  our 
own  circle,  yet  the  men  of  the  world  are  as  those  that  speak  a  strange  language  and  do 
not  follow  our  customs. 

II.  Ddtt  PRESENTED.  1.  Negatively.  {!)  Form.  "To  abstain  from  fleshly  lusts." 
We  are  not  to  understand  "  fleshly "  in  the  narrow  sense,  but  as  including  all  the 
desires  of  sinful  human  nature.  The  context  suggests  lusts  that  have  to  do  with 
insubordination ;  and  there  are  not  excluded  drunkenness,  gluttony,  and  what  is  called 
lust.  They  agree  in  being  irregular;  they  are  the  desires  belonging  to  our  nature 
going  beyond  the  order  appointed  for  them.  The  call  is  to  abstain  from  them.  This 
is  a  Christian  word  with  a  wider  range  than  is  sometimes  given  to  it  in  the  present 
day.  It  defines  the  movement  we  have  to  make  againt  our  lusts.  (2)  Season. 
"Which  war  against  the  soul."  There  is  reason  for  our  moving  against  fleshly  lusts 
in  this,  that  they  move  against  us.  They  are  not  only  antagonistic,  but  are  actively 
aggressive.  They  move  against  us  in  our  highest  nature,  viz.  the  soul — that  by  which 
we  are  capable  of  a  higher  destiny  than  is  to  be  got  on  earth.  As  sojourners  and  pilgrims, 
we  are  looking  forward  to  "  an  inheritance  incorruptible  and  undefiled,  and  that  fadeth 
not  away,  reserved  in  heaven ;  "  we  must  not,  by  giving  ourselves  into  the  power  of 
lusts,  unfit  ourselves  for  our  noble  destiny.  "  Abstain "  is  the  word  for  those  who 
would  have  their  souls  saved.  2.  Positively/.  (1)  Form.  "  Having  your  behaviour 
seemly  among  the  Gentiles."  The  whole  of  Christian  duty  is  not  contained  in  the 
word  "abstain."  There  must  be,  on  the  positive  side,  the  having  our  behaviour 
seemly.  The  usual  translation  of  the  word  is  "  beautiful,"  "  fair."  Mere  strictness  is 
often  repellent;  there  must  be  what  is  attractive  about  our  conduct,  especially  if  we 
take  into  account  those  who  are  yet  unfriendly  to  Christianity.  (2)  Christian  motive. 
"That  wherein  they  speak  against  you  as  evil-doers,  they  may  by  your  good  works, 
which  they  behold,  glorify  God  in  the'day  of  visitation."  There  is  often  a  very  loose 
way  of  classifying  men.  The  Christians  weie  classed  with  evil-doers.  Those  who  had 
the  highest  conception  of  God  were  spoken  against  as  atheists,  simply  because  they 
rejected  the  objects  of  heathen  worship.  Those  who  were  called  by  their  religion  to 
live  most  holy  lives  were  spoken  against  as  anarchists,  and  even  as  introducing  abomi- 
nations, the  only  foundation  for  it  being  that  they  had  necessarily  to  put  themselves  in 
opposition  to  many  heathen  ways.  How,  then,  were  they  to  act  before  the  heathen? 
They  were  to  see  well  to  the  seemliness  of  their  behaviour.  Peter  might  have  urged 
that  they  were  to  do  this,  that  they  might  not  come  into  collision  with  heathen  autho- 
rities. He  goes  a  point  beyond  that,  and  urges  that  by  good  works  (jbeautiful  works, 
being  the  same  word  that  is  translated  "seemly")  they  were  to  aim  at  the  conversion 
of  the  heathen.  We  can  understand,  from  what  follows,  that  he  had  in  his  mind 
exemplariness  in  the  different  relations  of  life,  and  not  returning  evil  for  evil ;  but 
we  can  also  think  of  the  deeds  for  which  TertuUian  praises  the  Christians.  "  When 
the  pagans  deserted  their  nearest  relatives  in  a  plague.  Christians  ministered  to  the 
sick  and  dying.  When  the  pagans  left  their  dead  unburied  alter  a  battle,  and  cast 
thuir  wounded  into  the  streets,  the  Christians  hastened  to  relieve  the  suffering."    By 


122  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  PETER,    [oh.  n.  1—26, 

such  fair  deeds  as  these  they  could  hope  to  break  down  prejudice.  The  heathen 
beholding  them  might  be  led  to  change  their  mind  about  them  as  irreligious  in  theil 
faith  and  life,  might  be  led  to  think  favourably  of  their  God,  and  thus  to  be  converted 
to  Christianity.  Such  a  result  would  be  glorifying  to  God,  and  it  was  only  in  keeping 
with  his  procedure.  It  was  a  day  of  visitation  from  God  (in  the  coming  of  the  mis- 
sionaries) that  accounted  for  their  deliverance  from  heathenism ;  what  was  to  hinder 
a  similar  day  of  visitation  in  the  conversion  even  of  their  defamers  ? — R.  F. 

Vers.  13 — 17. — Relation  of  Christians  to  civil  authorities.  L  Catbgtobt  ukdbe 
WHICH  THE  DXJTT  IN  THE  KELATioN  COMES.  "  Be  subject  to  every  ordinance  of  man 
for  the  Lord's  sake."  There  are  various  ordinances  of  man;  i.e.  Divine  appointments 
for  human  relations  which  are  subject  to  human  moulding.  With  reference  to  every 
such  ordinance  our  duty  is  subjection,  i.e.  deference,  even  when  we  cannot  give  our 
approval.  We  are  to  be  subject  to  the  ordinance /or  the  Lord's  sake.  There  is  here 
the  Pauline  thought  that  it  is  Christ  who  is  represented  in  the  position-  of  authority, 
and  we  are  to  be  subject  to  those  in  authority  for  the  sake  of  him  whose  represen- 
tatives they  are.  There  is  thus  the  placing  of  society,  not  only  on  a  religious,  but  on 
a  distinctively  Christian  basis.  "  The  relation  of  superiority  and  subordination  which 
permeates  the  whole  of  human  society,  and  excludes  all  abstract  liberty  and  equality, 
— this  pervading  relation  of  contrast,  tending  nevertheless  to  unity  between  authority 
and  liberty,  authority  and  obedience,  authority  and  filial  piety — in  its  original  source, 
in  its  inmost  foundation,  and  in  its  actual  essence,  is  not  of  man,  cannot  be  deduced 
from  the  right  of  the  stronger  or  the  more  able,  nor  from  the  common  consent,  but 
rests  on  God's  uiill  and  appointment,  and  is  subject  to  his  guidance.  This  implies 
that,  in  honouring  his  parents  and  obeying  the  laws,  one  obeys  not  only  man,  but  also 
God.  It  implies  that,  whilst  superiors  and  subordinates  are  mutually  bound  to  each 
other,  both  are  engaged  to  a^  higher  third  party,  whose  servants  they  both  are,  whose 
laws  they  must  both  obey,  and  to  whom  both  must  render  an  account.  It  implies,  in 
one  word,  that  the  whole  order  of  human  society  in  its  ultimate  resort  rests  on  the 
Divine  will  as  its  foundation  "  (Martensen). 

II.  Partioulab  duty  of  subjection  to  civil  acthoeities.  "  Whether  it  he  to 
the  king,  as  supreme ;  or  unto  governors,  as  sent  by  him."  There  is  here  specified  the 
ordinance  of  civil  government.  It  is  viewed  concretely  in  the  persons  in  whom  it  has 
reality.  The  highest  authority  is  vested  in  the  king ;  he  is  represented  as  sending 
governors,  i.e.  giving  authority  to  magistrate*  under  him.  There  is  no  determina- 
tion here  of  the  best  tunu  of  civil  government ;  that  is  left  to  human  moulding.  The 
duty  of  being  subject  is  not  made  dependent  on  the  government  under  which  we  are 
placed  being  the  best,  nor  is  it  made  dependent  on  legitirruK^ ;  we  have  simply  to  do 
with  the  government  in  fact,  and  its  acting  head  as  representing  to  us,  however  imper- 
fectly in  the  civil  sphere,  the  government  of  Christ.  Our  subjection  takes  the  form  of 
obeying  the  laws,  paying  taxes,  lending  our  influence  on  the  side  of  authority.  What 
we  render  to  our  civil  rulers  should  be  all  the  more  satisfactory  that  we  render  it  to 
them  for  the  sake  of  that  Lord  in  whose  Name  we  regard  them  as  acting. 

III.  Justification  or  the  ordinancb  of  civil  government.  "For  vengeance 
on  evil-doers  and  for  praise  to  them  that  do  well."  This  language  is  connected  with 
the  under-magistrates,  but  with  them  as  sent  by  the  supreme  magistrate.  It  therefore 
puts  before  us  the  idea  of  civil  government.  It  is  the  employment  of  force,  but  for 
moral  ends.  It  is  for  vengeance  on  evil-doers ;  i.e.  it  seta  itself  to  repress  evil-doing 
(such  as  it  takes  notice  of)  by  proportionate  pvinishmennts.  It  is  also /or  ^roise  to 
them  that  do  well;  i.e.  it  sets  itself  to  encourage  law-kee|ing  and  industrial  enterprise 
by  adequate  protection  to  life  and  property.  This  is  no  human  conception ;  it  is  the 
bodying  forth  (however  imperfectly)  of  the  Divine  love  for  order,  for  settled  institutions. 
"  God  is  not  the  Author  of  confusion,  but  of  order,  and  as  in  all  the  Churches  of  the 
saints,"  so  also  in  the  states  great  and  smalL 

IV.  Motive  influencino  subjection.  "  For  so  is  the  will  of  God,  that  by  well- 
doing ye  should  put  to  silence  the  ignorance  of  foolish  men."  It  is  implied  that  there 
was  an  impression  abroad  that  the  Christians  were  evil-doers,  or  elements  of  disorder 
in  the  state.  That  iKipression  was  not  founded  on  fact ;  the  apostle  sets  it  down  to 
the  ignorance  of  foolish  men,  t.e.  their  self-caused  inability  in  their  ignorance  to  under- 


OH.n.  1— 25.]    THE  FIBST  EPISTLE  GENEKAL  OF  PETER.  123 


stand  the  Christian  position  (rather  than  to  malice).  It  was  not  the  quiet  voice  of 
wisdom,  but  rather  the  loud  voice  of  foolishness.  The  Christians  were  really  the 
greatest  friends  6f  order,  and  it  was  not  only  their  interest  but  their  recognized  duty 
to  occupy  no  doubtful  position  toward  the  Roman  state.  It  was  a  direction  to  ancient 
Israel  in  captivity  in  Babylon,  "  Seek  the  peace  of  the  city  whither  I  have  caused  you 
to  be  carried  away  captive,  and  pray  unto  the  Lord  for  it :  for  in  the  peace  thereof 
shall  ye  have  prace."  Paul  gives  directions  even  to  give  thanks  for  kings  and  for  all 
that  are  in  authority.  So  it  is  here  declared  to  be  not  good  policy,  but  the  will  of 
God  (wliich  should  have  the  highest  power  to  influence),  that  by  well-doing,  t.«. 
■pecially  by  the  greatest  exemplariness  in  keeping  the  laws,  they  should  pat  to  silence 
the  ignorance  of  foolish  men. 

v.  Pbinoiplb  coNDiTioNrNO  LIBERTY.  "  As  free,  and  not  using  your  freedom  for  a 
cloke  of  wickedness,  but  as  bondservants  of  God."  We  should  rather  read  "malice" 
and  "  servants."  It  is  against  good  interpretation  to  bring  in  here  Christian  freedom 
in  general.  We  are  free  specially  in  relation  to  the  state.  We  are  free  to  obey,  or 
not  to  obey,  the  laws  of  the  land.  We  are  free  to  aspire  after  better  conditions  for  the 
state.  But  we  are  not  to  allow  our  freedom  to  degenerate  into  licence.  We  are  not 
to  use  it  as  a  pretext  for  gratifying  our  private  revenge.  We  are  not  to  use  it  as 
•  cloke  underneath  which  we  strike  at  established  authority.  How,  then,  are  we 
to  find  the  right  course?  It  is  by  this  consideration,  that  we  are  servants  of  God, 
Mid  bound  by  his  laws.  And  if  the  laws  of  the  land  require  what  his  laws  forbid,  or 
forbid  what  his  laws  require,  our  duty  is  to  refuse  obedience  to  them.  We  have  an 
«xample  of  the  latter  in  the  refusal  of  the  apostles  to  cease  teaching  in  the  name  of 
Christ.  When  brought  before  the  authorities  for  breaking  the  laws,  they  said,  "  Wo 
ought  to  obey  God  rather  than  man."  They  were  willing  to-  take  the  consequences, 
but  they  would  not  cease  preaching  Christ.  However  much  we  are  in  love  with  order, 
are  willing  to  be  subject  to  the  ordinance  for  the  Lord's  sake,  there  is  limitation.  If 
a  government  were  to  seek  to  impose  on  us  a  form  of  religion  of  which  in  our  con- 
science wo  did  not  approve,  our  choice  would  lio  between  suffering  and  exercising 
such  power  as  we  had.  And  if  we  as  citizens  had  the  power  we  believe  that  it  would 
only  be  according  to  the  mind  of  God  that  we  should  use  it  to  overthrow  the  tyranny 
— the  higher  consideration  in  this,  as  in  many  cases,  overruling  the  lower. 

VI,  SuEBOUNDiNGS  OF  THE  DDTT  OF  SUBJECTION.  1.  All  men.  "  Honour  all  men." 
We  must  understand  the  worst  of  men  as  included.  The  ground  of  the  honour  is  the 
worth  which  essentially  belongs  to  humanity  by  its  Divine  constitution.  We  are 
made  in  the  image  of  God,  made  to  think  of  God  aud  to  do  the  vrill  of  God,  made  for 
God  and  immortality.  The  form  in  which  Kant  puts  it  is  the  following :  "  No  man 
can  be  employed,  neither  by  others  nor  by  himself,  as  a  mere  instrument,  but  is  always 
to  be  regarded  as  an  end.  And  as  he  cannot  dispose  of  himself  for  any  price  (which 
would  be  subversive  of  his  own  self-reverence),  neither  is  he  at  liberty  to  derogate 
from  the  equally  necessary  self-reverence  of  others  as  men ;  i.e.  he  is  obliged  practically 
to  recognize  the  dignity  of  every  other  man's  humanity,  and  so  stands  under  a  duty 
based  on  that  reverential  observance  which  is  necessarily  to  be  demonstrated  towards 
every  other  person."  Besides  this  essential  worth,  there  is  superadded  worth  in  the 
fact  of  the  Incarnation.  "The  religion  of  Christ  is  a  testimony  to  the  worth  of  man 
in  the  sight  of  God,  to  the  importance  of  human  nature,  to  the  infinite  purposes  for 
which  we  were  framed.  God  is  there  set  forth  as  sending  to  the  succour  of  the  human 
family  his  Beloved  S(3n,  the  bright  image  and  representation  of  his  own  perfections ; 
and  sending  him,  not  simply  to  roll  away  a  biu'den  of  pain  and  punishment,  but  to 
create  man  after  the  Divine  image,  to  purify  the  soul  from  every  stain,  to  communi- 
cate to  it  power  over  evil,  to  open  before  it  immortality  as  its  aim  and  destination. 
And  these  blessings  it  proffers,  not  to  the  few,  not  to  the  educated,  not  to  the  eminent, 
but  to  all  human  beings,  to  the  poorest  and  the  most  fallen.  Honour,  then,  man  from 
the  beginning  to  the  end  of  his  earthly  course.  Honour  the  child.  Welcome  into  being 
the  infant,  with  a  feeling  of  its  mysterious  grandeur,  with  the  feeling  that  an  imnu<rt^ 
existence  has  begun,  that  a  spirit  has  been  kindled  which  is  never  to  be  quenched. 
Honour  the  child.  On  this  principle  all  good  education  rests.  Never  shall  we  learn 
to  train  up  the  child  till  we  take  it  in  our  arms,  as  Jesus  did,  and  feel  distinctly  that 
'  of  such  is  the  kingdom  of  heaven.'     Honour  the  poor.     This  sentiment  of  respect 


124  THE  FIBST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PETER,    [ch.  n.  1—25. 

is  essential  to  improving  the  connection  between  the  more  and  the  less  prosperous  con- 
ditions of  society.  Till  Christianity  shall  have  breathed  into  us  this  spirit  of  respect 
for  our  nature,  wherever  it  is  found,  we  shall  not  know  how  to  raise  the  fallen. 
Perhaps  none  of  us  have  yet  heard  or  can  comprehend  the  tone  of  voice  in  which  a 
man  thoroughly  impressed  with  this  sentiment  would  speak  to  a  fellow-creature" 
(Channing).  This  duty  is  fittingly  made  the  basis;  for  when  we  have  learned  to 
honour  all  men  for  the  worth  of  their  nature,  we  shall  come  more  readily  to  being  sub- 
ject to  what  God  has  appointed  for  man — including  civil  government.  2.  The  brother- 
hood. "  Love  the  bvotherhood."  We  are  to  understand  all  that  truly  belong  to  the 
Christian  circle.  We  are  to  love  men  beyond  the  brotherhood,  but  compassionately 
with  a  view  to  their  being  brought  within  the  brotherhood.  It  is  only  within  the 
brotherhood  that  we  can  get  outlet  for  our  brotherly  feelings,  because  it  is  there  only 
that  there  is  community  of  life,  that  there  are  excellences  on  which  we  can  rest  with 
complacency.  "  In  its  true  idea,  or  regarded  as  the  union  of  those  who  partake  in  the 
spirit  of  Jesus  Christ,  I  revere  it  as  the  noblest  of  all  associations.  Our  common 
social  unions  are  poor  by  its  side.  In  the  world  we  form  ties  of  interest,  pleasure,  and 
ambition.  We  come  together  as  creatures  of  time  and  seMse  for  transient  amuse- 
ment or  display.  In  the  Church  we  meet  as  God's  children  ;  we  recognize  in  ourselves 
something  higher  than  animal  and  worldly  life.  We  come,  that  holy  feelings  may 
spread  from  heart  to  heart.  The  Church,  in  itg  true  idea,  is  a  retreat  from  the  world. 
We  meet  in  it  that  by  union  with  the  holy  we  may  get  strength  to  withstand  our 
common  intercourse  with  the  impure.  We  meet  to  adore  God,  to  open  our  souls  to 
his  Spirit,  and,  by  recognition  of  the  common  Father,  to  forget  all  distinctions  among 
ourselves.  This  spiritual  union  with  the  holy  is  to  survive  all  ties  ;  the  union  of  the 
virtuous  friends  of  God  is  as  eternal  as  virtue ;  and  this  union  is  the  essence  of  the 
true  Church."  Let  us,  then,  value  the  brotherhood  as  meeting  the  social  side  of  our 
spiritual  life ;  let  our  love  go  out  towards  all  who  have  the  reality  of  Ufe  in  Christ, 
however  much  they  may  differ  from  us ;  let  our  love  go  out  towards  them  even  in  pro- 
portion to  the  depth  of  their  life ;  let  us  rejoice  in  the  progress  they  are  making ;  let 
us  seek  also  the  better  realization  of  the  brotherhood,  including  many  conquests  for 
it  from  the  world.  Stress  was  to  be  laid  on  this  in  connection  with  subjection  to 
civil  authorities  ;  for  if  the  brotherhood  was  dear  to  them  as  Zion  of  old  to  the  captives 
(Ps.  oxxxvii.),  great  care  was  to  be  taken  that  there  was  no  unnecei'sary  collision  with 
these  authorities.  3.  God.  "  Fear  God."  This  is  the  feeling  of  reverence  which  we 
are  to  entertain  towards  God  as  infinitely  exalted  above  us.  We  are  to  fear  God 
because  of  the  far-reaching  power,  wisdom,  even  goodness,  which  he  has  displayed  in 
his  works.  Even  in  the  contemplation  of  a  little  flower,  Linn^us  said,  "  God  eternal, 
omniscient,  omnipotent,  I  saw  Um  as  be  was  passing  by  from  behind,  and  I  was 
amazed."  We  are  to  fear  him  because  he  gave  us  being,  because  he  has  bound  us 
by  natural  law,  because  he  has  especially  bound  us  as  free  responsible  beings  by  moral 
law.  We  are  to  fear  him  who  is  the  absolutely  holy  Lawgiver,  and  especially  when  he 
commands  froin  Calvary.  It  is  evident  that  this  fear  to  God  has  to  do  with  subjection 
to  civil  authorities.  It  will  keep  ua  from  over-estimating  the  ruler,  as  though  his 
word  were  simply  to  be  obeyed,  his  example  to  be  followed.  We  have  first  to  inquire 
whether  no  injury  is  done  thereby  to  Divine  law.  It  will  keep  us,  on  the  other  hand, 
from  under-estimating  the  ruler.  As  placed  over  us  under  God,  he  has  (with  the 
necessary  reservation  that  has  been  pointed  to)  a  right  to  our  obedience.  4.  The  king. 
"  Honour  the  king."  We  may  esteem  the  king  because  of  his  personal  excellence, 
and  we  may  be  attached  to  his  rule  because  of  the  advantages  connected  with  it ; 
but  we  honour  him  because  of  the  office  which  he  holds.  Without  this  feeling  animat- 
ing us,  we  cannot  give  subjection  so  as  to  enjoy  the  approval  of  our  God. — R.  F. 

Vers.  18 — 26. — Svibfeetion  of  servants  to  their  masters.  I.  The  genebal  natubb 
OF  THE  SUBJECTION  TO  MASTERS.  "  Servants,  be  in  subjection  to  your  masters  with 
all  fear."  The  word  for  "  servants "  here  is  more  courteous  than  in  Ephesians  and 
Colossians.  It  is  literally  "  domestics,"  and  includes  free  servants  and  bondservants. 
Prom  the  strain  of  the  exhortation  it  would  seem  that  the  latter  are  principally 
addressed.  It  belongs  to  the  present  constitution  of  things  (and  for  ends  of  training) 
that  some  are  m  the  position  of  requiring  service,  others  are  in  the  position  of  render- 


OH.  n.  1—25.]    THE   FIRST   EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP   PETER,  126 

ing  service.  It  is  proper  that  the  will  of  the  former  should  regulate  the  service,  that 
the  will  of  the  latter  should  be  subjected  in  the  service.  This  is  the  Divine  foundation 
on  which  mastership  and  servitude  rest.  The  feeling  proper  to  servants  in  the  relation 
is  fear.  Paul  uses  stronger  language  when  he  says,  "  with  fear  and  trembling  "  (Eph, 
vi.  5).  Peter  strengthens,  too,  but  it  is  not  by  an  additional  substantive,  but  by  an 
adjective,  "  with  all  fear."  That  cannot  mean  "  all  that  fear  can  be,"  but  rather  "  all 
that  fear  should  be  in  the  relation."  There  is  fear  in  the  sense  of  reverence  to  be  shown 
towards  the  regulator  of  service  (not  diminishing  or  exaggerating  what  there  is  in  that); 
and  this  will  be  accompanied  by  another  fear,  viz.  anxious  solicitude  about  coming  up 
to  all  that  is  due  in  the  service.  There  is  a  higher  setting  of  the  duty,  which  is  not 
to  be  lelt  out  of  view.  There  is  fear  in  the  sense  of  reverence  to  be  shown  towards 
him  who  (to  our  greater  freedom  and  comfort  in  service)  is  over  the  earthly  regulator 
oi  service ;  and  this  will  be  accompanied  by  another  fearing,  anxious  solicitude  about 
coming  up  to  all  the  Divine  requirements  in  the  service.  In  this  there  is  the  con 
demnation  of  lad  compliance,  i.e.  doing  what  is  wrong  because  the  master  requires  it. 
According  to  Roman  jurists,  such  bad  compliance  was  the  duty  of  freedmen,  the  necessity 
of  slaves.  We  can  understand  that  Peter  intended  to  guard  against  bad  compliance 
when  be  does  not  state  the  duty  of  subjection  absolutely,  but  with  modification. 

II.  SUBJECTIOM    EVEN    TO   MASTERS    THAT   ABK   FBOWABD.      "  Not   Only   tO  the   gOod 

«nd  gentle,  but  also  to  the  froward."  We  cannot  but  admire  the  great  lobriely  thai 
there  is  in  apostolic  teaching.  There  are  masters  that  are  good,  i.e.  amiable,  and 
that  are  also  gentle,  Le.  showing  their  amiability  in  exacting  nothing  but  what  is 
reasonable.  In  the  case  of  such  masters  there  cau  be  no  question  of  the  obligation  of 
service.  Unless  the  servant  is  ill-grained,  the  service  is  rendered  freely  and  without  any 
sense  of  burdensomeness.  But  what  about  masters  that  are  froward,  or  awry,  i.e.  ill- 
dispositioned,  and  that  show  their  ill  disposition  by  making  unreasonable  demands  of 
their  servants,  and  (when  they  can  do  it  with  impunity)  abusing  them  ?  Is  there  any 
obligation  of  service  there  ?  "  Yes,"  say  the  apostles,  with  the  sobriet^haracteristic  of 
them,  "  the  obligation  remaini,  and  remains  the  same."  ^ 

III.  CONSIDEBATION    DRAWN   FROM    THB    FBAISEWOBTHT   OHABACTEB    OF   SUBJECTION 

TO  UABTEES  THAT  ARE  FBOWABD.  "  For  this  is  acceptable,  if  for  conscience  toward 
God  a  man  endureth  griefs,  suffering  wrongfully.  For  what  glory  is  it,  if,  when  ye  sin, 
and  are  buffeted  for  it,  ye  shall  take  it  patiently  ?  but  if,  when  ye  do  well,  and  suffer 
for  it,  ye  shall  take  it  patiently,  this  Is  acceptable  with  God."  It  was  the  slave 
especially  that  $uffered  wrongfully.  'Hiere  was  a  great  wrong  in  -his  being  a  slave, 
and  there  were  many  wrongs  connected  with  his  state  of  slavery.  He  was  at  the 
mercy  of  his  owner ;  if  he  did  not  get  justice,  he  had  no  redress.  Was  his  position, 
then,  unendurable  t  By  no  means ;  the  apostle  contrives  even  to  throw  a  halo  around 
it.  He  does  so  by  bringing  God  into  the  question.  If  a  man  has  the  consciousness  of 
God,  i.e.  of  him  as  recognizing  not  only  his  rights  of  humanity  but  also  his  sonship  in 
Christ ;  of  him  also  as  able  to  right  all  matters  between  him  and  his  master,  and  to  see 
to  all  fidelity  receiving  its  reward  at  last ;  of  him  especially  as  appointing  griefs  for  his 
earthly  lot; — then  he  can  endure  those  griefs,  whatever  they  are.  And  if  he  thus 
encourages  himself  in  endurance,  then  there  is  that  which  is  acceptable.  It  is  difficult 
to  catch  the  precise  shade  of  meaning.  One  way  of  it  is  "  there  is  grace."  But  we 
must  not  run  into  the  Roman  Catholic  error  of  supererogatory  merit,  which  can  be  com- 
municated to  others.  Another  way  of  it  is  "  there  is  loveliness."  That  readily  passes 
into  the  meaning  "  there  is  that  which,  coming  out  into  beauty,  calls  for  praise."  This 
meaning  seems  to  be  caught  up  in  the  following  word,  "  glory."  In  enduring  griefs 
from  a  bad  master  there  is  something  like  martyrdom. .  But  let  a  man  be  on  bis  guard 
here.  If  he  commits  a  fault  and  is  buffeted  (receives  a  blow)  for  it,  and  takes  this 
patiently,  there  is  no  halo  attaching  to  that.  It  is  when  a  man  does  well  in  the  matter 
of  service,  and  suffers  for  it,  and  then  takes  it  patiently,  that  he  has  praise  in  the 
highest  sphere  (whatever  men  may  think  of  it),  viz.  praise  with  God  for  conduct  that 
rises  into  loveliness. 

IV.  Consideration  dbawn  fbom  the  suffebingb  of  Chbist.  1.  Their  exemplary 
character.  (1)  Reason  for  their  being  presented  as  an  example.  "  For  hereunto  were  ye 
called :  because  Christ  also  suffered  for  you,  leaving  you  an  example,  that  ye  shoidd 
follow  his  steps."     Servants  were  called  to  endure  suffering.     When  thoy  were  called 


128  THE  FIBST  EPISTLE  QENEBAL  OF  FETEB.   [oh.  n.  1—25. 

to  be  Christians  like  others,  they  were  called  to  the  proper  bearing  of  all  hardships 
appointed  for  them.  There  was  One  whose  example  was  to  be  studied  by  them.  It 
will  not  be  tnoiight  that  Christ  Is  nnworthy  of  imitation.  It  may,  however,  be 
thought  that  he  is  too  great  for  imitation — that  he  is  only  for  admiration.  The  word 
translated  "  example  "  sugstests  a  great  picture  left  us  in  the  life  of  Christ !  how  are  we 
to  copy  it  line  for  line  ?  Christ  is  also  put  before  us  here  as  Leader  of  the  way ;  how  are 
we  to  follow  him  step  for  step  ?  The  solution  of  this  is  that  his  example  is  singularly 
imi table,  that  he  is  a  Leader  whom  it  is  singularly  easy  to  follow.  There  is  a  vulgar 
greatness  which  is  full  of  self-importance,  which  is  imprisoned  in  private  interests, 
which  multiplies  distinctions.  But  true  greatness  is  forgetful  of  self,  covets  nothing 
which  it  cannot  commnnicate,  goes  down  in  hope  of  raising  up.  We  are  told  here  that 
Christ  suffered  as  well  as  the  slaves.  We  are  told  also  that  he  suffered  for  the  slaves 
(the  meaning  of  which  is  afterwards  brought  out).  He  thus,  on  the  one  hand,  brought 
excellence  near  to  us ;  we  do  not  think  of  his  teaching  theoretically  as  from  a  chair  of 
learning.  Oa  the  other  hand,  by  the  great  advantage  conferred  on  us,  he  obtained  the 
right  to  be  our  Example,  power  over  us  to  make  us  follow  him.  (2)  The  innocence  of 
Christ  in  his  sufferings.  "  Who  did  no  sin,  neither  was  guile  found  in  his  mouth." 
Did  slaves  suffer  innocently  ?  Christ  suffered  innocently  too.  It  is  to  be  noted  that 
the  idea  of  sinlessness  entered  into  the  Old  Testament  conception  of  the  Messiah.  The 
language  here,  with  a  slight  exception,  is  taken  from  the  Septuagint  Version  of  Isa.  liii.  9, 
"  He  had  done  no  violence,  neither  was  any  deceit  in  his  mouth."  The  Servant  of  God  (in 
this  a  pattern  to  servants)  did  no  sin,  i.e.  brought  no  suffering  upon  himself  by  his  own 
faults.  This  sinlessness  extended  to  faultlessness  in  speech,  especially  to  freedom  from  a 
common  fault  in  slaves  connected  with  the  frequent  use  of  force.  Ouile  was  not  found  in 
his  mouth,  i.e.  there  never  passed  from  him,  even  inadvertently,  an  expression  that  was 
fitted  to  convey  a  false  impression  (with  the  escaping  of  suffering  or  anything  else  as 
his  end).  For  completeness  we  must  give  this  sinlessness  a  positive  aspect.  He  did 
always  what  the  truth  required  in  act,  and  spake  always  what  the  truth  required  in 
speech.  WhffTwe  have  here  in  a  general  statement  is  given  in  detail  in  the  portraiture 
of  Christ  in  the  Gospels.  It  is  interesting  to  notice  the  impression  produced  on  the 
apostles  by  what  they  saw.  "  The  idea  of  sinlessness  was  by  no  means  so  common  an 
idea  that  all  that  was  necessary  to  lead  men  like  the  apostles  to  apply  it  to  Christ 
was  an  accident  or  some  insufBcient  occasion.  Quite  the  contrary :  this  idea  was  never 
thought  of,  nor  had  it  ever  entered  into  the  heart  of  man  to  conceive  it,  until  it  appeared, 
not  as  an  idea  merely,  but  as  a  reality,  in  the  life  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth.  Even  now  to 
believe  in  the  realizing  of  the  idea  of  sinlessness  in  an  individual  is  not  so  very  easy  a 
thing  for  human  nature  in  its  present  state.  Men  are  not  in  general  much  addicted  to 
the  weakness  of  believing  too  easily  in  the  existence  of  purity  of  heart  and  true  great- 
ness ;  it  is  a  fact  that  they  are  only  too  prone  to  doubt  them  when  they  really  exist. 
It  appears  as  something  marvellous  and  extraordinary  in  the  extreme,  that  once,  and 
only  once,  in  the  world's  history  (and  that,  too,  in  a  time  of  great  moral  degradation) 
the  impression  could  be  produced  upon  the  minds  of  a  number  of  men,  that  a  character 
was  unfolding  itself  before  their  very  eyes,  of  perfect  purity  and  siu'less  holiness,  and 
that  the  consequence  of  its  manifestation  was  to  produce  in  them  a  faith  for  which 
they  lived  and  in  which  they  died.  But  once  does  this  fact  occur  in  the  history  of 
mankind"  (UUmann).  (3)  The  patience  of  Christ  in  his  sufferings.  "Who,  when 
he  was  reviled,  reviled  not  again ;  when  he  suffered,  threatened  not ;  but  committed 
himself  to  him  that  judgeth  righteously."  There  is  here  an  echo  of  Isa.  liii.  7, "  He  was 
oppressed,  and  he  was  afSicted,  yet  he  opened  not  his  mouth ;  he  is  brought  as  a  lamb 
to  the  slaughter,  and  as  a  sheep  before  her  shearers  is  dumb,  so  he  opened  not  his 
mouth."  When  he  was  reviled,  i.e.  was  injured  in  what  was  said  against  him,  he  reviled 
not  again ;  i.e.  did  not  resent  the  injury  by  any  injurious  word  in  return.  When  he 
suffered,  i.e.  was  injured  in  what  was  done  to  him,  he  threatened  not;  i.e.  though 
conscious  of  power,  he  was  not  provoked  by  the  injury  to  exercise  his  power,  or  even 
to  threaten  the  exercise  of  it,  against  his  enemies.  The  words  have  special  but  not 
exclusive  reference  to  the  judgment-scene  followed  by  the  crucifixion-scene.  When 
reviled  as  a  sabbath-breaker,  he  calmly  answered  that  his  Father  worked  on  the 
sabbath  day  as  well  as  himself.  When  reviled  as  casting  out  devi  ,  by  the  prince  o( 
the  devils,  he  met  the  wicked  suggestion  by  calmly  showing  how  S<itan  could  not  cast 


OH  II.  1—25.]    THE  PIB8T  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PETEB.  127 


out  Satan.  When  reviled  as  a  blasphemer,  he  simply  vindicated  himself  by  pointing  to 
his  works.  When  he  was  brought  before  the  Sanhedrin  on  charges  which  were  clearly 
unfounded  and  prompted  by  malice,  he  was  silent  uoder  them ;  and  it  was  only  when 
he  was  appealed  to  by  oath  that  he  lifted  his  eyes  to  his  judges,  and  said,  "  Hereafter 
shall  ye  see  the  Son  of  man  sitting  on  the  right  hand  of  power,  and  coming  in  the 
clouds  of  heaven."  When,  again,  he  was  brought  before  Pilate  on  a  charge  of  sedition 
which  his  judge  knew  to  be  unfounded  and  malicious,  he  maintained  the  same  silent 
demeanour;  and  it  was  only  when  he  was  appealed  to  that  he  fearlessly  asserted  his 
claim  of  Kingship.  He  silently  submitted  to  the  rudest  mookings,  to  the  most  cruel 
scourgings.  He  silently  carried  his  cross,  and  when,  nailed  to  it,  he  looked  round  on  his 
murderers,  the  prayer  which  rose  to  his  lips  was, "  Father,  forgive  them ;  for  they  know 
not  what  they  do."  He  was  able  to  endure  all  this  unjust  treatment  without  being 
hurried  into  a  wrong  word,  without  any  disturbing  influence  on  his  mind,  because  he 
committed  himtel/  to  him  that  Judgeth  righteously,  i.e.  in  the  consciousness  of  hit 
rectitude  he  left  himself  and  all  his  interests  to  him  whose  judgment  was  different 
from  and  of  a  higher  order  than  the  judgment  of  the  Sanhedrin  and  the  judgment  of 
the  Eoman  governor.  And  what  a  powerful  argument  (how  touching,  too,  to  \Sb  brought 
in  for  the  sake  of  the  slaves !)  to  induce  them  to  bear  patiently  all  their  wrongs  which, 
however  great,  were  small  in  comparison  with  the  wrongs  which  were  heaped  on  Christ  I 
2.  Their  vicarious  character.  Q.)  Punishment /or  our  sins.  "  Who  his  own  self  bare 
our  sins  in  his  body  upon  the  tree."  The  language  is  still  suggested  by  Isa.  liii,  "  Tree  " 
is  the  word  which  Peter  uses  in  his  sermons  for  the  cross.  The  simple  statement  here 
is  that  Christ  carried  the  but  den  of  sins.  An  expansion  of  it  is  that  he  carried  the 
burden  of  sins  to  whom  they  did  not  belong.  A  further  expansion  of  it  is  that 
he  carried  the  burden  of  our  sins  in  his  body,  i.e.  on  the  ground  of  human  nature  in 
its  completeness  (body  as  well  as  soul).  The  statement  fully  expanded  is  that  he 
carried  the  burden  of  our  sins  in  his  body  on  to  the  tree,  i.e.  to  the  place  where  death 
was  inflicted  on  him  for  them.  He  carried  the  burden  of  the  Divine  displeasure  against 
our  sins  so  as  to  carry  them  away  into  forgetfulness.  (2)  Salvation  intended  hy  them. 
"  That  we,  having  died  imto  sins,  might  live  unto  righteousness."  This  death  unto  sins 
is  death  not  merely  unto  their  condemnation,  but  unto  their  power.  The  life  unto 
righteousness  is  life  not  merely  in  the  possession  of  the  favour  of  God,  but  in  the 
possession  of  power  to  do  the  will  of  God.  In  the  state  in  which  Christ  found  us  it 
was  natural  for  us  to  seek  to  revenge  ourselves  for  injuries.  In  the  state  which  Christ 
intends  for  us  it  becomes  natural  for  us  to  be  plaCable,  to  be  silent  under  injuries,  and 
to  seek  by  our  gentleness  to  overcome  the  e^  that  is  manifested  agaiust  us.  And 
that  is  part,  only  part,  of  the  Divine  life  which  Christ  died  to  secure  for  us.  (3) 
Salvation  experienced  through  them,  (a)  Restoration  to  health.  "  By  whose  stripes  ye 
were  healed."  The  language  is  from  Isa.  liii.  5.  Having  changed  to  "  we "  in  the 
previous  parts  of  this  verse,  he  now  returns  to  "  ye.''  It  is  implied  that  in  their  former 
state  they  were  tick.  "  The  whole  head  is  sick,  and  the  whole  heart  faint.  From  the 
sole  of  the  foot  even  unto  the  head,  there  is  no  soundness  in  it ;  but  wounds,  and  bruises, 
and  putrefying  sores :  they  have  not  been  closed,  neither  bound  up,  neither  mollified 
with  ointment."  There  was  an  irregular  action  of  their  powers,  with  languor,  feverish- 
ness,  loss  of  appetite,  and  other  distressing  symptoms.  But  the  time  came  when  heal- 
ing was  experienced,  giving  the  powers  their  regular  action  and  bringing  Lajk  tone, 
endurance,  keenness,  and  all  healthful  symptoms.  The  remarkable  thing  is  that  the 
healing  is  ascribed  to  the  Saviour's  stripes.  The  word  is  literally  weal  (in  the  singular 
number),  t.e,  the  mark  of  a  stripe.  It  is  a  word  with  which  slaves  were  familiar,  as 
they  were  also  with  buffeting  formerly  used  (to  which,  as  well  as  to  stripes,  Christ  was 
subjected).  Weal  is  taken  here  as  the  symbol  of  Christ's  atoaing  death  j  and  the 
slaves  are  told,  in  a  way  that  was  fitted  to  go  home  to  them  in  the  remembrance  of 
bitter  experiences,  that  from  the  mark  of  the  lash  on  our  Lord  healing  had  gone  forth 
on  them.  (6)  Beturn  to  the  fold.  "  For  ye  were  going  astray  like  sheep ;  but  are  now 
returned  unto  the  Shepherd  and  Bishop  of  your  souls."  The  language  is  based  on 
Isa.  liii,  6,  "All  we  like  sheep  have  gone  astray,"  the  metaphor  being  abruptly  changed, 
Rs  in  Isaiah.  In  their  former  state  they  were  like  sheep  without  any  one  to  care  for 
them,  or  keep  his  eye  on  them.  Sheep,  left  to  themselves,  wander  from  the  fold.  So 
we,  left  to  ourselves,  wander  from  God  who  is  our  Home,  our  Fold,  where  we  have  shelter 


us 


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  PETER,    [oh.  in.  1—22. 


tnd  abundance.  They  were  now  In  the  happy  condition  of  having  a  Shepherd  and 
Bishop  for  their  souls.  The  words  refer  to  Christ.  The  first  points  rather  to  the  actual 
bestowal  of  care;  the  second  points  rather  to  observation  that  leads  to  care  being 
bestowed.  Christ  leads  as  to  rich  thoughts;  and  he  does  not  lead  us  to  rich  thoughts 
without  keenly  observing  our  condition.  If  we  would  have  this  Shepherd  and  Bishop 
for  our  souls,  we  must,  like  those  whom  Peter  addresses,  be  turned  toward  him.  The 
words  would  seem  to  indicate  the  action  that  is  needed  on  our  part.  We  have  nothing 
to  do  but  to  turn  ourselves  toward  Christ.  We  are  to  turn  ourselves  from  our  sins 
which  have  been  atoned  for,  and  no  longer  oonstitnte  a  hindrance ;  and  we  are  to  tnm 
ourselves  toward  Christ  to  have  his  affection  in  the  form  of  care  and  ovarsight,  with 
which  our  Kuls  can  lack  nothing. — B.  F. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  m. 


Ver.  1.— likewise,  ye  wives.  St.  Peter  has 
spoken  of  the  duties  of  servants :  why  does 
be  omit  those  of  masters  7  There  must  have 
been  Christian  masters  in  Asia  Minor,  as  is 
olain  from  Eph.  vi.  9 ;  Col.  iv.  1.  But  we 
notice  that  St.  Fanl,  though  he  has  a  few 
words  for  masters,  addresses  slaves  at  much 
greater  length.  Probably  Christian  masters 
were  comparatively  few,  while  large  numbers 
3f  slaves  had  embraced  the  religion  which 
eonld  do  so  much  to  comfort  and  elevate  the 
oppressed.  Again,  the  immediate  purpose 
of  the  apostle  is  to  inculcate  submission 
to  authority;  therefore,  having  enforced 
upon  Christian  servants  the  example  of 
their  Lord,  he  proceeds  to  speak  of  the  duty 
of  Christian  wives.  Christianity  was  in  its 
infancy ;  it  was  to  be  the  means  of  abolish- 
ing slavery,  and  of  raising  woman  to  her 
proper  place  in  society;  but  as  yet 'slaves 
were  cruelly  oppressed,  and  women  were  ill 
treated  and  despised.  Aristotle  tells  as  that 
among  the  barbarians  (and  a  large  propor- 
tion of  the  population  in  the  greater  part  of 
Asia  Minor  was  barbarian,  t.e.  non-Greek) 
the  woman  and  the  slave  hold  the  same 
rank  ('  Pol,,'  I.  ii.  4).  In  Greek  communities 
the  case  was  different ;  but  even  among  the 
Greeks  women  occupied  a  very  subordinate 
position.  Christianity  would  introduce  a 
great  and  sweeping  change  in  the  relations 
of  the  sexes,  as  well  as  in  the  relations  of 
master  and  slave.  But  the  change  must  be 
gradual,  not  violent;  it  must  be  brought 
about  by  the  softening  and  purifying  influ- 
ences of  religion,  not  by  revolt  against 
recognized  customs  and  established  autho- 
rity. Indeed,  Christianity  would  introduce 
an  element  of  division — the  Lord  had  said 
so  (Luke  xii.  51 — 53);  families  would  be 
divided.  It  could  not  be  otherwise ;  Chris- 
tians must  not  set  even  family  ties  alrave  the 
love  of  Christ.  But  Christian  wives  must 
be  peacemaker! ;  they  must,  aa  far  aspos- 
■ible,  live  at  peace  even  with  unbelieving 
kuB^nds.    They  would  often  have  much  ill 


treatment  to  endure  In  those  coarse,  ornel 
days;  they  must  bear  it  with  the  quiet 
strength  of  gentleness.  Be  in  subjection  to 
yonr  own  hnsbands;  literally,  mAmitting 
yourselves.  The  participle,  as  in  ch.  iL  18, 
seems  to  look  back  to  the  imperative,  "  sub- 
mit yourselves,"  in  oh.  ii.  13.  The  present 
participle  implies  that  this  voluntary  sub- 
mission is  to  be  habitual.  The  adjective 
"your  own"  (iS/o«j)  emphasizes  the  duty. 
That,  if  any  obey  not  the  Word,  thej  also  may 
without  the  Word  be  won  by  the  conversa- 
tion of  the  wives.  There  is  a  well-supported 
reading,  "  Even  if  any."  Husband  and  wife 
would  often  be  converted  together;  but  if 
this  should  not  be  the  case,  and  if  the  un- 
believing husband  should  set  himself  in 
direct  opposition  to  the  Word  of  God  (for  the 
words  "believe  not"  have  more  than  a 
negative  meaning,  as  in  oh.  ii.  7),  still 
Christian  wives  must  submit  themselves. 
They  must  do  this  for  the  glory  of  God,  and 
with  the  hope  of  saving  their  husbands' souls; 
that  those  unbelieving  husbands  may  be 
won  to  Christ  and  to  everlasting  life  by  the 
silent  eloquence  of  the  quiet  self-restraint 
and  holy  behaviour  of  their  wives,  without 
argument  or  preaching  on  the  wives'  part 
A  self-denying  holy  life  will  do  more  to  win 
those  with  whom  we  live  in  close  intercourse 
than  even  holy  words,  and  much  more  than 
debate  and  controversy.  This  seems  to  be 
the  meaning  of  Hvev  \6yov  rather  than  the 
other  possible  interpretation,  "without  the 
preaching  of  the  Word."  Be  won ;  literally, 
be  gained.  Each  soul  converted  is  a  gain  to 
Christ,  to  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  to  itselfi 
in  this  case  also  to  the  wife  who  is  the 
happy  instrument  of  saving  her  husband 
(comp.  1  Cor.  ix.  19,  20).  The  word  ren- 
dered "conversation"  here,  as  elsewhere, 
means  "  conduct,  behaviour."  (Compare,  on 
the  whole  subject,  the  teaching  of  St.  Paul, 
Eph.  V.  22—24;  Col.  iii.  18;  1  Tim.  ii.  9—11.) 
Ver.  2.— While  they  behold  (see  note  on 
oh.  ii.  12,  where  the  same  verb  occurs) 
your  chaste  conversation  coupled  with  fear; 
literally,    yoitr    ehastt   behaviour  in  /ear. 


OH. ml— 22.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  PETER. 


129 


Bengel  and  others  understand  the  fear  of 
God.  Certainly  the  holy  fear  of  God  is  the 
sphere  in  which  true  Christians  must  always 
live.  But  the  close  connection  with  the 
word  "  chaste  "  (riiv  iv  ^60^  ityv^v  iuatrTpocp^r 
tifioiv),  and  the  parallel  passage,  Eph.  v.  33 
(in  the  Greek),  make  it  probable  that  the 
fear  here  inculcated  is  reverence  for  the 
husband — an  anxious  avoidance  of  anything 
that  might  even  seem  to  interfere  with  his 
conjugal  rights  and  authority. 

Ver.  3. — ^Whose  adorning  let  it  not  bo  that 
ontvard  adorning  of  plaiting  the  hair.  A 
common  Hebraism,  like  our  Lord's  injunc- 
tion in  John  vi.  27,  "Labour  not  for  the 
meat  which  perisheth,  but  for  that  meat 
which  endureth  unto  everlasting  life."  St. 
Peter  does  not  forbid  the  moderate  vise  of 
ornaments,  but  asserts  their  utter  worthless- 
ness  compared  with  Christian  graces.  The 
ladies  of  the  time  seem  often  to  have  had 
their  hair  dressed  in  a  very  fantastic  and 
extravagant  manner.  And  of  wearing  of 
gold ;  rather,  golden  ornaments.  Or  of  put- 
ting on  of  apparel.  This  verse  shows  that, 
although  the  mass  of  believers  at  this  time 
belonged  to  the  poorer  classes,  yet  there 
must  have  been  a  proportion  of  persons  of 
rank  and  wealth  among  the  Christians  of 
Asia  Minor  (comp.  1  Tim.  ii.  9 ;  Bev.  iii. 
17). 

Yer.  4. — But  let  it  be  the  hidden  man  of 
the  heart.  The  "hidden"  is  here  equiva- 
lent to  the  "inward  man  "  of  Rom.  vii.  22 ; 
2  Cor.  iv.  16 ;  Eph.  iii.  16.  It  is  that  life 
which  is  "  hid  with  Christ  in  God  "  (Col. 
iii.  2),  the  life  of  Christ  ("  the  Second  Man  ") 
in  the  heart,  fashioning  that  heart  after  the 
likeness  of  Christ,  forming  in  it "  the  new 
man  which  ii  renewed  in  knowledge  after 
the  image  of  him  that  created  him"  (Col. 
iii.  10).  This  is  bidden ;  it  does  not  display 
itself  like  those  conspicuous  ornaments  men- 
tioned in  the  last  verse.  In  that  which  is 
not  cormptihie,  even  the  ornament  of  a  meek 
and  quiet  spirit ;  literally,  in  the  ineorrup- 
tMlity  of  the  meek  and  quiet  tpirit.  Tms 
ornament  is  incorruptible;  not  like  those 
eorruptible  things  (comp.  ch.  i.  18).  The 
meek  spirit  does  not  flash  into  angei.does 
not  answer  again,  takes  harsh  words  gently 
and  humbly.  The  quiet  spirit  is  calm  and 
tranquil ;  peaceful  in  itself,  it  spreads  peace 
around  (comp.  1  Tim.  ii.  2).  Whioh  is  in 
the  sight  of  God  of  great  price.  The  adjec- 
tive TToAvTcAcs  is  used  in  Mark  ziv.  3  of 
the  ointment  with  which  Mary  anointed  our 
Lord,  and  in  1  Tim.  ii.  9  of  the  "  array " 
which  St.  Paul  discourages  for  Christian 
women.  Those  adornments  are  costly  in  the 
sight  of  the  world ;  the  meek  and  quiet  ipirit 
ia  precious  in  the  sight  of  God. 

Yer.  5. — For  after  this  manner  in  the  old 
time  the  holy  woman  also,  who  trusted  in 

LFBTWt. 


Godj  rather,  viho  hyped  in  Ood  (eh  @e6v'), 
whose  hope  was  set  toward  God  and  rested 
in  God.  Bengel  says, "  Yera  sanctitas,  spes 
in  Deum."  St.  Peter  is  the  apostle  of  hope. 
Adorned  themselves,  being  in  subjection 
unto  their  own  husbands.  The  apostle  bids 
Christian  women  to  consider  the  example  of 
the  saintly  women  of  the  Old  Testament. 
With  their  hope  resting  upon  God,  they 
could  not  care  for  finery  and  costly  jewels. 
They  adorned  themselves  with  the  more 
costly  ornament  of  a  meek  and  quiet  spirit : 
they  showed  their  meekness  by  living  in 
subjection  to  their  hubbauds.  Submission  to 
authority  is  the  key-note  of  this  part  of  the 
Epistle. 

Ver.  6.— Even  as  Sara  obeyed  Abraham, 
calling  him  lord  St.  Peter  singles  out 
Sarah,  as  the  mother  of  the  chosen  people. 
She  obeyed  her  husband  habitually  (the 
imperfect  iiriiicovev  is  the  reading  of  some 
of  the  oldest  manuscripts;  the  aorist,  also 
well  supported,  would  represent  her  obedi- 
ence as  a  whole,  the  character  of  her  life  now 
past);  she  called  him  lord  (comp.  Gen. 
XVlll.  12,  6  54  Kupios  /lov  npeafiirepos). 
Whose  daughters  ye  are;  literally,  whose 
children  ye  became.  This  is  another  indica- 
tion that  the  Epistle  is  addressed,  not  only 
to  Jewish  Christians,  but  also,  and  that  in 
large  measure,  to  Gentile  converts.  Gentile 
women  became  by  faith  the  daughters  of 
Sarah ;  just  as  we  read  in  St.  Paul's  Epistles 
that  "  they  which  are  of  faith,  the  samcs  are 
the  children  of  Abraham  "  (Gal.  iii  7);  and 
that  Abraham  is  "  the  father  of  all  them 
that  believe,  though  they  be  not  circum- 
cised "  (Rom.  It.  11);  comp.  Gal.  iv.  22—31, 
where  St.  Paul  tells  us  that  we,  like  Isaao, 
are  the  children  of  promise;  children,  "not 
of  the  bondwoman,  but  of  the  free."  As  long 
as  ye  do  well.  This  clause  represents  one 
Greek  word  ayaBoiraovaai  ("doing  good"). 
Some  commentators  regard  the  words  from 
"  even  as  Sara "  to  "  whose  daughters  ye 
are"  as  a  parenthesis,  and  refer  the  par- 
ticiple to  "  the  holy  women  "  mentioned  in 
ver.  5.  This  does  not  seem  natural.  It  is 
better  to  regard  the  second  half  of  this  verse 
as  a  continuous  sentence,  and  to  understand 
the  participle  as  meaning  "  if  ye  do  well." 
The  doing  well,  etc.,  is  a  mark  that  Christian 
women  have  become  children  of  Sarah  by 
faith.  And  are  not  afraid  with  any  amaze- 
ment. The  Greek  word  for  "  amazement " 
(iTTidjffij)  does  not  occur  in  any  other  place 
of  the  New  Testament,  though  we  meet 
with  the  corresponding  verb  in  Luke  xxi.  9; 
xxiv.  37.  There  seems  to  be  a  reference  to 
Prov.  iu.  25,  "  Be  not  afraid  of  sudden  fear  • 
(koI  oil  (po$rieiiirri  irTiriaw  iirsKeovcrav).  TlTStf 
ais  is  "  dismay,  scared  terrified  excitement," 
very  different  from  the  calm  thoughtful 
^6&os,  th«  feai  lest  they  should  fail  In  proper 


130 


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PETER,    [ch.  ra.  1— 22 


reepeot  for  their  huebandi,  and  that  out  of 
the  holy  fear  of  God,  which  St.  Peter  incnl- 
cates  upon  wives  (ver.  2).  The  Ohristian 
wife  might  often  experience  cruel  treatment 
from  an  unbelieving  husband,  but  she  was 
not  to  live  in  a  flutter  of  excited  terror ;  she 
was  to  he  calm  and  quiet,  trusting  in  God. 
As  to  the  construction,  the  accusative  may 
be  cognate,  as  the  Authorized  Version  takes 
it;  or  the  accusative  of  the  object,  as  in 
ProT.  iii.  25.  The  lust  view  is,  perhaps,  the 
most  suitable :  "  And  are  not  afraid  of  any 
sudden  terror." 

Ver.  7.— likewise,  ye  husbands.  As  wives 
are  exliorted  to  be  in  subjection  to  their  own 
husbands,  so  hubbauds  also  must  do  their 
duty  to  their  wives.  The  construction 
(participial,  as  in  ver.  1)  seems,  like  ver.  1,  to 
look  back  to  ch.  ii.  13.  The  relation,  in- 
deed, is  no  longer  directly  one  of  subjection, 
and  marriage  is  an  ordinance  of  God ;  but 
Christian  husbands  must  submit  themselves 
to  the  duties  arising  out  of  the  marriage 
tie  ;  and  marriage  involves  a  civil  contract, 
though  to  ns  Christians  it  is  a  holy  estate 
instituted  of  God,  and  a  parable  of  the 
mystical  union  that  is  betwixt  Christ  and 
his  Church.  St.  Peter,  we  observe,  does  not 
consider  the  case  of  a  Christian  husband 
with  an  unbelieving  wife;  probably  that 
would  be  very  uncommon.  Dwell  with  them 
according  to  knowledge,  giving  honour  unto 
the  wife,  as  unto  the  weaker  vessel;  literally, 
Umng  together  with  the  feminine  an  with  tlie 
weaker  vessel.  Tliis  connection  seems  best 
suited  to  the  balance  of  the  sentence,  and 
also  to  the  sense.  The  apostle  bids  the 
hubband,  first,  to  give  due  consideration  to 
his  partner  on  the  ground  of  her  compara- 
tive weakness ;  and,  secondly,  to  give  her 
due  honour  as  being  an  heir,  like  himself, 
of  the  grace  of  life.  The  disparity  of  the 
sexes  was  the  cause  of  the  degradation  of 
woman  among  the  beatlien ;  Christianity 
makes  it  the  ground  of  tender  consideration. 
Christian  love  should  abound  in  knowledge 
(Phil.  i.  9);  it  should  throw  its  softening 
light  upon  all  the  relations  of  life.  Man 
and  woman  are  alike  vessels — vessels  made 
by  God  for  his  service  (comp.  Isa.  Ixiv.  8  ; 
Jer.  xviil.  6,  etc. ;  also  1  Thess.  iv.  4,  5) ;  the 
woman  is  the  weaker,  and  must,  for  that 
very  reason,  be  treated  with  gentleness. 
For  "according  to  knowledge,"  comp.  2 
Pet.  i.  5.  Christians  must  be  thoughtful; 
they  must  consider  what  becomes  them  in 
all  the  relations  of  life ;  not  act  carelessly 
and  at  random.  And  as  being  heirs  together 
of  the  grace  of  life  ;  rather,  rendering  honour 
as  to  those  who  are  also  fellow-heirit  or,  ac- 
cording to  another  well-supported  reading, 
rendering  honour  (to  them)  as  being  also 
fellow-heiri  (with  them).  The  sense  is  not 
materially  affected :  husband  and  wife  are 


joint-heirs  of  the  grace  of  life,  that  U,  of 
God's  gracious  gift  of  everlasting  Lfe.  That 
your  prayers  be  not  hindered ;  or,  according 
to  another  reading,  be  not  cut  off.  If  husband 
and  wife  live  together  without  mutual  rever- 
ence and  affection,  there  can  be  no  sympathy 
in  united  prayer;  the  promise  made  by 
Christ  in  Matt,  xviii.  19  cannot  be  realized. 
Nor  can  either  pray  acceptably  if  they  live 
at  variance ;  jealousies  and  bickerings  are 
opposed  to  the  spirit  of  prayer ;  they  hinder 
tlie  free  flow  of  prayer,  and  mar  its  earnest- 
ness and  devotion. 

Ver.  8. — linally.  St.  Peter  Is  bringing 
to  a  close  the  exhortations  to  submission, 
which  depend  on  the  imperative  in  ch.  ii. 
13.  He  turns  from  particular  classes  and 
relations  to  the  whole  Ohristian  community, 
and  describes  what  they  ought  to  be  in  five 
Greek  words,  the  fir^it  three  of  which  are 
found  nowhere  else  in  the  Greek  Scriptures. 
Be  ye  all  of  one  mind,  having  compassion 
one  of  another;  literally,  sympathiiing ; 
feeling  with  others,  rejoicing  with  them 
that  do  rejoice,  and  weeping  with  them 
that  weep.  Love  as  brethren.  An  adjec- 
tive (tpi\dSe\<!>oi)  in  the  Greek;  the  corre- 
sponding substantive  occurs  in  ch.  i.  22. 
Be  pitiM.  This  word  (fli<Tir\ayxvos)  has 
undergone  a  remarkable  change  of  meaning. 
In  Hippocrates,  quoted  by  Huther,  it  is 
used  literally  of  one  whose  viscera  are 
healthy;  it  is  also  sometimes  used  figura- 
tively, as  equivalent  to  fiKdpSios,  irSpttot; 
"  goodhearted "  with  the  heathen  would 
mean  "  brave ; "  with  Christian  writers 
"tender,"  "pitiful."  Be  courteous.  This 
represents  a  reading  (<pi.K6ippovis)  which  has 
very  little  support.  The  true  reading  ia 
Toireii'({(()p(»'€5,  humble-minded. 

Ver.  9. — Not  rendering  evil  for  evil,  or 
railing  for  railing.  St.  Peter,  like  St.  Paul 
(Rom.  xii.  17 ;  1  Thess.  v.  15),  repeats  his 
Master's  teaching  in  the  sermon  on  the 
mount  (Matt.  v.  39).  He  forbids  revenge 
in  word,  as  well  as  in  deed.  But  contrari- 
wise blessing.  The  word  "  blessing  "  is  not 
the  substantive,  but  the  participle  (euAo- 
yoivTe^,  and  thus  corresponds  with  the 
participle  "  rendering  "  (comp.  Matt.  v.  44, 
"Bless  them  that  curse  you").  Knowing 
that  ye  are  thereunto  called ;  rather,  as  in 
the  Revised  Ve'rsion,  for  hereunto  were  ye 
called.  The  word  "knovring"  is  omitted 
in  the  best  manuscripts  (comp.  ch.  ii.  21). 
Some  commentators  lake  these  words  with 
the  preceding:  "Ye  were  called  to  bless 
others,  that  so  ye  may  inherit  a  blessing." 
But,  on  the  whole,  it  seems  better  to  con- 
nect them  with  the  following  clause :  That 
ye  should  inherit  a  blessing,  Christiana 
bless  others,  not  in  order  that  they  should 
inherit  a  blessing,  but  because  it  is  God's 
will  and  their  duty ;  and  that  duty  follows 


ca.  in.  1—22.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  Of  PETER, 


131 


from  tile  fact  that  God  has  made  them 
inheritors  of  his  blessing.  "  Benedictionem 
ffiternam,"  eays  Beogel,  "oujag  primitias 
jam  nunc  pli  liabent."  God  has  blessed 
them ;  therefore  they  must  bless  others. 

Ver.  10. — roi  he  that  will  love  life; 
literally,  he  that  willeth  to  low  life.  St. 
Peter  deviates  somewhat  from  the  Septua- 
gint  Version  of  Ps.  xxxiv.  12 — 16,  which  he 
is  quoting.  The  literal  rendering  of  it  is, 
"  What  man  is  he  that  desireth  life,  loving 
good  dajs?"  His  connection  of  the  parti- 
ciple BfKav  with  aya-irar  is  remarkable. 
Perhaps  the  meaning  is  best  given  by 
Bengel,  "  Qui  vult  ita  vivere,  ut  ipsum  non 
ttsdeat  vitss" — "Who  wishes  to  live  so  that 
he  will  not  weary  of  life ; "  so  that  he  may  love 
it,  so  that  he  may  have  a  life  really  worth 
living.  There  is  a  love  of  life  which  can 
only  lead  to  the  loss  of  the  true  life  (John 
xii.  25).  St.  Peter  is  teaching  us  to  love 
life  wisely,  not  with  that  seliish  love  which 
Christ  condemns.  And  see  good  days.  Not 
necessarily  in  outward  prosperity,  but  in 
the  favour  of  God;  days  of  suffering  may 
be  good  days  in  the  truest  sense.  Let  him 
refrain  his  tongue  from  evil,  and  his  lips 
that  they  speak  no  guile.  We  have  here 
the  usual  parallelism  of  Hebrew  poetry. 
The  word  "refrain"  (vav<rdTw,  literally, 
■*  let  him  make  it  cease  ")  implies  a  natural 
tendency  to  sins  against  charity. 

Ver.  11. — Let  him  eschew  evil,  and  do 
good;  literally,  let  him  turn  away  from  evil. 
Let  Um  seek  peace,  and  ensue  it.  Let  him 
seek  it  as  a  hidden  treasure,  and  pursue  it 
as  if  it  might  escape  from  him. 

Ver.  12. — ror  the  eyes  of  the  Lord  are 
over  the  righteous,  and  his  ears  are  open 
unto  their  prayers.  The  apostle  adds  the 
conjunction  "for"  (8ti,  because)  to  mark 
the  connection.  God's  people  must  turn 
away  from  evil  and  do  good,  because  the 
all-seeing  eye  is  upon  them ;  they  will  find 
strength  to  do  so,  because  God  heareth 
prayer.  Perhaps  when  the  apostle  was 
writing  these  words  he  remembered  how 
once  "the  Lord  turned,  and  looked  upon 
Peter."  But  the  face  of  the  Lord  is  against 
them  that  do  evil.  The  preposition  in  the 
two  clauses  is  the  same  (ciri,  over,  or  upon). 
The  Lord's  eye  is  upon  the  good  and  the 
evil.  The  apostle  omits  the  words  that 
follow  in  the  psalm,  "  to  cut  off  the  remem- 
brance of  them  from  the  earth,"  perhaps 
because  he  wishes  us  to  regard  the  spiritual 
rather  than  the  temporal  consequences  of 
our  actions. 

Ver.  13. — And  who  is  he  that  will  harm 
you  ?  The  apostle,  as  he  began  his  quota- 
tion from  Ps.  xxxiv.  without  marks  of  cita- 
tion, BO  adds  at  once  his  inference  from  it  in 
the  form  of  a  question.  The  conjunction 
"and"  connects  the  question  with  the  quo- 


tation. If  God's  eye  is  over  the  righteous, 
and  his  ear  open  to  their  prayers,  who  shall 
harm  them  ?  St.  Peter  does  not  mean — Who 
will  have  the  heart  to  harm  you  ?  He  knew 
the  temper  of  Jews  and  heathens;  he  knew 
also  the  Saviour's  prophecies  of  coming 
persecution  too  well  to  say  that.  The  words 
remind  us  of  the  Soptuagint  rendering  of 
Isa.  I.  9,  Kiptos  fioriSiiati  /wi,  ris  xaicJxrei  /le  ; 
None  can  do  real  harm  to  the  Lord's  people; 
they  may  persecute  them,  but  he  will  make 
all  things  work  together  for  their  good.  If 
ye  be  followers  of  that  which  is  good; 
rather,  if  ye  become  lealous  of  that  which  is 
good,  with  the  oldest  manuscripts.  The 
Authorized  Version  adopts  the  reading 
ItinTiTtti,  followers  or  imitators,  which  is  not 
so  well  supported.  The  genitive  rod  dyafloS 
admits  the  masculine  translation,  "of  him 
that  is  good,"  but  it  is  probably  neuter 
in  this  place  (comp.  ver.  11).  With  the 
masculine  rendering,  comp.  Acts  xxii.  3, 
"and  was  zealous  toward  God  (^i)A.wt))$ 
ivdpx'"'  TeC  eeoB)." 

Ver.  14. — But  and  if  ye  suffer  for  right- 
eotisness'  sake,  happy  are  ye;  better,  but 
although  ye  should  suffer.  St.  Peter  knew 
that  persecution  was  coming;  he  wished  to 
prepare  his  readers  for  it.  He  recalls  to 
their  thoughts  the  eighth  beatitude,  almost 
reproducing  the  Lord's  words  (Matt.  v.  10). 
Such  suffering  (^' iriiTxc",  lenius  verbum 
quam  KaKovrBat,"  Bengel)  would  do  them 
no  real  harm ;  nay,  it  would  bring  with  it 
a  true  and  deep  blessing.  "  Righteousness  " 
here  seems  synonymous  with  "  that  which 
is  good"  in  the  last  verse.  Christians  had 
often  to  suffer,  not  only  because  of  their 
confession  of  Christ,  but  because  of  the 
purity  of  their  lives,  which  was  a  standing 
reproach  to  the  heathen.  Compare  St.  Au- 
gustine's well-known  saying,  "Martyrem 
facit  non  poena,  sed  causa."  And  be  not 
afraid  of  their  terror,  neither  be  troubled. 
Prom  Isa.  viii.  12.  The  genitive  may  be 
taken  as  objective:  "Be  not  afraid  of  the 
terror  which  they  cause ;"  or  as  subjective, 
"with  the  terror  which  they  feel."  The 
former  view  is  more  suitable  here. 

Ver.  15. — But  sanctify  the  Lord  God  in 
your  hearts.  From  Isa.  viii.  13.  The  reading 
of  the  best  and  oldest  manuscripts  here  is 
Kiptoii  S(  rhv  XpurrSv,  "Sanctify  the  Lord 
Christ,"  or,  "  Sanctify  the  Christ  as  Lord." 
The  absence  of  the  article  with  Kipiov  is  in 
favour  of  the  second  translation;  but  the 
first  seems  more  natural,  more  in  accordance 
with  the  original  passage  in  Laiah,  and  the 
common  expression,  Kipios  i  &e6s,  is  in  its 
favour.  Whichever  translation  is  adopted, 
St.  Peter  here  substitutes  the  Saviour's 
Name  where  the  prophet  wrote,  "the  Lord 
of  hosts,  Jehovah  Sabaoth  " — a  change  which 
would  be  nothing  lest  than  impious 'f  tha 


132 


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PETER,    [oh.  in.  1—84 


Lord  Jesus  Christ  were  not  truly  God. 
"  Sanctify  him,"  the  apostle  says  (as  the  Lord 
himself  teaches  us  to  say,  in  the  first  words 
of  the  Lord's  Prayer);  that  is,  regard  him  as 
most  holy,  awful  in  sanctity;  serve  him 
with  reverence  and  godly  fear;  so  yon  will 
not  "be  afraid  of  their  terror."  The  holy 
fear  of  God  will  lift  you  above  the  fear  of 
man.  "  Let  him  be  your  fear,  and  let  him 
be  your  dread "  (Isa.  viii.  13 ;  see  also  Lev. 
X.  3;  Isa.  xxix.  23;  Ezek.  xxxviii.  23).  St. 
Peter  adds  the  words,  "  in  your  hearts,"  to 
teiioh  us  that  this  reverence,  this  hallowing 
of  the  Name  of  God,  must  be  inward  and 
spiritual,  in  our  inmost  being.  And  be 
ready  always  to  give  on  answer  to  every 
man ;  literally,  ready  alwaya  for  an  apology 
to  every  man.  The  word  airo\oyla  is  often 
used  of  a  formal  answer  before  a  magistrate, 
or  of  a  written  defence  of  the  faith;  but 
here  the  addition,  "to  every  man,"  shows 
that  St.  Peter  ii  thinking  of  informal 
answers  on  any  suitable  occasion.  That 
asketh  you  a  reason  of  the  hope  that  is  in 
yon;  literally,  an  account  concerning  the 
hope.  Hope  is  the  grace  on  which  St. 
Peter  lays  most  stress;  it  lives  in  the  hearts 
of  Christians.  Christians  ought  to  be  able 
to  give  an  account  of  their  hope  when 
asked,  both  for  the  defence  of  the  truth 
and  for  the  good  of  the  asker.  That  ac- 
count may  be  very  simple;  it  may  be  the 
mere  recital  of  personal  experience — often 
the  most  convincing  of  arguments;  it  may 
be,  in  the  case  of  instructed  Christians, 
profound  and  closely  reasoned.  Some  an- 
swer every  Christian  ought  to  be  able  to 
give.  With  meekness  and  fear.  The  best 
manuscripts  read,  "but  with  meekness  and 
fear."  The  word  "but"  (dAAo)  is  em- 
phatic; argument  always  involves  danger 
of  weakening  the  spiritual  life  through 
pride  or  bitterness.  We  must  sometimes 
"contend  earnestly  for  the  faith;"  but  it 
must  be  with  gentleness  and  awe.  We 
should  fear  lest  we  injure  our  own  souls 
by  arrogant  and  angry  controversy;  we 
should  seek  the  spiritual  good  of  our  op- 
ponents ;  and  we  should  entertain  a  solemn 
awe  of  the  presence  of  God,  with  a  trembling 
anxiety  to  think  and  to  say  only  what  ia 
acceptable  unto  him. 

Yer.  16. — Having  a  good  conscience.  This 
word  "  conscience  "  ((ruKtiSjjiris)  is  one  of  the 
many  links  between  this  Epistle  and  the 
writings  of  St.  Paul.  St.  Peter  uses  it 
three  times;  SU  Paul,  very  frequently. 
There  is  a  close  connection  between  this 
clause  and  the  preceding  verse.  A  good 
conscience  is  the  best  reason  of  the  hop* 
that  is  in  us.  An  apology  may  be  learned, 
well-expressed,  eloquent;  but  it  will  not 
be  convincing  unless  it  oomei  from  the 
heart,  and  is  backed  up  by  the  life.    Calvin 


(quoted  by  Huther)  says,  "Quia  parum 
auctoritatis  hahet  sermo  absque  vita."  That, 
whereas  they  speak  evil  of  yon,  as  of  evil, 
doers.  The  Revised  Version  follows  the 
Sinaitio  Manuscript  in  reading,  "Wherein 
ye  are  spoken  against,"  and  omitting  "as 
of  evil-doers."  It  is  possible  that  the  re- 
ceived reading  may  have  been  interpolated 
from  ch.  ii.  12,  where  the  same  words  occur; 
except  that  there  the  mood  is  indicative, 
here,  conjunctive,  "  wherein  they  may  pos- 
sibly speak  evil  of  you."  They  may  he 
ashamed  that  falsely  accuse  your  good 
conversation  in  Christ;  rather,  as  the  Re- 
vised Version,  they  may  he  put  to  ihame, 
that  is,  "proved  to  be  liars"  (comp.  2  Cor. 
vii.  14).  The  word  translated  "falsely 
accuse"  ia  that  which  is  rendered  "de- 
spitefully  use  "  in  Matt.  v.  44 ;  Luke  Ti.  28. 
It  is  a  strong  word.  Aristotle  defines  the 
corresponding  substantive  as  a  thwarting 
of  the  wishes  of  others  out  of  gratuitous 
malice  ('Rhet.,'  ii  2).  For  "good  con- 
versation," see  ch.  i.  15,  18.  The  Chris- 
tian's life  is  in  Christ,  in  the  sphere  of  his 
presence,  he  dwelling  in  us,  and  we  in  him 
(comp.  2  Cor.  v.  17,  etc.). 

Ver.  17. — Tor  it  is  better.  St.  Peter  meets 
the  common  objection  that  suffering  could 
be  borne  more  easily  if  it  were  deserved; 
the  Christian  must  take  the  cross,  if  it 
comes,  as  from  God,  sent  for  hia  good  (comp. 
ch.  ii.  19,  20).  If  the  will  of  Qod  he  so ; 
literally,  if  the  will  of  Ood  should  to  uiill, 
@e\ilfM  denotes  the  will  in  itself;  6e\eu/,  its 
active  operation  (Winer,  iii.  65.  j8).  That 
ye  suffer  for  well-doing,  than  for  evil-doing. 
The  construction  is  participial,  as  in  ch.  ii. 
20.  As  there,  the  participle  expresses,  not 
merely  the  circumstances,  but  the  cause  of 
the  sniSering;  they  would  have  to  suffer,  not 
simply  whUe  they  were  doing  well,  but 
because  they  did  well. 

Ver.  18. — For  Christ  also  hath  once  suffered 
for  sins ;  rather,  hecaute  Christ  alio  once 
ruffered.  Two  of  the  oldest  manuscripts 
read  "died;"  but  "suffered"  corresponds 
best  with  the  previous  verse.  The  con- 
nexion is — It  must  be  better  to  suffer  for  well- 
doing, because  Christ  himself,  the  All-inno- 
cent One,  thus  suffered,  and  they  who  so 
suffer  are  made  most  like  unto  him.  The 
apostle  refers  us  again  to  that  transcendent 
Kxample  which  was  ever  before  his  eyes 
(compare  the  close  parallel  in  Heb.  ix.  26 — 
28).  Christ  suffered  once  for  all  (Sn-af);  so  the 
Bufferings  of  the  Christian  are  soon  over — 
"  but  for  a  moment."  For  sinn  (irepl) ;  con- 
cerning sins,  on  account  of  sins;  he,  himself 
sinless,  suffered  concerning  the  sins  of  others. 
The  preposition  nepl  is  constantly  used  in 
connection  with  the  sin  offering  in  the 
Beptuagint  (see  Lev.  vi.  25,  2<piiiov<n  ri  rcfil 
Tji  a/M/n-iat ;  oomp.  Lev.  v.  8 — 11,  etc. ;  alM 


OH.m.  1— 22.]    THE  FIEST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP   PETER. 


133 


Heb.  X.  6, 8, 1 8, 26).  The  Jast  for  the  nnjvBt ; 
literally,  jusi /or  unjittt.  There  i»  no  article. 
The  apostle  began  to  Bpeak  of  the  death  of 
Christ,  both  here  and  in  ch.  ii.,  as  an  ex- 
ample ;  in  both  places  he  seems  to  be  led  on 
by  an  instinctive  feeling  that  it  is  acarcely 
seemly  for  the  Christian  to  mention  that 
stupendous  event  without  dwelling  on  its 
deeper  and  more  mysterious  meaning.    The 
preposition  used  in  this  clause  (fin-ep)  does 
not  necessarily  convey  the  idea  of  yicarious 
suffering,  as  avrl  (Matt.  xx.  28 ;  Mark  x.  45 ; 
comp.   also   1   Tim.  ii.  6)  does;    it  means 
simply  "  in  behalf  of,"  leaving  the  character 
of  the  relation  undetermined  ;  here  the  con- 
text implies  the  particular  relation  of  sub- 
stitution (comp.  Rom.  v.  6 ;  also  St.  Peter's 
description  of  our  Lord  as  "the  Juit,"  in 
Acts  iii.  11).    That  he  might  bring  ns  to 
God.    The  Vatican  and  other  manuscripts 
read  "  you."    St.  Peter  opens  out  one  of  the 
deeper  aspects  of  the  death  of  Christ.    The 
TeU  that  hid  the  Holiest  was  then  rent  in 
twain,  and  believers  were  invited  and  en- 
couraged to  draw  near  into  the  immediate 
presence  of  God.    The  verb  used   here  is 
vpoiTiiyftv;  the  corresponding   substantive 
(irpaira7a)7^)  occurs  in  Eph.ii.  18;  iii.  12;  also 
in  Bom.  v  2.    In  those  places  it  is  rendered 
"access" — we  have  access  to  the  Father 
through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.    Being  put 
to  death  in  the  flesh,  but  quickened  by  the 
Spirit.     The  Greeks  words  are,  eamraeeU 
/jLev  ffapxl  ^{conoiriBels  dh  TrifeijMTt,  the  article 
rf  inserted  before  irferf/iori  in  the  received 
text  being  without  authority.     We  observe 
the  absence  of  any  article  or  preposition,  and 
the  exact  balance  and  correspondence  of  the 
two  clauses.    The  two  datives  must  be  taken 
in  the  same  sense ;  it  is  impossible  to  regard 
one  as  the  dative  of  the  sphere,  and  the  other 
as  the  dative  of  the  instrument ;  both  are 
evidently  datives  of  "  the  sphere  to  which  a 
general  predicate  is  to  be  limited  "  (Winer, 
xxxi.   6.  a);   they  limit  the  extent  of  the 
participles  (comp.  1  Cor.  vii.  34;  Col.  ii. 
5).     Thus  the  literal  translation  is,  "  Being 
put  to  death  in  flesh,  but  quickened  in 
spirit,"     For  the  antithesis  of  "  flesh  "  and 
"  spirit,"  common  in  the  New   Testament, 
comp.  Bom.  i.  3, 4,  "Made  of  the  seed  of  David 
according  to  the  flesh,  and  declared  to  be 
the  Son  of  God  with  power  according  to  the 
Spirit  of  holiness;"  and   1   Tim.  iii.   16, 
"  Manifest    in   the   flesh,  justified  in    the 
spirit ;  •"  see  especially  the  close  parallel  in 
ch.  iv.  6,   "That  they  might  be   judged 
according  to  men  in  the  flesh,  but  live  accord- 
ing to  God  in  the  spirit."    It  seems  to  follow, 
from  the  cpposition  of  flesh  and  spirit,  and 
from  a  comparison  of  the  passages  quoted 
above,  that  by  irveuna  in  this  verse  we  are  to 
understand,  not  God  the  Holy  Ghost,  bat 
the  holy  human  spirit  of  Christ.     In  his 


flesh  he  was  put  to  death,  but  in  his  spirit 
he  was  quickened.  When  the  Lord  bad 
said,  "Father,  into  thy  hands  I  commend 
my  spirit ;  "  when  he  bowed  his  head,  and 
gave  up  the  spirit ; — then  that  spirit  passed 
into  a  new  life.  So  Bengel  excellently  says,' 
"  Christus,  vitam  in  semet  ipso  habens,  et 
ipse  vita,  spiritu  vivere  neque  desiit,  neque 
iterum  coepit ;  sed  simulatque  per  mortiflca- 
tionem  involucro  infirmitatis  in  carne  solu- 
tus  erat,  statim  vitte  solvi  nesciss  virtus 
modis  novis  et  multo  expeditlssimis  sese  exse- 
rare  coepit."  Christ,  being  delivered  firom 
the  burden  of  that  suffering  flesh  which  he 
had  graciously  taken  for  our  salvation,  was 
quickened  in  his  holy  human  spirit— quick- 
ened tS  new  energies,  new  and  blessed 
activities.  So  it  shall  be  with  those  who 
suffer  for  well-doing ;  they  may  even  be  put 
to  death  in  the  flesh,  but  "  if  we  die  with 
him,  we  shall  also  live  with  him."  It  is  far 
better  (toK\$  /ia^Xov  Kpetaaov)  to  depart 
and  to  be  with  Christ,  to  be  absent  from  the 
body  and  to  be  present  with  the  Lord. 
They  that  are  Christ's  shall,  like  their 
Master,  be  quickened  in  the  spirit;  they 
pass  at  once  into  the  new  life  of  Paradise ; 
their  works  follow  them  thither;  it  may  be, 
we  cannot  tell,  they  will  be  employed  in 
blessed  work  for  Christ,  being  made  like 
unto  him  not  only  in  some  degree  during 
their  earthly  life,  but  also  in  the  intermediate 
state  of  rest  and  hope. 

Yer.  19. — By  which  also  he  went  and 
preached  unto  the  spirits  in  prison ;  rather, 
in  whieh  (€>>  ^).  The  Lord  was  no  longer 
in  the  flesh ;  the  component  parts  of  his 
human  nature  were  separated  by  death; 
his  flesh  lay  in  the  grave.  As  he  had  gone 
about  doing  good  in  the  flesh,  so  now  he 
went  in  Hie  spirit — ^in  his  holy  human 
spirit.  He  went.  The  Greek  word  (jopevSels) 
occurs  again  in  ver.  22,  "  who  is  gone  into 
heaven."  It  must  have  the  same  meaning 
in  both  places ;  in  ver.  22  it  asserts  a  change 
of  locality ;  it  must  do  the  like  here.  There 
it  is  used  of  the  ascent  into  heaven ;  it  can 
scarcely  mean  here  that,  without  any  such 
change  of  place,  Christ  preached,  not  in  his 
own  Person,  bnt  through  Noah  or  the 
apostles.  Compare  St.  Paul's  words  in  Eph. 
iv.  9  (the  Epistle  which  seems  to  have  been 
BO  much  in  St.  Peter's  thoughts), "  Now  that 
he  ascended,  what  is  it  but  that  he  also 
descended  first  into  the  lower  parts  of  the 
earth?"  And  preached  (eK^pv^ev).  It  is 
the  word  constantly  used  of  the  Lord  from 
the  time  when  "  Jesus  began  to  preach 
Cxripiirffeiv),  and  to  say,  Bepent:  for  the 
kingdom  of  heaven  is  at  hand "  (Matt.  ir. 
17).  Then,  himself  in  our  human  flesh,  he 
preached  to  men  living  in  the  flesh — ^to  a 
few  of  his  own  age  and  country.  Now  the 
range  of  his  preaching  was  extended;  him- 


134 


THE   FIKST  EPISTLE  GBKEBAL  OP  PETEB.     [oh.  ni.  1—22. 


self  in  the  ipirit,  he  preached  to  spiriti : 
"  Tlyei/iaTi,  rrti/iairi ;  ipiritu,  spiritibus," 
Bays  Bangel ;  "  congruens  eermo."  He 
preached  alto  to  the  Bpirits ;  not  only  once 
.to  living  men,  but  now  also  to  spirits,  even 
to  them.  The  xai  calls  for  attention ;  it  im- 
plies a  new  and  additional  fact;  it  emphasizes 
tlie  substantive  (koI  toTs  Trveip.Ainv).  The 
preaching  and  the  condition  of  the  hearers 
are  mentioned  together;  they  were  spirits 
when  they  heard  the  preaching.  It  seems 
impossible  to  undersliand  these  words  of 
preaching  through  Noah  or  the  apostles  to 
men  who  passed  afterwards  into  the  state  of 
disembodied  spirits.  And  he  preached  in 
the  spirit.  The  words  seem  to  limit  the 
preaching  to  the  time  when  the  Lord's  soul 
was  left  in  Plades  (Acts  ii.  27).  Euther,  in- 
deed, says  that  "  as  botli  expressions  (0ai>a- 
TaBfii  and  (mairoaietit)  apply  to  Christ  in 
his  entire  Person,  oonsisting  of  body  and 
soul,  what  follows  must  not  be  conceived  as 
an  activity  wliich  he  exercised  in  his  spirit 
only,  and  whilst  separated  from  his  body." 
But  d<'e«  Savarteef  Is  apply  to  body  and  soulf 
Men  "  are  not  able  to  kill  the  souL"  And 
is  it  true,  as  Huther  continues,  that  the 
first  words  of  this  verse  are  not  opposed  to 
the  view  that  €ferist  preached  in  his  glori- 
fied body, "  inasmuch  as  in  thii  body  the 
Lord  is  no  longer  4y  aapxi,  but  entirely  in 
iri'»t)/iaTi "  ?  Indeed,  we  are  taught  that 
"flesh  and  blood  cannot  inherit  the  king- 
dom of  God; "  and  that  that  which  "is  sown 
a  natural  body  ia  raised  a  spiritual  body  " 
(o-u^a  TtvtiiiuirtKSv);  but  Christ  himself  said 
of  his  resurrection-body,  "  A  spirit  halh  not 
flesh  and  bones,  as  ye  see  me  have "  (Luke 
xxiv.  39).  He  preaclied  to  "  the  spirits  in 
prison  (eV  <l>v\eucp)."  (For  (pv\aKii,  comp.  Bev. 
IX.  7;  Matt  T.  25,  etc.).  It  cannot  mean 
the  whole  realm  of  the  deiid.but  only  that 
part  of  Hades  in  which  the  souls  of  the 
ungodly  are  reserved  unto  the  day  of  judg- 
ment. Bengel  says,  "  In  carrere  puniuntur 
sontes :  in  Bu»todia  sei  vantur,  dum  expe- 
riantur  quid  facturus  sit  judex?"  But  it 
seems  douJ)tful  whether  this  distinction 
between  ipuKaKii  and  Sttriiwriipiov  can  be 
pressed ;  in  Bev.  xx.  7  tpvhan'/i  is  used  of  the 
prison  of  Satan,  though,  indeed,  that  prison 
is  not  the  &^vvaos  into  which  he  will  be 
cast  at  the'  last. 

■Ver.  20. — 'Whioh  sometime  were_  dis- 
obedient, when  once  the  long-suffering  of 
God  waited  in  the  days  of  Noah,  while  the 
ark  was  a-preparing,  wherein  few,  that  is, 
eight  souls  were  saved  by  water.  Omit  the 
word  "  once  "  (SiroO,  whioh  is  without  autlio- 
rity.  Wherein  ;  literally,  into  which  ;  they 
were  saved  by  ea  taring  into  it.  The  last 
words  may  mean,  "  tbey  were  carried  safely 
through  the  water,"  or,  "  they  were  saved 
by  water  ; "  M'at  is,  the  water  bore  up  the 


ark  (Gen.  vii.  17, 18).  The  argument  of  ver. 
21  makes  the  second  interpretation  the 
more  probable.  The  verse  now  before  ni 
limits  the  area  of  the  Lord's  preaching: 
without  it  we  might  have  supposed  that  he 
preached  to  the  whole  multituile  of  the 
dead,  or  at  least  to  all  the  ungodly  dead 
whose  spirits  were  in  prison.  'Why.  does 
St.  Peter  specify  the  generation  that  was 
swept  away  by  the  Flood?  Did  they  need 
the  preaching  of  the  Christ  more  than 
other  sinful  souls?  or  was  there  any  special 
reason  why  that  grace  shoul'l  be  vouchsafed 
to  them  rather  than  to  others  ?  The  fact 
must  have  been  revealed  to  the  apostle; 
but  evidently  we  are  in  the  presence  of  a 
mystery  into  which  we  can  see  only  a  little 
way.  Those  antediluvians  were  a  con- 
spicuous instance  of  men  who  suffered  for 
evil-doing  (see  ver.  17);  as  Christ  is  the 
transcendent  Example  of  one  who  suffered  for 
well-doing.  It  is  bietier  to  suffer  with  him 
than  with  them :  they  are  in  prison.  His 
chosen  are  with  him  in  Paradise.  But  St. 
Peter  cannot  rest  in  the  contemplation  of 
the  Lord's  death  as  an  example ;  he  must 
pass  on  to  the  deeper,  the  more  mysterious 
aspects  of  that  most  stupendous  of  events. 
The  Lord  suffered  concerning  sins,  for  the 
sake  of  unrighteous  men ;  not  only  did  he 
die  for  them,  he  did  not  rest  from  his  holy 
work  even  while  his  sacred  body  lay  in  the 
grave ;  he  went  and  preached  to  some  whose 
sins  had  been  most  notorious,  and  most 
signally  punished.  The  judgment  had 
been  one  of  unexampled  awfulness;  eight 
souls  only  were  saved  in  the  ark,  many 
thousands  perished.  It  may  be  that  St. 
Peter  mentions  the  fewness  of  the  saved  to 
indicate  one  reason  for  this  gracious  visit. 
It  seems  that  the  awful  destruction  of  the 
Deluge  had  made  a  deep  impression  upon 
his  mind ;  he  mentions  it  twice  in  his 
Second  Epistle  (ii.  5 ;  iii.  6);  he  saw  in  it  a 
solemn  anticipation  of  the  last  tremendous 
judgment.  Doubtless  he  remembered  well 
how  the  Lord,  in  his  great  prophetic  dis- 
course upon  the  Mount  of  Olives,  had  com- 
pared the  days  of  Noah  to  the  coming  of 
tbe  Son  of  man  (Matt.  xxiv.  37—39);  those 
words  seem  to  give  a  special  character  to 
the  Deluge,  separating  it  from  other  lesser 
judgments,  and  investing  it  with  a  peculiar 
awfulness.  It  may  be  that  the  apostle's 
thoughts  had  dwelt  much  upon  the  many 
mysterious  problems  (such  ss  the  .great 
destruction  of  infant  life)  connected  with  it; 
and  that  a  special  revelation  was  vouchsafed 
to  him  to  clear  up  some  of  his  difficulties. 
These  spirits,  in  prison  at  the  time  of  the 
descent  into  Hades,  had  aforetime  been  dis- 
obedient. The  Greek  word  (&ir«i9r)  (ran) 
means  literally  "  disbelieving ; "  but  here,  as 
in  oh.  ii  7  and  elsewhere,  it  stands  I'.,  that 


OH.  ra.  1—22.]    THB  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  PETER. 


135 


wilfal  unbelief  which  sets  itself  in  direct 
opposition  to  the  will  of  God.  They  were 
gailty  of  unbelief,  and  of  the  disobedience 
which  results  from  unbelief.  Noah  was  a 
"  preacher  of  righteousaesB  "  (2  Pet.  ii.  5, 
where  theGrcek  word  is  KijpuJ.thesubatautive 
oorresponding  with  the  verb  e'ltrf puffr  here); 
the  vast  structure  of  the  ark  was  a  staading 
warning  as  it  rose  slowly  before  their  eyes. 
The  long-suffering  of  God  waited  all  those 
hundred  and  twenty  years  (Gen.  Ti.  3),  as 
now  the  Lord  is  "  long-suffering  to  usward, 
not  willing  that  any  should  perish,  but  that 
all  should  come  to  repentance  "  (2  Pet.  iii. 
9).  But  they  heeded  neither  the  preaching 
of  Noah  nor  the  long-suffering  of  God  ;  and 
at  last  "  the  Flood  came,  and  took  them  all 
away.  So  shall  atko  the  coming  of  the 
Son  of  man  be."  Eight  only  weie  saved 
then ;  they  doubtless  suffered  for  well-doing ; 
they  had  to  endure  much  scorn  and  derision, 
perhaps  persecution.  But  they  were  not 
disobedient.  "  By  faith  Noah,  being  warned 
of  God  of  tilings  not  seen  as  yet,  moved 
with  fear,  prepared  an  ark  to  the  saving  of 
his  house."  The  eight  were  brought  a&h 
through  (_Sie<rti97itrav);  they  were  saved 
through  the  water;  the  water  bore  them 
up,  possibly  rescued  them  from  persecu- 
tion. But  the  rest  perished;  the  destruc- 
tion of  life  was  tremendous ;  we  know  not 
how  many  thousands  perished :  they  suffered 
for  evil-doing.  But  the  degrees  of  guilt 
must  have  varied  greatly  from  open  pro- 
fanity and  hostility  to  silent  doubt ;  while 
there  were  many  children  and  very  young 
persona ;  and  it  may  be  that  many  repented 
at  the  last  moment.  It  is  better  to  suffer 
for  well-doing  than  for  evil-doing;  but 
even  suffering  for  evil-doing  is  sometimes 
blessed  to  the  salvation  of  the  soul ;  and  it 
may  be  that  some  of  these,  having  been 
"judged  according  to  men  in  the  flesh," 
now  "  live  according  to  God  in  the  spirit " 
(ch.  iv.  6).  For  it  is  impossible  to  believe 
that  the  Lord's  preaching  was  a  "  concio 
damnatoria."  The  Lord  spoke  sternly  some- 
times in  the  days  of  his  flesh,  but  it  wa.s  the 
warning  voice  of  love;  even  that  sternest 
denunciation  of  the  concentrated  guilt  and 
hypocrisy  of  the  Pharisees  ended  in  a 
piteous  wail  of  loving  sorrow.  It  cannot  be 
that  the  most  merciful  Saviour  would  have 
visited  souls  irretrievably  lost  merely  to 
upbraid  them  and  to  enhance  their  misery. 
He  had  just  luffered  for  sins,  the  Just  for 
the  unjust :  is  it  not  possible  that  one  of  the 
effects  of  that  suffering  might  have  been 
"  to  bring  unto  God  "  some  souls  who  once 
had  been  alienated  from  God  by  wicked 
works,  but  had  not  wholly  hardened  toeir 
hearts;  who,  like  the  men  of  Tyre  and 
SidoD,  Bodom  and  Gomorrah,  had  not  the 
opportunities  which  we  eigoy,  who  had  not 


been  once  enlightened  and  made  partaken 
of  the  heavenly  gift  and  the  powers  of  the 
world  to  come?  Is  it  not  possible  that  in 
those  words,  "  which  tometitne  were  disobe- 
dient," there  may  be  a  hint  that  that  dis- 
obedience of  theirs  was  not  the  "eternal 
sin  "  which,  according  to  the  reading  of  the 
two  most  ancient  manuscripts  in  Mark  iii. 
29,  is  the  awful  lot  of  those  who  have  never 
forgiveness?  The  Lord  preached  to  the 
spirits  in  prison ;  that  word  (eKifpu|€i/)  is 
commonly  used  of  the  heralds  of  salvation, 
and  St.  Peter  himself,  in  the  next  chapter, 
tells  us  that  "  the  gospel  was  preached 
(fAj|77«\io-fl7))  to  them  tiat  are  dead."  The 
gospel  is  the  good  tidings  of  salvation 
through  the  cross  of  Christ.  The  Lord  had 
just  died  upon  the  cross  :  is  it  not  possible 
that,  in  the  moment  of  victory,  he  an- 
nounced the  saving  power  of  the  cross  to 
some  who  had  greatly  sinned;  as  at  the 
time  of  his  resiurection  "many  bodies  of 
the  saints  who  slept  arose  "  ?  There  is  one 
more  question  wliich  forces  itself  upon  us — 
What  was  the  result  of  this  preaching? 
Did  the  spirits  in  prison  listen  to  the 
Saviour's  voice  ?  Were  they  delivered  from 
that  prison  where  they  had  been  so  long 
confined  7  Here  Scripture  is  almost  silent ; 
yet  we  read  the  words  of  hope  in  ch.  iv.  6, 
"For  this  cause  was  the  gospel  preached 
also  to  them  that  are  dead,  that  they  might 
be  judged  according  to  men  in  the  flesh, 
but  live  according  to  God  in  the  spirit." 
The  good  news  was  announced  to  them  that 
they  might  live ;  then  may  we  not  dare  to 
hope  that  some  at  least  listened  to  that 
gracious  preaching,  and  were  saved  even 
out  of  that  prison  by  the  power  of  the 
Saviour's  cross?  May  ws  not  venture  to 
believe,  with  the  author  of  the  '  Christian 
Year,'  that  even  in  that  dreary  scene  the 
Saviour's  eye  reached  the  thronging  band  of 
souls,  and  that  his  cross  and  Passion,  his 
agony  and  bloody  sweat,  might  (we  know  not 
how  or  in  what  meaRure)  "  set  the  shadowy 
realms  from  sin  and  sorrow  free  "  ? 

It  seems  desirable  to  add  a  brief  summary 
of  the  history  of  opinion  on  this  much- 
controverted  passage.  The  early  Greek 
Fathers  appear  to  have  held,  with  one 
consent,  that  St.  Peter  is  here  speaking 
of  that  descent  into  Hades  of  which  he 
had  spoken  in  his  first  great  sermon  (Acta 
ii.  31).  Justin  Martyr,  in  his '  Dialogue  with 
Trypho'  (sect.  72),  accuses  the  Jews  of 
having  erased  from  the  prophecies  ol 
Jeremiah  the  following  words:  "  The  Lord 
God  of  Israel  remembered  his  dead  who 
slept  in  the  land  of  the  tomb,  and  descended 
to  them  to  preach  to  them  the  good  news  of 
his  salvation."  Irenasus  quotes  the  same 
passage,  attributing  it  in  one  place  to 
Issiab,  in  another  to  Jeremiah,  and  adds 


136 


THR   FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  PETER,    [ch.  m.  1—22 


that  tho  Lord's  purpose  was  to  deliver  them 
and  to  save  them  (extrahere  eoa  et  $alvaTe 
eoe).  TertuUian  says  that  the  Lord  de- 
scended into  the  lower  parts  of  the  earth, 
to  make  the  patriarchs  partakers  of  himself 
{compotei  eui ;  '  De  Anima,'  o.  55).  Clement 
of  Alexandria  tjuotes  Hermas  as  saying 
that  "the  apostles  and  teachers  who  had 
preached  the  Name  of  the  Son  of  God  and 
had  fallen  asleep,  preached  by  his  power 
and  faith  k.  'hose  who  had  fallen  asleep 
before  them'-  ,  5trom.,' ii.  9).  "And  then,'' 
Bishop  Pearson,  from  whodo  notes  on  the 
Creed  these  quotations  are  taken,  continues, 
"  Clement  supplies  that  authority  with  a 
reason  of  his  own,  that  as  the  apostles 
were  to  imitate  Christ  while  they  lived,  so 
did  they  also  imitate  him  after  death,  and 
therefore  preached  to  the  souls  in  Hades, 
as  Christ  did  before  them."  The  earliest 
writers  do  not  seem  to  bare  thought  that 
any  change  in  the  condition  of  the  dead  wai 
produced  by  Christ's  descent  into  Hades. 
The  Lord  announced  the  gospel  to  the 
dead .  the  departed  saints  rejoiced  to  hear 
the  glad  tidings,  as  now  the  angels  rejoice 
over  each  repentant  sinner.  Origen,  in  his 
second  homily  on  1  Kings,  taught  that  the 
Lord,  descending  into  Hades,  brought  the 
souls  of  the  holy  dead,  the  patriarchs  and 
prophets,  out  of  Hades  into  Paradise;  no 
hovSm  could  pass  the  flaming  sword  till  he 
had  led  the  way;  but  now,  through  his 
grace  and  power,  the  blessed  dead  who  die 
in  the  Lord  enter  at  once  into  the  rest  of 
Paradise — not  yet  heaven,  but  an  inter- 
mediate place  of  rest,  far  better  than  that 
from  which  the  saints  of  the  old  covenant 
were  delivered.  In  this  view  Origen  was 
followed  by  many  of  the  later  Fathers. 
But  St.  Peter  says  nothing  of  any  preach- 
ing to  departed  saints.  Christ  "  went  and 
preached,"  be  says,"imtothe  spirits  in  prison, 
which  sometime  were  disobedient."  Hence 
Jerome,  Ambrose,  Augustine,  and  others 
were  led  to  suppose  that  the  Lord  not  only 
raised  the  holy  dead  to  a  higher  state  of 
blessedness,  but  preached  also  to  the  dis- 
obedient, and  that  some  of  these  believed, 
and  were  by  his  grace  delivered  from 
"prison."  Some  few,  as  Cyril  of  Alexan- 
dria, held  that  the  Lord  spoiled  the  house 
of  the  strong  man  armed  (o-eo-i/AijTo  ray 
Ttvivixdroty  d  aSi^s),  and  released  all  his 
captives.  This  Augustine  reckoned  as  a 
heresy.  But  in  his  epistle  to  Euodius  (Ep. 
99  and  164)  Augustine,  much  exercised  (as 
he  says,  "  vehementissime  commotus  ")  by 
the  difBculties  of  the  question,  propounded 
the  interpretation  which  became  general 
in  the  Western  Church,  being  adopted  by 
Bede,  Thomas  Aquiuas,  De  Lyra,  and  later 
by  Beza,  Hammond,  Leigliton,  Pearson,  etc. 
•'  Tlie  spirits  in  prison,"  he  says,  "  are  the 


unbelieving  who  lived  in  the  days  of  Noah, 
whose  spirits,  «.e.  souls,  had  been  shot  up  ia 
the  flesh  and  In  the  darkness  of  ignorance, 
as  in  a  prison  [comp.  '  Paradise  Lost,'  xi. 
723].  Christ  preached  to  them,  not  in  the 
flesh,  inasmuch  as  he  was  not  yet  incarnate, 
but  in  the  spirit,  i.e.  according  to  his  Divine 
nature  {eeeundum  divinitatem)."  But  this 
interpretation  does  not  satisfy  St.  Peter's 
words.  Tlie  hypothesis  tliat  Christ  preached 
through  the  instrumentality  of  Noah  does 
not  adequately  represent  the  participle 
ropevScls ;  the  word  <pv\aieli  cannot  be  taken 
metaphorically  of  tlie  flesh  in  which  the 
soul  is  confined.  If,  with  Beza,  w«  imder- 
stand  it  as  meaning  "who  are  mm  in 
prison,"  we  escape  one  difSoultj,  bnt 
another  is  introduced  ;  for  it  is  surely  forced 
and  unnatural  to  make  the  time  of  the  verb 
and  that  of  the  dative  clause  different.  The 
words  4y  <pv\aicf  must  describe  the  condition 
of  the  spirits  at  the  time  of  the  Saviour's 
preaching.  Some  commentators,  as  Socinus 
and  Grotius,  refer  St.  Peter's  words  to  the 
preaching  of  Christ  through  the  apostles. 
These  writers  understand  <l>v\tucli  of  the 
prison  of  the  body,  or  the  prison  of  sin ;  and 
explein  St.  Peter  as  meaning  that  Christ 
preached  through  the  apostles  to  the  Jews 
who  were  under  the  yoke  of  the  Law,  and  to 
the  Gentiles  who  lay  under  the  power  of 
the  devil ;  and  tliey  regard  the  disobedient 
in  tlie  time  of  Noah  as  a  sample  of  sinners 
in  any  age.  But  this  interpretation  is 
altogether  arbitrary,  and  cannot  be  recon- 
ciled with  the  apostle's  words.  Other 
views  are — that  our  Lord  descended  into 
hell  to  triumph  over  Satan  (on  which  see 
Pearson  on  the  Creed,  art.  v.);  that  his 
preaching  was  a  concio  damnatoria — an 
announcement  of  condemnation,  not  of 
salvation  (which  is  disproved  by  oh.  iv.  6); 
that  the  spirits  in  prison  were  holy  souls 
waiting  for  Christ,  the  prison  being 
(according  to  Calvin)  "specula,  sive  ipse 
excubandi  actus  ; "  that  they  were  heathens, 
who  lived  according  to  their  light,  but  in 
idolatry.  We  may  mention,  in  conclusion, 
the  monstrous  explanation  of  the  heretic 
Marcion,  that  tht  y  were  those  who  in  the 
Old  Testament  are  called  ungodly,  but  were 
really  better  than  those  whom  the  Old 
Testament  regai'ds  as  saints. 

Ver.  21. — The  like  figure  wherennto  even 
baptism  doth  also  now  save  us.  The  reading 
of  the  Textus  Beceptus  ^,  represented  by 
"  wbereunto,"  is  without  authority ;  all  the 
uncial  manuscripts  have  S,  "  which,"  in  the 
nominative  case.  The  oldest  manuscripts 
also  read  "you"  instead  of  "us,"  The 
antecedent  of  the  relative  t  must  be  the 
word  immediately  preceding,  iSaros,  water; 
the  word  "baptism"  is  aided  in  apposition, 
to  define  more  clearly  the  apostle's  meaning ; 


OH.  m.  1—22,]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PETEB. 


131 


the  -water  which    Baves  ii    the  water   of 
baptism.    Thus  the  literal  translation  will 
be,  "Which  (as)  antitype  is  saving  you 
also,  (namely)  baptism ; "  that  is,  the  water 
which  is  saying  you  is  the  antitype  of  the 
water  of  the  Flood.    That  water  was  made 
the  means  of  saving  a  few ;  it  bore  up  the 
ark  in  which  they  were.    It  saved  them, 
perhaps,  from  the  malice  of  the  ungodly; 
it  saved  them  from  that  corruption  which 
was  almost  nniTersal;  it  was  the  means  of 
saving  the  nee  of  men  as  by  a  new  birth 
through  death  into  a  new  life,  a  new  begin- 
ning;   it    washed    away    the    evil,   those 
who  suffered  for  eril-doing,  and  so  saved 
those  who    had  doubtless    been    suffering 
for  well-doing.   Thus  it  is  the  figure  (tiSttos) 
of    the  antitype  ^ia/Ttnmov)  baptism;  the 
two  (the  water  of  the  Flood  and  the  water 
of  baptism)  correspond  ai  type  and  anti- 
type.   The  iyrkinrov  is  the  counterpart  of 
the  T&iros;  and  as  riiros  sometimes  means 
the  original,  sometimes  the  figure,  there  is 
a  correspondent  variation  in  the  meaning 
of  ivririnroy.    Delitzsch  Bays,  on  Heb.  ix. 
24,  "  We  have  found  riiros  at  ch.  viii.  5 
used  in  the  sense  of  an  original  figure — a 
model  from  which  a  copy  is  made;  snoh 
copy  from  an  original  (or  architype)  is  that 
designated  as  &.yTirvira  here.    Tinos  again 
(as  at  Bom.  v.  14)  is  used  in  the  sense  of 
a  prophetic  foretype,  of  which  the  accom- 
plishment is  reserved  for  the  future  (tu'jtos 
Twv  iie?iJ^.6vTai/) ;  and  that  accomplishment 
is  again  called  avTirmtov  (antitype);  e.g. 
baptism,  at  1  Pet.  iii,  21,  is  in  this  sense 
an  ianirvitov  of  the  Deluge.    The  earthly 
reflection  of  the  heavenly  archetype,  and 
the  actual  fulfilment  of  the  prophetic  Thros, 
are  each  called  kvririmov"    Here  the  water 
of  the  Flood    is   the  prophetic  foretype; 
baptism  is  the  accomplishment.   "  Baptism," 
St.  Peter  says,  "is  saving  you,"  the  few 
Christians,  separating  you  from  the.  vast 
number  of  Gentiles,  whom  in  some  sense 
it  condemns  through  their  rejection  of  God's 
offered  mercy  (comp.  Heb.   xi.  7),  saving 
you   from     the    corruption    of    their    evil 
example,  bringing    you  into    the   ark   of 
Christ's   Church,    bearing    up     that    ark 
through  the  grace  of  the  new  birth.    The 
apostle  says,  "  Baptism  is  saving  you ; "  he 
does  not  say,  "has  saved ; "  he  is  using  the 
present  tense   in  its   proper  sense  of  an 
incomplete  action  ;  it  brings  us  into  a  state 
of  salvation,  into  covenant  with  God.     But 
it  is  only  the  beginning,  the  birth;   the 
growth  must  follow;   the  death  unto  sin, 
the  new  birth  unto  righteousness,  must  be 
realized  in  actual  life ;  otherwise,  alas !  we 
shall  have  received  the  grace  of  God  in  vain 
(comp.  Titus  iii.  5).   (Not  the  putting  away 
of  the  filth  of  the  flesh,  but  the  answer  of  a 
good  conscience   toward   Ood.)    St  Peter 


hastens  to  explain  his  statement.     Baptism 
doth     save    us,    but    not    the   mere    out- 
ward ceremony  ;  you  may  "  make  clean  the 
outside"  vrith  the   most  scrupulous  care; 
you  may  be  very  careful  in  putting  away 
the  filtli  of  the  flesh  (or,  if  the  genitive  is 
In  be  regarded  as  subjective,  with  Bengel, 
the  flesh  may  put  away  its  filth) ;  but  more 
is  needed  than  the  old  Jewish  washings, 
the  frequent  purifications.     Comp.  Justin 
Martyr, '  Dial,  cum  Trypho,'  p.  331  (quoted 
by  Huther),  Ti  yiip  6<l)e\os  iK^ivov  tov  Pairria- 
juaros  (the  Jewish  washing)  %  t^v  a-dpKa 
Kol    fi6yoy    ri    iTfDjua  ^aiSpipei ;    PaTnlirB'qrt 
T^v  ij/ux^"-    Observe  that  St.  Peter  uses  the 
word  here  rendered  "  putting  away  "  (oTrii- 
eeo-is)  again  in  the  Second  Epistle  (i.  14)  of 
putting  off  the  earthly  tabernacle   (comp. 
also  oh.  ii.  1,  where  he  uses  the  correspond- 
ing participle,  imoes/ievoi).  The  next  clause 
(&A\cb  <rvvtiSii<rea>s  ayaBris  iirepil>Trifi.a  eis  0£(iv) 
presents  great  difficulty.  Is  the  genitive  sub- 
jective or  objective  ?    What  is  the  meaning 
of  eirip6n]iia  1     The  word  iirep^TTiUtt  occurs 
only  in    one  other    place    in    the    Greek 
Scriptures  (Dan.  iy.  14  [in  the  Authorized 
Version,  iv.   17]),  where    it  is  translated 
"  demand ; "  the  corresponding  verb   is  of 
frequent    occurrence;    as    in  Bom.   x.  20, 
"  them  that  asked  not  after  me ; "  and  2 
Kings  xi.  7  (2  Sam.  xi.  7,  in  the  Authorized 
Version),  where    it    is   joined    with    the 
preposition  els,  as   in    this    verse.     Thus 
6irepiiT7)|Uo  seems  to  mean  an  "  inquiry,"  and 
the  genitive  is  probably  subjective.     The 
inner  meaning  of  baptism  is  not  that  the 
flesh  puts  away  its  filth,  but  that  a  good 
conscience  inquires  after  God.     The  out- 
ward and  visible    sign  doth   not  save    if 
separated  from  the  inward  and   spiritual 
grace.    The  first  is  necessary,  for  it  is  an 
outward  sign  appointed  by  Christ;  but  it 
will  not  save   without  the   second;  tijose 
who  draw  near  to  God  must  have  their 
bodies   washed  with  pure  water,  but  also 
their  hearts   sprinkled  from  an  evil  con- 
science (Heb.  X.  22).    The  inner  cleansing 
of  the  soul  results  in  a  good  conscience,  a 
congoiousness  of  sincerity,  of  good  inten- 
tions atd  desires,  which  will  instinctively 
seek  after  God.     And  that  good  conscience 
is  the  effect  of  baptism,  when  baptism  has 
its  perfect  work,  when  those  who  have  once 
been  grafted  into  the  true  Vine  abide  in 
Christ,  when  those  who  have  once  been 
baptized  in  one  Spirit  into  one  body  keep 
the  unity  of  the  Spirit,  Christ  dwelling  in 
them,    and    they    in    Christ,  i  Archbishop 
Leighton  explains  the  word  iirepdrrifw.  as 
"  the  whole  correspondence  of  the  conscience 
with  God,  and  with  itself  as  towards  God, 
or  in  the  sight  of  God."    If  the  genitive  is 
regarded  as  objective,  the  meaning  will  he 
"an  inquiry  addressed  to  God  for  a  good 


138 


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  PETER,     {on.  nu  \  ~ii. 


comcienoe^"  the  soul,  once  awakened, 
seeks  continnally  fnller  purification,  hungers 
and  thirBts  after  righteousnesa.  This  gives 
a  good  sense,  but  eeeiuB  less  suitable  in  this 
context.  It  is  possible  also  to.  join  the 
preposition  cii  with  (rvreiSriiris  in  the  sense 
of  a  good  conscience  in  relation  to  God ; 
but  it  seems  much  more  natural  to  connect 
it  with  eVepwTrjiUo.  Some  commentators 
follow  Jiioumenius  in  paraphrasing  eVcpiiTTi/uo 
by  a^l)a$cjJVy  ere'xupoi',  air($S€i|i5 ;  they  take 
the  ground  that,  in  legal  language,  the  word 
was  used  in  the  sense  of  a  contract,  and 
they  see  in  St.  Peter's  words  a  reference 
to  the  coyenant  made  with  God  in  baptism, 
and  to  the  questions  and  answers  in  whirh, 
from  the  earliest  times,  that  covenant  was 
expressed ;  iTrcp&riuxa  being  used  in  a 
general  sense  so  as  to  cover  answers  as  well 
as  questions.  This  is  a  possible  alternative, 
but  the  word  seems  to  have  acquired  this 
meaning  in  later  times.  By  the  resnrrection 
of  Jesus  Christ.  These  words  refer  back  to 
"  bapiism  doth  also  now  save  us."  Baptism 
derives  its  saving  effect  from  the  resurrection 
of  our  Lord ;  without  that  resurrection  it 
would  be  an  empty  form  (see  note  on  ch. 
i.3). 

Yer.  22. — ^Who  is  gone  into  heaven.   The 
word  here  rendered  "  gone  "  is  that  used  in 


ver.  19,  "he  went  and  preached  (jnftv- 
9eti)"(comp.  Eph.  iv.  9,  "Now  that  he 
ascended,  what  is  it  but  that  he  also 
descended  first  into  the  lower  parts  of  the 
earth  ?  ").  And  is  on  the  right  hand  of  6oa 
(comp.  Ps.  ex.  1 ;  Rom.  viii.  34 ;  Col.  iii.  1 ; 
Eph.  i.  20 ;  Heb.  i.  3).  It  is  better  to  suffer 
for  well-doing  than  for  evil-doing,  far  he 
who  is  the  signal  Example,  who  suffered, 
the  Just  for  the  unjust,  is  now  exalted  to 
the  right  hand  of  the  Majesty  on  high ;  and 
"  is  able  to  save  them  to  the  uttermost  that 
come  to  God  by  him,  seeing  he  ever  liveth 
to  make  intercession  for  them."  Angels  and 
authorities  and  powers  being  made  subject 
unto  him.  God  "  hath  set  him  at  his  own 
right  hand  in  the  heavenly  places,  far  above 
all  principality,  and  power,  and  might,  and 
dominion,  and  every  name  that  is  named, 
not  only  in  this  world,  but  also  in  that 
which  is  to  come."  All  the  angels  of  God, 
in  the  various  grades  of  the  heavenly 
hierarchy,  are  made  subject  to  Christ.  The 
words  seem  to  include,  especially  when 
read  in  comparison  with  Col.  ii.  15,  the  evil 
angels  also  ;  they  are  made  subject  against 
their  will  to  Clirist;  they  asked  him  onc« 
if  he  was  come  to  torment  them  before  the 
time.  He  can  restrain  their  malice  and 
save  his  people  from  their  power. 


H0MILETI08. 

Vers,  1 — 7. — Duties  of  husbands  and  wives.  I.  Duties  of  wives.  1,  Obedience. 
Holy  matrimony  is  a  very  sacred  thing.  It  is  not  a  mere  human  ordinance  (Iwepanmii) 
Kriffts,  oh.  ii.  13) ;  it  is  not  a  creation  of  human  law.  Human  law,  indeed,  surrounds  it 
with  its  sanctions,  regarding  it  as  a  civil  contract ;  but  it  was  instituted  of  God  in  the 
time  of  man's  innocency  ;  it  is  an  image  of  the  mystical  union  between  Christ  and  his 
Church.  It  is  a  school  of  holy  love,  a  discipline  of  sweet  self-denials  for  the  loved 
one's  sake,  which  ought  to  help  Christian  people  greatly  in  the  pursuit  of  holiness. 
But  it  is  Christianity  that  has  restored  wedlock  to  what  it  was  at  the  first,  and  given 
it  a  yet  deeper  and  a  far  holier  meaning.  The  frequency  of  divorce  among  both  Jews 
and  heathens;  the  dislike  of  marriage,  which  had  become  so  serious  at  Rome;  the 
Greek  habit  of  regarding  the  wife  as  the  mistress  of  her  husband's  house,  the  mother 
of  his  children,  but  not  as  the  helpmeet,  the  partner  of  his  cares,  the  sharer  of  his  joys 
and  sorrows ;  the  depreciation  of  woman ; — all  this  had  made  the  ordinary  view  of 
marriage  very  different  from  what  God  had  intended  it  to  be,  from  what  it  now  is  in 
Christian  families.  It  is  to  Christianity,  not  to  civilization  (for  the  Greeks  and  Romans 
were  as  civilized  as  we  are),  that  we  owe  the  sweet  sanctities  of  wedded  life  and  the 
quiet  happiness  of  home.  But  at  first  Christianity  introduced  a  fresh  element  of  division. 
From  time  to  time  one  member  of  a  family  circle  would  have  to  put  the  constraining 
love  of  Christ  above  the  love  due  to  father  or  mother,  husband,  wife,  or  child.  The 
case  of  a  Christian  wife  with  an  unbelieving  husband  would  be  one  of  especial  difficulty. 
She  would  probably  have  to  hear  her  religion  derided,  her  Saviour  insulted ;  she  would 
have  to  endure  constant  reproaches  and  sarcasms,  often  hardships,  and  even  brutal 
cruelty.  St.  Paul  had  considered  the  case  in  1  Cor.  vii.  13 — 17.  St.  Peter  here  counsels 
submission ;  the  power  of  gentleness  might  succeed  in  winning  those  who  could  be  won 
in  no  other  way.  Let  Christian  wives  be  very  careful  to  respect  their  husband's 
authority ;  let  them  fear  to  give  them  so  much  as  the  shadow  of  a  reason  to  suspect 
their  purity.     Let  the  holy  fear  of  God  lead  them  to  regard  even  the  unbelieving 


BH.  in.  1—22.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  PETEB.  13« 

husband  with  due  reverence ;  let  them  carefully  avoid  giving  any  unnecessary  offence, 
or  unduly  putting  forward  the  differences,  great  and  fundamental  as  they  were,  which 
separated  them  from  one  another.  Thus  let  them  hope  and  pray  for  their  husbanda' 
conversion.  The  silent  eloquence  of  a  holy,  self-denying  life  will  generally  be  more 
powerful  than  argument  and  controversy,  Thus  they  would  have  the  best  hope  of 
winning  their  husbands  to  Christ,  of  "  gaining  them,"  as  the  word  literally  means. 
Compare  Archbishop  Leighton,  "  A  soul  converted  is  gained  to  itself,  gained  to  the 
pastor,  or  friend,  or  wife,  or  husband  who  sought  it,  and  gained  to  Jesus  Christ ;  added 
to  his  treasury,  who  thought  not  his  own  precious  blood  too  dear  to  lay  out  for  this  gain." 
The  earnest  words  of  Christian  men  and  women  are  sometimes  greatly  blessed,  but  a 
humble  holy  life  will  often  win  souls  which  no  eloquence  could  touch.  2.  Simplicify 
in  dress.  Christian  women  should  be  quiet  and  modest  in  their  attire.  St.  Peter's 
language  is,  of  course,  comparative,  like  Hosea's  words,  twice  quoted  by  our  Lord,  "  I 
will  have  mercy,  and  not  sacrifice."  He  does  not  mean  to  forbid  all  plaiting  of  hair  or 
wearing  of  gold  any  more  than  putting  on  of  apparel ;  he  means  that  these  are  poor 
and  contemptible  compared  with  the  costlier  ornaments  which  he  recommends  in  meir 
stead.  Christian  women  should  be  simple  and  unaffected  in  dress  as  in  behaviour.  In 
general,  the  best  rule  is  to  avoid  singularity.  "  There  may  be,"  Leighton  says,  "  in 
some  an  affected  pride  in  the  meanness  of  apparel,  and  in  others,  under  either  neat  or 
rich  attire,  a  very  humble,  unaffected  mind.  • .  . '  Magnus  qui  fictilibus  utitur  tanquam 
argeato,  nee  ille  minor  qui  argento  tanquam  fictilibus,'  says  Seneca.  'Great  is  he  who 
enjoys  his  earthenware  as  if  it  were  plate,  and  not  less  great  is  the  man  to  whom  all 
his  plate  is  no  more  than  earthenware.'"  In  this,  as  in  other  aspects  of  Christian  duty, 
the  enlightened  conscience  is  the  best  guide.  But  Christians  must  never  allow  their 
thoughts  to  dwell  on  these  things ;  they  must  learn  not  to  care  for  finery,  not  to  love 
display.  To  quote  Leighton  again,  "  Par  more  comfort  shalt  thou  have  on  thy  death- 
bed to  remember  that  at  such  »  time,  instead  of  putting  lace  on  my  own  clothes, 
I  helped  a  naked  back  to  clothing,  I  abated  somewhat  of  my  former  superfluities  to 
supply  the  poor  man's  necessities;  far  sweeter  will  this  be  than  to  remember  that 
I  could  needlessly  cast  away  many  pounds  to  serve  my  pride,  rather  than  give  a  penny 
to  relieve  the  poor."  3.  The  <r«t«  adorning.  The  soul  is  far  more  precious  than  the 
body.  It  is  of  far  greater  importance  to  adorn  the  soul  than  to  decorate  the  body. 
The  soul  is  unseen,  so  is  its  garniture ;  it  is  hidden  from  the  eye  of  man,  but  seen  of 
God.  The  proper  ornament  of  Christian  women  is  "  the  hidden  man  of  the  heart " — the 
hidden  life  of  the  regenerate  soul.  It  is  hidden ;  it  will  not  always  be  asserting  itself ; 
it  is  retiring  in  its  modest  beauty.  But  that  inner  man  is  very  fair  and  lovely,  for  it 
is  renewed  after  the  image  of  the  Saviour ;  its  beauty  lieth  in  the  incorruptibleness  of 
•  meek  and  quiet  spirit.  The  beauty  of  the  Christian  life  consists  in  these  softer 
graces  rather  than  in  self-assertion  and  denunciation  of  the  faults  of  others.  Christian 
women  should  be  meek  and  calm,  not  angry,  not  fretful ;  they  should  bear  their  daily 
cross  quietly  and  submissively ;  they  should  not  allow  the  unkind  words  or  deeds  of 
others  to  excite  them  to  wrath.  This  true  adorning  of  the  soul  is  incorruptible ;  it  is 
not  lost  by  death,  it  will  follow  the  holy  dead  into  the  paradise  of  God ;  and  it  is  of 
great  price  in  the  sight  of  God.  The  world  admires  rich  dress  and  costly  jewels ;  God 
prizes  the  meek  and  quiet  spirit.  Which  of  the  two  should  Christians  seek  to  please 
— God  or  the  world  ?  i.  The  example  of  holy  women.  They  hoped  in  God.  They  who 
have  that  high  and  holy  hope  cannot  care  for  the  pomps  and  vanities  of  this  sinfnl 
world.  They  adorned  themselves  with  the  more  precious  ornaments,  meekness  and 
humility  and  wifely  obedience.  Such  a  one  was  Sarah,  the  wife  of  the  father  of  the 
faithful.  Christian  women  are  her  daughters  in  the  faith,  while  they  persevere  in  tke 
way  of  holiAess,  and  preserve  a  calm  unruffled  spirit,  not  easily  excited,  not  terrified  by 
every  sudden  scare,  but  resting  in  the  Lord. 

II.  The  duties  or  husbands.  1.  Arising  from  the  greater  weakness  of  the  wife. 
Husband  and  wite  are  both  vessels :  they  should  be  "  vessels  unto  honour,  sanctified 
and  meet  for  the  Master's  use,  and  prepared  unto  every  good  work."  But  both  are 
weak;  the  woman,  as  a  rule,  is  the  weaker.  The  weaker  the  vessel  the  more  tenderly 
it  should  be  treated.  The  husband  must  dwell  with  his  wife  according  to  knowledge; 
he  must  treat  her  with  thoughtful  consideration.  True  love  (and  marriage  without 
love  is  a  profanation  of  God'i  holy  ordinance),  especially  if  refined  by  religion,  will 


140  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  PETER,    [oh.  ra.  1—22. 

^Te  him  tact  and  discernment;  he  will  care  for  his  wife,  nourish  and  cherish  her, 
•*  even  as  the  Lord  the  Church  "  (Eph.  v.  29).  2.  Arising  from  their  mutwd  hope  of 
heaven.  Hushand  and  wife  are  fellow-heirs  of  the  grace  of  life;  each  must  honour 
the  other.  There  is  no  true  love  which  is  not  founded  in  mutual  respect,  and  that 
retpect  will  he  truest  and  deepest  when  each  regards  the  other  as  a  Christian  soul, 
liring  in  the  faith  of  Christ,  lookiog  for  the  hlessed  hope  of  eternal  life  with  God. 
Then  hushands  and  wives  love  one  another  best  when  they  love  God  first  of  aU. 
"  That  love  which  is  cemented  by  youth  and  beauty,  when  these  moulder  and  decay, 
as  soon  they  do,  fades  too.  That  is  somewhat  purer,  and  so  more  lasting,  which 
holds  in  a  natural  or  moral  harmony  of  minds ;  yet  these  likewise  may  alter  and  change 
by  some  great  accident.  But  the  most  refined,  most  spiritual,  and  most  indissoluble, 
is  that  which  is  knit  with  the  highest  and  purest  spirit.  And  the  igoorance  or  dis- 
regard of  this  is  the  great  cause  of  so  much  bitterness,  or  so  little  true  sweetness,  in  the 
life  of  most  married  persons ;  because  God  is  left  out,  because  they  meet  not  as  one  in 
him  "  (Leighton).  3.  Banger  of  neglecting  these  duties.  Their  prayers  would  be  hindered. 
The  apostle  talies  it  for  granted  that  the  Christian  man  and  wife  live  in  constant  prayer. 
The  heirs  of  the  grace  of  life  must  pray ;  they  must  hold  frequent  converse  with 
him  who  gives  that  life,  on  whom  all  their  hopes  depend.  He  takes  it  for  granted  that 
they  know  something  of  the  sweetness  and  blessedness  of  prayer.  Knowing  this,  as 
they  do,  they  must  be  very  jealous  of  anything  that  can  make  their  prayers  less  accept- 
able, less  earnest.  Then  let  them  live  together  in  holy  love.  Jars  and  bickerings 
disquiet  the  soul,  disturb  its  communion  with  God,  put  it  out  of  harmony  with  the 
spirit  of  prayer.  They  cannot  pray  aright  who  sin  against  the  law  of  love.  God  hath 
made  husband  and  wife  one  by  holy  matrimony.  They  must  not  allow  misunderstand- 
ings and  jealousies  to  put  them  asunder  even  for  a  season,  lest  they  sin  not  only  against 
one  another,  but  also  against  God,  and  so  their  prayers  should  be  hindered,  and  be 
unable  to  reach  the  throne  of  grace. 

Lessons.  1.  Let  Christian  vrives  remember  their  promise  of  obedience.  If  their 
husbands  are  not  living  in  the  faith  of  Christ,  let  them  try  to  win  them  by  holy 
example  and  the  quiet  strength  of  gentleness.  2.  Let  them  study  simplicity  in  dress 
and  ornament,  seeking  to  adorn  their  souls  rather  than  their  bodies.  3.  Let  them  be 
followers  of  holy  matrons,  not  of  the  gay  and  thoughtless.  4.  Let  Christian  husbands 
be  tender  and  loving.  6.  Let  husband  and  wife  live  together  in  the  fear  of  God  and 
in  constant  prayer. 

Vers.  8 — 17. — Oeneral  exhortation!.  L  Thk  skeat  dutt  of  Cheistiah  love. 
1.  Among  the  brethren.  "  This  one  verse"  (eighth),  Leighton  says,  "  hath  a  cluster  of 
five  Christian  graces  or  virtues.  That  which  is  in  the  middle,  as  the  stalk  or  root  of  the 
rest,  love ;  and  the  others  growing  out  of  it,  two  on  each  side — unanimity  and  sym- 
pathy on  the  one,  and  pity  and  coui-tesy  (or  humility)  on  the  other."  (1)  "  Be  ye  all 
of  one  mind."  Christians  should  be  united,  they  should  mind  the  same  thing. 
Divisions,  St,  Paul  says,  mean  that  we  are  still  carnal  (2  Cor.  iiL  4) :  "  While  one 
saith,  I  am  of  Paul,  and  another,  I  am  of  ApoUos ;  are  ye  not  carnal  ?  "  The  Church 
would  still  be  one,  one  body  in  Christ,  if  all  her  members  were  spiritual,  if  very  many 
had  not  grieved  or  even  quenched  the  Spirit  by  pride  and  imbelief  and  many  forms  of  sin. 
The  Christian  must  long  and  pray  for  that  unity  for  which  the  blessed  Lord  prayed  in 
his  great  high-priestly  prayer.  And  the  best  means  for  promoting  that  unity  is  that 
each  individual  Christian  should  strive  to  live  in  the  fellowship  of  the  Spirit,  The 
more  that  one  Spirit  fills  all  the  members  of  the  Church,  the  nearer  will  they  be  drawn 
to  one  another,  and  to  the  one  Lord  who  is  the  Head  of  the  body  which  is  the  Church. 
(2)  "Have  compassion  one  of  another."  The  Church  should  be  ono,  not  only  in 
thought  and  doctrine,  but  also  in  feeling ;  there  should  be  a  true  sympathy  among  its 
members.  They  should  he  able  to  rejoice  with  them  that  do  rejoice,  and  weep  with 
them  that  weep.  We  should  rejoice  in  the  comforts  and  happiness  of  others,  but 
especially  in  their  spiritual  advancement,  in  the  lustre  of  their  graces:  envy  and 
jealousy  rend  the  body  of  Christ  and  destroy  individual  souls.  We  should  weep  for 
the  misfortunes  and  distresses  of  others,  and  especially, like  the  psalmist,  "because  men 
keep  not  thy  Law."  We  should  feel  a  keen  and  lively  sympathy  with  the  Church  aa 
a  wBoU :  "  Fray  for  the  pea««  »f  Jerusalem. '    We  should  rejoice  in  its  triumphs,  and 


OH.m.  1— 22.]    THE  FIEST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PETER.  1« 

sorrow  in  its  trials.  A  holy  sympathy  should  pervade  all  the  memhers  of  the  one 
body.  (3)  "  Love  as  brethren."  This  is  the  central  duty  of  Christians  towards  one 
another ;  all  other  duties  are  so  many  forms  of  love.  "  He  that  loveth  another  hath 
fulfilled  the  Law."  St,  Peter]  has  already  exhorted  us  to  an  unfeigned  love  of  the 
brethren  (oh.  i.  22) ;  he  reminded  us  then  that  Christians  are  brethren,  not  only  as 
creatures  of  the  same  God,  hut  also  in  virtue  of  that  new  birth  which  has  made  them 
children  of  the  heavenly  Father  in  a  deeper  and  holier  sense.  There  must  be  no 
variance  among  the  children  of  God ;  they  must  "  love  as  brethren,"  "  endeavouring  to 
keep  the  unity  of  the  Spirit  in  the  bond  of  peace."  (4)  "  Be  pitiful."  Love  cannot  lie 
dormant  in  the  heart ;  it  shows  itself  in  tenderness  and  pity.  There  is  much  sorrow  in 
the  world,  far  more  sorrow  than  joy ;  hence  there  is  much  room  for  the  exercise  of 
tenderness.  Christian  tenderness  is  not  a  weak  thing;  it  is  strong  and  manly;  the 
strongest  are  often  the  most  tender.  The  very  word  here  rendered  "pitiful,"  or 
*  tender-hearted,"  means,  in  classical  Greek, "  courageous."  The  change  of  meaning  is 
instructive,  and  marks  a  characteristic  difference  between  Christian  and  heathen  ethics. 
(5)  "Be  courteous."  True  religion  softens  the  roughest  natures,  and  produces  a 
sweetness  and  spiritual  refinement  far  more  beautiful  and  attractive  than  that  super- 
ficial polish  which  comes  only  of  education  and  habit.  The  best  Christian  is  ever  the 
truest  gentleman.  But  in  this  place  the  true  reading  is,  be  "humble-minded." 
Courtesy,  indeed,  and  humility  have  a  near  connection ;  he  thinks  most  of  the  feelings 
of  others  who  thinks  least  of  himself.  True  Christians  must  be  lowly ;  their  Lord  set 
them  the  example ;  only  humble-minded  men  can  follow  the  steps  of  the  lowly  Saviour. 
2.  Towards  enemies.  Christians  must  remember  the  Master's  teaching.  With  the 
heathen  revenge  was  regarded  as  manly,  as  a  duty  to  one's  self;  to  submit  calmly  to 
injury  was  reckoned  as  slavish,  unworthy  of  a  free-born  man.  The  Lord  reversed  this. 
"  Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbour,  and  hate  thine  enemy,"  was  the  old  rule ;  "  But  I  say 
unto  you,"  the  Lord  said  with  that  authority  which  astonished  the  listening  multitude, 
"Love  your  enemies,  bless  them  that  curse  you,  do  good  to  them  that  hate  you,  and 
pray  for  them  which  despitefully  use  you  and  persecute  you."  St.  Peter  echoes  the 
teaching  which  had  so  much  struck  him ;  he  remembered,  it  may  be,  his  own  passion- 
ate vehemence,  the  blow  which  he  had  struck  in  the  Lord's  defence,  and  the  Lord's 
gentle  rebuke.  He  knew  how  hard  it  was  for  human  nature  to  learn  that  holy  lesson, 
how  instinctively  railing  rises  to  our  lips  when  men  rail  at  us.  Christians  have  not 
lecumed  that  lesson  in  eighteen  centuries  and  more;  each  man  has  to  learn  it  for 
himself.  St.  Peter  repeats  and  enforces  it :  •'  Ye  are  called  to  inherit  a  blessing,"  he 
says ;  "  ye  hope  one  day  to  hear  those  words  of  welcome,  '  Come,  ye  blessed  of  my 
Father.'  Then  learn  yourselves  to  bless  others ;  render  not  evil  for  evil,  but  remember 
your  daily  prayer,  'Foigive  us  our  trespasses,  as  we  forgivA  them  that  trespass 
against  us.' " 

IL  This  duty  enfobcbd  by  thb  Scbipttjbbs.  1.  The  precept.  If  we  would  make 
our  life  a  thing  to  be  loved,  a  life  worth  living ;  if  we  would  see  each  day  as  it  passes 
blessed  with  peace  and  calm  satisfaction ; — then,  the  psalmist  says,  we  must  (1)  be 
careful  to  govern  the  tongue.  The  tongue  is  "a  world  of  iniquity."  A  very  large 
proportion  of  the  sins  of  our  daily  life  arise  from  an  unbridled  tongue.  There  are  the 
grosser  sins  of  the  tongue,  profane  and  impious  words,  filthy  and  impure  language, 
falsehood  and  guile ;  and  besides  these,  there  are  other  forms  of  sin,  not  so  coarse  and 
revolting,  but  far  more  common — sins  against  the  law  of  Christian  charity ;  slander  and 
evil-speaking ;  and  all  that  light,  careless,  unprofitable  talk  which  fills  up  so  much  of 
our  time.  The  Christian  must  refrain  his  lips  from  these  things;  his  mouth  must 
speak  wisdom.  (2)  We  must  do  good.  The  Lord  went  almut  doing  good.  His  servants 
must  follow  his  holy  example.  They  must  turn  aside  from  every  form  of  evil ;  they 
must  follow  peace  with  all  men.  The  Lord  is  the  Prince  of  Peace.  "  Peace  on  earth  " 
was  the  celestial  anthem  that  celebrated  his  birth.  His  followers  must  love  peace ;  they 
must  seek  it  amid  the  discord  of  opposing  wills,  though  it  seem  hidden  from  them : 
they  must  pursue  it,  though  it  may  seem  to  flee  before  them  through  the  strifes  and 
envies  of  men.  Among  murmurings,  among  jealousies,  among  angry  words  and  party 
animosities,  the  Christian  must  carefully  seek  for  peace,  and  eagerly  pursue  it.  2.  The 
sanction.  We  are  in  the  sight  of  God ;  his  eyes  behold,  his  eyelids  try,  the  children 
of  men.    If  we  can  only  realize  that  great  truth — the  eye  of  the  Lord  is  upon  us — w« 


142  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  PETER,    [oh.  m.  1—22. 

must  try  to  please  Wm  and  to  do  hi«  will.  His  will  is  that  we  should  love  one  another, 
that  we  should  speak  no  guile,  that  we  should  follow  after  peace.  Let  those  who 
would  live  a  godly  life  try  daily  to  bring  home  to  their  hearts  the  thought  that  the  eye 
of  God  is  reading  their  souls ;  that  thought  will  make  us  humble  and  contented,  will 
save  us  from  the  countless  temptations  that  surround  us,  will  keep  us  from  breaking,  by 
word  or  deed,  the  holy  law  of  love.  That  searching  eye  is  upon  the  righteous  and  the 
wicked ;  it  found  among  the  crowd  of  guests  the  one  unhappy  man  who  had  not  on  a 
wedding  garment ;  it  pierces  through  the  outside  of  pretence  and  hypocrisy  down  into 
the  very  heart.  Let  us  not  shrink  from  bringing  this  great  truth  to  bear  upon  our  lives ; 
let  us  walk  before  God,  as  Abraham  did,  knowing  that  our  whole  inward  life  of 
thought,  as  well  as  the  outward  life  of  word  and  action,  lies  mapped  out  clear  and  plain 
to  his  all-seeing  eye.  That  thought  will  give  solemn  meaning,  depth  of  purpose, 
dignity  to  the  most  commonplace  life.  And  it  will  give  strength  ;  for  the  Lord's  ear 
is  open  to  the  prayer  of  the  righteous ;  he  hears  those  who  come  before  him  in  that 
righteousness  which  is  through  fiiith  in  Christ;  in  answer  to  their  prayer  he  gives  his 
Holy  Spirit,  and  with  that  Holy  Spirit  comes  the  gift  of  a  higher  life,  the  gift  of 
strength  and  energy,  and  that  best  gift  of  all,  holy  heavenly  love. 

III.  The  duty  of  patience  in  buffering.  1.  The  true  Christian  cannot  he  really 
hurt  ty  external  troubles.  If  we  are  zealous  of  what  is  good,  no  one  can  harm  us.  In 
truth  a  man  can  be  really  hurt  only  by  himself,  through  his  own  consent ;  for  those  who 
suffer  for  righteousness'  sake  are  blessed ;  their  suffering  does  them  no  real  harm ;  it 
is  turned  by  the  grace  of  God  into  a  blessing.  Suffering  is  a  test  of  our  religion ;  it 
shows  what  it  is  worth.  The  mere  outward  semblance  of  religion  fails  under  it;  deep 
spiritual  religion  grows  brighter  and  more  refined  in  the  furnace  of  affliction.  But  only 
true  religion  can  endure  that  searching  fire.  True  religion  is  zealous,  feiTent, 
growing ;  it  cannot  be  lukewarm ;  it  zealously  seeks  everything  that  is  really  good, 
zealously  supports  every  good  work.  The  true  Christian  cannot  be  hurt  by  external 
troubles,  for  they  will  only  deepen  and  purify  that  religion  which  is  the  life  of  his  soul, 
the  joy  of  his  heart.  Sickness,  pain,  poverty — any  trouble  meekly  borne,  is  blessed  to 
the  soul's  inward  happiness ;  but  especially  blessed  is  that  suffering  which  is  borne  for 
righteousness'  sake.  When  a  man  is  content  to  suffer  voluntarily  in  the  cause  of  truth 
and  righteousness,  he  is  brought  very  near  to  Christ  the  Lord,  for  he  is  imitating 
his  example,  sharing  his  cross.  The  kingdom  of  heaven  is  his,  for  he  Is  very  near  to 
the  King ;  and  the  King  dwelleth  in  his  heart,  filling  him  with  his  sacred  presence. 
2.  Advice  to  suffering  Christians.  (1)  In  their  relations  to  God.  They  must  not  fear, 
they  must  not  allow  themselves  to  be  distressed  and  agitated  by  surrounding  troubles. 
Restless  excitement  is  destructive  of  that  tranquillity  which  is  the  characteristic 
Christian  temper.  And  the  antidote  to  anxious  fear  is  the  hallowing  presence  of  the 
Lord  within  us.  The  apostle  bids  us,  especially  in  times  of  trouble  and  anxiety,  to 
sanctify  the  Lord  Christ  in  our  hearts.  The  Christian  heart  should  be  a  sanctuary, 
cleansed  and  purified  for  his  indwelling  by  the  gracious  influences  of  the  Holy  Spirit. 
There  Christ  dwelleth  enthroned ;  doubts  and  fear  vanish  when  the  Christian  soul  falls 
down  and  worships  him,  crying,  "  My  Lord,  and  my  God  1 "  Therefore  we  are  bidden  to 
sanctify  him,  to  regard  him  as  alone  holy,  the  Most  Holy  One,  holiest  of  holies ;  to 
hallow  his  holy  Name,  to  reverence  his  most  sacred  presence  within  us,  and  in  all  awe 
ami  love  and  thankfulness  to  offer  tmto  him  the  deepest  adoration  of  our  hearts. 
Outward  worship  is  not  enough ;  outward  forms  of  reverence  have  their  value  when 
they  are  the  expression  of  the  inward  reverence  of  the  heart;  but  it  is  in  the  heart  that 
we  must  sanctify  the  Lord  Christ,  if  we  are  to  be  blessed  with  that  holy  tranquillity  of 
spirit  which  results  from  his  sacred  presence.  As  we  sanctify  him,  he  sanctifieth  us; 
the  more  we  learn  to  regard  him  with  a  deep,  awful,  loving  reverence,  the  more  does  he 
shed  his  sanctifying  grace  throughout  our  soul,  cleansing  it  from  all  that  is  unworthy, 
and  creating  it  anew  after  his  own  image.  When  our  heart  is  his  sanctuary,  "  he  shall 
be  for  a  sanctuary  "  to  us ;  he  dwelling  in  us  and  we  in  him ;  and  then  we  need  not 
fear.  "  Though  I  walk  through  the  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death,"  said  David,  "  I  will 
fear  no  evil,  for  thou  art  with  me."  He  who  fears  God  aright  fears  nothing  else  but 
God;  he  who  sanctifieth  the  Lord  Christ  in  his  heart  hath  a  sacred  presence  there 
which  keeps  him  calm  and  tranquil  amid  dangers  and  anticipations  of  coming  troubles. 
(2)  In  their  relations  to  men.     As   they  must  live  for  Christ,  go  they  must,  when 


OH.  ni.  1—22.]     THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  PBTKw.  14S 

occasion  serves,  speak  for  him.  The  best  evidence  of  the  power  of  religion  is  the  holy 
lires  of  Christians.  But  men  will  sometimes  ask  for  a  reason  of  the  hope  that  ia  in 
them.  That  hope  seemed  a  strange  thing  in  the  days  of  persecution  and  unbelief; 
men  thought  it  wild  folly,  fanaticism.  Christians  had  often  to  speak  or  to  write 
in  defence  of  their .  faith.  We  should  be  ready  to  do  so  still  both  for  the  glory  of  God 
and  for  the  sake  of  the  inquirer's  soul.  Therefore  we  should  imitate  the  Berceans,  who 
"  searched  the  Scriptures  daily,  whether  those  things  were  so."  We  should  take  care 
that  our  faith  is  established  on  the  holy  Word  of  God ;  those  who  are  able  should 
pursue  such  other  studies  as  may  assist  us  in  the  defence  of  the  faith.  "  But,"  the 
apostle  adds  (the  conjunction  is  emphatic),  "  with  meekness  and  fear."  There  is 
always  danger  in  theological  controversy — danger  lest,  in  heated  argument,  we  trans- 
gress the  law  of  love  and  truth ;  and  danger  lest  we  tread  irreverently  on  holy  ground, 
and  speak  thoughtlessly  of  holy  things.  There  must  he  a  mingling  of  awe  and  sweet- 
ness and  wisdom  in  the  temper  of  him  who  would  by  his  words  win  souls  to  God  and 
the  truth.  And  he  must  have  a  good  conscience.  A  good  conscience  is  the 
consciousness  of  good  thoughts,  motives,  desires;  the  Christian  must  exercise  himself, - 
like  St.  Paul,  "  to  have  always  a  conscience  void  of  offence  toward  God  and  toward 
men."  Such  an  inner  consciousness  will  give  warmth,  reality,  energy,  to  his  words  whee 
he  is  contending  for  the  faith.  Words  will  not  convince  if  they  are  out  of  harmonj 
with  the  life;  unreality  will  soon  betray  itself.  A  good  life  without  words  is  a  better 
defence  of  religion  than  the  most  learned  apology  without  a  godly  life.  The  good  life 
puts  to  shame  the  false  accusations  of  the  enemies  of  Christianity ;  it  proves  the  truth 
and  the  strength  of  Christian  motives.  But  the  good  life  must  flow  from  the  good 
conscience.  Men  sometimes  begin  at  the  wrong  end;  they  try  first  to  reform  the 
outward  life ;  they  should  begin  with  the  mind  and  conscience.  "  If  Christians  in  their 
progress  in  grace  would  eye  this  the  most,  that  the  conscience  be  growing  purer,  the 
heart  more  spiritual,  the  affections  more  regular  and  heavenly,  their  outward  carriage 
would  be  holier;  whereas  the  outword  work  of  performing  duties,  and  being  much 
exercised  in  reli^on,  may,  by  the  neglect  of  this,  be  labour  in  vain,  and  amend  nothing 
soundly.  To  set  the  outward  actions  right,  though  with  an  honest  intention,  and  not 
so  to  find  out  and  regard  the  inner  disorder  of  the  heart,  whence  that  in  the  actions 
flows,  is  but  to  be  still  putting  the  index  of  a  clock  right  with  your  finger,  while  it  is 
foul  or  out  of  order  within,  which  ita  continual  business,  and  does  no  good.  Oh !  but 
a  purified  conscience,  a  soul  renewed  and  refined  in  its  temper  and  affections,  will  make 
things  go  right  without,  in  all  the  duties  and  acts  of  our  callings"  (Leighton). 
3.  Christians  have  comfort  in  their  suffering*.  For  (1)  they  know,  if  they  are  called  to 
suffer,  that  it  is  the  will  of  God,  and  that  his  will  is  better  than  our  will.  He  willeth 
that  we  should  be  saved,  that  we  should  come  to  repentance  and  live ;  he  willeth  our 
sanctification ;  and  he  makes  our  earthly  afBiotions,  if  we  bear  them  patiently,  work 
together  for  our  souls'  good.  And  (2)  it  is  better  to  sufi'er  while  well-doing  and  (as 
was  once  the  case  often,  and  is  sometimes  the  case  now)  for  well-doing  than  for  evil- 
doing.  The  world  thinks  otherwise ;  people  often  say  that  they  could  bear  this  or  that 
trouble  better  if  they  had  deserved  it.  But  those  who  say  that  seldom  bear  deserved 
afflictions  well ;  and  the  Christian  knows  that  suffering  for  well-doing,  when  it  comes, 
is  the  highest  form  of  suffering,  for  it  makes  the  suffering  Christian  most  like  unto  the 
suffering  Lord.  If  only  he  has  a  good  conscience,  if  his  conversation  (his  life  and 
conduct)  is  in  Christ,  in  the  sphere  of  his  presence,— he  can  look  inward  and  find  Christ, 
he  can  look  upward  and  see  by  faith  the  prize  of  the  high  calling ;  and  then  he  can 
say,  even  in  the  midst  of  Buffering,  "  Blessed  be  the  Name  of  the  Lord." 

Lbbbons.  1.  Let  us  love  the  brethren ;  then  we  shall  be  of  one  mind  and  one  heart; 
we  shall  be  pitiful,  courteous,  humble.  2.  Remember  the  Lord's  words,  "  Vengeance  is 
♦nine ; "  "  Love  your  enemies."  3.  The  eye  of  the  Lord  is  upon  you  ;  speak  and  do  only 
what  is  acceptable  to  him.  4.  Make  your  heart  a  temple  of  God;  reverence  his 
presence  there.  6.  Be  very  careful,  when  it  is  your  duty  to  contend  for  the  faith,  to 
speak  with  meekness  and  reverence. 

Vers.  \h—22.—G<mtider  Christ.  I.  His  suffbeikgs.  1.  Their  cause.  Even  he 
suffered.  The  universality  of  suffering  is  a  common  topic  of  consolation.  '  .VTan  is  bom 
to  trouble."    But  the  thought  of  the  guflering  Saviour  is  a  source  of  sweeter  comfort 


144  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PETER,    [oh.  in.  1—22. 

and  holier  patience.  A  great  saint  has  said,  "  They  feel  not  their  own  wounds  who 
contemplate  the  wounds  of  Christ."  He  endured  the  cross,  despising  the  shame,  for  the 
joy  that  was  set  before  him.  If  we,  in  our  sufieiings,  look  unto  Jesus,  sacred  thoughts 
of  his  cross  will  fill  our  heart  more  and  more,  and  prevent  us  frorh  dwelling  overmuch 
on  our  own  afSictions.  He  is  the  transcendent  Example  of  suffering  for  well-doing.  But 
his  death  is  unique;  it  stands  alone  in  its  unapproachable  glory^  it  is  surrounded  with 
an  atmosphere  of  awful  and  yet  most  blessed  mystery.  He  is  not  simply  a  martyr  fur 
the  truth ;  he  suffered,  indeed,  for  well-doing,  but  he  suffered  also  on  account  of  sins. 
Sin  was  the  cause  of  his  death,  but  not  his  sin ;  be  was  absolutely  sinless.  He  was 
just,  the  Just  One ;  but  he  gave  himself  in  his  wondrous  love  to  suffer  for  the  unjust, 
for  their  sake,  in  their  behalf,  that  he  might  do  them  good.  Their  sin  caused  his 
death ;  if  man  had  not  sinned,  there  had  been  no  need  that  the  Son  of  Ood  should  die. 
The  gin  of  the  world  was  a  burden  that  none  but  he  could  bear;  he  took  it  upon  him. 
As  the  high  priest  bore  the  names  of  the  tribes  of  Israel  on  his  shoulders  and  on  his 
breast,  so  Christ  the  great  High  Priest  bore  the  names  of  his  chosen  in  his  heart,  and 
-the  tremendous  burden  of  the  world's  sin  upon  his  innocent  head.  And  this  he  did  of 
his  own  free  will,  in  his  own  generous  love ;  we  must  think  of  him  when  we  are  called 
to  suffer,  especially  when  we  suffer  for  well-doing.  2.  Their  purpose.  It  was  "that  he 
might  bring  us  to  God."  Our  sin  had  separated  us  from  God ;  we  were  afar  off  from 
him.  "But  now  hath  he  reconciled  us  by  his  cross,  having  slain  the  enmity  thereby,'' 
He  has  suffered  our  punishment ;  therefore,  if  we  are  his,  we  have  boldness  to  enter 
into  the  holiest  by  the  blood  of  Jesus.  Apart  from  God  there  can  be  no  holiness,  no 
happiness,  no  true  life.  Separation  from  God  means  darkness,  misery,  spiritual  death. 
Christ  suffered  that  he  might  bring  us  to  God;  then  we  must  follow  him  by  the  way 
which  he  trod,  the  way  of  the  cross.  He  himself  is  the  Way ;  and  we  can  walk  in  that 
way  only  by  imitating  him ;  if,  then,  we  would  come  to  the  Father  by  the  new  and  living 
Way,  which  is  Christ  himself,  we  must  learn  to  imitate  Christ,  always  in  patient 
submission  to  the  will  of  God,  sometimes  in  patient  suffering  for  the  truth's  sake. 
3.  Their  extent.  Christ's  sufferings  extended  even  unto  death ;  they  could  reach  no 
further.  "  Hetlnxmbled  himself,  and  became  obedient  unto  death,  even  the  death  of  the 
cross."  It  was  Gis  own  free  act;  be  laid  down  his  life  of  himself;  none  could  take  it 
from  Ima  The  heathen  thought  it  a  good  omen  when  the  victim  came  quietly  to  the 
altar.  No  victim  e'^er  came  with  such  entire  consent  of  will  as  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ ; 
for  he  knew  with  perfect  foreknowledge  all  the  circumstances  of  his  bitter  Passion, 
and  at  each  moment  of  that  long  agony  he  submitted  himself  of  his  own  will  to  the 
tortures  inflicted  by  those  poor  weak  creatures  whom  he  might  by  one  word  have 
swept  into  utter  death.  He  set  us  the  example  of  obedience  unto  death.  Let  us  learn 
of  him.  "  Be  thou  faithful  unto  death,  and  I  will  give  thee  the  crown  of  life."  The 
Lord  was  quickened  in  the  spirit ;  so  shall  it  be  with  his  chosen.  From  the  moment 
of  death  tbey  are  blessed ;  for  they  shall  be  with  him  in  Paradise.  From  that  moment 
they  are  quickened  in  the  spirit ;  the  spirit  is  filled  with  a  new  life,  with  new  power; 
and  energies ;  the  life  of  departed  saints  is  "  far  better  "  than  this  earthly  life ;  indeed, 
they  are  absent  from  the  body;  they  have  not  yet  reached  that  perfect  consummation 
and  bliss  both  in  body  and  soul,  which  can  be  realized  only  in  God's  everlasting  glory ; 
but  they  are  with  the  Lord ;  they  rest  from  the  labours  of  this  anxious,  restless  life ; 
their  works  do  follow  them ;  they  are  quickened  in  the  spirit  to  a  new  life  of  love  and 
blessedness,  and,  it  may  be,  of  holy  work  for  Christ.  That  work  will  be  full  of 
happiness ;  there  will  be  no  more  suffering,  no  more  weariness.  The  natural  tendency 
of  goodness  is  to  produce  happiness ;  those  tendencies  are  marred  and  impeded  here ; 
there  they  will  have  their  perfect  work;  perfected  holiness  will  issue  in  perfected 
happiness. 

11.  His  wobk  of  pbeachino.  1.  The  Preacher.  It  was  the  Lord  himself,  the  Word 
of  the  Father.  He  is  the  Word :  "  God  has  spoken  to  us  by  his  Son."  He  preaches  the 
Word,  the  Word  of  eternal  life.  He  preached  all  the  years  of  his  earthly  ministry ;  and 
when  his  holy  body  lay  in  the  grave,  after  he  had  been  put  to  death  in  the  flesh,  still 
he  preached  in  the  spirit.  The  ministers  of  God's  Ifoly  Word  and  sacraments  must 
learn  of  the  great  Preacher;  they  must  preach  faithfully,  diligently,  for  big  sake, 
for  the  love  of  the  souls  whom  he  loved;  they  must  count  it  not  a  labour,  but  a  nigh 
^nd  holy  privilege^  to  preach  the  gospel  of  salvation.    He  preached  in  the  spirit;  then 


«H.  ml— 22.]     THE  PIBST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PETER.  14  B 

we  may  ba  sure  that  the  spirits  and  louls  of  the  righteous  do  not  sleep  idly  in  thi 
intermediate  state.  Even  Dives  in  torment  prayed  for  his  five  brethren;  can  we 
doubt  but  that  departed  saints  pray  still  for  those  whom '  they  loved  on  earth,  for 
whom  they  were  wont  to  pray  ?  It  is  full  of  sweetness  to  believe  that  they  still  think 
of  us;  that  they  are  witnesses  (Heb.  xii.  1)  of  our  heavenward  course;  that  they  help 
us  with  their  prayers ;  that  as  the  number  of  the  blessed  who  have  died  in  the  Lord 
increases  in  ever  vaster  multitude,  so  a  fuller  volume  of  prayer  rises  from  Paradise  up 
to  the  glory-throne.  They  pray,  we  may  be  sure;  it  may  be  (for  St.  Peter  throughout 
this  passage  is  speaking  of  Christ  as  our  Example)  they  also  spread  the  glad  news  of 
the  gospel  among  the  kingdoms  of  the  dead.  2.  The  listeners.  They  too  were  absent 
from  the  body ;  but  they  were  not  in  Paradise,  on  the  happy  sides  of  Hades ;  they  were 
in  prison.  They  were  in  some  dreary  place,  apart  from  the  souls  of  the  blessed; 
for  they  had  once  been  disobedient  through  unbelief.  There  had  been  a  preacher 
among  them  then — Noah,  "  a  preacher  of  righteousness ; "  but  they  heeded  him  not. 
They  were  eating  and  drinking,  marrying  and  giving  in  marriage,  until  the  very  day 
that  Noah  entered  into  the  ark.  Noah  and  his  sons  ate  and  drank  too ;  but  his  main 
work  was  to  preach  righteousness,  and  to  build  the  ark  according  to  the  word  of  Ood. 
Still  Grod's  ministers  preach ;  slill  the  Church,  which  is  the  ark,  bears  witness  to  the 
mercy  and  long-suffering  of  God,  and  bids  the  world  to  escape  from  the  wrath  to  come. 
And  still,  alasl  vast  multitudes  live  on  in  unbelief,  eating  and  drinking  and  spending 
their  whole  time  in  worldly  pursuits,  as  if  eating  and  drinking  were  the  end  of  life,  as 
if  this  world  with  its  vain  pomp  and  glory  were  to  abide  for  ever.  So  it  was  with  tliess 
unhappy  men ;  the  long-suffering  of  God  waited  many  years  while  the  ark  was  a-pre- 
paring ;  as,  blessed  be  his  holy  Name,  it  is  waiting  now  till  the  number  of  his  elect 
is  complete.  Then  few  only  were  saved ;  now,  alas  I  it  is  the  few  who  find  the  strait 
and  narrow  path.  The  "prison"  must  be  the  end  of  unbelief  and  disobedience; 
the  word  suggests  fearful  thoughts  and  dark  unsatisfied  questions.  The  Lord  preached 
even  there ;  he  brought,  we  may  be  sure,  the  glad  tidings  of  salvation :  may  we  not 
venture  to  trust,  in  humble  hope,  that  some  who  had  not  listened  to  Noah,  the  preacher 
of  righteousness,  listened  then  to  Christ,  the  Preacher  of  salvation  ? 

III.  The  baptism  which  hb  ordained.  1.  The  outward  and  visible  sign.  It  is  water 
— "  water  wherein  a  person  is  baptized."  Water  once  saved  the  world,  water  cleansed 
it  from  that  wickedness  which  was  bringing  down  the  wrath  of  God ;  the  world  passed 
then  through  a  baptism  of  water  which  was  death  unto  sin,  but  a  new  birth  unto 
righteousness ;  there  was  a  new  beginning,  new  possibilities,  new  hopes.  And  water 
saved  the  few  that  had  entered  into  the  ark ;  it  bore  up  the  ark,  and  saved  those  in  it 
from  the  wrath  of  men  and  from  the  contagion  of  surrounding  pollution.  Yet  one  of 
those  few  brought  upon  himself  liis  father's  curse.  So  baptism,  the  antitype  of  the 
water  of  the  Flood,  is  now  saving  those  who  by  it  are  admitted  into  the  ark  of  Christ's 
Church.  It  is  saving  us,  for  it  is  the  beginning  of  our  salvation,  bringing  us,  as  it  does, 
into  covenant  with  God.  But  it  is  only  the  beginning ;  still  the  Lord  adds  daily  to  the 
Church  those  who  are  being  saved  (roif  irm(»ii.irms.  Acts  ii.  47).  But  that  salvation  has 
to  be  worked  out  by  the  grace  of  God  who  worketh  within  his  chosen.  2.  The  inicard 
and  spiritual  grace.  Ananias  said  to  St.  Paul,  "Arise,  and  be  baptized,  and  wash 
away  thy  sins."  But  mere  outward  washing  cannot  cleanse  the  soul.  The  conscience 
must  be  good,  the  heart  must  be  sprinkled '&om  an  evil  conscience.  The  inward  and 
spiritual  grace  is  a  death  unto  sin  and  a  new  birth  unto  righteousness ;  the  conscience 
will  bear  witness  whether  this,  the  inner  meaning  of  our  baptism,  is  realized  in  our  life. 
Conscience,  Leighton  says,  is  God's  deputy  in  the  soul :  "  Its  business  is  to  sit  and 
examine  and  judge  within ;  to  hold  courts  in  the  soul,  .  .  .  Not  a  day  ought  to  pass 
without  a  session  of  conscience  within ;  for  daily  disorders  arise  in  the  soul,  which,  if 
they  pass  on,  will  grow  and  gather  more,  and  so  breed  more  difficulty  in  their  trial 
and  redress."  The  good  conscience  will  inquire  after  God,  will  be  ever  seeking  God. 
If  we  have  not  that  good  conscience,  we  are  not  abiding  in  the  grace  of  our  baptism, 
and  then  the  holy  sacrament  ordained  for  our  salvation  loses  its  saving  power.  3.  The 
connection  between  them.  Baptism  becomes  a  means  of  grace  through  the  appointment 
of  the  risen  Saviour.  His  people  could  not  rise  with  him  in  baptism  save  through  the 
power  of  his  resurrection ;  that  resuirection  is  the  pledge  of  new  life,  new  energies,  new 
hopes,  to  all  who  are  baptized  in  one  Spirit  into  the'  one  mystical  body  of  Christ.  He 
L  PETSB.  I* 


146  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  PETER,    [ch.  in.  1—22. 

can  gire  grace  through  the  saoramentB,  for  a'l  power  is  given  unto  him;  he  is  at  the 
right  hand  of  God,  ever  interceding  for  ua,  able  to  save  us  to  the  uttermost.  There  i» 
no  guardian,  no  helper,  like  unto  him,  for  all  the  highest  spiritual  intelligences  art 
made  subject  unto  him ;  the  elect  angels  are  his  ministers ;  he  gives  tliiiu  charge  over 
his  chosen  j  the  evil  angels  are  under  his  control ;  he  can  restrain  their  malice,  he  can 
baffle  their  devices. 

Lessons.  1.  Christ  suffered  in  his  flesh  j  let  us  take  suffering  patiently.  2.  He 
suffered,  "  the  Just  for  the  unjust."  Sometimes  God's  holiest  servants  are  called  to  the 
greatest  suffering;  they  will  not  complain;  they  are  being  made,  in  their  poor  measure, 
like  their  Lord.  3.  He  suffered  to  bring  ns  to  God;  let  us  come  in  faith  and  love  and 
firatitude.  4.  He  preached  to  the  spirits  in  prision ;  may  we  listen  while  we  are  in  the 
6esh,  on  the  earth  I  6.  Let  us  strive  by  his  grace  to  realize  th'g  deep  meaning  of  our 
baptism,  the  death  unto  dn,  the  new  birth  unto  righteousness. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ter.  13. — Tli,c  amour  of  righteousness.  Thia  is  a  promise  in  the  shape  of  a  qnes<- 
lion,  which  makes  the  affirmation  stronger,  not  weaker.  It  is  the  question  of  trium- 
phant faith,  a  trumpet-blast  of  confident  defiance  of  all  foes,  like  the  wonderful  series 
of  similar  challenges  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Romans  (viii.  31 — 35),  or  that  in  Isaiah 
(i.  9),  the  Septuagint  Version  of  which  is  evidently  tne  basis  of  our  text.  We  have 
probably  here  a  consideration  additional  to  that  preceding,  in  order  to  confirm  the 
conclusion  of  the  blessedness  of  holiness.  The  apostle  has  been  quoting,  with  evident 
delight  in  the  flowing  periods,  the  assurance  of  the  psalm,  that  God's  watchful  eye  is 
upon  the  righteous.  Here  he  as  it  were  says — and,  besides,  it  is  the  general  experience 
of  the  world — lovers  of  good  get  good  from  men.  As  Christ  said,  "  Sinners  also  love 
those  that  love  them." 

I.  Thb  80BT  OF  UEN  THAT  OENEBALLY  oo  UNHABMED.  The  Revised  Version  reads 
"  zealous "  instead  of  "  followers,"  and  probably  is  right  in  the  substitution.  If 
"  followers,"  or  more  literally,  "  imitators,"  were  retained,  it  would  be  most  natural  to 
translate  "  him  who  is  "  instead  of  "  that  which  is  "  good.  But  the  antithesis  with 
the  previous  verse  ("  them  that  do  evil ")  and  with  the  word  translated  '  harm,"  which 
Is  from  the  same  root  as  that  rendered  "  evil,"  makes  the  neuter  more  probable.  If, 
tl  en,  we  take  "  zealous  for  that  which  is  good"  as  the  description  of  the  kind  of  men 
to  whom  the  promise  implied  in  our  text  is  made,  we  may  say  that  it  is  not  the  actual 
possession  of  purity  and  virtue  which  draws  men's  affections,-  so  much  as  a  certain 
enthusiasm  for  goodness  and  aspiration  after  it.  It  is  possible  to  be  good  in  a  very 
disagreeable  fashion — ^to  be  pure  as  the  eternal  snows  on  the  Alps,  and  cold  and  for- 
Udding  as  they.  And  it  is  possible  to  have  the  whiteness  of  even  an  austere  morality 
lit  up  with  a  rosy  gleam  of  ardour  and  emotion  which  shall  make  it  lovely  as  that 
same  snow  as  it  blushes  in  the  rising  sun.  The  morality  which  casts,  for  the  most 
part,  a  shield  around  its  posse.ssor  is  "  morality  touched  by  emotion,"  in  which  good  is 
evidently  loved  as  well  as  practised,  and  practised  because  it  is  loved.  It  is  precisely 
there  that  so  much  goodness  presents  an  unlovely  face  to  the  world.  The  doer  does 
Dot  seem  to  find  delight  in  it  himself,  and  so  the  onlookers  have  little  in  him.  If  our 
practice  of  purity  be  obviously  reluctant  and  constrained  it  will  not  dispose  men  to 
look  on  us  with  respect  or  favour.  We  must  be  "  zealous  of  good  "  if  we  are  to  dwm 
the  benefit  of  this  promise.  And  it  is  extremely  improbable  that  such  zeal  or  enthu- 
siastic emotion  shall  be  continuously  cherished  towards  a  mere  neuter  abstract — ^that 
which  i*  good.  A  living  Person  is  needed  to  evoke  it.  It  the  abstract  "  good"  be  the 
personal  God  our  Father;  if  it  be  incarnated  in  Jesus  Christ  our  Bruthur  who  loves  us, 
and  to  whom  as  their  conscious  and  responsive  Object  our  hearts  may  turn; — then  theie 
may  he  such  zeal,  but  scarcely  if  we  have  to  be  zealous  only  for  tliat  cold  and  yagte 
Impersonal  idea — goodness.  It  is  very  hard  to  keep  up  enthusiasm  for  anything 
ending  in  "-ness."'  Men  must  have  a  person  to  love,  and  their  desire  after  purity  i-; 
deepened  and  changed  into  a  more  ardent  earnestness  when  "  that  which  is  good  " 
lake*  human  form  and  becomes  "iini  who  is  good,  the  perfect  Christ,  the  Image  of  God, 
th«  only  Good."    All  earneat  seeking  after  moral  excellence  leads  the  seeker  at  la^i 


OB.  m.  1—22.1    THE  FIBST  EPISTLE  QENEBAL  OF  PBTEB.  141 

to  Jesus  Christ,  tnd  tbe  meTchantTnan's  quest  for  many  goodly  pearls  ends  In  the  fiad- 
ing  of  one  entire  and  perfect  chiyiolite  in  which  all  fragmentary  preciousnesses  are 
sphered. 

II.  Thf.  SArETT  OF  THESB  BMTHU8IA8T8  FOA  THE  0000.  There  is  an  antithesis  in 
the  original  which  is  lost  in  our  versions,  but  may  be  represented  by  some  such  ren- 
dering, "Who  is  he  that  will  do  bad  things  to  you,  if  you  be  zealous  of  the  good?" 
That  principle  thus  forcibly  put,  by  the  triumphant  challenge  of  the  question  and  by 
this  sharp  antithesis,  may  be  illustrated  by  several  considerations  which  are  linked 
together  in  such  a  way  that  each  comes  into  play  where  the  preceding  ceases  or  fails. 
1.  The  first  of  these  is  that,  as  a  rule,  o.  character  of  obvious  single-minded  enthusiasm 
for  goodness  conciliates.  Men  are  not  so  bad  but  that  there  is  a  place  in  their  hearts 
and  consciences  which  can  be  touched  by  goodness,  especially  if  it  is  accompanied 
with  that  self-forgetfulness  and  consciousness  of  imperfection  which  zeal  for  goodness 
will  always  bring.  When  good  men  are  disliked  it  is  very  often  not  for  their  goodnesa 
but  for  some  accompaniment  of  it  which  would  be  better  away,  such  as  their  want  of 
tact  or  of  sympathy,  their  apparent  sense  of  superiority,  or  the  like.  But  even  if  men 
are  not  won  to  love  purity,  or  even  to  be  at  ease  in  the  presence  of  good  men,  they 
will  very  seldom  go  so  far  as  to  put  dislike  into  action  and  do  harm  to  one  who  does 
good  to  them.  The  traveller  without  a  revolver  is  safest.  Fire  at  the  gaping  crowd 
on  the  banks,  and  they  will  overwhelm  you.  Meet  them  with  a  smile  and  a  handful 
of  gifts,  and  you  will  almost  always  make  friends.  Gentleness  and  patience,  sympathy 
and  love,  clear  a  path  for  their  possessors.  It  is  not  vinegar,  as  the  old  legend  has  it, 
which  will  split  the  rocks.  "  When  a  man's  ways  please  the  Lord,  he  maketh  even 
his  enemies  to  be  at  peace  with  him."  Of  course,  this  is  not  true  without  exception, 
as  the  whole  history  of  good  men  shows,  and  as  Peter  goes  on  to  admit.  Sometimes, 
righteousness  excites  men's  enmity,  and,  when  it  fails,  then  the  second  consideration 
comes  in.  2.  That  is,  that  God  will  protect  those  who  for  righteousnesif  sake  suffer. 
The  grand  promises  which  Peter  has  been  quoting  from  the  thirty-fourth  psalm  come 
into  play.  A  tacit  comparison  is  suggested  between  the  good  man's  enemies  and  his 
defences.  "  The  eyes  of  the  Lord  are  on  the  righteous,"  and  that  being  so,  though 
deadly  foes  prowl  round  him  with  their  cruel  eyes  gleaming  like  a  lion  greedy  of  hia 
prey,  the  question  of  our  text  rings  out  the  same  assurance  as  Paul's  proud  challenge, 
"  If  God  be  for  us,  who  can  be  against  us  ?  "  Many  a  time  the  persecutor  has  had  to 
confess  that  just  as  he  seemed  to  have  the  prey  in  his  power— 

"  The  man  sprang  to  his  feet. 
Stood  erect,  caught  at  God'*  skirts  and  prayed  I 
So  I  waa  afraid." 

The  man  whom  an  angel  had  brought  out  of  prison  when  the  morning  of  Ms  martyr- 
dom  was  dawning  might  well  preach  that  God  would  take  care  of  his  children  even 
when  man's  wrath  was  hottest.  3.  But  that  Divine  protection  is  not  always  granted. 
Peter  had  indeed  experienced  deliverance  at  the  eleventh  hour,  but  his  Lord  had  told 
him  that  one  day  the  putting  off  of  liis  tabernacle  was  to  come  by  violence ;  and  more, 
one  of  the  apostles  had  already  trod  that  brief  and  bloody  path  of  martyrdom  which 
he  knew  lay  before  him  and  before  many  of  those  to  whom  his  writings  would  come 
What,  in  such  extreme  case,  should  be  the  worth  of  such  a  saying  ?  Is  it  not  gi  imly 
contradicted  by  the  scaffold  and  the  fire  ?  No ;  for  even  if  these  two  outer  walls  of 
defence  are  carried  by  the  enemy,  and  men's  malice  is  not  softened  but  rather 
embittered  by  goodness,  and  God's  love  does  not  see  fit  to  shield  us  from  the  blow,  the 
inner  line  of  fortification  remains  impregnable.  In  the  utmost  extremity  of  outward 
suffering,  ay,  even  from  the  midst  of  the  fire,  the  Christian  may  ring  out  the  trium« 
phant  words  of  our  text;  for  no  real  harm  can  touch  us  if  we  be  zealous  of  that  which 
is  good.  The  evil  in  the  evil  will  be  averted.  The  bitter  will  be  changed  into  sweet, 
as  in  the  old  legend  the  shower  of  burning  coals  became  a  shower  of  rubies.  The  poison 
will  be  wiped  from  the  arrow.  The  loving  heart  that  cleaves  to  Christ  and  desires  most 
to  be  united  to  him  will  not  count  that  an  evil  which  biings  it  nearer  its  home  and  ita 
joy,  nor  think  the  wildest  storm  a  calamity  which  blows  it  to  Christ's  breast.  The 
same  events  may  be  quite  different  in  their  character  to  different  men.  Two  men  may 
b*  drowned  in  one  shipwreck.     To  the  one  it  may  be  the  opening  of  the  door  of  Ml 


J48  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  PbTBR.    [oh.  in.  1— 2a 

Father's  house  to  the  weary  pilgrim  and  the  very  crown  of  God's  mercieB.  To  th« 
other  it  may  be  misery  and  truly  a  sinking  in  a  boundless  sea  of  death.  All  depends 
on  our  relation  to  God,  who  is  the  Source  of  all  good.  If  we  love  him  in  Christ,  and. 
are  seeking  as  onr  highest  aim  amid  the  illusory  and  fleeting  good  of  earth  to  press 
closer  to  him,  then  he  will  deliver  us  from  all  real  evil ;  and  "  who  is  he  that  will 
harm  you,  if  ye  be  zealous  of  that  which  is  good  ?  "  "  All  things  work  together  for 
good  to  them  who  love  God." — A.  M. 

Vers.  3,  4. —  Woman's  true  apparel  and  ornament.  That  attention  to  dress  and 
personal  decoration  is  natural  to  woman,  is  obvious  from  an  observation  of  the  customs 
of  every  nation  in  every  age.  The  Apostle  Peter  must  not  be  understood  as  in  this 
place  censuring  such  attention,  but  as  pointing  out  that  there  is  apparel,  that  there  is 
ornament,  far  preferable  to  any  bodily  costume  and  jewellery  that  taste  can  devise  and 
wealth  can  purchase.  Christian  women  of  every  position  in  life  are  exhorted  to  pro- 
vide themselves  with  these  precious  and  incomparable  recommendations ;  to  cultivate, 
above  all  things,  "  a  meek  and  quiet  spirit." 

I.  Such  apparel  and  ornamentation  command  the  admibation  of  all  whose 
ADMIRATION  18  DESIRABLE.  Empty  fools  may  admire  as  supremely  admirable  in  woman 
the  outward  display  of  riches  and  of  fashion,  with  which  the  worldly  sometimes  seek 
to  dazzle  and  captivate  those  who  are  as  worldly  as  themselves.  To  men  of  sense  such 
things  are  utterly  indifferent ;  to  men  of  discernment  and  character  gentle  and  vir- 
tuous dispositions  and  habits  are  in  a  woman  beyond  all  price.  Such  qualities  as  Jesus 
found  in  the  sisters  of  the  home  at  Bethany  won  his  friendship,  and  similar  qualities 
will  never  cease  to  elicit  the  approval  and  appreciation  of  the  upright  and  the  pure. 

II.  Such  apparel  and  obnamentation  are  inseparable  from  the  ohabaotbb 
THEY  ADORN,  AND  ABE  IMPBBISHABLB.  Poverty  may  deprive  a  woman  of  the  power 
to  dress  with  expensiveness ;  advancing  years  may  make  the  adventitious  attractions 
excused  in  youth  unseemly  and  ridiculous.  But  "  the  meek  and  quiet  spirit "  remains 
unchanged  with  changing  time.  Often  does  it  happen  that  the  feminine  character, 
refined  and  sweetened  by  the  experience  of  life  and  by  ministrations  of  pity  and  of 
self-denial,  shines  with  a  fairer  lustre  with  advancing  years. 

III.  StrOH   APPAREL   AND   OBNAMENTATION   ARE    ACCEPTABLE   AND   PRECIOUS    IN    THE 

SIGHT  OF  God  himself.  The  approval  of  our  fellow-creatures  may  be  sought  with 
too  earnest  dilisenoe,  and  their  attachment  may  be  valued  Beyond  its  true  value.  But 
the  qualities  wliich  are  commended  by  him  who  alone  judgeth  with  perfect  justice  are 
qualities  which  cannot  be  cultivated  with  too  great  assiduity  and  care.  Our  Lord  has 
spoken  with  severity  of  those  who  seek  honour  from  men  in  preference  to  that  honour 
which  cometh  from  God.  Of  the  "  meek  and  quiet  spirit"  we  are  told  that  it  is  "of 
great  price  in  the  sight  of  God."  What  greater  inducement  than  this  could  be  offered 
to  Christian  women  to  look  with  comparative  unconcern  upon  all  those  social  and 
external  recommendations  which  are  so  often  over-estimated,  and  to  cultivate  with  all 
diligence  and  devotedness  the  graces  of  the  Christian  character  and  the  charities  of  ths 
Christianlife?— J.  B.  T. 

Ver.  7. — The  two/old  claim  of  womanhood.  In  Christ  Jesus  there  is  neither  male 
nor  female ;  the  man  and  the  woman,  as  possessors  alike  of  our  common  humanity, 
participate  alike  in  the  privileges  of  Christianity,  and  come  alike  under  the  law  of 
Christian  principle  and  motive.  And  if  this  is  so  in  the  Church,  it  is  the  case  in 
ordinary  social  life,  that,  whilst  the  man  and  the  woman  have  their  several  and  dis- 
tinct places  to  fill  and  services  to  render,  in  their  relations  to  each  other  duty  is 
reciprocal.  The  New  Testament  is  altogether  opposed  to  the  too  common  notion  that 
the  rights  are  all  on  the  side  of  the  man,  and  the  duties  all  on  the  side  of  the  woman. 
St.  Peter  is  no  more  stringent  in  laying  down  the  obligations  of  wives,  than  in  pre- 
scribing the  treatment  due  to  them  from  their  husbands.  Himself  a  married  man,  as 
the  Marriage  Service  in  our  Prayer-book  reminds  us,  he  writes  explicitly  and  wisely 
to  husbands  as  to  the  spirit  and  tone  which  should  be  apparent  in  their  domestic  life. 
The  grounds  upon  which  he  here  bases  his  injunctions  are  very  different  from  each 
other,  and  yet  thoroughly  harmonious. 

L  The  claim  of  woman  to  just  and  considebatk  tbeatuent  ib  basbd  ufok 


«fcin.  1— 22J    Tfia  FlEST  EPlSTLfi  GENE&AL  OJ  PETES.  Ui 

HBE  PHYSICAL  WEAKNESS.  Tho  fact  is  nnquestionable  that  woman  Is  less  robust  in 
constitution,  less  powerful  muscularly,  and  of  more  delicate  nerroua  organization,  than 
man.  Now,  this  fact  is  often  made  a  reason  for  overbearing  demeanour,  contemptuout 
language,  unjust  dealing,  and  even  brutal  abuse,  on  the  part  of  the  man  towards  the 
woman.  This  is  so,  not  only  in  savage  communities,  but  not  unfrequently  even  among 
civilized  nations.  Irresponsible  power  and  selfishness  coucur  in  leading  to  feminine 
degradation.  But  the  apostle  brings  forward  the  fact  that  woman  is  the  weaker  vessel 
as  a  reason  why  husbands  should  live  with  their  wives  in  a  reasonable  and  kindly 
manner,  and  should  render  to  them  all  due  respect.  1.  Human  sympathy  requires 
that  this  should  be  so.  There  is  a  natural  principle  within  leading  us  to  cherish  kind- 
ness towards  the  weak  and  defenceless;  and  this  principle  is  to  be  encouraged  as 
against  selfishness  and  brutal  indifference  and  injustice.  2.  In  addition  to  this  natural 
feeling,  there  is  a  cultivated  habit  of  chivalry  which  tends  to  the  exaltation  of  woman 
in  human  society.  Not  simply  of  the  young  and  beautiful,  the  highborn  and  accom- 
plished, but  of  all  who  are  stamped  with  the  seal  of  true,  gentle,  and  virtuous  woman- 
hood.    It  is  in  this  sense  only  that  we  can  speak  approvingly  of  sentiments  of  chivalry. 

II.  The  claim  of  woman  to  just  and  considbbatb  tbbatmbnt  is  based  upon  hgb 
SFIBITUAL  equality.  Granted  that  there  is  on  the  average  physical  inferiority  in  the 
one  point  of  strength,  it  must  be  maintained  that,  in  a  higher  plane,  inferiority  vanishes. 
Husbands  are  reminded  that  their  wives,  being  Christians  like  themselves,  are  joint- 
heirs  with  them  of  the  grace  of  life.  If,  then,  the  former  motive  was  addressed  to 
compassion,  this  appeals  to  reverence.  God  himself  acknowledges  "  the  weaker  sex  " 
as  appointed  unto  immortal  blessedness  through  his  Son,  our  Redeemer.  How  justly, 
then,  are  men  required  to  give  all  honour  to  those  who  are  fellow-inheritors  with 
themselves  of  a  domain  and  a  dominion  so  nnspeakably  glorious  t  1.  The  woman  is 
by  the  Father  of  the  spirits  of  all  flesh  regarded  with  the  same  interest  as  the  man. 
Womanhood  is  God's  own  creation,  and  the  feminine  characteristics  and  graces  are 
revelations  of  God's  own  thoughts  and  purposes.  Humanity  without  the  feminine 
element  would  be  incomplete,  one-sided,  and  lacking  in  the  harmony  of  "  perfect  music 
set  to  noble  words."  2.  The  woman  is  equally  with  the  man  redeemed  by  the  Friend 
and  Saviour  of  mankind.  Our  Lord's  ministry  upon  earth  was  a  ministry  to  both 
sexes.  Hs  counted  holy  women  among  his  friends ;  he  comforted  sorrowful  women  in 
their  distress;  he  saved  sinful  women  from  their  debasement.  And  his  death  was 
for  all  mankind ;  his  mediation  brings  near  to  God  all  who  wer«  afar  off — ^woman  as 
well  as  man.  3.  The  woman  is  appointed  with  the  man  to  share  the  happiness  and 
the  service  of  heaven.  The  grace  which  bestows  eternal  life  is  extended  to  the  wifa 
as  well  as  to  the  husband.  Aa  there  is  a  place  for  woman  in  God's  gracious  heart,  so  is 
there  a  place  for  her  in  God's  glorious  and  blessed  home. 

Such  are  th«  lugh  eonsiderations  which  hallow  and  dignify  the  Ohristian  home  I— 
J.R.T. 

Yer.  IS,— Ohristian  zeal.  Zeal  is  a  habit  of  feeling  and  purpose.  It  supposes  that 
a  certain  cause,  a  certain  end  of  action,  is  apprehended  by  the  understanding  and 
approved  by  the  judgment.  As  the  etymology  of  the  word  implies,  this  quality  is  one 
characterized  by  warmth,  fervour,  ardour,  in  the  pursuit  of  the  object  approved.  It 
manifests  itself  in  effort,  in  endurance,  in  perseverance.  Zeal  is  in  itself  neither  good 
nor  bad ;  but  it  is  always  powerful,  giving  efficiency  to  toil,  and  an  impetus  to  the 
cause  which  calls  it  into  activity.  In  a  bad  project  zeal  does  harm,  for  it  assists  in 
diffusing  error  and  immorality.  In  a  holy  enterprise  zeal  does  good;  no  great  and 
worthy  cause  was  ever  brought  to  success  and  victory  without  zealous  labours.  There 
are  cases  in  which  abundant  zeal  compensates  slender  abilities  and  mean  position.  Yet 
it  is  possible  for  zeal  to  outrun  judgment  and  discretion. 

I,  In  what  does  Chbibtian  zeal  consist?  1.  Its  spring,  its  sonrca,  ts  grateful 
love  and  ardent  consecration  to  God  as  revealed  in  Jesus  Christ.  Here  no  fanaticism 
is  possible.  There  is  the  best  reason  and  ground  for  such  emotions ;  the  danger  is  in 
the  directitm  of  indifference  and  coldness.  Interest  in  Divine  truth  cannot  be  toa 
keen;  eonsecration  to  Divine  service  cannot  be  too  complete.  2.  Its  tokens  and 
evidences  are  th*se — earnestness  in  devotion,  in  praise  and  prayer,  b«tk  public  an4 
private ;  earnestness  in  the  discharge  of  daily  duty,  however  secular,  yet  sanctified  by 


L60  THE   FIRST   EPISTLE   GENEKAL  OP   PETEE.    [oh.  m.  1—22. 

th«  Christian  motive  and  spirit;  earnestness  in  discouraging  and  repressing  all  sin; 
earnestness  in  exerting  social  influence  for  the  spread  of  truth  and  righteousness. 

JI.  Why  should  Christiahb  be  zealous?  1.  The  Scriptures  expressly  enjoin  and 
encourage  zeal.  "  Be  zealous  I "  is  the  admonition  the  ascended  Saviour  addresses  to 
his  Church.  "  It  is  good  always  to  be  zealously  affected  in  a  good  cause,"  is  the 
assertion  of  an  apostle.  2.  Our  Lord  Christ  was  supremely  zealous.  He  was  "  clothed 
with  zeal  as  with  a  cloak/'  In  his  conduct  was  a  fulfilment  of  the  words,  "  The  zeal 
of  thine  house  hath  eaten  me  up."  Zealous  in  love,  he  loved  to  the  end  ;  zealous  in 
labour,  he  finished  the  work  given  him  to  do.  3.  The  best  and  most  useful  men  have 
been  zealous.  This  is  true  of  the  apostles,  of  the  great  thinkers  and  scholars  of  the 
Church,  of  the  Eeformers,  of  leaders  in  benevolent  effort  and  missionary  enterprise. 
4.  The  presence  or  absence  of  zeal  affects  the  character  beneficially  or  injuriously.  Its 
absence  is  accompnnied  by  spiritual  declension;  its  presence  promotes  the  true 
prosperity  of  the  Church  and  the  advance  of  the  gospel ;  and  these  in  turn  react  upon 
the  individual  character  and  further  its  higher  deTelopment  and  everlasting  well- 
being.— J.  B.  T. 

Vers.  14 — 17. — Sufferen  fortified.  There  were  proTidential  reasons  why  the  early 
Christians  should  have  been  exposed  to  many  trials  of  faith,  purity,  and  patience. 
This  reason  is  obvious  to  us — that  thus  opportunity  was  afforded  for  the  administration 
of  such  fortifying  and  consolatory  principles  as  are  serviceable  to  the  aSlicted  and  the 
tempted  in  every  age. 

I.  The  TKiALS  AND  BUFFERINGS  CHRISTIANS  SHOULD  EXPECT.  These,  of  course,  ar« 
many  and  various;  but  it  is  instructive  to  notice  what  those  are  which  are  here 
singled  out  and  placed  in  prominence,  doubtless  by  the  wisdom  of  the  inspired  apostle. 
1.  Christians  may  expect  to  suffer  for  well-doing.  That  is,  they  will  have  to  endure 
injustice  from  the  world,  which  will  not  appreciate  their  character  and  their  efforts  for 
its  good.  2.  They  may  expect  to  be  evil  spoken  of,  as  if  evil-doers.  That  is,  they  wiU 
have  to  endure  calumny  from  those  who  will  take  pleasure  in  detracting  from  their 
merits,  magnifying  their  faults,  misrepresenting  their  motives,  and  traducing  their  life. 

n.  The  bgfleotions  bt  which  in  such  oases  Christians  mat  be  comforted. 
1.  They  should  not  forget  that  it  is  the  will  of  Qod  that  his  people  should  suffer,  even 
wrongfully.  2.  They  should  cherish  the  assurance  that  none  can  really  harm  them. 
3.  They  should  consider  that  their  lot  is  compatible  with  happiness.  4.  And  they  may 
even  believe  that  some  who  have  ill  treated  and  slandered  them  may  come  to  be 
ashamed  of  their  sinful  conduct. 

III.  The  fractical  frincifles  bt  which  Chbistianb  itAT  in  such  oases  fortift 
themselves.  1.  Let  them  sanctify  in  their  hearts  Christ  as  Lord.  2.  Let  them  be 
prepared  with  a  reasonable  account  of  their  hope,  the  hope  which  sustains  and  cheers 
the  afflicted  follower  of  Christ.  3.  Let  them  discard  all  fear  of  their  sinful  adversaries, 
and  confront  them  with  boldness  and  cheerfulness. — J.  R.  T. 

Ver.  18. — Bacrifidal  sufferingM.  To  Peter,  the  memory  of  his  Lord's  Passion  must 
have  been  peculiarly  pathetic  and  peculiarly  precious.  He  could  not  but  connect  the 
Master's  constancy  with  the  servant's  unfaithfulness,  and  the  servant's  penitence  with 
the  Master's  grace  and  pardoning  favour.  The  woe  he  had  witnessed  conld  never  be 
long  absent  Irom  his  recollection.  And  the  bearing  of  Christ's  sufferings  upon  human 
redemption  and  upon  Christian  consecration  must  have  constantly  occurred  to  him 
when  communicating  Divine  truth,  and  inspiring  his  fellow-believers  to  devotion  and 
endurance.  In  this  verse,  compact  with  precious  faet  and  doctrine^  we  have  set 
before  us — 

I.  The  fact  of  Christ's  buffering. 

II.  The  character  in  which  Christ  buffered.  It  is  here  that  th«  myst«iy  of  the 
fact  is  to  be  found.  The  Sufferer  was  the  Bighteous  One,  bkmeless  in  character, 
upriglit  in  conduct,  beneficent  in  ministry.  Tet  he  suffered,  notwithstanding  all  this. 
That  the  unrighteous  should  suffer,  this  appears  to  us  natural;  Uiey  eat  of  the  fruit  of 
their  doings;  they  reap  as  they  have  sown.  But  in  the  agony  and  death  of  Jesus  of 
Nazareth  we  see  the  undeserved  sufferings  of  "  the  Holy  One  and  the  Just." 

III.  The  pebsons  fob  whou  Chbist  buffkbeo.    This  consideration  increases  th« 


CH.  m.  1— 22.J    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  UF   PETER.  151 

mystery  and  enhances  the  interest  of  the  Passion  of  our  Redeemer.  At  first  sight  it 
seems  as  though,  if  undeserved  suSerings  are  to  he  endured,  this  must  be  at  least  on 
behalf  of  the  virtuous,  the  meritorious,  the  pious.  But  it  was  otherwise,  it  was  exactly 
contrary,  with  the  sufferiugs  of  Christ.  He  died  for  the  unrighteous,  for  those  who  had 
violated  the  laws  of  God  and  the  laws  of  man  I 

IV.  The  cause  by  and  fob  which  Christ  buffered.  He  was  brought  to  the  cross 
by  the  sins  of  men;  and  it  was  on  account  of  those  sins  that  he  deliberately  and 
graciously  consented  to  die.  The  connection  between  sin  and  suffering  is  obvious  io 
God's  providential  treatment  of  men ;  it  is  equally  obvious  in  God's  merciful  redemp- 
tion of  men  by  his  Son  Jesus  Christ. 

V.  The  intent  and  aim  with  which  Christ  suffered.  Nothing  more  sublime  in 
itself,  or  more  welcome  to  the  sinner's  ear,  can  be  found  than  the  statement  in  tbis 
verse  of  the  purpose  for  which  our  Lord  Jesus  accepted  the  death  of  humiliation  aud 
sbame — ^it  was  "  that  he  might  bring  us  to  God."  Surely  the  simplest  and  yet  the 
grandest  statement  of  Immanuel's  voluntary  and  sacrificial  death  t 

VI.  Christ's  bufferinq  oub  example  and  motive.  Let  Christians  see  to  it  that, 
if  they  suffer,  it  be  not  for  ill-doing,  but  (like  their  Lord)  for  well-doing.  Such 
endurance  may  be  wholesome  discipline  for  them,  and  it  may  be  the  means  of  good  to 
others,— J.  R,  T. 

Vers.  1 — 6. — The  Christian  wife  tailed  to  heart-culture  a$  the  meant  of  winning  the 
unconverted  husband.  The  subject  of  this  section  is  the  necessity  for  a  life  becoming  the 
Christian  name ;  this  is  applied  to  Christian  citizens  and  to  Christian  servants,  and,  here, 
to  Christian  wives.  The  reason  for  the  conspicuous  place  here  assigned  to  wives  is  obvious. 
The  writer  is  addressing  Churches  in  pagan  countries,  many  of  whose  members  were 
wives  of  heathen  husbands.  What  were  these  to  do?  were  they  to  continue  in  that 
relationship,  or  did  theirChristianity  sever  the  marriage  bond?  That  question  occurred 
more  than  once ;  it  was  broi^ht  before  Paul  by  the  Church  at  Corinth,  and  he  deals 
with  it  in  1  Cor.  vii.  There  was  probably  another  reason  for  this.  Dr.  John  Brown  says, 
"When  we  reflect  on  the  character  of  the  conjugal  relation  among  heathens,  how  much 
there  was  of  the  harshness  of  the  tyrant  in  the  husband,  and  of  the  baseness  of  the 
slave  in  the  wife,  and  how  much  pollution  and  cruelty  prevailed  in  the  home,  few 
things  were  more  calculated  to  strike  heathen  observers  favourably  than  the  power  of 
Christianity  in  introducing;  an  order  and  purity  and  enjoyment  into  the  domestic  circle 
beyond  what  heathen  philosophy  had  ever  dreamt  of."  Peter's  words  are  often  appli- 
cable still.  Two  hearts,  two  lives,  are  often  bound  together  by  the  closest  human  ties, 
one  devoted  to  Christianity,  the  other  not.  The  case  here,  however,  is  not  of  those 
who  had  been  united  after  one  liad  become  a  Christian;  the  nature  of  spiritual  life  and 
the  direct  Word  of  God  forbid  union  of  that  kind,  and  there  is  no  consnlation  here  for 
the  trouble  that  comes  from  disobedience  in  this  respect.  Here  the  wife  is  supposed  to 
have  become  a  Christian  since  she  gave  herself  to  the  ungodly  husband.  The  Divine 
finger  is  laid  on  the  secret  of  many  a  trouliled  life,  when  husbands  are  here  spokeL 
of  that  "  obey  not  the  Word ; "  but  the  hand  that  pains  is  that  which  heals,  for 
there  is  hope  and  strength  and  comfort  for  the  wounded  spirit  in  "  Ye  wives,  be  ir 
subjection,"  etc. 

I.  The  Christian  wife  is  here  called  to  consistent  Christian  ohabactek. 
1.  And  the  first  point  included  is  faithful  fulfilment  of  the  duties  of  her  relationship. 
"  Be  in  subjection  to  your  husbands ;  "  equi  valent  to  a  summary  of  the  various  duties  of 
the  position.  The  expression  is  harsh  at  first,  but  the  harshness  wears  off  as  we  think 
of  it,  for  love  is  always  in  subjection.  He  whose  life  was  the  embodiment  of  love  came 
not  to  be  ministered  unto,  but  to  minister.  Love  cannot  help  serving.  This  word  lays 
no  burden  on  love  but  what  she  lays  on  herself.  Nor  is  this  a  one-sided  requirement ;  for 
',he  same  Word  says, " Husbands, love  your  wives" — so  that  the  subjection  is  mutual — 
'  submitting  yourselves  one  to  another  in  the  fear  of  God."  Yet,  though  the  harsh- 
ness be  removed,  the  command  remains  and  means  someihing,  and  it  is  remarkable 
that  in  the  three  instances  in  the  Epistles  where  the  duties  of  wives  are  referred  to, 
the  same  idea  of  subjection  occuis  (Bph.  v.  22;  Col.  iii.  18;  and  here).  Woman  was 
made  for  a  " helpmeet  for  man ; "  "Thy  desire  shall  be  to  thy  husband,  and  he  shall 
rule  over  thee ; "  "  Man  was  not  created  for  the  woman,  but  the  woman  for  the  man," 


162  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PETER.    [««•  m.  1— 22. 

The  subjection,  therefore,  was  to  be  real,  yet  not  that  of  a  servant,  but  of  a  companion  ^ 
man's  other  self,  yet  still  subject.  2.  Possession  of  that  pure  character  which  spring* 
from  the  fear  of  Ood.  "  Chaste  conversation ; "  equivalent  to  pure  manner  of  life,  % 
charauler  unsullied,  and  this  arising  from  the  fear  of  God  in  the  heart.  The  godly  wife 
of  an  ungodly  man  is  exposed  to  great  difficulty ;  the  husband,  troubled  by  no  scruples, 
will  often  expect  of  her  what  her  conscience  condemns ;  and  that  position  is  as  perilou» 
as  it  is  painful.  Now,  this  word  requires  no  swerving  a  hair-breadth  from  righteous- 
ness,  not  even  under  pressure  of  the  husband's  love  and  plans.  "  Whoso  loveth  .  .  . 
husband  .  .  .  more  than,"  etc.  3.  Manifestation  of  the  graces  of  spirilualHy.  "  Whosa 
adorning,"  etc.  This  does  not  necessarily  condemn  what  is  simply  ornamental.  Did 
we  only  use  what  is  necessary  for  bare  existence,  many  of  our  fellow-creatures  could 
not  live.  God's  works  also  are  marked  by  beauty,  needless  but  for  gratification,  and 
we  may  well  copy  him  within  his  own  lines.  But  do  not  let  these  be  your  adornment, 
do  not  let  these  be  what  men  think  of  first  when  they  see  you,  nor  find  in  them  your 
attraction;  but  let  your  adornment  be  the  graces  of  the  inner  life.  Let  Christian 
women  set  themselves  against  the  dress  curse,  one  of  the  greatest  curses  of  the  day, 
and  put  character  first,  as  God  does.  - 

II.  This  is  bet  forth  as  the  means  of  winning  the  unconvebted  husband. 
These  heathen  husbands  did  not  frequent  the  sanctuary,  nor  listen  to  the  Word,  and 
thus  their  case  seemed  hopeless.  But  the  Divine  Word  may  be  carried  to  heart  and 
mind  as  much  by  a  Divine  life  as  by  a  Divine  book.  Feeding  on  this  book,  we  become 
its  embodiment,  living  Epistles  of  Christ,  read  of  all ;  and  the  promise  is  as  true  of  the 
Word  lived  as  of  the  Word  spoken,  "  My  Word  shall  not  return  unto  me  void."  Vers. 
5  and  6  :  not  simply  the  hope  to  win  the  husband  should  lead  to  living  thus,  but  not 
otherwise  could  the  wife  prove  herself  a  daughter  of  Abraham,  a  member  of  the  true 
Israel.  The  membership  of  the  Christian  wife  in  God's  family  is  of  itself  the  ground 
of  her  doing  what  is  here  required ;  all  this  is  owed  to  God  as  your  Master;  but  there 
is  an  additional  motive  for  this  in  its  effect  on  the  husband.  See  how  this  operates. 
1.  A  true  Christian  life  is  a  standing  proof  of  the  Divinity  of  Christianity.  How  can 
the  doubting  husband  be  undeceived  ?  By  the  life  of  the  wife.  2.  An  exemplification 
of  the  beauties  of  holiness  is  a  constant  persuasion.  Acts  of  forgiveness,  endurance, 
sacrifice,  adherence  to  right,  etc.,  gradually  tell  even  on  the  hardened,  and  often  loudly 
plead  for  Christ.  3.  Conquest  by  the  passive  virtues  is  God's  own  method.  Men  dislike 
direct  assaults  on  their  moral  nature,  but  often  open  their  hearts  spontaneously  to  what 
seems  to  make  no  onset.  God  recognizes  that  in  his  dealings  with  us.  The  meaning 
of  his  cross  is,  in  fact,  that  he  expects  to  subdue  us  by  suffering  for  us  and  bearing 
with  us.    We  may  expect  to  win  by  the  same  means. 

III.  This  is  only  accohplishbd  bt  personal  hbabt-cultcbe.  How  can  we  gain 
this  becoming  character?  The  passage  answers,  "By  heart-work."  Christian  character 
grows  from  within.  1.  Life  is  a  reflex  of  faith.  "What  a  man  believes,  that  is  he." 
Love,  peace,  purity,  power,  etc.,  are  the  proper  fruits  of  trust  Jai  God;  therefore 
strengthen  yoiu:  faith.  2.  Character  is  according  to  companionship.  We  become  like 
those  with  whom  we  associate.  They  take  knowledge  of  those  who  have  been  with 
Jesus.    God  impresses  bis  image  on  the  soul  that  is  much  with  him. — 0.  N. 

Ver.  7.— The  Christian  husband  called  to  enjoy  spiritual  blessings  with  the  Christian 
wife.  A  happier  case  is  supposed  than  the  preceding.  The  husband  is  "  won ; "  they 
are  "heirs  together  of  the  grace  of  life ; "  and  there  opens  before  them  the  possibility  of 
blessing  they  have  never  known.  But  even  this  has  a  touch  of  sadness  in  it.  If  it  be 
painful  for  the  one  member  in  this  relationship  having  a  piety  in  which  the  other  has 
no  share,  it  is  only  one  degree  less  so  when  they  share  it  equally,  but  live  as  though  they 
did  not.  Sharing  in  all  else,  but  units  and  solitary  in  things  eternal.  Two  fellow- 
travellers  walking  to  Emmaus,  each  talking  with  Jesus  as  they  go,  but  neither  with 
the  other — that  is  the  case  supposed  here.  ("  According  to  knowledge ; "  equivalent  to 
knowledge  of  what  is  possible  and  due  to  two  hearts  bound  together,  first  by  natural 
relationship,  and  then  by  common  love  to  God.) 

I.  The  blessednilss  or  mutual  piety  in  husband  and  wife.  They  are  both 
"heiis  of  the  grace  of  life;  "  but  the  fear  is  that  they  do  not  dwell  with  one  another  as 
"beirs  together."    Two  persons  may  make  the  same  journey,  and  never  speak.    How 


daum.!— 22.]    tHE  S'lEST  fiPIStLE  GEnEBAL  OF  PETER.  153 

different  that  from  two  who  go  in  every  respect  together,  having  common  interest  in 
all  that  happens  I  The  one  is  far  less  blessed  than  the  other.  Peter  here  urges  thb 
greater  blessedness.  Think  how  much  it  involves.  1.  It  produces  tht  closest  possible 
union.  For  that  there  must  be  no  secrets,  nothing  reserved.  Thus  we  can  get  nearer 
to  Gknl  than  to  any  other ;  we  can  never  lose  ourselves  but  in  the  heavenly  Father. 
But  those  we  love  best  on  earth  may  come  closer  to  us  in  this  respect  than  they 
sometimes  do;  and  some  Christian  husbands  and  wives  may  thus  be  more  to  each 
other  than  they  are,  sharing  not  only  temporal,  bat  spiritual  affairs.  In  this  way  there 
may  be  a  union  unutterably  more  intense,  precious,  and  fruitful,  than  before.  2.  It 
provides  muck  powerful  support.  Our  deepest  spiritual  experiences  cannot  be  told; 
many  others  should  not  be.  In  some  things  God  would  have  us  for  himself.  But 
there  is  much  also  of  the  spiritual  life  whose  utterance  to  a  fellow-creature  is  a  distinct 
need  of  the  soul ;  as  our  Lord  himself,  in  taking  the  favoured  three  apart  with  him  at 
some  of  the  crises  of  his  history — the  Transfiguration,  for  instance,  and  Gethsemane— 
seemed  to  express  the  need  of  human  sympathy,  although  in  its  highest  degree  he  had 
the  Divine.  God,  moreover,  has  given  us  our  fellows  to  be  a  helpmeet  to  ui,  as  well 
as  himself,  and  we  are  only  complete  with  both.  It  would  lighten  the  spiritual  burden 
and  brighten  the  spiritual  journey  for  husband  and  wife  to  commune  together  of  the 
way  they  go.  3.  It  gives  the  most  blessed  of  all  anticipations.  "  Till  death  us  do  part " 
is  only  true  of  those  whose  union  is  not  in  the  Lord.  Absence  for  the  day's  work,  or 
across  broad  seas, does  not  part  husband  and  wife;  they  are  still  one,  still  one  another's. 
No  more  does  death  rend  in  twain  Christian  spirits ;  the  oneness  remains,  and  there  will 
be  a  meeting  again  soon ;  and  that  meeting  will  be  heaven.  If  supreme  love  to  God, 
which  is  required  of  us  on  earth,  be  consistent  with  profound  and  tender  love  to  a 
fellow-creature,  which  is  also  required,  they  will  be  mutually  consistent  in  the  higher 
world.  Yea,  then  God  will  be  more  to  us,  being  shared  with  the  other  at  our  side,  and 
the  benediction  of  his  presence  will  impart  an  added  rapture  because  it  is  given  to  us 
both.  Of  tho^e  who  are  gone  before  it  is  said,  "  They  without  us  are  not  yet  made 
perfect."  "So"— <.e.  "  together "—" we  shall  ever  be  with  the  Lord."  That  is  our 
prospect.    Then  let  us  by  a  mutual  piety  anticipate  heaven  now. 

II.  This  blessedness  demands  mutual  pbayeb  fob  rrs  enjoyment.  In  "that 
your  prayers  be  not  hindered,"  is  not  the  apostle  thinking  of  mutual  prayer?  If 
mutual  prayer  be  wanting,  is  not  the  blessedness  of  mutual  piety  also  w.inting  as  the 
result  ?  Tertullian  wrote,  "  What  a  union  is  that  which  exists  between  two  believers, 
who  have  in  common  the  same  hope,  the  same  desire,  the  same  service  1  Like  brother 
and  sister,  united  both  in  spirit  and  in  flesh,  they  kneel  together,  they  pray  and  fast 
together,  they  teach  and  support  each  other  with  gentleness,  they  share  one  another's 
trials,  and  conceal  nothing  from  each  other,  and  they  rival  each  other  in  singing  with  their 
heart  to  God.  Christ  is  pleased  to  see  and  hear  these  things.  He  sends  down  his 
peace  upon  them.  Where  two  are  thus  met  he  is  with  them,  and  where  he  is  the  evil 
one  cannot  come."  That  is,  perhaps,  Peter's  thought  here.  1.  Mutual  prayer  is  th* 
first  and  most  natural  form  of  spirittuil  intercourse.  If  we  cannot  break  through  our 
reserve  so  far  as  to  pray  together,  it  is  unlikely  that  we  have  any  communion  on 
spiritual  topics.  It  would  seem  the  first  instinct  of  a  Christian  man  to  ask  her  he 
loves  best  to  kneel  with  him  at  the  throne  of  grac«.  Probably  this  prayer  is  the  door 
to  spiritual  intercourse,  the  removal  of  the  barriers  of  timidity  through  which  we  must 
pass  to  the  enjoyment  of  a  mutual  piety.  2.  The  utterance  before  God  of  a  common 
experience  tends  to  conscious  spiritual  oneness.  We  never  know  how  much  we  are  one 
with  other  saints  till  we  join  with  them  in  prayer  ;  then  we  find  ourselves  sorrowing, 
rejoicing,  hoping,  loving,  fearing,  trusting  alike,  and  are  thereby  drawn  closer  together 
still.  That  principle  operates  even  more  certainly  in  the  mutual  prayer  of  husband 
and  wife.  3.  Ute  fact  of  mutual  prayer  tends  to  mutual  spiritual  fidelity.  Would  not 
mutual  prayer  go  far  to  be  a  remedy  for  the  difficulty  which  it  is  to  be  of  spiritual  use 
to  those  nearest  to  us  ?  The  parent  who  prays  with  his  household,  the  husband  with 
his  wife,  will  find  it  specially  hard  to  sin  agaiust  or  with  them.  As  the  spirit  of  prayer 
prevails,  the  spirit  of  unkindnesi,  indifference,  evil  example,  etc.,  will  lessen.  "  That 
your  prayers  be  not  hindered "  ia  thus  the  warning  to  those  who  would  be  "  heiri 
together  of  the  grace  of  life." 

m.  TkuI  rSATXB  BX^UIBSS  TBS  FULULMINT  OF  KOTUAI.  DUTXX8  FOB  IT*  RUCOESft 


154  THE  FIRST  BPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  PETER,    [oh.  in.  1— 2a 

If  pnyer  helps  duty,  so  duty  helps  prayer.  Is  not  the  fact  that  some  Christians  in  tha 
game  home  seldom  pray  together,  due  to  the  fact  of  an  inconsistent  life — the  life  of  a 
kind  which  makes  the  proposal  to  pray  impossihle  ?  That  seems  to  be  the  idea  here : 
"  Te  husbands,  dwell  with  them,  .  .  .  giving  honour  unto  the  wife,  as  unto  the  weaker 
Tessel,  and  as  being  heirs  together  of  the  grace  of  life ;  that  your  prayers,"  etc.  1.  Tht 
consideration  of  what  we  owe  to  one  another  will  prevent  the  neglect  of  mutual  prayer. 
"  Honour  "  is  due  to  the  wife  on  the  physical  ground — she  is  "  weaker,"  which  brings 
corresponding  duties  to  the  stronger ;  and  on  the  spiritual  ground — she  is  partaker  of 
the  same  immortal  nature,  with  its  great  conflicts  and  high  responsibilities,  equally  an 
heir  of  Divine  grace,  which  brings  corresponding  duties  to  the  fellow-heir.  The 
consideration  of  that  should  lead  to  united  prayer.  2.  The  fulfilment  of  what  we  mot 
will  afford  the  right  spirit  for  prayer.  As  long  as  the  wife  is  defjauded  of  what  she 
has  a,  right  to,  mutual  prayer,  if  not  impossible,  will  be  robbed  of  its  sweetness  and 
power.  Unkindness  and  bitterness  kill  prayer.  Mutual  prayer  can  only  flourish  in 
the  atmosphere  of  mutual  love. — G.  N. 

Ver.  8. — The  conduct  that  hecomes  the  Ghrittian  towards  other  Chritlians.  "  Finally, 
be  ye  all  like-minded,  having  compassion  one  of  another,  love  as  brethren,  be  pitiful, 
be  courteous."  Only  a  colon  separates  this  passage  from  what  follows :  ought  it  not, 
therefore,  to  be  taken  with  the  subsequent  verses  ?  I  think  not.  Peter  is  evidently 
thinking  here  of  the  mutual  relation  of  believers;  whilst  in  the  next  verse  he  passes 
to  the  thought  of  how  Christians  should  treat  their  persecutors :  "  Not  rendering  railing 
for  railing,"  etc.  Then  why  should  there  only  be  a  colon  between  the  two  ?  Because 
the  two  are  so  closely  connected.  It  is  in  fellowship  with  our  brethren  that  we  find 
much  of  the  inspiration  we  need  for  facing  and  conquering  persecution  from  vrithout. 

I.  Beothbblt  love  the  ideal  of  a  Christian  CnnncH.  Is  it  possible  for  a 
Christian  to  have  no  practical  relationship  with  the  Church  ?  I  do  not  say  that  it  is 
not  possible,  but  such  a  position  is  very  unlikely.  A  Christian  is  he  who  is  born  into 
the  family  of  Cod,  and  a  certain  close  relationship  to  the  Father's  other  children  is, 
in  the  nature  of  the  case,  almost  inevitable.  1.  By  hrotherly  love  we  come  nearest  to 
the  spirit  of  the  Father.  The  feelings  which  are  classed  under  the  term  "  love  "  vary 
considerably.  Love  may  be  due  to  admiration  for  the  personal  qualities  of  another,  to 
a  common  interest  in  Church  matters,  to  a  sense  of  obligatioD,  the  fruit  of  gratitude ; 
but  there  is  nothing  essentially  Christian  in  all  that.  Brotherly  love  is  to  love  another 
because  he  is  our  brother,  and  for  no  other  reason ;  not  because  there  is  anything 
lovely  in  him,  but  just  because  we  have  a  common  father.  Brotherly  love  towards 
GM's  children — that  is  Divine;  that  is  to  be  of  one  spirit  with  the  Father;  that  is  to 
feel  in  measure  as  he  does.  2.  By  hrotherly  love  we  come  nearest  to  the  example  of 
Christ.  The  Church  is  to  be  a  perpetual  representation  of  Jesus — what  he  was  and  is. 
By  his  gracious  Spirit  he  is  embodied  in  his  people ;  and  they  most  truly  approach  his 
likeness  who  love  those  who  are  his.  He  loves  the  world ;  he  died  to  save  it ;  but  he 
hits  a  love  of  fellowship  for  those  who  come  to  him  out  of  the  world  that  he  can  have 
for  no  others.  His  love,  his  joy,  his  work,  his  life,  his  glory,  all  theirs ;  reaching  the 
climax  in  the  prayer,  "That  they  all  may  be  one;  as  thou,  Father,  art  in  me,  and  I  in 
thee,  that  they  also  may  be  one  in  us."  3.  By  Irotherly  love  we  come  nearest  to  the 
fuljilment  of  our  mission  as  a  Church.  The  Church  has  a  mission  to  itself  as  well  as 
to  the  world.  Christians  are  banded  together  in  fellowship  for  mutual  help;  they  are 
united  that  they  may  build  up  one  another ;  and  this  building  up  is  to  be  done  by  love 
What  will  not  love  do  for  the  brethren  ?  It  will  encourage  the  timid,  help  the  weak, 
uphold  the  infirm,  seek  the  wandering,  give  the  vigour  of.  joy  to  those  who  are  strong, 
will  stoop  even  to  wash  the  disciples'  feet.  The  Chwch,  fulfilling  her  mission  to  herself 
in  love,  thereby  begins  her  mission  to  the  world. 

II.  Wk  have  HEBE  a  WARNING  AGAINST  TWO  HINDEAN0E8  TO  THIS  IDEAIa  1.  Diver- 
gence of  aim.  "  Be  ye  all  like-minded."  That  does  not  mean  unanimity  of  sentiment 
and  action  in  all  matters ;  for  that  is  manifestly  impossible.  Variety  of  thought  and 
feeling  and  action  there  must  obviously  be ;  but  there  is,  of  course,  a  limit  to  this 
variety.  The  Church  cannot  fulfil  her  calling  as  the  "  pillar  and  ground  of  the  truth  " 
unless  there  be  a  consent  of  opinion  as  to  what  that  truth  in  its  essential  features  is. 
We  have  different  work,  different  positions  in  the  Church,  and  sometimes  differeat 


OT-m.  1— 22.]    THE   FIRST   EPISTLE   GENERAL  OF   PETER.  ir-> 

views  as  to  the  best  things  to  doj  but  if  Christian  love  is  to  be  maintained,  fts  the 
different  colours  into  which  the  prism  diverges  the  light — red,  and  purple,  and  orange, 
and  the  rest — all  blend  and  are  lost  in  the  pure  white  ray  they  form,  so  we  must  Icain 
the  secret  of  blending  our  differences  in  a  holy  unanimity.  '  Perhaps  nothing  is  harder 
than  to  sink,  and  that  gracefully,  so  that  no  one  knows  we  are  doing  it,  our  personal 
feeling  into  the  common  feeling  of  the  -rest.  How  can  all  be  like-minded?  In  the 
Revised  Version  the  word  "  courteous  "  drops  out,  and  in  its  place  we  have  "  humble- 
minded."  That  is  it;  heart-culture,  personal  discipline,  stern  struggle,  are  needed  if 
ve  are  to  be  like-minded,  laying  a  strong  hand  on  self,  and  keeping  it  under  when  it 
wants  to  rise.  2.  Mxclusiveness  of  feeling,  "Compassionate"  (the  Greek  word  is  sviaa- 
6f7s,  our  word,  "sympathy,"  fellow-feeling).  Our  Churches  are  not  always  conspicuous 
for  that.  They  are  often  broken  up  into  little  sets,  little  bands  of  friends  complete  in 
themselves ;  then  farewell  to  the  reign  of  Christian  love,  with  its  benediction,  and  in 
its  place  expect  hard  thoughts,  hitter  feelings,  wounded  spirits,  lonely  lives,  and  the 
curse  that  means.  But  how  can  we  get  this  compassion  ?  The  apostle  adds,  *'  tender- 
hearted" (as  the  same  Greek  word  is  rendered  in  Eph.  iv.  82),  and  in  that  he  may  be 
showing  us  how  to  secure  the  like-heartedness.  It  comes  from  keeping  the  heart 
tender.  We  must  live  much  with  Christ;  a  tender  heart  will  come  from  that,  and  ft 
like  tenderness  with  his  people, 

III.    W«    HAVB    HERB    THB    INPLUENCB    OF   OHB    ATTAINMENT    OP    THIS    IDEAL    (oF 

BROTHERLY  lovb)  ON  THE  WORLD.  The  Church  has  a  mission  to  those  who  are  without ; 
but  that  will  not  be  fulfilled  till  her  mission  to  herself  is  fulfilled.  A  Church  building 
up  herself  in  love  will  be  the  Church  which  compels  the  Gentiles  to  •'  glorify  God  in  the 
day  of  visitation."  1.  The  Spirit  works  where  love  i».  Absence  of  love  is  to  him  »a 
ungenial  atmosphere ;  it  grieves  him  and  tempts  him  to  depart,  or  to  withhold  hit 
gracious  influences.  2.  The  bea.uty  of  piety  reveals  itself  where  love  is.  Love  which  is 
independent  of  the  restraints  of  natural  affection,  and  loves  men  not  because  they  are 
good,  but  because  God  loves  them;  love  which  is  disinterested  and  strong  to  sustain 
and  protect,  and  tender  to  make  common  cause  with  those  who  need  it,  and  which 
sheds  a  holy  grace  over  the  life; — ^that  love  will  at  least  constrain  the  world  to 
acknowledge  its  Divinity,  and  we  may  expect  to  hear  more  frequently  that  welcome 
utterance,  "  I  will  go  with  you,  for  1  perceive  that  God  is  with  you."  And  God  himself 
will  triumph  over  such,  in  the  ancient  words, "  I  drew  them  with  cords  of  love."— C.  N. 

Vers.  9 — 17. —  The  conduct  hecoming  the  Christian  tonjardt  hit  persecutors.  Peter's 
Epistles  were  written  on  the  very  eve  of  the  persecution  by  Nero,  who,  anxious  to 
divert  the  suspicions  of  the  people  who  accused  him  of  setting  fire  to  Rome,  charged 
the  Christians  with  the  crime,  and  caused  them  to  be  seized  and  tortured  and  slain. 
Some  were  crucified;  some  vtere  clothed  in  the  skins  of  wild  beasts,  that  they  might  be 
torn  by  the  dogs ;  some,  having  been  rubbed  over  with  pitch,  were  made  to  serve  as 
torches  to  light  up  the  imperial  gardens, — this  gratified  at  once  sovereign  and  people. 
It  is  true  that  this  severity  was  confined  to  the  neighbourhood  of  Rome,  but  Rome 
was  the  centre  of  life  to  her  provinces ;  the  pulsations  of  the  heart  thrilled  to  the 
most  distant  parts  of  the  empire.  The  words  of  our  text  have  a  new  meaning  as  they 
rise  before  us  on  this  dark  background.  Some  may  ask — What  is  the  bearing  of  this 
on  na  ?  The  answer  is,  that  wlien  Paul  said,  "  They  that  will  live  godly  in  Christ 
Jesus  shall  suffer  persecution,"  ho  uttered  what  would  be  a  fact  to  the  end  of  the  age. 
The  fire,  the  rack,  the  headsman's  axe,  are  gone ;  but  in  their  place  there  are  words 
that  burn,  looks  that  go  like  poisoned  shafts  to  the  soul,  and  treatment  that  stings 
like  a  scourge.  As  long  as  the  truth  which  the  Church  is  called  to  maintain  and  to 
live  before  a  world  that  hates  it  is  what  it  is,  as  long  as  our  spiritual  life  needs  trial 
for  its  cleansing  and  development,  so  long  will  Christ's  people  find  how  true  it  is  that, 
because  they  are  not  of  the  world,  but  Christ  hath  chosen  them  out  of  the  world, 
therefore  the  world  hateth  thern.  We  can  only  glance  at  the  bare  outline  of  such  a 
long  passage  as  this.  It  contains  three  requirements,  each  of  which  has  a  benediction 
attached  to  it 

I.  Call  to  bless  those  who  peksecutb  ns.  From  the  ninth  verse  to  the  twelfth  ; 
you  can  hardly  read  these  words  without  feeling  you  are  listening  to  one  who  lieard 
the  sermon  on  the  mount,  and  ia  inspired  with  its  spirit ;  and  we  cannot  help  noting 


158  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  PETER.    [oB.  m.  1— 22. 


the  change  they  imply  in  Peter  himself.  But  perhaps  it  was  what  he  saw  in  his  Lord, 
more  than  what  he  heard  from  him,  to  which  the. change  was  due ;  Christ's  character 
carrying  his  words  home  with  transfiguring  force.  We  do  not  wonder  that  it  was 
Peter  who  wrote,  "  Not  rendering  evil  for  evil,"  etc.,  and  it  is  the  word  and  example 
of  the  same  gracious  Lord  that  lays  the  same  burden  on  us.  And  mark  the  blessing 
to  ourselves  that  grows  out  of  that.  Never  give  place  to  evil  in  word,  or  act,  or 
thought,,  let  the  provocation  be  what  it  may.  Yea,  not  only  so,  return  evil  with  good, 
recompense  wrong  with  right,  and  your  fidelity  to  Christ  will  make  an  open  way 
through  the  skies,  through  which  you  shall  see  his  smile  and  hear  his  "  Well  done ! " 
and  find  for  your  prayers  and  spirit  a  clear  path  to  his  throne. 

II.  Call  to  be  fearless  about  what  otjb  pbbsbootoeb  oah  do  to  us.  "  And 
who  is  he  that  will  harm  you,"  etc.  ?  Persecution  need  not  harm  us,  brethren ;  it  is  only 
one  of  God's  refining  fires,  that,  when  thus  he  has  tried  us,  we  may  come  forth  as  gold. 
And  what  is  the  remedy  for  this  fear  ?  Peter  is  thinking  of  a  passage  in  Isaiah  where 
Judah  is  called,  instead  of  fearing  idolatrous  Syria  and  trusting  in  Sennacherib,  to  fear 
and  trust  in  the  Lord.  "  Sanctify  the  Lord  of  hosts  himself;  and  let  him  be  your 
fear."  Now,  with  that  Old  Testament  passaaie  before  us,  the  change  which  the  Revisers 
have  made  here  is  very  striking.  Instead  of  "  Sanctify  the  Lord  God  in  your  hearts," 
it  is,  "Sanctify  in  your  hearts  Christ  as  Lord."  Peter,  the  Jew,  who  knew  that 
perhaps  the  very  highest  title  which  could  be  ascribed  to  Jehovah  was  "the  Lord  of 
hosts,"  did  not  hesitate  to  give  that  title  to  Christ.  Peter  had  known  him  in  the 
humiliation  of  his  human  life ;  he  had  even  washed  Peter's  feet,  yet  Peter  uses  his 
name  and  that  of  "  the  Lofd  of  hosts"  as  convertible  terms — speaks  of  these  two  as 
one.  Peter,  at  least,  had  no  doubt  of  the  Deity  of  Jesus.  And  this  attitude  also  has  a 
blessing  attached  to  it,  "If  ye  suffer  for  righteousness'  sake,  blessed  are  ye." 

III.  Call  to  maintain  a  good  conscience  in  those  thinos  about  which  oub 
pebsecutoes  eepboach  us.  "  And  be  ready  always  to  give  an  answer,"  etc.  A  good 
conscience,  a  good  conduct,  a  good  answer — I  think  that  is  the  order  here.  A  good 
conscience.  Be  sure  that  you  are  suffering  for  goodness  and  not  for  badness  ;  be  sure 
that  you  have  an  unclouded  sky  between  you  and  God ;  be  sure  that,  when  your  heart 
does  not  condemn  you,  you  hear  him  saying,  "  Neither  do  I  condemn  thee."  And  out 
of  that  will  come  what  Peter  calls  "  your  good  conversation,"  i.e.  conduct.  For  as 
the  sunshine  develops  and  perfects  the  hidden  beauties  of  nature  and  the  fruits  of  the 
earth,  so  does  the  light  of  God's  favour  resting  upon  the  conscious  soul  draw  forth 
into  character  the  graces  of  the  spiritual  life.  The  clear  conscience  that  catches 
Heaven's  smile  is  always  followed  by  a  brave  and  beautiful  piety,  which  is  its  own 
justification  against  those  who  speak  evil  of  it.  And  see  the  blessing  attached  to 
that !  There  is  a  broad  sense,  no  doubt,  in  which  we  might  apply  these  words  to  the 
Christian  hope  generally,  and  the  duty  of  being  able  to  give  an  intelligent  and  satis- 
factory reason  for  its  possession ;  but  their  meaning  here  seems  to  be  more  defined. 
The  good  conduct  that  issues  from  the  good  conscience  and  puts  to  shame  the  evil 
speakers,  leads  them  to  question  us  about  the  hope  which  they  see  hidden  within  us 
and  sustaining  us,  and  they  come  to  envy  it,  and  secretly  to  want  to  know  what  it  is. 
Now,  says  Peter,  "  be  ready  to  tell  them ;  let  them  know  that  it  is  the  grace  of  Christ 
which  renews  and  sanctifies."  One  of  the  benedictions  of  persecution  endured  and 
triumphed  over  is  that  it  may  bring  the  very  persecutors  themselves  to  the  feet  of 
Jesus.  Then,  brethren,  can  we  not  endorse  the  truth  in  the  verse  which  closes  this 
long  passage,  "  It  is  good,  if  the  will  of  the  Lord  be  so,  that  ye  suffer  for  well-doing  "  ? 
It  is  good  in  its  purifying  efiBcacy  on  ourselves ;  it  is  good  in  its  tendency  to  glorify 
God ;  it  is  good  as  a  saving  power  on  our  fellow-men. — C.  N. 

Vers.  18 — 22. — The  remembrance  of  our  Lord^s  atonement  a  help  to  persecuted 
Christians.  We  omit  for  the  present  the  clause  in  the  nineteenth  verse,  and  will  con- 
sider that  afterwards.  "  For  Christ  hath  once  suffered  for  sins,"  etc.  The  death  of 
Christ  is  not  only  the  purchase  of  our  redemption,  it  is  also  the  power  by  which  we 
enter  into  what  redemption  means.  Christ's  cross  is  not  only  the  secret  of  pardon, 
but  also  of  holiness.  Christ  alone  will  not  avail  us;  it  must  be  Christ  crucified,  every 
step  of  the  way,  till  what  has  been  the  inspiration  of  our  spiritual  life  down  here,  of 
every  duty,  every  conflict,  every  joy,  every  hope,  will  be  the  inspiration  of  our  song 


OH.  in.  1—22.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF   PETER.  157 

up  there :  "  Worthy  is  the  Lamb  that  was  slain,"    Let  us  see  how  Christ's  sufferings 
bear  on  the  conduct  of  his  persecuted  people. 

I.  The  substitutionaet  suffebinos  or  Cheist.  "  Christ  hath  once  suffered  for 
sins,  the  Just  for  the  unjust,  that  he  might  bring  us  to  God."  1.  A  plain  statement 
(^  the  substitutionary  character  (^ our  Lord's  sacrifice.  How  does  Christ  save?  By 
substitution.  In  that  word  is  the  explanation  of  our  Lord's  sacrifice  and  of  his  suf- 
ferings; they  were  endured  by  him  as  our  Substitute,  in  our  stead.  They  were 
undoubtedly  the  expression  of  his  perfect  consecration  to  the  Father,  the  great  proof  of 
his  obedience ;  they  were  also  the  great  revelation  of  God's  love  and  mercy  to  the 
sinful,  of  his  yearning  for  the  restoration  of  the  lost ;  but  they  were  this,  without 
which  they  would  have  been  in  every  other  respect  unavailing,  they  were  the 
endurance  in  the  stead  of  the  sinner,  of  that  which  alone  makes  his  righteous  forgive- 
ness possible.  But  it  is  said  that  Jesus  was  simply  revealing  what  God  was  willing  to 
bear  for  man's  redemption,  and  that  it  is  by  this  revelation  of  love  he  saves  us.  'Ihat 
is  not  what  Scripture  says.  "  God  made  him  to  be  sin  for  us,  that  we  might  be  made 
the  righteousness  of  God  in  him  ;  "  "  Who  his  own  self  bare  our  sins  in  his  own  body 
on  the  tree  [or,  '  to  the  tree,'  and  left  them  there]."  But,  says  another,  "  Christ 
saves  by  his  holy  example,  leading  us  to  holiness,  and  not  by  his  cruel  sufferings.  So 
far  from  that,  the  apostles,  in  their  teaching,  gave  weight  to  the  death  of  Christ  as  the 
world's^hope.  "  In  him  we  have  redemption  through  his  blood,  even  the  forgiveness 
of  sins ; "  "  We  are  redeemed  by  the  precious  blood  of  Christ ;  "  "  Without  shedding  of 
blood  there  is  no  remission."  Others  say  that  this  was  a  mere  Jewish  mode  of  expres- 
sion ;  the  apostles  were  only  meeting  Jewish  prejudice  when  they  spoke  thus.  But  we 
find  they  use  the  same  words  in  writing  to  the  Gentiles — to  the  Churches  at  Rome, 
Corinth,  Ephesus,  etc.  It  is  also  said  that  there  is  an  element  of  injustice  in  the  idea  of 
substitution.  Is  it  not  unjust  to  inflict  the  punishment  incurred  by  one  on  another 
who  is  innocent  ?  But  that  is  not  the  case  here.  Jesus  was  God — this  was  God  him- 
self making  the  atonement  necessary  for  our  forgiveness  by  shedding  his  own  blood. 

2.  TJie  necessity  for  such  a  saerijice  is  implied  in  its  design.  What  was  its  design  ?  "To 
bring  to  God,"  says  the  text.  But  there  are  two  great  obstacles  to  our  coming  back  to 
God — one  on  his  part,  and  one  on  ours.  How  can  he  receive  us  sinners  ?  How  can  we 
dare  to  come  ?  Eovi  can  Ood  receive  us  f  "  Cannot  I,"  says  a  father,  "  forgive  my 
child  just  because  I  will  ?  "  No,  you  cannot,  if,  like  the  great  Father,  you  have  been 
compelled  to  declare  what  the  penalty  of  transgression  must  be.  That  is  God's  posi- 
tion. He  can  only  forgive  if  he  forgives  righteously.  How  shall  he  do  that?  The 
substitution  of  Christ  is  the  answer.  Apart  from  that :  Eow  could  ws  dare  to  go 
to  him  f  Some  say  Christ  saves  by  re<ealing  God's  love,  by  alluring  us  to  follow  his 
example  of  self-saciiflco.  If  that  is  all  the  gospel  you  have  for  me,  I  am  condemned 
the  more ;  for  I  am  conscious  of  the  unutterable  distance  between  what  Jesus  was  and 
what  I  am.  I  dai  e  not  go  to  God,  and  I  must  pass  into  the  unseen  hopeless.  But 
when  we  follow  the  meaning  of  these  words,  "  Christ  hath  once  suffered  for  sins,  the 
Just  for  the  unjust,  that  he  might  bring  us  to  God,"  we  can  go  back  to  Q«d  then,  and 
are  welcomed  for  Christ's  sake. 

II.  Thb  bbsult  of  this  to  himself.  1.  Quickened  spiritual  power,  "  Being  put 
to  death  in  the  flesh,  but  quickened  by  the  Spirit."  It  should  read,  "in  the  spirit,"  not 
"  by  the  Spirit."  There  is  no  reference  here  to  the  work  of  God  the  Spirit,  to  whom  else- 
wrhere  the  resurrection  of  Christ  is  attributed ;  it  is  here  simply  a  contrast  between 
Christ's  flesh  and  his  spirit.  His  spirit  did  not  die ;  it  was  raised  by  the  death  of 
the  flesh  into  new  energy,  and  he  became  able  to  do  what  before  was  impossible.  He 
had  often  thought  of  this  :  "  I,  if  I  be  lifted  up  from  the  earth,  will  draw  all  men  unto 
me."     2.  Influence  on  spirits  in  prison.    This  subject  we  will  leave  for  the  present. 

3.  Ascension  to  heavenly  authority.  "Who  is  gone  into  heaven,"  etc.  What  see  we 
now?  "  I  looked,  and  behold  in  the  midst  of  the  throne,  a  Lamb  as  it  had  been  slain." 
Redemption  enthroned.  All  things  required  to  glorify  redemption.  Devils  restrained 
by  the  Redeemer's  will ;  angels  his  swift-winged  messengers ;  providences,  his  servants  j 
history,  the  unfolding  of  his  purpose ;  the  kingdoms  of  this  world  become  his  king- 
dom; and  he  ever  living  to  secure  this  glorious  consummation.  But  this  had  been 
impossible  apart  from  the  atonement ;  it  was  only  through  the  cross  that  Jesus  changed 
'Me  throne  of  heaven  from  that  of  almigbtiness  and  mercy  to  that  of  redemption. 


158  THE  PTRST  EPISTLE  GENBEAL  OP  PETER,     [ch.  m.  1—22 

in.  The  bbarins  of  this  oh  perseodtbd  Chuistians.  1.  Tt  sets  forth  Chriafi 
claim  on  our  suffering/or  him.  There  surely  is  nothing  like  a  remembrance  of  his 
cross  to  constr.iin  us  to  take  up  ours.  2.  It  reminds  the  persecuted  of  the  spiritual 
guiekening  that  may  come  through  the  suffering.  For  what  was  true  of  Jesus  is  to  be 
as  true  of  us :  "  Put  to  death  in  the  flesh,  but  quickened  in  the  spirit."  The  storm 
which  shakes  us  to  the  centre  sends  our  roots  down  deeper,  mooring  us  the  faster  to 
the  Rock  of  Ages.  Suffering  has  a  rare  tendency  to  send  us  down  to  the  foundation 
of  things,  a  rare  tendency  to  send  us  home  to  the  Life  of  all,  and  closer  contact  with 
him  means  more  life  from  him.  3.  This  points  to  the  glorious  end  of  the  suffering  of 
the  saints.  First  the  cross,  then  the  crown.  Jesus  once  suffered,  then  heaven  and  the 
right  hand  of  God,  and  "  angels  and  authorities  and  powers  subject  unto  him," — 0.  N. 

Vers.  19,  21. — TTie  crwyified  Saviour  quickened  in  spirit  preaching  to  the  spirits  In 
prison.  We  have  already  seen  that  through  our  Lord's  sufferings  he  secured  q'lickened 
spiritual  power — influence  over  spirits  in  prison,  and  ascension  to  heavenly  authority. 
This  passage  reveals  him  quickened  in  spirit,  preaching  to  the  "  spirits  in  prison." 
Now,  if  that  be  the  apostle's  line  of  thought,  the  correct  meaning  of  this  passage, 
whatever  it  be,  will  fall  in  naturally  with  it.  May  I  venture  to  show  why  I  cannot 
accept  either  of  two  common  explanations  of  these  words  ?  It  is  thought  by  some  that 
after  our  Lord's  death  (possibly  in  the  interval  between  his  death  and  resurrection) 
his  disembodied  spirit  passed  into  the  unseen  world,  and  preached  the  gospel' to  the 
disobedient  dead.  Now,  if  that  be  the- proper  meaning  of  the  words,  if  they  cannot 
mean  anything  else,  we  must  accept  it.  That  the  words  taken  by  themselves  will 
bear  that  meaning  cannot  probably  be  denied:  then  why  should  we  hesitate  to  adopt 
it?  I  might  remind  you  ttiat  as  far  as  those  three  days  are  concerned,  we  seem  to  be 
told  that  they  were  spent  in  Paradise  with  the  Fatlier  and  the  redeemed.  "  This 
day,"  he  said  to  the  penitent  thief,  "  thou  shalt  be  with  me  in  Paradise  ; "  "  Father," 
he  aaid,  "  into  thy  hands  I  commend  my  spirit :  and  having  said  tlius,  he  gave  up  the 
spirit."  Then,  if  this  passage  does  mean  that  Christ  preached  to  the  dead,  it  only 
speaks  of  the  dead  in  the  days  of  Koab;.it  seems  incredible  that  these  comparative 
few  should  be  singled  out  from  the  great  mass  of  mankind  for  so  great  a  blessing.  I 
might  remind  you,  too,  that  if  these  words  mean  that  the  impenitent  dead  have  a 
second  chance,  they  stand  alone  in  Scripture,  at  least  as  far  as  I  am  aware.  But 
weightier  than  all  is  the  fact  that  the  plain  teaching  of  this  book  is  to  the  contrary. 
I  know  the  tenacity  with  which  we  cling  to  the  hope  that  those  who  have  never  heard 
the  gospel  shall  yet  hear  it,  if  not  here,  hereafter ;  and  that  many  have  cherished  this 
hope,  partly  on  the  strength  of  these  words.  My  hope  of  that  is  not  less  because  I  do 
not  see  it  encouraged  here.  I  know  God  well  enough,  and  I  know  this  hook  well 
enough,  to  know  that  no  man  will  be  condemned  because  of  Adam's  sin ;  through 
Christ  every  man  stands  on  a  fair  footing ;  the  condemning  sin  is  rejection.  Then 
the  Saviour  must  be  presented  to  each  herealter,  if  not  here.  I  cling  to  the  hope  that 
the  preaching  of  the  Saviour  on  the  other  side  of  the  grave  will  bring  multitudes  to 
heaven  who  died  without  a  gosi  el.  But  for  you  who  have  the  gospel  now,  this  is 
your  day  of  grace;  with  you,  salvation  is  now  or  never.  It  has  been  supposed  that 
these  words  refer  to  Christ,  by  his  Spirit,  preaching  in  the  days  of  Noah  to  men  who 
were  then  on  earth,  but  who,  when  the  apostle  wrote,  were  in  the  unseen  world — 
"spirits  in  prison."  But  there  are  two  fatal  objections  to  this  meaning — one  is,  that 
there  is  nothing  here  about  God  the  Spirit,  as  I  have  already  shown  ;  and  the  other  is 
that  such  a  meaning  is  foreign  to  the  drift  of  thought  in  the  chapter.  It  is  not  easy 
to  see  what  room  there  is  in  that  for  the  interjection  of  a  reference  to  the  Spirit  of 
God  striving  with  men  nearly  three  thousand  years  before ;  it  seems  altogether  irrelevant 
to  the  apostle's  argument — that  alone  condemns  it. 

L  What,  then,  is  the  meaning  of  the  passage?  There  is  no  necessity  to  refer 
the  words,  "spirits  in  prison,"  to  those  who  have  passed  into  the  unseen  world;  for  in 
Scripture  the  ungodly  are  constantly  spoken  of  as  in  a  state  of  imprisonment,  bondage, 
captivity.  "Spirits  in  prison"  may  then  be  said  to  be  a  frequent  disignation  of  the 
unredeemed  on  earth;  indeed,  the  very  word  " redemption "  carries  this  idea.  Syme 
may  object  that  the  context  seems  to  imply  that  the  spirits  referred  to  are  the  spirits 
of  the  dead.     Not  necessarily  so.     If  we  refer  the  expression  not  to  certain  individuals, 


oir.  in.  1— 22.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENBBAL  OF  PETER.  15» 


but  to  the  whole  lost  race,  the  difficulty  vanishes.  Ohrist  did  not  preach  to  the  same 
persons  that  were  disobedient  before  the  Flood,  but  to  the  same  race,  the  same  spiritual 
condition.  But  did  Christ  thus  preach?  Certainly,  through  his  servants.  It  has 
been  said  that  the  more  correct  title  of  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles  would  be  the  Acts  of 
the  Risen  Lord.  But  why  this  reference  to  the  days  of  Noah?  If  you  look  through 
Peter's  Epistles  you  will  see  that  he  seems  to  have  regarded  the  Flood  as  a  dividing- 
line  between  two  worlds,  which  afford  points  of  contrast.  We  have  this  contrast  here. 
The  power  of  God  over  "spirits  in  prison"  was  straitened  formerly, — after  all  the 
years  through  which  his  long-suffering  waited,  only  "  few,  that  is  eight  souls,  were 
saved;"  but  since  Christ  suffered  for  sins,  this  is  the  record,  "  The  same  day  there  were 
added  to  the  Church  about  three  thousand  souls;"  and  the  record  ends  with  the  great 
multitude  which  no  man  can  number,  standing  before  the  throne,  and  before  the 
Lamb. 

II.  The  dbbignation  op  those  to  whom  Ohbist  pbbaohed,  "  spirits  in  pbison." 
"  Spirits : "  what  are  they  ?  Ah !  who  can  tell  ?  Immortal  natures,  whose  greatness  is 
not  hinted  at  in  the  frail  tabernacle  in  which  they  dwell.  Spirits  never  destined  to 
find  their  home  in  the  dust,  or  their  joys  on  earth,  but  to  rise  in  the  free  vast  world  of 
spirits  to  the  Father  of  spirits,  wearing  his  likeness,  fulfilling  his  will,  sharing  bis 
glory,  standing  before  his  throne.  Think  of  these  in  prison,  bound  by  the  fetters  of 
sin,  groping  in  darkness,  in  the  narrow  chamber  of  an  ever -narrowing  life — bound,  with 
Satan  for  the  gaoler.  The  power  toith  which  the  crucified  Ohrist  preached  to  these. 
The  power  over  men  and  on  men's  behalf  which  our .  Lord  possesses,  he  acquired 
through  his  cross ;  only  if  he  were  "  lifted  up  "  would  he  be  able  to  draw  all  men  unto 
him. 

III.  The  freedom  in  the  cleansing  of  the  conscience  which  resulted  from 
HIS  preaching.  The  twenty-first  verse  is  very  complicated ;  the  mixture  of  metaphor, 
too,  is  not  in  accord  with  modern  ideas,  but  it  is  frequent  in  Scripture.  Here  there 
are  two  incongruous  figures  blended,  but  the  idea  is  this  :  Peter  had  said  that  Noah 
was  saved  by  water,  and  he  adds  as  it  were,  "  And  by  the  way  it  is  water  that  saves 
you,  that  which  is  typified  in  the  water  of  baptism,  not  the  putting  away  of  the  filth 
of  the  flesh,  but  the  interrogation  of  a  good  conscience  towards  God,  through  the  resur- 
rection of  Christ.  Sin  is  the  great  bond  that  holds  Satan's  captives  fast — sin  in.  the 
conscience ;  there  is  no  freedom  for  the  soul  till  that  is  removed.  Salvation,  i.e.  free- 
dom, comes  through  cleansing  (water);  cleansing  comes  through  a  crucified  Saviour  ; 
"  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ,  God's  Son,  cleanses  ua  from  all  sin."  Brethren,  therein 
lies  Christ's  delivering  power. — C.  N. 

Vers.  8 — 12. — Unity  tetween  Christian  people,  Peter  had,  so  this  passage  suggests, 
well  learnt  the  lesson  about  forgiveness  to  which  he  had  listened  as  he  heard  the 
sermon  on  the  mount,  and  he  had  equally  well  drunk  in  the  spirit  of  the  great 
intercessory  prayer  he  had  heard  in  the  upper  room,  "  That  ye  all  may  be  one."  For 
he  is  here  gathering  np  all  his  teaching  about  social  life  in  the  strong  words  now  before 
us :  "  Finally,"  etc.  He  is  enjoining,  in  simple  detail  and  with  a  sublime  motive,  unity 
between  Christian  people. 

I.  Wherein  does  unitt  between  Christian  people  consist?  St.  Peter,  as 
Leighton  suggests,  here  denotes  five  graces,  of  which  "  love  "  is  the  stalk,  having  two 
on  either  side.  "  Like-minded ; "  not  simply  what  our  word  "  mind  "  usually  means — 
thought,  opinion ;  but  judgment,  purpose,  affection.  "  Compassionate,*  or  sympathetic ; 
i.e.  feeling  tinfh  others.  "  Loving  as  brethren."  True  family  life  is  a  model  of  Church 
life.  "Tender-hearted;"  insensitiveness  disqualifies  for  Christian  life.  "Humble- 
minded  ; "  the  old  version  has  "  courtesy ;  "  this  is  the  genius  or  secret  of  courtesy.  Ths 
lowly  temperament  makes  little  of  itself  and  much  of  others :  its  possessor,  and  ha 
alone,  is  the  gentleman. 

II.  How  IS  nNiTT  between  Christian  people  manifested  ?  The  tone  of  social 
relationship  here  enjoined  is  pitched  in  a  far  higher  key  than  the  prevalent  one, 
"  retaliate,"  etc. ;  it  is  in  harmony  with  the  sermon  on  the  mount.  "  Not  rendering 
evil  for  evil,  nor  reviling  for  reviling."  The  first  excluding  all  the  actions,  the  second 
all  the  words,  of  resentment.  "  But  contrariwise  blessing."  This  is  a  distinct  remi- 
niscence of  the  sermon  on  the  mount. 


160  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GBNEBAL  OP  PETER,    [oh.  in.  1—22. 

*'The  sandal  tree  perfnmes,  when  riTen, 
The  axe  that  laid  it  low. 
Let  him  that  hopes  to  be  foigiTen, 
Forgire  and  blesa  his  foe." 

m.  What  is  Tm  hbthod  fob  ATTAiNiNa  this  Chbistian  mnrr?  1.  There  is 
first  of  all  a  direction  at  to  the  detail  of  speech.  "  Refrain,"  etc.  2.  There  is  then  a 
wide  and  deep  precept  applying  to  the  whole  of  life.  "  Turn  away  from  evil,  and  do 
good."     The  negative  and  the  positive  are  here. 

IV.  What  are  the  MOTiVEa  fob  doino  all  and  being  all  that  will  bnsubb 
THIS  UNITT  ?  1.  The  Christian  man  is  called  to  inherit  blessing.  2.  The  cultivation 
of  the  essential  spirit  of  Christian  unity  ensures  the  summum  honum  of  individual  life. 
"  Love  life ;  see  good  days."  3.  The  relationship  of  God  is  the  great  determining  con- 
dition and  motive  in  all  that  leads  to  this  Christian  nnity.  "  The  eyes  of  the  Lord  .  .  . 
face,"  et«.— U.  R.  T. 

Vers.  13 — 18  (part). — Suffering  for  righteousness.    L  Th«  fact  that  good  men 

•UTFER,  FOB  THEIB  GOODNESS,  FBOM  THEIB  FELLOW-HEN.      ThoUgh  Peter  USCd  the  WOrd 

"  if,"  it  was  not  because  such  sufTering  was  unlikely  or  infrequent,  but  because  it  was 
not  universal,  and  because  the  reflections  on  which  he  had  been  dwelling  seemed 
calculated  to  make  such  suffering  impossible.  1.  For  it  might  seem  as  though  the 
promised  guardianship  of  God  would  have  ensured  the  security  of  good  men.  But  no. 
2.  Or  it  might  have  seemed  that  an  upright  benevolent  life  would  have  evoked  nothing 
but  kindness  and  gratitude  from  one's  fellow-men.  But  no.  "  Who  is  he  that  will 
harm  you  ?  "  read  in  the  lurid  light  of  persecution,  cannot  mean,  "  Who  is  he  that  will 
have  the  will  to  harm  you?"  However  mysterious  it  may  be,  it  is  an  unquestioned 
and  unquestionable  fact  that  men  suffer  for  righteousness'  sake.  It  was  so  from  Daniel 
to  Peter,  from  Moses  to  Paul.  "  If  you  would  follow  the  Church's  history,"  it  has  been 
too  truly  said,  "  it  is  by  the  track  of  her  blood." 

II.  The  iksfibed  dibeotion  fob  men  in  bitch  wbonqful  buffebqio.  "  Fear  not 
their  fear ;  "  that  is,  the  fear  their  threats  seek  to  awaken.  "  Sanctify  in  your  hearts 
Christ  as  Lord; "  give  him  the  shrine  of  worship.  "  Ready  always  to  give  a  reason." 
Be,  in  Newman's  sense,  ready  with  an  "  apologia."  "  Having  a  good  conscience ; " 
that  is,  one  keenly  alive  and  firee  firom  reproach.  "  That  they  may  put  to  shame  them 
that  revile."     Wear  the  silver  shield  of  innocent  lives,  so  be  "  defenders  of  the  faith." 

III.  The  lofty  pbtvilegb  of  those  who  suffeb  fob  eiohtboitsnbss'  bake. 
"  Blessed  are  ye."  Here,  again,  as  often  in  this  Epistle,  is  an  echo  of  the  sermon  on 
the  mount.  All  the  Beatitudes  pledge  you  blessing.  "  Better,  if  the  will  of  God  should 
so  will,  suffer  for  well-doiug,"  etc.  God  wills  suffering.  God  wills  suffering  for  well- 
doing. But  there  is  no  element  of  reproach  in  that,  not  to  say  of  remorse.  Suffering 
is  of  service,  and  it  is  "better"  the  suffering  (which  all  need)  should  not  come  from  our 
sin.  "  For  Christ  also  suffered  for  sins,  the  Righteous  for  Uie  unrighteous."  Fellow- 
ship with  him  is  ensured. 

IV.  The  IMFOSSIBILlrr  of  hen  who  BtlFFEB  in  THIB  spirit  BBINO  BEALLT  INJimBD. 

"  And  who  is  he  that  can  harm  you  ?  "  Canon  Mason  says  this  form  of  inquiry,  begin- 
ning "and,"  has  always  in  it  a  ring  of  scornful  assurance.  Here  is  the  "charm"  for 
Christians  to  wear — "  a  good  conscience."  Then  to  all  wrongful  treatment  of  malign 
men  you  can  say,  "  Strike  1  you  cannot  harm.  Strike  I  you  may  embarrass  my  cir- 
cumstances, undermine  my  health,  main  my  limbs,  rob  me  of  reputation,  take  away  my 
life ;  but  strike  I  you  cannot  harm  me.    Such  a  man 

**  Can  the  darkening  nni verse  defy 
To  quenoh  his  immoi-tality, 
Or  shake  his  faith  in  God." 

U.  R.  T. 

Vers.  18 — 20. — The  mission  of  our  Saviour.  I.  The  ohabaoteb  of  the  mission  of 
the  Saviour.  1.  His  mission  was  one  of  suffering.  He  "  suffered."  Christianity  is  not 
the  worship  of  sorrow,  according  to  the  cavil  of  some ;  but  it  is  the  worship  of  One 
who  had  much  to  do  with  sorrow,  touched  it  at  its  every  pore.    2.  His  mission  was 


OH.  III.  1—22.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PETER.  161 

one  of  innocent  sufiering.  Many  suffer  wrongfully,  he  absolutely  innocently.  "  The 
Righteous."  3.  His  mission  was  one  of  vicarious  suffering ;  "for,"  i.e.  on  account  of,  the 
unrighteous.  4.  His  mission  was  one  unconquered  by  suffering.  "  Being  put  to  death 
in  the  flesh,  he  was  quickened  in  the  spirit." 

II.  The  PUEPOSE  of  the  mission  of  the  Saviour.  "  That  he  might  bring  us  to  God." 
Implying :  1.  We  are  away  from  Ood.  Not  (1)  locally,  but  in  (2)  estrangement  of 
heart.  That  is  the  "  far  country."  2.  We  can  oe  restored  to  God.  The  great  gulf  is  not 
fixed.  The  golden  word  of  the  gospel  is  "  reconciliation."  3.  Ood  himsdf  brings  us 
hack  hy  Christ.  No  mutual  quarrel ;  God  always  pitiful.  "  Long-suffering,"  etc.  Guthrie 
well  says,  "  The  central  truth  of  the  Bible  is  not  that  God  loves  ua  because  Christ 
died,  but  that  Christ  died  because  God  loves." 

III.  The  extent  of  the  influence  of  the  Saviour's  mission.  The  literature  of 
ver.  19  is  a  library.  But  apart  from  any  confusion  created  by  that  literature,  is  it  not 
clearly  taught  ? — 1.  That  Christ  had  a  mission  to  disembodied  tpirits  after  his  death. 
Killed  in  the  flesh,  in  the  spirit  he  triumphed,  and  in  the  spirit  went  on  that  wider, 
deeper  mission.  2.  His  mission  to  disembodied  spirits  was  in  harmony  with  that  of  all 
his  life.  He  "  preached."  Some  read  it,  "  He  sealed  with  the  curse  of  damnation." 
Is  it  not  rather,  as  everywhere,  "  proclaimed  repentance,  pardon,"  "  heralded  love  and 
mercy  and  hope"  i  3.  This  mission  was  to  disembodied  spirits  in  a  state  or  place  of 
misery.  "  Prison."  Some  change  the  word  to  "  Paradise."  Dare  wo  do  that  ?  It  is 
rather  the  abode  of  the  guilty,  the  disobedient,  of  whom  the  apostle  gives  a  dark 
specimen  (ver.  20).  Dean  Alford  says,  "  This  throws  a  blessed  light  on  one  of  the 
darkest  enigmas  of  Divine  justice."  Yet  mark,  there  is  no  light  view  of  sin  here.  It 
is  awlul  for  spirits  to  be  in  prison,  and  in  prison  for  twenty-four  centuries. — ^U.  B.  T. 

Vers.  1 — 7. — Subjection  of  wives  to  their  husbands,  with  tubfoined  injunction  to 
husbands.  I.  SnBJEOTXoN  of  wives  to  theib  husbands.  1.  Duty  stated.  "  In  like 
manner,  ye  wives,  be  in  subjection  to  your  own  husbands."  The  space  which  is  here 
given  to  wives,  especially  in  comparison  with  what  is  given  to  husbands,  points  to  the 
gieat  influence  of  women  in  the  early  Christian  Church.  The  injunction  to  wivei 
comes  under  the  being  subject  to  every  ordinance  of  man  (ch.  ii.  13).  Christianity 
was  to  be  advanced  by  the  subjection  of  Christians  to  magistrates  placed  over  them. 
It  was  also  to  be  advanced  by  the  subjection  of  Christian  slaves  (who  were  compara- 
tively numerous)  to  their  masters.  In  like  manner  it  was  to  oe  advanced  by  the 
subjection  of  Christian  wives  (who  were  comparatively  numerous)  to  their  husbands. 
The  duty  of  subjection  is  here  stated  without  limitation  (which  is  only  introduced  in 
the  following  verse).  It  is,  however,  to  be  borne  in  mind  that  all  the  subjection 
enjoined  is  for  the  Lord^s  sake  (ch.  iL  13),  so  that  we  have  virtually  here  Paul's 
injunction  in  Bph.  v.  22,  "  Wives,  be  in  subjection  unto  your  own  husbands,  as  vmto 
the  Lord."  The  subjection  of  wives  is  founded  on  an  appointed  tuperiority  of  husbands 
to  their  wives.  It  is  not  that  wives  belong  to  their  husbands;  for  husbands  also 
belong  to  their  wives  (Bph.  v.  28).  There  is  a  very  great  amount  of  equality  between 
wives  and  their  husbands ;  there  is  the  closest  of  companionships  in  married  life.  But 
in  the  interest  of  order  in  family  life,  rule  must  be  placed  somewhere ;  and  so  it  has 
been  placed  by  God  in  the  hands  of  those  whose  duty  it  is  to  provide  for  the  main- 
tenance and  comfort  of  their  wives.  Where,  then,  there  is  a  difference  of  judgment  in 
connection  with  the  joint  management  of  a  household  (which  ought  not  very  often  to 
occur),  it  is  the  duty  of  the  wife  to  subject  her  will  to  the  will  of  her  husband. 
2.  Wives  in  a  special  situation.  "  That,  even  if  any  obey  not  the  Word,  they  may 
without  the  Word  be  gained  by  the  behavioin-  of  their  wives."  Subjection  is  due  in 
every  case,  even  in  so  unfavourable  a  case  as  that  which  is  now  to  be  dealt  with.  This 
was  the  not  unfrequent  case  (all  the  more,  therefore,  calling  for  apostolic  legislation) 
of  Christian  wives  having  heathen  husbands.  We  are  not  to  understand  that  it  was 
typen  for  Christian  women  to  take  heathen  husbands;  but  after  marriage  it  might 
hippen  (more  than  the  converse)  that  the  wives  were  converted  to  Christianity,  while 
their  husbands  remained  in  heathenism.  The  principle  of  the  apostolic  legislation  is 
that,  even  in  an  unfavourable  position,  subjection  is  due.  It  is  implied  that  wives, 
when  converted,  would  seek  to  gain  their  husbands  by  the  Word.  That  would  be  the 
prompting  both  of  natural  affection  and  of  Christian  compassion.  They  could  not  keep 
I.  petbb.  u 


162  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PETER,    [oh.  in.  1—22 

Christ  and  their  new-found  joys  to  themselves.    They  must  tell,  in  the  first  place, 
those  in  whom  they  had  the  deepest  interest  the  gospel  of  Christ,  viz.  that  as  mani- 
festing the  Father's  love,  and  impelled  by  love  himself,  the  Son  of  Ood  did  not  eschew 
human  nature,  but  in  it  lived  a  perfect  human  life  and  died  a  death  of  atonement  for 
sin,  to  bring  men  out  of  their  sins  to  a  glorious  life  with  himself  which  is  never  to 
know  an  end.     This  had  been  a  source  of  unparalleled  joy  to  them ;  and  they  told  theii 
husbands  about  Christ,  because  they  wished  them  to  be  sharers  with  themselves  in  their 
joy.    The  result  might  be  the  gaining  of  their  husbands,  i.e.  first  to  Christ  and  the 
advancement  of  his  kingdom,  and  then  to  themselves  (to  their  deep  and  lasting 
satisfaction).    It  is  one  of  Leighton's  rich  sayings,  "  A  soul  converted  is  gained  to  itself 
gained  to  the  pastor,  or  friend,  or  wife,  or  husband  who  sought  it,  and  gained  to  Jesus 
Christ ;  added  to  his  treasury  [and,  we  may  add,  to  his  instrumentality],  who  thought 
not  his  own  precious  blood  too  dear  to  lay  out  for  this  gain."    But  the  word  of  the 
gospel  is  not  always  obeyed.    What  if,  with  the  telling  and  retelling  of  the  Word 
(blessed  and  authoritative  as  it  is),  husbands  do  not  obey  the  Word  ?    What  if  the 
continued  telling  of  the  Word  is  only  to  be  the  occasion  of  domestic  dispeace  ?    Does 
the  duty  of  subjection  then  cease  ?    No ;  the  duty  of  telling  the  Word  then  ceases,  but 
not  the  duty  of  subjection.     Another  method  is  to  be  tried  by  them,  which  may  result 
in  the  gaining  of  their  husbands.     This  is  lehaviour  without  the  Word ;  Le.  acting  the 
gospel,  or  the  silent  influence  of  the  life,  especially  the  earnest  endeavour  to  show 
what  gospel  subjection  is.    The  hope  is  held  out  that  this  method  may  succeed  where 
the  other  fails.    If,  then,  a  wife  finds  herself  yoked  to  a  husband  who  is  not  converted 
(whether  she  has  been  to  blame  for  her  position  or  not),  her  duty  is  with  all  earnest- 
ness to  press  the  Word  on  him,  but  not  to  force  it  to  no  purpose  but  only  to  produce 
dispeace;  her  duty  is  to  cease  mentioning  the  disagreeable  subject,  and  to  try  the 
method  of  the  utmost  excellence  of  Christian  behaviour  without  the  Word.     The  trial 
may  be  prolonged;  but  length  will  be  forgotten  if  the  Divine  answer  comes  at  last  in 
the  conversion  of  the  husband.    3.  Eules  of  behaviour,    (1)  Bide  of  purity,    "  Behold- 
ing your  chaste  behaviour  coupled  with  fear."    The  feeling  from  which  good  wifely 
behaviour  proceeds  is /ear.     Wives  are  to  have  fear  in  the  sense  of  reverence  towari 
their  husbands  as  placed  over  them  in  the  Lord.     They  are  also  to  have  fear  in  the 
sense  of  shrinking  from  the  not  doing  of  all  that  is  required  In  the  relation.     This 
limitt  the  subjection  in  forbidding  bad  compliance,  i.e.  doing  a  wrong  thing  because  the 
husband  requires  it.    If  a  wife  were  required  to  give  up  her  religion,  it  would  be  her 
duty  not  to  obey  out  of  regard  to  him  to  whom  her  husband  is  subject,  and  apart  from 
whom  he  has  no  authority.   But  if  wives  feel  that  they  are  thus  limited,  they  will  be  all 
the  more  anxious  within  the  lawful  sphere  to  do  their  duty.    The  quality  of  behaviour 
here  fixed  upon  is  chastity,  which  is  to  be  understood  in  a  certain  wide  sense.     It  is  a 
word  which  is  appropriate  to  wifely  behaviour.    Women  are  especially  endowed  with 
feelings  (^modesty.    In  the  married  relation,  while  they  bestow  all  love  and  attention 
on  their  husbands,  there  will  be  nothing  in  wurd,  in  look,  in  dress,  in  act,  inconsistent 
with  what  modesty  requires.     "  Shamefacedness  "  is  the  word  used  by  Paul.    To  this, 
then.  Christian  wives  are  directed  in  dealing  with  their  heathen  husbands  after  the 
Word  has  been  ineffectual.    Let  their  husbands-  behold,  see  with  their  own  eyes  from 
day  to  day,  their  modest  behaviour,  springing  out  of  the  feeling  which  belongs  to 
subjection ;  and  when  the  Word-method  has  failed,  this  (especially  when  contrasted 
with  the  beLavioui  of  heathen  wives)  may  succeed!     (2)  Rule  of  a  meek  and  quiet 
tpirit.    "  Whose  adorning  let  it  not  be  the  outward  adorning  of  plaiting  the  hair,  and 
of  wearing  jewels  of  gold,  or  of  putting  on  apparel ;  but  let  it  be  the  hidden  man  of  the 
heart,  in  the  incorruptible  apparel  of  a  meek  and  quiet  spirit,  which  is  in  the  sight  of 
God  of  great  price."    The  rule  is  expressed  positively  in  figurative  language.     The 
negative  may  seem  to  be  too  literal.    What  has  religion  to  do  with  the  style  of  putting 
up  the  hair,  or  with  what  is  put  on  the  person  ?    It  is  a  fallacy  to  suppose  that  there 
is  any  sphere  from  which  religion  is  excluded.    At  the  same  time,  religion  does  not  do 
violence  to  any  natural  feeling.    It  is  implied  here  that  it  is  natural  for  women  to  love 
to  adorn  themselves.    A  wife  who  has  not  some  regard  for  ornament  in  her  house  or 
person,  who  is  plainness,  if  not  a  slattern,  who  has  not  a  flower  to  delight  the  eye,  is  not 
likely  to  have  much  inQuence  with  her  husband  even  for  Christianity.    We  must, 
therefore,  understand  the  apostle  as  forbidding  the  things  mentioned  without  proper 


ea.ni.  1—22.]    THE  PIBST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  PETEB.  163 

■nbordinatJon,  or  as  minigtering  to  womanly  vanity.  Bspficially  are  we  to  think  of 
them  as  forbidden  in  this  aspect  that  as  immodest,  or  as  enoroaching  on  time,  or  as 
heaping  up  expense,  they  form  a  temptation  to  a  wife  to  be  undutiful  to  her  husband. 
If  she  would  gain  him  for  what  is  good,  she  must,  without  disregard  of  the  lower 
ornamentation,  show  proper  regard  to  the  higher  ornamentation.  Let  her  adorning  be 
not  a  conspicuous  style  of  the  hair,  or  conspicuous  jewels,  or  conspicuous  apparel ;  but 
let  it  be  the  hidden  man  of  the  heart — ^not  that  alone  apart  from  moral  characterization, 
but,  while  it  has  its  seat  in  the  heart,  and  is  not  attractive  to  the  outward  eye,  let  it  be 
in  and  with  the  incorruptible.  Plaited  hair,  jewels  of  gold,  apparel,  are  subordinate  as 
belonging  to  the  category  of  the  corruptible.  The  incorruptible  in  adorning  that  is 
singled  out  is  a  meek  and  quiet  ^rit.  The  first  word  points  to  not  being  easily 
provoked ;  the  second  word  points  to  being  in  love  with  a  quiet  life.  A  Christian  wife 
might  have  much  to  bear  from  her  unenlightened  husband,  from  his  imperious  temper, 
from  his  bad  behaviour,  from  his  neglect ;  she  might  have  to  bear  from  him  on  accoimt 
of  her  religion ;  he  might  resent  her  choosing  her  own  religion  and  (by  implication) 
condemning  his;  hat  let  her  be  meek  under  his  wronging  of  her,  and  let  her  say  or  do 
nothing  to  cause  dispeace.  This  in  the  sight  of  men  may  be  a  very  poor  ornament; 
she  may  seem  to  be  regarding  herself  as  no  better  than  his  slave.  But  God  is  also 
looking  on  the  spirit  which  she  is  manifesting,  and  in  his  sight  (which  is  its  highest 
recommendation)  it  is  of  great  price.  The  way  God  takes  to  overcome  evil  in  us  is, 
under  our  provocations,  to  heap  goodness  on  us.  If  a  Christian  wife  would  conquer  her 
unbelieving  husband  for  Christ,  she  must  in  this  imitate  the  Divine  procedure. 
4.  Models  of  behaviour,  (1)  The  holy  women  of  old  time.  "  For  after  this  manner 
aforetime  the  holy  women  also,  who  hoped  in  God,  adorned  themselves,  being  in 
subjection  to  their  own  husbands."  In  heathen  mythology,  Penelope,  Andromache, 
Alcestis,  are  regarded  as  models  of  wifely  excellence.  But  Peter,  saturated  with  Old 
Testament  ideas,  does  not  fall  back  on  Greek  aforetime,  but  only  on  Old  Testament 
aforetime.  He  sets  up  as  models  to  those  whom  he  is  addressing  the  holy  women,  i.e. 
those  who  were  in  covenant  with  God,  and  whose  conduct  was  conditioned  by  tlie 
holiness  of  God.  This  implied  their  being  believers,  and  as  believers  they  are  further 
described  as  those  who  hoped  in  Ood,  i.e.  raised  their  expectation  from  what  they 
believed  God  to  be,  and  from  what  they  believed  Gfod  to  promise.  They  looked  forward 
to  the  coming  of  the  Messiah,  and  to  a  future  beyond  death  to  be  made  glorioui 
through  his  mission  to  earth.  We  have  not  much  information  as  to  the  facts  upon 
which  Peter  proceeds ;  but  he  plainly  certifies  it  of  the  holy  women  as  a  class,  that 
they  adomtd  themselves  after  this  manner,  i.e.  with  a  meek  and  qiuet  spirit.  They 
were  kept  from  thinking  about  mere  outward  ornamentation,  because  they  looked  for 
something  substantial  from  God.  They  did  this  as  what  was  proper  to  them  as 
subjected  to  their  husbands.  Instead  of  being  self-assertive,  they  were  compliant,  under 
the  impelling  and  also  restraining  of  fear.  The  rule  for  the  holy  women  of  the  New 
Testament  time  extending  down  to  our  day  is  not  different  from  what  was  the  rule 
for  the  holy  women  of  the  Old  Testament  time,  resting  as  it  does  on  a  Divine  appoint- 
ment in  the  earthly  constitution.  To  the  models  set  up  by  Peter  we  must  add 
Christian  models — women  who,  saturated  with  gospel  ideas,  have  been  adorned  with 
that  which  in  the  sight  of  God  is  of  great  price.  (2)  Sarah.  "As  Sarah  obeyed 
Abraham,  calling  him  lord :  whose  children  ye  now  are,  if  ye  do  well,  and  are  not  put 
in  fear  by  any  terror."  The  wordi  founded  on  are  to  be  found  in  Gen.  xviii.  12.  Sarah's 
calling  Abraham  her  lord  was  not  confined  to  the  one  occasion ;  it  was  characteristic  of 
her,  showed  the  habit  of  her  mind  toward  her  husband,  and  on  that  ground  it  is 
entitled  to  the  weight  which  is  here  attached  to  it.  The  occasion  was  also  closely 
connected  with  the  history  of  redemption,  bearing  on  the  birth  of  Isaac.  The  apostle 
could  not  have  found  a  better  model;  for  Sarah  was  specially  significant,  even  as 
Abraham  was.  If  the  one  was  father  "  of  all  them  that  believe  though  they  be  not 
circumcised,"  the  other  was  mother.  What  constitutes  daughterhood  is  here  not  faith, 
but  the  evidencing  of  faith.  It  is,  on  the  one  hand,  doing  well,  Sarah  did  well  in 
obeying  Abraham,  and  also  remarkably  in  that  through  faith  "  she  received  strength  to 
conceive  seed,  and  was  delivered  of  a  child  when  she  was  past  age,  because  she  judged 
him  faithful  who  had  promised,"  It  is,  on  the  other  hand,  not  doing  evil,  or,  as  it  ia 
her«  put  in  the  way  of  consequence,  not  being  put  in  fear  by  any  terror.    This  was 


164  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  PETER,    [oh.  m.  1— 2a 

what  mts  to  be  avoided  in  Sarah  as  a  model.  On  the  occasion  referred  to  she  was 
made  afraid  by  her  evil-doing  (laughing  at  the  first  mention  of  a  child),  and  by  her 
fear  was  led  into  more  sin  (in  denying  that  she  laughed),  thus  bringing  shame  not  only 
on  herself,  but  on  her  husband.  Holy  women  will  not  thus  compromise  their  husbands, 
hut,  mindful  of  what  is  due  to  them,  will  concur  with  them,  where  the  blessing 
promised  to  faith  is  to  be  obtained. 

II.  Subjoined  dudkction  to  husbands.  1.  Duty,  "  Ye  husbands,  in  like  manner, 
dwell  with  your  wives  according  to  knowledge,  giving  honour  unto  the  woman,  as 
imto  the  weaker  vessel,  as  being  also  joint-heirs  of  the  grace  of  life."  Having  dwelt  at 
length  (in  the  interest  of  Christianity)  on  the  subjection  of  wives,  he  feels  it  necessary 
to  subjoin  an  injunction  to  husbands,  which  he  did  not  feel  it  to  be  necessary  in  the 
case  of  magistrates  and  of  masters  (few  of  those  being  connected  with  the  Christian 
Church).  It  is  not  said  that  husbands  are  in  like  manner  to  be  subject ;  the  likeness 
can  only,  therefore,  refer  to  what  Ues  over  against  the  subjection.  As  subject,  the 
woman  is  weak — the  weaker  vessel,  not  so  strong  as  the  man.  In  this  lies  a  danger 
to  the  woman — the  danger  of  being  trampled  upon.  Hence  the  need  of  husbands  being 
enlightened  in  their  treatment  of  their  wives.  "  Dwell  with  according  to  knowledge  as 
with  the  weaker  vessel  the  womanly,"  is  the  literal  translation  and  the  proper  connec- 
tion. Weakness  in  the  woman  calls  for  knowledge  in  the  man.  He  is  to  love,  says  the 
Apostle  Paul ;  and  the  idea  is  similar  here.  He  is  to  act  according  to  knowledge,  Le. 
of  the  Divine  intention  or  order.  He  is  to  put  his  strength  at  the  service  of  love,  with 
his  strength  shielding  her  weakness  and  (generally)  promoting  her  good.  It  is  under 
this  enlightenedness  that  Tumour  comes.  Honour  is  to  be  paid  by  husbands  to  their 
wives  (Ijoth  being  regarded  as  Christians)  on  the  ground  that  they  are  also  joint-heirs 
of  the  grace  of  U/e.  They  are  even,  as  we  would  seem  to  be  taught  here,  to  be  honoured 
on  the  ground  of  nature.  "  God  hath  tempered  the  body  together,  having  given  more 
abundant  honour  to  that  part  which  lacked."  But  they  are  also  to  be  honoured  as 
heirs  together  of  the  grace  of  life,  i.e.  as  honoured  participators  (for  inheriting  here 
points  to  honour)  with  their  husbands  in  the  grace  that  is  needed  for  life  or  that  makes 
life  a  blessing,  both  here  and  hereafter.  It  is  only  in  the  earthly  sphere  of  things 
(which  is  also  temporary)  that  there  is  not  perfect  equality  ;  in  the  heavenly  sphere 
there  is  no  difierence.  Women  stand  in  the  same  relation  to  God,  have  the  same 
unction  on  their  life,  look  forward  to  the  same  eternal  home  as  their  husbands,  and  by 
this  consideration  the  honour  otherwise  due  to  them  and  to  be  apportioned  to  them  must 
be  regarded  as  greatly  heightened.  2.  Motive.  "  To  the  end  that  your  prayers  be  not 
hindered."  The  duty  enjoined  must  be  attended  to  by  husbands,  that  the  prayers 
offered  by  them  with  their  wives,  and  as  heads  of  the  household,  be  not  hindered. 
There  is  a  pointing  to  this  that  "  the  prayers  of  families  are  as  often  defeated  by  the 
want  of  any  such  concert  in  the  aims,  plans,  tempers,  works,  and  aspirations  of  the 
house,  as  are  necessary  to  a  conuuon  suit  before  God.  The  prayers  should  agree  with  as 
many  other  prayers  and  as  many  other  circles  of  causes  as  possible ;  for  God  is  work- 
ing always  towards  the  largest  harmony,  and  will  not  favour,  therefore,  the  prayer  of 
words  when  everything  else  in  the  life  is  demanding  something  else,  but  will  rather 
have  respect  to  what  has  the  widest  reach  of  things  and  persons  making  suit  with  it. 
At  this  latter  point  it  is  that  prayers  most  commonly  fail,  viz.  that  they  are  solitary 
and  contrary,  having  nothing  put  in  agreement  with  them ;  as  if  some  one  person 
should  be  praying  for  fair  weather,  when  everybody  else  wants  rain,  and  the  gaping 
earth  and  thirsty  animals  and  withering  trees  are  all  asking  for  it  together.  What 
is  p:ayed  for  in  the  house  by  the  father  is — how  commonly  I — not  prayed  for  by  the 
mother  in  her  family  tastes  and  tempers,  and  is  even  prayed  against,  in  fact,  by  all 
the  instigations  of  appearance  and  pride  and  show  which  are  raised  by  her  motherly 
studies  and  cares.  The  father  prays  in  the  morning  that  his  children  may  gro^  up 
in  the  Lord,  and  calls  it  even  the  principal  good  of  their  life  that  they  are  to  be  Chris- 
tians, living  to  God  and  for  the  world  to  come.  Then  he  goes  out  into  the  field,  or  the 
shop,  or  the  house  of  trade,  and  his  plans  and  works  puU  exactly  contrary  to  the  pull 
of  Ms  prayers  and  all  his  teaching  in  religion.  What  is  wanted,,  therefore,  is  to  put  aU 
the  causes,  all  the  prayers,  into  a  common  strain  of  endeavour,  reaching  after  a  common 
good  in  God  and  his  friendship  "  (Bushuell).— R.  F. 


«H.  m.  1—22.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  PETER.  166 

Vers.  8 — 22. — Infunetions  to  all.  I.  Union  awono  THT!M8Et,VE8.  "Finally,  be  ye 
all  like-minded,  compassionate,  loving  as  brethren,  tender-hearted,  humble-minded." 
"  Finally  "  does  not  point  to  the  close  of  the  Epistle,  but  to  the  close  of  a  particular 
series  of  injunctions.  He  has  been  addressing  various  classes  represented  in  the  Churches ; 
he  might  have  included  others,  but  he  will  simply  address  all.  He  has  it  principally  in 
his  mind  to  address  them  on  their  attitude  toward  a  hostile  world ;  he  is  preparing  the 
way  in  exhorting  them  to  union  among  themselves.  Let  them  all  be  like-minded,  i.e. 
have  the  same  exalted  opinion  of  Christ  and  the  same  views  as  to  the  methods  of  advanc- 
ing his  cause.  Let  them  also  be  affected  along  with  it  (as  the  literal  translation  is),  i.e. 
have  the  same  feelings — the  same  sympathy  with  truth  and  antipathy  to  error,  the 
same  feeling  of  gladness  when  the  cause  is  triumphing,  and  the  same  feeling  of  depres- 
sion when  it  receives  a  temporary  check,  yet  of  hope  of  its  ultimate  triumph.  Let 
them  also  love  the  brethren,  i.e.  be  drawn  to  them  who  have  the  same  views  and  the 
same  feelings.  Let  them  also  be  tender-hearted,  i.e.  considerate  of  their  brethren  in 
distress.  Kindness  such  as  was  exhibited  by  the  Gentile  Christians  to  the  poor  saints 
in  Judsea  has  great  influence  in  promoting  unity.  Let  them  be  humble-minded,  i.e. 
willing  to  sink,  not  the  truth,  but  self;  for  there  is  nothing  more  destructive  of  unity 
than  self-assertion.  It  is  with  a  feeling  of  regret  that  we  have  to  part  with  the  pre- 
cept, "  Be  courteous,"  as  being  a  distinct  recognition  of  what  are  called  by-works,  or 
accessory  virtues.  "  They  are  valid  only  as  small  coin,  and  yet  conduce  to  strengthen 
man's  virtnous  sentiments,  were  it  even  merely  by  awakening  the  endeavour  to  bring 
this  outward  form  as  near  as  possible  to  a  reality,  in  rendering  us  accessible,  conversible, 
polite,  hospitable,  and  engaging  in  our  daily  intercourse ;  which  things  do  promote  the 
cause  of  virtue  by  making  it  Moved  "  (Eant). 

II.  Beabino  toward  a  hostile  wobld.  1.  To  blesB  because  called  to  obtain  a 
blessing.  (1)  To  blest.  "  Not  rendering  evil  for  evil,  or  reviling  for  reviling,  but  con- 
trariwise blessing."  There  is  a  law  of  non-retaliation  under  which  we  are  placed  as 
laid  down  by  the  Master.  The  magistrate  is  warranted  in  proceeding  on  the  principle 
of  an  eye  for  an  eye  and  a  tooth  for  a  tooth  (administering  punishment  and  administer- 
ing it  in  proportion  to  the  offence) ;  and  we  may  be  warranted,  as  Paul  was,  in  taking 
advantage  of  the  law  to  shield  us  from  wrong  (where  more  good  is  not  to  be  gained  by 
waiving  our  rights).  It  does  not  belong  to  us  to  say  authoritatively  what  justice 
demands ;  and  certainly  in  any  action  we  take  or  word  we  utter  we  are  not  simply  to 
gratify  vengeful  feeling.  When  men  emit  their  malice  on  us  in  evil  or  railing,  we  are 
not  to  reciprocate  their  feeling  in  rendering  evil  for  evil  or  railing  for  railing ;  but,  as 
standing  on  higher  ground,  and  owning  another  Master  (Luke  vi.  27 — 29),  we  are  to 
bless  them,  i.e.  both  in  act  and  in  word  to  study  their  good.  (2)  Becaitse  called  to 
obtain  a  blessing.  "  For  hereunto  were  ye  called,  that  ye  should  inherit  a  blessing." 
We  may  well  study  the  good  of  those  who  injure  us,  when  we  think  of  the  large  bless- 
ing which  on  our  conversion  we  were  called  to  inherit.  God  did  not  then  take  justice 
out  of  ns,  deal  with  us  according  to  our  deserts,  but  acted  in  the  most  liberal,  kingly 
manner;  and  should  not  we  deal  nobly  with  others?  2.  Citation  from  the  thirty- 
fourth  psalm.  (1)  How  the  Messing  is  viewed.  "  For,  He  that  would  love  life,  and 
see  good  days."  This  confirmatory  citation  (introduced  without  a  formula)  extends 
over  three  verses.  The  Septuagint  rendering  here  is,  "  What  man  is  he  that  desireth 
life,  that  loveth  to  see  good  days?"  It  is  implied  that  it  requires  an  effort  to  love  life, 
i.e.  to  have  it  wisely  loved.  It  requires  an  effort  to  see  good  days,  i.e.  days  in  which 
the  blessing  of  God  is  enjoyed.  The  psalmist  had  probably  in  his  mind  length  as  one 
element ;  so  "  many "  is  introduced  into  the  Old  Testament  translation.  But  it  ia 
to  be  remembered  that  days,  however  long  or  outwardly  prosperous,  are  not  good  days 
without  the  Divine  blessing.  (2)  Conduct  by  which  the  blessing  is  conditioned,  (a) 
Righteousness  in  ^uch.  "  Let  him  refrain  his  tongue  from  evil  and  his  lips  that  they 
speak  no  guile."  When  tempted  to  use  bitter  or  calumnious  words,  or  to  use  honeyed 
words  for  evU  ends,  let  him  put  a  stop  to  it — holding  back  his  tongue  from  evil  and  his 
Ups  from  speaking  guile.  For  evil  feelings  indulged  in  speech,  or  deceit  in  speech 
found  out,  may  rob  him  of  much  of  the  pleasure  of  life,  if  not  of  life  itself,  (b) 
Righteousness  in  act  "And  let  him  turn  away  from  evil,  and  do  good ;  let  him  seek 
peace,  and  pursue  it."  When  tempted  to  follow  mischief  which  he  has  devised,  or  to 
oeclare  •  state  of  war,  let  him  turn  away  hia  feet  from  the  mischief  and  contrive  well- 


lee  THE  FIBST  BPI8TLB  GENERAL  OF  PETEB.    [oh.  m.  1—22. 

doing,  let  him  make  peace  hia  object  sought,  and  let  his  chase  after  it  (as  it  were 
fleeing  from  him)  be  keen.  For  evil  feelings  indulged  in  act,  peace  once  broken,  may- 
lead  to  the  embittering  or  shortening  of  life.  (3)  Reftrence  to  the  Divine  dealing. 
"  For  the  eyes  of  the  Lord  are  upon  the  righteous,  and  his  ears  imto  their  supplication : 
but  the  face  of  the  Lord  is  upon  them  that  do  evil."  The  anthropomorphism  is 
marked — the  eyes,  ears,  face,  of  the  Lord.  God  is  no  respecter  of  persons ;  but  he  is 
favourable  to  the  righteous,  i.e,  the  right-speaking  and  right  acting.  Hia  sympathies 
are  with  them ;  his  providence  is  in  league  with  them.  His  eyes  are  upon  them,  i.e. 
to  note  their  condition,  to  delight  in  their  struggles  after  conformity  to  his  will,  and  to 
send  them  tokens  of  his  favour.  His  ears  are  unto  their  supplication,  i.e.  to  mark  it, 
to  answer  it,  especially  when  it  rises  out  of  experience  of  wrong.  Oq  the  other  hand, 
God  is  unfavouraible  to  them  that  do  evil  things,  i.e.  make  a  practice  of  it,  refusing 
Divine  mercy  and  paying  no  heed  to  Divine  threatenings.  There  is  not  much 
expressed  here ;  it  is  oi^y  the  disjunctive  word  that  suggests  the  face  of  God  as  not  full 
of  pleasure,  hxit/ull  of  displeasure,  upon  them  that  do  evil.  "  With  the  froward  thou 
wilt  show  thyself  froward."  It  is  well  that  there  should  be  a  deep  and  widespread 
impression  of  the  truth  that  God  is  contrary  to  them  that  are  contrary  to  his  laws,  and 
forbids  them  in  their  contrariety  to  have  what  he  promises  to  the  righteous — life  and 
good  days.  3.  Application  of  the  citation.  "  And  who  is  he  that  will  harm  you,  if 
ye  be  zealous  of  that  which  is  good?"  The  Septuagint  rendering  of  Isa.  1.  9  is, 
"  Behold  the  Lord,  the  Lord  will  help  me ;  who  is  he  that  wUl  harm  met"  There  is  a 
way  in  which  we  can  be  proof  against  harm,  i.e.  any  real  injury  to  our  happiness.  It 
is  by  being  zealots,  not  unenliglitened  zealots,  but  zealots  of  the  good,  i.e.  all  that  is 
prescribed  by  God.  So  long  as  the  Israelites  were  zealous  in  their  attachment  to  God 
and  bis  ordinances  they  were  invulnerable.  4.  Blessedness  of  suffering  for  righteous- 
ness sake.  (1)  The  pronouncing  blessed.  "  But  and  if  ye  should  suffer  for  righteous- 
ness' sake,  blessed  are  ye."  While  proof  against  harm,  they  might  be  called  to  suffer. 
In  the  event  of  their  suffering  for  righteousness'  sake  they  would  come  within  the 
scope  of  the  Saviour's  beatitude,  "Blessed  are  they  which  are  persecuted  for  righteous- 
ness' sake :  for  theirs  is  the  kingdom  of  heaven."  The  preaching  of  righteousness  in 
the  life  is  offensive  to  the  world,  and  provokes  its  dislike  and  malice.  But  those  who 
are  persecuted  because  of  the  right  ordering  of  their  life  are  not  to  be  commiserated  : 
they  are  to  be  pronounced  blessed.  They  have  the  satisfaction  of  being  at  peace  with 
their  conscience,  the  satisfaction  of  enjoying  the  approval  of  their  God,  who  will  not 
forget  their  faithfulness.  (2)  Feeling  accompanying  the  blessedness.  "  And  fear  not 
their  fear,  neither  be  troubled."  It  is  remarkable  how  much  the  apostle's  thought  runs 
in  Old  Testament  language.  The  language  here  and  in  the  beginning  of  the  next  verse 
is  based  on  Isa.  viii.  12, 13.  Their  persecutors  would  seek  to  inspire  them  with  fear, 
to  throw  them  into  a  state  of  perturbation ;  but  let  them  not  fear  their  fear,  neither  be 
troubled.  "  Should  the  empress  determine  to  banish  me,  let  her  banish  me ;  '  the 
earth  is  the  Lord's,  and  the  fulness  thereof.'  If  she  will  cast  me  into  the  sea,  let  her 
cast  me  into  the  sea ;  I  will  remember  Jonah.  If  she  will  throw  me  into  a  burning 
fiery  furnace,  the  three  children  were  there  before  me.  If  she  will  throw  me  to  the 
wild  beasts,  I  will  remember  that  Daniel  was  in  the  den  of  lions.  If  she  will  condemn 
me  to  be  stoned,  I  shall  be  the  associate  of  Stephen,  the  proto-martyr.  If  she  will 
have  me  beheaded,  the  Baptist  submitted  to  the  same  punishment.  If  she  will  take 
away  my  substance,  'naked  came  I  out  of  my  mother's  womb,  and  naked  shall  I 
return  to  it ' "  (Chrysostom).  (3)  Means  of  being  undisturbed  in  the  blessedness,  (a) 
Adoration  of  Christ.  "  But  sanctify  in  your  hearts  Christ  as  Lord."  Peter  gives  a 
Christian  colouring  to  the  Old  Testament  language.  Our  hearts  are  oiu:  temple ;  there 
we  are  to  sanctify  Christ,  i.e.  to  hold  him  as  holy.  We  are  to  fear  him  as  shown  to  be 
hnly  in  his  redemption-work,  and  also  as  by  his  redemption-work  made  our  Lord.  In 
the  quiet  of  our  hearts  habitually  fearing  him  as  our  Redeemer  whose  every  word  is  to 
be  obeyed,  the  fear  of  man  will  not  find  admission.  (J)  Apology  in  presence  of  men. 
That  we  are  to  be  ready  with  our  apology.  "  Being  ready  always  to  give  answer  to 
every  man  that  asketh  you  a  reason  concerning  the  hope  that  is  in  you,  yet  with  meek- 
ness and  fear."  Fetor  begins, "  Being  ready  always  with  an  apology,"  i.e.  answer,  or 
defence.  It  is  not  intended  that  we  should  master  Christian  apologetics — he  able  to 
au3w«r  every  objection  which  infidels  may  start    The  apology  which  is  contemplated 


cam.  1—22.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLB  GENERAL  OP  PETER.  lOT 

here  is  of  a  much  more  simple  nature,  viz.  that  we  should  be  able  to  make  a  plain 
statement  of  the  considerations  that  have  had  weight  with  us  in  leading  us  to  be 
Christians.  We  are  here  regarded  as  having  a  hope  in  us,  i.e.  as  a  living,  active  prin- 
ciple. It  is  true  that  we  belong  more  to  the  future  than  to  the  present.  What  is 
fulflUcd  is  but  small  in  comparison  with  what  is  yet  to  be  fulfilled.  This  hope  is 
rationally  produced,  and  we  ought  to  be  able  to  give  a  rational  account  of  it.  Can  we 
give  a  clear  statement  of  its  nature,  and  of  the  grounds  on  which  it  rests  ?  It  is  the 
hope  of  saivation,  i.e.  of  ultimate  complete  deliverance  from  the  power  of  sin.  It  is 
the  hope  of  eternal  life,  i.e.  of  the  present  life  being  perfected.  It  is  the  hope  of  a 
resurrection,  i.e.  of  the  body  laid  in  the  grave  being  raised.  It  is  the  hope  of  glory,  i.e. 
of  our  whole  nature  having  a  shining  form.  It  is  the  hope  of  the  glorious  appearing  of 
Christ,  i.e.  to  have  his  own  glory  fully  manifested  and  to  consummate  ours.  It  is  the 
hope  of  being/or  ever  with  the  Lord,  i.e.  happy  in  his  presence  and  fellowship.  We 
rest  our  hope  on  the  work  of  Christ.  We  feel  that  his  righteousness  is  reason  for  the 
accusings  of  conscience  being  silenced,  and  for  God  bestowing  on  us  all  manifestations 
of  his  love.  We  rest  our  hope  on  the  promise  of  God  in  Christ.  We  have  not  only 
fact  to  rest  on,  but  the  expression  of  fact  in  word,  and  to  his  word  God  has  added  his 
oath,  "  That  by  two  immutable  things  [the  word  and  the  oath  both  based  on  fact]  in 
which  it  is  impossible  for  God  to  lie,  we  may  have  a  strong  encouragement,  who  have 
fled  for  refuge  to  lay  hold  of  the  hope  set  before  us."  We  further  rest  our  hope  on  our 
experience.  "  Tribulation  worketh  patience ;  and  patience,  experience ;  and  experience, 
hope."  What  we  have  already  experienced  of  God  does  not  discourage  ug ;  on  the  con- 
trary, it  is  strong  reason  for  our  looking  for  the  plenitude  of  the  Divine  blessing.  We 
are  to  be  readi/  always  with  our  apology;  that  does  not  mean  that  we  are  to  be 
always  putting  forward  our  apology,  for  we  must  use  discretion.  &it  we  are  to  b« 
ready  with  our  apology  whenever  occasion  oflers.  The  occasion  contemplated  ii  any 
one  asking  us  a  reason  concerning  the  hope  that  is  in  us.  We  are  then  to  be  equal  to 
the  occasion ;  we  are  not  to  let  slip  the  opportunity  of  our  commending  our  Master. 
Let  us  not  be  silent  through  ensnaring  fear;  but  let  us  come  forward  and  tell  what 
Christ  has  done  for  us,  and  what  we  expect  from  him.  But  let  us  put  forward  our 
apology  with  meekness.  "  Then  must  ye  not  answer  with  proud  words,  and  bring  out 
the  matter  with  a  defiance  and  with  violence,  as  if  ye  would  tear  up  trees "  (Luther). 
Let  us  also  put  forward  our  apology  with  fear,  i.e.  the  fear  of  damage  being  done  to  the 
cause  by  the  weakness  of  our  apology,  leading  us  to  make  God  our  Counsellor,  (e) 
Way  in  which  we  are  to  be  ready  with  our  apology.  "  Having  a  good  conscience ;  that, 
wherein  ye  are  spoken  against,  they  may  be  put  to  shame  who  revile  your  good  manner 
of  life  in  Christ."  We  must  have  materials  for  our  apology,  else  we  shall  never  be 
ready  with  it.  These  materials  are  to  be  supplied  from  a  good  life,  which  is  here 
Tiewed  in  connection  with  having  a  good  conscience,  i.e.  habitually  acting  according  to 
our  convictions  of  duty.  When  spoken  against,  we  shall  best  put  our  revilers  to  shame 
by  recounting  facts  which  can  bear  the  light.  In  the  absence  of  these,  no  amount  of 
skill  of  speech  will  make  us  good  apologists,  whom  fear  cannot  disturb.  (4)  The 
blessedness  brought  out  by  contrast.  "  For  it  is  better,  if  the  will  of  God  should  so  will, 
that  ye  suffer  for  well-doing  than  for  evil-doing."  It  is  better,  subject  to  the  condition 
of  the  Divine  willing  of  sufCering.  He  does  not  say  how  it  is  better.  His  former 
thought  was  that  in  suffering  for  our  faults  there  is  not  the  noble  element  that  there  is 
in  suffering  for  well-doing.  Thus  is  he  helped  to  rise  to  the  sublime  height  of  Ohrisfs 
suffering.  6.  Blessedness  of  suffering  for  righteousness  take  illustrated  by  the  example 
of  Christ.  (1)  In  bringing  us  to  Ood  Christ  suffered  not  for  his  own  sins.  "  Because 
Christ  'also  suffered  for  sins  once,  the  righteous  for  the  unrighteous,  that  he  might 
bring  us  to  God."  Stress  is  to  be  laid  here,  as  at  the  close  of  the  second  chapter,  on 
the  exemplary  character  of  Christ's  sufferings.  But  Peter  could  not  regard  these  in 
their  lower  aspect  without  also  bringing  in  their  higher  aspect.  The  great  object  oi 
Christ  was  to  bring  us  to  God,  i.e.  not  merely  into  a  state  of  reconciliation  to  God,  but 
into  a  state  of  fellowship  with  God.  His  suffering  was  for  this  end.  He  suffered  for 
sins ;  and  so  far  he  might  seem  to  have  the  character  of  an  evil-doer.  But  the  sins 
were  not  his  own ;  as  it  is  added  that  he  was  the  Righteous  One  (Peter's  designation  oJ 
Christ  in  Acts  iii.  14)  for  the  unrighteous,  i.e.  us  who  needed  to  be  brought  to  God. 
The  idea  of  lubititution  is  not  brought  forward,  but  it  is  in  the  background.    We  are 


168  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  PETER,    [oh.  m.  1—22. 

rather  to  think  of  advantage  eonferred  as  giving  Christ  indisputahle  authority  ai 
example.  Do  we  suffer  for  well-doing?  Christ,  it  is  said,  also  suffered,  by  whose  well- 
doing (the  thought  is)  we  are  so  mightily  advantaged.  But  the  apostle  has  a  look 
beyond  this ;  of  which  he  gives  a  hint  in  the  word  "  once."  Christ  suffered  once  ;  i.e. 
suffered,  and  then  passed  into  a  state  in  which  he  suffers  no  more.  So  we  are  to  under- 
stand that  we  have  this  to  comfort  us  (Christ  being  ora  Example),  that  our  suffering  is 
only  once ;  it  is  what  comes  after  suffering  that  is  permanent.  (2)  Eis  being  put  to 
death  was  followed  ly  his  heing  quickened.  "Being  put  to  death  in  the  flesh,  but 
quickened  in  the  spirit."  There  is  a  resuming  of  the  thought  of  suffering  in  connec- 
tion with  its  worst  and  last  phase.  Though  the  Righteous  One,  he  was  treated  as  a 
malefactor,  and  put  to  death  ("  killed "  is  Peter's  word  in  Acts  iii.  15)  ;  he  thus  came 
within  the  scope  of  his  own  beatitude,  "  Blessed  are  they  which  are  persecuted  for 
righteousness'  sake :  for  theirs  is  the  kingdom  of  heaven."  His  suffering  in  the  interest 
of  human  well-being  was  followed,  as  has  already  been  indicated,  by  his  suffering  no 
more.  It  is  now  declared  that  it  was  followed  by  his  being  quickened.  It  is  further 
declared  that  it  was  followed  by  his  resurrection  and  ascension ;  and  before  he  leaves 
his  theme,  it  is  declared  that  it  is  yet  to  be  followed  by  his  coming  to  judgment. 
Thus  no  sooner  did  he  suffer,  than  he  came  to  be  in  the  ascendant.  The  starting- 
point  of  his  after-suffering  career  was  his  leing  quickened.  His  being  put  to  death 
was  in  the  flesh;  i.e.  on  the  side  of  his  nature  by  which  he  was  connected  with  earth 
and  had  a  mortal  existence.  His  being  quickened  is  contrasted  in  being  not  in  the 
flesh,  but  in  the  spirit ;  i.e.  on  the  side  of  his  nature  by  which  he  was  above  earth  and 
had  an  immortal  existence.  At  death  there  takes  place  a  lepaiation  of  soul  and  body. 
During  the  time  Christ's  body  was  in  the  grave  his  soul  was  in  Hades.  It  was  Peter 
who  snowed  himself  alive  to  this  important  fact  in  bis  comments  on  the  words  of  the 
sixteenth  psalm,  "  Thou  wilt  not  leave  my  soul  in  hell,"  in  his  sermon  on  the  day  of 
Pentecost.  The  expression  of  the  fact  in  the  Apostles'  Creed  is  that  he  "  descended 
into  Hades."  By  "  Hades  "  is  denoted  the  invisible  world,  with  the  special  association 
of  the  world  of  the  dead.  Between  our  death  and  the  resurrection  we  are  to  be  in  an 
incomplete  state  in  so  far  as  soul  and  body  are  not  to  be  united.  Our  Lord's  identi- 
fication with  us  extended  to  his  being  for  a  determined  time  in  this  incomplete  state. 
At  our  death  (if  we  are  in  Christ)  we  believe  that  there  is  to  be  a  quickening  of  us  in 
spirit  in  connection  with  our  being  placed  under  higher  conditions.  So  we  would  seem 
to  be  taught  here,  regarding  our  Lord,  that  the  extinguishing  of  his  life  in  the  flesh 
was  immediately  followed  by  a  quickening  in  Ihat  which  could  not  die,  and  had  a 
separate  existence.  While  his  body  was  not  yet  quickened,  there  was  a  bursting  forth 
of  glorious  activity  in  his  spirit  in  the  new  sphere  of  things  and  altered  conditions  into 
which  he  passed.  (3)  Being  quickened,  he  was  also  active  in  Hades.  "  In  which 
also  he  went  and  preached  unto  the  spirits  in  prison,  which  aforetime  were  dis- 
obedient, when  the  long-suffering  of  God  waited  in  the  days  of  Noah,  while  the  ark 
was  a-preparing,  wherein  few,  that  is,  eight  souls,  were  saved  through  water."  In 
the  spirit  quickened,  he  was  also  active  in  a  particular  form.  The  congenial  abode  of 
Christ  in  Hades  was  Paradise,  or  the  abode  of  the  blessed  dead.  But  he  did  not  simply 
abide  in  Paradise;  he  went  from  it  to  the  abode  of  the  unsaved  dead.  This  is  here 
called  a  prison,  being  the  place  where  there  is  meantime  abridgment  of  liberty.  He 
penetrated  even  to  this  department  of  Hades,  and  preached.  This  is  a  word  of  evan- 
gelical sense  in  the  New  Testament,  and  is  to  be  interpreted  in  accordance  with  the 
reference  to  Christ's  death  going  before,  and  also  in  accordance  with  the  preaching 
of  the  gospel  in  ch.  iv.  6.  We  may  understand  that  in  Paradise  he  not  only  mani- 
fested himself  as  the  Incarnate  One,  but  also  announced  his  death  and  his  soon- 
to-be  accomplished  resurrection.  And  we  are  not  to  think  of  other  announcement 
than  this  in  the  place  where  spirits  are  imprisoned.  It  is  not  said  that  he  preached 
unto  all  the  spirits  in  prison,  but  only  unto  a  section  of  them,  viz.  the  spirits  of  them 
that  perished  in  the  Flood.  It  cannot  be  said  of  the  antediluvians  referred  to  that 
they  were  very  unfavourably  situated  for  trial.  There  was  addressed  to  them  a  call 
to  repentance ;  for  Noah  preached — preached  what  their  sins  would  bring  upon  them 
(aeooiding  to  the  revelation  made  to  him),  but  also  preached  the  means  of  deliverance. 
He  preached  not  only  by  word,  but  by  act.  And  OxA  was  not  in  haste  to  destroy. 
"  My  Spirit  shall  not  always  strive  with  man,  for  that  he  also  is  flesh ;  yet  his  days 


OH.  m.  l->22.]    THE  FIBST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PETEB.  161 

•ball  be  an  hundred  and  twenty  years."  During  all  the  time  the  ark  was  ••preparing 
the  long-Boffering  of  Ood  waited,  i.e.  not  to  destroy.  But  the  men  of  Noah's  time  were 
disobedient,  t.e.  refosed,  made  light  of  proffered  deliverance ;  and  as  they  were  over- 
taken by  an  earthly  judgment,  which  was  so  complete  that  only  eight  souls  ("  so  few 
as  eight")  were  saved  by  means  of  the  water,  with  regard  to  which  the  others,  to  their 
destruction,  were  sceptical.  And  they  are  here  represented  in  the  next  world  as  spirits 
in  prison.  And  yet  to  them  Christ  went  and  announced  his  death  and  coming  resur- 
rection. There  ia  a  certain  mystery  resting  upon  this  fact  which  it  was  not  the  pur- 
pose of  God  by  Peter  to  remove.  It  was  sufficient  to  emphasize  the  fact  that,  so  far 
from  being  crushed  by  death,  he  was  gloriously  active,  even  in  the  world  of  the\msaved 
dead.  Seeing  that  the  full  significance  of  the  fact  has  not  been  disclosed,  it  would  be 
wrsng  to  be  dogmatic ;  at  the  same  time,  we  are  bound  not  to  let  go  the  fact  which  is 
to  be  regarded  as  an  important  addition  to  the  facts  contained  in  the  Gospels.  What 
has  been  given  as  the  interpretation  was  substantially  what  prevailed  vmtil  the  time 
of  Augustine.  The  Augustinian  interpretation,  the  influence  of  which  is  evident  in 
our  translation,  starts  from  the  assumption  that  Peter  does  not  intend  to  bring  out  an 
antithesis  between  what  was  done  to  Christ  m  the  flesh  and  what  was  done  to  Christ 
tn  the  spirit.  It  also  proceeds  on  the  assumption  that  it  was  not  Christ  that  preached, 
but  Noah.  There  was  not  a  proper  going  from  one  place  to  another,  and  after  Christ's 
death.  The  preaching  was  not  founded  on  Christ's  death.  It  was  addressed  not  pro- 
perly to  spirits,  but  to  men  In  the  flesh.  These  were  not  literally  in  prison,  but  in 
the  prison  of  sin.  They  were  not  properly  aforetime  disobedient,  but  disobedient  when 
Noah  preached.  Thus  does  the  long-prevailing  Augustinian  interpretation  break  down 
along  the  whole  line.  (4)  Not  held  in  Hades,  he  reappeared  m  resurrection-form  and  with 
resurrection-power  on  earth.  "  Which  also  after  a  true  likeness  doth  now  save  yon, 
even  baptism,  not  the  putting  away  of  the  filth  of  the  flesh,  but  the  interrogation  of  a 
good  conscience  toward  God,  through  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ."  Water  saved 
the  eight  5  so  water  saves  us  still,  t'.s.  in  the  jtntitype,  the  type  being  now  baptism. 
How  does  baptism  save  us  ?  It  may  be  said  of  the  Flood  that  it  was  the  baptism  of 
the  earth.  It  was  associated  with  the  washing  away  of  the  filth  of  the  old  world ;  it 
was  also  associated  with  the  bringing  forth  of  a  renovated  world.  So  baptism  is  asso- 
ciated with  the  putting  away  of  the  filth  of  the  flesh ;  it  is  also  associated  (which  is  to 
the  purpose  here)  with  the  interrogation  of  a  good  conscience  toward  Qod.  At 
baptism  there  used  to  be  transacting  by  question  and  answer  such  as  this :  "  Dost 
thou  renounce  Satan?"  "I  do  renounce  him."  "Dost  thou  believe  in  Christ?" 
"I  do  believe  in  him."  "Dost  thou  take  thy  stand  by  Christ?"  "I  do  take  my 
stand  by  him."  Of  the  new  life  thus  entered  on  by  explicit  covenant  the  efficient 
cause  was  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  Ghriit.  Thus  the  apostle  gets  back  to  his  line  of 
thought.  So  far  from  being  crushed  by  death  Christ  was  not  held  within  the  world 
of  the  dead.  The  quickening  which  pervaded  his  spirit  extended  also,  and  from  his 
spirit,  to  his  body.  He  reappeared  for  a  time  on  earth  in  resurrection-form,  bringing 
in  glorious  resurrection-power  first  for  the  souls  of  men — of  which  the  earthly  channel 
is  baptism.  (5)  Saving  risen  from  earth,  he  now  reigns  from  the  right  hand  of  Ood 
in  heaven.  "  Who  is  on  the  right  hand  of  God,  having  gone  into  heaven ;  angels  and 
authorities  and  powers  being  maide  subject  unto  him."  So  fer  from  being  crushed  by 
death,  Christ  is  now  established  at  the  right  hand  of  God.  After  having,  as  typified  in 
baptism,  efficiently  left  a  channel  of  regenerating  influence  for  men,  he  left  earth.  As 
he  went  from  one  department  of  Hades  into  another,  so  he  went  up_  from  earth  into 
heaven.  In  heaven  he  is  at  the  right  hand  of  God— gloriously  reigning  there,  angels 
and  authorities  and  powers,  even  aU  the  orders  of  the  heavenly  hierarchy,  being  made 
subject  unto  him.  If  Christ,  then,  suffering  for  righteousness'  sake,  thus  came  to  be  in 
the  ascendant,  shall  not  we,  suffering  for  righteousness'  sake,  come  to  be  in  the  ascend-' 
ant  too,  all  the  more  that  he  is  now  in  a  position  to  bring  tbis  about  for  us?— B.  F. 


170 


THE  FIRST  IPISTLB  GKNERAL  OP  PETER.    foH-TV.!— 19 


IMPOSITION. 


CHAPTKR  IV 


Ver.  1. — Forasmuoh  then  as  Christ  hath 
suffered  for  ua  in  the  flesh.  St.  Peter  returns, 
after  the  digression  of  ch,  iii.  19 — 22,  to  the 
great  subject  of  Christ's  example.  The 
words  "  for  us  "  are  omitted  in  some  ancient 
mannscripts ;  they  express  a  great  truth 
already  dwelt  upon  in  ch.  iL  and  iii.  Here 
tlie  apostle  is  insisting  upon  the  example  of 
Christ,  not  on  the  atoning  efScacy  of  his 
deatli.  Arm  yonTselTes  l&ewise  with  the 
same  mind.  The  word  rendered  "  mind  " 
(ewoia)  is  more  exactly  "thouglit"  (comp. 
Heb.  iv.  12,  the  only  other  place  where  it 
occurs  in  the  New  Testament);  but  it 
certainly  has  sometimes  the  force  of  "  inten- 
tion, resolve."  The  Christian  must  be  like 
his  Master ;  he  must  arm  himself  with  the 
great  thought,  the  holy  resolve,  which  was 
in  the  mind  of  Christ— the  thought  that 
suffering  borne  in  faith  frees  us  from  the 
power  of  sin,  the  resolve  to  suffer  patiently 
accordingtotho  willof  God.  That  thought, 
which  can  be  made  our  own  only  by  faith,  is 
the  Christian's  shield ;  we  are  to  arm  our- 
selves with  it  against  the  assaults  of  the 
evil  one  (comp.  Bom.  xiii.  12 ;  2  Cor.  x.  4 ; 
Eph.  vi.  11).  For  he  that  hath  snffered  in 
the  flesh  hath  ceased  from  sin.  The  thought 
is  that  of  Bom.  yi.  6 — 11.  Some  translate 
the  conjunction  8ti,  "  that,"  and  understand 
it  as  giving  the  content  of  the  tvroia :  "  Arm 
yourselves  with  the  thought  that,"  etc. ;  but 
this  does  not  give  so  good  a  sense,  and 
woold  seem  to  require  rairriv  rather  than 
T^K  aiT■^>f — "  this  thought,"  rather  than  "  the 
same  thought."  Some,  again,  understand 
this  clause  of  Christ ;  but  this  seems  a  mis- 
take. The  apostle  spoke  first  of  the  Master ; 
now  he  turns  to  the  disciple.  Take,  he 
says,  for  your  armour  the  thoughts  which 
filled  the  sacred  heart  of  Christ — the  thought 
that  sufferuig  in  the  flesh  is  not,  as  the  world 
counts  it,  an  unmixed  evil,  but  often  a  deep 
blessing ;  for,  or  because,  he  that  suffered  in 
the  flesh  hath  ceased  from  sin.  If,  when  we 
are  called  to  suffer,  we  offer  up  our  suffer- 
ings to  Christ  who  suffered  for  us,  and  unite 
our  sufferings  with  his  by  faith  in  him, 
then  those  t^ufferings,  thus  sanctified,  destroy 
the  power  of  sin,  and  make  us  cease  from 
sin  (comp.  Bom.  vi.  10). 

ver.  2. — That  he  no  longer  shonldlive  the 
rest  of  his  time  in  the  flesh.  On  the  whole, 
it  seems  better  to  connect  this  clause  with 
the  imperative :  "  Arm  yourselves  with  the 
same  mind,  that  ye  no  longer  should  live  the 
rest  of  your  time ;  rather  than  with  the  clause 
immecuately  preceding :  **  He  that  hath  suf- 
fered in  the  flesh  hath  ceased  from  sin ;  that 


he  no  longer  should  IlTe,"  ete. ;  though  both 
connections  give  a  good  sense.  The  Oreek 
word  for  "  live  "  (/Simrrai)  occurs  only  here  in 
the  Xew  Testament.  Bengel  says, "  Aptum 
verbum,  non  dioitur  de  brutis.  "In  the 
flesh  "  here  means  simply  "  in  the  body,"  In 
this  mortal  life.  "  The  rest  of  your  time  " 
suggests  the  solemn  thought  of  the  shortness 
of  our  earthly  pilgrimage :  live  for  eternity. 
To  the  lusts  of  men,  hat  to  the  wUl  of  Ood. 
The  datives  are  normal;  they  express  the 
pattern  or  rule  according  to  which  our  life 
ought  to  be  fasliioned.  God's  wiU  is  our 
sanctifl  cation  (1  Thess.  iv.  3).  That  will  ia 
ever  the  same,  a  fixed,  unchanging  rule ;  the 
lusts  of  men  are  shifting,  uncertain,  restless. 
Ver.  3. — For  the  time  past  of  our  life  may 
Bufilce  as  to  have  wrought  the  will  of  the 
Gentiles ;  rather,  as  in  the  Bevised  Version, 
the  time  past  may  tuffice.  The  words,  "of 
our  life  "  and  "  us,"  are  not  found  in  the 
best  manuscripts.  St.  Peter  could  not  in- 
clude himself  among  those  who  wrought  the 
will  of  the  Gentiles.  The  Greek  word  for 
"  will "  here  is,  according  to  the  best  manu- 
scripts, fioiK-nna ;  in  ver.  2  "  the  wiU  of  God  " 
is  94\nim.  The  general  distinction  is  that 
94Ka  implies  choice  and  purpose,  Poi\oiuu 
merely  inclination  (compare,  in  tiie  Greek, 
Fhilem.  13,  14).  The  change  of  word 
seems  to  point  to  such  a  distinction  here, 
God's  will  is  a  fixed,  holy  purpose;  the  will, 
or  rather  wish,  of  the  Gentiles  was  uncertain 
inclination,  turned  this  way  or  that  way  by 
changeful  lusts.  The  perfect  infinitive,  "  to 
have  wrought,"  implies  that  that  part  of  life 
ought  to  be  regarded  as  a  thing  wholly  past 
and  gone.  The  whole  sentence  hag  a  tone 
of  solemn  irony.  "  Fastidium  peccati  apud 
resipiscentes"  (Bengel);  comp.  Eom.vi.  21. 
St.  Peter  is  here  addressing  Gentile  Chris- 
tians. Fronmiiller's  objection  is  peculiar: 
"  Suppose  that  the  readers  of  Peter's  Epistle 
liad  formerly  been  heathens,  his  reproaching 
them  with  having  formerly  done  the  will 
of  the  Gentiles  would  siurely  be  singular." 
They  had  done  the  will  of  the  Gentiles; 
thCT  were  now,  as  Christians,  to  do  the  will 
of  God.  When  we  walked  in  lasoiyiousness, 
lasts,  excess  of  wine,revellings,  banquetings, 
and  abominable  idolatries ;  letter,  as  in  the 
Bevised  Version,  and  to  have  lodlked.  There 
is  no  pronoun.  Lusts  are  the  hidden  sins 
of  unclean  thought,  which  lead  to  outbreaks 
of  lasclyiousness.  The  Greek  word  for  "  re- 
vellings  "  (Koiuai)  is  one  often  used  of  drunken 
youths  parading  the  streets,  or  of  festal  pro- 
cessions in  hononr  of  Bacchus.  The  word 
translated  "  banquetings  "  means  rather 
"  drinking-bouts."  The  word  for  "  abomin- 
able "  is  iStiilrut,  unlawful,  nefarious,  con- 


OH.  IT.  1—19.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GBNERAIi  OP  PETER. 


171 


ttaiy  to  the  eternal  principles  of  the  Divine 
Law ;  "  qnibna  eanctissimum  Dei  ins  viola- 
tor "  (Bengel).  St.  Peter  is  probably  re- 
ferring, not  only  to  the  sin  of  Idolatry  in 
itself,  but  also  to  the  many  licentious 
practices  connected  with  it.  After  the 
persecution  of  Nero,  in  which  St.  Peter 
perished,  Christianity  was  regarded  by  the 
state  as  a  religio  illioita.  Christianity  was 
condemned  by  the  law  of  Borne  ;  Idolatry  is 
opposed  to  the  eternal  Law  of  God.  This 
verse  could  not  have  been  addressed  to 
Hebrew  Christians. 

Ver.  4.— Wherein  they  think  it  strange. 
Wherein,  in  which  course  of  life,  in  the  fact 
that  the  Christians  once  lived  like  the 
Gentiles,  but  now  are  so  wholly  changed. 
The  word  i(yi(e<r6ai  means  commonly  to  be 
a  guest,  to  live  as  a  stranger  in  another's 
house  (Acts  x.  6,  18;  zxL  16);  here  it 
means  to  be  astonished,  as  at  some  strange 
sight,  as  such  guests  would  no  doubt  some- 
times be  (comp.  ver.  12  and  Acts  xvii.  20). 
That  ye  run  not  with  them  to  the  sama 
excess  of  riot.  The  Greek  words  arevei^ 
strong,  "  while  ye  run  not  with  them,"  as  if 
the  Gentiles  were  running  greedily  in  troops 
to  riot  and  ruin.  The  word  for  "  excess  " 
(incixwcw)  is  found  here  only  in  the  New 
Testament ;  it  means  "  an  overflowing ; "  the 
rendering «enttna(" a  sewer"  or  "cesspool") is 
doubtful.  The  word  rendered  "riot"  (aaayrla) 
occurs  also  in  Eph.  v.  18  and  Titus  i.  6,  and  is 
used  in  the  adverbial  form  in  describing  the 
recklessness  of  the  prodigal  son  (Luke  XT. 
13).  It  means  that  lost  state  in  which  a 
man  is  given  np  to  self-indulgence,  and 
saves  neither  reputation,  earthly  position, 
nor  his  immortal  soul.  Speaking  evil  of 
you;  better,  perhaps,  translated  literally, 
blaspheming.  The  words  "  of  you  "  are  not 
in  the  original;  they  who  revile  Christiana 
for  well-doing  are  blasphemers,  they  speak 
really  against  God. 

Yer.  5. — ^Who  shall  give  acoonnt  to  him 
that  is  ready  to  judge  the  quick  and  the 
dead.  The  judgment  is  at  hand ;  the  Judge 
standeth  before  the  door;  all  men>  quick 
and  dead  alike,  must  give  account  to  him. 
It  is  better  to  suffer  now  for  well-doing  tlian 
then  for  evil-doing.  Men  call  you  to  give 
account  now  (ch.  iii.  IS);  they  themselves 
must  give  account  to  God. 

Ver.  6. — For  for  this  cause  was  the  gospel 
preached  also  to  them  that  are  dead.  The 
conjunction  "for"  seems  to  link  this  verse 
closely  to  ver.  5,  while  the  /ca^  ("  also  "  or 
"  even  ")  gives  an  emphasis  to  "  them  that  are 
dead  "  ((c3  vexpois).  We  naturally  refer  these 
last  words  to  the  koI  viKpois  of  the  preceding 
verse.  The  apostle  seems  to  be  meeting  an 
objection.  The  Thessalonian  Christians 
feared  lest  believers  who  fell  asleep  before 
the  second  advent  should  lose  sometliinj; 


of  the  blessedness  of  those  who  should  be 
aliTe  and  remain  unto  the  coming  of  the 
Lord.  On  the  other  hand,  some  of  St.  Peter's 
readers  may,  perhaps,  have  thought  that  those 
who  had  passed  away  before  the  gospel 
times  could  not  be  justly  judged  in  the 
same  way  as  those  who  then  were  living. 
The  two  classes,  the  living  and  the  dead, 
were  separated  by  a  great  difference:  tho 
living  had  heard  the  gospel,  the  dead  had 
not ;  the  living  had  opportunities  and  privi- 
leges which  liad  not  been  granted  to  the 
dead.  But,  St.  Peter  says,  the  gospel  was 
preached  also  to  the  dead ;  they  too  heard 
the  glad  tidings  of  salvation  (xat  yc/tpoTj  ci- 
iiyye\l(r6Ti).  Some  have  thought  that  the 
word  "  dead  "  is  used  metaphorically  for  the 
dead  in  trespasses  and  sins.  But  it  seems 
scarcely  possible  to  give  the  word  a  literal 
sense  in  ver.  5  and  a  metapliorlcal  sense  in 
ver.  6.  Some  understand  the  apostle  as 
meaning  that  the  gospel  had  been  preached 
to  those  who  then  were  dead,  before  their 
death ;  but  it  seems  unnatural  to  assign  dif- 
ferent times  to  the  verb  and  the  substantive. 
The  aorist  tirryycMaBi)  directs  our  thoughts 
to  some  definite  occasion.  The  absence  of  the 
article  (ral  v(Kpois)  should  also  be  noticed ; 
the  words  assert  tliat  the  gospel  was  preached 
to  dead  persons — to  some  that  were  dead. 
These  considerations  lead  us  to  connect  tlie 
passage  with  oh.  iii.  19,  20.  There  St.  Peter 
tells  us  that  Christ  himself  went  and 
preached  in  the  spirit  "  to  the  spirits  in 
prison ; "  then  the  gospel  was  preached,  the 
good  news  of  salvation  was  announced,  to 
some  that  were  dead.  The  article  is  absent 
both  here  and  in  ver.  5  (^Cavras  xaX  rtxpois). 
All  men,  quick  and  dead  alike,  must  appear 
before  the  judgment-seat  of  Christ;  so  St. 
Peter  may  not  have  intended  to  limit  the 
area  of  the  Lord's  preaching  in  Hades  here, 
as  he  had  done  in  ch.  iii.  There  he  men- 
tioned one  section  only  of  the  departed ; 
partly  because  the  Deluge  furnished  a  con- 
spicuous example  of  men  who  suffered  for 
evil-doing,  partly  because  he  regarded  it  as  a 
striking  type  of  Christian  baptism.  Here, 
perhaps,  he  asserts  the  general  fact — the 
gospel  was  preached  to  the  dead;  perhaps 
(we  may  not  presume  to  dogmatize  in  a 
matter  so  mysterious,  about  which  so  little 
is  revealed)  to  all  the  vast  population  of  the 
underworld,  who  had  passed  away  before  the 
gospel  times.  Like  the  men  of  Tyre  and 
Sidon,  of  Sodom  and  Gomorrah,  they  had 
not  seen  the  works  or  heard  the  words  of 
Christ  during  their  Ufo  on  the  earth;  now 
they  heard  from  the  Lord  himself  what  he 
bad  done  for  the  salvation  of  mankind. 
Therefore  God  was  ready  to  judge  tho  quick 
and  the  dead,  for  to  both  was  the  gospel 
preached.  That  they  might  be  judged  ac- 
cording to  men  in  th«  &9&,  but  live  accord 


172 


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PETEE.     [oh.  iv.  1—19. 


ing  to  God  in  th»  spirit.  The  gospel  was 
preaohed  to  the  dead  for  this  end  (f  ts  toSto), 
that  they  might  he  jndged  indeed  (?ra  Kpi- 
eSiTi  nfv),  but  nerertheleBS  live  ({airi  Si). 
The  last  clause  expresses  the  end  and 
purpose  of  the  preaching ;  the  former  clause, 
though  grammatically  dependent  upon  the 
conjunction  Jm,  states  a  necessity  antecedent 
to  the  preaching  (comp.  Bom.  vi.  17,  "  God 
be  thanked  that  ye  were  the  servants  of  sin, 
but  ye  have  obeyed  from  the  heart ; "  and 
TiiL  10,  "  If  Christ  be  in  ■  yon,  the  body 
indeed  is  dead  because  of  sin,  but  the  spirit 
is  life  because  of  righteousness").  The 
meaning  seems  to  be — the  gospel  was 
preached  to  the  dead,  that,  though  they  were 
judged,  yet  they  might  live.  They  had 
suffered  the  judgment  of  death,  the  punish- 
ment of  human  sin.  Christ  had  been  put 
to  death  in  the  flesh  (oh.  iii.  18)  for  the 
sins  of  others ;  the  dead  had  suffered  death 
in  tlie  flesh  for  their  own  sins.  They  had 
died  before  the  manifestation  of  the  Son  of 
God,  before  the  great  work  of  atonement 
wrought  by  bis  death ;  but  that  atonement 
was  retrospective — he  "  taketh  away  the  sin 
of  the  world ; "  its  saving  influences  ex- 
tended even  to  the  realm  of  the  dead.  The 
gospel  was  preached  to  the  dead,  that,  though 
they  were  judged  according  to  men  (that  is, 
afteir  the  fashion  of  men,  as  all  men  are 
jndged),  yet  they  might  live  in  the  spirit 
(comp.  1  Cor.  v.  5,  "  To  deliver  such  a  one 
unto  Satan  for  the  destruction  of  the  flesh, 
that  the  spirit  may  be  saved  in  the  day  of 
the  Lord  Jesus  ").  The  verb  Kptdaat, "  might 
be  judged,"  is  aorist,  as  describing  a  single 
fact ;  tiie  verb  fStri,  "  might  live,"  is  present, 
as  desciibing  a  continual  state.  According 
to  God.  God  ia  Spirit;  and  as  they  that 
worship  him  must  worsliip  in  spirit,  so  they 
who  beliere  in  him  shall  live  in  spirit. 
The  future  life  is  a  spiritual  life ;  the  resnr- 
rection-bodies  of  the  saints  wiU  be  spiritual 
bodies,  for  "  flesh  and  blood  cannot  inherit  the 
kingdom  of  God."  But  Kara  @e6r  may  also 
mean  "  according  to  the  will  of  God "  (as 
in  Bom.  viii.  27),  according  to  his  gracious 
purpose,  and  in  that  life  which  he  giveth  to 
his  chosen,  that  eternal  life  which  lieth  in 
the  knowledge  of  God,  and  Jesus  Christ 
whom  he  hath  sent. 

Ver.  7. — ^Bnt  the  end  of  all  things  is  at 
hand.  The  mention  of  the  judgment  turns 
St.  Peter's  thoughts  into  another  channel. 
Tlie  end  is  at  hand,  not  only  the  judgment 
of  persecutors  and  slanderers,  but  the  end 
of  persecutions  and  sufi'erings,  the  end  of 
our  great  conflict  with  sin,  the  end  of  our 
earthly  probation;  therefore  prepare  to 
meet  your  God.  The  end  is  at  hand;  it 
hath  drawn  near.  St.  Peter  probably,  like 
the  other  apostles,  looked  for  the  speedy 
coming  of  the  Lord.    It  was  not  for  him,  aa 


it  is  not  for  ni,  "  to  know  the  times  or  the 
seasons  "  (Aois  i.  7).  It  is  enough  to  know 
that  our  own  time  ia  short.  When  St.  Peter 
wrote  these  words,  the  end  of  the  holy 
city,  the  centre  of  the  ancient  dispensation, 
was  very  near  at  hand;  and  behind  that 
awful  catastrophe  lay  the  incomparably 
more  tremendous  judgment,  of  which  the 
fall  of  Jerusalem  was  a  figure.  That  judg- 
ment, we  know  now,  was  to  be  separated 
by  a  wide  interval  from  the  date  of  St. 
Peter's  Ejpistle.  But  that  interval  ia 
measured,  in  the  prophetic  outlook,  not  by 
months  and  years.  We  are  now  living  in 
"the  last  times"  (1  Tim.  iv.  1;  1  John  ii. 
18).  The  coming  of  our  Lord  was  the 
beginning  of  the  last  period  in  the  develop- 
ment of  God's  dealings  with  mankind ;  there 
is  no  further  dispensation  to  be  looked  for. 
"  Not  only  is  there  nothing  more  between 
the  Christian's  present  state  of  salvation  and 
the  end,  but  the  former  is  itself  already  the 
end,  i.e.  the  beginning  of  the  end"  (Schott, 
quoted  by  Hni^er).  Be  ye  therefore  sober ; 
rather,  telf-restrained,  calm,  thoughtful.  The 
thought  of  the  nearness  of  the  end  should 
not  lead  to  excitement  and  neglect  of 
common  duties,  as  it  did  in  the  case  of  the 
Thessalonian  Christians,  and  again  at  the 
approach  of  the  thousandth  year  of  our  era. 
^d  watch  unto  prayer;  rather,  be  sober 
unto  prayers.  The  word  translated  "  watch  " 
in  the  Authorized  Version  is  not  that 
which  we  read  in  our  Lord's  exhortation  to 
"watch  and  pray."  The  word  used  here 
(vir^aTf)  rather  points  to  temperance, 
abstinence  from  strong  drinks,  though  it 
snggests  also  that  wariness  and  cool  thought- 
fulness  which  are  destroyed  by  excess. 
The  Christian  must  be  self-restrained  and 
sober,  and  that  with  a  view  to  perseverance 
in  prayer.  The  aorist  imperatives,  perhaps, 
imply  that  St.  Peter's  readers  needed  to  be 
stirred  up  (2  Pet  i.  13 ;  iii.  1),  to  be  aronsed 
from  that  indifference  into  which  men  are 
so  apt  to  fall.  The  exhortation  to  persevere 
in  watchfulness  would  be  expressed  by  the 
present 

Ver.  8. — And  above  all  things  have  fervent 
charity  among  yonrselves;  more  literally, 
before  all  things,  having  your  love  towards 
one  another  itUense.  The  existence  of 
charity  is  taken  for  granted.  Christians 
must  love  one  another ;  love  is  the  very 
badge  of  their  profession.  The  apostle 
urges  his  readers  to  keep  that  love  intense, 
and  that  before  all  things;  for  charity  is 
the  first  of  Christian  graces.  (On  the  word 
"  intense  "  (^xTeWjj),  see  note  on  ch.  i.  22.) 
For  charity  shall  cover  the  multitude  of 
sing.  Bead  and  translate,  with  the  Bevised 
Version,  for  love  eovereth  a  multitude  of 
sins.  If  St  Peter  is  directly  quoting 
Pior.  X.  12,  he  is  not  using  the  Septuagint, 


OH.  IV.  1—19.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTIiE  GENERAL  OP  PETER. 


173 


as  he  eommonly  does,  but  translating  from 
the  Hebrew.  The  Septuagint  rendering  is 
quite  different,  Tlivra*  Si  roiii  /u^  ifttXoyti- 
Kovmas  KftA^Tci  tjuxla.  But  it  may  be  that 
the  words  had  become  proverbial.  We 
find  them  also  in  Jas.  y.  20,  "He  which 
eonverteth  the  sinner  .  .  ..shall  hide  a 
mvltitnde  of  sins."  St.  James  means  that 
he  will  obtain  God's  forgiveness  for  the 
converted  sinner;  but  in  Prov.  x.  12  the 
meaning  (as  is  plain  from  the  context)  is 
that  love  covers  the  sins  of  others ;  docs  not 
stir  np  strifes,  as  hatred  does,  but  promotes 
concord  by  concealing  and  forgiving  sins. 
This  is  probably  St.  Peter's  meaning  here  : 
"Take  care  that  your  charity  is  intense, 
for  only  thus  can  you  forgive  as  you  are 
bidden  to  forgive,  as  you  hope  to  be  for- 
given." Fertmps  he  was  thinking  of  the 
"seventy  times  seven,"  to  which  the  Lord 
had  told  him  that  forgiveness  was  to  extend. 
But  bis  words  may  well  be  understood  as 
implying  more  than  this.  Love  shown  in 
forgiving  others  will  win  forgiveness  for 
yourselves :  "  Forgive,  and  ye  shall  be  for- 
given." Love  manifested  in  converting 
others  will  cover  their  sins,  and  obtain 
God's  forgiveness  for  them.  In  the  deepest 
sense,  it  is  only  the  love  of  Christ  energiz- 
ing in  his  atoning  work  which  can  cover 
sin ;  but  true  charity,  Christian  love,  flows 
from  that  holiest  love.  "  Love  is  of  God,  and 
every  one  that  loveth  is  born  of  God,  and 
knoweth  God."  Therefore  in  some  sense 
Christian  love,  flowing  &om  the  love  of 
Christ,  and  bringing  the  Christian  \eij 
near  to  Christ,  covers  sins ;  for  it  keeps  the 
Christian  close  to  the  cross,  within  the 
immediate  sphere  of  the  blessed  influences 
of  the  atonement,  so  that  he  becomes  a 
centre  of  grace,  a  light  Irindled  from  the 
true  Light,  a  well  of  living  waters  fed  by 
the  one  fouutain  which  is  opened  for  sin 
and  for  uncleannees.  The  mutual  love  of 
Christians,  their  kindly  words  and  deeds, 
check  the  work  of  sin ;  their- prayers,  their 
intercessions,  call  down  the  forgiveness  of 
God.  Therefore,  in  the  view  of  the 
approaching  end,  charity  is  before  all 
things  precious  for  our  own  souls  and  for 
the  souls  of  others. 

Yer.  9. — TTse  hospitality  one  to  another; 
literally,  being  hospitable  (comp.  Bom.  zii. 
13;  1  Tim.  iii.  2;  Heb.  xiii.  2 ;  3  John  5). 
Hospitality  must  have  been  a  necessary, 
and  often  a  costly,  duty  in  the  early  ages  of 
the  Church.  There  was  no  public  provision 
for  the  poor.  Christians  travelling  £rom 
place  to  place  would  find  no  suitable  shelter 
except  in  the  houses  of  Christians.  They 
would  be  obliged  to  avoid  the  public  houses 
of  entertainment,  where  they  would  be 
exposed  often  to  danger,  always  to  tempta- 
tion; only  the  private  houses  of  Christians 


would  be  safe  for  them.  Hence  the  use  of 
the  "  letters  of  commendation,"  mentioned 
by  St.  Paul  (2  Cor.  iii.  1>  Those  who 
brought  such  letters  were  to  be  received  is 
Cliristian  homes.  The  well-known  '  Teach- 
ing of  the  Twelve  Apostles '  speaks  of  this 
right  of  hospitality,  and  gives  cautions 
against  its  tdiuse.  The  apostle  is  not 
speaking  of  ordinary  social  gatherings; 
they  have  their  place  and  their  utility  in 
the  Christian  life,  but  they  do  not,  aa  a 
rule,  aflbrd  scope  for  the  higher  self-denials 
of  Christian  charity  (comp.  Luke  xiv.  12, 
13).  Without  grudging.  Such  hospitality 
would  be  always  costly,  often  inconvenient, 
sometimes  attended  with  danger,  as  in  the 
case  of  the  first  British  martyr;  but  it  was 
to  be  without  murmuring.  Murmuring 
would  take  from  the  hospitality  all  Its 
beauty;  it  should  be  oflered  as  a  gift  of 
love,  and  Christian  love  can  never  murmur 
(comp.  2  Cor.  ix.  7). 

Yer.  10. — As  every  man  hath  reoeived  the 
gift;  rather,  aceording  at  each  received  a 
gift.  The  aorist  l\aPfr,  "  reoeived,"  seems 
to  point  to  a  definite  time,  as  baptism,  or 
the  laying  on  of  hands  (comp.  Acts  viii.  17 ; 
xix.  6;  1  Tim.  iv.  14).  For  the  gift 
(X(£pi(r/((ii),  comp.  Bom.  xii.  6;  1  Cor.  xii.  4, 
"There  are  diversities  of  gifts."  Even  so 
minister  the  same  one  to  another;  literally, 
ministering  it  towards  one  another.  The 
gifts  of  grace,  whatever  they  may  be,  are 
talents  '  entrusted  to  individual  Christians 
for  the  good  of  the  whole  Church;  those 
who  have  them  must  use  them  to  minister 
to  the  'wants  of  others  (comp.  ch.  1.  12, 
where  the  same  word,  SiaicavciK,  to 
minister,  is  used  of  the  gift  of  prophecy). 
As  good  stewards  of  the  manifold  grace  of 
God.  We  seem  to  see  here  a  reference  to  the 
parable  of  the  talents  (comp.  also  1  Cor.  iv. 
1 ;  Titus  i.  7).  Christians  must  be  "  good 
stewards  (koXo!  olKov6fioi)."  There  should  be 
not  only  exactness,  but  also  grace  and 
beauty  in  their  stewardship — the  beauty 
which  belongs  to  holy  love,  and  flows  from 
the  imitation  of  him  who  is  "the  good 
Shepherd  (i  iroiniiv  i  itaKis)."  The  gifts 
(xapiiriiaTa)  are  the  manifestations  of  the 
grace  (x^P")  °^  God ;  that  grace  from  which 
all  gifts  issue  is  called  manifold  (troiic/Ar)), 
because  of  the  diversities  of  its  gifts,  the 
variety  of  its  manifestations. 

Yer.  11. — If  any  man  speak,  let  him 
speak  as  the  oracles  of  Ood.  St  Peter 
proceeds  to  give  examples  of  the  proper  use 
of  gifts.  One  of  those  gifts  is  utterance. 
The  apostle  means  all  Christian  utterance^ 
whether  public  in  the  Church,  or  private  in 
Christian  conversation  or  ministrations  to 
the  sick.  The  second  clause  may  be  also 
rendered,  as  in  the  Bevised  Yersion, "  speak- 
ing as  it  were  oracles  of  God."    It  is  mora 


174 


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PETBB.     [oh.  it.  1—19. 


natural  to  gnpply  the  participle  "  speaking" 
than  "  let  him  speak,"  after  the  analogy  of 
SioKovoSrTes  ("  ministering  ")  in  ver.  10.  For 
the  word  A.(fyio,  oraolea,  see  Acts  vii.  38; 
Rom.  iii.  2 ;  also  Heb.  t.  12,  in  which  last 
place  the  Scriptures  of  the  New  Testament 
seem  to  be  intended.    The  apostle's  mean- 
ing  may   be   either   that    the    Christian 
teacher  was  to  speak  as  do  the  oracles  of 
God,  that  is,  the   Scriptures,  or  (and  the 
absence  of  the  article  rather  favours  this 
view)  that  he  was  so  to  yield  himself  to  the 
guidance  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  that  his  teach- 
ing should  be  the  teaching  of  God ;  he  was 
to  seek  no  praise  or  reward  for  himself,  but 
only  the  glory  of  God.    Those  who  with 
single-hearted  zeal  seek  God's   glory  do 
speak  as  it  were  oracles  of  God,  for  he 
speaketh  by  them  (comp.  Mark  ziii.  11). 
If  any  man  minister,  let  him  do  it  as  of  the 
ability   whioh  God   glveth.     Again  it  ii 
better  to  supply  the  participle  "minister- 
ing."   Whatever  a  man's  gifts  may  be,  he 
must  minister  them  for  the  good  of  the 
whole  Church  (see  ver.  9;  also  Bom.  xii. 
8 ;  1  Cor.  xii.  28).    And  this  he  must  do  as 
of  the  strength  which  God  supplieth ;  the 
strength  is  not  his — God  giveth  it.     The 
verb  xopty^h  rendered  "  giveth,"  is  used  in 
elassical  Greek  first  of  supplying  the  ex- 
penses of  a  chorus,  then  of  liberal  giving 
generally ;  it  occurs  in  2  Cor.  ix.  10.     The 
compound,  fTrixoprryf'i',  is  more  common ;  St. 
Peter  has  it  in  the  Second  Epistle  (i.  5, 11). 
That  God  in  all  things  may  be  glorified 
through  Jesus  Christ.     The  glory  of  God 
should  be  the  one  end  of  all  Christian  work. 
The  Lord  himself  had  said  so  in  the  sermon 
on   the   mount,  in    words   doubtless   well 
remembered  by  the  apostle  (Matt  T.  16; 
oomp.  1  Cor.  x.  81).    To  whom  be  praise 
and  dominion  for  ever  and  ever.     Amen; 
rather,  as  in  the  Revised  Version,  tehoee  ia 
the  glory  and  dominion  for  the  age$  of  ages. 
It  is  thought  by  some  thatSt.  Peter  is  here 
quoting  from  some  ancient  form  of  prayer ; 
the  use  of  the  "  Amen,"  and  the  resemblance 
to  Kev.  i.  6  and  v.  13,  seem  to  favour  this 
supposition.    It  is  uncertain  whether  this 
doxology  is  addressed  to  God  the  Father 
or  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ ;  the  order  of 
the  words  is  in  favour  of  the  latter  view, 
and  the  doxology  closely  resembles  that  in 
Kev.  L  6. 

Ver.  12;— Beloved,  think  it  not  strange 
concerning  the  fiery  trial  which  is  to  try 
you,  as  though  some  strange  thing  happened 
unto  yon ;  lilerally,  be  not  attmmhed  at  the 
burning  among  you,  which  is  coming  to  you 
ftr  a  trial,  as  though  a  ttrange  thing  were 
happening  to  you.  Cit.  Peter  returns  to  the 
ealferings  of  his  readers.  The  address, 
"beloved,"  as  In  oh.  ii.  11,  shows  the 
depth  of  hi*  sympathy  with  them.     He 


resumes  the  thought  of  ch.  L  7;  the  perse- 
cution is  a  burning,  a  flery  furnace,  which 
is  being  kindled  among  them  for  a  trial,  to 
try  the  strength  of  their  faith.  The  present 
participles  imply  that  the  persecution  was 
already  beginning;  the  word  vipaxra,  a 
burning  (see  Kev.  zviii.  9,  18),  shows  the 
severity.  St  Peter  tells  them  its  meaning: 
it  was  to  prove  them;  it  would  turn  to  their 
good.  Persecution  was  not  to  be  regarded 
as  a  strange  thing.  The  Lord  had  foretold 
its  coming.  St.  Paul,  in  his  first  visit  to 
Asia  Minor,  had  warned  them  that  "we 
must  through  much  tribulation  enter  into 
the  kingdom  of  God.''  (On  the  word  itvi- 
ie<reai,  see  note  on  ver.  4-.)  The  thing  was 
not  strange ;  they  were  not  to  count  it  as 
strange;  they  must  learn,  so  to  speak,  to 
acclimatize  themselves  to  it ;  it  would 
brace  their  energies  and  strengthen  their 
faith. 

Vor.  13. — But  rejoice,  inasmuch  aa  ye  are 
partakers  of  Christ's  sufferings.  St.  Peter 
speaks  in  stronger  language  ;  he  repeats  the 
Lord's  words  in  Matt.  v.  12.  Christiani 
should  learn  to  rejoice  in  persecution ;  they 
must  rejoice  in  so  far  as,  in  proportion  as 
(icaed),  they  are  partakers  of  Christ's  suffer- 
ings (see  2  Cor.  iv.  10;  Phil.  iii.  10;  Heb. 
xiii.  13).  Suffering  meekly  borne  draws 
the  Christian  nearer  to  Christ,  lifts  him,  as 
on  a  cross,  nearer  to  the  crucified  Lord ;  bat 
this  it  does  only  when  he  looks  to  Jesus  in 
his  suffering,  when  the  eye  of  faith  is  fixed 
upon  the  cross  of  Christ.  Then  faith  unites 
the  sufferings  of  the  disciple  with  the  suffer- 
ings of  his  Lord ;  he  is  made  a  partaker  of 
Ovist's  sufferings;  and  so  far  as  suffering 
has  that  blessed  result,  in  such  measure  he 
must  rejoice  in  his  sufferings.  That,  when 
bis  glory  shall  be  revealed,  ye  may  be  glad 
also  with  exceeding  joy;  literally,  that  in 
the  revelation  of  hi»  glory  also  ye  may  rejoice 
exulting.  The  word  for  "  exulting,"  oyoaai- 
^lievoi,  corresponds  with  that  used  in  ch. 
i.  6  and  in  Matt.  y.  12  (xafpcrc  koI  ({yoXAi- 
aaBf).  Joy  in  suffering  now  is  the  earnest 
of  the  great  joy  of  the  redeemed  at  the 
revelation  of  that  glory  which  they  now  see 
through  a  glass  darkly. 

Ver.  14. — If  ye  be  reproached  for  the 
Name  of  Christ,  happy  are  ye ;  rather,  if  y» 
are  reviled  in  the  Name  of  Christ,  blessed  are 
ye.  There  is,  again,  a  manifest  quotation 
of  our  Lord's  words  in  Matt.  v.  11.  Th« 
conjunction  "  if"  does  not  imply  any  doubt : 
the  words  paean  "  when  ye  are  reviled." 
For  "  in  the  Name  of  Christ,"  comp.  Mark 
ix.  41,  "Whosoever  shall  give  you  a  cup 
of  water  to  drink  in  my  Name,  because  ye 
belong  to  Christ."  So  here  the  meaning  is, 
"  When  ye  are  reviled  because  ye  belong  to 
Christ,  because  ye  bear  his  Name,  because 
ye  are  Christians"  (comp.  Acts  t  41).    T»r 


OH.  IT.  1—19.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENBBAL  OF  PETER. 


175 


the  Spirit  of  glory  and  of  Ood  testeth  upon 
yon.  The  foim  of  the  eentence  in  the  Greek  ia 
nnusnal.  Some  regard  the  first  clause,  rh  ttjs 
S6iris,  as  a  periphrasis  for  Sdfa,  and  translate, 
"For  glory  and  the  Sj)irit  of  God  resteth 
upon  you.  But  there  ia  no  other  instance 
of  such  a  periphrasis  in  the  New  Testament 
(Winer,  iii.  18.  3)j  it  is  better  to  supply 
vvev/ia.  Men  revile  them,  but  God  glorifleth 
them.  The  Spirit  of  glory,  the  Spirit  -which 
hath  the  glorious  attributes  of  God,  the 
Spirit  which  prooeedeth  from  the  Father 
who  dwelleth  in  the  glory,  in  the  Sheohinah, 
— that  Spirit  resteth  upon  them,  and  sheds 
on  them  the  glory  of  holy  sufEering,  the  glory 
which  hung  around  the  cross  of  Christ. 
Two  of  the  most  ancient  manuscripts,  with 
come  others,  insert  the  words  leaX  Swineas, 
"  the  Spirit-  of  glory,  and  of  power,  and  of 
God."  The  Spirit  ia  power  from  on  high 
(Luke  xxiy.  49).  (For  "resteth,"  oomp. 
Isa.  si.  2.)  'ETTt  with  the  accusative  suggests 
the  thought  of  the  Spirit  descending  upon 
them  and  resting  there  (comp.  John  i.  32, 
33).  The  Spirit  abides  upon  those  who 
patiently  suffer  for  Christ.  On  their  part  he 
ia  evil  apoken  of,  hnt  on  your  part  he  is 
glorified.  These  words  are  not  found  in  the 
most  ancient  manuscripts,  and  are  probably 
a  gloss,  but  a  true  one.  Those  who  reviled 
the  suffering  Christians  really  blasphemed 
the  Holy  Spirit  of  God,  by  whom  they  were 
strengthened;  the  Holy  Spirit  was  glorified 
by  their  patient  endurance. 

Yer.  15. — Eat  let  none  of  yon  suffer  as  a 
morderer,  or  as  a  thief,  or  as  an  evil-doer ; 
literally,  for  let  none  of  you,  eto.  They  are 
blessed  who  suffer  in  the  Name  of  Christ, 
because  they  belong  to  Christ :  for  it  is  not 
the  suffering  which  brings  the  blessedness, 
but  the  cause,  the  faith  and  patience  with 
which  the  suffering  is  borne.  The  word 
for  "  evil-doer,"KaKo»r<H(fi,  is  used  by  St.  Peter 
in  two  other  places  (ch.  ii.  12  and  14).  Chris- 
tians were  spoken  against  as  evil-doera; 
they  must  be  very  careful  to  preserve  their 
purity,  and  to  suffer,  if  need  be,  not  for 
evil-doing,  but  for  well-doing  (oh.  iii.  17). 
Or  as  a  busybody  in  other  men's  matters. 
This  clause  represents  one  Greek  word,  dAA.o- 
rptoiiiiaKOTros;  it  means  an  MffKovos,  in- 
spector, overseer  ("  bishop  "  ia  the  modern 
form  of  the  word),  of  other  men's  matters — 
of  things  that  do  not  concern  him.  St. 
Peter  uses  the  word  Mckotos  only  once 
(ch.  ii.  25),  where  he  describes  Christ  as 
the  Bishop  of  our  souls.  It  cannot  be 
taken  here  in  its  ecclesiastical  sense, "  let 
no  man  suffer  as  a  bishop  in  matters  which 
do  not  concern  him ;  but  if  as  a  Christian 
(bishop),  let  him  not  be  ashamed."  The 
Jews  were  often  accused  of  constituting 
themselves  judges  and  meddling  in  other 
men's   matters;  it  may  be  that  the  cou- 


aolousnesa  of  spiritual  knowledge  and  high 
spiritual  dignity  exposed  Christiana  to  the 
same  temptation.  Hilgenfeld  sees  here  an 
allusion  to  Trajan's  laws  against  informers, 
and  uses  it  as  an  argument  for  his  theory 
of  the  late  date  of  this  Epistle. 

Ver.  16. — ^Yet  if  any  man  suffer  as  a 
Christian.  The  word  "Christian"  occurs 
only  three  times  in  the  New  Testament — 
twice  in  the  Acta  of  the  Apostles  (xi.  26 ; 
xxvi.  28),  and  here.  "  The  disciples  were 
called  Christians  first  in  Antiooh."  They 
were  originally  described  amongst  them- 
selves as  "  the  disciples,"  "  the  brethren," 
"  the  believers,"  "  the  elect,"  or  "  the  saints ;" 
by  the  Jews  they  were  called  "the  Na- 
zarenes  "  (Acts  xxiv.  5),  as  still  in  Moham- 
medan countries.  The  name  was  probably 
invented  by  the  heuthen,  and  used  at  first 
as  a  term  of  derision ;  there  is  something  of 
scorn  in  Agrippa's  use  of  it.  It  did  not  at 
once  become  common  among  the  disciples 
of  the  Lord.  St.  Peter  (who  preached  at 
Antiooh  (Gal.  ii.  11),  and  ia  said  to  have 
been  Bishop  of  Antiooh)  is  the  only  sacred 
writer  who  adopts  it  instead  of  the  older 
names,  and  that  only  once,  and  in  con- 
nection with  threatened  persecution.  St. 
James  may  possibly  allude  to  it  in  ii.  7. 
But  it  was  not  commonly  used  among 
believers  till  after  New  Testament  times. 
Then  they  began  to  discern  its  admirable 
suitableness.  It  reminded  them  that  the 
centre  of  their  religion  was  not  a  system  of 
doctrines,  but  a  Person,  and  that  Persou  the 
Messiah,  the  Anointed  of  God.  The 
Hebrew  origin  of  the  word,  the  Greek 
dress,  the  Latin  termination,  seemed  to 
point,  like  the  threefold  inscription  on  the 
cross,  to  the  nniversality  of  Christ's  re- 
ligion—  to  its  empire,  first  over  all  the 
civiLzed  nations,  and  through  them,  by 
continually  increasing  triumphs,  over  the 
whole  world.  It  reminded  them  that  they 
too  were  anointed,  that  they  had  an 
unction  from  the  Holy  One.  Its  very  cor- 
ruption through  heathen  ignorance,  Chrea- 
tian  from  xpio'Tdi,  good  (the  Sinaitio  Manu- 
script has  xP')<r'<'>n>'a's  in  this  plEU%)  had  its 
lesson — it  spoke  of  sweetness  and  of  good- 
ness. See  the  oft-quoted  passage  from 
TertuUian  :  "Sedquum  etperperam  Chres- 
tiani  nuncupamur  a  vobis  (nam  nee  nominis 
certa  est  notitia  penes  vos)  de  suavitate  et 
benignitate  compositum  est."  Let  him  not 
he  ashamed ;  but  let  him  glorify  Ood  on  this 
behalf.  The  best-supported  reading  is  iv 
Ttf  Mfiart  Toirin  This  may  be  understood 
as  an  idiom,  in  the  same  sense  aa  the  reading 
of  the  Authorized  Version ;  but  it  ia  better  to 
translate  it  literally,  in  thi$  name,  i.e.  either 
the  name  of  Christ,  or  (more  probably,  per- 
haps) that  of  Christian.  The  heathen  blas- 
phemed that  worthy  Name;  suffering  Ohxis> 


17« 


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PETER,    [oh.  it.  1—19. 


tiana  must  not  be  ashamed  of  it,  but,  as  tbe 
holy  martyra  did,  utter  their  "  Christianug 
sum  "  with  inward  peace  and  thanksgiving, 
glorifying  God  that  he  had  given  them 
grace  to  bear  that  honoured  Name  and  to 
sufflbr  for  Christ.  Bengel  says  here,  "  Po- 
tenit  Petrus  dicere,  honori  sibi  ducat :  sed 
honorem  Deo  reaignandum  esse  dooet." 

Ver.  17. — Tot  the  time  is  come  that  judg- 
ment must  begin  at  the  house  of  God.  The 
house  of  God  is  the  Church  (see  1  Tim.  iii. 
15;  1  Cor.  iii.  16;  and  oh.  li.  5).  The 
judgment  must  begin  at  the  aanotuary^ 
(Bzek.  ix.  6;  see  also  Jer.  xxv.  IS — 29). 
The  beginning  of  judgment  is  the  persecu- 
tion of  the  Christians,  as  our  Lord  had 
taught  (Matt.  xxiv.  8,  9,  and  following 
verses) ;  but  that  judgment  is  not  unto  con- 
demnation :  "  When  we  are  judged,  we  are 
chastened  of  the  Lord,  that  we  should  not 
be  condemned  with  the  world "  (1  Cor.  xi. 
32);  it  is  the  fiery  trial,  "which  is  much 
more  precious  than  of  gold  that  perisheth," 
the  refining  fire  of  afSiction.  And  if  it  first 
begin  at  us,  what  shall  the  end  be  of  them 
that  obey  not  the  gospel  of  God  1  Compare 
the  passage  in  Jeremiah  already  referred  to : 
"  Beheld,  I  begin  to  bring  evil  on  the  city 
which  is  called  by  my  Name,  and  should  ye 
be  utterly  unpunished?"  Compare  also  our 
Lord's  question,  "  If  they  do  these  things  in 
a  green  tree,  what  shall  be  done  in  the  dr^  ?  " 
Gerhard  (quoted  by  Huther)  rightly  re- 
marks, "  Exaggeratio  eat  in  interrogatione." 
The  question  suggests  answers  too  awful  for 
words. 

Yer.  18. — ^And  if  the  righteous  soarcely  be 
saved.  St.  Peter  is  quoting  the  Septuagint 
Version  of  Prov.  xi.  31.  That  version  departs 
considerably  from  the  Hebrew,  which  is  accu- 
rately represented  by  the  Authorized  Ver- 
sion, "  Behold,  the  righteous  shall  be  recom- 
pensed in  the  earth ;  much  more  the  wicked 
and  the  sinner."  Probably  the  word  ren- 
dered "  recompensed,"  which  is  neutral  in  ita 
meaning,  is  best  understood  here,  not  of  the 
good  deeds  of  the  righteous,  but  of  the  sin 
which  still  cleaves  to  aU  human  righteous- 
ness. The  righteous  shall  be  requited  in 
the  earth,  that  is,  chastised  for  his  trans- 
gressions. So  it  would  be  now,  St.  Peter 
says;  judgment  must  begin  at  the  house  of 


God.  He  adopts  the  inexact  Septuagint 
translation  for  its  substantial  trath,  as  we 
now  sometimes  use  versions  which  are  sufi- 
cient  for  practical  purposes,  though  we  know 
them  to  be  critically  inaccurate.  We  ob 
serve  again  the  absence  of  marks  of  qiiota. 
tion,  as  often  in  St.  Peter.  Bengel  well 
remarks  that  the  awful  "  scarcely  "  (^o'Ait 
(rii(eTai)  is  softened  by  2  Pet.  i.  11.  Where 
shall  the  ungodly  and  the  sinner  appear  1 
The  "  ungodly  "  are  the  impious,  scoffers,  and 
blasphemers ;  the  "  sinners  "  are  men  of  pro- 
fligate and  dissolute  lives.  But  the  worui 
are  (probably)  included  under  one  article  in 
the  Greek;  the  men  were  the  same;  one 
form  of  evil  led  to  the  other  (comp.  Ps.  L  5 ; 
see  also  Matt.  xix.  25). 

Ver.  19. — Wherefore  let  them  that  snfEer 
according  to  the  will  of  Qod;  rather,  let 
them  also  that  tuffer.  St  Peter  sums  up  his 
exhortation ;  he  returns  to  the  thought  of 
oh.  iii  17,  "  It  is  better,  if  the  wiU  of  God 
be  so,  that  ye  suffer  for  well-doing,  than  for 
evil-doing."  In  the  hour  of  suffering,  as 
well  as  in  times  of  prosperity,  we  are  in  the 
hands  of  a  merciful  and  loving  Father ;  we 
are  to  learn  submission,  not  because  the 
suffering  is  inevitable,  but  because  it  ii 
according  to  his  will,  and  his  will  is  oui 
sanctification  and  salvation.  Commit  the 
keeping  of  their  souls  to  him  in  well-doing, 
as  unto  a  faithful  Creator ;  rather,  as  in  the 
Revised  Version,  commit  their  touU  in  ueU- 
doing  unto  a  faithful  Creator.  The  con- 
junction "  as "  must  be  omitted,  not  being 
found  in  any  of  the  best  manuscripts.  The 
word  rendered  "Creator"  ((crfo-Tiij)  occun 
nowhere  else  in  the  Greek  Testament.  God 
is  our  Creator,  the  Father  af  spirits.  He  gave 
the  spirit ;  to  him  it  returneth.  We  must 
imitate  our  dying  Lord,  and,  like  him, 
commit  our  souls  to  the  keeping  of  out 
heavenly  Father  as  a  deposit  which  may  be 
left  with  perfect  confidence  in  the  hands  of 
a  &ithfnl  Creator  (see  2  Tim.  i.  12).  There 
is  an  evident  reference  here  to  our  Lord's 
words  upon  the  cross  (Luke  xxiii.  46 ;  Ps. 
xxxi.  5).  St.  Peter  adds,  "  in  well-doing." 
The  Christian's  faith  must  bring  forth  the 
fruits  of  holy  living;  even  in  the  midst  of 
auffering  he  must  "  be  careful  to  maintain 
good  works." 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  1 — 6. — Exhortation  to  entire  separation  from  sin.  1.  By  xrsios  with  Chbibt. 
1.  Through  suffering.  Suffering  is  the  appointed  discipline  of  the  Christian  soul.  Gold 
is  tried  by  fire,  the  Christian's  faith  by  suffering.  Christ  himself  suffered  in  the  fleah, 
and  while  we  are  in  the  flesh  we  must  also  suffer.  "  In  that  he  died,  he  died  unto 
gin  once ; "  his  death  separated  him  from  sin,  from  the  sight  and  hearing  of  sin,  from 
that  mysterious  contact  with  human  sin  which  be  endured  when  "  he  was  made  sin  for 
118,  though  he  was  without  sin."  Our  suffering  ought  to  havu  the  like  power — ^it  ought  ta 


OH.  IV.  1—19.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENBEAL  OP  PETER.  177 

remove  us  out  of  the  dominion  of  those  sitm  which  have  hitherto  ruled  over  us.  This  is  the 
end,  the  blessedness,  of  suffering.  God  sends  it  in  love ;  he  chastens  us  for  our  profit,  that 
we  may  be  partakers  of  his  holiness.  But  suffering  doth  not  always  save.  "The  sorrow 
of  the  world  worketh  death ; "  it  produces  discontent  and  murmuring,  and  hardens  the 
heart.  To  gain  the  blessed  fruit  of  suffering,  the  eye  of  the  suffering  Christian  must  be 
fixed  upon  the  suffering  Lord.  Wo  must  "  arm  ourselves  with  the  same  mind."  "  Let  this 
mind  be  in  you  which  was  also  in  Christ  Jesus."  It  must  be  our  effort  to  think  the 
same  holy  thoughts,  to  be  animated  by  the  same  high  resolve,  which  filled  the  sacred 
heart  of  Christ.  Those  thoughts,  that  resolve,  are  our  spiritual  armour.  If  we  let  our 
thoughts  dwell  on  our  troubles,  ijf  we  fret  ourselves,  we  are  defenceless,  we  are  exposed 
to  the  temptations  which  swarm  around  us.  But  we  must  look  away  from  our  own 
sufferings  and  keep  the  earnest  gaze  of  faith  fixed  upon  the  cross.  Thus  by  an  act  of 
faith  we  may  unite  our  sufferings  with  the  Saviour's  sufferings,  and  then  suffering 
sanctified  by  faith  in  Christ  wiU  have  its  blessed  work  in  destroying  the  power  of  sin. 
2.  Through  the  change  of  heart  wrought  hy  suffering.  "  He  that  hath  suffered  in  the 
flesh  hath  ceased  from  sin."  Suffering  meekly  borne  is  a  great  help  in  the  daily 
conflict  against  sin;  it  shows  us  our  own  weakness  and  the  emptiness  of  earthly 
comforts ;  it  humbles  vta,  and  makes  us  less  unwilling  to  submit  ourselves  to  the  holy 
will  of  God ;  it  points  our  thoughts  to  the  transitoriness  of  human  life  ;  it  is  miserable 
folly  to  waste  that  little  life  in  following  the  wretched  lusts  of  the  flesh,  when  we 
ought  to  be  doing  the  will  of  God.  As  the  blessed  angels  do  God's  holy  will  in  heaven, 
so  we  must  strive  to  do  it  in  earth  ;  we  shall  never  dwell  with  the  angels  unless  we 
are  really  trying  to  learn  that  deep  and  holy  lesson. 

II.  By  foesakino  old  sins  and  old  companions  in  snsr.  1.  What  we  must  forsake. 
The  will  of  the  Gentiles.  The  Gentile  world  was  very  evil  when  the  Lord  Jesus  came ;  sin 
reigned  everywhere,  open,  rampant,  unblushing.  It  was  a  shame  for  the  heathen  thui 
to  live,  for  they  had  the  light  of  conscience ;  it  ia  a  shame  of  far  deeper  guilt  for  us 
Christians,  who  have  the  full  light  of  the  gospel,  to  live  as  did  the  Gentiles.  Con- 
verted men  must  cast  off  those  old  sins ;  the  sins  of  the  flesh,  uncleanness,  drunkenness, 
and  such  like,  ruin  body  and  soul.  Men  set  up  idols  in  their  hearts — money,  station, 
honour;  they  fall  down  and  worship  these  things.  Christians  must  forsake  these 
unlawful  idolatries.  "  Thoii  shalt  worship  the  Lord  thy  God ;  him  only  shalt  thou  serv«." 
Him  only ;  Satan  stands  behind  these  idols — it  is  he  whom  men  really  worship  whan 
they  give  their  hearts  to  this  or  that  earthly  idol.  We  have  given  too  much  time,  far  too 
much,  to  these  idolatries.  Let  the  time  past  suffice  which  we  have  miserably  wasted ; 
the  residue  may  be  very  short.  There  is  much  to  be  done,  let  us  take  heed  that  we 
waste  our  time  no  more.  2.  WTiom  we  must  forsake.  Our  old  companions,  it  may  be, 
think  it  strange  that  we  no  longer  live  as  once,  perhaps,  we  did ;  we  were  as  bad  as 
themselves  once,  they  say.  It  may  be  so,  but  we  are  changed,  and  they,  alas  1  are  not ; 
we  have,  we  humbly  trust,  put  on  the  new  man ;  we  are  (God  grant  that  it  be  so  I)  in 
Christ,  abiding  in  vital  union  with  him,  as  living  branches  in  the  true  Vine  ;  and  old 
things  must  pass  away — old  desires,  old  pursuits,  old  hopes  and  fears ;  all  things  must 
become  new,  for  we  are  new  creatures  in  Christ.  Men  think  us  strange ;  they  speak 
evil  of  us,  perhaps ;  they  call  us  hypocritical,  sanctimonious ;  they  exaggerate  the 
inconsistencies  which  they  see  in  us,  and  invent  and  eagerly  propagate  falsehoods. 
They  cannot  understand  the  Christian  life ;  they  cannot  feel  its  hidden  sweetness ;  it 
seems  to  them  strange,  hard,  unattractive.  We  must  not  heed  the  vain  talk  of  men ; 
we  must  seek  the  praise  that  cometh  from  God ;  we  must  take  patiently  the  accusa- 
tions of  evil  tongues ;  in  some  degree,  probably,  we  have  deserved  them ;  only  let  us 
labour  more  and  more  to  please  God  in  all  things. 

III.  Bt  looking  fokwabd  to  the  judgment.  1.  All  must  le  judged.  All, 
believers  and  unbelievers,  saints  and  sinners,  persecuted  and  persecutors,  slandered  and 
slanderers, — all  must  give  account  of  their  deeds ;  for  the  Lord  ia  at  hand,  ready  to 
judge  the  quick  and  the  dead;  as  soon  as  the  number  of  his  elect  is  complete,  the 
judgment  will  be  set,  the  books  wUl  be  opened.  This  thought  gives  an  awful  solemnity 
to  human  life ;  the  record  of  sach  day  as  it  passes  is  entered  in  those  mysterious  books. 
Sufferings,  slanders,  can  be  patiently  endured  when  we  think  of  the  coming  judgment. 
The  persecutors,  the  evil-speakers,  must  give  account  to  the  great  Judge ;  the  Chris- 
tian «hould  pity  them,  should  pray  for  them.    It  seems  sad  now  to  be  persecuted ;  thee 

LTSIWU  ■ 


178  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  PETER,    [ch.  iv.  1— !»• 


it  will  be  sadder  far  to  have  been  persecutors.  2.  For  dU  will  have  heard  the  gospd. 
Quick  and  dead  alike  will  have  heard  it.  It  was  preached  in  Hades  by  the  Lord  him- 
self to  the  dead  who  in  life  had  not  heard  the  glad  tidings.  It  is  a  sweet  and  comfort- 
ing thought  that  they  were  not  left  to  perish  uncared  for.  We  know  not  the  result  of 
the  Saviour's  preaching ;  it  is  hidden  from  us ;  conjecture  is  vain,  perhaps  irreverent. 
But  we  have  the  fact — the  gospel  was  preached  to  them,  and  the  object  was  that  they 
might  live  according  to  God  in  the  spirit.  Is  it  now  preached  to  the  dead  who  in  life 
have  had  scanty  opportunities  and  scanty  knowledge?  We  are  not  told;  but  w« 
know  that  God  is  "  not  willing  that  any  should  perish,  but  that  all  should  come  to 
repentance ; "  we  know  that  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  "  tasted  death  for  every  man ;  "  we 
know  that  the  true  Light "  hghteth  every  man ;  "  and  we  feel  sure  that  none  can  be  left  to 
perish  without  the  means  of  grace ;  we  feel  sure  that,  in  some  way,  and  at  some  time, 
the  gracious  offer  of  salvation  comes  to  every  man  in  life  or  in  death,  in  ways  known 
or  unknown. 

Lessons.  1.  Christ  teaches  how  to  suffer.  Learn  of  him  in  this  as  in  all  things.  2. 
Make  suffering  a  means  for  destroying  the  power  of  sin.  It  will  be  so,  if  in  suffering 
you  contemplate  the  suffering  Lord,  and  arm  yourselves  with  his  holy  resolve.  3.  The 
time  is  short.  Live  a  godly,  righteous,  and  sober  life.  4.  Shun  evil  companions ;  when 
they  would  tempt  you  to  sin,  think  of  the  coming  judgment ;  take  heed  to  yourselves, 
and  pray  for  them. 

Vers.  7 — 11. — Exhortations  lased  on  <A«  impending  Judgment.  I.  The  need  o» 
PEBPABATioN.  1.  The  neavness  of  the  end.  The  end  seemed  near  when  St.  Peter 
wrote,  more  than  eighteen  hundred  years  ago ;  by  that  great  interval  it  is  the  nearer 
now.  That  long-expected  end  will  be  the  end  of  all  things — of  sorrows,  trials,  suffer- 
ing; of  pleasures,  pomps,  and  vanities;  of  all  the  pursuits  of  this  life,  the  restles* 
struggle  after  wealth,  or  fame,  or  earthly  comforts.  The  end  is  at  hand — how  near,  we 
cannot  tell ;  but  we  know  that  to  the  Lord  "a  thousand  years  are  as  one  day;"  and 
to  ourselves,  when  we  look  back,  the  years  that  are  passed  are  as  a  watch  in  the  night. 
All  will  be  over  then,  all  that  men  have  toiled  to  build  up — the  empires,  the  civUiza- 
tions,  the  philosophies ;  all  will  be  over,  save  only  the  results  of  human  action,  the 
moral  and  spiritual  consequences  of  human  lives.  Who  can  tell  what  will  be  th« 
grand  result  of  the  many  millions  of  lives  that  will  then  have  been  lived?  Now  each 
generation,  as  it  passes,  leaves  its  mark  upon  its  successors :  what  will  be  the  character 
of  the  great  society,  the  vast  multitude  of  souls,  that  will  live  on  when  the  end  of  the 
world  is  come?  To  each  individual  the  hour  of  death  is  the  end,  and  that  end  it 
very  near;  each  day,  as  it  comes,  ushers  in  the  end  of  many  lives.  The  time  of  that 
end,  like  the  time  of  the  end  of  all  things,  is  unknown.  God  has  hidden  both  from  ui 
in  his  wisdom  and  love.  But  certainly  it  is  near;  the  end  of  this  busy,  toiling  life, 
with  all  its  hopes  and  fears,  all  its  schemes  and  ambitions,  all  its  disappointments  and 
successes ;  the  end,  and  yet  not  the  end ;  for,  if  it  were  the  end  of  our  being,  there 
would  be  no  need  of  that  careful  preparation  which  St.  Peter  urges.  The  motto  of  the 
worldling  would  be  sufficient  for  us  all,  "  Let  us  eat  and  drink ;  for  to-morrow  we  die." 
The  nearness  of  the  end  gives  the  Christian  a  motive,  not  for  self-indulgence,  but  for 
self-denial,  not  for  nejileot  of  duty,  but  for  increasing  zeal ;  for  he  has  a  work  to  do  for 
his  Master,  and  oh!  whatever  is  left  undone,  whatever  calls  of  earthly  pleasure  or 
ambition  are  disregarded,  that  work  must  at  all  costs  be  done.  For  he  trusts  in  his 
poor  humble  way,  by  the  help  of  God's  Holy  Spirit,  to  be  able  at  the  last  to  echo  in 
some  sense  his  Saviour's  words, "  I  have  finished  the  work  which  thou  gavest  me  to  do ; " 
he  hopes  through  the  Lord's  atonement  to  hear  at  last  the  joyful  welcome,  "  Well  done, 
good  and  faithful  servant!"  Therefore  the  thought  of  the  nearness  of  the  end  must 
stimulate  him  continually  to  new  energy,  to  active  work  for  Christ.  2,  Sow  the 
Christian  should  prepare  himself.  (1)  He  must  exercise  self-restraint.  The  etymology 
of  the  Greek  word  points  to  the  safeguard  of  the  mind ;  the  mind,  with  all  its  thoughts, 
must  be  kept  safe,  lestrained  within  due  limits.  The  fancies,  aspirations,  desires,  must 
not  be  allowed  to  wander  unrestrained.  For  "  the  end  of  all  things  is  at  hand,"  and  the 
Christian  must  school  himself  into  thoughtful  preparation  for  that  solemn  hour.  His 
mind  should  be  filled,  not  with  castles  in  the  air,  not  with  visions  of  earthly  prosperity  (a 
miscbievons  and  enervating  habit),  but  with  thoughts  of  death,  judgment,  eternity 


en.  IV.  1—19.]    THE  FIRST  EPI8TLB  GENERAL  OF  PETER.  1?9 

To  keep  the  end  steadily  in  view  requires  much  self-restridnt;  it  implies  a  well*ordered 
mind,  a  life  guided  by  the  eternal  law  of  (Jod,  not  frittered  away  in  trifles  and  idle 
pleasures,  not  spent  in  pursuits  and  ambitions  which  do  not  rise  above  the  atmosphere 
of  earth.  This  self-restraint  is  the  sobriety,  the  soundness  of  mind  which  the  apostle 
here  inculcates  upon  usj  it  extends  over  all  the  relations  and  circumstances  of  life  ;  in 
all  his-desires  and  actions  the  Christian  must  be  thoughtfvd,  calm,  composed ;  for  he 
lives  in  the  anticipation  of  the  coming  end,  and  his  aim  is  the  glory  of  God  and  the 
salvation  of  souls.  (2)  He  must  be  sober  unto  prayer.  Excess  in  meat  or  drink  or 
other  pleasures  of  life  unnerves  the  mind ;  excess  weakens  the  body,  brings  misery 
into  families,  is  the  cause  of  poverty  and  squalor  and  wretchedness,  fills  our  wurk- 
houses,  our  asylums,  our  prisons.  And  it  ruins  the  soul ;  the  drunkard,  the  glutton, 
the  man  of  pleasure,  cannot  pray ;  his  vices  burden  his  soul  and  weigh  it  down  to  the 
earth,  he  cannot  lift  up  his  heart  in  prayer  to  God.  For,  indeed,  prayer  demands  the 
exercise  of  all  our  highest  powers ;  it  requires  concentration  of  thought,  energy  of  desire, 
devout  yearnings  after  God ;  it  needs  the  gracious  help  of  God  the  Holy  Ghost,  who 
maketh  intercession  in  and  for  those  who  earnestly  seek  that  sacred  gift.  He  who 
lives  in  expectation  of  the  end  of  all  things,  must  live  in  prayer ;  for  only  by  constant 
and  faithful  prayer  can  he  prepare  himself  for  that  awful  d^y ;  and  he  cannot  pray 
aright  unless  he  lives  a  godly,  righteous,  and  sober  life. 

II.  The  NEOE88ITT  OF  CHARiTT  DT  ITS  VARIOUS  MANITBSTATIONB.  1.  In  forgivtnest. 
In  view  of  the  coming  judgment  charity  is  necessary  above  all  things;  for  it  is  they 
who  love  the  brethren  in  Christ  and  for  Christ  who  shall  hear  the  joyful  welcome, 
"  Gome,  ye  blessed  of  my  Father."  They  see  Christ  in  his  people,  and  for  the  love  of 
Christ  love  and  care  for  those  whom  Christ  loved.  But  "  he  that  loveth  not,  knoweth 
not  God;  for  God  is  love ; "  he  cannot  enter  into  heaven,  which  is  the  home  of  love  ; 
there  is  no  room  there  for  the  selfish,  imloving  heart.  Love  is  necessary  above  all  oth«r 
graces ;  it  is  the  exceeding  great  love  of  our  Master  and  only  Saviour  Jesus  Christ 
which  draws  the  hearts  of  men  unto  the  cross ;  and  those  who  come  to  the  cross,  which 
is  the  school  of  love,  must  learn  of  him  who  loved  them  even  unto  death  to  love  all  the 
brethren ;  for  love  is  the  very  badge  of  our  profession :  "  By  this  shall  all  men  know  tliat 
ye  are  my  disciples,  if  ye  have  love  one  to  another."  Love  was  the  character  of  the 
Master;  it  must  be  the  mark  of  the  disciple.  They  must  not  only  love  one  another  ; 
but  that  love,  St.  Peter  says,  must  be  earnest,  intense ;  for  it  needs  the  strength  of 
great  love  to  forgive  perfectly,  and  they  who  do  not  forgive  cannot  hope  for  forgiveness. 
True  charity  covers  sins ;  it  "  believeth  all  things,  hopeth  all  things ; "  it  puts  the  fairest 
construction  on  the  actions  of  others ;  it  considers  all  possible  extenuations  of  their 
errors — antecedents,  circumstances,  temptations ;  it  does  not  willingly  speak  of  faults 
and  shortcomings ;  it  hides  them  as  far  as  may  be.  And  if  it  is  necessary  for  the  good 
of  the  sinner,  or  of  society,  to  uncover  sins,  charity  does  it  with  gentle,  loving  tact, 
seeking  to  win  the  sinner,  to  save  his  soul,  forgiving  him  and  seeking  God's  forgiveness 
for  him.  He  who  thus  covers  the  sins  of  others,  who  forgives  in  the  faith  of  Christ  and 
in  the  love  of  the  brethren,  shall  be  himself  forgiven ;  his  sin  shall  be  covered  through 
the  atonement  once  made  upon  the  cross.  2.  In  Christian  hospitality.  It  is  not 
costly  display  and  sumptuous  entertainments  that  St.  Peter  recommends ;  these  things 
are  often  sinful  waste ;  men  spSnd  their  money  in  selfish  ostentation  instead  of  holy 
and  religious  works.  The  Lord  had  said  to  his  disciples,  "He  that  receiveth  you, 
receiveth  me ; "  and  again,  "  Whosoever  shall  give  to  drink  unto  one  of  these  little  ones 
a  cup  of  Cold  water  only  in  the  name  of  a  disciple,  verily  I  say  unto  you,  he  shall  in  no 
wise  lose  his  reward."  St.  Peter  re-echoes  his  Master's  words.  Christians  must  show 
hospitality  to  one  another,  and  that  freely,  liberally ;  murmuring  destroys  the  beauty 
of  the  gift.  Christ  hath  received  us  into  the  kingdom  of  God;  he  feeds  us  with 
heavenly  food,  the  Bread  that  came  down  from  heaven ;  we  must  receive  our  brethren, 
and  that  gladly,  for  his  sake.  3.  in  the  use  of  spiritual  gifts.  They  are  given  to 
individual  Christians  for  the  benefit  of  the  whole  Church.  Whatever  gifts  we  may 
possess,  they  are  but  what  we  once  received ;  they  were  entrusted  to  us  to  be  used  in 
our  Master's  service;  that  service  is  the  edification  of  his  people.  Christians  are 
stewards  of  these  spiritual  gifts ;  they  should  be  good  stewards,  not  like  the  unjust 
iteward,  who  wasted  his  master's  goods,  and  showed  foresight  and  worldly  prudence 
O0I7  in   providing   for  himself.     They   should   discharge    their   itewardshlp  with 


180  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PETER,    [ch.  iv.  1— 19- 

unblemished  honour,  with  a  diligence  and  zeal  wTiich  are  beautiful  in  the  sight  of  the 
truly  good.  The  grace  of  God  varies  in  its  manifestations,  in  the  diversities  of  gifts 
which  issue  from  it,  according  to  the  needs  of  the  Church,  according  to  the  capacity  of 
the  individual  servant ;  it  is  like  a  piece  of  beautiful  embroidery,  various  in  colour  and 
design,  but  combined  in  one  harmonious  whole.  Every  Christian,  even  the  hmnblest, 
has  some  gift ;  each  should  contribute  his  part,  however  small,  to  the  general  welfaie  ; 
charity  will  guide  him  in  the  use  of  his  particular  gift.  The  apoatle  proceeds  to  gi  ve 
instances.  (1)  The  gift  of  utterance.  St.  Paul  asks  for  the  prayers  of  his  converts, 
"  that  utterance  may  be  given  unto  me,  that  I  may  open  my  mouth  boldly,  to  make 
known  the  mystery  of  the  gospel "  (Eph.  vi.  19),  It  is  a  great  gift,  often  a  powerful 
means  of  winning  souls  to  Christ.  The  utterances  of  spiritual  experience  must  flow  out 
of  a  sanctified  life.  Words  without  heart  have  little  power ;  they  soon  betray  their 
unreality.  The  words  of  a  real  Christian  must  be  as  oiaoles  of  God ;  if  they  issae  out  (f 
a  heart  cleansed  by  the  inspiration  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  then  they  are  his  utterances. 
"  It  is  not  ye  that  speak,"  said  our  Lord  to  his  apostles,  "  but  the  Spirit  of  my  Father 
which  speaketh  in  you."  This  should  be  our  aim  and  constant  desire — to  live  so  near 
to  God  that  we  may  be  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  so  speak  the  words  which  the 
Spirit  teaoheth ;  only  he  can  give  the  spiritual  tact,  the  ready  sympathy,  the  loving 
persuasiveness,  which  are  so  remarkable  in  some  of  his  saints.  But  if  our  words  are  to 
be  as  oracles  of  God,  we  must  be  deeply  versed  in  <Ae  oracles  of  God;  our  memories 
must  be  stored  with  precious  words  of  Holy  Scripture.  The  lessons  which  the  blessed 
Spirit  teaches  now  are  in  all  things  accordant  with  the  sacred  truths  which  holy  men 
of  old  spake  as  they  were  moved  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  (2)  Gifts  of  ministering.  St. 
Peter  combines  under  one  word  all  other  ministrations,  such  as  the  gift  of  government, 
of  teaching  the  little  children ;  services  to  be  rendered  to  the  poor,  the  sick,  the  afflicted. 
All  these  are  necessary  for  the  well-being  of  the  Church,  and  all  must  be  performed  in 
the  strength  which  God  giveth.  All  these  ministrations  require  love,  zeal,  energv,  self- 
denial  ;  and  these  holy  tempers  come  of  God,  We  are  weak,  but  his  strength  is  made 
perfect  in  weakness ;  we  are  selfish,  but  his  Spirit  can  kindle  the  fire  of  holy  love  in  the 
heart  that  once  was  cold  and  dead.  He  supplies  the  strength  which  we  need  for  the 
work  which  he  has  given  us  to  do;  he  has  appointed  to  every  man  his  work,  and  will 
enable  every  man  to  do  the  work  appointed  him,  if  he  seeks  for  that  strength  iu  faith 
and  prayer;  "  I  can  do  all  things,"  said  St.  Paul, "  through  him  that  strengtheneth  me." 
Then  let  us  work  in  the  strength  of  God,  and  let  us  ascribe  any  measure  of  success  which 
may  be  granted  t»  us  wholly  to  that  strength  which  God  giveth.  "  Lord,  thou  deliveredst 
unto  me  five  talents;  behold,  I  have  gained  beside  them  five  talents  more."  The 
faithful  servant  ascribes  his  gains  to  his  Lord's  original  gift.  (3)  All  gifts  to  be 
exercised  to  the  glory  of  God.  The  Saviour  said,  "I  have  glorified  thee  on  the  earth." 
His  disciples  should  imitate  him,  learning  of  him  to  seek  the  glory  of  God  in  all  things 
and  above  all  things.  The  love,  the  zeal,  the  energy,  which  true  Christians  exhibit  in 
the  use  of  the  gifts  given  them  by  God  show  forth  the  glory  of  God ;  for  that  love  and 
zeal  can  only  come  from  his  grace ;  weak,  selfish  creatures  such  as  we  are  could  not  live 
lioly,  self-denying  lives  save  by  the  help  of  God's  gracious  presence.  Every  act  of 
Christian  self-denial,  every  labour  of  love,  is  an  additional  proof  of  the  reality  of  God's 
power  and  grace.  Then  God  is  glorified  in  his  saints,  and  that  through  Jesus  Christ ; 
for  it  is  the  Lord  Jesus  who  by  his  atonement  hath  brought  us  near  to  God,  and 
enabled  his  true  disciples  to  know  and  love  and  glorify  their  Father  which  is  in  heaven. 
The  glory  and  the  dominion  are  his,  for  all  power  is  given  to  him  in  heaven  aud  in 
earth;  and  with  that  gift  of  power  he  strengthens  his  chosen,  enduing  them  with 
power  from  on  high,  enabling  them  to  glorify  God  by  a  holy  life  and  by  a  blessed  death. 
Lessons.  1.  "  The  end  of  all  things  is  at  hand."  "  Prepare  to  meet  thy  God."  2. 
Be  self-restrained ;  be  sober.  Much  prayer  is  needful  for  preparation  against  the  hour 
of  death ;  the  self-indulgent  cannot  pray  aright.  3,  Above  all  things,  follow  after 
charity.  4.  Make  proof  of  your  love  in  the  forgiveness  of  injuries,  in  hospitality,  in 
the  'JBe  of  spiritual  gifts  for  the  welfare  of  others.  6.  Seek  first  the  glory  of  God  and 
that  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord. 

Vers.  12—19. — Suffering.    I.  Thk  poktion  of  Christians.     1.  Therefore  fhey  mngi 
ft«t  think  it  strange.    The  Lord  had  foretold  it ;  it  must  come ;  it  was  coming  when 


8B.  IT.  1—19.]    THE  f mST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  PETEB.  181 

St.  Peter  was  wilting.  It  was  a  burning  furnace,  a  fiery  trial,  tlie  beginning  of  the 
cruel  persecudons  throngli  which  believers  were  to  pass;  the  prison  and  the  tortura, 
the  sword,  the  stake,  the  lion,  were  threatening  the  infant  Church ;  the  savage  shout, 
"  Christianos  ad  leones  I "  would  soon  be  heard  in  the  towns  of  Asia  Minor.  Hitherto 
the  Soman  magistrates  had  generally  been  on  the  side  of  justice;  they  had  often  pro- 
tected the  Christians  from  the  violence  of  the  Jews.  But  Christianity  was  about  to 
bo  regarded  as  a  religio  illicita ;  the  giant  power  of  Bome  was  to  be  arrayed  against  it ; 
emperors  would  attempt  to  blot  out  the  very  name  of  Christian.  This  frenzy  of  per- 
secution was  strange,  unheard  of;  there  had  never  been  the  like  before;  the  rulers  of 
the  earth  had  never  before  banded  together  to  root  out  a  religion  by  fire  and  sword ; 
conquered  nations  had  been  allowed  to  worship  their  own  gods  and  to  retain  their 
ancient  rites.  But  the  Son  of  God  had  come  to  be  the  Saviour  of  the  world ;  the 
malice  of  Satan  was  stirred  to  the  utmost;  he  would  make  a  mighty  «ffort  to  crush 
the  Church  of  Christ.  St.  Peter  shows  a  deep  sympathy  with  his  sufi^ering  brethren ; 
he  speaks  to  them  in  the  language  of  tenderness ;  he  calls  them  "  beloved."  He  does 
not  depreciate  the  severity  of  the  coming  persecution ;  he  calls  it  a  fiery  trial ;  he 
teaches  us  by  his  example  how  to  deal  with  the  afiSicted.  But  he  encourages  them. 
It  was  to  try  them,  to  prove  their  faith.  They  must  not  think  it  strange.  Indeed, 
this  bitterness  of  persecution  was  a  new  thing  now ;  but  sufiering  would  be  the  por- 
tion of  Christians ;  they  must  regard  it  as  belonging  to  their  profession,  and  accustom 
themselves  to  patient  endurance.  2.  They  must  even  rejoice  in  it.  For  it  brings  them 
near  to  Christ.  He  bore  the  cross ;  the  cross  is  the  badge  of  his  chosen.  The  cross  of 
knightly  orders  is  reckoned  a  high  honour  now;  but  there  is  no  cross  of  gold  to  be 
compared  for  true  honour  and  for  preciousness  with  that  spiritual  cross  which  makes 
the  faithful  Christian  partake  in  the  sufferings  of  Christ.  For  Christ  is  our  King, 
and  to  be  made  like  unto  the  King  is  of  all  honours  the  highest — ^far  above  all  earthly 
distinctions.  Leighton  reminds  us  that  Godfrey  of  Bouillon  refused  the  royal  crown 
when  it  was  offered  to  him  at  Jerusalem :  "  Nolo  auream,  ubi  Christns  spineam  " — "  No 
crown  of  gold  where  Christ  Jesus  was  crowned  with  thorns."  But  suffering  does  not 
only  make  the  faithful  Christian  like  unto  his  Lord ;  it  does  more,  it  brings  him  into 
communion  with  the  sufferings  of  Christ.  Suffering  home  in  faith  helps  the  Christian 
to  realize  the  sufferings  of  the  Lord ;  it  brings  the  cross  into  nearer  view ;  it  enables 
him  to  approach,  to  grasp,  to  cling  to  it,  to  take  it  into  his  heart.  And  suffering  thus 
endured  in  the  faith  of  Christ  cruciQed  is  united  by  faith  with  hii  sufferings  and 
becomes  part  of  them,  and  by  that  mystical  union  is  sanctified  and  blessed  to  the  soul's 
salvation  (Col.  i.  24).  3.  It  is  the  preparation  for  heaven.  Suffering  weans  the  Christian 
from  earthly  enjoyments ;  it  helps  him  to  lift  up  his  eyes  from  earth  and  to  see  by 
faith  the  glory  which  shall  be  revealed.  Those  who  now  suffer  with  Christ  shall  then 
rejoice,  and  that  with  a  joy  which  the  heart  of  man  cannot  conceive.  Even  now  they 
are  blessed ;  the  blessedness  of  the  eighth  Beatitude  is  theirs ;  for  the  Spirit  of  glory 
and  of  God  resteth  upon  them.  Men  may  revile  them;  they  will  do  so;  when  other 
persecutions  cease,  these  persecutions  of  the  tongue  continue ;  "  when  all  other  fires  of 
martyrdom  are  put  out,  these  burn  still "  (Leighton).  But  the  spirit  of  glory  resteth 
on  those  who  for  Christ's  sake  patiently  endure.  His  presence  is  the  foretaste  and  the 
pledge  of  the  everlasting  glory.  He  comes  from  the  throne  of  glory ;  he  brings  with 
him  the  glory  of  holiness ;  he  sheds  the  glory  of  a  saintly  life  around  the  followers  of 
Christ.  And  he  resteth  upon  them ;  he  came  down  from  heaven  on  the  great  Day  of 
Pentecost,  not  for  a  passing  visit,  but  to  abide  for  ever  with  the  Church.  He  abode 
upon  Christ  (John  i.  32);  he  abideth  with  his  true  disciples  (John  xiv.  16).  Christ 
was  anointed  with  the  Holy  Ghost  (Acts  x.  38).  Christians  too  partake  in  that 
Divine  anointing ;  it  abideth  in  them  (1  John  ii.  27).  The  Holy  Dove  resteth  on  the 
meek  and  patient  Christian,  preparing  him  by  its  sanctifying  influences  for  the  ever- 
lasting  glory  of  heaven.  Such  men  are  truly  blessed.  Men  may  revile  them,  and, 
reviling  them,  revile  the  Holy  Spirit  who  abideth  in  them ;  but  they  glorify  him  by 
the  light  which  shines  around  from  their  holy  lives — the  light  which  was  landled  by 
the  sacred  fire  of  his  presence. 

II.  Not  all  suffeeino  is  bi<bssbd.  1.  Let  Christians  not  suffer  for  eviJ'doin^ 
They  must  be  very  careful  to  set  a  good  example,  and  to  give  none  occasion  to  the 
adversary  to  ipeak  reproachfully.    They  must  not  suffer  as  evil-doenf  aor  vvsu  ^.i 


182  THE  FIEST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PETER,    [oh.  iv.  1—19. 

busTbodies.  They  must  imitate  the  Lord  Jesus,  who  said,  "  Man,  who  made  me  a 
judge  or  a  divider  over  you  ?  "  (Luke  xii.  14).  "  Be  much  at  home,"  says  Leighton, 
"  Retting  things  at  rights  within  your  own  breast,  where  there  is  so  much  work,  and 
such  daily  need  of  diligence,  and  then  you  will  find  no  leisure  for  utmecessary  idk 
prying  into  the  ways  and  affairs  of  others ;  and  further  than  your  calling  and  the 
rules  of  Christian  charity  engage  you,  you  will  not  interpose  in  any  matters  without 
you.  nor  be  found  proud  and  censorious,  as  the  world  is  ready  to  call  you."  2.  It  is 
tuffering  for  well-doing  that  is  hlessed.  Suffering  in  itself  has  no  spiritual  value ;  it 
softens  some,  it  hardens  others;  it  saves  some,  to  others  it  worketh  death.  But 
suffering  for  Christ's  sake  is  always  blessed.  If  any  man  is  called  to  suffer  as  a  Chris- 
tian, he  must  not  be  ashamed ;  for  the  Son  of  man  will  be  ashamed  in  the  last  day  of 
those  who  now  are  ashamed  of  him  before  men.  We  must  confess  him  openly  in  the 
world  J  and  if  in  any  way  we  are  called  to  suffer  because  we  belong  to  Christ  and  own 
him  as  our  Master,  we  must  glorify  God  because  we  are  counted  worthy  to  suffer 
shame  for  his  Name. 

ni.  The  buffekinos  of  Cheibtians  point  ohwabds  to  the  judoment.  1.  Judg-r 
ment  must  begin  at  the  house  of  God.  God  hates  sin ;  he  hates  it  most  in  those  who 
are  nearest  to  him;  he  would  have  those  on  whom  his  love  rests  clean  from  its  defiling 
touch.  Therefore  "  whom  the  Lord  loveth,  he  chasteneth  ; "  therefore  he  says,  "  You 
only  have  I  known  of  all  the  families  of  the  earth :  therefore  I  will  punish  you  for  all 
your  iniquities"  (Amos  iii.  2).  Sometimes  the  Church  passes  through  seasons  of 
great  affliction ;  one  such  season  was  at  hand  when  St.  Peter  wrote.  It  would  be  a 
fiery  trial,  but  the  fire  was  a  refining  fire.  It  was  kindled  in  a  sense  by  the  malice  of 
Satan  and  the  VMckedness  of  evil  men ;  but  in  a  true  and  higher  sense  it  came  by  the 
overruling  will  of  God.  Therefore  it  must  be  sent  in  love,  in  fatherly  care  for  their 
souls.  This  thought  sweetens  suffering  to  the  believer ;  it  is  our  Father  who  sends  it, 
and  he  sends  it  in  mercy.  "  Judgment  must  begin  at  the  house  of  God ; "  partly,  indeed, 
because  the  sins  of  Christians,  committed  against  light  and  agninst  knowledge,  are 
more  grievous  than  the  sins  of  those  who  know  not  the  gospel ;  but  mainly  because 
the  love  of  God  is  a  wise  and  holy  love,  and  though  "  he  doth  not  willingly  afflict 
nor  grieve  the  children  of  men,"  yet  he  chastens  us'  for  our  profit,  that  we  may  be 
partakers  of  his  holiness.  Judgment  begins  with  the  house  of  God ;  even  the  righteous 
are  "  scarcely  saved."  Not  that  their  salvation  is  for  a  moment  doubtful ;  Christ  is  able 
to  save  even  to  the  uttermost  all  who  come  to  God  by  him.  But  salvation  is  a  great 
and  difficult  work ;  we  are  bidden  to  work  out  our  salvation  with  fear  and  trembling ; 
and,  work  as  we  may,  we  could  not  work  it  out  for  ourselves,  were  it  not  that  God 
worketh  in  us  "  both  to  will  and  to  do  of  his  good  pleasure."  The  righteous  is  scarcely 
saved,  because  his  enemies  are  so  many  and  so  strong,  and  he  so  weak  and  sinful ; 
temptations  swarm  around  him,  and  there  are  sinful  lusts  within  his  heart  to  which 
those  temptations  address  themselves.  He  needs  all  the  armour  of  light — the  breast- 
plate of  righteousness,  the  helmet  of  salvation,  the  shield  of  faith,  the  sword  of  the 
Spirit ;  he  must  fight  the  good  fight  of  faith  ;  he  must  watch  and  pray;  he  must  quit 
himself  like  a  man,  "  enduring  hardness  as  a  good  soldier  of  Jesus  Christ."  But  if  the 
righteous  is  scarcely  saved,  what  hope  of  salvation  have  the  careless  and  the  slothful  ? 
Ifmen  are  indifferent,  listless  in  their  religious  exercises,  without  zeal,  without  enthu- 
siasm, without  self-denial,  can  they  be  walking  in  the  narrow  way  ?  And  there  is  no 
other  way  that  leads  to  heaven.  2.  It  ends  with  the  disobedient.  When  God's  people 
are  judged,  they  are  chastened  of  the  Lord,  that  they  should  not  be  condemned  with 
the  world.  Judgment  in  their  case  is  transitory ;  it  soon  makes  room  for  mercy ;  it 
was  sent  in  mercy,  and  it  issues  in  mercy.  But  it  rests  upon  the  disobedient.  They 
will  not  listen  to  the  gospel  of  God,  the  good  news  of  salvation  sent  from  heaven. 
God  is  not  willing  that  any  should  perish;  he  sought  to  save  them;  they  would  net 
accept  the  terms  of  salvation.  He  gave  his  blessed  Son  to  die  for  them;  they  "counted 
the  blood  of  the  covenant  an  unholy  thing."  Where  shall  the  ungodly  and  the  sinner 
appear  in  the  awful  day  ?  3.  Believers  have  no  cause  for  terror.  They  are  judged 
now  that  they  should  be  saved  at  the  last.  Their  sufferings  are  according  to  the  ynW 
of  God,  and  that  will  is  their  sanctification  now,  their  salvation  hereafter.  He  is  their 
Creator;  he  will  not  despise  the  work  of  his  own  hands.  Be  hath  begotten  them  agaLa 
to  » lirety  hape;  hts  saint*  are  right  dear  to  him;  he  is  fidthM;  his  truth  abideth; 


on.iv.  1—19.]    THE  PIKST  EPISTLK  GENERAL  OF  PETER.  183 


his  promise  is  sure.  Let  Ms  chosen  live  in  obedience,  in  well-doing,  and  then  let 
them  commit  their  souls  to  him.  "  Father,  into  thy  hands  I  commend  my  spirit," 
were  the  dying  words  of  Christ.  Let  these  words  be  our  daily  prayer ;  let  us  commit 
our  souls  to  him  in  life  and  in  death.  We  need  his  gracious  keepini?  every  day  to 
keep  those  souls  of  ours  safe  from  the  evil  one  and  pure  from  sin ;  and  ob,  how  shall 
we  need  that  holy  keeping  in  the  hour  of  our  death !  May  we  have  grace,  then,  to 
trust  ourselves  to  him  in  humble  confidence  and  Christian  hope,  learning  of  our 
blessed  Lord,  not  only  how  to  live,  but  also  how  to  die  1 

Lessons.  1.  The  Christian  should  not  count  suffering  strange;  it  must  coii  e  sooner 
or  later;  "Ye  must  through  much  tribulation  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God."  _. 
He  should  rejoice,  for  suffering  brings  him  nearer  to  the  cross.  3.  After  the  cross 
Cometh  the  crown  ;  even  now  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God  rests  upon  his  suffering  children. 
4.  The  judgment  is  at  hand :  prepare  for  it.  5.  The  righteous  are  "  scarcely  saved ; " 
"  work  out  your  own  salvation  with  fear  and  trembling."  6.  "  Where  shall  the  ungodly 
and  the  sinner  appear  T  "    "  Flee  from  the  wrath  to  come." 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ver.  lO.—Oifta  and  service.  If  we  may  venture  to  connect  these  words  with  the 
preceding  injunction  as  well  as  with  the  following,  the  power  of  rendering  simple 
hospitality  is  as  truly  a  gift  of  God's  grace  for  the  use  of  which  a  man  is  responsible 
as  is  the  loftiest  endowment  of  eloquent  speech  or  eminent  service.  The  large 
principles  embodied  in  these  simple  words  would  revolutionize  the  Church,  and  go  far 
to  regenerate  the  world,  if  they  were  honestly  carried  out.  All  powers  are  gifts.  All 
gifts  are  trusts.  What  simplicity,  what  power,  what  unselfishness,  what  diligence, 
what  regard  for  others'  work,  what  humility  as  to  one's  own,  would  fill  the  life  which 
was  wholly  moulded  by  these  convictions. 

I.  The  tjnivehsalitt  of  gift.  *'  Every  man  hath  received,"  says  Peter,  and  builds 
upon  it  as  a  well-recognized  fact.  All  these  poor  ignorant  Asiatics,  picked  from  the 
filth  of  idolatry,  slaves  and  outcasts  as  some  of  them  had  been,  rude  and  uncultured  and 
lowly  of  station  and  imperfectly  Christianized  as  many  of  them  were, — they  each  had  some 
Divine  gift  which  needed  only  to  be  burnished  and  shown  to  shine  afar  with  heavenly 
brightness.  Every  Christian  man  to-day,  in  like  manner,  is  endowed  with  some  gift ; 
for  every  Christian  has  the  Spirit  of  God  dwelling  in  him,  and  that  Spirit  never  comea 
empty-handed.  Whatever  subordination  there  may  be  in  the  Church,  as  in  all 
organized  communities,  its  very  life  depends  on  the  fact  that  all  its  members  possess 
the  Divine  Spirit,  and  no  claim  of  authority  to  rule  nor  prerogative  of  teaching,  which 
does  not  recognize  that  fact,  can  stand  for  a  moment.  The  aspiration  of  Moses  has 
been  fulfilled  (Numb.  xi.  29), "  All  the  Lord's  people"  are  "  prophets,"  and  "  the  Lord  " 
has  "  put  his  Spirit  upon  them."  Miraculous  powers  were  widely  diffused  in  the  early 
Church,  and,  with  the  gift  of  tongues,  constituted  the  most  conspicuous  tokens  of  the 
gift  of  the  Pentecostal  Spirit.  But  even  then  these  were  not  "  the  best  gifts."  The 
graces  of  faith,  hope,  and  charity,  those  fruits  of  the  Spirit  which  consist  of  a  holy 
character  and  a  heart  transparent  for  the  heavenly  light  which  bums  within  it,  as  a 
light  fed  by  perfumed  oil  in  an  alabaster  lamp, — these  are  better  gifts  of  an  indwelling 
Spirit  than  all  supernatural  endowments.  The  natural  faculties,  of  course,  are  gifts. 
To  each  man  the  question  may  be  addressed  concerning  these, "  What  hast  thou  which 
thou  hast  not  received?"  But  the  natural  faculties  of  the  Christian,  reinforced, 
quickened,  directed  by  the  indwelling  Spirit,  are  still  more  emphatically  gifts.  The 
power  of  brain  or  tongue,  the  spirit  of  counsel  or  of  might,  which  he  received  from  the 
creative  breath  of  God,  is  intensified  by  the  Spirit,  which  brings  the  breath  of  a  new 
Divine  life,  as  a  lamp  burns  brighter  when  plunged  into  a  jar  of  oxygen.  And 
besides  the  new  graces  and  heightened  action  of  native  power,  all  ability  or 
opportunity  dependent  on  outward  circumstances  is  gi/t.  Health,  any  skill  of  hand 
or  eye,  wealth,  position, — everything  must  come  into  this  category.  All  which  we  have 
is  gift.  In  that  sense  the  gift  is  universal.  And  we  all  have  the  gift.  In  that  sense, 
too,  it  is  universal. 

IL  The  tabibtt  or  aim.   The  apostle  speaks  here  of  the  "  manifold  " — literally,  the 


184  THE  WBST  EPISTLE  GENEBAL  OP  PETER*   [oa.  it.  1—19. 

"  variegated  "  or  "many-coloured"  grace ;  and  exhorts  to  variety  of  service  based  upon 
dissimilarity  of  gifts.  It  cannot  but  be  that  the  fulness  of  God  passing  into  the  limits 
of  created  minds  should  manifest  itself  in  an  infinite  variety.  The  light  flashed  at 
different  angles  from  a  million  dewdrops  twinkles  and  glitters  from  their  tiny  spheres 
in  all  differing  tints  of  green  and  purple  and  gold.  The  unlimited  variety  of  innumer- 
able recipients  growing  in  the  measure  of  their  possessions  through  eternity  is  the  only 
adequate  manifestation  of  the  infinite  God.  Such  variety  is  essential,  too,  to  the 
existence  of  a  community.  "If  the  whole  were  an  eye,  where  were  the  body?"  Tha 
homely  proverb  says,  "  It  takes  all  sorts  to  make  a  world."  With  diversity  comes 
room  for  mutual  help  and  mutual  tolerance.  Every  man  has  some  gift ;  no  man  has 
all.  Therefore  they  are  bound  together  by  reciprocal  wants  and  supplies,  and  con- 
vexities here  and  concavities  there  fit  in  to  one  another  and  make  a  solid  whole.  The 
same  life  works,  but  variously,  in  the  different  organs  of  the  one  body,  so  that  there 
should  be  no  schism  in  the  body.  This  variety  constitutes  an  imperative  call  to 
■ervice.    Each  man  has  something  which  some  of  his  brethren  want. 

"  The  least  flower  with  a  brimming  cup  may  stand. 
And  share  its  dewdrop  wilh  another  near." 

The  concert  will  not  be  complete,  though  the  roU  of  the  great  ocean  of  praise  that 
surges  round  the  throne  be  as  the  noise  of  many  waters,  without  the  tinkle  of  the  little 
rill  of  my  praise.  And  some  poor  soul,  which  God  meant  to  go  shares  with  me,  will 
have  to  starve  if  I  do  not  part  my  portion  among  the  needy.  It  constitutes,  too,  an 
authoritative  prescription  of  the  manner  of  service.  "  As  every  one  hath  received,  so 
minister  the  tame."  Do  not  minister  anything  else,  but  that  very  thing  which  you 
have  received.  God  shows  you  what  he  intends  you  to  do  by  what  he  gives  you.  Do 
not  copy  other  people ;  do  not  try  to  be  anybody  else.  Be  true  to  yourself.  If  your 
gifts  impel  you  to  a  special  mode  of  service,  follow  them.  Find  out  what  you  are  fit 
for,  and  do  it  in  your  own  fashion.  Take  your  directions  at  first  hand  from  God,  and 
don't  spoil  your  own  little  gift  by  trying  to  bend  it  into  the  shape  of  somebody  else's. 
Flutes  cannot  be  made  to  sound  like  drums.  Be  content  to  give  out  your  own  note, 
and  leave  the  care  of  the  harmony  to  God.  And,  on  the  other  hand,  beware  of 
interfering  with  your  brother's  equal  liberty.  Do  not  hastily  condemn  modes  of  action 
because  they  are  not  yours.  A  Salvation  Army  captain  and  a  philosophical  theologian 
may  not  understand  each  other's  dialect ;  but  there  is  room  for  them  both,  and  they 
should  not  hinder  each  other.  There  are  many  vessels  of  different  materials  and 
shapes  for  different  uses  in  Christ's  great  house.  The  widest  tolerance  of  the  diver- 
sities of  operation  is  the  truest  recognition  of  the  one  Spirit  which  worketh  all  in  all. 

in.  Ito  BESPONSIBILITY  OF  GIFTS.  "  As  good  Stewards."  Peter  is  probably  here 
repeating  the  thought  which  he  had  learned  from  his  Master's  parables.  The  thought 
of  stewardship  is  no  doubt  a  natural  one,  even  apart  from  the  reminiscence  of  our 
Lord's  teaching ;  but  we  can  scarcely  suppose  that  Christ's  words  did  not  suggest  it 
hero.  All  gifts  are  trusts,  Peter  thinks ;  that  is  to  say,  no  Christian  gets  his  natural 
endowments,  nor  his  material  possessions,  and  still  less  his  spiritual  graces,  for  himself 
alone.  We  all  admit  that  in  theory  about  the  two  former,  and  in  some  degree  about 
the  latter.  But  Christian  men  do  not  sufficiently  consider  that  God  gives  them  even 
salvation  for  the  sake  of  others  as  well  as  for  their  own.  No  creature  is  so  small  but 
that  its  well-being  is  a  worthy  end  for  God's  gifts  and  care.  No  being  is  so  great  that 
its  well-being  is  worthy  to  be  an  exclusive  end  of  God's  gifts  and  care.  We  are  saved 
"  that  we  may  show  forth  the  praises  of  hira  who  has  called  us  out  of  darkness  into  his 
marvellous  light."  The  joy  of  forgiveness,  the  peace  of  conscience,  the  blessed  assur- 
ance of  the  Father's  love,  the  hopes  of  an  immortal  heaven, — these  are  not  given  us  for 
self-absorbed  and  solitary  enjoyment,  but  that,  saved,  we  may  glorify  and  proclaim 
the  Saviour,  and  bring  to  others  the  unspeakable  gift.  So  -/rith  all  the  lesser  gifts 
which  flow  from  that  greatest — all  spiritual  endowments,  natural  capacities  heightened 
by  the  Spirit'*  indwelling,  or  outward  endowments  and  possessions — ^they  are  our  Lord's 
goods  put  into  our  hands  to  administer  for  him.  They  were  his  before  they  became 
oars.  They  are  his  while  they  are  called  ours.  They  are  ours  that  we  may  have  the 
ioy  of  bringing  him  somewhat,  and  may  not  only  know  the  blessedness  of  receiving, 
Vut  th«  greater  blessedness  of  giving,  even  though  we  have  t«  say,  wUle  we  bring  ow 


Ofi.iv.  1—19.3    THE  FIRST  EPISTLI!  GENERAL  OF  PETER.  185 

gifts,  "  Of  thine  own  have  we  given  thee."  If  Christian  men  really  believed  what  they 
say  they  do,  that  they  are  stewards,  not  owners,  trustees  and  noi  possessors,  the  whule 
face  of  Christianity  would  be  altered.  There  would  be  men  and  money  for  all  noble 
service,  and  the  world  would  be  bright  with  unselfish  and  vai  ious  ministries,  worthily 
representing  "  the  manifold  grace  of  God." — A.  M. 

Ver.  19. — The  gufferer's  wisdom  and  peace.  "  Where/ore."  The  word  carries  us 
back  to  the  whole  series  of  thoughts  on  persecution  and  sorrow  in  the  preceding  verses, 
and,  as  it  were,  binds  them  all  together,  as  a  man  might  bind  a  bundle  of  twigs  to 
make  a  standing-ground  for  himself  and  his  companions  on  a  black  bog.  The  fagot  is 
made  up  of  these  truths,  namely — sorrow  is  no  extraordinary  anomaly ;  we  share  in 
the  great  Sufferer's  afflictions;  the  purpose  of  them  is  our  participation  in  the  great 
King's  glory,  and  that  a  joy  exceeding  the  sorrow  may  be  ours ;  that  sorrow  and 
shame  will  bring  the  Divine  Spirit  to  overshadow  us  with  his  peaceful,  dove-like  wing, 
»nd  to  fill  our  souls  with  the  radiance  of  a  present  God ;  that  by  it  we  may  glorify  the 
God  who  in  it  glorifies  us ;  that  the  sharpest  sorrows  are  but  a  light  portion  of  the 
judgments  which  are  to  come  upon  all  the  earth,  and  are  meant,  not  to  destroy,  but  to 
purify  and  to  separate  from  those  on  whom  the  final  and  fatal  judgment  of  condemna- 
tion shall  falU  Wherefore,  for  all  this  closely  knit  structure  of  calming  and  courage- 
giving  truths,  quiet  confidence  and  uninterrupted  diligence  in  holy  deeds  is  the 
sorrowful  heart's  wisdom. 

L  Thb  trdb  tbmpeb  of  thb  Chbistian  buffbber.  We  can  scarcely  fail  to  hear 
in  the  words  one  more  echo  of  the  gospel  story.  Peter  remembers,  "  Father,  into  thy 
hands  I  commend  my  spirit,"  and  bids  us  all,  in  our  lighter  sorrows,  in  like  manner 
commit  our  souls  to  God.  The  word  is  the  same,  and,  though  our  Lord  spoke  of  the 
act  of  death,  and  the  apostle  of  the  surrender  in  life,  the  temper  and  disposition  are  the 
same.  Absolute  confidence  and  complete  submission  were  exhibited  on  the  cross, 
Nothing  less  is  our  duty  and  privilege.  When  sorrow  comes,  and  not  only  in  joy 
when  it  is  so  easy,  we  are  to  give  up  ourselves  to  God  in  the  fuU  abandonment  of 
trust,  as  a  man  who  has  been  fighting  for  hours  against  the  storm  reaches  home  at 
last,  and,  with  muscles  relieved  from  strain,  gratefully  flings  himself  down  to  rest. 
We  are  to  put  ourselves  in  God's  care,  as  people  in  war  flock  into  the  forts,  or  as  a 
householder  will  deposit  his  valuables  in  the  hands  of  his  banker,  and  then  sleep  care- 
less of  thieves  or  fire.  God  will  take  good  care  of  all  that  is  deposited  in  his  custody. 
No  violence  can  force  his  safe  where  his  jewels  are  kept.  If  we  recognize  our  own 
importance,  and,  abandoning  all  self-reliance,  trust  wholly  to  him,  we  shall  suifer  no 
harm  and  fear  no  foe ;  but  if  we  will  live  in  the  open  country,  and  refuse  the  shelter  of 
his  stronghold,  because  we  either  do  not  believe  the  peril,  or  think  we  can  keep  our- 
selves safe  by  our  own  arms,  some  night  or  other  we  shall  be  roused  from  dreams  to 
gee  the  faces  of  the  savage  foes  all  about  our  bed,  and  shall  know  the  sharpness  of  their 
arrows  and  the  implacableness  of  their  hearts.  These  two  things,  which  are  but  the 
positive  and  the  negative  sides  of  one — self-distrust  and  reliance  on  God — are  the  secret 
of  all  tranquillity  as  well  as  of  all  safety.  That  heart  may  well  be  at  rest  which  has 
shifted  the  responsibility  of  its  defence  from  its  own  weak  self  to  God.  If  we  once 
can  come  to  feel  tliat  it  is  more  his  business  than  oui's  to  take  care  of  us,  a  whole 
cloud  of  cares  falls  like  some  black  precipitate  to  the  bottom,  and  leaves  the  heart 
clear.  Confidence  is  not  enough  without  submission.  To  commit  our  souls  to  God 
includes  "Do  what  thou  wilt,"  as  well  as  "Thou  wilt  do  lovingly  and  well."  Only 
when  the  will  yields,  and,  though  it  may  be  with  tears  bitter  as  death,  and  lasting  as 
life,  accepts  and  conforms  itself  to  God's  will,  do  we  really  know  the  blessedness  of 
faith.  That  which  we  no  longer  kick  against  no  longer  pricks  us.  The  cell  out  of 
which  we  do  not  wish  to  go  ceases  to  be  a  prison,  and  becomes  an  oratory  or  a  study. 
The  horse  that  plunges  feels  the  restraint  of  his  harness,  which  would  not  gall  if  he 
went  quietly.  "  It  is  the  Lord,  let  him  do  what  seemeth  him  good,"  is  a  talisman 
which  changes  bitter  into  sweet,  darkness  into  light,  sorrow  into  content,  and  death 
into  life. 

n.  The  praoticai,  accompaniment  of  this  tempeb.  "  In  well-doing."  There  are 
many  important  truths  suggested  by  that  significant  addition.  1.  The  familiar  truth 
is  suggested  that  our  committing  our  soula  to  God  does  not  mean  that  we  are  to  toU 


ISe  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PETER,    [oh.  iv.  1—19, 

our  hands  in  indolence,  which  we  misname  trust.  Neither  are  we  to  be  so  much 
engaged  with  cultivating  the  inward  graces  of  faith  and  submission  as  to  neglect  the 
practice  of  common  deeds  of  kindness.  Our  religion  may  become  transcendental,  a 
thing  of  spiritual  experiences  and  emotions,  and  may  be  in  danger  of  soaring  so  high 
as  to  forget  the  work  which  has  to  be  done  here.  But  it  must  have  hands  to  toil  as 
well  as  wings  to  mount.  Peter  was  foolish  when  he  desired  to  stay  on  the  Mount  of 
Transfiguration,  for  there  was  a  poor  devil-ridden  boy  waiting  in  the  plain  to  be 
healed.  2.  Here  is  a  warning  against  giving  up  work  because  of  sorrow.  Ages  of 
persecution  have  seldom  been  ages  of  service.  All  the  strength  of  the  Church  has  been 
absorbed  in  simple  endurance.  And  in  our  private  sorrows  we  are  too  apt  to  fling 
aside  our  tools  in  order  to  sit  down,  and  brood,  and  remember,  and  weep.  We  hold 
ourselves  excused  from  tasljs  which  otherwise  seem  plain  duties,  because  our  hearts  are 
heavy.  There  is  no  greater  mistake  than  to  give  up  work  because  of  trouble.  Next  to 
God's  Spirit,  it  is  the  best  comforter.  We  feel  our  own  burdens  less  when  we  try  to 
help  some  heavy-laden  brother  to  carry  his.  Our  sorrow  will  be  less  and  our  faith 
more  if  we  honestly  set  ourselves  to  the  tasks,  and  especially  to  the  tasks  of  doing 
good  to  others  which  lie  at  our  hands.  3.  All  sin  kills  faith.  "  Well-doing"  here  may 
either  mean  beneficence  or  pure  moral  conduct.  If  the  former,  the  remarks  just  made 
apply.  If  the  latter,  the  principle  is  presented  that  such  conduct  must  be  associated 
with  our  committing  of  our  souls  to  God,  because  every  breach  of  the  solemn  law  of 
right  will  weaken  our  power  of  faith  and  make  a  barrier  between  us  and  God.  A 
small  grain  of  sin  will  blind  us ;  a  little  sin  will  prevent  us  from  seeing  God.  A  thin 
film  of  air  hinders  two  bodies  from  uniting;  a  thin  layer  of  sin  keeps  the  soul  from 
touching  God.  Any  transgression  will  disturb  our  faith,  and  make  it  close  its 
Opening  buds,  as  a  bright  cloud  crossing  the  sun  folds  together  the  petals  of  some 
plants.  There  must  be  pure  and  noble  deeds  if  there  is  to  be  any  completeness  and 
continuity  of  peaceful  confidence;  for,  though  faith  is  the  parent  of  righteousness, 
righteousness  reacts  on  faith,  and  a  hand  foul  with  evil  is  lamed  thereby,  so  that  it 
cannot  firmly  gtaa-p  the  outstretched  hand  of  Christ. 

III.  The  gbodnd  of  this  confidbnce  in  the  acts  and  chabaotbr  or  God.  He  to 
whom  we  entrust  our  souls  is  their  Creator.  Therefore  he  is  strong  to  preserve  no  less 
than  to  make,  and  therefore,  too,  he  knows  how  much  tension  and  strain  the  soul  can 
bear,  and  will  not  overweight  it,  nor  test  it  up  to  the  breaking-point.  As  St.  Paul 
says,  he  will  not  suffer  us  to  be  tempted  above  that  we  are  able.  Where  better  can 
some  precious  work  be  put  for  safe  keeping  than  in  the  maker's  hands?  Where 
can  my  soul  be  so  secure  and  well  than  confided  to  the  care  of  him  who  fashioned  me, 
and  measures  my  sorrows,  knowing  my  frame  and  remembering  that  I  am  dust?  He 
is  a  faithful  Creator.  The  act  of  creation  constitutes  a  relation  between  God  and  us, 
which  imposes  on  -him  obligations  and  gives  us  claims  on  him.  He  has  made  a 
covenant  with  his  creatures  in  the  horn-  when  he  created  them,  which  he  keeps  for 
ever.  He  is  faithful,  in  that  he  ever  remains  true  to  himself,  to  his  own  past,  and  to 
his  articulate  promises.  What  he  has  been  we  can  rely  on,  and  be  sure  that,  as  we 
have  heard,  so  shall  we  see,  and  that  every  act  of  mercy  and  succour  in  the  past  binds 
him  to  extend  the  same  mercy  and  succour  to-day  and  for  ever.  So  all  the  old  history 
flashes  up  into  new  meaning  for  every  poor  sorrowful,  trusting  soul.  What  he  has 
spoken  he  will  adhere  to,  and  there  are  promises  enough  for  us  to  build  absolute 
confidence  upon.  No  man  shall  ever  be  able  to  quote  an  assurance  of  his  which 
turned  out  a  rotten  support,  a  rind  without  a  kernel.  He  is  a  faithful  Creator.  There- 
fore, if  we  "  commit  the  keeping  of  our  souls  to  him  in  well-doing,"  with  the  ancient 
prayer,  "  Forsake  not  the  work  of  thine  own  hands,"  we  too  shall  be  blessed  with  the 
answer  given  to  a  hundred  generations,  and  fulfilled  to  every  soul  that  rested  upon  it, 
"  I  will  not  leave  thee  until  I  have  done  that  which  I  have  spoken  to  thee  of." — A.  M. 

Ver.  3. — "  Hie  time  past:"  a  sermon  for  the  last  day  of  the  year.  Every  day  and 
every  moment  closes  and  commences  a  year ;  yet  the  artificial  arrangement  by  which 
it  is  agreed  that  a  year  .shall  close  at  one  certain  fixed  moment  of  a  certain  fixed  day 
is  an  arrangement  both  convenient  and  contributive  in  many  ways  to  our  moral  and 
religious  advantage.  The  review  of  the  closing  year  is  a  very  proper,  and  may  be  a 
Tery  profitable,  exercise.    The  newsjapers  review  the  events  of  the  year  which  are  of 


oa.1T.  1—19.]    THE  FIEST  EPISTLE  OENBRAL  OF  PETER.  187 

political,  financial,  or  commercial  interest.  Man  has,  however,  higher  interests — those 
which  are  moral  and  spiritual.  It  is  desirable  that  we  should  take  a  retrospect  of 
"the  time  past,"  with  a  view  of  tracing  God's  providential  dealings  with  us,  with  a 
view  of  estimating  our  own  spiritual  progress,  and  of  learning  lessons  of  wisdom  and  of 
helpfulness. 

L  What  does  BEFLEorioiir  suogest  to  us  conoebkino  time  past  in  itself  ?  1.  Its 
passive  has  been  rapid,  yet  it  has  been  fiUed  with  events  of  great  importance.  2.  It 
is  perfectly  irrecoverable ;  we  cannot  live  the  expiring  year  over  again.  3.  It  has  left 
ineffaceable  traces  upon  our  character.  We  are  all  changed  by  its  influences,  its 
occupations,  its  lessons — some  for  the  better,  some  for  the  worse.  4.  It  is  not  for- 
gotten by  the  Lord  and  Judge  of  all.    In  this  sense  he  "  requireth  that  which  is  past." 

IL  Ik  what  spirit  should  the  Chbistian  consideb  the  time  past?  1.  His 
first  and  most  prominent  thought  should  be  of  the  mercy  and  loving-kinduess  of  God 
revealed  to  him  as  the  days  and  weeks  have  passed  by.  2.  Especially  should  he 
remember  the  long-suffering  and  forbearance  which  has  been  dispkyo<l  towards  him  by 
his  heavenly  Father  upon  repeated  occasions,  when  such  consideration  has  been  called 
for  by  failures  in  duty  and  by  forgetful  ness  of  Divine  love.  3.  He  should  remember 
with  regret  and  repentance  the  opportunities  of  obedience  and  usefulness  which  he  has 
neglected.  4.  Nor  should  he  lose  sight  of  the  discipline  which  he  may  have  been 
called  upon  to  endure,  and  which  be  should  remember,  not  with  a  rebellious,  but  with 
a  submissive  spirit. 

III.  In  what  spirit  should  the  irreligious  and  undecided  review  the  time 
PAST  ?  1.  He  should  remember  with  humiliation  and  shame  that  he  has  broken  the 
Law  of  God,  and  rejected  the  gospel  of  Christ.  2.  He  should  reflect  upon  the  evil 
influence  which  his  example  of  religion  has  exercised  over  his  fellow-men,  especially 
over  those  within  his  family  and  social  circle.  3.  He  should  consider  that  he  is  the 
worse  at  the  end  of  the  year  than  at  its  beginning,  because  of  his  delay  to  repent  and 
to  commence  by  God's  grace  a  new  and  better  life. 

IV.  How  should  the  memory  of  the  time  past  affeot  the  time  to  come  ?  1. 
We  may  be  helped  to  realize  the  brevity  of  life,»!ind  the  uncertainty  and  probable 
brevity  especially  of  what  of  life  yet  remains.  2.  We  may  be  induced  to  turn  away 
from  the  evil  which  has  been  indtjged  in  during  bygone  years,  and  to  enter  upon  the 
holier  life  and  more  consecrated  service  which  our  conscience  approves  and  enjoins. 
The  sands  are  fast  falling;  the  tide  is  fast  ebbing;  the  light  is  fast  fading.  Let  the 
future  see  our  vows  fulfilled,  our  hopes  realized,  our  aims  achieved  1 — J.  B.  T. 

Ver.  7. — Waiting  for  the  end.  Like  his  brother  apostle,  St.  Paul,  St.  Peter  lived  in 
constant  anticipation  of  "  the  end."  This  attitude  of  mind  was  no  doubt  encouraged 
by  the  discourses  of  our  Lord  Jesus,  to  which  Simon  Peter  had  undoubtedly  listened. 
Aiid  it  must  have  been  confirmed  by  the  state  of  society  both  in  the  Jewish  and  the 
Christian  world ;  changes  were  imminent,  and  none  could  say  what  form  these 
changes  might  take.  In  some  respects  such  statements  and  admonitions  as  those  of 
the  text  are  even  more  pressingly  appropriate  in  our  times  than  when  they  were  first 
penned. 

L  The  view  which  Christians  are  taught  to  take  of  their  earthly  condition. 
The  New  Testament  impresses  upon  us  the  transitory  and  temporary  nature  of  all 
things  earthly.  Sound  understanding  will  seek  to  verify  this,  not  by  prophetical  and 
historical  dates,  but  by  moral  and  unquestionably  significant  facts.  1.  There  may 
well  have  been  in  the  apostle's  miml  a  foresight  of  the  approaching  destruction  of 
Jerusalem,  the  dispersion  of  the  Jewish  race,  and  the  abrogation  of  the  Hebrew  religion. 
2.  Yet  a  larger  reference  is  probable;  "the  end  of  all  things"  can  scarcely  be  limited 
to  the  catastrophe  which  befell  the  Israelitish  people.  There  is  no  permanence  on 
earth.  The  Christian,  like  the  Jewish  dispensation,  must  pass  away.  When  this 
world  has  served  its  purpose — the  purpose  centring  in  the  moral  history  of  mankind — 
it  will  be  dissolved.  The  visible  and  tangible  are  not  the  real,  are  not  the  lasting. 
Moral  results  will  outlast  the  material  framework  of  their  development.  3.  Every 
individual  who  reflects  must  feel  that  his  own  brief  life-history  gives  point  and  pathos 
to  the  end  of  all  things. 

U.  The  consequent  spibit  and  putt  of  Christians  oHEBisHiNa  suoa  oontictions 


188  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PETER,     [oh.  !▼■  1— W- 

AND  EXPECTATIONS.  A  Superficial  observer  might  suppose  that  the  result  of  such 
beliefs  must  needs  be  excitement  and  distress,  or,  if  not  distress,  solicitude.  But  this 
is  not  the  effect  designed  by  our  Lord  and  his  apostles.  Quite  the  contrary ;  for  St. 
Peter,  in  view  of  the  approaching  end,  admonishes  to  (1)  soundness  of  mind;  (2) 
sobriety ;  and  (3)  prayers.  Such  great  and  solemn  realities  as  religion  unfolds  before 
the  mind  are  fitted  to  strengthen,  steady,  and  mature  the  character ;  and  at  the  same 
time  to  inspire  with  pious  desires  and  petitions.  A  spirit  such  as  that  here  enjoined 
may  justly  be  said  both  to  qualify  for  this  present  probation  and  to  prepare  for  future 
fruition.  For  "  the  end  of  all  things  "  does  not  involve  the  end  of  God's  government, 
or  the  end  of  man's  life  and  spiritual  progress. — J.  R.  T. 

Ver.  8. — Fervent  love.  Because  St.  John  was  emphatically  the  apostle  of  love,  It 
must  not  be  supposed  that  the  inculcation  of  this  virtue  was  left  to  him  alone.  The 
eloquent  panegyric  of  charity  in  St.  Paul's  Epistle  to  the  Corinthians  is  a  proof  of  that 
apostle's  sense  of  the  importance  of  this  virtue.  And  this  passage  in  St.  Peter's  Epistle 
shows  that  the  Lord's  companionship  had  not  failed  to  produce  upon  the  mind  of  "the 
prince  of  the  apostles"  an  impression  of  the  Divine  beauty  and  of  the  supreme 
excellence  of  love. 

I.  The  Divine  foundation  of  lovb  as  a  Chbistian  vibtuk.  1.  The  Divine 
nature  is  love ;  this  is  the  pre-eminent  attribute  of  the  Eternal  Father.  2.  The  spirit 
and  example  of  our  Lord  Jesus  are  the  supreme  revelation  of  this  grace ;  and  such  a 
rtivelation  was  only  possible  because  Jesus  was  the  Son  of  God. 

II.  The  pbeelbss  excellence  op  love  as  a  Christian  vibtub.  St.  Paul  tells  us, 
"  the  greatest  of  these  is  charity."  And  Peter  here  enjoins  Christians  to  be  "  above  all 
things  fervent  in  their  love." 

III.  The  social  benefits  of  lovb.  In  the  Christian  society  there  is  no  place  for 
those  lower  principles  of  union  which  have  force  in  some  relations  of  human  life,  as  e.g. 
a  common  interest.  But  where  love  is,  there  joy  and  peace,  fellowship  and  sympathy 
and  material  helpfulness,  will  assuredly  prevail.  Love  covers  sins ;  it  bides  those  that 
exist,  prevents  those  that  in  its  absence  might  make  their  appearance,  and  secures  by 
intercession  the  pardon  of  those  which  have  been  committed. 

IV.  The  fekvoub  of  Christian  love.  Love  may  be  in  name  only ;  it  may  exist 
in  a  state  of  feebleness.  But  in  such  cases  it  is  of  little  service.  The  love  which 
Christ  approves  is  that  which  "  many  waters  cannot  quench,"  and  which  ig  "  stronger 
than  death."— J.  R.  T. 

Ver.  10. — Stewardship.  It  is  too  common  for  men  to  pride  themselves  upon  their 
advantages,  the  strength  of  body,  the  gifts  of  intellect,  the  bestowments  of  fortune, 
which  they  call  their  own.  But  the  spirit  of  Christianity  is  altogether  opposed  to  such 
a  habit  of  mind.  Peter  as  well  as  Paul  took  occasion  to  remind  Christians  that  their 
advantages  should  be  estimated  and  employed  in  a  very  different  mannei'. 

I.  The  Chsistian's  endowments,  acquisitions,  and  possessions  are  the  fbeb 
gift  of  God's  kindness.  Those  who  do  not  believe  in  a  Divine  Giver  cannot  regard 
their  possessions  as  a  gift.  But  many  who  do  not  deny  that  they  are  the  creatures  of 
God's  power  and  the  dependents  upon  God's  bounty,  nevertheless  think  and  act  as  it 
they  had  only  themselves  to  thank  for  their  advantages.  We  are  therefore  again  and 
again  reminded  that  we  owe  all  that  we  have  to  the  unmerited  favour  of  Heaven. 
"  What  hast  thou  that  thou  didst  not  receive?" 

II.  The  Christian's  endowments,  acquisitions,  and  possessions  abb  a  trust 
which  he  holds  from  God,  and  fob  which  he  must  give  account.  We  are  called 
to  be  "good  stewards."  Now,  a  steward  is  not  an  owner  of  the  property;  he  is  the 
responsible  administrator  of  a  trust.  Why  have  our  various  advantages  been  con- 
ferred ?  Certainly  not  that  we  may  use  them  for  our  personal  pleasure  or  emolument 
or  aggrandizement,  but  that  by  their  means  we  may  be  serviceable  to  others.  The 
former  course  would  be  an  abuse  of  the  trust  reposed  in  us.  The  conferring  of  such  a 
trust  is  a  personal  probation.  He  who  lias  five  talents  is  expected  so  to  use  them  as  to 
increase  his  means  and  powers  of  usefulness,  and  to  offer  to  the  Judge  the  interest 
which  accrues  to  him  who  faithfully  employs  his  deposit. 

III.  TbB  CsBISTIAH'e  KKOOWMBNTS,  acquisitions,  and  F0I8BS8I0N8  ABB  DBBUNED 


CH.nr.  1— 19.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PETEB.  189 

FOR  THE  BERVIOE  AND  BENEFIT  OF  HIS  FELLOW-MEN.  The  expression  of  St.  Peter  is 
noticeable  in  its  de6niteness  and  graphic  force :  "  ministering  it  among  yourselves." 
1.  This,  then,  is  an  appointed  service.  2.  A  beneficial  service.  3.  A  mutual  service. 
In  the  Church  of  Christ  no  one  is  wholly  and  only  a  giver,  or  wholly  and  only 
a  receiver.  Every  one  has  some  gift,  and  every  one  has  some  need.  It  is  by 
mutual  ministration  that  the  general  welfare  is  secured.  4.  A  service  acceptable  to 
Christ.  He  who  gave  not  only  his  gifts,  but  himself,  for  men,  cannot  but  take 
pleasure  in  every  manifestation  of  sympathy,  in  every  ministration  of  helpfulness,  to 
be  met  with  in  his  Churcii. — J.  R.  T. 

Ver.  11. — Christian  speech.  The  language  of  the  apostle  here  need  not  be  taken  as 
referring  to  the  heathen  oracles.  The  New  Testament  makes  use  of  the  expression 
"oracles"  to  designate  divinely  authorized  utterances  intended  to  instruct  and  benefit 
men.  Thus  Moses  is  said  by  Stephen  to  have  received  "  living  oracles  "  to  give  unto 
the  Jews;  and  the  author  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  describes  the  elements 
of  Christian  doctrine  as  "  first  principles  of  the  oracles  of  God." 

I.  The  beverai.  kinds  op  Christian  speech.  1.  In  the  primitive  Church  there 
were  those  who  were  inspired  to  utter  forth  with  authority  doctrines  and  prec«pts  of 
religion.  This  was  a  special  and  supernatural  "  gift "  bestowed  upon  the  apostles,  but 
by  no  means  confined  to  them,  and  a  gift  the  exercise  of  which  must  have  been  especi- 
ally serviceable  when  Christianity  was  young,  when  some  of  the  books  of  the  New 
Testament  were  not  yet  written,  and  the  canon  was  not  yet  complete.  With  how  deep 
a  sense  of  responsibility  such  gifted  persons  must  have  addressed  Christian  congrega- 
tions one  can  easily  understand.  2.  There  were  also  those  who  were  entrusted  with 
the  gift  of  tongues.  Whatever  differences  of  opinion  may  prevail  with  regard  to  the 
character  of  this  gift,  one  thing  is  clear,  and  that  is  that  it  was  supernaturally  adapted 
for  making  a  deep  and  signal  impression  in  favour  of  the  Christian  faith.  The 
singular  nature  of  this  power  must  have  led  its  possessors  to  deem  themselves 
"  oracles  "  of  God.  3.  But  there  seems  no  reason  for  confining  the  reference  of  this 
admonition  within  limits  so  narrow.  In  the  Church  of  Christ  were  those  who,  as 
pastors,  teachers,  and  evangelists,  were  wont  to  employ  the  gift  of  speech  from 
Christian  motives  and  to  Christian  ends.  This  is  a  function  which  men  of  God  have 
through  all  the  Christian  centuries  been  called  to  discharge,  for  the  edification  of  the 
body  of  Christ,  and  for  the  spread  of  the  gospel  among  men.  Often  have  such  expe- 
rienced the  restraining  and  inspiring  influence  of  the  apostolic  direction  given  in  this 
passage.  When  tempted  to  use  their  gift  of  speech  for  the  purpose  of  advancing  their 
own  interests  or  displaying  their  own  powers,  such  men  have  been  checked  by  the 
recollection  of  this  just  and  holy  requirement,  that  they  should  speak  as  God's  oracles. 
4.  Further,  the  reference  of  this  language  may  be  enlarged  so  as  to  include  all  speech 
of  Christian  men.  There  is  a  sense  in  which  he  who  is  filled  with  the  Spirit  of  Christ 
must  needs  speak,  whenever  he  opens  his  lips,  as  the  oracles  of  God ;  for  his  speech  is 
sincere  and  true,  wise,  just,  and  kind. 

II.  The  holt  and  beneficent  intention  of  Christian  speech.  1.  It  should  be  a 
revelation  from  God — not,  indeed,  in  the  narrower  and  more  proper  meaning  of  that 
word,  but  in  a  sense  justifiable  and  defensible.  The  oracle  declares  the  mind  and  will 
of  the  Divinity.  The  Christian's  speech  brings  the  holy  and  gracious  God  near  to 
those  who  listen  and  understand.  2.  It  should  serve  for  the  guidance  of  those  to 
whom  it  is  addressed.  It  may  not  be  didactic  in  form,  but  substantially  it  possesses  a 
directing  virtue.  Christian  speech  may,  and  constantly  does,  preserve  men  from  error 
and  from  sin,  and  guide  them  into  truth  and  righteousness.  It  is  used  to  this  end  by 
the  Spirit  of  wisdom  and  of  grace,  who  not  only  influences  the  mind  and  heart  of  him 
who  speaks,  but  also  the  conscience,  affections,  and  will  of  those  who  hear. — J.  B.  T. 

Vers.  12, 13. — Trials.  The  word  "  trials  "  is  one  which  is  often  upon  the  lips  of 
persons  who  apparently  give,  little  heed  to  the  spiritual  meaning  which  is  implied  in 
it.  People  use  the  term  as  equivalent  to  "  sufferings,"  "  calamities,"  losing  sight  of 
the  fact  that  it  suggests  great  truths  concerning  our  moral  discipline  and  probation.  In 
this  passage  the  Apostle  Peter,  who  was  doubtless  by  Divine  inspiration  writing  out  ol 
his  own  experience,  expounds  the  Christian  doctrine  of  earthly  "  trials." 


190  THE   FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PBTKB.    [oh.  iv.  1—19. 

L  Thb  fubfose  fob  which  TEIAL8  ABE  PEBMiTTBD.  To  many  minds  the  trials 
which  hefall  the  good  and  the  bad  alike  seem  hardly  consistent  with  the  beneyolent 
character  of  God.  But  it  is  forgotten  that  the  end  of  the  Divine  government  is  not  to 
secure  to  all  men  the  greatest  possible  amoimt  of  enjoyment,  but  to  place  every  man 
in  a  position  of  moral  discipline,  to  give  him  an  opportunity  to  resist  temptation,  to 
cultivate  virtuous  habits,  to  live  an  obedient  and  submissive  and  truly  religious  life. 
Not  as  if  God  were  indifferent  to  the  issue  of  such  probation ;  on  the  contrary,  he 
watches  its  process  vrith  interest,  and  delights  to  see  the  gold  purified  in  the  furnace, 
the  wheat  winnowed  from  the  chaff.  The  hearer  of  the  Woi  d  is  put  upon  his  trial,  and 
events  prove  whether  he  will  hear  or  forbear.  The  believer  in  Christ  is  put  upon  his 
probation,  and  it  is  seen  whether  his  faith  is  Btrong  and  his  love  sincere.  Time 
tries  alL 

II.  Tee  bfibit  m  which  trials  abe  to.  be  BNDxncBD  bt  the  Chbibtiak.  St.  Peter 
shows  us  that  the  true  Christian  temper  under  trials  is  that  which  regards  all  such  afflic- 
tion* as  participation  in  the  Master's  sufferings.  He  who  is  one  with  Christ  finds  his 
satisfaction  in  being  "  as  his  Master,  his  Lord."  He  does  not  ask  to  be  exempt  from  th« 
experiences  Jesus  submitted  to  pass  through  before  him.  And  he  is  sustained  and 
cheered  to  know  that,  even  in  the  heated  furnace,  there  is  One  with  him  whose  form  is 
as  the  Son  of  God.  Here  is  the  true  remedy  for  human  restlessnesi  and  for  human 
discontent.    What  we  share  with  Christ  we  may  accept  with  submission  and  gratitude. 

III.  The  issue  to  which  trials  abb  to  tend.  We  are  not  left  without  light  upon 
the  future.  As  our  Lord  himself,  even  in  his  humiliation  and  woe,  saw  of  the  travail 
of  his  soul,  and  was  satisfied ;  so  are  his  followers  justified  in  anticipating,  not  merely 
deliverance,  but  exaltation.  The  glory  of  the  triumphant  Redeemer  shaU  be  revealed, 
and  they  who  have  shared  his  cross  shall  then  with  joy  sit  down  with  him  upon  hi* 
throne.— J.  E.  T. 

Vers.  1 — 7. — The  persecuted  Ohristian  reminded  of  the  necestity  of  lajfervng  for 
righteousness.  This  passable  is  the  most  difScult  in  the  entire  Epistle.  We  can  see  a 
meaning  in  each  of  its  sentences  taken  separately,  but  when  we  take  them  together 
their  meaning,  as  a  whole,  is  obscure.  As  far,  however,  as  I  can  understand  it,  I  would 
entitle  the  paragraph.  The  persecuted  Christian  reminded  of  the  necessity  qf  luffering 
far  righteousness.  Peter  here  states  the  fact  that  suffering  for  righteousness  i»  no 
strange  thing,  but  what  Christians  must  reasonably  look  for. 

I.    CHBIST'S   BXTFFEBINa   BIDS   HIS   PEOFLE  BE   BEADT   TO   EITFFEB.       The   SUtferingB   of 

our  Lord  alluded  to  here  are  not  his  substitutionary  sufferings — they  are  referred  to  in 
the  eighteenth  verse;  of  them,  to  the  world's  last  moment,  it  will  be  true,  "I  have 
trodden  the  wine-press  alone,  and  of  the  peo|ile  there  was  none  with  me."  But  there 
is  another  class  of  our  Lord's  sufferings  in  which  his  people  can,  and  according  to  their 
likeness  to  him  must,  share — the  suBeriog  he  bore  in  the  maintenance  of  holiness  in 
an  evil  world ;  of  this  he  could  say,  "  The  disciple  is  not  above  his  Master."  There 
is  sometimes  confusion  in  Christian  minds,  in  finding  that  Christ  is  said  to  suffer  for 
us,  and  yet  that  in  many  places  we  are  called  to  suffer  with  him.  Let  us  be  clear  on 
this  point,  we  are  "  redeemed  by  the  precious  blood  of  Christ ; "  God  requires  nothing 
from  us  for  our  redemption,  but,  when  thus  redeemed,  much  of  Christ's  suffering  becomes 
the  pattern  of  ours ;  and  of  that  he  says,  "  He  that  taketh  not  up  his  cross  and 
cometh  after  me  cannot  be  my  disciple."  1.  Christ's  experience  would  lead  us  to  expect 
that  holiness  must  suffer  on  earth.  For  three  and  thirty  years  he,  the  Embodiment  of 
jierfect  love  to  God  and  man,  lived  and  mov<d  upon  this  earth,  and  what  was  the 
result  ?  He  was  "  despised  and  rejected  of  men  ; "  the  longer  he  lived,  the  more  he 
wrought,  the  wider  he  was  known,  the  wilder  and  louder  and  fiercer  became  the  cry, 
"  Away  with  him  !  Crucify  him  I "  Goodness  condemns  wickedness  when  the  lips 
say  nothing ;  the  very  presence  of  a  good  man  in  an  ungodly  circle  is  a  protest  against 
evil.  On  one  side  at  least  there  will  always  be  enmity  between  the  seed  of  the  serpent 
and  the  seed  of  the  woman ;  and  the  nearer  his  people  approach  conformity  to  their 
Lord's  character,  the  more  may  they  be  sure  of  conformity  to  their  Lord's  death. 
2.  What  Christ's  sufferings  have  made  possible  to  us  should  lead  us  to  he  willing  to 
suffer  for  its  attainment.  Our  Lord's  sufferings  had  no  other  end  than  our  sanctifica- 
tioD,  to  secure  God-likeness  in  us.    How  great  a  boon  must  this  be,  when  it  could  be 


on.  nr.  1—19.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENEEAL  OP  PETER.  191 

porchaBed  at  no  less  a  price  than  what  comes  to  mind,  when  we  speak  of  our  Lord  as 
"  the  Man  of  sorrows,  and  acquainted  with  grief ; "  and  for  which  he  did  not  regard  that 
price  as  too  great  to  pay  1  And  if  we  find,  when  we  try  to  secure  and  maintain  this 
great  blessing,  that  it  can  only  be  done  at  much  cost  to  ourselves,  how  impossible  it  is 
tor  us  to  shrink  from  it,  when  we  remember  the  greater  cost  of  this  to  him !  It  were 
a  solemn  thing  to  refuse  through  cowardice  to  "  fill  up  that  which  is  behind  of  the 
sufferings  of  Christ."  3.  The  claims  of  Ohrist  should  lead  us  to  resolve  to  suffer  if  need 
he  for  him.  Where  Christ's  sacrifice  is  present  to  the  mind,  there  is  no  room  for  self 
left;  the  "I"  in  us  is  destroyed;  the  blood  of  Christ,  when  rightly  apprehended,  not 
only  blots  out  our  sin,  but  also  our  self.  We  come  now  to  the  difScult  part  of  this 
passage,  but  I  think  it  brings  before  us  this  truth — 

II.  The  sufferino  ov  Christ's  people  neoessaeilt  abisbs  feom  three  causes. 
1.  Suffering  through  mortification  of  the  flesh.  It  seems  natural  to  suppose  that  when, 
having  said,  "  Christ  hath  suffered  in  the  flesh,"  the  apostle  goes  on  to  say,  "  For  he 
that  hath  suffered  in  the  flesh  hath  ceased  from  sin,"  he  is  still  referring  to  Christ.  But 
it  cannot  be  so,  for  of  him  "  who  did  no  sin  "  it  cannot  be  said  that  he  hath  "  ceased 
from  sin  ;  "  It  must  refer  to  us.  Yet  how  can  it  be  said  of  them  whom  he  has  called  to 
arm  themselves  with  the  same  suffering  mind  as  Christ,  that  they  have  •'  ceased  from 
sin"?  I  think  we  have  here  a  parallel  to  what  we  read  in  Bom.  vL  6 — 11, "  Knowing  this, 
that  our  old  man  is  crucified  with  hitn,"  etc.  That  contains  a  priceless  truth,  which 
"ve  do  not  half  realize.  It  speaks  of  a  death  in  us,  corresponding  to  our  Lord's  death  ; 
that  this  is  to  be  the  sublime  result  of  his  death^the  death  of  sin  in  his  people ;  and 
it  is  this  which  Peter  here  holds  up  to  us,  "He  that  hath  suffered  in  the  flesh  [hath 
put  to  death  the  flesh],  hath  ceased  from  sin,"  etc.  But  that  destroying  the  flesh  is 
suffering,  to  take  our  natural  desires  and  passions  and  nail  them  to  the  cross  is  cruci- 
fixion^— a  slow,  lingering  death,  which  involves  unutterable  pain  till  it  is  complete.  2. 
Suffering  through  difference  from  the  world.  "  For  the  time  past  may  sufSce  to  have 
wrought  the  desire  of  the  Gentiles,"  etc.  We  have  here  a  true  picture  of  the  pagan 
character,  and  it  is  hardly  possible  for  us  to  imagine  the  contrast  which  was  manifest 
when  such  a  one  became  converted  to  Christ.  Glaring  evils  had  to  be  renounced  at 
once,  lifelong  associations  had  to  be  severed  at  a  blow.  That  was  the  case  here ;  and 
what  was  the  result  ?  They  were  evil  spoken  of,  and  that  is  where  the  suffering  always 
comes  in  when  we  break  with  wrong  associations.  We  shall  be  thought  strange  by 
others,  and  shall  seem  to  be  condemning  them,  assuming  that  we  are  better  than  they. 
And  to  be  misjudged,  misrepresented,  reviled,  is  suffering  ;  hut,  as  Christians,  there  is 
no  help  for  it,  we  must  sever  ourselves  from  what  is  worldly.  3.  Suffering  throfigh 
gpiritwil  discipline.  •'  For  unto  this  end  was  the  gospel  preached  even  to  the  dead," 
etc.  The  word  "  dead  "  here  must  be  taken  to  mean  those  who  are  dead  whilst  they 
live.  But  even  with  that  alteration,  it  is  difficult  to  see  clearly  what  the  verse  means. 
Now  it  is  said  that  the  construction  of  the  Greek  allows  of  the  insertion  of  the  word 
"  although ; "  just  as  in  a  passage  in  Horn.  vi.  17,  which  we  never  read  without  mentally 
inserting  the  word  "  although."  If  that  be  so,  the  meaning  is  evident :  "  For  to  this 
end  was  the  gospel  preached  even  to  them  who  were  dead  in  sins,  that  [although]  they 
might  be  judged,  condemned,  persecuted,  put  to  death  according  to  men  in  the  flesh, 
they  might  live  according  to  God  in  the  spirit."-  Spiritual  life  is  God's  end  with  us, 
let  men  do  with  us  what  they  may.  And  the  spiritual  life  is  often  developed  by  means 
of  what  men  do  to  us.  Every  act  of  persecution  is  to  be  followed  by  a  deeper  peace,  a 
holier  purity,  a  higher  power. 

III.  The  comins  BNn  assists  Christ's  people  to  bbab  surFEniNO  in  a  eight 
SPIRIT.  Looking  at  this  superficially,  some  might  think  this  a  hard  gospel ;  the  folic  vor 
of  Christ  is  to  arm  himself  with  the  ezpectation  of  suffering.  But  look  what  comts 
before,  and  what  follows  after  this.  What  comes  before  ?  "Forasmuch  as  Christ  hath 
suffered  for  us  in  the  flesh."  What  follows  it  ?  "  The  end  of  all  things  is  at  hand." 
This  hard  demand  stands  between  the  cross  and  the  crown  ;  that  makes  all  the  difference. 
1.  The  coming  end  calls  us  to  estimate  reasonably  the  extent  of  the  suffering.  Bead  it 
as  it  is  in  the  Revised  Version.  "  Be  ye  therefore  of  sound  mind."  The  apostle  is  here 
calling  the  persecuted  to  regard  their  sufferings  reasonably,  in  connection  with  the  fact 
that  "  the  end  of  all  things  is  at  hand."  The  earth-trials  of  God's  people  are,  after  all,  but 
th«  momentary  cloud  in  th«  day  of  heavenly  sunshine,  which  shall  have  no  evening,  of 


192  THE  PIBST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PETER,    [ch.  iv.  1—191 

which  now  in  Christ  we  have  the  dawn.  2.  The  coming  tnd  calls  us  to  vigilance  lest 
we  lose  the  coming  ikssing.  That  "  coming  end  "  will  be  the  beginning  of  the  glorified 
liSf — ^that  life  in  which  what  we  have  sown  here  we  shall  reap ;  that  life  in  which  we 
may  have  "  an  entrance  ministered  to  us  abundantly,"  or  in  which  we  may  be  "  saved 
yet  so  as  by  fire."  Beware  lest  under  the  pressure  of  temptation  you  conform  to  the 
world,  you  be  ashamed  of  Jesus,  you  refuse  your  cross,  and  thereby  lose  your  crown. 
Suffering  there  must  be ;  look  to  the  end,  anticipate  the  glory  which  it  begins,  and 
■tgainst  all  that  would  rob  you  of  the  fulness  of  that  glory,  watch  unto  prayer. — C.  N. 

Vers.  8 — 11. — The  persecuted  Christian  reminded  of  the  help  «f  Irotherly  love. 
"  Above  all  things  have  fervent  love  among  yourselves."  You  will  remember  how  this 
expression,  "  above  all  things,"  corresponds  with  other  Scripture.  Paul  saya,  "  Now 
abideth  faith,  hope,  love ;  but  the  greatest  of  these  is  love."  "  Now  the  end  of  the 
commandment  is  love  unfeigned."  James  calls  this  "  the  royal  law ; "  and  our  Lord 
himself  says,  "  By  this  shall  all  men  know  that  ye  are  my  disciples,  if  ye  have  love  one 
to  another."  The  introduction  of  this  theme  in  addressing  the  persecuted  Church  is 
very  natural.  Next  to  the  support  of  the  sympathy  and  help  of  God  in  trial,  is  the  grasp 
of  a  brother's  hand  of  whose  heart  we  are  sure.  Love  sustains  individual  weakness ;  it 
unites  the  Church,  and  makes  it  impregnable  to  the  common  foe.  This  is  one  end  of 
Church-fellowship ;  no  life  can  be  so  strong  as  it  might  that  stands  alone,  or,  even  if  it 
would,  alone  it  can  do  nothing  (as  it  ought)  to  shelter  the  weakness  of  others.  Strength 
comes  with  union,  therefore  let  there  be  union.  But  the  union  is  only  a  name,  Chnrch- 
fellowship  is  only  a  mockery,  and  its  promise  of  strength  a  deception,  unless  it  be  the 
union  and  fellowship  of  sacred  love. 

I.  The  demand  fob  feevbnt  love  dt  the  CHtntOH.  We  sometimes  excuse  our- 
selves for  not  feeling  as  we  should  towards  the  brethren  by  saying  we  cannot  make 
ourselves  love.  But  that  cannot  be  right,  for  our  very  text  lays  on  us  the  responsibility 
of  having  fervent  love,  and  everywhere  it  is  the  subject  of  command.  What,  then,  can 
we  do  to  this  end?  There  are  three  duties  we  can  fulfil  which  tend  to  it.  1.  The 
cultivation  of  what  would  foster  brotherly  love.  Love  of  the  brethren  springs  fiom  love 
to  the  Father.  Natural  love  is  born  in  us,  spiritual  love  is  not.  That  comes  with 
the  new  birth,  and  is  fostered  and  developed  only  by  fellowship  with  God.  Know  God, 
dwell  in  God,  love  God,  and  the  Scripture  says  brotherly  love  will  be  the  result.  Cherish 
love  to  God,  and  we  shall  find  ourselves,  without  setting  out  to  do  it,  loving  those  he  loves 
for  his  sake.  2.  Watchfulness  against  what  would  hinder  brotherly  love.  If  certain  evils 
are  allowed  to  spring  up  in  a  Church,  farewell  to  a  spirit  of  love  then.  One  great 
danger  of  these  evils  is  that  they  are  subtle  and  dwell  mostly  out  of  sight.  The  Church 
as  a  Church,  therefore,  cannot  deal  with  them ;  its  safety  depends  on  its  individual 
members  jealously  watching  their  approach,  and  unsparingly  destroying  them  at  the 
moment  of  contact.  A  disputatious  spirit  is  one  of  these  evils.  Some  minds  are  never 
known  to  agree  with  anything ;  there  is  always  something  to  criticize  adversely  every- 
where. That  spirit  is  contagious,  and  kills  love.  There  is  also  a  jealous  spirit ;  half 
the  troubles  of  Church-life  are  due  to  jealousy,  which  often  has  no  ground  but  that  of 
suspicion.  There  is  a  tale-bearing  spirit.  If  you  see  a  man  or  woman  going  from  ear 
to  ear  with  some  mischief-making  story,  some  gossip  which  tends  to  wound  or  discredit 
another,  suspect  that  person's  own  character,  regard  him  as  an  emissary  of  Satan.  There 
is  also  a  self-assertive  spirit  which  forgets  the  claims  of  others.  We  are  all  terribly  apt 
to  be  overcome  by  that  spirit,  and  love  falls  a  speedy  victim  to  it.  Every  spirit  in  the 
Church  that  is  hostile  to  love  we  must  destroy.  3.  A  refusal  to  be  repulsed  hy  a  lack 
of  love.  An  unloving  Christian  can  only  barm  himself  if  others  refuse  to  be  influenced 
by  him.  There  are  two  ways  of  treating  such — either  as  he  treats  you,  which  makes 
two  wrong-doers  instead  of  one ;  or  to  refuse  to  be  overcome  of  evil,  and  to  overcome 
evil  with  good.  It  is  impossible  that  fervent  love  can  long  widely  exist  in  a 
community,  unless  there  be  a  general  individual  determination,  in  the  strength  of  (Jod, 
first,  not  t«  provoke,  then  if  provoked,  not  to  "  render  evil  for  evil,  .  .  .  but  contrariwise 
blessing." 

n.  "The  mahifbbtation  op  Christian  love.  1.  It  expresses  itself  in  different  way  a. 
Love  speaks  evil  of  no  man,  and  thinketh  no  eviL  Love  is  the  "  advocate  of  the  absent." 
Love  gives;  the  homes  of  the  persecuted  were  but  slenderly  stocked,  they  had  vfUn  to 


m.  IV.  1—19.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  PETER.  198 

endure  the  "  spoiling  of  thoir  goods  ; "  but  there  was  to  be  a  place  at  the  table  and  a 
room  for  the  stranger  who  needed  food  and  rest.  Love  speaks — not  always,  does  not 
obtrude  itself,  but  where  there  is  an  erring  step  or  a  listening  ear,  love  speaks.  2.  It  i» 
reoiprocal.  Each  has  his  own  j^ift,  his  own  power  of  doing  good ;  there  is  not  a  single 
member  of  Christ's  Church  who  is  to  be  receptive  only ;  for  every  gift  each  receives  from 
another  there  is  another  he  can  give.  This  is  the  law,  "By  love  serve  one  another;  " 
"Edifying  one  another  in  love;"  "We  being  many  are  one  body,  and  every  one 
members  one  of  another."  All  receiving,  all  bestowing,  and  doing  both  in  love,  that  is 
God's  ideal  of  the  Church  on  earth.  3.  It  recognizes  that  it  holds  all  as  stewards  for 
Ood.  "  As  good  stewards  of  the  manifold  grace  of  Gh)d."  That  raises  our  thoughts 
from  the  human  to  the  Divine  obligation;  it  calls  us  to  the  duty  of  love  of  the  brethren, 
by  reminding  us  of  the  claims  of  a  higher  love  still.  Sometimes  our  love  to  the  brethren 
is  not  enough  to  constrain  us  to  these  tasks ;  self-love  is  strong  within  us,  and  some- 
times our  effort  may  be  repulsed  and  our  desire  chilled  by  a  cold  response.  It  is 
unspeakably  hard  to  get  over  the  feeling,  if  one  will  not  love  he  shall  not  be  loved. 
But  here  is  the  antidote  to  that — the  apostle  says  we  are  to  exercise  our  gifts  with  a 
view  to  God ;  service  we  could  not  render  to  others  for  their  own  sakes  we  can  render 
for  him. 

III.  The  end  of  Christian  love  is  the  otouiFyiNo  or  God  thbovoh  Jbstjs 
Christ.  The  possession  and  manifestation  of  Christian  love  glorifies  God,  and  in  so 
many  ways.  1.  In  the  manifestation  of  what  most  honours  him  amongst  men.  We 
think  of  1  Cor.  xiii.  as  the  creed  of  the  Church ;  it  is  the  creed  of  the  world,  it  is  what 
the  world  believes  in,  what  the  world  when  it  sees  it  recognizes  as  Divine.  It  cares 
nothing  for  our  doctrines  or  systems ;  what  it  believes  in  is  a  manly,  faithful  loving-kind- 
ness ;  where  that  is  it  feels  the  power  of  God.  2.  In  the  power  with  which  it  supplies 
others  to  glorify  him.  Probably  to  absence  of  love  in  the  Church  is  due,  more  than  to 
anything  else,  the  defections  from  the  Church.  It  is  largely  in  the  power  of  love  to 
make  others  what  they  should  be,  to  draw  them  into  the  Church  if  they  are  not  in,  and 
when  they  are,  the  quick  eye  of  love  should  detect  the  first  signs  of  wandering,  and  the 
gentle  power  of  love  restrain.  The  atmosphere  of  heaven  is  love,  and  when  that  is  the 
atmosphere  of  the  Church,  God  will  be  honoured  in  the  beauty  of  a  piety  which  other- 
wise he  seeks  in  vain.  3.  In  the  opportunity  it  gives  him  of  glorifying  himself.  Discord 
silences  his  voice  and  grieves  his  Spirit,  and  he  needs  to  chasten  us,  and  his  Word 
becomes  vain,  and  our  labour  vain.  Brethren,  "  live  in  peace,  and  the  God  of  love  and 
peace  shall  be  with  you." — 0.  N. 

Vers.  12 — 19. — The  Joyous  aspect  of  suffering  for  Christ  a  help  to  persecuted  Christians. 
The  apostle  is  writing  on  the  eve  of  the  dreadfiil  persecution  of  the  Church  by  Nero, 
which  was  already  beginning  to  be  felt.  The  increased  bitterness  of  those  around 
them,  and  probably  dark  intimations  from  their  teachers  that  the  evil  times  predicted 
by  Christ  were  nigh,  tended  to  awaken  very  gloomy  forebodings  in  the  hearts  of  the 
converts.  No  wonder  if  they  thought  the  trial  strange ;  even  to  us  with  our  larger 
knowledge  it  always  seems  strange  that  the  good  should  suffer,  and  often  so  severely. 
Yet  God  says,  "  Think  it  not  strange,  but  rejoice,"  and  that  word  "  rejoice  "  is  the  key- 
word to  the  passage.    There  are  three  reasons  here  for  this  rejoicing. 

I.  Theee  is  the  joy  of  fellowship  with  Chbist  in  suffekino.  Suffering  for  right- 
eousness brings  us  into  fellowship  with  Christ.  1.  It  is  suffering  for  his  sake.  The 
persecuted  partake  of  Christ's  sufferings.  Some  of  our  Lord's  sufferings  were  peculiarly 
his  own,  and  could  not  be  shared ;  but  we  participate  in  his  sufferings  when  we  suffer 
in  the  interests  of  his  Church,  the  interests  of  righteousness,  for  the  spread  of  his 
kingdom.  Suffering  is  always  suffering,  but  when  we  know  it  is  for  that  for  which  our 
Lord  suffered,  and  on  which  his  heart  is  set,  it  is  suffering  glorified.  2.  It  is  suffering 
hy  his  side.  We  are  never  more  conscious  of  his  presence  and  sympathy  than  in 
suffering  voluntarily  endured  for  his  cause.  None  ever  suffered  for  Christ  wkhowt 
loving  him  more.  3,  It  is  suffering  preparatory  to  his  glory.  Some  of  OKriat^a 
servants  do  not  think  much  of  his  coming  again.  That  may  be  due  to  their  not  havh^f 
fulfilled  the  tasks  he  gave  them.  His  servants  know  when  they  have  really  tried  to 
please  him,  and  he  knows  it  too,  and  this  gives  them  confidence  towards  him,  aaA 
makes  them  eager  for  hip  appearing. 

I.  PETEB.  O 


194  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PETEB.    [oh.  iv.  1 --19. 

n.  There  is  the  jot  of  globiftino  the  Spirit  in  sutfebino.  1.  Be  sure  that 
yours  is  really  Christian  suffering.  "  Let  none  of  you  suffer  as  a  murderer,  or  as  a 
thief,  or  as  a  busybody."  (Strange  company  that,  by  the  way,  for  busybodies !)  Is  it 
not  strange  that  Peter  should  suggest  that  Church-members  might  be  guilty  of  puch 
things?  The  fact  is  that  the  early  Church  contained  many  from  the  criminal  classes, 
and  some  of  them  were  too  easily  admitted  to  fellowship ;  thoir  adhesion  to  Christ  being 
simply  an  endeavour  to  atone  for  a  life  of  misdeeds  while  the  misdeeds  secretly 
remained.  Let  us  see  to  it  that  we  do  not  take  to  ourselves  the  comforts  of  those  who 
suffer  for  Christ's  sake,  when  we  really  suffer  for  our  sins'  sake.  It  is  not  the  suffering 
that  makes  the  martyr,  but  the  cause  of  it.  2.  7/"  ours  le  Christian  suffering,  its 
endurance  glorifies  the  Spirit.  "  If  ye  he  reproached  for  the  name  of  Christ,  the  Spirit 
of  glory  and  of  God  resteth  upon  you."  The  word  "  resteth  "  here  is  the  same  word  our 
Lord  uses  when  he  says, ''  Come  unto  me  and  rest."  On  the  seventh  day  God  rested 
from  his  works,  but  he  also  rested  in  them  :  "  He  saw  all  that  he  had  made,  and  behold 
it  w«s  very  good."  God  in  his  works  was  satisfied.  Bo  the  Spirit  of  God  rests  on  the 
Christian  martyr,  for  he  sees  his  work  there — the  ftuit  of  the  sacred  love  he  has  inspired, 
of  the  sustaining  grace  he  has  imparted ;  and  the  gracious  Spirit  reposes  in  the  glorious 
result  of  his  mission.  3.  Meproach  becomes  our  glory  rather  than  our  shame.  "  If  any 
man  suffer  as  a  Christian,"  etc.  Christian  was  a  name  of  scorn  at  first,  and  Peter  says, 
"  Be  not  ashamed,  glorify  God  in  this  name ;  respond  to  the  reproach  of  earth  by  praise 
to  heaven."  Why  should  we  do  this  ?  Because  in  us  at  that  moment  the  Spirit  of 
God  finds  a  resting-place.  Do  we  not  often  forget  the  claims  that  gracious  Spirit  has 
on  our  service  and  our  love  ?  We  owe  all  that  Christ  is  to  us,  and  all  that  the  Father 
is  to  us,  to  him. 

III.  There  is  the  jot  of  trustino  the  Father.  '•  For  the  time  is  come  that 
judgment  must  begin  at  the  house  of  God :  and  if  it  first  begin  at  us,  what  shall  the  end 
be  of  them  that  obey  not  the  gospel  of  God?  And  if  the  righteous  scarcely  be  saved, 
where  shall  the  ungodly  and  the  sinner  appear?  Wherefore  let  them  that  suffer 
according  to  the  will  of  God  commit  the  keeping  of  their  sonls  to  him  in  well-doing,  as 
unto  a  faithful  Creator."  "  The  time  is  come  that  judgment,"  etc.  We  understand 
these  words  when  we  remember  that  the  Epistle  was  written  before  the  awful  judgment 
which  terminated  in  the  destruction  of  the  ecclesiastical  and  civil  polity  of  the  Jews, 
which  our  Lord  had  foretold  :  "wars,  nnnours  of  wars,  famines,  pestilences,  earth- 
quakes," as  "  the  beginning  of  sorrows ; ''  and  added  to  his  people, "  Then  shall  they 
deliver  you  up  to  be  afflicted,  and  shall  kill  you,  and  ye  shall  be  hated  of  all  men  for 
my  Name's  sake."  "  And  if  the  righteous  scarcely  [with  difficulty]  be  saved,"  etc. 
What  fires  of  discipline,  and  what  deep  waters  of  sorrow,  they  have  to  go  through  to 
enter  the  kingdom  1  If  this  is  what  God's  children  endure,  what  of  those  who  are  not 
his  ?  If  BO  heavy  is  the  hand  of  chastening,  educating  love,  what  will  the  hand  of 
judgment  and  wrath  be  I  Christian,  shrinking  under  the  one,  remember  that  you  are 
delivered  from  the  other.  Trustfully  acquiesce  in  the  endurance  (^  Christian  suffering. 
This  suffering  is  according  to  God's  will,  the  other  is  not,  and  can  only  be  unmingl^ 
curse ;  but  that  of  his  people  in  the  way  of  righteousness  is  his  choice,  he  selects  that, 
presides  over  it,  tempers  it,  and  leads  it  on  to  unmingled  blessing.  Here,  then,  is  a 
fresh  possibility  of  joy  in  suffering  for  Christ — the  joy  of  resting  in  the  will  pf  the 
Father.  Do  we  know  anything  of  suffering  for  righteousness'  sake  ?  Other  sufferings 
we  are  each  familiar  with,  but  have  we  suffered  for  Christ  ?  do  we  live  a  life  of  voluntary 
suffering  for  him  ?  If  not,  I  might  say  we  have  reason  in  that  to  wonder  whether  we 
are  his  followers  at  alL  If  we  are  strangers  to  Christian  suffering,  we  are  strangers  to  the 
deepest  Christian  joy.  Christian  joy  is  a  flower  which  bears  its  fairest  blossoms  only 
when  it  grows  on  the  grave  where  self  lies  buried. — C.  N. 

Vers.  8 — 6. — Living  to  the  will  of  Ood.  We  have  seen  that  the  apostle — the  largo- 
hearted,  sympathetic,  experienced  apostle— is  showing  the  pcattered  Christians  he  \a 
addressing  how  to  fortify  themselves  against  the  persecution  that  in  stormful  violence 
had  fallen  upon  them  here  and  there,  before  and  since  they  became  fugitive?  or  exiles. 
This  is  mrt  of  a  long  paragraph  beginning  at  the  thirteenth  verse  of  the  last  chapter, 
in  which  he  is  teaching  that  amid  such  persecutioQ  a  good  conscience  is  the  only 
charm;    that  whatever  befalls  their  circumstances  or  their  bodily  life,  a  consistent 


0H.IT.1— 1».]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PETER.  195 


character  will  be  as  an  asbestos  robe  mwrapping  their  spirits.  Nothing  can  violate 
the  charm  of  that  good  conscience,  nothing  bum  or  even  singe  the  asbestos  robe  of 
that  true  character.  Remember  his  defiant  inquiry,  "  Who  is  he  that  can  harm  you, 
if  ye  bo  followers  of  that  which  is  good?  "  This  he  has  been  showing  in  many  verses ; 
and  the  possession  of  that  charm,  the  possession  of  that  character  is  the  burden  of  hie 
exhortation  here.    The  key-note  of  this  chapter  is — Live  to  the  will  of  God. 

I.  LrvB  TO  THE  WILL  OP  GoD.  This  is  the  lesson  of  man's  past  evil  life.  St.  Peter 
urges  that  "  the  time  past  may  su£Bce  to  have  wrought  the  desire  of  the  Oentilei." 
What  was  the  desire  of  the  Gentiles  in  time  past  f  What  they  desired  for  themselves 
and  others.  The  life  of  that  century  throughout  the  Roman  empire,  where  these 
scattered  Christians  were,  has  never,  perhaps,  been  equalled  in  the  hideousness  of  Its 
private  and  public  vices.  The  names  of  the  Emperors  Tiberius,  Gaius,  and  Glauciius 
Nero  are  so  many  symbols  of  cruelty,  lust,  and  buffoonery.  The  walls  of  Pompeii,  the 
pages  of  the  poets,  the  annals  of  the  historian,  all  testify  how  voluptuous,  how  debaued, 
how  heinously  immoral,  were  the  desires  of  the  Gentiles.  1.  Lasciviousness ;  outrageous 
debauchery  in  general,  including  all  that  follow — ^wine-swillings,  roysterings,  revels, 
and  the  filthy  festivals  of  idolatry.  So  many  forms — alas  1  scarcely  exaggerated — of 
seliism  provident  in  cultured  and  Christian  England  to-day.  The  apostle  says,  "  The 
time  past  may  su£5ce  to  have  wrought  the  desire  of  the  Gentiles."  There  is  deep 
sadness  in  the  irony  here  about  time  past.  And  yet  there  is  deeper  hope,  for  the  past  is 
past,  and  need  not  return.  2.  Badness.  Enough  tin  1  and  such  sin  as  we  have  been 
gazing  at  I    Enough ;  for  such  time  past — ^hour,  or  day,  or  year,  or  years — was  simply 

(1)  A  time  of  degradation  to  self.  Men  in  such  indulgences  become  coarse,  vulgar, 
low,  bestial.  (2)  A  time  of  imperiousness  to  others.  Such  a  life  was  the  breathing 
out  of  pollution  into  the  social  atmosphere ;  the  opening  up  of  foetid  and  poisonous 
foimtains  that  pour  forth  disease  and  death.  (3)  A  time  of  rehellion.  The  human 
misery  in  scenes  of  riot  and  shame  tell  of  Divine  anger.  Enough ;  let  not  the 
wheels  of  time  bring  back  an  hour  of  such  life  as  that  to  you,  my  brother.  3,  Eope. 
Time  past  may  be  left  behind.  (1)  There  is  forgiveness  for  time  past.  "  Depths  of 
the  sea ; "  not  shallow  river,  not  near  shore,  where  the  tide  may  wash  on  to  the  beach. 

(2)  There  is  ddiveranee  for  time  past.  The  charm  of  evil  can  be  broken ;  the  spell  of 
wrong-doing  can  be  dissolved.  With  all  the  energy  you  have,  get  away  from  that  past 
time.  The  pirate  bears  down  upon  the  vessel  and  captures  her  when  her  sails  are 
down  and  she  ia  making  no  headway.    Oh,  press  on  I    "  Escape  for  thy  life  1 " 

"  Let  the  dead  past  bury  its  dead. 
Act,  act  in  the  living  present — 
Heart  within,  and  God  o'erhead." 

U.   LrVB  TO  THB  WILIi  OF  GoD,  NOTWITHSTANDINO  BAD  MEn'S  WONDKB  AT  GOOD  M1!!N*B 

CONDDOT.  St.  Peter  said,  nearly  two  thousand  years  ago,  what  can  be  truly  said  to-day, 
that  worldly  men,  sinful  men,  sensual  men,  think  it  strange  that  Christian  men  do  not 
run  with  them  into  the  same  excess  of  riot.  Dissimilar  characters  often  find  it  difiicult 
to  understand  each  other ;  the  thoroughly  corrupt  man  seems  to  find  it  impossible  to 
understand  the  Christian.  1.  He  thinks  his  conduct  strange,  and  so  perhaps  he  ignores 
.  him  altogether.  He  does  not  invite  him  to  his  carousals ;  he  does  not  know  him  in 
society ;  stai  less  is  he  on  visiting  or  calling  terms  with  him.  He  is  an  enigma  he 
does  not  care  to  understand.  2.  Or  he  thinks  his  conduct  strange,  and  he  is  aggravated 
by  it.  He  is  contemptuous ;  he  sneers ;  he  tempts.  He  says  about  him,  or  to  him, 
with  curled  lip,  as  he  declines  the  wine-party,  or  gaming-table,  or  clubs  of  voluptuous 
pleasure.  "  Oh,  you  are  '  green ; '  you  are  '  soft ; '  you  are  '  melancholy ; '  you're  not 
'  half  a  man.'"  And  soon  their  irritation  makes  them  scandal-mongers  and  slanderers, 
as  were  the  pagan  scandal-mongers  and  slanderers  of  the  early  Christians.  3.  Or, 
better  far,  he  thinks  his  conduct  strange,  and  it  leads  him  to  inquire.  Wonder  ends  in 
respect,  and  respect  in  admiration,  and  admiration  in  imitation.  Not  a  few  of  the 
men  who  have  been  reclaimed  from  lives  of  silly,  not  to  say  sensual,  self-indulgence, 
began  to  climb  the  higher  path  and  to  breathe  the  purer  air  of  Christian  manhood  because 
they  saw  a  change  come  over  some  old  companion  that  they  at  first  thought  strange, 
but  soon  found  to  be  fascinating  and  ennobling.  Who  of  you  would  not  wish  so  to  live 
that  m«n  should  say,  "  We  will  go  with  you,  for  we  have  *««u  that  God  is  with  you  "  t 


196  THE  FiEST  EPISTLE  GENEEAL  OF  PETER,    [oh.  iv.  1—19. 

m.  Live  to  the  will  of  3od,  fob  both  Chkist's  judgment  and  Christ's 
GOSPEL  ABE  FOR  ALL.  The  point  the  apostle  is  here  pressing  is  that  these  bad  men — 
these  Gentiles  and  pagans  of  that  day,  who  find  their  counterpart  and  succession  in  all 
worldly,  sensual,  selfish  men  of  to-day — will  have  to  give  account  to  him  who  will 
judge  quick  and  dead.  The  last  time  he  mentioned  Christ  it  was  as  having  ascended 
to  the  right  hand  of  God ;  just  before  that,  as  having  suffered  and  died  and  gone  to  ■ 
Hades ;  now,  as  in  the  very  order  in  which  the  Apostles'  Creed  enshrines  the  great 
biography,  he  mentions  him  a&  judging  the  quick  and  the  dead.  All  the  living  and  all 
the  dead  shall  stand  at  that  tribunal.  "  Every  one  of  us  shall  give  account  of  himself 
to  God."  But  if  all  are  to  be  Judged,  all  must  have  the  gospel  preached  to  them ;  or 
the  judgment  would  be  partial,  unjust,  unrighteous.  "  Unto  this  end,"  that  is,  that 
all  may  be  righteously  judged,  all  have  the  gospel  preached  to  them.  The  gates  of 
mercy  are  as  vast  as  the  seat  of  judgment;  the  cross  of  Christ  is  as  stupendous  as  the 
great  white  throne.  Hence  the  good  tidings  had  been  preached  "  to  the  dead." 
"Spirits  in  prison"  were  visited  by  the  Redeemer;  to  the  dead  Christ  goes  with  his 
boundless  gospel  of  righteousness  and  mercy.  The  myriads  in  the  Eoman  empire  in 
Peter's  day  who  died  without  a  single  note  of  the  evangel  falling  on  their  ears — died  in 
gross  corruption  and  bewildering  superstitions  of  heathenism,  are  yet  to  be  met  with 
the  offers  of  mercy,  with  the  provisions  of  the  gospel,  and  with  the  love  of  Jesus  Christ. 
So  that  though  according  to  the  flesh — their  life  on  earth — they  were  judged  by  men, 
and  rightly  judged,  as  evil  and  wicked  men,  they  may,  if  they  will  yet  receive  the 
gospd  preached  to  them,  if  they  will  read  its  blessed  writing  in  the  lurid  light  of  the 
very  flames  of  hell,  yet  be  trophies  of  its  unspeakable  grace,  and  Hve  to  God  in  the 
spiiii.  Their  life  in  the  flesh  was  a  ruin  and  a  wreck,  a  scourge  and  a  curse ; — so  they 
are  judged  according  to  men.  But,  wondrous  ray  of  hope !  their  life  in  the  spirit  may, 
after  the  purgings  of  those  terrific  fires,  and  through  the  influence  of  the  gospel  of  our 
blessed  Lord,  yet  become  a  life  unto  God. 

That  is  the  object  and  only  sufficient  end  of  the  preaching  of  the  good  tidings  of 
Christ  anywhere  and  at  any  time — now  and  here,  or  then  and  yonder.  Has  it  led  us  to 
live  unto  God,  as  the  flower  lives  to  the  sun,  turning  to  it  to  paint  its  petals  and  to  distil 
its  odours  and  to  nourish  its  exquisite  life;  as  the  subject  lives  to  his  sovereign,  in 
unflinching  and  loyal  fidelity ;  as  the  child  lives  unto  his  parent,  in  loving,  watcliful, 
eager  obedience?  Some  men  are  alive  to  pleasure,  or  gain,  or  ambition,  or  friendship, 
and  no  more.    Are  we  alive  unto  God  ? — U.  B.  T. 

Vers.  7,  8. — A  solemn/aet  and  urgent  duty.  "  But  the  end  of  all  things  is  at  hand," 
•tc.  These  words,  which  are  part  of  the  paragraph  that  ends  with  the  eleventh  verse, 
naturally  follow  the  exhortation  on  vers.  3 — 6— an  exhortation  to  pure  living,  and  thii 
because  our  past  life  is  long  enough  for  sin  and  its  vanities ;  notwithstanding  that 
sinful  men  think  your  separation  from  them  in  spirit  and  conduct  strange ;  and  to  pure 
living,  because  Christ's  judgment  and  Christ's  gospel  are  for  aU.  The  exact  point  in 
the  argument  is  this — that  even  to  the  dead  was  the  gospel  preached ;  and  this  is  a 
deep  fathomless  mystery  of  Justice  and  of  grace.  But  however  that  may  be,  you  are  to 
remember  and  to  realise,  that  "  the  end  of  all  things  is  at  hand,"  etc.     Here  we  note — 

L  The  prediction  of  a  solemn  fact.  "  The  end  of  all  things  is  at  hand."  There 
are,  as  every  student  of  the  New  Testament  Epistles  knows,  great  diversities  of  opinion 
as  to  the  aspect  of  the  transitoriness  of  all  things  on  which  Peter  was  now  dwelling, 
and  from  which  he  was  enforcing  great  lessons.  It  is  clear  that  not  only  here,  but  all 
through  his  Epistles,  he  was  deeply  impressed  with  the  transitoriness  of  all  things. 
Glance  back  at  the  first  chapter,  and  on :  Sojourners — "  a  little  while ; "  "  time  of  your 
sojourning;"  "  All  flesh  is  grass,"  etc.  "Sojourners  and  pilgrims  in  the  day  of  visita- 
tion." Peter  seems  to  have  expected  now  a  termination  of  human  history — at  least  an 
approaching  end  of  the  age.  He  was  old  now,  nearly  seventy.  He  came  to  Eorae  on 
the  eve  of  the  conflagration  of  the  city  by  Nero.  He  felt  himself  growing  old — a 
prisoner  hounded  on  to  the  death  of  martyrdom  like  the  Master  who  preceded  him ; 
and,  getting  to  the  end  of  all  things,  discerns  in  the  corruptions  of  the  Eoman  empire 
indications  of  ruin — "the  end  of  all  things."  He  discerns,  too,  the  end  of  Judaism,  of 
ceremonial,  of  institutions ;  germs  perishing ;  and  the  scattering  of  Christians ;  the 
end  of  aU  thuigs  to  the  Chinch — personally,  in  the  empire,  in  cty stems.    Whether  "  th« 


OH.  IT.  1—19.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  PETER.  197 

end  "  be  "  tte  end  of  the  -world  "  or  "  the  end  of  the  age,"  that  is  approaching,  so  far 
as  we  and  all  with  whom  we  daily  have  to  do  are  concerned,  "  the  end  of  all  things 
is  at  hand."  In  our  persons,  homes,  institutions,  in  the  world  itself,  are  elements  of 
decay,  indications  of  transitoriness.  Yesterday,  honours,  old  age,  are  carried  to  the 
grare ;  to-morrow,  youth  and  hope — one  shadow  on  all  households ;  one  and  another  and 
another  join  the  majority.  "  Seeing  then  that  all  these  things  shall  be  dissolved,  what 
manner  of  persons  ought  ye  to  be  in  all  holy  conversation  and  godliness  ?" 

II.  The  consequent  call  to  the  hiohest  personal  and  social  duty.  The 
thought  of  the  termination  of  our  connection  with  all  things  produces  different  impres- 
sions on  different  minds.  Epicureans  both  ancient  and  modern,  as  represented  by 
Athens  and  England,  have  said,  " Let  us  eat  and  drink ;  for  to-morrow  we  die  1 "  "A 
short  life,  and  a  merry  one,"  is  the  maxim  some  formulate  from  their  impression  of  all 
things  passing  away.  Wiser,  deeper.  Heaven-taught  natures  draw  an  altogether  other 
lesson.  Here  it  is :  1.  Personal,  "  Be  of  sound  mind  and  sober,"  etc. — an  echo 
(especially  as  the  old  version  puts  it)  of  what  Peter  had  heard  from  his  Lord  on  the 
last  evening  of  his  life,  and  in  discourses  in  which  he  portrays  the  great  days  of 
judgment.  A  memory  which  saddened  him ;  for  he  had  not  watched  "  one  hour  " 
which  he  would  give  worlds  to  have  back.  The  bitter  experience  of  his  fall  had 
taught  him  his  deepest  need.  "  Sound  mind ; "  not  volatile  and  fickle,  and  perhaps 
impulsive  and  fanatic.  "  Sober"  Another  word  than  that  which  clears  gluttony  and 
drunkenness  from  the  experiences  of  the  Christian  life ;  all  temperance,  all  self-control, 
free  from  the  intoxication  of  all  inordinate  excitement,  whether  the  cause  be  alcohcd 
or  gold,  appetite  or  ambition.  "  Unto  prayer."  This  is  the  point  to  be  touched,  the 
focus  through  which  life  shall  pass — ^the  concert-pitch  note  of  prayerfulness.  Prayer  is 
both  a  means  and  an  end.  Here  it  is  an  end.  Such  nearness  to  Heaven  is  the  secret 
of  confidence  in  and  submission  to  God.  2.  Soeidl.  "  Above  all  things."  This  is  all- 
comprehending  and  crowning  social  duty.  Love  alone — all  alone.  John,  Paul,  Peter, 
James.  (1)  the  character  ^  love.  Fervent  or  ardent.  The  cordial  grasp  of  the  hand  ; 
the  tried  and  steady  gaze  of  the  eye ;  the  eager  step  of  the  foot.  Unservile,  unre- 
mitting ;  to  mix  and  mingle  with  men  whose  vices  jar,  tastes  annoy,  cannot  watch, 
nor  yet  love.  (2)  The  effect  of  love.  "  Covereth."  Some  thought  the  text  "justifi- 
cation by  love,"  covers  a  man's  own  sin — atones  for  it.  No  such  teaching ;  though 
"  forgive  as  we  forgive  "  shows  that  the  condition  of  enjoying  forgiveness  is  a  true  test 
of  forgiveness — covers  the  sins  of  others.  (1)  Overlooks ;  (2)  puts  best  interpretation 
upon ;  (3)  forgives ;  (4)  prevails  by  not  provoking,  not  differing ; — a  better,  truer  spirit. 
As  you  have  seen  ivy  covering  twisted  gnarled  oak,  defaced  and  scarred  rains,  so  let 
love  be  ever  green,  covering  the  multitude  of  sins  that  defame  and  deface  and  scar 
human  nature  on  every  side  of  you. — ^U.  B.  T. 

Vers.  9 — ^11. — Christian  love  as  a  service.  "Using  hospitality  one  to  another," 
etc.  Here  the  apostle  describes  Christian  love  as  a  service.  For  as  the  word  variously 
translated  "minister"  and  "deacon"  denotes  a  servant,  so  the  word  "  ministereth  "  here 
really  conveys  the  simple  thought  of  service — a  thought  which  veins  the  beautiful 
marble  of  these  two  verses.     This  service  is — 

I.  Univebsal  in  its  obligation.  "  As  each  hath  received  a  gift."  That  includes 
all,  for  all  are  gifted  by  God  with  some  endowment  or  other.  The  man  who  has  received 
no  gift  from  God  would  be  one  not  only  without  possession  or  influence,  but  without 
life ;  he  is  as  nothing,  and  he  is  nowhere  to  be  found.  We  have  seen  all  through 
the  Epistle  some  of  Peter's  memories  of  his  Lord's  teaching.  Is  there  not  here  a  recol- 
lection of  the  parable  of  the  talents  ?  In  its  light  every  gifted  man  is  "  a  steward  " 
(ver.  10). 

II.  Manifold  vs  its  method.  All  serve,  but  all  serve  in  differeat  ways  The 
service  of  love  is  not  a  dreary  monotone,  but  the  richest  music ;  it  embraces  the  full 
diapason  of  duty.  It  is  "the  manifold  grace  of  God."  Some  of  the  notes  are  here. 
"  Using  hospitality."  This  is  specially  applicable  to  those  to  whom  the  Epistle  was  first 
written,  i.e.  "  strangers  of  the  dispersion."  It  was,  indeed,  almost  the  earliest  form  of 
Christian  charity.  Peter  finds  it  in  Simon  the  tanner,  Paul  in  Gains,  etc.  It  is  incumr 
Imt  on  men  now  in  the  midst  of  the  yawning  social  distinctions,  and  of  the  ceaseless 
travel  «f  te-da/.    H«a  is  •»  «oh*  «f  tbe  teaching  of  the  apo«ile'» Lard,  "I  was  a 


lOd  THK  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PETER.    [o«.  it.  1— Iflt 

stranger,  and  y«  took  me  in."  "  Withont  murmuring ; "  i.t.  without  grumWng.  Three 
watch-dog3  keep  the  door  of  the  inhospitable  man :  temper,  vuspioion,  reproach.  "  If 
any  man  epeaketh."  Just  as  the  hands  pnt  on  the  table  viands  for  the  body,  the  lips 
are  to  Spread  a  banquet  for  the  intellect  and  the  heart.  How  ?  "  As  it  were  oracles 
of  God."  That  must  mean  with  reality,  with  purity,  with  tenderness.  "  If  any  man 
ministereth."  This  comprehends  every  form  of  service.  It  is  a  widening  of  the  other 
two  just  mentioned.  "  As  of  the  strength  which  God  supplies."  That  implies  that  the 
service  will  be  rendered  (1)  humbly, — no  pride,  for  he  is  a  channel  only,  not  a  fountain ; 
(2)  freely, — no  stint,  or  grudging,  when  God  is  the  Source. 

III.  One  nt  pubposb.  "That  in  all  things  God  may  be  glorified."  Hospitality, 
teaching,  almsgiving,  all  are  to  be  for  the  glory  of  God.  "  Through  Jesus  Christ."  Had 
it  not  been  for  Jesus  Christ,  that  kindness,  activity,  wisdom,  liberality,  would  not  have 
been.  He  awakened  all.  He  is  the  Head  from  whom  the  life  of  love  flows.  "  Whose 
is  the  glory  and  dominion,  for  ever  and  ever.  Amen."  This  is  not  a  note  of  conclusion, 
but  of  strong  emotion.  Reason,  gratitude,  love,  all  utter  their  deep  "  amen  "  to  the 
declaration  that  God  through  Christ  has  endless  glory  and  dominion. — tj.  R.  T. 

Vers.  12 — 14. — 2%e  Chrisiian'i  fiery  trial.  "Behold,  think  it  not  strange  concern- 
ing," etc.  Some  have  thought  Peter  is  alluding  to  the  burning  of  Rome,  but  both 
because  the  conception  of  suffering  generally  as  fire  is  very  common  in  the  Old  Testa- 
ment Scripture,  with  which  Peter  shows  himself  familiar,  and  also  because  he  is  writing 
to  Christians,  upon  whom  through  all  parts  of  the  Asiatic  provinces  of  Rome  the 
cruelties  of  Nero's  persecution  were  being  in  many  ways  wreaked,  we  conclude  that 
"the  fiery  trial"  is  a  wider  and  more  scathing  and  more  enduring  conflagration 
than  that  which  destroyed  the  imperial  city.  So  the  lessons  here  are  of  wide  appli- 
cation.   They  cover  the  whole  scope  of  Christian  suffering. 

I.  The  Christian  must  not  beckon  his  surFESiNOs  as  stbanoe.  Tenderly,  with 
the  word  "  beloved,"  Peter  bids  Christian  sufferers  not  to  feel  themselves  bewildered 
as  men  in  a  strange  country.  Do  not  let  suffering  shock  you.  Do  not  fear  as  you  enter 
into  the  cloud.  Why  not  ?  Because :  1.  The  sorrows  the  Christian  shares  in  common 
with  the  world  generally  are  not  strange.  His  religion  will  not  exempt  him  from  bodily 
pain,  business  calamities,  social  bereavement,  physical  death.  2.  The  sorrows  that 
Christians  endure  in  persecution  because  they  are  Christians  are  not  strange.  Persecu- 
tion is  not  to  be  wondered  at.  It  is  (1)  an  instinct  of  evil  men ;  (2)  in  harmony  with 
all  history.  The  flippant  dislike  the  real,  the  unclean  are  angry  with  the  pure,  the 
votaries  of  error  are  irritated  with  the  teachers  of  truth,  the  wicked  hate  the  good ; 
hence  the  pains  and  penalties  of  persecution  are  not  strange.  3.  T%e  sorrows  that 
are  the  direct  result  of  Christian  spirit  and  character  are  not  strange.  (1)  Grief  for 
sin  and  imperfection ;  (2)  compassion  for  the  miserable ;  (3)  self-sacrificing  sympathy 
for  the  vicious  and  wretched.  No.  Trial  is  not  "  strange ; "  for :  (1)  It  meets  the 
necessities  of  Christian  character.  "  It  cometh  upon  you  to  prove  you."  (2)  It  is 
in  fulfilment  of  the  Treated  declarations  of  Cod's  Word.  (3)  It  is  in  harmony 
with  all  the  biographies  of  good  men.  The  device  on  the  Church's  shield  is  the  bush 
that  burns  and  yet  is  not  consumed. 

II.  The  Christian  mat  find  in  his  sobbows  a  cause  fob  pnoFouNn  jot.  To 
^eter,  as  well  as  his  beloved  brother  Paul,  the  vast  region  of  sorrow  was  not  unknown 
«r  unexplored ;  they  did  not  feel  "  strange  "  in  it,  as  bewildered  men  in  a  foreign  country. 
They  had  descried  fight  on  its  hill-tops,  drunk  of  streams  in  its  deserts,  plucked  flowers 
in  its  solitudes,  eaten  manna  in  its  wastes.  How  was  this?  They  were  "partakers  of 
Christ's  sufferings."  Some  of  our  Lord's  sorrows  are  infinite  secrets.  Some  can  bo 
known  and  shared.  Such  as :  1.  Agonizing  sensitiveness  to  sin.  His  sigh,  tear,  groan, 
we  may  know  in  our  experience.  2.  Sacrificial  compassion  for  sinners.  3.  Sternly 
self'denying  loyalty  to  duty.  In  all  these  we  may,  we  must  as  Christians,  be  partakers 
of  Christ's  sufferings.  "At  the  revelation  of  his  glory."  These  words  speak  of 
un8()eakable  future  joy.  To  rejoice  in  the  revelation  of  his  glory,  which  will  be  the 
triumph  of  pity,  of  purity,  of  the  mission  to  bless  others,  we  must  be  partakers  of 
hii  sufferings.  Blessed  now  with  reproach  for  his  sake,  we  shall,  by  growing  resem- 
blamoe  to  him  and  gracious  reward  from  him,  be  blessed  then.  "  The  Spirit  of  glory 
and  of  CM  testeth  on  you."     This  token  of  the  Divine  presence  not  simply  indi- 


«H.  XV.  1—19.]    THE  FIEST  EPISTLE  GBNEBAL  OF  PETER.  199 

catei  the  continuance  of  God  with  yoil,  but  the  latiafacUon  of  God  In  yoti.  Hi» 
■pirit  "  resteth "  upon  you.  The  teaching  is :  (1)  God  is  near  thofle  "who  are  par- 
takers of  Obrist'B  Bu£fering8.  The  Spirit  of  God  is  with  them.  (2)  Gbd  is  near 
them  to  glortfy  them,  and  himself  to  refoica  in  them.  "  The  Spirit  of  glory  retteth." 
The  music  of  the  Beatitudes  is  ringing  through  Peter's  soul,  and  he  flings  out  thei; 
consoling,  inspiriting  tones  to  all  who  were  or  ever  shall  be  in  the  "fiery  trial" 
through  which  all  Christians  pass.  "Blessed  are  th^  that  are  persecuted  for  righteous- 
ness' sake :  for  theirs  is  the  kingdom  of  heaven." — ^U.  B.  T. 

Vers.  16 — 19.-~8tiffering,  thameful  and  glorioui,  "  For  let  none  of  you  suffer  as 
a  murderer,"  etc.  The  apostle  is  still  dwelling  on  the  "  flery  trial."  All  trial  to  the 
Christian  is  a  fire  that  (1)  gives  great  pain;  (2)  destroys  evU;  (3)  purifies  the  good. 
Notice— 

I.  SuFrEBINa  FOB  WBONO-DOINQ  IS  OEBTAIir  AKO  IB  BHAMEFTTI..      "  Let  none  of  yoU 

sufier  as  a  marderer,"  etc.  This  is  strange  counsel  to  Christians.  That  it  is  thus  given 
to  them  :  1.  Beminds  us  of  the  classes  from  which  the  first  converts  were  drawn.  No 
doubt  many  were  not  only  from  the  poorest,  but  from  criminal,  classes.  Hence  the 
apostle's  reminder  after  he  has  described  some  of  the  basest  of  characters,  "  Such  wer* 
some  of  you,"  2,  Suggests  to  us  to  he  on  our  guard  against  sins  to  which  be/ore  we 
hecame  Christians  we  were  addicted.  The  old  taint  is  a  periL  Perhaps  few  now  need 
fear  being  "  murderers  "  or  "  malefactors,"  but  many  may  be  on  their  guard  against 
being  "  meddlers."  "  Lay  aside  the  sin  that  so  easily  besets."  "  Tbem  that  obey  not  the 
gospel."  Here  is  another  class  whose  sufferings  will  bring  shame.  The  climax  of  judg- 
ment is  for  them.  Who  can  tell  what  their  "  end"  will  ba  ?  "  The  house  of  God"  is 
under  his  control,  and  all  in  it  must  suffer  for  their  wrong-doing.  Those  who  know  the 
claims  of  the  gospel,  the  possibilities  it  offers,  and  yet  despise  it  and  reject  it,  "  do  not 
obey  it^"  must  have  even  severer  suffering  than  Christians  who  have  blundered  into 
error  or  been  overborne  by  evil,  for  thsy  at  least  have  (1)  resignaikn ;  (2)  hope  of  better 
life ;  (3)  conscious  fellowship  with  a  forgiving  Ood. 

II.  SuFFEBmO  FOB  BIOHT-DOINQ  MAT  BBFALL  08,  BUT  WILL  BE  A  80UBOB  OF  GLOBT. 

This  Peter  noted  in  earlier  paragraphs,  and  reverts  to  again.  "  Suffer  as  a  Christian," 
that  is,  because  he  is  a  Chi^istian.  The  very  name  was  at  first  one  of  scorn.  And  the 
name  of  scorn  has  become  a  name  that  glorifies  God.  So  with  all  the  sufferings  that 
the  character  of  those  who  truly  wear  that  name  has  ever  brought  upon  them.  Are 
they  the  sufferings  of  (1)  poverty,  (2)  unpopularity,  (3)  contempt,  (4)  persecution  t 
They  are  sufferings  none  need  be  ashamed  oi^  but  in  which  they  may,  as  the  noblest 
of  men  have  done,  glorify  God. 

III.  SUFFEBINO  FOB  EWHT-DOINO  MUST  BE  ENDDBBD  IN  THE  BIOHT  BFIBIT.       The 

words  of  the  nineteenth  verse,  the  final  words  about  "  the  fiery  trial,"  are  addressed  to 
those  who  suffer  because  they  are  Christians.  1.  They  "  suffer  according  to  the  will 
of  God."  (1)  Because  he  wills  it ;  (2)  along  the  course  of  his  wise  providence.  2.  In 
such  Bufferings  they  are  to  "  commit  their  souls,  in  well-doing  unto  a  faithful  Creator." 
Here  is  the  obligation  of :  (1)  Trust.  "  Commit ; "  deposit  the  treasure.  (2)  DuUful- 
ness.  "  In  weU-doing ; "  keep  on  doing  the  right.  (8)  Trust  in  and  dutifiilnesB 
towards  God.  "Faithful  Creator."  He  knows— he  cares:  he  wiU  be  faithful  to  his 
creation,  and  emphatically  to  the  trustful  ones.  He  who  gave  the  soul  its  existence, 
and  knows  its  capacities  and  needs,  is  its  loving  Guardian. — U.  R.  T. 

Vers.  1 — 6.-^Coming  to  judgment.  I.  The  example  op  Chbibv  oaebibs  with  it 
THE  EESOLUTION  TO  8UFFBB.  "  Forasmuch  then  as  Christ  suffered  in  the  flesh,  arm  ye 
yourselves  also  with  the  same  mind."  Peter  goes  back  to  the  starting-point,  that  from 
it,  with  practical  instruction,  he  may  go  beyond  the  present  session  of  Christ  at  the 
right  hand  of  God,  viz.  to  his  coming  to  judgment.  He  does  not  say,  "  put  to  death 
in  the  flesh,"  but  more  generally,  to  suit  the  condition  of  those  whom  he  was  address- 
ing, "  suffered  in  the  flesh."  When  it  is  said  that  he  suffered,  we  are  to  understand 
that  he  did  not  avoid,  but  bravely  faced,  whatever  suffering  came  to  him  in  the  way 
of  righteousness.  He  armed  himself  with  the  resolution  to  suffer ;  and  thus  he  was 
prepared  for  it  when  it  came.  Let  us  also  arm  ourselves  with  the  same  mind.  Let  us 
not,  in  the  way  of  evil  compliance,  avoid  suffering.    Let  us  be  resolved  bravely  to  fact 


200  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PETER,    [oh.  nr.  1—19. 

whatever  ordeal  our  God  appoints;  thus  also  shall  we  be  prepared  for  it  when  it 
comes.  When  it  is  said  that  Christ  suffered  in  the  flesh,  there  may  be,  in  the  line  of 
a  former  thought,  a  luok  beyond  his  past  condition  to  his  present  condition.  He  is  no 
longer  in  the  flesh  to  suffer ;  so  shall  it  soon  be  with  us,  that  we  are  no  longer  in  the 
flesh  to  suffer. 

n.  The  bbsolution  to  surrBB  oaeribs  with  it  a  break  with  sin.  "For  ha 
that  hath  suffered  in  the  flesh  hath  ceased  from  sin  ;  that  ye  no  longer  should  live  the 
rest  of  your  time  in  the  flesh  to  the  lusts  of  men,  but  to  the  will  of  God."  It  is  better 
to  carry  the  third  person  through  the  whole,  the  second  part  being  simply  a  further 
definition  of  the  first.  It  is  wrong  also  not  to  brinz  out  the  past  tense,  "he  that 
suffered,"  just  as  it  was  said  "  Christ  suffered."  It  is,  however,  introducing  a  foreign 
thought  to  suppose  the  meaning  to  be  that,  when  Christ  suffered,  the  person  thought 
of  suffered.  The  person  to  be  thought  of  is  one  to  whom  at  a  previous  stage  and  a 
critical  sti^e  in  his  history  there  was  givea  the  choice  of  suffering  or  not  suffering. 
When  he  resolved  to  suffer,  he  very  distinctly  broke  with  sin.  He  said  that  he  would 
rather  suffer  than  sin.  He  looked  forward  to  the  rest  of  his  time  in  the  flesh,  and  said 
that  the  rule  of  his  life  would  no  longer  be  the  lusts  of  men  (a  rule  variaV^e  and  with- 
out authority),  but  the  vjHI  cf  Ood  (a  rule  invariable  and  having  the  highest  autho- 
rity). The  "no  longer"  of  sin  along  with  "the  time  past  of  suffering"  is  to  be 
explained  by  the  fact  that  suffering  commenced  with  conversion  to  Christianity. 

III.  The  break  with  sin  is  not  to  bb  regretted.  "  For  the  time  past  may 
suffice  to  have  wrought  the  desire  of  the  Gentiles,  and  to  have  walked  in  lascivious- 
ness,  lusts,  wine-bibbings,  reveUings,  carousings,  and  abominable  idolatries."  The  life 
according  to  "  the  desire  of  the  Gentiles  "  is  particularly  described.  It  was  a  life  in 
ixcesses,  especially  of  impurity.  It  was  a  life  in  lusts,  especially  fleshly.  It  was  a 
Ufe  in  mne-swillings.  It  was  a  life  in  night-hanquetings,  after  which  the  custom  was 
to  sally  out  into  tlie  streets  "wakening  the  echoes  with  song  and  dance  and  noisy 
frolic."  It  was  a  life  in  drinking-bouts.  It  was  a  life  in  idolatries  that  violated  what 
wai  tacred  (associated  with  many  abominations).  Peter's  ie»d«i8  were  of  Gentile 
extraction ;  for  it  is  said  that  in  time  past  they  had  wrought  the  desire  of  the  Gentiles, 
and  walked  in  the  things  mentioned.  He  adroitly  founds  on  their  experience,  saying 
less  than  the  reality  in  order  to  suggest  the  more.  "The  past  may  suffice;  there  is  a 
figure  in  that,  meaning  much  more  than  the  words  express.  It  is  enough  I  oh,  too 
much,  to  have  so  long,  so  miserable  a  life "  (Leighton).  We  are  reminded  of  Paul's 
way  of  dealing  with  the  Roman  Christians,  "  For  when  ye  were  the  servants  of  sin, 
ye  were  free  from  righteousness.  What  fruit  had  ye  then  in  those  things,  whereof  ye 
•re  now  ashamed  ?  for  the  end  of  those  things  is  death." 

rV.  The  new  abb  a  puzzle  and  an  offence  to  the  old.  "  Wherein  they  think 
it  strange  that  ye  run  not  with  them  into  the  same  excess  of  riot,  speaking  evU  of 
you."  The  heathen  are  represented  as  rushing  over  the  barriers  that  stand  in  the  way 
of  vicious  indulgeufe ;  and  they  are  astonished  to  find  their  former  companions  not 
rushing  with  them  to  the  same  goal.  They  are  puzzled  to  understand  the  new  prin- 
ciples from  which  they  act,  the  complete  revolution  that  has  taken  place  in  their  ways 
of  thinking  and  acting.  And  they  are  more  than  puzzled ;  they  are  offended.  They 
take  it  as  an  affront  that  their  company  should  not  be  thought  good  enough,  and  so 
they  t^peak  evU  of  them. 

V.  Account  is  to  be  given  to  Christ  as  Judqe.  "  Who  shall  give  account  to 
him  that  is  ready  to  judge  the  quick  and  the  dead."  Was  it  right  for  the  Christians 
to  withdraw  ?  was  it  wrong  for  the  heathen  to  resent  their  withdrawal  ?  Yes ;  it  would 
be  as  decided  by  Christ,  to  whom  these  evil-speakers  would  give  account.  Thus 
does  the  apostle  return  to  his  line  of  thought.  So  far  irom  being  crushed  by  death, 
Christ  is  to  be  gloriously  active  in  the  future  on  earth  again.  He  is  here  represented 
as  ready  to  judge  the  quick  and  the  dead.  He  is  to  judge  all  without  exception.  He 
is  ready  to  judge,  as  invested  with  all  the  authority  and  power  that  are  necessary  for 
judgment.  At  tbis  moment,  if  the  materials  for  judgment  were  complete,  he  could 
descend  ftom  heaven  to  hold  the  great  assize. 

VL  'Connection  with  judgment  op  the  formerly  mentioned  preaching  to  the 
DEAD.  "  For  unto  this  end  was  the  gospel  preached  even  to  the  dead,  that  they  might 
be  jadged  according  to  men  in  the  flash,  but  live  according  to  QoA  in  the  spirit." 


OH.  IT.  1—19.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PETER.  201 

"Dead"  is  general;  but  we  are  not  to  think  of  all  the  dead.  The  word  is  properly 
limited  by  the  connected  language.  The  time  is  to  be  observed — the  gospel  wat 
preached  to  the  dead.  And  we  are  only  to  think  of  the  dead  with  whom  the  language 
can  be  associated,  that  they  had  been/Mrfjred  according  to  men  in  the  flesh.  The  refer- 
ence seems  to  be  simply  to  the  antediluvianB,  They  had  been  overtaken,  not  by  death 
in  the  ordinary  way ;  but,  in  the  interests  of  humanity,  it  had  been  considered  neces- 
sary that  they  should  be  swept  from  the  face  of  the  earth.  This  Judgment  according 
to  man  was  not  one  with  the  final  Judgment  on  them.  To  them,  after  they  had  been 
judged  thus  on  earth,  in  Hades  the  gospel  was  preached.  The  aim  seems  to  be  so 
stated  as  to  throw  the  judging  before  the  preaching.  The  expression  of  the  aim  as 
life  in  the  spirit  is  very  startling.  This  is  far  from  being  plain  to  us ;  and  we  have 
not  the  links  that  would  enable  us  to  connect  it  with  judgment.  We  can  only  aj^ly 
to  Peter's  own  writings  the  words  he  applies  to  Paul's, "  In  which  are  some  things 
hard  to  be  understood." — R.  P. 

Vers.  7 — 11. — Duty  in  view  of  the  nearness  of  the  end.  I.  Nearness  op  the  bnd. 
"  But  the  end  of  all  things  is  at  hand."  It  is  presupposed  that  all  things  are  to  come 
to  an  end,  i.e.  the  Divine  purpose  in  all  things  is  to  be  brought  forward  to  its  com- 
pletion. What  gives  this  solemn  significance  to  us,  is  that  there  is  to  be,  in  view  of 
probation,  a  final  relating  of  us  to  the  purpose.  How  shall  we  stand  related  to  the 
completion  of  all  things?  Stress  is  laid  here  on  the  time  of  the  end.  It  is  not 
revealed  when  definitely  it  is  to  be — whether  it  is  to  he  to-day  or  a  thousand  years 
henceL  In  judging  of  the  language  employed,  it  is  to  be  borne  in  mind  that  with  the 
Lord  "  a  thousand  years  are  as  one  day."  Allowance  is  to  be  made  for  the  great  vivid- 
ness of  the  language.  The  early  Christians,  taking  some  words  of  revelation  too 
literally,  thought  the  end  of  all  things  was  to  be  in  their  day.  We  go  to  the  opposite 
extreme,  and  put  it  far  off.  It  is  intended  that  the  Church,  in  all  times,  should  have 
a  vivid  realization  of  the  end. 

IL  DuTT  IN  VIEW  OF  THE  NBAKNE8B  OF  THE  END.  1.  Personal  duty.  (I)  Calmness. 
"  Be  ye  therefore  of  sound  mind,  and  be  sober."  The  two  verbs  are  to  the  same  purport. 
The  first  points  rather  to  governing  considerations ;  the  second  points  rather  to  the 
effect  of  governing  considerations.  Because  the  end  is  near,  we  are  not  to  be  imaginative, 
extravagant,  unbalanced.  We  are  to  be  free  even  from  the  intoxication  of  the  coming 
glory  ;  not  driven  to  idleness,  but  bringing  ordinary  prudence  to  bear  on  our  daily  duties ; 
not  taking  ova  pleasure,  but  rather  being  the  more  exacting  on  ourselves.  (2)  Calmness 
vmto  prayer.  "  Unto  prayer."  A  calm  mind  is  needed  for  prayer ;  prayer,  again,  reacts 
on  the  mind  in  making  it  calm.  By  prayer  we  quietly  refer  the  determination  of  the 
future  and  of  the  end  to  God.  The  force  of  the  plural  seems  to  be  that  we  are  to  connect 
prayer  with  every  event  as  it  transpires ;  thus  shall  we  be  prepared  for  the  last  event. 
2.  Selative  duty.  (1)  Ministering  love  in  its  intensity.  "  Above  all  things  being 
fervent  in  your  love  among  yourselves ;  for  love  covereth  a  multitude  of  sins."  It  is 
presupposed  that  we  are  to  have  love  among  ourselves;  the  essential  thing  is  that  this 
love  is  to  have  its  proper  intensity  or  warmth.  Soon  the  end  is  to  be  upon  us ;  why 
should  there  be  any  coldness  or  disagreements  ?  The  apostle  does  not  enjoin  without 
presenting  sufBcient  reason.  He  goes  back,  as  is  his  manner,  on  Old  Testament 
language.  "Hatred  stirreth  up  strifes:  but  love  covereth  all  sins"  (Prov.  x.  12).  It 
is  the  latter  clause  that  is  made  use  of  here,  with  the  substitution  of  "  a  multitude 
of  sins"  for  "all  sins."  It  is  not  difficult  to  catch  the  meaning.  Where  there  is 
rancour  or  coldness  there  are  constant  occasions  of  variance ;  where  there  is  good 
feeling  there  is  a  passing  by  faults  in  the  spirit  of  forgiveness.  For  the  removal  of 
faults  connected  with  brotherly  intercourse,  the  Church  must  depend  on  the  fervency 
of  love.  (2)  Ministering  love  in  its  manifestations.  Hospitality.  "  Using  hospitality 
one  to  another  without  murmuring."  It  is  taken  for  granted  that  we  are  hospitable. 
There  was  greater  opportunity  when  Christians  had  sometimes  to  leave  their  homes, 
to  lose  their  employment,  on  account  of  their  religion.  Stress  is  laid  here  on  the  quality 
of  this  form  of  ministration.  Let  it  be  without  murmuring,  i.e.  at  the  trouble  and 
expense  caused  by  the  hospitality.  There  is  a  hint  here,  which  is  not  unneeded.  Oui 
religion  requires  that  we  should  give  out  of  our  means  for  its  support  and  extenlion. 
When  we  thus  give  out  of  our  means,  in  loyalty  to  our  convictions,  let  us  not  spoil  the 


202  THE  FIEST  EPISTLE  CfSlNERAL  OF  PBTEB.    [oh.  it.  1—19, 

giving  by  murmwring.  Exercise  of  gifts.  Bute  for  their  easerciit.  ''  According  as  each 
hatli  received  a  gift,  miniBtering  it  among  yotirselyes,  as  good  stewards  of  the  manifold 
grace  of  God."  All  that  God  graciously  bestows  on  the  Church  is  here  called  grace  • 
partictdar  manifestations  are  graces  (the  words  being  connected).  The  grace  Of  Goa 
(suttming  up  the  particular  manifestations,  and  implying  their  homogeneity^  is  mani- 
fold, i.e.  the  gifts  graciously  bestowed  on  members  of  the  Church  are  very  varied.  Bach 
hath  received  a  gift,  i.e.  one  or  more.  According  to  the  kind  of  gift  which  each  hath 
received  we  are  to  minister  it.  We  are  not  to  allow  it  to  be  unused ;  and  the  rule  for 
its  ministration  is  that  we  are  to  Use  it  for  the  good  of  the  Christian  community.  This 
proceeds  on  our  being  not  absolute  owners,  but  stewards  of  the  gift.  As  God  has  bestowed 
the  gift,  he  has  the  right  to  determine  the  use  to  which  it  is  to  be  put;  and  he  intends 
it  for  the  service,  not  of  the  individual  (which  Would  be  division),  but  of  the  sooirty 
(which  preserves  unity).  What,  then,  we  have  to  aim  at  is  to  be  good  stewards,  t>.  to 
have  the  excellence  of  stewardship — fidelity  to  our  trust.  Let  us  see  that  we  faithfully 
carry  out  the  intention  with  which  the  gift  was  bestowed  on  us.  Application  of  the 
rule  to  sptaking.  "  If  any  man  speakcth,  speaking  as  it  were  oracles  of  God."  It 
is  a  complaint  brought  against  Christian  teachers  that  we  assume  too  much.  We 
assume  the  existence  of  God ;  we  assume  that  the  Bible  has  come  from  God,  We  do 
not  argae  about  these  things  in  the  pulpit.  We  have  warrant  for  taking  this  course. 
We  proceed  on  the  principle  here  laid  down  by  the  Apostle  Peter.  In  speaking,  we 
■peak  as  it  were  the  oracles  of  God,  i.e.  as  uttering  the  Divine  thoughts,  as  giving 
forth  the  truths  presented  to  us  in  God's  book.  And  it  is  preaching  that  answers  to 
this  description — is  an  effective  uttering  of  the  Divine  thoughts,  opening  of  the  meaning 
of  Scripture,  that  is  fitted  to  produce  the  best  results.  Application  of  the  rule  to  doing. 
"  If  any  man  ministereth,  ministering  as  of  the  strength  which  God  supplieth."  We 
are  not  to  think  merely  of  official  ministering.  There  is  a'  ministering  oflicial  and 
unofficial  to  the  young,  to  the  poor,  to  the  sick,  to  the  ignorant,  to  the  erring.  The 
1  ule  for  this  ministering  is  here  laid  down.  Whatever  service  we  render  to  the  congre- 
gation, or  to  any  section  of  those  who  need  to  be  cared  for,  we  are  to  do  it,  not  as  out 
of  our  own  store  of  strength,  but  out  of  the  strength  which  God  supplieth.  It  is  by 
attention  to  this  rule  (difficult,  for  self  will  come  in,  even  when  we  profess  to  be 
unselfish)  that  Christian  service  is  to  be  purified  and  elevated.  Let  us  seek,  even  in 
our  ordinary  services,  to  be  filled  with  the  thought  of  God  supplying  the  strength. 
End  contemplated  in  the  rule.  "  That  in  all  things  God  may  be  Verified  through  Jesus 
Christ,  whose  is  the  glory  and  the  dominion  for  ever  and  ever.  Amen."  The  speaking 
and  the  acting  are  both  regulated  so  that,  in  all  things  embraced  under  these,  God  is 
to  be  glorified,  and  not  we  the  speakers  and  actors.  It  is  God's  thoughts  we  utter,  not 
our  own;  and  so  God  has  the  glory  for  these.  It  is  God's  strength  that  we  employ  in 
service ;  and  so  it  is  to  him  that  we  ascribe  the  enabling  power.  It  is  only  through 
Christ's  agency  that  we  can  either  speak  or  act  j  and  so  when  we  glorify  God,  it  is 
through  him.  The  glory  and  the  power  we  ascribe  to  God  to  the  ages  of  ages.  To 
this  ascription  let  us  add  our  hearty  "  Amen." — R.  P. 

Vers.  12 — 19. — Fiery  trial  among  the  Christian*.  I.  Happikbss  connected  with 
THE  FIERY  TRIAL.  1.  The  fiery  trial  not  a  perplexity.  "  Beloved,  think  it  not 
strange  concerning  the  fiery  trial  among  you,  which  cometh  upon  you  to  prove  you,  as 
though  a  strange  thing  happened  unto  you."  With  an  afi'ectiouate  address  the  subject 
is  appropriately  introduced.  There  was  a  fierce  trial  not  coming  on  them,  as  the  old 
trans' ation  bears,  but  already  in  the  midst  of  them,  as  the  revised  translation  bears. 
The  word  used  ("  fieriness  ")  expresses  the  sharpness  of  the  persecution  to  which  they 
were  subjected.  They  were  mercilessly  attacked  in  their  dearest  earthly  interests.  We 
do  not  knuw  the  details  of  the  persecution ;  but  it  was  a  reality  as  of  fire  carried  into  the 
midst  of  the  Christians,  laying  hold  upon  one  here  and  upon  another  there,  and  dis- 
tressing the  whole  circle.  By  severe  suffering  there  has  often  been  suggestion  of  the 
way  of  the  Divine  dealing.  'ITie  apostle  here  supposes  that  they  might  be  inclined  to 
think  it  strange  that  they  had  the  fire  of  persecution  in  the  midst  of  the  loved  circle. 
The  word  expressive  of  the  feeling  of  strangeness  was  formerly  used  with  regard  to  the 
miraculous  change  of  life  introduced  by  Christianity,  former  companions  thought  it 
(trange  that  they  did  not  continue  to  overleap  the  bounds  with  them.    Now,  th«  ajp- 


OH.nr.  1— 19,]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PETER.  203 


powtiQo  IS  of  them  that  did  not  overleap  the  bounds,  but  put  on  restraints,  thinking 
It  strange  that  the  fire  should  be  allowed  to  come  among  them.  How  did  this  consis, 
with  their  Christian  standing,  character,  destiny?  Were  they  not  the  objects  of 
covenant  love  ?  Were  they  not  sincerely  striving  to  honour  the  Divine  ordinances  ? 
Were  tfaey  not  looking  forward  to  a  glorious,  blood-bought  inheritance  ?  Why,  then, 
was  the  fire  working  its  work  among  them  ?  It  was  justified,  Peter  points  out,  by  its 
probationary  use.  It  was  upon  them,  and  not  yet  fully  spent,  not  to  pain  them  simply 
(which  would  be  inconsistent  with  covenant  love),  but  by  its  very  painfulness  to  prove 
them,  ».«.  to  bring  out  their  sincerity,  and  also  their  greater  excellence,  and  therewith 
their  deliverance  from  remaining  impurity.  The  fire  makes  us  feel  the  reality  of  life. 
It  tends  to  make  us  thoughtful,  earnest,  humble.  There  is  a  knowledge  of  God,  of 
Divine  things,  of  the  Divine  promises,  which  enters  only  by  the  door  of  suffering. 
"  Knowledge  through  suffering  entereth."  It  is  as  sufferers  that  we  obtain  the  richest 
experience,  even  of  the  tenderness  of  God,  and  that  our  love  in  its  greatest  tenderness 
is  drawn  out  towards  him.  Let  us  not,  then,  think  the  fire  strange,  even  as  though  a 
strange  thing  were  happening  unto  us.  It  is  not  strange  when  it  works  toward  such 
an  end.  And  we  may  trust  the  All-wise  God  to  proportion  the  intensity  of  the  fire  to 
what  our  spiritual  requirements  are.  2.  Tlie  fiery  trial  a  rejoicing.  <•  But  insomuch 
as  ye  are  partakers  of  Ohrist's  sufferings,  rejoice ;  that  at  the  revelation  of  his  glory  also 
ye  may  rejoice  with  exceeding  joy."  The  apostle  rises  here  to  jubilation.  Not  merely 
is  the  fiery  trial  not  a  reason  for  bewilderment ;  it  is  even  a  reason  for  rejoicing.  We 
are  to  rejoice  In  that  we  are  partners  with  Christ ;  we  are  to  rejoice  in  that  we  are 
partners  with  Christ  even  in  his  sufferings,  i.e.  those  which  he  personally  endured  on 
earth.  He  endured  the  sharpness  of  persecution,  ending  in  "  the  sharpness  of  death ; " 
and  what  made  his  death  so  difficult  to  endure  was  not  the  fire  of  persecution,  but  the 
penal  fire  of  God.  There  was  a  solitariness  in  Ohrist's  sufferings ;  and  yet  our  sufferings 
pan  be  joined  to  his  sufferings,  and  it  is  an  honour  to  have  them  so  joined.  We  are  to 
look  even  at  the  degree  or  measure  in  which  our  sufferings  can  be  placed  along  with 
Christ's  sufferings.  For  there  is  the  quantitative  word  used — meaning  "  in  proportion 
as."  There  is  thus  exegetical  value  in  the  remark  of  Leigh  ton,  "  What  does  the  world, 
by  its  hatred  and  persecutions  and  railings  for  Christ,  but  make  me  more  like  him, 
giva  me  a  greater  share  with  him  in  that  which  he  did  so  willingly  undergo  for  me  ?  " 
The  persecuting  world  thus  in  a  way  defeats  itself;  it  makes  the  Christian  suffer,  but 
only  to  add  to  his  joy  in  making  him  a  greater  sharer  with  Christ  in  what  he  suffered. 
"  Bejoice,"  then,  is  the  word  of  command  to  the  persecuted ;  but  now  the  end  of  the 
present  rejoicing  is  seized  on.  "  Rejoice ;  that  at  the  revelation  of  his  glory  also  ye 
may  rejoice  with  exceeding  joy."  There  is  a  present  rejoicing ;  there  is  also  a  future 
rejoicing ;  and  the  one  is  with  a  view  to  the  other.  Both,  it  seems  to  be  implied  here, 
and  is  certainly  elsewhere  taught,  go  upon  pa/rtnership,  and  in  this  order-^first 
partners  with  Christ  in  his  sufferings,  and  then  partners  with  Christ  in  his  glory.  The 
future  rejoicing  is  to  be  at  the  revelation  of  Christ's  glory.  There  is  a  glory  of  Christ 
which  is  at  present  concealed — concealed  from  the  world.  There  is  even  a  glory  of 
Christ  which  is  not  yet  possessed — the  glory  expressive  of  the  final  vindication  of  his 
mission,  the  final  triumph  of  his  cause.  Then  he  is  to  get  glory  from  the  saints ;  but 
then,  also,  he  is  to  be  in  a  position  to  bless  his  saints,  without  any  hindrance,  according 
to  his  heart's  desire,  according  also  to  the  thought  of  the  Father  from  all  eternity ;  and 
he  is  to  bless  them  by  making  them  partners  with  him  in  his  glory.  Their  very  bodies 
raiaed  are  to  take  after  his  glorified  body :  how  can  it,  then,  be  aught  but  Christ's  glory 
that  it  to  shine  forth  in  their  spirits?  The  word  for  the  present  is  "rejoice,"  but  at 
the  revelation  of  Christ's  glory  it  is  to  be  rejoicing  with  exceeding  joy,  rejoicing  beyond 
the  measure  of  the  present,  rejoicing  far  beyond  our  present  power  of  conception.  Now 
it  is  rejoicing  in  the  midst  of  persecutions ;  then  it  will  be  rejoicing  when  the  persecutions 
are  all  over  for  ever  and  sublimated,  and  the  glorious  realities  are  in  actual  possession. 
IL  The  CONDITION  OF  HAPPINESS  EMPHASIZED.  1.  Being  reproached  for  the  Name 
of  Ghrist.  "  If  ye  are  reproached  for  the  Name  of  Christ,  blessed  are  ye ;  because  the 
Spirit  of  glory  and  the  Spirit  of  God  resteth  upon  you."  The  condition  which  has 
been  implied  is  now  expressed.  There  are  reproachful  words,  and  there  are  reproach- 
ful acts.  To  be  reproached /or  the  Name  of  Christ  is  to  be  interpreted  iu  the  Ught  ol' 
«ur  Lord's  own  wwds,  "  In  my  Name,  because  ye  belong  to  Christ.''    We  we  aot,  then, 


204  THE   FIRST  EPISTLE  GENEEAL  OF  PETER,    [ch.  iv.  1— la 

to  unclerstand  the  Beatitude  as  connected  with  what  Christians  suffer  in  the  ordinary 
eourse  of  providence,  but  with  suffering  that  they  could  avoid  but  do  not  avoid  because 
the  Name  of  Christ  does  not  permit  it.  Blessed  are  they  who  are  not  intimidated,  who 
are  willingly  reproached,  when  it  is  demanded  by  Christian  principle,  nay,  by  loyalty  to 
him  who  has  been  manifested  as  their  Saviour,  and  entitled  to  be'  served  before  and  above 
every  other.  Blessed  are  they,  because  the  spirit  resting  upon  them  is  not  the  reproach- 
avoiding  spirit  of  the  world,  but  the  Spirit  of  glory,  who  is  also  the  Spirit  of  God. 
When  Paul  prays  for  the  Bphesian  Christians  that  they  may  have  a  worthy  conception 
of  the  future  glory,  he  calls  God  "  the  Father  of  glory  "  (Eph.  i.  17) ;  so  here  Peter  says 
that  there  rests  upon  the  reproached  for  the  Name  of  Christ  the  Spirit  of  glory,  i.e. 
whose  nature  is  glory,  and  who,  according  to  his  nature,  imparts  glory.  Granted  that 
tliey  do  not  by  worldly  compliance  avoid  reproach :  have  they  not  infinite  compensa- 
tion in  what  the  possessed  Spirit  of  glory  will  yet  make  to  shine  forth  in  them  ? 

2.  The  condition  in  what  it  exdudea,  "  For  let  none  of  you  suffer  as  a  murderer,  or 
a  thief,  or  an  evil-doer,  or  as  a  meddler  in  other  men's  matters."  "  For  "  is  explanatory. 
Let  the  characterization  of  the  condition  be  noted ;  for  there  is  a  suffering  with  which 
the  Beatitude  is  not  connected.  "  Let  none  of  you  [Peter  is  here  directly  personal]  suffer 
for  his  own  faults."  "  Let  none  of  you  suffer  as  a  murderer,  or  a  thief,  or  [generally] 
an  evil-doer."  By  the  second  "  as  "  a  fourth  class  is  marked  off  by  itself.  "  Let  none 
of  you  suffer  as  a  meddler  in  other  me/iCs  matters ; "  literally,  "  a  bishop  or  overseer 
within  what  belongs  to  another."  The  word,  which  may  have  been  of  Peter's  own 
coining,  is  sufficiently  expressive.  The  Christian,  with  his  superior  knowledge,  saw 
many  things  around  him  which  needed  to  be  rectified.  Let  him  not  thereby  be 
betrayed  into  stepping  beyond  his  proper  sphere.  Thus  meddling,  he  was  not  to  be 
classed  with  the  evil-doer ;  but  for  his  interference  he  might  suffer  heavily  enough. 

3.  The  condition  further  elucidated.  "  But  if  a  man  suffer  as  a  Christian,  let  him  not 
be  ashamed ;  but  let  him  glorify  God  in  this  name."  This  verse  is  remarkable  for  the 
introduction  of  a  name  which  occurs  in  only  two  other  places  in  the  New  Testament. 
At  first  the  followers  of  Christ  were  confounded  with  the  Jews;  when  the  distinction 
could  be  made,  they  were  very  naturally  named  Christians.  This  was  the  name 
current  when  Peter  wrote.  It  was  a  name  which  exposed  its  bearer  to  suffering.  But 
if  he  suffered  in  this  name,  let  him  not  consider  himself  disgraced.  He  was  disgraced 
if  he  suffered  as  a  murderer,  or  as  a  thief,  or  as  an  evil-doer,  or  even  as  a  meddler ;  but 
not  if  he  suffered  as  a  Christian.  On  the  contrary,  says  Peter,  "  let  him  glorify  God  in 
this  name."  He  might  have  said,  "  Let  him  consider  himself  honoured,"  but,  going 
beyond  that,  his  thought  is,  "  Let  him  render  the  honour  of  such  suffering  to  God." 

IIL  U»HAPPiKES8  CONNBOTBD  WITH  DisoBEDiENOB.  1.  The  order  of  Judgment. 
"  For  the  time  is  come'  for  judgment  to  begin  at  the  house  of  God :  and  if  it  begin  first 
at  us,  what  shall  be  the  end  of  them  that  obey  not  the  gospel  of  God  ?  "  This  follows 
up  not  being  ashamed,  but  glorifying  God.  There  is  to  be,  in  accordance  with  ver.  7, 
which  is  not  yet  lost  sight  of,  a  speedy  rectification  of  things.  There  is  the  actual 
arrival  of  the  time  for  judgment  to  begin.  With  this  there  is  a  passing  on  to  the  order 
of  judgment.  The  object  of  judgment  is  first  the  house  of  Ood,  i.e.  believers  collectively. 
The  language  is  taken  from  the  temple  at  Jerusalem,  which  was  probably  still  standing. 
The  objects  of  judgment  are  next — they  that  obey  not  the  gospd  of  Ood.  We  are  not 
to  think  of  those  with  whom  the  gospel  has  not  been  brought  into  contact.  We  are 
rather  to  think  of  men  refusing  the  gospel  when  presented  to  them.  We  are  especially 
to  think  of  men  showing  active  hostility  to  the  gospel  as  persecutors.  The  gospel  is 
here  called  "  the  gospel  of  God,"  not  as  coming  from  the  heart  of  God,  but  rather  as  that 
with  which  God  has  to  do  in  judgment  in  respect  of  the  treatment  it  receives.  There 
is  Judgment  upon  the  house  of  God.  We  are  not  to  think  of  condemnatory  judgment, 
but  rather  of  the  corrective  judgment  referred  to  in  1  Cor.  xi.  32,  "  But  when  we  are 
judged,  we  are  chastened  of  the  Lord,  that  we  should  not  be  condemned  with  the 
world."  The  judgment  was  to  be  regarded  as  taking  place  in  the  persecutions  to  which 
they  were  subjected  as  belonging  to  the  house  of  God.  These  were  fitted  to  remind 
them  of  their  sins,  their  shortcomings.  Because  they  were  not  pure  enough,  the  fiery 
trial  was  sent  upon  them  to  act  as  a  refiner's  fire,  separating  the  unworthy,  and  also 
from  the  genuine  all  unworthy  elements.  There  is  also  to  he  Judgment  upon  them  that 
ube.y  R«<  (Ac  gospd  of  God.    This  ia  of  the  nature  of  cwndemnatory  judgment.    There 


OH.IV.  1— 19.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PETER.  205 

IS  to  be  final  judicial  dealing  with  them  for  their  ungodly  deeds,  for  their  hard  speeches. 
There  is  especially  to  be  final  judicial  dealing  with  them  for  the  treatment  they  have 
given  the  gospel,  the  preachers  of  the  gospel,  the  Christian  communities,  the  Christian 
members.  Stress  is  laid  on  the  order  of  the  judgment.  The  starting-point  is  noted. 
It  begins  at,  or  from,  the  house  of  God.  The  language  is  used  in  Ezek.  ix.  6,  "  Begin 
at  my  sanctuary."  Upon  this  an  argument  is  founded.  It  is  similar  to  what  is  found 
in  Jer.  xxv.  29,  "For,  lo,  I  begin  to  bring  evil  on  the  city  which  is  called  by  my 
Name,  and  should  ye  be  utterly  unpunished  ?  "  The  argument  has  a  consolatory  side  to 
them  that  belong  to  the  house  of  God.  " If  it  begin  Jvrst  at  us,"  says  Peter,  referiing 
to  himself  and  the  persecuted  to  whom  he  wrote.  It  was  only  to  begin ^rsi  at  them; 
it  was  not  to  stay  with  them.  It  was  to  pass  on  to  them  that  obeyed  not  the  gospel  of 
God — and  how  ?  We  may  understand,  with  increasing  severity ;  for  the  question  is 
ominously  asked,  "What  shall  be  the  end  of  them  that  obey  not  the  gospel  of  God?" 
They  experienced  the  beginnings  of  the  storm :  what  would  be  their  experience  upon 
whom  the  storm,  gathering  volume  as  it  proceeded,  at  last  burst  in  all  its  fury?  2. 
Old  Testament  reference.  "  And  if  the  righteous  is  scarcely  saved,  where  shall  the 
ungodly  and  sinner  appear?"  The  reference  is  to  Prov.  xi.  31,  "  Behold  the  righteous 
shall  be  recompensed  in  the  earth:  much  more  the  wicked  and  the  sinner."  The 
language  is  properly  from  the  imperfect  Septuagint  rendering.  The  singular  indivi- 
dualizes. The  righteous  is  he  who  stands  in  a  right  relation  to  God.  The  New 
Testament  bearing  is  he  who  stands  in  right  relation  to  God  in  view  of  the  revelation 
made  in  the  gospel.  The  Old  Testament  equivalent  to  "  obeying  not  the  gospel  of  God," 
is  "  the  ungodly  and  sinner,"  i.e.  he  who  has  not  the  fear  of  God  on  him,  and  therefor* 
acts  presumptuously.  It  is  said  of  the  righteous  that  he  is  scarcely  saved.  Two  m«n 
have  a  task  assigned  to  them — climbing  a  hill;  the  task  to  be  accomplished  in  a  given 
time.  It  would  require  of  both  all  their  might  to  reach  the  top  in  the  given  time. 
One  sets  himself  to  it,  and  when  the  time  expires  he  has  scarcely  reached  the  top. 
What  ii  to  be  said  of  the  other,  who  all  the  time  has  gone  after  his  own  pleasure  ? 
God  has  assigned  to  all,  as  he  has  a  right  to  assign,  a  task ;  this  task  is  the  salvation 
of  the  soul.  To  accomplish  it  in  the  time  appointed  requires  working  with  all  the 
might.  Here  is  one  who  sets  himself  to  the  task.  He  works  while  it  is  day ;  and 
when  the  night  of  death  comes  down  on  him  the  task  is  scarcely  accomplished,  theie 
is  still  purification  that  needs  to  be  done.  It  is  not  said  of  him  that  he  shall  not 
appear  before  God  in  the  issue  of  judgment ;  rather  may  we  understand  that  he  shall 
appear,  though  there  may  be  withheld  from  him  the  highest  reward  in  the  presence 
of  God.  Here  is  another  who  misjudges  life,  who  spends  the  day  of  grace  in  idleness 
and  pleasure,  who  has  not  fear  for  the  God  who  is  to  judge  him,  who  throws  off 
restraints.  This  ungodly  man  and  sinner,  where  shall  he  appear  ?_  The  question  is 
ominously  left  unanswered;  but  we  may  take  the  answer  as  given  in  the  first  psalm, 
"  The  ungodly  are  not  so :  but  are  like  the  chaff  which  the  wind  driveth  away.  There- 
fore the  ungodly  shall  not  stand  in  the  judgment,  nor  sinners  in  the  congregation  of 
the  righteous.  For  the  Lord  knoweth  the  way  of  the  righteous :  but  the  way  of  the 
ungodly  shall  perish." 

IV.  Conclusion  bhowino  how  they  wbbk  to  do  undbb  ths  fibet  tkial. 
"  Wherefore  let  them  aJso  that  suffer  according  to  the  will  of  God  commit  their  souls 
in  well-doing  unto  a  faithful  Creator."  "  Also  "  is  to  be  connected  with  "  wherefore," 
and  is  to  be  taken  as  indicating  something  additional  in  the  way  of  conclusion.  By 
the  will  of  God  we  are  to  understand,  not  so  much  the  Divine  appointment,  as  the 
Divine  requirement.  It  is  the  wiU  of  God  that  we  should  suffer  even  as  confessors  and 
martyrs  rather  than  deny  Christ.  Let  them  that  thus  suffer  according  to  the  will  of 
God  follow  this  course.  Let  them  commit  their  souls  to  God.  Thus  it  was  with  him 
who  pre-eminently  suffered  according  to  the  will  of  God.  In  dying  he  said,  "Father, 
into  thy  hands  I  commend  my  spirit."  Let  them  commit  their  souls  in  well-doing  unt» 
a  faithful  Creator.  There  can  be  a  falling  back,  not  only  on  Fatherhood,  but  even  on 
Creatorship.  In  creating  us  he  constituted  us  so  that  in  a  course  of  well-doing  we 
should  be  happy.  Let  us  do  well,  and  we  may  be  assured  that  God  will  be  faithful  t« 
his  part  of  the  covenant.  "All  the  days  of  my  appointed  time  will  I  wait,  till  my 
change  come.  Thou  shalt  call,  and  I  will  answer  thee;  thou  wilt  have  a  dttirt  to  the 
uwk  iff  thine  htmds  "  (Job  sir.  li,  15>— R.  V 


acM 


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PETER,     [oh.  t.  1— 14» 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  V. 


Ver.  1. — The  elders  wMch  are  among  yo^ 
I  e^ort.  The  YatioAii  and  Alexandrine 
Manuscripts  omit  the  article,  and  insert 
"  therefore  "  (the  Sinaitio  gives  both),  read- 
ing, "  Elders,  therefore,  among  you  I  ex- 
hort" The  solemn  thoughts  of  the  last 
chapter,  the  coming  judgment,  the  approach 
of  persecution,  the  u^ceseity  of  perseverance 
in  well-doing,  suggest  the  exhortation; 
henoe  the  "  therefore,"  The  context  shows 
tiiat  the  apostle  is  using  the  word  '*  elder" 
(Trpitrpirfpos,  preabyter)  in  its  official  sense, 
though  its  original  meaning  was  also  in  his 
thoughts,  as  appears  by  Ter.  5,  We  flrst  meet 
with  the  word  in  the  Old  Testament  (Exod. 
iii.  16,  18;  xxiv.  9;  Numb.  xi.  16;  Josh.  xx. 
4,  etc.).  Used  originally  with  reference  to 
age,  it  soon  became  a  designation  of  office. 
Very  early  in  the  history  of  the  Christian 
Church  we  meet  with  the  same  title.  It 
occurs  first  in  Acts  xi,  30.  The  Christians 
of  Antioph  make  a  collection  for  the  poor 
saints  at  Jerusalem,  and  send  their  alms  by 
the  hand  of  Barnab>iS  and  Saul  to  the  elders 
of  the  Jerusalem  Church.  We  read  several 
times  of  these  elders  in  Acts  zy.,  as  asso- 
ciated with  the  apostles  in  the  consideration 
of  the  great  question  of  the  circumcision  of 
Gentile  Christians ;  they  joined  with  St. 
James  in  the  official  reception  of  St.  Paul  at 
his  last  visit  to  Jerusalem  (Acts  xxi  18).  It 
appears,  then,  that  the  Christian  presby- 
terate  originated  in  the  mother  Church  of 
Jerusalem.  It  was  soon  introduced  into  the 
daughter  Gburches ;  the  apostles  Paul  and 
Barnabas  ordained  elders  in  every  Church 
during  the  first  missionary  journey  (Acts 
xiy,  83) ;  and  the  various  notices  scattered 
over  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles  and  the 
Epistles  imply  the  early  establishment  of 
the  office  throughout  the  Church.  Who  am 
also  an  elder  (S  irvimpeafivT^pos).  St.  Peter, 
though  holding  the  very  highest  rank  in  the 
Church  as  an  apostle  of  Christ,  one  of  those 
who  were  to  sit  on  twelve  thrones  judgipg 
the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel  (IVTatt,  xix,  28), 
claims  no  supremacy ;  he  simply  designates 
himself  as  a  brother  presbyter.  So  also  St, 
John  (2  John  1 ;  3  John  1).  He  exhorts  the 
presbyters  as  a  brother,  and  grounds  his 
exhortation  on  community  of  office.  The 
absence  of  any  note  of  distinction  between 
bishops  and  presbyters  is,  so  far,  an  indica- 
tion of  the  early  date  of  this  Epistle,  as 
against  Hilgenfeld  and  others.  And  a  wit- 
ness of  the  sufferings  of  Ohrist.  This  was 
his  Qne  distinction  above  those  whom  he 
addresses.  Like  St.  John,  be  declared  unto 
them  that  which  he  had  heard,  which  he 


had  seen  with  his  eyes.  He  hstd  seen  the 
Lord  bound  and  delivered  into  the  hands  of 
wicked  men ;  probably  he  had  watched  his 
last  sufferings  among  them  which  stood  afar 
off.  And  also  a  partaker  of  the  glory  that 
shall  be  revealed.  The  thought  of  the 
sufferings  of  Christ  leads  on  to  the  tliought 
of  the  future  glory  (comp.  ch.  i,  11 ;  iv.  13). 
Perhaps  St.  Peter  was  also  thinking  of  the 
Lord's  promise  to  himself,  "  Whither  I  go, 
thou  canst  not  follow  me  now;  but  thorn 
Shalt  follow  me  afterwards  "  (John  xiii.  36). 
Ver.  2. — Feed  the  flock  of  God  which  is 
among  you ;  rather,  tend,  as  a  shepherd  tends 
his  flock.  The  verb  (Troifuti'aTe)  is  aorist,  as 
if  St.  Peter  wished  to  concentrate  into  one 
point  of  view  all  the  labours  of  the  minis- 
terial life.  He  is  echoing  the  word  so 
solemnly  addressed  to  himself  by  the  risen 
Lord,  "  Peed  my  sheep  (jro^/taii'e  t4  irpiJ. 
j8aTi£  /jLov)."  The  word  covers  all  the  various 
duties  of  the  pastoral  office :  "  Pasce  mente, 
pasce  ore,  pasce  opere,  pasce  animi  oratione, 
verbi  exbortatione,  exempli  eihibitione"  (St. 
Bernard,  quoted  by  Alford).  St  Peter  lays 
stress  upon  the  solemn  fact  that  the  flock  be- 
longs to  God,  not  to  the  shepherds  (comp.  Acts 
XX.  28).  Some  understand  the  words  ren- 
dered "  which  is  among  you  (ri  iy  fi/iiv)  "  as 
meaning  "  quantum  in  vobis  est,"  "  as  far 
as  lies  in  your  power."  Others  as  "that 
which  is  committed  to  you,"  or  "  that  which 
is  placed  under  your  care."  But  the  simple 
local  meaning  seems  the  best.  Taking  the 
oversight  thereof.  This  word  QiriaKcyTroVmes) 
is  not  fuund  in  the  Sinaitio  and  Vatican 
Manuscripts.  Alford  thinks  that  "it  has, 
perhaps,  been  removed  for  ecclesiastical  ■ 
reasons,  for  fear  vpea^pirepot  should  be  sup- 
posed to  be,  as  they  really  were,  iiria-Koiroi." 
It  is  in  the  Alexandrine  and  most  other 
ancient  manuscripts  and  versions,  and  there 
seems  to  be  no  sufficient  reason  for  omitting 
it.  It  shows  that  when  this  Epistle  was 
written,  the  words  irpetrfiiTepos  and  eivl- 
(THoiros,  presbyter  and  bishop,  were  still 
synonymous  (comp.  Acts  xx.  17  and  28 
in  tlieGreek ;  also  Titus  i.  5  and  7).  Not  by 
eonstraint,  but  wUUngly,  The  word  wpy- 
KKiTTm,  by  constraint,  occurs  only  here,  St. 
Paul  says  (1  Cor,  ix.  16),  "  Necessity  is  laid 
upon  me ; "  but  that  was  an  inward  neces- 
sity, the  constraining  love  of  Christ.  Bede, 
quoted  by  Alford,  says,  "  Coacte  pascit  gre- 
gem,  qui  propter  rerum  temporalium  penu- 
rium  non  habens  undo  vivat,  idolrco  prsedicat 
evangelium  ut  de  evangelic  vlvere  possit," 
Some  good  manuscripts  add,  after  "will- 
ingly," the  words  learit  Be6v, '  according  to 
God,"  I.e.  according  to  hie  will  (comp. 
Bom.  viii.  27>     JJ^t  tot  filthy  Ixiot*.    The 


CH.T.  1— 14.]     THE  PIEST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  PETER. 


201 


adverb  {m^xpoxtpSSis')  occurs  only  here  (for 
the  thought,  comp.  1  Tim.  iii.  8  ;  Titua  i.  7). 
It  would  seem  that,  even  in  the  apostolic  age, 
there  wore  sometimes  such  opportunities  of 
gain  (see  Titus  i.  11 ;  2  Tim.  iii.  6)  as  to  be 
a  temptation  to  enter  the  ministry  for  the 
sake  of  money.  St.  Peter  uses  a  strong  word 
in  condemnation  of  such  a  motive.  But  of 
a  ready  mind.  This  adverb  (irpofliJ/ias)  occurs 
nowhere  else  in  the  New  Testament ;  it  has 
a  stronger  moaning  than  the  preceding  word 
eKovffias,  willingly;  it  implies  zeal  and 
enthusiasm. 

Ver.  3. — Keither  as  being  lords  over  God's 
heritage ;  rather,  as  in  the  Eevised  Version, 
neither  as  lording  it  over  the  charge  allotted 
tt)  you.  The  Kard  in  the  verb  KaTaKvpuiw  is 
not  only  intensive,  it  implies  something  of 
siorn  and  tyranny  or  even  of  hostility,  as 
aldo  in  KaraSwao-Tetiu  (Jas.  ii.  6) ;  comp. 
Matt.  XX.  25.  The  literal  rendering  of  the 
clause  is,  "  lording  it  over  the  lots."  The 
Authorized  "Version,  following  Beza,  sup- 
plies ToS  0eoS,  "God's  heritage."  But  if 
this  were  the  apostle's  meaning,  he  would 
surely  have  used  the  singular,  icXrjpos,  "  the 
lot  or  portion  of  God ; "  and  it  is  very  un- 
likely that  he  would  have  left  the  most 
important  word  to  be  supplied.  Some  com- 
mentators take  KATJpoi  in  its  modem  sense, 
of  the  clergy,  as  if  St.  Peter  was  commanding 
thd  bishops  not  to  tyrannize  over  the  inferior 
clergy.  But  this  view  involves  an  ana- 
chronism;  the  word  had  not  acquired  this 
\aeaning  in  St.  Peter's  time.  It  is  clearly 
best  to  understand  it  of  the  lots  or  portions 
assigned  to  individual  presbyters.  The  word 
KKijpos  originally  meant  a  "  lot"  (Matt,  xxvii. 
35 ;  Acts  i.  26),  then  portion!  assigned  by 
casting  lots,  as  the  possessions  of  the  tribes 
of  Israel  (Josh,  xviii.  and  six.),  then  any 
portion  or  inheritance  however  obtained; 
thus  in  Deut.  x.  9  the  Lord  is  said  to  be 
the  Inheritance  (kAtj^oj)  of  the  Levitea.  In 
later  times  the  word  was  applied  to  the 
clergy,  who  were  regarded  as,  in  a  special 
sense,  the  Lord's  portion  or  inheritance, 
p^'"^  ,^  .^  oecause  God  was  pleased  to  take 
tLe  tribe  of  Levi  instead  of  the  firstborn, 
saying, "  the  Levitea  shall  be  mine  "  (Numb, 
iii.  12).  But  being  ensamples  to  the  flock ; 
literally,  heaoming  examples.  They  must 
imitate  the  great  Example,  the  Lord  Jesus, 
and,  by  gradual  imitation  of  his  blessed 
character,  become  examples  themselves. 
Thus  they  will  acquire  a  more  salutary  in- 
fluence and  »  truer  authority.  "The  life 
should  command,  and  the  tongue  persuade  " 
(Athanasius,  quoted  by  Fronmiiller). 

Ver.  4.— And  when  the  chief  Shepherd 
shall  appear;  rather,  «»  manifested.  The 
word  rendered  "chief  Shepherd"  (ipx'- 
iroifiriv)  occurs  only  here ;  it  reminds  us  of 
the  Lord'g  description  of  himself  as  "the 


good  Shepherd,"  and  of  the  "  great  Sliep- 
herd  of  the  sheep"  (Heb.  xiii.  20).  Ye  shall 
receive  a  crown  of  glory  that  fadeth  not 
away.  This  is  the  true  reward  of  tlie 
faithful  presbyter,  not  power  or  filthy  lucre. 
Literally,  it  is  "the  crown  of  glory,"  the 
promised  glory,  the  glory  of  the  Lord  which 
he  hath  promised  to  his  chosen.  "The 
glory  which  thou  gavest  me,  I  have  given 
them"  (Jolin  xvii.  22),  The  crown  is 
the  glory;  the  genitive  seems  to  be  one 
of  apposition.  The  Greek  word  here  ren- 
dered "that  fadeth  not  away"  (aixapiv- 
Tivos)  is  not  exactly  the  same  with  that  so 
rendered  in  oh.  1.  4  (ificJpoi'Tos) ;  taken  lite- 
rally, the  words  used  here  mean  an  amaran- 
thine wreath — a  wreath  of  amaranth  flowers ; 
the  general  meaning  remains  the  samu, 
"  unfading."  St.  Peter  is  thinking,  not  of 
a  kingly  crown,  but  of  the  wreaths  .sorn  on 
festive  occasions  or  bestowed  on  conquerors. 
Ver.  5. — likewise,  ye  younger,  submit 
yourselves  unto  the  elder.  Is  St.  Peter  still 
using  the  last  word  in  its  ofScial  sense?  nr 
is  he  passing  to  its  ordinary  meaning?  It 
seems  impossible  to  answer  the  question 
with  certainty.  Some  think  that  the  word 
ve^Tepoi,  younger,  had  also  acquired  an 
ofScial  meaning,  and  that  it  is  used  here, 
and  in  Acts  v.  6  of  assistant-ministers  who 
were  employed  to  help  the  presbyters  and 
apostles.  Others  think  that  it  had  a  mean- 
ing nearly  equivalent  to  our  "Liity"  as 
distinguished  from  the  presbyters.  Bat,  on 
the  whole,  it  seems  more  natural  to  suppose 
that  the  word  "elder,"  when  once  used,  led 
St.  Peter  on  from  one  meaning  to  another, 
and  that  here  he  is  simply  speaking  of  the 
respect  due  to  age  (comp.  1  Tim.  T.  1). 
Yea,  all  of  you  be  subject  one  to  another. 
The  word  InrorairadixivoL,  rendered  "be  sub- 
ject," is  omitted  in  the  most  ancient  manu- 
scripts. If  their  reading  is  adopted,  the 
dative,  i.Wl]hois,  "one  to  another,"  may  be 
taken  either  with  the  previous  clause, "  Sub- 
mit yourselves  unto  the  elder;  yea,  all  of 
you,  to  one  another;"  or  with  that  which 
follows,  "Be  clothed  with  humility  one 
towards  another."  And  be  clothed  with 
humility.  The  word  rendered  "  be  clothed  " 
(4yKOix0(i(ra<rde)  occurs  here  only,  and  is  a 
remarkable  word.  It  is  derived  from  kS/j-Pos, 
a  knot  or  band ;  the  corresponding  noun, 
iyK6ii0aiiia,  was  the  name  of  an  apron  worn 
by  slaves,  which  was  tied  round  them  when 
at  work,  to  keep  their  dress  clean.  The 
word  seems  to  teach  tbit  humility  is  a  gar- 
ment which  must  be  firmly  fastened  on  and 
bound  closely  round  us.  The  association 
of  the  slave's  apron  seems  also  to  suggest 
that  Christians  should  be  ready  to  submit 
to  the  humblest  works  of  charity  for  others, 
and  to  point  back  to  the  lowliness  of  the 
Lord  Jesus,  when  he  girded  himsell^  and 


208 


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  PETER,     [oh.  v.  1—14. 


washed  the  feet  of  his  apostles  (John  xiii. 
4).  It  may  be  notioed  that  the  Greek  word 
for  "  humility  "  (ravea>o(ppoirivri)  is  used  only 
by  St.  Paul,  except  in  this  place.  For  God 
resisteth  the  proud,  and  giveth  grace  to  the 
humble.  St.  Peter  is  quoting  from  the 
Septuagint  Version  of  Prov.  iii.  34,  without 
marks  of  quotation,  as  in  other  places. 
St.  James  quotes  the  same  passage  (iv.  6), 
and  with  the  same  variation,  substituting 
«  God  "  for  «  Lord,"  as  St.  Peter  does.  The 
Greek  word  for  "  resisteth  "  (4</TiTO(rircToi)  is 
a  strong  one :  God  rangeth  himself  as  with 
an  army  against  the  haughty. 

Ver.  6.— Humble  youiseWes  therefore 
under  the  mighty  hand  of  Ood,  that  he  may 
exalt  you  in  due  time.  The  Alexandrine 
Manuscript  and  some  ancient  versions  add 
fTnaxmris,  "  in  the  time  of  visitation,"  prob- 
ably from  Luke  xix.  44.  For  "  the  mighty 
hand  of  God,"  comp.  Deut.  iii.  24;  Luke  i. 
51.  St.  Peter  was  doubtless  thinking  of 
the  well-remembered  words  of  the  Lord, 
"He  that  humUeth  himself  shall  be  ex- 
alted." 

Ver.  7. — Casting  all  yonr  care  upon  him; 
rather,  all  your  anxiety  {inepiuva).  St.  Petei 
is  quoting,  with  slight  alterations,  the  Sep- 
tuagint Version  of  Ps.  It.  22.  We  cast 
our  anxiety  upon  God  when  we  fulfil  the 
Lord's  commandment,  "  Take  no  thought 
[rathez,  'be  not  anxious'],  saying,  WTiat 
shall  w»  eat?  or.  What  shall  we  drink?  or, 
Wherewithal  shall  we  be  clothed?  For  your 
heavenly  Father  knoweth  that  ye  have 
need  of  all  these  things."  God  cares  for  ns ; 
therefore  we  must  not  be  over-anxious, 
but  trust  in  him.  The  participle  is  aorist, 
as  if  implying  that  we  are  to  cast  the 
whole  burden  of  all  our  anxieties  (jraaav 
r^v  ixfptfjLifav  vfjuov)  by  one  act  of  faith  upon 
the  Lord.  For  he  careth  for  yon.  The 
Greek  word  is  /leAei,  quite  different  from 
the  ii4ptiiya  of  the  foregoing  clause.  The 
care  which  is  forbidden  is  that  anxiety  about 
worldly  things  which  harasses  a  man  and 
distracts  his  mind,  so  that  he  cannot  compose 
himself  to  prayer  and  holy  meditation. 
God's  care  for  us  is  calm,  holy,  thoughtful 
providence.  He  "  knoweth  that  we  have 
need  of  all  these  things ; "  and  he  maketh 
all  things  work  together  for  good  to  his 
chosen,  to  tbem  that  love  him. 

Ver.  8. — Be  sober,  he  vigilant  (comp.  1 
Thess.  T.  6).  For  the  first  word,  i^i^otc,  see 
note  on  oh.  iv.  7.  The  second,  yprr/SpnanTi, 
is  the  word  so  often  and  so  emphatically 
used  by  our  Lord  (Mark  xiii.  35,  37 ;  Matt. 
xxvi.  40,  41,  etc.).  The  imperatives  are 
aorist,  as  in  ch.  iv.  7 ;  and,  as  there,  either 
imply  that  the  exhortation  was  needed  by 
the  readers,  or  are  used  to  express  vividly 
the  necessity  of  instant  attention.  Becanse 
your  adversary  the  devil    The  conjunction 


"because"  is  omitted  in  the  best  manu- 
scripts. The  asyndeton,  as  in  the  last 
clause,  increases  the  emphasis.  The  word 
rendered  "  adversary  "  (wt/Sikoj)  means  pro- 
perly an  opponent  in  a  lawsuit,  as  in  Matt. 
V.  25;  but  it  is  also  used  generally  for 
"  adversary,"  and  so  is  a  translation  of  the 
Hebrew  word  Satan.  The  word  dtiPo\oi, 
devil,  means  "slanderer,"  "false  accuser." 
As  a  roaring  lion.  He  is  called  a  serpent 
to  denote  his  subtlety,  a  lion  to  express 
his  fierceness  and  strength.  The  word  ren- 
dered "roaring"  (aipu6/i.ei'os)  is  used  espe- 
cially of  the  cries  of  wild  beasts  when 
ravenous  with  hunger  (see  Ps.  civ.  21 ;  and 
comp.  Ps.  xxii.  13,  21).  Walketh  about, 
seeking  whom  he  may  devour  (comp.  Job  i. 
7;  ii.  2).  The  words  express  the  restless 
energy  of  the  wicked  one.  He  cannot  touch 
those  who  are  kept  by  the  power  of  God 
through  faith  unto  salvation ;  but  he  walketh 
about,  looking  eagerly  after  any  lost  sheep 
that  may  have  wandered  from  the  fold.  He 
roars  in  the  craving  of  his  heart  for  prey, 
like  a  hungry  lion,  seeking  whom  he  may 
devour,  or  (for  the  reading  here  is  somewhat 
uncertain)  to  devour  some  one,  or  simply  to 
devour.  The  Greek  word  means  literally 
"  to  drink  down ; "  it  implies  utter  destruc- 
tion. It  is  the  word  in  1  Cor.  xt.  54, 
"Death  is  swallowed  up  (KaT«r<iSi))  in 
victory."  Satan  now  seeks  whom  he  may 
destroy;  "The  Lord  will  destroy  him  that 
hath  the  power  of  death,  that  is,  the  devil " 
(Heb.  ii.  14). 

Ver.  9. — ^Whom  resist  steadfast  in  the  faith ; 
comp.  Jas.  iv.  7,  where  the  same  word, 
dPTttrrriTf,  is  used;  the  close  resemblance 
seems  to  indicate  St.  Peter's  knowledge  of 
the  Epistle  of  St.  James ;  comp.  also  St.  Paul 
in  Eph.  vi.  13,  etc.  The  Greek  word  for 
"  steadfast "  (irrtpfol)  is  emphatic ;  it  implies 
solidity,  rocklike  firmness.  Only  faith  can 
give  tliat  steadfastness— faith  in  Christ,  the 
one  Foundation,  the  Kock  on  which  the 
Christian's  house  is  built.  Faith  hero  is 
trustfulness  rather  than  objeotivp  truth 
Therefore  the  rendering  of  the  j.tuti.sed 
Version  seems  preferable,  "in  your  fjaith," 
the  article  having,  as  often,  a  possessive 
meaning.  Knowing  that  the  same  afBic- 
tiona  are  accomplished  in  yonr  brethren  that 
are  in  the  world ;  literally,  the  earns  (forms) 
of  afflictions  (ri  outo  tui/  vaBniJiiTav') — an 
unusual  construction  with  the  pronoun, 
though  common  with  adjectives,  intended 
to  give  emphasis;  the  sufferings  were  the 
very  same.  The  infinitive  is  present;  it 
should  therefore  be  rendered,  "are  being 
accomplished."  The  persecutions  were  now 
beginning  to  break  out.  The  word  for 
"brethren"  is  the  collective,  iSeXipSnjs, 
brotherhood,  which  we  met  with  in  ch.  ii.  17. 
The  dative  is  that  of  reference — "in"  or  "  for" 


OH.  Y.  1—14.]     THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  PETER. 


209 


the  brotherhood.  (For  the  wordi,  "  in  the 
world,"  oomp.  John  xvi.  83,  "  In  the  world 
ye  shall  have  tribulatioa :  but  be  of  good 
cheer ;  I  have  overcome  the  world.")  There 
is  another  way  of  taking  the  clause.  The 
unusual  oonstruotiou  (in  the  Greek  Testa- 
ment) of  the  accusative  and  infinitive, 
which,  indeed,  occurs  nowhere  else  with 
elSas,  has  led  Hofman  and  others  to  take 
the  verb  imrtKetaOat  as  middle,  and  to  con- 
nect the  dative,  "for  the  brotherhood,"  with 
ra  miri,  the  same.  Thus  the  translation 
will  be,  "Knowing  how  to  pay  the  same 
tribute  of  affliction  as  your  brethren  in  the 
world."  This  seems  forced  and  unnecessary. 
Huther  gives  another  possible  translation, 
which  he  thinks  preferable  to  all  others: 
"Knowing  [or  better  rather,  'considering'] 
that  the  same  sufferings  are  accomplishing 
themselves  in  the  brethren." 

Yer.  10. — But  the  God  of  all  grace  (comp. 
2  Cor.  i.  3,  "the  God  of  all  comfort").  St. 
Peter  has  finished  his  exhortations ;  he  has 
told  his  readers  what  they  must  do ;  he  now 
bids  them  look  to  God,  and  tells  them  where 
they  will  find  strength.  God  will  work 
withia  them  both  to  will  and  to  do  of  his 
good  pleasure;  for  he  is  the  God  of  all 
grace.  All  that  grace  by  which  we  are 
saved,  without  wluoh  we  can  do  nothing, 
comes  from  him  as  its  Author  and  Source. 
Who  hath  called  us  unto  hiB  eternal  glory 
by  Christ  Jesus;  rather,  who  called  you  . . . 
in  Christ  Jetua.  All  the  best  manuscripts 
read  "  you  "  instead  of  us.  Two  of  the  most 
ancient  omit  "  Jesus  "  here.  God  called  us 
"in  Christ;"  that  is,  through  spiiitual 
union  with  Christ;  the  glory  is  promised 
to  those  who  are  one  with  Christ;  for  the 
glory  is  Christ's,  and  his  members  will 
share  it.  The  very  end  and  purpose  of  our 
calling  was  that  we  might  inherit  that 
glory.  This  is  the  apostle's  great  topic  of 
consolation.  After  that  ye  have  suffered 
a  while ;  literally,  a  little.  The  word  may 
re£a  te  the  dsgiee,  as  well  as  to  the  dura- 
tion, of  the  sufferings.  They  are  transient ; 
the  glory  is  eternal.  They  may  seem  very 
severe,  but  they  are  light  in  comparison 
with  that  "  far  more  exceeding  and  eternal 
weight  of  glory."  Make  you  perfect,  stahlish, 
strengthen,  settle  you.  The  manuscripts 
vary  between  the  future  and  the  optative 
in  these  four  verbs ;  the  preponderance  of 
evidence  seems  in  favour  of  the  future. 
The  emphatic  pronoun  aiT6s  must  not  be 
omitted.  Translate  therefore,  "shall  him- 
self make  you  perfect."  He  only  can  "  per- 
fect what  is  lacking  in  our  faith  "  (1  Thess. 
iii.  10,  where  the  same  verb  is  used);  and 
he  will  do  it.  This  is  our  hope  and  en- 
couragement. The  verb  KarapTlCa  means 
"to  finish,  to  complete,  to  repair."  It  is  the 
word  used  in  the  account  of  the  calling  of 


Peter  and  Andrew,  James  and  John,  by  the 
Sea  of  Galilee,  when  the  two  last  were  in 
the  ship  with  Zebedee  their  father,  mending 
(KaToprifoj'Toi)  their  nets.  God  will  repair, 
bring  to  completion,  what  is  lacking  in  the 
character  of  his  chosen,  if  they  persevere  in 
prayer,  if  they  are  sober  and  vi^ant  (comp. 

1  Cor.  i.  10;  2  Cor.  xiii.  11,  etc.).  Btdblish 
((TTTjpfiei).  The  Lord  had  said  to  St.  Peter, 
"  When  thou  art  converted,  strengthen  (o-t^- 
pijoc)  thy  brethren  "  (Luke  xxii.  32) ;  Peter 
remembers  his  Master's  words.  Strengthen 
(a9eiidii(rei).  The  word  occurs  only  here. 
BetUe  (fieufXiiafi) ;  literally,  "  shall  ground 
you,  shall  give  you  a  finn  foundation." 
"Digna  Fetro  oratio,  'Coufirmat  (iratres 
euoB,'"  says  Bengel  (comp.   Bph.  iii.  17; 

2  Tim.  ii.  19;  1  Cor.  iii.  11).  The  word  is 
omitted  in  the  Vatican  and  Alexandrine 
Manuscripts ;  but  it  is  found  in  the  Sinaitio 
and  other  manuscripts  and  rersions,  and 
ought  to  be  retained. 

Ver.  11. — ^To  him  be  glory  and  dominion 
for  ever  and  ever.  Amen.  This  doxology 
occurs  also'  in  ch.  iv.  11,  where  see  notes. 
The  best  manuscripts  omit  the  word  "  glory  " 
in  this  place.  St.  Peter  has  been  directing 
the  thoughts  of  his  readers  to  the  power  of 
God.  He  will  make  them  perfect,  stablish, 
strengthen,  settle  them ;  he  can,  for  "  his  is 
the  might  for  ever  and  ever."  The  Chris- 
tian may  well  say  hia  "Amen"  with  a 
thankful  and  adoring  heart. 

Ver.  12. — ^By  Silvanus,  s  faithful  brother 
unto  yon,  ai  I  suppose,  I  have  written 
briefly;  rather,  as  in  the  Revised  Version, 
hy  Silvanui,  our  faithful  brother,  a*  1  ao- 
eouut  him,  I  liave  written  unto  you  briefly. 
The  preposition  "by"  (SkQ  has  the  same 
sense  as  Sict  x«p<!t  in  Acts  xv.  23.  Silvanug 
was  the  bearer  of  the  Epistle ;  he  may  have 
been  the  amanuensis  also.  In  all  probability 
he  is  the  Silas  of  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles, 
and  the  Silvanus  whose  name  St.  Paul 
associates  with  his  own  in  the  address  of 
both  Epistles  to  the  Thesaalonians ;  he  ia 
mentioned  also  in  2  Cor.  i.  19.  As  the 
companion  of  St.  Paul,  he  must  have  been 
known  to  the  Churches  of  Asia  Minor. 
The  word  rendered  in  the  Authorized  Ver- 
sion "I  suppose"  (\oyl(oiiat)  does  not 
imply  any  doubt  (comp.  Rom.  iii.  28 ;  viii. 
18 ;  Heb.  xi.  19).  The  Christians  of  Asia 
Minor  knew  Silvanus  as  a  faithful  brother ; 
St.  Peter  adds  his  testimony.  Some  connect 
it  with  the  clause,  "I  have  written  unto 
you  briefly,"  as  if  St.  Peter  meant  to  say 
that  he  regarded  his  letter  as  a  short  one, 
the  subjects  being  so  important;  but  this 
does  not  seem  natural.  It  is  better  to  taka 
the  pronoun  i/uv,  unto  you,  with  the  verb  "  I 
have  written,"  than  with  the  words, "  a  faith- 
ful brother,"  as  in  the  Authorized  Version. 
The  verb  iypaipa  ia  the  epistolary  aoria^ 


210 


THE  FIKST  EPISTLE   GENERAL  OF  PETEE.     [oh.  v.  1—14 


and  may  therefore  be  rendered  "I  write." 
Kshorting,  and  testifying.  Tlie  general 
tone  of  this  Epistle  is  hortatory :  Bt.  Peter 
comforts  his  readers  in  the  sufferings  which 
were  coming  on  them,  and  exhorts  them  to 
patient  endurance.  The  word  rendered 
"testifying"  (M/taprvpuv)  occurs  only  here 
in  the  New  Testament.  Bengel  and  others 
take  the  preposition  ivl  in  the  sense  of 
insuper,  in  "  addition : "  "  Petras  insaper  tes- 
tator;" he  adds  his  testimony  to  that  of 
Paul  and  others  who  have  gone  before ;  or, 
he  not  only  exhorts,  he  also  testifies— the 
testimony  is  in  addition  to  the  exhortation. 
But  more  probably  the  iirl  is  intensive,  or 
expresses  smiply  the  direction  of  the  testi- 
fying (comp.  Acts  ii.  40,  where  the  same 
words  (nearly ;  the  Greek  for  "testified"  is 
Siffiapriparo)  are  used  in  describing  St. 
Peter's  exhortations).  That  tMs  is  the  true 
grace  of  Ood  wherein  ye  stand;  rather,  as 
in  the  Bevised  Version,  that  this  i>  tlie  tru» 
graoe  of  God :  stand  ye  fast  therein.  The 
reading  cii  V  (tt^tc  is  supported  by  the 
oldest  manuscripts.  The  construction  in- 
volves a  common  ellipse,  "Into  which 
(having  entered)  stand  fast."  8ome  thinli 
that  it  was  St.  Feter^s  intention  in  these 
words  to  set  the  seal  of  hia  apostolio  au- 
thority upoa  the  truth  of  the  teaching 
which  the  Christians  of  Asia  Minor  had 
received  tiom  St.  Paul.  It  may  be  so.  The 
whole  Epistle  corroborates  the  teaching  of 
St.  Paul,  and  shows  St.  Peter's  exact  agree- 
ment with  it  But  it  seems  probable  ttiat, 
if  St.  Peter  had  thought  it  necessary  to  give 
a  formal  sanction  to  St.  Paul's  preaching, 
he  would  have  done  so  plainly,  as  he  does 
at  the  end  of  the  Second  Epistle.  Again, 
there  are  no  traces  in  the  Epistle  of  any 
doubts  now  existing  in  the  minds  of  the 
Asiatic  Ohiistians,  or  of  any  opposition  to 
St  Paul,  such  as  there  once  had  been  in 
the  Churches  of  Corinth  and  Galatia.  And 
St.  Peter  does  not  say, "  These  are  the  true 
doctrines,"  but  "Tlus  is  the  true  grace  of 
God."  He  seems  rather  to  be  giving  the 
testimony  of  his  knowledge  and  spiritual 
experience  to  the  fact  that  the  grace  which 
they  had  received  came  indeed  from  God, 
that  it  was  his  true  grace,  that  it  was  he 
who  was  working  within  them  both  to  wUl 
and  to  do.  They  must  stand  fast  in  that 
grace,  and  by  its  help  work  out  their  own 
salvation. 

Yer.  13.— The  Ohnioh  that  is  at  Babylon, 
elected  together  with  you,  salnteth  yon; 
literally,  (As  eo-eleot  in  Babylon  (v  iv  Ba$u- 
}iMvt  (rmeiA(ieTi).  The  word  "  Church  "  is 
given  in  no  manuscripts  with  the  remark- 
able exception  of  the  Sinaitio;  the  rest  have 
simply  "  th«  oo-elect"  We  ask — What  word 
is  to  b«  supplied, "^Churoh"  or  "sister"?  Some 
tiunk  tkat  St  Peter's  wife  (oomp.  Matt  viii. 


14 ;  1  Cor,  ix.  5)  is  intended,  or  some  othei 
well-known  Christian  woman  (comp.  2  John 
1).  In  favour  of  this  view  is  the  following 
salutation  from  Marcus.  It  is  more  natural 
to  join  together  the  names  of  two  persons 
than  to  couple  a  Church  with  an  individual. 
Also  it  seems  exceedingly  improbable  that 
such  a  word  as  "  Church  "  should  be  omitted 
(a  word,  we  may  remark,  which  occurs  no- 
wliere  in  St.  Peter's  Epistles),  and  the 
ellipse  left  to  be  filled  up  by  the  readers. 
On  the  other  hand,  it  is  said  to  be  unlikely 
that  a  humble  Galilsean  woman  should  be 
described  as  "the  oo-elect  in  Babylon." 
This  argument  would  have  considerable 
weight  if  the  apostle  were  writing  from  a 
large  and  well-known  Church,  like  that  at 
Bome;  but  it  is  quite  possible  that  "the 
co-elect"  might  be  the  only  Christian 
woman,  or  the  one  best  known  among  a 
very  small  number  in  Babylon.  On  the 
whole,  it  seems  most  probable  to  us  that 
by  "  the  co-elect "  (whether  we  supply  "  to- 
gether with  you"  or  "with  me")  is  meant 
a  Christian  woman  known  at  least  by  name 
to  the  Churches  of  Asia  Minor,  and  there- 
fore very  possibly  St.  Peter's  wife,  who,  St. 
Paul  tells  us,  was  his  companion  in  travel. 
The  question  now  meets  us — ^Is  "Babylon" 
to  be  taken  in  a  mystic  sense,  as  a  crypto- 
graph for  Bome,  or  literally?  Eusebius,  and 
ancient  writers  generally,  understand  it  of 
Bome.  Eusebius  is  commonly  understood 
to  claim  for  this  view  the  auUiority  of 
Papias  and  Clement  of  Alexandria  (aa  has 
been  stated  in  the  Introduction,  p.  ix.).  But 
the  historian's  words  ('  Hiat.  Bccl.,'  IL  xv. 
2)  seem  to  claim  that  authority  only  for  the 
connection  of  St.  Peter  with  St.  Mark's 
Gospel;  the  identification  of  Babylon  with 
Bome  seems  to  be  mentioned  only  as  s 
common  opinion  in  the  time  of  Eusebius.  It 
is  said  that  there  is  no  trace  of  the  existence  of 
a  Christian  Church  at  the  Chaldean  Baby- 
lon, and  no  proof,  apart  from  this  passage 
that  St.  Peter  was  ever  there.  There  had 
been  a  great  Jewish  colony  at  Babylon,  but 
it  had  been  destroyed  in  the  time  of  Cali- 
gula. In  answer  to  these  arguments,  it  may 
be  urged  that  the  cryptograph  of  Babylon 
for  Bome  would  probably  not  be  understood; 
even  if  we  assume  the  earliest  date  assigned 
to  the  Apocalypse,  that  book  could  scarcely 
be  known  very  generally  in  Asia  Minor 
when  this  Epistle  was  written.  St  Peter 
at  Babylon,  like  St  Paul  at  Athens,  may 
have  met  with  little  success;  the  infant 
Church  may  have  been  quickly  crashed. 
There  may  have  been  a  second  settlement 
of  Jews  at  Babylon  between  a.Ii.  40  and 
the  date  of  this  Epistle.  But  it  ia  quite 
possible  that  St  Peter  may  have  been 
working  as  a  missionary  among  the  Baby- 
lonian Gentiles,  for  W9  oannot  believe  thai 


flH.T.1— 14.]     THE   FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PETER. 


£11 


he  oonflned  Ma  mtntstrationa  to  the  JewL 
On  the  whole,  it  seems  much  more  probable 
that  St.  Peter  was  writing  at  the  famous 
city  on  the  Enphratei,  though  no  traces  of 
his  work  there  remain,  than  that  he  should 
have  used  this  one  word  in  a  mystical  sense 
kt  the  end  of  an  Epistle  where  all  else  is 
plain  and  simple  (see  this  qnestion  dis- 
cnssed  in  the  Introduction,  p.  iz.).  And 
■o  doth  Uarcns  my  son.  t4kvov  is  the  word 
used  by  St.  Paul  of  spiritual  relationship 
(see  1  Tim.  i.  2;  2  Tim.  i.  2;  Titus  1.  4). 
St.  Peter  has  vl6s  here.  Still,  it  seems  most 
probable  that  Marcus,  mentioned  as  he  is 
without  any  further  description,  is  not  a 
■on  of  the  apostle  after  the  flesh,  but  the 
well-known  John  Mark  of  the  Acta  (see 
Introduction,  p.  viii.}. 

Yer.  li. — Greet  ye  one  another  with  a 
kist  of  charity.  St.  Paul  gives  the  same 
direction  in  four  places  (Rom.  xvi.  16; 
1  Cor.  xtL  20:  3  Oor.  xiiL  12;  1  Then.  t. 


26).  The  practice  seems  to  have  been  uni- 
versal in  early  times;  it  is  mentioned  by 
Justin  ■  Martyr,  Tertullian,  Ohrysostom, 
Augustine,  and  other  ancient  writers  (see 
Bingham's  'Antiquities,'  xv.  iii.  3).  It  is 
now  used  only  in  the  (Joptic  Church  of 
Egypt.  Rites  and  ceremonies  may  be 
changed  "according  to  the  diversities  of 
countries,  times,  and  men's  manners ; "  the 
sacred  duty  of  brotherly  love  remains  un- 
changed for  ever.  Peace  be  with  you  all 
that  are  in  Christ  Jesus.  Amen.  The  most 
ancient  manuscripts  omit  the  word  "  Jesus  " 
here  and  the  "Amen."  St.  Paul's  blessing 
at  the  end  of  his  Epistles  is  usually  "  grace  " 
(in  the  Epistle  to  the  Ephesians  he  adds 
"peace").  St.  Peter  ends  his  Epistle  with 
the  benediction  which  he  htid  so  often 
heard  from  the  Saviour's  lips.  That  blessed 
gift  of  peace  is  granted  to  all  who  are  "ia 
Ohrist,''who  U  our  Peace  (Eph.  H  14> 


HOMILBTICS. 

Vers,  1—i.— Charge  to  the  elders  of  the  Ohtirches  of  Ana  Minor.  L  What  hb  n  w«o 
ADDBE88ES  THEU.  1.  "Alto  an  elder."  St.  Peter  is  a  beautiful  example  of  that  humility 
which  should  especially  mark  those  who  are  called  to  high  office  in  the  Ohurch,  with- 
out which  high  ofBce  is  a  most  dangerous  temptation.  He  assumes  no  superiority ; 
he  does  not  remind  them  of  the  great  trust  committed  to  him  by  Christ  (Matt.  xvi.  13, 
19);  he  does  not  even  insist  on  his  apostleship.  He  identifies  himself  with  those 
whom  he  exhorts,  calling  himself  simply  "a  brother  elder."  The  word  "  elder  "  should 
remind  them  of  the  dignity  of  their  office.  Most  of  them  were  probably  elders  in  jreara 
ai  well  as  in  official  position ;  but  sometimea  younger  men,  as  in  the  case  of  Timothy, 
would  have  special  fitness  for  the  work  of  the  ministry.  They  must  take  care  to  let 
none  despise  their  youth  (1  Tim.  iv.  12) ;  they  must  exhibit  in  their  lives  something  of  < 
that  thoughtfulness,  that  sobriety,  that  unworldliness,  that  sweet  and  holy  wisdom, 
which  the  very  name  of  their  o£Bce  suggests  as  necessary  qualifications  for  its  fulfil- 
ment. 2.  "A  witnesi  of  the  eufferingi  of  Christ."  St.  Peter  was  an  eye-witness,  at  least 
in  part,  of  the  sufferings  of  the  Lord ;  he  could  say,  like  St.  John,  "  That  which  we 
have  seen  and  heard,  declare  we  unto  you."  If  our  exhortations  are  to  have  real 
influence,  they  must  come  out  of  the  depths  of  personal  experiences ;  if  we  would  make 
Ohrist  known  to  others,  we  must  know  him  ourselves ;  we  must  be  made  conformable 
onto  his  death,  and  know  what  is  the  fellowship  of  his  sufferings,  if  we  are  to  bear 
witness  to  others  of  the  blessed  meaning  of  the  cross. 

"  Who  is  Ood's  chosen  priest  7 
He,  who  on  Christ  stands  waiting  day  and  night, 
Who  traced  his  holy  steps,  nor  ever  ceased. 

From  Jordan  banks  to  Bethpbage  height:  ,  ,  t 

"  Who  both  in  agony 
Hath  seen  him  and  in  glory;  and  in  both 
Owned  him  Divine,  and  yielded,  nothing  loth, 
Body  and  soul,  to  live  and  die^ 

"  In  witnesi  of  his  Lord, 
In  humble  following  of  his  Saviour  dear! 
This  is  the  man  to  wield  th'  unearthly  sword. 
Warring  unharmed  with  sin  and  fear." 

8.  "A  partaker  tf  the  glory  that  thatt  he  revealed."     St.  Peter  had  the  blessed  promise, 
*■  WUther  I  go,  thou  canst  not  follow  me  now ;  but  thou  shalt  follow  me  afterwards." 


212  THa  FIRST  EtISTLE  6ENERAL  OP  PETER,    [oh.  v.  1—14 

Those  who  would  teach  and  exhort  like  St.  Peter,  must  have  St.  Peter's  faith  and  hope ; 
we  must  know,  not  with  the  cold  knowledge  which  may  be  gleaned  from  books,  but  with 
the  warm,  real  knowledge  of  the  heart,  what  is  the  deep  value  of  religion — its  precious- 
ness,  the  sweetness  of  its  peace,  the  gladness  of  its  hope;  we  must  share  that  holy 
hope  ourselves,  if  we  are  to  kindle  it  in  others ;  our  words  must  have  that  reality, 
that  energy,  which  only  a  living  hope  can  give. 

II.  Thbie  DUTT.  1.  They  tmist  tend  the  flock.  That  touching  figure  of  the  relations 
between  a  shepherd  and  his  flock  covers  aU  the  duties  of  the  ministerial  office.  The 
shepherd  feeds,  guides,  protects,  his  flock.  The  presbyters  of  the  Church  must  do 
the  like ;  they  must  be  faithful  dispensers  of  God's  holy  Word  and  sacraments ;  they 
must  preach  zealously,  diligently,  as  dying  men  to  dying  men  ;  they  must  teach 
privately,  from  house  to  house ;  they  must  care  for  the  little  ones,  the  lambs  of  Christ ; 
they  must  do  all  that  lieth  in  them  to  bring  their  people  to  the  holy  table  of  the  Lord, 
there  to  feed  on  him  in  their  hearts  by  faith  with  thanksgiving.  They  must  guide 
the  flock,  themselves  leading  the  way,  setting  a  holy  example,  an  example  of  humility, 
holy  love,  self-denying  zeal.  They  must  do  all  they  can  to  protect  their  flock  from  the 
evil  one,  the  lion  who  goeth  about  seeking  whom  he  may  devour ;  they  must  do  their 
best  by  constant  prayer  for  tiieir  people,  by  affectionate  warnings,  sometimes  by  faithful 
rebukes,  to  save  the  souls  committed  to  their  charge.  And  in  all  this  they  must  set 
constantly  before  their  eyes  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  good  Shepherd,  as  the  high 
Pattern  for  all  under-shepherds  to  follow ;  they  must  seek  daily  to  learn  of  him  lessons 
of  self-sacrificing  love  and  lowliness  and  ardent  zeal  for  the  salvation  of  souls.  They 
must  remember  always  that  the  flock  is  his,  the  flock  of  God,  "  the  Church  of  God, 
which  he  hath  purchased  with  his  own  blood."  And  they  must  watch  for  souls,  as 
they  who  must  give  account ;  for  the  souls  for  which  the  precious  Blood  was  shed  are 
very  dear  in  the  sight  of  God.  The  care  of  his  flock  is  a  most  solemn,  a  most  sacred 
charge ;  those  to  whom  that  charge  is  entrusted  must  strive  so  to  labour  now  that  they 
may  render  their  account  with  joy  in  the  great  day,  2.  The  spirit  in  which  they  must 
work.  (1)  Willingly.  The  central  thought  here,  the  figure  of  the  shepherd,  implies 
loving  care ;  those  who  care  for  the  sheep  will  take  the  oversight  of  them  willingly. 
They  will  need  no  constraint ;  they  will  not  need  to  be  urged  to  diligence  by  those  set 
over  them,  for  they  wiU  work,  not  for  fear  of  censure,  but  for  the  love  of  souls.  They 
will  need  no  external  constraint;  for  they  have  within  them  a  constraint  stronger  than 
any  worldly  incentive,  the  strong  compulsion  of  the  constraining  love  of  Christ.  (2) 
Zealously.  The  hireling  cares  not  for  the  sheep,  but  only  for  his  hire ;  he  fleeth  when, 
there  is  danger,  when  there  is  need  of  hard  woik,  of  self-sacrifice.  Filthy  lucre  must 
not  enter  into  the  motives  which  actuate  the  minister  of  Christ ;  he  must  work  for  the 
love  of  the  work,  for  the  love  of  him  whose  work  it  is,  and  that  zealously,  with  a  holy 
enthusiasm,  knowing  the  priceless  value  of  immortal  souls.  (3)  Humbly.  The  Lord  had 
once  said  to  Peter,  "I  will  give  unto  thee  the  keys  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven :  and  whatso- 
ever thou  shalt  bind  on  earth  shall  be  bound  in  heaven :  and  whatsoever  thou  shalt  loose 
on  earth  shall  be  loosed  in  heaven."  He  did  not  pride  himself  on  the  greatness  of  his 
charge ;  he  did  not  make  it  a  means  of  self-exaltation ;  be  had  subdued  his  natural 
forwardness  and  impetuosity,  and  had  learned  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  the  blessed 
grace  of  humility.  Those  who  have  succeeded  him  in  the  work  of  the  ministry  must 
leam  the  same  holy  lesson;  they  must  crush  out  of  their  hearts  worldly  ambitions,  the 
lust  of  power  and  pre-eminence.  They  must  not  lord  it  over  those  committed  to  their 
charge,  but  must  tiy  to  lead  them  by  the  power  of  holy  example.  They  should  ever 
study  to  imitate  in  all  things  the  one  great  Example,  and  so  reflecting  in  their  lives 
something  of  the  glory  of  his  holiness,  they  should  become  themselves  examples  to  the 
flock.  Even  in  the  apostles'  times  there  were  presbyters — there  was  once  an  apostle — 
whose  motives  were  unholy,  who  were  covetous,  self-seeking,  proud.  Example  is 
better  than  precept ;  a  holy  life  has  more  power  over  men  than  holy  words ;  for  a  holy 
life  proves  with  convincing  evidence  the  presence  and  the  energy  of  the  good  Spirit 
of  God. 

IIL  Tbsib  bewabd.  1.  From  whom  it  comes.  Not  from  men.  They  must  not  look 
for  it  here;  they  must  wait  in  patient  expectation  for  the  manifestation  of  the  chief 
Shepherd.  He  is  the  Centre  of  all  pastoral  work ;  the  pastoral  office  comes  from  hinv 
He  fii'st  discharged  it  as  the  chief  Shepherd,  the  good  Shepherd ;  he  cared  for  the  sheep ; 


eB.T.1— 14.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PETER.  213 

he  died  for  them.  And  he  appointed  under-shepberds  to  work  under  his  eye.  He  still 
^ves  the  pastoral  spirit  to  those  who  are  faithfully  serving  him  in  their  sacred  calling ; 
zeal,  self-denying  charity,  the  strong  love  of  souls,  are  his  pft.  For  he  is  the  chief 
Shepherd,  and  under-shepberds  must  gather  round  him,  and  learn  of  him,  and  imitate 
him,  if  they  are  to  become  in  any  true  sense  shepherds  and  bishops  of  souls.  They 
see  bim  now,  by  faith,  "  through  a  glass,  darkly ;  "  but  in  the  time  appointed  of  the 
Father  be  shall  come  nearer,  he  shall  be  manifested — they  shall  see  him  face  to  face. 
"  Behold,  I  come  quickly,  and  my  reward  is  with  me."  2.  What  it  is.  Not  filthy 
lucre,  not  high  place  and  rank,  not  the  praise  of  men.  But  an  amaranthine  wreath  ; 
not  a  wreath  that  withereth,  such  as  those  worn  at  festive  gatherings,  or  the  wreaths 
so  highly  prized  that  were  bestowed  on  victorious  athletes.  The  wreath  which  the 
chief  Shepherd  giveth  is  of  amaranth,  imperishable ;  it  is  a  wreath  of  glory — glory  that 
cannot  fade,  for  it  is  the  Lord's  own  glory,  the  glory  which  he  had  before  the  foundation 
of  the  world,  which  he  giveth  to  his  chosen.  Bye  hath  not  seen  that  glory ;  it  hath 
not  entered  into  the  heart  of  man ;  it  is  the  glory  of  the  chief  Shepherd.  He  shall 
bestow  it  in  the  great  day  upon  those  faithful  shepherds  of  the  sheep,  who  for  his  love 
have  striven  in  patience  and  self-forgetfulness  to  fulfil  the  charge  which  was  once  given 
to  St.  Peter,  and  is  given  still  to  those  who  have  succeeded  the  apostles  in  the  sacred 
ministry  of  the  Church :  "Lovest  thou  me?  then,  feed  my  lambs,  tend  my  sheep." 

Lessons.  1.  If  we  are  to  exhort  others  with  success,  we  must  live  very  near  the 
cross ;  we  must  have  the  blessed  hope  of  glory  in  heaven.  2.  Presbyters  must  tend  the 
flock,  for  it  is  the  Lord's ;  and  to  neglect  it  is  to  neglect  him.  3.  They  must  work  out 
of  love,  willingly,  zealously,  humbly.  4.  They  must  foUow  the  chief  Shepherd  now,  and 
look  to  him  for  their  reward. 

Vers.  6 — ^9. — General  exkortationa.  I.  To  httmilitt.  1.  In  the  case  of  the  young. 
They  must  submit  themselves  to  the  elder.  Young  men  are  often  tempted  to  despise 
their  seniors,  to  regard  them  as  antiquated,  as  obstructive ;  to  be  impatient  to  remodel 
everything  according  to  their  own  devices;  to  put  more  trust  in  the  impetuosity 
characteristic  of  youth  than  in  the  mellow  wisdom  of  age.  Therefore  the  Scriptures 
exhort  young  men  to  be  sober-minded  (Titus  ii.  6).  They  must  learn  to  keep  in  check 
the  extravagance  of  their  aspirations,  and  to  remember  that  the  experience  of  years 
gives  greater  weight  to  the  opinions  and  advice  of  their  elders.  They  must  submit 
themselves  to  the  elder ;  for  "  the  hoary  head  is  a  crown  of  glory,  if  it  be  found  in  the 
way  of  righteousness."  "  A  graceless  old  age,"  Leighton  says,  "  is  a  most  despicable  and 
lamentable  sight.  What  gams  an  unholy  man  or  woman  by  their  scores  of  years,  but 
the  more  scores  of  guiltiness  and  misery  ?  Their  white  hairs  speak  of  nothing  but 
ripeness  for  wrath.  But,  found  in  the  way  of  righteousness,  the  hoary  head  shine.s,  and 
has  a  kind  of  royalty."  To  such  young  men  should  submit  themselves.  Eespect  for 
age  is  graceful  and  becoming  in  the  young,  and  has  the  sanction  of  Holy  Scripture.  2. 
Oenerally.  All  should  be  subject  one  to  another.  "  Honour  all  men,"  the  apostle  has 
already  taught  us  (ch.  ii.  17).  Respect  is  due  to  all  men,  whatever  their  outward 
condition ;  the  true  Christian  will  respect  the  feelings  of  his  humblest  dependents. 
For  all  men  are  the  creatures  of  the  one  Father;  all  are  redeemed  with  the  precious 
blood  of  Christ ;  all  are  dear  to  the  Saviour ;  and  he  who  loves  the  Lord  who  bought 
us  must  care  for  all  those  whom  he  bought  with  bis  blood.  Therefore  the  Christian  will 
in  a  true  sense  be  subject  to  all  men.  He  will  make  himself,  like  St.  Paul,  the  servant 
of  all ;  he  will  understand  that  he  has  duties  even  to  the  wicked  and  the  most  degraded ; 
he  will  readily  give  up  his  own  wishes,  and  submit  sometimes  to  work  and  surroundings 
which  are  coarse  and  offensive  and  utterly  distasteful  to  his  feelings;  he  will  be  content 
to  be  "  made  all  things  to  all  men,  that  he  might  by  all  means  save  some  "  (1  Cor.  ix. 
22).  Thus  he  will  be  clothed  with  humility.  He  will  wear  it  like  a  close-fitting  dress, 
firmly  fastened  on ;  for  unless  it  is  woven  into  the  very  character,  it  is  quickly  driven 
away  and  dissipated  by  the  constant  incitements  to  proud  and  self-seeking  thoughts, 
which  the  varying  circimistances  of  daily  life  continually  suggest.  It  may  be  despised, 
it  may  be  regarded  as  a  garment  fit  for  slaves ;  but  he  knows  how  precious  it  is ;  ha 
will  wrap  it  tightly  round  him,  and  will  be  careful  not  to  let  it  go ;  for  while  he  is 
covered  with  it,  his  inner  soul  is  kept  white  and  clean  from  many  stains  and  spots  which, 
bat  for  the  robe  of  humility,  he  would  inevitably  contract  in  the  stir  and  bustle  of  evetj- 


214  THE  PDasT  EPiStLE  GENERAL  OP  PBTBK.    [oh.  v.  1— li 

day  life.  The  Lord  himself  chose  and  wore  that  lowly  garb.  He  girded  himself;  he 
washed  his  disciples'  feet,  setting  us  an  example  that  we  should  do  as  he  hath  done 
unto  us ;  that  as  he,  our  Lord  and  Master,  washed  the  feet  of  his  creattures,  so  we  should 
be  willing  to  submit  ourselves  to  humble  works  of  Christian  love  for  the  lowliest  of 
our  brethren.  3.  Its  blessedness.  "  God  resisteth  the  proud."  It  is  not  out  of  envy,  as 
the  heathen  falsely  imagined,  and  as  the  serpent  whispered  to  Eve ;  the  greatness  of 
men  does  not  irritate  Gud,  as  the  Persian  thought  (Herod.,  vii.  10)  ;  man's  little  great- 
ness is  nothing  in  comparison  with  the  eternal  majesty  of  the  Most  High.  It  is  out  of 
loving  care  for  us;  it  is  because  pride  means  rebellion,  and  rebellion  is  the  very  essence 
of  sin ;  and  sin  means  misery,  ruin,  death.  Therefore  "  God  resisteth  the  proud ; "  he 
setteth  himself  in  array  against  them ;  they  must  be  brought  low ;  they  must  sooner 
or  later  be  humbled  to  the  very  dust :  for  how  can  they  stand  against  the  Lord  G.  d 
Almighty  ?  "  He  that  exalteth  himself  shall  be  abased."  But  "  he  giveth  grace  to  the 
humble.'"  The  heart  that  is  filled  with  pride  hath  no  room  for  the  blessed  grace  of  God ; 
thronging  thoughts  of  self  drive  out  the  holy  thought  of  God.  And  the  presence  of 
God  is  the  secret  of  holiness;  without  that  presence  there  is  no  spiritual  life.  "Abide 
in  me,"  saith  the  Lord.  It  is  only  lowly-hearted  men  who  can  abide  in  Christ ;  they 
obey  the  calling  of  the  Lord;  they  come  out  of  themselves,  so  to  speak,  away  from  the 
bustling,  restless  pursuit  of  self-interest  and  self-exaltation  into  the  quiet,  solemn, 
hallowing  sphere  of  the  blessed  Saviour's  presence ;  they  abide  in  that  presence,  because 
proud  thoughts  of  self  do  not  draw  them  away,  because,  through  the  absence  of  pride 
and  self-assertion,  they  are  enabled  to  concentrate  their  minds  upon  the  gracious  presence 
of  Christ.  And  while  they  abide  in  the  humble  and  reverent  sense  of  his  presence,  he 
abidetb  in  them ;  he  makes  his  influence  more  deeply  felt,  more  fully  enjoyed.  The 
spiritual  life,  which  comes  from  him  who  is  the  Life,  spreads  itself  throughout  their 
whole  being,  bringing  forth  the  fruit  of  holiness.  Thus  God  giveth  grace  to  the  humble. 
Therefore  we  ought  to  humble  ourselves  under  his  mighty  hand.  His  hand  js  mighty, 
almighty;  it  is  vain  to  strive  against  the  Lord;  he  brings  down  the  proud  and  humbles 
them  to  the  dust.  But  not  all  whom  the  Lord  humbles  with  his  chastisements  learn  to 
humble  themselves ;  they  are  crushed,  broken  down,  but  they  do  not  learn  that  sweet 
humility  which  recognizes  its  own  un worthiness  and  submits  in  patient  resignation. 
He  d"th  not  exalt  all  who  are  humbled,  but  all  who  humble  themselves.  Let  us  seek 
this  precious  grace  of  him  who  is  meek  and  lowly  in  heart.  "  He  humbled  himself,  and 
became  obedient  unto  death,  even  the  death  of  the  cross."  He  is  exalted  now  above  all 
heavens.  He  will  exalt  those  who  learn  of  him  the  grace  of  humility,  who  take  up  the 
cross,  denying  themselves.  He  will  exalt  them  in  due  time ;  in  his  own  good  time  : 
not  yet,  perhaps ;  but  surely,  sooner  or  later,  when  he  sees  it  best  for  us ;  certainly 
at  the  great  day,  when  those  who  have  taken  his  yoke  upon  them  shall  sit  with  him 
upon  his  throne. 

II.  To  TEUSTFDLNESS.  1.  Description  of  Christian  trustfulness.  It  consists  in 
casting  all  our  care  upon  God.  This  life  is  full  of  anxieties.  They  vary  indefinitely 
with  our  position  in  life,  our  ciicumstances,  our  characters;  but  none  are  free  from 
thom.  They  throng  in  upon  our  thoughts  and  disturb  our  rest  with  their  distracting 
presence,  The  Lord  says,  "Take  no  thought; "  St.  Paul  echoes  his  words,  "  Be  careful 
for  nothing ; "  St.  Peter,  quoting  the  ancient  Scriptures,  bids  us  cast  all  our  care  upon 
the  Lord.  It  is  not  thoughtfulnesa  which  our  Lord  and  his  apostles  forbid ;  it  is  not 
carelessness  and  improvidence  which  Holy  Scripture  commends.  The  original  word  in 
e^ch  passage  means  "  anxiety,  distracting  care."  We  must  do  our  duty,  we  must  provide, 
au  far  as  lieth  in  us,  for  ourselves  and  for  those  dependent  on  us,  and  then  trust  in  God, 
casting  ail  our  anxiety  upon  him.  If  we  have  learned  to  humble  ourselves  under  the 
mighty  hand  of  God,  we  shall  know  that  all  our  troubles  and  trials  come  from  him ; 
we  shall  know,  too,  that  his  fatherly  hand  is  ever  over  his  people,  that  they  are  in  his 
hawis  always.  Humility  increases  trustfulness ;  the  sense  of  our  own  weakness  deepens 
our  confidence  in  God.  2.  The  grounds  of  it.  "He  careth  for  us."  His  care  is  not 
like  ours ;  it  is  riot  anxiety  (jifpi/iva).  It  is  calm,  loving  providence.  He  ordereth  all 
things  both  in  heaven  and  earth,  and  he  cares  for  us  (at>rf  n4\ei  vepl  viuiy),  for  he  lovea 
us.  All  things  are  known  to  him — the  fall  of  every  sparrow.  He  knows  all  our  needs, 
difficulties,  dangers,  temptations,  with  the  same  fulness  of  knowledge  and  depth  of 
sympatliy  as  if  tiiei«  were  no  other  beings  in  the  world  besides  ourselves  and  our  God.   Is 


ca.T.  1— 14.]    THE  PIEST  EPlSTLE  GENERAL  OP  PETEft.  215 

all  tliose  troubles  he  cares  for  us,  and  guides  them  all  for  our  eternal  good.  If  we  have 
faith  in  his  love,  we  shall  be  able  to  cast  all  our  care  upon  him.  Hezekiah  took  the 
threatening  letter  of  Sennacherib  into  the  house  of  the  Lord,  and  spread  it  before  the 
Lord.  So  should  wo  do  with  all  our  anxieties,  great  and  small.  "Be  careful  for 
nothing;  but  in  everything  by  prayer  and  supplication  with  thanksgiving  let  your 
requests  be  made  known  unto  God.**  If  we  do  this,  if  we  lay  not  only  the  great 
anxieties  which  come  occasionally,  but  also  the  little  daily  trials  of  common  life,  before 
the  Lord,  then  the  peace  of  God  shall  keep  our  hearts  and  thoughts.  "  He  careth  for 
us."  The  thought  is  full  of  deep  sweetness  and  strong  consolation.  Only  let  us  take  it 
into  our  hearts,  and  we  shall  be  able  to  roll  away  from  ourselves  the  burden  of  anxieties 
and  to  cast  it  upon  God. 

III.  To  WATCHFULNESS.  1.  The  need  for  it.  We  may  cast  all  our  care  upon  him ; 
yet  we  must  watch  and  pray.  "  Tliis  is  the  Scripture  logic,"  says  Leighton.  "  It  is  he 
that  worketh  in  you  to  will  and  to  do.  Then,  would  you  possibly  think,  I  need  not  work 
at  all,  or,  if  I  do,  it  may  be  very  easily  and  securely  ?  No ;  therefore,  says  the  apostle, 
'  work  out  your  own  salvation ; '  yea,  and  do  it  with  fear  and  trembling.  Work  you  in 
humble  obedience  to  his  command,  and  in  dependence  on  him  who  worketh  all  in  you." 
We  are  bidden  to  cast  our  anxieties  upon  God  for  the  very  reason  that  we  may  have 
time  and  freedom  of  thought  to  care  for  our  souls.  There  is  need  of  watchfulness  and 
of  that  temperance  without  which  we  cannot  be  watchful,  for  we  have  an  adversary,  an 
enemy,  who  seeks  our  ruin.  That  adversary  is  restless  in  bis' insatiable  malice.  He 
goeth  to  and  fro  in  the  earth ;  he  walketh  about.  There  is  no  corner  of  the  earth,  no 
human  being  safe  from  his  assaults;  not  even  the  remote  wilderness,  not  even  the 
incarnate  Son  of  God.  He  walketh  about,  impatient,  eager,  full  of  rage  and  bitter 
hatred,  like  a  lion  roaring  from  the  pangs  of  unsatisfied  hunger.  The  holy  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  thirsted  for  the  salvation  of  souls;  this  horrible  lion  hungers  for  their  death  and 
endless  misery.  He  is  always  seeking  whom  he  may  devour.  Therefore  the  Christian 
must  be  ever  on  the  watch;  temptations  come  when  we  least  expect  them.  He  must 
be  strictly  temperate;  excess  in  meat  and  drink,  self-indulgence  in  any  form,  prevent 
him  from  watching,  and  expose  him  to  the  wiles  of  the  enemy.  2.  Encouragements  for 
it.  (1)  The  strength  of  faith.  We  are  bidden  to  resist  this  roaring  lion,  to  withstand 
him  in  all  his  fury.  He  is  strong;  but  this  is  the  victory  that  overcometh,  even  our 
faith.  Faith  is  strong,  because  it  lays  hold  upon  God,  and  finds  in  him  almighty 
strength.  "Faith,"  says  Leighton,  "sets  the  stronger  Lion  of  the  tribe  of  Judah 
against  this  roaring  lion  of  the  bottomless  pit ;  that  delivering  Lion  against  this  devour- 
ing lion."  Faith  gives  steadfastness,  solid  firmness,  for  it  sets  our  feet  upon  the  Bock, 
and  that  Rook  is  Christ.  "  They  that  trust  in  the  Lord  shall  be  as  Mount  Zion,  which 
cannot  be  moved,  but  abideth  for  ever."  (2)  The  thought  of  community  in  suffering. 
"  There  hath  no  temptation  taken  us,  but  such  as  is  common  to  man."  We  must  not 
suppose,  as  we  are  apt  to  do,  that  we  are  of  all  men  the  most  sorely  tried.  The  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  suffered  being  tempted.  He  endured  for  us  that  great  agony  of  tempta- 
tion in  the  wilderness.  All  our  brethren  in  the  faith  are  tempted  too,  and  tried  by 
various  forms  of  suffering.  Let  us,  seeing  that  we  are  encompassed  about  with  a  great 
cloud  of  witnesses,  follow  the  faith  of  the  saints  and  martyrs  of  the  Lord ;  but,  above 
all,  let  us  look  unto  Jesus,  the  Author  and  Finisher  of  our  faith,  learning  of  him  to 
endure  the  cross  and  to  be  faithful  unto  death. 

Lessons.  1.  Self-confidence  and  presumption  are  among  the  great  dangers  of  youth. 
Let  the  young  learn  to  reverence  the  aged.  2.  Humility  is  one  of  the  most  precious  of 
Christian  graces.  Let  us  learn  it  of  Christ  the  Lord,  and  practise  it  in  our  intercourse 
with  men.  3.  Humility  must  be  woven  into  the  white  robe  of  righteousness.  Let  us 
wrap  it  closely  round  us.  4.  God  resisteth  the  proud.  Herod  Agrippa  was  eaten  of 
worms  because  he  gave  not  God  the  glory.  Let  us  hate  pride  and  crush  it  out.  6. 
The  humble  will  bo  trustful.  Let  us  remember  always  that  Otoi  careth  for  us,  and 
always  strive  to  cast  our  care  upon  him.  6.  Yet  be  watchfiil,  for  the  devil  is  ever  at 
work.    "  Resist  him,  steadfast  in  faith." 

Vers.  10 — 14. — Conclusion  of  the  Epistle.  L  ENCOUKAGBMBirr.  1.  Z^  ground  ff 
confidenee.  St.  Peter  has  finished  his  work  of  exhortation.  He  bids  his  readers  look  to 
God.    Human  teachers  can  only  deliver  their  message ;  it  is  God  himself  who  giTe^ 


216  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  PETER.    [ch.t.I— 14 

strength  to  obey.  They  mtist  look  unto  Jesus  (iupopSvrfs,  Feb.  xH.  2) ;  they  must 
look  away  from  the  troubles  which  were  surrounding  them — their  light  affliction,  which 
was  but  for  a  moment,  to  the  Author  and  Finisher  of  their  faith.  And  that  because  it 
is  by  grace  that  men  are  saved,  and  Gbd  is  the  God  of  all  grace.  All  the  various  mani- 
festations of  grace — ^pardoning  grace,  sanctifying  grace,  supporting  grace — all  flow  from 
him  who  is  the  Fountain  of  grace.  That  grace  is  sufficient  for  the  Christian  in  all 
his  trials,  however  great  and  many  they  may  be.  It  is  made  perfect  in  weakness.  It 
was  God  who  began  the  good  work,  and  he  will  complete  it.  He  giveth  more  grace. 
The  fountain  of  grace  is  ever  open,  ever  flowing.  "The  Spirit  and  the  bride  say. 
Come.  .  .  .  And  whosoever  will,  let  him  take  the  water  of  life  freely."  We  may 
come  always,  and  come  boldly ;  for  it  was  God  who  first  called  us.  And  it  was  his 
own  eternal  glory  to  which  he  called  us ;  not  to  a  transient  enjoyment  of  his  pre- 
sence, nor  to  a  few  feeble  intermittent  efforts,  but  to  his  own  eternal  glory.  This  was 
the  very  end  and  purpose  for  which  he  called  us.  But  for  this  he  would  not  have 
called  us  at  all ;  for  the  God  of  truth  doth  not  mock  men  with  vain  promises.  The 
glory  to  which  he  called  us  is  eternal ;  then  he  will  not  desert  us  in  the  midst  of  our 
course,  but  will  complete  his  gracious  work.  It  is  his  glory,  true,  real  glory.  "  All 
here  that  is  so  named,"  says  Leighton,  "  is  no  more  than  a  name,  a  shadow  of  glory ;  it 
cannot  endure  the  balance,  but  is  found  light.  .  .  .  The  glory  above"  is  true,  real  glory, 
and  bears  weight,  and  so  hears  aright  the  name  of  glory,  the  term  for  which  in  the 
Hebrew  signifies  'weight;'  and  the  apostle's  expression  seems  to  allude  to  that  sense; 
speaking  of  this  same  glory  to  come,  he  calls  it  'a  far  more  exceeding  weight  of 
glory.'  It  weighs  down  all  labour  and  sufferings  in  the  way,  so  far  as  that  they  are  not 
worth  the  speaking  of  in  respect  of  it.  It  is  the  hyperbole,  (cafl*  (mepfioX^v  as  intepfioKSiv. 
Other  glory  is  over-spoken,  but  this  glory  is  over-glorious  to  be  duly  spoken;  it 
exceeds  and  rises  above  all  that  can  be  spoken  of  it."  It  is  this  to  which  God  hath 
called  us,  and  he  hath  called  us  in  Christ.  The  grace  by  which  the  spiritual  life  is 
given,  sustained,  strengthened,  comes  through  union  with  Christ.  That  life  flows  froic 
Christ,  who  is  the  Life,  through  all  the  members  of  his  mystical  body.  As  long  as  we 
abide  in  Christ  we  are  safe,  for  then  he  abideth  in  us,  and  the  life  that  comes  from 
Christ  dieth  not ;  it  will  live  on,  growing  fiom  grace  to  grace,  from  strength  to  strength, 
till  it  reaches  that  eternal  glory.  2.  What  Ood  wUl  do  for  us.  (1)  He  will  make  us 
perfect.  There  is  much  which  is  lacking  in  our  faith;  there  are  many  stains,  many 
rents,  in  what  should  be  the  white  robe  of  righteousness.  It  is,  alas  I  like  filthy  rags. 
But  God  will  repair  that  which  is  torn,  and  cleanse  that  which  is  defiled.  Our  cha- 
racters show  many  faults,  many  shortcomings,  many  stains  of  past  sins.  But  let  us 
not  despair.  It  was  God  who  began  the  work ;  he  will  complete  it.  Let  ns  do  our  poor 
best  to  work  out  our  own  salvation,  and  he  will  work  within  ns  both  to  will  and  to  do 
for  he  is  faithful.  (2)  He  will  "stablish"  ns.  We  are  unstable ;  we  are  easily  driven 
this  way  and  that  by  the  changeful  currents  of  temptation.  Our  course  is  marked  by 
much  wavering,  much  inconstancy.  This  is  the  reason  why  we  make  so  little  progress. 
If  we  are  not  to  fall  short  of  the  glory  of  God,  we  must  run,  not  as  uncertainly,  but 
with  a  firm  and  steadfast  step,  with  our  eyes  fixed  upon  the  prize  of  the  high  caUing. 
It  is  that  glory  to  which  God  hath  called  us.  He. will  stablish  us  if  we  persevere  and 
if  we  pray.  (3)  He  will  "strengthen "us.  Our  adversary  is  strong — strong  as  a  roaring 
lion ;  but  the  Lion  of  the  tribe  of  Judah  is  stronger.  He  will  bruise  Satan  under  our 
feet.  He  is  the  Strength  of  his  chosen ;  through  him  they  can  do  all  things.  "  He 
giveth  power  to  the  faint;  and  to  them  that  have  no  might  he  increaseth  strength." 
For  he  does  not  leave  his  people  to  wrestle  alone  against  the  evil  one ;  he  endues  them 
with  power  from  on  high — ^the  power  of  the  presence  of  the  Spirit  of  God.  With  that 
presence  there  comes  the  gift  of  strength — power  and  strength  to  have  the  victory,  and 
to  triumph  against  the  devil,  the  world,  and  the  fl,esh.  (4)  He  will "  settle  "  us.  He  hath 
built  his  Church  upon  a  Bock,  and  that  Rock  is  Christ.  He  will  build  up  each  faithful 
Christian  as  a  living  stone  upon  that  one  Foundation  once  laid,  "which  is  Jesus  Christ" 
(1  Cor.  iii.  11).  That  Foundation  is  "  like  Mount  Zion,  which  cannot  be  moved,  but 
standeth  fast  for  ever."  The  house  built  thereupon  is  safe.  The  rain  may  descend,  the 
floods  may  otHne,  the  winds  may  blow ;  they  may  beat  hard  upon  the  house  which  is  the 
shelter  of  the  faithful  Christian's  soul ;  but  (thanks  be  to  God  through  our  Lord  Jesui 
Ohdst)  it  oMBWt  fUt,  UtVth  founded  upon  a  Ro«k.    8.  TTtanksgiving  for  it.    Re  en 


ea.v.1— 14]    THE  MBST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  Of  PETES,  21? 

make  ns  perfect,  stablish,  streogtben,  settle  us ;  for  his  is  the  might,  and  that  for  all  the 
ages  of  eternity.  Hia  hand  is  mighty ;  all  might  is  his.  The  Christian  thankfully  and 
joyfully  acknowledges  it.  '  His  hand  framed  the  heavens ;  they  declare  his  glory.  His 
hand  is  over  bis  elect ;  they  set  forth  bis  praises.  The  same  power  that  sustains  the 
planets  in  their  orbits  as  tbey  circle  round  the  sun  orders  the  course  of  the  humblest 
believer  as  he  draws  nearer  and  nearer  to  the  Sun  of  Eighteousness.  His  heart  is  filled 
with  thankful  adoration  when  he  reflects  on  the  power  of  God,  and  remembers  that  that 
power  is  exerted  for  his  defence,  and  makes  all  things  work  together  for  his  eternal 
good.  Praise  becometh  saints ;  tbey  must  asciibe  unto  the  Lord  worship  and  power. 
In  heaven  tbey  rest  not  day  and  night,  saying, "  Holy,  holy,  holy,  Lord  God  Almighty." 
The  saints  on  earth  are  learning  the  new  song,  practising  the  anthems  of  heaven. 
They  delight  in  thanksgiving;  they  delight  to  contemplate  with  adoring  love  the 
majesty  of  God,  and  to  add  their  "  Amen  "  to  the  high  chant  of  praise. 

II.  Pebsonal  notices.  1.  Commendation  of  Silvanus.  He  was  faithful;  he  had 
proved  his  faithfulness  in  his  constant  attendance  on  St.  Paul.  He  had  laboured  much 
in  the  good  cause ;  he  had  been  patient  and  even  joyful,  able  to  give  thanks  in  suffering : 
"  At  midnight  Paul  and  Silas  prayed,  and  sang  praises  unto  God  "  (Acts  xvi.  25).  St. 
Peter  gives  bis  testimony  to  his  faithfulness,  and  sends  his  letter  by  him.  Good  men 
will  gladly  recognize  goodness  in  others.  2.  Season  for  writing.  (1)  To  exhort  them. 
They  needed  exhortation  and  eucouragement,  for  troubles  were  gathering  fast  around 
them.  St.  Peter  points  them  to  the  example  of  Christ ;  he  teaches  them  the  blessed 
meaning  of  suffering ;  his  letter  breathes  hope  and  consolation  from  beginning  to  end. 
If  Barnabas  was  a  son  of  prophesying  or  exhortation,  Peter  was  a  son  of  consolation. 
(2)  To  testify.  To  give  the  weight  of  Iiis  apostolic  authority  and  his  great  spiritual 
experience  to  the  truth  of  their  religion.  Like  St.  John,  he  declared  unto  others  that 
which  be  himself  had  heard  and  seen.  He  knew  from  the  certain  knowledge  of  actual 
experience  the  reality  of  the  power  of  the  grace  of  God.  Men  who  can  speak  like  this, 
with  weight  and  authority,  are  very  valuable  in  the  Church.  It  is  an  authority  which 
only  real  experience  can  give ;  it  springs  from  the  inner  life  of  prayer  and  fellowship 
with  God.  3.  Salutations.  (1)  From  "the  co-elect  at  Babylon  (^  iv  BajSuXSi/t  aw- 
ekKtKrf)r  If  there  was  a  Church  at  Babylon,  that  Church  sends  her  greetings  to  the 
Churches  of  Asia  Minor.  But  the  words  seem  to  indicate  an  individual.  There  was 
one  Christian  woman  in  great  Babylon,  in  what  had  been  once  the  mightiest  city  of 
the  world,  the  centre  of  a  mighty  empire,  the  very  type  of  the  world-power  arrayed 
against  the  people  of  God.  There,  where  Nebucha'inezzar  had  seen  in  vision  the  great 
image,  whose  brightness  was  excellent,  and  the  form  thereof  was  terrible — in  that  very 
city  the  Stone  that  "was  cut  out  without  bands"  was  now  beginning  its  conquering 
course ;  and  the  first  agent  in  the  great  work  was  the  apostle  "  called  Cephas,  which 
is  by  interpretation,  A  stone."  With  him  laboured  his  wife,  his  partner  now  in  holy 
work  for  Christ,  as  (we  are  told)  she  was  afterwards  in  the  blessed  death  of  martyrdom. 
Then  he  bade  her  remember  the  Lord :  Me/iyijo-o,  &  o3tij,  toS  Kvplm.  Here  he  calls  her 
the  co-elect ;  he  had  addressed  his  Epistle  to  the  elect  strangers  of  the  dispersion ;  his 
wife  also  was  elect,  and  she  was  now  at  Babylon.  "  The  Lord  knoweth  them  that  are 
his;"  wherever  they  are,  his  fatherly  hand  is  over  them;  they  are  his  chosen;  he 
careth  for  them;  at  Babylon  or  at  Jerusalem  be  is  near  them;  strangers  on  earth, 
they  are  citizens  of  the  heavenly  country;  there  is  their  heart  and  their  treasure. 
(2)  From  Marcus.  St.  Peter  calls  him  his  son,  as  St.  Paul  calls  Timothy  his  son  in 
the  faith  (1  Tim.  i.  2).  St.  Peter  knew  the  mother  of  John  whose  surname  was 
Mark  (Acts  xii.  12) ;  he  may  have  been  the  means  of  converting  her  son.  Mark,  like 
Silvanus,  was  one  of  the  links  between  the  two  great  apostles;  he  had  been  with 
St.  Paul  in  his  first  imprisonment  at  Rome  (Col.  iv.  10).  Then  he  was  about  to  travel 
into  Asia  Minor;  now,  it  seems,  he  had  joined  St.  Peter  at  Babylon.  He  had  once 
shrunk  from  hardships  and  dangers  (Acts  xv.  38) ;  now  he  had  learned  steadfastness 
and  Christian  courage— he  worked  now  with  St.  Peter  among  fierce  heathen  and 
fanatical  Jews.  St.  Paul,  who  once  "  thought  it  not  fjood  to  take  him,"  desired  his 
help  and  sympathy  (2  Tim.  iv.  11);  he  would  be  profitable  for  the  ministry  at  Rome, 
as  doubtless  he  was  at  Babylon.  Rome  and  Babylon  were  the  extreme  points  theu 
reached  by  Christian  missionaries.  Christ's  Church  is  dispersed  throughout  the  world ; 
its  centre  of  uoitjf  ii  Cltrist  tlw  Lord;  its  members  should  be  aaited  iu  faith  and  lovei 


218  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PETER     [oh.  t  1—14. 

4.  The  hiss  of  charity.  It  was  a  touching  custom  dating  from  our  Lord's  own  time, 
and  long  practised  in  the  Church.  Ceremonies  "  may  he  changed  according  to  the 
diversities  of  countries,  times,  and  men's  manners."  But  that  charity,  of  which  the 
holy  kiss  was  an  expression,  may  not  be  changed;  it  is  the  very  mark  and  badge  of 
Christ's  disciples.  Still  they  greet  one  another  with  looks  and  words  and  deeds  of  holy 
luve.  6.  St.  Peter's  greeting.  "Grace  unto  yon,  and  peace,  he  multiplied,"  he  had 
said  at  the  opening  of  his  Epistle;  he  closes  it  with  the  like  holy  farewell:  "Peace 
be  with  you  all  that  are  in  Christ  Jesus."  We  can  express  no  better  wish  for  our 
friends.  The  peace  of  God  passeth  all  understanding ;  but  they  only  can  have  that 
blessed  peace  who  are  in  Christ.  For  it  is  his  peace;  he  giveth  it;  it  cometh  to  his 
chosen  through  intimate  spiritual  communion  with  the  Lord.  May  we  share  fchat 
deep  blessedness ! 

Lessons.  1.  God  giveth  rtore  grace;  let  us  come  boldly  to  the  throne  of  grace. 
He  hath  called  us  to  his  eternal  glory ;  let  us  pers svere  in  faith  and  hope.  2.  He  can 
make  his  people  perfect;  he  can  stablish,  strengthen,  settle  them.  Let  us  trust  in 
him,  living  in  constant  thankfulness.  3.  St.  ^'eter's  friends  were  like-minded  with 
himself.  Let  us  seek  our  friends  among  faithful  Christians.  4.  St.  Peter's  wife  was 
co-elect.  The  marriage  tie  is  most  blessed  when  husband  and  wife  are  united  "  in  the 
Lord." 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ver.  6  (middle  clause). — The  slave's  dress.  "  Be  clothed,"  or,  according  to  the  Revised 
Version,  "  gird  yourselves."  It  is  a  remarkable  word,  occurring  only  here  in  the  New 
Testament.  It  means  to  put  on  a  certain  article  of  dress  which  according  to  one  view 
was  a  kind  of  "overall"  worn  by  slaves  above  their  other  clothing,  and  according  to 
another  was  a  white  scarf  which  was  part  of  the  slave's  dress.  In  either  case  it  was 
a  mark  of  servitude;  therefore  the  exhortation  is  not  merely  to  wear  the  garment  of 
lowly-mindednesB,  veiling  all  other  graces,  but  specifically  to  put  on  the  badge  Of  menial 
service.  There  may  be  a  still  more  touching  allusion  in  the  peculiar  word.  Did  not 
Peter's  memory  go  back  to  that  scene  in  the  upper  room,  which  he  had  understood  so 
little  then,  but  had,  as  his  Lord  promised,  come  to  "know"  in  some  measure  in  the 
"hereafter"  of  his  many  years  of  service?  He  recalls  how  the  Master  had  girded 
himself  with  the  towel,  and  stooped  to  the  slave's  task  of  washing  the  disciples'  feet. 
Surely  in  this  text,  especially  if  we  adopt  the  reading  and  translation  of  the  Revised 
Version  ("  gird  yourselves  with  h  umility  to  serve  one  another  "  ),  we  trace  a  reference  to 
that  wonderful  act  of  stooping  love,  and  hear  an  echo  of  the  solemn  lesson  which 
Christ  himself  taught  in  connection  with  it :  "  Ye  also  ought  to  wash  one  another's 
feet." 

I.  Thb  Chmstian  slave's  qabment.  Whatever  was  the  exact  form  of  the  article 
of  dress  referred  to,  it  was  worn  by  slaves,  and  was  a  badge  of  their  condition.  We, 
too,  are  slaves,  bought  and  absolutely  possessed  by  our  Owner  and  Master,  Jesus  Christ. 
The  fitting  garb  for  us  is  that  lowliness  of  mind  which  he  himself  manifested,  and 
which  Christianity  has  throned  as  in  some  sense  the  queen  of  all  the  virtues.  It  is 
purely  a  Christian  virtue;  the  very  name  for  it  in  the  New  Testament  is  a  Christian 
coinage ;  for  new  things  need  new  words,  and  this  was  a  new  thing.  The  modest  grace 
of  humility  looks,  by  the  side  of  the  splendid  virtues  of  Greece  and  Rome,  like  some 
homely  brown  bird  among  the  gorgeously  coloured  birds  of  the  East,  or  a  dove  among 
eagles.  The  gospel  has  brought  to  us  such  a  clear  revelation  of  what  we  ought  to  be, 
and  has  so  quickened  the  sensitiveness  of  men's  consciences  as  to  their  failures  and 
sins,  that  a  lowly  estimate  of  one's  self  is  for  a  Christian  the  only  possible  one,  and  is  felt 
to  be  for  all  men  the  only  true  one.  The  more  clear  our  vision  of  what  we  may  become, 
and  the  more  ardent  our  enthusiasm  after  yet  unattained  stages  of  progress  in  character, 
the  more  lowly  will  necessarily  be  our  estimate  of  ourselves.  Whoever  has  seen  him- 
self as  he  really  is  will  have  no  heart  to  blow  his  own  trumpet,  or  to  hear  other  men 
■ingrng  his  praises.  We  do  not  need  to  affect  to  be  ignorant  of,  or  to  depreciate,  what 
we  are  or  can  do.  It  is  no  breach  of  humility  to  be  conscious  of  power,  but  it  is  to  be 
M>  conscious  of  it  that  we  forget  our  weakness,  and  forget  that  the  power  is  a  gift,  or 
•re  ever  expecting  recognition  from  oar  brethren,  and  thinking  mora  of  ourselve*  and 


OH.  T.  1—14]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GBNBEAL  OP  PETER.  219 

of  our  daims  than  either  of  our  obligations  or  of  our  weaknesses.  If  we  would  obey, 
tliis  injunction,  and  be  rooted  in  humility,  we  must  seek  to  know  ourselves  as  we  are, 
and  to  that  end  must  study  our  own  faces  in  the  glass  of  God's  Word  and  Christ's 
example.  These  mirrors  wUl  show  us  what  will  put  us  out  of  conceit  of  ourselves. 
We  must  further  reverse  the  favourite  mode  of  comparison  with  others,  and  search 
into  their  good  and  our  own  eviL  We  must  further  remember  that  all  on  which  pride 
or  self-conceit  can  build  their  flimsy  castles  is  God's  gift,  and  that  therefore  th^nk- 
fulness  and  not  self-exaltation  should  be  our  temper.  To  wear  this  servile  dress  goes 
clean  against  the  grain  of  human  nature.  It  is  the  victory  of  unselfishness  when  we 
truly  put  it  on.  It  is  not  pleasant  to  flesh  and  blood  to  go  about  in  the  garb  which 
proclaims  that  we  are  slaves.  But  what  true  Christianity  can  there  be  in  a  man  who 
has  not  learned  that  he  is  poor  and  blind  and  naked,  and  that  all  his  wealth  and  sig!)t 
«nd  vesture  he  must  owe  to  undeserved,  unpurchased  grace?  And  how  can  a  man 
who  has  had  to  kneel  before  Jesus  a  suppliant  penitent,  and  confess  himself  leprous 
and  beggared  and  lost,  get  up  from  his  knees  and  go  out  among  his  fellows,  carrying 
his  head  very  high  and  bearing  himself  as  if  he  were  somebody?  If  we  are  Christ's, 
we  must  wear  the  dress  that  proclaims  us  slaves,  and  gird  ourselves  with  humility,  the 
livery  of  his  household. 

IL  The  Pattern  which  we  hatb  to  follow.  Our  thoughts  are  carried  back,  as 
we  have  already  suggested,  to  the  memorable  incident  of  the  foot-washing.  In  that 
incident  was  condensed,  and  as  it  were  presented  in  an  acted  parable,  the  spirit  of 
Christ's  whole  mission.  The  evangelist  emphatically  marks  that  supreme  instance  of 
condescension  as  being  the  outcome  of  our  Lord's  clear  consciousness  of  his  Divine 
Sonship  and  of  his  universal  authority.  Just  because  he  knew  that  he  had  come  from 
God  and  went  to  God,  and  held  all  things  in  his  sway,  he  bowed  to  serve  us.  And  it 
was  also  the  outcome  of  his  ever-flowing  love  to  his  followers.  So  his  whole  work  on 
earth,  in  every  stage  of  its  humiliation,  is  based  on  that  unique  consciousness  of  Divinity 
and  imperial  sway,  and  is  animated  by  love.  As  he  then  laid  aside  his  garments,  so 
he  has  put  off  the  glories  which  he  wore  or  ever  the  world  was ;  and  as  he  then  girded 
himself  with  the  towel,  so  he  has  voluntarily  assumed  the  coarse  and  lowly  body  of  our 
humiliation,  stooping  to  be  a  man.  As  he  then  assumed  a  menial  garb  in  order  that  he 
might  wash  his  disciples'  feet,  so  he  has  taken  the  form  of  a  servant  and  become  obedient 
to  death  that  he  might  cleanse  us  all  from  our  sins,  by  his  own  application  to  conscience 
and  character  of  his  own  cleansing  blood.  In  all  these  points  we  have  to  follow  his 
example.  Our  htunility  must  not  only  be  a  lowly  estimate  of  ourselves,  but  it  must  be 
a  practical  stripping  off  of  distinctions  and  prerogatives  and  an  identifying  of  ourselves 
with  the  lowliest.  It  must  lead  to  service.  That  service  must  have  for  its  end  our 
brother's  cleansing.  Jesus  is  not  only  our  Pattern,  but  also  our  Motive ;  and  not  only 
our  Motive,  but  by  his  indwelling  Spirit  he  is  the  Power  which  moulds  our  selfishness 
into  the  likeness  of  his  perfect  self-surrender.  In  the  deepest  sense  of  the  words,  the 
"  mind  which  was  in  Christ  Jesus  "  must  be  in  us,  if  we  are  truly  Christians.  If  we 
have  not  his  Spirit,  we  are  not  his  servants.  If  we  have  that  Spirit,  we  too,  like  him, 
shall  be  girt  with  humility,  and  do  for  others  what  he  has  done  for  us. 

III.  The  purpose  fob  which  it  is  woen.  According  to  one  view  of  the  word,  the 
piece  of  dress  here  referred  to  was,  as  we  have  said,  a  kind  of  loose  "  overall  "  put  on 
in  preparation  for  work,  and,  according  to  another,  a  scarf  which  served  the  purpose  of 
a  girdle.  So  this  grace  of  humility  may  be  regarded  as  keeping  all  the  other  virtues 
which  robe  the  Christian  character  in  their  places.  It  adds  lustre  to  them  all,  as  rich 
attire  and  flashing  jewels  are  harmonized  and  beautified  by  some  sober-tinted  cloak 
thrown  over  them.  Nay,  more,  it  is  their  very  life,  for  nothing  more  surely  destroys 
the  charm  of  all  other  excellences  and  withers  them  when  they  grow  than  self-gratula- 
tion  and  self-conceit.  Moses  was  all  unaware  that  his  face  shone.  But  the  great 
purpose  for  which  humility  is  enjoined-on  Christians  is  that  they  may  be  ready  for 
service.  The  man  who  flaunts  about  in  gay  clothing  of  self-conceit  is  usually  slow  to 
put  his  hand  to  work  in  anything  which  will  not  advance  his  reputation,  or  will  soil 
his  bravery.  Fine  clothes  and  hard  work  do  not  go  well  together.  He  is  generally 
more  ready  to  insist  upon  his  claims  than  to  respond  to  his  brother's  claims  on  him. 
We  must  put  off  that  gaudy  robe,  and  be  content  to  hide  our  excellences  with  the 
wrapper  of  buoiUt^,  M  «  servant  puts  on  some  coarse  apron  for  coarse  tasks,  if  we  are 


220  THK  PIEST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  PETER,    [oh.  v.  1-U 

to  be  rightly  attired  for  the  work  wo  have  to  do.  The  humble  mind  thinks  not  of  itf 
claims  on  others,  but  of  its  duties  to  them.  It  is  ready  for  the  lowest  service,  and  is 
kept  by  no  false  dignity  from  placing  itself  by  the  side  of  the  feeblest  and  the  foulest. 
Like  the  Master,  it  will  take  beggars  by  the  hand,  nor  shrink  from  the  touch  of  publicans 
and  sinners.  It  will  regard  the  meanest  task  done  for  Jesus  as  an  honour  and  a  mark 
of  the  Master's  favour.  DifBdent  of  its  own  power,  it  will  depend,  and  not  in  vain, 
upon  him  for  all  its  efficiency;  and,  so  depending,,it  will  be  enriched  with  all  necessary 
helps,  while  self-conceit,  trusting  in  its  own  power,  will  do  little,  and  that  little  mostly 
barren,  for,  as  the  next  words  tell  us, "  God  resisteth  the  proud,  but  giveth  grace  to  the 
humble."  The  rains  and  dews  run  oflf  the  mountain  crests,  which  are  always  ■  sterile 
and  often  struck  by  the  lightning.  It  is  down  in  the  valleys  that  the  broad  rivers  glide 
and  spread  fruitfulness  and  smiling  plenty. — A.  M. 

Ver.  10  (first  portion). —  Why  we  may  make  sure  of  QodHa  help  in  conflict.  These 
closing  words  of  the  Epistle,  which  have  only  some  personal  greetings  after  them,  are 
best  taken,  not  as  a  prayer,  but  as  a  full-toned  assurance,  like  some  grand  swell  of 
music  at  the  end  of  an  oratorio.  The  apostle  has  been  speaking  much  about  suffering 
and  trial,  especially  in  the  latter  part  of  his  letter.  He  has  just  warned  his  readers  of 
the  adversary  who  seeks  their  destruction.  And  here  against  that  grim  figure  he  holds 
up  the  shield  of  the  Name  and  purpose  of  God,  and  bids  us  be  brave  and  jubilant  amid 
aU  sufferings  and  in  the  presence  of  the  enemy,  because  he  is  for  us.  We  shall  consider 
the  rich  significance  of  the  various  forms  of  the  Divine  help  as  expressed  in  the  latter  part 
of  this  verse,  in  another  homily.  For  the  present  we  confine  ourselves  to  the  former 
half  of  the  verse,  each  clause  of  which  sets  forth  a  fresh  ground  on  which  a  poor  feeble 
Boul  may  build  its  confidence,  in  spite  of  sorrow  and  Satan,  that  no  harm  will  come 
to  it. 

L  The  gbeat  fouitdatioh  fob  the  tbiuuphant  assubanob  which  fobbsees  victory 

IN  the  midst  of  the  80EB8T  CONFLICT  18  THE  INFINITE  FULNESS  AND  LOVING  HEABT  OF 

God.  When  surrounded  by  difficulties,  crushed  by  sorrows,  assaulted  and  battered  by 
all  the  artillery  of  temptations,  when  faint  of  heart  and  conscious  of  one's  own  weakness, 
when  dull  torpor  seems  to  have  taken  all  warmth  of  feeling  out  of  us,  and  many  defeats 
to  have  robbed  us  of  hope, — there  is  one  strong  tower  into  which  we  may  run  and  be 
■afe.  The  Name  of  the  Lord,  the  thonght  of  his  revealed  character  as  the  God  of  all 
grace,  is  enough  to  scatter  all  the  black-winged  brood  of  cares  and  fears,  and  to  bring 
the  dove  of  peace  into  our  hearts,  though  they  be  lonely  as  the  ark,  and  all  be  one  waste 
of  waters  around.  For  that  great  Name  proclaims  that  his  love  is  inexhaustible.  Grace 
is  love  exercised  to  inferiors  and  undeserving  persons ;  and,  if  he  is  the  God  of  all  grace, 
boundless  love  for  the  lowliest  and  foulest  is  in  his  heart.  Anything  short  of  such  Divine 
fulness  of  love  wou]d  be  tired  out  by  our  slowness  and  repeated  sin.  Impatience  steals 
into  the  most  long-suffering  heart,  and  the  most  liberal  hand  will  shut  fast  at  last  when 
the  ragged  good-for-nothing  comes  for  the  hundredth  time  with  the  old  story  of  shiftless 
improvidence  and  misery,  and  the  old  whining  petition  for  help  already  so  often  given 
and  squandered.  But  there  is  no  wearying  out  his  patient  love,  and  no  past  misuse  ol 
his  gifts  can  ever  prompt  him  to  deny  us  more.  The  Grod  of  all  grace  has  grace  for  all. 
The  Name,  too,  proclaims  the  infinite  fulness  of  his  resources.  That  great  storehouse 
is  inexhaustible,  after  all  giving  full.  He  works  and  is  not  weary.  He  bestows  and  is 
none  the  poorer.  The  stream  has  been  pouring  for  ages  with  a  rush  like  Niagara,  and 
the  flood  to-day  is  as  mighty  as  at  the  beginning.  It  is  fed  from  the  eternal  fountains 
in  the  "  mountains  of  God,"  and  cannot  cease.  Shall  we  fear  drought  whilst  we  are 
borne  on  its  broad  bosom  ?  The  coins  in  circulation,  though  enough  to  enrich  the  world, 
are  as  nothing  to  the  masses  of  bullion  stored  in  the  depths.  The  sun  itself  will  die  by 
self-communication,  and  that  great  hearth-fire  will  grow  cold,  and  all  the  family  of 
worlds  that  move  around  it  cease  to  be  united  and  wanned  by  its  beams  ;  but  the  God 
who  is  our  Sun  burns  and  is  not  consumed.  Shall  we  fear  freezing  or  darkness  while 
we  walk  in  the  light  of  his  face?  And  that  great  Name  implies  an  infinite  variety  of 
resources.  AU  diversities  of  grace  are  his,  that  they  may  be  ours.  Grace  is  not  only 
love  in  exercise  to  inferiors,  but  is  also  the  gifts  of  that  love,  which  are  so  inseparable 
from  it  that  they  are  called  by  the  same  name.  These  take  the  shape  of  every  man's 
^eed,  And  of  all  tk«  need«  of  every  man.  The  bread-fruit  tree  to  the  South  Sea  Islauden 


CH.T.1— 14]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  PBTEB.  221 

IS  a  storehouse  from  which  they  get  all  they  require.  Its  fruit  is  their  food,  its  juice  their 
beverage,  from  its  bark  they  prepare  their  clothing,  from  its  wood  they  build  their 
houses  and  fashion  their  weapons,  its  leaves  make  their  thatch,  its  fibres  their  cordage. 
So  the  grace  of  God  is  all-sufficient — Protean  in  its  forms,  fitting  each  necessity  as  it 
arises,  and  shaped  so  as  to  give  to  every  one  of  us  the  very  thing  which  character  and 
circumstances  at  the  moment  require.  Shall  we  fear  to  be  ever  left  to  fall  before 
enemies  or  to  be  crushed  by  our  sorrows,  when  we  have  such  an  ever-full  fountain  of 
various  grace  to  draw  from  ? 

II.  Anothbb  gboond  op  confident  absdbanob  is  God's  own  act,  which  would 
BE  STnLTiFiED  IF  WE  WEBE  NOT  DFHELD.  He  "called  US  uuto  his  eternal  glory  in 
Cbrist."  Here  the  act  of  calling,  and  that  to  which  we  are  called,  and  the  Christ  in 
whom  we  are  called,  are  all  alleged  as  a  threefold  cord  on  which  we  may  hang  the 
whole  weight  of  our  confidence.  They  make  it  inconceivable  that  God  should  not  do 
for  us  aU  which  the  next  clause  assures  us  he  will  do.  He  will  not  leave  his  purpose 
half  accomplished.  Nobody  shall  ever  have  to  point  to  his  incomplete  work,  and  say 
that  he  began  to  build  and  was  not  able  to  finish.  His  gifts  and  calling  are  subject 
to  no  change  of  his  solemn  purpose.  He  is  not  a  son  of  man  that  he  should  repent. 
And  if  he  wills  an  end,  he  wills  the  means  to  that  end.  He  will  assuredly  provide 
for  his  children  all  that  is  needed  to  bring  them  to  the  glory  to  which  he  has  called 
them.  Does  God  summon  men  to  his  eternal  glory,  and  forget  to  provide  them  grace  ? 
Will  he  call  them  to  his  own  palace,  and  not  give  them  an  outfit  for  their  journey  ? 
Does  he  send  out  his  soldiers  without  ammunition  or  stores?  "It  is  your  Father's 
good  pleasure  to  give  you  the  kingdom "  was  Christ's  great  reason  to  his  little  flock 
why  they  should  not  fear ;  as  if  he  had  said,  "  Do  you  suppose  that  the  Father  who 
gives  you  a  crown  at  last  wiU  ngt  give  you  all  you  need  on  your  way  to  it  ? "  So  a 
joyous  temper  of  triuoiphant  confidence  in  the  face  of  all  sufiering  and  temptation 
should  be  ours ;  "  for  faithful  is  he  that  calleth  you,  who  also  will "  carry  out  his  purpose 
to  the  blessed  end. 

HI.  The  final  geound  on  which  we  may  build  cue  confidence  is  God's 
APPOINTMENT  OF  BDFFBBINO  AND  ITS  MEANING.  The  words,  "after  that  ye  have 
suffered  a  while,"  must  be  connected  more  immediately  with  the  preceding.  They 
teach  that  the  way  to  the  eternal  glory  is  through  transitory,  brief  suffering.  The 
apostle  comes  back  to  the  thoughts  with  which  he  began  his  Epistle  about  "  for  a 
season  being  in  heaviness."  These  sufferings,  then,  were  included  in  the  Divine  purpose. 
They  are  as  much  a  part  of  his  scheme,  are  as  much  a  fruit  of  his  inexhaustible  love, 
as  the  glory  to  which  they  lead.  They  do  not  break  in  upon  the  Divine  plan.  There  is 
no  fear  of  their  threatening  its  fulfilment.  They  are  not  excrescences,  but  essential  parts 
of  that  deep  counsel  of  the  unfathomable  wisdom  according  to  which  all  our  circumstances 
are  appointed  by  him.  He  will  not,  then,  be  taken  at  unawares  by  them,  nor  will  any 
accumulation  of  sorrow  or  suffering  be  any  hindrance  to  his  Divine  purpose  of  strength- 
ening us.  The  electric  spark  finds  no  resistance  to  its  passage  in  the  deepest  sea,  and 
though  all  the  waves  and  billows  go  over  us,  his  sustaining  grace  can  none  the  less  make 
its  way  to  our  hearts.  Nor  are  they  only  his  appointment,  but  their  direct  purpose  is 
to  fit  us  for  the  eternal  glory  to  which  we  are  called.  Joy  alone  would  not  do  that. 
The  heart  needs  to  be  refined  by  sorrow,  and  the  experience  of  desolation,  ere  it  can 
fally  receive  the  grace  now  which  leads  to  the  glory  hereafter.  So  we  are  not  only 
strengthened  for,  but  by,  sorrow;  and  one  of  God's  ways  of  "stablishing"  us  is  to  cut 
away  all  other  props,  that  we  may  lean  all  our  weight  upon  him.  Faith,  then,  out  of 
the  lion  brings  honey,  wrings  hope  and.  assured  triumph  out  of  the  very  pains  and  foes 
that  beset  us,  as  if  one  should  draw  lightning  to  guide  him  on  his  road  from  the  heavy 
thunder-clouds  that  frown  above  him.  When  sorrow  comes,  see  in  it  a  part  of  that 
Divine  plan  which  issues  in  eternal  glory,  see  in  it  one  of.  the  channels  by  which  that 
plan  shall  be  accomplished,  that  glory  reached,  and  the  grace  of  the  God  of  all  grace 
enter  more  abundantly  into  your  heart.  So  good  cheer  will  be  bom  of  sadness,  as 
radiant  morning  from  night,  and  your  light  affliction,  which  is  but  for  a  moment,  will 
bring  you  even  now  a  confidence  in  God  and  an  enlarged  strength,  which  are  precursors 
and  pledges  of  an  eternal  weight  of  glory. — A.  M. 

Ver.  10  (latter  halt). — The  mamjfold  gifU/t  manifeld  need.    The  apostle  has  so 


222  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  PETER,    [oh.  v.  1—14. 

exalted  an  idea  of  the  Ailness  and  variety  of  the  operations  of  God's  grace  that  he 
heaps  together  here  all  these  terms  which  substantially  express  t^e  same  idea.  '\  he 
accumulation,  however,  is  not  empty  tautology.  It  witnesses  to  the  joyful  emotion 
which  fills  his  heart.  It  hrings  to  view  the  completeness  of  the  multiform  help  which 
our  need  in  all  its  aspects  may  expect  to  receive.  That  great  river  of  ever-flowing 
Divine  commimication  parts  into  the  four  heads  which  water  all  the  Eden  of  the 
renewed  soul.  Though  the  ideas  he  closely  connected,  yet  ws  may  distinguish 
between  them,  and  may  let  our  thoughts  dwell  on  thes3  words,  in  which  the  apostle 
seeks  to  breathe  his  own  cheerful  confidence  into  sorrowful  and  tried  hearts,  as 
illustrating  both  man's  manifold  need  and  God's  manifold  grace.  The  whole  verse  is 
best  regarded,  with  the  Revised  Version,  not  as  a  prayer,  but  as  an  assurance :  "  God 
shall  perfect,  stablish,  strengthen,  settle  you," 

I.  OuB  FAILUKES  AND  IMPERFECTIONS  WILL  BE  REPAIRED.  The  word  here  translated 
"  perfect ''  properly  means  "  to  restore  to  a  state  of  completeness."  It  is  used  to  descri  be 
the  process  of  mending  nets.  It  is  used  in  its  ethical  sense  (Gal.  vi.  1)  to  express  the 
Christian  duty  of  restoring  the  brother  overtaken  in  a  fault.  And  so  it  is  employed 
here  for  that  great  work  of  Divine  grace  by  which  our  defects  are  made  good,  the  rents 
which  sin  has  made  mended,  the  tarnished  purity  given  back,  the  scars  effaced.  That 
form  of  the  Divine  help  answers  to  the  deepest  of  our  needs,  and,  in  its  incipient 
stages,  is  the  firstfruits  of  the  great  harvest  of  God's  grace  which  a  believing  soul 
reaps.  We  need  first  of  all  forgiveness  and  the  removal  of  the  guilt  of  our  sins.  All 
restoration  of  fallen  men  to  the  lost  ideal  of  man,  which  is  the  likeness  of  God,  must 
begin  there,  and  then  there  follows  a  long  process  which  the  patient  Gud  carries  on, 
mending  us  by  slow  degrees,  and  step  by  step  supplementing  this  defect  and  repairing 
the  results  of  that  sin,  till  there  be  no  gaps  remaining  needing  to  be  filled  and  no  flaws 
in  character  needing  to  be  corrected.  "  'Tis  a  lifelong  task  till  the  lump  be  leavened." 
The  restoring  grace  has  to  peiTneate  all  the  crannies  and  corners  of  the  soul.  It  must 
transform  and  expel,  if  it  is  to  mend  and  restore.  When  we  think  of  our  own  defects 
and  see  how  much  is  lacking  in  our  characters,  we  may  well  feel  that  nothing  can  ever 
fill  np  these.  Then  the  confidence  of  this  brave  text  may  hearten  us.  It  is  the  God  of 
all  grace  to  whom  we  look  for  our  perfecting.  Ko  emptiness  can  be  so  vast  and  so 
empty  that  that  "ali"  cannot  fill  it.  No  man  can  have  gone  so  far  from  the  right  way,  or 
had  his  nature  so  lacerated  by  sin's  cruel  fangs,  that  that  "  all "  cannot  heal  and  repair 
the  damage.  Therefore  the  more  we  sound  the  height,  and  length,  and  breadth,  aud 
depth  of  our  imperfections  and  sins,  the  more  joyfully  should  we  think  of  the  complete- 
ness of  that  power  which  overlaps  them  on  all  sides  and  surpasses  them  in  every 
dimension,  and  the  more  confidently  should  we  exclaim,  "  The  God  of  aU  grace  shall 
restore  us  and  complete  us." 

II.  Cue  fluotuations  will  be  steadied.  The  God  of  all  grace  will  stablish  us. 
The  asam-ance  comes  with  special  force  from  the  life  of  the  apostle  whose  earlier 
character  had  been  marked  by  such  extreme  variations,  and  by  such  an  enormous 
difference  between  high  and  low  water.  If  ever  there  was  a  believer  whose  impulsive- 
ness needed  steadying,  it  was  the  man  who  is  denying  his  Master  from  fear  of  a  maid- 
servant's sharp  tongue  less  than  four  and  twenty  hours  after  he  had  bragged  that, 
whoever  fled,  he  would  stand  by  him.  Such  quick  alternations  of  hot  and  cold  fits 
indicate  a  character  very  lovable,  no  doubt,  in  its  transparency  and  in  its  generous 
impulses,  but  needing  much  painful  discipline,  before  it  can  be  consolidated  into 
"  rock,"  and  Peter  deserve  his  new  name.  Thefe  are  many  indications  in  this  Epistle 
that  the  result  had  been  attained,  and  that  Peter's  assurance  here  is  in  some  measure  a 
transcript  of  his  own  experience.  But  however  that  may  be,  the  operation  of  the  grace 
of  God  is  to  give  firmness  and  solidity  of  character,  both  as  against  our  own  vacillations, 
and  as  against  outward  oppositions  which  bring  a  constant  pressure  against  us  to  move 
us  from  our  foundation.  So  long  as  we  are  on  tliis  earth  and  in  this  body,  we  shall  be 
subject  to  variations  both  in  the  clearness  of  our  perceptions  of  religious  truth  aud  in 
the  warmth  of  our  religious  emotions,  but  God's  grace  ij  able  to  diminish  the  range  of 
our  thermometers,  bo  that  there  shall  not  be  so  many  degrees  between  the  summer 
maximum  and  the  winter  minimum,  and  to  bring  about  a  gradual  approximation  to  a 
uniformity  in  which  emotion  shall  be  converted  into  steadfast  principle.  If  we  arc  to 
Iw  thiu  MtabUihed,  we  must  open  our  hearts  for  the  entry  of  the  grace  which  wUl 


CH.T.  1— 14,]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  PETER.  tH 

steady  us,  and  so  we  find,  a  yerse  or  two  Iwfore  oar  text,  that  the  apostle  has  bid  his 
readers  be  "  steadfast  in  the  faith,"  where  he  employs  a  word  which  is  cognate  with 
that  here  used.  Faith  knits  us  to  God,  and  sets  wide  the  portals  of  the  heart  that  the 
flood  of  his  power  may  enter  in.  If  we  trust  him,  he  will  hold  us  up.  If  we  set  the 
Lord  at  our  right  hands,  we  shall  not  be  moved.  Our  hearts  are  changeful,  and  our 
temperaments  may  be  impulsive  and  fickle,  but  Qod's  grace  ia  given  us  to  help  us  to 
conquer  our  temperaments  and  change  our  dispositions.  If  we  will  let  it  work  its  work 
upon  us,  it  will  make  us  partakers  of  an  inviolable  and  unshaken  evenness  of  soul, 
which  is  a  faint  shadow  of  God's  own  unchangeableness. 

III.  OuB  WEAKNESSES  WILL  BE  STEBHQTHENBD.  Our  mauifold  need  may  be  con- 
templated in  yet  another  aspect.  We  are  weak,  and  we  need  strength.  If  we  measure 
our  power  compared  with  what  we  have  to  do,  still  more  as  compared  with  what  we 
have  to  resist  and  suficr,  how  disproportionate  it  is  1  Heavy  tasks  have  to  be  done, 
hard  battles  to  be  fought,  bitter  sorrows  to  be  bome,']and  "  who  is  suBBcient  for  these 
things  7  "  Our  weakness  is  our  misery,  and  often  it  is  our  sin.  It  comes  partly  from 
the  natural  limits  of  our  powers,  but  far  more  from  the  enfeebling  influence  of  living  to 
self,  which,  like  fever,  burns  away  energy  and  leaves  us  exhausted.  What  we  are  unfit 
by  nature  to  do  is  not  duty  to  do.  It  may  be  and  often  Is  duty  to  attempt  what  seems 
more  than  we  can  manage,  and  experience  confirms  faith  in  the  expectation  that  power 
grows  in  the  effort.  But  that  which  is  plainly  beyond  our  measure  is  not  binding  on 
us.  God  never  bids  us  do  what  he  does  not  strengthen  us  to  dc.  And  the  feeblest 
Christian  may  cherish  the  triumphant  assurance  given  to  us  all  here  that  he  will  get 
all  the  power  he  needs  for  work,  warfare,  and  sorrow.  How  will  the  strength  come  ? 
It  will  be  breathed  into  us  by  the  communication  of  the  mighty  Spirit  who  dwells  in 
all  Christian  souls.  He  is  the  Comforter,  in  the  proper  meaning  of  that  word — the 
Strengthener,  by  whose  companionship  all  weakness  is  invigorated,  and  the  whole 
nature  quickened  into  higher  energy.  We  shall  be  strengthened  with  might  by  his 
Spirit  in  the  inner  man.  It  will  come  by  the  increase  of  faith ;  for  dependence  on  God 
of  itself  brings  strength,  and  to  be  persuaded  that  we  have  him  to  lean  on  makes  the 
weak  strong.  It  wiU  come  from  self-control  and  self-deidal ;  for  the  life  purged  of  that 
taint  is  strong. 

"My  strength  is  ai  the  strength  of  ten. 
Because  my  heart  is  pure." 

An  indwelling  God  will  be  the  glory  of  our  strength,  and,  possessing  his  grace,  "  the 
weakest  may  be  as  David,  and  David  as  an  angel  of  God." 

IV.  Wb  shall  be  fixed  on  the  foundation.  The  Revised  Version  omits  the 
word  "  settle,"  and  is  probably  correct  in  doing  so.  In  addition  to  the  external  evidence 
against  it,  we  may  notice  that  it  conveys  an  idea  of  a  somewhat  different  order  to  those 
of  the  preceding  verbs,  inasmuch  as  it  introduces  the  thought  of  a  foundation  external 
to  us,  while  they  pointed  entirely  to  inward  processes.  That  very  difference  in  the 
point  of  view  may  have  been  the  reason  for  the  insertion  of  the  word,  which,  even  if  it 
lie  spurious,  conveys  a  very  striking  and  important  concluding  thought.  AJl  the  pre- 
ceding assurances  will  only  be  realized  in  proportion  as  we  are  fixed  and  abide  on  the  one 
foundation.  This  unmoved  repose  on  it  is  expressed  by  that  final  word  "  settle."  All 
repair  of  our  manifold  imperfections  and  sins,  all  fixity  of  character  and  purpose,  all 
strength  for  service  or  for  suffering,  comes  from  union  with  Christ  the  Foundation.  Our 
organic  oneness  with  him  is  not  only  like  the  resting  of  a  building  on  the  rock,  it  is  like 
the  rooting  of  a  tree  in  the  ground  from  which  it  draws  nourishment,  and,  more  won- 
derful still,  is  like  the  union  of  a  branch  with  the  stem  from  which  it  draws  life.  I( 
we  rest  by  faith  on  Jesus  Christ,  we  have  a  basis  for  our  thoughts,  a  foundation  on 
which  we  can  build  holy,  strenuous,  and  blessed  lives.  We  have  \mion  with  the 
personal  Source  of  all  completeness,  of  all  resolute  self-command  and  heroic  persistence, 
as  well  as  of  all  strength.  If  we  keep  near  to  Christ,  his  life  will  pass  into  our  dead- 
ness,  and  all  our  needs  will  be  supplied  from  that  fulness  of  which  all  who  believe 
receive,  and  grace  for  grace. — ^A.  M. 

Vera.  2 — 4. — The  trtte  pastorate.  The  office  of  the  Christian  pastor — the  bishop,  the 
piesbyter,  the  deacon — was  something  new  in  the  history  of  mankind.    The  functiona 


224  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GBNEEAL  OP  PETER,    [oh.  t.  1—14. 

of  the  Christian  pastor  differ  widely  and  radically  from  those  of  the  heathen  priest  or 
philosopher;  and  they  differ  decidedly  from  those  of  the  Jevdsh  prophet  or  priest. 
The  bonds  uniting  pastor  and  people  together  are  more  sacred,  more  tender,  and  more 
morally  powerful  than  the  official  bonds  which  owe  their  efficacy  merely  to  superior 
power  or  superior  wisdom.  It  is  only  the  religion  of  Christ  which  can  furnish  the  basis 
for  the  pastoral  relation,  even  among  those  who  accept  the  great  doctrines  of  man's 
spiritual  nature  and  the  Divine  redemption. 

I.  The  nature  or  the  fastobal  lifb  and  hinistbt.  1.  The  personal  spring  of 
this  ministry  is  the  pure  devotion  of  heart  and  energies  to  the  welfare  of  those  for 
whom  Christ  died.  2.  The  intdlectual  character  of  the  pastorate  is  expressed  in  the 
vocation  described  by  St.  Peter  as  "feeding  the  flock."  The  reference  in  this  language 
is  evidently  to  teaching,  to  wise  and  constant  instruction  in  Divine  and  spiritual  truth. 
3.  The  moral  work  to  be  fulfilled  is  ruling  in  righteousness.  It  is  not  enough  for  the 
Christian  minister  to  teach ;  he  is  called  to  guide  in  the  way  of  virtue  and  piety,  to 
exercise  supervision  over  the  character  and  the  conduct  of  the  memberg  of  the  flock. 

n.  The  temptations  and  psbils  oi"  the  fastobal  life  and  ministbt.  St.  Peter 
deals  very  faithfully  with  his  fellow-labourers;  he  reminds  them  that  they  are  but 
men,  and  are  subject  to  human  infirmities,  which  must  be  guarded  against  by  watch- 
fulness and  prayer.  1.  It  is  possible  for  one  to  assume  or  to  retain  the  pastoral  office 
without  a  cheerful  and  cordial  delight  in  it ;  as  e.g.  is  the  case  with  those  who  engage 
iu  the  service  of  the  Church,  not  by  Divine  summons,  but  through  the  influence  of 
friends  or  through  the  force  of  circumstances.  Such  ministers  lose  the  greater  part 
of  their  power  for  good,  because  their  heart  is  not  in  their  work.  2.  Mercenary 
service  cannot  be  profitable  to  men  or  acceptable  to  God.  He  who  for  the  sake  of  gain 
insincerely  professes  to  seek  men's  spiritual  welfare  is  beneath  human  contempt,  3. 
A  domineering  spirit  is  contrary  to  the  very  nature  and  purpose  of  the  pastoral  relation. 
That  proud  and  ambitious  natures  have  mtule  the  Church  the  means  of  rising  to  high 
station  and  to  vast  power  is  plainly  taught  by  the  history  of  Christendom.  But  upon 
the  work  of  such  men  the  blessing  of  the  chief  Shepherd  cannot  rest ;  for  he  was  "  meek 
and  lowly  in  heart." 

III.  The  becohfense  of  the  fastobal  life  and  hinistbt.  1.  It  is  not  present, 
but  futiue.  2.  It  is  not  from  man,  but  from  God.  3.  It  is  not  perishable,  but 
immortal  For  the  faithful  and  the  lowly  servant  of  Christ  there  is  reserved  the 
amaranthine  crown. — J.  B.  T. 

Yer.  6. — The  rightful  authority  of  experienee.  Complaints  are  commonly  made  in 
our  day  that  the  authority  of  age,  experience,  and  sociiil  and  ecclesiastical  position  is 
little  reverenced  or  even  regarded.  There  have  been  times  when  such  authority  has 
been  boldly  asserted  on  the  one  hand,  and  readily  acknowledged  on  the  other.  Owing 
to  the  growth  of  education  and  of  democratic  sentiment,  a  very  different  habit  now 
prevails.  There  is  no  fear  of  harshness,  of  foul  and  arbitrary  conduct,  on  the  part  of 
the  older,  or  even  on  the  part  of  the  great,  in  human  society.  The  danger  is  all  in  the 
other  direction.  Hence  the  urgent  necessity,  at  the  present  time,  of  attention  to  the 
directions  of  St.  Peter  in  this  passage. 

I.  The  scope  of  the  fbboept.  1.  Children  are  required  by  Divine  authority  to  be 
subject  to  parents.  2.  The  young  and  inexperienced  in  human  society  are  enjoined  to 
show  respect  and  deference  to  those  who  have  seen  much  of  life,  and  who  have 
acquired  lessons  of  experience  and  wisdom.  3.  In  the  Church  of  Christ,  novices  and 
recruits  should  place  themselves  under  the  guidance  of  veterans,  and  members  of  any 
congregation  sliould  submit  to  the  judgment  and  authority  of  those  who  are  placed  in 
office.  Probably  this  is  the  especial  reference  of  the  apostle  in  this  passage.  It  would, 
indeed,  be  absurd  to  imagine  that  men  can  be  trusted  with  absolute  and  arbitrary 
power,  or  that  a  blind,  unreasoning  obedience  is  required  of  intelligent  beings.  There 
are  limits  alike  to  authority  and  to  submission.  But  the  lessons  of  history  teach  us 
that,  within  such  limits,  deference,  service,  and  submission  may  wisely  and  safely  be 
rendered. 

IL  Tbo!  beasonableness  and  advantaoeb  of  obedienob  to  this  fbeceft.  1. 
Submission  is  for  the  good  of  those  who  are  subject.  A  lawless  spirit  is  a  hopelesa 
spirit.    Where  there  is  no  modesty,  no  humility,  there  is  little  prospect  of  moral 


CH.  V.  1—14.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PETER.  224 

growth,  of  a  mature,  noble,  and  serviceable  character.  2.  Especially,  obedience  and 
subjection  are  the  best  preparation  for  the  exercise  of  authority  and  command.  Af 
society  is  constituted,  it  is  natural  and  necessary  that,  whilst  generation  succeeda 
generation,  the  younger  should  step  into  the  places  of  those  who  have  gone  before  them, 
and  should  wield  the  power  which  they  formerly  acknowledged  and  cheerfully  obeyed. 

3.  Thus  the  order  and  happiness  of  society  and  of  the  Christian  Church  are  secured 
and  promoted.  InsubordiDation  is  a  curse  alike  to  Church  and  state.  True  liberty 
and  true  order  are  not  opposed,  but  harmonious.  It  is  well  with  that  community 
where  the  elder  and  the  rulers  exercise  their  power  in  the  sight  of  God  and  for  the 
public  good ;  and  where  the  younger  and  the  subject  submit  themselves  "  to  every 
ordinance  of  man  for  the  Lord's  sake." — J.  R.  T. 

Vers.  5,  6. — Christian  humilitif.  It  is  natural  for  men  to  think  highly  of  themselves 
and  depreciatingly  of  others.  Pride  was  always  reckoned  by  the  old  Catholic  moralists 
among  the  seven  deadly  sins.  It  is  a  sin  into  which  too  many  habitually  fall,  however 
it  may  seem  to  them  anything  but  a  sign  of  degradation.  Christianity  attacks  this 
habit,  and  seeks  to  substitute  tor  it  in  human  character  the  fair  but  often  despised  grace 
of  humility. 

I.  The  bfhebe  of  humilitt.  1.  The  Christian  is  humble  before  God.  A  just 
and  scriptural  conception  of  the  Divine  attributes  is  necessary  to  true  humility.  A 
man  must  compare  himself  with  infinite  greatness  and  excellence,  with  infinite  power 
and  wisdom,  in  order  that  he  may  form  a  proper  estimate  of  himself.  Such  humility 
displays  itself  in  reverential  prayer,  in  scrupulous  obedience,  in  patient  submission, 
especially  under  disciplinary  affliction.  2.  The  Christian  is  humble  in  bis  demeanour 
towards  his  fellow-men.  This  is  a  far  more  diSicult  exercise.  And  it  must  not  be 
supposed  that  humility  is  expected,  of  the  same  kind  and  the  same  degree,  in  the 
attitude  of  man  to  man,  as  in  the  attitude  of  man  to  God.  A  wise  man  is  not  required 
to  regard  a  fool  as  his  superior  in  wisdom,  or  a  virtuous  man  to  regard  a  criminal  ai 
his  superior  in  character.  But  the  Christian  is  to  guard  against  an  overbearing  and 
haughty  spirit ;  -he  is  to  treat  the  lowly  and  the  poor  with  due  respect  and  considera- 
tion. Humility  is  best  shown  in  the  bearing  of  a  man  towards  those  who  are  his 
inferiors,  and  even  towards  those  who  are  ungrateful  for  favours  and  services. 

n.  The  discipline  and  habit  of  huuilitt.  The  expression  in  the  original 
translated  "  gird  yourselves  with  humility,"  is  not  without  difficulty ;  yet  it  seems  to 
imply  both  that  an  effort  and  resolution  are  required,  and  that  humility  is  to  become  a 
vestment,  a  clothing,  to  be  habitually  worn  for  use. 

III.  The  uotives  to  humility.  The  need  of  powerful  motives  in  order  to  overcome 
powerful  temptations  is  obvious;  and  such  motives  are  provided  for  the  Christian's 
beneSt  and  aid.  1.  The  consciousness  of  our  own  feebleness  and  ill  desert.  None  who 
truly  knows  himself  can  cherish  pride.  His  frequent  errors  in  the  past,  his  liability 
Btill  to  err,  must  be  too  present  to  his  mind  to  tdlow  of  self-confidence  and  boasting. 
2.  The  pressing  necessity  of  the  service  of  man.  All  around  us  are  those  who  neeA 
help.  It  may  not  promote  onr  personal  advantage  to  minister  to  their  needs ;  and 
such  ministry  may  involve  the  sacrifice  of  self,  the  crucifixion  of  pride.  3.  The 
prospect  of  the  future  exaltation  of  the  lowly.  This  is  a  proper  motive,  for  it  is  one 
presented  by  the  inspired  writers.    The  way  of  self-denial  is  the  way  to  victory. 

4.  The  precepts  and  example  of  the  Lord  Jesus  himself  must  have  great  force  with  hii 
affectionate  followers ;  and  he  has  shown  us  that  it  is  right  and  admirable  even  "  to 
wash  one  another's  feet "  I — J.  R.  T. 

Yer.  7. — The  cure  of  care.  The  Christian  religion  is  not  simply  a  body  of  doctrine, 
it  is  a  provision  of  grace.  Its  practical  helpfulness  has  been  proved  by  all  who  have 
accepted  its  guidance  and  put  themselves  under  its  authority.  It  is  intended  not 
merely  to  brighten  this  life,  when  dark,  by  the  prospect  of  a  better  life  to  come,  but 
to  supply  motives  to  service  and  to  endurance,  even  when  toil  is  hard  and  thankless 
and  trials  are  many  and  oppressive. 

I.  Ths  ili.  that  0AI.L8  FOB  BEMEDT.  This  is  anxiety ;  and  from  the  begiiming 
kuman  life  has  abounded  in  occasions  of  anxiety.  No  doubt  the  measure  of  this  evil 
varies  with  the  character  and  temperament  of  individuals,  and  with  their  needs  and 

J.  PETES  Q 


226  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PETER,    [on,  v.  1— U 


oiroumBtances.  The  anxieties  of  some  art  personal ;  those  of  others  are  relative.  Many 
are  anxious  because  health  is  broken,  or  drcumstances  are  narrow,  or  a  vocation  ii 
uncongenisL  Some  are  anxious  concerning  the  prospects  of  their  children,  others 
concerning  the  state  of  their  Church  or  their  country.  The  anxieties  of  not  a  few  arise 
from  their  spiritual  state — their  temptations,  doubts,  and  fears.  These  anxieties  are 
distractions,  and  have  a  tendency  to  depress  the  spirits,  to  mar  happiness,  to  cripple  in 
the  discharge  of  duty. 

n.  The  bemedt  pbofosed  fob  this  ill.  It  is,  in  the  simple  language  of  St 
Peter — language  prompted,  there  can  be  no  doubt,  by  his  own  personal  experience — to 
cast  anxiety  upon  God.  But  how  is  this  to  be  done?  It  is  to  be  done  by  confession, 
i.e.  where  there  is  a  consciousness  of  sin,  where  there  has  been  distrust  or  murmuring. 
By  prayer;  in  which  deliverance  is  to  be  sought.  "  Roll  thy  burden,"  said  the  psalmist, 
"  upon  the  Lord."  By  faith ;  in  which  the  anxious  Christian,  convinced  of  Qod'i  all- 
Bumoiency,  is  content  te  leave  all  that  concerns  him  in  the  wise  and  merciful  hands  of 
his  Father  and  Saviour.  Whether  the  cause  for  anxiety  be  temporal  or  spiritual,  great 
or  small,  personal  or  relative,  the  remedy  is  the  same,  and  is  equally  efficacious. 

IIL  ThB  SNOOXTBAaEMENT  TO  1.FFLT  THE  BEUEDT  TO  THE  ILL  WITH  A  VIEW  TO  BELIEF 

ASB  ouBK.  The  apostle  assures  us  that  God  "  careth  for  us."  By  this  we  understand 
that  he  observes,  being  minded  otherwise  than  the  fabled  Epicurean  deities,  who  were 
deaf  to  human  cries  and  indifferent  to  human  affairs.  And  he  takes  a  deep  and 
sympathetic  interest  in  the  condition  and  the  sorrows  of  his  children  upon  earth.  Nor 
is  this  all.  There  are  ways  in  which  God  gives  expression  to  hit  interest  and  care  for  his 
own.  By  his  providence  he  guides  and  governs  all  human  affairs  for  their  good.  And 
by  his  Spirit  he  brings  their  hearts  into  harmony  with  his  will,  and  thus  causes  all 
things  te  work  together  for  their  good. — J.  B.  T. 

Yer.  8.—Watclifalness.  Peter  may  well  have  remembered  the  Lord's  appeal  to  him 
and  his  companions  in  the  garden  of  Gethsemane,  "  Could  ye  not  watch  with  me  one 
hour  ?  "  And  his  failure  upon  that  occasion  to  exercise  this  virtue,  connected  as  it  was 
with  the  reproach  of  his  Divine  Friend,  may  well  have  deepened  his  sense  of  the 
importance  of  the  Christian  virtue  which  he  in  this  passage  inculcated  upon  his 
readers. 

I.  The  need  fob  watchfitlnebb.  1.  The  imcertainty  of  the  future.  No  one  can 
reckon  upon  events  succeeding  one  another  with  even  regularity,  and  therefore  no  one 
can  make  provision  for  time  to  come,  and  abandon  himself  to  security  and  ease,  assured 
that  all  things  will  continue  as  from  the  beginning.  In  our  Lord's  discourses  we  find 
frequent  warnings  of  changes  and  catastrophes,  accompanied  by  exhortations  to  vigilance. 
2.  The  certainty  that  every  man  will  be  called  upon,  and  that  before  very  long,  to 
appear  before  the  Divine  Judge,  to  give  an  account  of  the  deeds  done  in  the  body. 
How  important  that  that  day  should  not  come  upon  us  unawares  and  find  us  unpre- 
pared I  8.  The  temptations  to  unfaithfulness  and  indolence  which  beset  us  from  without. 
Whether  Christians  are  vigilant  or  not,  they  may  be  sure  the  adversary  of  souls  is  upon 
the  alert,  and  ready  to  take  advantage  of  every  opportunity  of  attacking  us  by  force  or 
s«lucing  us  by  craft.  4.  The  frailty  of  our  own  nature  is  prone  to  concur  with  the 
enemy's  activity  in  exposing  us  to  spiritual  danger.  We  have  not  only  to  watch  against 
tSatau,  we  have  to  watch  against  self. 

IL  The  uethoss  and  scope  of  Chribtiak  watchfulvebs.  As  the  avenues  by 
which  danger  approaches  are  many,  it  is  necessary  to  set  a  guard  against  every  one  of 
them.  More  especially  is  it  important :  1.  To  watch  the  thortghta.  Out  of  the  heart 
proceed  evil  thoughts  and  sins ;  accordingly  the  precept  of  inspiration  is  most  appropriate, 
"  Keep  thy  heart  with  all  diligence ;  for  out  of  it  are  the  issues  of  life."  2.  To  watch  the 
Ups.  We  are  reminded  by  St.  James  that  the  tongue  is  a  little  member,  but  that  it 
may  be  set  on  fife  of- hell.  How  much  misery  is  caused  by  unbridled  speech! — misery 
to  the  speaker  himself,  who  regrets  words  spoken  in  sinful  anger  or  passion  of  some 
other  kind  ;  misenr  to  others,  whose  character  may  be  blasted,  whose  usefulness  may 
be  crippled.  3.  To  watch  the  actions.  It  has  been  said  that  four-fifths  of  life  consists 
of  ooaduct.  Certain  it  is  that,  unless  the  actions  be  watched,  unless  deeds  of  justice 
and  mercy  occupy  the  energies,  all  professions  of  religioa  are  worthless.  No  man  ought 
to  be  so  confident  of  the  stability  and  purity  of  his  character  as  to  deem  himself  exempt 


ca.T.1— 14.]    THE  FIEST  EPISTLE  GENfiRAl,  OP  PETER.  227 

from  the  necessity  of  observing  Ms  conduct  and  consciously  regulating  it  by  the  counsels 
of  inspired  wisdom. 

III.  The  motive  to  watohfui,ness.  The  motive  which  will  wdgh  most  with  the 
Christian  will  be  the  wish  and  authoritative  command  of  his  Lord.  How  deep  an 
impression  his  frequent  admonitions  to  Bpiritual  vigilance  produced  upon  his.  Church 
is  amarent  from  the  truly  Christian  names  which  were  so  frequently  given  or  assumed 
by  Christians;  they  took  a  pleasure  in  being  called  by  such  names  as  Gregory  and 
Vjgilantius,  meaning  "  the  Watcher."  The  Lord  has  said,  "I  say  uato  all.  Watch  I  " 
"  Watch  and  pray,  lest  ye  enter  into  temptation  i " — J.  B.  T, 

Ver.  J.O. — "  Tht  Ood  of  all  grace."  This  language,  so  natural  coming  from  the  pen  of 
an  inspired  apostle,  would  have  been  almost  impossible  to  a  leligious  teacher  ignorant 
of  Christ.  It  is  testiniony  to  the  moral  revolution  wrought  by  the  Christian  faith  that 
such  a  description  of  the  almighty  and  eternal  power  should  seem  to  us  just  and  by  no 
means  singular.  For  nowhere  can  we  meet  with  language  more  glorious  in  itself,  more 
comforting  to  feeble,  sinful,  needy  men. 

I.  A  SUBLIME  DOCTKiNB  cwNOERNiNG  GoD.  To  gome  minds  omnipotence  or  omni- 
science might  appear  the  grandest  attributes  to  be  predicated  of  the  Supreme.  But  to 
the  Christian  the  moral  attributes  are  the  most  majestic.  That  the  Eternal  is  a  God 
of  grace  19  to  him  t^ie  peculiar  revelation  of  Christianity,  transcending  in  -excellence 
every  other  representation  of  the  character  of  Deity.  And  that  "  all  grace  "  should  be 
attributed  to  God  enhances  our  conception  of  his  glory.  In  fact,  it  is  the  mamfestation 
of  God  in  Christ  which  makes  this  declaration  comprehensible  and  real  to  us. 

IL  A  DOCTRINE  MOST  ooNSOLATORT  TO  MEN.  There  is  HO  One  of  us,  at  any  moment  of 
his  life,  who  does  not  stand  in  need  of  grace — ^pardoning  grace,  renewing  grace,  strengthen- 
ing grace,  enlightening  grace,  consolipg  grace.  And  when  our  Father  in  heaven  is 
thus  depicted  by  the  inspired  apostle,  the  Christian  reader  cannot  but  recognize,  in 
such  a  delightful  representation,  abundant  ground  for  gratitude,  abundant  encourage- 
ment to  faith,  abundant  stimulant  to  prayer;  whilst  he  who  has  offended  against 
God's  righteous  laws,  and  who  repents  of  his  transgressions,  may  find,  in  this  representa- 
tion, ground  for  approaching  the  Divine  p;resence  with  the  assurance  of  a  favourable 
reception  and  of  forgiving  mercy. — J.  B.  T, 

Vers.  1 — i:.-r-The  conduct  iecoming  the  elders  of  the  Church.  The  work  of  the  pastoral 
ofBcc  i?  to  be  fulfilled  also  by  the  private  members  of  the  Church,  according  to  their 
respective  gifts  and  opportunities.  So  there  are  practical  lessons  here  for  them,  as  well 
a|i  for  the  minister.  It  is  to  them  the  >rords  are  addressed,  "  Exhort  one  another  daily," 
and  "  Bishoping,  lest  any  man  fail  of  the  grace  of  God." 

I.  The  bldees  of  tbe  Chukch  and  their  wobk.  Church  system  is  in  itself  worth 
nothing ;  its  sole  value  consists  in  that  it  is  a  means  of  promoting  the  life  of  the  Church 
and  its  mission  to  the  world.  But  some  sj'stem  every  Church  must  have ;  and  it 
becomes  us,  in  our  reverence  for  inspired  example,  and  our  sense  of  the  importance  of 
the  ends  for  which  the  Church  exists,  to  endeavour'  to  discover  and  adopt  that  system 
most  in  harmony  with  the  Divine  mind,  as  seen  in  the  principles  embodied  in  apostolic 
times.  In  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles  and  in  the  Epistles  we  find  that  the  believers  in 
»ny  one  place  were  called  a  "Church* — "what  thou  seest  write  in  a  book,  and  send 
unto  the  seven  Churdies  which  are  in  Asia."  These  Churches  were  so  many  separate 
societies,  each  governing  itself  according  to  Divine  instruction,  without  acknowledging 
the  authority  of  sister  Churches.  Even  the  appeal  of  the  Church  at  Antioch  to  the' 
apoBtles  and  elders  at  Jerusalem  was  made  of  their  own  accord,  not  of  necessity ;  and 
they  received  in  response,  not  a  command,  but  a  recommendation  only.  The  3,postles 
endeavoured  tp  bind  these  Churches  together  in  Christian  affection ;  witness  the  greetings 
in  different  Epistles  from  members  of  one  fellowship  to  those  of  others.  The  only  unity 
of  early  Christians  was  that  of  spiritual  life  and  love ;  of  external  unity  there  is  no  trace. 
Now,  in  these  Churches  we  find  mention  of  two  permanent  ofBcers — bishops  and  deacons. 
Timothy  receives  instruction  as  to  the  ordination  of  two  classes  of  Church  servants, 
called  respectively  bishops  and  deacons.  Who,  then,  are  the  "  elders  "  of  whom  we  read  ? 
They  were  the  same  persons  as  the  bishops.  Paul,  in  writing  to  Titus,  says,  "  For  this 
cause  left  I  the*  in  Crete^  that  thou  ilioiudest . . .  ordain  dden  in  evsry  «it^,  ••  I  had 


228  THE  PIE8T  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  PETER,    [oh.  r.  1— U, 

appointed  thee :  if  any  be  blameless,  .  .  .  for  a  bishop  must  be  blameless,  as  the  steward 
of  God; "  or  in  the  passage  before  us.  "The  elders  which  are  among  you  I  exhort .  . . 
feed  the  flock  of  God  which  is  among  you,  taking  the  oversight  thereof  "  (literally,  Greek 
iirurKOTTovms,  bishoping). "  The  two  terms  (as  also,  we  believe,  the  term  "  angel,"  in  Eev. 
ii.)  are  designations  of  the  same  office,  and  used  interchangeably;  we  never  find  them 
together.  Each  Church  apparently  had  its  own  bishop,  or  elder,  and  deacons.  When 
you  have  taken  from  the  list  of  the  public  servants  of  the  early  Church  such  names  as 
those  of  "  apostles,"  "  prophets,"  "  workers  of  miracles,"  none  of  whom  were  intended 
to  be  permanent,  I  think  you  will  find  but  these  two  left  besides  the  evangelists.  The 
work  of  the  elders.  1.  To  feed  the  flock  of  Qod.  Just  the  words  you  would  expect  from 
Peter.  They  take  us  back  to  that  early  morning  when  his  Master  thiice  hade  him  feed 
his  sheep  and  lambs.  To  feed  the  flock  is  essentially  the  minister's  task.  The  Word 
of  truth  is  the  great  sanctifying  agency  in  the  hands  of  the  Divine  Spirit,  and  it  is  the 
minister's  business  so  to  present  this  that  sanctification  shall  be  the  result.  There 
never  was  greater  need  of  plain  practical  Scripture  teaching  than  now,  when  the  pressure 
of  b\isiness  leaves,  I  fear,  too  little- leisure  for  Scripture  study.  It  should  not  be  so, 
but  so  it  is.  2.  To  take  the  oversight  of  the  flMk.  "  Let  the  elders  that  rule  well  be 
counted  worthy  of  double  honour."  God's  Word  shows  that  he  regards  the  elders  as 
the  superintendents  of  the  Churches  committed  to  them,  as  the  presidents  of  all  the 
work  of  those  Churches,  and  as  having  heavy  responsibilities  for  their  well-being.  Of 
the  Christian  minister  it  is  said,  he  shall  "  warn  the  unruly,  comfort  the  feeble-minded, 
support  the  weak."  3.  To  be  examples  to  the  flock.  A  minister's  personal  spiritual  life 
is  the  first  essential  in  his  work ;  he  has  to  watch  his  character,  lest  it  should  be  • 
shadow  darkening  his  teaching.  Many  of  you  have  your  own  smaller  portions  of  the 
flock  to  feed  and  care  for.  Christian  workers,  remember  that  the  shepherds  of  Christ's 
fold  must,  like  the  great  Shepherd,  always  go  first.  If  you  want  to  work  for  Christ 
successfully,  the  best  part  of  that  work  will  be  done  in  your  closet,  ministering  Christ  to 
yourself.  The  work  can  never  be  better  than  the  worker ;  the  power  of  a  lesson  depend* 
on  the  teacher  seen  behind  it. 

IL  The  spirit  in  which  this  work  is  to  bb  WBOtroHT.  1.  It  it  to  te  wrotighffrom 
personal  fellowship  with  Christ.  Peter  here  says  that  he  was  an  elder,  because  he  had 
seen  Christ  suffer,  and  was  a  partaker  of  his  glory.  How  we  shall  teach  and  preach 
when  we  look  at  the  sufferings  of  Jesus,  and  at  his  glorified  face  I  We  must  live  with. 
our  unseen  Lord,  and  then  work  for  his  flock  will  be  no  more  a  constraint,  but  a  joy. 
2.  In  subordination  to  Christ.  "  Neither  as  being  lords  over  God's  heritage."  1.  is 
•'  God's  heritage ; "  it  is  the  "  flock  of  God ; "  and  there  is  a  "  chief  Shepherd."  Christ 
has  set  shepherds  over  his  people,  but  they  are  shepherds  under  him.  The  flock  are 
never  fed,  or  guided,  or  upheld,  or  restored  by  human  ministry,  but  he  does  it.  If  the 
under-shepherds  are  not  what  they  ought  to  be,  Jesus  remains,  and  the  flock  is  his.  3. 
It  i$  to  he  wrought  with  hope  in  Christ.  "  And  when  the  chief  Shepherd  shall  appear, 
ye  ahall  receive  a  crown  of  glory  that  fadeth  not  away."  Whatever  happiness  awaits 
Christ's  faithful  servants  in  another  world,  whatever  forms  the  unfading  crown  may 
take,  this  at  least  will  not  be  wanting — the  presence  there  of  those  who  have  been 
redeemed  through  their  instrumentality.  Christian  worker,  when  the  chief  Shepherd 
shall  appear,  and  you  with  him,  the  first  wondering  glance  at  the  autumnal  fields  you 
sowed  will  be  your  overwhelming  recompense. 

m.  The  bbarino  op  the  oall  to  this  work  on  the  Church.  Christ  has  called 
some  of  the  elders  in  his  Church  to  feed'and  oversee  his  flock.  What  of  that  to  the  Church  ? 
1.  It  reminds  us  of  the  dependence  of  the  people  on  the  ministry.  "The  perfecting  of 
the  saints,  and  the  edifying  of  the  body  of  Christ,"  are  declared  to  be,  in  a  very  important 
sense,  dependent  on  the  ministry ;  then  it  must  be  a  perilous  thing  to  depreciate  that 
ministry,  to  cast  one's  self  off  from  it  willingly.  "  Feed  the  flock  of  God,"  he  says  to  the 
elders ;  then  let  the  flock  of  God  see  that  they  are  willing  to  be  fed.  2.  And  this  calls 
f*r  the  reaognition  by  the  people  of  the  proper  work  of  the  ministry.  It  would  be  a 
great  thing  if  the  elders  were  able  to  lead  in  all  the  paths  of  life — in  things  political, 
things  vxSH,  things  literary,  things  scientific,  things  philanthropic ;  but  spiritual  work 
is  fltsentially  theirs,  and  Lf  these  lower  things  are  attended  to,  the  great  thing  will 
mffer;  and,  though  the  sheep  may  follow,  they  will  be  unfed.  3.  The  furtherance  h/ 
tta  ptepU^tlte  v!»rk  qfthe  ministry.    The  Church  can  greatly  help  their  minister  to 


oar.  1—14.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE   GBNEBAL  OF  PETER.  22S 

help  them ;  they  can  let  him  know  the  help  they  need ;  they  can  speak  freely  of  theii 
spiritaal  difficulties ;  they  can  ask  for  prayer  and  sympathy,  when  other  aid  is  unavailing  j 
and  in  this  way  can  give  a  joy  as  great  as  that  they  seek. — 0.  K. 

Vers.  6 — 7. — The  conduct  lecoming  Church  members  towards  the  elders  of  th* 
Church.  The  apostle  is  not  thinking  of  those  who  are  young  in  years  when  he  writes, 
"  Likewise,  ye  younger,"  In  the  early  Church  the  ministers  were  to  he  tried  men, 
consequently  they  were  more  advanced  in  experience  than  most  of  the  rest,  and  thus 
were  called  elders  as  their  official  designation ;  and  those  who  are  here  addressed  are 
the  private  memhers  of  the  Church.  He  speaks  of  them  as  "  younger,"  a  term  corre 
spending  to  "elder."  •'  Ye  younger,  suhmit  yourselves  unto  the  elder."  All  that  Peter 
actually  says  of  the  conduct  hecoming  the  Church  to  its  ministers  is  in  that  word 
"  submit."  He  then  applies  the  principle  on  a  much  broader  scale.  From  the  fifth  verse 
to  the  ninth  the  one  idea  is  self-submission,  and,  having  struck  that  key,  he  says,  "  Let 
there  be  the  humility  of  subjection  to  one  another;  the  humility  of  submission  to  God ; 
and  the  humility  of  suspicion  with  regard  to  Satan."  Our  subject  is — The  conduct 
hecoming  Chvirch  memhers  towards  the  elders  of  the  Church,  and  the  principle  applied 
generally.  Self-suppression  was  not  always  Peter's  characteristic;  the  Peter  of  the 
Gospels  almost  always  asserted  himself  and  took  the  lead  ;  the  Peter  of  the  Epistles, 
Peter  the  aged,  has  grown  in  gentleness  by  growing  downwards. 

I.  The  Divise  deuahtd  tob  humility.  "  God  resisteth  the  proud,  and  giveth  grace 
to  the  humble."  It  is  probably  correct  to  say  that  pride  is  wherever  self  is  put  first,  and 
refuses  to  submit  either  to  God  or  man.  There  is  the  pride  of  self-righteousness ;  the 
pride  of  self-glorification ;  the  pride  of  self-reliance ;  the  pride  of  self-will,  etc.  1 
Thinle  of  Cod's  resistance  of  pride.  The  word  really  means,  "  God  sets  himself  in 
battle  array  "  against  the  proud.  But  can  God  be  against  man  ?  May  I  use  an  illustra- 
tioE  ?  God  is  like  a  liver ;  his  laws  ever  sweep  to  the  .'great  ocean  of  blessing  his  love 
desires  for  men,  and  those  who  submit  to  be  carried  by  them  where  they  will,  ever  find 
that  God  is  wholly  on  man's  side ;  but  let  them  set  themselves  against  those  laws,  and 
try  to  make  headway  and  reach  success  in  opposition  to  them,  when,  then,  they  are 
beaten  about  and  disappointed,  and  at  last  utterly  ruined,  are  they  at  liberty  to  say 
that  God  is  against  them  ?  No,  and  Yes.  No,  because  they  were  against  him,  and  it 
was  not  God  resisting  them,  but  they  resisting  God.  Yes,  because  in  doing  that  they 
brought  all  the  Divine  force  to  bear  against  them.  Think  of  having  the  whole  of  God, 
his  purposes,  his  laws,  his  providences,  yea,  and  his  love,  turned  to  fight  against  us. 
2.  "  Ood  giveth  grace  to  the  humble,"  Grace !  what  grace  ?  All  kinds  of  grace — all  the 
varied  treasures  which  he  designs  for  his  children,  aud  which  Christ's  sacrifice  has  pur- 
chased for  them.  Grace  according  to  the  riches  of  Divine  glory.  Who  can  have  it? 
The  consciously  empty  heart,  submitting  itself  to  God,  to  be  filled  by  him. 

II.  The  application  op  this  demand  for  humility  to  the  mutual  bblationship 
OF  Christians.  "  All  of  you,"  ministers  and  people,  "  be  subject  one  to  another,  and 
be  clothed  with  humility."  The  apostle  here  uses  a  rare  and  curious  word ;  in  the 
Revised  Version  it  is  rendered,  "  Gird  yourselves  with  humility."  Another  instance  of 
how  Peter's  early  life  reproduces  itself  in  this  Epistle.  1.  Sumhle  subjection  to  one 
another  is  his  demand.  Forego  for  others  something  to  which  you  may  be  entitled — • 
some  pleasure,  or  distinction,  or  convenience,  which  none  could  blame  you  for  accept- 
ing, but  which  for  the  happiness  of  your  brother  you  willingly  give  up.  And  this 
when  you  have  to  stoop  to  do  it,  when  it  involves  a  bringing  down  of  your  pride,  when 
it  is  on  behalf  of  the  unworthy,  possibly  of  an  enemy,  or  one  lower  than  you.  2.  This 
must  be  a  matter  of  personal  discipline.  Humility  does  not  grow  on  us ;  it  is  foreign  to 
our  proud  selfish  nature ;  and  the  soul  which  sets  out  at  the  Divine  bidding  to  acquire 
this  spirit  of  humility  to  which  God  imparts  all  grace,  will  have  to  be  much  alone  with 
itself  and  God,  and  not  be  in  a  moment's  doubt  as  to  where  lies  one  of  the  great  battle- 
fields of  life.  3.  This  humble  subjection  to  one  another  is  greatly  due  to  the  keeping  of 
Chrisfs  example  before  us.  It  we  are  plagued  with  pride,  with  a  spirit  that  stands 
aloof,  that  cannot  bend,  nor  yield,  nor  serve,  but  that  wants  to  lead  and  receive  homage, 
that  spirit  from  which  God  withholds  his  grace,  let  us  set  Christ  before  us.  The  mind 
that  was  in  him  will  be  in  us  only  as  we  keep  him  in  view;  the  law  of  heaven  fulfilled 
on  avth — looking,  w«  become  like. 


>30  THE  FIRST  EPISTLB  GENEBAL  OF  PETER.    [oa.T.1— 14 

in.  This  DEUAin>  (fob  humilitt)  btilii  fubtheb  apflibd  to  cub  attitudi 
TOWABD  God  ttndeb  affliction.  It  is  implied  here  that  pride  of  heart  is  likely  to 
manifeBt  itself  in  affliction  in  two  ways.  1.  In  rebellion  against  Ood,  casting  ut  dovm. 
Affliction  may  come  through  many  means,  but,  let  the  means  be  what  they  may,  it  is 
"  the  mighty  hand  of  God,"  Now,  our  tendency  is  to  rebel  against  him  and  his  will,  and 
this  rebellion  is  the  essence  of  pride ;  it  is  the  soul  lifting  up  its  own  judgment  against 
the  wisdom  of  the  Most  High.  We  call  our  murmuring  at  God's  will  by  much  softer 
names  than  this,  but  this  is  what  it  is ;  let  us  shrink  from  it  with  all  our  might.  Here 
is  our  Pattern.  A  Pleader  in  the  dark  grove  of  Gethsemane,  pleading  in  his  agony, 
"Father,  if  it  be  possible,  let  this  cup  pass  from  mo;"  but  adding,  in  the  utter 
humility  of  his  faith,  "The  cup  which  my  Father  hath  given  me,  shall  I  not  drink 
it  ?  "  2.  In  unwillingness  to  trust  him.  We  think  our  affairs  depend  on  us,  and  that,  if 
we  fail,  they  must  fail.  I  say  it  is  a  subtle  pride  that  is  at  the  bottom  of  that,  the 
soul  unwilling  to  let  God  be  everything.  We  must  lose  that ;  for  God's  happiness  and 
glory,  we  must  lose  it ;  we  must  be  ready  to  confide  in  him  absolutely,  though  we 
cannot  see  what  he  is  doing,  and  cannot  do  anything  more  for  ourselves.  We  must 
rely  entirely  on  his  love.  3,  But  whence  comes  this  humility t  "Know  thyself." 
Depend  upon  it,  we  shall  be  humble  enough  if  we  know  ourselves.  But  we  shall  only 
know  ourselves  as  we  know  Jesus ;  in  his  greatness  we  discover  our  littleness,  in  his 
goodness  our  sin,  in  his  life  our  example,  in  his  love  our  coldness,  in  his  cross  our 
doom. — 0.  N, 

Vers.  8 — 11. — Suspicion  of  Satan.  "Be  sober,  be  vigilant ;  because  your  adversary 
the  devil,  as  a  roaring  lion,  walketh  about,  seeking  whom  he  may  devour,"  etc.  Jesus 
had  appointed  Peter  to  the  care  of  his  flock,  and  here  we  have  the  cry  of  the  wakeful 
shepherd,  and  also  another  instance  in  which  Peter's  personal  history  reappears  in  the 
Epistle.  The  lesson  of  humility  had  been  burnt  into  his  heart  on  that  dark  evening 
when  Jesus  was  betrayed;  he  had  discovered  then  what  he  tells  them  here,  that  the 
hour  of  sorrow  is  Satan's  hour.  No  wonder  that  years  after  he  wrote  with  emphMis, 
"  Cherish  that  Christian  humility  which  suspects  Satan." 

I.  The  Ohbistian's  adversabt.  ThefcKt  of  this  adversary.  Behind  the  forces 
antagonistic  to  the  Church,  P^ter  sees  another,  the  master-force,  the  inspiring  power  of 
all,  and,  thinking  of  him  as  the  one  great  foe,  speaks  of  "your  adversary  the  devil." 
The  doctrine  of  a  personal  Satan  is  regarded  by  some  as  a  superstition.  But  even  from 
the  standpoint  of  human  speculation  it  is  not  unreasonable.  There  are  many  grades  of 
being  between  man  and  the  rudimentary  forms  of  life,  and  for  aught  we  know  we  may 
he  as  far  from  the  perfect  creature  state  as  from  the  least  perfect ;  and  as  there  are  so 
many  ranks  between  us  and  the  one,  why  not  also  between  lis  and  the  other?  And  if, 
in  the  highest  forms  of  animal  life,  creatures  begin  to  herd  together  under  a  chief  till 
this  becomes  the  invariable  rule  with  man,  why,  as  life  rises  higher  into  the  unseen, 
should  there  not  still  be  leaders  and  princes,  one  position  above  another,  till  all  possible 
authority  is  vested  in  one  who  is  called  "  the  prince  of  the  power  of  darkness." 
Judging  thus  by  analogy  with  what  we  know,  the  idea  of  a  personal  Satan  is  not 
without  reason.  But  when  we  turn  to  Scripture,  which  of  necessity  is  our  only  source 
of  information  in  this  matter,  the  teaching  is  very  plain.  We  have  the  same  evidence 
for  the  personality  of  Satan  as  of  Gkid.  He  is  universally  spoken  of  as  a  person  ;  we  are 
taught  to  pray,  "  Deliver  ns  from  the  evil  one."  It  is  said,  when  Scripture  speaks  of 
him  thus,  it  is  in  a  figure — the  principle  of  evil  personified.  There  can  be  no  such  thing 
as  a  principle  of  evil  apart  from  mind ;  yet  when  Jesus,  in  whose  mind  was  no  evil, , 
was  in  the  wilderness,  Satan  was  there ;  and  in  heaven,  where  from  every  mind  evil 
has  been  expelled,  the  Book  of  Job  tells  us  Satan  was  there,  Satan  appears  before  us 
in  Scripture  as  an  apostate  angel,  exalted  above  his  associates,  the  great  enemy  of  Ood 
and  man,  the  first  cause  of  sin  here,  the  quickener  of  temptation  in  human  minds,  the 
"  god  of  this  world,"  permitted  under  Divine  restraint  to  "  blind  the  minds  of  those 
who  believe  not ; "  that  man  In  his  freedom  of  will  may  elect  the  good,  and  attain  that 
holiness  which  must  always  be  voluntary,  and  rise  to  that  purity  and  blessedness 
which  are  only  possible  through  temptation's  discipline.  The  character  of  t?ie  adversary. 
"  As  a  roaring  lion  "  suggests  the  twofold  idea  of  power  and  great  cruelty.  His  work. 
"He  goeth  about,''  etc.    Satsn  is  not  omnipotent,  neither  ia  he  omnipresent;  bnt  )>« 


OH.  ▼.  1—14.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GBNEBAL  OF  PETBB.  881 

probably  hat  larger  agencies  under  his  control  than  we  euppose,  and  wherever  man  is, 
there  may  be  no  moment  when,  by  some  instrumentality,  ne  may  not  have  access  t« 
our  wilt  Every  circumstance  may  conceal  our  deadly  foe.  Are  you  weak  ?  or  are  you  a 
leader  ?  Be  sure  his  eye  is  fixed  on  you  j  he  thirsts  to  destroy  your  faith,  your  purity, 
your  peace,  your  good  name, 

II.  Thb  Cbbistiah's  besistaitoi!  of  tbb  advsbsabt.  Satan  tempts  to  cast  ua 
down ;  God  permits  him  to  tempt,  in  order  to  raise  us  up.  Three  ways  in  which  we 
may  resist  him.  1.  Sobriety ;  the  opposite  of  intoxication.  Anything  that  strengthens 
the  lower  principle  of  our  nature,  deadening  us  to  conscience  and  reason,  intoxicates. 
Business,  love  of  the  world,  happiness,  sorrow.  Christian,  be  sober,  let  nothing  engross 
thee  till  it  masters  thee.  2.  VigiUfnce,  "  Be  vigilant."  Victory  is  sure  to  no  other 
attitude;  but  this  attitude  must  be  maintained  till  death  brings  the  great  discharge. 
Sometimes  Satan  so  takes  us  by  surprise  that  we  hardly  know  we  are  sinning  till  we 
have  sinned.  Take  heed  that  he  come  not  upon  you  unawares ;  five  minutes  off  your 
guard  may  be  the  loss  of  your  most  sacred  treasure.  3.  Stea^astnesg  m  the  faith. 
Faith  in  Qod  is  the  fort  &om  which  the  adversary  would  dislodge  us ;  driven  from  that, 
all  ia  lost,  unless  God  in  his  mercy  bring  us  back  again,  Satan  can  do  ua  no  harm 
whilst  we  are  shut  up  in  the  strong  walls  of  faith  in  God.  What  does  the  word  "  afSic- 
tions"  mean,  coming  in  where  it  does?  Peter  was  writing  to  the  afflicted,  and  he 
knew  that  affliction  is  Satan's  opportunity ;  the  afflicted  know  it  too.  It  ia  then  he 
whispers,  "  Is  this  a  God  of  love  ?  give  up  thy  faith  in  him."  Afflictions  are  a  family 
sign ;  of  all  the  brethren  it  shall  be  said,  "  These  are  they  who  have  come  out  of  great 
tribulation;"  and  the  sufferings  of  the  eldest  Brother,  God's  Well^beloved,  were  the 
keenest  of  all. 

III.  The  Gbbistian's  sTBENaTH  nt  besibtanob.  "  And  the  God  of  all  grace,"  etc. 
Bead  this  beautiful  verse  as  it  is  in  the  Bevised  Yersion,  and  you  will  see  that  it  is  a 
Divine  promise,  and  its  position  in  the  argument  will  be  apparent.  There  is  help 
enough  in  this  one  passage  for  any  victory.  1.  There  i>  help  in  the  title  here  awribei  to 
Qod.  "  The  God  of  all  grace  "—of  every  needed  grace,  of  every  kind  of  grace,  of  every 
means  of  grace.  Here  is  the  power  that  overcometh  Satan.  "  My  grace  is  snfflcieut 
for  thee."  2.  There  is  help  in  the  purpose  here  adopted  by  Qod.  "  Who  hath  called  us 
unto  his  eternal  glory,"  etc.  Then  he  will  accomplish  his  purpose,  and,  though  Satan 
does  his  worst,  if  in  our  resistance  of  him  we  bear  the  mark  of  the  "  called,"  nothing 
shall  prevent  our  reaching  perfect  victory  when  our  "  little  while"  of  suffering  shall ., 
be  forgotten  in  the  eternal  glory  of  the  tearless  land.  3.  There  is  help  in  the  promise 
here  given  by  Qod.  "  He  shall  himself  perfect,  stablish,  strengthen  you."  The  victory 
shall  be  his.  As  you  resist  the  foe,  he  will  gird  you  with  strength.  He  will  nerve 
your  arm,  he  will  "  beat  down  Satan  under  your  feet ; "  and  in  that  day  your  humbled, 
grateful  soul  will  recognize  that  it  was  all  of  him,  and  will  cry,  with  the  apostle,  "  To 
him  the  dominion  for  ever  and  ever." — C.  N. 

Ver,  1. — True  office-bearers  in  the  Ghureh  (No.  1).  "  The  elders  therefore  among  you  I 
exhort,  who  am  a  fellow-elder,"  etc.  With  the  word  "  well-doing  "  jn  the  last  sentence 
of  the  preceding  chapter  ringing  in  our  ears,  we  easily  understand  why  the  apostle 
thus  proceeds  to  exhort  men  to  their  duties  as  office-bearers  in  the  Ghristian  Church. 
We  notice,  as  here  indicated— 

I.  The  bpieit  of  offjcb-bbaeebs  in  thb  Christian  Chubob.  The  word  "  elders," 
according  to  Dean  Alford,'Bimply  here  means  "  leaders  "  in  the  Church.  Subsequently  it 
becomes  clear  that  there  were  two  orders  of  "  elders,"  viz.  bishops  and  deacons.  But 
at  this  time  these  offices  had  not  crystallized  thus.  All  were  included  in  the  term  here 
used.  Their  apirit  is  indicated  by  Peter's  use  of  the  word  "  fellow-elders  "  as  describing 
himself,  and  "exhort"  as  denoting  his  relationship  to  them.  There  is  none  of  the 
spirit  of  an  ecclesiastical  princeling ;  no  arrogance.  But  brotherllness  permeates  M  the 
intercourse.     That  is  the  supreme  spirit  of  true  office-bearers. 

II,  The  QTjALjriOATioNS  foe  tbue  sbbviob  in  thb  Cbbistian  Cbubch.  1.  Fellovi- 
thip  in  sympathy.  "  Fellow-elder ; "  burdened  with  the  same  cares,  stirred  with  the 
tame  inspirations,  etc,  2,  Witness-bewring  to  most  solemn  realities.  "  Witness  of  the 
Bufferings  of  Christ."  All  through  this  Epistle  those  sufferings  are  conspicuous  as  the 
th«m«  pf  thought,  the  constraint  of  will.    Th«  word  "  witness  "  impliat  tbftt  Pater  fait 


232  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  PETER,    [ch.  v.  1—14, 

he  was,  as  regarded  these  sufferings,  (1)  a  spectator ;  (2)  a  testifier.  Ruskin  says, 
"  You  look  at  marhle  which  is  the  delight  of  the  eyes,  the  wealth  of  the  architecture  of 
all  civilized  nations,  and  you  find  there  is  not  a  purple  vein  or  flaming  zone  that  is  not 
the  record  of  its  ancient  torture  in  raging  fire  and  stormful  convulsion."  So  is  It  with 
the  beauty  of  the  Christ,  our  Foundation-stone,  our  CJorner- stone.  3.  Possession  of  a 
tiiblime  inheritance.  "  Partaker  of  the  glory,"  etc.  (1)  The  glory  of  character.  (2) 
That  glory  at  present  partially  hidden.  (3)  Yet  a  Christian  already  possesses  it. 
What  wealth  I  what  dignity  I  How  unspeakably  richer  than  the  mere  millionaire,  and 
more  honourable  than  the  mere  hero,  is  the  true  Christian  worker  1 — U.  R.  T. 

Vers.  2 — 5.— True  office-bearers  in  the  Church  (No.  2).  "  Tend  the  flock  of  God  which 
is  among  you,"  etc.  The  apostle's  practical  exhortation  to  leaders  in  the  Church  about 
well-doing  opens  up  a  view  of — 

I.  Theibdutt.  "Tend" — a  completer  word  than  "feed."  The  word  "  flock  "  suggests 
what  tending  is  needful ;  e.g.  feeding,  leailing,  coniroUing,  protecting,  "  exercising  the 
oversight."  Keen  and  constant  care.  Of  what  sort  of  care  he  speaks,  the  word  Peter 
coins  to  describe  Christ,  "chief  Shepherd,"  eloquently  tells.  1.  Receive  instructions 
from  him.     2.  Imitate  him. 

II.  Their  motive.  1.  This  motive  is  dealt  with  negatively.  (1)  Not  constrainedly 
— a  warning  against  perfunctoriness.  (2)  Not  covetously.  "  Lucre  "  becomes  filthy  if 
it  is  a  motive  for  spiritual  work.  (3)  Not  ambitiously.  Not  "  lording  it."  2.  This 
motive  is  dealt  with  positively.  (1)  Voluntariness.  "  Ready  mind."  (2)  Sympathy. 
"  Making  yourselves  ensamplts." 

III.  Their  hope.  "  The  crown  " — the  symbol  of  dignity.  "  Of  glory ;  "  not  tinselled 
or  tarnished,  but  unalloyed.  "  That  fadeth  not  away."  Amaranthine ;  imperishable. 
We  are  advancing  to  such  a  coronation  if  we  are  true  workers  for  Christ. 

IV.  Their  spibit.  1.  Mutual  subjection.  "  Be  subject,"  etc.  2.  Perfect  humility. 
"  Gird  yourselves  with  humility ; "  persistent  and  constant  lowliness  of  temper. 

V.  Their  help.  "  God  giveth  grace."  Grace,  the  favour  of  God,  the  gentlest  yet 
mightiest  inspiration  of  souls.-^U.  B.  T. 

Vers.  6 — 11. — Counsels  for  troubled  Christians.  "  Humble  yourselves  therefore 
under  the  mighty  hand  of  God,"  etc.  Approaching  the*  end  of  his  letter,  the  apostle 
condenses  into  two  or  three  almost  electric  sentences  some  most  momentous  practical 
directions  for  troubled  Christian  men.     In  these  directions  we  learn — 

I.  The  true  spirit  for  Christian  men  to  cherish  in  life's  trials.  Here  ia: 
1.  Devout  humility,  and  with  it  freedom,  from  anxiety.  The  two  are  more  closely 
associated  than  we  sumetimes  imagine.  Let  us  look  at  them  separately,  and  then  in 
their  combination.  "  Humble  yourselves  .  . .  under  the  mij;hty  hand  of  God."  (1)  Sdf- 
humbling  is  true  humility.  To  be  crushed  by  others  or  by  circumstances  may  be  only 
humiliation.  (2)  Humbling  of  self  Ipfore  God  is  true  humility.  Towards  God  first 
and  chiefly  the  emotion  is  to  be  cherished,  the  attitude  maintained.  (3)  Humbling  of 
self  hefore  Si  personal,  great,  and  loving  God  is  true  humility.  "  Mighty  hand  of  God." 
Not  a  force,  but  a  "  hand  " — a  hand  as  gentle  as  mighty.  (4)  Humbling  of  self  before, 
such  a  God  will  lead  to  exaltation.  "  In  due  time  he  will  exalt."  "  Casting  all  your 
anxiety  upon  him,  because  he  careth  for  you."  "  Anxiety ; "  perplexing,  dividing,  cutting 
thought.  "  Cast ; "  by  a  brave  and  resolute  and  simple  act  of  will.  "  For  he  careth." 
Not  anxiety  now,  but  clear,  loving,  constant  interest.  Now,  we  can  see  how  true  humility 
leads  to  freedom  from  anxiety.  The  relationship  and  attitude  of  the  soul  towards  God 
is  the  key  to  both.  2.  Sober  watcJfulness,  and  with  it  stern  conflict.  "  Be  sober,"  etc. 
Note  the  need  for  the  watchfulness.  (1)  An  enemy.  "  Your  adversary  the  devil."  (2) 
An  active  enenjy.  "  Walketh  about."  (3)  A  destructive  enemy.  "Whom  he  may 
devour."  (4)  An  enemy  who  can  be  resisted.  "  Whom  withstand."  (5)  An  enemy 
whom  others  have  contended  with  and  conquered.  "  The  same  sufferings  are  accom- 
plished in  your  brethren  who  are  in  the  wprld."  Into  that  trial  and  battle  and  storm 
all  the  brotherhood,  even  the  great  elder  Brother,  have  gone. 

II.  The  final  pdrposb  of  God  with  besard  to  men  who  cherish  buoh  a  bpibit 
IX  life's  trials.  1.  A  destiny  that  is  wonderful.  "  God  of  grace  " — compassion,  favour, 
help,   "ballad."  God  compels  lirers,  oceans,  in  their  courses,  etc,  but  calls  souis  to  their 


rai.T.  1— 14.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  PETER.  233 

higlx  destiny.  "  Eternal  glory  in  Christ ; "  such  as  is  (1)  revealed  in  Christ ;  (2)  shared 
with  Christ;  (3)  inherited  through  Christ.  2.  A  trial  that  is  transient.  "Alter  ye 
have  suffered  a  little  while."  Often  it  seems  long.  "  Life,  an  age  to  the  miserable,  a 
moment  to  the  happy."  But  it  is  a  "  little  while "  comparatively  to  eternity,  and 
absolute  in  itself.  3.  A  character  that  is  complete.  "  Perfect ; "  no  deficiency  or  defect. 
"  Stablish ; "  all  this  to  be  made  permanent.  Not  goodness  like  the  early  cloud  and 
morning  dew.  "  Strengthen ; "  inspire  with  force  to  overcome  all  hostile  influences. 
4.  A  character  that  calls  for  praise  to  Ood.  "  To  him  be  the  dominion  for  ever  and 
ever.  Amen."  Peter  exulted  that  God  reigned,  and  yearned  for  him  to  have  empire  that 
was  universal  and  perpetual,  and  acknowledged  by  all  with  the  "  Amen,"  not  only  of 
all  men,  but  of  all  the  powers  in  every  man. — XJ.  B.  T. 

Vers.  1 — 11. — Concluding  exhortations.  1.  Exhoetation  to  EtDEES.  1.  In  what 
character  Peter  exhorts.  "  The  elders  therefore  among  you  I  exhort,  who  am  a  fellow- 
elder,  and  a  witness  of  the  sufferings  of  Christ,  who  am  also  a  partaker  of  the  glory 
that  shall  be  revealed."  The  link  of  connection  is  "  well-doing,"  which  is  here  given  in 
detail.  The  first  who  are  exhorted  to  do  well  are  the  elders,  to  be  understood  officially. 
These  elders  are  referred  to  as  among  them,  i.e.  in  the  Churches  in  the  various  localities. 
Peter  might  have  commanded  even  the  elders,  as  an  apostle;  there  was  nothing 
derogatory  to  his  apostleship,  and  there  was  a  gain  of  influence,  in  his  humbly 
exhorting  them  as  a  fellow-elder,  who  had  the  same  duties  of  the  eldership  to  perform. 
If  he  had  superior  authority,  he  would  only  derive  it  from  the  fact  that  he  was  "  a 
witness  of  the  sufferings  of  Christ."  He  had  seen  Christ  suffer  in  the  garden  and  on  the 
cross ;  he  had,  therefore,  the  advantage  of  proceeding  on  personal  testimony  in  his 
preaching.  An  eye-witness  of  the  sufferings  of  Christ,  might  he  not  claim  to  have  a 
special  title  comfortably  to  exhort  the  suffering,  the  persecuted  ?  Taking  them  back 
to  the  Crucifixion-scene,  he  does  not  leave  them  there,  but  points  them  forward.  He 
was  also  "  a  partaker  of  the  glory  to  be  revealed,"  i.e.  future  sharer  with  Christ  when 
revealed  in  his  glory,  of  which  he  had  already  enjoyed  the  foretaste  in  his  having  been 
a  privileged  witness  of  the  Transfiguration.  He  does  not  say  "  fellow-partaker ;  "  but  we 
may  suppose  that  this  was  in  his  mind  for  the  comfort  of  the  persecuted.  'Z.  To  what 
duty  he  exhorts.  (1)  Shepherding.  "Tend  the  flock  of  God  which  is  among  you." 
Thrice  Fetor  fell ;  thrice  the  Master  laid  on  him  his  commission.  Twice  the  word  of 
the  commission  was/ee(2,  as  if  special  attention  was  to  be  given  to  feeding  of  the  flock, 
finding  spiritual  food  for  them ;  on  the  second  occasion  the  word  of  the  commission 
was  more  coipprehensively  shepherd,  or,  as  it  is  translated, "  tend."  It  is  that  word  which 
is  used  here,  taken,  we  can  believe,  from  the  commission.  The  shepherd  has  to  guide, 
guard,  fold,  as  well  as  find  food ;  so  the  minister  (the  elder  chiefly,  though  not 
exclusively,  to  be  thought  of)  has  not  only  to  teach,  but  also  to  do  what  Ls  sometimes, 
vpith  a  limitation,  called  ^asioraZ  work — attending  to  the  sick,  the  aged,  the  anxious,  the 
tempted.  The  elders  were  to  tend  the  flock  in  their  several  localities  in  the  conscious- 
ness of  its  being  the  flock  of  God,  i.e.  not  belonging  absolutely  to  them,  but  God.  (2) 
Character  of  the  shepherding.  First  negative  and  positive.  "  Exercising  the  oversight, 
not  of  constraint,  but  willingly,  according  unto  God."  Shepherding  is  of  the  nature  of 
overseeing.  This  overseeing  is  not  to  be  engaged  in  of  constraint,  i.e.  from  outward 
pressure  such  as  the  solicitation  of  friends,  but  willingly,  i.e.  from  free  choice.  The 
remaining  words  introduced  into  the  Revised  Version  seem  unnecessary  in  thought. 
Second  negative  and  positive.  "Nor  yet  for  filthy  lucre,  but  of  a  ready  mind."  Over- 
seeing is  not  to  be  engaged  in  for  filthy  lucre,  i.e.  lucre  which  is  not  filthy  in  itself,  but 
becomes  filthy  when  made  the  determining  consideration  in  the  holding  of  a  sacred 
ofiBce.  On  the  contrary,  it  is  to  be  engaged  mofa  ready  mind,  i.e.  from  love  for  the 
work.  Support  cannot  be  overlooked,  but  it  will  be  a  secoudary  consideration  with  a 
man  who  loves  his  work,  is  glad  to  have  the  abundant  opportunity  of  doing  good  in 
the  name  of  Christ.  Third  negative  and  positive,  "  Neither  as  lording  it  over  the 
charge  allotted  to  you,  but  making  yourselves  ensamples  to  the  flock."  Elders  are  to 
oversee ;  it  is  said  that  they  are  to  preside ;  it  is  also  said  that  they  are  to  lead ;  but  it 
is  not  said  that  they  are  to  hrd  it,  nor  that  they  are  to  lord  it  against,  as  it  is  literally 
here,  «.«.  against  the  rights  or  interests  of  the  people  over  whom  they  are  placed.  They 
•re  not  to  lord  it  over  tli«  charges  allotted  to  them.    On  the  contrary,  they  are  to  mak$ 


234  THE  FIEST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  PETER,    [oh.  t.  1—14 

themselves  ensamples  to  the  jloch.  Their  ambition  is  to  be  to  live  what  they  teach. 
"  Either  teach  not,"  says  Gregory  Nazianzen,  "  or  teach  by  living."  3.  Promise  oj 
reward  for  fulfilrMJit  of  the  exhortation.  "  And  when  the  chief  Shepherd  shall  be 
manifested,  ye  shall  receive  the  crown  of  glory  that  fadeth  not  away."  The  pastoral 
wealth  of  the  great  Proprietor  makes  one  flock,  over  which  is  placed  the  chief  Shepherd. 
This  is  a  very  beautiful  designation  of  our  Lord.  It  is  suggestive  of  shepherds  under 
him.  If  these  under-shepherds  act  firom  their  own  free  choice,  and  from  love  of  the 
work,  and  are  exemplary,  they  shall  not  go  unrewarded.  The  time  of  their  reward 
is  to  be  when  the  chief  Shepherd  shall  be  manifested,  i.e.  shall  be  disclosed  in  all  the 
glory  that  belongs  to  him  on  account  of  what  he  has  done  for  the  flesh.  The  faithful 
under-shepherds  are  to  be  crowned  with  a  crown  of  glory.  Peter,  who  is  Jewish  in  his 
imagery,  may  have  had  in  his  mind  the  wreath  used  by  the  Jews  on  festive  occasions. 
They  are  to  be  crowned  as  with  flowers,  i.e.  with  all  that  is  most  beautiful  in  body  and 
soul.  The  designation  given  to  the  crown  of  beauty  is  derived  £rom  a  flower,  to  which 
Milton  thus  makes  allusion. 

"  Their  crowns  inwove  with  amarant  and  gold ) 
Injmortal  amarant,  a  flower  which  once 
In  Paradise,  fast  by  the  tree  of  Ufa 
Began  to  bloom." 

As  the  lily  Is  symbolie  of  purity,  go  the  amaranth  (being  what  we  call  an  "  everlasting  ") 
ife  symbolic  of  immortality.  What  is  at  last  to  blossom  forth  in  the  faithful  servants 
of  Christ  is  never  to  lose  its  form  or  brightness. 

II.  Exhortation  to  the  toukqbr.  "  Likewise,  ye  younger,  be  subject  unto  the 
elder."  As  there  was  what  was  suitable  for  the  elders,  in  like  manner  there  was  what 
was  suitable  for  the  younger  (people).  By  these  we  are  to  understand  all  in  the  con- 
gregations except  the  elders.  The  designation  was  not  simply  with  reference  to  f^e 
(which  held  to  a  certain  extent),  but  with  reference  to  their  being  placed  under  the 
elders.  We  should  therefore  read  "  elders  "  here,  as  in  the  first  verse.  In  acccn'dance  with 
former  injunctions  in  regard  toother  relations,  the  word  for  the  younger  is  "subjection" 
They  were  to  be  subject  unto  the  elders.  It  is  not  said  that  they  were  to  be  subject  in 
ihe  Lord ;  but  we  are  to  understand  the  ground  and  conditions  of  the  subjection  to  lie 
in  the  elders  being  representatives  of  Christ's  authority  and  administering  Christ's 
laws. 

III.  Humility.  1.  HmniUty  in  service  of  one  another.  "Tea,  all  of  yon  gird 
yourselves  with  humility,  to  serve  one  another :  for  God  resisteth  the  proud,  but  giveth 
grace  to  the  humble."  Peter  now  turns  to  all  of  them,  i.e.  both  the  elders  and  the 
younger  (people),  and  with  a  certain  emphasis  sums  up  their  duties  in  humility.  A 
recognized  definition  of  it  is  "  the  esteeming  of  ourselves  small,  because  we  are  so,  the 
thinking  truly,  and,  because  truly,  therefore  lowlUy,  of  ourselves."  The  work  for 
which  Christ's  gospel  came  into  the  world  was  no  less  than  to  put  down  the  mighty 
from  their  seat,  and  to  exalt  the  humble  and  meek.  It  was,  then,  only  in  accordance 
with  this  its  mission  that  it  should  dethrone  the  heathen  virtue  great-souledness,  and 
set  up  the  despised  Christian  grace  humility  in  its  room,  stripping  that  of  the  hono(ir 
it  had  unjustly  assumed,  delivering  this  from  the  dishonour  which  so  unjustly  had 
clung  to  it  hitherto;  and  in  this  direction  advancing  so  far  that  a  Christian  writer  has 
called  this  last  not  merely  a  grace,  but  the  casket  or  treasure-house  in  which  all  other 
graces  are  contained.  And,  indeed,  not  the  grace  only,  but  the  very  word  was  itself  a 
fruit  of  the  gospel ;  "  no  Greek  writer  employed  it  before  the  Christian  era,  nor,  apart 
from  the  influence  of  Christian  writers,  after"  (Trench).  What  we  are  to  do  with 
humility  is  to  gird  ourselves  with  it,  the  reference  being  to  the  use  of  an  apron  (worn 
especially  by  slaves)  for  menial  service.  "  Even  if  this  were  not  the  reference,  it  would 
be  difficult  to  believe  that  Peter  could  have  written  this  without  remembering  how  the 
Lord  washed  his  digciples'  feet,  and  what  he  said  on  that  occasion,  and  specially  to 
Peter  himself.  The  Lord  put  on  a  sei-vile  garment  for  the  occasion — he  girded  himself 
before  he  addressed  himself  to  that  menial,  gracious  task,  which  was  a  parable  in  action 
never  to  be  forgotten.  This  being  bo,  how  much  force,  how  much  life,  is  given  to 
Peter's  admonition  1  When  his  words  come  to  us  loaded  with  the  loving,  overwhelming 
yem«mbranc«,  tiasf  bring  to  us  all  the  weight  of  what  our  Saviour  aid  and  taid  wa. 


OH.  T.  1—14.]    THE  FIBST  KPT8TLE  GENERAL  OF  PETER.  231 

that  sacred  evening  before  the  Crucifixion  "  (Howson'a  •  Horas  Petrinsp ').  All  of  them, 
after  the  example  of  Christ,  were  to  gird  themselves  to  serve  one  another — ^the  elders  the 
younger  (people),  and  the  younger  (people)  the  elders.  The  principle  laid  down  in  ch. 
iv.  10  was  that  all  gifts — experience,  youthful  energy,  among  them — were  to  bo 
placed  at  the  service  of  the  community.  The  consideration  by  which  humility  is 
enforced  here  contains  the  principles  according  to  which  God  withholds  and  grants  his 
blessing.  There  is  a  certain  disposition  which  is  necessarily  disowned,  its  opposite 
being  that  which  is  owned.  The  proud,  {.a  those  who  ore  satisfied  with  themselves 
and  who  exalt  themselves  above  others  on  account  of  advantages,  Ood  sets  himself  in 
array  against  them.  The  humble,  i.e,  those  who  have  a  sense  of  their  needs  and  who 
do  not  think  of  comparing  themselves  with  others,  Ood  giveth  grace  to  them.  He  sends 
the  rich  empty  away,  while  satisfying  the  poor  with  good  things.  2.  Humilitp  before 
Ood,  "  Humble  yourselves  therefore  under  the  mighty  band  of  God,  that  he  may 
exalt  you  in  due  time."  Even  in  the  persecutors  Peter  saw  the  mighty  hand  of  Ood. 
in  what  they  suffered  at  their  hands  there  was  a  call  to  acknowledge  their  importance 
in  the  hands  of  might.  There  was  also  a  call  to  acknowledge  their  sins.  If  they 
thus  abased  themselves  individually  and  unitedly  before  God,  he  would  exalt  them  in 
due  time.  He  would  certainly  exalt  them  above  their  persecutors,  and,  without  reference 
to  their  persecutors,  on  the  day  of  judgmeat.  He  would  then  bring  forth  their 
righteousness  as  the  light,  and  their  judgment  as  the  noonday.  But  the  language  may 
also  be  taken  as  holding  out  a  promise  that,  whenever  the  ends  of  the  Divine  administra- 
tion permitted,  they  would  be  exalted  here  above  their  persecutors.  The  hand  that 
affiicted  would  also  remove  the  affliction.  3.  Accompaniment  of  humility  before  Ood. 
"  Casting  all  your  anxiety  upon  him,  because  he  careth  for  you."  This  does  not  stand 
by  itself,  but  is  participially  connected  with  the  foregoing.  Whilst  there  is  to  be 
an  abasing,  there  must  be,  if  there  is  to  be  a  lifting  up,  if  there  is  to  be  a  balanced 
condition  in  the  spiritual  life,  also  a  casting  upon  God.  What  they  were  to  cast  was, 
not  their  care,  but  their  anxious  care.  What  was  to  become  of  them  in  the  persecu- 
tion ?  In  the  event  of  their  being  martyred,  how  would  their  families  be  provided 
for?  how  would  their  children  be  defended  against  worldly  influences,  which  were  worse 
than  persecution?  Let  them  be  encouraged  to  cast  all  their  anxious  care  upon  God; 
for  he  most  effectually  cared  for  them.  He  was  acquainted  with  all  their  anxious  care 
in  its  length  and  breadth,  in  its  height  and  deptl^  and  he  would  not  forget  them  or 
theirs  in  the  present  or  in  the  future.  When  Peter  penned  this  precept  he  had  grown 
above  his  own  restless  energy  into  the  calm  of  wordis  which  he  had  once  heard  from 
sacred  lips.  "  For  your  heavenly  Father  knoweth  that  ye  have  need  of  these  things. 
But  seek  ye  first  the  kingdom  of  God  and  his  righteousness,  and  all  these  things  shall 
be  added  unto  you.  Take  therefore  no  thought  [have  no  anxious  care]  for  the  morrow." 
IV.  The  advbrsabt  of  souls.  1.  WatchfidnesB.  "  Be  sober,  be  watchful :  youj 
adversary  the  devil,  as  a  roaring  lion,  walketh  about,  seeking  whom  he  may  devour." 
By  the  omission  of  connecting  words,  a  nervous  force  is  given  to  the  language.  In 
1  Thess.  V.  6  it  is  said,  "  Let  us  watch  and  be  sober."  The  same  verbs  are  used  here, 
but  the  order  is  reversed.  The  stress  is  here  upon  be  watchful,  which  is  placed  next 
the  danger  pointed  to.  Be  tdber,  i.e.  be  free  from  the  stupefying  of  meats  and  drinks, 
from  all  worldly  excitement ;  from  the  disturbing  influence  of  anxious  care.  Unless 
they  were  sober,  they  could  not  be  ivatchful,  i.e.  have  all  their  senses  and  powers 
wakened  up,  so  as  to  be  prepared  like  a  sentinel  against  the  approach  of  the  enemy. 
The  two  words  are  like  the  ringing  of  an  alarm-bell.  Be  in  a  fit  and  wakeful  state; 
the  enemy  may  any  moment  be  here.  There  is  raised  an  impression  of  the  formid- 
ableness  of  the  enemy  named  here.  In  respect  of  good  qualities— Strength,  majesty- 
Christ  is  compared  to  a  lion.  He  is  the  Lion  of  the  tribe  of  Judah.  In  respect  of  bad 
qualities^fiercenesB,  wonderful  activity  for  rapacious  ends — the  devil  is  here  compared 
to  a  lion.  "  As  a  roaring  lion  he  walketh  about.  Seeking  whom  he  may  devour."  This 
language  has  special  application  to  times  of  persecution.  When  the  fire  of  persecution 
is  among  the  Chui-ches,  then  there  is,  as  it  were,  roaring,  unwonted  stirring-up  of  energy, 
in  the  expectation  that,  through  unsteadfastness,  one  here  and  another  there  may  fall 
into  his  power.  2.  Steadfastness.  "  Whom  withstand  steadfast  in  your  faith,  knowing 
that  the  same  sufferings  are  accomplished  in  your  brethren  who  are  in  the  world."  It 
is  sometimes  our  duty  to  flee  from  the  deviL    We  Ke  to  flee  from  the  scene  where  wa 


236  THE  FIBST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  PETEB.    [ch.  t.  1—14. 

are  strongly  tempted.  We  are  here  exhorted  not  to  flee  from  but  to  face  the  devil ; 
*nd  James  adds  the  thought  that,  when  we  boldly  face  him,  he  will  flee  from  us.  There 
seems  to  be  a  connecting  of  the  devil  with  the  persecutions  that  were  taking  place. 
Paul  says  that  Satan  hindered  once  and  again  his  going  to  the  Thessalonians.  So, 
through  the  persecutors  who  were  under  his  influence,  he  was  opposing  the  Christians  ; 
and  they  were  not  weakly  to  yield  to  him,  but  to  stand  up  against  him.  They  could 
only  expect  to  be  unwavering  in  their  stand  against  him  in  their  faith,  Le.  in  the  strong 
conviction  that  they  were  not  left  to  themselves,  but  that  there  was  One  with  them 
stronger  than  their  adversary.  Let  them  be  supported  by  the  consciousness  that  they 
occupied  no  singular  position.  It  was  the  destiny  of  the  brotherhood  in  the  world  to 
suffer.  The  same  sufferings  were  being  accomplished  in  Babylon  from  which  he  wrote 
as  in  the  Churches  of  Asia  Minor  to  which  he  wrote.  3.  Promise  (f  support  from  God. 
"  And  the  God  of  all  grace,  who  called  you  unto  his  eternal  gloiy  in  Christ,  after  that  ye 
have  suffered  a  little  while,  shall  himself  perfect,  stablish,  strengthen  you."  They  were 
to  be  steadfast  in  their  faith ;  there  was  this  promise  on  which  their  faith  could  rest.  The 
God  of  the  promise  is  designated  the  Ood  of  all  grace,  i.e.  who  could  supply  grace  up  to 
aud  beyond  all  their  needs.  The  beginning  of  bis  grace  was  when  he  called  them  in 
Christ;  but  that  beginning  was  connected  with  an  end.  He  called  them  unto  his 
eternal  glory.  The  end  was  not  to  be  reached,  unless  by  means  going  before.  The 
foregoing  condition  was  suffering  a  little  while.  There  is  consolation  in  the  manner  of 
stating  it,  the  shortness  of  the^suffering  being  placed  in  contrast  with  the  length  of  the 
glory.  In  and  through  the  suffering  God  would  support  them,  so  that  they  would  not 
fail  of  eternal  glory.  There  being  three  words  employed  has  the  effect  of  giving 
increased  force  to  the  idea.  The  first  word  is  a  promise  t^hat  God  will  supply  all  that 
is  lacking  in  the  elements  of  character  upon  which  strength  depends.  The  second  word 
is  a  promise  that  God  will  keep  from  being  overpowered  in  the  actual  assault.  The 
third  word  is  a  promise  that  God  will  increase  strength  so  as  to  turn  successful  resist- 
ance into  victorious  aggression.  The  God  who  called,  he  will  support  all  through  unto 
eternal  glory.  ^  Doxology  anneooed  to  the  promise.  "  To  him  be  the  dominion  for  ever 
and  ever.  Amen."  "Power  "is  a  better  word  than  "dominion."  When  God  promises  us 
power  or  gives  us  to  experience  power,  it  becomes  us  to  ascribe  the  power  to  him.  As 
we  shall  be  receiving  accessions  of  power  through  the  ages  of  ages,  our  ascriptions  of 
power  can  never  end.  As  our  ascriptions  are  so  defective  at  their  best,  we  seek  to  have 
them  intensified  by  adding  our  "  Amen." — B.  F. 

Vers.  12 — 14. — Conclusion.  L Notice  bboabbino thb lktteb.  1.  Theleartr.  "By 
Silvanus,  our  faithful  brother,  as  I  account  him,  I  have  written  unto  you  briefly." 
Peter  has  written  at  considerable  length,  and  yet,  in  comparison  with  the  crowding  of 
thoughts  on  his  mind,  briefly,  being  able  to  be  brief  because  he  had  so  qualified  a 
messenger  in  Silvanus.  This  Silvanus  or  Silas  is  a  link  between  Peter  and  Paul.  He 
was  associated  with  Paul  in  the  writing  of  the  two  letters  to  the  Thessalonians.  He 
had  assisted  Paul  in  the  founding  of  the  Churches  here  addressed.  This  associate  and 
assistant  of  Paul's  Peter  accounted  a  faithful  brother.  As  he  had  been  faithful  in  past 
services  to  the  Churches,  he  would  also  be  faithful  in  this.  2.  Aim.  "  Exhorting,  and 
testifying  that  this  is  the  true  grace  of  God :  stand  ye  fast  therein."  "  He  proposed  an 
exhorting  and  a  testifying,  both  in  close  connection  with  each  other,  as  the  immediate 
juxtaposition  of  the  ideas  shows.  The  occasion  of  them  lay  in  this,  that  the  readers, 
as  professing  Christians,  had  to  endure  severe  afBictions  through  the  slanders  of  the 
heathen.  In  view  of  the  dangers  lying  therein,  the  apostle  was  careful,  on  the  one 
hand,  to  exhort  them  to  patience,  by  directing  their  minds  to  the  future  inheritance,  as 
also  to  the  continuance  in  holiness,  and  to  a  conduct  towards  each  other  and  towards 
the  heathen,  such  as  would  lead  the  latter  to  see  how  groundless  their  slanders  were ; 
and,  on  the  other  hand,  that  his  exhortation  might  not  be  without  a  firm  basis,  to  assure 
them  that  a  state  of  suffering  was  the  true  Divine  state  of  grace  "  (Huther).  Having 
stated  his  aim,  he  also  exemplifies  it.  Having  testified  to  their  standing  in  the  true 
grace  (we  may  understand  through  Pauline  preaching,  which  thus  agreed  with  Petrine 
preaching)  he  exhorts  them  to  standfast  therein. 

n.  Salutations.  1.  The  Church  in  Babylon.  "  She  that  is  in  Babylon,  elect  together 
witk  T^M,  saluteth  you."    It  is  significoat  of  the  widespread  activity  of  Peter  that  h« 


di.T.l— 14.]    THE  PIEST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PBTE3.  837 

was  at  this  time  writing  from  Babylon.  He  was  attracted  to  this  city  (changed  from 
what  it  had  once  been)  by  the  number  of  Jews  that  were  resident  there.  Cliristianity 
had  found  a  congenial  soU  among  them;  and  now,  on  the  occasion  of  Peter  writing  to 
the  elect  Churches  of  Pontus,  Galatia,  Cappadocia,  Asia,  and  Bitbynia,  the  co-elect 
Babylonian  Church  sends  greeting  to  them.  2,  Mark.  "  And  so  doth  Mark  ray  son." 
As  Timothy  to  Paul,  so  was  Mark  to  Peter,  his  son,  i.e.  convert,  companion,  helper.  It 
was  to  the  house  of  Mary  the  mother  of  Mark  that  Peter  went  when  he  was  mii  actilously 
delivered  from  prison  ;  it  is  pleasing  to  see  the  old  friendship  kept  up.  Thus  associated, 
we  can  scarcely  think  of  Mark  writing  his  Gospel  without  consulting  with  Peter.  3. 
Miitual  salutation.  "Salute  one  another  with  a  kiss  of  love."  What  Paul  calls  the 
Tioly  kiss,  Peter  calls  the  kiss  of  love,  i.e.  Christian  brotherly  love.  When  this  Epistle 
was  read  aloud  in  open  assembly,  at  the  close  of  the  rearling,  the  men  were  to  kiss  each 
other,  and  the  women,  sitting  apart,  were  also  to  kiss  each  other.  "  The  fraternal  kiss, 
with  which  every  one,  after  being  baptized,  was  received  into  the  particular  community 
— which  the  members  bestowed  on  each  other  just  before  the  celebration  of  the  com'' 
munion,  and  with  which  every  Christian  saluted  his  brother,  though  he  never  saw  him 
before — was  not  an  empty  form,  but  the  expression  of  Christian  feeling ;  a  token  of  the 
relation  in  which  Christians  conceived  themselves  to  stand  to  each  other.  It  was  this, 
indeed,  which  in  a  cold  and  selfish  age  struck  the  pagans  with  wonder;  to  behold  men 
of  different  countries,  ranks,  stages  of  culture,  so  intimately  bound  together ;  to  see  the 
stranger  who  came  into  a  city,  and  by  his  letter  of  recognition  made  himself  known  to 
the  Christians  of  the  place  as  a  brother  beyond  suspicion,  finding  at  once  among  them, 
to  whom  he  was  peisonally  unknown,  all  manner  of  brotherly  sympathy  aud  protection  " 
(Neander). 

IIL  Benediction.  "  Peace  be  unto  you  all  that  are  in  Christ."  Christ  said,  "  Peace 
be  unto  you."  The  addition  made  by  Peter  to  the  Master's  words  defines  the  range 
within  which  he  invokes  peace.  Let  none  that  are  in  Christ  want  the  peace  of  th« 
Divine  forj^veuess,  of  the  Diving  keeping. — B.  F. 


HOMILETICAL  INDEX 

to  TBB 


FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PETER. 


CHAPTER  L 
theub  'ion 

The  Address         ...            ...            ...  12 

Thanl^sgiving        ...            ...            ...  15 

Practical  Exhortations        ...            ...  18 

The  Threefold  Condition  of  a  Christian  22 

The  Inheritance  reserved  for  tlie  Heirs  24 

The  Heirs  kept  for  the  Inheritance  ...  25 
The  Paradox  of  the  Christian  Life — 

Joy  subsisting  with  Sorrow 26 

The  Unique  Love  to  an  Unseen  Saviour  28 

Oiiristian  Joy        ...            ...            ...  29 

The  Work  of  Christ  the  Central  Fact 

of  the  Universe...            ...            ...  SO 

The  Christian's  Hope          ...            ...  82 

Christians  God-like  Men     ...            ...  34 

The  Father  and  Judge        ...            ...  35 

The  Scope,  Means,  and  Purpose  of  Ee- 

demption           ...            ...            ...  87 

Faith,  Love,  and  Joy          ...            ...  89 

Salvation  a  Matter  of  Universal  Interest  40 

Sufferings  and  Glory           ...            ...  40 

Practical  Christianity         ...            ...  41 

Christian  Fear      ...            ...            ...  42 

The  Divine  Means  to  Faith  and  Hope  42 

Tlie  Elect  of  God 43 

The  Key-note  of  the  Epistle — the  Be- 
liever's Hope     ...            ...            ...  44 

The     Saints'    Joy     notwithstanding 

Heaviness          ...            ...            ...  45 

The  Certainty  and  Greatness  of  Divine 

Salvation           ...            ...            ...  47 

Salvation  by  Christ  issuing  in  Holinesi  49 
The  Holiness  in  which  Salvation  con- 
sists a  Season  for  Christian  Fear  ...  50 


THE&n                                                          rAOi 
Christian  Love  the  Test  of  the  Posses- 
sion of  Salvation              ...  ...  51 

The  Introductory  Greeting...  ...  53 

An  Outburst  of  Praise         ...  ...  5S 

The  Testing  of  Religious  Faith  ...  55 

Love — Trust — Joy               ...  ...  50 

Soul-Salvation      ...            ».  ...  56 

The  Call  to  Holiness           ...  ...  5(i 

The  Awe  of  the  Redeemed  ...  58 
The  Life  of  the  True,  and  the  Word  of 

Truth...            ...  58 

Introduction          ...            ...  ...  59 

Salvation  in  its  Completion  ...  59 

The  Pilgrim-Life ...           ...  pm  64 


CHAPTER  n. 

The  Regenerate  Life           ... 

••. 

77 

Various  Exhortations          ... 

... 

81 

Special  Address  to  Servants 

... 

83 

Infants'  Fuod        ...            ... 

... 

86 

Living  Stones 

... 

87 

Temple,  Priest,  Sacrifice     ... 

... 

89 

The  Head  of  the  Corner;  or,  the  Stone 

of  Stumbling     ...            ...            ...  90 

What  the  Ohurcli  is  for       ...            ...  92 

Christ's  Passion  our  Peace  and  Pattern  94 

The  Shcplierd  and  Bishop  of  Souls  ...  96 
The  Spiritual  Temple,  Priesthood,  and 

Sacrifices           ...            ...            ...  97 

Elect  and  Precious              ...            ...  98 

.  The  Christian  Citizen         ...            ...  99 

True  Freedom       ...            ...            ...  100 

"  Honour  all  Men "             ...           „.  100 


INDEX. 


THEHIE  PAGB 

Seivitudo  and  Subjection    ...  ...  101 

The  Purpose  of  the  Saviour's  Suffer- 
ings    ...  ...  ...  ...  102 

The  Strayed  Sheep  recovered            ...  105 
The  Possession  of  Christian  Life  sum- 
moning to  Spiritual  Growth          ...  106 
Christian  Life  crowned  with  Wonder- 
ful Honour        ...            ...            ...  107 

The  Demand  for  a  Life  becoming  the 

Christian  Name  ...  ...  108 

The  Christian's  Duty  to  the  State    ...  110 
Servants  urged  to  Patient  Endurance 

of  Undeserved  Suffering  ...  ...  Ill 

Spiritual  Childhood  ...  ...  112 

The  Soul-Temple,  and  Soul-Service ...  113 
The  Glory  of  the  Church  as  a  Common- 
wealth              ...            ...            ...  113 

The  Threefold  Plea  against  Disorderly 

Passions  ...  ...  ...  114 

The  Highest  Motive  for  a  Loyal  Life  114 

Tlie  Christian  as  a  Servant  ...  115 

Newborn  Babes  and  the  Higher  Israel  115 

Christians  in  the  World      ...  ...  121 

Relation  of  Christians  to  Civil  Au- 
thorities ...  ...  ...  122 

Subjection  of  Servants  to  their  Masters  124 

CHAPTEE  in. 

Duties  of  Husbands  and  Wives         „.    138 
General  Exhortations         ...  ...    140 

Consider  Christ    ...  ...  ...     143 

The  Armour  of  Eighteousness  ...     146 

Woman's  True  Apparel  and  Ornament    148 
The  Twofold  Claim  of  Womanhood  ...     148 
Cliristian  Zeal      ...  ...  ...     149 

Sufferers  fortified ...  ...  ...     150 

Sacrificial  Sufferings  ...  ...     150 

The  Christian  Wife  called  to  Hoart- 
Culture  as  a  Means  of  Winning  the 
Unconverted  Husband     ...  ...     151 

The  Christian  Husband  called  to  enjoy 
Spiritual  Blessings  with  the  Chris- 
tian Wife  ...  ...  ...     152 

The  Conduct  that  becomes  the  Chris- 
tian towards  other  Christians        ...     154 
The  Conduct  becoming  the  Christian 
towards  his  Persecutors  ...  ...     155 

The  Eemembrance  of  our  Lord's  Atone- 
ment a  Help  to  Persecuted  Christians    156 
The  Crucified  Saviour  quickcTied   in 
Spirit  preaching  to  the  Spirits  in 
Prison...  ...  ...  ...    158 


THBUS  FAGB 

Unity  between  Christian  People      m.  159 
Suffering  for  Eighteousness               ...  160 
The  Mission  of  our  Saviour               ...  160 
Subjection  of  Wives  to  their  Husbands, 
with  Subjoined  Injunction  to  Hus- 
bands ...            ...            ...            ...  161 

Injunctions  to  all ...            m.            •••  165 

CHAPTEE  IV. 

Exhortation  to  Entire  Separation  tmm 

Sin      ...            176 

Exhortations  based  on  the  Impending 

Judgment         ...            ...            ...  178 

Suffering               ...            ...            ...  180 

Gifts  and  Service...            ...            ...  183 

The  Sufferer's  Wisdom  and  Peace    ...  185 
"The  Time  Past:"  3  Sermon  for  the 

Last  Day  of  the  Year      ...            ...  186 

Waiting  for  the  End           ...            ...  187 

Fervent  Love       ...           ...           ...  188 

Stewardship          ...            ...            ...  188 

Christian  Speech  ...            ...            ...  189 

Trials     ...            ...            ...            ...  189 

The   Persecuted  Christian  reminded 
of   the  Necessity  of  Suffering  tor 

Eighteousness  ...            ...            ...  190 

The  Persecuted  Christian  reminded  of 

the  Help  of  Brotherly  Love          ...  192 
The  Joyous  Aspect  of  Suffering  for 
Christ  a  Help  to  Persecuted  Chris- 
tians  ...            ...            ...            ...  193 

Living  to  the  Will  of  God  ...            ...  194 

A  Solemn  Fact  and  Urgent  Duty     ....  196 

Christian  Love  as  a  Service               :..  197 

The  Christian's  Fiery  Trial              ...  198 

Suffering,  Shameful  and  Glorious     ...  199 

Coming  to  Judgment          ...            ...  199 

Duty  in  View  of  the  Nearness  of  the 

End 201 

Fiery  Trial  among  the  Christiana     ...  202 

CHAPTEE  V. 

Charge  to  the  Elders  of  the  Churches 

of  Asia  Minor   ...            ...            ...  211 

General  Exhortations         ...            ...  213 

Conclusion  of  the  Epistle  ...  215, 236 

The  Slave's  Dress                ...            ...  218 

Why  we  may  make  Sure  of  God's  Help 

in  Conflict         ..,            ...            ...  220 

The  Manifold  Gifts  for  Manifold  Need  221 

The  True  Pastorate            ...           ...  223 


INDEX. 


Ui 


Tbo  Rightful  Aathority  of  Experience  224 

Christian  Humility             ...            ...  225 

The  Cure  of  Care ...           ...           ...  225 

WatohfulnesB        ...            ...            ...  226 

"  The  God  of  all  Grace" 227 

The  Condnot  becoming  the  Elders  of 

the  Chuiob       m.           #••           ...  227 


The  Conduct  becoming  Ohnich  Mem- 
bers towards  the  Elders  of  the  Church    229 
Shspicion  of  Satan  ...  ...    230 

True  Office-bearers  in  the  Church  231,  232 
Counsels  for  Troubled  ChriBtia.na  ...  232 
Concluding  Exhortatioiu   ...  m.    233 


THE 


PULPIT    COMMENTARY 


EDITED  BY  THE 


VERY  \m.  II.  1).  M.  SPENCE,  D.D., 


DEAN  OF  GLOUCESTER: 


AND   BY  THE 


REV.  JOSEPH    S.   EXELL,   M.A. 


II.    PETER. 

CExVositiou  arib  f  omilcticsr: 
By  rev.    B.    0.    CAPFIN,    M.A., 

VICAR  OF  NORTHALLERTON,    AND   RURAL  DEAN  ; 
LATE  FELLOW  AND   TUTOR  OF  WORCESTER   COLLEGE,    OXFORD. 

fomilics  bji  llndous  ^utljors: 

REV.  PROF.  J.  R.  THOMSON,  M.A.  REV.  U.  R.  THOMAS. 

REV.  C.  NEW.  REV.  R.  FINLAYSON,  B.A. 


PUNK    &   WAGNALLS    COMPANY 

New  Yoek  and  ToEONTa 


THE 

SECOND  EPISTLE  GENEKAL  OF  PETER. 


INTBODUOTION. 


L  Oknuimeness  or  ihi  Epistu. 

1.  External  Evidence. 

In  consideriitig  the  genuineness  of  this  Epistle  we  are  confronted  at  once  vvith 
the  -well-known  words  of  Eusebius.  He  says,  in  his  '  Ecclesiastical  History,' 
which  seems  to  have  been  finished  in  a.d.  325,  "  One  Epistle  of  Peter,  which 
is  called  the  first,  is  accepted ;  and  this  the  presbyters  of  old  have  nsed  in 
their  writings  as  undoubted.  But  that  which  is  circulated  as  his  Second 
Epistle  we  have  received  to  be  not  canonical.  Nevertheless,  as  it  appeared 
to  many  to  be  useful,  it  has  been  diligently  read  with  the  other  Scriptures  " 
(Eusebius,  '  Hist.  Eccl.,'  iii.  3).  In  the  same  chapter  he  says  that  he  knows 
only  one  genuine  Epistle  among  the  writings  attributed  to  St.  Peter ;  and 
in  bk.  iii.  25  he  classes  the  Second  Epistle  with  those  of  James  and  Jude.- 
as  "  disputed,  indeed,  but  known  to  most  men." 

There  are  no  direct  quotations  from  this  Epistle  in  the  Christian  writings 
of  the  first  two  centuries ;  there  are,  however,  some  scattered  allusions  which 
seem  to  imply  acquaintance  with  it.  Thus  Clement  of  E^^me,  in  his  '  Epistle 
t©  the  Corinthians,'  written  about  a.d.  100,  says  (ch.  xxiii.),  "Let  that 
Scripture  be  far  from  us  where  it  says,  Wretched  are  the  double-minded, 
.  .  .  who  say,  These  things  we  heard  even  in  the  time  of  our  fathers,  and, 
behold,  we  have  grown  old,  and  none  of  these  things  has  happened  to  us." 
The  same  passage  is  quoted  with  slight  diSerences  in  the  so-called  second 
epistle  of  Clement,  where  it  is  introduced  with  the  words,  "  For  also  the 
prophetic  word  (6  irpoffyiynKoi  Aoyos)  says."  Clement  seems  to  have  had  in 
his  mind  recollections  of  ch.  ui.  4  and  Jas.  i.  8.  The  words  of  the  second 
epistle  (written,  perhaps,  about  the  middle  of  the  second  century)  remind 
us  also  of  ch.  i.  19  (tov  irpoiprjTiKbv  \6yov).  The  remainder  of  &e  passage, 
as  quoted  in  1  Clement  xxiii.  and  2  Clement  xi.,  is  quite  different  from 
St.  Peter.    It  ia  therefore  possible  that  Clement  ma^  be  quoting  some 

IL  FITKB.  I 


fi  rSTTRODUOTION  TO 


apoQiyplial  writing;  but  it  is  at  least  probable  that  lie  is  mixing  together 
reminiscences  of  Jas.  i.  8  and  ch.  iii.  4,  with  additions  derived  from  some 
unknown  sonrce.  The  early  Fathers  were  accustomed  to  give  the  sense, 
not  the  exact  words,  of  their  citations,  often,  it  seems,  quoting  from  memory ; 
but  even  if  we  suppose  that  the  passage  was  borrowed  immediately  from 
some  unknown  writer,  it  remains  probable  that  that  writer,  older  than 
Clement  or  contemporary  with  him,  was  acquainted  with  this  Epistle.  The 
/ieyoXoTTpeir^s  Sofa  of  1  Clement  ix.  looks  like  a  recollection  of  the  same 
remarkable  words  in  oh.  i.  17.  It  is  also  probable  that  in  1  Clement  vii.  and 
ix.  there  is  a  reference  to  ch.  ii.  5,  and  in  1  Clement  xi.  to  ch.  ii.  6 — ^9.  In 
the  '  Shepherd  of  Hermas '  (written  about  a.d.  140)  there  are  three  or  four 
apparent  allusions  to  this  Epistle.  Thus  the  words,  rrjs  rpu^^s  koi  t^s  aTrdTijs 
6  xpovos  Zpa  ea-Ti  [da  ('  Sim.,'  vi.  4)  remind  us  of  ch.  ii.  13.  So  in  '  Vis.,'  iii. 
7.  1  the  words,  "  Who  .  .  .  have  forsaken  the  true  way,"  may  be  an  echo  of 
ch.  ii.  15,  and  "  Te  who  have  escaped  the  world  "  ('  Vis.,'  iv.  3.  2),  of  ch.  ii. 
20.  Justin  Martyr  (about  A.d.  145)  says,  in  controversy  with  the  Jew 
Trypho,  "  As  there  were  false  prophets  in  the  time  of  your  holy  prophets, 
so  now  there  are  many  false  teachers  among  us,"  in  which  words  there  seems 
to  be  a  reminiscence  of  ch.  iL  1.  In  the  same  book  he  says,  "  The  day  of 
the  Lord  is  as  a  thousand  years,"  which  may  be  suggested  by  Ps.  xc.  4, 
but  more  nearly  resembles  ch.  iii.  8 — a  passage  to  which  possible  allusions 
occur  in  the  epistle  ascribed  to  Barnabas,  in  Irenssus,  and  Hippolytus. 

In  the  Apology  addressed  to  Antoninus  by  Melito  of  Sardis,  about  a.d.  170, 
there  is  a  p&ssage  which  closely  resembles  ch.  iii.  5 — 7.  Irensans  also  speaks 
of  the  conflagration  of  the  universe  as  a  "  diluvium  ignis ;  "  and  it  may  be 
noted,  as  at  least  a  remarkable  coincidence,  that  in  speaking  of  the  death  of 
St.  Peter  he  has  the  same  word,  efoSos,  which  is  used  in  ch.  L  15.  In  the 
writings  of  Theophilus  of  Antioch,  who  wrote  about  the  same  time,  there  is 
a  possible  allusion  to  ch.  L  19,  and  an  almost  certain  reference  to  ch.  i.  21, 
"  Men  of  God,  moved  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  becoming  prophets,  inspired 
and  made  wise  by  God  himself,  became  taught  of  God"  ('Ad  Autoly« 
cum,'  ii.  9). 

Eusebius  tells  ua  ('Hist.  Eccl.,'  vi.  14)  that  Clement  of  Alexandi-ia 
wrote  expositions,  not  only  of  the  canonical  Scriptures,  but  also  of  the  dis- 
puted books,  aa  the  Epistle  of  Jude  and  the  remaining  Catholic  Epistles. 
Some  doubt  is  thrown  upon  this  assertion  by  some  contradictory  statements 
of  Cassiodorus;  but,  on  the  whole,  it  seems  probable  that  the  Second 
Epistle  of  St.  Peter  was  known  to  the  great  master  of  the  catechetical 
school. 

Hippolytus  of  Portus,  who  wrote  about  a.d.  220,  has  a  passage  which 
seems  to  be  an  expansion  of  ch.  i.  20.  He  says  ('  De  Antechristo,'  c.  2) 
that  "  the  prophets  spoke  not  of  their  own  power,  nor  did  they  preach  what 
they  themselves  wished ;  but  first  they  were  gifted  with  wisdom  through  the 
Word,  then  were  well  instructed  about  the  future  through  visions."  And  in 
Mtothar  place  ha  speaks  of  the  "wicked  angels  chained  in  Tartarus  as  a 


THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  PETER.  iU 

pnnisliment  for  their  sins"  ('Adv.  Hser.,'  x.  80).  Origen,  who  died  A.D. 
253,  was  certainly  aoquainted  with  both  the  Epistles  of  St.  Peter.  He  is 
quoted  by  Ensebius  ('  Hist.  Eccl.,'  vi.  26)  as  saying,  "  Peter  has  left  one 
acknowledged  Epistle :  let  it  be  granted  that  he  left  also  a'  second,  for  this 
is  disputed."  In  the  '  Homilies,'  which  we  have  only  in  the  Latin  translation 
of  Bufinus,  he  thrice  mentions  the  Second  Epistle :  "  Peter  sounds  forth 
with  the  two  trumpets  of  his  Epistles  "  (Hom.  vii.  on  Joshua)  ;  "  And  again 
Peter  says,  Ye  have  been  made  partakers  of  the  Divine  nature  "  (Hom.  iv. 
on  Leviticus)  ;  "  As  the  Scripture  saith  in  a  certain  place,  A  dumb  animal, 
answering  with  human  voice,  forbade  the  madness  of  the  prophet  "  (Hom. 
xiii.  on  Numbers).  But  there  are  no  quotations  from  the  Epistle  in  his 
extant  Greek  works,  and  he  twice  speaks  of  the  First  Epistle  as  the  Catholic 
Epistle  of  Peter. 

Firmilian,  Bishop  of  the  Oappadocian  Csesarea  (about  a.d.  270),  has  a 
clear  allusion  to  this  Epistle.  He  speaks  of  "  Peter  and  Paul,  the  blessed 
apostles,  .  .  .  who  execrated  heretics  in  their  Epistles,  and  warned  us  to 
avoid  them."  There  is  no  passage  in  the  First  Epistle  of  St.  Peter  to  which 
these  words  can  refer.  Athanasius  and  Cyril  of  Jerusalem  accepted  all  the 
seven  Catholic  Epistles  as  canonical. 

After  the  time  of  Eusebius  the  Epistle  seems  to  have  been  generally 
received.  Doubts  were  occasionally  expressed,  as  by  Gregory  of  Nazianzen 
and  Theodore  of  Mopsuestia,  who  is  said  to  have  rejected  both  Epistles. 
Jerome  writes,  in  a  well-known  passage,  "  Scripsit  (Petrns)  dnas  epistolas 
qu89  Catholic89  nominantur,  quarum  secunda  a  plerisqne  ejus  esse  negatur 
propter  stili  cum  priore  dissonantiam."  In  another  place,  however,  he 
explains  the  difference  of  style  by  supposing  that  the  apostle  had  used 
different  interpreters.  He  contributed  largely  to  the  general  acceptance 
of  the  Epistle  by  including  it  in  his  own  Latin  translation ;  and  from  his 
time  the  doubts  of  its  authenticity  seem  to  have  rapidly  disappeared. 

The  Epistle  is  not  in  the  Peschito,  or  Old  Syriac,  Version,  but  it  was 
received  by  Ephrem  Syrus,  and  is  contained  in  the  Philoxenian,  or  Latei 
Syriac.  It  is  not  in  the  Old  Latin,  which  was  used  before  the  time  of 
Jerome.  It  is  not  mentioned  in  the  Muratorian  Canon  ;  but  that  fragment 
omits  also  the  First  Epistle,  which  was  universally  accepted. 

The  Second  Epistle  of  St.  Peter  was  recognized  as  canonical  by  the 
Councils  of  Laodicaea'  (about  A.D.  366),  Hippo  (393),  and  Carthage  (397). 
Laodicffla,  we  must  remember,  was  one  of  the  Churches  of  that  Roman 
province  of  Asia  to  which  (among  other  countries  of  Asia  Minor)  St.  Peter's 
Epistles  were  addressed.  It  is  probable  that  a  much  larger  amount  of 
ancient  testimony  than  we  now  possess  was  within  the  reach  of  the  Fathers 
of  these  Councils.  They  appear  to  have  exercised  great  care  and  discrimina- 
tion.    They  excluded  some  writings  from  the  canon  which  had  been  read 

•  The  authenticity  of  the  oatalogne  of  the  •acred  book*  in  the  sixtieth  canon  of  this 
OonncU  is  very  doubtful  (see  Dr.  Westcott,   •On  the  Oanon  of  the  New  Testanusnt,* 


INTRODtTOnON  TO 


in  Churches  and  classed  with  the  Scriptures,  as  the  *  First  Epistle  of  Clement' 
and  the  '  Epistle  of  Barnabas.'  We  cannot  but  believe  that  they  had  the 
guidance  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in  the  performance  of  their  difficult  and 
momentous  dnty.  We  attach,  therefore,  very  great  weight  to  their  judg- 
ment. At  the  same  time,  it  must  be  admitted  that,  apart  from  their 
authority,  the  external  evidence  for  our  Epistle,  though  considerable,  cannot 
be  regarded  aa  entirely  convincing. 

2.  Internal  Evidence. 

We  come  next  to  the  evidence  which  may  be  derived  from  the  Bpistl* 
itself.  It  has  been  urged  against  its  genuineness :  (1)  That  the  writer 
labours  to  identify  himself  with  the  apostle  in  a  manner  forced  and  unna- 
tural. (2)  That  the  reference  to  St.  Paul  in  ch.  iii.  15,  16  is  not  such 
as  might  bo  expected  from  St.  Peter.  (3)  That,  as  Jerome  had  long  ago 
remarked,  there  is  a  striking  stiU  dissonantia  between  the  two  Epistles. 
(4)  That  the  key-note  of  the  Epistle  and  its  leading  thoughts  differ  widely 
from  those  of  the  First  Epistle.  (5)  That  the  relation  between  the  second 
chapter  and  the  Epistle  of  St.  Jude  is  perplexing,  and  suggests  doubts  as  to 
the  apostolic  authority  of  the  writers.  (6)  That  the  resemblances  between 
this  Epistle  and  certain  passages  in  Josephns  is  so  close  as  to  show  that  the 
writer  must  have  been  acquainted  with  works  which  were  not  published  till 
after  the  death  of  St.  Peter.  It  wUl  be  convenient  to  discuss  these  points 
in  order. 

(1)  The  writer  of  the  Epistle  calls  himself  "  Symeon  Peter,  a  servant 
and  an  apostle  of  Jesus  Christ."  In  ch.  i.  14  he  refers  to  the  Lord's  pro- 
phecy concerning  the  death  of  St.  Peter  in  John  xxi.  18,  19.  In  vers. 
16 — 18  of  the  same  chapter  he  tells  his  readers  that  he  was  one  of  the 
witnesses  of  the  Transfiguration,  and  heard  the  voice  that  was  bome  from 
heaven :  he  calls  the  scene  of  that  great  sight  "  the  holy  mount."  In 
ch.  iii.  1  he  'refers  to  the  First  Epistle ;  and  in  ch.  iii.  2,  according  to  the 
received  text,  he  again  asserts  his  apostleship. 

It  has  been  urged  that  the  double  name,  Symeon  Peter,  betrays  an 
anxiety  on  the  part  of  the  writer  to  identify  himself  with  the  apostle  • 
the  apostle  would  simply  say  Peter,  as  he  does  in  the  First  Epistle.  But 
on  the  other  hand,  it  is  altogether  improbable  that  an  imitator  would 
vary  the  form  of  address.  An  unknown  Christian,  wishing  to  assume  the 
personality  of  the  great  apostle,  would  not  begin  at  once  with  a  change  so 
unnecessary,  so  sure  to  excite  questionings.  A  man  uses  his  own  name 
with  a  certain  freedom :  sometimes  he  writes  it  in  full ;  sometimes  he 
uses  initials ;  sometimes,  if  he  has  several  names,  he  omits  some  of  them. 
The  variation,  if  it  surprises  us  a  little  in  the  apostle,  would  surprise  us 
much  more  in  the  case  of  an  imitator.  It  is  rather,  as  far  as  it  goes 
m  point  in  favour  of  the  authenticity  of  the  Epistle. 

The  leferenoe  in  oh.  L  14  to  the  interview  with  cur  Lord  described  in 


THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  GENEHAL  OP  PETER.  » 

John  xxi.  15 — 22  is  sometimes  compared  with  the  remiaiscence  of  the  same 
intei'view  in  1  Pet.  v.  2.  The  last,  it  is  said,  is  nnconscions — ^it  comes  from  the 
falness  of  the  heart ;  while  the  direct  assertion  of  ch.  i.  14  is  in  the  manner 
of  a  falsarius.  But  this,  surely,  is  hypercriticism.  St.  Peter,  when  stand- 
ing before  the  Sanhedrin,  asserted  his  personal  knowledge  of  the  great  facts 
of  the  gospel  (Acts  iv.  20),  much  as  he  does  in  this  Epistle.  Apostles,  like 
other  men,  may  sometimes  relate  at  length  events  of  their  previous  history, 
sometimes  make  allusions  to  them.  In  this  very  chapter  there  are  two  such 
unconscious  reminiscences.  The  use  of  the  word  "tabernacle"  in  vers.  13  and 
14  reminds  us  of  St.  Peter's  suggestion,  "  Let  us  make  three  tabernacles ;  " 
and  the  word  c|oSos  occurs  in  the  sense  of  "  decease "  nowhere  in  the 
New  Testament  except  in  ch.  i.  15  and  in  St.  Luke's  account  of  the  Trans- 
figuration. These  two  allusions  are  exactly  in  the  manner  of  the  First 
Epistle.  Compare  also  the  unconscious  adoption  of  Christ's  words  in 
ch.  ii.  20;  the  reference  in  ch.  iii.  10  to  Matt.  xxiv.  43  ;  the  apparent 
reminiscence  of  Matt.  vii.  6  in  ch.  ii.  22,  and  of  Matt.  xxv.  46  (KoAao-is) 
in  the  use  of  the  word  KoXaiofUvavs  in  ch.  ii.  9.  Surely  neither  the  asser- 
tions of  ch.  i.  14 — 18,  nor  those  of  1  John  i.  1 — 3  give  the  very  slightest 
reason  for  doubting  the  genuineness  of  either  Epistle. 

The  same  may  be  said  of  the  account  of  the  Trans Sgaration ;  there  also 
we  find  minute  evidences  of  Fetrine  authorship.  The  change  of  uumbei 
from  the  singular  in  ver.  14  to  the  plural  in  vers.  16,  18  may  well  come 
from  an  unconscious  recollection  that,  while  the  Lord's  words  recorded  in 
John  xxi.  18  were  spoken  to  St.  Peter  only,  two  other  apostles  were  wit- 
nesses of  the  Transfiguration.  And  we  may  regard  it  as  certain  that  a 
falsarius  of  the  second  century  would  have  quoted  the  words  of  the  voice 
from  heaven  exactly  as  they  are  given  in  one  of  the  synoptic  Gospels,  which 
were  then  well  known.  The  description  of  the  scene  of  the  Transfiguratioa 
88  "  the  holy  mount,"  doubtless  implies  that  the  Epistle  was  written  in 
the  later  apostolic  period,  when  the  leading  facts  of  the  gospel  history  were 
generally  known  among  Christians.  But  it  cannot  be  fairly  insisted  on  as 
an  argument  for  a  post-apostolic  date.  Why  should  not  the  mount  of  the 
Transfiguration  be  regarded  as  a  holy  place  by  the  early  Christians  as 
Mount  Sinai  was  by  the  ancient  Israelites  ? 

In  ch.  iii.  2  the  true  reading  seems  to  be  S/toiv,  so  that  St.  Peter  may  be 
understood  as  confirming  by  his  apostolic  authority  the  teaching  of  St.  Paul, 
as  he  does  in  ver.  15  of  the  same  chapter,  and  in  1  Pet.  i.  12,  25 ;  and,  as 
some  think,  in  1  Pet.  v.  12.  But,  even  if  the  reading  of  the  received  text 
is  retained,  there  is  no  reason  why  the  assertion  of  apostleship  should  be 
regarded  as  an  indication  of  a  non-Petrine  authorship,  any  more  than  the 
assumption  of  the  title,  "an  apostle  of  Jesus  Christ,"  in  both  Epistles.  St. 
Paul  often  asserts  his  apostleship :  why  should  not  St.  Peter  do  the  like  ? 

(2)  Another  objection  is  drawn  from  the  reference  to  St.  Paul  in  ch.  iii.  15, 
16.  One  apostle,  it  is  urged,  would  not  be  likely  to  give  his  imprimatur  to 
the  writings  of  another ;  he  would  not  speak  in  this  way  of  the  difficulties  in 


INTRODUCTION  TO 


(hem ;  lie  would  not  class  them  with  the  Scriptures  of  the  Old  Testament. 
Again  we  ask,  Why  not  ?  It  seems  a  very  natural  thing  that  an  apostle, 
writing  at  a  time  when  some  at  least  of  St.  Paul's  Epistles  had  become 
generally  known,  should  refer  to  writings  of  such  importance.  St.  Peter's 
first  letter  is  full  of  references  to  St.  Paul's  Epistles,  though  the  apostle  is 
not  mentioned  by  name.  And  there  may  have  been  good  reasons.  We  know 
that  St.  Paul's  authority  had  been  questioned  in  the  Churches  of  Galatia ;  St. 
Peter  may  haye  thought  it  desirable  to  support  that  authority.  We  know 
that  St.  Paul's  teaching  had  sometimes  been  misrepresented ;  St.  Peter  may 
have  thought  it  necessary  to  warn  his  readers  against  hasty  conclusions 
from  difficult  parts  of  that  teaching.  St.  Paul  himself  had  done  the  like 
in  his  Second  Epistle  to  the  Thessalonians,  in  Bonu  ilL  8,  and  elsewhere. 
Not  is  there  any  reason  to  be  startled  at  the  application  of  the  word 
"  Scripture "  to  the  Epistles  of  St  PauL  St  Panl  again  and  again 
asserts  his  own  inspiration ;  he  says  that  he  received  the  gospel  "  by  the 
revelation  of  Jesos  Christ "  (Gal.  i.  12) ;  he  tells  the  Corinthians  that 
the  spiritual  among  them  will  understand  that  the  things  which  he  writes 
"  are  the  commandments  of  the  Lord  "  (1  Cor.  xiv.  37 ;  see  also  1  Cor.  v. 
3,  4 ;  1  Thess.  ii  13) ;  he  applies  the  word  "  Scripture "  to  what  seems  to 
be  a  quotation  from  the  Gospel  of  St  Luke  (1  Tim.  v.  18).  St  Peter 
himself,  in  his  First  Epistle  (i.  12),  classes  "  them  that  have  preached  the 
gospel  unto  yon,"  of  whom  St  Panl  was  the  chief,  with  the  prophets 
of  the  Old  Testament  The  only  inference  to  be  fairly  drawn  is  that, 
at  the  date  of  this  Epistle,  some  of  the  writings  of  the  New  Testament 
were  generally  known  among  Christians,  and  were  accepted  among  them 
as  sacred  books,  of  equal  authority  with  the  Scriptures  of  the  Old 
Testament 

(3)  Undoubtedly,  there  is  a  difference  of  style.  The  style  of  both 
Epistles  is  nervous  and  energetic;  in  both  there  is  an  abundance  of  unusual 
words;  there  is  an  obvious  fondness  for  striking  and  picturesque  erpressions, 
as  well  as  for  mysterious  subjects.  These  characteristics,  common  to  both 
Epistles,  are  more  marked  in  the  second  than  in  the  first ;  the  style  is  hero 
and  there  more  rugged,  the  rare  words  are  more  startling ;  we  meet  here 
and  there  with  anacolutha  and  strange  participial  connections.  The  con- 
necting particles  commonly  used  in  the  First  Epistle  appear  rarely  in  the 
second ;  we  notice  also,  as  a  peculiarity  of  the  Second  Epistle,  a  remarkable 
tendency  to  repeat  a  word  three  or  four  times.  The  style  of  the  Second 
Epistle  is  perhaps,  as  a  rule,  less  Hebraistic ;  while  in  some  parts  the  Grreek 
seems  more  classical  and  more  periodic  than  that  of  the  first.  But  these 
differences  can  be  accounted  for.  The  First  Epistle  was  written  calmly. 
It  is  a  treatise  rather  than  a  letter ;  it  was  intended  to  arm  the  Christians 
of  Asia  Minor  against  the  coming  sufferings,  to  console  them,  to  remind 
them  of  the  high  privileges  and  blessed  hope  of  their  heavenly  calling.  It 
is  the  thoughtful  production  of  a  man  writing  deliberately.  The  Second 
Epiatla  is  a  more  hasty  composition ;  the  effect  is  produced  by  a  few  bold, 


THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  GEKEBAL  OF  PBTBB.  tU 

Iiorried  strokea.  The  apostle,  it  seems,  bad  heard  of  the  errors  of  the  false 
teachers;  thej  had  already  done  mnoh  harm;  they  were  beguming  theif 
eyil  work  in  Asia  Minor.  Perhaps  St.  Jnde's  Epistle  was  pnt  into  St. 
Peter's  hands ;  he  flashed  into  something  of  his  old  passionate  impetaosity. 
St.  Jude's  huming  words  fixed  themselves  npon  his  memory,  and  gave  their 
own  colonr  to  the  diction  of  the  whole  Epistle.  This  hypothesis  is,  to  say 
the  least,  not  improbable.  St.  Peter  had  read  the  Epistle  of  St.  James  and 
some  of  those  of  St.  Panl ;  these  writings  had  considerable  influence  upon 
the  thought  and  style  of  the  First  Epistle,  Is  it  not  possible  that  a  snbnn- 
quent  perusal  of  St.  Jude's  Epistle  may  not  only  have  given  him  fresh 
information,  but  may  have  communicated  something  of  its  fire  and  some- 
thing of  its  own  peculiar  character  to  his  impressionable  mind?  There 
is  a  strongly  marked  difference  of  style  between  the  preface  of  St.  Luke's 
Gospel  and  the  narrative  which  follows.  The  preface  is  in  the  ordinary 
style  of  the  writer;  the  narrative  took  its  colour  from  the  Aramaic  docu- 
ments which  he  consulted,  or  from  the  Aramaic  language  of  the  persons 
■nrho  related  to  him  the  events  of  which  they  had  been  eye-witnesses. 

It  is  possible,  as  St.  Jerome  suggests,  that  the  difference  of  style  between 
the  two  Epistles  of  St.  Peter  may  have  arisen  from  the  employment  of 
different  interpreters.  But  there  does  not  seem  to  be  much  ground  for  the 
hypothesis  that  St.  Peter  wrote  originally  in  Aramaic,  or  dictated  his  letters 
to  an  interpreter.  Galilee  was  a  half-Greek  country ;  Peter's  own  brother 
bore  a  Greek  name ;  it  is  probable  that  the  family  always  spoke  Greek  as 
well  as  Aramaic.  It  is  scarcely  possible  that  St.  Peter  could  have  been 
ignorant  of  Crreek  towards  the  end  of  a  life  of  which  much  had  been  spent 
away  from  Palestine. 

We  must  remember  also  that  the  Epistles,  especially  the  second,  are 
short  compositions ;  they  furnish  us  with  scarcely  sufficient  data  to  enable 
us  to  form  an  authoritative  decision  on  a  question  so  complicated  and  so 
delicate  as  that  of  style.  Thus  one  commentator  says  that  the  Greek  of 
the  First  Epistle  is  better  than  that  of  the  second ;  another,  also  a  good 
scholar,  pronounces  in  favour  of  the  Second  Epistle  as  more  classical  and 
less  Hebraistic  than  the  first. 

Bnt  if  there  is  a  difference,  there  are  also  many  points  of  resemblance. 
We  have  said  that  the  style  of  both  Epistles  is  lively  and  picturesque ;  in 
both  there  are  many  words  which  occur  nowhere  else  in  the  New  Testar 
ment.  Attention  will  be  drawn  to  them  in  the  notes ;  but  it  is,  perhaps, 
desirable  for  readier  comparison  to  note  some  of  the  most  remarkable  of 
them  here.  In  the  First  Epistle  we  have  avayewiqa-as  (L  3),  AfidpavTOi 
(i.  4),  avfKXaXijTos  (i.  8),  dva^nxra/icvot  (i.  13),  n-ar/HnrapdSoroc  (i.  18),  ipn- 
yiwT^TOi  and  &8o\os  (ii.  2),  Itpdrtvixa  (ii.  5,  9),  cTroTrrcvw  (iL  12;  iii.  2), 
wroXifiirdvat  and  VTToypaju/tos  (ii.  21),  fuiXmi^  (ii.  24),  c/tvXoK^  and  lySva-K 
(iii.  3),  oivo<^Xvy(a  (iv.  3),  dvaxvvtc  (iv.  4),  iXXtn-pioetcuTKiwet  (ir.  15),  Sjta- 
favTivos  (t.  4),  iyKofiPmaraaOt  (v.  6),  &p)(aroliKifr  (r.  4),  wyiv^/MKOt  (r.  8), 
(Tvi'CKXfKro^  (t.  IS).    Among  the  remi^rkfrbla  worda  nf  tbf  S^oood  Bpistis 


rW  INTRODUCTION  TO 


are  to-ort/ios  (i.  1),  eirayye\/ta  (i.  4),  irapeio-cveyicovTcs  (i.  5),  fi-vunrdZfinr  (i.  9), 
Ta)(ivo%  (i.  14;  ii.  1),  eTroTrnjs  (i.  16),  hiauyat/a,  av)(fi.r]p6$,  <j}(a(r<j>6pos  (i.  19), 
exiAvcris  (i.  20),  iKTraXcu  (ii.  3;  iii.  5),  wXatrTos  (ii.  3),  raprapmra<i  and  trapoh 
or  o-eipais  (ii.  4),  retfipdHras  (ii.  6),  a^e(7/xos  (ii.  7;  iii.  17),  pXi/xfia  (ii.  8), 
fuaKT/ios  (ii.  10),  roXfirjTat  (ii.  10),  fiUfios  and  ivrpvtfiam  (ii.  13),  dcrTj;pi)CTOS 
(ii.  14;  iii.  16),  aKaTairavorTos  (ii.  14),  -irapatjfpovia  and  cXey^is  (ii.  16),  iiepafm, 
KvXia-fw.,  and  ySopySojOos  (ii.  22),  i/jUTraiy/jLoin^  (iii.  3),  poifijSov  (iii.  10),  Kavo-o'oi 
(iii.  10,  12),  SuoToijTos  and  crrpefiXovcnv  (iii.  16),  onjpiy/ios  (iii.  17).  Forty- 
eight  airaf  Xcyo/iEva  have  been  connted  in  the  Second  Epistle,  fifty-eight 
in  the  first.  Thus  the  nse  of  unusual  words  is  characteristic  of  both 
Epistles ;  one  or  two  in  the  second,  as  especially  raprapuMra^,  may  be 
stranger  and  more  startling  than  any  in  the  first;  but  this  may  be  acci- 
dental (there  are  but  a  few  such),  or  it  may  be  due  to  the  difference  in 
subject ;  jnd  surely  an  imitator  in  the  second  century  would  be  far  more 
likely  to  copy  some  of  the  more  uncommon  words  of  the  First  Epistle,  than 
to  show  an  amonnt  of  literary  skill  which  we  cannot  attribute  to  any 
Christian  writer  of  that  period,  by  catching  the  manner  of  St.  Peter 
without  anything  like  a  servile  reproduction  of  his  expressions. 

But  although  there  is  no  direct  imitation,  there  are  words  and  phrases 
which  occur  also  in  the  First  Epistle  or  in  St.  Peter's  speeches  as  recorded 
in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  sufficient  in  number  and  importance  to  form 
an  element  in  estimating  the  genuineness  of  our  Epistle.  Thus,  in  the 
first  chapter,  the  words  to-ori/ios  of  ver.  1  and  riiua  of  ver.  3  remind  us  of 
the  Tt/uos  of  1  Pet.  i.  7,  19.  The  salutation  of  ver.  2  corresponds  exactly 
with  that  of  the  First  Epistle.  In  ver.  3  we  have  the  word  open;  (a  very 
unusual  word  in  the  New  Testament)  ascribed  in  a  very  remarkable  way 
to  God  himself,  as  in  1  Pet.  ii.  9.  In  ver.  6  the  word  iiri)(opTfyi^crart  points 
back  to  the  xopnfya  of  1  Pet.  iv.  11.  In  ver.  7  we  have  the  ^iXoSeAi^ia  which 
we  have  already  met  with  in  1  Pet.  i.  22  and  iii.  8.  In  ver.  14  the  airo6eo-is 
rov  fTKrp/iLiuKTO^  fiov  brings  to  our  memory  the  words  of  1  Pet.  iii,  21,  o-apKos 
a.7r6de(Ti<i  pvirov.  In  ver.  16  tiroirrcu  reminds  us  of  the  iiroirreuovTei  of  1  Pet. 
ii.  12.  In  the  first  verse  of  the  second  chapter  the  use  of  the  verb  w^opd^av 
reminds  ua  of  the  description  of  the  redeeming  work  of  Christ  in  1  Pet.  i. 
18.  In  ver.  4  the  words  eJs  (cpitriv  rtTqprjii,hrav%  turn  onr  thoughts  to  1  Pet. 
i.  4,  where  the  heavenly  inheritance  is  said  to  be  Ttnypij/tcKiyv  ev  ovpavots  eis 
vpSx.  In  ver.  7  we  have  the  word  daiXyaa,  which  occurs  also  in  1  Pet.  iv. 
3.  In  ver.  14  Karapai  re/cva  reminds  us  of  the  tckvo  vn-axo^s  of  1  Pet.  i.  14, 
and  aKaTwiravdTovi  a[Ji,apTiai  of  the  srcirairrai  djuaprias  of  1  Pet.  iv.  1.  In 
ch.  iii.  3  the  words,  ejr*  i(r)(a.Tmu  r&v  ^/ncpSv,  remind  us  of  the  eir'  icr)(a.rov  t5v 
Xpovmv  of  1  Pet.  i.  20,  and  in  ver.  14  the  exhortation  to  be  found,  oottiXoi  koJ 
ap,(op,ijToi,  points  back  to  the  "Lamb  without  blemish  and  without  spot 
(aixiifxav  KOI  dcnriKov)  "  of  1  Pet.  i.  19.  The  use  of  the  word  tStos  (1  Pet.  iii. 
1,  6;  ch.  i.  3;  ii.  16;  iii.  17)  and  the  frequent  omission  of  the  article  may 
also  be  noticed  as  points  of  similarity  between  the  two  Epistles  :  avaorpo^-^, 
conversation,  and  the  cognate  verb,  are  favourite  words  in  both.     Again, 


THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PETEB.  ix 

tte  verb  Xay^aveiv  in  ch.  1. 1  reminds  ns  of  St.  Peter's  use  of  the  word  in 
the  same  sense  in  Acts  i.  17  (the  only  two  New  Testament  passages  in 
which  the  word  occurs  in  this  meaning).  The  somewhat  uncommon  word 
evare^eia  in  ch.  i.  3, 6,  7,  and  iii.  11,  recalls  the  same  word  in  St.  Peter's  speech 
in  Acts  iii.  12.  The  "cleansing  from  his  old  sins"  of  ch.  i.  9  seems  to 
point  back  to  the  baptism  "  for  the  remission  of  sins  "  preached  by  St. 
Peter,  Acts  ii.  38.  The  word  (^cpo/tevos  of  ch.  i.  21,  which  we  find  also  in 
1  Pet.  i.  13,  occurs  in  Acts  ii.  2,  in  the  description  of  the  descent  of  the 
Holy  Ghost  on  the  Day  of  Pentecost,  when  St.  Peter  preached  his  great 
sermon.  In  ch.  ii.  1  St.  Peter  says  that  the  false  teachers  denied  the  Lord 
that  bought  them;  he  had  used  the  same  word  apvaaOai,  to  deny  (that  word 
to  him  so  full  of  solemn  memories),  twice  in  the  speech  in  Acts  iii.  (ver.  13, 
14).  The  words  of  ch.  ii.  13,  "  to  riot  in  the  daytime,"  recall  Acts  ii.  15. 
The  fiia-Ooi  T^s  aSiKias  of  ch.  ii.  16  is  found  in  St.  Peter's  speech  in  Acts 
i.  18.  The  Lord  Jesus  is  called  the  "  Saviour  "  five  times  in  this  Epistle ; 
St.  Peter  had  described  him  as  "  a  Prince  and  a  Saviour "  in  his  speech 
before  the  Sanhedrin  (Acts  v.  31). 

On  the  whole,  while  we  recognize  the  existence  of  that  dissonance  of  style 
which  was  noticed  long  ago  by  St.  Jerome,  there  are  also  many  points  of 
resemblance,  and  the  difference  is  not  greater  than  can  be  accounted  for. 
The  two  Epistles  were  separated  by  an  interval  of,  perhaps,  two  or  three 
years  ;  the  occasion  and  subject-matter  are  different ;  the  apostle  seems  to 
have  incorporated  into  the  second  chapter  the  substance  of  another  writing 
which  may  have  tinged  the  style  of  the  whole  Epistle ;  and  it  is  at  least 
possible,  as  St.  Jerome  suggests,  that  St.  Peter  may  have  used  the  services 
of  different  interpreters. 

(4)  The  leading  thoughts  of  the  Second  Epistle  are  not  those  of  the  first. 
The  key-note  of  the  First  Epistle  is  Jiope;  that  of  the  second  is  knowledge 
(tiriyi/(i)crts).  The  First  Epistle  directs  our  thoughts  to  the  great  events  in 
the  life  of  Christ — ^his  sufferings,  death,  his  descent  into  Hades,  his  resurrec- 
tion and  ascension.  It  dwells  on  the  doctrines  of  grace,  the  new  birth,  the 
atonement ;  it  enforces  the  necessity  of  patient  endurance  in  view  of  the 
coming  persecutions,  the  duty  of  loyal  obedience  to  rulers,  the  blessedness 
of  humility  ;  it  asserts  the  priesthood  of  all  true  Christians  ;  it  represents 
the  Church  as  a  spiritual  temple,  in  which  individual  believers  are  living 
stones.  It  is  full  of  the  Old  Testament ;  there  is  an  abundance  of  quotations' 
from  Isaiah,  the  Proverbs,  the  Psalms ;  there  are  constant  reminiscences  of 
the  Epistle  of  St.  James,  and  some  of  St.  Paul's  Epistles,  especially  those  to 
the  Romans  and  Bphesians.  The  Second  Epistle  is  very  difEerent ;  it  does  not 
dwell  on  the  great  events  and  doctrines  insisted  upon  in  the  First  Epistle. 
There  are  no  certain  quotations  from  the  Old  Testament  or  from  St.  Paul. 
But  the  difference  of  purpose  is  quite  sufficient  to  account  for  these  differ- 
ences of  treatment.  The  false  teachers  and  the  scoffers  are  the  most 
prominent  figures  in  the  Second  Epistle ;  the  writer's  mind  is  full  of  the 
dangers  to  be  apprehended  from  them.    The  full  knowledge  (jrtyi'uo-ic)  of 


INTEODUOTION  TO 


onr  Lord  Jeans  Christ  is  the  best  safeguard  against  these  dangers ;  therefore 
hnowhdge  is  the  apostle's  leading  topic  now,  as  Jiope  was  when  his  object 
was  to  comfort  and  support  his  suSering  brethren.     There  are,  however, 
points  of  contact  between  the  Epistles.     In  both  great  stress  is  laid  on 
ancient  prophecy,  as  also  in  St.  Peter's  speeches  recorded  in  the  Acts  of 
the  Apostles.    In  both  the  end  of  all  things  is  a  prominent  thought. 
St.  Peter,  in  oh.  iii.  12,  speaks  of  Christians  as  not  only  "  looking  for,"  but 
also  "  hasting  "  the  coming  of  the  day  of  God ;  he  had  long  before  expressed 
the  same  remarkable  conception  in  his  speech  (Acts  iii.  19,  20).    An 
imitator  would  not  have  been  likely  to  vary  the  apostle's  expression  ;  he 
would  not  have  adopted  the  form  parousia,  or  "  day  of  the  Lord,"  in  describing 
what  is  called  the  "  Revelation  of  Jesus  Christ,"  or  "  the  end  of  all  things,'' 
in  the  First  Epistle ;  he  would  probably  have  met  the  taunts  of  the  scoffers 
rather  by  maintaining  that  the  day  of  the  Lord  was  close  at  hand  (after 
the  manner  of  1  Pet.  iv.  7),  than  by  giving  reasons  for  its  apparent  delay. 
Again,  we  have  the  doctrine  of  election  in  both  Epistles,  and  in  both  the 
necessity  of  holiness  in  heart  and  life  is  earnestly  pressed  upon  the  readers ; 
both  Epistles  draw  attention  to  the  warnings  of  the  Deluge  and  the  fewness 
of  the  saved;  both  dwell  on  the  long-suffering  of  God;  both  regard  the 
history  and  privileges  of  God's  ancient  people  as  typical  of  the  temptations 
and  blessings  of  Christians  (comp.  oh.  ii.  1,  6, 6,  7, 15  and  1  Pet.  ii.  9).    The 
"  sinful  angels  "  of  the  Second  Epistle,  in  pits  or  chains  of  darkness,  remind 
us  of  the  "  spirits  in  prison  "  of  1  Peter.     The  Lord  preached  (eic^pv^e)  to 
those  spirits  (1  Pet.  iiL  19)  :  Noah  was  a  preacher  (ic^puf)  of  righteousness 
to  the  men  of  Sodom  (ch.  ii.  6).     And  if  the  writer  of  the  Second  Epistle 
does  not  dwell  upon  those  great  facts  of  our  Lord's  life  which  are  mentioned 
in  the  first,  as  an  imitator  would  have  done,  he  does  dwell  upon  another,  the 
Transfiguration.    If  he  does  not  quote  verbally  from  the  Old  Testament,  he 
directs  his  readers'  attention  to  the  word  of  prophecy,  and  his  thoughts  are 
full  of  Old  Testament  examples,  ".the  false  prophets  among  the  people  " 
(ch.  ii.  1),  Noah,  Sodom  and  Gomorrah,  Lot,  Balaam ;  while  he  has  two 
apparent  references  to  the  Old    Testament  in  ch.  ii.  22  and  iii.  8.      If 
he  does  not  quote  St.  Paul  directly,  he  refers  to  his  Epistles  generally  in 
ch.  iii.  15,  16 ;  and  there  are  words  and  expressions  here  and  there  which 
seem  to  imply  familiarity  with  the  Epistles  to  the  Romans  and  Ephesians  ; 
thus  hrCyvu>a-K,  the  key-note  of  the  Epistle,  is  found  in  Rom.  i.  28 ;  iii.  20  ; 
X.  2  (comp.  also  ch.  i.  17  with  Rem.  ii.  7 ;  ch.  ii.  13  with  Rom.  xiii.  13 ; 
ch.  ii.  18  with  Rom.  vi.  16  ;  ch.  iii.  7  with  Rom.  ii.  5  ;  ch.  iii.  15  with  Rom. 
ii.  4 ;  and  ch.  iii.  2  with  Eph.  ii.  20  and  iii.  5).     There  are  other  points  of 
contact  with  other  Epistles  of  St.  Paul,  most  of  which  are  noticed  in  the 
Exposition ;   and  there  are  two  apparent  reminiscences  of  the  Epistle  of 
St.  James ;  ch.  i.  9  recalls  to  our  thoughts  Jas.  i.  23,  24 ;  and  the  remarkable 
word  SeXeafo),  used  in  ch.  ii.  14,  18,  occurs  also  in  Jas.  i.  14.     It  is  some- 
times urged  as  an  additional  point  of  difference  between  the  Epistles  that 
while  our  Lord  is  usually  called  "  Christ "  or  "  J  eaus  Christ '  *  in  the  first,  in  the 


THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  PBTEB.  xl 

Becond  tbe  simple  name  is  never  used.  This  is  not  quite  time  (see  ch.  i.  1)  : 
bat,  if  it  were,  it  would  seem  a  point  of  very  little  importance  in  a  short 
Epistle  like  this,  separated  from  the  first  bj  an  interral  probably  of  two  or 
three  years. 

(5)  "We  come  now  to  the  relation  between  oh.  ii.  of  this  Epistle  and  the 
Epistle  of  St.  Jude.  There  can  be  no  doubt  but  that  one  of  the  two  sacred 
writers  borrowed  from  the  other,  unless  both  derived  their  materials  from 
R  common  source.  No  such  common  source  is  known  :  which  then,  we 
cannot  but  ask,  was  the  original  composition — St.  Jnde's  Epistle  or  2  Pet.  ii.  P 
If  St.  Peter  wrote  first,  the  difficulty  is  shifted  from  our  Epistle  ;  but,  while 
commentators  are  divided  on  the  subject,  the  balance  of  authorities  is  in 
favour  of  the  priority  of  St.  Jude.  And  this  seems  the  more  probable 
alternative.  When  we  compare  the  two  Epistles,  we  see  that  St.  Jude  is 
much  stronger  in  his  denunciation,  fiercer  in  his  invective ;  his  words  seem 
to  fiow  out  of  a  burning  indignation,  an  intense  horror.  He,  perhaps,  had 
been  brought  into  personal  contact  with  the  wicked  men  whom  he  describes  j 
St.  Peter  had  only  heard  from  others  of  their  evil  lives  and  false  doctrine. 
It  seems  more  likely  that  the  vehement,  fervid  Epistle  was  the  original 
rather  than  the  calmer  chapter ;  it  is  more  probable  that  St.  Peter,  repro- 
ducing, perhaps  from  memory,  the  warnings  of  St.  Jude,  would  soften  some 
of  its  sterner  language,  than  that  St.  Jude  should  have  taken  the  words  of 
St.  Peter  and  breathed  fire  and  passion  into  them.  It  is  more  probable 
that  St.  Peter  should  have  omitted  the  reason  which  St.  Jude  apparently 
gives  for  the  fall  of  the  angels,  and  the  dispute  between  Michael  the  arch- 
angel and  the  devil,  than  that  St.  Jude  should  have  made  these  additions  to 
St.  Peter's  words  from  apocryphal  books  or  Jewish  legends.  It  does  not 
seem  likely  that  St.  Jude,  while  adopting  a  portion  of  St.  Peter's  Epistle, 
would  have  omitted  all  reference  to  the  remainder ;  it  is  especially  unlikely 
that  he  should  have  altogether  omitted  the  solemn  description  of  the  day 
of  the  Lord  in  the  third  chapter,  so  suitable  for  his  purpose.  On  these 
grounds,  therefore,  we  believe  that  St.  Peter,  having  heard  of  the  doings  of 
the  false  teachers,  inserted  into  his  Epistle  much  of  the  earlier  Epistla 
of  St.  Ju<le,  from  which,  it  may  be,  he  derived  his  knowledge.  There  is 
nothing  inconsistent  with  his  apostolic  dignity  in  doing  so,  while  it  is  ia 
accordance  with  his  character,  always  open  to  impressions  from  without. 
During  his  residence  at  Antioch  (as  St.  Paul  tells  us  in  Gal.  ii.  11,  12), 
when  "  certain  came  from  James,"  he  was  led  by  their  inflnence  to  separate 
himself  from  the  Gentiles.  His  Eirsfr  Epistle,  written  while  he  was  in  the 
society  of  Mark  and  Silvanus,  was  largely  coloured  by  the  Epistles  of 
St.  Paul ;  it  is  not  surprising  that  in  his  second,  if  he  had  just  read  th« 
Epistle  of  St.  Jude,  he  should  have  made  use  of  a  large  portion  of  that 
vehement  and  striking  letter. 

(6)  Dr.  Abbott,  has  called  attention,  in  the  Expositor,  to  some  verbal 
coincidences  between  this  Epistle  and  the  writings  of  Josephns,  especially 
two  passages  in  the  '  Antiquities.'    In  the  fourth  seotioa  of  the  Ptefac^ 


xli  INTRODUCTION  TO 


Josephns  says  tliat  Moses  deemed  it  exceedingly  necessary  to  consider 
the  Divine  nature;  that  "other  legielaborB  followed  fahles,  and  by  their 
discourses  transferred  the  most  reproachful  of  human  sins  unto  the  gods ;  " 
but  that  Moses  demonstrated  that  "  God  was  possessed  of  perfect  virtue  ;  " 
and  that  there  is  nothing  in  his  writings  "disagreeable  to  the  majesty 
(/tsyoXetonjs)  of  God."  The  coincidences  between  this  passage  and  ch.  i. 
4,  16,  3  are  obvious ;  yet  we  must  remember  that  api-rq  is  ascribed  to 
God  in  1  Pet.  ii.  9 ;  that  /tSflos  occurs  four  times  in  St.  Paul's  pastoral  ' 
Epistles;  and  that  ^cios  is  not  uncommon  in  the  Septuagint.  Again,  in 
bk.  rV.  viii.  2,  where  Josephus  is  relating  the  last  address  of  Moses,  he 
uses  seven  or  eight  words  which  are  found  in  this  Epistle ;  such  as 
"  departure  "  in  the  sense  of  death,  "  the  present  truth,"  etc.  Dr.  Abbott 
haa  also  pointed  out  several  other  scattered  parallels,  besides  those  con- 
tained in  the  two  passages  referred  to ;  as  well  as  some  remarkable 
coincidences  with  the  writings  of  Philo.  St.  Peter  could  not  have  seen  the 
'  Antiquities '  of  Josephus,  which  were  not  published  earUer  than  A.D.  93.  It 
seems  most  unlikely  that  Josephus,  who  shows  no  acquaintance  with  any 
other  part  of  the  New  Testament,  should  have  read  this  one  Epistle.  But, 
on  the  other  hand,  it  does  not  seem  much  more  probable  that  a  Christian 
writer  of  the  second  century  (and  no  one  assigns  a  later  date  to  this 
Epistle)  would  care  to  reproduce  the  words  and  phrases  of  the  Jewish 
historian,  especially  if  he  wished  that  his  production  should  be  regarded  as 
the  work  of  St.  Peter ;  he  would  be  adopting  one  of  the  surest  means  to 
show  that  it  was  not  the  writing  of  the  apostle.  It  is  quite  possible  that 
these  resemblances  may  be  accidental ;  many  of  the  words  instanced  by  Dr. 
Abbott  are  ordinaiy  expressions  in  common  use.  It  is  possible,  again,  that 
they  may  have  been  derived  from  a  common  source,  such,  as  the  writings  of 
PhUo.  Philo  had  visited  Rome  in  the  reign  of  Caligula ;  Eusebius  ('  Hist. 
Eccl.,'  ii.  17)  accepts  the  legend  that  he  then  had  intercourse  with  St.  Peter. 
It  is  at  least  probable  that  Philo's  influence  would  have  made  itself  felt 
during  his  embassy  among  the  Roman  Jews,  and  so  St.  Peter,  if  writing  at 
Rome,  might  have  derived  some  words  and  phrases  directly  or  indirectly 
from  his  writings.  At  any  rate.  Dr.  Salmon  has  proved,  in  his  '  Historical 
Introduction  to  the  Books  of  the  New  Testament,'  that  "  aifinity  with  Philo 
is  a  point  of  likeness,  not  of  unlikeness,  between  the  two  Petrine  Epistles  " 
(pp.  650,  651)  ;  and  also  that  "  even  St.  Paul's  letters,  written  from  Rome, 
present  coincidences  with  Philo "  (see  note,  p.  652,  furnished  by  Dr. 
Gwynn).  It  is  probable  that,  as  Philo's  works  became  known  to  educated 
Jews,  many  words  and  thoughts  derived  from  them  would  find  their  way 
into  popular  use  among  the  scattered  Hebrew  nation.  This  seems  a  much 
more  likely  explanation  of  the  coincidences  (the  most  remarkable  of  which 
had  been  already  noted  by  many  commentators)  than  the  hypothesis  that 
(he  writer  of  this  Epistle  borrowed  from  the  Jewish  historian. 

On  the  whole,  the  internal  evidence  seems  decisive.     The  Epistle  bears 
Uie  Btrongest  testimony  to  its  own  genuineness.     The  writer's  oUums  are 


THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  GENBEAL  OP  PETER.  xil 

not  to  be  lightly  set  aside ;  he  asserts  himself  to  be  the  Apostle  St.  Peter 
Ro  plainly  and  repeatedly  that  it  is  hard,  on  the  hypothesis  of  imitation,  to 
acquit  him  of  deliberate  falsehood,  and  to  regard  the  Epistle  as  an  innocent 
attempt  to  strengthen  the  influence  of  a  good  and  holy  writing  by  investing 
it  with  apostolical  authority.  We  have  to  deal,  not  only  with  direct  asser- 
tions, as  oh.  i.  1  and  12 — 18 ;  oh.  iii.  1,  15,  16 ;  but  also  with  indirect 
reminiscences  and  allusions,  such  as  the  use  of  the  word  SeXtd^u)  (ch.  ii,  U, 
18),  which  points  back  to  St.  Peter's  early  occupation ;  the  evident  refer- 
ences in  oh.  ii.  and  iii.  to  that  solemn  discourse  of  the  Lord  upon  the 
Mount  of  Olives,  which,  it  seems,  was  heard  only  by  St.  Peter  and  three 
other  apostles  (see  Matt.  xxiv.  11,  12,  24,  29,  30, 43)  ;  the  constant  recollec- 
tion of  the  solemn  charge  which  the  Lord  had  given  him,  "  When  thou  art 
converted,  strengthen  thy  brethren  ;  "  three  times  in  this  Epistle  that  word 
a-TiQpLiov  seems  to  be  in  the  writer's  thoughts  (see  in  the  Greek,  ch.  i.  12 ; 
iii.  16, 17). 

Again,  there  is  considerable  weight  in  the  negative  evidence  for  the  early 
date  of  this  Epistle  implied  in  the  absence  of  references  to  the  more 
developed  heresies  of  the  second  century.  A  writer  of  that  date,  dealing, 
as  St,  Peter  does,  with  the  false  teachers  of  his  time,  must  have  shown,  at 
least  unconsciously,  an  acquaintance  with  some  of  the  various  forms  of 
Gnosticism.  It  would  have  been  difficult  for  him,  when  describing  the 
tremendous  circumstances  of  the  day  of  the  Lord,  to  suppress  altogether 
his  knowledge  of  the  fall  of  Jerusalem — ^the  great  catastrophe  which  in  our 
Lord's  prophecies  was  so  closely  associated  with  the  end  of  all  things.  And 
probably  in  a  writing  of  that  date  we  should  find  at  least  some  indications 
of  the  more  complete  ecclesiastical  organization  of  the  time. 

Another  important  element  in  the  evidence  for  the  authenticity  of  this 
Epistle  is  its  own  intrinsic  power  and  beauty.  We  have  several  Christian 
writings  of  the  second  century  ;  they  are  precious  for  many  reasons  ;  we 
should  be  very  sorry  to  be  without  any  one  of  them.  But  the  value  of  them 
all  put  together  is  as  nothing  compared  with  that  of  this  Epistle.  They 
are  such  books  as  good  men  might  write  now ;  full  of  piety  and  holiness, 
but  not  beyond  the  reach  of  men  endued  with  the  ordinary  gifts  of  the 
Holy  Spirit.  But  is  there  any  man  living,  however  wise  and  holy,  who 
could  write  an  Epistle  like  this  ?  Could  any  of  the  sub-apostolic  Fathers 
whose  writings  have  come  down  to  us  have  produced  anything  to  be 
compared  with  it  ?  The  books  of  Holy  Scripture  and  human  compositions 
lie  in  different  planes ;  they  do  not  bear  comparison.  There  is  an  inde- 
scribable something  in  the  Word  of  God  which  appeals  to  the  human  nature 
which  God  created,  to  the  conscience  which  bears  witness  of  him — some- 
thing which  tells  us  that  the  message  comes  from  God.  The  Second  Epistle 
of  St.  Peter  possesses  that  authority,  that  holy  beauty,  those  notes  of 
inspiration  which  differentiate  the  sacred  writings  from  the  works  of  men. 


miT  INTRODUCTION  TO 


IL  Integbitt  of  thb  Bpistli. 

Some  critics  call  in  question  tte  integrity  of  the  Epistle.  Some  regard 
tbe  second  chapter  as  an  interpolation  from  St.  Jade.  Lange  enlarges  the 
supposed  interpolation,  making  it  extend  from  oh.  i.  20  to  ch.  iii.  3.  One 
holds  the  first  chapter  only  to  he  genuine ;  the  critical  discernment  of 
another  pronounces  for  the  first  twelve  verses  of  the  Epistle  and  the  con- 
dudiug  doxology.  This  want  of  agreement  is  a  strong  argument  against 
the  attempts  to  disintegrate  the  Epistle.  There  is  no  evidence  whatever 
in  favour  of  the  theory  of  interpolation  from  manuscripts  or  versions  or 
ancient  authority  of  any  kind.  Neither  is  there  any  trace  of  such  interpo- 
lation  in  the  Epistle  itself.  The  writer  sums  up  the  substance  of  his 
teaching  in  the  last  two  verses :  "  Te  therefore,  beloved,  seeing  ye  know 
these  things  before,  beware  lest  ye  also,  being  led  away  with  the  error  of 
the  wicked,  fall  from  your  own  steadfastness.  But  grow  in  grace,  and  in 
the  knowlege  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ."  He  keeps  these  two 
purposes  in  view  throughout ;  he  passes  from  one  to  the  other  by  simple 
and  natural  transitions.  Such  differences  of  style  as  may  be  found  in  the 
different  sections  of  the  Epistle  can  be  accounted  for  by  change  of  subject 
and  in  part  by  the  influence  of  St.  Jade.  There  is  no  such  difference  as  to 
warrant  the  disintegration  of  the  Epistle. 


m.  Readers  :  Time  and  Place  op  "Wkitino. 

The  Epistle  is  addressed  generally  to  "  them  that  have  obtained  like 
precious  faith  with  us."  Bat  vers.  12  and  16  of  ch.  i.  seem  to  imply  some 
acquaintance,  either  personal  or  by  letter,  with  those  to  whom,  the  apostle  is 
writing ;  and  in  ch.  iii.  1  he  identifies  them  with  the  readers  of  his  First 
Epistle.  The  dangers  to  be  apprehended  from  the  false  teachers  threatened 
other  Churches  besides  those  of  Asia  Minor ;  therefore  the  apostle  gives  his 
letter  a  more  general  character,  probably  intending  it  for  a  wider  circula- 
tion. But  he  addresses  principally  the  readers  of  the  First  Epistle.  The 
spiritual  dangers  to  which  they  were  now  exposed  were  more  to  be  dreaded 
than  the  persecutions  of  which  so  much  had  been  already  said ;  therefore 
now  he  dwells  upon  the  errors  and  evil  practices  of  the  false  teachers,  not 
on  the  sufferings  which  were  gathering  round  the  Church. 

The  apostle  was  looking  forward  to  the  putting  off  of  his  earthly  tabei> 
nacle.  His  martyrdom  may  have  taken  place  about  the  year  68 ;  probably 
this  Epistle  was  written  not  long  before.  There  is  no  evidence  of  any  sort 
which  can  help  us  to  determine  the  place  of  writing  ;  the  apostle  may  have 
been  at  Babylon,  or  at  Borne,  or  at  some  intermediate  point  in  the  journey 
between  the  two  cities. 


Tflfi  SteCOND  UPlSTLt:  GfiNfiRAL  Ot  PETEB.  iv 


IV.   AlTALTSIB   or  THE   EpiSTLB. 

St.  Peter  addresses  his  letter  to  those  wlio  hare  obtained  the  like  precions 
faith  with  himself.  He  strikes  at  once  the  key-note  of  the  Epistle,  the  full 
knowledge  of  God.  He  dwells,  as  in  the  First  Epistle,  on  the  blessings  and 
the  high  privileges  of  the  Christian  life,  and  nrges  his  readers,  in  tbe 
strength  of  God's  promises  and  of  fellowship  with  God,  to  bring  in  all 
diligence  ;  they  must  go  on  from  grace  to  grace^beginning  with  faith,  they 
must  go  on  to  charity.  Such  continual  progress  is  necessary  for  the  attain- 
ment of  full  knowledge ;  without  it  men  are  blind,  forgetting  that  they  once 
were  cleansed.  Therefore  they  must  be  diligent  to  make  their  calling  and 
election  sure  by  holiness  of  life.  The  apostle  will  not  be  negligent  to  keep 
them  in  remembrance  of  what  they  knew  already.  For  his  end  would  be 
swift ;  he  would  have  no  time  for  death-bed  admonitions  ;  he  wished,  there- 
fore, now  to  say  all  that  was  necessary.  He  had  the  sure  knowledge  of  an 
eye-witness ;  he  had  seen  the  glory  of  the  Transfiguration,  and  had  heard 
the  attesting  voice  which  came  from  heaven.  And  this  was  not  the  only 
evidence  of  the  certain  truth  of  St.  Peter's  message ;  there  was  also  the 
word  of  prophecy,  to  which  Christians  should  give  heed,  for  it  came  from 
God  through  the  inspiration  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 

Ch.  ii.  But  as  there  had  been  false  prophets  of  old,  so  there  would  be 
false  teachers  now,  who  would  even  deny  the  Lord  that  bought  them,  bring, 
ing  in  heresies  of  destruction,  leading  many  astray,  seeking  their  own  gain. 
They  would  bring  upon  themselves  swift  destruction,  as  did  the  angels  that 
sinned,  and  the  contemporaries  of  Noah,  and  the  cities  of  the  plain.  Then 
the  faithful  few  were  saved ;  so  now  the  Lord  will  punish  the  wicked  anc 
deliver  the  godly.  The  characteristics  of  these  false  teachers  are  theii 
impurity,  their  presumption,  their  railing,  their  covetousness.  They  are  like 
Balaam  in  these  things ;  they  promise,  but  do  not  perform ;  they  talk  loudly 
of  liberty,  but  they  are  slaves  themselves.  Whatever  knowledge  they  may 
once  have  possessed  makes  their  guilt  the  greater ;  their  latter  end  is  worse 
than  the  beginning ;  they  exemplify  the  old  proverb,  and  return,  like 
unclean  animals,  to  their  un  cleanness. 

Ch.  iii.  Therefore  the  apostle  writes  a  second  Epistle,  urging  his  readers 
to  keep  in  remembrance  the  warnings  of  tbe  prophets  and  apostles.  There 
would  be  mockers  who  would  scoff  at  the  delay  of  the  Lord's  coming.  Let 
them  remember  that  by  the  Word  of  the  Lord  was  the  world  made ;  by  that 
Word  it  would  be  dissolved.  Let  them  remember  that  the  world  had  once 
perished  by  water ;  it  would  be  destroyed  by  fire.  "  One  day  is  with  the 
Lord  as  a  thousand  years,  and  a  thousand  years  as  one  day."  The  delay  of 
the  judgment  comes,  not  from  slackness,  but  from  the  Lord's  long-suffering 
mercy.  He  gives  us  time  for  repentance.  But  the  day  of  the  Lord  will 
come,  and  that  suddenly,  and  with  tremendous  portents.  Therefore  they 
must  prepare  to  meet  their  God.  We  have  the  promise  of  new  heavens  and 
»  new  earth,  wherein  dwelleth  righteousness  ;  therefore,  we  should  diligently 


xvi     INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PETEB. 

prepare  ourselTes  for  that  new  home.  St.  Paul  had  taught  the  same 
things ;  but  there  were  some  things  hard  to  be  understood  in  his  Epistles, 
as  in  other  Scriptures.  The  apostle  ends  by  urging  his  readers  to  be  on  their 
guard  and  preserve  their  steadfastness,  bidding  them,  as  he  did  at  the 
beginning  of  the  Epistle,  to  grow  in  grace  and  knowledge. 

v.   COMMBNTAKIES. 

Those  mentioned  in  tho  Introduction  to  the  First  Epistle.  It  may  be  added  that, 
while  the  authenticity  of  this  Epistle  has  been  denied,  not  only  by  Baur,  Schwegler, 
Hilgenfeld,  Mayerhoti',  Eeuss,  Bleek,  Davidson,  but  also  by  such  critics  as  Weiss, 
Huther,  and  Godet,  it  has  been  defended  by  Hug,  Guericke,  Wiridischman,  Thiersch, 
Schott,  Bruckner,  FronmUUer,  Hoffman,  and  other  German  writers ;  and,  among  Eng- 
lish scholars,  by  Lardner,  Alford,  Wordsworth,  Professor  Lumby.  Archdeacon  Parrar 
•ays,  "  I  believe  there  is  much  to  support  the  conclusion  that  we  have  not  here  the 
words  and  stylo  of  the  great  apostle,  but  that  he  lent  to  this  Epistle  the  sanction  of 
his  name  and  the  assistance  of  his  advice."  Bertholdt,  Ullman,  Bunsen,  and  Lange 
admit  the  authenticity,  but  question  the  integrity  of  the  Epistle,  holding  that  it  hu 
been  interpolated  in  various  degrees. 


THE 


SECOND  EPISTLE  GENEEAL  OF  PETEE. 


EXPOSITION. 


,  OHAPTEB  I. 

Ver.  1. — Simon  Feter.    "  Bymeon  "  ieems 
to  be  the  best-supported   spelling  in  this 
place.    The  same  form  of  the  name  is  found 
in  Luke  ii.  25  and  Acts  xiii.  1;  it  also 
occurs  in  Acts  xt.  14,  where  St.  James 
refers  to  St.  Peter's  speech  on  the  great 
question    of   the   circnmcision   of   Gentile 
Christians.    It  is  the  form  always  used  in 
the  Septuagint  Version  of  the  Old  Testa- 
ment.   The  old  man's  thoughts  go  back  to 
his  early  years ;  he  describes  himself  by  the 
familiar  name  of  his  youtli;  he  uses  that 
Greek   form  of    it  which  was  most   dis- 
tinotively  Jewish.     But  he  joins  with  the 
old  name,  which  spoke  of  Judaism,  the  new 
name  which  the  Lord  Jesus  had  given  him 
— ^the  name  which  describes  him  as  a  stone 
or  rook,  which  indicates  also  his  close  con- 
nection with  that  Bock  on  which  the  Church 
it  built,  which  is  Christ    His  names  com- 
bine   Hebrew    and    Greek,   Jewish    and 
Christian,    associations.      He    is    writing 
probably,  as  in  his  First  Epistle,  to  Ohurolies 
of  mingled  Jewish  and  Gentile  elements. 
The  first  word  of  the  Epistle  supplies  an 
argument  for  the  genuineness  of  the  Epistle. 
It  is  scarcely  possible  that  an  imitator,  who 
was    acquainted    with    the    First    Epistle 
(ch.  iii.  1),  and  shows,  as  some  say,  so  much 
anxiety  to  identify  himself  with  the  apostle 
(ch.    i    12 — 18),    would    have    announced 
himself  by  a  name  different  from  that  nsed 
in    the   First   Epistle,    and    would   have 
adopted  a  form  of  the  Hebrew  name  vary- 
ing from  that  which  occurs  so  frequently  in 
the  Gospels.    A  servant  and  an  apostle  of 
Jesus  Christ.     St.   Feter,  like   St.   Paul, 
describes  himself  as  a  servant,  literally,  "  a 
slave,"  a  bondman  of  Jesus  Christ.    We  are 
not  our  own;  we  are  bought  with  a  price; 
we  have  work  to  do  for  onr  Master.    St 
Peter's  work  was  that  of  •  missionary,  an 
H.  F£XBB. 


apostle  sent  into  the  world  to  win  souls  for 
Christ  (comp.  liom.  L  1 ;  Phil.  i.  1 ;  Titus  i. 
1 ;  Jas.  i.  1 ;  Jude  1).  To  them  that  have  ob- 
tained like  precious  faith  with  ns.  The  word 
rendered  "  obtained  "  (rais  Kaxovatv)  means 
properly  "  to  obtain  by  lot,"  as  in  Luke  i 
9.   It  is  noticeable  that  one  of  the  few  places 
in  which  it  occurs  in  the  New  Testament  is 
in  a  speech  of  St.  Peter's  (Acts  i.  17);  its 
use  here  implies  that  faith  is  a  gill  of  God. 
The  word  for  "like  precious"   Qtririiton, 
equally  precious)  is  found  only  here  in  the 
New  Testament ;  it  calls  to  our  memory  the 
iro\ii  Tiiudnepov  of  1  Pet.  L  7,  and  indicates 
a  correspondence  with  the  First  Epistle. 
St.  Peter  addresses  this  Epistle  simply  to 
those  who  have  obtained  an  equally  precious 
faith  "  with  us."    By  the  last  words  he  may 
mean  himself  only,  or  the  apostles  generally, 
or,  possibly,  all  Jewish  Christians.    He  is 
writing  apparently  to  the  same  Churches  to 
which  his  First  Epistle  was  addressed  (ver. 
16  and  ch.  iii.  1) ;  he  says  that  their  faith 
is  equally  precious  with  that  of  the  apostles, 
or  perhaps  that  the  Gentiles  have  received 
the   like   precious  gift   with   the   chosen 
people.    By  "faith"    he    may    mean   the 
truths  believed,  as  Jude  3;  or,  more  pro- 
bably, faith  in  the  subjective  sense,  t)ie 
grace  of  faith,  which  receives  those  truths 
as  a  message  from  God  (comp.  1  Pet,  i.  7). 
Through  the  righteousness  of  6od  and  cur 
Saviour  Jesus   Christ;  rather,  as  in   the 
Eevised  Version,  in  the  righteouiness  of  our 
God  and  Baviotir  Jeiua  Chriet.    Some  com- 
mentators, as  Luther,  Estius,  etc.,  under- 
stand by  "righteousness"  in  this  place, 
the  righteousness  which  God  gives,  as  in 
Bom.  z.  3,  etc.    But  this  seems  unsuitable 
here;   for  faith  is  not  given  in  righteous- 
ness, but    rather   righteousness   in   faith. 
Others  take  righteousness  as  the  object  of 
the  faith — "to  them  that   have  obtained 
faith  in  the  righteousness;"  i.».  who  are 


THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  PETER,  [oh.  1. 1—21. 


enabled  to  believe  in  God'i  righteonaneBS 
and  to  trust  in  it  TIub  leema  a  forced 
interpretation.  It  is  better  to  take  the 
preposition  as  meaning  "  in  the  working  of 
God's  righteousnesB,"  In  the  iphere  of  its 
operation,  and  to  understand  "  righteona- 
nesB  "  as  the  attribute  of  God,  his  just  and 
holy  dealing  with  men.  There  is  no 
respect  of  persons  with  God ;  in  his  right- 
eousness he  bestows  the  like  precious  faith 
on  all  who  oome  to  him,  without  distinction 
of  race  or  country.  According  to  the  strict 
grammatical  construction  of  the  passage, 
"  God  "  and  "  Saviour"  are  both  predicates 
of  "  Jesus  Christ,"  as  in  Titus  ii.  13.  The 
First  and  Second  Persons  of  the  blessed 
Trinity  are  distinguished  in  the  following 
verse,  and  this  has  led  several  commentators 
to  think  that  the  same  distinction  should  be 
made  here.  It  is  true  that  the  absence 
of  a  aeeond  article  does  not  make  it  abso- 
lutely certain  that  the  two  words  "God" 
and  "Saviour"  must  be  taken  as  united 
under  the  one  common  article,  and  so 
regarded  as  two  predicates  of  "Jesua 
Christ ; "  but  it  furnishes  at  least  a  very 
strong  presumption  in  favour  of  this  view, 
especiiilly  as  there  is  not  here,  as  there  is 
in  Titus  ii.  18,  any  word  like  Tipi&v  to  give 
definiteiiess  to  au-rripos  (see  Bishop  Eilicott's 
note  on  Titus  ii.  13,  and,  on  the  other  side, 
Alford's  notes  on  both  passages).  The 
Lord  Jesus  is  called  "our  Saviour"  five 
times  in  this  Epistle.  The  word  does  not 
occur  in  the  First  Epistle ;  but  in  St.  Peter's 
speech  (Acts  T.  81)  the  apostle  declared  to 
the  Siinbedrin  that  God  had  exalted  Jesus 
"  to  be  B  Prince  and  a  Saviour." 

Yer.  2. — Grace  and  peace  be  multiplied 
onto  yon.  The  order  of  the  words  in  the 
Greek  is  the  same  as  in  1  Pet.  i.  2.  The 
exact  correspondence  should  be  noticed. 
The  writer  of  the  Second  Epistle,  if  not  St. 
Peter  himself,  must  have  been  attempting 
to  imitate  of  set  purpose  the  opening  saluta- 
tion of  the  First  Epistle.  Through  the 
knowledge  of  God,  and  of  Jesus  our  Lord ; 
rather,  in  the  knowledge.  The  knowledge 
of  God  is  the  sphere  in  which  grace  and 
peace  are  communicated  to  the  soul;  they 
cannot  be  found  outside  that  sphere.  "  Full 
knowledge  "  (i-niyfuais)  may  be  regarded  as 
the  key-note  of  this  Epistle,  as  "  hope  "  is 
of  the  first.  'Ziriyvaais  is  a  stronger  word 
than  yvSurtf,  it  means  "knowledge" 
directed  towards  an  object,  gradually  ap- 
proaching nearer  and  nearer  to  it,  con- 
centrated upon  it,  fixed  closely  upon  it. 
So  it  comes  to  mean  the  knowledge,  not 
merely  of  inlollectual  apprehension,  but 
rather  of  deep  contemplation  ;  the  know- 
ledge which  implies  love — for  only  Inve  can 
concentrate  continually  the  powers  of  tho 
soul  in  close  meditation  upon  its  object. 


Comp.  1  Cor.  xlii.,  where,  after  saying  in 
ver.  8  that  "knowledge  {yviais)  shall  be 
done  away,"  St.  Paul  continues,  in  ver.  12, 
"  Now  I  know  (sfwdiaKiii)  in  part,  but  then 
I  shall  know  (iitiyv^iroiuu)  even  as  also  I 
am  known  (jdreyrdmBit*)"  He  contrasts  our 
present  imperfect  knowledge  with  the  full 
knowledge  which  the  blessed  will  have  in 
heaven,  and  which  God  now  hag  of  us, 
using  the  verb  iiriyivdaita  of  that  fuller 
knowledge,  as  he  had  used  yvatris  of  the 
imperfect  knowledge.  The  word  Myvaxris 
occurs  several  times  in  the  Gospels,  and  is 
common  in  St.  Paul's  Epistles ;  it  seems  to 
imply  a  sort  of  protest  against  the  know- 
ledge that  "  puffeth  up  "  (1  Cor.  viii.  1),  and 
especially  against  the  knowledge  "falsely 
so  called"  (X  Tim.  vi.  20),  which  was 
claimed  by  the  false  teachers,  who  were  the 
precursors  of  the  (oming  Gnosticism  (comp. 
Col.  i.  9,  10 ;  ii.  2;  lii.  10).  St.  Peter  had 
leaised  more  of  the  doings  of  these  faUb 
teachers  since  he  wrote  the  First  Epistle, 
and  this  may  perhaps  be  a  reason  for  his 
Sequent  use  of  the  word  iiriyvaiais  in  the 
second.  "Jesus  oxa  Lord"  is  a  variation 
of  the  more  common  form,  such  as  "  the 
Lord  Jesus;"  it  occurs  only  here  and  in 
Eom.  iv.  24. 

Ver.  3. — According  as  his  Divine  power ; 
better,  teeing  that,  as  in  the  Bevised  Ver- 
sion. The  construction  is  the  genitive 
absolute  with  Sis.  The  words  are  to  be 
closely  connected  with  ver.  2:  "We  need 
not  fear,  for  God  has  given  us  all  things 
that  are  necessary  for  our  salvation ;  grace 
and  peace  will  be  multiplied  unto  us,  if 
only  wo  seek  the  knowledge  of  God."  This 
is  better  than,  with  Huther  and  otheis,  to 
make  a  full  stop  after  ver.  2,  and  to  connect 
vers.  8  and  4  closely  with  ver.  5.  The 
word  for  "  Divine  "  (eeios)  is  unusual  in  the 
Greek  Testament;  it  occurs  only  in  two 
other  places — ver.  4  and  Acts  ivii.  29. 
Hath  given  unto  us  all  things  that  pertain 
unto  life  and  godliness;  rather,  as  in  the 
Revised  Version,  hath  granted.  St.  Peter 
does  not  here  use  the  ordinary  verb  for  "  to 
give,"  but  one  (Sa>p4oimi)  which  in  the  New 
Testament  occurs  only  in  this  Epistle  and 
in  Mark  xv.  45.  "God  hath  given  us  all 
things  for  (Trp6s)  life,"  t.«.  all  things  neces- 
sary for  life.  By  "life"  St.  Peter  means 
the  spiritual  life  of  the  soul;  that  life 
which  consists  in  union  with  Christ,  which 
is  tlie  life  of  Christ  living  in  us.  "  Godli- 
ness" (fJo-^jSeia)  is  a  word  of  the  later 
apostolic  age ;  besides  this  Epistle  (in 
wjiich  it  occurs  four  times)  and  a  speech  of 
St.  Peter's  in  Acts  iii.  12,  it  is  found  onlj 
in  St.  Paul's  pastoral  Epistles;  it  means 
reverence,  true  piety  towards  God. 
Through  the  biowledge  of  him  that  hath 
called  ns  to  glory  and  virtue;   literally, 


Ott.1.1— 21,]  THE  SfiCOl.ft  EMSTLfi  GENERAI.  OV  PETEH. 


through  the  full  hnowledge  (^hriyvdireKs)  of 
him  ffiat  called  u»  (comp.  John  xvii.  3, 
"  This  is  life  eternal,  that  they  might  know 
thee  the  only  true  God,  and  Jesus  Christ, 
whom  thou  hast  sent").  The  best-sup- 
ported reading  seems  to  be  that  followed  by 
the  Revised  Version,  "By  his  own  glory 
and  virtue  (ISla  S<({)j  ical  ciperp)."  Bengel 
says,  "  Ad  gloriam  referuntur  attributa  Dei 
naturalia,  ad  virtutera  ea  qu»  dicuntur 
moralia ;  intime  unum  sunt  utraque."  All 
hig  glorious  attributes  mtike  up  his  glory ; 
iperii,  virtue,  is  the  energy,  the  activity 
of  those  attributes.  The  other  reading, 
also  well  supported  (5itk  S((|r|i  ko!  iperrjs, 
"  tlirongh  glory  and  virtue  "),  would  mean 
nearly  the  same  (comp.  Gal.  1.  15 ;  KaK4<ras 
8iA  rrjs  x<JpiT0j  avToS).  God  calls  us  through 
his  attributes;  his  glorious  perfections 
invite  us,  the  revelation  of  those  perfections 
•alls  ns  to  his  service.  The  word  aper-ti, 
with  one  exception  (Phil.  iv.  8),  occurs  in 
the  New  Testament  only  in  St.  Peter's 
Epistles  (see  1  Pet.  ii.  9;  eh.  L  3  and  5). 
This  is,  so  far,  an  argument  in  favour  of 
Identity  of  authorship. 

Ver.  4.^-Whereby  are  given  unto  us  ex- 
•eeding  great  and  precious  promises ;  rather, 
u  in  the  Revised  Version,  whereby  he  hath 
granted  unto  us  hit  precious  and  exceeding  great 
promiset.  Does  the  word  "  whereby "  (Si' 
Sv,  literally,  "  thvough  which  things  ")  refer 
to  the  immediately  preceding  words,  "  glory 
■nd  virtue  "  ?  or  is  its  antecedent  to  be  found 
in  the  more  distant  "all  things  which 
pertain  nnto  life  and  godliness"?  Both 
views  are  possible.  God  first  granted  unto 
ns  all  things  necessary  for  life  and  godliness; 
through  those  first  gifts,  duly  used,  he  has 
granted  nnto  us  others  more  precious  still. 
But  it  seems  better  to  connect  the  relative 
with  the  nearer  antecedent.  It  is  through 
God's  glory  and  virtue,  through  his  glorious 
attributes  and  the  energetic  working  of 
those  attributes,  that  he  has  granted  the 
promises.  The  ,verb  (SeS^SprjToi)  should  be 
translated  "  hath  granted,"  as  in  the  pre- 
ceding verse.  The  word  for  "  promise  "  (_lw 
iyyeKim)  occurs  elsewhere  only  in  ch.  iii.  13 ; 
it  means  the  thing  promised,  not  the  act  of 
promising.  The  order  of  the  words,  "  ex- 
ceeding great  and  precious,"  is  differently 
given  in  the  manuscripts;  on  the  whole, 
that  adopted  by  tlie  Bevised  Version  seems 
the  best  supported.  The  article  with  the 
first  word  (ri  ri/ua  koI  fieyiaTo)  has  a 
possessive  force,  and  is  well  rendered,  "  his 
precious  promises."  They  are  precious, 
because  they  will  be  certainly  fulfilled  in 
all  their  depth  of  blessed  meaning,  and 
because  they  are  in  part  fulfilled  at  once 
(comp.  Eph.  i.  -13,  14,  "  In  whom  also 
after  that  ye  believed,  ye  were  sealed  with 
that  Holy  Spirit  of  promise,  which  is  the 


earnest  of  onr  inheritance '0.  The  word 
"  precious  "  reminds  us  of  1  Pet.  i.  7,  19 ; 
the  resemblance  with  1  Pet.  ii.  7  is  apparent 
only,  In  the  Authorized  Version,  not  in  the 
Greek.  That  by  these  ye  might  be  partakers 
of  the  Divine  nature ;  literally,  that  through 
theie  (promises,  t.e.  through  their  fulfilment) 
ye  may  become  partaken.  It  is  true  that  the 
veib  is  aorist  {ysvuaBf),  but  it  does  not 
follow  that  "  might  be"  is  the  right  transla- 
tion, or  that  the  writer  regarded  the  partici- 
pation as  having  already  taken  place 
(comp.  John  xii.  36,  "  Believe  in  the  light, 
that  ye  may  be  (Xva  ylvnaBe)  the  children  of 
light").  As  Alford  says,  the  aorist  seems 
to  imply  "  that  the  aim  was  not  the  pro- 
cedure, but  the  completion,  of  that  indicated ; 
not  the  ylviaOcu,  the  carrying  on  the  process, 
but  the  7cvc(r0ai,  its  accomplishment."  The 
end  of  God's  gift  is  the  complete  accomplish- 
ment of  his  gracious  purpose,  but  it  is  only 
by  continual  growth  that  the  Christian 
attains  at  length  to  that  accomplishment. 
St.  Peter's  words  seem  very  bold ;  but  they 
do  not  go  beyond  many  other  statements 
of  Holy  Scripture.  At  the  beginning  God 
said,  "  Let  us  make  man  in  our  image,  after 
our  likeness."  St.  Paul  tells  us  that  believers 
are  now  "  changed  into  the  same  image  from 
glory  to  glory  "  (2  Cor.  iii.  18 ;  comp.  also 
1  Cor.  xi,  7 ;  Eph.  iv.  24 ;  Col.  iii.  10 ;  Rom. 
viii.  29;  1  Cor.  xv.  49,  etc.).  Christians, 
born  of  God  (John  i.  13 ;  1  Pet.  I.  23),  are 
made  "partakers  of  Christ"  (Heb.  iii.  14), 
•'  partakers  of  the  Holy  Ghost "  (Heb.  vi.  4). 
Christ  prayed  for  us  that  we  might  be 
**  made  perfect  in  one  "  with  himself  who  is 
one  with  God  the  Father,  through  the  in- 
dwelling presence  of  the  Holy  Ghost  the 
Comforter  (John  xvii.  20—23;  xiv.  16,  17, 
23).  The  second  person  is  used  to  imply 
that  the  promises  made  to  all  Christian* 
(unto  us)  belong  to  those  whom  St.  Pete» 
now  addresses.  Having  escaped  the  oorrup- 
tion  that  is  in  the  world  through  last; 
literally,  having  escaped  from  the  corruption 
that  is  in  the  world  in  lust.  These  word» 
express  the  negative  side  of  the  Christian 
life,  the  former  clause  describing  its  aetivs 
and  positive  side.  God's  precious  promises 
realized  in  the  soul  enable  the  Christian  to 
become  partakers  of  the  Divine  nature,  and 
to  escape  from  corruption ;  the  two  aspects 
of  the  Christian  life  must  go  on  simulta- 
neously ;  each  implies  and  requires  the  other 
Bengel  says,  "  Hsec  f iiga  nou  tarn  ut  olficium 
nostrum,  quam  ut  beneflcium  divlnum,  cora- 
munionem  cum  Deo  comitana,  hoc  loco 
ponitur."  The  verb  used  here  (awocpeiyety) 
occurs  in  the  New  Testament  only  in  this 
Epistle.  It  reminds  us  of  St.  Paul's  words 
in  Eom.  viii.  21,  "The  creature  itself  also 
shall  be  delivered  from  the  bondage  of 
corruption."    The  corruption  or  destruction, 


THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  PETEB.   [ch.  i.  1—21 


(for  the  word  ^0of)({  hag  both  those  meanings) 
from  which  we  must  escape  has  its  seat  and 
power  in  lust ;  working  secretly  in  the  lusts 
of  men's  wicked  hearts,  it  manifests  its  evil 
presenc*  in  the  world  (comp.  Gen.  vi.  12; 
1  John  ii.  16). 

Yer.  5. — ^And  beside  this,  giving  all 
diligence;  rather,  but  for  thii  very  causa 
also.  Aurh  toGto  is  frequently  used  in  this 
sense  in  classical  Greek,  but  in  the  New 
Testament  only  here.  It  refers  back  to  the 
last  verse.  God's  precious  gifts  and  promises 
should  stimulate  us  to  earnest  effort.  The 
verb  rendered  "giving"  means  literally 
"  bringing  in  by  the  side ; "  it  is  one  of 
those  giapMo  and  picturesque  expressions 
which  are  characteristic  of  St.  Peter's  style. 
God  worketh  within  us  both  to  will  and  to 
do ;  this  (both  St.  Paul  and  St.  Peter  teach 
ub)  is  a  reason,  not  for  remissness,  but  for 
increased  exertion.  God's  grace  is  sufficient 
for  us  ;  without  that  we  can  do  nothing ;  but 
by  the  side  (so  to  speak)  of  that  grace,  along 
with  it,  we  must  bring  into  play  all  earnest- 
ness, we  must  work  out  our  own  salvation 
with  fear  and  trembling.  The  word  seems  to 
imply  that  the  work  is  God's  work ;  we  can 
do  very  little  indeed,  but  that  very  little 
we  must  do,  and  for  the  very  reason  that 
God  is  working  in  us.  The  word  (jropeiire- 
veyKomes)  occurs  only  here  in  the  New 
Testament.  Add  to  your  faith  virtue; 
literally,  Kupply  in  your  faith.  He  does 
not  say,  "  supply  faith ; "  he  assumes  the 
existence  of  faith.  "  He  that  cometh  unto 
God  must  believe."  The  Greek  word  (cVi- 
XopiiynaaTt)  means  properly  to  "  contribute 
to  the  expenses  of  a  chorus ; "  it  is  used 
three  times  by  St.  Paul,  and,  in  its  simple 
form,  by  St.  Peter  in  hia  First  Epistle  (iv. 
11).  In  usage  it  came  to  mean  simply  to  "  sup- 
ply or  provide,"  the  thought  of  the  chorus 
being  dropped.  So  we  cannot  be  sure  tbat 
the  idea  of  faith  as  leading  the  mystic  dance 
in  the  chorus  of  Christian  graces  was  present 
to  St.  Peter's  mind,  especially  as  tlie  word 
occurs  again  in  ver.  11,  where  no  such 
allusion  is  possible.  The  fruits  of  faith  are 
in  the  faith  which  produces  them,  as  a  tree 
is  in  its  seed ;  they  must  be  developed  out 
of  faith,  as  faith  expands  and  energizes; 
in  the  exercise  of  each  grace  a  fresh  grace 
must  issue  forth.  Virtue  is  well  described 
by  Bengel  as  "strenuus  animi  tonus  et 
vigor ;  "  it  is  Christian  manliness  and  active 
courage  in  the  good  fight  of  faith.  The 
word  "  virtue  "  (dpex^),  with  the  exception 
of  Phil.  iv.  8,  occurs  in  the  New  Testament 
only  in  St.  Peter — ^in  this  chapter  three 
times,  and  in  1  Pet.  ii.  9,  thus  forming  one 
of  the  links  between  the  two  Epistles.  And 
to  virtue  knowledge.  St.  Peter  here  uses 
the  simple  word  yvScris,  discretion,  a  right 
understanding,  "urm  malam  a  bono  aecernit. 


et  mali  fugam  docet"  (Bengel).  TWi 
practical  knowledge  is  gained  in  the  manly 
self-denying  activities  of  the  Christian  life, 
and  leads  on  to  the  fuller  knowledge  (M" 
yyaffis)  of  Christ  (ver.  8). 

Ver.  6. — ^And  to  knowledge  temperance ; 
rather,  $elf-eontrol  (iyKptireta).  The  wordi 
4yKpd.Tcia  ilivxris  are  the  heading  of  a  section 
in  the  Greek  of  Eeclus.  xviiL  80,  and  are 
followed  immediately  by  the  maxim,  "Go 
not  after  thy  lusts,  but  refrain  thyself  from 
thine  appetites."  This  self-control  extends 
over  the  whole  of  life,  and  consists  in  the 
government  of  all  the  appetites ;  it  must  be 
learned  in  the  exercise  of  that  practical 
knowledge  which  discerns  between  good 
and  evil.  True  knowledge  leads  on  to  self- 
control,  to  that  perfect  freedom  which 
consists  in  the  service  of  God;  not  to  that 
liberty  promised  by  the  false  teachers, 
which  is  licentiousness.  And  to  temperance 
patience;  and  to  patience  godliness.  The 
practice  of  self-control  will  result  in  patient 
endurance ;  but  that  endurance  will  not  be 
mere  stoicism ;  it  will  be  a  conscious  sub- 
mission of  our  human  will  to  the  holy  will 
of  God,  and  so  wiU  tend  to  develop  and 
strengthen  tiaePeta,  reverence  and  piety 
towards  God  (see  note  on  ver.  3). 

Ver.  7. — ^Aud  to  godliness  brotherly  ldnd> 
ness;  and  to  brotherly  kindness  charity. 
The  word  for  "  brotherly  kindness "  (4>iAa- 
SsK<l>ta)  is  another  link  between  the  two 
Epistles  (see  1  Pet.  i.  22;  iii  8).  "In 
your  godliness,"  St.  Peter  says,  "ye  must 
develop  brotherly  kindness,  the  unfeigned 
love  of  the  brethren ; "  for  "  every  one  that 
loveth  him  that  begat,  loveth  him  also  that 
is  begotten  of  him  "  (1  John  v.  1).  And  as 
God  is  loving  unto  every  man,  and  "  maketh 
his  sun  to  rise  on  the  evil  and  on  the  good," 
so  Christians,  who  are  taught  to  be  followere 
(imitators)  of  God  (Eph.  v.  1),  must  learn  in 
the  exercise  of  love  toward  the  brethren  that 
larger  love  which  embraces  all  men  in  an 
ever-widening  circle  (comp.  1  Thcss.  iii.  12). 
Thus  love,  the  greatest  of  all  Christian 
graces  (1  Cor.  xiii.  13),  is  the  climax  in  St. 
Peter's  list.  Out  of  faith,  the  root,  spring  the 
seven  fair  fruits  of  holiness,  of  which  holy 
love  is  the  fairest  and  the  sweetest  (comp, 
Ignatius, '  Ad  Ephes.,'  xiv.  'Apx^  M^*"  ^i<rTis, 
r4\os  Sh  iydmi).  No  grace  can  remain 
alone ;  each  grace,  as  it  is  gradually  formed 
in  the  soul,  tends  to  develop  and  stiengthon 
others;  all  graces  meet  in  that  highest  grace 
of  charity,  without  which  whosoever  livetU 
is  counted  dead  before  God,  Bengel  says 
well, "  Prsesensquisque  gradus  subsequentem 
parit  et  facilem  reddit,  subsequens  priorem 
tomperat  ac  perfloit." 

Ver.  8. — For  if  these  things  be  in  yon,  and 
abound ;  literally,  for  these  things  belonging 
to  you  and  abounding  make,  eta    The  word 


OH.  1. 1—21.]  THE  3EC0ND  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  PETER. 


nsed  here  (Sir<{px<"^o)  implies  actual  pos- 
eession;  these  graces  must  be  made  our 
own;  they  must  be  wrought  into  our 
characters;  then  they  will  increase  and 
multiply,  for  the  grace  of  God  cannot  lie 
still,  it  must  ever  be  advancing  from  glory 
to  glory.  They  make  you  that  ye  shall 
neither  be  barren  nor  nnfmitfol  in  the 
knowledge  of  our  Lord  leana  Christ; 
literally,  they  mcJte  you  not  idle  nor  yet 
unfruitftd  towards  the  full  knowledge.  The 
Greek  word  for  "knowledge"  is  iirlyvaais 
(on  which  see  ver.  2,  and  note  there).  Here 
we  know  only  in  part,  we  see  through  a 
glass  daikly ;  but  that  imperfect  knowledge 
should  be  ever  growing,  increasing  in 
fulness  and  distinctness  (see  oh.  iii  18). 
The  various  graces  of  the  Christian  charac- 
ter, realized  in  the  heart,  will  lead  us  on 
towards  that  fuller  knowledge  of  Christ; 
if  they  are  really  ours,  they  will  not  allow 
us  to  be  idle,  they  must  bring  forth  the  fruit 
of  good  works ;  and  the  life  of  righteousness 
by  faith  draws  the  Christian  onwards  in  the 
knowledge  of  Christ :  we  learn  to  know  him 
by  following  him  (comp,  Phil.  iii.  9,  10; 
Col.  i.  10). 

Ver.  9. — Bat  he  that  laeketh  these  things 
is  blind,  and  cannot  see  afar  off;  literally, 
for  he  to  whom  these  things  are  not  present 
i»  Hind,  short-sighted.  We  cannot  attain 
to  the  knowledge  of  Christ  without  these 
graces,  for  he  who  has  them  not  is  blind, 
or,  at  the  best,  short-sighted,  like  one  who 
blinks  with  his  eyes  when  he  tries  to  see 
distant  objects,  and  cannot  bear  the  full 
light  of  day.  Such  a  man  can  only  see  the 
things  which  lie  close  around  him — earth 
and  earthly  things;  he  cannot  lift  up  his 
eyes  by  faith  and  behold  "  the  land  that  is 
very  far  off;"  he  cannot  "see  the  King  in 
his  beauty"  (Isa.  zxxiiL  17).  The  word 
for  "short-sighted"  (jj.ucmiiC'"')  occurs  only 
here  in  the  New  Testament.  And  hath  for- 
gotten that  he  was  purged  from  his  old 
sins ;  literally,  having  incarred  forgetfulness 
of  the  cleansing  from  hi$  old  sins.  St.  Peter 
is  apparently  thinking  of  the  one  baptism 
for  the  remission  of  sin.  Ananias  had 
said  to  Saul,  "  Arise,  and  be  baptized,  and 
wash  away  thy  sins "  (Acts  xzii.  16) ;  St. 
Peter  himself  had  said,  in  his  first  great 
sermon,  "Hepent,  and  be  baptized  every 
one  of  you  in  the  Name  of  Jesus  Christ  for 
the  remission  of  sins."  Those  who  do  not 
realize  in  the  religious  life  that  death  unto 
sin  of  which  holy  baptism  is  the  sign  and 
the  beginning,  incur  forgetfulness  of  the 
cleansing  from  sin  which  they  then  received; 
they  do  not  use  the  grace  once  given  for  the 
attainment  of  those  higher  graces  of  which 
St.  Peter  has  been  speaking.  The  one  talent 
once  entrusted  to  them  must  be  taken  from 
them;  they  axe  idle  and  unfruitful,  and 


cannot  reach  unto  the  knowledge  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  (comp.  1  Cor.  vi.  11; 
Eph.  v.  26 ;  1  Pet.  iii.  21). 

Ver.  10. — Wherefore  the  rather,  brethren, 
give  diligence.  The  two  first  words,  Si^ 
/ittWov,  "wherefore  the  rather,"  are  by 
some  understood  as  referring  only  to  the 
last  clause;  as  if  St.  Peter  were  saying, 
"Bather  than  follow  those  who  lack  the 
gi'aces  enumerated  above,  and  forget  that 
they  were  cleansed  from  their  former  sins, 
give  diligence."  MaKKov  is  not  unfrequently 
used  in  this  antithetical  sense,  as  in  1  Cor. 
V.  2 ;  Heb.  zi.  25.  But  it  seems  better  to 
refer  Sio  to  the  whole  passage  (vers.  3 — 9), 
and  to  understand  /laWoy  in  its  more  usual 
intensive  sense,  "all  the  more,"  as  in  1  Tliess. 
iv.  10,  etc.  Because  God  has  bestowed 
such  gifts  on  men,  because  the  use  of  those 
gifts  leads  on  to  the  full  knowledge  of 
Christ,  therefore  all  the  more  give  diligence. 
The  word  trirouSdaare,  "give  diligence," 
recalls  the  a-irovSiii>  iraaav,  "all  diligence," 
of  ver,  5.  The  aorist  seems,  as  it  were,  to 
sum  up  the  continued  diligence  of  daily  life 
into  one  vivid  description.  This  is  the  only 
place  in  which  St.  Peter  uses  the  vocative 
"  brethren ; "  he  has  "  beloved  "  in  the  First 
Epistle  (ii.  11)  and  in  ch.  iii,  1,  8.  Both 
words  imply  affectionate  exhortation.  Two 
ancient  manuscripts,  the  Alexandrine  and 
the  Sinaitic,  insert  here,  "  Through  your 
good  works  (5ict  rSiv  KoKav  Ipyav,  or  to» 
KctAuv  iSfiai/  epyav)."  To  make  your 
calling  and  election  sure.  Alford  calls 
attention  to  the  middle  voice  of  the  verb, 
"  Not  itotiTy,  which  lay  beyond  their  power, 
but  woteicrBai,  on  their  side,  for  their  part. 
But  the  verb  must  not  be  explained  away 
into  a  pure  subjectivity,  '  to.  make  sure  to 
yourselves;'  it  carries  the  reflezive  force, 
but  only  in  so  far  as  the  act  is  and  must  be 
done  for  and  quoad  a  man's  own  self,  the 
absolute  and  final  determination  resting 
with  Another."  The  calling  and  election 
are  the  act  of  God  (comp.  1  Pet.  i.  2 ;  ii.  21). 
All  the  baptized,  all  who  bear  the  name  of 
Christ,  art)  called  into  the  Church,  but  few 
comparatively  are  chosen,  elect  Qxlyoi  Se 
lK\iKTol,  Matt.  XX.  16).  We  look,  as  it  were, 
from  far  below  up  to  the  mysteries  of  God's 
sovereign  government;  we  cannot  read  the 
list  of  blessed  names  written  in  the  Lamb's 
book  of  life;  we  cannot  lift  ourselves  to 
a  point  high  enough  to  comprehend  the 
secrets  of  God's  dealing  with  mankind,  and  ' 
to  reconcile  the  Divine  foreknowledge  and 
omnipotence  with  the  free  agency  of  man. 
But  we  feel  the  energy  of  that  free  agency 
within  us;  we  know  that  Holy  Scripture 
bids  us  to  work  out  our  salvation,  and  tells 
us  of  some  who  receive  the  grace  of  God  in 
vain  (2  Cor.  vi.  1),  or  frustrate  the  grace  of 
God  (Gal.  xL  21);  and  wa  UA  tluti  when 


THB  SECOND  EPISTlB  GENERAL  OP  tETfiH  t<^.  1. 1-21. 


the  apostle  tells  us  to  make  out  calling  and 
election  sure,  he  means  that  we  must  tiy  to 
realize  that  calling  and  election,  to  bring 
its  solemn  responsibilities  and  its  blessed 
hopes  to  bear  upon  our  daily  life,  to  live 
as  men  who  have  been  called  into  God's 
Church,  who  are  elect  unto  eternal  life,  and 
BO  (if  we  may  dare  to  say  it)  to  ratify  God's 
election  by  our  poor  acceptance.  He  calls 
us  into  covenant  with  himself;  we  answer, 
as  the  children  of  Israel  said  at  Mount 
Sinai,  "  All  that  the  Lord  hath  said  will  we 
do,  and  be  obedient"  (Exod.  xxiv.  7).  Our 
obedience  makes  the  covenant  sure  to  ua ; 
holiness  of  life  is  the  proof  of  God's  election, 
.for  it  implies  the  indwelling  presence  of 
"  that  Holy  Spirit  of  promise,  which  is  the 
earnest  ot  our  inheritance."  For  if  ye  do 
thesa  things,  ye  shall  never  fall.  "  If  ye  do 
these  things ; "  i.«.  "  If  ye  make  your  calling 
and  election  sure."  "The  plural  shows 
that  the  apostle  considered  this  making 
sure  a  very  many-sided  act "  (Dietlein,  in 
Huther).  Others  refer  the  toBto,  "these 
things,"  to  the  graces  just  enumerated.  Te 
ehall  never  faU;  literally,  ye  shall  never 
ttumble(pinij  irraltrriTf).  Urmfiv  is  "tostrike 
one's  foot  against  some  obstacle,"  and  so  to 
stumble.  St.  James  says,  "In  many  things 
we  offend  (vTalofiey)  all"  (iii.  2).  St.  Peter 
here  means  to  stumble  so  as  to  fall  (Bom. 
xi.  11) ;  while  Cliristians  "  do  these  things," 
while  they  make  their  calling  and  elec- 
tion sure  by  holiness  of  life,  they  cannot 
stumble ;  it  is  in  unguarded  moments  that 
they  fall  into  temptation. 

Ver.  11.— For  so  an  entrance  shall  he 
ministered  unto  yoa  abundantly;  rather, 
as  in  the  Revised  Version,  for  thua  shall 
be  richly  tupplied  unto  you  the  entrance. 
The  verb  inxopiiyriSiiffiTai  looks  back  to 
^jrixopijyifofoTf  in  ver.  5,  and  "richly"  to 
"abound"  in  ver.  8.  If  we  do  our  poor 
best  in  supplying  the  graces  mentioned 
above,  the  entrance  shall  be  richly  supplied. 
St.  Peter  seems  to  imply  that  there  will  be 
degrees  of  glory  hereafter  proportioned  to 
our  faithfulness  in  the  use  of  God's  gifts 
here.  The  adverb  "richly"  is  fitly  joined 
with  the  verb  iirtxapriyeiv,  which  signifies 
properly  to  provide  the  expenses  for  a  chorus. 
The  article  defines  the  entrance  as  the  great 
object  of  the  Christian's  hope.  Into  the 
everlasting  kingdom  of  our  Lord  and 
Saviour  Jesus  Christ ;  rather,  the  eternal 
kingdom.  Kotice  the  exact  correspondence 
of  the  Greek  words  here,  roS  Kvpiov  rifiiov 
Kol  iaiT^pos  'itiaoS  XpiaroS,  with  those  in 
ver.  1,  rod  Scoi!  iiiuii>  Kai  X^rrjpos  'IjjiroS 
Xpiarou,  as  a  strong  argument  in  favour  of 
the  translation,  "Our  God  and  Saviour 
Jeaus  Christ,"  in  that  verse. 

Yer.  12. — Wherefore  I  will  not  he  negli- 
gent te  pat  yon  always  in  temembrance 


of  these  things;  rather,  as  in  the  Bevised 
Yersion,  wherefore  I  thaU  he  ready.  This 
reading  (/ucAA^o-oi)  is  better  supported  than 
that  of  the  T.E.  (o«k  ifie^ffa).  (For  this 
use  of  fi4wetv  with  the  infinitive  almost  as 
a  periphrasis  for  the  future,  compare,  in  the 
Greek,  Matt.  xxiv.  6.)  The  apostle  vrill  take 
every  opportunity  of  reminding  his  readers 
of  the  truths  and  duties  which  he  has  been 
describing,  and  that  because  faith  in  those 
truths  and  the  practice  of  those  duties  is 
the  only  way  to  Christ's  eternal  kingdom. 
Though  ye  know  them,  and  be  established 
in  the  present  truth;  better,  as  in  the 
Bevised  Yersion,  and  are  established  in  the 
truth  which  is  with  you.  These  words  seem 
to  imply  that  St.  Peter  knew  something, 
through  Silvanus  (see  1  Pet.  v.  12),  of  those 
to  whom  he  was  writing;  they  were  not 
ignorant  of  the  gospel ;  now  they  had  read 
his  First  Epistle,  and  earlier  they  had 
heard  the  preaohiiig  of  St.  Paul  or  his 
companions  (comp.  Bom.  i.  13).  (For  the 
word  rendered  "established"  (iffrripiyiif- 
vovs),  comp.  1  Pet.  v.  10;  oh.  iii.  16,  17.) 
St.  Peter  seems  to  have  kept  ever  in  his 
thoughts  the  solemn  charge  of  the  Saviour, 
"  When  thou  art  converted,  strengthen 
(&T-ipiiov)  thy  brethren"  (Luke  xxii.  32), 
For  "the  truth  which  is  with  you" 
(jtapoiaig),  oomp.  Col.  i.  6. 

Yer.  13. — ^Yea,  I  think  it  meet,  as  long  as 
I  am  in  this  tabernacle ;  rather,  as  in  the 
Bevised  Yersion,  and  I  think  it  right.  The 
natural  body  is  but  a  tabernacle  for  the 
soul,  a  tent  to  dwell  in  during  our  earthly 
pilgrimage,  not  a  permanent  habitation. 
The  word  reminds  us  of  2  Cor.  v.  1 — 4, 
where  St.  Paul  uses  the  same  metaphor; 
and  also  of  St.  Peter's  words  at  the  Trans- 
figuration, "  Let  us  make  three  tabernacles." 
To  stir  you  up  by  putting  you  in  remem- 
brance; literally,  to  arouse  you  in  re- 
minding. The  phrase  occurs  again  in 
oh.  iii.  1.  St.  Peter's  readers  knew  the 
facts  of  the  gospel  history;  they  needed, 
as  we  all  need,  to  be  aroused  to  a  sense  of 
the  solemn  responsibilities  which  that 
knowledge  involves. 

Yer.  11. — Knowing  that  shortly  I  must 
put  off  this  my  tabernacle ;  literally,  know- 
ing that  swift  is  the  putting  off  of  my 
tabernacle.  St.  Peter  may  mean  by  these 
words  either  that  his  death  was  near  at 
hand,  or  that,  when  it  came,  it  would  be 
sudden,  a  violent  death,  not  a  lengthened 
illness.  So  Bongel,  "  Qui  diu  segrotant, 
possunt  alios  adhuo  pascere.  Crux  id 
Petro  non  erat  permissura.  Ideo  prius 
aglt  quod  agendum  est."  Compare  the  use 
of  the  same  word  (raxiv^)  iu  oh.  ii.  1.  St. 
Paul,  in  2  Coi.  v.  1 — i,  speaks,  like  St. 
Peter  here,  of  putting  off  a  tabernacle  or 
tent  as  we  talk  of  putting  off  a  (jamMnti 


OH.  1 1—21.]    THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PETKB. 


Alford  quotes  Josephns,  'Ant.,'  iv.  8.  2, 
where  Moses  says,  "Since  I  must  depart 
from  life,  I  have  thought  it  right  not  even 
now  to  lay  aside  my  zeal  for  your  happi- 
ness." The  word  used  here  for  "putting 
off"  ^inodfffis)  is  one  of  the  links  between 
the  two  Epistles;  it  occurs  also  in  1  Pet. 
iii.  21.  Even  as  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  hath 
showed  me ;  better,  as  in  the  Revised 
Version,  signified  unto  me.  The  aorist 
points  to  a  definite  time,  St,  Peter  is 
thinking  of  our]  Lord's  prophecy,  which 
St.  John  afterwards  recorded  (John  xxi. 
18);  he  could  never  forget  that  touching 
interview;  he  had  alreiidy  referred  to  it 
once  in  1  Pet.  v.  2. 

Ver.  15. — Koreover  I  vill  endeavonr  that 
ye  may  be  able  after  my  decease  to  have 
these  things  always  in  remembrance ;  rather, 
hut  I  will  also  give  diligence  that  ye  may 
be  able  at  every  time  after  my  deceate  to  call 
theie  things  to  remembrance.  Of  the  two 
particles  used  here  the  Se  connects  this 
verse  with  ver.  13 ;  the  xai  implies  a  further 
resolve.  St.  Peter  will  not  only  stir  up  the 
minds  of  his  readers  during  his  life,  but  he 
will  give  diligence  to  enable  them  to  call 
to  remembrance,  after  his  death,  the  truths 
which  he  had  preached.  These  words  may 
refer  simply  to  the  present  Epistle;  but  it 
seems  more  natural  to  understand  them  of 
an  intention  to  commit  to  writing  the  facts 
of  the  gospel  history;  if  this  be  so,  we 
have  here  a  confirmation  of  the  ancient 
tradition  that  the  Second  Gospel  was 
written  by  St.  Mark  at  the  dictation  of 
St.  Peter.  The  verb  movMaa  is  that  used 
in  ver.  10,  and  should  be  translated  in  the 
same  way;  they  must  give  diligence  to 
make  their  calling  and  election  sure.  St. 
Peter,  for  his  part,  will  give  diligence  to 
furnish  them  with  a  lasting  record  of  the 
truths  of  Christianity.  The  adverb  fxi.- 
(TTOTe,  at  every  time,  whenever  there  may 
be  need,  occurs  only  here  in  the  New 
Testament.  (For  %x(tv  in  the  sense  of  "to 
be  able,"  compare  the  Greek  of  Mark  xiv.  8.) 
It  is  remarkable  that  we  have  here,  in  two 
consecutive  verses,  two  words  which  remind 
ns  of  the  history  of  the  Transfiguration, 
"  tabernacle,"  and  "  decease "  (^Jo5os ;  see 
Luke  ix.  31).  Then  Peter  proposed  to  make 
three  tabernacles ;  then  he  heard  Moses  and 
Elijah  speaking  of  the  Lord's  decease 
which  he  should  accomplish  at  Jerusalem. 
The  simple  unconscious  occurrence  of  these 
coincidences  is  a  strong  proof  of  the  genuine- 
ness of  our  Epistle ;  it  is  inconceivable  that 
an  imitator  of  the  second  century  should 
have  shown  this  delicate  skill  in  adapting 
his  production  to  the  circumstances  of  the 
supposed  writer.  The  last  words  of  the 
verse  may  mean  (and  in  classical  Greek 
would  mean)  "to  make  mantioa  of  these 


things;"  bnt  the  nsual  rendering  neems 
more  suitable  here.  St.  Peter  was  onxiout 
rather  that  his  readers  should  have  the 
truths  of  the  gospel  living  in  their  me- 
mories, than  that  they  should  talk  about 
them;  that  would  follow  as  a  matter  of 
course :  "  Out  of  the  abundance  of  the  heart 
the  mouth  speaketh."  Some  Boman  Ca- 
tholic commentators  think  that  this  passage 
contains  a  promise  that  the  apostle  would 
still,  after  his  death,  continue  to  remember 
the  needs  of  the  Church  on  earth,  and  to 
help  them  by  his  intercessions;  but  this 
interpretation  involves  a  complete  disloca- 
tiou  of  clauses,  and  cannot  possibly  be  the 
true  meaning  of  the  words. 

Ver.  16.  —  Tor  we  have  not  followed 
cunningly  devised  fitbles;  rather,  did  not 
follow.  The  participle  (Jk^aKoKoueiaavTes)  is 
aorist.  This  compound  verb  is  used  only 
by  St.  Peter  in  the  New  Testament;  we 
find  it  again  in  ch.  ii.  2  and  15.  Bengel 
and  others  have  thought  that  the  preposi 
tion  l^,  from  or  out  of,  implies  wandering 
from  liie  truth  after  false  guides;  but  pro- 
bably the  word  merely  means  "to  follow 
closely,"  though  in  this  case  the  guides 
were  going  astray.  Perhaps  the  use  of  the 
plural  number  is  accounted  for  by  the  fact 
that  St.  Peter  was  not  the  only  witness  of 
the  glory  of  the  Transfiguration;  he  asso- 
ciates in  thought  his  two  brother-apostlea 
with  himself.  The  word  juBfloi,  fables,  with 
this  exception,  occurs  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment only  in  St.  Paul's  pastoral  Epistles. 
There  is  a  remarkable  parallel  in  the  pro 
oemium  of  the  'Antiquities'  of  Josephns, 
sect.  4,  OI  /ucv  JiAAoi  yofioBerai  rois  ixvBois 
i^aKo\ov$ii<ravTts.  St.  Peter  may  be  re- 
ferring to  the  "Jewish  fables"  mentioned 
by  St.  Paul  (Titus  L  14),  or  to  the  stories 
about  the  heathen  gods  such  as  those  in 
Hesiod  and  Ovid,  or  possibly  to  some  early 
inventions,  such  as  those  ascribed  to  Simon 
the  Sorcerer,  which  were  afterwards  to  be 
developed  into  the  strange  fictions  of  Gnos- 
ticism (eomp.  1  Tim.  i.  4;  iv.  7;  2  Tim.  iv. 
4).  The  word  rendered  "cunningly  de- 
vised "  occurs  elsewhere  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment only  in  2  Tim.  iii.  15;  but  there  a 
different  part  of  the  verb  is  used,  and  in 
a  different  sense.  When  we  made  known 
unto  yOn  the  power  and  coming  of  onr  Lord 
Jesus  Christ.  St.  Peter  can  scarcely  be 
referring  to  St.  Paul  or  other  missionaries, 
as  the  following  words  identify  the  preachers 
with  the  witnesses  of  the  Transfiguration; 
he  must  be  alluding  either  to  bis  First 
Epistle  (comp.  1  Pet.  i.  7,  13;  iv.  13),  or 
to  personal  teaching  of  his  which  has  not 
been  recorded,  or,  just  possibly,  to  the 
Gospel  of  St.  Mark.  St  Peter  had  seen 
the  power  of  the  Lord  Jesus  manifested  in 
his  miracles;  h«  had  heard  the  aimoauoe> 


THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  PETER.    [cH.  1. 1— 21. 


ment  of  the  risen  SaviouT,  "All  power  is 
given  unto  me  in  heaven  and  in  earth ; " 
he  had,  like  the  rest  of  the  apostles,  been 
"endued  with  power  from  on  high."  By 
the  coming  (irapovirfa)  he  must  mean  the 
second  advent,  the  invariable  meaning  of 
the  word  in  Holy  Scripture  (see  oh.  iii.  4 ; 
Matt.  ixiv.  3,  27;  1  Cor.  xv.  23;  1  Thess. 
ii  19,  etc.).  But  were  eye-witnesses  of  his 
majesty.  The  word  for  "eye-witnesses"  is 
not  the  common  one  (auT<im-ai,  used  by  St. 
Luke  i.  2),  but  a  technical  word  (^TnJirTai), 
which  in  classical  Greek  designates  the 
highest  class  of  those  who  had  been  initi- 
ated into  the  Eleusinian  Mysteries.  The 
choice  of  such  a  word  may  possibly  imply 
that  St.  Peter  regarded  himself  and  his 
brother-apostles  as  having  received  the 
highest  initiation  into  the  mysteries  of  re- 
ligion. The  noun  is  found  only  here  in  the 
New  Testament;  hut  the  corresponding 
verb  occurs  in  1  Pet.  ii.  12  and  iii.  2,  and 
in  no  other  of  the  New  Testament  writers. 
Here  again  we  have  an  undesigned  coin- 
cidence which  points  to  identity  of  author- 
ship. The  word  for  "  majesty  "  (/teyoXf  i<!tt)j) 
occurs  in  St.  Luke's  description  of  the 
healing  of  the  demoniac  boy  immediately 
after  the  Transfiguration  (Luke  ix.  43),  and 
elsewhere  only  in  Acts  xix.  27. 

Ver.  17. — For  he  received  from  God  the 
Father  hononr  and  glory.  The  construction 
here  is  interrupted;  the  literal  translation 
is,  "Having  received,"  etc.,  and  there  is 
no  verb  to  complete  the  sense.  Winer 
supposes  that  the  apostle  had  intended  to 
continue  with  some  such  words  as,  "  Ho  had 
us  for  witnesses,"  or, "  He  was  declared  to 
be  the  beloved  Son  of  God,"  and  that  the 
construction  was  interrupted  by  the  direct 
quotation  of  the  words  spoken  by  the  voice 
from  heaven  ('  Grammar,'  iii.  xlv.  6).  (For 
a  similar  anaeoluthon,  see  in  the  Greek 
2  Cor.  V.  6.)  "Honour"  seems  to  refer  to 
the  testimony  of  the  voice  liom  heaven; 
"glory,"  to  the  splendour  of  the  Lord's 
traasfigured  Person.  When  there  came 
such  a  voice  to  Mm  from  the  excellent 
glory;  more  literally,  wJien  such  a  voice 
was  borne  to  Mm.  The  same  verb  is  used 
in  Acts  ii.  2  of  "  the  rushing  mighty  wind  " 
which  announced  the  coming  of  the  Holy 
Ghost;  and  in  1  Pet.  i.  IB  of  "the  grace 
which  is  being  brought."  It  is  repeated 
in  the  next  verse.  It  seems  intended  to 
assert  emphatically  the  real  objective  cha- 
racter of  the  voice.  It  was  not  a  vision,  a 
dream ;  the  voice  was  borne  from  heaven;  the 
apostles  heard  it  with  their  ears.  The  prepo- 
sition uir6  must  be  rendered  "  by,"  not "  from." 
The  "excellent"  (rather,  "majestic,"  or 
"magnificent")  glory  was  the  Sheohinah, 
the  visible  manifestation  of  the  presence  of 
God,  which  had  appeared  in  ancient  times 


on  Mount  Sinai,  and  in  the  tabemEMile  and 
temple  above  the  meroy-seat.  God  wai 
there ;  it  was  he  who  spoke.  For  the  word 
rendered  "  excellent "  (^lieyoKoTrpeir^s)  eom- 
pare  the  Septuagint  Version  of  Deut.  xzziii. 
26,  S  fieyaKoirpeTriis  toS  vrfpei/iaTos,  literally, 
"the  Majestic  One  of  the  frmament;" 
where  our  Authorized  Version  gives  a  more 
exact  translation  of  the  Hebrew,  "in  his 
excellency  on  the  sky"  (see  also  the 
'Epistle  of  Clement  to  the  Corinthians,' 
ch.  ix.,  where  the  occurrence  of  the  same 
remarkable  words,  ineycAmrpeiriis  S(i|o,  sug- 
gests that  Clement  must  have  been  ac- 
quainted with  this  Epistle).  This  is  my 
beloved  Son,  in  whom  I  am  well  pleased. 
Our  translation  makes  these  words  corre- 
spond exactly  with  the  report  given  by 
St.  Matthew  in  his  account  of  the  Trans- 
figuration, except  that  "hear  ye  him"  is 
added  there.  In  the  Greek  there  are  some 
slight  variations.  According  to  one  ancient 
manuscript  (the  Vatican),  the  order  of  the 
words  is  different,  and  there  is  a  second  juov, 
"  This  is  my  Son,  my  Beloved."  All  uncial 
manuscripts  have  here,  instead  of  the  iu  4 
of  St.  Matthew's  Gospel,  «$  %v  ey«b  iMiaiaa. 
The  difference  cannot  be  represented  in  our 
translation.  The  construction  is  pregnant, 
and  the  meaning  is  that  from  all  eternity 
the  fvSoicia,  the  good  pleasure,  of  God  the 
Father  was  directed  towards  the  Divine 
Son,  and  still  abideth  on  him.  The  same 
truth  seems  to  be  implied  in  the  aorist 
evS6Knira  (comp.  John  xvii.  24,  "Thou 
lovedst  me  before  the  fouudaiion  of  the 
world  ").  An  imitator  of  the  second  century 
would  certainly  have  made  this  quotation 
to  correspond  exactly  with  the  words  as 
given  in  one  of  the  synoptic  Gospels. 

Ver.  18. — And  this  voice  which  came  from 
heaven  we  heard;  rather,  and  this  voice 
borne  from  heaven  we  heard.  The  pronoun 
is  emphatio ;  we,  the  apostles  who  had  that 
high  privilege.  They  heard  the  voice  when 
it  was  borne  QiyexBetaay;  he  repeats  for 
emphasis  the  remarkable  word  of  ver.  17) 
from  heaven,  they  heard  it  come  from 
heaven.  When  we  were  with  him  iu  the 
holy  mount.  This  description  of  the  Mount 
of  the  Transfiguration  supposes  a  knowledge 
of  the  history  in  St.  Peter's  readers ;  but  it 
gives  no  support  to  the  theory  of  a  post- 
apostolio  date.  Mount  Horeb  was  "holy 
ground,"  because  God  appeared  there  to 
Moses,  because  it  was  the  scene  of  the 
giving  of  the  Law.  Mount  Zion  was  a  holy 
hill,  because  God  had  chosen  it  to  be  a 
habitation  for  himself;  the  Mount  of  the 
Transfiguration  was  holy,  because  there 
God  the  Sou  manifested  forth  his  glory. 
God  hallows  every  place  which  he  pleases 
to  make  the  scene  of  his  revealed  presence. 
This  whole  passage  shows  the  deep  and 


OH.  1. 1—21.]    THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PETER. 


lasting  impTegsion  which  the  Transfiguration 
made  on  those  who  were  privileged  to 
witnea*  it  (comp.  Jolin  i.  14). 

Ver.  19. — We  have  also  a  more  sure  word 
of  prophecy ;  rather,  as  in  the  Revised  Ver- 
sion, and  we  have  the  word  of  prophecy  made 
more  iure ;  or,  we  have  the  word  of  prophecy 
more  sure  (than  the  testimony  of  the 
heavenly  voice).  The  rendering  of  the 
Authorized  Version  is  ungiammatical ;  we 
must  adopt  one  of  the  other  modes  of  repre- 
senting the  original.  The  second  seejns  to 
be  preferred  by  most  commentators.  Thus 
Archdeacon  Farrar,  translating  the  passage, 
"And  still  stronger  is  the  surety  we  have 
in  the  prophetic  word,"  adds  in  a  note, 
"Why  more  sure?  Because  wider  in  its 
range,  and  more  varied,  and  coming  from 
many,  and  bringing-  a  more  intense  per- 
Bonal  conviction  than  the  testimony  to  a 
single  fact."  But  when  St.  Peter  applied 
the  epithet  "  surer  "  {QiPaUrepov)  to  the 
word  of  prophecy,  does  he  mean  in  his 
own  estimate  of  it,  or  in  that  of  others?  If 
he  is  spealcing  of  himself,  it  is  surely  incon- 
ceivable that  any  possible  testimony  to  the 
truth,of  the  power  and  coming  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  could  be  comparable  with  the 
commanding  authority  of  the  Divine  voice 
which  he  himself  had  heard  home  from 
heaven,  and  the  transcendent  glory  wliich 
lie  himself  had  seen  flashing  from  the 
Saviour's  human  form  and  bathing  it  in  an 
aureole  of  celestial  light.  That  heavenly 
voice  had  made  the  deepest  possible  im- 
pression on  the  apostles.  "They  fell  on 
their  faces,"  as  Moses  had  done  under  the 
like  circumstances,  recognizing  it  as  the 
voice  of  God.  Peter  had  said,  "  Lord,  it  is 
good  foi  us  to  be  here ; "  and  evidently  all 
through  his  life  he  felt  that  it  was  good 
for  him  to  dwell  in  solemn  thouglit  on  the 
treasured  memories  of  that  august  revela- 
tion. No  written  testimony  could  be 
"  surer "  to  St.  Peter  than  that  voice  from 
heaven.  But  is  he  rather  thinking  of  the 
confirmation  of  the  faith  of  bis  readers  ?  He 
is  still  using  the  first  person  plural,  as  in 
vers.  16  and  18 ;  in  this  verse,  indeed,  he 
passes  to  the  second ;  but  the  retaining  of 
the  first  person  in  the  first  clause  of  the  verse 
shows  that,  if  he  is  not  still  speaking  of 
apostles  only,  he  at  least  includes  himself 
among  those  who  have  the  word  of  pro- 
phecy ;  and  to  him  certainly  the  testimony 
of  that  word,  though  sacred  and  precious, 
could  not  be  "  surer  "  than  the  testimony 
of  the  heavenly  voice.  To  Jewish  Chris- 
tians the  evidence  of  the  prophets  of  the 
Old  Testament  was  of  supreme  importance. 
Nathanael,  the  "  Israelite  indeed,"  was 
drawn  to  the  Lord  by  the  assurance  that, 
**  We  have  found  him  of  whom  Moses  in  the 
L«Wi  and  the  prophets,  did  write."     The 


Lord  himself  insisted  again  and  again  upon 
the  testimony  of  the  prophets ;  so  did  his 
apostles  after  him.  Still,  it  seems  difficult 
to  understand  that,  even  to  Jewi  sh  Christians, 
the  testimony  of  the  prorhets,  however 
sacred  and  weighty,  could  be  buier  than  that 
of  those  apostles  who  made  known  tho 
power  and  coming  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
having  been  eye-witnesses  of  his  majesty; 
while  to  Gentile  Christians  the  testimony 
of  those  apostles  of  the  Lamb  who  declared 
"what  they  had  heard,  what  they  had 
seen  with  their  eyes,  what  thoir  hands  had 
handled,  of  the  Word  of  life,"  must  have 
had  greater  power  to  convince  than  the 
predictions  of  the  Hebrew  prophets,  though 
these  predictions,  fulfilled  as  they  were  in 
the  Lord  Jesus,  furnish  subsidiary  evidence 
of  exceeding  value.  On  the  whole,  the 
more  probable  meaning  of  St.  Peter  seems 
to  be  that  the  word  of  prophecy  was  made 
more  sure  to  himself,  and,  through  his 
teaching,  to  others  by  the  overwhelming 
testimony  of  the  voice  from  heaven  and  the 
glory  of  th  e  Transfiguration.  He  had  become 
a  disciple  long  before.  His  brother  Andrew 
had  first  told  him  that  Jesus  was  the 
Messiah ;  he  himself,  a  week  before  the 
Transfiguration,  had  confessed  him  solemnly 
to  be  "the  Christ,  the  Son  of  the  living 
God."  But  the  Transfiguration  deepened 
that  faith  into  the  most  intense  conviction ; 
it  made  the  word  of  prophecy  which  spoke 
of  Christ  surer  and  more  certain.  It  is  not 
without  interest  that  tlie  writer  of  the  so- 
called  '  Second  Epistle  of  Clement '  quotes 
(oh.  li.)  from  "the  prophetic  word"  (tt/jo- 
^rtTiKds  \6yoi),  passages  which  resemble 
Jas.  i.  8  and  ch.  iii.  4.  Wherennto  ye  do  well 
that  ye  take  heed,  as  unto  a  light  that  shineth 
in  a  dark  place.  There  is  a  parallel  to  the 
first  clause  of  this  in  Josephus,  'Ant.,'  si. 
6.  12 ;  to  the  second  in  2  Esdr.  xii.  42. 
The  word  rendered  "  light "  is  rather  a 
lamp  or  torch ;  our  Lord  uses  it  of  John 
the  Baptist  (John  v.  35).  The  word  trans- 
lated "dark"  Qauxiivpi^)  is  found  only  here 
in  the  New  Testament;  it  means  "dry, 
parched,  and  so  squalid,  desert ; "  there  seems 
to  be  no  sufficient  authority  for  the  render- 
ing "dark."  God's  Word  is  a  lamp  unto 
our  feet,  and  a  light  unto  our  path ;  the 
word  of  prophecy  guides  us  to  Christ.  Until 
the  day  dawn,  and  the  day-star  arise  in  yonr 
hearts ;  literally,  until  day  dawn  through ; 
i.e.  "  through  the  gloom."  There  is  no 
article.  The  word  for  "  day-star "  ((piea^6- 
pos,  lucifer,  light-bringer)  is  found  in  no 
other  place  of  the  New  Testament;  but 
comp.  Eev.  ii.  28 ;  xxii.  16.  St.  Peter  seems 
to  mean  that  the  prophetic  word,  rendered 
more  sure  to  the  apostles  by  the  voice  front 
heaven,  and  to  Christians  generally  by 
apostolic    witness,  shines   like  a  guiding 


10 


THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PETER,    [oh.  1. 1— 2L 


lamp,  till  the  fnllei  light  of  day  dawns  upon 
the  soul,  as  the  believer,  led  by  the  pro- 
phetic word,  realizes  the  personal  knowledge 
of  the  liOrd,  and  he  manifests  himself  ac- 
cording to  his  blessed  promises  to  the  heart 
that  longs  for  his  sacred  presence.  He  is 
the  Bright  and  Morning  Star,  the  Day-star, 
the  Light-bringer ;  for  he  is  the  Light  of  the 
world — he  brings  the  light,  the  full  light  of 
day.  The  prophetic  word  is  precious;  it 
sheds  light  upon  the  surrounding  darkness 
— the  darkness  of  ignorance,  the  darkness  of 
the  heart  that  knows  not  Christ ;  but  its  light 
is  as  the  light  of  a  torch  or  a  lamp,  com- 
pared with  the  pervading  daylight  which 
the  felt  presence  of  Christ  sheds  into  those 
hearts  into  which  God  hath  ghined  to  give 
the  light  of  the  knowledge  of  the  glory  of 
God  in  the  face  of  Jesus  Christ  (comp. 
1  Pet.  ii.  9;  Luke  i.  78).  Some  under- 
stand "  day  "  here  of  the  great  day  of  the 
Lord.  Against  this  interpretation  is  the 
absence  of  the  article,  and  the  fact  that 
the  last  words  of  the  verse  seem  to  give  a 
subjective  meaning  to  the  passage. 

Var.  20. — Knowing  this  first,  that  no  pro- 
phecy of  the  Soriptnie  is  of  any  private 
interpretation.  By  "knowing  this  first" 
(yiydiTKovTes')  is  meant  thai  we  must  recog- 
nize this  truth  as  of  primary  importance, 
or,  before  we  commence  the  study  of  pro- 
phecy ;  the  phrase  occurs  again  in  ch.  iii.  3. 
The  literal  translation  of  the  following 
clause  is,  "that  all  prophecy  of  Scripture 
[there  is  no  article]  is  not;"  "all  .  .  .  not" 
(ttSo-o  .  .  .  ou)  being  a  common  Hebraism 
for  none,  oiSt/ita ;  but  the  verb  is  not  Ian, 
"is,"  but  7(i'€Tcu, "becomes,  arises,  comes  into 
being."  The  word  for  "private"  is  i5(o», 
"  special,"  or  commonly,  "  one's  own  "  (see 
1  Pet.  iii.  1,  5 ;  ch.  ii.  16,  22 ;  iii.  3,  16,  17). 
The  word  rendered  "  interpretation"  is  iwi- 
\i(Teus,  which  is  found  nowhere  else  in  the 
New  Testament ;  the  corresponding  verb 
occurs  in  Mark  iv.  34,  "He  expounded  all 
things;"  and  Acts  xix.  39,  "It  shall  be 
determined  or  settled."  These  considera- 
tions, strengthened  by  the  context,  seem  to 
guide  us  to  the  following  explanation:  No 
prophecy  of  Scripture  arises  from  the  pro- 
phet's own  interpretation  of  the  vision  pre- 
sented to  his  mind ;  for  it  was  from  God  that 
the  prophecy  was  brought,  and  men  spoke 
as  they  were  borne  on  by  the  Holy  Spirit. 
This  view  of  the  passage  is  also  supported 
by  tlie  remarkable  parallel  in  the  First 
Epistle  (i.  10—12).  The  prophets  searched 
diligently  into  the  meaning  of  the  revela- 
tion vouchsafed  to  them;  they  did  not 
always  comprelieud  it  in  all  its  details ;  they 
could  not  interpret  it  to  themselves ;  tlie 
written  prophecy  arose  out  of  the  interpreta- 
tion of  ths  revelation  supplied  by  the  same 
Spirit  from  whom  the  revelation  itself  pr»- 


ceeded.  Therefore  the  prophetio  books  of 
Holy  Scripture  are  sacred  and  precious,  and 
we  do  well  in  giving  heed  to  them ;  though 
the  day-star  of  the  Lord's  own  presence, 
shining  in  the  illuminated  heart,  is  holier 
still.  Other  views  of  this  difScult  passage 
are:  Prophecy  is  not  its  own  interpreter; 
the  guidance  of  the  Spirit  is  necessary.  Or, 
prophecy  is  not  a  matter  for  the  private  in- 
terpretation of  the  readers;  only  the  Holy 
Spirit  can  explain  it.  But  the  explanation 
adopted  seems  most  accordant  with  the  Greek 
words  and  with  the  general  sense  of  the 
context  (compare  St.  Paul's  teaching  in  1  Ctor. 
xii.  10).  The  gifts  of  the  Spirit  are  divided 
as  he  will ;  to  oue  man  are  given  "  diven 
kinds  of  tongues ;  to  another  the  interpreta- 
tion of  tongues."  Not  every  one,  it  ■seems, 
who  had  the  first  gift,'  had  also  the  latter. 
Tongues  and  the  interpretation  of  tongues 
were  two  distinct  gifts.  It  may  be  so  with 
prophecy  and  the  interpretation  of  pro- 
phecy. 

Ver.  21. — ^For  the  prophesy  came  not  in 
old  time  by  the  will  of  man ;  literally,  for 
not  hy  the  will  of  man  was  prophecy  home  ai 
any  time.  The  verb  is  that  abeady  uged  in 
vers.  17,  18,  "was  not  borne  or  brought;" 
it  refers  not  to  the  utterance  of  prophecy, 
but  to  its  origin — ^it  came  from  lieaven.  But 
holy  men  of  God  spake  as  they  were  moved 
hy  the  Holy  Ohoet;  literally,  hufbeingioma 
on  hy  the  Holy  Ghost,  the  holy  men  of  Ood 
spake;  or,  if  we  follow  the  Vatican  Manu- 
script, "But  being  borne  on  by  the  Holy 
Ghost,  men  spake  from  God."  We  have 
again  the  same  verb,  "being  borne  on" 
(<j)ep6ixevoi);  comp.  Aota  xxvii.  15, 17, where 
it  is  used  of  a  sldp  being  borne  on  hy  the 
wind.  So  the  prophets  were  homo  on  in 
their  prophetic  utterance  by  the  Holy  Spirit 
of  G(ra.  They  were  truly  and  really  inspired. 
The  mode  of  that  inspiration  is  not  ex- 
plained ;  perhaps  it  cannot  be  made  plain  to 
our  human  understanding ;  all  the  points  of 
contact  between  the  finite  and  the  Infinite 
ere  involved  in  mystery.  But  the  fact  is 
clearly  revealed — ^the  prophets  were  borne 
on  by  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God.  This  is  not, 
as  some  have  fancied,  the  language  of 
Montanism.  Prophecy  ia  but  a  lamp  shining 
in  a  dark  place;  ii  is  not  the  day-star. 
Prophecy  came  not  by  the  will  of  man ;  the 
prophets  were  moved  or  borne  on  by  the 
Holy  Gliost.  But  St.  Peter  does  not  say  that 
their  human  consciousness  was  suspended, 
or  that  they  were  passive  as  the  lyre  when 
swept  by  the  plectrum.  Had  this  passage 
been  written  after  the  rise  of  Montanism 
early  in  the  second  century,  the  writer,  if  • 
Montanist,  would  have  said  more ;  if  not  • 
Montanist,  he  would  have  carefully  guarded 
his  woitls  from  possible  misunderstanding. 


CH.I.1— 21.]    THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  PETER.  11 


H0MILETIC3. 

Vers.  1 — i. — The  address.  L  St.  Peter's  description  of  himskut.  1.  His  name. 
He  wrote  "  Peter  "  simply  in  the  First  Epistle ;  he  writes  "  Symeon  Peter  "  now. 
Apparently  he  is  writing  to  the  same  Churches  as  before ;  but  it  is  a  Second  Epistle,  he 
seems  to  know  more  of  them — he  gives  his  full  name.  That  name  contains  the  history 
of  his  soul :  the  first  tells  of  bis  admission  into  the  old  covenant  by  circumcision ;  the 
second,  of  his  admission  into  the  new  covenant  through  faith  in  Jesus  Christ.  He 
had  passed  through  a  great  spiritual  change ;  so  had  those  to  whom  he  was  writing ; 
they  bad  been  gathered,  one  by  one,  into  the  fold  of  Christ,  some  from  heathenism, 
some  from  Judaism.  His  first  name  seemed  to  speak  to  his  fellow-countrymen  ;  be 
was  a  Jew,  as  they  were ;  he  bore  the  name  of  one  of  their  old  patriarchs.  It  means 
"  hearing."  God  once  heard  the  prayer  «i  Leah,  and  gave  her  a  second  son ;  God  had 
heard  the  prayers  of  Simon  Barjona,  had  given  him  a  new  name,  and  had  made  him 
not  only  one  of  the  living  stones  in  the  spiritual  temple  which  he  described  in  his  First 
Epistle,  but  also  one  of  those  twelve  foundations  on  which  are  the  twelve  names  of  the 
twelve  apostles  of  the  Lamb  (Rev.  xxi.  14).  2.  His  office.  He  described  himself  in 
the  First  Epistle  as  "  an  apostle  of  Jesus  Christ ; "  he  again  claims  the  same  high  title ; 
but  here  adds  the  lowlier  name  of  "servant."  Christ's  ministers  must  learn  of  their 
Master,  who  is  meek  and  lowly  in  heart ;  if  his  providence  has  set  them  in  high  positions, 
shey  need  all  the  more  the  precious  grace  of  humility  ;  it  is  the  only  safeguard  against 
the  many  temptations  of  earthly  ambition.  And  they  must  remember  that  they  are 
the  bondservants  of  Jesus  Christ ;  he  has  given  them  work  to  do  for  him.  They  must 
watch  for  souls,  as  men  that  must  give  account :  woe  is  unto  them  if  they  preach  not 
the  gospel ! 

II.  His  description  op  his  readers.  1.  What  fhey  are.  They  are  believers.  They 
had  listened  to  the  preaching  of  St.  Paul  and  his  companions.  St.  Paul  had  said,  in  his 
first  sermon  in  Asia  Minor,  "  By  him  all  that  believe  are  justified  "  (Acts  xiii.  39) ;  he 
and  Barnabas,  Silvanus,  and  Timotheus,  and  other  holy  men,  had  gone  about  preaching 
the  gospel  of  Christ.  Many  souls  had  been  gathered  in ;  they  had  obtained  like 
precious  faith  with  those  who  had  preached  the  faith  to  them.  That  faith  was  now 
their  lot,  their  inheritance,  their  most  precious  possession.  Faith  is  the  gift  of  Qtxl : 
let  it  be  our  most  earnest  prayer,  "  Lord,  increase  our  faith."  For  faith  is  precious 
exceedingly,  above  all  earthly  price.  Sight  is  precious ;  blindness  shuts  a  man  out  from 
so  much  brightness  and  joy.  Faith  is  spiritual  sight :  by  faith  the  believer  sees  "  him 
who  is  invisible  "  (Heb.  xi.  27) ;  he  sees  the  promises  afar  off,  and  embraces  them,  and 
confesses  that  he  is  a  stranger  and  a  pilgrim  on  the  earth.  Spiritual  blindness  shuts  a 
man  out  from  all  this  bright  and  holy  hope.  "  The  world  seeth  me  no  more,"  the  Lord 
said;  "  but  ye  see  me  "  (John  xiv.  19).  Then  faith  is  far  more  precious  than  sight ; 
without  faith  we  *re  blind,  ignorant,  lost.  Christ  is  the  Way,  and  without  faith  we 
cannot  find  that  Way,  the  only  Way  to  life  eternal.  And  the  faith  of  the  humblest 
Christian  now  is  equally  precious  with  the  faith  of  the  holiest  apostle ;  it  is  the  gift  of 
the  same  God.  It  has  the  same  blessed,  justifying  influences ;  it  leads  on  to  the  same 
blessed  end,  everlasting  life  with  God  in  heaven.  2.  How  they  became  so.  "  In  the 
righteousness  of  our  God  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ."  He  was  in  the  form  of  God ;  he 
took  upon  him  the  form  of  a  servant ;  thus,  taking  our  nature  to  cleanse  it,  dying  in 
that  nature  to  atone  for  our  sins,  he  became  our  Saviour.  And  in  his  righteouaness  ho 
became  the  Saviour  of  the  world, "  the  Saviour  of  all  men,  specially  of  those  that  believe:" 
he  tasted  death  for  every  man.  Jew  and  Gentile  are  alike  invited ;  the  gospel  is  to  be 
preached  to  every  creature ;  all  that  are  weary  and  heavy-laden  are  called  to  come  to 
him.  And  none  that  come  are  cast  out ;  in  the  holy  working  of  his  righteouaness  they 
obtain  from  him  that  precious  faith  which  justifies  the  true  believer.  It  is  only  within 
the  sphere  of  the  working  of  that  righteous  love  that  we  can  gain  this  precious  gift. 
"  Lord,  increase  our  faith." 

III.  The  geeetino.  1.  The  hlessing  invoked  upon  his  readers.  It  is  the  old  form  of 
salutation  which  he  had  used  in  his  First  Epistle,  word  for  word  the  same.  He  could 
express  no  holier  wishes  for  them :  what  more  can  they  need  on  whom  the  gracious 
favour  of  God  abideth,  who  have  received  from  him  the  blessed  gift  of  jieace  ?    Ht 


12  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  PETER,    [oh.  1. 1— 2L 

prays  again,  as  he  had  prayed  before,  that  that  grace  and  peace  may  be  multiplied; 
"  men  ought  always  to  pray,  and  not  to  faint."  2.  Where  those  blessings  are  to  he  found. 
"  In  the  knowledge  of  God,  and  of  Jesus  our  Lord."  "  This  is  life  eternal,"  the  Lord 
Jesus  said, "  that  they  might  know  thee  the  only  true  God,  and  Jesus  Christ,  whom 
thou  hast  sent."  There  is  no  spiritual  life,  there  is  no  grace  and  peace,  outside  the 
sphere  of  the  knowledge  of  God.  But  the  knowledge  whichis  life  is  personal  knowledge ; 
not  that  external  knowledge  which  may  be  gained  from  books;  but  inner  spiritual 
knowledge  gained  by  communion  with  the  Lord  in  prayer  and  holy  sacrament,  in  the 
daily  life  of  faith  and  self-denial,  in  the  constant  adoring  contemplation  of  the  life  and 
death  of  Christ,  in  the  habitual  effort  to  live  unto  the  Lord  and  to  do  all  to  the  glory 
of  Gfld.  St.  Paul  might  well  count  all  things  but  loss  for  the  excellency  of  this  know- 
ledge ;  for  the  grace  of  God  flows  abundantly  into  the  soul  that  seeks  this  heavenly 
wisdom,  and  the  peace  of  God  that  passeth  all  understanding  keepeth  the  heart  that 
longeth  for  this  inner  knowledge  of  God  and  his  Christ.  3.  Our  warrant  for  expecting 
them.  Grace  and  peace  are  very  precious,  above  all  that  we  can  ask  or  think ;  we 
might  shrink  from  asking  for  blessings  so  far  above  our  deserts.  But  God  hath  called 
us,  the  invitation  comes  from  him ;  freely  of  his  own  sovereign  bounty  he  bids  us  come 
to  him.  He  attracts  us  by  his  own  glory  and  virtue,  revealing  to  us  his  glorious 
attributes,  manifesting  his  love  and  power  in  the  ceaseless  activity  of  his  providence 
and  his  grace.  Thus  he  kindles  in  the  Christian  soul  the  strong  desire  of  the  knowledge 
of  God,  he  satisfies  that  desire  by  the  revelation  of  himself;  and  through  that  full 
and  holy  knowledge,  granted  to  them  that  hunger  after  righteousness,  he  gives  them  all 
things  necessary  for  life  and  godliness — promises  precious  and  exceeding  great,  precious 
beyond  all  price,  inconceivably  great  in  their  grandeur  and  magnificence,  and  yet  within 
our  grasp,  weak  and  helpless  as  we  are,  because  the  Divine  power  hath  given  them  and 
the  Divine  word  is  pledged,  i.  Their  greatness.  The  gifts  of  God  must  be  great  and 
precious,  worthy  of  the  Giver ;  the  blessings  which  come  from  the  energy  of  the  Divine 
power  must  be  deep  and  sacred.  They  are  twofold.  (1)  Escape  from  corruption.  The 
world  is  corrupt — it  lieth  in  wickedness ;  it  is  lust,  the  sinful  desire  of  the  flesh,  that 
hath  corrupted  the  fair  creation  of  God.  And  this  corruption  is  all  around  us ;  we  hear 
of  its  workings  daily,  we  see  its  miserable  defilement  spreading  everywhere ;  we  feel  its 
laint  in  our  own  souls.  It  is  hard  to  escape  from  it.  As  God's  angels  once  laid  hold 
of  the  hand  of  Lot,  and  brought  him  out  of  the  doomed  city,  and  said,  "  Escape  for  thy 
life :  escape  to  the  mountain,  lest  thou  be  consimied ; "  so  now  it  is  the  Divine  power 
only  which  can  give  us  strength  and  resolution  to  escape  from  the  many  sins  which  do 
so  easily  beset  us.  (2)  The  mountain  to  which  we  must  escape  is  the  mountain  of  the 
Lord's  house,  the  place  where  his  honour  dwelleth.  We  can  be  saved  from  the  corrup- 
tion of  the  world  only  by  being  made  partakers  of  a  holiness  not  our  own.  "  He  that 
is  bom  of  God  cannot  commit  sin,  for  his  seed  abideth  in  him."  To  be  kept  safe  fix>m 
sin,  we  need  the  abiding  presence  and  growth  of  the  heavenly  birth ;  we  need,  as  St. 
Peter  tells  us,  to  be  made  partakers  of  the  Divine  nature.  This  seems  so  lofty  a  state 
as  to  be  above  our  reach.  The  promise  of  the  Spirit  is  a  promise  precious  and  exceeding 
great ;  it  seems  sometimes  so  great  that  we  cannot  lift  up  our  hearts  to  receive  it.  "  Will 
God  indeed  dwell  with  man  ?  "  we  say  in  our  unbelief.  "  Can  these  poor  bodies  of  ours 
become  the  temples  of  the  Holy  Ghost?  "  But  we  have  his  blessed  word,  his  precious 
promise ;  and  we  know  that  he  is  the  God  of  truth.  We  have  the  assurance  of  his  holy 
apostles ;  we  have  the  experience  of  thousands  of  his  saints  who  have  proved  in  their 
inmost  lives  the  deep  reality  of  this  heavenly  gift ;  and  something  of  its  blessedness,  it 
may  be,  we  have  felt  ourselves,  though  our  sin  and  our  want  of  perseverance  have  sadly 
grieved  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God,  and  interfered  with  the  free  working  of  the  new  life 
within  us.  But  "all  things  are  possible  to  him  that  believeth."  Let  us  believe  his 
Word ;  he  has  given  us  the  promises,  that  through  them  we  might  become  partakers  of 
the  Divine  nature.  Let  us  trust  him ;  let  us  only  do  what  he  bids  us,  giving  diligence 
to  make  our  calling  and  election  sure ;  and,  doubt  it  not,  but  earnestly  believe,  he  will 
fulfil  his  holy  promise  :  "  We  will  come,"  saith  the  Lord ;  God  the  Father,  God  the 
Son,  God  the  Holy  Ghost,  will  come  and  evermore  abide  with  those  humble,  happy  souls 
who  love  the  Saviour  Christ  and  keep  his  Word. 

Lesboks.    1.  Faith  is  precious  exceedingly ;  the  knowledge  of  God  and  of  his  Christ 
is  eternal  life.    Let  us  earnestly  seek  those  sacred  treasures.    2,  Gh)d  has  given  ui  all 


OH.  1 1—21.]   THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  PETEB.  18 

things  necessary  for  life  and  godliness.  Let  us  thankfully  accept  his  gifts  and  faithfully 
use  them.  3.  Would  you  realize  that  highest  gift  of  all,  to  be  made  partakers  of  the 
Divine  nature?  Then  " love  not  the  world :  ...  the  lust  of  the  flesh,  and  the  liist  of 
the  eye,  and  the  pride  of  life,  are  not  of  the  Father,  but  are  of  the  world." 

Vers.  6 — ^11, — Exhortation  to  earnest  effort.  I.  Odb  dutt.  1.  To  use  all  diligence. 
God's  Divine  power  is  with  us ;  he  has  granted  us  all  necessary  helps.  But  this,  says 
the  apostle,  is  the  very  reason  why  we  should  work  all  the  more  strenuously.  It  would 
be  heartless  work,  if  we  had  not  the  great  power  of  God  to  help  us ;  but  he  hath  endued 
his  Church  with  power  from  on  high.  This  gift  of  power  is  the  very  ground  on  which 
the  apostle  bases  his  exhortations ;  the  great  argument,  not  for  remissness  and  security, 
but  for  persevering,  self-denying  labour.  God's  power  is  fighting  for  us  ;  we  are  told 
to  bring  in  by  the  side  of  that  almighty  aid  all  our  earnestness.  It  may  seem  strange 
to  be  bidden  to  put  our  weak  trembling  endeavours  by  the  side  of  the  strength  of  God ; 
the  two  things  are  incommensurate:  how  can  the  Infinite  and  finite  work  together? 
But  it  Is  the  teaching  of  Holy  Scripture ;  the  saints  have  proved  its  value  in  their  daily 
lives.  The  work  is  God's  work ;  he  hath  begun  it ;  he  will  perform  it  unto  the  day  of 
Jesus  Christ;  but  just  on  that  very  ground  we  must  work  too,  with  fear  and  trembling 
indeed,  but  in  trustful  faith,  out  of  love  and  adoring  gratitude.  2.  To  go  on/rom  grace 
to  grace.  The  first  great  gift  of  God  is  faith,  that  precious  faith  of  which  St.  Peter 
speaks  so  warmly.  Faith,  St.  Augustine  says,  is  the  root  and  mother  of  all  virtues ; 
St.  Peter  says  the  same.  He  tells  us  that  in  the  life  of  faith,  in  the  active  energy  of 
faith,  we  must  furnish  the  attendant  chorus  of  graces.  The  word  which  he  uses  implies 
that  we  must  spare  no  effort,  no  expense  ;  the  Christian  must  be  willing  to  spend  and 
to  be  spent  in  order  to  provide  that  fair  train  of  graces  which  is  the  meet  adornment 
of  the  temple  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Faith,  the  first  gift  of  God,  cannot  remain  alone ; 
it  must  work,  and  out  of  its  active  energies  must  issue  virtue.  (1)  Virtue  is  manli- 
ness, the  holy  courage  which  enables  Christians  to  quit  themselves  like  men  in  the 
service  of  the  Captain  of  our  salvation.  In  the  midst  of  the  assaults  of  temptation  we 
need  a  resolute  determination  to  do  what  is  right  in  the  sight  of  God,  a  steadfast 
strength  of  will  to  choose  al  ways  the  good  part.  This  is  the  virtue  of  the  Ohristian  warrior, 
and  this  is  acquired  in  the  active  work  of  faith ;  faith  ever  working,  ever  energetic, 
strengthens  the  soul :  who  is  he  that  overcometh  the  world,  but  he  that  believeth  ? 
Hence  faith  leads  on  to  virtue.  (2)  With  virtue  comes  knowledge.  Courage  and  firm- 
ness may  do  harm  unless  they  are  directed  by  knowledge  :  true  Christian  virtue  will  lead 
on  to  knowledge.  Irresolute  men,  double-minded  and  undecided,  waver  between  right 
and  wrong ;  they  are  constantly  tempted  into  dangerous  compliances  with  evil ;  they 
profess  to  hate  sin,  but  they  have  a  lingering  love  for  it ;  and  so  they  do  not  attain 
to  that  keen  perception  of  good  and  evil  which  can  be  developed  only  in  the  active 
resolute  conflict  against  the  world,  the  flesh,  and  the  devil.  That  holy  discretion 
grows  from  Christian  virtue,  and  it  guides  and  informs  the  virtue  from  which  it 
springs.  (3)  Temperance.  The  tree  of  the  knowledge  of  good  and  evil  has  its 
dangers.  There  is  need  of  discretion  to  form  a  right  judgment,  and  of  virtue  to 
remain  steadfast  in  that  judgment.  The  union  of  virtue  and  knowledge  will  bring 
in  temperance,  or  self-control,  which  enables  a  man  to  govern  his  appetites,  and  to 
keep  them  under  the  sovereign  rule  of  conscience.  Without  that  seU'-control  there 
is  no  unity  of  purpose.  The  Christiau  must  strive,  like  St.  Paul,  to  devote  his 
energies  to  the  one  thing  needful ;  and  to  do  that  he  must  keep  under  his  body  and 
bring  it  into  subjection;  he  must  check  the  tumult  of  earthly  desire  by  the  light 
of  knowledge  and  the  strength  of  virtue.  (4)  Patience.  Side  by  side  with  self-con- 
trol comes  patient  endurance;  he  who  controls  his  appetites  will  learn  to  endure 
hardness.  Some  of  God's  people  have  to  wait  for  him  in  patient  endurance,  some 
to  work  for  him  in  active  labour.  Both  may  serve  him  with  equal  faithfulness.  It  is 
not  outward  work  in  itself,  but  inner  faithfulness  of  spirit,  that  wins  the  praise  of  God ; 
the  suffering  Church  of  Smyrna  is  commended ;  the  active  Church  of  Ephesus  is  blamed 
(Bev.  ii.  1 — 11).  (5)  Godliness.  Faith,  virtue,  knowledge,  temperance,  patience,  must 
help  to  strengthen  and  develop  godliness.  Godliness  is  the  spirit  of  reverence,  the  holy 
fear  of  God.  The  godly  man  gets  God  always  before  him ;  the  thought  of  God  controls 
hi*  whole  life ;  his  effort  is  to  do  all  things  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  to  live  unto 


U  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PETER,    [oh.  l  1—21 

the  Lord,  to  seek  his  glory  only.  This  holy  reverence  for  the  felt  presence  of  God  can 
only  be  maintained  in  the  life  of  faith  and  self-control ;  in  the  worldly  life  of  mere 
pleasure  and  business  it  cannot  flourish.  God  is  the  centre  of  the  devout  life,  the  life 
of  godliness ;  and  to  fix  the  eye  of  the  soul  on  him  we  must  learn  the  great  lesson, 
"  love  not  the  world."  (6)  Brotherly  kindness.  Out  of  godliness  must  flow  the  love 
of  the  brethren  ;  for  Holy  Scripture  tells  us  that  "  if  a  man  say,  I  love  God,  and  hateth 
his  brother,  he  is  a  liar ;  for  he  that  loveth  not  his  brother  whom  he  hath  seen,  how  can 
he  love  God  whom  he  hath  not  seen  ?  "  God's  elect  are  knit  together  in  one  communion 
and  fellowship;  all  loving  their  Father  in  heaven,  they  must  for  his  love's  sake  love 
all  who  in  virtue  of  the  heavenly  birth  are  made  the  children  of  God.  There  is  no  love 
truer  and  holier  than  that  which  lives  in  the  communion  of  saints ;  the  nearer  they  draw 
to  the  heavenly  Father,  the  Fountain  of  all  holy  love,  the  more  fervently  out  of  a  pure 
heart  they  love  one  another.  (7)  Charity.  Christian  love  must  not  be  confined  within 
the  limits  of  the  Christian  Church.  It  is  specially  due,  indeed,  to  those  who  are  of  the 
household  of  faith ;  but  it  cannot  stop  there.  For  it  comes  from  God,  who  is  Love, 
whose  love  is  without  limits  in  range  and  in  intensity  ;  and  that  love  which  his  chil- 
dren learn  of  him  must  be,  in  its  poor  measure,  like  his  love — it  must  not  be  cribbed 
and  confined  within  conventional  boundaries;  it  must  continually  increase  in  depth, 
and  as  it  increases  in  depth  it  must  increase  also  in  extent.  It  will  do  so,  if  it  is  real 
and  true ;  for  it  is  a  living  thing,  nay,  the  very  life  of  the  soul  with  God,  and  that  life 
which  it  has  of  God  involves  the  necessity  of  constant  growth.  Love  is  free,  spon- 
taneous, full  of  life  and  energy  and  warmth.  All  Christian  graces  meet  in  it ;  for 
it  is  the  crown  and  centre  of  the  Christian  character,  the  golden  link  that  binds 
together  into  one  glorious  whole  all  the  fair  adornments  of  those  holy  souls  that  have 
been  created  anew  after  the  image  of  Christ. 

II.  Reasons  ueqino  ds  to  the  zealous  performance  of  otjb  duti.  1.  The 
positive  reason.  If  only  we  give  all  diligence,  we  must  succeed,  for  the  Divine 
power  il  with  us;  and  when,  by  the  help  of  that  power  working  in  and  with  us, 
those  precious  graces  are  made  our  own,  they  will  not  let  us  be  idle  or  unfruitful. 
Love,  the  crown  of  all  the  rest,  is  not  a  mere  sentiment;  it  is  a  f.rce,  an  energy;  it 
will  not  allow  the  Christian  to  be  idle ;  it  must  work,  and  in  its  working;  it  will  bring 
us  ever  nearer  to  the  full  blessed  knowledge  of  Christ,  that  knowledge  which  is  eternal 
life,  in  comparison  with  which  all  the  good  things  of  this  world  are  as  dross,  as  very 
dung.  2.  The  negative  reason.  Without  those  graces  men  are  blind  ;  fur  faith,  the  first 
of  them,  out  of  which  all  the  others  spring,  is  the  eye  of  the  soul.  He  that  hath  not 
faith  is  spiritually  blind ;  he  is  not  blind  to  the  outward  objects  which  lie  close  around 
him, — those  he  can  see;  but  the  things  that  belong  to  his  peace  are  hidden  from  his 
eyes.  He  cannot  discern  the  cross  of  tlie  Lord  Jesus  Christ ;  he  cannot  see  the  awful 
realities  of  the  eternal  world ;  he  cannot  discern  the  spiritual  powers  that  are  working 
even  now  in  the  Church — the  Lord's  body  that  is  offered  to  the  faithful  in  the  Holy 
Communion  (1  Cor.  xi.  29),  the  grace  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in  the  sacrament  of  baptism 
(1  Cor.  xii.  13).  Through  that  spiritual  blindness  he  has  incurred  forgetfulness  of  the 
cleansing  from  his  old  sins;  and  it  is  not  the  outward  washing  of  baptism  that  saves 
us,  but  the  inquiry  of  a  good  conscience  after  God.  He  will  not  inquire  after  God  who 
has  received  the  grace  of  God  in  vain;  his  baptism  will  not  profit  him,  for  he  is  fallen 
from  grace.  Then  let  us  give  all  diligence  not  to  be  idle  or  unfruitful,  but  to  seek 
earnestly  after  those  special  graces  which  by  the  mi;^hty  working  of  the  Divine  power 
we  may  obtain  of  God. 

III.  Fdkthbb  enforcement  of  that  doty.  1.  For  pi-esent  safety.  St.  Peter  again 
urges  us  to  earnest  diligence,  to  the  active  use  of  the  blessed  means  of  grace.  He  uses 
the  language  of  entreaty:  "brethren,"  he  says,  in  tones  of  affectionate  appeal.  He 
knows  how  hard  it  is  to  persevere,  how  much  need  we  all  have  of  encouragement  and 
exhortation.  God's  exceeding  great  gifts,  the  danger  of  misusing  them,  the  profit  to 
be  gained  by  faithfully  using  them, — all  this,  he  says,  should  urge  us  on  to  continually 
increasing  diligence.  Such  diligence,  brought  in  by  the  side  of  the  Divine  power 
(ver.  5),  working  with  that  Divine  power  which  alone  is  the  source  of  our  salvation, 
will  tend  to  make  our  calling  and  election  sure.  While  we  are  diligent  in  working  out 
eur  own  salvation,  we  feel  God's  working  in  us ;  doubts  arise  if  we  relax  our  energies. 
Satan  suggesti  from  time  to  time  that  miserable  doubt,  "  If  thou  be  a  child  of  God," 


OH.  1.1— 21.]    THE  SECOKD  EPISTLE  GENESAL  OP  PETEll.  18 

If  we  listen  to  him  and  oease  to  trast  In  our  Father's  care,  labouring  more  for  the  meal 
that  perisheth  than  for  that  which  endureth  to  everlasting  life;  or  if  we  indulg* 
visions  of  spiritual  pride,  and  tempt  God  by  putting  ourselves  into  perilous  positions 
to  which  he  has  not  called  us, — ^then  the  doubts  increase  and  vex  the  soul.  But 
humble,  earnest  work  for  God  deepens  the  Christian's  assurance  of  God's  love  and 
choice.  "  I  follow  after,"  said  the  holy  apostle  St.  Paul,  "  if  that  I  may  apprehend 
that  for  which  also  I  am  apprehended  of  Christ  Jesus ;  "  and  again,  "  I  keep  under  my 
body,  and  bring  it  into  subjection,  lest  that  by  any  means,  when  I  have  preached  to 
others,  I  myself  should  be  a  castaway."  Therefore  give  diligence  ;  that  very  diligence 
is  a  sign  of  God's  election.  "  No  man  can  come  to  me,"  said  the  Lord,  "  except  the 
Father  which  hath  sent  me  draw  him;"  and  it  continually  deepens  our  trustfulness  in 
that  electing  grace.  If  we  are  bringing  forth  the  sevenfold  fruit  which  issues  out  of 
the  root  of  faith,  we  may  be  sure  that  our  faith  is  true  and  living.  And  we  must  try 
to  live  as  men  called  of  God  and  chosen  unto  everlasting  life  should  live,  in  trustfulness 
and  thankfulness,  in  the  abiding  sense  of  God's  preseuce,  in  the  persevering  eSbrt  to 
please  him  in  all  things.  The  life  of  obedience  and  spiritual  diligence  tends  to  deepen 
continually  the  consciousness  that  the  Divine  power  is  with  us,  giving  us  all  things 
needful  for  life  and  godliness,  and  so  to  make  our  calling  and  election  sure.  While  we 
live  thus  we  shall  not  stumble ;  for  the  godly  consideration  of  our  election  in  Christ 
doth  not  only  "  greatly  establish  and  confirm  the  faith  of  eternal  salvation  to  be 
enjoyed  through  Christ,"  but  doth  also  "  fervently  kindle  love  towards  God  ; "  there- 
fore Christian  men,  while  by  God's  grace  they  are  enabled  to  keep  the  faith  of  their 
election  in  Christ  steadfastly  before  their  eyes,  must  walk  religiously  in'good  works, 
and  will  not  fall  unto  sin.  "Whosoever  is  born  of  God  doth  not  commit  sin ;  for  his 
seed  remaineth  in  him ;  and  he  cannot  sin,  because  he  is  born  of  God."  So  long  as  we 
abide  in  the  grace  of  that  heavenly  birth,  in  the  faith  of  our  election  unto  everlasting 
life,  so  long  we  cannot  sin.  It  is  when  we  are  off  our  guard,  when  we  are  not  "  as  men 
waiting  for  their  Lord,"  that  we  fall  away.  Then  all  the  more  we  ought  to  "  give 
diligence  to  make  our  calling  and  election  sure."  2.  For  futwre  blessednes*.  The 
entrance  Into  Christ's  eternal  kingdom  shall  be  richly  furnished  to  those  who  use  all 
diligence  to  make  their  election  sure.  While  we  are  preparing  our  hearts  by  his 
gracious  help,  while  we  are  striving  to  furnish  the  fair  train  of  Christian  graces  to 
make  that  heart  ready  for  him,  we  £iiow  that  he  is  preparing  a  place  for  us  in  heaven, 
interceding  for  us,  praying  that  where  he  is  there  we  may  also  be.  That  entrance 
shall  be  richly  furnished;  with  glory  and  with  triumph  shall  the  Christian  soul  enter 
into  the  golden  city ;  there  are  the  true  riches — riches  of  blessedness  beyond  the  reach 
of  human  thought,  riches  of  knowledge,  Hches  of  holiness  and  joy  and  love  in  the 
unveiled  presence  of  God,  who  is  rich  in  mercy,  rich  in  power  and  glory  and  majesty, 
rich  in  tender  and  holy  and  unspeakable  love  for  his  elect. 

Lessons.  1.  God's  bounty  should  stir  us  to  show  our  thankfulness  in  our  lives. 
His  gifts  are  great,  so  ought  our  diligence  to  be  great.  2.  Our  hearts  are  th#  chosen 
temple  of  God ;  we  must  furnish  that  temple  richly  with  Christian  graces — its  proper 
decorations.  3.  By  that  holy  diligence  we  are  bidden  to  make  our  calling  and  election 
sure.    4.  Let  us  earnestly  strive  to  do  so,  looking  forward  in  faith  to  the  great  reward. 

Vers.  12 — 21. — Seasons  for  dUigen.ee  in  his  apostolic  work.  L  Ths  time  I8  bhobt. 
1.  W»  need  continually  to  he  aroused.  We  may  know  all  things  necessaty  for  salva- 
tion ;  we  iave  known  them,  it  may  be,  all  our  lives ;  we  are  firmly  convinced  of  their 
truth;  but  we  need  to  keep  that  knowledge  vividly  before  our  hearts,  to  bring  it  to 
bear  upon  the  circumstances  of  our  daily  lives.  Few  of  us  have  this  recollectedness, 
this  persevering  watchfulness;  we  need  constant  exhortation.  St.  Peter's  readers 
had  the  knowledge  of  the  gospel ;  they  had  heard  it  from  St.  Paul  and  his  com- 
panions. St.  Peter  gladly  acknowledges  it — exhortation  is  better  receired  when  it 
is  expressed  in  kindly  terms.  But  he  has  a  duty  to  perform;  he  felt,  like  St.  Paul, 
that  he  was  a  debtor  both  to  Jews  and  Greeks ;  that  he  must  do  his  utmost  to  preach 
the  gosfjel  of  Christ,  and  to  keep  alive  the  flame  of  holy  love  in  those  who  knew  the 
truth.  So  he  will  take  all  opportunities  of  arousing  those  whom  he  is  addrewing  |  he 
will  never  relax  his  efforts  as  long  as  he  lives ;  he  knows  that  they  will  always  Med 
tb<t  wwd  of  exhortation ;  he  knows  that  it  will  always  be  his  duty  to  exhort  them, 


18  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PETER,    [oh.  1. 1—21. 

St.  Peter  is  an  example  to  all  Christian  ministers.  They  must  watch  for  Bonis;  they 
must  never  weary  in  their  work  ;  at  all  times  and  in  all  places  they  should  strire, 
sometimes  by  word,  always  by  example,  to  arouse  men  to  a  sense  of  the  momentous 
importance  of  the  things  which  belong  to  their  peace.  They  are  never  "  off  duty,"  ai 
men  are  in  other  occupations ;  they  should  be  always  on  the  watch  for  opportunities  of 
saving  souls,  of  building  up  believers  in  their  most  holy  faith,  of  comforting  the  feeble- 
minded, of  arousing  the  careless,  of  warning,  guiding,  encouraging,  according  to  the 
needs  of  those  with  whom  they  have  to  do.  2.  "  2%«  night  cometh  when  no  man  can 
work."  St.  Peter  looks  forward  to  his  death  with  sweet  and  holy  calmness ;  he  knew 
that  it  would  be  swift — the  sharp  death  of  martyrdom.  He  may  have  felt  that  it  was 
near  at  hand ;  for  he  was  an  old  man  now,  and  the  hour  of  which  the  Lord  had  spoken 
(John  xxL  18, 19)  could  not  be  long  delayed.  He  calls  it  the  putting  off  of  his 
tabernacle.  His  earthly  body  was  but  as  a  tent,  perishable,  temporary ;  the  tent  was 
old,  worn  out ;  it  could  not  last  long.  The  apostle  knew,  like  St.  Paul,  that  he  had 
"a  building  of  God,  a  house  not  made  with  hands,  eternal  in  the  heavens,"  and, 
knowing  this,  he  could  calmly  await  the  dissolution  of  the  earthly  house  of  this 
tabernacle.  But  the  approach  of  death,  the  thought  that,  when  it  came,  it  would  be 
speedy,  was  a  reason  for  more  earnest  work  while  there  was  time.  It  is  good  for  us  to 
keep  the  thought  of  our  approaching  death  in  continual  remembrance,  to  accustom 
ourselves  to  reflect  calmly  and  thoughtfully  upon  it.  Such  meditation  throws  a  clear 
light  upon  the  solemn  meaning  of  our  earthly  life,  on  the  deep  importance  of  finishing 
the  work  which  God  has  given  us  to  do.  Sometimes  we  can  do  that  work  all  the 
better  when  the  shadow  of  approaching  death  is  falling  upon  us.  Our  testimony  seems 
more  real,  deeper,  and  more  convincing,  when  it  comes  from  men  who  are  on  tlie  point 
of  departure,  whose  immediate  future  is  in  the  world  beyond  the  grave.  The  thought 
of  coming  death  will  make  true  Christians  all  the  more  ei^er  to  work  for  God  ;  they 
will  pray  that  Christ  may  be  magnified  in  them,  whether  it  be  by  life  or  by  death ; 
they  will  pray  for  a  holy,  peaceful  death,  not  only  for  their  own  sakes,  but  also  that 
others,  seeing  how  Christian  men  can  die,  may  be  led  to  follow  their  faith.  They  will 
work  for  the  salvation  of  souls  even  on  their  death-bed,  and  they  will  do  what  lies  in 
their  power  to  leave  behind  them  a  legacy  of  holy  example  and  holy  memories,  or,  it 
may  be,  of  holy  writings,  which  may  benefit  those  who  remain.  To  such  holy  souls 
death  is  a  departure,  an  exodus,  out  of  a  life  of  sorrows  into  the  land  of  promise,  the 
heavenly  Canaan.  The  Lord  who  died  for  them  is  with  them  when  they  die;  he 
accomplished  his  decease  at  Jerusalem  for  them.  His  death  hath  destroyed  the  power  of 
the  king  of  terrors,  and  taken  away  the  sting  of  death  ;  his  death  was  a  departure  out 
of  humiliation  into  glory.  He  told  Peter  once  that  he  could  not  follow  whither  ha 
was  going  then,  but  that  he  should  follow  him  afterwards.  And  so  now  it  is  his  will 
that  all  those  whom  the  Father  hath  given  him  should  be  with  him  where  he  is. 

II.  Thb  certainty  of  the  truths  of  the  gospel.  1.  Ulietf  are  not  fable*. 
There  were  many  strange  stories  current,  some  among  Jews,  some  among  Gentiles; 
there  were  many  legends,  many  myths.  But  the  gospel  history  stands  apart  from 
all  these  in  its  unimpeachable  truthfulness.  It  contains  many  wonderful  works  of 
power,  many  wonders  of  grace ;  it  announces  the  future  advent  of  our  Saviour  Jesus 
Christ.  But  all  these  are  related  with  a  simplicity  which  has  the  stamp  of  truth. 
The  gospel  speaks  to  us  as  with  a  voice  from  heaven;  it  awakens  echoes  in  our 
hearts;  it  brings  with  it  its  own  evidence.  2.  They  have  the  testimony  of  eye-vntnesses. 
There  were  many  eye-witnesses  of  the  Lord's  life  and  works — five  hundred  brethren  at 
once  had  seen  him  after  he  was  risen  from  the  dead.  But  there  were  three  who  had 
received  an  august  initiation  into  the  holiest  mysteries,  who  had  been  eye-witnesses 
of  his  majesty  when  the  splendour  of  the  Divine  glory  flashed  through  the  veil  of 
human  flesh,  and  saints  long  ago  departed  from  the  world  came  to  do  him  homage, 
desiring,  as  the  blessed  angels  desire,  to  look  into  the  mysteries  of  redemption,  and 
to  understand  something  of  the  blessed  and  awful  meaning  of  his  most  precious  death. 
3.  2%e  direct  testimony  of  Ood  the  Father.  On  the  day  of  the  Transfiguration  sure 
and  irresistible  proof  of  the  Saviour's  Divine  majesty  was  vouchsafed  to  eye  and  ear 
alike.  That  radiant  glory  came  from  God  the  Father;  the  highly  favoured  three  had 
then  a  foretaste  of  the  glorious  vision  which  the  blessed  shall  behold  in  heaven  according 
to  th«  Saviour's  prayer,  "  Father,  I  will  that  they  also,  whom  thou  bast  given  me,  b« 


oa.1.1— 21.]    THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PETER.  1? 

with  me  where  I  am ;  that  they  may  behold  my  glory,  which  thou  hast  given  me." 
That  great  sight  was  to  prepare  them  for  the  awful  agony  that  was  to  follow.  God 
gives  from  time  to  time  glimpses  of  the  blessedness  of  heaven  to  his  saints ;  the  Saviour 
manifests  himself  to  his  chosen  as  he  doth  not  unto  the  world.  And  sometimes  those 
who  are  most  highly  favoured  with  the  vision  of  his  love  are  called  to  be  in  a  special 
manner  partakers  of  his  suffering,  to  bear  about  with  them  in  the  body  the  dying  of 
the  Lord  Jesus.  But  the  three  apostles  did  not  only  behold  the  glory  as  of  the  Only 
Begotten  from  the  Father;  a  further  heavenly  witness  was  vouchsafed.  A  voice 
uttered  by  the  excellent  glory  was  borne  out  of  the  bright  cloud  to  the  transfigured 
Lord ;  it  was  borne  along  towards  him,  as  if  pding  on  the  cherubim,  flying  on  the 
wings  of  the  wind ;  it  came  like  a  living  thing,  a  strange  startling  reality,  a  voice  such 
as  no  other  man  had  heard  except  the  holy  Baptist.  Borne  along  in  majestic  course, 
it  came  to  the  transfigured  Jesus,  and  recognized  him  as  the  eternal  Son.  "  This  is 
my  Son,  my  Beloved,  in  whom  I  am  well  pleased."  None  other  than  God  the  Father 
could  have  uttered  that  voice ;  the  emphatic  I  Qyii)  announced  his  presence.  He  was 
well  pleased  in  the  adorable  Son ;  ever  from  all  eternity  had  the  love  of  the  Father 
beamed  upon  the  everlasting  Son  of  God.  Now,  in  his  incarnation,  in  his  voluntary 
humiliation,  the  Father  was  well  pleased ;  he  had  declared  his  good  pleasure  at  the 
baptism,  he  declared  it  again  at  the  Transfiguration.  The  Lord  Jesus  might  be 
despised  and  rejected  of  men ;  he  was  owned  by  the  Lord  God  Omnipotent  as  the  Sou 
of  God  most  holy.  And  surely,  as  God  was  well  pleased  in  him  who  humbled  himself 
and  befiame  obedient  even  unto  death,  so  he  is  well  pleased  now  with  those  to  whom 
the  only  begotten  Son  hath  given  power  to  become  the  children  of  God,  when  they 
abase  themselves,  wheu  they  learn  of  the  Lord  Christ  humility  and  submission  of 
will,  and  pray  in  his  holy  words,  "  Father,  not  my  will,  but  thine  be  done."  The 
chosen  three  heard  that  august  voice  as  it  was  borne  from  heaven ;  they  heard  it,  as 
the  emphatic  i/ieu  signifies,  themselves,  with  their  own  ears ;  there  was  no  room  for 
doubt,  no  possibility  of  error.  The  voice  was  borne  from  heaven;  it  was  borne  to 
Christ ;  the  three  chosen  witnesses  heard  it,  as  they  were  with  him  in  the  holy  mount. 
We  have  their  testimony,  the  testimony  of  eye-witnesses,  who  declare  unto  us  that 
which  they  saw  and  heard.  The  witnesses  were  men  whose  truthfulness  could  not 
be  impeached.  They  had  nothing  to  gain  in  this  world,  but  everything  to  lose ;  all 
were  persecuted,  two  of  them  suffered  the  death  of  martyrdom.  We  may  well  thank 
God  for  the  strength  and  certainty  of  the  evidence  of  Christianity.  4.  The  testimony 
of  prophecy.  The  Law  and  the  prophets  testified  of  Christ.  The  Lord  himself  appealed 
to  that  testimony  when,  "  beginning  at  Moses  and  all  the  prophets,  he  expounded  the 
things  concerning  himself"  (Luke  xxiv.  27).  All  the  varied  testimony  of  all  the 
prophets  converges  in  the  Person  of  Christ,  and  finds  its  fulfilment  there.  No  other 
deliverer  has  arisen  answering  to  ancient  prediction;  in  the  Lord  Christ  only  meet 
all  the  voices  of  the  prophets.  Many  recognized  the  power  of  this  testimony  in 
apostolical  times:  the  eunuch  who  was  reading  the  great  prophecy  of  Isaiah  when 
Philip  drew  near  to  his  chariot ;  the  multitudes  who  listened  to  the  apostles  as  they 
persuaded  them  out  of  the  prophets,  witnessing,  as  they  did  again  and  again,  that 
"  all  the  prophets  from  Samuel,  and  those  that  follow  after,  as  many  as  have  spoken, 
have  likewise  foretold  of  these  days."  This  testimony  of  the  prophets,  so  convincing 
in  itself,  so  especially  weighty  and  sacred  to  Hebrew  believers,  was  rendered  surer  by 
the  most  august  and  authoritative  of  all  testimonies,  the  direct  testimony  of  God  the 
Father,  given  in  the  voice  that  was  borne  firom  heaven.  None  who  heard  that  voice 
could  entertain  one  moment's  doubt  that  the  Lord  Jesus  was  indeed  he  "  of  whom 
Moses  in  the  Law,  and  the  prophets,  did  write."  5.  The  value  and  use  of  prophecy. 
It  is  good  to  give  heed  to  prophecy,  to  study  the  prophetic  Word.  The  external  evi- 
dences of  our  religion  are  very  helpful  to  inquirers  after  truth ;  ancient  prophecy  is 
an  important  factor  of  those  external  evidences.  It  is  like  a  lamp  that  shineth  in 
a  dark  place.  The  world  is  a  dark  dreary  place ;  we  could  not  find  the  strait  path 
and  narrow  way  that  leadeth  unto  life  without  the  guiding  light  of  the  holy  Word  of 
God.  The  heart  is  a  dark  place,  gloomy,  dry,  and  squalid,  whea  it  is  not  illumined 
by  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God.  In  that  dark  place  the  light  of  prophecy  shine  ih.  It 
guided  the  steps  of  many  an  anxious  inquirer  in  the  early  days  of  Christianity; 
doubtless  the  fifty-third  chapter  of  Isaiah  led  many  thoughtful  men,  besides  the 

□.  PITXB.  t 


If  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PETER,    [on.  1. 1—21. 

Ethiopian  eunuch,  to  the  cross  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  That  chapter,  lilje  so  much 
more  of  Old  Testament  prophecy,  appeals  to  the  deepest  yearnings  of  the  awakening 
heart,  to  the  sense  of  sin,  the  feeling  of  need,  the  longing  for  atonement,  the  reaching 
forth  of  the  soul  for  a  personal  Saviour.  Prophecy  is  a  "  burning  and  a  shining  light," 
as  John  the  Baptist  was;  his  oifice  was  to  lead  men  to  Christ,  to  say,  "Behold  the 
Lamb  of  God ! "  Such  is  the  office  of  prophecy.  Its  guiding  lamp  is  precious ;  but 
more  precious  far  to  the  individual  soul  is  the  revealeil  presence  of  that  Saviour  of 
whom  all  prophecy  speaks.  His  presence,  manifested  according  to  his  promise  into 
the  Christian  heart,  is  the  dawn  of  the  spiritual  day.  He  is  the  Day-star,  the  Light- 
hringer;  for  he  is  the  Light,  the  Ligljt  of  the  world.  Precious  above  all  price  is  the 
clear  brightness  of  that  holy  day;  precious,  therefore,  is  prophecy,  as  it  guides  us 
onward  through  the  encircling  gloom  till  the  dawning  of  the  day,  and  the  rising  of 
the  Bright  and  Morning  Star.  And  we  shall  value  the  guidance  of  prophecy  the  more 
when  we  consider  the  source  from  which  it  comes.  The  prophecies  of  Holy  Scripture 
are  not  the  result  of  human  thought.  The  prophet  did  not  himself  unravel  the 
mysteries  of  the  future.  It  was  not  Joseph  who  interpreted  the  dreams  of  Pharaoh, 
or  Daniel  who  interpreted  the  visions  of  Nebuchadnezzar.  It  was  not  for  the  prophet 
to  interpret  the  revelation  presented  to  himself.  Interpretation  as  well  as  vision  comes 
from  God,  "  It  is  not  in  me,"  said  Joseph :  "  God  shall  give  Pharaoh  an  answer  of 
peace."  "There  is  a  God  in  heaven  that  revealeth  secrets,"  said  Daniel  to  the  king. 
Prophecy  came  from  heaven,  like  the  voice  wliich  spake  at  the  Transfiguration ;  it  was 
borne  to  the  prophet,  as  that  voice  was  borne  to  the  Lord.  The  holy  men  who  uttered 
the  prophecies  were  borne  along  by  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God.  God  who  spake  at  the 
Transfiguration  is  the  God  who  spake  by  the  prophets.  Both  forms  of  testimony  come 
from  him ;  both  are  sure  and  certain ;  the  one  makes  the  other  surer. 

Lessons.  1.  St.  Peter  looked  forward  calmly  to  the  approach  of  death ;  we  should 
learn  to  do  the  like.  He  regarded  the  nearness  of  death  as  an  incentive  to  earnest 
work ;  we  should  follow  his  example.  2.  The  external  evidence  of  our  religion  is  sure; 
we  have  the  testimony  of  eye-witnesses,  who  themselves  bad  the  testimony  of  God. 
We  have  the  testimony  of  prophets  who  were  inspired  by  the  Holy  Spirit.  3.  But 
the  surest  evidence  to  each  individual  soul  is  the  manifestation  of  Christ,  the  Day-star, 
rising  in  the  heart.  "Hereby  we  know  that  he  abideth  in  us,  by  the  Spirit  which  he 
hath  given  us." 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ver.  1. — Peter's  primacy.  We  have,  in  the  career  and  the  fame  of  St.  Peter,  an 
extraordinary  instance  of  a  man  rising  from  obscurity  to  renown.  A  Galilasan  fisherman 
became  the  leader  of  the  college  of  apostles,  and  has  for  centuries  been  aeknowledged 
by  the  whole  of  Christendom  as  one  of  its  inspired  teachers  and  counsellors;  whilst 
by  a  great  part  of  Christendom  Peter  has  been  regarded  as  the  chief  human  head  and 
ruler  of  the  Church,  first  in  his  own  person,  and  afterwards  by  those  considered  to  be 
his  successors.  It  is  certainly  very  remarkable  in  how  very  many  respects  Peter  stands 
first  among  our  Lord's  apostles.  Confining  ourselves  to  the  scriptural  narrative,  disre- 
garding all  traditions,  and  giving  no  heed  to  superstitious  claims,  we  cannot  but  admit 
the  many  evidences  of  St.  Peter's  primacy. 

L  Pbteb  was  the  riRST  amono  the  little  gkodp  of  chosen  pisoiples  admitted 
TO  WITNESS  Christ's  olort.  Peter  was  the  first-mentioned  of  the  three  who  saw  the 
transfigured  Son  of  man  upon  the  holy  mount;  and  it  was  he  who,  as  the  spokesman 
of  the  others,  exclaimed,  "  It  is  good  for  us  to  bo  here." 

II.  Peter  occupied  the  same  position  amongst  those  chosen  to  testify  of  the 
Saviour's  humiliation  and  agony.  In  the  garden  of  Gethsemane,  Simon  was  one  of 
the  game  band  of  three  whom  Jesus  kept  near  to  himself;  and  his  prominent  action  in 
his  Master's  defence  is  proof  of  his  admitted  leadership. 

III.  Peter  was  the  first  of  the  apostles  to  bear  witness  to  the  Lord's 
Messiahship  and  Divinity.  It  was  his  exclamation,  "  Thou  art  the  Christ,  the  Son 
of  the  living  God,"  which  called  forth  the  Lord's  approval  and  original  blessing, "  Blessed 
•rt  thou,  Simon,"  eto. 


OH.  1.1—21  J    THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PETER.  19 

IV.  Peteb  wab  thb  first  to  proclaim  the  Saviour's  resurrection  from  the 
DEAD.  Paul  himself  records  that  the-  risen  Redeemer  first  appeared  to  Cephas,  then  to 
the  twelve.  "The  Lord  hath  risen  indeed,  and  hath  appeared  unto  Simon," — such 
were  the  joyful  tidings  which  circulated  among  the  little  company  during  tiio 
resurrection- day. 

V.  Peter  was  the  first,  after  the  descent  of  the  Holt  Spirit,  to  preach 
THE  GOSPEL  to  HIS  FELLOW-MEN.  Upon  the  Day  of  Pentecost  he  stood  up,  and  in  the 
name  of  the  brethren  published  to  the  multitude  the  explanation  of  the  marvellous 
events  of  that  day.  As  tne  chief  speaker  and  rfepresofitative  of  the  Church,  he  proclaimed, 
not  only  the  facts  of  the  Resurrection  and  the  outpouring  of  the  Spirit,  but  pardon  and 
salvation  through  the  redemption  which  Christ  had  wrought. 

VI.  Peteb  was  the  first  amono  Christian  confessors  to  endure  and  to  deft 
THE  RAGE  OF  THB  PERSECUTOR.  The  storm  broko  upon  the  loftiest  oak  of  the  forest 
Peter  was  naturally  selected  by  the  enemies  of  the  faith  as  its  most  public  and  powerf  ui 
representative,  that  ho  might  be  made  to  feel  their  power.  But  his  attitude  and 
language  proved  that  he  was  conscious  of  the  presence  and  support  of  One  mightier  than 
all  those  who  were  opposed  to  him. 

VII.  Peteb  was  the  first  among  the  tweltb  to  welcome  believing  GENrrLES 
INTO  THE  Chuhoh  OF  Chrisi.  The  case  of  Cornelius,  the  circumstances  attending  the 
"  Council  of  Jerusalem,"  are  sufficient  proof  of  this.  Although  the  "  upostle  of  the 
circumcision,"  it  is  plain  that  Peter  was  in  fullest  sympathy  with  that  Divine  mCve- 
ment  of  expansiveness  which  was  to  represent  Christianity  as  the  religion  for  mankind, 
and  Christ  as  the  Saviour  of  the  world. 

VIII.  Peter  was  the  first  concerning  whom  it  was  foretold  that  he  should 
BUFFER  A  death  OF  MARTYRDOM  FOR  THE  LoRD  WHOM  HE  LOVED.  Jcsus  himself  fore- 
warned him  of  the  fate  which  was  before  him,  and  even  signified  what  death  he  should 
die.  He  who  counted  it  an  honour  to  fulfil  his  Lord's  will,  and  to  proclaim  his  Lord's 
grace  and  love,  when  the  time  came,  counted  it  a  joy  to  share  his  Master's  reproach 
and  to  bear  his  Master's  cross. — J.  B.  T. 

Vers.  8,  4. —  The  bounty  of  Ood.  The  lot  of  the  primitive  Christians  whom  the 
apostles  addresstd  in  their  spoken  and  written  utterances  must,  for  the  most  part,  have 
appeared  to  ordinary  observers  far  from  desirable.  Not  only  were  they  drawn  from 
the  lowly  and  unconsidered  classes  of  society,  but  they  often  had  much  to  endure  as  a 
consequence  of  their  reception  of  the  gospel  and  their  fidelity  to  Christ.  Especially  did 
they  meet  with  the  contempt  of  the  great,  on  account  of  their  adhesion  to  what  the 
world  deemed  an  unreasonable  superstition,  and  with  the  hostility,  now  of  a  mob,  and 
again  of  a  governor,  who  attacked  them  with  the  weapons  of  persecution.  Yet  these 
primitive  Christians  took  an  independent  view  of  their  own  position,  and  judged  them- 
selves very  differently  from  the  world's  judgment.  They  were  taught  by  their  inspired 
instructors  and  counsellors — as  by  St.  Peter  in  this  passage — to  consider  themselves 
objects  of  the  Divine  favour,  recipients  of  the  Divine  bounty — nay,  even  partakers  of 
the  Divine  life.  Such  an  appreciation  of  their  position  and  spiritual  endowments 
might  be  deemed  by  their  unenlightened  and  worldly  neighbours  mere  fanaticism.  But 
events  proved  that  the  Church  of  Christ  was  under  noillusiun  in  cherishing  a  profound 
conviction  that  all  its  true  members  were  enriched  with  incomparable  wealth,  and  called 
to  a  glorious  destiny.  High  thoughts  of  privilege  prepared  for  deeds  of  daring  and  ot 
endurance ;  and  the  world  which  could  not  comprehend  the  Church's  faith  and  claims 
was  constrained  to  feel  and  to  acknowledge  the  Church's  power. 

L  The  Divine  Giver.  1.  His  boundless  power  accounts  for  the  plenitude  and 
variety  of  God's  bestowments  upon  his  people.  If  we  speak  of  him  as  "  the  Almighty," 
when  considering  his  material  creation  and  all  its  illimitable  extent,  and  its  teeming 
wonders,  much  more  evidently  is  such  an  appellation  justified  when  we  turn  to  regard 
those  higher  manifestations  of  creative  energy  which  are  furnished  in  tranaformatioua 
wrought  in  the  individual  and  the  social  life  of  man. 

"  'Twas  great  to  speak  a  world  &om  nought, 
'Twas  greater  to  redeem." 

2.  Hii  wondetfui  gm*ro$ity.    The  endowments  of  the  Church  are  said  to  be  "granted  " 


aO  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OE  PETER,    [oh.  1. 1— 2L 

or  "  given."  And  this  must  have  been  so ;  for  they  are  altogether  beyond  human 
acquirement,  whilst  nothing  that  man  could  do  could  earn  such  blessings.  And  when 
the  sinfulness  of  the  whole  race  of  men  is  considered,  the  generosity  which  was  expressed 
in  the  bestowment  of  such  gifts  upon  such  recipients  must  be  acknowledged  to  be 
wonderful  indeed. 

n.  The  spiritual  gift.  There  are  two  parties  to  every  gift,  and  in  order  to  appre- 
ciate it,  it  is  necessary  to  look  at  the  gift  in  relation  to  him  who  gives  and  to  those  who 
receive.  1.  Looked  at  on  their  Divine  side,  these  gifts  are  the  fulfilment  of  "  promises 
precious  and  exceeding  great."  It  would  be  absurd  and  sinful  to  suppose  that  what  Grod 
bestows  upon  his  creatures  is  flung  to  them  in  a  momentary  and  capricious  fit  of 
liberality.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  from  the  earliest  periods  of  human  history,  from  the 
time  of  man's  "  fall,"  the  revelation  of  God  had  been  one  intended  to  inspire  hope  of 
salvation ;  and  the  primaeval  promise  had  been  renewed,  both  by  language  and  by  symbol, 
from  age  to  age.  These  promises  might  not  always  be  fully  understood,  clear  as  they 
are  to  us  when  we  read  them  in  the  light  of  their  fulfilment.  But  they  were  glorious 
with  a  glory  exceeding  any  human  assurances  of  help  and  blessing.  And  the  pur- 
port of  them  all  was  to  reveal  a  Divine  intention  to  provide  spiritual  blessings — 
knowledge,  deliverance,  and  life — for  a  needy  and  a  sinful  race.  Great  as  were  the  pro- 
mises, the  fulfilment  was  greater  still.  A  Saviour  was  promised,  and  in  the  fulness  of 
time  a  Saviour  came;  the  incarnation  and  advent  of  Christ  were  the  accomplishment 
of  the  predictions  and  the  purposes  of  eternal  wisdom  and  eternal  love.  The  difi'usion 
of  the  Spirit  throughout  a  society  which  needed  enlightenment  and  healing  and  fertili- 
zation was  the  accomplishment  of  some  of  the  most  striking  and  poetical  prophecies  of 
Old  Testament  Scripture.  2.  Looked  at  on  their  human  side,  these  Divine  gifts  include 
"all  things  that  pertain  unto  life  and  godliness."  A  marvellously  comprehensive 
description !  Spiritual  death  and  ungodliness  prevailed  in  the  world.  And  there  was 
no  human  means  by  which  their  power  could  be  destroyed  and  the  salvation  of  men 
secured.  But  in  the  fulfilment  of  the  Divine  promises,  in  the  mediatorial  dispensation, 
in  the  coming  of  the  Son  of  God,  and  of  the  Spirit  of  life  and  holiness,  the  amplest 
provision  was  made  for  the  highest  and  immortal  welfare  of  men.  We  may  compare 
this  declaration  with  the  reasoning  of  Paul,  who  argues  that  he  who  spared  not  his  Sen, 
but  gave  him  up  for  us  all,  will  with  him  also  freely  give  us  all  things. 

III.  The  means  by  which  the  Divine  oift  is  appreciated  bt  the  human 
REgipiENT.  1.  There  is  a  call,  a  summons,  an  invitation  of  God.  Very  fine,  very 
elevating  and  encouraging,  is  St.  Peter's  representation  of  the  method  adopted  by 
Divine  wisdom  to  secure  that  the  gift  shall  not  be  lost.  It  is  "  by  his  own  glory 
and  virtue  "  that  God  calls  us  to  salvation,  t.e.  by  an  exhibition  of  his  natural  and 
moral  attributes  eminently  fitted  to  reveal  himself  to  our  hearts,  and  to  produce  upon 
those  hearts  a  deep  impression,  winning  them  to  faith,  devotion,  gratitude,  and  love. 
The  beginning  of  good  must  be,  and  is,  a  movement  on  the  part  of  the  Almighty  Ruler 
and  Saviour.  2.  There  is  a  consequent  "  knowledge  "  of  our  redeeming  God,  which  the 
revelation  makes  possible  to  us,  furnishing  us  with  an  object  of  knowledge.  Such 
teaching  as  this  is  directly  opposed  to  the  agnosticism  with  which  so  many  are  content. 
Our  Lord  himself,  in  his  intercessory  prayer,  laid  the  greatest  stress  upon  the  knowledge 
of  himself  and  of  the  Father.  Doubtless  this  is  a  knowledge  of  a  higher  kind  than  is 
our  knowledge  of  nature ;  and  it  is  far  more  powerful  to  affect  the  character,  to  mould 
the  life.  Yet  it  is  knowledge  which  is  within  the  reach  of  the  lowliest  and  the  least 
cultured.    To  know  Gk>d  in  Christ  is  life  eternal. — J.  B.  T. 

Ver.  4. — Partakers  of  a  Divine  nattire.  Readers  of  classic  literature  are  aware  that 
the  cultivated  pagans  of  antiquity  broke  down  the  distinction  between  the  human  and 
the  Divine,  by  representing  their  emperors  and  other  great  men  as  taken  after  death  into 
the  rank  of  the  gods.  Bat  this  apotheosis  was  rather  an  exaltation  in  rank  than  an  assimi- 
lation to,  an  incorporation  in,  a  higher  moral  nature.  The  religion  of  Christ,  on  tha 
other  hand,  evinces  its  immeasurable  superiority  to  these  human  religions  by  represent- 
ing the  participation  in  the  Divine  as  moral,  and  by  holding  out  the  prospect,  not  merely 
to  a  limited  class,  but  to  all  who  receive  the  gospel. 

I.  The  respects  in  which  man  mat  share  the  nature  of  God.  1.  This  par- 
taking is  not  in  tha  natural  attributes  of  Deity,  such  as  omnipotence,  omnipresence,  am) 


ofi.1.1— 21.]   THE  SECOND  EPlStLfi  GENERAL  OP  PETEIl,  21 

omniscience,  which  are  incommunicable.  2.  But  in  the  moral  attributes.  Of  these 
may  be  especially  mentioned  holiness,  or  the  disposition  and  habit  of  loving  and  doing 
all  things  that  are  just  and  pure ;  and  love,  or  the  disposition  and  habit  of  seeking  the 
true  and  highest  well-being  of  all  whom  it  is  possible  to  benefit.  It  is  a  proof  of  the 
elevated  conception  of  God  which  Christianity  has  introduced  into  the  world,  that 
these  Divine  attributes  should  occur  to  the  mind  as  those  most  worthy  of  our  admira- 
tion and  imitation.  And  Christians  must  feel  at  once  that,  if  these  are  wanting  to  the 
character,  it  is  out  of  the  question  to  pretend  to  trace  assimilation  to  the  nature  of  our 
holy  and  loving  God. 

II.  The  oonstitdtion  in  virtue  of  which  man  mat  shabe  the  natube  of  God. 
1.  The  human  constitution  is  in  complete  contrast  with  that  of  the  inferior  animals, 
which  may  in  their  life  carry  out  the  purposes  of  God,  but  can  only  do  this  blindly  and 
unintelligently.  It  is,  says  Kant,  the  prerogative  of  an  intelligent  being  to  act,  not 
merely  according  to  law,  but  according  to  the  representation  of  law ;  i.e.  to  conceive, 
adopt,  and  voluntarily  obey,  the  law,  2.  Thus  it  is  that  man  is  endowed  with  a  nature 
capable,  through  God's  mercy,  of  acquiring  the  moral  nature  of  his  Divine  Maker  and 
Lord.  Constituted  as  he  is,  fashioned  in  the  likeness  of  God  (however  that  likeness  has 
been  marred  by  sin),  man  can,  under  heavenly  influences,  perceive  the  excellence  of  the 
moral  attributes  of  his  God,  can  admire  and  can  aspire  to  them,  can  resolve  and 
endeavour  to  participate  in  and  acquire  them. 

III.  The  fbotision  made  whereby  this  possibility  mat  become  actual.  It  is 
not  to  be  supposed  that,  merely  by  aspiring,  a  man  can  share  the  nature  of  God,  any 
more  than  by  merely  desiring  to  fly  he  can  raise  himself  into  the  air  and  cleave  it  as 
with  wings.  An  interposition  of  a  supernatural  character  is  necessary.  1.  A  condition 
and  means  by  which  this  end  may  be  secured  is  deliverance  by  the  redemption  of  Christ 
from  the  corruption  of  the  world.  There  is  no  harmony  between  the  lusts  of  the  world 
and  the  flesh,  and  the  life  of  God.  The  Bedeemer  came  in  order  to  set  men  free  from 
the  power  which  debases  and  degrades — in  order,  as  St.  Peter  says  in  the  context,  to 
enable  men  to  escape  from  the  corruption  that  is  in  the  world  by  lust.  And  experience 
has  shown  that  the  mediatorial  grace  of  Christ  is  able  to  effect  what  do  human  power 
can  bring  to  pass.  2.  The  renewal  and  purification  which  are  the  work  of  the  Holy 
Spirit  of  God  are  the  moral  power  by  which  the  participation  in  question  is  actually 
accomplished.  He  brings  the  life  of  the  Eternal  into  our  human  nature,  and  pours  that 
life  through  the  whole  being  of  the  believing  and  grateful  disciple  of  Christ,  so  that  he 
becomes  a  new  creature  in  Christ  Jesus. 

IV.  The  glorious  results  of  participation  in  the  Divine  nature.  1.  A  Divine 
nature  involves  a  Divine  life.  This  is  not  a  merely  sentimental,  or  even  a  merely 
mystical  and  transcendental,  change ;  on  the  contrary,  it  is  a  change  actual,  discernible, 
and  progressive ;  a  change  by  which  its  Divine  Author  is  glorified.  2.  A  Divine  nature 
involves  an  immortal  life  of  blessedness.  To  live  in  God  is  to  live  in  the  fulness  of 
joy,  and  to  live  thus  for  ever. — J.  B.  T. 

Vers.  16 — 18. — Witness  to  Christ.  The  Divine  Saviour  was  the  theme  of  apostolic 
preaching.  They,  whom  he  himself  commissioned  for  the  purpose,  published  the  tidings 
of  their  Lord's  first  advent  as  the  object  of  human  faith,  and  of  his  second  and  future 
advent  as  the  object  of  human  hope.  Thus  the  "power  and  presence  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ "  was  the  great  thought  that  inspired  the  apostles'  minds,  and  animated  them  in 
their  labours.  And  it  was  most  natural  and  wise  that,  for  their  own  sake  and  for  the 
iake  of  their  hearers  and  readers,  they  should  ever  keep  before  their  hearts,  and  should 
often  mention  in  their  discourse,  those  great  facts  concerning  the  Master  upon  which 
their  new  life  and  their  new  work  were  based.  This  accounts  for  the  reference  in  this 
passage  to  the  marvellous  scene  of  Christ's  Transfiguration. 

I.  The  witness  op  the  Father  to  the  Son.  On  three  occasions  during  our  Lord's 
earthly  ministry  was  the  silence  of  heaven  broken,  and  audible  testimony  borne  by  the 
Eternal  to  the  "  Son  of  his  love."  Of  these  occasions  the  Transfiguration  was  the  most 
glorious  and  impressive.  It  was  more  than  a  majestic  scene ;  it  was  an  appeal  to  human 
intelligence  and  devoutness.  1.  There  was  a  voice  from  heaven.  God  chose  an  avenue 
which  he  himself  had  designed  and  fashioned,  in  order  to  reach  the  minds  and  hearts 
of  men.    2.  Expressed  by  this  voice  was  the  Father't  penonal  relationship  of  afiectioa 


22  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PETER,    [oh.  1 1— 2L 

towards  Jesus.  In  his  humiliation  our  Lord  was  acknowledged  as  the  "  beloved  Sou." 
3.  Witness  was  also  borne  to  the  complacency  with  which  the  Father  regarded  the  Son, 
as  fulfilling  his  will  in  the  ministry  and  mediation  he  had  undertaken.  4.  The  Trans- 
figuration was  justly  regarded  by  the  apostles  as  a  bestowal  upon  their  Lord  of  "  honour 
and  glory."  Not  that  to  them  the  outward  splendour  was  everything ;  doubtles*  it 
was  the  symbol  of  a  spiritual  glory. 

IL  The  witness  of  the  disciples  to  theib  Master.  This  was  a  matter  of  fact, 
and  is  to  us  matter  of  history.  Place  and  time  are  duly  specified.  1.  The  disciples,  who 
were  serious  and  credible  men,  declared  themselves  to  be  eye-witnesses  of  Christ's 
majesty,  2.  And  ear-witnesses  of  the  Divine  attestation  borne  to  him.  3.  They 
expressly  asserted  that  in  this  matter  they  were  neither  deceivers  nor  deceived.  And, 
indeed,  the  case  of  their  being  either  the  one  or  the  other  is  utterly  incredible,  is  scarcely 
to  be  constructed  by  the  imagination.  They  were  not  following  cunningly  devised 
fables  J  neither  did  they  invent  the  incidents,  nor  did  they  adopt  the  inventions  of 
others.     In  accepting  the  gospel  narrative  we  build  upon  a  sure  foundation  of  fact. 

III.  The  pbactioal  infeebncb  to  be  drawn  by  those  who  receive  this  two- 
fold WITNESS,  Human  nature  is  such  that  it  is  not  possible  for  us  to  believe  such 
facts  as  those  which  St.  Peter  here  records,  and  not  be  affected  by  such  belief  in  our 
spirit  and  our  conduct.  1.  As  regards  Jesus  himself,  whosoever  receives  the  gospel  is 
constrained  to  confess  his  power,  presence,  and  coming.  2.  As  regards  himself,  he  i* 
bound  to  trust,  love,  honour,  and  serve  the  Saviour  and  Lord,  who  is  thus  made  known 
to  his  spiritual  nature  by  the  revelation  of  the  eternal  Father,  and  by  the  testimony  of 
his  believing  and  devoted  followers  and  apostles. — J.  R.  T. 

Ver.  19. — The  lamp  and  the  dawn.  Notwithstanding  Peter's  personal  acquaintance 
with  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  the  abundant  evidence  which  had  come  before  him,  during 
Christ's  ministry,  of  his  Master's  duty  and  authority,  Peter  was  far  from  dispara^ng  the 
value  of  those  attestations  to  the  authority  and  sway  of  the  Messiah- Prince  to  be  found 
in  the  Scriptures  of  the  Old  Testament. 

I.  The  night  of  time.  The  world  is,  apart  from  special  illumination  from  above, 
a  dark  place.  The  human  race,  in  this  condition  of  being,  are  like  wanderers  in 
midnight  gloom.  Ignorance  of  what  it  most  concerns  us  to  know,  sinful  habits  which 
cloud  the  reason  and  even  corrupt  the  conscience,  hopelessness  as  to  the  future  beyond 
this  brief  mortal  existence, — such  are  the  elements  of  moral  darkness.  The  gloom  ii 
not  unrelieved,  but  it  is  real  and  undeniable. 

II.  The  lamp  of  bevelation.  The  darkness  of  man's  moral  condition  has  been 
to  some  extent  dispelled  and  scattered  by  the  light  which  God  himself  has  kindled 
in  the  minds  of  holy  and  devout  men,  and  which  they  have  shed  upon  their  fellow- 
mortals'  path.    In  them  has  been  verified  the  grand  saying  of  the  poet— 

"  Heaven  doth  with  ns,  as  we  with  torohet  do^ 
Not  light  them  for  themselves." 

The  prophets,  whose  writings  form  a  large  part  of  the  sacred  volume,  have  rendered 
a  service  to  humanity  which  in  our  day  is  inadequately  acknowledged.  Certainly 
they  have  introduced  into  human  thinking  and  literature  many  of  our  Bublimest 
conceptions  of  God,  of  morality,  of  society.  And  certainly  they  have  done  much  to 
sustain  the  faith  of  men  in  a  Divine  rule,  and  to  inspire  the  hope  of  men  in  a  glorious 
future  for  the  moral  universe.  Not  only  did  they  reveal  the  coming  of  the  King 
whoso  way  to  empire  should  be  through  suffering  and  death;  they  revealed  the 
prospect  of  a  kingdom  which  has  yet  to  be  realized,  and  which  is  to  secure  the  highest 
welfare  of  man  and  to  exhibit  the  eternal  glory  of  God. 

III.  The  daybreak  of  Christ's  kingdom.  The  lamp  is  well  enough  for  the 
night;  but  how  welcome  and  how  precious  to  the  watcher  or  the  traveller  is  the 
break  of  day  1  The  day-star,  the  light-bringer,  shines  with  rays  of  lustrous  promise. 
Then  the  grey  dawn  appears  in  the  east,  and  reddens  as  the  sunrise  approaches.  Soon 
the  sun  rises  in  his  strength  and  floods  the  world  with  light.  The  process  is  a  picture 
of  what  happens  in  the  spiritual  history  of  humanity.  1,  What  the  day  is  deserves 
to  be  considered.  It  is  the  day  of  knowledge,  of  holiness,  of  hope.  Through  the 
shining  of  the  Sun  of  Bighteougness,  they  who  sometime  were  dwkness  are  now  light 


OH.!.  1—21.]    Tl'B  SECOND  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  PETEB.  2S 

in  the  Lord.  2.  Where  the  day  shines  is  also  matter  of  great  interest.  To  St.  Peter 
the  glory  of  noontide  splendour  was  still  in  the  future.  Certain  it  is  that  the  kingdom 
of  Christ,  like  the  path  of  the  just,  "  shineth  more  and  more  unto  the  perfect  day." 
What  we  have  hitherto  seen  lias  been  the  beauty  and  the  promise  of  the  morning. 
The  full  noontide  splendour  has  yet  to  be  revealed.  But  in  indulging  bright  hopes 
for  the  world,  for  the  destiny  of  our  redeemed  and  regenerated  humanity,  let  us  not 
lose  sight  of  the  internal,  the  spiritual,  the  personal  experience  of  enlightenment. 
St.  Peter's  hope  was  that  "  in  your  hearts "  this  day  should  dawn,  and  this  dny-star 
arise.  We  have  to  look  not  only  without,  but  within.  If  the  heart  be  dark  as  a 
cavern  secluded  in  forest  depths  from  every  ray  of  the  sun  in  heaven,  of  what  avail 
for  us  is  it  that  the  world  is  bathed  in  spiritual  lustre? 

Application.  1.  Take  heed  to  the  lamp  of  prophecy,  which  does  not  cease  to 
shine,  and  which  is  needed  by  every  traveller  through  the  night  of  time,  to  direct 
his  feet  into  the  paths  of  safety,  wisdom,  and  peace.  2.  Hail  the  promise  of  the 
morning,  and  look  forward  to  the  spiritual  and  perfect  day.  Of  times  and  seasons 
we  know  but  little;  but  this  we  know — "The  Lord  is  at  hand;"  "The  morning 
cometh."    "  Lift  up,  then,  your  heads,  for  your  redemption  draweth  nigh." — J.  R.  T. 

Ver.  21. — OocPt  voice  in  the  Bible.  The  reference  here  is,  of  course,  to  Old  Testament 
Scripture ;  but  there  is  no  reason  for  confining  this  assertion  to  any  portion  of  Holy 
Writ.  The  Bible,  as  a  whole,  is  a  Divine  utterance — Divine  in  its  purpose,  and  Divine 
in  its  authority.  A  spiritual  impulse  moved  the  writers,  and  their  .speech  accordingly 
was  in  reality  the  voice  of  God.  This  Divinity  of  meaning  is  discernible  in  the. aim 
of  the  Scriptures. 

L  The  Bible  teaches  man  what  he  is.  1.  Everywhere  in  Scripture  man  is 
represented  as  a  morod,  spiritual,  and  accountable  being.  Other  literature,  properly 
enough,  deals  with  man  under  other  aspects  of  his  nature — represents  him  as  suscep- 
tible of  emotions  incidental  to  human  relationships,  as  grief  and  joy,  fear  and  hope ; 
as  capable  of  exertion,  of  self-denial,  with  a  view  to  obtaining  earthly  objects.  But 
every  careful  and  discerning  reader  of  Scripture  feels  that  in  every  book  of  the  volume 
human  nature  is  depicted  as  Tnoral,  as  affected,  on  the  one  hand,  by  temptation  to 
a  lower  life,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  by  stimulus  and  encouragement  to  a  higher  life ;  as 
capable  of  obedience  and  holiness,  or  of  transgression  and  ungodliness.  Never  is  man 
represented  by  the  inspired  writers  as  a  mere  animal,  as  a  sentient  nature  moved,  like 
the  brutes,  only  by  Instinct  and  appetite.  On  the  contrary,  he  is  represented  as  akin 
to  God,  as  dependent  upon  God,  as  responsible  to  God.  2.  Everywhere  in  Scripture 
man  is  convicted  of  being  sinfvA  and  guilty  in  character  and  habit.  Such  a  state 
is,  indeed,  a  violation  of  his  original  and  proper  nature ;  but  the  fact  of  human  sinful- 
ness cannot  be  concealed  or  palliated  without  injustice  and  flattery.  It  is  this  fact 
which  accounts  for  very  much  of  the  contents  of  the  sacred  volume.  This  is  the 
explanation  of  the  Law,  which  is  not  for  the  righteous,  but  for  sinners;  and  of  the 
ceremonies  and  sacrifices  of  the  old  covenant,  which  symbolically  set  forth  the  impurity 
and  depravity  of  man's  heart  and  life.  In  this  light  we  must  read  the  history  of  the 
Hebrew  nation,  which  occupies  so  large  a  part  of  the  Old  Testament  It  is  a  record 
of  Israel's  faults,  defections,  and  apostasy ;  and  it  is  a  record  also  of  God's  displeasure 
with  sin,  embodied  in  acts  of  chastisement,  and  especially  in  the  afSictions  which 
repeatedly  befell  the  nation  as  a  whole.  Here,  too,  is  the  explanation  of  the  fact  that 
Scripture  contains  so  many  biographies  of  bad  men,  and  of  good  men  who  have  been 
tempted  and  have  fallen  into  sin.  The  intention  is  to  exhibit  human  frailties  and 
errors,  and  to  impress  upon  the  mind  of  every  reader  the  undeniable  power  and  curse 
of  sin.  It  would  appear  that  the  same  purpose  is  subserved  by  the  descriptions  of  the 
diseased  and  the  demoniacs,  which  abound  in  the  narratives  of  the  evangelists, 

II.  The  Bible  teaches  man  who  God  is.  The  profound  need  and  the  pressing 
urgency  and  importance  of  such  knowledge  must  be  admitted  by  all,  and  are  felt 
by  those  whose  spiritual  instincts  are  aroused  to  activity.  And  in  nothing  is  the  Bible 
more  manifestly  its  own  witness  and  evidence  than  in  its  incomparable  and  sublime 
revelation  of  God.  1.  In  Scripture  the  Personality  of  the  living  God  pervades  every  book. 
Not  only  is  there  no  pantheism  and  no  polytheism ;  there  is  a  pure  and  impressive  theism 
throughout  the  sacred  volume.    Even  those  who  deny  to  the  Bible  the  character  of  a 


24  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PETER,    [oh.  1. 1—21 


Bupernatural  revelation,  acknowledge  the  debt  of  humanity  to  the  representation  of 
monotheism  given  by  the  Hebrew  prophets  and  apostles.  2.  The  righteous  government 
and  the  holy  character  of  the  Eternal  are  set  forth  in  the  Bible,  not  only  by  means 
of  statements,  but  by  means  of  lessons  conveyed  in  the  form  of  history.  His  hatred  of 
sin,  in  both  private  and  public  life,  is  effectively  declared  in  his  righteous  judgments. 
His  moral  government  is  a  great  reality.  In  the  Scriptures,  the  Divine  Ruler  is  never 
exhibited  as  either  indifferent  to  moral  distinctions  or  capricious  in  his  treatment  of 
moral  agents.  None  who  acknowledges  the  authority  of  the  Bible  can  expect  to  escape 
the  eye  or  to  evade  the  judgment  of  the  righteous  Governor.  3.  God's  interest  in  man, 
and  his  design  for  man's  welfare,  are  portrayed  in  the  Bible,  as  in  no  other  professedly 
sacred  and  inspired  book,  and  indeed  as  nowhere  else  in  literature.  From  the  opening 
pages  of  Genesis,  where  God  is  represented  as  walking  and  as  speaking  with  men  in 
the  garden,  down  to  the  epoch  of  redemption,  when  "  the  Word  became  flesh,  and 
dwelt  among  us,"  the  Scriptures  are  full  of  evidence  of  the  Divine  interest  in  man's 
welfare.  Whilst  exhibiting  the  majestic  dignity  of  the  Eternal,  in  such  a  way  as  to 
call  forth  our  reverence,  the  sacred  volume  beyond  anything  else  makes  God  near  to  us, 
and  leads  us  to  feel  that  he  is  round  about  us  in  all  our  ways.  4.  Especially  does  the 
Bible  impress  upon  the  mind  of  the  reader  the  redemptive  purposes  of  the  Supreme ; 
it  shows  him  to  be  man's  Saviour.  His  character  is  set  forth  as  compassionate  and 
merciful,  and  he  is  represented  as  using  the  means  to  give  effect  to  his  gracious  inten- 
tions towards  sinful  man.  (1)  In  the  Old  Testament  history  we  have  proofs  of  this, 
Lspecially  in  the  deliverance  of  Israel  from  the  bondage  in  Egypt,  and  in  the  restoration 
of  Israel  from  the  captivity  in  the  East.  These  great  events  were  both  manifestations 
of  Ck)d's  mercy  towards  a  nation,  and  prophetic  anticipations  of  the  greater  deliverance 
in  the  future.  (2)  For  the  New  Testament  is  undoubtedly  the  fulfilment  of  the  Old. 
What  was  done  politically  for  a  people  was  in  Christ  done  morally  and  actually  for  the 
race.  The  Gospels  and  Epistles  set  forth  before  us  Jesus  as  the  Son  of  God  and  as  the 
Saviour  of  mankind.  "  He  that  hath  seen  me,"  said  Christ,  "  hath  seen  the  Father ;" 
and  this  has  respect,  not  simply  to  his  peerless  character,  but  also  to  the  mighty  power 
and  to  the  gracious  purposes  to  which  the  world  is  indebted  for  the  temporal  deliver- 
ance and  for  the  eternal  hope. — J.  R.  T. 

Vers.  2,  3. — Increase  of  spiritual  life  dependent  on  the  knomledge  of  Ood.  Our 
text  strikes  the  key-note  of  the  Epistle — the  need  of  watchfulness  against  error. 
Scripture  demands  a  clear  knowledge  of  revealed  truth.  On  this  the  maintenance  of 
spiritual  life  depends ;  to  swerve  from  Divine  truth  is  to  suffer  spiritual  loss. 

I.   A    eBBAT     INCKBASB     OF    SPESITnAL     BLESSINO    IB    POSSIBLE    TO    THE    BELIEVER. 

"  Grace  and  peace  "  we  may  take  as  including  all  spiritual  good.  Grace  is  God's 
part  therein ;  peace  is  man's.  God's  attitude  towards  us  is  grace ;  our  attitude 
towards  him,  for  that  is  the  end  of  righteousness,  is  to  be  peace.  Between  these  two 
lies  all  that  pertains  to  life  and  godliness.  And  the  apostle  says  this  may  be  multiplied 
to  the  Christian.  1.  Secause  of  the  great  capacity  of  his  nature.  The  life  imparted 
in  regeneration  has  almost  unlimited  possibilities ;  it  is  Heaven's  germ,  from  which  will 
be  developed  the  pure  and  perfect  spirit  which  will  gaze  on  the  face  of  God,  and  reflect 
bis  glory.  The  believer  is  joint-heir  with  Christ ;  where  Christ  is,  he  is  to  be.  Heaven 
will  be  a  constant  advance  into  the  character  of  God ;  that  is  the  capacity  of  spiritual 
life  in  the  soul,  "  filled  with  all  the  fulness  of  God."  2.  Because  Ood  has  already  given 
us  ail  things  that  pertain  to  life  and  godliness.  The  power  which  God  is  prepared  to 
manifest  towards  his  people  is  equal  to  that  which  raised  Christ  from  the  helplessness 
of  the  grave  to  the  supreme  dominion  of  the  universe.  And  in  what  way,  but  in 
giving  us  all  things  that  pertain  to  life  and  godliness?  Who  can  enumerate  what  is 
included  in  that  "all  things"?  We  do  not  always  realize  that  with  Christ  God  has 
already  "  freely  given  us  all  things."  True,  he  holds  them  still,  but  it  is  on  our  behalf. 
3.  Because  what  we  receive  is  through  the  Divine  glory  and  virtue.  In  the  Revised 
Version  the  third  verse  reads  thus :  "  He  hath  called  us  by  his  own  glory  and  virtue ; " 
and  that  is  the  ground  of  our  hopes,  and  triumphs  over  our  sense  of  ill  desert. 
God's  glory  is  his  mercy,  and  it  is  set  free  to  exercise  itself  by  Christ  in  the  atone< 
ment ;  and  he  finds  thero  the  reason  why  he  should  enrich  us. 
IL  This  inobeasb  of  blessing  oepends  on  thb  knowlbdgb  of  GtoD.    God  doei 


OH.  1. 1—21.]    THE  SECOND  EPISTxiE  GENERAL  OP  PETER.  25 

not  give  us  mature  spiritual  blessings,  but  rather  supplies  us  with  the  means  of  acquir- 
ing them.  When  we  can  do  anything  to  secure  the  answer  to  our  prayers,  God  gives 
the  answer  by  blessing  our  own  efforts,  and,  apart  from  the  effort,  the  answer  does  not 
come.  He  will  not  give  spiritual  enrichment  to  spiritual  inaction.  In  answer  to  ourprayers 
for  grace  and  peace  to  be  multiplied,  God  shows  us  how  we  may  have  it,  1.  Tht 
means  of  spiritual  increase  is  the  knowledge  of  himself.  Scripture  invariably  makes 
spiritual  good  to  rest  on  the  knowledge  of  God.  For  instance :  Security — "  They  have 
escaped  the  corruptions  of  the  world  through  the  knowledge  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour 
Jesus  Christ."  Peace — "  Acquaint  now  thyself  with  him,  and  be  at  peace."  Strength 
— "  The  people  that  do  know  their  God  shall  be  strong."  Obedience — "  Hereby  we  do 
know  that  we  know  him,  if  we  keep  his  commandments."  Love — "  He  that  loveth 
not  knoweth  not  God,  for  God  is  Love."  Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  sums  it  up  in  one 
sentence,  "  This  is  life  eternal,  that  they  might  know  thee  the  only  true  God,  and 
Jesus  Christ,  whom  thou  hast  sent."  But  there  is  a  difference  between  knowing 
about  God,  and  knowing  God,  and  the  difference  is  vital ;  the  one  knowledge  is  fruitful, 
the  other  barren.  There  is  a  natural  connection  between  the  increase  of  knowledge 
and  the  increase  of  grace.  2,  Knowledge  quickens  desire.  We  cannot  know  God  with- 
out longing  to  possess  more  of  him  and  of  what  he  has  to  give ;  and  that  longing  means 
prayer  for  more,  which  will  be  answered,  and  effort  for  more,  which  will  be  successful. 
3.  Knowledge  increases  faith.  Faith  being  the  hand  by  which  we  appropriate  and  so 
possess.  Why  do  we  not  take  God  as  our  own,  with  a  confidence  nothing  can  shake  ? 
To  a  great  extent  because  we  do  not  know  him — ^how  real  he  is,  how  vast  his  love,  how 
infinitely  trustworthy  his  nature.  If  we  only  knew  more  of  him,  we  should  hold  him  in 
the  embrace  of  a  strong,  restful  assurance.  4.  Knowledge  tends  to  participation. 
Personal  acquaintance  with  God  must  have  incalculable  results.  We  should  have  a 
new  power  constraining  us  to  iighteo\isness.  The  grace  and  peace  of  his  own  nature 
would  reflect  themselves  in  us. 

III.  This  increase  of  knowledob  should  be  the  believer's  aim.  The  dif- 
ference in  spiritual  stature  comes  from  different  degrees  of  spiritual  knowledge :  then 
how  can  we  know  God  better?  1.  Greater  knowledge  is  granted  as  the  result  of 
obedience.  Unless  God  reveal  himself,  we  cannot  know  him ;  and  he  reveals  himself 
to  him  who  lives  in  his  fear.  Sin  blinds  and  deafens  us ;  to  do  wrong  is  to  put  our- 
selves further  from  the  knowledge  of  God ;  to  do  right  is  to  thin  the  veil  that  hides  him 
from  us.  If  you  would  know  him,  obey  him.  2.  Greater  knowledge  is  granted  as  the 
fruit  of  study  and  fellowship.  It  is  only  in  face-to-face  communion  with  God,  such 
as  is  possible  through  the  teaching  of  his  Word,  that  we  can  really  know  him  ;  therein 
he  speaks  to  us,  and  in  prayer  we  speak  to  him.  3.  Greater  knowledge  is  granted  as 
the  end  of  Divine  discipline.  That  we  may  know  him  is  the  object  of  many  of  our 
sorrows.  Sickness  is  often  God  shutting  the  busy  soul  up  to  himself.  Trouble  is 
often  God  showing  us  how  tender  a  Father  he  is.  Darkness  is  often  God  compelling  us 
to  look  up— 

*  Darkness  revealing  worlds  of  light 
We  never  saw  by  day." 

Presently  the  need  of  discipline  will  be  ended,  and  from  knowing  God  in  part,  we  shall 
enter  into  his  presence. — 0.  N. 

Ver.  4. — The  sanctifying  power  of  the  promises.  The  text  is  a  continuation  of  the 
two  previous  verses ;  indeed,  from  the  second  verse  to  the  eleventh  is  one  paragraph. 
God  has  given  unto  us  exceeding  great  and  precious  promises,  whereby  grace  and  peace 
may  be  multiplied  to  us,  and  we  may  be  made  partakers  of  the  Divine  nature,  and  hav« 
an  abundant  entrance  ministered  unto  us  into  the  everlasting  kingdom  of  our  Lord  and 
Saviour  Jesus  Christ. 

I.  The  greatness  ahd  pbeoiousness  or  the  Word  of  promise.  Three  facts 
determine  the  worth  of  promises — the  value  of  the  thing  promised ;  the  character  of 
the  promiser ;  and  the  conditions  attached  to  it.  And  when  we  apply  these  to  Scripture, 
and  find  that  its  assurances  are  of  wonderful  blessing,  given  by  One  who  cannot  fail,  and 
that  they  require  on  our  part  only  what  the  feeblest  can  fulfil,  we  understand  well  why 
the  apostle  calls  them  "  exceeding  great  and  precious  promises."    1.  The  gift  promised. 


M  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PETER,    [oh.  1. 1—21. 

Scripture  does  not  so  much  contain  promises;  it  is  rather  one  great  promise,  God's  Word  of 
promise,  Christ  being  the  Gift  promised.  We  shall  never  understand  the  promises  by 
taking  a  text  here  and  a  text  there,  but  only  by  pondering  the  whole  volume  as  the  revela- 
tion of  Jesus ;  only  thus  can  we  have  a  true  idea  of  the  height,  and  depth,  and  length, 
and  breadth  of  what  God  assures  us  of  in  his  beloved  Son.  Look  at  him  in  any  aspect, 
and,  like  the  glittering  facets  of  a  precious  stone,  promises  gleam  on  us  from  him  at  every 
point.  (1)  Think,  for  instance,  of  the  glory  of  his  Person.  The  goodness,  the  grace, 
the  majesty,  the  tenderness,  the  truth,  embodied  in  him ;.  and  if  he  is  ours  (as  he  is), 
this  alone  is  full  of  promise.  (2)  The  revelation  of  Qod  which  he  is.  He  shows  us  God, 
so  holy  that  he  cannot  pass  by  sin  without  atonement,  though  that  atonement  involved 
the  sacrifice  of  himself.  He  shows  us  too  the  heart  of  God,  telling  us,  when  we  pray, 
to  say,  "  Our  Father."  Why,  that  one  sentence  involves  the  promise  of  all  we  need,  all 
that  God  can  give.  (3)  The  greatness  of  his  work.  He  undertakes  to  be  our  Saviour 
in  the  threefold  capacity  of  Prophet,  Priest,  and  King;  and  his  undertaking  these 
functions  is  the  assurance  that  he  will  fulfil  them.  (4)  The  dedaration  of  his  will. 
Every  purpose  of  Christ  is  a  promise;  it  is  Christ  saying, "  I  will."  And  so  also  every 
command  carries  a  promise  of  all  grace  needed  for  obedience  to  it.  (5)  The  closeness  of 
his  relationship  with  his  people.  He,  their  Life  and  Head,  and  so  having  nothing  wliich 
they  shall  not  share.  2.  The  character  of  the  Promiser.  Bach  of  God's  promises  is  the 
expression  of  his  loving-kindness  to  sinful  men,  and  if  his  mercy  could  not  rest  till  he 
had  given  them,  it  cannot  rest  till  he  has  fulfilled  them ;  going  on  giving,  and  giving, 
and  giving,  till  his  beloved  can  receive  no  more.  (1)  ITe  is  unchanging,  "  I,  the  Lord, 
change  not."  (2)  Ee  is  able  to  fulfil  his  will.  Omnipotence  is  behind  each  promise. 
"  What  he  hath  promised  he  is  able  also  to  perform."  (3)  In  every  promise  his  honour 
is  pledged.  "It  is  impossible  for  God  to  lie."  "He  is  faithful  that  hath  proaiised." 
Bead  the  promises,  then,  and  scatter  doubt  by  asking,  "  Hath  he  spoken,  and  slLiill  he 
not  do  it?"  3.  The  conditions  attached  to  the  promise.  The  only  conditions  are — 
conscious  need  of  the  thing  promised,  and  trust  that  for  the  Promiser'g  own  sake  it  will 
be  given.     Need  and  trust  are  our  capacity  for  receiving, 

II.  The  sanctifying  powbe  of  the  pbomises.  The  promises  deliver  us  from  the 
world's  corruption,  and  work  in  us  the  image  of  God.  Sanctiflcation  is  something  "  put 
off  "and  something  "put  on."  The  "old  man  "is  "put  off,"  and  the  "new  man"  is 
"  put  on ;"  and  this  is  said  here  to  be  effected  by  the  promises,  or  by  the  Word  of  promise, 

1.  The  Word  of  promise  conveys  the  knowledge  of  what  we  may  have.  From  the  heights  of 
this  sacred  book  all  things  lie  beneath  us,  stretching  away  like  a  vast  landscape  into  the 
dim  horizon  beyond  which  human  sight  cannot  follow ;  and  as  we  hear  a  voice  saying, 
"  All  things  are  yours,"  surely  nothing  can  deliver  us  from  the  bondage  of  the  world  at 
that  can.  One  affection  is  only  destroyed  by  another.  Let  the  soul  consciously  possess 
better,  and,  depend  upon  it,  it  will  turn  away  from  the  best  that  this  world  can  giTe, 

2,  The  Word  of  promise  imparts  the  faith  by  which  we  receive  from  Ood,  "  Partiikerg 
of  the  Divine  nature."  Of  how  much  of  it  ?  Of  so  much  as  exhausts  the  promise. 
"  That  ye  might  be  filled  unto  all  the  fulness  of  God."  Why,  then,  do  we  riot  receive  it 
in  that  measure  ?  Because  God  can  only  give  according  to  the  measure  of  our  faith. 
Now,  faith  depends  on  the  promises,  it  feeds  on  them,  and  thereby  the  soul's  capacity 
to  receive  increases,  3.  The  Word  of  promise  inspires  the  strength  by  which  toe  conquer 
Satan.  His  effort  is  to  make  us  doubt ;  that  was  his  aim  with  Christ.  He  would  take 
us  back  to  the  old  bondage,  and  weaken  the  faith  which  holds  us  to  God.  Have  we  not 
often  felt  how  doubt  closes  the  heart  to  the  incoming  of  the  Divine  nature  ?  we  can  fight 
no  more,  but  are  led  easy  caiitives.  Satan  can  deprive  us  of  all,  if  he  can  only  got  us  to 
doubt.  Now,  against  that  assault  the  promises  are  our  refuge.  God  is  in  them;  they 
are  the  utterances  of  bis  lips,  the  purpose  of  bis  heart ;  his  resources  and  perfections  are 
pledged  to  their  fulfilment ;  there  is  perfect  safety  in  trusting  them ;  by  them  we  can 
defy  Satan  and  the  powers  of  darkness.  Between  the  bondage  of  corruption  and  the 
liberty  of  participation  in  the  Divine  nature  is  the  Divine  promise.  Trust  it,  tread  it 
without  a  fear ;  it  will  not  give  way  beneath  you,  the  adversary  cannot  follow  you  there, 
and  on  the  oth  sr  side  is  the  beginning  of  heaven. — 0.  N. 

Vers.  5 — 11. — Personal  diligence  needed  for  sanctiflcation.  The  former  verses  say 
that  God  gives  the  knowledge  of  himself  in  the  Word  of  promise,  as  the  means  by  which 


OH.  L  1-21.]    THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PETER.  27 

grace  and  peace  are  to  be  multiplied ;  these  versea  say,  to  that  must  be  added  by  you 
"  all  diligence." 

I.  We  have  hebb  an  enumeration  of  certain  sraoeb  of  the  Ohbibtian  life.  It 
begins  with  "  faith  "  and  ends  with  "love,"  and  between  these  are  two  or  three  words  which 
need  attention.  Next  to  "faith,"  "virtue  "is  mentioned;  but  "virtue  "includes  the  whole 
group  of  graces,  whereas  Peter  is  thinking  of  somotliing  distinct.  The  classical  meaning 
of  the  word  is  "  manliness " — courage ;  so  if  we  paraphrase  it  thus,  we  shall  probably 
have  the  right  idea.  So  with  "  knowledge,"  which  is  a  different  word  to  that  rendered 
"knowledge"  in  the  eighth  verse,  and  here  refers  to  "practical  knowledge"  or  "pru- 
dence." "Temperance"  is  literally  "self-control,"  and  "godly  reverence"  is  the  idea 
in  the  word  "godliness."  "Faith,  courage,  prudence,  self-control,  patience,  godly 
reverence,  love  of  the  brethren,  love," — that  is  the  list.  1.  These  are  aU  subsequent  to 
faith.  Faith  is  supposed.  The  Epistle  is  addressed  to  those  who  "  have  obtained  like 
precious  faith  through  the  righteousness  of  God  and  our  Saviour ; "  anl  these  excellences 
come  after  faith,  and  in  the  Christian  have  a  character  of  their  own,  which  nature  cannot 

S reduce,  and  are,  indeed,  as  much  above  nature  as  Jesus  was  above  the  sons  of  men. 
lanj  try  to  be  holy  without  saving  faith;  it  is  a  useless  effort;  only  from  faith  can 
those  spiritual  graces  spring  whose  crown  is  love  to  all.  2.  Evert/  grace  needs  to  be 
gupplemented  by  (mother.  No  grace  can  stand  alone;  the  text  seems  to  urge  that. 
The  word  "  add"  is  the  same  as  in  the  eleventh  verse,  where  it  is  translated  "  minister." 
Each  grace  needs  to  be  ministered  to  by  another.  There  is  not  one  which,  if  it  be 
alone,  will  not  speedily  become  an  evil.  One  grace  is  to  wait  on,  to  supplement, 
to  protect,  to  perfect  another.  For  instance,  to  faith  ministers  courage — courage  to 
confess  the  Christ  believed  in ;  to  courage  ministers  prudence,  for  if  courage  be  not 
discreet,  it  is  destructive.  Beware  of  being  men  of  one  grace.  3.  2%«  believer  it  not 
l»  he  contented  till  he  has  acquired  all  the  graces.  What  a  list  this  is  I  The  leading 
features  of  a  perfect  character ;  and  Scripture  gives  a  plain  command  to  the  Christian 
to  acquire  these.  And  nothing  can  be  more  assuring  than  this  command,  for  God  does 
not  call  us  to  impossibilities;  and  he  is  prepared  to  supply  what  is  needed  for  its 
attainment. 

II.  We  have  here  a  demand  fob  dilioenoe  to  possess  these  asAOES.  Diligence 
is  the  burden  of  the  passage :  "  Giving  all  diligence,  add ; "  and  in  the  tenth  verse, 
"  Give  diligence."  1.  Diligenae  implies  that  spiritual  increase  requires  personal  effort. 
Speedy  and  spontaneous  sanctiRcation  is  what  we  should  prefer,  but  that  idea  is  not 
encouraged  in  Scripture.  It  is  true  growth  is  the  law  of  life — life  naturally  increases 
to  maturity,  as  Peter  says,  "Grow  in  grace;"  but  he  also  says,  "Giving  all  diligence, 
add."  If  we  cherish  the  idea  tliat  sanctification  is  given  immediately,  as  pardon  is  given, 
by  one  surrender  of  the  will,  as  it  is  said,  this  passage  ought  to  disabuse  us ;  it  clearly 
affirms  that  sanctification  is  progressive,  and  demands  constant  endeavour.  2.  Diligence 
is  encouraged  by  the/act  that  Ood  hath  given  unto  us  all  things  tfiat  pertain  to  life  and 
godliness.  The  previous  verses  are,  "  His  Divine  power  hath  given  unto  us  all  things 
that  pertain  unto  life  and  godliness  .  .  .  whereby  are  given  unto  us  exceeding  great  and 
precious  promises,"  etc. ;  when  the  next  clause  reads,  "  And  for  this  very  cause  "  (as  the 
Revised  Yersion  has  it),  "  giving  all  diligence,  add  to  your  faith  virtue,"  and  so  on, 
we  see  what  lies  behind  the  diligence,  what  spurs  it  on,  what  sustains  it.  Sanctification 
is  not  human  work,  as  it  is  sometimes  supposed  to  be,  when  the  need  of  effort  is 
enforced,  as  though,  redeemed  by  Christ,  we  have  to  Sanctify  ourselves — it  is  of  God ; 
yet  it  is  through  us,  into  our  effort  he  will  inspire  his  own  Divine  and  victorious  energy. 
3.  Diligence  also  involves  that  the  increase  of  Ghristian  graces  tomes  from  the  personal 
culture  of  each.  If  the  text  were  not  in  Scripture,  but  simply  part  of  a  sermon,  it  would 
be  said  to  be  mechanical  and  formal.  It  is  to  be  feared  the  prominent  features  of  our 
Christian  character  are  often  merely  the  result  of  natural  disposition,  or  early  training, 
or  of  circumstances  beyond  our  control.  Now,  this  passage  claims  that  we  do  not  Itave 
it  to  aocident  what  graces  we  shall  have ;  it  lays  down  a  list  of  what  is  required  of  us, 
and  bids  us  give  all  diligence  to  culture  each.  This  is  a  discriminating,  hourly,  life- 
long work. 

IlL  We  have  herb  strong  beabonb  fob  the  putting  forth  of  this  DruaENOE. 
Three  reasons  urged  from  the  eighth  verse  to  tiie  eleventh,  and  they  refer  to  past,  present, 
aad  future.    1.  Th»  graces  (which  are  the  result  <jf  diligence)  are  the  necessary  means  Ut 


28  THE  SECOFD  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  PETER,    [ch.  1, 1— 21. 

spiritual  wealth.  The  particular  meaning  in  the  eighth  verse  of  the  word  "  in  " — "  in 
the  knowledge  " — is  shown  in  the  Revised  Version,  where  it  reads,  "  unto  the  know- 
ledge," and  thus  throws  great  light  on  the  expression.  The  graces  which  come  from 
a  knowledge  of  Christ  lead  to  a  still  greater  knowledge  of  him — that  is  it.  All  the  care 
we  give  to  the  culture  of  Christian  graces  leads,  not  only  to  the  wealth  of  possessing 
them,  hut  to  the  greater  wealth  of  knowing  Christ  better.  2.  The  graces  (which  are 
the  result  of  diligence)  are  the  least  that  can  he  expected  from  one  who  is  purged  from  his 
old  sins.  "  He  that  lacketh  these  things  is  blind,  .  . .  having  forgotten  that  he  hath  been 
delivered  from  his  old  sins."  That  takes  us  back  to  the  cross.  It  pleads  our  obligation 
to  Christ,  who  laid  down  his  life  that  we  might  be  holy.  The  assurance  of  pardoned 
sin  is  the  strongest  stimulus  to  piety.  3.  These  graces  are  the  only  ground  of  assurance 
of  entrance  into  heaven.  Without  them  we  may  well  doubt  our  election  of  God.  Where 
calling  and  election  are  sure,  ye  shall  never  fall ;  but  how  can  we  be  sure  that  we 
are  among  the  called?  Only  by  the  fact  that  that  to  which  they  are  called  is  being 
wrought  in  us.  If  we  have  a  title  to  heaven,  the  spirit  of  heaven  is  already  begun. 
— O.N. 

Vers.  12 — ^15. — Thesainfs  earnest  endeavour  to  enforce  spiritual  truth.  At  the  close 
of  Peter's  life  the  corrupt  heresies  of  the  second  and  third  centuries  were  threatened, 
and  against  these  he  would  fortify  the  Church  by  making  them  "mindful"  of  the 
Word  of  God.  The  Church  would  be  strong — strong  to  resist  the  encroachments  of 
heresy,  if  established  in  the  knowledge  of  God  through  Scripture.  The  apostle's  work 
was  nearly  done,  the  end  of  his  pilgrimage  was  in  sight,  but  he  could  not  rest  till  he 
had  again  urged  the  old  theme ;  and  he  writes  this  second  letter,  winch  they  might 
keep  and  read,  and  thus  remember  what  he  had  said  when  he  had  passed  away.  The 
touching  earnt'stness  in  these  words  is  not  so  much  that  of  Christ's  servant  (speaking  by 
the  Holy  Ghost)  as  of  his  Lord,  and  the  lessons  it  involves  come  to  us  with  the  authority 
of  the  throne. 

I.  The  supbbmb  impobtanoe  or  beino  established  in  Divine  tedth.  There  are 
certain  fundamental  facts  which  are  essential  to  salvation,  and  essential  to  the  under- 
standing of  the  rest ;  certain  great  doors,  so  to  speak,  without  passing  through  which 
it  is  not  possible  to  thread  the  winding  corridors  within,  and  gaze  upon  the  glory  of 
the  inner  shrine.  I  understand  it  to  be  these  whose  constant  remembrance  is  here 
enforced.  Earnest  research  after  truth  is  part  of  the  honour  due  to  the  God  of  truWk. 
It  were  an  error  to  confine  ourselves  to  one  set  of  truths,  and  still  more  to  any  one 
aspect  of  them ;  yet  there  are  some  which  are  the  key-note  to  the  others,  and  the  main 
channels  through  which  life  flows  to  the  believer,  and  we  must  be  established  in  them, 
and  we  must  endeavour  to  "  have  these  things  always  in  remembrance."  "  These  things 
are  written  that  we  may  know ;  "  and  not  to  know  them  intelligently  were  fatal,  if  not 
to  salvation,  at  least  to  spiritual  peace  and  strength  and  hope. 

II.  The  saint's  eesponsibilitt  fob  this  with  eeoabd  to  those  he  loves.  1.  The 
apostle  recognizes  that  human  teaching  is  a  Divine  agency.  God  can  dispense  with 
human  teaching.  His  Spirit  accompanies  his  Word ;  though  there  may  be  no  instru- 
mentality, that  Word  may  he  "  the  power  of  God  unto  salvation."  But  none  the  less 
has  he  made  it  incumbent  on  those  who  know  the  truth  to  teach  it.  Think  of  this  in 
connection  with  parental  teaching.  On  parents  the  primary  obligation  of  teaching  their 
children  rests ;  let  them  do  it  day  by  day,  patiently,  systematically,  prayerfully 
instructing  them  in  those  things  which  it  most  concerns  them  to  know.  2;  The  apostle 
recognizes  that  this  must  he  continued  so  long  as  opportunity  la^ts.  "  Ye  know  these 
things,  and  are  established  in  the  truth,"  he  says,  and  yet  he  will  not  be  negligent  to 
put  them  always  in  remembrance ;  he  knows  that  it  is  not  so  much  the  knowledge  as 
the  recollection  of  truth  that  is  operative.  We  think  that  because  we  know  the  truth 
we  can  dispense  with  the  study  of  it.  That  is  a  great  error,  and  full  of  evil.  It  is  not 
the  truths  that  are  stored  away  in  the  memory  which  serve  us  in  the  battle  of  life,  hut 
those  which  can  be  grasped  in  a  moment ;  they  are  they  which  operate  on  our  spirituality 
and  become  ceaseless  means  of  grace.  That  is  why  we  need  to  study  Scripture  day  by 
day,  if  not  that  we  inay  know  it,  at  least  that  we  may  remember  it.  And  if  this  be  true  ot 
us,  how  much  more  is  it  true  of  those  we  teach — the  children !  We  must  sow  the  same 
ground  again  and  again  if  we  would  reap  a  harvest.    3.  Z%e  (jostle  recognizet  that  th« 


CH.  1. 1— 21.]    THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  GENEEAL  OP  PETER.  29 

teaching  may  abide  when  the  teacher  has  gone.  For  the  Word  is  "  incorruptible ;  "  the 
seed  we  «ow  has  life  in  itself;  and,  so  far  from  being  dismayed  when  it  springs  not  up 
at  once,  we  should  remember  it  is  said,  "  That  which  thou  sowest  is  not  quicliened 
except  it  die ; "  that  "  the  harvest  is  the  end  of  the  world ; "  and  that,  though  when  we 
pass  hence  there  is  still  no  life  in  the  hard  soil,  there  is  time  for  us  to  witness,  from 
anotlier  shore,  first  the  blade,  then  the  ear,  and  then  the  full  com  in  the  ear.  Life's 
work  continues  after  life,  to  many  generations ;  we  never  know  for  whom  or  for  what 
we  work.  Temptations  are  resisted  to-day,  and  crises  passed,  and  sorrows  borne, 
through  the  power  of  principles  enforced  long  years  before  by  those  who  are  now 
employed  in  higher  spheres.  "  Blessed  are  the  dead  which  die  in  the  Lord  from  hence- 
forth: Yea,  saith  the  Spirit,  that  they  may  rest  from  their  labours;  and  their  works 
do  follow  them."  Many  of  us  can  say,  "  Amen."  May  those  who  come  when  we  are 
gone,  as  they  hear  these  words,  think  of  us,  and  say,  "  Amen."  And  that  they  may, 
let  us  say  with  Peter — ^We  will  emieavour  that  they  may  be  able  after  our  decease  to 
have  these  things  always  in  remembrance.  "  We  will  endeavour ; "  yes,  we  can  only 
endeavour.    Paul  plants,  and  Apollos  waters,  but  God  must  give  the  increase. 

III.  This  responsibility  intensified  by  the  shohtness  os-  its  oppobtunity.  "  I 
will  not  be  negligent  .  .  .  kno-ving  that  shortly  I  must  put  ofif  this  my  tabernacle, 
even  as  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  hath  showed  me."  1.  We  cannot  look  calmly  at  death 
unless  we  have  a  sense  of  fidelity  with  regard  to  this.  Calmness  in  the  prospect  of  death 
can  only  be  enjoyed  by  those  who  (like  Peter,  faithful  to  the  end)  are  conscious  that 
to  their  utmost  they  have  beeif  faithful  to  the  opportunities  of  life.  The  evening  of 
our  days  will  be  distressing  (Christians  though  we  be)  unless  we  can  look  up  and  say 
(though  the  work  seems  poor  indeed,  and  perhaps  a  failure),  "  0  Father,  I  have  glorified 
thee  on  the  earth,  I  have  finished  the  work  which  thou  gavest  me  to  do."  But  we  may 
not  even  reckon  on  an  evening  to  our  days ;  our  sun  may  go  down  while  it  is  yet  noon. 
2.  Immediate  fidelity  it  demanded,  in  that  death-bed  exhortations  may  be  impossible. 
"  Knowing  that  shortly  I  must  put  off  this  my  tabernacle,"  shoidd  rather  read, 
"knowing  that  swiftly — ^by  a  sharp,  quick  stroke."  Then  what  he  does  he  will  do 
quickly.  If  some  of  us  knew  what  Christ  might  tell  us,  we  should  find  that  we  also 
are  to  die  thus  swiftly.  Have  we  done  our  work  ?  Have  we  pleaded  with  those  we 
love  ?  Have  we  taught  the  children  the  great  things  of  God's  Word  ?  Have  we  lived 
remembering  that  "  there  is  no  work,  nor  device,  in  the  grave  whither  "  we  are  going  ? 
-C.  N. 

Vers.  16 — 18. — Certainty  eoneerning  Christ  the  ucret  of  spiritual  earnestness.  The 
apostle  gives  the  reason  for  his  earnestness  in  the  passage  before  us,  and  certainty  is 
the  key-note  of  bis  utterance.  He  declares  he  knows  what  he  enforces,  that  error  has 
liot  been  palmed  on  hiin  for  truth,  that  his  eyes  have  seen  and  his  ears  have  heard 
what  he  tells.  Then  our  subject  is — Certainty  concerning  Christ  the  secret  of 
spiritiuU  earnestness.  Doubt  and  deadness  go  together,  certainty  and  vigour ;  and 
in  an  age  when  doubt  is  so  freely  suggested,  that  it  is  almost  in  the  air  we  breathe, 
and  is  sometimes  thought  to  be  a  sign  of  wisdom,  it  ought  to  be  useful  to  us  to 
consider  the  need  and  possibility  of  certainty.  It  does  not  follow  that  certainty  can 
be  attained  at  once,  nor  that  all  doubt  is  to  be  condemned.  Much  doubt  is  tempera- 
mental, like  that  of  Thomas  (and  Thomas  was  a  disciple  second  to  none  in  fidelity  to 
Jesus),  and  much,  again,  means  spiritual  progress,  leading  to  higher  faith  and  deeper 
repose;  but  we  need  not  remain  in  doubt.  There  is  a  reasonable  basis  for  belief, 
some  eternal  rock  at  least,  on  which  we  can  weather  the  storm,  though  mystery  lies 
around  us  on  every  side.  In  this  present  state  of  limited  vision  we  may  expect  this 
mystery. 

I.  Christ  is  the  sum  of  apostolic  tbuth.  About  what  was  the  apostle  certain  ? 
About  Christ.  He  is  here  enforcing  the  need  of  spiritual  truth;  he  is  determined  to 
live  and  die  urging  this  truth,  and  in  our  text  he  sums  up  what  this  truth  is.  It  is 
Christ.  And  that  is  equally  the  testimony  of  the  Old  Testament  as  of  the  New: 
what  have  they  to  say  to  us,  but  Christ?  How  that  simplifies  this  book!  how  it 
shows  what  we  are  to  come  here  to  learn!  One  of  the  stumbling-blocks  to  the 
understanding  of  Scripture  is  that  men  come  to  it  to  learn  what  it  is  not  intended  to 
teaoh.    1.  Ai  Christ  ti  the  embodiment  «f  Divine  truth,  the  Bible  it  ihe  revdation  of 


«0  THB  SECOND  EPISTLE  OEKEBAL  OP  PETEB.    [oh.  1. 1—21. 

Christ.  That  Is  what  Peter  in  effect  says  Lere,  the  sum  of  the  truth  he  urges — "the 
power  and  coming  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,"  that  is,  his  Deity  and  Incarnation,  the 
God-Man.  In  making  Christ  known  Scripture  necessarily  touches  on  other  subjects, 
for  he  is  connected  with  every  part  of  the  Father's  will,  and  he  cannot  be  separated 
from  them ;  there  must  be  some  reference  to  them,  and  this  may  be  indistinct,  leaving 
much  to  be  known  hereafter.  But  we  may  be  sure  there  will  be  nothing  indistinct  in 
the  great  central  theme  of  the  revelation.  It  would  be  regeneration  to  some  if  they 
would  be  content  to  leave  these  minor  matters  unsolved,  and,  remembering  that  the 
object  of  this  record  is  to  make  Christ  known,  would  lend  their  powers  to  discover  the 
certainty  about  liim,  and  rest  in  that.  2.  He  is  the  revelation  of  the  Father.  "  Who  by 
searching  can  find  out  God  ?  "  but  in  Jesus  we  have  God  manifested.  "  The  Word  was 
God,"  and  "  the  Word  was  made  flesh."  The  revelation  of  Christ  is  the  manifestation 
of  the  Godhead.  3.  Ee  is  the  filling  up  of  every  human  need.  For  man's  condemna- 
tion there  is  acquittal  in  him ;  for  his  sin  there  is  the  possibility  of  holiness;  for  his 
perplexity  there  is  light;  for  his  difficulties  there  is  help;  for  his  sorrows  there  is 
infliiite  love;  for  his  fear  of  the  future  there  are  life  and  immortality.  So  perfectly 
can  Clirist  raise  us  to  the  perfection  of  which  our  nature  is  capable,  that  it  is  said, 
"  Ye  are  complete  in  him."  The  revelation  of  Christ  is  the  satisfaction  of  men,  4.  He 
is  the  end  we  (ire  called  to  reach.  For  what  were  we  made  ?  Apart  from  him  we  know 
not.  Do  we  fulfil  our  end  in  the  toil  and  tears,  the  change  and  weariness,  the  fleeting 
pleasures  and  the  lasting  pains  of  three  score  years  and  ten?  Is  there  nothing  beyond 
this — nothing  to  which  this  may  be  but  the  development,  nothing  beneath  it,  whose 
blessedness  shall  justify  ovti  existence?  God  replies  by  revealing  Jesus.  His  life  and 
death  and  rising  again,  the  work  of  his  ascended  life, — they  are  to  raise  us  to  likeness 
to  himself:  "We  are  predestined  to  be  conformed  to  the  image  of  God'e  Son."  The 
revelation  of  Christ  is  the  guide  and  hope  of  our  being. 

II.  Personal  knowledge  is  the  gbocnd  of  cebtaintt  abodt  Christ.  Eye- 
witnesses, ear-witnesses,  of  what  he  is,  therefore  we  know ; — that  is  the  ground  of  the 
apostle's  assurance.  There  is  here  the  svggestion  of  doubt  concerning  what  was  said  if 
Christ.  If  we  have  sincere  doubt  about  what  is  essential,  it  is  better  to  face  it  and 
settle  it,  not  to  leave  it  to  work  its  quiet  mischief  within  us,  or  cast  its  shadow  on  our 
belief,  but  to  look  at  it  steadily,  to  turn  on  it  the  light  of  reason  and  truth,  and  satisfy 
ourselves  that  there  is  nothing  in  it.  Some  things  it  is  not  essential  to  know,  and 
from  their  nature  they  are  unknowable  here ;  but  of  the  mystery  in  what  is  essential, 
there  is  a  solution  somewhere,  and  to  it  God  will  not  fail  to  guide  the  childlike  spirit. 
There  are  three  simple  arguments  which  show  it  to  be  incredible  that  the  doctrine  of 
Jesus  is  a  "cunningly  devised  fable."  How  could  these  unlearned  men  invent  a  fable 
surpassingly  beyond  what  the  world  had  ever  heard,  and  so  cunningly  that  for  eighteen 
centuries  it  has  deceived  those  who  have  tested  it  with  the  eagerness  of  settling  life 
and  death?  Then  how  came  this  fable  they  had  invented  to  change  their  own 
characters,  and  enable  them  to  seal  their  testimony  with  their  blood?  Then  how  is 
it  this  fable  has  proved  the  regeneration  of  mankind,  has  become  the  world's  hope,  and 
is  cleaved  to  with  unwavering  assurance  by  growing  millions  of  the  race?  But  notice 
how  Peter  meets  the  suggestion.  He  does  not  argue — he  rests  on  what  he  himself  had 
seen  and  heard.  There  was  one  season  ho  ever  remembered,  when  he  was  with  his 
Lord  in  the  "  holy  mount,"  and  there  came  "  such  a  voice  to  him  from  the  excellent 
glory,  This  is  my  beloved  Son,  in  whom  I  am  well  pleased."  Our  certainty  about  Christ 
may  have  the  same  ground.  At  first  we  must  depend  on  outside  testimony  for  our 
knowledge  of  Christ ;  but  when  that  has  done  most  for  us,  there  is  a  better  assurance 
possible,  personal  fellowship  with  himself,  that  is  the  antidote  to  doubt  about  him. 
Let  him  work  his  work  upon  you,  and  you  will  smile  at  the  suggestion  that  the 
"power  and  coming  of  the  Lord  Jesus"  is  a  "cunningly  devised  fable." 

III.  Certainty  about  Christ  the  secret  of  spiritual  earnestness.  Let  bf 
have  no  rest  till  we  come  to  certainty  about  our  Lord.  We  may  be  as  certain  that  he 
is,  and  that  he  is  the  Saviour  of  sinners,  and  the  Satisfaction  of  human  needs,  as  we  are 
of  our  existence.  Then  we  shall  be  animated  with  earnestness  in  cleaving  to  him,  in 
living  for  him ;  duty  no  more  cold  and  hard,  but  joyous  service  for  the  Living  One  we 
love ;  the  very  sorrows  that  drawus  to  him  tinged  with  joy ;  yea,  death  itself  no  longer 
dreaded  because  we  see  him  waiting  for  us  on  the  further  shore. — 0.  N. 


OH.  1. 1—21.]    THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  PETER.  81 

Vers.  19 — ^21. — Certainty  about  Christ  the  result  of  giving  Tieed  to  the  Divine  Word, 
Borne  to  whom  the  apostle  writes  might  object,  that,  if  personal  intercourse  be  the 
groand  of  certainty  concerning  Christ,  Peter  may  well  be  certain ;  but  what  of  them 
who  have  had  no  such  personal  intercourse?  The  apo.'-tle  deals  with  that  in  the 
passage  before  us.  Earnestness  about  spiritual  things  due  to  certainty  about  Christ 
is  followed  here  by  certainty  about  Christ  the  result  of  giving  heed  to  the  Divine  Word. 

I.  PeBSONAI.  P0SBB88I0N  OF   ChRIST   IS  THE   GEEAT   PROOF   OF  SPIRITUAL   REALITIES. 

How  are  we  to  know  that  Christ  is,  that  he  is  the  Saviour,  the  Way  to  the  Father  ? 
We  have  testimony,  the  testimony  of  this  book,  the  testimony  of  those  who  have  come 
under  his  saving  power,  the  testimony  of  what  we  have  seen  of  the  effect  of  his  religion 
on  the  world.  And  we  should  deem  that  sufBcient  in  any  other  matter.  But  so  great 
are  the  issues  of  this,  that  the  soul  suggests  to  itself  that  in  this  evidence  there  may 
he  a  flaw ;  that  in  spite  of  it,  Jesus  and  what  he  can  do  may  be  a  figment,  and  it  craves 
evidence  which  never  can  be  questioned,  that  it  may  cast  itself  on  him  without  a  fear. 
That  seems  an  impossible  thing  to  ask,  but  it  is  not — it  can  be  granted.  There  is 
a  witness  to  Jesus  which  no  reasoning  can  shake.  "  He  that  believeth  on  the  Son 
of  God  hath  the  witness  in  himself."  1.  To  potsess  Christ  it  to  know  that  he  is.  I  have 
him,  therefore  I  know  he  is ;  he  has  wrought  his  work  on  me,  therefore  I  know  what 
he  can  do.  2.  To  possess  Christ  is  to  possess  the  Bevealer.  If  he  dwells  within  us, 
the  soul  becomes  a  temple  where  he  unveils  his  face  and  reveals  his  glory.  3.  T» 
possess  Christ  is  to  have  that  which  throws  light  on  spiritual  things.  We  never  see 
Divine  love  clearly  till  then,  nor  the  sinfulness  of  sin,  nor  the  beauty  of  holiness,  nor 
the  sweetness  of  the  will  of  God,  nor  the  meaning  of  redemption.  Let  us  not  wonder 
if  we  are  dark  till  then;  it  must  be  dark  "until  the  day  dawn,  and  the  Day-star 
arise  in  our  hearts." 

II.  Thb  way  to  possess  Christ  is  by  oivino  heed  to  the  Divine  ''?7'obd.  The 
Day-star  had  arisen  in  the  hearts  of  many  to  whom  the  apostle  wrote.  But  what  of 
those  who  would  read  this  letter  of  whom  that  was  not  true — what  could  they  do  ? 
For  them  the  morning  had  not  yet  come ;  but  they  have  a  Lamp — "  the  Word  of 
prophecy  made  more  sure  ...  as  a  lamp  that  shineth  in  a  dark  place."  Let  them 
take  heed  to  that,  and  it  will  bring  them  to  the  dawn.  "  More  sure : "  more  sure  than 
what?  The  Revised  Version  shows  how  it  ought  to  read.  The  Word  of  prophecy 
made  "more  sure"  because  it  had  been  fulfilled.  Many  of  the  predictions  in  the  Old 
Testament  about  Christ  were  vague  and  mysterious,  but  now  that  they  had  been 
fulfilled  in  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  their  meaning  and  truth  were  apparent ;  they  could  now 
be  read  and  pondered  with  a  confidence  not  possible  before.  1.  Scripture  is  the  reve- 
lation of  Christ.  He  is  not  to  be  found  in  nature,  though  he  is  there,  and  gleams  of 
his  glory  appear  therein  on  every  side ;  but  they  are  only  gleams,  not  himself.  He  is 
not  to  be  known  by  imagination;  he  is  far  beyond  man's  thougtit,  and  to  fashion 
a  Christ  for  ourselves,  according  to  what  we  think  ought  to  be,  is  to  bow  before  a  god 
of  our  own  creation.  Nor  is  he  to  be  known  by  our  highest  spiritual  experiences 
apart  from  Scripture.  For  though  it  is  in  communion  he  makes  himself  known  to  us, 
even  that  is  through  the  medium  of  Scripture,  and  in  harmony  with  what  Scripture 
teaches.  We  cannot  know  Christ  till  we  come  to  Scripture.  2.  To  "give  heed"  to 
Scripture  is  to  obey  and  trust  him  who  is  revealed  therein.  But  before  we  can  trust 
ourselves  to  Scripture,  we  must  have  reasonable  evidence  that  it  is  trustworthy.  We 
must  know  on  what  intelligible  ground  these  books,  written  by  so  many  writers,  are 
rightly  regarded  as  the  Word  of  God.  Well,  the  Old  Testament  is  as  it  was  in  the 
time  of  our  Lord.  He  recognized  it  as  the  Divine  Word,  made  it  the  ground  of  his 
teaching,  declared  it  the  final  authority,  that  "  the  Scripture  cannot  be  broken."  The 
principle  which  determines  the  New  Testament  is  equally  simple.  Christ  said  that 
he  had  more  to  say  than  he  said  whilst  he  was  with  his  servants,  and  that  the  Spirit 
of  truth  should  come  to  guide  them  into  all  truth;  that  Spirit  came,  and  under  his 
instructions  the  apostles  wrote  many  tilings.  Those  books,  then,  which  can  be  proved 
to  have  been  written  by  them,  or  to  have  had  their  sanction, — all  such  books  (but  only 
those)  are  brought  together  to  forin  the  New  Testament,  the  apostles  being  the  duly 
authenticated  messengers  of  Christ,  of  whom  he  said,  "  He  that  heareth  you  heareth 
me."  The  sacred  writers  impressed  their  peculiarities  on  their  several  productions, 
but  behind  them  all  there  was  the  Divine  Mind  directing.    Sometimes  it  waa  only 


32  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PETER,    [oh.  1. 1—21 

necessary  that  they  should  be  guarded  from  error  in  relating  facts  with  which  they 
were  familiar;  sometimes  they  were  instructed  to  write  what  they  could  not  fully 
understand — things  far  ahove  them,  demanding  direct  illumination ;  but  in  any  case  they 
were  subject  to  the  control  and  teaching  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  There  is  a  marvellous 
unity  in  the  Bible,  which  shows  it  to  be  the  product  of  one  Mind;  and  a  marvellous 
power  by  which  it  carries  regeneration  with  it,  which  shows  it  to  be  the  work  of  him 
who  only  can  re-create.  3.  To  obey  and  trust  Christ  as  here  revecUed  is  to  come  to  know 
him  perfectly.  Christ  has  promised  to  make  himself  known  to  the  obedient.  He  says, 
"  If  a  man  love  me,  he  will  keep  my  words :  ,  .  .  and  we  will  come  unto  him,  and 
make  our  abode  with  him." 

IIL  The  Divinb  Word  only  yields  rrs  sboeets  to  Divine  inspibation.  "  No 
prophecy  of  the  Scripture  is  of  any  private  [literally,  'one's  own']  interpretation." 
Do  not  go  to  Scripture  attempting  to  understand  it  by  your  own  power ;  make  use  of 
it  if  you  are  in  the  dark,  but  remember  beforehand  that,  as  the  Holy  Ghost  inspired 
men  to  write  it,  he  must  inspire  you  to  understand  it.  1.  That  explains  why  human 
learning  and  an  unteachable  spirit  cannot  understand  Scripture.  "  The  natural  man 
receiveth  not  the  things  of  the  Spirit  of  God  .  .  .  they  are  spiritually  discerned.' 
2.  And  this  suggests  the  hind  of  inspiration  possible  to  us  now.  God  inspires  his  people 
still,  not  indeed  to  write  Scripture,  but  to  understand  and  obey  it.  Had  he  intended 
to  inspire  all  as  he  inspired  the  writers  of  Scripture,  why  should  he  have  inspired  them 
to  write?  Clearly  that  inspiration  was  to  cease.  3.  But  then  this  Just  casts  us  in 
prayer  for  spiritual  knowledge  on  the  Holy  Ohost.  This  book  is  the  instrument  of 
the  Spirit  of  God;  apart  from  him  it  can  teach  us  nothing.  Then  before  we  search  it, 
let  us  bow  our  heads  reverently  and  say,  "  Lord,  open  thou  mine  eyes,  that  I  may 
behold  wondrous  things  out  of  thy  Law  " — 0.  N. 

Vers.  1,  2. — Divine  blessing  by  human  channels.  L  The  type  op  man  by  whom 
EiiESSiNO  COMES  TO  MAN.  No  One  Can  take  any  thoughtful  view  of  the  book  we  call 
the  Bible  without  learning  how  largely  man  is  the  channel  of  the  Divine  thought, 
the  Divine  emotion,  the  Divine  grace.  "  Men  spake  from  God,  being  moved  by  the 
Holy  Ghost."  And  their  individual  manhood  colours  and  tones  their  teaching.  So 
that  not  alone  by  the  writings  of  men,  but  by  their  toes— biographies  that  cluster 
round  the  Great  Biography,  either  in  resemblance  or  in  contrast  to  it — men  are  taught, 
warned,  comforted,  stimulated,  and,  in  a  sense  in  which  St.  Paul  uses  the  word,  "saved" 
by  man.  In  this  passage  is  a  type  of  the  man  by  whom  &-vd  blesses  men.  1.  In  his 
manhood.  "Simon  Peter" — a  name  that  recalls  the  story  of  his  life,  and  discovers  his 
temperament  and  unveils  his  ideal.  The  pearl  is  formed  by  some  irritating  substance 
causing  discomfort,  pain.  So  biography  has  its  moral  pearls.  And  St.  Peter's  is 
notable.  There  is  pathos  in  the  appeals  of  this  letter,  as  we  remember  how  "  Peter 
went  out  and  wept  bitterly."  2.  In  his  office.  "  A  servant  and  an  apostle."  This  is 
the  right  order:  first  a  bondman;  then  a  herald,  eager  and  brave, 

II.  The  common  condition  on  which  men  must  beceivb  the  chief  blessings 
or  God.  Peter  writes  to  those  who  "  have  obtained  like  precious  faith."  Their  pos- 
session of  that  qualifies  them  to  receive  the  blessings  this  salutation  desires  for  them. 
"Like  precious  faith."  "Like,"  not  necessarily  equal,  but  similar.  "Precious" — a 
favourite  word  of  Peter's,  used  about  "  stone,"  "  promises,"  "  blood,"  "  faith ; "  having 
a  double  thought — costly  and  cherished.  "In  the  righteousness  of  our  God  and 
Saviour  Jesus  Christ."  "  Righteousness :'' what  is  that?  Well  does  Charnook  say, 
"  Without  it  his  patience  would  be  indulgence  to  sin,  his  mercy  a  fondness,  his  wrath 
a  madness,  his  power  a  tyranny,  his  wisdom  an  unworthy  subtlety."  But  this  right- 
eousness gives  glory  to  all.  As  we  know  it  in  Christ  (1)  it  reveals  itself;  (2)  it 
vindicates  itself;  (3)  it  communicates  itself.  We  cannot  attain  it  or  maintain  it 
without  Christ. 

IIL  The  sdpeemb  blessing  man  can  desire  fob  man.  "  Grace  and  peace " 
(already  noted  in  the  first  Bpisi  le).  Peace,  the  growth  of  grace.  "  Be  multiplied." 
These  in  large  degree.  "  In  the  knowledge  of  Gori  and  of  Jesus  our  Lord ; "  better 
translated,  "  full  knowledge."  Peter  would  recall  his  Lord's  words  in  the  upper  room  . 
"This  is  life  eternal,  to  know  thee  the  only  true  God,  and  Jesus  Christ,  whom  thou 
hitst  sent."    From  that  knowledge,  and  that  alone,  will  flow  grace  and  peace. — ^U.  R.  T 


CH.  1. 1— 21.]    THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  PETER.  38 

Vera.  3,  4. —  The  leginning  of  soul-salvation.  These  words,  read  in  connection  with 
what  immediately  iollows  (specially  if  we,  following  Ellicott  and  Parrar,  place  a  period 
•t  the  end  of  the  second  verse),  distinctly  predicate  certain  things  ahout  the  beginning 
of  soul-salvation. 

L  God  has  given  ali.  things  necessary  for  soul-salvation.  Note :  1.  The  idea 
of  soul-salvation.  "Life  and  godliness."  Observe  the  order.  Vitality,  then  external 
piety.  2.  The  means  of  soul-salvation.  (1)  Many :  "  all  things."  So  that  first  there 
is  no  room  for  excuse;  second,  the  "all"  of  God  challenges  the  "all "of  man.  (2) 
Divinely  bestowed. '  "  By  his  Divine  power."  What  a  use  of  infinite  power — tc 
save! 

IL  God  calls  the  soul  to  a  knowlbdqe  of  himself  as  the  beginning  of  soul- 
salTation.  The  "all  things"  come  to  us:  1.  Through  the  call  of  God.  God  is  the 
great  Caller.  Whence?  To  what?  How?  2.  Through  knowing  him  who  calls  us. 
Not  knowing  about  him,  but  directly  knowing  him.  Probably  Peter  a;^ain  has  o 
reminiscence  of  the  Last  Supper :  "  This  is  life  eternal,  to  know  thee.'' 

III.  God's  call  comes  to  souls  by  the  bbvelation  of  himself.  "  Called  by  his  own 
glory  and  virtue."  "  Glory,"  majesty :  what  he  is.  "  Virtue,"  energy  :  what  he  does. 
Both  combined  give  the  full  revelation  of  God. 

IV.  God's  call  comes  to  souls  WITH  INSPIRING  PROMISES.  "Precious."  Note  Peter's 
frequent  word,  meaning  rare,  prized.     "  Exceeding  great."     1.  In  their  origin. 

"The  voice  that  rolls  the  stars  along 
Speaks  all  the  promises." 

2.  In  tbeir  substance.    8.  In  the  multitudes  to  whom  they  are  addressed. 

V.  God's  PURPOSE  in  soul-salvation  is  the  highest  we  can  conceive  of.  There  M  a 
twofold  end.  1.  "  Escape  the  corruption  that  is  in  the  world."  (1)  "  Corruption," 
deadly  evil ;  (2)  "  in  the  world,"  near,  mighty ;  (3)  "  through  lust."  No  evil  can  harm 
except  through  our  own  evil  desires.  2.  The  other  and  higher  end,  nobler  than  tbe 
negative  one  just  mentioned,  is  "  become  partakers  of  the  Divine  nature ;  "  i.e.  share  in 
the  very  righteousness  of  God.  Not  mere  forgiveness  of  sins,  not  mere  remission  of 
penalty,  not  safety  from  external  perils,  but  the  blessed  and  holy  purpose  of  God's  love 
accomplished  in  our  restoration  to  the  Divine  image. — U.  B.  T. 

Vers.  8 — 7. — True  Christian  character.  This  notable  passage,  growing  very  evi- 
dently out  of  what  precedes  and  into  what  follows,  has  a  wealth  of  instruction. 

I.  True  Christian  character  consists  of  manifold  elements.  Here  is  a  chain  no 
link  of  which  may  be  omitted,  a  structure  no  stone  in  which  may  be  lacking,  a  body 
no  member  of  which  may  be  wanting.  1.  Whether  the  general  order  is  to  be  insisted 
on  or  not,  it  is  certain  that  faith  is  the  primary  essential  of  the  whole  character.  It  is 
the  root  out  of  which  all  grows,  the  foundation  on  which  all  rests.  To  aim  at  the  rest 
first,  and  this  afterwards,  is  to  stand  a  pyramid  on  its  apex  instead  of  its  base.  Belief 
is  great,  is  life-giving.  2.  Each  of  the  other  elements  of  character  demands  careful 
contemplation.  "  Virtue," — manly  vigour,  making  it  impossible  for  the  charge  to  be 
sustained  that  the  devotional  man  is  not  necessarily  a  virtuous  man.  It  is  an  element 
of  character  that  will  save  a  man  from  being  a  chameleon,  catching  the  hue  of  every 
surrounding,  or  a  moral  mollusc  with  no  backbone.  "  Knowledge," — discernment,  intel- 
ligence. "  Thou  shalt  love  . . .  with  thy  . . .  mind."  "  Temperance," — all  self-restraint;  as 
Jeremy  Taylor  says,  ''reason's  girdle  as  well  as  passion's  bridle."'  '•  Patience," — the  silver 
side  of  the  shield  whose  iron  side  is  temperance, — endurance,  meekness,  continuance  in 
well-doing.  "  Godliness," — not  the  whole  of  piety,  but  fellowship  with  God,  walking 
with  God,  being  the  "  friend  of  God."  "  Brotherly  kindness," — the  duty  of  equals 
to  equals — simple,  constant  kindness.  "  Charity," — better  the  great  king-word,  the 
dear  home-word,  "love;"  the  sunshine  on  the  whole  landscape  of  character,  the 
Shechinah  in  the  temple  of  character. 

II.  The  cultivation  of  these  manifold  elements  of  character  is  an  urgent  Chris- 
tian duty.  "  Giving  all  diligence  .  .  .  add,"  etc.  1.  They  will  not  come  as  a  matter 
of  course.  2.  They  may  be  attained.  3.  The  methods  of  attaining  them.  (1)  Study 
of  models.  (2)  Exercise.  (3)  Pellowship  with  those  that  possess  them,  especially 
with  the  Christ.— U.  B.  T. 


M  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PETER.    t<^i,l— 2L 


Vers.  8 — 11. — The  goal  of  Christian  character.  If  snch  a  character  as  the  preceding 
verses  described  is  attained,  three  glorious  results  will  follow. 

L  SpieituaIi  vision.  Such  a  character  leads  "  arato  the  knowledge  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ."  They  that  do  the  will  shall  know  the  doctrine.  For  what  is  promised 
here  is:  1.  "Full  knowledge."  That  is  the  key-word  of  the  apostle.  2.  And  full 
knowledge  of  the  Supreme  Object,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Often  we  think  if  we 
knew  more  we  should  do  better;  here  the  teaching  is,  if  we  did  better  we  should  know 
more.  Obedience  is  the  organ  of  spiritual  vision.  "  Blessed  are  the  pure  in  heart : 
for  they  shall  see  God."    All  else  are  "  blind." 

II.  MoKAii  rooTHOliD.  "  Glve  the  more  diligence  to  make  your  calling  and  election 
sure."  Two  aspects  of  the  same  fact — choice,  and  the  result  of  choice.  "Make 
sure," — warrant,  prove.  "Never  stumble."  Peter  had  stumbled.  Hence  the  pathos  of 
his  counsel.   The  near-sighted  stumble.   The  moral  vision  depends  on  moral  character. 

IIL  Satisfaction  of  soul.  This  is  the  culmination  and  crown  of  Christian  character. 
A  life  of  Christian  earnestness  tends  to,  and  ends  in,  this.  "  Entrance  ipto  the  eternal 
kingdom."  We  are  encompassed  completely  with  its  order,  its  beauty,  its  safety. 
"Richly  supplied  unto  you" — a  word  that  throws  us  back  on  the  earlier  word  of 
exhortation.  "  Richly  supply "  Christian  graces  in  your  character,  and  God  will 
"  richly  supply "  Christian  glories  in  your  destiny.  Your  virtues  must  go  out  in  a 
kind  of  festal  procession,  then  your  true  glories  will  come  to  you  in  a  kind  of  festal 
procession  also. — U.  B.  T. 

Vers.  12 — 14. — An  old  man's  aim.  I.  An  aim  foe  the  highest  good  of  others. 
Peter  is  desiring  that  "  these  things  "  should  be  remembered  by  others  for  their  benefit 
and  blessing.  "  These  things  "  probably  comprehend  not  only  all  the  exhortations  and 
promises  the  letter  had  already  contained,  bat  the  great  facts  in  the  great  biography 
to  which  ever  and  again,  with  the  vizidness  of  an  eye-witness,  Peter  had  referred. 

II.  An  aim  for  the  highest  good  of  others  after  bib  own  death.  He  would  not 
simply  be  of  service  to  those  among  whom  ho  lived,  whilst  he  was  with  them,  but  to 
them  after  he  had  lefD  this  world,  and  to  the  generations  afterward.  All  must  exert 
posthumous  influence;  the  true  disciple  of  Christ  cares  intensely  that  that  posthumous 
influence  shall  tell  for  good,  and  for  good  only. 

III.  An  aim  pursued  with  all  the  more  jntensitt  because  of  approaohino 
DEATH.  1.  Peter  felt  death  was  near.  The  cords  and  skins  of  "  the  tabernacle  "  were 
loosening  and  shaking.  2.  He  had  had  a  prediction  from  his  Master  about  his  death: 
"  Another  shall  gird  thee,"  etc.  All  this  stimu'iited  his  eager  zeal  to  do  the  most  he 
could  while  he  lived.— U.  B.  T. 

Vers.  16 — 21. — Threefold  testimony  to  the  tnith  of  Christianity.  In  laying  out  the 
grounds  of  his  own  faith,  and  the  grounds,  tfio,  on  which  he  would  have  his  readers 
build  their  faith,  St.  Peter  indicates  the  lines  of  a  threefold  evidence. 

I.  The  testimony  op  the  apostles.  1.  They  were  "  eye-w(»ess«s " — a  rare  word, 
describing  spectiitors  who  were  admitted  into  the  highest  grade  of  initiation  into 
mysteries.  How  true  of  Peter  and  James  and  John,  with  regard  to  the  life  of  our 
Lord!  2.  They  were  eye-witnesses  of  a  wondrpus  revelation.  "His  majesty;"  no 
one  event  only,  though  chiefly  the  Transfiguration.  3.  They  had  heard  a  Divine  voice. 
"  The  voice  we  ourselves  heard."  No  hallucination :  we  all  heard,  we  all  saw.  4.  The 
recollection  of  such  vision  and  voice  was  for  ever  sacred.  "  The  holy  mount."  Wo 
know  not  its  name,  but  it  was  to  them  for  ever  a  consecrated  height.  Any  spot 
becomes  "  holy  "  to  the  soul  that  has  had  there  a  deep  sense  of  God's  presence ;  has 
been  awed  by  his  gicatness,  touched  by  his  love. 

II.  The  testimony  of  the  earlier  prophetic  word.  "  The  word  of  prophecy."  Does 
this  mean  "  prediction  "  only?  We  think  not.  1.  That  can  scarcely  be  said  to  be  more 
sure  than  the  testimony  of  "eye-witnesses."  2.  The  usual  scriptural  use  of  the  wonis 
"  prophet "  and  "  prophecy  "  is  wider  than  that.  "  Take  my  brethren,  the  prophets." 
Are  not  Paid,  John,  Peter  himself,  New  Testament  prophets?  3.  The  signiScance  of 
the  words  point  to  a  wider  meaning :  "  speak  forth,"  or  "  speak  for  another."  It  telU 
of  insight  as  much  as  of  foresight.  4.  The  last  verse  covers  the  whole  Scripture,  not 
merely  prediction.     If  the  whole  of  Holy  Scripture  be  thus  meant,  why  ia  it  called 


OH.  1. 1—21.]    THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OE  PETER.  81 

"more  sure"  than  the  oral  testimony  of  witnesses?  (1)  Because  it  is  a  more  compre- 
hensive record.  (2)  More  manifold  authority.  (3)  More  able  to  be  tested.  "  Thy  Word 
is  tried."  Concerning  this  "  sure  word  of  prophecy,"  this  passage  teaches :  (1)  It  is  of 
wide  application.  "  Not  of  private,"  that  is,  single  "  interpretation."  Deals  with 
principles,  not  merely  with  events.  (2)  It  is  not  a  discovery,  but  a  revelation  :  "  No 
prophecy  ever  came  by  will  of  man,"  etc.  (3)  It  has  a  Divine  Source:  "Men  spake 
from  God,  being  moved  by  the  Holy  Ghost."  "  Borne  along  " — a  strong  word,  denoting 
a  ship  before  the  wind.  (4)  Is  of  great  practical  use.  "  A  lamp  shining  in  a  dark  [or, 
'  squalid  and  gloomy ']  place ; "  a  camp-fire  in  the  desert.  (5)  Must  be  observed. 
Christianity,  as  Dean  Mansel  says,  is  regulative  rather  than  spc'culative.  "  Whereunto 
ye  do  well  that  ye  take  heed." 

III.  Thb  testimony  of  consciousness.  This  is  the  strongest  of  all.  1.  In  the  best 
region :  "  In  your  hearts."  2.  The  outcome  and  end  of  all  the  rest :  "  Day-star  arise." 
Better  even  than  lamp  is  the  Day-star.  So  much  better  is  the  knowldge  of  Christ  as  a 
power  and  presence  on  the  soul  than  any  other  testimony.  (1)  One  is  without,  the 
other  is  within.  (2)  One  is  passing,  the  other  is  perpetual.  (3)  One  is  stationary, 
the  other  harbinger  of  eternal  day.  Notice  the  signs  of  this  <tawa.  (1)  What  are 
they?  (2)  Seek  for  them.  (3)  Rejoice  in  them.  "  My  soul  waiteth  for  the  Lord  more 
than  they  that  watch  for  the  morning." — U.  B.  T. 

Vers.  1,  2. — Address  and  salutation.  I.  Address.  "Simon  Peter,  a  servant  and 
apostle  of  Jesus  Christ,  to  them  that  have  obtained  a  like  precious  faith  with  us  in  the 
righteousness  of  our  God  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ."  Peter  seems  to  class  himself  with 
Jewish  Christians  in  the  personal  designation  "Simon,"  or,  more  probably,  "Simeon 
Peter."  His  official  designation  is  first  (generally)  a  servant  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  then  (par- 
ticularly) an  apostle  of  Jesus  Christ.  The  readers  are  designated,  not  with  reference  to 
locality  (as  in  the  First  Epistle),  but  simply  with  reference  to  their  Christian  position. 
Peter  writes  on  this  occasion  "to  them  that  have  obtained" — by  lot,  the  idea  is,  i.e. 
not  in  their  own  power  or  of  their  own  right  (thus  corresponding  to  "  the  elect "  of  the 
First  Epistle).  What  they  have  obtained  is  faith,  by  whicli  we  should  understand, 
not  "  the  things  believed,"  but  the  "  subjective  disposition  of  faith ; "  for  it  is  faith  in 
this  sense  that  is  the  gracious  possession  proceeded  upon  in  ver.  5.  It  is  a  precioua 
faith,  both  in  the  mysteries  which  are  the  object  of  it  (centring  in  the  Incarnation),  and 
in  the-  blessings  which  are  appropriated  by  it  (beginning  with  forgiveness  of  sins).  It 
is  "a  like  precious  faith  with  us"  that  they  have  obtained.  If  Peter  classes  himself 
with  Jewish  Christians  (as  he  seems  to  do  in  taking  the  designation  Simeon),  then  it  is 
the  Gentile  Christians  who  have  a  like  precious  faith  with  the  Jewish,  and  it  is  they 
who  are  directly  addressed  in  the  Epistle,  though  Jewish  Christians  are  included  among 
the  readers.  This  equal  dealing  is  ascribed  to  "  the  righteousness  of  our  God."  This  is 
in  keeping  with  1  Pet.  i.  17,  and  also  with  the  sentiment  uttered  by  Peter  in  connec- 
tion with  the  admission  of  the  Gentiles,  as  given  in  Acts  x.  84  and  xv.  9.  The  equal 
dealii^  is  also  ascribed  to  the  righteousness  of  "our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ"  (who  could 
not  in  this  and  in  other  places  be  so  closely  associated  with  God  without  being  him- 
self God).  Jesus  Christ  is  here  regarded  as  the  manifestation  and  demonstration  of  the 
impartiality  of  God :  inasmuch  as  Saviour,  he  is  Saviour  for  Gentiles  and  Jews,  without 
any  difference. 

IL  Salutation.  "  Grace  to  you  and  peace  be  multiplied  in  the  knowledge  of  God  and 
of  Jesus  our  Lord."  By  grace  we  are  not  to  understand  the  attribute  of  graciousness, 
but  rather  the  outgoing  of  graciousness  as  experienced  by  us.  Peace  is  the  result  of  the 
consciousness  that  we  are  not  dealt  with  according  to  our  own  merit,  but  according  to 
the  merit  of  Another.  Grace  and  peace  are  already  enjoyed :  what  Peter  wishes  is  their 
multiplication,  for  which  there  is  room  in  the  best.  He  looks  for  this  multiplication 
in  a  particular  way,  viz.  that  oi  knowledge.  It  is  the  word  which  means  appreciative, 
mature  knowledge.  It  is  a  characteristic  word  of  the  Epistle.  In  view  of  the  place 
that  was  afterward  to  be  claimed  for  a  false  gnosis  (insight  into  transcendental  mysteries), 
it  was  well  that  Paul  and  Peter  taught  beforehand  the  place  that  was  to  be  given  to 
epignosis  (with  regard  to  which  there  is  no  mystification).  Peter  teaches  here  that 
grace  and  peace  are  only  to  be  multiplied  as  an  advance  in  Divine  knowledge — the 
knowledge  of  Ood  and  of  Jesus  (thus  again  closely  associated)  as  the  manifestation  oi 


THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PETER,    [oh.  1. 1—21. 


God.  When  we  get  to  know  how  gracious  God  is  in  Jesus,  our  peace  is  doubled, 
trebled,  quadrupled.  Peter  thinks  specially  of  a  peace  resulting  from  the  fact  that  God 
has  made  Jesus  our  Lord,  thus  able  to  control  all  circumstances  and  influeDces  that 
affect  us.  The  thought  of  this  Lordship  is  carried  forward  into  the  next  Terse,  from 
which  this  is  not  properly  dissociated. — II.  F. 

Vers.  3 — 11. — TJie  Christian  virtues  in  their  eompleteness.  L  Poundatioh  op  exhor- 
tation. 1.  Orant.  "  Seeing  that  his  Divine  power  hath  granted  unto  us  all  things 
that  pertain  unto  life  and  godliness."  The  grant  has  reference  to  life  and  godliness. 
The  first  of  these  words  is  to  be  understood  of  healthful  condition, ;  the  other  is  to  be 
understood  of  that  supreme  regard  to  God,  on  which  healthful  condition  depends.  The 
grant  is  not  of  life  and  godliness,  but  of  all  things  that  pertain  unto  life  and  godliness, 
by  which  we  are  to  understand  the  gracious  influences  that  have  been  liberated  by 
Christ — the  Holy  Spirit  in  his  manifold  gifts,  the  benefit  of  Christian  institutions.  Who 
la  to  be  thought  of  as  the  Granter  here  ?  The  nearer  reference  is  to  Jesus  our  Lord,  and 
it  is  not  superfluous  to  say  of  him,  as  it  would  be  to  say  of  God,  that  it  was  his  Divine 
power  that  made  the  grant.  It  was  the  Divine  power  of  him  who  afterward  became  man 
that  was  exercised  when  man  was  created  and  was  then  granted  all  that  was  necessary  for 
securing  life  by  godly  conduct.  The  requirements  were  greater  when  man  felL  Jesus 
bore  what  man  as  involved  in  sin  deserved,  so  as  to  be  constituted  our  Lord  with  Divine 
power  to  grant  unto  us  all  things  that  pertain  unto  life  and  godliness.  When  he  has 
such  power  to  grant,  nothing  can  be  wanting  of  what  is  needed  for  our  spiritual 
prosperity  and  the  production  of  a  godly  type  of  character.  2.  Communication  of  the 
grant.  (1)  Knowledge.  "  Through  the  knowledge  of  him  that  called  us  by  his  own 
glory  and  virtue."  This  is  the  second  introduction  of  knowledge  in  the  intensive  sense. 
It  is  here  regarded  as  the  channel  through  which  are  communicated  to  us  "  all  things 
that  pertain  unto  life  and  godliness."  Thus  it  is  that  knowledge  is  power.  To  know 
God  is  to  have  a  way  of  being  supplied  with  all  that  we  need.  It  is  to  have  an 
inexhaustible  fountain  of  blessing.  It  is  to  feel  the  quickening  and  transforming  power 
of  his  perfections.  But  it  will  be  noticed  that  it  is  the  knowledge  of  God  under  a 
particular  aspect,  viz.  ^  him  that  called  us.  Weiss  says,  "  appointed  us  to  the  consum- 
mation of  salvation ; "  but  this  is  brought  into  view  afterwards.  Here  it  is  what  in  God 
causes  our  calling.  For  "  called  us  to  glory  and  virtue "  is  a  great  blunder :  it  is 
"  called  us  hy  glory  and  virtue,"  i.e.  these  in  God.  It  was  a  desire  to  manifest  liimself, 
or  a  regard  for  his  own  glory,  that  led  him  to  call  us.  That  is  the  first  declaration.of 
the  cause ;  the  second  declaration  is  that  it  was  his  virtue  or  moral  excellence,  on  which 
his  glory  in  calling  us  rests.  It  is  the  same  word  which  is  used  in  the  plural  in  1  Pet.  iu 
9,  translated  "  excellences."  The  singular  here  points  us  to  the  sum  of  all  that  is  excellent 
in  God,  of  which  there  comes  to  be  glorious  manifestation.  "  Praise  him,"  says  the  writer 
of  the  hundred  and  fiftieth  psalm,  "according  to  his  excellent  greatness."  It  was  the 
transcendent  character  of  his  excellence,  for  which  it  becomes  us  to  praise  him,  that  led 
to  his  calling  such  as  we  were.  Archangelic  excellence  would  have  passed  us  by  ;  but 
there  was  an  excellence  in  God  far  above  all  created  excellence  that  led  to  his  making 
use  of  the  vilest  materials.  (2)  The  reflection  of  God  in  the  promises.  "  Whereby  he 
hath  granted  unto  us  his  precious  and  exceeding  great  promises."  It  is  through  know- 
ledge that  the  grant  is  communicated  to  us ;  it  is  well  to  have  the  grant  also  in  definite 
written  form,  which  we  have  in  the  promises.  These  promises  are  characterized  as 
precious,  which  characterization  more  naturally  comes  first,  as  in  the  Revised  Version. 
They  contain  all  that  we  need  of  light  for  our  minds,  of  solace  for  our  hearts,  of  strength 
fur  iiur  wiLs,  of  stimulus  for  our  desires.  They  are' not  only  precious,  but  exceeding 
great,  i.e.  precious  in  the  superlative  degree.  It  is  in  Ephesians  that  we  are  directed  to 
God  as  "able  to  do  exceeding  abundantly  above  all  that  we  ask  or  think."  God  has 
promised  to  open  the  windows  of  heaven,  and  pour  us  out  a  blessing  that  there  shall  not 
be  room  enough  to  receive  it.  But  let  it  be  noticed  that  there  is  given  an  explanation 
of  the  promises  being  exceeding  great  in  their  preciousness.  It  is  because  they  are 
granted  by  God's  glory  and  virtue.  They  are,  therefore,  to  be  regarded  as  the  reflection 
of  what  he  is.  They  express  all  that  he  would  bestow  upon  us — how,  with  his  fulness, 
he  would  fill  our  emptiness,  with  his  riches  our  poverty.  (3)  Aim  of  the  promises,  (o) 
Positively,    "  That  through  Ihese  ye  may  become  partakers  of  the  Divine  nature."    The 


OH.  1. 1—21.]    THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  PBTEB.  87 

teaching  here  is  not  with  regard  to  our  God-like  constitution  ("  For  we  are  also  his  off- 
spring"), but  with  regard  to  what  with  our  God-like  constitution  we  may  become.  The 
language  employed  is  strong  and  peculiarly  attractive  to  some  minds.  We  are  not  to  think 
ot  deification,  or  absorption  into  Gbd.  But  let  us  form  no  mean  conception  of  what, 
encouraged  by  the  promises,  we  may  become.  By  the  nature  of  God  we  understand 
those  qualities  which  exist  in  him  in  an  infinite  degree.  We  are  to  become,  in  the  last 
result,  partakers  of  the  Divine  nature ;  i.e.  we  are  to  have  the  same  qualities  up  to  our 
measure.  Even  now  we  can  think  the  same  thoughts,  be  thrilled  with  the  same  joy. 
"  God  becomes  a  real  Being  to  us  in  proportion  as  his  own  nature  is  unfolded  within  us. 
True  religion  desires  and  seeks  supremely  the  assimilation  of  the  mind  to  God,  or  the 
perpetual  unfolding  and  enlarging  ol  those  powers  and  virtues  by  which  it  is  constituted 
his  glorious  image.  The  mind,  in  proportion  as  it  is  enlightened  and  penetrated  by  true 
religion,  thirsts  and  labours  for  a  God-like  elevation.  Let  it  not  be  inferred  that  we 
place  religion  in  unnatural  effort,  in  straining  after  excitements  which  do  not  belong  to 
the  present  state,  or  in  anything  separate  from  the  clear  and  simple  duties  of  life  " 
(Channing).  (6)  Negatively.  "Having  escaped  from  the  corruption  that  is  in  the 
world  by  lust.''  In  the  world  we  do  not  find  that  healthful  action,  those  attractive 
forms,  which  God  intended  for  society ;  we  have  instead  diseased  action,  forms  from 
which  we  are  repelled.  This  corruption  is  in  tlw  world  hy  lust,  i.e.  the  prevalence  of 
the  lower  over  the  higher  principles  of  our  nature.  Where  there  is  the  inversion  of  the 
Divine  order,  society  must  go  to  corruption.  From  this  corruption  we  have  not  entirely 
escaped,  inasmuch  as  lust  is  not  entirely  subdued  in  us ;  but  with  our  becoming  in  the 
last  result  partakers  of  the  Divine  nature,  it  will  be  our  privilege  to  have  escaped  for 
ever  from  the  blighting,  putrefying  influences  that  prevail  in  the  world. 

II.  Exhortation  to  cultivation  op  the  Christian  vibtubs.  L  Condition  oj 
development.  "  Yea,  and  for  this  very  cause  adding  on  your  part  all  diligence."  There 
is  a  great  improvement  in  the  translation  here.  One  idea  which  is  brought  out  is  that 
what  we  are  to  do  is  to  be  in  answer  to  the  Divine  doing.  Christ  does  his  part  in  granting 
all  things  that  pertain  unto  life  and  godliness,  and  through  the  knowledge  of  God,  who 
promises  all  that  is  needful  for  our  being  partakers  of  the  Divine  nature ;  we  are  to 
bring  in  ly  tJie  side  of,  i.e.  contribute  our  part.  It  is  also  distinctly  brought  out  that 
the  Divine  doing  is  no  reason  for  our  doing  nothing,  but  the  very  opposite — a  reason 
for  our  doing.  What  we  have  to  contribute  on  our  side  is  diligence,  ie.  in  connection 
with  opportuhities  for  the  exercise  of  the  Christian  virtues  which  are  to  be  named. 
This  is  only  in  accordance  with  analogy.  God  supplies  the  qualities  of  the  soil  and  the 
heavenly  influences ;  and  the  farmer  supplies  diligence.  Because  God  sends  the  sunshine 
and  the  rain,  man  is  to  be  up  and  doing,  not  allowing  his  opportunity  to  slip  by ;  so 
because  Christ  is  so  liberal  in  granting,  because  the  promises  are  precious  in  the  super- 
lative degree,  for  that  very  reason  we  are  to  bestir  ourselves.  2.  Order  of  development  from 
faith.  (1)  Virtue.  "  In  your  faith  supply  virtue."  The  faith  is  here  regarded  as  already 
present.  If  we  have  not  yet  believed,  what  we  have  got  to  do  is  to  co-operate  with 
God  in  believing.  "  This  is  the  work  of  God  [required  by  God],  that  ye  believe  on  him 
whom  he  hath  sent."  Faith  is  here  specially  to  be  thought  of  as  the  laying  hold  on  the 
Divine  power  in  Christ  that  grants,  or  the  laying  hold  on  the  Divine  promises.  "  Be 
not  afraid,  only  helieve"  Christ  said ;  that  saying,  however,  is  not  to  be  pressed  to  mean 
that  faith,  undeveloped,  is  everything.  We  are.  here  taught  that  faith  is  only  the  root, 
and  it  must  be  carried  out  into  its  proper  development.  There  are  seven  virtues  needed 
to  make  it  complete ;  and  there  is  a  certain  order  in  which  they  follow  each  other.  The 
connection  is  closer  than  is  brought  out  by  the  "  add  to  "  of  the  old  translation.  The 
proper  connecting  words  are  "  supply  in,"  the  idea  being,  in  each  case,  of  that  which 
goes  before  being  incomplete,  unless  there  is  supplied  in  it  as  its  complement  that  which 
follows  after.  Beginning  with  faith,  we  have  to  supply  in  our  faith  virtue,  which  is  to 
be  understood  in  the  special  sense  of  moral  energy,  or  "  a  strenuous  tone  and  vigour  of 
mind."  Faith  is  leaning  on  God,  or  allowing  God  to  work.  When  there  is  only  that 
Bide  of  things,  there  is  the  quietism  to  which  Madame  Guyon  gives  expression,  "  I  can 
no  longer  will  anything."  To  quiet  leaning  on  God,  passivity  under  the  working  of 
God,  there  is  necessary,  as  its  complement,  personal  force.  (2)  Knowledge.  "  And  in 
your  virtue  knowledge."  Let  us  suppose  that  we  have  supplied  in  our  faith  personal 
fr)rce :  is  that  enough  ?    Where  there  is  a  stopping  at  this,  there  is  a  tealotism,  the 


?!fi  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  PETER,    [oh.  1. 1—21 

3xpression  of  which  is, "  Let  us  be  on  fire :  let  us  only  be  forcible.''  But  in  forciblenest 
tlieie  must  be  supplied,  as  its  necessary  complement,  knowledge.  There  is  a  different 
svurd  here  from  what  was  formerly  used.  The  idea  is  that  there  must  be  enlightened 
judgment — an  apprehension  in  every  moment  of  what  is  the  right  application  of  the 
force.  (3)  Temperance.  "  And  in  your  knowledge  temperance."  Let  us  suppose  that 
we  have  supplied  in  our  force  knowledge :  is  that  enough?  Where  there  is  a  stopping 
at  this,  there  is  scUntism,  the  expression  of  which  is,  "Let  us  have  abundance  of  light ; 
let  us  not  be  imposed  on;  let  us  know  the  right  way  of  things."  But  in  this  know- 
ledge there  must  be  supplied,  as  its  necessary  complement,  temperance,  i.e.  the  subjec- 
tion of  our  appetites,  desires,  affections,  tempers,  to  knowledge,  which  is  very  difficult, 
seeing  that  we  are  strongly  tempted  from  within  to  be  guided,  not  by  what  we  know, 
but  by  what  is  pleasing  to  us.  (4)  Patience.  "And  in  your  temperance  patience." 
Let  us  suppose  that  we  have  supplied  in  our  knowledge  self-restraint :  is  that  enough  ? 
Where  there  is  a  stopping  at  this,  there  is  a  rigorism,  of  which  the  expression  is,  "  Let 
us  abstain ;  let  us  mortify  self."  But  in  this  self-restraint  there  must  be  supplied,  as 
its  necessary  complement,  patience,  which  is  a  sustaining  by  self,  or  putting  one's 
shoulder  under  the  burdens,  and  especially  the  hardships  of  life.  (5)  Godliness.  "  And 
in  your  patience  godliness."  Let  us  suppose  that  we  have  supplied  in  our  self-restraint 
patience:  is  that  enough?  Where  there  is  a  stopping  at  this,  there  is  a  stoicism,  of 
which  the  expression  is,  "  Let  us  be  insensible  to  pain ;  let  us  be  heedless  of  difficulties." 
But  in  ttds  patience  there  must  be  supplied,  as  its  necessary  complement,  godliness,  or 
a  God-regarding,  especially  God-fcaiins,  disposition,  without  which  there  cannot  be 
HubduednesB,  sweetness,  or  stay,  in  patience.  (6)  Love  of  the  brethren.  "  And  in  your 
godliness  love  of  the  brethren."  Let  us  suppose  that  we  have  supplied  in  our  patience 
godliness :  is  that  enough  ?  Where  there  is  a  stopping  at  this,  there  is  a  one-sided 
religiousness,  of  which  the  expression  is,  "Let  us  pray;  let  us  attend  conscientiously 
on  the  public  means  of  grace."  But  in  this  godliness  there  must  be  supplied,  as  its 
necessary  complement,  hve  of  the  brethren,  i.e.  of  those  who  are  our  brethren  in  Christ. 
"  For  he  that  loveth  not  his  brother  whom  he  hath  seen,  how  can  he  love  God  whom 
he  hath  not  seen?"(l  John  iv.  20);  "And  every  one  that  loveth  him  that  begat, 
loveth  him  also  that  is  begotten  of  him  "  (1  John  v.  1).  (7)  Love.  "  And  in  your  love 
of  the  brethren  love."  Let  us  suppose  that  we  have  supplied  in  our  godliness  love  of 
the  brethren :  is  that  enough  ?  Where  there  is  a  stopping  at  this,  there  is  a  narrow- 
heartedness,  of  which  the  expression  is,  "Let  us  make  the  Christian  circle  our  home; 
let  us  choose  the  society  of  those  who  have  the  same  thoughts  and  the  same  hopes." 
But  in  this  love  of  the  brethren  there  must  be  supplied  love  or  philanthropy — love  for 
all  that  bear  the  Divine  image  and  for  whom  Christ  died.  3.  Importance  of  develop- 
ment with  reference  to  knowltdge.  (1)  Positively.  "  For  if  these  things  are  yours  and 
abound,  they  make  you  to  be  not  idle  nor  unfruitful  unto  the  knowledge  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ."  By  "  these  things  "  we  are  to  understand  the  seven  virtues  which  are 
to  be  supplied  in  faith.  These  are  regarded  as  actually  subsisting  in  us  or  belonging 
to  us.  There  is  a  difference  between  their  thus  being  in  us  and  their  abounding  in  us. 
There  is  a  difference  between  an  infant's  finding  of  strength  and  the  consciousness  of  a 
giant's  strength.  There  is  a  difference  between  a  rudimentary  knowledge  and  a  know- 
ledge that  can  be  effectually  applied  to  every  question  of  duty  that  comes  up.  There 
is  a  difference  between  the  mastery  of  a  single  appetite  and  the  full  mastery  of  all  our 
appetencies  and  tempers.  There  is  a  difference  between  a  patience  that  is  imtried  and 
a  patience  that  can  stand  the  severest  test.  There  is  a  difference  between  a  sense  of 
the  Being  of  G«d  and  the  deepest  awe  in  the  realization  of  his  perfections.  There  is  a 
difference  between  a  sense  of  brotherhood  in  Christ  and  the  full  flood  of  Christian  brother- 
liness.  There  is  a  difference  between  an  interest  in  a  single  case  of  reclamation  and  a 
large-hearted  philanthropy.  Given,  then,  that  these  virtues  are  not  merely  in  us,  but 
aboui  id,  they  make  us,  literally,  put  us  in  a  position,  to  be  not  idle  nor  unfruitful.  If  there 
are  certain  elements  in  a  tree,  they  make  it  to  be  not  idle ;  i.e.  it  discharges  its  functions, 
it  puts  forth  fresh  shoots  and  leaves  and  blossoms.  And  making  it  not  idle,  they  also 
make  it  not  unfruitful;  i.e.  in  due  season  it  is  laden  with  fruit.  So  if  these  virtues  are 
in  us,  and  in  abundant  measure,  they  make  us  to  be  not  idle ;  t.e.  we  do  in  the  right 
manner.  And  making  ns  not  idle,  they  also  make  us  not  unfruitful;  i.e.  there  are  good 
results.    The  goal  toward  which  we  are  to  be  fruitful  is  the  knowledge  (/  our  Lord 


OH.  1. 1—21,]    THE  SECOND  li-cISTLB  GENERAL  OF  PETER.  8« 

Jetus  Chritt.  This  is  not  the  knowledge  that  is  mentioned  as  one  of  the  seven  virtues, 
but  the  mature  knowledge  that  has  heeu  twice  mentioned.  It  has  been  regarded  as  the 
means ;  now  it  is  regarded  as  the  end.  Showing  diligence  in  the  practice  of  the  seven 
virtues,  we  are  to  come  to  a  rich  appreciative  knowlc^dge  of  Jesus  Christ  (who  interprets 
God  to  us).  Paul  takes  our  aim  to  be  the  being  able  "  to  comprehend  with  all  saints 
what  is  the  breadth,  and  length,  and  depth,  and  height,  and  to  know  the  love  of  Christ, 
which  passeth  knowledge."  Peter  brings  into  view  the  knowledge  of  Jesus  Christ  as 
oar  Lord,  Le.  able  in  his  surpassing  power  to  accomplish  all  things  for  us.  (2)  Negatively, 
"  For  he  that  lacketh  these  things  is  blind,  seeing  only  what  is  near,  having  forgotten 
the  cleansing  from  his  old  sins."  We  are  to  practise  the  virtues ;  for  there  is  a  great 
disadvantage  in  lacking  them.  The  lacking  here  is  not  merely  the  not  having  them  in 
abundance,  but  the  not  having  them  at  all.  James  says  that  "  faith  without  works  is 
dead."  Peter  says  here  that  "he  who  has  not  supplied  the  seven  virtues  in  his  faith, 
instead  of  appreciating  Christ,  he  is  blind,"  t.e.  to  his  real  worth.  His  idea  of  blindness 
ho  brings  to  this  focus — that  he  is  shortsighted.  The  word  is  taken  from  a  certain  con- 
tracting of  the  eyelids  in  order  to  see.  He  sees  what  is  near,  but  does  not  see  what  is 
far  off.  The  thins^s  of  this  world  bulk  largely  in  his  eyes  ;  the  distant  realities  of  the 
eternal  world  do  not  come  within  his  vision.  The  explanation  of  this  kind  of  blindness 
is  his  having  lapsed.  There  was  a  time  when  he  was  baptized.  Then  he  was  regarded 
as  deansed/rom  his  old  sins ;  and  did  not  that  seem  to  indicate  a  certain  appreciation 
of  Christ?    But  having  forgotten  his  cleansing,  Christ  has  not  worth  in  his  eyes. 

III.  Resumption  of  exhobtatiok.  1.  Condition  restated.  "  Wherefore,  brethren, 
give  the  more  diligence  to  make  your  calling  and  election  sure."  This  is  tiie  only  use  of 
the  address  "brethren"  in  the  Epistles  of  Peter.  It  indicates  greater  closeuess  and 
lirgenc»7  in  his  exhortation.  He  proceeds  in  "  wherefore  the  more  "  on  the  advantage 
of  having  the  seven  virtues  in  abundance,  and  the  disadvantage  of  lacking  them. 
What  he  exhorts  them  to  is  increased  diligence.  The  tense  used  points  to  their  making 
this  diligence  a  lifelong  thing.  They  were  to  give  diligence  with  regard  to  their  calling 
and  election,  i.e.  by  God  into  his  kingdom,  the  latter  word  referring  to  the  actual 
separation  of  the  called  from  the  world.  This  calling  and  election,  looked  at  from  the 
lower  side,  was  a  matter  of  uncertainty ;  they  are  exhorted  to  make  it  a  matter  of  cer- 
tainty— to  allow  no  doubt  to  rest  on  their  interest  in  Christ  and  title  to  the  kingdom. 
It  is  not  said  how  they  are  to  make  their  calling  and  election  sure;  but  the  very  want 
of  specification  points  to  what  was  formerly  specified,  viz.  the  practise  of  the  seven 
virtues;  and  this  is  confirmed  by  what  follows.  2.  Importance.  (1)  Negatively. 
"For  if  ye  do  these  things,  ye  shall  never  stumble."  In  "for"  there  is  a  falling 
back  on  the  condition.  "Doing  these  things"  may  refer  to  making  their  calling  and 
election  sure ;  but  it  is  to  it  as  a  multiform  act,  viz.  as  covering  the  practice  of  the 
seven  virtues.  If  they  did  these  things  with  due  diligence,  they  would  never  make 
such  a  stumble  as  would  prevent  their  entrance  into  the  kingdom.  (2)  Positively. 
"For  thus  shall  be  richly  supplied  unto  you  the  entrance  into  the  eternal  kingdom 
of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ."  It  is  here  that  there  comes  into  view  the 
full  scope  of  the  condition  laid  down.  It  is  a  condition  upon  which  their  interest  in  a 
kingdom  depends.  It  is  no  mean  kingdom ;  for  it  is  the  kingdom  presided  over  by 
their  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ.  The  kingdom  of  Christ  is  essentially  the  same 
in  the  present  and  in  the  future ;  but  in  its  present  outward  conditions  it  is  to  come  to 
an  end,  in  its  future  conditions  it  is  to  be  eternal.  It  is  the  entrance  into  the  eternal 
kingdom  that  is  here  promised.  Coming  to  a  kingdom  is  usually  celebrated  ;  so  the 
entrance  here  must  be  legarded  as  a  glorious  event.  This  entrance  is  a  gift ;  and  yet 
it  corresponds  to  previous  diligence.  This  is  strikingly  brought  out  in  the  form  of  the 
language.  To  those  who  have  supplied  the  seven  virtues  in  their  faith  it  is  promised 
that  there  shall  be  supplied  unto  them  this  glorious  entrance.  But  stress  is  laid  upon 
the  kind  of  entrance.  There  is  a  difference  between  reaping  sparingly  and  reaping 
bountifully.  There  is  a  difference  between  a  righteous  man's  reward  and  a  prophot's 
reward.  There  is  a  difference  between  being  saved  as  by  fire,  and  being  saved  with  a 
golden  reward  or  a  silver  reward  or  a  reward  to  be  compared  to  precious  stones.  So 
there  iS  a  difierence  between  a  bare  entrance  and  an  entrance  that  is  richly  supplied. 
The  richly  supplied  entrance  is  only  for  those  who  have  in  the  highest  degree  been 
diligent  in  the  practice  of  the  seven  virtues.    Let  this  highest  prise  be  the  otject  of 


40  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PETER,    [ch.  1. 1— 21 

our  ambition.  Let  us  not  be  content  with  a  bare  entrance ;  let  us,  by  increased  diligence, 
enricL  tlie  entrance  that  we  are  to  have. — B.  F. 

Vers.  12 — 21. — Putting  in  mind.  L  The  time  of  puttino  in  hind.  1.  Putting 
in  mind  as  long  as  he  was  in  this  tabernacle.  "Wherefore  I  shall  be  ready  always  to 
put  you  in  remembrance  of  these  things,  though  ye  know  them,  and  are  established  in 
the  truth  which  is  with  you.  And  I  think  it  right,  as  long  as  I  am  in  this  tabernacle, 
to  stir  you  up  by  putting  you  in  remembrance ;  knowing  that  the  putting  off  of  my 
tabernacle  cometh  swiftly,  even  as  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  signified  unto  me."  Because 
of  the  importance  of  the  things  dealt  with  in  the  previous  verses,  Peter  declares  that 
he  would  be  ready  always,  i.e.  would  take  every  opportunity,  to  put  them  in  mind  of 
them.  "  In  matters  of  such  importance  reminders  can  never  be  superfluous ;  where- 
fore they  should  never  be  troublesome"  (Calvin).  In  one  way  tliere  was  not  need  for 
putting  them  in  mind;  for  he  bears  testimony  courteously  to  their  knowing  these 
things,  and  being  established,  i.e.  having  a  firm  standing,  in  the  truth  that  was  with 
them  (not  the  present-day  truth,  as  is  suggested  by  the  old  translation).  Feeling  their 
importance  himself,  he  thought  it  right  to  tell  them  the  same  things  again  and  again, 
thereby  to  stir  them  up,  i.e.,  to  a  due  sense  of  their  meaning.  It  is  important  to 
enlarge  the  circle  of  human  knowledge — to  get  new  thoughts,  new  facts,  new  combina- 
tions of  facts ;  but  it  is  a  thousand  times  more  important  to  have  the  complete  realiza- 
tion of  one  or  two  things  that  we  know.  Even  with  those  who  knew  and  were 
established  Peter  laboured,  by  reiteration,  to  stir  them  up — to  give  them  a  deeper 
impression  of  a  few  simple  gospul  truths.  He  was  resolved  to  stir  them  up  by 
putting  them  in  mind,  as  long  as  he  was  in  this  tabernacle.  This  is  a  familiar  designa- 
tion of  the  body  in  relation  to  the  soul  (in  2  Cor.  v.  1  it  is  "  tabernacle-house  ").  The 
body  is  a  covering  to  the  soul ;  it  keeps  it  from  being  exposed  to  the  glare  of  the  world. 
"Tabernacle"  also  suggests  that  whicli  can  be  quickly  taken  down  (in  Isa.  xxxviii.  12 
there  is  the  association  of  death  with  the  removal  of  a  shepherd's  tent) ;  the  connection  of 
the  body  with  the  soul  is  not  so  close  but  that  it  can  be  quickly  removed  as  a  shepherd's 
tent.  Peter  was  incited  to  action  by  the  knowledge  of  what  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  had 
signified  unto  him.  There  is  unmistakable  reference  to  John  xxi.  18,  19.  Our  Lord, 
according  to  what  is  recorded  there,  siguified  to  Peter  that  he  was  to  die  a  martyr's  death. 
Let  Peter's  language  here  be  observed.  There  was  to  be  not  the  striking  of  his  tent,  but 
still,  not  out  of  keeping  with  the  idea  of  a  tent  as  a  temporary  soul-covering,  the  putting 
of  it  off.  And  swift  or  sudden  was  the  manner  in  which  it  was  to  be  put  off.  We  are 
not  to  think  of  the  swiftness  of  death's  approach  (unless  in  the  use  of  the  present  tense), 
but  of  death's  swift  work  when  it  did  come.  He  was  to  end  his  life  by  a  violent  death. 
Our  Lord  had  signified  to  him  that  he  was  not  to  die  soon ;  it  was  only  when  he  became 
old  that  he  was  to  stretch  forth  his  hands,  and  another  was  to  gird  him,  and  carry  him 
whither  he  would  not.  He  was  now  old,  without  the  assurance  he  had  once  had  of 
living  long ;  and  as  our  Lord  had  signified  to  him  that  not  much  time  was  to  be 
occupied  in  the  putting  off  of  his  tabernacle,  so  long  as  he  was  in  it  he  would  let 
slip  no  opportunity  of  putting  them  in  mind.  "  Teachers  who  are  long  sick  can  still 
feed  others.  The  cross  was  not  to  permit  that  to  Peter.  So  he  sees  to  doing  before- 
hand what  required  to  be  done  "  (Ben  gel).  2.  Putting  in  mind  as  affected  by  his 
decease.  "  Yea,  I  will  give  diligence  that  at  every  time  ye  may  be  able  after  my 
decease  to  call  these  things  to  remembrance."  "  Decease "  is  literally  "  departure," 
which,  from  the  context,  we  may  take  to  be  departure  out  of  the  tabernacle  of  the  body. 
In  view  of  what  follows,  it  is  to  be  remarked  that  both  "  tabernacle  "  and  "  decease  "  are 
words  associated  with  the  Transfiguration-scene.  How  were  they  to  be  provided  for 
after  his  decease  ?  He  was  to  use  diligence,  that  they  would  then  be  able,  as  occasion 
arose,  to  call  these  things  to  mind.  We  can  think  of  Peter  here  reflecting  the  Divine 
thoughtfulness.  The  apostles  were  not  to  live  alway ;  so  God  saw  to  the  important 
things  being  put  down  in  a  permanent  form  in  the  New  Testament.  Peter,  now  an 
old  man,  was  to  die  swiftly;  so,  as  the  servant  of  God,  he  was  to  see  to  the  important 
things  being  put  down  in  writing,  that,  as  occasion  arose,  they  might  be  able  to  call 
them  clearly  to  mind. 

II.  Putting  ih  kind  with  kbfebenob  to  the  subject  of  the  second  oomino. 
1,  Th«  certainty  of  tb»  coming,  "  For  we  did  not  follow  cunningly  devised  fables,  when 


OH.  1. 1—21.^     THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  PETER.  41 

we  made  known  unto  you  the  power  and  coming  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  There  are 
two  important  points  to  be  noticed  here.  In  the  first  place,  Peter,  writing  in  the  name 
of  the  other  apostles,  declares  that  they  were  careful  in  what  they  admitted  into  the 
historical  hasis  of  their  religion.  They  saw  the  putting  forward  of  cnmningly  devised 
fcAles — stories  without  foundation  in  reality,  cleverly  concocted,  so  as  to  impose  on  the 
ignorant,  and  to  keep  up  the  influence  of  the  priesthood  or  the  false  teachers.  They 
did  not  follow  this  lead ;  but  were  careful  to  exclude  all  mythical  elements,  and  to  admit 
only  well-established  fact.  In  the  second  place,  Peter  and  the  other  apostles  made 
known  unto  the  persons  addressed  the  power  and  coming  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  The 
first  exhibition  of  power  was  when  Christ  rose  from  the  dead ;  its  full  exhibition  was 
to  be  at  the  coming.  It  is  true  that  in  this  Epistle  there  is  no  direct  reference  to  the 
weakness  and  death  of  Christ;  this  is  to  be  explained  by  the  circumstances  in  which 
Peter  wrote.  There  are  times  when  we  need  to  pass  on  from  the  humiliation,  and  to 
allow  our  minds  to  be  occupied  with  the  exaltation.  2.  The  attesting  power  of  the 
Transfiguration  to  the  coming.  (1)  Eye-testimony.  "  But  we  were  eye-witnesses  of  his 
majesty."  The  refereuce,  as  is  seen  from  what  loUows,  is  to  the  Transfiguration.  The 
three  who  were  admitted  as  witnesses  were  Peter  and  James  and  John :  they  were 
admitted,  while  others  were  excluded.  What  they  saw  was  not  his  ordinary  earthly 
form,  but  that  form  transfigured — what  is  here  called  his  majesty.  "  His  sarments," 
according  to  the  graphic  account  of  Mark,  "  became  glistering,  exceeding  white;  so  as 
no  fuller  on  earth  can  whiten  them."  This  remarkable  manifestation,  which  was  out  of 
the  ordinary  course  in  Christ's  earthly  life,  which  was  not  for  the  common  gaze,  testified 
to  the  coming,  inasmuch  as  it  was  to  be  regarded  as  the  glorifying  of  Christ  before- 
hand. It  was  Christ  seen  as  he  was  to  be  after  his  ascension.  It  was  Christ  as  he  was 
afterwards  seen  by  the  prisoner  of  Patmos  in  his  actually  glorified  condition.  (2)  Ear- 
testimony,  (a)  What  was  heard.  "  For  he  received  from  God  the  Father  honour  and 
glory,  when  there  came  such  a  voice  to  him  from  the  excellent  glory.  This  is  my 
beloved  Son,  in  whom  I  am  well  pleased."  In  the  original  the  verse  begins,  "  for  having 
received,"  and  is  interrupted  before  its  close.  The  honour  and  glory  from  God  the 
Father  are  to  be  associated  with  the  voice,  but  with  the  voice  as  expressive  of  the 
majesty  that  was  seen  by  the  eye.  The  voice  is  represented  as  borne  to  him,  not  from, 
but  by,  the  excellent  glory,  which  is  putting  for  God  the  excellent  glory  in  which  he 
dwells,  so  as  to  raise  an  impression  of  the  magnificence  of  the  scene.  The  voice  was 
such  as  this,  "  This  is  my  beloved  Son,  in  whom  I  am  well  pleased."  There  is  only  a 
■light  variation  from  the  words  given  in  Matthew,  the  efiect  of  which  is  to  present  the 
good  pleasure  of  the  Father  as  on  his  beloved  Son,  so  as  to  abide  and  not  to  leave  him. 
This  was  fitted  to  encourage  Christ  in  prospect  of  the  decease  which  he  was  to  accom- 
plish at  Jerusalem.  As  testimony  to  the  coming,  it  is  to  be  taken  along  with  the  change 
presented  to  sight.  In  that  anticipation  of  glory  was  to  be  read  how  the  good 
pleasure  of  God  was  to  find  manifestation.  (6)  The  hearing.  "  And  this  voice  we 
ourselves  heard  come  out  of  heaven,  when  we  were  with  him  in  the  holy  mount."  This 
helps  to  emphasize  the  reality  of  the  voice.  There  was  no  possibility  of  deception ;  the 
voice  was  heard  borne  in  upon  them,  borne  in  from  heaven.  There  was  present  the 
condition  of  three  witnesses,  by  which  it  is  established  as  a  fact.  This  also  helps  to 
connect  the  thought  distinctly  with  the  Transfiguration.  The  voice  was  heard  when 
they,  the  three,  were  with  him  in  the  holy  mount — the  mount  rendered  holy  by  the 
association.  3.  The  attesting  power  of  the  prophetic  Word  to  the  coming.  (1)  The 
greater  attesting  power  of  the  prophetic  Word.  "  And  we  have  the  Word  of  prophecy 
made  more  sure."  The  literal  translation  is  preferable,  "  And  we  have  more  sure  the 
prophetic  Word."  By  "the  prophetic  Word"  we  are  to  understand  the  Bible,  with 
special  reference  to  what  it  has  to  say  about  the  future  in  its  connection  with  Christ. 
It  must  be  recognized  that  a  comparison  is  instituted.  The  comparison  is  not  between 
the  voice  from  heaven  and  the  prophetic  Word,  but  rather  between  the  Transfiguration 
(with  the  accompaniment  of  the  voice)  and  the  prophetic  Word  in,  their  attesting  power 
to  the  second  coming.  The  fact  was  significant;  but  there  is  greater  satisfaction  in 
having  definite  statements  as  to  Christ's  coming.  It  is  the  old  prophetic  Word  that 
Peter  seems  to  have  in  his  mind ;  but  we  may  regard  it  as  elucidated  and  filled  up  by 
New  Testament  statements.  From  these  statements  we  can  have  some  conception  of 
the  scene.    The  Lord  descends  from  his  heavenly  throne  iu  majesty.    The  moment 


4a 


THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PETBEl.    [oh.  n.  1—22 


that  the  Lord  descends,  the  archangel  marshals  hia  innumerable  host,  giving  the  shout 
of  command  with  the  living  voice.  Having  marshalled  his  hosts  to  move  in  harmony 
with  the  descending  Lord,  be  at  a  subsequent  stage  gives  another  shout  of  command, 
this  time  not  with  the  living  voice,  but  with  the  trump  of  God.  At  the  trumpet-call 
the  dead  arise.  The  Christian  dead,  raised  with  reconstituted  bodies,  join  tho 
Christian  living,  whose  bodies  are  transformed,  making  one  company,  and,  caught  up 
in  the  enveloping,  upbearing  clouds,  they  meet  their  descending  Lord  with  tlie 
marshalled  army  of  angels  in  the  air.  The  Lord  descends  to  earth ;  before  him  are 
gathered  all  nations,  and,  as  Judge,  he  separates  them  one  from  another,  as  the  shepherd 
separateth  the  sheep  from  the  goats.  The  wicked  receive  their  desert;  the  righteous 
ascend  in  the  triumphant  retinue  to  heaven,  to  be  for  ever  with  the  Lord.  (2)  On 
account  of  its  certainty  we  are  to  take  heed  to  it.  "  Whereunto  ye  do  well  that  ye  take 
heed,  as  unto  a  lamp  shining  in  a  dark  placOj  until  the  day  dawn,  and  the  day-star  arise 
in  your  hearts."  We  do  well  to  take  heed  to  what  the  Bible  says  about  the  issues  of  life 
as  connected  with  the  coming  of  Christ.  The  prophetic  Word  is  here  compared  to  a 
lamp,  on  account  of  the  clear  light  it  sheds.  It  is  true  of  the  Bible  as  a  whole  that 
it  is  as  a  lamp.  "  This  lamp  from  off  the  everlasting  throne  mercy  took  down."  The 
dark  place  in  which  it  shines  is  the  world.  How  dark  would  the  world  be  but  for  the 
light  it  casts  upon  God  and  upon  the  future  I  It  is  to  continue  to  shine  until  the  day 
dawn,  and  the  day-star  arise.  This  bringing  in  of  the  fuU  day  is  to  be  regarded  as  Christ's 
coming.  Then  the  Bible,  in  its  earthly  form,  will  have  served  its  purpose ;  it  will  give 
place  to  the  great  Teacher  himself.  The  relation  of  all  to  that  coming  is  not  to  be  joy- 
ful ;  to  gome  it  will  only  be  the  time  of  exposure,  the  time  of  discomfiture  and  of 
consignment  to  darkness.  But  it  is  to  come  with  a  blessed  certainty  in  the  hearts  of 
Christ's  people.  It  is  the  beginning  of  a  long  bright  day  to  them  in  the  presence  of 
their  Lord.  (3)  The  grotmd  of  the  certainty  on  account  of  which  we  are  to  take  heed  to 
it.  "  Knowing  this  first,  that  no  prophecy  of  Scripture  is  of  private  interpretation. 
For  no  prophecy  ever  came  by  the  will  of  man :  but  men  spake  from  God,  being 
moved  by  the  Holy  Ghost."  The  statement,  declared  to  be  of  prime  importance,  that 
no  prophecy  of  Scripture  is  of  private  interpretation,  was  long  obscure ;  and  Soman 
Catholic  theologians  took  advantage  of  the  obscurity  to  assert  that  its  meaning  is  that 
Scripture  can  only  be  interpreted  by  the  Church,  and  not  by  private  Christians.  There 
is  now  clearness  as  to  its  meaning,  which  is  that  the  prophet  did  not  proceed  on  hit 
own  private  interpretation  of  things.  For,  it  is  added,  no  prophecy  ever  came  by  the 
will  of  man,  i.e.  originated  in  mere  human  determination.  Men  indeed  spoke  (and  not 
always  holy  men,  as  in  the  case  of  Balaam);  there  was  thus  the  exercise  of  the  human 
mind  to  a  certain  extent,  there  was  the  human  form  in  what  they  spoke,  there  were 
even  individual  characteristics  brought  out ;  but  the  higher  causal  account  of  it  was  that 
they  spoke  from  God,  and  because  they  were  borne  along  unresistingly  by  the  Holy 
Ghost.  There  was  thus,  which  is  the  point  here,  secured  certainty,  infallibility  in  what 
they  spoke.  We  do  well,  then,  to  take  heed  to  what  they  say  to  us.  "  He  that  hath  an 
ear,  let  him  hear  what  the  Spirit  saith." — ^R.  P. 


EXPOSITION. 


OHAPTEE  n. 


Ver.  I.— But  there  were  false  prophets 
also  among  the  people;  rather,  as  in  the 
Revised  Version,  tuf  <Aej-e  arose  false  prophets 
also  among  the  people.  The  transition  is 
simple  and  natural.  Besides  the  true  pro- 
phets mentioned  in  the  last  chapter,  Vho 
spake  as  they  were  moved  by  the  Holy 
Ghost,  there  arose  false  prophets,  men  who 
wore  "  a  rough  garment  to  deceive  "  (Zech. 
xilL  4),  and  assumed  without  warrant  the 
prophetic  character.  Such  pretenders  would 
Commonly  ' prophecy  false  things;  but  the 


word  }fi(vSoirpofrjrat  seems  prinoipally  to 
imply  the  absence  of  a  Diviue  mission.  By 
"  the  people  "  (\a6si')  is  meant  the  people  of 
Israel,  as  in  Rom.  xv.ll;  Jude  5,  eto.  It 
is  plain  from  these  words  that  St.  Peter,  at 
the  end  of  the  last  oliapter,  was  speaking  of 
the  prophets  of  the  Old  Testament,  £vea 
as  there  shall  be  false  teachers  among  yoo, 
who  privily  shall  bring  in  damnable  heresies. 
By  the  false  teachers,  again  (the  word  ij/kvSi- 
StSdffKaXoi  is  peculiar  to  St.  Peter),  may  be 
meant  men  whose  teaching  was  false,  or 
men  who  falsely  claimed  the  teacher's  office. 
Si  Peter  deseribes  them  as  such  as  (pXruns) 


OH.n.  J— 22.]    THE  SECOND  EPISTLS  GENERAL  OF  PETER. 


43 


shall  faring  in  damnable  herenegk  The  verb 
(vapttad^miriv)  is  foand  Qnl;  here  in  the  New 
Testaments  the  adjective  derived  from  it 
is  used  by  St  Paul  in  Gal,  ii.  4,  "false 
brethren  unawares  brought  in."  It  means, 
"to  biing  in  by  the  side  of,"  as  if  these 
lalse  teachers  brought  in  their  errors  by  the 
aide  of  the  true  dootdue;  it  implies  also  the 
secondary  notion  of  secrecy.  Compare  St. 
Jade's  nse  of  the  verb  irapfureSvaw,  com- 
pounded with  the  same  prepositions  (ver. 
4) ;  and  notice  the  difference  of  tenses— St. 
Jade  using  the  past  where  St.  Peter  looks 
forward  to  the  future ;  but  St.  Peter  passes 
to  the  present  tense  in  ver,  10,  and  maintains 
it  for  the  rest  of  the  chapter.  We  may,  per- 
haps, infer  that  the  false  teaehiug  reierred 
to  was  already  beginning  to  affect  the 
Ohurcbes  of  Asia  Minor;  but  the  errors 
Were  not  so  much  developed  there,  the 
false  teachers  had  not  gained  so  much 
influence  aa  it  seems  they  had  in  the 
Churches  which  St  Jude  had  principally  in 
his  thoughts.  The  literal  translation  of  the 
words  rendered  "damnable  heresies"  is 
"heresies  of  destruction,"  the  last  word 
being  the  game  which  occurs  again  at  the 
end  of  the  verse.  These  heresies  destroy 
the  soul ;  they  bring  ruin  both  to  tbose  who 
are  led  astray  and  to  the  false  teachers 
themselves.  The  word  for  "  heresy  "  (a'/peo-u), 
meaning  originally  "choice,"  became  the 
name  for  a  party,  sect  or  school,  as  in  Acts 
T.  17,  "the  sect  of  the  Sadduoees;"  Acts 
XV.  5, "  the  seet  of  the  Pharisees ; "  Acts  xxiv. 
5  (in  the  mouth  of  TertuUus),  "  the  sect  of 
the  Nnzareues;"  then,  by  a  natural  transition, 
it  came  to  he  used  of  the  opinions  held  by 
•  sect  The  notion  of  self-will,  deliberate 
separation,  led  to  its  being  employed 
generally  itt  a  bad  sense  (see  especially 
Titus  iii.  10,  "A  man  that  is  a  heretic, 
{al/KTuiis)"}.  Even  denying  the  Lord  that 
bought  them;  literally,  as  in  the  Beviaed 
Version,  denying  even  the  Master  that  bought 
them.  The  word  for  "Master"  (§e(iir<(TDs) 
implies  that  the  deniera  stand  to  the  Lord  in 
thb  relation  of  slaves,  bondservants.  The 
Lord  had  bought  tliem ;  they  were  not  their 
own,  hut  his,  bought  with  a  price,  "not  with 
corruptible  things,  as  silver  and  gold,  but 
with  the  precious  blood  ojf  Clirist"  (1  Pet.  i. 
18 ;  see  also  the  pwallel  passage  Jude  4). 
These  words  plainly  assert  the  universality 
of  the  Lord's  redemption.  He  "tasted 
death  for  every  man  "  (Heb.  ii.  9),  even  for 
those  false  teachers  who  denied  him.  The 
denial  referred  to  may  have  been  doctrinal 
or  practical;  most  of  the  ancient  forms  of 
heresy  involved  some  grave  error  as  to  the 
Person  of  Christ;  and  the  germs  of  these 
errois  appeared  very  eajrly  in  the  Church 
(see  1  Jc^n  ii  22,  -23),  denying  sometimes 
the  Godhead  of  our  I«rd,  sometimes  the 


truth  of  his  humanity.  But  St  Peter  may 
meau  the  practical  denial  of  Christ  evinced 
in  an  ungodly  and  licentious  life.  The 
latter  form  of  denial  appears  most  prominent 
in  this  chapter}  probably  the  apostle  in- 
tended to  warn  his  readers  against  both.  It 
is  touching  to  remember  that  he  had  himself 
denied  the  Lord,  though  indeed  the  price 
with  which  our  suuls  were  bought  had  not 
then  been  paid ;  hut  his  denial  was  at  once 
followed  by  a  deep  and  true  repentance. 
The  Lord's  loving  look  recalled  him  to  him- 
self; his  bitter  tears  proved  the  sincerity  of 
his  contrition.  And  bring  upon  themselves 
swift  destruotion;  literally,  bringing.  The 
participial  construction  unites  the  two 
clauses  closely;  the  Mtter  expresses  the 
consequence  of  the  former.'  tbey  bring 
heresies  of  destruction  into  the  Church,  and 
by  80  doing  bring  upon  themselvts  swift 
destruotion.  The  word  for  «  swift "  (rexWs) 
is  used  by  no  other  New  Testament  writer. 
There  is  an  apparent  allusion  to  this  verse 
in  Justin  Martyr  ('OumTrypij.,'  lsxxii.),and 
the  first  clause  of  it  is  quoted  in  a  homily 
ascribed  to  Hippolytus  of  Portus.  Notice 
St.  Peter's  habit  of  repetition.  He  repeats 
the  word  aTniAfiB  three  times  in  vers.  1 — 3 ; 
Sixaios  three  times  in  vers.  7,  8;  the  verb 
irpaaSiuciai  three  times  in  oh.  iii.  18 — 14,  etc 

Ver.  a.'-^And  many  shall  follow  their  per' 
nioious  ways;  rather,  as  in  the  Revised 
Version,  (heir  laecivious  doings  ;  the  reading 
represented  by  the  Authorised  Version  lias 
very  little  support  (comp.  Jude  4,  8).  (For 
"  shall  follow  "  (6i«Ko\ouei)orov(ri»),  see  note 
on  oh.  i.  16.)  By  reason  of  whom  the  way  of 
truth  shall  be  evil  spoken  of.  The  heathen 
were  accustomed  to  cha:rge  Christians  with 
immorality;  the  conduct  of  these  f«lse 
teachers  gave  them  occasion;  they  did  not 
distinguisb  between  these  licentious  heretics 
and  true  Christians.  The  expression,  "  way 
of  truth,"  occurs  in  the '  Epistle  of  Barnabas,' 
ch.  V.  Christianity  is  called  "  the  way '" 
several  tiroes  in  the  Acta  (ii,  2 ;  iJx.  9,  83, 
etc).  It  is  tJie  way  of  truth,  because  Christ 
who  is  the  Centre  of  his  religion,  is  the  Way, 
the  Truth,  and  the  Life ;  tecause  it  is  the 
way  of  life  which  is  founded  on  the  truth. 

Ver.  3.— And  through  oovetousness  shall 
they  with  feigned  words  make  merchandise 
of  you;  rather,  t»  coioeioumeu,  Covetous- 
nesji  was  their  besetting  sin,  the  sphere  in 
whicb  they  lived.  St  Paul  warned  Titus 
against,  false  teachers  who  taught  "things 
which  they  ought  not,  for  filthy  lucre's 
sake  "  (Titus  ill;  see  also  1  Tim,  vi  6  and 
Jude  16),  gimon  Magus,  the  first  heresiarch, 
sought  to  trade  ia  holy  things;  the  like  ai« 
seems  to  have  been  oharacteristie  of  the 
false  teachers  of  apostolic  times.  The  word 
translated  "  feigned  "(jrXarroir)  occurs  bob 
where  else  in  the  New  Testament;   tho 


n 


THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  PETER,    [ch.  n.  1— 22, 


wordg  of  these  men  were  not  the  expression 
of  their  real  thoughts  and  feelings:  they 
were  invented,  craftily  oontiiTed  to  deceive 
men,  and  that  for  the  sake  of  money.  The 
last  words  of  the  clause  will  admit  another 
sense:  "shall  gain  you,"  i,e.  "shall  gain 
you  over  to  their  party;"  and  this  view 
derives  some  support  from  the  nae  of  the 
verb  i/tiropeitireai  in  the  Septuagint  Version 
of  Prov.  iii.  14.  But  the  verb  is  often  used 
in  classical  writers  in  the  sense  of  making  a 
profit  out  of  people  or  things,  and  this  mean- 
ing seems  most  suitable  here.  The  false 
teachers  will  work  hard,  as  the  Pharisees 
did,  to  make  proselytes;  but  their  real 
motive  is,  not  the  salvation  of  souls,  but 
their  own  selfish  g^.  Whose  judgment 
now  of  a  long  time  Uugereth  not ;  literally, 
for  whom  the  tentence  of  a  long  time  idUth 
not.  The  sentence  of  judgment  is  for  them, 
for  their  condemnation;  in  the  foreknow- 
ledge of  God  it  has  been  pronounced  long 
ago,  and  ever  since  it.  has  been  drawing 
near ;  it  doth  not  tarry  (comp.  Jude  4  and 
1  Pet.  iv.  17).  The  word  rendered  "  of  a 
long  time"  (fK7ro\ai)  occurs  only  here  and 
ch.  iii.  5.  And  their  damnation  slumbereth 
not;  deilruMon:  it  is  the  word  which  has 
been  used  already  twice  in  ver.  1.  The 
verb  means  literally  "to  nod,"  then  "to 
slumber ; "  it  is  found  elsewhere  in  the  New 
Testament  only  in  the  parable  of  the  virgins 
(Matt.  ixv.  5). 

Ver.  4. — For  if  Ood  spared  not  the  angels 
that  sinned ;  rather,  angels  when  they  sinned ; 
there  is  no  article.  St.  Peter  is  giving 
proofs  of  his  assertion  tliat  the  punishment 
of  the  ungodly  lingereth  not.  The  first  is 
the  punishment  of  angels  that  sinned.  He 
does  not  specify  the  sin,  whether  rebellion, 
as  in  Rev.  xii.  7;  or  nncteanness,  as 
apparently  in  Jude  6,  7,  and  Gen.  vi.  4. 
Formally,  there  is  an  anacoluthon  here,  but 
in  thought  we  have  the  apodosis  in  ver.  9. 
But  cast  them  down  to  hell.  The  Greek 
word,  which  is  found  nowhere  else  in  the 
Greek  Scriptures,  is  Taprapiaas,  "having 
cast  into  Tartarus."  This  use  of  a  word 
belonging  to  heathen  mythology  is  very 
remarkable,  and  without  p:irallel  in  the  New 
Testament.  (The  word  rdprapos  occurs  in 
the  Septuagint,  Job  xl.  15.  Compare  also 
the  Septuagint  rendering  of  the  name  of 
Job's  daughter  Keren-Happuoh,  'A/iaASalat 
K^pas,  the  horn  of  AmalthsBa ;  and  the  word 
ireipTJyis  in  Isa.  xliii.  20.)  Apparently,  St. 
Peter  regards  Tartarus  not  as  equivalent  to 
Gehenna,  for  the  sinful  angels  are  "  reserved 
unto  judgment,"  but  as  a  place  of  preliminary 
detention.  Josephus,  quoted  by  Professor 
Lumby  in  the  'Speaker's  Commentary,' 
speaks  of  the  oldest  heathen  gods  as  fettered 
in  Tartarus,  if  Tttprdpif  SeSefiei/ous  ('  Contra 
Apion,'  ii.  33).    And   delivered  them  into 


chains  of  darkness.  The  Hevised  Version 
"  pits "  represents  the  reading  of  the  four 
oldest  manuscripts;  but  the  variations  in 
two  of  them  (the  Sinaitio  and  Alexandrine 
have  aeipoTs  (i^ots),  and  the  fact  that  <reip6s 
seems  properly  to  mean  a  pit  for  the  storage 
of  corn,  throw  some  doubt  upon  this  reading. 
The  other  reading  creipais,  cords,  may  possibly 
have  arisen  from  the  parallel  passage  in 
Jude  6,  though  the  Greek  word  for  "chains" 
is  different  there.  The  chains  consist  in 
darkness;  the  pits  are  in  darkness.  IlapESwKc, 
delivered,  ia  often  used,  as  Huther  remarks, 
with  the  implied  idea  of  punishment.  It  is 
simpler  to  connect  the  chains  or  pits  of 
darkness  with  this  verb  than  (as  Fronmuller 
and  others)  with  Taprapiaas,  "  having  oast 
them  in  bonds  of  darkness  into  Tartarus" 
(comp.  Wisd.  xvii.  2,  16,  17).  To  bo  re- 
served unto  judgment;  literally,  being 
reserved;  but  the  readings  here  are  very 
confused.  St.  Jude  says  (ver.  6)  that  the 
sinful  angels  are  reserved  "  unto  the  judg- 
ment of  the  great  day."  Bengel  says, 
"  PoBsunt  autem  in  terra  qnoque  versari 
mancipia  Tartari  (Luke  viii.  31 ;  Eph.  ii.  2 ; 
etc.)  sic  ut  hello  captus  etiam  extra  locum 
captivitatis  potest  ambulare."  But  in  the 
case  of  a  mystery  of  which  so  little  has  been 
revealed,  we  are  scarcely  justified  in  as- 
suming the  identity  of  the  angels  cast  into 
Tartarus  with  the  evil  spirits  who  tempt 
and  harass  us  on  earth. 

Ver.  S. — And  spared  not  the  old  world, 
but  saved  Noah  the  eighth  person;  rather, 
as  in  the  Bevised  Version,  the  ancient  world, 
hut  'preserved  Noah  with  seven  others.  "  The 
eighth "  is  a  common  classical  idiom 
(generally  with  the  pronoun  airSs)  for 
"  with  seven  others."  Mark  the  close 
parallelism  with  1  Pet.  iii.  20,  where,  as 
here,  the  apostle  impresses  upon  his  readers 
the  fewness  of  the  saved.  A  preacher  of 
righteousness.  The  Old  Testament  nana^ 
tive  does  not  directly  assert  this ;  but "  a  just 
man  and  perfect,"  who  "  walked  with  God" 
(Gen.  vi.  9),  must  have  been  a  preacher 
(literally,  "herald")  of  righteousness  to  the 
ungodly  among  whom  he  lived.  Josephus, 
in  a  well-known  passage  ('  Ant,'  i.  3. 1),  says 
that  Noah  tried  to  persuade  his  neighbours 
to  change  their  mind  and  their  actions  for 
the  better.  Bringing  in  the  Flood  upon  the 
world  of  the  ungodly.  The  Revised  Version 
renders,  when  he  brought  a  Flood  upon  the 
world.  In  the  Greek  there  is  no  article 
throughout  this  verse.  In  ver.  1  the  un- 
godly are  represented  as  bringing  upon 
themselves  swift  destruction;  here  God 
brings  the  punisliment  upon  them.  The 
same  Greek  verb  is  used  in  both  places.  In 
one  place  St.  Peter  gives  the  human,  in  the 
other  the  Divine,  aspect  -of  the  same  events 
(comp.  Clement  I.  vii.  and  ix.). 


OH.  n.  1—22.]    THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PETER. 


46 


Yer.  6. — And  taming  the  cities  of  Sodom 
and  Gomonaii  into  ashes  condemned  them 
with  an  overthrow.  The  striking  word 
T6^pt5(ros,  turning  into  ashes,  occurs  no- 
whoie  else  in  the  New  Testament ;  and  the 
word  for  "  overthrow  "  (/coToffTpoi^^)  only  in 
2  Tim.  ii.  14.  It  is  used  in  the  Septuagint 
Version  of  Gen.  six.  29  of  this  same  judg- 
ment. Perhaps  "to  an  overthrow"  is  a 
better  translation  (comp.  Luke  xvii.  26 — 29 ; 
Jude  7).  MaJcing  them  an  ensample  unto 
those  that  after  should  live  ungodly ;  rather, 
having  made.  The  example  is  to  he  a 
lasting  warning;  literally,  an  example  of 
those  that  should  live  ungodly;  i.e.  an  ex- 
ample of  their  punishment,  their  end.  In 
this  verse  the  Vatican  Manuscript  omits 
"with  an  overthiow,"  and  reads  "an  ex- 
ample of  things  to  come  unto  the  ungodly." 
Ver.  7. — And  delivered  just  Lot,  vexed 
with  the  filthy  conversation  of  the  wicked ; 
literally,  OMd  delivered  righteous  Lot,  who 
wai  being  worn  out  ^iiaTaitovovjj.evov;  comp. 
Acts  vii.  24,  the  only  other  place  of  the 
New  Testament  where  the  word  occurs) 
with  the  behaviour  of  the  lawless  in  Koen- 
tiousness.  The  word  translated  "lawless" 
(dfleff/iac)  is  found  only  in  one  other  place 
of  the  New  Testament  (ch.  iii.  17);  but  it  is 
near  akin  to  the  iStuhois  ("  abominable  ")  of 
1  Pet.  iv.  3. 

Ver.  8. — For  that  righteous  man  dwelling 
among  them;  literally,  for  the  righteous 
man.  It  was  through  his  own  choice  that 
he  dwelt  among  the  people  of  Sodom.  The 
recollection  of  this  grave  mistake  must  have 
added  bitterness  to  the  daily  distress  caused 
by  the  sins  of  his  neighbours  (Gen.  xiii.  11). 
In  seeing  and  hearing,  vexed  his  righteous 
soul  from  day  to  day  with  their  unlawful 
deeds.  The  words, "  in  seeing  and  hearing," 
are  best  connected  with  the  verb  that 
follgwB,  not  with  "righteous"  according 
to  the  Vulgate  (though  this  would  be  the 
natural  oonaectiou,  if  with  the  Vatican 
Manuscript  we  omit  the  article),  nor  with 
"  dwelling  among  them."  The  literal  trans- 
lation is,  "was  tormenting  his  righteous 
soul."  The  sight  of  lawless  deeds  and  the 
aound  of  wicked  words  were  a  daily  grief 
to  Lot.  He  distressed  himself ;  he  felt  the 
guilt  and  danger  of  his  neighbours,  the 
dishonour  done  to  God,  and  his  own 
unhappy  choice.  St.  Peter  cannot  mean 
(as  (Ecumeniua  and  Theopbylact  suppose) 
that  Lot's  affliction  was  caused  by  the  sus- 
tained effort  to  resist  the  temptation  of 
falling  into  the  like  vices  himself.  The 
Greek  words  for  "  seeing  "  and  "  dwelling 
among"  occur  only  here  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment. 

Ver.  9. — The  lord  knoweth  how  to  de- 
liver the  godly  out  of  temptations,  and  to 
reserve  the  unjust  unto  the  day  of  judgment 


to  be  punished.  We  have  here  the  apodosis 
corresponding  with  the  conditional  sentence 
beginning  at  ver.  4.  'J'he  three  examples 
cited  by  St.  Peter  show  that  the  Lord 
knows  (and  with  the  Lord  knowledge  in- 
volves power)  how  to  deliver  the  righteous 
and  to  punish  the  wicked.  The  Greek 
words  for  "  godly  "  and  "  unjust "  are  both 
without  the  article.  The  word  rendered 
"  to  be  punished  "  (Ko\a(o/i€i/*vO  is  a  present 
participle,  not  future,  and  is  better  ren- 
dered, as  in  the  Eevised  Version,  "under 
punishment."  The  wicked  are  already 
under  punishment  while  awaiting  the  judg- 
ment; the  Lord  had  taught  this  in  the 
parable  of  Dives  and  Lazarus  (comp.  also 
Jude  6,  7,  and  ver.  4  of  this  chapter). 
Aristotle  makes  a  distinction  between  k6- 
Xairis  and  rtfxapia,  the  first  being  "chas- 
tisement inflicted  for  the  good  of  those 
chastised;"  the  second,  "punishment  in- 
flicted on  the  incorrigible  for  the  satisfaction 
of  justice"  (see  'Ehet.,'  i.  10);  but  it  is 
doubtful  whether  this  distinction  exists  in 
the  New  Testament  (comp.  Matt.  xxv.  46). 
Therefore  it  seems  dangerous  to  lay  much 
stress  on  the  nse  of  the  word  Ko\aCo/ievovs 
here  (comp.  Clement,  I.  xi.). 

Ver.  10. — But  chiefly  them  that  walk 
after  the  flesh  iu  the  lust  of  uncleanness; 
literally,  tn  the  Imt  of  pollution.  The  word 
occurs  nowhere  else  in  the  New  Testament, 
but  the  corresponding  verb  is  found  in 
several  places  (Titus  i.  15;  Eeb.  xii.  15; 
Jude  8).  We  observe  that  iu  this  verse  St. 
Peter  passes  from  the  future  tense  to  the 
present.  And  despise  government;  rather, 
lordship  (vu^kStiitos).  St.  Jude  has  the 
same  word  In  ver.  8.  In  Eph.  i.  21  and 
Col.  i.  16  it  is  used  of  angelic  dignities. 
Here  it  seems  to  stand  for  all  forms  of 
authority.  Presumptuous  are  they,  self- 
wiUed,  they  are  not  afraid  to  speak  evil  of 
dignities ;  literally,  daring,  self-willed,  they 
tremble  not  when  speaking  evU  of  glories  ;  or, 
they  fear  not  glories,  blaspheming.  Tlie  word 
rendered  "daring"  (ToX/tijjToi)  occurs  no- 
where else  in  the  New  Testament.  These 
daring,  self-willed  men  despise  all  lordship, 
all  glories,  whether  the  glnry  of  Olirist  ("  tlio 
excellent  glory,"  ch.  i.  17),  or  the  glory  of 
the  angels,  or  the  glory  of  holiness,  or  the 
glory  of  earthly  sovereignty.  The  next 
verse,  however,  makes  it  probable  that  the 
glory  of  the  angels  was  the  thought  present 
to  St.  Peter's  mind.  It  may  be  that,  as 
some  false  teachers  had  inculcated  the 
worship  of  angels  (Col.  ii.  18),  others  had 
gone  to  the  opposite  extreme  (comp.  Jude  8). 
The  Vulgate  strangely  translates  SiJfas  by 
§eclas, 

Ver.  11. — ^Whereas  sn^els,  which  are 
greater  in  power  and  might,  bring  not 
railing  accusation  against  tiiem  hsfora  th« 


46 


THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PETER,    [oh.  n.  1—22. 


Lord,  The  conjunction  is  Svov,  literally, 
"  wljere " — ^they  speak  evil  of  glories, 
"  whore,"  •'.«.  "  in  which  case."  The  literal 
rendering  of  the  following  words,  "angels 
being  greater,"  makes  it  probable  that  the 
comparison  is  with  the  false  teachers  of 
the  previous  verse  rather  than  with  the 
"  glories."  The  false  teachers  rail  at  glories, 
where  angels,  though  greater  than  they, 
bring  not  a  railing  judgment  against  those 
glories.  It  seems  certain  that  the  words 
"  against  them  "  (/car'  aimSv)  must  refer  to 
the  "glories,"  and  cannot  mean,  according 
to  the  Vulgate,  adversum  «e.  Men  rail  at 
these  glories;  but  the  .elect  angels,  when 
they  are  commissioned  to  proclaim  or  inflict 
the  just  judgment  (for  Kpims  is  "judgment," 
not"  accusation  ")of  God  upon  the  angels  that 
sinned,  the  fallen  glories,  do  not  rail ;  they 
romember  what  those  loot  spirits  once  were, 
ami  speak  solemnly  and  sorrowfully,  not  in 
coarse,  violent  language.  The  apostle  may 
be  alluding  to  Zech.  iii.  1,  2,  but  the  re- 
semblauoe  to  Jude  8,  9  is  so  close  that  this 
last  passage  must  have  been  in  his  thoughts, 
even  if  he  is  not  directly  referring  to  the 
disjiute  between  Michael  the  archangel  and 
the  devil.  Luther's  interpretation  (adopted 
by  FronmiiUer  and  others),  that  the  wicked 
angels  are  not  able  to  bear  the  judgment  of 
Ood  upon  their  blasphemy,  cannot  be  ex- 
tracted from  the  words.  The  Alexandrine 
Manuscript  omits  "before  the  Lord;"  but 
these  words  are  well  supported.  The  angels 
of  judgment  remember  that  they  are  in  the 
presence  of  God,  and  perform  their  solemn 
duty  with  godly  fear. 

Ver.  12. — But  these,  as  natural  brute 
beasts,  made  to  be  taken  and  destroyed. 
The  order  of  the  words  in  the  best  manu- 
scripts favours  tbd  translation  of  the  Revised 
Version,  But  thete,  at  creatures  without 
n  aton,  horn  mere  animah  to  he  taken  and  de- 
stroyed. The  word  rendered  "  mere  animals  " 
is  literally  "  natural "  (puffixa) ;  ocmp.  Jude 
10,  "what  they  know  naturally  (^uin/cSs) 
as  brute  beasts."  Speak  evil  of  the  things 
that  they  understand  not;  literally,  as  in 
the  Revised  Version,  railing  in  matters 
whereof  they  are  ignorant.  (For  the  con- 
struction, see  Winer,  iii.  66.  5,  at  the  end.) 
The  context  and  the  parallel  passage  in  St. 
Jude  show  Ihat  the  S6^ai,  the  glories,  are 
the  things  whicii  the  false  teachers  under- 
stand not  and  at  which  they  rail.  Good 
tlngels  do  not  pronounce  a  railing  judgment 
against  angels  that  sinned.  Tliese  men, 
knowing  nothing  of  the  angelic  sphere  of 
existence,  rail  at  the  elect  and  the  fallen 
angels  alike.  Men  should  speak  with  awe 
of  the  sin  of  the  angels;  jesting  on  such 
subjects  is  unbecoming  and  dangerous.  And 
shall  utterly  perish  in  their  own  corruption. 
The  beat  mauusoripts  read  here  kcU  ^Bapit- 


ffovrai, "  shall  also  be  destroyed  in  their  own 
corruption."  It  seems  better  to  take  (tiSofU  in 
the  sense  of  "  corruption  "  here,  as  in  oh.  i.  4, 
and  to  suppose  that  St.  Peter  is'intentionally 
playing  on  tlie  double  sense  of  the  noun  and 
its  cognate  verb  than,  with  Huther,  to  lefei 
the  pronoun  avruv,  "their  own,"  to  the 
&\oya  Coia,  and  to  understand  St.  Peter  as 
meaning  that  the  false  teachers,  who  ant 
like  irrational  animals,  shall  be  destroyed 
with  the  destruction  of  irrational  animals. 

Ver.  13. — And  shall  receive  the  reward  of 
nnrighteousness.  The  two  most  ancient 
manuscripts  read  here,  instead  of  Ko/uai- 
/Acvotf  aSiKovfiefot.  This  reading  is  adopted 
by  the  Revised  Version  in  the  translation, 
"  suffering  wrong  as  the  hire  of  wrong- 
doing." But  the  other  reading  is  well  sup- 
ported, and  gives  a  better  sense,  "  receiving, 
as  they  shall,  the  reward  of  unrighteous- 
ness." Balaam  loved  the  reward  of  un- 
righteousness in  this  world  (ver.  15);  the 
false  teachers  shall  receive  its  final  reward 
in  the  world  to  come.  Whichever  reading 
is  preferred,  this  clause  is  best  taken  with 
the  preceding  verse.  As  they  that  count  it 
pleasura  to  riot  in  the  daytime;  literally, 
counting  the  revel  in  daytime  a  pleaitwe.  St. 
Peter  has  hitherto  spoken  of  the  insubordi- 
nation and  irreverence  of  the  false  teachers ; 
he  now  goes  on  to  condemn  their  sensuality. 
The  words  h  i)p.ipa  cannot,  with  some  ancient 
interpreters,  be  takeu  as  equivalent  to  naff 
Tllifpav,  daily  (Luke  xvi.  19).  Many  com- 
mentators, as'  Huther  and  Alford,  trans- 
late "  delicate  living  for  a  day  " — enjoyment 
which  is  tempoial  and  short-lived.  But 
when  we  compare  1  Thess.  v.  7,  "  They  that 
are  drunken  are  drunken  in  the  night," 
and  St.  Peter's  own  words  in  Acts  ii.  15,  it 
seems  more  probable  that  the  apostle  means 
to  describe  these  false  teaohers  as  worse 
than  ordinary  men  of  pleasure.  They  re- 
serve the  night  for  their  feasting;  these 
men  spend  the  day  in  luxury.  The  woiti 
Tpuc/)^  means  "  luxurious  or  delicate  living  " 
rather  than  "riot."  Spotf  they  are  and 
blemishes.  (For  airixoi,  spots,  St.  Jude  has 
airiKiS^s,  sunken  rooks.)  The  word  for 
"blemishes"  (jiaiioi)  occurs  nowhere  else  in 
the  New  Testament.  But  comp.  1  jPet.  i. 
19,  where  the  Lord  Jesus  is  described  as 
"a  Lamb  without  blemish  and  without  spot 
(^afiiifiov  zeal  &ffir(\ou)."  The  Church  should 
be  like  her  Lord,  "not  having  spot,  or 
wrinkle,  or  any  such  thing"  (Bph.  v.  27); 
but  tliese  men  are  spots  and  blemishes  on 
her  beauty.  Sporting  themselves  with  their 
own  deceivings ;  literally,  revelling  in  their 
deceivings.  The  word  for  "  revelling  "  (e'v 
Tpv(j>(inTfs')  corresponds  with  rputpii,  used 
just  above.  The  manuscripts  vary  between 
aTrdrait,  deceivings,  and  d7airais,  loves,  love- 
feasta.    The  former  reeding  seems  the  best- 


ott.tt.1— 22.]    THE  SEOONB  EPTSTLE  GENERAL  OP  PETER. 


4? 


suxipoTtP'l  hpr»,  and  the  latter  in  the  jiarixllel 
passage  of  ht.  J ude  (ver.  12).  It  is  possiljle 
that  the  paroaomasia  may  be  intentinnal 
(compare  the  airiKoi  of  St.  Peter  and  the 
(nri\i£Sn  of  St.  Jude).  St.  Peter  will  not 
use  the  honourable  name  for  the  banquets 
which  these  men  disgraoe  by  their  excesses. 
He  calls  them  anaras,  not  ir/hras — deceits, 
not  love-feasts.  There  is  no  love  in  the 
hearts  of  these  men.  Their  love-feasts  are 
hypocrisies,  deceits ;  they  try  to  deceive 
men,  but  they  deceive  not  God.  While 
they  feast  with  you.  The  Greek  word 
auvsvaxniiifvoi  occurs  elsewhere  only  in 
Jude  12.  The  false  teachers  joined  in  the 
love-feasts,  but  made  them  the  occasion  of 
self-indulgence.  Compare  the  similar  con- 
duct of  the  Corinthians  (1  Cor.  xi.  20—22). 

Ver.  14. — Having  eyes  full  Of  adultery,  and 
that  cannot  cease  from  sin ;  literally,  of  an 
aduUerea*.  Compare  our  Lord's  words  in  the 
sermon  on  the  mount  (Matt.  v.  28),  which  may 
have  been  in  St  Peter's  thoughts.  For  the 
second  clause,  oomp.  1  Pet.  iv.  1,  "  He  that 
hath  suffered  in  the  flesh  hath  ceased  from 
sin."  Beguiling  unstable  souls ;  rather,  en- 
ticing. The  word  Se\id(ovTes,  from  SiKfap, 
a  bait,  belongs  to  the  art  of  the  fowler  or 
fisherman,  and  would  naturally  occur  to  St. 
Peter's  mind.  He  uses  it  again  in  ver.  18 
of  this  chapter  (comp.  also  Jas,  i.  14).  The 
word  for  "unstable"  (oo-TijpricTouj)  occurs 
only  here  and  in  ch.  iii.  16.  It  is  a  word  of 
peculiar  significance  in  the  mouth  of  St. 
Peter,  conscious,  as  he  must  have  been,  of 
his  own  want  of  stability  in  times  past. 
He  would  remember  also  the  charge  once 
given  to  him,  "When  thou  art  converted, 
strengthen  (irT^piJoi/)  thy  brethren "  (Luke 
xxii.  32).  An  heart  they  have  exercised 
with  covetous  practices;  rather,  trained  in 
covetousness,  according  to  the  reading  of  the 
best  manuscripts,  irheoff^ias.  This  is  the 
third  vice  laid  to  the  charge  of  the  false 
teachers.  They  had  practised  it  so  long 
that  their  very  heart  was  trained  in  the 
habitual  pursuit  of  gain  by  all  unrighteous 
means.  Cursed  ohildxen ;  rather,  children  of 
euree.  Like  "  the  son  of  perdition,"  "  chil- 
dren of  wrath,"  "children  of  disobedience," 
"  son  of  Belial,"  etc. 

Ver.  15. — Which  have  forsaken  the  right 
way,  and  are  gone  astray;  literally, /or- 
tdking  (or  having  forsaken ;  there  are  two 
slightly  differing  readings,  both  well  sup- 
ported) the  right  way,  they  went  astray.  The 
false  teachers  in  St.  Peter's  time  were  like 
Elymas  the  sorcerer,  whom  St.  Paul  accused 
of  perverting  "  the  right  ways  of  the  Lord  " 
(Acts  xiii  10 ;  comp.  also  ver.  2  of  this 
efaapter).  In  the  'Shepherd  of  Hermas' 
occurs  what  may  be  an  echo  of  this  verse  : 
"  Who  .  .  .  have  forsaken  their  true  way  " 
(Vis.,  iii.  7. 1).  I'ollowii^the  way  of  Balaam 


the  son  ol  Bosor.  The  word  rendered 
"following"  (4^aKo\o!jeiiTafTfs)is  found  also 
in  ch.  i.  16  and  ii  2  of  this  Epistle,  but  no- 
where else  in  the  NewTestament ;  it  means 
"  to  follow  out  to  the  end."  Comp.  Numb, 
xxii.  32,  where  the  angel  of  the  Lord  says 
of  Balaam,  "Thy  way  is  perverse  before 
me."  The  form  "Bosor,"  instead  of 
"Beor,"  arose  probably  from  a  peculiar 
(perhaps  Galilsean)  pronunciation  of  the 
guttural  V  in  lijia.  Thus  we,  perhaps,  have 
here  an  undesigned  coincidence,  a  slight 
confirmation  of  St.  Peter's  authorship :  he 
was  a  Galilsean,  and  his  speech  betrayed  him 
(Matt.  xxvi.  73);  one  characteristic  of  the 
Galilsean  dialect  was  a  mispronunciation  of 
the  gutturals.  But  some  commentators  see 
in  the  resemblance  of  the  form  "Bosor"toth6 
Hebrew  11^3,  flesh,  an  allusion  to  those  sins 
of  the  flesh  into  which  Balaam  allured  the 
Israelites.  Compare  the  Jewish  use  of  such 
names  as  IiKbosheth  in  derision  for  Eshbaal 
•("the  man  of  shame"  for  "tlie  man  ol 
Baal"),  and  Jeruhbesheth  (2  Sam.  xi.  21)  for 
Jerublaal.  The  references  to  Balaam  hero, 
in  St.  Jude,  the  Book  of  the  Eevelation,  and 
1  Cor.  X.  8,  show  that  his  history  had  made 
a  great  impression  on  the  mind  of  thoughtful 
Christians.  St.  John  connects  his  name  with 
the  Nicolaitanes  iu  Bev.  ii.  15,  much  as  St. 
Peter  here  connects  it  with  the  false  teacliers 
of  his  time.  Some,  again,  see  in  the  etymology 
ef  the  word  "  Nicolaitane "  an  allusion  to 
that  of  "Balaam,"  as  if  the  Nicolaitanes 
were  followers  of  Balaam.  There  is  another 
explanation  in  the  '  Speaker's  Commentary,' 
that  the  word  "  Bosor"  is  an  Aramaic  form, 
and  that  "  the  form  possibly  became  familiar 
to  St.  Peter  during  his  residence  at  Babylon, 
and  suggests  the  probability  that  Aramaio 
traditions  were  still  current  respecting 
Balaam  at  the  Christian  era,  and  on  the 
banks  of  the  Euphrates  "  (additional  note  on 
Numb.  xxii.  6).  But  the  two  oldest  manu- 
scripts read  "  Beor  "  here.  Who  loved  the 
wages  of  unrighteousness  (comp.  ver.  13, 
and  also  St.  Peter's  words  in  Acts  i.  18). 
Balaam  is  not  definitely  accused  of  covetous- 
ness in  the  Old  Testament  narriitive;  but 
his  conduct  can  be  explained  by  no  other 
motive. 

Ver.  16.— But  was  rebuked  for  his  iniquity ; 
literally,  but  had  a  rebuke  for  his  own  trans- 
gression. The  word  for  "  rebuke  "  (^A.eylii') 
occurs  nowhere  else  in  the  New  Testament. 
The  guilt  of  offering  the  wages  of  un- 
righteousness rested  with  Balak  ;  Balaam's 
own  transgression  lay  in  his  readiness  to 
accept  them — in  his  willingness  to  break  the 
law  of  God  by  cursing,  for  filthy  lucre's  sake, 
thuse  whom  God  had  not  cursed.  The  dumb 
ass  speaking  with  man's  voice  forbade  the 
madness  of  the  prophet.  The  word  for  "  ass  " 
is  literally  "  beast  of  burden  "  {tntoivytor,  M 


49 


THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PETER,    [oh.  n.  i  -22. 


in  Matt.  uxi.  S).  "  Dumb "  is  literally 
"  without  voice ;  "  naturally  without  Toice, 
it  spake  with  the  voice  of  man.  The  word 
4KciKv<rev,  rendered  "  forbade,"  is  rather 
"checked,"  or  "atayed."  The  word  for 
"  madness  "  (irapa<l>poi'tav)  occurs  nowhere 
else  in  the  New  Testament.  The  ass  checked 
the  prophet's  folly  by  her  shrinking  from  the 
angel,  and  by  the  miracle  that  followed ;  the 
angel,  while  permitting  Balaam  to  expose 
himself  to  the  danger  into  which  he  had 
fallen  by  tempting  the  Lord,  forbade  any 
deviation  from  the  word  to  be  put  into  his 
mouth  by  God.  Balaam  obeyed  in  the 
letter;  but  afterwards  the  madness  which 
had  been  checked  for  the  moment  led  him 
into  deadly  sin  (Numb.  xxxi.  16).  We 
observe  that  St.  Peter  assumes  the  truth- 
fulness of  the  narrative  in  the  Book  of 
Numbers  (see  Mv.  Clark's  note  in  the 
'  Speaker's  Commentary '  on  Numb.  xxii. 
28). 

Vor.  17. — These  are  wells  without  wate*. 
St.  Peter  has  spoken  of  the  vices  of  the  false 
teachers;  he  goes  on  to  describe  the  un- 
profitableness of  their  teaching.  They  are 
like  wells  without  water ;  they  deceive  men 
with  a  promise  which  they  do  not  fulfil.  In 
Jude  12  there  is  a  slight  difference — "  clouds 
without  water  "  (comp.  Jer.  ii.  13).  Clouds 
that  are  carried  with  a  tempest;  better, 
mists  driven  by  a  tempest.  The  best  manu- 
scripts have  iiilx>^ai,  mists,  instead  of  ve<pe- 
Xai,  clouds;  they  are  driven  along  by  the 
tempest ;  they  give  no  water  to  the  thirsty 
land,  but  only  bring  darkness  and  obscurity. 
The  Greek  word  for  "tempest"  (Aaa.cn(i)  is 
used  by  St.  Mark  and  St.  Luke  in  their 
account  of  the  tempest  on  the  Sea  of  Galilee. 
To  whom  the  mist  of  darkness  is  reserved 
for  ever ;  rather,  as  in  the  Revised  Version, 
the  blaclcness  of  darkness.  The  words  are  the 
same  as  those  of  Jude  13  (comp.  ver.  4  of 
this  chapter;  also  ch.  iii.  7;  and  1  Pet. 
i.  4,  where  the  same  verb  is  used  of  the 
inheritance  reserved  in  heaven  for  the  saints). 
The  words  "  for  ever "  are  omitted  in  the 
Vatican  and  Sinaitio  Manuscripts;  it  is 
possible  that  they  may  have  been  inserted 
from  the  parallel  passage  in  St.  Jude ;  but 
they  are  well  supported  here. 

Ver.  18. — For  when  they  speak  great 
swelling  words  of  vanity;  literally,  for 
spedldng.  "Great  swelling  words"  is  ex- 
pressed by  one  word  in  the  Greek,  {nrfpoyxa, 
St.  Jude  has  the  same  word  in  v^r.  16 ;  it  is 
used  in  the  classical  writers  of  great  bulk  of 
any  kind,  literal  or  figurative.  The  genitive 
is  descriptive — the  words  are  swelling,  high- 
sounding;  but  they  are  only  words,  vain 
and  meaningless;  they  have  nothing  but 
emptiness  behind  them.  They  allure  through 
the  lusts  of  the  flesh,  through  much  wanton- 
ness ;  rather,  as  in  the  Revised  Veraion,  they 


entire  (as  in  ver.  14)  in  (he  Iwts  of  the  flesh, 
by  lasciviousness.  The  preposition  "in" 
denotes  the  sphere  in  which  these  men  live, 
their  condition,  habits  of  life.  The  dative 
aufKjdais,  literally  "by  lasciviousnesscs," 
that  is,  by  acts  of  lasciviousness,  is  the  dative 
of  the  instrument;  it  states  the  means  by 
which  they  entice  men.  Those  that  were 
clean  escaped  from  them  who  live  in  error. 
The  Authorized  Version  follows  the  T.R., 
TOiJS  &i/Tas  airo^vySvTail  but  most  of  the 
best  manuscripts  have  robs  ohlyas  hrcxpei- 
yovTas.  This  last  reading  gives  a  better 
sense,  "  Those  who  are  just  escaping."  The 
adverb  oKiyus  may  be  understood  of  time, 
or,  perhaps  better,  of  measure — "escaping 
by  a  little,  a  little  way."  Those  who  were 
"  clean  escaped  "  would  not  be  so  easily 
enticed  by  the  false  teachers.  These  are 
only  beginning  to  escape ;  they  have  beard 
the  word  with  joy,  but  have  no  root  in  them- 
selves; they  put  their  hand  to  the  plough, 
but  they  look  baek.  They  "that  live  in 
error "  are  the  heathen ;  the  unhappy  men 
who  are  led  astray  by  the  false  teachers  are 
just  escaping  from  the  heathen  and  from 
their  mode  of  life.  It  is  possible  to  under- 
stand these  last  words  as  a  co-ordinate 
clause,  a  further  description  of  those  who 
are  just  escaping.  The  false  teachers  entice 
"  those  who  are  just  escaping,  those  who 
live  in  error."  But  the  common  rendering 
seems  better.  The  verb  translated  "  live  " 
{avaaTpi<poji,ivovs)  is  a  favourite  word  with 
St.  Peter  (see  1  Pet.  i.  15,  18;  ii.  12;  iii.  1, 
2,  16). 

Ver.  19. — While  they  promise  them  liberty ; 
literally,promfstnj|r.  Tlie  words  cohere  closely 
with  the  preceding  clause.  Liberty  was  the 
subject  of  their  great  swelling  words  of 
vanity;  they  talked  loudly,  made  a  great 
boast,  about  liberty.  Perhaps  they  were 
wresting  to  their  own  destruction  (comp.  oh. 
iii.  15,  16)  the  teaching  of  St.  Paul  concern- 
ing Christian  liberty.  St.  Paul  had  spoken 
of  the  liberty  of  the  glory  of  the  children  of 
God  (Rom.  viii.  21) ;  he  had  again  and  again 
asserted  the  liberty  of  Christians  in  things 
indifleient  (see  2  Cor.  iii.  17 ;  1  Cor.  viii. 
9 ;  X.  23,  etc.).  But  he  had  insisted  on  the 
paramount  duty  of  giving  no  offence  (1  Cor. 
viii.  13,  etc.),  and  had  earnestly  cautioned 
his  converts  to  "use  not  liberty  for  an 
occasion  to  the  flesh."  There  were  false 
teachers  who  maintained  that  the  true 
Gnostic  was  freefrommoral  restraints,  in  fact, 
that  liberty  meant  libertinism,  liberty  to  sin 
Ccomp.  1  Pet.  ii.  16).  They  themselves  are 
the  ssrvants  of  corruption.  The  construction 
is  still  participial,  "  being  "  (u7riipx'"''''«s) — 
being  from  the  beginning  servants  of  cor- 
ruption. Those  who  tafljed  about  liberty 
were  themselves  all  the  time  the  bond- 
Bervante,  the  slaves,  of  coiruptioa.     The 


CH.  II.  1—22.]    THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  PETER. 


49 


word  retidered  "corruption"  (^eopS)  in- 
cludes the  sense  of  "  destruction,"  as  in  ver. 
12  and  oh.  i.  i  (oomp.  Rom.  viii.  21).  Tor 
of  whom  a  man  is  OTercome,  of  the  same  is 
he  brought  in  bondage.  "  Of  whom,"  or 
"by  whatever;"  by  Satan,  the  personal 
tempter,  or  by  sin,  the  innate  tendency ;  the 
Greeli  word  will  bear  either  meaning. 
Some  good  manuscripts  add  "  also,"  which 
strengthens  the  assertion;  "is  he  also 
brought  in  bondage."  St.  Peter's  teaching 
corresponds  exactly  with  that  of  St.  Paul  in 
Bom.  vi.  16.  There  is  a  very  close  parallel 
to  this  clause  in  the '  Clementine  Recogni- 
tions '  (v.  12 ;  quoted  by  Dr.  Salmon,  in  his 
*  Historical  Introduction  to  the  Books  of  the 
New  Testament'):  "unusquiaque  illius  fit 
servna  cui  se  ipse  subjecerit." 

Ver.  20. — For  if  after  they  have  escaped 
the  pollutions  of  the  world  j  literally, /or  if, 
having  neaped  (jkiro^vy6vTii).  Is  St.  Peter 
in  this  Terse  still  speaking  of  the  false 
teachers,  or  of  those  whom  they  had  enticed 
(ver.  18)7  Bengel,  FronmiUler,  and  others 
take  the  latter  view,  thinking  that  the  hto- 
tj>vy6vTes  ("  those  having  escaped  ")  of  this 
verse  must  be  the  same  with  the  i.To4)ei- 
yovTas  or  diro^vySvTas  ("  those  who  are 
escaping,"  or  "  those  having  escaped  ")  of 
ver.  18.  But  it  is  far  more  natural  to  under- 
stand St,  Peter  as  continuing  his  description 
of  the  false  teachers.  The  conjunction  "  for  " 
connects  the  clause  closely  witii  .that 
immediately  preceding,  and  suggests  that 
St.  Peter  is  explaining  the  term  "bond- 
servants or  slaves"  applied  to  the  false 
teachers  in  ver.  19;  the  repetition  of  the 
word  "  overcome  "  also  seems  to  imply  that 
the  subjects  of  vers.  20  and  19  are  the  same. 
The  word  for  "  pollutions  "  duudr/iara)  occurs 
only  here.  In  •  Hermas '  (Vis.,  iv.  3.  2)  there 
oocurs  what  may  b^  a  reminiscence  of  this 
verse:  "Ye  who  have  escaped  this  world." 
Through  the  knowledge  of  the  Lord  and 
Saviour  Jesus  Christ.  Several  of  the  most 
ancient  manuscripts  read,  "  our  Lord  and 
Saviour."  The  word  rendered  "  knowledge  " 
is  iiiiyvaeis,  full  knowledge  (comp.  ch.  i.  2,  3, 
8;  also  Eph.  iv.  13;  Col.  ii.  2;  iii.  10;  1 
Tim.  ii.  4;  Bora,  i  28;  iii.  20).  The  pre- 
position is  iv.  The  full,  personal  knowledge 
of  the  Saviour  is  the  sphere  in  which  the 
Christian  lives;  while  he  abides  in  that 
knowledge  grace  and  peace  are  multiplied 
unto  him,  and  he  is  enabled  to  escape  the 
pollutions  of  the  world.  The  apostle  warns 
us  here  that  some  of  those  who  once  enjoyed 
the  blessedness  of  that  sacred  knowledge 
have  been  entangled  in  sin  and  have  fallen 
from  grace.  They  are  again  entangled 
therein,  and  overcome.  The  first  clause  is 
participial ;  the  connection  seems  to  be, 
"  If,  having  escaped  .  .  .  but  being  again 
•ntangled  they  are  overcome."  The  word 
U.  FGTBB. 


"entangled"  (liiTXaKivTet)  suggests  the 
figure  of  fishes  entangled  in  the  mealies  of  a 
net,  and  seems  to  point  back  to  the  ScAc(£- 
fouo-ij'  ("  entice  ")  of  vers.  18  and  U ;  they  en 
tice  others,  but  they  are  entangled  themselves 
(comp.  2  Tim.  ii.  4),  and  become  captives 
and  slaves  to  the  pollutions  of  the  world 
from  which  they  had  once  escaped.  The 
latter  end  is  worse  with  them  than  the 
beginning ;  rather,  as  in  the  Eevised  Version, 
the  last  ttate  is  become  worm  with  them  than 
the  first.  This  is  a  distinct  quotation  of  our 
Lord's  words  in  Matt.  xii.  45  and  Luke  xi.  26. 
The  evil  spirit  had  been  cast  out  from  these 
men;  for  a  time  they  had  lived  in  the  full 
knowledge  of  Christ ;  but  now  the  evil  spirit 
had  returned,  and  had  brought  with  him 
seven  other  spirits  more  wicked  than  him- 
self. This  spontaneous  adoption  of  our 
Lord's  words  without  marks  of  quotation  ii 
not  like  the  work  of  a  forger. 

Ver.  21. — For  it  had  been  better  for  them 
not  to  have  known  the  way  of  righteousness ; 
better,  as  in  the  Bevised  Version,/or  it  were 
better.  (For  this  use  of  the  imperfect  indi- 
cative, see  Winer,  iii  41.  2,  a.)  The  verb 
infyvaKeKot,  "  to  have  known,"  here,  and 
the  participle  iTriyvovarif,  "after  they  have 
known,"  in  the  next  clause,  correspond  with 
the  noun  iirlyvaxris  of  the  preceding,  and, 
like  that,  imply  that  these  unhappy  men 
once  had  the  full  knowledge  of  Christ.  (For 
"  the  wayi  of  righteousness,"  compare  "  the 
way  of  truth"  in  ver.  2,  and  note  there.) 
Than,  after  they  have  known  it,  to  turn  from 
the  holy  commandment  delivered  unto  them. 
The  manuscripts  exhibit  some  slight  varia- 
tions here:  the  Sinaitio  and  Alexandrine 
give  "  to  turn  back."  By  "  the  holy  com- 
mandment" St.  Peter  means  the  whole 
moral  Law,  which  the  Lord  enforced  and 
widened  in  his  sermon  on  the  mount ;  from 
this  the  false  teachers  turned  away.  For 
the  word  "  delivered  "  (irapaSoeeltrns),  comp. 
Jude  3.  Like  the  corresponding  word  ■Trapd- 
Soffis,  tradition  (2  Thess.  iii.  6),  it  implies  the 
oral  trausmisaion  of  Christian  teaching  in  the 
first  ages  (comp.  also  1  Pet.  i  18). 

Ver.  22. — But  it  is  happened  unto  them 
according  to  the  true  proverb.  The  con- 
junction "but"  is  omitted  in  the  best 
manuscripts.  The  literal  translation  is, 
"There  hath  happened  unto  them  that  of 
the  true  proverb  (rb  t^s  iropoi/*£aj) ; "  comp. 
Matt,  xxi  21,  -rh  tvs  trvKrjs.  The  dog  is 
turned  to  his  own  vomit  again.'  The  con- 
struction is  participial;  literally,  a  dog 
having  turned.  See  Winer  (iii.  45.  6,  V), 
who  says  that  in  such  proverbial  expressions 
there  is  no  reason  for  changing  the  participle 
into  a  finite  verb :  "  They  are  spoken  Seikti- 
Kcis,  as  it  were,  with  reference  to  a  case 
actually  observed."  St.  Peter  may  ba 
quoting  Prov.  zsvi.  11 ;  but  his  words  art 


THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  PETER.    [<«•  «•  1^21 


■xerj  different  fi»in  the  Septnagiftt  Version 
of  tluit  passage;  perhaps  it  is  more  probable 
thftt  the  elprepslon  had  become  proverbial, 
(tnd  tliat  the  apostle  is  referring  to  a  fbrm 
ef  it  in  common  use  with  his  readers ;  like 
that  which  follows,  which  is  not  in  the 
Book  of  Proverbs.  And  the  sow  that  was 
washed  to  her  wallowing  in  the  iltire; 
literally,  the  tovo  that  had  washed  to  her 
waUouing;  Or,  aooording  to  some  ancient 


manoaeripts,  "  her  wallowing-place."  St. 
Peter  compares  the  lives  of  the  false  teachers 
to  the  habits  of  those  ttnimale  which  were 
regarded  as  ttncleatt,  alttd  were  moat  despised 
by  the  Jews  (compare  our  Lord's  words  in 
Matt.  vii.  6).  The  words  ^{^pojita,  vomit; 
K0Xj<rfi6s,  wallowing;  aod  $i(i$«poi,  mire, 
are  not  found  elsewhere  in  the  Now  Testa- 
ment. 


HOMILETICS. 

Vera.  1 — 9. — Warning  against  false  teachera.  I.  THfi  nekd  of  WATOfiPtrtWEsS.  1. 
Tliere  must  he  false  teachers.  There  had  been  false  prophets  in  Israel,  like  Zedekiah 
the  son  of  Chenaanah,  who  flattered  Ahab  and  lured  him  to  his  death.  There  was  a 
traitor  among  the  chosen  twelve.  "  In  the  visible  Church  the  evil  are  ever  mingled  with 
the  good,  and  sometimes  the  evil  have  chief  authority  in  the  ministration  of  the  Word 
and  sacraments."  The  Lord  himself  had  said  that  it  would  be  so.  *'  Beware  of  false 
prophets,"  he  had  said  in  his  sermon  on  the  mount;  the  apostle  echoes  the  Master's 
words.  It  seems  very  »ad  that  there  should  be  the  taint  of  evil  even  in  the  chief 
places  of  the  Church,  that  ungodly  men  should  assume  the  character  of  teachers,  and 
abuse  the  form  of  religion  for  their  selfish  and  wicked  ends.  The  divisions  of  the 
Church,  the  strange  diversities  of  opinion  among  Christians,  seem  a  great  hindrance  to 
the  progress  of  the  gospel,  and  furnish  to  some  an  excuse  for  unbelief.  But  when  we 
remember  Judas  Iscariot,  we  feel  that  the  Church  must  he  always  liable  to  this  great 
misfortune ;  if  in  its  very  infancy,  in  the  very  presence  of  the  incarnate  Saviour,  one 
whom  he  had  chosen  could  betray  his  Lord  for  money,  it  is  not  to  be  expected  that  all 
those  who  serve  in  the  ministay  of  the  Church  should  be  pure  and  holy.  False  teacliing, 
too,  made  its  appearance  very  early  in  the  history  of  the  Church.  We  soon  meet  with 
the  name  of  the  first  heresiarch,  Simon  Magus ;  he  was  one  of  the  converts  of  Philip 
the  deacon  at  Samaria,  one  of  the  first  candidates  for  confirmation.  The  existence  of 
false  teaching  is  a  great  trial  of  our  faith ;  but,  like  Other  tri&ls,  it  is  overruled  for  good 
to  those  who  in  sincerity  seek  to  know  the  truth.  2.  The  eharaeter  of  their  teaching. 
All  false  doctrine  is  pernicious.  The  ancient  forms  of  heresy  stood  in  direct  opposition 
to  the  great  truths  of  Christianity :  they  denied  the  distinction  of  Persons  in  the  one 
God,  or  the  Divinity  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  or  the  truth  of  his  manhood,  or  the 
reality  of  his  precious  death ;  they  separated  Jesus  from  the  Christ,  and  the  God  of 
Christians  from  the  God  of  the  Old  Testament;  while  others,  as  apparently  the 
Nicolaitanes  of  the  Revelation,  indulged  in  licentious  practices,  and  maintained  that  the 
mind  might  be  pure,  though  the  faodiy  was  defiled.  These  and  such-like  heresies  were 
heresies  of  destruction  ;  they  led  to  the  spiritual  destruction  both  of  the  teachers  and 
the  taught;  they  were  privily  brought  in,  set  alongside  of  the  truths  of  the  gospel,  and 
so  corrupted  the  gospel  of  Christ,  and  deprived  it  of  its  saving  power.  For  these  false 
teacher*  denied  the  Master  that  bought  them,  Some  by  rejecting  either  his  Divinity  or 
his  humanity,  or  the  truth  of  his  atonement,  sume  by  the  practi(»l  denial  of  a  licentious 
life.  He  had  bought  them  to  be  his  own;  they  were  redeemed,  not  with  corruptible 
things,  as  silver  and  gold,  but  with  the  precious  blood  of  Christ ;  and  they  denied  the 
Master  that  bought  them  with  that  stupendous  price.  Alasl  we  have  all  at  some  time 
and  in  some  sense  denied  him  by  spiritual  sluth  and  actual  sin ;  we  knew  that  he 
died  that  we  should  die  unto  sin,  and  rose  again  that  we  should  rise  to  newness  of  life  ; 
and  knowing  this,  we  have  sinned  again  and  again,  yielding  ourselves  to  be  servants  of 
•in  rather  than  of  Christ.  St.  Peter  himself  had  thrioe  denied  the  Lord;  confident  in 
his  own  steadfaistness,  he  had  maintained  that  he  at  least  would  be  faithful  even  unto 
death  ;  but  his  courage  failed  him  in  tlio  hour  of  temptation.  He  must  have  remem- 
bered his  own  great  sin  when  he  wrote  these  words.  He  repented ;  the  bitter  tears, 
the  holy  life  that  followed,  proved  the  sincerity  of  his  repeBtance.  May  we  feel  the 
{tower  oi  tlie  Lord's  loving  look  fixed  on  us,  and  be  led,  like  Peter,  to  repentance, 


flft.  It.  1—22.]    THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  PETER.  61 

Thpse  fiilse  teachers  were  persisting  in  their  wilfulness,  and  bringing  upon  fheinselves 
swift  destruction.  3.  The  sad  results  of  if.  They  will  not  be  without  followers ;  many 
will  be  drawn  away  from  the  truth,  and  will  follow  these  false  teachers  this  way  and 
that,  to  strange  heresies  or  to  licentiousness  of  life.  Men  hanker  after  novelty ;  they 
dislike  strictness  of  life ;  they  are  easily  led  to  embrace  systems  which  offer  some 
new  phase  of  error,  or  permit  laxity  of  morals.  And  thus  the  way  of  truth  is  evil 
spoken  of.  Men  rail  at  Christianity  because  Christians  are  split  up  into  so  many  sects 
and  schools ;  they  speak  against  religion  because  so  many  of  its  professors  live  unworthy 
lives.  Itwassoin  the  early  days  of  the  Church;  it  is  so  still.  The  evil  lives  of 
professing  Christians  ^ve  occasion  to  much  scoffing  and  blasphemy  at  home ;  while 
abroad  the  progress  of  the  gospel  in  heathen  countries  is  sadly  checked  by  the  same 
unhappy  cause.  4.  The  moHve  of  thefahe  teachers.  They  do  not  care  for  the  souls  ol 
men;  they  want  their  money.  Their  words  are  fair,  but  they  do  not  spring  out  of 
strong  conviction ;  they  are  carefully  thought  out,  cunningly  devised  to  attract  atten- 
tion and  to  ensnare  m"en.  And  so  they  make  a  gain  of  their  followers,  reversing  St. 
Paul's  practice,  "  I  seek  not  yours,  but  you."  For  they  care  nothing  for  the  flock,  but 
only  for  their  own  sordid  gain.  Very  terrible  is  the  guilt  of  those  unhappy  men  who 
seek  the  ministry  with  such  miserable  objects.  Their  teaching  is  but  hollow  hypocrisy, 
their  whole  life  is  a  falsehood.  Thus  to  deal  with  sacred  things  is  awful  exceedingly. 
6.  Tlieir  danger.  God's  sentence  of  condemnation  is  already  gone  out  against  them  ; 
it  idleth  not ;  it  is  active  and  energetic.  They  have  brought  in  heresies  of  destruction, 
doing  what  they  could  to  destroy  the  souls  of  men.  But  the  Lord  most  holy  gave 
himself  to  die  for  those  precious  souls.  These  false  teachers  are  doing  what  they  can 
to  frustrate  the  grace  of  God,  to  slay  the  souls  for  whom  the  Lord  endured  the  cross. 
His  wrath,  except  they  repent,  must  come  upon  them  to  the  uttermost;  that  utter 
destruction  which  they  are  bringing  upon  themselves,  slumbereth  not ;  it  will  fall  upon 
them  suddenly  and  consume  them  in  a  moment.  "It  is  a  fearful  thing  to  fall  Into  the 
hands  of  the  living  God." 

II.  God's  weath  against  the  false  teachers  :  examples  or  His  awful  jodq- 
MENTS.  1.  The  judgment  of  the  angels  that  sinned.  Even  angels  sinned;  so  strange 
and  awful  is  the  mystery  of  evil.  We  must  not  be  surprised  that  there  are  sinful  men 
in  the  visible  Church,  sometimes,  alasl  in  its  highest  offices,  when  we  read  that  there 
wag  sin  in  heaven,  that  angels  of  God  sirined  against  their  King.  The  power  of  evil 
must  be  very  terrible,  wide-reaching,  and  alluring,  if  it  could  draw  angels  from  their 
allegiance  to  the  Creator.  What  need  have  we  men  to  watch  and  pray,  if  even  angels 
fell  from  the  gr.ice  of  God !  St.  Peter  bids  us  remember  their  punishment.  God  spared 
them  not ;  he  is  of  purer  eyes  than  to  behold  evil ;  the  sinful  cannot  abide  in  his 
presence.  He  cast  out  even  angels  when  they  sinned ;  Tartarus,  not  heaven,  was 
henceforth  their  fitting  abode ;  he  delivered  them  to  chains  of  darkness.  Holy 
Scripture  gives  us  no  details  concerning  the  sin  of  the  angels  or  its  punishment.  We 
do  not  know  the  measure  of  restraint  under  which  they  are  now  kept;  we  do  not 
know  whether  this  di  scription  applies  to  all  angels  who  sinned,  or  only  to  some.  Those 
evil  angels  of  whom  St.  Peter  is  here  speaking  are  under  some  restraint  and  suffering 
some  punishment ;  and  they  are  reserved  for  the  judgment  of  the  great  day.  Their 
fall  is  cited  for  our  warniug ;  if  God  spared  not  evil  angels,  he  will  not  spare  evil  men. 
2.  The  judgfneiii  of  the  antediluvians,  Satan,  the  prince  of  the  devils,  brought  sin 
into  the  world ;  it  spread  with  fearful  rapidity,  all  flesh  Corrupted  his  way  upon  the 
earth.  God  had  created  man  after  his  own  image ;  but  now  the  wickedness  of  man 
was  great,  and  every  imagination  of  the  thoughts  of  his  heart  was  only  evil  continually 
— an  awful  picture  of  the  corrupting  power  of  sin.  The  fixed  immutable  laws  of  the 
Divine  government  require  the  punishment  of  sin.  God  brought  the  Flood  upon  the 
world  of  the  ungodly.  But  in  wrath  he  remembered  mercy ;  he  guarded  Noah,  the 
just  man  who  walked  with  God,  the  preacher  of  righteousness.  Noah  had  proclaimed 
the  blessings  of  righteousness,  the  misery  of  sin ;  the  ark  itself  had  been  a  silent 
preaeher  during  the  many  years  which  elapsed  while  it  was  being  built ;  the  long 
labour  showed  the  faith  of  Noah,  and  proved  that  his  preaching  came  from  deep  con- 
viction. His  neighbours  would  not  listen ;  but  his  preaching,  though  it  saved  not 
them,  returned  into  his  own  bosom :  God  knoweth  how  to  deliver  the  godly.  Only 
«ight  souls  were  saved  In  that  tremendous  Visitation,    Let  us  take  warning  and  fear. 


62  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  PETEB.    [<m.  11.1—22. 

3.  The  jndgment  of  Sodom  and  Oomorrah.  "The  Lord  rained  upon  Sndom  and  upon 
Gomorrah  brimstone  and  fire  from  the  Lord  out  of  heaven."  That  tremendous  over- 
throw is  a  solemn  warning  to  the  ungodly  of  all  time.  God  will  by  no  means  spare 
the  guilty ;  if  men  will  pollute  God's  earth  and  their  own  bodies  by  sin  and  unclean- 
nes'B,  the  heavy  wrath  of  God  must  sooner  or  later  sweep  them  into  utter  ruin.  But 
even  that  frightful  catastrophe  showed  how  precious  the  souls  of  the  righteous  are  in 
the  sight  of  God.  Had  there  been  tea  such  in  that  wicked  city,  he  would  have  spared 
it  for  the  ten's  sake.  How  little  the  rulers  of  the  earth  think  that  the  course  of  this 
'world  is  ordered  for  the  sake  of  the  faithful ;  that  empires  are  saved  from  ruin,  and 
wars  averted,  for  the  salvation  of  the  few  chosen  souls !  Two  angels  were  sent  to  save 
the  one  righteous  man  in  the  cities  of  the  plain ;  they  laid  hold  upon  his  hand  while  he 
lingered,  and  brought  him  out  with  wife  and  daughters  almost  against  his  will.  As 
now  there  is  joy  in  the  presence  of  the  angels  of  God  over  one  sinner  that  repenteth,  so 
then  two  holy  angels  rescued  the  one  servant  of  God.  The  Lord  knoweth  them  that 
are  his ;  he  knows  them  all  and  each — each  individual  soul  that  believes  and  repents. 
Lot  was  not  wholly  blameless ;  he  had  tempted  God  by  exposing  himself  to  temptation ; 
God  had  not  led  him  there.  He  saw  that  the  plain  of  Jordan  was  well  watered  every- 
where, "  even  as  the  garden  of  the  Lord ; "  he  did  not  consider  that  "  the  men  of 
Sodom  were  wicked  and  sinners  before  the  Lord  exceedingly."  The  children  of  light 
ought  to  be  wiser  than  this ;  they  ought  to  regard  their  spiritual  interest  as  far  more 
momentous  than  their  temporal ;  but  alas !  the  error  of  Lot  is  common  still.  He  soon 
found  how  grievous  his  mistake  had  been.  He  preserved  his  integrity ;  he  was  saved, 
yet  so  as  by  fire.  He  passed  through  a  fiery  trial  of  distress  and  persecution ;  he  lived 
in  the  midst  of  licentiousness  and  uncleanness ;  day  by  day  evil  sights  were  present  to 
his  eyes,  evil  sounds  polluted  his  ears ;  he  saw  nothing  but  sin,  he  heard  nc>thing  but 
filthiness  and  blasphemy.  He  tortured  his  .righteous  soul  with  their  unlawful  deeds ; 
he  saw  the  dishonour  done  to  God ;  he  knew  something  of  the  tremendous  condemna- 
tion that  must  engulf  those  ungodly  men ;  his  whole  soul  revolted  from  the  vice  and 
filth  among  which  he  lived.  He  knew  that  his  own  act  had  brought  him  to  Sodom,  and 
he  tortured  his  soul  day  by  day  in  repentance,  we  may  be  sure,  for  his  thoughtless 
and  worldly  choice,  in  anxious  dread  cf  coming  retiibution,  in  bitter  sorrow  for  the 
awful  danger  of  those  wUful  sinners,  and  for  their  outrages  against  the  holy  Law  of  God ; 
he  was  crushed  down,  worn  out  with  their  wicked  behaviour  and  abominable  licentious- 
ness. He  had  greatly  erred ;  but  this  sorrow  of  heart,  this  self-torture,  showed  that  he 
was  sincerely  penitent,  that  he  was  not  corrupted  by  the  fearful  wickedness  which 
surrounded  him.  And  the  Lord  delivered  him,  4.  What  these  examples  prove.  God's 
love  and  God's  justice.  (1)  He  careth  for  the  righteous.  He  knows  them ;  he  knows 
how  to  deliver  them.  He  delivered  Lot  first  from  the  temptations  which  surrounded 
him,  then  from  the  ruin  which  overwhelmed  the  wicked.  So  now  he  bids  us  pray, "  Lead 
us  not  into  temptation  ;  but  deliver  us  from  evil."  He  can  save  us  from  being  exposed 
to  temptation,  if  he  knows  that  the  temptation  is  too  great  for  us;  he  can  deliver  us 
out  01  the  midst  of  temptation,  however  strong  and  overwhelming  that  temptation  may 
be.  We  may  be  set  amongst  ungodly  men,  we  may  have  nothing  but  evil  examples 
all  around  us ;  we  may  seem  left  alone,  like  Elijah  of  old,  in  a  tumvilt  of  corruption  and 
rebellion.  But "  the  eyes  of  the  Lord  are  over  the  righteous,  and  his  ears  are  open  unto 
their  prayers ; "  he  can  keep  his  people  safe ;  he  can  deliver  them.  Only  let  them  keep 
themselves  pure,  and  try  by  his  grace  to  lead  a  godly  life  in  an  ungodly  world.  (2) 
He  will  punish  the  unrighteous.  The  day  of  judgment  must  come;  then  shall  the 
King  say  to  the  wicked,  "  Depart  from  me,  ye  cursed,  into,  the  eternal  fire,  which  is 
prepared  for  the  devil  and  his  angels."  Even  now  the  angels  that  sinned  are  in  Tar- 
tarus, in  chains  of  darkness ;  the  men  of  Sodom  and  Gomorrah  sufl'er  the  punishment 
of  eternal  fire  (Jude  7).  Whether  that  punishment  is  in  some  cases  corrective  (as 
the  word  K6\aiTis  would  imply  in  the  language  of  the  Greek  philosophers  (see  note  on 
ver.  9) ;  whether  there  is  a  place  lor  repentance  in  "that  prison  "  where  those  who  once 
were  disobedient  are  now  confined ; — this  is  one  of  those  secret  things  which  belong 
unto  the  Lord  our  God.  Holy  Scripture  seems  here  and  there  to  give  us  some  gleams 
of  a  possible  restoration.  We  may  be  very  thankful  for  those  gracious  hints,  and 
cherish  for  others  the  hope  which  they  suggest.  But  we  must  not  be  presumptous; 
the  danger  is  tremendoua.  That  ieoniau  fire,  even  if  it  be  corrective,  has  a  very  fearfq| 


OH.  n.  1—22.]    THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  PETER.  63- 

meaning ;  and  beyond  that  fire  lies  the  awful  diy  of  judgment,  for  which  the  souls 
of  the  ungodly  are  now  kept  in  that  mysterious  "  prison  "  of  which  so  little  is  revealed. 
Lessons.  1.  The  Lord  bought  us;  we  are  his.  It  is  awful  guilt  to  deny  him  who 
ransomed  us  with  his  most  precious  blood.  2.  It  is  a  fearful  sacrilege  for  an  ungodly 
man  to  intrude  himself  into  the  sacred  ministry  for  the  sake  of  gain.  3.  There  must 
he  false  teachers  in  the  Church.  "Believe  not  every  spirit,  but  try  the  spirits  whether 
they  be  of  God."  4.  God's  justice  will  surely  overtake  all  who  sin,  whether  angels  or 
men.  5.  But  God  will  not  destroy  the  righteous  with  the  wicked ;  he  cares  for  every 
righteous  soul.  6.  Learn  from  the  case  of  Lot  that  worldliness  must  lead  to  sufiering 
in  this  world,  if  not  in  the  world  to  come. 

Vers.  10 — 22. — Description  of  the  false  teachers.  I.  Theib  pkbsumftion.  1.  They 
despise  government.  Living  an  evil  life,  they  will  not  endure  restraint  of  any  kind. 
Self-willed  and  daring,  they  despise  every  form  of  authority,  and  speak  evil  of  those 
who  are  better,  or  nobler,  or  loftier  than  themselves.  Reverence  is  an  important  element 
in  personal  religion.  Reverence  for  God  inclines  men  to  obey  those  who  by  God's  pro- 
vidence are  set  over  them;  especially  it  leads  them  to  respect  the  beauty  of  holiness 
which  comes  from  God,  to  speak  with  due  reverence  of  that  holiness  wherever  it  is 
manifested — whether  in  saints  living  or  departed,  or  in  the  angels  of  God  in  hoaven. 
2.  Contrast  between  their  conduct  and  that  of  the  elect  angels.  God's  holy  angels  ar6 
very  high  in  power  and  might,  but  they  do  not  rail  even  at  the  evil.  It  ia  their 
appointed  duty  to  pronounce  the  sentence  of  God  against  the  angels  that  sinned  ;  they 
do  it  solemnly  and  sadly.  These  presumptuous  men  rail  at  the  things  which  they 
understand  not— both  at  the  holy  angels  and  at  the  fallen  angels.  It  is  not  good  to  rail 
even  at  these  last.  Pools  make  a  mock  at  sin ;  and  the  sin  of  the  angils,  as  it  is  most 
mysterious,  so  it  is  also  most  awful.  Men  often  talk  lightly  and  idly  about  the  devil 
and  his  wiles.  Holy  Scripture  teaches  us  a  very  different  lesson.  We  are  engaged  in 
a  lifelong  struggle  acainst  him.  The  conflict  is  deadly,  awful;  its  is.^ues  are  most 
momentous — life  or  d>-ath,  heaven  or  hell.  The  soldiers  of  the  cross  must  be  in  earnest, 
for  they  "wrestle,  not  ngainst  flesh  and  blood,  but  against  principaUiira  ani  powers, 
against  the  world-rulers  of  this  darkness,  against  the  spiritual  hosts  of  wickedness."  To 
talk  lightly  of  the  enemy,  to  jest  about  matters  so  tremendous,  ia  not  only  unseemly;  it 
is  dangerous.  It  puts  men  off  their  guard,  and  exposes  them  to  the  insidious  assauiti 
of  the  tempter.  Thus  these  wicked  men,  of  whom  St.  Peter  writes,  talked  wildly  and 
presumptuously  about  things  above  their  comprehension.  They  behaved  like  irrational 
creatures  in  the  presence  of  great  peril,  and  their  end  must  be  destruction.  This  is  the 
due  reward  of  tliuir  unrighteousness,  and  this  they  shall  receive.  They  had  counted  on 
far  other  rewards;  but  the  master  to  whom  they  had  sold  themselves  is  a  liar.  He 
cheats  his  wretchid  slaves ;  he  lures  them  to  the  forbidden  fruit.  It  seems  pleasant  to 
the  eye  and  good  for  food,  but  it  proves  to  be  a  deadJy  poison  (see  reading  adopted  by 
the  Revised  Version). 

II.  Their  sensuality.  1.  Their  gluttony  and  diftnTcenness.  These  men  loved 
luxurious  living.  They  were  worse  than  their  heathon  neighbours.  The  heathen 
could  wait  for  the  night,  the  usual  time  for  banquetiags.  They  began  their  revelry 
early ;  they  gave  the  business  hours  of  the  day  (comp.  Horace, '  Odes,'  I.  i.  20,  "  Partem 
solido  demere  de  die")  to  self-indulgence.  They  joined,  it  seems,  in  the  love- feasts  of 
the  Christians,  but  their  love  was  only  a  pretenca.  As  far  as  they  were  concerned,  the 
love-feasts  were  but  hollow  hypocrisies,  occasions  for  excess.  They  were  spots  and 
blemishes  on  the  assemblies  of  the  godly.  Christians  must  imitate  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  the  Lamb  without  blemish  and  without  spot.  They  must  be  strictly  temperate 
in  all  things ;  for  temperance  is  one  of  the  blessed  fruits  of  the  Spirit,  while  drunkenness 
is  one  of  those  works  of  the  flesh  which  destroy  the  soul.  2.  Their  impurity.  The 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  teaches  his  followers  to  be  pure  in  heart.  These  men  indulged  openly 
in  vice.  Some  of  their  successors  even  taught  that,  as  the  sea  is  not  polluted  by  the 
impurities  which  it  receives,  so  the  true  Gnostic  might  take  his  fill  of  sensual  pleasure 
and  yet  not  be  defiled.  It  was  no  great  thing,  some  of  them  said,  to  abstain  from  lust 
if  it  had  not  been  tasted ;  the  triumph  was  to  live  in  sensual  enjoyments,  and  yet  to 
keep  the  mind  untainted  by  the  defilement  of  the  body.  The  holy  apostle  sternly  con- 
demns this  horrible  heresy.    These  men,  he  says,  are  enticing  souls  to  ruin.    They  art 


■54  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PETER.    [cH.  n.  1— 22. 

fishers  ot  men,  but  not  with  the  gospel  net;  they  hide  their  deadly  hook  with  an 
alluring  bait.  But  the  end  of  these  things  is  death ;  for  impurity  is  deadly  sin  in  the 
sight  of  God.  The  body  of  the  Christian  is  a  temple  of  God  the  Holy  Ghost ;  and  "  if 
any  man  defile  the  temple  of  God,  him  shall  God  destroy." 

IIL  Theib  cwvetoxjbnbbs.  1.  Their  example.  Not  Christ  the  Lord,  not  his  holy 
apostles,  who  could  say,  as  St.  Peter  once  said,  "  Behold,  we  have  forsaken  all,  and 
followed  thee ; "  but  Balaam  the  son  of  Beor — that  wnhappy  man  who  "  beard  the  words 
of  God,  and  knew  the  knowledge  of  the  Most  High,"  and  yet  loved  the  wages  of 
unrighteousness ;  who  was  a  prophet,  and  yet  mad  and  foolish;  who  could  pray,  "May 
I  die  the  death  of  the  righteous,"  and  yet  trieil,  and  in  some  measure  succeeded,  to 
entice  the  people  of  God  to  deadly  sin,  and  himself  perished  miserably  amqng  the 
enemies  of  the  Lord.  His  guilt  was  awful  exceedingly.  He  sought  to  destroy  souls 
for  the  sake  of  his  own  wretched  gain.  So  it  was  with  these  false  teachers.  The  love 
of  money,  the  root  of  all  evil,  had  taken  possession  of  their  heart;  they  shrank  from  no 
sin,  if  only  they  might  gratify  that  tyrant  passion.  2.  The  resvU.  They  became 
trained  in  covetousness.  They  were  like  athletes,  practised  wrestlers;  but  the  prize 
which  was  always  before  their  eyes  was,  not  the  ciowQ  of  glory  that  fadeth  not  away, 
but  those  poor  earthly  treasures  which  fall  away  from  the  dying  man,  and  leave  tlie 
unhappy  soul  desolate  in  the  hour  of  its  utmost  need.  For  this  prize,  the  reward  of 
unrighteousness,  they  sought,  like  Balaam,  to  lure  souls  to  ruin.  Therefore  were  they 
children  of  curse;  for  the  souls  of  men  are  very  precious  in  the  sight  of  God,  and  his 
awfiil  curse  must  light  upon  the  heads  of  those  wicked  men — all  the  more  intensely 
wicked  if,  like  Balaam,  they  hold  sacred  offices — who  cause  Christ's  little  ones  to  stumble 
and  fiiU,  and  destroy  the  souls  for  whom  the  Lord  Jesus  died. 

IV.  Their  teaching.  1.  It  is  vain.  They  are  wells  without  water.  God  is  the 
Fountain  of  living  waters.  True  believers  become,  in  a  secondary  sense,  fountains 
also.  The  water  that  he  giveth  is  in  them  a  well  of  water  springing  up  unto  eternal 
life.  These  men  exhibit  the  appearance  of  wells;  they  profess  to  be  teachers,  but 
there  is  no  living  water  in  them.  They  have  none  themselves;  they  cannot  give  it  to 
others.  They  are  like  clouds  that  promise  rain,  but  are  driven  away  by  the  wind,  and 
fail  to  satisfy  the  thirsty  land.  They  sj  eak  great  swelling  words,  but  they  are  words 
uf  vanity,  empty  and  profitless,  not  like  the  words  of  eternal  life  which  the  Lord  Jesus 
liath;  not  like  the  word  of  reconciliation  which  he  hath  committed  to  his  faithful  dis- 
ciples. 2.  It  is  dangerous.  For  those  high-sounding  phrases  cover  an  evil  life.  They 
gather  followers  round  them  by  means  of  their  specious  eloquence,  and  then  entice 
them  to  destruction  by  wicked  example.  They  bait  their  hook  with  their  own  licentious 
practices,  and  sometimes,  alas  I  succeed  in  destroying  souls  that  were  just  escaping  from 
evil  influences.  They  promise  them  liberty,  but  the  liberty  of  which  they  boast  is  not 
that  liberty  wherewith  Christ  hath  made  us  free — the  liberty  which  recognizes  the 
ireedom  of  the  Christian  within  the  sphere  of  things  indifferent,  but  even  within  that 
sphere  carefully  avoids  giving  offence  to  the  consciences  of  others,  and  sensitively 
shrinks  even  from  the  appearance  of  evil.  Their  liberty  is  libertinism.  It  is  freedom 
from  moral  restraints;  it  is  a  revolt  against  the  holy  Law  of  God;  it  is  a  lie, for  it 
contradicts  both  the  moral  instincts  of  human  nature  and  the  truth  of  God.  It  is  not 
liberty;  for  those  only  are  free  indeed  whom  the  Son  of  God  makes  free  in  that  service 
which  is  perfect  freedom.     This  false  liberty  is  really  slavery,  bondage  to  sin. 

V.  Their  miserable  condition.  1.  They  are  slaves.  They  talk  loudly  about 
liberty,  but  they  are  slaves  themselves.  They  have  yielded  themselves  up  to  the  evil 
one;  he  has  corrupted  their  whole  nature,  and  uses  them  to  corrupt  others.  They  are 
slaves  of  corruption,  overcome  by  it,  and  brought  into  bondage  to  it.  Vice  allures  men 
at  first.  It  offers  a  deceitful  pleasure ;  it  makes  the  restraints  of  virtue  seem  irksome ; 
it  presents  a  show  of  freedom.  It  entices  men;  then  it  ensnares  them.  Now  and 
then  they  offer  a  feeble  resistance:  it  draws  its  net  tighter  and  closer;  their  struggles 
become  continually  fainter;  it  holds  them  secure;  they  are  captive.  Tliey  find  out, 
when  it  is  too  late,  the  deceitfulness  of  sin.  The  false  pleasure  becomes  real  misery. 
They  feel  it,  but  their  strength  is  gone.  They  are  overcome;  they  are  in  bondage  from 
which  they  cannot  escape.  Such  is  the  pretended  freedom  of  vicious  men.  Only 
those  whom  the  truth  makes  free  are  free  indeed.  2.  Perhaps  some  of  them,  were  once 
free.    Christians  have  escaped  from  the  bondage  of  sin.    Once,  it  may  be,  they  loTe4 


OH.  11.1—22.]    THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  PETER.  6S 

the  world  and  the  things  that  are  in  the  world ;  once  the  lusts  of  the  flesh,  the  lusts  ol 
the  eye,  and  the  pride  of  life  filled  their  heart.  The  moral  miasma  of  the  corruption 
that  is  in  the  world  was  defiling  their  soul ;  but  they  escaped,  drawn  by  the  powerful 
attraction  of  the  cross.  They  rose  into  a  purer  atmosphere;  they  lived  in  the  know- 
ledge of  Christ.  The  full  knowledge  (inlypoxns)  of  Christ  is  the  very  sphere  in  which 
the  true  Christian  dwells.  Within  the  range  of  that  knowledge  grace  and  peace  are 
multiplied  unto  him  (oh.  i.  2).  That  knowledge  is  eternal  life  (John  xvii.  3) ;  it  more 
than  compensates  for  the  loss  of  all  that  the  world  can  give  (Phil.  iii.  8) ;  it  is  sweet, 
precious,  holy,  beyond  the  power  of  language  to  express.  Those  who  have  that  blessed 
knowledge  escape  from  the  pollutions  of  the  world.  Sensual  pleasures  have  no  hold 
upon  those  who  realize  the  holy  joy  of  communion  with  the  Lord.  But  they  must 
watch  and  pray,  and  keep  themselves  in  the  love  of  God.  It  seems,  indeed,  almost 
impossible  that  any  who  have  known  the  Lord  should  fall  away  into  sin;  but  "the 
heart  of  man  is  deceitful  above  all  things."  Satan  is  ever  on  the  watch  with  his 
insidious  temptations,  and  sometimes,  when  all  seems  safe,  the  danger  comes.  Some  of 
those  who  had  escaped  from  the  snare  of  the  evil  one  are  again  entangled  in  it,  and, 
alas !  so  entangled  that  escape  becomes  almost  impossible.  They  are  overcome  j  they 
are  captives,  brought  back  into  utter  bondage.  Judas,  like  St.  Peter,  had  forsaken  all 
and  followed  Christ;  and  yet,  oh  strange  and  awful  mystery  of  the  deceitfulness  of 
sin  1  he  was  covetous,  like  these  false  teachers ;  he  sold  his  Lord  for  money.  And  if 
one  of  the  chosen  twelve  who  lived  in  familiar  intercourse  with  Christ,  who  saw  every 
day  that  gracious  face,  and  heard  those  words  such  as  never  man  spake,  and  witnessed 
liis  many  works  of  power  and  love, — if  one  of  those  could  fall  completely  under  the 
dominion  of  Satan,  how  jealously  ought  we  to  watch  ag^tiiist  the  first  suggestions  of  the 
tempter!  how  carefully  should  we  take  heed  lest  we  fall  when  we  must  seem  to 
standi  It  is  impossible,  we  may  whisper  to  ourselves.  We  who  have  tailed  that  the 
Lord  is  gracious  can  have  no  taste  for  the  pollutions  of  the  world.  But  Scripture  tells 
us  it  is  not  imi)Ossible;  experience  tells  us  it  is  not  impossible.  "What  1  say  unto 
you"— such  is  the  emphatic  warning  of  the  Lord — "I  say  unto  all.  Watch."  All  need 
that  warning.  The  holiest  saints  of  God  do  not  count  themselves  to  have  already 
apprehended,  to  be  already  perfect :  they  watch.  3.  Now  their  case  is  more  hopeless 
than  ever.  The  last  state  is  worse  than  the  first.  Satan  iiad  them  once;  now  he  has 
them  again  ^  he  will  not  let  them  go.  They  once  knew  the  way  of  righteousness, 
but,  alas  1  that  knowledge,  now  lost,  only  serves  to  deepen  their  guilt  and  to  harden 
their  heart  all  the  more.  For  sin  against  light  is  more  deadly  far  than  the  sin  of 
ignorance ;  and,  the  greater  the  light,  the  deeper  is  the  sin  of  those  who  love  darkness 
rather  than  light.  For  all  knowledge  involves  responsibility ;  and,  as  the  full  know- 
ledge of  the  Lord  Je.sus  Christ  is  blessed  exceedingly,  so  to  sin  against  that  knowledge 
must  imply  an  intense  blackness  of  guilt.  It  is  like  the  sin  of  Judas,  who  was  one  cf 
the  twelve.  The  man  who  thus  sins  against  light  "hath  trodden  underfoot  the  Sou 
uf  God,  and  hath  counted  the  blood  of  the  covenant  wherewith  he  was  sanctified  an 
unholy  thing,  and  hath  done  despite  to  the  Spirit  of  grace."  He  was  once  unclean,  but 
he  was  washed,  but  he  was  sanctified  (1  Cor.  vi.  11),  and  now,  alas !  he  has  returnee]  to 
wallow  in  the  mire  of  uncleanness.  Holy  Scripture  sajs  of  such  men,  in  words  of 
most  awful  but  most  just  severity,  "  It  is  impossible  to  renew  them  again  unto  repent- 
ance."    "  It  is  a  fearful  thing  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  living  God." 

LKSS0N.S.  1.  Christians  tuust  avoid  the  sins  of  the  false  teachers;  they  must  not 
do.spise  dominion,  tliey  must  not  rail.  2.  Christians  must  be  strictly  temperate;  they 
must  hate  uncleanness.  3.  Covetousness  is  deadly  sin,  especially  in  teachers  of  religion. 
4.  Christians  must  be  on  their  guard  against  false  teachers ;  high-sounding  words  and 
loud  talk  about  liberty  often  lead  men  astray.  5.  To  sin  against  light,  to  fall  from 
grace,  involves  most  awful  danger.     "  Be  not  high-minded,  but  fear." 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ver.  1.— Denying  the  Master.  Neither  our  Lord  Jesus  nor  his  apostles  indulged  in 
sanguine  expectations  and  glowing  predictions  concerning  the  immediate  results  of  the 
proclamation  of  the  gospel.     It  was  well  understood  in  the  early  Church,  by  all  but 


56  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PETER,    [oh.  n.  1— 2a 

fanatics,  that  the  difficulties  with  which  Christianity  had  to  contend  were  very  formid- 
ible,  and  that,  added  to  those  encountered  from  without,  were  others — more  insidious 
md  dangerous — arising  from  within.  Of  these,  false  teachers,  corrupters  of  doctrine, 
ud  preachers  of  licentiousness  in  the  name  of  the  holy  Saviour,  are  denounced  as 
proofs  of  the  power  of  sin,  and  as  signs  of  a  coming  judginent. 

I.  The  ways  ih  which  pkofessino  Chbistians  dent  theib  Mabtee.  1.  Some 
take  an  unscriptural  and  dishonouring  view  of  his  nature,  and  deny  him  by  denying 
his  claims  to  Divine  dignity  and  authority.  From  the  early  Grnostics  onwards  there 
were  those  who  assailed  Christ's  account  of  himself,  and  his  inspired  apostles'  account 
of  him.  It  is  well  known  that  many  of  the  early  heresies  related  to  the  Person  of 
Christ,  and  that  early  Councils  were  occupied  with  defining  dogmatically  the  Divine 
and  human  natures.  By  way  of  opposition  and  correction,  it  may  be  said  that  to  errors 
of  the  kind  referred  to  we  are  indebted  for  our  precious  heritage,  the  Nioene  Creed,  in 
which  orthodox  doctrine  was  finally  and  sufficiently  fixed.  Still,  the  general  determi- 
nation of  truth  is  no  bar  to  the  continuance  of  sin  and  error ;  and  there  has  been,  perhaps, 
no  age  in  which  there  have  not  arisen  either  individuals  or  communities  who  have 
denied  their  Master.  2.  Some  repudiate  Christ's  rightful  authority.  There  are  many 
who  have  not  the  theological  interest  which  would  lead  them  to  discuss  Christ's  nature, 
who  nevertheless  resent  the  claim  advanced  on  his  behalf  to  be  the  Legislator  and  Judge 
of  human  society.  The  Church,  on  the  one  hand,  the  individual  reason  on  the  other, 
may  be  put  into  competition  with  the  Lord  Christ.  3.  Some  deny  Christ  by  practically 
disobeying  his  precepts.  To  such  as  these  Jesus  referred  when  he  asked,  "  Why  call 
ye  me,  Lord,  Lord,  and  do  not  the  things  which  I  say  ?  "  Profession  of  allegiance  on!y 
renders  real  rebellion  the  more  hateful  to  our  Lord. 

IL  The  unreasonableness  a»d  guilt  op  those  who  thus  dent  their  Mastbb. 
1.  In  view  of  the  claim  established  by  redemption,  such  are  guilty  of  base  ingratitude. 
The  introduction  of  the  clause,  "the  Master  that  lought  them,"  gives  point  to  the 
condemnation.  They  who  deny  Christ  deny  One  who  lived,  suffered,  and  died  for  them, 
and  whom  accordingly  they  ought  to  regard  and  treat  with  a  tender  and  reverential 
gratitude.  They  are  like  enfranchised  slaves  turning  round  upon  their  liberator, 
speaking  of  him  with  scorn  and  derision,  treating  him  with  neglect  and  indifference,  if 
not  with  hatred  and  hostility.  2.  In  view  of  their  own  profession  of  subjection  and 
indebtedness  to  him,  there  is  gross  inconsistency.  3.  In  view  of  the  doom  declared 
against  deniers  of  Christ,  their  conduct  is  the  uttermost  degree  of  infatuation.  They 
bring  upon  themselves  swift  destruction.  The  time  ah^  come  when  they  who  deny 
him  shall  be  denied  by  him. — J.  B.  T. 

Ver.  5. — "A  preacher  of  rightenusness."  In  the  Book  of  Genesis  we  read  that  Noah 
was  a  righteous  and  blameless  man,  who  found  grace  in  the  eyes  of  the  Lord,  and 
walked  with  God.  Joseplius,  who  preserves,  it  would  seem,  an  old  Hebrew  tradition, 
witnesses  not  only  to  Noah's  just  and  pious  character,  but  to  his  ministry  to  the 
sinful  generation  among  whom  his  lot  was  cast.  After  describing  the  sinfulness  of  the 
people,  Josephus  proceeds,  "But  Noah  was  very  uneasy  at  what  they  did;  and, 
being  displeased  at  their  conduct,  persuaded  them  to  change  their  dispositions  and 
acts  for  the  better;  but,  seeing  that  they  did  not  yie'd  to  him,  but  were  slaves  to  their 
wicked  pleasures,  he  was  afraid  they  would  kill  him."  The  office  and  ministry 
ascribed  to  Noah  are  required  in  every  generation,  and  God  ever  raises  up  faithful  men 
whom  he  empowers  to  discharge  amongst  their  contemporaries  the  duties  devolving 
upon  the  preachers  of  righteousness. 

I.  The  necessity  fob  pebachkbs  op  righteousness.  1.  This  appears  from  a  con- 
sideration of  man's  nature.  Human  beings  are  constituted  with  moral  capabilities  and 
with  faculties  to  be  employed  in  a  moral  life.  Intelligence,  conscience,  and  will  are  the 
prerogative  of  men  among  the  inhabitants  of  this  earth.  And  even  the  most  degraded, 
those  most  nearly  allied  in  habits  to  the  brutes,  are  susceptible  of  elevation  in  the  scale 
of  moral  life.  He  who  examines,  fairly  and  completely,  the  nature  of  man  must  admit 
that  he  is  made  for  righteousness.  2.  And  the  requirement  of  God  corresponds  with  the 
nature  of  man.  God  calls  men  to  righteousness,  holds  them  responsible  to  himself,  as 
the  righteous  Governor  and  Judge,  for  obedience  or  disobedience  to  his  commands.  3. 
Yet  it  is  not  to  be  questioned  t  lat  the  ideal  of  human  character  and  conduct  has  not 


OH.  n.  1—22.]    THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PETER.  67 

been  reached,  that  unrighteousDess  has  prevailed  amongst  men,  that  in  the  highest 
sense  "  there  is  none  that  doeth  righteousness  " — none  who  has  no  failings  to  acknow- 
ledge, none  who  has  a  perfect  obedience  to  present. 

II.  The  IMPORT  OF  the  prbachinGt  or  righteousness.  1.  The  standard  of  righteous- 
ness has  to  be  maintained.  It  would  be  base  indeed  on  the  part  of  the  preacher  were 
he  to  substitute  an  inferior  standard  for  the  Law  of  God,  were  he  to  aooommodate  his 
teaching  to  the  corrupt  nature  and  the  ungodly  life  of  the  sinful.  The  Law,  which  is 
holy,  just,  and  good,  must  be  upheld  in  all  its  purity  and  in  all  its  rigidity.  And  this  may 
be  done  with  the  assurance  that  the  conscience,  even  of  the  iniquitous,  will  in  all  likeli- 
hood acknowledge  that  the  right  is  a  higher  and  better  standard  than  the  agreeable  or 
the  customary,  however  human  infirmity  may  have  practically  adopted  and  followed 
the  latter.  Every  minister  of  religion  is  bound  to  insist  upon  a  scriptural  rule  of  right, 
to  apply  the  laws  of  morality  to  all  parts  of  human  nature,  to  all  relations  of  human 
■ociety.  2.  The  violators  of  the  Law  of  righteousness  have  to  be  rebuked.  Probably 
the  reference  in  the  text  is  especially  to  this  aspect  of  the  preacher's  service.  It  is  not 
enough  to  say,  "  This  is  what  men  should  be  and  do  I "  It  is  necessary  to  address  to 
the  disobedient  the  remonstrances,  the  rebukes,  the  warnings,  which  are  authorized  by 
the  Word  of  God.  Expostulation,  reproach,  and  admonition  are  not  the  most  agreeable 
or  the  most  easy  parts  of  a  preacher's  work  ;  yet  they  are  indispensable,  and  are  often 
most  valuable  in  their  effects.  Many  faithful  preachers  have,  like  Noah,  to  lament  that 
their  rebukes  and  warnings  seem  to  have  been  in  vain ;  yet  they  have  the  satisfaction 
of  having  done  their  duty  and  delivered  their  soul.  3.  The  restoration  of  righteousness 
by  means  of  the  Divine  Mediator  has  to  be  proclaimed.  There  is  a  righteousness  which 
is  by  the  Law ;  but  there  is  also  a  higher  righteousness  which  is  by  faith  in  Christ 
unto  those  who  believe,  and  this  is  exactlj'  adapted  to  the  needs  of  sinful  men,  who 
upon  repentance  and  faith  may  become  "  just  with  God."  It  is  the  privilege  and  the 
delight  of  the  Christian  preacher  to  exhibit  the  beauty  and  appropriateness  of  this  spiritual 
righteousness,  and  to  invite  men  to  use  those  means  by  which  they  may  secure  this  for 
themselves. 

III.  The  methods  of  the  prbaohing  op  righteottsness.  1.  The  most  natural  and 
obrious  method  is  by  the  utterances  of  the  living  voice,  the  organ  by  which,  according 
to  the  constitution  imposed  upon  man,  truth  is  communicated  and  impression  produced 
by  the  rousing  of  deep  and  divinely  implanted  emotion.  2.  Yet  there  are  other  means 
of  preaching  righteousness,  for  which  some  may  be  qualified  who  are  not  gifted  with 
effective  speech.  The  press  affords  in  these  days  an  outlet  for  much  consecrated 
Christian  energy,  and  most  important  is  it,  when  gifted  authors  are  found  endeavouring 
to  lower  by  their  writings  the  standard  of  human  morality,  that  Christian  thinkers  and 
writers  should  wield  their  pen,  in  all  departments  of  literature,  in  the  service  of 
righteousness  and  of  God.  3.  In  any  case  righteousness  may  be,  and  sHould  be, 
preached  in  the  impressive  and  effective  language  of  the  life. 

IV.  The  results  op  the  pkbaohing  op  righteousness.  1.  Such  preaching  must 
be  witness  of  condemnation  against  those  who  refuse  it.  2.  But  to  those  who  accept 
and  obey  the  Divine  message  it  is  the  means  of  salvation  and  of  life  eternal. — J.  B.  T. 

Ver.  9. — Deliverance  and  condemnation.  No  human  government  is  perfect.  The 
knowledge  of  earthly  rulers  is  limited,  and  they  are  utterly  incapable  of  discriminating 
among  individual  cases ;  and  it  often  happens  that  they  have  not  the  power  to  do  all 
that  is  desirable  and  expedient.  In  contradistinction  from  the  necessary  imperfections 
of  human  governments  is  the  perfect  adaptation  and  sufBciency  of  that  which  is 
Divine.  "  The  Lord  knoweth  "  how  to  rule  and  to  judge,  for  his  wisdom  and  his  equity 
are  alike  faultless ;  and  his  power  is  as  irresistible  as  his  knowledge  is  all-embracing. 

I.  The  distinction  in  human  ohabactbb  drawn  bt  the  Lord  and  Judge  of 
MANKIND.  Men  discriminate  often  upon  unsound  principles,  always  with  insufficient 
data.  They  are  guided  very  much  in  their  estimate  of  their  fellow-men  by  such  con- 
siderations as  social  position  and  social  acceptableness.  They  cannot  take  into  their 
dehberation  the  thoughts  and  intents  of  the  heart.  Hence  the  inadequacy  of  all 
human  attempts  to  create  a  moral  distinction  among  men.  Now,  according  to  St. 
Peter,  our  Divine  Ruler  distinguishes  men  into  (1)  the  godly,  or  those  animated  by 
true  piety,  by  a  reverence  for  God's  Law,  and  a  responsive  appreciation  of  God's  love  j 


68  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PETER,    [ch.  n.  1^24 

and  (2)  the  unjust,  or  thoae  who  have  no  respect  for  the  law  of  rectitude,  human  or 
Divine. 

[I.  The  oobbbsponding  distinction  of  treatment  on  the  part  of  the  Lobd  and 
Judge  of  mankind.  1.  The  godly  are  not  exempted  from  temptation, but  are  delivered 
out  of  it.  In  illustration  of  this  principle  of  the  Divine  government  St.  Peter  refers  to 
Noah,  vyhose  lot  was  cast  in  a  generation  of  sinners  and  scoifers,  but  who  was  preserved 
from  yielding  to  the  evil  solicitations  to  which  he  was  exposed;  and  to  Lot,  who, 
though  vexed  with  the  lascivious  life  and  lawless  deeds  of  his  wicked  neighbours,  was 
yet  delivered  from  participation  in  their  guilt  and  their  doom.  Certain  it  is  that  Divine 
providence  allows  the  purest  and  the  best  to  come  into  constant  contact  with  the  bond.< 
slaves  of  sin,  doubtless  in  order  that  their  virtue  may  be  tested  and  their  character 
strengthened.  But  never  does  God  abandon  those  who  confide  in  his  care,  and  who 
comply  with  his  conditions  of  safety.  The  means  by  which  he  protects  and  delivers 
his  own  are  known  to  himself,  and  he  makes  use  of  them  in  his  own  time.  Thus,  how- 
ever formidable  may  be  the  temptations  to  which  the  godly  are  exposed,  a  way  of 
escape  is  made  for  them,  and  they  are  delivered  from  the  hand  of  the  enemy.  2.  The 
imrighteouB  cannot  escape  just  retribution.  It  does  not  matter  how  high  is  their 
station,  in  what  esteem  they  are  held  by  their  fellow-creatures,  what  ia  their  power 
and  their  skill.  All  who  defy  and  all  who  forget  God  must  surely  learn  that  they  are 
subject  to  the  control  of  infinite  justice,  administered  by  omnipotence.  The  apostle>  in 
the  context,  adduces  illustrations  of  retributive  righteousness,  and  reminds  his  reader* 
that  the  rebel  angels  were  cast  into  'J'artaruB,  that  a  flood  was  brought  upon  thq  ancient 
world  of  the  ungodly,  and  that  the  cities  of  Sodom  and  Gomorrah  were  turned  into 
ashes.  For  all  impenitent  sinners  there  is  punishment,  even  here  and  now ;  and  the 
Scriptures  reveal  the  approach  of  a  day  of  judgment  in  which  God  shall  render  to  every 
num  according  to  his  works,  and  in  which  those  who  have  exalted  themselves  against  the 
holy  Supreme  shall  awake  to  "  shame  and  everlasting  contempt."-^.  B.  T. 

YfeT.  15. — The  sinner's  hire.  In  the  course  of  his  denunciation  of  abandoned  sinners 
St.  Peter  makes  use  in  two  places  of  this  remarkable  expression,  "the  wages  of 
unrighteousness,"  or  "the  hire  of  wrong-doing"— in  the  fifteenth  verse  as  something 
loved  and  sought  by  IJalaam,  and  in  the  twelfth  verse  as  that  which  shall  be  the 
portion  of  the  impenitent  transgressor.  The  idea  was  one  which  evidently  took  very 
forcible  possession  of  the  apostle's  mind,  and,  however  little  it  may  be  in  harmony  with 
the  sentimental  and  purblind  type  of  religion  too  prevalent  in  our  time,  it  is  an  idea  in 
perfect  harmony  with  the  stern  and  righteous  government  of  God.  Upon  the  sug- 
gestion uf  the  twofold  application  of  the  thoughts  in  this  chapter,  it  may  be  well  to  treat 
this  serious  and  awful  subject  under  two  aspects. 

I.  The'  sinner's  n.Lus]0N  as  to  bis.  work  and  his  waobs.  Life  is  represented  as 
a  bondman's  service,  and  in  any  case  the  representation  is  appropriate  and  just.  But 
experience  of  human  character  and  history  leads  to  the  conclusion,  which  coincides 
with  the  teaching  of  revelation,  that  men  constantly  engage  and  continue  in  the 
service  of  sin  under  a  double  illusion.  1.  They  imi^ine  the  work  which  they  under-^ 
take  to  be  easy  and  agreeable.  By  many  devices  the  tyrant  sin  disguises  the  evils  of 
his  service,  and  induces  his  victims  to  continue  in  it  to  their  souls'  injury  and  ruin. 
The  pleasures  of  sin  are  for  a  season,  and  they  who  indulge  in  them  are  like  those  who  eat 
of  the  lair  apples  of  the  Dead  Sea,  which  turn  to  ashes  in  the  mouth.  2.  They  imagine 
the  reward  of  tlie  service  to  be  liberal  and  satisfactory.  As  Balaam  lusted  for  the  gold 
which  was  to  be  his  hire,  as  Judua  clutched  the  thirty  pieces  of  silver  which  were  the 
price  of  his  Master's  blood,  so  the  bondmen  of  ungodliness  deceive  themselves  with  the 
imagination  that  the  reward  they  will  partake  will  enrich  and  satisfy  th^  nature. 
Whether  it  be  wealth  or  pleasure,  power  or  praise,  they  set  their  hearts  upon  it,  and  it 
becomes  to  them  as  the  supreme  good.  In  such  an  illusion  years  of  sin  and  folly  may 
be  passed. 

II.  The  sinner's  awakening  to  a  sense  of  the  bealitt  as  to  both  the  wobe 
AND  THE  WAGES  OF  SIN.  1.  The  Service  is,  sooner  or  later,  found  to  be  mere  slavery. 
The  chains  may  be  gilded,  but  they  are  chains  for  all  that.  The  dwelling  may  have 
the  semblance  of  a  palace,  but  it  is  in  fact  a  prison.  Tho  master's  speech  may  be 
honeyed,  but  it  is  the  speech  of  a  tyrant,  cruel  and  relentless.     '4,  The  hiie  of  wron^ 


CH.  n.  1— 22.]    THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  PETEB.  TO 


doing  is  not  payment,  but  punishment.  "  The  way  of  transgressors  "  is  found  to  be 
"  hard."     "  The  wages  of  sin  is  death." 

Application.  Let  these  considerations  lead  the  sinner  to  forsake  the  tyrant's  service, 
repudiate  the  tyrant's  claims,  and  fling  back  the  tyrant's  hire. — J.  B.  T. 

Ver.  19. — Slaves  promise  liberty  I  1.  In  denouncing  the  delusions  promoterl  by 
false  teachers,  St.  Peter  passes  from  invective  to  irony.  He  exhibits  in  this  verse,  not 
rnerely  the  impiety,  but  the  very  absurdity,  of  sinners,  wlio,  themselves  enslaved  t« 
sin,  are  so  unreasonable  as  to  oflFer  freedom  to  their  dupes  and  victims  1  The  lan- 
guage which  he  uses  gives  an  insight  into  religious  truths  of  the  highest  practical 
importance. 

I.  The  TBtTB  Chbistian  is  free  from  sin,  and  is  in  bondaoe  to  Christ.  There 
was  a  time  when  he  was  the  captive,  the  thrall  of  error,  perhaps  of  vice  or  of  crime. 
From  that  bondage  Divine  grace  delivered  him.  But,  in  renouncing  the  serfdom  to  sin, 
he  became  the  Lord's  freedman.  Yet  the  highe-st  use  the  Christian  makes  of  his 
freedom  is  to  submit  himself  to  the  holiest  and  the  kindest  of  Masters.  Even  apostles 
felt  it  an  honour  to  subscribe  themselves  bondservants  of  the  Lord  Christ.  The  will 
of  the  Saviour  is  the  law  of  the  saved. 

II.  The  false  Christian  is  free  from  Christ,  and  in  bondage  to  sin.  He  whose 
religion  is  only  a  name  may  call  himself  Christ's,  but  in  fact  he  has  renounced  the  yoke 
that  is  easy  and  the  burden  that  is  light ;  he  has  given  himself  over  to  work  the  wiU  »( 
the  tyrant  who  has  usurped  the  throne  which  is  by  right  Divine  the  proper  inheritauce 
of  the  Son  of  God.    He  may  boast  his  liberty,  but  the  boast  is  empty  and  vain. 

III.  The  promise  of  liberty  on  the  part  of  sin's  slaves  is  fallacious  and 
vain.  In  politics  it  has  always  been  common  for  those  bound  by  their  own  lusts  and 
vanity  to  make  loud  professions  of  liberty,  and  to  invite  men  to  partake  of  its  delights. 
These  were  the  men  of  whom  Milton  said  they 

**  Bawl  for  freedom  in  their  Benselesa  mood. 

And  still  revolt  when  truth  would  set  them  free. 
Licence  they  mean  when  they  cry,  'Liberty  I' 
For  who  lovea  that  must  first  be  wise  and  good." 

These  were  the  men  who  led  Dr.  Johnson  to  denounce  "  patriotism  as  the  last  refuge 
of  a  scoundrel."  These  were  the  men  whose  conduct  during  the  French  Bevolution  led 
to  the  famous  exclamation, "  0  Liberty,  what  crimes  have  been  wrousht  in  thy  name  I  " 
It  has  been,  and  is,  the  fashion  with  socialists  and  communists,  anarchists  and 
nihilists,  to  sing  the  praises  of  freedom;  but  the  " monntain-nymph,  sweet  Liberty," 
will  have  no  homage  from  such  professed  admirers  aa  tliese.  What  they  want  is 
licence  for  their  own  sins  and  scope  for  their  own  vanity.  So  has  it  ever  been,  and  so 
is  it  still,  in  religion.  In  the  early  ages  of  the  Church  the  Gnostics  professed  to  be 
wise,  to  have  found  the  secret  of  sinritual  freedom ;  but  in  too  many  cases  these  pro- 
fessions were  a  cloak  for  licentiousness.  Again  and  again  in  the  history  of  Christendom 
have  there  occurred  outbursts  of  fanaticism,  of  which  the  text  supplies  explanation. 
The  antinomian  is  a  "bondservant  of  corruption ; "  but  who  so  loud  as  he  in  the  pro- 
clamation of  liberty,  in  the  promise  to  all  men  of  a  life  of  spiritual  freedom?  But 
freedom  is  worthless  unless  it  be  freedom  from  sin's  vile,  debasing  chains,  unless  it  be 
the  practical  repudiation  of  the  tyranny  of  the  prince  of  darkness.  There  is  a  servitude 
which  it  is  an  honour  for  a  free  man  to  accept ;  it  is  the  service  of  Christ,  which  is 
"  perfect  liberty."— J.  B.  T. 

Ver.  21. — "  The  way  of  righteoutness."  By  this  expression  the  Apostle  Peter  denotes 
the  same  course  of  moral  life  as  he  desio;nates  in  previous  verses  "  the  way  of  truth  " 
and  "the  right  way."  The  epithet  "rigliteous"  here  employed  to  define  and  describe 
what  in  the  New  Testament  is  sometimes  called  "  the  way,"  is  peculiarly  suggestive 
and  instructive. 

I.  It  is  the  WAT  designed  by  a  righteous  God.  There  is  nothing  that  more 
signally  distinguishes  the  true  God  from  the  deities  of  the  heathen  than  his  inflexible 
righteousness.  His  character  is  righteous;  his  works  and  the  administration  of  liis 
moral  government  are  righteouB ;  the  laws  which  he  promulgates  for  the  direction  of 


60  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  PETER,    [ca.  ti.  1—22, 

his  subjects  are  righteous.    "  Righteous  and  true  are  thy  ways,  O  thou  King  of  the 
ages  I " 

IL  It  IS  A  WAT  CONSTRTJOTBD  BY  A  RiGHTBons  Savioub.  The  exsoiition  of  God's 
righteous  plans  for  man's  salvation  was  by  him  entrusted  to  his  own  Son.  In  Christ 
God  appears  before  men  as  "  a  just  God  and  a  Saviour."  The  mediatorial  dispensation 
in  all  its  provisions  is  distinguished  by  righteousness;  it  is  a  revelation  of  righteousness 
as  much  as  of  love. 

III.  It  is  a  WAT  WHICH  AVOIDS  THE  PATHS  OF  UNRiGHTKOusNEss.  This,  It  may  be 
objected,  is  tautological.  But  it  is  well  to  insist  upon  the  fact  that  there  can  be  no 
fellowship  between  light  and  darkness;  that  however  professed  travellers  in  the  narrow 
way  may  disgrace  their  profession  by  unrighteous  conduct,  the  religion  of  Christ  can 
tolerate  no  such  practices.  Other  religions  may  require  only  verbal  assent  or  cere- 
monial conformity,  but  Christianity  demands  righteousness  of  life  and,  what  is  more, 
righteousness  of  heart.  "  Except  your  righteousness,"  says  the  Pounder  of  our  faith, 
"  exceed  the  righteousness  of  the  scribes  and  Pharisees,  ye  shall  in  no  wise  enter  into 
the  kingdom  of  heaven." 

IV.  It  is  the  WAT  tkoddeh  bt  bighteous  hbh.  The  interest  and  attractiveness 
of  a  road  depend  in  no  small  meas  ■'le  upon  those  who  are  its  habitual  frequenters. 
Judged  by  this  test,  the  way  of  righteousness  has  attractions  far  beyond  any  other.  It 
is  the  path  which  has  for  centuries  been  trodden  by  the  great  and  good.  The  stimulus 
and  encouragement  afforded  by  the  nfiblest  and  the  best  society  are  there  enjoyed. 

V.  It  is  the  WAT  which  lbads  to  the  new  heavens  and  the  new  babth  wherein 
DWELLiffH  EIGHTE0USNES3.  As  is  the  road,  so  is  its  termination,  its  destination.  If 
righteousness  has  a  hard  battle  to  fight  for  existence  here  on  earth,  it  is  comforting  and 
inspiriting  to  be  assured  that  the  state  to  which  we  are  advancing  is  one  where 
unrighteousness  is  altogether  and  for  ever  unknown. 

Application.  1.  Seek  and  find  this  way.  2.  Having  entered  upon  it,  turn  not  back, 
but  persevere  even  unto  the  end. — J.  R.  T. 

Vers.  1—22. — False  teachers.  Archdeacon  Parrar  here  finds  "  the  burning  lava  of  th« 
apostle's  indignation."  The  chapter  is  indeed  in  a  style  that  well  suits  its  theme.  It 
is  strong,  not  to  say  rough  and  rugged ;  wild,  not  to  say  weird  and  ghastly.  It  might 
be  interesting  to  deal  with  the  many  metaphors  he  here  employs,  but  probably  an 
analysis  of  the  whole  chapter  will  better  convey  its  teaching. 

L  The  doctrines  op  false  teachers.  They  are  not  definitely  denoted,  but  one 
word  probably  indicates  them  all :  "  heresies  "  (ver.  1) — self-chosen  doctrines,  deve- 
loping into  endless  varieties.  1.  Self-indulgence  of  intellect.  2.  Self-indulgence  of 
passion.  They  are  similar  to  the  corresponding  sins  with  which  Paul  and  Jude  deal 
in  their  B|)istles. 

II.  The  conduot  of  false  teachers.  More  is  said  here,  much  more,  of  their 
conduct  than  of  their  error.  Their  conduct  is  described :  1.  In  its  relation  to  their 
teaching.  That  conduct  is  (1)  cunning  (ver.  1)  ;  (2)  treacherous  (ver.  3) ;  (3)  daringly 
insolent  (ver.  11);  (4)  coveteous  (vers.  14 — 16);  (5)  deluding  (ver.  19),  promising 
liberty :  "  0  Liberty,  what  crimes  have  been  wrought  in  thy  name  I "  2.  In  its  relation 
to  their  own  life.  It  is  (1)  bitterly  disappointing  (ver.  17) ;  (2)  enslaved  and  enslaving 
(ver.  19) ;  (3)  degraded  and  yet  ever  degrading  (ver.  22). 

III.  The  punishment  op  false  teachees.  1.  It  is  sure  (ver.  3).  Lingereth  not, 
is  not  idle,  slumbereth  not ;  justice  is  sleepless.  2.  It  is  in  harmony  with  God's  past 
dealings.  The  apostle  cites  other  ages  and  other  worlds.  Their  punishment  is  in 
harmony  with  God's  dealings  (1)  with  angels;  (2)  with  the  ancient  world — Noah, 
Sodom,  Gomorrai]. 

IV.  The  ohibX''  sin  op  false  teaohebb.  Its  central  evil  is  "denying  even  the 
Master  that  bought  them."  1.  In  itself  most  guilty.  Peter's  memory  burnt  that 
lesson  into  him.  2.  Leads  to  terrible  woe  (vers.  1 — 21).  "  The  man  who  turns  his 
back  on  well-known  ways  of  righteousness,  and  leads  others  from  those  ways,  is  of  all 
men  in  the  most  pitiable  and  terrible  condition. — ^U.  R.  T. 

Vers.  1 — 22. — Failuteacheri.  I.  Objects  of  punishment.  1.  On  account  of  their  anti- 
lifistian  character.    "  But  there  arose  false  prophets  also  among  the  people,  as  among 


OH.  n.  1—22,]    THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PETBB.  61 

yon  also  there  shall  he  false  teachers,  who  shall  privily  bring  in  destructive  heresies, 
denying  even  the  Master  that  bought  them,  bringing  upon  themselves  swift  destruction." 
The  connection  of  thought  seems  to  be  the  following :  There  were  prophets  that "  spak« 
from  God ; "  but  there  arose  false  prophets  also  among  the  people,  i.e.  in  ancieat.  Israel ; 
as  in  that  which  was  typified  by  ancient  Israel,  viz.  in  the  New  Testament  Church, 
there  were  to  be  false  teachers.    Where,  then,  those  teachers  are,  there  is  generally  an 
imperfect  condition  of  religious  society  which  gives  rise  to  them.    Under  similar  con- 
ditions, similar  manifestations  may  be  expected.     The  false  teachers  rising  up  among 
them  ("  of  your  own  selves  shall  men  arise,"  Acts  xx.  30),  these  would  have  the 
opportunity  of  (literally)  bringing  m  hy  the  side  of,  i.e.  by  the  side  of  the  authoritative 
teachings,  their  heresies.    The  authoritative  teachings  they  would  not  openly  saek.  to 
combat ;  for  that  might  lead  to  their  being  silenced,  even  in  their  speedy  ejection  from  the 
Christian  communities.    Their  policy  would  rather  be  to  keep  up  connection  with  the 
Christian  circle,  and  to  bring  in  a  spurious  Ghristianity,  having  resemblance  in  form, 
but  denial  in  substance.     The  authoritative  teachings  were  of  a  saving  nature ;  what 
these  would  seek  to  bring  in  would  be  heresies  of  destruction,  i.e.  not  put  forward  with 
the  professed  intent  to  destroy,  but  from  their  nature  fitted  to  conduct  men  to  destruc- 
tion.    Their  heresies  would  be  soul-destroying ;  for  they  would  "  deny  even  the  Master 
that  bought  them."     The  language  is  altogether  remarkable.    Christ  is  regarded  as 
having  paid  the  purchase  money,  which  is  not  here  mentioned,  but  is  to  be  under- 
stood, according  to  1  Pet.  i.  19,  of  his  precious  blood.     By  that  buying  he  has  become 
Possessor  and  Master,  i.e.  with  the  right  to  command.     The  startling  thing  is  that  he 
is  represented  as  the  Master,  through  purchase  or  redemption,  of  the  heretical  workers 
of  destruction.     Nothing  could  more  signally  set  forth  the  world-wide  character  of  the 
atonement.     The  Master  that  bought  them  they,  having  once  acknowledged,  were  to 
deny,  to  put  away  from  them,  to  supplant  by  a  counterfeit  Clirist.     But  it  is  dangerous 
to  deny  Christ ;  by  doing  so,  in  the  counter-working  of  providence,  they  would  only 
"  bring  upon  themselves  swift  destruction."    It  is  true  that  Ciirist  represents  the  Divine 
slowness  to  wrath.    Peter  knew  that  every  denial  does  not  bring  instantaneous  destruc- 
tion.   It  is  only  when  it  has  been  made  abundantly  clear  that  the  denial  is  the  settled 
habit  of  the  mind,  that  swift,  or  rather  sudden,  destruction  descends.     2.  On  account  of 
their  sensuality  followed  to  the  prejudice  of  Christianity.   "  And  many  shall  follow  their 
lascivious  doings :  by  reason  of  whom  the  way  of  the  truth  shall  be  evil  spoken  of." 
It  was  to  be  an  aggravating  element  in  their  punishment,  that  they  were  to  be  success- 
ful in  spreading  immorality.     Sensuality  is  the  charge  which  Peter  brings  up  again 
and  again.    They  were  to  allow  themselves  illicit  gratification;  and  their  example 
would  be  followed  by  many.     This  would  be  greatly  to  the  prejudice  of  Christianity  ; 
for  it  would  lead  to  its  being  misrepresented  as  pointing  out  tlie  way  of  truth,  i.e.  the 
way  of  life,  correspondingto  the  truth.    Men  outside,  unable  to  distinguish  between  what 
properly  belonged  to  it  and  what  did  not  properly  belong  to  it,  would  very  naturally 
say  of  it,  from  what  they  saw  in  its  professed  representatives,  that  it  encouraged  licen- 
tiousness.   3.  On  account  of  their  mercenary  character.    "  And  in  covetousness  shall 
they  with  feigned  words  make  merchandise  of  you :  whose  sentence  now  from  of  old 
Ungereth  not,  and  their  destruction  slumbereth  not."    Money  is  needed  for  the  purchase 
of  illicit  pleasure.     Covetousness  was  to  surround  the  false  teachers  as  an  atmosphere. 
Continually  breathing  it,  they  were  as  teachers  to  vise  feigned  words — not  bound  fast 
to  the  truth,  but  artfully  adapted  to  man's  prejudices.    The  end  of  teaching  is  to  do 
good ;  it  was  to  be  to  the  disgrace  of  the  false  teachers  that  they  were  to  have  as  their 
end  to  make  merchandise  of  those  over  whom  they  obtained  influence.     But  these 
teachers,  who  were  to  add  to  their  other  faults  their  being  mercenary,  would  not  go 
unpunished.     Peter,  in  impassioned  language,  represents  puuishment  as  already  on  the 
way  to  them.   "  Their  sentence  now  from  of  old  lingereth  not,"  i.e.  the  sentence  against 
such  has  gone  forth  from  of  old,  and,  not  delaying,  it  will  in  its  course  overtake  them ; 
and  "  their  destruction  slumbereth  not,"  i.e.  not  delayed  by  sleep,  as  it  were,  it  will 
follow  hard  on  the  sentence.    Let  them  not  think,  then,  that  they  will  escape. 

II.  Akcient  EXAMPiiBS  OF  PDNisHMENT.  1.  Stated  conditionally.  (1)  The  fallen 
angels  "  For  if  God  spared  not  angels  when  they  sinned,  but  cast  them  down  to  hell, 
and  committed  them  to  pits  of  darkness,  to  be  reserved  unto  judgment."  This  was 
the  most  ancient  example  that  there  was  to  go  back  upon.     Peter  does  not  say  whui 


«9  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PETER,    [ch.  n.  1—22. 

the  sin  of  tlie  angels  was.  Jude  is  more  informing,  and  suggests  that  they  did  not 
place  the  right  value  on  their  own  principality,  on  their  proper  habitation.  There  wai 
something  else  that  they  placed  before  what  they  had,  and,  reaching  after  it,  they  fell 
from  their  high  estate.  God,  it  is  said  here,  spared  them  not  wTien  they  sinned,  near 
though  they  were  to  him,  but  cast  them  down  to  Tartarus.  This  is,  strangely,  a  word 
connected  with  heathen  mythology,  and  is  to  be  understood  of  that  division  of  Hades 
which  is  the  place  of  preliminary  punishment,  as  distinguished  from  Gehenna,  which 
is  the  place  of  final  punishments.  In  Tartarus  God  "  committed  them  to  pita  of 
darkness."  There  was  an  irony  in  the  appointment.  They  loved  not  the  brightness  in 
which  there  was  no  feeling  of  being  walled  in ;  and  so  they  were  cast  down  to  he 
walled  in  on  every  side  by  gloom.  In  Tartarus  they  are  waiting  judgment ;  and  if 
they  are  imprisoned  in  gloom  before  judgment,  what  must  their  state  after  judgment 
bel  There  is  no  relieving  of  the  picture  here  as  in  the  other  two  examples  tliat 
follow.  (2)  The  Flood.  The  dark  hackgrowid.  "And  spared  not  the  ancient  world." 
This  ancient  example  comes  home  to  us,  as  relating  to  our  own  flesh  and  blood.  It  is 
the  most  disastrous  thing  that  has  happened  in  the  history  of  the  race ;  it  was  so 
extensive  and  overwhelming  in  its  sweep.  God  spared  not  the  ancient  world.  Men 
multiplied  on  the  earth  for  sixteen  or  seventeen  centuries,  and  then  the  Flood  swept 
them  away  as  though  they  had  never  been.  The  darkness  relieved.  "  But  preserved 
Noah  with  seven  others,  a  preacher  of  righteousness,  when  he  brought  a  flood  upon 
the  world  of  the  ungodly.  The  antediluvians  were  ungodly,  i.e.  had  lost  a  salutary 
impression  even  of  the  existence  of  God,  and  had  cast  off  Divine  restraints.  They  did 
eat  and  drink ;  they  lived  a  life  within  the  world  of  sense.  There  was  one  notable 
exception.  This  was  Noah,  who  is  here  styled  "  a  preacher  of  righteousness,"  i.e.  in  the 
midst  of  the  prevailing  ungodliness  he  had  so  much  of  the  fear  of  God  on  his  mind  as 
to  credit  and  proclaim,  by  word  and  act,  that,  if  they  did  not  repent  of  tlieir  ungod- 
lineps,  the  righteousness  of  God  would  be  manifested  against  them  in  their  destruction 
by  water.  And  so  God  preserved  Noah,  and  seven  others  on  account  of  their  con- 
nection with  him,  when  he  brought  a  flood  upon  the  world  of  the  ungodly.  (3)  3%e 
overthroxo  of  Sodom  and  Gomorrah.  The  dark  background.  "And  turning  the  cities 
of  Sodom  and  Gomorrah  into  ashes,  condemned  them  with  an  overthrow,  having  made 
them  an  example  unto  those  that  should  live  ungodly."  The  description  in  Genesis  is, 
"  The  Lord  rained  upon  Sodom  and  upon  Gomorrah  brimstone  and  fire  from  the  Lord 
out  of  heaven;  and  he  overthrew  those  cities."  Peter  marks  punitiveness  in  the  com- 
pleteness of  the  work  of  destruction.  God  turned  the  cities  into  ashes,  and  thus  punl- 
tively  overthrew  them,  i.e.  so  that  they  were  obliterated  as  cities.  Nor  was  this  an 
exceptional  procedure.  God  dealt  thus  with  the  cities  because  of  their  ungodliness, 
and  he  dealt  thus  with  them  that  the  ungodly  of  after-times  might  know  what  to 
expect  from  ungodliness.  The  darkness  relieved.  "And  delivered  righteous  Lot,  sore 
distressed  by  the  lascivious  life  of  the  wicked  (for  that  righteous  man  dwelling  among 
them,  in  seeing  and  hearing,  vexed  his  righteous  soul  from  day  to  day  with  their 
lawless  deeds)."  There  is  not  brought  into  view  the  fact  that  Lot  made  choice  of 
Sodom  from  considerations  of  worldly  advantage,  and  without  considering  religious 
privileges.  He  was  to  blame  for  being  in  Sodom,  and  yet,  though  he  should  never 
have  been  there,  he  is  called  righteous  Lot,  i.e.  one  who  strived  to  live  according  to 
Divine  rule.  He  was  righteous  in  the  midst  of  those  who  had  no  regard  for  law  either 
human  or  Divine,  as  seen  especially  in  their  sensual  behaviour.  This  had  a  wearing- 
down  or  wearing-out  effect  on  righteous  Lot.  That  righteous  man,  dwelling  among 
them,  was  forced  to  see  and  hear  things  which  tormented  his  righteous  soul,  and  so  he 
was  worn  out.  When  one  has  put  himself  in  a  wrong  position,  it  is  often  diflicult  to 
get  out  of  it.  But  because  Lot  did  not  allow  his  godly  sensibilities  to  be  blunted, 
God,  with  a  certain  sharpness,  effected  for  him  a  deliverance.  2.  Conclusion  drawn. 
(1)  The  hright  side.  "The  Lord  knoweth  how  to  deliver  the  godly  out  of  temptation." 
Peter  has  been  dwelling  on  the  bright  side,  so  as  to  throw  the  thought  out  of  form ; 
he  now  puts  the  bright  side  into  the  conclusion.  Noah  and  Lot  were  godly ;  their  temp- 
tation lay  in  their  being  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  ungodly.  But  the  Lord  found 
ways  and  means  of  deliverinp;  them ;  the  one  deliverance  involving  the  preservation  oi 
the  human  family,  and  the  other  deliverance  signifying  rectification  of  position.  The 
Lord  that  delivered  Noah  and  Lot  out  of  their  temptation  will  deliver  all  that,  lik« 


OH.H.  1— 22.]    THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  PBTEB.  63 

them,  are  godly  out  of  their  temptation,  whatoTer  it  is,  when  he  sees  it  to  be  for  his 
glory.  (2)  The  dark  side.  "  And  to  keep  the  unrighteous  under  punishment  unto  the 
day  of  judgment."  Three  classes  have  been  instanced  of  the  unrighteous,  i.e.  those  not 
right  toward  God.  The  Lord  found  ways  and  means  of  checking  them  ;  so  all  like 
them  will  he  checked.  The  time  will  come  when  God  will  place  them  under  punish- 
ment, to  be  kept  under  it  unto  the  day  of  judgment.  Let  us,  then,  be  warned  ofl 
the  rocks  on  which  men  long  ago  perished  and  are  perishing  still. 

III.  Objects  op  punishment.    1.  On  account  of  lensuality.    "  But  chiefly  them 
that  walk  after  the  flesh  in  the  lust  of  defilement."    This  is  connected  with  the  thought 
of  punishment.     The  teachers  are  now  thought  of  as  already  present.    The  evil  had 
already  commenced,  though  it  had  not  reached  its  height.     They  are  singled  out  for 
punishment  on  account  of  their  walking  after  the  flesh  in  the  lust  whose  object  is  that 
which  defiles.     2.  On  account  of  lawlessness.    (1)  The  lawlessness  described.    "  And 
despise  dominion.    Daring,  self-willed,  they  tremble  not  to  rail  at  dignities."    They  are 
next  singled  out  for  punishment  on  account  of  their  lawlessness.     There  is  the  same 
aesociation  in  Jude.    They  "  despise  "  ( Jude's  word  means  "  set  at  nought ")  dominion 
or  lordship  (especially  in  Christ).     In  their  objection  to  be  ruled  they  go  great  lengths 
("daring"),  making  self  their  rule  (" self-willed ").     In  their  presumption  and  self- 
assertion  they  tremble  not — though  it  should  make  them  tremble — to  rail  at  dignities 
(adopting  Jude's  expression).    The  reference  seems  to  be  to  dignities  belonging  to  the 
heavenly  world.    They  pay  no  regard,  in  what  they  say,  to  rank  bestowed  by  God. 
(2)  The  lawlessness  condemned.    "Whereas  angels,  though  greater  in  might  and  power, 
bring  not  a  railing  judgment  against  them  before  the  Lord."    Here  Peter  seems  to 
assume  acquaintance  with  what  Jude  says.      Michael  the  archangel,  with  all  self- 
restraint,  and  having  regard  to  the  original  dignity  of  Satan,  in  contending  with  him 
simply  said,  "  The  Lord  rebuke  thee."     Peter  brings  forward  the  angels  (good)  gene- 
rally as  greater  in  might  and  power  than  men  are,  and  asserts  that  they  do  not  retaliate 
upon  the  railers  in  what  they  bring  up  before  the  Lord.    (3)  The  lawlessness  punished. 
"  Bat  these,  as  creatures  without  reason,  bom  mere  animals,  to  be  taken  and  destroyed, 
roiling  in  matters  whereof  they  are  ignorant,  shall  in  their  destroying  surely  be 
destroyed,  suffering  wrong  as  the  hire  of  wrong-doing."     Here    Peter  flashes  out 
against  tlie  false  teachers.     He  thinks  of  irrational  brutes,  bom  with  nothing  higher 
than  an  animal  nature,  to  be  taken  and  destroyed.     They  are  also  irrational  in  railing 
in  matters  beyond  them,  and  shall  have  a  similar  fate.     In  their  destruction  as  respon- 
sible beings  they  shall  surely  be  destroyed,  getting  their  reward  in  wrong  inflicted  on 
them  for  wrong  done  by  them  (in  railing).    3.  On  account  of  luxurious  living.    "  Men 
that  count  it  pleasure  to  revel  in  the  daytime,  spots  and  blemishes,  revelling  in  their 
love-feasts  while  they  feast  with  you."    The  reference  is  to  luxurious  living.     Such 
living  shows  itself  chiefly  in  banquets  whose  natural  time  is  the  night.     To  regard 
banqueting  in  the  daytime  with  peculiar  zest  was  the  sign  of  a  very  diseased  state 
of  mind.    It  was  a  more  serious  thing  to  connect  luxurious  living  with  the  love-feasts. 
That  made  the  false  teachers  spots  of  dirt,  blemishes,  at  those  holy  gatherings  at  which 
•  they  were  present,  while  they  feasted  with  Christ's  people.    4.  On  account  of  sensuality. 
"  Having  eyes  full  of  adultery,  and  that  cannot  cease  from  sin ;  enticing  unsteadfast 
souls."    There  was  the  sensual  look,  apparently,  even  at  the  love-feasts.     This  was 
accompanied  by  restlessness  in  sin,  reflected  also  in  the  eye.    Those  to  whom  the  bait 
was  held  out,  and  who  became  their  prey,  were  souls  not  yet  established  in  faith  and 
the  pursuit  of  pure  pleasure — men,  according  to  the  after-representation,  only  a  few 
paces  from  heathenism.    6.  On  account  of  covetousness.    (1)  How  their  covetousness 
is  regarded.    "  Having  a  heart  exercised  in  covetousness  ;  children  of  cursing."     Here, 
again,  greed  follows  on  sensuality.     Spiritual  gymnastic  is  needed  to  counteract  the 
greed  of  the  heart ;  gymnastic  was  employed  by  these  teachers  to  the  increase  of  the 
greed  of  the  heart.      As  greed  increased,   the  blight  came  down  on  their  spiritual 
nature.     The  ripe  result  was  that,  in  the  ravenousness  of  greed,  they  became  "  ohil' 
dren  of  the  curse."    That  is  the  Hebrew  way  of  saying  that  the  curse  found  its  way 
deep  into  their  nature.    (2)  Comparison  with  Balaam.     "  Forsaking  the  right  way, 
they  went  astray,  having  followed  the  way  of  Balaam  the  son  of  Beor,  who  loved 
the  hire  of  wrong-doing  j    but  he  was  rebuked  for  his  own  transgression :    a  dumb 
ass  spake  with  mau'i  voice  and  atayed  the  madness  of  the  prophet,"    Balaam,  fw> 


64  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  PETEK.    [oh.  il  1—22. 

Baking  the  right  way,  went  astray.  It  was  wrong  for  him  ever  to  think  of  going 
to  Barak,  who  wished  him  to  curse  Israel.  "  Thy  way,"  he  was  told,  "  is  perverse 
before  me."  He  was  swayed  from  the  right  way  by  loving  the  hire  of  wrong-doing. 
"  And  God's  anger  was  kindled  because  he  went."  He  was  rebuked  for  what  was  not 
forced  upon  him,  but  was  his  own  transgression.  It  was  a  telling  rebuke  to  be  stayed 
in  his  mad  journey  by  the  dumb  animal  speaking  with  man's  voice.  Like  Balaam, 
these  men  were  prostituting  their  powers  in  the  service  of  gain,  and  would  not  fare 
better  in  the  end.  6.  On  account  of  false  promises.  (1)  Comparisons.  "These  are 
springs  without  water,  and  mists  driven  by  a  storm ;  for  whom  the  blackness  of  dark- 
ness hath  been  reserved."  Under  strong  feeling,  Peter  seizes  on  natural  imagery  to 
describe  the  false  teachers.  To  a  traveller  in  a  desert  nothing  can  be  more  grateful 
than  the  appearance  of  a  well ;  but,  when  he  comes  up  to  it,  and  finds  it  without  water, 
he  receives  a  bitter  disappointment.  In  a  protracted  drought  the  farmer  keenly  scans 
the  face  of  the  sky ;  a  misty  cloud  is  hailed  by  him,  and  he  watches  its  changes  and 
course,  but  it  is  driven  past  by  the  storm-wiad,  and  not  a  drop  of  rain  descends.  So 
those  false  teachers  held  out  promises  which  they  did  not  fulfil ;  and  in  another  natural 
appearance  he  sees  their  end  foreshadowed — a  meteor  seen  for  a  little,  and  then  passing 
into  the  blackness  of  darkness.  (2)  Sensual  promises.  "For,  uttering  great  swelling 
words  of  vanity,  they  entice  in  the  lusts  of  the  fiesh,  by  lasoiviousness,  those  who  are 
just  escaping  from  them  that  live  in  error."  Their  words  are  regarded  as  swollen  out 
beyond  the  ordinary  size,  while  they  are  filled  with  emptiness.  It  is  in  a  sensual  con- 
dition of  mind  that  they  use  tiieir  swollen  words.  The  bait  they  hold  out  is  sensual 
gratification.  "Their  guilt  is  exhibited  as  aggravated  by  the  fact  that  the  persons 
whom  they  plied  with  the  vile  bait  of  sensual  indulgence  were  those  least  fit  to  resist 
it ;  not  men  who  were  established  in  the  new  faith,  but  men  who  had  but  recently  broken 
off  from  the  ranks  of  heathenism,  or  who  had  as  yet  got  but  a  few  paces,  as  it  were,  in 
the  process  of  separating  themselves  from  their  old  pagan  life  "  (Salmond).  (3)  Pro- 
mising liberty,  while  themselves  hound.  "  Promising  them  liberty,  while  they  themselves 
are  bondservants  of  corruption ;  for  of  whom  a  man  is  overcome,  of  the  same  is  he  also 
brought  into  bondage."  In  swollen  language  they  promised  liberty :  but  were  they 
themselves  free  ?  No ;  they  were  the  bondservants  of  destructive  lusts.  When  their 
lusts  were  destroying  them,  and  they  could  not  cease  gratifying  them,  what  was  that 
but  bondage  ?  7.  On  account  of  their  apostasy.  (1)  Last  state  worse  than  the  first. 
"  For  if,  after  they  have  escaped  the  defilements  of  the  world  through  the  knowledge 
of  the  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ,  they  are  again  entangled  therein  and  overcome, 
the  last  state  is  become  worse  with  them  than  the  first."  Peter  thinks  of  them,  iu 
conclusion,  as  punished  in  their  moral  degradation.  They  were  once  the  prey  of  the 
miasmata — the  defilements — of  the  world.  There  supervened  a  blessed  time  of 
escape.  This  was  when  they  had  knowledge  of  the  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ 
(the  name  being  appreciatingly  dwelt  upon).  The  word  is  used  which  means  "  appre- 
ciative knowledge ; "  and  it  would  seem  to  be  implied  that  there  was  reality  in  their 
spiritual  experience.  But  the  time  came  when  they  were  again  entangled  in  the 
miasmata  of  the  world,  and  overcome  by  them.  In  that  case  they  were  the  worse  for 
the  experience  through  which  they  had  come.  We  cannot  have  conviction  of  sin  and 
appreciation  of  Christ,  and  put  away  from  us  that  experience,  without  our  bringing  evil 
into  our  nature  far  beyond  what  we  were  capable  of  in  our  former  state.  Judas  was  a 
worse  man  that  he  had  come  into  such  nearness  to  Christ,  than  he  would  otherwise 
have  been.  Therefore  let  us  be  careful  how  we  treat  visitations  of  the  Spirit,  solemn 
experience.  (2)  Preferable  evil  state.  "  For  it  were  better  for  them  not  to  have  known 
the  way  of  righteousness,  than,  after  knowing  it,  to  turn  back  from  the  holy  command- 
ment delivered  unto  them."  The  false  teachers  again  are  represented  as  having  known 
the  new  life  of  Christianity,  as  having  turned  to  the  holy  commandment  delivered  to 
them.  Better  that  they  had  remained  in  heathenism  than,  after  knowing  the  new  life, 
to  turn  back  from  the  holy  commandment  upon  which  it  depends.  Therefore  let  us 
be  careful  how  we  treat  Christian  rules  of  conduct.  There  is  a  sacredness  about 
them  which  is  not  to  be  trifled  with.  (3)  Proverb  explanatory  of  relapse.  "  It  has 
happened  unto  them,  according  to  the  true  proverb.  The  dog  turning  to  his  own 
vomit  again,  and  the  sow  that  had  washed  to  wallowing  in  the  mire."  This  double 
proverb  is  not  explanatory  of  the  last  state  being  worse  than  the  first,  but  simply  oi 


OT.m.l— 18.]    THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PETEB. 


65 


the  being  again  entangled  and  overcome.  Though  they  knew  the  Lord  and  Saviour 
Jesus  Christ,  they  were  not  beyond  temptation  to  sonsnality.  Their  relapse  took  place 
in  their  giving  the  old  nature  the  ascendency.  The  comparisons  employed  are  not 
complimentary.  The  false  teachers  are  compared  to  the  dog  and  the  sow — animali 
abhorred  in  the  East.  They  have  returned  to  the  filth  of  heathenism  as  the  dog  to  its 
vomit,  as  the  sow  that  had  washed  to  its  wallowing  in  the  mire.  Therefore  let  us  be 
careful  not  to  give  in  to  the  old  nature. — B.  F. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  m. 


Ver.  1.— This  Second  Epistle,  leloved,  I 
now  write  nnto  you ;  literally,  this  Epistle 
already  a  lecond  one  I  write  unto  you.  The 
ijSn  ("already")  implies  that  the  interval 
between  the  two  Epistles  was  not  long.  The 
expresaion  "beloved,"  four  times  repeated 
in  this  chapter,  shows  the  apostle's  affeo- 
tionate  interest  in  his  readers ;  and  the  word 
"  second "  forces  us  to  make  our  choice  be- 
tween the  Fetrine  authorship  of  the  Epistle 
or  the  hypotliesis  of  a  direct  forgery.  In 
both  which  I  stir  up  yonr  pure  minda  by 
way  of  remembrance;  literally,  t»  wMeh,  l.e. 
"  Epistles ; "  the  word  "  second  "  implied  an 
allusion  to  a  First  Epistle.  St.  Peter  repeats 
the  words  which  be  had  used  In  ch.  i.  13, 
"  I  think  it  meet  ...  to  stir  you  up  by  put- 
ting you  in  remembrance."  Mind  (Sdvoia) 
is  the  reflective  faculty  (see  1  Pet.  i.  18) ; 
that  faculty  should  be  exercised  in  holy 
things.  The  thoughts  that  pass  through  the 
Christian's  mind  should  be  holy  thoughts ; 
his  mind  should  be  pure.  The  word  ren- 
dered "  pure  "  (eiA.iKpii'^s)  occurs  in  Phil.  i. 
10  (where  see  note) ;  the  corresponding  sub- 
stantive is  found  in  1  Cor.  v.  8 ;  2  Cor.  i.  12 ; 
ii.  17.  It  is  said  of  things  which  can  bear  to 
be  judged  in  the  sunlight,  and  so  means 
"pure,  clear,"  or  (according  to  another 
possible  etymology)  "unmixed,"  and  go 
"  genuine,  sincere." 

Ver.  2. — That  ye  may  be  mindfiil  of  ths 
words  which  were  spoken  before  by  the  holy 
prophets.  "That  ye  may  be  mindful"  is 
represented  by  one  word  in  the  Greek 
(lji.vricr6rjvai) ;  compare  the  exact  parallel  in 
Luke  i.  72.  Great  stress  is  laid  on  the  word 
of  prophecy  in  both  Epistles  (see  1  Pet.  i. 
10 — 12  and  ch.  i.  19).  And  of  the  com- 
mandment of  oi  the  apostles  of  the  Xord 
and  Saviour;  rather,  as  in  the  Bevised 
Version,  and  the  eommandment  of  the  Lord 
and  Saviour  through  your  apoiflei.  All 
the  best  manuscripts  read  inav  here.  It 
is  a  remarkable  expression;  but  Christ's 
apostles  can  be  rightly  called  the  apostles 
of  those  to  whom  they  are  sent,  as  being 
their  teachers,  sent  to  them  for  their  benefit ; 
just  as  the  angels  of  God  are  called  also 
the  angels  of  Christ's  little  ones  (Matt,  xviii. 
U.XSLMM, 


10).  Compare  also  "  the  angels  of  the  seven 
Churches "  in  the  Revelation.  St.  Potcr 
shows  an  intimate  knowledge  of  several  of 
St.  Paul's  Epistles,  and  of  tliat  of  St.  James ; 
he  is  writing  to  the  Churches  addressed  in 
his  First  Epistle,  most  of  which  were  founded 
by  St.  Paul  or  his  companions.  We  must 
therefore  understand  this  passage,  as  well  as 
ver.  15  of  this  chapter,  as  a  distinct  recog- 
nition of  the  apostleship  of  St.  Paul.  The 
translation  of  the  Authorized  Version,  "  the 
apostles  of  the  Lord  and  Saviour,"  in  vol  ves 
a  violent  disturbance  of  the  order;  it  seems 
best  to  make  both  genitives  depend  on  "  com- 
mandment:" "your  apostles'  command- 
ment of  the  Lord ; "  the  first  genitive  being 
that  of  announcement,  the  second  of  origin. 
The  commandment  was  announced  by  the 
apostles,  but  it  was  the  Lord's  command- 
ment. (For  the  double  genitive,  comp.  Jas. 
ii.  1  and  Acts  v.  32.  For  the  whole  verse, 
see  the  parallel  passage  in  Jude  17.) 

Ver.  3. — Knowing  this  first,  that  thert 
shall  come  in  the  last  days  scoffers.  (For  the 
irregular  construction  of  yiviaKovrss,  see 
Winer,  iii.  63.  2,o.)  St.  Peter  has  the  wonls, 
"  knowing  this  first,"  in  ch.  i.  20,  where  he 
is  speaking  of  the  interpretation  of  prophecy ; 
he  repeats  them  now  when  referring  to  the 
scoffers  who  mocked  at  the  long  delay  of  the 
Lord's  coming  foretold  by  the  prophets. 
(For  "  the  last  days,"  see  note  on  1  Pet.  i.  20.) 
The  Bevised  Version  has,  "Mockers  shall 
come' with  mockery."  This  represents  the 
words  iv  kjjmcuyiiov^,  found  in  nearly  all  the 
best  manuscripts, 'which  give  emphasis  to 
the  expression  after  the  Hebrew  manner. 
The  word  in-iraiynovfi  occurs  nowhere  else 
in  the  New  Testament,  and  iiuraiKTat,  scof- 
fers, only  in  the  parallel  passage,  Jude  18. 
Walking  after  their  own  lusts.  Self-indul- 
gence often  leads  to  scepticism.  This  verse 
is  quoted  in  a  homily  ascribed  to  Hippolytus. 

Ver.  4. — And  saying,  Where  is  the  promise 
of  his  coming  ?  (comp.  Mai.  ii.  17,  "  Where 
is  the  God  of  judgment  ?  ").  The  Lord  had 
prophesied  of  his  coming;  St.  Paul  had 
spoken  more  than  once  as  if  that  coming 
were  very  near  at  hand  (1  Cor.  xv.  51 ;  2 
Cor.  V.4;  1  Thess.  iv.  15).  Yet  he  came  not. 
Already  men  were  beginning  to  mock,  and 
to  question  whether  the  long-delayed  pro- 


THE  KECOND  EPISTLE  GENEEAL  OP  PETEE.    [oh.  m.  1—18. 


miBe  wonld  ever  >«»  fiilfillnil.  Tot  BiTion  the 
fathers  fell  asleep  J  better, /rom  the  day  that. 
l^y  "tlie  fathers"  must  be  meant  here  the 
fathers  of  the  Ohristian  Church.  St.  Peter 
was  writing  more  than  thirty  years  after  the 
Ascension.  The  first  generation  of  Christians 
was  rapidly  passing  away.  Stephen  "fell 
asleep  "  first,  then  James  the  son  of  Zebedee, 
the  other  James  the  Lord's  brother,and  many 
others  who  had  looked,  it  may  be,  to  see  the 
coming  of  the  Lord  among  those  "  which  are 
alive  and  remain"  (1  Thess.  iv.  17).  But 
they  had  died,  and  he  came  not ;  and  from 
the  day  of  their  death  things  went  on  as 
they  were.  Should  men  look  for  him  still, 
the  mockerd  asked,  when  the  fathers  looked 
in  Tain  ?  The  mockers  adopted,  in  mockery, 
doubtless,  the  Christian  phrase  for  death. 
The  Lord  first  had  said, "  Our  friend  Lazarus 
slei'peth;"  then  the  holy  Stephen  "fell 
asleep ; "  and  so  "  they  which  are  asleep  " 
became  the  recognized  name  for  the  dead  in 
Christ.  Death  is  like  sleep;  the  holy  dead 
rest  from  their  labours.  They  "sleep  not 
idly,"  for  they  are  at  home  with  the  Lord, 
and  they  are  blessed ;  but  yet  the  quiet  rest 
of  Paradise,  though  "far  better"  than  this 
eai'tidy  life,  is  sleep  compared  with  the  per- 
fect Consummation  and  bliss,  both  in  body 
•nd  soul,  which  the  redeemed  of  the  Lord 
shall  enjoy  at  last  in  his  eternal  glory.  All 
things  oonliuue  as  they  were  from  the  be- 
ginning of  the  creation  ;  literally,  all  things 
eoniinue  thus,  as  they  are,  and  as  they  have 
br  en  from  the  beginning.  There  has  been 
no  sudden  catastrophe ;  the  world  has  gone 
on  as  it  was ;  the  laws  of  nature  are  still 
working  with  their  changeless  uniformity  " 
(see  B  remarkable  parallel  in  Clement,  L 
xxiii.,  which  is  important  also  as  an  inde- 
pendent proof  that  this  argument  of  the 
scoffers  is  as  old  as  the  end  of  the  first 
century). 

Ver.  5.— For  this  they  willingly  are  igno- 
rant of;  literally,  for  this  escapes  them  of 
their  own  will.  AH  things  have  not  always 
been  as  they  are;  there  have  been  great 
changes ;  there  was  once  a  great  catastrophe ; 
but  this  they  wilfully  forget.  Huther  trans- 
lates differenlly,  "For,  whilst  they  assert 
this,  it  is  hidden  from  them  that,"  etc.  But 
this  rendering  seems  forced  and  unsatisfac- 
tory, ami  gives  a  meaning  to  B4\w  which  it 
has  nowhere  in  the  New  Testament.  That 
by  the  Word  of  God  the  heavens  were  of  old, 
and  the  earth  standing  ont  of  the  water  and 
in  the  water.  The  Kevised  Version  trans- 
lates, TItat  there  were  heavens  from  of  old, 
and  an  eaith  compacted  out  of  water  and 
amidst  water,  liy  the  Word  of  God.  The 
mockers  say  that  all  things  continue  as  they 
were  from  the  beginning  of  creation.  That 
creation  itself  was  a  great,  a  stupen>lous 
change,  a  mighty  effort  of  the  power  of  God. 


Pt.  Poter  rofera  to  it  in  ■wnTd?  rvidpntly  de- 
rived from  the  Book  of  Genesis,  not  from 
any  other  sources,  whether  Greek,  Egyptian, 
or  Indian.  There  were  heavens  from  of  old 
(the  word  Ix-naKm  occurs  elsewhere  only  in 
ch.  ii.  3).  There  was  an  earth  formed  or 
standing  out  of  the  water.  The  Greek  par- 
ticiple here  used  ia  a-mea-rura,  literally, 
"standing  together  or  consisting"  (comp. 
Col.  i  17);  it  may  be  taken  closely  with 
both  prepositional  clauses,  "  earth  consisting 
of  water  and  by  means  of  water."  Thales 
had  taught  that  water  was  the  beginning  of 
things,  the  original  element  (wdi/ra  ^|  SSarot 
awfUTivaC) ;  the  narrative  in  Genesis  repre- 
sents water  e«  originally  overupreading  all 
things !  "  The  earth  was  without  form  [aitpo- 
ros,  Septuagint],  and  void;  and  darkness 
was  upon  the  face  of  the  deep.  And  the 
Spirit  of  God  moved  upon  the  face  of  the 
waters."  We  may  therefore  understand  St. 
Peter  as  meaning  that  the  earth  was  formed 
or  compacted  out  of  water,  or  out  of  those 
Bubstanoea  which  the  water  at  first  held  in 
solution ;  and  that  it  is  kept  together  in  co- 
herence and  solidity  by  means  of  water.  If, 
on  the  other  hand,  we  regard  the  participle 
as  closely  connected  with  the  second  prepo- 
sition only,  the  meaning  will  be  that  the 
earth,  held  together  and  compacted  by  means 
of  water,  rose  up  out  of  the  water,  and  ap- 
peared above  it,  when  God  said,  "  Let  the 
waters  under  the  heaven  be  gathered  to- 
gether unto  one  place,  and  let  the  dry  land 
appear."  It  is  possible,  again,  to  understand 
the  preposition  iii,  locally,  and  to  translate 
"  amidst  water."  Oomp.  Pb.  czzzvi.  6,  "  He 
stretched  out  the  earth  above  the  waters  ;  " 
and  Fs.  xziv.  2,  "  He  hath  founded  it  upon 
the  seas,  and  established  it  upon  the  floods." 
Of  course,  neither  St.  Peter  nor  Moses  is 
speaking  in  the  language  of  science ;  their 
object  was,  not  to  teach  scientific  truth,  but 
to  present  the  great  fact  of  creation  in  an 
aspect  suitable  to  our  poor  capacities.  For 
the  clause,  "  by  the  Word  of  God  (rip  toO 
06oS  Kdyif)"  coinp.  Heb.  xi.  3,  "Through 
faith  we  understand  that  the  worlds  were 
framed  by  the  Word  of  God  Q^tutn  0coD)." 
St.  Peter  may  be  referring  to  the  formula, 
"  And  God  said,"  so  constantly  repeated  in 
the  account  of  the  creation,  or  (what  is 
really  the  same  truth)  to  the  fact  that  "all 
things  were  made  by  him  [by  God  the 
Word],  and  without  him  was  not  anything 
made  that  was  made." 

Ver.  6. — Whereby  the  world  that  then 
was,  being  overflowed  with  water,  perished. 
The  Greek  for  "  whereby  "  is  St'  S>v,  liteially, 
"  through  which  things."  The  plural  here 
presents  some  difficulty.  The  most  obvious 
antecedents  are  "  the  heavens  and  the  earth  " 
of  the  last  verse;  but  many  commeutaton 
refer  the    relative   to   the   twice-repeated 


OH.  ml— 18]    THE  SECOND  BPISTLK  GENERAL  OF  PBTBB. 


6T 


"water."  The  meaning  will  be  the  «ame 
whicheyer  Tiew  we  take,  "The  fonntaing 
of  the  great  deep  were  broken  up,  and  the 
windows  of  heaven  were  opened ; "  that  is, 
the  Deluge  was  brought  to  pass  by  means  of 
the  heavens,  ».e.  the  waters  that  were  above 
the  firmament,  and  the  earth,  i.e.  the  waters 
that  were  below  the  fiimament,  which  came 
from  the  earth  as  the  waters  first  mentioned 
came  from  the  heavens.  Another  possible 
view  is  that  of  Huther,  who  refers  Si'  Sc  to 
the  water  and  the  Word  of  God.  By  the 
world  here  must  be  meant  the  world  of 
'iving  creatures.  This  is  St.  Peter's  answer 
to  the  mnckers :  there  had  been  one  great 
eatastrophe ;  there  will  be  another. 

Ver.  7. — But  the  heavens  and  the  earth, 
which  are  now;  rather,  the  heavent  tohioh 
ara  now,  and  the  earth.  The  "  now  "  does 
not  refer,  as  some  think,  to  any  change 
wrought  by  the  Flood,  but  distinguishes  the 
present  heavens  and  earth  from  the  new 
heavens  and  new  earth,  which  Ohristians 
are  to  look  for  (ver.  13).  By  the  same  Word 
are  kept  in  store,  reserved  unto  fire.  Several 
of  the  better  manuscripts  have  "by  his 
Word,"  which,  on  the  whole,  seems  to  give 
the  best  meaning.  The  reading  in  the  text 
may,  indeed,  be  uaderstood  in  a  similar 
sense,  "  by  the  same  Word  of  God ;  "  otlier- 
wise  it  would  mean  that  the  original  word 
of  creation  determined  also  the  duration  of 
the  world  and  the  means  of  its  destruction. 
The  words  rendered,  « are  kept  in  store," 
are,  literally,  "have  been  treasured  (jeBri- 
ravpurfxivoi  iltriv)  "  (eomp.  Bom.  ii.  5).  It 
seems  better  to  take  the  dative  itvplQ'  with 
fire,"  or  "for  fire")  with  this  verb  rather 
than  with  the  following,  as  in  the  Authorized 
Version.  If  we  take  the  first  meaning  of 
the  dative,  the  sense  will  be  that  the  world 
has  been  stored  with  fire,  i.e.  that  it  con- 
tains, stored  up  in  its  inner  depths,  the  fire 
which  is  destined  ultimately  to  destroy  it. 
But  the  other  view  seems  on  the  whole  more 
probable ;  tlie  heavens  and  the  earth  are 
stored  up  for  fire  or  unto  fire,  i.e.  with  the 
purpose  in  tlie  counsels  of  God  of  their  ulti- 
mate destruction  by  fire.  This  is  the  clearest 
prophecy  in  Holy  Scripture  of  the  final  con- 
flagration of  the  universe;  but  comp.  Isa. 
livi.  15;  Dan.  vii.  10;  Mai.  iv.  1;  2  Thess. 
i.  8.  Such  a  doctrine  formed  part  of  the 
physical  theories  of  the  Stoics ;  it  is  also 
found  in  the '  Book  of  P^noch.'  Against  the 
day  of  judgment  and  perdition  of  ungodly 
men.  The  participle  "  reserved  "  (ryipoiiicvoi) 
is  best  taken  with  this  clause :  "  Reserved 
against  the  day  of  j  idg^ent  and  perdition 
of  ungodly  men." 

Ver.  8. — But,  beloved,  he  not  ignorant  of 
this  one  thing;  literally,  let  not  this  one 
thing  eteape  you,  as  especially  important. 
That  one  day  i*  with  the  Lord  as  a  thousand 


years,  and  a  thousand  years  as  one  day. 
"With  the  Lord"  means  in  his  sight,  in 
his  estimate  of  things  (comp.  Fs.  xo.  4, 
"A  thousand  years  in  thy  sight  are  but 
as  yesterday").  Bengel  finely  says,  "Dei 
noniologium  (sic  appellare  liceat)  differt  ab 
borologio  mortalium.  Illius  gnomon  omnes 
horas  simul  indicat  in  summa  actione  et  io 
summa  quiete.  Ei  neo .  tardins  nee  celerius 
labuntur  tempera  quam  ipsi  et  oeconomisa 
ejus  aptum  sit.  Nulla  causa  est  cur  finem 
rerum  aut  prof  elare  aut  accelerare  necessum 
habeat.  Qui  hoc  oomprehendemus  ?  Si 
comprehendere  possemus,  non  opus  foret  a 
Moae  et  Petro  addl,  apud  Dominum."  God 
is  eternal:  his  ttiought  is  not,  like  ours, 
subject  to  the  law  of  time;  and  even  we 
can  understand  that  one  day,  as  the  day  of 
the  Saviour's  death,  may  have  far  more  of 
intense  action  compressed  into  it,  and  far 
more  influence  upon  the  spiritual  destiny  of 
mankind,  than  any  period  of  a  thousand 
years.  This  passage  seems  to  be  quoted  by 
Justin  Martyr,  the  '  Epistle  of  Barnabas,' 
IrensBus,  and  Hippolytus ;  hut  they  may  be 
referring  to  Ps.  xc,  though  the  quotations 
resemble  the  words  of  St,  Peter  more  closely 
than  those  of  the  psalm, 

Ver.  9. — The  Lord  is  not  slaok  concerning 
his  promise,  as  some  men  oount  slackness. 
TheLordhere.asfrequentlyin  these  Epistles, 
is  God  the  Father ;  it  is  he  only  who  knoweth 
that  day  and  that  hour  (Mark  xiii.  32). 
Some  take  the  genitive  t^s  rirayyeKtas  with 
"the  Lord,"  and  translate,  "The  Lord  of 
the  promise  is  not  slack."  This  is  a  possible 
connection,  but  not  so  satisfactory  as  the 
ordinary  rendering.  (For  the  genitive  with 
the  verb  PpaSivn,  see  Winer,  iii.  30.  6,  b.) 
The  latter  clause  may  be  understood,  "  as 
some  think  it,  i.e.  the  delay  of  the  judgment, 
to  be  slackness  ; "  or  better,  perhaps,  "  as 
some  understand  the  meaning  of  slackness." 
Men  are  slow  in  fulfilling  their  promises 
from  various,  often  selfish,  motives ;  the 
Lord's  delay  comes  from  love  and  long- 
suffering.  But  is  long-suffering  to  ns-ward ; 
rather,  to  you-ward,  which  seems  to  be  the 
best-supported  reading ;  two  ancient  manu- 
scripts give  "  for  your  sake."  St.  Peter  has 
the  same  thoughtin  the  First  Epistle  (iv.  20) ; 
there  he  reminds  us  how  the  long-suffering 
of  God  waited  while  the  ark  was  a- pre- 
paring; here  he  tells  us  that  the  delay  of 
the  judgment,  at  which  unbelievers  scoff, 
is  due  to  the  same  cause.  We  note  here  an 
item  of  evidence  for  the  common  authorship 
of  the  two  Epistles  (comp.  Hah.  ii.  3,  quoted 
in  Heb.  x.  37,  and  Ecclus.  xxxii.  22,  in  the 
Septungint ;  also  Augustine's  well-known 
words,  "  Patiens  quia  eeternus  ").  Not  will- 
ing that  any  should  perish;  rather,  not 
wiihing  or  degiring  (ju^  Pou\6nevQs).  The 
participle  gives  the  reason  of  tlia  Lord's 


«8 


THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  GBNEEAL  OP  PETER,    [oh.  m.  1—18. 


delay ;  be  hath  no  pleasure  that  the  wicked 
ehovild  die  (Ezek.  xviii.  23,  32,  and  xxxiii. 
11).  But  that  all  shonld  come  to  lepentanoe. 
The  Greek  word  for  "come  "  (xap^iroO'  occurs 
in  the  same  sense  in  Matt.  xt.  17  (see  also 
the  remarkable  parallel  from  Plutarch, '  De 
Flam.,'  p.  19  (quoted  by  Alford),  tij  /lerd- 
roiov  .  .  .  x<up4<raO.  Calvin  takes  it  transi- 
tirely, "  willing  to  receive  all  to  repentance." 
But  the  common  translation  is  plainly  right 
(comp.  1  Tim.  iL  4  combined  with  2  Tim. 
U.  25). 

Ver.  10. — But  the  day  of  the  lord  will 
come.  The  word  ^fci,  will  come,  stands 
emphatically  at  the  beginning  of  the  clause ; 
whatever  the  mockers  may  say,  whatever 
may  happen,  come  certainly  will  the  day  of 
the  Lord.  •'  The  day  of  the  Lord "  meets 
us  often  in  the  prophets ;  it  is  usually 
associated  with  the  thought  of  judgment 
(see  Isa.  ii.  12;  Ezek.  xiu.  5;  Joel  i.  15; 
Mai.  iii.  2).  In  the  New  Testament  it 
signifies  the  second  advent  of  Christ  (1 
Thess.  v.  2;  1  Cor.  i.  8;  Pbil.  i.  6;  2  Thess. 
ii.  2).  As  a  thief  in  the  night.  The  best 
manuscripts  omit  here  "in  the  night."  St. 
Peter  is  evidently  echoing  the  Lord's 
words  in  that  great  prophetic  discourse  on 
the  Mount  of  Olives,  which  must  have 
made  such  a  deep  impression  upon  the 
apostles.  This  illustration  of  the  sudden 
coming  of  the  thief  is  repeated  not  only  by 
Bt.  Peter  here,  but  also  by  St.  Paul(l  Thess. 
T.  2),  and  twice  by  St.  John  (Eev.  iii.  3  and 
xvi.  15).  In  the  which  the  heavens  shall 
pass  away  with  a  great  noise.  The  Greek 
for  "with  a  great  noise  QoiCriS6v)"  occurs 
nowhere  else  in  the  New  Testament,  and  is 
one  of  those  remarkable  poetic  forms  which 
are  not  unfrequent  in  this  Epistle :  the  noun 
(Soffos  is  used  of  the  whizzing  of  arrows,  of 
the  rush  of  wings,  of  the  sound  of  mighty 
winds  or  roaring  waters.  It  may  be  under- 
stood here  of  the  crash  of  a  falling  world  or 
of  the  roar  of  the  destroying  flames.  The 
word  rendered  "  pass  away "  is  that  used 
by  our  Lord  in  the  prophecy  just  referred 
to  (Matt.  xxiv.  35;  also  in  Matt.  v.  18 
and  in  Luke  xvi.  17).  And  the  elements 
shall  melt  with  fervent  heat.  It  is  uncer- 
tain whether  by  "  the  elements  "  (o-Toixeia) 
St.  Peter  means  the  foTir  elements  (in 
the  old  and  popular  use  of  the  word),  or 
the  great  constituent  parts  of  the  universe, 
the  heavenly  bodies.  Against  the  first  view 
is  the  assertion  that  one  of  those  elements 
is  to  be  the  agent  of  destruction.  But  the 
word  rendered  "melt"  means  "shall  be 
dissolved  "  or  "  loosed ; "  and  it  may  be,  as 
Bishop  Wordsworth  says,  that  "  St.  Peter's 
moaning  seems  to  be  that  the  arotx^la, 
elements  or  rudiments,  of  which  the  universe 
is  composed  tod  compacted,  will  be  loosed; 
that  is,  the  framework  of  the  world  will  be 


disorganized ;  and  this  is  the  sense  of  irroixf  ia 
in  the  LXX.  (Wied.  vii.  17 ;  xix.  17)  and 
in  HippolytuB, '  Philos.,'  pp.  219, 318.  The 
dissolution  is  contrasted  with  the  consistency 
described  by  the  word  avviarSitra  in  ver.  5. 
The  heavens  are  reserved  for  fire,  and  will 
pass  away  with  a  rushing  noise,  and,  being 
set  on  fire,  will  be  dissolved ;  the  elements 
will  be  on  fire  and  melt,  and  be  reduced  to  a 
state  of  confusion ;  the  earth  and  the  works 
therein  will  be  burnt  up.  There  does  not 
seem,  therefore,  to  be  any  cause  for  abandon- 
ing the  common  meaning  of  a-roixeta,  thp 
elemental  principles  of  which  the  universe 
is  made."  On  the  other  hand,  the  word 
o'TO(X"o  is  certainly  used  of  the  heavenly 
bodies  by  Justin  Martyr  ('  Apolog.,'  ii.  c.  5, 
and  'Dial,  cum  Tryphon,'  c.  23);  and  the 
heavenly  bodies  are  constantly  mentioned  in 
the  descriptions  of  the  awful  convulsions  of 
the  great  day  (Matt.  xxiv.  29;  Mark  xiii 
24  ;  Luke  xxi.  25 ;  Acts  ii.  20 ;  Eev.  vi.  12, 
etc.).  The  objection  that  the  word  does  not 
bear  this  meaning  elsewhere  in  Holy  Scrip- 
ture is  of  little  weight,  as  this  is  the  only 
place  in  which  it  has  a  physical  sense.  The 
literal  translation  of  the  clause  is,  "The 
elements,  being  scorched,  shall  be  dissolved." 
The  word  for  "  being  scorched  "  (Kouffoijuevo) 
occurs  in  the  New  Testament  only  here  and 
in  ver.  12 ;  it  is  used  by  the  Greek  physicians 
of  the  burning  heat  of  fever.  The  verb 
\v8iiaeTai  means  "shall  be  dissolved  or 
loosened."  The  earth  also  and  the  works 
that  are  therein  shall  be  homed  up.  By 
"the  works  that  are  therein"  St.  Peter 
seems  to  mean  all  the  works  both  of  God 
and  of  man,  "  opera  naturae  et  artis" 
(Bengel).  There  is  a  very  remarkable  read- 
ing here  (supported  by  the  Sinaitio  and 
Vatican  and  another  uncial  manuscript), 
eipeBiifferai, "  shall  be  discovered,"  instead  o£ 
Karaiai-liireTai,  "  shall  be  burned  up."  If  we 
understand  "  the  works  that  are  therein  "  of 
man's  works  and  actions,  this  reading  will 
give  a  good  sense  (comp.  1  Cor.  iii.  13, 
"  Every  man's  work  shall  be  made  manifest, 
for  the  day  shall  declare  it,  because  it  shall 
be  revealed  by  fire ;  and  the  fire  shall  try 
every  man's  work,  of  what  sort  it  is").  Or 
the  clause  may  be  regarded  as  interrogative, 
"  Shall  the  earth  and  the  works  that  are 
therein  be  found  ?  "  But  the  reading,  "  shall 
be  burned  up"  is  well  supported,  and  suits 
the  context  best. 

Ver.  11. — Seeing  then  that  all  these  things 
shall  be  dissolved;  rather,  seeing  that  all 
these  things  are  heing  dissolved.  The  parti- 
ciple is  present,  and  implies  the  certainty  of 
the  event  foretold,  and,  perhaps,  also  that 
the  germs  of  that  coming  dissolution  are 
already  in  being,  that  the  forces  which  are 
ultimately  to  bring  about  the  final  catas- 
trophe are  even  now  at  work.    Some  of  ths 


OH.  m.  1—18.]    THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  PETER. 


6d 


better  manuscripts  read,  instead  of  aZv,  then, 
oStus,  thus  :  "  seeing  that  all  tliese  things 
are  thus  being  dissolved."  What  manner 
of  persons  onght  ye  to  be  in  all  holy  conver- 
sation and  godliness  1  The  Greek  word  for 
"  what  manner  of  persons  "  means  literally, 
"  of  what  country ; "  it  seems  to  point  to  the 
great  truth  that  God's  people  are  fellow- 
citizens  of  the  saints,  that  the  commonwealth 
of  which  they  are  citizens  is  in  heaven. 
The  word  for  "to  be"  is  the  emphatic 
fiircipxeii'i  which  denotes  original,  essential, 
oontiniious  being.  (On  the  word  for  "  con- 
versation "  (avaffrpo^iats,  behaviour,  conduct), 
see  note  on  1  Pet.  i.  15.)  Both  this  noun 
and  the  following  are  plural  in  the  Greek, 
and  therefore  mean  "in  all  aspects  and 
forms  of  holy  conduct  and  godliness."  Some 
commentators  connect  these  last  words,  "  in 
all  holy  conversation  and  godliness,"  with 
the  next  verse :  "  looking  in  all  holy  conver- 
sation," etc.  Some,  again,  understand  this 
verse  as  asking  a  question,  which  is  answered 
in  the  next ;  but  the  Greek  word  for  "  what 
manner  of  persons"  (iroroTriis)  seems  to  be 
used  in  the  New  Testament  as  an  exclama- 
tion only,  not  interrogatively. 

Yer.  12. — Looking  for  and  hasting  onto 
fhe  coming  of  the  day  of  Ood.  The  pre- 
position "unto"  is  inserted  without  autliority. 
The  second  participle  a-iteiSovTas  is  followed 
directly  by  tlie  accusative,  and  is  evidently 
transitive.  In  the  Septuagiut  Version  of 
Isa.  xvi.  5,  <nreiSan>  Sucaioaiyriv  represents 
the  "  hasting  righteousness  "  of  our  transla- 
tion (oomp.  Pindar,  '  Isthm.,'  v.  22,  where 
trTreiSetv  itperdv  means  "  to  pursue  virtue  "). 
Here  the  translation  "hastening"  is  most 
appropriate.  The  Father  hath  put  the  times 
and  seasons  in  his  own  power ;  but  as  the 
long-suffering  of  God  waited  in  the  days  of 
Noah,  BO  now  he  is  "  long-suffering  to  us- 
ward,  not  willing  that  any  should  perish ; " 
and  in  his  gracious  mercy  waits  for  the 
repentance  of  his  chosen.  St.  Peter  seems 
to  represent  Christians  as  "hastening  the 
coming  [literally,  '  presence ']  of  the  day  of 
God  "  by  working  out  their  own  salvation, 
and  helping  to  spread  the  knowledge  of  the 
gospel  (Matt.  xxiv.  14),  and  so  rendering 
the  long-suffering  patience  of  God  no  longer 
necessary.  Tlie  words  imply  also  the  duty 
of  praying  for  that  coming,  as  we  do  in  the 
second  petition  of  the  Lord's  Prayer,  and  in 
the  Funeral  Service, "  Beseeching  thee,  that 
it  may  please  thee,  of  thy  gracious  goodness, 
shortly  to  accomplish  the  number  of  thine 
elect,  and  to  hasten  thy  kingdom."  Compare 
St.  Peter's  speech  in  Act  iii.,  where  he  says, 
"  Repent  ye  therefore ....  that  so  (Sttms  &v) 
there  may  come  seasons  of  refreshing  from 
the  presence  of  the  Lord,  and  that  lie  may 
send  the  Christ"  (vers.  19,  20,  Revised 
Yersiun).    This  remarkable  coincidence  of 


thought  furnishes  an  argument  of  consider- 
able weight  in  favour  of  the  genuineness  of 
this  Epistle.  Another  possible  rendering  of 
the  word  is  "  earnestly  desiring,"  which  is 
adopted  in  the  text  of  the  Revised  Version, 
and  is  preferred  by  some  commentators. 
■Wherein  the  heavens  being  on  fire  shall  be 
dissolved.  The  Greek  for  "  wherein  "  is  5i' 
^y,  oa-  account  of  which,  i.e.  on  account  of 
the  day  of  God,  or,  what  comes  to  mucli  the 
same  meaning,  on  account  of  the  coming, 
the  presence,  of  that  day.  Old  things  must 
pass  away  because  of  the  coming  of  the  day 
of  God;  the  old  order  must  give  place  to 
new.  And  the  elements  shall  melt  with 
fervent  heat.  The  apostle  repeats  the  strik- 
ing words  which  he  had  already  used  in 
ver.  10,  with  a  different  verb.  The  Greek 
word  for  "  shall  melt "  here  is  not  Kv9i\a(Tai, 
as  in  ver.  10,  but  a  stronger  word  Tif/cfrai, 
are  being  melted,  or  wasted  away.  The 
tense  is  the  prophetic  present,  implying  a 
certain  fulfilment.  There  is  probably  a 
reference  to  Isa.  xxxiv.  4,  where  the  Septua- 
giut rendering  is  Koi  TaxiiaoiiTai  iraaai  at 
Swd/ieis  TcSf  ovpavtjoi/, 

Ver.  13. — Nevertheless  we,  according  to 
his  promise,  look  for  new  heavens  and  a 
new  earth ;  rather,  hut,  according  to  his 
promise,  we  look  for.  The  promise  is  that  in 
Isa.  Ixv.  17,  "  Behold,  I  create  new  heavens 
and  a  new  earth  "  (see  also  Isa.  Ixvi.  22  and 
Rev.  xxi.  1).  St.  John  saw  in  vision  the 
fulfilment  of  the  prophecy  of  Isaiah  and  St. 
Peter ;  "  The  first  heaven  and  the  first  earth 
were  passed  away."  It  may  be  that,  as  the 
water  of  the  Deluge  was  the  baptism  of  the 
ancient  world  into  a  new  life,  so  the  fire  of 
the  great  day  will  be  the  means  of  purifying 
and  refining  the  universe,  transforming  it 
into  new  heavens  and  a  new  earth,  making 
all  things  new.  Our  Lord's  use  of  the  word 
"regeneration,"  in  Matt.  xix.  28,  seems  to 
favour  this  view.  In  the  regeneration  of 
the  individual  soul  the  personality  remains, 
the  tlioughts,  desires,  affections,  are  changed ; 
so,  it  may  be,  in  the  regeneration  of  the 
world  the  substance  will  remain,  the  fashion 
((rxw")  of  the  old  world  will  pass  away  (1 
Cor.  vii.  31).  But  it  is  impossible  to  pro- 
nounce dogmatically  whether  the  new 
heavens  and  earth  will  be  a  reproduction  of 
the  old  in  a  far  more  glorious  form,  through 
the  agency  of  the  refining  fire,  or  an  abso- 
lutely new  creation,  as  the  words  of  Isaiah 
seem  to  imply.  St.  John,  like  St.  Peter, 
speaks  of  a  new  earth,  and  tells  us  that  that 
new  earth  will  be  the  dwelling-place  of  the 
blessed.  He  saw  the  holy  city,  new  Jerusa- 
lem, coming  down  from  God  out  of  heaven ; 
the  throne  of  God  and  of  the  Lamb  (he  tells 
us)  shall  be  in  it :  "  The  tabernacle  of  Gtod  is 
with  men,  and  he  will  dwell  with  them." 
The  holy  city,  Jerusalem,  which  ia  above,  is 


TO 


THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  GENEEAL  OF  PETER,    [oh.  m.  1— la 


in  heaven  now ;  the  commonwealth  of  which 
the  Bainta  are  citizens  is  in  heaven  (Phil, 
iii.  20).  But  heaven  will  come  down  to 
earth ;  the  tbione  of  God  and  of  the  Lamb 
shall  be  there ;  there  hia  servants  shall  serve 
him.  The  distinction  between  earth  and 
heaven  will  be  abolished ;  for  vrhere  God 
is,  there  is  heaven.  Wherein  dwelleth 
righteousness  (comp.  Isa.  Ix.  21,  "Thy 
people  shall  be  all  righteous ; "  also  Isa.  Ixv. 
25 ;  Rev.  xxi.  27  ;  Rom.  viii.  21). 

Ver.  14. — Wherefore,  beloved,  seeing  that 
ye  look  for  suoh  things ;  rather,  these  things, 
the  coming  of  the  Lord,  the  restitution  of  all 
tilings,  the  new  heavens  and  the  new  earth. 
Be  diligent  that  ye  may  be  found  of  Tiim  in 
peace,  without  spot,  and  blameless ;  literally, 
give  diligence  (or,  be  earnest — the  same  word 
which  is  used  in  oh.  i.  10)  to  be  found 
without  epot  and  blameless  in  his  sight  in 
peace.  Christians  who  look  for  the  coming 
of  Christ  must  earnestly  strive  to  imitate 
their  Lord,  the  "  Lamb  without  blemish  and 
without  spot."  In  the  word  io-jriAoi,  "  with- 
out spot,"  we  have  a  link  with  1  Pet.  i.  19. 
The  word  for  "  blameless "  (i/idftiiToi)  is 
found  elsewhere  only  in  PhU.  ii  15.  The 
dative  airif  should  be  rendered,  not  "of 
him"  or  "by  him,"  but  "in  his  sight"  or 
''  before  him."  Peace  is  used  in  its  fullest 
sense — peace  with  God  and  with  man ;  the 
peace  which  Christ  giveth ;  "  the  peace  of 
God,  which  pasaeth  all  understanding."  "  In 
peace"  was  a  common  inscription  on  Chris- 
tian graves. 

Ver.  15. — And  account  that  the  long- 
suffering  of  OUT  Lord  is  salvation.  The 
apostle  is  referring  to  ver.  9.  Scoffers  count 
the  delay  of  the  judgment  slackness ;  the 
Christian  should  count  it  salvation;  it  is 
for  the  salvation  of  the  elect  that  tlie  judg- 
ment tarrieth.  It  is  almost  certain  that  by 
"  our  Lord  "  here  St.  Peter  means  the  Lord 
Jesus,  whom  he  describes  by  the  same  title 
in  ver.  18.  Even  as  our  beloved  brother  Paul 
also.  The  plural  pronoun  may  be  intended 
to  imply  that  St.  Paul  was  known  to  the 
Churches  to  which  St.  Peter  was  writing, 
and  was  beloved  there.  St.  Peter  addresses 
his  readers  as  "beloved"  four  times  in  this 
Epistle ;  he  here  uses  the  same  epithet  of 
St.  Paul.  It  comes  naturally  from  liis  lips ; 
but  a  writer  of  the  second  century  would 
probably  have  used  much  stronger  words  of 
praise  in  speaking  of  one  so  much  rever- 
enued.  According  to  the  wisdom  given  onto 
him  hath  written  unto  you ;  rather,  wrote  to 
you  (comp.  'Polycarp,  'Ad  Philipp.,'  i.  8, 
"  One  like  me  cannot  equal  the  wisdom  of 
the  blessed  Paul  ").  That  wisdom  was  given 
unto  him,  as  he  himself  says  (1  Cor.  iii.  10). 
If  we  ask  to  what  Epistles  of  St.  Paul  is  St. 
Peter  referring,  the  passage  which  at  once 
•oonn  to  us  is  1  Thesi.  ir.  and  t*     This 


Epistle  was  probably  known  to  St.  Peter, 
there  may  be  a  reference  to  1  Thess.  v.  2  in 
ver.  10  of  this  chapter ;  and  Silvanus,  whose 
nnme  St.  Paul  associates  with  his  own  in 
both  Epistles  to  the  Thessalonians,  was  with 
St.  Peter  when  he  wrote  his  First  Epistle 
(1  Pet.  V.  12).  But  St.  Peter's  Second 
Epistle  is  addressed  (primarily  at  least)  to 
the  same  Churches  to  which  the  first  was 
written  (ch.  iii.  1).  We  must  therefore  either 
say,  with  Dean  Alford,  that  "  our  Epistle  be- 
longs to  a  date  when  the  Pauline  Epistles 
were  no  longer  the  property  only  of  the 
Churches  to  which  they  were  written,  but 
were  disper.-'ed  through,  and  considered  to 
belong  to,  the  whole  Christian  Church ; "  or 
we  must  suppose  that  the  passages  in  St. 
Peter's  thoughts  were  not  in  the  Epistle  to 
the  Thessalonians,  but  in  some  of  the  Epistles 
addressed  to  the  Churches  of  Asia  Minor;  as, 
for  instance,  Eph.  i.  4 ;  ii.  8 ;  iii.  9 — 11 ;  OoL 
i.  22 ;  iii.  4,  24 ;  or,  possibly  Bom.  ii.  4  and 
iz.  22,  as  there  seem  to  be  some  reasons  for 
believing  that  this  last  Epistle  was  addressed 
to  the  Church  at  Ephesus  among  others. 

Yer.  16. — As  also  in  all  his  Epistles,  The 
true  reading  is  probably  iy  iriaaa  iirtv- 
To\ats  without  the  article.  The  words, 
therefore,  do  not  imply  the  existence  of  a 
complete  collection  of  St.  Paul's  Epistles, 
but  mean  only  "in  all  Epistles  which  he 
writes."  SpeaJdng  in  them  of  these  things ; 
that  is,  of  the  day  of  God,  the  end  of  the 
world,  etc.  St.  Peter  was  acquainted  with 
other  Epistles  of  St,  Paul  besides  those  ad- 
dressed to  the  Asiatic  Churches.  There  are 
evident  indications  of  his  knowledge  of  the 
Epistles  to  the  Thessalonians  and  Corin- 
thians, as  well  as  of  that  to  the  Romans. 
In  which  are  some  things  hard  to  be  under- 
stood. The  manuscripts  vary  between  «V  ofj 
and  tv  cUs.  The  first  reading  would  refer 
to  the  words  immediately  preceding — "  these 
things  ;  "  "  among  the  subjects  on  which  St. 
Paul  wrote  there  are  some  things,"  eto.  The 
second  would  refer  to  "  all  his  Epistles,"  and 
would  mean  that  there  are  certain  difficul- 
ties in  St.  Paul's  Epistles  generally.  St. 
Peter  does  not  tell  us  wliat  difficulties  were 
in  his  thoughts — whether  St.  Paul's  teach- 
ing about  "  the  man  of  sin,"  and  "  the  day 
of  the  Lord,"  or  his  doctrine  of  justification 
by  faith,  and  his  a&sertion  of  Christian 
liberty,  which  might  be  perverted  into  anti- 
nomianism  by  such  men  as  the  false  teachers 
censured  in  ch.  ii.  The  word  Suaviriios, 
"hard  to  be  understood,"  occurs  nowhere 
else  in  the  New  Testament  Which  they 
that  are  unlearned  and  unstable  wrest  j 
rather,  the  ignorant  and  unsteadfast.  Both 
words  are  peculiar  to  this  Epistle ;  the  last 
occurs  also  in  oh.  ii,  14,  the  first  here  only 
in  the  New  Testament.  The  verb  also  trans- 
lated "  wrest"  <jrrffp\oiinvi  is  found  onlj 


OH.  in.  1—18.]    THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  PETEB. 


71 


here!  it  means  "to  twist  witli  a  windlass," 
and  so  "  to  strain,  to  torture,  to  distort."  As 
they  do  also  the  other  Scriptures.  This  pas- 
sage is  of  the  greatest  interest,  as  showing  that 
some  of  St.  Paul's  Epistles  had  by  this  time 
taken  their  place  in  the  estimate  of  Christians 
by  the  side  of  the  sacred  hooka  of  the  Old 
Testament,  and  were  regarded  as  Holy  Scrip- 
ture. By  "  the  other  Scriptures  "  St.  Peter 
means  the  Old  Testament,  and  also,  perhaps, 
some  of  the  earlier  writings  of  the  New,  as 
the  first  three  Gospels  and  the  Epistle  of  St. 
James.  St.  Paul,  in  1  Tim.  v.  18,  quotes  a 
passage  which  seems  to  come  from  Luke  x. 
7  as  Scripture  (comp.  I  Pet.  i.  12).  TTnto 
their  own  destruotioji ;  literally,  their  own 
destruction  of  thgtmelvet.  Tho  use  of  botU 
adjective  and  pronoun  intensifies  the  mean- 
ing (oomp.  ch.  ii.  1, 12). 

Ver.  17. — ^Ye  therefore,  beloved,  leeing 
that  ye  know  these  things  before.  The  pro- 
noun "  ye  "  ia  emphatic ;  others  have  gone 
astray;  "continue  ye  faithful."  The  oon- 
atruction  is  participial,  and  there  is  no  ex- 
pressed object ;  literally,  "  knowing  before," 
i.e.  that  false  teachers  will  arise.  Beware 
lest  ye  also,  being  led  away  with  the  error 
of  the  wicked,  fall  from  your  own  steadfast- 
ness ;  rather,  as  in  the  Revised  Version,  lest, 
being  carried  away  .  ,  ,  ye  faU.  It  is  in- 
teresting to  notice  that  the  word  rendered 
"  Jed  or  carried  away  "  is  used  by  St.  Paul, 
in  Gal.  ii.  13,  of  St.  Barnabas,  who,  along 
with  St.  Peter  himself,  was  then  "  carried 
away  "  with  the  dissimulation  of  the  Juda- 
izers.  The  word  rendered  "wicked,"  rather 
"lawless,"  is  used  elsewhere  in  the  New 
Testament  only  in  oh.  ii.  7.  The  word  for 
"ateadfaatness  "  (a'T'iiptyn6t)  ocoors  only  here. 


Ver.  18. — But  grow  in  grace,  and  in  ths 
knowledge  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus 
Christ.  Growth  is  necessary  for  steadfast- 
ness ;  we  cannot  persevere  unless  we  con- 
tinually advance  in  faith  (comp.  1  Pet.  i. 
5 — 7;  ii.  2).  Some,  as  Alford,  take  the 
genitive  with  "  grace "  aa  well  as  with 
"  knowledge ;  "  but  this  connection  forces  us 
to  regard  it  first  as  subjective,  then  as  ob- 
jective— the  grace  which  Christ  gives,  and 
the  kTiowledge  of  which  he  is  the  Object — 
and  so  seems  somewhat  forced.  St  Peter 
insists  on  the  knowledge  of  Christ  as  es- 
sential for  growth  in  grace,  at  the  begin- 
ning, as  at  the  end,  of  this  Epistle.  To  him 
be  glory  both  now  and  for  ever.  Amen.  We 
notice  the  doxology  addressed  to  Christ ;  it 
reminds  ua  of  the  hymn  which  Pliny,  in  his 
famous  letter  to  Trajan,  says  the  Christians 
of  Bithynia  (one  of  the  provinces  mentioned 
in  1  Pet.  i.  1)  were  wont  to  address  to  Christ 
as  to  God.  To  him  be  (or  ia)  the  glory — all 
the  glory  which  belongs  to  God,  which  we 
ascribe  to  him.  "For  ever"  is,  literally, 
"for  the  day  of  the  age  or  of  eternity  (els 
illiephv  aluvosy  This  remarkable  expression 
is  found  only  here,  and  is  variously  inter- 
preted. Bengel  cxpbdns  it  aa,  "  dies  sine 
noote,  merus  et  perpetuus ; " '  Hnther  as, 
"  the  day  on  which  eternity  begins  as  con- 
trasted with  time,  but  which  day  ia  likewise 
all  eternity  itself."  Fronmiiller  quotes  St. 
Augustine :  "  It  is  only  one  day,  but  an 
everlasting  day,  without  yesterday  to  pre- 
cede it,  and  without  to-morrow  to  follow  it ; 
not  brought  forth  by  the  natural  sun,  which 
shall  exist  no  more,  but  by  Christ,  the  Sun 
of  Bighteonsueas." 


HOMILETICa 
Vers.  1 — 10. — The  certainty  of  the  Lorcfs  coming.  I,  Confdtation  of  scoffers. 
1.  St.  Peter's  purpose  in  writing.  He  took  a  deep  interest  in  the  spiiitual  welfare 
of  the  Christians  of  Asia  Minor;  he  felt  a  great  affection  for  them;  be  calls  them 
"  beloved  "  four  times  in  this  chapter.  We  do  not  know  whether  he  had  ever  seen 
them  face  to  face.  It  may  be  that  SUvanus  had  made  known  to  him  their  circum- 
stances, their  dangers,  their  temptations.  So  he  writes  to  them.  In  the  First  Epistle 
he  comforts  them  in  the  presence  of  great  persecution  ;  in  the  second  he  warns  them 
against  the  seductions  of  false  teachers.  He  is  an  example  to  Christian  ministers  of 
diligence,  of  affectionate  care  for  soiils.  He  writes :  (1)  To  stir  up  his  readers.  Theit 
minds,  he  says,  were  pure.  They  we*e  single-hearted  Christians;  their  religion  was 
genuine,  sincere.  Nevertheless,  it  was  well  to  stir  them  up.  We  all  need  to  be  aroused 
from  time  to  time.  We  live  on  in  the  same  way  day  after  day;  the  daily  prayers,  the 
daily  life,  are  ordered  according  to  rule;  there  is  danger  of  becoming  lukewarm, 
formal,  of  acting  from  habit  rather  than  from  the  conscious  desire  of  pleasing  God. 
Hence  the  need  of  exhortation.  We  ask  God  to  "  stir  up  the  wills  of  his  faithful 
people."  It  is  he  only  who,  by  the  power  of  his  Spirit,  can  really  arouse  us ;  but  he 
uses  men  as  bis  instruments.  He  used  the  agency  of  St.  Peter  to  stir  up  the  minds 
of  the  Asiatic  Christians.  ^2)  To  remind  them  of  the  words  of  the  prophets  and 
apostles.     He  had  urged  the  sturly  of  prophecy  in  the  first  chapter  of  this  Epistle ; 


72  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PETER,    [ch.  hi.  I— 1& 

he  had  dwelt  upon  the  subject  of  prophetical  inspiration  in  both  Epistles ;  be  waa 
cimstantly  referring  to  the  prophets  both  in  his  speeches  and  letters.  Christians 
ought  to  study  the  writings  of  the  prophets ;  they  ought  to  give  heed  to  the  Word 
(if  prophecy.  So  also  they  should  be  always  mindful  of  the  Lord's  commandm''nt 
given  through  the  apostles.  "  God  who  in  times  past  spoke  by  the  prophets,  hath  in 
the  latter  days  spoken  unto  us  by  his  Son."  The  writings  of  prophets  and  apostles 
come  from  the  same  source — the  inspiration  of  God ;  both  have  a  message  for  us.  It 
becomes  us  to  be  mindful  of  that  message ;  to  forget  it  is  to  be  wanting  in  reverence 
and  gratitude  to  him  from  whom  the  message  comes.  The  oomraandaient,  deliverc  d 
to  us  by  the  apostles,  is  in  truth  the  commandment  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour,  who, 
as  our  Lord,  has  a  right  to  our  obedience,  and,  as  our  Saviour,  has  a  claim  upon  our 
tenderest  feelings  of  love  and  gratitude.  2.  Scoffers  will  come.  It  has  always  been 
so ;  there  have  always  been  men  who  mocked  at  those  who  trusted  in  God.  It  was 
so  with  Lot  in  Sodom,  with  Isaac  the  heir  of  the  promise,  with  tlie  psalmist,  with 
the  Lord  Jesus  himself.  Those  of  whom  St.  Peter  speaks  were  men  of  sensual  habits, 
walking  after  their  own  lusts.  There  is  such  a  thing  as  honest  doubt,  lil<e  that  of  St. 
Thomas ;  there  are  men  who  would  give  the  world  to  believe,  if  they  could ;  their 
temperament,  their  education,  their  habits  of  thought,  throw  immense  difficulties  in 
their  way ;  such  men,  we  hope  and  trust,  will  be  guided,  sooner  or  later,  to  the  truth. 
But  in  all  ages  a  very  large  proportion  of  the  prevalent  Bceptioism  has  issued  out  of 
an  ungodly  life.  Men  have  rejected  the  faith  because  they  were  unwilling  to  believe. 
The  pure  morality  of  the  gospel  offends  the  self-indulgent ;  it  is  a  constant  reproach  to 
them ;  the  teaching  of  Scripture  concerning  the  judgment  is  repulsive  to  them ;  they 
try  to  keep  such  thoughts-  out  of  their  minds.  And,  besides  this,  sin  hardens  the 
heart ;  »  sensual  life  blinds  the  eye  of  the  soul,  and  makes  men  incapable  of  appre- 
ciating spiritual  truth.  "The  natural  man  [the  ^jivxucis,  in  whom  the  animal  soul  is 
predominant]  receiveth  not  the  things  of  the  Spirit  of  God :  for  they  are  foolishness 
unto  him  :  neither  can  he  know  them,  because  they  are  spiritually  discerned"  (1  Cor. 
ii.  14).  Such  men  come  with  their  mockery,  saying,  "Where  is  the  promise  of  "his 
coming  ?  The  fathers  have  fallen  asleep;  generation  after  generation  has  passed  away. 
Christians  have  lived  in  expectation  of  the  Lord's  coming  according  to  his  promise ; 
they  have  waited  for  him,  but  he  came  not;  they  are  in  their  graves.  Aie  men  still 
to  pass  their  lives  in  waiting  for  an  advent  which  seems  to  be  continually  receding? 
All  things  continue  thus,  as  they  are,  and  as  they  have  been ;  the  laws  of  nature  work 
on  in  their  changeless  uniforn  ty.  Where  is  the  promise?"  These  men  took  the 
Epicurean  view  of  the  Deity.  God  might  have  created  the  world ;  he  might  have 
called  into  being  the  forces  which  are  working  in  the  universe.  But  now,  they 
thought,  he  leaves  those  forces  to  their  mutual  action  and  reaction  upon  one  another ; 
he  does  not  interpose  either  in  the  natural  world  or  in  the  affairs  of  men ;  he  leaves  all 
to  the  silent  rule  of  law.  The  teaching  of  Holy  Scripture  is  directly  opposed  to  this 
form  of  agnosticism.  "My  Father  worketh  hitherto,  and  I  work,"  said  the  Lord  Jesus 
to  the  Jews.  "  In  him  we  live,  and  move,  and  have  our  being,"  said  St.  Paul  to  the 
Epicurean  and  Stoic  philosophers,  as  well  as  to  the  men  of  Athens  generally.  God 
sustains  the  universe  from  day  to  day,  from  hour  to  hour,  with  his  continued  agency. 
Without  his  support  the  world  would  fall  into  ruin ;  without  his  providence  the  order 
of  society  would  collapse.  The  laws  of  nature  are  but  observed  uniformities,  sequences 
of  cause  and  effect ;  they  are  not  forces ;  they  have  no  life,  no  power ;  they  are  the 
expression  of  the  Divine  will.  God  changeth  not;  and  those  laws  which  he  has 
impressed  upon  the  material  universe  exhibit'  the  hand  of  the  Creator,  they  too  are 
changeless  within  the  sphere  of  the  all-controlling  will  of  God.  He  can  suspend  their 
operation,  for  he  is  the  Lord  God  omnipotent;  but  as  a  rule  his  working  is  uniform, 
continuous.  If  it  were  not  so,  the  world  would  be  a  scene  of  disorder — all  its  rare 
beauty  would  be  lost,  life  in  its  present  conditions  could  not  be  sustained,  society 
would  be  impossible.  That  uniformity  which  is  the  result  of  the  wisdom  of  God 
must  not  be  made  an  argument  against  the  providence  of  God.  He  works  in  the 
uniformities  of  the  laws  of  nature  as  certainly  as  in  disturbances  of  those  uniformities. 
There  have  been  such  disturbances;  the  uniform  course  of  nature  has  been  broken  by 
Divine  interpositions  on  a  great  scale.  3.  The  answer  to  the  scoffers.  All  things  have 
not  always  continue!  as  they  are.    For :  (1)  Creation  itself  was  the  introduction  of  • 


BH.  ml— 18.]    THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PETEB.  73 

vast  oTiange ;  it  was  a  mighty  interposition  of  Divine  power.  "  In  the  heginning  God 
created  the  heaven  and  the  earth."  "We  are  not  concerned  here  with  the  scientific 
interpretation  of  phenomena.  The  Bible  was  not  intended  to  teach  us  that  knowledge 
which  men  may  by  patient  labour  obtain  for  themselves,  but  to  reveal  to  us  the 
relations  between  man  and  God,  so  far  as  those  relations  are  within  our  comprehension, 
and  to  show  us  the  duties  which  arise  out  of  those  relations.  We  are  not  told  how  many 
ages,  or  what  processes  of  evolution,  may  have  their  place  between  the  second  and  the 
third  verses  of  the  first  chapter  of  Genesis.  It  is  the  great  fact  of  crealion  which  is 
forcibly  declared  in  those  emphatic  words  with  which  the  tirst  of  the  sacred  books  begins. 
"  By  faith  we  understand  that  the  worlds  were  framed  by  the  Word  of  God,  so  that 
things  which  are  seen  were  not  made  of  things  which  do  appear."  This  is  the  great 
truth :  "  By  the  Word  of  the  Lord  were  the  heavens  made ;  and  all  the  host  of  them 
by  the  breath  of  his  mouth."  It  was  he  who  said,  "  Let  the  paters  under  the  heaven 
be  gathered  together  utito  one  place,  and  let  the  dry  land  appear."  The  scofl'ers 
wilfully  forget  this;  even  if  they  do  not  formally  deny  the  possibility  of  creation, 
they  shut  their  eyes  to  it,  and  forget  that  he  who  made  the  world  can  also  destroy  it, 
that  the  great  change  of  creation  may  be  preparatory  for  other  changes  as  great  in  the 
future.  (2)  One  such  catastrophe  was  the  Deluge,  The  earth,  which  God  had  once 
pronounced  to  be  "very  good,"  had  become  corrupt,  and  was  filled  with  violence.  Then 
God  brought  in  the  Flood  upon  the  world  of  the  ungodly.  By  his  Word  "  were  all  the 
fountains  of  the  great  deep  broken  up,  and  the  windows  of  heaven  were  opened."  "  And 
all  flesh  died  that  moved  upon  the  earth."  That  awful  visitation  was  a  warning  of 
coming  judgments.  All  things  did  not  go  on  in  the  same  unvarying  course  as  the 
scoffers  said.  When  all  flesh  had  corrupted  his  way  upon  the  earth,  then  God  inter- 
posed in  his  awful  justice,  and  the  earth  was,  by  a  baptism  of  water,  restored  and 
purified,  prepared  for  a  new  beginning.  (3)  All  things  will  not  always  continue  as 
they  are.  By  God's  Word  the  heavens  and  the  earth  were  «iade  at  the  first ;  by  his 
Word  they  are  now  maintained  in  being.  But  as  the  old  world  contained  in  itself  the 
element  which  swept  away  the  ungodly  race  of  men,  so  the  world  that  now  is  contains 
in  itself  the  agent  of  its  own  destruction.  It  is  stored  with  fire ;  there  are  stores  of 
fire  hidden  within  it,  which  are  to  work  the  last  most  awful  change,  which  are  to 
destroy  the  present  order  of  things,  and  by  their  purifying  and  refining  power  to  work, 
as  by  a  baptism  of  fire,  the  regeneration  of  the  universe  into  a  new  life.  And  it  is 
stored  up  for  fire,  reserved  unto  the  day  of  judgment,  when  the  Lord  Jesus  shall  be 
revealsd  from  heaven  in  flaming  fire.  That  great  day  is  presented  to  us  in  Holy 
Scripture  as  a  day  of  terror  with  surroundings  most  awful  and  overwhelming.  It  will 
be  a  day  of  destruction  to  the  ungodly ;  it  will  sweep  them  into  utter  death — that  death 
of  the  soul  which  is  so  much  more  dreadful  than  the  death  of  the  body,  for  it  is  death 
eternal,  a  state  of  separation  from  the  life  of  God,  separation  from  light  and  joy  and 
love,  felt  iu  all  its  blank  and  utter  misery.  Then  all  things  will  not  continue  as  they 
are ;  he  who  made  the  world  at  the  first,  he  who  interposed  when  that  world  had 
become  corrupt,  and  swept  away  the  wicked  with  the  waters  of  the  Flood, — he  will 
come  again,  but  this  time  "in  flaming  fire,  taking  vengeance  on  them  that  know  not 
God,  and  that  obey  not  the  gospel  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  The  mockers  may  mock ; 
but  the  Word  of  God  abideth ;  it  must  be  fulfilled — he  will  surely  come. 

II.  Explanation  of  the  delay  op  the  judgment.  1.  With  the  Eternal  time  it 
not.  We  think  under  the  laws  of  time;  time  is  an  essential  element  in  our  thought — 
we  cannot  think  without  recognizing  it.  It  is  not  so  with  God ;  the  thought  of  God  is 
not  subject  to  the  law  of  time.  He  is  eternal ;  past,  present,  and  future  are  all  within 
the  sphere  of  his  immediate  knowledge.  To  him  one  day  is  as  a  thousand  years,  and 
a  thousand  years  as  one  day.  To  him  that  inhabiteth  eternity  the  longest  time  that 
human  thought  can  conceive  is  but  as  a  speck.  Even  we  can  understand  that  real 
life  is  measured  not  by  mere  time,  but  by  action.  How  much  of  life  was  there  con- 
centrated in  the  three  years  of  our  Lord's  ministry,  those  years  filled  full  with  works 
of  love  and  holy  teaching!  while,  on  the  other  hand,  the  seventy  years  or  more  of 
many  men  pass  by  in  careless  living,  in  listless  idleness,  without  energy  either  of 
thought  or  action,  without  any  good  results  either  for  themselves  or  for  others.  It  ii 
thought,  love,  action,  that  measures  life,  not  the  hand  of  the  clock,  not  the  mere  lapse 
of  hours  and  years.    "  He,  being  made  perfect  in  a  short  time,  fulfilled  a  long  time  " 


T4  THE  SECOND  EPISTLI,  GENERAL  OF  PETBB.    [oh.  m.  1— la 

(Wisd.  iy.  13).  2.  The  Lord  it  long-suffering.  The  delay  does  not  mean  indif- 
ference; it  does  not  mean  that  the  Lord  heedeth  not  the  conduct  of  men.  The 
ungodly  say,  "Tush,  God  hath  forgotten:  he  hideth  away  his  face;  he  will  never 
see  it."  But  it  is  not  so.  The  delay  of  the  judgment  comes  from  a  far  different 
reason.  God  is  not  willing  that  any  should  perish.  Alas  1  men  do  perish  in  their 
sins ;  the  day  of  judgment  is  the  day  of  perdition  of  ungodly  men.  But  it  is  not  of 
God ;  it  is  of  their  own  wilfulness  and  ohstinacy ;  they  bring  upon  themselves  swift 
perdition.  God  has  bestowed  on  man  the  awful  gift  of  power  to  choose  good  or  evil; 
without  that  power  there  could  be  no  moral  action,  no  responsibility,  no  obedience,  no 
holiness,  no  love;  life  without  that  power  would  be  the  working  of  a  machine,  not  the 
energy  of  a  creature  made  after  the  likeness  of  God.  Man,  alas  1  has  too  often  abused 
that  great  and  perilous  gift,  and  has  turned  that  which  should  have  led  to  holiness  into 
an  occasion  of  sin ;  and  "  the  wages  of  sin  is  death."  But  God  hath  "  no  pleasure  in  the 
death  of  the  wicked ;  "  his  desire  is  that  "  all  should  come  to  repentance."  Therefore 
he  gives  them  time.  "  The  goodness  of  God  leadeth  them  to  repentance  "  (Rom.  ii.  4). 
We  cannot  enter  into  life  without  repentance,  without  a  deep  and  real  change  of  heart. 
"  Repent  ye :  for  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  at  hand,"  was  the  first  sermon  of  John  the 
Baptist,  the  first  sermon  of  our  Lord.  "  Repent,  and  be  baptized  every  one  of  you  ...  for 
the  remission  of  sins,"  was  the  exhortation  of  St.  Peter  in  his  first  great  sermon.  A  nd 
God  willeth  that  all  should  come  to  repentance;  for  "the  Lord  is  loving  unto  every 
man;"  and  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord  "tasted  death  for  every  man."  And  "there  is  joy 
in  heaven  over  one  sinner  that  repenteth."  Therefore  he  gives  us  time.  The  delay 
comes  from  the  long-suffering  love  of  God.  How  sad  that  men  should  scoff  at  that 
which  should  be  the  groimd  of  adoring  gratitude  I  3.  But  the  day  of  the  Lord  will 
come.  It  must  be  so,  for  so  it  is  decreed  in  the  counsels  of  God.  The  mockers  may 
mock  in  their  mockery ;  they  may  ask  in  bitter  sarcasm,  "  Where  is  the  promise  of  hia 
coming?"  The  Christian  knows  the  answer;  it  is  hidden  in  the  secret  purpose  of  God, 
in  the  mystic  book  sealed  with  seven  seals,  which  none  can  open  save  the  Lion  of  the 
tribe  of  judah.  But  the  day  of  the  Lord  will  come — that  we  know,  though  we  know 
not  the  time.  (1)  Its  coming  is  certain,  sure  as  the  Word  of  God ;  the  Bible  tells  us  it 
will  come ;  our  consciences  bear  witness  also ;  the  warning  voice  of  conscience  points 
forward  to  the  coming  of  the  awful  day.  And  it  will  come  suddenly,  as  the  thief 
cometh — when  men  are  not  looking  for  it.  Men  will  be  living,  as,  alas  I  so  many 
men  are  living  now,  heedlessly ;  eating,  drinking,  marrying,  and  giving  in  marriage, 
without  a  thought  of  God  and  the  solemn  future.  Then,  in  a  moment,  in  the  twinkling 
of  an  eye,  shall  the  sign  of  the  Son  of  man  be  seen  in  heaven,  and  the  archangel's  trump 
shall  Bcnind.  "  Therefore  take  ye  heed,"  saith  the  Lord,  "  lest  that  day  come  upon  you 
unawares."  (2)  And  its  coming  is  terrible.  St.  Peter's  words  bring  vividly  before  our 
thoughts  the  awful  scene — the  crash  of  falling  worlds,  the  roar  of  the  destroying 
flames,  the  dissolution  of  the  elements  into  chaos,  the  conflagration  which  shall  bum 
up  the  earth  and  all  that  is  therein.  All  the  works  that  are  therein,  the  palaces  of 
kings,  the  fortifications  of  cities,  the  cathedrals  and  churches  built  for  the  worship  of 
God, — all  shall  be  involved  in  that  one  tremendous  ruin.  This  is  the  apostle's  answer 
to  the  scoffers. 

Lessons.  1.  Scoffers  will  scoff;  men  of  science  will  point  to  the  unchanging  laws 
of  nature.  Neither  sarcasms  nor  the  hypotheses  of  scientific  men  can  shake  the  Chris- 
tian from  his  faith.  2.  Therefore  we  must  stir  up  one  another  and  ourselves;  we 
must  keep  the  solemn  words  of  Holy  Scripture  in  our  memories.  3.  God  has  intervened 
in  his  judgments;  he  will  intervene  again.  4.  God  is  long-suffering;  but  there  must 
be  a  limit  even  to  that  long-suffering  patience.  The  day  of  judgment  must  come ; 
therefore  repent  while  there  is  time. 

Vers.  11 — 18. — Exhortations.  L  The  dtptt  or  preparation.  1.  Christians  shoula 
looTcfor  the  city  that  hath  foundations.  The  cities  of  this  world  have  no  sure  founda- 
tion, for  the  earth  on  which  they  are  built  must  pass  away ;  it  has  within  itself  the 
element  which  Is  to  cause  its  dissolution;  the  germs  of  that  dissolution  are  working 
even  now.  Then  wise  men  must  not  lay  up  for  themselves  treasures  upon  earth ;  they 
must  not  live  as  If  this  changeful,  dying  world  was  to  be  their  home  for  ever;  they 
must  set  their  affections  on  things  above;  they  must  remember  that  Christian  men 


OH.m.  1— 18.]    THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PETEK.  76 


are  citizens  of  the  heavenly  country,  fellow-citizeils  with  the  Baints.  Therefore  they 
must  adopt  the  modes  of  life  which  are  characteristic  of  that  heavenly  country;  their 
conduct  as  they  move  about  among  men  must  be  holy  in  all  the  relations  of  life ;  they 
must  live  in  the  habitual  pursuit  of  godliness  in  all  its  aspects.  These  things  are  of 
true,  lasting  moment.  The  prizes  of  this  woild,  even  those  which  seem  to  us  the 
greatest  and  most  to  be  desired,  are  but  vanity,  vanity  of  vanities,  compared  with  the 
great  realities  of  the  spiritual  life.  2.  They  must  live  in  (he  expectation  of  the  Lord's 
coming.  They  must  daily  look  for  the  presence  of  the  great  day,  and  by  thus  looking 
for  it,  and  making  ready  for  it,  they  must  (St.  Peter  says,  in  the  condescending  lan- 
<;uage  which  Holy  Scripture  sometimes  uses)  hasten  its  coming.  For  that  day  cometlr, 
not  till  the  chosen  of  God  are  safe.  "  Haste  thee,  escape  thither,"  said  the  destroying 
angel  to  Lot;  "for  I  cannot  do  anything  till  thou  be  come  thither."  So  now  "the 
lightnings  of  the  judgment-day  pause  yet  a  while,"  stored  in  the  armoury  of  God 
('  Christian  Tear :  All  Saints'  Day '),  till  God's  elect  are  numbered,  till  they  are  i  eady, 
not  one  of  them  lost,  for  their  eternal  home.  Then  there  is  a  sense  in  which,  ver> 
strange  and  awful  though  it  may  seem.  Christians  may  hasten  the  coming  of  the  day 
of  God.  When  the  bride  hath  made  herself  ready,  when  the  work  of  repentance  is 
wrought  out  in  the  hearts  of  God's  people,  when  they  have  washed  their  robes,  and 
made  them  white  in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb, — then  the  day  of  God  shall  come.  Nuw 
the  long-suffering  of  God  waiteth,  as  it  waited  in  the  days  of  Noah.  It  is  a  holy  and 
a  blessed  truth — he  waits  for  us  in  his  tender  mercy ;  he  is  long-suffering,  not  willing 
that  any  should  perish ;  his  wrath  does  not  strike  at  once  the  sinuer  in  his  sin.  H; 
is  waiting  now,  giving  us  time ;  but  that  gracious  waiting  cannot  be  protracted  for 
ever;  the  day  of  the  Lord  will  come.  It  is  our  duty  to  do  what  lieth  in  us  to  hasten 
its  coming,  by  the  preparation  of  our  own  hearts,  by  stirring  up  others  to  repentance, 
and  by  our  prayers.  "Thy  kingdom  come,"  is  our  daily  prayer,  the  prayer  which  the 
Lord  himself  puts  Into  our  mouths.  "  The  kingdom  of  God  "  has  more  senses  than  one 
ia  Holy  Scripture;  but  certainly  one  thing  to  which  the  Lord  directs  our  prayers  in 
those  words  is  the  coming  of  the  day  of  God,  when  the  kingdoms  of  this  world  shall 
become  the  kingdoms  of  onr  Lord  and  of  his  Christ;  and  he  shall  reign  for  ever  and 
ever.  This  is  to  be  our  daily  prayer;  if  we  use  it  in  thoughtful  faith,  it  will  fix  our 
hearts  upon  our  eternal  home.  The  Church  on  earth  prays,  "  Thy  kingdom  come ; " 
in  Paradise  the  souls  under  the  altar  cry  with  a  loud  voice, "  How  long,  O  Lord,  holy 
and  true  ?  "  (Rev.  vi.  9, 10).  He  will  hear  the  prayer  that  goeth  up  to  him  day  and 
night;  he  will  avenge  his  own  elect ;  the  great  day  must  come.  3.  'Hiat  day  will  be 
a  day  of  terrors.  Because  of  its  presence  the  visible  heavens  will  be  on  fire ;  they  shall 
be  dissolved.  The  earth  and  the  heaven,  in  the  vision  of  judgment  that  was  revealed 
to  St.  John,  fled  away  from  the  face  of  him  who  sat  on  the  great  white  throne,  and 
there  was  found  no  place  for  them.  St.  Peter,  too,  saw  the  awful  scene  presented  to 
the  eye  of  his  mind — he  uses  the  prophetic  present— the  elements  are  melting,  wasting 
away,  with  fervent  heat.  Those  startling  words  suggest  thoughts  of  exceeding  awe 
and  terror :  "  Take  ye  heed ;  watch  and  pray."  4.  But  there  will  be  a  new  home  for 
the  righteous.  St.  John  heard  the  voice  of  him  that  sat  on  the  throne  saying, "  Behold, 
I  make  all  things  new."  God  had  promised  this  long  ago  by  the  mouth  of  his  prophet 
Isaiah.  He  will  surely  fulfil  his  word.  He  will  not  leave  his  people  desolate  and 
homeless.  He  provided  a  city  of  refuge  for  Lot,  when  his  old  abode  was  destroyed 
by  the  fire  of  the  wrath  of  God.  So,  out  of  the  appalling  conflagration  of  the  dreadful 
day  there  will  arise  a  new  and  blessed  home  for  his  elect.  We  look  for  new  heavens 
and  a  new  earth ;  and  they  shall  abide  for  ever.  As  once  the  promise  came  to  Noah 
that  there  should  not  be  any  more  a  flood  to  destroy  the  earth,  so  God  hath  promised 
that  "  the  new  heavens  and  the  new  earth,  which  I  will  make,  shall  remain  before 
me,  saith  the  Lord."  Heaven  and  earth  shall  then  be  very  near,  the  one  to  the  other; 
for  the  holy  city,  new  Jerusalem,  shall  come  down  from  God  out  of  heaven ;  and  the 
tabtrnacle  of  God  shall  be  with  men,  and  he  will  dwell  with  them.  The  common- 
wealth that  is  in  heaven  shall  be  established  (so  Holy  Scripture  seems  to  teach  us) 
upon  the  new  earth.  It  shall  come  down  from  heaven,  having  the  glory  of  God ;  the 
throne  of  God  and  of  the  Lamb  shall  be  in  it;  there  his  servants  shall  serve  him. 
Heaven  will  come  down  to  earth ;  and  so  the  new  earth  will  become  a  part  of  heaven, 
ver^  closely  joined  with  beaveit.    God  will  dwell  th^re  with  men,  and  tbe^r  shall  see 


76  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PETEB,    [ch.  in.  1—18. 

him  face  to  face,  and  live  in  that  new  earth  the  life  of  heaven ;  for  it  is  the  unveiled 
presence  of  God  which  makes  heaven  what  it  is,  the  abode  of  joy,  and  love,  and 
holiness,  and  entranced  contemplation  of  the  Divine  beauty.  Into  that  city  enteretb 
nothing  that  defileth ;  righteousness  dwelleth  there.  The  earth  that  now  is  hath  been 
defiled  with  many  sins;  it  has  been  stained  with  blood,  devastated  by  war  and  cruelty, 
polluted  with  sensuality  and  uncleanness.  But  the  new  earth  shall  be  all  holy.  The 
refining  fires  of  judgment  will  work  a  complete  and  everlasting  change.  The  Deluge 
cleansed  the  old  world,  but  only  for  a  time;  sin  soon  began  to  reassert  itself.  The 
fires  of  the  great  day  will  purely  purge  away  all  the  dross,  and  leave  only  the  refined 
gold.  Righteousness  shall  dwell  for  ever  in  that  new  earth.  The  people  of  the  holy 
city  shall  be  all  righteous ;  for  they  shall  abide  in  the  presence  of  him  who  is  the  Sun 
of  Righteousness,  and  shall  be  made  like  unto  him,  for  they  shall  see  him  as  he  is. 
5.  The  need  of  eai-nest  diligence.  St.  Peter  has  been  warning  us  of  the  solemn  future 
which  lies  before  us — the  most  tremendous  judgment,  the  destruction  of  the  present 
order  of  things  in  the  fires  of  the  last  day,  the  new  heavens  and  the  new  earth  which 
will  be  the  eternal  home  of  the'  blessed.  These  thoughts,  he  says,  enforce  upon  us  the 
lecessity  of  diligence  in  the  religious  life.  Men  who  really  believe  that  after  death 
Cometh  the  judgment  cannot  live  listlessly  and  idly.  Many  professing  Christians, 
alasl  live  careless  lives;  but  that  carelessness  evinces  a  practical  unbelief.  The 
momentous  issues  of  the  great  day  must  stir  the  believer  to  earnest  effort.  St.  Petei 
bad  urged  the  necessity  of  diligence  in  the  first  chapter;  he  urges  it  again  in  the  last. 
Then  he  appealed  to  the  grace  of  God,  his  gifts,  his  promises;  the  love  of  God,  ttie 
blessed  hope  set  before  us,  ought  to  arouse  us  to  love  and  zeal.  Now  he  appeals  to  the 
awful  future,  the  judgment  that  is  coming.  Carelessness  in  the  prospect  of  the  judg- 
ment ie  nothing  short  of  madness.  Those  whose  faith  is  real  must  be  diligent.  "  That 
day  Cometh  as  a  thief:"  how  will  it  find  us?  What  will  be  the  state  of  those  who  are 
surprised  in  sin  ?  Our  hearts  sicken  in  shuddering  dread  at  the  fearful  thought.  Then 
let  us  give  diligence  to  make  our  calling  and  election  sure.  God's  elect  must  be  con- 
formed to  the  image  of  his  Son.  His  Son,  the  holy  Lamb  of  God,  was  without  blemish 
and  without  spot ;  so  must  his  servants  be.  They  must  wash  their  robes,  and  make 
them  white  in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb.  "  The  blosd  of  Jesus  Christ  cleanseth  from  all 
sin ; "  but  it  cleanseth  only  those  who  "  walk  in  the  light."  Therefore  let  us  be  diligent 
to  walk  always  in  the  consciousness  of  God's  presence,  in  the  light  that  streams  from 
the  cross.  That  light  will  show  each  spot  and  blemish  that  lests  upon  the  soul;  it 
wUl  bring  us  to  repentance  and  confession;  and  then  God  "is  faithful  and  just  to 
forgive  us  our  sins,  and  to  cleanse  us  from  all  unrighteousness."  Those  who  "  follow  the 
Lamb  whithersoever  he  goeth"  are  without  fault  before  the  throne  of  God  (Rev.  xiv.S), 
for  every  fault  has  been  washed  away  in  the  precious  blood.  Their  sins  once  were  like 
ciimson,  but  now  they  are  whiter  than  snow;  they  are  clothed  with  the  wedding 
garment,  the  white  robe  of  righteousness;  therefore  they  are  found  in  peace.  Christ 
is  their  Peace ;  he  hath  made  peace  through  the  blood  of  his  cross.  Those  who  abide 
in  Christ  have  peace  with  God  now,  in  the  hour  of  death,  and  in  the  day  of  judgment. 
Such  men  account  that  the  long-suffering  of  our  Lord  is  salvation.  They  know  that 
life  is  a  sacred  trast,  that  the  time  of  probation  is  precious ;  and  they  wiU.  strive  by 
God's  gracious  help  to  work  out  their  own  salvation  with  fear  and  trembling,  knowing 
that  the  night  cometh,  in  which  no  man  can  work. 

II.  The  duty  of  listening  to  the  warnings  op  Holt  ScBiPTnRB.  1.  St.  Paui 
liad  warned  them.  St.  Paul  had,  by  himself  or  by  his  companions,  founded  most  of  the 
Churches  of  Asia  Minor.  He  had  written  Epistles  to  the  Galatians,  Colossians,  and 
Ephesians,  the  last  being  probably  a  circular  letter  intended  to  be  read  in  several 
Churches.  At  the  date  of  St.  Peter's  Second  Epistle  many  of  St.  Paul's  writings  must 
have  become  the  common  property  of  the  whole  Church,  and  thus  the  Christians  of 
Asia  Minor  probably  knew  and  read  some  of  the  Epistles  which  had  been  addressed  to 
European  Churches.  St.  Peter  calls  St.  Paul  his  beloved  brother ;  he  recognizes  the 
wisdom  which  had  been  given  unto  him.  The  two  holy  apostles  had  once  differed 
from  one  another;  now  they  were  united  in  one  faith  and  one  love.  St.  Peter  had 
overcome  his  old  impetuosity,  his  old  desire  to  be  first ;  he  had  learned  that  precious 
grace  of  humility,  which  in  his  First  Epistle  he  so  earnestly  inculcates.  He  does  not 
remember  that  he  had  once  been  reproved  by  St.  Paul ;  he  thinks  only  of  St.  Paul's 


OH.  m.  1—18.]    THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  PETER.  77 

holiness  and  inspired  wisdom;  he  is  wholly  above  petty  jealousies  and  resentment* 
Christians  ought  never  to  take  offence,  especially  at  well-intentioned  rebukes;  they 
ought  to  be  thaakful  for  them.  Christians  ought  to  rejoice  at  the  graces  vouchsafed 
to  others — at  their  zeal,  energy,  love,  at  the  success  of  their  religious  efforts.  Envy; 
especially  among  Christians,  is  a  hateful  vice,  a  deadly  sin.  St.  Peter,  the  first  of  the 
apostles,  appeals  to  St.  Paul,  who  was  called  last  of  all ;  he  is  an  example  of  Christian 
humility.  The  two  holy  apostles  taught  the  same  great  truths.  St.  Paul  and  St. 
Peter  both  press  earnestly  upon  us  the  great  danger  of  spiritual  sloth;  both  warn  us 
that  the  day  of  the  Lord  cometh  suddenly,  like  a  thief;  both  urge  us  to  be  watchful. 
Let  us  listen  to  those  two  holy  men  as  they  echo  the  solemn  teaching  of  the  great 
Master.  2.  There  are  difficulties  in  St.  Paul's  writings.  Men  misrepresented  the 
great  apostle  even  from  the  beginning;  they  represented  him,  as  teaching,  "Let  us  do 
evU,  that  good  may  come"  (Eom.  iii.  8).  They  distorted  his  doctrine  of  justification, 
and  perverted  it  into  antinomianism ;  though  he  himself  had  taught  that  the  faith  by 
which  we  are  saved  is  "faith  which  worketh  by  love,"  and  that  faith  which  could 
remove  mountains  is  nothing  if  it  be  alone,  without  charity.  The  false  teachers, 
against  whom  St.  Peter  has  been  warning  his  readers,  were  probably  among  these 
perverters  of  the  apostle's  meaning.  It  is  no  wonder:  "The  letter  killeth,  but  the 
Spirit  giveth  life."  There  will  always  be  in  the  visible  Church  men  unlearned  and 
unstable,  untaught  by  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God  who  alone  can  guide  us  to  the  truth, 
and  therefore  without  steadfastness,  carried  away  with  every  blast  of  vain  doctrine. 
Such  men  wrest  to  their  own  destruction,  not  only  the  "  things  hard  to  be  understood  " 
in  St.  Paul's  Epistles,  but  Holy  Scripture  generally.  For  it  is  not  the  written  Word 
that  in  the  fullest  sense  saves  the  soul,  but  the  Word  of  life,  the  Word  that  is  living 
and  powerful,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  himself  manifested  to  the  believer.  We  may  find 
him  in  the  thoughtful,  devout  study  of  God's  holy  Word ;  but  to  find  Christ,  to  win 
Christ,  we  must  count  all  else  as  loss ;  we  must  forsake  selfish  aims,  self-exaltation, 
self-indulgence,  and  follow  in  humility  and  earnest  prayer  the  leading  of  the  blessed 
Spirit.  The  written  Word  is  a  most  precious  gift ;  but  no  outward  privilege  can  save 
us.  Nay,  awful  as  it  seems,  men  may  wrest  it,  and  do  wrest  it,  to  their  own  destruc- 
tion. Beceive  it  in  simplicity  and  faith,  and  it  will  save  the  soul.  God  reveals  its 
deep  holy  meaning  to  babes  in  Christ.  But  if  men  with  perverse  ingenuity  will  use 
it  as  the  weapon  of  party  strife,  and  twist  its  sacred  words  to  suit  thalr  selfish  purposes, 
then  it  may — ^alas  I  that  it  should  be  so— increase  their  condemnation.  "  The  letter 
killeth."  Gorruptio  optimi  pessima.  3.  There  is  need  of  thoughtful  watchfulness.  False 
teachers  distort  the  meaning  of  Holy  Scripture ;  they  wander  far  from  the  truth ;  they 
are  self-willed,  lawless,  disobedient  to  the  Law  of  God  written  in  the  heart,  revealed 
in  his  Word.  Therefore  Christians  must  be  on  their  guard ;  they  must  "  not  believe 
every  spirit,  but  try  the  spirits,  whether  they  be  of  God :  because  many  false  prophets 
are  gone  out  into  the  world."  This  conflict  of  opinions  sometimes  produces  painful 
doubts  and  uncertainties ;  it  is  one  of  the  trials  of  the  Christian  life.  4.  And  of  growth 
in  grace.  God  will  reveal  the  truth  to  the  babes  in  Christ.  He  wiU  not  leave  the 
humble,  faithful  soul  in  darkness  and  perplexity.  Only  let  a  man  earnestly  pray  for 
the  grace  of  God ;  only  let  him  strive  daily  to  draw  nearer  to  Christ,  and  to  gain  that 
inner  knowledge  of  Christ  Jesus  the  Lord,  in  comparison  with  which  all  things  else  are 
dross ; — and  the  light  of  the  presence  of  Christ  will  surely  dawn  upon  him,  and  in  that 
light  he  will  find  a  Guide  to  bring  him  to  eternal  life.  For  his  is  the  glory  now  and 
to  the  day  of  eternity,  and  he  is  "able  to  save  to  the  uttermost  all  who  come  to  God 
by  him.** 

Lessons,  1.  "  The  fashion  of  this  world  passeth  away."  What  country  shall  we 
belong  to? — ^this  dying  world,  or  the  eternal  city?  2.  The  great  day  is  at  hand;  we 
must  look  forward  to  it.  We  must  prepare  the  way  of  the  Lord ;  we  must  pray, "  Thy 
kingdom  come."  3.  In  the  new  earth  righteousness  dwelleth.  Let  us  follow  after 
righteousness;  let  us  be  diligent,  "that  we  may  be  found  in  peace,  blameless  in  his 
sight."  4.  Let  us  study  the  Scriptures  in  faitii  and  prayer,  that  we  may  grow  in 
grace. 


78  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  GENEBAL  OF   PETEB.    [oh.  m.  1—18. 


HOMILIES  BY  VAEI0U8  AUTHOBS. 

Ver.  4. — "  The  promise  of  hit  coming."  The  principle  which  actuated  these  aooffers, 
leading  them  to  irreligion  and  self-indulgence  upon  the  ground  that  the  promises  and 
threats  professing  to  emanate  from  Divine  authority  were  unfulfilled,  is  the  same 
principle  which  was  embodied  in  the  «ncient  proverb,  "  Because  sentence  against  an 
evil  work  is  not  executed  speedily,  therefore  the  heart  of  the  sons  of  men  is  fully  set 
in  them  to  do  evil."  It  must  be  remembered  that  what  is  a  promise  to  the  loyal 
subject  is  a  threat  to  the  rebel.  The  second  coming  of  Christ  will  be  for  the  salvation 
of  the  righteous,  but  for  the  confusion  of  the  unpenitent  offender. 

L  Thb  HEAXiMa  OF  THE  FBOMisE.  1.  This  is  definite  enough  in  itself,  and  has  been 
and  is  firmly  held  by  the  whole  Church.  A  sincere  belief  in  the  first  advent  of  the 
Sou  of  God  leads  to  a  belief  in  his  second  advent,  at  plainly  foretold  both  by  our  Lord 
and  by  his  apostles.  2.  But,  though  definite  in  itself,  the  promise  of  Christ's  second 
coming  is  by  no  means  definite  in  circumstances  or  in  time.  This  is  apparent  from 
the  diversity  of  view  prevailing  upon  these  points  in  many  periods  of  the  Church's 
history.  How  and  when  Christ  shall  come  are  matters  of  secondary  interest  as  compared 
with  the  fact  that  he  shall  come. 

II.  The  Gives  of  tee  fbomisb.  The  value  of  any  promise  depends  upon  the 
character  of  him  by  whom  it  is  given,  and  not  upon  his  character  only,  but  also  upon  his 
ability  and  resources.  Now,  the  promise  in  question  has  been  given  by  a  Promiser 
who  is  in  the  highest  degree  faithful  and  powerful,  even  by  him  who  is  eternal  and 
unfailing  Truth.  The  voice  has  been  that  of  the  Son,  of  the  Inspired  prophets  and 
apostles ;  but  the  counsel  declared  has  been  the  counsel  of  the  all-wise  God. 

III.  The  delat  in  the  fulfilmbst  of  the  pbomisb.  No  doubt  there  has  been 
a  constant  coming  of  the  Lord  Christ  by  his  Spirit,  both  in  judgment  and  rebuke,  and 
also  in  mercy  and  deliverance.  Yet  the  coming  is  still  in  the  future.  If  the  primitive 
Christians  were  in  some  instances  impatient  because  their  glowing  hopes  were  not  ful- 
filled, what  wonder  if^  now  and  again — as  for  example  in  times  of  depression  and  in 
times  of  persecution — the  hearts  of  the  faithful  have  called  for  the  appearance  of  the 
Bedeemer,  in  fervent  prayer,  in  ardent  song]  Can  we  be  surprised  if  it  has  sometimes 
been  lost  sight  of,  that  "  witii  God  one  day  is  as  a  thousand  years,  and  a  thousand  years 
as  one  day  "  ? 

rV.  The  abuse  of  this  delay  bt  mockebs  and  sooffebs.  From  the  fiiBt  such 
persons  have  asked, "  Where  is  the  promise  ?  "  Unbelief  has  taken  the  form  of  ridicule. 
And,  even  worse,  the  fear  of  judgment  has  been  to  some  extent  cast  off.  Like  the 
servants  who,  finding  that  their  lord  delayed  his  coming,  began  to  eat,  drink,  and  be 
drunken,  and  to  abuse  their  fellow-servants,  so  the  scoffers  have  flung  aside  every 
restraint,  have  spurned  every  check,  and  have  abandoned  themselves  to  the  ijidulgence 
of  their  carnal  lusts. 

V.  The  powbb  and  ksfibation  of  the  promise.  That  which  to  one  is  the  occasion 
of  scoffing  is  to  another  the  inducement  to  every  Christian  virtue.  Faith  rests  upon 
the  first  ^vent;  Hope  stretches  forth  her  hands  towards  the  second  advent.  There 
may  be  mentioned  among  the  fruits  of  this  blessed  promise :  1.  Patient  endurance  of 
privations  and  sufferings  which  are  known  to  be  temporary.  2.  Faithful  fulfilment 
of  the  appointed  stewardship,  in  preparation  for  the  approaching  account.  3.  Quiet 
disregard  of  all  the  scoffs  and  mockeries  of  unbeliever8.--J.  B.  T. 

Ver.  8. — Th«  Eternal's  indejjendence  of  time.  In  all  likelihood  this  sublime  state- 
ment was  suggested  by  the  language  of  the  ninetieth  psalm,  "  A  thousand  years  in  thy 
sight  are  as  yesterday  when  it  is  past."  It  is  a  glorious  conception  of  the  Divine 
greatness  which  is  in  this  passage  brought  before  our  minds ;  whilst  at  the  same  time 
it  hat  a  practical  bearing  of  a  most  valuable  character  upon  the  conduct  of  human 
life. 

L  The  gbeat  tbdth  assebtbd.  Time  is  for  man,  not  for  God.  We  human  beings 
have  but  a  few  years  allotted  to  us  as  the  period  of  earthly  work ;  within  the  scant 
limits  of  those  years  we  must  do  what  wtf  have  power  to  do,  or  we  must  leave  it  for 
ever  uadene.    This  is  not  so  with  the  Eternal.     He  hat  the  vast  range  of  all  human 


OH.  m.  1—18.]    THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PETER.  W 

history  In  which  to  carry  ont  his  designs.    The  dispensations  follow  one  anothw  with 
no  haste.    The  ages  are  the  provioce  within  which  Q-od  works. 

II.  The  application  of  this  tbuth  to  impenitent  sinners.  It  cannot  ho  other- 
wise than  that  those  who  defy  God's  authority  should  be  affected  by  the  deliberation 
with  which  the  Almighty  Ruler  conducts  his  government.  1.  Judgment  deferred  is 
made  an  excuse  for  perseverance  in  sin.  If  the  Divine  King  were  under  the  same 
restrictions  as  to  time  by  which  an  earthly  ruler  is  governed,  the  case  would  be  other- 
wise. As  it  is,  the  withholding  of  retribution  is  misconceived.  Yet  judgment  deferred 
isjin  truth,  not  judgment  reversed,  but  judgment  delayed.  2.  If  the  matter  be  regarded 
from  the  Divine  side,  another  lesson  comes  to  light.  Judgment  delayed  is  an  oppor- 
tunity for  repentance.  Long-suffering  on  God's  part  has  this  merciful  significance. 
Time  may  teach  when  other  instructors  are  disregarded ;  forbearance  may  be  fruitful 
even  when  threatening  is  barren. 

III.  The  application  op  this  truth  to  the  tried  aot»  tempted  people  ot"  Gob. 
Sometimes  deliverance  deferred  is  made  a  ground  for  fear  that  deliverance  may  never 
come.  But  the  Christian  is  appointed  to  learn  that  deliverance  deferred  is  only  deliver- 
ance delayed.  Tlie  day  of  disappointment,  of  persecution,  of  seeming  desertion,  may 
appear  to  the  af9ict:ed  like  a  year ;  the  year  may  appear  to  be  an  age.  But  if  the 
matter  be  regarded  from  the  Divine  side — as  our  text  invites  us  to  regard  it — what 
a  change  comes  over  it  I  The  distinction  between  a  longer  and  a  shorter  period  now 
almost  vanishes.  **  What  of  the  night  ?  The  morning  cometh  ;  and  also  the  nighi." 
The  rescue  is  near;  the  daybreak  has  already  begun.  Interposition  is  to  be  measured, 
not  by  years  or  by  centuries,  but  by  Divine  purposes  and  promises. 

Application.  These  considerations  should  check  the  arrogance  of  scoffers  and 
nnbelievers ;  and  should  sustain  the  faith,  the  courage,  and  the  hope  of  the  Ohurch 
Biilitant.-J.  R.  T. 

Ver.  13. — Tht  abode  of  righteotimets.  If  the  catastrophe  which  the  apostle  describes 
in  the  tenth,  eleventh,  and  twelfth  verses  stood  alone,  it  might  well  fill  the  mind  of  the 
believing  reader  with  foreboding  and  with  awe,  and  paralyze  all  his  energies.  But  the 
inspired  writer  looks  beyond  the  scenes  of  dissolution  and  destruction  to  the  fur  and 
beautiful  visions  which  become  clear  to  the  eye  of  faith  when  ealightened  witk  a 
heavenly  ray. 

I.  The  bttbstancb  of  the  Christian's  bxeeotations.  Science  sometimes  foretells 
with  some  definiteness  the  future  of  the  material  universe,  that  is,  so  far  as  dissolution 
is  concerned.  According  to  a  universal  law  of  rhythm — so  we  are  told — this  earth 
shall  be  dissipated  into  atoms.  But  little  is  said  upon  scientific  grounds  of  any  process 
of  reconstruction.  Now,  it  is  admitted  that  Scripture  goes  into  no  details  with  regard 
to  the  future.  But,  at  the  same  time,  whilst  admitting  the  perishableness  of  all  created 
things,  revelation  passes  beyond  the  epoch  of  destruction,  and  assures  us  that  what 
seems  the  end  is  not  the  end  of  all  things.  The  old  will  certainly  decay,  but  only  to 
give  place  to  the  new.  How  this  reconstitution  is  to  be  effected,  we  know  not ;  yet 
that  it  shall  be  brought  to  pass  is  assured  in  the  promise  of  "  new  heavens  and  a  new 
earth." 

II.  The  moral  character  of  the  Christian's  expectation.  If  there  is  vagueness 
as  to  what  is  material,  nothing  could  be  more  explicit  than  so  much  of  the  revelation 
as  relates  to  the  spiritual.  It  matters  very  little  what  are  the  visible  and  tangible 
accompaniments  of  a  future  state,  if  only  its  ethical  character  be  satisfactorily  deter- 
mined. And  this  is  done  in  the  language,  "wherein  dwelleth  righteousness."  In 
such  a  revelation  as  this  the  judgment  and  conscience  can  peacefully  rest.  The 
contrast  between  the  prevalence  of  imrighteousness  on  this  earth,  and  the  reign  of 
righteousness  in  the  reconstructed  world,  is  striking  in  itself,  and  it  furnishes  a  true 
satisfaction  to  the  mind  which  by  reason  alone  cannot  confidently  anticipate  a  change 
so  blessed. 

III.  The  Divnra  basis  of  the  Christian's  expectation.  This  Is  no  surmise  of 
sngacity ;  it  is  no  poetic  dream.  Our  anticipation  is  "  according  to  God's  promise." 
Here  is  the  all-sufficient  justification.  Building  upon  the  assurances  of  him  wh* 
cannot  lie,  we  secure  a  firm  foundation  for  our  faith  and  hope.  We  know  that  what 
he  has  promised  he  is  able  to  perform.    In  the  region  in  question  all  created  mighl 


80  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  GENESAt  Of  PETES.    [cH.m.l-l8. 

Is  powerless ;  if  the  result  is  to  be  brought  to  pass,  it  must  be  by  the  exercise  of 
omnipotence  itself. 

IV.  The  pkepaeation  fob  the  folfilmekt  of  the  Chbistian's  bxpbctatioh.  If 
we  "look  for"  such  a  glorious  future  as  these  words  suggest,  our  attitude  must  be  other 
than  mere  hope.  We  shall  cherish  fortitude  amidst  ills  that  must  soon  pass  away ;  we 
shall  cultivate  that  habit  of  righteousness  which  shall  be  congenial  to  the  state  which 
we  anticipate ;  and  we  shall  seek  that  harmony  with  the  Divine  will  that  shall  make 
us  truly  and  for  ever  at  home  in  every  world  of  God. — J.  R.  T. 

Ver.  14. — Diligence.  Where  our  versions  say,  "  Be  diligent !  "  or  "  Give  diligence  I " 
the  original  says,  "  Hasten  1 "  Tet  our  word,  implying  choice,  value,  love,  seems  appro- 
priate as  a  rendering  of  the  Greek.  Let  the  traveller  speed  him  with  diligence  on 
hig  journey ;  let  the  ploughman  hasten  to  furrow  all  the  acres  of  his  field  ;  let  the 
sailor  diligently  take  advantage  of  every  favourable  wind,  and  beat  to  windward 
when  need  be,  that  he  may  reach  the  haven  where  he  fain  would  be.  And  let  the 
Christian,  in  like  manner,  be  diligent  in  his  Christian  calling,  ministry,  and  life. 

L  The  sphere  of  Chbibtian  diligbnob.  1.  Properly  considered,  this  includes  the 
whole  life.  There  is  no  department  of  om:  lawful  activity  where  negligence,  remissness, 
indolence,  are  allowable.  The  boy  in  his  school-work,  the  woman  in  her  household,  the 
man  in  his  profession, — all  are  called  to  diligence.  2.  Diligence  is  especially  important 
in  the  achievement  of  Christian  character.  E.g.  in  the  study  of  God's  Word,  in  medita- 
tion upon  Christ's  gospel,  in  imitating  Christ's  example,  in  the  use  of  all  the  means  of 
grace.  It  is  thus  that  we  hope  to  realize  the  noble  aim  before  us,  to  reach  the  stature 
of  the  perfect  man  in  Christ.  Such  an  aim  can  only  be  achieved  by  assiduity  and  per- 
severance. 3.  Diligence  should  distinguish  the  efforts  put  forth  to  promote  the  welfare 
of  our  fellow-men.  In  all  walks  of  Christian  philanthropy  and  usefulness  there  is  » 
loud  call  for  something  better  than  a  languid  interest  or  a  fitful  zeal. 

II.  The  methods  of  Christian  diligence.  Good  things  are  worth  seeking,  and 
for  the  most  part  are  not  to  be  had  without  seeking.  The  following  may  be  acted  upon 
as  rules  justified  by  practical  experience.  1.  Study  the  biographies  of  zealous,  success- 
ful, useful  servants  of  God.  2.  Ponder  the  searching  and  stirring  maxims  of  the  wise- 
especially  those  recorded  in  the  Book  of  Proverbs.  3.  Form  seriously  and  deliberately, 
good  resolutions  for  the  conduct  of  life.  4.  Pray,  especially  against  the  besetting  sin 
(if  such  it  be)  of  sloth.  5.  And  with  prayer  conjoin  watchfulness,  lest  constantly 
recurring  temptation  to  indolence  prevail. 

m.  The  motives  to  Chbistian  diliqenob.  1.  Foremost  among  these  must  be 
placed  the  influence  of  Christ's  love.  What  can  be  a  stronger  impulse  in  the  mind  of  a 
true  friend  of  Jesus  than  a  clear  understanding  of  the  Saviour's  sacrifice,  and  a  warm 
response  of  affection  and  gratitude  evoked  by  the  love,  pity,  and  self-denial  of 
Immanuel?  How  can  a  friend  of  Jesus  stand  beneath  his  Master's  cross,  listen  to  his 
Master's  dying  groan,  and  then  be  indifferent  and  remiss  in  doing  that  Master's  will? 
2.  The  wish  to  resemble  Christ  will  lead  to  diligence  in  the  service  of  God.  When  we 
remember  those  words  which  revealed  our  Saviour's  consecration,  "  I  must  work  the 
works  of  him  that  sent  me ; "  "  How  am  I  straitened  until  it  [the  baptism]  be  accom- 
plished ?  "  when  we  remember  that  it  is  recorded  of  him  that  he  "had  no  leisure  so  much 
as  to  eat;" — how  can  we  remain  or  become  supine  in  the  fulfilment  of  our  life-mission? 

"  Our  Master  all  the  work  hath  done 
He  asks  of  us  to-day  ; 
Sharing  hia  service,  every  one 
Share  too  his  Sonship  may." 

8.  Be  diligent  in  preparation  for  Christ's  return.  He  will  require  an  account  frfim  every 
one  of  his  servants — the  trustees  of  his  precious  gifts.  Then  shall  the  diligent,  the 
faithful,  be  rewarded,  and  have  praise  of  God,  "  Whatsoever  thy  hand  findeth  to  do, 
do  it  with  thy  might."— J.  E.  T. 

Ver.  15. — Divine  long-suffering.  When  the  religion  of  Christ  was  first  promulgated, 
there  was  on  the  part  of  many  who  embraced  it  an  impatience  with  the  state  of  things 
In  the  world,  and  an  expectation  of  the  end  of  the  age  and  of  the  speedy  return  of  the 


«H.m.  1— 18.]    THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  PETER.  81 

Saviour,  for  tlie  deliverance  of  his  people  and  the  destruction  of  his  foes.  Both  Paul 
and  Peter  found  it  necessary  to  restrain  the  impatience  and  to  check  the  enthusiastic 
anticipations  of  their  converts,  and  to  impress  upon  them  the  marvellous  forbearancf 
of  God.  They  aimed  at  showing  that  it  was  benevolence  which  chiefly  prompted  the 
manifestation  of  Bivine  long-suffering. 

L  Thb  natukb  op  Divine  lONo-sirFFEKiNO.  We  know  something  of  human 
patience  and  forbearance,  and  we  have  all  been  again  and  again  indebted  to  these 
qualities  for  our  opportunities  of  happiness  and  usefulness.  But  Divine  long-suffering 
transcends  all  that  has  been  displayed  by  men.  1.  Long-suffering  is  different  from 
mere  goodness  and  bounty,  i.e.  the  disposition  to  bestow  benefits  upon  the  needy  and 
dependent.  2.  And  fi-om  pity  or  compassion,  which  is  a  sentiment  of  commiseration 
towards  the  wretched  and  helpless.  3.  And  at  the  same  time  it  is,  on  the  other  hand, 
different  from  indifference  to  the  evil  conduct  which  is  observed  in  men.  4.  It  is  a 
kind  of  mercy.  It  involves  a  holy  Superior  and  an  offending  subject.  It  is  an  emotion 
of  the  heart  which  prompts  to  the  restraint  of  indignation ;  a  principle  of  action  which 
averts  and  withholds  wrath  and  penalty,  although  these  be  abundantly  deserved.  God, 
in  the  exercise  of  long-suffering,  bears  with  the  sinners  whom  he  might  justly  doom, 
gives  further  opportunity  for  repentance,  and  waits  for  its  signs. 

II.  The  occasion  fob  Divinb  LONO-suFFERiNa.  1.  The  sins  of  mankind  hav« 
given  occasion  for  the  exercise  of  this  grace  upon  the  vastest  scale.  Scripture  his- 
tory abounds  with  instances  of  God's  forbearance  ;  e.g.  in  the  time  of  Noah  ;  when 
Israel  rebelled  in  the  wilderness;  and  when  Israel  afterwards  so  largely  apostatized, 
etc.  So  has  it  been  in  the  history  of  every  nation,  and  in  the  history  of  the  human 
race.  2.  The  sins  of  individual  unbelievers  and  transgressors  call  for  the  forbearance 
of  a  gracious  God.  The  young  who  live  viciously  and  irreligiously,  those  in  after- 
life who  forget  God  and  give  themselves  to  the  pursuit  of  worldly  aims,  continue 
to  live  and  to  enjoy  privileges  only  through  the  forbearance  of  Heaven.  3.  The 
unfaithfulness  of  Christians  is  only  tolerated  by  a  long-suffering  Lord.  How  other- 
wise could  the  frailties  and  infirmities  which  disfigure  the  religious  life  of  multitudes 
be  endured?  If  our  God  had  not  again  and  again  home  with  our  imperfections,  should 
we, be  still  in  the  possession  of  opportunities  and  advantages  so  many  and  valuable? 

III.  The  manifestations  of  Diatine  long-suffebino.  1.  God  refrains  from  judg- 
ment and  condemnation.  2.  God  addresses  faithful  warnings,  and  summons  to  repent- 
ance— as  the  clouds  gather  befor«  the  thunderstorm  breaks.  Expostulations  are 
reiJeated:  "How  shall  I  give  thee  up?"  3.  Promises  and  invitations  ate  renewed. 
4.  Probation  is  extended,  in  order  that  further  opportunity  may  be  given  for  repentance. 
The  mandate  goes  forth  concerning  the  barren  tree,  "  Let  it  alone  this  year  also  1 " 

IV.  The  GKACI0TT8  intention  op  Divine  long-suffering.  When  the  apostle 
writes,  "is  salvation,"  he  means,  "is  intended  to  work  salvation."  God  does  not 
prolong  our  proving  with  a  view  to  the  increase  of  our  guilt  and  chastisement,  but 
for  a  purpose  exactly  opposed  to  this — in  order,  that  is,  that  hardness  may  be  melted 
down,  that  rebellion  may  cease  and  be  followed  by  loyalty,  that  neglect  and  disregard 
of  religion  may  give  place  to  interest  and  to  prayer,  that  the  sinner  may  repent,  the 
wanderer  return,  the  careless  be  revived.  The  gift  of  Christ  to  man  is  tho  most  glorious 
evidence  of  Divine  long-suffering.  This  is  a  dispensation  of  mercy.  To  forbearance  we 
owe  our  privileges,  and  to  forbearance  we  shall  be  indebted  for  our  final  and  everlasting 
salvation. 

Great,  Indeed,  is  the  guilt  of  those  who  despise  and  abuse  the  long-suffering  of  the 
Lord.  Such  there  have  ever  been.  "  Because  sentence  against  an  evil  work  is  not 
executed  speedily,  therefore  the  heart  of  the  sons  of  men  is  fully  set  in  them  to  do  evil." 
But  it  is  better  that  delay  in  judgment  should  be  used  as  the  opportunity  of  repent- 
ance, rather  than  that  it  should  be  abused  as  an  excuse  and  an  inducement  for 
perseverance  in  sin. — J.  R.  T. 

Ver.  18. — Orotuth.  The  Apostle  Paul  is  recorded  to  have  enjoined  his  converts  to 
"  continue  in  the  grace  of  God."  And  this  is  necessary  to  the  Christian  life,  but  it  it 
not  all  that  is  necessary.  To  abide  is  not  to  be  stationary.  The  Apostle  Peter  here 
instructs  us  that  it  is  required  of  Christians  that  they  not  only  continue  in  grace, 
but  grow  in  grace. 

Q.  ph'kb.  ^ 


82  THE  SECOND  EPTSTLE  GENEEAL  OF  PETER,    [oh.  m.  1—18. 

I.  The  DrvnTE  iaw  of  hpihituai.  okowth.  It  ig  well  that  the  tree  be  plan'^ed  in 
a  rich  and  suitable  soil ;  that  there  be  roum  for  its  roots  to  strike  forth  as  far  as  tb* 
most  spreading  of  its  goodly  boughs ;  that  it  be  by  rivers  of  water,  through  whose 
moisture  it  maybe  green;  that  the  winds  of  heaven  may  freely  ruslle  through  its 
leafage,  and  may  swing  its  lithe  young  branches  to  and  fro.  Bnt  to  what  end  does 
the  tree  possess  these  advantages  ?  Not  that  it  may  remain  a  tender  sai)ling,  not  that 
having  grown  for  a  while  it  may  be  pollarded,  or  its  growth  so  checked  that  it  may 
remain  a  stunted  deformity ;  bnt  rather  that,  through  all  the  rough  yet  kindly  forces 
cf  nature,  the  tree  may  wax  greater  and  stronger  year  by  year  ;  that  its  heart  may  be 
sound,  its  sap  full  flowing  every  spring ;  that  it  may  "  hang  all  its  leafy  banners  out;  " 
that  its  branches  may  give  homes  to  the  birds  of  the  air,  and  shade  to  the  beasts  of 
the  field ;  that  its  outline  may  be  beautiful  to  the  eye,  and  its  fruit  grateful  to  the 
taste.  So  is  it  the  intention  of  God,  and  the  duty  of  the  Christian,  that  there  should 
be  spiritual  growth.  It  is  for  those  who  dwell  in  the  land  of  privilege,  who  enjoy  the 
care  of  the  heavenly  Husbandman,  upon  whom  are  shed  the  soft  influences  of  heaven, 
to  profit  by  this  fostering  culture  and  these  genial  powers,  to  make  constant  and 
unmistakable  progress  in  those  graces  which  are  the  strength  and  beauty  of  the 
Christian  life. 

II.  The    KE8PE0T8    TS    WHICH    GROWTH   IS    TO   TAKK   PLACE.      "  Th*   righteOUS    shall 

Nourish  like  the  palm  tree ;  he  shall  grow  like  the  cedar  in  Lebanon."  "  Israel  shall 
grow  as  the  lilies."  In  such  declarations  the  reference  is  evidently  to  spiritual  progress. 
1.  In  the  grace  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  By  this  expression  we  are  to  understand  the 
grace  of  Christ  as  revealed,  bestowed,  and  experienced.  The  grace  in  us  is  to  be  over 
against,  in  correspondence  with,  the  grace  which  is  in  him.  Christian  character  and 
excellences  are  the  sign  and  the  effect  of  spiritual  participation  in  the  favour  of  our 
Lord.  (1)  Ib  the  number  of  Christian  graces.  These  are  enumerated  in  the  first 
chapter  of  this  Epistle.  Let  every  reader  ask  himself — Am  I  possessed  of  the  graces 
thus  catalogued?  or  am  I  not  painfully  lacking  in  some  one  or  more?  Now,  the 
possession  of  one  does  not  compensate  the  lack  of  another.  There  is  room  for  supplying 
many  deficiencies,  (2)  In  the  strength  of  Christian  graces.  In  degree  every  virtue  is 
capable  of  development;  and  it  is  by  exercise  that  the  desired  increase  is  to  be 
attained.  He  who  gives  play  and  scope  to  his  holy  emotions  shall  find  that  they 
become  purer  and  quicker.  If  righteous  purposes  and  endeavours  have  room  to  act, 
they  will  gain  in  vigour  and  effectiveness.  (3)  In  the  harmony  of  Christian  graces. 
Symmetry  of  character  is  essential  to  moral  perfection,  as  is  physical  symmetry  to  the 
perfection  of  bodily  figure  and  features.  Harmonious  as  well  as  vigorous  development 
of  the  renewed  nature  should  be  the  aim  of  ail  whose  desire  is  to  please  God>  Instances 
abound  in  which  the  possession  of  one  excellence  is  presumed  to  compensate  the  absence 
of  others.  But  to  be  bluntly  honest  and  tmcourteous,  or  to  be  discreet  »nd  untender ; 
to  be  amiable  but  unable  to  resist  evil  influence, — is  spiritual  deformity.  Whilst  perfec- 
tion is  to  be  found  in  God  alone,  each  follower  of  Christ  aspires  to  grow  up  in  all  things 
unto  him  who  is  the  Head.  "  Ye  are  complete  in  him."  The  tree  which  has  been 
hindered  from  growing  on  one  side  fails  in  symmetry ;  it  is  the  same  with  the  disciple 
of  Christ  who  has  evidently  failed  in  learning  some  of  the  Master's  most  essential 
lessons.  2.  In  the  knowledge  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Paul  prayed,  on  behalf  of  the 
Colossians,  that  they  might  increase  in  the  knowledge  of  God,  And  our  Lord  himself 
deemed  this  knowledge  so  important  that  he  inade  it  a  petition  of  his  great  intercessory 
prayer  that  his  disciples  might  "  know  the  only  true  God,  and  Jesus  Christ  whom  he 
had  sent."  Now,  all  human  knowledge  is  susceptible  of  increase ;  and  the  Lord  and 
Savioiu:  in  whom  we  trust  is  a  theme,  an  object  of  knowledge,  so  vast  as  to  be 
Inexhaustible. 

IIL  The  means  bt  which  growth  in  grace  is  aohibveb.  As  the  plant  needs 
soil,  air,  light,  culture,  in  order  that  it  may  grow,  as  the  body  needs  food  and  many 
and  varied  necessaries  in  order  that  the  child  may  develcqa  into  the  man,  so  are  there 
conditions  indispensable  to  spiritual  progress.  There  it  is  for  all  who  desire  to  advance 
in  the  Divine  life,  to  discover  and  to  use.  The  study  of  God's  Word,  the  diligent 
attendance  upon  Church  ordinances,  constancy  in  prayer,  faithfulness  in  work, — ^these 
are  acknowledged  "means  of  grace."  The  reading  of  biographies  of  great,  good,  and 
uiefol  men  may  be  mentioned  as  a  subsidiary  but  valuable  means  to  spiritual  progress. 


CB.m.  1— 18.]    THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  GENEEAL  OF  PETER.  83 

And  at  tbe  same  time,  it  is  important  to  observe  and  to  avoid  and  strive  against 
those- hindrances  to  growth  which  in  great  variety  beset  us  on  eveiy  side,  and  by 
which  veiy  many  have  been  injured,  if  not  ruined. 

IV.  The  extent  and  limit  of  Chbistian  obowth.  With  regard  to  this  world, 
such  progress  is  intended  to  be  lifelong.  If  growth  be  constant,  it  cannot  matter 
to  us  at  what  precise  stage  of  advance  the  earthly  development  comes  to  a  close.  Let 
death  come  when  it  may  to  the  Christian  who  is  making  progress  in  Divine  grace  and 
knowledge,  it  cannot  come  inopportunely. 

"  It  is  not  growing,  like  a  tree, 
In  bulk,  doth  make  man  better  be, 
Or  standing  long  an  oak,  three  hundred  year. 
To  fall  a  log  at  last,  dry,  bald,  and  sere; 
A  lily  of  a  day 
Is  fairer  far  in  May, 
Although  it  fall  and  die  that  night- 
It  was  the  plant  and  flower  of  light. 
In  small  proportions  we  just  beauties  see. 
And  in  short  measures  life  may  perfect  be." 

Beyond  this  life,  who  can  set  a  limit  to  such  growth  aa  is  here  inoulcited?  The  scope 
is  boundless  and  the  opportunity  is  infinite. — J.  R.  T. 

Vers.  1 — 9. — The  Divine  commavdment.  A  careful  study  of  this  passage  is  necessary 
to  a  clear  understanding  of  the  apostle's  meaning,  and  of  the  place  of  this  urgent  exhor- 
tation in  his  argument.  For  such  a  study  it  may  be  well  to  gather  up  his  teaching 
here  round  three  points. 

I.  The  "  woKD "  ob  "  commandmbst  "  herb  intended.    Concerning  such  we  ask : 

1.  By  whom  is  it  proclaimed  ?  (1)  "  Spoken  before  by  the  holy  prophets ; "  t.e.  perhaps 
chiefly,  though  not  solely,  of  the  Old  TesUment.  Forth-tellers  as  well  as  fore-tellers. 
(2)  "Your  apostles;"  t.e.  those  that  brought  you  the  gospel.  (3)  "The  Lord  and 
Saviour."  He  is  the  Source ;  the  prophets  and  apostles  are  but  the  channel.  2.  How 
is  it  to  be  received?  (1)  "Stir  up  your  mind  ;"  active  intelligence.  (2)  "Sincere" 
mind;  unprejudiced  intelligence.  (3)  By  way  of  "remembrance;"  intelligence  that 
recalls  what  has  been  revealed.  Not  a  novelty,  not  a  discovery.  3.  What  is  it  ?  The 
theme  of  both  Epistles — Christ's  coming. 

II.  The  objection  op  mrn  to  this  "  word  "  and  "  commandment."  1.  What  are 
the  men  who  object?     "Mockers  with  mockery."     Not  the  troubled  truth-seeker. 

2.  What  is  the  spirit  in  which  they  object?  "  Walking  after  their  own  lusts."  Strong 
unbridled  desire  is  the  explanation  of  their  scornful  unbelief.  3.  What  is  the  argument 
of  this  objection  ?  "  Where  is  the  promise  of  his  coming  ?  "  Not,  where  written  ?  but, 
what  has  come  of  it?    Since  the  fathers  fell  asleep  it  seems  to  lie  like  a  dead  letter. 

III.  The  threefold  answer  to  this  objbotion.  1.  It  arises  from  wilful  ignorance 
of  history.  There  is  the  "  Flood  " — probably  one  among  many,  but  the  chief — of  which 
tradition,  science,  the  Bible,  have  much  to  say.  And  that  Flood,  and  all  coming 
destruction,  is  to  be  traced,  not  to  a  fortuitous  concourse  of  atoms,  but  to  "the  Word 
dl  God."  2.  It  arises  from  fixing  time  as  a  condition  of  God's  ways,  as  it  is  of  man's 
"  One  day,"  etc.  Look  at  "  the  dial  of  the  ages,  not  the  horologe  of  time."  3.  It 
arises  from  misreading  the  apparent  tardiness  of  God.  He  is  slow,  but  never  late. 
What  seems  to  us  delay  is  not  an  interval  of  Divine  neglect,  but  a  period  of  Diyine 
mercy,  granting  an  opportunity  for  hupjan  "  repentance." — U.  R.  T. 

Vers.  10 — 13. — Destiny  and  duty.  This  passage  is  woven  to  the  preceding  by  a 
link  so  clear  and  close  that  there  is  no  need  for  indicating  it.  But  we  proceed  to 
notice — 

I.  The  certainty  and  tet  the  uncertainty  op  the  passing  away  op  thk 
PRESENT  system  OF  THINGS.  1.  What  will  "pass  away"?  "Heavens;"  ».«.  firma- 
ment. "Elements  ;"  not  the  forces  we  usually  so  name,  because  they  include  "fire," 
which  is  here  the  revolutionary  force ;  but,  according  to  Farrar  and  others,  "  the  orbs 
of  heaven."  2.  iToz^  shall  they  "pass  away  "  ?  " Dissolved,"  not  destroyed.  Fresh 
forma.    Whether  this  be  literal,  as  with  the  Flood,  or^wider  and  figuraJtiv*,  so  w  to 


84  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  PETER,    \cb.  m.  1— IS 

include  institutions,  empires,  and  all  that  "the  world"  is  to  us,  is  an  open  question. 
3.  The  certainty  of  all  passing  away.  The  fact  is  certain.  41.  The  uncertainty.  The 
date  is  uncertain.  "  As  a  thief ; "  not  as  to  wrongfulness,  but  unexpectedness.  "  At 
such  an  hour  as  ye  think  not "  is  the  true  answer  to  all  chronological  theories  about 
"  the  end." 

IL  The  gloet  of  the  future  after  that  btupbudous  event  has  happened.  It 
is  not  the  catastrophe,  or  climax,  but  the  prologue  and  dawn.  It  leads  not  to  annihila- 
tion, but  restoration  and  purification.  1.  A  new  system  of  things.  "  New  heavens  and 
new  earth."  Fresh,  in  contrast  to  worn  out.  Scars  and  wounds  all  gone.  2.  The  true 
principle  dominant  in  the  new  system^ — "  righteousness."  Probably  not  more  material 
grandeur  or  loveliness  than  now,  but  pervaded  with  rectitude — man  right  with  God, 
man  right  with  man,  man  right  with  himself.  3.  The  permanence  of  this  pervasive 
righteousness.  Wherein  "  dwelleth."  Not,  as  now  and  here,  often  an  alien,  frequently 
a  stranjrer,  at  best  a  visitor;  but  the  new  system  of  things  will  be  its  home.  That  is 
(1)  its  fitting,  (2)  its  happy,  (3)  its  permanent  abode.  4.  All  this  rests  on  a  Divine 
"promise."  'J his  indicates  (1)  God's  pity;  (2)  God's  prescience;  (3)  God's  power. 
The  tones  of  this  promise  are  manifold  and  harmonious,  from  Jonah  down  to 
Peter.— U.  B.  T, 

Vers.  14 — 18. — A  tender  concluding  appeal.  In  these  words  the  apostle  gets  near, 
as  a  shepherd  of  souls  tending  the  flock,  to  those  whom  he  would  bless. 

I.  He  makes  their  discipline  a  plea  for  reachino  a  blessed  ideal.  1.  Their 
discipline.  How  much  is  involved  in  "  these  things  "  1  2.  Their  ideal.  "  Be  found  in 
peace,  without  spot,  and  blameless."    3.  Their  struggle.     "  Give  diligence." 

II.  He  indicates  that  the  mystery  of  delayed  judgment  is  a  mystery  of 
Divine  mercy  givino  oppoktunity  for  salvation.  1.  This  is  taught  by  Paul. 
2.  This  is  affirmed  again  by  Peter.  3.  This  is  the  clear  teaching  of  Scripture,  even 
though  it  has  its  things  "  hard  to  be  understood." 

III.  He  warns  that  even  the  best  means  of  blessing  may  be  perverted  vo 
HARM.     The  ignorant  and  unsteadfast  wrest  the  Scriptures  to  their  own  destruction. 

IV.  He  shows  the  peril  that  comes  to  the  good  from  evil  men.  "Carried 
away  with  the  error  of  the  wicked,"  etc.  1.  Strong  influence — "carried."  2.  Great 
calamity—"  fall." 

V.  He  proclaims  the  method  and  hope  of  true  safety.  "  Grow  in  grace,  and 
in  the  knowledge  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour."  This  is  in  harmony  with  his  emphatic 
teaching :  "  Add  to  your  faith  virtue,"  etc. 

VI.  He  ascribes  praise  to  him  who  is  its  rightful  Object.  1.  The  glory  is 
Christ's.  "  On  hLs  head  are  many  crowns."  Peter  vies  with  Paul  in  passionate  homage 
for  his  Lord.  2.  Hie  glory  is  Christ's  now.  Our  obedience,  our  actual  service,  our 
praise,  to-day.  3.  The  glory  is  Christ's  for  ever.  There  may  be  new  systems  of  things, 
and  these  systems  of  surpassing  grandeur ;  but  his  glory  shall  ever  be  the  diadem  on 
the  very  brow  of  the  universe,  the  central  sun  amid  all  its  constellations.  For  the 
moral  evermore  transcends  the  materiaL  And  he  is  for  ever  "  the  Loid  ou 
Righteousness."— U.  B.  T. 

Vers.  1 — 10. — Fact  of  second  coming,  especially  in  its  accompaniments.  I.  Aim  of 
the  Epistle.  1.  To  stir  them  up  hy  reminding  them.  "  This  is  now,  beloved,  the 
second  Epistle  that  I  write  unto  you ;  and  in  both  of  them  I  stir  up  your  sincere  mind 
by  putting  yon  in  remembrance."  There  is  here  the  first  of  four  designations  of  them 
as  beloved  in  this  chapter.  It  was  already  a  second  Epistle  that  he  was  writing  to  the 
same  circle ;  not  much  time  had  elapsed  since  the  writing  of  the  First  Epistle,  which  in 
all  probability  is  that  which  has  come  down  to  us  under  that  title.  The  aim  of  both 
Epistles  was  the  same.  It  is" expressed  in  accordance  with  language  used  in  the  first 
chapter  of  this  Epistle.  He  did  not  profess  to  be  revealing  to  them  new  truths,  but 
only  to  put  them  in  remembrance  of  old  truths.  They  had  a  sincere  mind,  i.e.  open  to 
the  light.  They  would  not  therefore  object  to  truths  because  they  were  old,  or  to  their 
being  re-stated,  but  would  rather  welcome  being  reminded  of  them,  that  they  might  be 
stirred  up  to  a  deeper  sense  of  their  importance.  2.  To  stir  them  up  by  reminding  them 
<lf  tertain  holy  word*.     "  That  ye  should  remember  the  words  which  were  spoken 


CB.  at  1—18.]    THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  GENEBAL  OF  PETER.  8« 

before  by  the  holy  pnjphets,  and  the  commandment  of  the  Lord  and  Saviour  through 
your  apostles."  He  first  refers  them  to  the  words  of  the  holy  prophets,  i.e.  who  wrote 
on  holy  themes,  and  under  holy  inspiration.  He  has  specially  In  view  the  holy  theme 
of  the  second  coming.  Their  words  spoken  before  had  received  striking,  yet  partial, 
fulfilment  in  the  first  coming ;  they  would  receive  their  complete  fulfilment  in  the  second 
coming.  He  also  refers  them  to  the  commandment  of  the  Lord  and  Saviour,  than 
which  surely  nothing  could  be  more  binding.  Christ  first  saves,  and  then  commands : 
where  is  the  teacher  who  is  in  that  commanding  position?  He  first  teaches  the  fact  qf 
his  second  coming,  and  then  he  commands  the  corresponding  life.  "  Watch  therefore," 
says  Christ :  "for  ye  know  not  on  what  day  your  Lord  cometh.  But  know  this,  that  if 
the  master  of  the  house  had  known  in  what  watch  the  thief  was  coming,  he  would 
have  watched,  and  would  not  have  suffered  his  house  to  be  broken  through.  Therefore 
be  ye  .also  ready :  for  in  an  hour  that  ye  think  not  the  Son  of  man  cometh."  This 
commandment,  having  the  highest  authority,  was  delivered  to  them  through  their 
apostles,  i.e.  the  apostles  that  had  laboured  among  them.  The  chief  of  these  thus 
echoed  his  Lord.  "  The  day  of  the  Lord  so  cometh  as  a  thief  in  the  night : ...  so  then 
let  US  not  sleep,  as  do  the  rest,  but  let  us  watch  and  be  sober  "  (1  Thesa.  v.  2 — 7). 

IL  The  mockbbs.  1.  The  time  of  their  appearance.  "  Knowing  this  first,  that  in 
the  last  days  mockers  shall  come  with  mockery."  Peter  refers  to  the  advent  of  the 
mockers  as  of  primary  importance  in  its  bearings.  They  were  to  come  in  the  last  of 
the  days,  by  which  we  cannot  understand  simply  the  time  immediately  preceding  the 
second  advent.  The  last  period  is  to  be  regarded  as  extending  from  the  first  advent  to 
tbe  second  advent.  During  this  period,  as  time  went  on,  they  were  to  come,  and  to 
come  in  character.  In  Hebrew  style,  it  is  said  that  the  mockers  were  to  come  "  with 
mockery" — with  their  mocking  at  holy  things.  2.  What  they  were  to  mock  at. 
"  Walking  after  their  own  luste,  and  saying.  Where  is  the  promise  of  his  coming  ?  " 
What  they  were  to  say  was  to  be  determined,  not  by  truth,  nor  by  fact,  but  by 
prejudice,  and  by  prejudice  founded  on  their  walking  after  their  own  lusts,  i.e.  their  loose 
mode  of  life.  In  the  first  psalm  those  that  "  walk  in  the  counsel  of  the  ungodly  "  are 
next  represented  as  "  standing  in  the  way  of  sinners,"  and  then  as  "  sitting  in  the  seat  of 
the  scornful."  So  here  those  whose  life  cannot  bear  looking  into,  disliking  the  coming 
because  it  meant  a  check  to  them,  are  represented  as  saying,  with  an  air  of  mocking 
triumph,  "  Where  is  the  promise  of  his  coming?"  i.e.  it  has  turned  out  to  be  vain  and 
mendacious.  3.  How  they  were  to  argue.  (1)  Fact  on  which  they  were  to  hase  their 
argument.  "  For,  from  the  day  that  the  fathers  fell  asleep."  By  "  the  fathers"  we  are 
probably  to  understand  the  men  of  the  first  Christian  generation.  The  promise  was 
made  to  them,  and  they  lived  in  hope  of  its  being  fulfilled  in  their  day.  But  the  day 
came  when,  without  its  being  fulfilled,  they  fell  asleep.  There  is  an  example  here  of 
the  use  of  language  from  which  there  has  been  receding.  Christians  speak  of  their 
friends  in  Christ  as  falling  asleep.  The  sentiment  comes  out  in  the  word  cemetery, 
which  means  "  sleeping-place,"  with  which  we  associate  an  awaking.  The  mockers,  no 
longer  in  accord  with  Christianity,  use  Christian  language.  The  fact  on  which  they 
base  their  argument  is  not  to  be  denied :  the  use  which  they  made  of  it  is  taken  up  at 
ver.  8.  (2)  Argument  drawn  from  uniformity.  "All  things  continue  as  they  were 
from  the  beginning  of  the  creation."  We  are  warranted  in  proceeding  on  the  uniformity 
of  nature — on  the  sun  rising  to-morrow  as  it  has  done  to-day,  and  in  days  past.  Nor 
is  it  surprising  that  scientific  men  should  be  more  than  ordinarily  impressed  with  the 
fact  of  uniformity,  by  their  researches  into  nature.  Peter  here  prophesies  that  in  the 
last  days  mockers  would  seek  to  turn  the  fact  of  uniformity  against  Christianity,  and 
it  has  remarkably  turned  out  as  he  prophesied.  This  is  really  the  line  that  has  been 
followed  by  many  sceptics.  They  have  said,  "  All  things  continue  as  they  were  from 
the  beginning  of  the  creation."  On  this  ground  Hume  argued  against  miracles.  "  A 
miracle,"  he  said,  "  is  a  violation  of  a  law  of  nature :  but  the  universal  experience  of 
ourselves,  and  of  the  whole  human  family,  proves  that  the  laws  of  nature  are  uniform, 
without  exception."  Strauss  and  his  school  have  sought  to  establish,  not  merely  the 
incredibility,  but  the  impossibility,  of  miracles.  Their  argument  bears  against  such 
a  subversion  of  the  present  ord6r  of  things  as  is  connected  with  the  second  coming. 
They  have  thus  unconsciously  fulfilled  prophecy. 

lU.  Catastbofhibm  in  thb  past.    "For  this  they  wilfully  forget,  that  there  wer< 


86  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  GENBEAL  OP  PETEB.    [oh.  m.  1—18, 

heavens  from  of  old,  and  an  earth  compacted  out  of  water  and  amidst  water,  by  the 
Word  of  God ;  by  which  means  the  world  that  then  was,  being  overflowed  with  water, 
perished."  Peter,  in  putting  his  finger  on  catastrophism,  refers  to  it  as  what  they 
wilfully  forgot.  It  required  an  effort  of  their  will  to  shut  it  out.  The  impression  of 
the  event,  though  it  had  taken  place  centuries  before,  had  not  died  out.  His  reference 
to  the  Flood  is  introduced  by  a  statement  bearing  on  the  way  in  which  it  was  brought 
about.  This  is  founded  on  the  Mosaic  account  of  creation.  The  first  part  of  the 
statement  refers  to  the  bringing  of  the  heavens  into  existence.  There  were  heavens 
from  of  old,  by  the  Word  of  God.  This  is  the  first  thought  of  the  Bible :  "  In  the 
beginning  God  created  the  heaven."  It  did  not  exist  from  eternity,  but  was  brought 
into  existence  by  the  creative  word  of  God.  The  second  part  of  the  statement  refers, 
not  to  the  bringing-of  the  earth  into  existence,  but  to  its  receiving  its  present  form. 
An  earth  was  compacted  out  of  water,  t.e.  as  material.  The  reference  seems  to  be  to 
the  waters  of  chaos  in  the  Mosaic  record  (Gen.  i.  2).  It  was  also  compacted,  not  "  amidst 
water,"  as  it  is  unwarrantably  in  the  Eevised  Version,  but  "  by  means  of  water,"  i.e.  as 
the  instrumental  element.  The  reference  seems  to  be  to  the  gathering  together  of  the 
waters  into  one  place.  Behind  the  water  as  material  and  instrumental  element  was  the 
directing  and  potent  Word  of  God.  Having  made  this  statement,  Peter  introduces 
the  Flood  as  his  answer  to  the  mockers.  The  connecting  words  are, "  by  which  means." 
The  use  of  the  plural  creates  a  difficulty.  The  most  probable  solution  is  that  the 
reference  is  to  the  water  and  the  Word  of  God.  This  is  favoured  by  the  latter  being 
carried  forward  in  the  next  verse.  Water,  let  loose  by  God,  flooded  the  then,  world,  i.e. 
not  the  earth  simply,  but  the  earth  as  supporting  its  then  inhabitants.  There  was 
catastrophism  of  the  most  impressive  nature.  There  was  (let  the  mockers  note  it) 
a  mighty  disturbance  of  uniformity.    The  world  that  then  was  perished. 

IV.  Oatasthophism  in  the  futubb.  "  But  the  heavens  that  now  are,  and  the  earth, 
by  the  same  word  have  been  stored  up  for  fire,  being  reserved  a2:ainst  the  day  of  judg- 
ment and  destruction  of  ungodly  men."  There  is  suggestion,  not  of  their  ceasing  to  be 
heavens  and  earth,  but  rather  of  there  being  still  heavens  and  earth,  only  not  such  as  we 
now  see  them.  The  Word  of  God  has  fixed  the  destiny  of  the  new  heavens  and  earth. 
There  is  catastrophism  in  store  for  them.  They  are  here  represented  as  stored  up  for 
fire.  The  agency  is  not  far  to  seek,  being  in  the  heart  of  the  earth.  There  is  sug- 
gestion of  the  fire  being  needed  for  the  new  heavens  and  earth  on  account  of  the 
ungodly  men  that  have  defiled  them.  For  their  God-forgetting,  God-defying  life,  they 
— when  the  appointed  day  comes — are  to  be  adjudged  to  destruction.  The  heavens 
and  earth  that  they  have  defiled  are  to  be  subjected,  not  to  water  (which  is  forbidden 
by  promise),  but  to  an  agency  more  penetrative  and  subduing.  The  same  Word  that 
carried  out  the  catastrophism  of  water  is  to  carry  out  the  catastrophism  of  fire. 

V.  The  Divine  mobb  of  bkokonino.  "  But  forget  not  this  one  thing,  beloved,  that 
one  day  is  with  the  Lord  as  a  thousand  years,  and  a  thousand  years  as  one  day."  This 
is  Peter's  answer  to  the  suggestion  in  the  argument  of  the  mockers, "  From  the  day  that 
the  fathers  fell  asleep."  By  addressing  his  readers  as  "  beloved,"  he  bespeaks  their  atten- 
tion. He  bespeaks  their  attention  to  a  thing  which  they  were  in  danger  of  forgetting. 
He  bespeaks  their  attention  to  a  thing  which  was  principally  to  be  considered.  "  Forget 
not  this  one  thing."  The  language  in  which  this  one  thing  is  expressed  is  an  extension 
of  what  is  found  in  Ps.  xc.  4,  both  sides  being  presented  here.  Peter  teaches  that  our 
ideas  of  short  and  long  in  time  are  not  to  be  applied  to  God's  mode  of  reckoning.  A 
day  is  what  is  short  with  us.  We  think  of  there  being  many,  many  days  of  life.  But 
a  day  may  be  long  with  God.  If  we  think  of  the  days  of  creation,  how  much  was 
crowded  into  each  of  them  1  If  we  think  of  the  day  on  which  the  Flood  came,  how  much 
characterized  it  1  If  we  think  of  the  last  day  of  our  Lord's  Passion,  how  much  affecting 
human  history,  and  affecting  angelic  history,  and  affecting  even  GSod  himself,  was 
crowded  into  itl  We  are  taught  to  think  of  a  nation  being  bom  in  a  day.  So  we  do 
not  need  to  think  of  more  than  a  day  as  required  for  the  events  that  are  to  be  included 
in  the  second  coming.  On  the  other  hand,  a  thousand  years  is  what  is  long  with  us. 
Men  used  to  think  of  that  as  the  limit  of  human  life.  But  we  cannot  now  think  of 
our  living  a  hundred  years.  But  a  thousand  years  may  be  a  short  time  with  God.  "  A 
thousand  years  in  thy  sight  are  but  as  yesterday  when  it  is  past,  and  as  a  watch  in 
the  nighU"    There  was  a  waiting  for  thousands  of  years  before  the  arrival  of  nuuk  «| 


OH.  in.  1—18.]    THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PETER.  87 

the  earth ;  and  if  thousands  of  years  have  to  elapse  before  the  winding  up  of  human 
history,  in  the  sure  and  effectual  evolving  of  his  purpose  that  may  not  be  long  to 
God. 

VL  Explanation  of  sBBMiNa  delay.  "The  Lord  is  not  slack  concerning  his 
promise,  as  some  count  slackness;  but  is  long-suffering  to  you- ward,  not  wishing  that 
any  should  perish,  but  that  all  should  come  to  repentance."  When  a  promise  is  made 
for  a  specified  time,  and  is  not  fulfilled  at  that  time,  there  is  real  delay  there,  the  expla- 
nation of  which  may  be  found  to  he  slackness.  Such  slackness  cannot  be  attributed  to 
God.  There  is  apparent  delay,  and  some,  in  the  disappointment  of  their  expectation, 
and  in  the  working  of  unbelief,  may  say  it  is  slackness ;  but  that  cannot  be  justified. 
It  is  said  that  "  the  Judge  is  before  the  door,"  which  may  be  construed  as  an  immediate 
coming.  But  the  real  meaning  is  that  Christ  is  ready  for  judgment.  Why,  then,  does 
he  not  come  ?  The  answer  is  that  things  are  not  ready  for  his  coming.  Christ's  people 
are  charged  with  making  things  ready  for  his  coming,  so  far  as  they  themselves  are 
concerned,  and  so  far  as  others  are  concerned ;  and  they  have  not  things  in  sufBcient 
readiness.  It  is  not,  then,  that  Grod  is  slack  concerning  his  promise,  as  though  he 
were  not  sufiicientiy  interested  ;  it  is,  says  Peter,  that  he  is  long-suffering  to  you-ward. 
He  is  bearing  with  Christian  people  in  their  dereliction  of  duty,  in  their  slackness  in 
performing  their  part.  And  not  merely  they,  but  others,  are  thought  of  by  God.  He 
does  not  wish  that  any  should  perish.  It  is  not  according  to  his  heart  that  even  one 
whom  be  has  created,  and  for  whom  Christ  has  died,  should  remain  in  misery.  This  is 
•  thought  which  comes  out  strongly  in  the  prophecy  of  Ezekiel.  "  Have  I  any  pleasure 
at  all  that  the  wicked  should  die,  saith  the  Lord  God?"  "  For  I  have  no  pleasure  in 
the  death  of  him  that  dieth,  saith  the  Lord  God."  "  Say  unto  them  [that  pine  away 
in  their  sins].  As  I  live,  saith  the  Lord  God,  I  have  no  pleasure  in  the  death  of  the 
wicked."  The  positive  side  of  the  Divine  wish  is  that  all  should  come  to  repentance. 
He  has  not  an  interest  merely  in  some,  but  in  all.  None  can  be  happy  in  sin ;  it  can 
only  be  pining  away,  as  the  prophet  puts  it.  None  can  be  happy  without  repentance, 
t.e.  change  of  mind ;  but  this  change  of  mind  he  wishes  for  aU.  And  it  is  not  a  men 
wish,  but  it  is  a  wish  that  has  been  manifested  in  the  cross  of  Christ ;  and,  in  the 
operations  of  the  Spirit,  and  in  the  workings  of  Providence,  this  is  the  end  which  is 
sought.  Let  us  aU  respond,  then,  to  the  Divine  wish  which  accompanies  the  Divin* 
long-suffering. 

Vn.  The  coming  ohakaoterized.  "  But  the  day  of  the  Lord  will  come  as  a  thief; 
in  the  which  the'heavens  shall  pass  away  with  a  great  noise,  and  the  elements  shall  be 
dissolved  with  fervent  heat,  and  the  earth  and  the  works  that  are  therein  shall  be  burned 
up."  By  "  the  day  of  the  Lord  "  we  are  to  understand  the  day  of  Christ's  glorious  mani- 
festation. The  interest  of  that  day  will  all  centre  round  his  appearance  and  judicial 
action.  The  coming  of  the  day  is  regarded  with  certainty.  In  the  original  "  will  come  " 
has  the  emphatic  position :  "  Will  come  the  day  of  the  Lord."  Whether  our  thoughts  are 
contrary  to  it,  or  whether  we  have  not  thoughts  about  it  at  all,  it  will  come.  Peter 
touches  on  the  suddenness  of  the  comingj  in  this  echoing  the  Master,  as  Paul  also  did : 
"  Will  come  the  day  of  the  Lord  as  a  thief."  He  more  than  touches  on  an  awe-initpiring 
association  of  the  coming.  There  will  be  a  general  conflagration.  It  was  said  in  pro- 
phecy that  the  heavens  shall  vanish  away  like  smoke.  Here  it  is  said  that  they  shall 
pass  away  with  a  great  noise.  This  is  to  be  explained  by  the  clause  which  follows,  which 
is  to  be  taken  with  it.  The  elements,  i.e.  of  which  the  heavens  are  composed,  shall  he 
dissolved  with  fire.  The  noise,  then,  is  the  rushing  sound  of  the  destroying  fire,  or  the 
consequent  crash.  The  conflagration  is  to  embrace  the  earth  :  "  The  earth  and  the 
works  that  are  therein  shall  be  burned  up."  The  works  must  be  understood  as  includ- 
ing man's  works.  Some  works  long  outlive  the  workers.  It  is  hoped  that  some  works 
of  art  may  survive  for  centuries.  But,  however  long  they  survive,  they  will  at  last  be 
burnt  up.  That  teaches  us  that  there  is  what  is  higher  than  art.  And  we  need  not 
wonder  at  this  being  the  destiny  of  man's  works  on  earth,  when  it  is  to  be  the  destiny 
of  even  God's  works  on  earth.  Lift  up  your  eyes  to  the  heavens  in  the  stillness  of 
night,  or  look  upon  the  earth  beneath  bathed  in  the  sun- light  of  a  summer  day:  can 
it  be  that  catastrophism  shall  reign  wherever  your  eyes  rest?  can  it  be  that  the  wild, 
all-devouring  element  of  fire  shall  lay  hold  on  all  this  material  fabric?  So  propheoy 
tells  lu  that  it  will  W.    It  will  come,  the  day  of  general  conflagration. — Vi.  Ft 


88  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  PETER,    [oh.  m.  1—18. 

Vers.  11 — 18. — Duty  in  view  of  second  coming.  L  Eepbrenob  to  God  in  ouk  cx)n- 
nncT.  "  Seeing  that  these  things  are  thus  all  to  be  dissolved,  what  manner  of  persons 
ought  ye  to  be  in  all  holy  living  and  godliness  ?  "  The  catastrophe  that  is  to  accompany 
the  second  coming  is  here  put  down  in  time  present  in  the  original,  to  raise  an 
impression  of  its  certainty :  "  Seeing  that  these  things  are  thus  all  dissolved."  If  the 
conclusions  of  some  scientific  men  are  to  be  accepted,  this  is  literally  true,  inasmuch  as 
they  say  that  there  are  processes  going  on  which  must  end  in  the  material  fabric  being 
worn  out.  It  is  in  the  condition  of  a  clock  that,  if  not  wound  up,  must  run  out.  The 
catastrophe  thus  vividly  presented  is  here  made  a  reason  for  our  attending  to  ourselves. 
"  What  manner  of  persons,"  Peter  exclaims,  "  ought  ye  to  be  in  all  holy  living  and  godli- 
ness ?  "  Holy  living  is  the  living  of  those  who  are  set  apart  to  the  service  of  a  holy  God. 
Godliness  points  to  this  living  as  based  on  our  relation  to  God.  By  the  use  of  the 
plural  in  the  original  there  is  brought  out  the  manifold  workings  and  forms  of  a  godly 
life.  There  is  the  feeling  of  dependence  on  God  and  of  fear  toward  him,  desire  for  the 
blessing  from  God  and  trust  in  him  for  the  blessing,  the  feeling  of  love  toward  God  for 
what  he  is  and  of  gratitude  toward  him  for  his  mercies,  knowledge  of  God's  will  and 
the  resolution  to  do  his  will, — all  this  finding  expression  in  worship,  self-command,  and 
sacrifice  for  others. 

II.  Attitude  towaed  the  second  comino.  "  Looking  for  and  earnestly  desiring 
the  coming  of  the  day  of  God."  This  is  the  only  instance  of  the  day  being  called  "  the 
day  of  God."  We  must  think  of  the  Father  ordering  the  day  and  its  events,  that  the 
Son  after  his  mysterious  Passion  may  be  magnified.  "  As  the  Father  raisetli  the  dead 
and  quickeueth  them,  even  so  the  Son  also  quickeneth  whom  he  wilL  For  neither  doth 
the  Father  judge  any  man,  but  he  hath  given  all  judgment  imto  the  Son ;  that  all  may 
honour  the  Son,  even  as  they  honour  the  Father."  Our  attitude  to  the  day  of  God  is  to 
be  that  of  expectancy.  We  are  to  look  for  its  coming  or  presence.  We  are  to  allow  it 
to  dwell  in  our  minds,  so  as  to  call  forth  our  earnest  desire  after  it.  The  first  Christians 
looked  for  it  to  come  in  their  day.  They  were  nearer  the  Divine  intention  than  those 
who,  because  it  may  not  be  for  thousands  of  years,  do  not  think  of  it  at  all.  But  our 
attitude  is  also  to  be  that  of  active  prqacuration.  The  proper  translation  is  neither 
"  haste  unto  "  nor  "  earnestly  desire,"  but  "  hasten  oil"  The  idea  of  hastening  on  the 
coming  is  unusual;  but  it  is  remarkable  that  it  is  elsewhere  expressed  by  Peter. 
"  Eepent  ye  therefore,"  he  said  to  the  assembly  in  Solomon's  porch,  "  and  turn  again, 
that  your  sins  may  be  blotted  out,  that  so  there  may  come  seasons  of  refreshing  from 
the  presence  of  the  Lord ;  and  that  he  may  send  the  Christ  who  hath  been  appointed  for 
you,  even  Jesus :  whom  the  heaven  must  receive  until  the  times  of  restoration  of  all 
things."  It  is  thus  Petrine  and  scriptural  to  think  of  the  coming  as  an  event  which 
may  be  accelerated  by  our  repentance  and  prayers  and  efforts  for  the  diffusion  of  the 
gospel. 

III.  What  is  necessitated  by  the  second  coming  otrrwAnDLT.  "  By  reason  of 
which  the  heavens  being  on  fire  sfiall  be  dissolved,  and  the  elements  shall  melt  with 
fervent  heat."  It  is  said  that  the  heavens  are  not  clean  in  God's  sight.  The  idea  here 
is  that  even  the  heavens  have  been  defiled,  by  reason  of  those  who  have  lived  under 
them,  and  upon  the  earth.  Once  Christ  did  not  shrink  from  dwelling  on  this  earth, 
being  on  his  saving  mission ;  but  when  he  is  to  come  in  his  judicial  character,  he  is  to 
be  a  consuming  fire,  at  his  approach,  even  to  material  things.  It  is  said  in  Rev.  xx.  11, 
that  from  the  face  of  him  that  sat  upon  the  great  white  throne  the  earth  and  the  heaven 
fled  away,  and  there  was  found  no  place  for  them.  So  here  it  is  taught  that  even 
the  heavenly  world  is  to  be  subjected  to  fire,  not  merely  to  the  breaking  up  of  its 
order,  but  even  to  the  melting  of  its  elements. 

IV.  What  is  looked  fob  at  the  second  oomino  ootwakdlt.  "  But,  according 
to  his  promise,  we  look  for  new  heavens  and  a  new  earth,  wherein  dwelleth  righteous- 
ness." This  is  in  accordance  with  Rev.  xxi.  1,  "  And  I  saw  a  new  heaven  and  a  new 
earth :  for  the  first  heaven  and  the  first  earth  were  passed  away."  The  most  striking 
promise  is  in  Isa.  Ixv.  17,  "  For,  behold,  I  create  new  heavens  and  a  new  earth :  and  the 
former  shall  not  be  remembered."  The  newness  does  not  necessarily  refer  to  the  materials 
of  which  the  present  heavens  and  earth  are  composed ;  these  may  be  transformed  so  as  to 
constitute  new  heavens  and  earth,  just  as  our  bodies  are  to  be  transformed  so  as  to  con- 
■titut«  new  bodies.    The  new  heavens  and  new  earth  are  to  correspond  to  newness  ot 


CH.m.1— 18.]    THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  PETER.  89 

character — a  correspondence  of  the  outward  to  the  inward  never  to  be  disturhed.  It  is 
said  in  Isa.  Ixvi.  22,  " For  as  the  new  h(avens  and  the  new  earth,  which  I  shall  make, 
shall  remain  before  me,  saith  the  Lord,  so  shall  your  seed  and  your  name  remain." 
The  expression  of  the  idea  here  is,  "  wherein  dwelleth  righteousness  " — ^has  its  permanent 
abode,  from  which  it  will  never  take  ilight.  It  will  be  a  world  where  there  is  no  super- 
stition or  infidelity,  where  there  is  a  correct,  bright  conception  of  what  God  is,  and  a 
due  appreciation  of  the  work  of  Christ.  It  will  be  a  world  where  there  is  nothing  to 
interfere  with  social  well-being,  where  jealousies  and  antipathies  are  unknown.  "  The 
wolf  and  the  lamb  shall  feed  together,  and  the  lion  shall  eat  straw  like  the  bullock  :  and 
dust  shall  be  the  serpent's  meat.  They  shall  not  hurt  nor  destroy  in  all  my  holy 
mountain,  saith  the  Lord  1  "  Is  not,  then,  the  institution  of  this  order  of  things  to  be 
much  thought  of  by  us,  and  to  be  earnestly  desired  ?  We  may  regret  that  much 
that  is  beautiful  in  the  present  order  of  things  is  to  vanish.  Shall  we  never  again  look 
upon  that  beautiful  sky,  those  beautiful  landscapes,  the  beautiful  flowers  V  But  there  is 
ample  compensation  in  the  higher  beauty  to  which  the  present  is  to  give  place.  When 
we  have  got  the  glorious  resurrection-hody,  there  will  be  no  regret  that  we  have  left  the 
present  body  behind.  So  when  we  see  the  new  heavens  and  the  new  earth,  there  will 
be  no  regret  that  the  former  things  have  passed  away.  In  their  higher  forms  they  will 
have  a  greater  power  of  lifting  the  soul  to  God.  The  teaching  of  Peter  refrarding  the 
heavens  and  earth  agrees  with  what  Paul  teaches  in  the  eighth  of  Romans,  "  For  the 
creation  was  subjected  to  vanity,  not  of  its  own  vdll,  but  by  reason  of  him  who  sub- 
jected it,  in  hope  that  the  creation  itself  shall  be  delivered  from  the  bondage  of  corrup- 
tion into  the  liberty  of  the  glory  of  the  children  of  God."  Peter  emphasizes  fire  as  the 
liberating  element ;  Paul  simply  notes  the  liberation.  Peter,  again,  thinks  of  a  fit  abode 
for  righteousness ;  Paul  thinks  of  an  abode  that  shadows  forth  the  liberty  of  the  glory 
of  the  children  of  God.  There  is  use  in  looking  forward  to  new  heavens  and  a  new  earth. 
We  feel  that  the  present  arrangement  is  not  independent  of  God.  He  made  it,  and  he 
can  alter  it.  He  can  make  a  world  suitable  to  a  probationary  state,  and  a  world, suit- 
able to  a  state  of  attained  righteousness.  He  can  make  a  woild  suitable  for  his  people  in 
their  present  imperfect  state,  and  a  world  suitable  to  them  when  he  puts  glory  on 
them. 

V.  Pehbonal  ooncben  at  the  second  coming.  •'  Wherefore,  beloved,  seeing  that 
ye  look  for  these  things,  give  dUigenoe  that  ye  may  be  found  in  peace,  without  spot 
and  blameless  in  his  sight."  We  look  for  a  great  catastrophe  at  the  end  of  time  as  that 
which  has  been  certainly  foretold.  We  do  not  look  for  that  alone,  but  for  that  as 
introducing  a  gi  eat  reconstruction  in  the  production  of  new  heavens  and  earth.  This 
is  connected  with  our  seeing  God  on  the  day  formerly  referred  to.  Our  personal 
anxiety  must  be  to  be  found  in  peace  on  that  occasion — to  have  God  as  our  Friend,  so 
that  the  catastrophe  shall  not  reach  us,  and  so  that  the  new  heavens  and  new  eai  th 
shall  be  for  our  blessed  and  eternal  abode.  We  can  only  expect  this  consummation  by 
our  being  without  spot  and  blameless.  Spots  and  blemishes  attract  the  fire  of  Divine 
judgment.  This  very  earth  and  even  the  heavens  have  to  be  subjected  to  fire  because 
they  have  been  "connected  with  man's  sin.  Let  us  not  think,  then,  that  we  can  stand 
in  God's  sight  with  hearts  defiled.  We  must  give  diligence  to  have  all  spots  and 
blemishes  removed  from  us,  in  the  use  of  the  means  of  grace,  in  a  constant  recourse  to 
the  blood  of  Christ,  in  a  constant  endeavour  to  conform  our  life  to  the  Divine  will. 

VI  Intekpketation  of  pbesbnt  delat.  "  And  account  that  the  long-suffering  of 
our  Lord  is  salvation."  In  explanation  of  the  delay  of  the  second  coming,  it  was  said 
formerly  that  "  the  Lord  is  not  slack  concerning  his  promise,  but  is  long-suffering." 
Here  long-suffering  is  asserted  of  our  Lord,  apparently  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  as  the 
absolute  Manifestation  of  the  disposition  of  the  Father.  Here  also  thtre  is  connected 
with  long-suffering  its  end,  viz.  salvation.  Christ  makes  to  us  the  offer  of  salvation ;  but 
he  does  not  reject  us  so  soon  as  we  refuse  his  offer.  He  would  teach  us  even  from 
our  experience  of  the  bitterness  of  sin,  he  would  disabuse  our  minds  of  false  ideas  of  life, 
he  would  make  us  tired  of  a  life  of  sin,  he  would  make  us  turn  in  desire  to  a  life  ci 
holiness.  He  has  no  quarter  for  sin ;  but  he  has  patience  for  the  sinner,  he  heaps 
mercies  upon  him ;  there  is  the  continual  mercy  that  he  is  not  treated  according  to  hie 
desert.  Thus  by  his  continual  goodness  would  he  lead  us  to  repentance,  by  his  long- 
vufi'ering  he  would  compass  our  salvation,  by  his  gentleness  he  would  make  us  great. 


90  THE  SECOND,  EPISTLE  GENBEAL  OP  PETER,    [oh.  m.  1—18 

Bnt  for  patience  extended  over  years,  Paul  would  never  have  lived  to  be  a  preacher  of 
righteoneness,  and  John  Bunyan  would  never  have  lived  to  write  the  'Pilgrim's 
Progress.'  And  bo  it  is  with  the  race  as  a  whole.  The  offer  of  salvation  has  yet  to 
be  made  to  aU.  And  even  when  the  offer  has  beea  made,  uneans  have  to  be  used  to 
secure  the  acceptance  of  salvation.  Therefore  it  is  that  the  coming  is  delayed.  Let 
us  not,  then,  misinterpret  the  delay ;  let  ub  not  mistake  what  is  long-suffering  for  slack- 
ness in  promising,  or  indifference  to  sin. 

VIL  Befebenob  to  the  weitikqs  ot  Paul.  "  Even  as  our  beloved  brother  Paul 
also,  according  to  the  wisdom  given  to  him,  wrote  unto  yon ;  as  also  in  all  his  Epislles, 
speaking  in  them  of  these  things ;  wherein  are  some  things  hard  to  be  understood, 
which  the  ignorant  and  unsteadfast  wrest,  as  they  do  also  the  other  Scriptures,  unto 
their  owu  destruction."  Peter  refers  to  Paul  by  whom,  on  one  occasion,  he  had  been 
withstood,  as  his  beloved  brother,  i.e.  not  ministerial  associate,  but  brother  to  the  readers 
and  to  himself  alike,  and  alike  dear  to  them.  He  also  recognizes  him  as  possessing  a 
wisdom  which  was  not  his  own.  Paul  had  written  to  the  same  circle  on  the  subject 
of  the  coming.  If  we  think  of  the  Asiatic  circle,  we  turn  to  the  Epistle  to  the 
Ephesians.  In  it  the  nearest  approach  to  what  Peter  has  been  saying  is  to  be  found 
in  ch.  V.  27, "  That  he  might  present  the  Church  to  himself  a  glorious  Church,  not  bavin? 
spot,  or  wrinkle,  or  any  such  thing ;  but  that  it  should  be  holy  and  without  blemish." 
When  Peter  passes  to  other  Epistles,  we  at  once  think  of  the  Epistles  to  the  Thessa- 
lonians.  In  these  Paul  expressly  treats  of  delay  in  the  second  coming,  and  points 
out  the  attitude  to  be  taken  up.  And  this  naturally  suf;gests  "  some  things  hard  to 
be  understood."  What  he  had  in  his  mind  was  probably  the  revelation  of  the  man  of 
sin.  Of  other  things  hard  to  be  understood  in  Paul's  Epistles  we  may  particularize 
the  gathering  up  of  all  things  in  Christ,  the  doctrine  of  election  especially  as  set 
forth  in  the  ninth  chapter  of  Bomans,  and  the  filling  up  of  that  which  is  lacking  in 
the  Bufferings  of  Christ  in  Colossians.  Peter  notes  the  bad  use  made  of  these  things 
hard  to  be  understood,  in  common  with  other  Scriptures,  by  the  ignorant  and  unstead- 
fast, «.'«.  those  who  had  not  the  essentials  of  Christian  instruction,  and  did  not  hold 
to  the  Christian  position  once  taken  up  by  them.  They  "wrested  them"  as  by  a  hand- 
screw,  i.e.  from  their  natural  meaning  to  their  own  destruction.  There  is  no  support 
here  to  the  Koman  Catholic  idea  of  withholding  the  Bible  from  the  people.  Because 
Scriptures,  especially  difficult  Scriptures,  are  abused  by  the  ignorant  and  unsteadfast,  that 
is  no  argument  against  the  good  use  of  them  by  those  who  are  exhorted  in  this  same 
chapter  to  "  remember  the  words  spoken  before  by  the  holy  prophets,  and  the  com- 
mandment of  the  Lord  and  Saviour  through  the  apostles."  Let  us,  even  when  we  (in 
company  with  Peter)  do  not  thoroughly  underetand,  humbly  seek  to  get  profit. 

Vin.  Caution.  "Te  therefore,  beloved,  knowing  these  things  beforehand,  beware 
lest,  being  earned  away  with  the  error  of  the  wicked,  ye  fall  from  your  own  steadfast- 
ness." What  they  knew  beforehand  was  what  Paul  and  Peter  said  about  the  second 
coming.  The  conclusion  of  the  verse  points  especially  to  the  foretold  appearance  of 
errorists  before  the  coming.  These  were  condemned  by  their  lawless  conduct.  Let 
them  not,  then,  as  they  valued  his  love  in  the  gospel,  be  carried  away  with  their  error. 
They  had  firm  footing ;  let  them  not  be  carried  off  their  feet.  Let  them  not  be  like 
Barnabas,  the  companion  of  Paul,  who,  when  at  the  coming  of  some  from  James  to 
Antioch,  the  Jews  dissembled  with  Peter,  he  also  was  carried  off  his  feet  with  their 
dissimulation  (Gal.  ii.  13). 

IX.  Pabtinq  counsel.  "  But  grow  in  the  grace  and  knowledge  of  our  Lord  and 
Saviour  Jesus  Christ."  A  tree  is  not  a  complete  reality  at  once;  but  from  a  beginning 
there  is  progress  toward  an  end.  So  we  are  not  complete  beings  at  once ;  but  from  a 
beginning  there  is  a  progress  intended  for  us  toward  the  end  of  our  being.  There  may 
be  growth  in  a  wrong  direction :  what  we  are  here  exhorted  to  grow  in  is  what  of 
Divine  assistance  as  sinners  we  need  in  order  to  come  to  the  goal  of  our  being.  "  Grow 
in  grace,"  which  is  to  be  taken  as  an  independent  conception.  If  we  are  not  growing 
under  gracious  influence,  then  we  have  only  a  name  to  live.  Our  faith  grows  as  it 
becomes  more  ample  and  conquering.  Our  love  grows  as  it  becomes  more  fervent  and 
diffusive.  Our  hope  grows  as  it  becomes  more  calm  and  bright.  We  are  to  grow  in 
self-abasement,  in  power  of  work,  in  power  of  concentrating  the  mind  on  the  truth,  in 
power  to  bear  hardships  and  injuries.    We  are  to  grow  especially  in  that  in  which  w« 


OB.  m.  1-18.]    THE  BECOim  KFISTLB  OENEBiJL  07  PBTEB.  U 

find  onnelves  to  lie  deficient.  We  are  farther  axhorted  to  grow  in  "  tlie  knowledge  of 
our  Lord  and  Sariour  Jesus  Ohrist."  This  is  in  keeping  with  the  great  importance 
which  is  attached  to  knowledge  in  this  Epistle.  It  is  that  by  which  we  grow.  The 
knowledge  which  is  thus  nutritive  is  knowledge  of  Ohrist  as  opening  up  and  dispensing 
the  treasures  of  Divine  grace,  and  as  showing  in  his  own  life  what  grace  would  bring 
out  in  ours.  Let  us,  then,  have  a  worthy  conception  of  Christ  in  our  minds ;  it  is  upon 
this  that  our  growth  in  grace  depends. 

X.  DoxoLOQY.  "  To  him  be  the  glory  both  now  and  for  ever.  Amen."  It  ii  to 
Christ  that  the  adoration  is  offered.  To  him  be  glory  now  ;  for  it  is  to  the  knowledge 
of  him  that  we  owe  all  of  grace  that  we  have.  To  him  be  glory /or  ever,  literally, "  to 
the  day  of  the  age" — ^the  day  on  which  eternity,  as  contrasted  with  time,  begins,  and 
which  is  never  to  be  broken  up,  but  is  to  be  one  long  day.  To  him  we  are  indebted,  as 
for  all  that  we  have  now,  so  for  all  that  we  hope  to  have  hereafter.  Thus  does  the 
Epistle  end  without  the  customary  salutations,  simply  with  the  carrying  forward  of 
Clirist  into  our  eternal  life.  It  becomes  every  one  who  ha*  ifpUowed  out  the  thought  of 
the  Epgtle  to  add  his  devout  "  Ameu." — It.  W, 


HOMILETICAL  INDEX 

SECOl^D  EPISTLE  aENEEAL  OF  PETEE. 


OEAPTEB  L 

THEUS 

The  Address         .1.  •••  ••• 

Exhortation  to  Earnest  Effort  ... 

Beaeons  for  Diligence  in  bis  Apostolio 

WOTJC   ■•«  •••  •••  ■•« 

Peter's  Primacy   ...  m.  ... 

The  Bounty  of  God  ...  ... 

Partakers  of  a  Divine  Nature  „. 

Witness  to  Christ ...  ...  ... 

The  Lamp  and  the  Dawn  .n  ... 

God's  Voice  in  the  Bible    ... 

Increase  of  Spiritual  Life  dependent  on 
the  Knowledge  of  God    ... 

The  Sanctifying  Power  of  the  Promises 

Personal  Diligence  needed  for  Sancti- 
fication  ...  ...  ... 

The  Saint's  Earnest  EndeaTonr  to  en- 
force Spiritual  Truth 

Certainty  concerning  Christ  the  Secret 
of  Spiritual  Earnestness  ...  ... 

Certainty  about  Christ  the  Besult  of 
giving  Eeed  to  the  Divine  Word  ... 

Divine  Blessing  by  Human  Channels 

The  Beginning  of  Soul-Salvation     ... 

True  Christian  Character    ...  „. 

The  Goal  of  Christian  Character      ... 

An  Old  Man's  Aim  ...  ... 

Threefold  Testimony  to  the  Truth  of 
Christianity      ...  ...  ... 

Address  and  Salutation       ...  ... 


THEVB 

tAQU 

The  Christian  Virtues  In  their  Com- 

rioi 

pleteness 

... 

36 

11 
13 

Putting  in  Mind  .m           .n 

... 

40 

15 

18 

CHAPTEB  n. 

Warning  against  False  Teachers 

... 

50 

19 

Description  of  the  False  Teachers 

... 

53 

20 

Denyin  g  the  Master 

... 

55 

21 

"A  Preacher  of  Eighteousness  " 

*•• 

56 

22 

Deliverance  and  Condemnation 

... 

57 

23 

The  Sinner's  Hire 

... 

58 

Slaves  promise  Liberty  I      ... 

... 

59 

24 

"  The  Way  of  Eighteousness  " 

... 

59 

25 

False  Teachers     ... 

... 

60 

26 

CHAPTEB  lU. 

The  Certainty  of  the  Lord's  Comin 

3 

71 

28 

Exhortations 

74 

"  The  Promise  of  his  Coming  " 

... 

78 

29 

The  Eternal's  Independence  of  Tine 

78 

Tiie  Abode  of  Eighteousness 

79 

81 

Diligence 

80 

32 

Divine  Long-suffering         ... 

80 

33 

Growth  ... 

81 

33 

The  Divine  Commandment 

83 

.84 

Destiijy  and  Duty 

83 

34 

A  Tender  Concluding  Appeal 

84 

Fact  of  Second   Coming,    especially 

34 

in  its  Accompaniments    ... 

... 

84 

45 

Duty  in  View  of  Second  Coming 

..* 

88 

THE 


PULPIT    COMMENTARY 


EDITED   BY  THE 


VERY  JIEV.  II.  D.  M.  SPENCE,  D.D., 


DEAN  OF  GLOUCESTER  ; 


AND   BY   THE 


KEY.  JOSEPH    S.   EXELL,   M.A. 


I.    JOHN. 

(ffxvosilion: 
By  EEV.    a.    PLUMMER,    M.A.,  D.D., 

MASTER  OF   UNIVERSITY  COLLEGE,    DURHAM. 

iljomilctirs : 
By    rev.    C.    CLEMANCE,   B.A.,  D.D. 

"iSomilies  bji  llarious  Q\utl)or0: 

REV.  W.  JONES.  REV.  R.  FINI-AYSON,  B.A 


FUNK    &    WAGNALLS    COMPANY 
New  York  and  Toronto. 


THE  EPISTLES  OE  ST.  JOHN. 


INTRODUCTION. 


I.  The  Authorship  of  the  Epistles. 

Onb  of  the  first  questions  which  meets  the  student  of  these  Epistles  ; 
Who  wrote  them?  None  of  them  bears  any  name,  or  any  definite  and 
indisputahle  indication  of  the  writer.  Nevertheless,  the  authorship  is  not 
really  doubtful.  The  four  writings,  the  Fourth  Gospol  and  these  three 
Epistles,  are  too  closely  linked  together  to  be  separated,  and  assigned,  some 
to  one  author  and  some  to  another.  And  if  they  are  all  by  one  writer, 
that  writer,  beyond  all  reasonable  doubt,  is  St.  John  the  apostle.  No  other 
person  has  been  suggested  who  fits  into  the  very  complex  position  with 
even  tolerable  exactness.  If  the  Gospel  were  wanting,  we  might  be  in 
doubt  as  to  who  wrote  the  Epistles.  If  the  First  Epistle  were  wanting,  we 
might  be  in  doubt  as  to  who  wrote  the  two  short  Epistles.  If  the  Second 
Epistle  were  wanting,  we  should  certainly  be  in  serious  doubt  as  to  who 
wrote  the  third.  But  as  it  is,  there  is  no  room  for  reasonable  doubt ;  that 
is,  a  doubt  that  will  stand  the  impartial  investigation  of  all  the  evidence. 
Nearly  every  one  admits  that  the  Fourth  Gospel  and  the  First  Epistle  cannot 
be  severed;  both  external  and  internal  evidence  conclusively  show  that 
they  are  by  the  same  hand.  The  same  may  be  said  of  the  Second  and 
Third  Epistles.  And  a  patient  examination  of  the  evidence  respecting  the 
First  and  Second  Epistles  will  lead  most  people  to  the  conclusion  that  they 
also  are  by  the  same  hand ;  and  thus  the  two  ends  of  the  chain  are  united. 
The  key  of  the  position,  therefore,  is  the  Fourth  Gospel.  And  with  regard 
to  that  the  reader  is  referred  to  the  Introduction  to  St.  John's  Gospel  in  the 
'  Cambridge  Greek  Testament,'  or  in  the  '  Cambridge  Bible  for  Schools,' 
or  in  the  '  Pulpit  Commentary.'  By  the  side  of  which  the  following  sober 
and  eminently  just  statement  of  the  problem  will  repay  consideration : 
"  The  Gospel  of  St.  John  presents  a  unique  phenomenon.  It  contains  two 
distinct  strata  of  thought,  both  quite  unmistakable  to  the  critical  eye ;  and 
in  each  of  these  strata,  again,  there  are  local  peculiarities  which  complicate 
the  problem.  When  it  comes  to  be  closely  investigated,  the  complexities  ol 
ions  BPin.  ( 


nrTBODiTcrnoir  to 


the  proUem  are  snoli  that  the  whole  of  literature  prohahly  does  not  famish 
a  parallel.  The  hypothesis  of  authorship  that  shall  satisfy  them  thus 
becomes  in  its  tnm  eqnally  oomplioated.  It  is  necessary  to  find  one  who 
shall  be  at  once  Jew  and  Christian,  intensely  Jewish,  and  yet  comprehen- 
sively Christian ;  brought  up  on  the  Old  Testament,  and  yet  with  a  strong 
tincture  of  Alexandrian  philosophy ;  using  a  language  in  which  the  Hebrew 
structure  and  the  Greet  superstructure  are  eqnally  conspicuous ;  one  who 
had  mixed  personally  in  the  events,  and  yet  at  the  time  of  writing  stood 
at  a  distance  from  them ;  an  immediate  disciple  of  Jesus,  and  yet  possessed 
of  so  powerful  an  individuality  as  to  impress  the  mark  of  himself  upon  his 
reooUeotions ;  a  nature  capable  of  the  most  ardent  and  clinging  affection, 
and  yet  an  unsparing  denouncer  of  hostile  agencies  of  any  kind  which  lay 
outside  his  own  charmed  circle.  There  is  one  historical  figure  which 
seems  to  fit  like  a  key  into  all  these  intricate  wards — the  figure  of  St. 
John  as  it  has  been  handed  down  to  us  by  a  well-authenticated  tradi- 
tion. I  can  conceive  no  second.  If  the  St.  John  of  history  did  not  exist, 
he  would  have  to  be  invented  to  account  for  his  Gospel "  (Dr.  Sanday's 
'  Inaugural  Lecture '  as  Ireland  Professor  of  Exegesis :  Parker,  Oxford, 
1888).  In  short,  the  problem  with  regard  to  the  Epistles  of  St.  John  is 
very  similar  to  that  respecting  the  Pastoral  Epistles.  There  are  portions 
of  the  latter  which  are  unquestionably  Pauline ;  and  these  carry  with  them 
the  authorship  of  those  portions  the  Pauline  origin  of  which  might  be 
questioned.  Similarly,  the  apostolic  origin  of  the  Fourth  Gospel  carries 
with  it  the  apostolic  authorship  of  the  First  Epistle,  and  this  that  of  the 
Second  Epistle,  and  this  again  that  of  the  third. 

The  First  Epistle  was  known  to  St.  Polycarp,  the  disciple  of  St.  John, 
and  is  quoted  as  his  by  St.  Irenseui,  the  pupil  of  St.  Polycarp.  Papias, 
the  contemporary  of  Polycarp,  made  use  of  it.  It  is  repeatedly  quoted  as 
St.  John's  by  Clement  of  Alexandria,  and  still  more  frequently  by  TertulUan, 
who  seems  to  have  been  specially  fond  of  the  Epistle.  So  that  the  century 
immediately  following  St.  John's  death  is  well  filled  with  witnesses.  Origen 
and  his  pupil,  Dionysiue  of  Alexandria,  St.  Cyprian,  and  in  short  all  the 
Fathers,  Greek  and  Latin,  accept  the  Epistle  as  St.  John's.  The  Muratorian 
Fragment  quotes  the  opening  words  of  it,  and  it  is  contained  in  the  Old 
Syriac  Version.  The  evidence,  therefore,  both  external  and  internal,  fully 
justifies  the  classification  of  Eutehius,  who  places  the  First  Epistle  of 
St.  John  among  the  universally  received  (Jtv  o/toXoyovjucvois)  or  oatholio 
books  of  the  New  Testament. 

The  evidence  for  the  Second  Epistle,  though  less  ample,  is  sufiScient. 
That  for  the  Third  Epistle,  if  it  stood  alone,  would  leem  insuificient  for 
any  certain  conclusion.  But  both  on  external  and  internal  grounds  it  is 
impossible  to  disconnect  these  twin  Epistles  and  give  them  a  different 
parentage.  And  therefore  the  Third  Epistle  is  covered  by  the  evidenoe 
for  the  second,  as  that  again  by  the  evidenoe  for  the  first. 

IreimvM,  a  pupil  of  St.  John's  pupil,  Polycarp,  twice  quotes  the  Second 


THE  EPISTLES  OF  ST.  JOHN.  IH 


Epistle  as  St.  John's.  Clement  of  Alexandria  speaks  of  it  as  St.  John's,  and 
apparently  oommented  on  both  it  and  the  Third  Epistle  (Eusebina,  '  Hist. 
Ecol,,'  YI.  xiv.  1).  Dionysiui  of  Alexandria  thinks  that  his  not  naming 
himself  in  these  Epistles  is  in  accordance  with  St.  John's  common  practice 
A  passage  in  St,  Cyprian'$  works  seems  to  show  that  the  Second  Epistle  was 
accepted  as  St.  John's  by  the  African  Ohnrch  in  the  third  century,  Origen, 
Eusebins,  and  Jerome  all  speak  with  caution  about  the  two  shorter  Epistles. 
They  know  of  their  existence,  but  also  know  that  some  are  inclined  to 
attribute  them  to  another  author.  Eusebius,  however  (•  Dem.  Evan.,'  III. 
iii.  p.  120),  seems  himself  to  have  believed  that  they  were  by  the  apostle. 
But  they  are  absent  from  the  Old  Syriac  Version,  and  appear  to  have  been 
rejected  as  not  apostolic  by  the  theologians  of  Antiooh. 

Thus  it  is  precisely  the  earliest  witnesses  who  are  favourable  to  the 
apostolic  authorship ;  and  at  no  time  do  the  doubts  as  to  their  apostolioity 
appear  to  have  been  general.  And  if  the  evidence  as  a  whole  appears  to  be 
meagre,  we  must  remember  these  facts.  (1)  These  Epistles  were  probably 
written  the  very  last  of  all  the  books  in  the  New  Testament.  Many  of  the 
other  books  had  acquired  a  considerable  circulation  before  these  were  in 
existence.  (2)  They  are  private  letters,  addressed,  not  to  Churches,  but  to 
individuals,  and  therefore  were  likely  to  remain  in  obscurity  for  a  consider- 
able time.  We  may  compare  the  public  and  ofScial  letters  of  a  bishop  now 
with  his  private  letters.  The  one  kind  are  published  and  generally  circulated 
at  once ;  the  others,  if  published  at  all,  not  until  long  after  his  death,  (3) 
The  comparative  insignificance  of  these  letters  would  lead  to  their  remaining 
generally  unknown  for  some  time.  They  are  very  short,  and  not  of  very 
general  interest.  (4)  An  immense  amount  of  early  Christian  literature  has 
perished,  and  with  it,  no  doubt,  much  evidence  respecting  these  Epistles 
(see  Salmon,  '  Introduction  to  New  Testament,'  pp.  282-287,  3rd  edit.). 

But  the  somewhat,  meagre  external  evidence  is  strengthened  by  the 
internal.  Here  the  insignificant  character  of  the  Epistles  is  a  strong  point 
in  their  favour.  Who  would  care  to  forge  such  slight  productions  ?  And 
would  a  forger  have  been  content  with  calling  himself '  the  elder '  ?  Would 
he  not  have  said  '  the  apostle '  or  '  John  the  apostle '  ?  And  if  they  are 
the  bona  fide  writings  of  some  other  person,  whether  another  John  or  not, 
why  has  the  author  taken  such  minute  pains,  espeoiaUy  in  the  Second 
Epistle,  to  write  like  St.  John  ?  The  style  of  his  Gospel  and  First  Epistle 
is  imitated  with  the  greatest  care  and  skill  throughout.  The  student  has 
only  to  take  a  good  reference  Bible,  and  place  the  passages  side  by  side  in 
parallel  columns,  to  see  whether  far  the  most  satisfaotory  hypothesis  is  not 
that  of  the  common  tradition,  that  Gospel  and  Epistles  all  come  from  one 
and  the  same  author,  and  that  author  the  Apostle  St.  John. 

11.  The  Occasion  or  the  Epistles. 

Like  most  of  the  Epistles  in  the  New  Testament,  all  these  three  letters  are 
special  and  occasional.     They  are  not  written,  as  books  commonly  are  at 


It  INTEODUOTION  TO 


the  present  time,  to  elucidate  some  subject  in  which  the  writer  is  specially 
interested,  without  much  reference  to  current  events.  They  are  produced 
for  a  special  occasion,  to  meet  an  existing  difficulty  and  danger.  The  First 
Epistle  is  written  to  grapple  with  the  insidious  seductions  of  antinomian 
Gnosticism,  as  they  threatened  the  Church  at  large.  The  Second  Epistle 
deals  with  the  same  danger  as  it  affected  a  particular  family.  The  third 
treats  of  a  corresponding  danger  arising  from  lawlessness  of  another  kind — 
high-handed  rebellion  against  apostolic  authority.  Thus,  while  the  First 
Epistle  in  certain  aspects  forms  a  contrast  to  the  other  two,  in  other  aspects 
the  first  two  Epistles  form  a  contrast  to  the  third.  The  First  Epistle  is 
catholic,  or  general, — ^it  is  addressed  to  the  Church  at  large  ;  the  other  two 
are  not.  The  First  Epistle  is  a  companion  to  the  Gospel,  and  lays  the 
foundations  of  Christian  conduct  as  a  whole.  The  other  two  have  no  special 
relation  to  the  Gospel,  and  deal  with  only  one  or  two  points  of  conduct,  viz. 
the  duty  of  hospitality,  and  its  limits ;  and  the  treatment  of  those  who 
promote  heresy  and  schism.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  the  first  two  letters 
contrast  with  the  third,  in  that  they  treat  of  a  specious  and  subtle  evil 
which  was  poisoning  the  Church  from  without ;  while  the  other  treats  of 
open  and  violent  anarchy  which  was  troubling  the  Church  from  within. 
Humanly  speaking,  we  may  say  that,  but  for  the  pressure  of  Gnostisism 
upon  the  Church,  the  First  and  Second  Epistles,  and  perhaps  also  the 
Gospel  of  St.  John,  would  never  have  been  written  ;  and  again  that,  but 
for  the  turbulence  of  Diotrephes,  the  Third  Epistle  would  never  have  been 
written. 

The  turbulence  of  Diotrephes  speaks  for  itself.  It  is  amazing  as  being 
directed  against  a  person  like  St.  John,  the  last  remaining  representative  of 
the  apostolic  body ;  but  otherwise  it  is  simply  a  typical  instance  of  the  self- 
willed  and  domineering  ecclesiastic,  of  which  the  history  of  the  Church  can 
show  so  many  examples.  But  the  Gnosticism  whioh  called  forth  the  first 
two  Epistles  requires  a  few  words  of  explanation. 

Gnosticism,  although  it  often  had  much  in  common  with  Ebionitism  and 
Judaism,  was  not,  like  these,  the  open  enemy  of  Ghristianity.  It  professed 
to  give  its  approval  and  patronage  to  the  gospel.  The  gospel  was  very 
good  as  far  as  it  went;  but  the  Gnostics  had  "a  more  excellent  way." 
They  understood  the  gospel  better  than  the  apostles  themselves.  It  was 
a  mistake  to  suppose  that  the  historical  facts  and  moral  precepts  of  the 
Scriptures  were  to  be  taken  literally.  It  was  a  still  greater  mistake  to 
suppose  that  the  Scriptures  contained  all  that  was  necessary  for  man's  spiri- 
tual well-being.  There  was  a  higher  knowledge,  a  more  profound  gnosis ; 
and  this  the  Gnostic  could  attain  to  and  impart.  Illumined  by  this, 
men  would  see  that  everything  else  was  comparatively  of  unimportance. 
The  philosopher  whose  mind  was  enlightened  by  this  esoteric  knowledge 
need  not  trouble  himself  much  about  his  conduct.  His  soul  was  steeped  in 
light.  Good  actions  could  not  greatly  increase  his  enlightenment ;  bad 
actions  could  not  seriously  detract  fiom  it.     Indeed,  there  were  many  thing! 


THE  EPISTLES  OP  ST.  JOHN. 


commonly  regarded  as  bad,  which  the  true  Quostio  would  not  shtin,  but 
■eek,  as  a  means  of  enlarging  his  experience. 

It  will  be  seen  at  once  how  suoh  teaching  cut  at  the  root  of  all  Christian 
tmth  and  morality.  (1)  Bighteousness  was  made  of  no  account  in  com- 
parison with  intellectual  illumination.  (2)  Scripture  was  made  of  no 
account  in  comparison  with  a  knowledge  which  partly  transmuted  and 
partly  superseded  it.  (3)  The  work  of  Christ  was  made  of  no  account ;  for 
there  could  be  no  need  of  an  atonement  if  there  was  no  real  evil  in  sin. 

Besides  this  Oreek  doctrine  of  the  supremaoy  of  intellect  and  the  all- 
importance  of  intellectual  enlightenment,  most  Gnostics  also  taught  the 
Oriental  doctrine  that  matter,  with  everything  material,  is  evil.  This 
principle  also  entailed  a  complete  subversion  of  Christian  doctrine  and 
Christian  ethics.  (1)  If  the  material  universe  is  utterly  evil,  it  cannot 
have  been  created  by  the  supremely  good  God,  but  by  some  evil,  or  at  least 
some  inferior,  power.  (2)  The  supremely  good  God  must  be  utterly 
removed  from  such  a  universe.  (3)  The  Incarnation  is  impossible ;  for  the 
Deity  could  never  consent  to  be  united  to  a  material  body,  innately  and 
incorrigibly  impure. 

In  morals  opposite  oonclnsions  were  drawn  from  this  Gnostic  premiss  of 
the  inherently  impure  character  of  everything  material.  (1)  If  the  human 
body  is  utterly  evil,  it  must  be  subdued  and  chastised  to  the  utmost,  that 
the  enlightened  spirit  may  be  freed  from  the  burden  of  so  vile  an  instrument. 
(2)  If  the  human  body  is  utterly  evil,  it  is  a  matter  of  indifference  what  it 
does ;  and  so  worthless  an  instrument  may  be  made  to  commit  any  aot  from 
which  the  spirit  can  derive  additional  knowledge. 

Thus  the  "  more  excellent  way  "  of  these  advanced  thinkers  "  turned  the 
grace  of  our  God  into  lasciviousness,  and  denied  our  only  Master  and  Lord, 
Jesus  Christ "  (Jude  4).  Can  we  wonder  at  the  stern,  unyielding  attitude 
which  St.  John  adopted  in  confronting  it  ?  "  Liars,"  "  seducers,"  "  false 
prophets,"  "deceivers,"  "antichrists,"  seem  not  too  strong  appellations 
to  give  to  the  promoters  of  teaching  such  as  this.  The  apostle's  reitera- 
tions of  the  impossibility  of  light  without  holiness  and  without  love, 
of  the  impossibility  of  love  without  obedience,  of  the  impossibility  of 
combining  birth  from  God  with  love  of  the  world  and  its  lusts,  or  with 
hatred  of  one's  brethren, — become  doubly  intelligible  when  we  remember 
the  specious  doctrines  at  which  these  repeated  assurances  are  aimed.  Over 
and  over  again,  first  from  this  point  of  view  and  then  from  that,  St. 
John  solemnly  asserts  our  need  of  the  atoning  work  of  Christ,  the  necessity 
of  believing  in  it,  and  the  obligation  to  aot  as  those  who  have  abjured  all 
sin  and  are  daily  cleansing  themselves  from  its  pollution  and  power  in 
the  blood  of  Jesus.  To  deny  or  trifle  with  these  great  truths  is  to  leave 
the  family  of  God  for  the  dominion  of  the  evil  one.  Gnostics  may  boast 
of  their  knowledge ;  but  believers  in  the  Incarnation  have  their  know 
ledge  too.  They  know  that  they  have  passed  over  out  of  death  into  life 
(1  Epist.  iii.  14).     They  know  that  they  are  children  of  God,  and  as  suoh  are 


INTRODUCTION  TO 


freed  from  sin  by  his  Son  (1  Epist.  v.  18,  19).  They  know  that  the  Son  of 
God  has  come  in  the  flesh,  and  has  given  them  a  mind  wherewith  to  know, 
not  the  remote  abstraction  which  the  Gnostic  calls  God,  but  the  loving 
Father  in  whom  they  can  abide  through  his  Son  Jesns  Christ  (1  Epist.  v. 
20).  "  St.  John  has  been  called  the  apostle  of  the  absolute.  Those  who 
would  concede  to  Christianity  no  higher  dignity  than  that  of  relative  and 
provisional  truth,  will  fail  to  find  any  countenance  for  their  doctrine  in  the 
New  Testament.  But  nowhere  will  they  encounter  more  earnest  opposition 
to  it  than  in  the  pages  of  the  writer  who  is  pre-eminently  the  apostle  of 
charity.  St.  John  preaches  the  Christian  creed  as  the  one  absolute 
certainty  "  (Liddon, '  Bampton  Lectures,'  lect.  v.). 

in.  The  Destination  of  the  Epistles. 

To  whom  were  these  Epistles  written?  Beyond  question,  the  first  is 
rightly  called  "  catholic,"  or  "  generaL"  It  has  no  special  superscription. 
It  is  not  addressed  to  the  Church  of  Ephesus,  nor  to  the  Church  of  Fergamos, 
nor  to  the  Churches  of  Asia  collectively,  but  to  the  Church  at  large.  No 
doubt  it  circulated  first  among  the  Churches  of  Asia,  and  St.  John  probably 
had  their  needs  and  dangers  in  his  mind  as  he  wrote  it.  But  its  teaching 
and  exhortation  is  not  confined  to  them,  nor  to  the  Church  of  that  time. 
The  doctrines  and  warnings  which  it  contains  are  as  suitable  to  the  Church 
of  England  or  of  Eome  at  the  present  time  as  to  the  Church  of  Ephesus  in 
St.  John's  day.  The  "  little  children  "  addressed  in  it,  although  primarily 
those  whom  the  apostle  shepherded  while  still  on  earth,  are  not  confined  to 
that  small  band  of  Christians.  All  those  who  in  any  age,  past,  present,  or 
future,  listen  to  the  words  of  this  Epistle  with  willing  ears,  are  among  the 
«  little  children  "  of  St.  John. 

The  destination  of  the  Second  Epistle  is  more  open  to  doubt.  From  very 
early  times  some  have  supposed  that  the  "elect  lady"  is  an  allegorical 
expression  to  signify  a  Church.  Jerome  even  supposes  her  to  represent  the 
Church  universal.  But  this  is  quite  incredible.  "  The  children  of  thine  elect 
sister  salute  thee  "  may  possibly  mean  that  the  members  of  one  local  Church 
salute  another  local  Church ;  but  what  meaning  can  we  give  to  the  elect 
sister  of  the  Church  universal  ?    The  Church  universal  includes  all  the  elect. 

This  seems  to  be  a  case  in  which  the  literal  interpretation  is  the  right 
one,  because  the  literal  interpretation  makes  excellent  sense.  No  difficulty 
confronts  us  if  we  assume  the  elect  lady  to  be  an  individual.  Whereas  so 
slight  a  letter  seems  hardly  an  appropriate  occasion  for  the  employment  of 
an  allegory.  In  the  First  Epistle  a  symbolical  designation  of  the  Church 
would  have  been  much  more  in  place.  The  letter  to  Gains  is  certainly 
addressed  to  an  individual.  Does  not  this  in  itself  create  a  presumption 
that  the  sister-letter  to  the  elect  lady  is  addressed  to  an  individual  also  ? 

Of  the  elect  lady  and  of  Gains  we  know  no  more  than  the  Epistles  tell 
SB.  The  lady  has  children,  some  of  whom  are  away  from  her  roof,  and  are 
living  lojmL  Christian  lives.     Others  are  with  her ;  and  the  elder  fears  that 


THE  EPISTLES  OP  ST.  JOHN. 


they  hare  been  led  astray,  or  are  in  danger  of  being  led  astray,  by  false 
teaobera  to  whom  the  lady,  with  mistaken  generosity,  has  given  a  welcome. 
Some  commentators  infer  that  the  lady  herself  has  been  sednced  into  extreme 
asceticism  through  the  Gnostic  doctrine  of  the  Arileness  of  the  flesh ;  that  it  was 
a  case  in  which  "  a  noble  woman,  bent  on  maintaining  pnrity  of  spirit  and 
freedom  from  the  baser  cares  and  pleasures  of  life,  has  thought  to  gain  her 
end  by  mortification  of  the  body,  by  renunciation  of  the  world,  by  sacrificing 
natural  affection  and  forsaking  domestic  duties."  It  may  have  been  so ;  but 
it  is  difiicult  to  find  any  evidence  of  this  in  the  Epistle  itself.  AIL  that  is 
told  US  there  is  that  she  needed  to  be  on  her  guard,  lest,  by  welcoming  those 
who  denied  the  Incarnation,  she  and  her  children  should  suffer  serious  harm 
themselves,  and  also  incur  grave  responsibility  for  the  effects  of  such 
disastrous  teaching  upon  others.  Her  sister's  children,  who  are  with  the 
apostle,  send  a  salutation  in  his  letter,  perhaps  to  indicate  that  they 
sympathize  with  its  contents. 

Of  the  three  people  mentioned  in  the  Third  Epistle  we  know  nothing 
from  external  sources.  Gains  is  certainly  a  hospitable  and  godly  man, 
probably  well-to-do  and  a  layman.  Diotrephes  is  apparently  an  ecclesiastic  ; 
but  if  he  does  not  poRsees  ecclesiastical  authority  himself,  he  is  influential 
enough  to  get  it  exercised  according  to  his  wishes.  Demetrius  is  one 
whose  well-known  goodness  is  a  pleasing  contrast  to  the  wicked  folly  of 
Diotrephes.  Whether  either  Gains  or  Demetrius  belongs  to  the  same 
community  as  Diotrephes,  and  there  opposes  him  in  his  tyrannical  action, 
it  ia  not  easy  to  determine.  Apparently,  Gains  has  not  known  much  of 
Demetrius  previously,  and  therefore  they  are  not  likely  both  of  them  to 
have  been  members  of  the  Ohnrch  in  which  Diotrephes  prates  and  persecutes. 

lY.  Thb  Pljlck  jlsd  Datb  or  thi  Efistlxs. 

Nothing  is  known  on  either  point  with  regard  to  any  one  of  the  Epistles. 
But  as  Ephesus  was  the  apostle's  chief  abode  during  the  later  years  of  his 
life,  we  may  assume  that  they  were  written  there.  Certainly  they  were 
written  late  in  St  John's  life.  The  tone  of  them  is  that  of  an  old  man 
writing  to  a  younger  generation.  Moreover,  the  First  Epistle  was  almost, 
certainly  written  about  the  same  time  as  the  Gospel,  and  probably  after 
it.  The  internal  relation  of  the  two  writings  is  strongly  in  favour  of 
this  view.  And  the  Gospel  was  probably  written  in  the  apostle's  later 
years.  The  Second  Epistle  implies  the  existence  of  the  first,  and  therefore 
was  written  after  it.  The  third,  from  its  similarity  to  the  second,  appears 
to  have  been  written  abont  the  same  time.  We  shall  probably  not  be  far 
wrong  if  we  suppose  that  the  Gospel  and  all  three  Epistles  were  written 
between  i^jy.  80  and  x.d,  96. 

y.  Thi  Plas  or  thx  Epistles. 

Each  Epistle  hat  an  introduction  and  a  oonolnsion,  between  which  the 
portion  of  the  letter  lies.     In  all  three  Epistles  the  introduotioa 


»«  nmtODITCTION  TO 


occupies  four  veTses.  In  the  First  Epistle  the  oonclnsion  oconpies  fonr  or 
eight  verses ;  in  the  second,  two ;  and  in  the  third,  three.  It  is  the  central 
portion  of  the  First  Epistle  that  is  so  difiGcult  to  analyse  satisfactorily.  But 
the  difficulty  of  framing  a  satisfactory  analysis  must  not  lead  us  to  acquiesce 
in  the  indolent  and  impotent  conclusion  that  the  Epistle  has  no  plan.  Some 
would  have  it  that  in  this  letter  the  apostle  gives  us  nothing  more  con- 
seeutive  or  organic  than  a  string  of  disconnected,  or  very  slightly  connected, 
aphorisms.  The  running  analysis  which  is  given  side  by  side  with  the 
notes  on  the  Epistle  will,  it  is  hoped,  convince  any  thoughtful  reader  that 
the  aphoristic  view  is  untenable.  The  analysis  here  suggested  is  probably 
incorrect  in  some  places  and  inadequate  in  a  great  many  more ;  but  the 
mere  fact  that  any  such  scheme  can  be  brought  into  any  harmony  with  the 
words  of  the  Epistle  is  strong  evidence  that  the  Epistle  is  not  a  fortuitous 
concourse  of  aphorisms.  A  comparison  of  the  various  analyses  whiob  have 
been  put  forth  by  commentators  will  show  that  there  is  something  like 
general  agreement  as  to  three  divisions  in  the  letter.  Almost  all  make  a 
break  at  or  near  ch.  i.  4;  ii.  29 ;  and  v.  13  or  17.  Omitting  the  introduction 
and  conclusion,  we  may  take  oh.  ii.  29  as  the  centre  of  the  Epistle,  considering 
what  precedes  as  the  first  half,  and  what  follows  as  the  second  half.  For 
convenience  we  need  a  name  for  each  half;  and  perhaps  no  better  can  be 
found  than  the  great  statement  which  each  contains  respecting  the  Divine 
nature.  The  first  half,  therefore,  is  entitled  "God  is  Light,"  and  the 
second,  "God  is  Love."  The  following  table  will  show  the  remaining 
divisions  which  have  been  adopted.  But  it  must  be  borne  in  mind  that 
these  divisions  are  by  no  means  to  be  insisted  upon  as  present  to  the 
apostle's  mind  while  he  was  writing, — they  are  put  forth  merely  as  a  guide 
in  catching  the  sequence  of  his  thoughts.  There  are  three  facts  which 
render  a  succet^sful  analysis  of  the  Epistle  almost  an  impossibility  :  (1)  the 
divisions  melt  into  one  another;  (2)  the  sections  often  contain  a  plurality 
of  subjects,  from  which  it  is  difficult  to  select  any  one  as  dominating  the 
rest ;  (3)  subjects  touched  on  in  earlier  sections  are  constantly  reappearing, 
recut  and  reset,  in  later  sections.  From  this  it  follows  that,  to  mark  the 
divisions  between  the  sections,  and  also  to  name  the  sections  when  their 
limits  have  been  more  or  less  arbitrarily  determined,  are  no  easy  under- 
takings. Probably  no  student  of  the  Epistle  will  be  satisfied  with  his  own 
results  in  either  of  these  undertakings.  As  to  the  present  attempt,  Vdleai 
quantum  valeat. 


An  Analysis  or  the  First  Efistls. 

1.  Oh.  i.  1 — 4.    Introduction.    Subject-matter  and  purpose. 

2.  Ch.  i.  5 — ii.  28.    First  Main  Division.     Ood  it  Light. 

(1)  Ch.  i.  5— 11.  6.    Positive  side.    What  walking  in  the  light  involvea. 
Ch.  i.  6 — 7.    Fellowship  with  Qod  and  with  the  brethren. 
Ch.  i.  8 — 10.    Consdoasness  and  confession  of  sin. 
Ch.  U.  1—6.     Obedience  by  imitation  of  Christ. 


THE  EPISTLES  OF  ST.  JOHN. 


(2)  Ch.  ii.  7 — 28.    Negative  side.    'What  walking  in  the  light  exoludeo. 
Ch.  ii.  7 — 11.    Hatred  of  the  brethren. 
Ch.  ii.  12 — 17.    The  world  and  its  wayt. 
Ch.  ii.  18—28.    Antichrists. 
8.  Ch.  iii.  1 — ^v.  12.    Second  Main  DrvisiOK.     Ood  it  love. 

(1)  Ch.  iii.  1 — V.  24.     The  evidence  of  sonship :  Bighteousneas. 

Ch.  iii.  1 — 12.    The  children  of  Ood  and  the  children  of  the  devlL 
Ch.  iii.  13 — 24.    Love  and  hate ;  life  and  death. 

(2)  Ch.  iv.  1 — V.  12.     The  source  of  sonship :  Possession  of  the  Spirit. 
Ch,  iv.  1 — 6.    The  spirit  of  truth  and  the  spirit  of  error. 

Ch.  iv.  7 — ^v.  12.    Love  and  faith. 
4.  Clu  V.  13 — 21.    CoNOLusios. 

Aa  Analysis  or  the  Second  Epistli. 

1.  Vers.  1 — 4.    Introduction.    Address  and  occasion, 

2.  Vers.  5 — 11.    Main  Division.    Exhortation. 
Vers.  5,  6.    To  love  and  obedience. 

Vers.  7 — 9.    Against  false  doctrine. 
Vers.  10, 11.    Against  false  charity. 
8.  Vers.  12, 13.    CoNCLusiOK. 

An  Analtbib  or  the  Thibd  Epistxa 

1.  Vera.  1 — 4.    Inteodootion.    Address  and  occasion, 

2.  Vers.  5 — 12.    Main  Division.    JExhortation, 
Vers.  5 — 8.    The  hospitality  of  Gains. 
Vers.  9, 10.    The  arrogance  of  Diotrephea, 
Vers.  11, 12.     The  moraL 

8.  Vers.  13, 14.    Conclusion. 

VI.  The  Chakacteristics  of  the  Epistles. 

The  style  of  St.  John,  mobt  strongly  marked  in  his  Gospel  and  First  Epistle, 
conspicuous  in  the  Second  Epistle,  and  not  wanting,  though  less  conspicuous, 
in  the  third,  is,  in  one  respect,  very  similar  to  the  subject-matter  of  the 
First  Epistle ;  it  is  very  difficult  to  analyse.  Like  a  subtle  strain  of  music  or 
an  exquisite  effect  in  colouring,  it  can  be  felt  and  appreciated,  but  not  easily 
described. 

Two  characteristics  of  this  magic  style  may  be  mentioned  together :  pro- 
fundity of  thought  and  timpUeity  of  language.  This  marvellous  combination 
to  a  large  extent  accounts  for  the  power  which  St.  John's  writings  exercise 
over  those  who  listen  to  them.  We  seem  to  be  within  a  charmed  circle,  and 
to  be  listening  to  one  who  will  not  let  us  go  until  he  has  had  his  say ;  until 
he  has  placed  before  us,  in  words  which  the  most  simple-minded  can  com- 
prehend, truths  which  are  not  of  this  world,  nor  are  to  be  measured  by  those 
of  this  world.  Of  the  profundity  of  his  thoughts  there  can  be  no  question. 
The  ideas  which  he  places  before  us  are  among  the  deepest  mysteries  ot 
revelation :  man's  relation  to  God,  to  the  evil  one,  and  to  the  world  ;  the 


INTRODUCTION  TO 


Incarnation ;  the  Atonement;  the  judgment  to  come;  the  Son's  relation  to 
the  Father  and  to  the  Spirit ;  the  essential  characteristics  of  the  Godhead, 
And  all  this  is  stated  in  propositions,  which  commonly  contain  simple  wordi 
in  a  very  simple  construction.  "  Now  are  we  children  of  God."  "  He  that 
doeth  sin  is  of  the  devil."  "  The  world  is  passing  away,  and  the  lust  thereof : 
but  he  that  doeth  the  will  of  God  abideth  for  ever."  "  The  Father  hath  sent 
the  Son,  the  Saviour  of  the  world."  "  The  blood  of  Jesus,  his  Son,  cleanseth 
us  from  all  sin."  '•  God  is  Light,  and  in  him  is  no  darkness  at  all."  "  God 
is  Love."  What  form  of  expression  could  be  more  simple  ?  There  is  not  a 
dependent  sentence  or  a  relative  clause  in  any  of  these  statements,  much  less 
an  involved  construction.  And  the  words  used  are  of  the  simplest.  Yet 
who  can  fathom  the  depth  of  such  statements  ? 

This  simplicity  of  construction  and  avoidance  of  dependent  and  relative 
olanses  involves  a  good  deal  of  repetition — a  substantive  or  a  clause  is  repeated 
where  a  relative  might  have  taken  its  place.  But  even  where  repetition  is 
not  occasioned  in  this  way  we  find  it  employed  for  the  sake  of  emphasis. 
St.  John  is  not  afraid  of  wearying  us  by  reiteration,  if  by  reiteration  he  can 
make  the  impression  required.  And,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  his  repetitions  do 
not  weary  us,  and  they  do  leave  their  impression.  The  rhythm  of  his  simple 
sentences  charms  the  ear,  fixes  itself  in  the  memory,  and  sooner  or  later  finds 
its  way  home  to  the  heart.  Note  the  efieot  produced  by  the  repetition  of 
*'love"  and  "  world"  in  snoh  sentences  as  these — 

"  Lore  not  the  world. 
Neither  the  things  that  ara  In  the  world. 
If  any  man  love  the  world. 
The  love  of  th«  Father  i»  not  in  him." 

Or,  again,  the  repetition  of  **  last  hour  "  and  "  antichrist "  in  inverse  order 
in  the  following : — 

"  Little  children,  it  is  the  last  hour  t 
And  as  ye  heard  that  aalichrist  cometh. 
Even  now  have  there  arisen  many  antichrists ; 
Whereby  we  know  that  it  is  the  last  hour." 

There  would  be  nothing  but  loss  in  writing,  •♦  He  that  doeth  sin  is  of  the 
devil,  who  sinneth  from  the  beginning ;  to  destroy  whose  works  the  Son  of 
Ood  was  manifested,"  instead  of — 

«  He  that  doeth  sin  is  of  th«  devil ; 
For  the  devil  sinneth  from  the  beginning. 
To  this  end  was  the  Son  of  God  manifested. 
That  be  might  destroy  the  works  of  the  devil." 

Oomp.  also  oh.  ii.  24,  where  the  solemn  effect  produced  by  the  repetition  of 
the  word  "  abide  "  is  lost  in  the  Authorized  Version  by  substituting  "  abide," 
"reuain,"  ♦*oontinue,"for  the  threefold  "  abide." 
Tbe  repetition  and  rhythm  just  pointed  out  is  olosely  connected  with  that 


THE  EPISTLES  OF  ST.  JOHN.  xi 

love  ot  parallelism  which  is  so  conspictioTis  in  Hehrew  poetry.  St.  John,  full 
of  the  spirit  of  the  old  psalmists  and  prophets,  constantly  employs  this  form 
of  expres.'^ion — 

"  We  have  an  Advocate  with  the  Father,  Jesus  Christ  the  lighteou* : 
And  He  is  the  propitiation  for  our  sins." 

"  He  that  liateth  his  hrother  is  in  darkness, 
And  walketh  in  darkness. 
And  knoweth  not  whither  he  goeth." 

"  For  this  cause  the  world  knoweth  us  not, 
Because  it  knew  him  not." 

"  Receive  him  not  into  your  houses 
And  give  him  no  greeting." 

Sometimes  the  parallelism  is  antithetic,  and  the  second  clause  denies  tha 

opposite  of  the  first. 

vfoa  IS  Light, 

And  in  him  is  no  darkness  at  all." 

"  Ahidetb  in  the  light. 
And  there  is  none  occasion  of  stumbling  in  him." 

**  He  that  hath  the  Son  hath  the  life ; 
He  that  hath  not  the  Son  of  God,  hath  not  the  life." 

"  He  that  doeth  good  is  of  God ; 
He  that  doeth  evil  hath  not  seen  God." 

And  this  leads  ns  to  yet  another  characteristic — the  love  of  antithetf*. 
ThroTighout  the  Epistles,  and  especially  in  the  first,  there  is  a  constant 
movement  from  one  position  to  its  opposite ;  and  the  opposite  is  commonly 
not  the  exact  converse  of  the  original  position,  but  an  advance  beyond  it  ; 
and  thus  progress  is  made. 

"They  are  of  the  world : 
Therefore  speak  they  of  the  world, 
And  the  world  heareth  them. 
We  are  of  God : 

He  that  knoweth  God  heareth  us ; 
He  who  is  not  of  God  heareth  us  not. 
By  this  we  know  the  spirit  of  truth. 
And  the  spirit  of  error." 

"The  world  is  passing  away,  and  the  lust  thereof; 
But  he  that  doeth  the  will  of  God  abideth  for  ever," 

Lastly,  we  may  notice  the  calm  tone  of  eonaciouB  authority  which  pervades 
all  these  Epistles,  and  which,  as  it  is  seldom  put  prominently  forward,  and 
is  felt  rather  than  heard,  would  be  very  diflScult  to  assume  if  it  were  not 
possessed.  This  is  one  of  the  many  arguments  which  converge  to  point  out 
an  apostle,  and  that  apostle  St.  John,  as  the  writer  of  these  letters.  A  teacher 
who  can  write  like  this  has  already  done  much  to  vindicate  his  claim  to  be 


««  INTEODUCTION  TO  THE  EPISTLES  OF  ST.  JOHN. 

heard  and  olDeyed.  "  Thou  knowest  that  onr  witness  is  true,"  is  the  conviction 
which  comes  home  to  the  mind  of  every  patient  and  earnest  student  of  these 
writings.  "  That  (mr  witness  is  true."  He  has  the  whole  "  glorions  company 
of  the  apostles  "  at  his  hack.  He  has  "  the  holy  Church  throughout  all  the 
world  "  on  his  side.  "  He  knoweth  that  he  saith  true,  that  ye  also  may 
believe." 

In  these  Epistles  we  have  two  infinitely  necessary  things  which  can  never 
he  separated  without  serious  injury  to  both^principles  of  oonduot  and 
principles  of  faith.  They  contain  a  summary  of  Christian  ethics  and  a 
summary  of  Christian  belief.  They  teach  us,  on  the  one  hand,  the  Way,  on" 
the  other,  the  Truth ;  and  these  two  combined  are  the  Life.  "  This  is  the 
true  God,  and  eternal  life." 

Who  does  not  feel  that  for  the  study  of  such  writings  something  more  is 
Viseded  than  tbe  student's  thirst  for  knowledge,  and  the  scholar's  keenness 
of  perception  ?  There  is  need  of  the  believer's  understanding  to  "  know  him 
that  is  true,"  and  of  the  Christian's  purity  of  heart  to  welcome  him.  That 
collect,  the  language  of  which  is  so  largely  drawn  from  the  First  Epistk, 
will  help  us  to  enter  upon  the  study  of  it  in  the  right  spirit,  the  Collect  for 
the  Sixth  Sunday  after  the  Epiphany— 

"  0  Gkid,  whose  blessed  Son  was  manifested  that  he  might  destroy  the  works 
of  the  devil  (eh.  iii.  8),  and  make  us  the  sons  of  God  (oh.  iii.  1),  and  heirs  of 
eternal  life  (ch.  v.  20);  Grant  us,  we  beseech  thee,  that,  having  this  hope,  we 
may  purify  ourselves  even  as  he  is  pure  (ch.  iii.  3) ;  that,  when  he  shall  appear 
(oh.  iii.  2)  again  with  power  and  great  glory,  we  may  he  made  like  unto  him 
(ch.  iii.  2)  in  his  eternal  and  glorious  kingdom ;  where  with  thee,  O  Father, 
(oh.  i.  2),  and  thee,  0  Holy  Ghost,  he  liveth  and  reigneth,  ever  one  God, 
world  without  end  (oomp.  ch.  t.  20).    Ames." 


THE 


riEST  EPISTLE  GEKEEAL  OP  JOHN. 


BXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  L 


Ven.  I — 1. — 1.  Tab  iNTBODUonoN,  It 
declares  the  wiitei's  authority,  based  on 
personal  experience ;  announces  the  subject- 
matter  of  his  Gospel,  to  which  this  Epistle 
forms  a  companion ;  acd  states  his  object  in 
writing  the  Epistle. 

These  opening  yerses  help  to  raise  the 
leader  to  the  high  &ame  of  mind  in  which 
the  apostle  writes.  Emotion,  suppressed 
under  a  sense  of  awe  and  solemnity,  is 
shown  by  the  inTolved  construction  through 
which  his  thoughts  struggle  for  utterance. 
We  are  reminded  of  the  introduction  to  the 
Gospel,  especially  in  the  first  clause.  Both 
announce  to  us  the  subject  of  the  writing 
which  follows — the  Word  who  is  the  Life. 
Both  set  before  ua,  in  the  simplest  language, 
tiaths  of  profoundest  meaning.  But  while 
in  the  Gospel  he  seems  to  lose  sight  of  his 
leaders  in  the  magnitade  of  his  subject, 
here  the  thought  of  his  "  little  ohildren  "  is 
uppermost. 

The  construction  of  the  first  three  verses 
may  be  taken  in  more  ways  than  one ;  but 
almost  certainly  the  main  verb  is  iiroyy^x- 
Xofiev,  and  the  clauses  introduced  by  8  give 
ttiejsubstance  of  the  iaiD,yye\la.  The  sentence 
is  broken  by  the  parenthetical  ver.  2,  after 
which  the  main  part  of  ver.  1  is  repeated  for 
clearness.  Reduced  to  a  simple  fovm,  the 
whole  runs  thug : "  That  which  was  from  the 
beginning,  which  we  have  heard,  which  we 
have  *een  with  our  eyes,  which  we  looked 
upon,  and  our  hands  handled,  conoeming 
I.  JOBS. 


the  Word  of  life,  we  declare  to  yon  alio,  that 
ye  also  may  have  communion  with  us." 

Ver.  1. — The  first  clause  states  what  or 
how  the  object  is  in  itself ;  the  next  three 
state  St.  John's  relation  to  it ;  "  which,"  in 
the  first  clause  nominative,  in  the  others  is 
accusative.  The  neuter  (S)  expresses  a  col- 
lective and  comprehensive  whole  (John  iv. 
22  ;  vi.  37  ;  xvii.  2 ;  Acts  xvii.  23,  etc.) ;  the 
attributes  of  the  \6rfos  rather  than  the 
ti.6yos  himself  are  indicated.  Or,  as  Jelf 
expresses  it,  "  the  neuter  gender  denotes 
immaterial  personality,  the  masculine  or 
feminine  material  personality."  In  the  be- 
ginning is  not  quite  the  same  as  in  John  i. 
1 ;  there  St.  John  tells  us  that  the  Word  was 
in  existence  before  the  world  was  created ; 
here  that  he  was  in  existence  before  he  was 
manifested.  Thus  far  all  is  indefinite; 
the  philosopher,  about  to  expound  a  law  of 
nature,  might  begin,  "  That  which  was  from 
the  beginning  declare  we  unto  you."  What 
follows  is  in  a  climax,  making  the  meaning 
clearer  at  each  step :  seeing  is  more  than 
hearing,  and  handling  than  seeing.  The 
climax  is  in  two  pairs,  of  perfects  and  of 
aorists ;  the  aorists  giving  the  past  acts,  the 
perfects  the  permanent  results.  Together 
they  sum  up  the  apostolic  experience  of  that 
boundless  activity  of  Christ,  of  which  the 
world  could  not  contain  the  full  account 
(John  xxi.  25).  Beheld  (JSmaifxiBa)  is  more 
than  have  seen  (eapdKaficv).  Seeing  might 
be  momentary;  beholding  implies  that 
steady  contemplation,  for  which  the  beloved 
disciple  had  large  and  abundantly  used  op- 
portunities. In  our  hands  handled  we  may 
see  a  reference  to  Luke  xxiv.  39,  where  the 
same  verb  is  used  (i|/i)\a4>4craTc);  and  still 
more  to  John  xx.  27,  where  the  demanded 
test  of  handling;  is  offered  to  St.  Thomas, 
provoking  the  confession  of  faith  to  which 


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  JOHN.     [ch.  i.  1—10. 


the  whole  Gospel  leads  up,  "  My  Lord  and 
my  God!"  Had  St.  John  merely  said 
"heard,"  we  might  have  thought  that  he 
meant  a  doctrine.  Had  he  merely  said 
"heard  and  seen,"  we  might  haye  under- 
stood it  of  the  efEeets  of  Christ's  doctrine. 
But  "our  hands  handled  "  shows  clearly  that 
i\e  attributes  of  the  Word  btcome  Jlesh  are 
what  St.  John  insists  on,  and  probably  as  a 
contradiction  of  Docetism.  "  Those  who  read 
his  letter  could  have  no  doubt  that  he  was 
referring  to  the  time  when  he  saw  the  face 
of  Jesus  Christ,  when  he  heard  his  dis- 
courses, when  he  grasped  his  handj  when 
he  leaned  upon  his  breast"  (Maurice).  Be- 
tween the  first  clause  and  what  follows  lies 
the  tremendous  fact  of  the  Incarnation  ;  and 
St.  John  piles  verb  on  verb,  and  clause  on 
clause,  to  show  that  he  speaks  with  the  au- 
thority of  full  knowledge,  and  that  there  is 
no  possible  room  for  Ebionite  or  Cerinthian 
error.  The  first  clause  assm-es  us  that  Jesus 
was  no  mere  man  ;  the  others  assure  us  that 
he  was  really  man.  Precisely  that  Being  who 
was  in  existence  from  the  beginning  is  that 
of  whom  St.  John  and  others  have  had,  and 
still  possess,  knowledge  by  "all  the  means 
through  which  laiowledge  can  haye  access 
to  the  mind  of  man.  (For  "  seeing  with  the 
eyes,"  cf.  Luke  ii.  80 ;  for  BedaBai.  of  con- 
templating with  delight  [Mark  xvi.  11,  14], 
John  i.  14,  84  ;  Acts  i.  11.)  Conoeming  the 
Word  of  life.  "Concerning"  {nspi)  may  de- 
pend on  "have  heard,"  and,  by  a  kind  of 
zeugma,  on  the  other  three  verbs  also  ;  or  oh 
the  main  verb,  "  we  declare."  "  The  Word  of 
lU e' '  means  ' '  the  Word  who  is  the  Lite, ' '  like 
"  the  city  of  Rome,"  "  the  Book  of  Genesis;" 
the  genitive  case  is  "the  characterizing  or 
identifying  genitive."  The  irtpl  is  strongly 
against  the  interpretation,  "  the  word  of 
life,"  i.e.  the  life-giving  gospel.  Had  St. 
John  meant  this,  he  would  probably  have 
written  hv  aKJjKda/iev  .  .  .  tov  %6yov  rijc  ?6)^f 
oTrayye/l/lo/iEv  (John  v.  34,  37 ;  viii.  43  ;  xiv. 
24) ;  nepi  is  very  frequent  of  persons  (John 
i.  7,  8,  15,  22,  30,  48,  etc.).  Moreover,  the 
evident  connexion  between  the  introductions 
to  his  Gospel  and  Epistle  compels  us  to 
understand  6  Kdyog  in  the  same  sense  in 
both  (see  on  John  i.  1,  in  this  Commentary, 
and  iin  the  '  Cambridge  Greek  Testament ' 
or  'Bible  for  Schools  ').  What  St.  John  has 
to  announce  is  his  own  experience  of  the 
Eternal  Word  incarnate,  the  Eternal  Life 
made  manifest  (John  xiv.  6)  ;  his  hearing  of 
his  words,  his  seeing  with  his  oi^ti  eyes  his 
Messianic  works,  his  contemplation  of  the 
Divinity  which  shone  through  both  ;  his 
handling  of  the  body  of  the  risen  Redeemer. 
Ver.  3. — Parenthetical.  The  main  thought 
of  vers.  1  and  3  is,  "  We  declare  to  yon  a 
Being  both  eternal  and  yet  seen  and  known 
by  us."    That  of  ver.  2  is,  "  This  Being,  in 


his  character  of  the  Life,  became  visible,  and 
in  him  are  centred  all  the  relations  be- 
tween God  and  man."  Quite  in  St.  John's 
style,  ver.  2  takes  up  and  develops  a  portion 
of  ver.  1,  using  its  last  word  as  the  basis  of 
a  new  departure  (comp.  John  i.  14 ;  k^a- 
vepitdri  gives  the  same  fact  as  adp^  syhero 
from  another  point  of  view).  Became  flesh 
is  the  fact  in  itseK ;  the  incarnation  of  the 
Aoyof .  "  Was  manifested  "  is  the  fact  in  re- 
ference to  mankind  ;  their  admission  to  the 
knowledge  of  it.  the  union  of  "see"  with 
"bear  witness"  recalls  John  xix.  35;  and 
here,  again,  ver.  3  resumes  and  develops  part 
of  ver.  1.  Have  seen  sums  up  the  four  verbs 
in  ver.  1  ;  for  in  all  languages  sight  is  used 
of  experience  generally.  Bear  witness  and 
declare  carries  us  a  stage  further — the  com- 
munication  of  the  experience.  It  is  doubtful 
whether  r^v  t^ufjv  rf/v  aldviov  is  the  object  of 
all  four  verbs  or  of  airayyeUo/iev  only.  Note 
the  double  aiticle  ;  the  life,  the  eternal  life. 
The  Epistle  begins  and  ends  with  this  theme 
(ch.  V.  30).  (For  ^rig  and  -rrpdi,  cf.  John  viii. 
53  ;  i.  1.)  Which  indeed  (as  all  must  know) 
was  with  the  Father.  The  verse  ends  as  it 
began,  but  not  with  a  mere  repetition  ;  the 
Life  was  manifested,  and  in  particular  to  us. 
Ver.  3. — The  main  sentence  is  resumed 
from  ver.  1,  only  the  chief  points  being  re- 
touched. We  declare  to  you  also  {kuI  must 
be  read  before  v/ilv,  on  overwhelming  autho- 
rity) ;  i.e.  "you  as  well  as  we  must  share 
in  it,"  rather  than  "you  aa  well  as  others  to 
whom  we  have  declared  it."  Of  course, 
aivaYyeXkoaev  must  be  rendered  alike  in 
both  verses  "we  declare."  To  what  does 
it  refer  ?  Not  to  this  Epistle,  which  does 
not  contain  the  writer's  experience  of  the 
Word  of  Ufe  manifested  to  mankind,  but 
to  his  Gospel,  which  the  Epistle  is  to  ac- 
company. The  parallel  between  the  two 
writings  must  often  be  noted,  especially  be- 
tween the  Epistle  and  John  xvii.  Compare 
this  verse  with  John  xvii  31.  St.  John's 
aim  in  writing  his  Gospel  is  that  the  great 
High  Priest's  prayer  may  be  fulfilled — that 
believers  may  be  one  in  that  communion  of 
which  the  unity  between  the  Father  and 
the  Son  is  the  pattern  and  the  basis  ;  may 
"  be  joined  together  in  the  same  body,  the 
same  belief,  the  same  knowledge,  the  same 
aims,  the  same  hopes,  the  same  destinies" 
(Jelf).  Communion  with  Christians  is 
shown  to  mean  a  great  deal— no  less  than 
communion  with  the  Father  and  with  the 
Son.  Note  the  double  ixera.  St.  John's 
writings  teem  with  indications  of  the  unity 
and  yet  distinctness  between  the  Father  and 
the  Son?  Communion  with  the  one,  so  far 
from  absorbing  and  cancelling  communion 
with  the  other,  implies  it  as  a  separate  bliss. 
The  clause,  nal  rj  Koivuvia  6i,  k.t.X.,  does 
not  depend  on  tva,   as  the  Je  shows ;  we 


OH.  I  1—10.]      THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  JOHN. 


must  supply  ta-ri,  not  ^.  (For  Ka)  ...  8i,of. 
John  yi.  51,  where,  as  here,  xal  is  the  lead- 
ing oonjnnotion;  in  John  Tiii.  16,  17  and 
XT.  27,  8^  leads.)  "  Bles$ed  are  they  that  tee 
net  and  yet  believe.  It  is  we  who  are  here 
describ^  ice  who  are  desi^ated.  Then 
let  the  blessedness  take  place  in  ns,  of 
which  the  Lord  predicted  that  it  should 
take  place.  Let  xa  firmly  hold  that  which 
we  see  not,  because  those  tell  us  who  haye 
seen  "  (St.  Augustine,  in  loeX 

Ver.  4. — While  vers.  1 — 3  refer  to  the 
Gospel,  thi3  refers  to  the  Epistle ;  but, 
although  ravTa  in  ch.  ii.  26  and  y.  13 
refer  to  what  preeedee,  there  is  no  need  to 
limit  TaCra  here  to  these  opening  vereea  ;  ii 
coyers  the  whole  Epistle.  The  reading 
4;icu  seems  preferable  to  i/uv,  and  ^/uui/  to 
ifxwv.  But  Tifxeis  and  riftSbv  are  not  co-ordi- 
nate: iiniis  is  the  apostolio  "we;"  riiimv 
means  "  your  joy  as  well  as  mine."  This 
yerse  takes  the  place  of  the  usual  "  grace  and 
peace"  in  tbe  opening  of  other  Epistles; 
and  as  yer.  3  recalls  John  xvii.  21,  so  this 
recalls  John  xvii.  13.  The  joy  is  that  of 
knowing  that,  though  In  tbe  world,  they  are 
not  of  it,  but  are  one  with  one  another,  and 
with  the  Father  and  with  the  Bon.  The 
gospel  is  always  joy:  "Rejoice  alway" 
(1  Thesa.  y.  16);  "Rejoice  in  the  Lord 
alway "  (Phil.  iy.  4).  To  know  that  the 
Eternal  Life  has  been  manifested,  that  we 
hay*  communion  with  him,  and  through 
him  with  the  Father,  must  be  joy.  Whereas 
Gnosticism,  by  denying  the  atonement,  and 
"the  personal  o£Bce  of  God  in  the  salyation 
of  the  world,"  cuts  off  one  great  sphere  of 
Ood's  loye,  and  consequently  one  great 
cause  of  the  believer's  joy.  To  sum  up  this 
introduction :  St.  John  gives  his  Gospel  to 
the  Church  ^kirayyiwotiiv)  in  order  tliat 
all  may  share  in  the  union  for  which  Christ 
prayed;  and  to  the  Gospel  he  adds  this 
Epistle  (koI  ToBra  ypd<pofi,ev'),  that  all  may 
realize  the  joy  resulting  from  this  union — 
that  our  joy  may  be  fulfilled. 

In  this  introduction  we  find  tbe  following 
expressions  which  are  characteristic  of  St. 
John,  serTiDg  to  show  the  common  author- 
ship of  the  Gospel  and  Epistle,  and  in  some 
cases  of  the  .Revelation  also :  i  Aiyas,  ri 
(mil,  ^iaiep6u,  /la/n-vpfa,  ^wj)  aiivios,  liy  wfis, 
71  X"?^  ^  TreirKripaiifPTi.  It  is  among  the 
many  excellences  of  the  Revised  Version 
that  oharacteristio  expressions  are  marked 
by  a  uniform  translation ;  whereas  in  the 
Authorized  Version  they  are  obsctired  by 
capriciously  varying  the  translation:  e.g. 
fiapTvpea  is  rendered  in  four  different  ways 
-J* bear  witness,"  "bear  record,"  "give 
woord,"  "  testify  "  (rf.  p.  Ju). 


Ver.  5— ch.  ii.  28.-2.  Fibst  Main  Vm- 
BION.     Ood  it  Jjtghi. 

Ver.  5— oh.  ii,  6.— (1)  Pentive  Me.  What 
walking  in  the  light  involves ;  the  condition 
and  conduct  of  the  believer.  (2)  Oh.  ii.  7 — 
28.  Negative  tide.  What  walking  in  the 
light  excludes;  the  things  and  persons  to 
be  avoided. 

Ver.  5. — ^This  verse  constitutes  the  tost 
and  basis  of  this  division  of  the  Epistle, 
especially  on  its  positive  side.  And  the 
message  which  we  have  heard  ...  is  this. 
Again  we  have  a  remarkable  parallel  be- 
tween Gospel  and  Epistle ;  both  begin  with 
a  Ka(  (which  connects  the  opening  with 
the  introduction;  in  a  simple  and  artless 
manner),  and  with  the  same  kind  of  sen- 
tence :  "  And  the  witness  of  John  is  this." 
The  reading  4imyy(\la  (ch.  ii.  25,  and  fre- 
quent in  the  New  Testament)  must  be  re- 
jected here  and  in  oh.  iii  11  in  favour  of 
dyyeKia  (which  occurs  nowhere  else  in  the 
New  Testament),  on  overwhelming  evi- 
dence. 'E^ayycKla  in  the  New  Testament 
means  "  promise,"  which  would  be  almost 
meaningless  here.  The  change  from  eV- 
ayyiXXofiei'  (vers.  2,  8)  to  ivayyiWoiitv  is 
noteworthy :  the  one  is  "  declare,"  the  other 
"announce."  The  message  received  from 
Christ,  the  apostle  announces  or  reporti  (re- 
nunciaf)  to  Ms  readers.  He  does  not  name 
Christ  (im'  a&roS);  he  is  so  full  of  the 
thought  of  Christ  that  he  omits  to  name 
him  (rf.  John  xx.  7,  9,  15).  'AvayyiXKa 
is  used  of  authoritative  announcements ;  of 
priests  and  Levites  in  the  LXX. ;  of  the 
Messiah  (John  iv.  25) ;  of  the  Spirit  (John 
xvi.  13,  14,  15);  of  the  apostles  (Acts  xx, 
20,  27;  1  Pet.  i.  12).  St.  John  speaks  with 
authority.  Ood  is  light ;  not  the  Light,  nor 
a  light,  but  light ;  that  is  his  nature.  This 
sums  up  the  Divine  essence  on  its  intel- 
lectual side,  as  " God  is  love"  on  its  moral 
side.  In  neither  case  has  the  predicate  the 
article :  6  &fhs  ^ws  itrrip ;  6  &€hs  irydirTi 
iariv.  Light  and  love  are  not  attributes  of 
God,  but  himself.  The  connexion  between 
this  message  and  the  introduction  is  not  at 
first  obvious.  But  St.  John  writes  with  his 
Gospel  before  him,  and  the  prologue  to  that 
supplies  the  link.  There,  ajs  here,  three 
ideas  follow  in  order:  \6yoSf  fio^,  ^5. 
There,  as  here,  ^£i  immediately  suggiesta 
its  opposite,  axorla.  It  is  on  the  revelation 
of  the  A6yos  as  (pas,  and  the  consequent 
struggle  between  <j>us  and  (Tkotio,  that  the 
Gospel  is  based.  And  this  revelation  ia  the 
highest:  men  alone  are  competent  to  re- 
ceive or  reject  it  Other  organisms  exhibit 
the  creative  power  as  life :  none  but  m«n 
can  I'eoognize  it  as  light.  And  to  know  the 
Aiyot  M  light  ii  to  know  the  Father  a« 


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  JOHN.      [ch.  1. 1— 10 


light ;  for  the  A.iyos  is  the  Revelation  of  the 
Father's  nature.  That  God  is,  in  his  very 
nature,  light,  is  an  announcement  peculiar 
to  St.  John.  Others  tell  us  that  he  is  the 
Father  of  lights  (Jas.  i.  17),  the  Possessor 
of  light  (1  Pet.  ii.  9),  dwelling  in  light 
(1  Tim.  vi.  16) ;  but  not  that  he  t»  light. 
To  the  heathen  God  is  a  God  of  darkness, 
an  unknown  Being ;  a  Power  to  be  blindly 
propitiated,  not  a  Person  to  be  known  and 
loved.  To  the  philosopher  he  is  an  ab- 
straction, an  idea,  not  directly  cognizable 
by  man.  To  the  Jews  he  is  a  God  who 
hideth  himself;  not  light,  but  a  consuming 
fire.  To  the  Christian  alone  he  is  revealed 
OB  light,  absolutely  free  from  everything  im- 
pure, materia],  obscure,  and  gloomy.  Light 
was  the  first  product  of  the  Divine  creative 
energy,  the  earneet  and  condition  of  order, 
beauty,  life,  growth,  and  joy.  Of  all  phe- 
nomena it  best  represents  the  elements  of 
all  perfection.  "This  word  'light'  is  at 
once  the  simplest  and  the  fullest  and  the 
deepest  which  can  he  nied  in  human  dis- 
course. It  is  addressed  to  every  man  whp 
has  eyes  and  who  has  ever  looked  on  the 
iun."  It  tells  not  only  "  of  a  Goodness  and 
Truth  without  flaw ;  it  tells  of  a  Goodness 
and  Truth  that  are  always  seeking  to  spread 
themselves,  to  send  forth  rays  that  shall 
penetrate  everywhere,  and  scatter  the  dark- 
ness which  opposes  them  "  (Maurice).  In 
like  manner,  darkness  sums  up  the  elements 
of  evil — foulness,  secrecy,  repulsiveness,  and 
gloom.  In  all  but  the  lowest  forms  of  ex- 
istence it  inevitably  produces  decay  and 
death.  Everything  of  the  kind  is  excluded 
from  the  nature  of  God.  And  hence  St. 
John,  in  his  characteristic  manner,  imme- 
diately emphasizes  the  great  announcement 
with  an  equivalent  negative  statement: 
Darkness  in  him  there  is  not  any  at  all 
(comp.  ver.  8;  cb.  ii.  4,  23,  27;  iii.  6;  iv.  2, 
3,  6 — 8  ;  T.  12).  He  does  not  say,  "  in  his 
presence,"  but  "  in  him."  Darkness  exists, 
physical,  intellectual,  moral,  and  spiritual ; 
there  is  abundance  of  obscurity,  error,  de- 
pravity, sin,  and  its  consequence,  death. 
But  not  a  shade  of  these  is  "  in  him."  The 
Divine  Light  is  subject  to  no  spots,  no 
eclipse,  no  twilight,  no  night ;  as  a  Source 
of  light  it  cannot  in  any  degree  fail. 

Ver.  6. — ^A  corollary  from  ver.  5.  If  God 
is  Light  to  the  exclusion  of  all  darkness, 
than  fellowship  with  darkness  excludes  fel- 
lowship with  him.  If  we  say  (^cti'  etiranev); 
"if  any  of  us,  no  matter  who  he  be,  at  any 
time  say."  The  construction  marks  the 
supposed  action  as  one  likely  to  occur.  The 
apostle  includes  himself  in  the  possibility, 
and  of  course  he  and  his  readers  did  say  that 
they  had  communion  with  God.  By  "  walk- 
ing "  (TtporaTfiii,  vertari)  is  meant  our  daUy 
life,  our  movement  »nd  activity  in  the  world 


(Johnviii.  12;  xi.  9,  10;  xii.  35;  xxi.  18; 
Rev.  xxi.  24) ;  this  activity  will  inevitably 
express  the  Koivamia  in  which  we  Uve.  To 
have  communion  with  him  who  is  Light,  and 
be  continually  exhibiting  a  life  of  darkness, 
is  impossible.  The  Carpocratians  and  other 
Gnostics,  who  taught  that  to  the  enlightened 
all  action  is  indifferent,  because  neither 
purity  nor  filth  can  change  the  nature  of 
pure  gold,  are  perhaps  here  aimed  at  (Han- 
sel, '  Gnostic  Heresies,'  pp.  117 — 121).  We 
lie,  and  do  not  the  truth.  As  in  ver.  5,  St. 
John  enforces  a  statement  by  denying  the 
opposite.  But  the  negative  is  not  a  mere 
equivalent  of  the  positive :  the  two  together 
mean, "  we  are  false  both  in  word  and  deed." 
Truth  with  St.  John  is  not  confined  to 
language;  it  is  exhibited  in  conduct  also 
(cf.  iroiiiv  tf^euSoi,  Eev.  xxi.  27 ;  xxii.  15). 

Ver.  7. — The  contrary  hypothesis  is  now 
stated,  and  the  thought  is  carried  a  stage 
further  (of.  ver.  9).  He  again  speaks  con- 
ditionally (cfix),  and  does  so  until  ch.  ii.  3 ; 
after  which  the  participial  substantive  (i 
K^tov^  6  Syan'wi',  6  fittrwv)  represents  the  con- 
ditional clause.  The  change  of  verbs  is 
significant :  we  walk,  God  u,  in  the  light. 
We  move  through  time ;  he  is  in  eternity. 
Our  activity  involves  change ;  his  does  not. 
Like  the  sun,  he  both  is  Light  and  dwella 
in  the  light ;  and  if  we  walk  in  the  light, 
which  is  his  atmosphere,  we  have  fellowship 
one  with  another.  Darkness  is  an  unsocial 
condition,  and  this  the  light  expels.  From 
ver.  6  we  might  have  expected,  "  we  have 
fellowship  with  him;"  and  some  inferior 
authorities  read  iter'  abroS.  But  St.  John's 
repetitions  are  not  mere  repetitions :  the 
thought  is  always  recut  or  reset  to  carry  us 
a  step  further  (cf.  vers.  3,  4).  Having  fel- 
lowship with  one  another  is  a  sure  result  of 
that  fellowship  with  God  which  is  involved 
in  walking  in  the  light.  "  Here  is  a  reply 
to  those  who  would  restrain  Catholic  com- 
munion to  their  own  sect"  (Wordsworth). 
Another  result  of  walking  in  the  light  ii 
that  the  blood  of  Jesus  (his  sacrificial  death) 
cleanses  us  day  by  day  continually  (present 
tense)  &om  our  frequent  sins  of  frailty.  This 
cleansing  is  not  the  same  as  forgiveness  of 
sins  (ver.  9).  The  latter  is  the  case  of  6 
\f\oviiivos,  the  man  that  is  bathed  (John 
xiii.  10);  the  former  is  the  frequent  washing 
of  the  feet  (of.  Rev.  vii.  14 ;  xxii.  14).  The 
expression,  the  blood  of  Jesus,  in  Christian 
theology,  "is  dogma  with  pathos.  ...  It 
implies,  as  no  other  word  could  do,  the 
reality  (1)  of  the  human  body  of  Jesus,  (2) 
of  his  sufferings,  (3)  of  his  sacrifice."  By 
hii  blood  new  life-blood  is  infused  into 
human  nature. 

Ver.  8. — After  the  great  message, "  Gk)d  ii 
Light "  (vei.  5)  and  its  application  to  onr- 
selrei  (vers.  6,  7),  we  «re  now  told  what 


OH.  1. 1—10.]      THE  PIEST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  JOHN. 


■wallring  in  the  light  involves:  (1)  con- 
BoiousuesB  of  sin  and  confession  of  sin  (vers. 
8 — 10);  (2)  accepting  the  propitiation  of  Jesus 
Christ  the  Righteous  (oh.  ii.  1 — 2) ;  (3)  obe- 
dience (oh.  11. 3—6).  If  we  say  that  we  have 
not  sin.  The  present  (^xoMf)  again  shows 
that  the  daily  falls  of  those  who  are  walljing 
in  the  light  are  meant,  not  the  sins  com- 
mitted in  the  days  of  darliness  hefore  con- 
version. The  Lord's  Prayer  implies  that  we 
must  daily  ask  forgiveness.  We  lead  our- 
selves astray  from  the  truth,  and  have  no 
right  estimate  of  the  gulf  between  our  im- 
purity and  God's  holiness,  if  we  deny  this 
habitual  frailty.  In  the  sunlight  even 
flame  throws  a  shadow ;  and  that  man  is  in 
darkness  who  denies  his  sin.  The  truth 
may  be  near  him;  but  it  has  not  found  a 
home  with  him — it  is  not  in  him.  UKaySv 
is  specially  frequent  in  the  Bevelation,  aiid 
always  of  arch-deceivers— Satan,  the  beast, 
antichrist,  false  teachers ;  it  seems  to  imply 
fundamental  error  (oomp.  ch.  ii.  26). 

Ver.  9. — As  in  ver.  7,  we  have  the  oppo- 
site hypothesis  stated,  and  the  thought 
advanced  a  stage.  Not  the  exact  opposite, 
"if  we  confess  that  we  have  sin;"  but  "if 
we  confess  oar  sins."  It  is  easy  to  say,  "  I 
am  a  sinner ; "  but  if  confession  is  to  have 
value  it  must  state  the  definite  acts  of  sin. 
The  context  ("  deceive  ourselves  .  .  .  he  is 
faithful ")  shows  that  confession  at  the  bar 
of  the  conscience  and  of  God  is  meant. 
Circumstances  must  decide  whether  confes- 
sion to  man  is  required  also,  and  this  St. 
John  neither  forbids  nor  enjoins.  Kote  the 
asyndeton ;  there  is  no  S4,  as  in  ver.  7.  He 
is  faithful  and  righteous.  AUaios  must  be 
rendered  "righteous"  rather  than  "just," 
to  mark  the  contrast  with  anrighteousness 
(aStKla),  and  the  connexion  with  "Jesus 
Christ  the  Bighteous  "  (ch.  ii.  1).  To  for- 
give ...  to  cleanse.  As  explained  in  ver. 
7,  the  one  refers  to  freeing  us  from  the 
penalties  of  sin,  justification ;  the  other  to 
freeing  us  from  its  contamination,  sanctifica- 
tion.    The  sense  of  purpose  is  not  wholly  to 


be  surrendered.  No  doubt  Xva,  like  other 
particles,  becomes  weakened  in  later  Greek ; 
but  even  in  later  classical  Greek  the  notion 
of  purpose  is  mixed  up  with  that  of  conse- 
quence. Much  more  is  this  the  case  in  the 
New  Testament,  and  especially  in  St.  John, 
where  what  seems  to  us  to  be  mere  result  is 
really  design ;  and  this  higher  aspect  of  the 
sequence  of  facts  is  indicated  by  iVa.  It  is 
God's  nature  to  be  faithful  and  righteous; 
but  it  is  also  his  purpose  to  exhibit  these 
attributes  towards  us ;  and  this  purpose  is 
expressed  in  '/ra  di()i7  ij/iij'. 

Ver.  10. — Once  more  we  have  no  mere 
repetition,  but  a  fresh  thought.  "  We  have 
not  sin  "  (ver.  8)  refers  to  our  natural  con- 
dition; "we  have  not  sinned"  (ver.  10) 
refers  to  definite  acts.  Note  the  climax  ; 
we  lie  (ver.  6) ;  we  lead  ourselves  utterly 
astray  (ver.  8)  ;  we  make  God  a  liar  (ver. 
10).  The  whole  of  God's  dealing  with  man 
since  the  S'all,  especially  in  the  Incarnation, 
is  based  on  the  fact  of  man's  innate  sinful- 
ness. To  deny  this  fact,  therefore,  is  to 
charge  the  God  of  light  and  truth  with 
acting  and  maintaining  a  vast  and  persisten  t 
lie.  It  is  difScult  to  see  how  this  strong 
language  can  be  reconciled  with  the  Komuii 
dogma  of  the  immaculate  conception  of  the 
Virgin  Mary :  why  does  not  her  "  son  " 
(John  xix.  26,  27)  except  her  from  its 
sweep  7  His  word  is  not  in  us ;  <.«.  we  are 
out  off  from  all  communication  with  him 
(John  V.  88 ;  viii.  31).  "  His  Word  "  is  the 
sum  total  of  the  Divine  revelation.  That 
which  in  itself  is  "  the  truth  "  (ver.  8),  when 
communicated  to  us  is  "  his  Word."  How 
thoroughly  the  Church  of  England  enters 
into  the  spirit  of  these  verses  (8 — 10)  is 
shown  by  the  fact  that  it  appoints  confession 
and  absolution  as  part  of  public  service 
every  morning  and  evening  throughout  the 
year,  as  well  as  of  every  celebration  of  the 
Eucharist.  As  Bede  points  out,  the  Lord's 
Prayer  itself,  with  the  petition, "  Forgive  us 
our  trespasses,"  is  a  conclusive  answer  to 
Pelagian  opponents  of  St.  John's  dootrina. 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  1 — i. — The  Life.  Dr.  Edersheim  *  makes  the  remark  that  there  are  two  great 
stages  in  the  history  ol  the  Church's  learning  of  Christ :  the  first,  to  come  to  the  know- 
ledge of  what  he  was  by  experience  of  what  he  did ;  the  second,  to  come  to  experience 
of  what  he  did  and  does  by  knowledge  of  what  he  is.  The  former,  he  says,  is  that  of 
the  period  when  Jesus  was  on  earth ;  the  second  is  that  of  the  period  after  his  ascension 
into  heaven  and  the  descent  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  This  is  true.  And  there  is  also  an 
intermediate  truth  with  which  we  are  closely  concerned.  It  is  the  truth  of  which  we 
are  reminded  at  the  opening  of  this  Epistle,  viz.  that  the  instrumentality  by  meani 
of  which  we  now  pass  on  to  the  second  stage  is  the  writings  of  those  who  passed 
thtvugb  the  first.  This  is  evidently  intended  to  be  the  effect  of  this  inspired  letter ; 
■  '  Idfe  and  Times  of  the  Messiah,'  vol.  L  p.  601, 


e  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENBKAL  OF  JOHN,      [oh.i.1— Ift 

written,  it  can  scarcely  be  questioned,  by  the  author  of  the  Fourth  Gospel ;  written 
upon  a  ipecific  theme,  on  a  distinct  method,  with  an  avowed  aim.  Two  preliminary 
statements  hereupon  require  distinct  and  emphatic  notice  here.  1.  There  is  a  declara- 
tion that  the  writer  was  one  who  had  been  brought  into  close  contact  with  the  Person 
of  the  Lord  Jesus,  who  had  himself  intimately  known  him,  and  who  had  associates 
in  knowledge  of  and  fellowship  with  him.  2.  The  internal  evidence  that  the  author 
of  this  Epistle  is  the  same  who  wrote  the  Fourth  Gospel  is  unusually  char.  If  any 
man  could  be  known  by  his  style  of  writing,  surely  the  Apostle  John  can  be  by 
the  way  he  phiys  upon  the  words  "  life,"  "  light,"  "  love."  Note  :  Each  apostle  has  his 
own  key-words.  Those  of  John  are  the  ones  just  specified.  That  of  Jamea  is  "  works." 
That  of  Paul  is  "  faith."  That  of  Peter  is  "  hope."  The  main  key-word  of  John  here  is 
"  life."  In  these  introductory  verses  the  apostle  opens  up  his  theme.  The  purport  of 
his  Epistle,  yea,  not  only  of  his  Epistle,  but  of  his  entire  apostolic  and  ministerial  life, 
is  indicated  here  ;  it  has  to  do  with  "  the  Word  of  life,"  i.e.  (cf.  Westcott,  in  loc.)  with 
the  revelation  of  life ;  may  we  not  rather  say  with  the  Life  and  its  self-revelation  M  In 
opening  up  this  introductory  paragraph  we  may  trace  the  Life  in  five  stages. 

I.  The  Life  btbbnallt  existent.  "  That  which  was  from  the  beginning."  With 
God  there  is  no  beginning.  With  him  there  shall  be  no  end.  But  Divine  revelation 
is  worded  to  suit  the  exigencies  of  our  limited  apprehension.  Finite  minds  make  their 
own  horizon  of  thought.  Both  back  and  front  there  are  limits  beyond  which  thought 
cannot  go.'  Hence  we  are  mercifully  allowed  to  think  as  of  a  beginning  and  as  of  an 
end.  Not  as  if  either  were  a  "  definite  concrete  fact."  '  Let  us,  then,  go  back  to  this 
"  beginning."  It  is  not  said,  either  here  or  in  John  i.,  that  the  Life  then  (^lyfypro)  cam* 
to  be,  but  (jjv)  was  (of.  Prov.  v:ii.  22 — SI ;  also  PhiL  ii.  6,  hripxav).  There  is  here  no 
thought  of  life  apart  from  a  Living  One — a  personal  Being,  There  can  be  none.  That 
Living  One  was  before  all  creation — its  ground,  its  medium,  its  reason,  its  centre  of 
support.  In  him  all  things  hold  together.  This  Life  was  "  from  the  beginning."  But 
note — 

II.  The  Life  was  manifested  in  time.  "  The  Life  was  manifested  "  (ver.  2). 
From  what  afterwards  follows,  there  can  be  no  question  that  the  apostle  here  refers 
to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  And  in  thus  declaring  that  he  passed  out  of  eternity  into 
the  limits  of  time,  out  of  the  invisible  to  the  visible  realm,  he  thus  avows  the  mystery 
of  the  Incarnation.  A  mystery,  without  the  assumption  of  which  the  words  and  life 
of  the  Christ  can  no  more  be  accounted  for  than  the  stability  of  the.  framework  of 
nature  can  be  accounted  for  without  the  law  of  gravitation.  The  difficulties  that  gather 
round  the  doctrine  would  be  insuperable  if  it  were  a  mere  marvel,  leading  nowhere  and 
effecting  nothing.  But  since  it  is  the  centre  of  a  framework  of  doctrine  around  which 
the  noblest  hopes  do  gather,  and  the  substratum  of  the  renewed  life  of  an  entire  living 
Church,  the  difficulties  gather  rather  round  its  denial  than  around  its  assertion.  The 
Life  was  manifested.  The  Divine  Life  can  only  be  manifested  to  man  by  taking  the 
form  of  man. 

III.  The  Lifb  personally  vebified.  "  We  have  '  seen,' '  tasted,'  handled,' "  etc. 
This  should  be  compared  with  John  i.  14,  "  We  beheld  his  glory."  The  seeing  of  the 
glory  was  by  no  means  coextensive  with  beholding  the  bodily  form.  "  The  eye  only 
sees  that  which  it  brings  with  it  the  power  of  seeing."  Some  saw  Christ  to  vilify ; 
others  to  adore  him.  "  The  pure  in  heart  will  see  God."  The  Nathanaeis  will  see 
heaven  opened,  but  the  "  wise  and  prudent"  will  miss  the  sight. 

IV.  The  Life  thus  vbkifibd  is  authoritattvblt  declared.  "  That  which  we 
have  seen  .  .  .  declare  we  unto  you."  Here  are,  as  Westcott  admirably  remarks, 
"  in  due  sequence  the  ideas  of  personal  experience,  responsible  affirmation,  authoritative 
announcement."  This  latter  is  involved  in  the  words,  "  we  declare."  Some  object  to 
authority  in  matters  of  religion.  But  why?  Only  ignorance  can  demur  to  it,  M 
long  as  the  authority  is  a  lawful  one.  And  since  the  authority  here  implied  is  that 
which  comes  from  adequate  knowledge  on  the  matter  in  hand,  none  ought  to  demur  ta 
it  for  a  moment. 

'  See  Dr.  Kennedy's  admirable  work,  •  The  Self-Revelation  of  Jesus  Christ '  (Isbi^ter). 
•  See  Oleraance's  '  Theories  of  Future  Punishment,'  ch.  vi. 
f  Westoott  on '  The  Bpigtles  of  St.  Joh<  p.  6,  ooL  i. 


OH,  1. 1—10.]      THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  JOHN. 


v.  The  Life  AUTHOBiTATiviiT.T  declared  with  a  definite  aim.  The  aim  ii 
twofold :  1.  That  of  a  kindred  fellowship  of  souls  who  are  in  communion  with  the  Ufa  1 
No  other  fellowship  to  compare  with  this.  It  is  (1)  pure,  (2)  undying.  2.  That  out 
of  the  closeness  of  fellowship  there  tniglit  come  a  fulness  of  joy.  Life  is  the  root  of  joy. 
Joy  is  the  fruit  of  life.  A  plant  is  not  in  perfection  till  it  blooms.  The  Christian  life 
is  not  perfected  till  it  smiles  and  sings. 

In  conclusion,  note :  1.  The  real  and  only  valid  succession  in  the  Church  is  that  of 
life.  2.  There  can  be  no  value  in  forms,  except  as  they  express  life.  3.  Through  the 
Divine  Life  men  are  reborn  to  the  noblest  fellowship  with  God  and  with  one  another ! 

Ver.  6. —  The  message.  Connecting  link:  The  Son  of  God,  whom  we  have  seen  as 
manifested  Life,  has  brought  us  a  message  from  the  invisible  nnd  everlasting  Father. 
Topic — The  message  from  heaven  brought  ly  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  A  careful  study  of 
the  text  will  suggest  several  points  for  consideration  and  expansion. 

I.  What  the  message  is.  1.  Whom  it  concerns.  "  Goii."  "  The  announcement  as 
to  the  nature  of  God  is  a  personal  revelation,  and  not  a  discovery  "  (Westcott,  in  loe.). 
We  know  something  of  God  by  reasoning  upward  from  the  works  of  nature.  Nature 
speaks  (Ps.  xix.  1 — 4).  Her  works  are  ,a  manifestation  of  God.  But  not  a  full  or  a 
clear  one.  We  want  a  testimony  direct  from  God,  as  to  what  he  is,  as  to  his  thoughts 
towards  us ;  and  here  it  is.  2.  What  does  it  tell  us  about  God  ?  (1)  Positively :  "  God 
is  Light."  Physically,  light  is  the  splendour  in  which  all  else  is  revealed.  Intellectually, 
light  is  knowledge.  Morally,  light  is  purity.  God  is  the  One  Being  in  and  by  whose 
existence  all  else  receives  an  adequate  interpretation  of  its  coming  into  being.  He 
hath  knowledge  without  limit.  He  hath  purity  without  stain.  Hence  the  text  speaks : 
(2)  Negatively :  "  No  darkness  at  all,"  Not  the  least  speck.  He  is  absolutely  pure. 
Infinitely  wise.  How  much  is  summed  up  in  the  tliree  sentences  which  John  has 
recorded :  "  God  is  Spirit ; "  «  God  is  Light ; "  "  God  is  Love  "  I  Not  all  tte  collective 
wisdom  of  man  could  have  taught  us  so  much  as  this. 

II.  Whence  the  message  came.  "  We  have  heard  from  him ; "  i.e.  from  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  as  the  incarnate  Manifestation  of  the  Invisible.  Obviously,  the  value  of 
such  a  message  depends  on  the  Person  who  brings  it.  If,  then,  we  ask  the  all-important 
question — Who  brought  this  message  down  to  earth?  apostles,  one  and  all,  join  with 
unwavering  tongue  in  declaring  that  it  was  brought  by  the  everlasting  Son  of  the 
Father,  who  came  from  him.  This  is  the  distinctive  assertion  of  Christianity.  It  is 
made,  not  doubtfully,  not  apologetically,  but  categorically  and  positively,  for  the 
acceptance  and  salvation  of  man.  This  message  was  brought  to  man  directly  by  the 
greatest  Messenger  from  the  eternal  throne  that  even  heaven  itself  could  sendl 

HI.  How  the  message  beaches  us.  "  We  announce  unto  you."  The  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  asserted  his  claims  and  proved  them.  He  sealed  them  by  his  death,  confirmed 
them  by  his  resurrection,  and  gave  to  apostles  the  unwavering  certitude  of  their  validity 
by  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  They,  thus  sure  of  and  confirmed  in  the  message, 
living  on  it  themselves  as  their  own  life  and  joy,  preached  and  taught  it,  and  also  put 
it  down  in  writing,  that  it  might  be  spread  over  the  world  through  the  after-ages.  They 
gave  it  forth  authoritatively,  with  the  authority  which  comes  (1)  of  a  Divine  commission 
to  declare  it,  and  (2)  of  adequate  knowledge  of  that  which  they  declare.  Thus  the  mes- 
sage reaches  us.  In  the  Epistles  we  have  the  sum  and  substance  of  that  which  in  the 
first  century  was  orally  received.  It  is  utterly  useless  for  the  adherents  of  the  mythical 
school  to  urge  the  later  authorship  and  miracle-embellishraents  of  the  Gospels  with  the 
view  of  weakening  this  position ;  since,  whatever  be  the  age  of  the  Gospels,  there  are 
known  letters  of  the  apostolic  age,  by  Paul,  Peter,  James,  and  John,  from  which  alone 
the  ground-plan  of  the  Redeemer's  life  and  the  gist  of  his  message  could  be  reproduced, 
even  if  the  misfortune  of  the  loss  of  the  Gospels  could  be  supposed  possible.  The  historio 
position  is  one  which  never  has  been  and  never  can  be  shaken ;  that  in  the  Epistles  wo 
Wve  the  sum  of  that  which  apostles  gave  forth  orally — the  message  which  has  remained 
unchanged  from  the  beginning  of  the  Christian  age.  The  verse  of  our  text  has  as  much 
force  as  if  the  Apostle  John  were  now  living  and  actually  uttering  the  words  in  our 
ears  :  "  This  is  the  message,"  etc. 

IV.  How  DOBS  the  message  bear  upon  us  ?  We  can  but  briefly  suggest.  1.  The 
{act  <>f  this  trutii  coming  oi »  message  from  God  unto  us,  shows  us  that  0(^  it  concemet} 


°  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  JOHN.      [oh.  1. 1—10. 

about  his  intelligent  creatures  knomng  who  and  what  he  is.  2.  It  shows  us  also  that, 
if  we  are  adequately  to  know  who  or  what  God  is,  it  must  be  by  a  message  from  him  to 
man,  and  not  through  man  attempting  to  search  out  him.  3.  We  see,  further,  that  by 
means  of  such  a  message,  brought  by  sitch  a  Messenger,  we  may  come  to  know  the  very 
greatest  fact  in  the  very  simplest  way.  4.  This  revelation  of  the  nature  of  God  is  not 
for  the  purpose  of  satisfying  speculative  inquiries;  it  is  intended  to  yield  practical 
results  (cf.  vers.  6 — 10).  5.  The  right  use  of  this  message  will  yield  us  a  knowledge 
of  God  and  of  his  Son  Jesus  Christ,  which  is  in  itself  "  the  eternal  life  "  (cf.  John  x vii.  3), 
V.  Ini^bbncbs  and  application.  1.  This  sublime  truth,  being  presented  to  us  as  a 
message /ro?»  Ood,  indicates  to  us  so  far  an  element  of  truth  in  agnosticism.  "The 
world  through  its  wisdom  knew  not  God "  (1  Cor.  i.  21,  Revised  Version).  2.  If  the 
gospel  be  a  message  from  the  everlasting  God,  then  the  one  point  which  has  to  be 
verified  is,  not  whether  the  message  be  in  all  respects  such  a  one  as  we  might  have 
expected,  but  whether  the  Messenger  be  at  once  capable  and  true.  3.  To  demand  the 
$ame  kind  of  verification  which  a  man  gets  of  his  own  discoveries  in  physical  science, 
is  absurd.  The  only  possible  verification  of  a  testimony  lies  in  the  proof  of  the 
ability  and  veracity  of  the  witness.  Each  kind  of  truth  has  its  lines  of  verification  in 
its  own  direction,  and  in  no  other.  4.  Most  jealous  care  should  be  taken  that  we  do 
neither  the  Messenger  nor  the  message  an  injustice  through  allowing  any  prejudice  or 
any  dogmatic  assumption  to  interfere  with  the  consideration  of  their  claims.  5.  The 
substance  of  the  message  is  in  itself  a  strong  argument  for  the  truth  of  the  Messenger. 
One  assumption  only  is  involved  therein,  viz.  that  God  cam  reveal  himself.  6.  There 
is  an  infinite  difference  between  an  agnosticism  that  is  such  because  it  never  heard  the 
message,  and  that  which  is  such  because  it  scornfully  ignores  it  under  the  pretence  that 
God  is  unknowable.  The  one  is  a  grievous  misfortune ;  the  other,  a  more  grievous 
nn.  In  the  one  there  is  a  yearning  for  the  light ;  in  the  other,  a  turning  from  it. 
*  They  did  not  like  to  retain  God  in  their  knowledge." 

Vers.  6 — 10. — " If...if:'"  which  shall  it  he f  Connecting  link :  The  purpose  of 
God  in  revealing  himself  to  us  as  Light  is  that  we  may  come  into  fellowship  with  him ; 
and  that  in  this  fellowship  we  ourselves  may  become  sons  of  light,  which  by  nature  we 
are  not.  Topic — Th^  only  way  in  which  the  purpose  of  this  Divine  message  ahout 
God  himself  can  he  accomplished  in  us  is  hy  our  first  recognizing  truly  and  fully  uhat 
we  are,  and  then  acknowledging  our  state  before  him. 

I.  The  ends  of  God  in  thus  deolabino  himselp  mat  bb  fhustkatbd  in  one  ob 
OTHEB  of  thkee  WATS.  1.  If  WO  maintain  that  our  fellowship  with  God  follows  as  a 
matter  of  course,  independently  of  moral  considerations ;  e.g.  if  we  (1)  say  that  we  have 
fellowship  with  him  (ver.  6),  and  if  we  (2)  walk  in  darkness.  In  that  case  we  are  (a) 
false  in  word :  "  we  lie ; "  (6)  false  in  practice :  "  we  do  not  the  truth."  The  truth  is 
not  merely  to  be  objectively  perceived  by  the  understanding,  but  is  also  to  be  transmuted 
into  life.  Men  woiid  soon  go  on  to  know  more  of  objective  truth  if  they  would  but  put 
in  practice  what  they  already  know.  A  fellowship  in  the  Light,  and  a  living  and  walking  in 
the  darkness,  are  far  asunder  as  the  east  is  from  the  west.  2.  If  we  maintain  that  there  is 
no  wrong  in  not  being  in  fellowship  with  God,  or  if  we  deny  that  sin  is  the  great  barrier 
to  fellowship,  i.e.  "  if  we  say  that  we  have  no  sin  "  *  (ver.  8), — in  that  case  (1)  we  are 
self-deceived ;  (2)  "  the  truth  is  not  in  us,"  t.e.  as  an  informing  guide,  or  as  a  regulating 
power.  Note :  To  take  a  true  view  of  sin — its  evil,  its  guilt,  its  subtlety,  its  destrnc- 
tiveness — ^is  an  imperative  condition  of  understanding  the  value  of  the  gospel  message 
and  of  the  Redeemer's  work.  3.  If  we  maintain  that  sin,  albeit  it  may  be  located  in  us, 
has  never  broken  forth  into  act ;  i.e.  "  if  we  say  that  we  have  not  sinned  "  (ver.  10), — in 
that  case  (1)  we  are  putting  the  lie  on  what  God  has  said ;  for  certainly  God  himself 
and  we  are  m  violent  moral  contrast.  But  if  so,  and  we  say  we  have  not  sinned,  then 
we  charge  the  sin  on  God ;  and  since  the  revelation,  of  God  as  Light  is  meant  to  throw 
up  our  sin  in  its  darkness  and  enormity,  if  we  deny  our  darkness,  we  thereby  deny 
God's  light.  (2)  God's  Word  is  not  in  us,  i.e.  as  the  moving  power  or  the  enlightening 
force.  It  is  outside  us ;  but  we  close  the  eye,  and  will  not  let  it  shine  within.  It  may 
be,  it  is,  true  that  in  God  we  live,  and  move,  and  have  our  being :  that  we  cannot  flee 
from  his  presence :  that  he  has  beset  us  behind  and  before,  and  laid  his  hand  upon  lu ; 

'  See  We«tcott  on  the  phrase,  ix'"  a|MifiT<wv 


3H.  1.1-10.]      THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  aENEEAL  OP  JOHN.  » 

»nd  yet  we  may,  like  Cain,  "  go  out  from  the  presence  of  tlie  Lord,"  and  be  out  of 
fellowship  with  him ;  we  may,  yea,  we  shall,  remain  unillumined  by  his  brightness, 
and  unsaved  by  his  revelation  of  himself,  unless  we  first  learn  to  own  our  guilt,  to  take 
our  right  place  as  sinful  men  before  a  holy  God.  To  this  the  Apostle  John  urges. 
Hence  observe — 

n.   ThEBE  18  ANOTHER  AND  A  BETTER  COUBSB,  IN  OUB  ADOPTION  OF  WHICH  THE  ENDS 

OP  God  in  eevbaltng  himself  mat  be  accomplished  in  us.  A  double  duty  and  also 
a  double  issue  are  here  pointed  out.  1.  Confession.  "  If  we  confess  our  sins  "  (ver.  P) ; 
"not  only  acknowledge  them,  but  acknowledge  them  openly  in  the  face  of  men"  (so 
Westcott).  Unquestionably,  open  confession  forms  an  essential  part  of  our  duty  (of. 
Eom.  X.  9).  The  open  confession  before  men  of  Jesus  as  our  Saviour  from  sin,  obviously 
includes  as  its  basis  the  acknowledgment  of  the  sin  from  which  we  are  to  be  saved. 
Certainly  there  must  be  (1)  confession  before  God  (Ps.  xxxii.  5),  and  (2)  confession 
and  restitution  before  man  where  the  wrong  has  been  to  man  (Luke  xix.  8 ;  Jas.  vi. 
16).  This  first  duty  will  have  a  twofold  issue.  Where  sin  is  thus  confessed,  there  will 
be  (1)  forgiveness,  (2)  cl'  ansing ;  and  both  these  are  guaranteed  to  the  penitent  by 
(a)  the  faithfulness  and  (6)  the  justice  of  God.  Faithfulness  in  the  fulfilment  of  the 
promise ;  and  justice,  in  that,  when  the  penitent  puts  away  sin  by  forsaking  it,  God 
puts  it  away  by  forgiving  it,  through  his  method  of  mercy  in  Jesus  Christ.  2.  Wdlh- 
ing  in  the  light  is  the  second  duty.  We  walk  in  the  light,  and  God  is  in  the  light. 
Ours  is  to  be  constant  advance ;  God's  is  permanent  being.  When  once  a  penitent  hag 
by  confession  avowedly  quitted  the  realm  of  darkness,  he  at  once  begins  to  move  on 
in  light,  and  towards  fuller  light.  This  second  duty  will  also  have  a  twofold  issue. 
(1)  Fellowship.  Sin  is  the  great  separator  of  man  from  God,  and  of  men  from  one 
another.  We  "  turn  every  one  to  his  own  way."  Jesus  is  the  great  Beconciler,  and 
thus  the  Restorer  of  the  ruptured  fellowship.  (2)  The  efficacy  of  the  blood  of  Christ 
will  then  be  fully  realized.  Pew  verses  in  Scripture  have  suffered  so  much  as  thii 
seventh  verse,  by  being  first  halved  and  then  isolated.  It  must  be  read  as  a  whole,  and 
the  fall  force  of "  the  elongated  present "  must  be  given  to  each  verb.  "  If  we  are  walking 
in  the  light,  as  he  is  in  the  light,  we  are  having  fellowship  one  with  another,  and  the 
blood  of  Jesus  Christ  his  Son  is  cleansing  us  from  all  sin ; "  i.e.  the  redeeming  efficacy 
of  the  work  of  the  Son  of  God  is  disclosing  itself  as  a  practical  power,  by  removing 
the  estrangement  and  the  foulness  which  sin  had  brought.  It  can  no  longer  be  a 
question — Is  Christ  a  Eedeemer  ?  for  there  will  be  the  living,  the  manifest  proof  that  ha 
is  so,  in  our  being  cleatfSed  through  him  from  guilt  and  sin,  and  restored  to  communioa 
with  God  and  to  loving  fellowship  with  our  brother.  Then,  then,  he  who  is  the  Light 
will  not  only  have  transferred  us  from  the  kingdom  of  darkness  to  the  kingdom  of 
light,  but  will  actually  have  transformed  us  from  being  darkness  to  becoming  light  in 
the  Lord.  Then  will  the  light  and  purity  of  heaven  be  reflected  in  us  on  earth,  and 
we,  while  living  on  earth,  shall  be  steadily  moving  toward  the  brighter  light  above. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 4. — The  apostles  aim  and  method.  "  That  which  was  from  the  beginning, 
which  we  have  heard,"  etc. 

I.  Herb  is  an  object  eminently  worthy  op  an  apostle  of  Jbsus  Christ.  "  That 
ye  also  may  have  fellowship  with  us :  and  truly  our  fellowship  is  with  the  Father, 
and  with  his  Son  Jesus  Clirist.  And  these  things  write  we  unto  you,  that  your  joy 
may  be  full."  St.  John  sought  to  lead  his  readers  into :  1.  Participation  in  the  highest 
fellowship.  "  That  ye  also  may  have  fellowship  with  us,"  cttK  (ver.  3).  The  word  "  fellow- 
ship," or  "communion,"  signifies  "the  common  possession  of  anything  by  various  per- 
sons." By  the  "with  us"  we  understand  the  apostles  and  others,  who  had  been  eye- 
witnesses of  Jesus  Christ.  And  St.  John's  aim  was  that  his  readers  should  participate  in 
the  truth  and  trust,  the  life  and  love,  which  the  older  generation  of  Christian  disciples 
already  possessed ;  that  they  should  share  in  his  own  highest  and  holiest  experiences. 
And  it  was  not  into  an  exalted  human  communion  merely  that  the  apostle  endeavoured 
to  lead  his  readers.  "  And  truly,"  he  says,  "  our  fellowship  is  with  the  Father,  and 
>vith  his  Son  Jesus  Christ."    In  infinite  condescension,  the  heavenly  Father  and  tU« 


10  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  WENERAL  OF  JOHN,      [ch.  1. 1— 10. 

Divine  Son  admit  Christian  believers  into  vital  and  intimate  communion  with  them- 
sslves.  This  fellowship  is  a  thing  of  character  and  of  life.  They  who  share  in  it  are 
"  begotten  of  God ;  "  they  have  "  become  partakers  of  the  Divine  nature ;  "  and  they 
realize  with  joy  the  Divine  presence.  The  apostle  sought  to  lead  his  readers  into : 
2.  Realization  of  perfect  joy.  "  And  these  things  write  we  unto  you,  that  your  joy 
may  be  fuU."  Hitherto  the  joy  of  those  to  whom  St.  John  wrote  had  not  been  full ; 
for  their  acquaintance  with  Christian  truth  had  been  imperfect  and  partial.  By  the 
fuller  disclosures  of  that  truth  he  hopes  that  their  joy  may  be  fulfilled.  How  rich  and 
manifold  and  abundant  is  the  joy  of  the  true  Christian  1  The  joy  of  the  forgiveness 
of  sins,  of  reconciliation  with  God,  of  progress  in  truth  and  holiness,  of  hope  of  future 
perfection  and  glory.  Our  Lord  said,  "  These  things  have  I  spoken  unto  you,  that  my 
joy  may  be  in  you,  and  that  your  joy  may  be  full.      "  Rejoice  evermore." 

II.  Hebe  abb  means  eminently  adapted  to  accomplish  this  object.  St.  John 
endeavoured  to  attain  his  aim  by  declaration  of  the  truth  concerning  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ.  Notice :  1.  The  title  applied  to  him,  "  The  Word  of  life."  Each  term  of 
this  title  demands  consideration.  (1)  The  Word — ^the  Logos  (cf.  John  i.  1).  "  The 
term  Logos,"  says  Canon  Liddon,  "denotes  at  the  very  least  something  intimately  and 
everlastingly  present  with  Q-od,  something  as  internal  to  the  Being  of  God  as  thoi^ht 
is  to  the  soul  of  man.  In  truth,  the  Divine  Logos  is  God  reflected  in  his  own  eternal 
thought.  In  the  Logos  God  is  his  own  object.  This  infinite  thought,  the  reflection 
and  counterpart  of  God,  subsisting  in  God  as  a  Being  or  hypostasis,  and  having  • 
tendency  to  self-communication, — such  is  the  Logos.  The  Logos  is  the  thought  of  God, 
not  intermittent  and  precarious  like  human  thought,  but  subsisting  with  the  intensity 
of  a  personal  fuim.  The  expression  suggests  the  further  inference  that,  since  reason  is 
man'f  noblest  faculty,  the  uncreated  Logos  must  be  at  least  equal  with  God.  .  .  .  The 
Logos  necessarily  suggests  to  our  minds  the  further  idea  of  communicativeness.  The 
Logos  is  speech  as  well  as  thought."  (2)  The  life  which  is  predicated  of  the  Word. 
"  The  Word  of  life."  We  cannot  define  this  life.  Its  essential  nature  is  hidden  from 
us.  But  life  in  an  extraordinary  sense  and  degree  is  attributed  to  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ.  Twice  he  himself  said,  "  I  am  the  Life."  And  St.  John  says,  "  In  him  was 
life,  and  the  life  was  the  light  of  men."  "  As  the  Father  hath  life  in  himself,  even  so 
gave  he  tothe  Son  also  to  have  life  in  himself."  He  is  the  Giver  of  life  to  others. 
"  All  things  were  made  by  him,"  etc.  "  I  came,"  said  he,  "  that  they  might  have  life, 
and  that  they  might  have  it  abundantly."  "As  the  Father  raiseth  the  dead, and 
quickeneth  them,  even  so  the  Son  also  quiokeneth  whom  he  will."  He  has  life  in  him* 
self,  and  he  is  the  great  Bestower  of  all  hfe  to  others.  And  his  life  is  eternal.  It "  was 
from  the  beginning."  He  existed  before  creation,  and  before  time,  and  his  existence  is 
independent  of  time.  "We  declare  unto  you  that  eternal  life."  He  is  ever-living  and 
unchangeable.  2.  His  intimate  communion  with  Ood  the  Father,  "  That  eternal  life 
which  was  with  the  Father "  (of.  John  i.  1).  "The  Word  was  with  God."  « He  was 
not  merely  waph  np  0ey, '  along  with  God,'  but  irpij  rhv  @e6y.  This  last  preposition 
expresses,"  says  Canon  Liddon,  "beyond  the  fact  of  coexistence  or  immanence,  the 
more  significant  fact  of  perpetuated  intercommunion.  The  face  of  the  everlasting 
Word,  if  we  may  dare  so  to  express  ourselves,  was  ever  directed  towards  the  face  of  the 
everlasting  Father."  Or,  as  Ebrard  expresses  it,  the  life  "  was  towards  the  Father,  .  .  . 
A  life  which  did  indeed  flow  forth  from  the  bosom  of  the  Father,  but  which  did  at 
once  return  back  into  the  bosom  of  the  Father  in  the  ceaseless  flow  of  the  inmost  being 
of  God."  3.  Eis  manifestation  to  men.  "  And  the  life  was  manifested,  and  we  have 
seen,"  etc.  "The  Woi-d"  also  suggests  the  idea  of  revelation  or  communication;  for 
the  Logos  is  not  only  reason,  but  discourse ;  not  only  thought,  but  the  expression  of 
thought.-  The  life  was  manifested  in  the  Person  of  Jesus  Christ — in  his  words  and 
works  and  life  amongst  men.  It  was  exhibited  gloriously  in  his  splendid  triumph  over 
death  by  his  resurrection.  "It  was  not  possible  that  he  should  be  holden  of  it."  "The 
Word  became  flesh,  and  dwelt  among  us,"  etc.  We  have  said  that  these  means — the 
declaration  of  the  truth  concerning  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ — were  eminently  adapted  te 
lead  men  into  participation  in  the  highest  fellowship  and  realization  of  perfect  joy. 
The  statement  is  capable  of  ample  proof.  (1)  A  right  relation  to  God  is  essential  to 
fellowship  with  him  and  to  true  joy.  For  us,  who  have  sinned  against  him,  recon^ 
illation  to  him  and  trust  in  him  must  become  bets  before  w«  can  bar*  »xyf  eemr 


iH.  1. 1—10.]      THE  HEST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  JOHN.  11 

munion  with  him.  (2)  A  true  knowleJge  of  God  is  essential  to  right  relation  to  him. 
If  we  regard  him  as  a  stem  Lawgiver,  ofifended,  resentful,  implacable,  we  cannot  even 
approach  unto  him.  And  the  guilty  conscience  is  prone  to  entertain  such  views  of 
iim.  (S)  The  true  knowledge  of  God  is  attainable  through  Jesus  Christ.  "No  man 
hath  Been  God  at  any  time ;  the  only  begotten  Son,  which  is  in  the  bosom  of"  the 
Father,  he  hath  declared  him."  "  He  that  hath  seen  me  hath  seen  the  Father."  In 
Jesus  Christ,  God  is  revealed  unto  us  as  "  a  just  God  and  a  Saviour,"  as  mighty  and 
merciful,  as  faithful  and  forgiving,  as  infinitely  holy  and  gracious  and  full  of  compas- 
sion. Such  a  revelation  of  Gtid  is  attractive ;  it  is  fitted  to  melt  the  heart  into  peni- 
tence, to  awaken  its  confidence  in  him,  and  to  draw  it  to  him  in  the  fellowship  of  life 
and  light. 

III.  Hebs  is  an  agent  eminently  qttalifibd  to  use  these  means.  The  apostle 
was  qualified  by  various  and  competent  knowledge  of  him  concerning  whom  he  wrote. 
I.  He  had  heard  his  voice.  "  That  which  was  from  the  beginning,  which  we  have 
heard."  St.  John  and  his  fellow-apostles  had  beard  his  words  on  very  many  occasions 
both  in  public  discourse  and  in  private  conversation.  2.  Se  had  seen  his  hwnanform 
and  his  mighty  works.  "  That  which  we  have  seen  with  our  eyes.  .  .  .  The  Life  was 
manifested,  and  we  have  seen  it."  There  is,  perhaps,  a  special  reference  to  his  having 
seun  him  accomplish  his  great  and  beneficent  miracles.  But  the  apostles  had  seen 
their  Master  in  various  circumstances  and  conditions.  They  had  seen  him  in  his 
majesty  and  might  quelling  the  tempest  and  raising  the  dead  to  life ;  and  they  had 
seen  him  exhausted  and  weary.  They  had  seen  him  bleeding  and  dying  on  the  cross ; 
and  they  had  seen  him  after  he  had  risen  again  from  the  dead.  John  and  two  others 
had  seen  him  bowed  in  anguish  in  Gethsemane ;  and  they  had  seen  him  radiant  in 
glory  on  Hermon.  3.  He  had  intently  contemplated  him.  "  That  which  we  looked 
upon,"  or  beheld.  This  looking  upon  him  is  more  internal  and  continuous  than  the 
having  seen  him  with  their  eyes.  With  the  most  intense  and  affectionate  and  reverent 
interest  the  apostle  contemplated  him.  4.  He  had  handled  his  sacred  body.  The 
hands  of  John  and  the  other  apostles  must  frequently  have  touched  the  body  €f  their 
Divine  Master.  But  there  is,  perhaps,  special  reference  ta  the  touching  of  him  after 
his  resurrection:  "Behold  my  hands  and  my  feet,  that  it  is  I  myself:  handle  me," 
etc.  (Luke  xiiv.  39).  "  He  saith  to  Thomas,  Reach  hither  thy  finger,  and  see  my 
hands,"  etc  (John  xi.  27).  Thus  we  see  how  eminently  qualified  St.  John  was  to 
testify  concerning  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  How  conclusive  is  the  testimony  which  he 
beaiu  I  And  how  fitted  is  such  an  agent  with  such  means  to  introduce  men  into  the 
blessed  fellowship  and  the  perfect  joy  1  Have  we  entered  into  this  high  fellowship  ?  Do 
we  realize  this  sacred  and  perfect  joy  ?  Let  those  who  are  strangers  to  these  hallowed 
aud  blessed  experiences  seek  them  through  Jesus  Christ. — W.  J. 

Ver.  6. — The  great  message.  "  This  then  is  the  message  which  we  have  heard  of 
him,"  etc.  Notice  two  preliminary  points.  1.  That  the  Christian  minister  has  received 
a  mesKige/rom  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  He  spoke  to  his  apostles  and  to  many  others. 
He  revealed  unto  them  God  the  Father,  aud  the  great  truths  concerning  human  redemp 
tion.  He  still  speaks  to  us  through  the  sacred  Suriptures.  2.  That  the  Christian 
minister  should  announce  this  message  to  others.  It  is  his  duty  not  to  preach  the  theories 
of  men,  but  the  truth  of  God,  and  especially  the  truth  revealed  by  Jesus  Christ.  There 
ivas  beeia  too  much  preaching  of  our  ecclesiastical  and  theological  -isms  instead  of  the 
great  and  gracious  truths  of  the  gospel  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour.  In  our  text  St.  John 
briefly  announces  the  great  message  which  he  had  received  from  his  Divine  Master : 
"  that  God  is  Light,  and  in  him  is  no  darkness  at  all."  Light  is  frequently  associated 
with  the  Divine  Being  in  the  Bible.  It  is  his  vesture.  "  Thou  coverest  thyself  with 
light  as  with  a  garment "  (Ps.  civ.  2).  It  abides  with  him.  "  The  light  dwelleth  with 
him "  (Dan.  ii.  22).  He  abides  in  it.  "Dwelling  in  light  unapproachable."  It  accom- 
panies his  manifesiations.  "  His  brightness  was  as  the  light "  (Hab.  iii.  4).  He  is  the 
great  Saurce  of  all  illuminations.  "  The  Father  of  lights"  (Jas.  L  17).  He  calls  his 
people  to  dwell  and  to  walk  in  light.  "  Who  hath  called  you  out  of  darkness  into  his 
marvellous  light"  (1  Pet.  ii.  9);  "Ye  were  once  darkness,  but  are  now  liglit  in  the 
Lord :  Jvalk  as  children  of  light"  (Eph.  v.  8).  Our  Lord  claimed  to  be  "  the  Light  of 
the  woild  "  (John  viiL  12),    His  "  life  was  the  hght  of  men  "  (John  i.  4).    But  in  oui 


12  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  JOHN.      [oh.  i.  1— 10k 


text  light  ii  said  to  be  the  essence  of  the  Divine  Being.  "God  is  Light."  Of  all 
material  things  light  is  most  fitted  to  set  forth  truth  and  holy  spiritual  being.  "  It 
unites  in  itself,"  as  Alford  says,  "  purity,  and  clearness,  and  beauty,  and  glory,  as  no 
other  material  object  does."  And  Milton,  "  Light  ethereal,  first  of  things,  quintessence 
pure."     The  emblem  suggests — 

I.  The  infinite  intelligence  op  God.  He  is  the  Omniscient.  "  No  intellectual 
ignorance  can  darken  his  all-embracing  survey  of  actual  and  possible  fact."  "  Unto 
him  all  hearts  are  open,  all  desires  known,  and  from  him  no  secrets  are  hid."  "  0  Lord, 
thou  hast  searched  me  and  known  me.  Thou  knowest  my  down-sitting  and  mine 
uprising,"  etc.  (Ps.  cxxxix.  1 — 6) ;  "  He  telleth  the  number  of  the  stars,"  etc.  (Ps. 
cxlvii.  4,  5) ;  "  He  knoweth  the  secrets  of  the  heart "  (Ps.  xliv.  21) ;  "  God  knoweth 
all  things  "  (1  John  iii.  20) ;  « I  know  thy  works,"  etc.  (Rev.  ii.  2,  9, 13,  19 ;  iii.  1, 
8, 16).  Every  sparrow  is  known  unto  him  (Luke  xii.  6,  7).  Let  us  endeavour  to 
personally  realize  this  great  and  solemn  truth :  God  knows  me  always  and  thoroughly. 

II.  The  enlightening  influence  op  God.  Ho  created  the  light  of  the  material 
universe.  "  God  said,  Let  there  be  light :  and  there  was  light."  He  is  the  great 
Fountain  of  all  intellectual  and  moral  light.  He  inspired  Bezaleel  to  devise  and  execute 
skilful  handiwork  (Exod.  xxxi.  1 — 5).  The  scientist,  the  metaphysician,  the  statesman, 
the  poet,  the  artist,  each  and  all  derive  their  light  from  him.  He  communicates 
religious  truth  to  man.  He  inspired,  and  still  inspires,  the  great  religious  thinkers, 
and  the  far  and  clear-sighted  spiritual  seers  of  our  race.  By  his  Son  Jesus  Ohrist  ha 
"lighteth  every  man"  (John  i.  9). 

III.  The  life-giving  and  inviooeating  iNPLtrENCB  which  God  exbrts.  Light 
cannot  create  life ;  but  it  quickens,  develops,  and  strengthens  it.  "  Physical  light," 
says  Ebrard,  "appears  to  be  the  producing,  forming,  quickening  principle  of  all  organi- 
zation, in  its  essence  self-communicative,  and  the  stimulating  principle  of  all  physical 
organic  functions  of  life."  Light  is  essential  to  every  kind  of  life  with  which  we  are 
acquainted.  Without  it  our  world  would  speedily  become  one  vast,  dreary,  dread  abode 
of  the  dead.  Great  forces  also  of  various  kinds  are  produced  from  light.  As  George 
Stephenson  pointed  out,  it  is  light  which  propels  so  swiftly  our  long  and  heavy  railway 
trains.  "  It  is  light  bottled  up  in  the  earth  for  tens  of  thousands  of  years,  light 
absorbed  by  plants  and  vegetables  being  necessary  for  the  condensation  of  carbon 
during  the  process  of  their  growth,  if  it  he  not  carbon  in  another  form ;  and  now,  after 
being  biu-ied  in  the  earth  for  long  ages  in  fields  of  coal,  that  latent  might  is  again 
brought  forth  and  liberated — made  to  work,  as  in  that  locomotive,  for  great  human 
purposes."  God  is  the  great  Author  of  all  life  and  of  all  force.  He  created  the  physical 
universe,  and  he  sustains  it.  The  forces  of  nature  are  expressions  of  his  awful  or 
beautiful  might.  Evolution  is  a  mode  of  Divine  operation.  And  the  life  and  strength 
of  souls  he  inspires  and  renews.  He  inspires  the  soul  with  life.  "  You  being  dead  in 
your  sins  hath  he  quickened  "  (Col.  ii.  13).  The  true  Christian  "  is  born  of  the  Spirit " 
(John  iii.  8) ;  he  "  is  bom  of  God  "  (cb.  iii.  9).  And  God  imparts  and  renews  strength 
to  bis  people.  "  He  giveth  power  to  the  faint ;  and  to  them  that  have  no  might  he 
increaseth  strength,"  etc.  (Isa.  xl.  29 — 31). 

IV.  The  EXISTENCE  of  God  as  a  Trinity  in  unity.  This  is  at  least  suggested  by 
speaking  of  him  as  Light.  In  two  ways  does  light  suggest  the  triunity  of  God.  "  The 
researches  of  Young  and  Helmholtz,"  says  Mr.  Sugden,  "  have  proved  beyond  the  pos- 
sibility of  doubt  that  the  three  primary  colours  are  red,  green,  and  violet,  and  that  by 
farious  combinations  of  these  three  all  the  colours  with  which  we  are  acquainted  are 
produced ;  whilst  the  combination  of  all  three  in  equal  proportions  gives  white  light, 
apparently  one  simple  and  homogeneous  sensation,  but  in  reality  a  compound  of  three. 
Have  we  not  here  a  most  striking  illustration,  if  not  more  than  an  illustration,  of  the 
Christian  truth  about  the  nature  of  God,  which  teaches  us  that  he  is  a  Trinity  in  unity 
— three  Persons,  and  one  God  ?  ...  As  Luthardt  well  says, '  God  has,  in  the  history  of 
salvation,  revealed  himself  in  a  triune  manner — as  Father,  Son,  and  Spirit ;  and  we,  in 
that  work  of  appropriating  salvation,  through  which  we  become  Christians,  have  experi- 
ence of  God  apcording  to  this  distinction,  viz.  as  him  to  whom  we  are  reconciled,  and 
as  the  Spirit  who  has  inwardly  appropriated  to  us  the  grace  of  reconciliation,  and  made 
it  the  power  of  a  new  life  to  us.  Thus  do  we  become  certain  that  there  are  distinctions 
IB  the  Godhead,  that  God  is  the  triune  God.' "    Light  suggests  the  game  truth  in 


CH.  Ll— 10.]      THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  JOHN.  18 

another  way.  It  is  thus  stated  by  Professor  Lias :  "  When  we  reflect  on  the  threefold 
i^ature  of  light,  its  enlightening,  its  warming,  its  chemical  powers,  we  are  reminded  of 
the  Holy  Trinity — the  unapproachable  Light  himself;  his  eternal  Revealer,  bringing 
light  to  earth,  and  quickening  by  his  genial  warmtli  the  frozen  hearts  of  men ;  and  the 
eternal  Spirit,  dwelling  in  their  hearts,  and  slowly  bringing  hii  healing  influences  to 
bear  upon  their  diseased  souls." 

V.  The  pkbfeot  holiness  of  God.  Light  is  pure  and  purifying.  It  visits  scenes  of 
corruption  and  decay,  and  exsrcises  a  cleansing  and  healing  influence  there,  and  pursues 
its  glorious  course  without  having  contracted  any  taint,  still  absolutely  pure.  Pit 
emblem  of  the  infinite  holiness  of  the  great  God.  "  No  stain  can  soil  his  robe  of  awful 
sanctity."  He  is  pre-eminently  "  the  Holy  One."  "  Thou  only  art  holy."  The  highest 
intelligences  ceaselessly  praise  him,  crying,  "  Holy,  holy,  holy,  is  the  Lord  of  hosts." 
"  His  name  is  holy,  and  he  dwells  in  the  high  and  holy  place."  His  holiness  is  the 
glory  of  his  Being.  He  is  "glorious  in  holiness."  As  if  to  set  forth  the  entire  purity 
and  perfection  of  the  Divine  nature  considered  as  light,  St.  John  says,  "  And  in  him  is 
no  darkness  at  all."  No  kind  of  darkness  whatsoever  has  any  place  in  him.  "  Neither 
ignorance,  nor  error,  nor  sin,  nor  death  "  is  found  in  him. 

Conclusion.  1.  Let  us  reverence  this  great  and  holy  Being.  2.  Let  us  seek  hit  life- 
givmg,  enlightening,  and  invigorating  influences. — W.  J. 

Vers.  6,  7. — The  condition  and  consequences  of  fellowship  with  Ood.  "If  we  say 
that  we  have  fellowship  with  him,"  etc. 

I.  The  condition  of  fellowship  with  God.  St.  John  states  this  condition  both 
negatively  and  positively.  1.  Negatively.  "  If  we  say  that  wo  have  fellowship  with 
him,  and  walk  in  the  darkness,  we  lie,  and  do  not  the  truth.  (1)  There  may  be  a 
profession  of  fellowship  with  God,  while  the  practice  is  utterly  opposed  to  his  character 
and  will.  We  have  spoken  of  this  fellowship  in  our  treatment  of  the  third  verse.  To 
"walk"  is  an  expression  frequently  used  in  the  sacred  Scriptures  to  indicate  the 
entire  life,  with  special  reference  to  its  outward  aspects.  To  "  walk  in  darkness  "  is  to 
live  in  the  practice  of  sin.  In  St.  John's  time  there  were  persons  who  claimed  to  have 
communion  with  the  Light,  but  walked  in  the  darkness.  The  Gnostics  professedly 
devoted  their  souls  to  the  pursuit  of  the  highest  knowledge,  and  yet  were  guilty  of  the 
vilest  sins  with  their  bodies,  alleging  "  that  the  flesh  was  so  corrupt  that  no  filthiness 
of  life  could  affect  it."  (2)  That  such  profession,  joined  with  such  practice,  is  a  twofold 
lie.  "  If  we  say  that  we  have  fellowship  with  him,  and  walk  in  the  darkness,  we  lie." 
Here  is  the  lie  of  the  lip.  The  profession  is  untrue.  "  And  do  not  the  truth."  Here 
is  the  lie  of  the  life.  The  practice  is  opposed  to  truth.  Truth  is  not  only  to  be 
spoken,  but  acted.  Life  should  be  brought  into  harmony  with  the  eternal  verities. 
The  truth  acknowledged  in  the  creed  should  be  expressed  in  the  conduct.  But  in  this 
case  supposed  truth  is  neither  spoken  nor  acted.  2.  Positively.  "  But  if  we  walk  in 
the  light,  as  he  is  in  the  light,  we  have  fellowship  one  with  another."  "  Thii  walking 
In  the  light,  as  he  is  in  the  light,"  says  Alford,  "  is  no  mere  imitation  of  God,  but  is 
•n  identity  in  the  essential  element  of  our  daily  walk  with  the  essential  element  of 
God's  eternal  Being ;  not  imitation,  but  coincidence  and  identity  of  the  very  atmo- 
sphere of  life."  "  The  light "  denotes  "  the  sphere  of  the  manifestation  of  the  good  and 
the  God-Uke."  The  words  of  St.  Paul,  in  Eph.  v.  8,  9,  considerably  elucidate  this 
verse :  "  Ye  were  once  darkness,  but  are  now  light  in  the  Lord :  walk  as  children  of 
light  (for  the  fruit  of  the  light  is  in  all  goodness  and  righteousness  and  truth)."  As 
Meyer  says,  the  "  whole  of  Christian  morality  is  here  presented  under  its  three  great 
aspects — the  good,  the  right,  the  true."  If  we  would  express  the  meaning  of  the 
apostle's  phrase,  "  walking  in  the  light,"  in  a  single  word,  "  holiness  "  is  the  word  best 
suited  to  that  purpose.  We  discover  three  ideas  in  this  expression  of  St.  John.  (1)  Life 
in  sympathy  with  holiness.  The  heart  beating  in  harmony  with  the  light.  (2)  Life 
in  the  practice  of  holiness.  The  inward  principle  expressed  in  the  outward  conduct. 
The  light  of  the  heart  shining  in  the  life.  (3)  Life  progressing  in  holiness.  He 
who  walks  is  not  stationary,  but  advancing.  The  godly  soul  "  follows  on  to  know 
the  Lord ; "  "  presses  on  toward  the  goal  unto  the  prize  of  the  high  calling  of  God  in 
Christ  Jesus."  This,  then,  is  the  condition  of  fellowship  with  God — ^walking  in  the 
light ;  holiness  of  heart  and  of  life. 


14  THE  FIEST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  JOHN.      [oh.  1. 1—10 

IL  Thk  consbquknoes  of  fbllowship  with  God.  1.  FellowsMp  with  (he  laints. 
"  We  have  fellowship  one  with  another."  The  reality  of  our  communion  with  God  is 
attested  by  our  communion  of  love  with  those  who  are  his.  Walking  in  the  sphere  ol 
truth,  righteousness,  and  love,  we  have  fellowship  with  all  those  who  walk  in  the 
same. sphere.  All  who  walk  in  the  light  are  one  in  their  deepest  sympathies,  in  their 
most  steadfast  principles,  in  their  mo»t  important  aims,  and  in  their  highest  aspira- 
tions ;  they  are  one  in  character,  in  service,  and  in  destiny.  Hence  their  communion 
with  each  other  is  genuine,  vital,  and  blessed.  2.  Sanctificatian  through  the  Saviour, 
"  And  the  blood  of  Jesus  his  Son  cleanseth  us  from  all  sin."  This  implies  that  even 
they  who  walk  in  the  light  need  cleansing  from  sin.  '•  Tue  requirement  that  we  walk 
in  the  light,  is  confronted  by  the  fact  that  in  us  there  still  is  sin  and  dirkness." 
Notice :  (1)  The  power  by  which  we  are  cleansed.  "  The  blood  of  Jesus  his  Son." 
Not  the  material  blood  of  Jesus,  but  Ids  blood  in  its  moral  significance  and  strength. 
"  The  life  of  the  flesh  is  in  the  blood"  (Lev.  xvii.  11) ;  "The  blood  is  the  life"  (Deut. 
lii.  23).  The  blood  of  Jesus  denotes  the  sacrifice  of  the  life  of  Jesus  for  us.  The 
power  of  that  sacrifice  is  chiefly  the  power  of  holy  and  purifying  love.  It  is  the  fullest 
and  mightiest  expression  of  the  infinite  love  of  God  the  Father  toward  us,  who  "  spared 
not  his  own  Son,  but  delivered  him  up  for  us  all ; "  and  of  the  infinite  love  of  Jesus 
his  Son  toward  us  in  his  voluntary  self-sacrifice.  "  Who  gave  himself  for  us,  that  he 
might  redeem  us  from  all  iniquity,  and  purify  unto  himself  a  people  for  his  own  posses- 
sion, zealous  of  good  works."  Holy  love  received  into  the  heart,  by  its  own  essential 
nature,  is  cleansing  in  its  influence.  In  proportion  as  the  love  of  God  in  the  death  of 
Jesus  Christ  is  heartily  believed,  will  sin  be  hated  and  holiness  loved  and  cultivated. 
(2)  The  progressiveness  of  this  cleansing.  "  The  blood  of  Jesus  his  Son  cleanseth  us." 
The  apostle  uses  the  present  tense.  He  does  not  write  "  cleansed,"  or  "  hath  cleansed," 
but  "  is  cleansing  us."  The  cleansing  is  not  accomplishad  at  once  and  for  ever.  It  is 
a  continual  process.  The  precious  blood  of  Christ  exerts  its  purifying  and  sanctifying 
Influence  until  the  heart  and  the  life  are  thoroughly  cleansed  from  all  sin.  (3)  The 
thoroughness  of  this  cleansing.  "  Cleanseth  us  from  all  sin."  No  sin-stains  are  so 
deep  as  to  defy  its  power.  "  Though  your  sing  be  as  scarlet,  they  shall  be  as  white  as 
snow,"  etc.  (Isa.  i.  18;  of.  Bzek.  xxivi.  25;  Heb.  ix.  13,  14). 

Let  our  earnest  endeavour  be  to  walk  In  the  li^ht,  and  to  trust  in  the  great  and 
gracious  Saviour. — W.  J. 

Vers.  8 — 10. — Man's  attitude  towardt  Me  own  sint.  "  If  we  say  that  we  hare  no 
sin,  we  deceive  ourselves,"  etc.  It  is  implied  that  man  is  a  sinner,  that  even  Christian 
men  "have  sin."  The  renewed  nature  is  not,  in  our  present  condition,  an  altogether 
sinless  nature.  The  saintly  apostle  includes  himself  in  the  "  If  we  say  that  we  have 
no  sin,  we  deceive  ourselves,"  etc.  But  this  is  not  the  same  moral  condition  as 
"  walking  in  the  darkness  "  (ver.  6).  In  that  condition  the  man  "  is  in  the  darkness ; " 
in  this,  the  sin  is  in  the  man.  In  that,  darkness  is  the  moral  region  in  which  the 
sinner  lives  and  moves  and  has  his  being;  in  this,  he  lives  and  walks  in  the  light,  but 
is  not  altogethei'  free  from  bin.  Our  text  sets  before  us  two  contrasted  attitudes  of 
men  towards  their  own  sins. 

I.  The  cekial  of  pebbokal  sins.  "  If  we  say  that  we  have  no  sin,"  etc.  (ver,  8). 
"  If  we  say  that  we  have  not  sinned,"  etc.  (ver.  10).  Notice :  1.  This  denial  itself. 
It  may  be  made  variously.  (1)  By  affirming  that  we  are  free  from  sin.  There  may 
be  persons  whose  view  of  the  exalted  claims  of  God's  holy  law  is  so  deficient,  and 
whose  estimate  of  their  own  character  and  conduct  is  so  exaggerated,  that  they  think 
and  assert  that  they  have  no  sin.  (2)  By  pleading  the  merit  of  certain  good  actions 
as  a  set-off  against  our  sins.  In  this  case  certain  small  and  venial  sins  are  acknow- 
ledged, but  very  many  virtuous  and  generous  deeds  are  claimed,  and  great  merit  is 
a»crthed  to  them,  and  they  are  held  to  far  more  than  counterbalance  the  slight  offences. 
Or,  1  ke  the  Pharisee  (Luke  xviii.  11, 12),  a  man  may  conclude  that  he  has  no  sin  by 
compaiing  himself  and  his  good  works  with  others  whom  he  deems  very  much  his 
inferiors.  (3)  By  extenuating  the  character  of  sin.  There  are  not  a  few  who  virtually 
^eny  the  fact  of  sin  altogether.  What  the  Bible  calls  sin  they  speak  of  as  misdirec- 
•^ion,  imperfect  development,  inherited  tendencies  to  errors  of  life;  and  thus  they  seek 
CO  get  lid  «4'  jperiional  guilt.    2.  2%«  consegumieu  of  this  denial.    (1)  The  self-deception 


CH.  1.1—10.]      THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  JOHN.  15 

of  the  denier.  "  He  deoeWeth  himself."  By  closing  his  eyes  to  the  light  of  truth  and 
holiness,  he  is  wandering  into  moral  error,  falsehood,  and  danger.  He  sins  against  his 
own  soul.  (2)  The  manifestation  of  the  solemn  fact  that  the  truth  of  G-od  is  not  in 
him.  Saying  that  he  hsm  no  sin,  he  testifies  that  neither  the  truth  of  the  perfect 
holiness  of  God,  nor  that  of  the  sinfulness  of  man,  is  realized  hy  him.  (3)  Tlie  negation 
of  the  Divine  veracity.  "  If  we  say  that  we  have  not  sinned,  we  make  him  a  liar." 
Grod  has  repeatedly  declared  that  all  men  are  sinners  (Rom.  iii.  10 — 18).  All  the  pro- 
Tisions  and  arrangements  for  man's  redemption  imply  that  he  is  a  sinner  and  spiritually 
lost.  But  if  any  man  has  not  sinned,  these  declarations  are  untrue,  and  redemption 
itself  is  based  upon  falsehood.  How  dreadful  a  thing  it  is  to  "  make  him  a  liar  "1  (4) 
The  manifestation  of  the  fact  that  the  Word  of  God  is  not  in  him.  By  "  his  Word 
(ver.  10)  we  do  not  understand  the  eternal  and  personal  Word  (as  in  ver.  1),  but,  as 
Ebrard  says,  "  the  collective  revelation  of  God,  not  merely  that  which  is  contained  in 
the  written  words  of  the  Old  and  New  Testaments,  but  the  entire  self- annunciation  of 
the  nature  of  God,  who  is  Light."  The  whole  revelation  of  the  mind  and  will  of  Gud 
teaches  that  man  is  a  sinner ;  he  who  says  that  he  has  not  sinned  contradicts  that 
revelation,  and  in  so  doing  shows  that  the  spirit  of  that  revelation  is  not  in  him. 

II.  The  confession  of  personal  sins.  "  If  we  confess  our  sins,  he  is  faithful  and 
just  to  forgive  us  our  sins,  and  to  cleanse  us  from  all  unrighteousness."  1.  The  con- 
fession itself.  The  confession,  to  be  valid,  must  be  sincere ;  it  must  be  the  expression 
of  penitence.  The  apostle  means  more  than  a  vague,  general  confession  of  sin.  It  is 
to  be  feared  that  many  join  in  the  "general  confession"  in  church  every  Sunday 
without  any  true  .realization  of  their  personal  guiltiness,  and  whose  confession,  con- 
sequently, cannot  be  acceptable  unto  God.  Our  confession  must  be  personal  and  par- 
ticular; it  must  spring  from  the  heart,  and  its  sincerity  must  be  evinced  in  the  life. 
Confession  must  be  made  to  God.  In  our  text  there  is  no  suggestion  whatever  of 
confession  to  a  priest.  Confession  to  man  is  binding  only  when  we  have  injured  man, 
and  then  the  confession  should  be  made  to  the  injured  person  or  persons.  But  the 
confession  and  forgiveness  of  which  our  text  speaks  are  things  which  transpire  betwaen 
the  penitent  soul  and  the  pardoning  God.  2.  Tht  consequences  of  this  confession.  (1) 
Forgiveness  of  our  sins.  As  a  consequence  of  genuine  personal  confession  of  sins,  God 
exempts  us  from  their  spiritual  penalties,  sets  us  free  from  their  guilt,  and  deliyers 
us  from  condemnation.  How  completely  and  graciously  God  forgives  (Ps.  ciii.  12 ; 
Isa.  xxxviii.  17 ;  xliv.  22 ;  Iv.  6,  7 ;  Mioah  vji.  10 ;  Luke  xv.  20—24)1  (2)  Cleansing 
from  our  sins.  "And  to  cleanse  us  from  all  unrighteousness."  Purification  is 
promised  as  well  as  pardon  ;  sanctification  as  well  as  justification.  Of  this  sanotifica- 
tion  we  have  already  spoken  (ver.  7).  (3)  The  guarantee  of  these  blessings.  "  He  is 
faithful  and  just  [Revised  Version,  '  righteous ']  to  forgive  us  our  sins,"  etc.  The 
character  of  God  is  a  pledge  that  the  penitent  shall  receive  pardon  and  purification. 
He  has  promised  these  blessings ;  he  is  faithful,  and  will  fulfil  his  promises.  He  is 
faithful,  not  only  to  his  promises,  but  to  his  own  holy  nature.  "  God  is  Light,"  and  he 
is  true  to  himself  in  forgiving  and  sanctifying  those  who  sincerely  confess  their  sins. 
It  seems  tons  that  his  righteousness  here  does  not  mean  that,  Christ  having  borne  our 
sins  and  satisfied  Divine  justice,  the  forgiveness  of  all  who  believe  on  him  is  due  to 
bim  or  to  them  in  him.  That  may  be  taught  elsewhere,  but  we  cannot  discover  it 
here.  The  justice  or  righteousness  is  that  of  the  character  of  God ;  and  pardon  and 
purification  from  sin  are  bestowed  in  harmony  with  his  righteousness.  It  may  be,  as 
Alford  observes,  that  "  in  the  background  lie  all  the  details  of  redemption,  but  they 
are  not  here  in  this  verse :  oidy  the  simple  fact  of  God's  justice  is  adduced."  "  Justice 
and  mercy  are  forms  of  love.  The  same  is  true  of  righteousness,  or  right— this  requires 
both  justice  and  mercy ;  for  no  being  can  ever  think  himself  righteous  who  does  not 
exercise  mercy  where  mercy  is  possible — 'faithful  and  just'  (righteous),  says  an 
apostle, '  to  forgive  us  our  sins.'  God  wiU  be  just,  retributively,  because  he  is  righteous 
He  will  also  be  merciful  and  forgiving  because  he  is  righteous." ' 

Our  subject  presents  the  strongest  reasons  to  dissuade  us  from  attempting  to  cloak 
or  deny  our  sins,  and  the  strongest  encouragement  to  humbly  and  heartily  confess 
them  unto  God.  "  He  that  covereth  his  sins  shall  not  prosper ;  but  whoso  confesspth 
•ad  forsaketh  them  shall  have  mercy." — W.  J. 

•  '  Iii6  Yioiucious  Saorifiue,'  by  H.  Bushnell,  D.O.,  pL  ilL  eh.  3. 


16  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  JOHN.      [oh.  1. 1— la 

Vers.  1 — 4. — Introduction.  I.  Subjbot  of  apostolic  pboolamation.  1.  What  i$ 
thrown  into  prominenc$.  (1)  TTie  absolute  concerning  the  Word  of  life.  "  That  which 
was  from  the  beginning."  By  this  form  of  expression  we  are  taken  back  to  a  point . 
which  has  existence  only  in  thought,  and  from  that  point  we  are  called  to  look  forward. 
"  That  which  was  from  the  beginning,"  or,  strictly,  "  that  which  is  timeless,"  concerning 
the  Word  of  life,  viz.  his  Divine  Personality  and  attributes,  was  included  in  the  procla- 
mation. It  is  put  first  as  the  grand  background  of  the  Incarnation.  The  Incarnate 
One  must  be  thought  of  as  having  timelessness  and  all  that  belongs  to  timelessness.  (2) 
2%e  historical  concerning  the  Word  of  life.  "That  which  we  have  heard,  that  which 
we  have  seen  with  our  eyes,  that  which  we  beheld,  and  our  hands  handled."  John 
uses  the  plural  number,  as  writing  in  the  name  of  the  apostles,  of  whom  he  was  the 
Bole  survivor.  There  could  also  be  predicated  of  Christ  that  he  was  the  Obfed  of 
sensuous  perception.  This  was  not  from  the  beginning,  but  in  time.  We  thus  come 
upon  the  historical  existence  of  Christ.  "  That  which  we  have  heard."  In  accordance 
with  the  context,  we  are  to  think  only  of  what  they  had  heard  from  the  lips  of  Christ. 
They  had  been  so  near  him  as  actually  to  hear  him  speaking.  They  had  heard  him 
when  he  spoke  the  sermon  on  the  mount,  when  he  taught  them  to  pray,  when  he  bade 
the  sea  be  still,  when  he  uttered  the  seven  voices  on  the  cross,  when  he  saluted  them 
after  his  resurrection,  when  he  blessed  them  in  parting  from  them.  "  Have  heard." 
That  which  they  had  heard — the  words  and  tone  of  voice — was  their  permanent  pos- 
gession ;  and  it  is  the  permanent  possession  of  the  Church  still  in  substance,  though  not 
now  associated  with  impressions  through  the  sense  of  hearing.  "  That  which  we  have 
seen  with  our  eyes."  Some  had  only  come  into  contact  with  those  who  had  seen 
Christ :  they  had  seen  him  with  their  own  eyes.  They  had  seen  him  when  he  was 
teaching,  when  he  was  walking  on  the  sea,  when  he  was  transfigured,  when  he  was 
hanging  on  the  cross,  when  he  was  risen,  when  he  was  going  up  into  heaven.  "  Have 
seen."  The  impressions  received  through  the  sense  of  sight  remained  with  them, 
instead  of  which  we  have  only  the  descriptions  of  the  evangelists.  "That  which  we 
beheld."  By  a  change  of  verb  we  are  referred  to  seeing  vnth  an  intention,  and  by  a 
change  of  tense  we  are  referred  to  separate  acts.  On  occasion  after  occasion  they  looked 
purposely,  and  satisfied  themselves  that  he  was  indeed  bone  of  their  bone  and  flesh  of 
their  flesh.  "  And  our  hands  handled."  This  is  joined  closely  in  the  same  tense  to 
what  goes  before.  They  had  the  solid  evidence  of  handling  on  which  to  proceed.  They 
not  only  touched,  but  touched  with  an  intention.  They  must  often  have  felt  the  touch 
of  his  hand ;  and  we  can  think  of  them  looking  forward  to  an  opportunity,  and  satisfying 
themselves,  in  the  actual  contact,  that  he  was  indeed  their  own  flesh.  There  was  one 
remarkable  occasion  after  his  resurrection;  when  he  stood  suddenly  in  the  midst  of 
them,  they  were  terrified  and  affrighted,  and  supposed  that  they  beheld  a  spirit ;  and  he 
asked  them  to  go  beyond  beholding.  "  Handle  me,  and  see ;  for  a  spirit  hath  not 
flesh  and  bones,  as  ye  behold  me  having."  And  apparently  they  were  each  favoured 
with  the  convincing  evidence  of  handling  him.  (3)  2%e  designation  of  Christ  as  the 
Word  of  life.  "  Concerning  the  Word  of  life."  In  the  introduction  to  his  Gospel  John 
calls  Christ "  the  Word."  The  natural  interpretation  is  that  he  is  the  Word  in  relation  to 
God,  as  essentially  manifesting  God.  Instead  of  Grod.  here  we  have  Life,  which  there- 
fore is  to  be  taken  as  a  designation  of  God.  Created  life  has  only  a  partial  significance ; 
life  in  its  absolute  significance  is  only  to  be  found  in  God.  The  chief  elements  of  life 
are  consciousness,  activity,  gladness;  in  the  Word,  God  sees  brought  out  the  infinite 
richness  of  his  own  conscious,  active,  glad  life.  2.  Parenthetical  statement.  (1)  Desig- 
nation of  Christ  as  the  Life.  "And  the  Life."  In  the  former  designation  God  is 
thought  of  as  the  Life ;  now  Christ,  as  essentially  manifesting  God  in  the  particular 
aspect,  is  designated  the  Life  (John  i.  4).  (2)  Another  manifestation  which  is  connected 
with  the  evidence  of  sight.  "  Was  manifested,  and  we  have  seen,  and  bear  witness."  As 
the  Word,  Christ  was  manifested  to  God ;  but  here  we  come  upon  another  manifestation. 
The  reference  is  to  the  Incarnation,  or  his  becoming  flesh  (as  it  is  expressed  in  John 
i.  14).  As  the  Word,  he  was  hidden  from  men ;  as  the  Incarnate,  he  was  manifested  to 
men,  ipecially  to  the  apostles.  He  came  within  the  sphere  of  their  vision,  and  they 
were  put  in  the  position  of  eye-witnesses  to  the  Life  as  manifested.  (3)  The  second 
manvestatien  not  announced  out  of  connection  with  the  first.  "And  declare  unto  you 
the  Life,  tke  eternal  Life,  which  was  with  the  Father,  and  waa  manifested  unto  ua." 


OH.  L  1—10.]       THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  JOHN.  11 

They  realized  the  importance  of  making  public  the  manifestation  of  the  Life  to  tiiem, 
but,  at  the  Bame  time,  what  he  was  before  being  manifested  to  them.  He  was  eternal ; 
whUe  entering  into  time,  in  the  life  which  essentially  belonged  to  him,  he  was  timeless. 
He  was  also  with  the  Father — a  Companion,  as  it  were,  in  whom  the  fatherly  lov6 
found  its  object.  This  was  the  blessed  concealment  out  of  which  he  came.  It  is  only 
when  the  Incarnation  is  thus  connected  that  its  graciousness  appears.  He  who  mani- 
fested the  fuluess  of  the  Divine  life  was  manifested  in  a  form  level  to  sense.  He  who 
was  manifested  eternally  was  manifested  in  time.  He  who  was  manifested  with  the 
Father  was  manifested  in  the  midst  of  uncongenial  society.  3.  Former  statement,  which 
was  left  incomplete,  resumed.  "  That  which  we  have  seen  and  heard  declare  we  unto 
you  also."  We  are  not  told  who  the  recipients  of  this  Epistle  were.  They  were  not  all 
Christians,  for,  having  declared  their  message  to  others,  they  declared  it  to  them  also. 
Their  message  was  based  on  facts  for  which  they  had  the  evidence  of  sight  and  hearing. 
In  accordance  with  what  has  been  said,  they  presented  those  facts  with  their  proper 
setting,  viz.  as  facts  in  time  concerning  him  who  was  before  all  time.  They  also  pre- 
sented them  with  their  proper  interpretation,  viz.  as  showing  the  Divine  desire  for  human 
salvation.  This  gave  a  great  simplicity  and  power  to  their  preaching :  they  had  a  few 
facts  to  tell,  which  they  themselves  could  attest.  Christ  is  not  now  in  the  world,  so 
that  we  can  have  faith  founded  on  the  testimony  of  our  own  senses  of  sight  and  heariug ; 
but  we  can  have  faith  founded  on  apostolic  testimony.  We  owe  a  debt  of  gratitude  to 
the  apostles  that  they  were  as  careful  witnesses,  looking  purposely  and  handling  pur- 
posely, and  that  they  took  such  pains  to  make  their  testimony  known ;  and  we  owe  a 
debt  of  gratitude  to  the  great  Head  of  the  Church,  who  made  use  of  them  for  the 
eliciting  and  establishing  of  our  faith. 

II.  Aim  of  the  apostolic  proclamation  and  of  this  Epistle.  1.  Aim  of  tha 
apostolic  proclamation.  (1)  Fellowship  with  apostles.  "  That  ye  also  may  have  fellow- 
ship with  us."  Fellowship  depends,  to  a  great  extent,  on  a  common  range  of  experience. 
There  were  saving  experiences  which  the  apostles  enjoyed,  in  connection  with  which 
many  had  fellowship  with  them ;  they  wished  these,  too,  to  have  fellowship  with  them 
in  connection  with  the  same  experiences.  Therefore  they  preached  the  Incarnation  to 
them,  for  that  was  the  condition  of  those  experiences  being  enjoyed.  (2)  Fellowship 
with  Ood.  "Tea,  and  our  fellowship  is  with  the  Father,  and  with  his  Son  Jesus 
Christ."  Of  far  more  importance  than  having  fellowship,  even  with  apostles,  is  having 
fellowship  with  God.  This  is  the  principal  end  for  which  we  are  associated.  We  have 
fellowship  with  the  Father.  In  his  fatherly  love  he  enters  into  all  our  experiences, 
and  we  have  to  enter  into  his  loving  thoughts  and  purposes  and  to  share  in  his  peace 
and  joy.  We  have  fellowship  with  the  Father,  as  identified  with  his  Son  Jesus  Christ 
— him  whom  he  sent  forth  on  the  errand  of  human  salvation.  From  his  human  expe- 
riences, even  of  death,  the  Son  can  enter  into  all  our  experiences ;  and  we  are  to  be 
encouraged  to  enter  into  sympathy  with  him  in  the  whole  extent  of  his  saving  work. 
The  apostles  proclaimed  the  Incarnation,  that,  within  the  Christian  circle,  this  elevating 
fellowship  might, be  promoted.  2.  Aim  of  this  Epistle.  "  And  those  things  we  write, 
that  our  joy  may  be  fulfilled."  It  is  implied  that  his  letter  was  in  keeping  with  the 
apostolic  proclamation.  In  the  joy  of  the  experiences  connected  with  the  Incarnation 
there  wsis  one  element  of  pain.  It  was  the  feeling  that  man  did  not  share,  or  did  not 
share  more  fully,  in  the  joy  of  these  experiences.  He  sought  relief  from  this  pain  in 
writing.  He  had  some  joy  in  his  readers  experiencing  the  joy  of  the  Incarnation ;  ha 
wished  to  have  his  joy  completed  in  the  completion  of  their  joy.  This  was  the  apostle's 
feeling,  which,  as  the  last  of  the  apostles,  he  was  conserving  in  the  name  of  alL — R.  F. 

Vers.  6 — ^10. — Mesaagefrom  Christ  brought  to  hear  onfellowship  with  God.  I.  Natubb 
OF  God.  "  And  this  is  the  message  which  we  have  heard  from  him,  and  announce  unto 
you,  that  God  is  Light,  and  in  him  is  no  darkness  at  all."  Christ's  message  is  sup- 
ported by  the  conviction  that  he  has  a  message  to  deliver.  The  apostolic  message, 
which  has  still  to  be  delivered,  was  received  directly  from  the  lips  of  Christ.  It  has 
particular  reference  to  the  nature  of  God,  viz.  his  being  Light,  with  which  we  are  to 
associate  infinite  clearness  of  truth  and  infinite  purity.  He  is  Light,  to  the  absolut* 
exclusion  of  darkness,  there  being  in  him  not  the  slightest  trace  of  wror,  not  ths 
slightest  speck  of  impurity.    The  light  of  the  sun  is  a  fit,  though  only  an  imperfect, 

I,  JOBS  « 


18  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  JOHN.       [cu.  l  I— 10. 

gymbol  of  his  truth  and  purity.  Christ  may  have  given  the  revelation  in  these  words, 
though  they  are  not  to  be  found  in  the  Gospels.  It  is  implied  in  his  being  the  Light, 
while  at  the  same  time  the  Word  (John  i.  1 — 9).  It  was  because  he  manifested  the 
essential  light-nature  of  God  that  he  was  Light-bringer  to  men.  We  do  not  have  hero 
the  good  message  (language  which  John  nowhere  uses),  viz.  mercy  to  men,  though 
there  may  be  suggestion  of  this  in  the  great  diffusiveness  of  light.  We  have  that  which 
mercy  presupposes  in  God  and  seeks  to  diffuse  among  men. 

II.  Thrbk  false  conditions  conveunkd,  and  the  three  opposed  positions 
iUBTiFiED.  1.  First  false  position.  (1)  Stated.  "If  we  say  that  we  have  fellowship 
with  him,  and  walk  in  the  darkness."  The  three  hypothetical  sayings,  introduced  in 
the  same  way  ("if  we  say"),  are  unchristian.  As  one  who  would  be  warned  as  well  aa 
others,  John  includes  himself.  Christians,  according  to  the  conception  in  ver.  3,  are  those 
who  say  that  they  have  fellowship  with  God.  The  position  supposed  here  is  saying 
this  while  we  walk  in  the  darkness,  t.«.  while  we  habitually  move  in  this  element — 
while  we  keep  our  life  away  from  true  and  pure  influences,  loving  error  and  impurity. 
(2)  Condemned.  "  We  lie,  and  do  not  the  truth."  Our  lie  is  saying  that  we  have 
fellowship  with  God.  Our  doing  not  the  truth  evidences  our  lie.  We  make  our  life  • 
contradiction  of  the  nature  of  God,  which  is  light,  and  thus  necessarily  unfit  ourselves 
for  fellowship  with  God;  for  what  concord  hath  light  with  darkness?  It  cannot  ho 
held  that  we  can  be  indifferent  to  our  manner  of  life  and  yet  maintain  Mendship  with 
God.  2.  First  opposed  position.  (1)  Stated.  "But  if  we  walk  in  the  light,  as  he  is 
in  the  light."  This  is  the  Christian  supposition  opposed  to  the  other.  As  one  who 
would  be  confirmed,  John  includes  himself.  Let  us  also  include  ourselves.  Light  is  the 
Divine  element ;  let  it  Edso  be  ours.  God  is  in  the  light,  i.e.  has  absolute  fixedness  in  it. 
We  are  to  walk  in  the  light,  i.e.  to  throw  our  life  open  to  all  true  and  pure  influences, 
thus  moving  forward  toward  his  fixedness.  (2)  Justified.  One  good  consequent.  "Wo 
have  fellowship  one  with  another."  This  results  from  our  walking  in  the  light. 
Having  a  common  element  for  our  life,  and  therefore  common  sympathies  and  anti- 
pathies, the  foundation  is  laid  for  our  .having  fellowship  one  with  another.  This, 
according  to  the  Johannine  teaching,  is  closely  related  to  our  having  fellowship  with 
God.  But  how  are  we  to  be  fitted  for  this  higher  fellowship  ?  The  answer  is  given 
in  what  follows.  By  walking  in  the  light,  we  come  within  the  influence  of  the  blood 
of  Christ.  Another  good  consequent.  "  And  the  blood  of  Jesus  his  Son  cleanseth  us 
from  all  sin."  (a)  A  present  power.  The  blood  of  Christ  refers  to  tho  death  of 
Christ,  but  ii  to  be  distinguished  from  it  in  marking  it  as  having  present  virtue.  It  is 
a  great  living  reality  of  the  present.  It  is  mentioned,  along  with  other  verities,  in  the 
twelfth  of  Hebrews :  "  Te  are  come  ...  to  the  blood  of  sprinkling,  that  speakoth 
better  things  than  that  of  AbeL"  (6)  A  human-BivtTie  power.  It  is  the  blood  of  Jesus, 
and  therefore  human  blood ;  but  it  is  also  the  blood  of  God's  Son,  and  therefore  blood 
of  infinite  virtue,  (c)  A  deansing power.  It  is  blood  that  cleanses,  because  it  was  shed 
in  satisfaction  for  sin.  The  cleansing  is  with  a  view  to  our  having  fellowship  with 
God.  There  was  constant  instruction  in  this  truth  under  the  Jewish  dispensation. 
The  cleansing,  in  accordance  with  ver.  9,  is  to  be  referred  to  sanctification.  Even  after 
we  have  been  cleansed  from  guilt,  we  need  to  be  cleansed  from  impure  thoughts  and 
desires,  in  order  that  we  may  be  fitted  for  fellowship  with  him  who  is  Light.  Our 
whole  dependence  for  sanctification  must  be  on  the  eflicacy  of  the  blood,  along  with  the 
agency  of  the  Spirit,  (d)  A  universal  power.  It  is  blood  that  cleanses  from  all  sin. 
The  light-nature  of  God  is  constantly  revealing  the  presence  of  sinful  elements  in  our 
nature.  We  have  the  remedy  in  the  blood  of  Christ,  which  will  gradually  remove  all 
sinful  elements,  until,  thoroughly  purified,  we  are  as  fitted  as  creatures  can  be  for 
holding  converse  with  him  who  is  a  consuming  Fire  to  all  sin.  3.  Second  false  posi- 
tion. (1)  Stated.  "  If  we  say  that  we  have  no  sin."  This  goes  back  on  tho  previous 
thought,  viz.  the  cleansing  away  of  the  remaining  impurity,  until  wo  are  completely 
fitted  for  fellowship  with  God.  What  if  this  is  unnecessary  ?  if  our  sanctification  is 
ainady  completed?  This  is  the  supposition  which  is  now  made.  (2)  Condemned. 
"  We  deceive  onrselves,  and  the  truth  is  not  in  us."  It  is  too  violent  a  supposition  to 
he  mtertained  in  ignorance.  It  can  only  be  entertained  where  there  has  been  a  con- 
■idenUe  amount  of  tdf-activity  in  the  way  of  presenting  to  the  mind  deceitful  appear- 
anrm    fiphinn^  fuoh  as  the  Gnostic  idea  of  superior  enlightenment.    Wliile  there  is 


en.  II.  1—29.]       THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  JOHN.  M 

the  activity  of  eel  Meception,  there  is  not  the  activity  of  fhe  truth.  If  it  were  active  in 
us,  it  would  show  us  that  there  wag  much  remaining  evil  to  be  overcome.  4.  Second 
opposed  position.  (1)  Stated,  "If  we  confess  our  sins."  The  precise  converse  would 
have  been  saying  that  we  have  sin.  There  is  a  going  beyond  that  to  the  practice  of  the 
Christian  duty  of  confession,  which  is  literally, "  a  saying  along  with,"  i.e.  along  with  God. 
It  is  a  duty  which  cannot  be  performed  unless  witli  feelings  of  penitence,  arising  from 
a  proper  view  of  what  we  are  and  have  done.  What  we  are  to  confess  is  not  merely 
that  we  have  sin,  i.e.  have  the  taint  still  in  us,  are  not  completely  sanctified ;  but  we 
are  to  confess  particular  manifestations  of  sin.  "  Against  thee,  thee  only,  have  I  sinned, 
and  done  this  evil."  David  had  his  sin  brought  home  to  him  very  pointedly,  "Thou 
art  the  man ! "  and  he  did  not  then  hide  it,  but  confessed,  "  I  have  sinned  against  the 
Lord."  "  It  is  much  easier  to  make  pious  speeches  to  the  effect  that  we  are  sinners  in 
a  general  way,  and  expressive  of  general  deep  contrition,  and  of  the  misery  engendered  by 
sin,  than  to  acknowledge  the  particular  wrong  we  have  done,  and  to  endeavour  as  far 
as  possible  to  repair  it.  Many  who  are  ready  enough  to  admit  generally  that  they  are 
sinners  would  be  the  first  hotly  to  repel  a  charge  of  sinfulness  on  any  one  special  point, 
so  deep  is  the  self-deception  of  the  human  heart,  which  is  often  furthest  from  God 
when  the  lips  are  busiest  in  honouring  him."  Let  ovu-  confessions  have  the  particularity 
which  is  here  suggested.  Let  them  be  founded  on  self-knowledge,  and  on  self-know- 
ledge in  particular  manifestations.  The  sorrow  that  prompts  to  confession  cannot  be 
all  that  it  should  be  unless  we  clearly  realize  wherein  we  have  violated  the  spirit  of 
the  Divine  precepts  and  especially  of  the  gospel.  (2)  Justified.  "  He  is  faithful  and 
righteous  to  forgive  us  our  sins,  and  to  cleanse  us  from  all  unrighteousness."  When 
particular  sins  are  in  question,  there  is  brought  in  the  blessing  of  forgiveness  as  well  as 
of  cleansing.  God  has  pledged  his  word  to  forgive  us  our  sins :  "  I,  even  I,  am  he  that 
blotteth  out  thy  transgressions  for  mine  own  sake,  and  will  not  remember  thy  sins." 
He  has  also  pledged  his  word  to  advance  our  sanctiflcation :  "  I  will  put  my  Law  in 
their  inward  parts,  and  write  it  in  their  hearts."  This  Scripture  itself  is  a  distinct 
promise.  If,  then,  we  walk  in  the  light,  and  fulfil  the  specific  condition,  viz.  confess  our 
gins,  we  may  with  the  utmost  confidence  look  to  God  to  forgive  us  our  sins,  and  to 
cleanse  us  from  all  unrighteousness  of  disposition  which  would  lead  to  the  commission 
of  sin.  He  not  only  holds  himself  bound  by  his  promise,  but  the  promise  is  thoroi^hly 
in  accordance  with  his  nature.  In  view  of  what  he  has  done  in  redemption,  he  regards 
it  as  not  only  a  gracious  thing,  but  even  a  righteous  thing,  to  attach  the  double  blessing 
to  confession  of  our  sins.  Doing,  then,  what  he  commands,  we  can  appeal  to  him, even 
as  righteous,  to  bless  us.  6.  Third  false  position.  (1)  Stated.  "  If  we  say  that  we 
have  not  sinned."  This  is  a  very  large  assumption,  even  if  we  do  not  take  into  account 
our  pre-Christian  state :  "  We  have  never  committed  sin  since  we  entered  into  union 
with  Christ.  It  is  going  beyond  the  previous  assumption,  inasmuch  as  this  involves 
complete  sanctiflcation  from  the  beginning.  This,  then,  is  the  most  thorough-going 
perfectionism.  Thus  perfect,  we  may  say  with  Christ, "  Which  of  you  convinceth  me  of 
sin?"  But  what  is  said  about  the  assumption ?  (2)  Condemned.  "We  make  him  a 
liar,  and  his  Word  is  not  in  us."  The  wildest  assumption  receives  the  severest  con- 
demnation. The  blood  of  Christ  is  for  our  continval  cleansing.  God  is  therefore 
dealing  with  us  on  the  supposition  of  ovir  partial  sanctiflcation.  To  claim  complete 
sanctiflcation  is  to  make  him  a  liar,  t'.e.  to  contradict  this  supposition.  It  can  be  said, 
further,  that  his  Word  is  not  in  us,  t.e.  is  not  evidenced  in  our  consciousness  in  what  it 
says  about  our  state.  We  do  not  need  to  go  beyond  the  petition  which  Christ  put  into 
the  mouth  of  disciples,  "Forgive  us  our  sins."  It  is  the  height  of  presumption  to 
ima^ue  that  we  can  here  outgrow  the  Lord's  Prayer. — ^B.  F. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTEK  It 
Vers.   1,  2. — Moreover,  walking  in    the 
light    involves   accepting  the  propitiation 
wrought  through  Jesua  Christ  the  Bighteous. 


The  connexion  with  the  preceding  is  oloss. 
We  have  just  had  (1)  the  confeesion  that 
we  do  sin;  we  now  have  (2)  the  principle 
that  we  must  not  sin ;  and  (S)  the  consola- 
tion that  sin  is  not  iiremediable. 


20 


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  JOHN.         [ch.  n.  1— 29. 


Ver.  1. — My  little  oMldren;  or,  peihaps, 
my  dear  eldldren;  or,  simply,  my  children. 
The  diminutive  (jeKvla),  if  it  retaine  any 
force,  expresses  endearment  rather  than 
smallness  or  youth.  The  word  occurs  only 
once  outside  this  Epistle  (John  xiU.  33), 
and  it  was,  perhaps,  from  Christ's  use  of  it 
then  that  St.  John  adopted  it  (vers.  12,  28 ; 
ch.  iii.  7, 18 ;  iy.  4;  v.  21).  In  Gal.  iv.  19 
the  reading  is  doubtful.  Cf.  1l  /xe  ^eiyns, 
t4kvoVj  Thv  ffavTov  irarepa;  in  the  beautifnl 
story  of  St.  John  and  the  young  robber 
(Eusebius,  'Hist.  EccL,'  III.  xxiil.  17). 
As  distinct  from  jraiSfo  (oh.  ii.  13,  18), 
the  word  seems  to  imply  spiritual  fatherhood. 
These  things  (the  section,  ch.  i.  5 — 10)  I 
write  to  you,  that  ye  may  not  sin.  The 
aorist  forbids  the  rendering,  "continue  in 
sin ;  "  as  before,  those  who  are  walking  in 
light  and  yet  sin  through  frailty  are  ad- 
dressed. Two  apparently  contradictory  prin- 
ciples have  been  set  forth :  you  must  walk 
in  light ;  you  must  confess  that  you  sin. 
St.  John  now  goes  on  to  reconcile  them.  I 
write  (1)  to  charge  you  not  to  sin ;  (2)  [to 
tell  you  that]  if  we  sin,  we  have  an  Advo- 
cate. Instead  of  understanding  "  to  toll  you 
that,"  we  may  take  ko(  as  "and  yet" — a 
frequent  use  in  St.  John.  There  are  two 
seemingly  opposite  truths — sin  is  wholly 
alien  from  the  Christian,  and  the  Christian 
is  never  wholly  free  from  sin  ;  and  St.  John 
struggles  to  give  them  their  right  balance, 
not  in  the  dialectical  manner  of  St.  Paul, 
but  by  stating  them  alternately,  side  by 
side,  varying  the  point  of  view.  We  have 
an  Advocate.  The  possession  of  the  Advo- 
cate is  as  continual  (Ixo^uey)  as  of  the  sin 
(ch.  L  8).  Every  one  feels  that  "  a  Com- 
forter with  the  Father"  is  an  impossible 
rendering.  But  St.  John  alone  uses  the 
word  UapdKKiiTos,  four  times  in  his  Gospel  of 
the  Spirit  (see  on  John  xiv.  16),  and  once 
here  of  Christ.  Is  it  likely  that  he  would 
use  so  unusual  and  important  a  word  in  two 
different  senses,  and  that  in  two  writings 
intended  as  companions  to  one  another? 
The  rendering  "  Advocate,"  necessary  here, 
carries  with  it  the  rendering  "  Advocate  "  in 
the  Gospel.  Moreover,  what  is  the  meaning 
of  liWos  Tlapdic\riTos,  if  Christ  is  an  Advocate, 
but  the  Spirit  a  Comforter  i  If  Christ  is 
one  Advocate  and  the  Spirit  "  another  Ad- 
vocate," all  is  intelligible.  Philo  frequently 
uses  7ropci(c\7)Tos  of  the  high  priest  as  inter- 
cessor for  the  people,  and  also  of  the  Divine 
A6yos.  There  is  a  difference,  however,  be- 
tween "  Paraclete  "  as  used  of  the  Spirit  and 
as  used  of  Christ.  It  is  applied  to  the 
Spirit  in  his  relation  to  the  disciples;  to 
Christ  in  his  relation  to  the  Father.  Christ 
is  our  Advocate  irphs  rhv  narepa:  his  ad- 
vocacy turns  toward*  the  Father  to  pro- 
pitiate him.    And  not  in  vain;  for  he  is 


himself  "  righteous."  A  sinner  could  not 
reconcile  God  to  sinners;  but  a  righteoiri 
Advocate  can,  for  his  character  is  a  warrant 
for  the  righteousness  of  his  cause.  Thus, 
S'lKaiov  is  the  set-off  to  edv  Tis  afidprji.  One 
who  has  sinned  needs  an  advocate;  one  who 
has  not  sinned  can  best  undertake  the  office. 
Mxaioy  at  the  end,  without  the  article,  ia 
gently  miggestive  of  the  plea,  "Jesus 
Christ,  a  Bighteoui  One." 

Ver.  2. — And  he  (not  quia  nor  enim,  but 
idemque  iUe)  is  a  Propitiation  for  our  sins. 
'lAoir/trfs  occurs  here  and  ch.  iv.  10  only  in 
the  New  Testament.  St.  Paul's  word  is  ico- 
ToKKayli  (Kom.  v.  11 ;  zi.  15^  Oor.  v.  18, 
19).  They  are  not  equivalents;  l\aaii6s 
has  reference  to  the  one  party  to  be  pro- 
pitiated, KaraKSay^  to  the  two  parties  to 
be  reconciled.  'AiroXirpwiris  is  a  third  word 
expressing  yet  another  aspect  of  the  atone- 
ment— the  redemption  of  the  offending 
party  by  payment  of  his  debt  (Bom.  iiL  24, 
etc.).  Although  iKaaiiis  does  not  neces- 
sarily include  the  idea  of  sacrifice,  yet  the 
use  of  the  word  in  the  LXX.,  and  of  i\di- 
cnceo-flni  (Heb.  ii.  27)  and  t\a<rriptoy  (Bom. 
iii.  25 ;  Heb.  ix.  5)  in  the  New  Testament, 
points  to  the  expiation  wrought  by  the 
great  High  Priest  by  the  sacrifice  of  him- 
self. It  is  i\airii6s,  and  not  i\a<rTi}p,  be- 
cause the  prominent  fact  is  Christ  as  an 
Offering  rather  than  as  One  who  offers.  With 
the  irepi,  cf.  John  viii.  46 ;  x.  33 ;  zvi.  8. 
Our  sins  are  the  subject-matter  of  his  pro- 
pitiatory work.  And  not  for  ours  only,  but 
also  for  those  of  the  whole  world.  Again 
we  seem  to  have  an  echo  of  the  prayer  of 
the  great  High  Priest  (John  xvii.  20,  24). 
The  propitiation  is  for  all,  not  for  the  first 
band  of  believers  only.  The  sins  of  the 
whole  world  are  expiated;  and  if  the  ex- 
piation does  not  effect  the  salvation  of  the 
sinner,  it  is  because  he  rejects  it,  loving  the 
darkness  rather  than  the  light  (John  iii. 
19).  No  man — Christian,  Jew,  or  Gentile 
—is  outside  the  mercy  of  God,  unless  he 
places  himsel  f  there  deliberately.  "  It  seems 
clear  that  the  sacrifice  of  Christ,  though 
peculiarly  land  completely  available  only 
for  those  who  were  called,  does  in  some  par- 
ticulars benefit  the  whole  world,  and  release 
it  from  the  evil  in  which  the  whole  creation 
was  travailing  "  (Jelf). 

Vers.  3 — 6. — Thirdly,  walking  in  the  light 
involves  obedience. 

Ver.  3.— And  herein  we  perceive  that  we 
know  him,  if  we  keep  his  commandments 
QytvtitrKoney,  we  come  to  know,  we  recognize ; 
iyvdiea/ify,  we  have  come  to  know,  we 
know).  The  token  of  our  having  this  know- 
ledge is  stated  hypothetically ;  not  because, 
but  if,  we  obey.  To  serve  under  another 
and  obey  him  is  one  of  the  best  ways  of 
knowing  his  character.    The  knowledge  if 


OH.n.  1— 29.]       THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  JOHN. 


21 


no  mere  intellectual  apprehension,  such  as 
the  Gnostics  postulated,  but  a  moral  and 
■piritnal  affection  and  activity.  It  is  pos- 
sible to  knovr  and  hate  (John  xvi.  24). 
Again,  the  knowledge  is  not  a,  mere  emo- 
tional appreciation.  Christianity  knows 
nothing  of  piety  without  morality.  To 
know  Christ  is  to  love  him,  and  to  love  him 
is  to  obey  and  imitate  him.  By  "  keep  " 
(TJipSyney)  is  meant  "keep  the  eye  fixed 
upon,  observe." 

Ver.  4. — The  participial  substantive  (i 
A^i»i>)  now  takes  the  place  of  ^dv  with  the 
Bubjunotive,  but  the  two  are  equivalent  (cf. 
oh.  i.  6,  which  is  almost  exactly  parallel  to 
this,  and  shows  what  "knowing  him" 
really  is,  viz.  having  fellowship  with  him, 
just  as  not  keeping  his  commandments  is 
the  same  as  walking  in  darkuess).  St.  John 
says,  nil  Ti)pwv,  not  06  TrjpSc,  the  case  being 
hypothetical — if  there  be  such  a  man,  he  ia 
a  liar,  and  has  no  idea  of  truth  (see  on  ch. 
i.  8).  He  must  have  lost  the  very  power  of 
recognizmg  truth  to  maintain  that  he  knows 
Christ,  when  he  habitually  transgresses  bis 
commands.  It  is  no  great  thing,  as  Bede 
says,  to  know  as  the  devils  do,  who  "  believe 
and  tremble." 

Ver.  5. — Once  more  (of.  ch.  i  7,  9)  the 
opposite  is  stated  and  the  thought  carried 
further.  But  whoso  keepeth  his  word  (his 
dootrine  as  a  whole,  including  the  separate 
commandments),  of  a  truth  in  him  hath  the 
love  of  God  been  perfected ;  t.e.  as  an  ac- 
complished fact ;  the  relation  of  love  has 
been  established.  In  St.  John  ItKriBSis  is 
no  mere  expletive ;  it  expresses  reality,  and 
reality  that  is  hnown.  From  ver.  4  we 
might  have  expected  "  of  a  truth  he  lenoweth 
God;"  but  the  apostle  goes  beyond  this, 
and  shows  that  really  knowing  God  involves 
loving  him  (comp.  ch.  iv.  11).  The  context 
shows  that  toD  06oD  is  objective — ^his  love  of 
God  rather  than  God's  love  of  him.  The 
insertion  of  toO  ©eoS  here,  and  the  drift  of 
the  Epistle  thus  far,  are  in  favour  of  aMy 
and  airov  in  vers.  3 — 5  meaning  God  rather 
than,  Christ,  although  alirSs  in  ver.  2  tells 
the  other  way.  The  last  clause  sums  up 
and  reafSrms,  but  as  usual  with  a  new  turn 
of  thought,  the  whole  section  (vers.  3—5), 
which  begins  and  ends  with  ev  To^qa  yivd- 
(TKo/iev.  Knowing  God  implies  keeping  his 
Word;  and  keeping  his  Word  involves  loving 
him ;  and  all  this  implies  being  in  him,  t.e. 
having  that  fellowship  with  him  and  his 
Son  in  which  the  Christian's  life  (which  is 
eternal  life)  consists,  and  to  promote  which 
St.  John  publishes  his  Gospel  (ch.  i.  3,  4). 

Ver.  6. — ^Profession  involves  an  obliga- 
tion to  act  up  to  the  profession.  "  He  who 
says  that  he  abides  in  God  is  by  his  words 
morally  bound  to  walk  even  as  his  Son,  the 
incarnate  Bevelation  of  his  will,  walked."  I 


The  change  from  ^y  atir^  to  hte'vos  con- 
firms the  view  that  airSv  and  airov  mean 
the  Father ;  but  St.  John's  use  of  ixflvos  to 
recall  vrith  emphasis  a  previous  subject 
(John  i.  8,  18,  33 ;  v.  11 ;  ix.  37 ;  x.  1 ;  xii 
48)  makes  this  argument  inconclusive.  To 
be  or  abide  in  God  or  in  Christ  implies  an 
habitual  condition,  not  isolated  apprehen- 
sions of  his  presence.  Obedience,  not  feel- 
ing, is  the  test  of  union ;  and  the  Christian 
who  is  really  such  has  least  to  tell  of  "  ex- 
periences "  of  special  visitations.  He  who 
is  ever  in  the  light  has  few  sensible  illumi- 
nations to  record.  Note  the  strong  KaBds, 
even  as  (not  merely  ii,  as);  nothing  less 
than  "the  measure  of  the  stature  of  the 
fulness  of  Christ"  (Bph.  iv.  13)  is  to  be 
aimed  at.  "  Ye  therefore  shall  be  perfect  as 
your  heavenly  Father  is  perfect "  (Matt.  v. 
48). 

Vers.  7— 28.— (2)  Negative  side.  What 
walking  in  the  light  excludes ;  tlie  things 
and  persons  to  be  avoided — hatred  of  a 
brother,  love  of  the  world,  antichrists.  To 
this  section  vers.  7,  8  form  an  introduction, 
as  ch.  i.  5,  7  to  the  positive  side. 

Ver.  7. — Beloved;  dyairriTol,  not  oSe\</)o/, 
is  the  true  reading.  Addresses  of  this  kind 
commonly  introduce  a  fresh  division  of  the 
subject,  main  or  subordinate.  Thus  070^77- 
Tot  (ch.  iv.  1,  7)  ;  reicvla  (ch.  ii.  1) ;  iratSla 
(oh.  it  18);  aSeA(^oi' (ch.  iii.  13).  Sometimes, 
however,  they  introduce  an  earnest  conclu- 
sion (ch.  ii.  28 ;  iii.  21 ;  v.  21).  In  oh.  iv. 
11  ayairriTol  introduces  a  conclusion  which 
serves  as  a  fresh  starting-point.  Not  a  fresh 
commandment  do  I  write  to  yon,  bnt  an  old 
commandment.  Where  it  can  be  conveni- 
ently done,  it  is  worth  while  distinguishing 
Kaivis,  "fresh,"  as  opposed  to  "worn  out," 
"  obsolete,"  from  v4os,  "  new,"  as  opposed  to 
"  old,  aged."  "  New  wine  must  be  put  into 
fresh  skins"  (Mark  ii.  22).  Are  two  com- 
mandments meant — one  to  cultivate  brotherly 
love,  the  other  to  walk  as  Christ  walked? 
Or  is  there  only  one,  which  from  different 
points  of  view  may  be  regarded  as  either  new 
or  old  V  Commentators  are  divided ;  but  the 
latter  seems  better.  Then  what  is  the  com- 
mandment which  is  at  once  new  and  old? 
The  whole  gospel,  or  the  command  to  love 
one  another?  John  xiii.  34  and  xv.  2  will 
incline  us  to  the  latter  view.  The  command 
was  old,  for  "Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbour 
as  thyself"  (Lev.  xix.  18)  was  part  of  the 
Mosaic  Law.  But  the  standard  was  new : 
"  Even  as  I  loved  you ; "  "  Even  as  he  also 
walked ;  "  and  the  motive  was  new :  because 
"  God  so  loved  us  "  (ch.  iv.  11).  Brotherly 
love,  enforced  by  such  an  example,  and 
based  on  such  a  fact,  was  a  new  command 
as  compared  with  the  cold  injunction  of  the 
Law.  From  the  beginning  may  have  either 
of  two   senses:   (1)  &om  of  old,  i.e.  long 


22 


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  JOHN.       [oh.  ii.  1—29. 


before  the  Gospel ;  (2)  from  the  beginning 
of  your  career  as  ChrUtians.  This  new  and 
yet  old  oommand  sums  up  the  practical  side 
of  the  gospel  which  hnd  beea  preached  to 
them  from  the  first.  The  second  ait'  dpxvs 
it  spurious. 

Ver.  8. — Again.  The  irdMn  indicates 
Bnother  point  of  yiew — what  in  one  sense 
was  not  fresh,  in  another  sense  was  so.  It  is 
impossible  to  be  certain  as  to  tlie  meaning 
of  S  eVrii/  a\7i8is,  K.r.\.  It  may  mean  (1) 
"  which  thing  (the  newness  of  the  command) 
it  true ; "  or  (2)  "  as  a  fresh  commandment  I 
am  writing  to  you  o  thing  which  it  true." 
But  for  the  practical  example  of  the  life  of 
Christ,  and  men's  acceptance  of  it,  the  com- 
mand to  love  one's  neighbour  might  have 
remained  old  and  become  obsolete.  "On  is 
almost  certainly  "  because,"  not  "  that ;  "  it 
introduces  the  reason  why  he  writes,  not  the 
substance  of,  the  fresh  commandment.  How 
can  "  the  darkness  is  passing  away,"  etc.,  be 
a  commandment  ?  The  light,  the  true  light 
(t!)  <pas  rh  d\riBivir) ;  i.e.  the  real,  the  perfect, 
the  very  light,  that  which  most  fully  realizes 
the  ideal  of  light;  in  opposition  to  those 
"  wandering  stars,  for  whom  the  blackness 
of  darkness  hath  been  reserved  for  ever" 
(Jude  13;  cf.  John  i.  4,  9  ;  vi.  32 ;  xv.  1). 
Christ  is  the  perfect  Light,  as  he  is  the  per- 
feot  Bread  and  the  perfect  Vine. 

Tors.  9 — 11. — Walking  in  the  light  ex- 
cludes all  hatred  towards  brethren,  for  such 
hatred  is  a  form  of  darkness.  These  verses 
ict  forth  in  a  variety  of  forma  the  affinity 
between  love  and  light,  hatred  and  darkness, 
and  the  consequent  incompatibility  between 
hatred  and  light.  "  Hate  "  (fj-taeiv)  is  not  to 
be  watered  down  into  "  neglect "  or  "  fail  to 
love."  St.  Jdlin  knows  nothing  of  such 
compromises.  Love  is  love,  and  hate  is 
hate,  and  between  the  two  there  is  no 
neutral  ground,  any  more  than  between  life 
and  death,  or  between  Christ  and  antichrist. 
"He  that  is  not  with  me  is  against  me." 
"Love  is  the  moral  counterpart  of  intel- 
lectual light.  It  is  a  modern  fashion  to 
represent  these  two  tempers  as  necessarily 
opposed.  But  St.  John  is  at  once  earnestly 
dogmatic  and  earnestly  philanthropic ;  for 
the  Incamution  has  taught  him  both  the 
preoiousuei'S  of  man  and  the  preciousness  of 
truth  "  (Liddon). 

Ver.  9.— He  that  saith.  For  the  fifth 
time  St.  John  points  out  a  glaring  incon- 
sistency which  is  possible  between  profes- 
sion anii  fact  (^i^v  iXi^ta^iv^  ch.  i.  6,  8,  10 ;  & 
\eyav,  ch.  ii.  4.  9) ;  cf.  ch.  iv.  20.  In  all  these 
passages  the  case  is  put  hypothetically ;  but 
in  some  of  the  Gnostic  teaching  of  the  age 
this  inconsistency  existed  beyond  a  doubt. 
Is  in  darkness  even  until  now.  His  suppos- 
ing that  hatred  is  compatible  with  light 
proves  tne  darkness  in  which  he  is.    Nay, 


more,  it  shows  that,  in  gpiie  of  his  having 
nominally  entered  the  company  of  the 
children  of  light,  he  has  really  never  left 
the  darkness.  "If  ye  loved  only  your 
brethren,  ye  would  not  yet  be  perfect ;  but 
if  ye  hate  your  brethren,  what  are  ye  ?  wheia 
are  ye?  "  (St.  Augustine). 

Ver.  10. — Whereas  he  who  loves  his 
brother  has  not  only  entered  the  region  of 
light,  but  has  made  it  hia  home :  he  abideth 
in  the  light,  It  is  difBcnlt  to  determine 
whetlier  the  "  occasion  of  stumbling  "  {a-Kiv 
Sahoi/)  is  in  reference  to  himself  or  to  othen. 
The  context  here  and  John  xi.  9,  10  are  in 
favour  of  the  former.  It  is  a  man's  own 
salvation  that  is  under  consideration  here, 
not  his  influence  over  others  :  and  nyioa-Kiiir- 
Tei,  oTi  rh  tpus  ovK  eiTTiu  4v  aiiTip  seemfl 
exiictly  parallel.  To  have  no  light  in  one  ii 
to  be  in  danger  uf  stumbling ;  to  have  light 
in  one  is  to  have  no  occasion  of  stumbling 
(com  p.  Ezek.  xiv.  3,  which  is  very  parallel). 
But  elsewhere  in  the  New  Testament  axdi^ 
Sa\ov  means  a  stumbling-block  or  snare  in 
another's  way,  not  in  one's  ovm  way;  and 
this  makes  sense  here.  There  is  yet  a  third 
explanation.  'Ei'  aurif  may  mean  "in  it," 
i.e.  "in  the  light  there  is  no  occasion  of 
stumbling."  This  makes  a  good  antithesis 
to  the  close  of  ver.  11, "  knoweth  not  whither 
he  goeth." 

Ver.  11. — Note  the  alternation:  ver.  10  ii 
the  antithesis  of  ver.  9,  and  ver.  11  of  ver. 
10,  repeating  and  enlarging  ver.  9.  Note 
also  the  climax  effected  by  the  gradual 
increase  of  predicates  :  in  ver.  9  one,  in  ver. 
10  two,  in  ver.  11  three.  The  brother-hater 
has  darkness  as  his  habitual  condition  and  aa 
the  atmosphere  in  which  he  lives  and  works ; 
and  loug  ago  (aoiist)  the  continual  dark- 
ness deprived  him  of  the  very  power  of  sight, 
so  that  lie  is  in  ignorance  as  to  the  course 
he  is  taking.  Cf.  "  They  know  not,  neither 
will  they  understand ;  they  walk  on  in  dark- 
nest "  (Ps.  Ixxxii.  5);  "  The  fool  walheth  in 
darhnest "  (Ecoles.  ii.  14).  "  St.  John  scouts 
all  the  pretences  of  men  to  illumination 
which  do  not  involve  the  practical  acknow- 
ledgment of  brotherhood.  A  man  may  say 
he  is  in  the  light  as  much  as  he  pleases; 
but  to  be  in  the  light  implies  that  he  is  able 
to  see  his  brethren,  and  not  to  stumbla 
against  them  "  (Maurice). 

Vers.  12 — 14. — Before  passing  on  to  the 
second  thing  which  waUdiig  in  the  light  ex- 
cludes, viz.  love  of  the  world  (vers.  IS — 17), 
the  apostle  twice  makes  a  threefold  address, 
first  stating  why  he  writet  (ypd^ai),  and 
secondly  why  he  wrote  (iypa^a),  to  the  three 
classes  named.  This  suggests  several  ques- 
tions. (1)  What  it  the  differenct  ietvieen 
"  I  write  "  (or,  "  am  writing  ")  and  "  I  wrote  " 
(or, "  have  written ; "  for  this  is  a  case  where 
the  English  perfect  may  represent  the  Qraek 


«n.  n.  1— 29.]       THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  JOHN. 


23 


aoiist)?  Five  answers  are  given,  (a)  The 
change  is  made  for  emphasis :  "  I  write ;  I 
wrote;  there  is  nothing  more  to  be  said." 
But  in  this  case  the  past  tense  should  come 
first:  "I  wrote;  I  write  it  again."  More- 
over, we  should  expect  the  perfect  rather  than 
the  aorist,  as  in  i  yiypaipa  yeypa(tia,  (6)  "  I 
write"  refers  to  ^hat  follows;  "I  wrote,"  to 
what  precedes.  And  some  have  even  tried  to 
find  out  the  three  different  portions  in  each 
part  of  the  Epistle ;  e.g.  "  I  write  fo  you, 
little  children"  (ch.  ii.  15—17);  "to  you, 
fathers  "  (ch.  ii.  18—27) ;  "  to  you,  young 
men  "  (ch.  ii.  28— iii.  22) :  "I  mvte  to  you, 
children  "  (ch.  i.  5—7) ;  "  to  you,  fathers  " 
(ch.  i.  8— ii.  2) ;  "  to  you,  young  men  "  (oh. 
ii.  3 — 11).  But  this  is  fanciful  and  very 
arbitrary;  and  in  this  case  also  the  past 
tense  should  come  first:  "I  have  written 
thus  far  to  you ;  again  I  proceed  to  write  to 
you."  (o)  "I  write"  refers  to  the  whole 
Epistle;  "  I  wrote,"  to  what  precedes.  This 
answer  has  the  sanction  of  the  'Speaker's 
Commentary;'  but  it  seems  to  be  quite 
frivolous.  What  could  induce  St.  John  first 
of  all  In  tell  each  class  tliat  he  writes  the 
whole  Epistle  to  them,  and  then  to  tell  them 
that  he  wrote  the  first  part  of  it  to  them  ? 
There  would  be  little  enough  sense  in  first 
saying  that  he  wrote  the  beginning  to  them, 
and  then  that  he  writes  the  whole  to  them ; 
but  there  is  no  sense  in  the  former  state- 
ment if  it  comes  after  the  latter,  (d)  "  I  am 
writing  "  is  from  8t.  John's  point  of  view,  as 
he  pens  the  growing  letter.  "  I  wrote  "  is 
from  the  readers'  point  of  view,  as  they 
peruse  the  completed  letter.  But  what  is 
gained  by  this  change  of  standpoint  ?  Is  it 
probable  that  St.  John  would  make  three 
distinct  addresses  in  the  position  of  the 
writer  of  the  Epistle,  and  then  solemnly 
repeat  them  in  the  position  of  the  recipients 
of  it  ?  (e)  The  Epistle  is  written  as  a  com- 
panion to  the  Gospel :  therefore  "  I  write  " 
refers  to  (he  Epistle,  which  he  is  in  the  act 
^f  composing ;  "  I  wrote,"  to  the  Gospel,  which 
^ies  completed  before  him,  and  on  which  tlie 
Epistle  serves  as  a  commentary.  This  seems 
to  be  the  most  satisfactory  explanation  (see 
en  oh.  i.  4).  (2)  Who  are  indicated  by  the 
three  classes  f  In  the  first  triplet,  TiKvia,  as 
elsewhere  in  the  Epistle  (vers.  1,  28;  oli.  iii. 
,  18 ;  iv.  4,  5,  21),  refers  to  his  reailers  as  a 
whole,  of  whom  vdrepes  and  viaviaKoi  are 
two  component  divisions.  This  is  probably 
the  case  in  the  second  triplet  also,  although 
the  change  from  rexvta  to  ?raiS/a  renders  this 
a  little  doubtful  (see  on  ver.  13).  (8)  Doet 
the  difference  between  "fathers"  and  "young 
men  "  refer  to  age  as  men  or  age  as  Christians  f 
Probably  the  former.  In  both  Gospel  and 
Epistle  St.  John  writes  to  mature  and  well- 
instructed  Christians.  The  following  table 
vill  illustrate  the  view  taken  ;— 


I  write  this  EpisUe : 

1.  To  all  of  you. 

2.  To  the  old  among 

you. 

3.  To     the     young 

among  you. 

I  wrote  my  Gospel : 

1.  To  all  of  you  (?). 

2.  To  the  old  among 

you. 

3.  To     the     young 

among  you. 


Reasons  for  writing  it : 

You  have  been  for- 
given. 

You  have  knowledge 
of  the  Word. 

You  have  conquered 
the  evil  one. 

Reasons  for  writing  it : 

You  have  knowledge 
of  the  Father. 

You  hav.e  knowledge 
of  the  "Word. 

You  have  strength, 
have  God's  revela- 
tion in  your  hearts, 
andhaveconquered 
the  evil  one. 

Ver.  12. — I  am  writing  to  you,  little  chil- 
dren (see  on  ver.  I),  because,  etc.  Beyond  rea- 
sonable doubt,  Sti  is  "  because,"  not  "that," 
in  vers.  12 — 14 ;  it  gives  the  reason  for  his 
writing,  not  the  substance  of  what  he  has  to 
Bay  (cf.  ver.  21).  For  his  STamo's  sake  must 
refer  to  Christ,  not  only  because  of  the  con- 
text, but  also  of  the  instrumental  SiA  (cf.  oh. 
iii.  23 ;  V.  13 ;  John  i.  12) ;  and  Christ's  Name 
means  bis  character,  especially  as  Saviour. 
Because  they  have  already  partaken  of  the 
lAafffids  (ver.  2),  and  liave  had  their  sins 
washed  away  in  the  blood  of  Christ  (ch.  i. 
7),  therefore  he  writes  to  them  this  Epistle. 
Note  the  perfects  throughout,  indicating  tho 
permanent  result  of  past  action :  dip^avToi, 

Ver.  13. — Because  ye  know  (literally,  have 
com^  to  know,  as  in  vers.  3,  4)  him  that  is 
from  the  beginning  (jov  dv'  ipx?0-  The 
context  respecting  Christ's  Name  and  ft  ^v 
air'  dpxiis  (ch.  i.  1)  show  that  the  Word  and 
not  the  Father  is  meant.  A  more  perfect 
knowledge  of  Jesus  as  the  Eternal  Word,  and 
no  mere  seon  or  emanation  from  the  Deity, 
is  the  special  prerogative  of  the  aged  Chris- 
tian; and  such  are  fit  recipients  of  the 
dyyekia  of  the  apostle.  No  less  fit,  but  for 
a  different  reason,  are  the  younger  among 
his  readers.  To  fight  is  the  lot  of  the  young 
soldier;  and  a  victorious  warfare  against 
Satan  is  the  distinction  of  youthful  Chris- 
tians. They  have  got  the  better  of  that  evil 
one  in  whose  power  the  w  hole  world  lies 
(ch.  iii.  12;  v.  18,  19;  John  xii.  31  r  xiv. 
aO ;  xvi.  11).  Not  that  the  warfare  is  over, 
but  that  it  is  henceforth  warfare  with  a  de- 
feated enemy-.  Hence  they  also  have  a  right 
to  share  in  the  apostolic  m(  ssage.  I  wrote 
(or,  have  written^  to  you,  children,  heoauss 
ye  know  (or,  have  come  to  know)  the  Father. 
The  reading  eypmf/a  must  be  preferred  to 
ypi(pai,  on  overwhelming  evidence,  both  ex- 
ternal and  internal.  The  second  triplet  begins 
here,  and  this  sentence  should  have  been 


24 


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  JOHN.        [oh.  n.  1—29, 


given  to  ver.  14.  It  is  difficult  to  determine 
what  is  meant  by  the  change  fiom  reKvia 
to  TatSia.  TiKvia  occara  once  with  /uov 
(ver.  1),  and  six  times  without  iu>v  in  the 
Epistle,  and  once  in  the  Gospel  (xiii.  33),  the 
probable  source  of  this  foim  of  address. 
IIotBla  occurs  in  ver.  18  (see  note)  and  Jolin 
xxi.  5,  and  nowhere  else  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment as  a  form  of  address.  Probably  both 
words  are  applied  to  tlie  whole  of  St.  John's 
readers.  Some  would  limit  iroi5(a  to  actual 
children ;  but  in  that  case  we  should  expect 
a  different  order — children,  young  men, 
fathers;  or  fathers,  young  men,  children. 
These  "  children  "  know  the  Father  to  whom 
tliey  have  been  reconciled  by  forgiveness  of 
sins;  they  have  become  his  adopted  sons 
through  the  Name  of  his  ovm  Son  (ver.  12). 

Ver.  14. — The  address  to  the  fathers  re- 
mains unchanged ;  their  claim  to  Gospel  and 
to  Epistle  is  the  same.  The  address  to  the 
young  men  is  enlarged;  their  claim  to  the 
Gospel  is  that  they  are  strong  to  fight,  have 
God's  revelation  of  himself  as  a  permanent 
possession  in  their  hearts,  and  have  won  vic- 
tories over  Satan.  The  context  and  John  v. 
S8  and  x.  3S  utterly  forbid  us  from  under- 
standing i  \iyos  ToB  0eoB  of  the  "living 
Persoual  Lord "  (cf.  John  xvii.  6,  14,  17 ; 
Eev.  i.  9 ;  vi  9 ;  xx.  4). 

Vers.  15 — 17. — Secondly,  walking  in  the 
light  excludes  all  love  of  the  world.  This  is 
another  form  of  darkness. 

Ver.  IS. — Love  not  the  world.  Obviously, 
both  "  love  "  and  "  the  world "  are  used  in 
a  different  sense  in  John  iii.  16,  where  it  is 
said  that  "  God  loved  the  world."  The  one 
love  is  selfish,  the  other  unselfish.  In  the  one 
case  "  the  world"  means  the  sinful  elements 
of  human  life,  in  the  other  the  human  race. 
It  is  most  important  to  distinguish  the  dif- 
ferent meanings  of  KStr/ios  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment. Connected  with  KS/ieip  and  comere,  it 
means  (1)  ornament  (1  Pet.  iii.  3) ;  (2)  the 
ordered  univeise,  mundus  (Rom.  i  20);  (3) 
the  earth  (John  i.  9) ;  (4)  the  inhabitants  of 
the  earth  (John  iii,  16) ;  (5)  aZl  that  is  alien- 
ated from  God,  as  here  and  frequently  in  St. 
John's  writings.  The  things  of  the  world 
are  not  those  things  in  the  world  which  may 
become  objects  of  sinful  affection,  such  as 
wealth  or  honour,  still  less  such  as  scenery 
or  physical  objects.  St.  John  is  not  con- 
demning a  love  of  those  material  advantages 
which  are  God's  gifts,  nor  of  nature,  which 
is  God's  work.  He  is  forbidding  those 
things  the  love  of  which  rivals  and  excludes 
the  love  of  God — all  those  immoral  tenden- 
cies and  pursuits  which  give  the  world  its 
evil  character.  The  world  {ic6gnosy  is  order ; 
the  things  in  the  world  are  the  elements  of 
disorder — those  things  which  arise  from  each 
man  making  himself  the  centre  of  the  world, 
•I  of  some  little  world  of  his  own  creation. 


These  rival  centres  clash  with  one  another, 
and  also  with  the  one  true  Centre.  All  this 
St.  John  forbids.  With  ri.  iv  t^  K6<riuf,  of. 
t£  ^v  iv  T$  Mfdmif  (John  ii.  25).  Note 
the  nifii  (not  /tifre),  nor  yet :  "  Love  not  the 
world;  no,  nor  any  of  its  ways."  As  so 
often,  St.  John  goes  on  to  enforce  his  words 
by  a  negative  statement  of  similar  but  not 
identical  import.  Love  of  the  world  abso- 
lutely excludes  the  lore  of  the  Father.  "  Ye 
cannot  serve  God  and  mammon."  Some  im- 
portant authorities  have  toS  0£oG  for  roi 
TlaTp6s ;  the  balance  is  decidedly  for  the 
latter. 

Ver.  16. — He  still  further  emphasizes  the 
command  by  explaining  the  negative  state- 
ment just  made.  Everything  that  is  in  the 
world  has  as  its  source,  not  the  Jather,  but 
the  world.  This  shows  clearly  that  -ri  ii>  r^ 
K6aix.tf  cannot  mean  material  objects  capable 
of  being  desired ;  these  have  their  origin  in 
God  who  created  them  (John  i.  3).  To 
assert  otherwise  is  rank  Gnosticism  or  Ma- 
nicheism.  But  God  did  not  create  the  evil 
dispositions  and  aims  of  men ;  these  have 
their  source  in  the  sinful  wills  of  his  crea^ 
tures,  and  ultimately  in  "  the  ruler  of  this 
world  "  (John  viii.  44).  The  three  genitives 
which  follow  are  subjective,  not  objective. 
The  lust  of  the  flesh  is  not  merely  the  lust 
after  the  flesh,  but  all  lust  that  has  its  seat  in 
the  flesh  (Gal.  v.  16 ;  Eph.  ii.  3).  The  lust 
of  the  eyes  is  that  lust  that  has  its  origin  in 
sight  (Augerdust) — curiosity,  oovetousness, 
etc.  (cf.  "  the  lusts  of  their  hearts,"  "  the 
lusts  of  your  body,"  Bom.  i.  24 ;  vi.  12).  In 
the  world  of  St.  John's  day  the  impure  and 
brutal  spectacles  of  the  theatre  and  me  arena 
would  supply  abundant  illustrations  of  these 
iwiduiilau.  The  vain-glory  of  life,  or  arroganoy 
of  living,  is  ostento.tion  exhibited  in  the 
manner  of  living ;  the  empty  pride  and  pre- 
tentiousuess  of  fashion  and  display.  It  in- 
cludes the  desire  to  gain  credit  which  does  not 
belong  to  us,  and  outshine  our  neighbours. 
In  Greek  philosophy  fflos  is  higher  than  fa>^ : 
pios  is  the  life  peculiar  to  man ;  (ayfi  is  the 
vital  principle  which  he  shares  with  brutes 
and  vegetables.  In  the  New  Testament  fajj 
is  higher  than  plos:  $los  is  the  life  peculiar 
to  man ;  (ai)  is  the  vital  principle  which  he 
shares  with  God.  Contrast  fllos  here ;  ch.  iii. 
17;  Luke  viii.  14,43;  xv.  12,  80,  etc.,  with 
(uiil  in  oh.  i.  1, 2 ;  iii.  14 ;  v.  11, 12, 16 ;  John' 
i.  4 ;  iii.  36 ;  v.  24,  26,  etc.  Btos  occurs  only 
ten  times  in  the  New  Testament  (in  1  Pet. 
iv.  3  it  is  a  false  reading),  (arlj  more  than  a 
hundred  and  twenty  times.'  Each  of  the 
three  forms  of  evU  here  cited  by  St.  John  as 
types  of  Tck  ir  rf  ic6aiitf  are  dangerous  at 
different  periods  of  a  man's  life ;  each  also 
has  been  a  special  danger  at  diflerent  periods 
of  the  world's  history. 
Vei.  17.— Seeing,  then,  that  the  love  of  th« 


OR.  n.  1—29.]        THE  FIUST  EPISTLK  GENERAL  OF  JOHN. 


£5 


world  and  ihe  love  of  the  Father  are  abio- 
lutely  incompatible,  which  must  we  choose? 
Not  the  former,  for  its  object  is  already 
passing  away;    while  not  only  does  the 
Father  abide  for  oyer,  but  he'who  loves  him 
and  does  his  will  abides  for  ever  also.    The 
antithesis,  as  usual,  is  a  progress ;  it  carries 
n»  beyond  the  limits  of  the  original  state- 
ment.   The  world  is  passing  away  like  a 
dissolving  view.    It  has  its  sentence  of  death 
in  itself;  its  decay  has  begun.    And  even 
if  it  were  not  passing  away,  our  capacity  for 
enjoying  it  would  none  the  less  certainly 
come  to  an  end.    "  The  sensualist  does  not 
know  what  the  delights  of  sense  are ;  he  is 
out  of  temper  when  he  ia  denied  them ;  he 
is  out  of  temper  when  he  possesses  them  " 
(Maurice).    To  love  the  world  is  to  lose 
everything,  including  the  thing  loved.    To 
love  God  is  to  gain  Mm  and  his  kingdom. 
Some  men  would  have  it  that  the  external 
world  is  the  one  thing  that  is  certain  and 
permanent,  while  religion  is  based  on  a  mere 
hypothesis,  and  is  ever  changing  its  form. 
St.  John  assures  us  that  the  very  reverse  is 
the  case.    The  world  is  waning :  it  ia  God 
alone  and  his  faithful  servants  who  abide. 
As  St.  Augustine  says, "  What  can  the  world 
promise  ?    Let  it  promise  what  you  will,  it 
makes  the  promise,  perhaps,  to  one  who  to- 
morrow will  die."    The  will  of  God  is  the 
exact  antithesis' of  "  all  that  is  in  the  world." 
The  one  is  the  good  power  "  that  makes  for 
righteonsnesB ; "  the  other  is  the  sum  of  the 
evil  powers  which  make  for  sin.    Abideth 
for  ever  is  literally,  abideth  unto  the  age  (ji4yet 
cii  rhv  aiUva).    The  notion  of  endlessness  is, 
perhaps,  not  distinctly  included ;  for  that  we 
should  rather  have  had  «i  ToJrr  luuvas  rav 
aiivav  (Bev.  i.  18 ;  xi.  15 ;  xxiL  5).   The  con- 
trast is  not  between  "passing  away"  and 
"  lasting  for  ever,"  but   between  "  passing 
away  "  and  abiding  till  "  the  age  "  comes. 
But  as  "  the  age  "  is  the  age  of  eternity  as 
distinguished  from  this  age  of  time,  the  ren- 
dering "  abideth  for  ever  "  is  justified.    The 
Jews  used  "  this  age  "  and  "  the  age  to  come  " 
to  distinguish  the  periods  before  and  after  the 
coming  of  the  Messiah.    Christians  adopted 
the  same  phrases  to  indic&te  the  periods 
before  and  after  Christ's  second  coming; 
e.g.  i  aiiiy  oZtos  (Luke  xvi.  8 ;  Bom.  xii.  2 ;  1 
Cor.  i  20),  i  yvf  aUv  (1  Tim.  vi.  17 ;  2  Tim. 
iv.  10;  Titus  ii.  12),  as  opposed  to  i  aXlJiv 
iKeu/os  (Luke   XX.    35),  6  aiiiv  i  epx<ili'vos 
(Luke  xviii.  30),  6  ii.4k\uv  (Bph.  i  21),  and 
very  frequently,  as  here  and  throughout  St. 
John's  Gospel  and  Epistles,  simply  i  aidv. 
In  Bevelation  the  invariable  expression  is 
tts  Totit  aiiivas  tuv  atd>vm>,  the  rav  being 
omitted  in  Bev.  xiv.  11.    The  exact  meaning 
hete,  therefore,  is  "abideth  unto  the  age," 
j.e.  the  coming  of  Christ's  eternal  kingdom. 
Yar.  1&. — Childisn    (voiSfa)    here    must 


apply  to  aV,  those  addieued  in  the  Epistle; 
and  this  helps  to  fix  the  meaning  in  ver.  13. 
It  is  the  last  hour.  What  does  this  mean? 
There  is  scarcely  room  for  doubt.  The 
perishableness  of  the  world  has  suggested 
the  thought  of  its  end,  and  St.  John  goes  on 
to  warn  his  readers  that  this  thought  is  full 
of  meaning  to  them ;  for  they  may  recognize 
the  time  in  which  they  are  living  as  the 
last  hour  by  the  many  antichrists  that  have 
arisen.  "The  last  hour"  can  only  mean 
the  last  hoar  before  the  second  comirig  of 
Christ.  Nothing  but  the  unwillingness  of 
Christians  to  admit  that  an  apostle,  and  espe- 
cially the  Apostle  St.  John,  could  seem  to 
be  mj^ch  in  error  about  the  nearness  of  the 
day  of  judgment,  could  have  raised  a 
question  about  language  so  plain.  All 
explanations  about  its  signifying  the 
Christian  dispensation,  or  the  nearness  of 
St,  John's  death,  or  the  nearness  of  the 
destruction  of  Jerusalem,  must  be  firmly  set 
aside.  How  could  the  rising  of  antichrists 
show  that  the  Christian  dispensation  had 
begun  ?  It  was  Christ,  not  antichrist,  that 
showed  that?  What  had  antichrists  to  do 
with  St.  John's  death?  or  with  the  fall  of 
Jerusalem,  which,  moreover,  had  fallen 
many  years  before  this  Epistle  was  written  ? 
Just  as  the  apostles,  even  after  the  Besnr- 
reotion(Act8i.  6),  remained  grossly  ignorant 
of  the  nature  of  Clirist's  kingdom  on  earth, 
BO  to  the  last  they  remained  ignorant  of  its 
duration.  The  primitive  Church  had  not 
yet  found  its  true  perspective,  and,  in 
common  with  all  Christians  of  the  first  age, 
the  apostles  believed  that  Christ  would 
return  soon,  possibly  within  the  lifetime  of 
some  then  living.  "Yea,  I  come  quickly" 
(Bev.  xxii.  20)  was  by  them  understood  in 
the  most  literal  sense  of  raxi.  But  it  will 
not  surprise  those  who  remember  Christ's 
very  strong  declaration  (Mark  xiii.  32),  to 
find  even  an  apostle  in  ignorance  as  to  the 
time  of  the  second  advent  of  Christ.  But 
it  may  very  reasonably  and  reverently 
be  asked.  What  becomes  of  the  inspiration 
of  Scripture  if  an  inspired  writer  tells  the 
Church  that  the  end  of  the  world  is  near, 
when  it  is  not  near?  The  question  of 
inspiration  must  follow  that  of  interpreta- 
tion, not  lead  it.  Let  us  patiently  examine 
the  facts,  and  then  try  to  frame  a  theory  of 
inspiration  that  will  cover  them;  not  first 
frame  our  theory,  and  then  force  the  facts 
to  agree  with  it.  But  the  question  in  its 
proper  place  requires  an  answer.  The  Old 
Testament  prophets  were  often  guided  to 
utter  language  the  Divine  meaning  of  which 
they  did  not  themselves  understand.  They 
uttered  the  words  in  one  sense,  and  the 
words  were  true  in  a  far  higher  sense,  of 
which  they  scarcely  dreamed.  The  same 
thing  is  true  of  the  New  Testament  proph«t% 


ae 


TH15  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  JOHN.       [oh.  n.  1—29. 


though  in  a  less  degree,  beoanee  the  gift  of 
Pentecost  bad  given  them  poweis  of  insight 
which  their  predecessors  had  not  possessed. 
The  present  text  seems  to  be  an  illustration 
(rf'  this  truth.  We  can  hardlj  doubt  that,  in 
■aying,  "it  is  the  last  hour,"  St.  John  means 
to  imply  that  within  a  few  years,  or  possibly 
eveu  less  time,  Christ  will  return  to  judg- 
ment In  this  sense  tlie  statement  ia  not 
true.  But  it  may  also  mean  that  the  last 
period  in  the  world's  history  has  begun; 
and  in  this  sense  we  have  good  reason  for 
believing  that  the  statement  is  true.  "  That 
one  day  is  with  the  Lord  as  a  thousand 
years,  and  a  thousand  years  as  one  day  "  is 
not  rhetoric,  but  sober  fact.  By  theJDivine 
standard  times  are  measured,  not  according 
to  their  duration,  but  their  importance;  it 
is  their  meaning,  not  their  extent,  which 
gives  them  value.  What  are  all  the  measure- 
less prehistoric  eeons  of  the  material  uni- 
Terse  compared  with  the  time  since  the 
creation  of  rational  life?  What  are  the 
thousands  of  years  covered  by  the  Old 
Testament  compared  with  the  portion  of  a 
century  covered  by  the  New?  The  great 
crisis  in  the  history  of  the  world,  constituted 
by  the  life  and  death  of  Christ,  will  never 
be  equalled  until  he  comes  again.  When 
he  ascended  to  heaven  the  last  hour  sounded. 
There  may  follow  a  silence  (as  it  seemed  to 
St.  John)  about  the  space  of  half  an  hour, 
but  (as  hiunan  experience  may  prove)  of 
half  a  thousand  centuries.  Yet  the  dura- 
tion of  the  period,  as  measured  by  man,  will 
not  alter  its  essential  characteristics ;  it  was, 
is,  and  will  still  remain,  "the  last  hour." 
Even  as  ye  heard  (when  ye  were  instructed 
in  the  faith)  that  antichrist  oometh  (is 
destined  to  come).  Antichrist  in  this  also 
is  assimilated  to  the  Christ ;  he  is  j  ^/>x<i* 
iitvoi.  This  was  the  teaching  of  the  gospel 
(Matt.  ixiv.  5, 11, 28—26 ;  Mark  xiii.  22, 23 ; 
comp.  Acts  XX.  29;  2  Tim.  iii.  1;  2  Pet. 
ii.  1).  What  does  St.  John  mean  by  kvrl- 
XpiiTTOS?  The  four  passages  (oh.  ii.  18,  22; 
iv.  3 ;  2  John  7)  in  which  he  uses  the  term 
do  not  enable  us  to  answer  the  question 
with  certainty.  The  predominant  idea  is 
that  of  opposition  to  Christ,  and  rivalry  of 
Christ,  rather  than  merely  of  counterfeiling 
Christ.  If  hn-lxpiffTos  were  formed  on  the 
analogy  of  di>Tt$a<ri\fis  and  in/eiiraTos,  it 
would  mean  "  vice-Christ,  vicar  of  Christ." 
It  is,  however,  analogous  to  ivriSeos,  kvri- 
^i\6<roipos ;  and  the  Greek  for  a  counterfeit 
Christ  is  ^ivUxpurros  (Matt.  xxiv.  24).  But 
we  are  left  in  doubt  whether  this  rival  of 
Christ  is  a  principle  or  a  person.  None  of 
the  four  passages  is  decisive.  Here  we  are 
not  sure  whether  the  arising  of  many  anti- 
christs proves  that  the  $pirit  of  antichrist  ia 
•tlready  in  the  world,  or  that  by  them  the 
W.J  is  folly  prepared  for  the  one  perimal 


antichrist.  Either  the  existence  of  the 
antiohristian  character,  or  the  approach  of 
the  antichrist,  is  given  as  evidence  that 
the  day  of  the  Lord  is  at  hand.  The  latter 
is  the  more  probable.  A  great  personal 
opponent  to  the  personal  Christ  seems  to 
be  indicated  both  by  St.  John  and  St.  Paul 
(2  Thess.  ii.  1 — 8).  The  Jews  expected  a 
personal  opponent  of  the  Messiah  to  precede 
the  Messi^ — Armillua,  Gog,  Antiochus 
Epiphanes,  and  the  like  (Ezek.  xxxviii. ; 
xxxix. ;  Dan.  vii.  25;  vlii.  25;  xi  36);  and 
Christians  from  the  earliest  times  have 
expected  a  similar  prelude  to  the  retnm  of 
the  Messicih.  The  term  SlvtCxputtos  Is  abso- 
lutely peculiar  to  St.  John  in  the  New 
Testament.  By  the  hvTlxpurToi  TroAAof  he 
probably  means  those  early  heretical 
teachers,  who  in  various  ways  denied  the 
Incarnation,  and  were  thus  forerunners  of 
the  antichrist — the  Nicolaitanes,  Simon 
Magus,  Cerinthus,  Diotrephes,  Hymenieus, 
and  Philetus.  Besides  these  there  are 
practical  antichrists.  "  Let  us  mark,  not  the 
tongue,  but  the  deeds.  For  if  all  be  asked, 
all  with  one  mouth  confess  that  Jesus  is  tha 
Christ.  Let  the  tongue  keep  silent  awhile : 
ask  the  life.  If  the  Scripture  itself  shall 
tell  us  that  denial  is  a  thing  done  not  only 
with  the  tongue,  but  also  with  deeds,  then 
assuredly  we  find  many  antichrists.  ...  If 
deeds  are  to  be  questioned,  not  only  do  we 
find  many  antichrists  gone  out,  but  many 
not  yet  manifest,  who  ^ve  not  gone  out  at 
all "  (St.  Augustine). 

Ver.  19. — They  went  out  from  ns  (^J 
itpuav  liriK9av);  just  as  the  evil,  spirit  went 
out  of  the  demoniac  (J^fixtev  ^{  abrov,  Mark 
i.  26).  Bat  they  were  not  of  us  (o^k  ^aav  e'| 
4/iSv);  they  had  not  their  origin  with  us, 
just  as  the  unbelieving  Jews  were  "not  of 
God"  {^K  ToC  0eo5  ovK  ivri),  but  of  the 
devil  (John  viii.  23,  44,  47).  The  emphatio 
repetition  of  iiiiav,  five  times  in  one  verse, 
is  quite  in  St.  John's  style.  The  ."no 
doubt "  of  the  Authorized  Version,  rightly 
omitted  in  the  Eevised  Version,  probably 
represents  the  utiqtie  of  the  Vulgate,  which 
is  a  mistakep  attempt  to  give  a  separate 
word  to  translate  &v  (compare  forsitan 
in  John  iv.  10;  t.  46.  For  the  elliptical 
dAX'  tva,  comp.  John  i.  8).  What  follows  is 
not  clear,  and  is  taken  in  three  ways :  (1) 
"  That  all  are  not  of  us,"  which  seems  to 
imply  that  tome  of  them  are  of  us.  This 
can  hardly  be  right.  (2)  "That  all  of 
them  are  not-of-us;"  i.e.  are  aliens  (ver. 
21;  th.  iii.  15;  Rev.  xxii.  8;  Matt.  xxiv. 
22;  Mark  xiii.  20;  Luke  L  87;  Bom.  iii. 
20;  Gal.  ii.  16;  Eph.  t.  5).  But  in  that 
case  we  should  expect  vivrfs  ovk  dirlv,  not 
OVK  eiirlv  irivrts.  (3)  Two  thoughts  are  mixed 
together:  (o)  "That  they  may  be  made 
manifest  that  the/  aie  not  of  us;"    (b) 


OH.  n.  1—29.]        THE  FIEST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  JOHN. 


27 


"  That  It  may  be  made  manifest  that  not  all 
who  aie  with  im  (ntS"  rui&v)  are  of  us  (^f 
ili&y)."  This  seems  prefeiable.  The  rene- 
gade and  apostate  was  all  along  only  nomi- 
nally a  Christian.  Of  the  true  Christian 
the  declaration  remains  true,  "  Ifo  one 
•natcheth  them  out  of  his  hand." 

Ver.  20.— The  thought  of  many  anti- 
christs suggests  that  of  many  Christs;  t.a. 
many  who  have  been  anointed  (xpiffroO  by 
the  Christ  himself.  "The  false  teachers 
have  the  spirit  of  antichrist;  ye  have  a 
chrism  from  the  Christ."  The  Johannine 
Kai  places  the  two  antithetical  groups  side 
by  side,  while  the  emphatic  ifieJs  (comp. 
oh.  iv.  i)  accentuates  the  contrast.  And  ye 
have  an  anointing  from  the  Holy  One.  The 
unction  or  chrism  is  the  Holy  Spirit  (John 
i.  33;  ch.  iii.  24;  ii.  27).  As  Christ  was 
anointed  with  the  Spirit  in  all  fulness,  so 
each  Christian  is  anointed  with  him  in  his 
measure  (2  Cor.  1.  21,  22).  The  tweuty-flrst 
*  Catechetical  Lecture '  of  St.  Cyril,  "  On  the 
Holy  Chrism,"  should  be  read  in  illustration 
of  this  verse.  "  In  apostolic  language,  each 
Christian  is  in  due  measure  himself  a 
Christ,  empowered  by  the  gift  of  the  Holy 
Spirit  to  announce  the  truth  which  he  has 
learnt,  to  apply  the  atonement  which  he  has 
received,  to  establish  the  kingdom  which  he 
believes  to  be  universal"  (Westoott).  The 
cL-ir6  depends  on  ?x^'''«i  '»<'*  °^  XP'"'/'"-  The 
Holy  One  is  Jesus  Christ  (John  vi.  69 ;  Acts 
iii.  14 ;  Kev.  iii.  7 ;  comp.  John  xiv.  26 ;  xvi. 
7, 13).  It  is  hard  to  decide  between  three 
teadings:  (1)  roI  otSarc  irivTo,  "and  ye 
know  all  things"  necessary  to  salvation, 
i.e.  "the  truth"  (ver.  21;  John  ivi.  13); 
(2)  xal  oXian  irdyres,  "and  ye  all  know" 
that  ye  have  this  anointing;  (3)  oiSare 
irivTa, "  ye  all  know — I  did  not  write  to  you 
because  ye  know  not  the  truth."  There  is 
evidence  of  a  fourth  variation,  Trdi/ras,  "ye 
know  all"  the  antichrists.  If  (1)  be  right, 
it  does  not  mean  that  the  Christian  is 
omniscient,  but  that  he  has  the  basis  of  all 
knowledge ;  he  can  see  things  in  their  right 
proportions.  The  apostle's  own  disciple, 
St.  Polyoarp,  writes  to  the  Phllippians 
(xii.  1),  av5^i<  v/ias  \ttii6dvfi. 

Ver.  21. — The  first  owk  belongs  to  Sti,  not 
to  ^ph^d :  I  wrote  to  yon,  not  beoanse  ye 
know  not,  eto.  It  does  not  mean  "  I  omitted 
to  write  to  you  because  ye  know  not." 
Whatever  meaning  we  give  to  the  aorists  in 
vers.  13,  14  need  not  be  retained  h^e. 
There  is  here  no  abrupt  change  from 
present  to  aorist.  Moreover,  ver.  26  limits 
this  iyparfia  to  the  present  section.  What 
in  ver.  20  is  spoken  of  as  "all  things" 
(assuming  Trarro  to  be  light)  is  here  spoken 
of  as  "the  truth."  St.  John  writes  to  well- 
instructed  Christians,  to  adults  in  the  faith. 
It  is   precisely  because  they  "know  the 


truth"  that  he  addresses  them,  especially 
to  warn  them  against  antiohristo.  We  are 
in  doubt  whether  ical  3tj  depends  upon 
lypa\pa  ("and  because")  or  upon  oXSare 
("and  that").  The  former  is  better;  ii 
introduces  a  second  reason  for  his  writing. 
Some  take  Sti  in  all  three  places  as  "  that " 
after  typa^a :  "  I  did  not  write  to  you  and 
say  that  ye  know  not  the  truth,  but  that  ye 
know  it,  and  that  no  lie  ip  of  the  truth." 
Every  lie  is  fundamentally  and  a&  origins 
(^k)  separate  from  the  truth;  and  hence  his 
readers  will  easily  recognize  lies  and  liars, 
for  they  know  the  truth. 

Ver.  22.— Who  is  the  ^ar,  but  he  that 
denieth,  eto.  ?  From  the  he  St.  John  passes 
on  to  the  utterer  of  it.  "Ye  readily  dis- 
tinguish any  lie  from  the  truth.  Who,  then, 
is  the  liar?"  "The  liar"  does  not  mean 
the  liar  kbt'  i^oxhv,  as  if  this  denial  con- 
Btituted  the  very  acme  of  falsehood.  To 
deny  the  very  existence  of  God  is  surely  a 
worse  lie.  Still  less  can  we  say  that  "  the 
context  leaves  no  doubt  that  'the  liar 'is 
the  same  with '  the  antichrist.' "  The  article 
(i  i((e^<rT5)j)  refers  to  the  preceding  \/>eSBos, 
just  as  in  ch.  v.  4, 5  i  vik&v  refers  to  the  pre- 
ceding vIkti.  The  very  form  of  sentence  is 
the  same:  t/s  iirrui  i  hk&v  .  .  .  ei  jiii  6, 
K.T.A..,  and  there  i  vmuv  cannot  mean  the 
victor,  kot'  iioxhvt  who  is  Christ,  and  not 
the  believer.  So  that  the  Authorized 
Version  is  not  so  very  inaccurate  in  ren- 
dering i  jfieia-TTis  "  a  har."  "  Who  tells  lies, 
if  not  he  who  denies  (and  says)  that  Jesus 
is  not  the  Christ?"  This  was  the  great 
Gnostic  lie  to  which  St.  John's  Gospel  and 
Epistle  give  the  answer.  The  antiohrist  is 
this,  he  who  denieth  the  Father  and  the  Son. 
"The  antichrist"  here  is  not  the  great 
adversary,  but  one  having  similar  charae 
teristics.  He  denies  the  Messiahship  of 
Jesus,  and  thus  virtually  denies  both  the 
Father  and  Son  (comp.  2  Thess.  ii.  4). 
This  truth  St.  John  proceeds  to  restate  and 
develop. 

Ver.  23 — Every  one  who  denieth  the  Son 
not  only  does  that,  but  (_oiSe)  doth  not 
possess  the  Father.  To  deny  that  Jesus 
is  the  Christ  is  to  deny  the  Son  of  God,  for 
the  Christ  is  the  incarnate  Son;  and  to  deny 
the  Son  of  God  is  to  deny  the  Father  also, 
for  the  incarnate  Son  is  the  Revelation  of 
the  Father;  and  not  only  so,  but  to  deny 
the  Son  is  to  out  one's  self  off  from  the 
Father,  for  "no  one  knoweth  the  Father 
but  the  Son,  and  he  to  whom  the  Son  will 
reveal  him."  To  emphasize  this  great  truth 
St.  John  uses  his  favourite  method  of 
stating  it  both  negatively  and  positively. 
To  deny  tlie  Son  is  not  to  have  the  Father ; 
to  confess  the  Son  is  to  have  the  Father 
(comp.  ch.  i.  5,  8;  ii.  4,  27;  iii.  6  ;  iv.  2,  3, 
6,  7,  S;  V.  12).     Note  the  solemn  asyndeta 


28 


THE  PIEST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  JOHN.        [oh.  n.  1—29. 


There  ii  not  a  single  connecting  particle  in 
Ten.  22 — 21 ;  the  sentences  fall  on  the  ear 
like  minute-guns.  "Every  one  that  denieth." 
There  is  no  exception.  Even  an  apostle,  if 
he  denies  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ,  thereby 
also  loses  all  possession  of  the  Father.  The 
history  of  pbUosophy  verifies  the  statement. 
Deism  has  ever  a  tendency  to  end  in  pan- 
theism or  atheism. 

Vers.  24 — 28. — Exhortation  to  abide  in 
the  truth  and  in  God. 

Ver.  21.— The  oSv  of  the  T.B.  must  cer- 
tainly be  rejected.  The  viiets  placed  first 
marks  the  antithesis,  "as  for  you,"  as 
distinct  from  the  antichrists.  With  singular 
caprice  the  Authorized  Version  renders  St. 
John's  favourite  verb,  lUeVei/',  in  three  dif- 
ferent ways  in  this  one  verse — ^"  abide," 
"remain,"  "continue;"  thereby  losing  the 
emphasis  of  the  repetition :  "  Let  the  good 
seed  abide  in  your  hearts ;  not  be  snatched 
away  by  the  evil  one.  Then  not  only  vfill 
it  abide,  but  ye  also  (wol  iixe'is)  will  abide  in 
the  Son,  and  therefore  with  the  Father." 
From  the  beginning ;  when  they  first  heard 
the  gospel,  as  distinct  from  what  they  have 
since  heard  from  false  teachers. 

Ver.  25. — And  the  promise  which  he 
promised  us  is  this,  even  the  eternal  life. 
Airifs  is  Christ ;  oSnj  looks  forward  to  "  the 
eternal  life,"  not  backwards  to  the  abiding 
in  the  Father  (John  iii.  16;  v.  24;  vi.  40, 
54).  TV  (airip  t^v  aldiviov  is  in  the  accusa- 
tive by  attraction  to  '^v.  "  What  St.  John 
would  have  us  feel  is  this,  that  there  can  be 
no  promise  to  compare  with  this — that  we 
should  share  the  eternal  life,  the  life  of 
God.  .  .  .  We  often  speak  as  if  people 
were  to  be  paid  for  being  good;  not  as  if 
the  being  good  were  itself  God's  highest 
gift  and  blessing"  (Maurice).  The  reading 
iiuv  (B)  for  Tipuv  is  worthy  of  notice.  In 
vers.  16, 17  St.  John  gives  two  reasons  for 
shunning  the  world :  because  (1)  the  world 
is  alien  to  the  Father;  (2)  it  is  passing 
away.  So  here  he  gives  two  for  holding 
fast  the  truth  originally  delivered  to  them : 
because  the  truth  leads  (1)  to  fellowship 
with  God ;  (2)  to  eternal  life. 

Ver.  26  resumes  for  a  moment  and  con- 
cludes the  section  respecting  antichrists. 
"These  things"  refers  to  what  precedes, 
especially  vers.  18 — 23,  as  distinct  from 
what  now  follows.  The  present  participle 
(rav  nKavdivTuiv)  indicates  the  continual 
attempt  of  these  false  teachers  to  lead  the 
"little  cliildren"  astray.  "Kypa^a,  as  in 
ver.  21,  is  the  "epistolary  aorist"  (see  on 
2  John  4). 

Ver.  27. — Parallel  to  ver.  24,  but  stating 
as  a  fact  what  is  there  given  as  a  oommaud. 
The  emphatic  ifiui  again  marks  the  em- 
phatic contrast  between  St.  John's  readers 
and  the  antichrists.    'At'  kin*  v  means  "  from 


Christ"  (ver.  20).  The  indicative  (jtivti) 
states  what  ought  to  be  true  of  them,  and 
is  a  delicate  equivalent  to  luvirti  (ver,  24). 
The  anointing  of  Ohilst  (r^  XP^i'I'm  aiTovi) 
abides  with  them  as  a  permanent  gift,  and 
renders  further  apostolic  teaching  unneces- 
sary. It  is  quite  a  mistake  to  suppose  that 
the  superfluous  teaching  refers  to  the  anti- 
christs.  The  ideal  to  which  the  Christian 
must  aspire  is  the  being  led  into  all  truth 
by  the  Spirit;  he  will  need  no  himian 
tochers  then  (see  the  remarkable  parallel 
to  this  in  Jer.  zxzi.  33,  and  the  quotation 
of  it  in  Heb.  viii.  10, 11).  The  construction 
in  the  middle  of  the  verse  is  amphiboloos. 
We  may  take  koL  iiKriBh  iaTiv  either  as  tho 
apodosis  of  us  ("as  his  anointing  teacheth 
you  .  .  .  80  it  is  tme")  or  as  a  continuation 
of  the  protasis,  which  is  resumed  by  nadAs 
("as  his  anointing  teacheth  yon  .  .  .  and 
is  true  .  .  .  and  even  as").  The  latter  is 
better.  The  emphatic  "  and  is  no  lie "  is 
thoroughly  Johannine  (see  on  ver.  23). 
The  conclusion  of  the  verse  is  doubtful 
also.  The  reading  jucVetc  is  certainly  pre- 
ferable to  luveiTf ;  but  iiivere  may  be  indi- 
cative like  ikivu  in  the  first  clause,  or 
imperative  like  lUyere  in  the  next  verses 
The  latter  is  more  probable. 

Ver.  28, — And  now,  summing  np  the 
whole  section  (vers.  18 — 28).  "j^  he  shall 
be  manifested"  expresses  no  nnoertainty  as 
to  the  fcuA  of  Chnst's  appearing;  the  un- 
certainty is  in  the  time  (comp.  ch.  iii.  2; 
John  vi.  62 ;  zii.  32 ;  xlv.  3).  In  all  these 
cases  the  point  is  the  result  of  the  act,  not 
the  time  of  it.  The  graphio  cua-xvySa/iey  air' 
avTou  expresses  the  ehrinking  away  in  shame 
from  his  presence.  The  irapovaia  (see  on  2 
Thess.  ii.  8)  is  introduced  without  explana- 
tion as  a  well-known  belief. 

Ver.  29. — This  verse  forms  a  bridge  be- 
tween the  two  main  divisions  of  the  Epistle. 
The  coming  of  Christ  suggests  the  righteous- 
ness of  Christ;  for  it  is  as  the  righteous 
Judge  that  he  is  coming,  and  those  who 
would  not  be  ashamed  to  meet  him  at  his 
coming  must  be  righteous  also.  Once  more 
(ver.  27)  we  are  in  doubt  between  indi- 
cative and  imperative:  yivdaKere,  in  spite 
of  tho  preceding  /neVere  and  following  ISere, 
is  probably  indicative.  To  knew  that  God 
(not  Christ ;  oomp.  oh.  i.  9 ;  John  xviL  25) 
is  righteous  is  to  perceive  that  every  doer  of 
his  (tV)  righteousness  is  a  son  of  God  (not 
of  Christ ;  we  are  nowhere  in  Scripture  said 
to  be  born  of  Christ).  To  partake  of  that 
righteousness  which  is  God's  nature  is  proof 
of  birth  from  him.  With  iroieij'  riiv  Sikm- 
offiJfTjj/,  compare  iroteTv  t^;*  dAijOelav  (eh.  i.  6; 
John  iii.  21).  Eighteousness  must  be  shown 
in  conduct ;  mere  desire  to  be  righteous  will 
not  sufSce.  And  the  conduct  must  be 
habittuU  (i  xoiuy,  not  t  Tof^iras) ;  a  sirgli 


OH,  n.  1—29.]       THE  PIEST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  JOHN. 


29 


act  of  righteousness  will  not  suffice.  Note 
the  change  from  eiSrjre  to  ■ywJxncfTe.  To 
know  (intuitively)  that  God  is  righteous  is 


to  come  to  know  (hy  experience)  that  who- 
ever habitually  aotai  righteously  is  God's 
offspring. 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  1,  2.— r(?o(?s  remedy  for  sin.  Connecting  link:  The  being  irlthont  sin,  although 
that  to  which  we  cannot  as  yet  pretend  without  frustrating  the  purpose  of  God's  revela- 
tion of  himself,  is  nevertheless  a  point  to  be  aimed  at  in  our  advance  in  and  towards 
the  light,  and  is  the  purpo«e  of  the  apostle  in  unfolding  his  teachings.  Hence  there 
immediately  suggests  itself  the  following  topic — The  completeness  of  the  Divine  provision 
for  theforgiveness  and  cure  of  sin.  It  is  by  no  means  an  unimpoitant  part  of  the  evidence 
of  the  Divine  origin  of  the  gospel  that,  while  nowhere  else  is  sin  viewed  so  seriously, 
yet  nowhere  else  is  its  cure  j>rovided  for  so  radically.  And  whereas  one  of  the  first 
lessons  a  man  has  to  learn  is  that  of  the  terrible  evU  of  sin,  the  next  in  order  is  that 
of  its  possible  removal.  To  learn  how  deeply  he  is  sunk  in  it,  without  being  shown 
how  he  may  rise  above  it,  would  plunge  a  man  either  into  morbid  indifference  or  into 
bitter  and  hopeless  despair.  On  the  other  hand,  to  point  out  the  greatness  of  the 
remedy  to  one  who  sees  not  the  depth  of  the  eTil  it  is  designed  to  meet,  would  be  but 
to  speak  to  inappreciative  ears.  Consequently,  the  preacher  has  to  dwell  on  both  in 
turn.  Hence,  lest  any  one  should  have  been  brought  by  the  apostle's  teaching  to  so 
vivid  a  sense  of  sin's  pervasive  poisoning  as  to  despair  of  ever  attaining  to  the  end 
indicated  in  ver.  1,  "  that  ye  sin  not,"  the  apostle  seems  to  say,  "  Of  this  you  need 
not  despair,  for  God's  provision  is  so  complete.  If  any  man  sin,"  etc.  Hence  two 
lines  of  thought  may  be  indicated  here. 

I.  What  is  this  Divine  remedy  fob  sin?  Here  the  apostle  gives  us  three  steps, 
each  succeeding  one  an  advance  on  the  former.  1.  The  entire  work  of  God  in  providing 
a  remedy  for  sin  centres  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  (Let  each  word  in  the  apostle's 
phrase  have  its  full  weight  and  meaning  expanded  as  far  as  possible.)  (1)  Jesus — the 
Saviour.  (2)  Christ — the  Anointed  One,  the  Messiah.  (3)  The  Righteous  One — One 
who,  being  perfectly  righteous,  was  so  far  fitted  to  undertake  the  sinner's  cause ;  One 
who,  being  the  Son  of  man,  could  represent  earth  to  heaven,  and  who,  being  also  the 
Son  of  God,  could  represent  heaven  to  earth.  In  this  mutual  representativeness  is  the 
fitness  of  his  mediation.  As  such :  2.  His  work  is  represented  here  as  twofold.  (1)  He 
is  a  Propitiation.  It  is  all-important  to  indicate  here  the  wide  distinction  between 
the  classical  and  the  scriptural  conceptions  attached  to  this  word  (see  Westcott,  in  loc.). 
In  the  one  case  man  seeks  to  propitiate  an  offended  and  incensed  Deity.  In  the  other 
case  the  "  Eighteous  Father  "  himself  reconciles  the  world  to  himself  by  the  giving  up 
of  his  own  Son  to  do  a  work  which  should  at  once  clear  the  great  Buler  from  all  con- 
nivance at  sin,  and  thus  open  the  way  for  a  reception  of  the  penitent  sinner  in  abound- 
ing love  and  in  perfect  righteousness.  [The  student  should  study  the  entire  Scripture 
usage  of  the  words  i\atrii6s,  iKMrriipiov ;  isa,  rnbs-]  Nor  should  we  confine  ourselves 
to  the  thought  that  something  that  Christ  did  was  the  propitiation.  He  is  the 
Propitiation.  Kal  aiirhs  'lKa<rii.6s  iarai.  He  himself  is,  abidingly,  the  Propitiation.  The 
propitiation  is  not  simply  an  act  once  done ;  but  the  ever-living  Saviour  himself,  who 
died  for  us  and  rose  again.  He  covers  sin  with  the  mantle  of  his  own  forgiving  love, 
having  the  infinite  right  to  do  it  as  the  Priest  upon  his  throne.  (2)  Jesus  Christ  the 
Eighteous  One  is  also  an  Advocate  (napc^K^ijToi).  The  word  "  Paraclete  "  is  one  of  wide 
significance.  It  would  apply  to  one  who  undertook  a  cause  on  behalf  of  another — 
stood  by  him  through  all  difficulties,  and  saw  him  safely  through.  The  word  is 
translated  "  Comforter  "  in  Johnxiv, ;  here  "  Advocate."  Neither  is  inaccurate ;  both 
are  too  limited.  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who  came  to  us  from  the  Father,  is  now  our 
Intercessor  with  him.  (For  the  glory  of  this  office,  cf.  Heb.  vii.  For  the  contents  of 
the  pleading,  see  John  xvii.)  Of  its  method  in  detail  we  can  form  no  conception ; 
but  we  know  that,  if  our  cause  is  undertaken  by  the  Lord  Jesus,  he  will  carry  it 
through,  and  we  shall  prevail  through  him  1  3.  The  propitiation  is  for  the  sins  of  the 
whole  world.  How  unscriptural  does  any  limitation  of  the  merciful  intent  of  the 
atonement  seem  in  the  presence  of  such  phrases  as  this!    The  advocacy  is  for  all 


30  THE  FIBST  EPISTLE  GENEBAL  07  JOHN.       [oh.  n.  1—29, 

those  who  entrust  their  cause  to  him  (Heb.  vii.  25).  As  Westcott  beautifully  remarks, 
"He  is  not. an  Advocate  who  wishes  to  set  aside  the  Law,  but  to  carry  it  out  imd 
apply  it." 

II.   How  DOBS  ALL  THIS  BBAB  ON  THE  VOTSOr  AWAT  OF  SIN  IN  US  ?      The  actioU  of  tho 

Saviour's  work  is  twofold.  1.  Objectively.  For  us — Godward.  It  fulfils  the  Law.  It 
vindicates  righteousness.  It  reveals  the  purity  of  the  great  white  throne,  and  the  love 
of  the  eternal  Father.  It  thus  declares  God's  rectitude  in  the  remission  of  sin.  All 
that  is  needed  to  clear  the  way  for  the  sinner  having  access  to  the  Father  righteously, 
is  done.  "  It  is  finished  1 "  2.  Subjectively.  In  us — manward.  (1)  It  awakens  hope, 
and  thus  banishes  despair — an  imperative  condition,  without  which  no  further  step 
can  be  gained.  When  hope  dawns  it  is  a  sure  sign  all  is  not  lost.  (2)  Faith  is  called 
forth.  When  the  Spirit  of  God  shows  the  glory  of  Christ  to  a  sin-mourning  spirit, 
then  the  Object  of  trust  is  disclosed,  and  trust  reposes  in  that  Object,  and  pardon  i? 
received.  (3)  Penitence  is  awakened.  "  A  sense  of  blood-bought  pardon  soon  dissolves 
a  heart  of  stone."  (4)  Love  is  called  forth  to  a  living  and  loving  Redeemer.  The 
warmest  affections  of  the  soul  go  out  to  the  Son  of  God,  as  to  One  "  who  loved  us,  and 
gave  himself  for  us."  Then  (5)  there  is  henceforth  a  constant  and  increasing  loathing 
of  sin.  By  means  of  "  the  expulsive  power  of  a  new  affection  "  the  poison  of  sin  is 
driven  out  from  the  heart.  What  was  once  loved  is  loathed,  what  was  once  hated  is 
loved.  The  new  man  declares  a  lifelong  war  against  the  sin  which  made  his  Saviour 
bleed.  (6)  The  life  is  now  devoted  to  the  Lord  Jesus,  who,  in  the  new  kingdom  of  his 
grace,  gives  full  scope  for  every  power  and  faculty  of  the  man,  giving  them  "  loved  and 
Divine  employ."  And  the  more  ardently  the  Saviour's  service  is  entered  on,  the  more 
rapidly  doth  sin  perish  and  holiness  adorn  the  life.  And  in  this  course  the  new  career 
is  entered  on,  in  which,  surtained  by  Divine  grace  and  inspired  by  Divine  love,  the  sin 
which  once  was  his  plague  shall  come  to  be  for  ever  and  for  ever  dead  I 

Vers.  3 — 6. — Verification  verified;  or,  knowing  that  we  know  Ood.      Connecting 

link :  The  redemption  effected  by  Christ  in  doing  away  with  sin  restores  the  lost 
fellowship  between  us  and  God.  In  the  act  of  fellowship  we  come  to  a  heart-know- 
ledge of  God ;  and  this  true  knowledge  of  God  is  constantly  being  verified  by  a  life  of 
obedience.  "Topic — Certitude  in  the  knowledge  of  Ood.  The  closer  our  study  of  the 
Word  of  God,  and  the  more  minute  our  investigation  of  its  phrases  and  words,  the 
more  striking  will  the  far-reachingness  of  its  teachings  appear,  and  their  adaptednesg 
to  meet  the  exigencies  of  modem  times.  And  among  the  New  Testament  writers  none 
of  them  is  more  adapted  to  an  agnostic  age  than  the  Apostle  John.  Albeit  there  is  a 
great  difference  between  the  despairing  agnosticism  of  ancient  days  and  the  defiant 
agnosticism  of  our  own,  nevertheless,  the  words  of  the  Apostle  John  do  as  really 
administer  a  rebuke  to  the  pride  of  the  later,  as  they  supply  the  information  yearned 
for  by  the  earlier,  age.  His  key-words  being  "life,  "love,"  "knowledge,"  "fellow- 
ship," he  is  constantly  throwing  such  flashes  of  light  on  the  pathway  of  Christian 
thought,  as  to  lead  the  devout  student  often  spontaneously  to  cry  out,  "I  am  not 
ashamed  of  the  gospel  of  Christ,"  even  in  the  fierce  glare  of  nineteenth-century 
criticism  I  If  the  true  way  of  knowing  God,  and  of  knowing  that  we  know  him,  be 
disclosed,  either  of  the  three  following  false  theses  will  thereby  be  overturned :  Whether 
it  be  maintained  (1)  that  we  know  God  apart  from  a  supernatural  revelation ;  or  (2) 
that  we  cannot  possibly  know  God  at  all;  or  (3)  that  knowing  is  an  end  in  itself.  The 
apostle's  teachings  demolish  each  and  all  I  The  first,  by  his  showing  that  the  true  know- 
ledge of  God  has  been  brought  by  the  Son  of  God.  The  second,  by  showing  that,  even 
if  we  cannot  rise  to  God,  God  has  come  down  to  us.  The  third,  by  declaring  that  God 
has  come  down  to  us  in  order  to  bring  us  into  fellowship  with  himself.  But  even 
beyond  these  glorious  truths  does  the  apostle  lead  us.  He  shows  us  not  only  that  we 
can  know,  but  that  we  can  know  that  we  know  (ver.  3).  How  ?  Let  us  carefully 
follow  his  tracks  of  thought. 

L  There  are  "commandments"  brought  by  the  Lord  Jbsub  Christ  for  the 
OBEDIENCE  OF  MEN.  (Vcrs.  3 — 5.)  "  His  commandments."  The  tendency  of  many 
is  to  be  impatient  and  erratic  truth-seekers.  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  teaches  us  that, 
if  we  want  to  know  the  truth  which  as  yet  lies  beyond  us,  there  is  one  sure  way  thereto, 
•vea  by  liie  diBcharge  of  the  duty  which  we  already  know ;  the  truth  we  already  possess 


OH.  n.  1—29.]        THU  FIRST  EPISTLE  QENERAL  OF  JOHN.  81 

will  thereby  increase  (of.  John  vii,  17).  As  a  suminary,  moreorer,  of  the  command- 
ment* of  our  Lord  Jesus,  we  may  take  the  sermon  on  the  mount,  hi  which  tbe  only 
life  tiiat  will  bei  of  worth  in  hia  kingdom  is  set  forth,  and  that  too  on  his  own  Dithm 
suthority. 

n.  The  ooiiuanduents  of  the  Lojtn  Jiisus  abb  bttuued  up  bt  the  apostus  in 
TWO.  The  Lord  Jesus  summed  up  Old  Testament  commands  in  two  (Matt.  xxiL  37, 
88).  John  sums  up  his  Saviour's  Qommands  in  two  (oh.  iii.  23) :  (1)  Beliering  in  the 
Kame  of  Jesus  Christ,  i.«.  confiding  in  him  and  following  him.  (2)  Loring  one  another. 
How  much  stress  the  apostle  lays  on  this  we  shall  have  ahundaut  oiioasian  to  see  io 
after  homilies, 

ni,  OABEFHIt  BEOARD  FOB  AND  THB  PRACTIOAL  PULFILMBNT  Of  THB8B  WM  KTKB  BB 
LSTTIKa  US  VOBB  AND  KOBE  nTTO  THE  BE0BET3  0(F  THE  LOTS  Or  OOD.      There  are  twO 

phrases — "Keeping  his  commandments,"  and  "keeping  his  Word;"  the  former  (so 
Westcott)  being  an  observance  of  definite  instructions,  while  the  latter  is  the  observ- 
ance of  a  principle  which  is  ever  taking  a  new  embodiment  in  the  very  process  of  life. 
This  course  of  <H>nduot  will  disclose  to  us  the  love  of  Ood.  How  ?  Thus  our  life  will 
be  a  life  of  growing  love.  This  love  we  have  learnt  of  Jesus.  Jesus  is  the  perfect  copy 
of  the  divisible  Father.    Hence  we  learn,  practically,  "  God  is  love  t " 

IV,  Thus  we  oome  to  enow  that  we  have  oome  to  a  enowledob  of  Gob.*  The 
Father's  loye  is  revealed  through  the  Son,  The  Son  by  the  Spirit  reproduces  his  own 
love  in  our  hearts.  Thus  a  new  world  of  love  is  ever  opening  up  before  our  eyes.  If 
any  man  be  in  Christ,  there  is  a  new  creation  disclosed  to  his  view.  A  verification 
this  of  the  glorious  love  of  God,  which  brings  with  it  a  certitude  of  unspeakable  worth 
and  matchless  glory  1 

V.  This  is  the  seai,  of  oub  union  with  Christ.  Hereby  know  we  that  we  are  in 
him.  The  growing  conrormity  of  our  nature  to  his  likeness,  and  the  ripening  fellow- 
ship with  him,  are  seals  to  our  union  with  the  Lord  Jesus  that  cannot  be  mistaken. 

i^  conclusion :  The  Apostle  John  makes  use  of  all  this  to  ward  off  and  orertur*  the 
heresies  of  bis  day.  We  should  likewise  make  use  of  it  now.  Not,  howeyer,  by  setting 
one  BfiecnlatioQ  over  against  another ;  but  by  showing  that  the  certitude  of  the  belieyer 
is  gained  through  taking  the  lowly  pathway  of  duty,  and  that  in  the  elose  following 
of  him  whom  he  believes  and  loves  wiU  be  found  the  true  secret  of  the  highest  know- 
ledge — a  knowledgs  which  will  develop  from  moment  to  moment  in  the  actual  course 
of  life. 

Ver.  6.— Great  pro/eigioiu  involve  great  (Migatiora.  Conneetiag  link  ;  In  the  fifth 
verse  the  apostle  had  just  declared  that  a  life  of  obedience  to  God  certifies  to  the 
believer  that  he  is  in  Christ.  In  this  verse  that  thought  is  as  it  were  turned  round : 
not  only  is  it  true  thal^  if  a  man  diligently  obeys,  he  has  in  that  fact  the  proof  of  a 
living  union  with  Christ  but  it  also  follows  that,  if  a  man  avows  to  others  that  he  is 
living  in  union  with  the  Son  of  God,  he  is  bound  to  justify  that  avowal  by  a  life  in 
entire  hannony  therewith.  Hence  we  get  the  following  theme-rT,2!Je  avouxd  of  a 
Ghriititm  lify  demandi  a  Christ-like  voalh.    Two  lines  of  remark  are  here  suggested. 

I.  Hebe  is  a  obeat  deolabation  scfposed.  '*  He  that  saith  he  abidetk  in  him." 
It  has  been  not  unfrec^uently  remarked  that  old  words  and  phrases  whieh  had  long 
been  employed  in  pagan  terminology  have  to  put  on  a  new  meaning  altogether  when 
used  in  Christian  teaching.  Not  only  is  ihi»  true,  but  much  more.  There  are  in 
Christian  teaching  absolutely  new  phrases  used.  This  is  one  of  them :  "  in  Christ." 
It  is  entirely  new,  (1)  because  no  one  ever  sustained  such  a  loving  relation  to  the 
human  soul  as  Christ  sustains  to  it;  and  therefore  (2)  never  could  human  sonls  be  so 
related  to  any  other  being  as  they  are  to  the  Lord  Jesus,  specially  when  knit  to  him 
by  a  living  faith  and  drawing  their  very  life  firom  him.  If,  e.g.,  we  speak  of  being 
in  Isaiah  or  in  Moses,  who  is  there  that  would  not  turn  away  in  disgust  from  the 
absurdity?  And  yet  the  Christian  knows  and  feels  it  to  be  perfectly  natural  thus  to 
speak  of  his  relation  to  his  Saviour.  Yea,  more ;  so  close,  so  real,  so  vital,  is  that 
relationship,  that  nq  weaker  phrase  would  adequately  express  it  I  For  what  doss  he 
mean  by  it?  Certainly  not  less  than  seven  things.  L  That  he  worhips  him  as  the 
ideal  and  real  Head  of  the  entire  human  race.    2.  That  he  recognizes  the  sopreme 


82  THE  FIBST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  JOHN.        [oh.  n.  1—29 

Lordship  of  Christ.  3.  That  he  relies  upon  the  atonement  made  by  Christ.  4.  That 
he  receives  power  from  Christ  every  day  and  all  the  day  long.  5.  That  he  has  no  other 
conception  of  a  worthy  object  in  life  than  that  life  should  bo  wholly  for  CShrist.  6. 
That  for  life  or  death,  for  time  or  eternity,  he  commits  his  all  to  Christ.  7.  And  lastly, 
that  the  life  he  lives  now,  that  the  life  he  hopes  for  hereafter,  is  received  from 
Christ  himself,  and  can  be  sustained  by  him  alone.  For  there  is  no  such  hypothesis 
in  the  text  as  that  a  man  can  be  out  of  Christ  one  moment  and  in  him  the  next,  and 
vice  versa,  thus  alternating  perpetually.  The  phrase  is  "  dbideth  in  him."  It  is  not, 
however,  necessarily  supposed  here  that  the  man  «'»  in  Christ.  The  only  supposition 
is  that  he  declares  such  to  be  the  case.  Hence  the  question  arises — How  is  this  decla- 
ration supposed  to  be  made?  Nothing  can  be  clearer,  both  from  the  Gospels  and  the 
Epistles,  that  open  confession  of  faith  before  the  world  was  expected  of  believers,  and 
was  indeed  the  natural  outcome  of  such  faith.'  There  was  the  broader  confession, 
when  disciples  were  admitted  to  Christian  training  by  the  rite  of  baptism.  There  was 
the  far  fuller  and  deeper  one  when  the  ranks  of  believers  gathered  together  around  the 
table  of  the  Lord,  declaring  that  Christ  was  the  Life  of  those  that  believe.  In  a  word, 
whUe,  in  mingling  with  the  world  and  in  ordinary  conversation,  it  was  quite  possible 
for  a  man  openly  to  confess  his  Saviour,  go  where  he  would,  yet  the  recognized  public 
avowal  of  his  faith  and  hope  as  a  Christian  was  to  be  found  in  his  taking  his  place 
among  the  ranks  of  the  faithful,  and  in  pledging  himself  to  be  everywhere  true  to 
his  Saviour  and  to  his  fellow-believers,  when  he  gathered  with  them  around  the 
Eucharistio  board  I 

II.  An  avowal  so  oeeat  demands  a  corbbspondino  walk.  "  He  that  taith  .  .  , 
ought  himself,"  etc.  1.  How  oitght  he  to  walkt  "Even  as  he  walked."  The  out- 
ward walk  ought  to  correspond  with  the  verbal  avowal.  But  who  can  suitably  describe 
how  Christ  walked?  Expansion  of  this  is  not  possible  within  our  assigned  space. 
We  can  but  hint.  See  Christ's  purity,  devotedness  to  God,  love  of  communion  with 
God,  pity,  benevolence,  daring,  patience,  self-sacrifice,  resistive  force  even  to  the  death. 
A  man  who  says  he  abides  in  Christ  ought  to  reproduce  that  life  in  his  own !  We 
are  not  required  to  follow  him  in  the  waters  of  baptism,  nor  in  the  forty  days'  temp- 
tation, nor  in  his  wondrous  works ;  but  in  his  Spirit  and  his  life  he  has  left  us  an 
example  that  we  should  follow  his  steps.  He  stands  historically  at  the  head  of  the 
human  race,  its  most  heavenly  Inspirer,  its  noblest  Figure,  its  most  luminous  Example. 
2.  Why  ought  the  walk  to  he  conjoined  with  the  avowal  f  Dr.  Westcott  aptly  calls 
our  attention  to  the  fact  that  the  word  here  used  is  not  Se7,  denoting  a  "must"  in  the 
nature  of  things,  but  o(pel\ei,  which  expresses  a  special,  personal  obligation.  To 
whom,  then,  does  the  avower  owe  it  to  "  live  like  him  whom  he  avows  as  his  Lord  and 
his  Life  "  ?  Certainly  (1)  he  owes  it  to  himself  to  be  consistent  with  his  declaration. 
(2)  He  owes  it  to  his  Christian  brethren  with  whom  he  is  in  Church-fellowship.  (3) 
But  supremely  he  owes  it  to  his  Lord,  whose  holy  Name  he  thus  takes  upon  himself. 
For  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  in  some  sort  represented  by  the  professors  of  his  Name. 
Alas !  alas !  while  in  every  age  there  have  been  very  many  who  have  "  adorned  the 
doctrine  of  God  their  Saviour  in  all  things,"  who  can  reflect  without  many  a  sigh  and 
many  a  tear  of  the  numberless  ways  in  which  our  Lord  has  been  wounded  in  the 
house  of  his  friends  ?  Surely,  surely  our  Lord  endured  suffering  enough  for  us  when 
he  was  on  earth.  Do  not  let  him  suffer  from  us  now  he  is  in  heaven  1  And  if  even 
thus  the  argument  should  fail  to  impress,  let  two  matters  more  be  weighed :  One,  that 
if  the  avowal  is  true,  a  man  wUl  make  it  his  aim  to  live  as  Christ  lived ;  for  the  life  a 
man  receives  from  Christ  cannot  possibly  be  other  than  like  his  own.  Another,  that 
if  a  man  is  not  living  a  Christ-like  life,  he  is  thereby  disproving  the  truth  of  the 
avowal  he  is  making.  The  water  in  the  stream  cannot  be  muddy  if  it  comes  direct  from 
the  pure  fountain-head. 

We  are  well  aware  that  a  preacher's  fidelity  on  this  matter  will  be  met  by — Ohjection 
(1)  such  as  this :  "  How  ignorant  of  the  ways  of  the  world  yon  preachers  must  be  I 
Nothing  can  stand  in  our  day  against  twenty-five  per  cent,  profit."  Reply:  Our 
thesis  is,  if  a  man  declares  he  is  in  Christ,  he  says  he  treads  mammon  underfoot ;  and 
if  he  sayi  it,  he  is  expected  to  show  it.  Ohjection  (2) :  "  Impossible  I  too  high  1 " 
Reply :  It  is  too  high  for  a  Christless  man,  but  not  for  "  a  man  in  Christ."  Note : 
'  Let  the  following  passages  be  compared :  1  Cor.  xii.  3  ;  Bom;  x.  10. 


OH.  II.  1—29.]      THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  JOHN.  S3 

When  life  and  profession  harmonize  with  each  other,  and  hoth  harmonize  with  a  perfect 
ideal,  the  life  is  what  it  ought  to  be,  and  all  that  it  can  be. 

Vers.  7 — ^11. — Love  and  light.  Connecting  link :  The  word  "  ought "  (ver.  6) 
implies  a  command  explicitly  given  or  implicitly  involved  in  other  teaching ;  such  i« 
the  case  here.  The  Son  of  God  has  come.  And  from  him  as  the  Light  the  command 
has  proceeded.  What  specific  form  the  commandment  has  taken  from  his  lips  is  the 
main  teaching  of  this  paragraph.  Hence  our  theme — The  commandment,  old  and  yet 
new,  hroyght  hy  him  who  is  the  Light.  The  "  connecting  links  "  which  are  traceable 
in  the  writings  of  John,  are  very  different  from  such  as  are  discoverable  in  the  Epistles 
of  Paul.  Paul  works  out  mighty  themes  cumulatively.  John  treats  key-words  radia- 
tively.  Such  words  are  "light,"  "love,"  "truth,'|  "life,"  "knowledge,"  etc.  Conse- 
quently, it  would  be  a  mistake  to  attempt  to  find  in  this  Epistle  any  such  continuous 
unfolding  of  one  great  theme,  such,  e.g.,  as  the  doctrine  of  justification  by  faith,  which 
is  dealt  with  by  Paul  in  Rom.  i. — viii.  As  another  method,  and  that  very  widely 
different,  is  adopted  in  this  Epistle  by  the  Apostle  John,  so  the  work  of  the  pulpit 
expositor  in  dealing  therewith  must  vary  from  the  method  he  would  adopt  in  unfold- 
ing the  Epistle  to  the  Romans.  We  must  take  up  the  k?y-words  of  John  as  he  uses 
them,  and  expound  the  teaching  concerning  them.  In  tUs  paragraph  we  have  two 
main  lines  of  remark  suggested. 

I.  Teachings  concebnino  light  and  lovb  objbctivkly  considebed.  These  are 
fourfold.  1.  The  true  Light  is  now  shining.  A  reference  to  John  i.  4, 6  and  iii.  19  will 
indicate  the  way  in  which  the  apostle  refers  to  our  Lord  Jesus  as  the  Light.  God  has 
never  left  men  in  absolute  darkness  concerning  himself.  Even  before  the  Old  Testa- 
ment was  written,  devout  men  could  "  walk  with  God."  But  whatever  light  on  the 
invisible  men  have  had  has  come  from  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  "He  is  the  true  Light, 
which  ligliteth  every  man."  When,  however,  he  came  into  the  world,  men  beheld  the 
Source  of  light;  the  world  has  been  clearer  and  brighter  ever  since;  and  to  this  day 
the  light  streams  from  Christ  as  from  the  Sun  of  Righteousness.  2.  Because  of  this 
the  darkness  is  passing  away  (TtaftiytToi)}  It  is  aa  if  the  veil  were  being  lifted  off 
which  concealed  the  great  realities  on  which  the  meaning  and  destiny  of  human  life 
depend.  And  with  new  light  thrown  on  the  plans  and  mind  of  God  for  our  race,  it 
follows  that  fresh  Ught  is  cast  on  the  way  in  which  men  ought  to  walk.  3.  This  being 
the  case,  additional  force  is  given  to  human  duty.  (Note  the  Zrt  in  ver.  8.)  The  clearer 
the  light  on  a  man's  pathway,  the  greater  his  obligation  to  walk  aright.  Hence,  when 
Jesus  brings  a  fuller  light,  he  must  needs  bring  a  command  for  us  to  walk  accordingly. 
We  cannot  suppose  the  Son  of  God  to  come  from  heaven  to  light  up  our  way,  and  that 
it  can  then  be  an  indifferent  matter  whether  we  heed  him  or  no.  Surely  not.  The 
light  has  a  commandilig  force.  It  is  a  new  command,  as  brought  in  anew  by  the  Lord 
Jesus,  and  felt  with  new  force  through  his  infinite  love.  It  is  an  old  one,  inasmuch  aa 
it  had  been  in  force  from  the  very  beginning  of  the  Christian  economy,  and  even  then 
was  but  the  resetting  of  the  old  law  of  love  which  God  had  enjoined  from  the  first. 
4.  This  command  is  that  we  should  love  our  hrother.  This  is  the  burden  of  the  whole 
paragraph.  This  is  the  sum  and  substance  of  that  following  of  Christ  to  which  all 
"  who  profess  and  call  themselves  Christians  "  are  bound.  The  light  which  he  brings 
is  meant  to  guide  us  taa  life  of  love.     "  Love  one  another,  as  I  have  loved  you." 

II.  These  same  teachings  concbbnino  light  and  lovb  subjectively  applied. 
It  is  no  wonder  to  find  the  apostle  setting  and  resetting  his  key-words  in  so  many 
different  forms,  and  ringing  the  changes,  so  to  speak,  on  "  those  charming  bells  " — life, 
light,  love.  A  deep  and  true  philosophy  underlies  the  whole.  Right  conception  exist- 
ing in  thought  is  truth.  Right  conception  expressed  in  word  is  light.  Right  con- 
ception realized  in  act  is  duty.  Right  conception  embodied  in  a  life  is  love.  There 
are  five  distinct  statements  made  in  this  paragraph  on  the  subjective  side  of  our  theme, 
all  of  them  enforcing  with  terrific  power  the  importance  of  obeying  the  command 
of  love.  1.  "  He  who  loves  his  brother  abides  in  the  light."  Both  <ptKavaf<nla  and 
^iKaSf\<pia  would  be  included  here.  When  both  are  learned  of  Christ  the  pathway  is 
light,  and  he  who  walks  therein  becomes  "  light  in  the  Lord,"  receiving  and  reflecting 

>  See  *  Speaker's  Commentary '  on  "  The  Epistles  of  St.  John,"  Introduction,  |  L  S 
(New  Testament,  vol.  It,  p.  276). 

I.  JOHH.  B 


M  THE  FIBST  EPISTLS  OEKERAL  OF  JOHN,      [oh.  a.  1—29. 

tha  radiance  of  the  central  Siid>  2.  Consequently,  he  sees  where  he  is  going.  "  Thers 
is  BO  occasion  of  stumbling  iu  him"  (of.  John  xi.9, 10).  3.  This  is  an  unvarTiog  law, 
all  piofeuion  to  the  contrary  notwithstanding  (ver.  9).  Let  a  man  talk  as  largely  and 
as  loudly  at  he  may,  if  he  lores  not,  he  is  in  the  dark.  No  lore,  no  light.  He  will 
not  see  the  light  Q-od  has  shed  on  the  destiny  of  the  race.  He  will  be  in  miserable 
darkness  as  regards  his  own.  4.  Such  a  walk  in  the  darkness  will  issue  in  his  losing 
the  power  of  beeing.  "  The  darkness  blinded  his  eyes  "  (cf.  Matt.  tL  22,  23 ;  2  Cor. 
iv.  3,  i).  Fishes  in  underground  rivers  become  blind.  The  moral  and  spiritual  eye- 
sight may  be  trifled  with  till  it  is  destroyed,*  if  a  proper  use  be  not  made  of  the  light 
God  has  sent  to  us  in  Christ.  6.  When  the  power  of  seeing  is  gone,  every  step  must 
be  a  leap  in  the  dark.  "  Knoweth  not  wliither  he  goeth."  What  an  awful  agnosticism  1 
Can  anything  be  more  terrible  than  for  a  human  soul  to  be  compelled  to  plunge 
forward  wildly,  blindly,  without  a  ray  of  light  in  any  direction,  simply  because  he 
would  not  follow  the  light  God  sent  him,  and  tampered  with  his  own  power  of  seeing  7 
Thus  both  objectively  and  subjectively  it  is  true :  The  light  brought  in  by  Christ 
points  to  love,  and  his  love  leads  us  on  to  the  light.  Following  his  light,  we  learn  ta 
love;  imitating  his  love,  we  are  moving  forward  to  the  light.  Here,  then,  is  the  out- 
ward practical  proof  of  our  following  Christ — a  proof  which  even  the  world  can  to 
some  extent  appreciate,  the  proof  without  which  no  profession,  nor  words,  nor  deeds, 
nor  sacraments,  nor  ordinances,  can  avail ;  it  lies  in  this,  and  in  this  only,  in  love. 
The  only  possible  proof  that  we  can  give  that  we  love  Jesus  is  by  loving  those  for 
whom  he  died  and  in  whom  he  lives,  for  his  sake — by  loving  them  as  he  loved  ut.  This 
is  the  old,  old  line  of  duty,  yet  the  one  which  is  ever  new.  This  is  the  true  religion — 
to  love.  This  is  loyalty — to  love.  And  when  we  have  learned  to  love  others  as  Christ 
loved  us,  we  shall  have  within  us  the  proof  that  his  light  is  pervading  our  whole 
nature,  and  the  pledge  of  our  fitness  for  the  inheritance  of  saints  in  light  I 

Vers.  12 — 14. — "Little  ones,"  "young  men,''  and  "Jathem!'  Here  the  thread  of  thonght 
is  broken.  The  apostle,  instead  of  continuing  his  theme,  turns  for  a  little  to  those  to 
whom  be  wrote  and  is  writing ;  he  recognizes  the  difference  between  the  age,  standing, 
and  capacity  of  his  readers,  and  reminds  them  that  in  each  case  his  writing  has  had 
and  still  has  a  specific  reason  and  intent.  Topic — The  Word  of  Ood  penaanenUy 
tuited  alike  for  the  yomig  and  the  old. 

I.   ThEKE      ABE     TO    BB     FOUND    IK    TBB    ChUBOH    WIDK    DTVEBSITIEg    IN    AOE    ABB 

KZPSBIBNOB.  There  are,  at  least  apparently^  three  classes  specified — the  children,  the 
young  men,  and  the  fathers.  The  children  are  specified  by  two  distinctive  terms — 
*•  little  children,"  "  little  ones."  "  Little  children  "  as  sustaining  a  common  relation ; 
*  little  ones  "  as  being  equally  feeble  and  helpless  (cf.  Westcott,  in  he.).  There  is  room, 
however,  for  difierence  in  opinion  as  to  whether  the  apostle — aged  and  mature  as  he  him- 
self was  at  the  time  of  writing — does  not  include  all  under  the  term  "  little  children  "  here, 
as  he  certainly  does  in  the  first  verse  of  this  chapter.  But  it  appears  to  us  to  be  other- 
wise, and  tiuA  the  apostle  afterwards  varies  the  phraseology,  saying  "  little  ones,"  that 
he  might  make  it  clear  that  he,  in  this  particular  case,  means  "  little  ones  "  in  age,  t.e. 
as  concerning  the  Christian  life.  That  there  were  children  in  the  early  Churches  appears 
clearly  indicated  in  the  Epistles  to  the  Ephesians  and  to  the  Colossians.  And  certainly 
in  the  <%urehes  there  have  been,  in  all  periods,  the  little  ones,  who  have  newLy  come 
to  the  faiA ;  the  young  men,  whose  glory  is  in  their  strength ;  the  fathers,  whose  gloiy 
is  dieir  ripeness  in  Christian  experience  and  their  attainments  in  saving  knowledge. 

H.   ThESK  DrVXBSITIES  OF   AGS   ABE   BECOONIZED    BT    THE    APOSTLE.      In  the  faCt  of 

the  apostle  thus  distinctly  setting  each  class  before  him,  and  specifying  each,  we  see  a 
graciously  designed  adaptation  of  the  sacred  writings  alike  to  young  and  old.  And  alio 
in  the  specific  reason  given  in  each  case.  1.  John  writes  to  the  "  little  ones,"  because 
their  "  sins  are  forgiven  "  for  the  sake  of  Christ,  and  because  they  have  "  known  the 
Father."  The  most  glurious  fact,  forgiveness,  and  the  most  blessed  relationship, 
fatherhood, — these,  though  deep  enough  and  high  enough  for  the  researches  of  an 
eternity,  are  yet  simple  enough  for  babes  in  Christ  to  exult  rwturously  therein.  2.  He 
writes  to  the  "  young  men,"  because  they  "  are  strung,"  etc.  The  glory  of  a  yotrng  man 
ts  his  strength.  High  ideals,  ardent  pursuit,  brave  daring, — these  are  the  delight  of  young 
'  Cf.  Drnmmoad's  '  Natural  Law  in  the  Spiritual  World : '  chapter  on  "  Deg^eneratiMi." 


OH.  n.  1—29.]     THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  JOHN.  35 

men.  And  how  abundant  is  the  scope  afforded  In  the  teachings  of  the  Word  for  the 
abandonment  of  all  their  energies  to  the  noblest  objects  1  3.  fie  writes  to  the  "  fathei-H," 
because  they  have  "  known  him  that  is  from  the  beginning ; "  i.e.  in  the  ripeness  of  thuir 
attainment  they  have  learnt  the  glory  of  Christ  as  the  Eternal  Word,  and  have  come  to 
see  how  the  whole  course  of  human  history  is  bound  up  in  him.  Note :  The  fathers 
in  Christ  have  gone  on  learning  of  Christ  ever  since  they  were  little  ones ;  the  "  little 
ones,"  consequently,  should  never  be  pressed  too  hard,  nor  be  expected  to  see  all  that 
they  will  come  to  see  by-and-by.  Loyalty  and  docility  should  be  expected  of  them  ; 
but  not  maturity  of  knowledge  and  of  wisdom.  In  the  Bible  there  is  mUk  for  the  babes, 
as  well  as  strong  meat  for  those  of  full  age. 
in.  This  afostlk  bkfsatkdlt  puts  the  Divdje  truth  dowh  in  wbitino,  that  it 

MAT  BS  A  FEBUAinEHT  DIBEOTOBT  TO  ALL.      Tpdifia  .   .  .   tffO^lt.      "  I  am  writing   ...    I 

wrote."  (For  the  varied  possible  hypotheses  on  these  words,  i.e.  whether  John  refers  to  a 
previous  letter,  etc.,  see  Exposition ;  also  Westcott,  in  he.)  The  point  here  worthy  of 
being  dwelt  upon  is  the  gracious  foresight,  which,  seeing  the  danger  of  the  future  ages  to 
the  faith  of  men,  arranged  that  the  tiuth  should  be  repeatedly  committed  to  writing,  and 
BO  committed  that  in  the  after-years  there  should  be  something  for  all — for  the  little 
ones,  the  young  men,  and  the  fathers — to  which,  in  all  perils,  seductions,  and  bewilder- 
ments, whether  of  doctrine  or  of  practice,  they  may  {)erpetually  appeal,  as  the  standard 
alike  for  truth  and  for  duty  (cf.  Phil.  iii.  1 ;  2  Pet.  iii.  1,  2 ;  ver.  26). 

IV.   ThB  TBUTH  THUS  MIBMANENTLT  BECORDED  IS  BUOH,  AS  WHEN  BIOHTLT  USED,  WILL 

LEAD  ON  TO  TOBTHKB  ADTAN0E8  TK  THE  Chbistlan  LIFE.  1.  Are  there  those  who  are 
but  babes  in  Christ,  and  who  are  just  taking  their  first  feeble  steps  in  Zion's  pathway  ? 
lu  the  glorious  &ct  of  which  they  are  here  reminded  there  is  the  noblest  inspiration  to 
progress.  They  are  addressed  (1)  because  their  sins  are  forgiven ;  and  (2)  because  they 
can  rejoice  in  the  Father's  love  as  theirs.  How  great  the  achievement  expressed  in  the 
first  I  Huw  vast  the  possession  pointed  out  in  the  second!  Enough  for  them  to  rejoice 
in  eren  at  the  outset  of  their  Christian  life  with  a  joy  unspeakable  and  full  of  glory.  A 
treasure  indeed  to  start  with.  They  may  well  "  sing  in  the  ways  of  the  Lor<v'  hold  on 
their  way,  and  pass  from  mcve  to  more.  2.  There  are  the  young  men,  who  glory  in  thei  r 
enei^,  in  whom  ttie  Word  abideth,  and  who  have  in  Divine  might  overcome  the  wicked 
one.  They  are  addressed  In  the  book,  and  a  grand  field  is  opened  up  for  their  energies 
and  a  trial  ground  for  all  their  valour,  as  they  are  bidden  to  fight  the  good  fight  of  faith 
and  are  cautioned  against  the  antichrists  of  every  age.  Here  may  they  leam  how  to  bear 
the  shield  and  to  wield  the  sword ;  to  step  forth  to  war,  having  their  feet  shod  with  the 
preparation  of  the  gospel  of  peace,  sure  to  overcome  in  the  strength  of  the  great  Captain 
of  salvation.  3.  There  are  the  fathers,  too,  who  in  their  maturity  of  fife  and  love  are 
learning  the  glory  of  their  Redeemer  as  the  First  and  the  Last,  as  over  the  craati<m  of  God, 
"  the  same  yesterday,  and  to-day,  and  for  ever."  Here  are  disclosures  <rf  the  Redeemer's 
glory  in  which  they  too  may  luxuriate ;  so  that,  let  them  become  a*  ripe  as  they  may, 
they  will  still  find  the  teachings  of  the  book  far  ahead  of  them.  Yes ;  it  is  even  so.  As 
John  thought  of  all  in  writing  this  Epistle ;  so,  through  the  Spirit,  in  both  Old  and  New 
Testaments  there  will  be  found  simple  teachings  for  the  little  ones,  manlier  words  for 
robust  energy,  riper  truths  for  those  in  the  fulness  of  grace  and  knowledge.  All,  all 
may  go  to  tiie  book.  It  wiU  give  pictures  for  the  child  to  look  at,  a  shidd  and  sword 
which  the  warrior  may  wield,  and  a  pillow  on  which  the  aged  and  worn-out  veteran  may 
peacefully  breathe  his  last. 

Vots.  15—17. — Love  o^  the  world  forbidden.  Connecting  link:  Having  paused  for 
a  moment  in  his  theme  to  survey  lovingly  the  believers  of  various  ages  to  wham  he  is 
writing,  the  apostle  now  resumes  the  theme  of  love  and  life,  biaemitch  as  love  is  no 
merely  benev^ent  sentimentalism  disregarding  moral  distinctionB,  it  must  needs  follow 
that  the  duty  of  loving  in  one  direction  must  involve  the  corresponding  duty  of  not 
laving  in  an  opposite  and  ^en  direction.  In  the  negative  as  well  aa  the  positive 
aspects  of  duty  believers  need  instruction.  Hence  our  theme — The  region  in  ttkich 
Uie  is  prohibited,  and  why. 

L  Hbihs  h  Air  EABKK8T  PBOHIBTHON.  "  Love  not  the  world."  Owing  to  Ae  poverty 
«f  \tagamgt,  it  may  be,  one  word  has  to  serve  several  purposes.  It  is  ••  with  this 
^enn  "  wiaM."   SometfaMi  it  mtma*  the  i^^m  iteeif  (ftk  xovL  10).    Somtrtmii  Ihe  racii 


86  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  JOHN.      [ch  n.  1—29. 

of  people  thereon  (John  iii.  16).  Sometimes  the  onter  form  of  things  (1  Cor.  vli.  31). 
At  otha:  times,  as  here,  it  refers  to  the  world  of  busy  human  concerns,  of  thinking, 
planning,  racing,  hungering,  thirsting,  striving,  and  all  for  its  own  aims  and  purposes, 
irrespectively  of  the  glory  of  God  or  even  of  questions  of  righteousness  and  truth.  Ai 
such  it  is  a  sinful  world,  and  on  it  our  love  must  not  be  set.  There  are,  however,  three 
specific  forms  of  sinfulness,  against  the  love  of  which  we  are  warned.  1.  The  lust  of 
the  flesh.  The  vain  indulgence  and  pampering  of  the  fleshly  nature.  If,  e.g.,  we  eithei 
eat  or  drink  merely  for  pleasure's  sake,  or  indulge  in  excess  in  either  direction,  or  gratify 
the  sensual  appetites  either  in  wrong  directions  or  to  too  great  an  extent,  we  are  neglect- 
ing the  warning  of  the  text.  2.  The  lust  of  the  eyes.  The  fondness  for  glitter,  glare, 
and  show.  The  inordinate  love  of  sight-seeing,  etc.  3.  The  pride  of  life.  Its  vain-glory 
and  love  of  ostentatious  display.  This  will  have  no  place  in  a  consistent  Christian's  liie. 
The  spirit  of  the  words,  "My  river  is  my  own,  and  I  made  it  for  myself,"  is  by  no 
means  extinct.  Query :  How  far  has  the  civilizing  and  humanizing  effect  of  Christianity 
changed  the  "  world ''  ?  Is  the  evil  in  it,  and  the  consequent  peril  therefrom,  as  gnat 
as  in  the  Apostle  John's  time?  In  other  words,  Is  the  prohibition  of  the  text  as 
needful  now  as  it  was  then  ?  In  reply,  note :  (1)  Beyond  aU  question  there  is  a 
vast  improvement  in  many  respects,  notably  (a)  in  the  fact  that  sins  to  which  no 
disgrace  attached  in  the  days  of  the  old  Roman  empire  are  now  all  but  unknown,  ur 
at  least  bave  to  hide  themselves  from  view;  (6)  in  the  fact  that  there  is  a  very  large 
amount  of  commerce,  etc.,  in  which  there  is  "  upon  the  bridles  of  the  horses.  Holiness 
to  the  Lord."  For  this  we  may  be  devoutly  thankful.  In  many  directions,  too,  art, 
music,  painting,  sculpture,  are  consecrated  to  the  Lord.  (2)  Notwithstanding  a!l 
allowance  to  be  made  for  these  advances,  there  is  still  a  sinful  element  of  self-seeking, 
selfishness,  pride,  haughtiness,  and  boasting  in  the  world,  which  is  strenuously  to  be 
shunned.  The  lusts  of  the  flesh  are  not  dead  yet.  The  pride  of  life  lingers — ^nay,  it 
flourishes  yet.  The  "  interests  "  of  commerce  are  regarded  as  paramount.  (3)  There 
are  forms  of  ill  in  the  world  which  have  actually  developed  under  modern  civilization, 
and  against  which  it  behoves  a  Christian  steadily  and  steadfastly  to  protest.  Selfishness 
of  the  lords  of  the  soil,  etc.  In  all  that  partakes  of  the  world-spirit,  i.e.  self  first,  a 
believer  is  to  have  no  concern,  no  sympathy  whatever.  (4)  Nor  can  it  be  questioned 
that  since  the  apostle's  time  there  have  arisen,  and  in  our  day  there  still  exists,  forms 
ol  the  world-spirit  even  in  the  Churches  of  Christ.  Sectarian  strifes,  heart-burnings, 
huge  hierarchies,  dead  forms,  high  ofBces,  gorgeous  vestments,  large  ambitions,  exclusive 
claims,  etc.  All  these,  though  clad  in  religious  guise,  are  as  much  a  part  of  the  lust 
and  pride  of  the  worldliness  as  aught  outside ;  and,  because  found  in  the  Church,  must 
be  more  offensive  to  God,  because  of  the  pretence  of  sanctity  which  attaches  to  them. 
From  all  this  our  hearts  must  recoil.  It  is  "the  world,"  though  baptized  with  the 
Church's  sacred  name.  It  is  altogether  inconsistent  with  the  simplicity  that  is  ia 
Christ.    It  cannot  be  reconciled  with  the  Lord's  teaching  in  Matt.  xx.  25 — 28. 

U.  Hebe  abb  many  eeasons  suggested  against  this  pkohibitbd  lovb.  Mainly  five. 
1.  These  thiugs  in  the  world  which  we  are  forbidden  to  love  are  themselves  essentially 
and  radically  wrong.  They  are  "  not  of  the  Father,  but  of  the  world,"  i.e.  the  world 
indulges  its  own  lusts,  pursues  its  own  aims,  seeks  its  own  pleasures,  without  care  for 
or  thought  of  a  higher  will.  The  world  is  a  self-seeker  and  self-pleaser,  and  will  not 
be  burdened  with  the  larger  and  higher  questions  of  God,  righteousness,  and  truth.  2. 
The  love  of  the  world  is  incompatible  with  the  love  of  tine  Father,  i.e.  with  our  loving 
him.  We  can  love  either  God  or  the  world.  But  no  human  heart  can  hold  the  two 
opposing  at  the  same  time.  That  is  as  absolutely  certain  as  the  doctrine  of  the  impene- 
trability of  matter.  No  man  can  serve  God  and  mammon.  The  attempt  has  been  maiie 
to  form  a  God-and-mammon  guild.  But  all  such  attempts  must  be  miserable  failures. 
3.  Besides, "  perishableness  "  is  inscribed  on  the  world  and  all  that  is  therein.  "  The  world 
passeth  away."  And  how  sorely  incongruous  is  it  for  an  imperishable  spirit  to  ally 
itself  with  a  merely  perishing  framework  1  *  No  form  of  national  life  continueth  alway. 
Families  break  up  and  pass  away.  Friends  die.  Nothing  earthly  is  permanent.  4. 
And  more  than  this,  even  if  objectively  the  "  world  "  continued  pretty  much  the  same, 
yet  "  the  lust  thereof"  passes  away ;  earth  loses  its  power  to  charm ;  and  the  passions, 

'  For  «  striking  illustration  of  the  historic  bearings  of  this  statement,  see  *  Ohristiaa 
Ohaiity  in  the  Ancient  Church,'  by  Dr.  Vhlhom,  bk.  iii.  oh.  i.  p.  219, 


OH.  n.  1—29.]      THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  JOHN.  87 

if  they  have  been  lustfully  indulged,  retain  their  craving,  hut  lose  the  power  of  enjoy- 
ment. But  a  more  pleasing  reason  yet  remains  to  be  specified.  5.  There  is  a  far  better 
pursuit  open  to  us,  which  will  opea  up  nobler  prospects.  "  He  that  doeth  the  will  of 
God  abideth  for  ever."  Here  the  opposite  course  is  pointed  out — "  doing  the  will  of 
God."  Losing  our  wills  in  his,  "  This  is  the  way  the  Master  went,"  finding  his  meat 
in  the  fulfilment  of  the  Father's  will.  We  know  that  that  will  is  perfect  wisdom  and 
perfect  love.  And  if  we  ever  ask,  "  Lord,  what  wilt  thou  have  me  to  do?  "  our  duty 
will  he  revealved  to  us  (1)  in  the  Word,  (2)  by  the  openings  of  Providence,  and  (3)  the 
teachings  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  He  that  lives  for  this  end  "  abideth  for  ever ; "  i.e.  the 
aims  of  his  being  can  never  be  interrupted.  If  he  lives,  he  lives  to  the  Lord ;  if  he  dies, 
he  dies  to  the  Lord.  If  he  toils,  he  does  God's  will.  If  he  suffers,  he  hears  it.  If  he  be  on 
earth,  he  fulfils  his  Father's  will  in  this  life ;  if  he  departs  hence,  he  fulfils  it  ia  another. 
The  supreme  object  of  his  existence  is  sure  to  he  realized  under  any  circumstances, 
through  all  outward  changes,  in  all  possible  places,  and  in  any  state  of  being,  and 
throughout  the  ages  of  eternity.  He  who  is  thus  living  can  use  the  sublime  boast  of 
Paul,  and  say,  "  In  nothing  I  shall  be  ashamed  .  .  .  Christ  shall  be  magnified  in  my 
body,  whether  by  life  or  by  death.  .  .  .  For  to  me  to  live  is  Christ,  and  to  have  died  is 
gain."  A  beloved  and  honoured  pastor,  the  Rev.  Thomas  Craig,  of  Booking,  in  Essex, 
after  a  pastorate  of  sixty-two  years,  during  which  he  had  often  expressed  the  wish  to 
die  "  in  harness,"  was  called  to  his  rest  after  a  very  brief  illness.  After  his  death,  a 
sermon  he  had  begun  to  prepare  for  the  pulpit  was  found  half-finished  upon  his  desk. 
It  was  from  the  text,  "  The  world  passeth  away,  and  the  lust  thereof :  but  he  that  doeth 
the  wiU  of  God  abideth  for  ever." 

Ver.  18. — A  last  howr ;  or,  the  Divine  enclosure  of  revealed  time.  Connecting  link : 
"  The  world  is  passing  away,"  wrote  the  apostle  (ver.  17),  and  now  he  proceeds  to 
repeat  and  reimpress  this  fact  upon  his  readers  in  two  additional  statements :  (1)  that 
a  great  crisis  had  already  begun ;  and  (2)  that  the  mark  of  that  being  so  was  the 
appearance  of  antichrist, — by  this,  he  says,  we  know  that  it  is  a  last  hour.  (The 
phrase  is  anarthrous.)  Here  are  two  homiletic  studies  of  the  profoundest  interest. 
One  on  the  time-arrangements  of  the  Divine  dispensations ;  the  other  on  antichrist. 
The  first  only  do  we  now  note ;  our  topic — The  Divine  enclosure  of  revealed  time. 

I.  The  great  Supbbme,  who  is  from  eveblabtino  to  eveelastino,  has  gra- 
ciously DIVIDED  TIME  INTO  PERIODS  FOE  US.  No  finite  minds  can  comprehend  a 
whole  eternity.  They  will  make  their  own  horizon,  even  if  one  he  not  disclosed.  The 
eye  requires  a  point  of  repose  whichever  way  it  turns.  We  are  not,  however,  left  to 
make  our  own.  God  has  furnished  us  with  one  in  each  direction,  before  and  behind. 
We  have  such  phrases  as,  "  in  the  beginning "  (Gen.  i.  1 ;  John  i.  1) ;  "  then  the 
end  "  (1  Cor.  xv.  24).  In  neither  case  can  the  phrase  mean  an  absolute  beginning  or 
an  absolute  end.  For  with  God  is  neither  beginning  nor  end.  Beginning  and  end  can 
be  such  only  so  far  as  Ood  reveals  time  to  us.  These  are  the  two  enclosures  within 
which  revelatinn  moves.  There  are  varied  expressions  in  the  Scriptures,  moreover,  to 
indicate  several  epochs  which  lie  between  the  two  extremes ;  and  it  would  be  a  great 
gain  to  Bible  students  if,  instead  of  wasting  time  and  energy  in  attempting  to  fix  dates 
for  this  event  or 'that,  they  would  take  a  larger  view,  comprehending  all  the  time- 
expressions  in  the  sacred  volume,  and  endeavour  to  seize  hold  of  and  to  apply  the 
principles  of  the  Divine  government  and  the  outlines  of  Divine  plan  thereby  disclosed. 
Let  the  following  references  be  carefully  compared :  "  The  last  days,"  or  "  the  latter 
days,"  as  spoken  of  under  the  old  dispensation  (Gen.  xlix.  1 ;  Numb.  xxiv.  14 ;  Deut. 
iv.  30;  Isa.  ii.  2;  Jer.  xxiii.  20;  xxx.  24;  xlviii.  47;  xlix.  39;  Ezek.  xxxviii.  16; 
Hos.  iii.  5 ;  Joel  ii.  28 ;  iii.  1 ;  Micah  iv.  1).  In  the  New  Testament  we  have  the 
phrases,  "mine  hour  "(John  ii.  4);  "his  hour"  (John  xiii.  1;  viii.  20;  vii.  30);  "the 
hour  "  (John  xvii.  1 ;  xii.  23 ;  iv.  21,  23 ;  v.  28, 35 ;  xvi.  4,  25, 32) ;  « this  hour  "  (John 
xii.  27) ;  "  your  hoiu  "  (Luke  xxii.  53) ;  "  times  or  seasons  "  (Acts  i.  7) ;  "  forty-two 
months"  (Rev.  xi.  2);  "three  days  and  a  half"  (Rev.  xi.  11);  "time,  and  times,  and 
half  a  time"  (Rev.  xii.  14;  cf.  Dan.  vii.  25;  xiL  7,  11,  12);  "these  last  times"  (1 
Pet.  i.  20) ;  "  these  last  days  "  (Heb.  i.  2) ;  "  the  last  days  "  (Acts  ii.  17 ;  2  Tim.  iii. 
1 ;  2  Pet.  iii.  3 ;  Jude  18 ;  Jas.  v.  3)  ;  "  the  last  day  "  (John  vi.  39,  44,  54 ;  xii.  48) ; 
« the  day  of  Christ "  (Phil.  i.  10)  j  « the  day  of  the  Lord  "  (1  Thess.  y.  2 ;  Acts  ii.  20)  j 


88  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  JOHN.      [oh.  n.  1—29 

«th»t  day"  (Matt.  xxiv.  36;  viL  22;  2  Tim.  L  12, 18);  "the  last  time"  (1  Pet.  i. 
6);  "the  end"  (Matt.  xxiv.  14;  xiii.  39;  xiviii.  20;  ICor.  xv.  24);  "the  fulness 
of  times  "  (Gal.  iv.  4 ;  Eph.  i.  10) ;  "  the  age  to  come  "  (Heb.  ii.  5 ;  Eph,  L  21) ;  "  the 
ages"  (Heb.  i.  2;  xi.3);  "ages  of  ages"  (Rev.  xiv.  11);  "all  the  ages"  (Ps.  cxlv. 
18  [LXX.];  Jiide  25  [Greek]);  "all  the  generations  of  the  age  of  the  ages"  (Eph.  iii. 
21).  The  conception,  developed  with  gieat  care  by  Mr.  Grattan  Guinness,*  that  the 
clockwork  of  the  heavens  and  that  of  prophecy  are  similarly  set  as  to  time,  is  one  of 
exceeding  attractiveness  and  grandeur,  though  our  knowledge  requires  to  be  enor- 
mously wider  ere  we  have  the  materials  for  its  verification.  At  the  same  time,  the 
broad  fact  remains  that  he  whose  being  is  "  one  eternal  Nov?  "  has,  both  in  his  works  and 
In  his  Wurd,  enclosed  duration  for  us  in  a  series  of  periods  smaller  or  larger,  in  order 
that  our  limited  apprehensions  may  have  some  point  from  whence  to  start,  and  some 
goal  towards  which  to  lookl 

n.  God  has  his  own  specific  period  fob  each  step  to  bb  taken  in  the 
DEVELOPMENT  OF  HUMAN  AFFAIB8.  So  far  as  it  is  Deeded  that  we  should  know  what 
that  Step  may  be  at  any  age,  prophecy  unfolds  the  plans  of  God.  We  know,  e.g.,  that 
this  period  is  "the  day  of  salvation  "  foretold  by  the  prophets ;  that  it  was  ushered  in 
by  the  first  coming,  and  will  be  closed  by  the  second  coming  of  the  Son  of  God,  for 
which  we  are  bidden  to  wait  and  watch. 

m.  Each  succeedino  period  is  marked  by  features  peouliarlt  its  own.  "  By 
this  we  know  that  it  is  a  last  hour."  The  Adamic,  patriarchal.  Mosaic,  and  prophetic 
periods  were  all  distinctly  marked.  So  was  the  transition  period  of  the  Baptist,  and 
that  of  the  Messiah's  life,  death,  and  resurrection;  so  also  is  this,  the  dispensation  of 
the  Spirit.  A  critical  change  takes  place  in  each  one,  marking  an  advance  on  the 
times  gone  by,  and  serving  as  an  introduction  to  those  which  are  to  come. 

IV.  Hence  each  epoch  mat  be  described  as  "  a  labt  hour,"  inasmuch  as  it 
brings  to  a  close  some  form  of  good  (or  of  evil)  which  marked  that  which  preceded. 
John  the  Baptist  marked  "the  last  hour"  of  prophecy.  The  Lord  Jesus,  "the  lust 
hour  "  of  types  and  shadows ;  the  Holy  Ghost,  "  the  last  hour  "  of  human  probation. 
And  our  Lord  Jesus  reminds  us  that  earthquakes,  pestilences,  etc.,  will  mark  the  last 
hour  ere  he  comes  again,  but  that  these  will  be  but  the  beginnings  of  the  "  birth-pangs  " 
that  will  usher  in  a  new  and  glorious  life.  The  Apostle  John  sees  in  the  rise  of  anti- 
christ a  mark  of  "  the  last  hour."  Even  so.  It  is  the  period  in  which  Christ  goes 
forth  to  judgment  and  to  victory,  when  his  foes  are  to  be  made  manifest  to  their  own 
destruction  and  to  his  glory ! 

V.  Still,  the  Word  of  God  bids  us  fix  oub  eye  on  the  olobb  or  this  epoch, 
referred  to  as  "  the  day,"  "  that  day,"  "  the  great  day,"  etc.  We  are  looking  for  the 
reappearing  of  the  Son  of  God,  when  all  antichrists  shall  be  trampled  underfoot, 
and  when  he  shall  bring  in  the  "  new  heavens  and  the  new  earth,  wherein  dwelleth 
righteousness." 

VI.  Even  "  the  last  day,"  "  the  end  "  foe  which  we  loos,  will  not  be  ah 
absolute  end.  It  will  he  a  consummation ;  and  with  our  God  it  may  be  as  it  were 
a  new  beginning.  His  ways  are  ever  unfolding  from  glory  to  glory.  Then  let  it  be 
ours  to  recognize  this  method  of  Divine  disclosure,  and  learn  herefrom  :  1.  The  limits 
of  Divine  revelation.  It  is  enclosed  between  a  "  beginning"  and  an  "  end."  Of  what 
was  before  the  one,  of  what  will  be  after  the  other,  we  know  nothing  and  can  think 
nothing.  2.  To  use  the  revealed  period,  that  of  probation,  go  that,  let  the  "  end  "  be 
what  it  may  and  come  how  it  may,  we  are  "  ready."  3.  To  look  forward  without  fear, 
if  we  are  in  Christ.  4.  To  learn  "  the  terrors  of  the  Lord,"  his  manifestations  of  him- 
self, which  make  the  righteous  glad,  will  put  rebellion  and  the  rebel  to  increasing 
shame. 

Ver.  18. — "  Many  anUekristt."  Connecting  link  s  In  the  preceding  homily  we  had 
occasion  to  remark  that  the  expression,  "a  last  hour,"  indicated  that  a  great  crisis  had 
idready  begun,  and  that  the  apostle  declared  that  the  mark  of  such  a  crisis  was  to  be  seen 
in  the  rise  of  "  many  antichrists."  We  then,  with  the  thought  of  a  last  hour  as  the  basis, 
endeavoured  to  indicate  the  time-enclosures  of  Divine  revelation.  Now  we  have  to 
npand,  ■■  fiu*  as  our  space  permits,  the  apostolic  teachings  which  gather  round  tlm 
*  Bee  'The  Approaching  End  of  the  Age,'  2nd  edit,  pt.  it. 


OH.n.  1— 29.]      THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  JOHN.  89 

expressions,  "antichrist,"  "many  antichrists."  Topic — Antichrists  a  manifold  ierit* 
of  negations. 

I.  Since  the  BEonmiNo  op  the  Christian  aob,  the  supreme  test  of  truth  and 

FALSEHOOD  IN  UELIGION  IS  THEIR  REIiATION  TO  THE   LoRD  JeSUS   ChEIST.     Of.  Matt.  xii. 

30,  *here  our  Lord  shows  that  there  is  no  neutrality  in  reference  to  himself.  Either 
for  or  against.  And  we  know  the  apostle  hiaiself  received  a  sliarp  rehuke  and  a  touching 
lesson  when  forbidding  one,  who  was  casting  out  devils,  because  he  did  not  follow  with 
them.  Our  Lord  then  took  occasion  to  give  the  converse  of  the  former  expression,  saying, 
"  He  that  is  not  against  us  is  on  our  part."  So  that  it  is  no  wonder,  after  such  a  lesson 
(which  he  could  not  forget),  that  the  one  test  of  truth  should  be  with  John — How  does 
it  stand  with  reference  to  the  Master  ?  Does  it  enthrone  or  dethrone  him  1  If  the 
former,  a  wide  divergence  on  minor  topics  would  be  allowed.  If  the  latter,  however 
specious  its  pretence,  he  would  brand  it  as  antichrist.  This  word  (in  the  New  Testa- 
ment) is  peculiar  to  John.  It  is  found  in  vers.  18,  22 ;  oh.  iv.  3 ;  2  John  7.  It  is 
not  at  all  improbable  that  he  coined  the  word,  although  (so  Westcott)  the  absence  of 
the  article  in  this  verse  Indicates  that  it  had  become  current  as  a  technical  name. 

II.  Believers  had  deen  prepared  to  expect  the  rise  of  antichristian  heresy, 
fCf.  Matt.  xxiv.  5,  24 ;  Mark  xiii.  6  ;  Acts  xx.  29,  30 ;  2  Thess.  ii.  3 ;  1  Tim.  iv.  1.) 
And  no  one  can  read  the  Kpistles  to  the  Corinthians,  Colossians,  and  to  the  seven 
Churches  without  seeing  how  very  early,  even  during  the  lifetime  of  the  apostles, 
sundry  antichristian  heresies  threatened  to  make  havoc  of  the  Church.  It  would  be 
inaccurate  to  fix  the  term  "  antichrist "  solely  on  one  individual  or  one  system,  even  if 
our  knowledge  of  this  or  that  one  were  complete  enough  to  enable  us  to  identify  it  or 
him  as  one  foim  of  antichrist.  For  in  the  prophetic  passages  referred  to  such  forms  are 
pointed  out  as  manifold.  And  the  apostle  declares  that  manifold  are  the  forms  already 
seen ;  for,  says  he,  "  even  now  are  there  many  antichrists."  So  that  we  are  forbidden 
by  the  terms  of  the  passage  to  fasten  on  any  one  form  of  heresy  to  the  exclusion  of 
others. 

III.  Tnouiifi  prophecy  and  fact  show  many  antichrists,  there  is  one  feature 
MARKiNQ  them  ALL,  viz.  NEGATION.  (Ver.  22.)  "  He  is  antichrist  that  denieth  the  Father 
and  the  Son."  Thus  the  apostle  himself,  if  he  seems  to  plunga  us  into  uncertainty  as 
to  who  is  antichrist,  when  he  declares  that  there  are  many,  speedily  relieves  us  of  the 
uncertainty,  by  giving  us  one  mark  by  which  antichrist  may  be  distinguished  any- 
where and  in  all  ages,  whatever  the  name  he  assumes,  whatever  the  garb  he  wears. 
So  far,  of  course,  as  the  word  goes,  if  (1)  any  one  else  professed  to  be  the  Christ ;  (2)  if 
any  one,  under  the  guise  of  a  prophet,  opposed  Christ ;  (3)  if  any  one,  under  pretence  of 
honouring  his  Person,  denied  his  redeeming  work ;  or  (4)  if  any  one  set  himself  openly 
and  entirely  against  Christ ; — in  either  case  the  word  "  antichrist "  would  apply.  Whether 
a  man  or  a  system  opposes  Christ's  Person,  mission,  revelation,  redemption,  or  com- 
mandments, he  or  it  would  be  a  deceiver  and  an  antichrist.  But  the  apostle  lays  most 
stress,  yea,  the  entire  stress,  on  the  thought  of  a  denial.  "  Every  spirit  that  confesseth 
iwt  that  Jesus  Christ  is  come  in  the  flesh  .  .  .  this  is  the  [mark]  of  the  antichrist." 
What  may  be  its  claims  for  itself  does  not  enter  seriously  into  the  apostle's  mind 
thereon ;  if  it  will  not  yield  Christ  his  ntaims,  it  is  antichrist.  For  in  denying  the  Son, 
it  denies  all  the  faith.  If  any  one  denies  the  Son,  he  denies  the  Incarnation.  Denying 
the  Incarnation,  he  denies  revelation  of  God,  and  a  Mediator  between  God  and  man. 
He  denies,  consequently,  any  link  between  man  and  God.  Christ  united  man  to  God. 
Antiohiist  would  disown  or  break  the  tie,  so  that  man  is  cut  off  from  God,  thus  bringing 
out  the  terrible  result,  "  He  that  denieth  the  Son,  the  same  hath  not  the  Father." 
Thus  everything  distinctive  of  the  Christian  faith  goes  in  a  moment,  when  once  the 
incarnation  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  denied  (see  Westcott,  in  loc.').  This — this  is 
antichrist !     He  would  take  away  the  ladder  between  earth  and  heaven  I 

IV.  The  developments  of  history  show  us  this  antichristian  bpibit  m  great 
diversity  of  form.  Obviously,  all  we  have  space  for  is  to  name  some  of  the  more 
prominent  of  these  forms  of  error.  1.  The  heresies  of  the  apostolic  age^  These  are 
indicated  in  the  apostolic  Epistles  and  in  the  Apocalypse.  Notably,  there  was  Gnosticism. 
2.  Sacerdotaiwn.  In  the  multiplication  of  priests  and  mediators  the  all-sufficiency  of 
^  one  Priest  and  Mediator  is  deiiied.    In  the  Church  of  Rome  this  evil  has  reached 

■  gee  Dr.  Burton's  Bampton  Lecture  on  ibis  theuM, 


40  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  JOHN.      [oh.  n.  1—29 

an  a^>alling  height.  We  would  not  intimate  that  the  Church  of  Rome  is  one  form  of 
antichrist ;  but  so  far  as  this  one  point  is  concerned,  or  any  point  of  her  teaching,  which 
obscures  the  glory  of  the  Redeemer,  she  is  to  far  antichristian,  3.  Papal  infaUibility, 
When  the  pope  applies  to  himself  the  words,  "  No  man  cometh  to  the  Father  but  by 
me,"  he  is  so  far,  certainly,  antichrist.  4.  Socinianism.  The  denial  of  the  eternal 
Sonship,  and  consequently,  yea,  necessarily,  of  the  Incarnation,  is  another  antichrist. 
6.  Deism.  Denying  revelation  is  another.  6.  Anti-iupematuraUsm  is  another,  7. 
Positivism}  in  its  denial  of  all  but  the  phenomenal,  and  its  worship  of  humanity,  is 
another.  8.  Agnosticism,  in  denying  that  God  is  knowable,  or  that  he  has  ever  made 
himself  known,  is  another,  and  the  most  modern,  most  attractive,  and  most  perilous 
form  of  antichrist  existing  at  the  present  day.  The  growing  culture  of  the  day  has 
broken  off  much  of  the  roughness  of  religious  controversy  on  all  sides ;  but  this  system, 
whicl,  under  the  guise  of  ignorance,  declines  all  inquiry  into  religion,  as  lying  beyond 
all  possible  knowledge,  is  about  the  most  subtle  fallacy  by  which  men  could  be  misled. 
V.  The  apostle's  disclosure  op  the  eeal  antichristian  principle  is  most 
VALUABLE  AND  INSTRUCTIVE  TO  EVERY  AOB.  It  may  be  made  special  use  of.  by  at 
least  six  classes  of  persons.  1.  By  the  theologian.  Here  is  indicated :  (I)  The  centre- 
point  of  his  theology,  the  central  sun  which  lights  up  the  whole  of  it.  (2)  The  testing- 
point,  or  touchstone  to  be  applied  to  every  system  of  thought— Where  does  it  place  the 
Christ?  (3)  The  true  tolerance  which  is  demanded.  (4)  Also  where  he  must  be 
intolerant,  viz.  wherever  the  Christ  is  robbed  of  his  glory.  2.  By  the  preacher.  In  his 
preaching,  the  Son  of  God  must  be  all  in  all ;  he  must  be  preached  as  "  wisdom  from 
God  unto  us ;  even  righteousness  and  sanctification  and  redemption."  And  his  he.irers 
must  be  taught  to  be  very  impatient  of  any  form  of  thought  which  relegates  the  Christ 
to  an  inferior  place.  3.  By  the  Christian.  A  young  man  once  said  to  the  writer,  "  I 
wanted  to  be  right ;  I  wanted  to  be  religious ;  but  my  religion  wanted  a  centre-point ; 
and  now  I  have  it  in  Christ."  Just  so.  In  Christ,  the  incarnate  Son  of  God,  is  the 
immovable  centre  of  all  we  believe  and  know.  All  Christian  doctrine  is  what  it  is 
because  Christ  is  what  he  is.  When  he  is  denied  or  dislodged,  the  whole  Christian 
scheme  falls  to  pieces.  4.  By  the  inquirer.  In  the  search  after  Christian  truth,  let 
him  study  the  testimony  concerning  Jesus,  his  Person,  and  his  work.  And  if  at  first 
he  cannot  see  all  in  Christ  that  the  matured  Christian  sees  in  him,  let  him  "  follow 
on,"  ready  to  receive  the  kingdom  of  God  as  a  little  child,  and  he  will  certainly  come 
at  the  truth  concerning  his  Saviour's  glory.  6.  By  the  student  of  compa/rative  religion. 
Such  a  one  sees  here  the  main  point  of  the  Christian  religion;  and  it  is, one  with  which 
there  is  nought  in  the  world  to  compare.  6.  By  the  student  of  prophecy.  Since  the 
Person  of  Christ  as  the  incarnate  Son  of  God  is  the  supreme  feature  in  Christianity,  let 
him  not  wonder  that  in  the  Christian  age,  while  the  believer  finds  his  chief  glory  in 
Christ,  the  unbeliever  finds  in  him  a  stone  of  stumbling  and  a  rock  of  off'ence.  "  Tou 
may  say  anything  you  like  in  praise  of  Christ,"  said  a  noted  sceptic  to  the  writer, 
"  if  you  will  hut  put  him  on  the  merely  human  platform  I "  Ah  1  it  is  here,  it  is  here 
the  great  conflict  will  centre,  and  prophecy  leads  us  to  expect  that  it  will  grow  fiercer 
and  wilder  till  the  end  shall  come.  We  know  the  issue:  "Ee  must  reign  tiU  he  hath 
put  all  enemies  under  his  feet." 

Ver.  19. — Deserters,  self-revealers.  Connecting  link :  "  Even  now  are  there  many 
antichrists"  are  the  words  we  have  just  studied.  Do  not  these  words  raise  the 
question — But  whence  come  these  antichrists  ?  The  reply,  as  indicated  by  this  verse, 
is  painful  enough.  They  went  out  from  the  bosom  of  the  Church  itself.  They  first 
espoused  the  cause  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  then  from  some  cause  or  other  took  offence, 
went  out,  and  since  have  fought  against  the  very  Saviour  for  whom  they  had  vowed, 
with  us,  that  they  would  live  and  diel  Topic — An  early  defection  from  the  Church, 
and  how  it  is  accounted  for.  Let  us  arrange  our  expansion  of  the  teachings  of  this 
Terse  under  two  heads. 

I.  Here  is  a  painful  historic  fact,  with  an  apostlb's  comment  thereon. 
1.  There  had  been  a  defection  from  the  ranks  of  the  faithful.  They  went  out  from 
US."  How  many  questions  we  would  like  to  ask  the  Apostle  John  about  this  1  But 
details  are  not  given  u.s,  nor  are  they  accessible.     We  can  gather  little  more  than  we 

*  Be*  addieMes  of  Mi.  F.  Harrison,  in  the  weekly  edition  of  the  Timet,  Jaajiaij  S,  1884, 


n.l— 29.]      THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  JOHN.  41 

Te  hinted  at  already,  that  some — ^many — of  those  who  now  ranked  with  the  anti- 
istian  party  had  once  sought  admission  to  and  found  a  home  within  the  visible 
uroh  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  What  was  the  pressure  put  upon  them  from  without 
e  cannot  tell ;  but  outside  pressure  alone,  however  great,  would  not  account  for  their 
apostasy.  2.  The  apostle  at  once  reaches  a  definite  conclusion — that,  though  these 
deserters  had  once  had  a  name  and  a  place  on  the  Christian  roll,  yet  they  had  never 
known  that  living  fellowship  with  the  Father  and  with  his  Son  Jesus  Christ  wliich 
•lone  is  the  actual  raison  d'etre  for  Churches  at  all.  3.  This  conclusion  is  something 
more  than  a  decision  of  the  judgment ;  it  is  a  manifested  fact.  "That  it  might  be 
made  manifest  that  they  all  were  not  of  us."  1  "All."  Without  exception.  They  could 
not  have  drifted  off  from  the  ranks  of  Clirist's  followers  and  joined  an  antichristian 
heretical  party  If  they  had  been  really  in  Christ.  4.  Their  defection  was  a  Divine 
provision  for  the  exposure  of  the  hollowness  of  their  profession.  'A\\'  Xva  (pavepoBSffiv — 
"  in  order  that,"  etc. ;  either  they  went  out  with  that  purpose,  or  God  had  that  end 
in  view.  We  cannot  suppose  the  former.  We  are  shut  up  to  the  latter.  If  there  are 
hypocrites  in  the  Church,  God  will  not  allow  his  Church  to  be  wrecked  by  them,  but 
wiU  cause  them  somehow  or  other  to  be  exposed  to  view.  A  gardener  was  once  aslied, 
"  Why  do  so  many  pears  fall  oif  that  tree  ?  "  "  Oh  I  sir,"  was  his  reply,  "  it  is  only 
those  that  are  rotten  inside  that  fall  off."  Some  there  are  who  "receive  the  Word  with 
joy,"  and  "  for  a  while  believe ;"  but  they  have  "  no  root  in  themselves,  and  in  time  of 
temptation  fall  away." 

II.  Both  fact  and  comment  teach  lessons  or  pbemanent  value.  1.  External 
Church-membership  ami  vital  fellowship  with  Christ  and  his  people  are  hy  no  means 
the  same  4n  substance  or  vmiform  in  extent.  The  one  is  a  form ;  the  other  is  the 
reality  of  which  the  form  is  supposed  to  be  the  expression.  If  there  is  the  reality, 
the  form  should  follow.  But  it  is  quite  possible  for  the  form  to  be  adopted  without 
any  such  reality  behind  it.  Judas.  Demas.  Achan.  2.  There  may  be  vfmch  to 
attract  adherents  to  a  visible  Church.  The  first  outgushing  of  brotherly  love  and  com- 
munity of  goods  attracted  Ananias  and  Sapphira.  Success.  "  Nothing  succeeds  like 
success."  When  "religion  walks  in  silver  slippers"  many  will  be  ready  to  follow. 
Wealth.  Power.  Patronage.  Splendour.  Ornate  sei-vices.  All  such  features  in  the 
external  framework  and  environment  of  Churches  will  attract  numbers  of  adherents. 
And  if  such  a  phase  of  social  life  should  show  itself,  as  for  it  to  bo  "  the  thing  "  to 
make  a  profession  of  religion,  thousands  will  do  it  for  the  sake  of  going  with  the  stream. 
3.  Being  in  the  external  Church  will  not  minister  life,  any  more  than  it  will  prove  its 
existence.  If  belonging  to  God's  own  Church  is  a  sure  means  of  salvation,  these  deserters 
would  have  been  saved  by  union  with  it,  specially  when  under  the  oversight  of  the 
Apostle  John  !  But  no !  No  Church  on  earth  can  minister  spiritual  life  to  any  soul, 
by  any  ordinances  whatever.  What  a  scathing  rebuke  to  "  sacramental  efficacy,"  or 
any  such  doctrine,  is  the  fact  indicated  in  our  text  1  Note :  John  had  once  had  to 
learn  that  a  man  might  be  with  Christ,  though  he  did  not  follow  with  the  apostles. 
He  has  now  had  to  learn  that  a  man  may  follow  with  apostles,  and  yet  not  be  with 
Christ,  i.  All  such  merely  external  adherents  are  but  dead  weights  in  a  Church.  They 
do  not  and  cannot  increase  its  living  acting  force ;  they  are  rather  a  drag  on  the  body 
to  which  they  are  outwardly  attached.  When  a  living  Church  is  encumbered  with 
them  it  is  like  a  living  body  tied  to  so  many  dead  ones.  6.  It  is  even  possible  that 
many  forms  of  antichristian  evil  may  exist  in  such.  "  Many  antichrists  .  .  they 
went  out  from  us."  A  living  faith  in  a  living  Lord  ensures  unity  in  all  essential 
points.  But  if  men  are  only  dead  professors,  numberless  forms  of  error  may  take  root 
in  them  and  bear  poisonous  fruit.  If,  e.g.,  it  has  been  fashionable  to  belong  to  this  or 
that  Church,  to  repsat  a  form  of  sound  words,  and  to  accept  such  and  such  a  creed 
merely  because  it  is  the  law  of  the  land,  there  is  scarcely  any  form  of  pestiferous  error 
which  may  not  nestle  beneath  such  hollowness  as  that.  Nor  can  any  order  of  Church 
life,  however  free  in  action,  pure  in  creed,  scriptural  in  government,  or  becoming  in  its 
forms  of  Bervioe,  be  proof  against  the  intrusion  of  dead  professors.  6.  Consequently, 
any  external  Church  may  require  weeding  to  a  very  considerable  extent.  In  such  cases 
'  When  the  ttoj  is  separated  by  the  verb  from  the  ah,  the  negation,  according  to  the 
usage  of  the  New  Testament,  is  always  universal  (all  .  .  .  not),  and  not  partial  (not  ai2) 
(Weatoott, «» lot}, 


42  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  JOHN.      [oh.  n  1— 2ft 

u  t&flM  we  have  before  «s,  this  weeding  process  will  often  have  to  precede  all  others. 
The  grouad  must  be  cleared  of  its  cumberers,  that  the  plants  of  grace  may  thrive  the 
better.  7.  If  Churches  are  on  the  whole  loyal  and  sound,  false  men  will  "  go  out " 
from  tfiem.  "  They  went  out,"  etc.  This  is  an  effective  yet  potent  kind  of  Church 
discipline,  when  Chnrch  ministration  and  testimony  are  so  faithful  and  effective  that 
false  adherents  spontaneously  quit  its  ranka.  Happy  is  the  Church  whose  constitution 
is  so  sound  that  foreign  substances  expel  themselves  from  its  body ! '  8.  Where  this  is 
not  the  ease,  God  wUl  in  his  providence  use  another  and  a  sharper  remedy.  "  Judg- 
ment must  begin  at  the  house  of  God  "  (cf.  Isa.  iv.  6).  It  may  be :  (1)  Persecution. 
(2)  Disease  and  death  (1  Cor  xi.  32).  (3)  Pierce  blasts  of  temptation.  (4)  Keen  and 
searching  criticism.  (5)  New  forms  of  alien  thought.  All  these  may  and  will  have  a 
telling  eifect  on  formalists  in  the  Churches  in  any  age.  Their  defection  will  save  the 
Church !  9.  J.et  us  not  be  discouraged  at  the  fact  that  we  cannot  prevent  the  intrusion 
<^ false  members  into  the  Church.  Doubtless  we  should  be  glad  enough  of  the  oharism 
of  "  discernment  of  spirits ; "  but  we  see  that  even  in  the  apostle's  lifetime  that  wai 
not  granted  for  their  convenience.  It<lid  not  then  ensure  a  Church  being  proof  against 
imposture.  But  God  will  not  let  the  Church  be  fatally  injured  by  aliens  withiu.  It 
may  be  annoyed;  but  antichrist  shall  be  exposed,  and  the  living  fellowship  saved. 
10.  L^  each  reader  take  home  to  himself  three  dosely  and  sternly  practical  lessons.  (1) 
May  a  man  be  in  the  visible  Church  and  yet  be  an  "  antichrist"?  Then  should  not 
each  one  ask  tremulously,  "Lord,  is  it  I?  "  (2)  Is  it  so?  Then  let  each  one  of  us 
sympathize  with  the  Church,  and  not  pour  scorn  upon  it.  (3)  Is  it  so?  Then  let  us, 
each  of  us,  say,  "  The  more  strenuously  the  foes  of  Christ,  secretly  or  openly,  fight 
against  him,  the  more  courageously  will  I  fight  for  him  I  " 

Vers.  20,  27. — Unction.  Oonnecting  link:  If  it  be  so  that  many  who  were  in  the 
Church  have  become  ensnared  by  antichristian  error,  and  have  deserted  the  faith  they 
once  avowed,  the  question — a  very  serious  one — suggests  itself — Is  there  or  is  there 
not  any  sure  preservative  against  such  apostasy  in  any  case  ?  The  apostle  had  already 
observed,  indeed,  that  there  was  »  reason  which  would  account  for  some  deserting ; 
viz.  "  they  were  noi  of  us."  Still,  another  and  closer  question  arises — What  is  it  that 
makes  the  difference  between  being  merely  in  the  Church  and  being  also  of  it  ?  To 
this  vers.  20  and  27  are  an  answer :  "And  ye  [•  ye'  emphatic]  have  an  unction,"  etc., 
"  a  chrism,''  so  the  word  is — an  anointing  from  the  Holy  One.  Hence  our  topic — 
Ghrismfrom  the  Christ  the  preservative  against  antichrist. 

I.    Ls?r   TJS   BTUDT   WHAT   THK   APOSTLE   SAYS   BESPKCTINa   THIS   UNOTIOH   OB  ANOINT- 

nro.  1.  Whence  t  "  From  the  Holy  One ; "  i.e.  from  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  himself.  (1) 
He  is  "  the  Holy  "  (cf.  Kev.  iii.  7 ;  John  vi.  69,  Revised  Version ;  Acts  lii.  14).  (2) 
He  it  is  who  promised  to  send  another  Paraclete  (John  xvi.  16).  2.  What  it  the 
anointing  f  Christ  himself,  the  Anointed  of  the  Father,  anoints  them  with  the  Holy 
Ghost.  Another  symbolic  word  is  used  in  John  i.  33,  "  The  same  is  he  which  bap- 
tiseth  with  the  Holy  Ghost."  In  John  xvi.  26  the  Paraclete  is  said  to  be  the  Holy 
Ghost.  The  anointing  here  referred  to  is  not  a  merely  official  privilege,  but  is  an 
enrichment  of  believers,  as  such,  with  an  endowment  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  3.  When 
was  it  given t  "The  gift  is  referred  to  a  definite  time  (ver.  27) :  i  i\d0ere ;  and  the 
narrative  of  the  Acts  fixes  this  normally  at  the  imposition  of  hands  which  followed 
on  baptism  (Acts  viii.  14,  etc.).  But  the  context  shows  that  the  word  xp^<rii.a  is  not  to 
be  understood  of  the  material  signs,  but  of  the  corresponding  spiritual  reality"  (West- 
cott,  in  loc).  There  is  no  occasion  to  think  that  such  a  spiritual  gift  Will  synchronize 
in  its  bestowment  with  the  time  of  administration  of  any  external  ordinance.  Indeed, 
the  opposite  is  indicated  in  Eph.  i.  13.  It  is  given  after  believing.  Just  as  the  penitent 
may  receive  pardon  from  Christ,  so  the  believer  may  receive  this  unction  from  him. 
4,  Whore  t  "  In  you "  (ver.  27).  Here  the  figure  fails,  and  we  evidently  have  a 
reality  far  transcending  it.  An  unction  to  pervade  the  whole  nature  of  the  believer. 
The  Holy  Ghost  takes  up  his  abode  in  us.  Believers  are  his  temples.  5.  For  how 
long  t  Th  xf^cfM  •  .  .  /i^i  4y  vftTy,  The  anointing  is  a  permanent  endowment,  and  not 
%  fitful  or  uncertain  boon.  The  incoming  and  indwelling  of  the  Holy  Ghost  is  assured 
far  wrer  (John  xiv.  16).  Some  gifts  of  the  Spirit,  as  e.g.  his  supernatural  charismii 
*  Of.  Clemaae*'*  <  New  Testament  Church  Order  aad  Diaoiplise,'  p.  41 


«H.n.l— 29.]      THE  FIRST  KPISTLB  SENEBAL  0»  JOHK.  43 

or  his  bestowmeota  of  wiad«m  upon  tks  natural  man,  may  be  lost;  but  thi«  kigfaer 
chrism  in  true  believers,  noTer  1  6.  What  are  its  effects  t  (1)  Direct,  (o)  Enlighten- 
ment.  "Te  all  know"  (of.  John  xvL  18;  1  Cor.  IL  9—16).  Those  filled  with  the 
Spirit  see  the  truth  as  others  cannot.  (5)  Consequently,  they  can  apply  criteria  of 
truth  divinely  given  (ver.  27).  (c)  They  are,  in  a  most  important  sense,  independent 
of  human  teaching  (Heb.  viii.  11).  The  transition  from  a  traditional  faith  depending 
upon  what  man  says,  to  a  living  one  born  of  Qod,  is  of  vital  importance  (cf.  John  iy. 
41,  42).  (2)  Indirect,  (a)  The  lie  of  antichrist  will  be  perceived  in  a  moment 
through  the  supernatural  light  given  from  above.  The  iuward  guidance  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  enables  men  to  detect  false  guides.  (6)  The  quick  discernment  of  error  will  be 
the  surest  safeguard  against  it.  As  the  anointing  abides  in  believers,  the  abiding  of 
such  believers  in  Christ  naturally  follows.    Kaedit  ^S£Sa{cv  inas  nhen  ir  sir^. 

II.   How   FAB    DOES    THIS  USOTION    SKBVK    AS     A    BAFE8UABD    AOAINBT     IWM   AHTI- 

CHKISTS  OF  THIS  AND  OF  BVEBY  AOB  ?  The  teaching  of  the  apostU,  which  in  ow 
first  division  we  have  carefully  analyzed  and  arranged,  we  must  now  aim  at  using  for 
its  designed  end.  1.  There  are  now  many  antickriste.  A  legion  of  opposing  foes  set 
themselves  in  array  against  the  Lord  aad  against  his  gospel.  What  they  ara  the 
Christian  preacher  knows  but  too  well — atheism,  agnosticism,  deiam,  pantheism, 
positivism,  etc.  Several  forms  of  error  range  themselves  under  the  one  word  "  anti- 
supernaturalism."  As  in  apostolic  days  the  great  stumbling-block  was  "  the  offence  of 
the  cross,"  in  our  days  it  largely  consists  in  the  insisting  on  a  supernatural  revelation. 
2.  Argument  for  argument,  it  i$  quite  possible,  and  even  easy,  adequately  to  d^end  the 
Christian  faith.  There  have  never  been  lacking  competent  advocates  for  God's 
truth,  who  have  met  the  arguments  of  the  unbeliever  with  complete  and  even  crushing 
i-eplies.  Never  was  this  more  strikingly  the  case  than  now  (a.d.  1888).  Never  were 
the  enemies  of  the  cross  more  daring  in  their  denials.  Never  were  the  defences  of  the 
faith  more  magnificent  than  now.  So  complete,  indeed,  are  they,  that  if  the  unbeliever 
did  but  see  how  the  case  stands,  he  would  know  that  his  was  a  lost  cause.  But :  3. 
Something  more  than  argument  is  needed  for  an  effective  guard  against  antichristiati 
error.  Three  things  are  necessary.  (1)  A  disposition  to  weigh  the  argument.  (2) 
The  spiritual  discernment  to  perceive  things  that  are  spiritual.  (3)  A  readiness  to 
receive  the  kingdom  of  God  as  a  little  child — to  let  God  teach  us  what  he  will,  and  to 
let  in  the  light  from  above.  4.  ITiese.  conditions  it  is  not  in  the  power  of  man  to  ensure. 
God  will  give  them  to  every  earnest  prayerful  seeker  that  he  may  be  guided  into  all 
truth.  But  not  th«  ablest  pleader  for  God  can  create  these  conditions  of  success  in 
any  one  with  whom  he  pleads.  6.  Only  by  the  anointing  of  the  Holy  On«  can  these 
conditions  be  bestowed  and  maintained.  But  by  this  anointing,  by  this  rich  enduing 
with  the  Holy  Ghost,  will  that  state  of  soul  be  initiated  and  sustained,  to  which  the 
truth  of  God  will  readily  find  access,  and  by  which  it  will  be  guarded  against  serious 
and  fatal  error.  A  finely  cultivated  taste  will  be  a  better  safeguard  against  the  vio- 
lation of  good  taste  than  any  technical  rules  apart  therefrom  6.  Hence  the  one  point 
at  which  we  should  constantly  and  prayeifvXly  aim  is  the  sure  neutralisation  qf  error 
by  the  fulness  of  a  Divine  enlightenment  and  power.  (1)  for  the  Cliristian  advocate 
this  is  the  point  to  aim  at.  If  he  relies  on  argument  alone,  he  will  fail.  The  Divine 
Spirit  can  create  the  conditions  under  which  the  right  argument  will  have  its  right 
effect.  (2)  So  with  the  Christian.  Let  him  plead  for  a  discernment  so  accurate  and 
quick  that  he  will  see  -error  to  be  error  without  the  need  of  argument  about  it.  (3)  So 
with  our  young  people  as  they  go  forth  into  life,  and  have  to  meet  with  temptations 
everywhere  to  desert  the  Christian  camp.  Their  true,  their  oniy  sure  safeguard  is  the 
lulness  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  with  all  his  renewing,  enlightening,  and  quickening  powers. 
l<'illed  with  the  Spirit,  they  are  safe  anywhere ;  without  the  Spirit,  they  are  safe  nowhere! 

Ver.  22.— 'T^  greatett  possible  lie.  Connecting  link:  The  chrism  from  the  Christ 
will  ward  off  antichrist,  because  it  will  give  such  clear  and  quick  intuitions  concerning 
what  is  true  and  what  is  false,  that  the  lie  of  antichrist  will  be  instantly  seen  to  be 
such,  and  Christ's  anointed  ones  will  not  be  deceived  by  him.  And  the  value  of  this 
safeguard  against  antichrist  is  seen  in  the  fact  that  the  lie  he  would  proi  agate  being 
not  merely  on  a  minor  point  of  detail,  but  concerning  the  Person  of  the  Christ  himself, 
it  covers  so  much  ground  and  carries  go  much  along  with  it,  that  thia  lie  of  antichrist 


44  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENEBAL  OF  JOHN.      [oh.  ii.  1—29 

is  the  greatest  which  could  be  uttered.  "  Who  is  the  liar,"  etc.  (S  i^erfunji)  ?  Hence 
the  topic  presented  to  the  homiletic  expositor.  Topic — Tha  lie  of  antichrist  the  greatest 
falsehood  possible. 

I.  What  ib  that  which  antichrist  denies  ?  The  several  references  to  antichrist 
indicate  that  the  main,  if  not  the  sole,  mischief  of  antichrist  lies  in  denial.  It  is  not 
unfrequently  so.  To  deny,  or,  if  that  he  too  daring  an  effort,  to  call  in  question.  Divine 
testimony  and  even  first  principles,  is  the  favourite  method  of  the  father  of  lies.  It  is 
an  easy  way  of  seeking  to  unsettle  and  beguile  unstable  souls,  to  cast  doubt  on  every- 
thing. And  as  if  he  himself  did  not  know  the  difference  between  a  spirit  of  inquiry 
and  a  spirit  of  doubt,  one  of  our  foremost  men  of  science  has  laid  it  down  as  an  axiom 
that  the  first  step  in  science  is  to  doubt  everything  1  The  evU  one  knows  too  well  that 
it  is  much  quicker  work  to  throw  down  than  to  build  up.  And  hence  he  tries  this 
easy  way  of  ruining  souls  by  attempting  to  overthrow  all  that  is  sacred  in  their  religious 
beliefs.  As  he  could  not  prevail  against  the  Eing  when  he  met  him  in  single  combat, 
he  aims  his  deadly  blow  at  his  subjects,  in  order  to  seduce  them  from  their  loyalty  by 
casting  doubts  upon  and  even  denying  the  Christ.  This  denial,  not  without  motive, 
gathers  round  the  Son  of  G-od.  If  we  lose  him,  all  is  lost  that  is  peculiar  to  our  faith, 
as  we  shall  presently  see.  The  denial  of  Jesus  as  the  Christ  may  take  one  or  more  of 
four  forms.  1.  The  denial  of  Jesus  as  the  Messiah,  the  Anointed  of  the  Father.*  In 
this  respect  the  minds  of  the  Jews  (among  others)  are  blinded  to  this  day.  2.  The 
denial  of  Jesus  as  combining  the  Divine  and  human  natures  in  one  person:  according 
to  the  Gnostic  theory  that  the  Christ  descended  upon  the  man  Jesus  at  his  baptism, 
and  left  him  before  his  Passion  (see  Westcott,  in  loc).  3.  The  denial  of  Jesus  as  the 
eternal  Son  of  the  Father,  and  the  consequent  denial  of  the  Incarnation.  All  the 
present  systems  of  unbelief  are  at  one  on  this  point ;  though  "  neither  so  does  their 
witness  agree  together  "  in  aught  save  the  denial.  4.  The  denial  of  Jesus  as  the  Lord 
of  his  Church  enthroned  in  heaven.  The  latest  result  of  theology  is  affirmed  to  be, 
inter  alia,  "  that  the  Christ  holds  no  office  whatever."  The  same  in  substance,  the 
denial  changes  its  forms. 

II.  What  does  this  dbniai.  involve  ?  Many  errors  are  not  only  serious  in  them- 
selves, but  are  even  more  so  on  account  of  others  which  they  drag  along  with  them 
(cf.  1  Cor.  XV.).  We  have  remarked  that  if  we  lose  our  Christ,  we  lose  all.  So,  indeed, 
the  apostle  himself  argues,  "  Whosoever  denieth  the  Son,  the  same  hath  not  the 
Father;"  i.e.  as  Westcott  aptly  puts  it,  "  He  hath  not  the  Son,  whom  he  rejects,  nor  yet 
the  Father,  whom  he  professes  to  regard."  According  to  this  denial :  1.  There  is  no 
Fatherhood  and  Sonship  in  the  Divine  Nature.  2.  God  is  not  the  Father  as  Christ 
represented  him  (see  '  Speaker's  Commentary '  on  ver.  23).  3.  We  have  no  personal 
revelation  of  God,  nor  any  message  of  love  from  the  eternal  throne.  4.  We  have  no 
redemption.  6.  We  have  no  Saviour  and  no  salvation.  6.  We  have  no  Head  of 
humanity  with  living  and  regenerative  power  to  quicken  the  dead  mass  of  souls.  We 
may  have  from  one  source  or  other,  to  some  extent,  a  revelation  of  law,  order,  and  duty; 
but  we  have  no  disclosure  of  any  power  or  provision  to  quicken  to  obedience  to  the 
Law,  observance  of  the  order  or  fiilfilment  of  the  duty.' 

III.  On  what  grounds  ib  buch  a  denial  made?  Broadly  and  generally  thia 
denial  comes  either  of  a  misguided  intellect  or  a  depraved  heart.  It  may  be  made  in 
the  name  of  philosophy  or  of  science  (in  both  cases  falsely  so  called).  The  Christ 
comes  as  Bevealer  and  Bedeemer.  Antichrist  denies  both  the  °  revelation  and  the 
redemption,  either  on  the  ground  (1)  that  we  know  nothing  beyond  phenomena,  and 
that  the  infinite  and  eternal  are  absolutely  and  hopelessly  beyond  our  reach;  or  (2) 
that  humanity  is  working  itself  right  by  a  method  of  evolution,  in  the  struggle  for 
existence  casting  off  the  weak  and  worthless,  and  letting  only  the  fittest  survive, — that 
thus  no  redempiive  force  ah  extrd  is  needed,  the  vis  medicatrix  is  within  humanity; 
or  (3)  that  nothing  at  all  of  the  supernatural  can  be  entertained  for  a  moment. 

'  For  a  brief  indication  of  the  forms  which  this  denial  now  assumes,  see  Dr.  Edersheim'i 
'  Life  and  Times  of  Jesus  the  Messiah,'  Preface,  p.  xii. 

•  "  That  morality  has  a  basis  in  human  society,  that  nature  has  a  religion,  surely  makes 
(be  death  of  the  soul  when  left  to  itself  all  the  more  appalling.  It  means  that,  between 
them,  nature  and  morality  provide  all  for  virtue — except  the  life  to  Uv»  it "  (Dtummond, 
'Natural  Law  in  the  Spiritual  World,'  5th  edit,  p.  168). 


OH.  II.  1—29.]      THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  JOHN.  45 

TV.  The  oiboumstanoes  undeb  which  the  denial  is  made.  1.  In  spite  of  the 
clearest  testimony  to  the  facts  and  doctrines  denied — testimony,  given  by  blameless 
meD,  in  the  teeth  of  their  own  natural  and  strongest  prepossessions  to  the  contrary. 
(Let  this  last  clause  be  duly  weighed.)  2.  In  spite  of  the  tenderest  seal.  The  blood  of 
Christ.  "  The  blood  of  the  everlasting  covenant."  3.  In  spite  of  the  most  powerful 
confirmation.  The  resurrection  of  Christ.  The  descent  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  The 
•ustentation  of  a  living  Church  to  this  day,  in  spite  of  every  conceivahle  effort  to 
destroy  it.  4.  And  in  many  cases  the  denial  is  made  with  a  defiant  recklessness,  or  s 
proud  supercilious  scorn,  as  if  by  the  efforts  of  their  pen  men  would  wish  the  dearest 
hopes  of  millions  to  be  dashed  to  the  ground  1 

V.  The  oonsequbnoes  which  would  follow  the  success  of  antichrist's  dbstial. 
If  (as  shown  under  division  II.)  the  denial  drags  along  with  it  all  other  Christian 
doctrines,  then  the  basis  and  support  of  the  noblest  life  ceases.  Men  talk  largelj'  about 
the  evolution  of  the  race,  forgetting  to  note  :  1.  That  it  is  only  the  portion  of  the  race 
which  is  leavened  by  Christian  thought  that  is  thus  advancing.  2.  That  the  advance 
is  prompted  by  men  who,  because  leavened  with  Christian  thought,  are  inspired  by  faith, 
hojje,  and  level  But  destroy  Christian  doctrine,  then  (1)  faith  must  expire  for  want 
of  an  adequate  Object ;  (2)  hope  must  decline  from  the  lack  of  a  specific  goal ;  (3)  love 
must  die  out  through  lack  of  a  revealed  Object  worthy  of  the  perfect  love  of  the  soul, 
and  then  love  to  man  will  die  out  when  the  great  reason  for  it  and  inspiration  to  it 
are  withdrawn.  And  when  neither  faith,  nor  hope,  nor  love  have  any  sustaining  food, 
what  will  human  life  be  worth  ?  Life  is  dependent  upon  environment.  Withdraw  the 
environment,  and  life  must  decline  from  want  of  sustentation  from  without.  Clearli/, 
then,  the  lie  of  antichrist  is  the  master-lie  I 

VI.  Afplioation  and  ikfebences.  1.  If  these  things  be  so,  then  no  one  need  be 
surprised  that  some  of  the  controversies  respecting  Christian  doctrine  which  have  been 
carried  on  in  the  Church  have  been  so  sharp  and  bitter.  The  many  who  look  thought- 
lessly over  the  history  of  the  divisions  of  Christendom,  and  who  laugh  at  or  pour 
scorn  on  the  sternness  of  religious  war,  would  do  well  to  look  a  little  deeper.  If  they 
understood  more,  they  would  jeer  less.  Tolerance  may  arise  from  short-sightedness 
or  indifference ;  intolerance,  from  the  clear  foresight  of  what  must  follow  if  such  and 
such  an  error  be  permitted  to  flourish.  And  the  more  ardently  a  believer  loves  his  Lord, 
the  more  angry  is  he  hkely  to  be  at  aught  which  would  obscure  his  glory  I  Of  all  the 
apostles  John  loved  most  fervently,  yet  he  it  is  who  lashes  most  severely.  2.  Let  us, 
too,  be  very  jealous  for  the  honour  of  our  Lord  and  Master ;  and  if  any,  in  our  hearing, 
deny  him  the  glory  which  is  his  due,  let  us  not  be  found  wanting  in  the  defence.  We 
should  at  least  insist  on  such  points  as  these :  (1)  that  men  have  no  right  to  deny,  any 
more  than  to  a£5rm,  save  on  adequate  grounds;  (2)  that  violent  prejudice  against  the 
admission  of  the  supernatural  is  but  a  faulty  prepossession,  which  hinders  the  reception 
of  evidence ;  (3)  that  it  is  never  right  to  rob  men  of  an  inspiring  power  for  virtue, 
unless  the  denier  has  something  better  to  put  in  its  place.  3.  The  confession  of 
Christ,  by  contending  for  the  right  doctrine  concerning  him,  should  in  every  case  be 
attended  with  a  Christ-like  life.  We  shall  best  contend  for  him  non  sonando,  sed 
amando. 

Ver.  23. — Saving  the  Father.  Connecting  link  .•  Having  shown  us  of  how  much  the 
lie  of  antichrist  would  deprive  us,  the  apostle  declares  how  rich  we  are  when  that  lie  is 
rejected,  and  the  truth  of  Christ  abides  in  us.  Topic — The  vast  wealth  of  the  believer. 
No  xmcertainty  can  attach  to  the  expression,  "  he  that  hath  the  Son ; "  for  while  we 
are  sure  it  must  include  abiding  in  the  confession  of  the  Son  in  all  his  glory  and 
grace,  we  are  equally  sure  that  the  confession  must  be  the  submission  to,  the  accept- 
ance, the  embrace  of  Christ  with  all  the  hedrt,  as  well  as  the  avowal  of  him  with  the 
lip  (of.  1  Cor.  3di.).  To  "  have  "  Christ  is  to  have  received  him  as  a  Saviour,  to  own 
him  as  the  Revealer  of  the  Father,  to  honour  him  as  Lord,  to  follow  him  as  Leader,  to 
glow  up  to  him  as  the  Head.  Now,  our  text  contains  a  remarkable  statement  about 
those  who  thus  "have"  Christ.  They  "have"  the  Father  also.  In  what  sense?  1. 
In  the  Person  of  Christ  as  the  incarnate  Son  they  have  the  exact  Image  of  the  Father, 
so  that  they  see  him  through  the  Son  (John  xiv.  9).  2.  Through  the  atoning  work  of 
Christ — they  learn  the  self-sacrificing  love  of  the  Father,  "tV  ^oi'toS  oyo'mji'"  (Roth 


46  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  JOHN.      [oh.  n.  1—29, 

T.  8 ;  1  John  iv.  10).  3.  Through  the  mediation  of  Christ  they  have  accea*  to  the 
Father  (Eph.  iL  18 ;  Bom.  v.  2).  4.  Through  the  intercession  of  Christ  they  have 
constant  communion  with  the  Father;  not  merely  occasional  access  aa  to  a  King,  but 
a  filial  fellowship  with  a  Father.  5.  Through  Christ  as  the  channel  of  communi- 
cation between  earth  and  heaven  they  receive  of  the  infinite  wealth  of  the  Father 
(1  Cor.  iii.  21-7-23).  6.  Through  the  impartation  of  power  and  life  from  Christ  they 
.share  the  life  of  the  Father  (GaL  ii.  20).  We  are  not  ouly  Ir  r^  r'ajf,  but  also  ir  in  Uarpi 
(ver.  24).  7.  Through  the  gracious  leadership  of  Christ  they  will  have  an  everlasting 
home  with  the  Father  (John  liv.  2, 3).  And  such  a  Father  I  Then  how  ought  we :  (1) 
To  delight  in  God  in  Christ  with  rapturous  joy  I  (2)  To  rouse  all  the  powers  of  our 
soul  to  contend  against  those  who  would  misarahly  impoverish  us  by  compassing  the 
destruction  of  this  blessed  life !  (3)  To  honour  such  a  Father  by  a  calm,  pure,  heavenly 
life  1    Well  might  Faber  ask— 

<*0  little  heart  of  mine  t  shall  pain 
Or  sorrow  make  thee  moan. 
When  all  this  God  is  all  for  thee — 
A  Father  all  thine  own  7  " 

Vers.  24,  28. — Duty  annexed  to  privilege.  OonnecMng  link  :  The  apostle  had  jurt 
said  that  wherever  the  Christly  chrism  was  bestowed,  it  wotiid  prove  so  effective  a 
guard  against  antichrist  that  he  who  received  it  would  abide  in  Christ,  since,  being 
taught  of  God,  he  would  not  be  deceived  by  any  pretences  of  antichrist,  however 
plausible.  He  bow  guards  that  thought  from  abuse  by  balancing  his  statement  con- 
cerning the  believer's  privilege  with  another,  which  reminds  him  of  his  responsibility 
and  duty,  saying,  "  Let  that  therefore  abide  in  you,  wiiioh  ye  have  heard  from  the 
beginning.  .  .  .  And  now,  little  children,  abide  in  him  j  that  when  he  shall  be  mani- 
fested, we  may  have  freedom  of  speech,  and  not  be  ashamed  before  him  at  his  comiug." 
Hence  our  topic — I%e  duty  of  abiding  in  Chriit.  There  ore  six  or  seven  lines  of 
thought  which  are  here  put  before  us. 

I.  Tkb  xxtbctation  or  thb  EELnysB  is  the  secoitd  ooioNa  or  the  Son  of 
Gob.  The  Apostle  John  was  not  alone  in  the  assertion  of  this.  He  joins,  indeed, 
with  the  rest  (ef.  ver.  28 ;  oh.  iii.  2 ;  Bev.  i.  7  ;  xxii.  20).  Paul  gives  his  testimony 
thereto  (2  Cor.  v.  10 ;  Phil.  i.  6, 10 ;  Col.  iii  4 ;  1  Thess.  L 19, 20 ;  iii.  13 ;  2  Thess.  i. 
10;  ii.  1 ;  2  Tim.  i.  12;  iv.  8).  Peter  also  (1  Pet.  L  13;  t.  4).  There  are  in  our 
day  two  widely  divergent  views  as  to  the  place  the  second  coming  of  Christ  holds  in 
the  Divine  plan.  But  there  is  no  difference  among  believers  as  to  that  coming  being 
"  the  blessed  hope,"  and  as  to  its  being  the  great  event  for  which  all  should  be  "  ready  " 
(2  Pet.  iii.  12 — 14).  This,  this,  is  indeed  the  Christian's  greatest  ambition,  to  be  ready 
for  that  day.    For— 

II.  At  bis  second  coming  thx  Lobd  Jesus  will  be  hanivestxd.  The  deep 
meaning  of  the  Saviour's  "  manifestation  "  is  concealed  in  the  word  "  appear  "  (Autho- 
rised Version).  The  Bevised  Yersiou  brings  it  out  to  clear  light.  When  he  was  on 
earth  "  a  weary  Man  and  fall  of  woes "  there  was  a  veil  over  his  true  glory,  through 
which  only  a  few  could  see.  When  he  comes  a  second  time,  he  will  be  seen  as  he  is, 
"  in  his  glory  "  (Matt.  xxv.  1 — 46 ;  eh.  iii.  2 ;  2  Thess.  i.  7—10 ;  1  Tim.  vi.  14, 15 ; 
Heb.  ix.  28). 

ILL  Before  him  iji  account  will  hate  to  be  bendbbed.  The  word  waf^irla 
is  literally  "liberty  of  speech  to  speak  out  all  that  we  think."*  It  denotes  "the 
entire  freedom  with  which  we  unburden,  in  the  presence  of  an  intimate  friend,  all 
which  can  wMch  upon  our  heart."  So  Keander.  But  such  a  word  thus  used  obviously 
suggests,  as  V^stcott  remarks,  such  passages  as  2  Cor.  v.  10;  Bom.  xiv.  10 — 12;  and 
also,  w«  would  add,  Heb.  iv.  13  (Greek);  xiiL  17  (see  Bom.  viii.  19 ;  Col.  iii.  4 ;  Luke 
xii.  2{  MaU.  xU.  36). 

lY.  These  u  a  solemn  altesnattve  befoke  evxbt  man.  Either  <'to  have 
ooufidonce  "  or  "  to  be  ashamed."  In  the  former  case,  bow  blessed  the  freedom!  In 
the  latter,  how  dire  the  distress  I  The  original  reads  not  merdy  "  ashamed  before 
him,"  but  "ashamed  from  bin,"  as  if  conscious  guilt  would  itself  act  as  a  repellent 
fowe  to  bar  men  from  their  Lord  (see  Mark  vi.  30  as  illustiiuive  of  loving  unbuidoa- 
■  Bee  Df .  Alexander  in  '  Speaker's  Conuueutai; ,'  u  im. 


OH.II.  1— 29.]     THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  JOHN.  47 

ing  of  the  soul ;  Eev.  i.  7  as  illustrating  the  reverse.  Compare  also  2  Thess.  1.  9  for 
a  similar  use  of  oV!i).  What  if  the  Saviour's  yrord  "  depart "  should  be  a  terrified 
shrinking  from  the  presence  of  the  Lord  (cf.  Gen.  iv.  16 ;  ili.  8)  ?  Who  would  not 
labour  and  strive  and  pray,  that  at  his  Saviour's  appearing  he  may  be  ready  to  meet 
him  with  a  holy  joy,  and  lovingly  to  unburden  hia  whole  soul,  as  one  who,  though 
indeed  "  looking  for  mercy,"  yet  shrinks  not  back  with  shame  ? 

V.  To  ENSURE  THE    KES0LT   WE    MUST    MOST    DESIRE,   WB   MUST   ABIDE    IN    ChRIST. 

There  are  two  expressions  in  the  text,  "  Let  that  [Word]  abide  in  you,  which  ye  have 
heard  from  the  beginning."  "  Abide  in  him."  Our  Lord  had  joined  these  two  together 
in  the  hearing  of  John,  long  years  before  (John  xv.  7).  The  two  go  together.  Paith 
receives  the  Word,  and  it  lives  in  us.  Faith  clings  to  Christ,  and  we  live  in  him.  This, 
this  is  to  be  our  daily  life,  and  then,  let  the  Lord  come  when  he  will,  we  shall  not  be 
ashamed.  Note :  It  is  not  the  imperfections  of  a  loyal  soul  that  will  make  him 
ashamed  when  Christ  comes,  but  the  faithlessness  of  an  apostate  soul  who  has  to 
confront  a  deserted  Lord !  * 

VI.  To  THE   LITE  OP  FAITHFUL  ABIDINQ  IN  ChBIST   WE  ABE   MOST  TENDERLY  UBOED. 

"And  now,  little  children,"  etc.  1.  This  is  the  gospel  tone  (Bom.  xii.  1).  Sinai 
thunders.  Calvary  pleads,  2.  This  is  the  spirit  in  which  the  true  ambassador  for 
Christ  must  and  will  speak  (2  Cor.  v.  20).  3.  This  is  the  tone  which  tells  most  power- 
fully. The  cords  of  love  do  more  than  the  whips  of  the  taskmaster.  God  "  draws  " 
us  with  loving-kindness.  Let  us,  then,  hear  the  voice  of  the  Saviour  tenderly  calling, 
"  Hold  fast  to  me,  whatever  others  do."  (1)  Honour,  (2)  gratitude,  (3)  love,  (4) 
safety,  all  demand  our  lifelong  Tea. 

Ver.  26. — Eternal  life.  Connecting  link ;  Whatever  may  be  the  arts  used  and  the 
temptations  set  before  us  by  antichrist  to  draw  us  away  from  the  Father  by  tempting 
us  to  apostatize  from  the  Son,  there  can  be  offered  to  us  by  antichrist  nothing  so  great 
as,  yea,  nothing  to  compare  with,  the  Ta»t  promise  left  us  on  rectwd  by  our  own  gracious 
Lord  and  Master ;  for  "  this  is  the  promise  which  he  [himself]  hath  given  us,  even  the 
life,  the  eternal  lijfe."  Whence  our  topic —  TAe  greatest  of  all  promises  from  the  greatest 
of  all  Promisers. 

I.  Let  u8  first  inquire  into  the  content  and  meanino  of  the  promise.  "  The 
eternal  life."  The  phrase  is  so  expressively  worded  as  to  indicate  that  there  ii  one 
well-understood  kind  of  life  which  forms  the  sum  and  substance  of  the  hope  put  before 
Christian  believers.  It  had  been,  indeed,  very  clearly  defined  by  our  Lord  himself 
(cf.  John  xvii.  2,  3).  So  that  on  the  highest  possible  grounds  we  are  precluded  from 
any  warrant  for  confounding  the  phrase  "eternal  life  "  with  continuity  of  existence. 
The  latter,  indeed,  is  postulated  thereby;  but  it  might  be, quite  apart  from  the  former.* 
The  eternal  life  is  that  state  of  being  in  which  the  highest  part  of  man's  nature  is  in 
communion  with  the  Highest  One,  and  in  which  a  perfect  organization  that  can  never 
be  impaired  is  in  perfect  correspondence  with  a  perfect  environment  that  can  never 
change  (Drununond,  pp.  203,  et  seq.).  Or,  to  reset  this  definition  in  scriptural  phraseo- 
logy, it  is  an  unbroken  and  unending  enjoyment  of  God  by  perfected  natures  in  a 
perifected  world.  But  there  is  this  difference  between  the  two  definitions — the  one  lies 
in  the  region  of  science,  and  declares  in  what  it  must  consist  if  it  could  be  secured ; 
the  other  lies  in  the  region  of  revelation,  and  declares  in  what  it  does  consist  as  Divine 

>  "It  is  possible  to  understand  the  words  as  referring  to  the  apostle's  joy  in  the  orovrn 
of  his  work  [iaaBmach  as  he  says,  not,  '  abide  in  him,  that  ye  may  have  confidence ; ' 
bnt,  'abide  in  him,  that  we  may  have  confidence']  (oomp.  1  Thess.  ii.  19, etc. ;  Phil.  iv.  1). 
The  parallel  with  1  Thess  ii.  19,  eto.,i8  certainly  close ;  but  it  seems  to  be  more  natural 
to  suppose  that  the  apostle  made  himself  one  with  those  who  shared  his  life,  and  the 
ubseuce  of  the  personal  pronoun  seems  to  exclude  the  notion  of  any  contrast  between  him 
and  them  "  (Westoott,  in  toe.). 

The  remarkable  verse  in  Heb.  ziii  17  leads  me  to  think  that  more  weight  is  due  to  the 
change  of  person  in  the  verbs  used  in  the  text  than  some  would  attribute  thereto ;  but  I 
do  not  venture  to  speak  confidently,  and  therefore  have  not  developed  that  point  in  the 
homily. 

*  For  a  fuller  discussion  of  this  point  than  is  here  possible,  the  writer  may  perhaps  refer 
to  hia  work  on  'Future  Punishment,'  2ud  edit  (Snow  and  Co.).  See  also  Drummonrl'a 
'Kaioml  Law  in  the  Spiritual  World,'  5th  edit,  p.  216. 


48  THE  PIBST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  JOHN.      [oh.  n.  1—29. 

loye  secures  itl  There  are  three  factors  in  the  making  of  this  life.  1.  God,  and  tha 
riches  of  his  love  as  the  sustaining  energy  of  the  soul.  2.  A  nature  ripened  in  holiness, 
and  divested  of  all  decaying  tendencies  in  its  bodily  enswathement,  as  the  developed 
life  of  the  soul.  3.  A  world  of  undecaying  fitness  and  beauty  as  the  sphere  of  activity 
of  the  soul.  Now,  the  first  is  precisely  that  which  is  the  delight  and  the  food  of  tha 
soul  even  here.  God  I  God  in  Christ  I  The  second,  so  far  as  concerns  the  ripening 
the  nature  in  holiness,  is  now  being  secured  by  the  sanctification  of  the  Spirit ;  and  as 
concerns  the  freeing  of  the  soul  from  decaying  elements,  it  is  ensured  by  the  body  being 
left  behind  as  a  worn-out  vesture.  The  third  is  revealed  as  the  ensuing  outcome  of 
God's  plan  in  preparing  a  new  heavens  and  a  new  earth,  wherein  dwelleth  righteousness. 
The  work  already  done  upon  the  globe  is  a  prophecy  that  God  is  preparing  it  for 
something  higher.  The  work  already  wrought  on  the  soul  of  the  believer  is  a  prediction 
that  it  will  be  carried  on  to  completion  (1  Cor.  ii.  9 ;  Phil.  i.  6 ;  ch.  iii.  1,  2 ;  cf.  ch.  i.  3, 
in  which  Jesus  Christ  himself  is  spoken  of  as  "  that  Eternal  Life,"  etc.).  But  the  main 
point  now  to  be  insisted  on  is  this — not  only  that  all  the  elements  which  go  to  make 
up  eternal  life  are  even  now  in  existence  and  action,  but  also  that  the  consummation, 
the  perfection,  and  the  perpetuity  of  the  life  which  now  exists  in  germ  and  develops 
in  growth,  are  all  matter  of  distinct  and  definite  promise ;  yea,  that  this  is  the  promise 
in  which  all  lesser  ones  are  contained.  That  we  have  not  to  be  tantalized  with  a 
vision  of  glory,  saying,  "  That  is  it  if  it  could  be  attained,"  but  that  we  may  live  under 
the  inspiration  of  a  promise  which  says — It  b  the  Father's  will  that  you  should  be  kept 
from  ftdling,  and  presented  "  fruitless  before  the  presence  of  his  glory  with  exceeding 

n.  This,  teb  obeatebt  of  all  fbomiseb,  coheb  fbou  the  obeatebt  of  all 
Pbomibebb.  Not  all  the  conclaves  of  the  vrisest  philosophers  could  create  or  sustain 
the  lowly  life  of  a  blade  of  grass  1  Yet,  somehow  or  other,  there  is  a  promise  on  record 
of  a  gift  of  life,  of  the  highest  life,  to  men  of  all  nations,  and  kindreds,  and  peoples, 
and  Ungues,  to  a  great  multitude  which  no  man  can  number ;  and  that  that  l&e  shall 
be  sustained  for  ever  I  Well  may  the  apostle  lay  stress  on  the  personal  pronoun  he ; 
for  assuredly  none  but  a  Divine  Being  could  have  the  right  to  make  such  a  promise, 
forno  one  but  lie  who  is  Lord  of  life  could  possibly  guarantee  its  fulfilment!  The 
promise,  indeed,  was  first  made  long  before  Clirist  came  (Titus  i.  2).  Bat  in  and  by 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  has  it  been  again  vouchsafed.  1.  Where  and  how  has  Christ 
promised  eternal  life  t  (Cf.  John  vi.  37 — 40, 54 ;  x.  2T,  28 ;  xi.  26 ;  xii.  26 ;  liv.  3, 
19 ;  see  also  John  xvii.  2,  3.)  But  such  words  as  these  do  not  stand  alone.  Christ 
bids  us  "  eat  his  flesh,  and  drink  his  blood ;  "  i.e.  he  gives  us  himself  to  live  upon — he 
nourishes  us  with  his  own  life.  All  his  pledges,  moreover,  were  confirmed  by  his 
resurrection  and  ascension,  and  by  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  by  whom  he  now 
imparts  and  nourishes  the  life  which  he  promises  eternally  to  sustain.  2.  What  are  the 
qualifications  of  Christ  for  making  such  a  promise  as  thist  (1)  He  has  all  authority, 
and  therefore  may  make  such  a  promise  (John  xvii.  2,  3).  (2)  He  is  the  Almighty, 
therefore  can  fulfil  it  (Heb.  vii.  25  ;  Eev.  i.  8).  (3)  He  is  himself  the  Life-giver  (1 
Cor.  XV.  45).  (4)  He  is  the  Life-sustainer  (Heb.  i.  3).  (5)  His  love  leads  him  to  long 
tliat  his  people  should  be  with  him  (John  xvii.  24).  (6)  His  love  changes  not  (John 
xiii.  1).  (7)  His  being  changes  not  (Heb.  xiii.  8).  (8)  As  far  as  the  experience  of 
believers  this  side  the  grave  informs  us,  they  find  that  in  and  by  Christ  they  have 
already  this  very  life ;  and  up  to  the  close  of  his  earthly  career  he  proves  himself 
faithful  to  his  own  (ch.  v.  12  (Greek),  first  part ;  Gal.  ii.  20 ;  2  Tim.  i.  12).  Let  each 
of  these  seven  lines  of  illustration  be  followed  out,  and  they  will  prove  abundantly  that 
Jeeim  is  and  ever  will  be  equal  to  fulfil  the  promise  he  has  made. 

III.  Abb  these  things  so?  Then:  1.  Let  us  see  that,  since  the  objective  ground 
of  the  good  hope  of  the  believer  is  found  in  the  word  of  promise,  there  is  just  one 
point  to  which  the  teat  of  validity  needs  to  he  applied,  viz,  the  person  of  him  who 
promises.  If  he  is  true,  it  is  1  How  clear  and  yet  how  pure  the  ground  on  which  we 
stand  I  2.  It  should  never  trouble  us  to  find  that  neither  science  nor  philosojthy  can 
either  light  us  or  help  us  in  this  matter.  We  never  have  looked  to  them  as  guides  to 
iici  mortality,  and  never  will.  3.  The  ground  on  which  the  promise  is  given  removes 
all  improbability  of  its  fulfilment.  "Grace;"  "love;"  "The  riches  of  his  grace;" 
"  Herein  is  love  I "    4.  Both  objectively  and  subjectively,  (Ae  enjoyment  (jf  the  first- 


OH.ii.  1— 29.]      THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  JOHN.  4S 

fruUs  makes  us  sure  of  the  harvest.  Objectively  (Bom.  v.  10),  Subjectively  (Phil, 
L  6).  6.  This  dear  and  definite  goal  to  human  existence  gives  to  theories  of  advance, 
development,  evolution,  an  intelligible  meaning,  a  crowning  glory.  6.  The  reason  of 
life  is  thus  magnificently  told  us.  It  is  that  we  may  become  like  unto  the  Son  of 
God,  conformed  to  the  type  of  all  goodaess,  and  that  for  ever  1  7.  How  guilty  shall 
we  be,  and  how  miserably  poor,  if  we  miss  this  life !  "  Except  a  man  be  born  again, 
he  cannot  see  the  kingdom  of  Godl"  Ohl  if  there  be  a  higher  life  spoken  of  by 
others  and  experienced  by  them,  and  if  any  have  not  this  higher  life,  and  know  they 
have  not,  ought  they  not  to  cry  mightily  to  its  Lord  and  Giver,  saying,  "  Lord,  give  me 
this  higher  life  "  ?  They  will  not  cry  in  vain.  God  never  deserts  the  imploring  soul. 
Lastly  :  The  theme  prepares  us  for  an  answer  to  the  charge  of  unbelievers,  and  for  a 
retort  upon  them  likewise.  We  are  told  that  the  Christian  aims  are  selfish  in  cherish- 
ing the  hope  of  eternal  life,  and  in  being  inspired  thereby.  What  ?  Is  it  selfish  to 
find  an  inspiration  in  the  hope  of  being  free  from  all  selfishness,  and  of  becoming  more 
and  more  God-like  for  ever  in  benevolence  and  love  ?  We  reply  that  not  to  desire 
eternal  life  is  base  ingratitude.  It  is  like  saying  to  the  eternal  Father,  "  Father,  I  know 
quite  enough  of  thee  already,  and  do  not  wish  to  know  more ;  nor  do  I  desire  time  to 
grow  that  I  may  become  more  grateful  to  the  goodness  and  mercy  which  have  crowned 
my  days."  The  truly  loyal  son  will  long  to  do  something  to  recompense  his  Father's 
care,  and  to  fulfil  the  words,  "  As  a  bridegroom  rejoiceth  over  a  bride,  so  shall  thy  God 
rejoice  over  thee  1 " 

Yer.  29. — Se-bwn  t  This  verse  marks  a  transition.  It  ia  not,  indeed,  absolutely 
disconnected  from  the  preceding  ones,  but  yet  it  rather  prepares  the  way  for  what  is 
about  to  follow.  One  phrase  therein  contained — "  born  of  him  " — ^is  much  used  by  the 
Apostle  John ;  as  Bishop  Alexander  remarks  (in  *  Speaker's  Commentary,'  in  loc.),  "  it 
is  one  of  the  loops  which  connect  this  Epistle  with  the  Fourth  Gospel ; "  and  it  is 
also  grandly  developed  in  its  meaning  and  bearing  in  the  remaining  chapters  of  this 
Epistle.  Another  feature  of  the  verse  is  its  recognition  of  different  orders  of  know- 
ledge, as  indicated  by  the  use  of  the  two  verbs  «55t«  and  yindirKnf — the  one  mark- 
ing knowledge  direct  and  absolute;  the  other,  a  knowledge  gained  by  observation  and 
inference.  The  latter  verb  may  be  either  indicative  or  imperative.  We  may  read, 
•♦  If  ye  know  ...  ye  perceive,"  or,  "  If  ye  know  .  .  .  perceive  ye."  We  adopt  the 
latter,  understanding  the  apostle  to  point  it  out  as  a  duty  to  exercise  rightly  the 
spiiitual  faculties,  and,  so  doing,  to  draw  the  conclusion,  when  they  see  a  man  practising 
righteousness  habitually,  that  that  man  has  received  his  love  of  righteousness  from 
the  Righteous  One.  The  tttv  here  by  no  means  marks  an  uncertainty  as  to  whether 
Christ  is  righteous,  but  merely  indicates  concerning  the  two  facts  named  in  the  text 
that,  wherever  a  man  knows  the  first,  he  ought  to  be  equally  assured  of  the  second. 
Our  text,  therefore,  suggests — 

L  Hebe  ib  a  pact  put  befoeb  ns  dibectlt  in  the  Ohkistian  kbvelation. 
There  is  a  Righteous  One  (of.  ver.  1 ;  Acts  iii.  14 ;  1  Pet.  iii.  18).  Inasmuch,  more- 
over, as  he,  the  Son,  is  "  the  Image  of  the  invisible  God,"  then  in  the  righteousness  of 
the  Son  we  see  imaged  that  also  of  the  Father.  And  thus  we  come  to  know  it  as  the 
supreme  declaration  of  revealed  truth  that  righteousness  is  on  the  throne  of  the 
universe.  The  philosophy  of  to-day  declares,  "Amid  the  mysteries  which  become 
the  more  mysterious  the  more  they  are  thought  about,  there  will  remain  the  one 
absolute  certainty  that  he  [the  man  of  science]  is  ever  in  presence  of  an  infinite  and 
eternal  energy  from  which  all  things  proceed."  '  To  tliis  "  absolute  certainty  "  of  the 
man  of  science,  revelation  adds  that  that  infinite  and  eternal  energy  is  light  without 
a  speck  of  darkness  (ch.  i.  4) ;  love  which  changeth  not ;  righteousness  without  a  flaw. 
We  know  this. 

II.  Hebe  is  a  second  fact  gathebed  indieectlt  fkom  Ohbistian  obseevation. 
It  is  this :  Supposing  a  man  to  be  continuously  living  a  righteous  life,  we  can  gather 
from  thence  that  he  is  drawing  his  life  from  the  Righteous  One.  Note :  It  is  not 
a  casual  or  occasional  good  deed  which  will  manifest  this.  But  the  continuity  of 
righteousness — always,  everywhere,  under  all  circiimstances,  and  in  spite  of  all  temp- 
tations, 6  iroiay.  Given,  then,  this  man,  what  are  the  inferences  which  we  ought  with 
'  Herbert  Spencer,  in  the  Nineteenth  Century,  January,  1884. 

I.  JOHN,  B 


60  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  JOHN.     [ch.  ii.  1— 29. 


certainty  to  draw  ?  See  him ;  his  course  is  no  uncertain,  fickle  one ;  he  is  in  loya 
with  righteoasnesB,  and  with  nothing  but  righteousness ;  towards  God  his  mos* 
devout,  reverent  love  goes  forth  ;  towards  man  he  is  uniformly  true  and  kind.  As  foi 
himself,  the  soul  regulates  the  body,  the  spirit  governs  the  soul,  and  God  governs  all. 
Tell  us  what  he  ought  to  be  and  do  at  any  moment,  and  we  can  tell  you  what  he  will 
be  and  do  at  that  moment.  Tell  us  where  he  ought  to  be  at  any  instant,  and  we  will 
tell  you  where  at  that  instant  you  may  be  sure  to  find  him.  His  path  is  as  the  light, 
brighter  and  brighter  to  the  perfect  day.  Now,  when  we  see  such  a  man,  what  do  we 
with  certainty  know  about  him?  1.  We  hnow  that  he  is  alive,  "Alive  unto  God." 
He  is  a  spiritual  man.  He  has  passed  from  death  unto  life.  2.  We  hnow  that  Bitch  a 
life  it  from  God.  It  ii  divinely  originated  and  sustained.  A  stream  can  rise  no 
higher  than  its  source.  Only  a  spiritual  Being  could  originate  such  a  spiritual  life. 
The  Divine  Spirit  has  quickened  the  human  (Eph.  i.  1 — 6).  3.  We  know  that  such  a 
life  is  tegoiten  of  the  Divine  nature.  The  physical  world  is  God's  handiwork.  The 
social  and  moral  worlds  are  called  into  being  by  his  power.  The  order  of  the  cosmos 
proclaims  wisdom  and  skill.  But  not  here  is  there  aught  which  is  begotten  of  God, 
or  which  is  the  outcome  of  his  very  nature.  Music,  beauty,  fragrance,  are  all  of  God ; 
but  they  are  not  horn  of  God,  But  here,  here  in  this  man  whose  whole  nature  is 
renewed  to  righteousness,  there  is  one  whom  God  has  made  in  his  own  image  and  in 
the  image  of  his  Son.  4.  We  know  that  such  a  life  is  a  very  special  product.  It  is 
one  which  is  a  peculiar  manifestation  of  God.  You  may  learn  what  an  architect  is  at 
an  architect  by  seeing  the  buildings  he  has  designed.  But  you  may  learn  more  of 
what  he  was  at  a  man  from  one  of  his  children  than  of  all  the  products  of  his  designing 
genius.  So  here,  and  much  more  so.  When  the  Spirit  of  God  creates  and  sustains  a 
nature  in  holiness,  such  a  nature  is,  in  its  way,  a  manifestation  of  himself.  5.  We 
know  that  such  a  life  sustains  a  peculiar  relation  to  Qod.  Beiug  "  born"  of  him,  the 
man  is  in  God's  family — one  of  his  sons.  Not  in  the  general  sense  alone,  in  wbich  we 
all  are  the  offspring  of  God,  but  in  a  higher  sense ;  he  is  a  member  of  "  the  household 
of  God"— of  one  family  in  heaven  and  on  earth.  Of  what  in  privilege  aii<l  prospect 
accrues  to  those  "  bom  of  God  "  we  shall  speak  further  as  we  follow  the  apostle  in  his 
thought.  Here  we  take  our  stand  and  say,  "  When  we  know  that  a  man  resembles 
God  in  nature,"  we  are  sure  that  he  is  a  child  of  God  by  the  second  birth,  even  of  the 
Holy  Ghost. 

III.  To  BGOOaNIZX   ONX   WHO  BSBEMBLSS  GOD,  AS   HAVDTO    BEEN   EOBN   Ot  HIU,   IB  A 

8A0EBD  DUTY.  "  Know  ye  "  (margin.  Revised  Verson)  is  most  in  harmony  with  the 
context.  But  whether  John  means  that  we  do  know  it,  or  that  we  ought  to  know  it, 
either  way  the  practical  force  is  the  same.  For :  1.  In  the  band  of  holy  God-moved 
men  we  see  the  very  highest  manifestation  of  God's  nature  which  earth  affords.  2. 
In  these  we  see  the  home  of  God's  delight.  He  dwells  with  his  own,  and  communes 
with  them.  They  have  fellowship  with  the  Father.  3.  In  these  we  see  those  of 
mankind  who  are  ripening  for  a  higher  destiny,  and  whose  radiant  faces  shine  in  the 
light  of  a.  nobler  state.  4.  This  conclusion  is  not  to  be  denied  to  any  because  they 
"  follow  not  us,"  nor  because  they  do  not  belong  to  this  or  that  Church.  Wherever 
there  is  a  God-like  man,  there  is  a  Heaven-born  one.  6.  This  conclusion  is  not  to  be 
drawn  where  there  is  no  holiness  of  heart  and  life,  however  high  the  rank,  or  sound 
the  creed,  or  rigid  the  Churchmanship,  or  constant  the  reception  of  sacrameata.  With- 
out hiiUntsa  "  no  man  shall  see  the  Lord." 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORa. 

Vers.  1,  2. — Our  Advocate  and  Propitiation.  "My  little  children,  these  things 
write  I  unto  you,"  etc.  Very  tender  and  eminently  Johannean  is  the  opening  of  this 
paragraph.  "My  little  children."  The  appellation  suggests :  1.  The  spiritual  paternity 
of  the  apostle.  St.  Paul  addressed  the  same  words  to  those  Galatian  Christians  whom 
he  had  spiritually  begotten  (Gal.  iv.  19).  H«  referred  with  great  tenderness  and  force 
to  the  same  relationship  in  writing  to  the  Corinthians  (1  Cor.  iv.  14, 15).  Probably  many 
of  those  to  whom  St.  John  was  writing  wero  Ms  spiritual  children.  2.  The  spiritual 
affection  ^  the  aposfh.    The  use  cC  the  diminutiva  indicates  this.    8.   The  spiritual 


OH.  n.  1—29.]      THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENEKAL  OF  JOHN.  61 

authority  of  the  apostle.    His  fatherly  relation  to  them,  his  tender  affection  for  them, 
and  his  venerable  age  combine  to  invest  his  words  with  authority.    Our  text  teaches — 

I.  That  the  gospel  or  Jbsub  Cheist  discoubages  sin,  "  These  things  write  I  unto 
you,  that  ye  sin  not."  The  "these  things"  are  the  statements  made  in  ch.  L  6 — 10. 
The  fact  that  sin  exists  even  in  the  Christian  is  there  afBrmed,  and  gracious  provision 
for  the  forgiveness  of  sin  and  for  the  sanotification  of  the  believer  is  set  forth.  And 
now,  in  order  that  no  one  by  reason  of  these  things  should  look  upon  sin  as  inevitable, 
or  regard  it  with  tolerance,  or  fail  to  battle  against  it,  St.  John  writes,  "  These  things 
write  I  unto  you,  that  ye  sin  not."  St.  Paul  guards  against  the  same  misuse  of  the 
provisions  of  the  rich  grace  of  God  thus :  "  Shall  we  continue  in  sin,  that  grace  may 
abound?  God  forbid"  (Rom.  vL  1,  2).  That  the  provisions  of  Divine  grace  for  the 
pardon  of  sin  afford  no  encouragement  to  its  commission  is  proved  by :  1.  The  object  of 
Christ 6  mediatorial  work.  To  "  save  his  people  from  their  sins."  "  He  appeared  to 
put  away  sin  by  the  sacrifice  of  himself"  (cf.  Eph.  i.  4;  ii.  10;  v.  25 — 27;  Titus 
ii.  14).  2.  I%e  cost  of  Chrisfa  mediatorial  work.  The  great  price  at  which  pardon 
and  salvation  were  rendered  possible  should  powerfully  deter  from  the  practice  of  sin. 
"  God  spared  not  his  own  Son,"  etc. ;  "  Ye  were  not  redeemed  with  corruptible  thingi, 
as  silver  and  gold,  .  .  .  but  with  the  precious  blood  of  Christ,"  etc.  Since  redemption 
from  sin  is  so  expensive  a  process,  sin  must  be  not  a  trifling,  but  a  terrible  evil.  3. 
The  influence  of  Chrisfs  mediatorial  work.  The  love  of  God  manifested  in  our  Lord 
and  Saviour  is  flitted  to  awaken  our  love  to  him.  Love  to  God  springs  up  in  the  heart 
of  every  one  who  truly  believei  in  Jesus  Christ;  and  love  to  God  is  the  mightiest  and 
most  resolute  antagonist  of  sin. 

II.  That  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ  ebcognizes  thb  liabilitt  of  even  good 
MEN  TO  SIN.  "  And  if  any  man  sin."  This  liability  arises  from :  1.  Ottr  exx>oaure  to 
temptation.  Sometimes  we  are  confronted  by  our  "  adversary  the  devil,  as  a  roaring 
lion."  But  more  frequently  are  we  in  danger  by  reason  of  "  the  wiles  of  the  devil." 
"  Satan  fashioneth  himself  into  an  angel  of  light,"  that  he  may  deceive  souls  and  lead' 
them  into  sin.  We  are  also  assailed  by  temptations  in  human  society — temptations 
which  are  plausible  and  appear  harmless,  but  which  are  full  of  peril  to  us.  2.  Th* 
infirmity  of  ov/r  moral  nature.  There  is  that  in  ns  which  is  ready  to  respond  to  tempta- 
tion. Thus  temptations  which  appeal  to  our  sensual  appetites  sometimes  prove  too 
strong  for  our  spiritual  principles,  the  sensual  in  us  not  being  in  complete  subjection  to 
the  spiritual.  Temptations  which  promise  present  pleasure  or  profit,  but  involve  the 
risk  of  some  of  our  most  precious  interests  in  the  futm'e,  are  sometimes  successful 
because  of  defective  spiritual  perception  or  of  moral  weakness.  This  liability  to  sin  is 
confirmed  (1)  by  the  history  of  good  men,  t.g.  Noah,  Abraham,  Moses,  Aaron,  David, 
Peter ;  (2)  by  our  own  experience. 

III.  The  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ  announces  gracious  provision  to  meet  the 
liability  of  good  men  to  sin.  "And  if  any  man  sin,  we  have  an  Advocate  with  the 
Father,"  etc.  1.  Jesus  Christ  is  our  Representative  with  the  Father.  "  We  have  an 
Advocate  with  the  Father,  Jesus  Christ  the  Righteous."  The  word  translated  "advocate" 
means  one  who  is  called  to  our  side;  then  a  Comforter,  Helper,  Advocate.  "Repre- 
sentative "  is  a  word  which,  perhaps,  expresses  the  meaning  here.  Jesus  Christ "  appears 
before  the  face  of  God  for  us."  He  stands  by  us  with  his  face  directed  towards  the  face 
of  God  the  Father,  obtaining  for  ua  the  forgiveness  and  favour,  the  stimulus  and 
strength  which  we  need.  As  Professor  Lias  puts  it,  "  We  have  One  who  stands  by  us 
{wapd),  yet  looks  toward  (wp6s)  the  Father,  and  who,  one  with  us  and  with  him,  can 
enable  us  to  do  all  things  through  his  all-powerful  aid."  And  he  is  "  righteous."  In 
this  he  is  unlike  us.  We  are  unrighteous,  and  therefore  unfit  to  appear  before  the  face 
of  God.  But  he,  being  perfectly  righteous,  is  fitted  to  appear  before  God  on  our  behalf. 
2.  Jesus  Christ  is  also  the  Propitiation  for  our  sins,  "And  he  is  the  Propitiation  for 
our  sins ;  and  not  for  ours  only,  but  also  for  the  whole  world."  The  primary  meaning 
of  "  propitiation  "  was  that  which  appeases  or  turns  away  the  wrath  of  the  gods  from  men. 
But  we  must  take  heed  that  we  do  not  rashly  apply  the  ideas  of  heathenism  as  to  its 
gods,  to  the  only  living  and  true,  the  holy  and  gracious  God.  So  much  has  been  said  and 
written  concerningthe  propitiation,  which  seems  to  us  to  have  no  warrant  in  the  sacred 
Scriptures,  and  much  that  has  not  been  honourable  to  the  holy  and  ever-blessed  God 
«nd  Father,  that  it  is  with  difBdence  that  we  venture  upon  any  remarks  concerning  it. 


61  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  JOHN.     [ch.  n.  1— 2ft 

The  New  Testament  does  not  give  ns  any  explanation  of  the  propitiation  j  it  presenti 
us  wich  no  theory  or  scheme  concerning  it ;  it  simply  states  it  as  a  great  fact  in  the 
Divine  way  of  salvation.  And  it  would  have  been  well  if  the  example  of  the  sacred 
writers  in  this  respect  had  been  more  generally  followed.  Here  is  the  declaration  of  St. 
Paul :  "  Being  justified  freely  by  his  grace  through  the  redemption  that  is  in  Christ 
Jesus :  whom  God  set  forth  to  be  a  Propitiation,  through  faith,  by  his  blood,  to  show  his 
righteousness,"  etc.  (Rom.  iii.  24 — 26).  Jesus  Christ  himself  is  said  to  be  the  Pro- 
pitiation for  our  sins.  No  particular  portion  of  his  life  or  work,  his  sufferings  or  death, 
is  specified  in  our  text  as  constituting  the  propitiation.  Christ,  in  the  whole  of  his 
mediatorial  ministry — life  and  work,  sufferings  and  death,  resurrection,  ascension,  and 
Intercession — is  our  Propitiation.  We  venture  to  make  two  observations.  (1)  The 
propitiation  was  not  anything  offered  to  God  to  render  him  willing  to  bless  and  save  us. 
If  proof  of  this  were  required,  we  have  it  ir  ch.  iv.  10 :  "  Herein  is  love,  not  that  we  loved 
God,  but  that  he  loved  us,  and  sent  his  Son  to  be  the  Propitiation  for  our  sins."  God 
did  not  provide  the  propitiation  to  propitiate  himself.  Oar  Saviour  is  the  Gift  of  the 
Father's  love  to  ns,  not  the  Procurer  of  that  love  for  ns.  It  is  nowhere  said  in  the 
Scriptures  that  Christ  reconciled  God  to  man.  Such  reconciliation  was  never  needed. 
The  great  Father  was  always  disposed  to  bless  and  save  man.  (2)  The  propitiation  was 
designed  to  remove  obstructions  to  the  free  flowing  forth  of  the  mercy  of  God  to  man. 
Here  was  an  obstruction :  man  had  broken  the  holy  Law  of  God,  had  set  it  at  nought,  and 
was  stiU  doing  so.  But  man  cannot  be  pardoned  while  he  stands  in  such  an  attitude 
and  relation  to  Law.  Love  itself  demands  that  Law  shall  be  obeyed  and  honoured. 
True  mercy  can  only  be  exercised  in  harmony  with  righteousness.  The  well-being  of 
man  is  an  impossibility  except  he  be  won  to  loyalty  to  the  Law  of  God.  Jesus  Christ 
vindicated  the  solemn  authority  of  God's  holy  Law  by  his  obedience  unto  death,  even 
the  death  of  the  cross.  Again,  there  was  an  obstruction  in  the  heart  of  man  to  the  free 
flowing  forth  of  the  mercy  of  God  to  him.  Man  regarded  God  with  distrust  and  sus- 
piaon,  if  not  with  enmity.  "  Alienated  and  enemies  in  your  mind  in  your  evil  works  " 
is  the  apostolic  description  of  unrenewed  man.  The  propitiation  was  designed  to  recon- 
cile man  to  God,  and  dispose  him  to  accept  the  offered  salvation.  "  God  was  in  Christ 
reconciling  the  world  unto  himself."  The  sacrifice  of  Christ  is  the  supreme  manifesta- 
tion of  the  infinite  love  of  God  towards  man  (cf.  ch.  iii.  16;  Eom.  v.  8).  When  that 
lore  is  heartily  believed  in,  man  is  reconciled  to  God ;  he  no  longer  regards  him  as  an 
enemy,  but  as  his  gracious  and  adorable  God  and  Father.  This  accords  with  the  state- 
ment of  St.  Paul  that  Christ  Jesus  is  "  a  Propitiation  through  faith  by  his  blood." 
"  The  true  Christian  idea  of  propitiation,"  says  Bushnell, "  is  not  that  God  is  placated  or 
satisfied  by  the  expiatory  pains  offered  him.  It  supposes,  first,  a  subjective  atoning, 
or  reconciliation  in  ns ;  and  then,  as  a  further  result,  that  Gfod  is  objectively  propitiated, 
or  set  in  a  new  relation  of  welcome  and  peace.  Before  he  could  not  embrace  us,  even 
in  his  love.  His  love  was  the  love  of  compassion;  now  it  is  the  love  of  complacency 
and  permitted  friendship."  *  And  this  propitiation  is  for  all  men.  "  The  Propitiation 
for  our  sins ;  and  not  for  ours  only,  but  also  for  the  whole  world."  If  any  are  not  saved, 
it  is  neither  because  of  any  deficiency  in  the  Divine  purposes  or  provisions,  nor  because 
the  propitiation  of  Christ  is  limited  to  certain  persons  or  to  a  certain  number  only.  The 
salvation  of  Jesus  Christ  is  adequate  to  all  men,  and  is  offered  freely  to  all  men.  If  any 
are  not  saved,  it  is  because  they  refuse  the  redemptive  mercy  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus. 
—W.J. 

Vers.  3 — 6. —  The  true  knowledge  of  God  and  its  infallible  proof .  "And  hereby  we 
know  that  we  know  him,"  etc.     We  have  in  our  text — 

I.  An  exalted  spibitual  attainment.  To  "  know  him,"  i.e.  God.  This  is  not  to 
be  altered  and  weakened  into  knowing  certain  doctrines  concerning  him;  it  is  the 
knowledge  of  God  himself.  We  may  know,  or  think  that  we  know,  much  about  him, 
without  knowing  himself.  This  knowledge  of  God  is  not  intellectual,  but  moral  and 
spiritual.  It  is  not  the  trained  and  vigorous  intellect  that  sees  God,  but  the  piwe  heart. 
"Blessed  are  the  pure  in  heart:  for  they  shall  see  God."  This  knowledge  is  that 
iswaid  and  spiritual  acquaintance  with  him  which  arises  out  of  our  faith  in  him  and 
o«r  l*Te  to  him.  Our  Lord  speaks  of  it  as  identical  with  eternal  life.  "  This  is  life 
'  '  The  Vicarious  Sacrifice,'  part  iv.  oh.  3. 


OH.n.  1— 29.]      THE  FIEST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  JOHN.  53 

eternal,  that  they  should  know  thee  the  only  true  God,"  etc.  Again,  this  knowledge 
la  intimately  and  vitally  related  to  love.  "  Every  one  that  loveth  is  begotten  of  God, 
and  knoweth  God.  He  that  loveth  not,  knoweth  not  God  ;  for  God  ia  love."  It  is  by 
love  that  we  know  him.  Without  love  we  cannot  know  him  j  the  more  we  know  him 
the  more  we  shall  love  him,  and  the  more  we  love  him  the  more  clearly  and  fully  shall 
we  know  him.  Yet,  fully  and  perfectly,  we  can  never  know  him.  The  ocean  cannot 
be  contained  in  a  tea-cup.  The  finite  cannot  comprehend  the  Infinite.  To  the  most 
advanced  and  holy  of  created  intelligences  God  must  ever  remain  incomprehensible. 
But  we  may  know  him  truly,  savingly,  progressively,  blessedly. 

II.  The  proof  op  this  exalted  attainment.  "  Hereby  we  know  that  we  know 
him,  if  we  keep  his  commandments,"  etc.  The  sure  evidence  that  we  know  him  is  "  keep- 
ing his  commandments  "  and  "  keeping  his  Word."  The  idea  of  the  word  (ii/To\ii)  which 
St.  John  uses  here  is  "  that  of  a  charge  laid  upon  us  by  one  whom  we  ought  to  obey, 
a  charge  which  love  and  duty  urge  us  to  fulfil,  instead  of  the  old  idea  of  a  law  enforced 
by  penalties,  under  which  the  slightest  dereliction  of  duty  constituted  us  transgressors. 
In  short,  he  regards  the  Christian's  duty  as  of  personal  rather  than  legal  obligation  "  (Pro- 
fessor Lias,  M.A.).  It  is  certain,  as  Ebrard  says,  that  "his  Word  "  (ver.  5)  means  essen- 
tially the  same  as  "his  commandments."  "Nevertheless,  'his  Word'  is  not  perfectly 
synonymous  with  the  '  commandments,'  but  denotes  the  revelation  of  the  Divine  will  as 
one  whole."  The  word  translated  "  to  keep  "  (riipftv)  will  repay  notice.  It  means  "  to 
watch,  to  guard,  to  watch  over  protectively  " — "  guarding  as  some  precious  thing."  Thus 
it  comes  on  to  signify  "  to  observe  practically" — "  observing  to  keep."  When  it  is  used  to 
express  obedience,  it  is  obedience  because  the  commandments  and  the  Word  are  esteemed 
as  precious,  and  are  regarded  as  treasures  not  to  be  broken.  "  The  Law  is  holy,  and  the 
commandment  holy,  and  righteous,  and  good."  1.  This  Iceeping  is  habitual.  This  is 
indicated  by  the  use  of  the  present  tense  in  ver.  3 :  "if  we  keep."  It  does  not  denote 
the  perfect  keeping  of  the  commandments  without  any  omission  or  defect,  but  their 
habitual  observance.  It  does  not  mean  sinlessness,  but  that  he  who  knows  God,  as  a 
rule  obeys  him ;  he  does  not  "  walk  in  the  darkness,"  but  "  in  the  light."  2.  I%it 
keeping  is  the  development  of  love.  "  Whoso  keepeth  his  Word,  in  him  verily  ia  the  love 
of  God  perfected."  There  has  been  much  discussion  of  the  question  whether  the  love  of 
God  to  man  or  the  love  of  man  to  God  is  here  meant.  The  discussion  seems  to  us 
unnecessary.  God  is  the  great  Fountain  of  love.  All  love  flows  from  him.  "  We  love, 
because  he  first  loved  us."  Our  love  to  him  and  our  love  to  each  other  are  effects  of 
his  love  to  us.  If,  therefore,  we  say  that  the  love  of  God  in  this  verse  is  our  love  to 
him,  we  speak  of  his  own  love  in  one  of  its  efiects.  The  love  of  God  has  been  perfected 
in  him  who  keeps  his  Word.  This  cannot  mean  that  the  love  to  God  of  that  man  who 
keeps  his  Word  is  so  perfected  as  not  to  admit  of  further  growth  or  progress.  We  may 
get  at  the  meaning 'thus :  love  aims  at  obedience,  delights  in  obedience.  Our  Lord 
demands  obedience  as  an  evidence  of  our  love  to  him  (John  xiv.  15,  21, 23,  24 ;  xv.  10). 
If  we  take  "  perfected  "  as  meaning  that  which  is  appropriately  developed,  that  which 
has  attained  its  end,  then  we  see  how  love  is  perfected  in  keeping  hts  Word.  Our  love 
to  him  is  the  effect  of  his  love  to  us,  and  his  will  is  that  we  shoiSd  express  our  love  to 
him  by  keeping  his  commandments,  and  when  we  do  so  his  love  attains  its  design — 
it  is  perfected.  3.  Thit  keeping  is  Joyous.  It  is  the  keeping,  not  of  that  of  which 
we  would  fain  be  rid,  but  (as  the  verb  implies)  of  a  prized  treasure  in  which  we 
delight.  It  is  joyous,  too,  because  it  springs  from  love.  Obedience  to  those  we  love 
is  delightful.  God's  "service  is  perfect  freedom."  Where  this  obedience  is  not,  the 
profession  of  the  knowledge  of  God  is  false.  "  He  that  saith,  I  know  him,  and  keepeth 
not  his  commandments,  is  a  liar,  and  the  truth  is  not  in  him."  A  man  may  be  well 
versed  in  theology,  may  hold  an  orthodox  creed,  may  be  a  member  of  a  Christian 
Church,  and  may  profess  that  he  knows  God,  but  if  he  does  not  heartily  keep  his  com- 
mandments he  "  is  a  liar."  "  They  profess  that  they  know  God ;  but  by  their  works 
they  deny  him"  (Titus  i.  16).  Let  us  examine  ourselves  by  these  inspired  tests.  Are 
we  vindicating  our  Christian  confession  by  our  obedience  to  Divine  commands  ?  Are 
we  expressing  our  love  to  God  by  a  life  conformed  to  his  holy  will  ?  If  we  are,  let  us 
rejoice  that  we  have  in  this  a  well-founded  assurance  "  that  we  know  him."  And  let 
no  one  dishonour  God  and  delude  himself  with  the  false  profession  that  he  knowi 
him.— W.  J. 


S4  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  JOHN.      [oh.  n,  1—29. 

V«r.  6. — OhrisUan  profession  and  eonseqiiant  obUgation.  "  He  that  8«ith  he  abideth 
in  him  ought  himself,"  etc. 

L  A  PB0FEB3I0M  or  CHBigTiAS  OBABAOTBB.  "  He  that  Balth  he  abideth  ia  him,"  i.e. 
in  God.  In  the  paragraph  of  which  our  text  is  a  part  there  is  a  gradation  of  ideas  as 
to  the  relation  of  the  Christian  to  God :  to  know  him ;  to  be  in  him  ;  and  to  abide  in 
him.  1.  The  Christian  is  in  God  by  spiritual  fellowship.  Through  Christ  the 
Christian  is  brought  into  intimate  and  hallowed  communion  with  God — ^he  believes  his 
rerelation  of  himself,  he  endeavours  to  apprehend  his  thoughts,  he  accepts  his  gracious 
will,  he  receives  his  best  inspirations  from  him.  Thus  he  has  his  spiritual  being  in  God. 
He  derives  his  inner  life  of  thought,  affection,  purpose,  and  power  from  him.  2.  The 
Christian  is  in  God  by  mutual  love.  "  We  know  and  have  believed  the  love  which 
God  hath  in  us.  God  is  love ;  and  he  that  abideth  in  love,  abideth  in  God,  and  God 
abideth  in  him."  We  may  obtain  help  to  the  understanding  of  this  by  considering  how 
our  trusted  and  beloved  friends  dwell  in  us  and  we  in  them.  Distant  from  us  locally 
and  corporeally,  yet  they  are  with  us  truly  and  spiritually.  How  the  child  dwells  in 
ths  being,  occupies  the  thoughts  and  affections,  of  the  loving  parent  I  These  ar« 
impsrfect  figures  of  how  the  true  Christian  lives  in  God  the  Father  through  Jesus 
Christ  his  Son  (cf.  John  liv.  20,  21,  23  j  xv.  4 ;  xvii.  21—23).  And  to  say  that  we 
abide  in  him  is  to  profess  fidelity  and  perseverance  in  this  exalted  and  sacred  relation. 
It  is  a  great  profession. 

XL  The  consequent  obugation  of  Chbistian  oonduot.  "  Ought  himself  also  to 
walk  even  as  he  walked."  We  have  here  a  change  in  the  pronoun,  indicating  a  change 
of  person.  The  former  personal  pronouns  &om  ch.  i.  6  to  this  clause  point  to  God  the 
Father ;  the  present  one  denotes  God  the  Son.  The  Christian  is  to  walk  as  he  walked. 
It  cannot  be  said  that  the  eternal  God  walks.  He  is  ever  the  same.  His  being  admits 
of  no  advancement  or  progress.  Man  is  said  to  "  walk  in  the  light ; "  but  of  God  it  is 
said  that  he  " is  light,"  and  that  "he  is  in  the  light "  (ch.  i.  5, 7).  But  Christ  walked 
this  earth  as  our  Example.  He  spake  of  his  life  in  this  world  as  a  walk  :  "  I  must  walk 
t(j-day,  and  to-morrow,  and  the  day  following  "  (Luke  xiii.  33).  He  hath  left  us  "  an 
example,  that  ye  should  follow  his  steps "  (1  ret.  iL  21).  It  is  the  moral,  not  the 
miraculous,  in  his  life  that  we  are  called  to  imitate — his  devotion  and  reverence,  his 
truth  and  righteousness,  his  humility  and  self-sacritice,  his  love  and  holiness.  In  his 
character  and  conduct  we  have  the  clear  and  complete  expression  of  the  will  of  the 
Father.  To  walk  as  he  walked  is  the  obligation  of  every  one  who  professes  to  be  in 
God.  This  includes :  1.  Living  after  the  example  of  Christ.  " Learn  of  me ; "  "I 
hav«  given  you  an  exaiuple,  that  ye  also  should  do  as  I  have  done  to  you  "  (John  xiii. 
13 — 15) ;  "  Walk  in  love,  even  as  Christ  also  loved  you,"  etc.  (Bph.  v.  1,  2).  Let  us 
endeavour  to  act  in  our  lives  as  our  Saviour  and  Lord  would  act  if  he  were  in  our  place. 
2.  Growing  in  likeness  to  Christ.  Walking  implies  advancement.  The  Divine  life  in 
man  is  a  progressive  thing.  We  are  summoned  to  "  grow  in  the  grace  and  knowledge 
of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ."  "  Let  us  go  on  unto  perfection  "  (Heb.  vi.  1 — 
3).  In  this  respect  let  us  copy  the  example  of  St.  Paul :  "  I  press  on,  if  so  be  that  I 
may  apprehsnd  that  for  which  also  I  was  apprehended  by  Christ  Jesus,"  etc.  (PhiL  ili. 
12 — 14).  And  let  us  endeavour  to  prove  the  reality  of  our  Christian  profession  by 
treading  in  the  footsteps  of  our  perfect  Exemplar. — W.  J. 

Vers.  9—11. — Living  in  light  and  love.  "  He  that  saith  he  is  in  the  light,  and  hateth 
his  brother,"  etc.    Our  text  teaches — 

I.  That  the  exbboisb  of  bbothbrlt  love  is  ah  bvidbnob  of  the  Ohristiah  life. 
"  He  that  loveth  his  brother  abideth  in  the  light."  To  be  "in  the  light "  and  to  "abide 
in  the  light"  is  to  live  a  true  Christian  life,  a  life  in  harmony  with  the  light  of  God. 
By  the  "  brother  "  we  are  to  understand  here  neither  our  fellow-man  nor  our  neighbour, 
but  the  members  of  the  Christian  community,  those  who  by  profession  are  Christian 
brethren.  We  say,  "  by  profession,"  because  it  is  clear  that  in  vers.  9  and  11  persons 
are  spoken  of  who  are  professedly  but  not  really  Christians.  We  show  that  we  are  in 
the  light  by  our  affection  for  those  who  are  in  the  light.  "  God  is  Light "  and  "  God  is 
Love ;  "  if  we  are  shavers  in  his  light  we  shall  also  be  sharers  in  his  love.  "  A  new 
commandment  I  give  unto  you,  that  ye  love  one  another ;  even  as  I  have  loved  you, 
that  ye  also  1ot«  one  another.    By  this  shall  all  men  know  that  ye  are  my  disciples,  if 


OH.  n.  1—29.]      THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  QENEBAL  OP  JOHN.  68 

ye  have  love  one  to  another  "  (John  xiii.  34,  36).  "  In  this  one  thing,"  says  Stier, 
"  and  in  no  other,  is  discipleship  approved.  It  is  not  knowledge  which  avails,  not  a  8o- 
ealled/atth,  even  though,  like  uiat  of  Judas,  before  the  devil  entered  him,  it  could  cast 
out  devils  and  remove  mountains;  rather  is  this  knowledge  and  this  genuine  faith 
known  by  this  love.  As  little  avails  the  confession  of  my  Name,  or  of  all  the  truth 
concerning  my  Person  and  my  kingdom.  Where  this  walking  in  the  truth  is  not 
found,  the  confession  becomes  an  all  the  more  frightful  lie.  As  the  disciples  of  the 
Pharisees  were  known  by  their  phylacteries,  and  as  the  disciples  of  John  were  knowu 
by  their  fasting,  and  every  school  by  its  shibboleth— the  mark  of  the  disciples  of  Christ 
is  to  be  love.     And  that  a  genuine  love,  as  Christ  loveth." 

II.  Thk  exercise  of  brotherly  love  promotes  the  stability  of  the  Christian 
LIFE.  "  He  that  loveth  his  brother  dbideih  in  the  light."  Love  is  an  expression  of 
faith;  it  also  increases  and  invigorates  faith.  The  outgoing  of  the  heart  in  huly 
affection  to  the  Christian  brotherhood  strengthens  the  new  life  within  the  heart.  Pure 
affection  for  others  augments  the  wealth  of  our  being.  "  The  heart  grows  rich  in 
giving."  The  exercise  of  brotherly  love  promotes  the  sanctity  and  strength  of  the 
entire  Christian  life,  the  susceptibility  of  the  soul  to  Divine  Influences,  its  firmness  in 
holy  principles,  and  fidelity  and  facility  in  Christian  practices. 

III.  The  exercise  of  brotherly  love  promotes  the  security  of  ths  Christian 
LIFE.  •'  There  is  none  occasion  of  stumbling  In  him."  1.  Brotherly  love  will  give  no 
occasion  of  stumhling  to  others.  Love  will  keep  us  from  doing  any  wrong  to  others, 
from  giving  any  cause  of  offence  to  others,  or  from  doing  anything  whereby  they  may 
be  led  astray  from  the  path  of  rectitude  or  caused  to  stumble  in  that  path.  "Love 
worketh  no  ill  to  his  neighbour."  2.  Brotherly  love  will  preserve  us  from  stumbling 
ourselves.  Love  is  not  quick  to  take  offence.  Love  is  forbearing,  patient,  humble ; 
and  humility  walks  peacefully  and  safely  where  pride  painfully  stumbles  and  falls 
"  Love  suffereth  long,  and  is  kind ;  love  envieth  not ;  love  vaunteth  not  Itself,"  etc, 
(1  Cor.  xiiL  4—7). 

IV.  The  absence  of  brotherly  lovs  is  an  bvidenob  of  a  life  op  sin,  notwith- 
BTANDiNO  A  PROFESSION  OF  LIFE  IN  THE  LIGHT.  "  He  that  salth  he  Is  In  the  light,  and 
hateth  his  brother,  is  in  the  darkness  even  until  now.  ...  He  that  hateth  his  brother 
is  in  the  darkness,"  etc.  St.  John  mentions  no  middle  condition  between  love  of  the 
brethren  and  hatred  of  them.  As  Diisterdleck  says,  "  On  the  one  side  is  God,  on  the 
other  the  world  :  here  Is  life,  there  is  death  (ch.  ill.  14) :  here  love,  there  hate,  i.e. 
murder  (ch.  Hi.  15) ;  there  is  no  medium.  In  the  space  between,  Is  nothing.  Life  may 
as  yet  be  merely  elementary  and  fragmentary,  love  may  be  as  yet  weak  and  poor ; 
but  still,  life  in  God  and  its  necessary  demonstration  in  love,  is  present  really  and  truly, 
and  the  Word  of  our  Lord  Is  true,  '  He  that  Is  not  against  me  is  with  me '  (Luke  ix, 
50) :  and  on  the  other  side,  the  life  according  to  the  flesh,  the  attachment  to  the  world, 
and  the  necessary  action  of  this  selfishness  by  means  of  hatred,  may  be  much  hidden, 
may  be  craftily  covered  and  with  splendid  outer  surface ;  but  in  the  secret  depth  of 
the  man,  there,  where  spring  the  real  fountains  of  his  moral  life.  Is  not  God  but  the 
world  ;  the  man  Is  yet  in  death,  and  can  consequently  love  nothing  but  himself  and 
must  hate  his  brother,  and  then  that  other  Word  of  the  Lord  Is  true, '  He  that  is  not 
for  me  is  against  me '  (Luke  xl.  23).  For  a  man  can  only  be  either  for  or  against  - 
Christ,  and  consequently  can  only  have  either  love  or  hate  towards  his  brother."  Mark 
the  characteristics  of  this  life  from  which  brotherly  love  Is  absent,  as  they  are  here 
sketched.  1.  Darkness  of  moral  condition.  He  "is  in  the  darkness" — in  it  as  the 
<(lement  of  his  moral  life.  2.  Darkness  of  moral  action.  He  "  walketh  In  the  dark- 
neas."  His  course  of  life  and  conduct  Is  in  keeping  with  the  gloom  of  error  and  sin. 
3.  Darkness  as  to  destination.  He  "knoweth  not  whither  he  goeth."  He  knows 
neither  the  way  he  is  walking  in  nor  the  end  to  which  It  leads.  4.  Darkness  of  tht 
spiritual  leing.  "  The  darkness  hath  blinded  his  eyes."  Persons  who  have  long  been 
Imprisoned  in  darkness  have  frequently  lost  their  physical  vision.  So  here  it  is  said 
that  the  moral  darkness  in  which  the  sinner  dwells  has  destroyed  his  spiritual  vision ; 
and  he  walks  on  in  moral  night,  imagining  that  he  is  walking  in  the  light  of  daj 
(cf.JohnU.  41).— W.J. 

Ten.  12 — ^14. — Seeaont  of  lift  and  their  appropriate  spiritital  tasperieneet,    "  I  writs 


56  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  JOHN.      [oh.  n.  1—29, 

UDto  yon,  little  children,  because  your  sins  are  forgiven  you,"  etc.  Our  text  teaches: 
1.  That  the  revelations  of  redemptive  truth  are  adapted  to  e/very  season  of  human  life. 
St.  John  writes  to  little  children,  to  young  men,  and  to  fathers.  To  each  of  these 
classes  the  Bible  has  much  to  say,  and  much  that  is  appropriate  to  each  class.  The 
Bible  is  the  book  for  the  little  child,  for  the  veuerable  sage,  and  for  all  the  inter- 
mediate seasons  of  life.  2.  That  there  should  he  an  appropriate  relation  between  the 
physical  seasons  and  the  spiritual  experiences  of  human  ly/i.  Some  of  these  seasons 
and  experiences  are  mentioned  in  our  text ;  and  to  these  we  now  turn  our  attention. 

I.  An  ExrEEiENCB  COMMON  TO  ALL  CHRISTIANS.  "  I  Write  unto  you,  little  children, 
because  ,yonr  sins  are  forgiven  you  for  his  Name's  sake."  In  this  place  we  regard  the 
"little  children"  as  addressed  to  all  the  apostle's  readers,  irrespective  of  age.  The 
word  which  he  uses  (reicvta)  is  employed  seven  limes  in  this  Epistle,  and  always  as 
comprehending  the  whole  of  his  re;iders.  1.  77ie  great  tlessing  enjoyed.  "  Tour  sins 
are  lorgiven  you."  This  forgiveness  is  an  accomplished  fact,  and  is  realized  by  the 
Christian  as  a  present  blessing.  And  how  great  a  blessing  it  is  1  He  who  receives  it 
is  set  free  from  the  guilt  of  his  sins,  delivered  from  their  condemnation,  exempted  from 
their  punishment;  and  there  is  imparted  to  him  a  blessed  consciousness  of  the  favour 
of  God — "  the  love  of  God  is  shed  abroad  in  his  heart  by  the  Holy  Ghost."  Dr. 
Maclaren  has  well  said,  "  Not  putting  up  the  rod,  but  taking  your  child  to  your  heart, 
is  your  forgiveness.  .  .  .  And  pardon  is  the  open  heart  of  God,  full  of  love,  unaverted 
by  any  oonscq'iences  of  my  sin,  unclosed  by  any  of  my  departures  from  him."  2.  The 
medium  through  which  the  blessing  is  obtained.  "  For  his  Name's  sake."  The  Name  is 
that  of  Jesus  Christ,  the  Saviour  and  the  Anointed  of  God.  The  Name  is  suggestive 
of  all  his  work  for  us  and  for  our  salvation — his  perfect  redemptive  work,  with  which 
the  Father  was  well  pleased.  We  have  forgiveness  and  "  peace  with  God  through  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ." 

II.  An  experience  appropriate  to  childhood.  "  I  have  written  unto  you,  little 
children,  because  ye  know  the  Father."  The  word  used  for  "  children  "  (iroiS/a)  here  is 
not  the  same  as  that  in  the  preceding  verse ;  and  we  think,  with  Ebrard,  that  the 
apostle  does  not  now  address  all  his  readers,  but  those  only  who  were  children  in  age. 
One  of  the  first  indications  of  the  intelligence  of  a  child  is  its  recognition  of  its  father. 
Ver3'  early  in  life  the  heart  of  the  child  knows  its  father.  Not  as  the  result  of  teaching 
or  reasoning,  but  in  the  natural  unfolding  of  its  powers  it  makes  the  recognition.  And 
those  who  are  children  in  the  Christian  life  know  God  as  their  Father,  not  by  evidences 
or  argumints,  but  by  the  trust  and  love  of  their  heart,  which  have  been  awakened 
through  Jesus  Christ.  They  know  him  as  their  Father,  not  only  because  they  are  his 
creatures,  but  by  the  gracious,  loving,  tender  relations  which  he  sustains  to  them,  and 
by  the  existence  and  exercise  of  the  filial  spirit  in  themselves.  They  have  "  received 
the  Spirit  of  adoption,  whereby  they  cry,  Abba,  Father."  It  seems  to  us  that  "  little 
children  "  in  many  cases  apprehend  aud  realize  the  Divine  Fatherhood  more  clearly  and 
fully  than  Christians  of  mature  age ;  and  that  they  do  so  because  their  faith  in  him  is 
simpler  and  stronger. 

III.  An  experience  appkopeiate  to  toung  manhood.  "  I  have  written  unto  you, 
young  men,  because  ye  are  strong,  and  the  Word  of  God  abideth  in  you,  and  ye  have 
overcome  the  evil  one."  1.  The  possession  of  spiritual  strength.  "  Ye  are  strong." 
Strength  should  characterize  young  manhood.  Strength  of  body  is  a  good  thing ; 
strength  of  mind  is  better ;  strength  of  soul  is  best.  Spiritual  strength  is  the  strength 
of  confidence  in  God,  of  love  to  God  aod  to  man,  of  worthy  purposes,  of  righteous 
principles,  and  of  vital  accord  with  truth.  And  this  strength  finds  expression  in 
patient  endurance,  and  earnest  labour,  and  resolute  resistance  to  wrong  and  battling  for 
the  right.  The  last  aspect  of  this  strength  is  probably  prominent  in  the  clause  under 
CMnsideration.  The  young  men  were  strong  iu  moral  conflict.  The  interpretation  is 
confirmed  by  the  use" of  the  same  word  in  Luke  xi.  21, "  When  the  strong  man  armed," 
etc.;  and  in  Heb.  xi.  34,  "Waxed  valiant  in  fight,"  or,  as  in  the  Revised  Version, 
"  mighty  in  war."  And  this  strength  is  derived  through  Jesus  Christ.  Apart  from 
him  we  can  do  nothing.  We  can  do  all  things  in  him  that  strenglheneth us.  "There- 
fore be  strengthened  in  the  grace  that  is  in  Christ  Jesus."  2.  The  possession  of  Divine 
truth.  "  The  Word  of  God  abideth  in  you."  The  Word  of  God  is  the  revelation  of  his 
Bkind  aiui  will  which  he  had  made  to  man,  with  perhaps  special  reference  to  the  gospel. 


3H.II.1— 29.]      THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  JOHN.  67 

They  had  received  this  Word,  and  it  was  prized  by  them ;  they  retained  it  as  a  treasure 
(c£  Ps.  cxix.  162).  It  dwelt  within  them  (1)  as  an  illuminating  force  (cf.  Ps.  xix.  7, 
8 ;  cxix.  105, 130 ;  Prov.  vi.  23) ;  (2)  as  a  regulative  force  (cf.  Ps.  xxxvii.  31 ;  cxix. 
1 — 11,  101).  3.  The  attainment  of  spiritual  victory.  "  Ye  have  overcome  the  evil  one," 
i.e,  Satan.  He  is  the  wicked  one,  "because  the  first  in  wickedness,  because  most  indus- 
triously wicked,  and  because  most  obstinate  and  persevering  in  wickedness."  St.  John 
cannot  mean  that  the  young  men  had  completely  and  finally  vanquished  Satan.  He 
does  not  so  readily  accept  and  submit  to  defeat,  but  renews  his  attacks  again  and  again. 
The  apostle  writes  of  the  victory  achieved  in  conversion.  There  is  a  stnse  in  which  all 
who  have  become  new  creatures  in  Christ  Jesus  are  already  conquerors  of  the  wicked  one. 
They  are  "  delivered  out  of  the  power  of  darkness,  and  translated  into  the  kingdom  of 
the  Son  of  his  love  "  (Col.  i.  13 ;  and  cf.  ch.  v.  18).  As  Alford  says, "  Whatever  conflict 
remains  for  them  afterwards,  is  with  a  baffled  and  conquered  enemy." 

IV.  An  experienob  appbopbiatb  to  mature  manhood.  "  I  have  written  unto  you, 
fathers,  because  ye  know  him  which  is  from  the  beginning,"  ije.  Jesus  Christ  (cf.  ch.  i. 
1).  The  appropriate  occupation  of  age  is  not  conflict,  but  contemplation ;  not  stormy 
strife,  but  serene  meditation ;  to  penetrate  more  deeply  into  the  heart  of  truth,  to  get 
cleaver  and  deeper  visions  of  the  Eternal  and  the  Divine,  to  know  more  and  more  of 
Jesus  Christ,  and  of  God  in  Christ.  Maturity  in  the  knowledge  of  Christ  is  becoming 
in  Christian  fathers.  "  The  whole  sum  of  Christian  ripeness  and  experience  is  this  know- 
ledge of  'thee  the  only  true  God,  and  him  whom  thou  didst  send,  even  Jesus  Christ.' " 

Let  each  of  these  classes  addressed  by  St.  John  seek  to  realize  its  own  appropriate 
experience. — W.  J. 

Vers.  15 — 17. — An  apostolic  prohibition,  and  the  reason  thereof.  "  Love  not  the 
world,  neither  the  things  that  are  in  the  world,"  etc.  The  text  is  not  addressed  to 
either  of  the  three  previously  mentioned  classes  in  particular,  but  to  all  the  apostle's 
readers.  Genuine  Christians  need  to  guard  themselves  against  love  of  the  world.  The 
worldly  spirit  is  about  us,  it  pervades  much  of  society,  it  is  active  and  vigorous ;  and 
within  us  there  is  a  residue  of  the  old  worldly  and  sinful  nature.  By  reason  of  these 
things  even  a  true  Christian  is  in  danger  of  loving  the  world.    Notice — 

I.  The  apostolic  prohibition.  "  Love  not  the  world,  neither  the  things  that  are 
in  the  world."  1.  The  world  is  not  the  material  universe.  This  is  a  creation  of  God, 
and  it  vividly  illustrates  some  of  his  infinite  perfections.  "  The  heavens  declare  the 
glory  of  God,"  etc.  (Ps.  xix,  1 — 6).  The  light  is  the  garment  in  which  he  robes 
himself  (Ps.  civ.  2).  The  fertility  of  the  earth  is  an  illustration  of  his  bounty  and 
beneficence.  A  divinely  inspired  poet,  having  surveyed  the  creations  of  God, 
exclaimed,  "  O  Lord,  how  manifold  are  thy  works  I  in  wisdom  hast  thou  made  them 
all :  the  earth  is  full  of  thy  riches."  We  read,  "  The  Lord  shall  rejoice  in  his  works." 
There  is  in  nature  endless  significance  for  our  instruction,  much  that  is  vast  and 
sublime  to  awe  us,  much  that  is  beautiful  to  delight  us,  much  that  is  bountiful  to 
supply  our  needs,  and  much  to  lead  our  thoughts  to  God.  There  is  a  sense  in  which 
we  may  love  this  beautiful  creation,  and  with  all  the  more  of  warmth  because  our 
Father  made  it  and  sustains  it.  2.  The  world  is  not  the  world  of  men  as  such,  or 
mankind.  It  is  not  the  world  of  John  iii.  16, "  God  so  loved  the  world,"  etc.  With 
the  love  of  benevolence  and  pity  God  loved  the  world  of  sinful  men.  And  we  should 
cherish  feelings  of  kindness  and  pity  for  those  who  do  not  yet  know  Jesus  Christ — 
should  love  them  as  God  loved  the  world.  3.  The  world  here  is  the  world  of  sinners  as 
distinguished  from  those  that  are  true  Christians,  or,  as  Ebrard  expresses  it,  "  unchris- 
tian humanity."  By  "  the  world  "  St.  John  does  not  mean  the  material,  but  the  moral 
world,  the  heathen  world.  In  his  view,  as  Dr.  Culross  says,  "  the  world  is  in  sin.  Its 
sinful  condition  is  variously  represented.  It  is  in  darkness ;  it  knows  not  God ;  it 
finds  his  commandments  grievous ;  it  lies  in  wickedness ;  it  is  in  death — not  merely 
exposed  to  it  as  a  penalty,  but  in  it  as  a  condition.  The  'things'  of  it  are  such  as 
these — '  the  lust  of  the  flesh,  and  the  lust  of  the  eyes,  and  the  pride  of  life.'  .  .  .  The 
'  world '  of  John's  day  we  know,  as  to  its  actual  condition,  from  other  sources.  Let  any 
one  turn  over  the  pages  of  Tacitus,  Juvenal,  Martial,  or  Persius,  with  their  often- 
unconscious  disclosures  of  prevailing  licentiousness  and  cruelty ;  and  what  he  learns 
will  put '  colour'  into  John's  outlines.    The  same  world — at  heart — we  still  find  in  th« 


n  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  JOHN.      [oh.  n.  1— 2». 

pregent  century,  under  modern  conditions.  It  lias  grown  in  wealth.  It  has  become 
ciyilized  and  refined.  Law  has  become  a  mightier  thing.  The  glory  of  science  was 
never  half  so  bright.  But,  looking  close  in,  we  still  find  the  old  facts — a  dislike  of 
God  and  love  of  sin,  pride  and  self-sufficiency,  a  godless  and  selfish  use  of  things, 
men  'hating  one  another,'  selfishness  fighting  selfishness,  an  infinite  mass  of 
misery."  1  "Neither  the  things  that  aie  in  the  world,  .  .  .  the  lust  of  the  flesh,  the  lust 
of  the  eyes,  and  the  vaiu-glory  of  life."  By  "  the  lust  of  the  fltsh  "  we  understand  the 
inordinate  desire  for  sensual  indulgences,  the  longing  for  the  gratification  of  the  carnal 
appetites.  How  prevalent  is  this  lust  1  We  see  it  in  the  epicure,  in  the  wine-bibber, 
and  in  others  in  still  coarser  and  more  degrading  forms.  It  is  most  terrible  in  its 
effects  upon  the  soul.  "Tbe  lust  of  the  eyes,"  interpreted  by  the  aid  of  other  Scrip- 
tures, seems  to  mean  the  eager  desire  of  possession  directed  towards  temporal  and 
material  goods,  or  covetousness.  It  is  not  the  desire  to  look  upon  pleasing,  or  beautiful, 
or  sublime  ttiings,  which  is  here  condemned,  but  the  sinful  look  of  avarice.  In  confir- 
mation  of  this  view,  see  Prov.  xxiii.  5 ;  xxvii.  20 ;  Bccles.  iv.  8 ;  v.  10 ;  Luke  xiv. 
18, 19.  Probably  there  is  also  a  reference  to  the  fueling  of  hatred  and  the  desire  of 
revenge,  as  indicatpd  in  Ps.  xvii.  11 ;  liv.  7 ;  xci.  8 ;  xoii.  11.  "  The  vain-glory  of  life" 
i>  "  the  lust  of  shining  and  making  a  boasting  display."  It  points  to  that  which  is  so 
prevalent  in  our  day — the  desire  for  grand  houses,  and  costly  furniture,  and  fine  horses 
and  carriages,  and  rich  and  fashionable  dresses ;  the  effort  to  give  luxurious  parties  and 
splendid  entertainments,  and  to  outshine  our  neighbours  in  our  mode  of  life.  These 
things  are  of  the  world,  worldly  ;  and  these  things  Christians  are  exhorted  not  to  love, 

II.  The  kbason  op  this  peohibition.  The  reason  is  twofold.  1.  Because  the  love 
of  the  world  excludes  the  love  of  Ood.  "  If  any  man  love  the  world,  the  love  of  the 
Father  is  not  in  him."  Man  cannot  love  the  holy  Father  and  the  unchristian  world. 
These  two  affections  cannoi  coexist  in  one  heart.  Either  of  them,  by  its  veiy  nature, 
excludes  the  other.  And  "  the  things  that  are  in  the  world,"  the  love  of  which 
is  prohibiteil,  are  "not  of  the  Father,  but  of  the  world."  They  do  not  proceed  from 
him;  they  are  utterly  opposed  to  his  character  and  will;  and,  therefore,  affection 
to  them  cannot  dwell  in  tiie  heart  that  loves  him.  Sensuality  and  covetousness  and 
vain-glory  are  irreconcilably  opposed  to  love  to  God.  2.  Because  the  world  and 
worldly  things  are  transient.  "  Tlie  world  passeth  away,  and  the  lust  thereof."  "  The 
world  "  is  stUl  the  unchristian  world.  It  has  in  it  no  elements  of  permanence.  The 
darkness  of  moral  error  and  sin  must  recede  before  the  onward  march  of  the  light 
of  truth  and  holiness.  The  principles  and  words  which  oppose  the  Church  of  God  are 
transient;  they  are  passing  away.  Shall  we  set  onr  liearts  upon  such  fleeting  things? 
And  the  lusts  of  the  world  are  evanescent  also.  The  giatifications  of  the  flesh  and 
of  the  senses  quickly  cease.  The  things  which  many  so  eagerly  desire  and  pursue,  the 
pleasures  and  riches,  the  honours  and  vain  shows  of  this  world,  are  passing  away  like 
dreams  of  the  night.  And  even  the  appetite  for  some  of  these  things  fails.  The  time 
comes  when  the  desire  for  tensual  gratifications  ceases.  Indulgence  in  the  pleasures 
of  the  world  tends  to  destroy  the  capacity  for  enjoying  them.  When  that  time  comes, 
the  man  of  the  world,  sated,  wearied,  disappointed,  regards  these  things  bitterly  and 
cynically,  findirg  that  he  has  wasted  heart  and  life  upon  them.  Therefore  let  us  not 
love  them.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  "  he  that  doeth  the  will  of  God  abideth  for  ever." 
The  doing  of  his  will  is  the  evidence  and  expression  of  our  love  to  him.  Here, 
as  so  frequently  in  the  writings  of  St.  John,  we  see  the  importance  of  action.  It  is 
not  love  in  profession  that  is  blessed,  but  love  in  practice.  "  If  ye  love  me,  ye  will 
keep  my  commendnients."  It  is  not  the  creed  that  is  commended,  but  the  conduct. 
He  who  thus  acta  out  his  love  to  God  abides  for  ever.  He  is  connected  with  a  stable 
order  of  things.  He  is  vitally  related  to  God  himself,  and  is  an  heir  of  immortal  and 
blessed  life.  He  is  now  a  participator  in  tbe  life  of  Christ ;  and  to  all  his  disciples  he 
gives  the  great  assurance,  "  Because  I  live,  ye  shall  live  also." 

By  all  these  considerations  let  us  not  love  the  unchristian,  unsatisfying,  and  perigh- 
ing  world ;  but  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  let  us  seek  to  love  the  Father  with  an 
ever-growing  affection. — W.  J. 

Vet*.  20^  27. — 17k  unction  from  th«  Edy  One.    "  But  ye  have  an  unction  fro. , 
>  'John,  whom  Jesus  loved,'  oh.  t. 


*.  n.  1 -"9.]      THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  JOHN.  6<l 


the  Holy  One,  and  ye  know  all  thingi.  .  .  .  But  the  anointing  which  ye  have 
received,"  rto. 

I.  The  natukb  of  this  blessino.  "  Ye  have  an  anointing  from  the  Holy  One." 
The  "  unction,"  or  "  anointing,"  does  not  signify  the  act  of  anointing,  hut  the  material 
which  is  used  in  the  anointing — the  oil,  or  ointment,  or  unguent.  Here  it  donotes  the 
Holy  Spirit,  whom  the  Christians  to  whom  St.  John  was  writing  had  received. 
Prophets,  priests,  and  kings  were  anointed,  and  Christians  are  spoken  of  in  the  New 
Testament  as  "  kings  and  priests "  (Rev.  i.  6) ;  but  we  cannot  see  in  our  text  any 
reference  to  either  of  these  aspects  of  Christian  character  and  life.  The  apostle 
is  rather  contrasting  his  readers,  who  had  received  the  anointing  from  the  Holy  One, 
with  the  antichrists,  who  were  opposed  to  the  Anointed.  As  Alford  expresses  it,  "  The 
apostle  sets  his  readers,  as  xpicToij,  anointed  of  God,  over  against  the  avrlxpi'TToi." 
They  possessed  the  Holy  Spirit.  He  was  within  them  as  their  Teacher,  Comforter, 
Sanctifier.     This  blessing  is  of  unspeakable  and  inestimable  worth. 

II.  The  source  of  this  BLESsiNa.  "  Ye  have  ah  anointing  from  the  Holy  One ; " 
i.t.  Jesus  Christ.  In  ver.  1  St.  John  speaks  of  him  as  "  the  Righteous."  In  ch.  iii.  3 
he  says  that  "  he  is  pure."  St.  Peter  said  to  him,  "  We  know  that  ihou  art  the  Holy 
One  of  God"  (John  vi.  69).  And  he  afterwards  spake  of  hitn  as  "the  Holy  and 
Righteous  One  "  (Acts  iii.  14).  And  h«  spake  of  himself  to  "  his  servant  John  "  as 
"  he  that  is  holy,  he  that  is  true "  (Rev.  iii.  7).  He  baptizes  with  the  Holy  Spirit 
(John  1.  33).  He  sends  the  Holy  Spirit  (Jolin  xt.  26).  The  outpouring  of  the  Holy 
Spirit  on  the  Day  of  Pentecost  is  ascribed  to  him  (Acts  ii.  33).  Therefore  we  conclude 
that  he,  our  Lord  and  Saviour,  it  th«  Holy  One  from  whom  Christians  receive  the 
anointing ;  t.e.  the  Holy  Spirit. 

HI.  Thb  efteot  op  this  blessino.  "  Ye  know  all  things.  .  .  .  And  ye  need  not 
that  anyone  teach  you."  The  "all  things"  cannot,  of  course,  mean  all  things  in 
science  and  art,  in  history  and  philosophy.  An  examination  of  the  context  will  lead 
us  to  the  true  meaning.  In  ver.  20  St.  John  says,  "  Ye  know  all  things ;  "  in  ver.  21 
and  the  next  sentence  he  says,  "  Ye  know  the  truth ; "  and  in  the  following  verse  and 
the  next  sentence  he  shows  what  the  truth  of  which  he  had  spoken  is,  viz.  "  that  Jesus 
is  the  Christ."  By  the  "all  things,"  then,  the  apostle  means  "the  truth  .  .  .  that 
Jesus  is  the  Christ."  All  things  in  the  Christian  system  are  ^comprised  in  that  one 
great  fact.  "  He  who  knows  this  one  thing,"  says  Ebrard,  "  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ, 
knows  already  in  that  one  thing  all;  there  is  no  most  distant  height  or  depth  of  truth 
which  is  not  contained  or  involved  in  that  simple  proposition."  This  interpretation 
includes  other  interpretations  which  are  not  so  clearly  drawn  from  the  context ;  e.g. 
Alford,  "All  things  needful  for  right  action  in  the  matter  under  consideration;" 
Barnes,  "  All  things  which  it  is  essential  that  you  should  know  on  the  subject  of 
religion  j "  and  others,  "  AU  things  necessary  to  salvation."  These  and  others  are 
comprised  In  the  knowledge  "that  Jesus  is  the  Christ."  This  knowledge  they 
attained  by  means  of  "  an  unction  from  the  Holy  One."  We  do  not  understand  that 
the  Holy  Spirit  had  communicated  unto  them  new  truths,  or  directly  revealed  any 
truth  to  them.  But  by  reason  of  his  influence  they  saw  the  truths  which  they  had 
received,  more  clearly,  and  grasped  them  more  firmly.  This  is  well  illustrated  by 
Dr.  Chalmers :  The  Spirit  "does  not  tell  us  anything  that  is  out  of  the  record;  but 
all  that  is  within  it  he  sends  home  with  clearness  and  effect  upon  the  mind.  When 
a  telescope  is  directed  to  some  distant  landscape,  it  enables  us  to  see  what  we  could  not 
otherwise  have  seen ;  hut  it  does  not  enable  us  to  see  anything  which  has  not  a  real 
existence  in  the  prospect  before  us.  The  natural  eye  saw  nothing  but  blue  land 
stretching  along  the  distant  horizon.  By  the  aid  of  the  glass  there  bursts  upon 
it  a  charming  variety  of  fields,  and  woods,  and  spires,  and  villages.  Yet  who  would  say 
that  the  glass  added  one  feature  to  this  assemblage  ?  And  so  of  the  Spirit.  He  does 
not  add  a  single  truth  or  a  single  character  to  the  book  of  revelation,  fie  enables  the 
spiritual  man  to  see  what  the  natural  man  cannot  see  ;  but  the  spectacle  which  he 
lays  open  is  uniform  and  immutable.  It  is  the  Word  of  God  which  is  ever  the  same." 
So  the  Holy  Spirit  had  brought  into  clear  and  impressive  light  the  things  which  they 
to  whom  this  letter  is  addressed  had  learned  from  the  sacred  Scriptures  and  from 
St.  John  and  other  Christian  teachers,  and  had  enabled  them  to  realize  their  importance 
and  power.    And  as  a  matter  of  fact,  in  our  own  day  we  see  persons  whose  educational 


60  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  JOHN.      [oh.  ii.  1—29. 

advantages  have  Ijeen  of  the  slightest,  whose  powers  and  opportunities  for  study  have 
been  most  limited,  who  yet  have  a  clear  and  comprehensive  acquaintance  with  the 
essential  truths  of  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ.  And  the  reason  of  this  is,  they  "  have 
an  anointing  from  the  Holy  One,"  they  are  enlightened  by  the  Holy  Spirit  (cf.  John 
xiv.  26;  xvi.  13, 14;  1  Cor.  ii.  13—16).  But  St.  John  writes  further,  "Ye  need  not 
that  any  one  teach  you" — a  statement  on  which  Alford  remarks,  "His  assertions 
here  are  so  many  delicate  exhortations,  veiled  imder  the  declaration  of  their  true  ideal 
state  of  unction  with  the  Holy  Spirit  who  guides  into  all  truth.  If  that  unction  were 
abiding  in  them  in  all  its  fulness,  they  would  have  no  need  for  his  or  any  other 
teaching."  The  reference  is  to  their  knowledge  of  the  great  compreliensive  truth  "  that 
Jesus  is  the  Christ."  They  were  not  dependent  upon  any  one  for  teaching  concerning 
this  vital  and  fundamental  fact.  But  generally  speaking,  "  the  Divine  unction  does 
not  supersede  ministerial  teaching,  but  surmounts  it." 

IV.  The  obligation  of  this  BLBSsiKa.  More  fnlly  stated  this  is  the  obligation 
which  is  inseparable  f.om  the  possession  of  this  anointing  from  the  Holy  One.  "  Abide 
in  him,"  i.e.  in  Christ,  as  the  context  clearly  shows.  The  person  spoken  of  in  vers. 
27  and  28  is  evidently  the  Lord  Jesus.  The  exhortation  to  abide  in  him  is  based  on  the 
assurance  that  the  anointing  which  they  had  received  abode  in  them  (ver.  27).  The 
"  in  him  "  must  not  be  toned  down  to  his  doctrine,  or  his  system,  or  anything  of  that 
kind.  "  In  him  "  by  the  exercise  of  the  faith  of  the  heart,  by  the  attachment  of  holy 
love,  by  intimate  and  reverent  communion  with  him,  and  by  participation  in  his  life 
and  spirit.  Thus  are  we  to  abide  in  him  (of.  John  xv.  4 — 7).  Prom  our  subject  we 
learn :  1.  That  the  illumination  of  the  Holy  Spirit  is  indispensable  to  a  clear  and 
correct  apprehension  of  the  great  truths  of  Christianity.  "  Words  and  syllables,"  says 
Cudworth,  "  which  are  but  dead  things,  cannot  possibly  convey  the  living  notions  of 
heavenly  truths  to  us.  The  secret  mysteries  of  a  Divine  life,  of  a  new  nature,  of  Christ 
formed  in  our  hearts,  they  cannot  be  written  or  spoken;  language  and  expressions 
cannot  reach  them ;  neither  can  they  be  ever  truly  understood,  except  the  soul  itself  be 
kindled  from  within,  and  awakened  into  the  life  of  them "  (cf.  1  Cor.  ii.  10 — 12).  2. 
That  the  "  anointing  from  the  Holy  One  " — the  influence  and  presence  of  the  Holy  Spirit 
within  us — is  a  preservative  against  the  seductions  of  error.  "  If  that  which  ye  heard 
from  the  beginning  abide  in  you,  ye  also  shall  abide  in  the  Son,  and  in  the  Father  .  .  . 
.  .  .  but  the  anointing  which  ye  received  of  him  abideth  in  you,"  etc.  3.  That  the 
possession  of  this  Divine  preservative  is  not  an  encouragement  to  presumption,  but 
a  reason  for  perseverance.  Because  the  anointing  which  they  received  of  Christ  al>ode 
in  them,  St.  John  exhorts  his  readers  to  "  abide  in  him." — W.  J. 

Vers.  1 — 6. — Sin  supposed :  sin  dealt  with.  There  is  here  a  contrast  to  the  state- 
ment in  the  last  verse  of  the  first  chapter.  There,  a  man  was  supposed  to  deny  the 
commission  of  sin.  Here,  the  apostle  supposes  its  existence,  and  shows  how  God  has 
dealt  with  it.     We  have  here — 

I.  Divine  provision  against  experience  of  sin  dt  believers.  1.  Advocacy  as 
far  as  our  need  for  it  is  concerned.  "  My  little  children,  these  things  write  I  unto 
you,  that  ye  may  not  sin.  And  if  any  man  sin,"  etc.  John  addresses  Christians 
in  the  circle  of  Churches  of  which  Ephesus  was  the  centre,  in  wliom  he  was  deeply 
interested,  as  his  little  children.  This  term  of  affection,  which  Paul  only  uses 
once  in  his  Epistles,  John  uses  seven  times  in  this  Epistle.  It  is  in  accordance 
with  affection  being  the  strongest  element  in  his  nature,  and  also  in  accordance 
with  his  advanced  age  in  comparison  with  Paul.  The  addition  of  the  personal 
pronoun  is  found  only  here  and  in  ch.  iii.  18.  In  presenting  the  contrast,  John 
would  naturally  have  gone  on  to  say,  "  If  we  sin."  But  that  would  have  had  the 
appearance  of  treating  the  experience  of  sin  in  believers  too  much  as  a  matter  of  course. 
He  therefore  considers  it  necessary  to  interpose  words  in  which  he  slates  it  to  be  the 
object  of  his  writing  to  them,  that  they  should  not  sin.  It  is  important  to  note,  in 
view  of  subsequent  statements,  that  he  does  not  write  to  them  as  sinless,  but  as  those 
who  have  the  ideal  of  sinlessness  before  them.  Struggling  on  toward  sinlossness,  we 
have  yet  the  experience  of  sin.  It  was  not  thus  with  the  Master,  who,  in  his  struggle 
tin  toward  perfection,  could  say, "  Which  of  you  conviuceth  me  of  sin  ?  "  "  No  mere  man 
since  the  Fall  is  able,  in  this  life,  perfectly  to  keep  the  commandments  of  God,  but 


OH.  n.  1—29.]     THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  JOHN.  61 

doth  daily  break  them  in  thought,  word,  and  deed."  This  applies  even  to  those  who  are 
assisted  by  grace.  Our  nature  is  not  thoroughly  renewed,  and  so,  as  the  language  bears 
here,  there  are  acts  of  sin  which,  according  to  a  former  thought,  we  have  to  confess  to  God. 
How,  then,  with  the  constantly  recurring  consciousness  of  sin,  are  we  to  be  advanced 
to  sinlessness?  In  the  answer  which  the  apostle  gives  to  this  we  are  not  to  under- 
stand that  he  excludes  our  own  pleading ;  for  he  repeatedly  in  this  Epistle  assumes  that 
it  is  our  duty  to  ask  of  God,  which  must  pass  into  earnest  pleading.  But,  in  bringing 
in  the  advocacy  of  Another,  he  views  our  own  advocacy  as  being  insufficient  by  iteelf. 
It  is  not  difficult  to  see  how  this  should  be.  It  is  really  involved  in  tliat  which  gives 
'  rise  to  constantly  recurring  acts  of  sin.  It  is  one  and  the  same  disposition  which  leads 
us  to  shut  our  eyes  to  our  need,  and  also  makes  us  lukewarm  in  seeking  the  remedy. 
It  unfits  us  for  our  being  our  own  advocate,  that  we  have  an  insufficient  knowledge  oj 
our  case.  We  cannot  go  into  it  with  that  thoroughness  and  skilfulness  with  which  an 
advocate  should  go  into  a  case  which  he  undertakes.  We  do  not  know  precisely  the 
stage  to  which  we  have  already  come  in  our  deliverance  from  sin,  nor  have  we  an  ade- 
quate conception  of  the  goal  of  sinlessness  to  which  we  have  yet  to  come.  We  are, 
therefore,  more  or  less  working  in  the  dark,  and  our  pleading  for  ourselves  must  partake 
more  or  less  of  ignorance.  "  So  find  we  profit,"  says  Shakespeare,  "  by  losing  of  our 
prayers."  We  have  not  a  right  idea  of  the  blessings  which  we  really  need.  We  are  like 
children,  who  ask  many  things  of  their  parents  which  it  is  not  wise  for  them  to  grant. 
Again,  it  unfits  us  for  our  being  our  own  advocate,  that  we  have  an  insufficient  earnestness 
in  urging  our  case.  To  be  delivered  from  sin,  from  particular  sins  which  beset  us,  from 
the  love  of  sin,  is  a  matter  essential  to  our  well-being.  We  ought  to  plead  for  it  as  for 
our  life,  and, this  continuously.  We  are  not  to  plead  as  though  we  would  rather  be 
refused,  or  in  the  more  earnest  tone  only  by  fits  and  starts.  But  how  can  our  advocacy 
be  up  to  the  mark  of  what  advocacy  should  be,  when  what  we  have  need  to  plead  for  is 
earnestness  of  the  whole  soul,  and  this  in  every  successive  moment  of  life?  If,  then, 
we  are  to  have  perfect  advocacy,  we  must  look  away  from  ourselves.  2.  2%e  advocacy 
that  we  need.  "  We  have  an  Advocate."  It  has  sometimes  happened  that  a  person 
against  whom  a  charge  has  been  laid,  for  whom  a  good  plea  could  be'  presented,  has 
suffered  materially  for  want  of  an  advocate  properly  to  present  the  plea.  This  cannot 
be  said  of  us,  for  we  are  told  here  that,  if  we  sin,  we  have  an  Advocate.  The  Divine 
love  has  been  beforehand  with  us,  and  the  case  of  our  falling  into  sin,  as  we  do,  not- 
withstanding our  covenant  position,  and  notwithstanding  our  struggle  after  sinlessness 
every  day,  is  met  by  the  provision  of  an  Advocate.  There  is  the  same  word  here 
which  in  John's  Gospel  is  translated  "  Comforter."  It  is  literally  one  who  is  called  to 
our  side.  There  is  no  inconsistency  in  the  translation ;  for  in  the  Gospel  we  are  to 
think  of  One  who  stands  by  us  in  our  distresses,  whereas  here  we  are  to  think  of  One 
who  stands  by  us  so  that  we  do  not  sink  under  our  experience  of  sin  on  our  way  to  sin- 
lessness. The  Paraclete  in  the  Gospel  is  the  Holy  Ghost ;  but  he  is  said  to  be  anoth  r 
Comforter.  Christ  had  been  the  Paraclete  of  his  disciples,  ever  at  their  side  to  keep 
them  from  sinking  of  heart.  He  had  been  their  Paraclete  even  in  the  sense  of  Advo- 
cate. What  are  we  to  understand  by  the  night  spent  in  prayer  before  the  ordination 
of  the  twelve  ?  While  it  was  for  himself,  was  it  not  also  for  them,  "  that  they  might 
rise  to  the  height  of  their  high  calling,  not  puffed  up,  but  divinely  filled  with  grace  and 
lowly  power;  till  all — all  save  one — shoxdd  he  found  finally  not  unworthy  of  this 
ministry  and  apostleship  ?  And  for  us,  and  for  all  the  long  line  of  Christian  genera- 
tions to  be  built  up  on  those  twelve  foundations,  believing  through  their  wtird :  may 
we  not  so  read  that  long  night-prayer  of  consecration  and  of  intercession  by  our  Priest 
and  King  ?  What  are  we  to  make  of  that  prayer  for  Peter  on  the  last  night  of  our 
Saviour's  earthly  life :  "  Simon,  Simon,  behold,  Satan  hath  desired  to  have  you,  that 
he  may  sift  you  as  wheat ;  but  I  have  prayed  for  thee,  that  thy  faith  fail  not  "  ?  Have 
We  not  here  an  open  vision  of  the  manner  in  which  he  was  engaged  in  his  private 
devotions?  The  Spirit  makes  up  in  this  respect  for  the  want  of  Christ's  earthly 
presence ;  for  he  is  with  us  to  help  our  infirmities  in  prayer,  and  is  engaged  himself  in 
intercession.  The  Spirit's  advocacy  on  earth  does  not,  however,  supersede  our  Lord's 
advocacy  in  heaven.  For  even  the  sending  of  the  Spirit  was  to  be  an  answer  to  Christ's 
future  intercession.  "  I  will  pray  the  Father,  and  he  shall  give  you  another  Comforter, 
that  he  may  abide  with  you  for  ever."    When  we  sin,  then — which  is  the  experience 


«2  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  JOHN.     [oh.  n.  1—29. 

of  all  believers  in  this  life — this  is  the  heavenly  advocacy  that  we  are  to  take  advantage 
of.  Our  minds  may  turn  to  the  inexhausted  power  of  Christ's  work  on  earth.  But, 
according  to  wliat  ia  laid  down  here,  we  are  to  turn  our  minds  more  immediately  to  our 
Saviour's  advocacy.  The  high  priest  did  not  stop  with  the  offering  of  sacriSce  in  the 
court  of  the  temple ;  but  he  followed  It  up  by  going  into  the  most  holy  place,  and  going 
with  incense,  which  is  to  be  regarded  as  the  symbol  of  acceptable  prayer.  So  "  Christ  is 
not  entered  into  the  holy  places  made  with  hands,  which  are  the  figures  of  the  true,  but 
into  heaven  itself,  now  to  appear  in  the  presence  of  God  for  us."  His  appeiiranoe  there 
means  continued  priestly  service  in  the  form  of  advocacy  for  us.  As  acting  for  us  he_ 
takes  up  our  individual  cases,  with  a  view  to  our  being  brought  forward,  each  in  our 
own  way,  to  sinlessness.  Christ  has  all  the  knowledge  of  our  case  that  ia  needed  for 
advocacy.  We  have  to  make  up  for  the  deficiency  of  our  child.  He  has  to  be  educated 
for  all  the  relations  of  life — educated  even  physically,  educated  for  business,  educated 
for  society.  With  our  larger  acquaintance  with  life  we  superintend  his  education ;  and 
there  is  much  which  he  does  not  comprehend  or  see  the  use  of  now,  but  which,  we  hope, 
he  will  feel  the  benefit  of  hereafter.  Christ  occupies  a  similar  vantage-giound  with 
regard  to  our  life.  He  can  take  up  all  the  threads  of  our  life.  He  can  comprehend  its 
working,  in  view  of  the  past  and  in  view  of  the  future.  He  can  follow  out  in  detail  the 
whole  struggle  with  sin.  And  he  can  judge  infallibly  how  our  outward  circumstances 
need  to  be  arranged,  how  our  hearts  need  to  be  influenced,  with  a  view  to  our  complete 
deliverance  from  sin.  All  this  he  turns  into  matter  of  intercession  for  us,  and  we  have 
the  comfort  of  thinking  that  the  ignorance  which  cleaves  to  owt  prayers  is  covered  by 
the  perfect  knowledge  of  his  intercession.  He  has  also  all  the  interett  in  us  that  is 
needed  for  advocacy.  It  is  said  that  Jesus  died  once  for  all ;  but  the  spirit  in  which  he 
died  was  not  momentary  and  evanescent.  We  sometimes  attain  to  an  elevated  state  of 
feeling,  and  then  we  fall  back  into  an  habitually  lower  state.  But  the  same  intensity 
of  interest  in  us  which  led  Jesus  to  die  for  ui  he  has  carried  into  his  risen  life,  and  the 
form  which  it  takes  is  intercession.  We  are  given  to  understand  that  his  life  on  high 
is  directed  to  the  carrying  forward  of  the  work  of  grace  in  believers ;  and  is  this  not  the 
guarantee  of  its  completion?  "If,  while  we  were  enemies,  we  were  reconciled  to  God 
by  the  death  of  his  Son,  much  more,  being  reconciled,  we  shall  be  saved  by  his  life." 
"  Wherefore  he  is  able  to  save  them  to  the  uttermost  that  come  unto  God  by  him, 
seeing  he  ever  liveth  to  make  intercession  for  them."  The  latter  Scripture  is  sometimes 
quoted  in  the  sense  that,  while  there  is  life  there  is  hope ;  but,  In  accordance  with  the 
other  Scripture,  it  is  to  be  understood  in  the  sense  that  there  is,  in  the  living  interest 
and  unfailing  intercession  of  the  Saviour,  covering  all  deficient  interest  in  our  prayers, 
guarantee  for  our  salvation  being  carried  to  the  uttermost,  i.e.  being  thoroughly  com- 
pleted in  sinlessness.  S.  Uxplanation  of  its  sufficieney.  "  With  the  Father."  Christ 
is  our  Ambassador  at  the  court  of  heaven.  He  is  there  to  represent  us,  and  to  protect 
and  advance  our  interests.  But  we  are  not  to  think  of  any  reluctance  on  the  part  of 
the  First  Person  needing  to  be  overcome,  or  of  all  the  desire  to  save  us  being  en  the 
part  of  the  Son.  Rather  is  the  Saviour's  advocacy  to  be  regarded  as  the  manifestation 
of  the  earnest  desire  of  God  (without  distinction  of  Person)  for  our  salvation.  For  it  is 
with  the  Father  that  Christ  intercedes.  Does  not  this  suggest  to  us  his  being  easily 
reached  ?  Christ  tells  us  of  a  judge  who  seemed  unreachable,  and  yet  he  was  found  to 
be  reachable  by  the  very  lowest  of  considerations.  If  there  is  a  way  of  reaching  the 
worst  kind  of  mind,  how  much  more  must  there  be  a  way  of  reaching  the  Father's 
heart?  -Will  he  take  no  heed  of  his  children  who  cry  tmto  him  day  and  night ?  Will 
he  not  interpose  for  their  deliverance  firom  sin  when  their  case  is  taken  up  by  thsir 
heavenly  Advocate,  who,  from  all  eternity,  stands  to  him  in  the  most  intimate  of 
relations  ?  Will  the  face  of  his  Son  turned  toward  him,  and  his  continual  pleadings  on 
our  behalf,  be  unheeded  ?  (1)  Our  Representative.  "  Jesus  Christ  the  Righteous."  He 
ii  Jesus,  i.e.  in  our  humanity,  and,  at  the  same  time,  Christ,  <.«.  the  Anointed  of  God 
promised  to  men.  He  has,  therefore,  the  qualification  of  nature  that  is  needed  for  our 
Representative.  But  he  has  also  the  qualification  of  character,  being  here  called  the 
Righteous.  He  does  not  need  to  shrink  from  standing  in  the  presence  of  God  as  our 
Advocate ;  for  he  has  all  the  righteousness  in  our  humanity  which  God  demands.  He 
kas  met  the  Divine  requirement  all  round,  even  as  the  Representative  of  sinners.  God, 
Aerefore,  looks  upon  him  with  infinite  pleasure.    And  will  h«  not  be  willing  to  bless  ua 


m.  n.  1—29.]      THE  JPIEST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  JOHN.  63 

for  the  sake  of  so  righteous  an  Advocate  ?  (2)  Bis  work.  "  And  he  is  the  Propitia- 
tion for  our  sins."  The  character  of  Christ  had  to  do  with  his  work.  It  was  because 
he  always  pleased  the  Father  that  his  work  could  have  value.  He  is  here  called  "  the 
Propitiation."  He  was  also  the  Propitiator,  hut  he  is  called  the  "  Propitiation,"  as  being 
more  distinctive.  For  whereas  a  propitiator  has  usually  the  means  of  propitiation 
outside  himself,  in  Christ  both  are  united.  From  the  sacrificial  association  of  the  word, 
there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  reference  is  to  his  death.  It  was  of  the  nature  of  a  pro- 
pitiatory offering.  The  heathen  idea  was  that  there  was  the  feeling  of  revengefulness 
on  the  part  of  the  gods  toward  men.  Therefore  men  had,  by  their  offerings,  to  pro- 
pitiate them,  i.e.  to  appease  them  and  to  make  them  favourable.  The  Christian  idea  is 
essentially  different.  It  is  that  God  always  and  necessarily  is  benevolently  disposed 
toward  men,  and  desires  fellowship.  But  sin  has  placed  an  obstacle  between  us  and  the 
Divine  love  and  fellowship.  On  account  of  this  sin  God  is  an^ry  with  us.  But  Christ 
is  the  Propitiation,  i.e.  receives  into  himself  in  his  death  the  desert  of  sin,  so  that  now, 
as  is  most  pleasing  to  God,  the  Divine  love  and  fellowship  can  be  enjoyed.  This  is 
properly  Gtod  reconciling  the  world  uuto  himself — he  who  never  had  thought  of  evil 
toward  men  himself  graciously  removing  the  obstacle  which  sin  interposed  between  us 
and  him.  It  is  the  propitiatory  work  of  Christ.that  is  the  basis  of  his  advocacy.  He 
does  not  plead  our  desert,  which  would  tell  against  our  happiness;  but  he  pleads  his 
own  offering,  the  virtue  of  which  was  not  exhausted  in  his  own  age,  but  is  as  great 
to-day  as  it  was  eighteen  centuries  ago.  He  is  the  Propitiation  absolutely,  i.e.  has 
atoning  virtue  without  stint — one  with  his  Personality.  It  is  as  natural  for  him  to  give 
forth  atoning  virtue  as  it  is  for  a  rose  to  give  forth  fragrance.  He  is  an  Offering  nnd 
a  Sacrifice  to  God  for  a  swcot-smellin?;  savour.  As  incense  is  grateful  to  the  sense  of 
smell,  80,  in  an  infinite  degree,  is  Christ,  in  his  atonement  for  sin,  pleasing  to  God. 
Our  Advocate,  then,  in  his  own  inexhaustible  sacrificial  worth,  does  not  want  a  plea,  and 
a  very  strong  plea,  for  the  Divine  love  breaking  forth  upon  us  sinners  with  all  blessing. 
"  And  not  for  ours  only,  but  also  for  the  whole  world."  There  is  a  difference  which 
does  not  seem  to  be  unintentional  Christ  is  the  Propitiation  for  the  sins  of  believers : 
he  is  not  the  Propitiation  for  the  sins  of  the  world,  but  ibr  the  world  itself,  as  not  so 
much  sinning  as  being  in  a  state  of  sin.  With  this  difference,  he  is  the  Propitiation  in 
the  same  sense.  It  is  said  in  a  way  that  is  liberating  to  thought,  that  he  is  the  Pro- 
pitiation for  the  whole  world.  Most  perversely  Calvin  attempts  to  limit  the  reference 
of  the  atonement  here.  Luther  gives  the  evangelical  exposition ;  "  It  is  a  potent  fact 
that  thou  too  art  a  part  of  the  whole  world,  so  that  thine  heart  cannot  deceive  itself  and 
think,  '  The  Lord  died  for  Peter  and  Paul,  but  not  for  me.' "  The  meaning  of  the 
universal  reference  of  the  atonement  is  most  precious,  viz.  that  love,  which  is  inseparable 
from  God,  has  found  outlet  in  the  provision  of  suitable  means  for  the  salvation  of  all 
sinners  of  mankind.  It  is  not  said  that  Christ's  advocacy  extends  to  the  world.  "  We 
[believers]  have  an  Advocate."  And  yet  it  is  worthy  of  notice  that  it  is  in  connection 
with  Christ  being  the  Propitiation  for  the  whole  world  that  Christ's  advocacy  is  so 
plainly  taught.  If,  then,  we  have  an  Advocate,  what  is  our  duty  7  It  is  not  to  forbear 
praying  ovu'selves,  but  rather  to  join  our  prayers  to  our  Saviour's  advocacy.  When 
difficult  matters  have  to  be  taken  into  a  court  of  law,  there  requires  to  be  the  employ- 
ment of  an  advocate.  It  is  no  easy  matter  for  us  to  be  carried  through  constantly 
recurring  experiences  of  sin  up  to  complete  salvation.  The  action  which  we  require  to 
take,  and,  with  new  experience  of  sin,  to  renew,  is  to  put  oor  case  into  the  hands  of 
our  Advocate. 

n.   BVIDEKOK  OF  THB  DiVINK  PflOVISION  AOAIN8T  EIPEBIBNOB  OK  SIR  IK  BELIBYKBB 

BEING  PERSOKALLT  EFFICACIOUS.  1.  2%«  sign  of  knowledge.  "  And  hereby  know  we 
that  we  know  him,  if  we  keep  hb  commandments."  The  second  "  know  "  (which  in 
the  original  is  in  a  different  tense  from  the  first)  is  to  be  undei  stood  of  the  experience  of 
covenant  luve  and  fellowship.  John  wishes  to  class  himself,  as  we  should  all  wish  to 
class  ourselves,  with  them  that  know  God  in  this  way.  But  how  are  we  to  know,  i.t. 
have  the  consciousness,  from  moment  to  moment,  that  we  are  thus  classed  ?  The  sign 
given  here  is  obedience.  This  is  the  first  "  hereby  "  of  the  Epistle.  There  are  com- 
mandments of  God,  »".«.  instructions  laid  down  by  him  who  not  only  has  suprejae 
authoi'ity,  but  supreme  knowledge  -and  love.  These  we  are  to  tend  as  we  would  tend 
a  plant    There  are  certain  rules  founded  upon  observation  which  must  be  attended  to 


«4  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  JOHN.      [oh.  JI.  1   -2^ 

in  horticulture.  So  we  have  to  apply  the  maxims  of  past  experience  and  Divine 
wisdom  to  our  conduct  from  moment  to  moment.  Wo  are  to  see  to  their  having  their 
proper  place  in  regard  to  the  development  of  our  life.  (1)  Issue  of  disobedience.  "  He 
that  saith,  I  know  him,  and  keepeth  not  his  commandments,  is  a  liar,  and  the  truth  is 
not  in  him."  There  is  not  here  a  classing  with  others,  but  a  singling  out.  The  person 
ringled  out  is  hold  in  his  assertion, "  I  know  him ; "  hut  he  belies  it  by  his  conduct.  Ha 
does  not  see  to  the  Divine  pleasure  being  carried  out  in  his  life,  but  makes  his  own 
pleasure  his  rule.  And,  as  his  assertion  is  bold,  so  is  his  characterization  bold.  He  is 
described,  both  positively  and  negatively,  as  to  his  permanent  state.  He  is  a  liar,  i.e. 
lives  in  an  atmosphere  of  lies ;  and  the  truth  is  not  in  him,  i,e.  does  not  rule  his  thoughts 
and  actions.  (2)  Issue  of  the  activity  of  oledience.  "  But  whoso  keepeth  his  word,  in 
him  verily  hath  the  love  of  God  been  perfected."  Instead  of  singling  out,  there  is  now 
throwing  wide  the  door.  Let  every  one  be  included  in  this  class  who  fulfils  the  con- 
ditions. Instead  of  his  commandments  we  have  his  Word,  by  which  we  are  led  to 
think  of  the  commandments  in  their  unity,  and  especially  in  their  vitality.  The  Word 
is  the  Divine  revelation,  ever  instinct  with  Divine  power,  which,  entering  as  a  vital 
principle  into  us,  ever  comes  forth  in  new  manifestations  in  our  life.  This  Word  we  are 
to  tend,  so  as  to  bring  it  forward  to  all  beautiful  forms.  What,  from  the  Divine  side, 
is  the  issue  of  our  tending  the  Word?  It  is  not  said,  as  the  contrast  would  have  led  us 
to  expect,  that  the  truth  of  God  is  in  us;  but  the  truth  is  carried  forward  into  the  per- 
sonal relation.  "  In  him  verily  hath  the  love  of  God  been  perfected."  As  love  to  God 
is  included  in  what  we  are  to  cultivate,  this  must  be  God's  love  to  us.  According  as 
we  cultivate  the  Word  does  the  love  of  God  toward  us  reach  its  end.  When  our 
obedience  is  no  mere  outward  form,  but  is  active,  then  it  can  be  said  that  God's  love  is 
having  its  way.  Let  us,  then,  in  the  activity  of  our  obedience,  allow  freedom  for  the 
carrying  out  of  the  Divine  thought  and  desire  regarding  us.  2.  2^  sign  of  union, 
"  Hereby  know  we  that  we  are  in  him :  he  that  saith  he  abideth  in  him  ought  himself 
also  to  walk  even  as  he  walked."  There  is  here,  first,  classing  with  others,  and  then 
singling  out.  The  sign  of  our  union  to  God  is  here  declared  to  be  the  imitation  of 
Christ.  The  assertion  which  each  of  us  makes  is  that  we  abide  in  God,  i.e.  are  in  God, 
and  mean  to  continue  in  God.  This  assertion  brings  with  it  no  little  obligation. 
What  is  the  "  ought "  by  which  we  are  bound  as  making  the  assertion  ?  It  is  to  walk, 
even  as  that  Person  walked.  That  is  the  literal  translation,  and  there  is  only  One  to 
whom  it  can  refer.  It  is  he  in  whom  God  sees  all  his  thought  and  desire  regarding 
men.  It  is  he  who  perfectly  kept  the  commandments,  perfectly  kept  the  Word,  was 
the  living  realization  on  earth  of  all  that  God  demands  from  us.  While  we  go  for 
comfort  to  his  heavenly  life  of  advocacy,  we  are  to  go  for  direction  to  his  heavenly  life. 
He  has  left  us  in  great  detail  a  pattern  of  purity,  of  unselfishness,  especially  of  central 
obedience.  Let  us  look  upon  this  pattern  and  then  upon  our  blurred,  blotched  lives ; 
and,  if  there  is  thereby  produced  in  us  a  deep  sense  of  our  own  deficiency,  let  us  take 
encouragement  from  the  thought  that  he  who  asks  us  to  copy  into  our  life  such  a  pict'ire 
of  holiness  will  also  supply  the  needful  grace. — B.  P. 

Vers.  7 — 11. — The  commandment  of  brotherly  love.  I.  The  commandment  old. 
"  Beloved,  no  new  commandment  write  I  unto  you,  but  an  old  commandment  which  ye 
had  from  the  beginning :  the  old  commandment  is  the  Word  which  ye  heard."  The 
commandment  indicated  in  the  previous  verse,  viz.  to  walk  as  Christ  walked,  is  in  this 
paragraph  identified  with  the  commandment  of  brotherly  lo>e.  His  heart  warming  to 
his  readers,  he  addresses  them  as  "  beloved."  What  he  has  in  his  mind  to  lay  upon  them 
by  his  letter  was  no  new  commandment.  It  was  an  old  commandment,  older  than  his 
connection  with  them.  From  the  beginning,  t.e.  from  their  first  contact  with  Christianity 
dovm  to  his  connection  with  them,  it  had  been  presented  to  them.  It  was  no  sub- 
eidiary  matter,  such  as  the  form  of  Church  government,  which  could  be  held  back  for 
a  time,  hut  was  the  very  essence  of  the  message  which  had  been  delivered  to  them. 

II.  The  commandment  new.  "  Again,  a  new  commandment  write  I  unto  you,  which 
thing  is  true  in  him  and  in  you ;  because  the  darkness  is  passing  away,  and  the  true 
light  already  shineth."  Changing  his  point  of  view,  he  calls  it  a  new  commandment. 
Its  being  new  is  contemplated  as  inhering  both  in  Christ  and  in  them.  It  is  new, 
because  %k9  darkness  is  passing  away  and  tti9  true  light  thready  shineth.    What  vw 


on.  ir.  1—29.]      THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF   JOHN.  6S 

this  but  the  new  light  of  Christianity,  viz.  the  light  introduced  by  Christ  and  spread 
among  Christians  ?  Granted  that  the  duty  had  been  known  before,  it  had  been  greatly 
obscured.  What  an  obscuration  had  there  been  of  it  in  heathen  life  1  And  the  light 
that  had  been  shining  in  the  land  of  the  Jews  had  been  partial.  It  was  only  when 
Christ  came  and  showed  its  perfect  realization,  that  it  could  be  said  to  be  light  having 
all  the  elements  of  truth.  Realized  in  Christ,  it  was  also  being  realized  partially  in  his 
people.  Thus,  not  in  all  places,  but  in  many  places,  was  the  darkness  giving  place  to 
the  light,  giving  promise  of  the  ultimate  entire  displacement  of  darkness  and  prevalence 
of  light. 

III.  Condition  op  FtTMitLnra  the  commandment,  absent.  "  He  that  saith  he  is 
in  the  light,  and  hateth  his  brother,  is  in  the  darkness  even  until  now."  It  is  to  be 
inferred  that  the  condition  of  our  loving  our  brother  is  our  being  in  the  light,  i.e.  as  the 
element  in  which  we  live.  It  is  not  enough  to  say  that  we  are  in  the  light ;  saying 
must  be  taken  along  with  acting,  or  the  state  of  the  feelings.  Let  a  man's  character  be 
this,  that  he  hates  his  brother  (is  even  unsympathetic),  he  may  say  that  he  is  in  the 
light,  bat  it  is  a  moral  impossibility.  The  light  may  have  been  shining  widely  around 
him,  may  have  been  shining  around  him  for  long  years,  but  it  has  never  yet  penetrated 
his  being  and  displaced  his  natural  darkness.  He  is  in  that  darkness  even  until  now. 
This  is  John's  way  of  putting  the  Master's  lesson,  "  Not  every  one  that  saith  unto  me, 
Lord)  Lord."    Let  us  demand  from  ourselves  reality. 

IV.  Condition  of  ruhriLLisa  the  commandment,  pbesknt,  with  benefit.  "He 
that  loveth  his  brother  abideth  in  the  light,  and  there  is  none  occasion  of  stumbling  in 
him."  The  commandment  is  now  stated  positively;  the  condition  is  stated  with  a 
modification.  "  He  that  loveth  his  brother  abideth  in  the  light,"  t.e.  is  so  related  to  the 
light  as  to  have  it  continually  penetrating  his  being.  The  advantage  of  being  thus 
made  loving  by  the  light  Is  that  he  has  guidance  at  every  step.  He  sees  what  lies  in 
his  path,  and  does  not  fall  over  obstacles. 

v.  Condition  of  fdlfilliho  the  commandment,  absent,  with  detriment.  "  But 
he  that  hateth  his  brother  is  in  the  darkness,  and  walketh  in  the  darkness,  and  l^noweth 
not  whither  he  goeth,  because  the  darkness  bath  blinded  his  eyes."  To  the  state  formerly 
mentioned  is  added  the  corresponding  walk.  The  walk  of  the  unloving  is  in  the  dark- 
ness. He  does  not  see  what  lies  in  his  path,  and  may  be  tripped  up  at  any  moment. 
This  follows  with  a  double  certainty.  The  surrounding  darkness  keeps  him  from  seeing 
what  is  immediately  before  him ;  but  that  is  not  alL  The  darkness  in  which  he  has 
been  moving  has  operated  to  destroy  his  spiritual  vision,  just  as  fishes  in  a  dark  sub- 
terranean cave  are  known  to  have  become  eyeless  through  long  disuse  of  the  organ. 
— B.F. 

Vers.  12 — 17. — The  great  danger  of  Christiana.    L  How  addeessed.    1.  First  time. 

(1)  Generally.  "  I  write  unto  you,  my  little  children,  because  your  sins  are  forgiven 
you  for  his  Name's  sake."  In  accordance  with  ver.  1,  we  are  to  understand  by  "  little 
children"  all  his  readers.  It  is  a  designation  expressive  of  affection  more  than  of 
subordination.  Christians  are  addressed  according  to  their  fundamental  position. 
What  wo  need  first  of  all  is  to  have  our  sins  forgiven.  As  unforgiven,  our  position 
is  fundamentally  wrong;  we  lie  under  the  Divine  condemnation.  As  forgiven,  our 
position  is  fund^amentally  right;  we  come  into  the  Divine  favour.  The  ground  on 
account  of  which  we  are  forgiven  is  here  said  to  be  his  Name  (Christ's),  i.e.  what  he 
is  declared  to  be.  Because  he  is  declared  to  be  Saviour,  to  be  the  Source  of  all  atoning 
virtue,  by  believing  on  him  as  such  we  have  our  sins  forgiven  by  the  Father.  Those 
who  are  thus  forgiven  can  be  appealed  to  against  the  encroachments  of  the  world. 

(2)  Older  section.  "  I  write  unto  you,  fathers,  because  ye  know  him  which  is  from  the 
beginning."  While  all  Christians  are  forgiven,  they  are  divided  into  the  class  of  the 
fathers  and  the  class  of  the  young  men.  There  are  those  who  have  been  a  long  time 
Christians.  These,  the  fathers,  are  addressed  as  having  the  fruit  of  experience.  They 
know  him  which  is  from  the  beginning,  viz,  Christ.  They  have  a  large  amount  of 
peculiarly  Christian  experiencei  They  know  him  who  best  reveals  the  deep  things  of 
God,  who  was  at  the  beginning,  and  entered  into  the  Divine  counsels  about  redemption. 
They  know  the  love  of  him  who,  having  an  unbeginning  existence  and  glory,  entered 
iato  time  and  into  tb9  iQidst  of  sioful  men,  wd  devoted  hiifts^if  in  ih^me  and  anguisli 

I.  *0BB.  9 


C6  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  JOHN.      [oh.  ml— 29 

•nd  death — the  lore  this  which  passeth  knowledge;    Those  who  have  attained  to  this 
experience  may  well  be  appealed  to  against  thinking  of  substituting  for  it  a  mora 
worldly  experience.    (3)  Younger  lection.    "  I  write  unto  you,  young  men,  because  ye 
have  overcome  the  evu  one."   There  are  those  who  have  not  been  a  long  time  Ohristiar'?. 
These,  the  young  men,  are  addressed  as  having  victory,  the  prize  of  strength.     They 
have  not  had  time  for  experience,  but  are  in  the  midst  of  the  conflicts  which  give  rise 
to  experience.     Their  adversary  is  here  called  the  evil  one,  i.e.  one  who,  as  the  great 
impersonation  and  champon  of  evil,  heartily  wishes  their  destruction,  and  seeks,  by 
all  stiningij  within  and  solicitation*  from  without,  to  compass  their  destruction.     Espe- 
cially are  they  exposed  to  his  assaults  as  havincr,  in  their  youth,  strong  passions 
and  illusionary  viewi  of  life,  without  tha  counterpoise  of  experience.     But  Christ  has 
always  his  representatives  among  the  young  men.     They  have  not  been  deterred  by 
their  powerful  adversary  from  taking  up  their  position  on  his  side,  and  showing  an 
active  interest  in  his  cause.     These  youthful  victors  may  well  be  appealed  to  against 
thinking  of  throwing  away  victory  for  the  sake  of  a  few  worldly  pleasures.     2.  Second 
time.    (1)  Oenerally.    "  I  have  written  unto  you,  little  children,  because  ye  know  the 
Father."    There  is  not  the  same  Grreek  word  here  for  "little  children"  that  there  is  in 
the  twelfth  verse.     It  is  a  word  which  points  to  his  hearers  not  so  much,  as  objects  of 
his  affection,  as  placed  under  his  authority  and  care.     There  is  not  sufBcient  reason 
for  destroying  the  symmetry  of  the  passage,  and  supposing  the  refurence  to  be  to  those 
who  are  literally  little  childiren.     These  are  an  interesting  class,  for  whom  Christ  cared 
separately  when  he  said,  "  Feed  my  lambs; "  but  they  are  to  be  regarded  here  as  falling 
under  the  class  of  the  young  men.    For  even  the  littie  children  may  win  victories  over 
the  evil  one,  by  taking  up  their  position  on  the  side  of  Christ,  and  standing  by  his  side 
in  all  that  he  requires  of  resistance  to  evil,  and,  beyond  that,  though  their  equipment 
is  but  small,  of  aggression  on  evil.     Christians,  both  old  and  young,  are  addressed 
according  to  what  essentially  belongs  to  them.     Being  forgiven,  they  also  know  the 
Father,  i.e.  they  have  been  wlopted  into  his  family,  have  his  authority  and  loving  care 
exercised  over  them,  and  are  endeavouring  to  fulfil  their  duties  to  him  as  their  Father. 
That  is  the  basis  on  which  their  life  goes  forward,  and  they  may  well  be  appealed  to 
against  taking  a  worldly  basis  for  their  life.    (2)  Older  section.    "I  have  written 
unto  you,  fathers,  because  ye  know  him  which  is  from  the  beginning."    In  writing  to 
the  fathers  there  is  no  change  in  his  language.     We  need  no  new  object  uf  knowledge ; 
for  the  knowledge  of  Christ  comprehends  all  that  we  can  know.     What  we  need  is  to 
have  our  knowledge  of  him  deepened,  extended,  cleared,  ordered  into  a  more  complete 
whole ;  and  this  admits  of  endless  progress.     When  we  have  known  Christ  for  years, 
do  we  feel  that  we  have  exhausted  the  meaning  of  his  words  and  his  love  1    The 
fathers,  then,  may  well  be  appealed  to  a  second  time,  not  to  go  aside,  like  the  first  human 
pair,  to  a  forbidden  knowledge.    (3)  Younger  section.    "I  have  written  unto  you, 
young  men,  hecavise  ye  are  strong,  and  the  Word  of  God  abideth  in  you,  and  ye  have 
overcome  the  evil  one."    In  writing  to  the  young  men,  to  the  fact  of  victory  he  adds 
the  conditions  of  victory.    The  immediate  condition  of  victory  is  strength.     The 
condition  of  strength  is  the  indwelling  of  the  Word  of  God.    When  Christ  was  in  his 
youtl^vl  conflict  he  opposed  a  decisive  word  from  the  Old  Testament  to  the  devil's  lie. 
Three  times  he  conquered  by  the  use  of  the  same  means.     Toung  men  are  to  have 
their  inexperience  and  rawness  made  up  to  them  by  their  grasp  of  what  God  haa 
spoken.    The  Word  as  a  whole,  and  in  its  parts,  must  be  in  them — in  their  memory, 
in  their  understanding,  in  their  heart — ready  for  use.    And  when  the  needed  word  is 
brought  up  clearly  before  them,  they  are  rendered  invulnerable.     Young  men  who 
have  felt  this  to  be  the  secret  of  their  strength  may  well  be  appealed  to  not  to  allow 
the  strength  they  have  acquired  to  be  sapped  by  worldly  compliance. 

n.  How  WAENBD.  1.  Worldlinest  forbidden,  "Love  not  the  world,  neither  the 
things  that  are  in  the  world."  We  must  connect  with  the  world  here  the  idea  of  that 
which  is  abnormal,  or  separated  from  God.  But  we  are  not  to  think  of  the  morally 
corrupt  world,  the  world  that  lieth  in  the  evil  one.  We  are  to  think  of  the  v)orld  of 
created  good  as  apart  from  God;  for  it  is  represented  as  passing  away.  What,  then,  is 
to  be  our  feeling,  the  feeling  of  all  Christians — for  there  is  now  no  distinction  of  old 
and  young — or  rather,  what  is  not  to  be  our  feeling  with  regard  to  the  world  ?  The 
reeling  which  ia  most  peremptorily  vetoed  it  that  oiUve.    Some  would  say,  "  Love  not 


•H.  11, 1—29.]      THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  JOHN.  67 

the  world  too  much ; "  what  the  writer  of  this  Epistle  says  is,  "  Lore  it  not  at  all." 
Nay,  he  is  yet  more  explicit  With  regard  to  the  rarioug  things  which  constitute 
the  world,  as  though  each  passed  before  him  in  succession,  he  says,  with  the  same  per- 
emptoriness, "  Love  them  not  at  alL"  2.  Worldliness  incompatible  with  love  to  Ood.  "  If 
any  man  love  the  world,  the  love  of  the  Father  is  not  in  him."  Earthly  things,  such 
as  a  living,  money,  art,  ofBce,  may  be  sought  legitimately  and  worthily  in  connection 
with  God.  But  when  they  are  sought  as  complete,  as  ends  in  themselves,  they  become 
rivals  to  God,  and  love  to  them  can  only  be  cherished  at  the  expense  of  love  to  God. 
Love  to  the  world  and- love  to  the  Father  (who  adopts  us  in  Christ)  are  so  contrary 
that  one  heart  cannot  contain  them  both.  3.  Three  aspects  of  the  worldliness  that 
cannot  he  traced  to  Ood.  "  For  all  that  is  in  the  world,  the  lust  of  the  flesh,  and  the 
lust  of  the  eyes,  and  the  vain-glory  of  life,  is  not  of  the  Father,  but  is  of  the  world,"  We 
have  not  here  aU  sin ;  for  such  sins  as  hatred  of  the  brethren,  heresy,  spiritual  pride, 
are  not  included ;  we  have  only  three  aspects  of  one  sin,  viz.  worldliness.  "  The  flesh  " 
points  to  that  in  which  worldly  enjoyment  has  its  seat;  "the  eyes"  point  to  means  by 
which  there  is  a  ministering  to  worldly  enjoyment ;  "  life  "  (means  of  living)  points  to 
there  being  guarantee  of  worldly  enjoyment.  Within  the  flesh  there  is  the  stirring  of 
desire  for  worldly  enjoyment ;  the  eyes  are  ministers  to  the  flesh,  presenting  objects  for 
desire.  Objects  not  desired,  but  possessed  beyond  what  we  can  appropriate  of  them  for 
worldly  enjoyment,  produce  a  feeling  of  vain-glory.  All  this  stirring  within  the  flesh, 
this  desiring  through  the  eyes,  this  gloating  over  possession,  has  no  high  origin ;  it  is 
not  of  the  Father,  but  of  the  world.  4.  Worldliness  linked  to  the  transient,  not  to  the 
abiding.  "  And  the  world  passeth  away,  and  the  lust  thereof:  but  he  that  doeth  the 
will  of  God  abideth  for  ever."  The  transitoriness  of  the  world  is  brought  in  as  a  di»- 
Buasive  from  worldliness.  There  is  a  constant  flux  in  earthly  things,  and  tb«  pleasures 
connected  with  them  are  momentary. 

*  But  pleasures  are  like  poppies  spread^ 
You  seize  the  flower,  its  bloom  is  shed ; 
Or  like  the  snowfiake  on  the  river, 
A  moment  white— then  melts  for  ev«r; 
Or  like  the  borealis  race. 
That  flit  ere  yon  can  point  their  plaee; 
Or  like  the  rainbow's  lovely  form, 
Evanifihing  amid  the  storm." 

Not  merely  does  the  world  pass  away,  but  also  the  lust  thereof.  After  a  time  our 
capacity  for  enjoyment  is  diminished.  Those  that  look  out  at  the  windows  are  darkened ; 
the  daughters  of  music  are  brought  low ;  and  desire  fails  (Eccles,  xii.).  Death  severs  our 
connection  with  the  world,  and  puts  an  end  to  all  earthly  appetency.  What  is  this 
transitoriness  of  the  world  meant  to  teach  us  ?  The  voice  which  is  here  given  to  it  is 
this,  "  Love  not  the  world."  If  our  love  is  fixed  on  the  world,  then  the  time  is  coming 
when  we  shall  be  left  with  a  total  blank.  Divine  wisdom  counsels  another  course.  It 
is  to  do  the  will  of  God,  i.e.  to  believe  in  Christ,  and  to  follow  Christ.  The  recomenda- 
tion  of  this  coarse  is  that  it  links  us  to  the  eternal  order  of  things.  "  He  that  doeth 
the  will  of  God  abideth  for  ever."  There  are  creatures  that  keep  themselves  from  being 
drifted  about  in  the  waters  by  fastening  themselves  on  to  a  rock ;  so  in  our  mutable 
element  we  must  secure  fixity  for  our  being  by  attaching  ourselves  to  him  who  is  "tha 
same  yesterday,  and  to-day,  and  for  ever." — R.  F. 

Vers.  18 — 29. — Antichrist.  L  Pbbiod  of  antiohbist.  "Little  chUdren,  it  is  the 
last  hour :  and  as  ye  heard  that  antichrist  cometh,  even  now  have  there  arisen  many 
antichrists;  whereby  we  know  that  it  is  the  last  hour."  The  apostle  addresses  his 
readers  with  the  authority  of  age  and  experience.  He  has  been  referring  to  the 
transitoriness  of  the  world ;  from  that  he  passes  to  the  last  hour.  What  was  desigiwted 
in  Old  Testament  times  the  age  to  come,  extending  from  the  Incarnation  to  the  second 
coming,  is  here  called  not  "the  last  age,"  or  "the  last  days,"  but,  more  strongly,  *  the 
last  hour,"  to  emphasize  the  fact  that  we  know  not  the  hour  when  the  present  order  of 
things  is  to  terminate.  The  solemnity  of  the  end  is  fitted  to  have  a  salntary  fanpres- 
sion ;  and  it  is  kept  dark,  that  we  may  always  have  the  feeling  of  its  being  tlM  last 
b«ur.    The  f  rewat  era  is  for  the  Chriatian  manifestAtion  j  but  oppoa«d  to  it  is  the 


68  THE  S^iftSd?  fiPlSTLE  &EKE6AL  OP  JOHN.     [oh.  a  1— 2& 

antichristian  manifestation.  John  is  the  only  New  Testament  writer  who  uses  the 
term  "  antichrist."  Paul's  designation  is  "  ho  who  opposeth  himself."  Antichrist  is  more 
than  opposer;  he  is  one  who  opposes  under  the  guise  of  Christ.  He  is  one  who  would 
supplant  Christ  by  assuming  to  be  and  to  do  what  Christ  is  and  does.  Our  Lord  had 
said  that  many  would  come  in  his  name,  saying,  "I  am  Christ."  This  was  doubtless 
the  foundation  for  the  teaching  about  the  coming  of  antichrist.  John  follows  the 
Master  in  referring  to  a  plurality  of  antichrists.  It  would  seem  to  follow  that  the 
personal  element  changes;  the  spirit  remains.  Those  who  represent  separate  anti- 
christian manifestations  are  antichrists ;  the  whole  of  these  manifestations,  personally 
represented,  is  antichrist.  In  the  apostle's  day  there  were  not  wanting  quasi-Ghris- 
tian  movements;  they  are  not  wanting  still.  When  Christianity  is  active,  attempts 
are  made  to  meet  the  demand  it  makes,  with  something  spitrious,  resembling  Chris- 
tianity, but  not  really  Christianity.  There  is  a  displacing  of  Christ  by  priestly 
pretension,  by  the  multiplication  of  rites,  by  the  authority  of  the  Church,  by  the  merits 
of  the  saints ;  or  there  is,  on  the  other  hand,  an  explaining  away  of  the  IncarDatlon 
and  the  substitution,  hero-worship,  the  gospel  of  mere  science.  Such  antichristian 
developments,  however  much  to  be  regretted,  are  only  to  be  expected.  John  would 
seem  to  say  that  they  are  the  writhings  of  the  last  hour,  the  rising  up  of  evil  against 
him  by  whom  it  is  being  destroyed,  increasing  in  bitterness  as  the  end  approaches. 

II.  BsiiATiOM  or  THS  ANTicHBisTS  TO  THB  CHRISTIAN  Chuboh.  "  They  Went  out 
from  us,  but  they  were  not  of  us ;  for  if  they  had  been  of  us,  they  would  have  con- 
tinued with  UB :  but  they  went  out,  that  they  might  be  made  manifest  how  that  they 
all  are  not  of  us."  The  same  idea  is  brought  out  by  Paul  when  he  describes  the 
development  as  an  apostasy,  »'.«.  a  falling  away  from  the  Christian  position  once 
occupied.  The  leaders  were  apostates,  perverts,  men  who  used  the  intellectual  quicken- 
ing, general  enlightenment,  and  even  the  forms  of  thought  they  had  got  from  Chris- 
tianity, against  its  essential  principles.  The  leaving  of  the  Christian  society  by  the 
antichrists  of  John's  day  was  to  be  accounted  for  by  their  not  being  animated  by  the 
common  sentiment,  or  rather,  as  it  is  put,  by  their  not  being  sustained  in  their  life 
from  the.  society,  but  from  some  other  source.  They  had  never  been  able  to  say  that  all 
their  springs  were  in  the  Church  (Ps.  Ixxxvii.  7).  If  they  had  thus  derived  from  the 
Church,  they  would  have  remained  in  the  Church.  But  not  being  the  Church's  true 
progeny  and  upbringing,  they  went  out.  By  this  there  was  served  a  good,  probationary 
purpose.  Their  true  character  and  position  were  clearly  brought  out.  They  were 
known  as  persons  whom  the  Church  did  not  own.  It  is  well,  when  there  is  so  much 
life  in  Christian  societies,  that  those  who  are  not  of  them  feel  the  necessity  of  going 
out.     It  is  well,  also,  when  it  is  made  clear  with  whom  we  have  to  do. 

III.  CoNrlDBNOE  IN  THE  CHRISTIAN   DISOEENMENT   OF  HIS  EEADEES.      "  And  ye  have 

an  anointing  from  the  Holy  One,  and  ye  know  all  things.  I  have  not  written  unto  you 
because  ye  know  not  the  truth,  but  because  ye  know  it,  and  because  no  lie  is  of  the 
truth."  Christ  has  not  left  his  people  without  suitable  provision  against  deception. 
He  is  here  called  the  Holy  One ;  and  we  may  conclude  that  his  own  holiness  has  to  do 
with  his  discernment.  It  is  through  his  own  holy  experience,  acquired  in  this  world, 
thiit  he  sees  things.  And  so  it  is  the  good  who  have  true  discernment.  "Then  shall 
ye  return,  and  discern  between  the  righteous  and  the  wicked,  between  him  that  serveth 
God  and  him  that  serveth  him  not."  Without  holy  experience,  intellectual  giants  and 
the  most  successful  men  of  business  are  blind.  Christ's  provision  is  closely  allied  to 
his  own  name,  viz.  chrism.  It  is  he  who  is  himself  the  Christ,  the  Anointed  of  God, 
that  supplies  the  chrism,  the  anointing  oil  for  his  people.  'After  the  tabernacle  had 
been  constructed,  it  had  to  be  consecrated  by  the  application,  to  all  its  parts  and 
furniture,  of  the  holy  anointing  oil,  for  the  preparation  of  which  special  instructions 
were  given.  When  Samuel  poured  the  vial  of  oil  on  Saul's  head  he  said,  "  And  the 
Spirit  of  the  Lord  shall  come  upon  thee."  The  anointing  of  David  is  thus  described : 
"  Then  Samuel  took  the  horn  of  oil,  and  anointed  him  in  the  midst  of  his  brethren  ; 
and  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  came  upon  David  from  that  day  forward."  What  was 
conferred  on  prophets  and  priests  and  kings  is  now  conferred  on  Christians,  viz.  the 
anointing  Spirit.  The  Spirit  gives  us  a  pure,  deep,  rich  exferience  through  which  we 
can  see  things.  We  are  here  described  ideally,  as  those  whc>  with  the  anointing  of  the 
Spirit,  hnou)  all  things.    As  we  are  said  to  be  omnipotent  within  the  sphere  of  ow 


ea.  n.  1—29.        THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  Of  JOHN.  69 

doing,  BO  we  are  said  to  lie  omniscient  within  the  sphere  of  our  knowing.  As  in  the 
one  case  we  must  think  of  what  is  proper  for  ns  to  do,  so  in  the  other  case  we  must 
think  of  what  is  proper  for  ns  to  know.  We  are  to  regard  this  as  guarautee  against 
deception.  "  For  there  shall  arise  false  Ohrists  and  false  prophets,  and  shall  show  great 
Kgns  and  wonders ;  insomuch  that,  if  it  were  possible,  they  shall  deceive  the  very  elect." 
But  it  is  not  possible  with  what  provision  we  have  secured  to  us.  There  is  no  false 
appearance  beneath  which  it  is  impossible  for  us  to  see,  no  truth  into  which  it  is 
impossible  for  us  to  penetrate.  In  writing,  John  recognized  the  favoured  condition  oi 
his  readers  as  qualified  to  know  the  truth,  and  to  detect  every  lie  as  belonging  to 
another  category. 

IV.  Antiohbist  defined.  "Who  is  the  liar  but  he  that  denieth  that  Jesus  is  the 
Christ?  This  is  the  antichrist,  even  he  that  denieth  the  Father  and  the  Son.  Whoso- 
ever denieth  the  Son,  the  same  hath  not  the  Father :  he  that  confesseth  the  Son  hath 
the  Father  also."  Having  recognized  their  power  to  detect  every  lie  (passing  from  the 
abstract),  he  asks  vividly,  "  Who  is  the  liar?"  i.e.  the  utterer  of  the  supremo  lie,  the 
denier  of  truth  by  pre-eminence  ?  His  answer  is  virtually  a  definition  of  antichrist, 
viz.  "he  that  denieth  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ."  Jesus  was  a  historical  Person,  who  had 
been  seen,  heard,  handled ;  what  was  to  be  predicated  of  him  ?  As  there  was  a  defi  nite- 
ness  about  Jesus,  so  there  was  a  definiteness  about  the  Christ,  or  the  Messiah,  i.e.  there 
were  certain  ideas  which  the  Old  Testament  put  into  the  word,  and  which  the  Jews 
were  trained  to  associate  with  it.  There  were  these  ideas  in  the  Jewish  mind  as  to 
the  work  of  the  Messiah — that  he  would  tell  all  things  (John  iv.  25),  that  he  would 
be  a  King,  that  he  would  be  the  Saviour  of  the  world  (John  iv.  4^),  in  a  word,  meet 
all  spiritual  need.  There  were  these  ideas  as  to  his  Person — that  it  would  not  be 
known  whence  he  was  (John  vii.  27),  that  he  would  abide  for  ever  (John  xii.  34),  that 
he  would  be  the  Son  of  God  (John  i.  49).  These  ideas  were  far  from  being  distinctly 
or  consistently  held;  but  they  were  founded  on  the  Old  Testament.  When  Jesus 
claimed  to  be  the  Christ,  it  was  according  to  the  pure  Old  Testament  conception.  The 
distinguishing  part  of  the  conception  was  his  being  the  Son  of  God.  This  was  under- 
stood by  Peter  (Matt.  xvi.  16),  and  also  by  the  high  priest  (Matt.  xxvi.  63).  The  liar 
here  is  defined  to  be  he  that  denieth  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ ;  and  then  this  denier  of 
Christ— named  antichrist — is  regarded  as  denying  therewith  the  Father  and  the  Son. 
The  antichrlstian  lie,  then,  comes  to  be  the  denial  of  the  Incarnation,  which  is  the 
key-note  of  the  Epistle,  viz.  the  union  of  the  Son  of  God  and  man.  The  Jewish  anti- 
christ refused  to  recognize  Jesus  as  the  Messiah,  declared  him  to  be  an  impostor,  and 
thus  set  aside  the  Incarnation.  The  Gnostic  antichrist,  which  is  more  pointed  at  here, 
taught  that  the  seon,  Christ,  descended  on  the  man  Jesus  at  his  baptism,  and  left  him 
before  the  Passion.  The  antichrist  is  not  confined  to  one  shape  or  to  two  shapes,  but  is 
protean ;  its  inmost  character,  however,  always  is  the  setting  aside  of  the  Incarnation. 
If  God  has  not  formed  the  connection  with  humanity,  which  is  pointed  to  in  the  Incar- 
nation, then  his  Fatherhood  is  not  revealed ;  and  we  do  not  have  the  Father,  i.e.  possess 
him  in  living  fellowship.  Denying  the  Incarnation,  we  cannot  have  the  joy  of  the 
thought  that  he  has  gone  the  length  of  sacrificing  his  Son  for  us.  But,  confessing 
God  Incarnate,  we  have  the  joy  of  the  Son  dying  for  us,  and  of  the  Father  giving  him 
up  to  the  death  for  us. 

V.  Advantage  of  holding  to  the  Christian  position.  "  As  for  you,  let  that 
abide  in  you  which  ye  heard  from  the  beginning.  If  that  which  ye  heard  from  the 
beginning  abide  in  you,  ye  also  shall  abide  in  the  Son,  and  in  the  Father.  And  this  is 
the  promise  which  he  promised  us,  even  the  life  eternal."  That  which  they  heard  from 
the  beginning  was  the  truth  about  the  Incarnation.  If  that  abode  in  them,  constantly 
mingled  with  their  being,  then  they  would  also  abide  in  the  Son  and  in  the  Father — 
would  have  constant  communion,  not  only  with  the  incarnate  Son,  but  with  his  Father. 
The  promise  contained  in  the  Incarnation  is  the  life  eternal.  What  could  such  con- 
descending love  mean  but  that,  in  communion  with  the  Son  and  the  Father,  we  should 
have  our  highest  well-being  inalienably  secured  to  us  ?  Let,  then,  the  Incarnation 
dwell  in  our  minds.  Let  it  elevate  oiu-  conception  of  God ;  let  it  touch  our  hearts ;  let 
it  be  motive-power  to  our  wills.  According  as  it  takes  possession  of  us  do  we  advance 
toward  the  goal  of  our  being. 

YL  Renewed  expression  of  oonfidinox  in  bib  hxabbbb.    "Theac  things  havt 


70 


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  JOHN.      [ch.  m.  1—24. 


I  written  unto  you  concerning  them  that  would  lead  you  astray.  And  as  for  you,  the 
anointing  which  ye  received  of  him  abideth  in  you,  and  ye  need  not  that  any  one 
teach  you ;  but  as  big  anointing  teacheth  you  concerning  all  things,  and  is  true,  and  is 
no  lie,  and  even  as  it  taught  you,  ye  abide  in  him."  The  antichristiaa  teachers  were 
bu»y  at  their  work,  trying  to  lead  them  astray.  That  was  his  motive  for  writing  to 
them  as  he  had  done.  He  did  not  thereby  intend  to  convey  any  waut  of  confidence  in 
them.  They  had  immediate  commimication  with  Christ,  access  to  his  thoughts  through 
the  reception  of  Viie  anointing  Spirit.  The  anointing  abiding  in  them  made  them 
independent  of  any  human  teacher  such  as  he  was.  Christ  was  present,  in  his  Spirit, 
to  teach  them  as  every  new  occaBion  required — to  teach  them  what  was  truth  and  what 
was  no  lie,  to  teach  them  always  in  the  way  of  opening  up  the  meaning  of  the  original 
message.  Thus  taught  by  his  Spirit,  they  abode  in  him,  notwithstanding  the  attempts 
to  lead  them  astray.  This  doctrine  does  not  exclude  new  developments ;  but  these 
must  be  developments  of  the  original  teaching.  We  have  thus  a  safeguard  against 
extravagances.  We  are  not  to  despise  human  helps ;  but  it  is  well  that  we  can  all 
have  the  truth  witnessed  in  our  minds.  Our  teachers  are  not  intended  to  see  for  us 
(which  is  the  Roman  Catholic  idea),  but  to  help  us  to  see  for  ourselves. 

VII.  Exhortation  in  accoedancb  with  their  knowledse,  in  which  transition 
IB  HADE  TO  A  NEW  SECTION.  "And  now,  my  little  children,  abide  in  him  ;  that,  if  he 
shall  be  manifested,  we  may  have  boldness,  and  not  be  ashamed  before  him  at  his 
coming.  If  ye  know  that  he  is  righteous,  ye  know  that  every  one  also  that  doeth 
righteousness  is  begotten  of  him."  In  this  hortatory  part  he  addresses  them,  not  as 
under  his  care,  but  rather  as  oljects  of  his  warm  affection.  They  knew,  as  we  have 
seen,  how  to  abide  in  Christ ;  let  them,  then,  abide  in  him.  It  was  a  great  fact  that 
Christ  was  to  be  manifested,  i.e.  in  glory,  though  there  was  uncertainty  as  to  the  time 
of  the  manifestation.  What  was  their  relation  to  that  manifestation?  Were  they 
prepared,  the  moment  of  its  occurrence,  to  pass  into  his  presence  with  boldness,  and 
not  "  as  a  guilty  thing  surprised,"  to  shrink  with  shame  from  him  ?  They  knew  what 
was  required.  It  was  a  requirement  founded  on  wliat  they  knew  God  to  he,  viz. 
righteous.  "  The  righteousness  of  God  is  the  Divine  attribute  of  an  active  nature,  by 
virtue  of  which  God  wills  and  performs  all  things  which  are  conformable  to  his  eternal 
Law,  prescribes  suitable  laws  to  his  creatures,  implements  bis  promises  made  to  man, 
rewards  the  good,  and  punishes  the  ungodly."  The  requirement,  then  (to  which  there 
is  no  exception),  is  doing  righteousness,  i.e.  actively  fulfilling  our  duties.  The  inner 
abiding  in  Christ  must  pass  into  the  outer  life  of  God-defined  and  God-like  activity. 
Only  thus  can  we  show  ourselves  to  be  begotten  of  God — ^with  which  idea  the  new 
Be«tion  begins.— R.  F. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  lU. 


Ver.  1 — oh.  v.  12.~3.  Second  Main 
Division.     God  is  Love. 

Vers.  1 — 24. — (1)  TTie  evidence  of  tonship. 
EighteousnesB. 

Vers.  1 — 3. — The  Divine  hirth  is  the  out- 
come of  the  Divine  love. 

Ver.  1. — Behold  what  manner  of  love! 
narairis ;  literally, "  of  what  couuti  y,"  in  the 
Now  Testament  always  implies  amazement 
(Matt.  viii.  27 ;  Mark  xiii.  1 ;  Luke  i.  29  ; 
Tii.  39 ;  2  Pet.  lii.  11)  ;  but,  as  the  original 
meaning  leads  us  to  expect,  it  implies 
marvellous  quality  ratlier  than  marvellous 
size.  "  Love"  must  bo  taken  liti rally  :  the 
Divine  love  itself,  and  not  a  mere  proof  of 
it,  has  been  given.  Tlorawiiv  kyiitiiv  strikes 
the  key-note  of  the  whole  section,    "  And 


the  goal  of  this  'love  (Jva)  is  that  once  for 
all  (aorist)  we  have  received  tlie  title  'chil- 
dren of  God.'"  And,  whatever  cavillers 
may  say,  the  title  is  rightfully  ours.  (The 
word3,"aud  (such)  weare,"  arequite  rightly 
inserted  in  the  Revised  Version  after  "  chil- 
dren of  God.")  Tliis  is  shown  by  the  fact 
that  the  world  does  not  recognize  us  as 
such,  because  from  the  first  it  did  not  re- 
cognize God.  Had  it  known  the  Father, 
it  would  have  known  the  chiklren.  Ai^ 
toBto  in  St.  John  refers  to  what  precedes 
(v.  16,  18;  vii.  22;  viii.  47;  x.  17;  xii.  18, 
27,  39);  it  does  not  merely  anticipate  the 
8ti  which  follows  it.  In  logical  phraseology 
we  have  here  fiist  the  major  premise,  then 
the  conclusion  introduced  by  Si4  rairo,  tlien 
(to  clench  the  argument)  the  minor  premis* 
introduced  by  Sti — 


OH.  m.  1—24.]      THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  JOHN. 


71 


We  are  children  of  God  j 
Therefore  the  worW  knows  us  not ; 
For  the  world  knows  not  God. 
But  we  must  beware  of  Bupposing  that  every 
one  who  fails  to  recognize  OMr/orm  of  Chris- 
tianity is  necessarily  of  the  worhl.  St. 
John  invariably  (but  conip.  Rev.  xxi.  7) 
speaks  of  "children  of  God"  (t^kpu  ®eov), 
St.  Paul  generally  of  "  sons  of  God  "  (viol 
Beov).  The  latter  expression  can  apply  to 
adopted  sons ;  the  former,  strictly  speaking, 
implies  actual  parentage.  In  saying  KKriBS- 
H^v,  leaf  iffiisv,  St.  John  appeals  to  the  con- 
scious nobility  of  Christians :  we  have  this 
magnificent  title  with  its  corresponding 
dignity. 

Ver.  2. — Beloved,  now  are  we  children  of 
6od,  and  it  is  not  ^et  made  manifest  (or, 
('(  never  yet  wcu  manifested)  what  we  shall 
be.  The  emphatio  vSv  is  in  opposition  to 
oSvai  our  present  state  is  known;  our 
future  remains  still  unrevealed.  Again(ch.  ii. 
27,  29),  we  are  in  doubt  about  the  construc- 
tion. AVliat  is  the  nominative  to  "shall  be 
manifested"  (<pavepoien),  "he"  or  "it"? 
The  context  is  strongly  in  favour  of  "  it," 
i'.<.  "  if  it  shall  be  manifested  what  me  ehaU 
he;"  ch.  ii.  28  seems  to  favour  "he,"  i.e. 
"if  Chriit  shall  be  manifested."  The  con- 
text must  prevail.  "Our  future  state  is 
not  yet  made  manifest.  We  know  that  on 
its  manifestation  we  shall  find  ourselves 
like  God."  The  two  things  will  be  con- 
temporaneous. The  'Speaker's  Commen- 
tary '  quotes  tlie  following  anecdote ;  "  When 
some  heathen  converts  to  Christianity  were 
translating  a  Catechism  into  their  own  lan- 
guage, they  came  upon  1  John  iii.  2.  They 
stopped.  '  No ;  it  is  too  much,'  they  said  j 
'let  us  write  that  we  shall  be  permitted  to 
kiss  his  feet.'"  Beware  of  inverting  the 
meaning  of  the  last  clause,  Sn  oif>(f/teOa, 
K.T.\.  It  does  not  mean  that  the  seeing 
God  is  a  proof  or  tign  of  our  being  like  him 
(Matt.  V.  8),  but  the  cause  of  our  being  like 
him:  "We  shall  be  like  him,  iecause  we 
shall  see  him."  God  is  light  (oh.  i.  5),  and 
light  is  seen.  In  this  life  (ySv)  we  cannot 
see  the  light  of  the  Divine  nature  "  as  it 
is,"  but  only  as  it  is  reflected ;  and  the  re- 
flected light  cannot  transmit  to  us  the  nature 
of  the  Divine  original,  though  it  prepares 
ns  to  receive  it.  Hereafter  the  sight, "  face 
to  face"  (1  Cor.  xiii.  12),  of  the  Light  itself 
will  illuminate  us  through  and  through, 
and  we  shall  become  like  it.  Bothe  takes 
"like  him"  to  mean  like  Christ  (Bom.  viii. 
16, 17,  29 ;  2  Cor.  iii.  18 ;  comp.  John  xvii. 
84 ;  &)1.  iii.  18) ;  comp.  Rev.  xxii.  4 ;  i.  7. 

Ver.  3. — Sudh  being  our  hope,  based  upon 
God's  promises  (lir'  o6t^_),  of  becoming  like 
him,  we  most  keep  this  prospect  ever  in 
view,  and  live  up  to  it.  Commentators 
differ  M  to  whether  tArf  refers   to  the 


Father  or  Christ,  and  so  also  with  regard 
to  iicitfos.  The  best  way  is  to  take  aitr^ 
as  God,  and  ine'iyos  as  Christ:  this  agrees 
with  avriv  in  ver.  2,  with  eKfivos  in  ver.  5, 
and  with  the  common  use  of  the  two  pro- 
nouns. It  is  doubtless  possible,  especially 
in  St.  John,  to  take  iicuvos  as  merely  recall- 
ing the  person  already  indicated  by  aurds  or 
otherwise,  and  make  both  pronouns  here 
refer  to  God.  At  first  sight  this  seems  to 
make  a  better  sequence  between  vera.  2  and 
3 :  hereafter  we  shall  be  like  God ;  therefore 
here  we  must  strive  to  become  pure  as  he  is 
Moreover,  it  is  of  the  Father  that  it  is 
written,  "  Be  ye  lioly ;  for  I  am  holy  "  (Lev. 
xi.  44;  1  Pet.  i.  15,  16);  and  again,  "Ye 
shall  be  perfect,  as  your  heavenly  Father  is 
perfect"  (Matt.  v.  48).  But  the  other  is 
simpler  grammatically,  and  preserves  the 
logical  sequence  equally  well.  Hereafter 
we  shall  be  like  God.  Every  one  who  has 
such  a  hope  as  this  will  aim  at  becoming 
like  God  liere ;  even  as  Jesus  Christ  hat  set 
us  an  example,  a  perfect  realization  of  human 
conformity  to  God. 

Vers.  4 — 12. — Sin  is  absolutely  inoom- 
patible  with  Christ's  work  of  redemption 
and  our  nnion  with  him  (vers.  4 — 8),  and 
also  with  being  born  of  God,  as  is  shown 
by  the  presence  or  absence  of  brotherly  love 
(vers.  9—12). 

Ver.  4. — Once  more  the  apostle  turns  from 
the  positive  to  the  negative.  Having  shown 
what  birth  from  Grod  involves,  he  goes  on 
to  show  what  it  excludes.  "  Every  one  that 
doeth  sin"  evidently  balances  "every  one 
that  hath  this  hope "  (ver.  3),  and  "  to  do 
sin "  is  the  exact  opposite  of  "  to  do  righ- 
teousness "  (ch.  ii.  29).  Sin  is  lawlessness- 
{tj  a^apria  iailv  tj  i-vofiia).  Both  words 
having  the  article,  the  two  terms  are  exactly 
equivalent — all  sin  is  lawlessness,  and  all 
lawlessness  is  sin.  '^Aroiila,  like  "  lawless- 
ness," expresses  the  ignoring  of  the  law 
rather  than  the  absence  of  it.  "  The  law  " 
means  the  law  of  God  in  the  fullest  sense, 
not  the  Mosaic  Law.  In  short,  sin  is  defined 
as  the  transgression  of  God's  will. 

Ver.  5. — Two  additional  reasons  for  the 
absolute  separation  of  the  children  of  God 
from  sin.  (1)  They  know  well  that  the  Son 
of  God  was  manifested  in  the  flesh  to  put 
away  the  sins  (of  the  world,  John  L  29) ; 
not  mere  "sins,"  one  here  and  one  there, 
but  "  the  sins "  (rets  aiiapriai),  whatever 
sins  exist.  'H/uwv,  though  strongly  sup- 
ported, is  probably  not  genuine.  Afpeii'  in 
itself  means  not "  to  take  on  himself,  or  bear," 
but "  to  take  away;"  it  expresses  the  removal 
rather  than  the  manner  of  removal.  But 
it  may  represent  the  Hebrew  nasa,  which 
combines  the  two  meanings  (Lev.  x.  17; 
xxiv.  15;  Isa.  liu.  12).  (2)  The  Sod  o( 
God  was  absolutely  separated  iram  sis. 


THE  FIRST  EMSTLB  GENEftAL  OF  JOHN.     [oa.  m.  1—24. 


Ter.  6. — ^Eveiy  one  tliat  abideth  In  Christ 
ipio  facto  sinneth  not ;  for,  if  he  Bins,  he 
ceases  to  abide  in  him.  Just  in  bo  far  as  he 
abides,  he  does  not  sin.  Or  it  may  mean 
that  he  who  abides  in  Christ  cannot  de- 
liberately and  habitually  sin.  But  then 
would  not  St.  John  have  written,  "  He  that 
abideth  in  Ohrist  abideth  not  in  sin  "  ?  But 
the  main  difficulty  is  in  the  second  half. 
In  what  sense  is  it  true  that  every  one  that 
sinneth  hath  not  seen  Christ  1  In  the  main 
two  explanations  are  given.  (1)  The  Greek 
perfect  expresses  the  present  and  permanent 
result  of  a  past  action,  and  is  often  equiva- 
lent to  a  present.  No  doubt ;  and  all  would 
be  easy  if  we  had  only  to  deal  with  cyvaics, 
which  means,  "  he  hath  come  to  know," 
equivalent  to  "he  knoweth."  But  does 
eSipaKt  ever  mean  "  he  seeth,"  as  Alford 
suggests  as  the  best  rendering  for  a  version  ? 
If  St.  John  simply  means  that  whoever  sins 
thereby  ceases  to  see  and  know  Christ,  he 
would  hardly  express  himself  thns.  (2) 
The  fact  of  the  man's  sinning  proves  that 
his  perception  and  knowledge  have  been 
imperfect,  if  not  superficial,  or  even  imagi- 
nary ;  jnst  as  the  fact  of  Christians  leaving 
the  Church  proves  that  they  never  were 
really  members  of  it  (oh.  ii.  19).  This  expla- 
nation is  preferable.  In  ver.  2  we  were  told 
that  seeing  God  will  make  us  like  God ;  and 
similarly,  to  Bee  and  know  Christ  make  us 
like  Christ.  Whoever  is  unlike  Christ,  to 
that  extent  has  not  seen  nor  come  to  know 
him.  The  best  of  us,  it  may  be,  have  seen 
but  the  hem  of  his  garment. 

Ver.  7. — St.  John  repeats  his  declaration 
with  emphasis  and  fresh  considerations; 
hence  the  repetition  of  the  tender  address 
(ch.  il.  1),  "  Little  children,  let  no  one  ever 
seduce  you  into  the  belief  that  character 
and  practice  can  be  separated.  He  that 
doeth  righteousness  is  righteous;  for  u 
righteous  man  inevitably  practises  righ- 
teousness." There  are  always  persons  who 
endeavour  to  reconcile  religion  with  moral 
laxity :  and  in  St.  John's  day  some  Gnostics 
definitely  taught  that  conduct  was  imma- 
terial to  the  spiritual  man,  for  no  external 
acts  could  defile  such.  "  The  external  acts," 
says  St,  John,  "prove  the  man's  spiritual 
character  and  origin.  He  that  doeth  righ- 
teousness is  righteous  and  is  of  God :  he  that 
doeth  sin  is  of  the  devil."  Note  the  differ- 
ence between  "  even  as "  in  vers.  3  and  7. 
There  KaBds  introduces  a  pattern  as  a  fresh 
motive  for  self-purification;  here  it  intro- 
duces a  comparison.  Christ  is  righteous, 
and  his  character  produces  nothing  but 
righteousness;  so  also  is  it  with  the  righ- 
teous Christian. 

Ver.  8. — The  contrary  position  given  to 
make  the  statement  clear  and  emphatic. 
The  devil  (i  Sid0o\»s)  is  the  great  aeou$er  or 


$landerer,  as  in  Job  i.  and  ii.  (comp.  John  xiii, 
2;  Bev.  ii.  10;  xii.  9,  12;  xx.  2,  10).  The 
devil  sinneth  from  the  beginning  (dV 
apxrjs).  From  the  beginning  of  whatf 
From  the  beginning  of  sin.  The  devil  was 
the  first  sinner,  and  1ms  never  ceased  to  sin. 
Other  answers  are :  from  the  beginning  (1) 
of  the  devil,  (2)  of  the  creation,  (3)  of 
human  history.  Some  of  these  are  scarcely 
in  harmony  with  Scripture ;  none,  perhaps, 
fit  the  context  so  well  as  the  explanation 
adopted.  If  the  devil  committed  the  first 
sin,  and  has  sinned  unceasingly  ever  since, 
then  whoever  sins  is  akin  to  him,  is  morally 
his  ofispring  (John  viii.  44).  There  is  the  • 
kingdom  of  God  and  the  kingdom  of  the 
evil  one,  and  man  cannot  find  or  make  a 
third  domain ;  if  he  is  not  in  the  one  he  is 
in  the  other.  This  verse,  like  John  viii.  44, 
Beems  to  be  conclusive  as  to  the  personal 
existence  of  the  devil.  'Ek  rod  Sia06\ou 
balances  Ik  to?  0eou :  if  the  one  is  a  mere 
personification  of  a  tendency,  why  not  the 
other?  Botli  should  be  personal  or  neither. 
"  It  is  not  true  that  St.  John  speaks  so  con- 
fidently of  a  devil  because  he  was  a  Jew  and 
was  filled  with  Hebrew  opinions.  For  once 
that  the  devil  ia  introduced  in  the  Law, 
the  Psalms,  and  the  Prophets,  he  is  spoken 
of  twenty  times  in  any  Gospel  or  Epistle  " 
(Maurice),  and  not  least  in  the  Gentile 
Luke.  With  the  latter  half  of  ver.  8. 
comp.  ver.  5.  Christ's  act  in  removing  our 
sins  from  ns  destroys  the  devil's  works ;  for 
by  the  manifestation  of  the  Light  (John  i.  5) 
the  darkness  is  dispersed  and  destroyed. 
Our  sins  are  the  evil  one's  works:  what  is 
sin  in  us  is  his  natural  occupation.  (For 
Kietvin  the  sense  of  unbinding  or  dissolving, 
and  therefore  destroying — a  use  specially  fre- 
quent in  St.  John — comp.  John  U.  19 ;  v.  18 ; 
vii.  23 ;  x.  35.)  The  (pavepaxris  includes  the 
whole  work  of  Christ  on  earth. 

Vers.  9 — 12. — Sin  is  absolutely  incnm- 

Satible  with  being  bom  of  God,  as  is  shown 
y  the  presence  or  absence  of  brotherly  love. 
Ver.  9. — Having  stated  that  every  one  that 
doeth  sin  is  of  the  devil,  St.  John  now  states 
the  opposite  truth,  but  from  the  other  side ; 
not  "every  one  that  doeth  no  sin  is  of 
God,"  which  hardly  needs  to  be  stated ;  but 
every  one  that  is  begotten  of  God  doeth  no 
sin,  which  is  startling.  Who,  then,  can  be 
begotten  of  God?  But  the  statement  ii 
similar  to  that  in  ver.  6,  and  is  to  be  simi- 
larly understood.  So  far  us  any  man  sins, 
his  regeneration  is  incomplete.  If  the  new 
birth  from  God  were  perfect,  sin  would  be 
morally  impossible  (ou  iivarai  AiiapTdveiv). 
The  new  principle  of  life  abides  and  grows 
in  him,  and,  under  perfect  conditions,  it  en- 
tirely prevents  the  old  unregenerate  nature 
from  rebelling.  Note  that  St.  John  does 
not  say  au  Siyarai  a/iapTciv, "  cannot  commit  • 


CH.  m,  1— 2i;     THE  Pmst  EPISTLE  OEUEfiAL  0^  JOAN, 


?3 


rin,"  but  i)&  S  jcarai  i/iaprinttr, "  cannot  be  a 
sinner."  An  a«t  is  diffeient  from  a  state  of 
Bin.  This  is  an  ideal  to  which  every  Chris- 
tian is  bound  to  aspire — inability  to  sin. 
But  to  some  extent  this  ideal  is  a  fact  in 
the  case  of  every  true  Christian.  There  are 
sins  which  to  a  good  man  are  by  God's  grace 
quite  impossible.  The  meaning  of  axifim 
auToi  iv  a'lT^  ii4vfi  is  uncertain:    either 

(1)  "His  seed  abideth  in  Him,"  t'.«.  those 
who  are  bom  of  God  abide  in  God;  or 

(2)  "  his  seed  abideth  in  him,"  t.«.  the  new 
principle  which  he  haa  received  continues 
to  operate  in  the  man ;  or  (3)  «  His  seed 
abideth  in  him,"  «.«.  God's  quickening  Gift 
continues  to  operate  in  the  man,  (For 
tfirep/ta  airov,  in  the  sense  of  "  those  born 
of  God,"  oomp.  Isa.  liii.  10.)  But  this  is  the 
least  probable  of  the  three  interpretations ; 
in  this  sense  St.  John  would  probably  have 
written  T^Kvof.  Note  the  tense  of  the  con- 
cluding verb,  ytyivvitrcu,  not  iyeprlieii :  his 
bii-th  from  God  is  a  fact  which  stiU  con- 
tinues, not  one  that  is  past  and  gone. 

Ver.  10. — ^The  question  whether  "in  this*" 
C^v  Toirc^  refers  to  what  precedes  or  to  what 
follows  is  here  unimportant,  for  both  are 
similar  in  meaning;  and  "in  this"  may 
refer  to  both.  "  By  their  fruits  ye  shall  know 
them."  The  children  of  God  do  righteous- 
ness, and  not  sin ;  the  children  of  the  devil 
do  sin,  and  not  righteousness.  Of  course, 
moral  parentage  is  meant  in  both  cases. 
Nothing  here  lends  any  countenance  to  the 
view  that  the  writer  is  a  dualist  and  incul- 
cates two  principles  of  existence — God  and 
the  devil.  All,  whether  good  or  bad,  are 
God's  creatures  (John  i.  3);  but  while  all 
are  his  children  by  creation,  some  become 
his  children  spiritually  also,  while  others 
become  the  children  of  Satan.  St.  John's 
"  teaching  about  the  devil  is  not  at  all 
agreeable  to  those  who  dwell  exclusively 
on  the  sunny  aspects  of  the  world  and  of 
Jfe,  and  wonld  shut  their  eyes  to  what  is 
dark  and  terrible.  They  like  to  hear  of  a 
Being  who  is  all-gracious  and  loving;  the 
vision  of  one  who  is  the  enemy  of  all  that 
is  gracious  and  loving  shocks  them — they 
wish  to  suppose  that  it  belongs  to  the 
world's  infancy,  and  that  it  disappears  as 
we  know  more"  (Maurice).  The  expression, 
•the  children  of  the  devil,"  must  not  be 
confounded  with  the  Hebraistic  expressions, 
"  children  of  perdition,"  "  children  of  dark- 
ness," "children  of  light,"  "  son  of  death," 
"son  of  perdition,"  etc.  As  so  often,  St. 
John  not  only  restates  the  case  in  a  new 
form,  but  adds  a  new  thought  to  it — he 
that  loveth  not  his  brother.  This  forms  the 
link  with  the  next  section  (vers.  13 — 24), 
on  brotherly  love.  Of  all  failures  in  doing 
righteousness  this  is  the  most  conspicuous 
— fikUing  to  love  one's  brother.    And  who 


is  my  brother?  The  answer  is  tlie  game  as 
to  the  question,  "And  who  is  my  neigh- 
bour?" Mankind  at  large.  The  meaning 
cannot  be  limited  to  the  children  of  God. 
Even  Toiis  iSe\<l)ois  (vers.  14,  16)  does  not 
exclude  unbelievers,  still  less  does  rhp 
4Sf  A(pby  airov.  This  is  confirmed :  (1)  By  tlie 
fact  that  the  opposite  case  (ver.  13)  is  the 
children  of  the  world  hating  Christians ;  the 
true  opposite  of  Christians  loving  Christians 
would  be  the  children  of  the  world  hating 
one  another.  (2)  By  the  cited  example  of 
Christ  (ver.  16),  who  died  for  ua  when  we 
were  aliens  from  God.  Of  course,  if  the 
Christian  must  love  all  men,  a  fortiori  he 
must  love  Christians. 

Ver.  11. — Because  the  message  (leyyeKta : 
see  on  ch.  i  5)  which  ye  heard  from  the 
beginning  is  this.  Hot  merely  in  the  be- 
ginning, but  from  the  beginning;  it  was 
among  the  first  announcements,  and  it  had 
never  ceased  to  be  in  force.  Jerome,  in 
his  'Commentary  on  Galatians'  (vi  10), 
tells  us  that  when  St.  John  became  too 
infirm  to  preach,  he  used  often  to  say  no 
more  than  this,  "  Little  children,  love  one 
another."  His  hearers  at  last  wearied  of  it, 
and  said,  "Master,  why  dost  thou  always 
say  this?"  "It  is  the  Lord's  command," 
he  replied;  "and  if  this  alone  is  done,  it  is 
enough." 

Ver.  12 ^The  sentence  is  of  an  elliptical 

form,  common  in  language.  The  full  sense 
u,  "Not  that  we  should  do  even  as  Cain, 
who  was  of  the  evil  one,  and  slew  his 
brother."  Cain's  conduct  typifies  the  atti- 
tude of  the  world  towards  Christians.  2(^a- 
(eiv  in  the  New  Testament  occurs  only  here 
and  in  Bevelation.  In  the  LXX.  and  the 
New  Testament  it  seems  to  mean  "slay" 
without  necessarily  implying  the  cutting 
the  throat  of  a  victim.  That  Cain's  works 
were  evil  is  not  stated  in  Genesis,  but  is 
inferred  from  God's  rejection  of  him.  Com- 
pare carefully  the  remarkably  parallel  pas- 
sage, Heb.  xi.  4.  The  wicked  envy  the 
good  the  blessedness  of  their  goodness,  and 
try  to  destroy  what  they  cannot  share.  The 
war  between  good  and  evil  is  one  of  ex- 
termination ;  but  the  wicked  would  destroy 
the  righteous,  while  the  righteous  would 
destroy  wickedness  by  converting  the 
wicked. 

Vers.  13 — 24. — Hate  and  death  contrasted 
with  love  and  life  (vers.  13 — 15) ;  generous 
love,  which  has  its  pattern  in  the  self-sacri- 
fice of  Christ  (vera.  16,  17) ;  sincere  love, 
which  is  the  ground  of  our  boldness  to- 
ward God,  who  has  commanded  us  to  love 
(vers.  18—24). 

Ver.  13.— Human  nature  is  the  same  as 
of  old.  There  is  stUl  a  Cain,  the  world, 
hating  its  Abel,  the  Church.  Therefore 
marvel  not,  brethren,  if  the  world  hateth 


74 


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  JOHN.      [oh.  in.  1— 24> 


yon.  Here  only  docs  St.  John  use  tbe 
»ddreB8,  "  brethren,"  which  is  appropriate 
to  the  subject  of  brotherly  love.  Elsewhere 
hi*  readers  are  "children"  or  "beloved." 
The  "  if "  (ei  with  indicative)  expresses  no 
doubt  as  to  tbe  fact,  but  states  it  gently  and 
conditionally. 

Ver.  H. — We  know  that  we  have  passed 
over  out  of  death  into  life  (John  t.  24), 
because,  etc.  "  We  "  is  emphatic ;  whatever 
the  world  may  feel  about  us,  we  have  certain 
knowledge  (not  yivdirKoiitv,  but  ijneU  ol'So- 
uev).  The  love  of  the  brethren  is  the  caiise, 
not  of  the  passing  over,  but  of  our  knowing 
it.  It  proves  that  we  have  passed.  And  this 
test  every  one  can  apply  to  liimself;  "Do  I, 
«r  do  I  not,  Und  the  love  of  tlie  brethren 
within  me?"  A  Christian  can  no  more 
live  without  love  than  a  plant  can  live 
without  growth.  He  that  loveth  not  abideth 
in  death :  he  has  not  made  the  passage 
over.  There  is  no  accusative  after  "  loveth," 
■rhv  aSe\(p6y  being  a  gloss.  The  statement 
is  quite  general ;  absence  of  love  implies  an 
atmosphere  of  death. 

Ver.  16.— A*  in  ch.  iy.  20,  St.  John 
passes  at  once  from  not  loving  to  hating, 
treating  the  two  as  equivalent.  He  takes 
no  account  of  the  neutral  ground  of  indif- 
ference. He  that  is  not  for  his  brother  ii 
against  him.  Indifference  is  hute  quiescent, 
there  being  nothing  to  excite  it.  Love  is 
the  only  security  against  hate.  And  as 
every  one  who  does  not  love  is  potentially 
a  hater,  so  every  hater  is  potentially  a 
murderer.  A  murderer  is  a  hater  who  ex- 
presses his  hatred  in  the  most  emphatic  way. 
A  hater  who  does  not  murder  abstains  for 
various  reasons  from  this  extreme  way  of 
expressing  liis  hate.  But  the  temper  of 
the  two  men  is  the  same;  and  it  is  ob- 
vious (otSaTf,  "  ye  know  what  needs  no  evi- 
dence ")  that  every  murderer  is  incapable 
of  possessing  eternal  life.  It  is  the  mur- 
derous  temper,  not  the  act  of  homicide,  that 
excludes  from  eternal  Ufe.  St.  John,  of 
course,  does  not  mean  tliat  murder  is  an 
unpardonable  sin ;  but  he  shows  that  hate 
and  death  go  together,  as  love  and  life,  and 
that  the  two  pairs  are  mutually  exclusive. 
How  can  life  and  the  desire  to  extinguish 
life  be  comp'atible  ?  It  is  very  forced  to  in- 
terpret av9pamwriyos  as  either  "  destroyer 
of  Itis-  own  tout,"  or  "destroyer  of  the 
hated  man's  eoul,"  by  provoking  him  to 
return  hate  for  hate. 

Vers.  16, 17. — The  nature  of  love  as  shown 
by  Christ,  and  its  obligation  on  Christians. 
Love  has  been  declared  the  criterion  for  d  is- 
tinguishing  the  children  of  God  from  the 
children  of  the  devil.  It  remains  to  show 
■what  love  is;  and  this  is  best  seen  in  a 
concrete  example.  "The  Eternal  Word, 
incarnate  and  dying  for  the  trnth,  inspires 


St.  John  to  guard  it  with  apostolic  chivalry ; 
but  also  this  revelation  of  the  heart  of  God 
melts  him  into  tenderness  towards  the  race 
wbioh  Jesus  has  loved  so  well.  To  St,  John 
a  lack  of  love  for  men  seems  sheer  dishonoui 
to  the  love  of  Christ "  (Liddon). 

Ver.  16.— In  this  (ver.  10 ;  ch.  ii.  3)  w* 
have  come  to  know  (have  acquired  and  pos- 
sess the  knowledge  of)  love  (what  love  is), 
in  that  he  laid  down  Ms  life  for  ns.  This 
is  better  than  "  We  have  come  to  know 
love  as  consisting  in  this,  that  he  laid  down 
his  Ufe  for  us,"  which  would  have  been  4i> 
roirif  oZaav.  Cain  is  the  type  of  hate; 
Christ,  of  love.  Cain  took  his  brother's  life 
to  benefit  himself;  Christ  laid  down  his 
own  life  to  benefit  his  enemies  (see  on 
John  X.  12).  This  realized  ideal  of  love 
we  must  imitate;  ready  to  sacrifice  our- 
selves, and  even  our  lives,  for  the  good  of 
others.  The  effacemeut  of  another's  rights 
and  perhaps  existence  for  one's  own  sake 
is  the  essence  of  hatred;  the  effacement 
of  one's  self  for  another's  sake  is  the  essence 
of  love.  Christ  died  for  those  who  hated 
him ;  and  the  Christian  must  confront  tlie 
hatred  of  the  world  with  a  love  that  is  ready 
even  to  die  for  the  haters.  This  shows  that 
the  "brethren"  here  and  in  ver.  14,  though 
nsed  primarily  of  Christians,  does  not  ex- 
clude unbelievers;  otherwise  the  parallel 
with  Christ  would  be  spoiled  (see  on  ver.  10). 

Ver.  17.—"  But  (5e)  if  a  man  not  only 
fails  to  do  this,  but  even  steadily  contem- 
plates (deapf)  another's  distress,  and  forth- 
with (aorist,  Khilaji')  closes  his  heart  against 
him,  although  he  has  the  means  of  relieving 
him,  how  can  he  have  any  love  for  God  ?  " 
The  meaning  is  not,  "How  can  God  love 
him?"  as  is  plain  fiom  eh.  iv.  20.  But 
possibly  "love  such  as  God  has  shown  to- 
wards us  "  may  be  meant  (ch.  iv.  10).  "  The 
world's  goods"  (rhv  ploy  roS  lemrfiou)  is 
literally  "  the  world's  means  of  life  "  (see  on 
ch.  ii.  16,  and  Trench  on  '  Kew  Testament 
Synonyms,'  for  the  difference  between  plos 
and  for6).  (For  tA  arKdyxya  as  the  seat  of 
the  affections,  conip.  Luke  i.  78 ;  2  Cor.  vi. 
12 ;  vii.  15 ;  Phil.  i.  8 ;  u.  1 ;  Philem.  7, 12.) 
The  air'  airoS  is  graphic ;  closes  his  heart 
and  tumi  away  from  him  (oh.  ii.  28). 

Vers.  18— 24.— As  in  oh.  ii.  28,  St.  John 
bursts  out  into  personal  exhortation  (oomp. 
ver.  13;  ch.  iv.  1,  7),  based  upon  the  pre- 
ceding statements.  He  then  restates  the 
motive  in  u  new  form  both  positively  and 
nef;ativ6ly. 

Ver.  18. — Little  children  (jfKvia,  the  /iov 
being  spurious).  This  address,  as  in  ch.  ii. 
28,  introduces  the  summing  up  of  the  section. 
It  may  be  doubted  whether  the  absence 
of  iy  with  the  first  pair  (Kiycp  /iTjSi  rp 
yKiiaray)  and  its  presence  with  the  second 
(iy  ifr/if  Koi  iJ^tiStif)  indicates  any  marked 


OB.in.1— 24.J      THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  JOHN. 


75 


difference,  as  if  \iyif  expressed  the  instro- 
ment,  and  iv  fyy<p  the  element  or  sphere. 
This  introduces  a  false  antithesis,  like  "  Do 
not  dig  with  a  stick,  but  dig  in  the  earth." 
(For  the  Hebraic  iy  to  express  the  instru- 
ment, comp.  Bev.  ziii.  10.)  "Nor  yet  with 
the  tongue"  is  not  a  tautological  addition. 
One  may  love  «n  word  only,  and  yet  the 
affectionate  words  may  be  quite  sincere; 
and  this  is  a  common  case.  People  say  kind 
things  which  they  mean  at  the  moment,  but 
afterwards  they  do  not  take  the  trouble  to 
act  kindly.  But  to  love  with  the  tongue 
only  is  far  worse.  This  is  to  say  kind 
things  which  one  does  not  mean,  and  which 
one  knows  to  be  unreal.  Deeds  are  needed 
to  complete  the  kind  word ;  truth  is  needed 
to  correct  the  insincere  tongue. 

Ver.  19. — In  this;  oi,  hereby  (Ir  roirif), 
here  clearly  refers  to  what  precedes ;  and  the 
thought  is  similar  to  that  in  ver.  11.  By 
sincere  and  active  love  we  shall  come  to 
know  (yvaadititBa)  that  we  are  children  of 
the  truth.  "The  truth"  here  is  almost 
equivalent  to  "  God ; "  and  we  seem  to  have 
here  an  echo  of  Christ's  words  to  Pilate, 
"  Every  one  that  it  of  the  truth  heaieth  my 
voice  "  (comp.  ch.  li.  21 ;  John  iii.  31 ;  viii. 
23,  47,  etc.).  The  construction  in  what  fol- 
lows contains  several  doubtful  points:  (1) 
whether  Trelao/iev  is  co-ordinate  with  yva<r6- 
fifSa  or  ia-fiiv;  (2)  if  the  former,  whctlier 
iv  Toirrif  goes  on  to  irfiffofiiv,  or  is  confined 
to  yvwadiiida ;  (3)  whether  we  should  read 
8  Ti  iav  or  8ti  ihv.  In  aU  three  cases  tlie 
first  alternative  is  perhaps  preferable  :  And 
hersby  we  shall  persuade  our  heart  before 
him  (that  we  are  of  the  truth,  and  there- 
fore have  nothing  to  fear),  whereinsoever 
our  heart  condemn  us.  But  on  the  third 
point  see  Dr.  Field's  note  in  '  Otium  Nor- 
vicense,'  pars  iii.  Before  him  is  very  em- 
phatic ;  it  is  in  God's  sight  that  the  cliildren 
of  the  truth  are  able  to  quiet  their  hearts, 
not  merely  in  their  own  eyes.  (For  ndBai 
used  absolutely,  comp.  Matt,  xxviii.  14; 
Acts  xii.  20 ;  i  Cor.  v.  11.) 

Ver.  20. — Our  heart  means  our  conscience, 
not  the  affections,  which  would  be  ret 
<nr\i,yx''<>'  (ver.  17).  If  we  are  conscious 
of  sincere  and  habitual  love,  this  will  calm 
us  when  conscience  reproaches  us  (comp. 
oh.  i.  9 ;  ii.  1,  2).  St.  John  never  Ubos  tlie 
more  technical  term  (rweiSrj/ns,  which  occurs 
in  the  Acts  and  1  Peter,  and  is  very  frequent 
in  St.  Paul.  God  is  greater  than  our  heart. 
It  is  asked  whether  this  means  that  he  is 
more  merciful  or  more  rigorous.  Neither 
tlie  one  nor  the  other.  It  means  that,  al- 
though our  conscience  is  not  infallible,  God 
is.  Our  hearts  may  be  deceived;  he  cannot 
be.  He  kaoweth  all  things.  An  awful 
thought  for  the  impenitent,  a  blessed  and 
encouraging  thought  for  the  penitent.    Be 


knows  our  sins;  but  he  also  knows  our 
temptations,  our  strugglei,  our  sorrow,  and 
our  love. 

Ver.  21. — Beloved  (ch.  ii.  7;  iii.  2),  there 
is  a  still  more  blessed  possibility.  If  the 
consciousness  of  genuine  love  will  sustain  us 
before  God  when  our  heart  reproaches  us, 
much  more  may  we  have  confidence  towards 
him  (ch.  ii.  28)  when  it  does  not  reproach 
us. 

Ver.  22. — And  (as  a  guarantee  that  this 
confidence  is  not  baseless  or  misdirected) 
whatsoever  we  ask,  we  receive  from  him. 
Note  the  present  tense :  Xaii^ivoiuv,  not 
\7j<(n(;tc9a.  Whatever  the  child  of  God  asks 
as  such,  he  ipso  facto  obtains  (John  xv.  7). 
This  is  the  ideal  condition  of  things;  for 
the  child  of  God  cannot  ask  what  dis- 
pleases his  Father.  And  we  are  his  chil- 
dren "  because  we  keep  his  commandments." 
The  8ti  must  not  be  connected  too  closely 
with  Xa/xfiimii.ev,  as  if  our  obedience  were 
the  cause  of  God's  hearing  our  prayers.  Our 
obedience  shows  that  we  are  such  as  can 
pray  cfBcaoiouslv.  (For  the  parallelism, 
comp.  Exod.  XV.  26 ;  Isa.  xxxviii.  3.) 

Ver.  23. — And  his  commandment  is  this 
(comp.  ver.  11),  that  we  should  believe  the 
Name,  etc.  "  Do  not  forget,"  St.  John  would 
say,  "  what  the  full  scjpe  of  his  command- 
ment is.  It  is  not  exhausted  by  loving  the 
brethren ;  we  must  also  believe  in  his  Son ; 
and  the  one  implies  the  other."  Wh.it  is 
the  meaning  of  "  belieoing  the  Name  (iri- 
(rT€  Jf  11/  Tip  oycJyuoTi)"  ?  Wc  can  believe  a  docu- 
ment (John  ii.  22;  v.  47),  or  a  statement 
(John  V.  47 ;  xii.  38),  or  a  person  (John  x. 
37,  38) ;  but  how  can  we  believe  a  name  ? 
By  believing  those  truths  whioLi  the  -name 
implies:  in  the  present  case  by  believing 
that  Jesus  is  the  Saviour,  is  the  Messiah, 
is  tlie  Son  of  God.  To  produce  this  belief 
and  its  consequence,  eternal  life,  is  the  pur- 
pose of  St.  John's  Gospel  (John  xx.  31) ; 
it  is  also  the  will  of  God  (John  vi.  40),  and 
the  command  of  his  Son  (John  xiv.  1).  This 
belief  will  inevitably  produce  as  its  fruit  that 
we  "  love  one  another  [present  tense  of  what 
is  habitual],  even  as  Christ  gave  us  com- 
mandment" (John  xiii.  34;  xv.  12,  17). 
Throughout  the  Epistle,  and  especially  in 
this  pasaage  (vers.  22 — 24),  the  references 
to  Christ's  farewell  discourses  in  the  Gospel 
are  frequent.  Here  the  main  ideas  of  those 
discourses  are  represented— obedience  to  the 
Divine  commands,  particularly  as  to  faith 
and  love ;  promised  answer  to  prayer,  abiding 
in  God;  the  gift  of  the  Spirit  (sea  on  oh. 
iv.  5). 

Ver.  24. — We  are  again  in  doubt  as  to 
whether  aurcC  and  avrds  refer  to  God  the 
Father  or  to  Christ.  The  former  seems 
better  on  account  of  ver.  22 ;  but  the  latter 
may  be  right  (John  xiv.  15 ;  XT.  5).    Cent- 


76 


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  JOHN.    [ch.  m.  1—24. 


pare  the  conelnsion  of  the  first  main  division 
(ch.  ii.  24 — 28).  In  this  (or,  hereby)  pro- 
bably refers  to  what  follows;  the  iy  does 
not  disprove  this,  in  spite  of  the  ^k  which 
follows.  St.  John  has  combined  two  con- 
structions :  "In  this  we  know  .  .  .  in  (hat" 
(iv  Toirtf  yiviaKoniy  .  .  .  3Ti),asin  ver.  16; 
and  "  From  this  we  know  .  .  .  from "  (ex 
toJtoi/  yiv&ffKoiiev  . . .  /k  tov)  ;  oomp.  ch.iv.  6. 
From  the  Spirit  wMoh  he  gave  us.  "He" 
ii  probably  the  Father  (oh.  ziv.  16,  17).  and 


the  aorist  (fiSwieer)  refers  to  the  special  oc- 
casion of  Pentecost.  Hitherto  St.  John  has 
mentioned  only  the  Father  and  the  Son; 
now  the  Spirit  also  (alluded  to  in  oh.  ii.  20, 
27)  is  introduced  by  name  as  a  witness  and 
test  of  the  truth.  The  sentence  forms  the 
transition  to  the  subject  of  the  next  section 
(oh.  iv.  1 — 6),  which  is  a  sort  of  digression, 
the  subject  of  love  being  mentioueil  in  ver.  7. 
This  verae  is  said  to  have  been  a  favourite 
with  Spinoza. 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  1, 2. — "  What  manner  of  love  t "  Connecting  link :  The  apostle  lias  just  spoken 
about  being  "  born  of  Grod."  This  suggests  the  thought  that,  if  born  of  God,  then  are 
we  children  I  A  relation  so  near  and  dear,  a  privilege  so  great,  inspires  him  with  a 
rapturous  joy.  He  lingers  exultingly  on  the  thought,  and  calls  on  his  fellow-believers 
to  contemplate  it  as  an  amazing  proof  of  the  love  of  Qod.  Whence  our  topic — So  great 
love  an  object  for  adoring  contemplation.  There  are  some  texts  which  actually  oppress 
the  preacher  with  their  grandeur.  This  is  certainly  one  of  them.  The  utmost  that 
we  can  do  is  to  ask  the  reader  to  follow  us  as  we  endeavour  to  point  out  what  it  con- 
tains, and  then  to  invite  to  its  full  and  loving  contemplation.  This  is  our  order  of 
exposition.    "  Behold,"  etc. 

I.  Let  us  open  up  the  contentb  of  Tras  great  love  of  God  ab  pointed  out 
IN  THE  TEXT.  Need  we  ask,  "Vniat  is  love?"  The  question  would  have  been 
needless  were  it  not  that  human  handling  has  so  vitiated  the  New  Testament 
teachings  concerning  it.  Evidently  here  love  is  regarded  in  action.  So  looked  at, 
love  is  righteousness  and  benevolence  acting  in  harmony.  Apart  from  righteousness, 
benevolence  would  be  a  maudlin  sentimentalism.  Righteousness  without  benevolence 
would  seem  rigid  and  frigid.  Benevolence  is  the  beauty  of  righteousness.  Righteous- 
ness is  the  strength  of  benevolence.  "  Strength  and  beauty  "  are  both  in  God ;  and, 
together,  they  make  up  love.  Here  we  have :  1.  Love's  origin.  "  The  Father."  Here 
is  love's  fount,  love's  central  fire.  A  self-kindled,  self-sustaining  love.  Needing  no 
pleading  from  without,  but  gushing  forth  spontaneously  from  the  "  righteous  Father," 
from  the  very  delight  of  loving  I  Yes,  and  loving,  cw  the  Father,  all  the  rights  of 
the  Ruler  being  guarded,  and  his  rectitude  being  demonstrated  in  a  way  which  he 
appointed.  This  being  indeed  the  very  perfection  of  his  love,  that  it  is  so  manifested 
that  we  can  say  of  it,  "  The  righteousness  thereof  is  like  the  great  mountains."  But  we 
have  here  also :  2.  Love's  objects.  "  Us."  The  impression  this  makes  on  any  one  will 
depend  on  the  opinion  he  has  of  himself.  If  he  is  convicted  of  sin,  and  has  traced  the 
hidden  windings  of  evil  in  his  own  heart,  it  will  ever  be  to  him  the  marvel  of  marvels 
that  the  All-pure  One  could  ever  love  him,  and  seek  to  purge  him  from  guilt  by  the 
Divine  process  of  loving  I  3.  Love's  freeness.  "  Hath  given  to  us  (8e5i6ie«r  fifuy)." 
Love  not  only  exists  for  us,  goes  out  towards  us,  but  it  is  given  to  us,  as  a  rich  and 
priceless  treasure.  Confers  on  us  the  noblest  gifts  from  its  vast  stores,  and  all  freely 
(Hos.  xiv.  4).  4.  Love's  actual  achievements.  "  That  we  should  be  called  children  of 
God :  and  such  we  are."  We  were  rebels.  As  subjects  of  the  great  Governor,  we  had 
revolted.  And  love  has  re-made  us.  We  have  been  bom  a  second  time,  and  have 
thus  become  children  in  God's  family.  We  are  such.  We  are  called  such.  It  is  not, 
indeed,  as  yet  openly  manifested.  "  Our  life  is  hid  with  Christ  in  God."  There  is  no 
outward  visible  sign  by  which  the  world  can  distinguish  us.  Nor,  indeed,  have  they 
the  spiritual  perception  to  discern  nor  the  judgment  to  appreciate  the  marks  of  God's 
own.  Their  wisdom  fails  to  show  them  God.  They  did  not  know  the  Christ.  They 
do  not  know  us.  And  for  the  same  reason  in  every  case.  But  their  ignorance  does 
not  alter  the  glorious  fact.  "  The  Spirit  beareth  witness  with  our  spirit,  that  we  are 
the  children  of  Qod."  5.  Lovt^s  ultimate  intentions.  "  It  doth  not  yet  appear  what  wt 
shall  be,"  etc.    It  is  not  merely  for  the  st^ke  of  whstt  we  ve  to-4ay  tbftt  our  Fs^tfew 


OH.  m.  1—24.]     THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  JOHN.  77 

loves  nt  BO.  See  that  baby-boy  in  his  cradle.  Say,  over  and  above  tbe  instinctive 
fondness  of  parents  for  their  children,  are  there  not  big  hopes  that  gather  round  th* 
little  one's  head?  It  is  not  merely  for  what  he  is  to-day  that  he  is  loved  like  this; 
but  for  what  he  i»  to  be  1  So  with  us.  "  It  doth  not  yet  appear  what  we  shall  be." 
God's  children  are  as  yet  so  young,  so  immature ;  their  evolution  is  as  yet  so  incom- 
plete, that  none  can  tell,  from  what  they  are  with  all  their  imperfections  attending 
them,  what  they  will  be  when  all  the  imperfections  are  removed  and  their  growth  is 
unchecked.  Still,  three  data  are  bafore  us — certain.  (1)  The  Lord  Jesus  will  yet  be 
manifested*  (Col.  iii.  4,  Revised  Version).  (2)  Then  we  shall  see  him  as  he  is.  Not 
as  he  was  when  here  in  weakness  and  sorrow,  but  as  he  is  in  his  glory,  as  King  of 
men  and  Lord  of  worlds.  (3)  Seeing  him  as  he  is  will  complete  our  resemblance  to 
him.'  [This  efTect  presupposes  union  to  him  and  sympathy  with  him  ;  for  it  will  not 
be  so  with  all  (Eev.  i.  7).]  This  beatific  vision,  when  we  shall  see  face  to  face,  will 
teach  us  more  of  God's  love  at  a  glance  than  we  can  now  gather  from  half  a  century  of 
thought.  We  shall  no  longer  get  our  thoughts  of  God  at  second-hand,  through 
earthen  vessels,  but  direct  from  the  Son  of  God  himself  But  will  the  transformation 
effected  on  us  be  corporeal  or  spiritual?  Both  corporeal  and  spiritual.  For  the 
face  of  the  glorified  in  the  spiritual  body  will  be  a  perfect  index  of  the  perfected  spirit 
within.  Even  here  Divine  grace  impresses  itself  on  the  features.  God  is,  literally, 
"  the  health  of  our  countenance."  *  Much  more  when  all  drawbacks  are  removed.  6. 
Such  love  that  can  and  will  effect  all  this  is  wonderful.  "  What  manner  of  love  1  "  It 
is  marvellous :  (1)  In  its  purity.  We  love  only  that  which  is  worth  loving.  God  loves 
the  unworthy,  in  order  that  by  love  he  may  make  them  worth  loving.  (2)  In  its 
methods  of  giviiig — giving  the  noblest  Gift  at  the  greatest  cost  in  order  to  win,  and  by 
winning  to  save.  Had  he  terrified  us,  and  so  driven  us  from  him,  we  had  been  ruined. 
But  by  being  drawn  to  him,  sin  dies,  and  we  live.  (3)  In  its  royal  enrichments.  First 
creating  the  new  relationship  of  "  child,"  and  then  giving  the  new-born  child  the 
shelter  of  a  home,  the  endearments  of  tenderest  care,  and  the  wealth  of  the  Father's 
kingdom — and  all /or  ever  1     What  manner  of  love  is  this  ? 

II.  Such  love  is  worthy  op  dbvodt  and  absobbino  eeoakd.  "  Behold  1 "  "  See  ! " 
By  such  a  word  had  John's  attention  first  been  called  to  Jesus  (John  i.  29).  By  such 
a  word  would  he  now  arrest  ours  and  fasten  it  on  Heaven's  wondrous  love,  which  had 
been  the  Object  of  his  adoring  gaze  for  more  than  half  a  century  when  he  wrote  these 
words.  And  still  to  each  new-comer,  as  he  reads  this  Epistle,  the  words  address  them- 
selves, LooJi  at  this  sight }  There  is  no  other  object  so  gloriously  enchanting.  And  no 
other  object  will  so  infinitely  repay  the  longest  and  profoundest  study.  Then  look  1 
But :  1.  How  »  (1)  Penitently,  (2)  gratefully,  (3)  appropriatingly,  (4)  lovingly,  (5)  ador- 
ingly. 2.  When  1  (1)  When  earth's  glare  bewitches  you,  that  by  the  heavenly  sight 
the  world  may  lose  its  power  to  enthral.  (2)  When  sin  hangs  heavy  on  the  conscience, 
that  you  may  receive  the  pardoning  word.  (3)  When  storms  lower  o'er  your  path- 
way, that  Heaven's  light  may  disperse  the  gloom.  (4)  When  sickness  weakens  the 
frame,  that  you  may  rejoice  in  tribalation.  (5)  When  visiting  the  sepulchre,  that  you 
may  espy  the  region  in  which  there  is  no  death.  (6)  When  entering  the  valley  of  the 
shadow  of  death,  that  it  may  be  lit  up  with  a  heavenly  glory.  3.  How  long  f  Not 
fitfully  or  occasionally,  but  continuously,  let  the  sight  be  turned,  not  inwardly  on 
your  own  dark,  sinful  self,  but  outwardly,  on  the  love  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord. 
Then  in  the  clear  light  of  God's  love  many  a  perplexity  will  vanish  ;  for  love  is  the 
key,  and  the  only  key,  to  unlock  the  secrets  of  the  universe.  Then  doubt  and  dread 
will  give  place  to  perfect  peace,  and  in  a  rapturous  appropriation  you  will  feel  and  say 
and  sing,  "  All  is  mine,  since  the  love  of  God  is  mine."  Look  I  look  1  look !  "  till 
the  day  break,  and  the  shadows  flee  away,"  and  you  see  "  face  to  face." 

>  I  have  not  thought  it  well  to  interrupt  the  working  out  of  the  theme  by  discussing  the 
question  whether  we  should  translate  the  text  "  when  it  shall  be  manifested,"  or  "  when 
he  shall  be  manifested."  On  this,  see  the  Exposition,  I  would,  however,  observe  that, 
whichever  translation  we  accept,  since  our  manifestation  is  to  be  cononrrent  with  that  of 
our  Lord's,  the  meaning  is  practically  the  same. 

'  Howe's  mighty  treatise  on  '  The  Blessedness  of  the  Bighteons '  is  full  of  rich,  leraphlp 
thought  on  this  glorious  theme. 

♦  iee  Rev.  Joseph  Cook's  remarkable  lecture  on  '  The  Solar  Light.' 


78  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  JOHN.    [oh.  ni.  1—24. 

Ver.  3. — The  hope :  iU  purifying  power.  Connecting  link :  The  apostle  has  just 
pointed  out  the  blessedness  which  gathers  round  the  new  relationship  of  children  of 
Ood,  both  as  to  its  present  privilege  and  as  to  its  future  glory.  And  if  any  one  should 
suggest  that  it  is  very  questionable  doctrine,  to  assert  merely  that  the  sight  of  Christ 
by-and-by  will  make  them  all  that, they  ought  to  be,  the  anticipative  reply  is  ready. 
That  sight  will  but  complete  the  resemblance  which  is  even  now  being  aimed  at  and 
approximated ;  and  it  will  do  this  in  every  case,  for  even  now  the  expectation  of  such 
an  issue  has  a  purifying  power  on  all  who  cherish  it.  Whence  our  topic — Purified 
hy  hope. 

I.  The  children  of  God  havb  a.  disitnot  and  bpecifio  hope.  This  is  frequently 
referred  to  by  Paul  (Rom. ».  5 ;  Titus  ii.  13 ;  2  Thess.  ii.  16) ;  also  by  Peter  (1  Pet.  i.  3) ; 
but  only  here  by  John.  But  with  all  three  apostles  the  content  of  this  hope  is  the 
same.  It  is,  in  fact,  the  possession  of  this  hope  which  in  the  apostles'  time  marked  ofl' 
the  Christian  from  the  f  agan  and  unbelieving  world  (cf.  Bph.  ii.  12 ;  1  Thess.  iv.  13). 
And  such  is  the  case  now.  Never  was  it  more  strikingly  so.  Even  those  who  are 
most  positive  as  to  the  evolution  of  the  race  are  absolutely  hopeless  as  to  the  sm'vival 
of  the  individual.  But  the  Christian  hope  is  both  a  personal  and  collective  one.  Its 
features,  as  indicated  here,  are  twofold.  1.  "This  hope."  The  Apostle  Paul,  by  the  use 
of  the  definite  article  (Rom.  v.  5),  marks  it  off  just  as  distinctly.  For  the  antecedent 
matter  of  "  this,"  we  must  go  back  to  the  preceding  verses,  and  note  the  three  data 
there  specified  (see  previous  homily).  2.  "  In  him ; "  rather,  "  upon  him."  The  initial 
letter  of  the  pronoun  should  be  a  capital,  indicating  that  the  Lord  Jesus  is  he  on  whom 
the  hope  is  set.  He  it  is  who  is  at  once  the  central  Object  of  the  hope  itself.  He  it  is 
who  has  promised  to  fulfil  it.  His  death  and  resun-ection  set  the  seal  to  its  validity.  He 
by  his  Spirit  will  consummate  and  crown  it.  The  hope  is  set  on  Christ  from  beginning 
to  end.    These  two  features  mark  off  the  Christian  hope  from  all  vain  and  inferior  ones. 

II.  This  hope  has  m  eveet  case  a  puriftino  power.  This  cannot  be  truly 
said  concerning  any  other  hope  whatsoever.  It  is  true  of  this  only.  He  who  cherishes  , 
it  has  the  instinct  of  self-preservation  within  him  ;  he  will  discipline  and  train  his 
nature  in  doing,  bearing,  resisting,  and  thus  will  aim  to  "  perfect  holiness  in  the  fear  of 
God."  And  the  good  hope  that  he  shall  not  fall  short  is  a  constant  inspiration  to  him. 
There  are  three  ways  in  which  this  may  be  set  forth.  1.  It  is  necessarily  so  from  the 
nature  of  the  hope  itself.  Hope  is  commonly  (and  truly)  defined  as  "  a  compound  ot 
desire  and  expectation."  But  either  element  of  the  hope  has  special  weight  here. 
Desire  after  the  beatific  vision  includes  delight  in  purity ;  therefore  he  who  cherishes 
it  will  aim  at  being  pure.  Expectation  of  the  beatific  vision  is  regulated  by  the  Word 
of  God.  It  declares,  "  Without  holiness  no  man  shall  see  the  Lord ; "  and  therefore  he 
knows  that,  apart  from  holiness,  hoping  is  impossible.  Hence  the  conditions  of  the 
realization  of  the  hope  lead  him  to  purify*  himself.  2.  It  is  apart  of  God's  gracious 
plan  that  it  should  be  so.  (1)  All  in  whom  he  begets  this  living  hope  he  guards, 
guides,  and  trains  towards  its  fulfilment.  (2)  The  elation  and  joy  which  this  hope 
creates  are  in  themselves  a  blessed  means  of  spiritual  advancement.  3.  The  fact  that 
in  this  hope  the  believer  is  actually  clinging  to  a  living  Saviour  ensures  it.  The 
charm  of  this  hope  is  Christ  himself.  But  the  expectation  of  seeing  him  hereafter 
keeps  us  by  his  side  now.  And,  abiding  in  him,  we  grow  like  him,  and  are  preparing 
to  stand  before  him  at  his  coming. 

Application.  1.  Let  us  admire  the  grace  of  God  in  drawing  men  out  of  sin  by  the 
force  of  "  this  blessed  hope."  God  does  not  terrify  and  drive,  but  loves  and  wins  and 
saves.  2.  Let  us  use  the  text  as  a  touchstone.  No  pretence  of  hope  avails  apart 
from  growth  in  purity.  A  man  may,  indeed,  apart  therefrom,  have  some  hope,  but  it 
is  not  "  this  hope."  3.  To  refuse  to  indulge  such  a  hope  is  a  grieVbus  sin,  since  it 
throws  doubt  upon  the  love  of  God,  by  insinuating  that  he  does  not  care  enough 
for  his  creatures  to  prepare  such  good  for  them  as  the  Word  reveals.  Let  us  not  thus 
wrong  our  God.  4.  In  the  presence  of  such  solid  grounds  of  hope  as  are  disclosed  iu 
the  gospel,  how  great  a  wrong  is  done  to  a  man's  own  nature  when  his  indifference  or 
unbelief  has  reduced  him  to  such  a  state  of  hopelessness  that  his  highest  achievement 
Ig  that  of  submittiug  to  the  inevitable.     We  do  not  know,  and  have  no  intention  of 

*  See  a  most  valuable  note  in  Ciuion  Westcott,  t'n  loe.,  on  the  difference  between  iiyyi(*%r 
and  Kolaflitai. 


AH.  in.  1—24.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  JOHN.  Y9 

trying  to  discover,  to  what  degree  of  acquiescence  in  this  a  man  may  attain.  But  it  is 
absolutely  certain  that  in  such  a  case  anything  approximating,  anything  worthy  to  be 
compared  with,  the  "  joy  unspeakable  and  full  of  glory  "  is  absolutely  impossible.  The 
peace  of  God  can  never  make  the  face  radiant  with  heavenly  brightness  when  once 
the  light  of  hope  is  gone.  When  there  is  nothing  to  lighten  the  heart  there  can  be 
nothing  to  brighten  the  face.  5.  And  when  this  catastrophe  occurs  in  human  nature, 
the  spur  to  purity  is  gone.  Abstractly,  a  ground  and  reason  for  purity  may  exist  quite  ■ 
apart  from  any  hope  of  immortality.  This  is  possible.  But  in  actual  fact,  take  away 
the  hope,  and  life's  inspiration  is  gone  1  It  becomes  forthwith  a  mere  question  of  time 
as  to  how  soon  the  hopeless  one  will  succumb  to  the  maxim,  "  Let  us  eat  and  drink ; 
for  to-morrow  we  die  1 " 

Vers,  4 — 12, — Sinning  in  every  way  incompatibh  with  the  Christian  life.  Connect- 
ing link:  The  apostle  had  just  said  that  every  one  with  the  Christian  hope  would 
purify  himself  "  as  Christ  the  Lord  is  pure."  As  if  to  guard  this  absolutely  universal 
statement, "  every  one,"  against  the  possibility  of  question,  he  goes  on  to  illustrate  the 
varied  aspects  of  sin — in  its  bearing  on  law ;  as  regards  the  Person  and  work  of  Christ ; 
as  related  to  the  new  life  of  the  children  of  God ;  and  with  reference  to  the  eveilasting 
statute  of  the  gospel.  Thus  giving  an  overwhelming  force  to  the  doctrine  indicated  by 
the  topic  before  us.  Topic — Sinning  impossible  to  tht  idldren  of  Ood.^  The  apostle 
deals  here,  not  with  detailed  sins,  but  with  sinning ;  not  with  isolated  acts  (if,  indeed, 
there  can  be  any  such),  but  with  the  continuous  life  of  sinning.  As  6  itoimv  r^v  iiKato- 
irini"  is  "  one  who  lives  a  life  of  righteousness,"  so  6  vomv  tV  anapriav  is  "  one  who 
lives  a  life  of  sin."  Terrible  thought  (and  yet  how  true  to  fact  1)  that  of  living  a  life 
which  is  all  sin,  without  any  righteousness  in  it  at  all  I  The  man  who  lives  for  self- 
pleasing  rather  than  for  the  sake  of  pleasing  God — who  consults  his  fancies,  and  not 
his  duty ;  who  cares  only  for  himself,  and  not  at  all  for  his  brother — is  living  in  sin 
every  day  and  all  the  da}''  long,  however  glossy  his  external  self  may  seem.  It  is  to 
the  manifold  contrarieties  of  such  a  life  that  the  apostle  here  calls  our  attention.  Let 
V3  look  at  such  a  life — 

L  As  IT  coNCEBNs  THK  Law  OF  GoD.  "  Sin  is  the  transgression  of  law ; "  literally, 
"  lawlessness."  "  It  is,"  says  Westcott, "  the  assertion  of  the  selfish  will  against  a  para- 
laount  authority.  He  who  sins  breaks,  not  only  by  accident  or  in  an  isolated  detail,  but 
essentially,  the  '  Law '  which  he  was  created  to  fdlfil " — of  right  government  of  self,  of 
concern  for  our  brother,  of  loyalty  to  God.  Hence  the  spirit  of  the  Law  is,  broken  in 
its  entirety,  whatever  form  the  details  of  his  life  may  assume. 

IL  As  IT  CONOBBHS  THE  Cheist  HIMSELF.  (Ver.  5.)  1.  As  to  his  Person.  "  In  him 
Ihere  is  no  sin."  How  black  does  a  sinful,  selfish  Hfe  appear  by  the  side  of  the  life  of 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  I  Z.  As  to  his  work.  "  He  was  manifested  to  take  away  sins ; " 
not  only  (as  Paul  shows  in  Eom.  iii.)  to  demonstrate  God's  righteousness  in  forgiving 
sin,  but  also  "  to  take  away  siits "•  (Revised  Version) — to  remove  them  altogether.  'To 
this  end  his  whole  earthly  manifestation  was  directed,  from  the  manger  to  the  cross. 
And  in  thus  doing,  he  would  destroy  "  the  works  of  the  devil,"  who  "  sinneth  from  the 
beginning "  (cf.  John  xii.  31 ;  Col.  ii.  15  ;  Heb.  ii.  14, 15).  Hence  it  is  clear  that  one 
who  is  leading  a  sinful  life  is  in  constant  opposition  to  the  Person,  will,  and  work  of 
the  Son  of  God! 

III.  As  IT  00NCEBN8  THE  NEW  BiBTH  AS  A  DiviNE  PKODUOT.  1.  Sinning  is  altogether 
inconsistent  with  abiding  in  Christ  (ver.  6 ;  cf.  John  xv.  5).  2.  It  is  altogether  opposed 
to  the  true  knowledge  of  Christ  (ver.  6).  3.  It  is  contrary  to  the  features  which  always 
mark  Qod'a  children  (ver.  10).  God's  children  are  re-born — ^born  to  a  life  of  righteous- 
ness and  love.    Hence  (ver.  9)  whosoever  is  born  of  God  doth  not  commit  sin ;  for  the 

■  May  we  be  allowed  here  to  remark,  once  for  all,  that  each  one  of  the  divisions  in  a 
homily  on  a  paragraph  like  this  suggests  a  topic  for  separate  discourse  ?  Bat  it  would 
swell  the  Commentary  beyond  all  reasonable  limits  were  we  to  adopt  such  a  plan.  Besides, 
we  hold  it  to  be  the  design  in  this  department  to  suggest  rather  than  to  expand — to  exhibit 
the  order  of  the  lines  on  whioh  the  apostle's  thoughts  proceed,  than  to  develop  at  large  the 
thoughts  themselres.  Such  development,  with  the  application  thereof,  w«  leave  for  tlie 
pulpit. 

■  Not  "our  sins." 


80  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  JOHN.    [ch.  ni.  1— 24. 

seed  of  another  life  is  in  him.  4.  It  is  impossible  to  a  child  of  Ood.  "  He  cannot  sin, 
because  he  is  born  of  God."  Impossibility  of  sinning  is  one  mark  of  the  new  birth. 
"  He  cannot  sin."  Blessed  inability  I  Cannot  be  sinning,  or  living  a  life  out  of  harmony 
with  God's  will  and  Word.  Cannot !  Why  ?  Because  in  the  new  product  of  God's 
Spirit  the  principle  of  righteousness  is  so  active  that  a  sinning  life  is  entirely  out  of  the 
question.  Virtue  is  so  strong  that  it  expels  its  opposite.  A  true  child  of  God  cannot 
be  in  alienation  of  spirit  from  his  Father  in  heaven,  even  for  one  moment.  So  an 
honest  servant  cannot  steal,  a  faithful  husband  cannot  be  unfaithful.  Une  passionately 
fond  of  accuracy  cannot  be  systematically  inaccurate.  So,  also  a  child  of  God  cannot 
be  opposed  to  his  Father's  will,  simply  because,  ex  hypothesi,  the  product  of  the  new 
birth  is  a  child  who  will  wiU  as  his  Father  wills.  Into  errors  of  judgment  he  may 
fall,  by  sudden  gusts  of  temptation  he  may  be  overtaken  and  so  surprised  into  a  fault; 
but  from  sin,  from  the  sin  of  living  alien  to  God,  he  was  delivered  once  and  for  ever, 
when,  by  the  change  in  his  nature,  he  was  bom  again!  He  was  "renewed  .  .  .  after 
the  image  of  him  that  created  him." 

IV.  The  BntNiNa  life  is  opposed  to  the  evbelastino  btatutb  of  thb  oospei,. 
So  the  apostle  argues  here.  The  sinning  life  is  one  of  lawlessness,  one  of  selfishness. 
Unlovingness  and  unrighteousness  are  not  of  God.  He  who  drifts  away  from  loyalty  to 
God  will  soon  drift  away  also  from  consideration  to  man.  Disloyal  self-will  Godward, 
breeds  selfish  isolation  manv?ard.  And  this  is  contrary  to  the  commandment  that  wa 
heard  "  from  the  beginning,"  «'.«.  from  the  beginning  of  Divine  revelation  (Gen.  ix.  9),  or 
from  the  beginning  of  our  Saviour's  teaching  (Matt.  v.  44),  or  from  the  beginning  of 
oar  Christian  profession  (Gal.  vi.  10).  Consequently,  one  who  receives  and  obeys  the 
gospel  began  to  unlearn  selfishness  the  moment  he  was  won  for  God.  He  is  bound  bjr 
his  Lord's  precepts  to  do  good  unto  all  men.' 

Inferences  and  apflioation.  1.  now  very  serious  a  matter  sin  is  1  It  is  not 
a  mere  question  of  a  few  wrong  deeds,  but  of  a  &lse  bias  of  the  will,  which  turns  the 
•ntire  life  into  a  wrong  channel.  E.g.  think  of  the  prodigal  son.  During  his  guilty 
wanderings  he  may  have  been  entirely  faithful  to  the  citizen  who  hired  Mm,  but  he 
was  sinning  against  his  father  all  the  while  he  was  away  from  him.  So  the  disloyal 
man.  He  may  do  acts  that  are  right  as  towards  A  and  B  and  C ;  but  so  long  as  he  is 
disloyal  to  God,  he  is  sinning  against  him  all  the  while.  2.  Sow  manifold  are  the 
forces  employed  against  sin!  A  Law  to  condemn  it,  a  Saviour  to  redeem  from  it, 
a  Spirit  to  destroy  it,  a  gospel  to  testify  against  it,  a  whole  family  of  new-bom  sons 
to  be  living  witnesses  of  his  deliverance  from  its  power.  3.  Eow  blessed  and  honour- 
able to  be  a  child  of  Ood,  and  so  to  be  numbered  among  the  forces  which  God  would 
bring  to  bear  against  sin  I  God's  children  are  enlisted  on  his  side,  that  they  may  be 
workers  together  with  their  Father  in  declaring  eternal  war  against  sin.  Even  under 
the  Mosaic  economy  this  principle  was  recognized.  Jehovah  called  for  the  united  voice 
of  the  people  to  join  with  him  in  branding  sin  with  a  curse  (see  homily  on  Dent, 
xxvii.).  But  then  the  more  prominent  force  was  a  law  without;  now  it  is  s  life 
within.  4.  Sow  distinctively  Divine  is  the  life  of  the  true  child  of  Ood  1  and  how  clear 
and  manifest  a  proof  of  the  reality  of  redemption  and  of  regeneration  1  Of  the  former, 
because  he  is  redeemed  out  of  the  region  of  sin  altogether;  of  the  latter,  because  a  new 
life,  higher  than  nature  knows,  has  been  actually  begotten  in  him,  and  is  being  sus- 
tained by  the  power  of  God.  6.  Sow  sure  the  triumph  of  Ood's  children  I  They  have 
to  fight  against  the  world's  selfishness  and  sin,  and  in  doing  this  they  fight  along  with 
One  who  was  manifested  that  he  might  destroy  the  works  of  the  devil.  The  purport 
of  that  manifestation  shall  be  realized ;  and  when  their  Lord  triumphs,  his  victory  will 
be  theirs.  6.  What  a  sorry  outlook  for  those  who  are  not  the  children  of  God  I  What 
can  they  he  thinking  of  to  fight  against  so  much  ?  But  ah  1  they  do  not  think.  They 
pause  not  to  ask — What  am  I  doing?  How  forlorn  their  prospect!  Alien  from  God, 
rushing  against  his  Law,  neglecting  his  gospel,  despising  the  Son  of  God:  to  what 
humiliation  and  destruction  are  they  rushing  on?  Siding  with  the  evil  one,  like  him 
they  must  be  cast  down  (Luke  z.  18)  and  cast  out  (John  xii.  31). 

'  A  writer  in  the  Agnostio  Annual  for  1881  declares  that  the  morality  of  agnoaticissa  ii 
purer  than  that  of  Christianity,  since  the  latter  bids  us  strive  luuicly  after  our  own  personal 
welfare  1  If  the  writer  of  that  articln  has  been  trying  to  see  how  vast  an  inaocuiaoy  ha 
Gould  pen,  be  has  succeeded  to  pert'Li;tion,    No  one  could  pen  a  greater. 


CH.  m.  1—24.]    THE   FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  JOHN.  81 

Vers.  13 — 15. — The  world's  hatred  of  Christians.  Connecting  link  :  In  setting  fortl 
the  broad  contrast  between  sin  and  righteousness,  the  apostle  had  taken  occasion  to 
refer  to  Cain  as  the  earliest  illustration  of  the  wide  gulf  between  the  two.  The  violent 
contrast  between  him  and  his  brother  generated  as  yiolent  an  antipathy  on  his  part 
towards  him.  And  even  now  the  contrast  between  sin  and  righteousness  is  just  as 
wide  as  ever.  From  the  very  nature  of  the  case  they  are  an  immeasurable  distance 
asunder;  so  that  it  is  not  to  be  wondered  at  if  a  sinful  world  chafes  under  the  silent  and 
effective  rebuke  administered  to  it  by  the  lives  of  holy  men,  and  if  in  consequence 
thereof  hatred  ia  felt  by  men  of  the  world  towards  the  living  Church  of  God.  For  our 
part,  says  the  apostle,  we  know  it  is  so,  because  we  used  to  cherish  it  ourselves ;  and 
if  now  we  love  the  brethren,  it  is  because  we  have  undergone  so  great  a  change  that  it 
is  no  less  than  passing  from  death  unto  life.  And  even  though  that  hatred  which  we 
once  felt  may  never  have  broken  out  into  a  murderous  act,  yet  that  hatred  itself  is  the 
very  germ  out  of  which  such  an  act  would  develop  itself;  and  hence,  in  the  eye  of 
Gol,  he  that  hateth  his' brother  is  a  murderer ;  and  you  know, certainly  and  absolutely, 
that  no  man,  desiring  to  kill  his  brother,  has  an  eternal  life  abiding  in  him.  The 
whole  passage  reminds  us  of  John  xv.  13 — 21,  with  which  it  should  be  compared. 
Topic — The  world's  hatred  of  Christians  no  surprising  fact. 

I.  Let  us  look  at  the  case  herb  supposed.  "If  the  world  hate  you."  Gloss 
analysis  will  yield  us  several  distinct  facts  here.  1.  There  is  a  society  of  brethren  in 
Christ.  "  You."  There  is  evidently  a  fellowship  of  believers  in  Jesus,  who,  having 
passed  from  death  unto  life,  naturally  magnetized  each  other,  and  came  together  by  the 
mutual  attraction  of  the  spiritual  life  they  shared  in  common.  2.  There  is  an  outside 
world,  composed  of  those  who  are  of  the  earth,  earthy,  out  of  which  these  believers 
have  been  drawn,  and  from  which  they  have  become  separated.  While  "  the  brethren  " 
are  among  the  living,  the  outer  "  world  "  is  still  among  the  dead.*  3.  Those  who  had 
been  gathered  out  of  the  world  devoted  themselves  to  testifying  against  its  sin,  and  to 
the  manifestation  of  another  and  a  purer  life.  4.  This  double  condemnation  of  the 
world's  sin — that  of  witness-bearing  on  behalf  of  One  who  came  to  take  it  away,  and 
that  of  the  silent  condemnation  of  a  holy  life — roused  the  hostility  of  the  world  (cf. 
John  xvL  1,  2;  XT.  18—25). 

IL  Let  us  inquire  if  the  case  here  supposed  has  ant  pbesent-dat  paeallel. 
Does  "the  world"  really  hate  Christians  now?  Is  not  the  time  past  and  gone  for 
*ny tiling  of  the  kind?  Certainly  there  is  a  very  great  difference,  on  the  surface  at 
any  rate,  between  "  the  world  "  as  we  know  it  and  as  the  Apostle  John  knew  it.  And 
a?  certainly  there  is  a  vast  difference  between  the  Church  life  of  our  days  and  that  of 
his.  It  is  well,  therefore,  that  we  should  set  distinctly  and  clearly  before  us  the  thing 
&8  it  exists  under  our  own  eye.  How  are  we  to  apportion  the  two  apparently  contra- 
dictory propositions — (1)  the  world  is  now  a  great  deal  nearer  to  the  Church  than  it 
was  then ;  and  (2)  righteousness  and  unrighteousness  are  not  a  whit  nearer  each  other 
now  than  they  were  then  ?  Will  not  the  following  considerations,  cumulatively  weighed, 
set  the  matter  in  its  true  light?  1.  There  are  some  professors,  and  possibly  some 
Churches,  that  there  is  no  likelihood  of  the  world's  ever  hating,  since,  though  baptized 
into  the  Christian  name,  they  are  entirely  worldly  in  spirit — they  have  but  a  name  to 
live.  They  will  never  convert,  nor  startle,  nor  disturb  the  world.  They  will  be 
deemed  "highly  respectable"  and  "inoffensive."  They  will  never  be  hated.  2.  A 
true  Christian  even,  and  a  true  Church,  may  be  so  lacking  in  outspoken  testimony  for 
God's  truth,  and  in  aggressive  attacks  on  the  world's  sin,  that  they  arouse  no  hostility 
whatever.  And  in  such  a  case  they  will  be  allowed  to  pursue  their  course  in  peace. 
3.  Further,  it  is  certainly  the  case  that,  with  the  advance  of  civilization,  the  old 
element  of  a  persorud  hatred  is  very  largely  modified ;  to  persecute  any  man  for  his 
religious  faith,  or  for  a  holy  Christian  life,  would  not  be  tolerated  now  in  any  social 
circle  where  there  is  due  regard  for  the  laws  of  mutual  courtesy.  4.  Consequently, 
whatever  dislike-there  may  be  in  the  world  to  the  doctrines  of  the  gospel,  it  wiU  now 
show  itself  less  towards  men  than  towards  sysjems.  And  when  we  come  to  this  point, 
it  is  abundantly  clear  that  hatred,  and  a  virulent  hatred,  too,  exists  on  the  part  of  the 
world  towards  the  doctrines  maintained  in  the  Church.    The  dislike  will  vary  in  detail 

>  See  Mr.  Drummond'a  striking  chapter  on  "Classification"  in  'Natural  Law  in  tha 
Spiritual  World.' 


82  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  JOHN.    [oh.  m.  1—24 

according  to  the  staudpoint  of  the  individual.  The  worldling  will  hate  the  demandi 
for  a  life  consecrated  to  Christ.  The  formalist  will  hate  what  he  calls  "  Puritanism." 
The  easy-going  man  will  bate  the  call  to  strive  to  enter  in  at  the  strait  gate.  The 
rationalist  will  hate  the  doctrine  of  the  atonement.  The  man  of  "  broad  thought "  will 
hate  the  exclusive  claims  of  the  Saviour.  The  scientist  will  hate  the  suggestion  tliat 
an  Infinite  Will  rules  all.  The  philosopber  will  scorn  the  doctrine  of  the  Incarnation. 
The  positivist  will  refuse  to  rise  to  the  hyper-phenomenal.  The  agnostic  will  prefer 
his  ignorance,  because  he  hates  to  receive  the  kingdom  of  God  as  a  little  child.  The 
free-thinker  will  hate  to  subject  his  thinking  to  the  supreme  laws  of  righteousness. 
In  all  these  ways  men  "  hate  the  doctrine  of  the  cross."  5.  Nevertheless,  though  the 
hatred  ordinarily  is  more  towards  systems  tban  men,  yet,  let  any  man  move  out  of  the 
common  methods  of  easy-going  Christianity,  and  set  forth  on  a  crusade  for  some  Chris- 
tian doctrine  or  against  some  antichristian  heresy ; — let  him  expose  and  condemn  men's 
favourite  sins, — and  no  one  among  men  will  be  hated  more  intensely  than  he !  Illus- 
trations are  ready  to  hand  in  abundance.  Revivalists :  dead  Churches  and  dead 
ministers  intensely  hate  living  ones.  Temperance  reformers,  etc.  Those  who  expose 
the  crying  sins  of  covetousness,  landlordism,  land  monopoly,  etc.  In  a  word,  let  but 
a  man  aim  at  bringing  gospel  doctrine  to  bear  on  needed  social  reform  in  every  direction, 
the  old-world  greed  will  assert  itself,  and  Faithful  will  have  all  the  showmen  in  Vanity 
Fair  wishing  be  were  dead  1  6.  So  that,  practically,  the  whole  matter  may  be  summed 
up  thus :  The  world,  even  if  more  refined  in  manner  (as  it  most  certainly  is)  than  it 
was  in  John's  time,  yet  is  as  self-willed,  as  selfish,  as  indisposed  to  the  yuke  of  Christ 
as  ever.  If  we  are  faithful  in  bearing  testimony  for  God,  we  shall  meet  with  our  share 
of  hatred.  If  we  were  more  faithful,  wo  should  have  the  more  hatred  to  endure.  True, 
we  have  a  large  number  of  Christ's  followers  to  speed  us  on,  and  so  may  present  a 
larger  front  to  ihe  enemy  ;  consequently,  the  haired  will  be  less  felt  by  the  individual — 
so  many  will  share  it  with  him.  And  it  follows  that,  unless  we  make  the  world  wince 
and  writhe  under  our  rebuke  of  its  faithlessness  towards  God  and  its  wrongs  towards 
man,  we  are  not  truly  representing  him  whose  we  are  and  whom  we  are  pledged  to  serve. 

Vers.  16 — 18. — Love  others,  for  Ood  hath  loved  thee  I  Connecting  link  :  The  great 
contrast  has  been  presented  between  the  love  abiding  in  those  who  have  passed  froiii 
death  unto  life  and  the  enmity  abiding  in  the  world.  That  hatred  has  been  illustrated 
by  a  rererence  to  Cain,  and  believers  are  told  they  must  not  be  surprised  if  the  murderous 
spirit  still  survives.  The  apostle  then  reverts  to  his  favourite  theme — ^love.  He  seems 
to  say,  "  As  for  us,  we  have  learnt  a  diflferent  lesson.  We  have  come  to  know  QyvtiKo) 
•the  love'  [the  words 'of  God'  are  not  in  the  Greek  nor  the  Revised  Version]  the  supreme 
love  in  the  universe.  The  lesson  it  has  taught  us  is  that  we  ought  to  love  as  Ood 
loves.  He  [emphatic]  laid  down  his  life  for  us :  we  ought  to  lay  down  our  lives  for  the 
brethren."  Divine  love  has  not  merely  been  taught  us  merely  in  a  book,  or  by  teachers, 
but  in  the  most  stupendous  act  of  self-sacrifice  that  was  possible  either  in  heaven  or  on 
earth.  If,  after  this,  any  one  can  close  up  his  heart  against  a  needy  brother,  it  is  too  clear 
that  no  love,  either  of  God,  or  like  to  God's,  dwells  in  him.  Be  it  ours  to  show,  as  God 
has  shown,  that  with  us,  love  i&  not  merely  in  word,  but  also  in  power.  Topit — The 
supreme  love :  its  act  and  its  lessons. 

I.  Let  us  study  love's  qbeatbst  ast.  "  He  (iKe'vos)  laid  down  his  life  for  us.'' 
We  have  already  had  one  study  in  God's  love  (homily  on  ver.  2).  But  the  theme  is 
exhaustless.  The  precise  point  here  is  that  by  what  God  has  done  for  us  we  have 
come  to  learn  the  supreme  love ;  such  a  love  as  outshines  all  else — a  love  which  is  not 
only  unique  as  a  model,  but  also  as  a  creative  power  1  Nine  features  thereof  may 
here  bo  suggested.  1.  Love  in  its  highest  origin.  God  (cf.  ch.  iv.  10).  2.  Love's 
manifestation.  Through  the  Son.  3.  Love's  channel.  The  incarnate  Son.  4.  Love's 
method.  "  Laid  down  his  life."  5.  Love's  meaning  in  its  method.  "  A  propitiation  " 
(ch.  ii.  1,  2;  iv.  10);  "  A  demonstration  of  righteousness"  (Rom.  ifi.  20,  21);  "An 
ofiei  inu'  for  sin  "  (Heb.  ix.  26 — 28).  6.  Love  under  strangest  circumstances.  "  When 
we  were  yet  sinners  "  (Rom.  v.  8) ;  "  Ye  who  sometime  were  alienated,"  etc.  (Col.  i.  21 ; 
cf.  Rom.  V.  6).  7.  Love's  extent.  "  A  propitiation  for  .  .  .  the  sins  of  the  whole 
world"  (ch.  ii.  2)  ;  "  He  died  for  all "  (2  Cor.  v.  15).  8.  Love's  intent.  To  save  from 
^     To  purify.     To  remove  for  ever  the  one  stumbling-block  and  bar  to  human 


OH.  m,  1—24.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  JOHN.  8S 

progresi.  To  aee  men  perfect  (of.  Eph.  v.  25—28;  Col.  i.  26—28;  Titus  ii.  14). 
This — this  is  love ;  this  is  the  love ;  herein  is  love.  This  is  the  supreme  lesson  taught 
us  in  Christ — that  the  supreme  energy  is  infinite,  eternal,  hoimdless,  out-gushing  love/ 
Mr.  Herbert  Spencer  tells  ns  that  "  amid  the  mysteries  which  become  .the  more 
mysterious  the  more  they  are  thought  about,  there  will  remain  the  one  absolute 
certainty  that  we  are  ever  in  presence  of  an  Infinite  and  Eternal  Energy,  from  which 
all  things  proceed"  (^Nineteenth  Century,  January,  1884).  Where  the  agnostic  ends, 
acknowledging  that  there  is  an  Infinite  Energy,  though  he  knows  not  what  it  is,  the 
gospel  messenger  begins,  and  says,  "  That  Energy  I  declare  unto  you."  The  Infinite 
Energy  is  a  self-existing,  self-outpouring  love ! — a  love  that  makes  the  greatest  possible 
sacrifice  in  order  to  redeem  the  lost  I 

II.  Let  ub  leabn  lovb's  gbeatebt  lesson.  How  much  the  lesson  of  love  needed 
to  be  taught  can  only  be  learnt  from  the  studj  of  the  period  at  which  the  Apostle  John 
wrote.*  The  space  at  our  disposal  forbids  our  doin^;  more  than  to  refer  the  student  to 
works  touching  thereon.     This  love  of  God  for  man  is  seen  to  have  a  fivefold  effect. 

1.  It  teaches  new  truth  about  man.  (1)  That  mau  is  very  precious  in  the  eye  of  God. 
(2)  That  the  life  of  self-sacrifice  on  behalf  of  man  is  the  noblest  possible  expenditure  of 
spiritual  energy.  (3)  That  when  so  expended,  it  should  be  for  the  purpose  (a)  of 
removing  obstructions  to  human  advancement,  whether  (o)  from  within  or  (0)  from 
without ;  and  (6)  of  creating  and  sustaining  such  new  forces  as  will  raise  him  in  the 
scale  of  being.  (4)  That  to  teach  us  all  this,  Heaven  itself  has  led  the  way.  The 
highest  Being  in  the  universe  finds  his  highest  glory  in  stooping  to  redeem  and  save  I 

2.  It  creates  a  new  duty,  viz.  that  of  laying  ourselves  out  for  others.  "  And  we  ought," 
etc.  The  vastly  higher  plane  to  which  the  revelation  of  Divine  love  lifted  human 
nature,  ipso  facto  made  the  claims  of  manhood  on  redeemed  and  sanctified  man  enor- 
mously greater  than  before.  It  warranted  and  even  demanded  the  "  enthusiasm  of 
humanity."  The  measure  of  self-devotion  to  others'  weal,  indicated  in  the  words,  "  we 
ought  to  lay  down  our  lives  for  the  brethren,"  is  very  far  greater  than  the  phrase  just 
quoted  implies.  The  Church  of  God  has  "  left  its  first  love ;  "  a  return  to  it  would 
revolutionize  and  regenerate  society.  3.  It  becomes  a  new  inspiration  in  man.  Of 
this  the  text,  looked  at  historically,  is  a  proof  Such  precepts  as  it  contains  were  never 
considered  a  part  of  human  duty  till  God  so  loved  the  world.  -The  apostles  and  the  early 
Christians  had  learnt  of  God  to  love  one  another  and  to  do  good  unto  all  men.'  4.  It 
at  once  led  to  the  adoption  of  a  new  test  of  character.  E.g.  take  the  case  of  a  rich  man 
and  a  poor  one — of  Dives  and  Lazarus.  "  Whoso  hath  this  world's  good  (iS'os),  and 
seeth  his  brother  have  need,"  etc.  In  such  a  hard-hearted  one  it  is  perfectly  clear  the 
love  of  God  does  not  dwell,  ».e.  either  the  love  which  is  like  God's,  or  which  he  imparts, 
or  which  he  commands,  or  of  which  he  is  ttie  Object.  For  love  to  God  is  nothing  if  it  be 
not  loyal.  He  comnfiands  us  to  love  our  brethren.  Therefore,  if  we  do  not,  we  carmot 
truly  love  God.  5.  It  supplies  a  new  and  tender  persuasive  plea.  "  Let  us  not  love  in 
word,  neither  in  tongue,  but  in  deed  and  in  truth."  In  every  case  our  love  is  to  become 
a  practical  power.  If  a  man,  out  of  passionate  love  for  his  Lord,  spends  his  strength 
in  defending  the  doctrines  of  the  gospel,  it  is  so  far  well.  But  in  doing  this,  his  work 
is  but  half-done.  He  is  equally  bound  to  devote  himself  to  insisting  on  the  practice  of 
the  gospel,  and  to  inspire  men  to  practical  philanthropy  as  well  as  to  penitence  and 
faith.  And  while  the  fonner  ages  have  been  those  in  which  Christian  doctrines  had 
(1)  to  be  formulated,  and  (2)  then  to  be  defended,  the  great  work  for  Christians  and 
Churches  in  this  age  is  practically  to  apply  them,'  by  exercising  philanthropy  in  every 
needed  form.  Not  by  the  lavish  and  indiscriminate  distribution  of  alms,  but  by  making 
[leople  strong  enough  to  do  without  them  (cf.  Acts  iii.  6).    And  he  will  best  carry  out 

'  Cf.  Dr.  Uhlhom'^  '  Christian  Charity  in  the  Ancient  Church,'  the  chapter  entitled  "  A 
World  without  Love ; "  and  also  the  Ven.  Archdeacon  Farrar'g '  Early  Days  of  Christianity,* 
vol.  i.  oh.  L 

'  See  Schmidt's  '  Essai  sur  la  civilisation  de  I'empire  Romaine,  et  sa  transformation  par 
la  Christianisme ; '  also  Mr.  Brace's  '  Gesta  Ghristi,'  and  Dr.  Stoxr's  invaluable  volume  on 
the '  Historical  Effects  of  Christiauity.'  Schmidt's  work  has  recently  been  translated  by 
Mrs.  Thorpe ;  the  translation  is  published  by  Isbister  and  Co. 

'  gee  Dr.  Fairbairn's  address  as  chairman  of  the  Congregational  Union,  at  Sheffield,  on 
'  Ghristianity  in  the  Nineteenth  Century '  (Hoddei). 


84  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  JOHN.    [ch.  m.  1—24 

the  "imitation  of  God"  (Eph.  v.  1)  who  takes  some  distinctive  part  in  removing 
stumbling-blocks  out  of  the  people's  way,  and  in  leading  them,  by  the  grace  of  God,  to 
repent  of  sin,  to  turn  to  God,  and  to  live  on  the  Lord  Jesus  for  power  to  tread  the  right 
way.  Let  each  one  choose  his  own  department  of  duty,  and  be  faithful  therein.  There 
is  variety  enough  for  all.  Some  may  work  in  the  home,  some  in  the  school,  some  in 
the  Church,  some  in  the  state ;  some  on  sacred  lines,  others  on  secular.  But  be  it  in 
the  direction  of  removing  a  bane,  or  supplying  a  boon,  by  means  whereof  the  people 
may  be  made  happier,  cleaner,  purer,  kinder,  holier.  In  any  or  all  of  these  a  man  may 
prove  the  love  of  God  in  him  to  be  a  practical  force,  yea,  the  restorative  power  of  the 
world  1 

We  confess  we  are  jealous  for  the  honour  of  our  glorious  faith.  We  see  men  by 
thousands  deserting  the  Christian  camp  because  they  think  Christianity  has  nothing 
to  say  to  the  temporal  concerns  of  working  men.  We  see  secularists  and  others  taking 
up  such  questions,  and  coming  to  the  front  as  the  working  meo's  benefactors  1  and  ail 
because  we  Christians  have  so  .^ach  more  gro\md  yet  to  occupy  in  working  out  and 
solving  the  social  problems  of  the  age.'  Oh  1  let  us  to  the  fore  at  once  in  God's  Name, 
and,  inspired  by  everlasting  love,  let  us  show  to  men  of  every  class  and  calling  that 
while  there  is  not  a  sin  of  man  against  man  which  the  gospel  does  not  condemn,  neither 
is  there  a  right  of  man  which  the  gospel  does  not  press  on  his  behalf,  when  it  summons 
us  to  be  "  imitators  of  him  "  who  laid  down  his  life  to  save  our  race. 

Vers.  19 — 22. — The  privileges  of  Christian  loyalty.  Connecting  link ;  The  (r  roirf 
with  which  our  present  paragraph  begins  is  the  connecting  link  between  the  material 
of  this  homily  and  that  of  the  last.  It  connects  the  privileges  here  speciSed  with  the 
duties  there  enjoined.  No  verses  of  the  Epistles  of  John  lead  us  more  into  the  very 
heart-work  of  religion  than  do  these ;  nor  are  there  any  the  construction  of  which  is 
BO  complex,  and  the  exact  meaning  thereof  less  easy  to  ascertain.  We  have  no  space 
to  reproduce  here  the  exegesis  of  the  various  clauses.  [The  reader  will  turn  for  that  to 
the  Exposition.  Westcott's  remarks  thereon  are  finely  discriminating  and  clear.]  Wt 
do  but  give  the  results  of  our  own  anxious  study.  Thin  we  will  do  by  a  paraphrase  of 
the  four  verses,  the  meaning  of  which,  as  we  understand  them,  can  be  thus  expressed : 
"  By  means  of  such  a  life  of  self-devotion  to  man  for  God's  sake,  we  shall  come  to  know 
that  we  are  of  the  truth,  and  shall  be  able  to  cherish  a  calm  persuasion  of  heart  towards 
hiio  in  whose  presence  we  habitually  and  consciously  move.  We  may,  indeed,  often 
be  condemned  by  our  own  hearts  for  constantly  falling  short  of  our  ideal ;  still,  God  is 
greater  than  our  heart,  and  knows  all  things,  and  can  estimate  the  desire  even  when 
the  execution  is  defective.  Or  if,  as  may  be  the  case,  we  cannot  reproach  ourselves 
with  any  conscious  divergence  firom  his  will,  we  can  then  open  our  lips  freely  in  our 
addresses  to  God  ;  and  not  only  so,  but  he  will  open  his  hands  freely  to  us,  in  answer 
to  our  prayers,  knowing  that  it  is  our  reverent  care  and  study  to  obey  his  commands- 
and  to  do  habitually  what  will  please  him."  Topic — A  life  of  studied  loyalty  to  Qod 
is  one  of  highest  privilege.  The  case  supposed  here  is  that  a  believer  carries  out  his  love 
to  God  by  a  self-abandoning  devotion  to  his  brother-man.  He  makes  it  his  reverent 
concern  to  obey  every  precept,  and,  living  as  in  the  sight  of  God,  habitually  aims  at 
being  well-pleasing  to  him.  Surely  it  is  not  surprising  if  such  have  some  privileges  and 
enjoyments  that  others  know  nothing  of.  Not  that  they  are  regarded  as  payments  for 
any  meritoiious  act ;  that  is  quite  out  of  the  question.  They  are  privileges  conferred 
on  one  who  is  stirred  by  the  Spirit  of  Qod  to  a  life  of  devoted  and  exact  obedience  to  the 
Father's  will.     What  are  they  ?    The  apostle  specifies  six. 

I.  A  SURE  STEP.  "  We  shall  know  that  we  are  of  the  truth."  It  is  not  possible  for 
the  heart  in  loving  loyalty  to  God  to  doabt  if  it  be  the  right  thing  to  follow  God's 
commands.     Many  other  points  may  be  doubtful,  but  not  this  1 

II.  A  BBSTF0L  HEART.  "  We  shall  assure  our  hearts  before  him."  There  will  be 
a  holy  confidence  of  uprightness ;  and  the  believer  knows  well  that  God  is  not  a  hard 
Master.  It  is  much  ensier  to  please  God  than  to  please  the  dearest  friend  oa  earth  I 
"  The  Lord  taketb  pleasure  in  them  that  fear  him." 

'  See  article,  '  The  Ontcast  Poor,'  Contemporary  Review,  December,  1883  ;  also  a  small 
bntpriceless  volume  by  the  Bev.  Dr.  Paton,  M  A.,  on  '  The  Inner  Mission  of  the  Clintoh, 


OH-ra.  1— 24.]    THE  PIBST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  JOHN.  85 

IIL  A  coNFiDrNO  EYK.  "JLiatpoaBtv  abrov,  "  before  him ;"  as  in  his  sight.  As  a  loving, 
trustful  child  aiming  to  please  his  fiither  looks  up  with  placid  confidence  to  catch  the 
glance  of  his  father's  eye,  delighted  to  think  of  its  loving  vigilaace,  so  the  child  of  God 
lives  as  before  the  eye  of  his  Father  in  heaven,  happy  beyond  expression  to  think  that 
that  eye  is  ever  upon  him.  He  looks  up  to  catch  the  Father's  smile ;  the  Father  looka 
down  to  watch  the  child's  upturned  glance. 

IV.  A  LOVINO  BEFERENOE  TO  HIS   FaTHBB  WHEN   A   SENSE   OP   PAILUBB  BURDENS   HIS 

SOTO.  There  will  be  times  when  the  child's  heart  chides  him  that  he  has  fallen  so  (ar 
below  his  own  ideal  and  desire  i  (ver.  20).  Well,  his  Father  knows  how  far,  better  than 
the  child  does.  But  if  the  habitual  set  of  the  life  is  towards  pleasing  God,  he  can  rely 
upon  his  father's  love  in  any  case  of  faultineas  of  detail,  assured  that  he  who  said, "  The 
spirit  indeed  is  willing,  but  the  flesh  is  weak,"  will  be  the  kindest  possible  Judge  of  the 
acts  of  an  obedient  child.' 

"  There  is  no  place  where  earth'i  sorrowi 
Aro  BO  felt  as  np  in  heaven  ; 
There  is  no  plaoe  where  earth's  failing! 
Have  such  kindly  judgment  given.' 

He  would  rather  have  his  very  faultiness  estimated  by  God  than  by  the  kindest  fnend 
on  earth.  Very  likely  he  will  be  reproaching  himself  that  he  has  not  wrought  deeds 
more  worthy  of  God;  but  even  then  he  can  say  with  infinite  content,  "Lord,  thou 
knowest  sdl  things ; "  and  in  the  perfect  judgment  of  the  All-seeing  he  is  content 
lovingly  to  leave  the  estimate  and  the  award. 

V.  A  FREE  TONOUE.  It  may  be  that  his  heart  does  not  condemn  him  with  a  sense 
of  conscious  failure.  He  may  bo  able  to  use  Paul's  words  (1  Cor.  iv.  4).  In  such  a 
case  he  will  have  (iro^^ijo-Zo)  freedom  of  speech  towards  God.  He  will  be  able  to 
unburden  his  whole  soul,  without  restraint,  to  his  Father  in  heaven,  and  pour  forth 
words  that  he  would  on  no  account  whatever  utter  in  a  human  ear.  But  what  an 
infinite  relief  to  be  able  to  pour  out  the  wJiole  burden  of  one's  soul  to  a  Friend  who 
will  never  misunderstand  u>  I  No  such  freedom  of  speech  as  this  can  we  have  elsewhere 
than  before  God ;  and  only  there  when  loyally  living  to  please  God. 

VI.  A  FULL  HAND.  Free  words  to  God ;  free  gifts  from  God.  Such  is  the  order 
(ver.  22).  "  Whatsoever  we  ask,  we  receive  of  him."  Happy  the  man  who  can  get 
everything  he  asks  fori  No,  not  necessarily.  If  he  were  to  ask  for  a  bane,  thinking  it 
would  be  a  boon,  it  would  be  anything  but  a  blessing  to  him  to  receive  it.  But  the 
remarkable  statement  at  the  beginning  of  ver.  22  is  qualified,  or  rather  fenced  round 
and  guarded  from  abuse.  Of  whom  is  this  true  ?  The  children  of  God,  not  of  men 
indiscriminately.  Under  what  circumstances  is  it  true  ?  When  they  keep  his  com- 
mandments, and  do  those  things  which  are  pleasing  in  his  sight.  How,  then,  does  it 
become  true  ?  Obviously  (1)  because  the  same  loyalty  which  marks  their  deeds  will 
mark  their  prayers ;  (2)  because  their  loyalty  and  love  will  make  them  wise  to  under- 
stand what  the  will  of  the  Lord  is;  (3)  because  they  only  desire  that  God  should  give 
them  what  is  in  harmony  with  his  will.  Thus  God  educates  his  children  in  teaching 
them  what  to  ask  for,  and  then  whatever  they  ask  they  receive.  This,  then,  is  the  secret 
of  the  Lord.  It  is  with  those  that  fear  him,  and  with  those  alone  (of.  John  xiv.  13 ; 
ch.  v.  14 ;  John  xv.  7 ;  Ps.  xxxvii.  4 ;  Ezek.  xiv.  3 — 5.  See  homily  on  Deut.  xxvi.). 
Let  not  the  scoffer  talk  of  the  invalidity  of  prayer.  Be,  at  any  rate,  knows  nothing  at 
all  about  it.  He  only  is  sure  to  meet  with  responses  to  his  prayer  from  whom  God 
first  receives  the  response  of  obedience  to  his  commands  (Isa.  i.  15;  Prov.  xv.  8).  Note : 
1.  There  are  vast  privileges  to  be  enjoyed  by  man.  But  God  will  not  fling  them  away 
indiscriminately.  2.  There  is  an  infinite  reaonabloncss  in  the  connection  between  duty 
and  privilege  laid  down  in  this  text.  3.  Although  the  salvation  of  each  and  all  is 
freely  bestowed  on  the  ground  of  Divine  grace  alone,  yet  the  fulness  of  that  salvation, 
the  measure  of  enjoyment  therein,  and  the  degree  of  freedom  with  which  he  can  hold 

>  Bee  a  most  tonching  illustration  of  this  in  Miss  Ellice  Hopkins's '  Work  among  Working 
Men,'  ch.  i.  p.  15. 

'  Obviously  the  text,  verbally,  will  allow  of  either  of  two  constructions— one  the  mow 
tender,  the  other  the  more  severe.  Begarding  tlie  text  in  its  entirety,  the  more  tender  side  ii 
evidently  intended. 


8«  THE  FIEST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  JOHN.    [oh.  in.  1—24 

fellowsMp  with  God,  will  depend  on  the  exactitude  and  the  measure  of  hia  loyalty 
(Matt.  V.  19;  lOor.  liL8). 

Vers.  23,  24. — Outward  precept  and  inward  life.  Connecting  link :  The  word  lm\i 
which  marked  the  preceding  verse,  is  caught  up  in  this,  and  the  life  of  obedience  thereto, 
which  had  been  shown  to  be  the  condition  of  freedom  in  fellowship  with  God  and  of 
success  in  prayer,  is  here  declared  to  be  the  seal  and  fruit  of  the  living  Spirit,  creating 
and  sustaining  an  inward  life  corresponding  to  the  outward  rule.  Topic — The  life 
enjoined  hy  the  command  of  Christ  a  seal  of  the  indwelling  of  the  Spirit  of  Christ.  The 
following  order  of  thought  is  suggested. 

I.  The  pbbobpts  of  oub  Lobd  mat  bk  bummbd  up  ik  two.  1.  That  we  should  believe 
in  the  Name  of  his  Son  Jesus  Christ.  The  title  here  given  to  Christ  is  "  a  compressed 
creed"  (Westcott);  comp.  John  i.  12.  The  man  who  believes  in  Christ  is  one  to 
which  the  privilege  of  becoming  a  child  of  God  belongs,  as  the  apostle  had  taught  in  his 
Gospel  (see  also  John  vi.  28,  29).  This  faith  in  Christ  is  here  regarded  as  the  basis 
on  which  the  second  duty  rests.  2.  That  we  should  love  one  another.  The  first  includes 
the  sum  of  religion  Godward;  the  latter,  the  whole  of  practical  Christianity  manward. 
'We  second  is  in  every  way  so  obviously  admirable  that  many  contend  for  it  who  yet 
ignore  the  first.  But  it  will  be  found,  practically,  that  the  two  cannot  be  disjoined. 
Such  love  to  men  as  Christ  commands  never  has  been,  will  be,  or  can  be  sustained 
apart  from  faith  in  Christ.  No  building  can  be  put  up  without  a  foundation,  however 
admirably  its  outline'  may  be  drawn  on  paper.  The  cross  is  love's  inspiration  as  well 
as  its  model. 

II.  WhBRB  there   is   HABirUAL  OBEDIENCE  TO  BOTH   COMMANDS,  THERE  18  A  LIVINO 

UKION  BETWEEN  THE  soui,  AND  GoD.  f  Ver.  24.)  1.  Man  abides  in  God  by  faith  and 
fellowship.  2.  Ood  abides  in  man  by  the  indwelling  of  the  Holy  Ghost  (1  Cor.  iii.  16 ; 
Eph.  ii.  22). 

•III.  This  rBuiTFUL  indwellino  of  the  Spirit  is  the  seal  of  God's  lite  in  the 
BOVL.  When  by  an  inspiration  not  of  man  nor  by  man  we  are  led  to  a  life  which  is 
above  and  beyond  nature,  "we  know  that  he  abides  in  us."  The  Spirit  which  he  gave 
us  when  we  believed  (Eph.  i.  13)  is  the  seal  to  us  of  God's  own  life.  His  command 
used  to  be  an  outside  letter,  bidding  us  to  live  a  lile  that  was  high  above  us.  Now  we 
have  an  inward  force,  inspiring  a  life  that  conforms  to  the  letter !  In  a  word,  God's 
Spirit  in  the  soul  brings  about,  in  actual  life,  what  the  precept  enjoins.  By  the  Word 
we  were  taught  that  such  a  life  was  the  right  one  to  lead.  By  the  Spirit  we  are  so 
inspired  that  we  cannot  lead  any  other !  Note :  1.  The  Law  without  is  a  great  gift. 
The  Spirit  within  is  a  greater.  It  is  a  blessing  to  be  shown  the  right  way.  It  is  a 
greater  blessing  to  be  disposed  to  walk  therein.  2.  As  we  all  have  the  blessing  of  the 
Word,  since  we  know  there  is  a  greater  one  obtainable,  ought  we  not  to  seek  for  it  ? 
For  observe :  3.  The  gift  of  the  Holy  G  "st,  albeit  it  is  the  greatest  possible  blessing, 
is  precisely  that  of  which  we  may  make  most  sure,  when  sought  by  fervent  prayer. 
4.  Let  those  who  have  the  Spirit  of  God  seek  for  a  richer  fulness  of  his  indwelling 
power.'  The  more  of  the  Holy  Ghost  we  have,  the  easier  will  it  be  to  obey ;  and  just 
as  it  is  the  penitent's  duty  to  receive  pardon  from  Christ  hy  faith,  even  so  it  is  the 
believer's  duty'to  receive  the  Spirit  from  him  by  faith. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ver.  1. — "  Behold  what  manner  of  love  \ "  "  Behold  what  manner  of  love  the  Father 
hath  bestowed  upon  us,"  etc.!  The  "behold  "  summnns  our  attention  to  the  kind  of 
love  which  God  has  given  to  us.  It  is  not  the  greatness  of  the  love,  but  the  "  manner 
of  love,"  that  we  are  called  to  contemplate.  And  the  natureof  this  love  is  to  be  inferred 
from  its  expression ;  hence  St.  John  says  "  that  we  should  be  called  children  of  God." 
God  has  bestowed  his  love  upon  us ;  not  simply  the  gifts  of  it,  or  the  proof  of  it,  but 
itself.  Yet  of  what  kind  it  is  can  only  be  discovered  from  its  manifestations.  He  bai 
given  to  us  not  only  streams  of  blessing,  but  the  very  fountain  of  blessing;  yet  we  can 
know  the  nature  of  the  fountain  only  from  the  streams  which  flow  from  it.    Thus 

'  See  some  admirable  remarks  in  Miss  Ellice  Hopkins's  '  Work  among  Working  Men,'  p.  6, 


cam.  1—24.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENKRAL  OP  JOHN.  87 

let  ns  meditate  upon  the  love  of  the  Divine  Father  to  ua  as  it  ia  exhibited  in  tha 
text. 

I.  Love  of  immeasurablk  oohdbsobnsion.  "Behold  what  manner  of  love  the 
Father  hath  beatowed  upon  ual"  The  Creator  gave  his  love  to  his  creature  whom 
he  had  created  in  his  own  likeness.  He  made  him  capable  of  fellowship  with  himself, 
and,  looking  upon  him  with  complacency,  pronounced  him  "  very  good."  God  gave  hia 
love  to  man.  But  our  text  does  not  refer  to  man  as  he  was  created  by  God,  but  as  ha 
was  when  marred  by  sin  against  him.  The  infinitely  Holy  bestowed  his  love  upon  the 
unholy,  the  sinful ;  the  unspeakably  Glorious,  upon  the  deeply  degraded.  He  did  not 
give  h48  love  to  the  amiable,  the  attractive,  the  worthy,  or  the  lovable.  He  did  not 
bestow  it  upon  those  who  were  merely  immeasurably  beneath  him,  but  upon  those 
who  were  in  active  rebellion  against  him.  "  God  conimenileth  his  own  love  toward  us, 
in  that,  while  we  were  yet  sinners,  Christ  died  for  us."  His  love  to  us,  then,  was  not 
that  of  complacency,  but  of  compassion ;  not  that  of  admiration,  but  of  iienevolenco 
and  pity.  It  was  "love  seeking  not  its  own,"  but  our  well-being;  not  rejoicing  over 
the  good  and  beautiful,  but  seeking  with  deepest  solicitude  lor  the  salvation  of  the 
unworthy  and  sinful. 

II.  LovB  WHICH  EXALTS  AND  DiaNiFiEs  ITS  OBJECTS.  "  Behold  what  manner  of 
love  the  Father  hath  bestowed  upon  us,  that  we  should  be  called  children  of  God  I" 
He  himself  calls  us  his  children.  Our  Lord  taught  us  to  say,  "  Our  Father,  which  art 
in  heaven."  Ho  said,  "  My  Father  and  your  Father,  my  Uod  and  your  God."  But 
in  what  sense  does  he  call  us  hia  children?  Not  aa  being  his  by  creation,  tut  by 
regeneration.  The  words  immediately  preceding  the  text  place  this  beyond  dispute : 
"  Every  one  that  doeth  righteousness  is  begotten  of  him."  He  has  created  them  anew. 
They  are  "  born  from  above."  They  are  made  "  partakers  of  the  Divine  nature."  No 
new  faculties  or  capacities  are  given  to  them ;  nor  do  they  need  them ;  for  man  lost 
none  of  them  by  ain.  His  powers  were  corrupted  and  perverted,  but  not  destroyed. 
The  true  reUtion  and  harmony  and  direction  of  his  faculties  man  l>st  by  his  sin  :  he 
lost  holiness.  Being  begotten  of  God,  he  is  changed  from  an  attitude  of  distrust, 
suspicion,  or  aversion  from  God,  to  an  attitude  of  love  to  him ;  and  holy  love  is  the  life 
of  the  soul.  "  Every  one  that  loveth  is  begotten  of  God,  and  knoweth  God  "  (ch.  iv. 
7).  They  are  "  called  children  of  God,"  then :  1.  Because  they  are  sharers  in  his  life. 
In  some  humble  measure  they  participate  in  that  life  of  truth  and  righteousness,  purity 
and  love,  which  is  his  essentially  and  infinitely,  and  which  flows  from  him  to  all  his 
intelligent  creatures  who  are  in  union  with  him,  2.  Because  they  morally  resemble 
him.  Like  him  in  their  inward  life,  they  are  also  in  a  measure  like  him  in  their 
outward  action.  As  regards  both  their  character  and  conduct,  they  bear  some  moral 
resemblance  to  him.  He  calls  them  hia  children  because  they  are  his  children  restoreti 
through  Christ  to  his  fatherly  heart,  animated  with  the  Divine  hfe  of  love,  and 
growing  in  their  conformity  to  his  perfect  character.  How  glorious  is  the  love  which 
thus  blesses  its  objects  I 

III.  LOVB     WHICH     INSPIBB8     ITS    OBJBOTB    WITH    THE     MOST    BLESSED     ASSUBAUOE. 

"  Called  children  of  God :  and  such  we  are."  True  Christians  are  conscious  that  they 
are  children  of  God.  They  have  a  cheering  and  strengthening  conviction  that  they 
are  accepted  of  him,  not  only  as  his  subjects,  but  as  his  sons  and  daughters.  "  Tha 
Spirit  himself  beareth  witness  with  our  spirit,  that  we  are  children  of  God  "  (Rom.  viii. 
14 — 16) ;  "  Because  ye  are  sons,  God  hath  sent  forth  the  Spirit  of  his  Son  into  your 
hearts,  crying,  Abba,  Father"  (Gal.  iv.  4 — 6).  ^^e  have  this  sacred  testimony  in  our 
consciousness  of  the  Spirit's  presence  and  work  within  us.  He  imparts  unto  us  tha 
filial  spirit,  "  whereby  we  cry,  Abba,  Father."  He  inspires  within  us  holy  desires  and 
jiurposes,  he  restrains  us  from  sin,  he  comforts  us  in  sorrow,  he  strengthens  ns  to 
produce  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit.  "  The  fruit  of  the  Spirit  is  love,  joy,  peac«,  long- 
suffering,  kindness,  goodness,  faithfulness,  meekness,  temperance."  The  presenca 
of  those  things  in  our  lives  is  a  testimony  that  we  are  children  of  God.  "  We  know 
that  we  have  passed  from  death  unto  life,  because  we  love  the  brethren." 

IV.  Love  which  ennobles  the  ohakacteb  of  its  objects  above  the  becogki- 
TION  OF  THE  UNCHRISTIAN  woBLD.  " Therefoio  the  world  knoweth  us  not,  because 
it  knew  him  not,"  "  The  world  "  is  the  same  here  as  in  ch.  ii,  15.  1.  ITie  unchristian 
umrld  knewnot  the  Divine  Father.    "  It  knew  him  not."    The  "him  "  must  be  God  t.li 


88  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  JOHN.    [oh.  ni.  1—24. 

Father.  If  it  refer  to  Jesus  Christ  at  all,  it  most  be  as  the  Revelation  of  the  Father. 
Our  Lord  said  to  the  Pliarisees,  "  Ye  know  neither  me  nor  my  Father !  if  ye  knew  me, 
ye  would  know  my  Father  also  "  (John  viii.  19 ;  xvi.  3 ;  xvii.  25).  2.  The  unchristian 
world  knows  not  the  children  of  the  Divine  Father.  "  Therefore  the  world  khoweth  us 
not."  Because  they  are  his  children  and  resemble  him,  they  are  eniirmas  to  the  world. 
By  the  love  which  he  hath  bestowed  upon  them  they  are  so  ennobled  in  their  disposi- 
tion and  character,  their  principles  and  practice,  that  the  unchristian  wcrld  cannot 
understand  them. 

Behold,  then,  "  what  manner  of  love  the  Father  hath  bestowed  upon  ns"  I  Believe 
it ;  contemplate  it ;  admire  it ;  reciprocate  it. — W.  J. 

Vers.  2,  3. — The  present  and  the  future  of  the  good.  "  Beloved,  now  are  we  children 
of  God,"  etc.    Here  is — 

I.  A  OLOBIO08  TAOT  OF  PEESBNT  EXPERIENOB.  "  Boloved,  now  are  we  children 
of  God."  1.  As  sharing  in  his  life^  2.  As  morally  resembling  him.  3.  As  possessing 
the  filial  spirit.  , 

n,  A  OBACiouB  MTSTBBT  AS  TO  ouB  P0T17KB  CONDITION.  "  And  it  is  not  yet  made 
manifest  what  we  shall  be."  Ebrard  :  "  While  we  are  already  God's  children,  we  are 
nevertheless  yet  in  the  dark  as  to  the  nature  of  onr  future  condition."  1.  The  mode 
of  our  being  in  the  future  is  at  present  a  mystery  to  us.  We  know  that  the  soul 
exists  consciously  and  at  once  after  passing  from  our  present  mode  of  life.  We  infer 
this  from  such  Scriptures  as  these:  "To-day  ghalt  thou  be  with  me  in  Paradise" 
(Luke  xxiiL  43) ;  "  We  are  willing  rather  to  be  absent  from  the  body,  and  to  be  at  home 
with  the  Lord"  (2  Cor.  v.  8) ;  "  For  to  me  to  live  is  Christ,  and  to  die  is  gain.  .  .  . 
Having  the  desire  to  depart  and  be  with  Christ ;  for  it  is  very  far  better "  (PhiL  i. 
21,  23).  But  how  the  soul  exists  when  it  hag  departed  from  the  "  natural  body," 
or  what  is  its  mode  of  existence,  we  know  not.  At  present  the  body  is  the  organ  and 
instrument  of  the  soul.  Does  the  soul  after  death  require  some  vehicle  of  expression, 
some  instrument  of  action  ?  If  so,  of  what  kind  will  these  be  ?  Or  will  the  soul  be 
independent  of  such  things  ?  What  is  the  clothing  (2  Cor.  v.  2 — 4)  which  awaits  the 
Boul  when  it  passes  from  the  earthly  house  of  this  tabernacle  ?  Of  tlieso  things  we 
know  nothing.  "  It  is  not  yet  made  manifest  what  we  shall  be."  2.  The  exaltation 
of  our  being  in  the  future  is  at  present  a  mystery  to  us.  The  glory  of  our  future  being 
and  condition  is  hidden  from  us  as  yet.  What  developments  of  being  await  us,  to  what 
services  God  wiU  appoint  us,  with  what  honours  he  will  crown  us  in  the  hereafter, — 
of  these  things  we  are  altogether  ignorant.  Presumptuous  are  they  who  speak  of  the 
details  of  the  condition  and  circumstances  and  occupations  of  the  children  of  God  after 
death.  They  who  knew  something  of  these  things  and  were  recalled  to  this  life 
maintained  unbroken  silence  concerning  them  (Luke  vii.  11 — 16 ;  John  xi.  88 — 44). 
Paul  was  caught  up  into  Paradise,  but  he  said  that  it  was  not  lawful  to  utter  what  he 
heard  there  (2  Cor.  xiL  1 — 4).  Wisely  and  graciously  God  has  left  a  veil  over  our 
future  condition  and  circumstances.  Mystery  in  these  things  is  perhaps  inevitable. 
Probably  in  our  present  condition  we  have  no  symbols  by  which  the  future  glories 
could  be  revealed  unto  us.  Our  languages  could  not  describe  them.  Music,  as  we 
have  it,  could  not  express  them.  Painting  could  not  set  them  forth.  Moreover, 
mystery  in  these  things  is  merciful.  We  could  not  bear  the  revelation  of  the  bright 
future,  and  continue  in  the  faithful  and  patient  performance  of  our  duties  in  the 
present.  There  is  one  sense  in  which  the  children  of  God  will  ever  say,  "  It  is  not  yet 
made  manifest  what  we  shall  be."  Their  progress  will  be  interminable.  The  develop- 
ment of  their  being  and  blessedness  will  never  come  to  an  end. 

in.   A   GRAND   ABSUBANOE   AB  TO   OUR   FUTURE   CONDITION.       "  We  knOW   that,   if  he 

•hall  be  manifested,  we  shall  be  hke  him  ;  for  we  shall  see  him  even  as  he  is."  (It 
■eems  to  us  that  the  rendering  should  be,  "  if  it  shall  be  manifested."  '  But  the  chief 
points  of  the  apostle's  teaching  are  the  same  whether  we  translate,  "if  it "  or  " if  he 
shall  be  manifested.")  Here  is  an  assurance :  1.  Of  moral  af^similation  to  God  in 
Christ.     "  We  shall  be  like  him."    Like  him  in  character  and  sympathies  and  aims. 

>  See  this  and  the  following  points  under  this  main  division  more  fully  stated  in  ow 
I  "mily  on  ver.  1. 
'  See  Alford,  tn  loo. ;  and  Eibnod. 


OH.  m.  1—24.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  JOHS.  89 

Like  him  too,  in  some  respects,  corporeally;  for  he  "shall  fashion  anew  th«  hody  of  onr 
humiliation,  that  it  may  be  conformed  to  the  body  of  his  glory  "  (Phil.  iii.  21).  2.  Of 
the  vision  of  God  in  Christ.  "  For  we  shall  see  him  even  as  he  is."  Some  measure 
of  likeness  to  him  is  indispensable  to  our  seeing  him.  Spiritual  resemblance  to  him 
qualifies  the  soul  to  see  him  even  as  he  is.  "  Blessed  are  the  pure  in  heart :  for  they 
shall  see  God."  But  the  truth  here  is  that  the  vision  of  Grod  in  Christ  will  perfect  the 
likeness  of  his  children  unto  him.  Ebrard  :  "  The  being  like  unto  God  will  be  eflf'ected 
by  the  beholding  of  God."  The  vision  of  God  is  transforming  in  its  effect.  After 
Moses  had  been  with  the  Lord  forty  days  and  forty  nights  npon  Mount  Sinai,  when  he 
came  down  from  the  mount  the  skin  of  his  face  shone,  and  the  people  were  afiaid 
to  come  nigh  him  (Exod.  xxxiv.  29 — 36).  "  We  all,  with  unveiled  face  reflecting 
as  in  a  mirror  the  glory  of  the  Lord,  are  transformed  into  the  same  image  from  glory 
to  glory,  even  as  by  the  Lord  the  Spirit "  (2  Cor.  iii.  18).  By  the  operation  of  the 
same  principle,  when  the  children  of  God  see  him  as  he  is  they  will  become  like  unto 
him.  How  blessed  and  inspiring  is  this  assurance  1  To  see  him  and  to  be  like  him 
has  been  the  dearest  hope  of  the  noblest  souls.  Thus  David,  "  As  for  me,  I  will  behold 
thy  face  in  righteousness,"  etc.  (Ps.  xviii.  15);  and  St.  Paul,  "Having  the  desire 
to  depart  and  be  with  Christ ; "  and  St.  John,  "  The  throne  of  God  and  of  the  Lamb 
shall  be  therein ;  and  his  servants  shall  do  him  service ;  and  they  shall  see  his  face." 
"  We  shall  be  like  him  ;  for  we  shall  see  him  even  as  he  is." 

IV.    A   SALBTABT   INPLtrBNOB   OF    OUR    HOPE    FOE    THE    FUTUBB   ON    OUR    CONDITION 

IN  THE  PRESENT.  "  And  every  one  that  hath  this  hope  set  on  him  purifieth  himself," 
etc.  1.  The  character  of  this  hope.  It  is  the  assured  expectation  and  the  sincere 
desire  of  the  vision  of  God  in  Christ,  and  of  complete  moral  assimilation  to  him.  2. 
The  ground  of  this  hope.  "This  hope  set  on  him."  On  what  he  has  promised,  and 
on  what  he  is,  his  children  base  their  great  hope.  "  God  is  not  a  man,  that  he  should 
lie,"  etci  (Numb,  xxiii.  19);  "In  hope  of  eternal  life,  which  God,  who  cannot  lie, 
promised  before  times  eternal"  (Titus  i.  2).  3.  The  influence  of  this  hope,  "  Purifieth 
himself,  even  as  he  is  pure."  It  is  clearly  implied  that,  while  in  this  world,  the  children 
of  God  need  miral  purification.  They  are  not  yet  entirely  freed  from  sin,  and  fin 
pollutes  the  soul.  Their  sanctification  is  not  yet  perfected.  But  the  precious  and 
assured  hope  which  they  cherish  stimulates  them  to  seek  for  perfect  moral  purity.  To 
indulge  in  sin,  or  to  cease  to  sUive  after  holiness,  would  be  virtually  to  renounce  their 
hope.  They  endeavour  to  attain  to  a  holiness  like  unto  that  of  Christ — to  be  pure  as 
he  is  pure.  His  purity  is  the  pattern  of  theirs.  So  that  we  have  here  a  test  of 
Christian  character.  Does  our  religion  exert  a  sanctifying  power  in  our  hearts  and 
lives? 

«  O  Living  Will,  that  »halt  endnie 

When  all  that  seems  shall  suffer  shock. 

Rise  in  the  spiritual  rook, 
How  through  our  deeds  and  make  them  pure." 

(Tennyson.) 

W.J. 

Vers.  4 — 6. — Dissuasivesfrom  sin.  "  Whoioever  committeth  sin,  transgrrsseth  also 
the  Law,"  etc.  The  apostle,  having  stated  that  the  influence  of  the  hope  of  the  Christian 
stimulates  him  to  seek  for  moral  purity,  proceeds  to  present  forcible  reasons  against  the 
commission  of  sin.  Of  these  reasons  we  have  three  chief  ones  in  the  text,  and  these 
are  repeated,  with  some  additional  particulars,  in  vers.  7 — 9. 

L  Snf  IS  OPPOSED  TO  THE  HOLT  Law  OF  GoD.  "  Every  one  that  doeth  sin  doeth  also 
lawlessness :  and  sin  is  lawlessness."  1.  Sin  in  its  abstract  nature.  "  Sin  is  the  trans- 
gression of  the  Law,"  or  "  lawlessness."  This  is  said  of  sin  in  general :  it  is  true  of 
every  sin,  that  it  is  a  violation  of  the  Law  of  God.  This  is  opposed  to  several  modem 
theories  concerning  sin.  Some  say  that  sin  is  a  natural  imperfection  of  the  creature — 
the  crude  effort  of  untrained  man  for  right  conduct.  Our  text  says  that  it  is  not  imper- 
fection, but  transgression  of  a  holy  Law.  And  others  charge  all  sin  upon  defective 
social  arrangements :  human  society  is  not  rightly  organized,  and  because  of  this  men 
err.  But  St.  John  charges  sin  upon  the  individual,  and  charges  it  as  a  disregard  oi 
a  breach  of  Divine  Law.    And  others  apply  the  word  "  misdirection"  to  what  the  Bibk 


90  THE  VIKST  EPISTLE  GBNEBAL  OP  JOHN.    [oh.  m.  1—24, 

ealls  sin,  and  thns  endeavour  to  get  rid  of  guilt.  But  misdirection  implies  a  mlsdi- 
rector ;  that  misdirector  is  man.  And  sin  is  more  than  mlsdirectioa ;  it  is  the  infraction 
of  the  holy  Law  and  beautiful  order  of  the  Supreme.  The  sacred  Scriptures  everywhere 
assert  this.  The  cherubim  and  the  flaming  sword  of  Eden  (Gen.  iii.  24),  the  awful 
voices  of  Sinai  (Exod.  xx.),  and  the  mournful  but  glorious  sacrifice  of  Calvary  unite  in 
declaring  that  sin  is  the  transgression  of  the  Law  of  God.  And  the  voice  of  conscience 
confirms  this  testimony  of  Holy  Writ.  The  unsophisticated  and  awakened  conscience 
cries,  "  I  acknowledge  my  transgression,"  etc.  (Ps.  li.  3,  4).  2.  Sin  in  its  actual  com- 
mission. "  Every  one  that  doeth  sin  doeth  also  lawlessness."  The  expression  seems  to 
indicate  the  practice  of  sin — voluntariness,  deliberateness,  and  activity  in  wrong-doing. 
It  is  the  antithesis  of  the  conduct  of  the  child  of  God  in  purifying  himself.  It  is  not 
sin  as  an  occasional  or  exceptional  thing,  but  as  a  general  thing.  Persistent  activity 
in  doing  evil  is  suggested  by  the  form  of  expression.  We  are  reminded  by  it  of  tlie 
expression  of  the  royal  and  inspired  poet,  "  the  workers  of  iniquity " — persons  who 
habitually  practise  sin,  who  work  wickedness  as  though  it  were  their  business.  Here, 
then,  are  reasons  why  we  should  not  sin.  (1)  Sin  is  a  violation  of  the  Law  of  God ;  it 
is  a  rebellion  against  his  will — the  wise,  the  good,  the  Holy  One.  Therefore  in  itself 
it  is  an  evil  thing,  a  thing  of  great  enormity.  (2)  Law  carries  with  it  the  idea  of 
penalty.  It  has  its  rewards  for  those  who  observe  it ;  its  punishments  for  those  who 
transgress  it.     Hence  our  interests  plead  with  us  against  the  practice  of  sin. 

II.  Sin  is  opposed  to  the  glorious  gospel  op  Jestts  Chbist.  The  holy  will  of  God 
the  Father  and  the  redemptive  work  of  God  the  Son  are  both  essentially  antagonistic  to 
iniquity.    "Te  know  that  he  was  manifested  to  take  away  sins;  and  in  him  is  no  sin." 

1.  The  end  of  Ohrisfs  mission  wan  the  abolition  of  tin.  "  He  was  manifested  to  take 
away  sins.  ...  To  this  end  was  the  Son  of  God  manifested,  that  he  might  destroy  the 
works  of  the  devil."  The  bearing  of  our  sins  in  his  own  body  on  the  tree  is  not  the 
fact  here  mentioned.  It  is  involved ;  for  "  once  at  the  end  of  the  ages  hath  he  been 
manifested  to  put  away  sin  by  the  sacrifice  of  himself"  (Heb.  ix.  26);  but  it  is  not 
brought  out  in  this  place.  The  manifestation  denotes  his  incarnation,  and  his  life  and 
work  in  the  flesh.  His  entire  mission  was  opposed  to  lin.  He  became  incarnate,  he 
prayed  and  preached,  he  wrestled  with  temptation,  and  wrought  mighty  and  gracious 
works,  he  suffered  and  died,  he  arose  from  the  dead,  and  he  ever  lives,  to  take  away 
sins.  "Christ  Jesus  came  into  the  world  to  save  sinners."  2.  A  great  characteristic 
of  Chrisfs  Person  was  his  freedom  from  sin.  "  In  him  is  no  sin."  He  asserted  his  own 
sinlessness:  "Which  of  you  convicteth  me  of  sin?"  "The  prince  of  the  world 
cometh:  and  he  hath  nothing  in  me."  And  this  claim  he  consistently  maintained. 
His  enemies  tacitly  or  openly  confessed  that  they  could  find  no  ,sin  in  him.  The 
Pharisees  keenly  watched  him  to  discover  some  matter  of  accusation  against  him,  but 
their  watching  was  vain.  And  when  they  had  preferred  a  false  charge  against  him 
before  Pilate,  the  Roman  judge  said,  "  I,  having  examined  him  before  you,  found  no 
fault  in  this  Man  touching  those  things  whereof  ye  accuse  him;"  "  I  am  innocent  of 
the  blood  of  this  righteous  Man."  Judas  Iscariot  had  known  Jesus  intimately  for  three 
years,  and  after  he  had  traitorously  betrayed  him,  in  intolerable  anguish  he  cried,  "I 
have  sinned  in  that  I  betrayed  innocent  blood."  And  his  friends,  who  had  been  closely 
and  constantly  associated  with  him  for  three  years,  invariably  asserted  the  perfect  moral 
purity  of  his  character  and  conduct.  The  sinlessness  of  our  Lord  should  check  every 
inclination  to  sin  in  his  disciples,  and  stimulate  them  to  the  pursuit  of  holiness.  To 
commit  sin  is  to  run  counter  to  our  Saviour's  personal  character,  and  to  the  gracious 
spirit  and  grand  aim  of  the  redemption  which  he  has  wrought. 

III.  Sin  IS' opposed  to  the  Divine  life  in  man.  "Whosoever  abideth  in  him 
sinnethiiot:  whosoever  sinneth  hath  not  seen  him, neither  knoweth  him."  1.  Partici- 
pation in  the  Divine  life  precludes  the  practice  of  sin.  "  Whosoever  abideth  in  him 
sinneth  not."  We  abide  in  Christ  by  believing  on  him,  loving  him,  communing  with 
him,  drawing  our  life  from  him  (of.  John  xv.  1 — 7).*  That  this  part  of  our  text  cannot 
mean  that  sin  is  impossible  to  a  Christian  is  evident  from  ch,  i.  8 — 10;  ii.  1,  2.  But 
in  so  far  as  the  child  of  Gorl  abides  in  Christ  he  is  separated  from  sin.  In  the  degree 
in  which  the  Divine  life  is  realized  by  him,  in  that  degree  he  is  unable  to  sin  (cf.  ver.  dX 

2.  T^  practise  of  tin  proves  the  absence  of  a  true  knowledge  of  Jesus  Chritt,    "Whoso- 

'  See  onr  homily  on  eh.  il.  6L 


OH.  m.  1—24.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OV  JOHN.  91 

ever  sinneth  hath  not  seen  him,  neither  knoweth  him."  The  sight  and  knowledge  he/e 
spoken  of  are  not  merely  intellectual,  but  spiritual;  not  theoretical,  but  experimental. 
And  the  "  sinneth  "  does  not  denote  sin  as  an  occasional  and  exceptional  thing,  but  as 
general  and  habitual.  He  who  lives  iu  the  practice  of  sin  thereby  proclaims  that  he 
does  not  know  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

By  all  these  reasons  let  Christians  watch  and  pray  that  they  sin  not,  and  "  follow 
after  ianctiflcation,  without  which  no  man  shall  see  the  Lord." — W.  J. 

Ver.  14. — 'Love  the  evidence  of  life.  "  We  know  that  we  have  passed  from  death  unto 
life,"  etc.  To  know  our  true  character  and  condition  in  the  sis;ht  of  Ood  is  of  the 
greatest  importance.  An  earnest  consideration  of  our  text  will  help  us  to  attain  such 
knowledge.     Notice — 

I.  The  oreat  ohanob  hebe  bfoken  of.  "  We  haye  passed  out  of  death  into  life." 
Consider:  1.  The  state  from  which  the  Ohristian  has  passed.  It  is  here  spoken  of  as 
"  death."  The  death  is  not  physical,  or  intellectual,  or  social,  but  moral  and  spiritual.  "Ye 
were  dead  through  your  trespasses  and  sins ; "  "  alienated  from  the  life  of  God."  God  is 
the  Life  of  the  soul.  In  union  with  him  the  soul  lives ;  separated  from  him  the  soul  dies. 
Sin  separates  from  him.  "  Tour  iniquities  have  separated  between  you  and  your  God ; " 
"  The  soul  that  sinneth,  it  shall  die."  Sin  is  fatal  to  all  that  constitutes  the  life  of  the 
soul — to  truth  and  trust,  to  reverence  and  love,  etc.  A  state  of  sin  is  a  state  of  death. 
2.  Tlie  state  upon  which  the  Ohristian  ha,s  entered.  He  has  "  passed  out  of  death  into 
life."  He  is  united  to  God  by  faith  in  Jesus  Christ,  and  thus  participates  in  the  Divine 
life.  He  has  passed  over  from  the  sphere  of  the  darkness  into  that  of  the  light ;  from 
the  dreary  realm  of  death  into  the  blessed  kingdom  of  life.  "  He  that  heareth  my  word, 
and  beUeveth  him  that  sent  me,  hath  eternal  life,  and  cometh  not  into  judgment,  but 
hath  passed  out  of  death  into  lile"  (John  v.  24).  "  If  any  man  is  in  Christ,  he  is  a 
new  creature :  the  old  things  are  passed  away ;  behold,  they  are  become  new  "  (2  Cor. 
V.  17) ;  "  And  you,  being  dead  through  your  trespasses  ...  he  quickened  together  with 
him,  having  forgiven  us  all  our  trespasses"  (Col.  ii.  13).  This  great  and  blessed  change 
is  effected  (1)  through  the  mediation  of  Jesus  Christ  (John  vi.  40,  47 ;  x.  10 ;  xiv.  6) ; 
(2)  by  the  agency  of  the  Holy  Spirit  (John  iii.  5,  6,  8)  j  and  (3)  by  the  instrumentality 
of  the  sacred  Word  (Jas.  i.  18 ;  1  Pet.  i.  23). 

n.  The  evidence  of  this  obeat  chanog.  "  We  know  that  we  have  passed  out  of 
death  into  life,  because  we  love  the  brethren."  There  may  be  a  reference  in  the  term 
"brethren"  to  the  common  brotherhood  of  all  men;  but  it  seems  to  us  that  its  chief 
meaning  is  the  Christian  brethren.  The  love  spoken  of  is  not  simply  natural  affection,  as 
the  love  of  parent  for  child,  child  for  parent,  husband  for  wife,  wile  for  husband,  etc. 
Again,  there  may  be  certain  social  qualities  in  a  Christian  which  are  attractive  to  others, 
yet  not  distinctively  Christian.  He  may  be  a  useful  man;  in  society  he  may  be  inter- 
esting and  agreeable,  and  therefore  he  is  admired  and  loved ;  but  such  love  does  not  prove 
that  they  who  exercise  it  "have  passed  out  of  death  into  life."  Again,  we  may  love 
Christians,  not  because  they  are  Christians,  but  because  they  belong  to  our  ecclesiastical 
party  or  share  our  theological  opinions ;  but  this  affection  is  not  to  be  taken  as  an 
evidence  that  we  have  experienced  the  great  and  saving  change.  The  love  of  which 
St.  John  writes  is  a  love  of  the  brethren,  not  because  they  belong  to  us  or  to  our  party, 
but  because  they  belong  to  the  Lord  Jesus.  The  affection  which  is  a  proof  that  we 
have  passed  from  death  unto  life  is  a  love  of  the  brethren :  1.  Because  of  their  relation 
to  Christ  and  Ood.  They  are  one  with  Christ  by  faith  and  love.  Through  the  Saviour 
they  are  children  of  the  Divine  Father.  They  are  regarded  by  him  with  complacency. 
They  are  loved  by  him  with  the  love  of  approbation.  And  they  possess  the  filial  spirit  in 
relation  to  him  (Rom.  viii.  14 — 16).  If  we  love  God  we  shall  love  them,  because  they 
are  his.  "Whosoever  loveth  him  that  begat  loveth  him  also  that  is  begotten  of  him' 
(ch.  V.  1).  And  such  love  is  an  evidence  "  that  we  have  passed  out  of  death  into  life.' 
Z.  Because  of  their  resemllance  to  God  in  Christ.  Our  Lord  and  Saviour  is  the  Supreme 
Revelation  of  God  the  Father  to  our  race;  and  his  character,  "as  ho  lived  upon  earth," 
as  Hooper  has  said,  "  is  like  a  perfect,  many-sided  crystal.  Whichever  way  you  look 
at  it,  it  is  without  flaw.  Whichever  way  you  turn  it,  some  new  beauty  of  colour  ia 
reflected  from  the  rays  of  light  shining  through  it.  The  character  of  the  Christian  is 
like  a  crystal  too,  but  a  smaU  ona^  lull  of  cracks  and  flaws,  which  break  up  and  disflgu  r 


92  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  JOHN.     [oh.  ni.  1—24. 

the  brilliant  gleams  reflected  from  the  sunlight.  .  .  .  The  Christian  must  be  like 
Christ,  or  he  is  nothing ;  but  it  is  a  likeness  with  a  vast  distance  between — the  likeness 
ef  the  infant  to  the  strong  man  ;  the  likeness  of  a  feeble  sapling  to  the  full-grown  giant 
oak."  To  love  Christians  because  we  discover  in  them  this  moral  resemblauce  to  God 
m  Christ  is  an  evidence  "  that  we  lave  passed  out  of  death  into  life." 

1.  If  we  have  this  holy,  fraternal  affection,  let  us  draw  from  it  ike  assuranc*  which 
our  text  warrants.  "  We  know  that  we  have  passed,"  etc.  2.  Let  tu  cultivate  mor^ 
and  more  of  this  Christian  love. — W.  J. 

Vers.  16 — 18. — The  exhibition  and  obligation  of  true  love.  "  Hereby  perceive  we  the 
love  of  God,  because  he  laid  down  his  life  for  us,"  etc.  Our  subject  naturally  divides 
itself  into  two  main  branches. 

I.  The  exhibition  op  the  nature  of  true  love.  "  Hereby  know  we  love,  because 
he  laid  down  his  life  for  us." .  "  The  meaning  is  not,"  as  Ebrard  says,  "  wherein  we 
(subjectively)  have  perceived  love,  but  in  what  (objectively)  the  nature  of  love  consists." 
1.  It  is  of  the  nature  of  love  to  make  sacrifices.  Love  is  essentially  communicative. 
It  seeks  to  impart  itself  and  its  treasures  to  others.  It  does  not  ask — What  shall  I 
receive?  but — What  shall  I  give?  It  takes  upon  itself  the  burdens  and  sorrows  of 
others.  2.  The  greatest  sacr^ice  is  the  surrender  of  life.  The  strongest  self-love  in 
human  nature  is  that  of  life.  Man  will  perform  any  labours,  confront  any  perils,  make 
almost  any  sacrifice,  to  save  his  life.  "All  that  a  man  bath  will  he  give  for  his  life." 
Therefore  the  surrender  of  life  is  the  costliest  sacrifice  that  even  true  love  can  offer. 
"  Greater  love  hath  no  man  than  this,  that  a  man  lay  down  his  life  for  his  friends ; " 
"  Hereby  know  we  love,  because  he  laid  down  his  life  for  us."  3.  But  Christ  sacrificed 
his  life  for  his  enemies.  "  For  us."  That  it  was  for  sinners  is  not  mentioned  here ; 
but  it  is  elsewhere.  "  Herein  is  love,  not  that  we  loved  God,  but  that  be  loved  us," 
etc.  (ch.  iv.  10).  "  Christ  died  for  the  ungodly,"  etc.  (Rom.  v.  6 — 8).  And  the  maimer 
in  which  his  life  was  sacrificed  was  most  painful.  He  was  "  obedient  unto  death,  even 
the  death  of  the  cross."  The  derision  and  degradation,  the  ignominy  and  anguish, 
associated  with  his  great  self-sacrifice  were  such  that  death  itself  was  but  a  small 
portion  of  what  he  endured  for  ns.  Behold,  then,  in  him  who  laid  down  his  life  for  us 
what  genuine  love  is. 

IL  The  obligation  to  exercise  true  love.  "And  we  ought  te  lay  down  our 
lives  for  the  brethren.  But  whoso  hath  the  world's  goods,"  etc.  It  is  implied  that 
all  true  love  is  one  in  its  essential  nature ;  the  love  in  the  heart  of  Gud  and  pure  love 
in  the  heart  of  man  are  alike  in  kind ;  the  love  which  we  ought  to  exercise  should 
resemble  that  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  It  should  be  like  his,  not  in  its  degree,  but 
in  its  character ;  not  in  its  intensity  and  force,  but  in  its  kind.  Like  his  in  extent 
and  degree  our  love  can  never  be;  for  his  is  infinite,  ours  must  ever  be  finite.  "A 
pearl  of  dew  will  not  hold  the  sun,  but  it  may  hold  a  spark  of  its  light.  A  child,  by 
the  sea,  trying  to  catch  the  waves  as  they  dash  in  clouds  of  crystal  spray  upon  the 
sand,  cannot  hold  the  ocean  in  a  tiny  shell,  but  he  may  huld  a  drop  of  the  ocean  water." 
So  our  love,  though  utterly  unlike  Christ's  in  its  measure,  may  be  like  it  in  its  essential 
nature— it  may  be  as  a  spark  from  the  infinite  fire.  Two  forms  of  expression  of  genuine 
affection  are  here  set  forth  as  obligatory.  1.  Willingness  to  make  the  great  sacrifice  for 
our  brethren.  "  We  ought  to  lay  down  our  lives  for  the  brethren."  The  principle,  as 
we  apprehend  it,  may  be  thus  stated,  that,  when  a  greater  good  will  be  accomplished 
by  the  sacrifice  of  our  life  than  by  the  saving  of  it,  we  should  be  willing  to  surrender 
it.  Wo  should  have  such  love  for  the  brethren  as  would  inspire  us  to  lay  down  our 
life  for  them,  if  it  were  necessary,  and  we  could  thereby  effectually  promote  their 
salvation.  Such  was  the  love  of  St.  Paul :  "Yea,  and  if  I  am  ofi'ered  upon  the  sacrifice 
and  service  of  your  faith,  I  joy,  and  rejoice  with  you  all."  Love  which  would  enable 
us  to  imperil  our  life  if  by  so  doing  we  may  save  others  from  death.  Such  love  for  our 
Lord  and  Saviour  as  would  lead  us  to  choose  deatli  rather  than  deny  him.  Such  love 
for  his  cause  as  would  impel  us  to  sacrifice  our  comforts,  our  home,  and  even  life  itself, 
if  thereby  we  may  advance  its  interests  and  spread  its  triumphs.  So  St.  Paul :  "  I 
hold  not  my  life  of  any  account,  as  dear  unto  myself,  so  that  I  may  accomplish  my 
course,  and  the  ministry  which  I  received  from  the  Lord  Jesus,  to  testify  the  gospel 
«l  the  grice  of  God."    And  zeal  in  thii  cause  is  surely  one  of  the  highest  forms  of  lovt 


OH.  m.  1—24.]    THE  FIBBT  EPI8TLB  CZSEBAL  OP  JOHN.  9$ 

for  our  brethren.  S.  Beadineis  to  relieve  the  needs  of  owr  brethren.  "  But  whoto  hatli 
the  world's  goods,  and  beholdeth  his  brother  in  need,"  etc.  (ver.  17).  True  loya 
expresses  itself  not  only  in  great  and  heroic  acts,  but  in  little  deeds  of  thoughtful 
kindness,  in  lowly  ministries  to  the  poor  and  needy.  Our  Lord  not  only  gave  his  life 
for  men,  but  he  helped  them  in  other  ways.  He  fed  the  hungry  thousands  (Mark  Tiii. 
i — 9).  He  vindicated  the  loving  woman  who,  having  anointed  him  with  her  costly 
perfume,  was  blamed  for  so  doing  (Matt,  xxvi,  6 — 13).  He  prepared  a  meal  for  his 
hungry,  weary,  and  discouraged  disciples  (John  xii.  4-^13).  We  ought  to  imitate 
him  in  this  respect.  We  shall  not  fail  to  do  so  if  true  love  dwells  in  our  hearts.  If 
we  do  not  help  our  needy  brethren  when  it  is  in  our  power  to  do  so,  it  is  clear  that 
a  love  like  Christ's  is  not  in  us.  Look  at  the  case  stated  in  the  text.  (1)  Here  is 
a  brother  requiring  help — a  "  brother  in  need."  (2)  Here  is  another  who  has  power 
to  render  the  help  which  is  needed.  He  "hath  the  world's  goods" — the  things  needful 
for  the  sustenance  of  the  bodily  life,  (3)  The  latter  is  aware  of  the  need  of  the  former. 
He  "  beholdeth  his  brother  in  need ; "  he  has  not  only  seen,  but  looked  upon,  considered, 
his  needy  brother.  (4)  Tet  lie  does  nothing  to  relieve  the  need ;  he  bestows  nothing 
out  of  his  store  to  supply  the  wants  of  his  brother ;  he  closes  his  heart  against  him. 
(5)  "  How  doth  the  love  of  God  abide  in  him  ?  "  Whatever  may  be  his  professions, 
his  conduct  proves  him  destitute  of  Divine  love. 

"  Little  children,  let  us  not  love  in  word,  neither  with  the  tongue ;  but  in  deed  and 
in  truth."  Let  our  love  bo  not  merely  a  profession,  but  a  reality;  not  an  empty 
sentiment,  but  a  hearty  service.  Let  the  beueficence  of  our  hand  be  joined  with  the 
benevolence  of  our  heart.  In  the  spirit  of  our  Lord,  let  us  give  to  our  brethren,  not 
only  genuine  sympathy,  but  generous  self-«acrifice  whenever  it  is  needful  ao  to  do. 
— W.  J. 

Vers.  19 — 22. —  The  judicial  function  of  contcience.  ••  And  hereby  we  know  that  we 
are  of  the  truth,"  etc.     Our  text  suggests  the  following  observations. 

I.  That  conscience  exebcisbs  a  judicial  function  in  man.  By  "our  heart" 
in  the  text  St.  John  means,  as  Alford  says,  "  the  heart  as  the  seat  of  the  conscience, 
giving  rise  there  to  peace  or  to  terror,  according  as  it  is  at  rest  or  in  disquietude.  .  .  , 
The  heart  here  is  the  inward  judge  of  the  man."  Many  are  the  definitions  of  "  con- 
science." "  Man's  conscience  is  the  oracle  of  God."  "  Conscience  is  God's  monitor  in  the 
soul  of  man."  "  The  sense  of  right."  "  God's  vicegerent  in  the  souL"  Dr.  Whewell : 
"  Conscience  is  the  leason  employed  about  questions  of  right  and  wrong,  and  accompanied 
with  the  sentiments  of  approbation  and  condemnation."  The  function  of  conscience 
is  not  to  give  the  Law  unto  us,  but  to  pronounce  whether  we  have  kept  the  Law  or  not. 
"It  is  the  great  business  of  conscience,"  says  Archbishop  Leighton,  "to  sit,  and 
examine,  and  judge  within ;  to  hold  courts  in  the  soul ;  and  it  is  of  continual  necessity 
that  it  be  so."  It  is  most  important  that  we  bear  in  mind  that  for  us  conscience  is  not 
an  infallible  guide  in  the  ethics  of  conduct.  Some  of  the  darkest  crimes  that  were  ever 
committed  have  been  sanctioned  by  conscience.  Saul  of  Tarsus  was  conscientious  in 
his  fierce  persecution  of  the  early  Christians.  "I  verily  thought  with  myself,  that 
I  ought  to  do  many  things  contrary  to  the  Name  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth "  (Acts  xxvi. 
9 — 11).  And  in  subsequent  ages  many  a  prsecutor  has  resembled  him  in  this  respect 
while  perpetrating  the  most  revolting  cruelties.  That  the  judgment  of  conscience  may 
invariably  be  true  and  perfect  it  must  needs  be  regulated  by  the  revealed  will  of  God, 
and  be  inspired  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  We  should  take  the  will  of  God  in  Christ  Jeaua 
for  our  law;  and  then  let  conscience,  quickened  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  exercise  its 
judicial  function  in  condemning  or  approving  us  in  our  relation  to  that  law. 

II.  That  when,  in  ihe  exercise  of  its  judicial  function,  consoienob  oondeuni 
us,  MUCH  moke  abb  wb  CONDEMNED  BY  THE  HOLT  GoD.  "  Por  if  our  heart  condemn 
us,  God  is  greater  than  our  heart,  and  knoweth  all  things."  To  my  mind  these  words 
suggest  two  important  considerations.  1.  Our  conscience  is  an  imperfect  judge,  hit  Ood 
it  absolutely  and  infinitely  holy.  Conscience  has  undoubtedly  suffered  by  reason  of 
human  sin.  Its  judgments  are  not  always  of  the  most  exalted  character.  As  a  judge 
it  is  sometimes  partial.  Sometimes  it  allows  what  if  it  were  perfectly  pure  it  must 
condemn.  But  "  God  is  greater  than  our  heart."  His  righteousness  is  perfect.  Sin 
in  every  form  is  utterly  abhorrent  to  Mm.    Hii  holiness  is  without  the  dightMt  spot 


M  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  JOHN.    [oh.  ni.  1—21 

or  the  faintest  shadow.  The  greatuess  of  his  mercy  towards  the  sinner  does  not  lead 
him  to  excuse  any  sin.  If  our  heart  condemn  us,  how  much  more  does  he  ?  If  our 
conscience,  which  is  hut  a  faint  and  imperfect  echo  of  his  voice,  condemn  us,  how  mnch 
more  does  he  ?  2.  Conscience  may  not  take  cognizance  of  every  sin,  hut  God  "  knoweth 
all  things."  There  are  sins  which  escape  the  vigilance  of  conscience.  A  man's  secret 
sins  may  be  of  three  classes:  (1)  those  which  are  unknown  to  his  fellow-men,  but 
known  to  himself;  (2)  those  which  are  not  recognized  as  sins  by  himself,  but  are  so 
viewed  by  his  fellow-men;  and  (3)  those  which  are  not  regarded  as  sins  either  by 
himself  or  his  fellow-men.  But  no  sins  whatever  are  hidden  from  God.  "  His  eyes 
are  upon  the  ways  of  man,  and  he  seeth  all  his  goings.  There  is  no  darkness,"  etc. 
(Job  xxxiv.  21,  22) ;  "  He  hath  set  our  iniquities  before  him,  our  secret  sins  in  the 
light  of  his  countenance."  If,  then,  our  conscience  with  its  imperfect  information, 
condemn  us,  how  much  more  must  be  who  "knoweth  all  things"!  "If  conscience 
be  as  a  thousand  witnesses,"  says  Dr.  Arrowsmith,  "the  all-seeing  God  is  as  a  thousand 
consciences." 
III.  That  whsn,  is  the  exercise  of  its  jitdioial  rinrcTioN,  coksciekoe  does 

NOT  CONDEMN  US,  WE  REGARD  GoD  WITH  INSPIRINO  CONFIDENCE.      "  Beloved,  if  OUr  heart 

condemn  us  not,  then  have  we  confidence  towards  God."  Notice:  1.  Confidence  in 
Ood  OS  to  its  nature.  "  Hereby  we  know  that  we  are  of  the  truth,  and  shall  assure  our 
heart  before  him."  It  is  the  firm  persuasion,  the  assurance,  of  the  heai-t  that  we  are 
his  children,  and  that  we  may  look  to  him  to  be  to  us  and  to  do  for  us  all  that  he  has 
promised  to  be  to  and  to  do  for  his  children.  Or,  if  we  view  it  as  indicated  by  the 
twenty-first  verse,  it  is  the  confidence  that  he  does  not  condemn  us,  but  that  he  accepts 
us  now  and  will  own  us  in  the  great  day.  How  precious  is  this  assurance  1  2.  Confi- 
dence in  Ood  springing  from  the  exercise  of  holy  love  and  the  approbation  of  conscience. 
"Hereby  shall  we  know  that  we  are  of  ihe  truth,  and  shall  assure  our  hearts  before 
him."  The  "hereby"  refers  to  what  has  gone  before.  He  who  loves  neither  in  word 
nor  with  the  tongue,  but  in  deed  and  trath,  may  know  that  he  is  "  of  the  truth,"  etc. 
"We  know  that  we  have  passed  out  of  death  into  life,  because  we  love  the  brethren;" 
"  He  that  loveth  his  brother  abideth  in  the  light."  Again,  St.  John  speaks  of  this 
assurance  towards  God  as  springing  from  an  approving  conscience  (ver.  21).  Apart 
from  the  approbation  of  the  inward  monitor,  we  cannot  look  Gh)d-ward  with  confidence 
or  with  joy.  3.  Confidence  in  Ood  inspiring  the  conviction  that  he  wiU  answer  our 
prayers  to  him.  "And  whatsoever  we  ask,  we  receive  of  him,  because  we  keep  his 
comm.andments,  and  do  the  things  that  are  pleasing  in  his  sight."  The  keeping  of  his 
commandments  is  not  meritorious;  it  does  not  give  us  a  claim  upon  him  for  the 
blessings  which  we  ask  in  prayer ;  but  it  is  an  indication  of  character  which  shows 
that  the  suppliant  will  ask  only  what  is  in  accordance  with  his  wilL  That  we  "do 
the  things  that  are  pleasing  in  his  sight"  is  a  guarantee  that  we  shall  desire  only  those 
things  which  he  will  be  pleased  to  bestow  upon  us  (cf.  ch.  v.  14,  15 ;  Ps.  xxxvii.  4). 
Having  the  assurance  that  we  are  his  children  and  endeavouring  to  please  him,  we  are 
persuaded  that  the  wise  and  gracious  Father  will  answer  our  prayers  to  him. — ^W.  J. 

Vers.  1 — 12: — Righteousness  and  sin  in  relation  to  children  of  Ood.  I.  Eighteous- 
NES8  INSEPARABLE  FROM  BEING  CHILDREN  OF  GoD.  ■  1.  Present  inner  natwrt.  (1)  As 
recognized  by  Ood.  "  Behold  what  manner  of  love  the  Father  hath  bestowed  upon  us, 
that  we  should  he  called  children  of  God :  and  such  we  are."  The  subject  was  started 
in  the  closing  verse  of  the  second  chapter  in  the  connectin;^  of  "  doing  righteousness  " 
with  being  "  begotten  of  him."  The  latter  thought  so  arrests  John,  that  he  calls  them 
to  contemplate  the  great  bestowal  of  love  on  them.  It  was  love  calculated  to  excite 
their  admiration.  It  was  love  that  proceeded  from  the  Father.  The  fatherly  love  did 
not  stop  short  of  their  receiving  the  title  of  "  children  of  God ; "  and  the  title  corresponds 
to  the  reality.  God  gives  us  community  of  nature  with  himself.  "  Partakers  of  the 
Divine  nature  "  is  the  language  which  Peter  employs.  Our  having  God  as  our  Father 
implies  that  we  cau  enter  into  his  thoughts,  can  enjoy  his  approval  and  love,  can 
co-operiite  with  him  to  the  advancement  of  his  ends.  Beyond  this  it  was  impossible 
for  love  to  go.  Let  us  rejoice  in  the  gifting  of  love,  by  which  God  openly  gives  us  the 
title  of  his  children,  and  does  not  give  the  title  without  the  reality.  (2)  As  not  recog- 
nized by  the  world.    "  'S'ot  this  cause  the  world  knoweth  us  not,  because  it  knew  hiis 


cii.ni.  1—24.]    THE  FIRST  EPIbTLB  GENERAL  OP  JOHN.  9S 

not."  If  we  share  the  same  nature  with  God,  why  are  onr  circumstances  so  unlike  our 
origin?  The  reason  given  is  that  "  the  woild  knoweth  us  nut,"  t.e.  cannot  detect  the 
Divine  image  in  us.  Our  thoughts,  uur  delights,  our  motives  and  ways  of  acting,  are 
all  a  riddle  to  men  of  the  trorld.  Tha,t  this  reason  holdsi  good  is  confirmed  by  the  fact 
that,  when  God  appeared  in  Christ,  the  world  knew  him  not.  Instead  of  detecting  his 
Divinity,  when  it  was  abundantly  evidenced,  to  its  utter  condemnation,  it  took  him  to 
be  an  impostor.  2.  Future  glory.  (1)  As  concealed.  "  Beloved,  now  are  we  children 
of  God,  and  it  is  not  yet  made  manifest  what  we  shall  be."  His  heart  warming  toward 
his  readers  as  recipients  with  him  of  fatherly  love,  he  addresses  them  as  "  beloved."  He 
reverts  to  the  particular  outgoing  of  that  love,  to  mark  it  as  the  foundation  of  present 
blessedness.  *'  Now  [prominence  being  given  to  the  thought  of  time]  are  we  children 
of  God."  With  the  same  nature  as  the  Father,  we  revel  in  the  Father's  thoughts,  we 
bask  in  the  sunshine  of  the  Father's  love,  we  run  the  way  of  the  Father's  command- 
ments. But  what  are  we  to  say  about  our  future  state?  To  a  Certain  extent  that  is 
concealed.  "It  is  not  yet  made  manifest  what  we  shall  be."  The  conditions  of  life 
will  be  changed.  The  great  change,  as  indicated  at  the  close  of  this  verse,  is  that  we 
shall  see  God  as  he  is.  There  will  not  be  the  present  veil  of  his  works  between  us  and 
God ;  but  the  Veil  will  be  rent  in  twain  for  us.  Now  we  know  not  very  definitely, 
or  experimentally,  how  we  shall  be  adapted  for  this  vision  of  God.  We  can  only 
imperfectly  realize  both  the  conditions  and  the  experience.  (2)  As  reueaied.  "We 
know  that,  if  he  shall  be  manifested,  we  shall  be  like  him ;  for  we  shall  see  him  even 
as  he  is."  It  seems  better  to  translate,  "  if  it  shall  be  manifested."  It  is  not  yet  made 
manifest  what  we  shall  be ;  but  it  is  certain  that  one  day — jrre  know  not  how  soon-^t 
shall  be  made  manifest.  Though  we  cannot  very  definitely  anticipate  this  disclosure, 
yet  we  know  this  about  it — that  we  shall  have  likeness  to  Ood.  This  connects  our 
future  with  our  present.  The  main  element  in  Our  present  is  that  We  are  children  of 
God.  Our  future  is  to  be  our  full  growth,  the  bringing  out  of  the  Diviae  features  in 
us  to  their  greatest  distinctness.  It  may  be  doubted  whether  this  assimilation  is 
regarded  here  as  the  result  of  the  vision  of  God  as  he  is.  Bather  are  we  being  trans- 
figured at  present;  and  when  the  transfiguration  is  completed  then  will  be  fulfilled  the 
condition  of  the  beatific  vision.  Though,  then,  much  is  dark  about  our  future,  we  have 
this  upon  which  our  minds  can  work — that  it  is  the  consummation  of  what  we  have,  of 
likeness  to  God  along  with  the  direct  vision  of  God.  3.  Action  in  view  of  the  future. 
"  And  every  one  that  hath  this  hope  set  on  him  purifieth  himself,  even  as  he  [that 
One]  is  pure."  The  future  glory  is  a  matter  of  hope  to  us,  arising  out  of  our  present 
conscioTisnesB  of  sonship,  our  present  experience  of  assimilation  to  God.  It  is  a  hope 
that  rests  for  its  realization  on  God.  It  is  for  him  to  complete  the  assimilation,  and, 
with  that,  to  give  us  the  direct  vision  of  himself.  But  it  has  been  said  of  God 
(ch.  ii.  29)  that  he  is  righteous.  What,  then,  is  the  duty  of  every  one  who  has  his  hope 
set  on  a  righteous  God— the  hope  of  being  made  like  to  him  in  righteousness  ?  It  is  to 
address  himself  to  the  work  of  self-purification.  This  implies  that  he  has  yet  sin 
cleaving  to  him.  It  does  not  imply  that  he  is  to  look  to  himself  for  puriflcationj  but 
simply  that  it  rests  with  himself  to  tfse  the  appointed  means,  viz.  as  these  have  already 
been  set  forth — trust  in  the  cleansing  efficacy  of  Christ's  blood,  confessing  sins,  taking 
advantage  of  the  services  of  the  Advocate.  We  may  think  of  these  as  associated  with 
the  exercises  of  prayer  and  reading  of  Scripture,  and  with  the  struggle  after  purity  in 
the  daily  life.  We  have  great  assistance  in  the  work  Of  self-purification  in  the  fact 
that  we  have  a  Model  of  purity  set  before  us  in  that  One,  viz.  Christ.  That  was  purity 
attained  to  in  the  use  of  means,  and  within  humanity,  and  in  the  midst  of  the  world^ 
defilements ;  and  therefore  meaning  the  goal  of  purity  for  us,  while  giving  us  direction 
and  stimulus  toward  that  goaL  It  is  purity  which  is  viewed  as  in  the  present,  •  gain 
which  has  come  down  to  him  from  his  earthly  life,  inseparable  from  his  being  lost. 
Christ,  at  this  moment,  holds  up  before  us  an  image  of  human  purity,  under  the  speii 
of  which  every  one  who  hopes  to  get  near  to  God  should  come. 

IL  Sin  incompatible  with  being  chilprbn  Of  God.  1.  Sin  in  its  essence.  "  Every 
one  that  doeth  sin  doeth  also  lawlessness :  and  sin  is  lawlessness."  Every  one  who 
hopes  to  behold  God's  face  in  righteousness  pwrifieth  himself.  What  is  to  be  aaiA  of 
every  one  who,  instead  of  purifying  himself,  doeth  sin  t  He  is  in  conflict  with  law,  or 
the  Divine  order.    God  lays  down  certain  rules  for  our  life,  appoints  certain  meaoa 


»6  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  JOHN.    [oh.  in.  1—24. 

of  purification.  He  who  doea  not  observe  the  rules,  does  not  tise  the  means,  does  not 
escape  moral  judgment  or  characterization.  His  whole  doing  takes  the  character  of 
lawlessness:  and  sin,  it  is  added,  is  lawlessness.  Sin  supposes  a  law  which  has 
authority  over  us,  whether  revealed  simply  in  the  conscience  or  ia  Christ ;  it  is  the 
fact  of  there  being  such  a  law  that  gives  character  to  action.  Bighteousness  has  the 
approval  of  God,  as  being  the  observance  of  his  Law ;  sin  has  the  condemnation  of  God, 
as  being  the  violation  of  his  Law.  2.  Sin  incompatible  with  the  purpose  of  Chrises 
manifestation,  "  And  ye  know  that  he  [that  One]  was  manifested  to  take  away  sins." 
Christ  had  not  only  been  proclaimed,  but  had  been  received  by  his  readers ;  he  could 
therefore  appeal  to  their  consciousness.  The  manifestation  (in  the  past)  here  referred 
to  covers  the  whole  of  the  earthly  history  of  our  Lord ;  and  it  is  important  to  note  that, 
though  its  culminating  point  was  his  death,  yet  it  all  had  a  bearing  on  the  taking  away 
sin$.  The  language  seems  to  go  beyond  the  taking  of  our  sins  upon  him  as  our  Sub- 
stitute, and  the  procuring  of  forgiveness  for  us.  He  was  manifested  to  take  away  sins 
out  cf  our  life.  It  is  manifest,  then,  how  incompatible  sin  is  with  OocFs  thought.  He 
who  was  in  the  bosom  of  the  Father  was  manifested  in  flesh,  endured  hardness  in  this 
world,  brought  his  earthly  life  to  a  close  by  a  death  of  unmitigated  anguish;  and  all 
that  he  might  take  away  our  sins.  And  are  we,  instead  of  can  ying  out  the  Divine  inten- 
tion, and  having  our  sins  taken  away,  to  clutch  at  them  as  what  we  cannot  pait  with, 
thus  putting  self  before  God  ?  3.  Sin  incompatible  with  Chrisfs  sinlessness,  "  And  in 
him  is  no  sin."  The  sinlessness  (in  keeping  with  ver.  3)  is  carried  down  to  the  present 
moment.  He  is  sinless  now  in  heaven.  No  sin  has  come  down  to  him  from  the 
earthly  manifestation.  "  By  his  sinlessness  is  meant  that  he  was  filled  at  every  moment 
of  his  life  with  the  spirit  of  obedience,  and  with  a  love  to  God  which  surrendered  itself 
unconditionally  to  his  will,  and  with  those  powers  which  flow  firom  an  uninterrupted 
communion  with  God.  The  consequence  of  this  was,  not  only  that  no  distraction 
caused  by  sin  could  find  a  place  either  in  his  inner  or  his  outer  life,  but,  more  than 
this,  everything  was  both  willed  by  liim  and  carried  into  execution  that  the  will  of 
God  appointed."  The  worldly  minded  judge  of  Jesus,  who  was  a  man  by  no  means 
very  susceptible  of  what  is  high  and  noble,  felt  constrained  solemnly  to  recognize  the 
innocence  of  the  persecuted  Jesus.  And  Pilate's  wife,  who,  we  may  suppopo,  was  more 
impressible  than  be,  was  so  deeply  convinced  of  the  purity  and  blamelessness  of  Christ, 
that  the  thought  of  her  husband  imbruing  his  hands  in  the  blood  of  that  righteous 
Man  haunted  her  even  in  sleep,  and  gave  her  no  rest.  A  Roman  warrior  who  com- 
manded the  guard  at  the  cross  was  so  overpowered  by  the  impression  that  the  Crucified 
made  upon  him,  that  he  broke  forth  in  words  of  deepest  reverence,  "  Truly  this  wag 
a  righteous  Man,  this  was  the  Son  of  God."  And  the  malefactor  who  was  crucified 
along  with  him,  moved  by  his  dying  look,  was  made  strong  to  give  hit  whole  confidence 
to  his  Person,  and  to  apprehend  the  joy  of  a  better  life.  Long  and  confidential  inter- 
course had  given  Judas  the  most  intimate  knowledge  of  his  Master ;  hence,  if  he  could 
have  found  anything  reproachable  in  his  life,  he  would  without  doubt  have  brought  a 
forward,  in  order  to  quiet  his  conscience  in  the  view  of  the  consequences  of  his  treachery, 
and  to  palliate  his  crime.  Among  his  friends,  John  the  Baptist  started  back  at  the 
thought  of  baptizing  him,  saying,  "  I  have  need  to  be  baptized  of  thee,  and  comest  thou 
to  me  ?  "  Peter  was  so  impressed  with  the  presence  of  holiness  in  the  miraculous  draught 
of  fishes,  that  he  fell  at  Jesus'  knees,  saying,  "Depart  from  me;  for  I  am  a  sinful  man, 
0  Lord."  As  for  Jesus  himself,  he  was  conscious  of  freedom  from  sin :  "  Which  of 
you  convinceth  me  of  sin?"  He  claimed  to  be  the  Image  and  Keflection  of  perfect 
goodness :  "  He  that  hath  seen  me  hath  seen  the  Father."  What,  then,  is  the  meaning 
to  us  of  the  sinlessness  of  Christ  ?  It  means  that  we  are  not  to  sin.  Did  he  loathe  sin, 
and  reject  it  in  every  form?  did  he  fe§l  the  attraction  of  all  that  was  highest,  and  cleave 
to  it  with  his  whole  being?  and  are  we  to  feel  the  charm  of  sin,  and  take  it  unto  us? 
are  we  to  be  insensible  to  the  beauties  of  holiness,  and  put  them  away  from  us  ?  4.  Sin 
incompatible  with  communion  with  Christ.  "  Whosoever  abideth  in  him  sinneth  not ; 
whosoever  sinneth  hath  not  seen  him,  neither  knoweth  him."  "  Abiding  in  Christ " 
is  taken  up  from  the  close  of  the  second  chapter.  It  implies  an  entire  surrender  of 
ourselves  to  Christ.  It  is,  in  communion  with  Christ,  getting  into  his  thoughts  and 
life.  Whosoever  finds  his  destiny  in  this  sphere  of  things  sinneth  not;  i.e.  it  is  hii 
prin<»iJit  not  to  sin.    The  principle  is  no  doubt  imperfectly  carried  out,  and  is  accom- 


CH.  m.  1— 24.]    THE  FIEST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  JOHN.  81 

panied  with  daily  falls  into  sin,  for  which  forgiving  grace  is  needed ;  still,  it  is  his 
principle  not  to  sin.  Whosoever  sinneth,  t.e.  makes  it  his  principle  to  sin,  makes  self 
the  centre  of  his  thoughts  and  life — hath  not  seen  him,  neither  knoweth  him.  He  hath 
not  yet  truly  cast  his  eye  on  Christ,  neither  is  he  in  the  circle  of  his  thoughts.  5.  Same 
truth  emphasized.  "My  little  children,  let  no  man  lead  you  astray:  hs  that  doeth 
righteousness  is  righteous,  even  as  he  [that  One]  is  righteous."  He  addresses  them  as 
objects  of  his  warm  affection.  His  affection  goes  out  to  them  as  in  danger.  He  cannot 
bear  the  thought  of  their  being  led  astray.  He  has  just  been  referring  to  knowing. 
That  was  a  word  which  the  Gnostic  teachers  used.  Onostic  is  literally  "  known."  Those 
teachers  said'in  one  form  or  another,  that,  if  men  knew,  it  did  not  matter  what  their 
condiict  was.  Let  no  man,  whatever  his  seeming  authority,  whatever  his  plausibility, 
whatever  his  use  of  the  name  of  Christ,  lead  them  astray.  None  can  be  placed  above 
the  demand  for  rightness  of  conduct.  The  only  way  in  which  a  man  can  be  regarded 
as  righteous  in  the  sight  of  God  is  by  doing  righteousness,  i.e.  carrying  right  principles 
into  his  whole  conduct.  It  was  so  with  that  One ;  nay,  it  is  so  with  him  still.  Even 
in  his  glorified  life  he  can  be  thought  of  as  held  by  Divine  restraints.  And,  if  we 
would  maintain  communion  with  him,  we  must  love  Divine  restraints  too.  6.  Sin 
connects  with  an  evil  source.  "  He  that  doeth  sin  is  of  the  devil ;  for  the  devil  sinneth-i 
from  the  beginning.  To  this  end  was  the  Son  of  God  manifested,  that  he  might  destroy 
the  works  of  the  devil."  Taking  up  him  that  doeth  sin,  Le.  acts  without  regard  to 
Divine  restraints,  he  advances  to  the  thought  of  his  spiritual  genesis.  He  is  blessed 
with  no  high  origin.  He  is  connected  with  the  name  that  is  most  repellent.  The 
devil,  originally  good,  "  stood  not  in  the  truth."  Appearing  on  the  scene  of  human 
activity,  he  was  the  means  of  introducing  sin  into  the  world.  That  was  his  flagrant 
sin  at  the  beginning ;  and  he  has  not  recoiled  from  his  position.  It  is  still  his  thought 
to  baffle  God,  to  destroy  human  happiness.  This,  then,  is  the  spiritual  parentage  of 
him  that  doeth  sin.  God  is  not  owned  by  him.  He  revels  in  such  ungodly  thoughts 
as  Satan  revels  in,  engages  in  such  ungodly  designs  as  Satan  engages  in.  It  is  evident 
that  he  cannot  have  communion  with  Christ ;  for  there  is  a  deadly  antagonism  between 
Christ  and  the  works  of  the  devil.  He  was  the  Son  of  God,  naturally  zealous  (so  to 
think  of  it)  for  the  Fatlier's  honour.  It  was  no  matter  of  indifference  to  him  to  think 
of  the  fair  creation  as  marred,  of  human  happiness  as  destroyed.  And  in  the  depths  of 
eternity  he  burned  to  retrieve  our  lost  jMsition,  and  to  this  end,  in  the  fulness  of  time, 
he  was  manifested.  He  came  to  be  a  destroyer  too,  but  not  like  Satan  a  destroyer  of 
good  things,  but  a  destroyer  of  Satan's  works,  i.e.  all  works  that  have  this  common  bond 
that  they  are  done  against  God,  in  disregard  or  defiance  of  his  authority.  If  a  man, 
then,  is  Satan's  worker,  Christ  has  a  controversy  with  him ;  he  is  the  deadly  antagonist 
of  his  works,  he  aims  at  their  utter  destruction.  7.  Divine  origin  is  shown  in  opposi- 
tion to  sin.  "  Whosoever  is  begotten  of  God  doeth  no  sin,  because  his  seed  abideth  in 
him:  and  be  cannot  sin,  because  he  is  begotten  of  God,"  He  starts  here  from  the  high 
origin.  He  takes  a  man  who  is  begotten  of  God,  and  he  uses  the  strong  language 
regarding  him  that  he  doeth  not  sin,  the  reason  given  being  that  his  seed,  i.e.  the 
principle  of  the  Divine  life,  abideth  in  him.  Nay,  he  uses  the  still  stronger  language 
that  he  cannot  sin,  the  reason  given  being  that  it  is  of  God  and  of  no  other  that  he  is 
begotten.  An  animal  (which  is  si:^gested)  does  not  live,  cannot  live,  but  in  accordance 
with  the  principle  of  life  from  which  it  has  sprung,  and  whioii  is  being  unfolded  in  it. 
So  he  who  has  received  the  Divine  principle  into  his  life,  and  is  having  it  unfolded  in 
him,  is  not  as  though  he  had  only  the  seed  of  depravity  in  him.  Though  thet«  is 
depravity  remaining  in  him,  coming  out  in  sins  for  which  he  has  to  humble  himself, 
yet  it  can  be  said  that  sin  is  utterly  foreign  to  his  life.  A  man  can  only  have  properly 
one  principle  in  his  life,  and  his  principle  is  not,  cannot  be  sin,  because  the  Divine  seed 
is  there,  and  of  God  he  is  begotten. 

III.  Tbansition  to  a  nkw  section.  1.  Mark  of  brotherly  love.  "  In  this  the  children 
of  God  are  manifest,  and  the  children  of  the  devil :  whosoever  doeth  not  righteousness 
is  not  of  God,  neither  he  that  loveth  not  his  brother."  So  far  as  the  principle  of  life  is 
concerned,  there  are  two,  and  only  two,  classes  of  men.  We  are  either  the  children  of 
God  or  the  children  of  the  devil.  It  becomes  us  to  ask  of  ourselves  to  which  class  we 
belong.  And,  seeing  Christ  shall  say  of  many  who  profess  to  .have  eaten  and  drunk  in 
his  presence,  "  I  know  not  whence  ye  are ;  depart  from  sae,  all  ye  workers  of  iniquity," 
X.  JOBS.  ,     ^  9- 


98  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  JOHN,    [ch,  in.  1—24 

we  have  need  to  be  joaloua  over  ourselves  with  a  godly  jealousy.  Let  us  not  pleast 
ourselves  with  illusions,  but  let  us  keep  close  to  reality.  The  apostle  gives  us  a  mark 
here  by  which  we  may  be  helped  to  classify  ourselves.  According  to  his  manner,  he 
catches  up  the  former  idea  of  doing  righteousness,  but  only  to  fix  upon  its  most  gloriovls 
form.  He  is  not  the  child  of  God  that  loveth  not  Ms  brother.  Loving  our  brother, 
then,  is  that  by  which  we  are  marked  off  from  the  children  of  the  devil.  This  is  the 
mark  which  we  are  to  be  helped  to  apply,  2.  Oommandment  of  brotherly  love.  "  For 
this  is  the  message  which  ye  heard  from  the  beginning,  that  we  should  love  one 
another."  It  was  of  importance  to  consider  brotherly  love,  because  it  was  contained  in 
the  first  message  of  Christianity.  Did  it  announce  the  blessed  fact  that  God  made 
infinite  sacrifice  for  us  ?  Translated  into  a  eomma/nd  that  was  that  we  should  love  one 
another.  We  have  the  command,  with  all  the  Master's  authority.  This  contains  the 
principle  which  is  to  operate  in  our  life  in  our  relations  to  one  another.  3.  Exemplifi- 
cation of  the  convene  of  brotherly  love.  "  Not  as  Cain  wag  of  the  evil  one,  and  slew  his 
brother.  And  wherefore  slew  he  him  ?  Because  his  works  were  evil,  and  his  brother'* 
righteous."  He  goes  back  to  the  first  manifestations  of  evil  for  his  example.  Cain  was 
the  child  of  the  deviL  It  is  said  here  that  he  was  "  of  the  evil  one."  He  was  under  the 
influence  of  him  who  was  evil  affected  toward  men.  Being  evilly  affected  toward  hia 
brother,  he  slew  him.  "And  wherefore  slew  he  him?  Because  his  works  were  evil, 
and  his  brother's  righteous."  He  disliked  Abel's  piety,  not  so  much  purely,  as  because 
it  gave  him  a  better  standing  with  God.  When  evidence  was  given,  in  the  mo^t  con- 
vincing manner,  of  what  their  relative  standing  was,  Cain's  dislike  grew  to  hate  and 
hot  anger  which  could  not  be  appeased. — B.  F. 

Vers.  13 — 24. — The  sign  of  brotherly  love.  L  Lovs  to  bs  tbaoed  to  a.  ba vma 
OHAKOE.  1,  Not  to  be  expected  in  the  tuorld.  "  Marvel  not,  brethren,  if  the  world 
hateth  you."  Cain  hated  Abel;  after  the  same  fashion  the  world  hates  Christ's 
people.  Our  Lord,  whom  John  here  echoes,  points  to  the  fact  of  his  being  hated  b^ore 
his  people,  and  then  adds,  "  If  ye  were  of  the  world,  the  world  would  love  its  own :  but 
because  ye  are  not  of  the  world,  but  I  chose  you  out  of  the  world,  therefore  the  world 
hateth  you."  Abel's  tragic  end  was  conclusive  evidence  that  he  was  not  to  be  classed 
with  Cain ;  so  when  the  world  hates  us,  there  is  this  consolation,  that  we  have  evidence 
of  not  being  classed  with  the  world.  2.  Its  presence  the  sign  of  a  saving  change.  "  We 
know  that  we  have  passed  out  of  death  into  life,  because  we  love  the  brethren."  Here 
again  John  echoes  our  Lord,  who  describes  the  saving  change  in  the  same  language 
(John  V.  24).  The  passage  out  of  death  into  life  is  to  be  interpreted  in  accordance 
with  being  begotten  ot  God  and  having  his  seed  in  us.  It  is  not  siiap\y  Jttstiflcation — 
a  passage  out  of  a  state  of  condemnation  into  a  state  of  acceptance.  It  is  rather 
regeneration — a  passage  out  of  a  dead,  abnormal  state  of  our  thoughts,  desires,  volitions, 
into  their  living,  normal  state.  This  is  a  passage  which  must  take  place  in  the 
spiritual  history  of  everyone  of  us  who  would  come  forth  into  the  light  of  God's 
countenance.  It  is  not  effected  without  Divine  help,  which  is  offered  in  the  gospel. 
To  every  one  to  «  horn  the  gospel  offer  is  made  there  is  granted  the  assistance  of  the 
Spirit,  that  he  may  lay  hold  on  Christ  as  his  Saviour.    With  Christ  there  is  a  new 

Erinciple  introduced  into  our  life,  which  now  needs  full  manifestation  for  our  perfect 
ealth  and  happiness.  It  is  a  matter,  then,  of  the  very  greatest  importance  for  us 
to  know  that  we  have  made  the  passage  out  of  death  into  life.  We  are  not  to  take 
this  for  granted,  but  to  be  guided  by  evidence.  The  test  given  by  our  Lord  is — hearing 
his  Word,  and  believing  him  that  sent  him.  John's  interpretation  of  this  is  loving  the 
brethren.  We  are  to  love  those  who  are  animated  with  the  same  Christian  sentiment, 
not  in  the  same  way  those  who  are  animated  with  worldly  sentiment.  If  we  have  the 
right  feeling  within  the  Christian  circle,  loving  all  who  love  Christ,  then  we  may 
conclude  that  a  saving  change  has  taken  place  in  us.  3.  Its  absence  the  sign  of  con- 
tinuance in  an  unsaved  state.  "He  that  loveth  not  abideth  in  death,  whosoever 
hateth  his  brother  is  a  murderer :  and  ye  know  that  no  muiderer  hath  eternal  life 
•biding  in  him."  The  apostle  singles  out  him  who  is  not  under  the  influence  of  love 
(without  any  specification  of  object),  and  says  of  him,  that  he  abideth  in  death,  i.e.  hai 
not  made  the  passage — remains  where  he  was.  In  confirming  this,  he  assumes  that 
'vnnt  of  love  is  equivalent  to  hatred  of  a  brother*    It  is  only  where  love  is  active  that 


OH.  in.  1—24.]    THE  PIEST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  JOHN.  60 

hatred  is  effectually  excluded.  "  Whosoever  hateth  his  hrother  [there  seems  to  be  a 
limitation  to  the  Christian  circle]  is  a  murderer."  He  has  the  feeling  of  the  murderer, 
in  so  far  as  he  is  not  sorry  to  see  the  happiness  of  his  brother  diminished.  If  he  is  a 
murderer  to  any  extent,  then — according  to  the  old  law— his  life  is  forfeited.  It 
cannot  he  said  of  him,  as  it  can  be  said  of  him  that  loves,  that  he  has  eternal  lif« 
abiding  ii^  him.  His  true  life,  that  which  has  eternal  elements  in  it,  has  not  yet 
commenced. 

n.  LovB  nj  ITS  MANIFESTATION.  1.  Love  in  its  highest  manifestation.  "Hereby 
know  we  love,  because  he  [that  One]  laid  down  his  life  for  us :  and  we  ouglit  to  lay 
down  our  lives  for  the  brethren."  The  apostle  has  laid  down  love  as  the  sign  of  a 
saving  change;  how  are  we  to  know  what  love  is?  He  does  not  give  any  philosophical 
ilefinition  of  it ;  he  reaches  his  end  better  by  pointing  to  its  highest  manifestation,  viz. 
that  One  laying  down  his  life  for  ug.  "I  have  power  to  lay  it  down,"  he  said,  "and  I 
have  power  to  take  it  again ; "  but  he  elected  to  lay  it  down.  It  was  laying  down  that 
which  was  dearest  to  him,  that  which  cost  him  an  infinite  pang  to  lay  down.  There 
was  not  a  little  truth  in  what  Satan  said,  "  Skin  for  skin,  yea,  all  that  a  man  hath  will 
he  give  for  his  life."  It  was  only  love  that  could  overcome  the  greatest  natural  aversion 
to  dying — ^a  love  stronger  than  death,  a  love  burning  with  a  flame  that  waters  and 
floods  could  not  quench.  It  was  love  going  out  toward  us,  that  sought  to  be  of  infinite 
service  to  us.  He  did  not  grudge  his  Efe,  that  we  might  have  life — the  pardon  of  our 
gins,  and  the  quickening  of  his  Spirit  through  our  whole  nature.  To  point  to  this  is 
belter  than  to  give  any  definition  of  love — it  is  love  meeting  a  great  necessity,  solving 
the  problem  of  sin,  triumphing  over  the  greatest  difficulty  that  could  arise  under  the 
moral  government  of  God.  There  was  rebellion  against  the  Divine  authority :  how  was 
it  triumphed  over  ?  Not  by  a  resort  to  force,  which  would  have  been  easy,  but  by 
drawing  upon  the  resources  of  love,  even  by  that  which  was  fitted  to  excite  the 
astonishment  of  the  universe — ^the  Son  of  God  becoming  incarnate,  and  laying  down 
his  precious  life,  that  the  guilt  of  rebellion  and  all  its  evil  consequences  might  be 
removed.  So  John  needs  not  to  give  any  definition  of  love  in  abstract  terms ;  he  needs 
only  to  Bay, "  Hereby  know  we  love."  This  is  its  absolute  realization — a  realization  from 
which  we  are  to  derive  instruction  and  inspiration.  For  what  does  it  say  to  us?  John 
puts  it  thus, "  And  we  ought  to  lay  down  our  lives  for  the  brethren."  As  he  represents 
those  who  hate  as  murderen,  so  he  represents  those  who  love  as  martyrs.  If  we  take 
"laying  down  our  lives"  as  actual  martyrdom,  then  there  is  not  an  obligation  to  this 
under  all  circumstances.  In  the  early  times  Christians  had  often  to  face  martyrdom — 
it  was  a  matter  of  obligation  to  them  from  which  they  could  not  free  themselves,  from 
which  they  sought  not  to  free  themselves,  because  they  were  under  the  spell  of  Christ's 
sacrifice  for  them.  It  is  to  the  honour  of  our  Christianity  that  they  went  forth  even 
joyfully  to  meet  death  in  whatever  form  it  came  to  them.  If  opportunity  offered,  it 
would  be  our  duty  to  do  the  same.  But  observe  the  spirit  of  our  great  exemplification 
of  love.  It  was  not  self-immolation  for  its  own  sake,  but  rather  self-immolation  for  the 
sake  of  being  of  service  to  us.  He  who,  like  Lacordaire,  has  himself  bound  to  a  literal 
cross  is  doing  a  hold  thing,  but  a  mistaken  thing,  for  the  reason  that  there  is  no  proper 
connection  between  his  act  and  service  done.  Carried  out,  it  would  turn  Christianity 
into  •  religion  of  suicide.  What  keeps  us  right,  while  still  preserving  the  spell  of 
Christ's  sacrifice,  is  that  we  allow  our  love  to  go  as  far  in  sacrifice  as  our  doing  service 
to  others  requires.  2.  An  ordinary  failwre  in  love.  "  But  whoso  hath  the  world's 
goods,  and  beholdeth  his  brother  in  need,  and  shutteth  up  his  compassion  from  him, 
how  doth  the  love  of  God  abide  in  him  ?  "  It  is  very  exceptional  where  our  duty  is  to 
lay  down  our  lives  for  the  brethren ;  it  is  generally  a  much  simpler  matter.  Here  is  a 
Christian  who  hag  the  means  of  living  for  this  world  beyond  what  he  absolutely 
requires.  He  is  not  rich,  let  us  say,  but  is  in  good  health,  and  employed,  and  has  an 
ordinary  livLag.  Here,  on  the  other  hand,  is  a  brother  in  need,  who  is  in  bad  health, 
or  is  unemployed,  or  is  incapacitated  by  age  for  work.  "  The  poor  ye  have  always  with 
you."  What,  then,  is  the  duty  of  a  Christian  to  a  needy  brother  ?  Is  he  not  guided 
to  it  even  by  hig  natural  feelings  ?  As  he  beholds  his  brother  in  need,  his  heart  opens 
in  compassion  toward  him ;  and  he  goes  and  lays  down  for  him,  not  his  life  in  this 
case,  but  a  little  out  of  his  worldly  store,  which  goes  to  lighten  the  burden  of  his 
brother's  {wvert/.    That  iattxe  CJiristian  part.  But  let  ua  suppose  the  converse.   Her« 


loo  THE  WEST  EPISTLE  (JENllRAL  OP  JOflK.    [oh.  ni.  1—24 

is  one  who  professes  to  be  a  Christian.  Nature  does  not  refuse  him  assistance.  The 
spectacle  of  a  brother's  poverty  opens  his  heart  in  compassion.  But  he  selfishly  shuii 
it — goes  away,  and  finds  prudential  reasons  for  not  making  the  little  sacrifice  that  his 
feelings  unchecked  would  lead  him  to  make :  have  we  not  grounds,  in  this  case,  for 
doubting  his  Christianity?  Of  one  who  goes  and  lays  down  of  his  living  for  a  needy 
brother  we  can  think  that  he  has  the  love  of  God  abiding  in  him.  Even  in  that  little 
sacrifice  he  Is  acting  in  the  same  line  in  which  God  acted  in  making  infinite  sacrifice. 
But  of  one  who  cannot  lay  down,  not  his  life,  which  is  the  highest  test,  but  a  little  of 
his  living,  which  is  a  very  low  test,  what  are  we  to  think  ?  What  has  he  in  common 
with  that  God  whom  he  professes  to  love,  of  whoso  love  the  cross  of  Christ  is  the 
expression  ?  3.  The  requisite  of  reality  in  love.  "  My  little  children,  let  us  not  love  in 
word,  neither  with  the  tongue ;  but  in  deed  and  truth."  With  all  affectionateuess  he 
would  have  them  to  attend  to  this  lesson,  calling  them  his  little  children,  and  including 
himself  in  what  he  inculcates.  Love  may  very  properly  find  expression  in  word. 
"Kind  messages  have  a  grand  part  to  discharge  in  the  system  of  utterances  and  acts  by 
which  the  reign  of  love  is  maintained  and  advanced  in  so  hard  a  world.  As  soon  as 
we  have  passed  beyond  the  limits  of  school  into  the  real  world,  we  find  that  it  is  sweet 
to  be  remembereil  with  regard  by  friends  at  a  distance — to  learn  that  you  have  not 
faded  out  of  their  memory,  like  unfixed  photographs  in  the  sunshine ;  that  you  are 
sufliciently  a  distinct  object  of  regard  to  be  found  worthy  of  a  direct  and  afifectionate 
salutation."  It  is  very  proper  also  to  use  the  tongue  in  conveying  love.  The  kindly 
feeling  must  be  in  the  heart;  but  let  the  kindly  expression  also  be  on  the  tongue. 
There  is  nothing  more  beautiful  in  the  picture  of  the  virtuous  woman  drawn  by  King 
Lemuel  than  this  touch :  "  In  her  tongue  is  the  law  of  kindness."  Let  not  the  tongue 
be  used  as  the  vehicle  of  disagreeableness,  of  rancour ;  let  love  teach  us  how  to  use  it. 
Kindliness  of  tone,  especially  when  accompanied  with  the  fitting  word,  does  much  to 
take  awiiy  the  hardness  of  life  and  the  oppressive  sense  of  isolation.  But,  when  proper 
occasion  arises,  let  us  also  love  in  deed.  Withhold  not  from  a  needy  brother  when 
thou  canst  relieve  him.  Perform  the  act  to  which  the  kindly  feeling  prompts.  Then 
only  can  we  love  in  truth.  Love  that  stops  short  of  doing,  that  does  not  go  beyond 
fine  phrases,  is  characterized  by  unreality.  To  be  true,  it  must  penetrate  into  what  is 
practical,  however  unromantic. 

III.  Love  in  its  beheficial  besttlt.  1.  Assurance.  "  Hereby  shall  we  know  that 
we  are  of  the  truth,  and  shall  assure  our  heart  before  him."  The  link  of  connection 
is  truth  as  the  sphere  in  which  love  moves.  Let  us  go  on  loving,  and  we  shall  know 
that  we  are  (f  the  truth ;  i.e.  have  hold  of  eternal  reality,  so  as  to  be  steadied  by  it  and 
wholly  charactered  by  it.  Knowing  that  we  are  of  the  truth,  we  shall  assure  our  heart 
before  him.  It  is  of  the  utmost  importance  that  we  should  have  our  heart  assured 
as  to  our  state  and  destiny.  This  can  only  be  "  before  him ; "  for  it  is  with  him  that 
we  have  to  do— to  whom  we  stand  or  fall.  Does  our  heart  tell  us  that  we  stand 
in  a  right  relationship  to  him?  We  may  have  experience  of  sin,  as  we  liave  already 
been  taught,  and  yet  stand  in  a  right  relationship  to  him.  God's  people  are  those  who 
are  being  gradually  cleansed  from  sin  in  the  blood  of  Christ  and  in  connection  with 
confession  of  sins.  Their  titles,  then,  are  not  affected  by  remains  of  sin,  if  there  is 
a  new  life  operating  in  them,  showing  itself  especially  in  the  activity  of  brotherly  love. 
The  following  course  of  thought  cannot  be  ascertained  with  certainty.  The  difficulty 
is  caused  by  the  introduction  of  "  for  "  before  "  God  is  greater."  For  its  omission  there 
is  one  very  good  authority  of  the  fifth  century ;  but  the  weight  of  authority  is  for  its 
introduction.  If  we  take  the  more  authoritative  reading,  we  have  not  a  clear  sense ; 
on  the  other  hand,  if  we  take  the  less  authoritative  reading,  we  have  a  clear  and 
excellent  sense.  It  seems  to  be  a  case  (very  rare,  indeed)  in  which  the  authority  of 
manuscripis  must  yield  to  the  authority  of  consistent  thought.  The  way  of  getting 
over  the  difficulty  in  the  Revised  Version  is  far  from  satisfactory.  It  seems  to  teach 
that,  if  we  only  love,  then,  whereinsoever  our  heart  condemn  us,  we  may  pacify  it  by 
the  thought  that  God  is  greater  than  our  hearts,  especially  in  his  omniscience— which 
is  a  latitudinarian  sentiment.  In  the  old  version  there  is  a  distinction  drawn  between 
the  case  of  our  heart  condemning  us  and  the  case  of  our  heart  not  condemning  us.  (1) 
Misery  of  a  heart  that  condemns.  "  Whereinsoever  our  heart  condemn  us ;  because 
['  For  if  our  heart  condemn  us ']  God  is  greater  than  our  heart,  and  kuoweth  all  things," 


ea.  iti.  1— 24.]    THE  PlRSt  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP*  JOflN.  101 

Havin?  started  the  thought  of  assurance,  John  emphasizes  it  hy  putting  forward 
the  calamitoiisness  of  its  opposite.  If  our  heart  condemn  us,  ».e.  If,  from  the  presence 
of  unloving  feelings  and  from  other  evidences,  we  do  not  have  good  ground  for  thinking 
that  we  have  yet  come  into  a  covenant  relationship  to  God,  then  our  case  is  had.  We 
have  not  only  self-condemnation — conscience  turned  against  ourselves— but  we  have 
something  worse.  God  is  greater  than  our  heart  in  this  sense,  that  he  has  made  it  with 
its  power  of  judgment  upon  ourselves.  Conscience  is  only  his  legate ;  we  must  think 
of  the  great  God  himself  pronouncing  judgment  upon  us,  and  his  judgment  is  more 
efficient  than  ours.  We  have  but  a  limited  knowledge  even  of  ourselves.  If  with  that 
limited  knowledge  our  judgment  is  condemnatory,  what  must  the  judgment  of  God 
be?  He  has  more  to  proceed  upon ;  for  he  knoweth  all  things — things  that  have  faded 
from  our  mind,  things  in  the  depths  of  our  heart  beyond  our  own  power  of  clear 
discernment.  This  clear  condemnation  of  ourselves,  involving  the  weightier  and  more 
terrible  condemnation  of  God,  is  not  to  be  taken  as  equivalent  to  want  of  assurance, 
which  only  goes  thus  far — ^that  the  evidences  do  not  warrant  a  clear  judgment  in  our 
favour.  This  want  of  assurance,  which  not  a  few  Christians  have,  is  a  painful  state, 
which  should  stimulate  to  a  laying  firm  hold  upon  Christ,  in  whom  all  our  interests  are 
secured.  (2)  Bliss  of  a  heart  that  does  not  condemn.  "  Beloved,  if  our  heart  condemn 
UB  not,  we  have  boldness  toward  God."  In  view  of  his  now  stating  their  case  and  hig 
own  case,  he  calls  them  "  beloved."  We  look  into  our  hearts,  and,  with  an  honest  desire 
to  know  the  truth,  we  cannot  come  to  the  conclusion  that  we  stand  in  an  uncovenanted 
relationship  to  God.  With  the  traces  that  there  are  of  sin,  there  would  seem  to  be  also 
traces  of  a  work  of  grace  going  on  in  the  heart.  This  may  not  amount  to  full  assur- 
ance ;  but,  in  so  far  as  it  is  present,  we  do  not  need  to  look  up  to  God  with  fear.  We 
are  conscious  of  having  the  justifying  judgment  of  OtoA,  of  being  children  of  God ;  and 
we  can  look  up  with  holy  boldness  to  our  Father.  2.  Privilege  of  being  heard.  "  And 
whatsoever  we  ask,  we  receive  of  him,  because  we  keep  his  commandments,  and  do  the 
things  that  are  pleasing  in  his  sight."  One  form  which  our  boldness  takes  is  asking. 
We  are  full  of  wants ;  and  it  is  natural  for  us,  in  the  consciousness  of  our  sonship, 
to  express  our  wants  to  our  Father.  We  go  upon  the  ground  of  our  covenant  relation- 
ship in  pleading.  "  Preserve  my  soul ;  for  I  am  holy :  0  thou  my  God,  save  thy  servant 
that  trusteth  in  thee."  "  Wilt  thou  not  revive  us  again,  that  thy  people  may  rejoice 
in  thee  ?  "  We  ask  not  always  with  the  full  knowledge  of  what  we  really  need,  but 
with  the  reservation  that  respect  may  be  had  by  God  to  our  real  need.  And  whatso- 
ever we  thus  ask,  we  receive  of  him.  He  constantly  blesses  us  out  of  his  boundless 
stores.  There  is  a  ladder  of  communication  between  us  and  heaven,  upon  which  the 
angels  of  God  ascend  and  descend.  We  are  heard,  not  apart  from  obedience.  "  If 
I  regard  iniquity  in  my  heart,  the  Lord  will  not  hear  me."  We  must  be  conscious 
of  an  honest  intention  to  bring  our  life  into  agreement  with  our  prayers.  It  is  only 
when  we  keep  his  commandments  and  do  the  things  that  are  pleasing  in  his  sight,  that 
we  have  that  boldness  in  asking  which  God  rewards.  Added  explanation.  "  And  thi*! 
is  his  commandment,  that  we  should  believe  in  the  Name  of  his  Son  Jesus  Christ,  an<^ 
love  one  another,  even  as  he  gave  us  commandment.",  He  would  leave  no  doubt  as 
to  what  he  means.  The  conunandment  is  one  in  two  parts.  The  first  part  of  the 
commandment  is  that  we  believe  in  the  Name  of  his  Son  Jesus  Christ.  This  may  be 
said  to  be  his  full  Name.  He  was  the  historical  Jesus,  who  stood  in  an  essential  relation- 
ship to  God  as  his  Son,  and  was  sent  forth  to  do  his  saving  work.  Tliat  is  the  blessed 
import  of  the  Name  here  given  to  our  Lord.  His  nature  has  thus  been  declared ;  and 
what  we  are  commanded  to  do  is  to  trust  in  the  Name.  We  are,  as  sinners,  to  trust 
in  the  Name  of  him  who  has  gloriously  wrought  out  salvation  for  us.  And  what 
a  Name  to  trust  in  I  Not  the  name  of  one  who  can  love  a  little,  and  can  have  no 
saving  merit  to  transfer ;  but  the  Name  of  him  who  manifested  the  infinite  desire  of  God 
for  our  salvation,  and,  in  labour  and  in  hiding  of  the  Father's  face,  acquired  infinite  merit 
for  transference  to  us.  The  second  part  of  the  commandment  follows  on  the  first.  It 
is  loving  one  another,  and  the  manver  is  added  (as  commanded  by  Christ) — which 
is  loving  one  another  as  he  has  loved  us  (John  xv.  12).  He  in  whom  we  trust 
commands  in  accordance  with  his  own  nature,  commands  in  accordance  with  his  owb 
example.  We  cannot  trust  in  him  and  not  love;  and  thus  there  is  virtually  one 
eommandment.    3.  Frivilege  of  communion.    "  And  he  that  keepeth  bis  command- 


102 


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  JOHN.    [cH.iv.l— 21 


merits  abideth  in  him,  and  he  in  him."  The  apostle  here  recurs  to  the  key-note  of  th« 
Epistle.  When,  trusting  in  Christ,  we  lore  one  another,  we  keep  the  way  clear  for 
communion  with  God.  Transition  to  a  new  section.  "  And  hereby  we  know  that 
he  abideth  in  us,  by  the  Spirit  which  he  gave  us."  The  pledge  of  communion  is 
possession  of  the  Spirit,  which  is  unfolded  in  the  following  paragraph.^-B.  F. 


EXPOSITION, 


CHAPTER  IV. 


Ver.  1 — oh.  y.  12, — (2)  The  source  of  nn- 
$Mp.    Possession  of  the  Spirit. 

Vers.  1 — 6. — Confession  of  the  Incarna- 
tion is  the  assurance  that  the  Spirit  of  God, 
who  is  the  Spirit  of  truth,  is  working  in  us, 
and  not  the  spirit  of  error.  The  passage 
seems  clearly  to  teach  that  there  are  two 
rival  influences  contending  for  power  over 
the  spirits  of  men.  We  must  test  men's 
spirits  to  see  whether  they  are  organs  of  the 
Spirit  of  truth  or  of  the  spirit  of  error. 

Ver.  1. — Beloved  (as  in  oh.  ii.  28  and  iii.  18, 
the  apostle  again  breaks  out  with  a  personal 
appeal  into  an  earnest  exhortation  suggested 
by  the  statement  just  made),  prove  the 
spirits  {SoKiiiiC^re  ra  irvei/mTa).  "The 
spirits"  are  principles  and  tendencies  in 
religion :  these  need  to  be  tested,  for  earnest- 
ness and  fervour  are  no  guarantee  of  truth. 
And  to  test  these  principles  is  the  duty  of 
the  individual  Christian  as  well  as  of  the 
Church  in  its  official  capaoii?.  Just  as 
every  Athenian  was  subjected  to  an  ex- 
amination (SoKifioaia)  as  to  his  origin  and 
character  before  he  could  hold  ofSce,  so  the 
spirit  of  every  religious  teacher  must  be 
examined  before  his  teaoliing  can  be  ac- 
cepted. This  is  no  useless  precaution; 
because,  as  Christ  has  come  forth  (l(cX4\u0c) 
from  God  (John  xvi.  28 ;  comp.  John  viii. 
42;  xiii.  3;  xvi.  27),  many  false  prophets 
have  come  forth  (ef  cAi7\tJ0a(ri)  from  the  spirit 
of  error.  But  perhaps  "have  gone  forth 
into  the  world"  means  no  more  than  "  have 
displayed  themselves"  in  publicum  pro- 
dierunt.  There  is  probably  no  reference  to 
the  false  teachers  having  "  gone  forth  from 
va"  (ch.  ii.  19).  Besides  Cerinthus  and 
otlier  Gnostics,  there  were  the  Nicolaitanes, 
astrologers,  professors  of  magic,  and  dealers 
in  charms,  some  of  which  seem  to  have  had 
their  origin  in  Ephesus,  for  they  were  isnown 
as  "  Ephesian  letters."  Apollonius  of  Tyana 
was  eagerly  welcomed  at  Ephesus,  and  it  is 
not  impossible  that  his  visit  took  place 
during  St.  John's  lifetime. 

Ver.  2. — This  verse  contains  the  mnin 
lubjeot  of  the  section.  To  confess  the  In- 
carnation is  to  prove  that  one  draws  one's 
inspiration  from  God  through  his  Spirit. 
Know  ye ;  or,  recognize  ye  (yivdaxtre),  may  be 
3itherlmperative,in  harmony  with  "believe" 


and  "prove"  (ver.  1),  or  indicative,  in 
harmony  with  *•  we  know"  (ch.  iii  16,  [19,1 
84). 

Ver.  .<?. — Every  spirit  (not  so  much  tlie 
personal  teacher  as  tlie  principle  or  tendency 
of  the  doctrine)  which  oonfesseth  not  Jesus. 
This  is  the  true  reading,  the  words  Xpurr^v 
if  aapKl  i\n\vS6Ttt  being  a  spvious  addition 
&om  ver.  1.  As  so  often,  St.  John  states 
the  case  both  negatively  and  positively  for 
emphasis.  There  is  an  ancient  variant 
reading  of  much  interest,  probably  of  Latin 
origin,  which  can  be  traced  beck  to  the 
second  century,  being  known  to  Tertullian 
and  Irenasus.  For  /th  ii^ohnyet  rhv  'liiaouv 
it  gives  \iti  rbv  'In/row,  solvit  Jeium.  This 
corruption  of  the  text  was  evidently  aimed 
at  those  who  distinguished  the  man  Jesus 
from  the  Divine  Christ,  and  thus  "dis- 
solved "  his  Personality.  The  Greek  manu- 
scripts are  quite  unanimous  against  the 
reading.  Is  not  of  Qodj  and  therefore  is  of 
the  e^  one  (see  on  oh.  iii.  10).  Those 
professedly  Christian  teachers  are  ever 
among  the  most  dangerous  who  treat  the 
Divinity  of  Jesus  Christ  as  more  or  less  of 
an  open  question,  or  as  a  matter  of  indif- 
ference. Ti  ToC  imxpWov  probably  means 
"the  spirit  of  antichrist,"  understanding 
vreS/ia  from  the  preceding  clause  rather 
than  (quite  vaguely)  "  the  characteristic  of 
antichrist"  (see  on  eh.  ii.  18,  to  which 
passage,  however,  omiKdoTe  does  not  refer, 
but  to  Christian  teaching  in  general).  And 
now  it  is  in  the  world  &eady.  This  is  an 
independent  statement;  St.  John  does  not 
say  that  they  had  heard  this  previously. 

Ver.  4. — Ye  are  of  God.  The  i/ifU  is  in 
emphatic  opposition  to  the  false  teachers 
(comp.  ch,  ii.'20).  Tliey  are  on  one  side, 
and  the  apostle's  readers  on  the  other,  and 
it  is  from  tliis  standpoint  that  they  are  tr 
"  prove  the  spirits."  St.  John  knows  nothing 
of  any  neutral  position  from  which  the  Spirit 
of  truth  and  the  spirit  of  error  can  be  criti- 
cized "  with  absolute  impartiality."  "  He 
tliat  is  not  wltli  me  is  against  me."  This 
assumed  neutral  position  is  already  within 
the  domain  of  error.  Ye  have  overcome 
them.  "  Them  "  means  the  false  teachers ; 
but  in  what  sense  have  St.  John's  ^'little 
children"  overcome  them?  He  may  be 
speaking  by  anticipation ;  oonfldent  of  the 
viotory,  h^  writes  of  it  m  an  accomplivbej 


en.  IV.  1^21.]    THE  PIEST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  JOHN. 


lOS 


fact  (comp,  John  xvi.  33).  But  it  is 
bettor  to  take  the  statement  literally.  By 
refusing  to  listen  to  the  false  teachers  (ch. 
X.  8)  the  sheep  have  conquered  them :  the 
rseduoers  have  "gone  out-'  (oh.  ii.  19),  un- 
able to  hold  their  own  within  the  fold.  Nor 
is  this  wonderful :  the  one  side  have  God 
with  them,  the  other  Satan.  'O  iy  r^  K6<rfuf 
here  is  equivalent  to  i  &px<iv  toS  kSit/iov 
roirov  (Luke  xii.  31).  Just  as  Ood  is  in 
believers  and  they  in  God,  so  the  world  is 
in  the  evil  one  (ch,  t.  19)  and  the  evil  one 
in  it. 

Ver.  5. — The  source  of  their  character 
and  their  teaching  is  the  world;  from  it 
they  derive  their  inspiration ;  and  of  course 
the  world  listens  to  them.  Once  again  (see 
on  ch.  iii.  23)  we  have  an  echo  of  Christ's 
last  discourses  :  "  If  ye  were  of  the  world, 
the  world  would  love  its  own"  (John  xv. 
19). 

Ver.  6.— The  opposite  case  stated  again, 
but  not  In  the  same  form  as  in  ver.  4.  The 
"we"  here  is  not  the  same  as  the  "ye" 
there,  with  the  mere  addition  of  the  writer. 
"  We  "  here  seems  to  mean  the  apostles.  If 
it  is  considered  "broad  enough  to  include 
•11  who  have  truly  received  Christ  by 
faith,"  it  leaves  no  one  to  be  the  hearers. 
"He  that  knoweth  God  heareth  us"  will 
mean  that  we  hear  ourselves,  if  "  us  "  means 
all  believers.  But  St.  John's  meaning  seems 
rather  to  be  that  he  who  acquires  knotoledge 
(4  yiy:iffKav)  of  God  is  ready  to  listen  to 
further  apostolic  instruction.  From  this 
(4k  rodrov)  need  not  be  confined  to  ver.  6 ;  it 
may  apply  to  the  whole  passage.  For  the 
Spirit  of  truth,  comp.  John  xiv.  17;  xv,  26; 
»vi.  13. 

Vers.  7 — 21. — God  is  Lore,  and  love  is  the 
Burest  test  of  birth  from  God,  Krom  ch.  iii. 
11,  12  St.  John  renews  his  exhortations  to 
love,  this  time  at  greater  length  and  in 
closer  connexion  with  the  other  great  sub- 
ject of  this  second  half  of  the  Bpistle,  the 
birth  from  God, 

Ver.  7. — Beloved  (see  on  ver.  1).  The 
uddress  is  specially  suitable  where  the  sub- 
ject is  love.  As  before,  we  must  not  Iqok 
for  the  chief  purport  of  the  section  in  the 
exhortation  with  which  it  opens.  Just  as 
"prove  the  spirits"  is  subordinate  to  "every 
•pirit  which  confesseth,"  etc.,  so  "  let  us  love 
one  another"  is  subordinate  to  "God  is 
Love."  (For  the  history  and  meaning  pf 
the  specially  Christian  term  aydvri,  see 
Trench's  *  Synonyms  of  New  Testament.') 

Ver.  8. — In  giving  the  opposite,  St.  John 
again  varies  the  thought,  this  time  very 
remarkably.  Instead  of  "  love  is  of  God 
(veri  7),  we  have  "God  is  Love"— a  far 
deeper  thought;  and  instead  of  "kuoweth 
not  Q<)d,"  we  have  "knew  not  God,"  or,  as 
wa  should  sa^  in  Sin^lish, "  h«ith  not  kRPWn  " 


or  "never  knew  God."  The  man's  not 
loving  his  brother  shows  that  in  no  real 
sense  has  he  ever  in  the  past  known  Ood  ; 
he  is  of  the  world  (ch.  iii.  1),  not  of  God. 
We  must  beware  of  watering  down  "God  is 
Love  "  into  "  God  is  loving,"  or  even  "  Ood 
of  all  beings  is  the  most  loving."  Love  la 
not  a  mere  attribute  of  God ;  like  light,  it  ia 
his  very  nature.  As  "  God  as  Light  "  sami 
up  the  Being  of  God  intellectually  con- 
sidered, BO  "God  is  Love"  sums  up  the 
same  on  the  moral  side.  Only  when  this 
strong  meaning  is  given  to  the  statement 
does  St.  John's  argument  hold,  that  "ha 
that  loveth  not  knoweth  not  God."  A  man 
who  has  no  idea  of  any  one  of  the  attribulei 
of  God,  as  order,  or  beauty,  or  power,  oi 
justice,  has  an  imperfect  knowledge  of  Ood 
But  he  who  has  no  idea  of  love  has  rko 
knowledge  of  God,  for  love  ia  Mmself.  God 
alone  loves  in  the  fullest  and  highest  sensa 
of  the  word ;  for  he  alone  loves  with  perfect 
disinterestedness.  It  is  love  which  alone 
can  explain  creation.  Why  should  a  Being 
perfectly  blessed  in  himself  create  other 
beings,  but  to  bestow  a  blessing  upon  them  t 

Ver.  9,— The  verse  is  very  similar  to  ch. 
iii.  16,  "in  this"  referring  to  what  follows, 
and  introducing  a  concrete  and  crucial 
example  of  love.  Beware  of  the  inadequate 
and  misleading  rendering  "  towards  Ufl  "  for 
ip  riiuv.  It  means  in  us,  and  belongs  to 
"  manifested,"  as  John  ix.  4  plainly  sbows. 
We  must  not  connect  together  "  the  love  of 
God  in  us,"  still  less  "  the  love  of  God  toward 
ns,"  OS  one  idea.  "  In  us  "  means  "  in  our 
case,"  and  the  whole  may  be  paraphrased  ; 
"  A  transcendent  manifestation  of  the  love 
of  God  has  been  made  in  regard  to  us,  in 
that  he  hath  sent,"  eto.  The  verse  might 
serve  as  a  summary  of  St.  John's  GospeL 
The  word  novoysviis  as  applied  to  Christ  is 
peculiar  to  St.  John ;  it  and  ^iiamnev  are  the 
key-words  of  the  passage.  "  This  is  lovo 
indeed;  it  is  his  only  Son  whojn  he  haa 
sent,  and  he  has  sent  him  to  give  ns  life" 
Note  the  double  article — "  his  Son,  yes,  hia 
Only  Begotten." 

Ver.  10. — Let  no  man  think  that  any 
higher  manifestation  of  love  than  this  can 
be  found.  It  is  not  in  any  love  of  man  to 
his  Maker,  but  in  his  Maker's  love  to  him, 
that  the  real  nature  of  love  can  be  perceived. 
Note  the  change  from  perfect  to  aorist; 
oireo-ToXKcv  in  ver.  9  expresses  the  permanent 
results  of  the  mission ;  aitiaTuMy  bore 
states  tho  mission  as  an  accomplished  fact 
complete  in  itself.  (For  lKaitu.6s,  see  on  ch. 
ii,  2.) 

Ver.  11. — Bolo'''«d  introduces  a  solemn 
exhortation,  as  in  vers.  1,  7.  The  "if" 
implies  no  uncertainty  (see  pn  cb.  ▼•  9); 
it  puts  the  fact  more  gen^,  but  not  mora 
doubtfnlly,  than  «  aiaoe."  li?  "  ao  "  (tiko^ 


104 


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  JOHN.    [ch.  it.  1—21 


covers  both  the  quality  and  the  quantity  of 
the  love.  Kal  belongs  solely  to  rint7s :  "  we 
alto  on  our  part  ought  to  love  one  another." 
We  should  have  expected  as  the  apodosis, 
*'  we  also  ought  to  love  Ood."  But  this  link 
in  the  thought  the  apostle  omits  as  self- 
evident,  and  passes  on  to  state  what  neces- 
■arily  follows  from  it.  In  ver.  12  lie  shows 
how  loving  God  involves  loving  one's  fellow- 
men  (oomp.  ch.  ii.  5  for  a  similar  passage 
over  an  intermediate  link). 

Ver.  12.— H'o  one  hath  •ver  yet  beheld 
6od.  Beiv  stands  first  for  emphasis,  and 
without  the  article,  as  meaning  the  Divine 
Being  rather  than  the  Father  in  particular  : 
"With  regard  to  God — no  one  hath  ever 
yet  beheld  him"  (jeBeaTat,  stronger  than 
iiipaxev).  Why  does  St.  John  introduce 
this  statement  here?  Not,  of  course,  as 
implying  that  to  love  an  invisible  Being  is 
impossible;  but  that  the  only  security  for 
geuuine  and  lasting  love  in  such  a  case  is 
to  love  that  which  visibly  represents  liim. 
Seeing  that  God  is  invisible,  his  abiding  in 
us  can  be  shown  only  by  his  essential  cha- 
racteristic being  exhibited  in  us,  i.e.  by  our 
showing  similar  self-sacrificing  love.  'H 
leyiiTTi  airoS  can  scarcely  mean  God's  love 
for  us ;  for  how  can  our  loving  one  another 
make  his  love  perfect?  Nor  j-et  vaguely, 
"  the  relation  of  love  between  us  and  God;" 
but,  as  is  ch.  ii.  5,  our  love  for  him.  Our 
love  towards  God  is  perfected  and  brought 
to  maturity  by  the  exercise  of  love  towards 
our  brethren  in  him. 

Ver.  13. — Almost  identical  with  ch,  lii 
24.  In  vers.  1 — 7  the  apostle  says  that 
confession  of  the  Incarnation  proves  pos- 
session of  the  Spirit;  and  in  ver.  12  that 
love  of  the  bretmren  proves  the  indwelling 
of  God.  He  now  (ver.  13)  goes  on  to  say 
that  possession , of  the  Spirit  proves  tlie 
indwelling  of  God ;  and  (ver.  15)  that  con- 
fession of  the  Incarnation  proves  the  same. 
So  that  these  four  facts — confession  of  the 
Incarnation,  possession  of  the  Spirit,  love 
of  our  fellow-men,  and  indwelling  of  God — 
mutually  involve  one  another.  St.  John 
does  not  say,  "  He  has  given  us  bis  Spirit," 
but  "of  hia  Spirit  (ek  toS  Ui/fifiaroi  outoD)." 
It  is  impossible  for  us  to  receive  more  than 
a  portion ;  the  fiilness  of  the  Spirit  is  pos- 
sessed by  Christ  alone.  In  John  i.  16  we 
have  a  similar  use  of  4it  (comp.  John  xii.  3). 

Ver.  14. — And  we  have  beheld,  and  do 
bear  witness.  The  emphatio  ^/xeli  clearly 
means  "we  apostles;"  and  "beheld"  (rffleo- 
fLiBa)  implies  contemplation  with  bodily 
eyes,  as  in  ver.  12.  The  invisible  God  can 
be  only  "  invisibly  seen  "  by  the  pure  heart. 
But  the  incarnate  Son  has  been  visibly 
contemplated:  and  to  bear  witness  of  this 
fact  was  the  very  ofSce  of  an  apostle  (John 
XV.  27;   Aot»  i  8>    The  language  of  this 


verse,  as  of  ch.  i.  1,  8,  would  be  strained 
and  rather  unreal  in  one  who  had  not  seen 
the  Christ  in  the  flesh.  Note  that  trair^pa 
has  no  article,  and  is  not  in  mere  apposition, 
but  is  a  second  predicate:  "The  Father  hath 
sent  [see  on  ver.  10]  the  Son  at  Saviour,"  t.e. 
to  be  such.  "  The  world,"  as  commonly  in 
St.  John's  writings,  is  specially  the  nnre- 
generate  among  the  human  race. 

Ver.  15.— Whosoever  confesseth  (i»  &» 
ilio\oy!iaji').  This  rendering  seems  prefer- 
able to  "  whosoever  shall  confess  "  or  "  shall 
have  confessed."  The  exact  meaning  is, 
"Whosoever  has  once  for  all  taken  up  the 
position  of  confessing."  Ver.  14  gave  the 
case  of  the  apostles ;  this  gives  that  of  those 
who  accept  their  witness.  In  the  next  verse 
we  have  that  of  both  together. 

Ver.  16. — And  we  have  come  to  know  and 
believe.  Both  perfects  are  virtually  presents, 
expressing  the  present  continuance  of  a 
condition  begun  in  the  past :  "  We  know 
and  continue  to  believe."  Experience  and 
faith  are  intimately  connected;  and  some- 
times the  one  precedes,  sometimes  the  other 
(John  vi.  69).  As  in  ver.  9,  eV  ^uiv  should 
be  rendered  in  us,  not  "to  us  "  or  "  toward 
us;"  and  here  also  the  interpretation,  "in 
our  case,"  is  certainly  possible,  and  perhaps 
safer.  But  the  meaning  may  be  that  the 
object  of  our  knowledge  and  faith  is  that 
portion  of  his  own  love  which  God  has  in 
us.  It  is  "  in  us,"  and  is  exercised  towards 
him  and  onr  brethren,  but  in  reality  it  is 
his — it  is  himself  abiding  in  us.  In  either 
case  love  is  the  object  of  our  faith.  Thus 
love  is  not  only  the  true  note  of  the  Church 
(John  xiii.  35),  it  is  also  the  Church's  creed. 
The  second  half  of  the  verse  restates  the 
main  proposition  of  this  section  with  a  view 
to  further  development. 

Ver.  17. — This  verse  raises  various  ques- 
tions which  can  scarcely  be  answered  with 
certainty.  Does  "herein"  {4y  roirtf)  look 
back  to  ver.  16?  or  forwards  to  "that" 
(ii/a)?  or  forwards  to  "because"  (Sn)? 
Again,  does  "with  us"  (/nefl'  rifiiiv)  belong 
to  "is  made  perfect"  (TereAcWni)?  or  to 
"love"  (t!  iyimi)J  John  xv.  8  inclines 
us  to  refer  "herein"  to  "that"  (Iva);  and 
"with  us"  or  "among  us"  goes  better  with 
the  verb  than  with  the  subject:  "Herein 
has  love  reached  its  perfection  among  ua 
Christians,  i.e.  in  the  Chnrob,  that  we  have 
confidence  in  the  day  of  judgment."  This 
is  the  perfection  of  love,  to  have  no  fear. 
The  3ti  introduces  the  reason  for  this  confi- 
dence: its  b.isis  is  our  likeness  to  Christ, 
especially  in  being  united  to  the  Father 
(John  xvii.  21,  23,  26).  Compare  "  even  at 
he  is  pure "  (oh.  iii.  3),  and  "  even  as  he  ii 
righteous "  (oh.  iii.  7) :  Koflii  ixtivos  in  all 
three  cases. 

Ver    18.— Love   implies  attraction,  few 


ea.  IT.  1—21.]    tHE  PlRST  JiPtSTLE  GENEtlAL  OF  JOAN. 


104 


repulsion ;  therefore  fear  exists  not  in  love. 
Lore  here  means  the  principle  of  love  in 
general ;  it  must  not  be  limited  to  God's 
love  to  UB,  or  our  love  to  God,  or  our  love 
of  the  brethren.  Love  and  fear  coexist  only 
where  love  is  not  yet  perfect.  Perfect  love 
will  absolutely  exclude  fear  as  surely  as 
perfect  union  excludes  all  separation.  It 
is  self-interested  love  that  fears;  pure  and 
unselfish  love  has  no  fear.  Yet  nothing  but 
perfect  love  must  be  allowed  to  cast  out 
fear.  Otherwise  this  te.xt  might  be  made 
an  excuse  for  taking  the  most  unwarrant- 
able liberties  with  Almighty  God.  To 
cease  to  fear  without  attaining  to  perfect 
love  is  to  be  irreverent  and  presumptuous. 
Hence  the  apostle  is  once  more  pointing  out 
an  ideal  to  which  Christians  must  aspire, 
but  to  which  no  one  attains  in  this  life. 
There  is  a  fear,  as  Bede  points  out,  which 
prepares  the  way  for  love,  and  which  comes 
only  to  depart  again  when  its  work  is  done. 
Because  fear  hath  punishment.  K6\a(ns 
must  not  be  rendered  indefinitely  "suffer- 
ing" or  "torment"  (Matt.  xxv.  46;  Ezek. 
xliii.  11 ;  Wisd.  xi.  14;  2  Mace.  iv.  38).  But 
Ki\o.<riv  ix^i  does  not  mean  "deserves"  or 
"  will  receive  punishment,"  but  quite  lite- 
lally  "has  it."  It  is  the  day  of  judgment 
and  fear  in  reference  to  that  day  that  is 
under  consideration ;  and  fear  of  punishment 
is  in  itself  punishment  by  anticipation. 
Note  the  i\\i  and  the  Sc,  introducing  a 
contrary  and  then  a  contrast  back  again: 
"  There  is  no  fear  in  love  ;  nay,  perfect  love 
casteth  out  fear:  but  he  that  habitually 
feareth  [present  participle]  is  not  made 
perfect  in  love."  The  dread  of  punishment 
may  deter  men  from  sin ;  but  it  cannot  lead 
them  to  righteousness.  For  that  we  need 
either  the  sense  of  duty  or  the  feeling  of  love. 
Ver.  19. — We  love.  The  aMr  is  spurious, 
and  is  not  to  be  understood:  tlie  love  is 
again  quite  general.    "We  have  this  prin- 


elple  of  love."  To  take  ayarrSinfv  as  sub 
juuotive  in  the  seuao  "  let  us  love "  is  less 
forcible.  St.  John  states  as  a  fact  what 
ought  to  be  a  fact.  "  We  Christians  do  not 
fear,  but  love.  Yet  this  is  no  credit  to  ns. 
After  God's  love  in  giving  his  Son  for  us 
it  would  be  monstrous  not  to  love." 

Ver.  20. — Ebrard  and  others  make  a  new 
section  begin  here;  but  vers.  21,  22  are  iu 
intimate  connexion  with  what  precedes. 
What  is  this  love  of  which  the  apostle  Ims 
been  speaking?  Is  it  the  love  of  God  or  of 
our  fellow-men?  Both  ;  love  of  our  brethren 
is  organically  bound  up  with  love  of  God. 
To  love  God  and  hate  one's  brother  is  im- 
possible. Sight,  though  not  necessary  to 
affection,  aids  it;  and  it  is  therefore  eiisier 
to  love  men  than  God.  If  a  man  fails  iu 
the  easier,  will  he  succeed  in  the  harder  ? 
Moreover,  to  hate  one's  brother  is  to  hate 
God.  "Wiioso  rejecteth  you  rejecteth  me, 
and  whoso  rejecteth  me  rejecteth  him  that 
sent  me."  Note  the  negative,  /«f  not  ail. 
St.  John  has  no  definite  person  in  view  »a 
&  ovK  ayairuvt  but  any  one  who  may  happen 
to  be  of  such  a  character,  6  /xii  kyawav.  As 
before,  o'  /i^  oyaKoiv  and  6  fittrcov  are  treated 
as  equivalent;  there  is  no  neutral  term 
between  "  love  "  and  "  hate." 

Ver.  21.— That  he  who  loveth  God  love 
his  brother  also.  This  is  the  great  com- 
mandment, on  which  hang  all  the  Law  and 
the  prophets  (Matt.  xxii.  37,  39;  Luke  x. 
27 ;  John  xiii.  34),  and,  whatever  we  mn y 
think  of  the  relation  between  seeing  :ni(l 
loving,  there  is  the  Divine  command  to  love, 
not  only  the  invisible  God,  but  the  visible 
brother  in  whom  the  invisible  God  dwells. 
Bight  may  hinder  as  well  as  help ;  it  is 
hard  to  love  what  is  squalid  and  hideous. 
In  such  cases  let  us  remember  the  Divine 
command;  let  us  remember  the  Diviiiily 
which  even  the  most  debased  humanity 
oontains. 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  1 — 3. — Tests  of  trite  or  false  prophets.  Connecting  link :  The  apostle  had  just 
declared  that,  in  a  life  of  obedience  to  and  of  like  spirit  with  God,  we  had  a  twofold 
geal — firstly,  that  we  are  of  the  truth;  and  secondly,  that  God  abidetk  in  us.  But  it  was 
not  to  be  supposed  that  all  this  would  remain  unimpugned  from  without,  however  clear 
it  might  be  to  the  spirit  within.  At  the  same  time,. we  are  not  to  be  easily  moved  from 
our  ground.  But  should  any  attempt  to  seduce  us  from  the  faith,  we  are  to  apply  to 
such  a  very  searching  test.  Hence  our  topic — Teachers  of  novelties  to  he  severely  tested. 
For  many  an  age  there  have  been  and  will  be  two  classes  of  men — one,  desirous  of 
uttering  any  new  fancy  that  seizes  them,  or  of  disputing  any  accepted  faith  which  they 
themselves  are  not  disposed  to  embrace ;  and  another,  equally  ready  to  listen  to  any 
novelty  in  doctrine  which  may  at  any  time  be  propounded  to  them.  Even  in  the  ago 
when  the  Apostle  John  wrote  this  letter,  "  many  false  prophets  "  had  "  gone  out  into 
the  world."  And  it  is  a  great  blessing  for  us  that  the  aged  apostle  took  occasion  from 
that  fact  (1)  to  administer  a  caution  against  a  too  ready  acceptance  of  any  new  prophet, 
and  (2)  to  supply  a  test,  at  ouoe  exciusire  and  inclusive,  which  might  serve  tU. 
Churches  for  all  timo. 


106  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  JOHN.    [cm.  iv.  1— 2L 

I.  The  eight  of  "  tktwo  thS  spirits  "  belongs  to  evebt  Chbishan,  and  v 
iKAiilENABLE.  A  Christian  is  under  no  obligation  to  let  any  new  prophet  gain  his 
acceptance  without  severely  testing  him.  1.  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  himself  hSi  never 
called  for  a  blind  acceptance  of  his  claims.  He  courted  inquiry.  He  repelled  objectors 
by  statements  of  infinite  dignity  and  power.  He  appealed  to  their  reason,  their  candour, 
and  tbeir  sense  of  right.  One  assertion  indeed  he  made  and  maintained — that  he  was 
the  Son  of  God  and  the  King  of  men.  This  was  the  sole  charge  which  led  him  to  the 
cross.  For  the  first  part  of  the  assertion  he  was  condemned  by  the  Sanhedrin,  as 
it  he  were  against  Moses ;  for  the  second  by  the  Soman  power,  as  if  he  were  the  rival 
of  Caesar.  But  no  fewer  than  six  difi'erent  lines  did  he  suggest  on  which  the  proof  of 
Ills  claims  might  be  tried.  (1)  His  character  (John  viii.  46).  (2)  His  works  (John 
xiv.  10,  11).  (3)  Prophecy  (Luke  xxiv.  27).  (4)  Testimony  (John  viii.  17,  18).  (5) 
His  resurrection  (John  ii.  19).  (6)  The  promise  of  the  Holy  Ghost  (Acts  i.  4).  2.  In 
receiving  the  Lord  Jesus,  believers,  whether  Jew  or  Gentile,  had  found  their  very 
strongest  prepossessions  in  an  opposite  direction  overborne  by  the  accumulated  force  of 
the  evidence  that  Jesus  was  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  God  (John  xx.  30,  31).  3.  The 
reception  of  Christ  as  a  living  and  reigning  Saviour  had  been  followed  by  a  new  and 
regenerated  social  life.  4.  Consequently,  it  could  never  be  right  to  consent  to  imperil 
all  this  at  the  bidding  of  any  new  prophet  that  might  arise,  until  they  had  submitted 
that  prophet  to  a  scrutiny  as  severe  and  as  searching  as  their  own  Lord  and  Master  had 
invited  when  he  called  for  the  adhesion  of  their  hearts.  The  reason  was  satisfied  when 
the  Christ  was  accepted  ;  and  if  any  further  claims  arise  the  reason  must  still  assert 
its  right  to  examine  them,  and  to  be  equally  satisfied  on  them  before  accepting  them. 
So  in  every  age.     New  critics  must  be  criticized. 

II.  There  is  one  uniform  test  to  which  the  "bpibits"  abb  to  be  brouoht. 
Note  here :  1.  The  point  to  be  tested — "  whether  they  are  of  God."  2.  The  one  point 
which  will  be  the  test  of  that — Do  they  or  do  they  not  confess  that  Jesus  Christ  is 
come  in  the  flesh  ?  i.e.  Do  they  in  all  their  teachings  maintain  the  honour  of  our  Lord 
Jesus,  as  the  incarnate  Son  of  God,  the  Saviour  of  the  world,  the  Christ,  the  Lord  and 
King  of  men  ?  Fes  or  no  I  It  is  a  plain  issue.  And  it  is  manifestly  reasonable  to 
compel  men  to  try  the  whole  question  at  issue,  as  to  the  truth  or  otherwise  of  any  new 
prophet  on  a  point  so  distinct  and  so  sharply  defined.  For :  (1)  It  is  the  point.  For  if 
the  Lord  Jesus  is  all  that  he  claimed  to  be,  Christianity  stands.  If  he  bs  not,  it  falls 
with  a  crash.  (2)  The  claims  of  Christ  are  so  vast  that  they  stand  absolutely  alone. 
(3)  Some  point  of  invalidity  in  them  must  be  shown  before  those  claims  can  be  dis- 
placed. (4)  This  never  has  been,  never  will  be,  never  can  be  done.  (5)  Hence  any 
•'  spirit "  that  would  relegate  Christ  to  an  inferior  place,  is  to  be  rejected  forthwith. 

III.  Applying  this  test,  we  hate  the  extent  and  the  limit  of  the  Chbistiam 
BBOTHERHOOD.  1.  If  he  confesses  the  glory  of  Christ  as  the  incarnate  Son,  he  is  "  of 
God."  He  may  not  "  follow  with  us; "  he  may  be  uncertain  and  inaccurate  on  minor 
points.  He  may  come  in  no  line  of  succession,  and  have  felt  the  imposition  of  no 
priestly  hand ;  still,  if  he  avows  "  the  Christ,"  he  is  "  of  God."  2.  If  he  disavows  the 
Christ,  he  is  "not  of  God,"  however  plausible  his  pretensions  or  captivating  his 
words.  Without  the  Christ,  no  Christian  truth  stands.  "In  him  all  things  consist" 
(see  Greek);  Col.  L  11, 

There  may  indeed  be — there  are — demurs  against  drawing  the  division  so  sharply 
as  yes  or  no^true  or  false  ;  and  against  the  applicability  of  a  like  test  to  every  age. 
E.g.  it  is  objected :  1.  It  may  surely  be  contended  that,  through  prepossession  on  the 
part  of  the  sacred  writers,  embellishments  may  have  gathered  round  the  history  of 
a  true  Jesus,  without  insinuating  that  either  it  or  he  was  absolutely  false.  We 
reply :  The  theory  of  prepossession  will  not  hold ;  for  the  supreme  testimony  of  all  the 
New  Testament  is  to  the  resurrection  of  Christ :  as  for  the  Jew,  it  was  most  violently 
contrary  to  all  his  prepossessions  that  the  one  whom  his  own  nation  hanged  on  a  tree 
should  have  risen  from  the  dead ;  and  as  for  the  Gentile,  it  was  equally  contrary  to  his 
prepossessions  to  believe  in  a  resurrection  at  all  1  It  is  objected :  2.  We  admire  Christ 
extremely ;  we  honour  him  as  the  Prince  of  teachers.  In  fact,  no  praise  of  him  can  be 
excessive,  if  he  be  but  put  on  the  merely  human  platform.  We  reply :  That  inter- 
mediate position  cannot  consistently  be  held.  So  strongly  was  this  felt  at  the  Qctset, 
that  the  watchword  of  the  pagan  camp  was,  "Jesus  Christ  is  an^thevaa}"  that  9f  thf 


OH.  IT.  1—21.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GEKEBAL  OF  JOHN.  lOT 

Christian  camp,  "Jesus  Christ  is  Lord."  Therd  is  no  halting-place  between  the  two.  If 
is  asked :  3.  Is  there,  then,  to  be  no  pirogress  in  the  course  of  the  ages  ?  is  all  other 
science  to  advance  and  Christian  knowledge  remain  stationary,  so  that  in  the  nineteenth 
century  the  same  test  of  truth  applies  as  at  the  first?  We  reply:  Yes;  there  is  to  be 
progress  in  the  truth,  but  not  from  it.  Jesus  Christ  is  what  he  is.  He  is  what  he 
claims  to  be.  A  thousand  millions  of  ages  cannot  alter  that  fact.  Jesus  Christ  is  "  the 
same  yesterday,  and  to-day,  and  for  ever."  Hence  at  any  point  of  time,  however  distant, 
whoever  withholds  from  him  his  due,  cannot  be  "of  God."  Note:  1.  The  "trying 
the  spirits,"  as  prophets  and  teachers,  is  not  by  any  means  to  be  confounded  with  an 
attempt  to  decide  or  to  sit  in  judgment  upon  their  spiritual  position  individually,  as  in 
the  sight  of  God.  To  their  own  Master  they  stand  or  fall.  We  judge  their  teachings, 
not  them.  2.  At  the  same  time,  any  one  who  comes  to  teach  with  a  view  of  displacing 
Jesus  from  the  throne  of  our  hearts,  must  be  prepared  to  undergo  a  scrutinizing 
ordeal.  We  can  criticize  as  well  as  he,  and  we  will.  3.  In  repelling  attacks  on  the 
Christian  faith,  our  wisdom  lies  in  (1)  setting  minor  matters  in  due  relation  to  the  rest, 
and  then  (2)  remaining  calmly  in  our  stronghold,  compelling  an  onset  there,  if  any  be 
ventured  on  at  all.  4.  Our  attitude,  perpetually,  must  be  this :  "  We  know  we  hate 
a  Saviour,  who  has  saved  us,  who  is  saving  others  by  us,  and  who  is  perpetually 
proving  what  he  is  by  causing  the  lame  to  walk,  the  blind  to  see,  and  the  dead  to  Uve ; 
and  you  must  displace  these  facts  before  you  attempt  to  disturb  our  faith." 

Vers.  1.— 6. — Hie  powtf  of  trying  the  spirits.'  In  the  preceding  homily  we  laid 
stress  on  the  duty  here  indicated  of  "  trying  the  spirits,"  and  also  on  the  test  with 
which  we  are  furnished  for  applying  to  them  through  all  time.  We  moreover  there 
referred  almost  exclusively  to  them  as  ^cvScnr/iaft^Tat  rather  than  as  vyti/iara.  But 
a  dose  study  of  all  the  clauses  in  these  six  verses  will  disclose  to  us  teachings  of  great 
vividness  and  power  concerning  the  false  prophets  themselves — the  point  from  whence 
they  started,  the  mission  on  which  they  are  sent,  the  region  to  which  they  are  bound, 
and  the  spirit  with  which  they  are  inspired.  In  fact,  the  apostle  views  their  embassy 
and  action  as  a  part  of  the  great  mystery  of  "  antichrist,"  which  had  been  foretold, 
which  had  actually  made  ifh  appearance,  and  which  would  have  to  be  fought  against 
and  overcome.  It  is  the  right  and  the  duty  of  Christians  to  "try  the  spirits"  (as  we 
have  seen).  But  they  are  uot  left  to  go  to  this  warfare  at  their  own  charges,  or  with- 
out being  adequately  empowered.  To  them  the  right  belongs,  to  them  the  duty 
attaches,  because  to  them  the  power  is  given.  Let  us  see  how,  in  the  paragraph  before 
us,  this  is  shown.    Topic — The  power  cf  trying  the  spirits  a  Divine  bestowment, 

I.  TaonoH  sfibits  are  visible  as  such,  they  mat  embody  tbemseiiVES  ih  tee 
FOBM  of  fbofhets.  Indeed,  it  is  only  as  "  prophets "  bring  messages  of  truth  or  of 
falsehood— messages  which  belong  to  the  spiritual  realm — that  we  have  any  special 
concern  with  them;  i.e.  as  we  regard  them  and  their  message  as  above  and  beyond  the 
sphere  of  the  phenomenal,  and  as  representing  the  noumeual  (cf.  1  Kings  xxii.  20-^24 ; 
2  Pet.  i  21 ;  ii.  1 ;  1  Tim.  iv.  1).  Note :  It  is  by  clearly  apprehending  the  teachings 
of  the  Word  of  God  concerning  the  spiritual  world  that  we  shall  best  be  guarded  against 
the  prying  and  unholy  pretensions  of  a  spurious  spiritualism  (see  homily  on  Deut.  x  ViiL). 

IL  The  inbush  of  false  pbophets  fbom  time  to  time  is  The  development  of 
ANTICHKIST.  "  This  is  tliat  [spiri(]  of  antichrist  "  (ver.  3) ;  see  homily  on  ch.  ii.  18. 
"  This  is  that  whole  power  and  principle  of  the  antichrist"  ('  Speaker's  Commentary,' 
in  he.,  where  see  also  a  valuable  historical  note  on  ver.  1). 

IIL  These  false  pbofmets  abe  come  from  afab  on  a  hisbion  to  this  woblu 
The  apostle  says  of  them,  they  "  are  gone  out  into  the  world  " — "  on  a  mission  of  evil 
from  their  dark  home"  (Westcott).  This  world  is  regarded  as  the  sphere  in  which  they 
are  to  propagate  their  negations.  This  is  but  one  of  the  many  forms  in  which  Scripture 
sets  forth  the  mysterious  conflict  between  good  and  evil,  of  which  this  world  is  at  once 
the  theatre  and  the  witness.  The  struggle  is  between  (1)  the  serpent  and  Eve ;  (2) 
Christ  and  the  tempter;  (3)  Christ  and  the  world;  (4)  the  tempter  and  the  individual; 
(5)  error  and  truth ;  (6)  the  Church  and  the  world ;  (7)  the  Church  and  the  evil  one ; 
(8)  the  antichristian  embassy  and  the  body  of  believers. 

IV.  This  antiohbistian  mission  to  eabth  is  insfibbd  by  a  spibit  or  kbrob 
And  the  apostle  shows  us  here,  as  before  (see  homily  on  cL  il  18,  ut  lupfu)^  that  it  H 


108  THE  FIBST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  JOHN     [oh.  17. 1— 2L 


the  business  of  this  embassy  to  deny  the  truth.  The  first  lie  was,  "  Ye  shall  not  surely 
die."  The  supreme  lie  of  antichrist  now  is,  "  Jesus  is  not  the  Son  of  God."  Wherever 
that  lie  flourishes,  no  saving  truth  can  live.  The  forms  in  which  it  is  now  put  are 
l^ion ! 

V.  These  brror-inspiked  spibits  owe  theib  inspieation  to  a  personal  leader. 
Ver.  4,  6  iv  TifK6aiJUf.  The  apostle  sets  forth  here  the  personality  of  the  evil  one,  as  the 
one  animating  leader  of  the  false  prophets,  just  as  vividly  as  our  Lord  set  forth  the 
personality  of  the  devil  as  the  father  of  lies.  Difficult  as  the  doctrine  undoubtedly  is, 
it  is  far  less  so  than  any  theory  of  moral  evil  which  represents  it  as  having  its  seat  in 
no  one,  and  nowhere  (cf.  2  Cor.  iv.  4 ;  Eph.  ii.  2 ;  John  viii.  44).  The  fact  is,  neither 
the  beginnings  nor  the  endings  of  sin  are  shown  us  in  the  word.  We  only  know  what 
Ues  within  the  revealed  termini. 

VL  Great  as  is  the  powee  of  evil  which  ib  in  the  world,  there  is  a  gebateb 
POWER  IN  believers.  Me/faiv  iffrlv  i  iv  vjuir.  Satan  is  mighty,  but  there  is  a 
Mightier.  The  strong  one  has  beeii  vanquished  by.  a  Stronger  (Matt.  xii.  28,  29 ;  iv. 
11 ;  John  xvi.  33 ;  CoL  ii.  15 ;  John  xii.  31).  The  evil  one  proved  no  match  for  Jesus 
Christ  the  Righteous  when  he  sought  to  prevail  against  him  in  the  desert.  By  the 
cross  Satan  was  dethroned  and  Christ  enthroned.  And  not  all  the  band  of  hell-taught 
emissaries  with  which  the  world  and  the  Church  may  be  plagued  for  a  while  will  ever 
overthrow  the  Spirit,  the  army,  and  the  saving  work  of  Christ.  "  God  will  bruise 
Satan  under  our  feet  shortly." 

VIL  This  greater  power  is  "  of  God.''  The  Divine  Spirit  may  take  possession  of 
the  human  spirit.  He  does.  The  life  of  God  in  the  soul  of  man  is  the  great  secret 
of  personal  religion.  As  bearing  on  our  present  theme,  there  are  four  ways  in  which 
God's  Spirit  may  influence  man's.  1.  By  what  has  been  called  "  prevenient  grace ; " 
where  the  Spirit  of  God  goes  beforehand,  and  predisposes  him  to  hear  God's  Word. 
Our  Lord  spake  of  this,  in  words  which  have  never  yet  been  sufficiently  laid  hold  of 
by  the  Church  (.John  viii.  47).  2.  By  regenerating  grace.  When  a  man  is  born  of 
God,  that  wicked  one  touoheth  him  not.  3.  By  the  unction  from  above  (ch.  ii.  20 ;  see 
homily  on  ch.  ii.  20,  27).  This  imparts  spiritual  discernment.  4.  By  the  ardour  and 
courage  of  a  holy  combativeness  (Eph.  vl.  10 — 17).  • 

VIIL  Wheresoever  this  Divine  power  is  given,  the  power  of  antichrist  is 
GONE.  NtwK^KOTt  avTois.  "  Them."  All  of  them.  "  Ye  have  overcome  them." 
You  have  already  gained  the  victory!  Your  Lord's  triumph  is  yours.  On  those  who 
have  in  them  the  Spirit  of  God,  antichrist  can  have  no  hold.  So  Paul  (1  Cor.  xii.  3). 
All  depends  on  men  being  filled  with  the  Spirit.  If  a  man  has  not  the  Spirit  of  God, 
he  wUl  not  say,  "Jesus  is  Lord."  If  aman  /(as  the  Spirit  of  God,  he  will  not  say,"Jesu8 
is  anathema."  Against  antichiist  he  will  have  an  effectual  guard.  How  will  this  be? 
Thus,  by  the  teaching  and  power  of  the  Spirit,  he  will  be  enabled  (1)  to  perceive,  (2) 
to  receive,  and  (3)  to  hold  fast  the  truth.  He  will  be  enabled  (1)  to  detect,  (2)  to 
expose,  (3)  to  combat,  and  (4)  to  overcome  the  error. 

Note :  1.  It  is  an  unspeakable  mercy  to  have  the  Spirit  dwelling  within  us ;  by  virtue 
of  his  unction,  light,  and  mi<j;ht  we  shall  have  an  inward  and  effective  g\iard  against 
the  heresies  of  this  and  of  every  age.  The  possession  of  spiritual  religion  will  be,  as 
the  late  Kev.  J.  A.  James  expressed  it,  the  surest  preservative  against  the  snares  of 
infidelity  and  the  seductions  of  a  false  philosophy.  2.  It  is  by  means  of  the  conflict 
that  the  believer  is  himself  confirmed  in  the  truth.  We  do  not  -envy  the  man  who 
stirinks  from  open  conflict  against  error  on  the  behalf  of  Christian  truth.  Such  timidity 
argues  either  little  faith  in  the  power  of  the  truth,  or  else  small  trust  in  the  power  of 
his  Saviour.  Let  him  in  Christ's  strength  go  forth  to  war,  and  when  he  is  more  than 
conqueror  through  him  who  loved  him,  he  will  have  learnt  a  lesson  of  priceless  worth 
in  the  power  of  Christ  and  the  impotence  of  antichrist  1 

Vers.  7 — 12. — Love.  Connecting  link :  The  apostle  here  seems  to  begin  a  new  para- 
graph ;  yet  it  is  one  by  no  means  disconnected  firom  that  which  precedes.  If  antichrist 
plies  its  seductive  arts  without,  it  is  for  those  who  are  "of  God"  to  cleave  closer 
together ;  knit  by  the  bonds  of  a  holy  love,  which  is  of  itself  bom  of  him  who  is  love. 
Topic — Lovis  fount,  channel,  stream,  and  outlet.  We  have  more  than  once  had  occa- 
•"ion  to  remark  that  both  the  matter  and  the  style  of  the  Apostle  John  are  peculiarly 


OH.  nr.  1—21.]    TflE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  JOHN.  109 

his  own.  The  matter,  for  it  gathers  round  a  few  key-words — "light,"  "life,"  "love.'' 
The  style,  for  it  is  not  like  Paul's,  cumulative ;  it  is  rather  radiative.  We  have  no 
specimens  of  prolonged  and  closely  connective  argument;  hut  a  series  of  rich  and 
beautiful  teachings  throughout  a  paragraph,  on  one  of  his  key-words.  Here  the  key- 
word is — love.    Respecting  it  we  have  eight  distinct  assertions.' 

I.  God  is  Love.  In  John  iv.  24  we  have  "God  is  Spirit."  In  oh.  i.  5  "God 
Is  Light."  Here  "God  is  Love."  The  first  indicates  the  substance  of  the  Divine 
nature — ^personal,  conscious,  intelligent  Spirit.  The  second  declares  the  peifeotion 
of  that  nature  in  knowledge  and  in  purity.  The  third  shows  the  benevolence  of 
the  Divine  nature  in  its  regard  for  those  who  are  the  creatures  of  his  power  and  the 
subjects  of  his  giace.  These  three  words  contain  more  information  about  God  than  all 
the  sacred  books  of  the  East  put  together.  They  are  a  revelation.  We  are  taught 
how  to  think  about  God,  and  if  we  keep  within  the  lines  marked  out  by  these  three 
words,  we  cannot  go  far  wrong.  Note :  This  light  thrown  on  God's  nature  gives  us 
the  clue  to  the  meaning  of  his  works  and  ways  in  nature,  providence,  and  grace.  The 
three  spheres  give  us  the  triple  unfolding  of  infinite  love,  and  nothing  else. 

n.  That  love  hab  been  manifested  to  oub  race.  (Vers.  9,  10.)  Through 
whomt  " His  only  begotten  Son."  Eowt  "  A  Propitiation."  For  what  f  "For  our 
sins."  With  what  intent  f  That  we  might  live  through  him.  No  true  life  of  peace, 
joy,  and  fellowship  with  God  was  possible  for  us  until  sin  was  put  away.  No  one 
jcoidd  do  this  but  One  in  and  of  the  race,  yet  over  it — One  who  by  his  humanity  could 
represent  earth,  and  who  yet  as  the  eternal  Son  could  represent  the  Father ;  he  alone 
could  take  this  place,  and  by  offering  himself  to  the  Father,  for  us,  on  account  of  onr 
sin,  he  revealed  how  sin  burdened  the  heart  of  God,  and  gave  by  his  own  sacrifice  such 
an  expression  to  man  of  the  Divine  holiness  and  rectitude,  that,  on  the  ground  thereof, 
the  infinitely  Pure  One  might  receive  the  penitent  lovingly  to  his  embrace,  yet  make 
no  compromise  with  sin.* 

III.  StroH  A  Pbopitiation  bbveals  a  love  altoqethbb  unique.  (Vers.  9,  10.) 
"In  this,"  etc.  "Herein  is  love;  "as  if  it  were  seen  nowhere  else.  All  otlier  love 
fades  away  in  comparison  herewith.  This  will  appear  as  we  study:  1.  Its  origin. 
God's  own  love,  self  originated  and  sustained,  unbought,  spontaneous.  2.  Its  method. 
The  bestowment  of  the  greatest  possible  gift,  and  that  as  a  sacrifice.  3.  Its  objects. 
He  loved  us  sinners,  traitors,  alienated  ones.  4.  Its  extent.  "The  whole  world;" 
I.e.  all  the  race  on  the  globe  through  all  time  I  6.  It*  intent.  That  we  might  liva 
That  all  who  believe  might  be  made  heirs  of  glory. 

IV.  Such  a  love,  so  manifested,  creates  a  new  duty  of  love  on  oub  pabt.' 
(Ver.  11.)  Nothing  ever  threw  so  much  light  on  the  value  of  man  in  God's  eye  as  the 
work  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  oh  his  behalf.  Nothing  else  ever  disclosed  what  God 
meant  to  do  with  us.  But,  it  once  beiag  shown  how  great  are  the  possibilities 
opening  up  to  man  through  Christ,  all  the  relations  between  man  and  man  come  to  be 
invested  with  new  meaning;  and  the  self-evidencing  force  of  the  appeal  of  ver.  11 
ought  to  be  irresistibly  felt. 

V.  Goe's  amazing  love  to  man  is  attended  with  a  new  cbeative  poweb. 
(Ver.  7.)  "  Every  one  that  loveth  is  born  of  God."  *  "  It  should  never  be  forgotten," 
says  Trench,  "  that  dyi^Trj;  is  a  word  born  within  the  bosom  of  revealed  religion ;  it 
occurs  in  the  LXX.,  but  there  is  no  example  of  its  use  in  any  heathen  writer  whatever." 
The  pure  and  holy  parental  love,  the  love  of  children  as  we  understand  it,  the  fondest 
and  purest  affections  of  husband  and  wife,  are  the  birth  of  Christianity,  i.e.  of  Divine 
love  as  revealed  in  Christ.  Men  cannot  know  how  truly  and  how  largely  this  is  the 
case  till  they  examine  into  the  state  of  the  pagan  world  at  the  time  of  Christ.  The 
apostle  himself  declares,  "  We  love,  because  he  first  loved  ua." 

'  See  footnote  to  homily  on  oh.  iii.  4 — 12. 

•  See  homilies  on  oh.  ii.  1,  2 ;  iii.  1,  2. 

*  See  homilies  on  oh.  iii.  16 — 18 ;  ii.  7 — 11. 

♦  See  homily  on  ch.  ii.  29.  Also  the  late  Dean  Stanley's  'Commentary'  on  1  Cor.  xlH, 
£ind  Archbishop  Trench's  'New  Testament  Synonyms,'  sub  verb.  ayam).  The  chapter 
on  "  A  World  without  Love,"  in  Dr.  Uhlhom's  *  Christian  Charity  in  the  Ancient  Church,' 
is  deserving  of  careful  study,  as  alio  Brace's  'Gesta  Christ! ;'  and  the  Vea.  Archdeacog 
Farrat's  '  Eary  Christian  Life,'  toL  L  dl.  t 


110  THE  FIEST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  JOHN.    [gh.  it.  1— 2L 

VL  When  beinq  boen  of  God,  we  love  like  him,  we  abe  bkought  into 
rBLLOWSHiP  WITH  HIM.  (Vers.  12,  13.)  When  God  hath  given  us  of  his  own  Spirit 
of  love,  BO  that  we  in  our  measure  come  to  love  like  God,  then  we  know  tl.at  "we 
dwell  in  him,  and  he  in  us.''  There  is  a  loving  and  abiding  intercommunion.  We, 
being  in  full  sympathy  with  God,  must  needs  ytarn  to  pour  forth  ourselves  to  others, 
as  God  hath  given  himself  to  us.  And  this  outgoing  of  ourselves  to  our  brother  is 
a  sure  pledge  of  God  being  in  us,  and  we  in  him.* 

VII.  In  pbopobtion  as  tbis  is  the  case,  wb  know  God.  (Ver.  12.)  The  first 
and  second  clausts  of  this  verse  are  very  closely  connected  together.  "No  man  hath 
seen  God  at  any  time,  \hu{\  if  we  love  one  another,  God  dwelleth  in  us,  and  his  love  is 
perfected  in  us ; "  and  so  we  come  to  know  God,  though  no  one  hath  ever  seen  him. 
We  know  him  through  love  whom  we  cannot  behold  by  the  sight  (cf.  Matt.  v.  8). 
Only  love  can  possibly  read  love.  A  cold  heart  can  never  understand  a  warm  one,  but 
one  warm  heart  can  read  another.  So  we  come  to  know  God  through  learning  from 
him  to  love  as  he  loves.  And  the  more  complete  our  devotion  to  man  for  God's  sake, 
the  fuller  and  richer  will  be  our  knowledge  of  God's  infinite  love. 

VIII.  The  HEART  THAT  LovETH  NOT  OANNOT  KNOW  GoD.  (Ver.  8.)  The  love 
of  God  is  so  vast  that  it  embraoeth  "  a  great  multitude  which  no  man  can  number." 
It  is  BO  minute  that  it  yearus  for  "one  sinner"  to  repent.  It  is  so  active  that  it  sent 
its  noblest  embassy  to  invite  the  wanderers  to  return.  It  is  so  tender  that  it  would 
not  that  "  one  of  these  little  ones  should  perish."  How  can  a  man  who  does  not  love 
understand  all  thatf  It  is  not  that  God  closes  his  heart  against  the  man;  it  is  the  man 
that  steels  his  heart  against  God.  And  until  the  warnith  of  Divine  love  melts  the 
thick-ribbed  ice  of  his  frozen  soul,  no  stream  of  love  will  ever  flow  from  him  to  gladden 
and  fertilize  a  world. 

Note  i  See  what  it  is  will  estrange  a  man  for  ever  from  his  God,  and  will  shut  him 
up  in  hopeless  ignorance  of  God — unlovingness ;  simply  this.  '  Objection :  But  are 
you  not  reasoning  in  a  circle?  You  say  man  does  not  love  till  God's  love  kindles  his, 
and  yet  that  he  cannot  know  God  till  he  loves!  Which  is  first?  Surely  here  is  a, 
vicious  circle.  No;  not  at  all.  God's  love  goes  out  first.  That  love  is  manifested 
in  the  work  of  Christ.  When  we  were  yet  sinners  Christ  died  for  us.  "  He  that  would 
be  warm  must  keep  near  the  fire,"  said  Matthew  Henry.  Even  so,  let  the  cold  frozen 
heart  stay  near  the  cross,  till,  feeling  the  warmth  of  love  there,  it  is  set  aglow.  Then, 
being  set  aglow  by  learning  of  the  love  of  God,  he  will  at  once  begin  to  understand  the 
God  of  love  I 

Ver.  13.' — Ood-likeneu  the  teal  of  a  Divine  indwelling.  Connecting  link:  This 
verse  is  closely  allied  to  the  verse  preceding.  Though  no  one  has  at  any  time  seen 
God,  yet  God  is  within  us  if  his  love  is  reproduced  in  us  by  the  new  birth  of  the 
Holy  Ghost.  Hence  our  present  topic — Conformity  to  Ood  the  proof  that  Ood  is  the 
Life  of  our  lives?  There  is  in  some  respects  a  considerable  resemblance  between  this 
verse  and  ch.  iiL  24.  But  the  student  desiring  to  be  exact  in  his  unfolding  of  the 
writer's  words  will  note  (1)  that  the  complexion  of  words  is  much  modified  by  their 
connection ;  and  (2)  that  often  as  the  apostle  seems  to  use  approximately  the  same 
words,  yet  what  seems  at  first  sight  to  be  but  a  very  slight  variation  will,  when  he 
catches  the  precise  hue  of  each  clause,  start  him  on  a  distinctly  different  line  of  thought 
and  teaching.  Here,  set  in  relation  to  the  context,  the  apostle's  teaching  manifestly  is 
this — In  possessing,  and  in  being  possessed  by,  a  spirit  of  love,  we  are  conscious  of  a 
life  that  is  from  God  himself,  who  is  Love, 

I.  Herb  is  a  fact  assbbtbd.  "  He  hath  given  us  of  his  Spirit."  Both  the  Gospel 
and  the  Epistles  of  John  are  Trinitarian.  'The  Father,  the  Son,  the  Holy  Spirit,  all 
are  there,  each  fulfilling  his  own  part  in  the  saving  work.  The  Father  the  Origin, 
the  Son  the  Channel,  the  Spirit  the  Agent,  in  the  redemptive  economy.  The  Father 
sends  the  Son.  The  Spirit  proceeds  from  the  Father  and  the  Son.  The  Father  plans 
the  redeeming  work.    The  Son  carries  it  out  objectively  for  man.    The  Spirit  applies 

'  See  a  beautiful  quotation  from  Augustine  in  the  '  Speaker's  Commentary,'  in  loe. 

•  See  homily  on  ch.  iii.  23,  24. 

*  "  Though  God  is  invisible,  he  yet  ii  not  only  very  ueur  to  us,  but  may  be  in  us,  the 
Life  of  oiu  lives  "  (WestcottJ. 


CH.  nr.  1—21.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  JOHN.  Ill 

it  subjectively  in  man.  It  is  the  last-named  act  which  is  specified  here.  1.  The 
Spirit  of  Ood  comes  within  man,  freely.  "Given."  The  gift  of  the  Spirit  within  is 
as  gratuitous  on  God's  part  as  the  gift  of  his  dear  Son.  He  is  bestowed  by  tbe  Son, 
as  the  Gift  of  the  Father's  love  (Luke  xi.  13 ;  John  i.  33 ;  xiv.  16, 17).  2.  The  Spirit 
of  Ood,  when  within  us,  controls  us.  We  are  "  led  by  the  Spirit ; "  we  "  live  in  the 
Spirit ; "  we  "  walk  in  the  Spirit ; "  and  the  entire  direction  of  the  new  life  is  in  his 
gracious  hands.  3.  The  Spirit  of  Ood,  hy  controlling  us,  transforms  us.  We  come  to 
love  as  God  loves.  We  come  to  be,  in  our  measure,  as  the  governing  force  of  our 
spirits  is.  And  since  that  is  love,  we  love;  we  catch  the  holy  impulse  of  the  self- 
sacrificing  zeal ;  and  yearn  to  lay  ourselves  out  for  those  around  us. 

II.  'This  tbansformation  to  the  Divine  likenkss  is  the  prooi'  and  seal  of 
A  Divine  indwelling.  This  may  be  set  in  two  ways.  1.  Positively.  (1)  This 
dwelling  of  God  in  the  heart  is  what  is  promised  (John  xiv.  23).  (2)  This  is  the 
conscious  experience  (Rom.  v.  5).  (3)  This  is  the  actual  power  (Gal.  iL  20).  The 
living  on  another,  drawing  our  life,  joy,  love,  might,  all  from  another,  is  as  real  to  us 
as  the  air  we  breathe.  And  if  we  have  any  likeness  to  God,  it  is  to  God  himself  we 
owe  it,  and  by  fellowship  with  him  it  is  nourished  and  increased.  2.  Negatively. 
This  life  of  love  cannot  be  attributed  to  any  other  cause ;  for :  (1)  It  is  not  natural  to 
us.  (2)  We  did  not  get  it  from  man.  (a)  Not  from  the  world ;  for  there  man  turneth 
"  every  one  to  his  own  way."  (6)  Not  from  the  Church;  for  no  one  has  power  to  impart 
the  grace  of  love.  (3)  We  never  caught  sight  of  such  love  till  it  was  shown  us  in 
Christ.  (4)  Even  then  we  never  shared  it  till  he  who  died  for  us  breathed  the  new 
life  within.  Oh,  if  we  have  come  to  love  like  God,  it  can  only  be  through  the  gracious 
indwelling  of  the  God  of  love  I 

III.  The  FAor,  so  accounted  fob,  has  in  it  manifold  teachings.  1.  For  the 
unregenerate.  They  should  learn  what  it  is  they  need.  Life,  life  within  them  1  2. 
For  the  inconsistent  professors.  They  want  reality,  not  a  sham  life.  3.  For  those 
who  do  not  know  where  they  are  in  religion.  Let  them  not  waste  time  in  "  feeling 
their  pulse ; "  let  them  open  their  hearts  to  receive  God ;  they  will  soon  know  their 
state  then.  4.  For  those  seeking  after  the  evidences  of  Christianity.  They  will  find 
them  in  men  filled  with  the  Spirit  of  God".  6.  For  the  students  of  history.  They  will 
find  a  new  world  of  love,  slowly  yet  surely  forming,  under  the  power  of  the  cross  and 
of  the  Spirit  of  our  God. 

Ver.  14. — The  historic  basis  of  the  Christian  testimony.  Connecting  link:  The 
mutual  indwelling  of  God  in  us  and  of  our  spirits  in  God  is  the  result  of  a  Divine 
revelation  of  love  made  to  us  on  God's  part,  and  of  the  reception  of  that  love  on  our 
part.  That  love,  which  has  been  and  is  still  the  object  of  our  adoring  contemplation, 
and  to  speak  it  out  among  the  people  is  the  business  of  our  lives.  "  We  have  seen," 
etc.  We  may  be  permitted  here  to  quote  in  full  a  note  of  unusual  value  from  the 
'  Speaker's  Commentary'  upon  this  verse:  '"We  have  seen  with  adoring  wonder,  and 
tbe  impression  of  the  sight  abides  with  us  (riBedufBa),  and  are  bearing  witness  (/uaprv- 
pov/ieu),  that  the  Father  hath  sent  [perfect]  tiie  Son  as  the  Saviour  of  the  word.'  One 
of  the  numerous  loops  that  bind  the  Epistle  to  the  Gospel"  (comp.  John  i.  32,  34; 
oh.  i.  1 — 3 ;  John  xix.  35). 

I.  The  kecobd  before  ds  is  that  of  those  who  were  eye-witnesses  of  the 
FACTS  OF  THE  LIFE  OF  Jbsus  Chbist.  (John  i.  16  ;  xix.  35^  In  this  Epistle  (and  in 
the  Gospel  by  the  same  apostle)  we  have  the  history  of  our  Lord's  life  given  us  by  one 
who  had  followed  with  him,  and  who  understood  the  meaning  of  that  life  at  least  as 
well  as  any  other  of  the  apostles.     But  we  note — 

II.  That  the  ete-witnesses  of  the  external  facts  of  the  life  of  Chbist 

LOOKED   ALSO   BENEATH   THE   SUBFAOE,  AND   BEHELD   THE   SIGNIFICANCE   OP   THE   FACTS. 

Four  distinct  and  leading  features  thereof  are  given  here.  1.  That  Jesus  Christ  was 
"  the  Son  "  of  God.  Not  merely  a  Son.  Not  a  Son  merely  in  the  same  sense  that 
others  may  become.  But  the  only  begotten  Son ;  of  the  same  nature  with  the  Father. 
2.  That  he  was  "sent"  by  the  leather.  3.  That  he  was  sent  to  save — to  save  from 
sin.    4.  That  his  mission  was  for  the  race.    "  The  Saviour  of  the  world." 

III.  That  to  beak  witness  to  these  facts  was  the  great  business  of  their 
LIVES.    "  We  do  testify."    They  lived  for  this.    They  suffered  for  this.    If  need  be, 


112  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENEBAL  OF  JOHN.    [oh.  it.  1— 2t 

they  were  prepared  to  die  for  it.  To  assert  it  over  and  over  again  they  gave  up  aL 
that  earth  calls  dear;  they  encountered  opposition  and  fiery  persecution;  they  counted 
not  their  lives  dear  unto  them.  So  that  their  testimony  was  of  such  a  kind  as  could 
not  possibly  he  false.  We  say  this,  well  weighing  our  words,  and  fully  assured  that 
the  scientific  value  of  the  testimony  to  the  facts  of  our  Lord's  life,  death,  and  resur- 
rection cannot  be  overestimated,  and  that  it  is  a  question  which  demands  more  careful 
study  fl:om  the  unbeliever  than  many  will  consent  to  give  to  it.  The  testimony 
stands  thus:  1.  It  rests  on  a  clear  and  distinct  historical  basis.  2.  It  is  given  by 
men  who  were  eye-vritnesses  of  the  main  facts  they  relate.  3.  The  meaning  of  the 
facts  was  directly  opposed  to  their  national  expectations  and  prepossessions,  and  such 
as  they  could  only  have  been  induced  to  give  when  all  their  prejudices  were  overborne 
by  a  Power  from  on  high.  4.  In  such  a  life  and  work,  so  full  of  Divine  meaning,  there 
was  a  message  presented  to  the  people  for  them  to  believe  (John  xx.  31).  The  recep- 
tion of  the  message  was  intended  to  lead  up  to  a  living  faith  in  Jesus  as  the  Saviour  of 
the  lost  (comp.  John  iv.  42).  5.  Such  faith  in  Jesus  would  ensure  the  privileges  of 
sonship  (John  i  12).  With  sonship  would  come  fellowship,  with  fellowship  knowledge 
of  God.     In  this  knowledge  would  be  the  eternal  life  (ch.  v.  9 — 12). 

IV.   To   HAVE   SUCH   TBSTIMONT  BEFORE  US  INVOLVES   DS   Df   GKBAT  EESPONSIBILITT. 

Such  a  testimony,  so  given,  with  such  a  purpose,  cannot  leave  us  where  it  found  us. 
We  are  responsible  to  God  for  the  use  we  make  of  such  a  message  as  this.  We  are 
bound  (1)  to  hear  devoutly  and  thoughtfully ;  (2)  to  receive  it  believingly  and  lovingly ; 
(3)  to  use  it  (o)  for  the  purpose  of  being  saved  by  him  who  has  come  that  he  might 
save,  and  (6)  for  the  purpose  of  joining  in  the  witness-bearing,  and  so  co-operatmg 
with  Jesus  in  saving  others.  His  name  is  called  "  Jesus,"  for  he  saves  his  people  from 
their  sins. 

Vers.  15, 16. — Divine  love  a  home  for  the  soul,  and  a  force  within  it.  Connecting  link ; 
There  is  a  connection  between  the  several  verses  on  which  we  are  now  dwelling  (vers.  7 
— 19).  But  it  is  not  so  much  a  connection  of  thoughts  that  follow  consecutively  one 
from  another,  as  a  connection  such  as  exists  between  glowing  sparks  that  follow  one 
after  another,  from  the  same  mass,  when  struck  upon  the  same  anvil,  by  the  same 
hammer,  wielded  by  the  same  arm.  The  apostle  gives  us  here  a  startlingly  beautiful 
succession  of  truths  concerning  love — Divine  love — revealed  in  Christ,  and  laying  hold 
of  men.  ■  Obviously,  in  vers.  15,  16  there  are  two  statements  concerning  believers 
generally — "  Whosoever  shall  confess,"  etc. ;  "  He  that  dwelleth  in  love,"  etc.  There 
is  also  one  statement  concerning  the  apostle  and  his  fellow-workers — "  We  hare 
known,"  etc.    Let  us  take  these  in  their  order.* 

I.  Hebe  abb  two  general  statements,  conoeenino  a  blessed  condition  and 
THOSE  to  whom  IT  BELONGS.  1.  Here  is  a  supremely  happy  condition.  It  is  twofold. 
(1)  The  soul  full  of  God.  "  God  dwelleth  in  him "  (cf.  John  vi.  56 ;  xiv.  23  ;  Col.  i. 
27;  GaL  ii.  20;  2  Cor.  xiii.  5;  Eom.  viii.  9;  Eph.  ii.  22;  v.  18;  Eev.  iii.  20).  In 
some  passage  the  Dweller  in  the  heart  is  spoken  of  as  "Christ,"  sometimes  as  "the 
Spirit,"  sometimes  as  "the  Father  with  the  Son,"  sometimes  as  "Goil  by  the  Spirit.'" 
In  all  cases  the  meaning  is  that  there  is  a  Divine  Energy  within  the  man,  quickening 
inspiring,  and  controlling  him — a  new  directing  and  strengthening  force,  leading  on  tc 
all  holy  action,  to  patient  endurance,  to  final  victory.  Man  moves  not  upward  and 
heavenward  by  a  self-elicited  force,  but  soars  thither  by  a  Divine  power  imparted  and 
sustained  from  above !  (2)  The  soul  at  home  in  God.  "  He  dwelleth  in  God."  God 
is  not  only  a  new  life  in  him,  but  a  new  home  for  him,  in  which  he  abides,  and  from 
which  he  cannot  be  dislodged.  His  wanderings  are  over.  He  has  a  settled  rest,  an 
everlasting  home.  It  is  in  the  Father's  house,  nay,  in  the  Father's  heart,  the  heart  of 
boundless  love.  He  is  seated  now  in  "  the  heavenly  places  in  Christ  Jesus."  Happy, 
happy  home  I  It  is  heaven.  It  will  never  break  up.  No  foe  can  invade  it.  Sin  shall 
not  mar  it.  Death  cannot  disturb  it.  Oh,  to  have  found  already  a  home  like  this ! 
It  is  well  worth  our  while  to  ask  to  whom  it  belongs.  (Note :  The  two  indwellings 
complete  each  other,  God  dwelling  in  the  soul  ensures  the  soul  continuously  dwelling 
in  its  true  home ;  and  the  soul,  being  always  at  home,  has  entire  repose,  leaving  all  its 
force  free  for  happy,  holy  service.)  2.  To  whom  does  this  twofold  blessedness  bdo»g  t 
'  Bee  footnote  to  homily  on  ch.  iii.  4 — 12. 


OH.  IT.  1—21.]    THE  FIBST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  JOHN.  113 

There  are  here  two  statements  in  reply  to  this  question.  The  apostle  says, "  Whosoever 
shall  confess  that  Jesus  is  the  Son  of  God  "  is  thus  blessed  ;  and  that  "  he  that  dwelletb 
in  love  "  is  so  also.  We  must  elucidate  this  by  offering,  first,  a  word  or  two  on  each 
phrase,  and  then  by  showing  the  connection  that-exists  between  them.  (1)  The  two- 
fold indwelling  is  realized  by  him  who  "  dwells  in  love,"  t'.e.  whose  whole  being  is,  as  it 
were,  bathed  in  an  atmosphere  of  love  j  who  lives,  moves,  thinlss,  acts,  in  that  sphere, 
and  never  out  of  it.  Such  a  one  "  dwells  in  God,"  etc.  The  definite  article  {in  rp 
irfcmri)  should  be  noticed  here,  as  defining  the  love.  Following,  too,  on  the  phrase, 
i  @ebs  ayiirri  iffri,  its  force  is  equivalent  to  "  God  is  love,  and  he  that  lives  and  moves 
in  that  love  of  God  has  his  abiding  home  in  the  God  of  love."  (2)  The  twofold 
indwelling  is  realized  also  by  him  who  "confesses  that  Jesus  is  the  Son  of  God."  This 
sentence  probably  is  suggested  by  ver.  14,  indicating  that  the  continuous  witness- 
bearing  for  Christ  caused  them  to  realize  more  fully  than  ever  their  heavenly  privilege, 
a  privilege  which  the  apostle  seems  to  say,  "Every  confess ir  will  share  with  us."  It 
is  very  remarkable,  however,  that  the  apostle  should  attribute  a  like  blessedness  to 
such  apparently  different  (but  not  contradictory)  conditions.  The  reciprocal  indwelling 
is  realized  by  him  who  lives  and  moves  in  love,  and  also  by  him  who  openly  and  con- 
tinuously avows  a  certain  "dogma"  (to  use  a  'common  mode  of  expression).  The 
former  is  clear  enough.  Not  so,  perhaps,  the  latter.  But  what  if  the  two  should  be 
concurrent  ?  (not  coincident,  as  the  writer  in  the  '  Speaker's  Commentary,'  by  a  strange 
oversight  of  logic,  remarks).  They  are  concurrent.  Thus  (a)  that  "  Jesus  is  the  Son 
of  God,"  and  as  such  the  Kevealer  of  love,  is  the  message  addressed  to  faith.  (6)  Faith 
receives  him,  and  with  him  the  love  which  he  reveals,  (c)  Confession  constantly  rings 
out  the  faith,  and  by  so  doing  vastly  increases  faith's  realizing  power,  (d)  This, 
through  the  energy  of  the  Holy  Ghost  (1  Cor.  xii.  3),  makes  the  love  of  God  in  Christ 
so  real  to  the  faithful  confessor,  that  he  actually  dwells  in  love,  and  so  reaches  the 
state  specified  as  "dwelling  in  love  "  (ver.  16).  Thus  the  two  conditions  differ  only  as 
the  terminus  a  quo  from  the  terminus  ad  quern.  Confession  is  the  former;  dwelling  in 
love  is  the  latter.  Note :  This  is  verified  by  the  order  of  the  phrases  being  in  the  one 
case, " God  dwelleth  in  him,  and  he  in  God; "  and  in  the  other,  " dwelleth  in  God,  and 
God  in  him." 

II.  Thk  apostlk  makes  a  specific  applioation  op  this  to  himself  ard  his 
FBLLOW-BELIEVBKS.  He  has  not  been  writing  at  random,  nor  has  he  been  moving  in 
a  region  so  transcendental  that  experience  cannot  verify  it.  Ee  can  verify  it  from 
his  own  experience.  Those  to  whom  he  is  writing  can  verify  it  from  theirs.  The 
difference  between  the  Authorized  Version  and  the  Revised  Version  should  be  noted  here ; 
"  We  have  known  and  believed  the  love  that  God  hath  in  us  {in  fifiuv)."  Not  "  toward 
us  "  or  "  to  us,"  as  if  it  were  «i  iinas.  The  miserable  marginal  rendering  in  the  Revised 
Version  should  also  be  carefully  avoided :  "  in  our  case  "  (/).  The  believer  has  gone 
much  further  than  to  know  the  love  of  God  to  him.  He  knows  it  in  him,  as  a  reviving, 
cheering,  glowing,  inspiring,  life-giving  power.  It  is  in  him  as  the  "living  water 
springing  up  into  everlasting  life."  The  following  order  of  thought  might  develop  this. 
Divine  love  is :  1.  A  manifestation  amongst  us,  iv  ^/iiv  (ver.  9).  2.  An  imparlation 
realized  in  us  (Rom.  v.  5).  3.  A  reciprocated  love,  as  ours  has  been  called  forth 
thereby  (ver.  19).  4.  A  transforming  love,  causing  us  to  love  as  God  loves  (ver.  12). 
5.  A  self-consummating  love,  fulfilling  its  own  ends  in  and  through  us,  and  causing  its 
outworking  to  be  perfected  in  us,  as  its  newly  opened  channel,  through  which  it  is 
flowing  on  to  the  boundless  ocean  of  everlasting  life  and  glory  (^  kyimi  outoO  TiTf\imnivn 
iariv  iv  viuv).  Who,  who  is  equal  to  the  adequate  unfolding  of  thoughts  so  sublime? 
In  writing  this  homily  we  feel  as  if  human  words  were  an  intrusion ;  and  such  they 
are,  if  irrelevant  or  superfluous.  But  if  they  are  such  as  we  aim  to  make  them— 
illustrative  of  the  thoughts  in  the  text — then  the  gracious  Spirit  will  deign  to  own 
them,  however  far  they  fall  short  of  what  the  writer's  largest  wishes  could  desire. 
With  three  queries  for  the  conscience  and  the  heart  we  close.  (1)  Who  can  adequately 
extol  the  greatness  of  the  Divine  condescension,  in  choosing  us  as  vehicles  through 
•which  his  love  may  be  conveyed,  and  so  taught  to  others?  (2)  Who  can  but  wonder 
at  the  dignity  conferred  on  man,  in  making  him  the  means  of  manifusting  such  a  love? 
(3)  Who  would  not  open  his  heart  to  God  that  he  may  dwell  therein  and  sanctify  j^ 
having  expelled  the  sin  which  would  have  corrupted  and  destroyed  it? 

I.  JCHK. 

I 


114  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENBBAL  OF  JOHN.    [oh.  it.  1—21 

Vers.  17, 18. — Lovers  boldness  tn  the  day  of  judgment.  Connecting  Knk:  The  apostl* 
had  been  speaking  of  God's  love  being  perfected  in  us.  He  now  glances  forward  to  the 
outlook  of  believers,  as  bounded  by  the  irapoixrla  and  the  Kpiaa,  and  in  so  doing  he 
shows  that,  as  love  attains  its  perfection,  all  dread  which  might  otherwise  attend  on 
the  prospect  is  removed ;  so  that  the  believer  may  have  iraffnia-ia  even  on  the  judgment- 
day.  As,  however,  in  these  verses  there  is  some  room  for  differences  of  interpretation, 
we  must  first  state  what  appears  to  us  to  be  the  meaning  of  some  of  its  clauses,  since 
the  entire  structure  of  this  homily  depends  thereon.  1.  "  Herein  is  the  love  made 
perfect  with  us."  "  The  love,"  i.e.  God's  love  which  (ver.  12)  is  perfecting  itself  in  the 
soul  that  ioves.  "  With  us."  With  whom  ?  "  With  us,  as  believers,  one  towards 
another  ?  "  or  "  with  believers  and  God  ?  "  We  adopt  the  latter  view — God's  own  love 
consummating  itself  in  working  through  believers ;  and  their  love  consummating  itself 
also  in  laying  hold  of  God's.  "  It  is  difBcult  not  to  feel  that  there  is  some  subtle 
reference  to  the  idea  of  God  with  us."  *  "  Love  is  not  simply  perfected  in  man  by  an 
act  of  Divine  power,  but  in  fulfilling  this  issue  God  works  vrith  man"  (Westcott). 
2.  "  Because  as  he  is,  so  are  we  in  this  world."  In  what  sense  are  believers  in  the 
world  as  Christ  is?  or  rather,  what  is  the  sense  in  which  it  is  so  intended  here  by  the 
apostle  ?  Is  it  not  this — we  are  looking  forward  to  the  day  of  judgment  as  the  con- 
summation of  our  hope,  and  the  Eedeemer  is  working  in  the  world  with  a  view  to  the 
day  of  judgment  as  the  consummation  of  his  mediatorial  work  ?  In  this  view  we  are 
confirmed  by  a  remark  of  Canon  Westcott:  "'This  world'  as  distinguislied  from 
'  the  world'  einphasizes  the  idea  of  transitoriness."  Just  so,  Christ,  in  his  redeeming 
work,  and  we  in  our  believing  hope,  are  working  with  the  same  goal  in  view — "  the 
day  of  judgment."  This  world  is  but  a  passing  phase  of  things.  3.  "  Fear  hath 
punishment  [Authorized  Version,  'torment']."  There  is  nothing  here  to  suggest  that 
"fear"  has  any  disciplinary  effect  in  inducing  love.  The  apostle  views  it  simply  as 
the  ever-attendant  penalty  of  unlovingness.  He  whose  nature  is  out  of  harmony  with 
God's  must  dread  him  everywhere  and  always.  Spirits  in  league  with  evil  will  seek 
rest  in  vain.     They  will  tremble.    But  in  the  perfecting  of  love  all  this  is  done  away. 

I.  The  pbbsent  period  is  but  a  tbaksition  one.  This  is  the  day  in  which  our 
Lord  Jesus  is  carrying  on  his  saving  work  in  the  world,  and  his  educating  process  in 
the  Church ;  and  all  with  a  view  to  "  the  great  day."  Believers,  too,  are  only  in  the 
preliminary  period  of  their  training,  and  hence  they  too  believe  and  hope  and  love 
with  a  view  to  "  the  great  day."  As  their  Lord  is,  so  are  they  in  this  passing  world, 
looking  to  and  preparing  for  what  lies  above  and  beyond  it.  Hence  such  passages  as 
these:  Matt.  xxv. ;  Mark  xiii.  35—37;  Luke  xiii.  24,  25;  xviii.  8;  xxi.  36;  John 
xiv.  3;  Acts  ii.  20,  21;  Eom.  xiv.  9—12;  1  Cor.  iv.  5;  2  Cor.  v.  10;  Phil.  i.  6,  10  ; 
Col.  i.  28 ;  1  Thess.  v.  23 ;  2  Tim.  i.  12. 

II.  The  day  to  which  we  abb  looking  forward  is  "  the  day  of  jddgmekt."  It 
is  the  day  of  the  Lord,  when  he  shall  be  manifested.  It  may  be  as  lengthened  a  period 
as  the  present  one,  which  is  "  the  day  of  salvation."  As  the  day  of  jurfgment,  it  will 
close  the  probation  of  the  race ;  while  for  those  who  are  looking  for  our  Lord  it  will 
bring  in  the  salvation  which  is  ready  to  be  revealed  at  the  last  time.  In  the  word 
"judgment,"  however,  much  more  is  included  than  at  first  sight  appears.  "Judgment" 
is  indeed  a  rectification,  an  adjustment;  but  then  what  that  may  mean  in  detail 
depends  on  the  person  or  thing  to  be  judged.  If,  e.g.,  any  one  is  unlawfully  bound, 
judgment  would  be  liberation.  If  any  one  be  deprived  of  •  right,  his  judgment  would 
mean  restoration.  If  unjustly  accused,  vindication.  If  misunderstood  or  misinter- 
preted, manifestation.  If  good  and  evil  are  mixed  up  together,  judgment  would  be 
separation ;  and  as  the  result,  for  the  bad  condemnation,  and  for  the  righteous  glorifi- 
cation. Judgment  is,  in  fact,  tlie  restitution  of  all  things,  not  necessarily  in  the  sense 
attributed  to  that  phrase  by  advocates  of  universal  restoration,  but  in  a  far  higher  sense, 
even  that  of  rendering  to  every  man  according  as  his  work  shall  be  (cf.  Acts  xvii.  31). 

III.  If  that  day  be  dreaded  on  our  part,  it  is  evident  there  is  some  dbfioienot 
in  oub  love.  That  aught  so  solemn  as  the  final  destinies  of  a  race  can  be  contem- 
plated without  a  feeling  of  awe — an  awe  that  is  sometimes  overwhelming — ^is  not 
desirable,  even  were  it  possible.  Reverence,  indeed,  forbids  it  otherwise.  But  this 
holy,  reverent  awe  must  not  be  confounded  with  the  servile  dread  referred  to  in  th« 

'  So  '  Speaker's  Commentary,'  in  loc. ;  but  is  the  reference  "  gubtle  "  T 


OH.  rv.  1—21.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GBNEEAL  OF  JOHN.  11* 

text :  ti\a$e(a  (Heb.  xii.  28)  is  very  different  from  <p60ot.  The  fear  which  is  incon- 
sistent with  perfect  love  is  the  fear  of  the  slave  dreading  the  lash,  or  the  culprit 
dreading  the  verdict.  But  if  the  love  of  God  is  within  us,  sweetly  subduing  us  with 
its  tenderness,  and  if  through  that  loye  sin  is  pardoned  and  destroyed,  why,  there  is  no 
lash  to  dreaii,  there  is  no  adverse  verdict  to  fear  (John  v.  24,  Eevised  Version)  ;  for  in 
such  a  case,  to  see  the  Judge  upon  the  throne  will  be  to  look  upon  the  face  of  an 
infinite  Vindicator  and  Friend,  in  whose  love  we  have  lived  here,  and  the  enjoyment  of 
whose  love  is  the  highest  heaven  for  ever !  And  so  far  as  the  judgment  will  bear  on 
others,  the  man  of  love  will  be  more  than  content  with  the  decisions  of  the  Sou  of  God 
and  Son  of  man,  and  will  desire  nothing  more  than  that  the  entire  race  should  be  dealt 
with  by  Christ  as  he  sees  fit.  Evidently,  if  this  be  not  our  state  of  mind,  there  must 
be  deficiency  in  love  in  exactly  the  same  degree  as  there  is  any  restless  fear. 

IV.  Consequently,  cub  qeeat  concern  should  be  to  be  pbbfeotbd  in  love.  We 
may  take  this  in  either  or  both  of  two  ways.  1.  Let  it  be  our  concern  that  God's  own 
love  may  be  so  richly  communicated  to  us  as  to  transform  us  to  his  likeness.  2. 
Let  it  be  our  concern  to  have  so  clear  an  apprehension  and  knowledge  of  God,  that 
we  shall  see  in  him  and  in  all  his  attributes  only  pure  and  perfect  love.  In  the  former 
case  there  can  be  nothing  to  dread  for  ourselves.  In  the  latter  case  we  shall  dread 
nothinE;  in  him.    *(J/3oj  has  no  door  of  entrance  whatever. 

V.  When  perfected  in  love  wb  shall  have  iraf^-na-ta  in  the  day  op  judgment. 
"Confidence,"  "boldness,"  "  freedom  of  speech"  (cf.  ch.  ii.  38  ;  iiL  21,  Greek).     Dread 

-seals  the  lips.  Love  opens  them  (Luke  xxi.  36 ;  Rom.  xiv.  12 ;  Mark  vi.  30).  The 
"  salvation  "  which  will  serve  then  is  not  an  artificial  plucking  out  of  a  burning  ruin, 
irrespectively  of  character ;  it  is  being  made  perfect  by  Divine  grace,  even  as  our  Father 
in  heaven  is  perfect. 

VI.  Consequently,  as  the  apostle  of  love  shows  us  here,  bach  of  ub  must  face 
THE  solemn  question — ^What  will  the  judgment-day  bring  to  me — "  boldness "  or 
"  punishment "  ?  One  or  the  other  must  be.*  Which  ?  There  may  be  an  attempt 
to  lessen  the  weight  of  these  thoughts  by  objections  or  pleas ;  e.g.  it  may  be  said : 

1.  The  "  punishment "  is  corrective.  We  suggest  three  replies.  (1)  If  it  be,  is  that 
any  reason  for  being  content  with  "needing  correction,  when  we  ought  to  be  awaiting 
honour  ?  (2)  It  is  folly  to  urge  the  plea,  unless  men  are  very  sure  of  its  accuracy. 
But  are  they  ?    (3)  1  Cor.  xi.  32  is  totally  against  any  such  plea.     Or  it  may  be  said  ; 

2.  There  is  no  knowing  when  the  judgment  may  come  (cf.  Ezek.  xii.  27).  But  men 
forget  that  the  judgment  is  but  the  Tnanifestation  of  that  which  is  going  on  now  and 
ever.  A  spirit  out  of  harmony  with  God  must  be  ill  at  ease  always  and  everywhere. 
Fear  hath  torment,  now ;  and  can  never  be  separated  from  it,  any  more  than  a  man  can 
flee  from  his  own  shadow  (Job  xv.  21 — 35). 

Ver.  19. — Creed  and  life :  the  relation  between  them.  Connecting  link:  The  apostle 
had  shown  that  only  as  love  is  perfected  in  us  can  wo  be  free  from  the  fear  which  has 
torment,  and  so  have  boldness  in  the  day  of  judgment.  The  verse  before  us  declares 
that,  aa  matter  of  fact,  this  love  is  being  inwrought,  and  the  sole  cause  thereof  is  that 
God  first  loved.  "  We  love,  because  he  first  loved  us."  The  verse  is  one  of  peculiar 
beauty  and  value.  "  It  is  the  sanctuary  of  my  soul,"  said  an  aged  Oljrislian  to  the 
writer,  referring  to  this  text.  And  well  it  may  be.  We  propose  its  homiletio  exposition 
here,  as  a  Verse  which  sets  forth  with  striking,  yea,  almost  startling,  clearness  the  relation 
between  creed  and  life.  Often  have  we  been  pained  by  the  statement, "  Religion  Is  not 
a  creed,  but  a  life."  There  is  enough  truth  in  those  words  to  make  them  attractive,  and 
enough  error  to  make  them  deceptive.  Let  us  rather  say,  "Religion  is  not  only  a 
creed,  Iwt  also  a  life,"  and  then  we  shall  be  nearer  the  truth.  Following  the  words  of 
our  text,  observe — 

I.  In  eelioion  there  is  a  obeed.  "  He  first  loved  us."  Here,  in  these  four  short 
words,  is  the  first  creed  of  the  Christian  Church — a  creed  which  it  had  before  even  the 
New  Testament  existed ;  and  through  all  the  Christian  centuries,  with  all  their  per- 
plexing entanglements  and  sharp  controversies,  these  words  have  run  like  a  golden 

•  Canon  Westoott  aptly  quotes  what  he  rightly  calls  one  of  Bengel's  "unmatched 
epigrams:"  "  Varius  hominum  status :  sine  timore  et  amore;  cum  timore,  sine  amore;  cum 
timore  et  amore ;  sine  timore.  cum  amore." 


lie  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  JOHN.    [ch.  iv,  1— 21 

thread  through  the  faith  of  the  Church.  "  He  first  loved  us.''  What  is  love  ?  It  is 
righteousness  and  benevolence  acting  in  harmony.  Now,  here  is  love's  origin.  He 
first  loved.  That  is,  God  loved.  Note :  The  word  "  love  "  is  current  coin  throughout 
the  universe  of  God,  and  means  with  him  what  it  means  with  us.  (For  tn  opening  up 
of  the  wonders  of  God's  love,  see  homily  on  vers.  7 — 12.) 

"  All  my  life  I  still  have  found. 

And  I  will  forget  it  never— 
Every  sorrow  hath  its  bound. 

And  no  cross  endures  for  ever. 
After  all  the  winter's  snows 

Comes  sweet  summer  back  again. 

Patient  souls  ne'er  wait  in  vain : 
Joy  is  given  for  all  their  woes. 

All  things  else  must  have  their  day  | 

God's  love  only  lasts  for  aye." 

But  that  does  last — the  constant  wealth,  life,  and  joy  of  believers.  This,  this  is  theii 
:reed ;  not  held,  indeed,  as  a  dead  dogma,  but  as  a  living  and  inspiring  faith  through 
ihe  energy  of  the  Spirit  of  God. 

II.  In  religion  thebb  is  a  life.  "  We  love.''  Although  we  hold  fast  to  the 
principle  that  the  word  "love"  means  the  same  as  applied  to  God  and  to  us,  yet  we 
cannot  shake  off  a  sense,  even  painful,  of  the  wide  contrast  in  degree.  "  Ood  loves  . .  . 
we  love."  That  is  from  sunlight  to  rushlight  in  a  moment.  They  are  both  lights,  it  ia 
true;  but  what  a  space  hetween  them  I  Again,  God's  love  is  a  self-kindled  fire.  Our 
hearts  are  like  fuel  in  a  grate,  needing  the  spark  from  without  ere  it  will  bum.  Still, 
in  our  measure  "we  love."  But  what?  whom?  1.  We  love  God.  He  is  our  love's 
supreme  Object.  2.  We  love  each  other  as  fellow-believers.  3.  We  love  man  as  man. 
If  this  is  the  word  in  which  our  Christian  life  is  summed  up,  three  additional  matters 
should  be  noted  ere  we  pass  on  to  the  next  main  division.  (1)  Almost  every  Christian 
grace  which  can  be  named  is  love  in  some  foim  or  other.  Repentance  is  love  grieving. 
Faith  is  love  leaning.  Hope  is  love  anticipating.  Courage  is  love  daring,  etc.  (2) 
So  that  we  see  a  man  has  just  as  much  religion  as  he  has  love,  and  no  more.  (3)  And, 
further,  if  more  energy  is  wanted  in  any  one  of  the  graces,  let  a  man  love  more,  and 
every  grace  will  be  the  stronger.  "Yes,"  it  may  be  said,  "that  is  true  enough.  But 
how  are  we  to  love  more?"    Let  us  now  look  into  the  Christian  philosophy  of  loving. 

HI.  In  beligion  these  is  a  life  because  these  is  a  cseed.  We  love  because  he 
loved.  God  first  loved.  Even  so.  ITiere  is  the  spark,  and  there  only,  which  kindles 
ours.  We  may  set  this  truth  on  several  grounds.  1.  We  set  it  on  the  ground  of  philo- 
sophy. We  do  not  believe  it  possible  for  any  created  being  to  learn  to  love  except 
through  being  loved.  We  do  not  believe  any  angel  in  heaven  would  have  ever  come  to 
love  God  had  he  not  known  that  God  was  love.  Nor  could  we.  2.  We  set  it  on  the 
ground  of  history.  Take :  (1)  Paganism.  We  read  of  the  pagans  dreading  their  gods, 
seeking  to  propitiate  them,  being  very  much  obliged  to  their  gods  for  giving  them  a 
good  harvest,  and  such  like ;  but  nowhere  do  we  read  of  a  pagan  loving  his  god.  Why  ? 
Because  they  never  dreamt  of  a  god  who  loved  them.  And  as  to  love  to  man,  the 
heathen  world,  even  at  its  best,  was  a  world  without  love.  (2)  Judaism.  The  com- 
mand of  Moses  was  that  the  Hebrew  should  love  God.  But — a  God  who  did  not  care 
for  them  ?  By  no  means.  "  Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God,  who  brought  thee  up," 
etc.  Thek  love  was  called  for  as  a  response  to  God's.  (3)  Christianity.  What  evoked, 
nay,  what  created,  the  ardent  love  of  the  first  Christians?  What  has  sustained  the 
impassioned  preachers,  missionaries,  and  philanthropists  ever  since?  Love,  Divine 
love ;  nothing  but  that.  The  truth,  "  by  his  stripes  we  were  healed,"  has  more  power 
to  create  love  than  all  the  moralists  in  the  world  could  call  forth.  Take  the  cross 
away,  and  humanity  would  revert  to  a  glacial  age.  3.  We  set  it  on  the  ground  oj 
experience.  What  first  moved  us  to  love  ?  What  moves  us  still  ?  What  revives  us 
when  we  are  sluggish?    Is  it  not  this — 

"  Sweet  the  moments,  rich  in  blessing. 
Which  before  the  cross  I  spend  "  ? 

It  ii  this — it  ii  this  which  kindles  us  to  a  flame.  If  we  love,  it  Is  'because  he  first 
loved  us. 


OH.  IV.  1—21.]    THE   FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  JOHN.  117 

AppIiIOATion.  1.  It  is  qnite  intelligible  how  some  men  should  come  to  hate  what 
they  call  dogma.  If  a  man  accepts  a  form  of  sound  words,  and  is  dead  withal,  he  must 
not  be  surprised  if  his  words  are  thought  to  be  "  an  empty  sound."  Can  anything  be  more 
unutterably  offensive  than  a  bundle  of  dead  creeds  avowed  by  dead  men  ?  Men  ought 
to  hate  them.  But  if  a  man  says, "  My  religion  is  this—'  I  love  God  and  man  because 
God  loves  me ; '"  and  if  he  shows  it  while  he  says  it,  men  will  not  despise  him  or  his 
doctrine  either.  He  will  redeem  dogma  from  discredit  by  inspiring  it  with  life.  2. 
Whoever  expects  a  living  Church  without  a  creed,  expects  an  impossibility.  If  we  let 
go  our  faith,  we  put  out  our  fire.  If  any  Church  lets  go  its  hold  on  the  love  of  God  in 
Christ  Jesus  our  Lord,  its  life  will  not  be  worth  twenty  years'  purchase.  3.  If  God  first 
loves,  then  we  should  consent  to  lot  God's  love  be  first.  What  is  the  use  of  trying 
to  work  ourselves  into  favour  with  God  ?  The  very  effort  is  sin.  If  God  did  not  love 
us  out  of  the  promptings  of  his  own  nature,  nothing  that  we  can  ever  do  would  be  good 
enough  to  induce  him  to  love.  4.  If  God  first  loves  us,  and  seeks  "  the  love  of  poor 
souls,"  how  ungrateful  and  unjust  will  it  be  on  our  part  if  we  do  not  love  in  return  I  6. 
Here  is  a  glorious  object  on  which  we  may  set  our  gaze — Divine  love.  Yea,  it  is  a  staff 
on  which  we  can  lean,  a  pillow  on  which  we  may  repose ;  nay,  more,  it  is  a  vast  and 
gorgeous  cathedral  in  which  we  can  worship  and  adore ;  it  is  the  soul's  home  and  joy 
and  rest.  Here  is  "the  simplicity  which  is  in  Christ."  Here  are  theology, religion,  and 
philosophy  in  one  sentence.  Theology :  God  loves.  Religion :  we  love.  Philosophy : 
we  love  because  he  loves.  Here  is  that  which  is  simple  enough  for  the  child,  yet  so 
grand  that  not  the  wisest  philosopher  as  such  has  found,  or  ever  will  find,  aught  worthy 
to  be  compared  with  it. 

Vers.  20,  21. — Love  to  man  the  expression  of  love  to  Ood.  Connecting  link :  The 
apostle  has  just  declared  that  the  love  which  pervades  believers  is  owing  to  God's  love 
to  them.  He  now  advances  to  another  and,  indeed,  to  the  final  step  in  this  paragraph 
on  love,  in  which  he  sets  forth  more  powerfully  than  ever  the  truth  which  he  has  thrice 
before  (ch.  iii.  10, 17;  iv.  8  *)  indicated,  that  love  to  God  and  love  to  man  are  inseparably 
connected  together;  that  if  any  man  declares  that  he  loves  God,  while  yet  he  is  uncon- 
cerned about  his  brother,  "he  is  a  liar;"  for  adds  the  apostle,  "He  that  loveth  not  his 
brother  whom  be  hath  seen,  cannot  love  God  whom  he  hath  not  seen."  Hence  our 
topic — Love  to  Ood  and  love  to  man  inseparable.  Three  lines  of  remark  are  suggested 
by  the  verses  before  us. 

I.  Here  is  a  difficultt  which  wk  will  enbbavotjb  to  ebmovb.  What,  indeed, 
may  seem  a  difBculty  to  A  may  not  prove  so  to  B,  and  vice  versa.  To  some,  at  any 
rate,  there  lies  a  difBculty  here.  The  apostle  says,  "  He  that  loveth  not  his  brother 
whom  he  hath  seen,"  etc. ;  as  if  it  were  so  much  easier  and  simpler  to  do  that,  and  as  if 
his  meaning  were,  "  If  he  cannot  do  the  easier,  he  cannot  do  the  harder ;  if  he  does  not 
love  him  who  is  nearest,  he  cannot  love  him  who  is  further  removed ;  if  he  does  not 
love  one  whom  he  sees,  he  cannot  love  one  whom  he  cannot  see,"  etc.  On  this  Canon 
Westcott  remarks,  "  It  is  necessarily  easier  to  love  that  which  is  like  ourselves  than 
that  which  we  cannot  grasp  in  finite  form."  True,  on  the  supposition  that  our  brother 
possessed  all  moral  and  spiritual  excellences,  and  that  his  kindness  towar>1s  us  were 
at  all  the  counterpart  of  the  love  of  God ;  then  it  would  obviously  be  easier  to  love 
the  nearer  than  the  more  remote.  But  supposing  (as  is  too  often  the  case)  that  our 
"brother"  is  the  reverse  of  lovable — is  hard,  cruel,  selfish,  lustful,  bitter;  it  is  very 
much  harder  to  love  him  with  all  his  visible  vices  than  to  love  God  with  all  his  glorious 
perfections,  unseen  thoi^h  he  is.  Is  it  true  in  such  a  case,  if  a  man  love  not  a 
vicious  brother  he  cannotloye  an  unseen  Being  who  is  Love  ?  We  answer,  Undoubtedly ; 
for :  (1)  We  are  not  right  if  we  set  the  question  only  thus — Whether  is  easier  per  ee  f 
but — Is  it  possible,  looking  at  the  matter  all  round  ?  (2)  The  question  is  not  that  of 
the  love  in(Ucated  by  the  word  (pi\os,  but  rather  that  of  &7a»J).  (3)  Seeing  that  God  com- 
mands us  to  love  our  brother  (ver.  21),  and  that  love  to  God  is  nothing  if  it  be  not 
loyalty,  then  if  we  do  not  in  such  a  case  love  (hyamir)  our  brother,  it  is  certain  that  we 
cannot  be  loving  God.  (Note  the  change  of  rendering  in  the  Revised  Version  and  a 
corresponding  change  in  the  Greek.) 

II.  Hbbb  is  a  btatkuent  which  it  BEHOVsa  DS  oabefullt  to  poeidgr,  viz.  that 

'  See  homilies  theteon. 


118  THE  FIBST  EPISTLE  GEKEBAL  OF  JOHN.    [oh.  nr.  1— 2L 

Qod'g  command  to  lore  our  brother  is  bo  emphatically  the  command  of  the  gospel  that, 
if  it  is  neglected,  God  is  not  loved  at  all,  however  profuse  the  verbal  declaration  of  love 
may  be.  "  My  love  must  go  forth  towards  those  whom  I  see,  as  God  saw  me  when  he  first 
loved  me.  And  my  love  must  be  what  his  love  is — no  idle  sentiment  or  barren  sym- 
pathy, but  a  love  that  seeks  them,  and  bears  long  with  them,  and  waits  and  longs  and 
prays  for  their  salvation  j  a  love  that  gives  freely  and  without  upbraiding ;  a  love  self- 
sacrificing,  self-denying ;  a  love  that  will  lay  down  life  itself  to  save  them.  And  when 
they  become  by  grace  what  by  grace  I  am,  I  must  love  them  as  God  loves  me,  for  what 
I  see  in  them;  yes,  and  in  spite  of  what  I  see  in  them,*  too."  The  love  of  God  is  that 
we  keep  his  commandments  (ch.  T.  3);  but  his  command  is  that  we  love  as  he  loved 
ns.  The  only  being,  however,  whom  we  can  love  with  such  a  love  is  our  brother,  whom 
God  has  placed  before  us;  one  whom  we  have  seen.  "And  the  title  '  brother'  brings 
out  the  idea  of  that  which  is  God-like  in  man  to  which  love  can  be  directed.  He,  there- 
fore, who  fails  to  recognize  God  as  he  reveals  himself  through  Christ  in  man  (Matt. 
XXV.  40)  cannot  love  God.  He  has  refused  the  help  which  God  has  provided  for  the 
expression  of  love  in  action"  (Westcott, '  Commentary,'  in  loc).  Let  us,  then,  formulate 
the  statement  of  the  text  thus :  1.  The  love  which  has  God  for  its  supreme  Object  is  an 
element  pervading  the  whole  being,  and  radiating  towards  surrounding  objects.  It  is 
not  a  capricious  sentimentalism ;  it  is  a  love  which  is  not  only  towards  God,  but  fjom 
him,  and  like  his  own.  2.  I  am  to  love  compassionately  and  with  a  view  to  redeem 
another,  as  God  has  loved  me.  But  the  only  being  whom  I  can  thus  love  is  he  who  is 
before  me — ^my  brother.  3.  It  is  a  command  from  God  that  my  love  to  him,  the  great 
Unseen,  should  be  shown  in  this  way — ^by  loving  the  brother  who  is  seen.  4.  There- 
fore there  i$  no  other  way  of  practising  love  to  God  than  this — ^loving  the  seen  brother ; 
i.e.  not  simply  our  natural  brother  in  the  home,  nor  even  our  redeemed  brother  in  the 
Church,  but  our  fallen,  sinking,  perishing  brethren  in  the  "wide,  wide  world." 

IIL  Herb  is,  consequently,  a  dutt  speoified,  which  we  abb  bound  to  discharge. 
*  That  he  who  loveth  God  love  his  brother  also."  And,  lest  we  should  be  content  with 
vague  generalities,  we  are  supplied  elsewhere  with  two  other  specific  directions  to  the 
working  of  this  love — in  ch.  iii.  18  and  in  ch.  iii.  16.  According  to  the  first,  our  love  to 
man  ought  to  be  an  intensely  practical  one.  According  to  the  second,  we  should  be  such 
enthusiasts  therein  as  to  be  willing  to  lay  down  our  lives  for  the  brethren.  Now,  if 
any  one  earnestly  desired  to  fulfil  all  this  in  his  own  life,  he  would  go  very  far  towards 
succeeding  if  he  adopted  and  carried  out  the  following  principles  of  action :  1.  "  I  will, 
by  Gnd's  help,  for  God's  sake,  lay  out  myself  to  be  the  helper  of  mankind  in  any  way 
in  which  I  can  advance  their  Interests ;  and  this  plan  in  life  shall  take  precedence  of 
my  own  ease,  comfort,  and  wealth;  desiring  to  carry  out  the  apostolic  motto,' As  poor, 
yet  making  many  rich.'"  2.  The  most  truly  Christ-like  way  to  help  others  is  to  lead 
them  to  gain  the  power  of  so  helping  themselves  that  they  no  more  may  need  another's 
aid,  but  may  become  themselves,  in  their  turn,  helpers  of  others  (Acts  iii.  6).  That  is 
not  true  love  which  so  doles  out  charities  as  to  keep  the  recipients  in  a  perpetual  state 
of  dependence,  if  by  wiser  methods  they  could  be  raised  above  it.  3.  In  pursuing  this 
method  diligent  inquiry  must  be  made  as  to  what  evils  a£3ict  the  people  and  retard 
their  progress.  We  must  ascertain  whpther  they  come  from  within  or  from  without, 
and,  in  either  case,  what  they  are  and  how  they  come.  4.  These  causes  of  ill  being 
ascertained,  they  must  be  traced  to  their  source;  whether  health,  or  wealth,  or  morals, 
or  religion  be  imperilled:  whether  they  are  traceable  to  the  covetousness,  greed,  and 
love  of  power  on  the  part  of  men  in  the  higher  ranks,  or  to  lack  of  self-respect,  of  aim, 
of  hope,  of  faith,  and  of  a  sense  of  right  in  the  lower  ranks.  6.  Some  specific  external 
ills  require  an  equally  specific  and  special  remedy,  such  as  sanitary  ills,  overcrowding, 
etc.  6.  In  every  case  Christian  philosophy  requires  that  we  attack  the  evils  at  their 
»oot,  which  is  tin,  however  varied  the  forms  in  which  it  may  rear  its  head.  7.  Hence 
the  supreme  work  of  the  Christian  philanthropist  who  would  lay  himself  out  to  help 
his  brother  man  is  to  bring  the  love  of  Ood  in  Christ  to  bear  upon  his  heart  and  con- 
science. In  God's  love  the  desolate  soul  (1)  finds  a  home ;  (2)  learns  its  own  worth ; 
(3)  begins  to  love  others;  (4)  lives  to  help  others.  And  thus— thus,  in  letting  God's 
love  in  us  work  out  efiectively,  Christian  people  have  the  one  and  only  cure  for  all  the 
UU  of  mr  i»ce.  In  this  direction  much  more  remains  to  be  done  than  Christians  have 
<  Di.  CkadUili,  •  Oommentaiy,' ««  1  John,  vol  iL  pp.  165. 16a. 


OH.  IV.  1—21.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  JOHN.  US 

eyer  yet  attempted.    May  God  make  u»  loving  and  wise  enough  to  work  with  him 
in  blessing  our  age  and  race  1 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ver.  4. — The  victory  of  the  Christian  over  antichristian  teachers.  "  Ye  are  of  God, 
little  children,  and  have  overcome  them,"  etc.  Very  suggestive  are  the  words  with 
which  our  text  begins,  "Ye  are  of  God."  As  having  communion  with  him  ;  as  heartily 
holding  and  confessing  the  truth  which  unites  with  him  (ver.  2) ;  as  having  been  born 
of  him,  and  being  his  offspring  morally  and  spiritually,  they  were  of  God.  The  text 
suggests  the  following  observations. 

I.  That  Christians  abb  exposed  to  the  absattlts  of  hebetioal  tbachbes.  It 
was  so  in  St.  John's  time.  There  were  those  that  denied  that  Jesus  Christ  had  come 
in  the  flesh,  maintaining  that  his  human  body  was  apparent,  not  real.  And  others 
held,  with  Cerinthus,  "  that  the  Mon  Christ  had  entered  into  the  man  Jesus  at  his 
baptism,  and  remained  with  him  until  the  commencement  of  his  sufferings ;  but  denied 
that  Jesus  Christ  came  in  the  flesh"  (Ebrard).  Christians  are  still  assailed  by  the 
teachers  of  grave  errors,  many  of  which  relate  to  the  Person  and  work  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ. 

II.  That  Cheibtians  mat  ovbbcomk  the  assaults  of  hebetioal  teaohebs. 
St.  John's  readers  had  done  so.  "  Ye  have  overcome  them."  By  their  fidelity  to  the 
truth  they  had  obliged  the  teachers  of  error  to  retreat  (cf.  oh.  ii.  14,  19).  And  their 
complete  and  final  victory  the  apostle  looks  upon  as  an  assured  certainty.  The  false 
prophets  were  probably  plausible,  persuasive,  and  influential;  but  they  were  not 
irresistible.  They  had  been  repulsed ;  they  would  be  completely  vanquished.  We  are 
not  bound  to  accept  any  teaching  that  is  offered  to  us.  If  we  please,  we  may  refuse  to 
read  the  questionable  book  or  to  hear  the  teacher  of  whom  we  stand  in  doubt.  Or 
we  may  read  the  book  and  hear  the  teacher,  and  then  test  their  teaching  by  that 
of  our  Lord  and  his  apostles,  and  accept  or  rejept  it  according  to  its  agreement  or  dis- 
agreement with  the  Divine  standard.  "  Despise  not  prophesyings ;  prove  all  things ; 
hold  fast  that  which  is  good." 

III.  That  Chbistians  mat  ovebcomb  the  asbaults  of  hebetioal  teaohebs 
BECAUSE  of  the  pbesencb  OF  GoD  WITHIN  THBM.  "  Ye  havc  Overcome  them :  because 
greater  is  he  that  is  in  you  than  he  that  is  in  the  world."  He  that  was  in  the 
Christians  is  God  ;  he  that  was  in  the  world  is  Satan,  "  the  prince  of  this  world."  1. 
God  dwells  in  his  people.  (1)  By  his  Word.  The  author  whose  works  have  been 
sympathetically  and  diligently  studied  may  be  said  to  be  in  the  student.  The  student 
knows  the  views  and  opinions,  the  thoughts  and  theories,  the  principles  and  convic- 
tions, of  his  favourite  author,  and  sympathizes  with  them.  The  godly  soul  knows  God 
in  his  Word  (Ps.  i.  2  ;  oxix.  97) ;  and  by  means  of  his  Word  is  filled  with  his  thoughts, 
feelings,  and  principles.  (2)  By  the  faith  which  they  exercise  in  hira.  Their  faith  in 
him  is  not  mere  intellectual  assent,  but  spiritual  conviction,  which  makes  his  existence 
and  presence  real  unto  them.  (3)  By  their  love  to  him  (cf.  vers.  12,  13, 16 ;  John  xiv. 
23).  There  is  no  real  spiritual  indwelling  apart  from  love.  (4)  By  his  Spirit  (cf.  ver. 
13 ;  John  xiv.  16,  17).  2.  Ood  is  greater  than  Satan.  "Greater  is  he  that  is  in  you 
than  he  that  is  in  the  world."  (1)  God  is  independent,  but  Satan  is  dependent.  Satan 
cannot  do  anything  except  by  permission  of  the  Most  High  (cf.  Job  i.  12 ;  ii.  6).  But 
as  for  God,  "  he  doeth  according  to  his  will  in  the  array  of  heaven,  and  among  the 
inhabitants  of  the  earth  :  and  none  can  stay  his  hand,  or  say  unto  him.  What  doest 
thou?"  (2)  God  is  infinite,  but  Satan  is  finite.  However  great  the  power  of  the 
evil  one  may  be,  it  is  limited.  His  intelligence  is  limited,  his  agencies  and  instru- 
ments are  limited,  and  the  duration  of  his  power  is  limited  (Rev.  xx.  1 — 3).  But  God 
is  infinite  in  intelligence,  in  wisdom,  in  power,  in  duration,  in  perfection.  (3)  God  is 
the  God  of  truth,  but  Satan  is  the  father  of  lies  (John  viii.  44).  Truth  is  a  permanent 
and  victorious  force;  falsehood  is  transient,  feeble,  and  doomed  to  extinction.  The 
power  of  the  prince  of  this  world  is  based  upon  lies,  and,  for  that  reason,  its  overthrow 
is  certain.  But  the  power  of  God  is  the  power  of  truth  and  holiness,  and  is  therefore 
destined  to  continue  and  grow  etemalljr.    (4)  "  CKtd  is  love,"  but  Satan  is  m»liguant. 


120  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  JOHN.    [ch.  iv.  1— 21 

However  persistent  and  strong  hatred  may  be.  It  is  not  persistent,  patient,  or  powerful 
as  loT«.  In  love  God  dwells  in  his  people  for  their  salvation  ;  but  Satan  dwells  in  the 
world  for  the  destruction  of  the  worldly.  And  the  loving,  saving  Spirit  is  immeasurably 
greater  and  mightier  than  the  bating,  destroying  spirit.  3.  Ood'a  presence  within  his 
people  is  the  secret  of  their  victory  over  heretical  teachers,  "  Ye  have  overcome  them : 
because  greater  Is  he,"  etc.  This  Presence  in  the  soul  imparts  power  for  spiritual 
conflict  and  conquest.  The  most  effective  safeguard  against  error  in  religious  faith  and 
union  is  not  the  subtle  and  strong  intellect,  but  the  devout  and  godly  spirit  and  the 
upright  life.  "  The  meek  will  he  guide  in  judgment,"  etc. ;  "  The  secret  of  the  Lord 
is  with  them  that  fear  him,"  etc.  (Ps.  xxt.  9,  14) ;  "  If  any  man  willeth  to  do  his  will, 
he  shall  know  of  the  teaching,"  etc.  (John  vii.  17).  In  the  conflicts  of  the  spiritual 
life  the  mightiest  weapons  are  not  logical,  but  devotional.  In  this  sphere  the  greatest 
victories  are  often  won  upon  our  knees.  The  consciousness  of  God's  presence  within 
us  is  the  inspiration  for  the  achievement  of  the  sublimest  conquests. — W.  J. 

Vers.  9 — 11. — The  supreme  manifestation  of  love.  "  In  this  wa»  manifested  the 
love  of  God  toward  us,"  etc.  Our  text  does  not  speak  of  the  only  manifestation  of  the 
Divine  love.  In  many  things  is  the  love  of  God  manifested  to  us — in  the  beauty, 
the  utility,  and  the  fertility  of  our  world ;  in  the  exquisite  structure  of  our  souls  »nd 
bodies;  in  the  apt  relations  of  the  outer  world  to  our  nature.  Nor  does  our  text 
mention  the  manifestation  to  angelic  beings  of  the  love  of  God.  But  St.  John  sets 
forth  the  richest  and  most  glorious  exhibition  in  regard  to  us  of  the  love  of  God.  We 
see  here  several  aspects  of  the  Divine  love. 

I.  In  its  obeat  okiqin.  "  Herein  is  love,  not  that  we  loved  God,  but  that  he  loved 
us"  1.  OocCs  love  to  man  originated  entirely  with  himself.  This  love  in  its  beginning 
was  all  on  God's  part,  and  none  on  ours.  We  did  not  love  him.  There  was  ndthicg 
in  us  £6  awaken  his  love  to  us.  We  were  not  beautiful,  or  amiable,  or  meritorious,  or 
good.  "  But  God  commendeth  his  own  love  toward  us,  in  that,  while  we  were  yet 
sinners,  Christ  died  for  us."  It  was  our  sin  and  sufiering  and  deep  need  that  called 
forth  his  compassion  toward  us ;  and  ere  he  could  love  us  with  the  love  of  complacency, 
he  loved  us  with  the  love  of  tender  and  Divine  pity.  2.  Qod  is  the  Fountain  (f  aU  love. 
Love  flows  from  the  essential  nature  of  the  Divine  Being.  "  Love  is  of  God  .  .  .  God 
is  Love  "  (vers.  7,  8).  As  light  and  heat  from  the  sun,  so  all  true  love  everywhere  flows 
from  him,  or  took  its  rise  from  him.  And  seeing  that  he  is  love,  that  love  is  of  his 
essence,  the  flowing  forth  of  his  love  to  us  is  the  giving  of  himself  to  us.  But  the  love 
of  God  was  manifested  in  our  case — 

n.  In  the  great  Mbssbngbb  which  he  sent  unto  us.  "  Herein  was  the  love  of 
God  manifested  in  us  [or,  '  in  our  case '],  that  God  hath  sent  his  only  begotten  Son 
into  the  world,  that  we  might  live  through  him."  Notice:  1.  2%e  pre-existence  of 
Jesus  Christ.  This  is  clearly  implied  in  the  expression,  "  God  hath  sent  his  Son  into 
the  world  "  (cf.  John  xvii.  4,  5 ;  iii.  17,  34).  2.  The  endearing  relation  of  Jesus  Christ 
to  God  the  Father.  He  is  "  his  only  begotten  Son."  The  word  "Son"  alone  would  suggest 
that  their  relation  is  one  of  deep  affection ;  but  other  terms  are  added,  which  intensify 
and  strengthen  this  idea.  The  Father  speaks  of  him  as  "  my  beloved  Son,  in  whom  I 
am  well  pleased  "  (Matt.  iii.  17),  St.  Paul  writes  of  him  as  "  God's  own  Son  "  (Bom.  viii. 
3).  And  St.  John  styles  him  "  the  Only  Begotten  of  the  Father. . . .  the  only  begotten 
Son,  which  is  in  the  bosom  of  the  Father  "  (John  i.  14, 18) ;  "  The  Father  loveth  the 
Son,  and  hath  given  all  things  into  his  hand"  (John  iii.  35).  And  our  Saviour  said, 
"  Father,  thou  lovedst  me  before  the  foundation  of  the  world"  (John  xvii.  24).  It  is 
impossible  for  us  to  comprehend  this  ineffable  and  infinite  love  subsisting  between  the 
Father  and  his  only  Son,  or  the  deep  and  unuttfrable  joy  of  their  communion.  In 
sending  such  a  Messenger  to  our  world,  what  a  revelation  we  have  of  the  love  of  Qod ! 
3.  The  subordination  of  Jesus  Christ  to  Qod  the  Father  in  the  work  of  redemption. 
"  God  sent  his  only  begotten  Son  into  the  world."  "As  thou  didst  send  me  into  the 
world,  even  so  sent  1  them  into  the  world  "  (John  xvii.  18).  The  Divine  Son  cheerfully 
became  a  servant  that  his  Father's  authority  might  be  vindicated,  and  his  Father's 
glory  be  promoted  in  the  redemption  of  the  human  race  (cf.  Phil.  ii.  6 — 8). 

III.  In  the  blessing  which  he  designs  fob  us.  "  That  we  might  live  through 
him,"    Notice  :  1.  The  condition  in  which  the  love  cf  Qod  finds  -man.    "  Dead  by 


OH.  IT.  1—21.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  JOHN.  121 

reason  of  trespasses  and  sins."  There  is  a  resemblance  between  a  dead  body  and  the 
state  into  which  the  soul  is  brought  by  sin.  In  both  there  is  the  abseoce  of  vision,  of 
hearing,  of  sensibility,  and  of  activity.  2.  Hie  condition  into  which  the  love  of  Ood 
aimt  to  bring  man.  "  That  we  might  live  through  him."  His  design  is  to  quickea 
men  into  spiritual  life — the  life  of  true  thought,  pure  affection,  righteous  and  unselfish 
activity,  and  reverent  worship.  This  life  is  eternal  in  its  nature.  It  is  not  perishable 
or  decaying,  but  enduring  and  progressive.  And  it  is  blessed.  Life  in  the  text  com- 
prises salvation  in  all  its  glorious  fulness.  How  clear  is  the  manifestation  to  us  of  the 
Divine  love  in  this  1 

IV.  In  the  means  by  which  this  blessino  is  obtained  pob  us.  "  He  sent  his  Son 
to  be  the  Propitiation  for  our  sins."  The  best  commentary  on  Christ  the  Propitiation 
that  we  know,'  is  that  found  in  the  words  of  St.  Paid,  in  Bom.  iii.  24 — 26.  Two 
remarks  only  do  we  offer  concerning  the  propitiation.  1.  It  was  not  anything  offered  to 
God  to  render  him  willing  to  bless  and  save  us.  2.  It  was  designed  to  remove  obstructions 
to  the  free  fiowing  forth  of  the  mercy  of  Ood  to  man}  How  splendid  the  expression  of 
the  love  of  God  in  sending  his  Son,  only  and  well-beloved,  to  be  the  Propitiation  for 
our  sins  I 

V.  Ik  the  example  wmctf  it  presents  to  vb.  "  Beloved,  if  God  so  loved  us,  we 
also  ought  to  love  one  another."  The  obligation  to  copy  the  Divine  example  in  this 
respect  is  grounded  upon  our  relation  to  him  as  his  children.  Because  we  are  "  begotten 
of  God  "  (ver.  7)  we  should  seek  to  resemble  him.  The  argument  of  the  Apostle  Paul 
is  similar :  "  Be  ye  therefore  imitators  of  God,  as  beloved  children,  and  walk  in  love," 
etc.  (Eph.  V.  1,  2).  If  we  are  "  partakers  of  the  Divine  nature,"  we  should  imitate  the 
Divine  example.  1.  In  relation  to  mankind  in  general.  "  I  say  imto  you,  Love  your 
enemies,  and  pray  for  them  that  persecute  you ;  that  ye  may  be  sons  of  your  Father 
which  is  in  heaven,"  etc.  (Matt.  v.  44,  45).  He  loved  us  with  the  love  of  compassion 
before  he  could  love  us  with  the  love  of  complacency.  Let  us  imitate  him  in  this 
respect  lu  our  relation  to  those  who  are  yet  in  their  sins.  2.  In  relation  to  the 
Christian  brotherhood  in  particular.  (Cf.  ch.  iii,  10 — 18.)  Let  us  evince  our  relation 
to  the  Father,  who  is  infinite  Love,  by  our  unfeigned  love  to  our  Christian  brethren.  Let 
the  supreme  manifestation  in  regard  to  us  of  his  lore  thui  produce  its  appropriate  effect 
in  us. — ^W.  J. 

Ver.  14. — The  great  mission  of  Christ.  "And  wo  have  seen  and  do  testify  that  the 
Father  sent  the  Son,"  etc.  The  mission  of  Jesus  Christ  appears  here  in  a  threefold 
relation. 

I.  In  its  relation  to  the  world.  "  The  Father  gent  the  Son  to  be  the  Saviour  of 
the  world."  Notice.  1.  The  world^s  need  of  a  Saviour.  It  was  in  a  morally  lost  and 
undone  condition.  It  was  perishing  by  reason  of  its  sins.  Take  the  world  of  St.  John's 
day,  or  of  our  own  day,  in  confirmation  of  this.  2.  2%e  world's  inability  to  provide 
for  itself  a  Saviour.  Many  times  and  in  various  ways  it  has  made  the  attempt,  but 
it  has  always  failed.  Schemes  of  political  organization,  or  liberal  education,  or  social 
amelioration,  or  even  moral  reformation,  do  not  reach  the  central  depths  of  the  need  of 
our  race.  Man  needs  salvation,  redemption.  3.  The  Son  of  Ood  came  to  the  world  as 
its  Saviour.  "  The  Saviour  of  the  world."  The  expression  "  the  world "  is  to  be 
understood  in  its  plain,  natural  meaning  (cf.  ch.  ii.  2 ;  John  iii.  16).  He  saves  men 
from  sin  by  the  influence  of  his  life  and  work  upon  earth,  of  his  sacrificial  death,  his 
glorious  resurrection,  and  his  effectual  intercession.  How  benevolent  is  this  mission  I 
He  might  have  come  to  judge,  condemn,  and  destroy  our  rebellious  race.  But  "  God 
sent  not  his  Son  into  the  world  to  condemn  the  world;  but  that  the  world  through  him 
might  be  saved."  How  stupendous  is  this  mission  1  Creation  is  a  great  and  glorious 
work.  The  Divine  agency  in  upholding  the  universe,  and  presiding  over  its  vast  and 
infinitely  diversified  affairs,  baffles  our  every  attempt  to  comprehend  it.  The  immensity 
of  its  extent,  the  minuteness  of  its  attention,  the  infinity  of  its  wisdom,  the  almighti- 
ness  of  its  power,  immeasurably  traascend  our  utmost  thought.  But  the  salvation  o\ 
lost  men  is  God's  greatest  and  most  glorious  work.  In  the  Divine  Son  accomplishing 
his  redemptive  mission  we  have  the  clearest  and  fullest  manifestation  of  God. 

II.  In  its  relation  to  the  Father.    "  The  Father  hath  sent  the  Son  to  be  the 

'  For  additional  remarks  on  these  points,  see  our  homily  on  oh.  iL  1,  S. 


122  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  JOHN.    [ch.  iv.  1— 21. 

Saviour  of  the  world."  1.  Tlie  Saviour  i$  the  Son  of  the  Father.  Frequently  is  this 
relationship  expressed  in  the  sacred  Scriptures,  and  in  a  way  which  indicates  its  ineffable 
sacredness  and  dearness  (see  Matt.  iii.  17  ;  xvii.  6;  John  i.  14, 18;  xviL  24;  Rom.  viil. 
3;  and  ver.  9).'  2,  The  Saviouris  the  Sent  of  the  Father.  "  The  Father  hath  sent  the 
Son."  This  is  affirmed  again  and  again  in  the  writings  of  St.  John  (John  iiL  17,  34; 
Tii.  16 ;  X.  36 ;  xvi.  5  ;  xvii.  3,  4,  5,  18,  21,  23,  25).  Being  thus  sent  by  the  Father, 
the  Son's  mission  as  a  Saviour  is  Divine  in  its  authority.  He  claimed  this  himself:  "I 
have  not  spoken  of  myself;  but  the  Father  which  sent  me,  he  gave  me  a  commandment," 
etc.  (John  xii.  49,  60).  The  apostles  made  the  same  claim  on  his  behalf  (see  Acts  ii 
22;  X.  38). 

HI.  In  its  belation  to  the  apostles.  "  And  we  have  seen,  and  do  testify,  that 
the  Father  sent,"  etc.  1.  Thdr  knowledge  of  the  Saviour.  St.  John,  writing  of  himself 
and  his  fellow-apostles,  says,  "  We  have  beheld,"  etc.  They  had  seen  their  Lord  in  the 
exercise  of  his  miraculous  powers,  and  in  wondrous  gloiy  on  the  Mount  of  Transfiguration ; 
they  had  beheld  the  perfect  purity  and  beauty  of  his  daily  life ;  they  had  seen  him  dead 
upon  the  cross,  and  his  sacred  body  laid  in  its  rocky  sepulchre ;  they  had  afterwards 
repeatedly  seen  him  living ;  and  tliey  beheld  him  as  "  he  was  taken  up ;  and  a  cloud 
received  him  out  of  their  flight."  2.  Their  testimony  concerning  the  Saviour.  "We  have 
beheld  and  bear  witness  that  the  Father,"  etc.  They  testified  to  the  facts  which  we 
have  already  noticed :  (1)  That  Jesua  Christ  was  the  Son  of  God.  (2)  That  he  was 
the  Sent  of  God.  (3)  That  he  was  sent  of  God  as  the  Saviour  of  the  world.  Their 
Lord  had  appointed  them  to  be  witnesses  for  him  (John  xv.  27 ;  Acts  i.  8).  And  this 
may  fairly  be  said  to  be  the  sum  of  their  testimony :  "  The  Father  sent  the  Son  to  be 
the  Saviour  of  the  world."  And  it  is  beyond  reasonable  question  that  their  testimony  is 
"  worthy  of  all  acceptation." 

Thus  we  have  seen  that  the  great  mission  of  Jesus  Christ  (1)  meets  man's  deepest 
need ;  (2)  rests  upon  the  supreme  authority ;  aiid  (3)  is  attested  by  competent  and  trust- 
worthy witnesses.  Therefore  let  us  believe  their  testimony,  and  turn  heartily  to  the 
Son  of  God  as  our  Saviour. — ^W.  J. 

Ver.  16. — The  love  of  God.  "  God  is  Love."  "  God  is."  To  this  ahnost  all  peoples 
assent.  The  belief  in  a  Supreme  Being  is  nearly  coextensive  with  the  human  race. 
Very  different  are  the  attributes  ascribed  to  him  and  the  names  applied  to  him;  but 
as  to  the  fact  of  his  existence  well-nigh  all  are  agreed.  But  what  is  God  ?  Many  and 
various  are  the  answers  to  this  inquiry.  To  some  he  is  unintelligent  and  irresistible 
Fate.  To  others.  Nature.  To  others,  the  beautiful  Order  and  stupendous  Forces 
of  nature.  To  others,  "  the  Something,  not  ourselves,  which  makes  for  righteousness." 
To  others,  "  an  Infinite  and  Eternal  Energy  from  which  all  things  proceed."  To  others, 
the  Creator,  Sustainer,  and  Sovereign  of  the  universe.  But  what  saith  the  Supreme 
concerning  iiimself?  "God  is  Light;"  "God  is  Love."  A  complete  apprehension 
of  what  God  is,  is  unattainable  by  us.  The  finite  cannot  comprehend  tbe  Infinite. 
"  God  is  Love ; "  we  can  understand  that.  But  God  is  infinite.  Combine  the  two 
statements.  "  God  is  Infinite  Love."  Here  we  are  lost.  The  highest  and  mightiest  of 
created  beings  cannot  comprehend  the  infinite  love.  The  knowledge  which  holy  spirits 
have  of  God  will  go  on  increasing  for  ever ;  but  at  no  period  in  the  everlasting  future 
will  any  one  be  able  fully  to  know  him.  Yet  as  to  his  being  and  character  we  may  each 
attain  such  a  knowledge  as  will  enable  us  to  confide  in  him,  and  to  enter  upon  the 
blessed  and  imending  career  of  moral  assimilation  to  him.  Though  we  cannot  com- 
prehend him  who  is  Infinite  Love,  yet  through  Christ  we  may  apprehend  him,  trust 
him,  love  him,  commune  with  him,  and  become  one  with  him.  "  God  is  Love."  Let 
us  consider — 

I.  The  manifestation  op  this  olobious  tbuth.  1.  In  creation.  The  machine 
is  a  revelation  of  the  mechanist ;  the  building,  of  the  architect ;  the  painting,  of  the 
painter;  the  poem,  of  the  poet.  So  the  universe  is  an  embodimeat  of  the  ideas  of  the 
Divine  mind,  a  revelation  of  the  thought  and  feeling  of  the  Creator.  A  careful  survey 
of  God's  work  will  lead  to  the  conclusion  that  "God  is  good  to  all,  and  his  tender 
mercies  are  over  all  his  works."  Paley  states  the  argument  with  clearness  and  force : 
"Contrivance  proves  design;  and  the  predominant  tendency  of  the  contrivance 
*  S«e  OUT  homily  on  vers.  9 — 11  on  thia  point. 


OT.  IT.  1—21,]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  JOHN.  123 

indicates  the  disposition  of  the  designer.  The  world  abound*  with  contrivances ;  and 
all  the  contrivances  which  we  are  acquainted  with  are  directed  to  beneScial  purposes. 
.  .  .  We  never  discover  a  train  of  contrivance  to  bring  about  an  evil  purpose.  No 
anatomist  ever  discovered  a  system  of  organization  calculated  to  produce  pain  and 
disease ;  or,  in  explaining  the  parts  of  the  human  body,  ever  said,  '  This  is  to  irritate, 
this  to  inflame,  this  duct  is  to  convey  the  gravel  to  the  kidneys,  this  gland  to  secrete 
the  humour  which  forms  the  gout,'"  Viewed  from  this  standpoint,  the  universe 
appears  to  be  a  grand  outflow  of  the  love  of  God,  a  convincing  witness  of  his  delight 
in  promoting  the  well-being  and  the  gladness  of  his  creatures.  The  seasons  of  the  year 
supply  evidence  of  this  truth.  Spring,  with  its  gradual  unfolding  of  young  life  and 
verdant  beauty,  its  quickening  and  joy-giving  influence,  is  a  revelation  of  God's 
tenderness  and  grace.  Summer,  with  its  rich  light  and  heat,  its  abounding  life'  and 
glory,  is  a  revelation  of  the  inexhaustible  beauty  and  glory  and  munificence  of  God. 
Autumn,  with  its  maturity  and  mellowness  and  plenty,  proclaims  the  fidelity  and 
bountifulness  of  God.  But  what  shall  we  say  of  winter,  with  its  storms  and  tempests, 
its  sombre  clouds  and  stern  colds  ?  Even  this — that  it  is  not  without  its  beauties,  and 
in  its  bleak  and  trying  months  nature  is  silently  and  secretly  preparing  the  beauties 
of  the  coming  spring,  the  glories  of  summer,  and  the  bounties  of  autumn.  Rightly 
regarded,  even  winter  testifies  that  "  God  is  Love."  But  man,  with  guilty  conscience, 
and  A  dread  of  God,  and  viewing  him  only  through  the  distorted  medium  of  his  own 
sinful  soul,  fails  to  read  the  revelation  of  him  in  nature  correctly.  And  even  if  he 
should  do  so,  there  arises  the  inquiry — Is  God  love  in  his  relation  to  the  sinful  ?  To 
this,  nature  has  no  satisfactory  response.  Creation  may  have  been  a  sufficient  revelation 
of  God  for  unfallen  men,  bat  for  sinful  men  it  is  very  insufficient.  2.  In  the  Bible. 
The  Bible  is  the  revelation  of  God  in  his  relation  to  man  as  a  sinner.  And  this  revela- 
tion reaches  its  clearest,  fullest,  and  most  influential  development  in  Jesus  Christ  the 
Son  of  God.  (1)  In  the  Bible,  God  appears  as  the  Giver  of  every  good,  the  Fountain  of 
all  blessings.  "  He  giveth  us  richly  all  things  to  enjoy,"  "  Every  good  gift  and  every 
perfect  gift  is  from  above,"  etc.  Material,  mental,  and  spiritual  good  we  derive  from 
him.  Restoration  to  the  lost,  pardon  to  the  guilty,  sanctiflcation  to  the  sinful,  glory 
to  the  degraded,  he  gives.  Through  Christ  he  bestows  all  good  here,  and  eternal  and 
glorious  life  hereafter  to  all  who  believe  in  him.  (2)  God  confers  these  blessings  upon 
those  who  are  entirely  undeserving  of  them.  It  is  not  to  his  loyal  subjects  alone 
that  these  gifts  are  bestowed,  but  also  to  rebels  against  his  authority.  "  He  maketh 
his  sun  to  rise  on  the  evil  and  on  the  good,"  etc.  Not  only  are  we  undeserving ;  we 
are  ill  deserving ;  we  have  merited  his  wrath ;  yet  he  imparts  to  us  the  gifts  of  his 
love.  (3)  In  order  to  bestow  these  gifts  upon  us,  he  gave  us  a  Gift  of  greater  value 
than  all  the  others.  "He  gave  his  only  begotten  Son."  This  Gift  immeasurably 
transcends  all  the  others.  Without  this  they  would  not  have  reached  us.  They 
flow  to  us  through  the  mediation  of  Jesus.  (4)  And  Jesus  was  given,  not  to  those 
who  waited  to  receive  and  honour  him,  but  to  those  who  despised  and  rejected 
him.  He  was  given  to  labour  and  suffer  and  die  for  men,  in  order  that  they  might  have 
life  and  joy  (cf.  vers,  9,  10 ;  Bom,  v.  8 ;  John  iii.  16).  "  God  so  loved  the  world, 
that  he  gave,"  etc  Who  can  declare  the  sweep  and  intensity  of  that  little  adverb 
"  so  "  ?  It  indicates  an  infinity  of  love,  a  shoreless,  bottomless  ocean  of  love,  "  Love, 
Divine  love.  Divine  love  giving.  Divine  love  giting  its  only  begotten  Son,  that  whoso- 
ever believeth — not '  payeth,'  not '  worketh,'  not '  putteth  out  some  externai  strength,' 
but  'believeth' — should  not  perish,  but  have  everlasting  life"  (Dr.  Joseph  Parker). 
Great  as  was  the  love  between  the  Father  and  the  Son,  the  Father  "  spared  not  his  own 
Son,  but  delivered  him  up  for  us  all,"  All  the  love  of  the  Saviour's  life  was  the  love 
of  God.  "  God  was  in  Christ  reconciling  the  world  unto  himself."  In  all  the  life  of 
our  Loid  I  read  our  text,  and  in  his  death  it  is  proclaimed  with  an  almost  irresistible 
fulness  and  force  that  "  God  is  Love." 

II.  The  vnroiOATiON  op  this  glorioits  truth.  The  terrible  presence  of  sin  and 
sufiering  in  the  world  tends  to  make  men  doubt  the  love  of  God.  If  God  is  love,  how 
is  it  that  there  is  so  much  evil  amongst  men  ?  If  he  is  omniscient,  he  must  have 
foreseen  it ;  and,  foreseeing  it,  if  he  is  omnipotent,  he  might  have  prevented  it.  Why 
did  he  not  do  w)  ?  Why  does  he  allow  it  to  remain  ?  1.  In  relation  to  the  existence  of 
sin,  or  moral  evil,  amongst  us,  observe  this — the  moral  connxouaness  of  men  tver  charges 


124  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  JOHN.    [oh.  it.  1—21. 

sin  up(m  themselves,  not  upon  God.  The  weak  and  depraved  reason  of  man  may  be  so 
perverted  as  to  charge  or  implicate  the  Almighty  with  the  origin  and  presence  of  sin ; 
but  the  heart  and  oonsoienoe  never  do  so.  Conscience  brings  the  guilt  home  to  the 
sin-doer,  and  under  its  influence  he  cries,  "Against  thee,  thee  only,  have  I  sinned,"  etc. 
Remorse,  penitence,  prayer  for  pardon,  efforts  to  repair  wrongs  which  have  been  done, 
— all  these  psove  that  man  feels  himself,  and  not  God,  to  be  chargeable  with  sin.  And 
in  relation  to  the  origin  of  evil,  whatever  dark  suggestions  may  be  presented  to  our 
mind,  we  always  feel  that  it  cannot  be  of  God,  but  is  against  him.  The  presence 
of  evil  he  permitted  and  still  permits ;  but  it  did  not  originate  with  him.  All  his 
works  and  ways  are  utterly  opposed  to  sin.  His  material  creation,  his  universal 
providence,  his  moral  laws,  and  the  redemptive  mission  of  his  Son,  are  all  resolutely 
set  against  evil.  He  is  not  darkness,  but  light;  not  malignity,  but  love.  2.  Suffering, 
or  natural  evil,  as  it  is  sometimes  called,  is  the  result  ^  sin,  or  moral  evil.  Whence 
come  war  and  slavery,  distress  and  poverty,  pain  and  sorrow,  disease  and  "  the  bitter- 
ness of  death  "  ?  If  men  would  "  cease  to  do  evil,  and  learn  to  do  well,"  suffering  would 
disappear  from  our  world  almost  entirely.  3.  Much  of  our  suffering  is  self-inflicted. 
We  violate  the  laws  of  God's  universe,  and  we  suffer  in  consequence.  "  Whoso  breaketh 
an  hedge,  a  serpent  shall  bite  him."  This  is  an  arrangement  of  love.  4.  The  sufferings 
of  the  world  are  small  when  compart  with  its  enjoyments.  Pain  is  the  exception,  not 
the  rule,  in  human  life.  The  joy  that  is  in  the  world  is  far  greater  than  the  sorrow. 
The  sufferings  of  our  race  are  only  like  one  dark  and  stormy  day  in  a  whole  year  of 
smiling  and  joyous  sunshine.  6.  The  suffering  that  is  in  the  world  is  often,  the  means 
of  goodness  and  joy.  In  itself  evil  is  and  ever  must  be  evil;  in  itself  suffering  is  ever 
painful  and  bitter.  But  through  the  goodness  of  God  evil  is  not  an  end,  but  is  often 
used  and  overruled  for  the  promotion  of  good.  "All  chastening  seemeth  for  the  present 
to  be  not  joyous,  but  grievous :  yet  afterward  it  yieldeth  peaceable  fruit  unto  them 
that  have  been  exercised  thereby,  even  the  fruit  of  righteousness."  Severe  suffering  is 
like  a  great  thunderstorm  which  sweeps  over  a  country,  and,  by  its  flashing  flames  and 
awful  booms  and  pelting  rain,  fills  the  minds  of  men  with  terror ;  but  it  passes  away, 
and  leaves  the  air  purer  and  the  heavens  brighter.  Therefore  "  let  us  rejoice  in  our 
tribulations  :  knowing  that  tribulation  worketh  patience,"  etc.  (Rom.  v.  3 — 5 ;  also 
viii.  18,  28 ;  2  Cor.  iv.  16—18 ;  Jas.  i.  2,  3, 12).  "  You  must  out  the  diamond,"  said 
Thomas  Joues,  "  to  understand  its  value,  and  to  behold  the  play  of  its  tremulous  colours 
when  the  sun-rays  fall  upon  its  surface.  Thus  do  afiSictions  bring  to  light  what  was 
latent  in  the  heart.  The  strongest  faith,  the  intensest  love,  the  profoundest  gratitude, 
and  the  sublimest  moral  and  spiritual  power  have  been  manifested,  not  by  men  in  the 
clear  day  of  their  prosperity,  but  by  the  children  of  affliction  in  the  dark  night  of 
sorrow."  Thus  even  suffering  and  trial,  when  received  and  borne  in  a  right  spirit, 
witness  to  this  glorious  truth,  that  "  God  is  Love." — W.  J. 

Vers.  17, 18. — The  victory  of  love  over  fear.  "  Herein  is  our  love  made  perfect,  that 
we  may  have  boldness  in  the  day  of  judgment,"  eta  Our  text  authorizes  the  following 
observations. 

I.  That  a  great  day  of  judoment  awaits  us  in  the  future.  St.  John  speaks 
of  "  the  day  of  judgment."  The  evidence  for  the  coming  of  such  a  day  is  various  and 
strong.  I.  The  administration  of  morcd  government  in  this  world  requires  it.  In  this 
present  state  the  distribution  of  good  and  evil,  of  prosperity  and  adversity,  among  men 
is  not  in  harmony  with  their  respective  characters.  We  find  St.  Paul  in  prison,  and 
Nero  on  the  throne ;  the  infamous  Jeffreys  on  the  bench,  the  sainted  Baxter  at  the  bar. 
This  aspect  of  the  Divine  government  occasioned  sore  perplexity  to  Asaph  (Ps.  Ixxiii. 
2 — 14),  and  from  that  perplexity  he  obtained  deliverance  by  the  recollection  of  the 
truth  that  a  time  of  judgment  and  retribution  awaits  our  race  in  the  future  (Ps.  Ixxiii. 
16 — 20).  2.  Conscience  anticipates  the  coming  of  such  a  day.  The  "  dread  of  some- 
thing after  death  "  has  been  fell  by  most  men  at  some  time  or  other.  The  voice  within 
testifies  to  the  solemn  truth  that  after  death  cometh  judgment.  3.  The  Bible  declares 
the  coming  of  such  a  day.  (See  Bccles.  xi.  9 ;  xii.  14 ;  Matt.  xii.  36 ;  xxv.  31 — 46 ; 
Acts  xvii.  31 ;  Rom.  ii.  16  ;  xiv.  10, 12 ;  2  Cor.  v.  10;  Jude  14, 15 ;  Rev.  xx.  11—13.) 

II.  That  the  solemn  tbanbactions  of  that  day  are  fitted  to  awaken  human 
FEAB8.    Very  clearly  is  this  implied  in  the  text.    The  awakened  c«nscienc«  cries, 


BH.  IV.  1—21.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  JOHN.  125 

"  Enter  not  into  judgment  with  thy  servant ;  for  before  thee  no  man  living  is 
righteous."  Two  things  in  connection  with  the  day  of  judgment  are  likely  to  lead  to 
fear.  1.  The  consciousness  of  our  sins.  No  human  being  can  stand  before  the  great 
tribunal  and  plead  "  Not  guilty."  In  relation  to  man  we  may  be  guiltless ;  that  is 
possible.  But  in  relation  to  the  holy  God  and  his  perfect  Law,  we  have  each  sinned, 
and  brought  ourselves  into  condemnation,  and  merited  punishment.  Hence  the 
prospect  of  the  day  of  judgment  may  well  awaken  our  fear.  2.  The  omniscience  and 
holiness  of  the  Judge.  He  knows  our  every  sin.  Even  our  sinful  thoughts  and  feelijigs 
are  manifest  unto  him.  He  has  set  our  iniquities  before  him,  our  secret  sins  in  the 
light  of  his  countenance  (Ps.  xo.  8).  And  he  cannot  excuse  any  sin.  Sin  is  the 
abominable  thing  which  he  hates  (Jer.  xliv.  4).  He  is  "  of  purer  eyes  than  to  behold 
evil,  and  cannot  look  on  iniquity  "  (Hab.  i.  13).  Who,  then,  can  stand  before  him  in 
that  day? 

III.  Perfect  love  will  banish  such  fbabs  and  inspibe  holt  confidence.  "  Herein 
is  love  made  perfect  with  us,  that  we  may  have  boldness  in  the  day  of  judgment,"  etc. 
"  Love  "  here  is  not  merely  our  love  to  God,  or  our  love  to  our  neighbour,  but  the  principle 
of  love,  or,  as  Ebrard  expresses  it,  "  the  love  which  subsists  between  God  and  us ;  thus 
that  simple  relation  of  love  of  which  the  apostle  had  spoken  in  ver.  12,  and  just  now 
again  in  ver.  16."  And  its  being  perfected  cannot  mean  that  it  is  so  fully  developed 
as  to  be  incapable  of  further  increase  or  improvement.  In  that  sense  love  will  never  be 
altogether  "  made  perfect  with  us."  One  meaning  of  "  to  be  made  perfect "  Is  "  to  attain 
its  end."  And  one  of  the  designs  of  God  is  that  love  should  inspire  us  with  holy  bold- 
ness in  the  day  of  judgment.  "  The  confidence,"  says  Alford,  "  which  we  shall  have 
in  that  day,  and  which  we  have  even  now  by  anticipation  of  that  day,  is  the  perfection 
of  our  love ;  grounded  on  the  consideration  which  follows ; "  viz.  "  Because  as  he  is, 
even  so  are  we  in  this  world."  1.  Perfect  love  expels  servile  fear.  There  is  a  reverent 
fear  which  increases  as  our  love  increases.  "  0  fear  the  Lord,  ye  his  saints,"  etc.  (Ps. 
xxxiv.  9) ;  "  Ye  that  fear  the  Lord,  trust  in  the  Lord,"  etc.  (Ps.  oxv.  11,  13).  But 
servile  fear,  the  fear  which  hath  torment,  is  incompatible  with  holy  love.  "  There  is  no 
fear  in  love :  but  perfect  love  casteth  out  fear,"  etc.  What  countless  fears  agitate  the 
hearts  of  those  who  are  not  in  sympathy  with  God !  Some  men  are  dreading  secular 
poverty;  others,  painful  and  lingering  illness;  others,  death;  others,  judgment;  others, 
God  himself.  Such  fears  agitate  and  distress  souls ;  they  have  torment.  Perfect  love 
will  expel  each  and  all  of  these  tormentors.  It  clothes  our  life  and  its  experiences  in 
new  aspects,  by  enabling  us  to  regard  them  in  a  different  spirit.  This  love  is  of  God  ; 
it  proceeds  from  him  and  returns  to  him,  and  it  cannot  dread  him  or  his  appointments 
in  relation  to  us.  In  this  way  it  banishes  from  the  heart  the  dread  of  death  and  of  the 
judgment.  2.  Perfect  love  inspires  holy  confidence.  It  will  impart  "  boldness  in  the 
day  of  judgment."  Holy  love  is  a  most  courageous  thing.  "  Love  is  strong  as  death. 
.  .  .  Many  waters  cannot  quench  love,  neither  can  the  floods  drown  it."  Since  this 
relation  of  love  subsists  between  God  and  us,  and  since  God  is  what  he  is,  viz.  "  love  " 
(ver.  16)  and  "  light "  (ch.  i.  5),  we  can  do  no  other  than  trust  him,  and  even  now  look 
forward  with  confidence  to  the  day  of  judgment.  Perfect  love  not  only  expels  servile 
fear,  but  inspires  victorious  trust  in  God. 

IV.  The  confidence  which  perfect  love  inspires  is  wbll-okoundbd.  "  Because 
as  he  is,  even  so  are  we  in  this  world."  "  God  is  love ;  and  he  that  abideth  in  love 
abideth  in  God,  and  God  abideth  in  him ; "  and  in  a  measure  he  is  like  unto  God. 
Moreover,  love  is  a  transforming  principle  and  power;  and  they  who  abide  in  love  are 
ever  growing  into  more  complete  likeness  to  God  in  Christ ;  and  for  this  reason  they 
may  be  well  assured  that  in  the  day  of  judgment  they  will  be  accepted  of  him.  If  we 
are  in  this  relation  of  holy  love,  we  have  communion  with  our  Lord  and  Saviour,  he 
dwells  in  us,  we  dwell  in  him,  and  we  may  rejoice  in  the  assurance  that,  because  we 
morally  resemble  him,  he  will  not  condemn  us  in  that  day. — W.  J. 

Ver.  19. — God's  love  and  ours.    "  We  love,  because  he  first  loved  us." 

I.  God  loves.    He  is  not  an  impassive,  unemotional,  passionless  Being.     Prom  all 

eternity  there  was  a  tender,  infinite,  ineffable  love  between  the  Father  and  the  Son. 

When  the  Scriptures  represent  God  as  having  a  heart,  as  pitying,  sorrowing,  repenting, 

loving,  hating,  there  is  a  true  meaning  in  the  representations.    If  we  take  the  corr» 


126  THE  FIRST  EPISTLK  GENERAL  OP  JOHN.    [oh.  rv.  1—21 

Bponding  emotion  in  ourselves,  purge  it  from  evil,  elevate  and  iublime  it  aa  much  at 
possible,  then  we  have  that  which  in  its  character  resembles  the  emotion  which  is 
predicated  of  God.     God  truly  loves. 

II.  God  loves  man.  He  loves  not  only  his  equal  Son,  or  the  Holy  Spirit,  or  great 
and  good  angels,  but  man — weak,  trail,  and  sinful.  Yes,  "sinful;"  for  he  loves  man 
OS  man ;  not  merely  the  pure  and  lovable,  but  the  sinful  and  morally  deformed.  If 
God  loved  only  those  whose  hearts  had  some  love  toward  him,  he  would  love  none ;  for 
all  are  estranged  from  him  by  sin.  But  "  he  first  loved  us."  "  In  this  was  manifested 
the  love  of  God  towards  us,"  etc.  (vers.  9,  10) ;  "  For  when  we  were  yet  without 
strength,  in  due  season  Christ  died  for  the  ungodly,"  etc.  (Rom.  v.  6 — 8) ;  "  God  who 
is  rich  in  mercy,  for  his  great  love  wherewith  he  loved  us,  even  when  we  were  dead 
through  our  trespasses,"  etc.  (Bph.  ii.  4,  6) ;  "  God  so  loved  the  world,"  etc. 

III.  God's  love  to  man  is  the  ORiQiNATiNa  cause  of  man's  love.  "  Wo  love, 
because  he  first  loved  us."  "  The  love  of  God  to  us  is  the  source  of  all  our  love."  The 
flowers  that  slumber  in  the  earth  during  winter  do  not  start  forth  in  spring  and  woo 
the  sun's'  warm  return ;  but  the  sun  comes  bathing  their  beds  with  light  and  warmth 
until  they  feel  his  genial  influence  and  respond  thereto.  So  is  it  with  God's  love  and 
ours.  "  Love  begets  love ; "  and  so  God's  love  to  us  begets  love  in  us.  It  follows  from 
this  that  our  love,  in  its  character,  though  not  in  its  degree,  must  resemble  that  of  God. 
There  is  something  in  us  which  has  an  afiinity  to  his  love,  and  therefore  responds  to  it. 
We  were  made  in  his  image,  and  thus  our  love  is  like  unto  his.  Every  form  or  expres- 
sion of  human  love  finds  its  archetype  and  its  perfect  expression  in  God.  Take  the 
love  of  Sk  father  for  his  child.  A  noble  thing  is  a  father's  love.  It  is,  however,  perfect 
only  in  God.  "  A  Father  of  the  fatherless  is  God  in  his  holy  habitation ; "  "  Like 
as  a  father  pitieth  his  children,  so  the  Lord  pitieth  them  that  fear  him  ; "  "  Behold 
what  manner  of  love  the  Father  hath  bestowed  upon  us,"  etc.  A  mother's  love  is  one 
of  the  most  holy  and  beautiful  things  in  the  universe ;  but  it  is  perfect  only  in  God. 
"Can  a  woman  forget  her  sucking  child,  that  she  should  not  have  compassion  on  the 
son  of  her  womb  ?  "  etc.  (Isa.  xlix.  15, 16) ;  "  As  one  whom  his  mother  comforteth,  so 
will  I  comfort  you."  A  husband's  love  is  perfect  only  in  God.  "  Thy  Maker  is  thine 
Husband ;  the  Lord  of  hosts  is  his  name."  His  fidelity  is  steadfast,  his  protection  is 
constant  and  adequate,  etc.  The  love  ot  friends  is  found  in  perfection  only  in  God. 
"The  Lord  spake  unto  Moses  face  to  face,  as  a  man  speaketh  unto  his  friend;" 
"  Abraham  was  called  the  friend  of  God."  Jesus  Christ,  the  Revealer  of  God,  is  the 
"  Friend  that  sticketh  closer  than  a  brother."  "  Having  loved  his  own  which  were  in 
the  world,  he  loved  them  unto  the  end."  The  love  of  a  child  for  its  parents  also  finds 
perfect  expression  in  the  Divine  nature.  Jesus  Christ  as  the  Son  of  God  and  as  the 
Son  of  Mary  is  the  perfect  pattern  of  such  affection.  Thus  every  aspect  of  true  human 
love  is  beautiful,  sacred.  Divine.  God  has  them  edl  in  all  perfection  in  himself.  He 
has  manifested  them,  and  still  manifests  them  to  us.  Our  Lord  Jesus  is  the  com- 
pletest,  brightest  manifestation  of  love.  Behold  it  in  him.  Condescension,  labour, 
humiliation,  patient  submission,  and  uttermost  self-sacrifice  for  sinners.  Can  you 
conceive  any  manifestation  of  love  more  complete,  more  sublime,  more  Divine  ?  The 
personal  readization  of  a  love  such  as  this  must  beget  love  in  us.  Its  nature  or  ours 
must  be  changed  ere  it  can  be  otherwise.  If  you  love  him  not,  you  are  really  not  fully 
persuaded  that  he  loves  you.  Behold  in  Jesus  Christ  the  love  of  God  towards  you. 
Did  he  not  love  you  ?  Is  he  not  love  ?  Then,  why  not  love  him  ?  Gratitude  should 
constrain  you  to  do  so.  Some  can  adopt  the  language  of  the  text  as  their  own :  "  We 
love,  because  he  first  loved  us."  And  others  have  advanced  to  love  him  because  of 
what  he  is  in  himself.  Let  us  endeavour  to  love  him  more  and  know  him  more,  to 
know  him  more  and  love  him  more,  and  so  become  increasingly  like  unto  him. — W.  J. 

Vers.  1 — 6. —  The  spirit  of  truth  and  the  spirit  of  error.  I.  Need  fob  testino. 
"  Beloved,  believe  not  every  spirit,  but  prove  the  spirits,  whether  they  are  of  God  : 
because  many  false  prophets  are  gone  out  into  the  world."  Again,  at  the  thought  of 
danger,  his  heart  warms  toward  his  readers  as  his  beloved.  It  is  necessary  to  bear  in 
mind  the  circumstances  in  which  they  were  placed.  They  had  the  help  of  true  prophets. 
The  apostolic  age  had  not  come  to  an  end.  John  was  still  living ;  and  there  were 
others  who  bad  inspired  utterance.     They  bad  that  for  which  some  minds  still  crave— 


OH.  IV.  1—21.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  JOHN.  12'J 

infallible  guidance  on  the  spot.     But  they  were  not  placed  beyond  danger,  as  minds 
never  are  in  this  world.     Many  false  prophets  had  gone  out  into  the  world,  and  were 
in  their  neighbourhood,  as  they  are  in  all  neighbourhoods  where  Christ's  truth  is 
published  and  finding  acceptance.     The  false  prophets  are  Satan's  counterpoise  to  the 
true  piophets,  and,  as  the  true  prophets  were  really  under  Divine  inspiration,  the  false 
prophets  claimed  to  be  under  Divine  inspiration  too.     For  that  lie  best  succeeds  which 
is^made  to  bear  the  closest  resemblance  to  the  truth  that  is  active.     Christianity  was 
at  that  time  wonderfully  active  in  many  places.     How  was  it  to  be  counteracted  ?    We 
can  understand  that  forming  the  subject  of  evil  counsel.     One  way  was  to  incorporate 
Judaism  with  Christianity.     Another  way  was  to  incorporate  Gentile  philosophy  with 
Christianity,  to  which  the  name  of  Gnosticism  is  given.     The  general  drift  ^f  Gnosticism 
IS  to  substitute,  for  the  plain  facts  of  the  gospel,  philosophic  myths.     Cerinthus,  who 
was  a  contemporary  of  John  in  proconsular  Asia,  is  described  by  Neander  as  "  the 
intermediate  linli  between  the  Judaizing  and  the  Gnostic  sects."     "As  a  Judaizer, 
Cerinthus  held,  with  the  Bbionites,  that  Jesus  was  only  the  son  of  Joseph  and  Mary, 
born  in  the  natural  way.    As  a  Gnostic,  he  maintained  that  the  Christ  first  descended, 
in  the  form  of  a  dove,  on  the  carpenter's  son  at  his  baptism ;  that  he  reveakd  to  him 
the  unknown  Father,  and  worked  miracles  through  him ;  and  that  at  length  he  took 
his  flight,  and  left  him,  so  that  Jesns  alone  suffered  and  rose,  while  the  Christ  remained 
impassible."    There  is  reason  for  believing  that  this  was  the  particular  danger,  or 
something  not  unlike  it,  which  beset  the  circle  or  circles  to  which  John  writes  in  this 
Epistle.     There  therefore  arose  a  necessity  for  discriminating  between  the  true  prophets 
ind  the  false  prophets,  that  the  one  class  might  be  followed  and  the  others  shunned. 
How  was  this  necessity  to  be  met  ?    Only  by  the  action  of  the  Christians  themselves. 
The  duty  of  discrimination  is  here  laid  upon  them.     For  this  they  were  not  specially 
inspired;    but  they  had  the  ordinary  assistance  of  the  Holy  Spirit.     Observe  the 
language  in  which  the  duty  is  described.     "Believe  not  every  spirit,  but  prove  the 
spirits,  whether  they  are  of  God  :    because  many  false  prophets  are  gone  out  into 
the  world."     They  were  not  enjoined  to  sit  in  judgment  upon  the  prophets  as  indi- 
viduals, but  in  respect  oi  then  prophetic  teachings,  which  they  claimed,  to  have  received 
from  God.     There  were  spirits  of  God  to  whom  afterward  is  attributed  the  confessing 
of  Christ ;  and  there  were  spirits  not  of  God  to  whom  afterward  is  attributed  the  refusal 
to  confess  Christ,  the  organs  of  the  latter  being  the  false  prophets.     How  afe  we  to 
understand  this  pliirality  of  spirits?    Are  we  to  think  of  the  spirits  of  the  prophets  as 
objectified  }  or  are  we  to  think  of  spirits  as  connected  with  separate  movepients,  finding 
their  organs  in  prophets   true  or  false?     The  latter  view  is  not  excluded   by  the 
language ;  but  wb  know  very  little  of  the  sphere  in  question.     The  practical  thing  is 
that  there  are  true  teachers  and  false  teachers,  between  whom  a  discrimination  has  to 
be  made.     The  Christian  ministry  should  be  in  the  service  of  truth ;  but  it  would  be 
vain  to  think  that  the  teaching  from  every  Christian  pulpit  is  true.    There  are  times 
when  many  go  forth  from  our  theological  halls  with  rationalistic  tendencies.     What 
are  Christian  people  to  do?    They  are  not  to  believe  every  spirit.     Whoever  the 
Christian  teacher  is,  the  influence  resting  upon  him  and  giving  character  to  his  utter- 
ances must  be  tested,  to  see  whether  it  is  of  God.     There  are  teachers  rising  up  from 
timo  to  time  of  commanding  ability.     They  are,  or  seem  to  be,  burdened  with  a  message 
for  their  age.    Their  influence  extends  beyond  the  readers  of  their  books  or  listeners  to 
their  orations.     It  is  soon  to  be  found  in  novels,  in  magazines,  in  newspapers,  in 
conversation.    What  are  Christian  people  to  do.     They  are  to  discriminate,  they  are 
not  to  believe  every  spirit ;  they  are  to  satisfy  themselves  that  the  influence  present  in 
the  teaching  is  of  God  before  they  yield  themselves  to  it.     If  they  are  not  satisfied, 
then  they  must  do  what  they  can  to  make  themselves  impervious  to,  or  vigorously  to 
counteract,  the  influence.    For  very  much  depends  on  what  teaching  we  receive  through 
all  channels,  it   being  either  for  our    spiritual    advancement  or  for  our  spiritual 
deterioration. 

II.  The  test  to  be  applied.  "  Hereby  know  ye  the  Spirit  of  God."  1.  Positivt, 
"  Every  spirit  which  confesseth  that  Jesus  Christ  is  come  in  the  flesh  is  of  God." 
Teaching  is  to  be  judged  in  relation  to  Christ.  It  is  due  to  Christ  that  there  should 
be  an  open  declaration  in  his  favour.  The  object  of  confession  is  (strictly)  Jesus  Christ 
torn*  in  the  flesh.     It  i«  to  b«  borne  in  mind  that  Jesui  is  the  historical  name.     It  i« 


128  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  JOHN.    [oh.  iv.  1—21. 

admitted  od  all  sides  that  "  one  Jesus "  lived  about  nineteen  hundred  years  ago,  and 
that  his  influence  has  extended  far  and  wide.  What  account  is  to  be  given  of  thin 
Personage  ?  The  right  teaching  is  that  which  confesses  him  to  be  the  Christ.  Thig  is 
in  agreement  with  ch.  ii.  22.  Cerinthus  taught  that  the  Christ  had  a  temporary  abode 
in  Jesus ;  the  Christian  teacher  declares  Jesus  to  be  the  Christ.  But  the  Clirist  refers 
us  to  Divinity,  eternal  Sonship,  with  which  we  associate  ideas  of  immateriality, 
invisibility,  impassibility,  exemption  from  death.  This  was  virtually  the  understanding 
of  Cerinthus,  and  his  way  of  accounting  for  the  ordinary  manifestations  of  humanity 
in  Jesus  was  that  he  was  only  apparently  the  Christ.  This  was  the  usual  solution  of 
the  difiSculty  by  the  Grnostics.  The  right  teaching  is  that  Jesus  is  Christ  come  in  the 
flesh.  That  is  to  say,  the  true  solution  is  the  Incarnation.  Christ  is  Divine,  and  as 
such  we  can  think  of  him  as  essentially  immaterial,  invisible,  impassible,  undying ;  and 
yet  he  is  human,  and  as  such  there  could  be  connected  with  him  materiality,  visibility, 
sufTering,  death.  The  Incarnation  is  well  worthy  of  being  made  the  great  object  of 
confession.  For  it  proclaims  the  wonderful  and  indissoluble  union  between  God  and 
man  with  a  view  to  human  redemption,  which  sometimes  tends  to  repel  by  its  strange- 
ness. It  proclaims  a  new  and  unexpected  outlet  for  Divine  love,  transcending  all  finite 
power  of  thought,  to  be  estimated  adequately  only  by  him  in  whose  heart  the  love 
burned.  In  this  view  we  obtain  facta  which  are  rich  in  meaning.  We  first  stand  in 
presence  of  his  birth,  when  the  mysterious  union  commenced.  We  are  amazed  as  we 
contemplate  him  growing  up  to  manhood.  We  behold  him  setting  himself  to  his  work, 
and  proving  himself  in  a  threefold  encounter  with  the  tempter.  We  are  overwhelmed 
with  awe  to  think  of  him,  in  death,  passing  under  the  eclipse  of  the  Father's  counte- 
nance. We  are  profoundly  interested  to  behold  him  rising  from  the  dead,  and  to  think 
of  him  as  passing  into  the  heavens  in  our  glorified  nature.  That  is  the  right  kind  of 
teaching  which  deals  with  these  facts,  puts  them  forward  for  the  grasp  of  faith,  uses 
them  for  the  clearing  of  thought  and  the  stirring  up  of  love.  2.  Negative.  "  And  every 
spirit  which  oonfesseth  not  Jesus  is  not  of  God :  and  this  is  the  spirit  of  the  antichrist, 
whereof  ye  have  heard  that  it  cometh ;  and  now  it  is  in  the  world  already."  The  true 
confession  has  been  defined ;  this  is  its  contradiction.  There  is  implied  a  certain  know- 
ledge of  Christianity.  The  news  has  gone  forth  that  God  has  become  incarnate  for 
human  salvation.  It  is  news  which  is  fitted  to  arrest,  and  leaves  no  excuse  for  want  of 
inquiry'into  the  question  of  fact.  Every  teacher  especially  should  have  his  mind  made 
up  with  regard  to  it.  The  apostle  lays  it  down  as  the  test  of  a  true  coniession.  By 
this  Cerinthus  and  other  Gnostic  teachers  were  to  be  condemned.  They  found  a  way 
of  avoiding  the  Incarnation,  and  thus  took  away  the  impression  of  the  great  love  of 
God  manifested  toward  men.  The  same  thing  is  done  by  the  Unitarians  now.  They 
withhold  acknowledgment  from  Jesui.  Many  of  their  teachers  plead  for  warmth  of 
feeling  toward  Christ.  "  Without  the  passions  which  move  incessantly,  like  glittering 
and  intense  fire,  around  the  Person  of  Christ,  religious  teaching  will  not  make  men's 
hearts  so  to  burn  within  them  as  to  bring  them  in  crowds  to  hear  and  to  obey,  and  to 
be  impelled  to  become  teachers  in  turn "  (Stopford  Brooke).  They  do  not,  however, 
leave  room  for  the  calling  forth  of  such  love,  inasmuch  as  they  represent  Christ  as 
a  mere  man,  only  transcending  other  men  in  excellence  of  character.  They  do  not 
accept  the  Incarnation ;  it  is  not  credible  to  them ;  it  takes  away  from  the  simplicity  of 
the  faith.  Their  declaration  must  go  forward  to  judgment ;  a  Higher  than  man  will 
one  day  pronounce  upon  its  worth.  It  is  an  important  consideration  for  our  guidance 
that  Uiiitarianism  stands  clearly  condemned  by  the  apostolic  test.  It  confesses  not 
Jesus,  aiimits  not  the  Siigher  view  of  his  Person  and  work.  There  are  teachers  of  great 
eminencs  "  who  ociiupy  rather  a  negative  and  undefined  position  in  relation  to  Christ 
and  Christianity.  Th«y  have  written  upon  almost  every  subject  of  human  thought — 
upon  government  J,nd  the  Church,  upon  history  and  biography,  upon  morals  and 
destiny.  They  ha^e  gone  round  the  world  to  find  heroes  and  representative  men,  and 
have  said  many  true  and  striking  things  about  them ;  but,  strange  to  say,  they  have 
never  clearly  informed  the  world  as  to  what  they  think  of  Christ.  They  are 
unaccountably  reticent  upon  a  subject  that  is  the  most  important  cf  all.  They  allow 
a  painful  silence  to  brood  over  a  Name  that  is  above  every  name.  What  can  be  the 
meaning  of  tlds?  Is  it  because  they  have  no  faith  in  Christ,  but  do  not  think  it 
prudent  or  necessary  to  profess  their  unbelief?    Can  they  have  faith  without  professing 


OH.  IV.  1—21.]    THE  PIBST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  JOHN.  129 

it  ?  The  fact  remains  that  they  have  thought  it  their  business  to  act  as  guides  to  the 
world,  and  have  thought  it  necessary  to  publish  many  volumes  of  their  opinions,  and 
yet  have  never  directly  told  the  world  what  they  think  of  Christ.  That  fact  remains  ; 
and  alongside  of  it  the  truth  remains,  'Every  spirit  which  confesseth  not  Jesus  is  not  of 
God'"  (P.  Perguson).  Of  the  Corinthian  Gnosticism,  which  set  aside  the  Incarnation, 
John  says  that  it  was  the  presence  of  antichrist.  So  early  had  the  announced 
opposition  to  Christ  commenced ;  it  still  exists  under  other  specious  forms.  The  most 
radical  opposition  is  that  which  is  directed  against  the  central  fact  of  the  Incarnation, 
which  would  reduce  Christ  to  the  position  of  a  mere  human  teacher. 

III.  Success  in  applying  the  test.  1,  The/act  o/victory.  "  Te  are  of  God,  my 
little  children,  and  have  overcome  them."  This  is  another  occasion  on  which  the 
apostle  is  so  affectionate  as  to  call  them  his  little  children.  He  thinks  of  something  which 
was  greatly  to  their  honour.  They  had  overcome  ihs  false  prophets.  We  are  not  told 
the  wiles  which  were  used  by  these  prophets.  They  pretended  to  he  under  Divine 
inspiration.  Very  probably  they  pretended  to  work  miracles.  We  do  not  know  that 
they  held  out  the  inducement  of  false  pleasures.  Whatever  the  wiles  were,  in  vain 
were  -they  tried  on  those  to  whom  John  is  now  writing.  They  held  tenaciously  to  the 
fact  of  the  Incarnation,  and  to  its  blessed  import.  Nay,  we  can  understand  that  they 
succeeded  in  separating  from  their  communion  all  who  were  not  in  sympathy  with  the 
Incarnation,  who  for  the  fact  put  some  fanciful  idea.  "  They  went  out  from  us,"  it  is 
said  of  these  prophets  in  ch.  ii.  19,  which,  taken  in  connection  with  what  is  said  here, 
gives  us  an  impression  of  their  moral  defeat.  There  needed  to  be  no  recourse  to  the 
disciplinary  power  of  excommunication;  they  went  out  when  they  could  no  longer 
endure  the  power  of  the  truth.  2.  The  ground  of  victory.  "  Because  greater  is  he  that 
is  in  you  than  he  that  is  in  the  world."  The  Divine  Person  is  left  undefined.  We 
naturally  think  of  Christ  in  the  Spirit.  For  the  victory  lies  in  discrimination ;  and 
John's  conception  of  their  qualification  is  their  having  an  anointing  from  the  Holy  One. 
As  qualified  in  the  same  way,  Christ  had  to  fight.  He  was  brought  into  conflict  with 
him  that  is  in  the  world.  All  attempts  were  made  to  delude  him,  to  lead  him  to 
febandon  the  Father's  cause ;  but  he  conquered.  "  Now  is  the  judgment  of  this  world ; 
now  shall  the  prince  of  this  world  be  cast  out."  As  the  hour  approaches,  he  announces 
his  victory  for  the  encouragement  of  his  followers :  "  Be  of  good  cheer ;  I  have  conquered 
the  world."  John's  friends  conquered  too,  because  greater  was  he  that  was  in  them 
than  he  that  was  in  the  false  prophets,  and  in  the  world  to  which  properly  these 
belonged,  though  they  had  once  been  connected  with  the  communion  of  Christians. 
Christ  is  in  us  by  his  Spirit,  to  unmask  all  designs  on  us,  to  expose  all  fallacies,  to 
disclose  all  the  beauties  of  truth.  He  that  is  in  the  world  has  great  power  of  delusion ; 
but  we  can  think  of  it  as  vanquished,  and  we  can  think  of  the  victory  as  sure  for  us  in 
the  power  of  his  Spirit  which  is  within  us  as  our  equipment.  Therefore  let  us  be  of 
good  cheer.  3.  The  manner  of  victory.  (1)  Discrimination  in  respect  of  the  false 
prophets.  "  They  are  of  the  world :  therefore  speak  they  as  of  the  world,  and  the 
world  heareth  them."  How  are  false  prophets  to  be  known?  They  are  the  birth 
of  a  worldly  state  of  society,  they  give  utterance  to  worldly  sentiment,  they  gain 
worldly  applause.  As  for  the  Incarnation,  it  is  remote  from  their  thoughts ;  it  is  too 
high  for  their  low  origin ;  it  is  too  self-abasing,  too  self-restraining.  Let  a  field  he 
sought  where  looser  sentiment  may  be  uttered,  or  where  there  may  be  a  grim  handling 
of  abuses  and  unrealities  and  failings,  and,  if  there  is  only  sufficient  vis  in  the  teacher, 
certain  men  will  loudly  applaud.  (2)  Discrimination  in  respect  of  the  true  prophets, 
"  We  are  of  God :  he  that  knoweth  God  heareth  us ;  he  who  is  not  of  God  heareth 
u»  not."  How  are  true  prophets  to,  be  known  ?  They  may  be  said  to  he  the  birth 
of  a  quickened  Chvu:ch ;  they  are  here  represented  as  the  birth  of  God.  They  teach 
about  God,  and  they  set  forth  the  Incarnation  as  the  grandest  manifestation  of  what 
God  is — as  the  fact  of  facts  and  the  truth  of  truths.  He  that  is  in  the  school  of  God, 
and  seeks  to  advance  in  the  knowledge  of  God,  is  attracted  to  them ;  while  he  who 
is  not  yet  born  of  God  is  repelled  from  them.  "  I  have  set  thee,"  says  God  to  Jeremiah, 
"  for  a  tower  and  a  fortress  among  my  people,  that  thou  mayest  know  and  try  their 
way."  Marking  of  the  discrimination.  "  By  this  we  know  the  spirit  of  truth,  and, the 
spirit  of  error."  We  are  to  understand  the  principle  laid  down.  By  it  we  discriminate 
between  the  spirit  ef  truth  resting  on  the  true  teachers,  and  the  spirit  of  wandering 

-L  JOBJI.  K 


130  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  JOHN,    [oh  rr.  1—21 

festug  on  the  false  teachers.  There  is  implied  the  test  of  the  Incarnation.  According 
as  teachers  are  attracted  to  it  do  they  come  into  the  light  of  God ;  according  as  they 
are  repelled  from  it  do  they  wander  themselves,  and  lead  away  others,  into  the 
darkness. — K.  F. 

Vers.  7 — 21. — Threefold  recommendation  of  the  duty  of  loving  one  another,  I.  Thh 
DUTY  BECOMMENDED,  FROM  LOVE  HAVING  ITS  OBIGIN  TS  GoD.  The  duty  enjoined. 
"  Beloved,  let  us  love  onaanother."  John  has  a  winning  way  of  urging  duty,  addressing 
his  readers  as  Ohjects  of  his  affection,  and  desiring  himself  to  be  stirred  up  to  duty.  He 
has  in  view  the  "  absolute  type  of  love  "  (Westcott)  in  the  Christian  circle.  There  are 
considerations  adduced  which  go  beyond  brotherly  love,  which  suggest  rather  com- 
passionate love.  But  it  is  to  be  remembered  that  love  to  child,  to  friend,  to  sinner,  is 
intended  to  have  its  outcome  and  complete  satis/action  within  the  Christian  circle.  1. 
Divine  origin  of  love.  (1)  Positive.  "  For  love  is  of  God ;.  and  every  one  that  loveth 
is  begotten  of  God,  and  knoweth  God."  It  is  true  of  all  physical  force  that  there  is  in 
the  world,  thait  it  is  of  God,  in  this  sense — that  it  came  originally  from  the  creative 
energy  of  God.  In  the  same  wiv,  love  is  of  God,  inasmuch  as  we  have  been  created 
with  a  capacity  of  loving.  But  that  will  not  meet  the  requirement  of  the  thought  here. 
Love  is  of  God  in  the  sense  that,  as  an  actual  spiritual  force,  it  has  come  from  a 
fountain  of  love  in  God.  Every  one  that  loveth,  then,  is  begotten  of  God,  i.e.  has  had 
a  nature  imparted  to  him  like  God's,  and  so  that  he  is  a  child  of  God.  He  also  knoweth 
Ood,  i.e.  has  daily  and  growing  acquaintance  with  God,  through  which  there  ii  com- 
municated to  him  more  of  the  force  of  Divine  love.  (2)  Negative.  Statement.  "  He 
that  loveth  not  knoweth  not  God."  There  is  not  derivation  in  this  case ;  but  there  is 
the  singling  out  of  a  person  in  whom  love  is  not  a  force,  and  it  is  said  of  him  (passing 
over  nature)  that  he  knoweth  not  God.  The  difference  of  tense,  which  is  not  brought 
out  in  the  translation,  seems  to  be  aimed  at  apparent  Tcnowledge.  When  he  said,  at  his 
baptism  or  at  any  other  time,  that  he  knew  God,  looking  to  the  absence  of  love  as  a 
force  in  his  life,  John  is  confident  that  he  never  knew  him.  Reason.  "For  God  is  Love." 
This  is  the  way  in  which  the  most  sublime  statement  of  Scripture  is  the  first  time 
introduced.  One  of  the  most  striking  introductions  to  a  sermon  is  that  by  the  late  M. 
Monod  of  Paris,  in  which  he  supposes  an  almost  effaced  bit  of  paper  to  have  been  found 
among  the  ruins  of  Herculaneum.    After  great  difficulty,  the  assembled  men  of  letters 

succeed  in  deciphering  the  fiist  two  words, "  God  is ."    There  is  dreadful  suspense, 

while  they  labour  to  decipher  the  third  word.  What  is  God  ?  is  a  question  upon  the 
answer  to  which  human  destiny  very  much  depends.  There  is  a  glow  of  satisfaction 
when,  at  last,  they  make  out  letter  by  letter  1-o-v-e.  Ood  i»  Love.  It  was  left  to  the 
disciple  of  love  to  make  this  late,  but  fully  satisfying,  announcement  about  God,  if  from 
his  own  consciousness,  also  from  the  spirit  of  inspiration.  Qod  is  a  Spirit — that  is  a  state- 
ment of  our  Lord's  recorded  by  John,  describing  the  Divine  nature  as  above  all  limita- 
tions of  space  and  time.  God  is  Light — that  is  a  statement  already  made  in  this  Epistle, 
describing  the  Divine  nature  as  purity  with  no  limit  to  its  diffusiveness.  God  is  Love — 
that  is  a  statement  the  excellence  of  which  lies  in  its  bringing  out  the  personal  element 
in  the  Divine  nature.  This  God  is  essentially,  apart  from  all  thought  of  creation.  But 
how  are  we  to  think  of  him  as  love  in  the  depths  of  his  own  being  ?  "  Love  involves 
a  subject  and  an  object,  and  that  which  unites  both"  (Westcott).  "We  must  not, 
therefore,  think  merely  of  the  love  of  God  to  the  creature,  but  also  of  the  inner  Divine 
Trinitarian  love  in  God"  (Ehrard).  There  is  the  ontgoing  of  infinite  love  in  the  Father 
whicli  finds  an  infinite  response  in  the  Son,  and  this  is  maintained  through  the  Spirit. 
That  language  is  vague;  but  it  may  serve  to  mark  the  loving  intercommunication  that 
there  is  within  Godhead.  It  is  because  God  essentially  realizes  love,  without  going 
outside  of  his  own  being,  that  he  is  Self-blessed.  2.  The  love  of  Ood  was  rnanifeated  in 
the  Incarnation.  "  Herein  was  the  love  of  God  manifested  in  us,  that  God  hath  sent 
his  only  begotten  Son  into  the  world,  that  we  might  live  through  him."  There  is  the 
full  satisfaction  of  love  within  Godhead ;  and  yet  there  was  a  movement  of  love  with 
an  object  beyond  Godhead.  It  was  love  that  moved  God  to  create — the  desire  to  com- 
mupicate  of  the  riches  of  his  own  Being.  It  can  be  said  that,  even  from  eternity,  we  lay 
In  thethoughtsof  God,  with  the  clearness  of  the  Divine  intentions  and  the  kindling  of  the 
Divine  affection  around  as.    And  lo  the  place  of  aU  beings  and  of  all  things  in  his  world 


OH.IV.  1— 21.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  JOHN.  131 

lay  before  him,  as  that  in  which,  anticipatively,  he  took  delight.  When  angels  were 
brought  into  being,  it  was  love  that  was  operating,  and,  there  being  none  other,  God 
himself  rejoiced  over  them.  When  the  foundations  of  the  earth  were  fastened,  and  the 
comer-stones  thereof  laid,  it  was  love  that  was  operating ;  and  "  the  morning  stars  sang 
together,  and  all  the  sons  of  God  shouted  for  joy."  "  Herein  was  the  love  of  God 
manifested."  Creation,  in  all  its  lines,  has  been  drawn  by  love,  and  so  it  is  essentially 
a  glad  study,  calling  forth,  from  the  students  oif  its  many  parts,  the  symphonious  sontc, 
and  the  common  shout  of  joy.  But  it  is  not  to  this  manifestation  that  John  calls 
attention.  His  mind  has  been  filled,  from  the  beginning  of  his  letter,  with  that  which 
is  the  manifestation  of  love  by  pre-eminence.  It  is  the  Incarnation  that  he  cannot  leave 
out  of  fight.  "  Herein  was  the  love  of  God  manifested."  The  manifestation  is  said  to 
be  in  us,  i.e.  in  believers ;  for  it  is  in  them  that  the  Incarnation  reaches  its  end.  The 
Incarnation  is  descrihed  as  God  sending  his  only  begotten  Son  into  the  world.  We  start 
from  the  thought  of  his  dignity  as  the  only  begotten  Son  of  God,  besides  whom  the 
Father  had- none  in  whom  the  Father's  love  found  an  adequate  object.  He  found  the 
condition  a|  pointed  for  him  in  the  world.  That  is,  without  ceasing  to- be  the  only 
begotten  Son,  he  became  a  man  among  men,  even  sharing  the  evil  of  their  condition, 
yea,  suffering  death  at  the  hands  of  sinners.  What  was  the  meaning  of  this  strange 
manifestation?  It  was  not  that  God  took  delight  in  the  evil  condition  of  his  Son.  But 
it  was  love  going  out  toward  men.  We  were  in  a  dead  state,  in  relation  to  the  vindica- 
tion of  Law,  and  in  relation  to  our  true  life ;  and  we  had  not  yet  come  to  the  worst. 
God  did  not  blot  out  the  fair  page  of  creation,  he  did  not  part  with  one  son  out  of  many ; 
but  he  parted  with  his  only  begotten  Son — the  most  glorious  of  all  beings,  perfectly 
reflecting  his  own  majesty,  that  we  might  live  through  him.  He  made  the  sacrifice  in 
which  his  feelings  were  the  most  deeply  involved,  that  our  interests  might  be  advanced 
to  the  highest  point.  "Herein  was  the  love  of  God  manifested."  3.  iTie  Incarnation 
is  woof  that  love  was  not  first  in  us,  hut  in  Ood.  "  Herein  is  love,  not  that  we  loved 
Goa,  but  that  he  loved  us,  and  sent  his  Son  to  be  the  Propitiation  for  our  sins." 
Whence  has  love  sprung?  Was  it  first  in  our  hearts,  and  then,  by  contact  with  love 
in  our  hearts,  was  it  kindled  in  the  Divine  heart  ?  Ah  I  no ;  love  has  its  eternal  dwell- 
ing-place in  God.  It  was  not  that  we  loved  Ood ;  any  movement  of  love  in  us  was 
necessarily  subsequent  to  the  movement  of  the  Divine  love  in  creating  us.  It  was  not 
that  we  loved  God;  we  were  not  actually  lovers  of  God  in  our  characters.  We  were 
laden  with  sins,  those  sins  being  all  love  of  self  and  want  of  love  toward  God.  It  was 
that  he  loved  us ;  and  he  created  us  that  he  might  make  us  sharers  with  him  in  his 
bliss.  It  was  that  he  loved  us ;  and,  when  we  had  frustrated  the  end  of  his  love,  he 
did  not  leave  us  in  our  sins.  He  acted  without  prompting  from  without,  he  acted  with 
absolute  spontaneity,  he  acted  out  of  the  infinite  freedom  of  his  own  will ;  and  what 
did  he  do  r  He  sent  his  Son  to  be  the  Propitiation  for  our  sins ;  i.e.  sent  him  into  our 
nature  to  remove  all  the  obstacles  that  our  sins  presented  to  our  enjoying  the  blessings 
of  Divine  fellowship.  Love  is  free,  and  yet  it  has  an  inner  law  of  righteousness.  Our 
sins  could  not  be  removed  in  any  way,  they  could  not  be  removed  by  Divine  fiat,  tliey 
could  not  be  removed  without  adequate  satisfaction.  And,  when  righteousness  demanded 
that  the  satisfaction  should  be  given  in  our  nature.  Divine  love  proved  equal  to  the 
emergency.  The  Son,  breathing  forth  the  Father's  love,  did  not  eschew  our  nature, 
and,  in  it  dying,  made  infinite  satisfaction  for  our  sins.  Such  is  love,  in  all  the  glory  of 
its  freedom  and  of  its  power. 

II.  The  duty  recommended  from  lovk  being  necessary  to  fellowship  with  God. 
The  duty  inferred  from  the  Incarnation.  "  Beloved,  if  God  so  loved  us,  we  also  ought 
to  love  one  another."  John  again  adopts  the  affectionate  form  of  address.  He  proceeds 
on  the  manner  of  love  brought  out  in  the  preceding  verse.  "  If  so  [the  emphatic 
position]  God  loved  us."  It  is  implied  that  we  have  been  brought  into  the  position  of 
God's  children,  and  should  act  as  God  does.  The  conclusion  then  follows,  that  we  .should 
love  one  another.  As  for  the  manner  of  our  love,  it  should  be  love  that  can  go  the 
length  of  sacrifice,  and  love  that  can  conquer  obstacles  of  sin.  But  as  for  the  object  of 
our  love,  why  is  it  loving  one  another  $  It  is  to  this  point  that  John  directs  himself. 
1.  To  love  one  another  is  the  way  to  have  fellowship  with  the  invisible  Qod.  "  No  man 
hath  beheld  God  at  any  time :  if  we  love  one  another,  God  abideth  in  us,  and  his  love 
ia  perfected  in  us."    The  fact  of  the  invisibility  of  God  is  also  stated  in  John  i.  18 


132  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  JOHN.    [oh.  iv.  1— 2L 

"  No  man  hath  seen  God  at  any  time."  The  verb  is  different  here,  conveying  the  idea 
of  seeing  intently,  seeing  so  as  to  image  to  the  mind  what  God  is  through  the  sense  of 
sight.  In  John  i.  18  the  iavisibility  of  God  is  regarded  as  relieved  by  the  Incarnation. 
Here  the  invisibility  of  God  is  regarded  in  connection  with  fellowship  with  God,  and 
there  is  brought  into  view,  not  the  visible  Mediator,  but  our  visible  brethren.  How  are 
we  to  have  (not  to  prove  that  we  have)  fellowship  with  the  invisible  God  ?  The  way  ii 
to  have  visible  objects  for  our  love,  especially  to  love  one  another  in  the  Christian  circle. 
Loving  one  another,  on  the  one  hand, "  God  abideth  in  us,"  so  as  to  be  nearer  to  us  for 
fellowship,  than  if  we  beheld  him.  Loving  one  another,  on  the  other  hand,  his  love, 
i.e.  our  love  to  him,  is  perfected.  It  cannot  be  brought  to  perfection  unless  with  the 
help  of  love  to  the  brethren.  This  thought  receives  further  expression  at  the  close  of 
this  chapter.  2.  Participation  in  the  Spirit  is  the  sign  of  fellowship  with  God.  "Hereby 
know  we  that  we  abide  in  him,  and  he  in  us,  because  he  hath  given  us  of  his  Spirit." 
The  thought  is  similar  in  cb.  iii.  24.  Loving  one  another  leads  to  mutual  abiding.  But 
how  is  this  to  be  discovered  ?  It  is  by  the  distribution  to  us  of  the  Spirit.  ,  He  cannot 
be  communicated  to  us  in  the  full  flood  of  his  influence,  but  only  accoi'ding  to  our 
nature  and  disposition.  It  is  evident  that  the  Spirit  is  the  common  element  on  which 
our  fellowship  with  God  proceeds.  But  another  question  at  once  arises — How  do  we  know 
that  we  participate  in  the  Spirit?  The  answer,  given  in  what  follows,  is,  our  apprecia- 
tion of  the  Incarnation.  3.  There  can  be  no  fellowship  with  God  apart  from  the  Incar- 
nation. (1)  The  Incarnation  historically  attested.  "  And  we  have  beheld  and  bear 
witness  that  the  Father  hath  sent  the  Son  to  be  the  Saviour  of  the  world."  Strictly 
speaking,  what  the  apostles  beheld  was  what  Christ  was  in  the  flesh.  There  was  thus 
a  good  historical  basis  for  their  testimony.  They  knew,  at  first  hand,  that  Christ  was 
baptized,  wrought  miracles,  was  transfigured,  died,  rose  again,  and  that  he  claimed  to 
be  the  Son  of  God.  But  the  testimony  is  carried  here  beyond  the  actual  facts  to  the 
meaning  of  the  facts.  As  here  expressed,  it  is  that  "  the  Father  hath  sent  the  Son  to  be 
the  Saviour  of  the  world."  The  apostles,  carefully  observing  the  facts,  gave  this  as  their 
only  rational  explanation.  He  with  whom  they  had  been  thrown  into  closest  contact, 
was  no  mere  man,  but  the  Son  of  God.  He  was  the  object  of  the  Father's  infinite  love; 
but  the  Father,  in  a  wondrous  manner,  sent  him  forth  on  a  mission  of  a  saving  nature 
and  wide  as  the  world  in  its  reach.  John  here  echoes  the  Samaritans,  of  whom  he 
records  that  they  said  to  the  woman  with  whom  Christ  had  a  conversation,  "  Now  we 
believe,  not  because  of  thy  speaking :  for  we  have  heard  for  ourselves,  and  know  that 
this  is  indeed  the  Saviour  of  the  world."  It  is  well  to  have  a  title  that  sets  forth  so 
clearly  the  impartiality,  the  universality,  of  Christ's  mission.  It  is  implied  that  his 
mission  is  lasting.  He  is  still  to  be  thought  of  as  sent  into  the  world  as  its  Saviour. 
Every  unsaved  person  has  a  right  to  claim  him  as  his  Saviour ;  and  that  is  the  simple 
fact  with  which  we  have  lo  do.  There  is  hint  here  of  a  love  that  oversteps  love  of  the 
brethren.  (2)  The  test  of  confession.  "Whosoever  shall  confess  that  Jesus  is  the  Son 
of  God,  God  abideth  in  him,  and  he  in  God."  It  underlay  the  apostolic  attestation  that 
Jesus  is  the  Son  of  God.  This,  then,  is  the  form  which  the  test  takes,  in  agreement 
with  forms  in  which  it  has  already  been  put.  The  Unitarians  escape  the  application 
of  the  test,  by  retaining  the  language  while  taking  away  from  the  meaning.  "To  us," 
says  Channiug,  "  he  is  the  first  of  the  sons  of  God,  the  Son  by  peculiar  nearness  and 
likeness  to  the  Father.  In  this  mighty  universe,  framed  to  be  a  mirror  of  its  Author, 
we  turn  to  Jesus  as  the  brighest  Image  of  God,  and  gratefully  yield  him  a  place  in  our 
souls,  second  only  to  the  infinite  Father,  to  whom  he  himself^  directs  our  supreme 
affection."  But  the  whole  aspect  of  the  Incarnation  is  changed  if  we  think  of  Jesus  as 
only  an  exalted  creature,  humbling  himself  to  a  lower  creaturely  conditiouj  and  not  as 
the  uncreated  Soil,  humbling  himself  to  what  was  infinitely  below  him.  As  an  exhibi- 
tion of  love,  the  one  humbling  is  not  to  be  compared  with  the  other.  The  Son  is  to  be 
taken  as  absolutely  as  the  Father,  i.e.  One  in  "whom  the  Father  sees  his  perfect  image. 
Where  the  Spirit  of  God  works,  there  is  prompting  to  the  confession  of  the  mysterious 
entering  of  the  Divine  Son  into  our  nature;  aud  it  is  only  in  the  line  of  tliis  thought 
that  we  can  maintain  fellowship  with  God.  4.  Experience  of  love  in  which  there  is 
fellowship  with  God,  (1)  Experience  of  love.  "  And  we  know  and  have  believed  the 
love  which  God  hatli  in  us."  The  comfort  of  the  Incarnation  is  that  it  is  infiuite  love 
finding  a  lodguitnt  in  our  uuture,  aud  especially  in  our  hearts  as  believers.     According 


OH.  IT.  1—21.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  JOHN.  13S 

as  we  believe,  have  we  experience  of  the  love :  and,  however  much  we  have  experience 
of  it,  there  is  still  room  for  the  exercise  of  faitli.  (2)  Sestatement  reyarding  the  nature 
of  Ood.  "  God  is  Love."  In  neither  case  is  the  statement  made  to  stand  out ;  it  is 
introduced  as  though  it  were  a  familiar  thought  to  the  writer.  "  Pure,  universal  Love 
thou  art."  One  bearing  of  this  is  that  God  cannot  love  partially,  loving  one  and  not 
loving  another. 

"  For  the  dear  God  who  loveth  us. 
He  made  and  loveth  all." 

Another  bearing  of  it  is  that  God  cannot  \oye  feebly.  Eyen  in  his  reserve  there  is 
strength.  He  rests  in  his  love  (Zeph.  iii.  17) ;  but  it  is  because  he  is  conscious  of  his 
•treijgth.  He  had  infinite  repose  in  view  of  the  entrance  of  sin  into  the  world  ;  but  it 
was  because  he  was  conscious  of  his  power  to  defeat  it  for  his  own  glory  on  the  cross. 
And  we  must  think  of  him  as  having  infinite  repose  in  view  of  the  final  issue  of  things. 
That  he  is  Love  means  this  to  us — that  all  means  will  be  used  to  overcome  the  evil  of  our 
hearts.  (3)  Inference  regarding  fellowship  with  God.  "  And  he  that  abideth  in  love 
abideth  in  God,  and  God  abideth  in  him."  If  God  is  Love,  as  the  Spirit  gives  us  to  see 
in  the  Incarnation,  then  be  who  movei  habitually  in  love  as  the  sphere  of  his  being, 
keeps  up  fellowship  with  God. 

III.  The  duty  eecommbnded  pkom  love  wobkino  towaed  boldkess.  1.  Oonsum- 
mation.  "Herein  is  love  made  perfect  with  us,  that  we  may  have  boldness  in  the  day 
of  judgment ;  because  as  he  [that  One]  is,  even  so  are  we  in  this  world."  It  is  a  most 
solemn  thought  that  there  is  before  us  all  the  day  of  judgment.  "It  is  appointed  unto 
menronce  to  die,  and  after  this  coraeth  judgment."  There  is  a  final  and  authoritative 
judgment  to  be  pronounced  on  the  value  of  our  life.  What  has  there  been  in  it  of 
obedience  to  God?  How  far  have  we  received  Christ  into  it?  Upon  that  the 
sentence  must  turn.  Love  is  now  with  ut ;  i.e.  joined  to  us  as  an  influence  in  our  life. 
What  is  the  greatest  thing  th^t  it  can  do  for  our  future  ?  It  is  this,  to  inspire  us  with 
boldness  that  day  when  we  stand  before  the  judgment-seat  of  Christ.  The  ground  of 
our  present  confidence  is  likeness  to  Christ.  That  One  who  is  to  be  on  the  judgmeat- 
seat  was  once  in  this  world  in  bodily  form ;  he  is  still  in  the  world  in  spirit,  loving 
those  who  are  his  people,  and  seeking  to  embrace  all  others  within  the  number  of  his 
people.  According  as  we  are  in  sympathy  with  the  movements  of  his  love — ^love  his 
people,  and  seek  to  embrace  others  within  the  number  of  his  people — caa  we  assure 
our  hearts  in  view  of  the  day  of  judgment.  2.  Imperfection  on  the  we,y  to  the  con- 
summation. "  There  is  no  fear  in  love ;  but  perfect  love  casteth  out  fear,  because  fear 
hath  punishment;  and  he  that  feareth  is  not  made  perfect  in  love."  The  opposite  of 
boldness  is  fear :  this  is  excluded  from  love.  It  is  of  the  nature  of  fear  to  shrink  back 
from  a  person ;  it  is  of  the  nature  of  love  to  be  attracted  toward  a  person.  There  is 
naturally  fear  in  us  to  be  cast  out.  According  as  love  takes  possession  of  us  does  it 
cast  out  fear.  Men  may  have  a  certain  fear  of  each  other  on  first  acquaintance ;  but 
let  love  be  drawn  out,  and  fear  is  gradually  expelled.  So  we  have  a  feeling  of  fear 
toward  God,  while  our  relations  to  him  are  not  satisfactorily  determined,  wliile  we  have 
not  satisfactorily  discovered  his  feelings  toward  us.  We  are  startled  when  we  think 
of  our  sin,  when  we  think  of  the  Divine  indignation  against  sin.  But  wlien  we  think 
of  God  as  in  infinite  compassion  making  provision  for  us  as  sinners,  we  are  emboldened. 
"  He  is  near  that  justifleth  me ;  who  is  he  that  will  contend  with  me  V  "  And  as  we 
realize  more  of  the  greatness  of  redeeming  love,  there  is  less  room  left  for  fear.  There 
is  a  punitive  office  fulfilled  by  fear.  It  is  God  in  a  painful  manner  dealing  with  us 
for  our  imperfect  love,  and  telling  us  that  we  must  love  better.  3.  Love  that  is 
operative  is  caused  hy  anticipative  love.  "  We  love,  because  he  first  loved  us."  There 
is  an  affirmation  here,  and  an  explcmaiion.  The  affirmation  is,  "  We  love"  (without 
definition  of  object).  There  are  multitudes  who,  without  untruthfulness  and  without 
presumption,  can  say,  "  We  love."  Can  we  say  this  ?  The  love  of  parents  to  their 
children  is  acknowledged  to  be  real.  We  are  not  long  in  a  home  before  we  see  that 
love  is,  in  no  feigned  manner,  operating.  The  parents  cannot  suffer  their  children  to 
be  long  out  of  their  sight.  They  have  doubts  and  fears  about  them  in  many  ways. 
And  they  are  always  planning  for  their  vfell-being.  Do  we  love  all  rouiid  in  the  same 
way?  Would  we  be  conscious  of  a  great  blank  in  our  existence  if  we  had  not  a  God 
to  loT6?    Would  the  light  of  our  eye,  the  joy  of  our  heart,  be  gone  ?    Do  we  delighr 


134  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  JOHN.    [oh.  iv.  1—21 

in  fellowship  with  God  ?  Do  we  form  plans  for  advancing  the  glory  of  God  ?  Doei 
love,  too,  operate  toward  our  brethren?  Have  we  a  real  interest  in  them,  rejoicing 
with  them  when  they  rejoice,  and  weeping  with  them  when  they  weep?  Does  out 
love  operate  toward  those  who  are  not  yet  brethren,  leading  us  to  make  sacrifices  for 
them,  and  to  form  plans  for  their  being  brought  into  the  fold  of  the  Redeemer?  But 
there  is  also  an  explanation.  "  We  love,  hecause  he  first  loved  us."  What  is  the 
origin  of  love  in  us  ?  It  is  God  exercising  influence  over  us;  but  in  what  way?  Not 
by  the  manifestations  of  his  power,  not  by  the  manifestations  of  his  wisdom,  not  by 
the  manifestations  of  his  righteousness ;  but  by  the  manifestations  of  his  love.  Like 
produces  like.  God  loved  us  before  we  liad  the  opportunity  of  loving.  He  loved  us  in 
creating  us,  in  putting  it  into  the  hearts  of  parents  to  care  for  us  in  infancy  and  child- 
hood. He  thus  anticipated  us  with  goodness.  And  then  he  was  ready  with  a  scheme 
of  mercy  for  our  coming  into  the  world.  We  are  not  long  in  the  world  before  we  learn 
that  we  have  got  evil  hearts,  that  we  are  in  the  midst  of  sin  and  misery ;  and  some- 
times the  prospect  seems  dreary  enough.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  true  that  God 
has  made  the  world  warm  for  our  coming  into  it.  There  is  love  in  it  as  well  as  sin ; 
and  thus  God  has  been  beforehand  with  us.  He  did  not  wait  until  we  sinners  returned 
to  him.  That  was  impossible  by  an  act  of  our  own  will,  even  by  an  act  of  the  Divine 
will,  as  sheer  force.  It  needed  some  powerful  influence  to  bear  upon  our  hearts ;  and 
that  was  found  in  the  anticipative  love  of  God  in  redemption.  It  is  the  greater  love  that 
ever  comes  first.  Two  persons  have  a  quarrel.  The  one  comes  to  the  other,  and  desires 
a  reconciliation ;  the  other  is  overcome,,and  loves  in  return.  That  was  the  greater 
love  which  took  the  initiative,  and  broke  down  the  alienation.  So  God's  love  is  the 
greater,  for  he  speaks  the  first  word  of  reconciliation.  And  what  makes  it  all  the 
greater  is  that  the  fault  was  entirely  on  our  side.  We  had  wronged  him ;  he 
regarded  our  sin  with  the  utmost  displeasure ;  and  yet  he  loved  us.  1'he  love  with 
which  he  anticipated  us  was  greater  than  any  of  which  we  were  capable ;  great  as  his 
own  nature.  That  love  has  received  ample  manifestation.  There  was  once  a  poor 
Man  in  this  world.  He  was  brought  up  in  an  insignificant  little  town.  He  received 
no  education  but  what  that  little  town  could  afford  him.  He  at  first  worked  as  a 
carpenter,  eating  his  bread  in  the  sweat  of  his  brow.  Then  he  began  to  work  miracles 
as  with  Divine  power,  and  to  teach  as  with  Divine  wisdom.  His  public  career  was, 
however,  cut  short ;  for  men  did  not  like  his  teaching,  and  plotted  his  death.  He  was 
crucified  as  a  malefactor  at  the  ^e  of  thirty-three.  This  poor  Man  was  none  other 
than  the  Son  of  God.  What  was  the  meaning  of  this  humiliation?  It  was  anticipa- 
tive  love.  "  God  commendeth  his  love  toward  us,  in  that,  while  we  were  yet  sinners, 
Christ  died  for  us."  Of  this  love  we  can  give  no  account,  no  explanation ;  it  is  a 
mystery,  before  which  we  must  bow.  But  our  love  is  capable  of  explanation.  "  We 
love,  because  he  first  loved  us."  Let  the  pressure  of  anticipative  love  upon  us  be 
evermore  felt.  i.  Love  that  is  operative  rises  from  the  seen  to  the  unseen.  "  If  >  man 
say,  I  love  God,  and  hateth  his  brother,  he  is  a  liar :  for  he  that  loveth  not  his  brother 
whom  he  hath  seen,  cannot  love  Gud  whom  he  hath  not  seen.  And  this  command- 
ment have  we  from  him,  that  he  who  loveth  God  love  his  brother  also."  It  is  declared 
in  the  most  emphatic  manner  that  love  to  God  cannot  exist  apart  from  love  to  our 
brother,  on  the  ground  that  there  is  a  close  connection  between  loving  the  seen  and 
loving  the  uQseen,  and  further,  on  the  ground  that  this  connection  is  embodied  in  a 
positive  Divine  command.  A  first  noticeable  thing  is  that  love  should  form  the  subject 
of  a  command.  It  seems  strange  that  we  should  be  commanded  to  love.  Love  is 
supposed  to  have  a  freedom,  an  immunity  of  its  own.  And  yet  it  must  be  with  the 
affections  as  with  other  parts  of  our  nature.  They  must  be  placed  under  government 
and  discipline.  There  must,  in  the  first  instance,  be  the  voice  of  God,  the  voice  ol 
conscience,  authoritatively  prescribing  their  course,  directing  them  to  proper  objects, 
and  keeping  them  in  just  harmony.  This  would  be  necessary,  even  if  the  affections 
were  naturally  pure.  The  authority  of  conscience  would  need  to  be  exercised  over 
them  in  order  to  pive  them  character.  It  is,  therefore,  all  the  more  necessary,  seeing 
their  most  fine  gold  has  become  changed.  They  are  not  naturally  Christian.  Christ 
is  the  very  last  Person  round  whom  they  would  centre.  For  "  he  hath  no  form  nor 
comeliness ;  and  when  we  shall  see  him,  there  is  no  beauty  that  we  should  desire  him." 
And  how  hard  it  is  to  Christianize  the  affections,  to  give  them  the  genuine,  unmistak- 


OH.  lY.  1—21.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  JOHN.  135 

able  Christian  stamp  and  temper;  to  give  them  Christ's  steadiness,  and  tenderness,  and 
fervour,  and  catholicity!  How  hard  for  us,  who  are  beset  with  sin,  to  reach  to  that  I 
A.  first  love,  a  youthful  enthusiasm,  is  beautiful,  as  youth  always  is.  But  it  is  not  true 
to  Christ,  as  the  needle  to  the  pole ;  it  is  notoriously  erratic.  Neither  is  it  strong  and 
enduring,  as  the  feeling  of  him  who  has  been  accustomed  to  the  storm;  it  soon  waxes 
faint.  And  when  youth  is  past,  how  dull  and  sluggish  the  aflfections,  how  unexcitable 
even  before  the  cross,  and  in  presence  of  human  sin  and  sorrow !  how  unseemly,  and 
perhaps  malicious,  when  they  come  unexpectedly  out  in  the  conflict  of  opinion  and 
interest!  They  need  to  be  treated  with  severity;  they  need  to  be  dragged  at  the  heels 
of  duty.  It  is  only  by  superintendence  and  watchfulness  and  chastening  that  they 
can  be  brought  into  loving  obedience  to  Christ  Jesus,  the  altogether  Lovely.  A 
commandment,  then,  is  reasonable ;  it  is  urgently  needed,  and  shall  be  needed  until 
love  is  the  law  of  our  being — until  love  shall  perform  every  function  in  the  body  of 
Christ,  with  all  the  quickness  and  all  the  regularity  of  an  instinct.  A  second  notice- 
able thing  is  the  manner  in  which  John  issues  the  command.  There  were  two  com- 
mands/rom  him,  i.e.  from  God.  The  first  and  great  commandment  is  that  we  should 
loYe  the  Lord  our  God  with  all  our  heart,  with  all  our  soul,  and  with  all  our  mind. 
It  might  seem,  then,  that  we  should  not  love  others  at  all.  But  Christ,  going  beyond 
the  lawyer's  question,  brings  into  view  the  seccmd  commandment,  "  Thou  shalt  love 
thy  neighbour  as  thyself,"  connecting  it  by  declaring  it  to  be  like  unto  the  first.  John, 
in  the  line  of  the  Ma^iter's  thought,  brings  the  two  more  closely  together,  calling  them 
one  commandment.  The  broad  principle  here  is  this — that  the  love  of  our  brother  man, 
whom  we  see,  is  a  help  to  the  love  of  our  Father- God,  whom  we  do  not  see.  (1)  The 
family  affections.  What  does  the  family  institution  teach  us  regarding  God?  Nature 
gives  us  an  idea  of  God  as  the  great  and  inexhaustible  Cieator.  To  the  magnitude  and 
beauty  of  his  working  there  no  one  has  yet  discovered  the  limit.  Every  augnrientation 
of  optical  power,  every  improvement  in  the  science  of  seeing,  only  brings  fresh  worlds 
into  view — a  truth  which  holds  not  merely  in  astronomy,  but  in  the  whole  circle  of 
the  sciences.  And  yet  the  distance  between  God  and  nature  is  very  great — all  the 
distance  there  is  between  a  workman  and  his  work,  between  an  author  and  his  book. 
Nature,  after  all  that  can  be  said  of  it,  is  only  a  work,  a  production,  a  thing  made. 
Society  gives  us  a  higher  idea  of  God;  for  here,  under  a  variety  of  forms,  we  have  the 
relation  of  governing  and  governed.  The  state,  especially,  is  the  great  governing 
institution.  It  gives  us  the  idea  of  God  as  the  righteous  Governor;  One  ruling  in 
right,  and  backed  by  power.  This  brings  God  nearer  to  us ;  for  the  distance  between 
a  ruler  and  his  subjects  is  much  less  than  between  a  workman  and  his  work.  But  the 
family  gives  us  a  still  higher,  and  the  very  highest,  conception  of  God ;  for  it  is  to  be 
regarded  as  the  revelation  of  his  Fatherhood.  We  are  more  than  creatures,  we  are 
more  than  subjects ;  we  are  sons.  We  stand  in  the  most  intimate  relation  to  God :  a 
more  intimate  relation  we  do  not  know.  And  we  take  it  that  God  has  founded  the 
family,  has  instituted  the  relationship  of  father  and  son  among  men,  just  to  show  us 
how  closely  related  we  are  to  him.  The  family  is  full  of  spiritual  interest  and  meaning. 
Traces  of  infinite  benevolence  and  wisdom  are  to  be  found  in  all  its  arrangements. 
The  first  significant  fact  is  that  the  opening  period  of  each  human  life  is  marked  by 
helplessness.  This  is  not  peculiar  to  man ;  for  the  same  arrangement  is  found  in  other 
creatures.  In  the  human  economy,  however,  it  is  most  strongly  marked.  In  com- 
parison ^th  other  creatures,  man  is  but  slowly  furnished  with  the  knowledge  and 
strength  Aedful  for  self-subsistence.  The  period  of  his  pupilage  or  dependence  may  be 
said  to  extftid  to  a  third  or  a  fourth  of  his  lifetime.  At  first  si^ht  this  does  not  seem 
to  be  honouring  to  man.  Would  it  not  be  better  for  him  to  spring  at  once  into  self- 
subsistence,  with  powers  not  needing  to  be  matured?  But  the  true  explanation  is 
greatly  to  his  honour.  Among  the  lower  creatures,  it  is  those  that  in  infancy  ara 
most  dependent  that  show  the  greatest  natural  affection.  And  so  it  is  because  infancy 
and  childhood,  and  to  a  certain  extent  youth,  serve  the  purpose  of  God  in  cultivating 
the  affections,  that  they  are  thrown  so  much  on  the  kindly  help  of  oihers,  and  take  up 
so  large  a  proportion  of  our  brief  lifetime.  The  filial  affection  seems  to  be  the  specisj 
care  of  God.  While  there  is  yet  no  reflectioii,  no  power  of  resistance,  no  reasoning  about 
anything,  it  comes  into  existence  under  parental  nurturing.  It  gets  the  start  of  all 
else  that  has  a  place  or  a  power  in  our  nature.    And  for  a  time  it  bas  all  the  sway.    It 


136  THE  FIEST  BPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  JOHN.    [ch.  iv.  1— 21, 

is  allowed  time  silentlj  to  operate  and  to  deepen,  and  to  become  an  ineradicable  babit 
of  the  nature.  To  the  young  novitiate,  the  parent  is  very  much  in  the  place  of  God — 
is  supposed  to  know  everything,  to  be  able  to  do  everything.  But  by-and-by  in  many 
little  things  his  flnitude  is  discovered.  It  is  then  that  the  thought  of  God  breaks  in 
upon  the  child,  and  in  the  form  most  congenial  to  his  training,  viz.  as  the  earthly 
parent  raised  out  of  all  imperfection.  Mark  here  the  beautiful  illustration  of  the 
apostolic  principle,  that  it  is  through  the  love  of  the  seen  that  we  are  to  rise  into  thi 
love  of  the  unseen.  The  child  does  not  need  a  new  class  of  feelings,  does  not  need  to 
part  with  the  old,  when  God  is  first  thought  of.  It,  is  not  the  seen  against  the  unseen ; 
for  if  it  were,  thon,  the  feelings  with  which  we  regard  the  seen  being  already  deeply 
rooted,  there  would  be  no  inlet  for  the  unseen.  But  herein  magnify  and  adore  the 
wise  and  good  providence  of  God,  that,  in  giving  such  strength  and  vitality  and  advan- 
tage to  the  filial  feelings,  he  is  thereby  recommending  and  fortifying  religion;  he  is 
giving  it  the  start ;  he  is  unfolding  and  putting  forward  the  great  truth  of  his  Father- 
hood, and  winning  over  the  young  lieart  to  it  before  the  entrance  of  a  heartless  world. 
If  we  would  understand  the  love  of  the  seen  parent,  strong  and  overmastering,  we  must 
connect  it  with  the  love  of  the  unseen  Parent.  The  one  naturally  passes  into  the  other, 
when  wants  arise  too  deep  for  that  which  is  finite  to  sujiply.  "  If  ye  love  not  the  seen,"  ' 
says  the  apostle,  "how  can  ye  love  the  unseen?"  Implying  that  it  is  by  loving  the 
seen  that  we  are  to  learn  to  love  the  unseen.  There  is  a  lesson  to  be  learned  here 
regarding  the  education  of  children.  There  must  be  a  proper  representation  and  inter- 
pretation of  fatherhood  made  to  them.  There  must  be  gentle,  wise,  and  firm  dealing, 
signifying  this,  "  As  I  the  earthly  father  love  you,  so  does  the  heavenly  Father  love 
you."  For,  more  than  we  think,  the  our  Father  in  heaven  depends  on  the  our  father 
on  earth.  How  much  parents  have  it  in  their  power  to  make  religion  attractive,  or  to 
make  it  repellent,  to  their  childien I  The  family  affections  are,  to  some  extent,  con- 
nected with  trying  experiences.  "  When  father  and  mother  forsake  me,  the  Lord  will 
take  me  up."  And  there  is  a  forsaking  by  father  and  mother  before  there  may  be  a 
forsaking  by  death.  The  child,  as  he  grows  up,  becomes  more  and  more  independent 
of  his  parents ;  but  it  should  not  be  to  be  cut  loose  from  all  supports,  but  only  to  be 
more  thrown  upon  and  taken  up  by  the  heavenly  Parent.  And  then,  when  the  total 
forsaking  by  father  and  mother  takes  place,  he  is  not  so  desolate,  having  a  Father 
upon  whom  to  lean,  who  has  promised,  "  I  will  never  leave  thee  nor  forsake  thee." 
Again,  when  a  youthful  member  of  a  family  is  put  into  the  furnace  of  afiliotion, 
what  an  effulgence  and  concentration  of  affection !  It  was  strong  befiwe,  but,  in  the 
effort  to  relieve  the  sufferer,  it  is  wonderfully  intensified.  And  when  is  it  strongest? 
when  does  it  pass  all  hounds?  Is  it  not  in  the  last  dark  lone  hour?  This  is  the 
method  of  the  Divine  working.  And,  without  doubt,  one  end  is  effectually  attained 
— affection  does  break  forth  in  all  its  strength;  it  does  shine  with  more  than  a, 
sevenfold  lustre,  the  darkness  only  making  it  more  refulgent.  But  may  it  not  be 
charged  with  severity  ?  Strange,  some  one  may  say,  that  the  child  should  so  charm 
the  parent's  heart,  should  be  placed  so  as  to  secure  the  tenderest  affection,  should  be 
suffered  to  remain  until  being  is  inseparably  blended  with  being,  and  tlien  be  taken 
to  the  altar  1  Strange  that  Abraham  should  be  sent  into  the  land  of  Moriah,  to  have 
his  affection  toward  an  only  and  a  peculiar  son  cut  to  the  quick  1  Strange  that 
there  should  he  such  lamentation  in  Ramah — Rachel  weeping  for  her  children,  and  not 
to  be  comforted  because  they  are  not!  Were  it  not  better  to  love  the  seen  less ?  were 
it  not  better  to  be  divested  of  all  affection,  or,  at  least,  to  limit  its  sphere  ?  were  it  not 
better  to  retire  into  a  convent,  there  to  forget  all  earthly  relationships,  there  to  escape 
all  heart-breakings  and  sad  farewells,  there  to  love  God  purely  and  uninterruptedly? 
But  that  would  be  to  fight  against  nature — and  nature  is  strong.  We  must  love  the 
seen,  and  must  love  passionately  when  the  seen  threatens  to  leave  us.  Now,  there  is 
reason,  and  very  weighty  reason,  that  the  seen  should  be  loved,  and  should  be  taken 
away  so  as  to  bruise  love ;  there  is  reason  for  the  breaking  up  of  families,  as  well  as  for 
the  institution  of  families ;  and  in  both  cases  the  reason  is  substantially  the  same. 
We  have  a  family  education  on  earth,  that  we  may  be  early  familiarized  with  the 
truth  of  God's  Fatherhood.  Now,  what  is  the  Bible  representation  of  that  truth? 
We  find  that  earthly  things  are  indeed  made  after  the  heavenly  things.  We  find  a 
home  ia  Godhead;  we  find  the  relationship  of  Father  and  Son  existing  in  eternity. 


MLiv.  1— 21.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  JOHN.  131 

How  very  strong,  how  very  affecting,  the  expression  of  home  feeling  and  experience — 
the  Father  delighting  in  the  Son,  and  the  Son  rejoicing  in  the  Father's  works  (Prov. 
viii.)  I  How  true  to  human  nature,  we  should  say,  looking  from  our  standpoint,  oij 
rather,  how  very  like  the  human  and  the  Divine,  the  seen  and  the  unseen !  We 
find,  further,  such  words  as  these,  "  God  so  loved  the  world,  that  he  gave  his  only 
begotten  Son ; "  "  Herein  is  love,  not  that  we  loved  God,  but  that  he  loved  us ; "  "  He 
who  spared  not  his  Son,  but  delivered  him  up  for  us  all."  There  was  sacrifice,  then, 
on  the  part  of  God — the  sacrifice  of  the  Son  of  his  love;  and,  in  thinking  of  it, 
away  with  all  callojasness.  It  Is  a  sacred  theme,  and  is  not  to  be  approached 
with  common  feeling.  There  was  no  cessation,  no  diminution  of  affection — ^no,  not 
for  a  moment.  But  what  shall  we  say?  We  must,  indeed,  beware  of  ascribing 
to  God  iiuman  imperfection;  but  are  we  to  think  of  him  as  an  uninterested  on- 
looker at  Calvary  ?  Would  not  these  words,  "  God  so  loved  the  world,"  and  other 
kindred  words,  be  emptied  of  their  vast  meaning  if,  in  our  way  of  thinking,  we  are 
not  allowed  to  take  into  account  the  strong  pateroal  affection  ?  It  is  because  the 
relation  between  Father  and  Son  was  so  very  close,  so  very  intimate,  that  the  straining 
of  it  for  a  time,  in  a  human  atoning  life  and  death,  was  so  very  high  and  so  very 
mysterious  a  manifestation  of  Divine  love.  And  how  shall  we  understand  bow  God 
felt  in  contemplating  the  cross  ?  How  shall  we  understand  the  meaning  of  his  not 
sparing  his  Son,  his  not  holding  him  back  even  from  the  altar  of  sacrifice,  better  than 
by  such  an  experience  as  that  of  Abraham,  or  that  of  David  when  lie  uttered  the 
lamentation,  "  O  my  son  Absalom,  my  son,  my  son  Absalom !  would  God  I  had  died 
for  thee,  0  Absalom,  my  son,  my  son  "  ?  To  gain  this  high  end,  viz.  to  enter  into 
sympathy  with  Ood  in  the  highest  act  and  manifestation  of  his  Godhead,  is  it  not 
fitting  that  the  family  relations  are  made  so  close  and  tender,  and  should  we  not  be 
willing  to  bear  the  dismemberment  of  the  family  with  all  its  hallowed  associations  ? 
He  in  whose  hands  all  these  arrangements  are  is  not  severe  or  austere,  as  some  say ; 
he  is  the  God  of  families,  very  tender  and  very  compassionate ;  and  in  every  home 
there  should  be  an  altar  erected  for  his  worship.  (2)  The  brotherly  feelings  as  con- 
nected with  excellence  in  others.  It  is  in  this  line  that  the  apostle's  thought  chiefly 
moves.  How  are  we  helped  to  the  conception  of  the  Divine  excellence  ?  Partly  by 
what  of  excellence  we  find  in  ourselves ;  but,  beyond  that,  by  what  of  excellence  we 
find  in  others.  It  m  in  the  Christian  circle  that  true  excellence  is  to  be  found. 
Friendship  is  not  placed  on  a  proper  basis  unless  it  is  associated  with  Christian 
elements.  Our  conception  of  excellence  is  ebriched  from  the  past.  We  are  greatly 
helped  in  this  respect  by  the  excellence  exhibited  by  those  two  men — Paul  and  John. 
But  there  is  additional  help  when  we  have  actual  experience  of  excellence  in  our  own 
circle.  We  feel  it  to  be  more  of  a  reality,  we  can  lay  iQcra  deSivite  hold  upon  it,  and 
our  love  is  called  forth  into  actual  operation  in  all  befitting  forms.  Divine  excellence  ■ 
is  the  varied  excellence  apprehended  in  a  wide  circle,  infinitely  purified  and  heightened. 
And  our  love  to  God  is  more  real,  more  definite,  and  flows  forth  more  naturally,  when 
we  rise  from  excellence  that  is  seen  to  excellence  that. is  unseen.  Let  us,  then,  love 
our  brethren  sincerely,  with  appreciation,  and  within  no  narrow  circle,  that  our  love  to 
God  may  have  reality,  definiteness,  richness.  "If  ye  love  not  the  seen,"  says  the 
,  apostle,  "how  can  ye  love  the  unseen?"  (3)  The  missionary  feelings.  We  mean 
'  those  feelings  which  we  are  to  cherish  toward  a  sinner,  or  toward  a  fellow-Christian 
who  has  fallen  into  sin.  It  is  the  element  of  sin  in  their  object  that  broadly  distin- 
guishes them  from  those  feelings  with  which  we  regard  kindred  or  friends.  Here,  too, 
as  formerly,  it  holds  true  that  the  love  of  our  brother-man,  whom  we  see,  is  a  medium 
through  which  we  are  helped  to  rise  into  the  love  of  our  Father-God,  whom  we  do  not 
see.  What  are  the  feelings  with  which  we  are  to  regard  the  sinner?  There  are  some 
— and  the  thought  of  it  is  saddening — ^there  are  some  who  actually  rejoice  in  the 
existence  and  prevalence  of  sin.  A  second  class  look  upon  sin  as  a  weakness,  or, 
what  is  the  same  thing,  lay  the  blame  upon  circumstances.  A  third  class  treat  it 
with  utter  indifference.  The  dust  they  tread  under  their  feet  gives  them  as  little 
cc^cern.  A  fourth  class,  strange  to  say,  find  in  it  occasion  for  bitter,  irreconcilable 
hatred.  The  man  who  has  fallen  from  respectability  is  to  be  branded  and  cast  out, 
never  to  be  received  back.  If  we  belong  to  any  of  these  four  classes,  then  we  are  not 
true  Christians.    For  the  Christian,  by  all  holy  memories,  by  all  sacred  associations, 


138  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GBNERAI.  OF  JOHN.    [oh.  iv.  1—21. 

is  a  philanthropist.  By  this  he  should  he  known  in  his  private  walk  and  in  the  public 
arena.  On  his  banner  the  device  is,  "  One  lifted  up  to  the  cross  by  men,  and  yet 
drawing  all  men  to  him."  Let  us  inquire  for  a  little  into  the  nature  of  Christiar 
sympathy.  It  is  often  misrepresented  or  misunderstood.  The  creed  of  some  is  of  thii 
nature,  "  We  must  take  up  a  certain  moral  position ;  we  must,  indeed,  be  humane  when 
suffering  comes  in  our  way ;  but  to  go  down  to  the  fallen  is,  forsooth,  to  compromise 
our  moral  position."  It  is  the  old  Pharisaic  feeling :  "  He  is  the  Fi  lend  of  publicans 
and  sinners :  he  sits  down  with  those,  therefore  he  countenances  their  wicked  practices. 
It  is  safe  to  keep  the  leprous  at  a  distance."  But  Christian  sympathy  is  not  at  variance 
with  the  highest  moral  position.  The  truth  is,  it  is  only  to  be  found  in  conjunction 
with  the  very  severest  view  of  sin.  It  may  be  said  to  have  its  origin,  its  exciting, 
stimulating  cause  in  self-condemnation,.  We  ourselves  must  feel  the  darkness,  the 
isolation,  the  insupportable  sorrow  of  heart  occasioned  by  an  awakened, conscience. 
For  it  is  only  when  we  have  realized  what  sin  is  in  ourselves  that  we  can  feel  for  those 
who  are  under  its  power.  Were  sin  a  light  thing,  we  might  let  it  pass,  we  might 
suffer  it  to  lie  upon  a  neighbour;  but  seeing  it  is  so  heinous  a  thing,  so  subversive  of 
law,  so  dishonouring  to  God,  so  ruinous  in  its  consequences,  how  can  we  but  deplore  it 
wherever  and  in  whatever  f6rm  it  exists  ?  And  is  it  not  when  such  a  view  of  sin  is 
brought  home  most  strongly  to  our  minds  that  we  feel  greatest  sympathy  with  the 
erring?  Is  it  not  in  this  way,  too,  that  we  cast  off  wncharitablenessf  There  is  a 
providence  in  our  having  faults,  if,  by  keeping  our  eyes  upon  them,  we  are  led  to  pass  a 
charitable  judgment  upon  the  conduct  of  others.  What  pleasure  can  it  be  to  see  a  neigh- 
bour plagued  as  we  are  ?  So  is  it  with  forgivingness.  It  is  well  that  we  ourselves 
stand  in  perpetual  need  of  forgiveness,  if  thereby  we  are  led  to  forgive  others.  So  is  it 
with  active  henevolence.  Does  it  never  seem  strange  that  the  Christian  life  is  so  very 
difficult  ?  The  young  Christian  imagines  it  is  to  be  all  victory :  his  faith  shall  never 
wftver,  his  Father's  countenance  shall  never  be  turned  away ;  and  so,  when  he  turns 
to  his  neighbour  and  says,  "  Come  with  us,  and  we  will  show  you  good ;  for  the  Lord 
hatb  spoken  good  concerning  Israel,"  he  is  not  prepared  for  a  refusal ;  he  expects  the 
devil  to  go  out  of  the  possessed  at  once ;  he  lacks  patience,  which  is  a  sure  sign  that  his 
sympathy  is  not  yet  deep.  But  he  does  not  go  far  ere  a  change  comes  over  himself. 
As  li  is  put,  the  old  Adam  is  too  much  for  the  young  Melancthon.  Satan  is  not  yet 
cast  out  of  his  own  heart ;  but  continues  to  molest  in  formidable  strength,  and  it  is 
only  too  apparent  that  there  must  be  many  a  struggle  and  many  a  fall.  Mark  now 
how  this  produces  a  very  material  change  in  his  treatment  of  others.  Sin  is  a  greater 
evil  than  he  supposed  it  to  be,  and  he  feels  for  it  a  deeper  sorrow.  Shall  he  not  sorrow 
the  more  for  those  who  are  under  its  power,  but  who  do  not  see  it  as  he  sees  it  5 
Shall  he  not  be  more  patient  when  abuse  and  obloquy  are  heaped  upon  him,  or  whei. 
he  receives  the  stolid  look  of  the  indifferent?  It  is  not  to  be  overlooked  that  the 
simple  manifeststion  of  a  genuine,  warm-hearted  sympathy  is  sometimes  sufficient. 
There  are  many  souls  in  tho  world,  ay,  in  the  sphere  in  which  we  move,  that  arc 
waiting  to  be  comforted,  that  are  waiting  to  be  lifted  up  out  of  the  dust.  All  that 
they  need  is  a  kind  Christian  word.  Tell  them  that  we  forgive  them — we,  a  brother 
and  a  siimer  once  like  them.  Assure  them  by  all  we  hold  most  dear  that  God  forgives 
them  for  his  Son's  sake — forgives  them,  the  vile,  the  outcast ;  and  that  will  be  as  life 
from  the  dead ;  tho  hope  of  the  gospel  will  take  possession  of  them,  and  shed  a  mild, 
benign  lustre  over  their  dark  world.  But  there  are  others  who  are  not  so  easily  dealt 
with.  There  must  be  a  prolonged,  more  laborious,  and,  in  the  end,  perhaps,  a  sharper 
treatment.  But,  seeing  thst  it  may  be  got,  shall  we,  who  are  the  messengers  of  God, 
refuse  the  needful  assistance?  A  physician  finds  that  there  are  snme  diseases  more 
malignant  und  more  intricate  than  others;  but  shall  he  therefore  confine  himself  tc 
cases  iu  which  the  cure  is  safe  and  easy  ?  Why,  if  he  has  a  remedy  and  refuses  to  applj' 
it,  because  Le  is  appalled  at  the  danger  or  grudges  the  labour,  he  would  be  counted 
a  disgrace  to  his  profession ;  he  would  lack  the  element  which  is  next  in  importance  to 
skVU — that  which  gives  life  and  form  and  bisauty  to  skill — sympathy  with  the  distressed. 
And  shall  we  who  have  a  simple  and  univeisal  remedy  hold  it  back  from  those  who  have 
the  worst  kind  of  distemper,  or  from  those  who  are  the  most  virulent  against  ourselves? 
Shall  we  not  the  rather  extend  to  them  our  warmest  sympathy?  shall  we  not  th» 
rather  extend  to  them  the  largest  bhja'o  >»1  (.vf  earnest,  prayerful,  thoughtful  considera 


on.  V.  1—21.]     THE  FIEST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  JOHN. 


189 


tion,  regardless  of  consequences,  regardful  only  of  him  whose  Name  we  bear,  and 
whose  honour  we  would  by  no  means  tarnish  ?  This  may  be  put  on  various  grounds. 
We  put  it  here  on  this  ground — that  it  is  by  thus  loving  sinners  that  we  are  to  be 
'  brought  into  sympathy  with  that  God  who  loves  sinners.  "  For  scarcely  for  a  righteoui 
man  will  one  die :  yet  peradventure  for  a  good  man  some  would  even  dare  to  die. 
But  God  commendeth  his  love  towards  us,  in  that,  while  we  were  yet  sinners,  Christ 
died  for  us."  That  is  one  great  feature  of  the  Divine  love*— very  mysterious,  if  we 
think  of  it,  very  repugnant  to  all  our  preconceptions — that  God  should  love  those  who 
were  so  opposed  to  him.  There  is  something  here  that  startles  us;  there  is  something 
here  that  quite  overwhelms  us.  The  truth  is,  we  do  not  wonder  enough  at  itj  we  give 
our  wonder  to  lesser  things.  Is  it  not  often  with  us  so  low  as  this — only  »  vacant  look 
as  he  passes  before  us?  But  say,  all  ye  that  pass  by,  have  ye  seen  anything  like  to 
this  in  your  experience,  anything  so  really  wonderful  as  God's  love  to  sinners  ?  If  we 
would  realize  it,  if  we  would  breathe  the  atmosphere  of  the  cross,  if  we  would  feel  with 
God  in  his  love  to  sinners,  we  must  love  sinners  even  as  he  loves  them.  True,  it  is 
•  hard  thing  to  conceive  an  interest  in  a  sinner,  a  hard  thing  to  retain  that  interest 
when  all  the  romance  is  gone,  a  hard  thing  to  undertake  some  definite  direct  line  of 
procedure  for  his  reclamation ;  but  that  is  the  Divine  arrangement,  and  Divine  grace 
ii  offered.  "  If  ye  love  not  the  seen,"  says  the  apostle,  "  how  can  ye  love  the  unseen  ?  " 
implying  that  it  is  by  loving  the  seen  that  we  are  to  learn  to  love  the  unseen.  If  we 
do  not  know  the  forbearance  and  patience  which  need  to  be  exercised  towards  sinners, 
how  can  we  know  the  Divine  forbearance  and  patience  that  need  to  be  exercised 
toward  us  ?  It  is  to  be  borne  in  mind  that  love  to  our  Father-God  has  an  important 
influence  on  love  to  our  brother-man.  The  latter  would  soon  wither  and  decay  if  it 
were  not  fed  from  a  higher  source.  He  who  commands  here,  spake  from  Sinai;  he 
now  speaks  from  Calvary.  Here  him  speaking  from  Calvary.  His  first  word  to  the 
sinner  is  not  "Love  your  brother,"  but,  "Believe  on  me."  Should  not  an  ordinary 
gratitude  prompt  to  instantaneous  obedience  to  the  command  ? — B.  F. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  V. 


Vers.  1 — 12. — Faith  is  the  source  of  love. 

Ver.  1. — The  verse  is  a  sorites.  To  be- 
lieve in  the  Incarnalion  involves  birth  from 
God.  To  be  born  of  God  involves  loving 
God.  To  love  God  involves  loving  his  chil- 
dren. Tlierefore  to  believe  in  the  Incar- 
nation involves  loving  God's  children.  T^k 
yeyevv7i/j.4vov  c$  avTov  is  not  to  be  under- 
stoiod  as  meaning  Christ  to  the  exclusion  of 
Christians ;  it  means  any  son  of  God,  as  the 
next  verse  shows. 

Ver.  2. — ^Another  mark  by  which  we  can 
test  our  love  towards  the  brethren.  In  ver. 
1  faith  in  the  Incarnation  is  shown  to  in- 
volve this  love.  Here  ohedience  to  God  is 
the  test.  To  obey  God  proves  love  to  him, 
and  this  again  involves  love  Of  his  children. 

Ver.  3. — Eeason  for  the  preceding  state- 
ment. "  For  the  love  of  God  consists  in  this 
(ch.  iv.  17),  that  we  keep  his  command- 
ments :  and  these  are  not  grievous."  These 
»re  the  words,  not  merely  of  an  inspired 
apostle,  but  of  an  aged  man,  with  a  wide 
experience  of  life  and  its  difSoulties.  "  Diffl- 
onlt "  is  a  relative  term,  depending  upon  the 
relation  between  the  thing  to  be  done  and 
the  powers  of  the  doer  of  it.  The  Christian, 


whose  will  is  united  with  the  will  of  God, 
will  not  find  obedience  to  that  will  a  task. 

Ver.  i. — Reason  for  the  preceding  state- 
ment :  the  opposition  which  causes  the 
difficulty  ii  already  overcome.  Nothing, 
however,  is  gained  by  transferring  the  full 
stop  from  the  end  of  ver.  3  to  the  middle  of 
ver.  4,  any  more  than  from  the  end  of  ver.  2 
to  the  middle  of  ver.  3.  The  punctuation  of 
the  Authorized  Version  and  the  Revised 
Version  is  to  be  preferred.  It  is  the  world 
that  hinders  obedience  to  God's  command- 
ments and  makes  them  seem  grievous.  But 
everywhere  God's  children  (iroK  rh  yeycvmi- 
/leroy,  as  in  John  vi.  37, 39 ;  xvii.  2)  conquer 
the  world,  and  that  by  means  of  faith.  The 
aorist  (^  mc^iracra)  marks  the  victory  as 
already  won  and  complete :  "  the  victory 
that  hath  vanquished  the  world  is  this — our 
faith." 

Ver.  5.— Wliat  oiher  way  is  there  of  con- 
quering the  world  ?  And  how  can  he  who 
believes  fail  7  Belief  in  Christ  unites  us  to 
him,  and  gives  us  a  share  in  his  victories ; 
and  he  has  overcome  the  world  (John  xvi. 
33). 

Vers.  6 — 12.— The  section  takes  a  new 
turn ;  the  test  of  the  Christian  life  furnished 
by  the  witness  of  the  life  itself!  This  witness 


140 


THE  FIBST  EPISTLE  OENEEAL  OF  JOHN.      [oh.  t.  1—81 


is  that  of  the  Spirit  (ver.  6),  identical  with 
that  of  God  (ver.  9),  and  possessed  by  every 
believer  (ver.  10).  Few  passages  of  Scrip- 
ture have  produced  such  a  mass  of  widely 
divergent  interpretation. 

Ver.  6. — This  (Son  of  God)  is  he  who  came 
by  water  and  blood,  Jesus  Christ.  This  may 
be  regarded  as  one  of  the  main  propositions 
of  the  Epistle — that  the  eternal  Son  of  God 
is  identical  with  the  historic  Person,  Jesus, 
Of  the  water  and  the  blood  widely  differing 
interpretations  have  been  given.  It  would 
be  tedious  and  unprofitable  to  enumerate 
them.  Our  estimate  of  John  xix.  34,  "  the 
most  perplexing  incident  in  the  Gospel," 
will  probably  influence  our  interpretation  of 
this  "the  most  perplexing  passage  in  the 
Epistle."  Not  that  we  have  here  any  direct 
reference  to  the  piercing  of  Christ's  side,  and 
its  results.  Yet  both  passages  teach  similar 
spiritual  truths,  viz.  the  ideas  which  under- 
lie the  two  sacraments,  and  teach  them  by 
reference  to  facts  in  the  life  and  death  of 
Jesus  Christ.  But  the  facts  are  not  the 
same  in  each  case.  It  is  difScult  to  believe 
that  this  passage  contains  any  definite  and 
immediate  allusion  to  John  xix.  34.  Why 
in  that  case  the  marked  change  of  order, 
"  water  and  blood  "  instead  of  "  blood  and 
water"?  And  if  it  be  thought  that  this  is 
explained  by  saying  that  the  one  is  "  the 
ideal,  mystical,  sacramental,  subjective 
order,"  the  other  "  the  historical  and  ob- 
jective order,"  and  that  "the  first  is  ap- 
propriately adopted  in  the  Epistle,  the 
second  in  the  Gospel,"  we  are  not  at  the 
end  of  our  difEculties.  If  St  John  is  here 
referiing  to  the  effusions  from  Christ's  dead 
body,  what  can  be  the  meaning  of  "  not  in 
water  only,  but  in  water  and  blood"?  It 
was  the  water,  not  the  blood,  that  was 
specially  astonishing.  And  "  in  "  in  this 
case  seems  a  strange  expression  to  use.  We 
should  have  expected  rather,  "not  shedding 
blood  only,  but  blood  and  water."  More- 
over, how  can  blood  and  water  flowing  from 
the  Lord's  body  be  spoken  of  hia  "  coming 
through  water  and  blood  "  ?  The  simplest 
interpretation  is  that  which  refers  SSap  to 
the  baptism  of  water  to  which  he  himself 
submitted,  and  which  he  enjoined  upon  his 
disciples,  and  atfia  to  the  baptism  of  blood 
to  which  he  himself  submitted,  and  which 
raised  the  baptism  of  water  from  a  sign  into 
a  sacrament.  John  came  baptizing  in  water 
only,  iv  SSari  PaTTTi(ay  (John  i.  31,  38). 
Jesus  came  baptizing  in  water  and  Mood, 
t.e.  in  water  which  washed  away  gin  through 
the  cflBcaoy  of  his  blood.  This  interpretation 
explains  the  marked  change  of  preposition. 
Jesus  effected  his  work  through  the  baptisms 
of  water  and  blood ;  and  it  is  by  baptism  in 
these  elements  that  he  comes  to  his  followers. 
Moreovar,    this    interpretation   harmonize! 


with  the  polemical  purpose  of  the  Epistle, 
▼iz,  to  confute  the  errors  of  Ceiinthus 
Cerinthua  taught  that  the  Divine  Logos  o< 
Christ  descended  upon  JesuB  at  the  baptism, - 
and  departed  again  when  Jesus  was  arrested ; 
so  that  a  mere  man  was  born  of  Mary,  and  a 
mere  man  suffered  on  the  cross.  St.  John 
assures  us  that  there  was  no  such  severance. 
The  Divine  Son  Jesus  Christ  came  not  by 
water  only  at  his  baptism,  but  by  blood  also 
at  his  death.  Besides  these  two  abiding 
witnesses,  there  is  yet  a  third  still  more 
convincing.  And  there  is  the  Spirit  that 
beareth  witness  (to  the  Divinity  of  Christ) ; 
because  the  Spirit  is  the  truth.  There  can 
be  no  higher  testimony  than  that  of  the 
truth  iteelf  (John  xiy.  17;  xv.  26;  xvi  13) 
It  is  surprising  that  any  one  should  propose 
to  translate,  "  The  Spirit  is  that  which  is 
vritnesaing  that  the  Spirit  is  the  truth." 
What  has  this  to  do  with  the  context? 

Ver.  7. — For  those  who  bear  witness  ar« 
three,  and  thus  constitute  full  legal  testi- 
mony (Dent,  xvii  6;  xix.  15;  Matt.  xviiL 
16 ;  2  Cor.  xiii.  1).  It  will  be  assumed  here, 
without  discussion,  that  the  remainder  of 
this  verse  and  the  first  clause  of  ver.  8  are 
spurious.  Words  which  are  not  contained  in 
a  single  Greek  uncial  manuscript,  nor  in  a 
single  Greek  cursive  earlier  than  the  four- 
teenth century  (the  two  which  contain  the 
passage  being  evidently  translated  from  the 
Vulgate),  nor  are  quoted  by  a  single  Greek 
Father  during  the  whole  of  the  Trinitarian 
controversy,  nor  are  found  in  any  authority 
until  late  in  the  fifth  century,  cannot  be 
genuine. 

Ver.  8. — When  all  three  witnesses  are 
enumerated  together,  the  Spirit  naturally 
comes  first.  He  is  a  living  and  a  Divine 
witness,  independent  of  the  two  facts  of  the 
baptism  and  the  Passion,  wliich  concur  with 
him  in  testifying  that  the  Son  of  Ood  is 
Jesus  Christ. 

Ver.  9. — An  argument  a  fortiori,  li  we 
receive  expresses  no  doubt,  but  states  an 
admitted  fact  gently  (see  on  ch.  iv.  11  ;  and 
comp.  John  vii.  23 ;  x.  35 ;  xiii.  14).  "  If 
we  accept  human  witness  [and,  of  course,  we 
do],  we  must  accept  Divine  witness  [and, 
therefore,  must  believe  that  the  Son  of  God 
is  Jesus  Christ];  for  the  witness  of  God 
consists  in  this,  that  he  has  borne  witness 
concerning  bis  Son."  Note  the  pertinacious 
repetition  of  the  Word  "  witness,"  thoroughly 
in  SL  John's  style.  The  perfect  (Mfjuap- 
riprtKc)  indicates  that  the  witness  still 
continues. 

Ver.  10.— Hath  the  witness  ii  him.  This 
rendering  is  to  be  preferred  to  either  "in 
Him,"  i.e.  God,  or  "  in  himself."  The  former 
is  obscure  in  meaning;  the  latter,  though 
probably  correct  as  an  interpretation,  is  in- 
accurate as   a   translation,  for  the  bettei 


OH.r,  1— 21.]      THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  JOHN. 


141 


reading  is  aurip,  not  Ioi;ti?.  But  iv  air^ 
may  t^  reflexive.  The  believer  in  the  In- 
carnation has  the  Divine  teetimony  in  his 
heart,  and  it  abides  with  him  as  an  ad- 
ditional source  of  evidence,  supplementing 
and  confirming  the  external  evidence.  In 
its  daily  experience,  the  soul  finds  ever 
fresh  proof  that  the  declaration,  "This  is 
my  beloved  Son,"  is  true.  But  even  without 
this  internal  corroboration,  the  external  evi- 
dence suffices,  and  he  who  rejects  it  makes 
God  a  liar ;  for  it  is  God  who  presents  the 
evidence,  and  presents  it  as  sufScient  and 
true.  The  second  half  of  the  verse  is  paren- 
thetical, to  show  that  the  unbeliever,  though 
he  has  no  witness  in  himself,  is  not  therefore 
excused.  In  ver.  11  we  return  to  the  main 
proposition  at  the  beginning  of  ver.  10. 

Ver.  11. — "And  the  substance  of  the  in- 
ternal testimony  is  this — we  are  conscious  of 
the  Divine  gift  of  eternal  life,  and  this  we 
have  in  the  Son  of  God."  St.  John's  f<o^ 
ttidvios  is  not  "  everlasting  life : "  the  idea  of 
endlessness  may  be  included  in  it,  but  it  ig 
not  the  main  one.  The  distinction  between 
eternity  and  time  is  one  which  the  human 
mind  feels  to  be  real  and  necessary.  But 
we  are  apt  to  lose  ourselves  when  we  try  to 
think  of  eternity.  We  admit  that  it  is  not 
time,  that  it  is  the  very  antithesis  of  time, 
and  yet  we  attempt  to  measure  it  while  we 
declare  it  to  be  immeasurable.  We  make  it 
simply  a  very  long  time.  The  main  idea  of 
"  eternal  life  "  in  St.  John's  writings  has  no 
direct  reference  to  time.  Eternal  life  is 
possessed  already  by  believers;  it  is  not  a 
thing  of  the  future  (John  iii.  36 ;  v.  24 ;  vi. 
47,  54;  xvii.  3).  It  is  that  life  in  God 
which  includes  all  blessedness,  and  which 
is  not  broken  by  physical  death  (John  li.  25). 
Its  opposite  is  exclusion  from  God. 

Ver.  12. — Eternal  life  is  not  granted  to 
the  whole  world,  or  even  to  all  Christians 
en  masse ;  it  is  given  to  individuals,  soul  by 
soul,  according  as  each  does  or  does  not 
accept  the  Son  of  God.  The  order  of  the 
Greek  is  noteworthy — in  the  first  half  of 
the  verse  the  emphasis  is  on  "  hath,"  in  the 
second  on  "life."  Here,  as  in  John  i.  4, 
the  article  before  (a-fi  should  be  translated, 
"hath  the  life  .  .  .  hath  not  the  life."  The 
insertion  of  rov  0eoO  in  the  sec6nd  half  of 
the  verse  points  to  the  magnitude  of  the 
loss:  the  possessor  has  no  need  to  be  told 
tehote  Son  he  has. 

Vers.  13 — 21. — 4.  Conclusion  op  the 
Epistle;  without,  however,  any  marked 
break  between  this  section  and  the  last 
On  the  contrary,  the  prominent  thought  of 
eternal  life  through  faith  in  the  Son  of  God  ig 
continued  for  final  development.  This  topic 
is  the  main  idea  alike  of  the  Gospel  (xx.  31) 


and  of  the  Epistle,  with  this  difference — in 
the  Gospel  the  purpose  is  that  we  may  have 
eternal  life ;  in  the  Epistle,  that  we  may 
know  that  we  have  eternal  life. 

Ver.  13. — These  things  I  have  written  to 
you  sums  up  the  Epistle  as  a  whole.  At  the 
outset  the  apostle  said,  "  These  things  we 
write,  that  our  joy  [yours  as  well  as  mine] 
may  be  fulfilled ; "  and  now,  as  he  draws  to 
a  close,  he  says  the  same  thing  in  other 
words.  Their  joy  is  the  knowledge  that 
they  have  eternal  life  through  belief  in  the 
Son  of  God.  There  is  considurable  vaiiety 
of  reading  in  this  verse,  but  that  of  the  T.R., 
represented  by  the  Authorized  Version,  is  a 
manifest  simplification.  That  represented  by 
the  Revised  Version  is  probably  right.  The 
awkwardness  of  the  last  clause  produced 
various  alterations  with  a  view  to  greater 
smoothness.  The  verse,  both  as  regards 
construction  and  meaning,  should  be  care- 
fully compared  with  John  i.  12.  In  both 
we  have  the  epexegetio  addition  at  the  end. 
In  both  we  have  St.  John's  favourite  mtTTei- 
tiv  els,  expressing  the  very  strongest  belief; 
motion  to  and  repose  upon  the  object  of 
belief.  In  both  we  have  the  remarkable  ex- 
pression, "believe  on  his  Name."  This  is 
no  mere  periphrasis  for  "believe  on  him." 
Names  in  Jewish  history  were  so  often  sig- 
nificant, being  sometimes  given  by  God 
himself,  that  they  served  not  merely  to  dis- 
tinguish one  man  from  another,  but  to  indi- 
cate his  character.  So  also  with  the  Divine 
Name:  it  suggests  the  Divine  attributes. 
"  To  believe  on  the  Name  of  the  Son  of  God  " 
is  to  give  entire  adhesion  to  him  as  having 
the  qualities  of  the  Divine  Son. 

Ver.  14. — ^And  the  confidenoa  that  we  have 
towards  him  consists  in  this.  The  thought 
of  knowing  that  we  have  eternal  life  (ver. 
13)  leads  back  to  the  thought  of  confidence 
before  God  in  relation  to  prayer  (ch.  iii.  21, 
22).  This  idea  is  now  farther  developed 
with  special  reference  to  intercession  for 
others  ;  a  particular  form  of  prayer  which  is 
in  close  connexion  with  another  main  idea 
in  the  Epistle — love  of  the  brethren. 

Ver.  15.— The  point  is  not,  that  if  God 
hears  our  prayers  he  giants  them  (as  if  we 
could  ever  pray  to  him  without  his  being 
aware  of  it)  ;  but  that  if  we  know  that  he 
hears  our  prayers  (i.e.  trust  him  without 
reserve),  we  already  have  what  we  have 
asked  in  aoeordance  with  his  will.  It  may 
be  years  before  we  perceive  that  our  prayers 
have  been  answered :  perhaps  in  this  world 
we  may  never  be  able  to  see  this ;  but  we 
know  that  God  ftog  answered  them.  The 
peculiar  construction,  idu  with  the  indicative, 
is  not  uncommon  in  the  New  Testament  as 
a  variant  reading.  It  seems  to  be  genuine 
in  Luke  xix.  40  and  Acts  viii-  31  with  the 


143 


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  JOHN.     [oh.  t.  1—21. 


future  indicative,  and  in  1  Thees.  iii.  8  with 
the  pretent.  Here  the  reading  is  undisputed. 
Of  course,  oySa^uey  is  virtually  present;  but 
even  the  past  tenses  of  the  indicative  are 
sometimes  found  after  ii.v  (see  Winer,  pp. 
369, 370 ;  see  also  Trench, '  Qu  the  Authorized 
Version  of  the  New  Testiiment,'  p.  61). 

Ver.  16.— How  does  this  position  respect- 
ing God's  hearing  our  prayers  affect  the 
question  of  intercession  for  the  salvation  of 
others,  and  especially  of  an  emng  brother  ? 
If  any  prayer  can  be  made  with  con6denoe 
of  success,  surely  it  is  this.  It  is  an  unselfish 
prayer ;  a  prayer  of  love.  It  is  also  a  prayer 
in  harmony  with  tiod's  will;  a  prayer  fop 
the  extension  of  his  kingdom.  St.  John 
points  out  that  this  reasonable  expectation 
has  limits.  The,  prayer  of  one  human  being 
can  never  cancel  another's  free-will.  If  God's 
will  does  not  override  man's  will,  neither  can 
a  fellow-man's  prayer.  When  a  human  will 
has  been  firmly  and  persistently  set  in  oppo- 
sition to  tiie  Divine  will,  our  intercession 
will  be  of  no  avail.  And  this  seems  to  be 
the  meaning  of  "  sin  unto  death ;  "  wilful 
and  obstinate  rejection  of  God's  grace  and 
persistence  in  unrepented  sin.  "  Death  " 
corresponds  to  the  life  spoken  of  above ;  and 
if  the  one  is  eternal  (ver.  13),  so  is  the  other. 
Sins  punished  with  loss  of  life  in  this  world, 
whether  by  human  law  or  by  Divine  retri- 
bution, cannot  be  meant.  Christians  have 
before  now  suffered  agonies  of  mind,  fearing 
that  they  have  committed  what  they  suppose 
to  be  the  "sin  unto  death."  Their  fear  is 
evidence  that  they  have  not  committed  any 
such  sin.  But  if  they  despair  of  pardon, 
they  may  come  near  to  it.  There  are 
certain  statements  made  respecting  this 
mysterious  passage  against  which  we  must 
be  on  our  guard.  It  is  laid  down  as  a  canon 
of  interpretation  that  the  sin  unto  death  is 
one  which  can  he  known,  which  can  be  recog- 
nized as  such  by  the  intercessor.  St.  John 
neither  says  nor  implies  this.  He  implies 
that  some  sins  may  be  known  to  be  not  unto 
death.  Again,  it  is  asserted  that  he  forbids 
us  to  pray  concerning  sin  which  is  unto 
death.  "The  apostle  is  much  more  reserved. 
He  encourages  us  to  intercede  for  a  sinning 
brother  with  full  confidence  of  success.  But 
there  is  a  limit  to  this.  The  sinner  may  be 
sinning  unto  death;  and  in  that  case  St. 
John  cannot  encourage  us  to  pray.  Casuis- 
tical classifications  of  sins  under  the  heads  of 
mortal  and  venial  have  been  based  upon  this 
passage.  It  lends  no  authority  to  snch 
attempts ;  and  thoy  have  worked  untold 
mischief  in  the  Church.  The  apostle  tells 
us  that  the  distinction  between  mortal  and 
venial  exists ;  but  he  supplies  us  with  no 
test  by  which  one  man  can  judge  another  in 
this  respect.  By  pointedly  abstaining  from 
making  any  classification  of  sins  into  mortal 


and  Tenial.heviituallycondemns  the  making 
What  neither  he  nor  St.  Paul  ventured  to  d« 
we  may  well  shrink  from  doing.  The  sama 
overt  act  may  be  mortal  sin  in  one  case  and 
not  in  another.  It  is  the  attitude  of  mind 
with  which  the  sinner  contemplates  his  act 
before  and  after  commission  that  makes  all 
the  difference ;  and  how  seldom  can  this  b« 
known  to  his  fellow-men  1  The  change  from 
cuTeTi/  to  ipa>T^v  is  noteworthy.  The  former 
is  used  in  vers.  14, 15,  and  the  beginning  ol 
ver.  16;  the  latter  at  the  end  of  ver.  16. 
The  latter  is  the  less  humble  word  of  the 
two,  being  often  used  of  equals  or  superiors 
requesting  compliance  with  their  wishes. 
Perhaps  St.  John  uses  it  here  to  indicate 
that  a  prayer  of  this  kind  is  not  a  humble 
one. 

Ver.  17.  —  All  nnrighteonsness  is  sin, 
"Among  the  faithful  this  onglit  to  be  an 
indubitable  truth,  that  whatever  is  contrary 
to  God's  Law  is  sin,  and  in  its  nature  mortal ; 
for  where  there  is  a  transgression  of  the  Law, 
there  is  sin  and  death  "  (Calvin).  But  this 
terrifying  truth  brings  with  it  a  word  of 
encouragement.  For  if  all  unrighteousness 
without  exception  is  sin,  it  follows  that  not 
every  sin  is  unto  death.  It  is  incredible 
that  the  slightest  departure  from  righteons- 
ness  should  involve  eternal  damnation  (see 
notes  on  ch.  i.  7). 

Vers.  18 — 21.— With  three  solemn  asseve- 
rations and  one  equally  solemn  charge  the 
Epistle  is  brought  to  a  close.  "  Can  we  be 
certain  of  any  principles  in  ethics  ?  St. 
John  declares  that  we  can.  He  says  that  he 
has  not  been  making  probable  guesses  about 
the  grounds  of  human  actions,  the  relations 
of  man  to  God,  the  nature  of  G"od  himself. 
These  are  things  that  he  knows.  Nay,  he  is 
not  content  with  claiming  this  knowledge 
himself.  He  uses  the  plural  pronoun ;  he 
declares  that  his  disciples,  his  little  children, 
know  that  which  he  knows"  (Maurice). 

Ver.  18. — We  know  j  ofSa/ici/,  as  in  oh.  iii 
2,  li,  and  Johii  xxi.  24,  which  should  he 
compared  with  this  passage.  These  ex- 
pressions of  Christian  certitude  explain 
the  undialectical  oliaiacter  of  St.  Jnhn's 
Epistles  as  compared  with  those  of  St.  PauL 
What  need  to  argue  and  prove  when  both 
he  and  his  readers  already  knew  and 
believed  ?  We  must  have  "  begotten "  in 
both  clauses,  as  in  the  Revised  Version,  not 
"  born  "  in  one  and  "  begotten  "  in  the  other, 
as  in  the  Authorized  Version.  In  the  Greek 
there  is  a  change  of  tense  (4  jeyimitiiivos 
and  4  yevrriBili),  but  no  change  of  verb. 
The  whole  should  run,  "We  know  that 
whosoever  is  begotten  of  God  sinneth  not, 
but  the  Begotten  of  God  keepeth  him." 
For  the  perfect  participle,  comp.  eh.  iii.  9  j 
V.  1,4;  John  iii.  6,  8 :  it  expresses  him  who 
has  come  to  be,  and  still  continues  to  be,  ^ 


CH.  ▼.  1—21.]     THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  JOHN. 


143 


Bon  of  God.  The  aorist  participle  ocoure 
nowhere  else  in  St.  John  :  it  expresses  him 
whO|  without  relation  to  time  past  or  present, 
is  the  Son  of  God.  The  reading  arST6i>  is 
preferable  to  eavT6y.  The  "Vulgate  has 
con$ervat  eum,  not  coniervat  seipsum,  which 
Calvin  adopts.  The  eternal  Son  of  the 
Father  preserves  the  frail  children  of  the 
Father  from  the  common  foe,  go  that  the 
evil  one  touoheth  them  not.  The  verb  for 
"  touch "  (Sirreo-Boi)  is  the  same  as  in 
"Touch  me  not"  (John  xx.  17).  In  both 
esses  "touch"  is  somewhat  too  weak  a 
rendering;  the  meaning  is  rather,  "  lay  hold 
of,"  "hold  fast."  The  Magdalene  wished, 
not  merely  to  touch,  but  to  hold  the  Lord 
fast,  so  as  to  have  his  bodily  presence 
continually.  And  here  the  meaning  is  that, 
though  the  evil  one  may  attack  the  children 
of  God,  yet  he  cannot  get  them  into  his 
power. 

Ver.  19.— Omit  the  "and"  before  "we 
know."  There  is  no  xal  or  Se  in  the  true 
text ;  and  the  asyndeton  is  impressive.  The 
whole  world  lieth  in  the  evil  one.  This  ii 
the  second  great  fact  of  which  Christians 
have  certainty.  They,  as  children  of  God, 
and  preserved  from  the  evil  one  by  his  Son, 
have  nothing  to  do  with  the  world,  which 
still  lies  in  the  power  of  the  evil  one.  That 
"the  evil"  (r^iroMjpiy)  is  here  not  neuter 
but  masculine  is  evident  from  the  context, 
as  well  as  from  oh.  ii.  13,  14;  iv.  4.  "By 
saying  that  it  lieth  in  the  evil  one  (t» 
maligno)  he  represents  it  as  being  under  tlie 
dominion  of  Satan.  There  is,  therefore,  no 
reason  why  we  should  hesitate  to  shun  the 
world,  which  contemns  God  and  delivers  up 
itself  into  the  bondage  of  Satan;  nor  is 
there  any  reason  why  we  should  fear  its 
enmity,  because  it  is  alienated  from  God  " 
(Calvin). 

Ver.  20.— And  we  know.  The  "and" 
(Se)  is  here  rightly  given — it  sums  up  the 
whole  with  k  final  asseveration.  Whatever 
the  world  and  its  philosophy  chooses  to 
assert.  Christians  l;now  that  the  Son  of  God 
has  come  in  the  flesh,  and  has  endowed 
them  with  mental  faculties  capable  of 
attaining  to  a  knowledge  of  the  true  God. 
The  Christian's  certainty  is  not  fanaticism 
or  superstition ;  he  is  "  ready  always  to  give 
answer  to  every  man  that  asketh  a  reason 
concerning  the  hope  that  is  in  him"  (1  Pet. 
iii.  15) ;  by  the  gift  of  Christ  he  is  able  to 
obtain  an  intelligent  knowledge  of  him  who 
is  indeed  God.  "Him  that  is  true  "  does 
not  meai^  God,  who  is  not,  like  the  devil,  a 
liar,  but  "  very  God,"  as  opposed  to  the  idols 
against  which  St.  John  goes  on  to  warn 
them.  The  Greek  is  i\jiBiv6s,  not  4A.))eif  j. 
Thus  the  Epistle  ends  as  it  began,  with  a 
fulfilment  of  Christ's  prayer.  In  ch.  i.  3 
ve  had,  "  That  ye  also  may  have  fellowship 


with  US,"  which  is  identical  with  "That 
they  may  be  one,  even  as  we  are  "  (John 
xvii.  11).  And  here  we  have,  "That  we 
know  him  that  is  true,"  which  coincides 
with  "  That  they  should  know  thee  the  only 
true  God"  (John  xvii.  3).  This  prayer  of 
the  great  High  Priest  is  fulfilled.  "  We  are 
in  him  that  is  true,"  saya  tlie  apostle,  "  (by 
being)  in  his  Son  Jesus  Christ."  This  is 
the  true  Ocd,  and  eternal  life.  Does  "  this  " 
refer  to  God  or  to  Christ?  We  must  be 
content  to  leave  the  question  open ;  both 
interpretations  make  excellent  sense,  and 
none  of  the  arguments  in  favour  of  either 
are  decisive.  Thequestion  is  not  important. 
"  That  Jesus  is  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  God," 
who  was  with  the  Father  from  all  eternity, 
is  the  very  foundation  of  St.  John's  teaching 
in  Gospel  and  Epistles ;  and  it  is  not  of  much 
moment  whether  this  particular  text  contains 
the  doctrine  of  the  Divinity  of  Christ  or  not. 
But  if,  with  St.  Athanasius,  we  interpret 
"this"  of  Christ,  the  conclusion  of  the 
letter  is  brought  into  striking  harmony  with 
the  opening  of  it,  in  which  (ch-  i.  2)  Christ 
is  spoken  of  as  "  the  Eternal  Life  which  was 
with  the  Father,  and  was  manifested  to  us." 
Moreover,  we  obtain  a  striking  contrast  with 
what  follows.  "  This  Man,  Jesus  Christ,  is 
the  true  God !  it  is  no  idolatry  to  worship 
him.  Whosoever  says  that  he  is  not  God 
makes  us  idolaters.  But  idolatry  is  to  us  an 
abomination." 

Ver.  21. — Keep  yourselves  from  idols;  or, 
guard  yourselves  from  the  idols.  In  ver.  18 
we  had  ritpei;  here  the  verb  is  ^uAaJaTc. 
The  aorist,  rather  than  the  present  impera- 
tive, is  used  to  make  the  command  more 
forcible,  although  the  guarding  is  not 
momentary,  but  will  have  to  continue 
(Compare  /uefvaTc  iv  ^/iot,  John  xv.  4;  t&s 
ivToKiis  ris  f^ticij  TTjp^jffaTf,  John  xiv.  15). 
What  is  the  meaning  of  "  the  idols "  (t£» 
fISdKav)  here  ?  In  answering  this  question 
it  will  be  well  to  hold  fast  to  the  common 
canon  of  exegesis,  that  where  the  literal  in- 
terpretation makes  good  sense,  the  literal 
interpretation  is  probably  right.  Here  the 
literal  interpretation  makes  excellent  sense. 
Ephesus  was  famous  for  its  idols.  To  be 
"temple-keeper  of  the  great  Artemis" 
(Acts  xix.  35)  was  its  pride.  The  moral 
evils  which  had  resulted  from  the  abuse 
of  the  right  of  sanctuary  had  caused  the 
Roman  senate  to  cite  the  Ephesians  and 
other  states  to  submit  their  charters  to  the 
government  for  inspection.  Ephesus  had 
been  the  first  to  answer  to  the  summons, 
and  had  strenuously  defended  its  claims. 
It  was  famous,  moreover,  for  its  charms  and 
incantations;  and  folly  of  this  kind  had 
found  its  way  into  the  Christian  Church 
(Acts  xix.  13 — 20).  As  so  often  happens 
with  converts  from  a  religion  full  of  groci 


Hi 


THE  FIEST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  JOHN.      [oh.  v.  1—21 


supe«tition,  a  good  many  of  the  super- 
stitious observancea  Burvived  the  adoption 
of  Christianity.  With  facts  such  as  these 
before  us,  we  can  hardly  be  wrong  in  inter- 
preting "the  idols"  quite  literally.  The 
apostle's  "  little  oliildreu  "  could  not  live  in 
EphesuB  without  coming  constantly  in  con- 
tact with  these  polluting  but  attractive 
influences.  They  must  have  absolutely 
nothing  to  do  with  them :  "  Guard  yourselves 


and  abjure  (&irS)  them."  Of  course,  thii 
literal  interpretation  places  no  limit  on  the 
application  of  the  text.  To  a  Christian 
anything  is  an  idol  which  usurps  the  placa 
of  God  in  the  heart,  whether  this  be  a 
person,  or  a  system,  or  a  project,  or  wealth, 
or  what  not.  All  such  usurpations  come 
within  the  sweep  of  the  apostle's  injunction, 
"  Guard  yourselrei  from  your  idols." 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  1 — 5. — The  victory  of  faith.  Connecting  link :  The  preceding  chapter  closed 
with  a  statement  of  the  twofoldness  of  love,  showing  us  that  love  of  our  brother  must 
follow  our  love  to  God,  and  is,  in  fact,  the  commauded  and  the  only  outward  expression 
thereof.  But,  so  far,  at  any  rate,  as  our  redeemed  brethren  in  Christ  are  concerned, 
they  being  believers  in  Christ  have  been  begotten  of  God.  Consequently  they  are 
members  of  one  family  with  us.  And  every  one  who  loves  the  Father  will,  as  a  matter 
of  fact,  love  those  who  are  begotten  of  him,  and  so  bear  his  image.  With  this  new 
birth,  and  the  faith  and  love  which  are  its  fruits,  there  comes  to  be  a  spring  of  holy 
obedience,  so  that  there  is  not  only  an  external  command  telling  us  we  ought  to  love, 
but  a  spirit  within  leading  us  on  to  love.  We  do  not  by  any  means  feel  the  yoke  ol 
a  command  to  be  grievous ;  for  all  that  would  otherwise  have  made  it  so  has  been 
overcome  by  a  living  faith  born  from  above.  Topic — Faith  victorious  over  the  world, 
and  faith  alone.  It  wiU  be  noted  that  in  ver.  4  the  verb  "  overcome  "  is  twice  used. 
In  the  first  instance  it  is  in  the  present,  in  the  second  in  a  past  tense.  "  Overcometh" 
is  overcoming, continuously — "hath  overcome,"  rather,  "which  did  overcome" (aorist), 
referring  to  some  victory  which  was  gained  once  for  all.  Tte  continuous  overcoming 
is  attributed  to  "  whatsoever  is  begotten  of  God."  The  overcoming,  which  is  accom- 
plished once  for  all,  is  attributed  to  "  our  faith."  Hence  our  lines  of  homiletic  exposition 
are  at  once  suggested. 

L  We  have  a  glokious  faith  whereby  the  wokld  has  been  ovbroomb.  It  ii 
hardly  possible  to  regard  the  "  faith  "  here  as  other  than  objective,  as  in  Jude  3 ;  Luke 
xviii.  8  (Greek).  We  have,  moreover,  the  contents  thereof  clearly  stated  here,  "  that 
Jesns  is  the  Son  of  God."  This  is  the  mighty  fact  by  which  the  world  has  been 
conquered.  How  ?  In  three  senses.  1.  TAe  Lord  Jesus  as  the  Son  of  God  has  himself 
overcome  the  world ;  i.e.  he  has  grappled  with  and  put  to  open  shame  the  sinful  element 
in  the  world — that  of  self-rule  and  opposition  to  God.  (1)  By  his  obedience  unto 
death.  (2)  By  his  conflict  with  and  conquest  of  the  evil  one.  (3)  By  his  atoning 
death  the  prince  of  this  world  was  cast  out.  (4)  By  his  intercession  he  secures  a  like 
victory  to  aU  his  followers  (John  xvi.  33).  2.  By  the  use  of  his  Name,  the  powers  of  the 
world  had  been  met  and  worsted.  (2  Oor.  ii.  14 ;  Acts  xix.  20 ;  Phil.  i.  12  ;  Ool.  i.  13.) 
3.  'this  glorious  objective  truth,  that  Jesus  is  the  Son  of  God,  is  that  whereby  God,  in 
his  wondrous  grace,  has  come  to  have  new-born  sons  in  whom  the  world  is  overcome. 
All  things  are  through  Christ.  By  his  wondrous  work  he  has  come  to  be  the  Firstborn 
among  many  brethren.  Every  one  of  these  is  a  fresh  trophy  of  grace.  The  creation 
and  sustenance  of  the  Church  is  a  conquest  of  the  world,  being  so  much  snatched 
from  it ! 

II.  This  faith,  accepted,  becomes  a  livino  foecb  in  new-born  soms,  whereby 
THBT  CONTINUOUSLY  OVERCOME  THE  WORLD.  (Ver.  4.)  1.  God's  own  begotten  ones  are 
horn  to  a  new  life.  (1)  Of  faith  (ver.  1).  (2)  Of  love  (ch.  iv.  7).  (3)  Of  righteousnesi 
(ch.  ii.  29).  (4)  Of  inability  to  be  sinning  (ch.  iii.  9).  2.  This  new  life  of  tlieirs  is 
sustained  by  the  Lord  Jesus  as  the  Son  of  God.  Faith  laying  hold  of  him  appropriates 
his  power.  They  are  "  strong  in  the  Lord,  and  in  the  power  of  his  might."  They  can 
do  all  things  through  him  that  strengtheneth  them.  3.  Thus  strengthened,  their  faith 
achieves  a  continuous  victory  over  the  world.  By  Christ,  the  world  is  crucified  to  them 
and  they  to  the  world.  And  however  so  many  may  be  the  aspects  of  wrong-thinking  and 
wrong-doing  which  are  seen  in  the  world,  so  many  will  be  the  ways  in  which  the  children 


OH.  V.  1—21.]     THE  FIEST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OB"  JOHN.  148 


of  God  will  meet  and  overcome  them.  They  will  overcome  its  errors,  its  glare,  its 
enticements,  its  threats,  its  xmbelief,  its  hatred,  its  opposition,  its  persecution.  They 
will  overcome  by  powerful  argument,  by 'holy  living,  by  sturdy  resistance,  by  faithful 
testimony.  "  By  the  Word  of  truth,  by  the  power  of  God."  They  will  maintain  the 
fight  earnestly,  fearlessly,  joyously,  persistently,  even  to  the  end ;  and  they  will 

"  Win  the  day, 
Though  death  and  hell  obstruct  the  way." 

And  all — all  through  the  unconquerable  might  imparted  by  him  in  whom  they  believe— 
Jesus  the  Son  of  God  I  What  a  glorious  series  of  continuous  victories  over  the  world 
have  our  eighteen  Christian  centuries  witnessed!'  How  great  a  chapter,  like  to  the 
eleventh  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews,  might  be  compiled  from  the  histories  of  God's 
faithful  ones,  who  have  overcome  by  the  blood  of  the  Lamb  and  by  the  Word  of  his 
testimony ;  for  they  loved  not  their  lives  unto  the  death  ! 

III.  This  victoby  over  the  world  is  won  only  by  believkes  in  Jesus  Christ. 
(Ver.  6.')  "  Who  .  .  .  but."  Those  who  are  not  in  Christ  are  still  in  the  world ; 
hence  they  cannot  even  fight  against  it,  much  less  overcome  it !  Apart  from  Christ's 
light,  men's  vision  is  bounded  by  things  seen  and  temporal ;  apart  from  Christ's  life, 
their  pursuits  are  entirely  of  the  earth,  earthy ;  apart  from  Christ's  love,  their  aims 
are  all  for  self — "  They  turn  every  one  to  his  own  way."  Hence  the  world  is  ever 
conquering  them,  and  will  make  them  first  its  tools,  then  its  slaves,  and  at  last  its 
victims. 

Note :  Three  matters  are  suggested  here  for  pungent  and  powerful  application.  1.  If 
these  things  be  so,  then  whoever  casts  away  the  doctrine  that  Jesus  is  the  Son  of  God 
'  leaves  himself  helpless  in  life's  struggle.  2.  It  is  only  by  a  living  faith  in  Jesus  that 
we  receive  power  to  carry  on  the  struggle.  A  mental  adhesion  to  the  doctrine  only 
will  not  suffice.  A  living  cling  to  the  Person  is  needed.  3.  We  see  the  purpose 
jitended  to  be  secured  by  religion,  viz.  a  victory  over  all  that  is  false  and  wrong. 

Vers.  6 — 9. — The  Divine  witness  objectively/  given,  Oonnecting  link :  If  the  victory 
over  the  world  can  be  secured  only  by  those  who  believe  that  Jesus  is  the  Son  of  God, 
then  it  is  of  vast  importance  that  the  Divine  testimony  to  him  should  be  unmistakably 
tlear  to  the  upright.  As  if  this  or  some  such  thought  had  been  suggested  to  his  mind 
while  writing,  the  apostle  proceeds,  in  one  of  his  most  striking  passages  (one  of  the 
most  striking  paragraphs,  indeed,  in  the  New  Testament),  to  show,  first,  that  the  testi- 
mony of  God  concerning  his  Son  is  objectively  given  (vers.  6 — ^9),  and  then  that  it  is 
subjectively  proven  and  confirmed  (vers.  9 — 12).  To  each  of  these  topics  we  must 
devote  our  attention.  Topic — Ood's  three  witnesses  to  his  Son.  The  student  is  specially 
requested  here  to  compare  the  Authorized  Version  with  the  Revised  Version.  We  follow, 
in  this  homily,  the  Revisers'  Greek  text.  This  passage  has  an  intense  charm  for  us.  It 
is  so  manifestly  the  echo  of  words  which  the  apostle  had  heard  from  his  Master's  lips 
(John  V.  32 — 39),  together  with  such  addition  as  the  facts  consequent  on  our  Lord's  death 
and  resurrection  had  enabled  the  apostle  to  furnish.  As  bearing  on  the  Christian 
evidences  the  paragraph  is  unique.  It  is  of  infinite  value,  and  deserves  more  elaborate 
exposition  than,  so  far  a«  we  know,  it  has  ever  yet  received. 

I.  The  knowledqe  that  Jesus  is  the  Son  of  God  comes  to  us  through  testi- 
mony. We  gain  some  knowledge  through  the  senses  ;  other  knowledge  through  mental 
observation ;  some  through  experience ;  some  through  reasoning.  Knowledge  of  neces- 
sary truth  may  be  gained  by  intuition,  or  by  reasoning.  Knowledge  of  contingent 
truth,  i.e.  of  truth  that  is  dependent  on  the  will  of  another,  can  be  gained  only  as  we 
have  information  concerning  that  will.  Such  information  is  ordinarily  gained,  and  iB 
some  cases  exclusively,  by  testimony.  The  whole  of  the  gospel  message  comes  to  us  in 
this  way,  by  testimony  (cf.  1  Cor.  ii.  1).  An  inquiry  into  the  laws  of  trustworthy 
testimony  will  disclose  the  fact  that  the  evidence  on  which  we  should  feel  bound  to 
receive  the  testimony  of  men  is  far  exceeded  by  the  evidence  for  the  testimony  of  Qod 
(see  homily  on  vers.  9,  10). 

II.  There  are  three  historic  incidents  bearino  on  the  testimony  that  Jups 
IS  the  Son  of  God.    "  There  are  three  that  bear  witness  :  the  Spirit,  the  water,  and  the 

•  See  Hare's  •  Viotoiy  of  Faith.' 

I.  JOMV.  k 


14«  THE  FIEBT  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  JOHN.     [oh.  y.  1—21. 

blood."  "  This  is  he  that  came  by  water  and  blood ;  not  by  water  only,  but  by  water  and 
blood."  1.  The  water.  To  what  does  the  apostle  refer  when  he  says  that  Christ  came 
"  by  water"  ?  Undoubtedly  to  the  baptism  of  the  Christ  by  John  the  Baptist  When 
the  herald  baptized  his  Lord  as  the  great  High  Friesr,  and  so  set  him  apart  to  his 
calling  by  that  act,  the  race  of  prophets  was  closed,  and  the  Messiah  was  ushered  in. 
It  was  thefirat  step  taken  by  our  Lord  in  his  official  ministry.  But  why  such  a  step? 
Why  should  he  be  baptized  ?  Under  the  Law  of  Moses  the  priests  had  to  be  cleansed 
before  entering  on  the  sacred  office.  Still,  the  wonder  is  that  he  who  knew  no  sin 
should  submit  to  a  rite  which,  whatever  else  it  might  or  might  not  signify,  implied 
impurity  of  nature  in  the  baj.tized  One  from  which  be  required  to  be  cleansed.  We 
do  not  wonder  at  John  the  Baptist  shrinking  back  from  baptizing  the  Holy  One; 
it  surely  could  not  be  fitting  that  the  Sinless  One  should  do  just  as  the  vilest  of  the 
vile  had  done— come  and  let  Jordan's  stream  roll  over  him  as  if  he  had  been  a 
sinner  along  with  the  rest  1  Tet,  somehow  or  other,  it  was  needful  that  so  it  should 
be,  in  order  to  "  fulfil  all  righteousness."  What  was  that  righteousness  the  Saviour  had 
to  fulfil  ?  First  of  all,  as  he  came  to  be  the  sinner's  Bepresentative  by  bearing  the 
liabilities  of  the  race,  it  was  becoming  that  he  should  openly,  formally,  avowedly,  itep 
into  the  simier's  flaoe,  and  take  up  the  burden  of  sin  as  if  it  were  his  own.  This  he 
did  when  he  was  "  baptized  for  us."  It  was  the  first  act  which  showed  that  he  was 
"  numbered  with  the  transgressors."  And  mysterious  as  it  was  before  to  John  the 
Baptist,  yet  he  saw  its  meaning  afterwards,  and  forthwith  began  to  announce  him, 
saying,  "  Behold  the  Lamb  of  God,  that  is  hearing  away  the  sin  of  the  world  " — bearing 
it  on  himself,  and  bearing  it  off  from  us.  This  is  he  that  came  "  by  water."  2.  Z%« 
llood.  "Jesus  bare  our  sins  in  his  own  body  upon  the  tree."  In  the  margin  of  the 
Authorized  Version  read  "  to."  He  took  our  infirmities  and  bare  our  sicknesses.  He 
offered  himself  without  spot  to  God.  He  laid  down  his  life  for  us.  He  gave  it  np  of 
himself.  He  poured  out  his  blood.  It  was  "  precious  blood,"  as  of  a  lamb  without 
blemish  and  without  spot  (cf.  Matt.  xx.  i!8 ;  xxvi.  28;  Acts  xx.  28;  Hib.xiiL20; 
Rev.  i.  5).  "  Not  by  water  only,  but  by  water  and  blood."  3.  The  Hpirit.  Our 
Lord  left  a  promise,  "  the  promise  of  the  Father,"  that  when  he  had  gone  firom  earth 
the  Spirit  would  supply  his  place.  The  Holy  Ghost  would  he  the  Gift  of  a  risen 
Saviour.  He  it  was  who  "  should  baptize  with  the  Holy  Ghost."  The  narratives  in 
the  Acts  of  the  Apostles  are  the  confirmation  of  this.  The  four  Gospels  take  the  work 
of  Christ  up  to  the  point  when  the  atonement  was  "  finished ; "  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles 
continue  the  record  of  Christ  from  the  point  when  the  baptism  with  the  Holy  Ghost 
was  bestowed  (see  Acts  ii.,  et  seq.).  This  was  the  crowning  seal  that  Christ  was  the 
Son  of  God.  Note  ;  In  Jolin  i.  29 — 36  the  threefold  witness  concerning  our  Lord  is 
gummed  up.  John  had  baptized  him  with  water ;  had  heard  the  voice  from  heaven, 
"  This  is  my  beloved  Son ; "  had  pointed  out  Jesus  as  the  sacrificial  Lamb,  and  yet  as 
the  Baptizer  with  the  Holy  Ghost ;  and  on  the  whole  he  remarks,  "  I  saw  and  bare 
record,  that  this  is  the  Son  of  God." 

III.  These  three  witnesses  all  agree  in  one.  (Ver.  8.)  By  which  we  under- 
•stand,  not  merely  that  they  confirm  one  another  as  to  the  one  fact  that  Jesus  Christ 
is  the  Son  of  God,  however  true  that  unquestionably  is,  but  that  they  all  agree  in 
setting  forth  the  glory  of  his  mission.  For  the  testimony  is  "  that  God  hath  given  to 
us  eternal  life,"  as  well  as  that  "  this  life  is  in  his  Son."  .  And  the  Son  of  Gtod  brings 
about  the  life  by  taking  out  of  the  way  what  would  prevent  it,  in  order  that  he  may 
grant  what  would  ensure  it.  Now,  "  the  Spirit,"  "  the  water,"  "  the  blood,"  all  bear, 
primarily  and  directly,  on  man's  great  enemy  "  sin."  By  the  water  sin  is  acknowledged; 
by  the  blood  sin  is  atoned ;  by  the  Spirit  sin  b  destroyed.  The  voice  from  heaven  owned 
the  first;  the  Resurrection  ratified  the  second;  the  living  Church  is  the  standing 
result  of  the  third. 

IV.  These  witnesses,  thus  agreeing  in  one,  abb  giving  forth  the  pbbfstual 
TE8TIH0NT  OF  GoD  TO  CB  CONCERNING  HIS  SoN.  These  historic  facts — the  baptism, 
the  sacrifice,  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Spirit — are  not  events  that  once  had  a  significance 
and  now  are  done  with ;  they  are  not  merely  incidents  unwoven  into  the  texture  ol 
history,  which  cannot  he  torn  out  of  it  without  leaving  a  disfiguring  rent,  but  they  are 
continuous  voices  of  God,  which  are  now  speaking  to  us,  and  which  will  continue  to 
speak  to  men  in  tones  as  loud  and  clear  as  ever.    And  the  message  they  give  forth 


0H.T.1— ai.]     THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  JOHN.  147 

is  ever  this :  "  God  hath  given  to  ns  eternal  life,  and  this  life  is  in  his  Son."  They 
say:  1.  Here  is  One  who,  by  the  dignity  of  his  nature,  is  the  Son  of  God,  though 
through  the  lowliness  of  his  form  you  see  him  only  as  the  Son  of  man.  2.  He,  the  Son 
of  God,  the  Lord  of  man,  has  taken  human  flesh  and  blood,  that,  coming  into  the  race, 
he  might  bear  its  liabilities  on  himself,  and,  by  bearing  their  burden  on  him,  might 
throw  it  off  for  ever.  3'.  In  stepping  into  the  stream,  and  numbering  himself  with  the 
transgressors,  he  publicly  assumed  the  sinner's  place,  as  if  laden  with  the  sinner's 
guilt.  4.  Thus  laden  with  the  guilt  of  the  race,  through  having  voluntarily  taken  it 
on  himself,  he  bore  the  burden  to  the  cross,  there  atoned  for  sin,  cried  out,  "  It  is 
finished  1 "  and  the  burden  was  flung  off  for  ever.  5.  The  validity  of  his  work  was 
sealed  by  his  resurrection  and  his  ascension  to  heaven.  6.  The  Gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost 
was  his  own  promised  proof  of  his  having  received  all  power  in  heaven  and  on  earth  ; 
and  now  he  reigns  Head  over  all,  having  received  gifis  for  men,  to  bestow  on  us  the 
gift  of  eternal  life,  having  atoned  for  the  sin  which  forfeited  the  life,  and  having 
received  authority  and  power  to  give  and  to  sustain  the  life.  This  is  "  the  testimony 
0/  God." 

Vers.  9—12. — Tlie  Divine  witness  subjectively  verified.  Connecting  link :  The  main 
topic  is  now  the  witness  of  Ood.  In  the  preceding  sketch  we  dwelt  upon  the  witness 
of  God  objectively  given.  Now  we  have  for  our  topic — The  witness  of  Ood  verified  in 
the  individwd  experience.  The  apostle  gives  us  this  in  two  forms — the  positive  and  the 
negative.  (1)  Negative :  "  He  that  hath  not  the  Son  of  God  hath  not  the  life."  •  (2) 
Positive:  "He  that  hath  the  Son  hath  the  life."  We  deal  now  only  with  the  positive 
statement  (save  as  in  the  footnote).  In  so  doing,  we  join  with  it  the  corresponding 
one:  "He  that  helieveth  on  the  Son  of  God  hath  the  witness  in  himself"  (ver.  10). 
There  are  two  well-known  laws  concerning  testimony.  (1)  That  it  is  appropriate  uid 
even  obligatory  to  receive  adequate  testimony  objectively  given.  (2)  That  it  is 
impossible  to  question  such  testimony  when  it  is  subjectively  verified.  It  is  the  latter  of 
these  two  laws  the  operation  of  which  we  are  now  to  consider. 

L  Let  ds  inquire  what  this  inward  witness  is.  "  The  witness  in  himself."  So 
fiu  as  the  expression  is  concerned,  apart  from  the  context,  the  apostle's  words  might 
bear  either  of  two  meanings :  (1)  "  He  that  believeth  on  the  Son  of  God  hath  the 
witness  in  himself  that  he  believes ; "  or  (2)  "  He  that  believeth  on  the  Son  of  God  hath 
the  witness  in  himself  that  God's  testimony  concerning  his  Son  is  true."  The  context 
decides  for  the  latter,  and  it  is  set  by  the  apostle  in  form  most  exactly  logical.  First 
step :  "  This  is  the  witness — that  God  hath  given  to  us  eternal  life,  and  that  this  life  is  in 
his  Son."  Second  step :  "  He  that  hath  the  Son  hatk  the  life."  Conclusion :  "  He  has 
the  witness  in  himself  of  the  truth  of  God's  testimony."  Had  we  time  to  elaborate  this 
part  of  our  theme,  we  would  do  so  in  fourdistinct  stao^es.  1.  God  gives  man  life 
through  Christ,  and  promises  it  to  all  that  believe.  2.  Man  lelieve^  unfeignedly  in 
the  testimony  God  has  given  of  his  Son.  3.  Believing  in  Jesus,  he  already  enjoys  the 
life  which  God  has  promised  to  bestow.  4.  Therefore  he  has  within  him  an  actual 
verification  of  God's  own  faithful  Word.  He  believed  the  testimony  was  true,  and  now 
he  knows  it  to  be  so. 

IL  What  is  the  speoiai  value  of  this  inward  evidence  ?  It  has  a  sevenfold 
value.  1.  It  is  a  distinctively  personal  verification  of  the  truth  of  God's  Word  concern- 
ing his  Son.  It  is  emphatically  the  believer's  own,  which  may  he  paralleled  in  the  experi- 
ence of  others,  but  cannot  be  shared  by  them.  There  is  first  of  all  a  firm  and  unwavering 
certitude  that  he  has  a  life  above  and  beyond  that  of  nature.  Then  there  is  the 
knowledge  gained  by  continuous  experiance  that  only  by  and  through  Christ  has  such 
a  life  been  initiated,  nourished,  and  sustained.  2.  It  is  an  evidence  that  attends  him 
everywhere.  It  is  always  with  him.  He  affirms,  "The  life  I  now  live  in  the  flesh,  1 
live  by  the  faith  of  the  Son  of  God."    This  is  what  Dr.  Chalmers  used  to  call  *'  the 

'  On  this  negative  expression  it  seems  appropriate  to  note  that  the  absence  of  "life"  in 
the  seriptural  sense  by  no  means  denotes  the  loss  of  being.  Men  may  have  all  theil 
rational  faculties  and  moral  responsibilities,  and  yet  be  without  "  the  life."  We  do  not 
wonder  at  Dr.  Edersheim's  remark  that  the  annihilation  theory  seems  to  be  baaed  on  "  bad 

Ehilosophy  and  worse  exegesis"  (see  Dr.  Edersheim's  'Life  and  Times  of  Jesiia  th« 
[eiaiah.'  vol.  ii.  p.  791). 


148  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENBBAL  OF  JOHN.      [oh.  v.  1—21. 

portable  evidence  of  Christianity."  It  can  be  carried  about  with  a  man,  go  where  ha 
will.  It  takes  up  no  space  on  the  shelves  in  his  library,  but  ever  fills  a  snug  corner  of 
his  heart.  3.  It  is  an  evidence  which  is  independent  of  what  man  may  say.  At  one 
time,  when  the  only  evidence  he  knew  of  was  that  which  is  external  to  the  man,  he  was 
dependent  on  what  this  or  that  one  might  say,  and  his  belipf  would  be  stronger  or 
weaker  according  to  the  speaker's  success  or  failure  in  argument.  But  his  faith  is  no 
longer  a  traditional  one.  It  is  the  result  of  the  Spirit's  work  within  him ;  and  if  no 
other  advocate  for  the  Saviour  should  appear,  what  Christ  has  done  for  him  and  in  him 
would  lead  him  to  say  from  his  own  experience,  "  I  know  that  this  is  indeed  the  Christ, 
the  Saviour  of  the  world."  4.  It  is  an  evidence  which  brings  a  joy  along  with  it,  with 
which  a  stranger  intermeddleth  not.  Evidence  which  merely  shows  a  man  the  glory 
of  what  he  ought  to  believe,  and  that  it  is  "binding  on  him  to  believe,  may  but  irritate, 
and  will,  if  there,  be  a  dislike  to  the  truth.  But  when  a  man  has  God's  witness  within 
himself,  then  he  knows  whom  he  has  believed,  and  the  knowledge  brings  a  joy  unspeak- 
able and  full  of  glory.  His  maybe — yea,  is — a  life  of  calm  resting  in  the  promise, 
"  Where  I  am  there  shall  also  my  servant  be."  5.  Such  an  evidence  gives  him  power 
as  a  pleader  for  God.  With  what  zest  can  he  tell  to  sinners  round  what  a  dear  Saviour 
be  has  found !  He  can  speak,  not  from  hearsay,  not  merely  out  of  a  book,  but  of  "  what 
he  has  tasted  and  handled  and  felt  of  the  Word  of  life."  6.  This  evidence  accumulates 
in  strength  with  advancing  years.  The  longer  his  experience  of  the  power  and  grace  of 
Christ  to  sustain  in  him  the  eternal  life,  the  more  he  has  received  from  the  fulness  of 
the  Saviour,  and  the  severer  and  the  more  frequent  the  trials  which  have  thrown  him 
on  his  Redeemer  for  sympathy  and  for  strength, — the  stronger  will  this  inward  evidence 
become.  The  value  of  the  testimony,  "  Not  one  thing  hath  failed  of  all  that  the  Lord 
hath  spoken,"  must  needs  increase  with  the  number  of  the  years  that  such  testimony 
includes.  7.  This  is  an  evidence  of  which  its  possessor  cannot  he  deprived.  All 
evidences  that  are  without  a  man — ^historical,  philosophical,  moral — may  lose  their  hold 
on  him,  "  when  mind  and  memory  flee."  And  besides,  of  any  evidence  for  which  he  is 
dependent  on  man,  by  man  he  can  be  deprived.  An  evidence  of  which  man  cannot  rob 
us  must  be  an  evidence  man  cannot  give  us.  And  here  it  is :  "  The  witness  in  himself" 
— the  life  within,  which,  when  nature  sinks,  will  rise  the  higher,  and  which  will 
enable  the  believer  even  in  death  to  shout,  "  Thanks  be  to  God,  which  giveth  us  th« 
victory  1 " 

Note :  1.  When  we  summon  up  before  our  imagination  the  thousands  and  millions 
of  this  and  of  past  ages  who  have  known  and  declared  that  life  in  Christ  is  their  certain 
experience,  we  see  how  great  the  problem  which  the  destruoliye  sceptic  has  to  solve 
ere  he  can  demolish  the  evidences  of  and  for  Christianity  !  He  might  as  well  try  to 
put  out  the  sun's  light  I  If  it  were  possible  (which  it  is  not)  for  an  unbeliever  to 
know  all  the  evidence  of  Christianity,  objective  and  subjective,  he  would  give  up  his 
puny  attempts  at  disproof  thereof.  2.  Let  those  who  do  not  possess  this  inward 
witness  look  at  the  fact  that,  unless  they  are  to  disbelieve  in,  or  to  regard  as  fools,  the 
holiest  of  their  friends  who  speak  of  the  life  in  Christ  as  theirs,  this  evidence,  though 
inward  to  their  friends,  is  outward  to  themselves,  and  as  such  must  be  taken  into 
account  by  them  as  pertaining  to  human  experience.  For  it  is  by  no  means  allowable 
to  claim  experience  as  a  basis  of  evidence,  and  at  the  same  time  to  decide  a  priori  what 
that  experience  ought  to  be.  3.  If  a  man  knows  that  some  have  an  experimental  and 
living  faith  which  he  himself  lacks,  if  he  feels  painfully  that  religion  is  as  yet  something 
entirely  outside  him,  how  great  should  be  his  desire  to  pass  from  a  dead  faith  which  is 
dependent  on  man,  to  a  living  oue  imparted  and  sustained  by  God !  4.  Let  us  use  the 
doctrine  of  the  text  as  the  basis  of  an  earnest  and  loving  appeal ;  and  say,  "  We  know 
what  Christ  is,  for  he  is  our  Saviour ;  we  know  how  freely  he  forgives,  for  he  has 
forgiven  us ;  we  '  speak  that  we  do  know,  and  testify  that  we  have  seen,'  we  have 
trieil  his  own  words,  and  have  found  them  true, '  He  that  believeth  on  me  hath  the 
everlasting  life.' " 

Vers.  9,  10. — Human  and  Divine  testimony  compared.  Connecting  link :  There  is 
a  topic  suggested  in  these  verses  closely  bearing  on  the  themes  of  the  two  jreoeding 
homilies.  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  Son  of  God,  has  come  into  the  world,  bearing  a 
niessage  from  the  eternal  throne.     Of  the  contents  and  value  of  the  luessage  there  art 


OH.  V.  1—21.]     THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  JOHN.  149 

three  -witnesses — the  Spirit,  the  water,  and  the  blood.  The  message  is  that  God  has 
given  to  us  eternal  life,  and  that  this  life  is  in  his  Son.  Where  the  Son  of  God  has  been 
received  by  faith,  there  is  the  life  actually  existing;  and  this  inward  life  is  a  distinctive 
personal  seal  of  the  truth  of  God's  words,  whereby  they  are  verified  by  every  one  who 
shares  the  life.  But,  granting  that  this  verification  is  lacking  (as  it  is)  in  those  who 
have  not  the  life,  and  that  in  consequence  the  only  testimony  to  the  truth  of  God's 
words  is  that  which  comes  to  them  from  without,  how,  then,  does  the  case  stand  as  to 
the  sufficiency  of  that  outer  testimony  ?  Thus  there  are  certain  well-understood  laws 
which  govern  belief  in  human  testimony ;  there  are  circumstances  under  which  no  one 
would  think  of  rejecting  such  testimony — under  which,  if  he  were  to  reject  it,  he  would 
be  doing  a  manifold  wrong.  Much  more  is  this  the  case  with  regard  to  the  testimony 
of  God  concerning  Jesus  Christ.  It  is  in  every  respect  greater,  fuller,  clearer,  than  the 
testimony  of  man.  "  If  we  receive,"  etc.  Faith  in  God's  testimony  concerning  his  Son 
is  required  by  the  laws  which  ordinarily  govern  human  belief. 

I.  There  ake  certain  circumstances  under  which  the  testimony  of  man  would 
BE  UNHBSITATINQLT  ACCEPTED.  "  If  WO  receive  the  testimony  of  man,"  etc.  If,  not 
as  expressing  a  doubt  whether  we  do  or  no.  The  "  if"  is  nearly  equivalent  to  "  since  " 
or  "  Inasmuch  as."  The  fact  is  taken  for  granted,  as  one  well  known,  that  receiving 
testimony  from  man  is  a  commonly  accepted  way  of  gaining  knowledge.  We  can  but 
offer  in  our  limited  space  the  very  barest  outline  of  how  this  mafter  stands.  1.  More 
than  three-fourths  of  every  man's  knowledge  comes  to  him  from  the  testimony  of 
others.  Even  those  who  "demand  "  verification  "  are  content  to  accept  the  verification 
of  another  in  every  department  save  their  own.  If  it  were  not  so,  the  progress  of  man 
would  be  slow  indeed.  2.  What  is  required  in  a  witness  is  (1)  truthfulness ;  (2)  com- 
petent knowledge.  Let  these  conditions  be  fulfilled,  and  few  would  gainsay  his  testi- 
mony. 3.  If  for  a  particular  fact,  call  it  x,  there  were  not  only  one,  two,  or  three,  but 
twelve  witnesses.  4.  If  the  twelvis  witnesses  were  all  men  of  unimpeachable  character, 
and  teachers  and  examples  of  the  loftiest  morality  the  world  has  ever  known.  5.  If 
they  one  and  all  gave  up  all  that  the  world  holds  dear,  and  risked,  or  even  forfeited,  life 
itself  in  giving  their  testimony.  6.  If  it  was  well-known  that  the  testimony  was 
directly  opposed  to  the  very  strongest  prepossessions  in  which  they  had  been  nursed 
and  nurtured;  and  if:  7.  The  effect  of  their  testimony  was  to  impart  soundness,  joy, 
life,  love,  where  only  disease,  sorrow,  death,  and  selfishness  reigned  before ; — ^in  such  a 
case,  we  venture  to  say,  such  testimony  would  be  regarded  as  warranting,  and  even 
demanding,  belief.    It  could  not  and  would  not  be  rejected.     Be  it  so :  then  observe — 

II.  The  testimont  of  God  is  still  weightier  than  even  such  human  testimony 
WOULD  BE.  Evidently  the  apostle's  meaning  is  that,  if  we  feel  it  incumbent  on  us  not  to 
reject  human  testimony  when  clear  and  adequate,  much  more  ought  we  to  feel  it  bind- 
ing on  us  to  receive  the  testimony  of  God.  For  this  (and  specially  this  concerning  Christ) 
is  greater  than  any  human  testimony  could  possibly  be.  In  what  sense?  In  many. 
1.  It  it  greater  in  its  origin.  "  God."  It  may,  and  probably  would,  be  urged  by  an 
unbeliever  here,  "  I  grant  that  at  once,  that  God's  testimony  is  greater  than  man's ;  but 
the  difficulty  with  me  is,  is  it  Ood's  testimony  ?"  That  is  just  the  thing  to  be  shown. 
The  following  hints  may  serve.  (1)  It  is  admitted  by  the  philosopher  that  at  the  back  of 
all  things  there  is  an  infinite  energy.^  We  can  take  this  pagan  text  for  a  startins;-point, 
and  we  affirm,  if  the  energy  is  infinite,  it  can  let  us  know  something  about  itself.  (2)  If 
the  infinite  energy  deigns  to  tell  us  something  about  itself,  it  must  be  through  such 
channels  of  life,  thought,  and  words  as  we  can  apprehend.  (3)  The  fact  that  the 
channel  of  communication  may  be  human  is  entirely  consistent  with  the  origin  of  com- 
munication being  Divine.  (4)  When  this  is  the  case,  then  such  human  communication 
has  to  be  interrogated  and  tested  as  to  its  whence  and  how.  (5)  If  it  stands  this  test, 
».e.  if  (a)  it  claims  to  be  from  God,  if  (6)  it  justifies  that  claim,*  and  if  (c)  there  is 

'  See  article  by  Mr.  Herbert  Spencer,  in  Nineteenth  Century,  January,  1884. 

•  "  If  it  justifies  that  claim."  We  desire  to  expand  this,  but  cannot.  The  claim  might 
be  justified  (1)  by  the  glory  of  pure  moral  teaching ;  (2)  by  the  purity  of  personal  character ; 
(3)  by  mighty  works.  Jesus  Christ  appealed  to  all  three.  The  third,  however,  is  now 
regarded  by  some  as  an  additional  hindrance  rather  than  a  help.  To  such  we  would  offer 
the  following  hints.  1.  The  New  Testament  miracles  are  not  merely  wonders,  but  signs. 
They  fall  in  with  a  great  redemptive  plan.    2.  If  the  evidence  afforded  by  the  noble  moral 


160  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  JOHN.     [ob.  ▼.  1— 2L 

nothing  mconsistent  with  the  claim, — then  the  proof  of  the  validity  of  its  testimony  is 
complete.  The  carrying  out  of  this  argument  will  prove  that  the  Christian  testimony 
it  from  Ood,  We  have  a  heavenly  treasure,  though  put  into  earthen  vessels.  2.  It  t* 
greater  in  its  contents.  It  is  a  grand  proclamation  that  "  the  gift  of  God  is  eternal  life, 
through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord."  3.  It  is  greater  in  the  manifoldness  and  strength  of 
the  evidence.  Let  all  the  tests  suggested  under  the  first  division  be  applied,  e.g.,  to  the 
testimony  for  the  resurrection  of  Christ,  and  it  will  stand  them  all,  while  the  evidence 
from  the  perfection  of  the  moral  character  of  the  Christ  is  absolutely  unique  and  suf- 
ficient. 4.  It  is  greater,  consequently,  in  its  binding  fm-ce.  Well  we  know,  alas  1  that, 
inevitable  as  this  conclusion  is,  it  is  precisely  the  one  many  would  evade  and  avoid ; 
and,  in  fact,  it  may  even  be  that,  because  they  see  this  to  be  the  issue  of  the  inquiry, 
some  decline  to  enter  upon  it.  They  do  not  like  to  be  bound.  Their  spirit  is  Ps.  ii.  3. 
And  the  clearer  the  evidence,  the  greater  their  wrath.  But  John  vii.l7  (Greek)  shows 
us  what  the  conclusion  will  be  with  a  man  who  is  "of  God "  (John  viii.  47). 

III.  If  God's  testimony  concerning  his  Son  be  so  great  and  so  cleae,  what 
THEN  ?  1.  The  heliever  is  abundantly  justified  in  his  faith ;  so  that  he  is  doubly  happy, 
for  the  outer  evidence  justifies  his  faith  when  he  believes,  and  the  inner  evidence 
verifies  the  faith  after  he  believes.  2.  The  unbeliever  it  condemned.  The  apostle 
makes  a  terrible  charge  against  him — he  maketh  God  a  liar.  How?  Thus:  be 
declares  the  greatest  work  which  God  has  ever  done  in  the  world  to  have  its  basis  in 
a  delusion  and  a  lie.  The  noblest  life  that  the  world  has  received  has  been  grounded 
on  the  belief  that  Jesus  is  the  Son  of  God.  The  man  denies  tiiat.  In  doin°;  so  he  con- 
sequently declares  that  God  builds  up  his  noblest  lives  on  an  untruth.  What  is  this 
but  making  God  a  liar  ?    3.  The  sinner  has  abundant  warrant  for  saying— 

"  Hence  and  for  ever  from  my  heart 
I  bid  my  donbts  and  fears  depart. 
And  to  those  hands  my  soul  resign 
That  bear  credentials  so  Divine." 

Ver.  13.* — On  believers  Tcnowing  that  they  have  eternal  life,  Gmvnecting  link:  The 
statements  which  have  just  been  made  point  out  very  clearly  who  have  the  eternal  life 
and  who  have  it  not.  But  it  is  quite  possible  that  such  statements  may  exist,  may  be 
before  a  man's  eye,  may  have  been  read  over  again  and  again,  and  yet  they  may  have 
been  left  unapplied  to  himself  by  him  who  reads  them.  But  it  is  not  enough  to  know 
what  the  eternal  life  i-,  and  what  are  the  marks  of  its  existence.  It  is  all-important  for 
the  individual  himself  to  possess  the  life,  and  to  indicate  it  by  its  appropriate  signs. 
And  it  is  also  important — though  it  cannot  be  said  to  be  equally  so— that,  if  a  man  has 
this  life,  he  should  know  that  he  has  it.  Hence  the  apostle  declares  that  the  object  of 
his  writing  thus  has  been  that  those  who  believe  on  the  Name  of  the  Son  of  God  should 
know,  clearly  arid  decisively,  that  they  have  life,  and  that  the  life  they  have  is  an 
eternal  one.     Topic — On  bdievers  knowing  that  they  have  eternal  life. 

I.  To   EVERY  ONE  WHO   BELIEVES  IN   ChKIST   THE   GIFT   OF   ETERNAL   LIFE   BELONGS. 

This  is  the  repealed  and  clear  declaration  of  the  Word  of  God  (John  v.  24;  vi.  47 ;  iii. 
36 ;  ver.  12 ;  Eom.  vL  23 ;  John  i.  12  compared  with  Rom.  viii.  17,  38,  39).  (For 
remarks  on  the  meaning  and  contents  of  eternal  life,  see  homily  on  ch.  ii.  25.) 

II.  It  IS  POSSIBLE  FOR  A  TRUE  BELIEVER  TO  BE  UNAWARE  OF  HIS  WEALTH.      He  may 

have  the  life  eternal  and  not  know  it.  So,  at  any  rate,  the  Apostle  John  declares,  by 
implication,  in  this  verse.  We  gather  this :  1.  From  such  Scriptures  as  the  one  before 
us.  2.  From  observation.  Have  we  not  known  many  of  the  most  devout  believers  in 
Christ  "go  mourning  all  their  days"  through  the  lack  of  the  full  assurance  of  faith  and 

teaching  is  sufficient,  well,  be  it  so,  and  wait  for  further  light  on  what  you  deem  miraculous, 
only  remember :  3.  That  when  we  believe  in  one  God  and  Father  of  all,  we  do  in  that  one 
article  of  failh  cover  vastly  more  supernatural  ground  than  all  the  recorded  miracles  put 
together.  4.  Certainly  there  have  been  days  when  miracles  were  the  very  helps  that  men 
required.  Our  Lord  did  not  like  its  being  so.  He  complained  of  it.  Apostles  put  miraclei 
in  the  fourth  place.  But  if  to  some  minds  they  were  the  most  efficient  helps,  it  was  very 
kind  of  the  Father  thus  to  stoop  to  teach  his  cliildren  in  their  infancy. 

'  The  difference  between  the  Authorized  Version  and  Bevised  Version  should  be  specially 
noted  hers. 


OH.  T.  1—21.]     THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  JOHN.  161 

hope?  3.  From  experience.  There  are  times,  even  with  those  who  usually  live  in  the 
•unahine  of  God's  love,  when  their  joys  seem  clouded  over.  It  may  be  asked — What 
are  the  causes  of  this  uncertainty?  They  are  various.  Probably  no  two  cases  are 
exactly  alike;  but,  among  others,  we  suggest  (1)  lack  of  intelligence;  (2)  mistaken 
Relf-probing,  which  often  causes  men  to  miss  that  which  they  are  seeking  for;  (3)  ill 
health,  when  the  nervous  system  is  out  of  order;  (4)  decline  in  coinmuuion  with  God  ; 
(5)  natural  excess  of  caution.     But  whatever  the  cause  may  be — 

III.  Such  ignobancb  of  odb  eeai,  position  is  most  undbsibable.  1.  It  seriously 
hinders  spiritual  joy.  Who  can  glory  in  the  hope  of  heaven  when  he  cannot  tell  whether 
he  is  an  heir  of  its  bliss  ?  2.  It  dishonours  God ;  for  it  casts  reflection  on  the  complete- 
ness of  his  provision  for  his  children's  peace,  when  believers  seem  as  if  they  never  knew 
whether  they  were  children  of  God  or  no.  3.  It  cripples  their  advocacy  of  the  cause  of 
God.  How  unattractive  the  invitation  to  believe  in  Christ  will  seem  when  it  comes 
from  one  who  is  moaning  and  groaning,  instead  of  singing  the  songs  of  Zion!  4.  It 
will  seriously  interfere  with  their  progress.  Men  cannot  walk  fast  if  their  legs  are  like 
le*d  rather  than  like  cork. 

IV.  The  tbachino  of  God's  Woed  is  intended  and  adapted  to  remove  that 
lONOBANOEi.  1.  There  are  four  things  clearly  unfolded  concerning  the  life  eternal.  (1) 
That  it  is  the  gift  of  God.  (2)  That  it  belongs  to  those  who  are  Christ's.  (3)  That 
the  life  is  a  present  possession  (cf.  Eph.  ii.  6).  (4)  That  there  are  distinctive  signs 
and  marks  of  the  life  (cf.  ch.  iii.  14 ;  ii.  29  ;  ver.  1) — even  faith,  righteousness,  love ; 
where  these  are,  the  man  is  born  of  God  and  has  the  eternal  life.  2.  By  the  careful 
•nd  candid  application  to  his  own  case  of  these  four  lines  of  teaching,  a  man  may  come 
to  a  distinct  and  decisive  conclusion  as  to  his  possession  of  eternal  life.  For,  be  it  ever 
remembered,  this  eternal  life  is  not  to  be  regarded  as  something  which  is  to  commence 
in  the  next  state  of  being,  but  as  something  already  ]»<  ^  ssed,  to  be  tested  and  verified 
now,  as  a  blessed  possession  over  which  death  will  have  no  power. 

Infeeenoeb.  1.  It  is  no  virtue  to  be  the  subject  of  "  doubts  and  fears."  2,  If  we 
are  uncertain,  or  if  we  remain  in  uncertainty  as  to  our  having  this  greatest  of  all  boons, 
it  if  time  that  we  (1)  restudied  the  Word  of  God  to  see  the  comiition  on  which  eternal 
life  is  granted,  and  then  re-examined  ourselves  to  see  if  we  have  fulfilled  that  condition ; 
and  (2)  that  we  restudied  the  Word  of  God  to  see  what  are  the  invariable  marks  of  that 
life,  and  then  re-examined  ourselves  -to  see  if  we  bear  those  marks.  3.  Our  religious 
life  has  not  blossomed  into  its  full  beauty  until  we  are  perfectly  at  home  in  the  love  of 
God  in  Christ,  and  move  as  freely  and  step  as  firmly  there  as  children  in  their  Father's 
house,  so  that  the  question  "  whether  we  .ore  children,"  or  "  whether  we  are  at  home," 
never  comes  up  at  all.  A  loving  confidence  never  to  be  disturbed — this,  oh  1  this  is 
"knowing  that  we  have  the  eternal  life." 

Vers.  14,  15. — Liberty  and  prevalence  in  prayer.  Connecting  link :  The  knowledge 
that  we  hate  eternal  life  is,  in  fact,  a  coming  to  feel  perfectly  at  liome  in  the  redeeming 
love  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus.  Where  this  is  the  case,  confidence,  freedom  of  speech,  is 
enjoyed  towards  God;  and  this  holy  freedom  will  find  expression  in  prayer.  The 
thought  uttered  here  by  the  apostle  is  nearly  akin  to  that  in  cb.  iii.  22  (see  homily 
on  ch.  iii.  19 — 22).  There  are,  however,  one  or  two  not  uninteresting  points  of  detail 
peculiar  to  these  verses,  which  will  suggest  a  very  brief  homiletic  outline.  Topic — 
Liberty  and  success  in  prayer. 

I.  One  op  the  PBivrDEQES  of  KNOwraa  that  we  have  btebnal  life  is  fbeedom 
IN  PBAVEE.  (See  closing  sentences  of  preceding  homily.)  The  word  ira^^rjo-fo,  as 
remarked  in  homilies  on  ch.  ii.  24, 28 ;  iii.  19 — 22 ;  iv.  17, 18,  is  equivalent  to  "  freedom 
of  speech."  If  we  know  that  we  have  eternal  life,  we  shall  have  unreserved  openness 
in  communing  with  our  God.  The  relation  between  the  knowledge  and  that  freedom 
is  clear.  1.  Knowing  thereby  that  we  are  the  sons  of  God,  we  can  speak  freely  to 
the  Father.  2.  Knowing  that  we  are  redeemed  and  saved,  we  can  be  at  entire  liberty  in 
communing  with  our  Saviour.  3.  Knowing  that  we  are  "alive  unto  God,"  we  can 
breathe  out  that  life  towards  its  Giver  and  Sustainer. 

II.  One  fobm  of  peavbr  will  be  "makino  bequest  unto  Goo."'  'E&n  (tdriifteea). 
"One  form,"  we  say,  and  that  advisedly.     For  the  outbreathing  of  love  and  desire  to 

'  See  Trenoh'*  '  New  Tost.  Synonyms  : '  wpofftux^,  S^ijirit,  airrina,  iparir. 


152  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  JOHN.      [oh.  v.  1— 2L 

God  will  be  the  habit  of  the  soul,  and  will  include  vastly  more  than  the  asking  for 
specific  objects.  So  that  we  must  regard  the  apostle  here  as  not  covering  the  whole 
ground  of  prayer,  but  as  simply  indicating  one  direction  that  prayer  may  take  (in 
the  next  homily  a  still  further  limitation  is  noted).  We  may  freely  "make  our 
requests  known  unto  God."  Faith,  reverence,  and  love  will,  however,  regulate  this 
boldness  in  prayer.  "  If  we  ask  anything  according  to  his  will,  he  hears  us."  Even 
so.  God's  will  is  infinitely  wiser  than  ours.  And  our  faith  in  him  will  lead  us  to  offer 
all  our  petitions  subject  to  that  will.  This  is  not,  however,  a  fetter  upon  our  freedom. 
It  is  a  safeguard  to  it.     Otherwise  the  greater  the  freedom  the  greater  the  peril. 

m.  Such  requests  will  certainly  be  granted.  There  are  two  issues  of  such 
a  prayer.  1.  We  know  that  he  hears  us.  The  ^Ak  in  Ter.  15  does  not  indicate  any 
uncertainty.  If  we  know,  as  we  certainly  do,  that  he  hears  us,*  our  petitions  are  not 
wasted  breath ;  they  go  not  forth  to  empty  air  (Ps.  1.  15).  This  follows  from  the  truth 
in  Ps.  oiii.  13.  2._  We  know  that  we  have  the  petitions  we  desired  of  him.  Ta  aiT^/iaro, 
if  not  T«t  iuTr)$4vTa.  "  The  substance  of  the  requests,  if  not  necessarily  the  actual  things 
asked  for,"  sais  Canon  Westoott,  beautifully.  The  mother  of  Augustine  prayed 
earnestly  that  he  might  not  go  to  Rome,  fearing  it  would  be  his  bane.  Her  son,  how- 
ever, went  to  Rome ;  but  his  going  was  one  of  the  steps  which  led  to  his  conversion. 
As  Augustine  himself  said  afterwards,  God  regarded  the  hinge  of  the  petition.  So  it 
ever  is.  God  hears  the  prayer,  but  answers  it  according  to  his  infinite  wisdom  i-ather 
than  according  to  our  limited  foresight.  Note :  Though  this  at  first  sight  sc.  ms  a 
restriction  upon  prayer,  yet  it  is  precisely  this  which  makes  us  free  to  pray.  Were  it 
otherwise,  we  could  not  open  our  lips  to  ask  aught  which  we  deemed  a  boon,  should 
the  gift  asked  for  be  granted  even  though  it  would  prove  a  bane.  God,  in  his  love, 
buries  our  mistakes  in  prayer,  and  gives  us  just  what  we  should  most  desire  could  we 
see  as  he  sees. 

Vers.  15 — 17. — Intercessory  prayer:  its  sphere  and  its  issues.  Connecting  link  :  Wo 
have  freedom  in  prayer.  That  freedom  will  show  itself  in  making  intercession  for 
others.  At  once  there  is  suggested  our  topic — Intercessory  prayer.  There  are  six 
matters  here  requiring  notice. 

I.  Herb  is  an  outlook  pebsbnted.  We  are  surrounded  with  brethren — not  only 
Christian  brethren,  whether  those  that  are  really  or  those  that  are  nominally  such ; 
but  with  "  brethren  "  in  the  world,  those  of  our  own  race,  of  our  own  flesh  and  blood, 
owned  as  "  brethren  "  by  him  who  took  human  nature  on  himself,  and  certainly  not  to 
be  disowned  as  such  by  his  followers.'  Such  n^ay  be  seen  giving  way  to  sin.  Sins  are 
of  two  kinds — those  "unto  death"  and_"sin  not  unto  death."  Inasmuch  as  all  sin 
persisted  in  and  unrepented  of  is  "  unto  death,"  we  seeir  to  be  shut  up  to  the  inference 
that  there  is  a  state  of  sinning  which  is  beyond  the  boundary-line  of  hope ;  while  there 
are  also  sins  which  by  no  means  involve  any  such  sad  conclusion.  The  case  they  present 
may  be  grievous,  but  it  is  by  no  means  hopeless.  It  is  to  be  hoped  that  the  absolutely 
hopeless  cases  are  rare  indeed.  "  All  injustice  is  sin ; "  it  stains  the  soul,  but  need  not 
destroy  it. 

II.  A  CASE  SUPPOSED.  A  believer  sees  a  brother  sin  a  sin  which  is  not  unto  death 
(for  of  the  hopeless  cases  we  do  not  just  now  speak).  Such  a  case  may  fall  under  one 
of  three  heads.  1.  It  may  be  the  case  of  a  real  Christian  surprised  into  a  fault  (Gal. 
vi.  1).  2.  It  may  be  that  of  a  nominal  Christian  who  says  he  has  faith,  but  has  not 
works.  3.  It  may  be  that  of  one  entirely  outside  the  Christian  camp-^who  is  (1)  alienated 
from  God;  (2)  sunk  in  the  mire  of  uncleanness;  (3)  entangled  in  temptation;  (4) 
bewildered  with  doubt ;  (5)  hardened,  careless,  dead.  In  all  such  instances  there  is 
cause  for  grief,  there  is  urgent  need  of  laying  the  case  before  God ;  but  there  is  no  need 
for  despair. 

III.  A  COURSE  ADOPTED.  "  He  will  ask,"  i.e.  he  will  plead  for  such  a  one  with 
God.  The  apostle  does  not  lay  this  down  as  an  injunction  ;  he  says  "  he  will "  do  it,  as 
if  by  the  instinctive  promptings  of  an  earnest  spirit.     It  is  not  said  /or  what  he  will 

'  See  '  Speaker's  Commentary,'  in  loo, 

•  The  context  seems  decisive  against  any  limitation  of  the  term  "brethren"  to  Ohristians, 
since  no  Christian  brethren  would  be  seen  sinning  a  deadly  sin.  According  to  ver.  18,  and 
also  oh.  iii.  9,  that  is  not  posiible. 


OH.V.  1— 21.]     THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  JOHN.  158 

ask ;  that  is  understood.  He  will  ask  for  "  life  " — for  new  life  where  there  has  been 
none,  for  more  life  where  it  is  feeble,  for  revived  life  where  it  is  flagging.  Note  also 
that  it  is  here  supposed  that  the  intercessory  prayer  will  not  lose  its  point  by  wandering 
over  general  themes  and  spheres,  but  will  aim  at  laying  the  case  of  one  sinning  brother 
before  God.  How  much  point  and  power  would  our  prayers  gain  if  they  were  mora 
intercessory!  How  much  force  would  accrue  to  intercessory  prayer  if  it  were  more  specifici 

IV.  A  BOON  SECURED.  "He  shall  give  him  life  for  them  that  sin  not  unto  death;" 
and  these  are  those  for  whom  the  petitions  are  offered.  There  are  four  points  to  be 
noted.  1.  The  gift  is  life.  This  suggestive  word  includes  all  spiritual  good  in  each  case 
as  it  is  needed.  2.  The  Giver  is  God;  the  Divine  name  is  not  specified,  but  we  cannot 
be  in  doubt,  since  (1)  none  but  God  can  give  life,  and  (2)  it  is  to  him  the  paryer  is 
addressed,  therefore  from  him  the  answer  comes.  3.  The  gift  of  life  is  for  those  who 
have  sinned,  but  not  unto  death.  These  are  the  wanderers  whose  case  was  borne  upon 
the  pleader's  heart.  4.  This  gift  of  life  for  the  dead  and  dying  ones  is  God's  gift  to  the 
anxious  pleader.  Beautiful  gift !  To  see  life  from  God  coming  to  those  for  whom  we 
pray  is  surely  the  largest  gift  our  hearts  can  desire.  It  is  the  "  open  reward  "  of  the 
prayers  offered  to  the  Father  in  secret.  Not  thousands  of  gold  and  silver,  yea,  not  the 
wealth  of  worlds,  can  compare  with  a  boon  like  this  1  What  must  be  the  joy  of  him 
who  can  point  to  a  thousand  living  souls  turned  from  the  error  of  their  ways  in  answei 
to  his  prayer  I 

V.  A  (jnESTiON  EBSBRVED.  "  There  is  sin  unto  death  "  (not  "  a  sin."  Whether  thai 
be  so  or  no,  it  is  nut  what  the  apostle  says  here.  He  is  speaking  rather  of  the  state 
than  of  a  specific  act).  Great  obscurity  rests  on  this  phrase ;  for  the  reason  given  in 
division  L,  we  regard  it  as  necessarily  meaning  a  state  of  sinning  that  is  beyond  the 
hope-line.  1.  What  is  thin  state  f  The  following  texts  sum  up  nearly  all  that  we  know : 
John  XV,  6 ;  Luke  xii.  10 ;  Phil.  iii.  19 ;  Heb.  vi.  4 — 6.  (1)  Severance  from  Christ ; 
(2)  the  sin  against  the  Holy  Ghost;  (3)  apostasy;  (4)  final  and  fixed  impenitence. 
Either  of  these  is  a  state  of  "  sin  unto  death."  There  are  rocks  out  at  sea  in  perpetual 
mist.  Such  is  this  rock  of  fatal  sin.  We  cannot  sketch  it,  nor  point  out  its  exact 
hcus,  God  keep  us  all  far  away  from  it  I  But  granting  such  a  case :  2.  What  is  to  be 
done  M  Is  no  intercessory  voice  to  go  up  for  such  a  one  ?  The  apostle  is  alarmingly 
silent.  Se  does  not  say.  An  appalling  thought  is  here  brought  into  the  field  of  vision. 
That  possibly  a  man  may  be  so  far  gone  in  sin  that  not  the  fondest  intercessor  could 
offer  up  a  prayer  for  him,  if  he  knew  how  far  the  sin  had  gone.  We  cannot  venture  to 
write  on  such  a  theme  without  fear  and  trembling.  But  we  ask  the  reader  to  note  the 
words  we  have  italicized,  "if  he  knew,"  etc.  We  are  never  in  a  position  to  pronounce 
a  case  hopeless ;  hence  there  is  nothing  to  bar  our  pleading  for  the  worst  of  sinners. 
Besides,  if  a  man  be  a  man  of  prayer,  the  Spirit  of  God  will  guide  him  for  whom  to  pray 
and  what  to  pray  for ;  and  wherever  a  praying  man  is  borne  along  by  God's  Spirit 
to  pray  without  ceasing  for  the  conversion  of  this  one  or  that  one,  such  inward  groaning, 
divinely  born,  is  a  pledge  of  a  gracious  answer.  In  the  life  of  a  medical  missionary 
(Dr,  Henderson)  we  are  told  by  him  that  he  had  ten  thousand  cases  under  his  care  in 
the  hospiial.  For  some  cases  he  could  not  open  his  lips  in  prayer.  In  other  cases  he 
was  borne  along  to  plead  again  and  again  for  their  recovery ;  and  when  this  was  so,  he 
never  lost  a  case. 

VI.  The  kesult,  when  all  such  reserved  cases  are  allowed  for.  The  boon  secured  as 
touched  on  in  division  IV.  will  still  remain,  a  witness  to  the  power  of  prayer,  a  seal 
to  the  reality  of  communion  with  God,  and  a  blessed  reward  for  the  "  strong  crying 
and  tears "  of  the  faithful  pleader.  Note :  1.  "  The  apostolic  teaching  recognizes  a 
mysterious  dependence  of  man  on  man  in  the  spiritual  order,  like  that  which  is  now 
being  shown  to  exist  in  the  physical  order  "  (Canon  Westcott).  Even  so.  There  are 
wandering  souls  whose  weal  is  bound  up  with  the  intercession  of  the  saints.  2.  It  is 
by  this  intercessory  service  that  the  priesthood  of  believers  is  to  become  a  practical 
r^ity.  We  are  "  kings  and  priests  unto  God  "  (Rev,  i.  6).  No  priest  was  ever  made 
such  for  his  own  sake.  Priests  are  for  others.  We  are  to  go  into  the  holy  of  holies, 
and  there  to  bear  precious  souls  upon  our  heart  before  God.  3.  What  vast  possibilities 
of  life  are  wrapped  up  in  a  believer's  prayers  I    When  the  breath  of  prayer  rises  up 

'  The  change  of  verb  is  remarkable — we  have  Iparfv  instead  of  atrciv  rogare  instead  at 
petere  (see  Canon  Westcott  theieon). 


164  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  JOHN.     [oh.  t.  1—21. 

from  man  to  God,  the  breath  of  life  will  be  unbreathed  by  God  to  man.  4.  Who 
would  not  wish  to  spend  and  be  spent  in  prayer,  if  we  may  receive,  as  God's  blessed 
boon,  life  for  souls  1  Why  are  we  not  more  unselfish  in  our  prayers  ?  Why  is  so  large 
a  portion  of  them  for  ourselves,  so  small  a  portion  for  others  ?  And  why  are  we  not 
more  specific  in  prayer  ?  Let  us  call  up  before  us  some  brother  or  brethren  for  whose 
return  to  God  we  long  and  yearn ;  for  them  let  us  plead,  and  never,  never  give  up. 
And  if  by  our  pleading  many  are  visited  by  Heaven's  best  gift  of  life,  they  may  never 
know  who  prayed  for  them ;  but  our  prayers  will  go  up  for  a  memorial  befora  God, 
and  we  shall  find  it  true  that  "  they  that  sow  in  tears  shall  reap  in  joy." 

Vers.  18, 19. — The  strong  foe  and  the  stronger  Friend.  Connecting  link:  It  is  not 
without  reason  that  the  apostle  liad  just  written  of  life  from  God  as  the  needed  gift  to 
those  who  are  sinning,  whether  their  state  be  that  of  sin  unto  death  or  no ;  for  the  fact 
is  that  whosoever  is  born  of  God  is  not  sinning.  By  the  fact  of  the  new  birth  he  has 
been  delivered  out  of  that  state  in  which  the  evil  one  would  fain  have  held  him,  as 
that  evil  one  still  holds  the  world.  But  now  the  evil  one  is  powerless,  for  his  power  is 
neutralized  by  the  watchful  care  of  the  only  begotten  Son  of  God.  Note :  According  to 
the  Authorized  Version  this  verse  seems  to  teach  that  the  believer  has  and  exercises  an 
instinct  of  self-preservation.  The  Eevised  Version  and  the  Revisers'  Greek  text  should 
be  studied.  Instead  of  ^avr^i'i  we  now  read  airhy.  And  further,  the  d  yevinittls  plainly 
points  to  another  than  6  yeyevvrinei'os,  even  to  him  that  was  and  is  the  Begotten  One  ot- 
God.  He  it  is  who  so  watches  over  the  new-born  child  of  God  that  the  evil  one  has  no 
power  to  touch  him.     Topic — TOe  conquering  and  the  conquered  ones. 

I.  Thbbb  is  a  oreat  fob  of  man.  "  The  evil  one."  The  personality  of  the  evil 
one  is  clearly  implied  in  such  passages  as  these :  Matt.  iv.  1 ;  xiii.  39 ;  xxv.  41 ;  John 
viii.  44 ;  xiii.  2 ;  Eph.  iv.  27 ;  1  Tim.  iii.  6 ;  Jas.  iv.  7 ;  1  Pet.  v.  8 ;  ch.  iii.  8 ;  Luke 
xxii.  31 ;  Rom.  xvi.  20 ;  1  Cor.  v.  5  ;  2  Cor.  iv.  4.  It  is  not  possible  fairly  to  interpret 
all  these  passages  as  indicating  only  an  all-pervasive,  impersonal  evil.  If  any  demnr, 
let  them  consider  these  two  points.  1.  It  is  not  possible  for  moral  evil  to  exist  apart 
from  some  personal  being  in  whom  it  exists.  2.  Whatever  evil  is  in  man  is  tbore 
whether  there  be  a  devil  or  no.  If  there  be  no  devil,  and  all  man's  evil  is  self-origi- 
nated, then  man's  nature  is  a  great  deal  worse  than  the  Scriptures  declare  it  to  be. 

IL  Though  man  has  a  great  foe,  he  has  a  gbbatbe  Fbiend.  This  Friend  is  the 
"  Begotten  One  of  God ; "  "  the  only  hegotten  Sou."  He  beheld  this  world  usurped  by 
the  destroyer,  and  came  to  set  it  free.  His  work  is  fourfold.  1.  He  came  and  worsted 
the  evil  one  in  single  combat.  2.  He  laid  down  his  life  for  men,  and  claims  the  globe 
as  his.  3.  He  has  assumed  the  sovereignty  over  all,  and  dethroned  the  evil  one  (John 
xii.  31,  32).  4.  He  is  now  engaged  by  his  Word  and  Spirit  in  (1)  snatching  men  from 
the  power  of  darkness,  and  transferring  them  to  his  own  kingdom  (CoL  i.  13);  and  (2) 
in  guarding  those  tlius  rescued  (Luke  xxii.  31,  32).  Note :  The  great  mystery  of  evU 
has  its  origin  elsewhere  than  here,  and  a  vaster  field  than  this  globe,  although  it  is  only 
here  that  we  can  trace  it. 

III.  Through  this  Friend  (the  only  begotten  Son  of  God)  there  abb  those  who 
ESCAPE  THE  EVIL.  1.  Who  are  these  t  Those  who  are  born  again  (ver.  18).  All  of 
them.  2.  How  do  they  escape  the  evil }  Through  the  watchful  care  of  the  Lord  Jesus. 
He  guards  {rripe!)  them.  The  word  "expresses  a  watchful  regard  from  without,  rather 
than  safe  custody  "  (so  Weatcott).  This  guardianship  is  exercised  (1)  by  gr^ious  inter- 
cession (Luke  xxii.  31) ;  (2)  by  providential  care  (Ps.  cxxi.) ;  (3)  by  sustaining  the  inward 
li'e  (John  xv.) ;  (4)  by  bringing  to  nought  the  plans  of  the  evil  one  (Rom.  xvi.  20).  3. 
What  is  the  effect  1  The  wicked  one  does  not  touch  them  with  a  contaminating,  poison- 
ing hand.  He  would,  but  he  cannot.  This  must  be  the  issue.  (1)  The  strong  one  is 
outwitted  by  the  Stronger  (Luke  xi.  21,  22) ;  (2)  has  been,  as  matter  of  history  (Rev. 
xii.  10,  11) ;  (3)  is,  as  matter  of  observation  (ch.  iv.  4) ;  (4)  we  know  it  as  matter  of 
experience  (ver.  19).'  The  life  which  is  guarded  without  and  sustained  within  by 
the  Son  of  God  is  a  perpetual  proof  that  there  are  some  whom  evil  cannot  touch.  They 
move  amid  the  evil,  but  it  harms  them  not-.  Let  the  world  get  more  and  more  corrupt, 
they  do  but  become  more  and  more  like  their  Lord. 

*  Bee  a  moat  instructive  note  from  Mr.  J.  Taylor,  quoted  in  the  '  Speaker's  Commentary, 
m  lo*. 


OH.  T.  1—21.]     THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  JOHN.  155 

IV.  Wk  have  herb  the  secret  op  viotobt  or  defeat  in  life  ;  ».«.  of  conquest  over 
•Til  or  conquest  by  it.  All  depends  on  whether  we  are  ix  rod  Kdr/iov  or  iK  toS  eeoS  (cf. 
ch.  iv.  4) ;  t.e,  whether  we  have  a  life  that  is  inspired  by  God  or  a  life  upon  the  lower 
level  of  this  world.'  If  our  being  is  still  of  the  earth  earthy,  we  are  in  that  region 
which  lieth  wholly  in  the  wicked  one,  "  in  all  its  parts  and  elements."  It  is  in  his 
domain,  in  his  grasp.  He  is  the  "  god  of  this  world,"  blinding  men's  minds.  Its 
darkness  is  the  realm  in  which  he  moves.  And  if  we  remain  in  this  sphere,  and  ar« 
never  extricated  from  it  by  a  mightier  power,  with  darkness  and  sin  we  must  "  lie 
down  in  sorrow."  Who  can  consent  to  remain  a  prey  to  evil  when  the  great  Eedeemer 
stands  ready  with  a  mighty  hand  to  pluck  us  out  of  it,  and  to  guard  as  so  securely  that 
DO  evil  shall  touch  us  ? 

V.  All  this  is  among  the  contents  op  the  believeb's  knowledge.  "  We  know.'' 
1.  Who  know  itt  "We" — we  who  are  born  of  God.  Much  is  known  by  us  that  is 
hidden  from  the  world.  2.  Eow  do  they  know  itt  (1)  Partly  by  testimony  (a)  of 
God,  (6)  of  history.  (2)  Partly  by  observation.  (3)  Partly  by  experience.  (But  see 
next  homily,  division  II.) 

Ver.  20. — Zj/e's  hardest  problems  solved.  Connecting  links  The  connection  between 
this  verse  and  those  before  it  is  indicated  by  the  adversative  particle  U,  which  is  equi- 
valent to  "  but."  "  We  know,"  etc.,  as  if  John  had  said, "  I  am  quite  aware  of  the  vast- 
ness  of  the  m}  stery  in  the  conflict  between  good  and  evil.  Still,  I  have  not  spoken  at 
random.  There  are  before  us  positive,  verifiable  data  which  enable  us  to  see  something 
of  the  wonders  of  the  spritual  world.  The  Son  of  God  has  poured  a  flood  of  light 
upon  the  invisible  realm,  and  has  given  us  discerning  power,  so  that  we  see  what  ho 
has  revealed."  Topic — The  Son  of  Ood  the  Solver  cf  life's  greatest  problems.  At  this 
point  we  must  indicate  the  conclusion  to  which  we  have  come  upon  the  verse  before  us. 
The  student  wiU  be  well  aware  of  the  controversy  which  has  gathered  round  its  last 
clause,  owilig  to  some  obscurity  which  rests  on  the  questions :  (1)  What  is  the  ante- 
cedent of  ovris — ^is  it  "  Jesus  Christ "  or  "  him  that  is  true  "  ?  (2)  When  the  apostle 
lays, "  We  are  in  him  that  is  true,  in  his  Son  Jesus  Christ,"  does  he  mean,  "  We  are  in 
him  that  is  true,  [ewem]  in  his  Son  Jesus  Christ,"  or  "  We  are  in  him  that  is  true, 
[being]  in  his  Son  Jesus  Christ "  ?  For  a  discussion  of  the  questions,  the  student  can 
turn  to  the  writers  named  below.*  As  the  structure  of  this  homily  depends  on  the 
answer  given  thereto,  we  must  needs  imlicate  the  conclusion  to  which  we  have  come. 
1.  The  answer  must  be  given  without  doctrinal  bias,  and  simply  on  exegetical  grounds. 
For  our  own  part,  we  have  the  most  unhesitating  conviction  of  the  true  and  proper 
Deity  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  but  we  have  never  quoted  this  verse  in  proof  thereof;  not 
because  it  does  not  contain  it  by  implication,  but  on  account  of  the  dispute  as  to  its 
grammatical  construction.  2.  In  reply  to.  the  second  question  above  named,  we  accept 
the  last-mentioned  f6rm  of  the  phrase,  viz.  "  We  are  in  him  that  is  true,  [being]  in  his 
Son  Jesus  Christ."  3.  It  almost  follows  therefrom  that  the  antecedent  of  ofiriii  is 
"  him  that  is  true ;  "  and  as,  according  to  that  expression  when  used  in  the  preceding 
clause  of  the  verse,  the  apostle  evidently  means  the  Father,  whom  we  know  through 
the  Son — "  that  we  know  him  that  is  true  " — the  antecedent  of  oiT6s  being  "  him  that  is 
true,"  which  is  equivalent  to  "  the  Father."  The  theological  question  here  at  stake, 
however,  is  not  whether  the  Son  is  of  like  nature  with  the  Father,  nor  whether  the 
Son  be  the  very  "  Image  of  the  invisible  God,"  but  whether  in  this  particular  verse  the 
apostle  declares  that  we  know  the  true  God  in  the  Son  or  through  him.  4.  The  full 
point  before  "This"  outs  off  the  following  sentence  too  completely.  It  may  be  a 
complete  sentence  grammatically ;  it  is  not  an  independent  one  either  exegetically  or 
doctrinally.  6.  The  word  oirSs  includes  much  more  than  the  "  Being."  It  is  equiva- 
lent to  the  "  Being "  plus  the  entire  revelation  which  he  is  and  brings :  "  This  is  the 
true  God  and  eternal  life,"  the  masculine  form,  ovt6s,  being  used  on  account  of  the 
noun  first  following.  In  the  text,  so  understood,  three  lines  of  thought  open  up  to  us. 
I.  We  have  a  certain  fact  directly  and  absolutely  known.  "We  know  that 
the  Son  of  God  ig  come ; "  rather, "  is  here,"  i.e.  has  come  and  remains  with  us.     Accord- 

'  Is  it  needful  to  point  out  that  it  is  not  of  the  world  as  to  its  geogvtiphical  extent,  but  ai 
to  its  ethical  relations,  that  the  apostle  is  writing* 
'  See  Westcott,  Ebrard,  and  Haupt. 


ISe  THE  PIBST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  JOHN.     [oh.  ▼.  1— St 

tag  to  the  usage  of  the  apostle,  this  would  include  the  Incarnation,  or  his  coming  from 
the  heavenly  home  to  earth  (ch.  It.  1 — 4).  It  also  distinctly  declares  that  the  Son  of 
God  is  on  earth  still — that  he  remains  with  us.  Nor  can  the  student  of  Scripture  Im 
at  a  loss  to  understand  how  that  is  (Matt,  xviii.  20 ;  xxviii.  20).  His  people  are  his 
representatives.  His  Spirit  supplies  his  place.  His  words  are  still  among  us.  So  that 
we  may  assign  a  manifold  meaning  to  the  expression.  Jesui  Christ  is  here;  1.  In 
his  words.  2.  In  the  influence  and  power  of  his  holy  life.  It  abides  in-the  world,  the 
ideal  standard  of  humanity.  3.  In  the  people  in  whom  he  dwells.  4.  In  the  living 
Church  which  he  inspires.  5.  By  his  Spirit,  by  whom  he,  though  now  bodily  in 
heaven,  is  converting  the  world  and  educating  the  Church.  Note :  It  is  quite  possible 
to  do  our  Saviour  a  great  wrong  by  representing  his  Church  as  mourning  an  absent 
Lord.     He  is  much  more  fiilly  with  believers  now  thau  when  his  feet  walk^  the  earth. 

II.  A  BLESSED  EZFEBIENCE  as  the  outcome  of  the  coming  of  the  Son  of  God.  This 
is  declared  in  the  text  to  be  fourfold.  1.  We  owe  to  Jesus  Christ  the  gift  of  a  spiritual 
understanding  (jStdvoiav,  sensum;  cf.  1  Cor.  ii.  14;  Eph.  i.  18  (Greek,  T.B.);  Matt.  y.  8j 
xiii.  14 ;  vi.  22,  23).  As  is  the  heart,  so  is  the  eye.  When  Christ  by  his  Spirit  renews 
the  one,  there  is  new  power  of  sight  in  the  other.  More  is  included,  however,  than  ■ 
clear  perception.  The  word  also  bears  the  meaning  of  a  power  of  sound  reasoning.  Sin 
vitiates  the  reasoning  powers  by  warping  the  will  which  directs  them  (Eph.  iv.  17, 
18,  23).  When  men  are  born  again,  their  powers  of  reasoning  become  rectified  and 
sanctified,  being  governed  by  the  Spirit  of  God.  2.  Having  this  new  understanding, 
we  know,  through  Christ,  him  that  is  true,  i.e.  the  Father.  Christ  being  himself  the 
•'  Effulgence  of  "  the  Father's  "  glory,  and  the  very  Image  of  his  substance,"  in  knowing 
him  we  know  the  Father.  As  by  his  incarnation  he  discloses  the  Object,  and  by 
imparting  a  new  understanding  enables  us  to  see  the  Object,  there  comes  to  be  through 
Christ  the  meeting  of  subject  and  Object,  which  constitutes  knowledge.  3.  The  Lord 
Jesus  has  also  brought  us  into  a  living  and  abiding  union  with  himself.  "  We  are  in 
his  Son  Jesus  Christ."  The  knowledge  we  gain  is  not  that  of  One  who  is  far  oS  from 
us,  and  from  whom  we  remain  far  off.  It  is  attended  with  a  vital  union  with  him. 
We  are  "  in  him."  How  ?  (1)  In  him  as  our  Life ;  from  him  we  draw  our  own.  (2) 
In  him  as  the  Sphere  of  our  communion  and  abiding  fellowship.  (3)  In  him  as  our 
Mediator;  in  whom  the  Father  sees  us.  (4)  In  him  as  "the  Lord  our  Righteousness" 
and  Strength.  (5)  In  him  as  our  Refuge  from  the  storm.  (6)  In  him  as  our  eternal 
Joy.  No  less  expressive  phrase  than  this,  "  in  him,"  will  suffice  to  tell  how  closely 
Christ  and  his  own  are  locked  in  each  other's  embrace.  4.  Being  brought  into  this 
vital  union  with  the  Son,  we  are  in  living  and  loving  union  with  the  Father.  "  We  arc 
in  him  that  is  true,"  through  being  "  in  his  Son  Jesus  Christ "  (cf.  ch.  iv.  15, 16, 12). 
We  are  "  born  of  God,"  "  begotten  of  him." 

III.  In  this  blessed  experience  is  the  achieved  solution  of  life's  vastest 
PROBLEMS.  "  This  is  the  true  God,  and  Eternal  Life."  There  are  two  problems  which 
men  have  been  for  ages  attempting  to  solve — one  concerning  the  Supreme  Being; 
another  concerning  the  meaning  and  destiny  of  human  life.  The  one  the  greatest 
objective,  the  other  the  greatest  subjective  problem.  Both  find  their  solution  in  Christ, 
and  only  in  him.  For :  1.  In  Christ,  or  through  him  (whichever  view  of  the  text  be 
taken),  we  come  to  know  the  true  God.  The  word  thrice  translated  "  true  "  is  not  the 
one  which  means  true  in  distinction  from  the  false;  it  means  "true"  in  distinction 
from  the  inferior,  partial,  defective,  and  incomplete.  "  True  "  as  fulfilling  completely 
the  highest  ideal,  as  "  in  contrast  with  all  imaginary  and  imperfect  objects  of  worship," 
and  as  fully  satisfying  "  the  idea  of  Godhead  in  the  mind  of  man."  This  perfect  ideal 
of  the  great  Supreme,  and  this  Being  who  answers  to  that  perfect  ideal,  we  know  through 
Christ.  2.  In  Christ,  eternal  life,  too,  is  revealed  as  existing  in  him,  as  imparted  by 
him  to  those  who  believe  on  his  Name.  Note:  Obviously  we  have  here,  and  here 
alone,  the  absolutely  universal  religion,  not  only  for  all  the  world,  but  for  all  the 
worlds.  It  is  so,  not  simply  because  it  is  too  exclusive  to  tolerate  any  other,  but 
because  in  it,  and  in  it  alone,  are  secured  all  to  which  any  religion  anywhere  can 
aspire — even  a  knowledge  of  the  very  God,  and  such  a  union  with  him  as  ensures  a  life 
of  eternal  and  ever-growing  blessedness.  What  more  can  any  religion  show  us?  The 
whole  ground  of  possible  yearning  is  covered.  And  is  there  any  other  in  the  world  that 
professes  to  secure  all  this,  and  that  verifies  its  claims  by  giving  new,  is  a  living  txp*- 


OH.  V.  1—21.]     THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  JOHN.  157 

rience,  the  actual  foretaste  of  tbe  life  to  come?    Verily  in  and  through  Christ  alone 
have  we  "  the  very  Qod,  and  the  eternal  life." 

Ver.  21. — Beware  of  the  idols !  Closing  warning.  By  how  much  the  evidence  is 
clear  that  in  Christ  we  have  the  true  God,  and  eternal  life,  by  so  much  should  we  he 
Sternly  jealous  over  ourselves  that  we  suffer  nought  to  take  the  place  in  our  regard 
which  he  alone  should  fill.  Hence  it  is  not  unnatural  that  a  sentence  like  this  should 
come  from  the  apostle's  pen  ere  he  closes  the  letter.  It  is  easy  to  detect  an  undertone 
of  deep  emotion,  as  the  apostle,  having  discharged  his  responsibilities  in  unfolding  tha 
truth,  now  reminds  his  readers  most  tenderly  of  theirs,  in  cleaving  to  it  and  rejecting 
all  besides.     Topic — A  warning  against  the  idolatry  of  cleaving  to  any  hut  Christ. 

I.  Wb  abb  uniformly  taught  in  Scripture  to  cherish  ah  abhorrence  op  idol* 
The  second  commandment  forbids  any  worship  to  them.  Isaiah  poured  scorn  on  idoU 
worship.  "  Idols  "  (efSwAa,  simulacra) — images,  dead  representations  of  the  Living 
One.  Anything  which  fills  the  place  in  the  understanding,  the  heart,  the  life, 
which  is  due  to  God  alone,  is  an  idol.  Note :  None  have  ever  been  more  noted  for 
horror  of  idolatry  than  those  who  have  paid  the  most  reverent  worship  to  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  as  the  Son  of  God.  It  is,  in  fact,  in  connection  with  the  most  distinct 
avowal  of  him  as  "the  true  God  and  eternal  life,"  that  this  warning  against  all  idolatry 
is  found.     But  the  verse  is  not  general  and  indefinite,  for  observe — 

II.  The  apostle  has  bbfokb  his  eye  the  various  "  idols  *"  with  which  his 
READERS  WOULD  BE  SURROUNDED.  "  Guard  yourselv OS  from  the  idols  Qmh  rav  flSdTMv)." 
It  is  absolutely  necessary  to  study  with  close  attention  the  actual  surroundings  of 
John  and  the  Churches  of  his  care,  if  we  would  rightly  apprehend  and  expound  the 
caution  here  recorded.*  There  appears  to  be  no  reason  to  doubt  that  the  apostle  wrote 
this  Epistle  at  Ephesus.  The  worship  of  the  great  goddess  Diana  had  its  seat  there. 
The  temple  of  Ephesus  was  a  wonder  of  the  world.  And,  over  and  above  the  dark 
black  mass  of  people  who  cared  not  either  for  religion  or  morals.  Gnosticism  and  Dualism 
were  prominent  there.  The  doctrine  of  the  Nicolaitanes  was  taught  there,  and  there 
too  a  spurious  and  magic  spiritualism  had  its  seat  (see  Acts  zix.  19,  26,  35 ;  Bev. 
ii.  6).  There  was  both  a  denial  of  the  true  and  a  presentation  of  the  false  claim  to  the 
regard  of  men. 

III.  With  ali.  these  forms  of  error  before  him,  the  apostle  had  called 
THEM  BY  THE  ONE  NAME — ANTICHRIST.  With  this  onc  word  he  indicates  the  one 
feature  they  all  have  in  common.  They  so  mar  the  representation  of  Christ  that  he  is 
no  longer  the  Christ;  and  set  up  in  his  place  a  substitute  of  their  own,  which  is  no 
better  than  an  antichrist.  There  were  many  of  them ;  but  their  huge  denials  of  the 
truth  were  not  to  be  tolerated  (ch.  ii.  22,  23 ;  iv.  1 — 3  ;  2  John  7).  If  the  Incarnation 
were  denied,  along  therewith  must  be  the  denial  of  the  Propitiation,  the  Redemption, 
the  cleansing,  the  fellowship,  the  life.  All  goes  if  the  Christ  goes.  And  inasmuch  as 
men  will  have  a  faith  of  some  kind,  so  that  when  they^have  dethroned  the  true,  they 
will  enthrone  the  false,  there  will  at  once  come  to  be  some  antichrist — some  rival  to  the 
Son  of  God.  It  may  appear  in  the  form  of  some  worldly  attachment,  eliciting  a  falsa 
affection  (ch.  ii.  15 — 18) ;  or  in  the  disguise  of  some  intellectual  subtlety,  leading  to 
or  from  a  false  philosophy  (ch.  iv.  1 — 3) ;  or  in  some  manifest  depravity  of  morals 
denying  the  need  of  aa  atonement  or  of  cleansing  grace,  through  denying  the  fact  of 
sin  (oh.  i.  8,  10).  The  "many  antichrists"  which  John  espied  were  but  so  many 
ftSaAo,  and  whoever  followed  them  would  be,  in  fact,  an  idolater. 

IV.  From  all  these  forms  of  idolatry  it  is  necessary  for  believers  ro 
8UARD  THEMSELVES.  The  proposition  oir4  is  significant  here.  They  must  keep  away 
from  them.  From  everything  that  (1)  denies,  or  (2)  lowers,  or  (3)  opposes,  or  (4)  dis- 
honours, or  (5)  supplements  the  Christ.  "  Keep  yourselves,"  "  guard  "  yourselves,  the 
word  is — as  in  a  watch-tower  (i^uA.(i|oT6).  But  what  is  the  fortress?  Can  we  he 
wrong  in  saying ;  1.  The  truth  is  the  stronyhold  in  which  they  were  to  remain.  While 
keeping  a  vigilant  watch  on  the  foe  ?  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  Son  of  God  and 
Saviour  of  men,  the  Propitiation  for  sins,  the  fiual  Judge  of  men,  the  true  Object  ol 
•  devout  and  adoring  worship,  the  Life,  the  Mediator,  the  Model,  the  Leader,  the  Lord. 

'  See  the  Bampton  Lecture  by  Dr.  Burton,  on  the  'Heresies  of  the  Apostolic  Agt,' 
tiao  "  Introduction  to  the  First  Spistle  of  John,"  in  the  '  Speaker's  Commentary.' 


158  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  JOHN.     [oh.  V.  1— 2L 

2.  Thty  were  to  ensure  remaining  in  this  stronghold.of  truth  hy  cultivating /tHowship 
in  him  who  is  the  Truth.  (Ch.  ii.  28 ;  cf.  also  the  analogous  phrase  in  Phil.  It.  7,  tpoupiiati 
roi  KapSlas  iiiSp  »al  rd  yoiifiara  ifiaii.')  Communion  with  God  will  ensure  a  holy  peace 
that  will  guard  the  heart  from  restlessness  and  the  thinkings  from  error. 

V.  This  keeping  of  themselves  m  quaed  against  the  idols  is  herb  tbbowh 
ON  THEIR  OWN  PERSONAL  RESPONSIBILITY.  "  Guard  yourselves."  It  is  as  if  the  apostle 
had  said,  "I  have  done  what  I  can  in  writing  down  the  truth  aod  in  warning  you  against 
the  errors  of  the  day.  Now,  where  my  respoasibility  ends,  yours  begins."  Compare 
the  parting  words  of  Moses  (Deut.  zzix.  9—29 ;  xxxi,  2 — 13)  and  of  Paul  (Acts 
XX.  28—31). 

VI.  This  reminder  or  their  personal  responsibilitt  is  given  with  the  utmost 
TENDERNESS  OF  PASTORAL  SOLICITUDE.  The  last  Stroke  of  the  pen  reminds  the  apostle 
of  his  own  inability  to  do  more  than  he  has  done.  He  cannot  always  be  with  the 
Churches.  And  as  if  the  thoughts  that  they  and  he  must  soon  part,  and  that  he,  the 
last  surviving  apostle,  must  leave  the  Churches  "  as  sheep  in  the  midst  of  wolves," 
as  their  Lord  had  said,  were  almost  overwhelming,  his  tone  at  parting  is  that  of  the 
utmost  tenderness  :  "  Little  children,  hoW  yourselves  aloof  from  all  the  idols." 

VII.  The  precept,  though  it  has  Ji  local  and  temporal  beference,  n  o» 
WORLD-WIDE  AND  PERMANENT  SIGNIFICANCE.  Forms  of  antichrist  Still  abouud,  and 
there  is  as  much  need  for  vigilant  watchfulness  on  the  part  of  believers  now  as  there 
was  in  the  apostle's  time.  Can  we  think  of  pantheism,  agoosticiam,  positivism,  mate- 
rialism, rationalism,  anti-supernaturalism,  without  seeing  how  many  forms  of  error 
would  supplant  the  Christ,  and  put  a  rival  in  his  place  ?  Can  we  think  of  sacerdotalism, 
rampant  and  wild,  without  seeing  how  many  there  are  who  would  put  a  priest  between 
the  aoul  and  the  Saviour;  who  teach  that  the  Church  is  to  be  our  bulwark,  by  remaining 
in  which  we  shall  keep  from  idols ;  •  who  would  make  an  idol  of  the  sacramental  bread, 
as  if  it  would  nourish  the  spiritual  life,  and  even  of  the  baptismal  water,  as  if  it  could 
initiate  it  ?  And  we  venture  to  think  that  these  sacerdotal  eUaKa  are  more  perilous  to 
many  than  those  of  the  unbelieving  world.  They  are  more  specious,  and  therefore  more 
deceptive.  May  the  Holy  Ghost  grant  us  his  enlightening  unction,  that  we  may  discern 
and  detect  error  with  a  glance  of  the  eye  I    Amen. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORa 

Vers.  1 — 3. — The  reason  and  the  evidence  of  brotherly  love,  "  Whosoever  believeth 
that  Jesus  is  the  Christ  is  born  of  God,"  etc.  Our  text  is  vitally  related  to  the  last 
two  verses  of  the  preceding  chapter.  To  oar  mind  it  presents  two  important  aspects  of 
love  amongst  Christian  brethren. 

I.  The  REASON  op  the  obligation  of  beothbely  love.  The  duty  to  love  our 
Christian  brethren  is  here  based  upon  our  common  relation  to  God.  The  order  of  the 
apostle's  thonght  seems  to  be  this :  1.  The  Christian  brother  is  a  true  believer  in  Jesui 
the  Christ.  "  Whosoever  believeth  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ "  is  included  by  St.  John 
among  the  Christian  fraternity.  The  genuine  Christian  accepts  Jesus  as  the  Christ  of 
God,  the  Anointed  of  the  Father  for  the  great  work  of  human  redemption.  He  looks 
to  him  as  the  Being  in  whom  ancient  prophecies  are  fulfiUed,  and  in  whom  the  noblest 
expectation  and  the  purest  desire  of  the  human  race  are  t^tlized.  And  the  belief  of 
which  the  apostle  writes  is  not  the  mere  intellectual  acceptation  of  the  proposition 
that  Jesus  is  the  Christ,  but  the  hearty  acceptation  of  Jesus  Mmself  as  the  Saviour 
appointed  by  God.  Every  one  who  thus  receives  him  is  a  true  i»k'>mber  of  the  Christian 
brotherhood.  2.  Hvery  true  believer  in  Jesus  the  Christ  is  a  c}iJ4  of  Ood.  "  Who- 
soever believeth  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ  is  begotten  of  God."  Wh^'^  there  is  genuine 
faith  in  our  Lord  and  Saviour  there  is  a  new  moral  disposition.  The  t  Vistian  believer 
is  bom  anew  of  the  Spirit  of  God.  "  As  many  as  received  him  [i.e.  Jeixs  the  Christ], 
to  them  gave  he  the  right  to  bec<ime  children  of  God,  even  to  them  that  <*'<Iieve  on  his 
Name,"  etc.  (John  i.  12,  13).  "  If  any  man  is  in  Christ  he  is  a  new  civ^ture,"  etc. 
(2  Cor.  V.  17) — he  has  new  sympathies,  new  purposes,  new  principles,  nev  ^elation- 

I  6o  'Speaker's  Commentary,'  inloe.,  sadly  disfigured  by  its  High  Churohitt'  aad 
m  ciamentarianiim. 


OH.  T.  1—21.]     THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  JOHN.  1R8 

Ships,  a  new  spMt.  He  has  the  filial  spirit,  "  the  Spirit  of  iadoption,  whereby  we  cry, 
Abba,  Father."  3.  Ev&t}/  child  0/  God  should  be  loved  hy  the  children  </  tfeaf.  "  Who- 
soever loreth  him  that  begat  loveth  him  also  that  is  begotten  of  him."  (1)  It  ia 
takea  for  granted  that  the  child  of  God  loveS  his  Divine  Parent.  Iii  whomsoever  the 
hew  life  beats  there  is  love  to  God.  In  the  spiritual  realm  love  is  life,  "  Every  one 
that  loveth  is  begotten  of  God,  and  knoweth  God."  The  highest  life  is  that  of  suprdtnte 
love  to  God ;  and,  where  this  is,  love  to  the  brotherhood  will  not  be  absent.  "  If  a 
man  say,  I  love  God,  and  hateth  his  brother,  he  is  a  liar,"  etc.  (6h.  iv.  20,  21).  (2) 
From  the  fact  that  the  child  of  God  loVea  his  Divine  Parent,  St.  John  makeu  this 
deduction,  that  he  will  love  the  thildten  of  Gk)d.  It  is  natural  and  right  that  he 
Who  loves  the  Father  should  also  love  his  children,  or  that  the  children  of  the  one 
Father  should  love  each  other.  Here,  then,  is  the  reason  of  the  obligation  to  l0v«  our 
Christian  brethren.  We  believe  in  one  LOtd  and  Saviour  J  We  are  children  of  the  one 
Divine  Father ;  we  are  members  of  one  spiritual  family ;  We  are  characterized  by  some 
measure  of  moral  resemblance  to  each  other,  for  each  is  to  some  extetat  like  unto  the 
Father  of  all ;  we  are  animated  by  the  same  exalted  and  itivigoratitig  hope ;  and  we  are 
looking  forward  to  the  same  bright  and  blessed  home.  That  we  ishould  love  each  other 
is  in  the  highest  degree  natural  and  reasonable. 

II.  The  evidbncb  op  the  genuineness  of  brothbblt  love.  "  Heteby  we  know 
that  we  love  the  children  of  God,  when  we  love  God,"  etc.  (vers.  2,  3).  Two  remarks, 
we  think,  will  help  us  to  apprehend  the  meaning  of  St.  John.  1.  Our  love  to  th^ 
brethren  is  genuine  v)hen  vie  lo'ue  Qod.  "  Hereby  we  know  that  we  love  the  children 
of  God,  when  we  love  God,  and  do  his  commandments."  We  may  love  our  Cbristiati 
brethren  for  other  and  inferior  reasons  than  that  of  theif  relation  to  the  heavenly 
Father ;  we  may  love  them  because  they  are  rich  in  worldly  goods,  or  because  tbfey  are 
gifted  and  clever,  or  because  they  are  amiable  and  attractive,  or  because  they  hold  th« 
same  political  principles,  or  believe  the  same  theologifeal  Opinions,  or  belong  tO  the  same 
ecclesiastical  party,  as  we  do.  But  love  for  any  of  these  reasons  is  not  necessarily  and 
essentially  Christian  love.  The  gehtiine  Christian  affection  towards  the  brethren  is  to 
love  them  because  they  believe  that  JesUS  is  the  Christ,  and  they  are  the  children  of 
God.  In  the  consciousness  of  our  lovS  to  God  we  have  evidence  that  we  loVe  our 
Christian  brethren  as  his  children.  2.  Our  love  to  Qod  is  genuine  when  we  cheerfully 
keep  his  commandmetits.  "  For  this  is  the  love  of  God,  that  we  keep  his  cotnmand- 
ments ;  and  his  commandments  are  not  grievous."  (1)  The  divinely  appointed  test  Of 
love  to  God  is  obedience  to  his  commandments.  "  If  ye  loVe  me,  ye  will  keep  my 
commandments.  ...  He  that  hath  my  commandments,  and  keepeth  them,  he  it  is 
that  loveth  me,"  etc.  (John  Xiv.  15,  21,  23) ;  "  If  ye  keep  my  commandments,  ye 
shall  abide  in  my  love,"  etc.  (John  xv.  10^ ;  "This  is  love,  that  we  should  walk  after 
his  commandments "  (2  John  6).  Genume  love  is  not  a  fflettly  Sentimental,  but  a 
practical  thing.  (2)  The  obedience  Which  springs  from  love  iS  CheerfuL  "  His  com- 
mandments are  not  grievous "  to  thefti  that  love  him.  Love  is  not  only  life,  but 
inspiration,  courage,  and  strength  j  therefore,  as  love  to  God  increases,  obedience  to  his 
commands  becomes  easier  and  more  delightful.  "  1  eonfeSS,"  says  WatsOn,  "  to  him 
that  hath  no  love  to  God,  religion  must  needs  be  a  burden  J  and  1  wonder  not  to  hear 
him  say, '  What  a  weariness  is  it  to  setve  the  LoM  1 '  It  Is  like  rowing  against  the  tide. 
But  love  oils  the  wheels;  it  makes  duty  a  pleasure.  Why  are  the  angels  so  swift  and 
winged  in  God's  service,  but  because  they  love  hJm?  Jacob  thoiight  seven  years 
but  little  for  the  love  he  did  bear  to  Rachel.  Love  is  never  weary ;  he  who  lovei 
money  is  not  weary  of  toiling  for  it ;  and  he  who  loves  God  Is  not  weary  of  Serving 
him."  Says  Miss  Austin,  "  Where  love  is  there  is  no  labour  j  and  if  there  be  labour, 
that  labour  is  loved."  Will  our  loVe  to  God  bear  this  test  of  cheerful  obedience  to  his 
commands  ?  Then  do  we  lotre  him  truly ;  and  so  Idving  him,  we  shall  love  all  his 
children,— *W.  J. 

Vers.  4,  6. — 2%e  vietorious  life.  "  For  whatsoever  is  born  of  God  0Ter<x>meth  tha 
world,"  etc.    St.  John  here  present*  the  victorious  life  in  fouJ  aspects. 

I.  Is  ITS  OBioiN.  "  Whatsoever  is  begotten  of  God  overcometh  the  world."  The 
true  Christian  is  "born  anewj"  he  is  "  bom  ef  the  Spirit; "  he  "  is  begotten  of  God." 
This  raladonship  involves :  L  Furtitdpatitm  in  the  l^  of  Qod,  especillly  the  Ufa  o/ 


160  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  JOHN.     [oh.  ▼.  1—21. 

love  (cf.  ch.  iv.  7).'  2.  Eesemhlanee  to  the  charoicier  of  Qod.  '3.  Possession  of  the  filial 
spirit  in  relation  to  Qod.  4.  The  title  to  a  glorious  inheritance  from  God.  "  We  ara 
children  of  God :  and  if  children,  then  heirs ;  heirs  of  God,  and  joint-heirs  with  Christ " 
(Kom.  viii.  16, 17) ;  God  "  hath  begotten  us  again  unto  a  lively  hope,  by  the  resur- 
rection of  Jesus  Christ  from  the  dead,  unto  an  inheritance  incorruptible,"  etc  (1 
Pet.  i.  3—5). 

II.  In  Its  conflict.  Our  text  speaks  of  overcoming,  and  overcoming  is  suggestive 
of  struggle.  "Victory  "  implies  combat.  The  Divine  life  in  man  and  the  life  of  the 
ungodly  world  are  essentially  antagonistic'  Satan  is  "the  prince  of  this  world" — 
"  the  god  of  this  world."  "  St.  John  constantly  teaches,"  says  Canon  Liddon,  "  that 
the  ChrTstian's  work  in  this  state  of  probation  is  to  conquer  '  the  world.'  It  is,  in 
other  words,  to  fight  successfully  against  that  view  of  life  which  ignores  God,  against 
that  complex  system  of  attractive  moral  and  specious  intellectual  falsehood  which  is 
marshalled  and  organized  by  the  great  enemy  of  God,  and  which  permeates  and 
inspires  non-Christianized  society.  The  world's  force  is  seen  especially  in  •  the  lust  of 
the  flesh,  in  the  lust  of  the  eyes,  and  in  the  pride  of  life.'  These  three  forms  of  con- 
cupiscence manifest  the  inner  life  of  the  world,"  and  against  them  the  Christian  has 
to  contend.  It  is  the  battle  of  truth  against  error,  of  light  against  darkness,  and  of 
love  against  hatred. 

III.  In  its  conquest.  "Whatsoever  is  begotten  of  God  overcometh  the  world; 
and  this  is  the  victory  that  hath  overcome  the  world,  even  our  faith."  The  Divine 
life  in  the  children  of  God  is  by  its  nature  mightier  than  the  life  and  spirit  of  the 
unchristian  world.  There  is  conflict,  but  the  conflict  issues  in  the  victory  of  the  child 
of  God.  He  is  not  overcome  of  evil,  but  overcomes  evil  with  good.  He  is  not  led 
astray  by  "  the  lust  of  the  flesh,  the  lust  of  the  eyes,  or  the  vain-glory  of  life,"  but  rises 
superior  to  them.  In  proportion  as  he  who  "  is  begotten  of  God  "  participates  in  the 
life  of  God,  he  vanquishes  the  world  and  its  temptations,  both  its  seductions  and  its 
tribulations.  And  all  the  evil  world,  of  which  the  apostle  wrote,  is  destined  to  be 
completely  conquered  by  the  life  of  God  working  in  and  through  men. 

IV.  In  the  secret  op  its  power.  "  This  is  the  victory  that  hath  overcome  the 
world,  even  our  faith.  And  who  is  he  that  overcometh  the  world,  but  he  that 
believeth  that  Jesus  is  the  Son  of  God  ? "  Notice :  1.  The  nature  of  this  faith. 
It  is  not  the  mere  intellectual  acceptation  of  a  theological  proposition  or  propo- 
sitions ;  •'  not  that  heartless  assent  which  never  touches  the  practice  nor  moulds  the 
affections."  This  faith  is  quite  as  much  a  moral  as  an  intellectual  act ;  it  is  of  the 
heart  as  well  as  of  the  head ;  and  it  infuses  courage,  moulds  character,  and  directs 
conduct.  2.  The  Obfect  of  this  faith.  "  Who  is  he  that  overcometh  the  world,  but  he 
that  believeth  that  Jesus  is  the  Son  of  God?"  (1)  Faith  in  Jesus  as  truly  human. 
St.  John,  in  thus  mentioning  Jesus,  evidently  took  for  granted  that  his  readers  believed 
in  the  reality  of  his  human  life.  We  must  believe  in  him  as  toiling  and  tired,  tempted 
and  tried,  svtffering  and  sorrowful,  persecuted  and  crucified,  risen  and  ascended.  Tet 
he  was  never  the  vanquished,  but  always  the  Victor.  Even  on  the  cross  he  conquered. 
(2)  Faith  in  Jesus  as  essentially  Divine.  Not  that  he  is  a  son  of  God,  but  "  that  Jesus 
is  the  Son  of  God  " — "  His  only  begotten  Son "  (ch.  iv.  9).  If  the  Christian  would 
overcome  the  world, "  he  must  have  a  strong  faith,"  as  Canon  Liddon  says — "  a  faith  in 
a  Divine  Saviour.  This  faith,  which  introduces  the  soul  to  communion  with  God  in 
light,  attained  through  communion  with  his  blessed  Son,  exhibits  the  world  in  its  true 
colours.  The  soul  spurns  the  world  as  she  clings  believingly  to  the  Divine  Son."  We 
have  said  that  Jesus  was  always  victorious.  As  we  truly  believe  in  him,  we  are  par* 
takers  of  his  life  and  sharers  in  his  victory.  This  is  in  accordance  with  his  own  word 
to  his  disciples:  "In  the  world  ye  have  tribulation:  but  be  of  good  cheer;  I  have 
overcome  the  world."  Says  Dr.  Stier,  "Our  faith  in  him  is  the  victory  which  has 
already  overcome  the  world.  •  The  conflict  and  suffering  which  we  now  have  is  not 
the  real  war,  but  only  the  celebration,  a  part  of  the  glory,  of  this  victory '  (Luther)." 
6o  St.  Paul,  "  In  all  these  things  we  are  more  than  conquerors  through  him  that  loved 
OS."  "  I  can  do  all  things  in  him  that  strengtheneth  me."  3.  The  exdusiveness  of  thit 
faith  as  the  means  of  victory  over  the  world.     "  Who  is  he  that  ovei'cometh  the  worl<l, 

*  See  this  and  the  following  points  more  fully  stated  in  our  homily  on  ch,  lii,  1. 
'  Qn  th^  meaning  of  "  the  world  "  in  this  Epistle,  gee  oui  bootily  on  oh.  ii.  1$ — 17. 


OH.  T.  1—21.]     THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  JOHN.  161 

but  he  that  believeth  that  Jesiia  is  the  Son  of  God  ?  "  The  complete  victory  over  the 
world  caa  he  attained  only  by  genuine  faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  Son  o( 
God.— W.J. 

Vers.  6 — 11. — The  fourfold  wiiness  to  the  Divine  Sonship  of  Jesu».  "  This  is  he  that 
came  by  water  and  blood,"  etc.  We  omit  the  interpolated  clauses,  and  take  the  text 
as  it  is  given  in  the  Revised  Version.  St.  John  here  states  the  basis  of  that  faith  by 
means  of  which  the  Christian  overcomes  the  world.  We  have  the  most  convincing 
testimony  that  the  confidence  which  is  reposed  in  Jesus  Christ  as  the  Son  of  God  is 
well  founded.    Tliat  testimony  is  manifold.     We  have — 

I.  The  testimony  op  his  baptism.  "  This  is  he  that  came  by  water, .  .  .  even 
Jesus  Christ."  The  coming  here  meant  is  not  that  of  his  incarnation,  his  entrance 
into  this  world ;  but  his  coming  forth  from  the  retirement  of  Nazareth  to  enter  upon 
his  great  redemptive  mission.  His  coming  "  by  water  "  we  regard  as  referring  to  his 
baptism  by  John.  That  baptism  was :  1.  The  inauguration  of  his  great  mission. 
When  Jesus  went  to  John  for  baptism  he  had  finally  left  his  private  life,  and  was  just 
about  to  enter  upon  his  public  ministry,  and  his  baptism  was  a  fitting  introduction  to 
that  ministry.  2.  An  inauguration  characterized  by  supernatural  and  Divine  attesta- 
tion. Probably  it  is  for  this  reason  that  St.  John  here  refers  to  our  Lord's  baptism : 
"Jesus,  when  he  was  Ijaptized,  went  up  straightway  from  the  water:  and  lo,  the 
heavens  were  opened  unto  him,"  etc.  (Matt.  iii.  16, 17).  And  John  the  Baptist  testified, 
"  This  is  he  of  whom  I  said.  After  me  cometh  a  Man  which  is  become  before  me :  for  he 
was  before  me.  And  I  knew  him  not ;  but  that  he  should  be  made  manifest  to  Jsrael," 
etc.  (John  i.  30—34). 

II.  Thb  testimony  or  ms  cbucifixion.  "  This  is  he  that  came  by  water  and  blood, 
even  Jesus  Christ ;  not  with  the  water  only,  but  with  the  water  and  with  the  blood." 
The  reference  is  to  the  blood  which  he  shed  upon  the  cross  for  the  redemption  of  man- 
kind. But  how  did  his  death  witness  to  the  truth  that  he  was  the  Son  of  God  ?  1. 
£y  the  extraordinary  phenomena  associated  with  his  death.  "  Now  from  the  sixth 
hour  there  was  darkness  over  all  the  land  until  the  ninth  hour.  .  .  .  And  Jesus  yielded 
up  the  ghost.  And  behold,  the  veil  of  the  temple  was  rent  in  twain  from  the  top  to 
the  bottom,"  etc.  (Matt,  xxvii.  45,  50 — 54;  Luke  xxiii.  47,  48).  2.  By  the  trans- 
cendent moral  grandeur  expressed  in  his  death.  He  voluntarily  submitted  himself  to 
death  for  the  salvation  of  the  lost  world.  Our  Lord  said,  "  Therefore  doth  my  Father 
love  me,  because  I  lay  down  my  life  that  I  may  take  it  again.  No  one  taketh  it  away 
from  me,"  etc.  (John  x.  17,  18) ;  "  He  gave  himself  for  our  sins,"  etc.  (Gal.  i.  4) ;  "  He 
gave  himself  a  Ransom  for  all,"  etc.  (1  Tim.  li.  6) ;  "  He  gave  himself  for  us,"  etc.  (Titus 
ii.  14) ;  "  Christ  also  suffered  for  sins  once,  the  Righteous  for  the  unrighteous,"  etc. 
(1  Pet.  iii.  18).  He  freely  surrendered  himself  to  the  most  painful  and  shameful  death, 
not  for  himself,  or  for  his  friends,  but  for  sinners  and  rebels  against  him  and  his  Father, 
and  in  order  that  they  might  have  eternal  life.  Such  self-sacrifice  was  more  than 
human,  more  than  angelic, — it  was  strictly  and  properly  Divine. 

**  This  was  compaaion  like  a  God, 
That  when  the  Saviour  knew 
The  price  of  pardon  was  his  blood. 
His  pity  ne'er  withdrew." 

(Watti) 

III.  Thb  testimony  of  his  Spirit,  "ijid  it  is  the  Spirit  that  beareth  witness, 
I)  ;eiu«e  the  Spirit  is  the  truth.  For  there  are  three  who  bear  witness,  the  Spirit,  and 
the  water,  and  the  blood :  and  the  three  agree  in  one."  Notice :  1.  The  nature  of  the 
testimony  of  the  Eoly  Spirit.  At  our  Lord's  baptism  the  Spirit  bore  witness  that  he 
was  the  Son  of  God  (Matt.  iii.  16, 17).  Our  Lord  said,  «  The  Spirit  of  truth,  which 
proceedeth  from  the  Father,  he  shall  bear  witness  of  me  "  (John  xv.  26).  Again  he 
Btiid,  "  The  Spirit  of  truth  ...  he  shall  glorify  me ;  for  he  shall  take  of  mine,  and 
shall  declare  it  unto  you."  He  bore  witness  to  the  Messiahship  of  Jesus  by  coming 
down,  according  to  his  promise,  upon  the  apostles,  and  by  making  the  gospel  of  Christ 
nrhich  they  preached  a  saving  power  to  thousands  of  souls  (Acts  ii. ;  iv.  31).  And  he 
bears  witness  for  Christ  in  the  hearts  of  Christians  (ch.  iii.  84  j  1  Cor.  xii.  3).    2„  The 

I.  JOHN.  H 


162  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  JOHN.     [ch.  ▼,  1—21. 

value  o/  the  testimony  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  "  The  Spirit,  is  the  truth ; "  "  The  Spirit  of 
truth  "  (John  xlv.  17 ;  xv.  26) ;  "  When  he,  the  Spirit  of  truth,  is  come,  he  shall  guide 
you  into  all  the  truth."  His  testimony  is  of  the  utmost  value  and  importance,  because 
it  is  perfectly  free  from  error  or  fraud ;  proceeding  from  the  Spirit  of  truth,  the  Spirit 
who  is  the  truth,  it  is  light  without  any  darkness,  truth  without  any  error.  And  hii 
testimony  is  that  Jesus  is  the  Messiah  and  the  Son  of  Gbd. 

IV.  The  testimony  op  his  bblievin»  people.  "  He  that  helieveth  on  the  Son  of 
Grod  hath  the  witness  in  him.  .  ,  ,  And  the  witness  is  this,  that  Grod  gave  unto  ua 
eternal  life,  and  this  life -is  in  his  Son."  "The  object  of  the  Divine  testimony  being,'" 
says  Alford,  "  to  produce  faith  in  Christ,  the  apostle  takes  him  in  whom  it  has  wrought 
this  its  effect,  one  who  hahitually  believes  in  the  Son  of  God,  and  says  of  such  a  one 
that  he  possesses  the  testimony  in  himself."  All  genuine  believers  in  Jesus  Christ 
have  the  witness  of  their  own  consciousness  "  that  God  gave  unto  us  eternal  life,  and 
this  lite  is  in  his  Son."  They  are  conscious  that  the  life  of  love — love  to  God  and  to 
man — is  theirs.  "  We  know  that  we  have  passed  out  of  death  into  life,  because  we 
love  the  brethren."  And  we  know  that  this  life  was  quickened  within  us  through  the 
exercise  of  faith  in  Christ.  To  us  individually  this  is  the  most  convincing  of  all 
witnesses.     "  One  thing  I  know,  that,  whereas  I  was  blind,  now  I  see." 

Y.  The  testimony  of  all  the  befobe-mektioned  combined.  All  the  foregoing 
witnesses  are  united  and  concurrent  in  their  evidence.  "  The  three  agree  in  one."  We 
may  say  that  the  four  agree  in  one.  Their  testimony  is  imanimouB.  There  is  no 
contradiction,  no  discrepancy  in  their  evidence.  With  one  voice  they  declare,  "  Rabbi, 
thou  art  the  Son  of  God,  thou  art  the  King  of  Israel."  "  Thou  art  the  Christ,  the 
Son  of  the  living  God." 

Notice  two  points  in  conclusion :  1.  TVie  claim  which  thi$  tettimony  hat  upon  owr 
aeoiptanet.  "  If  we  receive  the  witness  of  men,  the  witness  of  God  is  greater,"  etc.  We 
receive  human  testimony,  notwithstanding  that  (1) :  The  witness  may  unintentionally 
be  untrue.  Human  observations  and  impressions  and  recollections  are  not  alwayi 
accurate ;  hence  the  witness  of  men  is  sometimes  undesignedly  incorrect.  But  in  the 
manifold  and  Divine  testimony  to  the  truth  that  Jesus  is  the  Son  of  God  there  cannot 
be  any  inaccuracy  or  imperfection.  (2)  The  human  witness  may  intentionally  be 
untrue.  Man  may  endeavour  to  deceive;  he  may  wilfully  bear  false  witness.  But 
"the  witness  of  God  is  greater."  The  Spirit  of  truth  cannot  lie.  Therefore  thia 
testimony  has  the  most  commanding  claims  upon  our  acceptance.  2.  The  isstie 
involved  in  the  non-acceptance  of  this  testimony.  "  He  that  helieveth  not  God  hath 
made  him  a  liar ;  because  he  bath  not  believed  in  the  witness  that  God  hath  borne 
concerning  his  Son."  Is  any  one  prepared  to  discredit  God?  WiU  any  one  implicitly 
charge  him  with  falsehood?  Be  it  ours  to  receive  his  testimony  with  larger,  fuller  con- 
fidence, and  to  rest  in  his  Son  with  deeper,  more  loving,  and  more  reverent  trust. — ^W.  J. 

Yer.  12.— The  tupreme  possession.  "  He  that  hath  the  Son  hath  the  life,"  etc.  In 
our  text  the  apostle  expresses — 

I.  A  SPECIAL  relationship  TO  THE  LoRD  Jbsus  Chbist.  "  He  that  hath  the  Son," 
What  are  we  to  understand  by  these  words  ?  What  is  involved  in  them  ?  1.  Realizing 
faith  in  him.  (1)  In  his  existence.  Saving  faith  in  Christ  is  faith,  not  in  his  historic 
reality  only,  but  in  his  present  existence — that  he  is.  "  He  ever  liveth."  (2)  In  hit 
perfection.  It  will  profit  me  nothing  to  believe  in  Jesus  as  an  ordinary  Man,  having 
the  imperfections,  weaknesses,  and  sins  of  our  human  nature.  Faith  in  such  a  heing 
would  not  result  in  any  accession  of  strength.  Faith  must  be  exercised  in  him  as 
"  holy,  harmless,  undefiled,"  etc.  Thus  believing  in  him  we  are,  as  it  seems  to  us, 
necessarily  led  on  to  faith  in  his  proper  Divinity — "that  Jesus  is  the  Son  of  God" 
(ver.  5).  (3)  In  his  interest  in  us.  Faith  in  his  existence  and  perfection  and 
Divinity  will  not  benefit  us  unless  we  believe  in  his  regard  for  ua— that  he  cares  for  us, 
desires  to  bless  and  save  us.  Now,  we  need  what  I  have  called  a  realizing  faith  in  him. 
The  faith  of  which  St.  John  and  St.  Paul  wrote,  and  which  our  Lord  required  in  him- 
self, is  a  far  greater  and  deeper  thing  than  intellectual  assent.  "  With  the  heart  man 
helieveth  unto  righteousness."  "  When  the  soul  in  very  truth  responds  to  the  message 
of  God,"  says  Canon  Liddon,  "  the  complete  responsive  act  of  faith  is  threefold.  This 
act  proceeds  simultaneously  from  the  intelligence,  from  the  heart,  and  from  the  will 


OH.V.  1—21.1     THE  FIBST  EPISTLE  GENERAI,  OP  JOHN.  163 

of  the  bfeliever.  His  intelligence  recQgnizea  the  unseen  object  as  a  fact.  His  heart 
embraces  the  object  thus  present  to  the -understanding ;  his  heart  opens  instinctively  and 
unhesitatingly  to  receive  a  ray  of  heavenly  light.  And  his  will,  too,  resigns  itself  to 
the  truth  before  it;  it  places  the  soul  at  the  disposal  of  the  object  which  thus  rivets  its 
eye  and  conquers  its  affections."  With  a  faith  like  this,  the  Christian  apprehends 
Jesus  Christ  as  a  grand,  living,  spiritual,  Divine  Person ;  enshrines  him  in  the  heart's 
innermost  and  holiest  temple ;  and  offers  to  him  humblest  and  deepest  reverence 
Thus  the  Christian  "hath  the  Son."  2.  Acceptance  of  his  teaching.  The  Christian  is 
intellectttally  and  practically  loyal  to  the  teaching  of  Jesus  Olwist.  In  a  very  true  and 
important  sense  Plato  iriay  be  said  to  have  had  Socrates.  He  had  so  studied  his 
utterances,  so  mastered  his  methoti,  so  thoroughly  acquainted  himself  with  his  views 
and  theories  and  principles ;  moreover,  he  held  him  in  such  high  esteem,  regarded  him 
with  such  reverence,  that  we  may,  witliout  exaggeration,  say  that  he  possessed  Socrates, 
"  We  have  the  mind  of  Christ."  By  means  of  his  teaching  we  have  intellectual  com- 
munion with  him.  His  precious  utterances,  his  glorious  revelations,  we  believe ;  they 
are  ours.  All  that  he  spake  we  receive  as  true ;  so  his  mind  becomes  ours ;  aud  in  this 
sense  we  have  him.  3.  Supreme  sympathy  with  him.  He  gave  himself  for  us,  and  in 
return  we  give  ourselves  to  him.  "  We  love  him,  because  he  first  loved  us."  By 
reciprocal  affection  we  have  him.  This  is  the  trust,  completest,  highest  way  in  which 
one  person  can  have  another.  He  by  whom  I  am  truly  loved,  and  whom  I  truly  love. 
Is  mine  indeed.  Thus  we  have  the  Son.  Ho  dwells  in  us  by  his  Spirit,  His  teaching,, 
his  presence,  his  love,  his  life,  his  Spirit,  are  ours  ;  himself  is  ours,  inalienably  and  for 
ever.  St.  John  frequently  represents  this  relationship  to  Christ  as  conditioned  simply 
by  faith  in  him  (ver.  13 ;  John  iiL  14 — 16,  34).  In  his  vocabulary  •'  faith  "  is  a  compre- 
hensive word.  It  "is  not  merely  a  perception  of  the  understanding;  it  is  a  kindling 
of  the  heart,  and  a  resolve  of  the  will ;  it  is,  in  short,  an  act  of  the  whole  soul,  which, 
by  one  simultaneous  complex  movement,  sees,  feels,  and  obeys  the  truth  presented  to 
it."    He  who  thus  believes  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  "  hath  the  Son." 

XL  They  who  hold  this  EELATIONSHIP  ark  POSSBSSOBS  of  the  HiaHEST  LIFE.    "  He 

that  hath  the  Son  hath  the  life."  What  are  we  to  imderstand  by  "  the  life "  (t4» 
fw^i')?  1.  Not  mere  existence.  The  most  wicked  among  men  have  this.  Fallen 
angels  have  existed  through  thousands  of  years  (2  Pet.  ii.  4 ;  Jude  6).  To  argue  for 
either  the  perpetuity  or  the  non-perpetuity  of  existence  from  the  teaching  of  the  apostle 
concerning  "  the  life  "  is  a  gross  perversion  of  his  teaching.  2.  Not  mere  intellectual 
life.  Voltaire,  Byron,  e<  al.,  possessed  this  in  a  high  degree  j  but  who  would  afiSrm  that 
they  had  "  the  Son  "  and  "  the  life  "  ?  3.  Not  m,ere  emotional  life.  There  are  many 
whose  sympathies  are  abundant  and  active,  who  sincerely  pity  the  wretched,  who  have 
often  been  moved  to  tears  as  they  have  contemplated  the  woes  of  the  Man  of  sorrows,  who 
yet  have  neither  "  the  Son  "  nor  "  the  life."  The  life  of  which  St.  John  writes  is  "  the 
new  life  of  God  in  humanity."  This  new  life  may  be  viewed  as  a  new  reigning  affection. 
By  faith  in  Christ  man  is  regenerated,  his  ruling  love  is  changed.  His  deepest  and 
strongest  affection  is  no  longer  earthly,  selfish,  or  sinful,  but  heavenly,  self-abnegating, 
holy ;  he  loves  God  supremely.  He  is  thus  brought  into  vital  and  blessed  relationship 
with  God.  Hdy  love  is  life.  "  The  mind  of  the  Spirit  is  life  "  (Rom.  viii.  6).  He  who 
has  the  Son  has  this  life.  He  has  it  now,  not  in  its  most  glorious  development,  but 
really  and  increasingly  (Gal.  ii.  20).  Under  the  influence  of  this  supreme  love  to  God 
all  the  faculties  of  the  spiritual  nature  advance  towards  perfection  in  blessed  harmony 
with  his  holy  will. 

III.  This  ufe  is  attainable  only  thbouqh  Christ.  "  He  that  hath  not  the  Son 
of  God  hath  not  the  life."  What  is  essential  to  this  life  ?  That  man's  strongest  and 
deepest  love  shall  be  fixed  on  God.  And  we  have  no  revelation  of  God  adequate  to 
inspire  this  affection  save  that  which  ia  given  unto  us  in  Jesus  Christ.  On  viewing  the 
life  as  consisting  of  the  union  of  the  soul  of  man  with  God,  we  affirm  that  it  is 'only 
through  the  mediation  of  Jesus  Christ  that  this  union  can  be  effected.  Man  ia  estranged 
from  God.  by  sin,  "  alienated  from  the  life  of  God,"  and  under  condemnation  because 
of  sin.  "  The  Son  of  man  has  power  to  forgive  sins."  "  There  is  no  condemnation  to 
them  that  are_  in  Christ  Jesus."  By  the  manifestation  of  the  love  of  God  in  his  life, 
and  especially  in  his  death,  he  destroys  the  enmity  of  the  sinful  heart,  and  reconciles 
Toaa  unto  God.    "  When  we  wei«  enemies,  we  were  reconciled  to  God  by  the  death  of 


164  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  JOHN.      [oh.  v.  1—21. 

his  Son."  Christ  reveals  God  as  a  Being  possessing  in  infinite  degree  those  attributes 
which  are  necessary  to  command  the  soul's  supreme  love.  He  manifests  the  perfect 
righteousness  of  God.  The  cross  of  Jesus  Christ  is  the  grand  declaration  of  God's 
unappeasable  hatred  of  sin,  and  his  zeal  for  the  maintenance  of  rectitude.  It  is  the 
perfect  revelation  of  religious  truth  for  man's  intellect  and  heart.  He  is  "  the  Truth." 
In  him  truth  was  incarnate.  In  him  the  lova  of  God  is  most  perfectly  expressed. 
Divine  love  toiling,  sorrowing,  suffering,  dying,  to  save  the  unlovely,  the  imworthy,  the 
ill  deserving,  is  manifest  in  him.  He  shows  us  the  ineffable  mystery  of  God  in  self- 
sacrifice  for  us.  He  reve'&ls,  as  fully  as  is  possible  to  our  dim  vision,  the  transcendent 
heauty  of  tbe  Divine  character,  for  our  admiration  and  reverence.  In  a  word,  taking 
holiness  as  expressing  tbe  summation  of  the  Divine  perfections,  he  reveals  the  infinite 
holiness  of  Ood.  Here  in  him  we  have  such  a  revelation  of  the  Supreme  Being  as  is 
perfectly  fitted  to  command  the  homage  of  conscience,  to  quicken  and  strengthen  the 
intellect,  to  expel  all  enmity,  and  beget  in  tbe  soul  tbe  purest,  deepest,  intensest  love, 
and  to  call  forth  the  reverent  devotion  of  our  being.  Such  a  revelation  believed  in  and 
brought  home  to  our  spirit  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  is  life-giving;  and  such  a  revelation  we 
have  in  Christ  alone.  Only  through  him  can  we  attain  the  highest  life  (cf.  John  iii. 
36 ;  xiv.  6 ;  Acts  iv.  12). 

Conclusion.  1.  This  relationship  may  he  attained  hy  every  one.  (John  iii.  16.)  2. 
Ood  seeks  to  hring  all  men  into  this  relationship.  He  invites,  exhorts,  entreats,  etc.  3. 
If  any  have  not  this  life,  it  is  because  they  refuse  to  comply  with  the  condition  of  its 
bestowment.    "  Ye  will  not  come  unto  me,  that  ye  might  have  life." — W.  J. 

Vers.  14, 15. — The  Christian's  confidence  toward  God  in  relation  to  prayer.  "  And 
this  is  the  confidence  that  we  have  in  him,"  etc.    We  have  in  our  text — 

I.  An  assdkance  that  God  hears  prayer.  "  This  is  the  boldness  that  we  have 
toward  him,  that,  if  we  ask  anything  according  to  his  will,  he  heareth  us."  Prayer  is 
much  more  than  petition.  Canon  Liddon  admirably  defines  it :  "  Prayer  is  the  act  by 
which  man,  conscious  at  once  of  his  weakness  and  of  his  immortality,  puts  himself  into 
real  and  effective  communication  with  the  Almighty,  the  Eternal,  the  self-existent 
God.  .  .  ,  Prayer  is  not  only— perhaps  in  some  of  the  holiest  souls  it  is  not  even 
chiefly — a  petition  for  something  that  we  want  and  do  not  possess.  In  the  larger 
sense  of  the  word,  as  the  spiritual  language  of  the  soul,  prayer  is  intercourse  with  God, 
often  seeking  no  end  beyond  the  pleasure  of  such  intercourse.  It  is  praise;  it  is 
congratulation ;  it  is  adoration  of  the  Infinite  Majesty ;  it  is  a  colloquy  in  which  the 
soul  engages  with  the  All-wise  and  the  All-holy ;  it  is  a  basking  in  the  sunshine, 
varied  by  ejaculations  of  thankfulness  to  the  Sun  of  Righteousness  for  his  light  and  his 
warmth.  .  .  .  Prayer  is  not,  as  it  has  been  scornfully  described,  '  only  a  machine 
warranted  by  theologians  to  make  God  do  what  his  clients  want ; '  it  is  a  great  deal 
more  than  petition,  which  is  only  one  department  of  it :  it  is  nothing  less  than  the 
whole  spiritual  action  of  the  soul  turned  towards  God  as  its  true  and  adequate  Object. 
...  It  is  the  action  whereby  we  men,  in  all  our  frailty  and  defilement,  associate  our- 
selves with  our  Divine  Advocate  on  high,  and  realize  the  sublime  bond  which  in  him, 
the  one  Mediator  between  God  and  man,  unites  'js  in  our  utter  unworthiness  to  the 
strong  and  all-holy  God."  Such  is  prayer  in  its  highest  and  largest  significance.  But 
in  our  text  prayer  is  viewed  simply  as  petition.  "  If  we  ask  anything ;  .  .  .  whatsoever 
we  ask, .  ,  .  the  petitions  which  we  have  asked  of  him."  Notice :  1.  The  offering 
of  prayer.  This  implies  (1)  consciousness  of  need.  How  many  are  man's  wants! 
Regular  supplies  for  the  requirements  of  the  body,  forgiveness  of  sin,  daily  guidance 
and  grace,  reliable  hope  as  to  our  future,  etc.  We  are  creatures  of  constant  and 
countlets  necessities.  Every  moment  we  are  dependent  upon  the  power  and  grace 
of  the  Supreme.  The  exercise  of  prayer  implies  (2)  belief  that  God  is  able  and 
willing  to  supply  our  needs.  Without  this  faith  man  would  never  address  himself  in 
his  times  of  need  to  God.  Moreover,  the  "  we  "  of  our  text  refers  to  Christians,  even 
unto  them  "  that  believe  on  the  Name  of  the  Son  of  God  "  (ver.  13).  Their  belief  in  the 
reality  of  prayer  springs  out  of  their  faith  in  Christ.  And  the  exercise  of  prayer  is  an 
expression  of  their  spiritual  life.  2.  The  hearing  of  prayer.  How  marvellous  is  the  fact 
that  God  hears  the  innumerable  prayers  that  are  ever  being  presented  unto  him  I  None 
but  an  Infinite  Being  could  hear  them.  And  a  Being  of  infinite  intelligvnoe  cannot  fall  to 


OH.T.  1— 21.]     THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  JOHN.  165 

observe  every  longing  vyhioh  is  directed  towards  him.  No  utterance  whatever  escapes 
the  Divine  ear.  None  but  a  gracious  Being  would  regard  the  prayers  which  are  offered 
by  such  unworthy  suppliants.  Great  is  the  condescension  of  God  in  attending  to  our 
requests.  That  he  does  graciously  hear  and  attend  to  them  is  repeatedly  declared  in 
the  sacred  Scriptures  (see  2  Sam.  xxii.  7 ;  Ps.  xxii.  4, 5,  24 ;  xxi.  2,  8 — 12 ;  xxxi.  22 ; 
xxxiv.  4 — 6;  L  15;  Matt.  vii.  7 — 11;  Luke  xviii.  1 — 8;  John  xvi.  23,  24;  Jas.  i.  5; 
V.  16). 

II.   An    important    limitation    op  the    scope    of   acceptable    PBATEB.      "  If  W8 

ask  anything  according  to  his  will,  he  heareth  us."  1.  This  limitation  is  necessary. 
God's  will  is  supreme.  The  well-being  of  the  universe  is  bound  up  with  the  execution 
of  his  will.  Therefore  he  cannot  grant  the  petitions  which  are  not  in  harmony  there- 
with. This  limitation  is  necessary  also,  inasmuch  as  different  suppliants  may  be  seeking 
from  him  at  the  same  time  things  which  are  thoroughly  opposed  to  each  other.  Thus 
in  time  of  war  between  two  Christian  nations,  prayer  is  presented  to  God  for  the  success 
of  each  of  the  contending  armies.  The  requests  of  both  cannot  be  granted.  2.  This 
limitation  it  beneficial.  The  judicious  and  kind  parent  does  not  give  to  his  child  the 
thing  which  he  asks  for,  if  it  will  prove  hurtful  or  perilous  tQ,him.  In  our  ignorance 
we  may  pray  'to  God  for  such  things  as  would  be  injurious  to  us,  in  which  case  it  is 
well  for  us  to  be  denied.  Thus  the  request  of  St.  Paul  was  not  granted,  though  his 
prayer  was  graciously  answered  (2  Cor.  xii.  7 — 9).  On  the  other  hand,  the  clamorous 
cry  of  the  unbelieving  and  self-willed  Israelites  for  flesh  was  acceded  to,  to  their  sore 
injury  (Numb.  xi.  4 — 6,  31 — 34 ;  Ps.  cvi.  15).  3.  This  limitation  allows  a  large  sphere 
for  the  exercise  of  prayer.  There  are  many  things  which  we  know  are  "  according  to 
his  will,"  and  these  are  the  most  important  things  ;  e.g.  supplies  for  bodily  and  tem- 
poral needs,  forgiveness  of  sins,  grace  to  enable  us  to  do  or  to  bear  his  will,  guidance 
in  our  quest  of  truth  and  in  our  way  of  life,  the  sanctification  of  our  being,  and 
possession  of  an  inheritance  in  heaven.  We  may  seek  the  salvation  of  others,  the 
extension  of  the  Redeemer's  kingdom,  and  the  final  triumph  of  his  cause  throughout 
the  world.    These  and  other  things  we  know  accord  with  his  will. 

III.  An  absukanoe  that  the  things  solicited  in  bitch  prateks  will  bb 
OR  anted.  "And  if  we  know  that  he  heareth  us  whatsoever  we  ask,  we  know  that  we 
have  the  petitions  which  we  have  asked  of  him."  Alford  calls  attention  to  the  present, 
"  we  have  the  petitions,"  with  the  perfect,  "  which  we  have  asked  of  him."  "  The 
perfect  reaches  through  all  our  past  prayers  to  this  moment.  All  these '  we  have; '  not 
one  of  them  is  lost :  he  has  heard,  he  has  answered  them  all :  we  know  that  we  have 
them  in  the  truest  sense,  in  possession."  It  is  important  to  bear  in  mind  here  the 
character  of  those  to  whom  St.  John  writes.  They  are  genuine  Christians  ;  possessors 
of  Jesus  Christ,  and  of  eternal  life  in  him.  Their  will  is  that  God's  will  may  be  done. 
In  them  is  fulfilled  the  inspiring  assurance  of  the  sacred  psalmist :  "  Delight  thyself  in 
the  Lord ;  and  he  shall  give  thee  the  desires  of  thine  heart."  In  whomsoever  this 
character  is  realized,  the  desires  are  in  harmony  with  the  will  of  God,  and  the  things 
solicited  in  prayer  are  such  as  God  takes  pleasure  in  bestowing  and  man  is  blessed  in 
receiving.  And  this  assurance  which  the  apostle  expresses  is  confirmed  by  the 
experience  of  the  godly  in  all  ages  (cf.  Exod.  xxxii.  11 — 14,  31 — 34;  Numb.  xi.  1,  2; 
1  Kings  xvii.  17—24 ;  xviii.  42—45 ;  2  Kings  iv.  28—36 ;  Ps.  cxvi.  1—8 ;  Isa. 
xxxviii.  1 — 8 ;  Dan.  ix.  20 — 23 ;  Acts  xii.  1 — 17).  Let  us  seek  a  character  like  that 
indicated  by  the  apostle  (vers.  11 — 13),  and  then  this  inspiring  and  strengthening 
"  confidence  toward  God  "  may  be  ours  also. — W.  J. 

Vers.  16, 17.—  The  Christian's  prayer  for  his  hrethren.  "  If  any  man  see  his  brother 
sin  a  sin  which  is  not  unto  diath,"  etc.  Having  expressed  his  assurance  as  to  the 
efficacy  of  the  prayers  of  Christians  generally  (vers.  14,  15),  the  apostle  here  brings 
forward  a  special  case  in  which  prayer  may  be  beneficently  exercised,  viz.  on  behalf 
of  an  erring  brother.    Notice — 

L  The  occasion  of  prater  for  the  brethren.    We  do  not  mean  that  St.  John 


"  brother  "  to  those  who  are  believers  in  Christ — Christian  brethren,  or  take  it  in  iti 


166  THE  FIBST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  JOHN.     [oh.  v.  1—21. 

broadest  sigDification  of  our  fellow-men,  it  is  true  that  they  are  liable  to  sin.  Genuine 
Christians  are  so  (cf.  ch.  i.  8, 10).  The  grave  fact  of  temptation  to  sin,  the  pronenesa 
of  man  to  sin,  the  moral  weakness  in  some  respects  of  even  good  men,  the  history  of  the 
godly,  the  teachings  of  the  Bible,  and  our  own  experience,— these  show  our  liability 
to  sin.  2.  The  knowledge  of  a  brother's  iin.  "If  any  man  see  his  brother  sinning  a 
sin."  The  sin  spoken  of  is  not  a  secret  one.  The  knowledge  of  it  is  not  derived  either 
from  irresponsible  rumour  or  from  malignant  slander.  To  these  we  should  pay  no  heed. 
We  should  discredit  them,  and  seek  to  extinguish,  them.  But  it  is  immediate,  direct, 
and  certain.  3.  Prayer  for  a  hrother  leeavse  of  his  sin,  "  If  any  man  see  his  brother 
sinning  a  an  not  unto  dea'h,  he  shall  ask," etc.  Without  entering  at  present  upon  the 
inquiry  of  what  is  the  "  sin  unto  death,"  we  may  say,  with  Ebrard,  that  taking  the 
statements  and  directions  of  the  text  as  to  "  sin  not  unto  death "  "  in  their  simple 
meaning,  the  only  thing  laid  down  and  presupposed  ia  this — that  a  sin  which  is  not 
unto  death  may  be  surely  known  as  such.  That  any  particular  sin  which  another  may 
commit,  as  also  the  general  state  in  which  he  may  be  found,  is  not  unto  death — that 
he  may  stUl  repent  and  be  converted— this  may  be  easily  and  with  the  utmost  con- 
fidence known.  And  where  this  is  known  with  certainty,  where  there  is  no  necessity 
for  thinking  another  to  be  hardened  and  past  salvation,  there  must  prayer 'he 
offered-"  We  know  a  great  many  sins  which  men  commit  for  which  there  is  forgive- 
ness with  God,  and  in  all  such  cases,  unhindered  by  any  question  as  to  the  "  sin  unto 
death,"  we  should  pray  to  God  for  the  sinner.  But  more  than  this,  is  not  Barnes  right 
in  saying,  "  It  may  be  said  now  with  truth,  that  as  we  can  never  be  certain  respecting 
any  one  that  he  has  committed  the  unpardonable  sin,  there  is  no  one  for  whom  we  may 
not  with  propriety  pray  "  ?  Let  us,  then,  learn  from  our  text  what  our  conduct  should 
be  towards  a  sinning  brother.  We  are  not  to  sit  in  judgnient  on  him  and  condemn 
him,  not  to  spread  abroad  the  fact  of  his  sin,  not  to  turn  away  from  him  as  if  he  were 
unclean  and  we  holy,  not,  on  the  other  hand,  to  make  light  of  his  sin.  Such,  alas  1  is 
the  treatment  very  often  dealt  to  a  brother  who  has  sinned.  But  so  should  not  we  do. 
As  Christians,  our  duty  ia  to  pray  for  him.  Such  prayer  is  not  optional,  but  obligatory ; 
it  is  not  a  thing  which  we  may  do,  but  which  we  ought  to  do.  "  He  shall  ask."  In 
this  spirit  St.  Paul  exhorted  the  Galatian  Christians^  "  Brethren,  even  if  a  man  be 
overtaken  in  any  trespass,  ye  which  are  spiritual,  restore  such  a  one,"  etc.  (Gal.  vi.  1). 

II.  The  encouragement  to  pbay  fob  the  brotheb  who  has  sinned.  "  He  shall 
ask,  and  God  will  give  him  life  for  them  that  sin  not  unto  death."  How  unspeakably 
great  and  precious  is  the  blessing  which  by  our  prayers  we  may  secure  for  our  erring 
brother  I  As  a  result  of  our  petitions  on  his  behalf,  God  will  giant  him  forgiveness  of 
his  sins  and  confer  upon  him  spiritual  life.  How  exalted  and  glorious  a  boon  is  this  I ' 
The  knowledge  that  we  may  obtain  such  a  blessing  for  him  should  prove  a  powerful 
stimulus  to  us  to  pray  for  the  brother  who  has  sinned.  How  can  we  do  other  than 
pray  for  liim  when  our  prayers  may  have  such  a  glorious  issue  ?  "  My  brethren,  if  any 
among  you  do  err  from  the  truth,  and  one  convert  him ;  let  him  know,  that  he  which 
converteth  a  sinner  from  the  error  of  his  way  shall  save  a  soul  from  death,  and  shall 
cover  a  multitude  of  sins  "  (Jas.  v.  19,  20). 

III.  1'HE    limitation    to    OUB    PKAYEE8     FOB     THE     BBOTHBB     WHO     HAS     SINNED. 

"  There  is  a  sin  unto  death :  not  concerning  this  do  I  say  that  he  should  make  request." 
What  are  we  to  understand  by  the  "  sin  unto  death  "  ?  With  a  view  of  ascertaining 
this,  let  us  endeavour  to  fix  upon  the  meaning  of  "  death  "  here.  There  are  three  dis- 
tinct uses  of  the  word  in  the  sacred  Scriptures.  (1)  The  death  of  the  body.  (2)  That 
death  of  the  spirit  which  is  common  to  all  men  apart  from  the  renewing  grace  of  God. 
"  Dead  by  reason  of  trespasses  and  sins."  (3)  The  eternal  death,  which  is  the  antithesis 
of  the  ''eternal  life"  which  God  gives  through  Jesus  Christ  (vers.  11 — 13).  Now, 
"  death  "  in  the  text  canuot  mean  either  (1)  the  death  of  the  body,  for  that  is  the  lot  of 
all  men ;  or  (2)  the  spiritual  death  above  mentioned,  for  every  sin  tends  to  such  death. 
If  we  are  right  thus  far,  and  in  this  also  that  the  death  must  be  the  antithesis  of  the 
life,  we  conclude  that  it  must  be  that  death  which  is  the  just  retribution  of  those  who 
have  deliberately  and  resolutely  rejected  the  Christ.  Such  a  sin  involves  the  abiding 
loss  of  the  li:e  which  is  derived  through  him  (ver.  12).  The  rejection  of  the  Christ 
necessarily  involves  the  renunciation  of  the  life.  If  a  man  deliberately  and  decidedly 
>  gee  our  homily  on  ver.  12. 


OH.  V.  1—21.]     THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  JOHN.  167 

rejects  the  only  Being  through  whom  he  can  ohtain  eternal  life,  what  remains  for  him 
but  to  abide  in  the  dark  night  of  death  ?  For  such  persons  St.  John  does  not  encourage 
us  to  pray.  He  neither  prohibits  nor  commands  us  to  pray  for  thtm.  The  negation 
belongs  to  the  '♦  I  say,"  not  to  the  "  he  should  make  request."  "  Not  concerning  this 
do  I  say  that  he  should  make  request."  The  encouragement  to  offer  prayer  for  those 
whose  sin  is  not  unto  death  is  withheld  iu  respect  to  prayer  for  those  who  hare  committed 
the  sin  unto  death, 

CoNQLUBioN.  1,  Let  the  fact  that  it  is  possible  to  commit  a  sin  which  is  unto  death 
lead  us  to  watchfulness  and  prayer  against  every  sin  and  all  sin.  Beware  of  beginnings 
in  evil.  2.  Let  this  gracious  assurance  as  to  the  result  of  prayer  for  those  wlio  have 
sinned  lead  us  to  be  often  at  the  throne  of  grace  on  behalf  of  our  brethren. — W.  J. 

Vers.  18 — 20-,-~The  suhlimeat  kximHedge.  "  We  know  that  whosoever  is  born  of  God 
sinueth  not,"  etc.  There  are  certain  things  of  which  St.  John  writes  without  even  the 
faintest  tone  o{  hesitation  or  doubt,  with  the  calmest  and  firmest  assurance,  and  with 
the  accent  of  deep  conviction.  And  the  things  of  which  he  writes  with  so  much 
certainty  are  of  the  greatest  and  most  important.  So  in  the  paragraph  before  us  he 
utters  hia  triple  "  we  know  "  concerning  some  of  the  most  vital  and  weighty  questions. 
Let  us  notice  each  of  these  in  the  order  in  which  they  here  stand. 

L  Tb£  enowledoe  of  thb  characteb  and  condition  of  thb  children  of  God. 
"  We  know  that  whosoever  is  begotten  of  God  sinneth  not ;  but  he  that  was  begotten 
of  God  keepeth  himself,  and  the  wicked  one  touoheth  him  not."  Here  are  three  points 
for  consideration  concerning  true  Ohristians.  1.  jf%«r  eriginatitfnfrom  Qod.  They  are 
"begotten  of  God."  They  are  "called  children  of  God,"  and  are  such.*  2.  Their 
a^&tention/rom  sin,  "  Whosoever  is  begotten  of  Qoi  sinneth  not."  He  will  not  com- 
mit the  "sin  unto  death;"  and  in  proportion  as  he  partidpates  in  the  Divine  life  he 
will  shun  sin  in  any  form  (cf.  oh.  iii.  6 — 9 ;  and  see  our  remarks  on  ch.  iii.  6),  3. 
Thdr  freservaiianfrma  tht  toil  one.  ' "  He  that  was  begotten  of  God  keepeth  himself, 
and  the  wicked  one  toucheth  him  not."  Danger  is  clearly  implied  here.  "  Be  sober, 
he  vigilant;  your  adversary  the  devil,  as  a  roaring  lion,  walketh  about,  seeking  whom 
he  may  devour  ;  whom  resist  steadfast  in  the  feith."  "  Put  on  the  whole  armour  of 
God,  that  ye  may  be  able  to  stand  against  the  wiles  of  the  devU,"  etc.  (Eph,  vi. 
11 — 18).  "  Satan  transformeth  himself  into  an  angel  of  light."  Hence  the  danger. 
But  notice :  (1)  The  means  of  preservation.  "  He  that  was  begotten  of  God  keepeth 
himself."  He  is  sober  and  watchful  and  prayerful  in  order  that  he  may  not  be  surprised 
by  temptation  and  seduced  into  sin.  It  has  been  well  said  by  John  Howe,  "  He  that 
is  begotten  of  God  keepeth  hiinself  from  those  deadly  mortal  touches  which  would 
endanger  his  precious  life ;  that  is,  he  is  his  own  undeikeeper.  We  are  every  one  to  be 
our  brother's  keeper,  much  more  our  own ;  but  still  in  a  subordinate  sense,  subservient 
to,  and  dependent  upon,  the  Supreme  One.  Indeed,  it  were  a  kind  of  monstrous  thing 
in  the  creation,  that  there  should  be  so  noble  a  life  planted  in  \ia,  but  destitute  of  the 
self-preserving  faculty  or  disposition;  whereas  every  life,  how  mean  soever,  even  that 
of  a  worm,  a  gnat,  or  a  fly,  hath  a  disposition  to  preserve  itself."  Christians  are  "  kept 
by  the  power  of  God  through  faith  unto  salvation."  (2)  The  nature  of  the  preservation. 
"  The  wicked  one  toucheth  him  not."  This  does  not  signify  exemption  from  temptation, 
but  victory  over  it.  The  great  adversary  shall  not  touch  "  the  true-bom  child  of  God  " 
so  as  to  destroy  his  spiritual  life  or  effect  his  overthrow. 

II.  The  knowlbdqb  of  personal  filial  belationshp  to  God.  "  We  know  that 
we  are  of  God,  and  the  whole  world  lieth  in  the  wicked  one."  The  assurance  with 
which  the  apostle  writes  is  remarkable.  Not,  "  we  are  probably  of  God ; "  not, "  we  hope 
we  are  of  God,"  etc. ;  but  "  we  know  that  we  are  of  God,"  etc.  We  may  know  this: 
1,  By  our  consaiousness  of  our  Christian  character.  The  genuine  Christian  can  say  of 
his  spiritual  condition,  "  One  thing  I  know,  that,  whereas  I  was  blind,  now  I  see." 
He  is  conscious  of  his  faith  in  Christ.  "I  know  whom  I  have  believed,"  etc,  (2  Tim. 
i.  12).  He  feels  that  the  Saviour  is  precious  unto  him  (1  Fet.  ii.  7).  He  knows  that 
he  loves  the  Chiistian  brotherhood  ;  and  "we  know  that  we  have  passed  out  of  death 
into  life,  because  we  love  the  brethren."  He  is  conscious  of  his  sincere  desire  and 
audeavour  to  follow  Christ  as  his  great  Exemplar,  and  to  obev  him  as  his  Divine  Lord, 
'  Bee  our  homily  on  ch.  iiL  1. 


168  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  JOHN.      [oh.  v.  1— 2L 

2.  By  our  consciousness  of  our  filial  disposition  toward  God.  We  have  "received  tht 
spirit  of  adoption,  whereby  we  cry,  Abba,  Father."  Our  own  hearts  assure  ns  that  we 
trust  and  love  and  reverence  our  heavenly  Father.  Thus  "  we  know  that  we  are  oi 
Grod."  3.  By  the  contrast  between  ourselves  and  the  unchristian  world.  "  The  whole 
world  lieth  in  the  wicked  one."  We  have  already  endeavoured  to  indicate  the  character 
of  "  the  world  "  of  which  St.  John  writes.'  "  Concerning  the  world,  he  says,  not  merely 
that  it  is  of  the  wicked  one,  or  has  him  for  a  father,  and  bears  his  nature,  but  also 
that  it '  lies  in  him,'  that  is,  lies  in  his  bosom,  .  .  .  like  an  infant  on  the  bosom  of  a 
mother  or  a  father,  which  is  absolutely  given  up  to  its  parent's  power "  (Ebrard). 
The  true  Christian  knows  that  he  is  not  in  such  a  condition,  but  in  a  decidedly  oppo»li« 
one — that  he  "  abides  in  the  Son,  and  in  the  Father  "  (ch.  ii.  24). 

III.  The  knowledge  op  a  transcendent  pact,  and  op  obeat  pkesonal  benefits 
DERIVED  THROUGH  THAT  FACT.  "  And  WO  kuow  that  the  Son  of  God  is  come,  and 
hath  given  us  an  understanding,  that  we  know  him  that  is  true,"  etc.  Here  are  four 
points  which  require  our  attention.  1.  That  tht  Son  of  Qod  came  into  our  world, 
"  We  know  that  the  Son  of  God  is  come."  (This  great  fact  has  already  e.\gaged  our  atten- 
tion in  our  homily  on  ch.  iv.  9 — 11,  and  the  apostle's  assurance  of  it  ill  that  on  ch.  iT. 
14.).  2.  That  the  Son  of  God  hath  given  to  us  spiritual  discernment  that  we  might  krtoui 
God.  "  And  hath  given  us  an  understanding,  that  we  know  him  that  is  true."  This 
does  not  mean  that  he  has  given  to  us  any  new  faculty,  but  that  he  has  brought  our 
spiritual  faculties  into  a  right  condition  for  the  apprehension  of  the  Divine  Being. 
"  As  Christ  has  come  (in  the  sense  of  ch.  iv.  9),"  says  Ebrard,  "and  through  this  act  of 
love  has  kindled  love  in  us  (ch.  iv.  10),  thus  communicating  his  nature  to  us,  he  has 
furnished  us  with  the  understanding  necessary  in  order  that  we  may  know  God.  For 
God  is,  according  to  ch.  i.  5  and  iv.  8,  Light  and  Love ;  and  only  he  who  is  penetrated 
by  his  light,  and  kindled  by  his  love,  can  know  him."  God  was  not  the  Unknowable 
to  St.  John.  He  knew  him  through  the  revelation  of  Jesus  Christ,  by  the  conscious 
realization  of  his  presence  with  his  Spirit,  and  by  hallowed  communion  with  him. 

3.  Thai  we  are  in  vital  union  with  Qod  and  with  his  Son  Jesus  Christ.  "  We  are  in 
him  that  is  true,  even  in  his  Son  Jesus  Clirist."  (We  have  already  considered  what  it 
is  to  be  in  God,  in  our  homily  on  ch.  ii.  6.)  The  true  Christian  is  in  God  the  Father 
through  being  in  Christ  the  Son.  He  is  in  the  Father  through  the  mediation  of  the 
Son.  4.  That  the  Son  of  God  is  truly  and  properly  Divine.  "  This  is  the  true  God, 
and  eternal  life  "  (cf.  vers.  11 — 13). 

Let  us  seek  to  realize  the  exalted  and  blessed  knowledge  which  we  have  been  con- 
sidering. And  if  it  be  already  ours,  let  us  endeavour  to  possess  it  in  clearer  light  and 
fuller  measure.    "  Then  shall  we  know,  if  we  follow  on  to  know  the  Lord." — W.  J. 

Ver.  21. — Self-guardianship  against  idolatry.  "Little  children,  keep  yourselves 
from  idols."  The  connection  of  this  verse  with  the  preceding  seems  to  be  in  the 
antithesis  between  the  "  true  God  "  and  "  idols."  Loyalty  to  the  "  true  God  "  demands 
separation  from  all  false  gods.     Notice — 

I.  The  AFFECTIONATE  APPELLATION  BY  WHICH  THE  APOSTLE  ADDRESSES  HIS  READERS. 

"  Little  children."  "  He  parts  from  them  with  his  warmest  and  most  affectionate  word 
of  address."  This  form  of  address  suggests :  1.  The  spiritual  paternity  of  the  apostle. 
Probably  many  of  those  to  whom  he  was  writing  were  his  children  in  the  Lord,  begotten 
by  his  ministry — ^by  his  preaching,  his  prayers,  and  his  faith.  Very  tender  and  sacred 
is  this  relationship  (cf.  ch.  ii.  1 ;  1  Cor.  iv.  14,  15  ;  Gal.  iv.  19 ;  Philem.  10).  2.  The 
spiritual  affection  of  the  apostle.  This  is  delicately  yet  clearly  indicated  by  the  use  of 
the  diminutive.  3.  The  spiritual  authority  of  the  apostle.  His  relation  to  them,  his 
affection  for  them,  and  his  large  and  ripe  experience,  combined  to  invest  him  with  sacred 
and  commanding  influence.  And,  as  "  little  children,"  his  readers  needed  guidance,  and 
owed  to  him  obedience.' 

II.  The   IMPORTANT  EXHORTATION   WHICH   THE   APOSTLE  ADDRESSES  TO  HIS  READERS. 

"Keep  yourselves  from  idols."  Consider:  1.  TAe  nature  of  the  sin  to  he  guarded 
against.  Idolatry.  Originally  it  seems  to  have  comprised  two  things :  (1)  the  attempt 
to  represent  the  Divine  Being  by  visible  and  material  forms ;  (2)  the  offering  to  these 
fuimt  the  worship  which  belongs  only  to  God.  Some  are  in  danger  to-day  of  falling 
'  8ee  oar  homily  on  ch.  ii.  19 — 17. 


OH.V.  1— 21.]     THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  JOHN.  169 

into  idolatry  of  this  kind  through  the  use  in  worship  of  pictures  and  statues  designed 
to  represent  the  Saviotir.  But  the  essence  of  idolatry  is  giving  to  another  the  love  and 
reverence  and  devotion  which  are  rightly  due  to  God  alone.  Many  make  an  idol  of 
riches.  Money  is  their  god,  and  they  devote  all  their  powers  and  opportunities  to  the 
eager  pursuit  of  it.  "  Covetousness  ...  is  idolatry ."  Others  worship  pleasure.  They 
live  but  for  amusement,  and  endeavour  to  subordinate  everything  to  their  personal 
gratification.  And  others  make  honour,  or  fame,  or  power,  their  god.  We  may  make 
an  idol  of  some  beloved  relative  or  friend — wife,  husband,  or  child.  Or,  and  this  is  in 
some  respects  worst  of  all,  a  man  may  make  a  god  of  himself — ^may  think  first  and 
chiefly  of  himself,  study  his  own  interests  and  happiness,  and  love  himself  supremely. 
It  has  been  well  said,  "  Wooden  idols  are  easily  avoided,  but  take  heed  of  the  idols  of 
gold.  It  is  no  difficult  matter  to  keep  from  dead  idols,  but  take  heed  that  thou  worship 
not  the  living  ones,  and  especially  thyself}  for  as  soon  as  thou  arrogatest  to  thyself 
either  honour,  or  praise,  or  knowledge,  or  power,  thou  settest  thyself  in  the  place  of 
God,  and  he  has  declared  that  he  ♦  wUl  not  give  his  glory  to  another.' "  And  this  sin 
ofiferi  the  greatest  dishonour  and  wrong  and  insult  to  God.  2.  The  danger  of  the  sin  to 
he  guarded  against.  This  may  be  seen  from  the  following  considerations.  (1)  The 
worship  of  anything  less  than  God  cannot  satisfy  our  spiritual  nature.  God  has  made 
us  for  himself,  and  our  souls  cannot  rest  until  they  rest  in  him.  (2)  1'he  worship  of 
anything  less  than  God  dwarfs  and  degrades  man's  spiritual  nature.  The  exercise  of 
real  worship  transforms  the  worshipper  into  likeness  to  the  object  worshipped ;  e.g. 
the  idolatry  of  riches  will  gradually  mould  man  into  a  grovelling,  grasping  miser ;  of 
power,  into  a  ruthless,  despotic  tyrant,  etc.  (3)  The  worship  of  anything  less  than 
God  will  lead  to  bitter  disappointment  and  irretrievable  loss.  Sooner  or  later,  the 
idolater  will  be  awakened  from  his  delusions,  and  then  he  will  find  that  his  god  is  a 
poor  sham,  and  that,  as  for  himself,  he  has  "  forsaken  the  Fountain  of  living  waters,  and 
hawed  him  out  cisterns,  broken  cisterns,  that  can  hold  no  water."  And  how  terrible  is 
death  to  the  idolater  1  Death  may  take  from  him  the  wife  whom  be  loves  more  than 
he  loves  God,  or  the  child,  etc.  And  when  he  dies  he  must  leave  his  idols  behind 
him — his  money,  etc.  "  We  brought  nothing  into  the  world,  neither  can  we  carry 
anything  out."  "  When  he  dieth  he  shall  carry  nothing  away ;  his  glory  shall  not 
descend  after  him."  And  then  will  arise  the  bitter  cry,  "  Ye  have  taken  away  my 
gods;  and  what  have  I  more?"  3.  The  method  of  guarding  against  this  sin.  The 
most  effective  preservative  against  idolatry  is  growing  fidelity  to  God.  He  who 
assiduously  cultivates  reverent  attachment  and  hearty  devotion  to  him  caanot  fall  into 
idolatry.  "The  Lord  our  God  is  one  Lord:  and  thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God  with 
all  thy  heart,  and  with  all  thy  soul,  and  with  all  thy  mind,  and  with  all  thy  strength." 
"  Thou  shalt  have  no  other  gods  before  me."  "  Little  children,  keep  yourselves  from 
idols."— W.  J. 

Vers.  1 — 12. — Faith  and  the  Divine  testimony.  L  Faith.  1.  A  common  faith  with 
a  common  life  is  the  foundation  of  brotherly  love.  "  Whosoever  believeth  that  Jesus  is 
the  Christ  is  begotten  of  God :  and  whosoever  loveth  him  that  begat  loveth  him  also 
that  is  begotten  of  him."  A  general  aspect  is  given  to  the  truth.  Given  a  person  who 
(according  to  what  John  has  formerly  taught)  believes  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ,  it  can 
be  said  of  him  that  he  is  begotten  of  Ood,  i.e.  is  the  subject  of  a  Divine  life.  It  is 
implied,  but  not  expressed,  that  a  child  of  God  loves  the  Author  of  his  life.  This  love 
is  estended  to  him  that  shares  with  him  the  same  Divine  life.  There  is  thus  created 
a  brotherhood,  with  a  common  source  of  life  and  a  common  stream  of  life.  And  shall 
not  all  who  have  a  common  origin  and  common  movements  love  oiie  another?  2.  2%« 
reality  of  brotherly  love  is  proved  by  the  activity  of  obedience.  "  Hereby  we  know  that 
we  love  the  children  of  God,  when  we  love  God,  and  do  his  commandments.  For  this 
is  the  love  of  God,  that  we  keep  his  commandments."  There  is  here  personal  appli- 
cation of  the  truth.  When  can  we  say  that  we  love  the  children  of  God?  The  answer 
given  is  (the  converse  being  also  true),  when  we  love  Ood.  Have  we  some  real  love  ta 
God  ?  then  inseparable  from  that  is  love  to  his  children.  For  along  with  love  to  God 
goes  the  doing  of  his  commandments,  under  which  is  included  love  to  the  children  of 
God.  'I'his  is  the  love  of  God  in  its  working,  that  we  are  careful  about  doing  the  com- 
mandments of  God.    If  a  child  has  a  sincere  love  to  his  parents,  and  knows  that  th«* 


170  THE  FIKST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OP  JOHN,     [ok.t.1— £1 

wish  him  to  be  kind  to  his  brothers  and  sisters,  be  will  not  oppose  that  wish.  So  i( 
we  have  love  to  God,  and  know  that  it  is  his  will  that  we  should  extend  nur  love  to 
his  children,  we  shall  make  an  endeavour  in  that  direction.  Transitional  thought. 
"  And  his  commandmeats  are  not  grievous."  If  a  parent  loves  his  children,  he  will  not 
give  them  all  that  they  are  inclined  for;  but  he  will  lay  commandments  on  them,  t.e. 
he  will  lay  down  certain  rules  for  their  conduct,  lines  in  which  they  are  to  act,  which 
will  be  for  their  benefit,  and,  he  hopes,  their  ultimate  emancipation.  There  is  nothing 
grievous  in  these  commandments;  they  are  the  expression,  not  only  of  righteousness, 
but  of  kindness.  So  with  the  Divine  commandment.  If  God  had  not  loved  us,  he 
might  have  left  us  without  directions  for  our  life;  but  because  he  loved  us,  and  coald 
not  bear  to  see  ua  straying  in  devious  paths  to  our  destruction,  therefore  he  has  com- 
manded and  warned  us  well.  There  is  "  line  upon  line,  precept  upon  precept."  So  fai 
from  these  commandments  being;  grievous  in  their  nature,  they  are  beneficial,  emanci- 
pating. They  are  the  direct  roads  to  our  happiness.  They  are  not  arbitrarily  laid 
on  us,  but  are  thoroughly  reasonable  and  suited  to  our  nature.  Is  there  anything 
unreasonable  or  unnatiual  in  our  loving  the  God  of  out  life,  and  with  our  whole  soul? 
And,  loving  the  Father,  may  we  not  be  asked  to  love  also  those  who  share  with  us  the 
life  of  God?  3.  The  difficulties  (^obedience  which  are  presented  hy  what  the  world  U 
areeongiwed  ty  faith,  "  For  whatsoever  ia  begotten  of, God  overoometh  the  world; 
and  this  is  the  victory  that  hath  overcome  the  world,  even  our  faith."  The  apostle's 
thought  is  not  of  the  world  in  its  normal  state,  but  as  it  has  been  rriade  by  sin.  The 
world  is  that  of  which  the  pervading  spirit  is  forgeifulness  of  Ood.  "  The  wicked . . .  and 
all  the  nations  that  forget  God "  (Pa.  ix.  17).  Men  may  not  be  all  wicked  in  the 
highest  degree — deliberate  and  daring  in  sin ;  they  may  be  divided  against  each  other ; 
but  it  is  natural  to  all  alike  to  wish  to  banish  God  out  of  their  minds  as  ati  unwelcome, 
disagreeable  subject.  The  world  is  that  of  which  the  pervading  spirit  is  selfishness — ■ 
the  opposite  of  what  is  here  inculcated.  Men  may  not  be  all  malevolent  in  the  highest 
degree — devilish,  according  to  the  common  conception — ^but  it  is  natural  to  all  alike 
to  hurry  on  to  their  own  satisfaction,  without  regard  to  the  claims  of  others.  The 
world  is,  further,  that  in  social  condition  which  is  formed  hy  following  ungodly,  selfish 
tendencies.  Take  such  a  social  condition  as  is  presented  among  the  Jews.  Long  ago 
they  took  up  a  wrouK  position  with  regard  to  the  Messiah.  "  His  blood  be  on  us, 
and  on  our  children  1"  And  in  their  generations,  with  few  exceptions,  they  have 
stood  to  their  position.  Scattered  among  the  nations,  they  have  not  conformed  to  the 
creeds  of  the  nations.  A  common  sentiment  has  pervaded  them  in  many  lands. 
Centuries  of  neglect,  and  persecution  have  only  served  to  burn  into  their  minds  the 
conviction  that  their  forelatliers  were  in  the  right.  And  now  it  would  seem  like  a 
cutting  off  a  right  arm  to  acknowledge  the  Messiah.  Take,  again,  such  a  social  con- 
dition as  is  presented  in  the  Church  of  Borne.  It  is  well  organized,  is  restlessly  active, 
has  a  wonderful  power  of  reaching  minds,  and  yet  it  is  identified  with  a  system  which 
is,  to  a  great  extent,  in  the  name  of  Christ,  a  fiattery  of  the  human  heart.  Take  a 
quasi- Christian  conditiou  of  society.  Without  flagrant  irreli<iiousness  and  vice,  there 
is  a  worldly  tone  prevalent  in  families,  in  communities,  in  trades,  in  professions,  even 
in  Churches.  There  are  views  of  life  and  practices  that  tend  to  lessen  the  sense  of 
responsibility,  and  to  divide  men.  When  the  world  has  on  its  side  the  influences  of 
early  training,  of  numbers,  of  dignitaries,  of  daily  example,  it  is  a  formidable  power  to 
which  to  be  opposed.  And,  if  we  look  to  ourselves,  we  are  entirely  at  its  mercy.  But 
we  are  not  hopeless,  for  a  Divine  power  can  be  communicated  to  us,  and  all  within  us 
that  is  quickened  by  the  Divine  touch  overcometh  the  world.  What  God  does  is  to 
impiiit  life ;  what  we  have  to  do  is  to  exercise  faith.  We  lay  hold  on  what  is  outside 
of  us,  and  thus  we  conquer.  W-e  lay  hold  on  the  infinite  satisfaction  there  is  in  Christ, 
and  thus  we  are  not  clogged,  in  our  battle  with  the  world,  with  the  feeling  of  guilt. 
We  lay  hold  on  the  conquest  Christ  obtained  over  the  world.  There  is  presented  to 
our  faith  a  God  whom  we  are  powerfully  impelled  to  love.  Thus  situated,  the  com- 
mandments of  God  are  not  grievous.  We  may  be  said  to  conquer  the  world  when  no 
longer  worldly  ideas  are  influential  with  u-s.  And  when  we  have  taken  up  the  position 
of  faith,  the  world  becomes  only  the  means  of  our  discipline.  The  world  will  only  be 
conquered  in  the  fullest  sense  when  the  customs  of  society  and  influences  which 
permeate  it  are  auch  as  to  afford  the  greatest  help  to  remembering  God  and  living  foi 


OH.  V.  1—21.]     THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GBNERIL  OP  JOHN.  171 

the  good  of  others.  Appeal  to  experience.  "And  vrbo  is  he  that  oTercometh  the 
world,  but  he  that  believeth  that  Jesus  is  the  Son  of  God  ? "  "  Survey  the  whole 
world,  and  show  me  e<'en  one  of  whom  it  can  be  afiSrmed  with  truth  that  he  overcomes 
the  world,  who  is  not  a  Christian,  and  endowed  with  this  faith."  In  the  apostle's  day 
there  were  many  who  seemed  hopelessly  involved  in  heathen  customs  and  traditions; 
but  even  out  of  their  heathenism  they  reached  forth  the  hand  of  faith  tothe  incarnate 
Son  of  God,  and  conquered,  in  giving  up  their  heathen  life,  and  living,  according  to 
Christian  rule.  It  is  only  condescending  love,  apprehended  by  faith,  that  can  break 
the  spell  of  the  world. 

II.  The  Divine  testimony  to  the  object  o»  faith.  1.  iij  nature.  "  This  is  he 
that  came  by  water  and  blood,  even  Jesus  Christ  j  not  with  the  water  only,  but  with 
the  water  and  with  the  blood.  And  it  is  the  Spirit  that  beareth  witness,  because  the 
Spirit  is  the  tnith.  For  there  are  three  who  bear  witness,  the  Spirit,  and  the  water, 
and  the  blood:  and  the  three  agree  in  one."  The  Bible  is  not  so  plain  in  every  part 
that  he  that  runneth  can  read.  Peter  found  in  Paul's  writings  some  things  hard  to  be 
understood,  John  uses  simple  words,  but  it  is  not  always  easy  to  catch  his  meaning, 
The  present  passage  has  been  very  perplexing.  The  Imtoricai  basis  is  obvious.  Thers 
was  water  at  the  commencement  of  our  Lord's  ministry ;  there  was  blood  at  its  dose. 
He  came  by  water  as  baptized,  he  came  by  blood  as  crucified.  Water  signifies  life  in 
its  purity ;  blood  signifies  life  in  all  its  purity  sacrificed^  and  so  made  available  for  us. 
He  came  not  with  the  water  only ;  fur  his  pure  life  by  itself  could  not  be  available  for 
us.  But  he  came  with  the  water  and  with  the  blood;  for  it  was  as  sacrificed  tliat  his 
pure  life  was  available  for  us.  The  fact  that  he  had  a  pure  life  in  the  midst  of  sinful 
humanity. testified  to  his  being  the  Son  of  God.  And  so  at  his  baptism  there  was  the 
voice  from  heaven,  "  This  is  my  beloved  Son,  in  whom  I  am  well  pleased."  The  fact 
that  by  his  death  a  fountain  of  life  was  open  for  men  (significantly  there  gushed  from 
his  pierced  side  blood  and  water — first  blood,  and  then  water)  also  testified  to  his  being 
the  Son  of  God.  And  so  there  was  the  Divine  attestation  following  in  his  resurrection. 
That  is  historical  testimony  belonging  to  a  distant  century.  But  the  Spirit  is  the  ^ver- 
present  Witness,  being  the  Truth.  There  are  thus  three  present  witnesses.  There  is  the 
Spirity  placed  first ;  because  he  witnesses  through  the  water  and  the  blood.  There  is 
the  water,  witnessing  in  the  power  of  a  new  life  in  us.  There  is  the  hlood,  witnessing 
in  tedemptive  virtue  going  into  us  to  give  us  the  power  of  a  new  life.  And  the  three 
agree  in  one ;  their  testimony  converges  to  one  point,  viz.  to  the  new  life  in  us  being 
the  grand  proof  that  Jesus  is  the  Son  of  Ood.  2.  Its  sufficiency.  (1)  It  is  Divine. 
"  If  we  receive  the  witness  of  men,  the  witness  of  God  is  greater :  for  the  witness  of 
Gt)d  is  this,  that  he  hath  borne  witness  concerning  his  Son."  It  is  implied  that  we 
receive  the  witness  of  men.  If  three  human  witnesses  of  ordinary  intelligence  and 
probity  agree,  we  proceed  upon  their  testimony  even  in  matters  affecting  life  and 
death.  There  is  an  important  sense  in  which  the  condition  of  three  witnesses  is  ful- 
filled with  regard  to  the  Divine  testimony.  Apart  from  that  there  is  to  be  taken  into 
account  the  infinite  superiority  of  God  to  man.  He  is  not  a  man,  that  he  should  be 
deceived ;  he  is  not  a  man,  that  he  should  lie ;  and,  therefore,  when  he  gives  his  testi- 
mony concerning  his  Son,  he  should  be  believed.  (2)  It  is  in  consciousness,  "He 
that  -believeth  on  the  Son  of  God  hath  the  witness  in  him  :  he  that  believeth  not 
God  hath  made  him  a  liar ;  because  he  hath  not  believed  in  the  witness  that  God  hath 
borne  concerning  his  Son."  The  object  of  the  Divine  testimony  is  that  we  should 
believe  on  the  Son  of  God.  He  that,  accepting  the  Divine  testimony,  believes  on  the 
Son  of  God  is  made  independent  of  it  as  external.  He  hath  the  (Divine). testimony  in 
himself,  so  that  he  does  not  need  to  go  beyond  his  own  consciousness  for  testimony  to 
the  place  of  Jesus.  In  the  case  of  him  who  believes  not  God  who  hath  testified,  this 
testimony  in  consciousness  is  forbidden  by  the  very  nature  of  his  unbelief,  whidi  is 
making  God  a  liar — believing  what  men  say  in  ordinary  matters,  but  not  believing 
what  God  says  about  his  Son.  (3)  It  is  in  the  possession  of  life  in  Christ,  "  And  the 
witness  is  this,  that  God  gave  unto  us  eternal  life,  and  this  life  is  in  his  Son."  We 
have  here  a  better  disclosure  of  the  purport  of  the  testimony,  showing  it  to  be  fraught 
with  the  greatest  blessing.  It  is  testimony  regarding  God's  own  gift  of  life.  One 
element  in  life  is  the  enjoyment  of  the  Divine  favour ;  another  element  is  the  quicken- 
ing of  our  powers.    It  is  life  that,  even  in  what  is  begun  cf  it  here,  is  eternal  in  its 


172  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  JOHN.     [oh.  v.  1—21 

nature.  It  is  life  not  promised,  but  actually  giuen.  It  is  life  intended  for  our  appro- 
priation by  faith.  It  is  life  to  be  found  in  Christ,  by  whom,  though  free  in  reference 
to  us,  it  has  been  meritoriously  procured,  in  whom  also  its  nature  is  exhibited.  We 
who  have  appropriated  the  Divine  gift  in  the  Holder  and  Dispenser  of  it  can  testify  to 
his  being  more  than  man,  even  God  incarnate.  Practical  inference.  "  He  that  hath 
the  Son  hath  the  life ;  he  that  hath  not  the  Son  of  God  hath  not  the  life."  The  boon, 
which  is  of  unspeakable  value,  comes  with  the  possession  of  the  Son ;  therefore  the 
all-important  thing  is  to  possess  the  Son.  He  that  hath  the  Son  hath  the  life  gifted, 
enjoys  the  favour  of  God,  has  his  spiritual  powers  quickened.  He  that  hath  not  the 
Son  of  God  hath  not  the  life  gifted,  lies  under  the  Divine  disfavour,  has  his  spiritual 
powers  with  the  torpor  of  death  on  them.  And  the  two  states  are  the  poles  asuoder. 
Let  US  believe  on  the  Son  of  God,  and  we  are  at  the  pole  of  eternal  sunshine.  Let  us 
refuse  the  Divine  testimony,  and  we  are  at  the  opposite  pole  of  eternal  cold. — R.  F. 

Vers.  13 — 17. — Assurance.  I.  The  aim  op  the  Epistle  connected  with  assukancb. 
"These  things  have  I  written  unto  you,  that  ye  may  know  that  ye  have  eternal  life, 
even  unto  you  that  believe  on  the  Name  of  the  Son  of  God."  At  the  beginning  of  the 
Epistle,  the  apostle's  aim  was  stated  to  be  Divine  fellowship  and  completed  joy.  In 
looking  back,  he  feels  that  he  has  kept  his  end  in  view.  In  the  restatement  of  his  aim, 
he  goes  the  length  of  completed  joy.  Bej'ond  the  quickening  of  their  spiritual  life,  he 
has  aimed  at  their  having  the  joy  of  knowing  that  they  had  the  life  eternal  actually 
begun  in  them.  He  has  given  them  certain  marks  (usually  introduced  by  "herein") 
by  which  to  make  clear  to  them  their  Divine  birth,  or  possession  of  the  Divine  life  as 
believers  on  the  Name  of  the  Son  of  God.  When  we  have  the  right  elements  in  our 
life,  and  can  make  a  correct  diagnosis  of  them,  we  have  comfort.  We  are  indebted  to 
the  apostle  yet  for  the  help  he  has  given  us,  in  this  Epistle,  to  the  right  reading  oi 
•ur  life. 

II.  Assurance  in  kblation  to  peateb.  1.  Confidence  of  leing  heard.  "  And  this 
is  the  boldness  which  we  have  toward  him,  that,  if  we  ask  anything  according  to  his 
will,  he  heareth  us."  Knowing  that  we  have  the  Divine  life,  we  are  reasonably  bold 
toward  God,  as  children  are  bold  toward  their  parents.  Our  boldness  comes  out 
especially  in  our  asking.  We  are  full  of  wants,  and  so  we  need  to  be  constantly 
asking.  We  ask  in  the  confidence  of  being  heard.  If  we  ask  anything,  he  heareth  us — 
which  has  only  this  limitation,  that  we  ask  according  to  God's  vnll  (not  properly  a 
limitation ;  for  God's  will  is  our  highest  good).  If  we  are  to  ask  according  to  God'g 
will,  then  the  meaning  of  that  is  that  we  are  to  have  our  desires  in  a. proper  state — to 
have  them  educated  up  to  God's  will.  We  are  to  have  them  chastened  by  proper  sub- 
mission to  God's  appointments ;  and  we  are  to  have  them  thoroughly  enlightened,  so 
that  we  desire  with  God,  and  up  to  the  largeness  of  the  Messing  that  he  holds  out  to  us. 
As  Jesus  was  praying  in  a  certain  place,  after  he  ceased,  the  disciples,  filled  with  a 
sense  of  their  own  deficiencies,  said,  "  Lord,  teach  us  to  pray."  It  is  not  the  language 
of  our  prayers  that  we  need  to  have  improved,  so  much  as  our  simple  responsiveness  to 
the  Divine  will.  2.  Certainty  of  having  our  petitions.  "  And  if  we  know  that  he 
heareth  us  whatsoever  we  ask,  we  know  that  we  have  the  petitions  which  we  have 
asked  of  him."  We  have  actually  presented  our  petitions  in  confidence  of  being  heard : 
how  do  we  stand  ?  We  know  that  we  are  richer  than  we  were  before.  Hannah  rose  to 
accord  with  the  Divine  will,  and,  knowing  that  she  had  her  petition,  it  happened  to  the 
"  woman  of  a  sorrowful  spirit "  that  "  her  countenance  was  no  more  sad."  The  Master 
was  in  perfect  accord  with  the  Divine  will ;  and  he  had  his  every  petition.  "  And  I 
knew  that  thou  hearest  me  always  "  (John  xi.  42).  In  so  far  as  we  resemble  him,  in 
confidently  expressing  the  Divme  will,  shall  we  know  ourselves  to  be  richer  for  our 
prayers. 

III.  AssuKANCB  IN  SPBCIAL  RBT,ATiON  TO  INTERCESSION.  1.  Promise.  "  If  any  man 
see  his  brother  sinning  a  sin  not  unto  death,  he  shall  ask,  and  God  will  give  him  life 
for  them  that  sin  not  unto  death."  This  is  asking  suggested  by  the  brotherly  love 
which  the  apostle  has  been  inculcating.  Have  we  any  ground  of  confidence  to  go  upon 
in  asking  for  a  brother?  We  have  here  very  distinct  ground  pointed  to,  even  in  the 
case  of  a  brother  who  is  seen  sinning  a  sin.  It  is  not  a  sin  by  which  he  is  wholly 
deprived  of  life,  but  a  sin  by  which  his  life  is  regarded  as  iu  part  suspended.    He  i» 


OH.  V.  1—21.]       THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  JOHN.  173 

seea  by  one  who  Is  united  to  him  by  the  tie  of  Christian  brotherhood,  who  does  not 
regard  him  with  unconcern,  who  is  moved  by  the  sight  to  ask  for  him  restoration  of 
life.  The  promise  is  that  the  asker  will  be  the  instrument  of  giving  life  to  those 
within  the  brotherhood  of  whom  it  can  be  said  that  thej  sin  not  unto  death.  2. 
Limitation  of  the  promise.  "  There  is  a  sin  unto  death:  not  concerning  this  do  I  say 
that  he  should  make  request."  This  must  be  taken  in  close  connection  with  the 
context.  The  reference  is  simply  to  the  brotherhood.  Are  we  warranted  in  all  cases 
to  pray  for  an  erring  brother,  in  the  expectation  that  we  shall  be  the  means,  under  God, 
of  giving  him  life?  The  promise  does  not  go  that  length.  A  (hitherto)  recognized 
member  of  the  brotherhood  may  unhrother  himself,  may  cut  himself  off  from  fellowship 
with  God,  by  denying  (let  us  say)  the  force  of  the  Incarnation.  In  such  a  case,  the 
apostle  does  not  say  that  we  are  to  make  request  (familiarly)  for  him  as  for  a  brother. 
The  virtue  that  there  is  in  brotherhood  and  in  brotherly  intercession  is  there  lost ;  and 
he  is  really  to  be  dealt  with  as  one  unhrothered.  That  is  not  to  say  that  we  are  not 
to  pray  for  him  at  all ;  for  we  are  to  pray  for  all  men.  3.  Large  scope  of  the  promise. 
"  All  unvighteousness  is  sin :  and  there  is  a  sin  not  unto  death."  "  Sin  "  is  a  wide  word ; 
it  includes  all  violation  of  right.  Every  unbrotherly  expression  that  we  use  is  an  offence 
against  God.  There  is  thus  abundant  room  for  the  exercise  of  intercession.  There  is 
sinning  through  many  degrees  without  sinning  mortally.  Let  us,  then,  realize  what  is 
in  our  power.  A  brother,  to  our  knowledge,  sins  even  seriously.  He  does  not  sin,  in 
our  judgment,  so  as  to  put  the  Incarnate  One  decisively  away  from  him ;  but  he  sins 
80  as  seriously  to  interrupt  fellowship  with  God,  which  is  his  Ufe.  As  belonging  to  the 
same  privileged  circle,  we  have  a  part  to  perform.  We  have  to  intercede  with  God  on 
bis  behalf.  We  have  to  intercede  confidently ;  for  the  promise  of  our  giving  him  life  is 
clearly  applicable.  In  answer  to  our  intercession  there  will  be  a  wakening  of  him  up 
out  of  the  slumber  that  has  been  upon  him,  so  that  he  enjoys  renewed  fellowship  with 
God.— R.  F. 

Vers.  18 — 21. — The  three  certainties  of  the  Epistle.  I.  The  cebtaintt  of  the  poweb 
ov  THE  Divine  birth.  "  We  know  that  whosoever  is  begotten  of  God  sinneth  not ; 
but  he  that  was  begotten  of  God  keepeth  him,  and  the  evil  one  toiicheth  him  not." 
This  is  doctrine  which  has  already  been  laid  down.  In  ch.  iii.  6  sinlessness  is  connected 
with  human  action;  here  it  is  connected  with  Divine  action.  There  is  sin^  as  in  the 
context  has  been  admitted,  within  the  Christian  circle ;  but  it  is  according  to  the  norm 
of  the  Divine  life  not  to  sin.  The  language  that  is  added  here  is  unusual.  Westcott 
would  remove  its  unusual  aspect  by  thinking  of  Christ,  as  the  Begotten  of  God,  opposed 
to  the  evil  one.  But  it  is  God  that  is  opposed  to  the  evil  one  in  the  following  verse; 
and  the  mere  change  of  tense  does  not  prepare  for  the  introduction  of  Christ.  In 
passing  from  the  now  begotten  of  God  to  the  past  begotten  of  God,  we  naturally  think 
of  the  same  person,  only  at  a  different  moment,  viz.  that  of  the  commencement  of  the 
Divine  life.  The  new  nature  then  received  (ascribing  all  to  God),  it  keepeth  him ;  and 
the  evil  one,  having  nothing  in  the  new  nature  to  lay  hold  on,  toucheth  him  not.  He 
is  indeed  tempted;  but  he  has  a  defence  against  temptation  in  his  quickened  sensibili- 
ties and  activities. 

II.  The  cebtaintt  op  oue  possessing  life  pbom  God.  "  We  know  that  we  are  of 
God,  and  the  whole  world  lieth  in  the  evil  one."  There  is  here  the  strength  of 
personal,  assurance.  We  know  that  we  are  of  God ;  we  know  that  we  draw  our  life 
from  the  highest  source.  But  there  is  also  the  certitude  of  Christian  pessimism — the 
worst  view  of  the  world.  In  the  Christian  judgment,  the  whole  world  lieth  in  the  evil 
one.  It  is  not  only  touched  by  the  evil  one  (ver.  18),  but  the  evil  one  is,  as  it  were, 
the  circumambient  element  in  which  it  passively  lies,  and  by  which  it  is  completely 
moulded  in  all  its  systems  and  customs  and  institutions.  This  is  not  a  cheering  view 
to  take  of  the  world ;  but  it  would  be  less  cheering  to  think  that  the  world  is  only  as 
God  intended  it  to  be — that  it  has  not  suffered  from  a  fall.  The  counterbalancing  truth 
is  that,  bad  as  it  is,  it  is  loved  by  God,  and  is  susceptible  of  redemption.  And  the 
Christian  optimism,  which  we  are  warranted  to  entertain,  is  this — that  the  world  in 
all  its  thinking  and  fashions,  will  yet  be  on  the  right  side,  not  fraught  with  peril  but 
fraught  with  deliverai  ce  to  souls.  ' 

III.  ThS   ODfiTAINTY    OF  THE  BEVEALINO  POWEB  OF  THE   InOABN^TION.      "And   we 


174  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  JOHK.      [oh.  T.  1—21 

know  that  the  Son  of  God  is  come,  and  hath  givett  us  an  ttndefstandtng,  that  we  know 
him  that  is  true,  and  we  are  in  him  that  is  true,  even  in  his  Son  Jesus  Christ.  This  is 
the  true  God,  and  eternal  life."  Thb  is  the  third  "we  know"  which  the  apostla 
recalls.  We  know  that  the  Incarnation  is  a  fact.  Through  the  Incarnation  oiu 
understanding  is  Christianized,  that  we  know  him  that  is  true,  which  is  equivalent 
to  being  in  him  that  is  true,  which  again  is  equivalent  to  being  in  his  Son  Jesus 
Christ.  This  God  whom  Jesus  Christ  reveals,  this  is  the  true  God,  and  eternal  life. 
The  proof  of  the  Divinity  of  Christ  here  lies  in  this,  that  in  his  incarnation  he 
absolutely  reveals  God  as  Father,  as  infinite  Love,  which  is  the  highest  truth  about 
the  nature  of  God,  and  also  absolutely  reveals  eternal  life,  which  is  the  highest 
happiness  of  God,  he  being,  according  to  the  thought  of  ver.  11,  the  receptacle  of  It 
for  us.  From  the  centre  all  things  are  made  capable  of  ultimate  explanation.  The 
world,  as  it  lies  in  the  evil  one,  may  seem  to  call  up  gloofliy  thoughts  of  God ;  but  the 
Incarnation,  the  fact  that  Christ  is  come,  and  come  into  the  midst  of  the  world  for  its 
redemption,  calls  up  bright,  cheering  thoughts  of  God.  Parting  word.  "  My  little 
children,  guard  yourselves  from  idols."  In  parting,  he  naturally  fixes  on  the  word  of 
special  affection  for  his  readers.  In  ver.  18  he  put  forward  Divine  keeping — "  he  that 
was  begotten  of  God  [the  Divine  birth]  keepeth  him."  Here  he  puts  forward  self- 
keeping — "  guard  ['  keep,'  with  added  emphasis]  yourselves,"  ».«.  in  the  use  of  meani. 
The  idols  against  which  we  are  to  be  on  our  guard  are  the  vaiti  shadows  that  usurp  the 
place  of  the  true  God.  In  connection  with  heathen  idolatry,  there  are  such  false  repre- 
sentations of  God  as  these — that  he  is  to  be  apprehended  by  sense ;  that  he  is  confined 
to  temples  made  with  hands ;  that  he  has  a  divided  sovereignty ;  that  he  takes  delight 
in  impurities  and  in  the  blood  of  human  victims.  In  connection  with  idolatry,  in  the 
wide  sense  here  to  be  thought  of,  there  are  such  fake  representations  of  God  as  these-^ 
that  he  is  pleased  with  our  taking  selfish  gratification;  that  he  does  not  extend  his 
interest  beyond  our  home,  or  some  narrow  circle  with  which  we  are  connected ;  that  he 
is  indifferent  to  our  happiness;  that  he  does  not  notice  our  actions,  and  will  not  bring 
us  into  judgment  for  them.  Let  us  oppose  to  these  false  representations  of  Ctod  the 
representation  given  in  the  Incarnation.  Let  us  brood  over  this  great  fact  till  all  vaiti 
shadows  fiee  away,  and  God  comes  forth  to  us  in  all-the  splendour  of  his  lore.  This 
is  a  word  suitable  for  parting.  We  may  think  of  John,  noi"  nmid  the  realities  o< 
heaven,  still  beseeching  us,  and  with  greater  intensity,  to  tmware  Of  the  deceitfOl 
•hadows  that  are  here  as  often  taken  for  God. — B.  F, 


HOMILETICAL  INDEX 

TO  THS 

ElEST  EPISTLE  GENEEAL  OE  JOHN. 


C3HAPTEB  L 

rans  'Aoi 

The  Life              ...           ...           ...  6 

The  Message        ...           ...           ...  7 

"  If  ...  if: "  which  ehftll  it  be?      ...  8 

The  Apostle's  Aim  and  Method        ...  9 

The  Great  Message             ...            ...  11 

The  Condition  and  Gonsequenoes  of 

Fellowship  with  Ctod      ...           ...  13 

Man's  Attitude  towards  hid  own  Sins  14 

Introduction          ...            ...            ...  16 

Message  from  Ohrist  brought  to  bear 

on  Fellowship  with  Ood...           ...  17 

CHAPTER  n. 

God's  Bemedy  for  Sin         ...            ...  S9 

Verification    verified;    or.    Knowing 

that  we  know  God          ...           ...  30 

Great  Professions  involve  Great  Obli- 
gations              ...            ...            ...  31 

Love  and  Light    ...            ...            ...  83 

"Little   Ones,"   "Young    Men,"  and 

"Fathers"        ...  34 

Love  of  the  World  forbidden             ...  35 
A  Last  Hour ;  or,  the  Divine  Enclosure 

of  Bevealed  Time            ...            ...  87 

"  Many  Antichrists "           ...            ...  38 

Deserters,  Self-Eevealeis    ...            ...  40 

Unction  ...            ...            ...            ...  42 

The  Greatest  Possible  Lie  ...            ...  43 

Having  the  Father              ...            ...  43 

Duty  annexed  to  Privilege                ...  46 

Eternal  Life         ...            ...            ...  47 

Ke-boraLn           •«           •••           •••  49 


rAOB 

Our  Advocate  and  Propitiation  .,.  SO 
The  True  Knowledge  of  God  and  its 

Infallible  Proof ...            ...            ...  52 

Christian  Profession  and  Consequent 

Obligation        ...           ...           ...  54 

Living  in  Light  and  Love  ...           ...  54 

Seasons  of  Life  and  their  Appropriate 

Spiritual  Experiences      ...            ...  55 

An  Apostolic   Prohibition,   and   the 

Beason  thereof ...           ...           ...  97 

The  Unotion  from  the  Holy  One      ...  58 

Sin  supposed :  Bin  dealt  with           ...  60 

The  Commandment  of  Brotherly  Love  64 

The  Great  Danger  of  Christians       ...  65 

Antiohri»t             ...            ...            „.  67 

OHAPTEB  IXL 

"  Wnat  Manner  of  Love  I "...            „.  7« 

The  Hope :  its  Purifying  Power  ...  78 
Sinning  in  every  Way  Incompatible  with 

the  Christian  Life           ...            ...  79 

The  World's  Hatred  of  Christians    ...  81 

Love  others,  for  God  hath  loved  thee  I  82 

The  Privileges  of  Christian  Loyalty...  84 

Outward  Precept  and  Inward  Life    ...  86 

«  Behold  what  Manner  of  Love  I "  ...  86 
The  Present  and  the  Future  of  the 

Good 8g 

Dissuasives  from  Sin           ...            ...  89 

Love  the  Evidence  of  Life  ...            ...  91 

The  Exhibition  and  Obligation  of  True 

Love et 

The  Judicial  Funotioa  of  Oonaoienoe  M 


DTOEX. 


BighteonmeM  and  Sin  in  Belation  to 

Children  of  God  ...  m« 

The  Sign  of  Biotherly  Lore  ». 

OHAPTEB  IV. 


94 

98 


Teats  of  True  or  False  Prophets       m.    105 
The  Power  of  Trying  the  Spirits      ...    107 
Love      ...  ...  ...  ...    108 

God-likenesa  the  Seal  of  »  Divine  In- 
dwelling ...  ...  ...    110 

The  Historic  Basis  of  the  Christian 
Testimony         ...  ...  ...    Ill 

Divine  Love  a  Home  for  the  Soul,  and 
a  Force  within  it  ...  ...    112 

Love's  Boldness  in  the  Day  of  Judg- 
ment ...  ...  ...  ...    114 

Creed  and  Life:  the  Belation  between 
them   ...  ...  ...  ...    lis 

Love  to  Man  the  Expression  of  Love 

to  God  117 

The  Victory  of  the   Christian  over 
Antiohristian  Teachers    ...  ...    119 

The  Supreme  Manifestation  of  Love       120 
The  Great  Mission  of  Christ  m.    121 

The  Love  of  God  ...  ...  m.    122 

The  Victory  of  Love  over  Fear        ...    124 
God's  Love  and  ours  ...  ...    125 

The  Spirit  of  Truth  and  the  Spirit  of 
Brror  ...  ...  ...  ...    126 

Threefold  Beoommendation  of  theDuty 
•f  Loving  one  another     ...  w.    130 


CHAPTBB  V. 

rAos 

The  Victory  of  Faith          ...            ...  144 

The  Divine  Witness  objectively  given  145 
.  The  Divine  Witness  subjectively  veri- 
fied     ...            ...            ...            ...  147 

Human  and  Divine  Testimony  com- 
pared ...            ...            ...            ...  143 

On  Believers  knowing  tliat  they  have 

Eternal  Life      ...            ...            ...  150 

Liberty  and  Prevalence  in  Prayer    ...  151 
Intercessory  Prayer:   its  Sphere  and 

its  Issues           ...           ...           ...  152 

The  Strong   Foe  and   the  Stronger 

Friend               ...            ...            ...  154 

Life's  Hardest  Problems  solved        ...  155 

Beware  ofthe  Idols  I   Closing  Warning  157 
The    Season   and    the    Evidence    of 

Brotherly  Love ...            ...            ...  158 

The  Victorious  Life            ...           ...  159 

The  Fourfold  Witness  to  the  Divine 

Sonship  of  Jesus              ...            ...  161 

The  Supreme  Posaossion     ...           ...  162 

The    Christian's   Confidenoe   toward 

God  in  Belation  to  Prayer            ...  164 

The  Christian's  Prayer  for  his  Brethren  165 

The  Snblimest  Knowledge ...           ...  167 

Self-Guardianship  against  Idolatry  ...  168 

Faith  and  the  Divine  Testimony      ...  169 

Assurance             ...           ...           ...  172 

The  Three  Certainties  of  the  Epistle  173 


THE 


PULPIT    COMMENTARY, 


EDITED   BY  THE 


VERY  JIEV.  11.  D.  M.  SPENCE,  D.D., 


DEAN  OF  GLOUCESTER  ■ 


AND   BY  THE 


REY.  JOSEPH    S.   EXELL,  M.A, 


II.    JOHN. 

Exposition: 
By  EEV.    a.    PLUMMER,    M.A.,  D.D., 

MASTER  OF  UNIVERSITY  COLLEGE,    DURHAM. 

f  omildics : 
By   rev.    C.    CLEMANCE,   B.A.,  D.D. 

jljomilics  bg  l)arious  ^ntl)ois : 

REV.  W.  JONES.  REV.  R.  FINLAYSON,  B.A. 


FUKK    &    WAGNALLS    COMPANY 

Nev/  Yohk  and  Toronto. 


THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  OF  JOHN, 


EXPOSITION. 


This  letter  la  not  rightly  called  "  general." 
It  ii  not  addressed  to  the  whole  Ohnrch, 
but  either  to  gome  particular  Christian  com- 
munity, or  (more  probably)  to  an  individual. 
The  letter  hat  an  address  and  greeting,  ag 
is  the  case  with  most  of  the  Oatholic  Epistles 
and  the  Epistlei  of  St.  Paul.  This  address 
ocoupies  the  first  three  verses. 

Vers.  1 — 4. — 1.  Intboduotiok.  Addreu 
and  occasion. 

Ver.  1. — ^Th»  elder.  Not  an  unlikely 
appellation  to  have  been  given  to  the  last 
surviving  apostle.  Other  apostles  had  been 
called  elders ;  their  successors  also  were 
called  elders ;  but  St.  John  was  "  the  elder." 
That  there  was  a  second  John  at  Ephesus, 
who  was  known  as  "  the  elder,"  to  distin- 
guish him  from  the  apostle  and  evangelist, 
ia  a  theory  of  Eusebins,  based  upon  a  doubt- 
ful interpretation  of  an  awkwardly  worded 
passage  in  Fapiaa.  But  it  ia  by  no  means 
certain  that  any  such  person  ever  existed. 
IreitsBus,  who  had  reiid  Papias,  and  been 
intimate  .with  Folycarp,  the  disciple  of  St. 
John,  spems  to  know  nothing  of  any  such 
person.  Even  if  he  existed,  there  is  little 
reason  for  attributing  this  Epistle  to  him ; 
it  is  too  like  the  First  Epistle  to  be  by  a 
different  author.  Unto  the  eleot  lady.  This 
rendering  of  ^kAckt^  Kvpiif  should  be  re- 
tained :  iiAem-li  tannot  be  a  proper  name, 
on  account  of  ver.  13 ;  Kvpia  need  not  be 
one.  We  commit  ourselves  to  nothing  that 
is  disputable  if  we  render  Kvpia  "lady;" 
whereas  if  we  render  it  "  Kyria  "  it  is  open 
to  any  one  to  object  that  perhaps  the  lady's 
name  was  not  Eyria,  and  that  perhaps  she 
is  not  an  individual  at  all,  but  a  Church. 
She  is  eleot,  as  being  ehosen  out  of  the 
dominion  of  the  evil  one  (1  John  t.  19)  into 
the  Christian  family.  She  is  thus  reminded 
at  the  outset  of  the  relationship  between 
them;  she  is  •  Kember  of  that  eleet  oom- 
U.  MUk 


pany  of  believers  of  whioh  he  Is  the  elder. 
It  is  futile  to  ask  who  this  lady  is.  There 
have  been  various  conjectures,  some  of  them 
absurd;  but  we  know  no  more  than  the 
letter  itself  tells  us.  Evidently  the  lady 
and  her  ohildrea  were  not  among  the  great 
ones  of  the  earth ;  they  have  made  no  name 
in  the  world,  ▲nd  herein  lies  one  of  the 
chlof  lessons  of  the  Epistle.  Those  men- 
tioned in  it  were  ordinary  people,  such  as 
any  Church  in  any  generation  might  pro- 
duce. But  because  they  were  faithful,  and 
endeavoured  to  live  up  to  their  calling,  the 
apostle  loved  them,  and  all  true  Christians 
loved  them,  and  he  dared  to  assure  them 
that  "  grace,  mercy,  and  peace  from  God 
the  Father  and  from  Jesus  Christ  the  Son  of 
the  Father  "  should  be  their  portion.  Any 
Christian  minister  may  give  the  same  as- 
surance to  faithful  christians,  however 
humble  and  inconspicuous,  still.  They 
may  win  no  placo  in  the  history  of  the 
world  that  is  passing  away ;  but  they  have 
a  place  in  the  heart  of  him  who  abideth  for 
ever.  Note  the  characteristic  repetition  of 
the  characteristic  word  "truth,"  which 
occurs  five  times  in  the  first  four  verses.  All 
words  respecting  truth  and  bearing  witness 
to  it  are  characteristic  of  St.  John.  In  two 
of  the  five  eases  "  truth  "  has  the  article ; 
"  all  they  that  know  the  truth ;  for  the  truth's 
sake  which  abideth  in  ns."  It  is  not  im- 
possible that  "  the  truth  "  here  means  him 
who  is  the  Way,  the  Truth  and  the  Life. 
Christ  is  the  Revelation  of  Divine  truth  to 
man.  All  who  know  him  love  all  faithful 
Christians  for  his  sake.  To  the  apostle 
truth  was  not  a  mere  notion,  "or  »  set  of 
notions,  however  large  and  accurate ;  it  was 
no  theory  about  Ood,  but  God  himself,  and 
God  manifest  in  the  flesh  in  order  th^  we 
might  know  him  and  partake  his  life." 

Ver.  8. — ^In  truth  and  loTS,  Love,  as  we 
have  seen  in  the  First  Epistle,  is  another 
of  the  words  whleh  is  eharaeteristio  of  St. 


THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  OP  JOHN. 


p.— 13, 


Jobn,  "the  apostle  of  love;"  It  alio  oecnrg 
repeatedly  in  this  short  letter.  Truth  and 
love  are  noble  and  natural  companions. 
They  Must  not  be  aerered  on  earth  any 
more  ttum  in  heaven.  In  the  Godhead  the 
two  are  essentially  united :  "  God  is  Light " 
and  "  God  is  Lovo."  In  human  society  they 
ought  to  be  united:  truth  without  love  be- 
comes flold,  stem,  and  even  cruel;  love 
without  truth  becomes  unstable  and  capri- 
eioua 

Yer.  4. — ^I  lejoioe  greatly  that  I  have 
found  (certain)  of  thy  children  walking  in 
truth.  The  Revised  Version  is  certainly 
right  in  rendering  tipriKa"!  have  found" 
rather  than  "  I  found ; "  and  it  is  probably 
right  in  rendering  4x(ipv  "  I  rejoice  "  rather 
than  "I  rejoiced."  It  looks  Uke  the  idio- 
matic "epistolary  aorist,"  of  which  we  have 
had  probable  instancH  in  1  John  ii.  21  and 
26.  In  this  idiom  the  point  of  view  of  the 
recipient  of  the  letter  ii  taken  instead  of 
that  of  the  writer.  In  Latin  the  imperfect  is 
used  in  a  similar  way — leribebam,  dabamut; 
and  sometimes  the  perfect,  seripU,  miti,  and 
the  like  (comp.  Acts  xxiii.  30 ;  Phil.  ii.  25, 
28;  Philem.  11,  19,  21.  See  Moulton's 
Winer,  p.  347).  We  are  probably  to  under- 
stand this  verse  as  a  gentle  intimation  on 
the  part  of  the  elder  that  he  has  reason  to 
know  that  certain  others  of  her  ebildren  are 
not  walking  in  truth.  Through  the  elect 
lady's  too  indiscriminate  hospitality,  some 
of  her  ehildren  have  been  seduced  by  the 
deceivers  who  have  oome  to  her  bringing 
other  doctrine  than  that  of  Christ. 

Vers.  5 — 11. — 2.  Maih  Divisicnr.  Rehor- 
tation.  Having  thus  stated  what  has  led 
to  his  writing,  the  apostle  passes  on  to  the 
central  portion  of  the  letter  (vers.  5^11), 
which  consists  of  three  exhortations:  to 
love  and  obedience  (vers.  5,  6);  against 
false  dootrine  (vers.  7 — 9);  against  false 
charity  (vers.  10,  11).  The  transition  to 
this  practical  part  of  the  Epistle  is  indicated 
by  the  opening  particles,  "And  now." 

Ver.  5. — ^I  beseeoh  thee,  lady.  The  verb 
has,  perhaps,  a  tinge  of  peremptorinesg  about 
it  (^fHuTw) :  "  This  is  a  request  which  I  have 
a  right  to  make."  Bespecting  the  "  new 
commandment "  and  "  from  the  beginning," 
see  notes  on  1  John  ii.  7.  We  may  reason- 
ably suppose  that  St.  John  is  here  remind- 
ing her  of  the  contents  of  his  First  Epistle. 
The  parallels  between  this  Epitstle  and  the 
First  are  so  numerous  and  so  close,  that  we 
can  scarcely  doubt  that  some  of  them  are 
Bonsolously  made.  There  are  at  least  eight 
Buch  in  these  thirteen  verses,  as  may  be 
•een  from  the  margin  of  a  good  reference 
Bibla. 


Ver.  6.— And  this  is  love;  i.e.  the  love 
which  the  commandment  enjoins  consists 
in  this — active  and  unremitting  obedience. 
Just  as  in  the  sphere  of  thought  truth  must 
be  combined  with  love  (see  on  ver.  3),  so  in 
the  sphere  of  emotion  love  must  be  com- 
bined with  obedience.  Warm  feelings, 
whether  towards  God  or  towards  man,  are 
worse  than  valueless  if  they  are  not  united, 
on  the  one  hand  with  obedience,  on  tha 
other  with  truth.  This  was  the  elect  lady's 
danger;  in  the  exuberance  of  her  charity 
she  was  forgetting  her  obligations  to  the 
truth  and  the  commandment. 

Ver.  7. — ^For.  These  are  no  mere  gene- 
ralities, and  it  is  not  without  reason  that 
these  facts  are  insisted  upon.  The  dangers 
which  they  suggest  are  not  imaginary. 
Mischief  has  already  been  done  by  neglect- 
ing them.  "  Deceiver  "  (^irXivos)  here  means 
"seducer,"  one  who  causes  others  to  go 
astray.  The  cognate  verb  (jrAov^i')  is  fre- 
quent in  St.  John,  especially  in  the  Revela- 
tion (ii.  20;  xii.  9;  xiii.  14;  zix.  20;  xx. 
3,  8, 10),  and  conmionly  indicates  seduction 
into  grave  error  (comp.  1  John  L  8 ;  ii.  26 ; 
iii  7).  The  true  reading  Q^rjKeov)  gives 
"art  gone  forth,"  not  "are  entered"  (eiV- 
rjKBoii).  We  eannot  be  sure  that  "are  gone 
forth"  refers  to  their  leaving  the  true 
Church ;  although  1  John  ii.  18  inclines  us 
to  think  so :  it  may  mean  no  more  than  that 
they  have  gone  abroad  spreading  theii 
erroneous  tenets.  Just  as  "love  not"  in 
1  John  iiL  10, 14, 15  and  iv.  20  is  equivalent 
to  "hato,"  so  "confess  not"  here  is  equi- 
valent to  "deny."  These  seducers  deny 
"Jesus  Christ  as  coming  in  the  flesh,"  oi 
(as  the  Greek  may  possibly  mean)  they 
deny  "  Jesus  at  Chritl  coming  in  the  flesh." 
The  present  participle  (ifx^iuvov)  seems  to 
indicate  exaotly  the  position  of  some  of  the 
Gnostic  teachers.  The  Jew  denied  that  the 
Incarnation  had  taken  place — the  Messiah 
had  not  yet  oome.  The  Gnostic  deuied  that 
the  Incarnation  cmUd  take  place:  no  such 
Person  as  the  Christ  coming  in  the  flesh 
was  possible;  that  the  Infinite  should  be- 
come finite,  that  the  Divine  Word  diould 
become  fiesh,  was  inconceivable.  The 
teacher  who  brings  such  doctrine  as  this 
"is  the  deceiver  and  the  antichrist"  about 
whom  the  elder's  children  had  been  so  fre- 
quently warned.  In  the  strong  language 
which  St  Jobn  here  and  elsewhere  (1  John 
ii.  22,  26 ;  iv,  1)  uses  respecting  those  who 
deny  or  pervert  the  truth,  we  hear  the  voice 
of  the  "  son  of  thunder,"  ever  jealous  about 
whatever  touched  the  honour  of  his  Lord. 
Suoh  hatred  of  error  was  the  outcome  of  a 
firm  grasp,  and  profound  love,  of  the  truth. 
It  is  easy  to  imitate  and  to  exceed  such 
strength  of  language ;  but  let  us  beware  oi 
doing  s*  without  having  first  attainsd  to  m 


1—13.] 


THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  OP  JOHN. 


eqtml  eomprehension  of  the  truth,  and  an 
equal  affection  for  it.  The  strong  words  of 
the  apostle  are  the  expression  of  a  glowing 
conviction.  Our  strong  words  are  too  often 
the  expression  of  a  heated  temper ;  and  a 
man  who  loses  his  temper  in  argument  cares 
more  about  himself  than  about  the  truth. 
Let  us  remember  the  noble  words  of  St. 
AuguEitine  to  the  heretics  of  his  own  day : 
"  Let  those  rage  against  you  who  know  not 
with  what  toil  truth  is  found,  and  how  diffl- 
calt  it  is  to  avoid  errors;  who  know  not 
with  how  much  difficulty  the  eye  of  the 
inner  man  is  made  whole;  who  know  not 
with  what  sighs  and  groans  it  is  made  pos- 
sible, in  however  small  a  degree,  to  compre- 
hend God." 

Ver.  8. — ^The  authorities  vary  much  as  to 
the  persons  of  the  three  verbs, "  lose,"  "  have 
wrought,"  "receive ; "  some  reading  "  we," 
and  some  "ye,"  in  each  case.  The  best 
reading  seems  to  be,  "  That  ye  lose  not  the 
things  which  vie  have  wrought,  but  that  ye 
receive  a  full  reward ; "  i.«. bewareof  allowing 
oui'  •%f:st\c.  in  yon  to  be  undone  to  your  grievous 
less.  Through  net  seeing  the  meaning  of 
the  passage,  some  scribei  changed  "  ye  "  into 
**  we,"  and  others  changed  "  we  "  into  "  ye," 
a^na  making  all  three  verbs  in  the  same 
person.  There  is  a  similar  case  in  John  ix. 
4,  where  the  true  reading  seems  to  be,  "  We 
must  work  the  works  of  him  that  sent  me ; " 
but  in  order  to  produce  uniformity  some 
scribes  altered  "  we"  into  "  I,"  while  others 
turned  "me"  into  "us."  The  next  verse 
explains  the  nature  of  the  "  full  reward  " 
which  the  lady  and  some  of  her  children 
are  in  danger  of  losing, — ^it  is  nothing  less 
than  God  himself. 

Ver.  9. — For  whosoever  transgreBseth  (vas 
i  Ttapaffaivuii)  we  must  substitute  whosoever 
advanceiA  (iras  S  jrpoiyajv):  both  external 
and  interaal  evidence  are  strongly  in  favour 
of  this  correction.  "  Whosoever  advanceth  " 
probably  means  whosoever  goes  beyond 
revealed  truth  and  professes  to  teach  some- 
thing more  profound.  Gnostic  teachers  pro- 
fessed to  have  advanced  a  long  way  beyond 
the  simple  facts  and  simple  moral  teaching 
of  the  gospel;  they  "  knew  the  depths ;"  they 
had  "things  ineffable,  secret,  higher  than 
the  heavens,"  to  disclose ;  and  these  secret 
things  were  often  not  merely  incompatible 
with  Scripture,  but  a  complete  reversal  of  it. 
But  it  is  possible  that  iras  6  vpodytov  may 
mean  no  more  than  "  every  one  who  takes 
the  lead,"  t'.e.  choses  a  line  for  himself^ 
which  in  matters  of  doctrine  means  creating 
a  heresy. 

Ver.  10. — If  any  one  oometh  unto  yos.  As 
in  1  John  v.  9,  the  Greek  construction  (in- 
dicative with  »,  not  conjunctive  with  idy) 
shows  that  the  case  is  stated  as  a  fact,  and 
Bot  M  a  mere  suppositioii.    "If  jpsogpla  of 


this  kind  come — and  it  is  well  known  that 
they  do — do  not  receive  them  or  give  them 
a  welcome."    It  is  of  the  utmost  importance 
to  remember  that  St.  John  is  here  giving  a 
rule  for  a  special  case,  not  laying  down  a 
general  principle.    His  words  give  no  sanc- 
tion to  the  view  that  no  hospitality  is  to  be 
shown  to  heretics,  still  less  to  the  monstrous 
mediteval  doctrine  that  no  faith  need  be 
kept  with  them.     The  apostle  is  giving 
directions  to  a  particular  Christian  household 
during  a  particular  crisis  in  the  history  of 
the  Christian  faith.    It  by  no  means  follows 
that  he  would  have  given  the  same  directions 
to  every  household  during  that  crisis,  or  to 
any  household  under  totally  different  oir- 
onmstauces.    We  may  well  believe  that  he 
would  not  have  followed  them  himself,  but 
would  have  endeavoured  "to  conviace  the 
gainsayers."      His   charity   towards    them 
would  not  have  been  misunderstood,  and 
his  faith  would  not  have  been  in  danger  of 
being  subverted.    It  was  otherwise  with  her 
and  her  children,  as  experience  had  prbved. 
And  before  we  take  this  verse  as  a  rule  for 
our  own  guidance,  we  must  consider  the 
difference,  which  may  well  constitute  an 
essential  difference,  between  a  time  in  which 
those  who  confessed  Jesus  Christ  coming  in 
the  flesh  were  ■  despised  and  persecuted 
handful,  and  one  in  which  some  courage  ij 
required  to  avow  that  one  denies  him. 

Ver.  11. — To  give  countenance  and  sanc- 
tion to  false  doctrine  is  to  share  in  the 
responsibility  for  all  the  harm  which  such 
false  doctrine  does.  With  which  solemn 
warning  the  main  portion  of  the  Epistle 
ends. 

Vers.  12, 13. — 3.  The  Conolusion  of  thb 
Epistle.  It  is  in  their  openings  and  con- 
clusions, and  especially  in  tha  latter,  that 
the  Second  and  Third  Epistles  have  so 
strong  a  resemblance  that  we  are  almost 
compelled  to  assign  them  not  merely  to  the 
same  author,  but  to  the  same  period  in  the 
author's  life.  St.  John  had  a  tenacious 
memory,  as  his  writings  prove ;  but  we  may 
doubt  whether  so  trivial  a  matter  as  the 
mode  of  beginning  and  ending  a  short 
letter  wpuld  have  remained  for  years  to- 
gether in  his  mind.  We  may  reasonably 
conclude  from  their  similarity  that  these 
two  Epistles  are  separated  from  one  another 
by  only  a  short  interval  of  time. 

Ver.  12.— Having  many  things  to  write. 
This  remark  is  almost  conclusive  against 
the  supposition  that  the  Second  Epistle  wai 
sent  as  a  companion-letter  to  the  First.  Thi 
hypothesis  has  little  or  nothing  to  support  it. 
I  would  not  (do  so)  by  meani  of  paper  and 


THi:  SECOIID  BMSTLE  OT  JOHN. 


L1-1& 


ink.  It  ia  Mtoninhing  that  any  one  ihoiild 
t^nppose  that  intercourie  on  paper  is  here 
uppoBed  to  ipiriUtal  intercourse:  ohTiously 
it  is  opposed  to  eonter$ation.  The  elder 
just  writes  what  is  of  urgent  importance  to 
prevent  fatal  mistakes  during  tne  present 
time,  and  leaves  everything  else  until  he  can 
talk  matters  over  with  her.  Xdpriis  is  men- 
tinned  nowhere  else  in  the  New  Testament, 
but  is  found  in  the  Septuagint  (Jer.  zzrvi. 
23) ;  it  probably  means  "  papyrus."  VliKav 
occurs  in  the  parallel  passage  3  John  13, 
and  in  2  Oor.  iU.  3 ;  it  was  commonly  made 
of  lampblack  or  other  soot,  and  hence  the 
name.  But  I  hope  to  oome  unto  yon ;  lite- 
rally, I  hope  to  comt  to  he  (^iv«riia)  at  your 
houie.  Tlphs  ifuis  is  here  very  much  the  same 
as  the  Frenoh  ehei  votu.  So  also  irpht  rinSs, 
Matt,  xiii  56  (oomp.  1  Cor.  zvL  7 ;  Oal  L 
18 ;  1  Thess.  iii.  4 ;  Fhilem.  13).  "  Face  to 
face"  (<rr6na  nphs  stSiio)  is  exactly  the 
Fraich  houehe  h  houehe.  The  phrase  occurs 
tnly  here  and  3  John  14  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment In  1  Oor.  xiii.  12  we  have  Ttp6<raitor  vpht 
wpintTrev;  but  there  the  emphatic  thing  it 
niat  the  two  should  tee  one  another.  Here 
the  special  point  is  that  they  should  convene 
with  one  aaother ;  and  this  is  more  dearly 
expressed  by  "mouth  to  month"  than  by 
**  £sas  to  faee."  For  the  phrase,  "  that  your 
Jey  may  be  foUllled,"  see  note  eo.  1  John  1. 


4,  to  which  xMssage  the  apostle  may  here  be 
consciously  referring.  That  was  ever  one 
main  purpose  of  bis  teaoliing — the  perfeet- 
ine  of  Christian  joy. 

Ver.  13. — The  ohlldren  of  thine  elect  sister 
salute  thee.  Why  the  ohange  from  "you" 
(irpis  vims)  in  ver.  12  to  "  thee"  (<rO  here,  if 
the  letter  \»  addressed  to  a  oommunity  ?  The 
change  is  very  intelligible  if  "yon"  means 
"thee  and  thy  family,"  and  "thee"  means 
"  thee  in  particular."  The  elect  sister  herself 
sends  no  greeting,  because  she  does  not  live, 
as  these  children  of  hers  do,  near  the  apostle ; 
perhaps  she  is  dead.  This  message  to  the 
elect  lady  &om  her  sister's  children  is,  per- 
haps, intended  as  a  delicate  intimation  that 
they  know  why  the  elder  is  vrriting,  and 
join  in  his  affectionate  warning.  "  The  last 
sentences  of  this  letter  to  the  eleot  lady 
remind  us  that  it  is  what  it  professes  to  be— 
a  letter  to  a  friend ;  that  the  friendship  was 
the  more  natural  and  human  because  it  was 
grounded  on  the  truth;  and  that  other 
ladies  also  elect  were,  like  this  one,  not 
nuns,  but  mothers"  (Mnnrice).  The  con- 
(dnding  "  Amen"'  at  the  end  of  this  Epistle, 
as  at  the  end  of  most  of  the  Epistles,  is 
spurious.  Gkilatians,  and  perhaps  2  Fetor, 
seem  to  be  the  only  instannee  in  which  ike 
"  Amen  "  is  gennineb 


EOMILETIOS. 

Tare.  1— 18.— ^n  e^pettdtie  pastoral  to  a  ChrUtian  famUg.  Thi«  Epistle  ii  written 
by  the  Apostle  John  to  •  Christian  family.  He,  like  the  Apostle  Peter  had  done 
before  him  (1  Pet.  v.  1),  styles  himself  a  presbyter.  His  First  Epistle  was  written  to 
a  Church  or  t«  tiie  Churches.  In  this,  the  Second  Epistle,  we  have  a  priceless  fragment 
of  early  Cfaiistian  history,  showing  us  the  relation  which  subsisted  between  the  apostle 
and  •  Christian  family,  end  also  to  how  large  an  extent  the  new  Christian  faith  was  in 
some  instances  moulding  family  life,  by  leavening  it  with  the  truth  of  Qt>d.  It  ii  to 
as  lurprising  to  find  how  many  difScultiea  bare  seemed  to  gather  round  the  question- 
Wat  the  Epistle  written  to  a  society  or  to  an  individual  ?  The  former  conclusion  waa 
drawn  by  some  owing  to  the  form  of  address  being  the  second  person  plural;  the 
latter,  owing  to  the  phrase,  "  to  the  elect  lady."  ^  We  do  not  adopt  either  hypothesis, 
but  regard  the  phrase,  "  to  the  elect  lady  and  her  children,"  as  a  sufficient  mdication 
that  the  letter  was  written  to  a  Christian  family.  With  this  aupposition  every  phrase 
in  the  letter  harmonizes.  We  do  not  know,  indeed,  the  name  of  the  surviving  head  of 
the  family ;  but  so  many  ])artiQu1ars  concerning  the  family  may  he  gathered  from  the 
letter,  that  we  can  retain,  after  studying  it,  a  fairly  clear  and  distinct  impression  of 
Christian  family  life  in  the  first  century.  There  are  several  features  about  it,  which 
one  by  one  may  be  suggestive  of  mneh  instruction. 

I.  It  was  a  familt  whebb  "  «bs  tbttth  "  was  beobived  avd  embodied.  (Vers, 
1,  S.)  What  the  apostle  meant  by  "the  truth"  none  can  doubt  who  know  hli 
writings.  Kor  can  any  one  who  has  enthroned  the  Saviour  in  his  heart  as  the  Son  of* 
Gkid  and  the  King  of  men,  have  any  misgiving  as  to  whether  he  has  the  truth  or  no.  T^ 
him,  the  life  he  has  in  Jeeus,  and  the  love  of  him  and  from  him  which  are  shed  abroad 
in  his  heart  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  forbid  him  going  any  further  in  search  of  the  truth. 

■  The  nasona  given  by  Canon  Weeteott,  et  oL,  againat  taki«g  Kifi^  to  be  a  fieper  Mkm* 
are,  in  ear  jodgment,  ^twiiite. 


1— lit]  THE  8B0OKD  EPISTLE  OF  JOHN.  » 

He  has  found  it  in  OhriBt.  It  is  the  "pearl  of  great  price."  And  where  the  truth  if 
received  in,  and  is  leavening  a  familf  with  its  blessed  influence,  there  is  a  home  on 
which  the  eye  of  the  Ohriitian  pastor  can  look  with  a  loving  gladness. 

n..OTEB  THISTAHILTTHK  APOSTMHBU>THK  OTMOB  OF  PRBBBTTBB.    (Ver.  1.)    "It 

is  easy  to  see  why  St.  John  would  choose  such  a  title,  which,  while  it  described  an  official 
position,  Bv^gested  also  a  fatherly  relation "  (Westcott,  in  loo.).  It  was  to  the  office 
of  presbyter  that  the  pastoral  care  belonged  (Acts  zx.  28 ;  1  Pet.  v.  2)  of  feeding  and 
tending  the  flock.  Apostles,  indeed,  were  more  than  presbyters,  overseers,  and  pastors, 
inasmuch  as  they  sustained  larger  relations  to  the  whole  Church.  But  this  did  not 
annul  the  relation  they  bore  to  the  several  families  in  their  charge.  There  is  no 
spiritual  bond  more  sacred  than  that  of  the  Christian  pastor,  provided  he  does  not  mar 
the  holy  influence  he  is  bound  to  exert,  by  pretending  to  an  authority  with  which  God'* 
Word  does  not  invest  him. 

III.   To  THIB  VAHILT   THK  AF08TLS   IS  DBAWN   BT  BTBONO   AND  WABM   ATTACHMENT. 

(Vers.  2,  3.)  The  truth  which  he  had  taught  and  they  received  knit  them  together  in 
one.  And  seeing  they  were  one  in  Christ,  united  in  him  to  one  common  God  and 
Father,  there  is  a  warm  and  glowing  forth-pouring  of  benediction  from  the  aged  teacher. 
John  was  no  cold,  heartless  official.  He  once  had  a  strong,  fiery,  despotic  spirit  in 
him.  But  that  has  long  ago  been  toned  down  by  Divine  grace,  and  now  from  him  as 
the  elder,  just  such  outbreathings  of  benevolence  are  expressed  as  one  Christian  might 
utter  for  another.     "  Grace,  mercy,  and  peace  be  with  you,"  etc. 

lY.  This  tauilt  affeabb  to  have  been  bebeft  of  its  eabthlt  head,  and  to 
BE  BOATTEBBD  ABBOAD.  "  The  elect  lady  and  her  children  "—no  mention  is  made  of 
the  husband  and  father.  The  probability  is  that  he  was  no  longer  on  earth.  The 
surviving  head — the  widow — had  probably  been  "elected"  among  the  number  of 
widows  (1  Tim.  v.  9),  or  else  chosen  as  a  deaconess  (Bom.  xvi.  1) ;  and,  having  sus- 
tained her  position  with  honour  in  the  Church,  was  widely  known  and  loved  (ver.  1). 
Her  children  were  not  all  at  home.  The  apostle,  in  his  wanderings  among  the  Churches, 
appears  to  have  met  some  of  them,  and  "  found  of  them "  (tSpiiKo),  to  his  great  joy, 
"walking  in  the  truth."  There  is  no  greater  joy  on  earth,  whether  to  parents  or 
pastors,  than  to  find  the  children  of  their  care  staunch  to  the  true  and  the  right.  If 
in  the  home  they  have  been  baptized  and  trained  for  God,  they  are  "  beloved  for  the 
fethers'  Bakes,"  and  will  be  surrounded  with  a  special  care  when  far  out  in  the  world. 
The  children  cannot  always  be  under  the  home  roo£  If  the  grace  of  God  be  in  them, 
they  are  safe  everywhere. 

V.  ThBT  all  needed,  HOWBTBB,  TO  BBWAEB  OF  BUBROUNDINO  FEBIL8.      (VerS.  6 — 9.) 

1.  There  were  abroad,  deceivers,  teachers  of  false  doctrine,  such  as  those  of  whom  he 
had  warned  the  Churches.  There  were  "advance"  men  even  in  those  early  days  (irSi 
i  wpodyuy).  But  then,  as  now,  the  people  who  "go  forward"  too  rapidly,  let  that 
which  is  most  worth  keeping  drop  as  they  go  I  These  abode  not  in  the  doctrine  of 
Christ.  2.  If  the  false  teachers  should  succeed  in  decoying  away  any  of  this  family, 
it  would  be  a  serious  loss  to  them  (ver.  8,  Revised  Version).*  3.  Consequently,  they 
needed  to  be  exceedingly  wary  and  watchful.  The  danger  was  not  only  outward,  but 
inward.    "  Look  to  yourselves,  that  ye  lose  not,"  etc. 

VI.  The  HotrsE  was  to  be  bebebved  and  fbebervbo  fob  thb  truth  alone. 
(Vers.  10, 11.)  Much  needless  difficulty  has  been  raised  over  the  apparent  exclusive- 
uess  of  these  words,  as  if  no  one  that  did  not  believe  in  Christ  was  to  be  admitted  to  the 
house.*  But  the  reference  plainly  ia  to  any  one  who  wishes  to  come  into  the  house  to 
teach  another  doctrine,  and  to  draw  away  the  mother  and  the  children  from  allegiance 
to  their  Lord.  What  would  be  any  Christian  mother's  duty  in  such  a  case  ?  Plainly, 
to  forbid,  and  that  peremptorily,  any  attempts  to  tamper  with  her  faith  or  that  of  her 
children.  And  how  could  she  honestly  wish  such  a  teacher  "  God-speed  "  ?  To  do  so 
would  be  to  have  fellowship  In  his  errors  (icoivupfi).  No.  Every  Christian  parent  is 
bound  to  lay  down  as  the  law  of  the  house — "  This  home  is  for  Christ.  The  children 
are  for  Christ  and  for  the  truth,  and  I  will  not  imperil  their  souls,  nor  lend  a  hand  to 
the  propagation  of  error,  by  letting  the  germs  thereof  be  planted  here  1 " 

'  See  Revisers'  Greek  Testament. 

*  The  Apostle  Fanl  most  helpfully  defines  the  limit  of  a  similar  restriction  in  I  Oor.  t 
9-11. 


•  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  OF  JOHN.  [1—18. 

NoTB.  1.  It  is  to  the  laity  (to  use  a  common  term)  that  the  teachers  and  preacher! 
of  the  truth  mast  look  to  he  its  conservers,  upholders,  and  defenders.  Christian  homes 
are  to  be  its  nurseries,  in  which  the  weeds  of  error  are  not  allowed  to  grow.  There  are 
qviite  enough  perils  ready  to  meet  the  children — from  inward  corruption  and  outward 
temptation,  without  their  being  exposed  to  the  additional  perils  of  finding  seed-plots 
of  heresy  allowed  in  the  home.  2.  This  Epistle  is  of  great  value  as  showing  us, 
through  the  teaching  of  an  inspired  apostle,  that  Christian  parents  are  -expected  to 
train  their  children  in  the  faith  which  they  themselves  believe,  and  to  put  and  keep 
a  holy  guard  around  them,  that  their  young  minds  may  not  be  harassed  by  the 
seductions  of  any  antichristian  deceiver.  Let  every  parent  say,  "My  home  is  for 
Christ,  and  for  Christ  alone  1 " 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 3. — An  exemplary  Christian  greeting.  "The  elder  unto  the  elect  lady 
and  her  children,"  etc.  This  address  and  salutation  presents  to  us  three  chief  topics 
for  consideration. 

I.  A  LADY   OF   BAINTLT    OHAKAOTER   AHD    DISTINGUISHED    PRIVILEGE.      "  The    elder 

unto  the  elect  lady  and  her  children,"  etc.  1.  .4  saintly  character.  This  lady  is 
designated  "  elect,"  as  chosen  out  of  the  unchristian  world  and  called  "  into  the  sanc- 
tified company  of  the  Church  of  God"  (cf.  John  xv.  19 ;  2  Tim.  ii.  10;  1  Pet.  i.  1 ; 
ii.  9).  We  may  also  infer  that  she  was  eminent  for  her  piety  from  the  fact  that  she 
was  loved  by  the  writer,  and  by  all  them  that  knew  the  truth  (ver.  1).  2.  A  dis- 
tinguished privilege.  Unto  this  "  elect  lady "  was  this  letter  written  by  an  apostle ; 
and  in  the  providence  of  God  this  letter  is  incorporated  into  the  sacred  Scriptures  and 
preserved  for  the  instruction  and  edification  of  the  Christian  world  in  all  ages.  Chris- 
tianity has  done  more  for  woman  than  all  other  systems  whether  social  or  religious. 
It  represents  her  neither  as  the  serf  nor  as  the  toy  of  man,  but  as  his  companion.  "She 
is  thy  companion."  "  There  is  neither  male  nor  female ; "  both  "  are  one  in  Christ  Jesus." 
Our  Lord  honoured  women.  We  see  this  in  his  treatment  of  Martha  and  Mary  of 
Bethany ;  Mary  Magdalene,  to  whom  he  first  appeared  after  the  resiu-rection ;  and  even 
the  poor  and  sadly  erring  woman  of  Samaria.  Other  women  are  distinguished  in  the 
New  Testament.  The  three  Maries  at  the  cross,  the  women  at  the  sepulchre,  Lydia, 
Dorcas,  Priscilla,  et  al.  It  is  worthy  of  note  that  the  children  of  "  the  elect  lady  "  are 
mentioned  in  this  address.  "  Unto  the  elect  lady  and  her  children."  In  Christian  and 
in  friendly  correspondence  it  is  well  to  remember  the  children  for  their  encouragement 
in  what  is  good,  and  for  their  caution  as  to  what  is  evil. 

II.  A   DBCLABATION   OF   EXALTED  CHRISTIAN  AFFEOTIOK.      "  Whom  I  loVC   Lq  truth  ; 

and  not  I  only,  but  also  all  they  that  know  the  truth ;  for  the  truth's  sake  which 
dwelleth  in  us,  and  it  shall  be  with  us  for  ever."  1.  Love  of  genuine  character.  "Whom 
I  love  in  truth."  The  attachment  of  the  apostle  to  this  lady  and  her  children  was 
sincere.  He  loved  them  not  merely  in  word,  or  "  with  the  tongue,  but  in  deed  and 
truth  "  (1  John  iii.  18).  2.  Love  in  the  highest  sph^ere.  "  Whom  I  love  in  truth.  "  He 
loved  her,"  says  Ebrard,  "  with  that  love  which  was  a  love  in  truth.  His  love  was 
such  as  approved  itself  in  perfect  truth  and  truthfulness  of  conduct :  thus  it  was  not 
blind  to  the  faults  and  sins  of  the  object  beloved ;  it  did  not  spare  from  a  false  delicacy 
and  sense  of  propriety ;  but  it  had  its  existence  in  the  sphere  of  truth,  that  is,  of  the 
being  true.  .  .  .  Truth  accordingly  designates  here,  not  truth  in  the  objective  sense 
(revealed  truth),  but  truth  as  the  subjective  Christian-moral  characteristic  of  the  spirit 
and  temper  and  being."  3.  Love  for  the  worthiest  reason.  "  For  the  truth's  sake  which 
abideth  in  us,  and  shall  be  with  us  for  ever."  Truth  is  in  the  Christian  intellectually ; 
in  his  mind — ^he  holds  the  truth.  It  is  in  him  sympathetically ;  in  his  heart — he  loves 
the  truth.  It  is  in  him  authoritatively;  in  his  soul — ^he  lives  the  truth.  Truth  becomes, 
as  it  were,  incorporated  into  his  being,  and  his  eternal  portion.  "  It  shall  be  with  us 
for  ever."  It  was  because  of  the  truth  which  was  in  the  apostle  and  also  in  "  the  elect 
lady  "  that  he  loved  her,  "  The  apostle  and  the  other  Christians  loved  this  lady,  not 
so  much  for  her  honour,  as  her  holiness ;  not  so  much  for  her  bounty,  as  her  serious 
Ohristianity."    "  St.  John  loved  the  lady  for  the  truth's  sake,  but  how  many  in  oui 


1—13.]  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  OF  JOHN,  1 

days  love  the  truth  for  the  lady's  sake  I — I  mean  for  sinister  ends  and  bj'-rospeots.  It  is 
a  blessed  thing  when  religion,  and  the  grace  of  God  shining  in  the  lives  of  Cbristians,  is 
the  special  loadstone  of  our  love  and  affection  towards  them  "  (Burkitt). 

III.  An  expression  op  a  confident  wish  that  othbbs  mat  enjoy  the  richest 
BLESSINGS.  "Grace  be  with  you,  mercy,  and  peace  from  God  the  Father,"  etc.  1. 
The  hlessings  desired.  (1)  "  Grace"  is  th*  free  and  unmerited  favour  of  God  towards 
man,  manifested  especially  in  his  redemptive  relations  to  us.  Grace  is  the  fountain 
whence  all  blessings  flow  to  us.  Here  I  take  it  as  "  meaning  every  Christian  grace 
and  virtue,  which  the  Spirit  of  God  imparts  to  the  followers  of  Christ ;  Divine  favour 
in  the  most  extensive  sense,  but  specially  in  the  sense,  of  spiritual  blessings."  (2) 
"  Mercy  "  is  pity  or  compassion  for  the  sinful  and  wretched.  The  word  is  sometimes 
used  to  express  the  benefits  which  result  from  compassion.  Mercy  is  exercised  towards 
those  who  deserve  punishment  or  need  succour.  It  is  the  manifestation  of  grace  towards 
the  guilty  and  miserable.  The  forgiveness  of  sins  is  a  mercy.  Inasmuch  as  St.  John 
wishes  mercy  for  "  the  elect  lady,"  we  infer  that  they  "  who  are  already  rich  in  grace 
have  need  of  continual  forgiveness."  (3)  "  Peace,"  like  the  Hebrew  shalom,  means 
every  kind  of  good  and  blessing.  "  Peace  with  God,  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ " 
(Bom.  v.  1).  This  implies  forgiveness  of  sin  and  reconciliation  with  God.  Peace  as 
denoting  the  absence  of  anxiety,  fear,  etc.  "  Peace  I  leave  with  you ;  my  peace  I  give 
unto  you,"  etc.  (John  xiv.  27 ;  xvi.  33  ;  Phil.  iv.  6, 7).  Peace  also  with  our  fellow-men 
and  in  our  own  souls.  What  a  fine  example  is  this  of  Christian  well-wishing !  Let  us 
imitate  it.  Mark  the  confidence  with  which  this  wish  is  expressed.  Literally,  "  there 
shall  be  with  us  grace,  mercy,  peace,"  etc.  It  is  "  a  wish  expressed  by  a  confident 
assertion  of  its  fiilfilment."  2.  The  Persons  frcm  whom  these  hlessings  are  desired. 
(1)  "  From  God  the  Father."  He  is  the  Father  (a)  of  all  men,  as  created  by  him  and 
in  his  image.  Even  since  the  fall  of  man  he  in  some  respects  resembles  his  Creator ;  he 
is  still  possessed  of  reason,  conscience,  volition  (cf.  Acts  xvii.  28, 29).  He  is  the  Father 
(h)  especially  of  all  true  Christians,  because  they  are  renewed  into  moral  resemblance 
to  him  (Col.  iii.  10).  They  have  been  "  begotten  again,"  and  are  his  children  by  a 
second  birth.  They  also  possess  the  filial  spirit  (Rom.  viii.  15).  God  the  Father  is  the 
great  original  Source  of  all  good.  "  Every  good  gift  and  every  perfect  gift  is  from 
above,"  etc.  (Jas.  L  17).  (2)  "And  from  Jesus  Christ,  the  Son  of  the  father." 
Alford,  "This  solemn  title  is  used  for  the  more  complete  setting  forth  of  the  union  of 
Jesus  with  the  Father  in  the  essence  of  the  Godhead."  He  is  "  inch  a  Son  as  none  else 
can  be."  "  This  is  my  beloved  Son,"  etc.  (Matt.  iii.  17).  "  The  Only  Begotten  of  the 
Father  .  .  .  the  only  begotten  Son,  which  is  in  the  bosom  of  the  Father  "  (John  i.  14 — 
18).  Jesus  Christ  is  the  channel  of  communication  between  God  and  man.  He  is  the 
medium  tlirough  which  these  blessings  are  bestowed  upon  man.  Nay,  more,  as  being 
the  only  begotten  Sou  of  the  Father,  united  with  the  Father  in  the  essence  of  the  God- 
head, he  is  the  Author  and  Communicator  of  these  blessings.  3.  The  condition  necessary 
to  the  enjoyment  of  these  hlessings.  "  In  truth  and  love."  We  are  not  certain  as  to 
the  exact  interpretation  of  these  words.  Alford,  "  Truth  and  love  are  the  conditional 
elements  in  wrhioh  the  grace,  mercy,  and  peace  are  to  be  received  and  enjoyed."  These 
blessings  will  not  be  granted  unto  us  unless  we  are  true  and  loving.  Or  we  may  take 
the  clause  thus :  the  grace,  mercy,  and  peace  are  to  be  manifested  in  truth  and  love ; 
they  are  to  promote  truth  and  love  in  us. — ^W.  J. 

Ver.  4. — TTie  rejoicing  of  the  good  in  the  exemplificatian  of  the  godly  life.  "I 
rejoiced  greatly  that  I  found  of  thy  children  walking  in  truth,"  etc. 

I.  The  kule  of  the  oodlt  ufe.  "  Walking  in  truth,  as  we  received  commandment 
from  the  Father."  The  rule  of  the  true  Christian  life  is  the  revealed  will  of  God.  The 
authoritative  command  proceeds  from  the  Divine  Father.  He  is  the  great  Source  of 
law.  Man  in  a  state  of  sin  is  prone  to  regard  law  as  proceeding  from  an  arbitrary, 
tyrannical  power.  But  the  law  and  government  of  God  are  patei-aal  (cf.  Matt.  xxi. 
28 — 31).  The  rule  of  a  well-ordered  family  is,  perhaps,  the  highest  illustration  of  the 
rule  of  Heaven  in  this  world.  God  speaketh  as  a  Father  to  his  rebellious  children  when 
he  saith,  "  Thou  shalt,"  and  "  Thou  shalt  not."  If  the  voice  seem  xmfatherly  and  stem, 
it  is  because  they  who  hear  it  dislike  and  disregard  his  authority.  If  to  ptkera  it  seem 
firm,  auth»ritatiT«,  yet  &theily,  it  is  because  they  are  di&rMtljr  related  te  him  by 


THB  SECOND  EFI8TLK  0»  JOHK.  [1—1*. 


their  character  and  conduct.  In  both  caaea  it  is  the  voice  of  a  Father,  all-wiie,  gradons, 
■upremely  authoritative.    His  will  is  the  rule  of  the  godly  life. 

n.  Th«  XXSMPLIFIOA.TION  OF  TH«  ooDLT  LiFK.  "  Walking  lu  truth."  "  Walking" 
is  a  term  used  to  denote  the  life  and  conduct.  "Walking  in  truth"  ii  living  in 
accordance  with  the  truth  which  was  specially  believed  by  CbristianB.  It  implies  that 
the  children  of  the  elect  lady  eschewed  Gnosticism  and  other  errors ;  that  they  held  the 
truth  concerning  the  Person  and  work  of  the  Lord  Jesua  Christ;  and  that  they  embodied 
the  truth  in  their  conduct — ^their  life  was  Christ-like.  How  practical  a  thing  Chris- 
tianity is  I  The  grace  and  the  calling  of  God  are  not  simply  to  Christian  profession, 
but  to  Christian  practice — to  a  holy  life.  We  are  to  show  our  faith  by  our  works ;  and 
by  our  works  our  faith  is  to  be  perfected  (of.  Jas.  iL  18, 21).  It  is  "  walking  in  truth  " 
that  calls  forth  apostolic  commendation. 

III.  Tee  BEJoioiNa  or  thb  oood  in  thk  EXBupLinoATioN  of  thi  godly  Lin  nt 
OTHERS.  "  I  rejoiced  greatly  that  I  have  found  of  thy  children  walking  in  truth."  Let 
UB  endeavour  to  discover  the  reasons  of  this  rejoicing.  1.  Th«  good  r^oice  to  find  any 
p»rion$  "  walking  in  truth,"  because  such  a  walk  indicates  an  increase  of  goodneis  in 
the  world ;  an  increase  of  the  results  of  goodness,  e.g.  peace,  joy,  beneficent  influence, 
eto. ;  and  an  increase  of  glory  to  God.  2.  The  good  rejoice  the  more  to  find  the  yov/ng 
"  walking  in  truth."  Our  hope  for  the  future  cannot  be  separated  from  those  who  at 
present  are  young.  From  their  ranks  must  arise  the  Christian  preachers,  the  teachers 
in  schools  and  colleges,  the  authors  and  editors  of  our  literature,  the  framers  and 
administrators  of  our  laws,  of  a  few  years  hence.  How  important  that  the  young 
should  exemplify  the  godly  life  1  3.  The  good  rejoice  still  more  to  find  the  children  of 
pious  parents  "  walking  in  truth."  They  rise  up  to  tread  in  the  footsteps  of  their 
godly  parents,  to  fill  their  places  and  carry  on  their  beneficent  works  when  they  are  no 
longer  able  to  do  so  themselves.  In  them  we  see  the  rich  reward  of  loving  Christian 
nurture,  and  fervent,  persevering  prayer.  4.  The  good  rejoice  still  more  to  find  the 
children  of  their  heloved  friends  "  walking  in  truth."  So  it  was  with  St.  John  in  the 
case  before  us.  Friendship  gives  a  common  interest.  What  is  dear  to  my  friend  is  dear 
to  me  for  my  friend's  sake.  Thus  Mephibosheth  was  dear  to  David  for  the  sake  of  his 
father  Jonathan,  David's  friend  (2  Sam.  ix.).  6.  The  good  rejoice  still  more  to  find 
persons  "  walking  in  truth  "  when  the  accomplishment  of  this  is  the  object  of  their  life. 
The  apostle  lived  to  bear  witness  of  Christ,  and  to  lead  men  to  him  as  their  Saviour  and 
Lord.  When  he  foimd-  persons  exemplifying  Christianity  in  their  life,  the  joy  of  know- 
ing that  his  own  and  others'  labours  were  not  in  vain  would  be  his.  He  who  is  moet 
deeply  interested  in  the  cause  of  Christ  realizes  the  greatest  gladness  in  its  progress. 

IV.  The  limitation  in  the  EXBMPLinoATioN  OF  THE  ooDLT  UFK.  "  1  have  found 
certain  of  thy  children  walking  in  truth"  (Eevised  Version);  or,  "some  of  your 
children,"  etc.  The  apostle  does  not  assert  that,  while  some  of  the  children  of  the  elect 
lady  were  "  walking  in  truth,"  others  were  not  doing  so.  His  expression  may  mean 
simply  that  he  only  knew  that  some  of  them  were  living  a  true  Christian  life.  But  it 
certainly  seems  to  imply  that  all  of  them  were  not  "  walking  in  truth."  Perhaps  some 
had  been  been  led  away  from  Christian  truth  by  the  errors  of  that  age,  or  tbcy  miglit 
have  been  living  in  wickedness.  It  is  not  an  infrequent  thing  amongst  the  children  of 
saintly  parents  to  find  one  or  more  sad  sinners.  When  the  family  is  large  it  is  seldom 
that  the  rejoicing  because  of  its  piety  is  complete  and  unalloyed.  Too  often  the  song  of 
gladness  because  of  those  who  are  in  Christ  grows  tremulous  with  grief  because  of  the 
wayward  and  wicked  son  or  daughter.  But  may  we  not  hope  that  at  last,  in  the 
great  and  blessed  home  of  the  heavenly  Father,  all  the  children  of  Christian  parents 
will  be  safely  gathered?  That  it  may  be  so  let  us  heartily  work  and  earnestly  pray. — '■ 
W.J. 

Vers.  6,  6. — Mutual  love.  '*  And  now  I  beseech  thee,  lady,  not  as  though  I  wrote 
a  new  commandment  unto  thee,"  etc.  Having  expressed  hu  joy  that  certain  of  the 
children  of  the  elect  lady  were  "  walking  in  truth,"  the  apostle  exhorts  to  the  exercise 
•f  mutual  love.  Truth  and  love  must  be  combined  in  Christian  character  and  conduct. 
Where  truth  dwells  without  lov^  the  character  is  likely  to  be  or  to  become  cold,  rigid, 
and  harsh.  Where  love  dwells  without  truth,  the  character  becomes  effeminate,  imf- 
indnlgMrt,  Mid  vnreli*bl«.    Neither  ia  truth  ia  itself  complete  witinout  love^  nor  lova 


1— 1&]  TBX  SECOND  EPffiTLE  OF  JOHN.  t 

vithout  truth.    The  combination  of  both  is  needful  (o  the  oompletenesa  of  either  in 
Christian  character.    Notice-» 

I.  Thb  OBuaATioH  or  ktitval  z.otb.  It  Is  commanded  by  God.  "  A  commandment 
.  .  .  that  we  loTe  one  another.  .  .  .  This  is  the  commandment,  even  as  ye  heard  from 
the  beginning,  that  ye  ahould  walk  im  it,"  i.e.  in  love.  1.  The  nature  of  thi*  Ume.  In 
the  original  of  the  New  Testament  there  are  two  words  both  of  which  are  translated 
**  love  "  in  our  Authorized  Version.  "  The  distinction  seems  to  Im  that  liyamr  is  more 
used  of  that  reyerential  love,  grounded  on  high  graces  of  character,  which  is  borne  towards 
God  and  man  by  the  child  of  God  ;  whereas  ^lAciv  expresses  more  the  personal  love  of 
human  affection  "  (Alford).  The  apostle  here  uses  the  word  with  the  higher  meaning. 
The  affection  of  which  he  writes  differs  from  matrimonial,  parental,  filial,  and  friendly 
love.  It  cannot  be  exercised  towards  the  wicked.  It  has  reference  chiefly  to  the 
character  of  the  person  loved.  Ita  exercise  involves  respect  and  esteem.  2.  The 
obligatoriness  of  this  love.  It  is  a  sacred  "commandment  that  we  love  one  another" 
(cf.  John  ziiL  84;  xv.  12;  1  John  iiL  10—18).  It  is  a  moral  duty  to  reverence 
goodness,  to  admire  beauty  of  character,  to  love  in  this  high  sense  those  who  are 
spiritually  excellent.  It  is  ill  with  »  man  when  he  fails  to  esteem  uprightness  and 
honour  in  man,  to  venerate  consistent  piety,  and  to  love  genuine  godliness.  Buch  a 
man  is  on  the  road  to  perdition.  Mark  the  fact  that  this  obligation  was  not  new. 
"  Not  as  though  I  wrote  to  thee  a  new  commandment,  but  that  which  we  had  from 
the  beginning,"  etc.  Some  understand  "  from  the  beginning  "  to  mean  from  the  creation 
of  humanity.  "  As  to  the  matter  of  it  (mutual  holy  love)  it  is  as  old  as  natural,  Jewish, 
or  Christian  religion."  "  It  is  as  old  as  Moses,  yea,  as  old  as  Adam,  being  a  part  of  the 
law  of  nature  written  in  Adam's  heart."  Others  interpret,  "from  the  beginning  of  their 
fidth  in  Jesus  Christ,"  or  "  from  the  time  of  their  conversion  to  Christianity."  In  a 
sense  the  former  view  is  true,  but  the  latter  seems  to  us  to  be  the  meaning  of  St.  John 
in  this  place.  From  the  commencement  of  their  Christian  life  they  were  under  the 
most  sacred  obligations  to  obey  this  command.  And  yet  it  is  a  new  commandment, 
"  inasmuch  as  it  ever  assumes  new  freshness  as  the  Christian  life  unfolds,  as  the  old 
darkness  is  more  and  more  cleared  away,  and  the  true  light  shineth."  It  is  new  also 
because  it  should  "  be  always  fresh  in  the  memories,  and  found  in  the  practice,  of 
Christ's  disciples  to  the  end  of-the  world."  8.  The  earnestnesi  with  which  the  apostle 
requests  this  love.  "  I  beseech  thee,  lady,"  eto.  Such  an  entreaty  from  the  sainted 
apostle  would  carry  more  force  than  an  earnest  exhortation  or  an  authoritative 
command.  It  is  said  that,  in  his  extreme  age,  when  he  was  unable  to  walk  to  the  place 
where  the  Christians  met  together,  St.  John  caused  himself  to  be  borne  thither,  that  he 
might  address  the  assembly ;  and  his  address  was  only  this—"  Little  children,  love 
one  another."  And  when  he  was  asked  why  he  always  spoke  the  same  thing  and 
nothing  else,  he  replied,  "  That  it  was  the  command  of  the  Lord,  and  that  if  this  only 
were  done,  enough  was  done."  The  story  is  perfectly  in  keeping  vrith  our  text,  "  I 
beseech  thee,  lady  .  .  .  that  we  love  one  another."  And  St.  Paul  wrote,  "  Love  is  the 
fulfilling  of  the  Law." 

II.  Thk  XANirESTATiOH  OF  THIS  LOTK.  "  And  this  {•  love,  that  we  should  walk 
after  his  commandments.  This  is  the  commandment,  even  as  ye  heard  from  the 
beginning,  that  ye  should  walk  in  it."  The  love  for  the  exercise  of  which  St.  John 
prays,  may  be  described  as  walking  according  to  God's  commandments ;  and  the  one 
commandment  in  which  all  others  is  summed  up  is  this — "  that  ye  should  walk  in  it," 
i.e.  in  love.  Love  is  to  be  manifested  by  obedience  to  the  Divine  will.  1.  Obedience  it 
the  product  of  love.  The  obedience  which  springs  from  servile  fear  or  from  considera- 
tions of  self-interest  is  not  true.  It  is  mechanical,  not  hearty.  It  is  utterly  lackinz 
of  loyalty,  and  cannot  be  acceptable  to  God.  To  be  true,  obedience  must  be  free  and 
cordial ;  it  is  the  product  of  love.  Love  makes  obedience  easy,  and  duty  delightful.  2. 
Obedience  is  the  evidence  of  love.  The  genuine  evidence  of  aifection  is  not  profession, 
but  obedience  j  not  words,  but  deeds.  "  If  ye  love  me,"  said  our  Lord,  "  ye  will  keep 
my  commandments."  The  mutual  love  which  St.  John  estreats  "  is  not  an  effeminate, 
■elf-seeking,  self-complacent  love  to  our  neighbour,  but  a  love  which  manifests  itself  in 
the  steady  discharge  of  every  obligation."  "  By  this  we  know  that  we  love  the  children 
of  God,  when  we  love  Gk)d  and  do  his  commandments.  For  this  is  the  love  of  God, 
tlmt  we  keep  his  commandments ;  and  his  commandments  are  not  grievous  "  (1  Jeika 


10  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  OF  JOHN.  [1—18. 


T.  2,  3).    "  He  that  hath  my  commandments,  and  keepeth  them,  he  it  is  that  loveth 
me,"  etc.  (John  xiv.  21). 

Conclusion.  1.  Let  us  endeavour  to  become  worthy  of  tMs  exalted  Christian  love. 
By  the  help  of  Divine  grace  let  us  seek  to  develop  characters  worthy  of  the  esteem  and 
affection  of  the  good.  2.  Let  its  live  in  the  exercise  of  this  love.  Said  our  Lord,  "  A 
new  commandment  I  give  unto  you,  that  ye  love  another ;  even  as  I  have  loved  you, 
that  ye  also  love  another.  By  this  shall  all  men  know  that  ye  are  my  disciples,  if  ye 
have  love  one  to  another." — W.  J. 

Ver.  7. — The  exhibition  and  condemnation  of  heretics.  "  For  many  deceivers  ar* 
entered  into  the  vrorld,"  etc.  Our  text  is  set  forth  as  a  reason  for  the  exhortation  of 
vers.  5  and  6.  "  Walk  in  love — in  that  love  whose  condition  is  truth,  because  many 
deceivers  are  gone  forth  denying  the  truth."     Notice.— 

L  Thk  hbrbst  HEBE  MENTIONED.  The  denial  of  the  great  truth  of  the  incarnation 
of  the  Son  of  God.  *'  They  confess  not  that  Jesus  Christ  cometh  in  the  flesh."  There 
were  persons  who  held  that  the  humanity  of  the  Lord  Jesns  was  not  real,  but  appari- 
tional ;  that  the  Son  of  God  assumed  only  the  appearance  of  humanity.  And  there  was 
the  heresy  of  Cerinthus,  that  the  .^on  Christ  came  into  the  flesh— "  entered  into  the 
man  Jesus  at  his  baptism,  and  remained  with  him  until  the  commencement  of  his 
sufferings ;  but  Cerinthus  denied  that  Jesus  Christ  came  in  the  flesh"  The  sacred 
Scriptures,  assert  the  reality  and  completeness  of  our  Lord's  humanity ;  that  "  he  took 
a  body  of  flesh,  and  his  whole  humanity  both  of  soul  and  body  shared  in  the  sinless 
infirmities  which  belong  to  our  common  nature  "  (Liddon.  Cf.  Heb.  ii.  14 — 18).  Bfis 
body  passed  through  the  real  experiences  of  a  human  body,  performed  its  duties, 
endured  its  sufferings,  etc.  The  heresy  which  St.  John  is  exposing  arose  in  the  Church. 
"  Many  deceivers  are  gone  forth  into  the  world,"  i.e.  from  the  Church,  as  in  1  John  iu 
19.  We  are  not  in  danger  from  error  in  this  form  at  present,  but  in  the  opposite  form, 
even  the  denial  of  the  Godhead  of  our  Lord.  It  is  not  now  the  fact  of  his  humanity,  but 
the  fact  of  his  Deity,  that  is  called  into  question.  Both  are  essential  to  a  true  Christology. 

II.  The  DE8CBIFTI0N  OF  THE  HEBETics.  "  This  Is  the  deceirer  and  the  antichrist." 
The  "  this  "  points  to  these  heretics  as  a  class.  Here  are  two  of  their  characteristics. 
1.  Their  injuriousness  to  men.  They  were  "  deceivers,"  "  makers  to  wander  "  from  the 
truth  in  faith,  and  (as  a  consequence)  from  the  truth  in  practice.  The  influence  of  the 
misbeliever  tends  to  corrupt  the  faith  of  others,  and  thtis  to  impoverish  and  enfeeble 
their  lives.  2.  Their  hostility  to  Christ.  They  were  "  antichrist,"  i.e.  against  Christ. 
"  The  antichristian  principle  was  then,"  says  Alford, "  as  it  is  now,  and  will  be  in  every 
age,  working,  realizing,  and  concentrating  itself  from  time  to  time,  in  evil  men  and 
evil  hooks  and  evil  days,  but  awaiting  its  final  development  and  consummation  in  the 
antichrist  who  shall  personally  appear  before  the  coming  of  the  Lord."  These  deceivers 
corrupted  Christian  doctrine  and  practice ;  they  troubled  the  Church ;  they  were 
opposed  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

III.  The  season  why  the  apostle  attached  so  mvoh  impoetanoe  to  this  mattbb. 
Why  does  St.  John  write  so  earnestly  upon  this  question  ?  Why  does  he  use  such 
strong  language  in  respect  to  these  heretics?  Because  of  the  great  importance  of  the 
truth  which  they  denied.  The  manhood  of  the  Saviour  is  one  of  the  essential  facts  of 
Chiistian  teaching  and  life.  The  denial  of  the  reality  of  his  manhood  :  1.  Invalidates 
his  atonement  and  redemption  ;  for  it  makes  his  sufferings  fictitious,  and  his  death  an 
illusion.  2.  Nullifies  his  mediation.  The  mediator  must  be  in  contact  with  those 
between  whom  he  merliates,  and  by  his  manhood  Jesus  Christ  places  himself  in  contact 
with  us  men ;  but  if  his  humanity  he  only  apparent,  he  is  not  in  any  real  contact  with 
us,  and  he  cannot  be  a  Mediator  for  us.  3.  Deprives  his  example  of  aU  its  force  and 
reality.  If  our  Lord  did  not  truly  share  our  human  nature,  his  life  cannot  be  exemplary 
to  us.  4.  Does  away  vriih  his  sympathy  with  ««.  Sympathy  is  fellow-feeling — feeling- 
together  ;  and  if  Christ  Jesus  has  not  participated  in  our  humanity,  how  much  soever 
he  may  feel  for  us,  he  cannot  feel  with  us.  "  If  Christ  be  not  truly  man,  the  chasm 
which  parted  earth  and  heaven  has  not  been  bridged  over.  God,  as  before  the  Incarna- 
tion, is  still  awful,  remote,  inaccessible." 

Beware,  brethren,  of  any  departure  from  the  essential  truths  of  Christianity,  especially 
from  the  truths  which  relate  to  the  Person  and  work  of  our  blessed  Lord. — W.  i. 


1—13.]  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  OF  JOHN,  H 

Ver.  8. — A  ntmmona  io  uff-guardianthip,  "  Lcwk  to  yourselves,  that  we  lose  not 
those  things,"  etc.  What  is  the  first  business  of  the  Christian  in  relation  to  error? 
To  oppose  it?  To  denounce  it  ?  To  expose  it?  Some  at  once  rush  to  attack  it,  eyen 
before  they  are  well  acquainted  with  its  character  and  tendency  and  power :  an  unwise 
and  presumptuous  course.  Others  examine  error  that  they  may  understand  it 
thoroughly,  and  then  combat  it  successfully :  this  is  sometimes  perilous.  When  a 
contagious  disease  is  prevalent,  the  prudent  man  shuns  the  habitations  into  which  it 
has  entered  (unless  duty  summon  him  to  them),  and  endeavours  to  maintain  his  own 
health  and  vigour.  And  when  error,  with  its  moral  contagion,  is  abroad,  the  wise  man 
will  at  once  guard  himself  against  it.  Even  when  we  are  certain  that  certain  opiniona 
are  false,  and  that  the  errors  relate  to  a  fundamental  question  or  questions,  the  prudent 
course  for  the  great  majority  of  true  believers  is  to  look  to  their  own  faith  and  life,  and 
leave  it  to  the  few  competent  champions  of  truth  to  expose  and  overthrow  the  error. 
Basing  our  remarks  on  the  Bevised  Yersion  of  our  text,  let  us  notice — 

L  The  danoeb  to  bb  axTAROED  aoainst.  "  That  ye  lose  not  the  things  which  we 
have  wrought."  Whether  the  genuine  reading  is  "  we  have  wrought "  or  "  ye  have 
wrought "  ii  uncertain.  But  adopting  the  former,  the  "  we  have  wrought "  signifies  the 
work  of  the  apostle  and  other  Christian  ministers,  "  through  which  those  who  were 
addressed  had  been  brought  to  conversion,  and  furthered  in  their  Christian  course  to 
the  present  time ;  and  by  '  the  things  which  we  have  wrought '  we  are  to  understand 
that  stage  of  salvation  to  which,  through  those  labours,  the  elect  lady  and  her  children 
had  attained "  (Ebrard).  The  text  is  a  warning  to  the  true  Christian  against  loss.  It 
lomewhat  corresponds  with  the  words  of  the  glor&ed  Lord  in  Bev.  ii.  25  and  ui.  11.  What 
we  have  of  Christian  attainment — of  soimd  doctrine,  of  spiritual  life,  of  holy  conduct, 
and  of  faithful  labour  for  Christ — we  must  hold  fast,  that  none  should  cause  ui  to  lose 
it,  and  so  deprive  us  of  our  reward.  The  loss  of  which  St.  John  wrote  was  one  of  which 
there  was  danger  from  errors  of  faith.  And  in  his  view,  if  faith  lost  its  purity,  Christian 
love  would  be  imperilled  and  injured,  and  the  whole  tone  and  power  of  Christian  life 
impaired.  In  our  own  day  the  peril  of  being  led  astray  from  truth  is  very  great.  We 
do  not  say  that  we  are  to  rest  satisfied  with  what  we  know,  as  though  we  had  grasped 
all  truth ;  or  that  we  are  to  condemn  an  opinion  as  false  because  it  is  opposed  to  certain 
opinions  of  ours ;  or  that  we  are  to  sit  in  judgment  upon  those  who  difier  from  us. 
That  is  the  part  of  the  bigot,  not  of  the  intelligent  and  devout  Christian.  But  beware 
lest  any  one  lead  you  from  your  faith  in  the  great  essential  verities  of  Christianity 
revealed  in  the  sacred  Scriptures.  As  to  the  great  facts  of  the  incarnation,  the  atone- 
ment, and  the  resurrection  of  our  Lord,  "  look  to  yourselves  that "  your  faith  in  these 
be  not  shaken.  As  to  the  mode  of  these  facts  we  may  lawfully  differ ;  but  as  to  the 
facts  themselves,  he  who  believes  in  the  Bible  as  the  Word  of  God  can  admit  neither 
doubt  nor  question.  If  there  be  loss  in  our  faith,  that  loss  wUl  ere  long  manifest  itself 
in  our  life.  If  belief  be  corrupted,  the  practice  also  will  become  corrupt.  Injury  to 
our  religious  convictions  wiU  soon  show  itself  in  the  deterioration  of  our  general  actions. 
And  even  if  faith  be  not  corrupted,  if  it  be  only  weakened,  that  weakened  faith  will 
result  in  a  less  intense  love  to  God,  in  less  hearty  obedience  to  him,  in  less  faithful 
service,  and  in  a  less  brilliant  crown  in  heaven.  "  Look  to  yourselves,"  then,  that  ye 
lose  nothing  of  your  true  faith,  your  holy  love,  your  fervent  zeal,  etc. 

II.  The  object  to  be  attained.  "  That  ye  receive  a  fuU  reward."  This  exhorta- 
tion implies  that  the  rewards  of  heaven  will  correspond  with  the  acquisitions  made  in 
Christian  character,  and  the  work  accomplished  for  our  Lord  upon  earth.  1.  Hieat 
reward*  wUl  le  tn  proportion  with  our  acquisitions  in  Divine  grace.  This  is  inevitable ; 
for  glory  is  the  flower  of  which  grace  is  the  bud.  The  measure  of  grace  must  determine 
the  measure  of  glory.  Our  fitness  or  capacity  for  reward  must  necessarily  have  much 
to  do  in  determining  the  measure  of  our  reward.  2.  These  rewards  will  also  he  in 
proportion  with  our  true  work  for  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  The  sacred  Scriptures  do 
not  teach  the  meritoriousness  of  good  works,  but  they  clearly  teach  that  faithful  service 
will  be  rewarded  by  God,  and  that  there  will  be  a  proportion  between  the  service  and 
the  reward,  as  the  following  portions  show :  Dan.  xii.  3 ;  Matt.  x.  41,  42 ;  xxv.  21,  23, 
34 — 40;  Luke  vL  23;  xix.  16—19;  John  iv.  36  ;  1  Cor.  iii.  14.  But  the  rewards  ol 
fidelity  and  of  service  in  Christ's  Name  must  be  attributed,  not  to  the  merit  of  the 
lenrants,  but  to  the  grace  of  the  great  Master.    That  we  get  any  rewanl  at  aU  ia  owing 


18  THB  SECOND  EPISTLE  OF  JOHN  11—11 


to  tk«  ferafur  of  our  God.  But  the  grace  of  Qod  in  opposed  neither  to  th  jie  laws  of  the 
human  miad  which  point  towards  this  direndty  in  the  degree  of  the  rewards  of  the 
faithful,  nor  to  that  Divine  righteousness  which  points  in  the  same  direction.  "  For 
God  is  not  unrighteous  to  forget  your  work,"  etc.  (Heb.  vi.  10).  The  extent  and 
quality  ofpersonal  faith,  character,  and  service  are  the  measures  of  personal  glory  and 
reward.  Therefore  let  us  aim  at  the  highest  in  personal  character,  and  the  best  in 
personal  service ;  let  us  labour  that  we  may  "receive  a  full  reward." 

IIL  Thb  means  to  be  KMPLOYiro.  "  Look  to  yourselves,"  etc.  Be  on  your  guard, 
that  yon  are  not  led  astray  from  the  true  faith  of  (jhrist  by  these  deceivers ;  diligently 
use  the  means,  so  "  that  ye  lose  pot  the  things  which  we  have  wrought,"  etc.  1.  Chiard 
against  irror  in  your  rAigioua  faith.  The  things  that  we  really  and  heartily  believe 
are  of  the  utmost  importance  to  us.  Avoid,  on  the  one  hand,  bigotry,  and  on  the  other, 
laxity  of  religious  belief.  "  Prove  all  things ;  hold  fast  that  which  is  good."  Let  no 
one  tamper  with  your  faith  in  the  grand  verities  of  Ohristianity.  2.  Beek  to  know  more 
of  Ohriitian  truth.  "  Search  the  Scriptiu'es."  By  so  doing  you  will  become  established 
in  the  true  &ith ;  and  if  in  anything  your  faith  be  erroneous  or  defective,  by  bringing 
it  to  the  touchstone  of  the  Word  of  God  you  will  discover  the  error  or  defect.  3. 
Maintain  your  spiritual  vitality.  In  seasons  of  prevalent  disease  persons  whose 
physical  vitality  is  low  are  most  likely  to  fall  victims  to  it.  So  a  low  state  of  piety 
renders  a  man  an  easy  prey  to  error.  One  of  the  most  effective  safeguards  against  the 
corruption  of  our  faith  is  a  healthy,  vigorous,  spiritual  life.  4.  The  most  effective  way 
ef  looking  to  ourselvei  is  looking  earnestly  to  Ohrist.  That  will  secure  our  safety,  our 
progress,  and  our  full  reward.  Some  set  out  in  Christian  life  and  service  with  fervent 
zeal,  and  work  earnestly  for  a  time,  and  then  grow  lukewarm,  and  decline  into  almost 
useless  servants.  Great  will  be  their  loss,  and  etemid.  Let  it  not  be  so  with  us.  Let 
us  be  covetous  of  a  rich  reward,  and  ambitious  of  a  splendid  crown,  and  dUigent  both 
in  the  pursuit  of  holiness  and  of  duties  of  the  Divine  Master's  service,  that  at  last  we 
may  have  a  triumphal  "  entrance  into  the  eternal  kingdom  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour 
Jesus  Christ"— W.  J. 

Ver.  9. — Man's  true  rtlation  to  the  doctrine~of  Ohrist.  "  Whosoever  transgresseth 
and  abideth  not  in  the  doctrine  of  Christ,"  etc.  In  our  remarks  we  shall  follow  the 
Bevised  Version,  which  is  sustained  by  the  authority  of  aU  the  oldest  manuscripta.  The 
text  presents  for  our  consideration — 

L  The  butseue  Tsaoekb  or  the  Divine.  Our  Lord  is  here  represented  as  the 
supreme  and  infallible  Teacher  of  men  in  the  tUngs  of  GK>d.  "The  doctrine  of 
Christ "  we  understand  as  meaning  the  truth  which  Christ  himself  taught.  And  from 
the  connection  it  seems  in  this  place  to  refer  especially  to  his  teaching  concerning  the 
Divine  Being  and  his  relations  with  men.  "  Whosoever  goeth  onward  and  abideth  not 
in  the  teaching  of  Christ,  hath  not  God :  he  that  abideth  in  the  teaching,  the  same  hath 
both  the  Father  and  the  Son."  Concerning  God,  and  his  attitude  and  relation  to  us,  our 
Lord  is  the  supreme  Teacher.  1.  As  regards  his  words.  "  No  man  hath  seen  God  at 
any  time ;  the  only  begotten  Son,  which  is  in  the  bosom  of  the  Father,  he  hath  declared 
him."  Take  some  of  his  declarations.  "God  is  a  Spirit,"  etc.  (John  iv.  24).  The 
parable  of  the  prodigal  son  is  a  wonderfully  beautifol  representation  of  the  attitude 
of  the  Father  towards  his  rebellious  children,  also  towards  his  penitent  children.  His 
conversation  with  Nicodemns  sets  forth  with  great  clearness  and  force  the  infinite  love 
of  God  in  the  gift  of  his  Son,  and  the  way  of  salvation  for  man.  The  sermon  on  the 
mount  is  a  most  luminous  exposition  of  the  will  of  the  Father  towards  men.  2.  As 
regards  his  life.  The  life  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  the  supreme  revelation  of  God. 
"  The  Word  became  flesh,  and  dwelt  among  us  (and  we  beheld  his  glory,  glory  as  of  the 
Only  Begotten  from  the  Father),  full  of  grace  and  truth."  "  Jesus  saith,  I  am  the  Way, 
and  the  Truth,  and  the  Life :  no  one  cometh  unto  the  Father,  but  by  me,"  etc.  (John 
ziv.  6 — 10).  "  Neither  doth  any  know  the  Father,  save  the  Son,  and  he  to  whomsoever 
the  Son  willeth  to  reveal  him." 

n.  Max'*  tbue  bslation  to  the  bupbeme  TKxamsa  of  the  Divine.  He  must 
•bide  in  it.  There  is  danger  of  his  renouncing  it.  "  Whosoever  goeth  onward  and 
abideth  not  in  the  teaching  of  Christ,"  etc.  "  <£>eth  onward,"  or  "  taketh  the  lead,"  is 
•  lomewhnt  <M<8ento  CKfresaiaa.    It  may  mean,  "  every  one  whs  would  Mt  uy  iut  « 


1^18.]  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  OF  JOHN.  U 

teadher  "  (Alford\  as  in  John  Zi  4,  "  He  goeth  before  them,"  etc.  Ebrard  tjsplains  it 
thu^ :  " '  He  wbo  in  such  a  sense  gioes  forward  in  knowledge  as  not  to  abide  in  the 
doctrine  of  Christ,  hath  not  God.'  It  is  undeniable  that  reference  is  here  made  to  the 
pretensions  of  the  Gnostics,  who  tk)ways  represented  their  doctrine  as  a  constant  pro- 
gression in  knowledge.  There  is  a  progress  which  forsakes  the  first  principles  which 
have  been  established;  and  subh  a  progress  is  apostasy.  In  all  true  progression  of 
knowledge  there  tnust  ever  be  a  firm  adherence  to  the  unehangeable  root  or  foundation 
of  knowledge-."  Men  may  renounce  truth  for  error.  "  If  any  among  you  do  err  from 
the  triith."  Men  niay  fail  to  abide  in  the  true  doctrine  by  reason  of  (1)  a  curious  and 
speculative  meiital  disposition.  Some  will  not  recognize  the  fact  that, "secret  things 
belong  unto  the  Lord."  Thtey  are  presttmptuoua  in  their  intellectual  inquiries  and 
investigations.  They  forget  that  it  is"  the  meek  whom  he  will  guide  in  judgment/' 
etc.  (Ps.  ixT.  9).  "  Thou  hast  hid  these  things  from  the  wise  and  understanding," 
etu.  (Matt.  xi.  25);  Again,  men  may  fail  to  abide  in  the  true  doctrine  by  reason  of 
(2)  loss  of  spiritual  health.  If  a  man  become  a  backslider  in  heart,  his  strongest 
guarantee  for  Steadfastness  in  the  faith  is  gone.  "  The  secret  of  the  Lord  is  with  them 
that  fear  him,"  etc.  When  the  heart  is  not  right  with  God,  man  is  easily  led  away 
from  truth  into  error.  We  are  required  to  abide  in  the  true  teaoliing;  We  are  to  be 
rooted  and  grounded  in  it ;  to  grow  up  in  it,  etc.  The  sad  consequence  of  failure  in 
this  respect  should  arouse  us  to  maintain  Our  steadfastness  in  the  doctrine  of  Christ. 
"  Whosoever  goeth  onward  And  abideth  not  in  the  teaching  of  Christ,  hath  not  God ; " 
i.e.  he  has  no  fellowship  with  Godj  he  ia  not  a  partaker  of  his  nature,  he  does  not  possess 
him  as  his  Portion. 

III.  The  blessed  consequence  of  maintaining  this  true  relation  to  thb 
BUPBBMB  TEACHING  OF  THB  DiviNB.  "  He  that  abideth  in  the  teaching,  the  same  hath 
both  the  Father  and  the  Son."  How  are  we  to  understand  this?  He  has  them  :  1.  By 
true  acquaintance  with  them.  "  We  have  the  mind  of  Christ."  We  know  the  only 
true  God,  and  Jesus  Christ  whom  he  hath  sent.  We  liave  the  author  himself,  in  an 
Important  sense,  when  we  have  grasped  his  opinions^  principles,  arguments,  sympathies ; 
so  we  have  the  Father  and  the  Son  by  our  acquaintance  -with  the  Divine  teaching.  2. 
By  supreme  sympathy  with  th«m.  "  God  is  Love ;  and  he  that  dyvelleth  in  love  dwelleth 
in  God,  and  God  dwelleth  in  him."  "  Our  fellowship  is  with  the  Father,  and  with  his 
Son  Jesus  Christ."  By  mutual  love  we  possess  each  other.  By  mutual  love  we  "have 
both  the  Father  and  the  Son."  3.  By  covenant  relation  with  them.  "  God  said,  I  will 
dwell  in  them,  and  walk  in  them :  and  I  will  be  their  God,  and  they  shall  be  my 
people ; "  "  The  Lord  is  my  Portion,  saith  my  soul ; "  "  My  Lord  and  my  God." 

Let  us  give  all  diligence  to  abide  in  the  teaching  of  Christ,  that  this  most  glorious 
and  blessM.  possession  may  be  ours,  even  "  the  Father  and  the  Son." — W.  J. 

Vers.  10, 11. — Sow  to  treat  heffetics.  "  If  there  come  any  unto  you,  and  bring  not  this 
doctrinej"  etc.    Ovur  subject  divides  itself  into  two  branches. 

I.  The  bxhobtation  of  the  apostle.  "  If  any  one  cometh  unto  you,  and  Bringeth 
not  this  teaching,  receive  him  hot  into  your  house,  and  give  him  no  greeting."  Notice : 
1.  What  the  exhortation  implies^  (1)  That  the  elect  lady  was  accustomed  to  enter- 
tain ChristiaB  ministers  (cf.  3  John  6,  6)i  We  have  a  beautiful  illustration  of  similar 
hospitality  in  2  Kings  iVi  8 — 13.  From  that  time  to  this  very  many  godly  persons 
have  obtained  for  themselves  a  good  report  by  entertaining  faithful  ministers  of  religion. 
Ill  so  doing  th^y  have  often  been  richly  blessed ;  and  a  gracious  reward  is  promised 
unto  them  (Matt.  x.  40 — 42);  (2)  That  thpre  were  ministers  of  false  teaching  abroad 
who  were  likely  to  cdll  upon  this  lady,  "  If  any  one  cometh  unto  you,  and  bringeth 
not  this  teachiilg ; "  i.e.  "  the  teaching  of  Christ "  (ver.  9).  Alfoid  points  out  that  the 
use  of  "  the  indicative  after  ti  shows  that  the  case  supposed  actually  existed ;  that  such 
persons  were  sure  to  come  to  "  her.  The  teachers  of  error  were  at  work,  etc.  2.  What 
thx  exhortation  enjoins.  "  If  any  one  cometh  unto  you^  and  bringeth  not  this  teaching, 
receive  him  not  into  your  hoU^e^  and  give  him  no  greeting.".  We  have  already  con- 
sidered (in  dealing  with  ver.  8)  what  is  a  Christian's  first  duty  in  relation  to  false 
doctrines  and  their  prbpagators.  What  is  his  subsequent  diity?  To  refute  such 
doctrines  ?  To  denounce  such  teachers  ?  To  oppose  them  ?  Or,  to  persecute  them  ? 
The  New  TestameBt  nowhere  sanctiouiperseeutien  in  any  form.   Ajid  opposition  should 


14  THE   SECOND  EPISTLE  OF  JOHN.  [1— 1» 

be  left  to  the  few  who  have  the  ability  to  conduct  it  successfully.  The  wise  course  for 
the  great  majority  of  those  who  hold  the  truth  is,  first,  to  look  to  themselves  (ver.  8), 
and  next,  to  withhold  all  help  and  encouragement  from  the  false  teachers.  St.  John 
enjoins:  (1)  That  we  do  not  aid  the  teachers  of  folse  doctrine  by  our  hospitality. 
"  Eeceive  him  not  into  your  house."  The  apostle  is  not  giving  directions  concerning 
the  case  of  an  ordinary  traveller  seeking  hospitality ;  but  of  an  active  i^ent  in  the 
propagation  of  error,  and  error  as  to  a  fact  of  vital  importance.  "  Let  not  your  house 
he  made  a  base  of  operations  against  Christ."  (2)  That  we  do  not  aid  the  teachers  of 
false  doctrine  by  wishing  them  success.  "  Give  him  no  greeting."  Do  not  bid  him 
"  God-speed."  Do  not  countenance  him  and  his  errors  in  any  way  or  in  any  degree. 
"  God  wiU  be  no  Patron  of  falsehood,  seduction,  and  sin."  And  in  this  respect  his  people 
should  imitate  him.  In  our  age,  in  some  quarters,  there  is  a  great  demand  for  liberality 
in  the  treatment  of  men  who  differ  from  us  on  religious  questions.  And  so  far  as 
matters  of  opinion  and  of  the  interpretation  of  the  Scriptures  are  concerned,  the  demand 
is  a  just  one.  But  it  is  altogether  different  when  it  is  a  question  of  the  acceptation  or 
rejection  oi  facts,  or  a  fact,  as  in  the  case  before  us.  The  question  was — Had  Jesus  Christ 
come  in  the  flesh,  or  not  ?  (ver.  7).  In  such  a  case  the  course  marked  oat  by  St.  John 
in  this  letter  (vers.  8, 10, 11)  is  the  only  one  for  a  Christian.  How  severely  he  cha- 
racterizes the  heretics  (ver.  7)1  How  sternly  St.  Paul  writes  of  teachers  of  error 
(GaL  L  7 — 9) !  They  knew  that  a  true  faith  is  the  necessary  root  of  Christian  fruit- 
fulness  and  beauty.  True  faith  is  essential  to  spiritual  life,  holy  love,  and  hearty 
obedience. 

II.  The  reason  by  which  thk  exhobtation  is  knfoboed.  "  For  he  that  g^veth  him 
greeting  partaketh  in  his  evil  works."  To  countenance  a  teacher  of  error,  to  wish  him 
"  God-speed,"  is  to  approve  his  evil  works  and  to  share  his  guilt.  Says  Matthew  Henry, 
"  We  may  be  sharers  in  the  iniquities  of  others.  How  judicious  and  how  cautious 
should  the  Christian  be  1  There  are  many  ways  of  sharing  the  guilt  of  other  people's 
transgressions ;  it  may  be  done  by  culpable  silence,  indolence,  UDConcemednes3,  private 
contribution,  public  countenance  and  assistance,  inward  approbation,  open  apology  and 
defence."    Let  us  take  heed  that  we  be  not  "  partakers  of  other  men's  sins." 

In  matters  of  opinion  let  us  cultivate  the  widest  liberality ;  in  matters  of  fact,  uncom- 
promising firmness.  "  In  things  essential,  unity ;  in  things  doubtful,  liberty ;  in  all 
things,  charity." — W.  J. 

Vers.  12, 13. — Commumcationt,  tvriiten  and  oral,  "  Having  many  things  to  write 
unto  you,"  etc.  This  is  the  conclusion  of  the  letter ;  and  it  suggests  several  topics  for 
meditation. 

I.  The  excellence  of  wbitinq  ab  a  means  of  communioation.  St.  John  speaks 
of  writing  "with  paper  and  ink,"  Paper  as  we  now  have  it  was  not  invented  until 
long  after  the  date  of  this  Epistle.  In  our  text "  paper  "  means  a  kind  of  leaf  made  from 
the  Egyptian  papyrus  plant.  The  ink  was  made  of  soot  and  water,  with  gum  added  to 
thicken  it  and  make  it  lasting.  The  pen  was  made  of  a  reed,  and  was  probably  split. 
1.  How  excellent  is  writing  when  speech  is  unaiiaindble  I  It  was  well  that,  when  St. 
John  could  not  visit  the  elect  lady,  he  was  able  to  communicate  with  her  "  with  paper 
and  ink."  How  refreshing  it  is  to  get  letters  from  those  who  are  dear  to  us  but  distant 
from  us  I     When  a  son  has  left  the  parental  roof,  and  feels  desolate  in  a  large  city,  how 

.  he  is  cheered  by  a  letter  from  home  I  And  how  eagerly  do  parents,  who  are  deeply 
solicitous  for  the  safety  and  prosperity  of  their  absent  child,  look  for  the  accustomed 
letter !  How  much  more  so  if  they  are  in  different  countries,  separated  by  the  wide 
ocean!  2.  How  excellent  is  writing  when  permanence  is  desired  I  The  spoken  word 
passes  away  so  quickly.  The  written  word  may  be  preserved.  Here  is  this  little  letter, 
nearly  two  thousand  years  old,  supplying  us  with  themes  for  profitable  meditation 
to-day.    The  Bible  is  the  grandest  witness  of  the  excellence  and  value  of  writing, 

II.  ThTC    GBEATEB    excellence   of    speech  "  FACE   TO   FACE  "   AS   A   UEAKS  OF   COU- 

MUNiCATioN.  1.  Speech  is  more  quick  and  easy  than  writing.  This  is  the  idea  of  the 
apostle  here.  "  Having  many  things  to  write  unto  you,  I  would  not  write  them  with 
paper  and  ink,"  etc.  The  number  of  hi*  communications  led  him  to  prefer  the  more 
expeditious  method  of  communication.  The  swiftest  pen  travels  too  slowly  for  the 
iittewaca  of  the  full  heart.    The  most  r^pid  writer,  unless  he  employ  shorthand,  f^U 


1—13.]  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  OP  JOHN.  15 

far  behind  the  fluent  speaker.  2.  Speech  U  more  expressive  than  writing.  The  effect 
of  our  words  depends  not  only  upon  what  is  said,  but  also  upon  how  it  is  said.  Tou 
cannot  write  or  print  tones  or  cadences  of  the  voice,  glances  of  the  eye,  or  aspects  of 
the  features.  When  the  eloquent  John  Elias  was  entreated  to  allow  some  of  his  sermons 
to  be  printed,  he  replied,  "You  cannot  print  fire."  And  Dr.  Baleigh  says,  "  Ther«  is 
much  in  a  sermon  which  cannot  be  published.  If  it  is  true,  it  is  'a  building  of  God ' 
for  the  time  '  not  made  with  hands,'  and  neither  hands  nor  pens  can  preserve  it.  '  The 
grace  of  the  fashion  of  it  perisheth,'  or  survives  only  in  the  memory  and  the  life  of  the 
hearer.  The  elastic  obedient  words  seem  cool  and  hardened  on  the  printed  page." 
This  is  also  true  of  conversation.  In  this  respect  the  pen  and  the  printing-press  can 
never  even  approach  the  pulpit  in  power  for  present  impression. 

in.  The  deliqbt  of  friendly  converse  and  communion.  "  I  hope  to  come  imto 
you,  and  to  speak  face  to  face,  that  your  joy  may  be  fulfilled."  How  delightful  is  the 
fellowship  of  kindred  minds  I  For  this  at  least  three  things  are  essential.  1.  Mutual 
interest*.  Good  conversation  is  impossible  apart  from  this.  How  much  more  impos- 
sible is  communion  I  2.  Mutual  sympathies.  Where  fellow-feeling  is  absent,  social 
intercourse  can  never  be  pleasant.  3.  Mutual  confidence.  Without  thorough  trust  in 
each  other,  conversation  cannot  be  bee,  communion  cannot  be  true  and  hearty.  But 
where  these  things  are  found,  how  delightful  is  social  intercourse  I  One  of  the  purest 
and  fullest  joys  we  have  in  this  world'  is  that  of  really  congenial  society.  It  will  be 
a  source  of  rich  enjoyment  in  heaven.    Heaven  is  a  great  and  blessed  society. 

IV.  The  propriety  of  fbiendi.t  orbetinqs.  "  The  children  of  thine  elect  sister 
salute  thee."  Although  St.  John  had  many  things  to  communicate  which  he  deferred 
until  he  saw  the  elect  lady,  he  did  not  omit  the  greetings  of  her  sister's  children. 
Concerning  such  salutations  the  spirit  of  Christianity  authorizes  two  remarks.  1.  Unless 
kind  greetings  are  true,  they  should  not  be  tendered.  We  fear  that  there  is  much 
formality  and  unreality  in  many  of  the  salutations  of  our  age.  2.  When  kind  greetings 
are  sent  by  us  we  shoiUd  be  earful  to  communicate  them.  True  and  gentle  hearts  may 
be  pained,  and  warm  affections  may  be  chilled,  by  our  neglecting  so  to  do. — W.  J. 

Vers.  1 — S. — Salutation:  I.  iHTROnncniox.  1.  Address,  "The  elder  unto  the 
elect  lady  and  her  children."  The  writer  of  this  Epistle  was  known  as  "the  elder  ;" 
it  clearly  bears  the  Johannine  mark.  The  principal  receiver  was  "the  elect  lady," 
Some  think  that  "  a  Church "  is  intended ;  but  a  mystical  interpretation  is  not  to  be 
resorted  to  when  a  plain  interpretation  is  tenable  and  beautiful.  The  lady  was  "  elect," 
as  "chosen  out  of  the  profane  world  into  the  sanctified  company  of  the  Church  of 
God."  She  found  a  sphere  of  usefulness  in  receiving  into  her  "  house  "  the  Christian 
teachers ;  her  temptation  was  to  be  indiscriminate  in  her  receiving ;  therefore  the 
"  elder,"  meantime,  "  with  paper  and  ink,"  puts  her  on  her  guard.  Her  children  are 
associated  with  her :  they  were  advanced  enough  to  understand  the  shibboleth  of  the 
Incarnation.  Amplification.  (1)  The  lady  and  her  children  objects  of  love,  "  Whom 
I  love  in  truth ;  and  not  I  only,  but  also  all  they  that  know  the  truth."  They  were 
loved,  not  with  a  love  bestowed  on  friends  and  foes  of  the  truth  alike,  but  with  a  love 
which  took  its  restriction  of  object  and  whole  characterization  from  the  truth.  They 
were  loved,  not  by  John  only,  but  also  by  them  that  knew  the  truth — especially  the  truth 
of  the  Incarnation,  as  being  the  highest  revelation  of  God.  They  were  universally 
loved  by  these ;  wherever  there  were  Christians,  they  were  thought  of  with  kindly 
feelings.  (2)  Explanation  of  their  being  loved,  "  For  the  truth's  sake  which  abideth 
in  us,  and  it  shall  be  with  us  for  ever."  What  claim  has  the  truth  on  us  ?  Wandering 
up  and  down  in  the  world,  it  is  due  to  the  truth  that  we  give  it  admittance  to  our  hearts. 
It  is  also  due  to  the  truth  that  we  retain  it  as  that  deprived  of  which  we  are  made  poor 
indeed.  It  is  further  due  to  the  truth  that  we  allow  it  to  be  the  transforming  power 
in  our  characters.  It  is  especially  due  to  the  truth  that  we  let  our  convictions  of  it  be 
clearly  knoion.  It  is  due  to  the  truth  that  we  help  its  extension.  It  is,  finally,  due 
to  the  truth  that  we  love  ail  its  friends.  The  lady  and  her  children  had  given  facilities 
for  spreading  the  truth;  therefore  it  was  that  they  were  loved.  The  truth  is  said  to 
abide  in  us.  We  are  the  house,  and  the  truth  (greater  than  us)  is  the  occupant.  How 
cheerless  a  deserted  house — windows  closed  against  the  light  of  day,  darkness,  coldness, 
deadness  reigning  within  1    So  is  it  when  the  soul  shuts  out  the  truth,  is  not  lighted 


16  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  OP  JOHN.  [1— 1» 

»nd  wanned  by  thought*  of  God's  lore.  It  is  different  when  a  house  is  occupied. 
There  are  signs  of  life,  there  is  a  feeling  of  warmth.  And  so  is  it  with  the  soul  when 
it  is  lighted  up  with  God's  truth  and  warmed  with  the  influences  of  his  Spirit.  The 
truth  is  also  said,  very  confidently,  to  be  tvith  «•  /or  ever.  It  is  to  be  thought  of  not 
merely  as  occupant,  but  as  companion.  As  the  psalmist  had  the  testimonies  as  his 
counsellors,  so  we  enjoy  the  society,  the  enlivening  presence,  of  the  truth.  It  is  a 
companionship  which  will  never  be  broken  up.  In  heaven  there  will  be  greater  open- 
ness of  nature  to  the  truth — a  keener  insight,  a  more  tender  sensibility,  a  readier 
memory,  a  richer  suggestiveness,  a  livelier  imagination  in  the  service  of  the  truth. 
The  truth  shall  be  with  us  for  ever  in  ever  fuller  revelation.  The  truth  is  so  greatthat 
it  Vcill  require  a  finite  mind  »  whole  eternity  to  think  it  out.  The  companionship  of 
which  we  are  never  to  be  deprived  is  a  companionship  that  admits  of  no  monotony, 
that  ever  opens  up  new  elements  of  enjoyment.  2.  Salutation.  (1)  The  three  words 
of  salutation.  "  Grace,  mercy,  peace,  shall  be  with  us."  While  John  passes  from  a 
wish  into  assurance,  and  includes  himself  in  the  salutation,  he  uses  the  three  Pauline 
words.  What  we  need  for  ourselves  and  others  is  to  be  dealt  with,  not  according  to 
our  deserts,  but  according  to  the  freeness  and  richness  of  yraix.  This  will  be  manifested 
in  marei/ul  visitations  suited  to  our  need.  And  the  result  will  be  peace  within,  and 
even  peace  from  without  so  far  as  it  is  salutary,  (2)  Somrce  looked  to  in  talutation, 
"  From  God  the  Father,  and  from  Jesus  Christ,  the  Son  of  the  Father."  It  is  to  God 
that  we  look  for  blessing,  first  in  his  absolute  Fatherhood,  and  then  in  his  Fatherhood 
as  historically  manifested  in  his  Son.  Laying  hold  on  what  God  absolutely  is,  and  then 
on  what  he  has  explicitly  shown  himself  to  be,  there  is  no  limit  to  what  we  may  expect 
of  blessing.  (3)  Eoto  tht  blessing  is  realized  in  us.  "In  truth  and  love."  These  are 
the  two  words  which  give  character  to  the  Epistle.  If  we  are  blessed  by  God  we  must 
have  love;  but  love  must  be  no  vague  sentiment,  temporary. ebullition — it  must  be 
Galled  forth,  stistained,  tempered  by  truth.  Beligious  people  who  are  orthodox,  but 
have  a  want  of  warmth,  are  unattractive  enough,  and  are  apt  to  produce  revulsion 
against  the  truth.  Beligious  people,  again,  who  abound  in  feeling,  but  have,  not  clear 
perceptions  of  truth,  are  apt  to  be  imprudent,  and  thiis  to  bring  religion  into  contempt. 
IL  Main  pobtion.  1.  Counsel.  (1)  Foundation.  "  I  rejpice  greatly  that  I  have 
found  certain  of  thy  children  walking  in  truth,  even  as  we  received  conimandment  from 
the  Father."  It  is  quite  Pauline  thus  to  begin  with  words  of  praise.  The  accurate 
translation  is,  "  I  rejoiced  greatly  that  I  have  foutid  of  thy  children."  The  joy  is 
referred  to  its  initial  moment;  the  ground  of  it  still  continues.  The  lady  and  her 
children  were  aU  loved  by  John ;  but,  m  bestowing  praise,  he  is  careful  not  to  go  beyond 
his  position  of  observation.  He  had  come  into  contact  with  some  of  her  children,  whose 
walk  was  according  to  his  mind.  It  was  Characterized  by  truth  ;  and  that  was  as  God 
wished  it  to  be.  It  was  so  appointed  for  the  household  by  the  great  Father.  What 
greater  joy  can  there  be  for  a  mother  than  to  be  told  of  this  one  and  that  one  of  her 
children  walking  according  to  Divine  rule?  (2)  Nature.  The  old  eommandment. 
"  And  now  I  beseech  thee,  itidy,  not  as  though  I  i\rrote  to  thee  a  new  commandment, 
but  that  which  we  had  frorii  the  beginning,  that  we  love  one  another."  It  is  "  in  the 
exercise  of  the  full  privilege  of  Christian  fellowship  "  that  he  beseeches.  He  makes  his 
appeal  more  direct  by  designating  her  as  in  ver.  1.  In  language  very  Similar  to  1  John 
iL  7,  he  points  to  familiarity  with  the  commandment.  With  great  delicacy  hA  includes 
himself  in  the  reference  of  the  commandment.  He  was  doing  What  Christian  love 
demanded  toward  her  in  counselling  and  warning  her;  she  must  do  what  Christian 
love  demanded  toward  him  in  attencQng  to  his  counsel  and  warning.  The  summary  o/ 
the  commandments.  "  And  this  is  love,  that  we  should  walk  after  his  commandments. 
This  is  the  commandment,  even  as  ye  heard  from  the  beginning,  that  ye  should  walk 
in  it."  The  first  statement  closely  resembles  what  is  found  in  1  John  v.  S.  If  we  lovd 
(without  distinction  of  object  here),  we  shall  endeavour  to  walk  after  the  Divine  coin- 
mandments.  Those  commandments  (separate  expressions  of  the  Divine  will)  are 
summarized  in  one,  vi«.  walking  in  love  with  one  another,  to  which,  as  a  familiar 
commandment,  the  lady  And  her  children  are  directed.  2.  Warning.  (1)  Foundatibn 
in  the  number  of  false  teachers.  "  For  many  deceivers  are  gone  forth  into  the  world, 
even  they  that  confess  not  that  Jesus  Christ  cometh  in  the  fiesh.  This  it  the  deceiver 
•nd  the  antichrist."    There  is  a  transition  here  from  love  to  truth.    The  £ilse  teacher* 


1— IS.]  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  OF  JOHN.  II 

•re  ttjM  "  ^eeeiTsri,"  by  which  we  are  to  understand  th«t  they  were  not  only  aside  from 
the  truth  in  their  teaching,  but  that  they  practised  the  art  of  deception  in  teaching 
what  resembled  Christianity  while  not  actually  Christiaoity.    It  would  have  been  rnora 
honest  to  have  openly  denounced  Christianity ;  but  there  would  have  been  less  chance  of 
■uccess,  as  they  would  never  have  been  able  to  ingratiate  themselTes  with  the  friends  of 
Christianity.    These  deceivers  were  numerous,  and  they  were  everywhere  (ha,vi»g  "  gone 
forth  into  the  world  ")  ;  as  the  lady  there  was  an  entertainer  of  the  Christian  teachers, 
there  was  every  likelihood  of  some  of  them  coming  her  way,  and  falsely  representing 
themselves  to  be  Christian  teachers.    How  were  they  to  be  known  ?    Here  we  come 
upon  the  design  of  the  Epistle.    They  were  to  be  known  (In  accordance  with  the  leading 
thought  of  the  First  Epistle)  by  their  confessing  not  that  Jesus  Christ  cometh  in  the 
flesh.    She  was  to  put  to  them  the  shibboleth  of  the  Incarnation.    Did  they  recognize 
in  their  teaching,  {Mainly,  without  mystification,  not  merely  the  pa^t  but  the  presenit 
coming  in  the  flesh  of  Jesus  Christ  ?    Was  that  flesh  of  his  a  manifestation  of  a  union 
formed  between  his  Divine  nature  and  human  nature,  which  still  remains  and  operates 
as  a  great  fact  ?    He  who  could  not  give  satisfaction  on  that  point  was  to  be  set  down 
as  personally  the  representative  of  the  deceiver  (who  has  designs  on  Christiaiis}  and  the 
antichrist  (whose  task  is  to  thwart  Christ)^    (2)  Dcmgw  to  he  feouetct  from  the  false 
teachert.    *'  Look  to  yourselves,  that  ye  lose  not  the  things  v^rhich  we  have  wrought, 
but  that  ye  receive  a  full  reward.     Whosoever  goeth  onward  and  abideth  not  in  the 
teaching  of  Christ,  hath  not  Ood :  he  that  abideth  in  the  teaching,  the  same  hath  both 
the  Father  and  the  Son."    A  good  work  had  been  wrought  by  John  and  his  associates 
on  the  lady  and  her  children,  in  their  Christian  faith,  love,  enlightenment,  activity. 
There  was  a  reward  corresponding  to  the  work.    If  they  looked  to  themselves  (as  to 
their  being  influenced),  the  reward  would  be  obtained  in  fulL    If  they  did  not  look  to 
themselves,  the  reward  would  be  lost.    The  reward  was  not  to  be  expected  under  the 
influence  of  a  teacher  of  the  advanced  school.    He  is  here  happily  described  as  going 
beyond  and  not  abiding  in  the  teaching  of  Christ.    He  went  beyond  what  Christ  taugh^ 
with  the  penalty  attached,  that  there  was  the  absence  of  Ood  from  bis  teaching.    The 
reward  was  only  to  be  expected  under  the  influence  of  a  true  Christian  teacher.    He 
really  progressed,  but  only  in  the  way  of  opening  up  what  Christ  taught,  with  the  blessing 
attached  that  he  had  the  Father  and  the  Son  in  his  teaching,  t.«.  Divine  love  in  ite 
most  tender  manifestation  in  the  Incarnation.    Having  both  the  Father  and  the  Son  in 
his  teaching,  this  became  the  reward  of  them  that  looked  to  themselves  in  hearing. 
(3)  Course  to  he  followed  with  the  false  teachers.     "  If  any  one  cometh  unto  you,  and 
bringeth  not  this  teaching,  receive  him  not  into  yom  house,  and  give  turn  no  greeting : 
for  he  that  giveth  him  greeting  partaketh  in  his  evil  works."    As  many  fiilse  teachers 
were  going  forth  into  the  world,  John  assumes  the  coming  of  one  of  them  to  their  door. 
If  he  came  as  destitute,  it  would  not  Im  undutiful  on  their  part  to  relieve  him.    But  he 
would  come  bringing  teaching,  not,  however,  the  true  teaching  of  the  Incarnation.    This 
being  the  case,  they  were  not  to  receive  liim  into  their  house  (extend  to  him  hospitality) ; 
they  were  not  to  give  him  the  greeting  prsliminary  to  this  i  they  were  not  to  be  thus 
friendly  to  him  in  his  capacity  as  tfiacner — claiming  falsely  to  be  a  Christian  teacher. 
That  would  be  friendship  on  an  entirely  wrong  footing.    Among  those  who  actually 
possess  Christian  faith  and  Christian  knowledge,  how  many  are  there  who,  under  the 
influence  of  a  secret  vanity,  think  they  must  play  a  magnanimous  part,  and  exhibit  at 
once  the  firmness  of  their  faith  and  the  largeness  of  their  charity,  and  therefore  do  not 
seek  to  avoid  personal  intercourse  with  even  notorious  enemies  of  the  Christian  fiuth? 
They  are  so  firmly  grounded  that  they  can  venture  on  this  without  fear  of  being  per- 
verted 1    They  stand  so  spiritually  high,  and  their  views  are  so  broad  and  free,  that  there 
is  no  danger  for  themselves,  but  much  advantage  to  those  with  whom  they  hold  this 
fellowship  I    But  this  is  a  soul-imperilling  delusion.    A  Christian  man  should  have  to 
do  with  these  deniers  of  Christ  only  for  the  one  sole  end  of  their  conversion ;  as  soon  as 
he  sees  that  his  great  object  is  spurned,  he  has  nothing  more  to  do  with  them.    Any 
compromise,  which  would  let  them  think  in  their  own  way,  and  nevertheless  continue 
personal  intimate  fellowship,  is  altogether  of  evil ;  it  is  a  denial  of  the  Lord,  who  will 
not  have  his  light  put  under  a  busheL    The  ground- on  which  John  condemns  frater- 
■icing  with  the  open  enemies  or  false  friends  of  Christianity  is  this,  that  he  that  givetb 
any  of  them  greeting  partaketh  in  his  evil  works,     A  falsa  teacher  wtaae,  to  our  dog; 
n.wm.  « 


M  TBE  SECOND  EPISTLE  OF  JOHN.  ti^tfL 

(Htenlly  or  fig^uratirelj) ;  we  give  him  friendly  greeting  and  receive  kim  into  our 
Aouie ;  he  remains  m  time  with  us,  and,  when  learing,  we  bid  him  "  Ghxl-speed."  Are  we 
Bot  thereby  making  ourselves  partakers  in  his  evil  works  7  We  are  giving  him  excellent 
facilities  for  doing  bad  work  on  ourselves  and  on  the  members  of  our  homes ;  and  we 
are  sending  him  forth  with  the  influence  of  our  name  (so  far  m  that  goes),  thus  opening 
doors  for  more  perverting  work. 

UL  CoNOLUsioN.  1.  Beaton /or  brevity.  "Having  many  things  to  write  unto  you, 
I  would  not  write  them  with  paper  and  ink :  but  I  hope  to  come  nnto  you,  and  to  speak 
£Eu;e  to  face,  that  your  joy  may  be  fulfilled."  His  end  of  cautioning  the  lady  and  her 
children  has  been  served.  The  burden  of  the  Lord  is  on  his  mind  as  he  thinks  of  their 
circumstances  and  needs — messages  &om  the  Lord  to  them.  These  he  does  not  put 
down  in  writing,  using  jxip«r  and  ink  ;  he  hopes  to  pay  a  visit  to  them,  when  he  will 
have  the  advantage  of  speaking  face  to  face.  Hearing  from  his  Upt  the  messages  at 
present  reserved,  their  joy  will  then  be  fulfilled.  2.  Salutation.  *'Tha  children  of 
thine  elect  sister  salute  thee."  The  "  elect  sister"  was  not  with  the  apostle^  to  send  her 
salutation.  Her  children  (of  whom  we  are  to  think  well)  send  tbeir  salutatiou  to  the 
"  elect  lady."  They  must  have  been  cognizant  of  the  fact  of  the  letter  b^g  sent,  and 
also  of  its  purport.  It  is  pleasant  to  mid  the  children  in  two  homes  so  aymDathati* 
with  thair  motMc*  aad  with  tha  apostle  oa  the  great  matters  U  life.— &  W, 


HOMILETICAL  INDEX 


ID 


THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  OE  JOHN. 


An  Apostolic  Pastoral  to  •  ChriBtian 
Family  ...  ... 

An  Bxemplary  Christian  Greeting   ... 

Tlie  Rejoicing  of  the  Good  in  the  Ex- 
emplification of  the  Godly  Life     ... 

Mutual  Love         ...  ... 

The  Exhibition  and  Condemnation  of 
HeRties  •••  •••  ... 


7 
8 

10 


THEm  rA«« 

A  Summons  to  Self-Gnardianship   ...  11 
Man's  True  Belation  to  the  Doctrine 

of  Christ            ...            ...            ...  12 

How  to  treat  Heretics         ...            ...  13 

Commnnications,  Written  and  Oral  ...  14 

SalutatioB             m»           m*           •••  IS 


THE 


PULPIT    COMMENTARY 


EDITED   BY  THE 


VERY  UY.  H.  1).  M.  SPENCE,  D.D., 


DEAN  OF  GLOUCESTER  ; 


AND   BY  THE 


REV.  JOSEPH    S.   EXELL,  M.A. 


III.   JOHN. 

By  rev.    a.    PLUMMER,    M.A.,  D.D.. 

MASTER  OF  UNIVERSITY  COLLEGE,    DURHAM. 

ijomilctics : 
By    rev.    C.    CLEMANCE,    B.A.,  D.D. 

fomiltcs  bji  llarious  Qlutljors: 

REV.   W.  JONES.  REV.    R.    FINLAYSON,   B.A, 


FUNK    &    WAGNALLS    COMPANY 
New  York  and  Toronto. 


THE  THIRD  EPISTLE  OF  JOHN. 


EXPOSITION. 


ffnOM  rery  early  times  some  have  held  the 
opinion  that  the  Second  Epistle  is  addressed 
to  a  community,  which  is  spoken  of  allegori- 
oftUy  as  "the  elect  lady,"  her  "elect  sister" 
being  a  sister  community;  but  at  no  time 
does  tliere  seem  to  have  heen  any  doubt 
that  the  Third  Epistle  ia  addressed  to  an 
individual.  It  certainly  would  be  an  extra- 
Tagant  hypothesis  that  Gaius  symbolizes  a 
Church. 

Vers.  1 — i. — iNTEODUOTlOlf.  Addrea  and 
occasion.  Bespecting  the  address  and  the 
title  of  "  the  elder,"  see  note  on  2  John  1. 

Ver.  1. — To  Qains  the  beloved  (Fafy  rif 
iyaitTiT^.  This  is  additional  reason  for 
thinking  that  Kupta  in  the  Second  Epistle  is 
not  a  proper  name;  if  it  were  we  should 
probably  have  the  same  formula  as  we  have 
here,  Kvpiif  t^  ^kXckt^.  The  name  Oaiiu 
occurs  elsewhere  in  the  New  Testament  four 
times  (Acts  xis.  29 ;  xx.  4 ;  Bom.  xvL  23 ;  1 
Cor.  i.  14) ;  as  it  was  as  common  in  the  Boman 
Empire  as  John  Smith  is  among  ourselves, 
it  would  be  rash  to  infer  that  the  Oaius 
addressed  here  is  the  same  as  any  of  those 
mentioned  elsewhere.  In  all  probability 
there  are  at  least  four  persons  of  this  name 
in  the  New  Testament.  In  the  opening  of 
this  Epistle  also  we  have  to  remark  the 
characteristic  repetition  of  the  word  "truth," 
which  occurs  four  times  in  the  first  four 
verses.  Deeds,  in  which  Gains  and  Deme- 
trius were  rich,  not  words,  of  which  Diotre- 
phes  was  so  prodigal,  are  what  win  the 
approbation  and  love  of  the  apostle.  The 
thing  which  he  hates  is  unreality;  the 
object  of  bis  special  adoration  is  "the 
truth ; "  "  to  walk  in  the  truth  "  is  nothing 
less  than  to  follow  in  the  footsteps  of  the 
Ijord. 

Ver.  2.— Belovsd,  I  pmy  that  in  all  rsspeota 
(■•t  "otoM  aU  thing!"— €t.  John  wonld 

nfcMn. 


surely  never  have  said  that)  thou  mnyert 
prosper  and  be  in  health,  even  as  thy  soul 
prospereth.  The  apostle  wishes  that  his 
earthly  career  may  be  as  bright  as  his 
spiritual  career  is ;  may  he  have  a  sound 
body  for  Iiis  sound  mind,  and  may  his 
fortunes  be  sound  also.  The  Greek  for 
"prosper"  (euoSoSo-flai)  means  eiactly  to 
"  have  a  good  career." 

Vers.  3,  4. — ror  I  rejoiced  greatly.  We 
must  not  lose  sight  of  the  "  for,"  which  is 
full  of  meaning.  The  elder  has  just  ex- 
pressed a  wish  that  the  external  well- 
being  of  GaiuB  may  equal  the  well-being 
of  his  soul;  and  he  is  quite  sure  of  the 
latter, /or  brethren  keep  coming  and  bearing 
witness  to  the  fact.  The  gmd  report  of 
Gaius  is  still  greater  joy  to  the  apostle  than 
the  evil  report  of  Diotrephes  is  a  sorrow  to 
him.  The  language  in  condemnation  of 
Diotrephes,  severe  as  it  is,  is  not  so  strong 
as  this  in  thankful  delight  respecting  Gaius : 
Greater  joy  have  I  none  than  (to  hear  of) 
these  thuigs.  "Greater"  is  made  doubly 
emphatic,  first  by  position  at  the  beginning 
of  the  sentence,  and  secondly  by  the  double 
comparative  (jiti(oT4paii), 

Vera.  0 — 12. — ^3.  Main  Divisiojt.  Exher- 
tation.  Having  thus  stated  the  circum- 
stances which  have  led  to  his  writing  (comp. 
2  John  4),  the  elder  begins  the  main  portion 
of  the  letter,  which  consists  of  three  sections ; 
the  hospitality  of  Gaius,  and  its  value  (vera. 
6 — 8);  the  arrogance  of  Diotrephes,  and  its 
results  (vers.  9, 10);  the  moral  (vers.  11, 12). 
The  transition  to  this  central  portion  of  the 
Epistle  is  marked  by  a  repetition  of  the 
loving  address.  In  all  three  cases  (vera.  2, 
S,  11),  the  introductory  "beloved"  indicate* 
the  beginning  of  ■  section. 

Ter.  &— It  ia  bjr  no  mewiis  oaay  to  tnuulatt 


TKE  THIBD  EPISTLE  OF  JOHN. 


[1-14. 


thii  Terse  satlifaotorily;  wiffrir  woita  t  iiar 
ipydffii  tls  roiii  iS€\pobs  koI  rovrt  iivovs. 
Here  we  have  three  diflSculties:  (I)  to 
determine  the  meaning  of  vtariy  iroxis ;  (2) 
to  bring  out  the  meaning  of  ipryiirji ;  (3)  to 
translate  toGto  \rithout  awkwardness.  The 
reading  iis  t<As  (K,  L)  for  rovro  (N,  A,  B, 
O,  and  versions)  has  probably  arisen  from  a 
wish  to  avoid  tMs  last  difflcultj.  Ihon  doest 
a  faithful  act  in  all  that  thou  workest  to- 
wards the  brethren,  and  that  towards 
strangers,  is  a  fairly  literal  and  intelligible 
rendering.  But  "to  do  a  faithful  act"  is 
somewhat  obscure.  Probably  it  means  "  to 
act  as  a  faithful  man  would."  All  his 
conduct  towards  the  brethren,  even  when 
they  were  not  previously  known  to  him,  was 
soon  as  became  a  faithful  Christian.  This 
was  his  special  merit;  he  treated  brethren 
who  were  entire  strangers  to  him,  not  as 
strangers,  but  as  brethren.  He  did  not 
pick  and  choose,  showing  hospitality  to 
those  whom  be  liked  and  neglecting  the 
rest.  Every  missionary  was  sure  of  a 
welcome  from  Oaius. 

Ver.  6. — ^Who  bare  witness  to  thy  love 
before  -the  Chnioh.  The  thoroughly  Greek 
word  4KKX7)(r(a  (which,  however,  had  received 
a  number  of  Jewish  associations  through  its 
frequent  use  in  the  Septuagint)  is  used  by 
St.  John  nowhere  but  in  this  Epistle.  This 
witness  of  the  brethren  before  the  Church 
respecting  the  good  deeds  done  to  them  is 
a  type  and  earnest  of  the  witness  of  Christ  at 
the  day  of  judgment :  "  I  was  a  stranger,  and 
ye  took  me  in  .  .  .  Inasmsch  as  ye  did  it 
onto  one  of  these  my  brethren,  even  these 
least,  ye  did  it  unto  me."  Whom  thou  wilt 
da  weJl  to  forward  on  their  journey  in  a 
manner  worthy  of  Ood.  No  higher  standard 
could  well  be  set.  It  reminds  us  of  "  perfect, 
as  your  heavenly  Father  is  perfect"  Gains 
is  to  treat  them  as  remembering  the  Divine 
declaration,  "He  that  receivetb  whomsoever 
I  send,  receivetb  me;  and  he  that  receiveth 
me,  receiveth  him  that  sent  me  "  (John  xiii. 
20).  This  coincidence,  consciously  or  un- 
consciously made,  between  the  Gtespel  and 
Third  Epistle,  is  lost  in  the  rather  colourless 
tendering  in  tiie  Authorized  Yersion, "  after 
•  godly  sort." 

Ver.  7.— For  for  the  sake  of  THE  NAME. 
Such  is  the  exact  rendering  of  the  tme  text ; 
the  insertion  of  "  his  "  before  "  Name " 
weakens  the  effect.  There  was  no  need  to 
■ay  more.  Just  as  to  a  Jew  "  the  Name " 
most  mean  "Jehovah,"  so  to  a  Christian 
•'the  Name"  must  mean  "Jesus  Clirist" 
(oomp.  Acts  y.  41 ;  Jas.  ii.  7).  Bt.  Ignatius 
writes  to  the  Ephesians,  "  I  am  in  bonds  for 
th»  Name't  take  "  (iii.) ;  and  "  Some  are  wont 
of  malicious  guile  to  hawk  about  (h«  Name  " 

tyii.):  and  again  to  the  Fhiladelphians,  "It 
I  beooming  &r  you,  as  a  Church  of  Qod,  to 


•ppolnt  a  deaoon  to  go  thither  as  Ood'i 
ambassador,  that  he  may  congratulate  them 
when  they  are  assembled  together,  and  may 
glorify  tM  Name  "  (x.).  Taking  nothing  of 
the  Gentiles,  lest  the  heathen  should  suspeot 
their  motives,  and  think,  "Like  all  the 
quack  priests  and  philosophers,  you  make  a 
mere  trade  of  your  doctrine,  and  preach  to 
fill  your  bellies."  Nothing  wins  men  over 
so  much  as  clear  proofs  of  disinterestedness. 
The  missionary  who  is  suspected  of  self- 
seeking  will  preach  in  vain.  That  oi  iSvMol 
here  must  mean  "heathen"  seems  clear 
from  Matt.  y.  47;  vl.  7;  xviii.  17,  the  only 
other  places  in  the  New  Testament  where 
the  word  is  found;  moreover,  the  context 
requires  it.  There  is  no  need  to  ask  whether 
the  word  may  not  mean  "  Gentile  GhriiUam." 
The  missionary  brethren  would,  therefore, 
have  been  in  great  straits  bnt  for  the  courage 
and  generosity  of  Gaius ;  Diotrephes  turned 
themontof  dooiBandforbadeothers  to  succour 
them ;  and  they  themselves  made  it  a  rule 
not  to  ask  for  help  from  Gentiles. 

Ver.  8. — We,  therefore,  ought  to  support 
such.  The  pronoun  is  very  emphatic.  If  no 
help  comes  from  the  heathen,  vi»  must  give 
it ;  that  we  may  become  their  fellow-worken 
for  the  truth.  Just  as  the  apostle  warned 
the  elect  lady  that  to  welcome  and  support 
preachers  of  false  doctrine  is  to  partake  in 
their  evils  works  (2  John  11),  so  he  en- 
courages Gaius  and  his  friends  with  the 
thought  that  to  welcome  and  support 
preachers  of  the  truth  is  to  partake  in 
their  good  works.  It  is  the  Master's  teach- 
ing in  another  form,  "  He  that  receiveth  a 
prophet  in  the  name  of  a  prophet  shall 
receive  a  prophet's  reward"  (Matt.  i.  41). 

Ver.  9. — ^I  wrote  somewhat  to  the  Church 
(reading,  with  the  best  authorities,  ^ypa^i 
Tj)  probably  means  that  St.  John  had  written 
a  letter,  now  lost,  and  perhaps  destroyed 
by  Diotrephes,  to  the  Church  to  which 
Diotrephes  belonged.  That  Diotrephes  was 
bishop  of  this  Church  is  conjecture;  as  also 
that  he  opposed  St.  John's  emissaries  "  be- 
cause they  were  bent  on  carrying  the  gospel 
to  the  Gentiles,  he  himself  lierng,  no  doubt, 
both  a  Jew  and  of  the  Jewish  faction."  He 
may  have  been  an  influential  layman.  But 
the  context  &vours  the  view  that  he  was  at 
least  a  presbyter.  This  ecclesiastical  Cleon 
is  the  type  of  all  vain,  noisy,  self-asserting 
teachers,  whose  main  object  is  to  get  their 
own  way — an  object  which  they  effect  by 
browbeating  all  who  differ  from  them.  No 
(luthority  is  respecti-d  and  no  character 
spared  which  seems  to  oppose  their  policy. 
Even  an  apostle  is  denounced  if  he  ventures 
to  maintain  that  the  truth  may  be  larger 
than  their  view  of  it.  Christian  ministers 
now  must  not  be  surprised  if  they  iou» 
times  meet  with  no  bettor  treatment 


1—14.] 


THE  THIRD  EPISTLE  OF  JOHN. 


Yer.  10. — For  this  cauEe,  if  I  come,  I  will 
bring  to  Temembtanoe  bis  vorks  wbioh  he 
dbetb.  The  apostle  1^  proceeding  on  the 
lines  pteBoribeS  by  Christ.  He  has  remoll- 
etl-ated  with  Dibttephfes  privately ;  he  has 
s6nt  messengers  to  him  tb  speak  in  his  name^ 
and  Diotrephes  hasdeolined  to  receive  them. 
There  remains  one  step  more,  and  St.  John 
means  to  take  it.  "If  he  refuse  to  hear 
them,  tell  it  unto  the  Church:  and  if  he 
refuse  to  hear  the  Charch  also,  let  him  be 
unto  thee  as  the  Gentile  [4  iBpiKos,  as  in  ver.  7] 
and  the  publican"  (Matt,  xviii.  17).  Just 
as  the  misSional-y  brethren  bore  witness 
before  the  Ohuroh  to  the  Christian  lote  of 
Gaius^  so  the  elder  will  bear  witness  before 
the  Chilreh  to  the  arrbgant  hostility  of 
Diotrephes.  Once  more  we  see  that  words 
may  be  works.  He  who  sanctions  teachers 
of  false  doctrine  shares  in  their  "evil  works  " 
(2  John  11) ;  and  the  "  works  "  of  Diotrephes 
partly  consist  in  "  prating  against  us  with 
evil  words."  The  same  word  for  "  evil "  is 
used  in  both  cases  (vovripis) — the  word  used 
to  express  "  the  evil  one ; "  the  coinoidenes 
is  significant.  The  insolent  opposition  to 
the  apostle  oil  the  part  Of  Diotrephes,  and 
the  severe  language  used  by  St.  John  in 
condemnihg  him,  stand  almost  alone  in  the 
New  Testament.  For  a  parallel  to  the 
latter  we  must  look  to  our  Lord's  denuncia- 
tion of  the  arrogaat  and  hypocritical  Phari- 
sees who  opposed  him.  The  Pharisees,  like 
Diotrephes,  not  merely  refused  to  walk  in 
the  right  path  themselves,  biit  hindered 
those  who  were  entering  upon  it  (Luke  xi. 
52).  They  also  "oast  out"  those  who  pre- 
suined  to  take  a  less  narrow  View  than 
themselves  (John  ix.  34,  35). 

Ver.  11. — This  is  the  moral  to  which  St. 
Jolm  has  been  leading  up.  Diotrephes  will 
at  least  serve  as  a  warning.  A  Christian 
gentleman  will  note  such  behaviour  in  order 
to  avoid  it.  Strengthened  by  his  own  pre- 
vious walk  in  the  truth  (ver.  3),  and  en- 
couraged by  the  apostle  (vers.  5—8),  with 
Diotrephes  &s  a  warning  on  the  one  hand, 
and  Demetrius  as  an  example  on  the  other, 
he  ou^ht  not  to  fail  in  proving  his  heavenly 
birth  by  doihg  good  and  avoiding  eVU  (see 
on  1  John  iii.  6). 

Ver.  12..^Eespeoting  Demetrius  we  know 
no  more  than  is  told  us  here.  All  that  we 
can  safely  infer  from  what  is  stated  is  that  he 


is  a  person  of  whom  Gains  has  not  hitherto 
known  much ;  otherwise  this  elaboi^te 
commendation  \r6uld  scarcely  be  necessary. 
Conjectures  about  him  are  (1)  that  he  was 
the  bearer  of  this  Epistle  to  Gaius, — ^wliioh 
is  not  improbable  j  (2)  that  he  was  a  membei: 
of  the  same  Ohureh  as  Diotrephes,  and  had 
done  good  service  in  opposing  him, — ^whicb 
is  possible;  (3)  that  he  is  the  silversmith 
of  Ajtemis  (Acts  xix.  2i),  now  "preaching 
the  faith  of  which  he  once  made  havoc," — 
Which  is  not  probable.  The  name  was  a 
common  one.  It  iS  not  easy  to  determint 
the  meaning  of  the  statement  that  Demetriur 
hath  the  witness  of  all  men,  and  of  the  truth 
itself,  Perhaps  it  means  that  those  who 
bore  testimony  to  Demetrius  were  some- 
thing more  than  a  large  body  of  unanimous 
human  witnesses,  strong  eis  such  testimony 
would  be  J  in  giving  their  witness  they  were 
guided  by  "the  Spirit  of  truth."  Or  it 
may  mean  that  the  facts  speak  of  them- 
selves :  as  soon  as  Gains  knows  Demetrius 
he  will  see  that  the  universal  commendation 
of  him  is  amply  justified.  The  true  reading 
in  what  follows  is,  "  and  thou  knowest  that 
our  witness  is  true  "  (comp.  John  xix.  35 ; 
xxi.  24).  The  calm  confidenc*  with  itrhich 
the  writer  asserts  his  author  ty^  both  over 
Diotrephes  and  also  as  a  witness,  confirms 
us  in  the  belief  that  "the  elder"  is  no  leas 
than  the  apostle. 

Vers.  13,  14.— 3.  Conolcbioi)  (see  notes 
on  2  John  12,  l3).  Here  the  pen  or  Ked 
(^niXaiios)  is  mehtioned  instead  of  the  paper, 
as  a  means  of  writihg.  The  word  is  found 
nowhere  else  in  the  NeW  Testament  in  this 
sense  Note  the  aXAd  and  the  Se,  each  with 
its  right  force,  the  former  etpressing  a 
stronger  opposition  than  the  latter :  "  I 
had  many  things  to  write  to  thee ;  never- 
theless, I  do  not  care  (it\A'  ov  BeKa)  with  ink 
and  pen  to  write  to  thee :  but  I  hope  (cATrf^w 
Si)  straightway  to  see  thee,  and  we  shall 
speak  mouth  to  mouth."  "The  friends" 
aie  perhaps  so  called  in  contrast  to  the 
hostility  Of  biotrephes  and  his  party.  lil- 
stead  of  warfare,  "peace  be  to  thee;"  inStBAd 
of  the  wicked  prating  of  enemies,  the  salutA- 
tiohs  of  friehdS;  The  elder  concludes  with 
his  own  personal  salutation  to  all  the 
members  of  his  flock  who  reside  near  to 
Grains  (eomp.  John  x.  3). 


H0MtLETICi3. 

Vers*  l-'-^i4. — An  apOstolU  paitoral  to  a  Ohristian  man.  We  have  here  another  priDe* 
less  fragmehtj  giving  us  a  glimpBe  into  the  actual  Ohuroh  life  of  the  first  cetitury,  and 
of  the  Christian  deeds  and  difiiculties  of  one  of  its  honoured  memberB,  We  have  no 
other  inspired  letter  to  a  private  Church  member.  This  serves  a  doable  purposet  It 
enables  us  to  picture,  iii  outline,  Gaius,  with  his  Christian  work,  his  character^  and  hia 
trials.    It  enables  m  klso  to  picture  a  Church  as  to  its  fellowship,  its  constituticnij  and 


4  THE  THIBD  EPISTLE  OF  JOHN.  [t—li- 

its  work.  GaiuB  was  a  metnlier  of  a  Christian  Church  (ver.  9,  rp  ticKKritriif),  though  we 
do  not  know  of  which.  He  was,  apparently,  one  of  St.  John's  own  spiritual  children 
(ver.  4,  Tck  ejtti  riKva),  who  gave  the  apostle,  unfeigned  joy  (ver.  3),  as,  behi>tiing  his 
steadfast  grasp  of  the  truth  (ver.  3)  and  his  upright  walk,  he  regarded  this  as  the 
greatest  gift  of  God's  grace  (ver.  4)  he  could  desire  to  receive.  His  reputation  was  so 
well  maintained  (ver.  6)  that  the  apostle  felt  sure  enough  of  his  true  spiritual 
prosperity  to  warrant  him  in  cherishing  the  wish  that  he  might  make  as  much  progress 
and  be  in  as  good  health  in  a  worldly  as  he  was  in  a  religious  point  of  view  (ver.  2). 
Gaius  was  not  only  a  helper  of  his  own  Church,  but  a  lover  of  the  brethren,  even 
though  they  might  be  strangers  to  him  (ver.  6,  Greek);  for  when  men  had  gone 
forth  among  the  Gentiles,  talking  nothing  from  them,  and  had  spread  abroad  the 
Name  (ver.  7),  it  was  the  delight  of  Gaius  to  help  such  forward  on  their  journey  (ver. 
6).  Still,  his  work  was  not  easy.  Diotrephes,  who  loved  office,  was  probably  jealous 
of  the  influence  which  Gaius  had  acquired  by  his  unambitious  service  (vers.  5 — 9) ;  so 
that  John  takes  occasion  to  assure  Gaius  that  what  he  has  done  he  has  well  done 
(ver.  5),  and  that  when  he  (the  apostle)  next  visits  the  Church,  he  will  put  Diotrephes 
to  shame  (ver.  10).  It  is  interesting  to  note  that  here,  as  in  his  Second  Epistle,  he 
speaks  of  himself  as  "  the  elder  "  (ver.  1).  The  various  expressions  in  the  letter  which 
touch  upon  the  Church  life  of  those  days,  do,  when  gathered  up  and  set  in  order,  put 
before  us  a  Church  picture  unique  in  the  New  Testament  writings. 

I.  There  is  a  distinct  Chukch  herb  specified  ovbb  which  the  Apostle  John 
HAD  SOME  oversight.  Wc  have  before  remarked  (homily  on  2  John)  that  the  apostles' 
range  of  superintendence  was  much  wider  than  that  of  those  who  were  only  presbyters 
or  bishops,  or  overseers  (see  Bishop  Lightfoot, '  Ep.  Phil.').  Yet  in  reference  to  specific 
Churches,  or  individuals  in  them,  it  is  a*  presbyter  that  he  writes  (ver.  1).  That  there 
is  a  distinct  Church,  to  which  Gaius  belonged,  is  clear  from  vers.  9  and  10.  The 
conception  of  one  vast  territorial  Church  does  not  belong  to  the  New  Testament  books 
— "  the  Churches  of  Galatia  "  (Gal.  i.  1) ;  "  the  Church  at  Ephesus  "  (Eev.  ii.  1),  etc. 

II.  The  mbmbbes  of  this  Chukch  weeb  dnited  in  a  holt  fellowship,  and 
KECEivED  each  otheb  IN  CHRIST'S  NAME.  (Ver.  8 ;  Bom.  xiv.  1.)  They  met  together 
and  received  reports  of  faithful  Christian  service  (ver.  6),  and  were  addressed  as  a 
community  by  the  apostle  (ver.  9). 

III.  This  Church  had  a  sblf-aotino  constitution.  (Vers.  9,  10.)  This  Dio- 
trephes, who  loved  to  have  the  pre-eminence,  and  to  exercise  the  power  of  casting  men 
out  of  the  Church,  is  one  whose  lordly  ambition  is  evidently  overriding  all,  and  even 
defying  the  apostle  himself.  Evidently  this  is  abnormal.  It  will  be  brought  to  an 
end.  Why  ?  Because  the  authority  of  a  Church  can  only  be  exercised  by  the  Church 
itself,  and  cannot  be  delegated  to  or  usurped  by  another  without  a  gross  invasion  of 
the  rights  of  the  Christian  priesthood.  Of  this,  more  further  on.  Just  now  let  us 
observe  that  the  precepts  laid  down  to  Churches  are  such  that  they  cannot  be  carried 
out  if  the  Church  allows  its  authority  to  slip  ft«m  itself  (1  Cor.  v.),  or  if  out  of  any 
temporal  consideration  whatever  it  allows  its  movements  to  be  regulated  by  an  outer 
and  alien  power. 

IV.  The  objects  bet  before  this  Church  are  oleab  and  definite.  (Ver.  8.) 
"  That  we  may  be  fellow-workers  with  the  truth."  It  is  assumed  here  that  the  Church 
is  composed  of  such  as  believe  and  know  and  exemplify  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus. 
[Though  there  is  no  allusion  in  this  letter  either  to  Jesus  Christ  or  to  the  gospel,  yet 
the  phrase,  "  the  truth,"  bears  no  uncertain  meaning  when  it  comes  from  John's  pen.] 
These,  and  these  alone,  can  be  fellow-workers  therewith.  The  aim  of  a  Church  in  its 
fellowship  is  not  only  mutual  sympathy,  common  worship,  or  the  building  up  of  itself 
from  the  families  of  its  members.  All  these  are  necessary,  but  these  necessary  things 
are  not  all.  The  Church  is  for  the  diffusion  of  the  truth  far  and  wide.  It  is  bound  to 
send  forth  men  who  shall  go  out  among  the  Gentiles  for  the  sake  of  the  Name,  like 
those  to  whom  Gaius  was  so  conspicuous  a  friend ;  yea,  and  to  set  forward  such  on 
their  journey  "  worthily  of  God."  We  gather  from  the  letter  that  Gaius  took  such  a 
task  upon  himself,  because  Diotrephes  would  not  allow  it  to  be  done,  but  that  properly 
the  Church  ought  to  have  done  it,  and  not  have  suffered  the  whole  weight  to  rest  on 
the  shoulders  of  one  man  (cf.  vers.  5 — 10).  They  should  haT«  be«n  sustained  by  th« 
Oiuu«h  Sxitm  wiu«lt  thay  weat  out  (IjqAfw). 


1—14.]  THE  THIRD  EPISTLE  OP  JOHN.  i 

V.  This  ChUBOH    had    to    BEAB    a    sore    TBIAL    THEOXraH    trNSANCTIPIED    HUMAN 

AMBITION.  In  the  preceding  Epistle  the  "  advance  "  man  (irpoiyav)  is  the  bane  of 
the  Chuich.  Here  the  ambitious  inan  (^lA.oTrpuTc^iui')  il  such.  This  spirit  showed 
itself  very  early  among  the  disciples  (Mark  ix.  38, 39),  and  was  severely  rebuked  by  the 
Lord  Jesus  (Matt,  xviii.  1—4),  Prom  no  other  external  cause,  perhaps,  has  the  Church 
had  to  suflfer  so  much  as  from  this.  Let  the  sad  and  sorry  story  of  Church  history  be 
unfolded,  and  it  will  tell  us  a  thousand  times  over  that  unholy  ambition  is  the  bane  of  the 
Church.  The  latest  form  of  it  is  "  papal  infallibility."  Priestly  assumptions  are  crippling 
Churches  and  ruining  souls.  Lord-deacons  and  lordly  pastors  are  a  Church's  bane. 
A  true  and  healthy  Church  life  is  the  analogue  of  a  true  and  healthy  bodily  life,  where 
every  member  fulfils  its  own  functions,  and  no  one  interferes  with  that  of  another. 

VI.  Though  some  members  mat  hindbe  and  disobedit  a  Chuboh,  yet  there 
ABB  OTHBBS  WHO  TBUi^Y  HELP  AND  HONOUB  IT.  Men  like  Gaius  and  Demetrius 
abound.  They  are  a  Church's  honour  and  joy.  It  is  very  likely  that,  owing  to  their 
unambitious  and  unpretending  worth,  they  seldom  come  to  the  front,  uialess  compelled 
by  circumstances  so  to  do  j  but  their  loyalty  to  the  truth,  their  holy  lives,  their 
kindliness  and  steadfastness,  are  the  honour  of  the  Churches,  and  the  glory  of  Christ, 
Doubtless,  the  "  world  "  will  talk  more  about  one  Diotrephes  than  about  twelve  men 
like  Gaius,  and  be  well  pleased  to  do  so.    But  "  the  Lord  knoweth  them  that  are  his," 

VII.  Whatevbb  and  whbrevee  a  Chuboh  mat  be,  it  is  foe  each  individual 

TO  BEAB  IN   MIND   HIS    OWN   PEBSONAL    EELATIONS    WITH    GoD,   AND    TO    AOT    ACOOBD- 

INOLY,  (Vers.  11, 12.)  Connection  with  the  holiest  Church  in  the  world  cannot  save  us. 
Association  with  the  most  imperfect  Church  in  Christendom  cannot  hinder  our  salvation, 
unless  we  allow  it  to  do  so ;  in  which  case,  the  fault  will  be  our  own.  Beligion  is 
•  matter  between  the  soul  and  God.  Strictly  so.  The  question  is — Are  we  bom  of 
God?  Are  we  in  Christ?  Is  Christ  in  us,  the  Hope  of  glory?  And  the  proof  oi 
this  lies,  not  in  Church  membership,  but  in  the  life,  and  in  the  life  alone.  Church 
membership  may  be  of  great  service.  The  fact  that  it  may  be  made  too  much  of  ii  no 
argument  against  it.  But  ever,  ever  let  us  remember  that  we  may  be  in  a  Church  yet 
not  in  the  Church.  If  we  are  not  in  Christ,  we  are  not  in  the  Church.  If  we  are  in 
Christ  by  a  living  faith,  we  are  in  his  true  Church,  by  a  right  which  none  can  disprove, 
and  which  no  one  ought  ever  to  dispute. 


HOMILIES  BY  VABI0U8  AUTHORS. 

Ver.  2. — Ideal  prosperity/.  "  Beloved,  I  wish  above  all  things  that  thou  mayest 
prosper,"  etc.  The  Authorized  Version  of  this  verse  seems  to  carry  the  meaning  that 
St.  John  valued  physical  health  and  secular  prosperity  above  everything  else.  The 
original  does  not  convey  such  a  meaning.  Revised  Version,  "  Beloved,  I  pray  that  in  all 
things  thou  mayest  prosper  and  be  in  health,  even  as  thy  soul  prospereth." 

I.  The  APOSTLE  prats  that  his  feiend  Gaius  mat  have  temporal  peospbbitt 
AND  PHTSIOAL  HEALTH.  Prom  the  expression  of  this  desire  in  so  brief  a  letter,  we  may 
infer  that  St.  John  regarded  these  things  as  of  great  importance.  1.  Secular  prosperity 
is  desirable.  Non-success  in  business  is  to  be  deprecated.  Por  our  own  sake,  for  the 
sake  of  our  families,  and  for  the  sake  of  our  usefulness,  prosperity  in  temporal  things  is 
desirable.  Wealth  is  a  wonderful  power ;  and  in  the  hands  of  a  wise  man  it  is  a  great 
boon  both  to  himself  and  to  others.  2.  Physical  health  is  desirable.  Health  of  body, 
for  many  obvious  reasons,  is  one  of  God's  best  gifts  to  man.  It  is  important  also  for 
other  reasons  which  are  not  obvious  to  all.  The  state  of  the  body  exercises  a  great 
injluence  upon  the  mind  and  souL  It  is  the  organ  and  agent  of  both ;  and,  if  it  be 
unhealthy,  our  impressions  of  the  outward  will  be  untrue,  and  our  influence  upon  the 
outward  will  be  limited  and  feeble.  Our  spiritual  feelings  and  expressions  are  consider- 
ably toned  and  coloured  by  our  physical  condition. 

II.  The  apostle  indicates  the  remarkable  spiritual  peospebity  of  his  frdsnd 
Gaius.  This  is  clear  from  his  making  his  spiritual  prosperity  the  measure  of  the  desired 
bodily  health  and  temporal  prosperity.  The  next  verse  also  contributes  evidence  of  this 
prosperit}'  of  soul.  It  was  seen  in  his  growing  acquaintance  with  the  truth  and  his  grow- 
ing coufornuty  to  the  truth.   "  Brethren  . . .  bare  witness  unto  thy  truth,  even  as  thou 


a  THE  THIRD  EPISTLE  OF  JOHN.  [1—14 

walkest  in  truth."  Perhaps  Qaius  himself  needed  this  assurance  of  his  spiritual  pros- 
perity. "  The  words  of  the  apostle  seem  to  imply,"  says  IDr.  Binney, "  that  the  health  of 
Craius  was  somewhat  enfeehled.  This  might  affect  his  feelings,  and  render  the  actual 
pro>perity  of  his  soul,  while  visible  to  others,  unperceived  by  himself;  his  excellence 
was  obvious  to  all  who  knew  him,  though  bodily  infirmity  or  mental  depression  con- 
cealed the  truth  from  his  own  consciousness.  On  this  account  he  was  addressed  by 
John  in  the  words  of  encourasement — words  delicately  but  strongly  conveying,  the 
apostle's  confidence  in  his  spiritual  state,  and  assuring  him,  at  the  same  time,  of  hia 
constantly  sharing  in  his  supplications  and  prayers."  This  spiritual  prosperity  is  more 
important  than  material  progress  and  success. 

III.  The  apostle  makes  the  prosperity  of  his  boul  the  mbasube  op  the  phy- 
sical   HEALTH   AND   SECULAR   PKOSPEBITT   DESIRED   FOR    GaIUS.        this    is   profoundly 

significant.  Unless  our  spiritual  prosperity  be  at  least  commensurate  with  our  tem|ior.il 
prosperity,  the  latter  ceases  to  be  a  blessing.  All  the  worldly  wealth  which  a  man 
possesses  which  is  more  than  proportionate  to  the  wealth  of  his  soul,  he  will  do  well  to 
get  rid  of  at  once,  or  by  Divine  grace  bring  the  wealth  of  his  soul  into  proportion  with 
it.  Without  this  correspondence  we  cannot  use  wealth  aright,  riches  will  injure  us,  the 
material  will  crush  the  spiritual  in  us.  When  outward  riches  are  more  than  propor-_ 
tionate  to  his  godliness  and  grace,  they  are  a  curse  to  their  possessor.  But  when  there 
is  a  proportion  between  the  two,  wealth  is  a  blessing  worthy  an  apostle's  prayer.  What 
a8toun(Ung  revolutions  would  take  place  if  this  prayer  were  universally  realized  I 
What  transformations  in  health  I  Many  now  hale  and  strong  would  become  weak  and 
sickly.  Many  now  diseased  and  feeble  would  become  sound  and  vigorous.  What 
transformations  in  circumstances  t  Many  pampered  sons  and  daughters  of  riches  and 
luxury  would  come  to  poverty  and  want.  Many  of  the  indigent  would  pass  from  the 
abode  of  penury  to  the  palace  of  ease  and  plenty.  "  A  terrible  wish  this,"  says  Binney, 
"  if  it  were  offered  for  and  were  to  take  effect  upon  many  a  professor :  it  would 
blast  them  in  body  and  ruin  them  in  circumstances ;  it  would  render  them,  like  the 
Church  that  thought  itself  rich  and  increased  in  goods,  '  poor,  and  miserable,  and  blind, 
and  naked.'"  Shall  I  offer  this  prayer  for  you?  If  this  prayer  were  realized,  the 
physical  would  bear  the  true  proportion  to  the  spiritual,  and  the  temporal  to  the 
eternal.     Learn  how  far  secular  wealth  is  desirable. — W.  J. 

Vers.  3,  4. — Spiritual  prosperity.  "For  I  rejoiced  greatly  when  the  brethren  came 
and  testified  of  the  truth  that  is  in  thee,"  etc.  In  these  and  some  subsequent  verses 
we  have  some  aspects  and  evidences  of  the  spiritual  prosperity  of  Gains. 

I.  Aspects  of  spiritual  peospeeity.  "  Brethren  came  and  bare  witness  unto  thy 
truth,  even  as  thou  walkest  in  tnith."  1.  Truth  appropriated  in  mind  and  heart. 
Our  interpretation  of  the  words,  "  thy  truthj"  would  he  superficial  and  inadequate  if 
we  simply  said  that  they  express  the  sincerity  of  Gaiusi  The  expression  involves  thiSj 
that  he  was  true  in  religion  and  in  life ;  but  it  means  that  his  religious  beliefs  were 
correct — that  he  held  the  truth  concerning  the  Person  and  work  of  Jesus  Christ.  On 
these  subjects  pernicious  errors  bad  arisen  in  the  Church.  Some  denied  the  Grodhead 
of  our  Saviour;  others  denied  the  reality  of  his  manhood.  "  The  first  stumbled  at  his 
pfe-existence  and  incarnation,  because  he  suffered  indignity  and  anguish ;  the  other, 
admitting  his  Divine  nature,  thought  it  beneath  him  actually  to  suffel-^  and  therefore 
denied  that  his  body  or  his  sufferings  were  anytliing  elsfe  but  illusory  appearances" 
(Binney}.  Against  each  of  these  errors  St.  John  wrote.  And  by  the  expression,  "  the 
truth,".he  generally  means  the  apostolic  doctrine  concerning  the  Person  and  work  of 
Jesus  Christ.  "  This  truth  Gains  held ;  held  it  as  his  life :  it  was  '  in  him^'  as  filling 
his  intellect  and  affections ;  in  his  understanding  as  a  source  of  light,  in  his  heart  as 
the  object  of  love."  The  apostle,  as  we  have  learned  from  his  former  Epistles,  attached 
the  utmost  importance  to  correct  religious  belief.  2;  Truth  manifested  in  lift  a/nd 
conduct,  "  Thou  walkest  in  truth."  His  practical  life  was  in  harmony  with  lus  pro- 
fessed creed.  The  truth  he  held  was  not  merely  a  form  of  sound  words,  but  a  living 
force  in  his  chaiacter  and  conduct.  His  faith  was  not  a  mere  speculation  or  opiniouj 
but  a  thing  of  deep  feeling  and  firm  conviction.  The  faith  that  does  not  influence  the 
life  towards  harmony  with  itself  is  not  faith  in  the  Scriptural  sense ;  it  is  assent,  or 
opinion ;  but  it  is  not  Christian  faith,  or  saving  faith.    Our  real  faith  moulds  the  Ufa 


1—14.]  THE  THIBD  EPISTLE  OF  JOHN.  1 

into  conformity  with  the  truth  believed.  St  John  quite  as  earnestly  insiited  upon 
practising  the  truth  as  upon  holding  it.  "  He  that  doeth  good  is  of  Qod ;  he  that 
doeth  evil  hath  not  seen  God"  (ver.  11;  and  1  John  iii.  7, 10).  Let  us,  like  Gaius, 
hold  the  truth,  make  it  our  own;  and  also  live  the  truth,  walk  in  it  day  by  day. 
Cultivate  a  true  faith  and  a  holy  life. 

U.  Testimomt  to  sfibitdal  pbospebitt.  "  Brethren  came  and  bare  witness  unto 
thy  truth,"  etc.  These  brethren  were  probably  those  who  had  been  commended  to 
the  Ohurch  by  the  apostle,  rejected  through  the  influence  of  Diotrephes  (ver.  9),  and 
then  entertained  by  Gaius,  They  probably  presented  this  report  on  their  return  to 
the  Church  of  which  St.  John  was  pastor,  and  from  which  they  had  been  sent  forth 
(vers.  6,  6).  1.  It  is  a  pleasure  to  good  men  to  tetti/y  to  th«  excellence  of  othera,  2.  It 
it  gratifying  to  a  good  mom  to  receive  the  commendation  of  good  men.  "  A  good  name 
is  better  than  precious  ointment."  "  A  good  name  is  rather  to  be  chosen  than  great 
riches." 

in.  The  intlvenob  or  bpibitual  pbospebitt  upok  the  good.  "  Greater  joy  have 
I  none  than  this,  to  hear  of  my  children,"  etc.  1.  2%«  tender  relation  here  mentioned. 
"  My  children,"  It  seems  that  Gbius  had  been  converted  through  the  ministry  of 
St.  John.  He  was  the  spiritual  child  of  the  apostle ;  his  "  true  child  in  faith ; "  his 
"  beloved  child,"  as  St.  Paul  says  of  Timothy.  This  relationship  is  very  close,  tender, 
and  sacred  (of.  1  Cor.  iv.  14,  15).  2.  The  great  joy  here  tpoken  of.  "  Greater  Joy 
have  I  none  than  this,"  etc.  Every  genuine  Christian  rejoices  to  find  men  walking  in 
the  truth ;  but  the  apostle  had  the  additional  joy  which  arose  from  the  dear  and  holy, 
tie  by  which  he  and  Gaius  were  united.  The  success  of  a  young  man  in  temporal 
things  is  a  great  joy  to  his  parents.  To  Christian  parents  it  is  a  far  greater  joy  when 
their  children  give  their  hearts  to  God,  and  walk  in  truth.  And  to  the  Christian 
minister,  and  the  Sunday  school  teacher,  the  spiritual  prosperity  of  those  whom  they 
have  led  to  the  Saviour  is  a  source  of  deep  and  pure  rejoicing.  Such  prosperity  is  ft 
proof  that  we  have  not  laboured  in  vain ;  it  is  a  distinguished  honour  conferred  upon 
us  by  God ;  and  it  gives  a  foretaste  of  the  grand  final  reward,  "  Well  done,  good  and 
faithful  servant,"  etc.  To  hear  of  or  to  behold  such  fruits  of  our  Christian  work  both 
humbles  and  rejoices  us. 

Christian  brethren,  let  us  aim  both  to  appropriate  and  to  exemplify  Christian  truth. 
—W.J. 

Vers,  6, 6. — HotpitaMty.    "  Beloved,  thou  doest  fiuthfully  whatsoever  thou  doest  to 

the  brethren,"  etc.    We  have  here — 

L  Hosfitalitt  bxebcised.  "  Beloved,  thou  doest  a  faithful  work  in  whatsoever 
thou  doest  toward  them  that  are  brethren  and  strangers  withal."  1.  The  venom 
totuardt  whom  it  had  been  exercised.  (1)  "  Strangers."  We  mention  this  first  because 
it  is  involved  in  the  Greek  word  for  "  hospitality,"  ipi\o(tvla,  i.e.  kindness  to  strangers. 
Entertaining  our  friends  is  not  properly  hospitality.  This  virtue,  says  Barnes,  "  springs 
up  naturally  in  countries  thinly  settled,  where  the  sight  of  a  stranger  would  be  there- 
fore peculiarly  pleasant;  .  .  .  and  where  the  population  was  too  sparse,  and  the 
travellers  too  infrequent,  to  justify  inn-keeping  as  a  business.  From  these  causes  it 
has  happened  that  there  are,  properly  speaking,  no  inns  or  taverns  in  the  region  around 
Palestine,  It  was  customary,  indeed,  to  erect  places  for  lodging  and  shelter  at  suitable 
distances,  or  by  the  side  of  springs  or  watering-places,  for  travellers  to  lodge  in.  But 
they  are  built  at  the  public  expense,  and  are  unfurnished.  Each  traveller  carries  his 
own  bed  and  clothes  and  cooking  utensils,  and  such  places  are  merely  designed  as  a 
shelter  for  caravans.  It  is  still  so ;  and  hence  it  becomes,  in  their  view,  a  virtue  of 
high  order  to  entertain,  at  their  own  tables  and  in  their  families,  such  strangers  as 
may  he  travelling."  But  these  strangers  were  also :  (2)  "  Brethren."  They  were  fellow- 
Christians.  Hospitality  should  not  be  limited  to  them,  but  it  should  be  shown  to 
them  first  and  chiefly.  The  New  Testament  teaches  that  kindness  should  begin  at 
home  (1  Tim.  v.  8 ;  Gal.  vL  10).  The  apostles  were  to  "  begin  at  Jerusalem."  Chris- 
tian people  have  sometimes  supplied  the  wants  of  the  drunken,  the  indolent,  and  the 
wasteful,  and  neglected  their  own  sober,  industrious,  and  tfarirty  poor  in  their  need. 
It  seems  to  us  that  in  such  ministries  the  rule  should  be — our  own  home  first,  our  own 
O^imh  and  oongregation  next,  other  Christian  bretbran  uexti  and  then  Um  irrtUgioai. 


8  THE  THIBD  EPISTLE  OP  JOHN.  [1— U 

2.  Z%«  person  hy  whom  it  had  been  exercised.  Gaius.  But  St.  John  in  the  text  wis 
forth  the  exercise  of  hospitaUty  as  specially  hecomiDg  in  Cbristians.  He  speaks  of  it 
ai  "  a  faithful  work,"  i.e.  a,  work  worthy  of  a  faithful  man  or  a  Christian.  Hospitality 
is  frequently  in  the  sacred  Scriptures  enjoined  upon  Christians  as  a  duty  (Bom.  xii.  13 ; 
Heh.  xiii.  2 ;  1  Fet.  iv.  9).  St.  Paul  mentions  it  as  one  of  the  duties  of  a  Christian 
bishop  (1  Tim.  iii.  2 ;  Titus  i.  8).  At  the  last  judgment,  one  reason  for  the  reward  of 
the  good  is  that  they  exercised  hospitality,  and  one  of  the  charges  upon  which  the 
wicked  will  be  condemned  is  the  neglect  of  hospitality  (Matt.  xxv.  34 — 46).  Accord- 
ingly, we  find  that  the  "  primitive  Christians  considered  one  principal  part  of  their  duty 
to  consist  in  showing  hospitality  to  strangers.  They  were.  In  fact,  so  ready  in  dis- 
charging this  duty,  that  the  very  heathen  admired  them  for  it.  They  were  hospitable 
to  all  strangers,  but  especially  to  those  who  were  of  the  household  of  faith.  Believers 
scarcely  ever  travelled  without  letters  of  communion,  which  testified  the  purity  of 
their  faith,  and  procured  for  them  a  favourable  reception  wherever  the  name  of  Jesus 
Christ  was  known  "  (Calmet).  We  also  find  that  the  hospitality  of  Gaius  was  hearty ; 
for  the  brethren  whom  he  bad  entertained  testified  to  his  love  (ver.  6).  "  There  is," 
sayi  Washington  Irving,  "  an  emanation  from  the  heart  in  genuine  hospitality  which 
cannot  be  described,  but  is  immediately  felt,  and  puts  the  stranger  at  once  at  his  ease." 
As  occasion  requires  it,  hospitality  is  still  a  Christian  duty. 

n.  Hospitality  aoknowlbdoed.  "VS^ho  bare  witness  to  thy  love  before  the 
Church."  The  evangelists,  when  they  returned  to  the  Church  from  which  they  had 
been  sent  forth  on  their  work,  gave  an  account  of  their  mission,  and  in  so  doing  testified 
to  the  hearty  hospitality  of  Gaius.  This  report  of  Gaius  difiereii  from  that  of  a  minister 
of  whom  I  have  read.    This  minister  "  had  travelled  far  to  preach  for  a  congregation 

at .    After  the  sermon,  he  waited,  expecting  some  one  would  ask  him  to  dinner. 

At  length,  the  place  becoming  almost  empty,  he  mustered  courage,  and  walked  up  to 
an  old  gentleman,  and  said,  'Will  you  go  home  and  dine  with  me  to-day,  brother?' 
'Where  do  you  live?'  'About  twenty  miles  from  here,  sir.'  'No;'  said  the  man, 
colouring,  'but  you  must  go  with  me.'  'Thank  you;  I  will,  cheerfully.'  After  this 
th«  minister  was  never  troubled  about  his  dinner."  Gratefully  to  testify  to  kindness 
like  that  of  Gaius  must  be  a  delight  to  those  who  are  worthy  recipients  of  it. 

III.  HospiTAiiirr  encottbaoed.  "  Whom  thou  wilt  do  well  to  set  forward  on  their 
journey  worthily  of  God."  This  refers  to  a  second  visit  to  Gaius,  in  which  they  prob« 
ably  brought  this  letter  with  them.  To  set  them  forward  was  to  enable  them  to 
proceed  onward  by  furnishing  them  with  necessaries  for  the  journey.  Here  is  an 
admirable  rule  for  regulating  the  exercise  of  our  hospitality — "worthily  of  God;" 
Alf<»-d,  "  In  a  manner  worthy  of  him  whose  messengers  they  are  and  whose  servant 
thou  art."  We  should  show  kindness  as  becometh  the  followers  of  him  "  who  giveth 
to  all  liberally  and  upbraideth  not."  "It  would,"  says  Barnes,  "be  particularly 
expected  of  Christians  that  they  should  show  hospitality  to  the  ministers  of  religion. 
They  were  commonly  poor ;  they  received  no  fixed  salary ;  they  travelled  from  place 
to  place;  and  they  would  be  dependent  for  support  on  the  kindness  of  those  who  loved 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ "  (cf.  Matt.  x.  9—15).  The  exercise  of  this  duty  is  often  richly 
rewarded  in  the  present.  Certain  and  splendid  is  its  reward  in  the  fiitnre  (Matt.  x. 
40-42;  xxT.  34— 36).— W.  J. 

Vers.  7,  8. — Miesionari/  workers  and  helpers.  "  Because  that  for  his  Name's  sake 
they  went  forth,"  etc.  The  Bible  is  remarkable  for  its  universality.  Either  directly 
or  inferentially,  it  has  something  of  importance  and  value  to  say  on  almost  everything 
which  affects  human  life  and  interests.  It  throws  light  on  many  modem  questions ; 
and  in  studying  it  we  are  often  agreeably  surprised  to  find  directions  and  hints  touch- 
ing many  things  which  we  regard  as  quite  modem,  and  concerning  which  we  had  not 
expected  to  find  much  suggestion  or  Ught  in  its  pages.  Thus  in  this  short  letter  we 
have  some  apostolic  notes  on  Christian  missions,  which  are  as  applicable  to  missionary 
enterprise  now  as  they  were  to  the  mission  work  of  the  Chiuch  eighteen  hundred  years 
ago.    Here  are  notes  on — 

I.  MisHOKABT  W0BKEB8.  "  For  the  sako  of  the  Name  they  went  forth,  taking 
nothing  of  the  Gentiles."  Notice:  1.  The  motive  of  these  Ghriitian  miuionarie*. 
"  For  tlM  sake  of  the  Name  they  went  forth."    In  all  that  w«  do  we  are  Mtuaied  b/ 


1-^14.]  THE  THIRD  EPISTLE  OF  JOHN.  9 

some  motive  or  motives.  Christian  work  is  no  exception  to  this  rule.  In  Christian 
propagandism  there  may  be  various  motives ;  e.g.  zeal  for  a  cause  or  society,  or  for  the 
spread  of  certain  doctrines  or  forms  of  Church  government,  etc.  Each  of  these  it 
allowable  in  its  place ;  but  neither  of  them  is  the  highest  and  best  motive  of  Christian 
service.  The  most  devoted  workers  in  Christianity  have  a  nobler  motive  than  any 
one  or  all  of  these.  "  Go  into  a  large  manufacturing  establishment.  If  you  will 
notice  carefully,  you  will  perceive  a  large  shaft  running  the  whole  length  of  the  build- 
ing. To  this  are  attached  wheels,  and  bands  go  from  these  wheels  to  other  wheels, 
and  in  these  is  inserted  short  shafting,  and  to  it  are  attached  augers,  saws,  knives,  and 
chisels ;  and  by  these  an  immense  amount  of  mechanical  work  is  done.  But  what 
is  the  cause  of  aU  this  motion  ?  Where  is  the  secret  power  which  makes  all  this 
machinery  do  the  work  of  five  hundred  men?  The  answer  is  easily  given.  It  is 
steam.  Let  the  steam  go  down,  and  this  whole  machinery  would  become  as  still  and 
silent  as  the  grave "  (C.  M.  Temple).  And  the  grand  motive  power  for  working  the 
machinery  of  Christianity  is  love  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ ;  not  zeal  for  doctrines, 
however  sound,  but  love  to  a  Person ;  not  the  desire  to  build  up  the  Church,  still  less 
to  extend  a  denomination  or  sect ;  but  a  passionate  attachment  to  the  living  Lord  of 
the  Church.  Christ  himself  is  the  life  of  Christianity.  The  great  motive  of  the 
noblest  Christian  work  is  supreme  love  to  him.  "  The  love  of  Christ  constraineth  us  " 
is  the  explanation  of  the  best  and  bravest  work  which  is  done  for  men.  There  is  no 
motive  like  love;  and  love  to  a  person  will  always  prove  a  stronger  motive  than  love 
to  a  cause  or  a  creed.  When  Christ  is  received  into  the  heart  he  awakens  its  highest, 
holiest,  intensest  love.  This  love  is  the  mightiest  inspiration  in  Christian  service.  It 
can  da/re  most,  do  most,  endure  most.  The  bravest  workers  go  forth  "  for  the  sake  o£ 
the  Name  "  of  Jesus  Christ.  2.  The  policy  of  these  Christian  missionaries.  "  Taking 
nothing  of  the  Gentiles."  The  apostles  held  and  repeatedly  asserted  the  principle 
"  that  they  which  proclaim  the  gospel  should  live  of  the  gospel "  (1  Cor.  ix.  14).  Our 
Lord  taught  the  same  truth :  "  The  labourer  is  worthy  of  his  food  "  (Matt.  x.  10).  But 
there  were  oases  in  which  it  was  not  expedient  to  enforce  this  principle.  The  gospel 
should  be  proclaimed  without  charge  to  those  who  know  it  not ;  for  they  cannot  be 
expected  to  prize  it  before  they  are  acquainted  with  it.  Therefore  these  early  mis- 
sionaries, by  "  their  own  deliberate  purpose,"  took  nothing  of  the  Gentiles  to  whom 
they  went.  If  they  had  done  otherwise,  they  might  have  been  suspected  of  mercenary 
motives.  We  should  always  be  able  to  say  to  the  heathen,  both  at  home  and  abroad, 
"  I  seek  not  yours,  but  you."  "  I  coveted  no  man's  silver,  or  gold,  or  apparel."  But 
when  the  heathen  are  heathen  no  longer,  but  have  learned  to  appreciate  the  gospel,  we 
may  say  unto  them,  "  If  we  sowed  unto  you  spiritual  things,"  etc.  (1  Cor.  ix.  11,  13, 
14).  In  these  respects  the  apostles  and  the  early  missionaries  are  an  example  for 
succeeding  ages. 

II.  Missionary  helpbkb.  "  We  therefore  ought  to  welcome  such,  that  we  may  be 
fellow-workers  with  the  truth."  This  brings  out  the  duty  of  the  Church  to  mis- 
sionary workers.  1.  To  support  the  missionaries.  "  We  ought  to  receive  such ; " 
Eevised  Version,  "  to  welcome ;  "  Alford,  "  to  support."  The  word  signifies  not  only  "  to 
welcome,"  but  "  to  aid  and  strengthen."  And  this  should  be  done  in  a  worthy  manner 
— "  worthily  of  God."  Workers  for  Jesus  Christ  should  be  treated  with  kindness,  gene- 
rously entertained,  and  encouraged  in  their  work.  They  need  this  from  the  Church. 
Without  it  they  may  "  wax  weary,  fainting  in  their  souls ; "  and  in  that  case  the 
work  will  suffer.  2.  To  co-operatt  with  the  missionaries.  "  That  we  might  be  fellow- 
helpers  to  the  truth ; "  Eevised  Version,  "  that  we  may  be  fellow-workers  with  the 
truth;"  Alford,  "that  we  may  become  fellow- workers  for  the  truth."  The  idea  is 
that,  by  supporting  the  missionaries.  Gains  would  become  a  fellow-worker  with  them  in 
promoting  the  cause  of  the  truth.  This  is  stated  as  a  reason  why  he  should  show 
kindness  to  them  and  help  them.  It  is  also  clearly  implied  that  it  is  the  duty  of  the 
Christian  to  be  a  fellow-worker  in  the  cause  of  the  truth.  Knowing  the  truth  our- 
selves, we  are  morally  bound  to  make  it  known  to  others.  But  there  are  many  who 
cannot  do  this  themselves  by  preaching  or  teaching.  Then,  according  to  St.  John  in 
our  text,  they  should  do  it  by  encouraging  and  supporting  those  who  can  preach  or 
teach.  "  In  this  way,"  says  Binney,  "  Gaius  was  enabled  to  do  much  ;  far  more,  in 
fact,  in  the  way  of  preaching,  than  if  he  himself  had  been  the  most  eloquent  of 


10  THE  THIRD  EPISTLE  OP  JOHN.  [1— U 

preacliers ;  for  by  aiding  many,  and  helping  them  on  their  way  and  in  their  work,  ha 
was  virtually  speaking,  at  the  same  moment,  by  many  mouths,  and  in  the  eye  of  Gk>d 
might  be  regarded  as  converting  many  souls  in  several  places  and  at  the  same  time, 
and  when  otherwise  occupied  himself — when  he  was  engaged  ia  his  worldly  business, 
at  home  in  his  family,  asleep  in  his  bed,  at  rest  or  on  a  journey,  in  Bickuesa  or  in 
health,  living  or  dead."  Christians,  behold  your  duty  and  privilege^  to  be  either  mis- 
nonary  workers  or  missionary  helpers, — W.  J. 

Vers.  9, 10. — Diotrephea ;  a  leacon.    "  I  wrote  unto  the  Church :  but  Diotrephes," 

etc. 

I.  Thb  oharaotbe  op  Diotrephes  briefly  stated.  "  Diotrephes,  who  loveth  to 
have  the  pre-eminence  among  them."  We  do  not  know  who  or  what  this  man  was 
beyond  what  is  stated  in  our  text.  Whether  he  was  pastor,  elder,  deacon,  or  other 
ofBce-bearer  in  the  Church,  we  cannot  tell.  Whatever  he  was  in  other  respects,  we 
know  that  he  was  ambitious  of  the  highest  place  and  of  the  greatest  power  in  the 
Church:  he  would  be  first  and  chief  of  all,  or  he  would  be  nothing.  An  evil  and 
dangerous  character  in  any  one.  "  Before  honour  is  humility."  "  A  man's  pride  shall 
bring  him  low ;  but  honour  shall  uphold  the  humble  in  spirit."  "  Every  one  that  is 
proud  in  heart  is  an  abomination  to  the  Lord."  "  Pride  goeth  before  destruction,"  etc. 
"Whosoever  would  become  great  among  you  shall  be  your  minister  [or, '  servant  *] ;  and 
whosoever  wovJd  be  first  among  you  shall  be  your  servant  [or,  •  bondservant '] ;  even  as 
the  Son  of  man  came  not  to  be  ministered  unto,"  etc.  The  chiefship  is  to  be  given, 
not  to  him  who  loveth  to  be  first,  but  to  him  who  most  humbly  and  faithfully  serves 
others.  "  For  every  one  that  exalteth  himself  shall  be  humbled ;  and  he  that 
humbleth  himself  shall  be  exalted."  "Humility  is  the  surest  path  to  exaltation." 
"  The  highest  honour  is  won  by  the  deepest  humility."  He  who  will  be  first  of  all,  or 
nothing,  will  in  the  end  be  last  and  lowest  of  all. 

II.  The  character  of  Diotrephes  illustrated  is  his  conduot.  1.  Se  rejected 
the  highest  commendation.  "  I  wrole  somewhat  unto  the  Church :  but  Diotrephes 
.  .  .  receiveth  us  not."  He  would  not  recognize  the  authority  of  St.  John,  and 
rejected  the  letter  of  commendation  which  the  apostle  had  sent  to  the  Church.  Neither 
wovdd  he  receive  the  missionaries,  and  that  probably  because  St.  John  commended 
them,  and  he  would  acknowledge  no  one  to  be  greater  than  himself  in  the  Church  to 
which  he  belonged.  He  was  determined  "  that  not  the  apostle,  but  himself,  should 
rule  the  Church."  2.  Se  defamed  the  fairest  reputation.  "  Prating  against  us  with 
wicked  words."  Here  are  two  evils,  and  one  worse  than  the  other.  (1)  Loquacity 
"  Prating  " — running  on  with  speech.  "  The  reproaches  were  mere  tattle,  worth  nothing, 
irrelevant."  "  In  the  multitude  of  words  there  wanteth  not  sin."  "  Be  slow  to 
speak."  "-If  any  man  bridleth  not  his  tongue,  this  man's  religion  is  vaiu."  Bewara 
of  the  slavery  of  the  tongue,  and  the  sin  of  gab.  (2)  Slander.  "With  wicked  words." 
The  holiest  man  is  exposed  to  the  venom  of  the  tongue  of  the  slanderer.  Arrogance 
leads  to  terrible  extremes;  it  dares  to  calumniate  the  most  beautiful-spirited  apostle. 
When  a  man  has  done  wrong  to  another,  he  finds  it  necessary  either  to  confess  the 
wrong  or  to  say  false  and  wicked  things  against  him  he  has  wronged,  hoping  thereby 
to  justify  himself.  So  Diotrephes  prated  against  St.  John  with  wicked  words.  There- 
fore beware  of  the  first  wrong  step.  The  slanderer  frequently  assails  the  best  of  men. 
Our  Lord  was  thus  attacked.  "A  gluttonous  man  and  a  wine-bibber."  "  He  hath 
Beelzebub,  and  by  the  prince  of  the  demons  casteth  he  out  the  demons." 

"  No  might  nor  greatness  in  mortality 
Oau  censure  'scape;  back- wounding  calumny 
The  whitest  virtue  strikes :  what  king  so  strong 
Can  tie  the  gall  up  in  the  slanderous  tongue  ?  " 

(Bhakespeaitt,) 
"Be  thou  as  chaste  as  ice,  as  pure  as  snow, 
Thou  shalt  not  escape  calumny." 

(Ibid.) 

Be  not  dismayed  if  you  are  thus  assailed.  Loathe  this  sin.  3.  n«  prohibited  Ih* 
Mtrcise  of  a  sacred  privilege  and  duty.  "  Neither  doth  he  himself  receive  the  brethren, 
juA-tbam  that  would  he  forbiddeth,"  eta    He  would  neither  receive  the  miisionaries 


1—14.]  THE  THntD  EPISTLE  OF  JOHN.  11 

bimBelf  nor  allow  others  to  do  go.  "  The  dog  in  the  manger"  is  the  beat  exponent 
of  his  spirit  and  conduct.  He  prevented  some  irom  doing  two  things  which  are  at 
once  duties  and  privileges :  (1)  exercising  hospitality  to  the  "  brethren  and  strangers ;  " 
(2)  aiding  them  in  their  work  of  evangelization.  How  terribly  evil  was  the  course 
he  pursued  1  He  injured  the  apostle,  the  missionaries,  those  who  would  have  received 
them,  those  to  whom  they  were  sent,  the  whole  Church,  and  the  Church's  Lord  ;  and 
yet  he  was  a  member  of  the  Church,  and  the  chief  man  in  it  1  He  went  so  far  as  to 
expel  from  the  Church  those  who  would  have  entertained  the  evangelists.  "  And 
oasteth  them  out  of  the  Church." 

m.  The  oharacteb  and  cond0OT  of  Diotbephes  condemned.  In  this  letter 
they  are  justly  censured.  And  further  rebuke  is  referred  to :  "  If  I  come,  I  will  bring 
to  remembrance  his  works  which  he  doeth,"  etc.  There  is  nothing  vindictive  in 
this.  The  apostle  would  vindicate  his  owa  authority  and  the  commission  of  the 
missionaries,  enlighten  the  Church,  and  rebuke  Dlotrephes.  "There  are  awkward 
men  in  the  Church ;  men  who,  if  they  have  any  grace  at  all,  have  so  much  of  the 
devil  in  them  still  that  their  grace  has  but  little  control  over  them.  Good  men  should 
resist  such  persons.  It  may  be  very  pleasant  to  talk  of  dealing  with  them  in  a  spirit 
of  charity,  and  being  gentle  with  them,  and  forbearing  and  kind.  Up  to  a  certain 
point  this  is  perfectly  right.  There  is  a  work  which  compassion  has  to  do ;  there  is  a 
sphere  in  which  pity  may  be  called  into  active  exercise ;  at  the  same  time,  we  are  to 
mark  those  who  cause  divisions  and  offences,  and  to  avoid  them ;  and  there  is  a  certain 
class  of  men  on  whom  pity  has  no  effect,  and  compassion  is  lost ;  and  the  only  thing 
which  can  be  done  is  to  'deliver  them  over  unto  Satan,  that  they  may  learn  not  to 
blaspheme ' "  (Dr.  Joseph  Parker). 

One  masterful,  power-loving  man  in  a  Church  may  work  incalculable  mischief  and 
injury ;  therefore  (1)  let  us  guard  against  the  presence  or  growth  of  such  a  spirit  in 
ourselves ;  (2)  let  us  take  heed  that  we  afford  no  encouragement  or  countenance  to 
such  a  spirit  in  others.—W.  J. 

Vers.  11,  12. — Imitating  the  good.  "  Beloved,  follow  not  that  which  is  evil,"  etc. 
This  exhortation  occurs  here  very  naturally  after  the  mention  of  Diotrephes.  "  Be- 
loved, imitate  not  that  which  is  evil ;  "  do  not  copy  Diotrephes ;  regard  him  not  as  an 
example,  but  as  a  beacon.  But  imitate  the  good ;  take  Demetrius  as  a  pattern ;  copy 
his  conduct. 

I.  Man  imitates.  It  is  implied  here  that  Gaius  would  imitate  either  the  good  or 
the  evil— either' Demetrius  or  Diotrephes.  The  propensity  to  imitation  is  one  of  the 
strongest  in  human  nature.  It  is  this  which  makes  example  so  much  mightier  than 
precept.  This  propensity  is  one  of  the  earliest  to  be  called  into  exercise  in  human 
fife.  The  tender  infant  is  stirred  by  it  almost  before  it  knows  anything.  Very  fre- 
quently we  imitate  others  unconsciously.  The  extent  of  our  conscious  and  intentional 
imitation  is  very  small  as  compared  with  our  unconscious  and  unintentional  imitation. 
This  tendency  plays  a  most  important  part  in  human  education.  Without  intentional 
imitation  instruction  would  be  impossible,  as  in  reading,  writing,  etc.  And  unin- 
tentional imitation  has  great  influence  in  thie  growth  of  habit  and  the  formation  of 
character.    A  very  important  thing  is  this  tendency  to  imitation. 

IL  Man  should  imitate  only  the  good.  "  Beloved,  imitate  not  that  which  is 
evil,  but  that  which  is  good,"  etc.  Many  and  forcible  reasons  may  be  assigned  for 
this;  e.g.  that  the  opposite  course  must  inevitably  lead  to  ruin;  that  this  course 
ennobles  and  blesses  him  who  pursues  it.  But  let  us  confine  ourselves  to  the  reasons 
assigned  in  the  text.  1.  Because  the  good-doer  is  of  God.  "  He  that  doeth  good  is  of 
God ; "  i.e.  he  that  doeth  good  truly  and  naturally,  in  whom  well-doing  is  not  the 
exception,  but  the  rule  of  life,  is  of  God.  He  is  "  begotten  of  God  "  (1  John  iii.  9). 
He  proves  that  he  is  a  child  of  God  by  his  likeness  to  his  Father  in  character  and 
conduct.  He  is  inspired  by  God  both  as  to  his  inner  life  and  as  to  his  outward  prac- 
tice. Notice  how  practical  is  the  apostle's  idea  of  true  personal  religion.  The  godly 
man  is  the  man  who  does  good;  his  good  works  are  the  evidence  of  his  godliness.  Wo 
ihould  imitate  the  good  because  of  their  intimate  and  blessed  lelation  to  God.  2. 
S«cau.se  the  tvii-doer  has  no  true  knowledge  of  Ood.  "  He  that  doeth  evil  hath  not 
«ecn  God."    By  doing  evil  we  must  understand  not  an  occasional  and  exceptional 


12  THE  THIRD  EPISTLE  OF  JOHN.  [1— U 


action,  but  the  general  tenor  of  life  and  conduct.  He  tliat  doetli  evil  is  one  the  general 
characteristic  of  whose  works  is  evil.  Such  a  one  has  not  seen  Grod.  The  beholding 
of  God  is  spiritual.  And  the  vision  of  God  and  the  doing  of  evil  are  incompatible ; 
because :  (1)  Purity  of  heart  is  essential  to  the  seeing  of  God,  and,  where  purity  of  heart 
is,  sin  cannot  be  the  general  characteristic  of  the  conduct.  "  Holiness,  without  which 
no  man  shall  see  the  Lord."  "  Blessed  are  the  pure  in  heart :  for  they  shall  see  God." 
(2)  When  a  man  has  seen  the  Lord,  he  cannot  live  in  the  practice  of  sin.  He  who  has 
seen  and  appreciated  the  highest  beauty  cannot  live  in  constant  and  willing  fellowship 
with  extreme  deformity.  And  he  whose  soul  has  seen  anything  of  the  supremely 
Perfect  and  the  infinitely  Beautiful  cannot  look  upon  sin  with  approval ;  it  must 
appear  loathsome  unto  him.  This  consideration  ti  nds  to  strengthen  faith  in  the  full 
and  final  salvation  of  every  regenerate  man.  He  who  has  tasted  the  high  joys  of 
Divine  vision  and  communion  can  never  be  content  with  the  pleasures  of  sin  or  satisfied 
with  the  things  of  this  world.  Do  not  imitate  the  evil ;  for  the  practice  of  it  darkens 
and  destroys  the  vision  of  the  soul ;  it  excludes  from  the  highest  and  divinest  know- 
ledge, even  the  knowledge  which  is  the  soul's  life.  "  This  is  life  eternal,  that  they 
should  know  thee,  the  only  true  God,"  etc. 

III.  Good  examples  aee  generally  available.  It  is  very  seldom  that  we  are 
unable  to  point  to  some  known  example  well  worthy  of  imitation.  To  such  a  one 
St.  John  calls  attention.  "Demetrius  hath  the  witness  of  ail,  and  of  the  truth  itself: 
yea,  we  also  bear  witness ;  and  thou  knowest  that  our  witness  is  true."  Diotrephes 
was  a  beacon  to  be  shunned;  Demetrius,  an  example  to  be  imitated.  He  was  probably 
a  member  of  the  same  Church  as  Gains,  and  well  known  to  him ;  and  therefore  the 
apostle  does  not  state  what  his  chief  excellences  were,  but  from  his  being  named  here 
we  infer  that  they  were  those  which  Diotrephes  had  not.  Where  the  latter  was  want- 
ing, Demetrius  excelled.  Good  character  is  not  always  accompanied  by  good  reputa- 
tion, but  in  the  case  of  Demetrius  it  was.  He  had  a  good  reputation  of:  (1)  St.  John  ; 
"  We  also  bear  witness."  (2)  Gaius :  "  Thou  knowest  that  our  witness  is  true."  (3) 
All  who  knew  him ;  or,  perhaps,  of  all  the  brethren  mentioned  in  vers.  3,  5, 10 : 
"  Demetrius  hath  the  witness  of  all."  (4)  "  And  of  the  truth  itself."  Alford  say», 
"  The  objective  truth  of  God,  which  is  the  Divine  rule  of  the  walk  of  all  believers, 
gives  a  good  testimony  to  him  who  really  walks  in  the  truth.  This  witness  lies  in 
the  accordance  of  his  walk  with  the  requirement  of  God's  truth.''  That  truth,  like  a 
"  mirror,  seemed  to  place  in  a  clear  light  his  Christian  virtue  and  uprightness,  and  thus 
to  bear  witness  to  him."  The  most  precious  testimony  is  that  of  the  truth  itself. 
When  that  is  in  our  favour,  we  may  thankfully  rejoice.  So  manifold  and  excellent 
was  the  testimony  home  of  Demetrius.  In  most  places  and  societies  there  are  some 
who  are  worth  imitating.  Let  us  imitate  them  in  so  far  as  they  embody  the  truth. 
There  are  seasons  in  our  experience  when  good  human  examples  are  specially  valuable. 
Sometimes  the  Perfect  Example  seems  to  tower  far  above  our  imitation,  and  we  despair 
of  ever  copying  that  with  success.  In  such  moods  the  excellent  human  example  is 
peculiarly  precious.  It  is  not  so  very  much  higher  than  our  own  level  of  attainment; 
it  encourages  us;  and,  when  our  despondency  has  passed  away,  we  are  able  to  aspire 
once  more  for  conformity  to  the  Supreme  Exemplar. — W.  J. 

Vers.  13,  14. —  Valediction.*  "  I  had  many  things  to  write,"  etc.  What  a  precious 
boon  communication  by  writing  is  when  communication  by  speech  is  unattainable ! 
How  valuable  is  writing  also  when  accuracy  and  permanence  are  desired  I  Yet  writing 
has  its  disadvantages  as  compared  with  speech,  as  St.  John  found  at  this  time. 

L  The  apostle's  hope.  "  I  hope  shortly  to  see  thee,  and  we  shall  speak  face  to 
face."  He  hoped  for  communication  by  speech,  which,  as  compared  with  writing,  is: 
I.  More  easy  and  rapid.  2.  More  expressive.  3.  More  phasuralle.  The  sainted 
apostle  mentions  this  in  closing  his  former  private  Epistle.  "  That  your  joy  may  he 
fulfilled." 

II.  The  apostle's  benediction.  "Peace  be  unto  thee."  A  very  comprehensive 
benediction.  It  comprises :  1.  Peace  in  our  relation  to  Ood  This  peace  is  a  conse- 
quence of  the  forgiveness  of  our  sins  and  our  reconciliation  unto  God.     "  Thy  sins  art 

'  Moit  of  the  point*  itated  in  this  outline  ore  more  follr  stated  in  oni  homilT  on  2  John 
18.18. 


1—14.]  THE  THIRD  EPISTLE  OF  JOHN.  13 

forgiven  ...  go  in  peace."  "  Being  justified  by  faith,  let  us  have  peace  with  God," 
etc.  The  peace  also  which  flows  from  confidence  in  God  as  regards  the  possibilities  of 
the  future  (see  Matt.  vi.  25 — 34).  "  Thou  wilt  keep  him  in  perfect  peace,  whose  mind 
is  stayed  on  thee,  because  he  trusteth  in  thee."  2.  Peace  in  our  relation  to  men. 
The  absence  of  jealousy,  revenge,  bitterness  of  spirit,  etc.  The  practical  recognition  of 
the  claims  of  others  upon  us.  And  the  exercise  of  good  will,  kindness,  etc.  3.  Feact 
in  our  own  heing.  The  accusations  of  conscience  silenced  by  the  removal  of  our  guilt 
through  the  mercy  of  God. 

"  I  feel  within  ma 
A  peace  aboTe  all  earthly  dignities, 
A  still  and  quiet  conscience." 

(Shakespean.) 

The  conflict  between  the  flesh  and  the  spirit  ended  in  the  victory  of  the  spirit.  The 
rebellion  of  passion  against  principle,  and  of  appetites  against  aspirations,  quelled  by 
the  power  of  the  Divine  life  in  the  soul.  By  his  grace  God  establishes  order  in  a 
man's  own  being,  brings  the  faculties  and  propensities  of  his  nature  into  harmony,  and 
so  gives  to  him  inward  peace.  In  this  way  the  peace  of  the  Christian  soul  is  complete. 
Our  Lord  bequeathed  this  peace  unto  his  disciples.  "Peace  I  leave  vrith  you,  my 
peace  I  give  unto  you,"  etc.  (John  xiv.  27  ;  xx.  19,  26).  4.  Perfect  peace  in  heaven. 
Here  our  realization  of  this  peace  is  variable.  Doubts  assail  us ;  fears  depress  us ; 
sickness  and  sorrow  darken  and  disturb,  if  they  do  not  distress  us.  Serenity  of  spirit 
is  not  always  ours.  But  hereafter  "  God  shall  wipe  away  every  tear  from  our  eyes," 
etc.  (Rev.  xxi.  4). 

IIL  The  apostle's  OBEETiNa.  "The  friends  salute  thee.  Salute  the  fiienda  by 
name."— W.  J. 

Vers.  1—14. — ITie  aged  preebyter'i  letter  to  a  private  Church-member.  "  The  elder 
unto  Gains  the  beloved,  whom  I  love  in  truth."  As  in  the  Second  Epistle,  John  takes 
the  familiar  official  designation  of  "the  elder."  The  receiver  of  the  Epistle  was 
regarded  by  John  with  more  than  ordinary  affection ;  for  he  at  once  designates  Gaius 
"the  beloved,"  and  three  times  in  the  course  of  the  short  Epistle  he  addresses  him 
by  this  designation.  He  was  widely  beloved;  for  the  addition  here,  while  emphasizing 
the  apostle's  own  affection  for  Gaius,  widens  the  range  of  affection  for  him.  "Whom 
I  (for  my  part)  love,"  he  says ;  i.e.  he  along  with  many  others,  not  he  in  opposition  to 
some  who  withheld  love  or  entertained  hate.  He  loved  Gaius  as  he  loved  "  the  elect 
lady  and  her  children  " — in  truth.  This  Epistle  contains  no  statement  of  the  Incar- 
nation s  but  we  know  that  by  the  apostle  the  Incarnation  was  regarded  as  the  vital 
part  of  the  truth  (1  John  iv.  1,  2).  It  was  the  highest  revelation  of  Godhead,  which 
bound  hearts  to  God,  and  hearts  to  hearts  in  the  Christian  circle.  Attached  to  the  truth 
himself,  he  coxild  not  love  every  one  alike ;  but  he  loved  Gaius  as  a  friend  of  the  truth. 

I.  Gaius.  1.  Bis  well-being  desired.  "Beloved,  I  pray  that  in  all  things  thou 
mayest  prosper  and  be  in  health,  even  as  thy  soul  prospereth."  This  is  the  salutation 
thrown  into  an  unusual  form.  As  the  foundation  of  the  good  wish,  Gaius  is  congratu 
lated  on  his  soul-prosperity.  This  soul-prosperity  is  brought  out,  in  what  follows,  in 
connection  with  a  satisfactory  relation  to  the  truth,  and  specially  the  practice  of 
hospitality.  In  the  form  given  to  the  good  wish,  it  is  implied  that  there  is  a  relation 
between  soul-prosperity  and  other  prosperity.  To  wish  a  man  success  in  business  and 
good  bodily  health  is  to  wish  him  well  so  far ;  only  the  wish  does  not  go  far  enough. 
For  every  man  has  an  eternal  interest  as  well  as  a  temporal  interest,  has  a  soul  as  well 
as  a  body ;  and,  if  we  are  his  true  well-wishers,  we  shall  wish  him  well  in  the  whole, 
and  not  merely  in  part,  of  his  well-being.  To  wish  him  success  in  business  and  good 
bodily  health  alone  is  as  though  a  friend  were  travelling  from  Edinburgh  to  London, 
and  we  wished  him  well  as  far  as  York — not  saying  anything  about  the  rest  of  the 
joiuney.  The  lower  prosperity  is  not  to  be  sought  for  a  man  apart  from  soul-pros* 
perity.  It  might  seem  from  the  old  translation  that  it  is  to  be  sought  above  all  things ; 
but  there  is  a  mistranslation,  which  has  properly  been  corrected  in  the  Revised  trans- 
lation. John  expresses  for  Gaius  the  wish  that  in  all  things  relating  to  business  and 
baalth  it  may  ba  wall  with  him ;  not,  however,  without  regard  to  his  spiritual  con- 


14  THE  THIRD  BPISTLE  OP  JOHN.  [1—14 

dition.    His  soul  was  prospering ;  he  was  tberafora  a  man  for  whom  this  might  be 
safely  sought.    He  was  making  a  good  use  of  his  means  in  the  interest  of  the  truth, 
and  so  his  health  was  precious.    What,  then,  John  wishes  for  Gains  is  in  effect  this — 
more  means  and  better  health,  that  he  might  have  more  to  serve  God  with.    The  more 
that  suqh  a  man  as  Gains  had,  the  more  good  he  would  do.    But  we  cannot  safely  wish 
for  every  man  more  means  and  better  health.    That  might  only  mean  more  to  serve 
the  devil  with.     What  some  need  is  to  get  a  severe  check  in  business,  to  be  laid  down 
on  a  bed  of  sickness  ;  and  our  wish  for  them  may  justly  be  that  this  should  happen  to 
them,  rather  than  that  they  should  lose  their  souls.     Prom  this  it  will  be  seen  that 
a  Christian  may  he  justiflea  in  seeking  the  utmost  success  in  business  and  the  largest 
measure  of  health,  provided  his  motive  is  to  have  more  nieans  and  better  health  with 
which  to  serve  God.    This  may  be  a  greater  spur  to  diligence  than  even  the  desire  to 
amass  wealth,  being  attended  with  the  advantage  that  it  leaves    the  mind  free  and 
buoyant.    Let  us  learn  the  benefit  of  vielhwishing.    It  was  no  small  thing  to  have 
Joha  as  a  well'wisher,  both  from  the  oQice  which  he  held  and  his  great  spiritual 
experience;  and  the  likelihood  was  that  Gaius  would  get  more  means  and  better  health 
because  of  the  aged  apostle's  wish.    Let  us,  in  our  letters  or  otherwise,  wish  our  friends 
well  in  their  worldly  affairs  and  in  their  health,  not  without  regard  to  the  degree  in 
which  their  souls  prosper,  and  God  will  see  to  our  wishes  taking  effect.    2,  Sis  relation 
to  the  truth  rejoiced  in.    (1)  Truth  appropriated.    "  For  I  rejoiced  greatly,  when 
brethren  came  and  bare  witness  unto  thy  truth."    The  joy  of  John  was  great  because 
of  brethren  arriving  and  testifying  to  the  reception  of  the  truth  by  Gains.     It  is  men- 
tioned here  as  that  on  which  liis  soul-prosperity  depended.    One  of  the  lessons  taught 
by  the  openflotver  in  the  ornamentation  of  the  temple  was  receptivity,      "  It  lies  open 
to  catch  the  sunshine,  and  to  drink  the  rain  and  the  dew,  shuts  up  when  the  sun 
departs,  but  expands  itself  again  when  the  sun's  rays  touch  it.     By  reception  the  plant 
and  the  flower  live ;  and  by  reception  the  soul  of  man  lives  and  grows."     We  are  to  be 
careful  to  give  the  soul  its  proper  nourishment,  which  is  the  truth :  thoughts  of  God's 
love,  thoughts  of  his  ends  in  our  life.    If  we  entertain  false  views  of  God  and  of  life, 
we  are  really  taking  poison  into  our  souls.    Gains  felt  the  need  of  the  truth  to  nourish 
and  beautify  him.    "Behold,  thou  desirest  truth  in  the  inward  parts."    This  Gaius  had ; 
by  assimilation,  it  had  become  part  of  his  being.    (2)  Truth  carried  out  into  conduct. 
"  Even  as  thou  walkest  in  tnith,"    This  was  more  than  receiving  the  truth,  being  its 
proper  consequent.     The  reception  of  the  truth  appeared  (so  that  brethren  could  testify 
to  it)  in  a  higher  style  of  conduct.    It  is  under  sunny  skies  that  the  finest  colouring  in 
nature  is  to  lie  lound.    It  is  in  good  society  that  the  finest  accent  is  to  be  found.    So 
it  is  those  who  move  within  the  circle  of  the  Divine  thoughts,  lie  open  to  the  Divine 
influences,  that  attain  to  the  most  attractive  style  of  life.    Brethren  carry  away  a  good 
report  of  them,  which  is  cheering  to  the  souls  of  veterans.      Appended  comment 
emphasising  the  apostles  joy.    "  Greater  joy  have  I  nonethan  this,  to  hear  of  my  children 
walking  in  the  truth,"    The  reception  of  the  truth  was  implied  in  walking  in  the  truth; 
therefore  it  was  enough  to  note  the  latter.    There  were  many  to  whom  John  stood  in 
the  relation  ai  spiritucd father  (more  than  those  who  owed  to  him  their  spiritual  birth); 
he  was  no  stranger  io  fatherly  foy.    And  what  gave  him  joy  ?    To  hear  of  his  children, 
that  they  were  prost  ering  in  their  worldly  affairs,  that  they  were  enjoying  good  health, 
that  they  were  exempted  from  persecution.    It  did  cheer  him  to  hear  of  their  lower 
prosperity ;  but  what  cheered  him,  with  more  refreshing  influence,  was  to  hear  of  their 
soul-prosperity,  as  evidence  in  their  walking  in  the  truth.    3.  Practice  of  hospitality. 
(1)  Commended,    "  Beloved,  thou  doest  a  faithful  work  in  whatsoever  thou  doest  toward 
them  that  are  brethren  and  strangers  withal."    The  truth  binds  the  whole  walk ;  it 
specially  bound  Graius  in  the  practce  of  hospitality.    While  just,  ha  made  a  free  use  of 
his  means.    The  objects  of  his  hospitality  were  brethren,  as  it  appears,  missionary 
brethren,  and  missionary  brethren  who  were  strangers  to  him,  and  therefore  had  no 
claim  on  him  beyond  their  Christian  position  and  calling.    He  had  opportunity  ol 
rendering  them  service  beyond  simjly  entertaining  them;  and,  whatever  service  he 
rendered,  be  did  it  as  the  truth  required,  i.e.  huxdsomely.    (2)  Witnessed  to.    "  Who 
biffe  witness  to  thy  love  before  the  Church."    It  was  love  that  moved  Gains  to  serve  the 
missionary  brethren ;  and  they  were  mindful  of  services  rendered.    On  their  rettim  to 
the  Church  over  which  John  presided,  in  giving  an  account  of  their  missionary  lahours, 


1—14.]  THE  THIRD  EPISTLE  OF  JOHN.  IS 

they  told,  in  presence  of  the  Church,  how  well  they  had  heen  treated  hy  Gaius.  Thu« 
the  things  which  were  lovely  became  also  the  things  of  good  report.  (3)  Encouraged, 
"  Whom  thou  wilt  do  well  to  set  forward  on  their  journey  worthily  of  God  "  Th« 
missionary  brethren  were  returning  to  their  labours  his  way ;  the  apostle,  therefore, 
bespeaks  for  them  a  good  reception.  Let  him  follow  up  his  former  kindnesses,  and  set 
them  forward  on  their  journey,  by  providing  the  necessary  rest,  and  also,  as  is  suggested 
by  what  follows,  by  making  some  provision  against  their  future  needs.  He  was  to  do 
this  worthily  of  God,  i.e.  as  representing  to  them  the  Divine  solicitude.  The^/  tvere 
deserving.  "  Because  that  for  the  sake  of  the  Name  they  went  forth,  taking  nothing  of 
the  Gentiles."  The  Jews  "  besought  Jesus  earnestly  for  the  centurion,  saying.  He  is 
worthy  that  thou  shouldest  do  this  for  him :  for  he  loveth  our  nation,  and  himself  built 
us  our  synagogue."  The  missionary  brethren  were  worthy  that  Gaius  should  assist  them 
by  setting  them  forward  on  their  journey.  It  was  for  the  sake  of  the  Name  that  they 
went  forth,  t.«,  "  not  for  their  own  occasions  and  earthly  interests,"  but  that  the  Name 
of  Christ  might  be  magnified.  They  w^nt  forth  from  the  home  Church  (which  was 
limited  in  its  resources)  to  convert  the  Gentiles.  That  they  might  not  hinder  their  aim 
by  the  appearance  of  being  mercenary,  they  chose  (so  far  as  it  was  necessary)  to  labour 
with  their  own  hands,  rather  than  take  from  the  Gentiles.  The  accomplishment  of 
their  aim,  in  the  formation  of  a  Gentile  Christian  Church  (to  be  cared  for  by  others  while 
they  went  further  on),  was  work  to  which  the  building  of  a  sacred  house  was  secondary. 
It  was  work  fitted  to  exalt  the  Name,  showing  the  power  of  Divine  love  over  the  hard- 
ness of  men's  hearts  and  the  evils  of  Gentilism.  They,  then,  whose  missionary  zeal 
was  kindled  by  the  Name  must  not  be  overlooked.  They  were  representatives  of  tha 
truth.  "  We  therefore  ought  to  welcome  siuh,  that  we  may  be  fellow-helpers  with  the 
truth."  We  are  to  think  of  Gaius,  in  accordance  with  his  known  character,  taking  th« 
burden  (so  we  may  translate)  for  these  men— making  them  happy  while  in  his  house, 
and  contributing  not  only  for  the  journey,  but  for  the  end  of  the  journey,  so  that  with 
disengaged  hands  they  might  begin  their  luission;  and  thus,  while  not  proclaiming 
the  truth  himself,  earning  the  praise  of  being  a  "  fellow-helper  with  the  truth."  There  is 
an  obligation  lying  on  us  to  take  the  burden  for  the  missionaries.  While,  in  the  interest 
of  the  truth,  they  go  forth  as  bearers  of  the  truth  to  the  heathen,  we  are,  by  our  con- 
tributions, to  leave  their  hands  and  minds  free  for  their  proper  work ;  thus,  while  not 
bearers  of  the  truth  ourselves  (from  want  of  opportunity  and  qualifications),  having  an 
interest  in  the  truth,  and  having  the  satisfaction  and  honour  of  being  "  fellow-helpers  with 
the  truth." 

II.  DiOTREPHES.  1.  Eis  resistance  of  John's  authority.  "  I  wrote  somewhat  unto 
the  Church :  but  Diotrephes,  who  loveth  to  have  the  pre-eminence  among  them, 
teoeiveth  us  not."  The  particular  Church  is  not  named;  but  we  must  understand 
it  to  be  that  to  which  Gaius  belonged,  so  that  we  have  a  new  element  introduced. 
Gaius  entertained  the  stranger  missionaries  in  the/ace  of  opposition.  1'he  opposition 
came  from  Diotrephes.  The  occasion  was  a  letter  from  John.  This  letter  has  not 
been  preserved ;  we  must  think  of  it  as  containing  a  request  to  the  Church  to  give 
a  favourable  reception  to  the  missionaries.  The  request  was  only  reasonable;  but 
Diotrephes  opposed  it,  not  because  he  disliked  John's  teaching,  or  the  teaching  of  the 
missionaries,  but  simply  because  he  wished  to  assert  his  personal  authority.  He  belonged 
to  the  class  of  those  who  love  to  have  the  pre-eminence ;  who  are  bent,  not  on  the  peace 
and  prosperity  of  the  Church,  but  on  their  being  first  in  the  Church,  even  at  the  expense 
of  its  peace  and  prosperity.  And  this  ambitious  member  or  office-bearer  of  the  Church 
succeeded  for  a  time;  he  tasted  the  sweets  of  ecclesiastical  power,  in  getting  a  majority 
to  agree  with  him  against  the  apostle.  We  come  here  upon  the  design  of  this  letter  to 
Gaius.  2.  Eis  coming  defeat.  "Therefore,  if  I  come,  I  will  bring  to  remembrance  his 
works  which  he  doeth,  prating  against  us  with  wicked  words :  and  not  content  there- 
with, neither  doth  he  himself  receive  the  brethren,  and  them  that  would  he  forbiddeth, 
and  casteth  them  out  of  the  Church."  Diotrephes  did  not  gain  his  victory  without 
working  for  it.  His  works,  however,  were  not  such  as  could  bear  to  be  remembered. 
His  punishment  woidd  be,  on  the  coming  of  John,  to  have  his  works  brought  to 
remembrance.  Their  true  valuation  would  be  his  dethronement  from  power.  What  he 
did  was  to  speak  against  John  and  his  friends.  While  his  words  were  nvll,  they  wer« 
mitchiivous.    Not  content  with  speaking,  he  had  recourse  \o  action,.    He  set  theexunpl* 


16  THE  THIBD  EPISTLE  OP  JOHN.  [1—14 

of  abutting  bis  door  against  the  missionaries ;  and  when  some  (one  being  Gaius)  chose 
to  be  guid«l  rather  by  the  apostle's  letter,  he  at  once  vetoed  them,  and,  on  their  non> 
■ubmiasion  to  his  authority,  excommunicated  them.  But  this  working,  meantime 
triumphant,  would  soon,  and  very  simply,  be  put  a  stop  to.  "  Knowest  thou  not  this 
of  old,  since  man  was  placed  upon  earth,  that  the  triumphing  of  the  wicked  is  short  t " 

IIL  Dembteius.  1.  Hiaunlikenessto  Diotrephes.  "  Beloved,  imitate  not  that  which 
is  evil,  but  that  which  is  good.  He  that  doeth  good  is  of  God :  be  that  doeth  evil  hath 
not  seen  Qoi."  While  there  is  evil  working  in  Churches,  there  is  also  good  working. 
The  evil  is  there  for  us  to  avoid ;  the  good  is  there  for  us  to  imitate.  We  need  to  learn 
to  "  discern  between  the  righteous  and  the  wicked,  between  him  that  serveth  God  and 
him  that  serveth  him  not."  The  Johannine  principle  of  discrimination  is  simple.  He 
that  is  associated  with  the  working  of  good  has  his  life  derived  from  God ;  he  that  is 
associated  with  the  working  of  evil  (whatever  his  profession)  is  not  in  the  way  of 
receiving  first  impressions  of  God  in  his  true  nature,  or  is  not  placed  so  as  to  make  a 
commencement  in  the  Divine  life.  2.  Three/old  testimony/  to  his  excellence.  "  Demetrius 
hath  the  witness  of  all  men,  and  of  the  truth  itself :  yea,  we  also  bear  witness ;  and 
thou  knowest  that  our  witness  is  true."  Demetrius  had  the  witness  of  all  men.  We 
are  to  regard  the  language  as  hyperbolical,  not  limiting  the  "  all "  to  the  Christian  circle, 
nor  to  the  few  who  in  the  strictest  sense  could  be  witnesses,  but  the  many  who  spoke 
well  of  Demetrius  are  made  "  all,"  the  more  to  impress  us  with  their  number.  Demetrius 
bad  a  witness  greater  than  of  numbers  :  he  had  the  witness  of  the  truth  itself.  Though 
there  had  been  not  a  man  to  be  a  witness  to  him,  the  truth  (to  personify  it)  could  have 
been  produced  as  a  witness.  Though  no  man  had  owned  him,  the  truth  would  have 
owned  him.  Apart  from  the  personification,  the  idea  is  that  there  was  a  close  corre- 
spondence between  what  Demetrius  was  and  what  the  truth  demanded.  But  to  judge 
of  this  correspondence  requires  a  competent  witness,  with  opportunity  and  also  with 
correct  intuitions  of  the  truth ;  and  so,  in  the  third  place,  John  comes  forward  to  vouch 
for  Demetrius — a  witness  than  whom  none  could  be  more  satisfactory  to  Gaius.  We  are 
not  told  who  this  Demetrius  was ;  but  it  is  not  an  improbable  conjecture  that  he  was 
the  bearer  of  the  Epistle.  If  so,  then  it  is  to  be  noted  how,  by  a  happy  turn,  he  supplies 
him  with  the  necessary  recommendation. 

Conclusion.  1.  Season  for  not  writing  more.  "  I  had  many  things  to  write  unto 
thee,  but  I  am  unwilling  to  write  them  to  thee  with  ink  and  pen  :  but  I  hope  shortly 
to  see  thee,  and  we  shall  speak  face  to  face."  It  is  interesting  to  note  how  the  writing 
materials  are  here,  not  "  paper  and  ink  "  (2  John  12),  but  "  ink  and  pen."  He  could 
have  put  his  pen  to  the  writing  of  many  things ;  for  Gaius  and  he  had  much  in  common 
in  their  sympathies.  He  had  written  meantime  to  counteract,  so  far  as  he  could  by 
writing,  the  dangerous  influence  of  Diotrephes.  He  hoped  soon  to  see  Gaius.  When 
he  saw  him,  and  they  spoke  face  to  face,  he  would  have  more  opportunity  and  freedom 
to  disburden  himself.  2.  Salutations.  "  Peace  be  unto  thee.  The  friends  salute  thee. 
Salute  the  friends  by  name."  John  was  at  peace  with  Gbius ;  he  wished  the  whole 
world  to  be  at  peace  with  him.  They  had  common  friends.  Friends  with  John  (whom 
the  bearer  would  name)  saluted  Gaius.  Friends  with  Gaius,  he  (the  receiver  of  th« 
latter)  was  first  to  name  singly,  and  then  to  salute  in  this  form, "  John  sends  his  i^utft- 
tioB  to  thee."— B.  F. 


HOMILETIOAL  INDEX 


to 


THE  THIED  EPISTLE  OF  JOHN. 


iHEin 

PAGE 

THEMI                                                                                             PABt 

An  Apostolic  Pastoral  to  a  Christian 

Diotrephes :  a  Beacon        ...            ...      IC 

Man    ... 

3 

Imitating  the  Good            ...            ...      11 

Ideal  Prosperity   ... 

5 

Valediction           ...            ...            ...      12 

Spiritual  Prosperity            ...            ... 

6 

The  Aged  Presbyter's   Letter    to    a 

Hospitality 

7 

Private  Church-Member...            ^      13 

Missionary  Workers  and  Helpers      ... 

8 

THE 


PULPIT    COMMENTARY 


EDITED   BY  THE 


VERY  REY.  H.  D.  M.  SPENCE,  D.D., 


DEAN  OF  GLOUCESTER; 


AND   BY  THE 


REV.  JOSEPH    S.   EXELL,   M.A. 


JUDE. 

®)£}]osilion  axiis  l^omiletica: 
By  EEV.   S.   D.   F.    SALMOND,   M.A.,  D.D., 

PROFESSOR  OF  THEOLOGY,   FREE  CHURCH  COLLEGE,  ABERDEEM. 

Igomilies  by  llarious  ^utl)ors: 

REV.  PROF.  T.  CROSKERY,  D.D.  REV.  J.  S.  BRIGHT,  D.O. 

REV.  R.  FINLAYSON,  B.A. 


FUNK    &    WAGNALLS    COMPANY 
New  Yokk  and  Toronto. 


THE  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OE  JUDE. 


INTRODUCTION. 


I.  Gbneral  Chabactbristios. 

This  short  Epistle  holds  a  singular  place  p.moiig  the  New  Testament  hooks. 
Its  authorship,  its  date,  the  circle  of  its  readers,  the  evils  against  which  it 
is  directed,  and  indeed  almost  all  points  connected  with  its  literary  history, 
are  the  subjects  of  keen  dispute.  The  most  opposite  verdicts  have  been 
pronounced,  and  continue  to  be  pronounced,  on  its  title  to  a  position  in  the 
canon,  on  its  doctrinal  value,  on  its  worth  as  a  mirror  of  the  condition  of  the 
primitive  Church.  There  are  things  in  it  which  have  no  proper  parallels  in 
the  canonical  Scriptures.  It  is  not  too  much  to  say  that  the  New  Tester 
ment  nowhere  else  presents  so  many  strange  phenomena,  or  raises  so  many 
cnrious  questions  within  so  narrow  a  space.  It  has  a  character  which 
makes  one  feel  how  different  it  is  even  from  writings  like  the  Second 
Epistle  of  Peter,  which  it  seems  most  to  resemble.  Its  style  is  broken  and 
rugged,  bold  and  picturesque,  energetic,  vehement,  glowing  with  the  fires 
of  passion.  In  the  build  of  its  sentences  it  is  more  Aramaic  than  Greek, 
bat  it  has  at  the  same  time  a  considerable  command  of  strong,  varied,  and 
expressive  terms.  Hebrew  phrases  and  idioms  betray  the  Jewish  training 
and  Jewish  standpoint  of  the  writer.  It  combines  some  of  the  peculiar 
features  of  Old  Testament  prophecy  with  those  of  the  Jewish  Apocalyptiq 
literature.  Its  general  character  is  given  with  sufficient  point  by  Origen, 
in  a  well-known  sentence.  "  Jude  wrote  an  Epistle,"  he  says,  in  his  Com- 
mentary on  Matthew,  "  consisting  of  few  lines,  indeed,  but  filled  with  the 
vigorous  words  of  heavenly  grace." 

n.  Title,  and  Oedeb  oi  Thought. 

The  title  of  the  Epistle  appears  in  a  variety  of  forms,  and  these  are  of 
some  interest.  The  older  the  document,  the  simpler  the  title.  The  two 
most  ancient  and  valuable  manuscripts,  the  Sinaitio  and  the  Vatican,  give 

JUDE.  i 


INTEODUCTION  TO 


nothing  more  than  the  single  word  "  Jude."  The  Codex  Alexandrinus,  with 
some  others  of  high  quality,  is  content  with  the  heading,  "  The  Epistle  of 
Jude,"  and  leaves  the  question  of  the  author's  identity  untouched.  Later  the 
title  expands  into  such  forms  as  these :  "  The  Epistle  of  Jude  the  Apostle," 
"  The  Epistle  of  the  Holy  Apostle  Jude,"  "  The  Catholic  Epistle  of  Jude," 
"  The  Catholic  Epistle  of  St.  Jude,"  "  The  Catholic  Epistle  of  the  Apostle 
Jude,"  "  The  Catholic  Epistle  of  the  Holy  Apostle  Jude,"  "  The  Epistle  of 
Jude  the  Brother  of  James."  One  very  late  manuscript  ventures  to  give 
Jude  the  designation  a.8e\(l>o6e6s,  "  brother  of  God." 

The  order  of  thought  is  clear  enough.  The  Epistle  begins  with  an 
inscription  (vers.  1,  2),  which  resembles  in  some  respects  the  introductions 
to  the  Epistles  of  Peter  and  Paul,  but  has  at  the  same  time  its  own 
peculiarities.  This  is  followed  by  an  explanation  of  the  object  and  occasion 
of  writing  (vers.  3,4).  The  writer  next  indicates  the  gravity  of  the  circum- 
stances to  which  he  is  to  call  attention,  by  setting  in  the  foreground  three 
exceptional  instances  of  the  Divine  vengeance  (vers.  5 — 7).  He  then 
describes,  in  scathing  terms  and  by  contrast  with  archangelio  reserve,  the 
character  and  conduct  of  the  men'  he  combats  (vers.  8,  9).  The  description 
breaks  for  an  instant  into  a  vehement  denunciation  (ver.  11).  It  is  at  once 
resumed  and  connected  with  declarations  made  by  most  ancient  prophecy 
on  the  subject  of  the  Lord's  judicial  advent  (vers.  12 — 16).  Next  comes  an 
appeal  to  the  readers  to  be  mindful  of  former  apostolic  warnings  (vers.  17, 
18) ;  which  appeal  is  followed  by  yet  another  description  of  the  men  in 
question — short,  sharp,  and  penetrating  to  the  radical  evil  (ver.  19).  The 
Epistle  then  turns  to  counsels  to  the  readers  on  the  two  great  questions — 
how  to  protect  themselves  against  the  perversion  which  has  seized  others, 
and  how  to  conduct  themselves  towards  the  men  in  whom  that  perversion 
in  different  degrees  has  appeared  (vera.  20 — 23).  The  whole  is  brought  to 
a  solemn  and  tranquil  conclusion  by  a  doxology  which  touches  once  moi« 
both  the  danger  and  the  security  (vers.  24,  25). 


m.   AnTHOSSHIP  OF  TUB  EpISTLK. 

In  addition  to  the  traitor  Judas  Iscariot,  another  Jude  appears  in  th« 
lists  of  the  apostles.  In  the  Gospel  histories  he  is  entirely  in  the  back> 
ground,  there  being,  indeed,  but  a  single  occasion  on  which  he  is  reported  to 
haTe  taken  an  active  part  even  in  speech.  That  is  during  our  Lord's  dis- 
course  previous  to  his  going  forth  to  meet  his  betrayal ;  when  this  one  of  the 
twelve  breaks  in  with  the  question,  "  Lord,  how  is  it  that  thou  wilt  manifest 
thyself  unto  ns,  and  not  unto  the  world  ?  "  (John  liv.  22).  But  in  the 
apostolic  lists  he  is  introduced  along  with  James  the  son  of  Alpheus,  Simon 
Zelotes,  and  Judas  Iscariot.  He  is  generally  identified  with  Lebbeus  and 
Thaddens  (Matt.  z.  3  ;  Mark  iii.  18),  although  some  have  attempted  rather 
to  make  Levi  one  with  Lebbeus.  He  is  also  called  "  Jude  of  James  "  (Lake 
n.  Ifi) — a  phrase  which  the  Authorized  Version  renders,  "  Jude  the  irother 


THE  OENEtJAL  EPISTLE  OP  JUDB. 


of  James,"  but  which  has  on  the  whole  a  better  title  to  be  taken  as  "  Jude 
the  ton  of  James." 

But  the  Gospels  also  speak  of  a  Jude,  or  Judas,  who  was  one  of  ihe 
brethren  of  Jesus.     Both  Matthew  (xiii.  55)  and  Mark  (vi.  3)  represent 
the  men  of  our  Lord's  "own  country"  as  mentioning  him  hy  name.     Of 
this  Jude  we  know  extremely  little.     The  historical  books  of  the  Kew 
Testament  indicate  that  these  brethren  of  Jesus  were  at  first  nnbelieverg 
(John  vii.  5),  and  that  afterwards  (probably  not  till  the  Resarrediion  was 
accomplished)  they  were  of  the  company  of  disciples  (Acts  i.  14).  ,  This 
will  apply,  we  have  every  reason  to  think,  to  Jude  as  well  as  others.    But 
beyond  what  these  passages  suggest,   we  have  nothing  from  the  New 
Testament  itself.     Neither  does  early  ecclesiastical  history  furnish  ns  with 
much,     There  is,  however,  one  statement  of  great  interest,  which  has  come 
down  to  ns  from  Hegesippus,  the  father  of  Church  history,  who  flourished 
perhaps  about  the  middle  of  the  second  century.    It  has  been  preserved 
for  us  by  Eusebius,  and  is  of  such  importance  that  it  may  be  given  in  full. 
"  There  were  yet  living  of  the  family  of  our  Lord,"  the  narrative  says,  "  the 
grandchildren  of  Judas,  called  the  brother  of  our  Lord,  according  to  the 
flesh.    These  were  reported  as  being  of  the  family  of  David,  and  were 
brought  to  Domitian  by  the  Evocatns.    For  this  emperor  was  as  much 
alarmed  at  the  appearance  of  Christ  as  Herod.    He  put  the  question 
whether  they  were  of  David's  race,  and  they  confessed  that  they  were.    He 
then  asked  them  what  property  they  had,  or  how  much  money  they  owned. 
And  both  of    them  answered  that  they  had  between  them  only  nine 
thousand  denarii,  and  this  they  had  not  in  silver,  but  in  the  value  of  a  piece 
of  land  containing  only  thirty-nine  acres,  from  which  they  raised  their 
taxes,  and  supported  themselves  by  their  own  labour.    Then  they  also  began 
to  show  their  hands,  exhibiting  the  hardness   of  their  bodies,  and  the 
callosity  formed  by  incessant  labour  on  their  hands,  as  evidence  of  their 
own  labour.     When  asked,  also,  respecting  Christ  and  his  kingdom,  what 
was  its  nature,  and  when  and  where  it  was  to  appear,  they  replied  '  that  it 
was  not  a  temporal  nor  an  earthly  kingdom,  bat  celestial  and  angelic ;  that 
it  would  appear  at  the  end  of  the  world,  when,  coming  in  glory,  he  would 
judge  the  quick  and  dead,  and  give  to  every  one  according  to  his  works.' 
Upon  which  Domitian,  despising  them,  made  no  reply ;  but  treating  them 
with  contempt,  as  simpletons,  commanded  them  to  be  dismissed,  and  by  a 
decree  ordered  the  persecution  to  cease.     Thus  delivered,  they  ruled  the 
Churches,  both  as  witnesses  and  relatives  of  the  Lord.     When  peace  was 
established,  they  continued  living  even  to  the  times  of  Trajan  "  (Eusebius, 
'  Ecol.  Hist.,'  iii.  20  :  Bohn).    Aa  Domitian  reigned  from  a.d.  81  to  96,  this 
passage  helps  ns  so  far  to  determine  the  limit  of  Jude's  life. 

The  question  of  the  authorship  of  our  Epistle  has  been  for  the  most  part 
»  question  as  to  which  of  these  two  Judes  is  the  writer.  The  necessity  of 
making  a  choice  has  been  superseded,  it  is  true,  by  some  who  have  can- 
tended  that  the  apostle  and  the  Lord's  brother  were  one  and  the  same 


INTRODUCTION  TO 


person.  This  identification,  however,  rests  npon  the  two  suppositions  that 
"  Jade  of  James  "  means  "  Jnde  the  brother  of  James,"  and  that  the  sons 
of  Alphens  were  brothers  of  Jesus.  Bnt  the  former  supposition  is,  as  we 
have  said,  less  probable  than  another,  and  the  latter  has  against  it  the 
distinct  statement  in  John  vii.  5.  The  theory  has  also  been  propounded 
that  the  author  is  the  Jndas  snrnamed  Barsabas  of  Acts  zv.  22,  etc.  Bat 
this  has  met  with  little  favour.  With  most,  therefore,  the  question  is 
still  this — Which  of  two  Judes  is  the  writer  of  this  Epistle  ?  Is  it  the 
apostle  with  the  three  names,  or  is  it  the  non-apostolic  brother  of  Jesus  ? 

With  many,  both  in  ancient  and  in  modern  times,  the  opinion  haa 
prevailed  that  the  apostle  is  the  author.  But  the  difficalties  in  the  way 
of  this  are  considerable.  Besides  the  argument  drawn  from  the  circum- 
stance that  the  Jude  who  belongs  to  the  twelve  is  represented  rather  as 
the  son  than  as  the  brother  of  James,  there  is  the  fact  that  the  writer  of  our 
Epistle  nowhere  calls  himself  an  apostle,  or  even  hints  at  his  being  so,  and 
there  is  no  apparent  reason  why  he  should  have  avoided  mention  of  his 
real  position.  Further,  if  he  was  an  apostle,  it  is  difficult  to  see  why  he 
should  have  appealed  to  his  relationship  to  James  rather  than  to  the 
weightier  fact  of  his  official  dignity.  And  again,  the  manner  in  which  he 
refers  to  "  the  words  which  have  been  spoken  before  by  the  apostles  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ"  (ver.  17)  leads  us  most  naturally  to  the  same  con- 
clusion. For  he  appears  there  to  distingaish  himself  from  them,  and  to 
appeal,  in  support  of  his  exhortations,  to  an  authority  higher  than  his  own. 

This  being  the  case,  the  decision  must  be  in  favour  of  the  Lord's 
brother.  It  has  been  strongly  urged  by  some  that,  if  the  writer  had  held 
this  relationship  to  Christ,  he  would  have  found  in  it  his  most  direct  and 
obvious  claim  upon  the  attention  of  his  readers,  and  would  not  have  failed 
to  make  use  of  the  title.  But  this  is  sufficiently  met  by  the  explanation 
which  was  given  in  very  ancient  times.  The  death  and  resurrection  and 
ascension  of  Jesus  had  produced  such  a  change  on  the  position  and  the 
ideas  of  those  who  had  been  most  intimately  connected  with  him  on  earth, 
that  religious  feeUng  would  restrain  them  from  preferring  any  claim  on  the 
ground  of  human  relationship  or  asserting  the  ties  of  nature.  On  the  other 
hand,  the  designation,  "  brother  of  James,"  and  other  peculiarities  of  the 
Epistle,  are  easily  understood  if  the  writer  is  not  the  apostle,  and  if  the 
James  referred  to  is  the  well-known  head  of  the  mother  Church  of 
Jerosalem. 

rV.  Puo>  AND  Date  of  Composition. 

Both  these  questions  remain  unsettled.  As  regards  the  question  of 
place,  materials  for  a  decision  entirely  fail  us.  So  far  as  a  decision  has 
been  attempted,  it  has  been  in  favour  of  Palestine.  This  is  held  to  be 
supported  by  the  Jewish- Christian  tone  of  the  Epistle,  and  the  tradition 
regarding  the  residence  of  the  descendants  of  Jade.  But  there  ia  nothing 
of  a  wore  positiy*  kind  to  appeal  to. 


THE  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OF  JDDK, 


The  case  is  somewhat  difFerent  with  the  qnestion  of  date.  While  external 
testimoiiy  is  lacking,  there  is  a  certain  measure  of  internal  evidence  to  fall 
back  upon.  But  even  that  is  unfortunately  very  indeterminate.  Little  or 
nothing  can  be  made  of  the  references  to  apocryphal  writings,  the  date  of 
these  writings  themselves  being  so  far  from  certain.  Neither  can  any 
reliance  be  placed  upon  forms  of  expression  which  have  been  supposed  to 
indicate  an  acquaintance  with  some  of  the  Pauline  Epistles.  We  should 
be  on  surer  ground  if  it. were  possible  to  pronounce  decisively  on  the 
relation  in  which  Jude  stands  to  2  Peter.  The  resemblances  between 
these  two  Epistles,  in  matter  and  in  style,  are  numerous  and  striking. 
They  are  also  of  the  kind  to  suggest  that  the  one  Epistle  is  indebted  to 
the  other,  rather  than  that  both  borrow  from  a  common  stock.  But  it  is 
extiemely  difficult  to  say  which  is  prior.  In  support  of  the  priority  of 
Jude,  for  example,  it  is  said  that  his  style  is  so  much  more  nervous, 
original,  and  concentrated  than  that  of  2  Peter,  that  the  latter  seems  a 
weakened  amplification  of  the  former;  that  it  is  more  likely  that  a  short 
Epistle  should  be  extended  by  a  later  writer  than  that  a  longer  Epistle 
should  be  condensed,  and  so  forth.  But  then,  with  at  least  equal  reason,  it 
is  argued,  on  behalf  of  the  priority  of  2  Peter,  that  that  Epistle  presents, 
in  the  form  of  predictions,  certain  evils  which  appear  in  Jude  as  actualities ; 
that  the  arrangement  of  the  matter  is  less  artificial  than  in  Jude ;  that 
there  is  a  richness  of  imagery,  antithesis,  and  the  like  in  the  latter  which 
makes  it  strange  that  2  Peter,  if  later  and  dependent,  should  borrow  so 
little  of  it  and  pass  by  so  many  of  the  finest  points. 

In  these  circumstances  it  is  no  wonder  that  very  different  dates  have 
been  accepted.  Benan,  who  discovers  anti-Pauline  feeling  in  the  Epistle, 
would  carry  it  as  far  back  as  a.d.  54.  Lardner  puts  it  between  64  and  66. 
Others  would  place  it  somewhere  between  70  and  80,  and  some  take  it  to 
have  been  written  after  all  the  apostles,  save  John,  had  died.  The  most 
probable  conclusion  seems  to  be  that  it  was  composed  before  a.d.  70,  but 
how  long  before  that  year  it  is  impossible  to  say.  This  idea  of  the  date  is 
supported  by  the  general  view  which  it  offers  of  the  state  of  the  Church, 
the  nature  of  the  evils  dealt  with,  and  the  allusion  to  the  teaching  of  the 
apostles,  but  more  especially  by  the  absence  of  all  reference  to  the  destruc- 
-  tion  of  Jerusalem.  For  if  an  event  of  such  moment  and  one  so  pertinent 
to  the  subject  in  band  had  taken  place  before  this  Epistle  was  written,  it  is 
hard  to  believe  that  the  writer  could  have  failed  to  notice  the  fact,  or  have 
missed  the  opportunity  of  adding  it  to  the  list  of  the  warnings  which  he 
takes  from  the  dread  judgments  of  God. 


V.   Genuineness  and  Canonicitt. 

No  doubt  appears  to  have  been  entertained  by  the  early  Church  as  to  the 
genuineness  of  the  Epistle.  Opinions  might  waver  for  a  time  as  to  the 
position  assignable  to  it  in  the  Chwch,  and  a#  to  the  particulftr  Jade  who 


INTRODUCTION  TO 


wrote  it.  Bat  there  was  no  dispute  alx>at  its  being  the  work  of  a  Jnde,  tlia 
genuine  work  of  the  man  from  whom  it  professed  to  proceed.  Even  in 
later  times  few  have  been  found  to  pronounce  it  fictitious  or  spurious.  It 
is  true  that  some  recent  critics  hare  attempted  to  make  it  out  to  be  a 
product  of  the  post-apostolio  age,  and  that  several  scholars  of  considerable 
authority  hare  regarded  it  as  a  protest  against  the  GTnosticism  of  the  second 
century.  But  its  direct  and  unaffected  style,  the  witness  which  it  bears  to 
the  life  of  the  Church,  the  type  of  doctrine  which  it  exhibits,  and,  above  all, 
the  improbability  that  any  forger  would  hare  selected  a  name  comparatively 
BO  obscure  as  that  of  Jude  under  which  to  shelter  himself,  or  indeed  would 
have  thought  of  constructing  an  Epistle  of  this  kind  at  all,  have  won  for 
it  general  acceptance  as  genuine.  "  Whatever  may  be  our  opinion  as  to 
Second  Peter,"  it  is  justly  remarked  by  Dr.  Plummer,  "  sober  criticism 
requires  us  to  believe  that  Jade  was  written  by  the  man  whose  name  it 
bears.     To  suppose  that  Jude  is  an  assumed  name  is  gratuitous." 

It  is  otherwise  with  its  canonicity.  It  won  its  way  to  ecclesiastical 
rank  by  slow  and  uncertain  steps.  Doubts  orerhung  its  claims  in  early 
antiquity,  and  these  have  been  revired  from  time  to  time  with  an  access  of 
force,  notably  at  the  period  of  the  Beformation  and  in  our  own  day.  On 
the  one  hand,  it  was  not  included  in  the  Peshito  Syriao  Version.  It  was 
known,  indeed,  to  EphrsBm,  the  most  distinguished  name  in  the  Syrian 
Church  of  the  fourth  century.  But  there  is  little  or  no  evidence  of  its 
use  in  the  Asiatic  Churches  up  to  the  beginning  of  the  fourth  centnry. 
Ensebius  classes  it  with  the  books  which,  though  well  known  to  many, 
were  disputed.  In  another  connection  he  speaks  of  it  thus :  "  Not  many 
of  the  ancients  have  mentioned  the  Epistle  of  Jude,  which  is  also  one  of 
the  seven  Catholic  Epistles.  Nevertheless,  we  know  that  these,  with  the 
rest,  are  publicly  used  in  most  of  the  Churches."  On  the  other  hand,  it  is 
found  in  the  Muratorian  Canon  (about  a.d.  170),  and  in  the  Old  Latin 
Version.  It  is  referred  to  as  the  work  of  an  apostle,  or  as  Scripture,  by  such 
early  writers  as  Clement  of  Alexandria  (about  A.D.  190),  TertuUian  of 
Carthage  (about  a.d.  200),  Origen  (about  a.d.  230),  and  Malohion  of  Antioch 
(about  A.D.  270).  It  also  obtained  a  place  in  the  Laodicean  Canon  (a.d. 
364),  the  Carthaginian  Canon  (a.d.  397),  and  subsequent  lists.  Some  of 
these  witnesses,  howerer,  indicate  that  its  position  was  not  quite  certain, 
and  Jerome  mentions  the  fact  that  it  quotes  the  apocryphal  Book  of  Enoch 
as  a  reason  for  its  being  rejected  in  some  quarters.  Its  brevity,  its  peculiar 
contents,  and  the  circumstance  that  it  makes  no  claim  to  apostolic  author- 
ship, would  no  doubt  also  stand  in  the  way  of  a  rapid,  extensive,  and 
unhesitating  acceptance. 

VI.  The  Partibs  addressed. 

It  has  been  alleged  that  there  is  nothing  in  the  Epistle  to  limit  it  to  any 
particular  Church  or  Churches,  but  that  it  deals  with  dangers  to  whioh  aU 


THE  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OF  JUDB.  tii 

branohea  of  tha  Ohnroli  were  exposed.  The  inscription  certainlj  is  in  tbe 
most  general  terma,  and  the  errors  are  snob  as  may  have  prevailed  more  or 
less  in  different  parts  of  the  Church.  Bnt  even  when  it  is  held  to  be  a 
OathoUo  Epistle  in  the  broadest  sense  of  the  term,  it  is  nsaally  admitted 
that  the  -writer,  while  he  meant  it  for  all  Christians  without  distinction, 
may  have  had  some  particular  circle  in  his  eye,  and  this  is  very  largely 
taken  to  be  the  Christian  community  in  Palestine.  The  definiteness  of  the 
terms  strongly  favours  the  idea  that  a  definite  Church  or  group  of  Churches 
must  have  been  in  view.  Bnt  the  question  remains — Where  are  these  to  be 
found  ?  In  Palestine,  say  Credner,  Keil,  and  others,  because  the  Epistle, 
abounding  as  it  does  in  allusions  to  events  in  the  history  of  Israel,  presup- 
poses Jewish-Christian  readers,  and  only  in  Palestine  itself  were  distinctively 
Jewish-Christian  Churches  to  be  found  at  the  period.  In  Syria,  say  others, 
or  in  the  licentious  Corinthian  territory,  or  even  in  Egypt,  in  which  land 
the  physical  phenomena  are  supposed  to  correspond  remarkably  with  those 
appearing  in  the  imagery  of  this  letter.  The  question  is  really  one  between 
Jewish-Christian  and  Qentile-Christian  readers.  There  is  undoubtedly 
much  to  favour  the  idea  that  the  former  are  in  view,  the  books  and  con- 
ditions referred  to,  as  well  as  the  historical  incidents,  being  all  Jewish.  Bat, 
on  the  other  hand,  it  may  be  said  that  the  Jewish  colouring  of  the  Epistle 
ia  sufficiently  explained  by  the  fact  that  the  writer  was  originally  a  Jew, 
without  making  it  necessary  to  suppose  that  the  readers  must  have  been  the 
game.  Further,  the  evils  dealt  with  are  of  the  kind  to  which  converts  from 
heathenism  would  be  more  liable  than  converts  from  Judaism.  Hence  there 
is  some  probability  in  the  supposition  that  the  Churches  of  Asia  Minor  are 
particularly  in  view.  On  these  Chnrches  Paul  had  expended  much  labour. 
In  these  he  had  set  forth  with  g^eat  definiteness  his  doctrine  of  grace.  In 
these  he  had  had  cause  to  defend  the  liberty  of  the  gospel  against  gainsayers, 
and  to  meet  a  variety  of  errors.  And  these  were  the  Churches  in  which  such 
immoral  perversion  of  the  Pauline  doctrine  of  grace,  and  such  perils  alike 
to  truth  and  to  life,  as  are  dealt  with  in  this  Epistle,  might  most  naturally 
arise.  In  this  case  Jude's  Epistle  would  be  a  companion,  not  to  that  of  hu 
brother  James,  bat  to  the  Epistles  of  Petnr,  to  the  second  of  which  it  exhibits 
■o  many  points  of  resemblance  as  at  once  to  suggest  that  the  same  oirol*  oi 
readers  and  the  same  evils  were  in  the  visw  of  both. 

YIL  Thb  Ebbobists  or  thb  Epistli. 

It  ii  a  question  of  great  interest  who  are  meant  by  the  men  who  "  crept 
in  unawares."  Their  entrance  into  the  Church  is  the  occasion  of  Jude's 
writing,  and  it  is  against  them  that  he  hurls  so  many  terms  of  terror.  It 
is  obvious,  therefore,  that  the  view  taken  of  what  these  men  were,  whether 
doctrinal  heretics,  practical  libertines,  or  what  else,  will  affect  onr  whole 
reading  of  the  Epistle. 

Many,  both  in  ancient  and  in  modem  times,  have  been  of  th«  opiaio^ 


vili  INTBODUOTION  TO 


that  these  insidione  enemies  of  the  Church  were  some  kind  of  heretical 
teachers;  bat  there  has  been  no  unanimity  in  identifying  the  particalar 
kind.  For  the  most  part  they  haye  been  regarded  as  one  and  the  same 
with  those  referred  to  in  2  Peter.  This  was  the  view  of  Lnther  and 
Melanchthon,  and  it  is  still  the  view  of  many  competent  scholars ;  bat  the 
basis  on  which  it  rests  is  by  no  means  secore.  Not  to  speak  of  arguments, 
evidently  of  a  very  precarious  kind,  which  are  taken  from  one  or  two 
phrases  (such  as  the  clause,  "the  words  spoken  before,"  in  ver.  17,  and  the 
"  separate  themselves  "  ia  ver.  19),  that  basis  is  the  likeness  between  Jude 
and  2  Peter.  This  likeness,  it  is  said,  extends  not  only  to  the  broad 
outlines  of  the  descriptions,  but  to  many  remarkable  figures  and  turns  of 
expression ;  and  as  Peter  certainly  speaks  of  false  teachers,  Jude  must  be 
understood  to  do  the  same.  But  this  is  met  by  the  contention  that  a  more 
careful  inspection  of  the  two  lines  of  description  shows  that  they  have 
distinctions  at  least  as  remarkable  as  their  resemblances.  It  is  pointed  out, 
for  example,  that  the  outstanding  feature  of  the  statement  in  2  Pet.  ii.  1 
is  not  found  in  Jude,  and  that  in  2  Pet.  iii.  2  we  have  something  quite 
different  from  what  appears  in  the  smaller  Epistle.  Hence  some,  frankly 
recognizing  these  differences,  hold  that  the  errorists  of  Jude  are  to  bfi 
identified  rather  with  those  of  the  Pastoral  Epistles — ^the  "  false  teachers  " 
of  1  Tim.  iv.  1 ;  2  Tim.  iii.  1,  etc.  Others  would  fain  discover  them  in  the 
men  who  are  in  view  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Colossians ;  while  one  inflnential 
school  asserts  that  they  are  Gnostics  of  the  second-century  type.  The 
absence,  however,  of  any  definite  indication  of  the  doctrines  supposed  to 
be  taught,  the  difficulty  of  identifying  the  teachers  with  any  known  class, 
and  the  doubtful  construction  put  upon  two  or  three  Bsntences  which 
seem  to  favour  some  such  view,  we  serious  objections  to  this  theory  in  any 
of  its  forms. 

Hence  a  considerable  number  of  interpreters  have  been  driven  to  conclude 
for  the  opposite  view— that  the  errorists  in  question  are  men  of  a  certain 
manner  of  life,  not  of  a  certain  type  of  doctrinal  belief  and  teaching.  But 
here  again  we  have  more  than  one  form  of  the  theory.  Some  take  the  men 
to  have  been  libertines  pure  and  simple — men  who  allowed  themselves  the 
utmost  licence  of  an  immoral  life,  despising  rule  and  authority,  and  cor- 
rupting the  Church  by  their  evil  example  and  seductive  inflaence.  Thus 
put,  however,  the  theory  is  too  absolute,  and  it  overlooks  some  notable 
features  of  the  Epistle.  For  sach  statements  as  those  in  vers.  4,  10, 18, 19, 
appear  to  point  to  men  of  the  kind  referred  to  in  Rom.  vi.  15 — men  who 
made  the  doctrine  of  grace  an  excuse  for  lascivionsness,  and  a  plea  for  hold- 
ing themselves  subject  to  no  external  law  of  life,  whether  that  of  the  Old 
Testament  or  that  of  Christ.  Hence  the  safest  conclusion  is  probably  the 
intermediate  position  adopted  by  Weiss.  These  insidious  foes  to  the  purity 
of  the  Church  were  not  indeed  doctrinal  theorists  or  wild  speculators  like 
the  GhaosticB,  or  professed  teachers.  They  were  in  the  first  instance 
libertines  in  oondaot,  but  at  the  same  time  men  whose  libertinism  in  life 
Itad  ita  root  in  perverted  riewi  of  Divine  graoe  and  Christian  VLbtaetj. 


THS  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OF  JUDK. 


Yin.  LrrEBATUBB  of  the  Efibtlb. 

Among  the  older  commentaries  or  treatises  on  Jude  may  be  mentioned  those  by 
Manton  (London,  1658);  Jenkyn  (republished,  Edinburgh,  1863);  Witsius  (Basle, 
1739);  Sohmid  (Leipsic,  1768) ;  Semler  (Halle,  1782) ;  Hasse  (Jena,  1786);  Hanlein 
(Brlangen,  1799, 1804) ;  Jessien  (Leipsio,  1821) ;  Schnecksnburger  (Stuttgardt,  1832) ; 
De  Wette  (Leipsic,  1847) ;  Stier  (Berlin,  1850) ;  Arnaud  (Strassburg,  1851) ;  Bampf 
(Sulzbach,  1854) ;  Gardiner  (Boston,  1856),  Wiesinger  (in  Olshausen,  1862) ;  Sohott 
(Brlangen,  1863) ;  Bruckner  (Leipsio,  1865,  3rd  edit.).  More  recent  are  the  following : 
Hofmann's  Commentary  (in  his  '  Heilige  Schrift,'  etc.,  NordUngen,  1876) ;  Huthe?s 
(in  Meyer;  English  translation,  Edinburgh,  1881);  Eeil's  (Leipsio,  1883);  Spitta's 
(Halle,  1885);  Kiihl's  (in  Meyer,  1887);  Burger's  (iu  Straok  and  Zooklei'a  '  Kurzge- 
fasster  Kommentar,"  Nordlingen,  1888).  The  expositions  in  the  following  commen- 
taries on  the  whole  New  Testament  also  deserve  notice,  namely,  those  by  Webster  and 
Wilkinson,  Alfoid,  Wordsworth,  and  Eeuss ;  those  in  Schaff's  '  Popular  Commentary,' 
the  'Speaker's  Commentary'  (by  Lumby);  Cassell's  'Commentary,'  edited  by  Bishop 
EUicott  (by  Plummer) ;  Lange's '  Commentary '  (by  Fronm'iller);  and  the  '  Cambridge 
Series'  (by  Plumptre). 


THE  GENEEAL  EPISTLE  OF  JUM 


EXPOSITION. 


Yen.  1,  2.— iKBonmroir  dbboriftitb  o» 
Wbitkr  and  Rbadsbs,  ahd  cwmvbyino  Salv- 

rATION. 

Yer.  1.— Jnias,  a  servant  of  Jetxa  ChiiBt, 
and  brother  of  James.  The  Epistle  opens 
with  a  designation  of  the  author  which  is 
brief,  consisting  but  of  two  terms,  only 
remotely,  if  at  all,  ofBcial,  and  having 
nothing  exactly  like  it  io  the  inscriptions  of 
other  New  Testament  Epistles.  The  writer 
gives  his  personal  name  Jude,  or  rather,  as 
the  Revised  Version  puts  it,  Judat.  For 
while  in  the  New  Testament  the  Authorized 
Version  uses  the  various  forms,  Judat, 
Judah,  Juda,  and  Jude,  the  Revised  Version, 
with  better  reason,  adheres  to  the  form  Judai 
in  all  cases  except  those  of  the  tribe  and  the 
■on  of  Jacob.  The  name  was  a  familiar  one 
among  the  Jews,  whose  stock  of  personal 
names  was  limited.  This  i*  seen  in  its 
New  Testament  use.  Not  to  speak  of  its 
occnrrence  as  the  name  of  the  son  of  Jacob, 
and  as  the  name  of  two  individuals  in  the 
line  of  the  ancestry  of  Jesus  (Luke  iii.  26, 
30),  it  appears  as  the  name  of  several 
persons  belonging  to  New  Testament  times. 
These  include  one  of  the  brethren  of  the 
Lord  (Matt  xiiL  55;  Mark  vi.  3);  the 
apostle  who  is  called  in  our  Authorized 
^^rsion  "the  brother  of  James,"  but  who 
may  rather  be  "  the  son  of  James "  (Luke 
vL  16:  Jobn  xiv.  22;  Acts  L  13);  the 
traitor  Iscariot;  the  writer  of  this  Epistle; 
the  rebel  leader  of  Galilee  (Acts  v.  37); 
the  man  of  Damascus  to  whose  house 
Ananias  was  directed  to  go  (Acts  ix.  11) ; 
the  delegate,  surnamed  Barsabas,  who  was 
sent  with  Paul  and  Barnabas  fiom  the 
mother  Church  to  Antioch  (Acts  xr.  22, 
27,  32).  The  writer  attaches  a  twofold 
designation  to  his  personal  name.  First, 
he  terms  himself  "a  servant  of  Jesui 
Christ,"  as  the  Eevised  Version  puts  it, 
aot  "the  servant  of  Jesus  OhrisV'  with 
iVDX, 


the  Authorized  Version.  The  enrions  fkot 
has  been  noticed  that  this  passage  and 
Phil.  i.  1  (in  which  latter,  however,  we  have 
the  plural  form)  are  the  only  passages 
in  which  the  Authorized  Version  inseits 
the  definite  article  in  the  deidgnation  of 
the  author  of  any  New  Testament  book. 
He  gives  himself  thus  the  same  title  as  is 
adopted  by  the  James  whose  name  heads 
another  of  the  Catholic  Epistles,  and  who 
is  taken  to  be  his  brother.  It  is  not  certain, 
however,  what  breadth  of  ateaning  is  to  be 
ascribed  to  the  phrase.  The  term,  "  servant 
of  Jesus  Christ,"  or  its  cognate,  is  nsed  as  a 
general  description  of  the  Christian  believer, 
apart  from  all  reference  to  any  particular 
position  in  the  Church  (1  Cor,  vii.  22,  eto,; 
Eph,  vi.  6).  It  does  not  carry  a  strictly 
official  sense.  It  seems  never  to  designate  the 
apostoliooffioea(suob,nnleB8somequalifying 
clause  is  added.  It  stands  without  any  such 
addition,  it  is  true,  in  Phil.  i.  1  and  Jas.  i.  I. 
But  in  the  former  it  is  applied  to  two  com- 
rades, one  of  whom  is  not  an  apostle ;  and  in 
the  latter  the  person  so  described  is  in  all 
probability  not  one  of  those  who  appear  in 
the  lists  of  the  apostles.  In  other  passages 
(Rom.  i.  1 ;  Titus  L 1 ;  2  Pet  i.  1)  it  is  coupled 
with  the  official  term  "apostle."  It  is 
claimed  by  some  of  the  best  expositors, 
however,  that  in  this  passage,  as  in  some 
others,  it  has  an  intermediate  sense,  mean 
ing  one  who,  while  not  an  apostle  proper, 
was  charged  with  the  apostolic  work  of 
preaching  and  ministering.  If  that  is  so, 
the  writer  presents  himself  as  one  occupy- 
ing the  kind  of  position  which  is  assigned 
to  Barnabas,  Timothy,  and  others  in  the 
Book  of  the  Acta.  But  he  describes  himself 
further  as  the  "  brother  of  James."  Tlie  title 
has  nothing  likeit  elsewhere  io  the  inscrip- 
tions of  the  Epistles,  and,  as  the  particle 
which  connects  it  with  the  former  clause 
indicates,  it  points  to  something  not  merely 
additional,  but   distiuctiv*.    The  distin^ 


THE  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OF  JUDE. 


[1—25. 


Hon  is  the  relationship  to  another  person 
in  the  Church,  better  known  and  more 
influential  than  himself.  For  the  James 
here  mentioned  is  generally,  and  we  believe 
rightly,  identified,  not  with  the  brother  (or 
eon)  of  Alpheus  who  appears  among  the 
twelve,  but  with  the  Lord's  brother,  who 
is  represented  by  the  Book  of  the  Acts  as  in 
pre-eminent  honour  and  authority  in  the 
mother  Church  of  Jerusalem.  Jude,  there- 
fore, might  have  called  himself  the  "  brother 
of  Mie  Lord."  He  abstains  from  doing  so, 
it  ia  supposed  by  some,  because  that  title 
had  become  the  recognized  and  almost 
consecrated  name  of  James.  Or  it  may 
lather  be  tliat  he  shrank  from  what  might 
■eem  an  appeal  to  an  earthly  kinship  which 
had  been  sunk  in  a  higher  spiritual  re- 
lationship. The  choice  of  the  title  is  at  the 
lame  time  a  weighty  argument  against  his 
belonging  to  the  twelve.  Unable  to  put 
forward  any  apostolic  dignity  or  commission 
M  his  warrant  for  writing,  and  as  his  claim 
upon  his  readei-s'  attention,  he  places  him- 
self beneath  the  shield  of  the  more  eminent 
name  of  a  brother,  who  also  was  the  author 
of  an  Epistle  in  all  probability  extensively 
circulated  before  this  one  was  put  forth. 
Those  to  whom  he  writes  are  also  most  care- 
fully described.  The  terms  of  this  threefold 
designation  are  unusual  and  somewhat 
difficult  to  construe.  The  text  itself  is 
not  quite  certain.  The  Beceived  Text  and 
onr  Authorized  Version  give  the  reading 
"  wnctlfied,"  which  has  the  support  of  one 
or  two  documents  of  good  character,  and  is 
•till  accepted,  chiefly  on  the  ground  of 
intrinsic  fitness,  by  some  scholars  of  rank. 
It  must  be  displaced,  however,  by  the  reading 
"  beloved,"  which  has  on  its  side  three  of  the 
five  primary  uncials  (the  Vatican,  Sinaitic, 
uid  Alexandrian)  as  well  as  important 
versions  and  patrisfio  quotations,  and  is 
accepted  by  the  best  recent  authorities. 
This,  howerer,  gives  ns  so  unusual  a  com- 
bination, "beloved  in  God  the  Father," 
that  some  are  driven  to  the  conclusion 
that  the  preposition  has  got  somehow  into 
a  wrong  place.  Dr.  Hort  pronounces  tlie 
connection  to  be  "without  analogy,"  and 
to  admit  of  "  no  natural  interpretation ; " 
and  the  great  critical  edition  of  Messrs. 
Westcott  and  Hort  marks  the  clause  as 
one  which  probably  contains  some  primitive 
error.  Taking  the  terms,  however,  as  the 
vast  preponderance  of  documentary  evidence 
presents  them,  we  have  three  brief  descrip- 
tion! of  the  readers,  all  sufficiently  intelli- 
gible, and  each  obviously  in  point.  The 
most  general  of  the  three  descriptive  notes 
is  the  "called."  The  idea  of  a  "call" 
pervades  all  Scripture.  It  appears  in  a 
Tariety  of  applications,  of  which  the  most 
distinctiTe   la    that    <^   •  mU   into   the 


Messianic  kingdom.  This  call  is  ascribed 
usually,  we  may  perhaps  say  uniyersally, 
to  God  himself.  In  the  Gospels  we  find 
the  term  "  called  "  contrasted  with  the  term 
"elect"  or  "chosen"  (Matt.  xxii.  14),  so 
that  the  call  is  of  uncertain  issue.  On 
the  other  hand,  in  the  Epistles,  at  least 
in  Pauline  passages  of  great  doctrinal  sig- 
nificance (Rom.  viii.  28,  30;  xi.  29,  etc.), 
the  election  appears  as  the  cause,  the  call 
as  the  result;  and  the  latter  then  is  of 
certain  issue,  or,  in  the  language  of  theo- 
logy, eff'eciual.  It  is  held  by  many  that 
tlirougbout  the  Epistles,  or  at  least 
throughout  the  Pauline  group,  the  term 
has  uniformly  the  sense  of  a  call  not  merely 
to  the  membership  of  the  Church,  but  to 
final  salvation.  Whether  tliis  is  the  ca«e, 
and  huw  the  usage  of  the  Epistles  is  to  be 
harmonized  with  that  of  the  Gospels,  are 
questions  which  require  further  considera- 
tion. It  appears,  however,  that  in  the 
Epistles  the  idea  of  the  election  and  the 
idea  of  the  call  often  lie  so  near  each  other 
that  they  seem  to  be  different  expressions 
of  one  Divine  act,  and  that  an  act  which 
makes  its  object  sure.  In  passages  like 
the  present,  the  "called"  seems  parallel 
to  the  "  elect "  of  the  inscriptions  of  1  Peter 
and  2  John,  and  probably  has  the  deeper 
Pauline  meaning — a  meaning  which  has 
its  roots  no  doubt  in  the  Old  Testament 
conception  of  the  certain  election  of  a 
believing  remnant  under  the  theocracy 
(1  Kings  xiz.  18;  Isa.  lix.  20,<etc.).  The 
parties  addressed  are  described  more  par- 
ticularly as  "  beloved  in  God  the  Father." 
The  difficulty  which  is  felt  by  the  best 
interpreters  of  the  present  day  in  explain- 
ing the  preposition  "in"  as  it  stands  in 
this  unusual  connection,  appears  also  in 
the  renderings  of  the  old  English  Versions. 
Tyndale  and  Cranmer,  indeed,  foUow  the 
Beceived  Text,  and  translate  "  sanctified  in 
God  the  Father."  The  Genevan  also  gives 
"sanctified  of  God  the  Father."  But 
Wiokliffe  and  the  Bhemish  Version  follow 
the  other  text  (which  is  that  of  the  Vulgate), 
and  translate  it,  the  former,  "  to  thes  that 
ben  loued  that  ben  in  God  the  fadir ; "  the 
latter,  "to  them  that  are  in  God  the 
father  beloved."  The  difficulty  is  met  by 
a  variety  of  doubtful  expedients.  Some 
cut  the  knot  by  imposing  upon  the  pre- 
position the  sense  of  "  by  "  or  the  equally 
alien  sense  of  « on  account  of."  Some 
take  it  to  mean  "in  the  case  of  God," 
or  "  as  regards  God,"  which  comes  nearer 
the  point,  but  is  yet  short  of  what  is  in- 
tended. Others  would  render  it  "within 
the  sphere  of  God,"  understanding  the 
readers  to  be  described  as  the  objects  of  the 
writer's  love — a  love  which  is  no  mere 
natural  affection,  but  inspired  by  God  and 


1-28J 


THE  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OF  JUDE. 


of  spiritual  motive;  the  objection  to 
whioh  is  that  it  is  out  of  harmony  with 
the  other  designations,  which  desciibe  the 
leaders  from  the  view-point  of  the  Divine 
care.  The  idea,  therefore,  seems  to  be 
that  they  are  the  objects  of  the  Divine 
love,  that  they  have  been  that  and  con- 
tinue to  be  that  in  the  way  of  a  gracious 
union  and  fellowship  with  himself,  into 
which  they  have  been  introduced  by  God 
the  Father.  The  preposition,  therefore,  has 
the  mystical  force  which  it  haa  in  the 
familiar  phrase,  "  in  Christ " — a  force  which 
it  may  also  have  where  God  is  the  subject. 
All  the  more  so  that  the  title  "God  the 
Father"  seems  to  refer  usually,  if  not 
exclusively,  to  God  as  the  Father  of  Christ. 
The  third  clause  describes  the  readers, 
according  to  the  Authorized  Version,  as 
preserved  in  Jesus  Christ.  Here  the 
Authorized  Version  follows  Tyndale,  Cran- 
mer,  and  the  Bhemish  Version.  That 
rendering  has  also  been  adopted  by  some 
recent  interpreters  of  importance.  It  is 
wrong,  nevertheless.  For  there  is  no 
instance  elsewhere  of  tho  carrying  over  of 
a  preposition  from  one  clause  to  another  in 
such  a  connection  as  this.  Not  less  mis- 
taken is  Wickliftie's  "  kept  of  Jesus  Christ." 
The  Genevan  Version,  however,  gives  the 
correct  rendering,  "reserved  to  Jesus 
Christ,"  and  the  Bevised  Version  translates 
it  very  aptly, "  kept  for  Jesus  Christ."  The 
verb  is  the  one  which  is  used  in  1  Pet.  i.  4 
to  describe  the  inheritance  as  "reserved." 
It  occurs  frequently  in  the  Gospels,  some- 
what rarely  in  the  Pauline  Epistles,  and 
there  oftenest  in  those  of  latest  date 
(1  Tim.  V.  22;  vi.  14;  2  Tim.  iv.7).  It 
occurs  with  marked  frequency  in  the 
Catholic  Epistles  and  the  Apocalypse.  It 
is  most  characteristic  of  1  John,  2  Peter, 
and  Jude  among  these  Epistles.  The  idea 
is  that  of  being  preserved  by  the  Divine 
power  until  the  coming  of  Christ — a 
preservation  of  whioh  there  was  the  more 
need  to  be  assured  in  face  of  the  falling 
away  which  threatened  the  Churches,  and 
had  indeed  begun  in  some.  Christ  prayed 
his  Father  to  keep,  through  his  own  Name, 
those  that  were  given  him  (John  xvii.  11). 
Paul  prays  God  to  keep  his  converts  blame- 
less unto  the  coming  of  Christ  (1  Thess.  v. 
23).  These  designations  tell  ns  nothing  of 
the  locality  or  circumstances  of  the  readers, 
but  limit  themselves  to  spiritual  charac- 
teristics. The*  relations  in  which  the 
several  clauses  stand  to  each  other  is  also 
a  matter  of  dispute.  The  Authorized 
Version  makes  them  co-ordinate  clauses, 
"  To  them  that  are  sanctified  .  .  .  and  pre- 
served ...  and  called."  It  is  better  to 
take  the  "called"  as  the  subject,  and  the 
two  participles  as  the  qualifying  epithets, 


translating,  with  the  Eevised  Version,  "  To 
them  that  are  called,  beloved  in  God  the 
Father,  and  kept  for  Jesus  Christ."  But  it 
perhaps  best  represents  both  the  force  and 
the  order  of  the  original  to  render  it,  "  To 
them  that  are  beloved  in  God  the  Father, 
and  kept  for  Jesus  Christ,  called  ones." 

Yei.  2. — The  greeting.  This  takes  the 
form  of  a  prayer  or  benediction  in  three 
articles.  It  is  rendered  in  precisely  the 
same  terms — mercy  unto  you  and  peace  and 
love  be  multiplied — in  Tyndale,  Cranmer, 
the  Genevan,  the  Authorized  Version,  and 
the  Eevised  Version.  In  Paul's  Epistles 
the  opening  salutations  usually  mention 
only  "grace  and  peace,"  and  these  as 
proceeding  from  "6od  the  Father  and  the 
Lord  Jeaus  Christ."  But  in  the  pastoral 
Epistles  (as  also  in  2  John)  the  three  bless- 
ings, "grace,  mercy,  and  peace"  appear, 
and  these  as  coming  from  the  same  twofold 
source  of  Father  and  Son.  In  the  Petrine 
Epistles  we  have  again  the  two  Pauline 
blessings  of  grace  and  peace,  but  with  the 
distinctive  addition  of  the  "  be  multiplied." 
Here,  in  Jude,  we  have  the  characteristic 
Petrine  "be  multiplied,"  but  this  con- 
nected with  three  blessings,  and  these 
somewhat  different  from  those  which  appear 
in  the  Pastoral  Epistles — "mercy,  peace, 
and  love,"  instead  of  "  grace  and  mercy 
and  peace."  What  the  writer  desires,  there- 
fore, on  behalf  of  the  readers  is  an  abound- 
ing measure  of  the  three  great  qualities  of 
grace,  which  refer  respectively  to  the  case 
of  the  miserable,  the  case  of  the  hostile,  and 
the  case  of  the  unworthy.  Are  these 
regarded  as  subjective  qualities  in  man,  or 
as  objective  gifts  from  God?  The  former 
view  is  favoured  by  some,  who  point 
especially  to  the  closing  benediction  in  the 
Epistle  to  the  Ephesians  (vi.  23)  as  a  case 
in  point.  But  the  latter  view  is  sustained 
by  the  force  of  the  "beloved"  in  the 
previous  verse,  and  the  mention  of  "  love " 
in  ver.  21,  as  well  as  by  the  general  analogy 
of  the  inscriptions  of  Epistles.  What  Jude 
prays  for,  therefore,  is  not  that  his  readers 
may  be  helped  to  exhibit  in  large  measure 
a  merciful,  peaceful,  and  loving  disposition 
to  others,  but  that  they  may  enjoy  in  liberal 
degree  the  great  blessings  of  God's  mercy, 
peace,  and  love  bestowed  upon  themselves. 

Ver.  3. — The  authm-'e  reason  for  writing. 
The  statement  of  this  is  introduced  by  the 
conciliatory  address,  beloved — a  form  of 
address  found  twice  again  in  this  short 
Epistle  (vers.  17,  20).  It  occurs  at  great 
turning-points  in  all  the  Catholic  Epistles, 
except  for  an  obvious  reason  in  2  John. 
(See  Jas.  i.  16,- 19 ;  ii.  5  (who  couples  the 
term  "brethren  "  witt  it) :  1  Pet.  ii.  11 :  iv. 
12;  2  Pet.  iii.  1,  8,  Ii,  17;  1  John  iii.  2, 
21;  iv.  1,  7,  11 ;  8  John  2,  6,  11.)    It  U 


THE  GKNBRAL  XFISTLB  Of  JUBa 


[1—29. 


frequent  bIbo  ia  the  Faaline  EpbtlM.  It  b 
onlj  here,  howerer,  and  in  8  John  S  th»t 
it  u  introdvoed  ao  near  the  heginning  of 
an  Epistle.  The  etateiuent  itself  eontbinf 
aeveral  expressionB  vhloh  demand  notioA. 
The  phrase  which  the  Authorized  Version 
renders.  When  I  gave  all  diligenoe,  ie  better 
rendered,  whila  I  wo*  giving  all  diligenee, 
with  the  Bevised  Yersion.  In  this  par> 
ticular  form  it  occurs  nowhere  else  in  the 
New  Testament ;  but  it  has  close  parallels 
in  3  Fet.  i.  5  and  Heb.  vi.  11.  The  noun  is 
the  same  as  is  translated  "diligenoe"  in 
Bom.  xii.  8i  and  "  business "  in  Bum.  xii. 
11.  It  is  not  certain  whether  the  phrase 
expresses  action  here  as  well  as  earnest 
desire ;  but  it  indicates  the  position  of  the 
author,  whether  as  serioudy  bethinking 
himself  to  write,  or  actually  engaged  in  the 
task,  when  he  bad  occasion  to  send  the 
counsels  given  in  this  Epistle.  The  subject 
on  which  he  had  thought  of  addressing 
them  was  the  common  salTation— the  term 
"salvation"  meaning  here  neither  the 
doctrine  nor  the  meant  of  redemption,  but 
the  grace  of  redemption  itself.  And  this 
gi'aoe  is  designated  "common,"  or,  as  tb« 
better  reading  gives  it,  "  our  common  salva- 
tion;" not  wiUi  reference  to  any  contrast 
of  Jew  with  Oentile,  but  simply  as  a  grace 
open  to  all,  and  in  which  writer  and  readers 
had  an  equal  interest  (comp.  Acts  ii.  il; 
ir.  32 ;  and  especially  the  "  common  faith  " 
of  Titus  i.  i).  The  "  like  precious  faith  "  of 
2  Pet  i.  1  is  a  stronger  expression,  and 
probably  points  to  a  distinction,  formerly 
existent,  but  now  removed,  between  Jew  and 
Gentile.  The  next  phrase  is  rendered  too 
weakly  by  the  Authorized  Version,  It  vai 
needful  for  me  to  write  unto  yon.  Neither 
does  the  Bevised  Version  quite  bring  out 
the  idea  when  it  substitutes,  I  wa$  con- 
ttrained  to  virite  unto  you.  What  is  in  view 
is  an  objective  necessity;  certain  circum- 
stances which  had  arisen  and  imperatively 
demanded  writing.  So  that  we  might 
translate  it,  "necessity  arose  for  me  to 
write,"  or,  "an  emergency  occurred  con- 
straining  me  to  write."  He  was  thus  induced 
to  write  in  the  way  of  oAmrting  them.  The 
particular  subject  of  the  exhortation  i* 
desoribed  as  tike  dnl^  of  contending  ear- 
nestly for  the  foith;  the  contention  being 
expressed  by  a  strong  term  somewhat 
analogous  to  that  used  by  Paul  in  Phil.  i. 
27,  and  the  "  faith  "  being  taken,  not  in  the 
subjective  sense  of  the  quality  or  gtaae  of 
belief,  but  in  the  objective  sense  of  the 
things  believed.  This  "  faith  "  is  declared 
to  have  been  delivered  once  foi  all  (so,  with 
the  Bevised  Version;  not  ono«  ddivtred, 
M  the  Authorized  Version  puta  it,  wliiob 
might  mean  "  once  on  a  time '')  to  the  saints. 
(I  U  net  stated  hf  tthmn  the  deliverance  was 


made.  The  niMxpresaed  snbjeot  may  be 
God,  •■  some  snppose  who  point  to  the  ana- 
logy of  1  Cor.  xL  23  and  xv.  3 ;  or  it  ni»y  be 
the  apostles,  as  othen  hold  who  look  to  the 
analogy  of  such  passages  as  1  Oor.  xi.  2; 
2  Pet.  iL  21,  and  espeoiall;|r  the  seventeenth 
verse  of  the  present  Epistle  itself.  The 
main  point  is,  not  the  author  or  the  instru- 
ments of  the  deliverance,  but  the  fact  that 
such  a  deliverance  has  taken  place.  What 
has  been  transmitted  is  oarefuUy  defined, 
not,  indeed,  as  a  system  of  doctrine,  but  at 
least  as  a  sum  or  deposit  of  things  necessary 
to  be  believed.  This  ia  said  to  have  been 
given  once  for  all,  so  that  there  is  no 
repetition  or  extension  of  the  gift.  It  ia 
described,  further,  as  committed,  not  to  the 
Church  as  an  organization,  nor  to  any 
particular  offloe-bearers,  but  to  the  saints  in 
general. 

Ver.  4.— It  has  been  inferred  that  the 
writer  had  been  actually  at  work  upon 
another  Epistle,  when  he  felt  it  necessary 
to  give  it  up  and  compose  this  one.  That 
ia  not  a  certain  inference  irom  the  previous 
verse.  What  that  verse  makes  clear  is  that 
it  had  been  Jude's  purpose  to  compose  an 
Epistle  on  the  general  subject  of  the  common 
salvation,  and  that  something  emerged 
which  made  him  change  his  plan  and  write 
a  letter  dealing  with  certain  specific  matters 
of  urgent  importance,  and  hortatory  in  its 
form.  The  oircumBtance  which  led  to  tliis 
change  is  here  stated— it  was  the  appear- 
ance of  a  corrupt  and  insidious  party  in  the 
Church.  7or,  he  says,  there  are  certain 
men  crept  in  nnawares;  or,  as  the  Bevised 
Version  more  forcibly  renders  it,  privily. 
The  verb  describes  the  men  as  men  who  had 
no  rightful  standing  in  the  Church,  but  had 
made  their  way  into  it  secretly  and  by  false 
pretences.  Compare  Paul's  description  of 
the  "  false  brethren  unawares  brought  in, 
who  came  in  privily  to  spy  out  our  liberW, 
which  we  have  in  Christ  Jesus"  (QaL  li. 
4);  but  especially  (he  picture  which  two  of 
the  latest  Epistles  give  of  the  "  false  teachers 
who  privily  shall  bring  in  damnable 
heresies"  (2  Pet  ii.  I),  and  those  who 
"creep  into  houses  and  lead  captive  silly 
women"  (2  Tim.  iii.  6>  The  men  thoa 
generally  described  are  next  designated 
more  precisely  as  those  who  were  before  of 
old  ordained  to  this  condemnation.  So  the 
Authorized  Version  renders  it.  But  the 
point  is  more  correctly  caught  by  the  "even 
they  who"  of  the  Bevised  Version,  The 
men  just  spoken  of  in  general  terma  are 
immediately  desoribed  as  the  very  men  to 
whom  something  more  precise  applies,  whidi 
is  now  to  be  stated.  There  is  some  difficulty, 
however,  as  to  the  exact  sense  of  the  state- 
ment. The  term  which  is  translated 
"  ordained  "  by  the  Authorized  Vernon  ia  o| 


1—25.] 


THE  QENBRAL  EPISTLB  OF  JUDB. 


donbtfal  interpratetion,  the  doubt  turning 
on  the  question  whether  it  has  a  temporal  or 
a  heal  reference.  The  latter  idea  eeema  to 
be  expressed  in  Gal.  iii.  1,  where  the  verb 
means  either  pMicly  ptaoarded  or  openli) 
let  forth  {"  evidently  set  forth,"  according 
to  the  Authorized  Version).  For  the  most 
part,  however,  the  temporal  sense  prevails, 
and  that  this  is  the  sense  here  is  confirmed 
by  the  fact  that  the  verb  is  connected  with 
the  temporal  adverb  "of  old."  It  has  been 
contended  that  the  biblical  figure  of  a  book 
of  the  Divine  counsels  is  at  the  basis  of  the 
expression  here,  and  that  it  should  be 
rendered  "  ordained  "  (with  the  Authorized 
Version),  in  the  Calvinistio  sense  of  "  fore- 
ordained." But  this  is  opposed  by  the  fact 
that  the  term  here  rendered  "of  old"  is  not 
applied  in  the  New  Testament  to  the 
eternal  purpose  of  God.  The  reference, 
therefore,  is  to  ancient  prophecy,  and  the 
term  means  "  who  were  of  old  written  of," 
"  who  were  of  old  set  forth,"  as  the  Revised 
Version  puts  it,  or  "designated"  in 
prophecy.  The  writer  does  not  specify 
what  particular  prophecies  are  in  view. 
Hence  some  tnke  them  to  be  predictions  of 
the  evils  of  the  last  days  spoken  of  by  the 
apotilles,  such  as  we  find  recorded  in  the 
Pastoral  Epistles  and  in  2  Peter.  But  the 
foyce  of  the  phrase  "  of  old,"  in  its  present 
connection,  points  to  wliat  is  of  ancient 
^te  in  the  stiicter  sense.  The  Old  Testa- 
ment prophecies,  therefore,  are  probably 
those  referred  to,  and  the  fact  that  mention 
is  made  by-and-by  of  Enoch  as  one  of  the 
prophets  of  old,  makes  it  likely  that  tlie 
predictive  sections  of  the  book  which  bears 
his  name  are  also  in  the  author's  mind. 
The  phrase,  "  to  this  condemnation," 
explains  that  unto  which  these  men  were 
prophetically  designated  in  ancient  time. 
The  noun  denotes  usually,  if  not  invari- 
ably, the  judgment  of  a  judge  on  something 
wnjng,  and  here,  therefore,  it  seems  to 
have  the  sense  of  penal  judgment  or  con- 
demnation. It  is  not  quite  apparent  what 
judgment  is  intended.  It  is  supposed  by 
some  that  the  writer  is  looking  to  the 
unhappy  relations  of  these  meu  to  the 
Church,  and  finds  in  these  relations  and  in 
the  moral  conditions  thereby  revealed  the 
judgment  of  God  upon  them.  It  is  more 
probable  that  he  refers  to  the  ^enal  retribu- 
tion, of  which  he  is  immeiliately  to  give 
examples.  Three  strokes  are  added  to  the 
picture  of  tlie'men.  These  bring  out  in 
darkest  outline  both  their  character  and 
their  faith.  There  ifl  first  the  general 
description  of  them  as  ungodly  men— im- 
pious men,  in  whom  there  is  no  spirit  of 
reverence,  as  the  adjective  literally  implies. 
The  same  note  appears  in  Peter's  descrip- 
tion (a  P«t.  it   6,  6).     (Compare  the  use 


of  the  same  term  in  Bom.  iv.  6;  v.  6;  1 
Tim.  i.  9 ;  2  Fet.  iii.  7.)  This  nngodliness 
is  next  shown  to  take  the  form  of  an 
immoral  perversion  of  spiritual  privilege- 
turning  the  grace  of  our  Qod  Into  lascivlaus- 
ness.  By  the  grace  of  God  is  meant  the 
whole  gift  of  redemption  ofifered  in  th« 
.  gospel.  It  is  called  here  the  grace  of  our 
God;  the  turn  thus  given  to  the  expres- 
sion indicating  at  once  the  dear  and 
intimate  relation  to  Gud  into  which  the 
writer  and  liis  fellows  in  the  faith  have 
been  introduced,  and  their  shuddering 
sense  of  the  shameless  use  to  which  his 
gift  was  debased.  The  thing  to  which 
that  grace  was  perverted  is  deiioribed  by 
a  word  of  wide  and  evil  application,  de- 
noting every  species  of  unbridled  conduct, 
but  particularly  unblushing  licentiousness. 
The  same  ungodliness  in  these  men  is 
further  declurcd  to  rise  to  a  denial  and 
disavowal  of  all  Divine  claims  upon  them. 
The  Bevised  Version,  which  is  more 
rigorously  true  to  the  original  here  than  the 
Authorized  Version,  gives  an  alternative 
rendering,  denying  our  only  Uaster  and 
Lord,  Jesus  Christ,  in  the  text,  but  denying 
the  only  Master,  and  our  Lord  Jeaut  Ohriit 
in  the  margin.  The  question  is  whether 
God  and  Christ  are  separately  mentioned  as 
buth  objects  of  the  denial,  or  whether  Christ 
alone  is  referred  to ;  both  the  titles.  Master 
and  Lord,  being  applied  to  him.  Tlie 
question  is  not  easy  to  decide.  Among  the 
strongest  arguments  in  favour  of  the  latter 
view  are  the  two  considerations  that  the 
attitude  of  these  men  to  God  has  been 
already  stated  in  the  previous  clause,  and 
that  in  2  Pet.  ii.  1  we  find  both  the  vejb 
and  the  noun  which  are  used  here  applied 
to  Christ.  On  the  other  side,  it  is  urged  that 
the  parallel  in  1  John  ii.  22  favours  the 
double  refereuoe  here;  that  the  title  here 
readered  "Master "  is  never  applied  to  Christ 
except  in  the  single  instance  of  2  Pet.  ii,  1 ; 
that  the  epitliet  "only"  is  used  more 
properly  of  God,  as  in  ver.  25  of  this  same 
Epistle;  that  it  is  difiScuU  to  distinguish 
between  the  two  titles,  if  both  are  referred 
to  Christ  here;  and  tliat  the  analogous 
expression  in  the  Book  of  Enoch  (xtviii.  10) 
is  to  be  considered.  The  case  is  stronger 
on  the  whole  on  the  side  of  the  twofold 
subject  being  in  view.  But  it  is  further 
asked  wliether  this  denial  of  God  and  of 
Christ  is  meant  to  be  a  theoretical  denial  or 
a  practical.  It  is  the  practical  disavowal  of 
God,  which  appears  in  a  godless  and  un- 
bridled life,  that  seems  chiefly  in  view.  But 
there  is  no  good  reason  for  excluding  the 
idea  of  corrupt  doctrine  or  teaching.  The 
latter  is  not  expressed,  it  is  true,  in  the  terms 
adopted  in  the  Epistles  of  John.  Keither 
is  there  anything  to  warrant  the  suppoiition 


THE  GENBEAL  EPISTLE  OP  JUDB. 


l1— 25. 


that  the  writer  was  thinking  of  Simon 
Magna  in  particular,  or  of  Oarpocrates,  or 
any  of  the  early  GnoBtioB — a  supposition 
entertained  both  by  the  earliest  Christian 
writers  and  by  some  in  our  own  time.  But 
it  is  possible  enough  that  the  seeds  which 
were  to  develop  into  the  pronounced 
Grnosticism  of  a  later  time  were  already 
sown,  and  that  in  such  speculative  error 
Jude  saw  the  ally  of  a  life  which  was  re- 
gardless of  all  Divine  restraint. 

Vers.  5 — 7. — Three  instances  of  the  judg- 
ments of  God  are  now  referred  to.  They  are 
cited  as  typical  examples  of  the  Divine 
retribution,  with  which  the  readers  can  be 
taken  to  be  familiar,  and  which  they  will 
recognize  to  give  point  to  the  terror  of  the 
condemnation  overhanging  the  men  in 
question. 

Ver.  5. — The  first  is  taken  from  the  history 
of  Israel.  It  is  introduced,  not  as  a  contrast 
with  what  precedes,  but  as  a  natural  tran- 
sition from  it.  It  is  given,  too,  as  a  matter 
quite  within  their  knowledge,  and  of  which 
consequently  Ihey  need  only  to  be  reminded. 
The  Authorized  Version  is  short  of  the  mark 
in  »everal  respects  here.  What  the  writer 
expresses  is  not  the  mere  fact  that  he  is 
to  do  a  certain  thing,  but  that  he  has  the 
wish  to  do  so.  Hence  the  now  I  desire  to 
pat  yon  in  remembrance  of  the  Bevised 
Version  is  preferable  to  the  I  will  therefore, 
etc.,  of  the  Authorized  Version.  The  next 
clause  is  more  decidedly  astray.  For  the 
term  rendered  "  once  "  means  "  once  for  all," 
and  the  knowledge  is  given  as  a  present 
possession.  Hence  the  rendering  should 
be  though  ye  know  once  for  all ;  or  better, 
knowing  as  ye  do  once  for  dU — a  form  of 
expression  which  might  be  paraphrased  in 
our  English  idiom,  as  Mr.  Humphry  rightly 
observes,  "  though  ye  have  known  all  along." 
There  is,  however,  very  considerable  difiB- 
culty  in  the  reading  here.  It  varies  be- 
tween "  ye  know  this  "  which  is  accepted  by 
the  Authorized  Version, "  ye  know  all  things " 
which  is  preferred  by  the  Revised  Version, 
and  "  ye  all  know  "  which,  though  poorly 
accredited,  is  yet  supposed  by  Professor 
Hort  to  be  not  improbably  the  original. 
The  documentary  evidence  is,  on  the  whole, 
on  the  side  of  "  all  things  ; "  and  if  this 
is  adopted,  the  nniversal  term  will  naturally 
be  limited  by  the  context  to  a  knowledge  of 
all  that  is  pertinent  to  the  point  in  question. 
This  knowledge  of  the  principles  at  issue 
in  the  case  of  these  evil  men,  and  of  the 
retributive  deeds  of  God  by  which  these 
principles  have  been  signally  vindicated,  is 
a  reason  why  Jude  needs  simply  to  refresh 
the  memories  of  his  readers,  and  not  to  tell 
them  anything  u«w.    In  the  8«o«ud  UtUf  af 


the  verse  there  is  a  still  more  serious  di£9- 
culty  in  the  text.     Instead  of  the  term 
"  Lord,"  some  of  the  very  best  authorities 
read  "Jesus."    If  this  must  be  accepted, 
we  have  an  act  of  the  Jehovah  of  the  Old 
Testament  ascribed  to  the  Jesut  of  the  New 
Testament.    But  this  would  be  an  entirely 
unexampled  usage.    For,  while  the  New 
Testament  not  unfrequently  introduces  the 
name  of  Christ  when  it  refers  to  deeds  of 
grace  or  claims  of  honour  which  the  Old 
Testament  connects  with  the  name  of  Je- 
hovah (of.  1  Cor.  X.  4 ;  1  Pet.  iii.  15,  etc.), 
it  never  does  this  with  that  name  of  the 
Eedeemer  of  the   New  Testament  which, 
specially    marks   his   human   nature    and 
origin.      Hence  Frol'essor  Hort  speaks  of 
the  reading  "Jesus"  here  as  a  blunder, 
however  supported.    The  ordinary  reading 
may,  therefore,  be  adhered  to,  especially  as 
it  is  by  no  means  ill  accredited,  having 
on  its  side  two  of  the  primary  uncials  and 
otiier  weighty  authorities.     These  clause! 
are  peculiar  in  other  respects.    They  speak 
not  of  "  the  people  "  as  the  Authorized  Ver« 
sion  puts  it,  but  rather  of  "  a  people."    And 
this  is  not  without  its  purpose.    For  the 
idea  is  not  simply  that  the  ancient  Israel 
experienced  both  redemption  and  judgment 
at  the  hands  of  their  Lord,  but  that  Israel's 
Lord,  by  bringing  Israel  out  of  Egypt,  secured 
a  people  for  himself,  though  he  had  also  to 
destroy  unbelievers  among  them.    Again, 
the   phi'ase  rendered  "afterward"  by  the 
Authorized  Version    means  strictly  "the 
second  time,"  as  is  noticed  by  the  margin  of 
the  Bevised  Version.    What  is  intended, 
therefore,  may,  be  that  Israel  was  the  sub- 
ject of  two  great  deeds  on  Jehovah's  part 
— in  the  first  instance  a  redeeming  deed,  in 
the  secoiid  instance  a  punitive  deed.    And 
his  purpose  in  seeking  a  people  for  himself 
was  not  inconsistent  with  his  doing  what  he 
did  in  this  second  instance.    What,  then,  ia 
referred  to  ?   Those  seem  to  interpret  it  best 
who  take  it  to  be  a  general  reference  to  the 
wilderuess-fate  of  unbelieving  Israel,  rather 
than  to  any  single  instance  of  the  terrors 
of  the  Divine  judgment,  such  as  that  re- 
ported iu  Numb.  xxv.  1 — 9.   It  is  far-fetched 
to  suppose  that  the  event  in  view  is  one  so 
remote  from  the  deliverance  of  Israel  from 
Egypt  as  the  Babylonian  captivity.    We 
may  compare  with   this    verse,   therefore, 
such  passages  as  Pa.  ovL  12 — 21 ;  Heb.  iii. 
16— iv.  5. 

Ver.  6. — ^The  second  instance  of  Divine 
judgment  is  taken  from  the  angelic  world, 
The  copula  connects  it  closely  with  the 
former,  and  gi  ves  it  some  emphasis :  "angels, 
too,"  I.e.  angels  not  less  than  the  people 
selected  by  God  to  be  a  people  for  himself, 
have  been  examples  of  the  terribia  law  of 
Divine  rvtribttttou.    The  partipular  ohm  «t 


1-25.] 


THE  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OP  JUDE. 


angels  are  defined  as  those  who  kept  not  their 
first  estate;  or  better,  their  own  prineipality. 
The  idea  conveyed  by  the  term  here  is  that 
of  lordghip  rather  than  beginning.  It  is  the 
term  which  is  held  by  most  commentators 
to  be  used  as  a  title  of  angels  in  such 
passages  as  Col.  i.  16;  Bph.  i.  21;  iii.  10; 
vi.  12,  etc.,  where  mention  is  made  of"  prin- 
cipalities." In  the  present  passage  Tyndale, 
Oranmer,  the  Genevan  and  our  Authorized 
Version  agree  in  rendering  it  "  first  estate." 
But  the  Khemish  gives  "principality,"  and 
Wiokliffe  has  "  princehood."  Those  seem 
right,  therefore,  who  take  the  reference  to 
be  to  the  Jewish  idea  of  a  peculiar  dignity 
or  lordship  held  by  the  angels  in  creation. 
The  sin  alleged  as  the  reason  for  the  penalty 
which  the  writer  recalls  to  the  minds  of  liis 
readers  is  that  they  failed  to  keep  this  lord- 
ship, and  left  their  proper  habitation;  by 
which  latter  clause  a  descent  to  a  different 
sphere  of  being  is  intended.  The  penalty 
itself  is  this — that  God  hath  kept  them  in 
everlasting  chains  (or,  hondi,  with  the  Be- 
vised  Version)  under  darkness  unto  the 
judgment  of  the  great  day.  It  is  well  to 
retain  the  rendering  "  kept "  in  tliis  clause, 
instead  of  the  "  reserved  "  of  the  Authorized 
Version.  For  the  verb  used  in  describing 
the  sin  and  that  used  in  describing  the 
penalty  are  the  same.  As  they  "  kept  not 
their  lordship,"  God  has  "kept  them  in 
everlasting  bonds."  The  word  by  which 
the  idea  of  the  everlaiting  is  expressed  is  a 
peculiarly  strong  one,  occurring  only  once 
again  in  the  New  Testament,  viz.  in  Rom.  i. 
20,  where  it  is  applied  to  God's  "■eternal 
power."  It  designates  these  bonds  as  bonds 
from  which  there  never  can  be  escape.  The 
place  of  this  present  penal  detention  is 
declared  to  be  "  under  darkness."  The 
term  selected  for  the  darkness,  again,  is  an 
unusual  one,  occurring  only  here,  in  ver.  13, 
and  in  2  Pet.  ii.  4,  17,  and  possibly  Heb.  xii. 
18.  It  means  the  densest,  blackest  darkness, 
and  is  used  both  in  Homer  and  in  the 
apocryphal  literature  (Wisd.  xviL  2)  of  the 
darkness  of  the  nether  world.  This  darkness, 
as  Dean  Alford  observes,  is  "  considered  as 
brooding  over  them,  and  they  under  it."  But 
this  present  penal  detention  is  itself  the 
prelude  to  a  still  more  awful  doom — "  the 
judgment  of  tlie  great  day  "  (cf.  Acts  ii.  20 ; 
Rev.  vi,  17).  There  is  a  similar,  but  less 
definite,  statement  on  the  subject  of  angelio 
sin  and  penalty  in  2  Pet.  ii.  4.  But  these 
representations  differ  greatly  from  others 
(e.g.  Eph.  ii.  2;  vi.  12),  where  the  air  or  the 
heavenly  places  appear  as  the  scenes  occu- 
pied by  evil  spii-its,  and  these  spirits  possess 
freedom.  In  the  New  Testament,  indeed, 
there  are  no  ptissiiges,  except  those  in  Peter 
and  Jude,  which  speak  of  fallen  angels  as 
at  present  in  bonds.   JJven  in  Matt.  «v.  41, 


the  statement  is  of  a  fate  prepared,  and 
nothingmoro.  Thedifference in thetwo repre- 
sentations is  due  probably  to  a  difference  in 
the  subjects.  Other  passages  refer  to  the 
devil  and  his  angels.  But  in  the  present 
passLige  there  is  nothing  to  indicate  that  the 
fall  of  Satan  is  in  view.  The  sin  suggested 
by  the  context  is  not  the  sin  of  pride,  but  a 
sin  against  nature.  The  reference,  there- 
fore, is  taken  to  be  to  the  Jewish  idea  that 
amatory  passion  is  not  limited  to  the 
creatures  of  earth,  and  that  some  angels, 
yielding  to  the  spell  of  the  beauty  of  the 
daughters  of  men,  forsook  their  own  king- 
dom, and  entered  unto  unnatural  relations 
with  them.  The  Jewish  belief  is  seen  in 
the  story  of  Asmodeus  in  the  Book  of 
Tobit;  it  is  found  by  Josephus  (who  has 
been  followed  by  not  a  few  modem  in- 
terpreters) in  Gen.  vi.  1 — 4 ;  and  it  is  given 
with  special  distinctness  in  the  Book  of 
Enoch. 

Ver.  7. — The  third  example  is  taken  from 
the  history  of  the  cities  of  the  Plain.  This 
example  is  closely  connected  with  the 
immediately  preceding  by  the  even  af  with 
which  the  verse  opens;  which  phrase  ex- 
presses a  likeness  between  the  two  cases,  to 
wit,  between  the  reservation  of  those  angels 
in  bonds  for  the  final  judgment,  and  the  fate 
of  those  cities  as  subjects  of  the  penal  ven- 
geance of  God.  Two  of  those  cities  of  evil 
memory,  Sodom  and  Oomorrah,  aK  men- 
tioned by  name.  The  other  two,  Admah 
and  Zeboim,  are  included  in  the  phrase, 
and  the  cities  about  them.  Attention  is 
rightly  called  by  some  of  the  commentators 
to  the  remarkable  frequency  with  which  the 
case  of  Sodom  and  Gomorrah  is  brought  for- 
ward, both  in  the  New  Testament  and  in  the 
Old,  and  to  the  use  which  Paul  makes  of  it 
(as  he  finds  it  cited  by  Isaiah)  in  the  great 
argument  of  Bom.  ix.  The  sin  charged 
against  these  cities  is  stated  in  express  terms 
to  have  been  the  same  in  kind  with  that 
of  the  angels — the  indulgence  of  passion 
contrary  to  nature.  They  are  described  as 
having  in  like  manner  with  these  (that  is, 
surely,  in  like  manner  with  these  angels  just 
referred  to ;  not,  as  some  strangely  imagine, 
with  these  men  who  corrupt  the  Church) 
given  themselves  over  to  fornication,  and 
gone  after  strange  flesh.  The  verbs  are 
selected  to  bring  out  the  intense  sinfulness 
of  the  sin — the  one  being  a  strong  compound 
form  expressing  unreserved  surrender,  the 
other  an  equally  strong  compound  form 
denoting  a  depai  ture  from  the  law  of  nature 
in  the  impurities  practised.  The  sin  has 
taken  its  name  from  the  city  with  which 
the  Book  of  Genesis  so  fearfully  connects  its 
indulgence.  It  forms  one  of  the  darkest 
strokes  in  the  terrible  picture  which  Paul  has 
given  us  of  the  stat«  of  the  ancient  be»tben 


THE  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OF  JUDE. 


[1—26. 


world  (Bom.  1.  27).  With  the  Dead  Sea 
probably  in  his  view,  the  writer  describes 
tiie  doom  of  the  cities  as  an  example  of  or  a 
witneat  to  (the  noun  used  being  one  that 
occurs  again  only  in  Jas.  v.  11,  and  bearing 
either  sense)  the  retributive  justice  of  God. 
They  are  set  forth  (literally,  they  lie  before 
US)  for  an  example,  suffering  the  vengeance 
(rather,  the  punishment)  of  eternal  fire.  So 
It  is  put  by  the  Authorized  Version  and 
the  Eevised  Version,  as  also  by  Wiokliffe, 
Tyndale,  Cranmer,  the  Genevan,  and  the 
l^hemish.  Thero  is  much  to  be  said,  how- 
ever, in  favnur  of  the  order  adopted  by  the 
Revised  Version  in  its  margin,  viz.  "set 
forth  as  an  example  of  eternal  fire,  suffering 
punishment."  It  could  not,  except  in  a 
(oTced  manner,  be  said  that  these  cities,  in 
being  destroyed  as  they  were,  suffered  the 
penalty  of  eternal  fire,  and  continued  to 
serre  as  an  instance  of  that.  But  it  could 
be  said  that,  in  being  destroyed,  they  suffered 
punisliment,  and  that  the  kind  of  punish- 
ment was  typical  of  the  eternal  retribution 
of  God.  "A  destruction,"  says  Professor 
Lumby,  "so  utter  and  so  permanent  as 
theirs  has  been,  is  the  nearest  approach 
that  can  be  found  in  this  world  to  the  de- 
struction which  awaits  those  who  are  kept 
under  darkness  unto  the  Judgment  of  the 
great  day." 

Ver.  8. — Having  set  in  the  forefront  of 
his  warnings  these  terrible  instances  of  gross 
sin  and  overwhelming  penalty,  the  writer 
proceeds  to  deal  with  the  real  character  of 
the  insidious  troublers  and  corrupters  of  the 
Churches  of  his  time.  He  describes  them 
as  filthy  dreamers;  or  better,  as  the  Re- 
vised Version  puts  it,  Tnen  in  their  dream- 
ingi — an  expression  pointing  to  the  foul 
and  perverted  fancies  in  the  service  of 
which  they  lived.  He  charges  them  with 
the  particular  sins  of  defiling  the  flesh, 
despising  dominion,  and  railing  at  dignities. 
He  further  declares  of  them  that,  in  prac- 
tising such  sins,  they  run  a  course  like  that 
of  the  cities  of  the  plain,  and  run  it  in 
defiance,  too,  of  the  warning  held  forth  to 
them  by  the  case  of  Sodom  and  Gomorrah, 
For  such  seems  the  point  of  the  terms  con- 
necting this  paragraph  with  the  preceding, 
which  are  best  rendered  "nevertheless  in 
like  manner,"  or  "  yet  in  like  manner " 
(Revised  Version).  The  difficulty  lies, 
however,  in  the  description  of  their  offences. 
What  is  intended  by  the  charge  that  they 
defile  the  flesh  is  obvious.  But  what  is 
referred  to  in  the  other  clauses,  and  set 
at  nought  dominion  (or,  lordship),  and  tail 
at  dignities  (or,  ghriet),  is  far  from  clear. 
It  has  been  supposed  that  a  lawlessness  is 
meant  which  expressed  itself  in  contempt 
for  all  earthly  authority,  whether  political 
•r  eoolesiastioal.    The  whole  scope  of  the 


passage,  however,  and  the  analogy  of  1 
Pet.  ii.  10,  etc.,  seem  to  point  so  decidedly 
to  higher  dignities  than  the  earthly  insti- 
tutions of  Church  and  State,  that  most  inter 
preters  now  think  that  celestial  lordship  ol 
some  kind  is  in  view.  But  of  what  kind  ? 
That  of  God  and  that  of  good  angels,  say 
sume.  That  of  Christ  and  that  of  angelf, 
say  others.  Both  clauses,  say  a  third  class 
of  interpreters,  refer  to  angels,  both  to  good 
angels  and  to  evil,  or  to  good  angels  alone, 
or  to  evil  angels  alone,  as  the  allusicins 
are  variously  understood.  Pointing  to  the 
particular  word  which  is  used  here  for 
"  dominion  "  or  "  lordship,"  somecontend  that 
there  is  a  definite  reference  to  the  dominion 
of  Christ,  the  Lord  distinctively  so  called. 
But  the  same  word  is  used  elsewhere  (cf. 
Bph.i.  21 ;  Ool.i.  16)  of  angels,  while  the  term 
translated  "  dignities,"  or  "  glories,"  occuri 
again  only  in  2  Pet.  ii.  10.  If,  therefore, 
aiiy  single  kind  of  lordship  is  in  view,  wo 
should  conclude  In  favour  of  angelic  dig- 
nities, and  the  authority  of  good  angels  in 
particular.  But  it  may  be  that  Jule  uses 
the  terms  here  in  a  general  sense  to  cover 
all  kinds  of  authority,  especially  celest  al 
authority.  This  is  favoured  by  the  unde 
fined  expressions  which  meet  us  in  th« 
Petrine  parallel  (2  Pet.  ii.  10,  etc.).  It  is 
supported,  too,  by  the  consideration  that  in 
levelling  three  separate  charges  against  the 
men,  Jude  has  probably  in  view  the  three 
separate  cases  which  he  has  just  cited  in 
vers.  5 — ^7.  la  which  case  the  parallel 
between  these  latter  and  the  men  now 
described  can  naturally  be  only  of  a  general 
kind.  It  is  remarked  by  Professor  Plumptre 
that  the  passage  in  2  Pet.  ii.  10,  etc.  (see 
his  Commentary),  taken  in  connection  with 
this  one  in  Jude,  suggests  that  "  the  undue 
worshipping  of  angels  in  the  Judaizing 
Gnosticism  which  had  developed  out  of  the 
teaching  of  the  Essenes  (Col.  ii.  18),  had 
been  met  by  its  most  extreme  opponents 
with  coarse  and  railing  mockery  as  to  all 
angels,  whether  good  or  evil,  and  that  the 
apostle  felt  it  necessary  to  rebuke  this 
licence  of  speech  as  well  as  that  which 
paid  no  respect  to  human  authority." 

Ver.  9. — ^The  irreverent  and  unbridled 
speech  of  these  "  filthy  dreamers  "  is  now 
contrasted  with  the  self-restraint  of  one  of 
the  "  dignities  "  of  the  angelic  world.  The 
point  of  the  contrast  is  sufficiently  clear. 
The  incident  itself  is  obscure.  But  Michael 
the  archangel.  With  the  exception  of 
Rev.  xii.  7,  where  ho  is  described  as  warring 
with  the  diagon,  this  is  the  only  mention 
which  the  New  Testament  makes  of  Michael. 
It  is  entirely  in  harmony,  however,  with  th* 
Old  Testament  representation.  It  is  oldj 
in  the  Book  of  Daniel  that  he  is  named 
there,  but  he  appears  as  the  champion  aad 


1—25.] 


THE  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OP  JUDB. 


protector  of  Israel  against  the  world-powers 
of  heathenism.  He  is  "one  of  the  chief 
princes"  (x.  13),  "your  prince"  (x.  21),|"  the 
great  prince  "  (xii.  1),  who  gives  help  against 
Persia,  and  stands  for  the  chosen  people. 
He  is  also  introduced  in  the  Book  of  Enoch, 
and  the  view  given  of  him  there  is  like  that 
in  Jude.  He  is  "  the  merciful,  the  patient, 
the  holy  Michael "  (xl.  8).  He  belongs  to 
that  developed  form  which  the  doctrine  of 
angels  took  towards  the  close  of  Old  Testa- 
ment revelation,  when  the  ideas  of  distinc- 
tion in  dignity  and  office  were  added  to  the 
simpler  conception  of  earlier  times.  In  the 
apocryphal  books  we  find  a  hierarchy  with 
seven  archangels,  includingMiohae],Gabriel, 
Baphael,  Uriel.  When  contending  with 
the  devil  he  disputed  about  the  body  of 
Moses,  durst  not  bring  against  liim  a  railing 
accusation,  but  said,  The  Lord  rebuke  thee. 
These  last  words  occur  in  Zech.  iii.  2,  where 
they  are  addiessed  by  the  Lord  to  Satan. 
The  term  used  for  "  disputed  "  points  to  a 
contention  in  words.  The  phrase  rendered 
"  railing  accusation "  by  the  English 
Version,  and  "  invective  "  by  others,  means 
rather  a  judgment  or  "  sentence  savouring  of 
evil-speaking,"  as  Alford  puts  it.  Follow- 
ing the  Bhemish  Version,  therefore,  the 
Revised  Version  renders  it  a  "  railing  judg- 
ment." What  is  meant,  then,  is  that  Michael 
restrained  himself,  leaving  all  judgment  and 
vengeance  even  in  this  case  to  God.  But 
what  is  tlie  case  referred  to  ?  The  Targum 
of  Jonathan,  on  Deut.  xxxiv.  6,  speaks  of 
Michael  as  having  charge  of  the  grave  of 
Moses,  and  there  may  be  something  to  the 
same  effect  in  other  ancient  Jewish  legends 
(see  Wetstein).  But  with  this  partial  ex- 
ception, there  seems  to  be  nothing  resem- 
bling Jude's  statement  either  in  apocryphal 
books  like  that  of  Enoch  or  in  the  rabbini- 
cal literature,  not  to  speak  of  the  canonical 
Scriptures.  Neither  is  the  object  of  the 
contention  quite  apparent — whether  it  is 
meant  that  the  devil  attempted  to  deprive 
Moses  of  the  honour  of  burial  by  impeach- 
ing him  of  the  murder  of  the  Egyptian,  or 
that  he  sought  to  preserve  the  body  for 
idolatrous  uses  such  as  the  brazen  serpent 
lent  itself  to,  or  what  else.  The  matter, 
nevertheless,  is  introduced  by  Jude  as  one 
with  which  his  readers  would  be  familiar. 
Whence,  then,  comes  the  story?  Some  have 
solved  the  difficulty  by  the  desperate  ex-' 
pedient  of  allegory,  as  if  the  body  of  Moses 
were  a,  figure  of  the  Israelite  Law,  polity, 
or  people ;  and  as  if  the  sentence  referred  to 
the  giving  of  the  Law  at  Sinai,  the  siege 
under  Hezekiali,  or  tlie  rebuilding  under 
Zerubbabel.  Others  seek  its  source  in  a 
special  revelation,  or  in  some  unrecorded 
instructions  given  by  Christ  in  explanation 
of  the  Transfiguration  scene.  Herder  would 


travel  all  the  way  to  the  Zend-Avesta  for 
it.  Calvin  referred  it  to  oral  Jewish  tra- 
dition. Another  view  of  it  appears,  how 
ever,  in  so  early  a  writer  as  Origen,  viz. 
that  it  is  a  quotation  from  an  old  apo- 
cryphal writing  on  the  Ascent  or  Amrnip- 
tion  of  Moses,  the  date  of  which  is  much 
disputed,  but  is  taken  by  some  of  the  best 
autliorities  (Ewald,  Wieseler,  Dillmann, 
Drummond)  to  be  the  first  decade  after  the 
death  of  Herod.  This  is  the  most  probable 
explanation ;  and  Jude's  use  of  this  story, 
therefore,  carries  no  more  serious  conse- 
quences with  it  than  the  use  he  after- 
wards makes  of  the  Book  of  Enoch. 
Beyond  what  could  be  gathered  &om  a  few 
scattered  references  and  quotations  in  the 
Fathers  and  some  later  writings,  the  book  in 
question  remained  unknown  for  many  cen- 
turies. But  in  the  year  IStil  a  considerable 
part  of  it,  which  had  been  discovered  in  the 
Ambrosian  Library  of  Milan,  was  given  to 
the  public  by  Ceriani,  in  an  Old  Latin 
version,  and  since  that  time  various  edi- 
tions of  it  have  been  published.  Ewald 
observes  that  the  quotation  "shows  how 
early  the  attempt  was  made  to  describe 
exactly  the  final  moment  of  the  life  of 
Moses,  and  to  weave  into  this  description  a 
complete  answer  to  the  questions  which 
arose  concerning  his  highest  glory,  and  his 
guilt  or  innocence"  (' History  of  Israel,'  ii 
p.  226,  Eng.  trans.).  Some  who  are  not 
prepared  to  accept  the  theory  that  the 
passage  is  a  quotation  from  this  ancient 
book,  understand  Jude  to  refer  to  a  tradi- 
tional expansion  of  Scripture,  based  partly 
on  the  narrative  of  the  death  of  Moses  in 
Deuteronomy,  and  partly  on  the  scene 
between  Joshua  and  Satan  in  Zech.  iii. 
So,  for  example.  Professor  Lumby,  who  is 
of  opinion  that  the  mention  of  Jannes  and 
Jambres  in  2  Tim.  iii.  8,  and  certain  passages 
in  Stephen's  speech  as  reported  in  Acts  vii., 
show  that  there  were  current  among  the 
Jews  "  traditional  explanations  of  the  earlier 
history,  which  had  grown  round  the  Old 
Testament  narrative."  (On  the  Assumption 
of  Moses,  and  the  spread  of  legend  on  the 
subject  of  the  death  of  Moses,  see  Schiirer's 
•  The  Jewish  People  in  the  Time  of  Christ,' 
Tol.  iii.  div.  ii.  pp.  80 — 83,  Clark's  transla- 
tion.) 

Ver.  10. — ^The  description  of  the  men 
dealt  with  in  ver.  8  is  resumed,  their  impioni 
irreverence  and  self-indulgence  being  set 
over  against  Michael's  bearing.  The  corre- 
sponding passage  in  2  Pet.  ii.  12  is  less  de- 
finite. Here  we  have  two  pointed  statements, 
one  referring  to  the  railers  at  dignities,  the 
other  to  the  dofilers  of  the  flesh  in  ver.  8.  But 
these  rail  at  whatsoever  things  they  know 
not:  and  what  they  trnderstand  naturally, 
like  the  oraatuxei  without  reason,  in  tibese 


10 


THE  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OF  JUDB. 


[1—25 


things  are  they  destroyed.    So  the  Revised 
Version  renders  it,  with  much  more  precision 
than  the  Authorized  Version,  and  preserving 
the  distinction  which  appears  in  the  original 
tween  two  verbs,  ••  knowing  "  and  "  under- 
nding,"  applied  to  two  different  classes  of 
eots.    The  idea  is  that  high  and  holy 
ects  are  beyond  their  knowledge,  and 
ir    nnderstanding    is    limited    to   the 
nses,   the  physical  wants  and  appetites 
hioh  they  have  in  common  with  the  brutes. 
In  the  case  of  the  former  they  are  rash  and 
profane  of  speech  where  they  should  be 
silent  and  restrained;  in  the  case  of  the 
latter  they  use  them  only  to  their  own  un- 
doing.   The  turn  of  the  phrase,  "in  these 
they  are  destroyed "    (or,  "  destroy  them- 
selves "),  indicates,  perhaps,  how  absolutely 
they  are  lost  in  the  service  of  the  physical 
appetites.    The  words  which  Milton  makes 
tlie  tempter  use  of  himself  have  been  cited 
as  a  parallel  to  this  verse — 

"  I  was  at  first  as  other  beasts  that  graze 
The  trodden  herb,  of  abject  thoughts  and 

low, 
As  was  my  food;  nor  aught  hut  food  dii- 

oemed 
Or  tex,  and  apprehended  nothing  high." 
('Paradise  Lost,'  ix.  571—574.) 

Ver,  11. — As  in  2  Pet.  ii.  15,  the  darkeit 
passages  in  the  Old  Testament  history  are 
again  appealed  to.  While  Peter,  however, 
refers  only  to  a  single  instance,  Jude  intro- 
duces three,  and  prefaces  the  whole  by  a 
Woe  1  such  as  the  Gospels  repeatedly  attri- 
bute to  Christ  himself.  Woe  unto  them! 
for  they  have  gone  in  the  way  of  Cain; 
rather,  they  went  m  the  way  of  Cain.  The 
phrase  is  the  familiar  one  for  a  habitual 
course  of  conduct  (Ps.  i.  1 ;  Acts  ix.  31 ;  xiv. 
16,  etc.).  But  what  is  the  point  of  the 
comparison  ?  Cain  is  supposed  to  be  intro- 
duced as  the  type  of  murderous  envy,  of  tlie 
persecuting  spirit,  or  of  those  who  live  by 
tlie  impulse  of  nature,  regardless  of  God  or 
man.  In  John  iii.  12  he  is  the  type  of  all 
that  is  opposed  to  the  sense  of  brother- 
hood, the  murderer  of  the  brother  whose 
righteous  works  are  an  offence  to  him ;  but 
in  the  present  passage  he  is  introduced 
rather  as  the  first  and,  in  some  respects, 
the  most  pronounced  example  of  wickedness 
which  the  Old  Testament  offers — a  wicked- 
ness defying  God  and  destroying  man. 
And  ran  greedily  after  the  error  of  Balaam 
for  reward.  The  "  error  "  in  view  is  a  life 
diverted  from  righteousness  and  truth.  The 
verb  rendered  "  ran  greedily,"  or  "  ran  riot- 
ously," is  a  very  strung  one,  meaning  tUey 
"were  poured  out,"  and  expressing,  there- 
fore, the  baneful  absoluteness  of  their  sur- 
render to  the  error  in  question.  Otherwise 
I  he  construction  of  the  sentence  is  so  far 


from  obvious  that  various  renderings  are 
proposed :  e.g. "  They  gave  themselves  wholly 
up  to  the  error  of  Balaam  for  the  sake  of  a 
reward;"  "By  the  seduction  of  Balaam's 
reward  they  committed  excess  of  wicked- 
ness ; "  "  They  went  to  excess  by  Balaam's 
error,  which  was  one  determined  by  gain." 
The  first  of  these  is  adopted,  with  some 
modification,  by  the  Revised  Version,  and 
comes  nearest  the  idea,  which  is  that  of 
men  losing  themselves  in  riotous  excess  for 
the  sake  of  worldly  advantage.  The  point 
of  the  analogy  between  Balaam  and  them, 
therefore,  is,  not  his  enticing  Israel  to 
idolatry  or  to  immorality,  as  some  tinder- 
stand  it,  but  the  covetous  spirit  which  the 
Old  Testament  and  the  New  alike  attribute 
to  the  prophet  of  Petbor,  to  which  also  the 
Book  of  Numbers  carries  back  the  entire 
debasement  of  his  character  and  perversion 
of  his  gifts.  And  perished  in  the  gainsaying 
of  Core.  The  term  which  is  very  fitly  ren- 
dered "  gainsaying  "  by  the  English  Version 
here  (•■  contrad.iction  "  in  the  Rhemish  Yet- 
sion ;  "  treason  "  in  Tyndale,  Cranmer,  and 
the  Genevan)  denotes  properly  an  opposition 
expressing  itself  in  words.  It  is,  therefore, 
aptly  applied  to  the  rebellion  of  Korah  and 
his  company,  who  "gathered  themselves 
together  against  Moses  and  against  Aaron, 
and  said  unto  them.  Ye  take  too  much  upon 
you,"  etc.  (Numb.  xvi.  3).  The  analogy 
between  the  two  cases,  consequently,  is 
limited  by  some  to  the  assertion  of  an 
unregulated  liberty,  the  assumption  of  a 
self-invented  holiness,  or  the  adoption  of 
a  worship  which  was  alien  to  God.  It  lies 
in  the  broader  idea  of  a  contemptuous  and 
determined  assertion  of  self  against  divinely 
appointed  ordinances. 

Vers.  12, 13. — The  next  two  verses  carry 
on  the  description  of  the  men  in  a  running 
fire  of  epithets  and  figures,  short,  sharp,  and 
piercing,  corresponding  also  at  certain  points 
with  2  Pet.  ii.  13 — 17.  These  are  spots  in 
your  feasts  of  charity,  when  they  feast  with 
yon,  feeding  themselves  without  fear.  What 
is  referred  to  appears  not  to  be  ordinary 
friendly  gatherings  or  occasions  for  the 
interchange  of  affection,  but  the  well-known 
agapse,  or  love-feasts,  of  the  primitive 
Church,  the  meals  provided  in  connection 
with  the  Lord's  Supper,  at  which  rich  and 
poor  sat  down  together.  In  adopting  the 
rendering  "spots,"  the  English  Version 
follows  Tyndale,  Cranmer,  the  Genevan, 
and  the  Rhemish,  and  is  followed  by  some 
good  interpreters  on  the  ground  that  the 
term,  though  formally  different,  is  essen- 
tially the  same  as  that  in  2  Pet.  ii.  13, 
The  word  itself,  however,  properly  means 
"rocks,"  and  therefore  the  point  may  be 
that  their  immoral  conduct  makes  these 
men  like  treacherous  reefs,  on  which  theli 


1—26.] 


THE  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OP  JUDE. 


n 


fellows  make  shipwreck.  So  the  Bevised 
Version  gives  "hidden  rooks"  in  the  text, 
and  transfers  "  spots  "  to  the  margin.  Tlie 
"without  fear,"  which  is  usually  attached 
to  the  third  clause,  is  connected  by  some 
with  the  second,  in  which  case  it  expresses 
the  reckless,  irreverent  spirit  in  which  these 
men  joined  in  the  sacred  agapie.  The  last 
clause,  "feeding  [or,  'pasturing']  them- 
selves," describes  them  further  as  having 
no  regard  to  the  proper  object  of  these  love- 
feasts  in  ministering  to  Christian  fellowship 
and  the  holy  sense  of  brotherhood,  but  as 
using  them  simply  as  a  means  for  the  satis- 
faction of  their  own  appetites  and  the 
furtherance  of  their  own  base  ends.  Com- 
pare the  evils  referred  to  by  Paul  in  1  Cor. 
xi.  21,  and  the  description  of  the  shepherds 
in  Ezek.  xxxiv.  and  Isa.  Ivi.  H.  "They 
are  like  shepherds,"  says  Humphry,  "  that 
have  themselves  for  their  flocks,  feasting 
themselves,  not  their  sheep,  and  doing  this 
without  fear  of  the  chief  Shepherd,  who  has 
hig  eye  upon  them."  Clouds  they  are  with- 
out water,  carried  about  of  winds;  or, 
carried  past  by  winds.  Like  rainless  clouds, 
the  sport  of  the  uncertain  breezes,  yielding 
nothing  for  the  fruitfulness  of  earth,  these 
empty,  volatile,  inconstant  men  disappoint 
the  expectation  of  the  Church  and  do  it  no 
service.  Trees  whose  fruit  withereth,  with- 
out fimit,  twice  dead,  plucked  up  by  the  roots. 
The  Authorized  Version  is  less  happy  than 
usual  in  its  rendering  of  the  first  clause. 
The  Revised  Version,  in  adopting  "  autumn 
trees"  instead  of  "trees  whose  fruit 
withereth,"  returns  to  the  renderings  of  the 
earlier  versions,  Wickliffe  giving  "harvest 
trees,"  Tjndale  and  Oranmer  "  trees  without 
fruit  at  gathering-time,"  and  the  Bhemish 
"  trees  of  autumn."  The  idea  of  uselessness 
and  unfruitfulness,  which  was  expressed  in 
the  previous  figure,  is  repeated,  but  in  a 
more  absolute  form,  in  this  new  figure.  The 
late  autumn  is  not  the  time,  from  the 
Eastern  point  of  view,  for  the  putting  forth 
of  fruit.  The  tree  then  becomes  bare, 
barren,  leafless.  So  is  it  with  these  men. 
Nor  is  it  only  that  they  have  no  irnit  to 
show.  The  capacity  of  fruitfulness  is 
extinct  within  them.  The  possibility  of 
recovering  it  is  gone  from  them.  They 
are  as'  dead  to  all  good  service  as  trees  are 
which  are  rooted  out  as  hopelessly  useless. 
The  phrase,  "twice  dead,"  may  mean  no 
more  than  "  utterly  dead."  The  point,  how- 
ever, is  rather  this — that  they  are  dead,  not 
only  in  respect  of  barrenness — which  is  a 
death  in  life — but  in  respect  of  the  extinction 
of  all  vitality.  Baging  (or,  mid)  waves  of 
the  sea,  foaming  out  their  own  shame;  or 
shames,  as  the  original  gives  it ;  that  is  to 
say,  shameful  deeds,  or,  it  may  be,  the  de- 
grading lusts  which  inspire  their  unlicensed 


life  (Huther).  .  This  comparison  recalls  at 
once  the  figure  in  Isa.  Ivii.  20.  Wandering 
stars,  to  whom  is  (or,  has  been)  reserved  the 
blackness  of  darkness  for  ever.  In  the  Book 
of  Enoch  (oh.  xviii.  14)  the  angel  shows 
the  prophet  "a  prison  for  the  stars  of 
heaven,  and,  for  the  host  of  heaven,"  and 
in  the  next  verse  it  is  explained  that  "  the 
stars  that  roll  over  the  fire  are  they  who 
have  transgressed  the  command  of  God 
before  their  rising,  because  they  did  not 
come  forth  in  their  time."  It  is  possible 
that  Jude  had  this  in  mind  here,  as  the  lan- 

fuageofearlierchaptersofthesamebookmay 
ave  suggested  others  of  Jude's  figures,    u 
the  "wandering  stars"  are  to  be  identified 
with  any  particular  order  of  the  heavenly 
bodies,  it  will  be  with  the  comets  rather  than 
the  planets,  the  movements  of  the  former 
seeming,  tothe  common  eye, somuch  the  more 
erratic.   The  doom  which  is  declared  to  be  in 
reserve,  no  doubt  takes  its  form  so  far  from 
the  immediate  figure  of  the  comet  vanishing 
into  the  unseen.    But  the  idea  expressed  is 
not  so  much  that  of  suddenness  as  that 
of  certainty  and  irreversibility.    It  is  the 
doom  which  Christ  himself  pronounces  to  be 
prepared  (Matt.  xxv.  41),  and,  therefore,  ine- 
vitable and  perpetual.  In  oonfirmationof  this 
statement  of  the  certainty  of  the  doom,  the 
readers  are  next  reminded  of  the  Lord's 
judicial  coming,  and  of  that  as  the  subject 
of  prophecy.     The  prophecy  in  question, 
though  not  one  of  those  recorded  in  the 
canonical  Hebrew  Scriptures,  seems  to  have 
been  familiar  enough  to  the  readi^rs  to  make 
it  a  natural  and  pertinent  thing  to  quote  it. 
So  Paul  cites  heathen  authors  or  common 
popular  sayings  in  support  of  his  statements. 
Vers.    14,    15. — And    Enoch    also,    the 
seventh  from  Adam,  prophesied  of  these. 
The  Bevisers  render  it,  and  to  these  also 
Mioch  .  .  .  prophesied.    In  the  apocryphal 
writing  from  which  the  passage  is  taken 
Enoch  is  styled,  as  here,  "  the  seventh  ttom 
Adam."    Seven  occurs  in  Scripture  as  a 
sacred  symbolical  number.    Its  introduc- 
tion here,  therefore,  is  very  generally  under- 
stood to  claim  a    peculiar  authority  and 
finality  for  the  prophecy  emitted  by  Enoch. 
But  it  may  be  intended  simply  to  mark  the 
high  antiquity  of  the  prophecy,  and  its 
connection   with  the  man  who    was   dis- 
tinguished from  others  of  the  same  name 
mentioned  in  the  oldest  Scriptures  (Gen.  iv. 
17;   XXV.  4;    xlvi.  9)  by  his  exceptional 
nearness  to  God.    Saying,  Behold  the  Lord 
Cometh  (literally,  came)  with  ten  thousands 
of  Ms  saints,  to  execute  judgment  upon  all, 
and  to  convince  (that  is,  to  convict)  all  that 
are  ungodly  among  them  of  all  their  un- 
godly deeds  which  they  have  ungodly  com- 
mitted, and  of  all  their  hard  speeoluis  (or, 
with    the  Bevised  Version,  •H   Utt   Mrd 


IS 


THE  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OF  JUDB. 


[1—25. 


thingt)  which  Tingodly  siimers  have  spoken 
againit  him.  The  "ten  thousands  of  his 
laintf"  ii  better  rendered  "ten  thousandB 
of  hl«  holy  ones,"  or,  as  the  Revised  Version 
gives  it  in  the  margin,  "  his  holy  myriads." 
For  the  "  holy  ones  "  here  intended  are  the 
angels.  The  mention  of  this  retinue  of 
Jehovah  is  in  accordance  with  the  Hebrew 
idea  which  appears  in  such  passages  as 
Dvnt.  xxxiii.  2,  3;  Dan.  vii.  10;  Zech.  xiv. 
5  (where  the  better  reading  is,  "  and  the 
holy  ones  with  him") ;  and  appears  a°;ain  in 
the  New  Testament  (Matt.  xxv.  3: ;  2  Thess. 
i.  7,  etc.).  The  clause,  "among  them," 
which  might  limit  the  ungodly  to  those  in 
Israel,  is  omitted  by  the  best  authorities. 
The  epithet  "hard,"  which  is  applied  to 
the  "  speeches,"  means  hard  in  the  sense  of 
"harsh,"  not  in  the  sense  of  "difScult  to 
understand."  It  is  the  "  churlish  "  which  is 
applied  to  Nabal  (1  Sam.  xxv.  3).  In  the 
original  the  whole  emphasis  of  the  sentence 
is  on  the  "ungodly  sinners,"  which  words  are 
thrown  forward  to  the  close,  thus :  "  all  the 
hard  things  which  they  uttered  against 
him — these  impious  sinners ! "  Near  the 
beginning  of  that  remarkable  specimen  of 
Ancient  apocalyptic  literature,  the  Book  of 
Enoch  (ch.  i.  9),  we  find  these  words,  "And 
behold,  he  comes  with  myriads  of  the  holy, 
to  pass  judgment  upon  them,  and  wUl 
destroy  the  impious,  and  will  call  to  account 
all  flesh  for  everything  the  sinners  and  the 
impious  have  done  and  committed  against 
him"  (Schodde's  rendering).  This  is  the 
passage  which  Jude  quotes.  He  does  so, 
however,  with  some  modification;  for  the 
original,  as  we  now  have  it,  does  not  contain 
any  reference  to  the  "  hard  speeches  "  of  the 
men  of  impiety.  The  book  itself  has  had  a 
singular  history.  Some  acquaintance  with 
it  is  discovered  as  early  as  the  '  Epistle  of 
Barnabas,'  the  '  Book  of  Jubilees,'  and  the 
'Testament  of  the  Twelve  Patriarchs.'  It 
was  freely  used  by  the  Fathers  of  the  first  five 
centuries.  Though  never  formally  recog- 
nized as  canonical,  it  was  in  great  esteem, 
largely  accepted  as  a  record  of  revelations, 
and  regarded  as  the  work  of  Enoch.  It 
disappeared  after  Augustine's  time,  the 
only  traces  of  its  existence  being  some 
references  to  it  in  the  writings  of  Syncellus 
and  Nioephorus.  From  this  time  (about 
A.D.  800)  it  was  entirely  lost  sight  of  till 
rather  more  than  a  century  ago,  when  the 
Abyssinian  Church  was  discovered  to 
posaeas  an  Ethiopio  version  of  it.  The 
well-known  traveller,  Bruce,  obtained  three 
copies  of  this  version  in  1773,  and  in  1821 
an  English  translation  was  publislied  by 
Archbishop  Laurence.  This  was  followed 
by  a  German  translation  by  Hoffmann  in 
1883.  The  Ethiopio  text  itself  was  first 
issued  by  Archbishop  Laurence  in  1838, 


and  afterwards  in  most  scholarly  fashion  by 
Dillmann,  in  18S1,  who  also  published  a 
new  German  translation  with  important 
emendations  in  1853,  Since  then  much 
attention  has  been  paid  to  the  book 
Wilihin  the  last  few  years  a  corrected 
edition  of  Laurence's  English  translation 
has  been  published  by  the  author  of  the 
•Evolution  of  Christianity'  (Kegau  Paul 
and  Co.,  1881);  while  another  edition,  with 
an  English  translation  and  important 
explanatory  matter,  has  been  issued  by 
Professor  Schodde  of  Ohio  (Andover,  1882). 
An  attempt  has  been  made  by  some  to 
bring  the  composition  of  the  book  down  to 
Christian  times,  so  that  Enoch  should  quote 
Jude,  not  Jude  Enoch.  But  there  is  every 
reason  to  believe  that  it  belongs  to  the 
second  century  B.a  Certain  portions  of  the 
book,  however,  are  of  later  date.  For  it  is 
scarcely  possible  to  deny  that  it  is  the  wurk 
of  more  than  one  hand.  The  original  seems 
to  have  been  written  in  Hebrew  or  Aramaio. 
We  cannot  be  far  astray,  therefore,  in 
accepting  it  as  the  composition  of  a  Jew  of 
Palestine  datingtbetween  B.a.  166  and  110. 
It  professes  to  give  a  series  of  revelations  or 
visions  received  by  Enoch,  in  which  the  fall 
of  the  angels,  tlie  punishment  of  nn- 
righteous  men,  the  reward  of  the  godly, 
the  coming  of  Messiah,  the  mystery  of  the 
world-weeks,  and  the  secrets  of  the  kingdom 
of  nature,  as  well  as  those  of  the  kingdom  of 
grace,  are  shown  him.  That  such  a  book 
should  have  been  ascribed  to  Enoch  is  not 
strange.  It  was  suggested  by  the  account 
which  is  given  of  him  in  Gen.  y.  21 — 24. 
"  The  statements  there  left  ample  room,"  as 
Dr.  Schodde  well  remarks,  "for  a  vivid 
imagination  to  supply  unwritten  history, 
while  antiquity  and  piety  made  Enoch  a 
welcome  name  to  give  force  a  id  authority 
to  a  book,  and  the  'walking  with  God'  of 
Enoch,  and  his  translation  to  heaven,  which 
correct  exegesis  has  always  read  in  this 
passage,  founded  his  claim  of  having  en- 
joyed close  communion  with  God  and 
having  possessed  superhuman  knowledge." 
Ver.  16.— As  in  2  Pet.  u.  18,  19,  the  men 
are  further  stigmatized  for  the  gross  and 
profane  selfishness  to  which  they  ga  ve  vent 
in  speech.  The  present  verse  enlarges  on 
the  particular  vice  which  the  writer  adds 
to  the  more  general  statement  given  in  the 
Book  of  Enoch — ^the  vice  of  uttering  hard 
things  against  God.  These  are  muimurers, 
complaiuers,  walking  after  their  own  lusts; 
and  their  mouth  speaketh  great  swelling 
words,  having  men's  persons  in  admiration 
beoanss  of  advantage.  The  words  rendered 
"murmurers"  and  "complaiuers"  occur 
nowhere  else  in  the  New  Testament.  It  is 
doubtful  whether  any  clear  distinction  can 
be  drawn  between  them,  except  that  th» 


I— 25.J 


THE  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OP  JUDE. 


18 


former  term  ii  the  more  general,  and  the 
latter  the  more  Bpeciflo,  expressing  one  par- 
ticular direction  which  the  murmuring 
•pirit  takes,  namely,  that  of  discontent  with 
their  circumstances  (so  Huther,  etc.).  The 
clause,  "walking  after  their  own  lusts," 
then  declares  the  secret  cause  of  their  dis- 
content. They  made  themselves,  their  own 
notions  of  things,  their  own  ambitions  and 
appetites,  the  one  rule  of  their  life.  They 
therefore  judged  the  lot  which  was  assigned 
them  by  God  unworthy  of  them  avd  railed 
against  it.  We  may  gather  from  the  parallel 
passage  in  2  Peter  that  they  forswore  in 
especial  the  restraints  put  upon  them  by 
tlie  providence  or  by  the  grace  of  God,  and 
asserted  a  liberty  which  meant  unbridled 
self-indulgeuce.  The  arrogant  selfishness 
which  refused  to  be  fettered  by  Divine 
law  naturally  expressed  itself  also  in 
"great  swelling  words,"  in  loud  protesta- 
tions, perhaps,  that  nothing  should  interfere 
with  their  liberty.  The  phrase  (which  in 
the  New  Testament  occurs  again  only  in 
2  Pet.  ii.  18)  is  the  same  as  is  rendered 
"  speak  marvellous  things "  iu  Daniel's 
description  of  the  king  who  "shall  do 
according  to  his  will ;  and  he  shall  exalt 
himself  and  magnify  himself  above  every 
god,  and  shall  speak  marvellous  thing:i 
against  the  God  of  gods,"  etc  (Dan.  xi.  36, 
37).  In  the  last  clause  we  have  a  phrase 
similar  to,  but  not  quite  the  same  as,  the 
01^  which  usually  expresses  the  idea  of 
hftving  respect  of  persons.  The  Authorized 
Veision,  therefore,  seems  to  do  better  than 
the  Revised  Version  here  in  adopting  a 
rendering  which  indicates  that  there  ia 
some  difference  from  the  usual  form.  The 
point  of  this  difference  may  be  that  Jude's 
plirase  expresses  not  merely  the  partial  and 
unprincipled  conduct  which  is  one  thing  to 
the  poor  and  another  to  the  rich,  but  the 
open  and  unconcealed  adulation  with  which 
these  men  hung  upon  those  to  whom  it 
might  be  of  advantage  to  attach  themselves. 
The  proud  repudiation  of  the  submission 
which  was  due  to  God  and  the  Divine 
disposal  of  their  lot  was  accompanied  by  a 
cringing,  unblushing  submission  of  their 
manliood  to  those  of  their  fellow-men  who 
had  favours  to  bestow.  Arrogance  and 
servility  are  near  of  kin.  The  boaster  ia 
half-brother  to  the  parasite. 

Vers.  17,  18. — A  direct  appeal  is  now 
introduced  to  the  readers.  Its  object  is  to 
save  them  from  being  disconcerted  by  the 
rise  of  these  impious  men  or  beguiled  by 
their  pretensions.  They  are  reminded, 
therefore,  of  apostolic  words,  by  which  from 
the  beginning  they  had  been  taught  to 
anticipate  such  perils  and  to  be  on  their 
guard  against  them.  But,  beloved,  remem- 
ber ye  the  words  which  were  (or,  have  been) 


spoken  before  of  (i.e.  by)  the  apostles  of  ou 
Lord  Jesus  Christ.  The  Eovised  Version 
rightly  restores  the  rendering  "  but  ye,  be- 
loved," whioh  the  Authorized  Version 
dropped.  The  older  versions,  Wickliffe,  Tyn- 
dale,  Oranmer,  the  Genevan,  the  Bhemish, 
agree  in  introducing  this  emphatic  "ye," 
which  sets  the  readers  in  sharpest  contrust  to 
these  " muimurei-s,"  and  gives  greater  point 
to  Jude's  appeal.  The  teaching  of  the 
apostles  on  the  subject  in  hand  is  referred  to 
as  something  by  no  means  strange  to  them. 
The  terms  would  naturally  suggest  that  the 
readers  liad  been  themselves  hearers  of  the 
apostles.  They  are  not  decisive,  however, 
of  the  question  whetlier  oral  or  written 
communications,  direct  or  indirect  instruc- 
tions, are  in  view.  The  indeterminate  sense 
of  the  term  "  apostle,"  and  the  general 
tenor  of  the  reference,  make  it  impossible  to 
say  that  Jade  ranks  himself  liere  among  the 
twelve.  The  sentence  would  be  more  natural 
on  the  lips  of  one  who  was  not  himself 
an  apostle.  How  that  they  told  you  there 
should  be  mockers  in  the  last  time,  who 
should  walk  after  their  own  ungodly  Insti. 
The  Kevised  Version  is  more  literally  true  to 
the  original  iu  giving  this  the  direct  form, 
how  tliat  they  laid,  to  you,.  In  the  last  time 
there  ehall  be  mockers,  etc.  This  does  not 
necessarily  imply,  however,  that  written 
words  are  referred  to,  or  that  a  quotation 
is  being  made.  The  tense  of  the  verb, "  said," 
by  which  the  words  are  introduced,  point* 
the  other  way.  It  means  that  they  were 
in  the  way  of  saying  such  things,  and  makes 
it  probable,  therefore,  that  Jude  refers  to 
the  substance  of  what  the  apostles  were  in 
the  habit  of  saying  about  the  future  in  their 
ordinary  preaching  and  teaching.  Christ's 
own  prophecies  on  the  subject  of  the  end 
(Matt,  xxiv.,  XXV.)  would  form  the  text  for 
such  declarations.  We  have  examples  of 
these  apostolic  predictions  in  the  case  of 
Paul  (Acts  XX.  29 ;  2  Tim.  iii.  1),  in  that 
of  John  (1  John  ii.  18),  in  that  of  Peter 
(2  Pet.  iii.  2,  3).  The  last  resembles  the 
present  passage  most  closely,  the  same 
unusual  word  for  "  mockers,"  or  "  scoffers," 
being  common  to  both.  The  stress  of  the 
statement  is  again  on  the  sensual  impiety 
of  these  men,  as  appears  from  the  strong 
and  peculiar  phrase  with  which  the  pre- 
diction closes,  "walking  after  their  own 
lusts  of  ungodliness"  (Revised  Version, 
margin).  JBy  "  the  last  time  "  (with  whioh 
compare  the  expressions  iu  1  Pet.  i.  5,  20 ; 
2  Pet.  iii.  3 ;  Ueb.  i.  1,  etc.)  is  meant  the 
time  which  closes  the  present  order  of 
things,  and  ushers  in  Christ's  return.  It 
was  a  Hebrew  idea  that  time  was  divided 
into  two  great  periods — "this  age"  and  "  the 
age  to  come,"  which  were  paited  by  th« 
coming  of  Messiah.    The  "age  to  oom^" 


14 


THE  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OF  JUDE. 


[1—36. 


or  the  Messianic  age,  was  in  principle  in- 
troduced b;  Messiah's  first  adrent,  but  it 
was  to  be  finally  brought  in  by  his  second 
advent — an  event  conceived  to  be  near. 
The  time  which  heralded  the  conclusive 
termination  of  the  one  period  and  entrance 
of  the  other  was  "the  last  time"— a  time  of 
evils  and  of  portents  marking  the  end  of 
the  old  order. 

Ver.  19. — There  follows  yet  another 
description  of  the  same  men,  taking  up  that 
in  ver.  16,  and  generalizing  it  in  harmony 
with  what  is  suggested  by  the  apostolic 
prediction.  In  three  bold  strokes  it  gives  a 
representation  of  them  which  is  at  once 
the  sharpest  and  the  broadest  of  all.  This 
final  description,  too,  at  last  lays  bare  the 
root  of  their  hopeless  corruption.  These 
be  they  who  separate  themselves,  sensual, 
having  not  the  Spirit.  The  pronoun  "  them- 
selves" cannot  be  retained  in  face  of  the 
weight  of  documentary  evidence  against  it. 
The  verb  (which  is  one  of  very  rare  occur- 
rence) is  held  to  be  capable  of  more  than  one 
sense — seceding,  causing  divitions,  creating 
faetiont,  malting  definitions  or  distinctions. 
The  most  natural  meaning  seems  to  be  that 
adopted  by  the  Bevieed  Version,  they  who 
make  separations.  Bo  Tyndale;  Cranmer 
and  the  Genevan  have  "  these  are  makers 
of  sects,"  and  Luther  gives  "  makers  of  fac- 
tions." It  may  be  that  they  caused  divisions 
by  setting  themselves  up  as  the  only  en- 
lightened Christians,  and,  on  the  ground  of 
that  enlightenment,  claiming  to  be  superior 
to  the  moral  laws  which  bound  others.  The 
term  translated  "sensual"  has  unfortu- 
nately no  proper  representative  in  English. 
It  it  "psychical,"  being  formed  from  the 
noun  psyche,  which  is  rendered  "  life "  or 
■'soul."  This  psyche  is  intermediate  be- 
tween "  body  "  and  "  spirit"  It  is  in  the 
first  Instance  simply  the  bond  or  principle 
of  the  animal  life,  and  m  the  second  instance 
it  is  embodied  life.  Thus  it  is  that  in  man 
which  he  has  in  common  with  the  brute 
creation  beneath  him.  But  it  becomes  also 
more  than  this,  expressing  that  in  man 
which  renders  him  capable  of  connection 
with  God  For  in  the  third  instance  it 
denotes  the  seat  of  feeling,  desire,  affection, 
and  emotion ;  the  centre  of  the  personal  life — 
the  self  in  man.  The  adjective  itself  occurs 
in  the  New  Testament  only  in  a  few  passages 
of  marked  importance — 1  Cor.  ii.  14;  xv.  44, 
46;  Jas.  iii.  15;  and  the  present  verse. 
Here  it  designates  the  men  as  men  who  live 
only  for  the  natural  self — men  who  make 
the  sensuous  nature,  with  its  appetites  and 
passions,  the  law  of  their  life ;  natural  or 
animal  men,  as  the  Bevised  Version  gives 
it  in  the  margin.  Wicklifie  renders  it 
"  beaatly ; "  Tyndale,  Cranmer,  and  the  Gene- 
van, "fleshly;"  the  Bhemish,"  sensual."  The 


third  clause  admits  of  being  rendered  either 
"having  not  the  spirit"  (In  which  the 
Authorized  is  supported  by  Wicklifie,  Tyn- 
dale, and  Cranmer),  or  "having  not  the 
Spirit  "(so  tlie  Bevised  Version,  following 
the  Genevan  and  the  Rbemish).  For  it  is 
in  many  passages  difScult  to  decide  whether 
the  word  "  spirit "  means  the  Holy  Spirit 
of  God  or  man's  own  spirit — that  in  him 
in  virtue  of  which  he  can  have  fellowship 
with  the  Divine,  and  on  which  God  specially 
acts;  "that  higliest  and  noblest  part  of 
man,"  as  Luther  puts  it,  "which  qualifies 
him  to  lay  hold  of  incomprehensible,  in- 
visible things,  eternal  things  ;  in  short  .  .  . 
the  house  where  faith  and  God's  Word 
are  at  home."  The  rendering  of  the 
Bevised  Version  is  favoured  by  the  occur- 
rence of  the  term  in  the  following  verse. 
The  Spirit  of  God  was  not  in  tlie  lives  or 
the  thoughts  of  these  men,  and  hence  they 
were  creators  of  division,  and  sensuaL  Their 
pretension  was  that  they  were  the  eminently 
spiritual.  But  in  refusing  the  Divine 
Spirit  they  had  sunk  to  the  level  of  an 
animal  life,  immoral  in  itself,  and  productive 
of  confusion  to  the  Church, 

Vers.  20 — 23. — From  these  corrupters  of 
the  Church,  who  have  occupied  his  pen  so 
long  and  so  painfully,  Jude  now  turns 
direct  to  his  readers  and  brings  his  subject 
to  a  fitting  close,  with  a  couple  of  exhorta- 
tions full  of  a  wise  and  tender  concern.  One 
of  the  two  counsels  deals  with  what  they 
should  do  for  the  proteclion  of  their  own 
Christian  position  against  the  insidious 
evils  of  which  he  has  written  in  words  of 
passion.  The  other  deals  with  what  they 
should  do  for  the  preservation  of  others 
exposed  to  the  same  seductive  perils.  But 
ye,  beloved,  building  up  yourselves  on  your 
most  holy  faith.  The  tone  of  pleading 
atfection  appears  in  the  grave  and  earnest 
words  by  which  he  reminds  his  readers  of 
the  necessity  of  looking  carefully  to  their  own 
perseverance.  As  the  condition  of  all  else, 
he  names  the  great  duty  of  personal  edifica- 
tion or  up-building.  They  must  strengthen 
themselves  on  their  foundation,  and  that 
foundation  is  their  "  most  holy  faith."  By 
this  apparently  Jude  does  not  mean  simply 
the  subjective  grace  or  virtue  of  faith. 
Peter,  indeed,  speaks  of  the  strengthening 
and  development  of  that  as  the  secret  of 
being  neither  barren  nor  unfruitful.  But 
the  idea  and  the  phrase  seem  somewhat  dif- 
ferent here;  for  any  spiritual  gift  of  their  own 
would  be  all  too  weak  a  secui  ity.  It  is  rather 
the  "  faith  "  which  has  been  already  men- 
tioned as  "  once  delivered  unto  the  saints  " 
(ver.  3),  and  is  now  conceived  as  possessed 
by  the  readers.  In  this  faith,  of  which  Christ 
himself  is  the  Sum,  they  have  a  secme  foun. 
dation  for  their  renewed  life,  and  on  this  faith 


1—25.] 


THE  UENEBAL  EPISTLE  OF  JUDB. 


16 


they  are  to  establish  themselves  more  and 
moie.  Fraying  in  the  Holy  Ghost.  Theee 
words  go  best  together,  though  gome  attach 
the  term,  "  in  the  Holy  Ghost,"  to  the  former 
clause.  They  express  a  second  condition 
which  must  be  made  good,  if  the  readers  are 
to  be  safe  from  the  seductions  which  threaten 
them.  Their  Christian  life,  if  it  is  to  be 
proof  against  these  evils,  must  be  fed  by 
prayer,  and  by  prayer  of  the  deepest  and 
most  effectual  order — prayer  which  takes 
its  life  and  power  from  the  Holy  Spirit 
(of.  Eph.  vi.  18 ;  Kom.  viii.  26).  Keep  yonr- 
selves  in  the  love  of  Ood,  looking  for  the 
mercy  of  oni  Lord  Jesus  Christ  unto  eternal 
life.  The  "love  of  God"  must  have  a 
sense  parallel  to  that  of  the  "mercy  of 
Christ."  It  is,  therefore,  not  our  love  to 
God,  but  his  love  to  us.  The  love  which 
God  is  revealed  in  Christ  to  have  to  us 
is  that  in  which  they  are  to  keep  themselves. 
So  long  as  they  live  within  its  grace  they 
cannot  but  be  secure  against  the  corruptions 
of  men.  If  they  fall  away  from  it,  they  be- 
come an  easy  prey.  And  keeping  themselves 
in  this  love,  they  are  to  "  look  for  mercy." 
They  are  then  entitled  to  expect  that  mercy, 
and  the  attitude  of  expectation  will  itself 
be  an  aid  to  the  keeping  of  themselves 
in  the  love.  The  mercy  of  tiie  future  is  here 
spoken  of  as  specifically  the  mercy  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ;  Jude  having  in  view 
that  advent  of  Christ  which  filled  the 
immediate  horizon  of  the  early  Christians, 
and  to  which  they  looked  with  an  intensity 
of  expectation  to  us  very  partially  realizable, 
as  the  event  which  would  speedily  reveal 
every  man's  work  and  in  which  mercy 
would  triumph  over  judgment  for  the  faith- 
ful. And  this  mercy,  or,  as  it  also  may  be,  tliis 
expectation,  is  further  described  as  having 
nothing  less  than  eternal  life  for  its  object 
and  its  certain  end.  So  the  central  idea 
in  this  counsel  is  the  necessity  of  holding  by 
the  revealed  fact  of  God's  love  in  Christ. 
The  first  two  clauses  point  to  the  means  by 
which  this  is  to  be  made  good,  and  the  last 
clause  expresses  an  attitude  of  soul  which 
is  at  once  an  extension  of  the  central  duty 
and  a  help  to  it.  And  of  some  have  compas- 
sion, making  a  difference :  and  others  save 
with  fear,  pulling  them  out  of  the  fire.  The 
readings  here  ave.  so  diverse,  and  so  difficult 
to  determine,  that  some  of  our  best  critics 
take  this  to  be  one  of  the  passages  in  which 
we  have  to  recognize  a  corruption  of  the 
primitive  text  now  past  certain  correction. 
The  Keceived  Text  is  clearly  in  error  at 
least  in  one  important  term.  The  word 
which  it  renders  "  making  a  difference,"  as 
if  it  referred  to  the  readers,  is  in  the  same 
case  with  the  "  some,"  and  refers  to  the 

Sersons  who  are  to  be  dealt  with.    It  is 
oubtful,    too,    whether    w«    have    three 


different  classes  of  persons  referred  to  in 
three  distinct  hortatory  sentences,  or  onlj 
two  such  classes.  The  most  recent  and 
best  of  our  English  students  of  the  text, 
Messrs.  Westcott  and  Hort,  adopt  readings 
which  differ  in  some  respects  from  those 
of  the  Authorized,  but  agree  with  it  in 
presenting  only  two  classes  of  persons. 
The  Revised  Version,  following  many  good 
authorities,  both  ancient  and  modern,  prefers 
another  form  of  text  with  a  triple  division. 
Accepting  this,  we  have  still  more  than  one 
uncertainty  to  take  account  of.  In  the  first 
of  the  three  clauses  there  is  the  difficulty  of 
deciding  between  two  readings,  one  of 
which  gives  us  "on  some  have  mercy,"  while 
the  other  yields  the  sense  "  some  convict," 
that  is  to  say,  iring  their  lin  home  to  them, 
or  refute  their  error.  The  preference  is  to  be 
given,  on  the  whole,  though  with  some  hesita- 
tion, to  the  former  of  these  readings,  which 
is  also  the  more  difficult  of  the  two.  There 
is  also  the  difficulty  of  determining  the 
precise  idea  expressed  by  tlie  participle  in 
the  same  clause.  It  appears  elear  enough 
that  it  cannot  have  the  sense  assigned  it  by 
the  Authorized  Version,  namely,  that  of 
"making  a  difference."  But  setting  this 
aside,  we  have  still  to  choose  between  two 
ways  of  taking  it.  It  may  have  the  sense  of 
hesitating  or  doubting;  in  which  case  the  class 
of  persons  referred  to  will  be  those  who  are 
not  wholly  gone  in  unbelief,  but  are  on  the 
way  to  it.  Such  persons  are  to  be  regarded 
as  fit  objects  for  anxious,  considerate,  pitiful 
treatment.  This  is  a  sense  which  the  word 
undoubtedly  bears  in  several  passages  of 
the  New  Testament  (Jas.  i.  6;  also  Matt, 
xxi.  21 ;  Mark  xi.  22 ;  Rom.  iv.  20).  It  has 
also  the  sanction  of  the  Revised  Version, 
which  renders  it,  "  And  on  some  have  mercy, 
who  are  in  doubt."  But  it  may  also  have 
the  sense  of  contending,  and  the  fact  that 
it  has  already  been  so  used  in  the  present 
Epistle  (ver.  9)  is  a  weighty  consideration 
in  favour  of  this  view.  The  rendering  then 
might  be,  "  Some  compassionate,  when  they 
contend  with  you  "  (so  Alford,  etc.).  In  tLiia 
case  the  class  referred  to  will  be  the  couten- 
tious,  of  whom  there  might  be  different 
kinds,  some  more  hopeful  and  reasonable, 
others  less  so.  Men  of  this  spirit  are  to  be 
tried  first  with  kindness  and  consider^ition. 
Even  when  they  oppose  you  and  draw  off 
from  you,  be  pitiful  toward  them;  take  a 
compassionate,  helpful  interest  in  them, 
Tlie  second  clause  is  best  rendered  with  the 
Revised  Version, "  And  some  save,  snatching 
them  out  of  the  fire."  This  bj  ings  a  different 
class  of  persons  into  view — those  who  have 
sunk  into  corrupt  courses  which  will  soon 
undo  them,  who  are  already,  indeed,  in  tha 
penal  fires  of  wrong,  but  yet  are  not  be- 
yond the  possibility  of  rescue  if  quick  and 


16 


TEE  GENEBAIi  EPISTLE  OF  JUDB. 


[1-25 


vigorous  measures  are  taken  vrith  them. 
It  is  generally  supposed  that  Jude  has  in 
Tieir  here  the  figure  of  the  "  brand  plucked 
ftom  the  burning,"  which  occurs  in  Zech. 
iii.  2.  If  BO,  the  position  in  which  this 
second  class  stands  is  represented  as  one 
of  the  last  possible  peril.  The  terms  are 
strong  and  vivid  enough  for  this.  They 
mean  that  there  is  no  time  to  lose,  that  all 
depends  upon  the  prompt  use  of  efficient 
measures,  however  forcible  and  unwelcome. 
The  third  clause  then  runs,  "And  some 
compassionate  with  fear."  It  points  to  a  class 
who  are  to  be  dealt  with  in  the  same  way 
as  the  first  class.  Yet  there  is  a  difference 
between  them.  This  third  class  of  persons 
is  more  dangerous  to  those  who  seek  their 
good.  They  too  are  to  be  tried  with  active, 
helpful  pity ;  but  this  is  to  be  done  "  with 
fear."  In  their  case  the  life  is  so  treacherous, 
the  error  so  insidious,  that  their  Christian 
benefactors  incur  grave  risk  in  coming 
to  dose  terras  with  them,  and  require  to 
practise  an  anxious  vigilance  lest  they  be 
themselves  led  astray.  Hating  even  the 
garment  spotted  by  the  flesh.  The  idea  of 
"filthy  garments"  occurs  in  the  same  pas- 
sage of  Zeehariah  already  referred  to,  and 
the  term  "  garment"  (here  the  tunic,  or  inner 
robe)  is  elsewhere  used  in  a  figurative  sense 
(Eev.  iiL  4).  Here  it  points  to  everything 
that  is  in  contact  with  pollution.  The 
clause  seems  to  be  added  in  order  to  give 
greater  emphasis  to  the  need  of  "fear"  in 
dealing  with  men  of  the  kind  in  question. 
Not  only  are  their  impurities  to  be  zealously 
avoided,  but  all  the  accessories  of  these 
impurities — everything,  in  short,  that  is  in 
any  way  connected  with  them.  If  this  i* 
the  case,  then  this  last  is  the  most  danger- 
ous  and  hopeless  of  the  three  clauses  men- 
tioned. They  are  those  "  on  whom  profound 
pity  is  all  that  we  dare  bestow,  and  that  in 
fear  and  trembling,  lest  by  contact  with 
them  we  may  be  brought  within  the  in- 
fluence of  the  deadly  contamination  that 
clings  to  all  their  surroundings"  (Plummer). 
Only  the  pity  which  is  to  be  shown  them  is 
not  mere  feeling,  but  a  compassion  which  im- 
plies some  active,  though  anxious  interest  in 
their  rescue. 

Ver»  24,  25.— The  Epistle  closes  with  a 
doxology  of  a  high  and  solemn  strain, 
resembling  in  some  respects  that  with  which 
the  Epistle  to  the  Romans  concludes,  and 
couched  in  terms  befitting  what  has  just 
been  said  of  danger  and  duty.  Now  unto  him 
that  is  able  to  keep  you  from  faUing.  The 
writer  has  counselled  the  readers  to  keep 
themselves  in  the  love  of  God.  He  has  also 
set  before  them  the  attitude  they  ought  to 
adopt  toward  different  classes,  and  has  not 
eonoealed  the  peril  to  themselves  which  the 


discharge  of  Christian  duty  to  other*  may 
involve.  Eeoognizing  how  short  the  way 
is  that  brotherly  counsel  or  personal  effort 
can  carry  one  in  these  solemn  and  arduous 
obligations,  he  now  reminds  his  readers 
of  a  higher  power  that  is  available  for 
their  help  and  protection,  and  commends 
them  to  that  as  tlieir  best,  their  only 
security.  The  risk  of  falling  or  ttwmhling, 
as  it  rather  means,  is  great.  Only  the 
omnipotence  of  God  can  "keep"  them  from 
it  or  protect  them  against  it,  the  word  for 
"  keeping  "  being  one  which  expresses  the 
idea  of  "guarding."  And  to  present  you 
faultless  before  the  presence  of  hii  glory 
with  exceeding  joy.  The  terms  here  again  are 
exceedingly  vivid,  the  one  which  is  rendered 
"  present "  meaning  to  "  set  one  up "  or 
"make  one  stand,"  and  the  "faultless" 
being  the  adjective  "without  blemisli" 
which  is  applied  to  the  Levitical  offerings  in 
the  Old  Testament,  and  to  Christ  himself  in 
1  Pet.  i.  19.  The  "  glory  "  here  in  view  is 
that  of  the  last  day,  when  he  to  whom  all 
judgment  is  committed  returns  to  execute 
that  judgment  in  his  own  glory  and  that  of 
his  Father  (Luke  ix.  26 ;  Titus  ii.  13).  The 
"  exceeding  joy "  expresses  the  feeling 
with  which  it  shall  be  given  to  the  faithful 
to  meet  that  day.  The  Revised  Version, 
therefore,  more  correctly  renders  it,  "And 
to  set  you  before  the  presence  of  his  glory 
without  blemish  in  exceeding  joy."  Weak 
and  vulnerable  as  they  are,  God's  grace 
is  mighty  to  do  these  two  things  for  them 
— to  protect  them  through  time,  and  at 
the  end  of  time  to  make  them  stand  the 
scrutiny  of  the  Judge  like  men  in  whom  no 
blemish  is  discovered,  and  to  whom  that  day 
brings  exultant  joy.  To  the  only  Ood  oar 
Saviour,  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord,  be 
glory,  majesty,  dominion,  and  power,  before 
all  time,  and  notr,  and  for  evermore  (or, 
unto  all  the  age»y  So  the  Revised  Version 
renders  it,  in  accordance  with  tbe  best- 
authenticated  text.  Documentary  evidence 
renders  it  necessary  to  omit  the  "wise" 
in  the  "only  wise  God"  of  the  Authorized 
Version,  to  insert  the  clause,  "  through  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,"  to  omit  the  "  and " 
before  the  "majesty,"  and  to  adopt  the 
extended  expression  of  duration  in  the 
closing  sentence.  Thus  the  largest  possible 
ascription  of  praise  is  made  to  God.  It  is 
the  ascription  of  an  honour  which  is  con- 
fessed to  belong  to  him  eternally,  before  the 
world  w&b,  as  well  as  in  the  present,  and  on 
to  the  eternity  which  is  yet  to  enter.  This 
is  his  in  his  character  of  Saviour — Preserver 
of  them  that  are  tending  to  fall.  Redeemer 
of  the  weak  and  sinful ;  and  therefore,  it  it 
"  through  Jesus  Christ." 


1—25.1  THE  GENERAL   EPISTLE  OP  JUDB.  17 


H0MILETIC8. 

Vprs.  1,  2. — "  Called,  Moved  in  Qod  the  Father,  preserved  for  Jesus  Ghrist."  Three 
designations  expressing  the  three  great  facts  of  grace  which  make  the  honour  of  God's 
saints.  There  is  the  call — the  act  of  God  which  takes  us  out  of  the  world  of  evil  and 
brings  us  into  the  kingdom  of  Christ.  But  this  call  implies  that  we  are  the  subjects  of 
«n  eternal  love  which  holds  us  within  its  unfailing  arms,  and  of  a  protective  power  which 
keeps  us  for  Ghrist  whose  possession  we  are  designed  to  be.  To  these  three  facts  of  grace 
wo  owe  the  good  which  enriches  our  life.  In  virtue  of  these  the  three  great  blessings 
of  mercy,  peace,  and  love  are  ours  by  right,  and  form  the  proper  subjects  of  prayer  in 
our  behalf.  This  selecting  and  separating  operation  of  the  Sjiirit,  that  infallible  purpose 
of  the  Father's  love,  these  rights  which  the  Son  has  in  us  and  in  consequence  of  which 
we  are  destined  to  be  his  servants  and  his  possession, — these  are  the  immovable  founda- 
tions of  our  security.  But  the  same  high  facts  of  grace  are  likewise  the  measure  of  our 
responsibility,  and  the  irresistible  argument  for  a  life  which  should  be  superior  to 
whatever  evil  may  threaten  or  tempt  it. 

Vers.  3,  4. — Error  not  to  he  trifled  with,  hut  to  he  earnestly  dealt  with.  "  It  wa» 
needful  for  me  to  write  unto  you,  and  exhort  you  that  you  should  earnestly  contend 
for  the  faith,"  etc.  Least  of  all  is  the  kind  of  error  which  acts  upon  the  moral  life  to  be 
lightly  thought  of  or  suffered  to  pass  unchallenged.  One  of  the  most  difficult,  yet  most 
imperative,  of  the  Christian  duties  is  to  admonish  and  fortify  brethren  who  are  ready 
to  yield  to  the  seductions  of  error.  The  bond  of  a  "  common  salvation  "  of  which  we  are 
partakers  together,  pledges  us  to  the  discharge  of  such  duty.  The  "  faith  "  is  the  deposit 
of  truth.  The  message  of  Christ  is  spirit  and  life.  But  the  new  spirit  and  the  new  life, 
in  which  the  power  of  his  gospel  consists,  rise  out  of  the  facts  and  truths  of  revelation, 
and  work  through  these.  To  the  Church  universal,  the  whole  body  of  believers,  has 
been  committed,  therefore,  a  sacred  deposit  of  truth,  here  called  ths  faith,  embracing 
evangelical  history,  doctrine,  and  precept.  This  body  of  truth  is  a  permanent  trust. 
It  has  survived  the  times  of  the  Church's  greatest  declension,  and  by  it  she  has  lived. 
It  is  her  chief  advantage  and  distinction,  as  the  possession  of  the  "  oracles  of  God  "  was 
the  chief  advantage  of  the  Jew  over  the  Gentile  (Eom.  iii.  2).  It  is  something 
delivered  to  us,  not  elaborated  by  our  own  thought.  How  great  the  responsibility 
attaching  to  our  stewardship  therein  1  The  trustee's  duty  is  to  keep  this  deposit  intact, 
to  protect  it  against  corruption,  and  to  hand  it  on  to  others. 

Vers.  5 — 7. — The  invasion  of  the  Chwreh  hy  error  is  no  accident  or  surprise.  "  I  will 
therefore  put  you  in  remembrance,  though  ye  once  knew  this,"  etc.  It  is  not  to  be 
taken  "  as  though  some  strange  thing  happened "  (1  Pet.  iv.  12).  Faith  is  apt  to  be 
staggered  or  darkened  by  it.  Yet  it  is  to  be  anticipated.  It  has  been  the  subject  of 
prophecy.  It  is  provided  for  in  the  Divine  guidance  of  the  Church,  and  it  works  to 
its  own  retribution.  The  history  of  God's  ways,  too,  is  the  best  corrective  for  faith's 
perplexities  and  fears  in  presence  of  the  march  of  error.  The  history  shows  that 
what  is,  is  only  that  which  also  has  been.  The  dread  things  in  its  record  bear  witnees 
to  the  fact  that  victory  is  not  on  the  side  of  evil,  but  that  there  is  a  defeat  pre- 
determined for  it — a  penalty  which  follows  it  by  a  certain  law.  God's  terrible  deeds 
in  righteousness  attest  the  temporal  punishment  of  sin.  The  Old  Testament  history, 
in  which  these  are  registered,  is  the  nurse  of  a  faith  which  should  be  humble,  strong, 
courageous,  hopeful.  To  neglect  it  is  certain  loss.  It  is  gain  to  be  "  put  in  remem- 
brance" of  it.  "Them  that  believed  not"— the  explanation  both  of  the  sin,  and  of 
the  destruction  of  the  generation  in  the  wilderness.  So  the  evil  heart  of  unbelief  is  the 
final  secret  of  guilt  and  error,  the  hidden  laboratory  of  all  perversions  of  truth  and  all 
depravations  of  the  moral  life,  the  subtle  inspiration  of  enmity  to  God  and  defiance 
to  law. 

Yerg.  8 11. — ITie  mutual  dependence  ofhelief  and  life.    "  Likewise  also  these  filthy 

dreamers  defile  the  flesh,"  etc.     Religion  is  the  strength  and  security  of  morality. 
Morality  is  the  outcome  and  flower  of  religion.    There  must  be  some  relation,  therefore 

JCDB.  • 


18  THE  GENEEAL  EPISTLE  OP  JUDE.  [1—25. 

between  the  truth  of  the  religious  belief  and  the  purity  and  elevation  of  the  moral  life. 
A  doctrine  of  God  and  things  Divine  which  becomes  mistaken,  imperfect,  or  corrupt, 
cannot  but  affect  the  conduct  which  a  man  allows  himself.  A  life  of  licence  is  the 
natural  result  of  a  denial  of  God  and  Christ.  Morals  are  imperilled  and  impaired  as 
spiritual  truth  is  scorned  or  depraved.  The  abuse  of  grace  is  the  most  fatal  canker 
in  the  Church.  The  corru|)tion  of  the  best  is  the  worst.  The  angel  that  falls  becomes 
a  devil.  The  grace  of  God,  corrupted,  is  turned  tc  lasciviousness.  The  liberty  of  the 
gospel,  when  perverted,  becomes  an  occasion  to  the  flesh.  Humility  is  the  true  note  of 
dignity.  The  liighest  natures  are  the  most  modest  and  self-restrained ;  the  lowest  and 
most  ignorant,  the  rashest  and  the  most  self-willed.  Reverence  is  the  safeguard  both 
of  faith  and  of  virtue.  The  latest  developments  of  error  and  unbelief  are  no  novelty. 
The  corruptions  of  Jude's  time  were  but  the  corruptions  of  ancient  days.  The  evUs 
which  crept  into  the  primitive  Church  of  Christ  were  but  the  renewals  of  the  "way  of 
Cain,"  the  "error  of  Balaam,"  the  "gainsaying  of  Korah."  Sin  only  repeats  itself  as 
it  perpetuates  itself.  Under  many  new  forms  we  recognize  only  the  old  sins  of  envy, 
avarice,  and  pride. 

Vers.  12, 13. — A  perfect  Church  a  vain  expectation.  "  These  are  spots  in  your  feasts 
of  charity,"  etc.  The  teaching  of  our  Lord's  great  parables  gives  us  no  warrant  to  look 
for  a  perfect  Church  till  the  end.  Popular  ideas  of  the  purity  of  the  primitive  Church  are 
far  from  being  borne  out  by  fact.  The  New  Testament  writings  themselves,  especially 
the  Epistles  to  the  Corinthians,  the  Pastoral  Epistles,  Jude,  2  Peter,  and  the  Apocalypse, 
indicate  with  the  utmost  plainness  how  mixed  the  early  Churches  were,  and  to  what 
an  extent  they  suffered  from  grievous  and  varied  evils.  Neither  have  we  any  scriptural 
warrant  for  setting  up  impracticable  terms  of  admission  to  the  Christian  Church,  or 
impracticable  conditions  of  discipline  within  it.  The  facility  with  which  the  most 
sacred  usages  and  ordinances  admit  of  abuse,  e.g.  the  perversion  of  the  simple  and 
beautiful  institution  of  the  love-feasts,  shows  the  necessity  of  jealous  watchfulness  over 
ecclesiastical  practice,  and  the  wisdom  of  denying  ourselves  the  most  appropriate  forms 
for  the  expression  of  Christian  life  and  worship,  when  these  become  misunderstood, 
lifeless,  or  associated  with  evil.  The  most  fatal  form  of  selfishness  is  the  selfishness 
which  takes  advantage  of  reliyon,  and  assumes  the  cloak  of  spirituality.  Mark  Jude's 
lurid  picture  of  the  brood  of  deceits,  sensualities,  and  blasphemies  that  spring  from 
it.  Study,  too,  his  equally  lurid  picture  of  the  degradation,  the  emptiness,  the  death, 
in-life  of  such  a  life — the  treacherous  hopes  like  rainless  clouds  with  which  it  beguiles 
and  embitters,  the  barrenness  worse  than  that  of  exhausted  autumnal  trees  to  which  it 
is  doomed,  the  shame  which  is  the  issue  of  its  passionate  licence. — There  is  a  double 
punishment  of  fleshly  sins.  Their  retribution  comes  in  the  penal  law  which  works  in 
nature  and  makes  them  in  part  their  own  avengers  in  time.  It  comes,  too,  in  the 
nameless  awards  of  eternity,  which  are  in  reserve. 

Vers.  14 — 19. — Future  Judgment  an  anticipation  of  nature  and  a  truth  of  revelation. 
"  To  execute  judgment  upon  all,"  etc.  Its  declared  era  is  the  Lord's  advent ;  its  declared 
functions  are  those  of  correction  and  retribution.  "Great  swelling  words" — the 
natural  language  of  the  errorist  and  the  deceiver.  "Very  many  such  words  are 
recorded  in  Church  history,  and  that,  too,  as  spoken  in  justification  of  unbridled  lust. 
Some  of  the  more  openly  abominable  belong  to  the  Gnostic  and  other  antinomian 
heretics  of  early  times,  when  men  were  taught  that  by  faith  and  what  was  called 
knowledge  they  were  raised  above  all  restraints  of  law  and  obligations  of  morality — 
became,  in  fact,  incapable  of  sin,  and  especially  so  superior  to  matter  and  all  material 
influences  that  no  degradation  or  pollution  of  the  body  could  possibly  affect  them  in 
any  way  whatever,  any  more  than  the  ocean  is  defiled  by  what  you  throw  into  it. 
The  later  centuries  also  supply  abundant  illustrations  of  the  text,  as  in  the  arrogant 
pretensions  of  popery,  the  extravagances  of  the  libertines  in  the  Reformation,  and  the 
Mormon  and '  free  love '  and  spiritualistic  ravings  of  our  own  day"  (Lillie).  "Mockers" 
— the  class  most  impervious  to  grace,  the  most  hopeless  to  reclaim.  The  rise  of  such 
is  the  most  deadly  symptom  of  evil  in  the  Church.  But  the  sins  of  discontent  with 
providence,  immoral  licence,  swelling  vanity,  cringing  servility,  and  malignant  scoffing 
are  near  of  kin.    "  The  lack  of  the  Spirit "  is  the  last  word  in  the  description  of  impiety. 


1—25.]  THE  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OF  JUDB.  1» 

The  grace  of  that  Spirit  is  the  Bole  guarantee  of  the  higher  life.    The  loss  of  that  Spirit 
is  the  way  of  death. 

Vers.  20,  21. — The  law  of  Christian  safety — to  keep  ourselves  in  the  lovt  of  Ood. 
"  Keep  yourselves  in  the  love  of  God,"  etc.  The  soul's  one  asylum  and  retreat  is  the 
love  of  God  revealed  in  Jesus  Christ.  The  act  of  grace  which  calls  us  to  the  Christian 
life  introduces  us  to  the  knowledge  of  that  love,  and  brings  us  within  its  pavilion.  The 
sum  of  all  subsequent  Christian  duty  is  to  be  true  to  it;  the  sum  of  all  Christian  wisdom 
is  to  suffer  nothing  to  turn  us  away  from  it.  But  our  continuance  within  it  demands 
that  we  persevere  in  building  up  the  structure  of  a  holy  life  on  the  foundation  of  the 
faith  given  us ;  that  we  nourish  and  strengthen  that  life  by  prayer,  and  that  we  keep 
the  eye  of  expectation  on  the  future.  The  Christian  life,  too,  is  necessarily  a  progressive 
life.  Growth  is  its  security  against  decay,  and  its  protection  against  temptation.  And 
the  prayer  that  nourishes  and  strengthens  is  prayer  in  the  Holy  Ghost  —  prayer 
prompted  by  him,  directed  in  its  subjects  and  its  frames  by  him,  interpreted  in 
its  deep  and  unutterable  longings  by  him.  "  So  great  is  the  sloth  and  coldness  of 
our  carnal  nature,"  says  Calvin,  "  that  no  one  can  pray  as  he  ought  unless  moved 
by  the  Spirit  of  God;  even  as  we  are  so  prone  to  distrust  and  fear  that  no  one 
dare  call  God  '  Father '  save  by  the  dictation  of  the  same  Spirit.  Hence  comes  the 
desire,  hence  the  earnestness  and  vehemence,  hence  the  activity,  hence  the  confidence 
of  obtaining,  hence,  finally,  those  unutterable  groanings  of  which  St.  Paul  speaks. 
Therefore  not  without  cause  does  Jude  teach  them  that  none  can  pray  as  he  ought 
save  by  the  guidance  of  the  Spirit."  The  judicial  decisions  of  the  future  are  com- 
mitted to  the  Son  of  man.  The  hope  of  mercy  in  the  day  of  his  coming  is  one  of  the 
gifts  of  the  regenerating  and  sanctifying  Spirit.  That  hope  is  the  light  which  brightens 
the  believer's  path  in  the  darkened  present,  and  makes  him  proof  against  the  seductions 
of  sin  and  error.  The  expectation  of  that  mercy  is  the  inspiration  of  his  courage ;  it  is 
the  call  from  beyond  the  stars  which  makes  it  easy  for  him  to  hold  by  the  love  and 
trath  of  God,  and  bid  away  whatever  would  tempt  him  to  depart  from  these. 

Vers.  22,  23. — The  law  of  Christian  duty  to  others  in  times  of  peril  and  evil.  "And 
of  some  have  compassion,"  etc.  There  is  a  duty  to  all,  but  the  duty  is  not  the  same  to 
each.  Christian  v?isdom  must  decide  how  to  distinguish  between  cases,  and  to  act  in 
each  80  as  at  once  to  seek  the  good  of  others  and  to  keep  ourselves  pjire.  "Different 
courses  are  to  be  pursued  according  to  their  different  circumstances,  characters,  and 
dispositions.  Some  must  be  dealt  with  sternly,  even  as  that  Hymeneus  and  Alexander, 
whom  St.  Paul  '  delivereii  unto  Satan,  that  they  may  learn  not  to  blaspheme.'  Some 
may  be  saved  by  promptness  and  decision  even  from  the  extremity  of  danger.  Some, 
while  they  awaken  compassion,  must  yet  be  dealt  with  tremblingly,  lest  he  who  seeks 
to  save  them  himself  suffer  from  the  contact.  Such  is  obviously  the  part  of  wisdom. 
An  insight  into  character,  and  a  ready  tact  in  adapting  one's  efforts  to  its  various 
phases,  is  an  important  qualification  in  those  who  would  win  souls  from  the  error  of 
their  ways.    AH  souls  are  to  be  cared  for ;  but  not  all  by  the  same  methods  "  (Gardiner). 

Vers.  24,  25. — Tlie  grace  of  Ood  the  believer's  first  and  last  dependence.  "  Now  unto 
him  that  is  able  to  keep  you,"  etc.  Only  his  power  can  protect  usfrom  our  own  weakness 
and  sin  and  error,  and  make  us  capable  of  standing,  and  purify  us  for  the  manifestation 
of  the  great  day.  But  that  grace  is  sufficient,  and  it  is  at  hand  to  give  success  to  our 
own  efforts  in  keeping  ourselves  in  the  asylum  of  God's  love.  "  Full  of  consolation," 
says  the  writer  immediately  quoted, "  must  have  been  the  thought  in  days  when  danger 
pressed  on  every  side,  and  ungodly  men,  bringing  with  them  all  error  of  doctrine  and 
viciousness  of  life,  had  crept  into  the  very  fold  whither  the  faithful  had  turned  for 
safety.  Equally  comforting  must  it  prove  in  an  age  when  the  name  of  Christ  is  madi 
the  cloak  for  strani;e  oppositions  to  his'  teaching  and  his  example,  and  when  in  th« 
wide  wilderness  of  error  it  is  difficult  to  discern  the  narrow  pathway  of  truth," 


20  THE  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OP  JUDE.  [1—25 


HOMILIES  BY  VAEIOtJS  AUTHORS. 

Yen.  1,  2. — Avthorship  and  salutation.  This  brief  Epistle  is  remarkable  for  its 
triple  order  of  ideas,  carried  through  to  the  very  end.  The  first  instance  occurs  in  the 
account  the  author  gives  of  himself — "  Jude,  a  servant  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  brother 
of  James." 

L  AuTHOKSHiP.  1.  Who  was  Judet  There  are  two  persons  of  the  name  repre- 
sented as  relatives  of  James.  'J'here  is  Jude  the  apostle,  brother  or  son  of  James  the 
martyr  (Luke  vi.  16 ;  Acts  i.  13),  who  is  also  called  Lebbsus ;  and  there  is  this  Jude, 
the  brother  of  James — that  is  James  the  Just,  the  brother  of  the  Lord  (G-al.  i.  19), 
president  of  the  council  at  Jerusalem  (Acts  xv.  13).  Ihe  author  of  this  Kpistle  was, 
therefore,  a  younger  brother  of  our  Lord  and  a  younger  son  of  Joseph  and  Mary.  He 
was  not  an  apostle,  else  he  would  probably  have  called  himself  so.  He  did  not 
believe  in  our  Lord  during  his  ministry  (John  vii.  5),  but  became  a  convert  after  the 
Resurrection  (Acts  i.  14).  2.  Bis  official  position.  He  was  "a  servant  of  Jesus 
Christ,"  not  merely  in  the  larger  sense  in  which  all  saints  are  so,  but  in  the  special 
sense  of  his  oiScial  relation  to  the  Church  as  an  evangelist.  (1)  It  is  an  honour  to  be 
in  the  service  of  such  a  Master.  (2)  Our  service  ought  to  be  (a)  to  him  alone  (Matt, 
vi.  24) ;  (6)  and  to  be  a  diligent,  cheerful,  and  constant  service.  (3)  Those  who  would 
lead  others  to  serve  Christ  must  themselves  set  the  example.  3.  His  relationship  to 
James.  Jude  mentions  this  fact:  (1)  Partly  that  he  may  distinguish  himself  from 
others  like  Judas  the  apostle  and  Judas  Iscariot.  (2)  Partly  to  substantiate  his  claim 
to  a  hearing  from  his  relationship  to  one  more  celebrated  and  better  known  in  the 
Church ;  James  was  at  once  "  the  Lord's  brother,"  **  a  pillar  in  the  Church  "  (Gal.  ii.  9), 
and  a  saintly  character.  (3)  Partly  as  implying  an  agreement  in  doctrine  between  James 
and  himself.  (4)  Had  Jude  been  an  apostle,  he  would  hardly  have  mentioned  this 
relationship,  inasmuch  as  he  could  have  asserted  a  much  stronger  claim.  (S)  It  may 
be  asked — Why  did  he  not  rather  mention  his  relationship  to  Christ  himself?  (a)  He 
may  have  been  led  by  religious  feeling,  like  James  himself  in  his  Epistle,  to  omit  all 
reference  to  this  matter,  (b)  The  ascension  of  Christ  had  altered  the  character  of  this 
earthly  relationship,  (c)  Such  a  course  would  have  been  inconsistent  with  the  spirit 
and  teaching  of  our  Lord  himself,  who  taught  that  those  who  did  his  will  were  more 
nearly  allied  to  him  than  earthly  kin  (Luke  xi.  27,  28). 

II.  The  persons  to  whom  the  Epistle  was  addkebsed.  "To  them  that  are 
called,  beloved  in  God  the  Father,  and  preserved  for  Jesus  Christ."  Here,  again,  we 
have  a  triple  order  of  ideas.  He  addresses  true  saints  of  God.  1.  They  were  called. 
This  is  the  familiar  Pauline  description  of  the  saints.  They  are  called  (1)  out  of 
darkness  into  God's  marvellous  light  (1  Pet.  ii.  9).  (2)  The  calling  is  "  according  to 
his  purpose  "  (Rom.  viii.  28).  (3)  Not  according  to  works  (2  Tim.  L  9).  (4)  It  is  a  high 
calling,  (5)  a  holy  calling ;  and  therefore  saints  ought  to  live  suitably  thereto.  2.  T/iey 
were  beloved  in  Ood  the  Father.  This  is  a  unique  expression  in  the  New  Testament. 
Tiie  tense  of  the  participle  implies  the  love  as  a  continuously  existing  fact.  The 
Father  is  the  Source  of  all  love-experiences,  the  sphere  in  which  love  is  displayed ;  for 
God  is  love.  3.  They  were  preserved  for  Jesus  Christ.  (1)  Their  preservation  does 
not  depend  upon  their  own  holiness  or  effort.  (2)  It  depends  on  God's  purpose,  on  his 
calling,  on  his  grace.  He  is  able  to  "  keep  them  from  falling  "  (ver.  24).  Christ  shall 
"confirm  them  to  the  end"  (1  Cor.  i.  8);  no  one  shall  pluck  them  out  of  his  hand 
(John  X.  29) ;  their  seed  abideth  in  them  (1  John  iii.  9) ;  the  fear  of  the  Lord  in  then- 
hearts  shall  keep  them  from  departing  from  hira  (Jer.  xxxii.  40);  they  are  "kept  by 
the  power  of  God  through  faith  unto  salvation  "  (1  Pet.  i.  5).  (3)  They  are  preserved 
(o)  from  the  curse  of  the  Law  (Gal.  iii.  13)  ;  (6)  from  the  evil  of  the  world  (John  xvii. 
15) ;  (c)  from  falling  (ver.  24) ;  (d)  from  the  touch  of  the  evil  one  (1  John  v.  18). 
(4)  They  are  preserved  for  the  day  of  Christ's  coming.  That  signifies  their  steadfast 
perseverance  till  death.  The  Apostle  Paul  placed  his  soul,  as  an  immortal  deposit,  in 
Christ's  hands,  with  the  full  persuasion  that  it  would  be  safely  kept  "  till  that  day  " 
(2  Tim.  i.  12).  The  saints  are  kept  for  the  glory  of  Immanuel  in  his  everlasting 
kingdom. 

IIL  Thb  SALUTATION.      "Mer3y   unto  you  and  peace  and   love   be  multiplied.' 


1—25.]  TUB  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OP  JUDE.  21 


Another  triplet.  1.  Mercy  is  from  the  Father.  It  is  his  distinguishing  attriVute. 
"  His  mercy  endureth  for  ever."  There  is  forgiving  mercy,  providing  mercy,  rcctrain- 
ing  mercy,  restoring  mercy,  crowning  mercy.  He  has  "  bowels  of  mercy."  He 
"  delights  to  show  mercy."  2.  Peace  is  throvgh  the  Son.  (1)  He  is  our  Peace  (fiph. 
ii.  14),  as  "  the  chastisement  of  our  peace  was  upon  him  "  (Isa.  liii.  5).  (2)  He  gives 
peace  (John  xiv.  27).  (3)  He  preached  peace  (Eph.  ii.  17).  Therefore  great  shall  be  the 
peace  of  God's  children.  3.  Love  is  from  the  IIo!y  Ghost.  He  sheds  it  abroad  in  the 
heart  (Rom.  v.  5).  There  is  "  a  love  of  the  Spirit "  (Rom  xv.  30).  The  Christian  has 
experience  of  love  objective  and  subjective.  4.  Jude  prays  that  these  graces  may  he 
multiplied.  (1)  This  implies  that  saints  are  till  death  incomplete  in  their  graces. 
There  never  will  come  a  time  in  which  this  prayer  may  not  be  offered  for  saints  in  the 
flesh.  (2)  This  prayer  has  an  eye  to  the  glory  of  God  as  well  as  to  the  comfort  »,nd 
peace  of  believers.  (3)  The  Lord  is  always  willing  to  impart  his  best  gifts.  (4)  He 
has  abundance  of  grace  for  all  his  children,  and  for  all  the  exigencies  of  their  life. — T.  C. 

Ver.  3. — The  purpose  and  occasion  of  this  Epistle.  It  was  to  exhort  the  saints  to 
steadfastness  in  contending  for  the  truth  which  was  then  threatened  by  an  insidious 
party  of  antinomians  who  had  entered  the  Church.  Love  prompted  the  writing  of  the 
Epistle,  as  we  may  infer  from  the  term  "  beloved  "  by  which  the  author  addresses  his 
readers. 

I.  His  oonoebn  fob  theib  wblfabb.  "  Beloved,  while  I  was  giving  all  diligence 
to  write  unto  you  of  our  common  salvation,  I  was  constrained  to  write  unto  you." 
1.  It  was  a  ready,  prompt,  entire  diligence,  because  there  was  danger  in  delay,  and  the 
constraint  of  love  was  upon  him.  2.  It  is  right  that  ministers  should  he  diligent  about 
the  most  important  concerns,  the  interests  of  truth  and  the  welfare  of  the  flock.  3.  Jude 
showed  his  concern  for  the  saints  by  committing  his  thoughts  to  writing.  (1)  Writing 
gave  them  p-rmanence.  Words  pass  away,  but  writing  remains.  "This  shall  be 
written  for  the  generation  to  come."  (2)  Writing  secured  a  wider  circle  of  hearers. 
Every  age  of  the  Church,  as  well  as  the  first,  has  been  benefited  by  this  brief  letter 
of  Jude.     (3)  It  is  a  great  sin  to  undervalue  the  written  Word  of  God. 

II.  The  impobtancb  op  the  subject  of  his  weiting.  "  Our  common  salvation." 
1.  The  nature  of  this  salvation.  (1)  It  is  the  deliverance  of  man  from  the  guilt  and 
power  of  sin  and  the  complete  redemption  of  his  soul  and  body  in  the  day  of  judgment. 
(2)  It  begins  in  the  present  life.  (3)  God  has  given  us  his  Word  to  show  the  way  of 
salvation.  2.  It  is  the  common  salvation  of  all  saints.  "Our  common  salvation." 
(1)  Christ,  the  Saviour,  is  common  to  all  the  saints.  (2)  There  is  but  one  common 
way  to  heaven.  There  is  but  "  one  faith."  (3)  The  blessings  of  salvation  are  common 
to  all  believers,  Jew  and  Gentile.  (4)  It  is  a  salvation  of  which  the  early  Christians 
had  an  experimental  knowledge ;  it  is  "  our  common  salvation." 

III.  The  necessity  fob  his  writing.  "  I  was  constrained  to  write  unto  you." 
This  arose :  1.  From  the  evil  doctrines  of  the  antinomians.  2.  From  their  subtle  arts. 
3.  From  the  too  great  readiness  of  the  saints  to  be  deceived.  4.  The  exposure  of  seducers 
is  a  necessary  part  of  the  ministry. 

IV.  The  katube  of  the  bxhobtation  Jude  addeessed  to  the  saints.  "  Exhort- 
ing you  to  contend  earnestly  for  the  faith  which  was  once  for  all  delivered  unto  the 
saints."  Christians  must  suffer  the  word  of  exhortation,  which  is  an  excellent  help  to 
religious  steadfastness.  1.  The  matter  to  be  contended  for.  (1)  It  is  the  doctrine  of 
faith, or  the  truth  which  is  to  be  received  in  order  to  our  salvation.  It  is  called  "  faith" 
because  it  is  the  instrument  used  by  the  Holy  Spirit  to  work  faith.  (2)  It  is  the  faith 
"  delivered  "  by  God,  not  discovered  by  man.  The  natural  man  can  no  more  perceive 
than  he  can  discover  the  things  which  are  of  God  (1  Cor.  ii.  24).  (3)  It  is  the  faith 
delivered  "once  for  all."  No  other  faith  will  ever  be  given.  No  new  doctrines  are  to 
be  added  to  the  circle  of  faith,  though  the  truth  may  be  cast  in  new  fonfts,  and 
shaped  according  to  the  intellectual  and  spiritual  exigencies  of  each  age.  Therefore 
(a)  it  is  a  great  sin  to  despise  the  faith  delivered  to  us ;  (6)  we  ought  to  be  thank- 
ful for  it;  (c)  we  ought  to  receive  and  obey  it  in  the  love  of  it;  (d)  we  ought  to 
guard  it  against  heretical  perversions.  (4)  It  is  a  sacred  deposit  placed  in  the  hands 
of  trustees — "  delivered'to  the  saints.*'  Not  to  holy  prophets  and  apostles  merely, 
but  to  all  saints,  even  in  ages  destitute  of  prophets  and  apostles,    (a)  It  is  a  solemn 


n  THB  GENBBAL  EPISTLE  OF  JIJDE.  [1— 2IL 

trait,  inTolring  great  tesponsibilities,  (&)  The  saints  are  to  keep  the  faith  for  their 
own  aalTation  and  comfort,  (c)  They  are  to  keep  it  for  generations  to  come,  (d) 
How  much  is  the  world  indebted  to  the  saints !  (e)  The  trustees  of  the  faith  ought 
to  have  holy  hands  and  holy  hearts.  2.  2%e  duty  of  the  saints  to  cotitend  for  the 
faith.  This  duty  implies  (1)  the  importance  of  this  faith,  for  it  is  the  best  things  that 
Satan  is  most  anxious  to  destroy ;  (2)  the  presence  of  adversaries  seeking  to  corrupt  o< 
destroy  it;  (3)  the  need  of  Divine  strength  for  contending  for  it  with  eifect;  (4)  the 
various  ways  in  which  the  saints  are  to  contend  for  it — (o)  by  refuting  and  convincing 
gainsayers,  (6)  by  praying  for  its  success,  (c)  by  confessing  it  boldly  before  men,  (d)  lay 
mutual  exhortation,  (e)  by  holy  example,  (/)  by  suffering  for  the  truth. — T.  0. 

Ver.  4. — Beasons  to  enforce  the  duty  of  contending  for  the  faith.  The  principal 
reason  is  the  presence  of  antinomian  errorists  in  the  Church. 

I.  The  bntbancb  of  wicked  errorists  ikto  thb  Church.  "  For  there  are  certain 
men  crept  in  privily,  even  they  who  w^re  of  old  set  forth  unto  this  condemnation." 
1.  These  men  are  not  named,  either  because  Jude  did  not  care  to  give  them  the  celebrity 
their  vanity  might  have  desired,  or  because  their  names  were  already  known  to  the 
saints.  2.  It  is  not  possible  for  man  to  guard  the  Church  against  the  entrance  of  such 
mm.  Even  apostles  themselves  could  not  keep  the  Church  pure.  3.  The  entrance  of 
errorists  is  mually  effected  by  hypocritical  arts.  They  are  "  false  apostles,"  "  deceitful 
workers,"  "deceiving  the  hearts  of  the  simple,"  "drawing  many  disciples  after  them," 
"  false  teachers  privily  bringing  in  damnable  heresies."  They  usually  conceal  their  real 
opinions ;  they  mix  wholesome  truth  with  destructive  errors ;  and  they  preach  doctrines 
palatable  to  the  corrupt  nature  of  man.  They  usually  effect  an  air  of  novelty  or  origi- 
nality in  their  teaching.  The  best  Christians  may  therefore  be  sometimes  mistaken  in 
such  seducers.  4.  The  presence  of  such  men  in  the  Church  does  not  destroy  the  being 
of  the  Church.  6.  Their  destructive  influence  and  the  retribution  that  awaits  them 
were  predicted  beforehand.  For  "  they  were  of  old  set  forth  unto  this  condemnation." 
Not  in  the  prophecies  by  Peter  and  Paul,  but  in  the  Old  Testament ;  for  the  phrase,  "  erf 
old,"  refers  to  something  in  history.  The  condemnation  is  that  illustrated  by  the 
examples  recorded  in  the  following  verses.  6.  Jt  is  needful  that  Christians  should  be 
on  the  watch  against  the  entrance  and  the  influence  of  wicked  errorists. 

II.  The  charactbb  of  thesb  men.  "  Ungodly  men,  turning  the  grace  of  our  God 
into  lasciviousness,  and  denying  our  only  Master  and  Lord,  Jesus  Christ."  1.  They  were 
godless  men.  (1)  They  denied  to  God  the  honour  due  to  him.  They  lived  without 
relation  to  God.  They  were  practically  "  without  God  in  the  world."  "  In  their  works 
they  denied  him."  "  They  called  not  upon  the  Lord."  (2)  They  gave  to  the  world, 
to  sin,  to  folly,  the  allegiance  that  was  due  to  God.  They  "  served  the  creature  more 
than  the  Creator."  (3)  They  sought  to  honour  God  in  a  wrong  manner.  They  wor- 
shipped not  according  to  his  Word;  and  their  service  was  selfish,  or  partial,  or  incon- 
stant, or  profane.  (4)  Ungodliness  leads  to  all  wicked  practices.  2.  They  perverted 
the  doctrines  of  grace.  "  Turning  the  grace  of  our  God  into  lasciviousness ; "  arguing,  as 
Trapp  says,  from  mercy  to  liberty,  which  is  the  devil's  logic.  (1)  The  true  design  of 
the  grace  of  God.  It  is  that "  denying  ungodliness  and  worldly  lusts,  we  may  live  soberly, 
lighteously,  godly,  in  this  world. '  As  the  free  gift  of  God,  our  election  and  our  calling 
being  both  of  grace,  we  are  twund  to  see  that  we  receive  it  not  in  vain  (2  Cor.  vi.  1). 
(2)  The  perversion  of  this  grace  is  effected  (a)  by  men  "  using  their  liberty  for  a  cloak 
of  maliciousness"  (1  Pet.  ii.  16),  "for  an  occasion  to  the  flesh  "  (0^1.  v.  13),  by  "  con- 
tinuing in  sin  that  grace  may  abound  "  (Bom.  vL  1) ;  (6)  by  rejecting  the  Law  as  a  rule 
of  life ;  (c)  by  abusing  their  liberty  to  the  offence  of  weak  consciences.  (3)  The  heinous- 
ness  of  such  conduct,  (o)  It  implies  the  sin  of  hypocrisy.  (6)  It  is  a  profound 
dishonour  to  God  and  his  doctrine,  (c)  It  argues  a  boundless  ingratitude,  (d)  It  ij 
almost  the  most  hopeless  of  all  sins  against  God.  3.  IHiey  denied  Jesus  Christ. 
Wearing  the  livery  of  Christ,  they  were  all  the  while  vassals  of  the  devil.  (1)  Christ  is 
the  only  Lord  and  Master  of  believers.  This  Lordship  is  based  upon  the  idea  of  pro* 
perty.  We  are  the  Lord's,  whether  livii^  or  dead  (Bom.  xiv.  9).  (a)  He  gives  laws 
to  lus  servants.  (6)  He  binds  them  lovingly  to  obedience,  (c)  He  rewards  them 
Mcording  to  their  service,  (d)  He  has  power  both  to  give  and  to  take  away,  (e)  There 
is  no  escape  for  his  enemies.    We  may,  therefore,  infer :  (a)  Hew  serious  an  error  it  is 


1— 25.J  THE  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OF  JUDB.  k* 

to  deny  Cliri«t'B  Deity  I  (;8)  How  foolish  to  trust  in  any  other  Saviour !  (7)  How  blessed 
•re  believers  in  possessing  such  a  Lorrl !  (2)  These  errorists  denied  this  Lord. 
(a)  Dootrinally ; — perhaps,  like  the  Gnostics,  they  denied  his  true  Deity  and  his  true 
humanity.  (6)  Practically,  (o)  by  opposing  his  gospel ;  (i8)  by  apostasy  from  his 
truth ;  (7)  by  a  wicked  and  lewd  life.  These  men,  by  rejecting  Christ's  authority 
as  well  as  his  salvation,  "  forsook  their  own  mercy." — T.  C. 

Ver.  5. — First  example  of  Divine  vengeance.  Jude  then  proceeds  to  give  three 
instances  of  this'  sort— the  first  being  that  of  the  unbelieving  Israelites  in  the 
wildemegs. 

I.  The  keobssitt  of  kbmindino  saints  of  familiar  ScniPTcrnE  facts.  "Now 
I  desire  to  put  you  in  remembrance,  though  ye  know  all  things  once  for  all,  how  that 
the  Lord,  having  saved  a  people  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt,  afterwards  destroyed  them 
that  believed  not."  1.  Every  private  Christian  ought  to  be  well  acquainted  with  the 
Scriptures.  Jude  concedes  that  those  he  addressed  were  so.  The  Bible  is  a  book 
for  the  people  as  well  as  for  ministers.  Knowledge  is  highly  commendable  in  a  Christian 
(Eom.  XT.  14),  as  well  as  goodness.  2.  The  best  of  people  need  to  have  their  pure  minds 
stirred  wp  by  way  of  remembrance ;  for  memory  is  too  oltea  "  like  the  sieve  which  holds 
the  bran  and  lets  the  flour  go." 

II.  The  saints  eemindbd  of  a  famous  dblivbrancb.  "I  removed  his  shoulder 
from  the  burden,  and  his  hands  were  delivered  from  the  pots"  (Ps.  Ixxxi.  6).  1.  No 
difficulties  could  hinder  Israel's  deliverance  from  Egypt.  2.  Israel  went  down  to  Egypt 
a  family,  and  emerged  out  of  it  a  nation.  3.  This  nation  carried  the  destinies  of  the 
world  in  its  bosom. 

III.  Thb  baikts  reminded  of  a  obeat  dbsteuction.  The  Lord  dealt  first  in  mercy, 
then  afterward  in  judgment.  1.  Destruction  overtook  the  Israelites  from  plague,  fire, 
serpents,  earthquake,  §word.  The  wilderness  was  strewn  besides  with  the  carcases  of 
aU  except  those  of  twenty  years  old  and  under,  who  alone  were  privileged  to  enter  the 
land  of  Canaan.  2,  'J%is  destruction  was  a  disappointment  of  high  hopes  as  well  as  a 
fall  from  a  high  position  of  privilege.  3.  Yet  it  was  but  partial.  The  stock  of  Israel  wag 
spared.  And  the  doom  was  long  deferred,  so  as  to  give  more  than  a  generation  of  time 
for  repentance.  4.  The  Lord's  Judgment  in  thi»  ease^oves  that  punishment  cannot  be 
averted  by  privileges  abused. 

IV.  The  baihts  beminded  of  thb  cause  op  this  destruction.  It  was  unbelier. 
"  They  could  not  enter  in  because  of  unbelief  "  (Heb.  iv.  6).  1.  Difficulties  soon  dis- 
cover the  untrustful  heart.  2.  Unbelievers  forsake  their  own  mercies,  and  are  their  own 
worst  enemies.  3.  There  is  no  folly  like  unbelief.  "  Blessed  are  they  that  have  not 
seen,  and  yet  have  believed."    4,  2%«  end  of  vmkelief  is  utter  and  absolute  destruction. 

— T.a 

Ver.  6. — Second  exampit  of  Divine  vengeance.    This  is  the  case  of  the  fallen  angels. 

I.  The  bxistbncb  of  evil  angels.  It  is  expressly  asserted  in  Scripture.  There  is 
no  greater  moral  difficulty  in  understanding  the  existence  of  such  beings  than  in 
uaderstanding  the  existence  of  evil  men.  They  are  spoken  of  as  "  angels  that  sinned" 
(2  Pet.  iL  4),  as  devils  "  who  enter  into  men  "  (Luke  viii.  30),  as  beings  to  be  judged  by 
the  saints  (1  Cor.  vi.  3). 

n.  Thbib  ebvolt  and  defection  from  God.  "  And  angels  which  kept  not  their 
own  principality,  but  left  their  proper  habitation."  They  aie  represented  in  the 
parallel  passage  in  Peter  as  simply  "  the  angels  that  sinned;"  and  the  devil  is  spoken' 
of  as  not  "abiding  in  the  truth,"  and  pride  is  assigned  apparently  as  the  cause  of  his 
fall  (1  Tim.  iii.  6).  "  It  is  hard  to  be  high  and  not  high-minded."  But  the  allu- 
sion here  is  rather  to  the  angels  rejecting  their  high  dignity  of  position  in  subjection  to 
God,  and  departing  from  their  habitations  in  heaven,  as  the  consequence  of  the  aliena- 
tion caused  by  pride.  1.  Their  revolt  was  a  dishonour  to  God.  (1)  They  slighted 
the  place  of  his  glory.  (2)  They  were  the  highest  order  of  his  creatures,  and  might 
have  found  their  happiness  in  obedient  service.  2.  An  evil  nature  cannot  endure 
either  the  joys  or  the  holiness  of  heaven.  3.  It  is  a  sin  for  the.  highest  being  to  exempt 
himself  from  service.    4.  The  angels  have  a  habitation  in  heaven. 

III.  Thb  punishment  of  thb  evil  angels.    "  He  hath  kept  in  everlasting  boada 


H  THE  GBNEBAIi  EPISTLE  OF  JUDB.  [1— 2Sk 

under  darkness  unto  the  .judgment  of  the  great  day,"  1.  There  is  a  present  ptmtshfMnt. 
They  are  "  kept  in  everlasting  bonds  under  darkness."  (1)  There  are  the  bonds  of 
God's  power.  "The  strong  man  is  bound  by  a  stronger  than  he."  "The  old  dragon 
was  bound  for  a  thousand  years."  (2)  There  are  the  bonds  of  sin,  as  if  to  account  for 
the  dread  consistency  of  him  "  who  sinneth  from  the  beginning  "  (1  John  iii.  8).  (3) 
There  are  the  bonds  of  a  guilty  conscience,  which  cause  the  devils  to  tremble  as  they 
believe  (Jas.  ii.  19).  (4)  Yet  restraint  or  torment  cannot  reform  the  evil  angels.  (5) 
The  devils  cannot  hurt  us  unless  we  get  within  the  compass  of  their  chains.  Calvin 
says,  "  Wherever  they  go  they  drag  with  them  their  own  chains,  and  remain  involved 
in  darkness."  (6)  The  darkness  under  which  they  are  held  points  to  their  miserable 
condition,  as  signified  by  their  separation  from  the  presence  of  God,  brought  about  as 
it  was  by  their  own  act,  and  utterly  irrevocable.  2.  Thei-e  is  a  future  punishment. 
"  Unto  the  judgment  of  the  great  day."  (1)  The  Lord  will  judge  the  angels  in  that 
day  with  the  saints  as  his  assessors  (1  Cor.  vi.  3).  (2)  The  devil  will  be  cast  into  the 
lake  of  fire  and  brimstone.  (3)  There  will  be  no  further  seduction  of  the  wicked,  and  no 
further  hurt  to  the  elect. — T.  C. 

Ver.  7. —  Third  example  of  Bivint  vengeanot.  This  is  the  case  of  the  cities  of  th« 
plain. 

I.  The  cause  of  theib  punishment.  "Even  as  Sodom  and  Gomorrah,  and  the 
cities  about  them,  having  in  like  manner  with  these  given  themselves  over  to  fornica- 
tion, and  gone  after  strange  flesh."  1.  God  often  assigns  the  faost  fertile  placet  to  the 
greatest  sinners.  Sodom  is  compared  to  "  the  garden  of  the  Lord."  2.  Prosperity  often 
becomes  an  occasion  for  much  wicleedness  and  impiety.  3.  The  inhabitants  cf  these  eitiei 
of  the  plain  were  guilty  of  fornication  and  unnatural  crimes.  (1)  These  were  personal 
sins  of  a  heinous  character.  They  were  sins  against  both  soul  and  body.  No  whorei- 
moDger  shall  enter  the  kingdom  of  God  (1  Cor.  vi.  9),  and  fornication  is  a  sin  "  against 
the  body  itself"  (1  Cor.  vi.  18).  (2)  They  were  social  sins.  They  affect  the  family 
and  society.  (3)  They  were  sacrilegious  sins.  The  bod}',  which  is  a  temple  of  the  Holy 
Gthoit,  allows  its  members  to  become  those  of  a  harlot  (1  Cor.  vL  15).  (4)  They  were 
sins  not  to  be  named  among  saints  (Eph.  v.  3).  4.  The  causes  of  these  sins  were  (1) 
fulness  of  bread  (Ezek.  xvi.  49),  and  (2)  idleness. 

IL  The  severity  op  theib  punishment.  "  Suffering  the  vengeance  of  eternal  fire." 
1.  JJiere  may  be  allusion  to  the  rain  of  fire  that  destroyed  the  cities,  and  to  the  volcanic 
nature  of  the  soil  which  underlies  their  present  site.  2.  But  that  destruction  it  only  a 
type  of  the  worse  destruction  that  overtook  the  guilty  inhabitants.  (1)  No  "dogs" 
siiall  be  admitted  into  the  New  Jerusalem  (Rev.  xxii.  15).  "Our  God  is  a  consuming 
fire  "  (Heb.  xii.  29).  The  justice  of  God  is  not  abolished  by  his  mercy.  (2)  Yet  the 
rejection  of  the  gospel  is  a  worse  sin  than  that  of  the  Sodomites.  It  will  be  more 
tolerable  for  Sodom  and  Gomorrah  in  the  day  of  judgment  than  for  Capernaum  and 
Bethsaida  (Matt.  x.  15). 

III.  These  Sodomites  webb  punished  as  an  example,  1.  Qod  shows  thus  hit 
hatred  of  sin,  2.  Sis  desire  to  prevent  our  ruin.  3.  The  inexcusableness  of  those  who 
sin  in  the  face  of  such  examples.  4.  We  need  under  the  gospel  the  restraints  of  fear  at 
well  as  the  allurements  of  love.  5.  Tlie  same  sins  recur  in  every  age,  and  therefore  need 
to  Je  very  pointedly  condemned.  6.  The  sins  of  the  Sodomites  are  more  heinous  if 
committed  in  this  dispensation  of  light  and  privilege.  7.  Let  us  be  ihankftd  to  Qod  for 
sucA  learnings  against  sin. — T.  C. 

Ver.  8. — The  character  of  the  libertines  in  Jude's  day.  Three  triplets  again,  to  corre- 
spond to  the  triplets  of  vers.  5 — 7.    Mark  the  sins  of  these  libertines. 

I.  Gboss  licentiousness.  "They  defile  the  flesh."  Thus  they  resemble  the 
Sodomites.  The  early  Gnosticism  had  an  antinomian  as  well  as  an  ascetic  side.  1.  Sint 
of  unchastity  inflict  deep  dishonour  on  the  body.  They  deflle  that  body  which  oucht 
to  be  a  temple  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  2.  27iey  lead  men  info  destructive  error.  "  The 
lusts  make  the  affections  to  be  judges;  and  where  affection  sways,  judgment  decays." 
The  errorists  of  primitive  times  were  men  "of  corrupt  minds,"  teaching  "  things  they 
•uglit  not  for  filthy  lucre's  sake,  serving  their  own  belly."  Solomon  says,  "  Evil  men 
understand  not  judgment." 


1—25.]  THE  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OP  JUDB.  26 

n.  Thbt  aeb  hostile  to  the  Divine  LoftDSHi*.  "  They  set  at  nought  dominion.'" 
Like  the  fallen  angels.  The  dominion  here  spoken  of  is  not  human  magistracy,  but  the 
Lordship  of  God  Almighty.  They  deny  the  Lord  Jesus ;  they  will  not  have  this  Man  to 
reign  over  them.  This  evil  temper  springs :  1.  From  pride.  2.  From  self-sufficietuy. 
8.  From  hatred  of  Ood.    4.  From  anger  at  all  Divine  restraint  in  their  evil  actiont. 

in.  Thbt  EEViLK  the  angblio  hieeakchy,  "They  rail  at  dignities."  Like  the 
murmurers  in  the  wilderness.  They  rail  at  celestial  lordships.  1.  Great  is  the  excess 
of  an  unsanctifled  tongue.  2.  Fools  rail  at  powers  of  whom  they  know  nothing.  3. 
It  is  a  great  sin  t«put  dishonour  on  edestial  beings  whom  Cfod  has  so  highly  honoured. 

IV.  The  fountain  from  which  these  bins  issue.  "  In  their  dieamings."  This 
threefold  manifestation  of  an  evil  mind  has  its  origin  in  the  self-delusion  of  sinners. 
Their  dreaming  implies :  1.  That  they  live  in  an  unreal  world,  and  have  no  true  eon- 
teption  of  the  serious  nature  of  sin.  2.  That  they  a/re  unconscious  of  the  danger  that 
threatens  their  immortal  souls.  8.  2%a(  they  are  insensible  to  aU  the  warnings  of 
coming  Judgment.  4.  Dreaming  is  dangerous,  for,  like  the  hypocrite,  the  tinner  shall 
fly  away  as  a  dream  (Job  xx,  8). — ^T.  0. 

Ver.  9. — An  angetie  example  for  human  tmitation.  Jude  then  refers  to  an  extraor- 
dinary incident  not  recorded  in  Scripture,  but  evidently  contained  in  the  old  Jewish 
traditions  respecting  a  contest  of  Michael  the  archangel  with  the  devil. 

L  The  aechAnqbi,  Miohabii — who  was  he ?  1.  He  appears  as  "one  of  the  <hi^ 
princes  "  who  stood  up  for  God's  people  against  the  Persians  (Dan.  x.  13).  2.  Ee  appears 
as  fighting.  "  Michael  and  his  angels"  against  the  devil  and  his  angels  (Rev.  xiL  71 
8.  Me  is  probably  the  archangel  whose  voice  i»to  be  heard  at  the  period  of  our  Lora* 
descent  to  Judgmental  Thess.  iv.  16.)  4,  Ee  is  probably  at  the  head  of  the  good  angels, 
as  the  devil  is  represented  as  at  the  head  of  the  evil  angels.  6.  Eigh  as  he  it  in  rank, 
he  is  most  active  in  dutiful  service  to  Ood. 

lit  The  steife  between  Michael  and  the  devil.  "But  Michael  the  archangel, 
when  contending  with  the  devil  he  disputed  about  the  body  of  Moses,  durst  not  bring 
against  him  a  failing  judgment."  1.  The  incident  lure  referred  to  occurred  necessarily 
vifter  Mose^  death,  2.  The  dispitte  did  nt7t  arise,  as  some  think,  from  the  effort^  the 
devil  to  prevent  the  concealment  of  the  body  of  Moses,  whom  Gtid  buried  that  no  man 
might  know  the  place  of  his  sepulture.  The  reason  usually  assigned  for  the  secrecy  of 
the  burial  is  that  the  Israelites  might  have  worshipped  the  body  of  their  great  lawgiver. 
But  there  is  no  evidence  that  the  Israelites  ever  at  any  time  showed  a  disposition  to 
worship  dead  men's  bones.  Their  inclination  was  rather  to  worship  the  powers  of 
nature.  3.  An  ingenious  and  plausible  explanation  has  been  given  of  this  strife  in  this 
wise.  (1)  We  know  that  Moses  and  Elias  appeared  together  at  the  Transfiguration 
(Luke  ix.  29—33).  They  are  called  "  two  men  "  Elias  was  certainly  in  the  body — a 
glorified  body,  no  doubt.  Does  not  the  similarity  of  statement  imply  that  Moses  was 
likewise  in  the  body  ? .  (2)  This  would  imply  that  Moses  was  raised  up  after  his  burial, 
but  before  he  saw  corruption,  and  was  takea  to  heaven  like  Elijah  and  Enoch.  God 
buried  him,  and  the  archangel  watched  over  him  that  he  should  not  see  corruption. 
But  why  should  the  devil  interfere  with  the  archangel's  watch  ?  Is  it  that  the  devil 
has  "  the  power  of  death  "  (Heb.  ii.  14)  ?  Is  it  that  he  has  an  interest  in  the  corruption 
of  our  bodies,  as  the  completion  of  that  physical  death  which  enters  into  the  wages 
of  sin  ?  The  contest  may  have  arisen  from  the  effort  of  Michael,  on  the  one  side,  to 
secure  the  body  of  Moses  from  corruption  till  the  moment  when  he,  with  his  angels, 
would  carry  it  into  heaven,  and  from  the  effort  of  the  devil,  on  the  other  side,  to  inflict 
the  last  stigma  of  death  upon  the  great  Israelite.  This  explanation  seems  more  plausible 
than  any  other  that  has  been  suggested  of  this  mysterious  conflict  between  the  heads  of 
the  principalities  of  the  spirit-world.  The  conflict  suggests  that:  (a)  Sin  and  holiness 
must  necessarily  come  into  conflict  wherever  they  encounter  each  other.  (&)  Michael 
Dvercomes  the  devil.  "  He  that  is  for  us  is  far  greater  than  all  they  that  be  against  us." 

III.  The  dbpoetmbnt  of  Michael  in  this  strife  with  the  dbvii,.  "He  durst 
not  bring  against  him  a  railing  judgment,  but  said.  The  Lord  rebuke  thee."  1.  /(  would 
have  been  inconsistent  with  angelical  perfection  to  rail  against  the  devil.  2.  TTiere  is  no 
cowardice  in  Michael  not  daring  to  sin.  3.  What  is  wrong  for  anads  cannot  be  right 
for  men  to  do,    4.  Michael  left  the  decision  of  the  strife  absolutely  in  Ood's  hande,    6. 


26  THE  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OP  JUDE.  [1—25 

God's  power  restrains  that  of  the  devil.  6.  The  thought  that  we  have  a  God  into  whost 
hands  we  may  commit  our  cause  ought  to  make  us  patient,  forbearing,  and  forgiving. 
— T.  C. 

Ver.  10. — 37ie  deplorable  perversion  of  knowledge.  This  verse  is  a  practical  applica- 
tion of  the  historic  reference  to  the  archangel  Michael. 

I.  The  lesson  op  ignorant  depreciation.  "  But  these  rail  at  whatsoever  things 
they  know  not."  These  were  unseen  spiritual  powers  whom  they  treat  with  mocking 
irreverence.  1.  The  ignorance  in  question,  is  that  conceited  wnd  contented  ignorance  of 
which  the  psahnist  speaks.  "  They  know  not  nor  will  understand,  but  walk  on  in  dark- 
ness." They  are  "  willingly  ignorant "  (Bom.  i.  28).  None  are  so  ready  to  speak  as 
the  ignorant.  Or,  it  is  ignorance  of  things  not  possible  for  man  to  know  in  his  present 
life,  and  is  therefore  excusable.  2.  The  sinfulness  of  railing  at  such  things.  (1)  It  is 
great  folly,  for  it  is  railing  at  what  is  the  result  of  man's  infirmity  or  his  limited  powers. 
"  He  that  answereth  a  matter  before  he  heareth  it,  it  is  a  folly  and  a  shame  to  him  " 
(Prov.  xviii.  13).  (2)  It  is  great  presumption.  3.  It  is  great  wickedness ;  for  it  is  to 
impute  evil  where  none  may  exist.  It  is  to  rejoice  in  the  evil  which  may  only  exist  in 
our  own  thoughts.  How  j^reat  is  the  sin  of  railing  at  things  which  are  worthy !  We 
see  how  corrupt  affections  blind  the  judgment.  4.  We  ought  to  reprove  known  evU,  and 
to  praise  what  we  know  to  he  good. 

IL  The  lesson  of  the  ruin  wrought  by  sensual  knowledge.  "  And  what  they 
understand  naturally,  like  the  creatures  without  reason,  in  these  things  they  corrupt 
themselves."  1.  The  range  and  scope  of  natural  knowledge.  Jude  refers  here  to  the 
familiar  objects  of  sense  as  equally  obvious  to  both  man  and  beast.  (1)  These  evil 
persons,  like  the  irrational  animals,  readily  discover  the  means  of  gratifying  their 
desires.  (2)  They  receive  all  their  blessings,  like  the  beasts,  without  thought  or 
thanks  to  the  Giver.  (3)  They  cannot  improve  them  spiritually  any  more  than  the 
beasts  which  only  live  to  eat.  (4)  They  use  them  to  excess,  wallowing  like  swine  in 
the  mire  of  mere  sensual  enjoyments.  (5)  They  are  impatient  of  restraint  in  pro- 
portion to  the  full  enjoyment  of  natural  bounties.  2.  The  corruption  that  springe  out 
of  mere  things  of  sense.  (1)  These  evil  men,  by  their  abuse  of  natural  blessings, 
bring  disease  upon  themselves.  (2)  They  corrupt  their  moral  nature.  "  Wine  and 
women  take  away  the  heart"  (Hos.  iv.  11).  Outward  enjoyments  make  no  man 
excel  in  beauty  of  character.  (3)  They  are  corrupted  eternally.  "  Satan  lies  in 
ambush  behind  our  lawful  enjoyments."  "They  who  sow  to  the  flesh  shall  of  the 
flesh  reap  corruption  "  (Gal.  vi.  8). — T.  C. 

Ver.  11. — Three  examples  of  similar  ungodliness.  Another  triplet,  answering  to  the 
triplet  of  Sodom,  the  evil  angels,  the  unbelieving  Israelites.  In  both  triplets  there  was 
an  outrage  against  nature,  a  contempt  for  Divine  sovereignty,  a  revolt  against  dignities. 

I.  A  denunciation  of  judgment.  "  Woe  unto  them ! "  1.  Wickedness  has  its  end 
in  woes.  The  end  of  it  is  "  death."  2.  The  most  fearful  woes  are  those  tohich  are 
spiritual  in  their  nature.  No  outward  calamity  is  so  terrible  as  the  wrath  of  God,  no 
worldly  misfortune  so  great  as  a  seared  conscience.  3.  ITie  woe  does  not  come  without 
warning.  God  foretells  the  ruin  that  it  may  be  averted,  as  in  the  notable  case  of  the 
Ninevites.  4.  Ministers  ought  to  exhibit  the  terrors  of  the  Law  as  well  as  the  sweet 
promises  of  the  gospel. 

II.  The  grounds  or  this  denunciation  of  judgment.  There  is  a  threefold 
variety  in  godless  transgression.  1.  There  is  an  outrage  against  the  laws  of 
nature.  "For  they  went  in  the  way  of  Cain."  (1)  That  was  a  way  of  hypocrisy. 
Cain  offered  a  sacrifice,  but  in  a  faithless  spirit.  (2)  It  was  a  way  of  envy.  "  The 
spirit  that  dwelleth  in  us  lusteth  to  envy."  In  the  case  of  Cain  it  was  "  the  inlet 
to  murder."  Who  is  nble  to  stand  before  envy  ?  It  is  its  own  punishment.  (3)  It 
was  a  way  of  selfishness  and  hatred.  Hatred  led  to  the  murder  of  Abel,  and  selfishness 
was  stamped  upon  the  interrogative  answer  to  God's  question :  "  Am  I  my  brother's 
keeper  ? "  (4)  It  was  a  way  of  violence  and  cruelty.  "  He  who  cared  not  how  ht 
»erved  God  regarded  not  how  he  used  his  brother.  Cain  begins  with  sacrifice  and  ends 
with  murder."  Those  who  plead  for  most  liberty  are  apt  to  be  most  selfish  and  cruel. 
Z.  There  is  a  religious  opposition  to  Qod  from  interested  motives.    "  And  ran  riotousl; 


1—25.]  THE  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OP  JUDB.  21 

in  the  error  of  Balaam  for  hire."  (1)  Their  guide — Balaam,  (a)  Ha  was  a  fals* 
prophet;  he  is  called  both  a  prophet  (2  Pet.  ii.  16)  and  a  soothsayer  (Josh.  xiii.  22). 
(5)  The  devil  uses  the  ablest  instruments  to  serve  his  ends,  (c)  God  often  endows 
wicked  persons  with  high  gifts.  Great,  accordingly,  is  their  responsibility.  (2)  The 
error  of  Balaam,  (a)  This  does  not  refer  to  his  being  deceived  in  the  expectation  of 
reward  for  his  wicked  work.  (6)  It  refers  rather  to  his  deviation  from  God's  will  and 
commandment  in  the  whole  history  of  his  relations  with  Balak.  "His  way  was 
perverse  before  the  Lord."  He  made  the  Israelites  to  err  from  the  way  of  righteousness 
by  teaching  Balak  to  cast  a  stumbling-block  before  them — ^to  eat  things  sacrificed  to 
idols,  and  to  commit  fornication  (Rev.  ii.  14).  (c)  It  was  a  deviation  in  doctrine  that 
led  to  a  deviation  from  holiness.  Thus  false  teachers  are  usually  evil-workers  (Phil, 
iii.  2).  Their  "  minds  are  defiled,  they  are  reprobate  to  every  good  work."  "  Truth 
reforms  as  well  as  informs."  (3)  The  motive  of  Balaam's  conduct.  "  For  hire."  (a) 
There  was  profanity  in  such  conduct.  Covetousness  is  idolatry ;  but  it  is  something 
like  blasphemy  in  a  religious  guide.  The  guide  to  heaven  ought  to  be  above  the  base 
love  of  lucre.  (6)  There  was  hypocrisy  in  such  conduct.  There  was  an  apparent 
concern  for  God's  honoiir  and  the  good  of  man  ;  but  uuder  all  was  the  eager  lust  for 
reward.  (4)  The  impetuous  and  eager  pace  of  seducers.  "  They  ran  riotously."  (o) 
They  are  not  checked  by  God's  judgments.  (6)  The  desire  for  gain  hurries  men 
forward  to  many  an  act  of  wickedness  and  sin.  "  He  that  maketh  haste  to  be  rich 
shall  not  be  innocent "  (Prov.  xxviii.  20).  (c)  Sinners  pursuing  a  downward  course 
know  not  where  they  may  stop,  (d)  There  is  a  Divine  hand  to  punish  the  greatest 
sinners,  (e)  How  sad  that  the  saints  of  God  should  not  run  as  eagerly  in  the  way  of 
God  as  sinners  in  the  way  of  wickedness  and  folly  I  They  ought,  surely,  to  "  press  toward 
the  mark  for  the' prize  of  the  high  calling  of  God."  3.  There  is  a  contempt  for  sacred 
ordinances  which  brings  its  own  retribution.   "  And  perished  in  the  gainsaying  of  Korah." 

(1)  The  history  of  Korah.  He  was  a  Levite  of  the  tribe  of  Levi,  and  cousin-german 
of  Moses.  He  was,  therefore,  employed  in  an  honourable  department  of  the  ecclesias- 
tical service — "  to  wait  upon  the  sons  of  Aaron  in  the  service  of  the  house  of  the  Lord." 

(2)  His  insurrection.  "  The  gainsaying  of  Korah."  He  opposed  the  exclusive  privileges 
of  Moses  and  Aaron,  saying  that  they  "  took  too  much  upon  them,"  and  he  claimed 
the  privileges  of  the  priesthood  for  himself  and  others.  "  And  seek  ye  the  priesthood 
also?"  says  Moses.  The  conduct  of  Korah  finds  its  comiterpart  in  the  seducers  of 
Jude's  day,  who  des^jised  ecclesiastical  ordinances,  and  set  at  nought  the  order  of  the 
Church.  Their  conduct  showed  (a)  contempt  for  Divine  order  and  appointment ;  (h) 
discontent  with  their  existing  privileges;  (c)  envy  at  the  rulers  of  the  Church;  (d) 
ingratitude  to  God  for  his  privileges.  (3)  His  punishment.  "Perished  in  the  gain- 
saying of  Korah."  The  facts  of  Korah's  destruction  are  familiar  to  all.  They  suggest : 
(as)  That  seducers  ordinarily  involve  others  in  their  own  destruction.  So  it  was  with 
Korah.  Two  hundred  and  fifty — "  famous  in  the  congregation,  and  men  of  renown  " — 
were  drawn  into  the  conspiracy.  "  He  would  neither  be  alone  in  woe  nor  in  wicked- 
ness." (6)  God  opposes  those  who  oppose  hii  ordinances.  "  An  evil  man  seeketh  only 
rebellion,  therefore  a  cruel  messenger  shall  bo  sent  against  him"  (Prov.  xxiv.  22).  (c) 
We  are  bound  to  accept  thankfully  the  privileges  which  God  has  provided  for  us. — T.  C. 

Vers.  12,  13. — A  vivid  picture  of  the  moral  corruption  of  the  ungodly  seducers. 
I.  Thbib  selfish  and  sinful  pebvbbsion  of  the  Chubch's  fellowship.  "  These 
are  they  who  are  hidden  rocks  in  your  love-feasts  when  they  feast  with  you,  shepherds 
that  without  fiar  feed  themselves."  1.  They,  like  sanhen  rocks,  wi'ecked  those  who 
unsuspectingly  approached  them.  (1)  Their  profession  of  religion  was  so  belied  by  their 
immoral  ways,  that  men,  taking  them  to  be  Christians,  abhorred  the  true  gospel  and 
turned  away  from  it  to  their  destruction.  (2)  Their  evil  example  led  others  into 
unchristian  courses  to  their  eternal  ruin.  2.  They  mingled,  without  fear  or  misgiving, 
in  the  loving  fellowships  of  the  Church.  (1)  The  love-feasts  were  connected  with  the 
Lord's  Supper,  which  is  itself,  indeed,  a  love-feast.  They  were  designed  to  maintain 
brotherly  love,  and  especially  to  refresh  the  poor  saints.  They  always  began  and  ended 
with  prayer.  They  were  no  places  for  self-indulgence  or  gluttony.  (2)  These  godless 
persons  attended  the  love-feasts,  with  no  fear  of  the  Divine  displeasure,  with  no 
reverence  for  the  holy  society  into  which  they  intruded  themselves,    (a)  It  is  not 


28  THE  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OP  JUDB.  [1—25. 

possible  in  this  world  entirely  to  separate  the  godly  from  the  ungodly.  It  is  impossible 
for  ministers  to  read  the  hearts  of  men  so  surely  as  to  keep  a  sharp  line  of  distinction 
between  believers  and  unbelievers.  Yet  the  discipline  of  tlie  Church  ought  to  enforce 
a  conformity  to  the  terms  of  their  profession.  (6)  These  seducers  were  unfit  guests  at 
a  feast  designed  to  commemoiate  the  unity  of  the  body  of  Christ  and  the  brotherhoud 
of  all  believers.  "  Who  shall  abide  in  thy  tabernacle  ?  "  3.  They  feasted  themselves 
luxuriously,  regardless  of  the  poor.  Their  conduct  reminds  one  of  the  shepherds  of 
Israel.  "  Woe  be  to  the  shepherds  of  Israel,  that  do  feed  themselves  I  should  riot  the 
shepherds  feed  the  flock  ?  "  (Ezek.  xxxiv.  2).  (1)  They  feasted  immoderately.  "  Their 
hearts  were  oppressed  with  surfeiting."  Like  the  Israelites  in  their  idolatry,  "  they 
sat  down  to  eat  and  to  drink  "  (Exod.  xxxii.  6).  (2)  They  wronged  the  poor,  whom 
they  suffered  to  fast  while  they  were  feasting. 

II.  Thkib  emptiness  and  instability.  "  Clouds  \vithout  water,  carried  along  by 
winds."  1.  Instead  of  being  like  clouds  dropping  refreshing  rain  upon  the  earth,  they, 
as  rainless  clouds,  while  promising  much,  were  profitless  and  disappointing  to  the  hopes 
of  the  Church.  They  could  not  give  what  they  had  not,  but  they  professed  to  have 
something  to  give.  Their  deluded  followers  "  spent  their  money  for  that  which  was 
not  bread,  and  their  labour  for  that  which  satisfied  not."  When  people  are  athirst  for 
God — "  the  heart  panting  for  the  water-brooks  " — it  is  hard  to  find  no  water  at  hand 
to  satisfy  the  soul.  Yet  the  Lord  says,  "  Open  thy  mouth  wide,  and  I  will  fill  it." 
It  is  a  great  sin  to  profess  a  goodness  to  which  we  are  utterly  opposed,  because  (1)  it 
profanes  God's  Name ;  (2)  it  grieves  the  hearts  of  true  saints ;  (3)  it  hardens  the  wicked ; 
(4)  it  is  utterly  improfitable  to  the  empty  professors  themselves.  2.  Thei/  were  as 
unstable  as  clouds  whirled  every  way  hy  the  wind.  (1)  They  were  unstable  in  doctrine, 
carried  about  by  every  intellectual  caprice,  like  those  who  halt  between  two  opinions, 
and  are  not  settled  in  the  truths  of  religion.  They  were  not  "  grounded  and  settled  " 
because  they  were  off  the  true  Foundation  (ver.  20).  (2)  They. were  unstable  in  their 
affections,  now  fervent,  now  cold,  "  framing  to  themselves  such  a  moderation  as  will 
just  serve  the  scantling  of  the  times."  (3)  They  were  unstable  in  their  practical 
conduct.  At  one  time  they  were  ascetic  in  their  ideas ;  then  self-indulgent,  loose,  evil. 
With  all  their  changes  they  begin  in  the  fiesh  and  end  in  the  flesh.  (4)  Christians 
ought  to  be  warned  against  unsteadfastness.  They  ought  to  continue  in  the  things 
which  they  have  learned  (2  Tim.  iiL  14),  and  not  to  be  "  tossed  to  and  fro  with  every 
wind  of  doctrine  "  (Eph.  iv.  14). 

IIL  Their  utteb  tjnfruitfcIiNkss.  "Autumn  trees  without  fruit,  twice  dead, 
plucked  up  by  the  roots."  Saints  are  fruit-bearing  trees  of  righteousness  (Isa.  Ixi.  3). 
There  is  an  evident  climax  in  this  picture  of  the  godless  seducers.  First,  they  are  like 
autumn  trees,  which  ought  to  be  full  of  fruit,  yet  they  are  without  fruit,  like  the 
barren  fig  tree ;  then  they  are  utterly  dead — dead  in  appearance  and  dead  in  reality ; 
then  they  are  like  uprooted  trees  concerning  which  there  can  be  no  more  hope  of  fruit. 
There  is  a  logical  as  well  as  rhetorical  fitness  in  the  picture.  1.  There  was  no  fruit 
because  there  was  no  life  in  the  tree.  These  godless  persons  wore  spiritually  dead  (Eph. 
iL  2).  2.  This  death  implies  ignorance,  darkness,  alienation  from  &od.  3.  The  torn- 
up  roots  imply  not  only  that  there  is  no  l^)pe  of  growth,  but  that  the  world  sees  the  secret 
rottenness  that  was  at  the  root  of  such  trees.  They  will  never  again  be  taken  for  fruit- 
bearers.  "  From  them  who  had  not,  even  that  which  they  seemed  to  have  is  taken 
away"  (Luke  viii.  18).  4.  The  picture  before  us  isa  solemn  warning  to  believers.  (1) 
It  is  their  duty  to  be  spiritually  fruitful  (Phil.  i.  11 ;  John  xv.  2 ;  Col.  i.  10).  (2)  They 
must  bring  forth  fruit  at  every  season,  even  in  old  age  (Ps.  xcii.  12).  (3)  Believers, 
therefore,  ought  to  plant  themselves  by  the  rivers  of  water  (Ps.  i.  3).  (4)  They  ought 
to  guard  E^ainst  apostasy.  "  Be  not  high-minded,  but  fear."  (5)  They  ought,  therefore, 
to  pray  for  the  dews  of  God's  blessing.    He  alone  can  give  the  increase. 

IV.  Theib  shameless  and  tdrbulbnt  temper.  "  Wild  waves  of  the  sea,  foaming 
out  their  own  shame."  1.  There  was  a  restless  agitation  in  their  life.  They  were 
"  like  the  troubled  sea,  whose  waters  cast  up  mire  and  dirt "  (Isa.  Ivii.  20),  "  There  is 
no  peace,  saith  my  God,  to  the  wicked."  Their  consciences  were  unquiet ;  they  were 
fretful  and  arrogant ;  they  troubled  the  peace  of  those  Churches  into  which  they  crept, 
by  their  hard  speeches,  their  obscene  talking,  their  blasphemous  suggestions.  2.  As  the 
wild  uuves  lash  themselves  into  foam,  these  seducer*  throw  forth  upon  the  world  all  tht 


1—25.1  THE  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OF  JUDB.  129 

tnamefulness  that  lies  buried  in  their  wicked  hearts.  "  Boldly  belching  out  their  abomi> 
nahle  opiaiong  aod  their  detestable  doctrines;"  but,  above  all,  giving  a  free  outlet  to  all 
licentiousness.  Evil  things  come  forth  from  "  the  evil  treasure  of  the  heart."  3.  It 
is  the  lot  of  the  Church  to  live  in  the  midst  of  these  "  raging  waves  "  o/  wickedness  and 
folly.  4.  The  Ohwch  is  most  disquitted  by  enemies  within  her  communion.  5.  The 
enemies  of  Qod  proclaim  their  own  shame,  and  hring  confusion  upon  themselves.  6.  Tht 
saints  ought  ever  to  pray  that  the  peace  of  Qod  may  dwell  in  their  hearts. 

V.  MiSLEAWNa  GUIDES  AND  THBiB  FUTURE  DESTINY.  "  Wandering  stftrs,  for  whom 
the  blackness  of  darkness  hath  been  reserved  for  ever."  1.  These  seducers  were  like  stars, 
conspicuous  iy  their  position  and  their  exploits.  They  were  false  lights  to  mislead  the 
people  into  error  and  destruction.  2.  They  were  wandering  stars,  (1)  because  they  kept 
no  certain  course;  (2)  because  they  blazed  brightly  for  a  moment,  then  went  out  in 
darkness.  3.  They  threw  down  no  light  upon  the  world  lying  in  darkness  and  tht 
region  of  death.  4.  It  is  a  fearful  thing  to  seduce  others  from  the  way  of  truth.  "  They 
which  lead  thee  cause  thee  to  err  "  (Isa.  iii.  12).  5.  Qod  shows  great  forbearance  even 
to  sedwcers.  He  "  endured  with  much  long-sufiering  the  vessels  of  wrath  fitted  to 
destruction ''  (Kom.  ix.  22).  6.  Divine  judgments  are  often  in  kind.  The  seducers 
who  loved  darkness  rather  than  light  will  be  plunged  into  still  deeper  darkness — "  into 
the  very  blackness  of  darkness  for  ever."  7.  Lei  believers  ba  warned  to  seek  the  light— 
to  walk  in  the  light,  to  walk  decently  as  in  the  day. — T.  0. 

Vers.  14, 15.— ^n  ancient  prophecy  of  judgment  against  the  wicked.  L  The  pbophet. 
"  And  to  these  also  Enoch,  the  seventh  from  Adam,  prophesied."  1.  Ee  was  a  pre- 
eminently holy  man,  who  was  translated  to  heaven  without  dying.  2.  His  descent  is 
here  mentioned,  (1)  partly  to  indicate  the  antiquity  of  his  prophecy,  as  going  back  to 
the  first  days  of  man  on  earth ;  (2)  partly  to  distinguish  him  from  Enoch  the  son  of 
Cain ;  (3)  partly  also  to  show  the  zeal  of  Enoch  against  wickedness  in  those  early  times. 
Ee  was  the  seventh  from  Adam,  reckoning  by  generations. 

II.  His  peophect.  It  is  the  coming  of  Christ  to  judgment.  "  Behold,  the  Lord 
came  with  ten  thousands  of  his  holy  ones."  We  have  here  the  historic  tense  of 
prophecy.  1.  The  Lord  comes  from  heaven.  "  The  Lord  himself  shall  deiscend  from 
heaven  "  to  judge  the  world.  2.  It  will  be  in  the  end  of  the  world,  in  a  day  utterly 
unknown  to  man  or  angel.  3.  Ee  will  be  accompanied  by  ten  thousands  of  his  saints, 
who  will  sit  with  him  as  assessors  (1  Cor.  vi.  3).  "  The  saints  shall  appear  with  him  in 
glory."  They  are  called  his  saints,  because  they  are  so  by  redemption  and  by  service. 
4.  This  second  advent  is  to  execute  jvdgment  and  convict  the  ungodly.  (1)  The  last 
judgment  is  to  be  regarded  as  a  matter  of  the  greatest  certainty.  (2)  II  is  foolish  to 
expect  an  escape  from  judgment  through  secrecy.  (3)  Words  will  be  judged  as  well 
as  deeds.  "All  the  bard  things  which  ungodly  sinners,  have  spoken  against  him." 
Sinners  reproach,  mock,  and  condemn  the  just.  The  piety  of  the  just  does  not  exempt 
them  frotn  severe  aspersions.  Christ  regards  the  words  spoken  against  his  disciples  as 
spoken  against  himself.  (4)  The  judgment  will  take  account  of  the  manner  or  motive 
of  transgression.  "  Works  of  ungodliness  which  they  have  ungodly  wrought."  (a) 
The  wicked  devise  mischief  (Prov.  vi.  14).  (6)  They  delight  and  take  pleasure  in  it 
(Prov.  X.  30).  (c)  They  persist  in  transgression  in  the  teeth  of  all  warnings,  {d) 
Their  sin  does  not  spring  from  mere  infirmity  like  the  sin  of  the  righteous.  (5)  The 
true  interest  as  well  as  the  highest  wisdom  of  the  sinner  is  to  make  a  friend  of  the  Lord 
against  die  day  of  iudgment.-^T.  0. 

Ver.  16. — The  cynical  and  dissatisfied  temper  of  these  self-indulgent  flatteries.  I. 
Thet  WEBB  LOUD  IN  THE  E?;PEESsioN  OF  THEIR  DISCONTENT.  "  Tbcsc  are  muTmurers, 
oomijlainers."  It  was  natural  they  should  be  so  if  they  "  walked  after  their  own  lusts,*' 
because  these  lusts  were  insatiable,  and  the  means  of  their  gratification  were  not  always 
iccessible.  1.  Thehabit  of  murmwring  a/rgues  unhdief  and  distrust  in  the  Lord.  When 
men  can  say,  "  The  Lord  is  my  Portion,"  they  will  be  likely  to  add,  "  The  lines  are 
"alien  to  me  in  pleasant  places  "  (Ps.  xvL  5, 6).  No  fulness  of  earthly  blessing  can  still 
,he  complaints  of  an  unbelieving  heart.  The  lesson  of  contentment  is  not  to  1>-  learnt 
n  the  school  of  great  prosperity.  2.  It  argues  withankfulness.  The  humble  believer, 
s  ha  receives  ius  blessings,  sayi,  "  I  am  teas  than  th«  least  of  thy  mercies."    S.  /( 


80  THE  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OP  JUDB.  [1—25. 

argues  a  high  estimate  of  the  murmurei'i  worth.  "  He  counts  God  a  hard  master  and 
himself  a  good  servant."  He  seems  to  say,  too,  that  if  he  had  the  oidering  of  human 
destiny,  he  could  dispose  it  to  better  account.  4.  The  lesson  for  murmurers  is  that 
iheir  habit  (1)  cannot  relieve  or  benefit  them,  (2)  but  rather  fills  their  life  with  still 
deeper  anxiety  and  unrest.  6.  The  lesson  for  believers  is  (1)  to  cultivate  a  contented 
mind  (1  Tim.  vi.  8) ;  (2)  to  seek  for  submissiveness  of  heart ;  (3)  to  be  thankful  that 
their  lot  is  better  than  that  of  many  others  in  the  world. 

II.  They  webb  binfullt  self-indulgent.  "  Walking  after  their  lusts."  1.  The 
lusts  of  men  are  from  within.  "  Out  of  the  heart  proceed  "  all  evil  things  (Matt.  xv. 
18).  "The  wars  and  the  fightings  "of  life  come  of  the  lusts  of  men  (Jas.  iv.  1).  2. 
They  are  (1)  deceitful  (Eph.  iv.  22);  (2)  entangling  (2  Tim.  iii.  6);  (3)  defiling; 
(4)  disquieting  (2  Pet.  ii.  11).  3.  The  course  of  the  wicked  is  usually  very  persistent. 
4.  The  servitude  of  the  sinner  to  lust  is  miserable  in  its  end.  "The  wages  of  sin  is 
death." 

IIL  They  were  given  to  vain  and  boabtful  bxagoeration.  •*  And  their  mouth 
speaketh  great  swelling  words."  Either  of  themselves  or  others.  The  beast  in  the 
Apocalypse  had  a  "mouth  speaking  great  things"  (Rev.  xiii.  5).  1.  None  are  so 
ready  to  boast  of  themselves  as  those  possessing  the  least  merit.  2.  It  is  a  folly  to  boast 
of  ourselves.  The  Apostle  Paul  "  became  a  fool  in  glorying  "  (2  Cor.  xii.  11).  "Let 
another  man's  lips  praise  thee,  and  not  thine  own."  Our  worth  should  commend  ns,  not 
our  words.  3.  We  should  not  allow  swelling  words  to  seduce  us  from  the  truth.  There 
are  those  "who  with  feigned  words  make  merchandise  of  you"  (2  Pet.  ii.  3),  who  "by 
good  words  and  fair  speeches  deceive  the  hearts  of  the  simple  "  (Eev.  xvi.  18). 

rV.  They  were  parasites  and  flatterers.  "  Showing  respect  of  persons  for  the 
sake  of  advantage."  1.  It  is  right  to  show  respect  to  persons  worthy  of  honour,  but 
wrong  to  show  respect  to  persons  of  evil  character.  It  is  wrong  to  "  glory  in  men,"  but 
above  all  to  "  think  of  men  above  what  is  meet,"  and  to  be  puffed  up  for  one  against 
another.  We  are  not  to  have  "  the  faith  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  with  respect  of 
persons"  (Jas.  ii.  1) — "  when  wickedness  in  robes  is  magnified,  and  holiness  in  rags  is 
contemned."  The  Lord  says,  "  Thou  shalt  not  respect  the  person  of  the  poor,  ror 
honour  the  person  of  the  mighty  "  (Lev.  six.  15).  2.  It  is  peculiarly  base  to  act  in  this 
matter  with  a  view  to  owr  personal  advantage.  (1)  It  i  s  sinful  and  hypocritical  to  flatter 
the  wicked  because  they  are  great  or  powerful.  (2)  We  must  leam  to  know  the  true 
glory  of  man,  which  is  "  the  hidden  man  of  the  heart." — T.  C. 

Vers.  17, 18. — A  quotation  from  recent  prophecies.  Jude  then  refers  to  the  warnings 
of  apostles  respectina;  these  scoffing  sensualists.  "  But  ye,  beloved,  remember  ye  the 
words  which  have  been  spoken  before  by  the  apostles  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ." 

I.  Confiemation  of  his  statements  by  the  authority  op  apostles.  1.  It  is 
evident  that  Jude^s  Epistle  was  written  subsequent,  perhaps  long  subsequent,  to  the 
Epistles  of  Peter  and  Paul,  to  which  he  refers.  These  sensual  seducers  had  time  to 
develop  their  corruptions  and  their  audacity  of  position.  2.  Jvde  recognizes  the  Divine 
authority  and  inspiration  of  these  earlier  writings  of  Scripture.  3.  He  throws  back  the 
saints  upon  the  recollection  of  Scripture  as  their  only  authoritative  guide.  There  is 
no  evidence  that  he  refers  here  to  any  oral  traditions.  4.  Jude  believes  in  the  fact  of 
prophetic  illumination.  5.  It  is  the  duty  of  ministers  to  warn  their  people  against 
approaching  evils.    6.  To  before/warned  is  to  be  forearmed. 

n.  The  strssTANOE  of  the  prophetic  warnino.  "  In  the  last  time  there  shall  be 
mockers,  walking  after  their  own  ungodly  lusts."  Note  here  the  predicted  appearance 
of  wicked  mockers.  1.  They  arise  in  "  the  last  time  "  That  is,  in  the  period  lying 
between  the  first  and  the  second  advents  of  Christ.  They  appear  even  under  the  purest 
dispensation  of  grace.  The  wicked  are  most  wicked  when  grace  is  most  abundant.  2. 
They  are  as  wicked  as  they  are  scornful.  Mockery  is,  indeed,  a  note  of  advanced  corrup- 
tion. Their  mockeries  are  directed  both  agiiinst  God  and  man.  These  mockers  were 
probably  those  referred  to  by  Peter  as  asking,  "  Where  is  the- promise  of  his  coming?" 
(1)  Mockery  is  essentially  a  profane  act.  It  argues  contempt  of  God's  being  as  well  as 
his  attributes.  (2)  It  argues  unbelief.  It  implies  that  God's  threatenings  °are  a  fable. 
(3)  It  is  a  barrier  against  the  reception  of  good.  "  Rebuke  a  scorner,  and  he  will  hat€ 
hee."    (4)  It  is  a  form  of  persecution  (GraL  iy.  29).    (6)  Great  U  ^e  Divine  forbear- 


1—25.]  THE  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OP  JUDB.  SI 

ance  with  mockers.    (6)  God  will  punish  the  mockers.     He  "  scorneth  the  scomer-> " 
(Prov.  iii.  34) ;  and  will  "  mock  at  their  calamities"  io  the  day  of  their  judgment. 

III.  The  conduct  of  believers  in  the  presence  or  mockeeb.  1.  We  must  bear 
mockings  with  patience,  like  our  Lord,  who  "  endured  the  cross,  despising  the  shame  ' 
(Heb.  xii.  2).  2.  We  must  not  render  scoff  for  scoff,  at  the  risk  of  hardening  scoffers. 
3.   We  must  not  allow  scoffers  to  deter  us  from  following  the  Lord  fully. — T.  C. 

Ver.  19. — Application  of  the  prophecy  to  the  seducers  of  Jude's  day.  Mark  the  three- 
fold division  of  the  verse. 

L  They  were  separatists.  "  These  are  they  who  make  separations."  Perhaps  as 
"spiritual"  persons,  who  regard  things  of  sense  as  so  indifferent  that  they  may  be 
enjoyed  without  risk  to  the  soul.  1.  Church  divisions  are  usually  grounded  on  separa- 
tions from  the  Church's  doctrine.  Those  who  bring  in  "  damnable  heresies  "  "  draw  away 
disciples  after  them  "  (Acts  xx.  30).  2.  Separations  may  le  justified  by  the  Ghwch't 
departure  from  the  truth.  This  is  the  justification  of  Protestantism  in  withdrawing 
from  the  Church  of  Rome  in  the  sixteeuth  century.  3.  Separations,  originated  hy 
scoffing  sensualists,  (1)  have  their  origin  in  unbelief  and  pride;  (2)  engender  hatred  ;  (3) 
and  end  in  the  destruction  of  immortal  souls. 

IL  They  were  sensual.  "  Sensual."  1.  Sensuality,  or  the  idea  of  an  enlarged 
liberty  in  sinful  enjoyment,  is  often  the  motive  of  separations.  2.  Corrupt  affections 
blind  the  judgment  and  harden  the  conscience.  Burns  says  that  sensuality  "hardens  a' 
within."  It  turos  Christianity  into  epicurism.  3.  Sensuality  destroys  the  soul 
eternaily.  "  They  who  sow  to  the  flesh  shall  of  the  flesh  reap  corruption  "  (Gal.  vi.  8). 
"  If  ye  live  after  the  flesh,  ye  shall  die  "  (Rom.  viii,  13). 

III.  They  are  without  the  Holy  Spirit.  "  Having  not  the  Spirit."  1.  Sanctity 
and  sensuality  cannot  dwell  together.  2.  Those  who  want  the  Spirit  are  easily  carried 
away  into  sensual  sin.  Therefore  David  prayed,  "Take  not  thy  Holy  Spirit  from 
mo  "  (Ps.  11.  11).  3.  Saints  ought  to  seek  the  Spirit  of  holiness,  love,  meekness,  and  truth. 
"  Walk  in  the  Spirit,  and  ye  shall  not  fulfil  the  lusts  of  the  flesh  "  (Gal.  v.  16).— T.  C. 

Vers.  20,  31. — Exhortation  to  the  saints  to  build  up  their  own  spiritual  life  as  the 
grand  security  against  apostasy.  I.  Working  upon  the  foundation  of  faith  is 
the  only  means  of  our  spiritual  self-preservation.  "But  ye,  beloved, 
building  up  yourselves  on  your  most  holy  faith,  praying  in  the  Holy  Spirit,  keep 
yourselves  in  the  love  of  God."  1.  The  foundation.  "  Your  most  holy  faith."  This 
is  faith  objective,  not  subjective ;  the  doctrine  of  faith  rather  than  the  grace  of  faith. 
It  is  true  that  Christ  is  our  only  Foundation,  but  he  is  so  as  revealed  to  faith,  and  he 
can  only  become  so  through  faith.  We  build  upon  Christ  by  building  upon  his  Word. 
We  receive  him  as  he  is  offered  in  the  gospel.  (1)  It  is  "  your  faith,"  because  it  is 
"delivered  to  the  saints"  (ver.  4);  because  the  saints  were  "delivered  into  it"  (Rom. 
vii.  5) ;  because  it  was  for  the  salvation  of  their  souls  (1  Pet.  i.  9).  (2)  It  is  "  your 
most  holy  laith,"  because  (a)  every  word  of  God  is  pure ;  (6)  the  covenant  is  holy ; 
(c)  it  works  holiness  in  the  heart  and  life  (John  xv.).  2.  The  building  up  upon  this 
foundation.  (1)  The  saints  are  to  build  themselves  up.  This  is  addressed,  not  to 
sinners,  but  to  saints  who  have  been  already  placed  upon  the  foundation.  The  counsel 
is  the  same  as  that  of  PhU.  ii.  12,  "  Work  out  your  own  salvation  with  fear  and 
trembling."  Jude  writes  to  those  who  already  possess  the  Spirit,  through  whom  they 
already  enjoy  that  inward  and  habitual  grace  which  is  to  be  used  by  believers  according 
to  their  need  and  upon  a  sense  of  their  deep  responsibility.  Yet  believers  are  still  in 
a  true  sense  "God's  workmanship"  (Bph.  ii.  10);  and  it  is  "the  Lord  who  builds  the 
house "  (Ps.  cxxvii.  1).  (2)  The  building  implies  a  various  and  skilful  use  of  the 
materials  necessary  to  that  end.  Faith,  love,  hope,  patience,  watchfulness,  knowledge, 
are  to  be  the  gold,  silver,  precious  stones,  built  upon  this  broad  foundation.  We  are 
to  grow  in  grace,  and  grow  up  in  Christ  in  all  things,  adding  to  faith  all  the  virtues 
(2  Pet.  i.  5—7)  and  all  the  graces  of  the  Spirit  (Gal.  v.  22,  23). 

II.  True  prayer  the  only  means  of  building  ourselves  up.  "  Praying  in  the 
Holy  Spirit."  1.  There  is  no  prayer  without  the  Spirit.  (Rom.  viii.  26.)  The  Spirit 
suggests  the  matter  of  prayer ;  without  him  "  v\'e  know  not  what  to  pray  for."  He 
instructs  us  to  ask  for  things  according  to  G(4'i  wiU.    The  Spirit  suggests  the  true 


32  THE  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OP  JUDE.  [1-25. 

maimer  of  prayer.  (1)  It  must  be  "  in  sincerity  and  truth.''  (2)  In  fervour :  "  With 
groanings."  (3)  In  faith:  "Nothing  wavering."  (4)  In  holiness;  for  the  Spirit  ol 
supplication  is  always  a  Spirit  of  grace,  (5)  In  lovfl ;  for  we  are  to  lift  holy  hands 
without  wrath,  and  the  Spirit  makes  us  at  peace  with  ourselves.  2.  Without  prayer 
«  man  shows  himself  to  he  destitute  of  the  Spirit,  3.  What  a  resource  have  the  saints 
in  the  building  Tip  of  their  spiritual  lifel 

III.  The  sBLF-PBEaBKviNa  end  towakd  which  all  this  spiritual  effort  is 
DiKBOTBD.  "  Keep  yourselves  in  the  love  of  God."  1.  This  is  not  our  love  to  God, 
hut  i}od's  love  to  us,  in  which  we  dwell  as  in  a  region  of  safety — "  as  in  a  watch-tower," 
says  Calvin;  for  it  is  parallel  to  the  saying  of  our  Lord,  "Abide  ye  in  my  love"  (John 
XV.  9).  "  How  great,"  says  Jenkyn,  "  how  full,  a  good  is  God! "  In  him  is  all  fulness 
of  grace,  of  joy,  of  safety,  springing  out  of  his  infinite  love.  "  He  that  dwelleth  in  love 
dwelleth  in  God,  and  God  in  him  "  (1  John  iv.  16).  2.  Our  preservation  in  the  midst 
of  heresy  and  impiety  depends  on  ow  dwelling  in  Ood's  love.  3.  We  cannot  keep 
ourselves  in  God's  love  without  having  our  aivn  love  deeply  stirred.  This  breastplate 
of  love  will  be  a  preservative  against  seduction  (1  Tliess.  v.  8).  4.  We  ought  con- 
tinually to  pray  that  the  love  of  God  may  be  shed  abroad  in  our  hearts  by  the  Holy 
Ghost.  (Bom.  V.  5.)  $,  Saints  ought  ever  to  know  and  believe  that  love.  (1  John 
iv.  16.) 

IV.  Tee  expectation  that  is  linked  to  this  guaedianship  within  the  sphekb 
OF  God's  love,  "Looking  for  the  mercy  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  unto  eternal 
life."  1.  The  object  of  this  expectation.  (1)  It  ia  Christ's  mercy,  because:  (a)  He 
procured  it  by  his  merit,  (b)  He  applied  it  to  us  by  his  Spirit,  (c)  Ho  holds  out  its 
crowning  blessings  in  the  future  day  of  judgment:  "Come,  ye  blessed  of  my  Father." 
There  is  "  a  crown  gf  righteousness  in  that  day."  He  is  "  to  present  us  faultless  before 
the  presence  of  glory"  (ver.  24).  (d)  There  is  no  mercy  apart  from  Christ.  2.  The 
expectation  itself.  This  implies  (1)  a  confident  belief  in  the  reality  of  this  mercy; 
(2)  warm  desire  for  it;  (3)  patient  waiting  for  it  (Heb.  vL  12) ;  (4)  a  joyful  foretaste 
of  it  (Rom.  v.  2 ;  1  Pet.  i.  8) ;  (5)  the  love  of  his  "  appearance  "  (2  Tim.  iv.  8).  3.  The 
fiml  issue  of  the  expected  mercy.  "  Eternal  life."  This  is  the  true  life  of  man.  In  its 
final  glory  it  implies  the  function  of  God's  presence.  Augustine  says, "  Heaven  is  a  low 
thing  without  God."  Our  happiness  finds  its  end  in  everlasting  communion  with  God. 
4.  2'he  ^ects  which  this  expectOition  ought  to  exercise  upon  «s.  It  ought  (1)  to  preserve 
us  against  error  and  sin ;  (2)  to  quicken  our  zeal ;  (3)  to  make  us  faithful  in  the  dis- 
charge of  all  duty  ;  (4)  to  make  us  patient  in  the  endurance  of  trial. — T.  0. 

Vers.  22,  23. — Exhortation  to  faithful,  hut  discriminating,  dealing  with  three  classes 
of  transgressors.  I.  The  least  hopeless  class — the  unstable  and  disputatious. 
"  And  on  some  have  mercy,  who  contend  with  you."  We  are  to  be  compassionate 
towards  errorista  of  this  class.  1.  Compassion  becomes  a  Christian ;  for  he  ought  to 
have  the  very  bowels  of  Christ  himself.  2,  It  is  not  to  he  denied  to  errorists  of  a 
certain  dass.  They  are  entangled  with  doubts.  Their  very  disputations  imply  that 
they  are  restless  in  ipind.  We  are  to  restore  the  fallen  in  a  spirit  of  meekness.  "  We 
live  not  among  the  perfect,  but  such  as  a,re  subject  to  many  slips."  We  have  frequent 
need  ourselves  of  God's  pity  and  help.  3.  Wisdom  is  needed  in  dealing  with  the  fallen. 
Some  will  be  won  by  love  who  will  be  repelled  by  severity.  The  persons  in  this  first 
class  may  have  fallen  through  infirmity,  ignorance,  or  blinded  zeal. 

II.  Anotheb  class  to  be  treated  with  a  holy  severity.  "And  some  save, 
snatching  them  out  of  the  fire."  1.  This  dass  is  obdurate,  presumptuous,  and  without 
shoime.  They  have  not  known  the  bitterness  of  sin,  and  they  are  in  gTea,t  hazard. 
2.  The  saints  can,  in  a  sense,  save  transgressors.  "  How  knowest  thou,  0  man,  whether 
thou  shalt  save  thy  wife?  "  (1  Cor,  vii.  16)  j  " Thou  shalt  both  save  thyself,  and  them 
that  hear  thee "  (1  Tim,  iv.  16 ;  see  also  Jas,  v.  20).  Believers  can  rebuke  sinners, 
plead  with  them,  pray  for  them,  and  win  them  back  to  the  gospel.  3.  A  holy  severity 
it  often  needed  in  dealing  with  transgressors.  "  Knowing  the  terrors  of  the  Lord,  we 
persuade  men  "  (2  Cor.  v.  10).  Sinners  must  be  plucked  violently  from  the  fire.  Our 
severity  ought  to  have  a  saving  motive:  "Severity  to  sin  being  mercy  to  the  soul;" 
"  and  a  godly  heart,"  as  Jenkyn  says,  "  would  not  have  one  threat  the  less  in  the 
Bible,"    4.  The  wieked  are  fea,rless,  in  sin,  and  regardless  of  its  dread  consequences. 


i— 25.]  THE  (JENEEAL  EPISTLE  OP  JUDE.  83 


Yet  (1)  tboBO  who  are  in  the  fire  may  be  plucked  out.    (2)  The  merriment  of  a  sinner 
is  mudness.     The  flre  of  judgment  is  burning  under  his  feet,  and  he  knows  it  not. 

HI.  Tb9  most  hopeless  and  corrupt  class.  Those  to  be  sa^ed  by  appeals  to 
their  feat.  "  And  on  some  have  mercy  with  fear ;  hating  even  the  garment  spotted 
by  the  flesh."  I.  Such  sinners  need  to  be  confronted  with,  the  terrors  of  the  Law.  A 
holy  rigour  is  needful  for  corrupt  iind  proud  transgressors.  None  but  fools  hate  reproof. 
2.  The  saints  ought,  in  dealing  with  them,  to  watch  lest  they  should  receive  contami- 
natian.  (1)  Sinners  are  very  defiling  in  all  the  accessories  of  their  life.  (2)  Even  the 
saints  run  risks  of  defilement.  (3)  They  must  seek  to  avoid  even  the  appearance  of 
evil.  They  should  pray  to  be  "  kept  from  the  evil."  They  must  seek  to  purge  them- 
selves from  the  vessels  of  dishonour  (2  Tim.  ii.  21). — T.  0. 

YerB.2i,Z5.-^The  doxology.  I.  Tbe  Peebon  to  whom  praise  is  ascribed.  "Now 
unto  him  that  is  able  to  guard  you  from  stumbling,  and  to  set  you  before  the  presence 
of  his  glory  without  blemish  in  exceeding  joy,  to  the  only  God  our  Saviour,  througt 
Jeans  Christ  pnr  Lord."  1.  It  is  Qod  our  Saviour  presented  under  a  double  aspect 
(1)  As  he  who  alone  can  keep  us  from  stumbling  or  falling.  The  allusion  is  appro- 
priato  to  an  Epistyle  so  full  of  warnings  and  denunciations  and  exhortations,  and  which 
began  \yith  an  address  to  saints  as  those  "  preserved  for  Christ  Jesus."  We  stand  by 
faith,  and  we  can  only  stand  strong  "  in  the  Lord,  and  in  the  power  of  his  might."  "  He 
that  hath  begun  a  good  work  in  us  will  perform  it  till  the  day  of  Christ  Jesus  "  (Phil. 
i.  6).  (2)  As  he  who  will  present  us  in  final  glory,  (a)  "  Without  blemish ; "  for  the 
Church  will  then  be  "without  spot, or  wrinkle,  or  any  such  thing."  (6)  "  In  exceeding 
joy,"  where  there  is  fulness  of  joy;  for  he  "who  is  self-sufiBcient,  all-sufficient,  must 
nee&i  be  soul-sufficient."  2.  The  final  glory  comes  through  Jesus  Christ.  The  salva- 
tion, in  its  beginning,  progress,  and  end,  is  the  Lord's. 

IL  The  praise  ascribed  to  God.  "Be  glory,  majesty,  dominion,  and  power, 
before  all  time,  and  now,  and  for  evermore.  Amen."  These  men  who  despised 
dominion,  and  spoke  evil  of  dignities,  are  told  that  all  dominion  and  glory  belonged 
to  God  ages  before  they  were  born,  as  they  do  still  in  the  ages  of  time,  and  will  do  for 
ever  through  eternity.  Mark  the  threefold  phrase  for  "  eternity,"  as  if  to  carry  the 
threefold  idea  of  everything  out  to  the  very  end. — T.  C. 

Vers.  1 — i. — Christian  eo-operation  desired  in  the  defence  of  the  gospel.  The 
believers  to  whom  Jude  wrote  were  "  called "  by  an  external  and  spiritual  power  into 
the  fellowship  of  the  Church ;  had  been  "  preserved  "  from  the  gross  evils  and  corrup- 
tions which  sprang  up  in  those  early  days,  and  "  sanctified  by  God  the  Father,?'  and 
made  partakers  of  his  holiness.  As  he  claims  their  service  in  the  preservation  of  the 
faith  he  implores  "  mercy  "  that  they  may  be  enabled  to  help,  "  peace  "  of  mind  amid 
the  earnestness  of  their  contention  for  the  truth,  and  "love"  that  the  thought  of  the 
Divine  love  to  them  might  influence  them  to  speak  the  "truth  in  love"  to  others. 

L  The  spibitvai,  estimate  of  the  work  or  salvation.  Natural  men  pass  it 
by  with  indifference;  and,  if  they  regard  it,  object  to  its  claims,  its  doctrines,  and  its 
pursuits.  Jude,  James,  and  those  who  were  "  called,"  knew  that  it  was  the  highest 
and  most  precious  gift  of  God.  It  was  his  Divine  idea ;  "  for  of  him  are  all  things." 
It  was  the  result  of  a  marvellous  preparation,  and  was  accomplished  by  the  holy  sacri- 
fice of  our  Lord  on  "the  accursed  tree."  It  is  applied  by  the  eternal  Spirit,  and 
secures  forgiveness,  imparts  power  to  appropriate  good  from  all  agencies,  objects,  and 
conditions ;  and  prepares  for  eternal  glory.  It  saves  from  the  waste  of  our  life,  our 
labour,  own  influence,  and  property ;  and  makes  the  future  one  of  gracious  recompense 
and  imfailing  reward.  Many  things  in  the  world  engage  the  affections  and  tax  the 
energies  of  mankind,  among  which  are  to  be  found  the  alluremeuts  of  pleasure,  the 
attractions  of  power,  and  the  possession  of  gold ;  but  these,  when  viewed  in  the  clear 
and  heavenly  light  of  Divine  instruction,  appear  as  the  light  dust  of  the  balance,  and 
unworthy  of  our  highest  love  and  our  most  ardent  pursuit.  Whatever  difference  may 
be  found  in  place  of  abode,  and  diversity  of  forms  of  worship,  an  exalted  estimate  of 
the  gospel  is  the  broad  and  universal  mark  of  the  Church  of  Christ.  As  believers 
understand  the  worth  of  the  "  faith  once  delivered  to  the  saints,"  they  are  required  to 
watch  over  its  purity,  and  by  their  steady  profession  of  obedience  to  the  Saviour,  by 


54  THE   GENEEAL  EPISTLE   OF   JUDE.  [1— !i5. 


tne  fervour  of  their  prayers,  and  by  their  seasonable  advocacy  of  the  gospel,  are  to 
contend  for  its  preservation  from  mutilation  and  injury. 

II.  The  univrbsal  aspect  and  final  character  of  the  gospel  justify  endea- 
vour TO  preserve  it  unimpaired.  This  inspired  writer  was  a  Jew,  and  aU  the 
apostles  of  Christ  were  of  the  stock  of  Abraham,  and  had  been  trained  up  in  a  system 
of  local  sacrifice  and  national  privilege.  This  state  of  things  made  many  of  their 
countrymen  narrow  and  exclusive,  and  disposed  to  look  upon  other  nations  with  the 
8|)irit  of  dislike  and  even  of  contempt.  When  our  Lord  came  he  foretold  the  eitension 
of  grace  to  the  Gentiles,  and  said,  "  And  I,  if  I  be  lifted  up  from  the  earth,  will  draw  all 
men  unto  me."  His  followers  received  his  Spirit,  and  found  that,  "  where  the  Spirit  of 
the  Lord  was  there  was  liberty."  "  The  middle  wall  of  partition  was  thrown  down," 
and  now  by  one  Spirit  Jew  and  Gentile  have  "  access  to  the  Father,"  It  was  the 
"  common  salvation,"  and,  with  all  its  Divine  blessings  and  extraordinary  privileges, 
offered  to  men  of  every  clime  and  tongue,  that  they  might  be  fellow-heirs  with  believers 
who,  according  to  the  flesh,  descended  from  Abraham,  the  father  of  the  faithful.  It 
was  a  system  of  grace  which  was  the  last  and  abiding  revelation  of  the  will  of  God 
for  the  salvation  of  mankind.  There  had  been  vast  and  long-continued  processes  of 
gradual  discovery  to  patriarchs,  prophets,  and  psalmists ;  foreshadowings  in  the  cere- 
monial law,  and  typical  service  of  the  temple ;  continuous  and  far-reaching"  movements 
of  providence ;  and  all  these  were  designed  to  prepare  the  way  of  the  Lord,  and  herald 
his  approach,  who  is  "  the  End  of  the  Law  for  righteousness."  Previous  institutions 
were  to  give  way  and  be  shaken,  that  those  things  which  "  cannot  be  shaken  may 
remain."  The  kingdom  of  Christ  cannot  be  moved ;  and  the  truths  which  concern  it 
are  given  once  for  all.  None  can  add  to  them  or  take  from  them  without  being 
guilty  of  presumption  and  unfaithfulness.  They  are  committed  to  the  saints,  who  are 
bound  by  loyalty  to  Christ  their  King ;  and  by  a  desire  to  promote  the  good  of  others 
to  guard  the  sacred  and  invaluable  deposit. 

II.  The  grave  and  urgent  reasons  fob  spiritual  vigilance  and  courage.  Jude 
does  not  allude  to  any  persecution  outside  the  Church  which  demanded  steadfastness 
and  decision ;  but  he  points  to  those  adversaries  who  with  policy  and  cunning  climbed 
up  some  other  way,  and  were  dangerous  because  their  corruption  of  Christian  doctrine 
and  of  personal  conduct  proved  them  to  be  enemies  of  the  cross  of  Christ.  They  proved 
the  truth  of  Cowper's  lines — 

"Errors  in  life  breed  errors  in  the  brain. 
And  these  reoipiocally  those  again." 

These  men  entered  into  the  Church,  as  the  serpent  into  Paradise,  to  tempt  and  seduce 
believers  from  the  truth.  They  were  the  apostles  of  Satan,  and  turned  the  glorious 
grace  of  the  gospel,  which  was  given  to  deliver  from  sin,  into  indulgence  in  sensual 
pleasure,  and  thereby  turned  the  clemency  of  God  into  a  motive  to  further  and  more 
frequent  rebellion  against  him.  It  was  a  heavy  charge  against  Israel  that  "  she  did  not 
know  that  I  fiave  her  corn,  and  wine,  and  oil,  and  multiplied  her  silver  and  gold,  which 
they  prepared  for  Baal "  (Hos.  ii.  8).  If  Jehovah  was-  righteously  angry  at  such  per- 
version of  temporal  gifts,  how  much  more  must  he  be  offended  by  the  profanation  of  his 
gospel  to  purposes  of  selfish  indulgence !  By  the  ministry  of  Jude  he  calls  them  to 
share  in  his  righteous  displeasure  against  sin.  To  add  to  their  transgressions  and  mis- 
belief, these  offenders  denied  the  right  of  Jesus  Christ  to  control  and  shape  their  life  and 
conduct.  He  died  that,  "whether  we  live,  we  are  to  live  to  the  Lord  ;  or  whether  we 
die,  we  are  to  die  to  the  Lord  :  whether  we  live  therefore,  or  die,  we  are  the  Lord's." 
These  views  were  not  innncent  as  differences  about  meats ;  but  they  affected  the  very 
spirit  and  object  of  the  gospel ;  and,  therefore,  required  of  believers  their  most  zealous 
concern  for  those  things  which  were  the  means  of  their  salvation  and  the  basis  of  theii 
hopes  of  eternal  life.  Characters  of  the  description  here  introduced  were  already  con- 
demned by  the  voice  of  God  ;  and  »  hatever  their  smooth  and  deceitful  policy,  whatever 
reluctance  to  censure  these  Christinns  might  feel,  they  were,  since  such  solemn  interests 
were  in  jeopardy,  to  "  con  tend  earnestly  for  the  faith  once  delivered  to  the  saints."— 
J.  S.  B. 

Vers.  6 — 16. — Here  sro  reasons  for  resisting  evil  men  drawn  from  examples  ofth« 


1—25,]  THE  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OP  JUDE.  86 

Divine  mnger  against  others.  As  a  scribe  well-instructed,  Jade  brings  from  the  treasures 
of  Old  Testament  truth  suitable  illustrations  to  inspire  believers  with  becoming  earnest- 
ness in  the  W(jrk  of  defending  the  purity  of  the  Church,  and  the  completeness  of  Chris- 
tian doctrine.  They  are  reminded  that  no  special  relation  to  Jehovah — like  that  which 
subsisted  between  Israel  and  their  Redeemer  from  the  slavery  of  Egypt — will  avail 
to  protect  men  from  the  penalties  of  disobedience  ;  and  therefore  many  who  had 
been  delivered  by  miracle  and  by  the  mighty  power  of  God  were  overthrown  in  the 
wilderness.  There  is  a  higher  illustration  adduced,  which  affirms  that  no  dignity  of 
nature  such  as  the  angels  possessed,  and  no  past  perfection  of  adoration  and  service, 
will  screen  offenders  from  merited  punishment.  The  "first  estate"  of  the  angels  was 
one  of  splendour — ample  knowledge  drawn  from  the  unclouded  revelation  of  God,  and 
blessednoss  of  emotion ;  but  the  awful  righteousness  of  the  eternal  throne  casr  them 
into  outer  darkness,  and  reserves  them  for  future  condemnation  and  shame.  The  last 
example  is  drawn  from  the  wide  and  hateful  corruption  of  those  who  dwelt  in  one  of  the 
fairest  tmd  most  fruitful  regions  of  ancient  Canaan.  The  spot,  which  was  well  watered 
and  like  the  garden  of  the  Lord,  was  defiled  by  man,  wliose  sin  drew  down  the  flames  of 
the  Divine  anger,  which  turned  the  region  into  desolation  and  made  it  permanent  witnesa 
for  the  hatred  of  God  against  iniquity.  Such  demonstrations  of  the  mind  of  Jehovah 
respecting  sinners  and  their  punishment  should  create  in  believers  definite  impressions 
of  the  evil  of  disobedience,  and  a  determination,  by  Christian  methods,  to  denounce  it 
wherever  they  find  it  active,  and  endeavour  to  check  and  restrain  its  spread  and  influence. 

I.  It  invites  us  to  consider  the  shameful  misuse  of  knowledoe  and  speech. 
These  men  who  crept  into  the  Church  appear  to  have  revealed  the  corruption  of  their 
nature  during  the  hours  of  sleep — since  they  were  the  same  wicked  offenders  as  when 
they  were  full  of  activity  during  the  day,  and  their  nature,  like  the  "  troubled  sea,  cast 
forth  mire  and  dirt."  With  this  sad  feature  of  their  life  there  was  connected  the  spirit 
of  contempt  for  magistracy  and  the  powers  that  were  "  ordained  of  God."  To  condemn 
this  spirit  of  scorn  and  derision  a  fact  is  introduced  which  shows  the  spirit  of  reverence 
which  obtains  in  heaven.  Michael  the  archangel,  one  of  the  most  lofty  and  noble 
among  the  "  principalities  and  powers,"  is  brought  to  oppose  and  turn  aside  the  accusa- 
tions of  Satan,  who  is  a  fallen  and  lying  spirit,  and  is  eager,  agreeably  to  the  vision  of 
Zechariah  (iii.  2)  to  urge  the  destruction  of  Israel,  whose  plight  is  represented  by  the 
high  priest  clothed  in  filthy  garments.  The  Jews  restored  from  captivity  are  like  a  half- 
consumed  brand  nr  branch;  and  Satan,asamurderer,desires  the  annihilation  of  the  tribes 
of  Israel.  He  is  rebuked  with  calm  dignity,  when  Michael  might  have  overpowered  him 
with  terrific  and  well-deserved  upbraidings.  The  evil  users  of  their  speech  and  knowledge 
are  condemned  because  they  presumptuously  venture  to  speak  scornfully  of  Divine 
things,  which,  as  "  natural  men,"  they  cannot  understand ;  and  whereas  the  light  and 
instincts  of  nature  should  guide  to  certain  lines  of  conduct,  even  there  they  grossly 
abuse  and  pervert  their  faculties  and  powers  to  dishonourable  indulgence.  These  facts 
show  the  deplorable  activity  of  sin,  and  should  awaken  the  prayer  for  that  preservation 
from  the  evil  of  the  world,  which  is  impressively  suggested  in  the  intercessory  petitions 
offered  by  our  Lord  just  before  his  sufferings  and  death. 

II.  The  feabful  portrait  which  Jude  presents  of  these  transgressors  and 
thkir  final  condemnation  by  the  Lord  Jesus  at  his  appeabinq.  They  are 
described  as  murmurers  and  complainers  against  the  methods  of  providence — the  rulers 
of  countries  and  the  claims  of  the  gospel.  They  have  men's  persons  in  admiration ;  as 
Tertullus  complimented  Felix,  who  was  a  cruel  governor,  to  prejudice  his  mind  against 
Paul  (Acts  xxiv.  2,  3),  by  means  of  "  great  swelling  words."  These  offenders  followed 
Cain  in  his  unacceptable  worship,  in  which  there  was  no  sacrifice  of  a  victim,  no  contri- 
tion of  spirit,  and  no  prayer  for  me.cy.  They  imitated  the  temper  of  Balaam,  who  for 
gain  would  have  injured  the  tribes  of  Israel;  and  in  the  way  of  ambition  rose  up,  as 
Korah  and  his  company,  against  the  solemn  appoi  iitmeuts  of  the  Aaronio  family  to  serve 
at  the  altar.  In  the  agape,  or  love-feast,  they  act  as  rocks  at  sea,  upon  which  the  ship 
is  driven  and  wrecked.  They  are  shepherds  who  feed  themselves  without  restraint ; 
clouds  that  promise  rain,  and  yet  distil  no  moisture  on  the  thirsty  soil ;  trees  which 
bear  no  fruit  ;  and  wandering  stars  which  guide  no  traveller ;  and  hasten  to  deserved  and 
eternal  darkness.  The  ancient  '  Book  of  Enoch '  foretells  their  certain  and  inevitable 
doom.    The  Son  of  God— who  in  his  own  character,  and  in  the  treatment  of  his  people, 


86  THE  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OF  JUDB.  [1—25. 

who  are  membera  of  his  mystical  body,  has  endured  reproach,  accusation,  and  calumny 
— will  come  to  be  glorified  in  hia  saints,  and  take  vengeance  upon  them  that  know  not 
God,  and  that  obey  not  the  gospel,  of  which  he  is  the  Centre  and  the  Glory.  In  view  of 
the  vast  corruption  of  these  men,  and  the  fearful  prospects  which  await  them,  the  allusion 
to  believers  being  "preserved  iu  Christ  Jesus"  acquires  a  power  and  depth  of  meaning 
which  could  scarcely  fail  to  awaken  the  ardours  of  gratitude  to  him  who  had  kept  them 
in  times  of  fiery  temptation. — J.  S.  B. 

Vers.  17 — 21. — Believers  urged  to  remember  the  prophecies  of  the  apostles,  and  to  note 
their  fulfilment.  Jude  acknowledges  the  truth  that  the  apostles  spake  under  the  guidance 
of  the  Holy  Spirit  as  really  aa  Isaiah  and  Jeremiah ;  and  their  predictions  of  the 
working  of  Satan  and  his  servants  were  delivered  partly  by  word  of  mouth,  and  partly 
by  writings  addressed  to  the  Churches,  and  to  evangelists  like  Timothy.  Paul  affiriDS 
that  there  would  be  many  whose  charactevs  resembled  those  described  in  this  Epistle 
(see  2  Tim,  iii.  1^-6).  These  offenders  would  "mock"  sacred  things  and  sacred 
persons ;  and  in  the  spirit  of  scorn  would  exclude  themselves  from  saving  knowledge, 
and  repeat  the  experience  of  Herod,  before  whom  the  Son  of  God  would  work  no 
miracle  and  utter  no  word ;  no,  not  even  of  reproof.  The  life  of  these  men  would  be 
impure,  their  spirit  factious  and  schismatic;  and  they  would  prove  that  they  were 
in  their  natural  state — for  "  that  which  is  bom  of  the  flesh  is  flesh  " — and  were  therefore 
deprived  of  the  life-giving  and  purifying  presence  of  the  Divine  Spirit.  These  believers 
were  to  observe  the  inspired  predictions  of  the  apostles;  and  then  mark  how  the  prophecy 
corresponded  with  the  facts.  If  they  remembered  these  things  they  would  find  their 
memory  a  means  of  grace,  and,  instead  of  being  shaken  iu  mind,  they  might  from  these 
Bad  examples  draw  reasons  for  firmer  faith  and  more  steady  profession  of  the  gospel. 

Here  we  have  special  ddtibs  and  pbivileqes  of  believers  associated  with  the 
OFFICES  AKD  GRACE  OF  THE  HoLT  Trinitt.  They  are  first  encouraged  to  pursue  the 
work  of  building  up  their  spiritual  life  and  character,  which  assumes  that  a  foundation 
has  been  laid  by  faith  in  Christ ;  and  that  the  fabric  is  to  be  carj-ied  up,  by  the  addition 
of  similar  materials,  to  visibility  and  permanence.  To  realize  this  blessing  there  must 
be  prayer  in  association  with  tjie  help  of  the  Bivine  Spirit,  who  will  unfold  the  work 
of  new  covenant  blessings,  and  prompt  the  suppliant  to  geek  the  "  fruits  of  the  Spirit " 
in  all  their  variety  and  inexpressible  value.  Christians  are  then  exhorted  to  keep 
themselves  in  the  circle  of  the  Father's  love,  that  they  may  realize  all  the  benefits  of 
adoption,  and  maintain  a  becoming  confidence  in  the  aim  of  all  his  discipline  which  is 
to  prepare  them  for  eternal  life.  However  diversified  his  methods  may  be,  his  purpose 
is  unchangeable  and  gracious ;  obedience  to  his  will  is  the  way  to  rest  in  his  love,  and 
to  be  in  the  way  of  his  gracious  manifestations  to  hie  children.  All  these  counsels  are 
concluded  by  an  exhortation  to  look  for  eternal  life  through  Christ.  His  mercy  begins 
this  spiritual  life — and  the  same  mercy  is  seen  in  patience  with  our  slowness — the 
revival  and  strengthening  of  spiritual  convictions,  and  supplies  of  Divine  grace.  The 
Lord  Jesus  often  directed  the  minds  of  his  disciples  to  the  future  life,  in  which  would 
be  found  the  consummation  of  his  purposes  in  the  peace,  security,  joy,  and  perfection 
of  his  followers.  The  completeness  of  these  counsels  is  worth  our  observation.  The 
greatness  of  the  work  of  edification  leads  to  prayer  in  the  Spirit.  Pjayer  in  the  Spirit 
will  conduce  to  growing  impressions  of  the  Father's  love ;  and  all  v? ill  tend  to  promote 
anticipation  and  desire  of  eternal  life  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord. — J.  S.  B. 

Vers.  22,  23. — Believers  who  enjoy  the  llessing  of  mercy  from  Christ  are  required  to 
show  mercy  to  others.  It  is  probable  that  there  were  many  in  the  circle  of  the  Church 
whose  spiritual  condition  required  judicious  and  compassionate  treatment ;  and  all  who 
were  strong  in  faith  were  here,  as  in  many  other  parts  of  the  New  Testament,  counselled 
to  help  and  restore  others  to  peace  and  spiritual  strength.  There  must  be  merciful 
consideration  of  such  as  are  perplexed  with  doubts  and  anxieties ;  for,  according  to  the 
original,  the  phrase,  "  making  a  difference,"  seems  to  refer  to  such  as  were  troubled  by 
a  scrupulous  conscience.  To  such  Paul  refers  when  he  writes,  "  But  him  that  is  weak 
in  the  faith  receive  ye,  yet  not  to  doubtful  disputations."  Others  are  to  be  snatched 
like  a  half-burnt  brand  from  the  fire,  lest  they  be  entirely  lost  by  being  "  swallowed 
up  with  overmuch  grief; "  or  some  earnest  cautions  were  to  be  given  to  those  who  stood 


1—25.]  THE  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OP  JUDE.  87 

in  great  moral  peril ;  or  by  ^onizing  prayer  a  soul  might  be  saved  fipom  spiritual  death. 
Spiritual  caution  was  necessary  in  some  special  casos,  since  mercy  was  to  be  exercised 
with  "  fear "  lest  the  taint  of  fleshly  evil  should  defile  those  who  treated  them  for  the 
purposes  of  penitence  and  restoration.  The  garment  which  must  be  touched  must  be 
hated,  while  the  sinner  was  pitied  and  forgiven.  These  thoughts  remind  us  of  the 
responsibility  of  the  Christian's  state,  and  the  obligation  which  lies  upon  him  to  diffuse 
blessings  around  him.  He  will  not  he  inattentive  to  the  claims  of  others,  and  will  not 
walk  in  the  way  of  Cain,  who  said,  "  Am  I  my  brother's  keeper  ?  "  If  the  scrupulous, 
the  erring,  and  those  who  are  in  moral  danger,  are  neglected  by  the  followers  of  Christ, 
how  can  they  be  warned,  restored,  and  strengthened  ?-— J.  S.  B. 

Vers.  24,  25. — The  sublime  character  of  OhriBtian  prayer.  It  is  permitted  ns  to  pray 
for  temporal  supplies  and  all  things  which  are  necessary  for  the  life  of  the  body;  but 
the  general  current  of  petitions  recorded  in  the  New  Testament  has  regard  to  the 
worth  of  spiritual  advantages,  and  the  enduring  blessedness  of  the  life  to  come.  Jude 
teaches  us  to  pray  for  ourselves  and  for  others,  that  when  our  Lord  shall  appear  the 
second  time  there  may  be  acceptance  and  welcome.  It  is  an  immense  privilege  to  be 
kept "  fi:om  falling  "  or  stumbling,  from  the  prevalence  of  doubts,  trust  in  ceremonies, 
and  from  being  surprised  by  grievous  sins.  This  precious  safety  must  flow  from  him 
who  has  power  over  the  external  conditions  of  our  life,  and  over  the  inward  processes  of 
thought  and  meditation,  and  can  strengthen  us  by  his  Spirit  "  in  the  inner  man."  The 
desire  expressed  by  Jude  includes  the  continuance  and  completeness  of  the  process  of 
sanotification ;  the  attainment,  through  the  mighty  power  of  Christ,  of  a  glorified  body 
on  the  day  of  the  resurrection ;  and  entrance  into  the  inheritance  of  the  saints  in  light. 
Notice — 

I.  The  wisdom  of  bolicitino  thb  oo-opbration  of  DrvniB  power  to  establish 
A?!D  PRESERVE  CHRISTIAN  WORE.  It  is  instructive  to  observe  the  pains  and  care  with 
which  inspired  apostles  marshalled  their  arguments  when  they  wrote  to  the  Churches. 
It  is  impossible  not  to  admire  the  fervour  and  urgency  with  which  they  exhort  believers 
to  avoid  inconstancy,  worldliness,  and  evil  associations ;  and  at  the  same  time,  they  Wisely 
introduce  promises,  encouragements,  and  cheering  prospects  to  prompt  them  to  make 
their  "  calling  and  election  sure."  They  then  supplicate  grace  to  give  effect  to  their 
work,  and  to  fulfil  the  desire  of  their  hearts.  The  seed  which  is  sown  needs  the  rain 
and  sunshine  of  heaven  to  make  it  prosper,  that  he  who  has  sown  in  tears  may  come 
back  "  with  rejoicing,  bringing  his  sheaves  with  him."  This  truth  is  illustrated  by  a  very 
cheering  passage  which  describes  the  happy  experience  of  Paul  and  Apollos,  in  which 
we  find  the  zeal  and  power  of  the  apostle  of  the  G^entiles,  and  the  learniDg.and  eloquence 
of  Apollos,  applied  to  the  work  of  the  ministry,  and  the  happy  success  with  which  the 
Divine  blessing  crowned  their  labours ;  for  said  Paul,  "  I  planted,  Apollos  watered ;  but 
God  gave  the  increase  "  (1  Cor.  iii.  6). 

II.  The    HAPPINESS  of  CONCLUDINO   our  work  with   GRATITtrDB   TO   THB  SoUROB  OP 

ALL  GOOD.  Jude  reached  the  close  of  the  Epistle  with  the  conviction  that  the  Divine 
love  seen  in  the  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Spirit  should  awaken  feelings  of  fervent 
thanksgiving.  The  Father  is  the  Fountain  of  salvation;  the  Son,  the  Medium  of 
grace  to  us,  and  the  Way  of  our  approach  to  God;  the  Holy  Spirit  enables  us  to 
realize  and  enjoy  the  blessings  of  the  covenant  of  grace.  It  is  right  to  ascribe  to  God 
the  "  glory,"  which  is  the  manifestation  of  his  excellence  in  the  past,  the  present,  and 
wondrous  future;  "majesty,"  which  consists  in  royal  state;  "dominion,"  which  is 
supreme  over  all  things  and  beings;  "power,"  whereby  he  can  realize  tlie  counsels  of 
his  own  will,  and  his  right  to  our  eternal  adoration  and  service.  Such  is  the  close  of 
the  Epistle,  and  such  should  he  the  close  of  our  life-work.  In  this  way  David  ended 
his  career,  and  said,  "  Thine,  0  Lord,  is  the  greatness,  and  the  power,  and  the  glory, 
and  the  victory,  and  the  majesty :  for  all  that  is  in  the  heaven  and  in  the  earth  is 
tliine  ;  thine  is  the  kingdom,  0  Lord,  and  thou  art  exalted  as  Head  above  all. .  .  .  Now 
therefore,  our  God,  we  thank  thee,  and  praise  thy  glorious  Name"  (1  Chron.  zxix.  11— 
13).    Amen.— J.  S.  B. 

Vers,  1 — 25. — The  Letter.  1,  Introduction.  1.  Address.  (1)  Writer.  "Judaa, 
a  servant  of  Jesus   Christ,  and  brother  of  James."     The  first  designation  of  Jude 


38  THE  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OF  JUDB.  [1—25. 

points  to  his  being  a  minister  of  the  gospeL  The  second  designation  points  to  him 
as  not  so  well  known  as  his  brother  James.  He  does  not  take  the  designation  of 
"  apostle ; "  and  this  is  in  favour  of  his  being  brother  of  the  James  who  was  so  well 
known  as  head  of  the  Church  in  Jerusalem,  and  therefore  also  brother  of  the  Lord. 
Ohtrusiveness  cannot  be  charged  against  Jude.  He  professes  to  write  as  the  Lord's 
servant,  not  as  the  Lord's  brother;  and  when  he  does  bring  in  natural  relation- 
ship it  is  not  to  the  Lord,  but  to  James.  (2)  Readers.  "To  them  that  are 
called,  beloved  in  God  the  Father,  and  kept  for  Jesus  Christ."  There  is  no  indication 
given  of  locality.  The  first  designation  (to  follow  the  order  in  the  original)  points 
to  the  overflowing  of  love  on  them  as  belonging  to  the  family  of  God.  The  second 
designation  points  to  watch  being  kept  over  them  for  Jesus  Christ  who  is  to  have 
satisfaction  in  their  destiny.  ■  The  third  designation,  following  on  the  other  two, 
points  to  their  having  been  effectually  brought  within  the  family  circle  of  God  and  its 
privileges.  2.  Salutation.  "  Mercy  unto  you  and  peace  and  love  he  multiplied."  The 
first  word  of  salutation  points  to  their  being  regarded  under  troublous  conditions.  The 
second  word  of  salutation  points  to  their  enjoyment  of  the  Divine  protection.  The  third 
word  of  salutation  points  to  their  being  (generally)  delighted  in  by  God.  This  Divine 
blessing  is  already  realized :  let  it  be  realized  a  hundredfold. 

II.  Tee  letter.  1.  Purpose.  (1)  Bis  original  purpose.  "  Beloved,  while  I  was 
giving  all  diligence  to  write  unto  you  of  our  common  salvation."  Jude  was  busily 
engaged  in  the  collection  of  materials  for  a  treatise,  which,  if  we  may  judge  from  this 
fragment,  would  have  been  masterly.  It  did  not  seem  good  to  the  Spirit  to  give  more 
than  the  title  of  the  contemplated  treatise,  which  is  very  suggestive,  viz.  "  Our  common 
salvation."  It  is  a  salvation  which  was  wrought  out  for  men  simply  as  sinners.  Respect 
was  had  to  the  wniversal  fact  of  sin.  "  For  all  have  sinned,  and  come  short  of  the  glory 
of  God."  When  men  had  common  implication  in  sin,  and  could  do  nothing  for  them- 
■elves,  God  in  Christ  wrought  out  for  them  a  common  salvation.  It  is  a  salvation  which 
i«  enjoyed  simply  on  the  condition  of  faith.  There  is  not  the  test  of  social  condition, 
nor  the  test  of  race,  but  the  test  of  that  disposition  which  is  called  faith.  All  who 
humble  themselves  as  sinners,  and  accept  of  what  has  been  wrought  out  for  them  by 
Christ,  are  saved.  (2)  Sis  purpose  as  changed.  "  I  was  constrained  to  v^rite  vmto  you 
exhorting  you  to  contend  earnestly  for  the  faith  which  was  once  for  aU  delivered  unto 
the  saints."  His  purpose  was  changed  by  a  necessity  arising  before  its  fuU  accomplish- 
ment, on  which  light  is  thrown  in  the  next  verse ;  but  it  was  not  entirely  changed. 
His  changed  purpose  related  to  the  faith,  i.e.  contents  of  the  faith,  which  were  essentially 
these — that  for  himian  salvation  the  Son  of  God  became  incarnate,  that  in  human 
nature  he  endured  the  fuU  desert  of  sin,  that  in  enduring  the  full  desert  of  sin  he  emitted 
a  protest  against  sin  as  what  was  not  to  be  permitted  with  impunity  under  the  govern- 
ment of  God.  This  faith  was  deUvered  unto  the  saints,  Le.  Christians  (one  and  all  of 
them),  of  whom,  in  accordance  with  the  faith,  holiness  is  expected.  It  was  delivered 
OTua  for  all,  i.e.  so  as  to  admit  of  elucidation,  but  not  of  addition  (by  deliverances  from 
age  to  age).  The  faith  is  the  same  for  Christians  of  all  generations.  Jude's  purpose 
with  reference  to  the  common  faith,  which  otherwise  might  have  been  distinctively 
expository,  became  distinctively  hortatory.  The  common  faith  carried  with  it  a  common 
obligation,  viz.  to  fight  in  its  defence.  In  penning  this  Epistle,  Jude  was  an  earnest 
comhatant.  But  the  obligation  was  not  confined  to  him.  He  wished  his  readers  also 
to  feel  the  obligation  of  defending  as  they  could  the  faith — preserving  firom  all  attenua- 
tion or  disparagement  the  entrance  of  the  Son  of  God  into  our  nature,  his  satisfaction 
for  sin,  his  emphatic  protest  against  the  indifference  of  sin.  2.  Occasion.  "  For  there 
are  certain  men  crept  in  privily,  Bven  they  who  were  of  old  set  forth  unto  this  condem- 
nation, ungodly  men,  turning  the  graca  of  our  God  into  lasciviousness,  and  denying  our 
only  Master  and  Lord,  Jesus  Christ."  Juds's  alarm  was  occasioned  by  the  presence  of 
inUtiders  in  the  Christian  fold.  These  crept  in  privily — literally, "  entered  in  aside  from," 
i.e.  did  not  enter  in  by  the  door.  They  are  described  indefinitely  as  certain  men,  being 
not  definitely,  or  all  of  them,  false  teacherg.  They  fell  back  on  false  ideas,  but  more  in 
the  way  of  justifying  their  immoral  conduct.  Jude  puts  to  the  front  their  condemnation, 
which  he  is  to  announce,  and  alaj  (as  he  is  to  show)  their  being  of  old  set  forth  unto 
this  condemnation  as  being  men  of  a  certain  character  which  is  described.  They  were 
mngodly  men,  Le.  they  wanted  eipecially  reference  toward  God  (want  of  right  feeling 


1—25.]  THE  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OF  JUDE.  89 

toward  God  being  founded  on  an  unworthy  conception  of  God).  To  the  adopted  into 
the  family  of  God  the  grace  of  our  God  is  most  sacred ;  but  these  treated  it  irreverently, 
turning  freedom  from  the  condemning  power  of  the  Law  into  freedom  from  the  regulative 
power  of  the  Law.  Especially  was  their  antinomianism  associated  with  lasciviousness. 
The  adopted  into  the  family  of  God  acknowledge  Jesus  Christ  as  their  only  Master  and 
Lord,  i.e.  as  having  alone  power  to  sway  and  direct  them ;  these  are  antichristian,  in 
refusing  to  acknowledge  Jesus  Christ  as  having  the  sole  swaying  and  directing  of  them. 

III.  Three  examples  op  judgment.  1.  The  people  redeemed  from  Egyptian  bondage. 
"  Now  I  desire  to  put  you  in  remembrance,  though  ye  know  all  things  once  for  all,  how 
that  the  Lord,  having  saved  a  people  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt,  afterward  destroyed  them 
that  believed  not."  They  had  got  once  for  all  in  the  knowledge  of  Christ  the  key  to  the 
interpretation  of  all  things ;  he  might  therefore  have  left  them  to  find  out  examples  for 
themselves.  He  would  only  put  them  in  mind  of  a  few.  He  takes  his  first  example 
ffom  the  generation  of  Israel  that  come  out  of  Egypt.  The  Lord  stood  forth  a  first 
time,  and  it  was  to  save  a  people.  I{e  stood  forth  a  second  time  (this  is  the  literal 
rendering  of  the  word  which  is  translated  "  afterward  "),  and  it  was  not  to  save,  but  to 
destroy.  It  might  have  been  expected  that  the  generation  who  had  seen  the  great 
works  of  the  Lord  in  Egypt,  for  whom  the  Red  Sea  was  parted,  would  have  believed  j 
yet  this  was  the  generation  that  perished  in  the  wilderness  for  their  unbelief.  If  the 
Lord  works  deliverance  for  us,  it  is  that  we  may  believe ;  if  we  show  a  disregard  of  the 
Divine  works,  an  insensibility  to  their  importance,  we  can  only  expect  that  the  Lord 
will  .stand  forth  some  day  when  we  may  not  be  thinking  of  it,  and  this  time  not  to 
deliver,  but  to  destroy,  so  that  we  never  reach  the  heavenly  Canaan.  2.  The  angeh 
that  appreciated  not  their  rule  and  their  abode,  "  And  angels  which  kept  not  their  own 
principality,  but  left  their  proper  habitation,  he  hath  kept  in  everlasting  bonds  under 
darkness  until  the  judgment  of  the  great  day."  We  are  here  given  to  understand  that 
these  angels  had  their  own  rule,  i.e.  under  God,  and  their  own  habitation,  i.e.  a  place  in 
heaven.  Their  rule,  though  necessarily  circumscribed  in  comparison  with  Divine  rule, 
was  important  in  ways  that  we  cannot  clearly  define ;  their  habitation  was  light  and 
peace  and  joy.  It  might  have  been  expected  that  they  would  have  been  content  with 
what  they  possessed ;  but  no ;  there  was  something  else  which  appeared  more  desirable 
to  them,  and  for  it  they  kept  not  their  own  principality,  but  left  their  own  habitation. 
And  what  an  irony  in  the  exchange  they  made  1  Instead  of  keeping  power,  they  were 
kept  in  bonds.  Instead  of  "having  an  abode  of  light,'  they  were  kept  under  darkness. 
They  are  to  be  kept  in  everlasting  bonds  ("  everlasting  "  having  here  a  limited  sense) 
until  the  judgment  of  the  great  day,  when  their  false  preference  is  to  be  adjudicated 
on.  If  we  appreciate  not  the  position  of  influence  God  means  us  to  fill,  and  the  light 
and  happiness  he  would  appoint  for  us  on  earth,  but  prefer  something  else,  there  are 
certainly  bonds  and  darkness  for  us  until  the  great  assize.  3.  Sodom  and  Qomorrah. 
"  Even  as  Sodom  and  Gomorrah,  and  the  cities  about  them,  having  in  like  manner 
with  these  given  themselves  over  to  fornication,  and  gone  after  strange  flesh,  are  set 
forth  as  an  example,  suffering  the  punishment  of  eternal  fire."  The  inhabitants  of 
these  cities  gave  themselves  over  to  fornication,  and  went  after  strange  flesh,  i.e.  other 
than  human.  They  did  this  in  like  manner  with  the  angels,  there  being  an  unnatural- 
ness  in  the  sin  of  the  angel^^,  but  not  the  same  unnatuialness.  Their  abominations  did 
not  escape  the  notice  of  God;  they  suffered  for  them  the  punishment  of  fire.  The 
fire  is  regarded  as  eternal,  inasmuch  as  its  consequences  remain.  The  Dead  Sea  covers 
the  sites  of  those  cities.  It  is  said  in  ver.  4,  "  They  who  were  of  old  set  forth  unto 
this  condemnatiiin ; "  or  it  is  said  here  "  are  set  forth  as  an  example."  We  are  intended 
to  learn  from  the  inhabitants  of  those  old  cities,  or  from  the  buried  cities  themselves. 
If  we  give  ourselves  up  to  forbidden  pleasures,  will  not  the  judgment-day  bring  punish- 
ment as  of  eternal  fire  ? 

IV.  Two  CHARAOTBRISTI08  OP  THE  INTBDDBB8.  "  Yet  in  like  manner  those  also  in 
their  dreamings  defile  the  flesh,  and  set  at  nought  dominion,  and  rail  at  dignities."  Their 
first  characteristic  was  defiling  the  flesh  (corresponding  to  "  lasciviousness  "  in  ver.  4). 
They  did  this  in  like  manner  with  the  inhabitants  of  the  cities  of  the  plain,  by  whose 
fate  they  were  not  warned.  Their  second  characteristic  was  setting  at  nought  dominion 
and  raUing  at  dignities  (corresponding  to  "  denying  our  only  Master  and  Lord"  in  rer. 
4).    They  did  this  in  like  manner  with  the  Israelites  who  believed  not,  and  witt  the 


<0  THE  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OF  JUDB.  [1—25, 

angels  who  valued  not  their  rule  and  their  habitation.  Lordship  over  them  (in  Christ) 
they  despised ;  dignities  (belonging  to  the  heavenly  world)  they  railed  at.  They  did 
this  when  they  should  have  been  warned  by  the  judgments  on  Israel  and  on  the  angels. 
Both  these  characteristics  were  displayed  by  them  in  their  dreamings,  i.e.  "in  the 
arbitrary  fancies  of  their  own  perverted  sense,  which  rendered  them  deaf  to  the  truths 
and  warnings  of  the  Divine  Word.'.' 

IV.  Theie  conduct  contrasted  with  that  ot  Michael.  1.  Michael.  "But 
Michael  the  archangel,  when  contending  with  the  devil  he  disputed  about  the  body  of 
Moses,  durst  not  bring  against  him  a  railing  judgment,  but  said.  The  Lord  rebuke  thee." 
"  And  the  Lord  buried  him  in  a  valley  in  the  land  of  Moab,  over  against  Beth-peor  5 
but  no  man  knoweth  of  his  sepulchre  unto  this  day."  There  was  a  Jewish  tradition 
that  the  grave  of  Moses  was  given  to  the  special  custody  of  Michael.  There  seems  also 
to  have  been  a  tradition  (which  cannot  be  traced)  of  a  dispute  which  Michael  had  about 
the  body  of  Moses.  That  the  dispute  was  matter  of  fact  is  here  certified.  It  throws 
light  both  on  the  importance  of  Moses  and  on  the  spirit  of  Michael.  Of  so  much 
importance  was  Moses  to  the  Israelites  that  there  was  danger  of  their  worshipping  him 
after  his  death.  His  body  was  therefore  put  beyond  their  search,  and  placed  under  the 
care  of  Michael.  The  devil,  assuming  a  claim  to  the  body  as  death's  prey,  sought  to 
get  it  back  for  the  enticement  of  the  Israelites.  Michael,  contending  with  him  in 
defence  of  his  charge,  was  indignant  at  the  attempt  to  thwart  the  Divine  purpose ;  but 
he  did  not  allow  himself  to  be  abusive  in  his  condemnation.  Having  respect  to  his 
adversary's  original  dignity,  he  simply  said,  "The  Lord  rebuke  thee."  The  same 
language  was  used  when  an  attempt  was  made  to  stop  the  building  of  the  temple. 
Satan  is  represented  as  at  the  right  hand  of  Joshua,  the  high  priest,  in  the  act  of 
resisting  him.  The  Lord  (as  Joshua's  defender)  said  unto  Satan, "  The  Lord  rebuke 
thee."  2.  Contrast.  "  But  these  rail  at  whatsoever  things  they  know  not :  and  what 
they  understand  naturally,  like  the  creatures  without  reason,  in  these  things  are  they 
destroyed."  In  contrast  with  Michael,  these  had  no  proper  knowledge  of  the  heavenly 
dignities  that  they  railed  at  (of  the  nature  and  position  given  by  G-od);  there  was  a 
brutish  kind  of  knowledge  in  which  they  were  well  advanced  to  their  destruction. 

VI.  DEinjNCIATION  OF  THEM  BABED  ON  AFFINITIE8  TO  EVIL  MEN.     "  Woe  imto  them  ! 

for  they  went  in  the  way  of  Cain,  and  ran  riotously  in  the  error  of  Balaam  for  hire, 
and  perished  in  the  gainsaying  of  Korah."  Jude,  at  this  stage,  becomes  so  impassioned 
that  he  regards  the  woe  he  pronounces  on  these  men  as  ttlxeady  carried  out.  When 
Cain  would  not  listen  to  the  Divine  remonstrance,  but  went  on  his  wilful  way,  and  was 
punished  by  being  made  a  fugitive  and  a  vagabond,  they  were  made  fugitives  and 
vagabonds  with  him.  When  Balaam  was  told  not  to  go  and  curse  Israel,  but  was  swayed 
into  a  precipitous  course  by  Balak's  tempting  offer,  they  were  infatuated  with  him. 
When  Korah  set  himself  against  the  Divine  appointment  of  Moses  and  Aaron,  and 
was  swallowed  up  alive,  they  perished  with  him. 

VII.  DeSOEIPTION  of  THEM   BY   ASSOCIATION  WITH   CEETAIN  NATnUAIi  OBJECTS.      1. 

EocJa.  "  These  are  they  who  are  hidden  rocks  in  your  love-feasts  when  they  feast 
with  you,  shepherds  that  without  fear  feed  themselves."  In  the  same  impassioned  tone 
Jude  seizes  upon  natural  objects  to  describe  them.  First  of  all  he  calls  them  "  hidden 
rocks"  (which  is  the  right  translation).  When  he  contemplates  them  as  "hidden 
rocks  "  is  at  the  love-feasts.  It  was  the  fact  of  their  being  hidden  in  their  true  characters 
that  led  to  their  having  a  place  at  the  love-feasts.  It  was  also  the  fact  of  their  being 
hidden  that  made  them  so  dangerous  there,  as  it.  is  the  rock  that  is  just  covered  with 
water  that  is  so  dangerous  to  vessels.  It  is  wrong  and  confusing  to  bring  in  "  shepherds." 
AU  that  is  conveyed  is  that,  with  the  characters  they  had,  they  should  have  been  afraid 
to  present  themselves  at  the  love-feasts ;  but  instead  of  that,  they  feasted  themselves  at 
their  pleasure.  It  was  their  want  of  moderation  that  was  dangerous  by  way  of  example 
to  others.  2.  Clouds.  "  Clouds  without  water,  carried  along  by  winds."  In  seasons 
of  drought  cluuds  sometimes  appear  in  the  sky  that  hold  out  the  promise  of  rain  to  those 
who  have  been  long  and  anxiously  looking  for  it ;  but  they  are  only  a  deception — they 
have  no  rain  in  them  to  give  out,  and  are  carried  past  by  the  winds.  So  the  men  of 
whom  Jude  writes  held  out  the  promise  of  being  a  blessing  especially  to  the  Christian 
society,  but  they  were  only  a  deception,  having  no  spiritual  influences  in  them  to  give 
forth  to  any.     3.  Trees.     "Autumn  trees  without  fruit,  twice  dead,  plucked  up  by  the 


1—26.]  THE  GKNBRAL  EPISTLE  OP  JUDE.  « 

roots."  In  autumn  fruit  is  expected  on  trees,  but  we  have  here  autumn  trees  without 
fruit,  and  incapable  of  bearing  fruit  iu  the  future,  for  they  are  dead,  and  twice  dead, 
not  only  dead  with  their  roots  in  the  ground,  hut  dead  with  their  roots  plucked  up.  So 
the  men  of  whom  Jude  writes  were  not  only  destitute  of  good  works,  but  incapable  of 
ever  producing  them,  being  "  rooted  out  of  the  soil  of  grace."  4.  Waves.  "  Wild  waves 
of  the  sea,  foaming  out  their  own  shame."  "  The  wicked  are  like  the  troubled  sea, 
when  it  cannot  rest,  whose  waters  cast  up  mire  and  dirt."  There  are  those  who  are  not 
only  sinners,  but  sinners  without  the  restraints  that  many  put  upon  themselves  in 
sioning,  %.e.  wicked.  They  are  restlessly  active  in  sinning ;  and  what  they  do  in  their 
restlessness  is  to  bring  up  the  moral  filth  that  hag  collected  in  them.  It  is  these  that 
Jude  pictures  here.  5.  Stars.  "  Wandering  stars,  for  whom  the  blackness  of  darkness 
hath  been  reserved  for  ever."  We  are  to  think  of  comets,  whose  course  strikes  us  as 
erratic,  and  that,  after  shining  for  a  time,  are  lost  in  the  darkness.  So  there  are  those 
who  are  really  out  of  the  course  appointed  for  them,  but  call  forth  the  admiration  of 
man  for  a  time ;  their  erratic  course,  however  brilliant,  can  only  end  in  their  passing 
into  the  blackness  of  darkness  for  ever.  This  is  the  startling  image  with  which  Jude 
reaches  a  climax. 

VIIL  Pbopheot  of  Enooh.  1.  Enoch.  "  And  to  these  also  Enoch,  the  seventh  from 
Adam,  prophesied."  This  is  a  new  association  with  Enoch.  We  think  of  the  godly 
humility  of  his  walk,  and  of  his  being  one  of  two  rewarded  with  a  translation ;  but  it 
is  only  here  that  Scripture  ascribes  to  him  the  prophetic  gift.  We  do  not  wonder  at 
his  singular  sanctity  being  accompanied  with  inspiration.  He  is  here  called  the  seventh 
from  Adam,  to  mark  the  ancient  date  of  his  prophecy.  For  Jude,  having  referred  to 
"  these  "  men  as  having  been  of  old  set  forth  to  their  condemnation,  and  having  brought 
forward  many  ancient  examples,  is  now  able  to  bring  forward  a  distinct  prophecy 
having  a  bearing  on  them  (though  not  on  them  exclusively)  of  the  most  ancient  date. 
The  remarkable  thing  is  that  the  prophecy  (substantially)  is  found  in  the  apocryphal 
'  Book  of  Enoch,'  with  which  Jude  seems  to  have  been  acquainted.  The  likelihood  is 
that  it  found  its  way  into  that  book  from  tradition.  Jude  did  not  avoid  tradition  (with 
regard  to  Michael  as  well  as  with  regard  to  Enoch),  rather  took  to  tradition  as  that 
which  was  familiar  to  his  readers,  and  what  he  did  with  it  as  an  inspired  man  was  to 
give  it  a  pure,  authentic  form.  We  are  thus  indebted  to  him  for  the  transmission  of  two 
important  traditions,  without  the  uncertainty  that  attaches  to  other  Jewish  traditions. 
2.  Contents  of  the  prophecy.  "  Saying,  Behold,  the  Lord  came  with  ten  thousands  of  his 
holy  ones,  to  execute  judgment  upon  all,  and  to  convict  all  the  ungodly  of  all  their  works 
of  ungodliness  which  they  have  ungodly  wrought,  and  of  all  the  hard  things  which 
ungodly  sinners  have  spoken  against  him."  To  Adam  was  made  an  announcement  of 
redemption ;  it  is  a  significant  fact  that  "  the  seventh  from  Adam  "  was  able  to  make  as 
clear  an  announcement  of  judgment.  He  announces  the  event  as  though  it  had  taken 
place,  and  he  was,  after  the  event,  narrating  what  he  had  seen.  It  was  an  event  that  was 
fitted  to  611  with  astonishmeiit.  The  Lord  came,  i.e.  from  heaven  to  earth.  He  came 
with  a  brilliant  retinue,  viz.  "ten  thousands  of  his  holy  ones"  (apparently  the  angels) 
He  came  to  execute  judgment,  which  is  the  very  language  Christ  uses  of  what  was 
assigned  him  by  the  Father  (John  v.  27).  He  came  to  execute  judgment  upon  all,  Le. 
both  godly  and  ungodly.  He  came  to  convict,  t.«.  bring  home  guilt  to  all  included  in 
the  latter  class  (therefore  in  Jude's  time  too),  both  for  their  works  and  for  their 
speeches.  "  A  corrupt  tree  bringeth  forth  evil  fruit."  The  ungodly  had  their  works  of 
ungodliness  which  they  had  ungodly  wrought.  The  ungodly  sinners  had  their  hard 
speeches  which  they  had  spoken  against  the  Lord.  Five  times  is  the  thought  of  ungod- 
liness brought  in.  We  may  account  for  it  by  the  strong  impression  Enoch  had  of  the 
ungodliness  that  was  around  him.  Men  were  working  works  as  though  they  were  never 
to  be  brought  into  judgment  for  them.  God  they  thought  of  only  to  utter  hard  things 
against  him  who  was  Infinite  and  Essential  Beasonableness  and  Tenderness.  When 
brooding  over  the  ungodliness  of  his  day,  Enoch  was  moved  to  predict,  in  rhythmic  form, 
a  coming,  world-wide  judgment.  3.  Application  of  the  prophecy,  "  These  are  mur- 
murers,  complainers,  walking  after  their  lusts  (and  their  mouth  speaketh  great  swelling 
words),  showing  respect  of  persons  for  the  sake  of  advantage."  These  are  hard  speakers 
against  the  Lord,  especially  in  regard  to  their  lot.  They  are  murmurers,  complainers  q/ 
^ir  lot — which  is  connected  with  their  lusts  (not  God-governed  desires),  which  are  not 


42  THE  GENERAL  BPlSTLE  OS"  JUDE.  [1—25. 

easily  satisfied.  And,  in  murmuring  and  complaining,  "  their  mouth  speaketh  great 
swelling  words ; "  they  reflect  on  God  for  not  making  their  lot  better,  they  seek  to  impress 
men  with  the  great  things  they  are  entitled  to.  While  thus  they  exalt  themselves, 
they  can  demean  themselves  far  enough  in  &wiiing  upon  persons  from  whom  they  hope 
to  obtain  an  advantage. 

IXi  Apostolic  teaohino.  1.  Its  contents.  "But  ye,  beloved,  remember  ye  the 
words  which  have  been  spoken  before  by  the  apostles  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ ;  how 
that  they  said  to  you.  In  the  last  time  there  shall  be  mockers,  walking  after  their  own 
ungodly  lusts."  The  prophecy  of  Enoch  was  of  most  ancient  date ;  he  now  refers  his 
readers  to  what  was  within  their  own  recollection.  They  had  not  heard  our  Lord  Jesus 
Clirist ;  but  they  had  heard  his  apostles.  They  were  thus  very  near  the  highest  source. 
Those  apostles  spoke  of  the  last  time,  i.e.  tba  period  immediately  preceding  the  com- 
pletion of  the  kingdom  of  God.  They  spoke  of  mockers  then.  Of  all  classes  of  men 
these  are  the  worst.  They  are  not  satisfied  with  ignoring  holy  things — they  turn  them 
into  ridicule.  They  are  represented  by  the'  free-thinkers  of  the  present  day,  who  are 
increasingly  aggressive.  There  is  this  to  be  said  that  where  there  is  an  earnest  Chris- 
tianity, dislike  of  it  takes  the  form  of  mocking.  In  the  last  time  there  will  be  an  earnest 
Christianity  such  as  we  have  not  yet  seen ;  and  we  may  also  expect  that  infidelity  will 
tlien  be  most  bitter  when  its  utter  defeat  is  near.  We  have  the  authority  of  the  apostles 
here  for  saying  that  infidelity  and  libertinism  go  together.  Mockers,  they  say,  "  walking 
after  their  own  Ixists  of  ungodliness."  The  explanation  of  the  infidelity  of  many  is  their 
dislike  of  godly  restraints.  2.  Its  application.  "  These  are  they  who  make  separations, 
sensual,  having  not  the  Spirit"  It  is  very  difficult  to  fix  the  meaning  of  the  first  part 
of  this  description.  It  is  against  the  old  translation,  "  they  who  separate  themselves," 
that  the  men  in  question  were  present  at  the  love-feasts.  Neither  does  it  appear  that 
they  were  connected  with  a  Christian  society  to  "  make  separations,"  as  the  Revised 
translation  bears.  The  idea  of  mocking  is  not  lost  sight  of,  as  appears  from  the  following 
verse.  But,  as  if  mocking  were  already  asserted  of  these  men,  the  thought  proceeds, 
"  These  mockers  are  they."  What,  then,  are  we  to  make  of  the  word  which  has  given 
so  much  trouble  ?  Taking  the  literal  meaning  to  be  "  to  put  the  limit  away  from," 
we  would  translate,  "  they  who  take  excess  of  liberty."  This  is  in  accordance  vrith  the 
second  idea  in  the  apostolic  saying.  There  is  an  easy  transition  then  to  "  psychical." 
"  The  '  psychical '  of  Scripture  are  those  in  whom  the  spirit,  as  the  organ  of  the  Divine 
Spirit,  is  suppressed,  dormant,  for  the  time  as  good  as  extinct ;  whom  the  operations  of 
the  Divine  Spuit  have  never  lilted  into  the  region  of  spiritual  things  "  (Trench).  Hence 
•  it  is  added,  "  having  not  the  Spirit."  These  mockers  make  their  own  bounds,  because 
under  natural  impulses  instead  of  the  Spirit's  influences. 

X.  Exhortation  to  beadebs  BEOAROiNa  themselves.  1.  Connection  of  life  with 
faith.  "  But  ye,  beloved,  building  up  yourselves  on  your  most  holy  faith."  There  is 
a  couplet  which  is  taken  to  con  vey  this  meaning — that  one  mode  of  laith  is  just  as  good 
as  another. 

"  For  modes  of  faith  let  graceless  zealots  fight ; 
His  can't  be  wrong,  whose  life  is  in  the  right." 

It  is  true  that  bis  mode  of  faith  can't  be  vrrong,  whose  life  is  in  the  right ;  but  it  is  also 
true  that  his  life  can't  be  in  the  right,  whose  mode  of  faith  is  wrong.  What  we  believe 
U  the  foundation ;  what  we  build  on  it  is  our  life.  This  is  in  the  line  of  Jude's  thought. 
He  has  characterized  mockers  as  libertines.  And,  having  recorded  this  charge  against 
the  infidels  or  scoffers  of  his  day  (even  within  the  pale  of  the  Church),  he  turns  to  his 
own  true  brethren  in  the  faith,  and  says  to  them,  addressing  them  by  an  endearing 
title,  "  But  ye,  beloved,  building  up  yourselves  on  your  most  holy  faith."  As  if  he  said, 
"  Te  have  a  most  holy  faith,  let  your  life  (to  correspond  with  it)  also  be  most  holy." 
"  Faith  "  here  is  equivalent  to  the  Object  of  faith.  We  do  not  build  upon  our  act  of  faith ; 
thai  is  the  heresy  of  building  on  ourselves.  We  build  on  the  Object  of  our  faith.  Now 
the  great  Object  of  our  faith  is  God.  We  believe  in  God — that  is  the  first  article  of 
our  creed.  We  are  theists,  and  not  atheists.  Uut  more  definitely  we  are  Christian 
believers — we  believe  in  a  God  identified  with  the  Christian  manifestation.  We  believe 
in  a  God  to  whom  sin  was  so  heinous  that  nothing  but  the  blood  of  his  incarnate  Son 
could  suffice  to  take  it  away.    Should  there  not,  then,  be  an  awfvJ  sanctity  about  our 


1—25.]  THE  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OF  JUDB.  4S 

life  ?  It  should  be  far  removed  from  that  of  infidels,  who  have  no  object  of  faith  to 
elevate  them ;  aud  from  that  of  pagans,  who  hare  an  unholy  faith ;  and  from  that  of 
Romanists,  whose  faith  is  to  a  great  extent  nullified  by  such  excesses  as  indulgences  and 
purgatory ;  and  from  that  of  rationalists,  who  think  of  lin  being  taken  away  without 
satisfaction  being  made  for  it.  What  we  count  an  immeasurable  advanti^e  in  our 
creed  should  be  turned  into  a  corresponding  advantage  in  our  life.  But  is  it  not  some* 
times  as  though  we  did  not  believe  our  creed  ?  Is  there  not  a  vast  discrepancy  between 
our  life  and  the  embodiment  of  our  creed  in  the  life  of  Christ?  Let  us  listen,  then,  to 
the  exhortation  of  this  servant  of  Christ,  and  advocate  of  consistency.  2.  Becognition 
of  the  Trinity  in  connection  roith  our  life.  We  believe,  we  have  said,  in  God ;  we  believe 
also  in  the  Three  Persons  of  the  Godhead — ^in  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost.  We  are  to 
build  upon  the  Three  Persons,  tLough  in  different  ways.  "  Praying  in  the  Holy  Spirit." 
Under  the  dispensation  of  the  Spirit,  we  must  not  forget  the  work  of  the  Spirit.  The 
Spirit  is  here  placed  first,  and  in  connection  with  prayer.  In  a  good  life  we  must  give 
the  first  place  to  prayer.  It  qualifies  us  for  receiving  the  bounties  of  Providence,  puts 
ns  into  working  order,  arms  us  against  temptation.  But  prayer,  to  do  this,  must  be 
prayer  in  the  Holy  Spirit.  How  can  we  wrestle  with  God  in  our  own  might  ?  How 
can  we  have  the  right  desires  from  ourselves?  It  is  only  when  we  pray  in  the  might 
of  the  Holy  Spirit,  who  is  promised  to  help  our  infirmities  and  to  teach  us  how  we 
ought  to  pray,  that  we  can  succeed.  The  true  idea  of  prayer  is  the  Spirit  of  God 
pleading  in  our  prayers,  exciting  within  us  the  right  desires — desires  which  at  times 
cannot  find  expression  in  words,  but  only  in  sighings  and  groanings.  We  have  often  to 
complain  that  our  prayers  are  cold.  We  have  come  under  some  worldly  iuQuence,  and 
have  no  heart  to  pray.  At  such  a  time  let  us  not  neglect  the  duty,  or  attempt  its 
performance  in  our  own  strength ;  but  let  us,  in  despair  of  self,  depend  on  the  Spirit's 
help,  saying,  "  Come,  0  Breath,  and  breathe  on  these  dead  desires,  that  they  may  live  I " 
"  Keep  yourselves  in  the  love  of  God."  This  we  are  to  do  when,  from  the  mount  of 
prayer,  we  go  dovm  into  the  world.  Our  whole  duty  in  the  world  may  be  summed  up 
m  this — that  we  keep  ourselves  in  the  love  of  God  there.  The  temptation  is  to  slide 
into  the  love  of  sdf.  In  thiaga  forbidden  we  cannot  love  God  at  all.  "  Have  no  fellow- 
ship with  the  unfruitful  works  of  darkness,  but  rather  reprove  them."  In  things  lawful 
we  can  love  God  only  by  putting  due  restraints  on  ourselves.  Let  us  eat  and  drink 
and  work,  not  for  selfish  ends,  but  for  the  glory  of  God.  To  keep  ourselves  thus  in  the 
love  of  God  will  require  effort.  Without  effort  we  can  keep  ourselves  in  the  love  of 
self.  Without  effort  men  are  sliding  every  day  to  ruin.  It  is  not  those  alone  that  sin 
hard  who  are  lost,  but  those  also  who  do  not  bestir  themselves.  Let  us,  then,  make 
every  effort  to  keep  ourselves  out  of  the  love  of  self,  and  in  the  love  of  God.  "  Looking 
for  the  mercy  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  unto  eternal  life."  We  have  been  trying  hard 
to  keep  ourselves  in  the  love  of  God  amid  worldly  allurements.  We  are  not  now  to 
rest  in  anything  we  have  done,  as  though  we  had  advantaged  God  in  any  way.  "  So 
likewise  ye,  when  ye  shall  have  done  all  these  things  which  are  commanded  you,  say. 
We  are  unprofitable  servants :  we  have  done  that  which  was  our  duty  to  do."  We  are 
conscious  of  our  feebleness  as  agents.  We  find  it  hard  to  live  the  most  holy  life,  to 
attain  to  eminent  distinction  in  holiness.  We  are  conscious  of  self  soiling  even  our  best 
efforts.  It  is  well,  then,  that  we  can  look  for  mercy.  But  for  mercy  we  should  faint. 
It  is  well  that  we  can  look  for  the  mercy  "  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  We  can  hope  that 
our  poor  services  will  be  accepted  of  God  with  an  all-merciful  regard  to  that  perfect 
service  which  he  has  rendered  on  our  behalf.  Thus,  then,  are  we  to  build  up  the  most 
holy  life.  We  are  to  begin  with  prayer  in  the  Holy  Spirit ;  we  are  to  go  about  every- 
thing in  the  world  in  the  love  of  God,  and  then  we  are  to  look  for  acceptance  of  what 
we  have  done  through  Jesus  Christ.  That  is  to  be  our  order  of  procedure  "  unto  the  life 
eternal  "  (the  unity  of  thought  connects  this  with  all) — until  this  life  of  time  is  merged 
in  the  hfe  of  eternity,  until  this  very  imperfect  life  is  merged  in  the  perfect  life  above. 
Let  us  look  forward  to  this  complenient  and  goal  of  our  life  as  that  which  is  fitted  to 
free  and  uplift  us  under  present  conditions. 

XL   EXHOBTATION  TO  BBADEE8   BEQARDINO  THE  ENDANGERED.     1.    Those  who  are  in 

incipient  danger.  "  And  on  some  have  mercy,  who  are  in  doubt.''  By  those  "  who  are 
in  doubt "  we  are  to  understand  those  who  hesitated  in  their  judgment  of  the  course 
pursued  by  the  men  with  whom  Jude  has  been  dealing.    In  their  hesitating  mood  there 


44  THE  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OF  JUDB.  [1—26, 

was  danger  of  their  being  drawn  into  the  same  course.  They  were  certainly  to  be 
condemned  for  not  being  able  to  discriminate  between  a  Christian  course  and  an 
un-Christian  course ;  but  they  were  to  be  treated  with  mercy.  If  care  was  taken  to  give 
them  Christian  enlightenment,  so  that  they  were  able  to  pronounce  decisively  against  an 
un-Christian  course,  their  safety  would  be  secured.  2.  Those  who  are  in  extreme  danger. 
"  And  some  save,  snatching  them  out  of  the  fire."  There  seems  to  be  a  reference  here, 
as  in  yer.  9,  to  Zech.  iii.  2.  Joshua  (representing  Jerusalem),  clothed  with  filthy 
garments,  was  a  brand  already  burning.  With  his  filthy  garments  taken  away,  and 
clothed  with  a  change  of  raiment,  he  was  a  brand  plucked  out  of  the  fire.  There  were 
some  who  had  come  under  the  polluting  influence  of  I  he  evil  men,  for  wh'ise  contracted 
pollution  the  fire  was  burning.  They  were  not  beyond  recovery,  but  as  in  extreme 
danger,  mercy  toward  them  needed  to  take  a  certain  swiftness  and  forcibleness.  Let 
them  be  snatched  hastily,  even  violently,  as  brands  out  of  the  fire.  3.  ITwse  who  are 
a  source  of  clanger.  "  And  on  some  have  mercy  with  fear ;  hating  even  the  garment 
spotted  by  the  flesh.''  There  are  some  who,  in  their  pollution,  are  fit  objects  for  mercy ; 
and  yet  they  are  a  source  of  danger  to  those  who  have  to  deal  with  them,  from  the 
filling  of  the  mind  with  images  of  pollution.  The  only  safety  in  dealing  with  such  is, 
along  with  wholesome  fear  leadin"  to  prayer  for  Divine  help,  a  strong  detestation  of  the 
pollution  sought  to  be  removed.  The  Saviour  was  thus  proof  against  the  pollution  with 
which  he  had  to  deal,  and  none  of  us  is  safe  in  the  neighbourhood  of  pollution  without 
his  detestation.  Only  we  shall  be  very  unlovely  if,  with  his  detestation,  we  have  not 
also  hi8  mercy  (Luke  xv.  2). 

XIL  Conclusion  ih  the  form  of  a  doxoloqt.  1.  God  addressed.  (1)  With 
refertnce  to  the  condition  of  the  readers.  "  Now  unto  him  that  is  able  to  guard  you 
from  stumbling,  and  to  set  you  before  the  presence  of  his  glory  without  blemish  in 
exceeding  joy."  They  were  in  danger  of  stumbling  from  the  ung.idly  influences  to 
which  they  were  exposed,  and  the  treacherousness  of  their  own  hearts.  God  is  addressed 
as  able  to  guard  them  from  stumbling.  We  are  like  Imfimts  beginning  to  walk ;  he  is 
the  Strong  One  who  keeps  watch  over  us,  so  that  we  do  not  stumble.  The  result  of  hii 
guarding  them  from  stumbling  would  ultimately  be  his  placing  them  in  a  secure 
position.  This  would  be  at  the  time  of  the  full  display  of  liis  glory.  They  would  then 
be  in  such  a  state  that  the  all-searching  eye  would  discover  no  blemish  in  them.  It 
would  be  a  time  of  exceeding  joy  to  them,  meaning  their  triumph  ove*-  all  opposing 
elements,  over  the  evil  of  their  hearts,  and  over  the  mortality  of  their  bodies.  They 
must  not  stumble  on  their  way  to  the  glorious  consummation.  For  this  (by  implication) 
Jude  prays  on  their  account ;  and  they  (he  suggests)  must  remember  where  their  safety 
lies.  (2)  According  to  the  Christian  manifestation.  "  To  the  only  God  our  Saviour, 
through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord."  "  I  am  the  Lord,  and  there  is  none  else,  there  is  no 
God  besides  me."  It  is  only  when  we  stand  clear  of  the  polytheistic  idea,  and  think  of 
sovereignty  as  undiviiied,  that  we  have  a  proper  object  for  our  adoration.  It  is  not  his 
simple  sovereignty  that  we  adore,  but  his  sovereignty  joined  to  saving  power.  We  can 
look  up  to  him,  and  say,  out  of  our  consciousness  of  what  he  has  done  for  us,  "Our 
Saviotir."  It  is  in  the  New  Testament  that  we  have  this  clearly  disclosed.  God  saves 
through  an  Agent  of  his  own  appointment,  even  his  own  Son  in  our  nature.  Jesus, 
having  wrought  out  salvation  in  a  wonderful  manner,  claims  our  obedience ;  and,  by 
yielding  obedience  to  him  as  our  Lord,  we  come  into  possession  of  salvation.  Saved, 
we  have  a  new  song  put  in  our  mouth — even  praise  unto  our  God.  2.  T/ie  ascription 
to  God.  (1)  Four/old  quality.  "Be  glory,  majesty,  dominion,  and  power."  Who  can 
measure  the  breadth,  and  length,  and  depth,  and  lieight  of  the  Divine  perfections  ?  We 
ascribe  to  God  the  right  to  receive  praise,  to  be  counted  great,  to  exercise  dominion,  and 
to  put  forth  power,  to  the  exclusion  of  every  other,  and  beyond  what  we  can  grasp. 
(2)  Threefold  time.  "  Before  all  time,  and  now,  and  for  evermore.  Amen."  There  is 
the  division  into  time  past,  i>resent,  and  future.  God  was  worthy  of  being  adored 
hefore  all  time — when  yet  there  was  no  creature  to  adore  him.  He  is  worthy  of  being 
adored  now,  in  what  he  is  doing  for  his  people.  And  he  will  be  worthy  of  being  adored 
through  all  the  ages  that  will  elapse  after  the  salvation  of  his  people  has  been  completed. 
It  becomes  us,  in  token  of  our  acknowledgment,  and  in  expectation  of  oiu-  triumph,  to 
add  our  "  Amen." — R.  F. 


HOMILETICAL  INDEX 


TO 


THE  GENEEAL  EPISTLE  OE  JUDE. 


nmtrm  ri.ax 

"  Called,  beloved  In  God  the  Father, 

preserved  for  JesuB  Christ "  ...      17 

Error  not  to  be  trifled  with,  but  to  be 

earnestly  dealt  with         ...  ...      17 

The  Invasion  of  the  Church  by  Error 

is  no  Accident  or  Snrpfise  ...      17 

The  Mutual  Dependence  of  Belief  and 

Life 17 

A  Perfect  Church  a  Vain  Expectation  18 
Future  Judgment  an  Anticipation  of 

Nature  and  a  Truth  of  Bevelation  18 

The  Law  of  Christian  Safety — to  keep 

ourselves  in  the  Love  of  God  ...  19 
The  Law  of  Christian  Duty  to  others 

in  Times  of  Peril  and  Evil  ...       19 

.The  Grace  of  God  the  Believer's  First 

and  Last  Dependence      ...  ...      19 

Authorship  and  Salutation ...  ...      20 

The   Purpose  and   Occasion    of  this 

Epistle  ...  ...  ...      21 

Reasons  to  enforce  the  Duty  of  Con- 
tending for  the  Faith      ...  ...      22 

First  Examjjle  of  Divine  Vengeance ...  23 
oecond  Example  of  Divine  Vengeance  23 
Third  Example  of  Divine  Vengeance  24 
The  Character  of  the   Libertines  in 

Jude's  Day        ...  ...  ...      24 

A..  Anft'  lie  Example  for  Human  Imi- 

tati"u  ...  ...  ...  ...      25 

The  Ui'iploniblb  Perversion  of  Kumv- 

lodgo  ...  n.  ..•  ...      26 


Three  Examplesof  Similar  Ungodliness      26 

A  Vivid  Picture  of  the  Moral  Corrup- 
tion of  the  Ungodly  Seducers       „.      27 

An  Ancient  Prophecy  of  Judgment 
against  the  Wicked         ...  ,..      29 

The  Cynical  and  Dissatisfied  Temper 
of  these  Self-indulgent  Flatteries  ,„      29 

A  Quotation  from  Becent  Prophecies         30 

Application  of  the  Prophecy  to  the 
Seducers  of  Jude's  Day  ...  „,      81 

Exhortation  to  the  Saints  to  build  up 
their  own  Spiritual  Life  as  the 
Grand  Security  against  Apostasy ...      81 

Exhortation  to  Faithful,  but  Discrimi- 
nating, Dealing  with  Three  Classes 
of  Transgressors  ...  ...      32 

TheDoxology       ...  ...  „,       33 

Christian  Co-operation  desired  in  the 
Defence  of  the  Gospel     ...  ...'      33 

Eeasons  for  Besisting  Evil  Men  drawn 
from  Examples  of  the  Divine  Anger 
against  others    ...  ...  ...      34 

Believers  urged  to  remember  the  Pro- 
phecies of  the  Apostles,  and  to  note 
their  Fulfilment  ...  ...      gg 

Believers  who  enjoy  the  Blessing  of 
Mercy  from  Christ  are  required  to 
show  Mercy  to  others      ...  ...      36 

The  Sulilime  Character  of  Christian 
Prayer  ...  ...  ...       37 

The  Letter  ...  ...  „.      37 


.'''■":■:;!;!  llli 


