CORNELL

UNIVERSITY

LIBRARY





Cornell University
Library



The original of this book is in
the Cornell University Library.

There are no known copyright restrictions in
the United States on the use of the text.



http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924101104861



THE

PULPIT COMMENTARY,

EDITED BY THE

VERY REV. H. D. M. SPENCE, D.D.,

DEAN OF GLOUCESTER;
AND BY THE

REV. JOSEPH S. EXELL, M.A.

WITH

INTRODUCTIONS

BY THE



VEN. JLRCXHDEACON P. W. FAERAE, D.D., P.E.S.— EIGHT EEV. H. COTTEEtLL, B.D,
F.K.S.E.— -VIEET EEV. PEINCIPAL J. TULLOCH, D.D.— EEV. CANON Q.
KA.WLINSON, M.A.-KEV. A. PLCMMEE, M.A., D.D.



FUNK & WAGNALLS COMPANY
New York and Toronto.



THE



PULPIT COMMENTARY,



■DITED BT THE



VERY REV. H. D. M. SPENCE, D.D.,



DKAN or glouoestbb;



AHS BT THB



EEV. JOSEPH S. EXELL, M.A.



PSALMS.

Bt rev. G. RAWLINSON, M.A.,

CANON OF CANTEBBDBY.

Bt rev. E. R. OONDER, D.D.,

AND

REV. W. CLARKSON, B.A.
?@nmflies bg Faiious ^uttots.

EEV. W. FOBSYTH, M.A. EEV. S. CONWAY, B.A.

BRV. E. TUCK, B.A. EEV. 0. SHOET, M.A.

VOL. 11.



FUNK & WAGNALLS COMPANY
Nkw Yoek and Toronto.



THE BOOK OF PSALMS.



EXPOSITION.



PSALM LVL



Trib and the following have been called
" twin psalms." They begin with Ihe same
words, are nearly of the same length, and
haTe each a refrain which divides them into
two portions. Formally, the chief differ-
ence between the two is that Ps. Ivi. has
an epilogue, or appendix (rers. 12, 13), after
the second refrain, to whieh there is nothing
correspondent in Ps. Ivii. Both psalms were
written under circumstances of great dis-
tress, and the tone of thought in them is
very similar. Each begins with complaint,
«nd earnest prayer for delireranoe, while
«ach ends with praise and triumph.

The present psalm has a very complex
heading, or " title." First, it is addressed,
like most of the other psalms of this book,
"to the chief musician," or "precentor."
Then it is said to be " On the silent dore
of far-off regions." Thirdly, it is called
" Michtam of Dayid," which some explain
as "a golden psalm composed by David."
And fourthly, the occasion of its composi-
tion is declared to have been " the seizure
of David by the Philistines in Oath."
David's authorship may readily be accepted,
for the psalm is, as Ewald says, " one of the
most beautiful in the Psalter.*' And the
occasion is not to be lightly set aside ; since,
although no seizure of David by the Philis-
tines of Gath is mentioned in 1 Samuel,
•uch an event is quite conceivable; while
no compiler or editor of a late date would
have ventured to interpolate such a fact
into the accepted history of David. The
'*nlent dove" is, no doubt, David himself,

PSALMS — U.



who had wished for "the wings of a dove"
(Ps. Iv. 6), and was compelled to be silent
while he was in captivity.

Yer. 1. — Be merciful unto me, Qod ; for
man would swallow me up ; literally, man
panteth after me — like a wild beast after
his prey. The contrast is sharp between
" man " (enonh, " weak man ") and God
(Elohim, " the Mighty One "). He fighting
daily oppresseth me; rather, all the day
l<mg is he fighting and oppressing me.

Ver. 2. — Mine enemies; literally, my
watchers — those who keep a continual guard
over me. If David had been seized and
made a prisoner by the Philistine lords, this
expression would be very appropriate.
VTould daily swallow me up ; rather, pant
after me all day. For they be many that
fight against me. The " lords of the Philis-
tines " were, doubtless, " many ; ' they
seem to have, all of them, opposed them-
selves to David (1 Sam. xxix. 2 — 9). thou
Host High. This rendering is now generally
abandoned, since mardm (Qiip), "height,"
is nowhere else used in this sense. Dr.
Kay, Hengstenberg, and the Bevised Yer-
sion render "proucUy;" Professor Cheyne,
" with high looks."

Yer. a^What time I am afraid, I will
trust in thee; literally, the day when I am
afraid. When the day comes that I feel
fear stealing over me, by an act of will I
(even I, weak as I am) will put my trust
in thee (comp. Pss. vii. 1 ; xi. 1 ; xviii. 2,
etc.).

Yer. 4. — ^In God I ivill praise his word;
rather, through God; i.e. " with Ood's help,
by his grace^" I am ready to praise whatever
sentence he pronounces, whatever fiat goes
forth from him. In Sod I have put my trust
(so again, ver. 11). This is at once the
refrain and the key-note of the psalm. In
all dangers, in all troubles, whatever hap-
pens, whatever seems to be impending, the

II



THE BOOK OF PSALMS.



[P8. LVL 1 — 1*.



pealmist will never lelinquiuh hia trust in
the Almighty. I will not fear what flesh
can do nnto me. This is the. true martyr
spirit. Compare our Lord's words, "Fear
not them which kill the body, but are not
able to kill the soul : but rather fear him
which is able to destroy both body and soul
in hell" (Matt. X. 28).

Ver. 5. — Every day they wrest my words ;
rather, all the day Inng they wrest (or, torture)
my words. They seek to give my words an
evil meaning, and so to misrepresent me to
Achish, their king. As Canon Cook says,
"This description is singularly applicable
to David's position among the envious
nobles at the court of Achish. , . . Still, it
does not speak of his having been actually
arrested, and does not, therefore, seem to
have suggested the inscription." All their
thoughts aie against me for evil. They are
entirely bent on doing the psalmist some
hurt. What thny really seek is his life
(veh 6); but, short of that, they would
gladly do him some mischief.

Ter. 6. — They gather themselves together,
they hide themselves; or, "they gather
themselves together; they get an ambush."
They mark my steps, when they wait for my
soul; literally, tiiny, even they, ma/rk my
uteps; i.e. they themselves, grand as they
are, condescend to be spies, and track my
footsteps.

Ver. 7. — Shall they escape by iniquity 1
Shall they escape God's judgments, the
psalmist asks, by their iniquity ? Assuredly
not. God will prevent such an escape.
In thine anger cast down the people, God;
literally, the peoples; i.e. the heathen gene-
rally, to whom David's enemies, the Gittites,
belong. Though assured that they will
not escape, the psalmist, to make assurance
doubly sure, prays that they may not.

Ver. 8. — Thou tellest my wanderings ; i.e.
thou, O God, takest account of my wretched
wandering life (1 Sam xxi. — ^xxx.), and
notest each occasion when I am forced to
move from one city, or cave, or wilderness
to another. Fat thou my tears into thy
bottle. Take also note of my tears — let
them not pass unheeded. Bather, gather
them drop by drop, and store them, as
costly wine is stored, in a flask. The
thought, thus dressed in a mQtapbor, was.



no doubt (as Professor Cheyne observes),
" Store them up in thy memory." Are they
not in thy book 1 i.e. hast thou not antici-
pated my request, and entered an account
of every tear that I have shed, in thy book
of records (comp. Pss. Ixix. 28 ; cxxxix. 16) ?

Ver. 9.— When I cry unto thee, then shall
mine enemies turn back : this I know ; for
God is for me ; literally, in the day that I
eall upon thee.

Ver. 10. — In God will I praise his word ;
rather, through God (see the comment on
ver. 4). In the Lord (rather, through the
Lord) will I praise his word. Profecsor
Cheyne looks upon this as " a feeble Jeho-
vistio interpolation, which interrupts the
refrain." But other commentators see in it
a certain force.

Ver. 11. — ^In God have I put my trust : I
will not be afraid what man oan do nnto me.
Eepeated word for word from ver. 4 (see the
comment on that passage).

Vers. 12, 13. — The psalm ends with an
expression of thankfulness to God for the
deliverance, which is so confidently expected,
that it is looked upon as assured, and even
spoken of as past (ver. 13).

Ver. 12. — Thy vows are upon me, God.
The psalmist, under his afSiction, has made
vows to God ; i.e. promises of thank offer-
ings if God would come to his aid, and save
him from his enemies. These vows he con-
siders to be now due, and himself ta be
under the obligation of paying them. Ac-
cordingly, he announces his intention of
speedily discharging his obligation — ^I will
render praises (rather, thank offerings) nnto
thee.

Ver. 13. — Tor thou hast delivered my soul
from death : wilt not thou deliver my feet
from falling ; rather, hast thou not delivered f
(Revised Version); or, surely thou hast de-
livered (Professor Cheyne). The psalmist
views his entire deliverance as accom-
plished; nothing remains to be asked for.
That I may walk before God in the light of
the living ; i.e. that henceforth I may be
free from trouble, and walk before God in
the clear daylight, no longer dwelling in
darkness, but in " the light of life " (comp.
Job zxxiiL 80 ; John viiL 12).



HOMILETICS.

Vers. 4, 10, 11. — T).e expression and the result o/faith. " In God I will praise hit
word," etc. This is not a vain repetition or a mere poetic burden. The meaning is
enlarged and strengthened. In ver. 4 that Divine name is used which speaks of the
Almighty Creator, " God." In ver. 10 this is repeated, but that personal name is added
which speaks of God's covenant and faithfulness, "in the Lord" (equivalent to
"Jehovah"). Again, in ver. 4 the psalmist speaks of man in his weakness — ^" flesh;"



M.LVI.1— 13.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. S

but in ver. 11 — "what man can do" — man in his utmost strength is defied to hurt
one of God's refugees. Here is (1) the expression of faith ; (2) the result of faith.

L The expression ov faith. " In God will I praise his word." The word of God
is everywhere in Scripture the special object of faith, for this reason — that it is by his
word, viz. his commands and his promises, that God enters into moral relations with
us, and enables us to enter into such relations to him. Hence room not for mere
vague faith, such as we might have in the Creator of the universe, the Almighty
Ruler, the Author of our being; but direct personal trust, accepting and grasping
God's word. The name " Jehovah " warrants this faith. The word of promise is
chiefly meant. This faith is in contrast to all the causes and circumstances of fu<tr
and peril (vers. 1, 2).

II. The result op faith. " I will not fear." As love casts out the slavish fear
of God — the fear which would drive or keep us from him (1 John iv. 18) — so faith casts
out the fear of man. Let the arrows fly like hail; behind "the shield of faith"
(Eph. vi. 16) we are safe, not only from what " flesh and blood " can do, but from our
spiritual foes (Eph. vi. 12). Illustrate from such passages as Gen. xvi. 1; John vi.
20. Courage, therefore, is a duty. The courage of self-reliance belongs only to the
strong, but the courage of reliance on God is within reach of the weakest. Man of
the world, canst thou look the future in the face and say, "I will not fear"?

Ver. 13. — 2%e eoaperience of GocPs mercy a ground/or hope. " Thou hast delivered,"
etc. (Authorized Version). The Revisers have filled up the ellipsis in the Hebrew,
" Hast thou not delivered ? " instead of " Wilt thou not deliver ? " The Hebrew has
simply " not," with a word expressing a question. It is one of many cases where the
instructed English reader may judge for himself, as well as the Hebrew scholar. Cer-
tainly the Authorized Version gives a much more full and haniionious sense, and
accords with the analogy of ver. 8 — prayer founded on experience, following praise. ,
Thus therefore we will take it — the experience of God's redeeming mercy a ground for
hope, and a plea in prayer.

L Herb is thankful acknowledgments of God's great goodness. The title,
though no part of the psalm, gives (as in other cases) an ancient Jewish tradition as
to the special danger from which David had been delivered (see 1 Sam. xxi. 10 — xxii. 1).
David had carried a dangerous trophy with him to the court of Gath — the sword of
Goliath. The Philistine chiefs were prompt to point out who this fugitive was. A
word from Achish would have avenged the giant's death. But "the king's heart is
in the hand of the Lord " (Prov. xxi. 1). David was soon breathing the free air of the
desert, and looked back with a shudder of horror, but with an overwhelming sense of
thankfulness (ver. 3). Some of us can take up these words in their literal sense. You
remember when the icy breath of death seemed to chill your blood ; the gate of death
seemed just ready to roll back on its noiseless hinges, and shut behind you. But God
locked it fast. The good Shepherd led you through the dark valley, out into the
sunshine. You are the living, to praise him. Others have no such special experience.
But what is life but a series of escapes ? What is health but the perpetual warding
o£r of death; safety, but hourly deliverance?

** Strange that a harp of thousand strings
Should keep in tune so long I "

The unfailing, unsleeping care of God's Fatherly providence does not strike and amaze
us as do miracles ; but it is no less wonderful (Lam. iii. 22, 23). Every real Christian
can read in these words a deeper and higher meaning. Deliverance from the death
that parts soul and body is but a reprieve — perhaps brief. Death remains to be faced ;
and behind death, all that makes it indeed terrible. But to the believer in Christ
the character of death is wholly changed. The outside show remains ; dust must
return to dust ; the earthly tabernacle must be taken down. But the sting, the terror,
the power, of death are gone. Christ has " abolished death " (2 Tim. L 10) for every
one who can say, " Christ liveth in me." The coming of the last enemy shall be as
though an executioner, axe on shoulder, entered the ceU of a condemned prisoner. The
axe is lifted — ^it falls, but only on the chain. The dark visitor takes the prisoner by
the hand, and leads him into air and sunlight ; and, lo 1 he drops his mask and jailor's



THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [ps. lvl 1— 13.



garb, flings aside his blunted axe— he is the messenger sent to lead the pardoned
offender into the King's presence. " Death 1 " the Christian may say ; " grim sentanel
at the gate of immortality ; silent porter at the door of my Father's house; my flesh
shudders at thee, but my spirit fears thee not. Jesus has conquered thee for me.
Because he lives, I shall live also ! "

II. Past deliverance thus thankfully acknowledged fubnisheb an abgu-
MENT FOR HOPE, AND A PLEA IN PEATEB. " Wilt thou not," etc. ? "I beseech thee
to do 80 : I am sure thou wilt." It is an argument from the greater to the less ; like
St. Paul's in Rom. viii. 32. A remarkable and powerful argument, because based on
the faithfulness of God's character and the continuity of his dealings. Can he awaken
hope only to disappoint ? If he has raised a soul from death, reconciled a sinner to
himself through the death of Jesus, taught him by his own Spirit to pray, trust, love,
— can he forget to be gracious ? Impossible 1 Is it, then, impossible for a believer to
fall — forasovd once saved to perish? Not only possible, but inevitable, if lef^ '"
himself. But surely that is the wrong question to put. Will the Savumr forsake a
soul that wholly trusts him ? Christ's answer is given (John x. 28 — 30 ; 2 Tim. i. 12).
This logic of faith the psSlmist turns into the rhetoric of prayer. The arrows of
prayer, feathered with praise for blessings already received, fly swift and sure : because
those blessings are the earnest of others, failing which they would be useless (Phil- i^-
6). May we apply this argument to temporal, earthly blessings as well as spiritual ?
Assuredly ; provided always we bear in mind the ruling aim of God's Fatherly guid-
ance. We are travellers, not tourists ; our route must be chosen mainly, not for the
pleasure of the scenery, but as the right road to our home. But when God led his
people through the wilderness, he did not forget the daily manna and the water-
springs, the cloud by day and the fire by night (Matt. vL 31 — 33).



HOMILIES BY VAKIOUS AUTHORS.

Vers. 1 — ^13. — Fear and deliverance. Taking this psalm as David's, we may use it
to illustrate two great truths.

I. " The FEAR OF MAN BRINGBTH A SNARE." (Prov. xxix. 25.) The best of men
are but men at the best. David was a man of splendid courage and generosity ; but
there were times when he grievously erred (1 Sam. xxi. 10 — 15). It was said by Dr.
Arnold, " The fear of God makes no man do anything mean or dishonourable, but the
fear of man does lead to all sorts of weakness and baseness." We may see here how
the fear of man leads to failure in truth. When the thought of self is uppermost, we
are apt to resort to our own devices. God's ways are too slow, so we turn to our own
way. Children, through fear, will tell lies. We pity them and forgive. But, alas !
we do not ourselves wholly put away childish things. Abraham prevaricated. David
practised deceit. Peter denied his Lord. The fear of man also leads to the sacrifice
of independence. Imagination working through fear exaggerates our danger. We
become restless and impatient. Instead of bravely facing our foes, we shrink from the
path of duty.

"He is a slave who will not be
la the truth, with two or three."

But, worse still, the fear of man may lead to failure in justice and generosity. We are
apt to put ourselves first. To save our miserable lives is the chief thing. Bather
than that we should suffer, we would let others suffer. Rather than that we should
be put to shame, we would have our opponents "cast down." This is the mean,
eelfish spirit which Satan recognized as so strong in human nature, when he said, " All
that a man hath will he give for his life."

II. God DBLIVEBETH HIS SERVANTS THAT TRUST IN HIM. (Dan. iU. 28.) How

naturally David turned to God in trouble 1 Circumstances moved him, but there was
more — ^love constrained him. His heart went forth in clinging trust to God, Faith
is the true antidote to fear. It lifts us out of the dust. It places us by the side of
God. It fills our soul with peace and hope. Through trust we gain courage to face
the foe (ver. 6). Further, we obtain resolution to continue the conflict (vers. 7 — 9).



M. LVL 1— 13.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS.



Taking hold of God's strength, we wax strong. All that is deepest and truest in our
hearts calls upon us to he hrave, and to quit ourselves like men. We are in the way
of duty, and are able to say, like the king in the story, " Come on, come all ; this rock
shall fly from its firm base as soon as I." The experience of the past and the sure
word of promise raise our hopes. We look to the future with confidence. In all our
wanderings God watches over us. In all our weaknesses and sorrows God stands by
U8 with tender compassion for our weaknesses, and with loving consolations for our
sorrows. The victory will be with the right (vers. 10 — 13). If God has begun a
good work in us, he will carry it on to the end. He who has been our Befuge in the
past will not fail us in the future. Therefore let us go forward bravely in the path ul
duty, not counting our lives dear unto ourselves, so that we may be found faithful to
him who hath called us, and finish our' course with joy. — ^W. F.

Ver. 12. — Vows. The first time we read of vows in the Bible is in Gen. xxviii. 20,
where it is said, " And Jacob vowed a vow." Sometimes vows were made at special
times and for special purposes; but, in the deepest sense, God's people felt that to
them life was a vow ; at every moment and through all changes they were under the
law of consecration to God. The words of the psalmist may he held as appropriate to
the period of entering upon a new year. This is a fittin;; time —

I. Fob thankful acknowledgment op God's mercies. The eye is upon the
past, and as the memory calls up God's deeds of love, the heart glows with gratitude.
" I will render praises unto thee." How just and reasonable ! — " For thou hast delivered
my soul from death."

II. Earnest prater to God for spiritual help. The future has its dangers.
The biographies of good men, our own experiences, and the circumstances of our lot,
warn us that we are liable to fall. In our weakness and fear we cry to God, " Wilt
not thou deliver my feet from falling?" Falls are hurtful to ourselves and to othei's.
Therefore our cry should be the more urgent to him who is "able to keep us from
falling" (Jude 24). The deliverances of the past are a strong plea for deliverance
in the future. As Cowper has said of gifts, we may say of deliverances —

"The best return for one like me.
So wretched and so poor.
Is from his gifts to draw a plea.
And ask nim still for more."

HL Renewal or cub covenant bnoagements. " Thy vows." It is well for us
to consecrate ourselves afresh to Goii. 1. lo walk be/ore Ood. 2. In the light of the
living. Christ is the Living One (Bev. i. 18). The saints are the living (1 Thess. v.
4 — 10). It is in the light of Christ, and in fellowship with his people, that we can
best fulfil our course here, and best prepare for the services of eternity. How sweet
the light instead of the darkness 1 and how blessed life instead of death I — W. F.

Vers. 1 — 13. — The struggle and victory of faith. The contents of this psalm may
be summed up as the struggle and the victory of faith.

L The STRnoGLE of faith. He is in great fear and danger on account of the plots
and wickedness of his enemies. They fight against him with the most dangerous
weapons they can command. He does not seek to defend himself with counter-plots
such as they employed. What are his weapons ? The one mighty weapon of trust
in Ood. 1. In the mercif id protection of the Almighty One. (Ver. 1.) In the power
of God as contrasted with the weakness of man. 2, In the word of Ood's eternal
promise. " When I am encompassed with fear, then do I trust and praise his faithful
word " (vers. 3 and 4). 3. In God's retributive justice. (Ver. 7.) That he will
overturn and punish all evil-doers. 4. In the tenderness and strength of the Divint
sympathy. God counts his sighs, put his tears in his bottle, and records them in
his book of remembrance.

IL The victoet of faith. (Vers. 9 — 13.) 1. And will put his enemies to flight
when he calls upon him. (Ver. 9.) Of this he is triumphantly assured, even against
all present appearances. 2. He knows that Ood is on his side. (Ver. 9.) God always
«n the side of the righteous, to protect them from all real harm. " If Gh>d be for ub.



6



THE BOOK OF PSALMS.



[ps. Lvn. 1 — 11.



who can be against U8?" 3. Et sees his salvation as an already accomplished fact.
(Ver. 13.) Faith seeB the future in the present, and the distant in the near (Heb.
xi. 1). 4. Ee is thus filled with the spirit of praise and fidelity. (Ver. 12.)
Will perform his vows and render thanks. "This is the victory that overcometh the
world, even your faith." — S.



EXPOSITION.



PSALM LVn.



This paalm — ^the "twin psalm" with the
last — has also an elaborate " title," which
mns thns: "To the precentor (or chief
mnsioian) : destroy not ; David's ; Miohtam ;
when he fled from Sanl ; in the cave." The
meaning of the second and fourth headings
is doubtful. Some explain the second as
" musical ; " others as an allusion to David's
words when he bade Abishai not to kill
Baul. The last two clauses give the place
and occasion of the composition. It was
written " in the cave " — probably the cave
of Adullam (1 Sam. xxii. 1) — when David
was flying from Saul. No valid reason can
be urged against these statements.

The psalm is divided by its refrain (vers.
5, 11) into two parts, which are further sub-
divided by the pause-mark, " Selah." The
initial strophe (vers. 1 — 5) is a mixture of
prayer and complaint ; the concluding one
(vers. 6 — 11) begins with complaint (ver.
6), but almost immediately changes into " a
strain of exulting and triumphant confi-
dence," so exulting and triumphant as to
cause its selection by our Church for reci-
tation on Easter Day.

Ver, 1. — Be merciful unto me, God, be
merciful unto me : for my sonl trnsteth in
thee (compare the preceding psalm, vers. 1
and 4). Yea, in the shadow of thy wings will
I make my refuge (see the comment on
Ps. xvii. 8 ; and comp. Psa. xxxvi. 7; Ixi. 4;
Ixiii. 7 ; zci. 4). The metaplior is first used
in Deut. zxxii. 11. Until these calamities
(rather, these wichednettet, or these malig-
nities) be overpast. That they will puss
away the psalmist has no doubt. What he
needs is support while they endure.

Ver. 2 — I will cry unto God most High.
In the original, " unto Elohim 'elyon "— an
expression which only occurs here and in
Ps. Ixxviii. 56. El elyon, however, occurs in
Ps. Ixxviii. 45 ; as in Gen. xiv. 18, 19,
22, and Jehovah 'elyon in Ps. vii. 18. Unto
God that performeth all things for me
(comp. Ps. cxxxviii. 8). God "accomplishes "
for his saints whatever is good for them.

Ver. 8.- -He shall send from heaven, and



save me from the reproach of him that would
swallow me up. The two clauses stand un-
connected in the original, which runs, " He
shall send from heaven and save me — my
pursuer reproaches — God shall send," etc.
The second cb,use is really parenthetic, and,
as Dr. Driver says (' Hebrew Verbs,' § 163),
" circumstantial," noting the circumstances
under which God would take action. Ood
shall send forth his meroy and his truth.
Hjg meroy, to relieve th» psalmist; his
truth, to confound the psalmist's enemies.

Ver. 4. — Uy soul is among lions (comp.
Pss. vii. 2 ; X. 9 ; xvii. 12 ; xxii. 21, etc.).
And I lie even among them that are set on
fire, even the sons of men — literally, I lie
on flrebands, sons of men — whose teeth are
spears and arrows, and their tongue a sharp
Bword. David occupies the cave (of Adul-
lam?), while around him prowl lion-like
men, whose fury is like that of firebrands,
who threaten to devour him with their
sharp teeth, and to pierce his sonl with their
cruel tongues.

Ver. 5. — Be thou exalted, God, above
the heavens ; or, exalt thyself, God, above
the heavens; i.e. show forth thy might in
such a signal way that the heavens (i.e. the
angels) may stand to gaze at it. Let thy
glory be above all the earth. Let thy
exaltation equally draw the attention of the
whole earth.

Vers. 6 — 11. — The strophe of "trium-
phant confidence " now begins, but with an
echo from the strophe of complaint. The
enemy is still at work, still plotting against
the psalmist, still seeking to do him a mis-
chief; but the efforts made are in vain.
They only bring the enemy himself into
trouble (ver. 6), and cause the psalmist to
pour forth a song of joy (vers. 7 — 11).

Ver. 6. — They have prepared a net for my
steps (comp. Pss. ix. 15 ; x. 10 ; xxv. 15 ;
xxxi. 4 ; XXXV. 7). These metaphors from
the chase are peculiarly appropriate at the
time when Saul was " hunting David upon
the mountains " (1 Sam. xxvi. 20). My soul
is bowed down; rather, they have homed
down my eoul ; literally, he has bowed down f
but the alternate use of the singular and
the plural, without any real change of
subject, is very common. They have £gged
a pit before me (comp. Pss. vii. 15; oxix.



n. Lvn. 1—11.]



THE BOOK OP PSALMS.



85). Into the midst whereof they are fallen
themsol ves. Here is the first note of triumph
— a very familiar note (Pss. vii. 15 ; ix. 15 ;
xxxiz. 8 ; oxli. 10), bnt one always sounded
with marked satisfaotion.

Ver. 7. — My heart is fixed, Ood, my heart
is fixed ; or, my heart is steadfast — it does not
doubt or waver, it is firm in its trust on
tliee. I will sing and give praise. Slug to
thee, i.e^ and praise thy Name.

Ver. 8. — Awake np, my glory; t.e. "my
^oul" (comp. Pss. xvi. 9; xxx. 12). The
psalmist stirs his soul to earnest, heartfelt
devotion. Awake, psaltery and harp; i.e.
awake, my musical instrumerts and my
muBicEd powers, whioli have slept, as it were,
while I was in afiB lotion. I myself will
awake early ; or, " will awaken the dawn "
<comp. Ovid, 'Metaph.,' xi. 597, "Vigil



ales evocat aurorara ;'' and Milton, " Cbeerly
rouse the slumbering morn."

Ver. 9. — I will praiss thee, Lord, among
the people (rather, peoples) ; I will sing
unto thee among the nations. The psalmist's
joy is too great to be confined within any
narrower limits than tliise of the entire
earth. He will have liis hymn of praise
go forth to all "peoples," "nations," and
languages. Micliaelis notes that his desire
has had a full accomplishment.

Ver, 10. — For thy mercy is great unto
the heavens, and thy truth unto the clouds.
" Thy mercy, thy truth " (comp. ver. 3).

Ver. 11. — Be thoi exalted, God, above
the heavens : let thy glory be above all the
earth (compare the comment on ver. 5, with
which this verse is identical).



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Vers. 1 — 11. — One of Ooil's rescues. The Bible is full of records of deliverances,
not only deliverances of nations, but rescues of individuals. These things are " written
for our learning, that we through patience and comlbrt of the Scriptures might have
bope " (Bom. x v. 4). We have in this psalm the story of one ol' Gi id's rescues. We see —

L B&scuE SORELY NIKDED. The enemies of the snul are represented as strong,
•crafty, and merciless. Thi-y are savage as " lions." They use guile and deceit, and
^' hunt every man his' brother with a net " (Micah vii. 2). Though they wound body
and soul, this is not enough. Blood is what they want. If they had their will, they
would cast the Joseph of their hate into the " pit," caring not if he perish miserably.
In this world of sin and sorrow and temptation, we are always in danger ; but there are
times when peril comes closer, and " calamities " crowd on every side, leaving no way
of escape. Happy are we if, in our helplessness and fear, we " flee for refuge to lay hold
-of the hope set before us " I

IL Keboue earnestly bought. (Vers. 1 — 3.) Here is a difference between the
ungodly and the godly. The ungodly seeks deliverance by his own devices ; the godly
«eeks deliverance from God. He cries for rescue, not in his own way, but in the way
that accords with God's character and will. When it comes, it must be in the line of
" mercy and truth." What God was, he is. What God has done is earnest of what
<}od will do. What God undertakes, he will carry out. Man promises more than he
performs, God performs more than he promises. The nearer we get to God, the more
clearly we see things in God's light. Our faith gains force and our hopes grow stronger.
If dangers press, we cry with the more urgency for hel p. God is " able to do for us
exceeding abundantly above all that we ask or think " (Eph. iii. 20).

III. Beboue geatefuixy AOENOWLEDaED. (Vers. 7 — 11.) Beligion ii for the whole
of life, but there are times when special services are proper. Deliverances wrought for
us by God are not to be kept secret, but to be openly acknowledged. Our gratitude
should be sincere, hearty, and demonstrative. Like the woman of Capernaum, who
was healed of the issue of blood, we should yield to the gentle solicitings of love, and
declare unto our Lord, before all the people, what he has done for us. Like the
Samaritan cured of his leprosy, though alone, we should come with a full heart to
God, and to give thanks for his goodness and wonderful works (Luke viii. 47 ; xvii.
18). How inspiring and comforting it is to read of the great deliverances which God
wrought for David and the prophets, and for the saints of every land and tongue !
When we remember these things, our hearts burn within us ; for this God is our God,
this Saviour is our Saviour. Nay, more ; in thought of what God is and has done, we
rise to the sight of the things not yet seen, and to the vision of the latter day when
the kingdom shall not be limited to Israel, but the glory of the Lord shall fill the
whole earth.— W. F



THE BOOK OP PSALMS.



[PB. LVIIl. 1 — 11.



Yer. 3. — " Meroy and truth." I. Mabk God's ohabaoteb. When God proclaimed
Ua Name to Moses, he put " mercy " in the forefront : " The Lord God merciful ; " but
" truth " had also its place, for it is added, " abundant in truth " (Ezod. xxxiv. 6). The
same order is observed in the Psalms. Thus it is said (Ps. Ixxzvi. 16), " Thou,0 Lord,
art a God full of compassion, and gracious, long-suffering, and plentemts in mercy and'
tntth " (of. Ps. Ixxxix. 2).

IL Shini: fobth m Gx)d'b jimaHEiiTS. What God does shows what he la. His
works express his character. " Mercy and truth " are, so to apeak, the rails on which
his judgments travel (Pss. xxv. 10 ; ciii. 17).

IIL Chabaotebize God's dealinos with his people. They need "mercy," and
unto the Lord " belongeth meroy " (Ps. Ixii. 12). They need " truth," and God is
*' the God of truth " (Ps. xxxi. 5). In the salvation which God has wrought, both are
blended in beautiful harmony (Ps. Ixxxv. 10). As has been quaintly said, " Mercy
•nd truth are but the transverse arms of the cross of Christ, Righteousness and peace
are but its upper and lower limbs. The one springs out of the earth, the other has
looked down from heaven, and they have kissed each other, in token of Gt>d'B love and
of his reconciliation with the sons of men."

IV. Foundation of hope to thb ohildben op men. Mercy and truth are the
two outspread wings of God. Under them there is sure shelter and peace (Pas, xxxvi.
7 ; Ixi. 1 — 4). Here there is hope for the sinaer (Pes. xxxiii. 18, 22 ; IxxviiL 7 ;
clxviL II). Here there is comfort for the troubled in heart (Ps. Ivii. 3—10). Here
there is inspiration for all who are minded to serve God (Pss. Ixix. 13 ; xcviii. 3 ;.
cxv. 1). Here there is earnest and foreshadowing of the everlasting rest (Pss. Ixi. % ;
Ixiii. 7 ; cxxxviiL 8). — W. F.

Vera. 1 — 11. — Expectation and assurance of deliveranoe. In many respects thia psalm
is very like the previous one. May be regarded under two genertd aspects. As
expressing —

I. The psalmist's expectation op delivebanoe fbom danoeb. (Vers. 1 — 6.)
Founded : 1. Upon his trust in God's tender protection. (Ver. 1; Deut. xxiL 11, 12.)
This faith in the tender love of God " has no parallel in heathen literature." 2. Qod
could not fail to perform or complete the work he had begun for him. (Ver. 2.) " He
who hath begun a good work in you," etc. God does not abandon his own work. 3.
Ood's retributive justice must give the victory to the righteous. (Vers. 3, 4, 6.) The
designs of wicked men recoil in the end upo,n themselves, and ensure their own
destruction. This is true, in the long run, of God's providence.

IL The joyful, inwaed assurance of delivebancb. (Vers. 7 — 12.) 1. His
heart is steadfast with fearless confidence in Ood. (Ver. 7.) The psalm records the
gradual progress of his mind towards the highest rejoicing in the Divine deliverance.
2. He calls upon himself to celebrate the praise of Qod in the highest strains. (Ver, 8.)
" His glory," equivalent to " his soul." He will wake the dawn with his earnest^
fervent songs. 3. ffe will make his praises to sound forth among the heathen. (Ver. 9.)
Not only among his own people. 4. ^e calls upon heaven to unite with earth in
praising the glory of Ood. (Ver. 12.) His triumph in God over his enemies has now
reached its culminating point, — S.



EXPOSITION.



PSALM LVin.



A psalm of condemnation on unrighteons
judges. Some suppose the judges to be
■nperhnman beings, entrusted with the
government of the earth (Cheyne). Others
suggest heathen rulers of Israel, in Baby-
lonia, during the time of the Captivity.
But the language is not stronger than that
addressed often to native judges (see Isa. i.



16—25 J X. 1—4 ; Jer. v. 2&— 29 ; Mioah lii.
9 — 12, etc.). And there is no reason for
rejecting the statement of the " title," that
the psalm was written by David. It may
either belong to the early years of David's
reign, or to the time immediately preceding
Absalom's rebellion.

The psalm consists of two strophes and »
conolasion. The first strophe is one of five
verses, and lays down the grounds of eova-



PS. Lvin. 1—1-1.]



THE BOOK OP PSALMS.



plaint (yen. 1 — 5). The Becond, which is one
of four verses (vers. 6 — &), passes sentence,
desorihing the coining punishment. The
conclusion (vers. 10, 11) expresses the
righteous man's satisfaction at the result.

Yer. 1. — Do ye indeed speak righteona-
nesi, congregation 1 The rendering of
ilem (d^8) by "congregation" is con-
trary to all analogy, and quite untenable.
It must either mean "dumb ones," or be
• corruption of Slim (o'^S) — "mighty
ones " (comp. Ps. xxix. 1). In either case
it is an epithet applied to the judges of the
people^ and not to the congregation. Do ye
judge uprightly, ye sons of meni Both
questions are asked in bitter irony, as is
clear from the context,

Yer. 2. — Yea, in heart ye work wicked-
ness; literally, leiekednestes, or iniquities.
These ye first devise in your heart, and
then (see the next clause) carry out with
your hands. Te weigh (or, weigh out) the
violence of your hands in the earth. In-
stead of carefully meting out justice to
men, after accurately weighing it in the
balance of right and equity, you weigh out
to them mere wrong and " violence."

Yer. 3. — The wicked are estranged from
the womb : they go astray as soon as they
be born, speaUng lies. This is the lan-
guage of hyperbole, and is certainly not the
profession of the doctrine of original sin.
What the psalmist means is that those who
ultimately become heinous sinners, for the
most part show, even from their early
childhood, a strong tendency towards evil.
He implies that with others the case is
different. Though there may be in them
a corruption of nature (Ps. li. 6), yet, on
the whole, they have good dispositions, and
present a contrast to the ungodly ones
whom he is describing.

Yer. 1. — Their poison is like the poison of
a serpent (comp. Ps. cxL 3; Song of Sirach
XXV. 15). They are like the deaf adder that
stoppeth her ear. The "adder" was sup-
posed to be " deaf," on account of its being
very difficult to oliarm. It was thought
obstinately to set itself against the charmer,
and, as it were, stop its ears against him,

Yer. S. — Which will not hearken to the
voice •/ charmers. Serpent-charmers are
alluded to in Eccles. x. 11 and Jer. yi. 17.
They have at all times been common in the
Bast, as they are still in India ; and it is
with reason suspected that the magicians of
Pharaoh employed the art in their contest
with Moses and Aaron. Charming never
to wisely; literally, though they bind their
tpelU ehilfMy.

Yers. 6 — 9. — "Description passes into
imprecation, with an 'Elohim' emphati-



cally placed first" (Oheyne). Metaphors
are accumulated. Menace follow menace.
The wrath of God is first invoked upon
the evil-doers (vers, 6 — 8); then (ver, 9)
coming judgment is annonnced.

Yer, 6. — Break their teeth, God, vx
their mouth. Serpent-charmers soinetimes,
when they have caught their snake, proceed
to beat out the poison-fangs with a stone or
stick (Oeike, 'The Holy Land and the
Bible,' vol. i. p. 245). The psalmist, in the
first clause, seems to allude to this practice ;
in the second, he changes the metnpfaor,
reverting to his favourite image of the
young lion (kephir). Break out the great
teeth of the young lions, Lord. The
"cheek teeth" (Joel i. 6), or principal
fangs on either side, are intended.

Yer. 7. — Let them melt away as waters
which run continually ; i.e. " let them waste
away, and go to naught, like wuter, that
runs off and accomplishes nothing." When
he bendeth his bow to shoot his arrows, let
them be as out in pieces; te. "let the
arrows be as though snapped in two, or
headless."

Yer. a. — As a snail which melteth, let
every one of them pass away; or, "let
them be as a snail, which melteth and
passeth away " (Bevised Version). Snails
in Palestine, dxiring dry seasons, often
shrink, shrivel up, and disappenr from their
shells (Tristram, 'Natural History of the
Bible,' p. 296). Like the untimely birth of
a woman, that they may not see the sun ;
rather, that hath not seen the sun (Professor
Cheyne, Bevised Yersion); i.e. "let them
be as an abortion " (comp. job iii. 16).

Yer. 9. — ^Before your pots can feel the
thorns, he shall take them away as with a
whirlwind, both living, and in his wrath.
This " difficult and obscure verse " has been
variously explained. Professor Cheyne
translates, "Before your pots can feel the
thorns, and while your flesh (i.e. the flesh
in the pots, on which yon are about to
feast) is still raw, the hot wrath of Jehovah
shall sweep it away." The Bevised Yer-
sion gives the following : " Before your pots
can feel the thorns, he shall take them [i,e.
the thorns] away with a whirlwind, the
green [thorns] and the burning alike." Dj-.
Eay, " Before your caldrons have felt the
thorn-fire, even as raw flesh, even so, shall
hot fury sweep him away." The general
meaning seems to be that before the wicked
judges can enjoy the &uits of their wicked-
ness, the fierce wrath of God will come
upon them like a tempest, and sweep both
them and the produce of their villainy
away (comp. 2 Sam. xxiii. 6, 7).

Yers. 10, 11. — In conoluaion, the psalmist



10



THE BOOK OF PSALMS.



[ps. Lvin. 1 — It



expresses the Batisfantion of the rigUteona
at the punishment of the unjust j udges.

Ver. 10. — The ri3^htaoTi9 shall rejoice
when he seeth the vengeance. Aa the ^oud
man ia pained when lie sees the ungi>dly
prosper, so he cannot but feel a certain
Batiafautinn and pleasure when punisUment
overtakes him. Dante Bays —

"O Signer mio, quando sar6 io lieto
A veder la vendetta, olie nascosa
Fa dolce I'iia tua nel auo segr to ? "
(' Purg.,' XX. 94—96.)

He shall wash his feet in the blood of the
wicked (comp. Ps. Ixviii. 21 ; I»a. Ixiii. 3).



It is obaervablo tliat David, personally,
was too imlulgent, rather than too severe,
towards offenders.

Ver. 11.— So that a man shall say, Verily
tliere ia a reward for the righteous. _ God'a
righteous judgment being seen in the
punisliment of the wicked, men will no
longer doulit of the ultimate reward of the
goilly. God must, by his very nature, be
more inclined to re>vard goodness than to
punish wickednei-B. Verily he is a God that
judgeth in the earth ; rather, verily there it
a God, etc. (see Revised Version). Klohim
ia joined with a plural liere, because the
B/iealcera are men generally, not only
Israelitea.



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Vers. 1 — 11. — Unjust Judges. There is a contrast in this psalm between the unjust
judges of the earth, and God the righteous Judge of all men (vers. 1, 2, and ver. 11).
"Do ye really, ye gods, apeak righteousness? Do ye in uprightness judue ihe
children of men ? Nay, in heart ye work iniquities, in the land ye weigh out the
violence of your hands " (Delitzsch). This indignant protest is jnst. Judges have
often been false to their trust. They have prostituted their power to selfish ends.
They have increased instead of diminished the evils of society, and made confusion
worse confounded by their wicked deeds. There are signal examples of this in the
Bible, and though the lines have fallen unto us, in these last days, in pleasant places,
our fathers, in the days of Bonner and Jeffries and Claverhouse, and in days of
persecution, suffered grievously. But how different is it witli God the Judge of all the
earth I His judgments are all righteous. Even the wicked cannot complain. In their
punishment they only receive, as their own consciences testify, " the just reward of
their deeds." Our attention is specially concentrated on the wicked.

I. Theib chahacter is portbated. (Vers. 1 — 5.) Character is a growth. No
man becomes uf a sudden either very had or very good. There is gradation — " first the
blade, then the ear, then the full corn in the ear." We are shown wickedness in its
germ. It has its source in a bad heart — a heart not right with God. From within it
works toward without. Evil may lor a time be concealed or held in check, but it is
sure to show itself. People may be worse than they seem. God inly knows the evil
that lies hidden and rooted in the heart. Then we see wickedness in its development.
It has been said that " tongue sins are our first transgressions." But how quickly do
we proceed from " lies" to other and more flagrant forms of wickedness! The more
the will of the flesh is indulged, the stronger it becomes. The poison spreads throngh
aU the veins.

"The soul growB clothed by contagion,
Imborlies and imbrutes, till she quite loae
The Divine property of her fiist being."

(Milton.)

Then cometh the consummation. All checks and warnings and remonstrances are
in vain. Men become " more deaf than adders to the voice of true decision." Like
Baul, they choose the evil instead of the good. Like Rehoboam, they persist in their
sins. Like Ahab, they sell themselves to work iniquity. Like Israel, they harden
their hearts against all teaching and rebuke, till iu the end there is no remedy
(2 Chron. xxxvi. 16).

II. Their judqment m fbedioted. (Vers. 6 — 11.) God ia long-suffering and
merciful. How excellent his counsels 1 how tender his rebukes! how gracious his calls
to repentance ! But when evil men knowingly and obstinately persist in their evil
ways, judgment must be done. The psalmist adds image to image to strengthen the
argument, and to set forth the more vividly the awful doom of the wicked. 1. Judg-



rs. Lix. 1 — ^17.]



THE SOOK OF PSaLMj>.



11



ment it required in the interests of humanity. In all good goTemments there are laws
for the protection of society. If evil-doers will not repenti they must be restrained.
Their power to do injury must be stopped. 2. Besides, /ud^ment m demanded in
accordance with righteousness. There is nothing arbitrary in the procedure. Ereu
evil must be dealt with fairly. 3. Judgment also is necessary for the vindication of
Gods truth. There is a moral necessity why it should be " ill with the wicked." " Qod
is not a man, that he should lie."

" Bat evil on itself shall back recoil,
And mix no more with goodness, when at last^
Oather'd like scum, and settled to itseU^
It shall be in eternal restless change,
Belf-fed and gelf-consnmed ; if this fail.
The pillar'd firmament is rottenness,
And earth's base built on stubble."

(Milton.)

W.F.

Ven. 1 — 11. — A bold protest against unrighteous judges. I. Thb invetebatkly
wic&^ii. (Vers. 1 — 5.) 1, Wicked within and without. (Vers. 1, 2.) In heart and
aeed. 2. Wicked by nature and by habit. (Ver. 3.) Go astray all their lives. 3.
Incorrigible. (Ver. 4.) Like the adder that will not be turned by the voice of the
charmer.

II. Theib punishment. (Vers. 6 — 11.) 1. ITiey shall be rendered powerless in
their designs. (Vers. 6 — 9.) All the figures in vers. 6 — 9 mean this. 2. ITiey shall
become the objects of God's righteous vengeance. (Vers. 9, 10.) 3. The victims of their
wickedness shall see their overthrow, and rejoice in it. (Vers. 10, 11.) They shall
rejoice that there is a Gkkx that judgeth amoug men. — S.



EXPOSITION.



PSALM LIX.
LiKB Pis. Ivi. and Mi, this to a cry for
deliverance ont of great peril, with a final
expression of confidence (vers. 16, 17) that
the deliverance will be granted. . From the
psalm itself there is some diffionlty in de-
termining who are the enemies against
whom aid is sought, since, while the bulk
of the allusions suggest domestic enemies,
there is distinct mention of the "heathen"
in two places (vers. 5, 8). Hence it has
been argued by critics of note that the entire
complaint is against foreign foes, and the
complainant either the nation (De Wette),
or a late king of Judah (Ewald), or a Mac-
cabean leader (Hitzig), or a poet of the time
of Nebemiah (Koster). But the whole cha-
racter of the psalm is Davidic, and the
"title" must be regarded as having more in-
trinsic weight than the conjectures of critics,
especially of critics who are so wholly at
variance one with another as these. The
title lays it down that the psalm is David's,
and assigns, as the occasion of its composi-
tion, Saul's Bending emissaries to watch the



house where David was, with the intent to
kill him. The reference is dearly to the
narrative in 1 Sam. xix. 11 — 18. And the
psalm itself, when carefully oousidered, will
be found to agree well with this time and
occasion.

It is generally agreed that the composition
divides into four portions, two of them closed
by the pause-mark, '■ Selah," and the other
two by a refrain. It thus consists of four
strophes, the first of five verses (vera. 1 — 5),
and the other three of four verses each
(vers. 6—9, 10—13, and 14—17).

Ver. 1. — ^Deliver me from mine enemies,
my God. This is David's almost constant
cry (see Pss. vii. 1 ; xvii. 13 ; xxii. 20 ; xxv.
20; xxxi. 1, 2, 15; xxxv. 17; xl. 13; xliii
1 ; Ixix. 18 ; Ixx. 1, 4 ; oix. 21, etc.). He
has enemies, both domestic and foreign.
In his early youth Saul becomes his enemy
out of jealousy; then most of Saul's conr-
tiera espouse their master's quarrel. He
has enemies at the court of Achish ; enemies
in his family, even among his sons, as Absa-
lom; enemies among his counsellors, as
Abithophel ; foreign enemies on all sides
of him — Pljilistines, Edomites, Moabites,



12



THE BOOK OF PSALMS.



[PB. LIX. 1 — 17.



Ammonites, Amalekites, Syrians, Mesopo-
tamiang, etc. Against all of them he in-
vokes God's aid, and by God's aid he
triumphs ovei all. Defend me from them
that rise up against me ; or, set me on high
above them (Kay, Bevised Version). David's
domestic foes "rose up ap;ain8t him," no
less tlian his foreign foes ; mado nar on him ;
sought to seize his person, and put him to
death.

Ver. 2. — ^Deliver me from the workers of
iniquity, and save me from bloody men.
Foreign enemies are never reproached with
being " bloody men," since war is their trade,
and it is their business to wound and slay.

Ver. 3. — For, lo, they lie in wait for my
Bonl. The emissaries of Saul were sent to
David's house " to watch him, and to slay
him in the morning" (I Sam. xix. 11).
This seems to be tlie "lying in wait" in-
tended. Warned by his wife, Miohal, Saul's
daughter, David fled horn his house during
the night throug^h a window, and so saved
himself (1 Bam. xix. 12). The mighty (or, the
ttrong ones) are gathered against me ; not
for my transgression, nor for my sin,
Lord. Not in consequence of any wrong
that I have done. It is noted, as charac-
teristic of David's early psalms, tliat he pro-
tests his absolute innocence in them.

Ver. 4. — Xhey run and prepare themselves
without my fault; or, "establish them-
selves" — "take up their position" (so
Hengstenberg, Kay, and Professor Cheyne).
Awake to help me (see the comment on Ps.
xliv. 23). And behold; i.e. "see how things
are — how innocent I am ; how unjust and
cruel are my enemies I "

Ver. 5.— Thou therefore, Lord Ood of
hosts, the Ood of Israel (comp. Fs. Ixix. 6,
also " a psalm of David "). Awake to visit
all the heathen. "All" is emphatic, and
means not only those without the covenant,
but also those within — the wicked Israelites.
It is noted that Saul's instruments consisted
of two classes — actual heathen, such as
Doeg the Edo;nite; and irreligious Israelites,
as the Ziphites and others, who were no
better than iieathen. Be not mercifnl to
any wicked transgressors. "Tlie Hebrew
irords denote treachery and faithlessness"
(Cook). They are scarcely applicable to
open foreign enemies.

Vers. 6 — 9. — " Here a new stanza begins "
(Oheyne). The "enemies" of ver. 1 and
the "workers of iniquity" of ver. 2 are
more elaborately portrayed. First they are
represented as " dogs " — such hideous, half-
wild dogs as frequent Eastern cities, which
sleep during the greater part of the day,
md rove about in packs at night — unclean,
horrid, loathsome animals (ver. 6). Then



they appear as men — abnsive, slanderous,
godless (ver. 7). In conclusion, appeal is
made to God against them. He mill " laugh
them to scorn " (ver. 8) ; and he is a sure
Defence against all their efforts (ver. 9).

Ver. 6.— They return at evening. Having
traced David to his house, they disperse for
a time, but " return " again at evening, and
take up their watch (l Sam. zix. 11). Xhey
make a noise like a dog ; i.e. snarl and
growl, quarrelling more or less among them-
selves during the night-time. And go round
about the city. Either wander vaguely
about, as dogs do for prey, or patrol the
walls and gates to see that David does not
quit the city, and so escape them.

Ver. 7. — Behold, they belch out with their
mouth. All night long they keep uttering
abuse and execrations and threats (comp.
Fs. xciv. 4). Swords are in their lips (comp.
Fs. Ivii. 4). Speeches that wound «nd cut
to the heart. For who, say they, doth hear 1
(comp. Pss. X. 11 — 13 ; Ixiv. 6 ; Ixxiii. 11 ;
xoiv. 7). They think themselves irrespon-
sible for their words. No one will hear or
know what they say.

Ver. 8. — But thou, Lord, shalt laugh at
them (comp. Fa. ii. 4). Thou shalt have all
the heathen in derision (see the comment
on ver. 5, and particularly the explanation
there given of "all the heathen ").

Ver. 9. — Because of his strength. There
is no "because of" in the original, and the
reading, "his strength" ("lip), is doubtful.
Several manuscripts have "my strength"
(<.i!>), and this reading was followed in all
the ancient versions. Most modem oritios
prefer it, and translate, my strength, as in
ver. 17. Will I wait upon thee; ratiter,
I will wait upon thee. For my God is my
Defence ; or, my Bigh Tower (Bevised
Version).

Vera. 10 — 13. — The enemies are still the
main subject. Their pride, their cursing,
their lying, are denounced (ver. 12). The
psalmist trusts to "see his desire" upon
them (ver. 10). First he begs that they
may not be slain, but only "scattered
abroad," so that they may remain as ex^
amples of God's vengeance for the warning
of others (ver. 11). Then, forgetting this
wish, he pleads for their capture and their
utter destruction, without which Qoi's glory
will not be fully vindicated (vers. 12, IS).

Ver. 10. — The Ood of my meroy shall pre-
vent me ; or, according to another reading,
God with his merey shaU prevent (t.e. anti-
cipate) me. God shall let me see my desire
upon mine enemies (comp. Fs. liv. 7).



PS. ux. 1—17.]



THE BOOK OP PSALMS.



13



Yer. 11. — Slay them not, lest my people
forget; i.e. my true people— faithful Israel.
'I'he psalmist's "firat thought is, that by
lingering on in life for a while the wicked
may be more edifying monnments of the
Divine anger " (Cheyne). (For a parallel,
see Exod. ix. 16.) Scatter them hy thy
power; or, make them vjanderen (comp.
Gen. iv. 12, 11). It has been often noted
that David's curse seems to have passed oa
to the entire nation of the Jews. And bring
them down, Lord our Shield; i.e. "oast
them down from their honourable position —
bring them into misery nnd disgrace — O
Loi'<^ who art our Defence and Shield"
(comp. PsB. iii. 3 ; xviii. 2 ; xxviii. 7).

Yer. 12. — For the sin of their mouth and
the words of their lips; ratlier, the tin of
their mouth it each word of their lipt (Hup-
feld, Cheyne) ; or, O the sin of their mouth t
the word of their lips ! (Ewald, Kay, Canon
Cook). Let them even be taken in their
pride. Saul's special emissaries (1 Sam,
lix. 11) would, of course, be proud of tlieir
mission. And for cursing and lying which
they speak (comp. Fs. x. 7; and, for an
example, see 2 Sam. xvi. 5 — 8).

Yer. 13. — Consume them in wrath, con-
sume them; or, "make an end of them" —
"bring them to naught." That they may
not be; or, "that they be no more," And
let them know that God ruleth in Jacob
unto the ends of the earth. The frustration
of their plans, and their signal punishment,
will cause the God of Israel to be recog-
nized widely as the King of the whole
earth. Compare the words of David to
Goliath, "I will give the carcases of the
host of the Philistines this day unto the
fowls of the air, and to the wild beasts of
the earth ; that all the earth may know that
there it a Ood in Israel " (1 Sam. xvii. 46).

Vers. 14 — 17. — David here turns back
from the future fate of his enemies to their



present condition, and repeats vei.Tterhatim,
He thus reminds liimself of his existing
danger ; he is still being sought — they are
still in quest of their prey, and will con-
tinue so till morning comes (rer. 15). But
in the morning he will be gone — he will
have escaped them. Upon this thought
occurring, be raises a renewed thanksgiving
to God (vers. 16, 17).

Yer. 14. — And at evening let them return ;
rather, they return, as in ver. 6. And let
them make a noise like a dog ; rather, they
make a noise. And go round about the city.
Keeping their watch upon me.

Yer. 15. — Let them wander up and down
for meat ; rather, they wander up and down
for meat. David himself was the prey whicli
they desired. They kept guard around his
house, wandering, no doubt, up and down.
And grudge if they be not satisfied ; rather,
as in the margin and in the Revised Ver-
sion, and if they be not satisfied, they will
stay all night. This they appear to have
done from 1 Sam. xix. 11 — 15.

Yer. 16.— Bnt I will sing of thy power;
rather, of thy ytrength — the same word as
that used in vers. 9 and 17. Yea, I will
sing aloud of thy mercy in the morning.
When the morning came, David had escaped
(1 Sam. xix. 12), and could "sing of Gods
mercy" securely at Bamah, where he had
joined Samuel. For thou hast been my
Defence and Befuge in the day of my
trouble; or, my High Tower, as in vers. 9
and 17.

Yer. 17. — TJuto thee, my Strength, will
I sing : for God is my Defence ; or. Strong
Tower (comp, ver. 9, which, if we read ny
for Hiy, is so far, excepting in the verb,
identical). And the God of my mercy; i.e.
"the God who showeth meroy upon me"
(comp. ver. 10).



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Vers. 1 — 17. — Waiting upon Ood. There are expressions in this psalm which
sound harsh and cruel, and which Christians would shrink from usiug. But, on the
other hand, there is much here that comes home to our experience, and that is helpful
and comforting in the great trials of life. It is something to know that good men
have suffered affliction before us — that they have been falsely accused and foully
wronged, that they have felt the pangs of grief and the bitterness of disappointment,
and that they have had to bear much and wait long before deliverance came. The
lesson is clear. It is — Wait upon Ood. This is the refrain, which comes so sweetly at
the middle (ver. 10), and then with increased force and emphasis at the end (ver. 17).
The figure seems that of a sentinel on his tower. He is set there to watch. He must
be vigilant and patient. There is much to' try him, but not till morning breaks will
he find release.

I. Waitin» upon God assttbes deliverance. Waiting implies faith and hope.
" The husbandman waiteth for the harvest." The physician waits for the effect of his



14



THE BOOK OP PSA.LMS.



[P8. LX. 1—12.



remedies. The father waits for the time when his son is educated, and fit to take his
place in the world. So we are to have faith, to hold ourselves still, in patient expect-
ancy, till God's will is made known. Waiting does not preclude personal effort. On
the contrary, it implies it. God will not do for us what he has made us able to do
for ourselves. Our duty is to work, and wait upon God for his blessing. We must
do our part, if we expect God to do his part. But there are times when we have,
so far as we know, done all in our power, when we have exhausted all lawful efforts,
and yet our condition is not bettered, but rather grown worse. Our straits are great.
Our needs are urgent Our enemies press us on every side, and shout as if sure of
their prey. What comfort it is, at such a time, to commit ourselves to God, and to
wait patiently for him from whom our salvation cometh ! Remember what God is,
and what he has done. He is our " Strength " and our " Defence." God in ks is our
Strength^our strength made perfect in weakness. We in Ood is our "DefcDu"
— our Strong Tower to which we run and are sale.

IL Waiting upon God awakens pbaibb. (Vers. 14 — 17.) Here is a sweet strain
of thanksgiving. The rage and malice of the enemy still continue, but it is malice
that is defeated, and rage that is baulked of its prey. The " moroing " brings deliver-
ance, and, instead of the shrieks of the victim, there are the songs ot the victor. God
has saved his servant who trusted in him. How often has the same thing corae true !
God's people, waiting upon him in the day of their trouble, have found " defence " and
" refuge." God's power has delivered them from their enemies ; God's " mercy " has
brought joy and peace to their hearts. Therefore they, with renewed ardour, say,
" Unto thee, O my Strength, will I sing : for God is my Defence, and the God of my
mercy."— W. F.



EXPOSITION.



PSALM LX.



In the case of this psalm, the " title " is
again our best guide, both with respeot to
the author and to the occasion of the com-
position. The title is unusually full, and
contalna such a number of minute par-
ticulars, as a later compiler or commentator
would scarcely have ventured upon. The
history involved in the title — reconcilable
on the whole with the accounts in 2 Sam.
and 1 Chron. — is certainly not contained
bi those accounts. It implies an author,
writing from his own knowledge of facts —
an author who, if not David himself, must
have been a contemporary.

The psalm itself has every characteristic
of the Davidic style — liveliness, rapid tran-
sitions, terse yet comprehensive language,
strong metaphors, intense feeling, hopeful-
ness. It belongs to the time when, after
his first Syrian campaign (2 Sam. viii. 3 — 8),
David was engaged in a war with Edom of
a most sanguinary character (2 Sam. viii.
13: 1 Kings xi. 15, 16; 1 Ohron. zviiL 12)
— marked by striking vicissitudes, and at
least one grievous defeat of the forces of
Israel (vers. 1 — 3, 12) — but terminating in
a glorious victory, and in the subjugation



and occupation of the country (2 Sam. vliL
14; 1 Chron. xviii. 13). The psalm is
written after the great defeat, and before
the fortune of war has turned. God is
pleaded with (vers. 1 — 5), reminded of the
promises which he has made (vera. 6 — 8),
exhorted in tlie strongest terms to give his
help (vers. 9 — 11), finally pronounced a
sure Helper, through whom Israel is certain
to obtain complete victory (ver. 12).

There are three strophes in the psalm
— the first of five verses (vers. 1 — 5); the
second of three (vers. 6 — 8); and the third
of four (vers. 9 — 12).

Ver. 1. — God, thou hast cast ns off, thou
hast scattered ns, thou hast been displeased
(comp. Ps. xliv. 9 — 11). The expressions
used imply a signal defeat, which, though
not mentioned in the historical books, har-
monizes with the account given in 1 Kings
of the severe treatment of Bdom by Joab.
From the fact of the defeat the psalmist
infers the gjound of it— God's displeasure.
turn thyself to ns again ; rather, O rettore
to u$ (Le. make restoration to ns) again
(see the Bevised Version),

Ver. 2.— Thou hast made the eartb (rather,
the land) to tremble. The blow struck con-
Tulsed the whole land— {.e. the people in it.
It is not really an earthquake, but a panic
fear, that is intended. Thon hast broken it ;



PS. hx. 1—12.]



THE BOOK OF PSALMS.



15



or, rent it The imagery of an earthquake
is kept up. Heal the breaohes thereof; for
it ehaketh. The panic fear atill contiQued.

Yer. 3. — ^Thon hast showed thy people
hard things; literally, a hard thing, or
harshnets ; i.e. severity. Thou hast made us
to drink the wins of astonishment; or, of
trembling (as in Isa. li. 17, 22) ; oomp. Ps.
Ixxv. 8; Jer. xxr. 15—17: xlix. 12; Ezek.
xxiii. 32 — 34; Zeoh, xii. 2. The outpour-
ing of Divine vengeance is represented under
the figure of presenting a oup, which the
doomed man is forceil to drink.

Yer. 4. — Thou hast given a banner to
them that fear thee, that It may be dis-
played because of the truth. So most com-
mentators. But the ancient reniieriug,
recently revived by Professor Oheyne, is
perhaps prefeiable. According to this, the
menniug is, " Thou hast indeed given a
banner to them that fear thee (see Exod.
xvii. 15), but only that they may flee before
the bow '* (tov tpvyew airh TrpofftJlnrov rd^av,
LXX.). On the last occasion that the
banner bad been lifted, it had seemed to
be, not so much a rallying-pnint, as a signal
for dispersion.

Yer. 5. — That thy beloved may be de-
livered ; save with thy right hand, and hear
me ; rather, hear v,s. From complaint (vers.
1 — 4) the psalmist abruptly turns to prayer,
thus closing the first strophe with a gleam
of hope.

Vers. 6 — 8. — Appeal is next made to God's
promises. Some suppose that a Divine
oracle had been recently given to David
himself, and that he here records the words
of it. But, in that case, it is difficult to
account for the despondent tone of vers.
1 — i. Heng'stenberg's explanation seems
preferable, that David now encourages him-
self by a " reference to the general aspect
of the assurances given in the Pentateuch
in regard to the possession of the land of
Canaan in its widest extent, and to victory
over hostile neighbours," and that he has
his eye especially on the blessing of Jacob
(Gen. xlix.) and the blessing of Moses
(Dent, xxxiii.). If these assurances are to
be depended on, Israel cannot now be about
to succumb to Edom.

Yer. 6. — God hath spoken in bis holiness ;
or, promised by his lioliness (comp, Ps. Ixxxix.
35). As God is holy, he cannot falsify his
promises. I will rejoice, I will divide
Shechem, and mete out;, the valley of Sno-
coth; i.e. I will distribute Canaan among
my people — ^both the western region, of
which Sliechem was the chief town (1 Kin^s
xii. 25), and the eastern, which contained



" the valley of Succoth " (Gen. xxxiii. 17).
God, having assigned the whole land to hia
people (Gen. xiii. 14, 15), " meted it out "
through Joshua, his servant, and gave to
each tribe its inheritance.

Yer. 7. — Gilead is mine, and Uanasseh ii
mine. Gilead was an old name for the
territory beyond the Jordan (Gen. xxxvii.
25), especially the more northern portion of
it. Manasdeh had a portion of this territory
assigned to him (Numb, xxxii. 39 — 42 ;
Josh. xvii. 1). But Manasseh had also a
large inheritance on the western side of
Jordan (Josh. xvii. 7—11). It is not quite
clear whether both the divisions of Maiiaa-
seh, or the eastern one only, is here in-
tended. £phraim also is the strength of
mine head. Ephraim was the most Im-
portant of the tribes next to Judah, and
held the central position in the western
region, forming the niiiin strength of the
northern kingdom after the separation
under Jeroboam (see 1 Kings xii. 25 ; and
comp. Isa. vii. 2, 5, 9, 17 ; ix. 21 ; Hos. iv.
17; V. 7 — 14; vi. 4—10, etc.). Judah is my
lawgiver (comp. Gen. xlix. 10; Numb. xxi.
17); i.e. "my ruling tribe"— the tribe to
which I have committed the government of
my people" (see 1 Sam. xvi. 1; 2 Sam. ii.
4; V. 1—3; Ps. Ixxviit. 68).

Yer. 8. — Moab is my washpot. A term of
extreme contempt (see Herod., ii. 172). The
subjugation of Moab was prophesied by
Balaam (Numb, xxiv. 17), and eiieoted by
David (2 Sam. viii. 2). Over Edom wiU X
oast out my shoe. The reference to Ruth
iv. 7, 8, which is commonly made, is very
doubtl'ul. Probably no more is iuteuded
than that Edom will bo a slave of so low a
rank as only to clean the shoes of its master.
The subjugation of Edom, like that of
Moab, had been prophesied by Balaam
(Numb. xxiv. 18). Fhilistia, triumph thou
because of me. The context will nbt allow of
this rendering, since Philistia, like the other
enemies of Israel, must be triumphed over,
and not triumph. Translate, over Fhilistia
is my triumphing (oomp. Ps. cviii. 9).

Yera. 9 — 12. — Rehearsal of God's promises
has raised the psalmist out of despondency,
and he can now confidently call God to hia
assistance. Edom is to lie conquered, for
so God has promised (ver. 8). But bow?
Who will lead out Israel's armies? Will
God, who has lately " oast Israel off " ? If
not, it must be man. But "vain is the
help of man" (ver. 11). So the call is
made that God will give help in the trouble
— and with the call comes full confidence
— and the triumphant cry goes forth,
"Through God we shall do valiantly; fui



16



THE BOOK OF PSALMS.



[k. lx, 1—12.



he it is that shall tread down our enemies "
(ver. 12).

Ver. S.^Who will bring me into the
strong city 1 The " strong city " of Edom
was Sela, "The Cliff"— now Petra. And
it was a city of enormous strength, rock-
hewn in the main, and guarded by frightful
precipices. Who will conduct me tb^ough
its strong natural and artificial defences,
and give me possession of the place ? Who
will lead me into Sdom! Who will even
bring me into the country ? The Edomites,
flushed with their recent victory, will, of
course, dispute my entrance. Who will
enable me to OTercome their resistance ?

Ver. 10.— Wilt not thou, God, which
hadst cast us off? rather, Satt not thou, O
God, cast u» offi Can we expect thee to
lead us, when thou hast so lately cast us
off, and, as we hear it said on all sides,
dost not g« out with onr armies % A refer-
ence, perhaps, to Ps. xliv. 9.



Ver, 11. — Give ns help from tronble.
Faith combats donbt, and, overcoming it,
finds an ntteranoe — "Oire us help now,
whatever thou hast done in the past." Our
trouble is great. "Help us from it." For
vain is the help of man. We have, there-
fore, no hope but in thee.

Ver. 12. — ^Through God we shall do va-
liantly. No miracle is expected or asked
for. Let God look upon us favourably —
let his light shine into onr hearts, and then
" we ourselves shall do valiantly " — wo
shall gain the victory — we shall aocomplisb
the prophecy of Balaam (Knmb. zxiv. 18) ;
and Edom shall pass into our possession.
(For the fulfilment, see 2 Sam. viii 14;
1 Chron. xviii. 13.) For he it is that shall
tread down our enemies (comp. Ps. xliv. 5),
which has the same meaning, "Through
thy Kame will we tread them under that
rise up against us." (For the extent to
which Edom was trodden down, see 1 Kings
xi. 15, 16.)



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHOES.

Vers. 1 — 12. — Despondency and its antidote. There are -heights and depths in the
Divine life. We may pass quickly from the one to the other. When at the height
of triumph we may be brought low. When in the depths of despondency we may be
raised up. This psalm speaks of despondency. We see —

I. Hope eisino in the midst op despondency. (Vers. 1 — 4.) We are apt to fix
our mind on our trials. They bulk large. They press us sorely. We dwell upon
their grievousness. We shrink from their effects^ bewildered and dismayed (ver. 3).
Besides, we are too ready to think of onr trials as judgments. Our sins make us
afraid. God seems to be visiting us in wrath, instead of mercy. But this is our
infirmity. As we turn to God with humility, hope rises in our hearts. God is not
against us, but for us. If he visits us with trials, it is for our good. His banner over
us is still the banner of love.

II. Faith in God's pbomisbb sustaining thb soitl in despondbnot. (Vers. 6 — 8.)
The words of Moses, Samuel, and Nathan had sunk deep into the psalmist's heart.
He remembered them, and was comforted. How much more reason have we to say,
" God hath spoken in his holiness " 1 We have not only the words, that David had,
but many words besides— not only the words of prophets and apostles, but the words
of him of whom it was said, « Thou hast the words of eternal life," The Holy
Scriptures are rich in promises (2 Pet. i. 3, 4 ; 2 Cor. i. 20). We may take one and
another to the throne of grace, and say, " Remember the word unto thy servant, upon
which thou hast caused me to hope. This is my comfort in my affiction " (Ps. cxix.
49, 50). Two rabbis, it is said, approaching Jerusalem, observed a fox running up
the hill of Zion. Rabbi Joshua wept, but Rabbi Eliezer laughed, " Wherefore dost
thon weep ? " asked Eliezer, " I weep because I see what is written in the Lamenta-
tions fiilQlled: 'Because of the mountain of Zion, which is desolate, the foxes walk
upon it ' " (Lam. v. 18). " And therefore do I laugh," said Eliezer ; " for when I see with
my own eyes that God has fulfilled his threatenings to the letter, I have thereby a
pledge that not one of his promises shall fail, for he is ever more ready to show mercy
than judgment,"

m. Fbateb to God OAiNma thb viotobt ovee desfondenot. (Vers. 9 12,)

There are great things promised, but how are they to be performed? If we had to
do with man, we might have doubts and fears. But we have to do with God, and
he is both able and willing to fulfil his word. Remembering his character and his
works, we rise above all desponding and depressing influences. Committing ourselves



PS. LXI. 1—8.]



THE BOOK OF PSALMS.



17



to the keeping of the Lord of hosts, we go forth to the fight with hrave hearts.
" Jehovah-Nissi " is our watchword, and we are able to say, " Thanks be unto God,
who giveth us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ " (1 Cor. xv. 57). — W. F.

Vers. 1 — 12. — Assurance in prayer. I. The peateb op the rejected foe bestoba-
TioN. (Vers. 1 — 5.) The grounds of the prayer are: 1. Tlmr great need. Felt themselves
as if cast off — the very earth trembling with their calamity. They had been reduced
to the helplessness of one overcome with wine. 2. The faithfulness of God to his
promises was their hanner. (Ver. 4.) They could pray bfcause they carried this
banner. 3. They could hope and pray on account of their relation, to Ood, (Ver. 5.)
They were beloved of God, and could urge the claim of affection.

II. Whatever losses we suffer wb have vietuallt universal possessions.
(Vers. 6 — 8.) " As having nothing, and yet possessing all things." " All things are
yours : things present, and things to come," etc.

III. The Spirit and power of God must lead us into the natueai, possession.
1. Qod alone can comfort us in trouble. (Ver. 1 1.) 2. God alone can give us the
victory over our strongest foes. (Ver. 12.) " If God be for us, who can be against
us ? "— S.



EXPOSITION.



PSALM LXL
This short psalm is one of much beauty,
and was sung daily at Matins in the earliest
ages of the Church. It is, however, some-
what obscure, especially in its later portion,
where a king is spoken of (ver. 6), who may
be David, or may represent David's house,
or may be the Messiah, the " King " of
Ps. ii. 6. The Davidical authorship, as-
serted in the "title," is probable, though
some contend for a captive exile of a later
date. The psalm consists of an earnest
prayer (vers. 1, 2), followed by expressions
of trust and confidence (vers. 3 — 7), and by
a burst of praise in oonclusion (ver. 8).
Metrically, it consists of two strophes of
four verses each, separated by the pause-
mark, " Selah."

Ver. 1. — Hear my cry, God (see the
comment on Ps. xvii. 1). The word rinnah
expresses a shrill, piercing cry, but one
which may be of joy or of lamentation.
Attend nnto my prayer; i.e. "hear and
answer it"

Ver. 2. — Frcm the end of the earth will I
cry nnto thee. Eastern hyperbole vMy call
the Trans-Jordanio territory "the end of
the earth," but certainly the expression
would be more natural in the mouth of an
exile in Assyria, Media, or Babylon. When
my heart is overwhelmed; or, "when my
heart fainteth" (comp. Ps. cvii. 5). lead
me to the rock that is higher than I ; rather,
(/mt t» too high for me — that I cannot reach
unaided. Some regard the "rock" as
Mount Zion; but others, more reasonably,
PSALMS — n.



explain it as "God himself" (see Ps. Ixii.
2,6,7). "Let thy grace lead me to thee"
(Kay).

Ver. 3. — For thou hast been a Shelter for
me, In the past thou hast ofteu been my
"Shelter" or my "Kefuge" (comp. Pss.
xviii. 2; xlvi. 7, 11 ; xlviii. 3, etc.); be so
once njore. And a strong Tower. A migdal
— a fortress, like the great fortress of the
south (Exod. xiv. 2) — the Magdolus of Hero-
dotus (ii. 149). From the enemy. If the
psalm is David's, " the enemy " is probably
Absalom.

Ver. 4. — I will abide in thy tabernacle
for ever. As the psalmist is in exile, at
" the end of the earth " (ver. 2), the literal
" tabernacle " cannot be intended. A spiii-
tual abiding in the heavenly dwelling,
whereof the tabernacle was a type, must be
meant (comp. Ps. xviii. 11). I will trust in
the covert of thy wings (comp. Pss. xvii. 8 ;
xxxvi. 7 ; Ivii 1 ; Ixiii. 7 ; xci. 4). The
ori<>;in of the metaphor is hardly to he sought
in the outspread wings of the cherubim ou
the mercy-seat ; rather in the brooding wings
of birds protecting and defending their
young (Deut. xxxii. 11 ; Matt, xxiii. 37).

Ver. 5. — For thon, God, hast heard isy
vows. Thou liast heard me so often in the
past, thou bast granted so many of my
prayers, accepted so many of my vows, that
I am emboldened to make further requests.
Thou hast given me the heritage of thosp
that iear thy Name. All the blessed in-
heritance of thy saiuts thou bast made mine,
and, included in it, boldness to approach
the throne of grace in full assurance of
faith, and to present to thei' my petitions.

Ver. 6. — Thou wilt prolong (or, mayett
thou prolong) the king's life. The question
arises — What king? Some answer that

o



18



THE BOOK OF PSALMS.



[w. LXI. 1 — 8.



David prays for tlie extension of liia own
life ; or, if not exactly of his own life, then
for the prolongation of his dynasty upon
the throne (Hengstcnberg) ; others suggest
that a distant exile, perhaps in Assyria,
prays for the life of the reigning King of
Judah, Josiah probably ('Pour Friends,'
p. 117); but the Messianic interpretation is
perhaps the best. The writer, lifted up
above himself and above sublunary things,
abiding, as he does, in the spiritual taber-
naule under the shelter of God's wings
(ver. 4), prays for long continuance of days
for the true King, the ideal King, Messiah,
of whom David and his house are types :
" Mayest thou add days to the days of the
King," &ud make his years as many genera-



tions ; or, OM generation and generation ; I.e.
eternally continuous.

Ver. 7.— He shall abide (or, may he ahide)
before God for ever: prepare mercy and
trnth, which may preserve him; literally,
appoint that merey and trnth may preterve
him. Let "mercy and truth," the highest
of thy attributes, preserve him, and keep
him in life for ever.

Ver. 8. — So wUl I sing praise unto thv
Name for ever. This, if thou doest, then I,
for my part, so long as I have my being,
will praise thy Name, thus performing day
by day what I have vowed. The writer's
continuance in life, and retention of oon-
ecionsnesB, though not actually asserted, is
implied.



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Vers. 1 — 8. — The power of prayer in trouble. " My cry." Every one has his own
needs. Think how it is this day. In how many lands, by what various voices, with
what manilold emotions, the cries of men are uttered 1 What sighs of pain, what plaints
of desire, what passionate prayers for help, go up to heaven I Who but God could
"attend" to them all? Moses groaned under "the burden of all the people " (Numb,
xi. 11). Paul was oppressed with "the care of all the Churches" (2 Cor. xi. 28). But
increase the "burden," and noultiply thu "cares" ten thousand times, and what is it
all compared with what falls upon God ? What mind but the eternal mind of God
could attend to all? Wliat love but the infinite and unchanging love of God would
not grow weary by the continual comings and the countless importunities of such
multitudes of suppliants ? But Gud beuds his ear to all. Not one, not the humblest
or the poorest, is neglected. Wherever we are, however great and sore may be our
troubles, though weak and sinful and unworthy of the least of God's mercies, yet if
we call upon him he will hear us ; if we commit our cause to him, he will bring us
deliverance. The psalm illustrates the power o( prayer iu trouble.

L Peayeb 8PBINGING FBOM FAITH IN GoD. Like an exile, we may be far off from
friends, solitary and sad. But God is always near. Though all help from mau should
fail, God is with us to deliver us The enemy may be coming in like a flood. There
may seem to be no way to escape. But God will, when we cry to him, stretch forth
bis mighty arm from above, and lead us to " the Rock " where we shall find safety
and peace.

II. Pbaykb sustained by the memory of past mercies. (Vers. 3 — 5.) We trust
our friends. The remembrance of their kindness in the past emboldens us to confide in
them for the future. How much more should we trust in God ! " Thou hast been a
Shelter fur me " is a strong plea. Our past life is not lost. It is gone, but it has left
its le.-<son8 and its memories. Looking back, we can see the harjd of God. Our
memories may be turned to hopes. Our remembrance of God's gracious dealings may
be converted into inspiration and guidance for the future.

III. Prayer rising to the heights of assurance. (Vers. 6, 7.) When we are
sincere in our prayers, we feel that we have not only pledged ourselves to God, but that
God has pledged himself to us. Ue will not only give us " the heritage " of his people,
but the " life " that will enable us to enjoy it. His white-robed angels of " mercy and
truth " will go with us and preserve us, aud we shall " abide before God for ever."

IV. Prayer culminating in joyful consecration to GK)D. (Ver. 8.) Prayer
ends in praise. True praise is not in words only, but in the free and joyous devotion
of our lives. Religion will be a daily duty. Our service here will be a preparation for
our service hereafter — for ever and ever. — W. F.

Vers. 1 — i. — A cry from the wilderness. I. The heart becomes " faint " wbkk

IT IS COKSOIOUS OF BEING FAR FROM GoD. (Ver. 1.)



ra. Lxii. 1 — 12,]



THE BOOK OF PSALMS,



19



IL When thus overwhelmed (or faint), our difficulties are too great fob
vs. (Ver. 2.)

III. We are then driven for help to God, who alone can enable ub to
SUBMOTOTT THEM. " Land me upon the rook that is too high for ma."

IV. Past experience warrants us to expect the interposition of God. (Ver. 3.)

v. To DWELL NEAR GOD ALWAYS AND OONSOIOUSLT IS THE GREATEST BLESSEDNESS.

(Ver. 4.)— S.



EXPOSITION.



PSALM LXIL



This psalm, like so many, is the cry of an
afflicted one— a man of high position, whom
his enemies seek to destroy, or, if that be not
possible, to thrust down from his dignity
(vers. 3, 4). He himself is full of trust in
God, and calmly confident that his enemies
cannot succeed (vers. 1, 2, 5 — 7). The con-
fidence which he feels he tries to impart
to Ilia people (ver. 8). lu conclusion, he
warns his enemies that they are likely to
provoke God's powerful anger (vers. 9 — 11),
and encourages his friends by the thought
of God's mercy, and of his gooilnees in
rewarding those who faithfully serve him.

It is evident that tlie pgalm contains
nothing but what is suitable to the character
of David, to whom the " title " assigns it ;
and further, that it accords well with his
eiroamstance, when the revolt of Absalom
was imminent. In further proof of the
Davidical authorship may be urged "the
earnestness of thought, the depth and force
of religious feeling," and " the vigour and
sublimity of the language" (Canon Cook).

The psalm divides into three stanzas,
each of four verses, the break between the
first and second and between the third and
fourth being notified by the usual pause-
mark, " Selah."

Ver. 1, — Imly my sonl waiteth npon
God ; rather, my tool waiteth only upon Ood
(Revised Version). The initial word, ah
('>|K), which occurs six times in this psalm
(vers. 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 9), is best translated
"only" in every instance. It always in-
tensifies the word or phrase to which it is
attaehed — " only upon God " — " only he " —
" onl V from his excellency " — " only vanity."
From him cometh my salvation (comp. Pss.
XXXV. 3 ; xxxvii. S9 ; Ixv. 5, etc.).

Ver. 2. — He only is my Eook (comp. Ps.
Ixi. 2, and the comment ad loe.'). And my
Salvation (so Pss. xviii. 2; xxvii. 1 ; cxviii.
14, 21). He is my Sefenoe; or, my High
Toioer,mj Strong Hold. Ishall notbe greatly



moved. Comp. ver. 6, where, with still
greater confidence, the writer declares, "1
shall not be moved," i.e. not moved, or
shaken in my faith, at all.

Ver. 3. — How long will ye imagine mis-
chief against a man ) rather. How long ieiU
ye assault (or, set upon) a manf Attack
him, that is — seek to do him grievous hurt,
as ye are attacking me. Ye shall be slain
all of you; rather, that ye may crush him,
all of you together. The hope of the con-
spirators under Absalom was in their united
strength. As a bowing wall shall ye be,
and as a tottering fenoe. The words supplied
in the Authorized Version should be omitted.
It is David who is viewed by his enemies
as a bulged wall (see Isa. xxx. 15) or a
tottering fence, which it requires only a
strong push to throw down.

Ver. 4. — They only consult to cast him
down from his excellency; t.e. they have
no other thought but tliis — to cast me down
from my high station, while I have no othei
thought but to trust in God, and to look to
him for support and protection (vers. 1, 2,
6). Thev delight in lies. Some indication
of tlie "lies" circulated against David at
this time is given in 2 Sam. xv. 3 — 5 ; xvi.
7, 8. They bless with their mouth, bnt
they curse inwardly; literally, they bUss
with hit mouth, which may be explained a*
meaning either, " They bless, each of them,
with his mouth " (Kay, Cheyne), or " they
bless through the mouth of their leader " —
i.e. Ahithophel (Canon Cook).

Vers. 5 — 8. — From the thought of his
bitter enemies and their wicked machi-
nations against him, the psalmist returns
to expressions of his own full confidence
in God — first falling back on almost the
identical words of his opening stanza (comp,
vers. 5, 6 with vers. 1, 2); then slightly
varying them (ver. 7); and finally com-
mending trust and confidence to the remnant
of the people who continue fisithful to Ood
and to his anointed (ver. 8).

Ver. 5. — My soul, wait thou only npon
God. Compare the opening words of the
psalm, which are nearly identical. For my
expectation is from him. "Expectation"



20



THE BOOK OF PSALMS.



[ps. Lxii. 1—12:



here takes the place of " salvation " in ver.
I. Otherwise there is no difference. The
God who has given salvation in the part
is the Being from whom it i^ expected in
the future.

Ver. 6. — He only is my Eock and my
Salvation ; he is my Defence ; I shall not be
moved. Identical with ver. 2, except in
the omission of the single word " greatly."
The psalmist's confidence has increased.
He feels now that, whatever his enemies
may attempt, he will not be shaken at all.

Yer. 7. — In God is my salvation and my
glory. The last phrase is new. The
psalmist feels that the God who saves him,
at the same time sheds on him glory and
honour. The Book of my strength, and my
Befage, is in God (oomp. Pss. ix. 9 ; Ivii. 2 ;
xoiv. 22, etc.).

Ver. 8. — Trust in him at all times, ye
people. It is characteristic of David to join
the " people " with himself in all his fears
and in all his hopes. Even at the worst
times, God had always some faithful ones in
Israel — a "remnant" (Isa. i. 9); and men
of this sort clung to David through all his
perils, and were sufficiently numerous to
constitute a "people" (see 2 Sam. xviii.
1 — 6). Pour out your heart before him
(oomp. Pss. xlii. 4; cxlii. 2, etc.): God is
a Refuge for us (oomp. ver. 7).

Vers. 9 — 12. — " Here the psalmist becomes
didactic " (Professor Cheyne). He en-
courages the faithful, and warns the wicked,
by the declaratinu thiit men of every sort
" are but vanity " — have no strength, no
permanence — while power belongs only to
God. Those who " oppress " and " rob " are,'
consequently, not to be feared — there is no
strength in riches — God alone determines
the issues of things. Unto him belongs
mercy, or loving-kindness — a quality which
leads him not only to forgive men their
transgressions, but to " reward " them, when.



by his assisting grace, they have done goo*
works.

Ver. 9.— Surely men of low degree ar»
vanity, and men of high degree are a lie;
rather, only vanity— or, nought but vanity —
are men of low degree; common men, as we
call them — mere sons of Adam. This i»
too evident for dispute ; but, in the view
of the psalmist, this is not the worst. " M en.
of high degree " (beney ish) are no better -
they are "a lie" — an unreality— a fading,
false illusion. To be laid in the balance ;^
rather, in the balance, they go up (Hupfeld,.
Ewald, Hitzig. Revised Version). They
are altogether lighter than vanity ; or, alto-
gether made out of vanity (Kay) ; i.e. there
IS no substance, no solidity, in them.

Ver. 10. — Trust not in oppression (comp.
ver. 3). The class that supported Absalom
was the class of oppressors in Israel, whom
David kept under and restrained as far aa
possible. The writer warns them against
trusting in their power to oppress, since
such strength as they have is not their own,
but lent them by God. And become not
vain in robbery ; or, rely not vainly on robbery
(Kay). Do not suppose that Gud will
allow you to continue oppressing and rob-
bing. Such a belief is a vain iUusiun. If
riches increase, set not your heart opon them.
Even when wealth accumulates naturally,
and not as the result of ill-doing, it is not
a thing to be trusted or set store by.

Ver. 11. — God hath spoken once; twice
have I heard this (comp. Job xxxiii. 14).
When a thing i;i spoken twice, then
assurance is made doubly sure. That powdr
beloiigeth unto God. God, i.e., is the only
ultimate Source of all power.

Ver. 12. — Also unto thee, Lord, belongeth
mercy ; or, Uyving-MndneaB. " Of Divinfr
power all nature speaks; the knowledge
of God's mercy rests mainly on revelation "
(Kay). Tor thou renderei.t to every man
according to his work. Wlien God rewards
well-doing, it is still of his mercy, since na
man can claim that he deserves reward.



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Vers. 1—12. — This is a psalm of testimony. It includes two things.

I. Ak expression of pbbsonal confidenob IK God. Some trust in themselves;
others in their fellow-men ; others, in the laws of nature. All this is so far good. It i»
well to be self-reliant. It is well to take advantage of the wisdom and help of others.
It is well to act in the line of law, and in dependence upon the settled order of things-
with which we are connected. But there is something higher and better. The true
way is to trust in God. Trust in God puts things in their right places ; inspires courage
and fortitude ; ennobles and satisfies our whole beinz (vers. 5 — 7).

II. A» EABNEST EZHOBTATION TO ALL MEN TO PUT THEIR TRUST IN GoD. (Vers.

8 — 12.) All men have their trials. There will come times when they are troubled
and perplexed, when they must look out of themselves anxiously for help. They are
tempted. They are in danger of putting their trust in objects that are vain and



OT. Lxii. 1— 12.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 21

worthless. If disappointed, they are apt to get soured and hardened in sin. The remedy
counselled is twofold. 1. Trust. God is the true and only Being worthy of supreme
trust. There is everything in him to inspire confidence and hope. "At all times."
In the darkness and in the light, in adversity as well as prosperity ; when he hides
his face as when he makes his countenance to shine upon us. 2. Prayer. We are
always free to come to God. We may tell him all that is in our hearts. What a joy
iu this trust ! What a comfort in this unhosoming of ourselves ! God will not only
liear, but have pity. He will not only answer, but magnify his " power " and his
" mercy " in our deliverance. Who so fit to give this counsel — as to trust and prayer
—as the man who is speaking from the depths of his own experience, and from the
•biding convictions of his own heart (2 Cor. iv. 13; 1 John i. 1—3)1 — W. P.

Ver. 1. — Waiting. " Silent unto God " — so the word " waiteth " may be interpreted.
Take this in connection with the word " only" repeated with such emphasis and mean-
ing, and we may understand tlie silence as deeply expressive.

I. SioN OF FAITH. The soul says, " I can trust and wait."

II. Beoobd of conflict. There has been a struggle. Peace has not been won
without a hard fight, and "strong crying and tears." We must sacrifice self before
we can say, in the silence of our hearts, " All is well."

III. ExPBESSioN OF THE soul's COMPLETE ACQUIESCENCE. There may have been
disappointments from men, but there is hope iu God. He is to be trusted at all times.
His will is holy and good, and all our " expectation is from him." Hence there is the
•tillnesB of content (vers. 5 — 8).

IV. FoBESHADOWlNG OP viOTOET. " Power belougeth unto God," and that power is
pledged in behalf of his people. How God may work we cannot surely tell, but we
wait for light. There is a time to " stand still " (Exod. xiv. 13) ; and there is a time
to " go forward " (Exod. xiv. 15). When we do as the Lord commands, we shall " see
the salvation of God."— W. P.

Ver. 6. — Steadfastness. " I shall not be moved." We are susceptible to influence.
We may be " moved." The word here is not a boast, but an expression of confidence
in God. Peter said, in effect, " 1 shiill nut be moved," and he was put to shame (Mark
xiv. 29, 30). But if we trust in God, then our strength will not fail. We shall stand
"steadfast and immovable" in the surges of the waves and the violence of the storm.
There is the —

I. Consciousness op biohtness.

II. The sense op being backed by the poweb of Gton.

III. The ovebmastebino foeoe of love.

IV. The exulting prospect of final victoby. Paul said, " None of these things
move me " (Acts xx. 24). So aH strong in the love of God and in the confidence that
ri^ht must triumph in the end, will suffer rather than sin, and die rather than lie false
to'Christ (Heb. xii. 1, 2).— W. P.

Ver, 9. — " Laid in the balance." I. Bank. Precedence among men does not depend
on moral worth. It is a matter of etiquette. The man of " low degree " before men
may be of " high degree " before God. The man who gets the " lowest place " in the
great houses of this world may sit in the highest place in the kingdom ot' God.
'* Knighthoods and honours borne without desert are titles but of scorn " (Shakespeare).
The true honour is that which cometh from God only.

II. ElOHES. Most people would like to be rich. In this, as in other matters, there
is a right way and a wrong way. It is hinted (ver. 10) that if riches increase, it may
be by " oppression " and " robbery." But though they should be obtained lawfully,
they bring great responsibilities and risks, and often prove a delusion and a mockery
/I Tim. vi. 9). The true riches are not in the hand, but in the heart ; not in the
abundance of things outward, but in faith and love and good works — ^in being " rich
toward God" (Luke xii. 21).

III. Refutation. What others think of us is of importance. It so far settles our

gace and our influence in society. But the judgment of men is not the judgment of
od. In the world, in society, in the Church, our reputation may stand high, but if



THE BOOK OF PSALMS.



[ps. Lxin. 1 — 11.



our repntation and our character — which is what we are really and in the sight of God
— do not agree, we are hut hypocrites and liars. " Except your righteousness shall
exceed the righteousness of the scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no case enter into the
kingdom of God " (Matt. t. 20).— W. P.

Ver. 11. — Omnipotence. " Power belongeth unto God."

I. Exclusive possession. All around us we see evidences of power. Much of it
can be traced to man. But besides, mark the forces that are continually at work, in
the earth and in the heavens, — and behind all these is God. He is; the Force of all
forces. Even with man, in sight of all his works, boasting is excluded. What have
we that we have not received? " In God we live and move and have our being."

II. Employed fob the highest interests of men. Power in bad hands is a curse.
But in good hands it is a ^)lessing. God alone is capable of using power in the wisest
manner, and for the best and holiest ends. It is true that, as Gbd works by means, he
of necessity limits himself. He has established a certain order of things, and by this
he is pleased, so far, to bind himself in his actions. But in everything we may see his
mercy and truth. In the material, the mental, and the spiritual world he is ever
working, animating, upholding, and controlling all things for the advancement of his
own holy ends and for the highest good of his creatures.

III. Secitrinq the eternal blessedness of the good. Power without love is
brutality. Love without power is weakness. God's power is in Christ — for our
redemption (Eom. i. 4 ; Acts x. 38 ; Eph. L 19 ; Matt, xxviii. 18 ; John xvii. 2). This
power is quickening (Eph. ii. 1), regulating (Acts ix. 1 — 9), energizing (Phil. iv. 19),
elevating (Eph. i. 19), consoling (2 Cor. xii. 9). It rests as a beneficent influence on
God's people, for time and for eternity. — W. F.

Vers. 1 — 12. — Danger and safety. The psalmist, like a mighty eagle, poises himself
on the wings of his faith at a great height above the dangers that threatened him,
and feels safe. Three things claim consideration.

I. Danger. 1. His kingly dignity was threatened. (Ver. 4.) The position of the
Christian is in constant danger. 2. His life was in danger. (Ver. 3.) His enemies
rushed upon him to overthrow him as if he were a bowing wall or a tottering fence.
Our spiritual life is in danger from numerous foes.

II. Safety the most absolute. 1. Be silently trusts in Ood as Salvation. Does
not pray, but confidently trusts, as a child in his father. Heaps epithet on epithet,
denoting the sense of safety. " High Tower, Rock," etc. The perfection of trust in
God. 2. He exhorts others to the same perfect trust. " At all times." God is the common
Refuge and Salvation for all who will trust him, because he "careth" for all.

III. The revklation on which his trust was grounded. (Vers. 11, 12.) 1. That
Ood has univei'sal power. If we need strength, we are to seek it, not in robbery or
riches, but in God, who is Almighty. 2. That Ood is filled also with loving-kindness.
" Power without love is brutality, and love without power is weakness ; " but when
both are combined they are the guarantee of righteous rule, and that God will "reward
every man according to his work." — S.



EXPOSITION.



PSALM LXlir.



A PSALM of one absent from the sanctuary,
and longing to return to it (vers. 1, 2),
pnrsued by enemies who seek his life (ver.
9), but confident in God's protection (vers.
7, 8), and, indeed, full of joy and praise and
thankfulness (vers. 3 — 6 and 11). Near
the close he lets fall a word, which shows
him to be a king; anil there is some reason
to think that he is passing through a "dry



and thirsty land," literally as well as
figuratively (ver. 1). All these indications
agree exactly with the statements in the
" title," that the poem was composed by
David as he lied through the wilderness of
Judaea towards the Jordan on the revolt
of Absalom (2 Sam. xv. 16—30; xvi
1—14).

The psalm is made up of five short stanzas
— the first four consisting of two verses
each, and the last of three.



tB. LXIIL 1 — H.]



THE BOOK OF PSALMS.



23



Ver. 1. — God, thon art my God; or, my
ttrong God (Eli)—Tay Tower of strength.
Early will I seek tbee. The song was,
perhaps, composed in the night watches,
and poured forth at early dawn, when the
king woke "refreshed" (comp. vers. 5, 6;
and 2 Sam. xvi. 14), Uy soni thirsteth for
thee, my flesh longeth for thee; or, pineth
for thee (the verb ooa".~ „uly m tnis
place). Boul and body equally long for
God, and especially desire to worship him
in the sanctuary (ver. 2). In a dry and
thirsty (or, weary) land, where no water is.
This is figurative, no doubt; but it may
also contain an allusion to the literal fact
(2 Sam. xvi. 2 ; xvii. 29).

Ver. 2. — To see thy power and thy glory,
80 as I have seen thee in the sanctuary.
This is the form which the longing takes —
to see God once more worshipped in the
sanctuary in all the " beauty of holiness,"
as he had so often seen him previously
(comp. 2 Sam. xv. 25).

Ver. 3. — Because thy loving-kindness is
better than life, my lips shall praise thee.
The complete resignation of the psalmist,
his sense of God's " loving-kindness," and
hie desire to " praise," not to compluin, are,
under the circumstances, most wundurl'ul,
most admirable, ami furnish a pattern to
the Church in all a.'ea.

Ver, 4, — Thus will I bless thee while I
live : I will lift up my hands in thy Name
(comp. Pas, civ, 33 ; cxlvi. 2). The purpose
of man's creation, the end of his being, his
main employmeat throughout eternity, is
the praise of God.

Ver. 5. — My sonl shall be satisfied as with
marrow and fatness. The "marrow and
fatness" of the sacrificial feasts caused a
delight to worshippers, which was no donbt
partly sensuous. The memory of them
occurs to the psalmist, but only as the
shadow and emblem of the far deeper joy
and satisfaction which he finds in the
spiritual worship of the Most High, and
especially in the offering of praise and
thanksgiving. And my month shall praise
thee with joyful lips; or, while my mouth
praiteth tltee (see the Prayer-book Version,
which brings out the true sense).

Ver. 6, — When I remember thee upon my
bed, and meditate on thee in the night
watches. David had doubtless done this
during the long and anxious night which
followed his first day in the vrilderness of
Jnd»a (2 SauL xvi. 14).



Ver, 7. — Because thou hast been my
help. God had already delivered David
out of so many dangers and troubles, that
he felt all the more coufidence for th?
future. Therefore in the shadow of thy
wings will I rejoice (see the comment on
Ps, Ixi. 4).

Ver. 8.— My sonl followeth hard aft.jr
thee; or, clinieth close after thee i^iy,
Cheyne) ; " Tibi adhssret teque sequitur "
(Gesenius) — longs to come as near to thee
as possible ; while, on thy part, thy rigi>t
hand npholdeth me; t.e. with a reciprocal
action, thou puttest forth thy right hand to
sust.iin aud support me, drawing lue to thee,
and holding me, as it were, in thy embrace,

Ver. 9. — But those that seek my soul, to
destroy it, rhall go into the low^r parts of
the earth. Professor Cheyne notes that "the
psalmist has no sense of any incongruity
between deeply spiritual musings and
vehement denunciations of his enemies."
And this is certainly true. But it is to
be remembered that he views his enemies,
not merely as his own foes, but as the fues
of God and of Israel. As the servant of
God, he must hate those wlio are opposed
to God ; as the King of I.'-rael, he must hate
those who seek to injure itnd ruin his
people. He does not, however, desire for
them suffering or torment; he imly asks
that they may be removed from this sphere
into anotlier world. (On David's concep-
tion of the lower world, see the comment
upon Pss. xvi. 10 and Ixxxvi. 13.)

Ver. 10.— They shall fall by the sword ;
i.e. in hattle — the natural end of those who
stir up civil strife. They shall be a portion
for foxes; rather, for jackals (see 2 Sam.
xviii. ti — 8).

Ver. 11. — But the king shall rejoice in
God, The "kinf>;," thus suddenly intro-
duced, cannot be an entirely new personage,
unknown to the rest of the psalm, ami,
therefore, must be the composer, speaking
of himself in the third person (comp, Pss.
xviii. 50 ; Ixxii. 1), £very one that swear-
eth by him (i.e. by God) shall glory; or,
shall triumph (Kay). Those who swear by
the Name of God show themselves to be
believers in Gnd, and will be npheld by
him in time of danger (see Deut, vi. 13;
lea. Ixv. 16) But the month of them that
speak lies shall be stopped. (On the false-
hoods told by David's enemies, see 2 Sam.
XV. 3; xvi. 7, 8; and comp. Pss, xxxviii.
12 ; ili. 5—8.)



HOMILETICS,

Ver. 1. — An invocation and a vow, " God . . . seek thee." Eightly nndergtood,
these are the sublimegt words human lips can utter. " My Qtoi I " To claim God_ as
his own with joyfil!, adoring intelligence and absolute faith, is the highest act of which



24 THE BOOK OF PSALMS, [ps. lxiu. 1—11.

ourniture is capable. It is melancholy to think that these same words may denote the
degradation of our nature instead of its glory ! The Prophet Isaiah, with holy indigna-
tion, restrained only by pity from utter scorn, depicts the idol-worshipper falling down
l)efore his wooden image, and saying, " Deliver me, for thou art my god 1 " (Isa. xliv.
li—lT^. Perhaps we need not go far to find even a lower depth. These words,
" My God 1 " constantly slip from thoughtless, profane lips, as an unmeaning exclama-
tion, with no trace of religious feeling. The poor heathen, who has some dim sense of
an invisible spiritual power behind his image, may look down with wonder and pity
on the educated Englishman who is devoid of all sense of worship, all consciousness of
relationship to the Father of spirits. We have here (1) an invocation; and (2) a
purpose or vow.

I. David's sublime deolabation. " God, thou art -my God ! " 1. The expreuion
of worship. Our English word " God" is one of those ancient words whose original
meaning is unknown. The Hebrew word for which it stands in the Bible primarily
means " mighty." The object of true worship is the omnipotent, self-existent Creator.
Yet observe that mere power is never set forth in Scripture as the sule or chief reason
for worship, — that would be heathenish. God's wisdom, righteousness, truth, holiness,
bountiful loving-kindness, and pardoning mercy are everywhere regarded as his claim
to our worship, obedience, trust, and love. Underneath, like the solid rook on whicli
the temple stood, is this foundation-truth of his almightiness. Worship is bowing
down before God, but it is also looking up. " He that humbleth himself shall be
exalted." The more abasing the sense of our weakness, ignorance, sin, need, the more
glorious and joyful a thing it is to look out of ourselves to him with whom is " the
fountain of life," and say, " God, thou art my God 1 " 2. 77ie expression of the sense
of personal relationship, " My God ! " Worship is much, but it is far from being the
sura of religion. No small proof that the Bible is God's Word to man — a message
Irora our Father to his lost children, is this — that its practical aim throughout is to
awaken and appeal to this sense of personal relationship to God ; to show us how sin
has put us in a wholly false, unnatural relation to him ; to bring us back to our right
place and character — " children of God by faith in Christ Jesus." 3. Accordingly, this
is the utterance of faith — reasonable, happy, unlimited trust. Nature, brilliant with
the glory of its Maker, ruled by the awful harmony of his unswerving laws, impresses
us with the distance between the Creator and the creature. Sin adds to the sense of
distance that of estrangement and fear. In Ps. li. David says, " Thou God of my
sal vation ! " but does not venture to say, " My God ! " But when faith sees " the glory
of God in the face of Jesus Christ," and grasps his plighted word, the shadow of guilt
is chased away by the joy of pardon. Love casts out fear. The soul that was " far
off" is "brought nigh by the blood of Christ." Experience comes in to help faith, and
the language of faith becomes also the language of adoring gratitude and exulting
certainty : " God, thou art my God ! "

II. David's purpose and vow. "Early will I seek thee." Our Revisers have
happily kept this beautiful word " early," which an overstrained scholarship seeks to
get rid of. The Hebrew word is the same with the word for " dawn." We have a
similar figure in Ps. cxxx. 6, a very natural and forcible imago to a nation of early
risers (oomp. Alexander on Isa. xxvi. 9). This yearning of the spirit after God — heart-
hunger, soul-thirst for his presence, love, likeness, is the very voice of his Spirit in the
soul. Desire, hope, quest, perseverance, are all included here (see vers. 2 — ."5). And
they who thus seek shall find, for "the Father seeketh such" (John iv. 23). Some
sincere Christians may feel this intense yearning after God an experience they would
fain reach, but scarcely dare claim. Take courage ; he is God of the valleys as well
as of the hills. The prayer of the humble is his delight. Why not make David's
words your own — with better right than he? For the ancient saint came and claimed
his privilege only on the ground of God's covenant ; we claim our birthright through
him who said, " I ascend unto my Father and your Father, and to my God and your
God " (John XX. 17 ; cf. Rom. viii. 16). We are met for worship, yet there may be
those to whom worship is but a dead form, who have never aspired, never cared to
say, " God, thou art my God ! " You pity and despise the poor Hindu idolater.
Which is really on the lower platform — he in his rude, dim, maimed, yet sincere
fashion, expressing his sense of dependence on a higher and invisible power, *' feeling



P8. Lxui. 1— 11.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 35

after God ; " or you, with the light of nineteen Christian centuries shining full on you,
with the open Bible, with the music of God's message of reconciliation filling the air,
yet with man's noblest aspiration, the quest of God; man's deepest, purest affection, —
the love of God ; man's sublimest capacity, — the worship of God, dead or slumbering in
your soul ? Alas I you do not dream what a glory, power, joy, meaning, would come
into your life if from this hour you learned to say, " God, thou art my God ; early
will I seek thee."



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Vers. 1 — 11. — Boul-thirst. We may imagine the psalmist in the wilderness. It is
night. He stands at his tent door. The light of moon and stars falls on a sandy waste
stretching into dimness and mystery. He is lonely and sad. The emptiness of all
around and the memory of better times breed a great longing in his soul. It is not as
if it were something new and strange, rather it is the revival of the deepest and
strongest cravings of his heart, that as he muses gather force and intensity, and must
express themselves in song. The key-veises seem to be vers. 1, 6, 8.

L Thb soul's longing. (Vers. 1 — 4.) When we " thirst for God," we naturally
look back and recall the times when we had the truest and fullest enjoyment of his
presence. We think ot " the sanctuary ." It was not the outward glory ; it was not
the splendid ritual ; it was cot the excitement of the great congregation ; but it was
the vision of God that then brought peace and joy to the souL And that is wliat is
craved again — more life and fuller : " To see thy power and thy glory." There are
often circumstances which intensify and strengthen our longings. When we come to
know God, not only as God, but as our God and our Redeemer, we feel that it is a very
necessity of our being, that it is our life, to see him and to serve him, to love him, to
worship him, to rejoice in him as all our Salvation and all our Desire.

II. The boul'b satisfaction. (Vers. 6^7.) What alone can satisfy the soul is
the vision of God ; not God afar off, but nigh ; not God in nature, or in the Law, or in
the imagination of our hearts, but God in Christ. Here is true and abiding satisfaction,
infinite truth for the mind, eternal righteousness for the conscience, perfect love for
the heart. Philip said, " Show us the Father, and it sufSceth us ; " and the answer of
our Lord was, " Be that hath seen me hath seen the Father." The more we meditate
on this possession, the more we rejoice and give thanks. We cannot but praise. " As
the spirit of the whole Book of Psalms is contracted into this psalm, so is the spirit
and soul of the whole psalm contracted into this verse" (Donne). "Because thou hast
been my Help, therefore in the shadow of thy wings will I rejoice " (ver. 7).

IIL The soul's eesolution. (Vers. 8 — 11.) There is mutual action. The soul
cleaves to God, and God cleaves to the soul. There is a double embrace — we both hold
and are upheld. The result is invigoration — the quickening glow of life through all
our being, the free and joyous resolve to cleave to God, and to follow him in love and
devotion all our days. Our needs are constant, and God's love never fails. When we
are weak, his strength makes us strong ; when we are weary, his comforts sustain our
fainting souls ; when we are ready to sink in the waters, his voice gives us courage, and
his strong arm brings us salvation. God ever comes to those who want him. Desire
on our part is met by satisfaction on his part. More and more as we love and serve
we enter into the joy of our Lord. Our heart is prophet to our heart, and tells of
vanquishment of the enemy, of the coming glory and the pleasures which are at God's
right hand for evermore. — W. F.

Vera 1— 8. — Sublime things. Chrysostom says, " That it was decreed and ordained
by the primitive Fathers that no day should pass without the public singing of this
psalm."

I. Thb aBANDEST conviction the cbeatube can have. (Ver. 1.) That God
th ours, and that we are God's.

IL The obandest LONaiNO of body and soul. (Ver. 1.)

III. The obandest vision of lifb. (Ver. 2.) To see the power and ; ory
of God.



26



THE BOOK OF PSALMS.



[PS. LXIV. 1 lOi



IV. The orajidest song. (Ver, 3.) The loving-kindness of God better than life
" in all the fulness of its earthly meaning."

V. The most aboundikg satisfaction of the soul. (Ver. 6.)
VL The surest and safest protection. (Ver. 7.)

Vn. The most cnfailins snppoET. (Ver. 8.) — S.



EXPOSITION.



PSALM LXrV.



At a time of great danger from domestic
enemies, who threaten insurrection (ver. 2),
the psalmist first complains to God, and
entreats hia aid (vers. 1 — 6) ; after which he
boldly denounces his foes, and threatens
them with discomfiture (vers. 7, 8). Finally,
he draws a lesson from their fate, of warn-
ing to men in general (ver. 9), and of
encouragement to the righteous (ver. 10).
The author is probably David, as asserted
in the " title," and the time that a Uttle
preceding tbe open revolt of Absalom.

Two strophes of four verses each (vers.
1 — 4, 7 — 10) are separated by one of two
Terses (vers. 5, 6).

Ver. 1. — Hear my Toioe, God, in my
prayer; rather, e» my complaint (Cheyne,
Bevised Virsioii) ; see Ps. Iv. 2. Preserve
my life from fear of the enemy. David
already feels that it is not his deposition
only, but his life, that is sought (comp.
2 Sam. XV. 14; xvii. 2).

Ver. 2. — Hide me from the secret counsel
of the wicked ; from the insurrection of the
workers of iniquity. The first danger is
from secret plots, which David knows to be
going on against his authority (2 Sam. xv.
1 — 12). The second, and greater danger,
will he from open insurrection (2 Sam. xvii.
1—14).

Ver. 3. — Who whet their tongue like a
sword (comp. Pss. Iv. 21 ; Ivii. 4 ; lix. 7).
And bend tlieir bows to shoot their arrows,
even bitter words (comp. Pss. xi. 2 ; Ivii. 4).
Calumny wns what David especially feared,
and what actually brought about his down-
fall (see 2 Sam. xv. 2—6). The "bitter-
ness " of his enemies is further emphasized
by the speeches and curses of Shimei (2
Sam. xvi. 5 — 13).

Ver. 4.— That they may shoot in secret
at the perfect; or, t'n their hiding-pladet.
David does not scruple to call himself
" perfect," nsing the word in the sense in
which it is used of Job (Job 1. 1; iL 3),
meaning a sincere and upright man.
Suddenly do they shoot at him, and fear not
They are not afraid, though it is "the
anointed of the Lord," whom to attaok is not
ooly rebellion, but sacrilege (see 2 Sam. i. 14).



Ver. .'5. — They encourage themseWoi In an
evil matter ; or, in an evil scheme — the plan
of making David unpopular, and then
raising the standard of open revolt agaiust
him (2 Sam. xv. 1 — 12). They commune of
laying snares privily. The ungodly con-
tinually set traps for the righteous, who
are so simple that they often fall into them.
We do not know the exact proceedings of
his enemies against David at the time, the
narrative of 2 Sam xv. being so brief; but
it was probably by some trickery that
David was induced to quit the stronghold
of Jerusalem, and so yield the seat of
government, and many other advantages, to
his rival. They say, Who shall see them!
(comp. Pss. X. 1 1 ; lix. 7 ; xciv. 7). It is an
inveterate folly for men to imagine, either
that God will not see their actions, or that
he will pay no Iieed to them. A spurious
humility is brought into play in the latter
case — How can it be supposed that God
will note the doings of such worms as men 7

Ver. 6. — They search out iniquities ; they
accomplish a diligent search; rather, they
dense iniquities. We have aecomplishea
(they say) a well-devised device. So modern
critics generally (Hengstenberg, Kay,
Cheyne, Canon Cook, Bevised Version).
Both the inward thought of every one of
them, and the heart, is deep. Therefore
the righteous man is in great danger from
them, unless God interpose.

Ver. 7. — But Ood shEdl shoot at them
with an arrow. But God will interpose.
As they have shot with their arrows at the
righteous (ver. 3), so with his arrow shall
God shoot at thmn. Suddenly shall they be
wounded. The first word, "suddenly,"
may belong equally well either to the
preceding or to the following clause. The
result is all that is important. Not the
righteous, but they themselves, shall receive
the wound ; literally, their wound shall lie.

Ver. 8.— So they shall make their own
tongue to fall upon themselves; rather, so
shall they he made to stumble; their own
tongue shall be againet them. TIi« tongue,
which they "whetted like a sword," shall
be the principal means of bringing them
into trouble (see 2 Sam. xvii. 1 — 23). All
that see them shall flee away ; rather, shaU
wag the head (Cheyne, Bevised Version) in
derision.

Ver. 9. — And all men shall fear, and ihalj



P8. LXIT. 1—10.]



THE BOOK OF PSALMS.



27



declare the work of God. The fate of David's
enemies shall cause widespread fear and
alarm. Men shall perceive God's hand in
it, and shall be led. in consequence, to
declare " God's work." The tragic ends of
Ahithophel and Absalom were certainly well
calculated to impress the minds of men
generally, and to strike awe into the hearts
of those who had looked with Indifference,
or even, perhaps, with satisfaction, on the
political troubles. For they shall wisely
consider of his doing ; rather, for they tliall
understand hit operation. They shall
understand, t.e., that God is on the side



of the rigliteous, and, when danger presses,
will interpose on their behalf, to the terrible
discomfiture of the wicked.

Ver. 10. — The righteous shall be glad in
the Lord, and shall trust in him. The
righteous, delivered from their imminent
peril, naturally "rejoice in the Lord," i.e.
rejoice in God's goodness to them, and feel
their confidence in him increased. And all
the upright in heart shall glory (comp. Pss.
xxxii. 11 ; Iviii. 11). A thrill of joy passes
through the whole of God's people, whetiier
they were involved in the danger escaped
or not.



HOMILETICS.

Ver. 3.—" Bitter words." Of the ten commandments, tvoo are directed against tins
of speech— (mo against profane words concerning God ; the other against slanderous
words concerning our neighbours. No sins are apt to be thought more lightly of than
sins of the tongue; yet no sins are more severely and constantly denounced in Scripture.
Probably no class of sins does more mischief in the world. Our words are spoken of as
the special object of Divine knowledge (Ps. cxxxix. 4). The sinfulness of " hitter
words" is seen (1) in their sowrce — they flow from a bitter fountain in the heart;
(2) in their utte/rance — they have a bitter taste in the mouth ; (2) in their results —
they infuse bitterness into life.

I. In THEiB BOTiiiOB. St. James compares the heart to a fountain, and notes the
unnatural anomaly that from the same source should flow sweetness and bitterness,
blessing and cursing, praise and slander (Jas. iii, 8 — 12). If the heart harboured no
envy, malice, anger, pride, uncharitableness, ill-natured censorious judgments, how
sweet and refreshing would the flow of speech be (Eph. iv. 29 — 32 ; Matt. xv. 18)!

IL In THEIB UTTERANCE. Our Lord speaks of the good man bringing forth what
is good from " the good treasure of his heart," and the evil man, that which is evil
" out of the evil treasure " (Matt. xiL 35). Solomon marks it as one great difference
between a wise man and a fool, that the former knows how to hold his tongue
(Prov. X. 19 ; xxix. 11). A good man may be aware of envious evil, uncharitable
thoughts ; but he is very careful how be gives them vent in hitter words. His prayer
is, " Keep the door of my lips " (Ps. cxli; 3). Some people not merely find a pleasure
in uttering all the sharp unkind things that occur to them ; they persuade themselves
it is a duty. No matter how bitter the word may be, out it comes, on the plea, " I
must be honest; I must always speak my mind." Why must you? It is not honesty;
it is want of self-control, of sympathy, good feeling. Christian and Christ-like •considera-
tion for others.

III. In THEIB BESULTS. The word once spoken, like the bolt overshot, cannot be
recalled. But the deadliest arrow can hit but one mark ; the bitter word may fly irom
lip to lip, growing as it flies, and inflict a thousand wounds before it is forgotten.
David suffered much from bitter words. He counts it a great instance of God's good-
ness when he defends his servants "from the strife of tongues" (P-s. xxxi. 20; cf.
vers. 13, 18). Unjust, slanderous, cruel words are compared to arrows, swords, spears,
razors, serpents' teeth, burning coals (Pss. Iii. 2 — t ; Iv. 21 ; Ivii. 4 ; Iviii. 4 ; cxx. 4 ;
cxl. 3).

Bitter words were no small part of the bitter cup which our Saviour drank for us,
and of which he warned his disciples they must taste. Spoken by the unbelieving
world, " falsely for his sake," they are the Christian's glory (Matt, v, 11 ; x. 25) ; but
spoken by Christians of Christians, they are weapons put into the hand of unbelief.
The bitterness of controversy has perhaps been a greater hindrance to truth than the
assaults of atheism. Wherever this Marah flows — in the Church, the home, the
sucial circle, the nation — it poisons life. Seek to cast into it the healing branch
(Col. iv. 6).



28 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. mt. 1—13.



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Vers. 1 — 10. — "Mian's inhumanity to man." I. Dbivino the oodlt mak to
PRATKB. We see many evils we cannot remedy. They move our pity, they stir our
indignation. Perhaps we argue and remonstrate ; perhaps in a moment of generous
impulse we may try our hand at redress. But how little can we do ! and our best efforts
not only fail, but may even brin<j ourselves and others into greater trouble (Bxod. ii.
11 — 14). In our grief and despair we turn to God ; his ear is ever open to the cry of
the poor ; his arm is ever ready to bring help to the oppressed. Into his great, fatherly
heart we can pour all our woes; and under his sheltering wings we may ever find sweet
security.

II. Deplored as a sore evil under tee bun. There are differences. Inhumanity
breaks forth more furiously at times. Some men see and suffer vastly more than others.
It lias been said of poets that " they learn in suffering what they teach in song," and
this was the experience of the psalmist. Inhumanity is characterized by secrecy. Men
who do evil hate the light. By combinations. Sin is weakness. Hand had to join with
hand so as to give power. Co-operation for good is praiseworthy ; but men banded
together for evil are branded with infamy. Inveterate malice. There is no relenting, no
mercy. The heart grows hardened in selfishness. Utter godlessness. (Ver. 5.) The
more men indulge in sin, the blinder they become ; the more |)ersistently they break
the second great comniandment, the more indifferent they grow to the first. The
thought of God troubles them, and they put it away. If it returns, they still reject it.
By-and-by it will cease to come. Their hearts are set in them to do iniquity. How
distressing it is for the man who fears God to behold all this ! He thinks how different
it might have been ; he grieves over the wdste and, worse still, the awful misapplication
of human power ; he confesses with shame and sorrow of heart the sins that have
brought such terrible woes into the world ; and mourns the guilt of which he must
bear his share.

III. Doomed to the biohteous judoment of God. Even here, where we know
but in part, we cannot but see that it is ill with the wicked. In spite of their
vauntings, they are not at peace. Though they call their lips their own, they are in
reality held in by bit and bridle ; though they boast of their successes, their rejoicing
is vain and fatile ; retribution will in the end surely come upon them. So it was
with Pharaoh and Sennacherib and Herod ; so it was with Ahab, who thought to
escape by disguising himself; but a certain man drew his bow at a venture, and smote
him between the joints of his harness, and he died. God's arrows never miss their mark.

Learn three great lessons. 1. That to do right is always best. 2. That we can only
overcome evil with good. 3. That vengeance belongeth to God alone. — W. F.

Vers. 1 — 10. — Danger and faith. The psalm was probably written by David at
the court of Saul.

L DANftBR. (Vers. 2 — 6.) 1. To character. From slander. 2. To life. (Ver. 1.)
From secret plots and conspiracies.

II. Faith in God. 1. Ikepressed in prayer for protection. 2. That Qod will
dettroy the plots of his enemies. (Vers. 7, 8.) " The Divine judgment is now painted
as if actually fulfilling itself before the very eyes of the psalmist."

III. The baldtaey effects of God's ketributivk providence. 1. Upon the
companions of the wicked. (Ver. 8.) They shake the head, or flee away, so that they
become separate and scattered. 2. IJpun men generally. (Ver. 9.) They shall declare
the work of God, and consider his doings. 3. Upon the righteous. They shall trust,
rejoice, and glory in the Lord, in his righteousness and goodness. — S.

EXPOSITION.



PSALM LXV.

Thtb is a Bong of unmixed praise and thank-
fulnew. God is first praised lor his moral



qualities : (1) as Hearer of prayer (ver. 2) ;
(2) as Pardoner of sin (ver. 3) ; (3) as Giver
of blessings in his courts (ver. 4) ; and (4)
as Deliverer of his people from their enemief



«. LXV. 1—13.]



THE BOOK OF PSALMS.



89



(ver. 5). Next, God ia praised for his might
and majesty in nature (vers. 6—8). Lastly,
he is praised fop his goodness and bounty
in connection with the harvest (vers. 9 — 13).
Metrically, the psalm seems to consist of
three strophes, the first and second of four
verses each, the third of five.

The Davidical authorship, though as-
serted in the " title," is snmewhat doubtful.
The mention of the temple, and especially
of the "courts" of the temple, seems to
imply a later date than David's. And the
psalm cannot be said to be in his manner,
since it is too easy, flowing, and equable.
The conjecture which places the date soou
after Sennacherib's invasion (Dflitzsch) is
plausible, but still quite uncertain.

Ver.,1. — Praise waiteth for thee, God,
in Zion; literally, there is silence-praise
(equivalent to " silent praise ") for thee,
Qod, in Zion. There was, for the most part,
a hushed silence in the tabernacle and
temple, amid which silent prayer and praise
were offered to God by the priests and
Levites, and any lay persons who might be
present (comp. 1 Sam. i. 18). And unto thee
shall the vow be performed. Wheu there
was any special outpouring of praise in the
temple, there would almost always be a
performance of vows. Both depended on
some deliverance or favour having been
granted.

Ver. 2. — thou that hearest prayer. A
necessary and inalienable attribute of God.
Calvin rightly observes on the passage :
" God can no more divest himself of bis
attribute of Iiearing prayer than of bein^."
Unto thee shall aU flesh come. " All flesh "
might certaijily, in a psalmist's mouth, mean
no more than "all Isrsiel" (so Ewald and
Hitzig). But the context (especially in
vers. 5 and 8) shows that in this piialm the
writer is univertsalist in his ideas, and
embraces all mankind in his hopes and
aspirations (comp. Fss. xxii. 27, 28 ; IxxxvL
9; Isa. Ixvi. 23; Jer. xvi. 19; Joel ii. 28).

Ver. 3. — Iniquities prevail against me.
Not so much, perhaps, his own iniquities, as
those of his nation. Compure the expression,
"our transgressions," in tlie next clause.
As for our trangxessions, thou shalt purge
them away ; or, cover them.

Yer. 4. — Blessed is the man whom thou
ehoosest The "choosing" intended is
certainly nut that of the seed of Aaron
(Lev. viii. 1), or of the seed of Levi (Numb,
zviii. 21 — 23), but that act by which God
" chose " Israel out of all the nations of the
earth to be " a special people unto himself"
(Dent. m\\. 6), and gave them a distinct
position, and peculiar privileges. And



causest to approach unto thee, that he may
dwell in thy courts. Among the peculiar
privileges, one of the greatest was that of
approaching God's presence in his holy
temple, and entering bis " courts " and
worshipping there. This all Israelites were
not only permitted, but commanded to do,
at least three times in the year, while the
dwellers in Jerusalem, privileged above the
rest, had constant opportunities of attending,
and using to the full the means of grace
provided for them in the sanctuary. We
shall be satisfied with the goodness of thy
house, even of thy holy temple. In "the
goodness of God's house" the psalmist
includes, not only the delights there ex-
perienced, but also all the blessings which
God gives to those who devoutly worship
him there — " from the forfrfvencss of sins to
outward, temporal mercies" (Hengstenberg).
Ver. 5. — By terrible things in righteous-
ness (i.e. " by terrible acts of righteous
judgment upon our enemies ") wiit thou
answer us. This is a sequel to ver. 2. As
God hears prayer and answers it, so when
his people cry to him for protection uud
deliverance from their foes, the result can
only be righteous juilgmcnts of a tearful
character upon the persecutors. God of
our salvation; i.e. God through whom we
obtain salvation. Who art the confidence of
all the ends of the earth (see the comment
on ver 2, and comp. ver. 8). And of them
that are afar off upon the sea; literally,
and of the sea of those afar off. Tlie reading
is, perhaps, corrupt.

Vers. 6 — 8. — God having been praised for
his moral qualities, is now further eulogized
in respect of his doings in nature. Tlie
mountains Set forth his majesty and perma-
nence (ver. 6) ; the seas and waves, his
power to control and subdue (ver. 7); the
outgoings of the morning and evening —
sunrise and sunset — his gracious loving-
kindness (ver. 8).

Ver. 6. — Which by his strength setteth
fast the mountains (comp. Fss. xxxvi. 6;
xcv. 4 ; Amos iv. 13). The mountains are
an emblem of God's strength and firmness
and fixedness. They stand up in still and
silent majesty ; they seem as if they could
never be moved. He who created them
must be girded with power (comp. Ps.
xciii. 1).

Ver. 7. — Which stilleth the noise of the
seas. The power of God, as set forth in his
control of the sea, is a favourite topic with
the sacred writers (see Job xxxviii. 8;
Prov. viii. 29; Isa. 1. 2; li. 10; Jer. v. 22,
etc.). Being so entirely beyond his own
control, it seems to man one of the greatest
of marvels that there should be any force



30



THE BOOK OP PSALMS.



[P8. LXV. 1 — 13.



capable of Bubdaing and taming i^ Hence
the admiration excited by our Lord's
miracle (Matt. viii. 26, 27). The noise of
their waves (comp. Iss. xvii. 12). And the
tumult of the people. This clause may
seem a little out of place in a passa°:e which
treats of God's power over nature. But, after
all, humanity is a constituent part of nature.
Ver. 8.— They also that dwell in the
uttermost parts are afraid of thy tokens;
».«. tliey see thy tokens — indicaliona of thy
mighty power — and are filled with awe.
Thou makest the outgoings of the morning
and evening (or, the portaU of morn and eve —
tlie gateways through which the sun comes
forth each morning and retires each even-
ing) to rejoice ; t.e. to gladden mankind, to
spread joy and gladness over the earth. The
splendour of simrise and sunset are in the
poet's mind.

Vers. 9 — 13. — ^In conclusion, the psalmist
praises God for his bountiful providence
with respect to the harvest. According to
some, the whole poem is essentially a harvest
thanksgiving, and the poet now " comes at
last to the point aimed at from the first." He
traces the whole process by which the glori-
ous termination is arrived at. First, the
" eai ly rain," descending from "the river of
God," or the reservoir for rain which God
guards in the heavens (Job xxxviii. 37),
moistening the furrows, softening the ridges,
and preparing the land for the seed-corn.
Then the sowing, which, being man's work, is
but just touched on (ver. 9, ad fin."). After
that, the " latter rain " — the gentle showers
of March and April — which cause the grain
to burst and the blade to spring, and the ear
to form itself, and turn the dull fallow into
a mass of greenery (vers. 10, 12). At last,
the full result — pastures clothed with flocks ;
valleys, the " long broad sweeps between
parallel ranges of hills," covered over with
coin ; all nature laughing and shouting for
joy (ver. 13).

Ver. 9. — Thou visitest the earth, and
waterest it (comp. Job xxxvi. 27, 28 ; xxxvii.



6 ; xxxviii. 26—28 ; Ps. oxlvii. 18 ; Jer. v. 24 ;
Matt. V. 45). Thou greatly enrichest it with
the river of God. There is no " with " in
the original ; and the two clauses are better
taken separately. Translate, Thou greatly
enrichest it; the river of God it full of water.
By " the river of God " is to be understood
God's store of water in the clouds and
atmosphere, which he can at any time retain
or let loose. Thou preparest them com, when
thou hast so provided for it ; rather, when
thou halt to prepared her (tlie earth). By
thus preparing the earth for the sowing.
God prepares for men the corn which they
ultimately obtain at the harvest.

Ver. 10. — Thou waterest the ridges thereof
abundantly ; rather, the furrowe (Hengsten-
berg, Kay, Cheyne, Revised Version). Thou
settlest the furrows thereof; rather, tlmu
tmoothett down its ridget. So covering up
the grain, and bringing the rough ploughed
laud to a comparatively smooth surface.
Thou makost it soft with showers: thou
blessest the springing thereof. The whole
ground being softened with warm showers,
the sprin)i;ing of the blade begins under
God's blessins.

Ver. 11. — Thou crownest the year with
thy goodness. As God had begun, so he
goes on to the " crowning " of the whole.
And thy paths drop fatness. As he moves
about, visiting the earth (ver. 9), there drop
from him fertility and abundance.

Ver. 12. — They drop upon the pastures of
the wilderness; rather, the pasluret of the
wilderness drip with it ; i.e. with the " fat-
ness" which is shed from God's presence.
And the little hills rejoice on every side;
literally, are girded with joy.

Ver. 13. — The pastures are clothed with
flocks ; or, with their flocki ; i.e. the flocks
befitting them. The valleys also are
covered over with corn. The great open
sweeps between the ranges of hills are
completely covered over with grain crops,
wheat, barley, millet ; and the result is that
they seem to shout for joy, they also sing.
This is better than the rendering of Ewald
end DelitZBch, " Man shouts for joy ; he
sings." All the poets personify Xature, and
ma^e her sympathize with humun kind
(comp. Isa. xiv. 8 ; xxxv. 1 ; Iv. 12 ; Virg.,
• Eolog.,' V. 62 ; 'GeorgV iv. 461).



HOMILETICS.

Ver. 2. — Hie privilege and duty of prayer, " Thou that hearest prayer." All prac-
tical religion rests on this fact — that God hears prayer. A God who could not or
would not hear prayer, an" almighiy Creator with whom we could hold no converse,
would not be God to us. We could not say, " God, thou art my God I " There would
be no impiety in the question, "What profit shall we have if we pray unto him?"
The Epicureans, who taught that there are gods, but that they do not concern them-
selves with human affairs, were practically atheists. Prayer is the one conscious link



Pfl. Lxv. 1— 13.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 3i

(there are many unconscious) between the seen and the unseen worlds. A prayerless
life is a godless life — shut up, imprisoned in the narrow sphere of " things seen " aud
tempoial. A prayerful life transcends these barriers, takes hold on " things unseen"
and eternal ; walks with God ; endures as seeing him who is in7isible.

I. The glorious cebtaintt op the fact that God hears fbater. By hearing
prayer is meant in Scripture taking account of our requests and answering them
(I John y. 14, 15). This involves all that is most glorious in God's revealed attributes.
Uis infinite knowlecige, which not the most timid or rapid desire, or speechless lifting
up of any heart, escapes. His wisdom to discern whether, when, how, to grant our
requests. Poreknuwled.;e — for long preparation may have been needful, though the
prayer be uttered and granted in a moment. Bighteousness, to grant no petition,
however fervent, which it would not be right to grant. Love — to take fatherly interest
in our childish ways, small needs, and often iguorant and impatient desires; and to
care for our best welfare. And almighty power — to carry out all that wisdom, righteous-
ness, and love direct, and to make " all things work together," etc. (Bom. viii. 28).
The certainty that God hears prayer rests on his faithfulness and the promises which
fill the Bible ; on the commands which lay on us the duty as well as confer the
privilege of prayer ; on the examples, still more abundant in Scripture than these com-
mands and promises of prayer answered (including our Saviour's own example); on
the daily experience of God's Church. If any truth in the scope of human knowledge
rests on a firm foundation of experience, it is this.

IL The transcendent privilege and blessing of pbatee. It would be a great
thing were we permitted (as the Romish creed teaches) to invoke the aid and counsel
of augels and glorified saints. But we pass through their shining ranks and come with
boldness to the very throne of God (Heb. x. 19; iv. 16). Whatever lielp angels can
render will be given under orders from their Lord and ours (Heb. ii. 14 ; 1 Pet. iii. 22).
We measure blessings often by their loss. Let us imagine this privilege of prayer
withdrawn or limited. Suppose a day in each week (a sort of anti-sahhatK) on which
prayer was forbidden — or but one in a month or year. Who would choose that day
for any enterprise ? Who would not fear to die on such a day ? When its cheerless
dawn broke we should say, "Would God it were evening!" aud wiien midnight
chimed we should thank God tlie lips of prayer were again unsealed. Or a region of
earth where prayer was forbidden ; if men cried to God, they were warned it would
be vain. Let its valleys teem with plenty, its hills with precious ore, climate and
scenery be the finest in the world, — would you care — would you dare — to dwell in that
accursed spot ? Or if there were one human being to whom God's voice had said,
" Ask not ; for thou slialt not receive 1 " with what horror we should look at this outlaw
irom Divine mercy ! how giddy would be for him heights of prosperity ! how cheerless
the dark days of trouble 1 how dreadful the hour of death — the plunge into an unknown
et«rnity ! And yet there are those (perhaps here) for whom every day is a day with-
out prayer ; from whose home no voice of prayer ascends ; self-exiled from God !

III. The coerespokding duty. " Men ought always to pray " (Luke xviii. 1).
" This is the will of God " (1 Thess. v. 17, 18). Prayer is one of the great laws of
God's moral government. He has ordained that we should ask in order to receive
(Luke xi. 9, 10). This is the reply to all those plausible objections to prayer drawn
from God's superior and infinite wisdom, the unohangeableness of his laws, the
unreasonableness of thinking that our will can bend his, and so forth. Plausible; but
uugatoiy in the face of tlie fact that God has commanded us to pray. He has given
us his only begotten Son as our Intercessor; his Holy Spirit, to teach us how to pray;
has pledged his word to hear prayer; aud daily and hourly answers the prayers of his
children. To regard prayer only as a duty is fatal to life, freedom, joy in prayer. It
would lead to mechanical formalism. But duty is, after all, the backbone of life. You
do not feel at all times in a right frame of mind for prayer. If you had no guide but
feeling, you would say, " Another time will be more suitable." Or when pressed and
hurried, you wotild say, " I must attend to urgent duties ; and leave the enjoyment
and relreshmeut of prayer to a time of leisure." But duty stands guard at the door
(Matt. vL 6). And as in other cases, it brings its own reward. Perhaps at the very
time when you have set yourself to pray with a cold heart, because you know you
fnig)U to pray and must, you have come from your chamber with beaming countenance,



32 THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [ps. lxv. 1— 13.

ready to say with Jacob, G-uu. xxviii. 16, 17. Thia applies to public aad social, as
well as private, prayer.

Ver. 11. — The lessons of harvest, "Thou crownest the year," etc. Men see what
they have eyes to see. The farmer looks on the field of golden graio, ripe for the
sickle, and sees the reward of his toil and return for his capital. The painter seee a
glorious subject for a picture. The economist thinks of prices, averages, national
prosperity. The devout Christian sees God's hand opening to answer the prayer for
daily bread. Now, it is one leading characteristic of the Scripture writers that they
see God in everything. In this light let us try to read the lessons of harvest.

I. THANKFUliNESS. Literal rendering in margin, " Thou crownest the year of thy
goodness," which some take to refer to some special year of remarkably bountiful
harvest. Perhaps rather the thought is that God's unceasing goodness runs through
the whole circle of the seasons, though the harvest is the crowning manifestation
(Matt. V. 45 ; Acts xiv. 17 ; 2 Cor. ix. 10). Grace at meals should be no dead form,
but the welling-up and outpouring of new thankfulness for Iresh goodness. God's
hand spreads the daily table for all creatures. As the secret spring of life is in him,
so all that nourishes and maintains life is from him. Hence our Saviour makes the
gift of daily bread the image of himself — " the Bread of Life " (John vi. 33, 35, 48 — 51).

IL Obedience to law. God works according to those unchanging laws which he
has ordained — unchanging as long as the present order of the world continues (Gkn.
viii. 22). Human labour is profitable only as it conforms to those laws. He who
would reap in harvest-time must sow in seed-time. The natural is the image of the
spiritual order (Gal. vi, 7 — 9).

in. Patience. (Jas. v. 7.) Here also our Lord bids us see the spiritual order
(Mark iv. 26 — 29). Do not expect ripe ears in January. Be patient with your
children, your scholars, your hearers; yea, let the Christian even be patient with
himself.

IV. Co-OPBRATION. The ploughman, sower, reaper, must join their toil ; and the
ploughman did not make his plough, the sower his basket, the reaper his sickle.
Other hands built the garner. Who can reckon how many hands have combined their
labour to place on our table a single loaf (Horn. xiv. 7) ?

V. Hope. Under dark wintry skies, beneath frost and snow, the grain is growing,
which summer suns shall ripen. The worst harvest that was ever reaped kept alive
the germs of all the harvests that have since grown or ever will (1 Cor. xv. 58). And
note, that as long as the grain is stored, it preserves life (even for centuries), but pro-
duces none. It must bo flung away and buried, and, as grain, must perish, for the
hidden life to burst forth. Heuce our Lord makes it the image of his life-giving death
(John xii. 24), and St. Paul of resurrection (1 Cor. xv. 35 — 38).



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Vers. 1 — 13. — Harvest thanksgiving. The three great Jewish feasts had referenoa
to the harvest. The Passover was kept e-irly in the year, when the barley harvest
was begun, and a sheaf of the firstfruits was offered as a thank-offering (Lev. xxiii. 10).
Fifty days later came Pentecost, when the wheat was ripe; and then two loaves of the
new corn were presented (Lev. xxiii. 17). Last of all was the Feast of Tabernacles,
when the fruits of the earth had been gathered in, and the people gave thanks and
rejoiced before the Lord with " the joy of harvest " (Lev. xxiii. 40; Deut. xvi. 13—17).
This psalm is a song of thanksgiving to God for the harvest.

I. The bight standpoint. Israel was a people near to God. They had been
separated from other nations. They enjoyed special privileges and blessings. " Zion "
was to them the great centre of unity. Thither the tribes went up. There the people,
with their rulers, assembled to worship God. As with them, so with us. Our worship
must be ruled by God's will as revealed to us. We can only come before him with
acceptance when we come through Jesus Christ. Our standpoint also is "Zion"
(Matt, xviii. 20 ; Bph. ii. 11—18 ; Heb. ii. 22—28).

II. The spirit in which wb should draw near. L With unfeigned faith.



PS. Lxv. 1— 13.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 33



""Waiting" expresses quiet confidence. It is both "praise" and "prayer." 2. With
asstired hope in Ood's mercy. Sin meets us -when we come before God. It fills our
hearts with shame and apprehension. But when we look to Christ we are comforted.
In him we have redemption and the forgiveness of sins. It is as sinners pardoned that
we should praise Grod. All God's gifts are enhanced in value when we take them
from the hands of the Crucified. 3. With adoring thanksgiving. Relieved of sin, our
hearts rise in joy to God (ver. 4). God in Christ is the true home of our souls. Here
we reach peace. Here we are made glad in the light of our Father's face, and enriched
out of the fulness of his grace and truth. Nay, more. Remembering God's " great
love," and " the exceeding riches of his grace, in his kindness towards us " (Eph. ii. 7),
and realizing the power of Christ, we can rejoice in hope of the blessedness of the
coming time when the "God of our salvation" shall be the Confidence of all the ends
of the earth, and the j^eople of every kindred and tongue shall sins his praise.

III. The subjects which should specially engage cue attention. The world
is not a dead world, a mere piece of mechanism, subject to cold material laws. It is
God's world, and is ruled by God's laws. Looking back, we should recall the great
events of the year. We may consider what is general — national, social, and religious
blessings common to all. Not only mercies, but chastisements; for every chastise-
ment is, when rightly received, a blessing. How comforting to know that the same
God who " by his strength setteth fast the mountains " is the God " who heareth
prayer;" that the same God "who stilleth the noise of the seas and the tumult of the
people " is the " God of our salvation " ! In particular we should consider God's good-
ness in the harvest (vers. 8 — 13). How vivid and beautiful is the picture 1 We see
the various stages, from the sowing of the seed onward to the reaping-tiine ; from the
•weet greenness of spring to the golden glow and manifold glories of harvest. All
-his is of God. "He worketh hitherto." During all the ages of the past he has
olessed the labours of the husbandman, and every year we see new proofs of his faith-
mlness, and enjoy richer manifestations of his love and bounty. " While the earth
remaineth, seedtime and harvest . . . shall not cease " (Gen. viii. 22), and as often as
the harvest comes round God's Name will be praised. — VV. P.

Ver. 3. — Defeat and victory. I. Here is a confession of defeat. When we look
within we find that, instead of all being right, all is wrong. This alarms us. We rouse
ourselves to action. We resolve to live a new life of love and holiness. But the more
we try the less we succeed. Our strength is weakness. Our purposes are broken off.
Our best endeavours end in defeat. Instead of overcoming evil, we are overcome of
evil. Instead of gaining purity and freedom, our case grows worse, and we groan in
misery as the bond-slaves of sin. Confused and confounded, our cry is, " wretched
man that I am, who shall deliver me ? "

II. Thanksgiving for victobt. Though we despair of ourselves, we must not
despair of God. We know what God is, and what he has done for us, and therefore
we turn to him with hope. Casting ourselves simply upon his mercy in Christ, we
are able to grasp the gracious promise, "Sin shall not have dominion over you."
God's love to us is a personal love. Good's work in us is designed to make us pure
from sin, and he will perfect it in the day of Christ. While we say, therefore, with
grief and pain, " Iniquities prevnil against me," let us with renewed hope proclaim,
" As for our transgressions, thou shalt purge them away." — W. P.

Ver. 9. — Thanksgiving for corn. " Thou preparest them corn."

I. Because it is thk special gift of God to man. It came from God at first.
It is renewed year by year. Wherever man dwells it may be cultivated in some form
or other. " How it stands, that yellow corii, on its fair taper stems, its golden head
bent, all rich and waving there ! The mute earth at God's kind bidding has produced
it once again — man's bread " (Luther).

II. Because it is indispensable to the welfare op man. Corn is not only
valuable, but nee. ssary. Individuals may live without it, but for roan, on the broad
scale, it is indispensable. The worth is known by the want. When there is a scarcity
of corn, all the markets of the world are affected. Bread is the staff of life. It is
because of its worth and its suitableness to human needs that corn is constituted the

PgALMS— II. »



84



THE BOOK OP PSALMS.



[ps. Lxvi. 1—20.



symbol of the highest blessings. It stands for the Word of God. It figures the great
redemption (John xii. 24). It foreshadows the glory of the resurrection (1 Cor. xv.).

III. Because it depends fob its continuanob on the laboitb of man. Many
gifts come to us irrespective of our own efforts, but corn is not one of them. Its
enjoyment is conditional. It is an annual. It has not an independent existence.
It does not live and propagate itself by its own seed. It requires the care of man, else
it would soon die out and be lost. In order to be pieserved it must be sown by man's
own hand in ground which man's own hand has tilled. The land must be prepared
for the corn, as well as the corn for the land. Manifold blessings result from this
arrangement. Tlirift is good. Labour is a healthful discipline. Providing for the
wants of ourselves and others binds us more closely together as brethren. If there be
famine in Canaan, there is corn in Egjrpt ; and this leads to commerce and friendly
intercourse between nations. Besides, in the fact that year after year we must sow in
order to reap ; that each season's supply is but a measured quantity, never much in
excess of what is required for food ; and that the powers of heaven must work together
with the powers of earth to secure a bountiful harvest ; — we are taught in the most
impressive manner our dependence upon God, and our obligations to praise him for
his goodness and his wonderful works. — W. P.

Vers. 1 — 13. — Reasons for praising Ood. " Can hardly doubt that this psalm
was composed on the occasion of an abundant harvest, and was intended to be sung
as a hymn of thanksgiving by the whole congregation gathered before God in Zion."
God is praised under three aspects,

I. As THE God OP the Chueoh. (Vers. 1 — 5.) " Whom thou choosest, and causest
to approach." 1. He is the Hearer of all true prayer. (Ver. 2.) " Unto thee doth all
flesh come " in dependence and prayer. 2. He pardons iniquity and transgression.
(Ver. 3.) Pardons those who become conscious of their sins, and are persistent.
S. Satisjks the desires of those whom he draws to himsdf. (Ver. 4.) God inspires the
worship he rewards with such satisfying blessings. 4. Manifests his righteousness in
the salvation of his people.

II. As the God who bbveals himself in nattjke. (Vers. 6 — 8.) 1. His work
in nature manifests omnipotence. (Ver. 6.) " Setteth fast the mountains," etc.

2. He overrules the greatest disturbances of nature and the nations. (Ver. 7.) 3. Man
and nature both ultimately subject to him. 3. Man is afraid, but nature sings of
Ood in the miming and in the evening. (Ver. 8.) The ignorant heathen are afraid,
not those who know God.

III. As the God of the habvest. (Vers. 9 — 13.) 1. God is the great Husband-
man. (Vers. 9, 10.) He prepares and enriches the soil to receive the com. 2. He
makes the wilderness and the hills to rejoice with their abundance. (Vers. 11, 12.)

3. God is the great Shyaherd of the earth. (Ver. 13.) The pastures are clothed with
flocks.— S.



EXPOSITION.



PSALM LXVI.



This is another song of thanksgiving, and
is connected with a special deliverance (vers.
10 — 1 2). The composer is about to offer a
gaorifioe to God in his holy place, in per-
formance of a TOW which be had made when
he was in trouble (vers. 13— t15), and has
prepared the psalm as a liturgical formula
to be used on the occasion. It is an ode in
four strophes : an opening one of four verses
— « simple rendering of praise (vers. 1 — 1) ;
then a short strophe of three verses, cele-
brating God's might against bis enemies



(vers. 5 — ^7); next a statement in general
terms of the deliverance experienced, and a
description of the sacrifloes to be offered for
it (vers. 8 — 15) ; and finally an address to
the people, calling on them to " hearken " —
together with a protestation of sincerity,
and an appeal to God as witnessing to it
(vers. 16—20). The psalm, not being
ascribed to David in the " title," and having
no especial traces of his manner, is gene-
rally assigned to » later Judseau king, as
Asa, Jehosliaphat, or Hezekiah.

Ver. 1. — Hake a joyfol noise nnto Ood, all



PS. LXVI. 1—20.]



THE BOOK OF PSALMS.



86



ye lands ; literally, all the earth— an. invita-
tion to the whole world to join in the joy
of laiael, wherein they too are interested
<oomp. Ps. IxT. 2, 5).

Ver. 2. — Sing forth the honour of his
Name ; rather, the glory of his Name. Hake
his praise glorious ; or, recognize his glory
in your praise of him; ».e. do not merely
thank him for his kindness to you per-
sonally, but magnify him for his greatness
and mtijesty.

Ver. 3. — Say unto Ood, How terrible art
thou in thy works ! rather, How terrible are
thy works 1 God's deliverances, while re-
joicing the persecuted, are "terrible" to
the persecutors. Through the greatness of
thy power shall thine enemies submit them-
selves unto thee. God's enemies, compelled
against their will, have to submit them-
selves, but it is a feigned submission (comp.
Ps. Ixxvi. 12).

Ver. 4. — All the earth shall worship thee,
and shall sing unto thee ; they shall sing to
thy Name (see above, ver. 1, and compare
the passages quoted in the comment ad loo,).
Dr. Kay notes that " the universality of the
Church is clearly contemplated " in all the
psalms from Ps. Ixv. to Ps. Ixviii.

Ver. 5. — Come and see the works of Ood.
Contemplate, i.e., the terrible " works of
God," spoken of in ver. 3. See how, to
save his people, he has to smite their
enemies. Truly, on such occasions, he is
terrible in his doing toward the ohildren
of men (compare the next verse for an
example).

Ver. 6. — ^He turned the sea into dry land :
they went through the flood on foot ; there
did we rejoioe in him. The passage of the
Bed Sea at the time of the Exodus was one
»f the most wonderful of God's works. To
the Isiaelites it was altogether a matter of
joy and rejoicing (see Bxod. xv. 1 — 21).
But how terrible a tliiug was it to the
Egyptians 1 " The waters returned, and
covered the chariots, and the horsemen, and
all the host of Pharaoh that came into the
sea after tliem ; there remained not so much
as one of them" (Exod. xiv. 28).

Ver. 7. — He ruleth by his power for ever ;
his eyes behold (or, observe) the nations.
God keeps perpetual watch upon the heathen
nations, whose general attitude is that of
hostility to his " peculiar people," lest his
people should suffer at their hands. Al-
though they may professedly be submissive
(ver. 3), their submission is not to be de-
pended on. Let not the rebellious exalt
themselves. At any time rebellion may
break out, his people be attacked, and " the
nations" endeavour to "exalt themselves."
All such attempts, however, will be in vain,
■inoe "by his power God ruleth for ever."

Vers. 8 — 15. — Here we reach the heart of



the psalm. The people are called upon to
praise God for a recent deliverance from a
long period of severe aCSiotioa and oppression
at the hand of enemies (vers. 8 — 12), and to
join in tlie sacrifices wliich are about to be
oSered to God in payment of the vows made
during the time of trouble (vers. 13 — 1.5).
As the writer ascribes to himself both the
making of the vows and the offering of the
sacrifices, he must have been the leader of
the nation at the time of the oppression
and of the deliverance.

Ver. 8. — bless our Ood, ye people;
literally, ye peoples — but the plural form
here can scarcely point to the "nations,"
who have just been called, not 'ammim, but
gdim (see ver. 7). And make the voice of
his praise to he heard (comp. Pss. xxxiii. 3 ;
cl. 5). The heartiness of the soul's devotion
was made apparent by the loudness of the
voice.

Ver. 9. — ^Which holdeth our soul in life ;
rather, which eetteth (or, hath set) our soul in
life — implying a previous condition of great
danger. And snffereth not our feet to be
moved. In allusion, perhaps, to a threatened
captivity.

Ver. 10. — Tor thou, Ood, hast proyed us.
The calamity had been sent as a trial, to
prove and purify (comp. Pss. vii. 9; xi. 5).
Xhon hast tried us, as silver is tried (comp.
Ps. xii. 6 ; Prov. xvli. 3 ; xxv. 4 ; Isa. i. 22,
25; xlviii. 10; Zech. xiii. 9; Mai. iii. 3).
Silver, according to ancient methods, re-
quired a prolonged process of refining before
it could be pronounced pure. The calamity
under which Israel had suffered had been
of long duration.

Ver. 11. — Thou broughtest us into the
net. Professor Cheyne translates " into the
dungeon." But mHsudah has nowhere else
this meaning. It is always either " a net "
or "a stronghold." Thou laidst a£9iction
upon our loins ; or, a sore burden (Bevised
Version). The meaning is, "Thou orush-
edst us down under a heavy weight of
oppression."

Ver. 12.^— Thou hast caused men to ride
over our heads. See the Egyptian and
Assyrian sculptures patsim, where the
king in his chariot gallops over the bodies
of his dead and wounded enemies. We
went through fire and through water ; i.e.
through dangers of every kind — a pro-
verbial expression (comp. Isa. xliii. 2). But
thou broughtest us out into a wealthy
place ; or, " a place of refreshment " («j
iLva^vxhy, liXX.). Dr. Kay renders, " a
place of rich comfort ; " Professor Cheyne,
"a place of liberty" (comp, Ps, xxiii. 4 and
Jer. xxxi. 25).

Ver. 13. — I will go into thy house with



36



THE BOOK OF PSALMS.



[fb, lxvi. 1—20.



burnt offerings ; I will pay thee my tows.
la the old world the strict performauoe of
vows was always held to be one of the main
obligations of religion. A vow was of the
nature of a compact with God, and to break
it was an act of flagrant dishonesty, from
which men shrank. The Mosaic Law
sanctioned tows of various kinds, as the
vowing of children to the service of God
(Lev. xxvii. 1 — 8; 1 Sam. i. 11); the vow of
the Nazarite (Numb. vi. 2—21) ; and vows
of clean or unclean animals (Lev. xxv!i.
9 — 13, 27 — 29), etc. Clean animals, when
vowed, must be either redeemed or sacrificed.
The importance of performing vows is borne
frequent witness to by the psalmists (see
Pss. xxii. 25; 1. 14; Ivi. 12 ; Ixi. 8; Ixv. 1 ;
cxvi. 14, 18 : oxxxii. 2).

Ver. 14. — Which my lips have uttered,
and my mouth hath spoken, when I was in
trouble. Vows were commonly made in a
time of trouble, or, at any rate, of difficulty
(see Judg. xi. 30, 31 ; 1 Sam. i. 11).

Ver. 15. — I will offer unto thee burnt
sacrifices of failings; i.e. of fatted beasts
(comp. 1 Sam. xv. 9 ; 2 Sam. vi. 13 ; Ezek.
xxxix. 18). With the incense of rams; i.e.
the smoke, or savoury odour of rams. I will
offer bullocks with goats; literally, / will
prepare — i.e. dress for sacrifice (see 1 Kings
xviii. 23, 26).

Vers. 16 — 20. — In conclusion, the psalmist
calls on all pious Israelites to "hearken,"
while he explains to them liow it is that his
prayers and vows have been so effectual. It
has been because his prayers and vows pro-
ceeded from a sincere and honest heart, one
which was free from " iniquity " (ver. 18).
As Hengstenberg points out, this portion of
the psalm is didactic, and inculcates the
lesson "that there is no way of salvation
except that of well-doing." God, by answer-
ing the psalmist's prayer, and giving the
deliverance for which he ha I i ntieated, had
set his testimony to the fact of the psalmist's
integrity (vers. 19, 20).



Ver. 16. — Come and hear, all ye that fear
God. The address is scarcely to all that
have any sense of religion anywhere, as
Professor Cheyne suggests, but rather to the
religious section of his own nation — the
" righteous " or " godly " of other psalms.
They are invited to draw near, nnd be
received into the psalmist's confidence.
And I will declare what he hath done for
my soul. Wliat God had done for the
psalmist was to give him confidence and
assurance. He knew tliat his prayers would
be ineffectual unless his heart was pure.
God heard him, and then he became sure
that he was free from the "great trans-
gression " (Oheyhe).

Ver. 17. — I cried unto him with my mouth,
and he was extolled with my tongue ; rather,
and praise loas under my tongue ; i.e. I was
so confident of being heard that a song of
praise was already in my mouth, on the
point of bur-^sting forth.

Ver. 18. — If I regard iniquity in my
heart, the Lord will not hear me. This is
the inward conviction of every simple, un-
sophisticated soul. It is confirmed by
numerous passages of Holy Writ (Job
xxvii. 9; xxxi. 27; Prov. xv. 29; xxviii
9; Isa. i. 15; Zech. vii. 13; John ix.
31, etc.).

Ver. 19. — But verily God hath heard me.
The psalmist's prayer had been answered
so unmistakably, so directly, that he could
not doubt of the result, which had been
brought about, being the consequence of his
vows and supplioations (vers. 13, 14). He
hath attended to the voice of my prayer.
Strange as it might seem to be that God
had attended to tlie voice of a man (Job vii.
17; Pss. viii. 4; cxliv. 3; Jas. v. 14—18),
yet so it was ; the psalmist did not and
could not doubt it.

Ver. 20. — Blessed be God, which hath not
turned away my prayer, nor his mercy from
me. The psalm of thanksgiving appro-
priately concludts with a special blessing
of God by the psalmist, who felt that such
especial mercy had been shown to himself
(vers. 16—20).



HOMILETICS.

Ver. 5. — Holy fear a reasonable element of true spiritual worship. " Come and see,"
etc. Joy and terror seem so diverse and contrary, that one might seem to shut out
the other. Yet this psalm, which opens with a note of exultant joy, follows it with
a note of terror (vers. 1 — 3). So in Ps. ii. 11, " Eejoice with trembling."

I. As INSPIRED BY God's oharactbb AND GLORY. " Perfect love casteth out fear."
I' Ye have not received," etc. (1 John iv. 18; Rom. viii. 15; 2 Tim. i. 7). But there
is a fear which love does not cast out, which is not tormenting or slavish, but salutary
and akin to " a sound mind." To contemplate the inBnite greatness, majesty, power,
Vfisdom, and eternal unohangeableness of (Jod, and the fact that we and all creatures
live, move, and have our being in him, with no emotion of profound awe and sacred



M. Li VI. 1—20.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 3T

fear, argues ratlier clodlike insensibility than childlike confidence. Hence in so
many passages, " the fear of the Lord " stands for the whole of true piety. The word
here (vers. 3, 5) translated " terrible," and in very many other passages, is elsewhere
rendered " reverend," or " to be had in reverence " (Pss. cxi. 9 ; Ixxxix. 7).

IL God's DEALINGS. " Terrible things in righteousness " (Ps.lxv. 5). These especially
referred to here (vers. 3—5). As tlie cloud which gave light to Israel in their flight was
darkness to their pursuers, so the redemption of Israel involved the destruction of
their tyrants. They trembled as they rejoiced (Bxod. xiv. 30, 31). God's holiness
must needs have a severe side of justice, as well as a gracious side of redeeming
mercy. The cross reveals both. Christ would not have " died for our sins," but that
" the wages of sin is death." As the psalmist says of the Egyptian plagues, the Ked
Sea and Sina«, so we, of the cross, and of the place where the Lord lay, " Come and
•ee!"

III. The sense of oue own unwoethinbss and sin. (See Job xlii. 5, 6 ; Isa. vi.
5 ; Luke v. 8.) To this is sometimes added personal experience of troubles in which
faith and joy find it hard to stand ground against terror and despair (vers. 10 — 12 ;
2 Cor. i. 8, 9). Yet the outcome is to be joy in Qod. " There did we rejoice " (ver. 6) ;
or, as margin of Revised Version, " let us rejoice." This is the strict translation, but
has been set aside because of supposed difficulty as to meaning. But " Faith makes the
past as well as the future her own " (Perowne). What the greatest heathen historian
wished his work to be (Thuc, i. 22), is incomparably truer of the record of God's
mighty works for his Church — it is " a possession for ever."

Pbactioal. 1. Holy fear must not lose its place in our religion. 2. But must not
eclipse joy in God. 3. Faith must call memory to her aid, and joy and gratitude.

Ver. 18. — Prayer hindered by allowed sin. " If 1 regard iniquity," etc. If we read
the text as in the margin of Eevised Version, " If 1 had regarded . . . God would not
hear [or, ' have heard 'j ; " — this makes no practical difference. It only substitutes a
special for a general statement. The lesson taught is the same — Sin allowed in {he
heart a fatal hindrance to our prayers being answered.

I. Sin consciously indulqed disables fbom pbateb. Inconsistent with that
sincerity essential to the reality of prayer (1 John iii. 19 — 21). One has known men
who were afterwards discovered to have been living in secret a wicked life, fluent in
the language of what seemed fervent prayer. But such prayer is "abomination"
(Prov. xxi. 27 ; xxviii. 9). It is a fearful aggravation of guilt.

II. Even sins ignobantlt, ok with partial knowledge, indulged, put the spirit
out of tune for prayer ; grieve and quench the Holy Spirit, by whose teaching alone
we can pray aright; put coldness between the heart and Goil.

III. Sin indulged hinders the answers to prayer. 1. By rendering us incapable
of spiritual blessing. As long as David refused to confess his sin to God, forgivenesi
and spiritual joy were impossible (Ps. xxxii. 3 — 5). 2. By rendering it often unwise
for God to grant the temporal blessings we ask. God could not grant David's prayer
for the life of his child, even after he had repented, because of the scandal his crimes
had brought on religion (2 Sam. xiii., etc.). All David's great after-troubles sprang from
his sin. A Christian who has sinned, repented, and been forgiven is not to regard his
troubles as punishment — except, indeed, that they may be sin's inevitable fruit and
consequence. But they may be a wise and needful, though merciful, chastisemeni
(1 Cor. xi. 31, 32).

HOMILIES BY VAEIOUS AUTHORS.

Vers. 1—20. — God in history. It has been said that "History is philosophy
teaching by example ; " but we are taught in the Psalms to take a higher view, and
to recognize God in history. It is only as we do this that we can rejoice and give
thanks.

I. God's hand should be seen in histcbt. First there is the call (vers. 1, 2).
Then the reason is given (ver. 3). We are brought face to face with God. We are
confronted with the awful manifestations of Ms power. The world is not a world of



38 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [rs. lxvi. 1—20.

confusion and misrule, where we see only the working of human passion. Behind all
is the hand of God. So it is still. Our Lord said, " My Father worketh hitherto." If
men everywhere were brought to this faith, that this is not a forsaken and fatherless
world, but a world under the benign rule of God, they would bow their hearts in
worship, and rejoice to sing praise to the Most High (ver. 4).

IL GoD'a SFECIAL DEALINGS WITH NATIONS SBOULD BE SEEN IN HISTORY. (YerS.

5 — 7.) It is said of the ungodly, that " the harp, and the viol, the tabret, and pipe, and
wine, are in their feasts : but they regard not the work of the Lord, neither consider
the operation of his hands" (Isa. v. 12). But the psalmist was of a different spirit. He
had seen much that had thrilled his heart with admiration and delight, and he would
have others to enter into his joy. " Come and see the works of God " (ver. 5). Israel
may be called the model nation. As " a city set on a hill." Israel has been set on
high for the instruction of other nations and peoples (1 Cor. x. 11). The principles
and laws by which God governed and judged Israel are the principles and laws
according to which he deals with his people everywhere, in all times and in all lands.
God changes his methods, but not his laws. His dispensations alter, but he himself is
the same. Hence his judgments of Israel and of the nations are full of instruction to
us. Israel was the chosen people, " unto whom were committed the oracles of God "
(Bom. iii. 2). God is represented as keeping guard over them. He was their Watch-
man, and his eye was ever on " the nations " (ver. 7) around, ready to warn and
defend his own people. Let us be sure that in like manner be is now standing in
watch over the interests of truth and righteousness, and that he will overrule all things
for the advancement of the kingdom of his Son (Ezek. xxi. 27).

III. God's great mokal purposes should be seen in histobt. (Vers. 8 — 20.)
1. First, we are called upon to bless God for our preservation. If one is taken and
the other left, it is not without a reason. It is God that keeps both nations and
individuals alive. 2. Further, we are taught that all trials are part of Ood's discipline.
(Vers. 10 — 12.) Even in the injustice, the oppression, and cruelty of men, we should
discern the purposes of God. We are being educated by trial. When we see God's
love behind and over all, we learn to be patient and to hope to the end (Deut. viii. 1).
The outcome of Israel's trials was Canaan; and "there is a rest that remaineth for the
people of God." 3. Lastly, we are admonished how Qod works to bring us ever nearer
to himself in love and service. What the psalmist did is an example to ua. (1) There
should be renewed consecration. (Vers. 13, 14.) (2) There should be grateful and
thorough obedience. (Ver. 15.) (3) There should be opera and manly testimony,
(Ver. 16.) (4) There should be more oi prayer and more oi pi-aise. (Vers. 18 — 20.)

" New mercies, each returning day,

Hover around us while we pray ;

New perils past, new sins forgiven,

New thoughts of God, new hopes of heaveiu
" Only, O Lor<l, in thy dear love

Fit us for perfect rest above ;

And help us, this and every day.

To live more nearly as we prav."

(Keble.)

W. P.

Ver. 16. — The best evidence for Christ. It has been said that "the evidence for
Christianity is not the evidences." This may be true of much that is technically
called '« evidences ; " but it is not true of the evidence brought before us here. Facts
are facts. Effects must have sufficient causes. Godliness can only be rightly
accounted for by being traced to God. Christianity witnesses for Christ. Wherever
you find a man saved by Christ, there you have the best evidence for Christ.

I. This evidence is the most accessible. Like the facts of science, it is before
onr eyes. If you want to know the truth, " come and see." As St. Paul argues, " the
works of the flesh are mrinifest," and a black catalogue he gives of some of them.
But the works of the Spirit are also manifest ; and they are so contrary to the works
of the flesh, that when a man changes his life, to walk, not according to the flesh, but
according to the Spirit, the evidence is conclusive as to the transcendent and beneficent



PS, Lxvi. 1—20.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 89

power of Christ. The great conversions of St. Luke, as recorded in his Gospel and ic
the Acts, are evidences of tlie highest kind; but they are but samples. From that
time down through the ages there is an ever-increasing cloud of witnesses. There is
much evidence that is only accessible to the learned, and to such as have leisure and
capacity for investigation ; but here is evidence open to all— clear, relevant, and
unmistakable.

IL This evidence is the most convikcino. It is so to the individual Christian
limseir. There may be arguments you cannot answer, and difficulties and doubts you
cannot remove ; but if you have felt the power of Christ for good, you have proof
which is better than all else, that Christ is from God (1 John v. 10). You know the
Bible to be true. You know salvation to be a reality. It is not something you have
heard of or seen in others, but something which God has done for your own soul.
Like the man who had his sight restored, you can say, " Wljereas I was blind, now
I see." Or like the woman healed of the issue of blood, you can, solicited by love,
bear witness, even " before all the people " (Luke viii. 47), as to the great thiags which
Christ has done for you. This evidence is the most convincing to others besides
ourselves. When we find a real change of mind, a transformation of character, a life
made beautiful by self-denial and virtue where formerly it was otherwise, and self
ruled instead of Clirist, we cannot but confess the hand of God (Gal. i. 23 ; Acts iv.
13; 2 Cur. iii. 1; 1 Cor. xiv. 21).

III. This evidence is the most enduring. It is not limited to one time ; it runs
through the ages. Here is the true apostolic succession, and it has never been broken.
In spite of all opposition and hostility, Christianity lives and prevails. At home and
abroad, in every department of business and in every kind of society, it has its
witnesses. Wherever we go, we may find brethren in Christ ; and when, like Paul,
we meet them, perhaps, when we are in trouble or in unexpected places, let us thank
God, and take courage (Acts xxviii. 14). Let us also, in our several places, see that
we are found faithful. If we are called of God, it is that we may live for God. If we
have been enlightened by Christ, it is that we may let our light shine where he has
given us our lot. What an honour to be a witness for Christ 1 The more closely we
imitate him by holy living, by faithful work, by loving service to the poor and needy,
the .greater shall be our power with God and men, and the greater our reward in
heaven (John xx. 21 ; Matt. xix. 28).— W. F.

Vers. 1—4. — Worship. The psalm would seem to have been composed on the
occasion of some special deliverance ; but the expressions used are too general to
indicate the time or the occasion of its being written.

I. The woeship op God shoui.d be joyful and fervent as well as solemn.
(Ver. 1.) Love and reverence are the perfection of worship.

II. The qloet of God's natube is the inspieation op all true woeship.
(Ver. 2.) His name is his nature; and the glory of his nature is his greatness and
goodness.

III. God's providential woek in histoet compels the eeluotant homage op
EVEN HIS ENEMIES. (Ver. 3.) " Thine enemies feign allegiance unto thee " (see
marginal reading).

IV. The whole earth is the temple of God, wheebin his pbaises are oele-
BBated. (Ver. 4.) Prediction of faith, that not only in Zion, but in the whole world,
the praises of God should be uttered. — S.

Vers. 6 — 12. — An invitation to study God's marvellous works towards men. I. Wb
BBonLD STUDY THE PHYSICAL WONDERS OF THE woELD. (Ver. 6.) He tums the BCa
into dry land still, and the dry land into sea.

II. Wb SHOULD STUDY HIS PEOVIDBNTIAL RULE IN THE HISTOEY OP NATIONS. How

he humbles and overthrows those who rebel against his will, and exalts and establishes
the people who obey his laws.

III. We should STUDY God's work of salvation in the woeld. (Vers. 8, 9.)
" Who putteth [not ' holdeth '] our soul in life, and suffereth not our feet to be
moved."

IV. Wb should study God's methods o? trial and discipline foe making us



40



THE BOOK OF PSALMS.



[PS. LXTII. 1 — 7,



BPiEiTUALLT RICH. (Vers. 10 — 12.) " We went through fire and through water ; but
thou broughlest iis out to abundance." — S.

Veis. 13 — 20. — VowsfulfiUed and experiences related. I. Vows FnLFiLLRD. (Vers,
13 —15.) 1. When we are in trouble we make solemn vows of amendment and service.
As the psalmist had done in his distress. 2. The fulfilment of our religious vows will
often call for great sacrifices. Not burnt offerings from us, but the more cosily
sacrifices of the heart and spirit. " The sacrifices of God are a broken heart and a
contrite spirit."

II. ExPEKiENOBS BELATED. (Vers. 16 — 20.) He proclaims what God had done for
him in answer to his praises and prayers. 1. It is only those who fear God that have
any sympathy with spiritual experience. Only these would care to listen. 2. Only
those who are conscious of integrity of heart expect any answer to prayer. (Ver. 18 ;
Job xxvii. 8, 9.) 3. God will assuredly answer and Mess those who call upon him in
sincerity and in truth. The psalmist knew from experience that Grod had lieard him
and manifested his loving-kindness towards him. His faith in God iiad the warrant
of his experience, and was not an unfulfilled expectation. — S.



EXPOSITION.



PSALM LXVIL

According to some, tliis psalm, like Ps. Ixv.,
is a harvest thanksgiving (Hengstenberg,
Cheyne). But tlie single expression (in
ver. 6) on which tliis view is grounded
seems insufSsicnt to suppoi t it, more especi-
ally as that expression may well be uuder-
Btood figuratively (see Ps. Ixxxv. 12 ; Jer.
viii. 20; Hds. vi. 11 ; Joel iii. 13; Matt. ix.
37, etc.). The real idea of the psalm appears
to be an aspiration after the general conver-
sion of the world, to be eifected by God's
special manifestation of his mercy upon
Israel. This will draw all nations to him.
The psalm is one of three stanzas, consisting
respectively of two, two, and three verses.
Tlie second and third stanzas have the same
initiatory refrain (vers. 3, 5). In the first
Btnnza the "selah" is a pause of reverence,
not a break in the sense.

Ver. 1.— God be merciful unto us, and
blass UB. An echo of tbe priestly blessing
(Numb. vi. 24, 25), but not necessarily
ultered by a priest. The substitution of
JSIohim for Jehovah is natural, considering
the universalist character of the psalm.
And cause his face to shine upon us ; lite-
rally, with us. "With us" especially, as
the people of God ; but not " with us " exolu-
eively, as the whole psalm makes manifest.

Ver. 2. — That thy way may be known
upon earth, thy saving health among all
nations. God is besought to bless his
people Israel (ver. 1), in order that to his
** way " may become known to all the earth,
his " saving health," or his " salvation," to
•11 (heatlien) nations. The idea id not



i of any compulsory empire, but of one
1 will gradually extend itself, by win-



raised I

which' „ J ^. ..„^.., „j ..tu-
ning the heathen over to it through the
sight of Israel's blessedness (romp. Isa. xlii.
18—23; Ix. 3,4).

Ver. 3.— Let the people praise thoe,
God ; let all the people praise thee ; rather,
the peoples, in both clauses. In the second
clause the prayer is intensified by the addi-
tion of the word cullam, "all of them."

Ver. 4. — let the nations be glad and
sing for joy. There could be no greater
blessing to the nations than their attraction
into God's kingdom ; nor, consequently,
any event more worthy to be hailed with
joyful acclaim, with songs of joy and thanks-
giving. For thou Shalt judge the people
(rather, the peoples) righteously, and gorem
the nations upon earth. The main advan-
tage of the change would be the bringing
of the heathen into that kingdom of perfect
righteousness, wherein God (in the Person
of Christ) would dispense justice unerringly,
and rule all men with perfect and absolute
equity.

Ver. 5.— Let the people praise thee,
God ; let all the people praise thoe. A repe-
tition of ver. 3 without any oliange.

Ver. 6. — Then shall the earth yield her
increase; literally, the land hath given her
increase — a quotation from Lev. xxvi. 4, but
probably in a metaphorical sense. An
abundant spiritual harvest is seen by the
psalmist as tlio result of the entrance of the
Gentilis into the Church — an immense "in-
crease" in the fruits of righteousness
hitherto yielded— and this is spoken of as
a result already obtained, through the per-
fect assurance of the writer that his prayers
are granted and the result deterinined on in
the Divine counsels. And God, even our
own Qod, shall bless us. "Our own God"



P8. LXVII. 1 7.]



THE BOOK OF PSALMS.



41



must certainly be Jeliovah ; but the writer,
in his broad uuiversulism, will not use the
expression.

Ver. 7. — Go4 shall bless us ; or, " may
God bless us" (Kay, Cheyne); but the form



is identical with that used in ver. 6. And
all the ends of the earth shall fear him.
One day the earth shall be full of tiie know-
ledge and fear of the Lord " as the waters
cover the sea " (laa. xi. 11).



HOMILETICS.

Vers. 1, 2.—" God he merciful," etc. No vponder this beautiful little psalm has
been enshrined so prominently in the worship of the Christian Church. Its most
remarkable character is its world-wide breadth of sympathy, hope, and prayer. It is
like a beam from the unrisen sun of Christianity. The more one studies the intense
narrow national sentiment of the Jews, the more plain is it that strains like these
could be inspired only by the Spirit of Grod. The psalm is Hebrew of the Hebrews —
sung probably for ages in the temple. Yet its aspirations can be fulfilled only by the
gospel and kingdom of Christ.

I. The meaning of this prater. "That thy way may be known" — "thy
saving health." 1. Ood's way is : (1) The revelation he has made of himself in his
dealings with mankind. In its widest sense this includes his universal providence
(Acts xiv. 17 ; Prov. viii. 22 ; Isa. Iv. 8, 9). (2) The revealed path of man's duty
(Ps. XXV. 9 ; Matt. xxii. 16). (3) The way of salvation ; of return, reconciliation,
access to God (Acts xviii. 26; John xiv. 6). 2. God's ".saving health" is salvation
(simply another translation of the same Hebrew word). Not simply "the way of sal-
vation " — the knowledge oF the gospel, and provision for our salvation ; but actual
experience of deliverance from sin, pardon, peace with God, strength for holiness.
Salvation, in the Scriptures, means both safety and health. lUust. : Matt. viii. 25 ; Luke
xviii. 42; vii. 50.

II. The scope of this prater. " On earth ; " " among all nations." St. Paul
says that the gospel was preached beforehand to Abraham, in the pnimise that in his
offspring all nations should be blessed. We are apt to take too narrow a view both of
the gospel and of salvation. We think and speak of " saving souls." That is the
beginning; for there is no reconciliation to God but by personal repentance, faith,
turning to God. But nations have their life ; their collective action, righteousness,
guilt, growth, decay, prosperity, ruin. Knowledge of God's truth, and obedience to
God's law, are the conditions of national welfare. We have a message to " all nations "
as well as to " every creature." We are to labour as well as pray, that God's will
may be " done on earth, as it is in heaven."



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Vers. 1 — 7. — This is a song of salvation. It teaches that —

I. Salvation is from God. Hence God's mercy is specially invoked. It is as
Ood causes his face to shine upon us in Christ Jesus (2 Cor, iv. 6) that his " way "
is made known, and his "salvation" enjoyed (vers. 1, 2).

II. Salvation is the highest blessing for man. When the high priest blessed
the people, he spoke for God (Numb. vi. 22—27). Salvation is "saving health."
Man is corrupt. There is no "soundness" in him. But God brings healing. Salva-
tion is to be restored to health in body and'Soul and spirit (1 Thess. v. 23).

III. Salvation is impaeteo through human agbnot. God works by means.
He uses man to help man. " The Law was given by Moses, but grace and truth came
by Jesus Christ" (John i. 17; cf. Rom. v. 12 — 15). When we believe on Christ, we
may say, with Simeon, " Mine eyes have seen thy salvation" (Like ii. 30). And
what Christ has won for us he would have us make known to others. All Christiana
are missionaries. " God does with us as we with torches do." Every lamp that is
lighted is lighted in order to shine. We are to receive and reflect the light (1 Thess. i.
€—8 ; Matt. v. 16).

I\'. Salvation is destined to spread among all nations. It was not limited
to Israel. There is no exclusiveness in the gospel. There is no brand of reprobation



42



THE BOOK OF PSALMS.



[PS. LXTIII. 1 35.



on any man's brow. The salvation of Christ is for all people — the Jew first, but als»
for all men. " The leaves of the tree are for the healing of the nations " (Rev. xxii. 2),
This we have seen in part, and greater fulfilments are near. Paul could say (Bom. xv.
19), " From Jerusalem, and round about unto lUyricum, I have fully preached the
gospel of Christ." But how great has been the advance since then I Nations that
Paul never knew have heard the joyful sound, and the most distant isles of the sea
have been blessed in Christ.

V. Salvation will ultimately fill the earth with jot and peace. Harvest
is the time of joy. The great harvest-home of the world is coming (Isa. ii. 2, 3 j
Zeph. iii. 9 ; Zeoh. xiv. 16).— W. F.

Ver. 4. — Universal joy. "Let the nations be glad."

I. God in the government of the world recognizes the existence of sbparatb
nations.

II. God in the government of the world adapts his methods to the neces-
sities OF nations. (Aroos ix. 7.)

III. God in the government of the world works throughout for the highest
good of nations. His object is to bring all men everywhere to serve him. He would
have them, through the power of Christ, be enlightened, sanctified, and blessed. It
is true of nations as of individuals, " The nation that will not serve him shall perish "
(Isa. Ix. 12). It is as nations forget God that they decline and fall. It is as nations-
become penetrated and ruled by Divine truth that they become truly free and strong
and prosperous. — W. F.

Vers. 1 — 7. — A missionary psalm. The psalmist prays " that the favour of Ood-
towards the chosen people may become visible, in order that, by its splendour, it may
lead the heathen to the hope of sharing in it." The salvation of the heathen is here
felt to depend upon the following conditions : —

I. The salvation of those who claim to be his Church. (Vers. 1, 2.) If it i»
God's " way " to save any, he must be able and willing to save all. And if his face-
shone upon them, his "saving health" would be made manifest to all peoples. This
is the force of the prayer here used.

II. The knowledge of God's righteous government of the would. (Ver, 4.)
1. Qod, as the experience of Israel shows, governs men upon righteous principles. The
psalm was most probably written after the Exile — a terrible part of their history, which
taught them how God punishes sin. 2. Ood is leading the world forward upon *
Divine course. (Yet. 4.) He " governs " or leads the nations as a shepherd leads his
flock. To this truth the Hebrews bore emphatic testimony.

HI. God's bounty to the earth is his bounty towards man. (Ver. 6.) "The
earth yields her increase ; God, our God, blesses us." But the harvest is only a single,
though a splendid, instance of God's goodness towards men ; he blesses them in a
thousand ways, which, when considered, are adapted deeply to impress the heathen
mind. — S.



EXPOSITION.



PSALM LXVIIL



This psalm is one of triumphant praise
and jubilation, the crown and gem of the
Second Book. Professor Cheyne calls it
" a patriotic and religious ode of wondrous
range and compass, and in the grandest
style." He also notes that it was a favourite
with the Huguenots, who called it "The
Song of Battles," and that it was chanted
by Savanarola and his brother monks as



they marched to the trial of fire in the
Piazza of Florence. While some critics'
assign it to the post-Captivity period
(Ewald, Cheyne), the greater number, and
the most acute (Bottioher, Hitzig, Heng-
stenberg, Kay, Dean Johnson, etc.) see in
it one of the earliest, as well as the most
beautiful, specimens of Hebrew poetry.
The ascription to David, which we find in
the " title," is by these critics accepted as
fully borne out by the contents. The-



P8. i,xvni. 1 — 35.]



THE BOOK OP PSALMS.



43



antique language, the impresBive descrip-
tions, the fresh powerful tone of the poetry,
the lyrio emotion which pervades the ode,
and ma1<es it live, are all worthy of the
" sweet psalmist of Israel," and of him
alone among known Hehrew composers
of hymns. Whether it can be probably
■•signed to any special period in David's
life is disputed, but Hengstenberg's sug-
gestion that it celebrated the final victory
in the Ammonitio war, and the capture of
Babbah (2 gam. xii. 26 — 31), seems to
deserve mention.

The psalm has been variously divided, but
may best be considered as consisting of five
portions: 1. An introduction (vers. 1 — 6),
in which Ood is praised on general grounds.
2. Praise of Ood for his doings at Sinai and
in the wilderness (vers. 7 — 10). 3. Praise
of Ood for the conquest of Canaan, and the
series of Tictories terminating in the full
establishment of David's rule (vers. 11 — 23).
4, Praise of God in connection with his
sanctuary (vers. 24 — 27). 5. Prophetic
announcement of future triumphs (vers.
28—35).

Yer. 1. — Let Ood arise, let his enemies be
scattered ; let them also that hate him flee
before him. Compare! the chant with which
the ark set forth in the wiMerness, " Eise
up, Lord, and let thine enemies be scattered ;
and let tliem that hate thee flee before thee "
(Kumb. z. 35). Buth utterances are ex-
pressions of cunfidence, that, whenever God
arises, his enemies will be scattered and
dispersed before him. Neither refers to any
one special occasion.

Ver. 2. — As smoke is driven away, so
driTe them away. As clouds of smoke are
dispersed and driven away by the wind,
and totally disappear, so let God, whenever
his enemied congregate, scatter and disperse
them, and reduce them to nothingness. As
wax melteth before the fire, so let the
wicked perish at the presence of Sod. As
smoke vanishes, so wax entirely melts away
and disappears before a hot fire (comp. Pss.
zxii. 14 ; xcvii. 5).

Ver. 3. — But let the righteons be glad ;
let them rejoice before Ood : yea, let them
exceedingly rejoice. When the wicked are
destroyed, the righteous receive relief, and
cannot but rejoice at God's goodness to them
(comp. Pss. lii. 6 ; Iviii. 10 ; Ixiv. 7 — 10, etc.).

Ver. 4. — Sing unto Ood, sing praises to
his Name (comp. Ps. Ixiv. 4): extol him
that rideth upon the heavens. This passage
is now generally translated. Cast up a
highway for him that ridelh through the



deserts (Hengstenberg, Kay, Dean Johnson,
Professor Cheyne, Revised Version). The
image is that of a king travelling through
a waste, for whom a way was made before-
hand (comp. Isa. xl. 3 ; xliz. 11). By his
name Jah ; rather, Jdh is his Name. " Jah "
— the shortened form of " Jehovah " — occurs
first in the Song of Moses (Exod. xv. 2). It
is repealed here in ver. IS, and recurs in
Isa. xsvi. 4. Dr. Kay suggests that " it
represents the concentration of God's redeem-
ing power and love." And rejoice before
him (comp. ver. 3).

Ver. 5. — A father of the fatherless, and a
jndge of the widows, is God. A defender,
('.e., of the oppressed and do^vntrodden
(comp. Isa. i. 17). In his holy habitation.
Thelieavenly and not the earthly dwelling-
place — wliether tabernacle or temple^
seems to be intended. God from his holy
seat in the highest heaven pours down his
grace and mercy, his defence and protection,
on all those who specially need his aid.

Ver. 6. — God setteth the solitary in
families ; or, in a home ; i.e. gives '■ solitary
ones" — outcasts, wanderers — a home to
dwell in. The reference is to the settlement
of the nomadic Israelites in Canaan. He
bringeth out those which are bound (see Ps.
cxlvi. 7, " The Lord looseth the prisoners ; "
and compare the many references to the
" bondage " of Israel in Egypt). The Exodus
is glanced at, but not exclusively. God
" brings men out " from the tyranny of
worldly oppressors, of ghostly enemies, and
of their own lusts and sins. With chains \
rather, into prosperity (Hengstenberg, Kay,
Cheyne, Revised Version). But the re-
bellious dwell in a dry land. Bebels against
God are not " brought out." Tbeyaie left
to dwell in the " dry laud " of their own
impenitence and self-will (comp. Namb. xiv.
29—35).

Vers. 7—10. — In the central portion of
the psalm, from ver. 7 to ver. 28, God is
praised for his doings in connection with the
history of Israel; and, first of all, in tlie
present passage, for his doings at Sinai and
in the wilderness.

Ver, 7. — God, when thou wentest forth
before thy people (see Exod. xiiL 20—22).
The pre.-ent verse and the next are an echo
of the Song of Deborah (Judg. v. 4, 5),
" Lord, when thou wentest ont of Seir, when
thou marchedot out of the field of Edom,
the earth trembled, and the heavens dropped,
the clouds also dropped water ; the moun-
tains melted from before the Lord, even that
Sinai from belore the Lord God of Israel."
When thou didst march through the wilder-
ness. The entire march from Etham to
Pisgah is in the poet's mind ; but he caa



44



THE BOOK OF PSALMS.



[P8. Lxvin. 1 — 35.



touch only certain features of it. And first,
the scene at Sinai.

Ver. 8. — The earth shook, the heavens
also dropped, at the presence of God (see
Exod. xix. 16-18 ; Deut. v. 22, 23). The
" dropping " of the heavens was the descent
of a thick thunder-eloud upon the mount,
which rested upon it, and spread around
a dense and weird darkness. Even Sinai
itself was moved at the presence of Ood;
literally, yonder Sinai, as if it were in sight,
and could be pointed at. The God of Israel.
Our God, who did all these great things
for us.

Yer. 9. — Then, God, didst send a
plentiful rain. Not a literal rain, but a
shower of blessings — manna, quails, water
out of the rock, protection against enemies,
victories, etc. Whereby thou didst confirm
(or, eetabliah) thine inheritance (see 2 Sam.
vii. 13). When it was weary. The wander-
ing in the wilderness must have been inex-
pressibly dull and wearisome, especially to
those who hnd left Egypt with tlje hope of
a quick marcli tliriiugh the waste, and a
speedy entrance into '■ a land flowing with
milk and honey" (Exod. iii. 17). The
" establiohiiient" in Palestine under Joshua
was a blessing that could not but be highly
valued after well-nigli a century of cruel
bondage in Egypt, and forty years of aim-
less wandering in the Sinaitic peninsula.

Ver. 10. — Thy congregation hath dwelt
therein ; thy troop, or thy host (see 2 Sam.
xxiii. 11, 13). The word used (n»n) is an
unusual one. Thou, God, hast prepared
of thy goodness for the poor; or, thou,
God, didst in thy goodness make preparation
for the poor. " The poor " are the Israelites,
biought low by their sufferings in Egypt
and the wilderness ; the preparations those
by which their conquest of Palestine was
facilitated (Exod. xxv. 28 ; Josh. xxiv. 12).

Vers. 1 1 — 23. — Prom God's mercies to his
people at Sinai and in the wilderness, the
paalmist goes on to consider those connected
with the conquest of Canaan, and the
establishment of David's widespread rule.
The passage is diCBcult and obscure, perhaps
from its embodying fragments of the earlier
Hebrew poetry. It is also full of curious
transitions, and of ellipses which make the
mianing doubtful.

Ver. 11. — The Lord gave the word. The
reader naturally asks — What word? Com-
mentators answer variously : " the watch-
word" (Cheyne); "promise of victory"
(Eay) ; " the word of command " (Dean
Johnson); "announcement of an actual
victory gained " (Hengstenberg). I should
lather understand a sort of creative word.



initiating the period of strife (comp. Shakes-
peare's " Cry havoek, and let slip the dogs
of war 1 "). Great was the company of those
that published it ; literally, grmt was the
oompany of the women thai heralded it. The
reference is to the female choirs which took
a prominent part in the war-songs of aijcient
days (see Exod. xv. 20, 21 ; Judg. v. 1 ; 1
Sam. xviii. 6, 7).

Ver. 12. — Kings of armies did flee apace ;
literally, did fie'— did flee; i.e. fled re-
peatedly before Israel (see Josh. viii. 19 —
22; X. 19, 20; xi. 8, 9; JuJg. iii. 10, 29;
iv. 14—16; vii. 19—25; viii. 11, 12 : xi. 29—
33; XV. 14—16; 1 Sam. vii. 10, 11; xi. 11;
xiv. 47, 48; xv. 7, 8; xvii. 52; 2 Sam. v.
17—25 ; viii. 1, 2, 4, 5, l.S ; x. H— 18, etc.).
And she that tarried at home divided the
spoil. The wives of the conquerors shared
in tlie spoil when it was brought liome (Judg.
V. 28—30).

Ver. 13.— Though ye have lien among the
pots ; rather. Will ye lie down among the sheep-
folds ? Will ye, O ye laggarts of Israel, like
tlie Eenbenites in the war against Sisera, in-
stead of going out to war with your brethren,
"abide among the sheepfolds, to hear the
bleatings of the flocks " (see Judg. v. 16) f
Yet shall ye be as the wings of a dove
covered with silver, and her leathers with
yellow gold. It is certainly wrong to supply,
"yet shall ye lie" before "as the wings of
a dove." There can be no prDmise of good
made to these laggarts. Probably the mean-
ing ia, "Will ye be," or "Will ye seek to
be as the wings of a dove, covered with
silver, and her feathers of yellow gold?" i.e.
Will ye aiiide in your prosperity and your
riches, decked in gorgeous apparel, re-
splendent with silver and gold, while your
brethren are bearing the brunt ot battle,
with all its ghastly sights and sounds, in
your and the land's defence ?

Ver. 14. — ^When the Almighty scattered
kings in it ; i.e. " in the land " (comp. ver.
10). Most of the defeats of kings, referred
to above (see the comment on ver. 12), took
place within the limits of Palestine. It was
white as snow in Salmon. The present text
has only the two words which mean, "it
snows on Salmon ; " whence it is concluded
that sometliing must have fallen out. Pro-
fessor Cheyne supplies :Wri iD^, " like snow,"
and understands the passage to mean that,
when the kings were scattered, "it was like
snow when it snows on Salmon" — the
ground was all covered with glistering arms,
armour, and garments. Salmon was a
wooded hill near Shechem (Judg. ix. 48).

Ver. 15. — The hill of God is as the hill of
Bashan; rather, a mountain of God is the
mountain of Bashan. A sudden transition,
and perhaps a quotation from an ancient
poem. The soecial object of the psalmist's



PS. Lxvm. I — 35.]



THE BOOK OF PSALMS.



45



thought is not Bashan, but Mount Zion;
and what he is about to celebrate iB Jehovah's
choice of Mount Zion for his dwelling-place,
and his establishment on it. But he prefers
to introduce tlie subject by a contrast with
the great range of Canaan. Bashan, lie
says, is truly " a mountain of God " — i.e. a
very great mountain (see the comment on
Ps. xxxvi. 6)— "one which seemed in an
especial degree to show forth creative power."
It is also an high hill ; or rather, a mountain
of peaks, containing numerous pointed sum-
mits. Yet Ood did not choose one of these
for his habitation.

Ver. 16. — Why leap ye, ye high hills ?
ratlier, Why look ye askance, ye mountains of
ipeaksl In jealousy at not being chosen.
This is the lull which God desireth to dwell
in; rather, on the mountain which God
desireth to dwell in — a continuation of the
preceding sentence. The mountain intended
is, of course. Mount Zion, a comparatively
low elevation. Yea, the Lord will dwell in
it for ever ; i.e. make it his permanent, not
merely liis temporary, habitation, like Sinai.

Ver. 17. — The chariots of God are twenty
thousand, even thousands of angels. Ano ther
abrupt transition. The psalmist sees God
move from Sinai, -where he had represented
him as present in ver. 8, into the sanctuary
of Mount Zion. He is, of course, accom-
panied by his angelic host. This is described
as a bust of chariots (comp. 2 Kings vi. 17) —
twenty thousand in number, and " thousands
of repetition " — or thousands multiplied by
thousands, as Hengstenberg understands
the phrase (comp. Dan. vii. 1 0). The Lord
(Jehovah) is among them ; or, " in their mid St."
As in Sinai, in the holy place ; rather,
Sinai is in the sanctuary. The glories of
Sinai are, as it were, transferred thither.

Yer. 18. — Thon hast ascended on high ; i.e.
ascended into the sanctuary. Mount Zion —
gone up with the ark when it was trans-
ferred thither (see 2 Sam. vi. 12—19;
1 Chron. xv. 11 — 28). Thon hast led captivity
captive ; i.e. thon hast made many cap-
tives — or enabled us to take many prisoners.
Thou hast received gifts for men; rather,
among men. Tribute from Israel's enemies
is probably intended (see 2 Sam. viii. 2;
comp. 1 Kings iv. 21). Yea, for the rebellious
also ; literally, yea, rebels also; i.e. enemies,
that when reduced have rebelled, and then
submitted to pay tribute a second time.
That the Lord God (Jah Eloldm) might
dwill among them; "That God, after the
nations had been subJued »nd submitted
themselves, might re^t quietly thenceforth
in Zion."

Ver. 19. — Blessed be the Lord, who daily
loadeth us with benefits, even the God of
our salvation; rather, blessed he the Lord
day bg day; he will bear (our burden) for
lu, (he is) tlie God of our salvation.



Ver. 20. — He that is our God is the God
of salvation; rather, Ood is to us a Ood
of saving deeds (Kay), or of deliverawes
(Revised Version) ; i.e. not of salvation only
in the abstract (ver. 19), but of deeds by
which we are saved. And unto God the
Lord belong the issues from death. It is
through God only that, when death threatens,
men escape it.

Ver. 21. — But God shall wound the head
of his enemies; or, "yet surely God will
smite," etc. Though he gives escape frnin
death, yet he will not do so always. On
the contrary, lie will assuredly smite and
destroy his enemies, wounding them where
a wound is fatal. And the hairy scalp of
such a one as goeth on still in his tres-
passes. "The liairy scalp," says Dr. Kay,
" points almost certainly to Absalom."
Others take it as merely indicating the
young and strong.

Ver. 22.— The Lord said, I wiU bring
again from Bashan, I will bring my people
again from the depths of the sea. Our
tran Jators' interpolation of the words, " my
people," is unhappy. The jisalmist means
to represent God as threatening Ids enemies,
not as encouraging his faithful ones. Though
his enemies (ver. 21) fly to Bashan and
bury themselves in its woods, or though
they even hide themselves in the depths
of the sea, he will search them out, and
" bring them back," that vengeance may be
taken on them (see ver. 23).

Ver. 23. — That thy foot may be dipped in
the blood of thine enemies; i.t. "I will
bring them back for thee, my people, to
dip your feet in their blood." 'The same
metaphor is used in Isa, Ixiii. 1 — 3; but it
is God himself who, in that passage, liaa
his feet reddened in his enemies' blood.
And the tongue of thy dogs in the same.
The Authorized Version has omitted one
word of the original here. Translate, And
that the tongue of thy dogs may have its
portion from the sitme (comp. 2 Kings ix.
35 ; Jer. xv. 3).

Vers. 24 — 27. — Again we find a transi-
tion. The conquest of Canaan is complete
— God is gone up into his sanctuary. The
nations are led captive or put to tribute.
Rebels are crushed; the last remnants of
them sought out, brought back, and de-
livered into the hands of Israel. Now we
have a description of God's " goings in the
sanctuary " (ver. 24). Some critics suppose
a particular occasion to be pointed at ; but
the expression "goings" rather indicates
something habitual, or, at any rate, re-
curring. God is from time to time glorified
in his sanctuary by ceremonies which the
poet describes.



46



THE BOOK OF PSALMi



[ps. Lxvin. 1 — 35.



Ver. 24. — They have seen thy goings,
God; i.e. men have seen — friends and foes
alike — even the goings of my God, my
King, in the sanotnary. God is at once
both Israel's God and Israel's King. Tlie
monarchy has not wholly destroyed the
theocracy.

Ver. 25. — The singers went before, the
players oninstrnments followed after (comp.
2 Sam. vi. 15 ; 1 Oliron. xv. 16—28). In
Assyrian musical processions tlie players on
instruments precede the singers {'Ancient
Monarchies,' Tol. i. p. 512). Among them
were the damsels playing with timbrels;
rather, in the midst of the damsels, etc. The
damsels are represented, not as intermixed
witli the (male) singers and players on in-
struments, but as encircling them. (On the
use of" timbrels " (tambourines) by Israelite
maidens, see Exod. xy. 20 ; Judg. xi. 34.)

Ver. 26. — Bless ye God in the congrega-
tions, even the Lord, from the fountain of
Israel. This is probably the refrain of the
hymn sung (comp. Exod. xv. 21 ; 2 Cliron.
V. 13 J Ezra iii. 11). By "the fountain of
Israel " is no doubt meant the sanctuary on
Mount Zion — ^"the ever-living fountain of
praise " (Kay).

Ver, 27. — There is little Benjamin with
their ruler. " With " is wrongly supplied
by our translators. "Little Benjamin" —
the " smallest of the tribes of Israel " (1 Sam.
ix. 21) — is called " their ruler," as having
furnished the first king, and the one who
began the conquests celebrated in vers. 11
— 23. If the psalm is to be accounted as
David's, we may note it as a graceful act on
his part that he places Saul's tribe first.
The princes of Jndah and their oouncU.
Again " and " is wrongly supplied. "Tho
princes of Judah " are called " their coun-
cil," or " their bulwark " (Kay), as holding
the most important position in Israel at the
time. The reading, however, is doubtful.
The princes of Zsbulun, and the princes of
Naphtali. Four tribes only are mentioned,
not because no more than four took part in
the processions, but as representatives of
the whole number. The tjibes selected for
mention are from the two ends of the land
— the extreme south and the extreme north.
Zebulun and Naphtali were the most im-
portant of the northern tribes (see Judg.
iv. 6, 10 ; V. 18), as Judah and Benjamin
were of the southern ones.

Vers. 28 — 35. — The psalmist now turns
to the future. First, he prays that God
will complete the work which he has begun
by continually strengthening Israel (ver. 28).
Then he rises to prophecy. Kings and
princes shall bring presents to Zion ; empires
shall prostrate themselves; Egypt and



Ethiopia shall hasten to bow down ; all the
kingdoms of the earth shall ultimately '* sing
praises unto the Lord." Israel and the God
of Israel wUl thus be glorified exceedingly.

Ver. 28. — Thy God hath commanded (or,
ordained) thy strength. It is fixed in the
Divine counsels that Israel shall be strong.
This was determined long ago, and is in
course of accomplishment. But more is
needed. The psalmist therefore prays,
Strengthen, God, that which thou hast
wrought for ns. Complete thy work;
" strengthen the weak hands, and confirm
the feeble knees ; " weaken also and bring
down our enemies (ver. 30).

Ver. 29. — Because of thy temple at Jera-
salem shall kings bring presents unto thee.
So Ewald, Kay, and tue Revised Version,
though critics generally doubt whether mt»
can have this meaning. If min has its
usual sense of " from," we must regard the
kings as having entered the temple courts,
and/rom thence stretching out their hands,
and offering their gifts, to God, who is in
the holy of holies. (On the offering of gifts
by heathen kings, see Isa. xliz. 23 ; Ix. 16 ;
and comp. Fs. Ixxii. 10.)

Ver. 30. — Eebuke the company of spear-
men; rather, the wild beast of the reeds;
i.e. the crocodile or the hippopotamus, either
of which may well symbolize the empire of
Egypt, the mightiest of the lieathen powen
in David's time. The multitude of the
bulls represents other heathen powers,
Assyria perhaps especially, which had the
human-headed and winged bull for its prin-
cipal emblem. With the calves of the
people ; rather, of peoples — an obscure
phrase, perhaps meaning inferior powers.
Till every one submit himself with pieces
of silver ; literally, (each) submitting himsdf
to thee with pieces of silver- This is given
as the result of the rebukes. When the
various earth-powers have been " rebuked "
or chastised by God, then they will submit
to bring gifts, or pay tribute, to Israel (comp.
ver. 18). Scatter thou the people that
delight in war. This is exegetioal of the
first clause — rebuke these various world-
powers that delight in war by " scattering "
them, or putting them to flight before their
enemies.

Ver. 31. — Princes shall come out of Egypt.
Then shall princely ambassadors come to
Zion out of Egypt, and make submission
(comp. Isa. xliii. 3; xlv. 14). Ethiopia shall
soon stretch out her hands unto God. The
Ptolemies, in their wars with Syria, often
sought the favour of the Jews. Ohristian
Churches at an early date were established
both in Egypt and in Abyssinia, and some
of the most promising mission fields to-day
are in Africa.



P6. LXVIII. 1 — 35.]



THE BOOK OF PSALMS.



47



Tei. 32. — Sing unto Ood, ye kingdoms of
the earth; sing praises unto the Lord.
All the world-powers having submitted to
the Church, all the kingdoms of the earth
can be called upon to join in the praise of
God.

Ver. 33. — To him that rideth upon the
heavens of heavens (comp. ver. 4; and for
the expression "heavens of heavens," see
Deut. X. 14 ; 1 Kings viii. 27). Which were
■of old. la which God dwelt from all eternity
— long before he created the " heavens " of
Gen. i. 1. Lo, he doth send oat his voice,
and that a mighty voice. A voice that
is beard and obeyed in every part of
creation.

Ter. 34. — ^Ascribe ye strength unto Ood;



or, "might," "power"' — that whioh makes
him Shaddai, " the Almighty." His excel-
lency is over Israel ; or, " his majesty "
(Kay). And his stiength id in the clouds.
Not in earth only, but in heaven also.

Ver. 35. — God, thou art terrible out of
thy holy places. "Terrible," i.e., in the
things that thou accomplishest out of thy
holy places," as Sinai, Zion, heaven. (On
the " terribleness " of (jod, see Deut. vii. 21;
X. 17 ; Job xxxvii. 22 ; Pss. xlvii. 2 ; Ixvi.
3, 5; Jer. xx. 11; Zeph. ii. 11; Neh. i 5;
iv. 14; vi. 32; Heb. xii. 29.) The Sod of
Israel is he that giveth strength and power
unto his people (comp. ver. 28). Blessed be
God. A worttiy ending to this glorious
hymn of praise.



HOMILETIOS.

Vers. 3, 4. — Joy in God. " Let the righteous be glad," etc. The Bible, like human
life, has its dark as well as bright side. Rather say, shows human life thus double-
sided — half in light of happiness, knowledge, goodness ; half in night of weeping. And
as the earth in her path round the sun makes her own night, rolling into her own
shadow ; so the darkness of life results from man's turning away from Q-od, the source
of light, life, joy. No depths of sorrow so dark as those the Bible reveals. No heights of
joy so bright. Almost the first page records the incoming of sin and death. Almost
the last page, the forecast of doom. But before the record of sin, the declaration that
man was created in God's image ; and that all which Grod had made was good. After
prophecy of judgments, the promise of new heavens and earth — the unclouded glory
of the heavenly city. The text, in harmony with large part of Psalter, brings Irafore
us the bright side of life — joy in Ood.

I. Grounds op this jot. 1. Deepest and highest of all reasons for joy in God —
his character : righteousness, truth, mercy, or (as same word beautifully translated)
loving-kindness ; eternal opposition to evil, and delight in good. All this is summed
up in two words : " holiness," " love." These do not divide God's character ; each
describes the whole. In regard to his own perfection — pattern and fountain of all
goodness — Ood is holy. In regard to his creatures, Ood is love. Peculiar inalienable
glory of Bible — it lays this moral spiritual basis for religion. Worship, which regards
the infinite greatness and glory of the Creator ; obedience (" the fear of God "), which
regards his authority and power as Lord of all ; — these are everywhere inseparably joined
■with, faith (trust), which goodness alone can command or warrant. The more we disinte'
the relics of ancient religions (inscriptions, sacred books, etc.), the more evident how
widely the knowledge of the true God was once diffused; how gradually the darkness
swallowed up the light (Eom. i. 1). We meet with wonderful and beautiful settings-
forth of Divine glory. Yet the contrast with religious teaching of Bible only grows
more marked. One reason — nowhere else do we find a practical revelation, even the
very notion or pretence, of Ood^s character by continuous course of dealings and
messages, parallel with human history. Nowhere else any hint, much less full unfold-
ing, ot a Divine message to the whole human race, " God so loved the world ; " to
«very individual, "Be ye reconciled to God." 2. Second ground of joy — ow personal
relation to Ood. New Testament full of this, " Children of God " (Gal. iii. 26 ;
1 John iii. 1). Modern heresy of substituting what is called " the universal Father-
hood of God" for message of gospel, substitutes a general for a personal relation.
Throws back religion into Genesis. Each Hebrew, under Law of Moses, was brought
into personal relation to God : (1) by the covenant at Sinai, to which " his Name Jah"
■(equivalent to " Jehovah ") referred ; (2) by sacrifices, which had direct reference to
his own sins. Conversion to God cannot be more truly described than as coming
consciously, joyfully, trustfully, though penitently, into personal relation with God,
in and through Christ. The vital question for every one is, " On what footing am I



46 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. umn. 1— 35.

with the Father of spirits ? " Is it possible — not even on speaking terms f Or, if no<
so bad as that, yet so that you cannot, dare not, say, " My God ; my Father " ? Then
you cannot rejoice in God. 3. Third reason for joy in God — his unchangeahleness.
This is what gives value to all past revelations ; truataorthiness to promises ; security
for the future; for eternity. 4. Fourth reason — the assured triumph of right over
wrong ; good over evil, because God reigns. A severe side to this. Perfect goodness
cannot but have its severe side, in world swarming with injustice, cruelty, falsehood,
lust. Powerful tendency of present day to ignore this; look only on soft side of
goodness. But perfect love must include perfect hatred of all that debases and ruins
human life. Illust. : Father sees child maimed or blinded, through carelessness or
cruelty; Chi istian meekness represses desire of vengeance; but not to feel riKhteous
anger would be mon.'itrous insensibility. And welfare of society may demand exem-
plary punishment. God's character assures us that he has " no pleasure in the death
of a sinner ; " but equally, that " the wages of sin is death."

II. Influence of this jot in God. Suppose the agnostic right; revelation an
illusion; faith a blind conjecture flung out into void of ignorance. Even so, it would
remain true that the believer has spring of unselfish motive, inspiration of pure, lofty
aim, fount of comfort and joy, the world canuot give or take away. But " we have not
followed . . . fables." If deprived of this wonder.''ul Book of Psalms, of whole story
of God's dealings and messages down to nineteen hundred years ago, this would not
alter glory or certainty of fact that " Ood was in Christ reconciling the world to
himselr."

Ver. 9. — " A plentiful rain." Closely rendered, " A rain of free bounty didst thou
shed forth, God ! Thine inheritance, when weary, thou stiengthenedst it." In the
poetic Hebrew phrase, the land suffering from drought is said to be " weary ; " as if
exhausted and thirsting for the rain. If the reference here (as commonly supposed)
be to the manna and other blessings, even including spiritual blessings, bestowed by
God on Israel ; yet the image is drawn from nature. Nothing is more delightful to
every sense than an abundant rain after scorching drought. None of God's works is
more full of usefulness, beauty, or spiritual symbolism than the rain. Take some of
its lessons.

I. The kiches of God's bounty. As its uncounted millions of drops fall from the
sky, they vividly remind us that " every good gift is from above." All life, of man and
lower creatures, hangs on those tiny drops. In wells, springs, storage reservoirs, they
furnish the life-giving diaught; which lacking, intolerable torments of thirst would
presently end in death. At the roots of grass, corn, trees, plants of divers kinds, they
are food for man and beast ; and not food only, but clothing, habitation, fuel, inex-
haustible material of industry. Gathered in streams and rivers, or vanishing again in
steam, they are motive power, slaves of traffic, builders of homesteads and of citisa.
Truly does another psalm say, " Thou greatly enrichest it." Our wealth and luxury,
as well as food and drink, descend in the " plentiful rain."

II. The gentleness of Divine powee. The silent softness with which the rain-
drops fall conceals the tremendous strength stored up in them. Now and then
waterspouts, floods, hailstorms, show how easily the rain may become the minister of
ruin and death, instead of nourishment and growth. God's gentleness makes us great.
A drop of rain from a mile high will not hurt a child's hand. An ounce of ice from
the same height would kill a giant.

III. God's fab-woeking poweb and all-bmbeaoinq wisdom. The provision for
rain — ^in the seas and oceans covering so large a proportion of our globe ; in the heat
which raises the vapour, the winds which bear the clouds, the forces by which the
rain-drops are formed and fall — presents a network of contrivance encompassing the
whole globe ; one of the most wonderful and beautiful examples of creative design.
No wonder the referisnces in the Bible are so numerous : St. Paul, to the idolaters of
Lystra (Acts xiv. 17) ; Amos (v. 8) ; Jeremiah (xiv. 22) ; our Saviour (Matt. v. 45).
The general laws according to which this prime necessary of life is supplied are sin i pie
and uniform, and there are regions in which they work with monotonous regulariiy;
but in th« countries chosen for the principal education of the human race there is a
wide margin of mystery and apparent irregularity, which seems specially intended



PSf Lxviii. 1— 35.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 49

to give scope for the discipline of providence and for prayer (Amos iv. 7, 8 ; Jas. v.
17, 18).

IV. The rain is the imaob of spisiTnAi, blbssinos, ESPBoiAriiiT of Diviue
TRUTH AND OF THE HoLT SpiBiT. (Isa. Iv. 10, 11 ; xUv. 3, 4 ; Ezek. xxxvi. 25, 26.;
And as the rain falls in vain on the sea and on the sandy waste, so the truth and
grace of God are offered in vain to thankless, unbelieving hearts (Heb. vi, 7, 8 ;
2 Cor. vL 1).



HOMILTES BY VARIOUS AUTHOBS.

Vers. 1 — 35. — The ark and Christ. It is said tiiat " the testimony of [or, ' con-
cerning '] Jesus is the spirit of prophecy " (Rev. xix. 10). This is specially true of this
psalm. It might be called a song of the ark. As Moses spake of the setting forward
and resting of the ark (Numb. x. 35, 36), so the psalmist sings of the glorious march
of Messiah at the head of his Church — onward from victory to victory — to the final
rest. We may bring out much of its spiritual significance by marking some points of
resemblance between the ark and Christ.

L The Law or God was placed within the ark. The Law was the " testimony ''
to God's character and will, and the foundation of his "covenant " with IsraeL That
this might be kept in perpetual remembrance, the Law was put in the ark as the mosit
sacred place (Deut. x. 1—5). Therefore the ark was called " the ark of the testimony "
and " the ark of the covenant " (Exod. xvi. 34 ; Deut. xxxi. 26 ; Heb. ix. 4). The ark
was thus a figure of him that was to come, of whom it was written, "Thy Law is
within my heart" (Ps. xl. 8; cf. Isa. xliL 21; Matt. v. 17; John iv. 34; ivii. 4;
Rom. X. 4 ; Rev. xi. 19).

II. The abk was bet in the forefront of Israel in all theib ooinos. It
was always at the head. When it moved, Israel moved. When it rested, Israel rested.
In the wilderness, at the passage of the Jordan, and on during the conquest of Canaan,
the ark always went before, as showing that they were under the guidance of God, and
that in all their doings they must have regard to the will of God. The Law within
the ark was to be the Law of Israel (ver. 7 ; Numb. x. 33 ; Josh. iii. 3). So it is with
Christ, as saith Isaiah, " Behold, I have given him for a Leader and Commander to the
people " (Isa. Iv. 4). We see this beautifully illustrated in our Lord's earthly life.
He was the good Shepherd, of whom it is said, " He calleth his own sheep by name,
and leadeth them out; " "He goeth before them, and they follow him" (John x. 3, 4).
The word of the Lord to his disciples is always, " Follow me." What was said of the
twelve is true of all others. " They were in the way going up to Jerusalem, and Jesus
went before them" (Mark x. 32).

III. The abk was the mebting-plaoe between God and his people. (Cf.
Exod. XXV. 22, " There I will meet with thee, and I will commune with thee from
above the mercy-seat, from between the two cherubims which are upon the ark of the
testimony.") What was here in shadow we have now in substance. Christ is the
meeting-place between God and man (2 Cor. v. 19). " Through him we have access
unto God the Father " (Eph. ii. 18). He is Immanuel, God with us (Matt. i. 23 ;
1 John i. 3 ; Heb. iv. 16).

IV. The abk was associated with the great events in the histobt of
IsBAEL. Some of these are recorded in this psalm. So Christ has been with his
people from the beginning. Their life, their conquests, their achievements, have all
Ijeen through him. And he promises to be with them to the end (Matt, xxviii. 20).

V. The abk was enthroned with the highest honours in the house of God.
There had been many trials and conflicts, but at last there was victory. The ark was
carried in triumph to Jerusalem, and set in glory on Mount Zion. Afterwards it was
removed, and placed in the most holy place in the temple on Mount Moriah (vers. 18
— 31). All this may be said to have been typical of the sufferings of Christ and the
glory that should follow, wheu he was received into heaven, and seated in glory on the
right hand of God (Ps. xxiv. ; Bph. iv. 11 ; Heb. ii. 9, 10 ; x. 12, 13). But there
are certain differences. The ark was carried by human hands, but Christ conquered and
ascended in his own strength (Heb. ix. 11). The ark was set in an earthly tabernacle,

PSALMS — II. ■



50 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. lxviii. 1— 3&

but Christ " is set on the right hand of the throne of the majesty in the heavens "
(Heb. viii. 1, 9, 24). The ark was but a temporary thing, a symbol that served its
purpose and has long since passed away. Christ is " the same yesterday, to-day, and for
ever." The Gospels set forth his glory ; we see his royal progress in the Acts of the
Apostles; and the Revelation of St. John bears witness to his continued triumphs, till
the end come, when he shall be bailed by Jew and Gentile as " the King of kings and
Lord of lords."— W. P.

Vers. 5, 6. — Comfort for the desolate. 1. Eabthlt obossbs. What significance in the
terms "fatherless" and "widows"! They tell of death, of war and pestilence aiid
famine, of desolated homes and broken hearts and innumerable sorrows. Then in " the
solitary," all the ills of life seem gathered up.

IL Heavenly comfobtb. It is a great comfort to believe that there is a God who
made the world, and cares for the world that he has made. But there is much more
here. God is represented as not only great, but kind ; not only as mighty, but
merciful ; not only as ruling over all his works in righteousness, but as making the weak
and the sorrowful his special care. There are three great comforts here. 1. OocCa
Fatherhood. (Jer. xlix. 11.) 2. The brotherhood of man. 3. llie blessedness o/ home.
" God setteth the solitary in families." This is in part fulfilled here. Perhaps " the
solitary," like Moses in the desert, finds a home. Instead of wandering alone, he is
blessed with a wife and children, and the sweet joys of family life. Again, " the
solitary " may have friends raised up to him. In the Church and in society he finds
true companionships and healthy occupation, and walks no more with aimless feet.
Or it may be that God works such a change in his heart that he rises superior to
circumstances. There are "spiritual presences" with him. Though alone, he is yet
not alone, because God is with him (Acts viii. 39 ; 2 Tim. iv. 17). But the highest
fulfilment is to come. Heaven is the eternal home. There is no " solitary " there.
It is the house of God, of many mansions, of happy families, and of endless fellow-
ships and joys. While the text shows the Divine origin and the manifold blessings of
" the family," it hints also at its immortality. It has withstood the greatest shocks of
time, and it may, in some higher way, survive in the eternal world (Prov. xii. 7; c£
E|>h. iii. 15, Revised Version). — W. F.

Ver. 9. — These words may be taken as symbolizing OocTs love-gifts to his people.
What he did to Israel in the wilderness, he will do to his Church to the end of the
world. He is the great Sender, the Giver of every good and perfect gift, and ever-
more the thought of his love awakens gratitude and praise. His gifts are charac-
terized by —

I. Sweetness. They are sweet in themselves as the " rain," but they are sweeter
still as sent from God. They have the impress of his hand. They are the tokens of
his love (Acts xiv. 17 ; Deut. xxxii. 2).

II. Copiousness. Eain may be slight, partial, or temporary. Here it is " plentiful."
It is like that which came on Carmel at the prophet's call — " abundance of rain "
(1 Kings xviii. 41). It is a " rain of gifts " — large, generous, widespread, meeting the
needs of all, reaching to the furthest part of the dry and parched land.

III. Timeliness. God does nothing in an arbitrary way. It is when his people
are " weary " that he visits them with " times of refreshing." They are " weary "
from toil, or conflict, or suffering, or long and anxious waiting ; and their hearts are
like the "parched ground" crying for "rain." God hears. When "rain "is most
needed it is best appreciated. God promises " to pour water on the thirsty "
(Isa. xliv. 3).

IV. Refbbshmbnt. "Confirm." This implies renewal of strength, invigoration of
faith and hope and love. As the " rain " quickens and calls forth the life iu the earth,
so that the grass flourisheth and the corn ripens, so it is with God's people when he
visits them with the outpouring of the Spirit. It is as if Pentecost were come again.
Let us pray and wait. Let us turn new vigour to right use.

" As torrents in summer, half dried in their channels,
Suddenly rise though the sky is still clouilless,
For rain has been falling far oti' at their fountains ;



P8. Lxvin. 1—35.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 61



So hearts that are fainting grow full to o'erflowing,

And they that behold it marvel and know not

That Gh)d at their fountains far off has been raining."

(Longfellow.)

W. F.
Ver. 18. — Consider the Ascension in three aspects.

I. As A FACT. "Thou hast ascended." What was shown in figure is now fulfilled
What was a faith is now a fact (Acts i. 2 — 9; Bph. iv. 7). While there is much thai
is strange, there is nothing that is incredible. The marrellous thing was not ChristV
ascent, but his descent. Believe in the Incarnation,^and all beside, down to the glorious
ascent from Olivet, becomes not only credible, but natural.

II. Ab a poweb. Christ ascended as a conqueror. His entrance into heaven was a
triumph. His power is seen not only in victory over his enemies, but in blessings to
his friends. Power over matter is great, but power over mind is greater. Christ's
power is moral and beneficent. The work he did on earth was the earnest of the work
he carries on in heaven. His " gifts " are not only kingly, but they are bestowed in the
most kingly manner. " The rebellious " are not excluded. There is mercy for the
greatest sinner, as there is grace to the uttermost for all the saints. Christ's " gifts "
are not only precious, but permanent. As long as there is need on earth there will be
supply from heaven (Heb. iv. 14 — 16).

m. As A PBOFEEOT. Christ was the first, but not the last, to ascend. He has
" opened the kingdom of heaven to all believers." His ascent is the pledge of his people's
ascent. " Where should the living members be but with their living Head ? " His
ascent is the sure prophecy of his second coming, and of the everlasting glory of his
kingdom (Acts i. 11 ; Col. iii. 4 ; Heb. ix. 28). " In his blessed life we see the
path, and in his death the price, and in his great ascent the proof supreme of
iiumortality." — W. F.

Ver. 19. — Oo(Pb gentknesi. " Blessed be the Lord, who daily beareth onr burden "
(Revised Version).

I. Here is a sweet piotube of God. It is sometimes Miid that the God of the
Old Testament is a God stem and implacable, more tu be fearc'l than to be loved. This
is to err. The picture here is very difi'erent. It is tender and winning. We see the
Lord here stooping down in love, to help the weak, to relieve the weary, to bring
deliverance to the oppressed. This is in accordance with his character. Thus he has
dealt with his people, with Abraham and Isaac and Jacob, and countless others, in
the time of their need. The thought of what God is and has done excites endless
gratitude. Daily inercy calls forth daily praise. " Blessed be the Lord."

II. Hebe is h. bright fobeqlbam of the globt of Chbist. It may be said that we
have the gospel preached here in a figure. Take this word as a test, and Christ's life
is the comment. See how he came down to us. See how he bore the burden of our
sins and weaknesses. See how gently he dealt with his first disciples, and so gave
token of the way he would deal with his disciples to the end of the world. His love
never faileth. From day to day, with unwearied patience and mercy, he bears our
burden. Hear his voice ringing sweetly through the ages, " Come unto me, all ye that
labour and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest." What Christ does for us we
should endeavour to do, so far as lieth in us, for others. We should help one another
(Gal. vi. 1, 2).

III. Herb is a beautiful bbpbesbntation of the Christian life. What we
cannot do for ourselves, Christ will do for ns. We are not alone, Christ is with us.
We are not called tu face the trials and to bear the burdens of life in our own strength ;
Christ is our Burden-bearer. Our sins, which would have crushed us down to hell, he
has already borne, and the lesser burdens, also too heavy for us, he will bear lor us.
He may not take them off us, but if not, he will enable us to carry them. He will
make his grace sufficient for us. Every day brings to us its burden, and every day
we need anew the help of Christ. Though we can do nothing without him, we can do
all things through his strength. Thus our path is onward. We go from strength to
strength. Nearer and nearer comes the time when we shall lay our burdens down for
ever, and enter into the rest of God. — W. F.



52



THE BOOK OP PSALMS.



[ps. liXix. 1 — 36.



Vers. 1 — 6. — The subject of this grand hymn is the entry of God into his sanctvmry
on Zion. " These introductory verses contain the praise of God as the Almighty
Destroyer of the wicked and the Deliverer of the just, and the exhortation to praise him
as the Helper of all the miserable."

I. QOU SOMETIMES SEEMS TO BIT INACTIVE, AND NOT TO INTEBFEBB WITH HUMAN

AFFAiBS. At such times wicked men and wicked nations seem to triun^ph over
righteous men and righteous nations, and good men are filled with doubting and despon-
dent thoughts. Hence they pray, " Let God arise, and let his enemies be scattered."

IL But theee abb times when God shows how weak is the stbonoest when
AEBAYBD AGAINST HIM. The wicked then flee before his face as smoke is driven
before the wind, or as wax melts before the fire. Then good men are filled with
rejoicing, and are confirmed in their highest thoughts of God. National revolutions
and national growths are full of God's activity.

in. When God aeisbs to wobk ant geeat change, we hate to fbefabe the
WAY FOE HIS COMING. (Ver. 4.) "Oast up a highway for him who rideth through
the deserts," alluding to the custom of Eastern monarohs, who sent pioneers to prepare
the route which they intended to follow; not "extol him that rideth upon the
heavens." Here the preparation is evidently the joyful expectation of his coming to
go before his people, and of the mighty deeds which he will work. By faith and joy-
ful work we prepare God's way ; and he goes before us to prepare our way. Both
ideas here.

17. God is to be peaised not only foe his geeat victobies, but foe his
COMPASSION TO THE MiSKEABLB. (Vers. 4, 6.) He helps those most to be pitied, while
the great earthly potentates respect only the rich and the noble. 1. He helps and
annforti the imdow tmd the faiherkst. 2. -He gives homes to the outcast and hometeas.
S. Be gives liberty to the captive. Only the rebellious abide in a land of drought. — S.



EXPOSITION.



PSALM LXIX.



This is the cry of one suffering severely
from men, partly on account of his own sins
(ver. 5), but mainly for the sake of God
(vers. 7 — ^9). It is said to be " written in
tlie style of Jeremiah " (Cljeyne) ; but the
resemblance to several Davidical psalms,
especially Pas. xxii., xxxv., and xl., is
admitted; and the expression, "Al Sho-
shannim," in the "title," oonueots it also
witli Ps. xlv. Moreover, the "title" dis-
tinctly assigns it to David, as does St. Paul
(Bom. xi. 9); and there are no arguments
of any weight to set against these testi-
monies. As for the time in David's life to
which it belongs, there is no very distinct
evidence ; but Dr. Kay's conjecture, that it
was written at the time of Adonijah's rebel-
lion, is not improbable.

The psalm divides into five unequal por-
tions, consisting respectively of four, eight,
nine, eight, and seven verses.

Vers. 1 — 4 contain a pathetic complaint,
expressed first in figurative language (vers.
1—3), but (in ver. 4) plainly connected with
the wicked designs of human enemies.



Ver. 1. — Save me, Ood ; for the wateri
are come in unto my sonL This is a com-
mon, perhaps, we may say, a proverbial,
expression for any great distress (oomp.
Pss. xviiL 4 ; xlii. 7 ; Ixxxviii. 7, 17 ; and
Job xxii. 11 ; xxvii. 20).

Ver. 2. — I sink in deep mire, where there
is no standing. "Mire" and "clay" are
metaphors for dangers and difficulties, which
entangle a man and incapacitate him from
exertion (comp. Ps. xl. 2). I am come into
deep waters (comp. ver. 15; and see also
Pss. oxxiv. 4, 5 ; cxxx. 1). Where the floods
overflow me ; ie. " I am utterly overwhelmed
by my misfortunes."

Ver. 3. — I am weary of my crying ; i.e.
" I have cried to God for aid, until I am
weary of so doing." No reply comes, no add
is given. My throat is dried. Parched-
unable to cry out any more. Mine eyes fail
while I wait for my God (oomp. Ps. cxix.
82; Deut. xxviii. 32). "I have waited and
looked for God, till I can look no more."

Ver. 4. — They that hate me without a
oause are more than the hairs of mine head
(comp. Ps xxxv. 14; and for the simile,
oomp. Ps. xl. 12; botii of them Davidical
compositions). They that would destroy me,
being mine enemies wrongfully, are mighty.
Joab and Abiathar, who supported the re-
bellion of Adonijah (1 Kings i. 7), and were
" mighty " men, certainly were David's



P8. Lxrs. 1 — 36.]



THE BOOK OP PSALMS.



68



enemies " wrongfully." And the same may
be said of Absalom and Ahithnphel. Then
I restored tliat which I took not away. Dr.
Kay supposes David's quasi-abdioation of
a crown which he had not placed on his
own head (2 Sam. xv. 14 — 17) to be
alluded to.

Vers. 5—12. — David follows up his com-
plaint by a confession of sin (ver. 5), which
shows that hid sufferings are, at any rate, in
some measure, deserved; but, at tlie same
time, he pleads that, as his enemies are
really persecuting him for his rigliteous
deeds and his adherence to God (vers. 7 —
11), Ood is bound to uome to his aid, in
order that his own honour may be vindi-
cated, and that the godly may not be put
to shame on his (David's) account.

Ter. 5. — God, thou knowest my foolish-
ness (see Fs. xxxviii. 5). According to the
teaching both of the Old Testament (Pro-
verbs, passim) and of the New (Mark vii. 22 ;
Eom. i. 21, 22 ; GhI. iii. 1, etc.), folly is a
form of sin. And my sins are not hid from
thee. The rebuke of Nathan and tlie death
of his child (2 Sam. xii. 7—19) had fully
convinced David of this. Thenceforward his
sing were ever before him (Pg. li. 3), con-
tinually confessed by him, and felt to be
as well known to God aa to himself. Com-
pare the opening of Ps. cxxxix., " Lord,
thon hast searched me, and known me.
Tiiou knowest my downsitting and mine
uprising, thou understandest my thought
afar off. Thou compassest my path and my
lying down, and art acquainted with all
my ways. For there is not a word in my
tongue, but, lo, O Lord, thou knowest it
altogether " (vers. 1 — 4).

Ver. 6. — Let not them that wait on thee
(or, hope in thee), Lord Ood of hosts, be
ashamed for my sake; or, through me (B.e-
vised Version); on my aecount (Kay) — ^asthey
would be if I, altliough thy faithful wor-
shipper, were delivered into my enemies'
hands. Let not those that seek thee be con-
founded for my sake, God of Israel. One
of the many places where the second clause
is a simple echo of the first.

Ver. 7. — ^Because for thy sake I have borne
reproach. The real secret of the enmity
which David provoked, botli on the part of
Baul, of Absalom, of Joab. and of other
ungodly men, wag his own piety and devo-
tion to God's service. Irreligious men hate
those who are religious, whose conduct
shames them by its contrast with their own
evil courses. They revenge themselves,
sometimes by scoffing at the religious obser-
vances of the pious (ver. 10), sometimes by
insinuating that all profetsion of religion is



hypocrisy. Shame hath covered my face

1 have been made to feel sljame at the
charges which have been brought against
me (see 2 Sam. xv. 3 ; xvi. 7, 8).

Ver. 8. — I am become a stranger unto my
brethren, and an alien unto my mother's chil-
dren. The preference of David over all his
elder bretiiren was calculated to arouse their
jealousy (1 Sam. xvi. 6 — 13); and Eliab's
hostile feeling is distinctly shown in 1 Sam.
xvii. 28. We may gather from Ps. xxxviii.,
as well as from the present passage, that
the alienation continued, and was not con-
fined to Eliab.

Ver. 9.— For the zeal of thine house hath
eaten me up. David's " zeal for God's house "
was shown, first, in his establishment of the
tabernacle on Mount Zion (2 Sam. vi. 12 —
19) ; next^ in his earnest desire to build a
permanent and magnificent dwelling for the
ark of the covenant (2 Sam. vii. 2; Ps.
cxxxii, 2 — 5); then, in his careful collec-
tion of materials for the building which lie
was forbidden to erect himself (1 Ohron.
xxviii. 11 — 18; xxix. 2—5); and finally,
in the directions that he left to Solomun
with respect to it (1 Chron, xxviii. 9, 10,
20). It was also shown, if we take "house"
in a wider sense, by his careful government
of the land and people, the kingdom and
household of God, for forty years. And the
reproaches of them that reproached thee are
fallen upon me. David may either mean
that every reproach uttered against God
was as keenly felt by him as if it had been
directed against himself, or that, when men
reproached him, they really meant to re-
proach God (i.e. religion) in him.

Ver. 10. — When I wept, and chastened
my soul with fasting, that was to my re-
proach. David's practice of fasting appears
both here and also in Pss. xxxv. 13 ; cix. 24 ;

2 Kings xii. 16, 22. As fasting was not
enjoined by the Law, he might be reproached
for over-righteousness, and perhaps also for
ostentation, on account of it.

Ver. 1 1. — I made sackcloth also my gar-
ment (see Pss. XXX. 12; xxxv. 13); and I
became a proverb to them ; or, a byword, as
the same word, mdshdl, is rendered in Ps
xliv. 14.

Ver. 12. — They that sit in the gate speak
against me ; rather, talk about me (Bevised
Version) — make me their theme (Cheyne)
The gates, where the chief business was
done, were no doubt also places of gossip
And I was the song of the drunkards (com|>.
Job XXX. 9) I literally, of the drinkers oj
ttrong drink.

Vers. 13 — 21. — The psalmist now betakes
himself to earnest prayer — he has sufficiently
represented his cundltiou, though he still
adds a few words respecting it (vers. 19 — 21 \



54



THE BOOK OF PSALMS.



[ps. Lxix. I^a6.



and the immediate need is relief. He theri-
fore approaches Ood in what he hopes ia
" an acceptable time " (ver. 13), and humbly
entreats for meroy (vers. 14: — 18).

Ver. 13. — But as for me, my prayer ig unto
thee, Lord, in an acceptable time (comp.
Ps. xxxii. 6 ; Isa. xlix. 8). Profess(,r Cheyne
asks, "How has it been revealed to the
psalmist that this is an acceptable time?"
We can only answer — Perhaps it has not
been revealed; he may express a hope
ratlier than a full assurance. Or it may
have been revealed to him in the way that
other things were. God, in the multitude
of thy meroy hear me ; or, " in the greatness
of thy mercy ; " i.e. as thy mercy is so great.
In the truth of thy salvation. "In the
exercise of that fidelity which secures the
salvation of all that trust it" (Professor
Alexander).

Ver. 14. — ^Deliver me out of the mire,
and let me not sink (comp. ver. 2, with the
comment). Let me be delivered from them
that hate me (see ver. 4). And out of the
deep waters (comp. vers. 1, 2).

Ver. 15. — Let not the waterflood overflow
me, neither let the deep swallow me up,
and let not the pit shut her month upon me.
The reference is still to vers. 1, 2 ; and the
prayer is for deliverance from the dangers
and entanglements there spoken of.

Ver. 16. — Hear me, Lord, for thy loving-
kindness is good (comp. ver. 13). Turn
ante me according to the multitude of thy
tender mercies. The psalmist implies that
God's face had been for some time turned
away from him, and begs to be restored to
favour.

Ver. 17. — And hide not thy face ftom thy
servant (comp. Pss. x. 1; xiii. 1; xxii. 24;
xxvii. 9, etc.). For i am in trouble; lite-
rally, for there is trouble to me. On the
probable nature of the " trouble," see the
introductory paragraph. Hear me speedily
(comp. Pss. xxii. 19 ; xxxi. 2 ; xxxviii. 22 ;
Ixx. 1, etc.).

Ver. 18. — Draw nigh unto my sonl, and
redeem it. David often complains that God
is far from him (Pss. x. 1 ; xxii. 19; xxxviii.
21 ; Ixxi. 12, etc.), and prays that lie will
"draw nigh," the sense of distance and
alienation being intolerable. Deliver me
because of mine enemies; i.e. because of
their plots and machinations (see ver. 4).

Ver. 19. — Thou hast known my reproach,
and my shame, and my dishonour (comp.
vera. 7 — 12). Whatever David has suffered
at the hands of his enemies has been fully
known to God, who has at any rate per-
mitted it. Having seen and known, God
will not forget. My adversaries are all
before thee. Thou hast seen my adver-
i^arips also, and still liast tlicm in tliy



sight. Thou beholdest their insolence and
audacity.

Ver. 20.— Beproach hath broken my heart,
(oomp. vers. 7, 9, 19). Some of his enemies'
reproaches were, no doubt, baaed on David's
old misdoings. These, which he could not
rebut, would cause him the severest pain.
And I am full of heaviness ; or, " full nf
sickness;" "very sick" (Kay); "sick to
death " (Delitzaeh). And I looked for some
to take pity, but there was none ; and for
comforters, but I found none. It is ques-
tioned whether David was ever without
friends to pity and comfort him, and sug-
gested that at tills point he passes from
narrative to prophecy, and describes, nnt
his own condition, but that of the Messiah,
whom he typified, speaking as he was moved
by the Holy Ghost. Jesus was certainly
left without pity or comfort, when " all the
disciples forsook him, and fled" (Matt.
xxvi. 56).

Ver. 21. — ^They gave me also gall for my
meat. Here, at any rate, tlie psalmist is
inspired to be Messianic, i.e. to use words
which, while they can only be applied to
himself metaphorically and loosely, are in
the strictest and most literal sense applicable
to Christ. Gall was actually mingled with
the drink which was given to Christ jnst
before he was crucified, and which he
tasted, but would not swallow (Matt. ixviL
84). And in my thirst they gave me vinegar
to drink. Similarly, when upon the cross
Christ uttered the words, " 1 thirst," those
who stood by " filled a sponge with vinegar,
and put it upon hyssop, and put it to hii
mouth. When Jesus therefore had received
the vinegar, he said. It is finished ; and he
bowed his head, and gave >ip the ghost"
(John xix. 29, 30); comp. Ps. xxii. 16—
18, where little facts, not true of David,
but true of Christ, are recorded of an
afflicted one, who partly represents David,
partly his great Descendant.

Vers. 22— 29.— The imagination of the
cruelties to be inflicted on his innocent
Descendant works up the psalmist to a pitch
of passionate resentment, which finds vent
in a series of bitter imprecations, very dis-
tasteful to many. They are less startling,
however, than some to be found elsewhere,
as in Ps. oil. We may view them either as
an outpouring of righteous indignation upon
the enemies, not of David only, but of God ;
or as a series of prophetic dennnciations,
whereby the wicked of David's time were
warned of the consequences of such wicked-
ness as theirs, and stimulated to repentance.

Ver. 22. — Let their table became a snare



P8. iiXix. 1 — 36.]



THE BOOK OF PSALMS.



66



before them. It is not very clear liow their
t»ble was to ensnare them: perhaps by
encouraging them to gluttony and sensuous-
negs, and bringing upon them the diseases
which tliose Bins breed; perhaps by lead-
ing them to an ostentatious display of
wealth and luxury (comp. Bzek. xxiii 40,
41). And that which should have been for
their welfare, let it become a trap. Let
them be trapped by the good things of their
table, like a wild beast by a bait.

Yer. 23. — Let their eyes be darkened, that
they see not. This may be taken either
literally, "let blindness come upcm those
who have Bo misused their eyes; " or meta-
phorically, " let their understandings, which
they have partially blinded, be wholly
darkened." And make their loins continually
to shake. Deprive them of the strength
whereof they have boasted, and which they
have misapplied.

Yer. 24. — Four out thine indignation upon
them, and let thy wrathful anger take hold
of them. At any rate, be angry with them,
and show thine anger in some way or other.
Let them not escape scatheless. A general
uialedictiou, after which the writer returns
to particulars.

Yer. 25. — Let their habitation be desolate ;
literally, their encnmpment. Tirah (np'D)
is the circular enclosure of a nomadic
tribe, within which it kept its cattle or
took refuge itself (Gen. xxvi. 16; Numb,
xxxi. 10). Nomarlic expressions remained
in use after nomadic habits had ceased (see
1 Kings xii. 16). And let none dwell in
their tents. A duplication of the preceding
clause.

Yer. 26. — For they persecute him whom
thou hast smitten. This would apply
equally to David, and his great Antitype.
It is an aggravation of cruelty when men
persecute one who is already suffering
a£Biction at God's band. And they talk to
the grief of those whom thou hast wounded ;
mther, they talk of the grief of those, etc.
They speak of it mockingly, or, at any rate,
unsympathetioally.

Yer. 27. — Add iniquity unto their iniquity.
Either " let them fall from one wickedness
to another," as the clause is rendered in the
Prayer-book Yersion; or "add to the
record of their sin in thy book, a further
record of other sins, as they commit them."
And let them not come into thy righteons-
ness; ('.«■ let them not receive the gift of
thy justifying grace, and so be counted
among thy righteous ones.

Yer. 28. — Let them be blotted out of the
book of the living. God is supposed to have
a " book of the living " in his possession,
which contains the names of all those on
whom he looks with favour, and whom he
will bless both in this world and beyond the



grave (comp. Exod. xxxii. 32 ; Ps. Ixxxvi.
6 ; Bzek. xiii. 9 ; Dan. xii. 1). From this
list, as from any register of earthly citizen-
ship, the names of the unworthy may be
erased. David prays for the erasure of the
names of those unworthy ones against whom
his imprecations are uttered. And not bs
written with the righteous ; t.e. not remain
written in the book side by side with the
names of the righteous. The New Testa-
ment, no less than the Old, tells of this
book (see Luke x. 20 ; Phil. iv. 3 ; Bev. iii.
5; xiii. 8; xx. 12; xxi. 27).

Ver. 29. — But I am poor and sorrowful ;
let thy salvation, God, set me up on high.
The psalmist adds to his list of imprecations,
by way of contrast, an invocation nf blessing
on himself. As his present condition is in
strong contrast with that of his ungodly
enemies, as he is "poor and sorrowful,"
while they are prosperous and self-satisfied,
so let their future conditions be. While they
are depressed and disgraced, let him be " set
up on high."

Yers. 30 — 36. — ^In conclusion, the psalmist
bnrsts out into praise. Confident of receiv-
ing the deliverance for which he has prayed,
he anticipates it by at once offering thanks-
giving (ver. SO). He then calls on others
I to rejoice with him, first on the poor and
I humblb (vers. 32, 83), then on heaven and
earth and their inhabitants generally (ver.
34). Finally, he delivers a confident
prophecy of the continued prosperity of
Judah and Jerusalem (vers. 35, 36).

Yer. 30. — ^I wiU praise the Name of Ood
with a song. (For praise of the Name of
God, see Pss. vii. 17 : ix. 2 ; xxix. 2 ; xxxiv.
3 ; Ixvi. 1 ; Ixviii. 4, etc.) And will magnify
him with thanksgiving. Thanksgiving had
already, in Ps. 1. 13, 14, been set above
sacrifice.

Yer. 31. — This also shall please the Lord
better than an ox or bullock that hath horns
and hoofs ; i.e. that is fit for legal sacrifice
— of full age, and clean.

Yer. 82. — ^The humble shall see this, and
be glad. The meek — God's people — see
David's deliverance, and are glad — ^rejoice
in their heart, and unite with him in thanks-
giving. And your heart shall live that seek
Ood (comp. Ps. xxii. 26).

Yer. 33. — For the Lord heareth the poor.
The "poor in spirit" are probably meant
(comp. ver. 29). And despiseth not his
prisoners. Those who suffer for his sake.

Yer. 34. — Let the heaven and earth praise
him, the seas, and everything that moveth
therein (comp. Ps. xcvi. 11). As Job calls
on heaven and earth to sympathize with
him in his distress (Job xvi. 18, 19), so



56 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. lxix. 1— 36.

David wonld hare them to partake in his | hrought about her own destruction. And
joy at his deliverance. I will build the cities of Judah ; i.e. maintain



Ver. 35. — For God will save Zion. It is
not neoeesary to suppose that Jerusalem was
in any immediate danger. The iisalinist
merely means that the same God from
whom Ije now confidently expacts deliver-
ance will always watoh over his city, over
his people, over his inheritance, and whenever
danger threatens, will exert his protecting
power and save. Prophecies of this kind
are always conditional, and thus Zion, when
she rejected God for idols (2 Chron. xzxvi.
14), and again when she rejected him for
Barabbas (Matt, xxvii. 21), forfeited the
promised blessing of continuance, and



them, keep them from decay and ruin.
That they may dwell there ; i.e. continue to
inhabit the cities. And have it (i.e. Zion,
or Jerusalem) in possession,

Yer. 36. — The seed also of his servants
shall inherit it. Nor shall the city alone —
the mere walls and buiLiings — continue to
exist. " The seed of God's servants " — his
people Israel— sh ill continue to inhabit it.
And they that love his ITame shall dwell
therein. When the earthly Zion fell away
and forfeited the promises, they passed to
tlie heavenly Zion (Heb. xii. 22) — the Ohordi
of God, the true laraeL



HOMILIES BY VAEI0U8 AUTHORS.

Vers. 1 — 13. — The psalmist in three aspects. I. As A man to be pitied. The
suffering! described are many and great. They threatened to be overwhelming. With-
out, there was no escape ; within, there was no peace. Crying for help brought no
rescue, and waiting upon God brought no deliverance. Hope deferred made the heart
sick. Disappointment only called forth more bitter scorn from enemies, and made the
ills that multiplied more and more hard to bear. Besides, there was the distressful
feeling that the evils that had come were in large part unmerited, and that the hate
of enemies was as unjust as it was unprovoked. When we find a man in such a case,
we cannot but sympathize with him. He may be too maguanimous to crave our pity,
but all the more our heart goes out to him in compassion, and our prayers are joined
with his for deliverance (Job vi. 14 ; xix. 21 ; 1 Pet. iii. 8). It is one of the advan-
tages of suffering that, while it may be a salutary discipline to the sufferer, it becomes
a means of calling forth brotherly kindness and manly help from beholders.

II. Ab a sinner to be condemned. There are some who resent any condemnatioL
of the psalmist. They say he was inspired, that he was one of the " holy men who
spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost." This is true, but all the same, he
speaks of himself as a sinner, and we are more likely to deal truly with him by taking
him on his own judgment than by setting him up as if he were perfect, and as if his
confessions of sin and folly were made in some non-natural sense. Besides, there are
evideui proofs here of the working of sin, of the flesh lusting against the spirit, of the
struggle which all good men have to make against the rise of unholy passions in time
of temptation. If we are to take the language (in vers. 22 — 28) just as we find it, and
if we are to understand it as used by a man of undoubted but of imperfect piety, we
cannot but regard it as highly culpable. There is more here than just indignation.
The life of the psalmist had been made bitter by the rancour and hate of his enemies,
and he seems to give way to wrath, and to hurl back upon his foes the curses which
they had so cruelly heaped upon himself. But be this as it may, it is plain that we
should guard against indulgence in such language. It is not Jor us to judge others ; it
is not for us to return evil for evil. Christ has taught us that they greatly erred who
said, " Thou shalt love thy neighbour, but hate thine enemy " (Matt. v. 43 — 45).
Bather we are to love our enemies. And what our Lord taught us by word he illustrated
in his life. Even of those whose hatids were red with his blood, he said, " Father,
forgive them ; " and his return for all the hate and malice and cruelty of the wicki d
Jews was to send them first of all the gospel of peace (Luke xxiii. 24 ; xxiv. 47). If
we indulge in resentment, we not only hurt ourselves, but we wrong our brother, for,
however badly a luan may use us, he is still our brother, and we should not put a
greater barrier between him and lis by wrath, but rather try to bring him to a better
mind by love and mercy (Rom. xii. 19 — 21).

III. Ab a Saint to be imitated. The very fact that we cannot and dare not
follow the psalmist in all that we find here, is evidence of bis imperfection. We are



PB. LXix. 1— 36.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 67



bound to use our reason — to examine things by the standard of God's Law and the
Spirit of Christ. We should only imitate what is good, and what commends itself to
our consciences and hearts as good (1 Cor. xi. 1 ; Bph. v. 1, 2). But if we consider,
we shall find much here to admire, and therefore to imitate. It would be well for us,
like the psalmist, to call upon God in the day of trouble. We may be in straits, but
he can help. We may be repulsed on all sides, and lonely, but he will not cast us off.
We should also learn from t'he psalmist not to plead our own merits, but to cast our-
selves on God's mercy. God knows what is best. Above all, we should do what the
psalmist could only do imperfectly, in the dim light of the days before the gospel —
we should look to Christ, and learn of him how to behave ourselves in times ul
suffering. — W. F.

Vers. 30 — 36. — Praise. 1. Gbandebt theme. " Name of God." Take Exod. iii.
14, where God is called the "I am ; " or the next verse, where as " the Lord God of
your fathers, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob," he says,
" This is my Name for ever." Or take Exod. xxxiv. 6, or some of the great titles
given to God : Jehovah-jireh (Gen. xxii. 14) ; Jehovah-tsidkenu (Jer. xxxiii. 16) ;
Jehovah-shalom (Judg. vi. 24); Jehovah-nissi (Exod. xvii. 15). What a glorious
subject, with endless variety of charm !

II. Noblest inspiration. " Thanksgiving." This implies in the singer a right
relation and a right spirit. We can only praise God aright as we know him as God,
and as our hearts glow with love to him as our God and our Redeemer.

III. Tbttebt fofulabitt. It is not what pleases the people that stands highest,
but what pleases God. He looks to the heart. He distinguishes between the form and
the spirit. The sacrifice which is acceptable to him is that which is offered in faith
and luve. The two mites of the humble widow far transcend the splendid gifts of the
prond Phaiisees.

IV. The most powbefui, abgumbnt. (Ver. 33.) " For." Beference is made td
Gkxi's love of the poor ; God's rescue of the oppressed, his " prisoners," from Joseph io
Egypt, down to John at Patmos ; God's promotion of righteousness and mercy and
peace.

V. The most delightful conclusion. (Vers. 34 — 36.) True in part of Judah
and Zion, but finding its highest fulfilment in him who is the true King of men,
and whose rule alone can unite Jew and Ctentile, and bring joy to heaven and earth.
— W. F.

Ver. 32. — Here are three greatest things. I. The gbeatest thing in man. The
"heart." It is the heart that marks character (Prov. xxiii. 7); that settles worth
(1 Sam. xvi. 7); that determines destiny (Bom. x. 9, 10; Prov. iv. 23). Even among
men, the man who has " no heart," whatever else he may have, is despised ; whereas
he who has a kind heart, though he may have many failings, is beloved (cf. Nabal
and David).

II. The greatest work fob man. " Seek God." This implies that, though nian
is separated from God through sin, there is a possibility of return. God has drawn
near to us, and we may draw near to God. Christ is the true Mercy-seat. In him God
and man meet and are reconciled. The chief object of life is to seek God (Fs. xxvii.
8 ; Isa. Iv. 6). In his works and in his Word, in the Person of his Son and in doing
his will by the Spirit, he is evermore to be found of those who truly seek him (Isa. xlv.
19 ; Amos v. 8).

III. The gbeatest blessedness fob iulS. " Live." Life is the greatest boon —
but only when it is the life of the heart.

"We live by admiration, faith, and hope.
And ever as these are well and wisely fixed.
In dignity of being we ascend."

(Wordgworth.)

It is in Christ that we find our true life and our highest blessedness (cf. Demas and
Paul, 2 Tim. iv. 10; 2 Cor. vi. 11 ; 1 John iii. 1).— W. F.



58



THE BOOK OP PSALMS.



[rg. Lxx. 1 — 5.



Vers. 1 — 18. — Suffering and prayer, " The psalm is a prayer and complaint of one
jufFering severely from men for the sake of God."

I. Gebat bdffebino. (Vers. 1 — 4.) 1. Exposing Mm to great danger. (Vers. 1, 2.)
He is in |ieril of his life. " The floods overwhelm him." 2. Entailing great bodily
exhaustion. (Ver. 3.) Weary of crying, parched throat, failing eyes. Z. Arisiny from
the unjust hatred of his enemies, who are numerous and strong. (Ver. 4.) They that
hate him without a just cause aiui wrongfully, are numberless and mighty.

II. GkBAT StJFFBEINQ FOR THE SAKE OF GoD AND THE RIGHTEOUS OAtTSE. (Vers.

5 — 12.) 1. Awakens a sense of personal unworthiness. (Ver. 5.) All suffering tends
to this. 2. The sin of his enemies was sin ayainst Ood. (Vers. 7 — 9.) 3. Intimate
relatives and friends at well as strangers join in the persecution of his enemies.
(Vers. 8—12.)

III. The oroumds of his prater fob dblivbeancb. (Vers. 13 — 18.) 1. Other*
who trust in God will he put to shame if he is left to perish. Go back to ver. 6 for this.
Faith in God is at stake. 2. Eis great misery is his argttment for salvation. (Vers.
14, 15 — 17.) We may well use this plea. 3. The greatness of the Divine loving-kind-
ness and mercy, (Vers. 13 — 16.) This is the argument vyhich is fiillest of hope to
l^hose who have known God in aU ages, but especially to those who have known God
in Christ. — S.

Vers. 29 — 36. — The psalm closes with joyfid hopes and vows of thanksgiving for
salvation. These consequences flow from his confidence in God's salvation.

I. His OWN personal gratitude and service. 1. 2%e thanksgiving of a grateful
heart will show itself in song and service. (Ver. 30.) 2. Spiritual service is more
acceptable to Ood than ceremonial. (Ver. 31.)

II. HiB salvation will strenqthen the faith of all righteous sufferers.
(Vers. 32, 33.) 1. The humble, the afflicted, viill see in it the pledge of their oum deliver-
ance. (Ver. 32.) God will make a difierence between all the righteous and the wicked.
2. The experience of the righteous warrants the utmost trust in Ood. (Ver. 33.) " For
the Lord heareth the poor, and despiseth not his prisoners." That is a truth of
experience as well as of faith and hope.

III. ZiON and the cities of Judah shall be rebuilt. The revelations of God
to his own experience gave him the hope of a wide and general deliverance ; and in the
distinction made by God between him and his enemies, security for the victory of the
whole Church of God. He calls upon the heavens, the earth, and seas to praise God
on this account (vers. 34 — 36). — S.



EXPOSITION.



PSALM LXX.



This psalm is a detached fragment of Ps.
si., separated off, probably, for liturgical
purposes. Except in the last clause, the
name "Elohim" is substituted for "Jeho-
vah." A few omissions are made, and one
alteration which affects the sense.

Ver. 1. — Make haste, God, to deliveT me.
In Ps. xl. 13 we find, « Be pleated, O Lord,
to deliver me ; " and this would seem to be
the right way of supplying the ellipse here.
Hake haste to help me, Lord.

Ver. 2. — Let them be ashamed and con-
founded. Ps. xl. 14 adds, "together." That
seek after my soul. Ps. xl. adds, " to destroy
it." Let them be tamed backward, and pnt
to oonftuion, that desire my hart. Identical
with Fs. xL 11, and translated more
literally.



Ver. 3. — Let them be tamed baok for a
reward of their shame. Ps. xl. 15 has, " Let
them be desolate," but this difference seems
to arise from a corruption. That say. Aha,
aha I Ps. xl. 15 has, " that say to me, Aha,
aha I " which is better.

Ver. 4. — Let all those that seek thee
rejoice and be glad in thee : and let such as
love thy salvation say continually. Let God
be magnified. Ps. xl 16 has, " Let the Lord
be magnified."

Ver. 5. — But I am poor and needy : make
haste unto me, God. Instead of this last
clause, Ps. xl. 17 has, " Yet the Lord thinketh
upon me," which caunot be ascribed to a
corruption, but must be an alteration made
deliberately. Thou art my Help and my
Deliverer J Lord, make no tarrying. Iden-
tical with Ps xl, 17, except that here once
more "Jehovah " replaces " Elohim."



vs. Lxxi. 1 — 24.]



THE BOOK OP PSALMS.



59



HOMILIES BY VAEIOUS AUTHORS.

Vers, 1 — 5. — " Help 1 " This is the cry of many. By sea and land, in times of peril,
this call is made. That gun " hoomint); loud " is the signal of a ship in distress. That
flag held up from the boat is a silent appeal. That cry, rising lood and shrill, above
the turmoil of storm, tells of " some strong swimmer iu his agony," who still hopes fui-
succour. And as brother cries to brother, so the soul cries ti) Q-od. There are cases
when we can help ourselves. There are other cases where friends and brethren can
help us. For this we should thank God and take courage. The more the Spirit of
Christ prevails, the more there will be both of self-help and mutual help. But there
are other cases when God alone can help. Let us turn to him. There is every reason
to hope that we shall not seek him in vain. He has power (2 Chron. xxv. 8). He
has the disposition (Isa. xli. 10 ; xliv. 2). He has pledged his word (Hos. xiii. 9).
Well, therefore, might the psalmist say, " Happy is he that hath the God ol Jacob for
his help " (Ps. cxlvi. 5) I This psalm is entitled, " To put God in remembrance ; " and
it is rich in light and comfort to all who make their prayer to Goi'. for help. Mark —

I. The cry. " Help ! " It is the sign of weakness and of fear. God seems to
delay. The peril increases, and therefore the cry becomes more urgent. Soon it will
be too late. " Mal?e haste ! " Who is there who has not felt the pain of need, and the
greater pain of anxiety and fear. The more grievous our straits, the more earnest
should be our prayers.

II. The kbsponse. The chief pleas are three, and God's answer always meets our
necessities. 1. The malice of foes. Men are to be found who actually take pleasure in
pain, and especially when the pain falls upon those they hate. The more of trouble,
the greater their joy. This is the very spirit of hell. Such as persist in this kind of
life must perish. God will disappoint the malice of the wicked by his deliverance of
the good. 2. The benefit of Ood's people. The good delight in good. Happy them-
selves in God, they would have all others share in the same happiness. Especially
have they sympathy with all of like spirit with themselves (1 Cor. xii. 26). Hence
when the godly conquer their troubles by bearing them patiently, or are rescued as by
the hand of God, their hearts are refreshed. What is done to others is as if done to
themselves. 3. Personal necessity. God looks to individuals. None are so "poor"
that he will despise them. None are so " needy " that he cannot satisfy their
wants. He deligbteth in mnrcy. Each one of us may put himself in the place of the
psalmist, and cry, as he did, with lively hope, " / am poor and needy : make haste
unto me, God I '" When we thus trust in God, hope rises to assurance. We feel as if
what we asked was given, as if what we sought was done. " Thou art my Help and
my Deliverer." But still, so long as we are in distress, and God has not yet perfected
that which concerneth us, we urge the prayer, " Make no tarrying." — W. P.

Vers. 1 — 6. — This psalm is substantially a repetition of the last five verses of Ps. xL
{which see). It was most likely detached and altered for a special occasion. — S.



EXPOSITION.



PSALM LXXI.



Ps. lxxi, is, like so many others, s psalm
divided between complaint and praise. It
is comparatively wanting in originality,
being, to a very great extent, an echo of
other psalms, especially Pss. xxii., xxxi.,
XXXV., and xl. Complaint, mingled with
prayer, occupies tlie first half (vera. 1 — 13) ;
praise and thanksgiving the second (vers.
14 — 24). The authorship of the psalm is
very doubtful, as it has n" " title," and few



marked characteristics. Kay and Heng-
stenberg, however, regard it as Davidical,
the former assigning it to the time of
Adonijah's attempt, the latter to that of
the rebellion of Absalom. Metrically, it is
thought to divide into seven short stanzas,
each of either three or four verses.

Vers. 1 — 3 are almost identical with the
opening verses of Ps. xxxi. They express
» firm trust in God, but combine with t)ie
expression of this trust an urgent prayer for
deli veranoe.



60



THE BOOK OP PSALMS.



[PS. LXXI. 1 24



Ver. 1. — In thee, lord, do I put my
tinst : let me never be put to confusion ;
rather, as in Ps. xxxi. 1, "let me never
be ashamed ; " or, let me never be put to
thame (Cheyne).

Ver. 2. — Deliver me in thy righteonsnesi.
Identical with the last clause of Ps. xxxi. 1.
And cause me to escape. The danger seems
to be pressing, and such as characterized
Absalom's rather than Adonijah's rebellion.
Incline thine ear unto me, and save me
(comp. Ps. xxxi. 2).

Yer. 3. — Be thou my strong Habitation ;
literally, be thou to me for a Book of habita-
tion ; i.e. a rock upon which I may take up
my abode. Whereunto I may continually
resort. Exegetical of the preceding clause,
"a rock of habitation." Thou hast given
oommandment to save me. It is in thy
counsels tbat I am to be helped and saved —
not left to the will of my enemies (comp.
Ps. IxviiL 28). This conviction lies at the
root of the psalmist's faith and trust. For
thou art my Bock and my PortresB (comp.
Ps». xviii. 2 ; Ixi. 2, 3, etc.).

Ver. 4. — Deliver me, my Ood, out of the
hand of the wicked, out of the hand (rather,

?ratp') of the unrighteous and cruel man.
t is characteristic of David to single out
from his adversaries an individual man,
from whom he especially asks to be delivered
(comp. Pss. xiii. 2 ; xvii. 13 ; xviii. 17, 48 ;
ixxv. 8; xli. 6, 9, 11 ; Iv. IS, 14, etc.).

Ver. 5. — For thou art my Hope, Lord
Bod (comp. Ps. xxxix. 7 ; Jer. xiv. 8 ; xvU.
13; 1. 7). Thou art my Trust firom mj
youth (comp. Ps. xl. 4).

Ver. 6. — By thee have I been holden up
from the womb : thou art he that took me
out of my mother's bowels (comp. Ps. xxii.
9, 10, of which this is plainly an echo or
reminiscence). My praise shall be con-
tinually of thee (see vers. 14—16, 22—24).

Ver. 7. — I am as a wonder unto many ;
or, a$ a portent, a prodigy — something
monstrous. Some explain, "as an object
of God's singular favour from his youth"
(Kay, Cheyne); others, "as a marvellous
example of God's punishments" (Schultens,
Hengstenberg, Professor Alexander, Canon
Cook). The latter explanation is supported
by Dent, xxviii. 46, and, on the whole,
seems preferable. But thou art my strong
Aefnge (see above, ver. 3, ad Jin.).

Ver. 8. — ^IiOt my mouth be filled with thy
praise and with thy honour all the day.
Praise alternates with complaint and
prayer, even in this first portion of the
psalm, preparing the way for the sustained
praise of the second portion.

Ver. 9. — Cast me not off in the time of
dd age. This expression, combined with
the allusion to old age and grey hairs in
ver. 18, indicates that the writer was drawin g



near to the natural term of human life, and
already felt the infirmities of old age creep-
ing upon him. This note of date suits
better the time of Adonijah's rebellion than
that of Absalom's. Forsake me not when
my strength faileth. An appeal to the
Divine compassion. If God was his " Bock
and Fortress " (ver. 3), his " strong Befuge "
(ver. 7), when he was in Ids full vigour,
much more will he support and befriend
htm when he is weak and helpless.

Ver. 10. — For mine enemies speak against
me. The psalmist's weakness encourages
his enemies to make their attacks. They
begin by spealitngragainst him — calumniating
him (2 Sam. xv. 3, 4), and shortly they will
proceed to acts. And they that lay wait for
my soul take counsel together; or, "they
that watch for my soul " (Bevised Version).

Ver. 11. — Saying, God hath forsaken him :
persecute and take him ; for there is none
to deliver him. Compare the words of
Ahithophel, " Let me now choose out
twelve thousand men, and I will arise and
pursue after David this night ; and I will
come upon him while he is aeary and weak-
handed ; and all the people that are with
him shall flee; and I will smite the king
only" (2 Sam. xvii. 1, 2). It no doubt
appeared to Absalom's party generally, as
it did to Shimei, that God had "forsakeo"
David, and turned against him (2 Sam.
ivi. 8).

Ver. 12.— God, be not tax from me :
my God, make haste for my help (comp. Pss.
xxii 19; xxxv 22).

Ver. 13. — Let them be confoanded and
consumed that are adversaries to my soul ;
let them be covered with reproach and dis-
honour that seek my hurt (comp. Pss. xxxv.
4 ; xL 14 ; Ixx. 2).

Vers. 14 — 24. — Begarding his prayers as
heard, and their fulfilment as certain, the
psalmist now betakes himself to praise and
thanksgiving, He will never cease to hope ;
he will praise God more and more (ver. 14).
He will spend the whole day in telling of
God's righteouiiness and salvation (ver. 15).
The mighty acts of the Lord shall form his
theme, together with the righteousness of
GoA, and of none other (ver. 16). As God
has enabled him to declare his praise in the
past (ver. 17), so he trusts to be still up-
held and enabled to proclaim the same to
the new generation (ver. 18). God's right-
eousness is " very high," and there is none
like him (ver. 19), When he brings men
into trouble, it is only to " turn again and
comfort them " (vers. 20, 21). In conclusion,
the writer promises that his hymns of praisp'



PS. LXXI. 1 — ^24.]



THE BOOK OF PSALMS.



61



shall not only be said, but sung, and accom-
panied with the melody of music (ver. 22).
His lips and soul shall both rejoice together
(ver. 23) ; and the praise of God shall
employ his tongue without ceasing (ver. 21),

Ver. 14. — But I will hope continually;
literally, but <u for me, I will hope, etc.
The phrase, "as for me," almost always
marks a transition. And will yet praise
thee more and more; literally, I will add
to all thy praiie; i.e. "I will add to all
my past praises of thee further praises in
the future."

Yei. 15. — Uy mouth shall show forth thy
righteousness and thy salvation all the
day. Salvation is inseparable from riglit-
eousness. It is as being righteous himself
that Ood accepts the righteous, and as
faithful to his promises, wliich is a purt of
his righteousness, that he pardons penitents.
For I know not the numbers thereof (comp,
Ps. xL 5). God's acts of pardqiiing mercy,
by which he brings about the salvation of
penitents, are innumerable.

Ver. 16. — I will go in the strength of the
Lord God; literally, I will eome with the
mighty aets of the Lord Ood (Bevised Ver-
sion); t.e. I will bring these acts forward,
and make mention of them in my songs of
praise. I will make mention of thy right-
eousness, even of thine only. I will attribute
my deliverance to no strength, or efforts, or
righteousness of my own (see Fss. zx. 7;
xUv. 3, 6), but to thy righteousness — >>.
thy faithfulness and truth — only.

Ver. 17. — God, thou hast taught me from
my youth : and hitherto have I declared thy
wondrous works. Hitherto, i.e., have I
always had thy guidance and instruction,
and hitherto have I always had occasion to
praise thy Name. Hence I am confident
with respect to the future.

Ver. 18. — Now also when I am old and
greyheaded, God, forsake me not. Surely,
then, thou wilt not forsake me when my
youth has fled, and my time of weakness
and decay has arrived, so that I need thee
•11 the more. At the time of Adonijah's
rebellion, David was "old and stricken in
years " (1 Kings i. 1) — nearly, if not quite,
seventy years of age (2 Sam. v. 4). Until I
have showed thy strength (literally, thine
otm) unto this generation, and thy power



to every one that is to come. The psalmist
calls on God to sustain him in his old age,
not for his own sake, but that ho may im-
press on tlie rising generation God's might
and marvellous acts.

Ver. 19. — Thy righteousness also, God,
is very high ; or, reaehes to the height (comp.
PsB. vii. 7 ; x. 5 ; xviii. 16, etc.). Who hast
done great things : God, who is like unto
thee I (comp. Pss. xxxv. 10; Ixxxix. 6, 8).

Ver. 20. — Thou, which hast showed me
great and sore troubles, shalt quicken me
again; or, according to another reading,
which haat showed us — shalt deliver us. The
change of number may be ascribed to the
desire of tiie psalmist to unite his people
with himself in the hopes of deliverance
which he is expressing. And shalt bring
me up again (rather, shalt bring us up again)
from the depths of the earth. The " depths
of the earth " is a metaphor for the extreme
of misery and depression (comp. Fss. Ixxxviii.
6; cxxx. 1).

Ver. 21. — Thou shalt iuorease my great-
ness, and comfort me on every side. The
psalmist feels that the trial now laid upon
him is the last — that henceforth bis great-
ness and majesty will increase instead of
diminishing, and that God will turn and
comfort him (comp. 1 Chron. xxix. 28).

Ver. 22. — I will also praise thee with the
psaltery, even thy truth, my God: unto
thee will I sing with the harp, thou Holy
One of Israel, (On the psaltery, and its use
as a devotional instrument, see the comment
on Ps. xxxiii. 2.) The conjunction of the
psaltery and harp seems to imply that the
"praisi," of which the writer here speaks,
is to be public praise in the sanctuary, ac-
companied by the usual sacred music.

Ver. 23.— My lips shall greatly rejoice
when I sing unto thee ; and my soul, which
thou hast redeemed. Not my mouth only,
but my heart and spirit, will " rejoice," or
" sing out thy praise " (Oheyne), when the
time comes, and my " redemption," or de-
liverance, has been accomplished.

Ver. 24. — My tongue also shall talk of
thy righteousness all the day long. The
musical utterance of praise can only be oc-
casional, but the tongue can " talk " of God
continually (see ver. 15). For they are con-
founded and brought unto shame, that seek
my hurt (comp. Pss. xxxv. 4 ; xL 14 ; Ixx. 2).



H0MILETI08.

Ver. 16. — Strong confidence. " I will go," etc. Since these words were written, almost
everything in the world capable of change has changed. Empires, nations, languages,
religions have died, and new ones grown up in their stead. The centre of civilization has
moved westward. Discovery and invention have so revolutionized man's relation to his
surroundings, that he seems to live in a new world. The form of revealed religion has
undergone a no less marvellous change. The priesthood, sacrifices, sanctuary, laws,



62 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. lxm. 1—24.

which seemed to a pio'is Israelite an integral part of true religion, have waxed old and
vanished away. But "the Word of the Lord abideth for ever." Faith, hope, love,
based on God's promises, are the same in all ages — ^in Watts or Wesley, Calvin ot
Luther, Paul or John, as in David and Isaiah. Across that wide gull of time which
has swallowed so much deemed imperishable, we join hands with this ancient sain',
and feel that he is our brother. His experience holds the mirror to our own. The
Spirit who inspired him is promised to us also. Let us take note of his resolve, hi.-
hwnUity, his confidence.

I. The psalmist's fixed resolve and fubfose. "I will go." He speaks as one
who knows. The Revisers give a different sense. But they render the same Hebrew-
word (which commonly means "come") "go" in Gen. xxxvii. 30; Numb, xxxii. 6 j
Jonah 1. 3. And the word for " strength " (plural in Hebrew) is so rendered, and cannot
be otherwise rendered, in Ps. xc. 10. The vigorous Authorized Version is much the
more apt and intelligible. Whither he is bound, and what he needs for the journey.
Some lives can hardly be likened to either a journey or a race. No fixed purpose rules
them; no high aim inspires; no goal shines in view. They veer and drift with the
changing current of fashion and circumstance. There is something very noble and
admirable in fixed indomitable purpose, even when it does not rest on the highest
motives. We admire the courage of the great Roman, who said to the trembling pilots
in view of the tempest, " It is not necessary for me to live, but it is necessary for me
to go " (Plutarch's ' Life of Pompey the Great '). But we find a grander courage in
St. Paul (Acts xxi. 13). Or in Luther, after two hours spent in intense })rayer, " If
there were as many devils in Worms as tiles on the house-tops, I would go." The one
is the firmness of human will, defying circumstauces to bend it. The other, of human
weakness taking hold on almighty strength.

U. Therefore note secondly, the psalmist's humilitt. He is not vaunting hig own
strength, or trusting to it. "In the strength of the Lord Ood." AH strength is
God's. He nerves the arm that is raised against his law ; kindles the light of reason
in the mind that denies him. Let but a tiny clot of blood press on a thread of nerve„
rind the strongest arm will be paralyzed, the keenest brain unconscious. Hence
Soripttire strongly condemns the worship of hwnan power and greatness (Isa. ii. 2-)
A view to which men are always pr.ne. A great blemish on the writings of one ot
our most powerful writers, Thomas Carlyle. It is wonderful how much people pardon
in a conqueror 1 Such judgment is false. "God resisteth the proud." Ulust. :
Nebuchadnezzar (Dan. iv. 30, 31, etc.). Humility is true wisdom ; since it is simply
acknowledging what is fact.

III. The psalmist's confidence. "I will go,'' etc. A confidence resting in blind
presumption, " I will go, come what may, hinder who dare 1 " is mere self-delusion.
On the other hand, mere sense of weakness, " I cannot go 1 " is miserable, fatal to all
success. Faith solves the parados of combining the humblest sense of weakness with
the boldest courage, most strenuous effort, most assured hope (1 John v. 4, 5 ; John
XV. 4, 5; 2 Cor. xii. 9). Nothing but this courage of humility, this confidence of
faith, can warrant, in any sane mind, a fearless outlook, even as concerns earthly life.
For the strongest, is not strong all round ; and the strain may come at the one weak
point. To climb the mountain is one thing; to breathe the rare air at the top is
another. The dash which carries the soldier against the enemies' ranks will noi
sustain him through the dark, cold hours of the sentinel's lone watch. The athlete may
fail at the desk. The man whom no labour could over-task, whose resource, quickness,
energy, promptly met every emergency in action, may helplessly break down in
adversity. The man whom adversity could neither break nor bend may lose self-
cuntrol in prosperity, and make shipwreck in a smooth sea. Yet more is this true of
I he spiritual life. Illust. : Peter (John xiy. 37, 38; xviii. 10, 17, 25, 27). Have we
the right to exercise this confidence anew t We cannot over-trust Ood (Phil. iv. 13).
Suppose a farmer has lowlying meadows along the course of a river, which he can
ijrigate at will. It is no presumption in him to say, "My land can never suffer
drought" — if he opens the sluices. Prayer opens the sluices which let the full river of
Guii's grace, wisdom, strength, peace, flow into the soul. How can you bear to face
the unknown possibilities, or the certainties, of the future without this "strength
of the Lord 'jod " ? What may happen any minute ? " No use," you say, " to think



F8. Lxxi. 1— 24.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 63

of that." No; I know it is no use: does that make things better? How can you
help thinking of it, unless you can take hold of Ood'$ strength and be at peace
with him t



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Vers. 1 — 2i, — Oodly old age. Solomon has said, " The beauty of old men Is the grey
Aead" (Prov. xx. 29). But he tells also of a nobler beauty, "The hoary head is
a crown of glory, if it be found in the way of righteousness " (Prov. xvi. 31). Old
men are few, but godly old men are fewer still. Rarity signalizes the " beauty," and
enhances the "glory," This psalm may well be called, "The Old Man's Psalm."
Would that the portrait were more common 1 It is pleasant to look at in poetry ; it is
far more delightful to behold in fact. In this portrait of a godly old man, we
may mark —

I. His bublimb vaith. " In thee, Lord, do I put my trust " (ver. 1). Here is the
secret of his character. " Trust" gave strength to his heart, and unity and completenesf
to his life. In this he was in sympathy with others who had gone before (cf
Ps. xxxi. 1 — 3).

II. His earnest pbatbbs. The godly are ever given to prayer. It b their great
resource. It is the never-failing means of obtaining mercy and grace. They learnt
to call upon God at their mother's knee (cf. Ps. cxvi. 16 ; 2 Tim. i. 6), and all through
life they have found the virtue and the blessedness of prayer. In old age the cry of
the godly is, " I must pray more."

III. Hib vabied experiences. Often, when looking back, there is dimness, or
many things have fallen out of sight, or there is a confusion in the perspective ; but
events that have made a deep impression stand out clearly. Memory goes back to
the time of youth, and traces life onward, with all the great changes, the dangers and
adventures, the attempts and the achievements, the joys and sorrows. There are
grateful recollections of kindness and help from many ; but above all, there is praise
to God for his goodness and wonderful works (vers. 6, 6 ; cf. Isa. xlvL 4).

IV. His settled convictions. Experience is a great teacher. The man who has
seen many days has learned much, and is able to bear witness as one that speaketh with
authority (Job xxxii. 7; Lev. xix. 32; 2 Pet. i. 13). One thing that the godly oM
man testifies is that God is worthy of trust ; another thing is that the Word of God
is not a cunningly devised fable, but truth ; another thing is that religion is not a
delusion, but a reality — the power of God unto salvation ; another thing is that the
most pleasant memories are of loyalty to God, and of good done to men, even to
enemies, and that the saddest thoughts are of times when self prevailed over love
and duty, and opportunities were lost from neglect and sloth.

V. His unfaltering resolution. The old have their regrets.^ They have also
their times of trial and weakness. In another place the psalmist says, "I have been
young, and now am old; yet have I not seen the righteous forsaken " (Ps. xxxvii. 25),
and yet here he seems just for a moment to falter ; but if he trembles at the thought of
being a " castaway," as Paul also did (1 Cor. ix. 27), he renews his strength by prayer
(vers. 17, 20). Then having gained courage, he pledges himself with fresh ardour to
be true to God. Instead of wavering, he will press on. Instead of keeping silence,
he will testify, by word and deed, to the strength and power of Gud. This was
beautifully seen in Polycarp, " Eighty and six years have 1 served him, and he never
wronged me ; and shall I forsake mv God and my Saviour? "

VL Hib gloeious prospects. For the old the end is near. They know that soon
they must die, and have no more to do with anything under the sun. This seems
a dismal condition. But for the godly there is not only hope in death, but the bright
prospect of a blessed immortality. " The end of that man is peace," yea, more, far
more, the fiiture is glorious.— W. P.

Vers. 1 18. — The tuffermg righteous man in his old age. An introduction (vers.

1—3) borrowed from Ps. xxxi. The prayer is shortly expressed in the fourth verse,
utd is succeeded in vers. 6—8 by the basis on which it rests, and after that the



«4 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. Lxxn. 1—20.

prayer is expanded in vers. 9 — 13. The second half of the psalm contains the hope
tind the thanks of the writer.

I. The pratbb op the psalmist. 1. For deliverance from the power of evil-doers.
(Ver. 4.) We have need to pray for deliverance from the dangers that imperil the
Srifety of the soul. 2. For special protection in his old age. (Ver. 9.) When his
natural strength had hegun to fail. This was the prayer for spiritual strength — that
he might not be abandoned to physical infirmity, and so be unable to contend with his
fues. Z. Fur immediate help and rescue. (Ver. 12.) " Make haste to help me." He
was in a pressing emergency, and needed instant deliverance. " Be not far from me."
lie prayed for the signs of G-od's presence with him.

II. The grounds op his pbayeb. 1. Ood had heen hit Hope and Confidence from
infancy. (Vers. 5, 6.) And he had confidence that he might still lean upon God for
help, and still have cause to praise him. 2. The greatness of his sufferings. (Ver. 7,
^' I by the greatness of my sufferings drew upon myself the astonishment and wonder
of many.") Great suffering leads us to God with a cry to which he will always listen ;
for "Like as a father pitieth his children," etc. Z. He is a constant and devoted
worshipper of Ood. (Ver. 8, " My mouth is full of thy praise," etc.) God will not
refuse help to those who serve him; if he gives help to any, he must help those who
honour him. 4. He wants it to be proved to his enemies that God has not forsaken
him. (Vers. 10, 11.) He is jealous of God's honour, and wants it .to be seen that God
13 unchangeable in his goodness as his Deliverer. Good men have always been con-
cerned that God's righteousness should be manifest and invincible. — S.

Vers. 14 — 24. — Persistent hope and increasing praise. Upon these the psalmist
resolves in this second half of the psalm. Let us distinguish the topics of his hope and
praise.

I. God's woekb of eiohtbousness are innuubrablb. (Ver. 15.) They cannot
be reckoned up. All his works are right, both in nature and towards man.

II. God's works op eiohtbousness are miohtt wobks. (Ver. 16.) " I will come
with the mighty deeds of the Lord " — " unto the temple, with all the great and mighty
deeds which God has done on my behalf, as my subject of grateful praise." What
a tale each life-history could tell I

III. God's wondrous works have been the theme op his youth, and shall
BE op his old age. (Vers. 17, 18.) He has been taught them from his youth, and
now that he is old he will tell them to the coming generation. We should be wise
teachers in old age, having the experiences of a whole life to draw from.

IV. God in hib works op biqhteousness is an inoompabablb Bbino. (Ver. 19.)
None like unto the infinite and eternal Being. His righteousness is perfect and exalted,

V. The apfliotions which God bends are to have a quiokeninq and exalting
epvect. (Vers. 20, 21.) By such means God increases our greatness, and manifests
himself to us as the comforting God.

VI. Upon these qroundb he will pbaisb God by all the means he can
command. (Vers. 22 — 24.) With the lute and the harp ; his lips shall shout for joy,
and his soul and his tongue shall talk all day of his righteousness which has caused
him to triumph over his foes. " Unto him that loved us, and washed us firom our sins
in his own blood, and hath made us kings and priests unto God and his Father ; to him
be glory and dominion for ever and ever." This will be the eternal song of the
redeemed creation of God. — S.



EXPOSITION.



PBALM LXXn.

Thh " title " attributes this psalm to Solo-
mon, and the contents of the psalm are very
favonrable to his authorsliip. The prayer
in vers. 1 — i is an echo of that recorded in
t Kings iii 9. The stress laid upon " peace "



(vers. 3, 7 — 16) accords with the peaoefnl
reign (1 Kinp;8 iv. 20—25) of " the peaceful
one." The local allusions (vers. 10, 15)
suit the circumstances of Solomon's time.
The tone, cheerful, equable, and objective
rather than subjective, is Solomonio. The
psalm is thought to have been composed



PB. LXXII. i — 20.]



THE BOOK OF PSALMS.



65



early in Solomon's reign for liturgical pur-
poses. It is a prophetic prayer for a bless-
ing on the king and on his reign, which is
represented in oolours and with oiroum-
stances, that make it typical of the reign
of Messiah (see especially vers. 8, 11, 17).
The concluding verses (18, 19) are a doxo-
logy, marking the end of the Second Book
(compare the comment on Fs. xli 13).

Yer. 1. — Give the king thy judgments,
Ood, and thy righteousness unto the king's
son. God had established in Israel, in the
person of David, hereditary monarchy (2
Sam. vii. 12 — 16), such as was usual in the
East, and suited to Oriental notions. In
speaking of himself, not only as " the king,"
but also as " the king's son," Solomon makes
appeal to the sentiment of respect for hered-
itary loyalty. Compare the inscription of
Mesha, "My father was i<ing over Moab
thirty years, and I became Idng after my
father " (line 1). In praying God to give
him " his judgments," he is desiring a
"spirit of judgment" which will enable
him to deliver decisions as righteous as
God's.

Ver. 2. — He shall judge thy people with
righteousness, and thy poor with judgment.
Then will he have wisdom to judge tliy
people aright. The wish is in the cIoBeat
possible agreement with the prayer in 1
Kings iii. 6 — 9.

Ver. 3. — The mountains shall bring pease
to the people, and the little hills, by right-
eonsness. Through the general establish-
ment of "righteousness" shall "peace"
overspread the land, well represented by its
" mountains " and " hills " — certainly its
most prominent features.

Ver. i. — He shall judge the poor of the
people. Not exclusively, but especially.
The unjust rulers and judges of Israel
neglected this duty : " They judge not the
fatherless . . . and the light of the needy
do they not judge" (Je.. v. 28; see also
Isa. i. 23 ; Zech. vii. 10). He shall save the
ohildren of the needy. He shall preserve
tliem, i.e., from oppression and wrong. And
shall break in pieces the oppressor. (On
God's hatred of oppression and oppressors,
see Exod. iii, 9 ; Lev. xxv, li ; Job xxvii,,
13 ; Pa. xii 5 ; Isa. xvi. 14, etc.)

Ver. 5. — They shall fear thee (i.e. God) as
long as the sun and moon endure, through-
out all generations. The rigliteous govern-
ment of the king shall spread abroad the
" fear of God," and establish pure religion
in the land, while the world continues.
Here the psalm first becomes distinctly
Messianic, passing on from the reigning
monarch to the ideal king whom he typifies.

Ver. 6. — He shall come down like rain

PBALMS — U.



upon the mown grass ; i.e. softly and gently,
bringing refreshment (comp. Deut. xxxii.
2; Isa. Iv. 10, 11; and perhaps 2 Sara,
xxiii. 4). As showers that water the earth.
The same idea as in the preceding clause
(oomp. Hos. vi. 3).

Ver. 7. — In his days shall the righteous
flourish. In Messiah's days, when his king-
dom is fully established, the righteous will
flourish and prosper, since the wicked will
not be Buflered to hinder them (comp. ver.
4 ; and see Butler's ' Analogy,' pt. i. vh. iii.).
And abundance of peace so long as the moon
endureth ; literally, till there he no longer a
moon (comp. ver. 5).

Yer. 8.— He shall have dominion also
from sea to sea. It does not appear that
any particular seas are meant, as in Exod.
xxiii. 31 and Numb, xxziv. 3, 6 ; rather, the
idea is that the earth is set in the midst of
the sea, and that Messiah'a dominion will
reach from shore to shore. And from the
river (i.e. the Euplirates) unto the ends of
the earth. Israel's promised dominion ex-
tended only as far as the great river (Gen.
XV. 18), which was also the boundary of
Solomon's kingdom eastward (1 Kings iv.
21, 24) ; Messiah's was to reach indefinitely
beyond the river to the world's end.

Ver. 9. — They that dwell in the wilderness
shall bow before him (for the meaning here
assigned to isiyyim (d"s), see Ps, Ixxiv. 14 ;
loa. xxiii. 13). The wild tribes of the
Syrian and Arabian deserts a e probably
intended (comp. Isa. Ix. 6, 7). And bis
enemies shall Uck the dust ; i.e. prostrate
themselves at his feet with their fiices in
the dust. See the Assyrian representations
of Oriental prostrations ('Ancient Monar-
chies,' vol. i. pp. 266, 502).

Ver. 10. — The kings of Tarshish and of
the isles shall bring presents. " Tarshish "
here is probably Tartessus in Spain, so well
known to the Israelites in the days of
Solomon (1 Kings x. 22; 2 Chron. ix. 21).
According to Herodotus, Tartessus, when
it first became known to the Greeks, was
governed by kings (Herod., i. 163). By
" the isles " are to be understood the coasts
and islands of the Mediterranean generally.
All these have, at one time or another, paid
homage to Clirist. The kings of Sheba and
Seba shall offer gifts. " Sheba " and " Seba "
are distinguished by the writer of Genesis
(Gen. X. 7), nnd appear not even to have
been very near the one to the other. Sheba
was in South-Eastern Arabia, and was
known to the Grteks and Enmans as the
country of the Sabseans (Diod. Sic, iii, 45;
Sirabo, xvi. 4, § 19 ; Pliny, ' Hist. Nat.,' vi.
23). Saba was in Africa, on the Middle Nile,
and the Sebseans (D<N3p) are closely con.
nected by Isaiah with Ethiopia and Egypt
(Isa. xliii. 3 ; xlv. 14).



66



THE BOOK OF PSALMS.



[PS. LXXII. 1 — 20.



Ver. 11. — Yea, all kings shall fall down
before him ; all nations shall serve him
(comp. Isa. xlix. 7, 2:!; Ix. 3—14). This
pri'phecy lias not yet been fulfilled in the
letter; but it may uiie day be exactly
apconiplished. Or it may not hiive been
intended to be understood literally. General
truths are often expressed by the sacred
writers universally.

Yer. 12. — For he shall deliver the needy
when he crieth ; the poor also, and him that
hath no helper (comp. ver. 4) ; rather, and
lite pour who has no helper. Two classes of
[lersons are spoken of, not three (comp. Job
.\xix. 12).

Yer. 13. — He shall spare the poor and
tisedy ; or, the weak and needy. And shall
save the souls of the needy. He shall not
merely deliver them from their cruel op-
pressors in this life (ver. 4), but also give
health and life to their souls.

Yer. 14. — He shall redeem their sonl from
deceit and violence. Messiah's especial
tendemesB towards the poor and lowly is
a main feature in all descriptions of his
kingdom (see Isa. xi. 4 ; xxix. 19 ; xli. 17,
etc.), and was emphasized by our Lord when
lie came upon earth (Matt. xi. 5 ; Luke iv.
18). And precious shall their blood be in
his sight. Worth, therefore, a mighty ransom
(oomp. Ps. cxvi. 15).

Ver. 15. — And he shall live, and to him
shall be given of the gold of Sheba. He
(i.e. Messiah) " shall live " — shall live on,
and reign on, in his everlasting kingdom;
and men shall bring to him of the gold of
Shiba (1 Kings x. 10; Ezek. xxvii. 22),
giving him of their best and rarest, in
grateful acknowledgment of his goodness
and protection. Prayer also shall be made
for him continually. His subjects shall
offer prayer for him continually, as Chris-
tians do when they pray, " Thy kingdom
come" (Hengstenberg). And daily shall
he be praised; rather, a22 day long stuill they
praise Mm.

Yer. 16. — There shall be an handful of
corn in the earth ; rather, as in the Prayer-
book Version, an heap of corn ; or,
abundance of corn (Bevised Yersion).
"Abundance of com" is put for general
prusperity. TTpon the top of the monntains.
In flourishing times of agriculture, the very
tops of the mountains were cultivated all



over Palestine, as appears by the remains
of terraces. The fruit thereof shall shake
like Lebanon. Canon Cook's seems to be the
best expedition : " The ripened corn on the
heights shall rustle in the wind like the
foliage on Lebanon." And they of the city
shall flourish like grass of the earth. " 'I'hey
of the city" are the inhabitants of the
" New Jerusalem " (Rev. xxi. 2), the citizins
of Messiah's kingdom.

Yer. 17. — His Name shall endure for ever
(comp. Pss. zlv. 2, ti; cii. 12; Isa. ix. 7).
" The eternity of the Name is based upon
the eternity of the kingdom " (Heugsten-
berg). His Xame shall be continued as long
as the sun (comp. ver. 5); oT,hisN'i me shall
be renewed — shall spring again to fresh life.
Dr Kay compares an expression of Beniin's,
" Son culte ee rajeunira," And men shall
he blessed in him; literally, men shall
hless themselves in him (comp. Gren. xxiL
18; xxvi. 4). All nations shall call him
blessed. With these words the psalm, pro-
perly speaking, ends. The doxology (vers.
18, 19) and the note (ver. 20) were pro-
bably appended by the arranger of the
book.

Yers. 18, 19. — Blessed be the lord Qod,
the God of Israel (compare the other doxo-
logies, which begin similarly (Pss. xli. 13 ;
Ixxxix. 52 ; cvi. 48). Who only doeth
wondrous things (oomp. Ps. Ixxxvi. 8, 10;
and Job v. 9). And blessed be his glorious
Name for ever (comp. Pss. xxix. 2 ; xxxiv. 3 ;
Ixvi. 2 ; Ixix. 30 : cxiii. 2, etc.). And let
the whole earth be filled with his glory.
The whole earth can no otherwise be filled
With the glory of God, than by men every-
where glorifying him, and bowing down in
adoration before his Son. The promise had
been made tliat so it should one day be
(Numb. xiv. 21); ami the psalmist antici-
pates the fulfilment of the promise. Amen,
and Amen (comp. Pss. xli. IS ; Ixxxix. 52 ;
cvi. 48).

Yer. 20. — The prayers of David the son of
Jesse are ended. This is a note appended,
either by the collector of the first two Books
of the Psalms, or by the collector of the
Third Book, who thus marked the differ-
ence between the previous collrction and his
own, the former containing sixty psalms
ascribed to David in their titles, and the
latter one only (Ps. Ixxxvi.).



HOMILETICa

Ver. 17. — Messiah's reign. " Men shall be blessed in him." This great promise
looks back to the glorious and amazing assurance thrice given to the Patriarch
Abraham (and repeated to his son and "irandson, Gen. xii. 3 ; xviii. 18 ; xxii. 18).
St. Paul says the gospel was thus " preached before " (GhI. iii. 8). In the third of
these passages, and in the text, the Hebrew word is strictly " bless themselves" (margin,



PS. Lxxii. 1— 20.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. «7



Revised Version); but thu sense is governed by the other two passages ^^»u v,i ...
xxvi. 4 compared with xxviii. 14), As we are said to wash ourselvet in water, though
it is the water that cleanses ; or to feed ourselves, though it is the food that nourishes ;
or to rest ourselves, though it is the resting-place which yields us rest; so we hless
ourselves when we take the blessings God gives us, and find cleansing, food, rest, in
Christ. Ancient Hebrew expositors took this glorious psalm as a prophecy of Messiah.
Modern Christian critics have spent great learning and ingenuity in dethroning Christ,
and leaving Solomon in his stead. If Solomon really wrote this psalm concerning
himsdf, it must be pronounced such a piece of self-glorification, with such Eastern
exaggeration, as we nowhere else find in Scripture. Yet we may regard the peaceful
glory of Solomon's reign, nnlike anything before or since, as an earthly and typical
fulfilment, in part, of this majestic, prophetic picture, taking it to refer not to Solomon
personally, but to David's royal line, crowned and consummated in Christ (so of
Abraham's line St. Paul says, " which is Christ," Q-al. iii. 16).

I. GKid'b Word promises blessing in which all nations are to share. This
wondrous chain of promises, stretching across thousands of years, holds out a hope
which has no root but in the Bible — the universal equal hap(jiness of all nations of
mankind. Men may discard the Bible, and yet cling, in the name of progress and
civilization, to this splendid hope. But whence did it spring? National haiipiness or
welfare, or, in the strong Bible word, " blessedness," depends on six things — justice,
freedom, virtue, knowledge, distribution of wealth, peace (Ps. cxliv. 15). 1. Justice is
the first office and object of government (Bom. xiii. 1 — 5), the first condition of
national welfare (Deut. iv. 8). Great Charters, Petitions of Right, Declarations of
Independence, and the like, are the outcry of oppressed peoples for this prime necessity
of national life. 2. Freedom is really implied in justice, the only real guardiHU of
right and nurse of true virtne. 3. Virtue is no less essential to real national happiness
»nd greatness. Fraud, intemperance, impurity, covetous greed, wild love of pleasure,
sloth, cowardice, suck the vitals and sap the roots of national lite. 4. Knowledge is the
parent of all progress. Not mere labour, but wisely directed labour, is the source of
wealth. The mind that invents and foresees must guide the hand which toils.
5. Bight distributiem of wealth is the most urgent national pr.ililem of our own day in
our own and all civilized nations. No nation is blessed in which immense wealth
stagnates in a few hands, and the toiling millions are wretched and joyless. 6. Peace
is the fence and crown of all the other elements of national welfare. War is a short
name for all calamities, cruellest of misfortunes, if necessary and just; if unjust,
avoidable, the greatest of crimes.

II. All nations are to be blessed in Christ. 1. Possibility and reasonableness
of this. It is not open to question that if even the bulk of a nation, its rulers,
legislators, and individual citizens became real Christians, such as may be found b;
thousands, loving God truly and their neighbour unselfishly, hating vice, dealing
justly, loving mercy, and walking humbly with God, — that nation would soon be th«
envy of all nations. Let every nation undergo such a transformation, and war would
be impossible ; slavery and tyranny would be things of the past ; social problem)
would be solved, not by legislation, but by every one's sense of what is due to others j
mutual help would take the place of fierce competition ; labour would becnme faithful
and wealth beneficent; even secular knowledge of all kinds would receive a luightj
impulse from the new value given to each human life and the high moral tone ol
society. These things the gospel can certainly do, if only all men would believe.
2. Hopelessness of such a condition, except from the kingdom of Christ. Human nutuie
has not in itself the tendency to produce such a state of things. Knowledge aiit*
progress do not change human nature, do not give life ; Christ alone gives life (John
X. 10). 3. Hopefulness of this prospect. (1) God has provided for nothing less. W ja(
the gospel effects on a small scale it is equally fitted to effect on the largest scale.
What Jesus Christ is actually doing for every sinner who believes in him, every
disciple who truly follows him, he is able to do for mankind. (2) God has promised no
less. In the Lord's Prayer we pray for the coming of his kingdom " on earth " (Ps.
ii. 8 ; Isa. ii. 4).



68 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. lxxii. 1—20



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Vers. 1 — 20. — The glory of Ghriat'i kingdom. It is written that Satan took our Lord
" up into an exceeding lii£;h mountain, and showed him all the kingdoms of the world
and the glory of them " (Matt. iv. 8) ; but they had uo charm for him. In this psalm
we are, so to speak, taken up by the Spirit, and shown the kingdom of Messiah ; and
13 its glory opens to our sight our hearts are thrilled with admiration and delight.
With renewed ardour we cry, " Thy kingdom come." Consider some things testified
here as to the glory of Chiist's kingdom.*

I. The gbeatnbss of the Sovbrbion. David and Solomon were in some respects
great kings ; and their greatue ss, so far as it was real, arose from their feeling their
dependence upun God, and that it was their first duty to rule themselves and their
people according to God's Law. We know how in many things they offended. But
aere is a King spoken of whose greatness is of a nobler kind, and who comes short in
aotbing of God's glory. As respects his nature, his character, his relationships, he is
supremely fitted to rule. In him " righteousness " and " judgment " ar§ found as in
God. The will of God, on the one hand, and the welfare of his people are his highest
ends. " God is light ; " and this King saith, " I am the Light of the world." " God
is love ; " and this King's advent was proclaimed by angels as the Saviour who should
bring down love to men : " Glory to God in the highest, peace on earth, good will to
the children of men."

IL Thb biohteousness op the ADiimisTBATiON. (Vers. 2 — 4.) David, in his
last words, describes Messiah's manner of government (2 Sam. zziii. 1^-4). It is
characterized by justice; there is no respect of persons; friends are not unduly
favoured, nor enemies unfairly punished (Isa. xi. 4, 5) ; the cunditiun and interests uf
all are considered, and the poor are specially regarded; but justice is blended with
mercy. It is the glory of Christ's government that it provides for the return of the
rebellious, and for the restoration of the fallen.

III. The happiness of the people. (Vers. 6, 7.) The laws of the kingdom are
not only adapted to the nature and necessities of man, but designed for the welfare of
those who obey them (Deut. xxxii. 47 ; Isa. xlviii. 18) ; they are not arbitrary, but
fiiunded in truth; they are not alterable, but eternally fixed. Earthly governments
so far regulate their laws according to circumstances, and there may be improvements
made and reforms carried out from time to time for the greater advantage of the
people ; but the laws of this kingdom do not need improvement — they are perfect as
God is perfect. We see the result in the character and privileges of the people (Isa.
xliii. 21; Matt. v. 1 — 10). They are enlightened, contented, law-abiding; they strive
to mould their lives according to the will of their Kmg, and in loyalty and devotion
to him they find their highest honour and their highest happiness. In this kingdom
alone can liberty, equality, and fraternity, in the truest sense, be enjoyed.

IV. The pdtdbe triumphs that mat be confidently expected. This kingdom
is destined to grow from more to more ; it has an unlimited power of expansiveness
(vers. 8, 13) ; it is also marked by stability. Earthly kingdoms have their rise and
fall ; .but this kingdom is unshakable and eternal. It begins on earth, but is carried
up to heaven. Other kings may have successors, though often the direct succession
fails ; but this King has no successor, but will reign for ever and ever.— W. F.

Ver. 15. — Christ on the throne. If it may be said of the twenty-second psalm that
it lets us see Christ on the cross, it may be said of this that it shows us Christ on the
throne. Instead of humiliation, there is exaltation; instead of the mockery of "the
purple robe," there is the homage of angels; instead of the wicked cries of envious
priests and a deluded people, " Crucify him 1 " there is the joyful song of the redeemed,
"Alleluia, for the Lord God omnipotent reigneth!" The saints on earth, as well as
the saints in heaven, are partakers of this joy ; they know whom they have believed,
and they have had experience of his benign and righteous rule. We learn here —

L That where Christ eeiqnb there is life. He is the Source and the Giver
of life. Where the waters that Bzekiel saw came, there was life; and so where the
goapel of Christ oomes, there is life. The mind that before was dark has the life of
truth ; the conscience that before was dormant has the life of righteousness; the heart



HI. LKii, 1— 20.J THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 69

that before was dead in sins is quickened to the new life of love and holiness. Christ's
rule ever tends to the well-being of his people.

IL That where the be is life there will be prater. The first sign of infant
life is breathing; and the first sign of the soul's life is the breathing of prayer to Q-od.
The life within expresses itself in accordance with its nature and needs. The mind
that has light cries for more light; the conscience, awakened to a sense of sin, seeks
deliverance ; the heart that has been touched with the love of God yearns for more
love and nearer fellowship. So it was with Paul. " Behold, he prayeth ! " and so onward,
through all the toils and struggles of his noble life, he continued instant in prayer.

III. That where there is prayer the supreme desire will be the olobi
OF Christ. Self will be lost in love. Concern about ourselves will be merged in
concern for the glory of Christ our Lord. " Prayer shall be made fw him." 1. For
his cause. What interests him will interest us ; what lies nearest his heart will be
nearest ours. There is unity of life. 2. For his people. He identifies himself with
them. He regards what is done to them as done to himself. When " prayer was
made of the Church " for Peter, they were, in a sense, making prayer for Chiist. Our
sympathies should be as broad as the sympathies of Christ. 3. For his second coming.
His first coming was the hope of Israel ; his second coming is the hope of the Church
of the gospel (Eev. xxii. 20 ; Titus ii. 13). " Prayer for Christ " increases our love to
him, binds us in closer union with the brethren, and enables us to transmit the blessed
hope to future generations. Think of the prayers made every Lord's day ! What
cause for thankfulness and joy ! Yea, " daily " prayer shall be made till prayer is
consummated in praise. — W. F.

Vers, 1 — ^7. — The effect of the anger of a perfectly righteous King. Most probably
put into form by Solomon, even if David suggested the substance of it. It is the
portrait of an ideal King, never yet realized completely by any earthly monarch, and
finds its perfect fulfilment only in Christ and his kingdom. Solomon did not fulfil it.
It shows the effects of the reign of a perfectly righteous King such as Christ.

I. He proclaims and administers onlt righteous laws and judgments.
(Vers. 1, 2.) In opposition to the injustice of the despot. But the true King has •
passion for justice.

II. The reign op righteousness brings in the reign op peaok. (Ver. 3.')
" Mountains and hills are mentioned as being characteristic features of the country.
Peace is always spoken of in the Scriptures as the fruit of righteousness — ^in public and
in private.

III. It upholds and vindicates the rights of the poor against all oppres-
sion. (Ver. 4.) Those who are born to poverty are more or less regarded by an
unrighteous government as having no rights. Christianity expresses the cause of the
poor, and vindicates their rights against aJl injustice and selfishness.

IV. Righteous rule teaches the people the fear or God. (Ver. 6.) COTrupt
government encourages licentiousness and irreligion among the people.

V. Righteous government quickens and fertilizes all the affairs of a
nation. (Ver. 6.) As rain quickens and fertilizes the dry earth.

VI. Good men prosper and have peace under righteous government.
(Ver. 7.) But aie mostly persecuted and despoiled of their liberty and rights unJer a
tyrannical rule. It is the ofBce of a righteous king to defend the righteous ; but it is
Christ's work to make men righteous by fashioning their minds anew by his Holj
Spirit.— a



70



THE BOOK OP PSALMS.



[pa. Lxxiii. 1 — 28.



BOOK III.



EXPOSITION.



PSALM LXXIII.
This i» the first of the " Psalms of Asaph,"
trheieof the present book oontains eleven.
Tliey are characterized by a preponderating
use of the name " Elohim " over that of " Je-
hovah," by a great calmness and solemnity
of tone, and by a pervading melancholy.
The present psalm has for its subject the
woll-woru problem of the prosperity of the
wicked (Job xxi. 7 — 15; Ps. xxxvii. 1 — 38;
Jer. xiL 1 — 3, etc.). The writer has been
troabled with respect to it, and has well-
nigh fallen away from God in consequence
(ver. 2) ; but, after a severe struggle (vers.
13 — 16), liis eyes have been enlightened on
the subject, and he has found an explana-
tion which is satisfactory to him (vers.
17—20). He contrasts his former state of
perplexity and danger with his present
satisfaction and security (vers. 21 — 24);
and concludes by expressing an unqualified
trust in the ultimate salvation of the
rig' teous and destruction of the wicked.

Metrically, the psalm seems to fall into
eight stanzas ; the first and last of two
verses each, the remaining six each of four



Ver. 1. — Truly God is good to Israel ; i.e.
verily, in spite of appearances to the con-
trary, which had fur a time made the
writer doubt. It is suggested that the
triumph of Absalom may iiave beeTi the
circumstance that shook Asaph's faith.
Even to snoh as are of a clean heart ; i.e.
to the pious in Israel, wlio are the true
Israel. God is really on their side, though
he may seem for a time to favour the
vviukerl. (On the need of a pure heart, see
Ps. xxiv. 4.)

Ver. 2. — But as for me, my feet were
almost gone; my steps had well-nigh
slipped. The psalmist had doubted God's
llfdodness and righteousness, on account of
the prosperity of the winked He feels now
that his doubt had been a sin, and had
almost caused him to give up his confidence
and trust in the Almighty. He liad well-
nigh slipped from the rock of faith into the
«bys8 of scepticism.

Ver. 3. — For I was envioas at the foolish,



wlien I saw the prosperity of tho wlokea
(comp. Ps. xxxvii. 1). To envy the wieked"
because they prosper is to make more
account of the good things of this life than
of God's favour — to prefer physical good to
moral. It is also to doubt that God governs
the universe by the strict rule of justice.
The word translated " foolish " means
rather, "vain arrogant boasters." Such
the wicked commonly become when they
prosper (comp. Ps. v. 5).

Ver. 4. — For there are no bands in their
death ; or, no sufferings (SvmriBetat, Aquila ;
"torments," Oheyne); comp. Job xxi. 13,
"They spend their days in wealth, and
in a moment go down to the grave;" and
ver. 23, "One dieth in his full strength,
being wholly at ease and quiet." Such
deaths often happen, and are a severe trial
of faith to those who have no firm c 'U-
viction of the reality of a hereafter. Bnt
their strength is firm ; literally, their body
is plump (Oheyne). But the Authorized
Version probably gives the true meaning.
They drop into the grave while their
strengtii is still undiminished.

V. r. 5. — They are not in trouble as other
men; neither are they plagued like other
men (comp. Job xxi. 8 — 10). There is, no
doubt, something of Oriental hyperbole in
this representation, as there is in the
account given by Job (l.s^J), which he
afterwards qualifies (Job xxvii. 13 — 23).
But still a certain immunity from suffering
does seem often to attach to the wicked
man, whom God does not chasten, because
chastening would be of no service to him.

Ver. 6. — Therefore pride compasseth them
about as a chain; or, it as a chain about
their neek (Eevised Version) — makes them
stiffen their neck, and hold their head aloft.
Kot being afflicted, they regard themselves
as favourites of Heaven, and are therefore
puffed up with pride, which they show in
their gait and bearing. Violence covereth
them as a garment. Pride and self-conceit
naturally lead on to violence, which be-
comes so habitual to them that it seems
like their ordinary apparel (comp. Ps. oil
18, 19). The violence of the great ones
in Israel is continually denounced, both by
psalmists and prophets (see Pss. xi. 2 ; Iv.
9; Iviii. 2; Ixxii. 14, eta; Isa. i. 15; iii
15; lix. 3—7; Hos. iv. 1, 2; Amos iii. 10,
etc.).

Ver. 7. — Their eyes stand ont with fat-
ness. Their eyes, which gloat upon the



es. Lxxin. 1 — 28.]



THE BOOK OP PSALMS.



71



laxnries around them, seem to stand out
from their fat and bloated faces (oomp. Job
XV. 27; Ps. xvii. 10). They have more
than heart could wish ; literally, the imagi-
nation! of their heart overflow. The exact
meaning is doubtful.

Ver. 8. — They are oorrupt, and speak
wickedly ooncerniDg oppression : they speak
loftily J rather, they moff, and speak wickedly;
of oppreetion do they apeak from heaven'i
height; i.e. "they scoff at the righteous,
and speak wickedly coacerniug them ; tbey
talk of the oppressive acts which they
meditate, as though they vrere Divine
beings, speaking from the heavenly height "
(Cheyne).

Ver. 9.— They set their month against
the heavens. So Hupfeld and Canon Cook,
who understand the expression of blas-
phemy; but most modern critics translate,
"They have set their mouth in the
heavens," and regard the meaning as nearly
allied to that of the second clause of the
preceding verse, "They speak as though
they were inhabitants of the heavens." And
their tongue walketh through the earth.
Their tongui- ia always busily employed —
boas ling (ver. 3), lying, backbiting.

Ver. 10. — Therefore his people return
hither ; rather, therefore he turns his people
hitherward; i.e. by his great pretensions
aiid his audacity, he (the wicked man)
turns liis followers to his own courses, and
induces them to act as he acts. And waters
of a fnll cup are wrung out to them ; rather, ,
and waters in abundance are drained by
them. They "drink iniquity like water
(Job XV. 16), "draining" the cup which
il handed to them.

Ver. 11. — And they say, How doth God
know? Their wickedness breeds scepti-
cism in them. They wish God not to
know, and therefore begin to question
whether he does or can know (comp. Pg.
X. 4, 11, 13). And is there knowledge in
the Host High? Does Gnd concein him-
self at all with the things that take place
on earth (oomp. Ps, xoiv. 7)? Is not man
too weak and contemptible to attract his
attention ?

Ver 12.— Behold, these are the ungodly,
who prosper in the world ; rather, and they
prosper always. They increase in riches.
This is the impression which the psalmist
has received from the general course of
human affairs in his day. It is closely
allied to the view taken by Job (xxi.
7—15).

Ver. 13. — Verily, I have cleansed my
heart in vain, and washed my hands in
innocency. Such was the psalmist's first
instinctive feeling, when he noticed the
prosperity of the wicked. The Prayer-
book Version inserts, between this verse and



the last, the words, " and 1 said ; " which
is correct, though somewhat free, exegesis.
Compare with the expression, " I have
washed my hands in innocency," Job's re-
markable words, "If I wash myself with
snow, and make my hands never so clean "
(Job ix. 30).

Ver. 14.— For all the day long have I
been plagued. While the ungodly have
prospered, and not been plagued at all
(ver. 5), I, the representative of the right-
eous, have been "plagued," or afflicted,
continually. What, then, does goodness
advantage me ? And chastened every morn-
ing ; literally, and my chastisement has been
every morning (comp. Job vii. 18).

Ver. 15. — If I say, I will speak thus;
behold, I should offend against the genera-
tion of thy children; or, if I haid said
(Revised Version). If, when these leelings
assailed me, and the lot of tlie ungodly
man seemed to me much better than my
own, I had resolved to speak out all my
thoughts, and let tliem be generally known,
then should I have dealt lreach<-rou4y with
(Revised Version) the generation of tliy oliil-
dreii. I should have deserted their cause ;
I should have hurt their feelings ; I should
have put a stumMing-block in their way.
Therefore, the psalmist implies, he said
notliing — a reticence well worthy of imita-
tion.

Ver. 16. — When I thought to know this ;
literally, and I meditated, that I might
understand this. A process of careful
thouglit and consideration is implied, dur-
ing which the psalmist tried hard to under-
stand the method of God's government, and
to explain to himself its seeming anomalies.
But be says, It was too painful for me. He
did not succeed ; he was baffled and per-
plexed, and the whole effort was a pain and
a grief to him.

Ver. 17. — Until I went into the sanctuary
of God; literally, the sanctuaries (oomp.
Pss. Ixviii. 35; Ixxxiv. 1; cxxxii. 7). The
three subdivisions of both the tabernacle
and the first temple, viz. the court, the
holy place, and the holy of holies, con-
stituted three sanctuaries. The psalmist,
in his perplexity, took his doubts into the
sanctuary of God, and there, " in the calm-
ness of the sacred court" (Kay), recon-
sidered the hard problem. Compare Hez<'-
, kiah's action with the perplexing letter nf
Sennacherib (2 Kings xix. 14). Then
understood I their end. There came to liim
in the sanctuary the thought that, to judge
aright of tiie happiness or misery, of any
man, it is necessary to await the end (comp.
Herod., i. 32; Soph., '(Ed. Tyr.,' ad Jin.;
Eurip., ' Andromach.,' 1. 100; Aristot.,'Etli.
Nic.,' i. 10).

Ver. 18. — Surely thou didst set them up



12



THE BOOK OF PSALMS.



[pa. Lxzin. 1 — 28.



in slippery places. The wicked have at no
time any sure hold on their prosperity.
They are * stt in slippery places " — places
from which they may easily slip and fall.
Ihon castedst them down to destrnotion.
The fall often comes, even in this life. The
flourishing; cities of tlie plain are destroyed
by fire from heaven; Pharaoh's land is
ruined by the plagues, and his host de-
stroyed in the Bed Sea ; Sennacherib's army
perishes in a night ; Jezebel is devoured by
dogs ; AtUaliah is slain with the sword ;
Antiocbns Epiphanes perishes in a distant
expedition; Herod Agrippa is eaten of
worms; persecutors, like Nero, Galerius,
Julian, come to untimely ends. A. signal
retribution yisits the wicked in hum I reds
and thousands of instances. Wlien it does
not, the question remains — Is death the
end? This point is not formally brought
forward, but it underlies the whole argu-
ment; and, unless retribution after death
be regarded as certain, a single exception to
the general rule of retribution in this life
would upset the solution which the psalmist
finds satisfactory.

Ver. 19. — Sow are they brought into
desolation, as in a moment I There is some-
thing very striking in the suddenness with
which the prosperity of a wicked man often
collapses. Saul, Jezebel, Athaliah, Epi-
phanes, Herod Agiippa, are oases in point,
likewise Mero, Galerius, Julian. The first
and second Napoleonic empires may also
be cited. They are utterly consumed with
terrors ; literally, they perish ; thi-y come to
an end through terrors (comp. Job xviii. 11 ;
xxiv. 17 ; xxvii. 20).

Ver. 20. — As a dream when one awaketh ;
so, Lord, when thou awakest, thou shalt
despise their image. As men despise their
dreams when they awake from them, so,
when God " stirs up himself and awakes to
judgment " (Ps. xxxv. 23), he will despise
such mere semblances of humanity (Ps.
xzzix. 6) as the wicked are.

Ver. 21. — Thus my heart was grieved;
literally, /or my heart was grieved, or "was
soured." The " for " refers to a suppressed
phrase of self-condemnation, "But at the
time I did not see all this — the solution
did not present itself to me." I was too full
of grief and bitterness to consider the mat-
ter calmly and dispassionately. And I was
]^e]ced in my reins ; t.e. "a pang of pas-
Bionate discontent had pierced my inmost
being " (Cheyne).

Ver. 22. — So foolish was I, and ignorant :
'. was as a beast before thee. I had no
more intelligence than the brute beasts ; I
was wholly unable to reason aright (comp.
Pts. xxxii. 9 ; xcii. 7 ; Frov. xxx. 2).

Ver. 23. — Nevertheless I am continnally
with thee; i.e. "nevertheless, I have not



fallen away, but have kept always my hold
upon thee;" and, on thy part, thou hast
holden me by my right hand ; t.e. thou hast
upheld me and prevented me from slipping
(comp. Pss. xviii. 35 ; Ixxxix. 21 ; cxix.
117).

Ver. 24. — ^Thon ihalt gnide me with thy
counsel. The psalmist expre.sses full con-
fidence in God's continual guidance through
all life's dangers and difSculties, notwith-
standing his own shortcomings and " foolish-
ness." He tlien looks beyond this life, and
exclaims, And afterward (thou wilt) receive
me to glory. Even Professor Cheyne sees in
this "the story of Enoch spiritualized."
" Walking with God," he says, " is followed
by a reception with glory, or into glory ; "
and he compares the paeoage with Fi.
xlix. 16, which he has previously explained
as siiowing that "the poet has that religious
intuition which forms the kernel of the
hope of immortality."

Ver. 25. — Whom have I in heaven but
thee? Who is there in all the host oi
heaven on whom I can place any reliance,
excepting thee 1 None of thy " holy ones,"
neither angel nor archangel, can afiord me
any support or sustenance, preserve or guide
or save me, but thot; only (comp. Job v. 1).
And there is none upon earth that I desire
beside thee, Much less can earth supply
me with a substitute for God. On him my
heart's affections are centred (comp. Ps.
Ixiii, 1, "My soul thirsteth for thee, my
flesh longeth for thee in a dry and thirsty
land, where no water is ").

Ver. 26. — My flesh and my heart faileth
The meaning is, " Though my flesh and my
heart fail utterly, though my whole cor-
poreal and animal nature fade away and
come to nothing, yet something in the
nature of a heart — the true ' I,' conscious-
ness, will remain, and will be upheld by
God." God is the Strength of my heart, and
my Portion for ever. "A strong assertion
of personal immortality" (Cook). "This
is the mysticism of faith; we are on the
verge of St. Paul's conception of the vecv/to,
the organ of life in God " (Cheyne).

Ver. 27. — For lo, they that are far from
thee shall perish. As God is the source of
all life, to be " far from him " is to perish —
to have this life depart from us, even if
existence of any kind remains. The psalmist
is vague with respect to the ultimate fate of
the wicked, confident only of the continued
existence, in a condition which he declares
to be " good," of the righteous. Thou hast
destroyed all them that go a-whoring from
thee. The strong phrase here used is rare
in the Psalm?, occurring only in this place
and in Ps. cvi. 39. It commonly refers to
idolatrous practices, but is used sometimes
of other kinds of deoleusion and alienation



PS. Lxxm. 1—28.]



THE BOOK OP PSALMS.



7»



from God (see Lev. xx. 6; Numb. xiv.
S3).

Ver. 28. — But it ii good for me to draw
near to God; or, "but as for me, nearness
to God is my good " (Kay). Compare the
well-known hymn —

"Nearer, my Goil, to thee.
Nearer to thee ;
Even though it be a aroH
That raiaeth me;



Still all my song shall be,
Nearer, my God, to thee.
Nearer to thee."

I have put my trust in the Lord Qod;
literally, in the Lord Jehavah (_Adanai
Jehovah)— e.n unusual combination. That I
may declare all thy works. Witli the in-
tention of ever hereafter declaring and
magnifying all thy worka.



HOMILETIOS.

Ver. 24. — Divine guidanot. "Thou shalt guide," etc. Asaph looked out on the
world of human life, and beheld a sight which troubled and perplexed him, as it has
troubled and perplexed many a pious heart since. He saw the wealthy sinner clothed
in purple and fine linen, and faring sumptuously ; godless, yet prosperous ; adding
field to field ; spending in selfish luxury what he gained by fraud and extortion ; and
at last dying in peaceful old age, and laid in a splendid sepulchre. And he saw the
devout, honest, patient worshipper of God, toiling hard to keep the wolf from his door,
glad of the crumbs from the rich man's table to eke out his children's scanty meal ;
dying prematurely, worn out with care and hardship, and hurried into a nameless
grave. As Asaph saw this, and much more like this, he could not help asking, " Whtf
is this f Why does not the hand of Omnipotence with a touch arrest the crooked
balance, crown virtue and piety with prosperity, and overwhelm vice and injustice
with misery and shame ? " Then he " went into the sanctuary of God." He joined,
though with troubled spirit, in praising God; "for his mercy endureth for ever." He
poured out his soul in silent prayer, while the priest ministered at the golden altar.
Then the Holy Spirit shed a light into his mind that lighted up the whole prospect of
human life. He saw that he had left the main element out of his reckoning — for-
gotten to a&k, " What will he the end f " He discerned the dangers of prosperity and
the benefits of adversity; how pride, covetousness, lust, selfishness, injustice, thrive in
luxurious self-indulgence, like rank weeds in a rich soil; and how the Lord chastens
those he loves (Heb. xii. 10). Then understood he their end. He confessed his error.
And with new humility and fresh faith he here entrusts himself and all his concerns
to God's fatherly guidance and sovereign will. " Thou shalt guide," etc. These words
express a deep sense of need of Divine guidance; wUUngness to be guided; assuramce
that God wiU guide.

I. The neeb of Divine quidanoe. Man begins life as the most helpless of creatures.
If not fed, clothed, cared for by others, he would perish almost as soon as bom. With-
out the company and training of bis elders, if he could grow up at all, he wuuld lack
language, if not reason. As he grows up, and reaps the fruit of all this guidance and
counsel, he begins to be impatient of control, to imagine himself self-sufiicient. Hk
will' be guided by his own counsel. This conceit becomes in many cases so unbridled,
that the thuujiht of dependence even upon God becomes intolerable. "Our lips, say
they, are our own : who is Lord over us ? " The truth is that what we really need,
when we have outgrown our first lessens, is not less guidance, but of a higher sort.
The stronger, richer, wiser, any one is, the more mischiel he may do, and the more
misery he may incur, if he takes a wrong course. You, young man, in the pride ol
your untamed energy ; you, man of the world, in the ripeness of your gathered experi-
ence, — have not less, but more need of guidance than when you sat on the bench at
school, or lay in your nurse's arms. 1. We need guidance because of our ignorance of
the future. The only things we can certainly foresee are the motions of the heavenly
bodies and the action of natural forces. The moment we get into the world of life
we are in the region of uncertainty. True, we foresee a great deal. Business would be
impossible, life would be impossible, without a great deal of foresight. But over alt
hangs a haze of uncertainty. Tour plans are laid, perhaps, with wise forecast. But
will the ship come in? Will the rise or fall ou which you reckon take place? WiU



74 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. lxxiii. 1— 28.

the demand for the gonds you are making continue, or suddenly cease? Will the
harreBt be good or bad ? You can no more tell than whether you will be able to attend
to your business this day week, or be lying delirious with fever. 2. We need guidance
because of the fallibility of our judgment. Were there no cloud on our knowledge,
yet if the balance of judgment hang awry, we may easily involve ourselves and others
in irreparable misfortune. This was what so humbled the psalmist. He perceived
that his judgment of human affairs had been completely at fault. He had adojited a
wholly false standard, and, if left to choose for himself and for others, he would have
chosen disastrously wrong. God's thoughts, he saw, are not our thoughts, any more
than God's ways are our ways. " What, then, is the guidance?" he asks. " With thy
counsel." "Coimsel" has a double meaning: " advice," and " plan, or purpose." lie
may mean, " Lead me by thy Word and thy Spirit, teaching me how to judge, making
my duty plain ; " or, " Choose my path and lot according to thine own wise purpose."
But the firet siinse really includes the second ; for if God shows us our way, it must
be the way he chooses for us. Calvin says, " Although sometimes things turn out
well when we are rash and foolish (for Grod mends our mistakes, and turns our wrong
beginnings to happy endings), vet his more common and fuller blessing lies in giving
wisdom to his people; and nothing is to be more earnestly prayed for than that we
may be ruled by the Spirit of wisdom and counsel."

IL Therefore these words are a prayeb fob Divine ouidance. As much as to
say, "I need guidance; my future is hidden; my judgment is fallible. To thee the
future is as the present ; the darkness as the light. All events, all seasons, all minds
and wills of men, are in thy hand. Choose thou my way. Lead me in thy path,
and teach me. Make my path plain ; but, even if it be obscure, let me rest in this
— that it is thy counsel, not my own." It is one thing to believe the fact of Divine
guidance ; another to be willing to follow it. One thing, also, to trust God to lead
us in the path we have chosen; another to say, "Not my will, but thine." And vet
it ought to be easy! What is the whole Bible but one continued proof that God's way
is the right way, and the ways men choose for themselves, wrong? "All- we like
sheep," etc. ; " He that spared not," etc. (Isa. liii. 6 ; Eom. viii. 32).

III. Absueance that God will guide. Therefore what we need that God should
do, because he can and we cannot; and what we are willing he should do, and ask
him to do for us, — that we may expect him to do. These words are more than the
cry of need ; more than the surrender of self-will ; are the triumphant utterance of
faith. " Thou wilt guide ... to glory." Here is a sunbeam of clear hope and inspired
pre mise breaking through all the clouds of doubt, fear, and ignorance. One such test
IS enough to prove that it is a huge mistake to suppose the hope of immortality hidden
from the ancient saints. (Indeed, even apart from inspiration, the Hebrews could not
be ignorant of what was well known to the Egyptians, ages before Moses.) Here the
balance rights itself. Why do the ungodly prosper ? Because they are " men of the
world, whose portion is in this life " (Ps. xvii. U). Why does God not give his children
their portion here 1 That he may prepare them for their portion hereafter (2 Cor. iv.
16 — 18 ; John xiv. 2 — i, 6). Here is the difference between the foresight of faith
and the foresight of worlrily calculation. To earthly foresight it is the near future
that is plain ; the further it recedes, the thicker the mists gather. To the eye of faith
it is the near future which we can contentedly leave uncertain, because the distant,
the eternal future, is revealed. " We know not what shall be on the morrow ; " but we
know what shall be when the heavens and earth that are now shall have passed away.
« We know" (2 Cor. v. 1).

Vor. 26. — Strength in weahness. "My flesh ... for ever." Asaph's psalms bear
no less the stamp of Divine inspiration than David's; yet their character is widely
different. The Holy Spirit employs different instruments for different ends. Beading
David's psalms and David's life, one is ready to say we have an epitome of all human
experience. Yet Asaph shows us depths of experience into which probably David
never penetrated. This psalm opens abruptly : " surely " — or, as in the margin,
" yet," nevertheless — " God is good to Israel ! " This points back to that severe
mental conflict in which Asaph had barely escaped overthrow (vers. 2, 3). A
struggle with doubt, in which many can sympathize. In vers. 16, etc., he show^ how his



#8. Lxxm. 1—28.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 75



eyes were opened to the folly and injustice of his hard thoughts of God. From this
■deep abasement (ver. 22) he springs at a bound to the loftiest height of faith. And in
this twenty-sixth verse, he crushes together, as it were, the two extremes of his
experience. At once a cry of defeat and a shout of victory.

I. The cry or defeat, a confession of weakness, despair, failure. " My flesh,"
-etc, "Heart," in the Scriptures, stands for the whole meutal and spiritual nature;
" flesh " (often " flesh and blood"), for our nature as mortal, often as sinful. Here,
as in Ps. Ixxxiv. 2. An utter breakdown of energy, bodily, and mental. Hope and
courage seem spent. The past looks au abyss in which happiness has been engulfed ;
the present, a crushing burden; the future, a dark blank. If I were to call this a
picture of human life, I should seem to many darkly, ungratefully exaggerating. Our
views of life depend on our experience. Young, happy, strong, hopeful, — you find
nothing like this. Past has few regrets, present few drawbacks, future no clouds.
Thank God for sunshine! But remember on what a brittle thread life hangs. Health
may fail, friends die, most trusted investments prove a snare, calculations mistaken.
(Like houses on brink of Lake of Zag.) The lesson of our own weakness one of great
lessons of life. God has various ways — some gentle, some severe — of teaching it ; but
we need it. Those who do not learn it, not the happiest (vers. 6 — 9). Extreme case —
people ruined by their own prosperity. But take milder examples — those who have
never learned humbling lesson of weakness ; not ripest, richest Christians, most able
to sympathize. Even our blessed Lord needed this lesson (may we venture to say ?), not
only for perfection of obedience, but sympathy (Heb. v. 7,8; ii. 18). If you have
never been forced to say, '' My flesh and my heart fail," you have much to learn.
Espeoialiy the full comfort and liiumph of the other half of the verse.

II. The shout of victory. The utterance of triumphant laith. "God," etc. 1.
This implies what the New Testament calls recunciliation to God. Theologians speak
of Ood being reconciled to us. The Scriptures, o/' om/' being reconciled — God reconciling
«s to himself (Roto. xv. 10, see Revised Version, ver. 11; 2 Cor. v. 18). God cannot
be " the Strength " of a heart unreconciled — at enmity. I believe there are persons who
have heard the gospel preached all their lives,' yet never really taken m that the
gospel is just this message. They know something is wanting to make them true
Christians. But " unreconciled ! — at enmity ! " Not so bad as that 1 If they could
see that it is even so, this would be first step to " taking hold of God's strength." An
uneasy conscience is a great cause of weakness ; a dead or sleeping conscience, worse.
Peace is strength ; righteousness, love, joy, are strength. 2. A mind at rest in Ood ;
satisfied as to the wisdom, justice, goodness, of all his dealings ; not because we can
thoroughly understand them, but can trust God. Asaph had severe trials (ver. 14).
But worst, hardest, difficulty of reconciling what he saw in the world with goodness
.and righteousness of God. Such doubt as may arise in the most devout mind ; the
more devout, the more painful. Insoluble to reason (ver. 16). " Light and peace
come not by thinking, but by faith " (Perowne). In God's house, perhaps in public
worship, perhaps in silent meditation and prayer, these two great truths dawned on
him : (1) that God's plan is not to interfere violently to stop sin, but to make sin its
own punisher and penalty ; (2) the meaning and measure of life lie, not in the compass
of this short life, but beyond. Some interpreters so possessed with belief that Hebrews
were ignorant of immortality, that they explain this of temporal calamities. Pros-
perous wickedness often has a shameful and terrible end. But the very diificulty (vers.
6 — 12) is that this is olten not the case. Asaph would not have learned this in the
house of pra3er, but in courts of law, haunts of business, etc. Besides, this view is unten-
able. Impossible that Hebrews, to say nothing of inspired prophets, could be ignorant
of what Egyptians and other heathen nations knew. (Sheol is never " the grave ; "
it is " Hades.") 3. Accordingly, here is an infinite portion, a boimdless hope. " My
Portion for ever." Guidance here, glory hereafter (ver. 24). In this sunshine, the
darkness and chill of doubt vanish. Not that the believer overlooks tlie difficulties,
but looks beyond. Perhaps sees more forcibly than the unbeliever; but only shadows
across the path; no longer barriers, stumbling-blocks. " God" both " Strength " and
•' Portion.'*^ Not my views, my faith, but God himself. He does not say, " strength of
my flesh," though that, too, is true (Gal. ii. 20, " in the flesh "). Let that fail, decay,
perish I Before Asaph spoke or wrote as a prophet, he had to learn as a believer.
The same Spirit is willing to be our Teaciier.



76 TflE BOOK OP PSALMS. [ps. lxxiu. 1— 2ft..



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Vers. 1 — 28. — The grievous conflict of the flesh and the Spirit, and the glorious coo-
quest of the Spirit at the last. I. The beoinnino of the psalm. In this he ingeniously
poiuteth at those rocks against which he was like to have split his soul.

II. The middle of the psalm. In this he candidly confesseth his ignorance and
folly to have been the chiefest foundation of his fault.

III. The end of the psalm. In this he gratefully kisseth that hand which led him.
out of the labyrinth.

Such is the clear and accurate summing up of the contents of this psalm by an uld.
Puritan divine. Should any of us, unhappily, find our own portraiture in the conduct
told of at the beginning, may it not be long ere the middle and the end of the paalm-
portray us equally well I — S. C.

Vers. 1 — 28. — Asaph't trial and deliverance. Asaph was greatly tempted, as this-
psalm plainly shows. It doe.-! not matter whether he speaks of himself or, as is likely,
of some other servant ol God. Consider —

I. HiB TEMPTATION. 1. It was o Very terrible one. (See ver. 2, "My feet were
almost gone," etc.) How honest the Bible is! It tells the whole truth about men,
and good men, too. It ^hows them tempted, and all but overcome. 2. It arose froim-
his seeing " the prosperity of the wicked." A sight, to Old Testament saints, very hard'
to bear. For they had not our knowledge of the life eternal. Ver. 24 is no disproof
of this statement. For had it meant, as we so commonly take it to mean, the being
received to the future " glory " of God's redeemed in heaven, how was it that so large
a portion of the Jews in our Lord's time did not believe in any future life at all, and;
that our Lord had to turn to th« (to us) apparently irrelevant declaration, " I am the
God of Abraham, of Isaac," etc., when, if the common interpretation be right, there
was this and other plain Scriptures like it to appeal to ? Hence, and for yet other
riasons, we hold that the Old Testament saints had not the knowledge of the future
life and the recompenses that should be accorded them. Therefore to them the sight
of what seemed to be injustice — such as the prosperity of the wicked and the adversity
ol the good — was especially painful ; for they knew of no remedy. 3. And it wrought'
him much harm. He became envious and bitter, vers. 4 — 14 are one long protest
and com|ilaint against God; and sullen — "as a beast before thee;" and miserable —
" It was too paiuful for me." And it all but overthrew him (ver. 2). Such was
A.saph's trial.

II. OuBB IS the same to-dat. We see just what Asaph did ; and we are tempted
to say, as many do say, " The fear of God is not the beginning of wisdom, nor, indeed,,
wisdom at all ; " and so they will have nothing to do with it. But our excuse is far
less than that of Asaph, since clearer light and fuller knowledge are ours. Neverthe-
less, the facts of life do lead to unbelief, if we look only at them. Men feel that right
ought to prevail. When we were children, we were told that it would. But very often,.
so far as we can see, it does not. We look at nature, and it appears utterly immoral,
because cruel, relentless, unforgiving, murderous to the weak, favouring only the strong.
We real history, and how often it records only the triumph of the wicked and the
abasement of the good 1 Society, also, is ordered on anything but a morally righteous-
basis. And do we not everywhere see the innocent sufi'ering for the guilty, involved
in their sin, and bearing their doom ? It is not merely the suffering, though so great,
that gives rise to unbelief in God, but the seeming injustice of its allotment. And'
hence, to-day, the drear cynicism and unbelief of the Book of Ecclesiastes tells the
thought of not a few. But note —

III. Some bueb safeguards against this temptation. See how Asaph found
deliverance, and came at length to the conclusion which he avows in the opening verse
of this psalm. 1. He held his tongue— A\d. not talk about his doubts, but kept them,
to himself, so far as men were concerned (ver. 15). 2. He laid them all before Qod.
(Ver. 17.) He " went into the sanctuary." He prayed, but did not argue. And the-
result was that he came to see facts in their true light; that the ungodly man's wealtb.
meant but so many "slippery places." Deaih for him was " destruction," and '



•PS. Lxxni. 1—28.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 77



certain prospect caused him to be "utterly coQSumed with terrors;" and even at his
best lie was "despised" of the Lord (vers. 19, 20). Thus Asaph's envy was turned
into pity, as well it might be. 3. He realized the love of Qod. He gained this by honest
confession of the sin of which God had convicted him (vers. 21, 22). Also by calling
to mind the love which Qod had shown him (ver. 23) ; the care exercise<i over him ;
and the sure prospect of blessedness set befoi'e him. Thus there came a great rush of
love in his heart toward God (ver. 25) ; and the settled persuasion both of the misery
of bein^ far from God (ver, 27), and of the blessedness of drawing near to him (ver. 28).
Thus the mist and darkness cleared away, as, on the mount of communion with God,
they ever wilL — S. 0.

Ver. 2. — Narrow escapes. " The victorious general, in the hour of triumph, has not
unfrequently reason to remember how nearly, through oversight or miscalculation, he
had lost the day. A little more pressure on this wing or that, a trifling prolongation
of the struggle, a few minutes' further delay in the arrival of reinforcements, and his
proud banner had been dragged in the dust. The pilot, steering his barque safely
into port, sometimes knows how, through lack of seamanship, he nearly made ship-
wreck. And the successful merchant remembers crises in his history when he found
himself on the brink of ruin — when the last straw only was wanting to precipitate the
catastrophe." And like narrow escapes occur in the spiritual life.

I. Note bomb op them. 1. The doubt and darkness of unbelief caused by brooding
over the mysteries of providence (cf. Jer. xlviii. 11). 2. Terrible temptation. See
Joseph in prison, Moses in Egypt, Daniel in Babylon, the martyrs. "The righteous
scarcely are saved." 3. When brouyhi very low, as the piodigal son was, by our own
sin. Then the crisis is when we have to decide whether we will turn back to God or
go on in our sin. The prodigal went back to his father ; Ephraim was juined to his
idols, and, like Amon, " sinned more and more." How many are in heaven now who
ODce were all but lost I David, Manasseh, Peter, the penitent thief, Mary Magdalene,
and many more.

II. What such instances teach us. 1. Never to despair of any one. God cau
save them. 2. Never to presume for ourselves. " Let him that thinketh he standeth,"
etc. 3. Great thankfulness, if we are kept. 4. Deep sympathy with those who fall.
5. Ever to abide in Christ. — S. 0.

Vers. 5, 6. — MmA ease, much peril. That is the teaching of these verses, and of
innumerable Scriptures besides (see Pa. Iv. 19 ; Jer. xlviii. 11). Thus —

L God is ever teaching us this truth. 1. In his Word. See also Heb. xii., and
the biographies of God's people in all ages. The history of the Churoli as given in
Scripture abundantly reveals God's merciful law of change. 2. By analogy. God
suffers nothing to be without change. Even the rocks and hills, the solid globe, are
all subject to change. The seasons alternate. Storm and tempest make pure the air
which, as in the Swiss valleys, would otherwise become stagnant. The great sea ib
" troubled, that it can never be quiet." In plant-life, " except a corn of wheat fall
into," etc. The processes of change are varied and ever acting in the entire vegetable
world. And so in animal life. Not to experience change would be death. And it is
so with the mind. No change there is idiocy. It must be stirred by the incoming of
fresh truth, and the readjustment of old. In social life —

** The old order ohangeth, giving place to new.
Lest one good custom should corrupt the world."

In ecclesiastical life. What was the Reformation but the tempest that rushed through
the valleys of the Church- life of that day, where the air had become so stagnant and
corrupt that men could not live ? And it is so in political and in moral life. Much
peace is much peril. " Because men have no changes they fear not God." We cannot
glide into the kingdom of God, nor, as the well-known hymn mistakenly teaches that

we m«y—

"Sit and sing ourselves away
To everlasting bliss."



Va THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. lxxiii. 1— 28.

Not so do we enter there, but " through much tribulation." So our Lord, and all
experience, plainly declare.

II. But why ib all this? Because in our nature there are rooted evils, which can
only be got rid of by the action of this law of change. Such as : 1. Self-will. See the
stream come brawling noisily along, as it descends throusili the valley down from the
hill. But, lying right in its way, lol there is a huge rock. Down comes the stream
full tilt towards it, as if it .would say, " Just you get out of my way." But that is^
exactly what the rock does not do; and so the angry stream dashes against it. And
oh, what rage and riot, what fret and fume, there at once arises I But if you wait a
moment, and watch, you will see that the stream seems to be thinking, what it had
better do ; for lo I it glides softly, smoothly, quietly round the rock, which still standf
stubbornly and relentlessly just where it stood before. The stream seems to hav«i
learnt a lesson — it has become all at once so gentle and submissive. Now, that is one
ol the ten thousand natural parables with which the world is full. The stream of our
self-will, determined to go its own way, rushes on its course ; but the rock of God's law
of change, sending adversity and trial, stands in its way, and will not move, and self-
will is broken against it, as God intended it should be. Only so can this evil be
cured. 2. Pride. Trouble and sorrow humble men, and bring down the haughty
spirit. 3. Unbelief. The materialism and atheism of the day are shattered by this
law. In the day of distress, the soul cannot keep from calling upon God. 4. Selfish-
ness. Ease fosters this as it fosters so much more that is evil; but trial often teaches
men to think of others as well as of themselves. 5. And so with indolence and the love
of the world. To be " in trouble as other men are " has a salutary power to rouse men
from the one and to loose them from the other. And what opportunity does this law
of change give for bearing testimony to the sustaining power of God's grace 1 Trouble
endured with patient God-given courage is a mighty argument for God, the force of
which all feel.

III. What should be que attitude towards this law ? 1. Faint not ; fret not ;
fear not. 2. Humble yourself beneath the mighty hand of God, so that you may secure
the blessing your trouble is destined to bring. — S. C.

Ver. 10. — The doingi of urigodly prosperity. One of three of these doings seems
to have been in the psalmist's mind, but we cannot certainly say which. The words
warrant either interpretation. Let us take, first, that one suggested by them as they
stand in the Authorized Version, and as commonly read.

I. The people of God aee led astray. For by " his people " many understand
the people of God to be meant, and that they, allured and ensnared by the glitter of
earthly prosperity, turn from the ways of God to follow after these ungodly ones.
" They are led away by the evil example, just as the psalmist confesses he himself
was ; " and tiiey turn after them. (Cf. " Demas hath forsaken me, having loved this
present world.") How often this happens ! But what is meant by the " waters of a
full cup," etc. ? Either the cup of unholy pleasure, which they drain to the dregs ;
or else it is, as in Ps. Ixxx. 5, and as actual experience attests, that when God's people
go astray, as here represented, it will be a full cup of sorrow and tears that they will
have to drink, as indeed they do. The most miserable of men are backsliders from
God. It cannot but be so. This is what our translators meant to imply by their
rendering. But another meaning that the words warrant is —

II. A crowd follow them, that is, the ungodly. The people spoken of are the
crowd of hangers-on to the prosperous — those who will try to find favour with the rich
and great of this world. The Prayer-book Version thus sets it forth : " Therefore the
people fall unto them, and thereout suck they no small advantage." These hangers-
on are the people who attach themselves to the world's rich ones, and " who gather lik»
sheep to the water-trough," in hopes of what they may get. But whether tbey get
anything or no, the ungodly whom they follow do; they "suck no small advantage."
They are yet raoie worshipped and fawned upon, and have ready to hand innumerable
and willing tools to serve their purpose and to bring more " grist to their mill." And
the result is that they get more proud and arrogant than ever (see ver. 11). But,
child of God, whoe'er thou art, say to thy soul, " My soul, come not thou into their
eeciet."



re. Lxxiu. 1—28.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 79



III. The people of God have to suffer bitter PEasEonTioN. So the Chaldee,
the Septuagint, and the Vulgate seem to understand the words. The wicked turn upon
God's people, who are, in consequence, "fed with the bread of teats, and have given to
them tears to drink without measure" (Ps. Ixxx. 5). It is the predestined lot of the
people of God ; but our Saviour tells us that it is a blessed portion. The last and
chiefest of the Beatitudes (Matt, v.) declares, "Blessed are \e when men shall per-
secute you," etc. And it is so ; for it shows, by your endurance of persecution, that you
have found out the preoiousness of the love of God, and know assuredly that, for the
sake of it, you may be well content to die. That is knowledge which is, here and now,
life eternal. May God keep us from exemplifying the first of these interpretations,
and from forming part of that miserable crowd told of in the second 1 but if we are
found amongst the third, then Christ will call us his blessed ones.— S. G.

Ver. 25. — Supreme delight in Ood. "It is not — What have I, but — Whomf
Things, however many, rich, glorious, beautiful, cannot satisfy the soul, neither in
heaven any more than on earth." Not in things, but in persons, the personal soul
must find its portion. And not in many, but in One ; to whom the soul can look, to
whom at all times it can come, and to whom, as here, it can lift up its cry, " Thou art
the Strength of my heart, and my Portion for ever." But —

I. Such delight in God has been held to be impossible. For example: 1. Oalvin,
a learned, devout, and in the main a true expositor of Scripture, but sadly wanting in
those more gentle and tender instincts which are absolutely essential to its full and
accurate understanding, has, in commenting on our text, actually said, " If we give
the smallest portion of our affections to the creatures, we in so far defraud God of the
honour which belongs to him." Now, that is utterly untrue and in dire contradiction
to the Word which says, " If we love not our brother, whom we have seen, how can we
love God whom we have not seen ? " 2. And there are many devout souls haunted w ith
the fear that, in loving those around them with the intense atiectiou which they know
they bear towards them, they are somehow defrauding God of what is due only to
him. And yet more, when they compare the love which they have for God with the
love which they cherish for those dear to them on earth, the latter love seems so much
warmer and deeper than the former that, when they come to a text like this.they hesitate,
and confess to themselves that such words are not for them — for them they would not
be true. And they are sore troubled about this, and scarce know what to do. They
would like to be able to say them, but they feel they cannot. Now, of course, there
are many people in whom it would be hypocrisy, gross and palpable, were they to
speak as does the psalmist here. They are cold, hard, worldly, and so earth-bound
that they never think about loving God. The utmost you can get from them is a
vague confession that they "suppose they ought to." But we are thinking of really
devout, godly souls, who nevertheless sorrowfully confess that the words of our text,
and the many others like them, are far beyond what they can say. Such people
believe, apparently, that, though our blessed Lord has commanded them to love the
Lord their God with all their heart, they do not, and they doubt if any one ever has
done so, or can. They do not seem to see how serious is the charge they thus luring
against the Lord — that he has commanded what it is impossible to obey. Eartlily
parents do not deal with their children so, but they seem to think our heavenly
Father does.

II. But it is possible for us, nevertheless. 1. Here, at any rate, stands one
declaration of it. The psalmist, if he did not express, as we are certain he did, liis
own deep and sincere feeling, must have been the victim of delusion, or else a wretched
hypocrite. But who thinks that ? 2. And he is not nlone in such utterance. The
poalms are full of them, and we have already referred to the first and great command-
ment. The New Testament also speaks of " perfect love " — ^just that sentiment which
our text tells of. 3. And there have been and are thousands of souls in which such love
dwells, to whom God is their "exceeding Joy," whose supreme delight is in God
4. And what seems to does not really contradict this. For consider the elements of
uur love to God. They are — complete distrust of self; confidence in God only for the
supply of our souls' deepest needs, such as pardon, peace, purity, eternal life; holy
reverence and awe and gratitude. But all these are far other than what we cherish



«0 THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [ps. lxxiu. 1— 2&

to our fellow-men ; so that they do not clash one with the other. On the contrary,
the lower love may help the higher, and the higher cannot exist if the lower do not.

III. But if such supreme delight in God be possible, it is also infinitely
DESIBABLE. All life, even the most mean and poor, becomes transformed, transfigured,
glorified, by means of it. The soul becomes independent of all earthly favour, and
heeds not this world's frown, nor all " the slings and arrows of outrageous fortune."
Unspeakably blest aod blessing is the characteristic of the soul in whom this love of
Ood dwells. See Paul's "sorrowful, but always rejoicing," etc.

IV. It is attained thbouqh obedience and trust. " He that keepeth my com-
mandments, he it is that loveth me," said our Lord. Such obedience is not only the
fruit, but the root, of the love which grows out of it. We obey, and we come to love
him whom we obey. Serving is the secret — not alone the sign, but the source also — of
loving. Our love for our children is in proportion to the sacrifices we make for them.
It is BO everywhere and for ever. — S. 0.

Ver. 26. — ITte failing flesh and the strengthening Ood. Here is a vivid and blessed
contrast. Consider —

I. The failing of eeabt and flesh here told of. 1. Some imderstand this as the
result of his foolish conflict with Ood ; and here, as all who contend with God are, he
was worsted and brought low. 2. Others, as Idling of his passionate desire after. Ood,
how he was "sick of love," broken down with his longing for God. 3. Others, as
telling of his heavy load of trouble. " He had a God's rod instead of a good piece of
bread for his breakfast every morning ; and the table was covered with sackcloth, and
furnished with the same bitter herbs both at dinner and supper." 4. Anyway, it is a
fact that heart and flesh do fail, both of the evil and of the good. The best herbs
wither as well as the worst weeds. There is no discharge in this war. 5. What a
rebuke it is to those whose treasures are all of the world !

II. The STRENGTHBNINS God. How does he accomplish his gracious work? 1. By
his Spirit in our hearts. 2. By his Word of promise for the future. The Spirit and
the Word are his " rod and staff," which comfort us. — S. 0.

Ver. 28. — Drawing near to Ood, a good thing: The psalmist is very emphatic
about it. His words imply that he is quite sure of it. Let us ask, then — Why is it
so good to draw near to God ? Many are the answers.

I. It is so BY WAT OF CONTRAST WITH WHAT HE HAD BEEN DOING — Wearying himsolf
to understand the hidden ways of God, the labyrinth of his providence. No good had
come of that, but ouly evil. Gotthold, in his ' Emblems,' tells us of the freaks of his
^shild. The father was one day sitting in his study, and when he lifted his eyes from
his book, he saw, standing upon the window-ledge, his little son. He was terribly
frightened, for the child stood there in utmost peril of falling to the ground and being
dashed to pieces. The little lad had been anxious to know what his father was doing
so many hours in the day in his study, and he had at last, by a ladder, managed,
with boyish daring, to climb up, till there he stood outside the window, gazing at his
father with all his eyes. " So," said the father, as he took the child into his chamber,
and rebuked him for his folly — "so have I often tried to climb into the council-
chamber of God, to see why and wherefore he did this and that; and thus have I
exposed myself to peril of falling to my own destruction."

II. Because of what it implies. 1. That he was at peace with Ood. A soul
unreconciled cannot draw near. 2. That he kneio the way. He had learned the
blessed but difficult art of drawing near ; for drawing near is of the heart, not of the
lips merely; and Satan will always try, and too often he succeeds, to hinder that.
3. Be had found how good it was by his own experience.

III. Because the light is so much betteb in the region near God. What a fog
iuA mist he was in until he " went into the sanctuary of God," and drew near to him I
VV^e see things truly there as we cannot elsewhere.

IV. The tempests of the soul die down thebb. It is the region of blessed
calm.

V. The air is so invigorating. God is " the Health of my countenance," " th«
Strength of my heart."



F8. LXXIV. 1—23.]



THE BOOK OF PSALMS.



81



VI. Is NOT God ohb God, oub own God, oub soul's home? Where, then, can
we be better thau at home? — S. 0,

Vers. 1 — 28. — 2%e solution of a great problem. The question here is — Why should
good men suffer, and bad men prosper, when the Law had said that God was a
righteous Judge, metin? out to men in this world the due recompense of their deeds V
The course of things should perfectly reflect the righteousness of God. The psalmist
struggles for a solution of this problem. The first verse contains the conclusion he had
arrived at.

I. His danger. Expressed in the second, thirteenth, and twenty-second verses.
l._ The example and sophintries of the wicked had nearly wrought hit own downfall.
His feet had been tempted by their prosperity to forsake the ways of righteousness,
and he had almost fallen into their infidelity. 2. His faith in righteousness had been
nearly lost. (Ver. 13.) In vain had he cleansed his inward and outward life— at least,
he was tempted to think so for a time. 3. Others had been induced to follow the
example of the wicked. (Ver. 10.) "Therefore turn his people after them, and at
the full stream (of their prosperity) would slake their thirst" (Perowne).

II. The cause of his danger. (Vers. 4 — 9.) 1. The wicked and athristic seemed
prosperous and happy. They had no trouble, no sorrows that hasten their death
(" bands "). They are proud and violent, oppressive and defiant of the heavens. All
these are hasty and superficial estimates of the experience of the wicked. 2. He
himself was troubled and chastened continually. (Ver. 14.) He who had been at
such pains to cleanse his heart and hands. This was mystery that bewildered him.
3. But he restrains the utterance of his doubts to others. (Ver. 15.) He forbore to
shake the faith of others, and cause them to stumble.

m. Ebassuranoe by the rboovbrt of his faith. (Vers. 17 — 28.) 1. He found
t?ie solution in the light of God's presence. (Ver. 17.) The sanctuary was the symbol
of God's presence. Hitherto he ha I studied the matter only in the light of human
experience; now in the light of Gods righteous character. 2. ITieir prosperity would
come to a sudden end. (Vers. 18 — 20.) 3. Communion with Qod is the realization of our
highest destiny, not any unknown good. (Vers. 23 — 28.) — 8.



EXPOSITION.



PSALM LXXIV.



"The misery of the Jews is here at its
deepest" (Four Friends, p. 291). The
psalmist describes Jerusalem as fallen into
*• perpetual ruins " (ver. 3). The temple is
violated (ver. 3) ; its carved work is ruth-
lessly cut down (ver. 6) ; the aid of fire has
been called in to destroy it, and its walls
are cast down to the ground (ver. 7). Nor
has Jerusalem alone suffered. Tho object
has been to " make havoc " of Israel " al-
together;" and the enemy have spread
themselves, and "burnt up all the houses of
God in the land " (ver. 8). The prophets
have succumbed ; tli6ir voices are heard no
more (ver. 9). A blasphemous enemy lords
it over the entire country (vers. 10, 23), and
sets up its banners as signs of its dominion
(Ter. 4). Three periods have been assigned
for the composition of the psalm : (1) the
time of the invasion of Shishak ; (2) that of



the Babylonian conquest ; and (3) the early
Macoabean period, or the reign of Judas
Maccabseiis. In favour of the first is the
ascription of the psalm in the "title" to
Asaph. But all other considerations are
against it. There is no evidence tliat
Shishak ever entered Jerusalem. He cer-
tainly did not break down the carved work of
the temple, or set the temple on fire, much less
" cast it down to the ground." His invasion
was a mere raid, and Behoboam seems to
have bought his retreat by the sacrifice of
the temple treasury (2 Kings xiv. 25— 28 ;
2 Chron. zii. 2 — 12). The circumstauces
described in the psalm are also unsuitable
to the reign of Judas Maccabsaus, in whose
time the temple suffered desecration at the
hands of the Syrians, but was not seriously
damaged, much less demolished. Thus the
only diite suitable for the composition of
the psalm is that immediately following the
capture of the city under Nebuchadnezzar.



82



THE BOOK OF PSALMS.



[P8. LXXIV. 1 — 23.



We must explain the "title" by the con-
Bideration that Asaph, like Jeiluthua and
Heman, beoame a tribe-name, attaching to
all the descendants of the original Asaph,
and was equivalent to "sou of Asaph"
(see Ezra ii. 41 ; iii. 10 ; Neh. vii. 44 ! xi. 22).
The psalm consists of three portions : 1.
A complaint to God, including a description
of all the horrors of the situation (vers. 1 —
11). 2. An enumeration of God's mercies
in the olden time, as a foundation for hope
that he will yet rescue Israel (vers. 12 — 17).
3. An earnest prayer for relief and restora-
tion, and tile re-estublisliment of the cove-
nant (vers. 18—23).

Ver. 1. — God, why hast thou cast us off
for ever? It coulJ only have been in the
extremity of distnss that a devout Israelite
believed, even for a time, that Israel was
" cast otf /or ever " (comp. Ps. Ixxix. 5, which
must have been written nearly at the same
period aa tliig). Wtiy doth thine anger
smoke against the sheep of thy pasture!
God's anger " smokes " when it is hot and
furious (see Pss. xviii. 8 ; oiv. 32 ; oxlir. 5).
It is now smoking " against the sheep of hia
pasture" — his own flock (Ps. Ixxviii. 53),
his peculiar people (comp. Jer. xxiii. 4; 1.
6, 17; and Ps. Ixxix. 13).

Ver. 2. — Bemember thy congregation,
which thou hast purchased of old ; or, which
thou didst purchase of old. The reference
is to the redemption out of Egypt (see Exod.
XT. 16). God is besought, though he has
forgotten, nnce more to remember his people,
and urged to do so by the memory of hia
former mercies (comp. vera. 12 — 17). The
rod of thine inheritance, which thou hast
redeemed ; rather, which thou didst redeem
to be 'he tribe ot thine inherilance ; i.e. the
people of t..ine inheritance. " The conven-
tional expresoiim, ' the triljes of Israel,' was
not always used after the fall of the northern
kingdom" (Cheyne); comp. Jer. x. 16; li.
19 This Mount Zicn, wherein thou hast
dwelt (comp. Pa. Ixxiii. 68). The exprea-
sion, "thia Mount Zion," implies that the
psalm is composed either by one of the
exiles before lie ia removed from the Holy
Land, or by one of those who were left
behind by the conquerors (2 Kings xxt. 12,
22 ; Jer. xlii. 10 ; Iii. 16).

Ver. 3. — Lift up thy feet unto the per-
petual desolations ; or, the perpetual ruins.
God is asked to visit and protect, or else to
visit and inspect, the desolate ruins with
which the Babylonians have covered Mount
Zion. Even all that the enemy hath dona
wickedly in the sanctuary. The Baby-
lonians bad plundered the temple of all its



treasures, breaking the preoious Phoenician
bronze-work into pieces, and carrying off
everything of value that was portable (2
Kings XXV. 13—17). They had also " burnt
the house of the Lord " (ver. 9), and "broken
down the walla of Jerusalem " (ver. 10) and
the walls of the temple to a large extent
(see below, ver. 7). It is quite certain that
neither Shishak nor the Syrians nnder
AntiochuB Epiphanes created any such
devastation.

Ver. 4. — Thine enemies roar in the midst
of thy congregations ; or, have roared; l,e.
have created disturbances, or raised tumults.
The temple did not pass into the enemy's
hands without fighting and bloodshed ; the
battle-cry of the assailants and their shouts
of triumph when viotorioua resounded
through it (comp. Lam. ii. 7) They set up
their ensigns for s gns. Probably for tokens
of victory and dominion. Scarcely aa objects
of worship, since their intention was to
destroy the temple and leave Jerusalem
desolate.

Ver. 5. — ^A man was famous according as
he had lifted up axes upon the thick trees ;
rather, they eeemed a» men that plied aloft
hatchets in a thicket of trees i so Kay, Canon
Cook, Professor Cheyne, and the Beviaed
Version) ; i.e. they plied their hatchets with
as little reverence aa if they had been hewing
timber in a copse of wood.

Ver. 6. — But now they break down the
carved work thereof at once with axes and
hammers. The " carved work " (pittitchim')
of the temple consisted of the cherubim
and palm trees and open flowers which
formed the decoration of the temple walla
(see 1 Kings vi. 29, where the same word,
pittuchim, ia used). Thia superficial carved
work may have been broken down for the
Bake of the gold with which it was overlaid
(1 Kings vL 22, 32, 35).

Ver. 7. — They have cast fire into thy
sanctuary; or, tliey have set thy sanctuary
on fire (Revised Version). The temple of
Solomon was burnt by Nebuchadnezzar (2
Kings XXV. 9; 2 Chron. xxxvi. 19). That
of Zerubbabel was never burnt, but was
entirely rebuilt, and on a much larger scale,
by Herod the Great. That of Herod the
Great was burnt in the siege by Titus.
They have defiled by casting down the
dwelling-place of thy Name to the ground
(oump. Lam. ii. 6 ; iv. 1). The very founda-
tions of the second temple had to be laid
by Zerubbabel (Ezra iii. 6, 12).

Ver. 8.— They said in their hearts. Let ua
destroy them altogether. It was, no doubt,
the intention of Nebuchadnezzar to destroy
Israel as a nation. Hence the complete
destruction of the city and temple (2 Kings
XXV. 9, 10; 2 Chron. xxxvi. 19; Lam. ii.
1 — 9, etc.) ; hence the deportation of all the



PS. Lxxiv. 1—23.]



THE BOOK OF PSALMS.



8S



itrength of the nation (2 Kings xxiv. 14 — 16 ;
XXV. 11), and their settleinent in the far-off
region of Babylonia ; hence the desolation,
not only of Jerusalem, but of " all the
habitations of Jacob " (Lam. ii. 2), nil the
" strongholds of the daughter of Judah "
(Lam. ii. 2, 5). They h&ve burnt up all
ths synagogues of Ood in the land. Tlie
synagogue system was first introduced by
.Kzra, according to Jewish tradition ; and it
has been argued that the mention of " syna-
gogues" here — literally, "sacred meeting-
places" — proves tlie psalm to be Macoabean.
But meeting-places tor worship, other than
the temple, always existed in Palestine,
both before and after its erection. Mesha
speaks of having plundered a "house of
Jehovah " in his war with Aliab (' Kecorda
of the Past,' vol. xi. p. 167); and it is plain
from 2 Kings iv. 23 that religious meetings
were held by the prophets, probably in
houses devoted to the purpose, during the
period of the divided monarchy. Hezekiah's
destruction of the high places (2 Kings xviii.
4) is not likely to have interfered with the
use of these buildings, to which no savour
of idolatry can have attached in the mind
of the most violent iconoclast. I should
therefore believe, witli Leopold Low, that
buildings existed before the Exile, in which
religious instruction was given by authorized
teachers.

Ver. 9. — ^We see not our signs. Some
suppose "standards" to be meant, as in
ver. 4, where the same word is used ; but it
is, perhaps, better to understand, with Dr.
Kay, " Divine ordinances, which were stand-
ing signs of God's presence — as the taber-
nacle, the sacrifices, the sabbaths." There
is no more any prophet. It has been said
that this shows the psalm not to have been
written on the occasion of the destruction
of Jerusalem by Nebuchadnezzar, since
Jeremiah, Ezekiel, and Daniel were, all of
them, then living. But the writer only
means to tay that there are no prophets in
Palestine, where he is residing. Jeremiah
in Egypt, Ezekiel on the banks of Chebar,
Daniel in Babylon, are nothing to him, even
if ho knows ot their existence, and in no
way fill up the gap whereof he complains.
If either is there among us any who knoweth
how long. Jeremiah's prophecy of the
seventy years (Jer. xxv. 11, 12) did not
remove the doubt, since it was uncertain
from what event the seventy years were to
be counted. Jeremiah's prophecies, more-
over, were not yet, in all probability, col-
lected into a volume, and so may not have
been known to the psalmist.

Ver. 10.— God, how long shall the adver-
sary reproach? shall the enemy blaspheme
thy Name for ever? There is no contra-
diction between these two clauses. The



psalmist wishes to ask two things : 1. Is
the preaiiit distress to continue for ever?
2. And if not, how long is it to endure?
It is true that he inverts the natural order
of the questions; but this is so common a
mode of speech, that grammarians have
given it a name, and call it S<TTepoi>-irp6Tepov.
Ver. 11. — Why withdrawest thou thy
hand, even thy right hand? Why dost
thou keep back the right hand of thy power,
hiding it in thy bosom? Why not show
forth thy power, and consume them, as it
were, in a moment? (See the next clause.)
Pluck it out of thy bo3om ; rather, out with
it from thy hosom, and consume them. The
psalmist sees no reason why the Baby-
lonians should not be consumed, and Israel
delivered, at once. He has an insufficient
sense of the greatness of Israel's sin.

Vers. 12 — 17. — Comfort springs from the
thought of God's previous deliverances of
his people, and of his other great mercies.
The deliverance from Egypt has the fore-
most place (vers. 13, 11), as the most striking.
Then the deliverance from the wilderness,
and the passage of Jordan (ver. 15). Prom
these the poet passes to God's mercies in
nature — day and night, light and snn, set
bounds of earth and sea, alternations of the
seasons — all formed and arranged by the
Almighty (vers. 16, 17).

Ver. 12.— For God is my King of old
(comp. Ps. xliv. 4). As "King," he has
power to perform all that he wills, to set up
and to cast down, to give into the enemy's
hand and to deliver. Working salvation
in the midst of the earth. Not in any
imaginary earth-centre, but, as Professor
Cheyne says, "quite broadly, in various
parts of the earth " (comp. Exnd. viii. 22).

Ver. 13.— Thou didst divide the sea by
thy strength. A clear reference to Exod.
xiv. 21 (comp. Pss. Ixxvii. 16; Ixxviii. 13;
cvi. 9). Thou brakest the heads of the
dragons in the waters. The dragon (tannim)
is frequently used as a symbol of Egyptian
power (see Isa. Ii. 9 ; Ezek. xxix. 3 ; xxxii.
2). The allusion here is to the destruction
of Pharaoh's host in the waters of the Bed
Sea (Exod. xiv. 27—30 ; xv. 4).

Ver. 14. — Thou brakest the heads of
leviathan in pieces. Here the metaphor is
only slightly varied, leviathan, " the croco-
dile," being substituted for tannim, "the
dragon," or "sea-monster," as the repre-
sentative of the might of Egypt. And
gavest him to be meat to the people inhabit-
ing the wilderness. The corpses of the
Egyptians thrown up upon the Red Sea
sliores (Exod. xiv. 30) are certainly the



84



THE BOOK OP PSALMS.



[PB. LXXIV. 1—231



"meat" intended. Whether the "people
of dwellers in tlie wilderness " are cannibal
tribes, or jackals and hyenas, is perhaps
donbtftl.

Yer. 15. — Thou didst cleave the fonntain
and the flood ; rather, and the torrent (comp,
Exod. xvii. 6 ; Numb. xx. 11). Thon driedst
up mighty rivers ; i.e. the Jordan (Josh. iii.
13, et (eg;.).

Ver. 16. — The day is thine, the night also
is thine ; thou hast prepared the light and
the sun (see Geu, i. 5, lo, 16) ; rather, thou
luut prepared him lightand sun. " Luminary "
(TN!j) is probably a class-name for the
heavenly lights generally. The sun is then
particularized, as so much the most impor-
tant of tlie luminaries. But tlie result is
"an imperfect parallelism" (Cheyne).

Ver. 17. — Thon hast set all the borders of
the earth. The " borders of the earth " are
the boundaries of land and sea, which are
ascribed to God in Gen. i. 9 (comp. Job
xxvi. 10 ; xzxviii. 8 ; Ps. xsxiii. 7 ; Prov.
viii. 29; Jer. v. 22). Thou hast made
summer and winter ; literally, summer and
winter thou, dii 1st form them; i.e. they are
the result of thy arrangement of creation.

Vers. 18 — 23. — In conclusion, the psalmist
prays earnestly that God will deliver his
people from their wicked oppressors (vers.
18, 19), that he will remember his covenant
(ver. 20), cause the oppressed ones to praise
him (ver. 21), and assert himself against
those who insult and oppose him (vers.
22, 23).

Ver. 18. — Eememher this, that the enemy
hath reproached, Lord, and that the foolish
people have blasphemed thy Ifame (comp.
Lam. i. 7; ii. 7, 15, 16). Every nation of
idolaters is a " foolish people " to the sacred
writers, whatever cleverness or intellectual
capacity it may possess. Aahal, the word
translated " foolish," designates a folly that
is closely akin to wickedness.

Ver. 19. — deliver not the soul of thy
turtle-dove unto the multitude of the
wicked; rather, deliver not thy turtle-dove
unto the greedy multitude (Eevised Version
margin). Israel is beautifully compared to
a pet dove, the gentlest and tenderest of
birds. The Babylonians are the "greedy
multitude" ready to kill and devour it.
Forget not the congregation (or, ths multi-
tude) of thy poor for ever. The " multitude
of God's poor " is being carried off into a



cruel captivity, or else left as a miserable
remnant in an exhausted and desolated
land — in either case needing much God'»
protection and " remembrance."

Ver. 20. — Have respect unto the covenant.
The "covenant" intended is probably thsit
made with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob,
whereby Canaan was assured to their
descendants, as "the lot of their inherit-
ance." Israel is being deprived of it»
inheritance, and dragged off into "dark
places." Will not "respect for his cove-
nant ' induce God to interpose, and even
now at the last gasp deliver his afHictedS
ones? For the dark places of the earth are
fnU of the habitations of cruelty. Israel i»
being dragged into '-dark places of the
earth "—benighted lands, where there is no
glimmer of the light of God's truth — and-
lands, moreover, wliich are "full of habi-
tations of cruelty," abodes, i.e., where
captives taken in war are treated with
harshness and violence.

Ver. 21. — let not the oppressed retnrtt
ashamed ; i.e. let not this oppressed nation
turn their back on thee in shame and con-
fusion at thy forsaking them. Bather, let
the poor and needy praise thy Name ; i.e.
show them some mercy, some deliverance,
which may turn their shame into joy, and
call forth from them songs of praise.

Ver. 22, — Arise, God, plead thine own
cause; i.e. assert thyself, show forth thy
power, avenge thyself on thine enemies.
Bemember how the foolish man reproachetb'
thee daily (comp. ver. 18, and see the com-
ment ad toe.). In the ancient world the
conquest of a people was always regarded
as a triumph over the people's god or gods.
Naturally, insults to the god found a place
in the victor's songs of triumph (see 2
Kings xix. 10—13; Isa. x. 8—11).

Ver. 2S. — Forget not the voice of thine
enemies. God does not forget insults ot
this kind, but punishes them (see 2 Kings
xix. 28, "Because thy rage against me,
and tliy tumult, is come up into my ears,
therefore I will put my hook in thy nose,
aud my bridle in thy lips, and I will turn
thee back by tlie way by which thou
camest"). He punished Babylon after »
time with extreme severity (see Jer. 1. and
li.). The tnmult of those that rise up
against thee inoreaseth continually ; rather,
aseendeth continually — goes up before God's
throne, crying for vengeance (comp. Gen. iv.
10; xviii. 20, 21 ; Exod. iii 9, etc.).



HOMILETICS.

Ver. 22. — G'ocTt eouse that of hit: people. " Arise, . , . thine own cause." The
great problems of life, and the inner depths of human experience, are the same in all
ages. The surface of society changes marvellously ; but heart still answers to heart.



«. txxiT. 1— 23.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 85

Asaph's questions and troubles and prayers find their echo in ten thousand Christian
li«arts to-day. It would be extremely interesting if we could certainly tell to what
crisis of Israel's history this noble psalm refers. Some say the Chaldean invasion ;
others, the Maccabean tyranny. Very strong reasons are given in the ' Speaker's Com-
.luentary' for believing that it refers to the Egyptian invasion in the reign of Behoboam
(2 Chron. xii.). As that was the first time when the kingdom of David lell under the
.{tower of a heathen conqueror, so the trial to the faith of God's people was correspond-
ingly severe. It seemed as though God had forgotten his covenant, and Church and
•tate (to use our modern phrase) were to perish io common ruin. The spiritual lesson
is not affected by any uncertainty as to the historic reference. The psalmist takes
<«fuge in God. His plea is that it is God's own cause which is at stake. In effect, it
is the same which Moses urged (Ezod. xxxii. 11, S. ; Numb, xiv, 13, fl'.) ; and Joshui.
" What wilt thou do unto thy great Name? " (Josh. vii. 9). " Arise," etc.

I. The cause of God's Chdech is God's own cause. The word so rendered
jneans " strife," " controversy " (comp. Hos. iv. 1 ; xii. 2 ; Micah vi. 2 ; Jer. xxv. 31).
The Lord's cause, then, is that ancient controversy which began when sin entered the
world ; and will never cease till sin is conquered, and death, the last enemy, destroyed.
And all things placed under the feet of Christ. The strife between truth and lies,
.holiness and sin, tight and wrong, between "the things that make for peace" and
the things about which men cry, " Peace ! peace 1 " but God says, " There is no peace
to the wicked." One of the moral dangers of our time is a feeble sense of the reality,
greatness, infinite issues, of the conflict. Society is awake, sensitive, as never before,
to human suffering and misery ; but no corresponding sense of man's sin and guilt.
Criminals are often more pitied for their punishment than condemned for their wicked-
ness. We can understand (or think we can) our Saviour's tears over the approaching
calamities of Jerusalem ; but, perhaps, fail to see that the deepest source of his grief
was the unbelief and the sin of which those impending calamities would be the outcome
'(Luke xix. 42 ; Matt, xxiii. 37). We see how dread tul it is for savages to run about
naked and eat one another, to be enslaved or massacred. But do we see how far more
terrible it is for them to be without God in the world, without Christ, without hope ?
We do not want to be less humane, soft-hearted, sympathetic ; but we do want to
measure by a juster standard, to see that Ood's cause is the supreme interest of human
iiistory, that there is nothing we can pray for, work for, live for, to be compared with
this — that his Name be hallowed, his kingdom triumph, his will be done. We can see
that this is God's own cause ; but how is it the cause of his people, of Israel in ancient
^ys, of the Church of Christ in our own ? Just because this is the very end for the
«ake of which the Church exists, for the sake of which the nation of Israel was called
Into being. Christians are in danger of just the mistake into which the Jews fell.
They thought they were the chosen, favoured people of Jehovah, to the exclusion of
«11 other nations, and that they might despise and hate the Gentiles. Whereas the
truth was, it was for the sake of all mankind that they were chosen — to be God's
witnesses, that all nations might be blessed in their promised King and Saviour. So
Christians are not saved simply for their own sake, but to be the " salt of the earth "
Jind " light of the world ; " " firstfruits " (Jas. i. 18).

II. Therefore, secondly, the cause op God is the cause of mankind. Attempts
iiave been made to set in opposition " the service of God" and " the service of man."
In actual fact, none have rendered such service to men as those devoted to the service
of God. No power but the gospel of Jesus Christ can take a horde of naked cannibals
.and, in a single generation, change them into peaceful, intelligent, useful members of
the great community of nations — many of them willing martyrs for truth and charity.
The inoral ideas of universal justice, personal liberty, human brotherhood, the value of
each human being, the duty of the rich to the poor, which have abolished slavery and
serfdom, and are working so mightily towards the regeneration of society, find room
only in Christianized nations, and have their fountain in the gospel. But the gospel
.aims at something very different from regenerating society with ideas, however true
-and Divine. It aims to bring each human being, as a lost wanderer, home to God.
Alone among systems, the gospel goes to the heart and root of all man's wretchedness
And degradation — sin. The estrangement of the individual heart and life from God,
.and disobedience to his law of love. If you want au unanswerable proof that the



66 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [P8. lxxiv. 1-2S.

gospel is God's word, not man's, yon may find one (among innumerable others) iu the
view given of sin and God's dealing with it. Take just four passages : (1) John i. 29 ;
(2) 1 John iv. 10 (" our sins ; " q.d. " of the whole world," ii. 2) j (3) John vi. 51, " th«
bread," etc.) ; (4) John xvi, 8.

III. The success of God's cause defends on God eimself pleadino it. Asa's
plea (2 Chron. xiv. 11). We may be in danger of forgetting this. If we see full
subscription lists, large congregations, plenty of new societies, we think God's work is
surely prospering. If the leverse, we are downcast, perhaps almost despairing. One
way in which God wonderfully holds the work in his own hand is in the raising up of
workers. What would the religious history of mankind have been without Abraham,
Moses, St. Paul ? Such men as John Wesley, J. F. Oberlin, Felix NefF, Robert Moffat,
are not results of any law of evolution and human progress. Each is unique — a gift
fiom God. God only is the Judge, in what way best to plead his own cause. Some-
times by letting men take their own blind, proud way, and eat the fruit of their doings.
Spain has never recovered the withering blight brought on her by the Inquisition, which
trampled out her noblest life. Nor France the massacre of the Huguenots and the
Revocation of the Edict of Nantes.

IV. Therefore we are waeranted, encouraged, constrained, to offer this
PRATER. " Arise," etc. Beware of praying as though we were more zealous for God's
cause than God hinjself, more earnest for his glory, more compassionate towards
perishing men. Yet we are not to treat prayer as a mere form. Sometimes it seems
inscrutable, almost incredible, that our poor, weak prayers can be of any account in
the world's history — the fulfilment of God's promises. But God knows best. He has
made prayer one of the great laws of his spiritual universe. Ours not to question, but
obey. What infinite comfort to turn from our own failures, the world's unbelief and
misery, and the mysteries of providence to God's plain word of promise and command
(Matt. vi. 9) I



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Vers. 3 — 8. — SeWs carnival. This is what is portrayed to us in those lamentations
over the desecrations and destructions wreaked upon the temple at Jerusalem, probably
at the time of Nebucbailnezzar's invasion (see 2 Chron. xxxvi. 17, etc.). As the destroyer
acted then, so he acts ncpvv wbi-n the like work is on hand of profaning Gud's sanctuary.
What the ancient temple was, the Church of God is — the sanctuary of God. And it
has once and again come under the destroyer's power.

I. The temple is laid waste. (Ver. 3.) 1. That at Jerusalem was. The sacred
service had come to an end; the throng of worshippers were diiven away: the ministers
of the temple no longer served at the altar ; there was desolation everywhere. " The
holy and beautiful house wherein the fathers of Israel had worshipped has been
plundered and desecrated by a I'cathen soldiery. Instead of the psalms and hymns
and sacred anthems which once echoed within those walls, has been heard the brutal
shout of the fierce invaders, roaring like lions over their prey." 2. And there have been
similar desecrations. Our own land, and other's, are sprinkled over with the ruins of
desecrated shrines. They are beautiful even now in their decay, and suggest to us
how glorious they must have been when they stood erect and complete in all their
grandeur; when, instead of being given over, as now, to mouldering ruin, they were
thronged with devout worshippers, and the sublime music of the praises of God
reverberated through their high-roofed naves and choirs, and down the long vistas of
their vaulted aisles. One can, even now, scarce keep back the bitter curse upon those
brutal iconoclasts who in these once magnificent houses of God have wrought such
cruel havoc and desolation, and the effects of whose blind fanaticism or wanton
wickedness and greed can now never be repaired. The sacred rage which breathes
in this psalm finds place yet in many hearts against those detestable destroyers of the
most beautiful products of God-inspired genius and devotion that the world has ever
seen or will see. 3. But the desolation of the spiritual temple is worse still, and what
most concerns us all. And the wasters of that are not wicked men who assail us from
without, but spiritual foes whom we have sheltered within. It is unbelief which lays



PB. Lxxiv. 1— 23.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 87

waste the spiritual temple. AVor^e than fire, or axe, or sword, it makes havoc of the
soul. And wickedness following hard on its footsteps completes the work which it has
begun. Then comes —

II. The exultation op the asvegsaby. (Ver. 4.) No doubt this literally
occurred at Jerusalem, as it has in many another sanctuary of God which has been
brought to ruin. But most assuredly that " roar " has been heard when the Church
of God — his temple in the soul — has been laid waste. The adversaries of God point
the finger of scorn ; they scoff and jibe and mock ; they never weary of holding up
to contempt the loud, lofty pretensions and vast claims of the Christian Church, as they
bid all men see what a wretched fraud she has at last proved to be. They contrast
what she said and what she is, and the roar of execration and exultation over her
is heard far and wide as that contrast is seen. Let none of us by our infidelities add
to that bitter shame.

III. Thet set up theib btandabds as tbue. (Ver. 4.) In the temple at
Jerusalem the invaders, no doubt, piled their military trophies, banners, and ensigns ;
or the " signs " spoken of may mean religious emblems, heathen rites and ceremonies
(cf. 1 Mace. i. 54, 59; iii. 48). But both meanings may be combined, as the temple
may have been turned both into a barrack and heathen altar at the same time. The
incident, however, suggests what is so continually seen when the spiritual temple of
God is laid waste. Then men take their standards of truth for those of God; they
assert their miserable theories of things for the veiities which the Holy Scriptures
have taught us ; they bid us welcome some age of reason instead of the time-honoured
truths on which the Church is founded. Their ensigns for signs, man's speculations
for God's revelations.

IV. The beauty and qkacb of the temple they break down. (Ver. 6.) So
has it been with mateiial sanctuaries of God, and the like has been done in those
which are spiritual. For a while the unbeliever filches from the fair fabric of Christian
truth those gracious and winsome doctrines which have ever commended the faith
of Christ to men, and he claims them as the mere product of reason, as evolved by the
processes of human thought. But when his work of destruction is complete, and the
spiritual sanctuary of God is all laid waste, faith utterly gone, then it will be louiid
that this "carved work of the sanctuary " will be broken down, and the love and care
of men will depart with the love and faith of God.

V. The wohk goes on until all is destroyed. (Ver. 7.) It was so with the
material temple; but, thank God, all is not lost in the spiritual. There may be,
however, individuals and groups of men in which the dread work is complete, and
" God is not in all their thoughts."

VI. Every kelio and trace op the worship op God is got bid op. (Ver. 8.)
Besides the temple, there were, doubtless, synagogues, places of assembly, where
religious men met for worship, though we do not meet with the actual mention of
synagogues until the times of the New Testament. And when the first temple was
destroyed, we may reasonably believe that such places existed, as we know they did
afterwards. But there are, alas 1 places and human hearts where every relic and trace
of God's worship have been swept utterly away, as if burned with fire. So long as
any place where the snul can meet with God is left, the great enemy's triumph is not
complete ; he is not satisfied till what is said in ver. 8 has been done. But from
this may God keep us all 1 — S. 0.

Ver. 9. — " We see not our signs." It is said that there were five signs in the first
temple which the second had not — the ark of the covenant, the fire from heaven, the
Shechinah, the Urim and Thummim, and the spirit of prophecy. So in the Church of
Christ there are signs which are very blessed for us to see.

I. Signs op what ? it will be asked. Of the presence, the power, the love of the
Lord in our midst. This was what the signs in the first temple told of.

II. What abe these signs ? 1. The attention of men around. 2. The work of
conversion going on. 3. Witness of believers, 4. Their love to one another and to
their fellow-men, because of their love to God. 5. Their peace and joy in Qod.

III. The different belations between the seeing and these signs. 1. Ther*
may be neither. It is better there should be no fancied seeing, if the reality be not there.



88 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. lxxiv. 1— 23.

For i 2. There may he the seeing, and not the signs, 3. There may be the signs, and yet
not the seeing, 4. There may he both. This is most blesised of all. — S. C.

Ver. 17. — Summer teachings. The four seasons, it has been well said, are God's
four evangelists of the natural world. The sternness vf winter; the hopefulness of
spring ; the richne.-s of summer ; the bounty of autumn ; — each season has its own
message from God to our souls. Note —

I. The natural summeb. This is what is referred to in our text : the psalmist
appeals to it as a plea for God's much-needed help. His infinite power, which had
made summer and winter, and had been manifested in so niany marvellous ways, was
able to help Israel in their great distress, and their trust was that he would. 1. Israel
had to maintain stoutly the truth that God made all things, A whole mob of idol-
gods was put forward and worshipped by the heathen as the authors and creators of
the powers of nature. 2. And our missionaries to the heathen have to maintain the
same truth of God the Creator of all. It is by no means universally or generally believed
even yet. 3. And in our day and in our own land, professedly Christian as it is, we
may not slacken our testimony to this truth. It is not that we have to contend with
rival gods, as Israel had, and the missionary still has, but the existence of any God
at all is either openly questioned or flatly denied. It is not polytheism, but atheism,
that confronts and opposes the Christian advocate to-day and here at home. Natural
law is everything; as if a law could do anything without an executive to put it in
force. The anoieat Greeks were pantheists, but our men of science have, too many of
them, sunk down to a lower depth than that. The Greek saw gods everywhere and
in all things; we see God nowhere. Shall we give in to this proud yet miserable
atheism? God foibid! Let us still maintain with the psalmist, "Thou hast made
summer." As we look round on all the rich glories of the season, let us confess, with
our great Puritan poet —

"These are thy works, Parent of good," eta

II. The summer of God's pkovidenoe. How many are enjoying thisl God's
daily gifts of life, health, and joy are lavished upon them. They bask in the sunshine
of his love. Everything bids them rejoice. But forget not the Giverof your joy — him
who made the summer. That holy memory will be to you like the string attached
to the child's kite, which is soaring away up in the blue heavens to the child's exuberant
di-light. But let that string be broken which now steadies and sustains it, not
hinilering but aiding it in its upward way through the sunlit air, and then you
know that at once it will come tumbling ignominiously to the ground. So if we let
ourselves forget our God, and we be in thought and affection separated from him, then
our poor joy, like that child's kite, will soon fall to the ground, and our gladness will
suon be at an end. It is the remembrance, " Thou hast made summer," which does
not hinder but help our joy, steadying and sustaining it as did that cord the child's
toy. Let us not forget this. And we would bid you remember God, because, else, the
summer of God's providence, like the natural summer, is apt to breed many forms of
evil life, like those many creeping, noisome, and miserably destructive insects, etc.,
which the summer sun calls forth, and which in our fields and gardens we are ever
seeking to be rid of. How full the Bible is of records of the ill that the summer of
God's providence has occasioned to many unwatchful and God-forgetting souls 1
Remember, too, that such seasons let that live which is not really strong, and which
the first frost of winter will speedily kill. So is it easy, when no trial or persecution
arises because of Christ, to appear as if we were really his. But when they do arise,
what then ?

III. The summer of God's grace. 1. This may he in us — is so when the love
of God is shed abroad in our hearts. It is very delightful ; is independent of every
other summer; comes by degrees; is the result of conflict; unlike the natural summer,
it never ends, though it may be interrupted. And : 2. It is above us, waiting for ua
in the future world. There is the " land of pure delight." The lovely scenes of earth
are reminders of it. It is the true, real, most blessed, because unending, summer of
the soul.— S. C.



PB. Lxxiv. 1— 23.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 89

Ver. 17. — Winter. Winter: what has that to say to us of God and of his ways? —
Winter, with its cold, chilling hreath, compelling even the strong to wrap themselves
round with all manner of protection, and making all who can, shelter within their
well-built homes, and draw close their warm curtains, and heap up the blazing fires.
Winter, pinching so cruelly the ill-clad, the ill-fed, the ill-housed, making want more
terrible, all sickness more deadly, and all misery more miserable. Winter, grim, gaunt,
bearing down in its cruel might all less strong than itself. Winter, with its snowy
shroud coyering the fields and hiUs which all lie as silent and as still as if they were
laid out for burial, and the snow over them were a real winding-sheet instead of only
a seeming one. And sometimes it is a real one, when winter bids the snow fall
quickly, closely, softly, continuously; then, blinding the eyes of the unfortunate
wanderer on the moor, so that he can make out neither road, nor path, nor track, nor
waymark; beating persistently against his mouth and nostrils, taking away his
breath, numbing all his senses, uutil the poor lost one staggers on in hopeless search
of the way he has lost. " Oh, thou winter snow, who more cruel, deadly, treacherous,
than thou ? Thou wilt not cease thy work until the poor traveller, weary and heart-
broken, falls down exhausted ; and then, as he dies, thou wilt smite him in the face,
cover bim up softly as with kisses, tenderly as with eider down, like a sleek white
murderer as thou artl " (Alex. Smith). And not only so is winter terrible ; its keen
northerly blast, tearing over the seas and lands, driving the ships across the waves,
and rendering the mariners all but powerless to struggle against their foe. Their
fingers freeze to the rigging, and the stiffened sails refuse to bend to their will, and
happy are they if, " amid this howling wintry sea," they find some port of refuge.
Shepherds and their flocks in some seeming shelter on Scotch hills are caught by the
whirling, blinding, smothering, snow, and all are lost. Oh, the terrible winter, ruthlessly
tearing the foliage off the trees, stripping the flowers from all gardens and fields,
banishing most of the birds, and silencing all that remain; rejoicing seemingly in
darkness and cold, in all that is drear, deadly, desolate ; — such is winter, bearable by
the rich and strong, but terrible to the poor and weak, and would be terrible to all
were it not for the sure hope of the blessed spring. And yet, though we have spoken
oardly of it, G-od made it even as he made the summer. And he has promised that
it shall not fail. Certainly, therefore, it must be for other than only evil ; it must
serve some beneficent purpose. And it does ; we have proof upon proof. Winter, as
well as the other seasons, is one of the gifts of our Pather-God, the gifts of his love.
Let us listen a while to some of the voices of the winter — the wise, warning, winning
words it utters to those who will hearken. And —

L It 8BEM8 TO us TO BAT, " Be te ALSO READT." It is Certain to come ; it is no
chance arrangement, and none but a fool would fail to make provision for it. Every
one does to the best of his power.

"All is safely gathered in.
Ere the winter storms begin."

Let it be BO in regwd to the winter that is sure to visit our souls, our circumstances,
our lives. Be ready for it when it comes. Let our treasure be where winter cannot
ci'me, even in God and the eternal life.

II. Teubt. For the winter is God's ordering : he makes it drear and dark and even
dreadful, as it often seems to be. It is the product of no blind fate, no mere soulless
relentless law ; but it is of God. If we will hold fast to this sure faith, we shall be able
to hope and patiently wait for the salvation of our God, and meanwhile even to rejoice.

III. Submit. Winter is irresistible. Everything must bend before it. Who can
resist his will? Great is the part that the winter has played in the humiliation of
haughty men. As it lays hold even upon the raging seas, and binds them down in
motionless silence, hushing their turbulence till they lie still as a stone ; so has God,
by the same agency, often baffled anil destroyed the power of man. See Napoleon's
retreat from Moscow. And how easily 1 The gently, persistingly falling snow did it
all. Shall man, then, war against God ? Submit.

IT. SiKO or UEBCT AB WELL AS OF JUDOMENT. See how in the winter these
are blessedly mingled. True, God giveth snow, but it is "like wool" (Ps. cxlvii. 16,
17). It wraps up warmly the seed sown in the earth.



90 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. lxxt. 1— 10.

** His flakes of snow like wool he sends,
And thus the springing corn defeads."

And ** he scattereth the hoar-frost," hut it is " like ashes," cleansing, purifying, making
healthful that on which they are cast. And the frost is a cleansing power, ridding
gardens and fields of the foul, noxious creatures that swarm and creep and devour.
And does not that humiliation and sorrow of which the sprinkled ashes told do tho
like in the region of the soul ? " He casteth forth his ice," hut they are " like
morsels " — like the crumbs which feed the hungry. So the ice prepares the soil, breaks
it up, and fits it for the growth of the seed.

V. The jot of the Lord is toce stbenqth. Abundant life — see that throng of
shouting, laughing bovs careering on the ice — heeds not the cold, rather rejoices in it.
So let there be in us fulness of Divine life, the life which Christ gives, and we shall be
able to " stand before his cold." — S. C.

Vers. 7 — 8, 12. — The destructive work of man and the constructive work of Ood.
The prayer in vers. 1, 2, to help the people sunk in the deepest misery, is followed by
its basis or ground, which consists of a picture of this misery (vers. 3 — 9); the
sanctuary is destroyed, and all traces of the presence of God among his people have
disappeared. The short prayer in vers. 10, 11 seeks support and stay in the thought
uf the i.iiiniputence of the God of Israel (vers. 12 — 17). The prayer is renewed at the
close in lui expanded form (Gen. xvii. 7, h). It shows how the Church of God and
iudividiial believers are to conduct themselves in times when everything appears to be
lost and to lie in ruins. The whole psalm may sujgest two general points for con-
sideration — the destructive work of man, and the constructive work of God.

I. The DBSTRncTiVB work op man. (Vers. 3 — 9.) The enemy had destroyed
everything in the simctuary, and burnt up the holy place itself. Look at some
destructive wurk in our day. 1. The material tendencies of physical science. Leading
to a denial of God and immortality, and striking at the foundation of morals by deny-
ing the freedom of man's nature. Ideas destructive, as well as eondv,ct. 2. The
critical spirit which is abroad. A spirit of denial, almost universally pulling down,
and not building up. This and that not true — in history and creed. 3. The selfish
spirit, wherever it rules, is destructive. In politics and commerce, and in our social
relations — tending to antagonism and separation, and breaking all law — moral. Divine,
and social. 4. The absence of true prophets — inspired men — is also a sign of the
destrtustive process. (Ver. 9.) The true prophet is the constructor, and not the
destroyer ; the inspirer, and not the critic.

II. The constructive work of God. 1. God's greatest work of old was redemp-
tive. (Vers. 12 — 15.) " For God is my King of old, working salvation in the midst
of the earth." His work in Christ is reconstructive, building men up after the highest
pattern. Christ came not to destroy, but to fulfil. 2. Bis work in the physicai
creation is constructive. (Vers. 16, 17.) He prepared the light and the sun, made
summer and wmter. The same mind ordained and continues the precious seasons as
ordained the laws and works of redemption. 3. Ood's covenant is a covenant of salva-
tion. (Ver. 20.) And the world is still in urgent need of redemption. "The dark
places," etc. 4. ITie work of redemption is Ood's own — " his own cause.'' (Ver. 22.)
And therefore he will not abandon it. We can therefore pray as the psalmist did. — S.



EXPOSITION.



PSALM LXXV.
Ibib is a hymn of praise in anticipation
of a deliverance, which may be from
Sennacherib, or from some other dangerous
enemy. The actual praise is confined to
the first and the last two verses. The
remainder of the poem (vers. 2 — 8) sets



forth Ood as a righteous Judge, against
whom the ungodly contend in vain, and
who will pour out at last the dregs of his
vengeance upon them. The author may be
Asaph, and the deliverance that from Zerah
(2 Chron. xiv. 9 — 13); or the date may be
later, and the writer an Asaphite Levite of
the time of Jehoshaphat or Hezekiah.



PS. LXXV. 1—10.]



THE BOOK OF PSALMS.



91



The plirase, " Al-taschitli," in the " title,"
is probably a musical term. It occurs also
in the titles of Fss. Ivii., Iviii., and lix.

Yer. 1. — TTnto thee, God, do we give
thanks, nnto thee do we give thanks: for
that thy Name is near thy wondrous works
declare ; literally, and thy Name is near
(i.e. thy providence and care are close to
ub); this do thy icondroua icork) declare.
The "wondrous works" are those of times
past (oomp. Ps. Ixxiv. 12 — 15), whereof the
psalmist anticipates a continuance or
repetition.

Yer. 2. — When I shall receive the con-
gregation ; rather, when I ehall have ap-
pointed a set time. It is agreed that the
speaker, in this verse and the next, is God,
who announces that he is about to descend
in judgment. This, however, be will do
" at his own set time," for which men must
wait patiently (comp. Hab. ii. 3). I will
judge uprightly ; or, " with uprightness "
(comp. Ps. Iviii. 1).

Ver. 3. — The earth and all the inhabitants
thereof are dissolved. They "melt" with
fear (Ps. xlvi. 6), either at Tjod's coming in
judgment, or at the dissolution which a
hostile invasion is bringitig on their Ixnd.
I bear up the pillars of it. Meanwhile God
upholds, and will uphold, both the moral
and pLiysical order of things. He will
neither suffer the earth to be moved, nor
the supports on which society depends to
fail and crumble away.

Yer. 4. — I said. It is doubtful who is the
speaker. Profe;ssor Oheyne regards the
entire passage from the beginning of ver, 2
to the end of ver. 5 as spoken by the
Almighty ; but most commtutators assign
vers. 4 and 5 to the psalmist or tlie people
of Israel Unto the fools ; i.e. to the enemy
which was attacking Israel ; literally, to
tlie boasters, or to the arrogant ones (see
Revised Version). Deal not foolishly ;
rather, deal not to arrogantly. Do not set
yourselves so proudly against the Almighty.
And to the wicked. Lilt not up the horn ;
t'.e. be not fierce aod menacing, like a bull
who threatens with bis liorns.

Yer. 5. — Lift not up your horn an high ;
(peak not with a stiff neck. The phrase, " a
stiff neck," common in the Pentateuch
(Exod. xzxii. 9; xxxiii. 3, 5; xxxiv. 9;
Deut. ix. 6, 13 ; x. 16 ; xxxi. 27), is rare
elsewhere. I« expresses pride, arrogance,
and obstinacy.

Yer. 6. — For promotion cometh neither
from the east, nor from the west, nor from
the south. So Hupfeld, Kay, Canon Cook,
and the Bevieed YersioTi. Others suggest



the meaning to be, " For it is not from the
east, nor is it from the west, nor yet from
the mountainous desert [that help cometh]."
But the ellipse of the main idea is impro-
bable. The address is to the enemies who
threaten Israel, " Lift not up your horns —
speak not proudly — for exaltation comes not
from any earthly quarter — east, west, north,
or south" ("north" being omitted, as
sufficiently implied in the others) ; it is God
alone who gives it, and he is not likely to
give it to you."

Yer. 7. — But Ood is the Jndge (comp. Pes.
1. 6 ; Ixxxii. 1 : xciv. 2 ; and, especially,
the original of all the later passages, Gen.
xviii. 25). He putteth down one, and setteth
up (or, exalteth) another (oomp. 1 Sam. ii.
7; Dan. ii. 21; iv. 17). True equally of
nations and of individuals.

Ver. 8.— For in the hand of the Lord there
is a cup, and the wine is red. Tlie " cup
of God's fury " is a frequent metaphor with
the prophets (Isa. Ii. 17, 22; Jer. xxv. 15,
17, 28 ; xlix. 12 ; Lam. iv. 21 ; Ezek. xxiiL
31 — 33 ; Hab. ii. 16, etc.) ; and is commonly
represented as full of wine, which his
enemies have to drink. The " redness " of
the wine typifies the shedding of blood. It
is full of mixture. Mingled, i.e., with
spices, and so made stronger and more
efficacious (see Prov. ix. 2; xxiii., 30;
Cant. viii. 2 ; Isa. v. 22). And he poureth
out of the same. God pours out the cup of
his fury on all nations, or persons, whom he
chooses to afiBict, and they are compelled to
drink of it (Jer. xxv. 15—28). But the dregs
thereof, all the wicked of the earth shall
wring them out, and drink them. To drink
a cup, dregs and all, is to empty it wholly,
to swallow down all its contents,

Yer, 9. — But I will declare for ever ; i.e.
"1 will declare these things" — viz. God's
just judgments upon the wicked. I will
sing praises to the Ood of Jacob. On the
force of the phrase, " God of Oncob," see the
comment upon Ps. xx. 1.

Ver. 10. — All the horns of the \k «oked also
will I cat off. Besides declariu;^ God's
judgments and singing his praisi^, the
psalmist adds that he will, as far as lies in
his power, seek to advance God's cause, and
establish his kingdom, by checking, con-
trolling, and putting down the wicked.
This he expresses by the metaphor, " I will
cut off tlieir horns ; " i.e. bring down their
haughtiness, and deprive them of the power
of doing mischief. But the horns of the
righteous shall be exalted. Then, as a
necessary consequence, "the horns of th«
righteous" — their power and might and
glory — will be exalted.



92 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [pb. lxxv. 1—10.



HOMILETICS.

Ver. 1. — The estence, certainty, and preciousness of Divine revelation. " Thy Name
is nigh." This rendering is given in the margin of the Bevised Version, and another
in the text. The difference arises from the exceeding brevity of the Hebrew making
the sense doubtful. But the sense given in our Authorized Version is supported by
weighty authorities ; and has the advantage of being at once full of meaning and fuU
of grandeur. We may regard it as bringing before us the essencei the certainty, and
the preciousness of Divine revelation.

I. Essence of Divine revelation. The possibility of knowing God, and the
possibility of conversing, holding communion, with God are the two fundamental
truths of revelation. Apart from these, the Bible would give us nothing but dead
history, barren doctrine, baseless imagination. The first is expressed in the Scriptures
by the Name of God ; the second by his drawing near to us, and bringing us near lo
him. 1. OocFs Name stands in Scriptnre for all that we can know and do know of
him. Names are the instruments of all our knowledge. What we cannot name, or
name wrongly, we do not know. Giving names was the beginning of speech fGen. ii.
19). Moses, therefore, asked how he was to name God to Israel (Exod. lii. 13 — 15 ;
comp. Exod. xxxiii. 19 ; xxxiv. 6, 7 ; xxiii. 21 ; Prov. xviii. 10). 2. Communion wiih
God and enjoyment of his favour are constantly expressed under this imase of Ood's
nearness (though "in him we live," etc.) (Deut. iv. 7; Ps. cxlv. 18 ; Prov. xv. 29 ; Jer.
xii. 2; Eph. ii. 13,17).

II. The certainty. How do we know that we know God, and that we can converse
with him ? By the evidence of experience, historical and personal. " That thy Name
is near, thy wondrous works declare." Divine revelation goes exactly on the lines of
human nature and life. We know one another — our fellow human beings by speech
and action. These reveal character. The Bible is the continuous record of God's
manifestation of himself to meu by word and by deed. His works of nature reveal
him (Ps. xix. 1 ; Bom. L 19, 20). But he has " magnified his Word above all his Name ; "
q.d. the living voice of his prophets and the record in Scripture of their message, has
brought God near to us, and us to him, as nature never could — yet a very large part
of Scripture itself consists in the record of his " wondrous deeds, his dealings with his
Church and mankind." Above all, the incarnation, the personal life, and atonement
of the Lord Jesus, reveal God as nothing else can (John xvii. 3 ; xiv. 9 ; 1 John iv. 9 ;
2 Pet. L 16).

III. The preciousness. " Unto thee do we give thanks." What blessing, what
treasure, is comparable with this — the certainty that Qod is near, and is known I — not
the infinite Unknowable, but our Father in Christ Jesus. We do not pretend to a
compute knowledge of Gt)d. The Bible, far from professing to give such knowledge,
declares it impossible (Job xi. 7 ; Ps. cxxxix. 6 ; Isa. Iv. 9). We do not completely
know our fellow-men or our own selves. But we know all we need to know. Our
knowledge, as far as it goes, is real and certain (John i. 18 ; Job xxviii. 28 ; Jer. ix.
23, 24). It is an ample resting-place, both for intellect and heart (Matt. xi. 28).



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Vers. 1 — 10. — The undaunted one. Such is the spirit of this psalm; fearlessness
characterizes it throughout, and concerning this spirit it teaches much.

I. On what such spirit rests. 1. On the conviction that Ood is n<-ar at hand
for our help. " For that thy Name is near," etc. (ver. 1). 2. On the evidence for this
conviction which God's " wondrous works " supplies : works in nature, providence,
grace.

II. The fruits such spirit bears. 1. Thankfulness. (Ver. L) 2. Sighteous
deeding. (Ver. 2, " I will judge uprightly.") 3. Clear-sightedness as to the reality
of things (ver. 3). Where this spirit is, there is no fear of man. He shrinks not
from facing and confessing the actual truth, however unwelcome it may be. 4. Cheerful
tnil. "I bear up the pillars of it" (ver. 3); cf, St. Paul, " I can do all things through



PS. Lxxv. 1—10.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 83

Christ," etc. 5. FaUhful testimony. (Ver. 4.) Against the wicked. For Grod (ver. 7).
Concerning; wrath to come (ver. 8). 6. Delight in Ood. (Ver. 9.) 7. Open siding
with the right against the wronz (ver. 10).
III. The obeat Exeuplab and Giveb of this spibit — the Lord Jesus Christ. — S. C.

Ver. 1. — The uplifting Ood. Such is the theme of this psalm. This we gather
from the frequent repetition of the word "uplift." Like the repeated clear strokes of
a hell, it reverberates through the psalm. In ver. 4 the wicked are bidden " lift not
up the horn," as doth the fierce bull that, in the pride of his might, tosses his horns
de&antly against all comers. Let them not boast themselves in their fancied strength.
And ver. 5 repeats this warning, and ver. 6 tells them that " uplifting " — " promotion,"
our Authorized Version reads it, but it is the same word all through — is neither from
the east, nor the west, nor south, but — so ver. 7 tells them — God is the Judge ; he
putteth down one and " lifts up " another, — again the same word. And then once
more in ver. 10 God declares that the strength, " the horns," of the righteous shall be
lifted up. Thus over and over again this emphatic word and key-note of the psalm is
heard. And this gracious dealing of God with his people is the ground of the earnest
thanksgiving with which the psalm opens ; and it is the " Name " of God which it
asserts to be so " near," and which his wondrous worlds declare. As in Ps. cxxi.,
God's gracious keeping of his people is the theme, and hence the word " keep " is
repeated all through the psalm. We do not know for certain when, or by whom, or
on what occasion, this psalm was written. It is like the sonij; of Hannah echoed in
the Magnificat of the mother of our Lord. Or it may celebrate one or all of David's
many deliverances — how God had " uplifted him " out of all his troubles, and hence his
vow of righteousness which in ver. 2 and repeatedly, he declares. Or it may celebrate
the " uplifting " of Judah and Eezekiah from the peril of Sennacherib. We do not
know, nor does it matter. Severed as it is for us from all special circumstances, we
are the better able to make application of it according to our individual need. Now, in
the text we note —

I. Its exubeeant thanksoiying. The writer's heart was full. 1. He repeats his
thanksgiving. It is as if he felt himself unable to tell out all his gratitude ; as if he
had said, " Tea, Lord, unto thee do we give thanks ; yea, we do." 2. And it arises
from many hearts, not one alone. It is "we," not "I." 3. AnA it reveals the character
of the grace received. That it had been such as was greatly and consciously needed ;
and could come from no other source (ver. 6) ; and it had been great indeed (Luke
vii. 47) ; and both unexpected and undeserved,

II. The abundant reason foe it. " For that thy Name is near." 1. What are
we to understand by " thy Name " t It means that which the name suggests. Names
call up in our minds that which we know and feel of those to whom they belong. The
Name of God suggests, therefore, to any man his idea of God— one thin;; to one man,
another to another. To the writer of this psalm it is evident what thought of God his
Name suggested. God was to him the God who lifts his people up from all their
distresses. 2. What he says of this Name. It is " near." He meant, near in time, in
locality, — at hand and not afar ofif, to his consciousness ; he realized this nearness of
God. 3. And we can still assert the Name. How often and how greatly, and for how
many, God has uplifted their snuls ! — from the burden of guilty fear, of sin's oppression,
of earthly oaie, of death's terror, and of all forms of Satan's rage. In all such times of
trouble God has been near to his people, and has lifted them up far above and away
from all their fear.

III. Its peesuabive plea. Surely testimony such as is here given is a plea^
unanswerable that we all should put our trust in the uplifting God, and turn to him
in every trouble, and abide in him always. For us, too, there is the further argument
of God's grace in Christ, and the infinite love revealed in him. May we hearken and
obey!— S. 0.

Ver. 3. — Belp laid on One that i» mighty. Our text and this whole psalm show
jlearly enough that —

I. Such help was needed. 1. Society, order, law, seemed all on the point of
dissolution. A condition of affairs is contemplated in which everything seemed rushing



94 THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [ps. lxxv. 1— la

ruinwards, and would rapidly have reached such sad ending, had they not been held
back by One mightier than they. We cannot say for certain, though we may con-
jecture, what special agi, persons, or events are alluded to. The psalm suits several
such, and is capable of many applications. For our own use of its teachings it is well
that we are left in ignorance of its actual allnsions, and cannot point to the special
events which were before the psalmist's mind. 2. And such conditions are all too
common. We see them in nations. Churches, families, individual souls. Everything
seems slipping away, all order and strength and well-being dissolving. It is as if " the
earth and all the inhabitants thereof were dissolved." It is so in things temporal, and
so, too, in things spiritual. 3. jThe causes that produce such conditions are manifold.
Sometimes, in nations, it is war, or political strife, or, and this more commonly, moral
corruption. So it seems to have been in the condition contemplated by this psalm
(see vers. 2, 4). And none can read the records of history, whether in the Bible or in
other books, but may trace this cause, sin, ever at its deadly work. If a nation, a
Church, a city has fallen, we have not far to seek for what has brought it about. The
]ihilosophy of history is the tracing out the contrasted effects of righteousness and
wrong. And in the dissolution told of here, the solvent that brought it about was
certainly sin. And so is it also in the like conditions that are found elsewhere. 4. But
wherever found, they are very sad. The groaning and travail of the whole creation,
which were so audible and distressing to St. Paul, are the result of such conditions,
and the sorrow would have been greater than he could have borne had he not been
" saved by hope " — the hope suggested by the latter half of our text, of help being laid
on One that is mighty. For —

II. Such help is forthcomixo. " I bear up the pillars of it." The earth is
pictured as some vast temple supported on pillars, but which are on the point of giving
way, and would were they not upheld by a mi,i,'hty support. The meaning is plain
— that there is One who holds back the ruin which is everywhere threatening, who will
interpose and prevent it. Who is this Mighty One? It may be some monarch,
statesman, prophet. God h.)s raised up such — like Moses, David, our own Alfred
the Great; like Nehemiah, like William the Silent, and many more. The saying, " I
bear up," etc., is not arrogance, but the simple statement of the duty God has assigned
him. The faith in God, and the courage which characterize such men, are evident in
this psalm. But in the last resort it is God who is the real Up-bearer, It is he who
itispires and qualifies his servants.

III. S0OH HELP, UNDER SUCH CIRCUMSTANCES, 18 WAITING FOR US. Seek it. S. C.

Ver. 5. — The uplifted horn and the stiff neck. These are two formidable enemies of
God and the soul. They are generally (bund together, as in nature, so in the "soul.
They help one another in doing evil. They are metaphors derived from the tossing
horn and the sturdy neck of the fierce wild bull found in the forests of Palestine.
They represent severally the haughty s|)irit, — that is the uplifted horn ; and the stubborn
will, — that is' the stiff neck. Let us speak of —

I. Their origins. 1. ITie haughty spirit Many are its roots. The evil heart,
seeing the wicked prosper, worldly success, God's delay of judgment, ill example, and
often the possession of a naturally strong will to which other men, as is usual, yield.
2. The stubham will. This partly natural, partly acquired, and ever fostered by the
haughty spirit. Pride cherishes it, and encourages it always.

II. Theib EVIL WORK. God's Spirit, his Word, his ministers, his providence, Christ**
love, plead, threaten, and warn in vain, and the man dies in his sins.

III. Their destruction. This wrought by : 1. The final awful judgment of Ood.
2. His providence. 3. His Spirit's power. They come in reverse order. But they
are effectual, one or other of them. Which shall be so with us ? — S. C.

Ver. 8. — The Lord's cup for us. Many will say that the cup told of in this verse is
the Lord's cup of wrath, as in Ps. xi. 6 ; Isa. li. 17 — 23, and frequently elsewhere.
And if it were here said that the whole cup told of in our text was to be drunk by the
wicked, there could be no doubt as to what cup was meant. But it is only " the dregs "
thereof that is said to be their portion, not the rich foaming draught that fills the
rest of the cup. No doubt there is the cup of God's wrath, but there is also the cup



ps.Lxxv. 1-10.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 96

of salvation, and for his people " the Lord " himself " is the portion of tneir cup."
And as in the previous veroe the diverse dealings of God with men are told of, putting
down one and setting up another, so here also we liave the main contents of the cup,
which are rich and bright and good, declared, and the miserable dregs which the wicked
shall drink and drain out to the last. There is the better part for the good, the evil
part for the wicked. We therefore take the " cup " here told of, as setting forth human
life, our earthly existence allotted to us by the Lord. And thus we learn —
I 1. That cub life is given to us op the Lord. It is a cup, a portion, an assigned
lot, intended and ordered for us. " The cup which my Father hath given me, shall I
not drink it ? " So said our blessed Saviour of the life allotted to him. Life for us all
is in the hand of God, and he gives it to each one as he sees fit. This is a very blessed
truth. For we know we have no choice over the main elements of our life ; when,
where, with what endowments, many or few, or of what parentage we shall be born,—
all this we have no control over. But it is good to know that not chance, still less ill
will, but the Lord, has assigned to each of us the life we have to live, and he, like
the master of the feast, deals out to each his cup (cf. Ps. c, " It is he that hath made
us," etc.). Therefore we may be sure that he means it to be for our good ; for —

II. He pukposes that it should be bright and joyous. This, though apparently
so contrary to what life is to many, is, nevertheless, what the metaphor employed here
means. It tells of the wine which was meant to "make glad the heart of man ; " the
wine which was the symbol, not of vile debauchery, as it too often is in this country,
but ol' gladness, mirth, joy. And the wine spoken of is of the choicest sort — sparkling,
fuaming, bright, not some common sour beverage, such as the "vinegar "which one
of the soldiers at the cross save to our Lord to drink when he cried, " I thirst." But
the cup which the Lord gives us, as many of his children know, the life which he
assigns us, is one that he would have to be rich and bright and glad. Not rich it may
be — it rarely is — with this world's wealth, but rich with those " unsearchable riches,"
with that " heavenly gift," which is the perpetual gladness of the soul. Do we all of
us know this? We ought to. The fault is our own if we do not. Our Lord would
have us all live — and we may — ^bright and blessed and beautiful lives. We thirst for
joy, and God gives us, in the gift of life, a cup full of it. But, as in the happiest of
homes, the ohiLl to be happy must be obedient, so is it with ourselves towards God.

III. Nevertheless, thkbb is much of danger in it. " It is full of mixture "
(of. Prov. ix. 2). As was the wine mingled with myrrh, intended to stupefy the senses,
which was given to our Lord on his way to Calvary. This mixture increased the
Intoxicating power of the wine, or acted as a narcotic to deaden the senses. And in
the cup of life there is much to intoxicate, to excite with pride and passion, and to
unduly lift up the foolish h( art. See Jeshurun, Nebuchadnezzar, the power of wealth,
the pride of life, the efiects of power, etc. Oii, how many souls have been ruined thus 1
And there is much to oeaden or dull all holy sensibility. Yes, "full of mixture" is
this cup of life.

IV. The wicked drink the dregs. They drink so deeply, the world is everythmg
to them, they care for nothing else, and they find that life has its dregs, and they have
to drink them. Evil conscience, fear of judgment, disappointment, the luture dark,
death without hope,— these are some of the dregs. Oh for grace that we may use the
world, and not abuse it 1 — S. C.

Ver. 1. A pious ruler's purposes and confidences. The division of the Book of

Psalms into five books, and the clear recognition of the historical relations of many of
the psalms, have given fresh interest to the study of this book of the Bible. It was
usual to seek only for historical associations of the Psalms in the life of David. We
now know that many of the later psalms stand related to the succeeding reigns, to the
time of the Oaptivity, and to the renewed national life, on the return from Babylon.
The Psalms have wider associations than the records of the experience of any^one life.
They reflect God's ways with his people in all the ages, and the ways of God's people
with him. This psalm is often jiassed over as not being a very striking one, or havmg
in it any very memorable or suggestive sentences. But it gains new interest when we
connect it with Hezekiah, and find illustrations for it in the great strain-time of his
reign when Sennacherib put the holy city in peril, and there was a strange and sad



96 THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [ps. lxiv. 1—10.

strife of parties within the city, making Hezekiah's position an extremely difficult one.
Some pleailed hard for human alliances as defence against the Assyrians ; Hezekiah held
fast his dependence on God, the God of his fathers, the God of the nation. Disorganiza-
tion within paralyzed his pious attempts ; and the party of Shebna was plotting to
secure an alliance with Egypt. The psalm is the expression of steadfast purpose and
pious hope in a time of inward trouble. Its refrain is, " God reigneth, God is Judge, God
is near. All things will be well, fur Gud is with us." See what such a cherished con-
viction can do for a mun.

I. It gives him a quiet confidence. He can even give thanks, because his trust
makes him feel so restful and happy (see Hah. iii. 17, 18).

II. It helps him to stand fast to the bkjht, uninfluenced by the mere party
contentions of the time. Man's right is variable in each generation; God's right is the
same throughout all generations. The man whose strength and hope are in Ood can
" judge uprightly."

IIL It keeps him steadfast in evil times. " I bear up the pillars," Hezekiah
guided the state wisely through that time of commotion and peril. When everything
seemed shifting and un ertain, he stood firm to first principles, primary truths, and God.
Time always comes ro'>nd to those who are strong, and stand firm to truth and
righteousness.

IV. It frees him fkom all feab or the wilful. He knows that "God is
Promoter." The evil man may push and strive : " God putteth down one, and setteth
up another."

V. It A88UEES HIM OF FINAL AND IEBBVEE8IBLB JUDOMENT. God mUSt be Ogainst

the wicked. Gkxl must he /or the righteous. And it will be seen at last that he is.
— B.T.

Ver. 1. — The Divine Name and Names. " For that thy Name is near, thy wondrous
works declare." Every god worshipped by a people has his own distinctive name amona;
the people. But this is peculiarly true of the nation of Israel. The Divine Name,
Jehovah, was given as the seal of the special covenant made with the nation. So the
name Jehovah stands ever for God, God's presence, God's relations. But we can never
be wholly satisfied with any one name for God. Besides it, we must have names of
our own for him, which find expression for our sense of his gracious dealings with us,
and relations to us. Two points are suggested : 1. God has a Name. 2. God has many
Names.

I. God has a Name. This helps us to realize that he is a Person, not a mere force
or influence. The general name for God is El. The specific name for God, as God of
Israel, is Jehovah (see occasion of definiiely fixing the name, Exod. iii. 14). Note
that it is the assertion of absolute and independent existence. It works out su°:ges-
tively in three directions. It asserts (1) God's uniti/ ; (2) God's spirituality ; (3) God's
holiness. This threefold conception of God lies at the basis of the Mosaic system, and
is, therefore, properly gathered up into his Name. But it is striking and impressive to
note, that God was not satisfied with giving his people a name which only dealt with
his abstr.oct nature. He added a name which would gather up his relations with his
people, and called himself, " The God of Abraham and Isaac and Jacob." God's Name
is said to be " near," when men are specially impressed with his wonderful workings.
Past dealings and present dealings bring home to men's hearts the power and justice
and grace which are summed up and expressed in his Name (Deut. iv. 7 ; Isa. xxx. 27).
A remarkable deliverance, such as that from Sennacherib, was poetically spoken of as
a " coming near of the Divine Name."

II. God has many Names. In families there are often pet names as well as the
fixed names. Those pet names express individual feeling. So each person who gains
an individual apprehension of God wants to put his special apprehension into a name.
Indicate the variety of names : " God of heaven," " King," " Father," etc. ; and poetic
figures like " my Bock," " Refuge," " Horn," etc. Impress the point that no man really
knows God until he finds he can put his own special meaning into the term he uses for
him. Each one of us, reading the story of God's wondrous works for us and gracious
dealings with us, ought to be able to put our impressions into a name of our own,
— B.T.



PS. Lxxv. 1— 10.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 97

Ver. 1. — Reasonings from the Divine activity. " Thy wondrous works declare."
The thought of the restless activity of God is made by the psalmists, frequently, their
ground of confidence. " He that keepeth thee will not slumber ; behold, he that
keepeth Israel shall neither slumber nor sleep ; " " Remember his marvellous works
that he hath done ; his wonders and the judgments of his mouth." As first introduced
to us in the Word, God comes forth into activity as the Creator of the earth ; busy
for six continuous Divine periods in framing the world of material things to be the
trial-scene for man, and setting man in his sphere. And all the ages of human history
have revealed God working in man's spheres, providins, correcting, guiding, restoring,
delivering ; man's model of unresting activity.

I. The Divine activity impresses on ns the Divine nobility. Contrast the
unexpressive, passive faces of idol-gods. There is no dignity in listlessness, no
honour in doing nothing. He is miseri^ble indeed who has nothing to do; but he is
a thonsandfold more miserable who wants to do nothing. Among men the workers are
the true nobility. And God is exalted to our thought when the Lord Jesus says of
him, " My Father worketh liitherto, and I work."

II. The Divine activity convikces trs op the Divine interest. Thinking of
God's wondrous works, the psalmist feels how near God is to him and to his people —
near in love and power, near in succour and blessing. How much more impressive this
becomes if we apply it to immediate signs of Divine activity in the sudden overthrow
of Sennacherib (2 Kings xix. 35) 1 Hezekiah could confidently rest in the assurance
that God was actively working for him, and the rest of his anxieties would surely be
mastered, as this one had been. So we can in a general way assure our hearts by read-
ing of what God has done for our fathers ; but the impression of Divine interest comes
home to us only when we have been the objects of some gracious deliverance and guid-
ance ; then we know God is working /or us.

III. The Divine activitt assures vs of the Divine effioibnoy. We can trace
the way in which that activity has wrought through long ages ; and we can see what
it has accomplished. It is not only that "'with God all things are possible ; " it is
that all things are wise, right, good, ffe can — that is true. " He doeth all things well "
— that is even more true ; and it is a more precious truth. The conviction that God is
working, and that God is near, calls for the thanks which would fittingly express our
trust in him. — R. T.

Ver. 2. — Ood's set time for Judgment. It is not certain whether vers. 2 and 3 are
to be taken as an utterance of the psalmist for himself, or whether God is here intro-
duced as speaking. Dean Perowne thinks, " God is abruptly introduced as the speaker.
The oracle is thus given as from the mouth of God himself, to those who may be in
doubt or perplexity because their lot is cast in troublous times." But other writers
think that Hezekiah is appealing to God, and assuring him that, even amidst the civil
commotions and party struggles creating strong feelings, he will hold fast his integrity
as chief magistrate, and judge fairly, uprightly, between man and man. " Receiving
the congregation " is thus a poetical figure for the king's daily magistracy. The
Revised Version renders, " When I shall find the set time, I will judge uprightly," and
this favours the view that God is the speaker. " Judgment " here probably stands lor
" active intervention." God often seems to delay his help ; and such delay is a strain
on faith and feeling. He never does really delay, because his time is set in infinite
wisdom. Illustrate by the waiting at the shores of the Bed Sea, for God's set time to
make the pathway through. See also Hezekiah's waiting for God's set time before his
deliverance Irom the Assyrians. A " set time " implies —

I. Thought beforehand. God knew all Hezekiah's anxieties long before he
seemed to intervene. He was interested. He watched. God was caring when he did
not seem to care. How much better it is that God should observe all circumstances,
and decide for the wisest moment in which to act for us I We may wish him to act
at once ; but in that case he could only alter our circumstances. By thoughtfully
dedding on a " set time," the " best time," God is able to bless tis, to carry on his
sanctifying work in us. A set time implies —

II. Thk selection of the best time. But what is a best time can never be
judged from any one point of view. God's best is the best all round ; the best for

PSAT.MS II. H



98 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. lxxt. 1— 10.

everybody; and the best in every sense. In connection with the jisalm, God's set
time had to be best for Assyria, best for Seniiacherih, bust lor Israel, beat for Hezekiah,
best for Shebna and bis party, and best for us who have to learn from the uld-world
story. We can so seldom make a far judgment concerning God's " set times " for us,
because we cannot view them all round, and thei efure wo easily misunderstand them as
seen from some point of self-interest. A " set lime " implies —

III. Effective action when the time has come. Illustrate by the attack of
Wolseley on Tel-el-Kebir. A set time was fixed, so everything was prepared and
adjusted, and the stroke was vigorously delivered. It is well for us to wait God's time,
because his time is a " set time." — R. T.

Ver. 4. — jThe self -lifted horn. Perhaps the most suggestive explanation of this
figure is that given by Mr. Munro, in his ' Summer Rambles in Syria.' He is writing
concerning the females in a Maronite village of Mount Lebanon. "' The most remark-
able peculiarities ol their dress are the immense silver ear-rings hanging forward upon
the neck, and the tantoura, or ' horn,' which supports the veil. This latter ornament
varies in form, material, and position, according to the dignity, taste, and circu mstances
of the wearer. Horns art ot gnld, silver-gilt, and silver, and sometimes of wood. The
former are cither plain or tig'ired in low relief, and occasionally set with jewels ; but
the length and position of them is that upon which the traveller looks with the greatest
interest, as illustrating and explaining a familiar expression of Scripture. The young,
the rich, and the vain wear the tantoura of great length, standing straight up from the
top ot the forehead; whereas the huuible, the poor, and the aged place it upon the
side of the head, much shorter, and spreading at the end like a trumpet. I do not mean
to say that these distinctions are universal, but I was told that they are very general,
and thus the ' exalted horn ' still remains a mark of power and confidence, as it was
in the days of Israel's glory." The appeal of the text is to those who unduly exalt
themselves, as party-leaders in times of civil commotion are in constant danger of
doing. They " think of themselves above that they ought to think." This is clearly
indicated in the marginal alternative of the Revised Version, " Speak not insolently
with a haughty neck " (see Hannah's song, 1 Sam. ii. 3).

I. The self-impobtant uan does not worthilt estimate himself. The most
difficult work for any man to do is honestly to criticize himself. Men shrink from that
work. Men incapacitate themselves for it. Men spoil their own vision, and when
they look jn on themselves only find what they wished to find. " To thine own self
be true," even if the truth humbles you in the dust. Illustrate from the case of Shebna.

II. The self-important man takes no account of God's estimate of him.
" Be not deceived : God is not mocked." A man can never delude God with any
braggings, or mere appearances. He searcheth the heart and trieth the reins (see
Isa. ii. 10 — 17). See the confession of a psalmist, " My goodness extendeth not to thee."
Only the huuible man can dare to consider the Divine searchings. Of the proud man
it must be said, " God is not in all his thoughts." He would be glad if there were rut Qod.

III. The self-impobtant man deludes himself concebnino other people's
estimate of him. Because he will only give heed to the flatterers. He blinds him-
self to the mistrust and fear all prudent and good men show in relation to him. — B. T,

Vers. 6, 7. — Divine promotions ihrough. Divine providences. There seems to be a
recalling of the sentiments expressed in Hannah's song (see 1 Sam. ii. 6 — 8). Keeping
to the relations of the psalm with Hezekiah's trouble, we may understand him as express-
ing his confidence that the national deliverance would not come by securing any national
alliances, either with Egypt, the power of the south, or with the kingdoms of the
mountain districts round Palestine. Hezekiah's assurance was that JiWine providence
would work out the Divine pwrpose. He believed God's purpose was set on his deliver-
ance, therefore he encouraged himself to watch and wait for the working of God's
providence. It is remarkable that no reference is made to the north. This Delitzsch
explains : " It is a northern power which arrogantly, even to blasphemy, threatens the
small Israelitish nation with destruction, and against which it looks for help neither
finm the east nor west, nor from the reed-staff of Egypt, but from Jahve alone." The
V. Old " prumotiun " should be rendered " lifting up," and seems to refer to the depre84:■-^n



w. Lxxv. 1— 10.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 99

and distress of the people at this time of invasion. The point iB this — He who trusts
in Ood can wait for OocFs workings. Illustrate three ways of trusting God, and find
out which of the ways alone can honour him.

I. Trusting God, and doing nothiko. To this pious people are often tempted.
It is a very specious kind of self-delusion. It seems to be a special way of honouring
God, to let him do it all. Sometimes this mistake is associated with the Divine
promise to give right words when God's servants have to stand before kings. But a
prumise specially made for sudden experience must not be forced to apply to ordinary,
everyday, and anticipated duty.

II. Trusting God, and seeking help from fbllow-man. This is an unconscious
hypocrisy. The trusting God becomes the unreality, and the reliance on man becomes
the practical reality. The condition is indicated in those who " feared the Lord, and
served other gods." It was the special sin of a section of the people in Eezekiah's
time. They said, " Trusting God is all very well, but we had better be doing something
for the national deliverance and defence." It is our peril still. We may really be
leaning on man, and think we are leaning on God.

III. Trusting God, and doing the duty of the hour. This is acceptable to
God. Simply doing present duty is leaving God's providence to work out God's " uplift-
ings.'* The duty of the hour is a step in God's providence j each duty is a step ; and
on them we shall certainly rise to the realization of God's gracious purposes concern-
ing those who thus show their trust. — E. T.

Ver. 8. — The dregs for the wicked. Burder has an interesting note on this verse.
" The punishments which Jehovah inflicts upon the wicked are compared to a cupful of
fermenting wine, mixed with intoxicating herbs, of which all those to whom it is given
must drink the dregs, or sediment. The same image is found, not only frequently in
other places of the Old Testament, but also very often in the Arabian poets. Thus
Taabbata Scbarran, in a passage of an Arabic Anthology, by Albert Schultens: 'To
those of the tribe of Hodail, we gave the cup of death, whose dregs were confusion,
shame, and reproach.' Another poet says, ' A cup such as they gave us, we gave
to them.' When Calif Almansor had his valiant though dreaded general, Abre-Moslem,
mnrdered, he repeated the following verse, in which he addressed tjie corpse : * A cup
auch as he gave, gave I to him, bitterer to the taste than wormwood.' " The point to
which attention is directed is that all the contents of the cup God offers to his people
have more or less bitterness in them. But the good drink the wine, which is mostly
sweet, though in some degree bitter ; the wicked drink the dregs, which are almost all
bitter, and are intensely bitter. And the added bitterness is that they will be obliged
to drink these dregs, whether they wish it or not. Probably reference may be to the
dreadful fate of Sennacherib's army, and the humiliation of the general himself; but
possibly reference is also intended to the anti-Jehovah party in Israel, who caused so
much trouble by their mischievous schemings. A time of bitterest humiliation was
before them, when the nation was so gloriously delivered by God.

I. The mixed cup of a human lot. Wine and bitter herbs were In this cup.
But the taste of the herbs was only added to the wine, giving it really a tonic value.
8o the good man's earthly lot is a niixed one. Much that is pleasant; something
afllicting, something humbling ; but these things only with tonic power. Good men
are bettertd by the influence on them of the bitter flavour in God's cup.

II. The dregs in the cup of a human lot. All the strength of the bitter herbs
is kept in the dregs. Nobody would drink them if they were not obliged. The wicked
man has to drink thein. They represent the "after-time" of all wilful, untrustful
souls. There is a judgment of wrath meted out to sinners, and given them to endure
to the end. Compare St. Paul's figure, " Whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he
also reap."— R. T.

Ver. 9. — " Tht God ^ Jacob." It is a singular and suggestive thing that God is not
thought of by Hezekiah here as the God "of Abraham, but as the God of Jacob.



The revelations God makes to men are, partly, general to all men, suitable to man as
man ; and, partly, special to individuals, precisely adapted to the circumstances and
necessities of particular persons. We may therefore profitably study what God wai to



100 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. uciv. 1— 10-

Abraham, what to Isaac, what to Jacob. And if we can see these three cases to be^
ia a comprehensive sense, typical cases, we shall have a general sense of Gbd's relations
with men when we call him " the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob." But the life
of Abraham presented no particular likeness to the circumstances of Hezekiah. To
Abraham God was the gracious Guide, the near Friend. To Jacob's troubled, anxious
life the king turned, and found similar experiencea to his own. God's ways with
Jacob were those of the Redeemer and Deliverer. This probably was more especially
in the mind of Hezekiah. Jacob was a man grievously wronged — wronged by Laban,
and fearing wrong at the hands of Esau. And God had stood by the wronged man,
saw him through, and saw him righted. That came as a Divine comforting to Hezekiah.
He too was wronaed ; he too was misunderstood ; he too was in peril. But the God
of Jacob was his God. The " God of Jacob " ia God the Judge. This may be shows
to include three things.

I. God is the Estimatob of ohabaoteb. It is plain that a man's character caa
never be safely estimated by a consideration of his (drcumstances. Job's could not.
.Jacob's could not. David's could not. Try to read Hezekiah's character in those times
of strain and stress. Ask Shebna's party their opinion of the king. It is full of com-
forting to ns that we can be sure God is not deceived by circumstances, but knows us
altogether. We may be absolutely content with the Divine appraisement. Bead
Jacob's life in man's light, then try to read it in Ood's light,

II. God is the Vindicator of the good. This is absolutely and entirely true of
every good man, in what is called the " long run." As in Jacob's case. Job's cuse, and
David's case, the vindication may be delayed for purposes of Divine training and
sanctifying. God never has finally left his faithful servants un vindicated. His witness
rested on Hezekiah : the Divine deliverance from Sennacherib proved a Divine witness
on behalf of the faithful king.

III. God is the Ponisheb of the wicked. And the severest punishment to
them is the humbling failure of their seemingly well-devised schemes. — R, T.

Ver. 10. — Earns cut off. " All the horns of the wicked also will I cut off." A
lifted horn well represents the insolent boasting of Rabshakeh, the Assyrian officer
(see Isa. xxxvi.). The Divine answer was the cutting off of Rabshakeh 's uplifted horn.
God dealt in this way with proud Rabshakeh : " Behold, I will send a blast upon him,
and he shall hear a rumour, and return to his own land ; and I will cause him to fall
by the sword in his own land " (Isa. xxxvii. 7). Or, if Sennacherib be chiefly in mind,
we may see that his vain confidences of capturing Jerusalem were destroyed, his
" purposes were broken off," his horn was brought low. " So Sennacherib retvuned,"
a humiliated and disgraced man ; " and it came to pass, as he was worshipping in the
house of Nisrooh his god, that Adrammelech and Sharezer his sons smote him with the
sword " (Isa. xxxvii. 37, 38). Some think that Antiochus Epiphanes is in the mind of
the psalmist; and, certainly, further illustration may be taken from his case (Dan.
viii. 9). The confidence Hezekiah has in God's deliverance enables him to declare that
he shall humble the pride of his foes. And God's intervention would confirm the
king in his regular work of humbling the wicked and exalting the righteous, in the
exercise of his authority.

I. God's humbling of the wicked. The wicked here are more especially those
who scorn his claims and insult his majesty, as did the Assyrian general, saying, " Let
not thy God in whom thou trustest deceive thee, saying, Jerusalem shall not be given
into the hand of the King of Assyria." God is "jealous " of the honour of his Name.
"The lofty looks of man must be bowed down, and the Lord- alone exalted." Show
what state of mind and heart is indicated by the offering of such insult to Jehovah.
That state of mind and heart is ruin to any man.

II. God's humbling, encouraging God's people to humble the wicked.
Hezekiah will do it, in his official position, because God does it. Apply to all positions
of authority. But there is no more difficult duty committed to us than this humbling
the proud. It has to be done. It is both right and kind to do it. But we may harden,
not humble. We may act in passion rather than in the calmness of holy love. We
should humble because God does. But we must only humble as God does ; wounding
in the hope of healing. — B. T.



rs. LxxvL 1- -12.]



THE BOOK OF PSALMS.



101



Vers. 1 — 10. — Uie righteous judgment of God. This psalm celebrates in prophetic
•train the righteous judgment of God, The voice of God himself declares from heaven
his righteousness; that he is not, as human impertinence has been wont to think,
regardless of wrong and suffering, but only waits for the moment which to his infinite
wisdom seems best.

I. God's eighteods government of the wobld. 1. Ood's wonderful work in
history attests it. (Ver 1.) " What nation is there that hath God so near unto them ? "
{Deut. iv. 7). He is not separated by distance from the world. His Name, his nature,
is near to us. 2. Ood^s times of judgment are wisely and divinely chosen. (Ver. 2,
"When the set time is come, I,even I, will judge uprightly.") He executes his sentence
not according to man's impatient expectations, but at the time which he himself has
chosen. 3. When the moral order of the world seems near dissolution, Ood's power is
the security for its continuance. (Ver. 3.) The natural and the moral framework of the
world are here identified. He sustains the world by the pillars which he has set up.
4. God is the real Source of every righteous revolution in the world. (Vers. 6, 7.) " Glory
and power come not from any earthly source, though a man should seek it in every
quarter of the globe, but only from God, who lifteth up and casteth down according to
his own righteous sentence."

II. The admonition which these truths administer to the wicked. (Vers. 4,
5.) 1. It is madness to resist God. (Ver. 4.) 2. No arrogant sef-exaltation will avail
against God's judgments. (Vers. 5, 8.) The poet speaks here as a prophet. That which
©od threatens he accomplishes by the hands of his servants. " Though hand join in
hand, the wicked shall not go unpunished." — S.



EXPOSITION,



PSALM LXXVI.



The present psalm consists of three stanzas
— the first of three verses, terminated by
the pause-mark, " Selah ; " the second of six
verses, ended similarly, and the third (like
the first) of three verses. It is a psalm of
thanksgiving for some great and signal
mercy, which has delivered Jerusulem, and
at the same time benefited "all the afiSicted
of the earth" (ver. 9). All the earth is
therefore called upon to join with Israel in
praising God, and making him an offering
(vers. 10 — 12). Critics of all schools (Heng-
stenberg. Canon Cook, Professor Alex-
ander, Dr. Kay, Pour Friends, etc.) agree
in regarding the deliverance as that from
Sennacherib. We must, therefore, under-
stand the " Asaph " of the ■ title as desig-
nating, not the individual, but the division
of the Levites named after him.

Ver. 1. — In Jndah is God knoxni (comp.
Pss. ix. 16; xlviii. 3). By "known" is
meant " freshly made known," " revealed,"
as it were, " anew " by the recent wonderful
deliverance. His Name is great in Israel ;
i.e. greatly honoured and regarded, on
account of what has happened.

Ver. 2. — In Salem ; i.e. Jerusalem. ** Sa-
lem " was probnbly a shortened form of the
full iind complete name, like "'Peor" for



" Baalpeor," " Maachah " for " Aram-Maa-
chali," " El Kiids " for " Beit-el-Kuda," and
the like. (So Professor Cbeyne.) " Salem "
is ihe peaceful place, the place where God's
presence breathed peace and tranquillity,
it is only used herti and in Gen. xiv. 11.
Is his tabernacle; literally, kin tent (comp.
Pss. XV. 1 ; xxvii. 5, 6 ; Ixi 4). The temple
is meant, as even Professor Cheyne sees. It
took the place of the original " tabernacle,"
and was modelled upon it. And Ms dwelling-
place in Zion; or, " bis lair " (comp. Ps. oiv.
22).

Ver. 8. — There brake he the arrows of the
bow. The expression "there" seems cer-
tainly to show ttiat the deliverance celebrated
took place at, or very near to, Jerusalem.
This would sufficiently suit the destruction
of Sennacherib's army, which certainly
occurred in the neighbourhood, though not
very close to the city (see 2 Kings xix. 32,
38). The word translated " airows " ('styi)
means properly "lightnings" (comp. Ps.
Ixxviii. 48), and expresses the swift flight
of the arrow, not actual "fiery darts." The
shield, and the sword, and the battle ; rather,
the war-equipment (Kay, Cheyne).

Ver. 4. — Thou art more glorious and ex-
cellent than the mountains of prey. The
psalmist, in this, the main portion of his
psalm, directly addresses Ood. " Thou, O
God," he says, " art glorious," or " terrible "
(oomp. ver. 7, where the same word is used),
"and excellent, more than the mountains of
prey," or perhaps " from the mountains of



102



THE BOOK OF PSALMS.



[P8. LXXVI. 1—12.



•poll;" i.e. from Jerasalem, where the
spoils of the Assyrians are laid up, and
where thon sittest and rulest. (So Protessor
Cheyne and Canon Cook.)

Ver. 5. — The stout-hearted are spoiled.
A "vivid description of the oatastroplie" now
follows. The " stout-hearted," the aggres-
sors, the great dominant race, that has
spoiled all the natious of the earth, and
fears no one (oomp. Isa. x. 12 — 14, "The
stout heart of the King of Assyria"), is
itself spoiled in turn. They have slept their
sleep. They have slept, and, as they slept
(2 Kings xix. 35), they found it indeed a
sleep, even the sleep of death. And none
of the men of might have found their hande.
The mighty men, suddenly assaulted by the
grim destroyer. Death, can make no resist-
ance ; they are paralyzed ; they cannot even
move a hand.

Ver. 6. — At thy rehuke, God of Jacob.
The catastrophe has been God's doing;
man has had no part in it (comp. 2 Kings
xix. 28, 35). Both the chariot and the
horse are oast into a dead sleep. Metonymy
for the charioteers and the horsemen (comp.
Isa. xliii. 17). These were the two chief
arms of the military service with the
Assyrians.

Ver. 7. — Thou, even thou, art to be feared.
God is to be feared as well as loved. Only
" perfect love oasteth out fear " (1 Jolin iv.
18), and " perfect love " is not icr mi )rtals.
And ■who may stand in thy sight when once
thou art angry? literally, /rom tlie time of
thine anger (oomip. Exoil. v. 23; Jnsh. xiv. 10).

Ver. 8. — Thon didst cause judgment to be
heard from heaven. By the dettruition of
Sennacherib's host, God spoke, as it were,
with a voice of thunder, to the wliole earth.
He delivered a "judgment," or a " sen-
tence " (Revised Version), which could not
be ignored. The earth feared, and was
still. All the world, i.e. all the Oriental
world, (Vared. The attention of the natious
of We.-tern Asia generally was attracted
(2 Chron. xxxii. 23), and their minds were
affected with a wholesome fear of Jehovah.
The result was that they remained at rest
and gave Israel rest.

Ver. 9. — When God arose to judgment
(see the preceding verses). God's " rising "
is an anthropomorphism, drawn from the
fact that men " rise up " when they proceed



to take vengeance (comp. Pss. iii. 7; vii. 6;
xliv. 26 ; Ixviii. 1, etc.). To save all the
meek of the earth. Ood's vengeances on
the wicked are, in great measure, for the
relief of the righteous. Sennacherib's dis-
comfiture relieved " the meek of the earth,"
i.e. not only Israel, but many other down-
trodden and oppressed nations. The
psalmist's sympathies are with all the
victims of Assyrian ambition.

Ver. 10. -Surely the wrath of man shall
praise thee. Tije sentimeut is general, but
no doubt there is a special reference to the
recent deliverance. The " wrath of man,"
i.e. man's wicked fury and hostility of God
and his people, siiall give occasion for great
deeds on God's part — deeds which will
bring him praise and honour. The remainder
of wrath shalt thou restrain. Either, " the
unexpended fury of thine enemies,that which
they have not vented, thou wilt hold in
check, and prevent from doing mischief;"
or else," with thine own tinexpended wrath
wilt thou gird thyself against the wicked,
as with a weapon." (So Kay, Cheyne, and
the Revised Version.)

Ver. 1 1. — Vow, and pay unto the Lord your
God. Tlie people of Israel are now addressed.
Under tlie circumstances, they are sure to
have made vows to God in the time of their
great trouble, before the deliverance came.
Now, when the deliverance has come, let
them pay these vows. Let all that be round
about him bring presents unto him that ought
to be feared ; literally, unto the Terrible One.
By "all that are round about him" the psalm-
ist seems to mean, not Israel only, but those
other oppressed ones who had shared the
benefit of the deliverance (oomp. ver. 9).
That presents were brought by some of these
is recorded by the writer of Chronicles (2
Chron. xxxii. 23).

Ver. 12. — He shall cut off the spirit of
princes. " The spirit " seems here to mean
" tlie life." God cuts off princes in their
prime as a gardener cuts off bunches of
grapes (comp. Isa. xviii. 5). He is terrible
to the kings of the earth. Not " princes "
only — D'TJj — but " kings " — a-zha — also
are cut off in their prime when God pleases.
St-nuauherib's untimely deatli (2 Kings xix.
37) followed not many years after the de-
struction of his host, in which there must
have been many " princes."



HOMILETICa.

Ver. 10. — J7l« will of man and the will of God. "The wrath of man shall praise
thee." Two great streams of spiritual force meet our view, alike in the Bible and in
human life and history, crossing one another every instant, as waves of light and waves
of sound, in closest vital relation, yet each holding its course unhindered — the will of
man and the will ^ Ood, When man waa created, not in the image of lower creatures.



P8. wx,.. I— x_.j THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 103



but "in the image of God," he was endowed with this glorious yet perilous heritag
will and conscience. Will — power tu weigh reasons, balance motives, pursue a fixed
purpose, choose the good or the evil, the right or the wrong; and conscience — power
to pass judgment on himself, approving or condemnins! his own conduct. Yet Qod'a
w&t must needs be sovereign, supreme ; even as God's conscience (if the phrase be
lawful) must be supreme arbiter of ric;ht and wrong (Dan, iv. 35). Even the wrath of
man shall praise him. That the obedience, love, piety, of men will praise God is
natural and easy to understand; but that man's rebellion, disobedience, even angry
and violent resistance to God's will, ends in bringing praise to God, — this is indeed the
deepest mystery, both of the Bible and of human life. " The wrath of man " — human
pride, enmity, ambition, revenge, lawless violence — -praises Qod.

I. When God makes it the instrument op his judgments ; either in chastening
his people or in subduing his foes. If this word "foes of God" sounds to any
harsh and contrary to Divine love, let it be understood that the Bible means by
it the enemies of truth, of righteousness, and of love. The Book of Judges is full of
examples (see eh. ii. 7, 12, 14, etc.). In later days, the just resentment of the ten
tribes against Behoboam was the means of executing God's sentence against Snlomon,
•nd rending the kingdom (2 Chron. x. 15, 16) ; the invasion by Shishak, the punish-
ment on Behoboam for forsaking God's Law, " and all Israel with him " (2 Chron. xii.
1, 2); the leading captive of Israel by the Assyrians, and Judah by Nebuchadnezzar,
the punishment of centuries of idolatry, and the fulfilment of the warnings of a long
series of prophets (2 Chron. xxxvi. 15 — 17) ; the overthrow of Babylon by Cyrus was
the fulfilment of God's promise to restore his penitent people to their own land.

II. When God brings to nought human pride and power, and delivers his
PEOPLE. The destruction of Seunaoherib's host, the overthrow of Pharaoh's power in
the Bed Sea, are leading and stupendous examples. *' The remainder," etc. (Isa. xxxvii.
28, 29). The rendering adopted by the Eevisers is according to the common use of
the word (as girding on a sword, a girdle, etc.) ; but "upon thee" should be printed
in italics, — there is nothing to answer to it in the Hebrew. And the much more
intelligible and apt sense of the Authorized Version has the authority of one of the
greatest of all the Jewish commentators.

III. When the violence and wiokedness of men, in most unbridled excesses,
work out the PURPOSES AND FULFIL THE PROMISES OF GoD. The supreme exatnpla
is the crucifixion of our Lord Jesus (see John xi. 49 — 52 ; Acts ii. 23 ; iii. 17, 18).

IV. When God subdues the heart of his enemies, and turns rebels into
LOYAL SUBJECTS AND FAITHFUL SERVANTS, persecutors into preachers, blasphemers
into witnesses to his truth (see Acts ix. 13—16 ; 1 Tim. i. 12 — 17). Willingly or
unwillingly, men's lives are weaving the web of God's providence, working the pattern
of his purpose. The stormy current of human will canuot overflow its banks. In
ways as yet unknown, ungiiessed by us, God will bring good out of eviL The song
of eternity shall be, "He hath done all things well 1 "



HOMILIES BY VABIOUS AUTHORS.

Vers. 1—12. — The triumphs of Ood. There can be little doubt that this psalm
is one of several others whose main theme is God's deliverance of his people from
Sennacherib, King of Assyria. Then, in Judah, God was known, and his Name was
great in Israel. But we may fitly use the psalm as telling of those great and blessed
spiritual deliverances which the soul of God's servants have often known and rejoiced
in — these triumphs of God over a deadlier foe than ever any Assyrian king could be to
Israel. Concerning then note —

I. Where thet take place. (Cf. vers. 1, 2.) It is where God dwells. The
soul that is the abiding-place of God witnesses and shares in the triumphs of God as
none other can do. Fitful and partial religion leaves the soul more often vanquished
than victor, and can never sing such a psalm as this.

II. Their nature. It is threefold. 1. God destroys the weapons of the soul's great
enemy. The arrows of evil thought ; the shield of unbelief, love of sin, indifference —
all that which wards off those words of God which are sharp in the heart of the King's



104 THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [P8. lxxvi. 1— 12.

enemies (Ps. xlv.) ; the sword of the soul-slaying sin ; the battle, the combined array
of all the forces of evil. 2. Takes for himself the prey which the enemy had regarded as
his own. (Ver. 4.) All the spoil of Judah, which Assyria had reckoned to gather on
the mountains where they were encamped, all that spoil, together with what they already
had, — all was taken from them (cf. Luke xi. 22). So God takes from the evil one the
possession of those human powers and faculties which he had usurped and claims, and
keeps them as his own. 3. Keeps the enemy in the place of death. (Ver. 6.) It would
be of little avail if our great spiritual foe were but for a time overcome, if after a little
while he could come back with all his power. But our Lord came that he might give
complete deliverance ; and by the soul that continually trusts in him that deliverance
is realized,

III. How THET ARE ACCOMPLISHED. (Ver. 6, " At thy rebuke.") The moment
we believe, our help comes. Not before. All our strivings and endeavours leave us
pretty much where we were ; but when abandoning ourselves to God, that be may save
us, then his power is made known, the enemy is rebuked aud slain. The life of faith
is, through God's grace, the death of our foe.

IV. FoK WHOM ALL THIS IS DONE. (Ver. 9, " Tho meek of the earth.") Judah
and Jerusalem were emptied of all self-trust, all pride and boasting, and had become
meek, knowing that in quiftness and in confidence was their strength. And so with
the soul that is delivered by God.

V. The impression PRODnoBD. 1. Holy fear, (Ver. 7.) God's mercy and deliver-
ance will never destroy, but ever deepen, holy fear. And there is no argument for God
so effectual amongst men as the witnessing his real spiritual deliverances of his people.

2. Disdain of the wrath of man. What can it do against us, if God be fur us ? 3.
Exultant confession, adoration, and service, together with earnest endeavours to draw
others unto God. — S. U.

Ver. 1. — Qreat because known. I. Nothino is of more importance to mbh thah
THE KNOWLEDGE AND EIGHT ESTEEM OF GoD. 1. We See this in regard to nations. Such
knowledge raises them from the degradation of sensuality and barbarity to purity and
humanity. 2. So also in regard to individuals. Such knowledge ministers guidance
for life, solace fur the spirit, inspiration for righteousness. Thus important is it.

II. Such knowledge is the special possession and privilege of the Chuboe
OF God. " In Judah is God known: his Kame is great in Israel." Judah and Israel
represent the Church of God, the company of believing, redeemed, Gk)d-fearing people,
scattered throughout the world. Amongst them God is known by his Word, his people,
his ordinances, his Spirit.

III. Where he is thus known he is great amongst them. Increase of know-
ledge of one another, familiarity with them, by no means always increases our esteem
of them ; but the more we know of God, the greater he becomes to us. See this in the
Lord Jesus — the more his disciples knew of him the greater he became to them.
For in the past, the present, the future, he is our AIL — S. G.

Ver. 7. — The fear of Ood. Consider —

I. The forms it assumes. There is : 1. The fear of terror. The dismay of the
vanquished enemies of God seems specially to be pointed at here (cf. Rev. vi. 16), 2.
The fear of dread. The might and majesty of God awe the soul, as they well may.

3. The fear of reverence. The holy character of God, when seen, cannot but inspire
this. 4. The fear of love. Such fear trembles and shrinks from causing pain to the
object of its love. This is the sweet filial fear which is blessed indeed. It is but
another form of the " love which casteth out fear." Some fear of God every soul must
one day know : which shall it be for ourselves ?

II. The sources whence it bpbinos. 1. The heholding of God?s judgment on his
foes. 2. The experiencing of Ood's mercy to ourselves.

IIL The ohabaoteb it beabs. 1. It will be the supreme motive of the sotU, No
matter which form it assumes, it will be the supreme motive whilst ii: reigns. 2. It
will be exclusive. " Thou, even thou " — as if shutting out all other fear.

IV. The blessings it bbinos. 1. The Christian life cannot be begun without it.
N<tr perpetuated ; for life without it has no root. 3. Nor perfected.—^- C.



P8. Lxxvi. 1—12.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 106

Ver. 10. — " The wrath of man." By this ia meant man's rage against God and
against God's people. Of tins it is affirmed that —

L It praises God. The Bible is full of illustrations of this. It is part of God's
universal purpose of overruling all evil for good. See this in the history of the Fall —
it became the occasion of redemption. The cross of our Lord Jesus Christ — it draws all
men unto him. Persecution of the Church caused its world-wide extension. The
corruption of the Church led to the Reformation. See the hand of God in history
continually compelling what is " meant in malice to he changed to blessing."

II. But is not, thbrefoke, to be held guiltless. (Of Rom. iii. 8, and St.
Paul's reply.) If evil were to be held guiltless because overruled for good, then there
could be no judgment of the world ; all punishment of sin now would be wrong, and all
wickedness would be justified.

III. But 18 THE HEIGHT OP siKFUL FOLLY, What madness it is and has ever been
found to be 1

IV. The people or God abb not to be terrified by it. (See Job i. 12; 1
Cor. X. 13 ; Ps. ii.) Let them praise God for the blessed alchemy of his grace, whereby
he transmutes the wrath of man into his praise. — S. C.

Ver. 1. — Ways of knowing Qod. "In Judah is God known." This is a fitting
psalm to be sung after any great national victory, any Divine deliverance. It may be
associated with the victory of Jehoshaphat, or with the discomfiture of Sennacherib
(2 Chron. xx. 28 ; Isa. xxxvii. 36). If we associate it with Hezekiah's times, it should
be noticed that the triumph over Sennacherib was, in a very special sense, a Divine
triumph, and so an extraordinary revelation of God, through which he ought to have
been better known by his people. Man had nothing to do with that defeat of Assyria.
God's working in it man might study. One hundred and eighty-five thousand men
are said to have been miraculously destroyed in one night, without the operation of
any military agencies. Judah and Israel are mentioned together as thus cuuiing to
know God, because the two nations, which had been separated from the days of Reho-
boam, were united again under Hezekiah. Here God is revealed, and so known and
apprehended, by the Judgments which he executes. But God's judgments are always
two-sided — they relate to those who suffer under them ; and they relate to those who
are delivered through them.

I. They kkow God who suffeb under his judgments. Illustrate from the
Assyrians. It is quite clear that the Assyrian general, Rabshakeh, did not know
Jehovah, or he never would have put him into comparison with the gods of the
nations as he did (Isa. xxxvii. 10 — 13). The Assyrians had to be taught that Jehovah
was God alone ; and that lesson they could only learn through such a manifestation
of Jehovah's power as would declare him to stand alone. See the effect of Divine
mimil'estation on Nebuchadnezzar (Dan. iii. 28, 29 ; iv. 37) ; Darius (Diin. vi. 26, 27).
But God is known through his judgments even by his own people. Illustrative cases
may be taken from the wilderness experiences, the times of Joshua, David, etc. And
it is still true for the godly individual ; he has sometimes to learn to know God fully
by coming under Divine judgments. " Judgments " may, for the present purpose, be
distinguished from " afflictions " or "chastisements," as meaning "irremediable cala-
mines," such as this plague on the Assyrians. The point is an important one. The
"irremediable" is more or less in every man's life; and the "irremediable" is a help
to the full knowledge of God.

II. They know God who abb delivered through his judgments. This leads us
along more familiar and easy lines. Israel learned to know God through deliverances
and redemptions. Those political and social difficnlties of Hezekiah's time, which had
their trne rootage in mistaken views of Jehovah's relation to his people, were in part
TiSDttoved by the knowledge gained of God through this deliverance. — B. 1'.

Ver. 2. — The localization of Qod. " In Salem also is his covert, and his dwelling-
place in Zion " (comp. Jer. xxv. 38, " He hath forsaken his covert as the lion ").
The poetical figure is the likening of God to a lion — ^the " Lion of the tribe of Judah " —
who leaves his covert in Salem, and his lair in Zion, to spoil the enemy. There ia
now evidence that the holy city was known as Salem Icng before the time of Joshua.



106 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. lxxvi. 1—12.

but the special Divine association with it dates from the time when David brought
back the ark, and found for it a resting-place in the new tabernacle ou Mount Zion.
That ark was the symbol of abiding Divine presence. The poet can only liken the
sudden and overwhelming destruction of the Assyrian army to the springing of a lion
on his prey. Then it was easy to conceive of the holy place at Jerusalem as the den
or covert where the lion abode, and out of which he sprang. In treating such poetical
figures, we should remember that Easterns allowed themselves a freer poetical licence
than we do; and we should treat their extravagant figures with great care and
becoming reverence. First recall to mind that God is everywhere present. We must
never prison the thought of God to any time or any place. " The heaven is my throne,
and the earth is my footstool : where is the house that ye build unto me ? and where
is the place of my rest ? " (Isa. Ixvi. 1). But, keeping that as our primary thought of
God, we may realize helpful associations of God with places and persons.

I. God mat be thought of as the God of a nation. " Elohim " for all the
world, God was "Jehovah" for Israel — by virtue of special relations and revelations,
the " God of Israel." So there is a proper sense in which God may be spoken of as
the " God of England ; " and we rightly realize the unique relations in which he stands
to us. Impress that effective education of the rising race includes the teaching of this
special relation of God to our nation.

II. God mat be thought op as the God of a buildino. In the wilderness we
read of "God's tabernacle;" in the later history we read of God's "dwelling-
place in Zion." So now we properly speak of God's house," and understand certain
buildings to be consecrated to him. There he is pleased to manifest himself.

III. God mat be thought of as the God of a person. God was, in a sense,
in Moses, with Moses. God's Spirit dwelt " without measure " in Christ. Still God
works through his ministers, making of them his earthly dwelling-place.

IV. God mat be thought op as the God of a stmbol. As in the Shechinah-
cloud, and as in the Holy Sacrament. God is everywhere. God is here. — E. T.

Ver. 4. — The returning Conqueror ; or, Ood glorified in his triumph over evU. The
actual triumph over the Assyrian army is poetically presented in the sudden excla-
mation of ver. 3, " There brake he the arrows of the bow, the shield, and the sword,
and the battle." In ver. 4 God is legaided as returning to Zion with the spoils of the
camp. The precise fi'gure is difBcult to trace. Some render, " Bright art thou and
glorious from the mountains of spoil ; " and understand the mountains to be referred
to on which the hostile army had encamped. The Prayer-book Version has, " Thou art
of more honour and might than the hills of the robbers." Others read, "Enlightened
art thou, and glorious, coming down fiom the mountains of prey;" and this seems to
give the most simple and .suggestive explanation. Having the lion-figure still in
mind, the psalmist sees the lion returning from his prey, with the pride of his triumph
on him ; and this suggests the glory of God the Conqueror and Deliverer. Compare
the songs the women sang when Saul and David returned from the conquest of the
Philistines; or Moses' song at the Bed Sea; or Deborah's song at the defeat of Sisera;
or the cry of Isaiah, " Who is this that cometh from Edom, with dyed garments from
Bozrah ? " Our joy in the returning Conqueror, our glory in his triumph for us, may
be said to depend on three things.

I. The greatness op the distress from which we are delivered. Illustrate
from the ho[ieles8 condition of Hezekiah at this time. He had no force effective to
combat Assyria; and internal conflict broke up and weakened the little force he
had. It was a time of uttermost distress; the very independence, the very existence,
of the nation was imperilled. Then contrast the state of things when the hostile
army became dead men. Imagine the relief, and the joy of the relief. Such feeling
is thus expressed elsewhere : " When the Lord turned again the captivity of Zion, we
were like them that dream. Then was our mouth filled with laughter, and our tongue
with singing." Lead on to show what that deliverance must be which God wrought,
in Christ Jesus, for those whose hopeless distress is described in Bom. iii. 10 — 19.

II. Our sense op the foweb shown in oub deliverance. The agency used for
the destruction of the Assyrian army cannot be certainly known. But we feel this —
that destruction was a xmique and amazing display of Divine power. There had



M. Lxxvi. 1—12.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 107

been notliing like it before. God had lifted up a mighty hand, and stretched forth
a strong arm. Show that, in Christ's dealings with the sin-foe, the same impression
is made on us. See the doxologies in the Book of Revelation.

III. OnB APPREHENSION OP THE FULNESS AND COMPLETENESS OP THE DELIVEBANCB

WROUGHT. Compare the results of God's intervention with the consequences of a
mere victory on an ordinary battle-field ; God wrought a perfect triumph. So Christ
" leads captivity captive," and " saves to the uttermost." — R. T.

Ver. 6. — The power of the LorcFt rebuke. " At thy rebuke, God of Jacob, both
chariot and horse are cast into a deep sleep." Byron pictures the scene with great
poetical force —

" And there lay the steed with his nostril all wide.
But thrnagh it there rolled not the breath of his pride;
And the fnam of his gasping lay white on the turf,
And cold as the spray of the rock-beating surf.

"And there lay the rider distorted and pale,
With the dew on his brow, and tlie rust on liis mail."

" God did but speak the word, as the God of Jacob that commands deliverances for
Jacob, and, at his rebuke, the chariot and horse were both cast into a dead sleep. See
the pow^r and ef&cacy of God's rebukes." " It is impossible to mistake the allusion
to the deeper sleep of death, falling on the sleeping Assyrian army, before the valiant
men could ' find their hands,' in the half-waking grasp of weapons in the hour of
danger."

I. God's bebukes abe sometimes wobds. Illustrate by Moses' messages from
God to Pharaoh. Or the case of the prophet who went to Bethel to rebuke Jeroboam.
Or Nathan's rebuke of David. Or Elijah's rebuke of Ahab. What is it that specially
calls for the Lord's rebuke ? Wilfulness. Persistent forcing of a man's own way.
And even more precisely, the daring of the man who forces his way when he knows
it is contrary to the will of Gud, or when he means to put dishonour on God, This
is the case before us now. Sennacherib was forcing his own way, with designed
intention of insulting and humiliating the God of Israel. And still the Divine rebuke
is called forth when we fall into the committal of " presumptuous sins."

II. God's bebuees abe sometimes deeds. But they are voiceful deeds. See here,
the rebuke was a night-blast that slew the tens of thousands, and drove Sennacherib
back to his land, a defeated and humiliated man. God's rebuke to hardened Pharaoh
was the flower of his army drowned in the Red Sea. God's rebuke to over-confident
David was three days' plague in the land. God's rebuke to Herod, who accepted the
homage due alone to God, was a terrible disease, that carried him off in agony and
disgrace. Read life aright, and we may find God's rebuke in disappointments that we
have known, and disasters we have suffered. Blessed are they who (1) receive, who
(2) heed, and who (3) respond to, their Lord's rebuke 1 — B. T.

Ver. 7. — The Divine anger. "Who may stand in thy sight when once thou art
angry?" God can only be apprehended through human figures with which we are
familiar. So we find in the Divine revelations of Holy Scripture anthropomorphic
figures for God, taken from man's limbs and bodily organs ; and anthropopathic figures
tai<en Ironi man's feelings, emotions, and passions. But in applying such figures to
God, we must carefully eliminate the ein-dement which belongs to all such things
when they concern man. As man is made in the image of God, from man we may
learn of God. But as man lias marred the image by his wilfulness and sin, we must
take care how we apply the likeness which we now think we see. In applying
such terms as "anger "to God, it is important to observe the distinction between
the anger of an official and the anger of a private person. The anger of an
official — a king, or a judge — should have no feeling in it; it should be the proper
response to some public wrong. The anger of an individual may have feeling in it,
and be a sign of hatred. In this psalm God is thought of as an official. He is the
great King, and so his "anger" is really indignation against the foe that imperils
the country, and against the self-willed people who play into the hands of the national



108 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. lxxvi. 1— 12.

enemy. There is, then, a sense in which the king of a country ought to be angry;
but in his anger there should be no feeliug of hate, no feeling towards individuals,
only feeling concerning the wrong which either individuals or combined bodies
may do.

i. The sense in which God mat be anoet. Three terms need to be carefully
defined and illustrated. Indignation is the proper revolt of all noble natures against
wrong-doing, and especially wrong-doing of a mean character, as when the strong
takes advantage of the weak. Anger is the state of mind suitable for a king, governor,
' or judge, in the presence of any form of public injustice or crime. Wrath is the
term that brings in the additional idea of giving expression, in vigorous action, to
vigorous feeling. In some senses, each term may be applied to God.

II. The fear which God's anobr may peopbblt inspire. Because it is asso-
ciated with perfect wisdom, absolute righteousness, and irresistible power. We smile
sometimes at the futile anger of men ; for they can do nothing. We dare not smile at
God's anger; for he can do everything. None can stand before him. — K. T.

Ver. 9. — With Ood judgment is salvation. "When God arose to judgment, to save
dl the meek of the earth." The "meek" are those who, with Hezekiah, held last
their integrity to Jehovah, and yet seemed placed in circumstances of hopeless distress.
God's judgment on Sennacherib was their vindication, deliverance, and uplifting.
Compare the destruction of Pharaoh's hont at the Red Sea. God's judgmen* on the
Egyptians was God's salvation of his pei.iple. It may even be established as the recog-
nized principle of Divine dealings, that judgment and mercy shall always go together.
They are like the pillar of cloud, which lay dark against the Egyptians, but shone
a bright light forth to guide the womlerful path of delivered Israel. It must not be
assumed that in this is seen any favouritism on the part of God ; for if it is true that
God's judgments on the nations were blessing for Israel, it is equally true that God's
judgments on Israel were blessings for the nations. What we dwell on here is that,
whatever may be the feature of Divine dealing that we specially observe, we may confi-
dently look for signs ot that dealing being made a blessing and salvation to somebody.
This introduces a very large subject — the vicariousness of all forms of human calamity
and trouble. " No man dieth unto himself." No suffering ever bears exclusive rela-
tion to the sufferer. You never have read its mission when you have found out what
it did for him. You have never apprehended God's infinitely gracious purposes when
you have only seen some one thing that he has accomplished. What mistaken views
of Gud the man would take who persisted in seeing only what this awful night-
judgment was to the Assyrians! It must be seen all round to be truly understood
and appreciated.

L God works in wats of judgment. Illustrate from Bible history, both- of
nations and ot imlividuals.

II. God works dj ways of salvation. Illustrate in a similar way.

III. When worthily apprehended, these two abb really one, and God's
JUDGMENT IB SALVATION. Lead Up to illustrate from the sublime case of the Lord
Jesus. " The Lord laid on him the iniquity of us all," and the judgment that fell on
him was salvation for us. — B. T.

Ver. 10. — Man's wrath bringing praise to Ood. The rendering of this verse is
uncertain. The LXX. reads the verse, "The wrath of man shall praise thee; the
remainder of «rath shall keep festival unto thee." And the idea of the verse seems to
he — "the only result of Sennacherib's enmity to God's chosen people will be that the
power of the God who overthrows him shall be more widely acknowledged; for vain
will it be for the small remnant of the Assyrians to continue the invasion in which
their mighty host had been so terribly foiled" (Jennings and Lowe). This idea
may be worked out. Be it the seemingly overwhelming wrath of the mighty army, or
be it the manifestly helpless and futile enmity of the enfeebled remnant, — God's ways
with them will bring piaise to his Name. It will often be noticed that the mischief
wrought by a remnant is more to be feared than the mischief wrought by a host.
Bunyan, in his 'Holy War,' makes a few Diabolians left in Mansoul do greater
mischief than Dinbolus' army. ISo there is point in pressing on our Attention that



PB.LXXVI. 1— 12J THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 108

remnants are as much in God's power as armies, and he will he glorified in the mastery
of hoth.

I. The life-foes that we know and estimate are well within the control
OF our God. And a man ought to understand what his besettins sins are, what his
circumstances of temptation are. There are spiritual foes which " loom large " to our
view — large as the vast host of Assyria did to Hezelsiah. But " greater is he who is
with us than all who can be against us." Those foes lose their power to affright us
when once we can see that God will get his glory in dealing with them, and in
delivering us from them.

II. The life-toes that are too subtle and insionipioant for us to observe
are equally in the control of oub God. They may be represented by the
remnant, or remainder, of the Assyrians. And after the disaster, Sennacherib might
have collected his soldiers, stayed in the land, and done much mischief. God con-
trolled that remnant, and sent him ignominiously back to his own country. Subtle
foes, small foes, like ichneumon flies, who deposit their eggs in the caterpillar and eat
up its life, cuuld ruin us more surely than open foes, were it not that our God will be
sure also to get his praise of them. — R. T.

Ver. 11. — Following up our vows. " Vow, and pay unto the Lord your God." Vows
were formal promises or engagements made in acknowledgment of Divine mercies, or
as conditions on which Divine help was sought. They are illustrated by Jacob's vow
after the vision at Bethel; by King Saul's vow at Michmash ; Absalom's vow which
was made the excuse for starting his revolt ; St. Paul's vow, which explained his
presence in the temple courts, etc. The vows of the olden time are precisely repre-
sented by our solemn resolves, our good resolutions, which become promises and pledges
of what we will do. The psalmist found out, what we have all found out through our
own experiences, that it is easy to make vows and promises, and to take solemn pledges,
but far easier to neglect them and let them go unfulfilled. Therefore in moments of
awakened feeling, he exclaims, " I will pay my vows unto the Lord," and he advises
Gk>d's people to " vow and pay " — to follow up their vows, and never to rest until they
are fulfilled. It may be well to note what is the mission of vows. They are helpful
in strengthening the viill. A purpose may be formed which will stand but little
testing, and exert but feeble influence. We strengthen that purpose if, in relation to
it, we take open pledge, we make solemn promise. Our own inward purpose may be
easily forgotten ; no one knows about it but ourselves, and so its power of influence on
us is small. Turn our purpose into a public vow, and we are helped by remembering
that others, and God, expect us to be faithful to our word. How has it been with
the vows we have made in the past ? Have we joined " vowing " and " paying " ?

I. Oub vows at Confirmation, and union with Christ's Church.

II. Oub vows on bibthoats, New- Year days, etc.

in. Our vows when ENTERINQ on new life-relationships — MARBIAQE, BTO.

IV. Our vows on rescue from perils, or recovebt prom sickness.

Thinking over all these vows, who among us can fail to be impressed by the thought
of how much is unpaid, and how much we owe to God ? Never have we had a year of
life in which our payment of vows matched our New- Year promises. What a heap
of unpaid vows the years have piled up I What a heap of imperfectly paid vows !
Very seldom, indeed, have our vows been fully kept ; and we search our lives almost
in vain to find any single instances in which we have done better than we vowed. It
is important that we should have solemn opportunities for calling our vows to remem-
brance, such as sacramental seasons provide. So we may be set on new efforts to
" pay our vows." — R. T.

Vers. 1 — 12. — A psalm of triumph. This is one of several psalms supposed to have
been written in celebration of the sudden overthrow of Sennacherib's army in the
neighbourhood of Jerusalem, and siiggests the following truths —

I. That the Church is God's peculiar abode, where the most glorious

REVELATIONS OF HIS POWER AND GRACE ARE SEEN. (Ver. 3.) The gOSpel is mOSt

emphatically the " power of God unto salvation."

II. That God's greatest glory is not in destroying, but in saving and



110



THE BOOK OF PSALMS.



[PS. LXXVU. 1 — 20.



BEDGEHIKO, MEN. (Vers. 4 — 6.) Here his power for destruction is celebrated; but
in the New Testament his work of salvation — his power to give life, not his power to
take it away.

III. God IB TO BE FEABED MOEB FOE HIS HOLINESS AND LOVE THAN FOB HIS

PHYSICAL OMNIPOTENCE. (Vers. 7— 9.) ra«5e excite filial affectionate fear; <Aa< excites
an unworthy slavish fear.

IV. God 18 ABLE TO OVEBBULB THE EEBELLION OF MEN BO THAT IN THE END IT

BHALL ILLUSTBATE HIS PBAisE. (Ver. 10.) God's love Can conquer human wrath,
and BO make it praise him.

V. The ONLY acceptable gifts wb can offbb to God abb those of bepbnt-
ANOB AND A BENBWBD LIFE. (Ver. 11.) " A broken and a contrite spirit ; " " To
do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God;" "Let all that
are around him do homage to his majesty." — S.



EXPOSITION.



PSALM LXXVn.



This paalm is the lament and expostulation
with God of some afflicted person, perhaps
Asaph, who speaks as the mouthpiece of
his countrymen, complaining of Israel's
apparent desertion by God (vers. 1 — 9), but
thence rising into a higlier strain of hope
and confidence, based on a recollection of
Jehovah's past mercies (vers. 10 — 20;. The
particular occasion which called forth the
paalm cannot be determined. The psalm
consists of six stanzas of three verses each,
to which is appended one of two verses only.
The pause-mark, "selah," occurs at the end
of the first, the third, and the fifth stanzas.

Ver. 1. — ^I cried unto God with my voice,
even unto God with my voice. The repeti-
tion marks the intensity of the appeal,
" with my voice " — that the appellant is not
content with mere silent prayer. And he
gave ear unto me; rather, "that he may
hearken unto me" (Cheyue), or "and do
thou hearken unto me " (Hengstenberg,
Kay).

Ver. 2. — In the day of my trouble I sought
the Lord (comp. Gen. xxxv. 3 ; Hab. iii. 16).
Uy sore ran in the night ; rather, my hand
wa» stretched out in the night (Cook, Cheyne,
Revised Version) ; comp. Ps. xxviii. 2.
And ceased not. He continued in prayer all
through the night. Ky soul refused to be
comforted (comp. Gen. xxxvii. 35 ; Jer. xxxi.
15). He \va^ like Jacob when he lost
Joseph, or like Rachel weeping for her
children.

Ver. 3. — I remembered God, and was
troubled. Tlie tenses used are present rather
than past; they mark continuance; tliey
describe the condition in which the writer
remained for days or weeks. He thought of
God, but tiie tliought troubled him. It was



God who had brnnglit the calamity, what-
ever it was, upon his people. Seemingly, he
had "cast them off" — he had "forgotten
to be gracious" (see vers. 7 — 9). I com-
plained ; rather, I muse or meditate (Heng-
stenberg, Kay, Clieyne). And my spirit was
overwhelmed; or, waxelh faint, as in the
Prayer-book Version.

Ver. 4. — Thou boldest mine eyes waking;
literally, thou, holdest the watches of mine
eyes; i.e. pieventedst me from obtaining any
sleep. I am so troubled that I cannot speak ;
literally, / was perplexed and did not speak.
The perplexity was probably caused by an
inability to understaml Goil's ways. Why
had he affloled his people ? Was ihe afflic-
tion always to continue? Was Israel cast
oa?

Ver. 5. — I have considered ; rather, 7 con-
sidered. In my perplexity, when I could no
longer speak, I betook myself to meditation.
I considered the days of old, the years of
ancient times. He called to miiid, i.e., God's
doings in the past (comp. vers. It— 19).

Vei'. 6. — I call to remembrance my song
in the night. He bethought himself of tlie
songs of thanksgiving which he used to sing
to God in tlie night (comp. Job xxxv. 10)
on account of mercies received ; but this did
not comtort him. " Nessun maggior dolore
che ricordarsi di tempo felice nella miseria."
I commune with mine own heart, and my
spirit made diligent search; or, "and I
diligently searched out my spirit " (Clieyue).
The results of the searcliings out seem tis
be given in vers. 7 — 10.

Ver. 7.— Will the Lord cast off for everl
The psalmist asked himself in the night
Bucli questions as these : Is it really to be
supposed that God will cast off his (leople
for evert And will he be favourable (or,
gracious') no morel Surely such desertion
IS incredible.

Ver. 8. — Is his mercy clean gone for ever 1
The mercy which he hag ao long shown
towards Israel (comp. Ps. Ixxviii.). Doth his



P8. LXXVII. 1- -20.]



THE BOOK OF TSALMS.



Ill



promise fail for evermore 1 The promise
which he made to Abraham, Isaaf, and
Jacob, that he would be with their seed for
ever (Gen. xvii. 7 — 13 ; xxvi. 24 ; xxxv. 11,
12).

Ver. 9. — Hath God forgotten to be gracious 1
Can God, who forgets nothing and no one
. (Isa. xlix, 15), have forgotten his own
I nature, which is to be "merciful and
gTaciou8, lono;-euffering, and abundant in
goodness" (Exod. xxxiv. 6)? Assuredly
not. The bibber nature in the psalmist, ag
Professor Cheyne observes, expostulates with
the lower one. Hath he in anger shut up
Us tender mercies 1 Han he shut them up,
" as in B closed hand " (Kay, Canon Cook) ?
(comp. Deut. xv. 7).

Ver. 10. — A nd I said, This is my infirmity ;
t.e. "the fault is not in God, but in myself"
— in my own weakness and want of faith.
But I will remember the years of the right
hand of the Host High. There is nu " I will
remember " in the original, which expresses
the thought of the writer imperfectly ; but
some such phrase must of necessity be
supplied. The words aro retained in the
Eevised Version and by Professor Cheyne.
Tlie remembrance of God's mercies during
the many years that are past is tliat which
best sustains us in a time of severe trouble.

Ver. 11. — I will remember the works of
the Lord. The same thought is carried on
and expressed more clearly in the present
and the ensuing verse. Then a special re-
membrance is made of one particular mercy
— the deliverance from Egypt (vers. 13 — 20).
Surely I will remember thy wonders of old
(comp. Exod. XV. 11).

Ver. 12. — I will meditate also of all thy
work, and talk of thy doings ; rather, as in
the Bevised Version, and muse on thy doings
(comp. ver. S).

Ver. 13. — Thy way, God, is in the
lanctuary; rather, in Ao/tne«s. God's "way"
— his conduct, his proceedings — however
strange and mysterious it may teem to
us, is always holy, i.e. just and right
(comp. Gen. xviii. 25; Job viii. 3;. Who
it Bu great a God as our God ? God is both
good and great ; just in himself, and able to
execute justice.

Ver. 14.— Thou art the God that doest
wonders. The gods of the heathen could
do notliing. They were weakness, vanity,
nothingness, Jehovah alone was powerful.
He could work, aud could " work wonders."
This clause prepares the way for the magni-
ficent description of the deliverancu of Israel
at the KeJ Sea, which occupies vers. 16 — 19.
Thou hast declared thy strength among the
people; rather, among the peoples — i.e. in
the siglit of many he.ithen nations (comp.
Exud. XV. 14— Ifi).

Ver. 15. — Thou hast with thine arm {i.e.



with thy mighty strengtli) redeemed thy
people The deliveriince from Egypt is
constantly called a "redemption" (Exod
vi. 6 ; XV. 13 ; Deut. vii. 8 ; ix. 26, etc. ; 2
Sam. vii. 23; 1 Chrou. xvii. 21, etc.). It
is brought forward here " as the greatest
and most wonderful of ail the works of God,
and hence as containing the strongest pledge
of future deliverance " (Hengstenberg). The
sons of Jacob and Joseph, A new designa-
tion of the people of Israel, and one which
elsewhere occurs only in Obad. 18. Pro-
fessor Cheyne suggests that it is a geo-
graphical division — ^by Jacob southern Israel,
and by Joseph northern Israel, being in-
tended (comp. Hos. xii 2; Amos v. 6, 15;
vi. 6).

Ver. 16. — The waters saw thee, God,
the waters saw thee. Professor Cheyne
regards this and the Ihree lollowing verses
as not belonging properly to this psalm, but
a " fragment of another," aociilentallv trans-
ferred to this place. But most oommeutalora
see in the passage a most essential portion
of the poem. It is the thought of the de-
liverance from Kgypt that especially sustains
and comforts the psalmist in his extreme
distress. The passage is prepared for by
vers. 11 and 14, and is exegetioal of ver. 15.
They were afraid. They shrank from the
sight of God, and made a way for his people
to pass over. The depths also were troubled.
The very abysses trembled with fear, and
moved themselves, leaving the bottom of
the sea dry (see Exod. xiv. 29).

Ver. 17. — The clouds poured out water.
The description here becomea more poetical
than historical, unless, indeed, we may sup-
pose that the writer possessed, besides what
is sail] in Exodus, some traditional account
of the passage. The skies sent out a sound;
or, " uttered » voice " — the voice of the
thunder, beyond a doubt (compare next
verse). Thine arrows also went abroad ; i.e.
lightnings darted hither and thither (see
Ps. xviii. 14 ; 2 Sam. xxii 15).

Ver. 18. — The voice of thy thunder was in
the heavens ; rather, in the whirlwind
(Kay, Cheyne, Eevised Version). A storm
of wind usually accompanies thunder and
lightning. This the author, with poetical
exaggeration, heightens into a " whirlwind "
(comp. Pb. Ixxxiii. 13; Isa. xvii. 13). The
lightnings lightened the world. More hyper-
bole. Not only did they "go abroad" (ver.
17), darting hither and thither, but their
intense brightness illuminated the wliole
earth. The earth trembled and shook.
Through the reverberatiou of air, the earth
seems to shake in a heavy thunderstorm.

Ver. 19.— Thy way is in the sea ; rather,
was in the sen. Tliou wentest, i.e., in person
before thy people in their passage across the
dry bed of the Bed Sea ; truly there, though



L12



THE BOOK OF PSALMS.



[ps. LXXVII. 1 — 20,



invigible (comp. Exod. xv. 13 ; Pss. Ixxviii.
52, 53; ovi. 9; Isa. Ixiii. 13). And thy
path in the great waters; littrally, thy
paths. So the Revised Version. And thy
footsteps are not known; latber, were not.
No one perceived thy presence, much less
discerned thy footsteps. As in external
nature and in the human heart, God worked
secretly.



Ver. 20. — Then leddest thy people like a
flock (comp. Isa. Ixiii. 11 ; Ps. Ixxviii. 52).
By the hand of Moses and Aaron. God waa
the true Leader. Moses and Aarou were but
his instruments. Moses atone time refused
to lead any more, unless God would pledge
himself to go up with him (see Exod. zxxiii
12—16).



HOMILETICS.

Vers. 7 — 9. — Hie temptation and the refuge. " Will the Lord cast off? " Here is

1 soul passing through the very valley of the shadow of death, yet coming out again
Into the sunshine of God's loving-kindness and truth. As Christian, in Banyan's
lUegory, could not distinguish the whisperings of evil spirits from his own thoughts,
10 the bitter questions the psalmist records here as almost overturning his faith, may
(veil have been temptations of the evil one. Whatever their source, there could he
but one antidote, one refuge. From his dark thoughts and tormenting doubts of God
lie turns to the actual facts of God's past dealings, and stays his fainting faith on
clod's eternal faithfulness.

I. The temptation. Perhaps the severest trial to which a believer can he exposed
kj the temptation to entertain hard, unthankful, unbelieving thoughts of God. This
is like cutting off the anchor in the tempest. 1. This temptation may spring from
heavy affliction; unusual in nature or duration, and so aggravated by contrast; or
unlooked-for, like a bolt out of a clear sky ; or just what we have prayed to be spared
and laboured to avoid. 2. Or from rememhrance of special sins. Conscience wakes,
as if refreshed with sleep. We lose sight of the cross, and see only the Law we have
broken and the judgment we are on our way to meet. 3. Or from mental depression ;
spiritual darkness ; the sense of desertion, and loss of all the joy of God's salvation
and Ov mfort of promises. Often this has its secret source in bodily weakness or disease,
but is none the less hard to bear, and needs spiritual as well as bodily remedies.

II, The kefuge and deliverance fkom this awful temptation. 1. Jn the con-
viction that the source of our trouble is in our own weakness, not in any failure of God's
loving-Xindness. " I said. This is my infirmity." 2. In calling to mind Ood's past
mercies. This psalm opens with a note of faith (ver. 1). Literally, " My voice [is]
unto God, and I will cry ; my voice [was] unto God, and he gave ear to me." Then
vers. 2 — 4 record Asaph's sleepless, weary trouble. This thought, that his trouble
came from God, instead of a consolation, seemed an aggravation of his woe. Then he
began to think of God's past goodness — ^his own past joy in God. Can God change or
prove unfaithful ? Impossible ! Only my own weak, faithless heart can suggest such
a thought. If such a time of trial assails any of us, let us remember: (1) The history of
God's dealings with his people, in the days recorded in Scripture and in alter-times.
(2) Our own experience of prayers heard, sins pardoned, troubles turned into bless-
ings, deliverances beyond hope, grace and goodness above all we asked or thoutiht
(2 Tim. ii. 11 — 13). Trials come from our Father, for we need them. But the
temptation to doubt his love and truth comes from the enemy. Do not sit down in
the shadow of your grief. Open the windows of your soul towards Jerusalem. Take
to you the whole armour of God; but above all, the shield of faith and the sword of
the Spirit (Eph. vi. 16, 17). Remember : God does not forget (Isa. xlix. 14 — 16 ;

2 Tim. ii. 13). Jesus our Saviour changes not (Heb. xiii. 8).

Ver. 19. — The profound mystery which surrounds all thoughts of God, "Thy way
IS in the sea," etc. A new word has been added of late to the English language— a brace
of new words, as dismal in meaning, as uncouth in sound — "agnostic," "agnosticism."
The fact is not new (1 Cor. i. 21). An agnostic is one who believes it impossible to
know that one central, supreme, primary truth, apart from which all knowledge is
vanity. Nature, science, conscience, love, like sides of an immense pyramid, slope



P8. Lxxvn. 1— 20.] THE BOOK OF PSALMa 113

upward ; but tlie summit is in cloud. Reason pierces the cloud, and cries, " God is
tliere 1 " Faith soars into the light which thick darkness veils, and proclaims, " God
is love I " But the agnostic reckons Faith uuscientiflo, Reason going beyond her pro-
vince ; doubts if there be anything but cloud. So when Moses went up into the
thick darkness where God was, the people, who thought the flesh-pots of Egypt much
more real than the voice from Sinai, said, "As for this Moses, ... we know not what
is become of him." Christianity and agnosticism are so irreconcilably opposed, that
sympathy on the part of a Cliristian towards an agnostic seems difficult. Yet you
cannot understand any one with whom you have no sympathy; and when you neither
sympathize nor understand, you have little chance of doing good. Agnosticism con-
tains a kernel of Christian truth, and therefore presents a point of contrast for Chris-
tian sympathy, viz. the profound mystery which surrounds all our thouiihts of God,
setting strait limits to our knowledge, baffling all attempts of human reason to pass
those limits (Job xi. 7 ; 1 Tim. vi. 16).

I. The mtstkbt of creation. Our senses show us the surface of universe-
phenomenon; the harmonious working of the mighty machine; the endless flow,
through birtli, growth, decay, of the river of life. But where is the moving power, the
fowntain, the loom in which this wondrous web is being woven, and the hand which
weaves? Science pierces below the surface; shows everywhere unchanging law,
faultless adjustment, interchangeable forces, rules of number, measure, weight, mutual
attraction and fitness. But we cannot stop short in these. " Evolution " is supposed
to explain it all. But what explains evolution? As Mr. Spencer has rightly observed,
we should rather call the process of nature " involution," because at each step and
stage something new and surprising comes in. Process is not cause. When, e.g.,
a number of primary atoms enter into combination, not at haphazard, bat in fixed
proportions of number and weight, and a new substance, with wholly new properties,
is produced — whence came these properties? Had the atoms continued apart, they
would have had no existence to all eternity. Why do the atoms attract and cleave
to one another? Whence their violent movement ? Where are those laws of number,
weight, proportion, which cannot exist in the atoms, yet which every atom so abso-
lutely obeys ? To talk of laws is no explanation ; it is the very existence of laws we
want explained. Science can give no reply to these or ten thousand such questions.
The Bible gathers up all lesser mysteries in the one primaeval mystery with which its
first sentence sets us face to face — ^not to reason or comprehend, but to worship : " In
the beginning, God created."

II. The mystebt op pbovidbnoe. By "providence" we understand the Creator's
wise, merciful, universal, sovereign control over all his works, especially human life
and the welfare of his children. We often compare nature, or human life, to a web
incessantly weaving; but this is a very feeble image. Instead of parallel threads,
crossed at right angles by another set of parallel threads, we see countless millions
of independeut lines of natural force and of human will crossing at every conceivable
angle every moment with incalculable speed. Yet the pattern of God's purpose is
being woven. " No man liveth to himself.'' Sometimes in concert, often in discord,
mostly in ignorance or disregard, we are influencing one another, depending on one
another. Yet " we know that all things work together for good to them that love
God." Daily experience confirms the Bible teaching, that in what is to our eyes this
inconceivable tangle of will, chance, and law, every thread lies under God's e^ e,
obeys his will. Illust. : History of Joseph (of. Gen. xv. 13 ; xlii. 36 ; xlv. 7, 8).
Miracles are not more wonderful than providence (special reference here to the passage
of the Red Sea). No sharp line between them in Scripture. No reason to think " natural
laws" broken in one case or other, any more than man breaks natural laws when he
drives his trains through mountains, makes iron float on the ocean, compels wind,
water, steam, lightning, to work his engines (see Ps. cxix. 89 ; Dan. iv. 35).

lil. The mystery of God's dealisgs with our race and with individuals.
Scripture shows one line of Divine purpose from beginning to end of world. Hibtory
shows all the most energetic progressive races brought into contact with the Bible and
the Church of God. But why tlie slow progress of the gospel; the huge stagnating
masses of heathendom ; the late birth of science ; the obstinate prevalence of war,
tyranny, slavery ? If we say (rightly) sin is at the bottom of all, this only runs uj

PSALMS — II. '



114 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. lxxvii. 1—20.

all other mysteries into the deepest and darkest. Compared with all this, what we
call "mysteries" in our daily life seem simple, especially with the key of promise
(Heb. xii. 5 — ^10). Yet how dark they often are 1

IV. Above, beneath, around, behind, all these mysteries is that of which we
S04R0ELY DABB SPEAK — THE MYSTERY OF GoD HIMSELF — his eternity, omnipotence,
omnipresence, omniscience, righteousness, love (Ps. cxzxix. 6). This is a lesson, not
of unbelief, but of laith. A God whom we could comprehend, in whom we found no
unfathomable depth of mystery, would be no more the God of the Bible than of nature.
Yet "we know what we worship" (John iv. 22). The cloud covers the mount, but
the path is open. " We draw near " (Exod. xx. 21 ; Isa. xlv. 15 ; Heb. x. 19, 22).
See how from this awful view of Divine mystery the psalmist passes — like a change in
music from a stormy minor to a cheerful major, and restful close : " Thou leddest,"
etc. We know all we need to know. Not a question concerning God, on which our
welfare practically turns, but the Bible has a clear, full answer (John i. 18 ; xvii. 3 ;
1 John ir.lG).



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Vers. 1 — ^20. — From darkness to dawn. So may this psalm be described. We
have the night of weeping followed by the morning, if not of joy, yet of peace. It is
a portraiture to which the experience of myriads of souls has answered and will
answer. Hence, for the help of all such, the psalm has been given. We know not
who the writer was, nor when, nor the special reason why, the psalm was written. We
only know that it is the utterance of a heart that had been sorely troubled, but to
wiiom light and peace came again. We are shown the darkness, the paling of that
darkness, and the dawn,

L The dabeness. 1. It was very dark. There was great trouble. He tells of it in
vers. 2, 3, 4. And prayer seemed no good, notwithstanding it was very earnest, hence
spoken aloud (ver. 1) and prolonged all the night through (ver. 2 : " My hand in the
night hath been stretched out [the hand of entreaty and prayer] and ceased not ").
Nevertheless, no comfort came. 2. Sis grief seems to have prompted distrust. As
Jacob (Gen. xxxvii. 35) about Joseph, and David about his child (2 Sam. xii. 17) and
ahout Absalom (2 Sam. xviii.), so here there was what there should not have bein^
the refusing to be comforted. 3. But this made the darkness yet deeper. He could not
remember God (ver. 3). He could not realize his presence and help ; he could only
sigh in distress. He could not commune with his own heart, but his spirit was too
overwhelmed. He would sleep, but could not. He would speak to God, but his trouble
was too great. The distressed soul, as it often does, utterly broke down. But a break-
down like that brings speedily the help of God. He will never leave his people in a
strait like that, blessed be his Name I And so we see—

II. Thb falino of the dabenebb. Those who ascend high mountains to witness
the glory of the dawn itre told of its advent by the paling of the darkness. And
spiritually, we see this here. God sends the thoughts of his servant back to " the days
of old " (ver. 5), and to the bright joyous periods which were like a " song," and their
sweet memories came back and talked to him, and set his spirit in " diligent search,"
so that he was compelled to come to the conclusion that all his dark and dreadful
thoughts about the Lord's casting off for ever, and being favourable no mure (see vers.
7, 8, 9), were all impossible of belief, mere nightmares of the soul, altogether false and
untrue. Then in ver. 10 he comes to see how he has been led to think such sad
thoughts. " Then I said, This is my sorrow, that the right hand of the Highest hath
changed." Yes, God's providence had changed, but not his heart. Before we pass on,
let us ask — Why does God let his servants suffer such eclipse of all joy as is recorded
here ? Partly by way of reproof. The psalmist " refused to be comforted." We often
do when, would we only say, " I will trust," then we should find that we should " not
be afraid." It is the letting in of doubt and unbelief that works such barm. Or, if
not for reproof, then for the sake of others, that when we find them in darkness, we
may be able to tell them how God helped us.

III. The dawn. This came through his remembrance of, and meditation on : 1. The



P8. Lxxvn. 1— 20.J THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 115

deeds, so wondrous, of the Lord (vers. 11, 12). 2. What God himself was — so holy
aiid 80 great (ver. 13). 3. The reooUeotion of God's specjal act of redemption (vers.
15—19). 4. The shepberd-oare of God.— S. C.

Ver. 13. — Ood's way in the sancttiary. This verse is capable of different renderings.
We take the one here given, as in the main true, and rich in sacred suggestion. God's
way is in the sanctuary because —

I. It IB BEEN THERE. The character, mind, and heart of God are revealed there.
His holiness, that nothing unclean may approach him ; yet also his mercy and com-
passion, as seen in the forgiveness through sacrifice proclaimed there ; the worship he
delights in and demands ; the surrender of the self to him, symbolized by the shedding
of the blood of the sacrifices, for " the blood is the life." So must the heart, the will,
the real self, of the worshipper be presented to God ; the transforming power of the
Holy Spirit which he will give to us who thus come in full surrender to him, for the
fire which consumed the sacrifice was no man-enkindled flame, but came down from
heaven, and set forth how the blessed Holy Spirit of God would tnke hold of our poor
dead fleshly nature, and transform it and uplift it heavenward, God ward, as did the fire
the sacrifice. Thus was God's way of saving sinful men set forth and shown.

IL Leads thebe. All his dealings with us are to lead us to his own presence, to
bring us back to himself. We have got away into the far country, poor sinful ones that
we are, and God's way with us is all to lead us to turn and say, " I will arise and go
to my Father, and wUl say," etc.

III. Ib like what is there — holy, just, and good. God can ask, " Are not my
ways holy?" 'I hey are in harmony with the spirit of the sanctuary. He is holy in
all his ways. One rendering of the text is, " O God, thy way is holy." The records
of history, of experience, of conscience, all assert the righteousness and holiness of God.

IV. Is UNDBBSTOOD THERE. (Of. Ps. Ixxiii. 17.) There we get light sufiScient, and,
better still, the acquiescent, submissive mind, that learns to rest in the Lord and wait
patiently for him (cf. Hannah, 1 Sam. i. 13 ; Luke xviii. 10). Ah ! how often has the
wearied, much-tried child of God found im the holy sanctuary that there have come
such messages from God to his suul, through prayer, or psalm, or hymn, or God-inspirel
word, that he has gone down to his home comforted !

V. Is traksfiqured there. It may have been a terribly hard, difficult, rough
way ; the man's lot in life may be heavily burdened with care, but " in the sanctuary,"
as be waits upon God and pours out his soul before the Lord, lo, these very trials and
cares become transfigured and changed in fashion, so that they become as wings on
which his soul mounts up nearer to God than ever he had attained to before, and he
comes to confess, " It was good for me that I was afflicted."

Conclusion. Then do we know the way of the sanctuary ? Would we enter there ?
The path leads by the altar. The soul that would enter in and know the blessedness
of the sanctuary of God, must come along that path, the path of lowly penitence and
trust and heart-surrender, so that on him may come the bliessed fire of the Holy Spirit,
bringing him into the presence of God. — S. C.

Ver. 19. — The mysteries of Providence. " We know not, Israel knew not, by what
precise means their deliverance from the hosts of Pharaoh was wrought ; we know
not by what precise track through the gulf the passage was effected. We know
not, and we need not know ; the obscurity, the mystery here, as elsewhere, was pait, of
the lesson. ... All that we see distinctly is that through this dark and terrible night,
with the enemy pressing close behind, and the driving sea on either side, he led his
people like sheep by the hand of Moses and Aaron " (Stanley). And that great event
of the Exodus, the mercy and mystery of which were so alike conspicuous, has often
been taken as the symbol of those manifold and often mysterious dealings of God with
his people in which we can do nothing but believe and trust that, through these deep
waters and by these unknown ways, he will bring us out into a full deliverance from
all that oppresses us. And for those who trust him this is assuredly what he will do.
But the mind cannot keep, and, indeed, it need not, from reverently asking why God's
providence is often so full of mystery as well as of pain to men ? Calamities frightful
m their nature, desolations terrible and widespread, so that human life at times becomes



116 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [rs. lxxvii. 1— 20.

like the prophetfs scroll, which was full, both within and without, of mourning, lamen-
tation, and woe. What is to be said of these things ? Certainly they are instrumental
in much that is good.

Human life owes moee to its faihb than to its plbasuees. 1. How would
faith he educated a/nd developed but for the demands made upon it by tbe trials of life ?
Trust Iq God is an absolute essential to the strength, the joy, the power, and tbe per-
manence of the Christian life. There must, then, be occasions and demands for its
exercise, and the trials of life supply them. 2. WJiat a spur to invention earthly
calamities are I Perhaps there is no one single safeguard agairjst such calamities in
which we now rejoice, but owed its existence to their occurrencp, and the pressure
they put upon men to discover such safeguard. Is there a lighthouse anywhere along
our coasts but where some gallant ship has, for want of it, gone down with many precious
lives? 3. What power there is in lifers sorrows to hind together hearts that other-
wise would have remained apart I There is a blessed uniting power in sorrow. 4. The
calamities of life, when death seems to reign in terrible power, serve to startle the con-
science of sinful men, and, as it were, force them to think of God and things eternal
(Isa. xxvi. 9). 5. They strengthen the argument for the future life. The justice and
guoiiness of God could not be maintained, if " in this life only we have hope." 6. 2%«
good man is hy them drawn nearer to Ood, and hides the more closely within the blessed
shelter df God's never-failing love. 7. They seme as revelations of character to the self-
deceived, and show such how far other than they have thought they really are.
8. They teach us to sympathize wi'.h the sorrowful. Even Christ learned through the
things that he suffered. 9. Suffering is the way to life. " Through much tribulation
we must enter the kingdom." 10. They show, what men are apt to forget, that " here
we have no continuing city." — S. C.

Ver. 1. — Complaining to Ood. " I will cry unto God with my voice, and may he
give ear unto me ! " No historical associations can be fixed for this psalm. It is the
psalm of one deeply interested in the welfare of Israel, who takes as a burden on his
own heart the depressed condition of the nation, and gloomily regards it as a sign of
the withdrawal of God's favour. The trouble of the writer is not personal, but relative ;
and with its moods may be compared the prayers of Daniel (ix.) and of Nehemiah
(i.). It is well that there should always be persons who take the burdens of their
nation on their own hearts ; recognize the Divine relation to national condition ; and
put their feeling and desire into intercessory prayer. Under some phases of Christianity
there is danger of religion becoming too strictly personal — too little concerned with
corporate and national life. This psalm is characteristically a psalm of complaint ; it
is the utterance of a man in sore perplexity and distress, who can only see the dark
side even of Divine dealings. Was he right or wrong? May we say he was both
right and wrong ?

I. On the face of it, complaining must be wrong. It is usually the utterance
of tbe discontented mind. A man complains when he imagines himself to be neglected
or ill-used. At the bottom of complaining generally lies an overweening sense of our
own importance — ^the idea that we deserve better than we get. This, in part, may
have a£fected the psalmist. Not concerning himself, but concerning the favoured
nation. He complains because he thinks the nation deserved better at the hands of
Gud than it was receiving. He was jealous for his people. Fancied desert is the root
out of which complainings spring. But what desert can man or nation have before
God, that can form ground of reproach? And whoever makes much of his "deserts"
must be reminded of his "ill deserts." "If thou, Lord, shouldest mark iniquities,
Lord, who shall stand?" Complaining of God must be wrong; because it shows
(1) no proper understanding of ourselves; (2) no worthy apprehension of his wisdom
and goodness. Even in the strangest experiences, submission, not complaint, is the
becoming thing.

II. On fubthbe consideration, we mat sat, complaining is eight. As a sign of
confidence in God, it is right ; but then it will be complaining to God, not of him.
Openness before God means that we speak freely to him just what is in our thought
and heart. Relief comes to us only whtn, in such ways, we can make full and free
expre.-sion of our confidence, and tell God what we do think and feel, even though we



p». Lxxvii. 1—20.] THE BUOK OF PSALMS. 117

know it is wrong to think and feel it. Reserve is the bane of friendship. There must
be no reserve with God. And the very best way in which to become ashamed of our
complainings is to speak them out l.efore God. The infinite patience and gentleness
towards us seems to search us through and through.— B. T.

Ver. 2. — The mission of mental depressions. "My hand in the night season wns
stretched out, and ceased not." The figure is of the hand stretclied out in prayer till it
was unnerved by weariness, and yet refused to rest. The cause of lying awake at
night is usually mental anxiety and distress ; burdens on the mind rather than pains
in the l^ody. We begin to think worryfuUy, and so banish sleep. The text, there-
fore, presents a season of mental depression ; and the occasion of it is found in the
finxious condition of the nation. lUust. by the times of Hezekiah. Times of mental
depression are not necessarily wrong. They are the natural response of the mind to
physical conditions and outward circumstances. They mean " sensitiveness," "quick-
ness to respond;" and these differ in different individuals, Some are easily made
despondent; they can always see, or tliirik they see, black clouds gathering in the
sky. Some are unduly hopeful, and fail to respond when circumstances do call for
anxiety. We make the mistake of failing to recognize Divine working through the
anxieties of the mind, as well as through the pains of the body, and the distress of the
circumstances. We deceive ourselves by thinking these mental trials are in no sense
sent ; we make them ourselves, and so we fail to associate God with them, and lose
what would be our best comfort and relief. The truth is, that God is even more freely
working through our mental depressions, because they are immaterial — they belong to
the innermost of us, to the sphere in which God's grace is most unhindered.

I. Mental depressions keep us convinced of the spiritual. Suppose we took
all things easily ; never troubled over them ; never brooded ; — how easily the
" material " would gain the mastery ! We know there is another world than the world
of sense ; there is a world of thought and feeling. How intense and real this world is
we are made to know when depression prevents sleep, and even breaks down health.
And so we come to apprehend the reality of the " spiritual."

II. Mental depressions convince of the seriousness of cub uobal conflict.
Conceive that the struggle for character only concerned circumstances and relations, and
then what an unimportant struggle it would seem to be! "But we wrestle, not with
flesh and blood only, but with the rulers of spiritual darkness." Add mentid conflict,
and virtue becomes a sublime achievement, a transcendent victory, won at an awful
cost.

III. Mental depressions hay be ovebrcled bo ab to give nobleb views of God.
Illustrate by the psalo) (vers. 10 — 20). The law of rebound applies. Compare such a
case as that of the poet Cowper, whose songs of trust were the cries of one who was
often in despair. The question is — Do we yield to mental depressions, or do we resist
them, and so let God work his work of grace through them? — B. T.

Ver. 4. — Occupations for sleepless nights. Comparing ver. 3, we find that, lying
awake, the psalmist had "remembered God," or, more precisely, had "thought upon
God." It is true that the thought had only brought him trouble, but the occupation
was good, whatever it brought him. Oomp. Ps. iv. 4, "Commune with your own
heart upon your bed, and be still ; " Pb. Ixiii. 6, " When I remember thee upon my
bed, and meditate on thee in the night watches." As the cause of loss of sleep is
generally a physical condition, and often brain-disease of some kind, men usually at
such times take sombre, dreary, and distressing views. They are never so ready to
"write hitter things against themselves as when they lie awake at night." It is well
to see clearly that the views taken at such times are almost always untrue and
unworthy, and can seldom be hopefully made the guide of conduct or the basis of
important decisions. And proper correction of gloomy night-views should be made
when sunshine brings light and cheer into our souls once more.

I. Most people, when thet lib awake, worry over their oiroumbtanobs. And
that is a very hopeless occupation. Only dark, depressing, anxious sides of things are
likely to come to view in night seasons. It will be found that the fretting things are
usually the things selected for thinking over. And, usually, it is imagination that



118 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. lxxvii. 1— 20.

is active, fashioning woes in the near future, ami presenting all the issues that are
unfolding as disastrous. It would be a lesson never to be forgotten by any man, if he
could be told the fears he fashioned in the night seasons that never came to pass.

II. Many people, when they lie awake, think ovee theib sins. And that is
even a more hopeless occupation. A man wants light in which to see his sins truly.
Brooding over the " things we have done which we should not have done, and the
things left undone which we should have done," is sure to become morbid work. Souls
do even get a kind of dreadful satisfaction in making themselves out to be aB wicked
as possible. And night estimates of sin are very seldom true ones. Besides, this going
over of past sins is absolutely wrong, for it is dishonouring GoA by the untrustfulness
which will not fully receive the truth, that all those sins are pardoned and put for ever
away. If God no longer " remembers " them, it must be wrong for us to do so.

III. Wise people, when thbt lie awake, set theib thoughts on God. And
that is the proper and hopeful occupation. 1. Even our circumstances seem to gain
new shapings, settings, and relations, and become altogether more hopeful, when we
can associate God with them. 2. Even our sins can be calmly reviewed, when we can
see how God has dealt with them, and what he has done for us through sanctifying
to ua our very experience of them. — R. T.

Ver. 6. — The cheer of hallowed memories. "1 call to remembrance my song in the
night." This expression recalls the appeal of Elihu (Job xxxv. 10), "But none saith.
Where is God my Maker, who giveth songs in the night ? " But the mood of the psalmist
here is peculiar. To him the memories of past joys do but intensify present distress.
" When I remember how near God once was, the present seems more bitter, and the
thought brings increase of sadness." Some, however, render this clause, " I will give
my mind to my song in the night ; I will muse with my heart while my spirit makes
search ; " and understand the psalmist to mean, that he resolves to compose the
present poem that very night.

I. All men have freoioub and cherished memobies. However gad and anxious
and burdened later life may become, every man's early life — childhood, youth, young
manhood — is more or less pleasant to look back on. Partly because of what it actually
was, partly because of the sunshine which the spirit of youth put on it, and partly
because memory keeps the pleasant, and easily drops the painful. Then there are
memories of events th^t have happened. And, for the Christian man, memories of
special times of Divine guidance, rescue, restoration. And for many, dearest memories
of sanctified human love. The term, " song in the night," suggests special memories
of ways in which our hearts were kept trustful and cheerful, even in times of darkest
trouble and most painful distress. With the waves and billows going over us, we yet
could sing in our souls, " Yet the Lord will command his loving-kindness ... in the
night his song shall be with me."

II. The pleasantness ob painfdlness or odb memories depends on dub own
CONDITIONS OF MIND AND PEELiNO. The memories never change. They are always
full of God and of his grace. We change our relation to them, and make them depress-
ing or inspiriting according to our moods. According to bodily states, anxious
circumstances, or mental and spiritual conditions, we read our past. So the cause for
anxiety is that " singleness," clearness of vision, which enables us to see the past as
it was, and read aright its relation to the present. So often when memories depress
us, we need to see that the fault lies in our way of recalling them ; and we should say,
" This is my infirmity."

III. If OUB MEMORIES tell us we WEBB ONCE QLAD IN GoD, THBT REMIND US THAT

WE MAY WISELY BE GLAD IN GoD STILL. For " he is the Same yesterday, to-day, and
for ever." No matter what may seem to be the present, it is the sphere of the same
Divine love and care. — R. T.

Ver. 8. — Possible exhaustion of Ood's mercies. So fully was the thought of God
woven into the whole life and relations of a pious Jew, that to him the unbearable
distress was the lost sense of God's presence and interest. We have two striking
Instances of this. The supreme point of David's distress, when fleeing from his son
Aiisalom, lay in this — his enemies taunted him with the lost favour of God, saying.



PS. Lxxvii. 1—20.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 110



" Where is now thy God? " And Isaiali closes his magnificent fortieth chapter with
this sublime ap^jeal, " Why sayest thou, Jacob, and speakest, Israel, Mv way is
hid from the Lord, and my judgment is passed over from ray God?" Imagined change
iu God's relation, and the failure of God's mercy, are the sapreme woe» to all God-
fearing men still.

I. The Chbistian's great TBonBLBs are doubts about God, not apfliotions bent
BY God. The distinction between these two is this— doubts are inward, afflictions are
outward. It is not a very great thing for the soul to master mere circumstances —
especially since God never permits them to be overwhelming. The great thing is for
the soul to master itself. When our circumstances start doubts, then we get humbled
and broken. It is doubt, suspicion, fear, that really crushes our spirits, and forces
tears. Our doubtings usually concern : 1. God's Personality. Like David, we cry for
assurance that God is a "living God;" not a vain idol; not an abstraction of science;
not the vague "eternal that makes for rigliteousness." 2. God's relationship. He
may be God, but is he my Ood t 3. God's faithfulness. For God ever sets out
promises for faith to grasp ; and what can faith do if God does not keep his promises?
4. God's actual present nearness. " Where is now thy God ? " " Thou hast covered
thyself with a cloud, that our prayer might not pass through."

IL The sting of doubting-times is the coNsotonsNESs op sin. Illustrate from
the case of David, who lost the sense of God, lost his hope in God, filled his soul with
questionings and fears, when he had stepped aside from the ways of righteousness and
good self-restraint. Sin clouds the mind with doubts.

III. Neither afflictions, nob doubts, nor consoiods sin do make God's mbboibs
FAIL. Precisely in those scenes Divine mercies most abound. Things, and conditions
of mind and feeling, may affect our vision of him ; they cannot affect him. We may
project our shadows over him, and then find we can only see the shadows. God is
not moved to change by our change. "He abideth faithful."

" His mercies aye endure.
Ever faithful, ever sure."

Ask, " Is his mercy clean gone for ever ? " and you cannot want any answer. To state
the question is to be ashamed of the doubting that suggested it. — B. T.

Ver. 10. — A supreme mental distress. " That the right band of the Highest hath
changed." It is as if the psalmist were saying, " All this that I have been asking
myself, and saddening myself with asking, seems impossible, and yet it is this very
possibility of change in God toward me which so sorely perplexes and distresses me."
" This is my sorrow, the changing of the right hand of the Most High." Do we not
all feel that, if God be changed, then indeed the "whole foundation rocks"? We build
our hopes on this — " He abideth the same, and his years are throughout all genera-
tions." As the psalmist gradually comes to a better mind, he feels that his sorrow
was really his infirmity, and in some sense his shame. No man can expect to be free
from experience of mental distress ; the question is — Shall we give way to it, or shall
we resist it ? Here, in this psalm, we may find two things.

L A MAN — A GOOD MAN — DISPOSED TO TAKE DESPONDENT VIEWS. And there is

always a self-strand in the spirit of the despondent. They keep too much in the self-
sphere, looking within rather than "off unto Jesus." This man took despondent
views : 1. Of life generally. We call those who put this tone on their reading of
life pessimists — men who can always see the "dark sides," and make "dark sides"
when there are none to see. It is partly a nervous, anxious disposition, and may often
be wisely dealt with as disease, whose cure may be found in abundance of God's sweet
sunshine, and the good cheer of pleasant human friendship. 2. Of their present
circumstances. Some people always wear " smolsed spectacles," and so nothing is
bright to their view. 3. Of Ood^s dealings with them. They think so much more
of the things, than of the love and wisdom that devise, arrange, and adapt them.
Things are always variable; the love and the wisdom are always the same. The sea
down below is always heaving and tossing ; the heavens up above are always steadfast.
There is variety in Ood's working, but no variety in him.

II. A MAN ^A GOOD MAN — WHO SETS HIMSELF TO FIND A REMEDY FOB HIS DBSPON-



120 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. Lxxvii. 1— 20.

DENCT. He resists the disposition to doubt, and will not let it get the mastery over
him. He sets himself upon thinking well over two things. 1. His own frailty. He
suspects that what be seems to see may be in himself. It may be liku the tiny insect
in the astronomer's telescope, that seemed to show a huge creature eating up the moon.
It is well always to suspect imperfection in our vision when doubts distress. 2. Goa's
power and purpose. If he cannot see these in his own small sphere, he can see them
in the large spheres of the history of God's Church. This is absolutely certain — God
works for ends of blessing, and God is able to accomplish that which he purposes.
— B. T.

Vers. 11, 12. — A remedy for troubled hearts. " But I will celebrate the deeds of
Jah." With ver, 11 the change in the prophet's feeling actually begins. " Hitherto
he has looked too much within, has sought too much to read the mystery of God's
dealings by the light of his own experience merely. Hence the despondency when
he contrasts the gloomy present with the far brighter and happier past. He cannot
believe that God has indeed forgotten to be gracious, that he has indeed changed his
very nature ; but that he may be reassured and satisfied on this point, his eye must
take a wider range than that of his own narrow experience." The remedy for troubled
hearts so often is this — get out of your limited, narrow spheres ; take larger, wider,
more comprehensive views. Begin to consider the " God of the whole earth ; " cease
to keep God in the small sphere of your own personal interests. See the unchanging
purpose that through the ages runs. For our help towards gaining the larger views
of God, the records are left us of his dealings with men in the early ages of the world,
and from them this comes out clearly and strongly — God is, everywhere and always,
the Redeemer, Deliverer, Restorer, Saviour ; always " putting things right again ; "
always working towards the highest ends of blessing for the creatures he has made.
If we can get the conviction of this large truth into our souls, we are easily lifted up
above the perplexities of our particular lot. If our " puzzle-piece " does seem to be
oddly shaped, it fits into the great scheme, which, when completed, will plainly be seen
to have accomplished the highest possible benediction for humanity.

I. It comforts us to beuembeb God's deeds as a whole. Take any biography
given in the Old Testament. We could find in it single perplexing things ; e.g. Joseph
cast into the pit ; David hunted over the mountains. But read the lives as a whole,
and God's purpose of grace comes fully to view. So read incidents of history, and you
will be perplexed ; read the history, and all becomes clear. Bead the struggles of an
age, and you may find no meaning ; read the dealings of Gt>d with the raee, and much
is made plain.

II. It comfoets us to set God's dealinos one over aoainst another. Nothing
stands alone. Everything is prepared for, related to something else, and having its
characteristic influences and results. Things match, and the matching often provides
the explanation.

III. It comforts us to set God's deeds in relation to our higher necessities.
Not comfortableness, but our higher moral welfare, is the end God has in view. It is
often a new view of our circumstances to read them in this light. — B. T.

Ver. 13. — The holiness of Divine dealings. "0 God, thy way is holy I Who is

Sso] great a God as [our] God ? " Comp. Exod. xv. 11, " Who is like unto thee,
ehovah, among the gods ? who is like thee, glorious in holiness, fearful in praises,
doing wonders ? " For " in the sanctuary " there is the various rendering " in holiness."
It is evident that the term "holy," as applied to God, must include much more than
it does when applied to men. We must try to find what was especially in the
psalmist's mind, and so what he put, as his meaning, into this word. He began
thinking of God's ways with his people Israel, especially in the rescue from Egypt,
and deliverance at the Red Sea. This recalled the song of Moses, and the striking
contrast between the gods of the heathen and the God of Israel. The first thing that
arrests attention whenever that contrast is made is that the God of Israel has character,
and puts character into his works; but the idol-gods cannot be said to have any
character. This the psalmist expresses by saying, " Q-od, thy way is holy ; " or,
" Thy doings biar a character, they havo an aim and purpose, and that is a moral aim."



PS. Lxxvii. 1—20.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS, 121-



We may take suggestions of a division from the passage in Exodus which presents
three points in which Jehovah is unapproachable — holiness, awefulness, and miraculous
power.

I. God is " glorious in holiness;" that is, in character. We may read the sto]y
of God's dealings in either of two ways. 1. We may study it in order to find out
what God is in himself. 2. We may bring our knowledge of what God is in himself
to help us in explaining the meaning and mystery of his dealings. This latter is the
higher work. When we are fully satisfied with the character of God, we begin to trace
purposes of holiness and love iu all his doings. We see that God's way is right,
because Tie is right. If he is holy, we can trust him, if we cannot trace his way.

II. God is " feabful in pkaises." The proper object of the profoundest awe, even
to those who approach him with praise and thanksgiving. They who are duly impressed
with the Divine holiness never permit any sirowth of knowledge, any acquaintance
with God's ways, to nourish undue familiarities with his sacred Name. Think what
we may of Goid's dealings, we must keep in our souls due reverence for God himself.
No awe can attach to the gods of man's creation. It is the unique response of man
to adequate impressions of the Divine holiness.

III. God " DOETH WONDERS." " Both through nature, and on occasions overruling
nature, accomplishing the most astonishing results," which are seen to be most
astonishing when viewed in the moral issues which they accomplish. — B. T.

Ver. 19. — OocCa unknown ways. " Thy footsteps were not known ; " that is, they
were not known or understood beforehand. They were not, they could not have beeD^
anticipated. It is said that "the unexpected is the thing that happens." And so it
is in connection with the ways of God. Man can but seldom find out the Almighty
intent. God's " ways are higher than our ways, and his thoughts than our thoughts."
The life of a godly man is full of the " surprises of grace ; " and so he is taught lessons
of trust. Recall the scene on the Egyptian side of the Bed Sea. Observe that such
were the hopeless features of the situation, that a way of rescue never came to the
minds of any of the leaders. They must " stand still, and see the salvation of God ; "
and to the surprise of every one, his way proved to be " in the sea, and his path in
the great waters." Of God's ways with his people, three things may be said.

I. Experience cannot suggest them. We fall back on our experience to guide
our conduct under new circumstances. What happened before will explain what is
happening now. But the sphere of human experiences is strictly limited. Men never
do things that somebody has not done before them. " There has no temptation taken
us but such as is common to man." But God is under no limitation to the circle of
human experiences. He does, he is constantly doing, new things. Life for every one
of us is like the story of the children of Israel, full of Divine surprises, and we are
never " straitened in God." Illustrations may be taken from Old Testament history^
in which God delivered his people in ways which experience could not have suggested.

II. Thought cannot anticipate them. " It is not in man that walketh to direct
his steps." In a similar way, show how man's thought is limited by man's limited
knowledge. No man has compassed the entire circle of Divine possibilities. The
man who knows most must say, " These are parts of his ways." So man has not the
material for deciding what God will be sure to do in any given case.

III. Trust can always wait fob them, sure that God will unfold them in the
best times and in the best ways. God's people are as safe as Israel at the Bed Sea.
God's unknown way for them will be revealed to them in good time. — R. T.

Ver. 2,0.— Ood, the Shepherd of hit people. "Thou leddest thy people like a flock."
Vaihinger gives a key-note in his sentence, " The minstrel lets his harp drop, and
reclines in Ailness of faith on God's love." In the psalm depressing circumstance*
awaken depressing thoughts ; they even make the psalmist think hard things about
Ood. He found relief in turning his thoughts away from himself &uA his own con-
dition, and dwelling on the larger theme of God's ways of dealing with his people
through all the generations. After going over them awhile, he lightens upon a new
and satisfying idea of God with which he may close his meditations. God is really
the Shepherd oi his people. Read his work aright, and you cannot fail to recognize



122 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. lxxvii. 1— 20.

that it is just shepherding. He leads as a shepherd leads his flock. The shepherd-
figure is familiar to Scripture readers; but our Western associations cannot fill the
term with its best meanings and suggestions. In mountain districts, or on broad moor-
lands and plains, we get more suitable Impressions of the perils of sheep, and of the
exclusive devotion of the shepherd to their care.

I. God as Shepherd for the kebds of his people. Shepherding involves com-
petency of knowledge of the district, so as to provide pasture and water. Apply to
the provisions made for Israel when journeying through the wildeiness — manna, water,
meat. These represent our common everyday needs, which truly come by the Shep-
herd's providing, arranging, and controlling. But a flock has special needs, such as
arise from sickness, weather, time of lambs, etc. And so the striking figure is given
us of God, " He shall feed his flock like a Shepherd ; he shall gather the lambs in
his arm, and carry them in his bosom, and shall gently lead those that give suck."
Shepherding, then — flock-leading — involves that our " God doth provide." " My God
shall supply all your needs."

II. God ab Shepherd for the changes op his people. This point is specially
Eastern. Flocks necessarily kept moving, changing the pasture-grounds, because of
failing food and need of adjustment to different seasons. In mountain-lands the cattle
are taken to the higher grounds for the summer months, and brought down into the
valleys again before winter sets in. Some of the changes in the circumstances of God's
l)eopIe are made by his providence. There never was an age of greater restlessness
and changeableness than this in which we live. Some of the changes come through
our own wills and wilfulness; and these changes try the Shepherd. Within the Shep-
herd's will the sheep have their own will — freedom, in many ways, to follow their own
inclination. So we have a large liberty, a measure of free-will ; but it has always tu
be kept within the Shepherd's lines. Man's free-will must be kept well within God's
will. On this side special dealing is sometimes found necessary for the sheep and for
Gk>d's people. The Shepherd may require to be even rmigh in his restrainings and
restorin°s.

III. God as Shepherd for the dangers of ms people. Illustrate from Eastern
flocks : (£a^-dangers — such as crossing rivers, broken limbs, sudden floods down the
wadies, etc. ; m^r^^^angers — ^need of finding sheep-cotes, gathering brushwood to top
the hurriedly raised wall of the fold, watching against wild animals and robbers. But
the sheep are not aware of, or fail to estimate, their dangers. All the burden of watch-
ing depends on the shepherd. So the dangers of God's people come from (1) what they
are ; (2) where they are ; (3) the relation betweei what they are and where they are.

Their Shepherd knows precisely both them and their circumstances. The faithfulness
of our Shepherd only meets with fitting response in our submission and obedience.
If God is still leading bis people as a flock, two things may be impressed on us.
1. Able to lead is God's attribute. 2. Willing to be led is his people's attitude. — R. T.

Vers. 1 — 15. — Refuge in Ood^s unchangeahleness. Occasion of the psalm uncertain.
" The poet flees from the sorrowful present away into the memory of the years of olden
times, and consoles himself especially with the deliverance out of Egypt. But it
remains obscure what kind of affliction it is which drives him to find refuge from the
God now hidden in the God who was formerly manifest."

I. He perseveres in prater, THOuaH he has no sense of the presence or mebot
OF God. (Vers. 1—3.)

II. When he can no longer pbat, he falls back in thought upon the memories
OF THE PAST. (Vers. 4 — 6.)

III. If God has forsaken him, it is somethino inconsistent with his natubx
AND COVENANT. (Vcrs. 7 — 9.) His promises cannot fail ; his mercy, which is from ever-
lasting, cannot be blotted out from his nature. Ver. 10 is of doubtful interpretation.

IV. He will conquer his doubts by bemembebing God's wonders wrought fob
HIS people of old. (Vers. 10 — 15.) Because God must be unchangeable. God
redeemed his people from their afflictions in Egypt ; therefore he will redeem them
from their present affliction. — S.

Ver. 3. — Sich-bed promises. " I remembered God, and was troubled : I complained.



es. LXXTiii. 1 — 72,]



THE BOOK OF PSALMS.



123



»nd my spirit was overwhelmed." "Conversion during trouble difficult and unsatis-
factory." Most men forget God while they are free from trouble; some remember
him in trouble, and the remembrance brings an increase of trouble. Salvaticn,
conversion, on a sick-bed (death-bed) difficult and doubtful.

I. It la DIFFICULT. 1. The mind is sometimes oppressed with such fears as to
prevent the exercise of faith and love. Prospect of iminediate death, and the sudden
light cast upon the memory. 2. The enfeebled state of the mind and the pains of the
body hinder us from receiving any spiritual impressions. 3. The greatness of the
change requires all the powers ol health. Painter and astronomer in a storm.

II. The bealitt of it is doubtful. 1. The want of experience to prove its sound-
ness. Temptation, etc. 2. The suddenness of it, without striking a blow. 3. The
mind may have been deeply impressed without being changed. In prospect of eternity,
remembered sins would impress. Faith, love, hope, necessary to change the mind.

Address two classes. 1. Those who have not fulfilled their sick-bed promises,
2. Those who are trusting to a future sick-bed conversion. — S.



EXPOSITION.



PSALM LXXVIII.
Tms, the first of the "liistorioal psalms,"
tl.ough assigned by the rationalistic school
(De Wette, Ewald, Koster, Hitzig) to a
period subsequent to the Captivity, is gene-
rally allowed by more sober critics (Heng-
stenberg, Kay, WordBWorth, Canon Cook,
Professor Alexander) to belong to the
Davidical age — i.e. either to the reign of
David or to that of Solomon. Tlie abrupt
<!onclusion when David's time is reached
indicates that the writer cannot carry the
lessons of history any further. The way in
which David is spoken of (ver. 72), and the
(apparent) mention of the temple in ver. 69,
indicate that Solomon's reign was begun,
and make " a few years alter the accession
of Solomon " the most probable date of the
composition. There is thus no reason for
rejecting tlie authorship of Asaph, which is
asserted by the title.

The psalm is, as the title also declares,
one of "instruction." It seeks to keep the
people faithful to David and his house, and
to oljeok their tendency to place themselves
under tlie leadership of the tribe of Bphraim,
by recalling the whole course of God's deal-
ings with Israel in the past, from the time
of the sojourn in Egypt to the establishment
of David's kingdom. It also seeks to keep
them faithful to God, by showing how all
their past calamities and sufferings had
arisen out of their unfaithfulness (vers. 8,
10, 22, 32, 37, etc.).

The psalm divides itself merely into a



preface or introduction (vers. 1 — 8), and »

continuous narrative (vers. 9 — 72).

Vera. 1 — 8. — The introduction calls
special attention to the teaching that is
about to be put forth, which it declares to
be traditional (ver. 3), and, further, to be
the sort of instruction which God had
especially commanded to be given to his
people by their teachers (vers. 5, 6) for their
edification (vers. 7, 8).

Ver. 1. — Give ear, my people, to my law ;
rather, to my teaehtTig. Hat-torah — torah
with the artiule — is "the Law ; " but torah
alone is any traching or instruction. Incline
your ears to the words of my mouth. Dr.
Kay regards the words of ver. 1 as "God's
own words," (1) on account of the expres-
sion, "O my people;" and (2) on account
of "my Law." But "my people" is not
inappropriate in the mouth of a psalmist,
and occurs in Fss. lix. 11 and cxliv. 2. It
"indicates the love in which the effort of
the psalmist originated" (Hengstenberg).
And " law," as already observed, is not the
proper, or at any rate not the only, meaning
of torah.

Ver. 2. — I will open my mouth in a
parable. The facts of Israelitish history
are the " parable," the inner meaning of
which it is for the intelligent to grasp.
They are tpavavra ffuyerottTty. I will utter
dark sayings of old (comp. Prov. i. 6).
Khidoth (niTn) are properly "riddles"
(see Judg. liv. 12). Here the idea is that
God's dealings with his people had been
" riddles," whereto the psalmist would give
the clue (oomp. vers. 21, 22, 33, 56—59,
etc.).

Ver. 3. — Which we have heard and
known, and our fathers have told us; or



124



THE BOOK OP PSALMS.



[P8. Lxxvin. 1 — 72.



"recounted to us" (Kay). The facts of
their past history hibd Men handed down
nrally from father to son among the
Israelites, not simply learnt from their
sacred writings. So the facts of Ohris-
tianity hare reached us, not merely through
the New Testament, hut also by the teach-
ing of the Church.

Ver. 4.— We will not hide them from
their children. They shall stiU be handed
down in the same way. We of this gene-
ration will still continue the practice of
handing down, by word of mouth, to the
next generation, how God has dealt with
Isinel. Asaph's psalms were written, it
must be remembered, to be rerited in the
services of the sanctuary (comp 2 Chron.
xxlx. 30). Showing to the generation to
come the praises of the Lord; t.e. the
actions for which he deserves praise. And
his strength, and his wonderful works that
he hath done (comp. vers. 12 — 16, and vers.
23— 55>

Ver. 5. — ^For he established a testimony
in Jacob, and appointed a law in Israel
The " testimony " and the " law " are the
whole series of commands given by God
to his people, beginning with the direc-
tions concerning circumcision in Genesis
(xvii 10 — 14), and terminating with the
last precept in Deuteronomy (xxxii. 46).
They may include also the teachings
of God through history. These he com-
manded onr &ther6, that they shonld make
them known to their children (see Exod.
xii. 26, 27; xiii. 8, 14, 15; Deut. iv. 9; vi.
7 ; xi. 19 ; xxxii. 46, etc.).

Ver. 6. — That the generation to come
might know them. "The generation to
come " is the next generation, that imme-
diately following those to whom the
command was directly given. Even the
children which should be born. Their
actual sons and daughters. Who should
arise and declare them to their children.
The tirst generation were to hand the
knowledge on to the second, fhe second to
the third, and so on. This is the way in
which the bulk of human knowledge
uctually passes on. Not much is learnt
from books without a teacher (see Acts
viii. 31).

Ver. 7.— That they might set their hope
in Ood. Instruction in God's Law, and in
liis treatment of their forefathers, would
naturally tend to make the Israelites " set
their hope in God," who in the pa»t had
done so much for them. And not forget the
works of God. They could not well forget,
it they were perpetually ri.'minded of them.
But keep his commandments. If they bore
God's works — i.e. his many mercies — in
mind, they would be the more disposed to
nhedience.



Ver. 8. — And might not be as their
fathers, a stubborn and rebellions genera-
tion (comp. Deut. zxi 18, 20, for tlie
combination of the two words). The
"stubbornness" of Israel is noted in Deut.
ix. 27; Judg. ii. 19; and frequeutly by
Jeremiah (iii. 17; vii. 24; ix. 14: xi. 8,
etc.) ; their " rebelliousness " in Deut. ix. 7,
24; Isa. xxx. 1, 9 ; Ixv. 2 ; Jer. v. 23; Ezek
ii. 3—8; iii. 9, 26, 27; xii. 2, 3, etc
(compare also for the idea 2 Kings xvii.
14—17; 2 Chron. xxxvi. 14-16; Ezra ix.
6, 7; Neh. i. 6, 7; Dan, ix. 5—11; and
Acts vii. 51, "Ye stiff-necked and un-
circumcised in heart and ears, ye do alwayc
resist the Holy Ghost ; at your fathers did,
so do ye "). A generation that set not their
heart aright; literally, that prepared »o'
their heart — did not make it ready to receive
Divine inQuences (see 1 Sam. vii. 3; Job xi.
13; 2 Chron. xx. 33). And whose spirit
was not steadfast with Ood. It was not that
Israel was wholly without religious feeling,
but the feeling was fickle, unsteadfaet, never
to be depended on (comp. Exod. xxxii. 1 — 6 ;
Numb. xTi. 41, 42 ; Judg. ii. 17, etc.).

Vers. 9 — ^72. — The historical portion of
the psalm now follows. It commences with
some general remarks on the transgressions
of Ephraim, i.e. of Israel while under the
guidance of Ephraim — from Joshua to
Samuel (vers. 9 — 11). It then proceeds
to details, and sketches the Israelite history
from the deliverance out of Egypt to the
establishment of David's kingdom (vers.
12—72).

Ver. 9. — The children of Ephraim (comp.
ver. 67). Ephraim was the leading tribe,
&om the appointment of Joshua to succeed
Moses until the establishment of Saul as
king. Hence the tabernacle was set up
within tlie territory of Ephraim (Josh, xviii.
1). The importance of Ephraim appears
in Judg. iii. 27 ; vii. 24 ; viii. 1, 2 ; x. 9 ;
xii 1 — 6. Being armed, and carrying bows.
There is no " and " in the original. " Carry-
ing bows "is exegetioal of "being armed"
(comp. 2 Chron. xvii. 17). Turned back in
the day of battle. The allusion is not to
any one particular occasion, but to the ill
success of Israel under the leadersliip of
Ephraim during tlie whole period of the
Judgea (see Judg. ii. 14; iii. 8, 13, 31; iv.
2 ; vi. 1 ; x. 7, 12, etc.).

Ver 10. — They kept not the covenant of
God (comp. Deut. xxix. 25; xxxi. 20; 1
Kings xix. 10, 14, etc.). And refused to
walk in his law (see Judg. ii. 11 — IS; viii.
33; X. 10).

Ver. 11. — And forgat his works (see ver



P8. LXXVIII. 1—72.]



THE BOOK OF PSALMS.



125



42), and his wonders that he had showed
them (see vers. 12—15, 21—28, 43—53).

Ver. 12. — Marrellons things did he in. the
Bight of their fathers, in the land of Egypt,
in the field of Zoan. The miracles of
Egypt are, perhaps, the most striking series
in Jewish history. A more particular
account of Ihem is given below (vers. 44 —
53). They were wrought " in the field of
Zoan," i.e. in the rich flat tract east and
south of tlie city of Zoan, the Greek
Tanis, now San. (On this place, see Mr. Ee-
ginald Poole's ' Cities of Egypt,' pp. 64—88.)
This fact could not have been gathered
from Exodus, but must have come to the
writer from tlie tradition of which he
speaks in ver. 3.

Ver. 13. — He divided the sea, and cansed
them to pass through (see Exod. xiv. 21,
22). And he made the waters to stand as
an heap. The expression is taken from
the Song of Moses (Exod. xv. 8). It must
he understood poetically.

Ver. 14. — In the daytime also he led them
with a cloud. The "pillar of the cloud''
is, of course, intended (see Exod. xiii. 21, 22 ;
xiv. 19, 24; xl. 38; Numb. ix. 15; x. 34;
xiv. 14; Deut. i. 33) And all the night
with a light of fire. The " pillar of fire "
(Exod. xiii. 21; xl. 38; Numb. ix. 16,
etc.).

Vers. 15, 16. — He clave the rocks in the
wilderness; rather, he clave rooks. The
word lias no article. The reference is
probably to both Exod. xvii. 6 and Numb.
XX. 8 — 11. And gave them drink as out of
the great depths ; rather, " and gave them
drink ahundantly, as out of the deptlis " (so
Cheyne and the Revised Version). On the
ai'undaiice of tlie water, see Numb. xx. 11,
aud compare the next verse : He brought
streams also ont of the rock, aud caused
waters to rtin down like rivers.

Ver. 17. — Aud they sinned yet more
against him by provoking the Most High in
the wUdemess. The two provocations of a
demand for bread (Exod. xvi. 3) and a
deniaiid for flesh (Numb. xi. 4) are joined
together in the present passage, as the two
occasions of giving water are in vers. 15,
16. Only the second of these two provoca-
tions was subsequent to the (first) giving of
water; but the psalmist does not allow
himself to be bound by coiisideiatioiis of
strict chronological acuuiacy. He is a
poet, and not an historian ; though at
present he is treating of history.

Ver. 18.— And they tempted God in their
heart by asking moat for their lust ; rather,
by asking food (Kay, Cheyne, Alexamler).
The term used ("jSN) is wide enough to
include both bread (arh) and flesh (nsa')
" For their lust " (literally, "for their soul ")
means for the gratification of their carnal



appetites (oomp. Exod. xvi. 8; Numb.
xi. 5).

Ver. 19. — ^Yea, they spake against God;
they said, Can Ood furnish a table in the
wilderness 1 (see Numb. xi. 4). But the
psalmist either feels himself at liberty to
expand the account given in the Penta-
teuch, or has a further knowledge of the
real feelings of the people, which has come
to him by tradition (compare the comment
on ver. 12).

Ver. 20. — Behold, he smote the rock, that
the waters gushed out, and the streams
(literally, ffte torrent-coursei) overflowed;
can he give bread also? can he provide
flesh for his people 1 These were probably
the people's thoughts rather than their
words. An "evil heart of unbelief" under-
lay their clamours and their murmurings.
They doubted God's power to relieve their
wants, notwithstanding all the proofs that
they had had of his omnipoteuce.

Ver. 21. — Therefore the Lord heard this.
Though these might be unspoken thoughts,
yet God would " hear " them, i.e. be aware
of them ; for " he knoweth the very secrets
of the heart." And was wroth (oomp. vers.
59, 62; Deut. iii. 26). So a fire was
kindled against Jacob. Not a material fire,
as in Lev. x. 2; Numb. xi. 1 — 3; and xvi.
35 ; but the fire of God's displeasure. An*!
anger also came up agaiast Israel (comp.
vers. 30, 31 ; Numb. xi. 33).

Ver. 22. — Because they believed not in
God, and trusted not in his salvation. They
trusted neither in God's power nor in his
love ; they neither believed tliat he would
nor that he could save them.

Ver. 23. — Though he had commanded the
clouds from above; rather, and he com-
manded (Hengstenberg, Cheyne, Eevised
Version). The command was subsequent,
not previous, to the want of faith (see
Numb. xi. 4—31). And opened the doors
of heaven (comp. Gen. vii. 11, "Tlie
windows of heaven were opened"). The
expressions are, of course, poetical (see also
2 Kings vii. 2).

Ver. ^4. — And had rained down manna
upon them to eat, and had given thtm;
rather, and rained down manna to eat, atid
gave them (comp. Exod. xvi. 13, 14). Of
the corn of heaven (comp. Exod, xvi. 4; Ps.
cv. 40 ; John vi. 6, 7).

Ver. 25. — Man did eat angels' food;
literally, bread of the mighty onen, by which
the LXX. and most commentators under-
stand "angels" to be meant. "Angels'
food" may mean either the actual food
on which angels subsist, or food supplied
by the ministrarion of angels, and derived
from their dwelling-place. It cannot be
laid down dogmatically that angels require
no food. He sent them meat to the fiJI



126



THE BOOK OF PSALMS.



[P8. Lxxvin. 1 — 72.



(oomp. Ezod. XTi. S, where the Israelites
contraet with their wretched life in the
wildemesa their life in Egypt, where they
"did eat bread to the full").

Ver. 26. — He cansed an east wind to blow
in the heaven : and by his power he brought
in the south wind. Here, again, tradition
seems to speak. The narrative in the
Pentateuch has only, "There went forth
a wind from the Lord " (Numb, xi 31).

Ver. 27. — He rained flesh also upon them.
With the expression, "rained flesh," comp.
Exod. xvi. 4, " Behold, I will rain bread
from heaven;" and see also Gen. xix. 24
and Exod. ix. 23. As dnst; i.e. "as thick
as dust" (Prayer-book Version). The
quails lay " as it were two cubits high " for
the distance of a day's journey round about
each encampment (see Numb. xi. 31). And
feathered fowls like as the sand of the sea.
The commonest image of multiplicity (Gen.
xxii. 17; Deut. xxxiil 19; Josh. xi. 4;
Judg. vii. 12, etc.).

Yer. 28. — And he let it fall in the midst
of their oamp. The quails " covered the
camp " (Exod. xvi. 13). Sound about their
habitations. They extended also round it
on every side (Numb. xi. 31).

Ver. 29. — So they did eat, and were well
filled; i.e. sated (comp. Numb. xi. 19, 20).
For he gave them their own desire ; or, their
own lust — that they lusted after (Revised
Version).

Ver. 30. — They were not estranged from
their lust; i.e. their lust was not yet
satiated — they were still indulging it. The
meat was yet in their mouths, still under-
going mastication, when —

Ver. 31. — The wrath of God came upon
them, and slew the fattest of them (comp.
Numb. xi. 33, "While the flesh was yet
between their teeth, ere it was chewed, the
wrath of the Lord was kindled against the
people, and the Lord smote the people with
a very great plague "). By " the fattest of
them," we are to understand the strongest
and healthiest. And smote down the
chosen men of Israel; rather, the young
men, as in the margin, " the ripened
youths " (Cheyne). Here, again, tlie author
ndds touches which be has not obtained
from the Pentateuch.

Ver. 32. — For all this they sinned still.
Neither gratitude for favours received (vers.
13 — 17), nor alarm at punibhments inflicted
( vir. 31), had any effect on tlie stiff-necked
people ; despite of both, they " sinned still "
(comp. vers. 40, 41, 56 — 58). And believed
not for Ms wondrous works. Unbelief was
at the root of their contumacy. They could
not deny God's mighty works iu the past,
but they did not accept them as any evidence
of his power to do other mighty works in the
future (see ver. 20).



Ver. 33.— Therefore their days did be
oonsume in vanity, and their years in
trouble. Their faithlessness was punished
by their forty years of vain and purposeless
wandering in the wilderness, and by the
"troubles" that befell them there.

Ver. 34. — When he slew them, then they
sought him (comp. Exod. xxxiL 28, 35;
ixxiii. 4, 10; Numb. xi. 33; xvi. 48, 49,
etc.). The repentance is not always noticed
in the Mosaic narrative, being, as it was,
short-lived, if not even feigned (ver. 36).
But, no doubt, after each outpouring of the
Divine vengeance, there was at least some
show of repentance, as noted in Exod. xxxiii.
4. And they returned — i.e. turned back
from their evil courses— and inquired early
after Qod ; rather, earneitly (Cheyne, Canon
Cook).

Ver. 35. — And they remembered that God
was their Book; i.e. their strength and stay.
The expression is first used of God in Deut.
xxxii. 4. Ani the high God their Bedeemer
(oomp. Pss. xix. 14; Ixxiv. 2).

Ver. 36. — Nevertheless they did flatter
him with their mouth. The Bevised Version
is simpler and better. But they flattered him
with their mouth. AIL that they said or did
when alarmed by some judgment of God's
was a mere pretence — an attempt to
"flatter" and cozen God, and so win his
favour. And they lied unto him with their
tongues. They oflcred him a lip-service,
which was a " lie," a mere semblance of rea)
religion.

Ver. 37. — For their heart was not right
with him. It is the worship of the heart
alone which God values (see Deut. x. 12 ;
Prov. iii. 1 ; xxiii. 26, etc.). If the heart be
not "right with God," our worship is an
offence to him. Neither were they stead
fast in his covenant (comp. ver. 8).

Ver. 38. — But he, being full of compas-
sion, forgave their iniquity. (On God's com-
passion, see Exod. xxxiv. 6, 7 ; Numb. xiv.
18 : Pss. ciii. 8 ; cxlv. 8.) And destroyed
them not. The allubion is to such occasions
as are noted in Exod. xxxii. 10 — 14 ; Numb,
xiv. 12 — 20; xvt.21, 45— 50, when God was
on the point of destroying the whole people,
but relented at the intercession of Moses.
Tea, many a time turned he his anger
away, and did not stir up all his wrath
(comp. Judg. ii. 11—16; iii. 8,9 ; iv. 2, 16 ;
vi. 1 — 8, etc.).

Ver. 39. — For he remembered that they
were but flesh (comt). Geu. vi. 3). Flesli
is weak, erring, frail— "in us, that is, in
our flesh, dwelleth no good thing" (Bom.
vii. 17) — God, therefore, who had made them
" flesh," had compassion on their weakness.
A wind that passeth away, and oometh not
again (comp. Job vii. 7). Man is a mere
passing breath — as light, as fleeting, as tran-



PS. LXxviii. 1 — 72.]



THE BOOK OP PSALMS.



127



sitory — ^"a vapour that appearetb for a little
while, and then vanisheth away " (Jas. It.
H).

Yer. 40. — How oft did they provoke him
ia the wilderness, and ^eve him in the
desert I (com p. Deut. xxxi. 27 ; xxxii. IS-
IS; Acts vii. 30—43, etc.). That God is
" grieved " at man's sins appears, not only
from this passage, bat also from Gen. vi. 6 ;
Ps. xcY. 10 ; Eph. iv. 30 ; Heb. iii. 17.

Ver. 41. — Yea, they turned back and
tempted Qod ; rather, ayain and again they
tempted God (Hengstenberg, Kay, Oheyne) ;
see Exod. XTii. 2, 7 ; Deut. vi. 16. And
limited the Holy One of Israel (comp. Numb.
xxxiv. 7, 8). This may mean either " they
set limits to his power iu their own minds "
(see ver. 20), or " they actually limited his
power to help and suooour them by their
want of faith" (comp. Mark vi. 5, "He
could there do no mighty work," explained
in Matt. xiii. 58 to have been " because of
their unbelief "). The other meanings
suggested — " disgraced " and " provoked" —
are less probable.

Yer. 42. — They remembered not his hand;
t.«. "his doings" (oomp. ver. 11, they
"forgat his works"). Nor the day when
he delivered them from the enemy. " The
day" intended is probably that of the
drowniug of the Egyptians in the Bed Sea
(Exod. XV. 28). In this the Egyptian signs
culminated.

Yer. 43. — How he had wrought his signs
in Egypt. The point just touched in ver.
12 is now taken up and expanded, with the
object of showing to the Israelites of the
writer's day what cause they had for thank-
fulae^s to God iu the past and for trust in
him for the future. And his wonders in the
field of Zoan. " The field of Zoau " (socket
Zoan) is said to be mentioned in an Egyp-
tian inocription (Zeitsehri/t fiir Mgyptiiehe
aprache for the year 1872, p. 16).

Yer. 44. — And had turned their riven
into blood (see Exod. vii. 19, 20). " Their
rivers " are the many branches of the Nile,
some natural, some artitioial (Herod., ii. 17),
by which Lower Egypt is traversed. And
their floods; or, their streams ; i.e. the
smaller canals, which diffused the Nile
water over the entire land. That they
could not drink (see Exod. vii. 21).

Yer. 45. — He sent divers sorts of flies
among them (see Exod. viii. 24). A particu-
lar uoit of fly or beetle is meant, rather
than many ditferent sorts. Dr. Kay and
Profussor Cheyne sui^'gest "dog-flies" —
Canon Cook, the Blatta Orientalis. Which
devoured them; i.e. "preyed upon them,"
sucking out their life-blood. And frogs,
which destroyed them (see Exod. viii. 6).
The poet, nut being an historian, does not
give the plagues in their chronological



order, neither regards himself as bound to
mention all of them. He omits the third,
and reverses the order of tho second and
fourth.

Yer. 46. — He gave also their increase unto
the caterpillar, and their labour unto the
locust. Khdsil (h'Dii), here translated
" caterpillar," is probably either a particular
kind of locust, or the locust in one of its
stages. (On the plague of locusts in Egypt,
see Exod. x. 14, 15.)

Yer. 47.— He destroyed their vines with
hail (see Exod. ix. 23—25). Here, again,
there is an inversion of the order in which
the plagues came, since the plague of hail
preceded that of the locusts. There is also
an addition to the narrative of Exodus in
the mention of " vines " (see also Ps. ov. 33),
which may indicate a use of tradition. That
vines were cultivated in Egypt is now
generally acknowledged. And their syca-
more trees with frost; or, icith sleet -a
variant of the ■' hail " in the other hemistich.

Yer. 48. — He gave up their cattle also to
the hail (comp. Exod. ix. 19—21, 25). And
their flocks to hot thunderbolts (see Exod. ix.
24, 28, 29, 34). The " Are which ran along
the ground " (Exod. ix. 23) must have been
caused by electrified cloudsof high tension:
the highly charged drops of rain meeting
the inductively charged earth, and sparking
across when within striking distance. This
is believed to accompany every thunder-
storm, though generally invisible to the
eye. When exceptionally severe, it woulil
convey the idea of running fire, and would
of course be very destructive of life. It is no
wonder that most of the cattle which were
left " in the field " died (Exod. ix. 21, 25).

Yer. 49. — ^He cast upon them the fierceness
of his anger, wrath, and indignation, and
trouble. " The accumulation of terms signi-
fying Divine wrath is designed to set forth
the dreadful nature of this last judgment "
(Hengstenberg) — the death of the firstborn.
By sanding evil angals among them. Most
moiern critics regard this clause as in appo-
sition with the preceding one, and consider
the " wrath, indignation, and trouble" to be
themselves the "evil angels" spoken of.
Some, however, as Hengstenberg and Kay,
interpret the passage of spiritual beings —
not, however, of spirits of evil, who are
never said to be ministers of God's wratli,
but of good angels, who on this occasion
were " ministers of woe."

Yer. 50.— He made a way to his anger;
literally, he levelled a way for his anger ^ i.e.
made a smooth path for it (Cheyne). He
spared not their soul from death; rather,
held not bach their soul. But gave their
life over to the pestilence. This is, un-
doubtedly, the true meaning, and not " he



rl8



THE BOOK OF PSALMS.



[P8. LXXVIIl. 1 7i



gave theii beasts over to the murrain."
Tliough no "pestilence" is expressly men-
tioned in Exofl. xii. as having caused the
death of the firstborn, yet pestilence may
assureilly have been the means employed.

Ver. 51.— And smote all the firstborn in
Egypt (see Exod. xii. 29). The chief of
their strength in the tabernacles of Ham;
or, " the heqinning (literally, firstfriiite) of
their strength " (comp. Gen. xlix. 3). " The
tabernacles of Ham" is a periphrasis for
" Egypt " — the Egyptians, accoriing to the
autlior of Genesis (Gen. x. 6), being de-
scendants of Ham (comp. Fss. cv. 23, 27 ;
vi. 22). There are no sutiicient grounds for
connecting the name of Ham either with
the Egyptian Kem, Kerai — the native name
for the country— or with Khem, one of the
principal Egyptian gods. The literation
is, no doubt, close in the latter case ; but
etymologists lay it down that close approxi-
mations are especially deceptive.

Ver. 52. — But made his ovn people to go
forth like sheep (comp. Fss. Ixxvii. 20;
xcv. 7). And guided them in the wilderness
like a flock. The guidance began from
SiK'coth, and was effected by means of the
pillar of the cloud and the pillar of fire (see
Exod. xiii. 20—22).

Ver. 53. — And he led them on safely, bo
that they feared not (comp. Exod. xiv. 13 —
22). At Pi-hahiroth they "were sore
afraid" (Exod. xiv. 10), but after Moses
had exhorted them (ver. 13), they showed
no more signs of fear. But the sea over-
whelmed their enemies (Exod. xiv. 26 — 31 ;
XV. 1,4,10).

Ver. 54. — And he brought them to the
border of his sanctuary. I'he " sanctuary "
is here probably the Holy Land, as in Exod.
XV 17; or we may translate lE'ip ^J "his
holy territory." Even to this mountain.
Mount Ziou, on which the writer regards
himself as .standing while his words are
chanted in the temple service. Which his
right hand had purchased; or, had gotten,
"had won." God's right hand won the
whole land for his people.

Ver. 55. — He cast out the heathen also
before them (comp. Exod. xxxiv. 24 ; Deut.
vii. 1; 1 Kings xxi. 26; Ps. xliv. 2, etc.).
"They gat not the land in possession by
their own sword, neither did their own arm
save them; but God's right band, and his
arm, and the light of his countenance " (Ps.
xliv. 3). And divided them an inheiitance
by line. The measuriug-line, which was
employed in parcelling out territory, is in-
tended (comp. Jer. xxxi. 39; Amos vii. 17).
Joshua's division of the land (Josh. xv. —
xix.) among the tribes is specially pointed at.
And made the tribes of Israel to dwell in
their tents ; i.e. in the tents of the heathen



— the abodes of the Hivites, Hitlites, Amor-
ites, Ferizzites, Girgashites, and Jebusites.

Ver. 56. — Yet they tempted and provoked
the most high Ood (comp. above, ver. 17).
The Israelites continued to " tempt and
provoke God " after they had obtained pos-
session of the Holy Land, and divided it
among them (see Judg. ii. 11 — 19; iii. 12;
iv. I; vi. 1; X. 6 — 15; xiii. 1, etc.). And
kept not his testimonies ; or, his ordinancei
(Cheyne).

Ver. 57. — But turned back, and dealt nn-
faithfully like their fathers (cump. ver. 8,
and the comment ad loc.). They were
turned aside like a deceitful how (comp.
Hos. vii. 16). A " deceitful bow " is one
that fails in the hour of need, either break-
ing, or losing its strength, or sending its
arrows wide of the mark.

Ver. 58. — tot they provoked him to anger
with their high places. The " high place "
worship was always displeasing to God. It
was, no doubt, deeply tinged with idolatry.
And moved him to jealousy with their graven
images. In the time of the Judges, both
graven and molten images were employed
by the Israelites in a worship which they
nevertheless regarded as the worship of
Jehovah (see the history of Micah in Judg.
xviL and xviii., especially oh. zvii. 4, 13,
and oh. xvUi. 14, 17, 18, 31).

Ver. 59. — When Ood heard this, he was
wroth (comp. above, ver. 21). And greatly
abhorred Israel. Not Israel, as distinct from
Judah, but Israel in the broadest sense, the
entire nation, as in ver. 55.

Ver. 60. — So that he forsook the taber-
nacle of Shiloh. The " tabernacle of the
congregation " wa" first set up under Joshua
(Josh, xviii.) at Shiloh, a city of Ephraim,
and here the national sanctuary continued
throughout the period of the Judges (Judg.
xviii. 31; xxi. 19; 1 Sam. i. 3, 24; li. 14;
iii. 21 ; iv. 4, etc.). God was regarded as
having " forsaken " this sanctuary, when he
allowed the ark of the covenant, its chief
treasure, to be taken (1 Sam. iv. 11 — 22).
Subsequently, but at what exact time is un-
known, the tabernacle was removeil from
Shiloh t» Nob (1 Sam. xxi. 1), and later on
to Gibeon (1 Kings iii. 4). The tent; which
he pitched among men. (On the form and
materials of the tabernacle, see Exod. xxvi.
1 — 37, and compare Mr. Pergusson's article
on the subject in Smith's 'Dictionary of
the Bible,' vol. iii. pp. 1451—1455.)

Ver. 61. — And delivered his strength into
captivity, and his glory into the enemy's
hand. God's "streugth" and "glory" is
the ark of the covenant (compare the ex-
pression in 1 Sam. iv. 21, 22, " The glory is
departed from Israel"). (For the capture
am 1 " captivity " of the ark, seel Sam. iv.
17, and v.. vi.)



w. Lxxvrn, 1 — 72.]



THE BOOK OF PSALMS.



129



Ver. 62. — ^He gave his people over also
unto the swoid. Thirty thousand Israelites
were slain in the battle in whicli the ark
was captured (see 1 Sam. iv. 10). And was
wroth with his inheritance (oomp. Pss. xxviii.
9; xxxiii. 12; cvi. 5, 40).

Ver. 63. — The flre consumed their yonng
men. The reference is not to such passages
SB Lev. X. 2 ; Numb. xi. 1 ; xvi. 35, where
a literal fire seems to be spoken of, but
rather to the fire of war (Numb. xxi. 28 ;
Isa. xxvi. 11; Jer. xlviii. 45), or more
generally to the fire of the Divine anger
(Isa. X. 16 — 18 ; xlvii. 14, etc.). And their
maidens were not given to marriage;
literally, were not praised in long; i.e. in
the bridal song. The destruction of the
youns men, either in battle or in any other
way, caused there to be more marriageable
girls in Israel than there were husbands
for (oomp. Isa. iv. 1).

Ver. 64. — Their priests fell by the sword.
As Hophni and Phinehas at the taking of
tlie ark (1 Sam. iv. 11), and, no doubt,
many others on other occasions. And their
widows made no lamentation. The solemn
funeral dirge could not take place, since
the bodies remained on the battle-field.

Ver. 65. — Then the lord awaked as one out
of sleep (comp. Pss. vii. 6 ; xxxv. 23 ; Ixxiii.
20). God is said to " awake," when, after
a time of inaction, he suddenly exerts his
Almighty power, to the discomfiture of his
enemies. That God never really slept was
the profound conviction of the Israelites
generally (see 2 Kings xviii. 27 ; Ps. cxxi. 3,
4). And like a mighty man that shonteth by
reason of wine (comp. iZech. x. 7 ; Isa. xlii. 13),
Ver. 66. — And he smote his enemies in
the hinder parts ; rather, baekward, so that
they fled before him (comp. Pss. xl. 14;
Ixx 2, etc.). There is no allusion to
1 Sam. V. 6i-— 12. The reference is ratlier
to the many victories of Israel over the
Philistines, which began under Samuel
(1 Sam. viL 10), and continued under Saul
and David. He pat them to a perpetual
reproach. Covered them, that is, with
shame and disgrace. The shame culmi-
nated, perhaps, in David's victory over
Goliath (1 Sam. xvii. 40—51).

Ver. 67. — Moreover he refused the taber-
nacle of Joseph. The "tabernacle of
Joseph " is the sanctuary at Shiloh, which
was north of Bethel, and thus within the
limits of the tribe of Ephraim. When a
permanent site was to be assigned to the
tabernacle and the ark, God did not choose
for them the position of Shiloh, but that of
Jerusalem. And chose not the tribe of



Ephraim, Ephraim had enjoyed the pre-
emiuenoy from the time of the death of
Moses (see the comment on ver. 9). By
the course of events between Samuel's
death and the establishment of the king-
dom of David, the pre-eminency had been
transferred to Judah, according to the
design of the Almighty from the first (sto
Gen. xlix. 8—10).

Ver. 68 — But chose the tribe of Judah.
The choice was made when David was, by
God's command, anointed to bo king (1
Sam. xvi. 1 — 12). The Mo^t 2mz arhieh
he loved (oomp. Pd. Ixsx-fA. i, " The Lord
loveth the gates of ZicE mcae than all the
dwellings of Jacob"). God, no doubt,
inspired David with the thought of fixing
his residence in "the stronghold of Zion "
(2 Sam. V. 9), and of bringing up the ark o{
the covenant into it (2 Sara vi. 12 — 17).
The presence of the ark determined the
selection of Jerusalem for the site of the
temple.

Ver. 69. — And he built his sanctuary like
high palaces ; rather, like the heights. The
" heights of heaven " (Job xi. 8 ; xxii. 12)
are probably meant. Like the earth which
he hath established for ever; i.e. lofty as
heaven, stable and firmly fixed as earth.
The ultimate fate of the sanctuary is
mercifully bidden from the psalmist.

Ver. 70. — ^He ohose David also his servant
(see 1 Sam. xvi. 1, 12). And took him from
the sheepfolds (comp. 1 Sam. xvi. 11,19; 2
Sam. vil. 8).

Ver. 71. — From following the ewes great
with young he brought him (comp. Isa. xL
11). The Hebrew word translated "ewes
great with young" really means "ewes
that are giving suck." This is the portion
of the flock which needs the tenderest care.
To feed Jacob his people, and Israel his
inheritance (see 1 Chron. xi. 2). As Peter,
James, and John were called from their
occupation of fishers to be " fishers of men "
(Matt. iv. 19), BO David was called from
feeding sheep to feed God's people.

Ver. 72. — Bo he fed them according to
the integrity of his heart. On the whole,
David performed his task of governing
Israel faithfully. He had the direct testi-
mony of God to that effect (see 1 Kings ix.
4). And he guided them by the skilfulness
of his hands. David was not only an
upright and faithfal king, but also a
** skilful " or prudent one. He built up his
kingdom into an empire without suffering
any serions disasters. Israel reached its
aome of glory and prosperity under him,
decline setting in under Solomon.



■sAiiMs — n.



130 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. lxxvui. 1— 72.



HOMILETICS.

Ver. 29. — The hearf$ dtsire gratified. " He gave them their own desire." Three
days' march from Sinai, at the first baiting-place, where the tabernacle was first pitched
after quitting the plain at the foot uf that holy mountain, the wandering Arabs of the
desert might gaze on the saddest, most shameful waymarks of Israel's pilgrimage
towards the Land of Promise. A row of dreary mounds marked where thousands of
plague-stricken corpses had been hastily buried iy the terrified survivors. As the
silver trumpets again sounded, and the monming host, with thinned ranks, marched
away from the ghastly spot, they named it " Eibroth-hattaavah " — " Graves of lust."
Many centuries afterwards the Holy Spirit in this psalm wrote this epitaph.

L The histobt is told in Numb, xi., with that terseness and graphic power which
belong to Bible narratives. The grand oliaracteristic of those narratives, however, is
not their style (though it may well be called miraculous), but this — they let us see
behind the scenes; they withdraw the veil and show us God's guiding and controlling
hand — ^in miracle, when miracles are needed, not otherwise ; but no less in the ordinary
course of nature and human affairs. Thus we are taught that when we cannot see
behind the scenes, within the veil, the same hand is always there. This terrible
episode in Israel's history is one of the most signal illustrations of that profound
mystery — the thwarting of God's gracious designs by man's sin and unbelief. " Desisn "
— not that absolute purpose which must stand, let who will gainsay, but, as in nature
and providence, so in the spiritual realm, the lines along which God works; the
manifest fitness of things ; the blessed and useful results which would certainly come
about if men were trustfully obedient. In this sense, the design with which God led
Israel forth out of Egypt is clear as day (Isa. xliii. 21). To form a nation, giving them
the two main elements of civilization — order and ideas : wise, righteous order ; true,
noble, fruitful ideas. And this, that they might be — as they have been, spite of all
their sin and failure — the religious leaders and teachers of mankind. They were a
rough material — with little, perhaps, beyond the patriarchal government of their chiefs of
tribes and families, and the strict discipline to which their labour in Egypt inured them,
to raise them above the "mixed multitude" of fugitives who joined them in their
escape from bondage. Severe training was indispensable to mould them first into an
army of hardy warriors, then into a nation of industrious. God-fearing, law-abiding free
men. But had they bent to the hand that led them, listened to the voice that spoke
to them, it would have been a gracious discipline. Their first lesson was the foundation-
truth of religion — absolute dependence on the power and providence of the Almighty
Creator, " not far from every one of us " (vers. 14 — 16, 23, 24). Then, at the foot of
Mount Sinai, even the dullest, most unbelieving, ungodly heart was constrained to feel
the actual presence of the living God ; and national as well as personal life definitely
hung on these two principles — obedience to God's Law, and faith in God's promise.
Stained and maimed as is the history of God's ancient people, through their incurable,
insensate unbelief and rebellion, so faithfully confessed in their own Scriptures, it is
yet the source, remote but real, of our own religious life to-day; supplies our most
touching and stirring pictures and parables of the Christian's life-journey to the better
land. What wouid it have been could tliey have risen to the height of God's purpose,
and, like Caleb, " followed the Lord wholly "? Three conclusions seem so plain that I
do not well know how any candid mind can avoid them. 1. That such a history — so
imlike anything else — would never have been invented had it not been reaL 2. That
Hebrew writers would never have penned such a history of national apostasy, folly, and
sin (of which this psalm is an epitome and specimen), unless divinely inspired. 3. The
fact that what the Bible records as God's promises have been fulfilled after the lapse
of ages, spite of the unbelief and opposition of those to whom they were given, cannot
rationally be accounted for except by the fact that they are in truth God's word,
which cannot be broken (Numb, xxiii. 19).

XL Some special lessons fbom this paoe of Israel's histobt. 1. Ood is able
to give you your " orvn desire," Some hidden wish, perhaps, so bold, or selfish, or
wrong, or out of all ordinary range of likelihood, you dare not breathe in human ear.
Yet if God spoke to you as to Solomon (2 Chron. i. 7), that is what would leap to your



PS. Lxxvm. 1— 72.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 131

iips.^ If God does not grant it, it will not be because he cannot. No need of miracle.
" With God all things are possible." Beware, therefore, how you pray 1 2. Ood may
(and sometimes -does) grant our heart's desire, not approving, but in displeasure and
punishment : happy for us if it be only for chastisement ; not (as in the case of Israel) for
destruction (Ps, cvi. 15). Not arbitrarily. The body cannot be gorged, unbridled lust
•atiated, and at the same time the soul fed, the spiritual life nourished. Examples :
love of wealth ; amusement ; success ; ease. God and idols cannot both dwell in the
■ouI'b sanctukry. Sin brings its own penalty. 3. Therefore Qod may refuse and
withhold our hearts desire, not in anger, hut in mercy and wisdom. The father will
not give the stone, serpent, scorpion (Luke xi. 11, 12), even if the child asks for it.
4. The heart's desire is the test of character. What a man loves both shows what he is
and moulds him. " As he thinketh in his heart, so is he" (Heb. iv. 12). The sinful
desire, Christ teaches, is sin (Ps. xix. 12 ; 1 John i, 8, 9). 6. Hiere are desires which
we may he sure Qod will satisfy : the earnest of their own fulfilment (Ps. cxlv. 19 ;
Isa. xxvi. 8).

Ver. 34. — Mercy rememhered in wrath. " When he slew them," etc. Sin is not all

wilfulness ; it is also infirmity — our calamity as well as our crime. Perhaps, otherwise,
repentance and pardon would be impossible. God takes account of men's weakness as
well as of their guilt. He alone can hold the balance. Tliis psalm lays a heavy
Indictment of disobedience, lust, and unbelief against God's chosen people. Yet there
is no more touching, beautiful description of Divine compassion than vers. 38, 39. In
wrath he remembers mercy. The punishment of sin is not only consistent with God's
mercy, it is an exercise of mercy ; because both its effect and purpose are to bring men
to acknowledge their sin and return to God. If it fail, hardening instead of softening,
this is through impenitence and unbelief.

I. First lesson. Experience shows that tbouble leads men to seek God when
■OTHmo ELSE WILL. " When he slew them" (cf. Ps. cxix. 67, 71). 1. Troiihle
aaawrges conscience awake ; brings sin to mind (1 Kings xvii. 18). Joseph's brethren
<:arried their sin on their consciences unconfessed two and twenty years ; covered the
sore with opium plaster of silence, indifference, forgetfulness. But with Simeon bound
before their eyes, accused of being spies, families at home gnawed with hunger,
conscience woke (Gen. xlii. 21, 22). In many cases trouble actually springs from sin :
conscience dull, indeed, if not touched 1 Of course, this does not apply to all troubles.
Ko greater mistake than for Christians to torment themselves with the notion that every
trial is punishment for some special sin. Probably the hardest trials in life arise from
sins of others ; e.g. good wife has bad husband, good husband bad wife, godly parents
undutiful, vicious children ; honest man deceived by those he trusts. Even careless-
ness, ignorance of others, may overwhelm brightest life with calamity; «.y. whole family
■wept away through poisoned milk or ill-laid drains. Yet, even so, the sufferer may
hear a voice none else can hear. Very solemn, touchintr glimpse of inner working of
conscience (Job xiii. 23 — 26). 2. Trouble breaks up the illusions of life. Life's chariot-
wheels would drive heavily if we had no illusions. Hardly even young people would
have courage to face the future if we saw things just as they are. A token man was
meant for bliss — an heir of life, not death — that trouble commonly seems so strange,
joy so natural. Faith can lift above sorrow, but no experience (our own or others')
makes us at home with it. As misfortune tests a man's friends — perhaps few out of
many, and not those he counted on — so when trouble singles us out, sets us apart on
that beach of God's school, we learn the difference between dreams and realities, pleasure
and profit, show and substance. Well for you if then the anchor holds ; great eternal
realities emerge. Terrible if the surface breaks up, shadows dissolve, and no reality,
no refuge, rest, certainty, remain ! The lesson of Ps. xlvi. is a hard one ; but those who
have learned it count it worth while : " God is our Eefuge " (vers. 1 — 3). 3. In trouble
mten learn to pray. The sense of our weakness and dependence on God, and of his near-
ness and readiness to help, may slumber, like sense of sin ; and need heavy blow to waken
it. Even earnest Christian can hardly pray when all goes smoothly, as when the storm
bursts. Jonah, no doubt, a man of prayer ; but never prayed before as when weeds
wrapt about his head (Jonah ii.). Disciples (Mark iv. 38). Even heathen sailors
(Jonah i. 6). The anchor of prayer which, perhaps, has swung idly through half the



132 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. Lxxvm. 1—72,

voyage of life, is let down then. (See Mrs. Browning's ' Cry of the Children.') Let ub
correct our views of life. We are often amazed — faith is tiled — by the enormous mass
of human sorrow and suffering, and that life is so unstably balanced on brink of death.
How would it be if trouble banished, and life secure, healthful, joyous, for centuries —
men still being sinners f Would not God be more fearfully forgotten, sin regarded as
a trifle, shows of life taken for substance, voice of prayer fall silent? World would
become not better, but incalculably worse. In mercy, as well as judgment, man was
shut out of Eden (Gen. iii. 22) lest immortality became a curse.

IL As EXFERIENOi: SHOWS THIS BESULT OF TBOUBLE, God'S WoBD BETEALB TEW

DESIQN OF TBOUBLE. " Then they sought him." God meant they should. What we
have spoken of may be called the natural effect of trouble, if accepted as God's chasten-
ing — to awaken conscience, dispel illusions, lead us to pray; not necessary result — takei*
amiss, it may harden, "Natural result" is only another name for Divin* purpou
(except so far as sin has perverted our nature). But God's Word gives far higher, more
inward, view of life — a distinct Divine plan and purpose, at least for every life yielded
and trusted to God. No view of life so noble as this (Ps. cxxxviiL 8). Scripture
abounds with illustrations : Abraham, Joseph, David, Saul of Tarsus. Exceptions t
Yes, in this sense, that high place and conspicuous service are for the few. But, after
•11, chief aim in God's training is character, not service ; not what we are to do, but
to he. Tens of thousands in lowliest walks God is training, as surely as Joseph — not
for high place here, but glory, honour, immortality. Now, if one thing is plain, it i»
that character is perfected hy discipline. Gold needs the furnace (Htb. xii. 5). To go
above all mere human examples. Our Saviour's whole life was obedience — prayer —
fellowship with his Father. But see Heb. v. 7 — 9 ; ii. 10 ; John xvi. 32. Those
lessons, therefore, we have spoken of, do not belong merely to conversion, or early stages
of Christian experience. Christian who has long rejoiced in forgiveness may need
deepened sense of sin. If he has kept his head steady in prosperity, he may yet need
the bracing air and cool twilight of adversity. Holiest Christian may be brought
nearer to God — to the Saviour. It would be a narrow view to think all this exhausts
the design of trouble. In the case of our blessed Lord we should not have dared to
think of this end at all, if not so plainly taught. Main end — supreme purpose — " to
give his life a ransom." He " bare our sins." Even with us, his humble imperfect
disciples, suffering is largely " vicarious " — for the sake of others. Calls forth as nothing
else could, sympathy, love, mutual help. Softens and enriches the soil of life. St. Paul
(Col. i. 24),

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Vers. 1 — 72. — Whole psalm; Warnings against uribelief. I. Its pdbposb. 1. Tv
warn Ephraim; not to taunt and exult over him, but to warn. This psalm seems
to belong to the period of the disruption. Ephraim, with the other northern tribes,
had broken away from Judah and from the worship of God, and this psalm seems
designed, by its recital of their old sins and the consequences thereof, to warn them,
against like sin in the future (of. 2 Chron, xiii,), 2, To warn Judah. If they had
been greatly exalted of God, and by his presence amongst them were so still, let them
take warning by Ephraim's sin, that they fall not in like manner.

II. Its contents. 1. After an exordium (vers. 1 — 4), in which he asks attention,
and tells the manner of his speech, its source, and its intent; 2. He begins his history,.
telling of the covenant, and wherefore God bad appointed it, and what a failure on
Israel's part it had been (vers. 6 — 8). 3. Then he gives the details of his story. He
charges Ephraim as being most in fault ; how they broke the covenant, refused God's
Law, and forgot his works — the wonders of the Exodus and of the wilderness, the
pillar of fire, and the water out of the rock ; how they tempted God in spite of all,
and taunted him with their unbelief as to his power to provide them bread, 4. Then
the psalm recites how God was wroth with them, and gave them the flesh they lusted
after, but the plague along with it, letting them eat of the fruit of their own wayii'
(rer. 81), 6. Next he tells of their miserable repentance (vers, 34 — 36), and how oft,
nsTertheless, God forgave them (vers. 38, 39). 6. Then £rom vers, 42 — 58 there is »



w. Lxxvni. 1— 72.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 133

further ndtaj, of God's favour, and their ingratitude and disobedience. Then from
vera. 59 — 67 is told the final rejection of Uphraim, and from thence onward the
choosing of Judah and of David, and the justification of that choice (ver. 72). But —
in. What IB THE message op all this for us to-dat? 1. The fearf id strength
of the evil heart of ■unbelief. Religious privilege cannot restrain it ; miracles cannot
convince it ; nor mercies persuade it ; nor awful judgments permanently change it.
2. Inquire whence deliverance from such evil heart may come. (1) Do not encourage it
Bin makes unbelief our interesfr^we cannot afford to believe. (2) If we have given
such encouragement, by true repentance take it away. (3) Encourage faith. Let it be
your real interest to believe, as the real believer knows it is. He loves faith. (4) By
constant communion keep close to God. — S. C.

Ver. 2. — History a parable. In Matt. xiii. this verse is quoted as the ground of our
Lord's teaching by parables. He never used fiibles — stories which contain the
annatural and grotesque, — ^but parables — stories of what were, or might have been,
•ctual occurrences. Probably many of them were. And all history is a parable, and
«ught to be so used by us in teaching far more than it is ; for, like the parables,
history has for —

I. Its Atjthoe — God. The story of the nations often seems to be no better than a
wild hurly-burly, and their wars to be no more important than, as one has said, the
fightings of so many kites and crows. But such idea is the result of a merely alight
and superficial observation. Deeper study would show the

" Divinity that shapes our ends,
Bough-hew them how we will."

The philosophy of history is the discovery of God.

II. Its methods — the record of events that are ordinary, familiar, human. These
are the common groundwork of both parable and history.

III. Its usefulness — that it conveys instruction in a manner that arrests
thought, deepens impression, awakes interest, and is retained in the memory as other
forms of teaching are not. It is especially adapted for children.

IV. Its intent and pueposk — to teach men, and to incline them to follow the
ways of God. And such are —

v. Its BE8ULTS. For just as the result of the parables of our Lord on the minds
and hearts of men is simply incalculable in the vast extent of its controlling power, so
also is it with the teachings of history. They have created a just judgment and a fixed
habit of mind in men, upon which most of the modern life of the nations is based.
History — the record of experience — is, after all, the Bible of mankind, and doubtlesi
was intended so to be. We do no honour to the sacred Scriptures by our too common
habit of confining our studies of the ways of God in history to its records alone. All
history teaches of God, and not that of the Bible only. Happy will it be for both
teachers and taught when they, as did the writer of this psalm, regard all national
history as a parable of God, — S, 0,

Ver. 4. — Bdigious education. The first eight verses of this psalm have much to say
npon this great question. Upon —

L Its authority. " He commanded our fathers " (ver. 5 ; cf. Deut. vi.). That
which reason, conscience, and experience would alike teach, the authority of God
confirms by direct command. And it is at ojir peril that we neglect this. The
sanctions that accompany the command have not to wait for the future^ life for their
fulfilment ; they are visible everywhere in the present, as they have been in all the past.

II. Its importance. This entire psalm is the sad record of the results of neglecting
this command (see vers. 8, 40),

in. Its method. 1. By entrusting this duty mainly to the parents (see ver, 5) —
those who might naturally be expected to feel the chief interest in, and responsibility
tat their children. 2. Adopting the most interesting mode of instruction — the
parabolic (ver. 2) ; the historic (ver. 4). 3, Charging the children with the respon-
•ibility of transmission (vers. 5, 6).

IV, Its high and holt purpose. (Vers. 7, 8.) — S. C.



134 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. Lxxvin. 1— Ti

Ver. 9. — Becreant Ephraim. We do not know what battle this was. Some point
to 1 ChroD. Tii. 21 ; others to Josh. xiii. 1, 13 and xviii. 3 ; otherB to 1 Sam. iv. But wa
do not certainly know. Kphraim's character was such as is here described (see ver. 57V
Also Hosea, passim ; he terms them " a cake not turned ; " "a silly dove." Ha
says, they " compass me about with lies." As to their armour, see 2 Chron. zvii. 17.
Also see David's teaching " the children of Judah the use of the bow." Their
opportunities for service were very great. As a tribe they were rich ; the sanctuary
of Israel was at Shilob, in their midst ; the metropolis of the land also ; theirs, too, tha
largest population, the most famous names — Joseph, Joshua, Gideon. They were an
especially military tribe. As to their fate, they utterly perished (see Bom. xi. 1 — 8)i
Their history is very instructive ; for there is a battle to be waged to-day. As we watch
we see many come to it " armed," and capable of rendering the good service we look
for from them. But lo I many of them turn back, and render no help at all, to their
own shame and to the hurt of many more. Note —

I. The battle. " All the world's a stage," said our great poet. Had he said, " All
the world's a battle-field," he would have been yet more true to fact. The battle ia
between God and Satan, as to who shall reign over us — God or his adversary. And
God has equipped many soldiers for the fight. See —

n. The abuoub he has given them — given to many of us. Christian education ;
holy example; means of grace; power and capacity for service, imparted by tha
teaching of bis Word; the sanctions and urgings of conscience, the drawings of his
Spirit, and much more. Such things constitute the armour which would make us
good soldiers if we would avail ourselves of them. But there is —

III. The tubnimg back on the part of many, even as Ephraim turned back.
Ridicule has, perhaps, to be met; or loss to be borne; or self to be denied; or ease to
be foregone ; the cross in one or other of its forms has to be taken up ; and many go
away — go back, sorrowful, perhaps, but, nevertheless, they turn back. Oh, what
shame to them ! a people nobly born, well-armed, and pledged to the service, and yet,
etc. 1 What dishonour to Christ 1 what discouragement to the faithful Church! what
loss to God's kingdom 1 what triumph for the foe I what ruin for themselves 1 — S. G.

Ver. 16.— Tfte rock. (Cf. 1 Cor. i. 4; Numb, xx.) What rock was this?
Travellers have described such rock ; but we do not know that it was this one. But
we do know that it existed ; that the waters which flowed from it followed Israel;
which is what Paul means by saying that the " rook followed them ; " and that this
rock was a type of Christ — ^not Christ himself, but a type of him. Note —

I. The beseublanoe between Chbist and the bock. 1. In nature. A rock ii lika
Christ; it is stable, solid, fit for a foundation. A rock may be a great defence. " Be
thou my strong Rock, a House of defence to cover me." A refreshing shade. " The
shadow of a great rock," etc. 2. In the fact that the rock was smitten ere the waters
Bowed out. 3. Moses, the Law's representative, was the smiter. And to obey the Law,
Christ was smitten.

II. The 8TBBAM8 WHICH FLOWED FBOM IT. Thcse tell of what from Christ flow t»
us — pardoning mercy, sanctifying grace, spiritual consolation, eternal life. And aa
those streams, so these are free, satisfying, copious, constant.

III. The iNQuiEiES SUGGESTED. Have WO drunk of them ? If not, do so. Are wa
drinking of them ? Invite others. — S. C.

Ver. 21. — National Judgments. This psalm is emphatically a judgment psalm. It
teaches that —

I. Nations abe jcdged as well as indivibuals. History is almost entirely
occupied with the judgments of God upon nations. Hence it is that we say, "Happy
is that nation which has no history I " for if it has, we know the nature of the record
for the most part.

II. Theib judoment 18 JUST. Study the causes of the decline of empires, nations,
and peoples, and it will generally be found that, as with the Canaanitish nations, their
rice and wickedness had become so rampant and foul that, for the sake of humanity
at large, it was necessary that the besom of God's destruction should sweep them
away. Gibbon's great work on the ' Decline and Fall of the Empire «f Rome ' is really



re. lixxviii. 1— 72.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 135

— though Gibbon was far enough from intending it to be so — a theodici, • vindication
of God and of his righteousness.

m. But such judgments do not cohb until all other means have been first
TRIED. It was so witli Israel. They had witnessed the plagues upon Egypt. They
had experienced the unstinted mercy and long-suffering of God. They had seen the
glorious miracles which God wrought on their behalf. They had been taught his holy
Law. So that the question of Isa. v. 4 was altogether just. And so in the history of
all nations. If God's vengeance cometh surely, it cometh very slowly; so that,
perchance, it may not need to come at all.

IV. Thbt are executed in the present life. There is no future judgment for
nations. When Christ came, as be did at the destruction of Jerusalem in a.d. 70, the
judgment he predicted should then take place was fulfilled.

V. In them the innocent suffer with the guilty. This is inevitable. The
sins of the fathers are visited upon the children. Hence —

VI. They predict the future final judgment. God shall then judge every man
according to his works, as is not possible in the judgments of the nations now.

VII. Are effectual but fob a time. They do not put an end to sin, but only
stay it for a season (ver. 34).

Vm. Abb according to righteousness. The leaders in sin shall suffer deepest
condemnation. See the doom of Ephraim, Israel's ringleader in iniquity (vers. 9, 57, 67).

IX. The sins which provoke them do not hinder the purposes of God. (Vtr.
70.) David was raised up to carry on what should have been Ephraim's work.

X. True patriotism is to help forward, by all means in oub power, that
bighteousness which alone exaltbth a nation. — S. C.

Ver. 32. — The tenacity of sin. This psalm might have for title, "The Devil's
Grip; " "The Heart-bold of Sin ;" "The Gates of Hell prevailing," or any other such
■ad surname. For throughout its weary length it tells of scarce anything else. And
would that it were only an old-world story ! — a tale of ancient Israel, but of nobody
else. But concerning such persistence in sin, note —

I. It is seen to-dat as much as ever. In the history of nations ; of Churches ;
of families ; of individuals. Of how many may it be said as it was of Amon, " But
Amon sinned more and more " ! What Christian pastor has not had under his own
observation again and again those whose story is told here ?

II. There are no gbaoious ebsistances which it dobs not overcome. " For all
this," was said of old, and can be now. This " all " includes now, as of old : Divine
revelation (ver. 5); early education (ver. 3); warning from ill example of others
near to them (ver. 8); unspeakable mercies and deliverances (vers. 11, 12); per-
petual providential love ; forbearance upon forbearance (ver. 38) ; terrible judgments
(ver. 31) ; opportunities of return (vers. 34, 35). All this and more of like gracious
nature they disregarded, even as men do still.

III. Its secret is ever the evil heart of unbelief. Not the unbelief which is
the result of the perverted brain, but that which is generated by the evil heart, the
Bin-loving soul.

IV. Its word of warning is very plain. 1. " Fools make a mock at sin." What
else can they be who tamper and trifle with such a deadly thing ! It may be in you
seemingly weak as a cobweb film ; let alone, it will become strong as the cable which
holds fast, let the strain on it be what it may. 2. Meet this tenacity of sin by the
tenacity of grace. Cling to Christ in strenuous prayer; hold on so to him. 3. Be
content with nothing less than the gift of the clean heart; be sanctifled as well as
justified. " The blood of Christ cleanseth from all sin." 4. Remember how the strong
one was and ever will be cast out by the Stronger (Luke xi. 21, 22), even Christ,
who is " mighty to save," if we will give ourselves up to him. — S. C.

Ver. 34. — The determined sinner's regular round. There are regions to which so
many tourists go, and the notable places in which they usually visit in an almost
fixed order, that the way they take has come to be known as and called " the regular
round." This psalm and this verse seem to set forth another regular round which sin-
hardened souls do perpetually take. We will —



136 THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [pb. Lxxvin. 1— T2.

I. Note its stages. 1. They sturt with sin, and on and on they go, with occasional
misgivings, which, however, soon grow less along the broad, attractive, much-
frequented road, 2. But next they come to where the punishment of Qod has to be
met and endured. This is a dreary place, and they cry out in their pain. But they
cannot avoid this stage. However slowly thoy may seem to travel, they reach it one
day, and a dark day that is. They had no business along the road at all, and God
will have them know that ; and hence this punishment stage is placed right across it,
that men may either be deterred from going by the road at all, or else turn speedily
back. But if they will still go on in it, they are certain to come to this terrible place.
3. They are in a great hurry to get away, and so they alter their course. They seem
to repent of their previous journey altogether. "When he slew them, then they
sought him." "The devil was sick, the devil a monk would be." How often
Pharaoh, when he had got to this miserable stage, made as if he would amend his way !
And it very often seems as if such as he really had done so. The sham repentance is,
to our poor bleared eyes, so much like the real, that we are quite deceived, and we
help the sinner to deceive himself. 4. Then next is the stage of the hardened heart.
The will unsubdued, the mind determined on its own way. Hidden away, deep
down underneath the decorous disguise of a temporarily altered conduct, there is the
stone-like heart, the will resolute in its own way. It is not going to change, though
it may be prudent to seem for a time as if it were. " The heart is deceitful above all
things, and desperately wicked." 5. Then there is reached, not long alter, the fini
stage whence the toretched round began. The soul is back at its sin again.

II. The point where the soul mat bueae awat. It is at the repentance stage.
Some one has said that what we call the ten plagues might rather be called Pharaoh's
ten opportunities of turning from his sin to God. And undoubtedly they were such.
The pang of repentance which he felt might have led right away from God's judgments.

" There is a tide in the affairs of men.
Which, taken at the flood, leads on to fortune."

And in the affairs of the soul that tide at flood is the hour when God shows as the
wretchedness of our sin, and bids us turn to him.

III. How TO DO this. 1. It is evidently possible. The road branches where you are :
one way leads to God — the way along which God's voice is surely calling you ; the
other leads to the hardened heart, — ^it is the way along which you have come. 2. Now
call upon God for help to answer his call. 3. Break away in actual, conduct. Books,
companions, amusements, all that is to you occasion of and temptation to sin ; break
away resolutely and at once from them ; have done with them altogether. 4. All the
while keep calling upon Qod. He has promised to save you. Put in the cheque of
his promise, and claim payment of it. Trust him, expect him to make good his word
— and he will. Orede experto. — S. C.

Ver. 36. — TTie worship that Qod hates. I. It is all too common. This psalm is
all taken up with the record of such worship. And it did not begin with the people
told of here. What was Cain's worship but so much flattery and lying unto God ?
And all through the prophetic history, the like worship is perpetually denounced. The
one class of people whose presence and contact even the wonted gentleness of our Lord
could not abide were such as these — hypocrites. We know with what scathing words
he was wont to address them. And the apostles of our Lord, after his ascension, were
continually meeting with it and condemning it. And it is rife and rampant still.
How terrible the contrast, so widely seen, between what men profess and what they
really are and do ! But —

II. How 18 IT TO BH accounted FOB ? 1. Sometimes the visible anger of Qod
will lead to it. It is the too common product of a religion begotten of terror and abject
fear (see ver. 34 ; and cf. Isa. xxv. 9). Such times will make men profess anything
that they think will get them relief. 2. Sometimes it is from the contagion of common
custom. Everybody makes a profession of religion ; in many circles it is held to be
bad form not to do something of the kind. But it makes no sort of difference to the
real character or the ordinary conduct. It leaves the heart untouched, and too often
worse than that, 3. There is a secret, undefined trust that there is some good in it.



PB. Lxxvm, 1— 72.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 137

after aU. People do not flatter their fellow-men, nor tell lies to them when they are
perfectly sure that no advantage will result ; still less if they are sure that harm will
follow. But they think they will be advantaged by it, perhaps greatly. And so in
regard to God. Men think that their attention to religious observances, and the loud
profession they make, must count for something to their advantage when the great
reckoning-day comes. And hence the flattering and lying told of here go on. 4. And
tuch people encourage one another. Beligious teachers, judging only by what they
gee — and they cani.ot do much more — assume that all is right, and hope for the best,
and so insensibly soothe those who really need to be aroused from their condition as
with the trump of doom. Even under a generally faithful ministry a man who will
not give up his sin can manage to suck a poisonous satisfaction from these flatteries
and lies, whereby he has probably first of all deceived himself, and hopes to deceive
God, as he has his ministers and his Church generally. But —

III. What comes op it ? 1. If there be amendment of conduct, it is very short-
lived (vers. 34 — 40). 2. A heart made harder than before. 3. Repeated Divine
chastisements, so that their life is a wretched one. 4. Final and utter rejection
(vers. 59, 60).

IV. What dobs all this bay to us? 1. Examine yourselves. Do you give
time to regular secret prayer? Are you really consecrated to God? If so, then:
2. Trust Christ to keep you hour by hour and day by day. — S. C.

Ver. 40. — Provoking God. Israel did this, and notwithstanding every inducement
to do otherwise. We note —

I. MANr PEOPLE DO THE LIKE STILL. God Bpeaks plainly, loudly, persistently, by
his Spirit, his providence, his Word, his judgments, and yet, etc.

II. And they will continue to do so unless (1) they be willing to give up
their sin ; and (2) set themselves to seek the Lord.

III. Have we done so? Then: 1. Truly repent 2. Trust Christ. 3. Be filled
with the Spirit.— S. C.

Ver. 40.— -Hbio oft did they provokel I. Answer the question. This long psalm
supplies a sample of Israel's sin. Their provokings were so frequent that the whole
history of the people, stretching over many generations and long centuries, seemed to
be all of a piece, and is called " the day of provocation."

II. Inquibe how they provoked God ? By the perpetual repetition of the wretched
round of sin, and then repentance. If they had done nothing else but sin, they would
quickly have perished ; if they had sinned once, and done with it, their history would
have been a far happier one ; but it was this perpetual backsliding which provoked God.

III. Why was it ? There was : 1. The force of example ; all the nations round,
the greatest and most glorious of them included, worshipped idols. 2. Then the
indulgence which idolatry gave to sin ; it was such an easy religion. 3. The difficulty
of realizing the unseen, of living by faith. 4. The cravings of a corrupt nature.

IV. What made their conduct so wicked ? 1. It was siu:h madness. Nothing
but evil had ever come of their sin, and yet they went alter it again. 2. Such ingrati-
tude to God. What had he not done for them ? 3. The terrible harm they did to their
children and to the whole world.

V. What came of it? What always must come^repeated and terrible chastise-
ment, and rejection at the last, — S. C.

Ver. 41. — Limiting God. This psalm contains many instances of this. It is a
painful thing to see even a bird or beast, made for freedom and longing after it, caged
or chained or otherwise kept in captivity. Yet more is it distressing to see a man of
noble aspiration, of lolty capacity, of patriotic spirit, and intent on doing good, get
•* cribbed, cabined, and confined " by petty prejudices, mean jealousies, base motives, and
vile conduct, on the part of those around him; and often such a sight has been seen.
And the cry of a soul awfully limited and bound down is heard in Rom. vii. 24, "
wretched man that I am I who shall deliver me," etc. ? What barrier in the way of
blessing do such limitings set up? But what must it be to limit God? How much
more sad and deplorable that must be 1 Now —



138 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. lxxviii. 1— 72.

I. Man cak limit God. 1. But this may be questioned. It should seem impossible
when we thiak of the greatness and power of God, of his umversal sway, of his infinite
wisdom, of the hurt and harm that must come of such conduct. All such considera-
tions seem to render impossible the limiting of God. 2. But undoubtedly man can do
this. For else he would be a mere machine, not a man ; he would have no more
volition than a tree or a bird. If he is to be able to say " Yes " to God, he must be able
also to say " No." And he can and does. Scripture asserts it — see this whole psalm.
God stood ready to bless, but Israel would have none of his counsel, and set at nought
all his reproof. Reason asserts it, for it steadily afSrms that we are free, and can will
and choose as we please. Experience asserts it. Concerning nations. Churches, indi-
viduals, has not God again and again said, as Jesus did when he wept over Jerusalem,
" How often would I have gathered thee . . . but ye would not 1 " ? We read how in
some places Christ could do no mighty works there because of their unbelief.

II. And men do this still. 1. Very often in their prayers and desires. They
insist too much upon definite blessings being given. They ask some tempi iral blessing
— rain, or health, or the sparing of life, or it may be a spiritual blessing ; but they
limit God to definite time, manner, and means. And such prayers come to nothmg,
for they have asked amiss. And then men make a mock at prayer. We need to
remember our Lord's words in Gethsemane, " Father, not my will, but," etc. 2. Tet
more do we limit Ood in our thoughts. (See vers. 19, 20.) And all anxious care and
foreboding is really a limiting of God. Hence Christ so forbade it (see Matt. vi.).
How Jacub limited God when he cried, " All tnese things are against me " 1 We shall
get help against this by heeding Paul's counsel (Phil, It.), " Be carelul for nothing,
but," etc. But if foreboding care is guilty of this, yet more is despair, whether for
ourselves or for others. 3. But most of all, and worst, our sins Umit Ood. Th«
Church at Laodicea kept the Lord outside her door. And how often we stand in our
children's way, when God would bless them, by our worldliness and unbelief 1 We
will not let God bless us or them. God would, but we would not. May the Lord
pardon us every one, and save us from this sin I — S. 0.

Ver. 57. — " A deceitful bow." Note—

L What God bequibes in his bebvants. 1. That they should be as a bow. That
is a weapon, and for him. Christians are to be aggressive, a power in the hands of
God agaiust the world, the flesh, and the devil. 2. ITiat they should be powerful. In
the case of the bow, that depended on the elasticity uf the wood, or the temper of the
steel, of which the bow was made, also on the skill shown in its construction. Fault
in either so much lessened the value of the bow. And God wuuld have us a power in
his hands; he can use weak things, but he would have us strong for bimsulf. 3. True.
The bow made of the right material and in right manner would send the arrow
straight to the mark and up to the mark, so that it would not tall short or swerve
aside. But how many of us, in serving God, are guilty of this I We fall short, are not
thorough, or are by one cause or another turned aside. 4. And that their strength
should abide. It was said of Joseph, " His bow abode in strength." As a good liow
would retain its tenacity and elasticity, so that it could be permanently relied upon.
Here is the real test <jf our fidelity ; it is not so much our having strength — at the
beginning we all have this more or less — ^but it is the keeping it, the standing the
year-in-and-year-out strain. This is what God desires in us.

II. What by his gbace thet veby often abe. 1. The bow was a very effective
weapon. Hence no army was sent forth without a large body of trained archers. Its
silent, swift, distant, deadly effect made it a weapon not only very valued, but indis-
penbable. And God has such servants. Was not Peter one such, and Paul, and many
other of less distinguished name — ^men who so wrought for God as to render service
of most effectual kind ? And there are such still, men and women too, so endued with
power by God that their presence and ministry are the signal at once for great victories
to be won for God. 2. And it was therefore reckoned as very formidable, a force not
to be trifled with by any foe. And because faithful ministers of Goil are such weapons
for God, therefore it is that Satan strives with all his power to disarm them or to
render their ministry of none effect. He knew full weU what destruction the Lord
! "R<is would bring upon his dominion, and therefore, immediately after his baptism, he



PS. oAA^iii. 1—72.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 18S

w^ough^ during those dread forty days, by repeated and terrible temptation, to mak«
his mission ineffectual and to baffle its design. Bat our Lord, as we all know, gained
■ignal victory, as we also through him may gain like victory.

III. How, TBEBEFORE, GrOD BE0ABD3 THEM. 1. The bow was a trusted weapon.
"I will not trust in my bow," said the psalmist (xUt. 6), implying how usual was the
trust men had in it. The sword and the bow are constantly coupled together in
Scripture as the two chief weapons of the soldier on which be was to rely. And 8«
Qod trusts his servants, commits the treasures of his grace to them, entrusts thern to
guard and keep the souls Christ died to redeem. 2. And hence a favourite weapon.
David commanded that the children of Judah should be taught the use of the bow,
because it was his beloved Jonathan's favourite weapon. And it is not too much to
say that the chosen means whereby God accomplishes his victories in hb spiritual
kingdom is through liis faithful servants. Not to angels, not to the might, learning,
or wisdom of this world, has God given this great charge. But to those who may be.
and often are, weak and despised in the eyes of the world, but God makes them
mighty.

ly. But, nevbbthbless, there are those who abb deceitful. In the bow
itself, it is owing to fault iu material ur structure. In those whom the bow represents,
it is because they are spiritually weak and untrue. The Prophet Hosea (viii.) uses
this same figure, and shows how applicable it was to the people of his day. And there
are such now.

y . The results of such DEOEn? abe all bad. God is dishonoured ; the faithful
Church is reviled; the enemy triumphs; the bow itself is cast away.

VL How THIS MAY BE PBEVENTED. By abiding in Christ, who is our Life, our
Strength, our All.— 8. C.

Ver. 59. — Ood turned against his people. L This an awful possibilitt. We
have an instance here told of. And the history ot nations. Churches, individuals,
furnish many more.

II. But geeatlt disbelieved. Tlie devil will do his bad best to make men not
believe it. Therefore uses : 1. False theology, wresting the Scriptures. There were
people in St. John's day (see 1 John i.) who said they had no sin. Some trusted in
their Abrahamic descent ; others did not believe in sin at all, they counted it to be but
infirmity ; others talked of the imputed righteousness of Christ, and affirmed that
whatever sin they might commit, they, being in Christ, were guiltless ; others, as to-day,
believed that God was too merciful to condemn any one. 2. The deceitfulness of sin.
3. The ill example of others.

in. Much needino, thebbfobb, to be insisted on. Slight views of sin lie at
the root of well-nigh all departures from God, but such views are impossible when it
is seen to what they lead.

IV B0T NBVBE TO BE FEABED BY THOSE WHO WILL LIVE IN THE LOVE OT QoD.
— S.C.

Vers. 67 72. — Ood's chosen ones. These verses show that they whom God choosea



L Often not found amongst the obbat. (Ver. 67.) Ephraim was the lordly
tribe, the aristocracy of Israel. They had a long roll-call of illustrious names. Bat
God " refused the tabernacle of Joseph " (of. 1 Cor. i.).

11. But, nbvbbtheless, they may be. (Ver. 68.) For the tribe of Judah was
but little less exalted than Ephraim. God puts no ban upon any rank, or people, or
tribe. How stern are the utterances of our Lord about the richl And yet there have
been many saints of God who have been rich.

in. Abb FOUND GENBBALLT AMONGST THE LOWLY. (Vers. 70, 71.) " Blosscd are
ye poor," said our Lord. From amongst them the pioneers of the kingdom of God
have nearly all come — "unlearned and ignorant men," poor, but rich in faith.

IV. And whebb no appabent fitness exists lor the work that has to be done.
David, a rustic shepherd lad, and yet, etc. (ver. 71). „,^ ^, ,

V. But God's choice is always justified. (Ver. 72.) Of what great servant of
God'could it have been foretold that he would be what he came to be?



140 THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [ps. lxxviu. 1— 72,

VI, OuB Lord Jesus Christ la thk sdpkemb Example of this. Despised of
men. My soul, what is he to thee ? — S. C.

Ver. 1. — The responsibility of hearers. " Incline your ears." This psalm is regarded
as the first and greatest of the historical psalms. It is " an inspired comment on the
sacreii history, with an avowed didactic purpose of warning, by a recital of God's
repeated mercies, and of Israel's repeated sins. The historical psalms haye a double
value. They illustrate and confirm the historic record, always giving it vividness, and
occasionally adding tresh touches of detail. But their real importance lies in the light
which they throw on the religious conception of that history, which, indeed, alone makes
it a continual lesson on the eternal will of God, and the unchanging characteriiitics of
humanity." This psalm may be compared to the modem sermon or religious address,
which differs from teaching in being an appeal to feeling, emotion, and principle, as
well as to intellect. The Hebrew people were, and still are, easily interested in public
teachers who can skilfully review the national history. But the point to which attention
is now directed is, that there is a double responsibility when the teacher and the taught
come together — an effort demanded of the hearer as well as of the teacher. He must
"incline his ear." Dr. Clay Trumbull points out, in relation to Sunday school work,
that " intelligent, purposefiil teaching; includes the idea of two persons, both of them
active. ' Teaching,' as causing another to know, includes the mutual effort of two
persons to the same end. The teacher must endeavour to cause the pupil to learn a
particular fact or truth which he wants him to know ; the learner must endeavour to
learn that particular fact or truth. Until the two are at this common work, the process
of teaching has not begun : until the learner has learned, the teacher has not taught."
The counsel to " incline our ears," or " our heart," is repeated again and again in
Scripture (see Josh. xxiv. 23 ; 1 Kings viii. 58 ; Pss. cxix. 36, 112 ; oxli. 4 ; Prov.. v.
13 ; Jer. vii, 24 ; xxv. 4, etc.). It seems designed to impress on us that we are
responsible for making the effort to hear profitably. Men make effort to listen to
music ; they make effort to catch every word of the orator ; they can and they ought
to make effort to heed the religious teacher. The responsibility of hearers may be said
to concern four things.

I. Cdltivatino the habit of iiisTENmo. Which involves drawing the mind in
from other subjects, and fixing it on one. Of some people this praise can be spoken —
they are good listeners.

II. Heabing with iNTBLLiaENT ATTENTION. Involving the activity of the mind in
relation to what is heard. Thinking as well as listening.

III. HBAEiNa WITH PERSONAL iNTfiBBST. For rellgious truth is not abstract, but
relative to individuals. A man does not bear the right relation to it until he sees how
it concerns himself,

IV. Hearing with pueposb of obkdibncb. For all religious teaching is designed
to be, in some way, a guide to conduct. — R. T.

Ver. 2. — Teaching by parable. The answering word to " parable,*" in this verse. Is
" dark sayings," or " hard sentences," which reminds us of the Queen of Sheba, who
journeyed to Jerusalem to prove Solomon with " hard questions." We cannot bring
the precise New Testament ideas of the word " parable " to bear upon the word as used
in this psalm, and yet its meaning is very exact. The parable is treated as a setting of
truth which veils or hides the truth, and compels the hearer to search, if he would find
it. A parable is truth like a nut. The kernel of truth can only be reached by those
who wUl break the shell. Here the psalmist gives a sketch of the national history in
such a way that, to many, it may only be a sketch of history ; but he wraps up higher
moral and spiritual teachings in it, and these those who are in earnest may discover. The
parable, as used by our Lord, may be thus described : " It used an incident, taken from
common life, and rounded into a gem-like picture, to set forth some corresponding truth
in the higher and spiritual region." The Old Testament parable used "point* of
history " with a similar purpose. There is need for this method of teaching, in precise
adaptation to every age ; because the human mind needs help to the apprehension of
higher truth, and the human heart needs help to the reception of spiritual truth.
Pleading for teaching by parable or by illustration still, we may point out that—



P8. LxxTin. 1— 72.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 141

L It ABBE8TB ATTENTION. Just as children are all alive if we propose to tell them
a story, so the teacher and the preacher at once brighten up their audiences when they
give an illustration. Our Lord always secured attention because he was illustrative.
There were no abstract statements in his teachings ; they were all changed into pictures.
His work " swarmed with figures of speech," and so it was that " the common people
heard him gladly."

II. It disarms pbejubioe. It is difficult for public teachers to warn and reprove
wisely. They may easily offend by direct and pointed applications. They can interest
in a picture which excites no prejudice, and skilfully bring out applications that awaken
consciences, and set them making their reproaches.

III. It excites thought. Illustrate by the difference between history as a bare
record of facts, and the philosophy of history, which concerns the relations of the facts,
and the mutual influence of the characters. The psalmist here designs to present the
old history in such ways as to compel thought concerning God's ways with man, and
man's ways with God.

lY. It remains in memoby. Only particular dispositions and trained intellects
can remember abstract propositions. Everybody can remember stories, pictures, and
illustrations ; and there is always the possibility that, holding the parable, they will
hold — for use on occasion — the truth which it was designed to teach. — R. T.

Vers. 4, 5. — Our mission, to the coming generation. The interest of the Old Testament
in children is seldom worthily recognized. The Divine confidence is felt in Abraham
on this singular grouurl, "For I know him, that he will command his children and his
household after him, and they shall keep the way of the Lord, to do justice and judg-
ment" (Gen. xviii.l9). The meaning of the most significant rite of the Mosaic system
— the Passover — was to be carefully explained to the " children." The command is
given concerning the holy laws, " Thou shalt teach them diligently unto thy children,
and shalt talk of them when thou sittest in thine house, and when thou walkest by the
way, and when thou liest down, and when thou risest up " (Deut. vi. 7). The psalmist
speaks thus of his work : " This shall be written for the generation to come ; and the
people which shall be created shall praise the Lord " (Ps. cii. 18). And the prophets
repeat after Isaiah, and say, " The father to the children shall make known thy truth "
(Isa. xxxviii. 19). Dr. Horace Bushnell, in a very striking way, calls the religious
teaching of religious families " the out-populating of the Ohristian stuck." There is always
hope for the new generation ; but the foundation of that hope is the righteousuess and
faithfulness of this generation. Then they truly work for the children who work to
fit the parents for influencing the children. Our mission to our children is — if we
follow the psalm —

I. To TEACH them God's DOINGS AND God'b WILL. This mission is entrusted
first to parents. Only as civilization involves parental inabilities and disabilities, can
the duty be delegated to servants, or to Sunday school teachers. The things we have
to teach our children are : 1. God in history. 2. God in covenant. 3. God in law.
4. God in redemption. Our power to do our work worthily depends on our own
spiritual apprehensions. And they must not be left to pick up religious knowledge.
God requires that we teach them.

n. To HELP THEM TO BEGIN LIVES OF TBUST AND OBEDIENCE. (See VCr. 8.) Thls

we can do : 1. By commending such lives in the grace and beauty of our oion. It is
not enough to " allure to brighter worlds ; " we can " lead the way." 2. By teaching
them the lessons that we may be able to draw from our own experience. 3. By
enforcing the warnings which are suggested by the ancient histories (see ver. 9). 4. By
patiently aiding them in the formation of good religious habits.

III. To MAKE THEM TEEL THEIB BESPONSIBILITT TO THE GENERATION FOLLOWING

THEM. The object set before us, in teaching our children, is (ver. 7), "to the intent
that, when they come up " into their fatherhoods and motherhoods, " they might show
their children the same." So our influence should be repeating itself, generation after
generation. Our faithfulness to our mission may put a new and nobler impress on the
coming generations (see Ps. cxlv. 4). — E. T.

Yj,, 9, yAe bad example of Ephraim, The incident here alluded to is not known.



142 THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [Pfc utxvm. 1—72.

Evidently there was some well-remembered occasion when Ephraim suffered an
ignominious defeat in consequence of their apostasy from God. There is a Hebrew
legend which records how, during the Egyptian captivity, the tribe of Ephraim, in the
pride of their heart, endeavoured to forestall the appointed time of the Exodus, and
went out armed, only to be massacred by the men of Gath. It has, however, been
observed that in the prophetical books (especially Hosea), the whole northern kingdom
is mentioned under the term " Ephraim ; '* and, taking this view, the " psalmist may
allude to a defeat of a peculiarly disgraceful character, which was regarded as a punish-
ment of the ten tribes for their secession from the divinely appointed Davidio dynasty.
Precisely of this nature is the defeat of the 800,000 men of Jeroboam by the 400,000
of Abijah, in 2 Chron. ziii." But we ought to look for some instance in which Ephraim
made a show of taking part with the other tribes, and forsook them — perhaps through
jealousy — in the moment of stress. The image is one of faithksinets. The thought
that calls to mind the sin of Ephraim is given at the close of ver, 8, " A generation . . .
whose spirit was not steadfast with God." We are to learn, not from their act, but
from the spirit which found expression in their act. Illustrate from all known of
this tribe.

L A BAD EXAMPLE OF WAVEBINO. Compare Reuben, " unstable as water." This is
the common failure of impulsive people, who take up things excitedly, but have no
staying power. (See the "stony ground" hearers.) It implies grave weakness of
character, which prevents success iu life being won, or confidence being felt. We can
never be sure of the wavering man, who may respond to the last impulse, and fail us
at the most trying time. Constancy, steadfastness, are not recognized sufficiently as
elements of character that may be, and should be, developed and educated iu the young,
wiio should be made to carry through what they begin.

IL A BAD EXAUPLG OF LACK OF PBiNciPLE. In the case before us, Ephraim
evidently acted on mere feeling. Principles of loyalty, and brotherly service to their
fellow-tribes, would have enabled them to master " feeling " and " fear." They had no
adequate " sense of the right; " they allowed themselves to be ruled by the "expedient,"
which constantly leads men to do mean and shameful things. He only is noble who
can act on principle, and suffer for the right.

III. A BAD EXAUPLE OF BUSFicionsNEBS. Illustrate by the difficulty Gideon had
with the Ephraimites (Judg. viii. 1 — t). Some always think they are being neglected,
slighted. In this case, probably Gideon had not thought about these Ephraimites, so
he could not have designed any evil. When discontented with ourselves, we readily
suspect other people's treatment of us.

ly. A BAD EXAMPLE OF SELF-iMPOSTAKCE. Ephraim was always thinking what
was due to itself as the leading tribe. The people who are over full of se^ are only too
likely to fail their friends in the evil day. — K. T.

Vers. 12, 31. — Ood's marvellous doings. The marvel of GM's doings is always this
— He is ever rescuing, delivering, restoring, redeeming, saving, or, as we may say,
putting things straight. The type of all God's doings was, to the Jew, the rescue of
the race from Egyptian bondage. The Divine attributes are not best seen in punish-
ments or scenes of terror ; throughout the history of the world they have been most
fully revealed in God's savings, deliverings, and redeemings. Moses composed a song
when the Hebrews had safely reached the further shores of the Bed Sea. To him that
rescue was a most impressive demonstration of the Divine righteousness ; so the song
runs thus: "Who is like unto thee, Lord, among the gods? Who is like thee,
glorious in holiness, fearful in praises, doing wonders ? " When God would declare the
great foundation laws, he revealed himself as the nation's Deliverer and Saviour : " I am
the Lord thy God, that brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of
bondage." When Joshua pleaded so earnestly, " What wilt thou do unto thy great
Kame ? " the thing distressing him was that God seemed to have ceased to be a
Deliverer and Bedeemer of his people. David gains right impressions of the Divine
righteousness by meditating on the Divine mercy. Started on this line, we may consider
M " marvellous doings " —

L The Ditine delivebanoes. Beading sacred history for illustrations, we find:
L Koah delivered from peril of flood. 2. Abraham delivered from Chaldean polytheistic



M, Lxxviii. 1— 72.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS, 14»

associations. 3. Hebrews delivered from bondage, and from position of peril at the Bed
Sea. 4. Local deliverances, as in the times of the Judges, early history of David, reigns
of Asa and Jehoshaphat. 5. National rescue from captivity. 6. Deliverance from
sin, by Christ Jesus. Every case is a marvel of Divine wisdom, power, and grace.
And God is best known in his redeemings. " He delivereth and rescueth."

II. The Divine peovidbnoes. Which efficiently provide, and mysteriously guida
By providences we mean the ordinary arrangements of life, as distinct from times of
; trouble and peril. There is a marvel of the Divine ordering of Israel's way, and of ours.
Heaven-sent manna, and streams from smitten rocks, tell of an ever-wonder-working
providence. To devout minds, no marvel is greater than Qod's making " all things
work together for good."

IIL The Divine fobbbabances. Many of these are called to mind in this psalm.
God's long-suffering towards stiff-necked Israel must always seem a marvel of grace ;
and his people in every age have exclaimed, " It is of the Lord's mercies that we are
not consumed."

IV. The Divine judgments. (See ver. 31.) These must be included, but they are
put last, because "judgment is his strange work." The marvel of God's judgments is
the absence of vindictiveness in them, and tiie power that makes them work towards
ends of moral blessing. — R. T.

Ver. 18. — Heart-tempting of God. Prayer-book Version, " And provoked the Most
Highest in the wilderness." The idea is that, in their urgent entreaty for meat^ which
became, in fact, a demand, and an expression of masterful self-willedness, the people
made it necessary for God to do what he would gladly have been spared from doing —
correct them hy means of severe Judgments. " They required meat for their lust." God
provided for their need ; they wanted him to provide for their sdf-indulgence ; and thii
no man has ever any right to expect of God, though, in fact, he does give us "all things
richly to enjoy." But notice this point. The mere request the people made did not
appear to be wrong in itself. The wrong is seen when the heart, the purpose, prompt-
ing the request, is clearly recognized. " God looketh on the heart." Compare the
request of Simon Magus (Acts viii. 21). Simon Peter recognized heart-tempting of
God, and firmly declared, " Thy heart is not right in the sight of God."

L OuB EBQUBSTS CAN NEVBK STAND ALONE. We can usually Only judge the pro-
priety or impropriety of a request. God never separates the request from the person
who makes it. Even we look anxiously for signs of sincerity aud earnestness. God
finds all the interest of a request in the state of mind it expresses. What prompts the
request is the question of supreme importance. God answers the man, not the man's
words. Show in how many ways there may be divorce between the mon and his
request. Illustrate by Augustine's prayer, " Lord, convert me," which sounds well, and
can be approved. When he added, " but not yet," he let his heart speak, and spoiled
his prayer. When God read his heart, he heard this, " Don't convert me, Lord." If
we look at the heart behind the request of the Israelites, we can see the unbelief which
-would put God to the test, and say, " He can give us this light bread, he cannot give
us good meat." Plead for searching!* of heart before offering petitions to God, because
he will answer the heart, not the petition, so we must see to it that the petition expresses
the heart. God is provoked by insinfierity to correct through judgments (vers. 30, 31).

II. OuB BEQUESTS MAT EEALLY BE INSULTS. Nouc of US oau come aright to God
unless " we believe that he is, and that he is the Rewarder of those who diligently seek
him." Qoi asks for trust. " Believe that ye receive them, and ye shall have them."
The supreme o£fence to God is "doubting him," " suspecting him." These men otfered
insult to Jehovah when in effect they said, " Give us flesh to eat ; we know you cannot
do that."— R. T.

Ver. 22. — God's call to trustfully. Grod is represented as being " grieved " because his
people failed to trust him, and depend upon his help. The good man is troubled when
those whom he loves fail to trust him. We love to be relied on. We do our noblest
and our best for those who wiE confide in us. And from ourselves we may learn to
think of God aright. The best in man is the suggestion of the truest thoughts we can
have of God. Our Lord represented the attitude of God towards us when he said to



lU THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [ps. Lxxviii. 1— 72.

the ruler, " Only believe [trust] ; all things are possible to him that believeth." If God
calls us to trust him fully, and is grieved with us when we fail to trust him fully, the
question arises, " Has he made such trust possible and reasonable ? " We may con-
fidently say he has, in view of what we know he m ; what relations he bears to his
people ; and what things he has been doing in all ages for his people.

I. In view op what we know he ib. Whatever side of his revelation of him8i4f
to us we may study, the impression left on us is that he is infinitely trustworthy. Take
his Oreatorship, involving the reliance of all existence on his upholding. Take his
independence, as indicated in the term, "I am," given to Moses as a substitute for a
name. Take his holiness, as the indication of absolute perlection in character. We
want, in those on whom we can rely, power — we must know that they can ; inde-
pendence — we must be sure that they are above being biassed ; and character — we must
be sure of their response, in feeling, to our need. On this line it may be shown that
none but God can have the right to claim our perfect trust. We may " trust in the
Lord for ever."

II. In view or the belations he bears to his people. These have a special
character. Beyond what God is to all his creatures, he bears special relations to his
people. These gather up into the terms. Redeemer, Saviour, Father. Eedeemer from
Egypt, and fr(im sin. Saviour from peril, and from self. Father, as bearing on himself
the burden of his children's well-being. If these relations are unfolded in their Christian
developments, the call to full trust will be shown as every way reasonable.

III. In view of the things he has been doing in all ages. This brings us
to the psalm. We may select illustrations from this historical retrospect. The two
things immediately connected with the text are — the failure to trust God to provide
needful daily bread. They might have trusted, for he could, he did, provide. With
this lesson, the people failed to trust God for needed drink. But they might have
trusted fully, for he could, he did, provide. — B. T.

Ver. 37. — 2%e grievous «» of insincerity. " For their heart was not right with
him;" Prayer-book Version, "not whole with him;" Perowne, "not steadfast with
him." An accusation is brought against God's people by Hosea to this effect, " Their
heart is divided ; now shall they be found faulty." Some are said to have " feared the
Lord, and served other gods." But it is a more searching view of insincerity, or double-
mindedness, if we see that a man may keep up his open and outward relations with
God, and all the time be really serving himself, "following the devices and desires of
his own heart." This is the kind of insincerity to which, in subtle ways, we are all
exposed ; and it is a supreme offence in the sight of God, who wants act and motive,
doing and feeling, to match. Our Lord Jesus Christ represented the feeling of God in
his stern words concerning the insincere, the hypocrite. To the wicked he was ever
tender and gracious ; but to the wicked who cloaked his wickedness, to the man who
came hiding with fawning words his malicious purpose, the Lord Jesus was most
severe. The point of insincerity that comes out in connection with the text, is the
show of reformation that men will make in order just to get out of their calamities.
" When he slew them, then they inquired after him ; " but there was no serious
purpose in their inquiries. "Yea, they turned again, and sought God." They did
but " flatter him with their mouth, and they lied unto him with their tongue."

I. Insinobbitt IB OFFENSIVE IN THE SIGHT OF GoD. The infinitely True One
loves truth. The infinitely Pure One loves sincerity. Insincerity never deceives him,
who " searcheth the heart and trieth the reins," and " needeth not that any should
testify of man, for he knows what is in man." The clothes of a man should genuinely
express the man. Much more should the words of a man, and the ways of a man,
express the man.

IL Insinobritt IB AN ANXIETY IN THE MIND OF GoD. Because it is the most
effective hindrance to his work in men's souls. The man puts a false front on, to
prevent God's dealing with him as he is. Because it reveals a depraved condition.
And because cherished insincerity exercises a most debasing influence on character.
A man cannot become noble who keeps up a sham. The inevitable result is the
formation of a habit of mind and thought which makes a serious and truthful life
impossible. — ^R. T.



ra. Lxxvm. 1— 72.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 146



Ver. 70. — The grace of Divint selections. " He chose David also Tiis Berrant, and
took him from the sheepfolds." The selection of David may be viewed from two
sides. It was an act of Divine grace toward David himself; and an act of Divine
grace in providing such a king for the people.

L Divine obaoe toward David himself. A careful study of David's early life
brings out the fact that he was, in some sense, the despised one of the family. He
was evidently much younger than bis brothers ; probably the child of another mother,
who was brought into the family under somewhat peculiar circumstances. While all
the brothers went to the war, David was kept at home. When Jesse called all his
sons before Samuel, he left David out, as if he hardly came into the family reckoning.
It was, then, the despised one, who had been sent to the sheepfolds with the women,
who was selected by God for the highest place in the new state. God constantly
makes the " poor of this world to contbund the wise." But not arbitrarily. Only
because he seeks to fit men to places, on the ground of their endowments and character
and fitness for their positions. There is " no respect of persons with Gk>d." David
was selected as the fitting man.

11. Divine obaoe PBoviDnra buoh a Kisa fob the people. He was selected on
the Divine judgiuent as to what was best for the people. Compare Saul, selected as
meeting the people's idea of what was best for them. Kingsley says, " I look on
David as an ail-but ideal king, educated for his ofiSce by an ail-but ideal training.
Among the dumb animals he learnt experience which he afterwards put into practice
among human beings. The shepherd of the sheep became the shepherd of men. He
who had slain the lion and the bear became the champion of his native land. He who
followed the ewes great with young fed God's oppressed and weary people with a
faithful and true heart, till he raised them into a great and strong nation. So buth
sides of the true kingly character, the masculine and the feminine, are brought out in
David," It may be pointed out that, in David, were qualities of kingship which would
have made him a blessing to any nation, in any age. And it may further be shown that,
in him, there were characteristic abilities, which made him specially the man for his
time. Lead on to show that the one thing which made David's reign a supreme blessing
to the people was his personal and governmental loyalty to the theocratic idea. He
never failed through any disloyalty to his Over-lord, Jehovah. — ^B. T.

Vers. 3 — 8. — The Divine object of revelation. In this paragraph we have stated the
object which God had appointed Israel to fulfil — to receive his Law and truth, that they
might transmit them to posterity, and that they and their posterity might be brought
to a living trust in God, and obedience to his will. Suggests —

I. God has made the fullest bevelation of himself and his will id man-
kind IK Jesus Christ. 1. Se has gloriously revealed his character in Christ: his
love. Christ showed the nature of God to be love by his ovm character and by his
teaching. 2. By him also he made the most perfeet revelation of his Law. The old Law
was interpreted by Christ, and received its most spiritual meaning and its widest
sweep and application. Love is the only fulfilment of the Law — ^love to God and love
to man.

II. That this bevelation is adapted to wobk out the salvation of men.
1. Si/ awakening trust or faith in Ood. (Ver. 7.) That is the natural effect of the
revelation he has made. 2. By producing obedience to his will. (Ver. 7.) 3. By
awakening a reciprocal love. (Ver. 4.) This celebrates " the praise of God, and his
might, and his wonderful works that he has done."

III. That this revelation was given that it might be propagated. To all
that are living now, and to all coming generations. 1. By the public ministry. By
preaching, by books, and by living example. 2. By the instruction of our children.
In the family and in schools. The power of character as a teacher. — S.

Vers. 32 — 39. — God's tender mercy. This passage describes the conduct of the
rebellious and lustful Israelites in the wilderness, and sets forth three things — God's
chastisement of their sin ; their superficial repentance ; God's pitiful compassion.

I. God's chastisement op sin. (Vers. 33,34.) "The wrath of God is revealed
from heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men, who hold the truth

P8ALMS — IL L



lie



THE BOOK OP PSALMS.



[PS. LXXIX. 1 — 13.



in unrighteousness." 1. Their sin was senstml indifference to the wonders of Ood'i
redemption. (Ver. 32.) "They believed not his wondrous works" — in connectiOQ
with their redemption from the miseries of Egypt. The same sin now in reference to
the work of Christ. 2. The punishment was trouble and death. (Vers. 33, 34.) Sin
always leads to trouble, and sometimes to death. 3. By granting them their sinful
desires. (Ver. 29.)

II. SuPEEFioiAi KEPBNTANOE. (Vers. 34 — 37.) 1. It was inspired hy fear. (Ver. 34.)
Fear — terror — never produces genuine repentance. 2. They made insincere promises of
amendment. (Ver. 36.) " They flattered God with their mouth, and lied unto him
with their tongues." It was no true repentance. 3. They were still uncha/nged in
heart. (Ver. 37.) And no repentance is true and lasting which does not make the ,
heart right towards God.

III. God's pitiful compassion. (Vers. 38, 39.) 1. Qod^s punishment of sin is a
moderated punishment. (Ver. 38.) "And did not stir up all his wrath." No punish-
ment goes beyond the desert, and he makes it as light as it can be. 2. &od pities
as well as condemns our weakness and misery. (Ver. 39.) " He knoweth our frame,
and remembereth that we are dust." 3. God's forbearance is exercised with a view to our
redemption. (Ver. 38.) " Many a time turned he his anger away." " Not willing
that any should perish, but that all should come to repentance." — S.



EXPOSITION.



PSALM LXXIX.
This is "a psalm of complaint, closely
parallel to Pa. Ixiiv." (Cheyne), and must,
like that psalm, be referred to the time of
the Babylonian conquest (see above, p. 81).
It shows US the Huly Land occupied by the
heathen, the temple desecrated, Jerusalem
laid in ruins, the special servants of God
put to death, and the whole nation of the
Israelites become an object of scorn and
reproach to their neighbours (vers. 1 — 4).
Some critics have supposed that it might
have been written after the invasion of
Shishak; but the condition of things is
far worse than can be reasonably supposed
to have been reached at that period.
Others incline to assign it to the age of the
Maccabees; but Jerusalem was not then
destroyed, much less " laid on heaps " (ver.
1). Hence the general voice of commenta-
tors is in favour of the date here advocated.
The psalm consists of four strophes of
four verses each, together with an epilogue
consisting of one verse only. In vers. 1 — 4
the situation is described. In vers. 5 — 8 and
vers. 9 — 12 prayer is inade to God for de-
liverance, and for vengeance upon the cruel
enemy. Ver. 13 is an expression of confi-
dence in God, and a promise of perpetual
thankfulness.

Ver. 1. — God, the heathen are come into
thine inheritance (oomp. Pas. Ixxiv. 2;



Uiviii62). Israel — alike the people and the
land — is " God's inheritance." Thy holy
temple have they defiled. The Babylonians
defiled the temple by breaking into it,
seizing its treasures and ornaments (Jer.
lii. 17—23), and finally setting fire to it
(Jer. lii. 13). They have laid Jerusalem on
heaps. This was certainly not done either
by Sliishak or by Antiochus Epiphanes;
but was done, as prophesied (Jer. ix. 11 ;
xxvi. 18; Micah iil 12X by the Baby-
lonians.

Ver. 2. — The dead bodies of thy servants
have they given to be meat unto the fowls
of the heaven. A common incident of war-
fare (see the Assyrian sculptures, passim).
The fiesh of thy saints unto the beasts of the
earth ; or, of the land. Hysenas and jackals
would dispute the flesh of the slain with
vultures and crows.

Ver. 3. — Their blood have they shed Uke
water round about Jerusalem. During the
long siege (eighteen months) the number
slain in the neighbourhood of Jerusalem
would be very large. And there was none to
bury them (compare the prophecy of Jere-
miah, ch. xiv. 16). The population being
for the most part carried into captivity, and
but few left in the land (Jer. lii. 15, 16), the
bodies of the slain lay unburied, the few
left not being able to bury them, Oompare
the preceding; verse.

Ver. 4. — ^We are become a reproach to our
neighbours (comp. Ps. xliv. 13; Lam. ii 15 j
V. 1). The "neighbours" intended are the
nations in the vicinity of the Holy Land—
the Syrians, Moubites, Ammonites, Edom-
ites, eto. Their attitude towards Israel
under the circu instances may be gathered



PB. LXXIZ. 1 — 13.]



THE BOOK OF PSALMS.



147



from what is related of the Eilomites in Ps.
oxzxTu. 7. A Bcom and derision to them
that are round ahont ns. It was not so
much the "reproaches" of their enemies
that yexed and grieved Israel, as the jeers
and scoffs which they heard on every side
(comp. Lam. i. 7, 20 ; ii. 15 ; iit 62, 63).

Ver. 5.— How long, lord? i.e. "How
long, O Lord, is this condition of things to
endure ? " (comp. Psa vi. 5 ; xc. 13 ; Kev. vi.
10). An ellipse after " how long?" is com-
mon. Wilt thou be angry for ever! (see
Pss. xiii. 1; Ixiiv. 12; Lam. T. 20). Shall
thy jealousy burn like fire? It was their
worship of other gods that God especially
visited on his people by the Babylonish
captivity (see Jeremiah, passim).

Ver. 6.— Ponr out thy wrath upon the
heathen that have not known thee. It is
not the heathen that had never heard of
Ood who are intended, but those who, having
heard of him, bad refused to " know " him
(comp. Ezod. v. 2), as was the case with all
the nations round about Canaan. And upon
the kingdoms that have not called upon thy
ITame. Now that we are punished, go on to
punish those who have persecuted us, and
who are at least as guilty as ourselves.
"The prayer rests," as Hengstenberg re-
marks, "upon what God does constantly.
Judgment begins at the house of God ; but
it proceeds thence to those whom God has
employed as the instrument of his punish-
ment. The storm of the wrath of God
always remains to fall at last upon the
world at enmity with his Church."

Ver. 7. — For they have devoured Jacob,
and laid waste his dwelling-place. This
and the preceding verse occur also, almost
word for word, in Jer. x. 25. It is difficult
to say which writer has quoted from the
other.

Ver. 8. — remember not against us
former iniquities; or, the iniquities of our
forefathers (so Professor Oheyne and the
Revised Version) ; comp. Lev. xxvi. 45, " I
will remember to them the covenant of their
ancestors" — where the same word (D'yaJSl)
is used. Let thy tender mercies speedily
prevent ua; or, come to meet us (Kay,
Cheyne). for we are brought very low
(oomp. Pss. cxi. 6; oxlii. 6).

Ver. 9.— Help us, God of our salvation,
for the glory of thy Name. The calamities
suffered have not extinguished all faith or
hope. God is still the God of Israel's sal-
vation, i.e. the God from whom alone salva-
tion can be obtaiued and may be expected.
He is entreated to come to Israel's aid, not
for their sakei, as they are wholly unde-
serving, but for his own glory (comp. Exod.
xxxii. 12; Numb. xiv. 13; Deut, ix. 28;



and xxxii. 27). And deliver us, and purge
away our sins ; literally, make atonement for
our sins (Exod. xxx. 15) ; t'.e. " cancel them "
(Clieyne), or "forgive them" (Hengsten-
berg, Kay). For thy Name's sake (comp.
Pss. xxiii. 3; xxv. 11; xxxiv. 3; Ezek.
xxxvi. 22).

Ver. 10.— Wherefore should the heathen
say, Where is their Qod } (so Joel iL 17).
A triumph over a foreign nation was always
regarded in the ancient world ng a triumph
over their gods. Their gods were bound to
protect them, and, if they did not, must
either have been absent or powerless (comp.
2 Kings xviii. 33—35 ; xix. 12). Let him
be known among the heathen in our sight
by the revenging of the blood of thy servants
which is shed; rather, let there be shown
forth among the heathen in our sight ven-
geance for the ilood of thy senants that has
been shed ; or, in other words, " Let an
evident judgment, visible to us, fall upon
the heathen who have shed the blood of our
brethren, thy true servants." An immediate
judgment is prayed for; but it did not
please God to send the judgment till after
the expiration of a long term of years.

Ver. 11. — Let the sighing of the prisoner
come before thee; or, the groaning, as in
Bxod. ii. 24. The Babylonians treated their
Jewish captives variously. Some, like
Daniel and the " Three Children," were
favoured, and exalted to high places. But
the bulk of them w.. re afflicted and oppressed
(see Lam. i. 3 — 5 ; v. 1 8, etc.). But, whether
well or ill treated, all sighed to return
(comp. Ps. cxxxvii. 1 — 6). According to
the greatness of thy power preserve thou
those that are appointed to die; literally,
that are children of death, which may have
the meaning assigned to it in our version,
or may simply signify, " those whose death
is imminent " — who cannot live long now
that they are torn from their country. The
phrase recurs in Ps. cii. 20.

Ver. 12. — And render unto our neighbours
sevenfold into their bosom their reproach,
wherewith they have reproached thee,
Lord. (For the "reproach" intended, see
ver. 10.) The whole passage means,
"Punish them seven times as much as thou
hast punished us." Then their reproach
will be seven times as great.

Ver. 13.— So we thy people and sheep of
thy pasture (see Ps. Ixxiv. 1; and comp.
Ps. Ixxviii. 52). WiU give thee thanks for
ever. When thou hast punished our ene-
mies, and delivered us, we will give thee
thanks perpetually, and show forth thy
praise to all generations. An instance of
identical parallelism.



148 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [pg. lxxii. 1—13.



HOMILETICS.

Ver. 9. — " For fht glory of thy Name." The mariner throws out hi» heaviest anchor
when the storm rages ; if that will not hold, nothing else can save. So the psalmist
puts out this plea. The tempest of judgment was sweeping over the land. The future
was dark. Israel's unfaithfulness had forfeited God's promises. We have no certain
clue to the exact occasion of this psalm. The Spirit who spake by the prophets would
not tie it up to one time of trial, but let it stand ready for the Church's use. Serious
difficulties beset the explanations that it belongs to the time either of Nebuchadnezzar
or of the Maccabees. Much may be said for referring it to the Egyptian invasion in
the time of Eehoboam ; which, if not equally calamitous with the Assyrian and
Babylonian, must have appeared unspeakably terrible, following close on the glories
of Divid and Solomon; flinging over the heads of devout Israelites the deadly fear
that God was about to annul his covenant and forsake his people. " If the foundations,"
etc. (Ps. li. 3). He can take refuge in God. So Jeremiah (xiv. 21).

I. What is the meaning or this plea? A name stands for much or little,
according to whose it is. A stranger's palls on our ear as empty sound. A great
man's — Milton, Wren, Howard, Wilbeiforce — stands not only for the man himself,
but his work. We think of ' Paradise Lost,' St. Paul's, the lightening of the prisoners'
misery, the freedom of the slave. A friend's name sets a thousand echoes ringing, the
heart beating ; brings roses to the cheek or tears to the eye. A man's name stands
for his character, credit, faith. The banker looks what name is at the back of the
paper. "Give us your name," say the promoters of an enterprise, "and we are certain
of success." Prov. xxii. 1 true in more senses than one. When a man gives his name,
he pledges his honour. So, then, God's name stands for his honour, promise, character
— in a word, for his very self; and for all that we know concerning him (see Exod.
iii. 13 ; vi. 3 *). When Moses asked to see God's glory, the Lord answered that he
would proclaim his Name (Exod. xxxiii. 19; xxxiv. 5; cf. xxiii. 21). Our Saviour
sums up his work on earth thus (John ivii. 6). The "glory" of GocPs Name, then,
corresponds, humanly speaking, with what every honest man holds dearer than life —
his character. On God's part it stands for his claim to love, trust, obedience, gratitude,
reverence, adoration. On ours, when we exercise all these, we are said to " give glory
to God," " the glory due unto his Name."

II. What is this plea woeth? Wherein lies its force and value? "For men
to search their own glory is not glory." Some minds are perplexed by the thotight
that what is wrong for us cannot be right for God ; and so God cannot make his glory
the object of his dealings. This is for want of clear thought. Eternal principles
of right and wrong are the same with God as with us, else no mortal likeness to
God possible. But duties change with relationships ; parental not the same as filial ;
or a king's as a private citizen's. That God is what he is is the eternal foundation
of all happiness, life, being. That be should be known to he what he is, and receive
the love, obedience, worship, due to him, is indispensable to the order and well-being
of his children. If all men glorified God perfectly, this would be a happy and glorious
world. Just because it is possible for us to glorify God, it is degrading and unhappy
to live for lower ends. To live for self is lowest of all, self-worship the worst
idolatry. To live for others — for your family, your profession, your country, your
fellow-men, — this is noble as far as it goes. But high above all other aims (like
the snow-peak above lower heights) rises this crowning achievement. The highest
life was his who could say John xvii. 4. If this is true of each, it must be true of
alL And God must act according to truth. "He cannot deny himself;" cannot
abdicate, or " give his glory to another." Impossible 1 If we try to imagine such an
impossibility, we see it would be an infinite wrong to all creatures no less than to the
Creator. Clouds in the sky do not hinder the sun's rays from filling space ; but they
eiiut them out from earth. Life is depressed; were they dense enough permanently

' The words may possibly, withont violating Hebrew grammar, be taken as a qnestion,
"And . . . was I not known?" Otherwise we must understand that the full import of
this name was not revealed to the fathers as to and by Moses.



P8. Lxxn. 1— 13.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 149

and completely to shut out the sunlight, it would perish. So all that hides God's
glory is deadly to man's true life.

IIL When and bt whom mat this plea bb used? By all God's children at
all times. It ought to be the prayer of all men. Our Saviour sets it in the fore-
front of our prayer, " Hallowed," etc. If our hearts beat true, no selfish desire will
compete with this; God's honour will be dearer than life. Yet our best welfare is
comprehended (Prov. xviii. 10; Ps. xxv. 11). But this plea specially fits times of
public distress and danger, as in this psalm; and the position and work of God's
Church in the world. Moses urged it (Exod. xxxii. ; Numb, xiv.); Joshua (vii. 9).
These two petitions are inseparable, " Hallowed be thy Name ; thy kingdom come."

IV. The gospbi. is the gbbat answer to this phatebl This was the angels'
song (Luke ii. 14) ; our Saviour's prayer, and God's answer (John xii. 28). This is
the gospel message — our sins are forgiven /or hia Name's sake (1 John ii. 12). The
glory of God's Name consists, above all, in righteousness and love. It is often said, and
the saying is often blamed, that the gospel reconciles these. Where no discord is, there
is no room for reconciliation.^ Yet, to our view, justice requires pxmishment; love,
pardon. The gospel shows these, not in discord or contrast, but unity (Bom. i. 17, 18 ;
iii. 25, 26 ; vi. 23 ; 1 John i. 9).



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHOES.

Vers. 1 — 13.— ^n imprecatory psalm. We need not be at pains to fix the date of
this psalm, whether it belongs to the period of the Exile or of Antiochus Epiphanes,
The words to some extent suit either. But we note in it —

I. What is right fob every one. The writer is in sore trouble, but he takes his
trouble to God. One purpose of all such trouble has already been won — the heart has
been brought nearer God.

II. What was natural and not wrong fob Israel, but would be vert wrong
FOR us. We refer especially to the vengeful utterances which we find in vers. 6, 10,
12, 13. Now, concerning them we note : 1. That there are very many such in the
Psalms. The ccimminatory, and especially the imprecatory psalms, have ever been a
stumbling-block to Christian readers. But there they are, and we cannot get rid of
them. 2. They are very natural. The spirit of resentment and revenge is a definite
part of human nature ; it may manifest itself in varied forms, more or less barbaric,
according to the degree of civilization which has been reached, but it exists in all.
3. And in Israel of old it was not wrong. For it must ever be remembered that to them
no revelation of the future life, still less of the future judgment, had been given. Had
there been any Scripture plainly teaching this doctrine which Christians know so well
from the New Testament, our Lord, in showing to the Sadduoees who believed no such
doctrine, would not have appealed to a text which, unless he had told us so, we should
never have regarded as teaching that doctrine at all. Before our Lord so explained it,
it had not been recognized that the oft-repeated words, " I am the God of Abraham, of
Isaac," etc., involved the truth of the future life. . But there was no more evident text,
or it would have been appealed to. Hence, and for many other reasons, we conclude
that the truth of the future life and immortality, still less of judgment to come, had
not been brought to light when these psalms were written. If this were so, then such as
the psalmist could only vindicate the righteousness of God by appealing to his visible acts
of judgment and retribution here and now. Were they not seen, who would believe in
a righteous God at all ? Hence was it that so often, and so prominently, not to say so
fiercely, the ancient psalmists and prophets appealed to God as in this psalm. Had
they known what we do, there would have been no such appeals made. It was not
mere personal revenge or national hate, but jealousy for the honour of God's Name,
and therefore we say that, however wrong such sentiments would be for us, in them
they were not wrong. 4. But for us they would he wrong, being altogether ojiposed
to the Spirit of Christ. 6. All this does not condemn either national or personal self-
defence.

III. How WE mat lawfullt adopt foe oitbbelvbs this whole psalm and all
BUOH PSALMS. By turning all these prayers for the destruction of enemies against the



150 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [pb. lxxix. 1— U

hosts of spiritual wickedness, " the gates of hell " which do sore assail, and seek to
prevail over the people of God. They are the heathen, the defilers, the destroyers,
the sheddera of blood, the mockers, the oppressws. Not against our fellow-men, but
against them, we may and should thus pray. The devil and his angels are no mere
myth or superstition, but terrible realities, and every faithful soul knows sadly well
their cruel tyranny, and seemingly invincible might. — S. C,

Ver. 8. — " Brought very low." I. This a condition vest common. Sometimes it is
through: 1. Mental distress, helplesanesg, sorrow, despair. 2. Or sickness of body, as
Hezekiah. 3. Or outward disaster, as in this psalm.

II. Its causes genbrallt tbaoeable: 1. To ourselves — our own sin or folly.
2. To others with whom we are associated. See this verse, where " former iniquities "
mean the iniquities of people who have lived before us. Parents, ancestors. We all
are members one of another, and if one suffer, all others suffer with him. Hence it
may be their sin or folly rather than our own. S. To Ood. He, as with Job, may
see fit to let us be brought very low.

III. Its beabons vaeioos. 1. Punishment. 2. DiitipUne. 3. For the drawing
of the soul nearer Ood. 4. For opportunity of testifying to Ood's sustaining grace. 6.
To teach sympathy.

IV. Beset with pebil. The devil loves to hit a man when he is down. Hence
he assails the mind with thoughts hard, bitter, unbelieving, desperate. Shipwreck of
faith and good conscience lies near at hand.

V. BnT MAY become the means op gbbat smeitual attainment. Even our Lord
" learned obedience " so. — S. 0.

Ver. 10. — The heathen taunt. I. The heathen did sat this — ^Where is their God ?
The Jew had talked so much of his God, how great and glorious he was, what wonder-
ful works he had done, the victories he had given them, that now, in view of their
burning city, their desecrated temple, the heaps of slain in their streets, the heathen
in pride and scorn flung this taunt in their face— Where is your God?

U. And the heathen say it stilIi. Missionaries go to them, and tell them of
God, go holy, merciful, righteous, that many of them are won for God ; but lo I there
come, soon after, fellow-countrymen of the missionaries — traders, sailors, and others,
who bring vile alcoholic drinks, murderous weapons, vices unnamable, and much else
with them, and do their bad best to make the heathen's home a hell : what wonder if
they should ask, as they do — Where is your God ?

III. And men godless as heathens say it here iNoim own land. 1. So-called
scientific men. One of them, the other day, contemptuously declared that he had
been looking down a microscope for some thirty years, and he hadn't found God yet ;
and he was sure he should have found him if there was a God to be found. And
many others scoff at the idea of God, and deny his existence, or, at any rate, defy you
to prove it. 2. Others, because of the problems of moral and physical evil, refuse to
believe in Ood. 3. Others under the pressure of trial and earthly care : hence they have
become bitter and hard, and so cast off all faith. 4. Many others, as they mark the
glaring inconsistencies of professed Christiana. They condemn them all as false,
hypocritical, and insincere.

IV. But we ask — Whebefobe should they bat this? 1. Wherefore the man of
science f For God is known by the spirit, not the intellect. 2. Or the mind baffled by
moral problems f Our children trust, us, when they cannot understand : should not
God's children trust him ? 3. Or the care-embittered soul t Does the denial of God
make care lighter ? Would it not be better to humble one's self before God, and to
hide in the shelter of his love ? 4. And the declaimer against the inconsistencies tf the
Chwrch f He exaggerates them, and ignores the mass of true-hearted believers.

Conclusion. But let us take care to give no occasion for the heathen to lay —
Where, etc. ?— S. 0.

Vera. 1 — 4. — Times of persecution. Snch times have been repeated uver and over
again. They must be recognized as parts of the Divine administration, and we must
inquire how they are made to bear on the spiritual interests of God's Church in the



P8. Lxxix. 1— 13.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 151

world. They are not merely historical incidents. They are not merely isolated
calamities. They are only seen and apprehended aright when they are seen to be
Divine permissions, and even taken up and used for high moral ends by Divine power.
They are one form in which God's Church is disciplined, and, through discipline,
perfected. Illustrate from the Book of Revelation, which deals so largely with ths
persecution of Christ's Church, but shows us the Church being sanctified through its
tribulation. Illustrative cases of persecution may be taken from (1) Old Testament
history ; e.g. the times of Jezebel. (2) New Testament history ; e.g. the time succeed*
ing Stephen's martyrdom. (3) Early Church history; e.g, the persecution under
Diocletian. ^4) Middle Age history : give some account of the work of the Inquisition
in Spain. (5) Modern Age history: see the persecution of the native Christians in
Madagascar, under the Qaeen Banavalona. The historical associations of this psalm
with the seventy-fourth, which is singularly like it, cannot be certainly assured. It is
generally agreed that it must refer to the destruction of Jerusalem by Nebuchadnezzar,
or to the sack of the city by Antiochus Epiphanes. If the latter is referred to, we
must recognize that some of the psalms belong to the Maccabean period. The details
of these two sieges may be given, and the psalm treated as helping ns to realize the
misery and distress of God's people at such a time. The points which may be opened
out profitably are these : 1. Judgments on the wicked iring disabilities on the righteous.
The invasion of Nebuchadnezzar was a distinct Divine judgment on the Israelite nation.
The Babylonians did but execute the Divine judgment, as Israel itself had, in previous
ages, executed the Divine judgments on the Canaanites. Sometimes God was pleased
to spare the few faithful ones, as in the case of Noah; the prophets preserved by
Obadiah; and the Christians at the Bom an siege of Jerusalem. But usually the
judgments affected the pious and the wicked; and the attitude of the pious under
the judgment became an appeal and an example. It should, however, be noticed that
judgments on the wicked are only chastisements to the righteous. 2. TJte trouble of
the righteous is the insult offered to Ood, rather than the damage done to themselves.
Here the defiling of God's temple is the chief complaint. This better suits an
association with Antiochus Bpiphanes. In all times of public calamity, the good man
is chiefly concerned about God's honour, as Joshua was when he cried, " What wilt
thou do unto thy great Name ? " Such concern for God's honour is one of the surest
signs of right-heartedness. — R. T.

Ver. 5. — Expected limitations of the Divine wrath. "How long, Jehovah, wilt
thou be angry for ever ? " The duration of Divine judgment may seem long to pious
feeling ; it is known not to be long, when faith begins to read it aright. The Divine
wrath is ever in the control of the Divine righteousness and the Divine love. There
is no personal feeling in it. When its ends are reached, the Divine wrath is satisfied.
God's people may comfort themselves with the assurance that there are three limitations
always being put on the Divine wrath.

I. The Divine honodb. Of that honour God is jealous. We may be quite sure
that he will never act, or continue to act, in such ways as would reasonably give men
wrong thoughts concerning him. Take one thing : the good man may be quite sure
that God will never so act as to produce impressions of personal vindictiveness. We
may not think of God as "hating" anything that he has made. His judgments are
official, parts of the wise ordering of his kingdom. No man could have high ideas of
the Divine honour who failed to realize the strict limitations of the Divine wrath.
Judgments on frail men could not honour the God of righteousness and love, if they
were continued for ever. They end when their object is gained.

II. The Divine furposb. This too must be seen to be official, not personal. The
well-being of the creatuie, not his own pleasure, we are to regard as the purpose ever
set before God. It is, however, a moral purpose concerning a moral being ; and can
be best represented by the aims cherished in the family life. Parents hold ever before
them the good manhood and womanhood of their children; and in their efforts to
secure these things, strict limitations have to be put on times of wrath and judgment.
If God's purpose is to fit us to be with him, and to have us with him, his anger can
but be a " hiding of his face for a little moment ; " it cannot be for ever. If God's
purpose is our betterment, no agency used by him can be unduly continued. If it were.



152 THE BOOK OF PSA.LMS. [ps. lxxix. 1—13.

" our souls would fail before him." Illustrate from the Church in the wilderness ; the
times of the prophets ; such Christian times as the age of our Queen Mary. The Divine
purpose of dispensations of wrath must be fully accomplished ; and therefore troubles,
calamities, and persecutions may have to stay wearyingly long, until the souls of the
martyred cry out, " How long, Lord, how long ! " But God has the long ages to
work in, and his purposes are ever " ripening fast, unfolding every hour."

IlL The Divinb fitt. The psalmist found comfort in thinking of this. "He
knoweth our frame, he remembereth that we are dust." His judgments and his
chastisements are always strictly limited to that which we are able to bear. There
is something very like untrustfuInesB in the plaint of our text. He who is sure of the
Divine pity and love has no voice in which to utter the fear that his judgments can be
"forever."— R.T.

Vers. 6, 7. — Praying against owr enemies. The gravest difficulties in treating
the Book of Psalms concern the entire psalms, and the passages in tlie psalms, which
seem to be invocations of wrath on personal enemies. This is reasonably felt to
be wholly contrary to the spirit of Christianity. It is not, however, usually noticed,
that it is a hopeful sign for a man to speak his bad feelings out to Ood. He
will do mischief if he speaks them out to his fellow-men. He will do no mischief
if he speaks them out to God. Before him the man will soon grow calm, and begin
to think more kindly. Dlustrate by the relief it is, when we feel very strongly about
a matter, to speak out quite freely to some one who, we are sure, will not make
mischief of it. We feel better when we have got it out. The psalmists were wise in
this — that when they felt disau reeably towards their fellows, they told Ood, and not their
fellows. It is also pointed out that most, if not all, the imprecatory psalms represent
official rather than personal feelings; and a king or governor may pray against the
national enemies, as Hezekiah might properly pray against the Assyrians. From
a person acting officially, we presume that the element of temper is excluded. The
mischief done by the invaders was distinctly national — the desecration of the temple,
the reduction of the city to a heap of ruins, the exposure of the dead, the captivity of
multitudes. Prayer fur the turning of God's judgments on the nation's enemies could
not be regarded as improper, seeing that exactly this God had done oyer and over
again, notably in the case of Sennacherib. What God would do it could not be wrong
to pray him to do. And seeing God says, " Avenge not yourselves ; " " Vengeance is
mine, 1 will repay, saith the Lord ; " it may even be regarded as an act of virtue
and piety to restrain our vengeance, and commit our vindications unto the Lord. He
who prays against his enemies will not take upon himself his own vindications. The
following thoughts may be opened and illustrated.

I. We had better ^ray against our enemies than fight against them.

II. When we pray we commit all the times and ways of judgment on them to the
infinitely wise and gracious Lord. In even this prayer we should say, " Nevertheless,
not as I will, but as thou wilt."

III. If we pray about persons, we soon begin to change our feelings towards them.
lY. But it is the height to which Christian principle raises us, when we pray /or our

enemies rather than against them. The older religion prayed for vengeance un them,
the newer religion prays for mercy towards them. " If thine enemy hunger, feed him :
if he thirst, give him drink." — R. T.

Ver. 8. — The trouble of our old sins. Prayer-book Version, "Oh remember not our
old sins." Because a man cannot forget his old sins, he is very disposed to think that
QoA cannot forget them either. And this he will do in face of the repeated assurances
of God's Word, that Mb forgiving includes hia forgetting. Three very striking figures
are used to assure us that God will not keep the memory of the sins which he has
forgiven and blotted out. 1. It is as if they were thrown " behind his back." 2. It
is as if they were "cast into the depths of the sea." 3, It is as if they were removed
from U8 " far as the east is from the west." We can never really think that God will
bring up against us what he has forgiven. The fear that he will only tells of the state
of our own hearts. We may, therefore, consider—

I. The reasonable use we mat make of the memobt of past sura. This



PS. Lxjax. 1—13,] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 15»

may be applied to both national and family sins. Israel was required to keep in
memory the sins of its forefathers, and propljeta made it part of their work to remind
Israel of those bygone iniquities. So we may be sure that some moral value lies in such
memories. This much we can see : they keep us (1) impressed with the sovereignty
of Divine grace; and they bring us (2) the safeguard of a proper fear of ourselves.
In view of the sins of the past, we are plainly the monuments of Divine grace ; all
boasting is excluded. We can have no claim before God. He must mercifully have
passed by transgression and sin iu order to " clear the guilty." He loved us because he
loved us, and no more can be said. Divine grace triumphed in bringing salvation to
such as we were. See St. Paul's plea : " Such were some of you ; but ye are washed,
but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and by the
Spirit of our God" (1 Cor. vi. 11). And the thought of our past sins brings a worthy
humbling, and a holy fear. What we have been we might fall back upon again ; and
we can only be kept steadfast by the sustainings of Divine grace (comp. Ps. Ixxviii, 8).
Nothing checks self-confidence, the self-trusting that destroys dependence, like
recalling our wilful past. We have fallen — the thought makes us fear lest we should
fall again ; and forces from us the cry, " Hold thou me up, and I siiall be safe."

IL The nNRBASONABLB U8B WE MAT MAKE OF THE MEMOBT OF PAST SINS. Dwell

chiefly on one point. We are always wrong, and we always act unworthily, when
we think of our past sins without thinking also that they are forgiven, blotted out,
put away ; so far as God is concerned, done with, irrecoverable. It honours God for
us to use the memory of our past sins in order to make us more watchful and humble ;
but it never honours, God for us to worry over sins that he has forgiven, and put
wholly away from him. We ought to enter into the full joy of his forgiveness. — B. T,

Ver. 9. — Purging away sins. " Deliver us, and purge away our sins ; " " Cover our
sins." The figure is evidently one familiar to those brought up under the old covenant
system. In it the atonement idea was prominent, as a " covering over " of transgression.
The two words are distinct, but closely related ; and they suggested the two things
which man needs to haire done to his sin. It must (1) le covered over; (2) it must be
fwged away.

I. OuE SIN MUST BE " covEKBD ovBB." The Mosaic idea of the word " atonement "
is very clearly defined. It always means "to cover," An "atonement" is exactly
this, " a sin-cover," It is something that covers sin over ; puts it out of sight ; hides
it irom view ; removes it from consideration ; puts something before God in its place.
To " make atonement " is really to " make a sin-cover ; " and that is but a quaint
Hebrew figure for " to make reconciliation," or to provide a basis or persuasion for
reconciliation ; " the conception being that sin is thereby covered up, hidden from
sight and memory. Exactly the same thing is meant when, using a different figure, it
is said to be purged, cleansed, taken away. When the transgressor is said to be atoned
or reconciled, the being covered is taken subjectively in the same way ; as if something
had come upon him to change his unclean state and make him ceremonially or, it
may be, spiritually pure. But the subject thus atoned is not only covered or cleansed
in himself, he is figured as put in a new relation with God, and God with him ;
and it is as if God were somehow changed towards him — newly inclined, propitiated,
or made propitious " (H. Bushnell). As a New Testament illustration of this term,
we may be reminded of the words of St. James, " Brethren, if any of you do err from
the truth, and one convert him, let him know that he which converteth the sinner from
the error of his way shall save a soul from death, and shall hide a multitude of sins."
St. James was an apostle of the most Judaic type, and he evidently had in mind the
Old Testament idea of covering sin by some conspicuous act of goodness, and so
making atonement for it. As an Old Testament illustration, the striking words of
Ezekial may be taken. He says, in the name of Jehovah, " If the wicked will turn
from all his sins that he hath committed, and keep all my statutes, and do that which
is lawful and right, he shall surely live, he shall not die. All his transgressions that
he hath committed, they shall not be mentioned unto him : in his righteousness that
he hath done, he shall live." That is, his full, hearty return to God shall be graciously
regarded as a sin-cover, it shall hide from God those former sins which, if God saw,
would demand his judgments. There are three very striking historical incidents in



154 THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [ps. lxxix. 1—13.

the Old Testament which illustrate this "covering over of sin." They are Moses'
intercession with God in the matter of the golden calf. The atonement made by Aaron
in connection with the rebellion of Korah, Dathan, and Abiram. And the vindication
of Fhinehas, when Balaam's bad advice had brought moral woes on Israel. These
were but preparatory illustrations of the way in which man's sin is " covered over " by
the great atonement, the great vindication of the Divine righteousness, made by the
Lord Jesus Christ. He is God himself covering over human sin.

IL OuE SIN MUST BE " PUBGED AWAY." We must not for one moment think of
the atonement as if it were some device or deception. It is no "covering over" that
merely keeps from view. There is another truth that must be clearly seen. Along
with the " covering over " goes a " purging away." It is not covered up and kept,
but covered over until it can get pmrged away. The Word of God is ever trying to help
us In apprehending that sin is not the mere act we do, but the state of mind and
heart out of which the act comes, and of which it finds the expression. The sin is, as
it were, in the stuff, like a stain ; so it must be washed, cleansed, purged away. And
this is done by Divine discipline. And this the true-hearted man desires to have done
in liim, and lovingly yields himself to the Divine cleansing. He even makes it a
matter of devout and earnest prayer, " Purge me with hyssop, and I shall be clean ;
wasli me, and I shall be whiter than snow." In this passage national calamity is seen
as the consequence of national sins ; but the psalmist seems almost able to take the
truer, deeper view, that those national calamities are doing God's purging work, and
delivering the nation from the power of the old sins. We want our sins covered ever,
but that cannot content us. We also want them purged away. And this is but
another way of saying that we need Jesus the Justifler, and Jesus the Sanctifier. — ^R. T.

Ver. 11. — The cry of the prisoner. " The sighing of the prisoner." The prisoner
here is not the man under the penalty of his crime. It is the captive placed under
wearying limitations, not for personal faults, but as sharing the national disabilities.
The case of such may be treated from three points of view. We have the sigh of the
captive, the exile, and the oppressed.

L The bigh of the captive. The restraint of personal liberty is a most grievous
distress. Man loves his freedom, and cannot endure bondage. There is the captivity
of the body, but there is also a captivity of opinion, and a captivity of habits. When
men are awakened, they begin to sigh under these bondages. "He is the free man
whom the truth makes free, and all are slaves besides." Illustrate by the condition of
captive Israel in Babylon. . One psalmist pictvu*es their distress in a very touching
way (Ps. cxxxvii. 1, 2), " By the rivers of Babylon, there we sat down, yea, we wept,
when we remembered Zion. We hanged our harps upon the willows in the midst
thereof." Not captives in the bodily or in the national sense, we may be captives to
sin ; then what is the sigh we breathe, and the cry we make, and into whose ears will
our cry enter? There is One whose work concerns the "freeing of them that are
bound." There is a trumpet-voice which proclaims for all who sigh and cry in the
prison-house —

"The year of jubilee is come,
Keturn, ye ransomed sinners, home."

n. The bigh of the exile. Where patriot-feeling is strong, it is an inconceivable
distress to be away from one's own land. At least it is to be compelled to be away.
We may leave home pleasantly at our own will ; we never leave home pleasantly against
our will. Illustrate by the passionate yearning of the Babylonian exiles for Jerusalem.
" If I forget thee, Jerusalem, let my right hand forget her cunning." See Daniel,
the exile, praying with his window open toward Jerusalem. And yet here is a most
Btrange and unnatural thing — so many souls are exiled by the compulsions of sin and
Belf-will from their true home in God, and yet they neither sigh nor cry for their
return. For all who do sigh there is a Divine Zerubbabel, ever ready to lead them
back.

III. The bigh of the oppressed. For the captive life in Babylon was a life of
Btem trials and hardships. There were even some " appointed to die," placed in peril
«f life. To whom should they cry in their time of sore need, save to the God of their



PB. Lxxix. 1— 13.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 165

fathers? Like Samson, blind and oppressed, they could find a way to God. And sin
is an oppression and humiliation. They who lire in sin find it, as the prodigal son
did, a hard lot; and presently they cry for home and father and God, even as he
did.— K, T.

Ver. 13. — Divine relationships our lest plea in prayer. " We thy people and sheep
of thy pasture." This verse gives a gleam of hope and confidence at the end of the
long cry of anguish. Compare a New Testament cry, " Though we believe not, yet
he abideth faithful; he cannot deny himself." Illustrate by our Lord's distress on the
cross. In extreme anguish, he yet coxdd say, " My God, my God 1 " We may set in
order three possible pleas which we are permitted to use in prayer. (1) Our needs ; (2)
God's Name ; (3) God's relations. He must be consistent with himself.

I. OuB NEEDS. This may seem the most persuasive plea from our point of view. It
is, indeed, our best plea in asking from our fellow-men. With them we must make out
a clear case of need. And God graciously allows it to be our plea with him. But in
our family life we know that the children's wanting a thing is not a sufficient reason
for giving it to them ; because their wants and desires are not necessarily their real
needs. There are some considerations on which their needs must be estimated. True,
we ought to speak quite freely our thoughts about our needs when we draw near to
God; and it is equally true that a Divine and gracious consideration of our needs
guides the Divine decisions and the Divine doings; but we must not think of this
as the supreme persuasion with God.

II. God's Name. In the Old Testament it is impressively presented to us that the
supreme motive urging God is jealousy of his own Divine Name. All good for man is
bound up in keeping the honour of the Divine Name. Man has no anchorage for his
trust and hope if God be not infinitely good. For our sakes he must do nothing, give
nothing, withhold nothing, if these things imperil his Name, make us question his
Divine integrity. Ezekiel is the prophet who puts this puint most forcilily. "Thus
saith the Lord God, I do not this for your sakes, house of Israel, but for mine holy
Name's sake " (Ezek. xxxvi. 22). Apply to God's Name as the Almighty One, the
All-holy One, the All-saving One. There must always be consistency between the
Divine doings and the Divine Name. Good men, like Joshua, are jealous of the
Divine Name.

III. God's relations. Not what be abstractly is, but what he relatively is to us.
God has been pleased to come into relations with us , to set himself in relations. He
has therefore limited himself, conditioned himself, placed himself under honourable
obligations. And so our supreme plea in prayer has come to be, reminding God of the
honourable obligations involved in his relationships to us. We may be sure of this —
he must be true to himself. This may be fully opened out in connection with the
most blessed relationship of Fatherhood. — fi. T.

Vers. 1 — 13. — Prayer for deliverance from, suffering. " Written in a time of the
deepest distress; the city is desolate and the wliole nation oppressed by the cruel
thraldom of their heathen oppressors. 'J'hey are apparently deserted by God, and their
bitterness enhanced by the feeling that God was exacting from them the penalty for
the iniquity of their forefathers."

I. SurrBBiso. 1. Ood's Ohurchseemedindanger of being entirely overthrown. (Vers.
1 — 6.) Nothing causes profounder sadness to good men than the apparent triumph of
thecause of unrighteousness and injustice. 2. This seemed a retributive penalty for the
sins of themselves and their forefathers. (Ver. 8.) Nothing aggravates our sufferings
so much as the knowledge that we, and those connected with us, have been the real
causes of them ; that they are Divine punishments.

IL The pbateb tob delivbbakce. (Vers. 8, 9, 12.) Contains three pleas. 1.
Their awn misery. " We are brought very low ; " we are come to great misery (vers. 8f
12). It is the cry for mercy to a com|)assionate Father; and God has taught us to
make this appeal. 2. For the sake of God's own Name. His Name or nature is that
he is the God of salvation, and that for his own sake, as well as for the sake of his
guilty sons and daughters, he will deliver. It is his nature to help and save ; his glory
is his goodness, as we are taught in Exod. xxxiv. 6, 7. But this is more wonderful Iv



158



THE BOOK OF PSALMS.



[PS. LXXX. 1 19.



brought out in the incarnation and the life and death of Christ. Grod'sName or nature
is hve. 3. Because of their close relation to Ood. (Ver. 13.) They are his people,
nourished and cared for and led by him. The Lord will not abandon those that ave so
closely related to him. " The Lord is my Shepherd ; therefore I shall not want."
Christ, as the good Shepherd, ia his Representative. — S.



EXPOSITION.



PSALM LXXX.



A PSALM in which the writer entreats God
to restore his favour once more to Israel,
and especially to the ten tribes, who are
in affliction, and in danger of perishing
(vers. 1, 2, 15—17). The psalm is evidently
written vrhile the temple is standing (ver.
1), and while Israel stiU occupies the Holy
Land (vers. 8 — 15), but in a time of deep
suffering, when the nation has sustained a
•evere blow. It probably belongs to the
period immediately preceding the final
captivity of the ten tribes, when the
kingdom of Israel was already tottering to
its fall, and the carrying off of the popula-
tion had begun (2 Kings xv. 29). The
psalm is "Asapbian," i.e. composed by a
member of the Asaphian division of the
temple choir, but certainly not by Asaph.
It consists of two short strophes (vers. 1 — 3,
4 — 7) and one long one (vers. 8 — 19), each
concluded with an almost identical refrain
(vers. 3, 7, 19).

Ver. 1. — Give ear, Shepherd of Israel.
The title, " Sheplieid of Israel," is a new
one ; but it follows naturally from the
metaphor, so often employed (Pss. Ixxiv. 1 ;
Ixxvii. 20 ; Ixxviii. 52 ; Ixxix. 13), of Israel
being God's "flock." Thou that leadest
Joseph like a flock. "Thou that leddeet"
(Clieyne). Tlie mention of " Joseph " shows
at once that the thoughts of the psalmist
are fixed on tlie northern kingdom. Thou
that dwellest between the oherubims. The
two cherubim that overshadowed the
mercy-seat seem to be meant. Shine forth ;
t.e. "show thyself — manifest thy might"
(comp. Ps. 1. 2).

Yer. 2. — Before Ephraim and Benjamin
and Manasseh. " Ephraim " and " Munas-
seli " form a natural expansion of the
"Joseph" of the preceding verse; but it
is difficult to understand the mention of
••Benjamin" here. Hengstenberg suggests,
and both Canon Cook and Professor Cheyne
seem to accept the suggestion, that it was
only a small portion of Benjamin which
adhered to Judah at the division of the



kingdoms, the greater part attaching itself
to the rival power. Stir up thy strength ;
i'.e. "rouse thyself from thine inaction —
come forward, and make thy might te
appear." And come and save ns ; literally,
come for salvation to us. The writer
identifies himself with the rebel tribes,
who, after all, are a part of God's people —
a part of Israel

Ver. 3. — Torn us again, Ood ; or, restore
us — "bring us back" — t.e. bring those of
us who are in exile (2 Kings xv. 29) back
to our country. And cause thy face to shine
(comp. Numb. vi. 25 ; Pss. xxxi. 16 ; Ixvii.
1). The metaphor scarcely needs explana-
tion. And we shall be saved. If thou
lookest npon us with favour, our salvation
is assured.

Ver. 4. — Lord God of hosts. A form of
address unusual in the Psalms, but occurring
in Pss. lix. 5 ; Ixxxiv. 8 ; and below in ver.
18. How long wilt thou be angry against
the prayer of thy people 1 literally, how long
wilt thou smokei (comp. Ps. Ixxiv. 1).
" Against the prayer " means " in spite of
the prayer," or "notwithstanding the
prayer." Ordinarily, God forgives, and
ceases from his anger, as soon as the
afflicted one makes earnest prayer to him.
But this is not always so. A time comes
when his wrath cannot be appeased — when
"there is no remedy" (2 Chron. xxxvi.
16). Evil has been persisted in too long.

Ver. 5. — Thou feedest them with the
bread of tears (oomp. Ps. xlii. 2, "My
tears have been my meat day and night").
And givest them tears to drink in great
measure; or, and gimst them to drink a
copious draught of tears; literally, shalish
is a measure of capacity, probably the
third part of an ephah (see Isa. xl. 12).

Ver. 6. — Thou makest us a strife onto our
neighbours. A great invasion, Assyrian
or Babylonian, was always a signal to the
near neighbours of Israel — Syria, Moab,
Ammon, Edom — to indulge in hostilities
(see 2 Kings xxiv. 2). And oar enemies
laugh among themselves (oomp. Pss. xliv.
13; Ixxix. 4).

Ver. 7. — Turn us again, God of hosts,
and cause thy face to shine ; and we shall
be saved. Here the refrain occurs for the
second time, but with the slight variation of
"O God of hosts" instead of "O God"
simply (see the comment on ver. 19).



PS. LXXZ. 1 — 19.]



THE BOOK OF PSALMS.



157



Vers. 8—19. — The poet, to excite God'B
compaseion, proceeda to depict iBtael as it
wa8 and ae it is. He adopts the figure of
a Tine, perhaps suggested to him by the
description of Joseph in the dying speech
of Jacob (Gen. xliz, 22), and carries out
bis metaphor, in nine consecutive verses,
witli great beauty and oonsistency. Isaiah's
description of Israel as a vineyard (Isa, t.
1 — 7) is somewhat similar.

Vei. 8. — Then hast brought a vine out of
Egypt. The history of Israel a» a nation
begins with the Ezodns. The nation was
transplanted from Egypt into a soil better
fitted for it by the loving hand of God, in
order that it might have ample room to
grow up and develop itself freely. God
" brought it out of Kgypt," not merely in
the exercise of his ordinary providence over
humanity, but by an active exertion of his
Almighty power, and a long series of
miraculous manifestations, without which
the transfer oould not have been effected.
He then cast out the heathen, and planted
it — drove out, that is, before Israel the
seven nations of the Hivites, Hittites,
Gergasbites, Amorites, Canaanites, Periz-
zites, and Jebusites, and, having driven
them out, "planted" in his own people
(see Ps. xliv. 2).

Ver. 9. — ^Thou preparedst room before it.
The "room" was made by the removal of
the heathen inhabitants, who were first
greatly weakened by Barneses III., and then
driven out by Joshua. And didst cause it
to take deep root ; rather, and it took deep
root, as in the Bevised Version. And it
filled the land (com p. Deut. zi. 24; Josh. i.
3). Possession was taken of the whole
land, not at once (Judg. i. 27 — 36), but
slowly and surely; the furthest limits
being reached in David's time (1 Kings iv.
21, 24).

Ver. 10. — ^The hills were covered with the
shadow of it. The "liills" intended are
probably those of the south — the hill
country of Judah — since the clauses which
follow designate the boundaries towards
the north, west, and east. (So Hengsten-
berg, Kay, Professor Oheyne, and others.)
And the boughs thereof were like the goodly
cedars; rather, and the goodly cedar treei
were covered with their branches. The cedars
of Lebanon are intended. They marked
the boundary-line on the north. The
psalmist calls them "cedars of God," by
a strong, but not unprecedented (Ps. xxxvi.
6), hyperbole.

Ver. 11.— She gent out her boughs unto
the sea. The Mediterranean ; the western
boundary of the land. And her branches



(or, her ihoots, Revised Version) unto the
river. The Euphrates (see Gen. xv. 18;
1 Kings iv. 21, 24).

Ver. 12. — Why hast then then broken
down her hedges f or, her fenceg. Vine-
yards in the East were fenced round with
walls (see Isa. t. S). So aUthey which pass
by the way do pluck her; i,e. "pluck off
her grapes" — ravage her and plunder her
(comp. Ps. Ixxxix. 40, 41).

Ver. 13. — The hoar out of the wood doth
waste it. The "boar out of the wood," i.e.
the wild boar — is probably Tiglath-pileser
(2 Kings XT. 29), or the Assyrian power
generally. And the wild beast of the field
doth devour it. Other beasts, i.e. other
enemies of Israel, join in and share in
the plundering (see above, ver. 6, and
comp. Jer. t. 6).

Ver. 14. — ^Return, we beseech thee, God
of hosts ; i.e. " come back to us, to be our
Helper and Defender." Look down from
heaven, and behold. Condescend to " look
down " upon us " from heaTon," thy
dwelling-place, and " behold "—take note
of our condition, see hnw we suffer, and
thou wilt be sure to visit this Tine ; i.e. to
" visit " it, not in wrath, but in loving-kind-
ness and compassion — to " visit it with thy
salvation " (Ps. cvi. 4).

Ver. 15. — And the vineyard which thy
right. hand hath planted; rather, f%e stock.
(So Kay, Oheyne, and the Bevised Version.)
Some, however, regard n|5 as a verb, and
translate, "Establish that which thy rij»ht
hand has planted " (see the LXX., Michaelis,
Hupfeld, Canon Cook, and others). And
the branch that thou madest strong for
thyself; literally, the son, which may mean
the offshoot (comp. Gen. xlix. 22). Is this
offshoot Ephraim ? or is tlie entire vine, all
Israel, intended?

Ver. 16.— It is bnmed with fire, it is cut
down. The flames of war have begun to
consume it — ^it is no longer a vine, liut mere
fuel (comp. Isa. xxxiii. 12), ready to be
burned. They perish at the rebuke of thy
oonntenance. Here the metaphor is dropped.
The climax has been reached, and the
matter is too serious for rhetorical treat-
ment. The nation typified by tlie vine,
the Israel of God, is perishing — perishing
"at the rebuke of God's countenance" —
because his favour is withdrawn from tliem.
Unless God steps in to save, destructiuu is
certain.

Ver, 17. — let thy hand be upon the man
of thy right hand. Either upon Israel
generally, or upon Ephraira — the northern
kingdom — especially, A Judseau poet
interceding for the rival state, ^s touching,
Upon the son of man whom thou madest
strong for thyself (comp. ver. 15 and the
comment).



158



THE BOOK OF PSALMS.



[P8. LXIX. 1 — 19.



Ver. 18. — So will not we go baok from
thee ; t'.e. " we shall not go back from
thee any more." Gratitude for our deliver-
ance will bind ns fast to thy service.
Quicken ns (comp. Hob. vi. 2). The prayer
is for national ratlier than spiritual life —
for a recovery from the destruction which
has almost come upon them (ver. 16). And
we will oall upon thy Name; {.«. we will
be faithful to thee henceforth ; we will not
go after other gods, but "call upon" thee,
and thee only. The poet makes himself
the spokesman of the whole nation.



Ver. 19. — Turn ns again, lord God of
hosts, cause thy faoe to shine ; and we shall
be saved. The psalm is closed by the
refrain in its third and most perfect form.
First we had, "Turn us again, O God"
(ver. 3) ; then, " Turn us again, O God of
hosts" (ver. 7); now, "Turn us again, O
Lord God of hosts" — the appeal to God
continually increasing in intensity. Having
made his third appeal by the covenant
Kame, the psalmist seems to feel that he
has done all that he can, and desists.



OMILETICS.

Vers. 3, 7, 18. — A cry of weakness, a prayer of faith, " Turn us ... we shall be
turned." The life of the individual, of the Church, of the nation, depends not on
means, methods, forms, institutions. With God 18 the fountain of life. These words
are a cry of weakness, helplessness, humiliation ; but also a prayer of faith, hope,
joyful expectancy.

L A CONFESSION OF WEAKNESS, DANGER, SIN. 1. In ordinary affairs a sense of
weakness, helplessness, despondency, is the forerunner of failure, often its cause. Bash
over-boldness, conceit of ability and good luck, though dangerous, are more apt to
ensure success than timid self-distrust. Strange, then, that the " glad tidings," calling
us to the grandest, most hopeful of all enterprises, begins by bidding us despair of
ourselves! for true repentance is nothing less. The reason is precisely the grandeur
of the mark set before tis. In undertakings and tasks within our reach, calm self-
reliance is the winning temper ; but when the task is altogether too vast, the aim too
high, for our strength and wisdom, self-confidence becomes folly, humility our safety.
Further, the reason lies in the original greatness of man's nature, and his undestroyed
capacity. The height measures the fall. If a temple or a pyramid be overthrown,
what hands have built, hands can rebuild; but if a landslip carries down half a
mountain, God's hand alone can rebuild. 2. A confession, not only of weakness, but of
sin. The soul has turned away from God, and in so doing destroyed itself (Hos. xiii. 9).
No sense of helplessness more absolute than conscious guilt. The past is irrevocable.
Tears cannot wash the memory. Prayer cannot undo the deed (' Macbeth,' act ii.
sc. 2, "Wake, Duncan," etc. 1). I cannot sever to-day from yesterday, my present
self from my past. This is the sting and burden of remorse (' Macbeth,' act v. sc. 1,
" Here's the smell of the blood "). He whom we have forsaken alone can restore us
(Lam. V. 21).

II. A PBAYEK FOB FOEQIVENESS AND FULL FAvoHB. " Causo thy faoe to shine,"
etc. Salvation can be nothing less than full restoration to God's favour, childlike
trust ; no middle ground between condemnation and acceptance (Bom. v. 1). When
the storm-cloud is blown away, what comes in its place is not mere daylight, but sun-
shine. Our sins are the cloud that hides God's face (Isa. lix. 1). The sort of half-and-
half condition in which many seem contented to live — between hope that they shall be
saved, and fear that they shall be lost — has no warrant in Scripture. " We shall be
saved," not " We hope we may be," Salvation is God's free, full gift in Christ, if not
rejected or neglected, to be accepted fulljr, and wrought out with idl our might (PhiL
ii. 12, 13 ; Bph. ii. 10). " He that hath the Son hath life " (1 John v. 12). The true
Christian temper, therefore, is the perfect, habitual union of these two — profound
humility because of our sin and sinfulness ; joyful trust and thankfulness becauao of
" the salvation which is in Christ Jesus " (2 Tim. iL 10),



. HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Ver, 1. — The cherubim. Who and what were they? We regard them as types of
Kdeemed humanity, and designed to prefigure and promise that redemption. In proof,
consider—



pfl. Lxxx. 1—19.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 159

I. Thb vabious refkbenoes to them in the Sobiftures. 1. In connection with
the expulsion of Adam and Eve from Paradise. (Gen. iii. 24.) This passage tells bat
little of the nature of these exalted beings, onl^ that they were held fit to occupy the
place where only perfect righteousness could dwell. But neither their form, number,
nor service are revealed to us. But inasmuch as the word " place '' signifies rather " to
place in a tabernacle," it seems as if the spot (see Gren. iv. 14 — 16) where God had placed
them had become a sort of local tabernacle, and was called " the presence of the Lord,"
and so for a long time remained, probably until the Deluge. Thus the idea of the
cherubim seems to have become familiar to the Jews. Bezaleel, when he was bidden
make cherubim for the ark of the covenant, knew exactly what he was to do (Exod.
xxxi, 2 ; XXV. 18, etc.). There must, therefore, have been some tradition concerning
these mysterious beings, though that tradition is almost entirely lost to us. But we
cannot but believe that our unhappy first parents, as they looked upon the cherubim,
must have had some idea as to what they meant, and, like the first promise made to
the woman of her seed that should bruise the serpent's head, so these mysterious
beings would convey to their minds a gleam of bright, blessed hope, that restoration to
what they had lost was destined for them, and that, though not now, yet in the future,
they should again find themselves amid that favour and joy and righteousness from all
which their sin had cast them out. 2. In the construction of the ark of testimony.
(See Exod. xxv. 18, etc.) Now, at first sight this seems as if it was a contradiction of
the command not to " make any graven image, nor any likeness," etc. (Exod, xx.).
But that command had refereuce to the making of such likenesses for the purpose of
worship, as did the Egyptians, who paid to such things religious honour. But this
Israel was not to do ; nevertheless, they might and did make these cherubim, on the
ark, woven in the curtains, and all about the tabernacle and temple. They were not
representations of God, or of angels, or of anything upon earth, but, as we believe, of
the spiritual character and condition of humanity when redeemed. Then : 3. The
cherubim are told of in Ezek. i. 10, and in ch. x., where a description is given of them,
but such as is impossible of pictorial representation. They were, when represented as
in the tabernacle, but sacred hieroglyphs, symbols, not of earthly or heavenly bodies,
but of spiritual realities. Then : 4. In Rev. iv. the " four living ones " told of there
(not " beasts," as our most unfortunate translation gives it) are again the cherubim.

II. What they bbpbesent. We have already said that we take them as symbols
of redeemed man. 1. They represent humanity, not the elemental forces of nature.
This has been affirmed from Fss. xviii. 10 ; civ. 4, etc. Hence the air, fire, winds, have
been regarded as the cherubim. But if so, how can they be called " living ones " ?
The blind forces of nature have no " life " in them. But the cherubim have. And it
is the life of humanity. 2. The creature-representation tells of character. The ox
(see Ezekiel and Revelation) tells of patient meekness, readiness for sacrifice or for toil,
accustomed to the yoke — the character our Lord tells of, and exemplified, when he said
(Matt, xi.), " Take my yoke upon you." The lion, symbol of nobleness of nature, of
courage and might. Heuce Christ is " the Lion of the tribe of Judah." The eagle
tells of the swift, strong, upward-soaring spirit that mounts heavenward, God ward.
Man, the chief of all creatures, in whom all these excellences combine. 3. Of perfect
man. For the cherubim are in the presence of God, but standing on the mercy-seat ;
hence they tell of man redeemed by the blood of Christ, and ever there, abiding always.
Amid such God loves to dwell.

III. Thbib teaching roE us. 1. The infinite compassion of God. See the depths
of distress in which they were to whom these visions were given. But then God thus
came to them with hope, and so with help. It is his blessed way. 2. We may he as the
eheruhim, shall be, if " in Christ." That is, we shall be perfect, holy, blessed, because
iweUing for ever in God's presence. — S. 0.

Ver. 3. — Seal salvation. 1. Three times is this prayer repeated, but with slight, though
noticeable, diflference. Here, in its first utterance, it is addressed only to God. But
the second time (ver. 7) it calls on God as " God of hosts." The eye of faith saw the
ministers of God's power around him, the hosts of the holy angels who waited to do
his will. Then the third time (ver. 19) it is the " Lord God of hosts " on whom he
calls, making mention of the covenant name by which God was known in Israel as



160 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. lxtx. 1— 19.

-especially their God. Hence our argument for faith. If God be our God, then he will
help us. Thus " Faith's day grows brighter as the hours roll on ; and her prayerg
grow more full and mighty." Prayer, warms to its work, and in it. Often we beain
with but scant store of trust, but as we pray on our hope and confidence grow. There-
fore be instant in prayer. 2. Note the opening words of this prayer. It is " turn us,"
not our circumstances and conditions. Many people think that if these were right they
would be right; but the truth is far more often just the other way : it is we who want
changing ; if the Lord turn vs, then all the rest will be of small import, and will be
turned as much as will be for our good. And it is not a mere improvement, a patch
on the old garment, that is wanted — just a partial reformation here and there, but a
complete change. " Ye must be born again." God must " turn us." An old sea
captain replied to a faithful minister who, in seeking to lead him to God, told him that
he had better sail from henceforth under another flag, " No," said the sailor, " that
won't do ; I mean to scuttle the ship, and get a new one altogether ; there's nothing
else to be done. I've tried to mend the other often enough." He was right. No
partial amendment will save any soul. And God must turn us. There is a human
side in man's salvation, but there is still more a Divine side, and the first work is of
■God. He ever seeks us before we seek him. And when he fully saves a man, it is
along the lines suggested by our text. There are three stages in the work.

I. God tcbnb us. And he does this : 1. By giving us repentance. Too many keep
calling on men to "only believe." Christ and his apostles never bade men "only
believe," when they sought salvation. But Christ commanded that " repentance and
fiiith " should be preached, not faith only. Where, as with the Philippian gaoler, the
apostle said, " Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ," etc., it was because repentance bad
already taken place, the man was really repentant at that moment. And whenever
God turns a soul to himself, it is by way of repentance. This means that the soul sees
its »in, feels and grieves over it, renounces it before God and man. 2. Sy leading us
to faith. Not the mere belief of any doctrine about Christ, but more than that — the
actual committal of himself to Christ for salvation ; actually trusting him to pardon,
accept, and gave. Now, this is the complete spiritual change which the word " turn "
implies. It is the first great step in the soul's salvation. Then —

II. God tubns us again. The prayer is, " Turn us again." Now, what does this
mean ? 1. It may be the prayer of a penitent lacksUder. This psalm contemplates
Israel as such. And unless the backslider is turned again, he cannot be saved. He
must come back to God. But : 2. It is the prayer of one who seeks full salvation.
After repentance and faith, which constituted the great first step in salvation, and which
■do save a man if he abide therein, there is given a higher gift to liim who heartily desires
it. It is called in Acts viii., xviii., xix., speaking of the Samaritan converts, of ApoUos,
and of the twelve disciples of John at Ephesus, " the receiving of the Holy Ghost." It
is a distinct and further and most blessed gift, qualifying for service, and uplifting
the soul to a stage of experience which it has not known as yet. It separates the soul
fiom sin, secures the clean heart, and wins the fulfilment of that glorious promise in
Ezek. xxxvi. 25, and the many others like unto it. The believer is made " pure in
heart," and the blood of Jesus Christ cleanses him from all sin. This comes from the
receiving of the Holy Ghost. We are delivered from that miserable round of ginning
and repenting, which the mass of professing Christians wearily travel, and, instead
thereof, a life is lived in which the " whole spirit, soul, and body is preserved blameless."
It is the " abundant life " which our Lord came to give.

III. God causes his face to shine. This tells of " the joy " of God's salvation,
that H alking in the light which ensures that here and now the days of our mourning
Are ended. It is that holy, happy, joyful, winsome religion which is what our God
intended us to have, which not a few have enjoyed, and which waits for all those who
truly seek it. Then, when all this is, then " we shall be saved." God will be glorified,
we ourselves filled with the love of God, and our fellow-men will be blessed through
us as otherwise they cannot be. Then will our religious life answer to the beautiful
description given in vers. 8 — 11. " Amen, even so, come. Lord Jesus." — S. C.

Vers. 8 — 15. — The vine of God. These verses may be taken —

I. As A BYMBOLic HISTORY OF IsRAEL. 1. FoT Qod\ people were as a virtt.



M, Lxxx. 1— 19.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 161

DesigDed for fruit ; carefully tended ; highly esteemed ; thoroughly Cleansed ; diligently
guarded. 2. Israel had been brought out of Egypt. 3. ITie nations of Canaan were
driven out. i. Israel became a settled nation. 5. Strong. %. Populous. "Pilled the
land ; " covering the hilla and the plains. 7. Dominion increasing, from the Mediter-
ranean in the west to the Euphrates in the east. Then, at the time when this psalm
was written : 8. A great change had. come. Pierce foes, as Assyria and Babylon ; and
wild-beast-like enemies, Edom, Ammon, Moab, and others, all made havoc of Israel,
uprooting and devouring. But all this led Israel, as God purposed it should, to
turn again unto him in penitence, faith, prayer, and reconsecration (ver. 18). But
also —

II. As AN ALLEQOBT OF THB Ghbistian boitl. 1. In prosperity. Por it, too, is
God's vine. Redeemed from the slavery and wretchedness and sin of the Egypt-like
world. The heathen, the terrible spiritual enemies, God drove out, and saved his people
from their sins; planted the soul in the kingdom of grace; made it happy in God, so
that it took " deep root." And that grace of God governed the whole being, " filled the
land," so that, as Paul, he could say, " I live, yet not I, but," etc. The Divine life in
him attained to noble proportions, in height, in breadth (ver. 10), And became
victorious over many, and possessor of wide and beneficent power (ver. 11). All this
tells of the soul happy and strong, and abiding and useful in God. Blessed condition.
2. In adversity. (Ver. 12.) We are told (2 Chron. xxxii. 31) how God left Hezekiah.
That was an instance of God breaking down the " hedges." It was done " to try him,
that he might know all that was in his heart." This God often does. At other times
in anger, to punish, as with Israel. Yet again to teach the soul its dependence upon
God. What are these hedges? Holy habits, the presence of the Holy Spirit in the
soul, means of grace. Sin forfeits all these, breaks through holy habit, drives away
the Spirit, sterihzes all means of grace. It is not God who breaks down the hedges, but
our sin — our forgetfulness of God, our disobedience, our pride. " Let him that thinketh
he standeth, take heed," etc. And then what is told of here is sure to follow (vers. 12,
13). Any passer-by is able to pluck away her strength, to rob the soul of some of its
power. The soul gives in to them, does what they say. And some foul, fierce, strong,
wild-boar-like sin will gel itself entrance into the soul, and, oh 1 the wasting that there
is then ! what rooting up and devouring of all good! and lesser creatures, but of like
nature, rush in and do similar work. O my soul, keep near thy God, lest thy hedges
be broken down 1 3. In recovery. Thank God, the allegory does not close with the
misery we have just contemplated ; but we see recovery beginning. For there is
(ver. 14) earnest crying to God; pleading of the ancient covenant (ver. 15). God
himself planted the vine and loved it. Confession of utter misery (ver. 16) and helti-
lessness and guilt ; for their misery is because of God's rebuke. Pleading again God's
former love, so great, so precious, how he made Israel " strong for thyself; " protest-
ing (ver. 18) that they will no more go back from God ; and interceding for that
again turning to God, and that consciousness of his favour which would ensure that
they would go back no more. These are the steps of the upward ascent, even out of
the depths.— S. 0.

Ver. 18. — Ooing back from Ood, This psalm, this verse, is a penitent confession
that Israel had been guilty of this sin, and it is a prayer for pardon and restoration.
But such backsliding did not cease with Israel. We have here —

L A CONFESSION OF TEE SIN. Israel needed to make such confession. But so do
others now. 1. Apostates, like Demas, Judas, etc. 2. Those who know Ood has called
them, but from fear of man refttse to corifess him. 3. Those who have confessed Aim, but
live inconsistent lives. 4. Those who, after special seasons of nearness to God, go back to
induce their old sins. These, and yet others, need this confession.

IL A PORTRAYAL OF ITS MisBBT. (See vers. 5, 6, 12, 13, 16.) The backslider is
the most miserable man on the face of the earth. He can never forget that he has
known the better way, and has chosen the worse.

III. An assurance of its pbevbntion. 1. Such prevention needed; for going
back is so easy, so secret, so perilous, so shameful, so condemned of God. 2. And it
sure, by the grace of Ood turning us again, leading us into the possession and retain-
ment of the fulness of his grace, and giving us the joy of his salvation. — S. C.

F8ALM8 — II. H



162 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. lxxx. 1— 19.

Ver. 1. — Throned above the cherubim — a conception of God. Prayer-book VerBicn,
"Thou that sittest upon the cherubim;" Perowne, "Thou that sittest (throned
above) the cherubim ; " Bevised Version margin, " dwellest between." It is plain
that this psalm was composed when Israel was groaning under some foreiga oppression
which it was powerless to resist. It is a plaintive cry for restoration to a state which
should be indicative of the Divine favour. Two periods may be mentioned as times
when Palestine became the battle-ground of rival powers (see ver. 6) — when Assyria
and Egypt lb\ight in it ; and in the post-Exilic period, when it was the apple of discord
between the Ptolemies and the Seleucidse. There is evident poetical reference to the
tabernacle of the wiiderness, rather than to the temple at Jerusalem; for the poet was
thinking of God as leading his people, and in vision saw the tribes in their camping
and marching order. The cover, or mercy-seat, of the ark was thought of as the throas
of Jehovah. Above it rested the bright light, which was the symbol of the Divine
presence ; and the figures of the cherubim, with their wings extended and touching
each other, formed the canopy of the throne. God's presence there was the sign of his
al)iding presence, and close, helpful relations with his people. His shining out, or
Bhining forth, was the sign of his specially acting in judgment on the rebellious, or in
vindication of the Divine honour, as in the case of Korah. So the psalmist, in Ps. 1. 2,
says, " Out of Zion, the perlection of beauty, God hath shined." (The account of the
cherubim is given in Exod. xxv. 19 — 22.) We inquire what thoughts of God are
•pecially associated with his manifestations from between the cherubim.

L God is evee present with his people. To the Jewish mind the symbol was
always there between the cherubim, though not one of the people ever beheld it. It
helped them to realize that their God was in their midst. Ko matter what might be
the national calamities, at least they could be sure of this — that symbol of the present
God remained. There could be no overwhelming calamity while the Keeper of Israel
was still between the cherubim.

II. God mat be hidinq himself from his people ; or rather, he may seem to
them to be hiding himself. This is the trouble of the psalmist— Israel is in sore
distress, and God seems to keep silence, to " dwell in the thick darkness," and hold
aloof from the strife. God never is uninterested in his people's cares; but his interest
may sometimes best be shown in withholding his hand, and biding his time. His time
is sure to come.

III. God may be asked to manifest himself to his people. It may be
precisely for the attitude which expresses itself in asking that God may be waiting.
He manifests himself by " stirring up his strength to help us, and by shining forth his
glory to cheer us." — R. T.

Ver. 2. — Qod^s strength needed for saving work. " Stir up thy strength, and come
and save us." It is singular that three nly of the twelve tribes should be mentioned ;
but the poet's mind was full of the wilderness associations, and he knew that these
three tribes followed in the order of procession immediately behind the ark. So the
shining forth of the glory is thought of as at once seen by them. " The writer prays
that the brightness of the Shecbinab, the light of God's countenance, thus manifested
in old time ' before Ephraim and Benjamin and Manasseh,' may be once more vouch-
safed as a sign of favour." The expression here used, " Stir up thy strength for our
salvation," implies that all God's savings may be thought of as expenditures of the
Divine strength— the strength of the Divine activity, the strength of the Divine
wisdom, and ihe strength of the Divine love.

I. The stbenqth of God'b activity needed foe saving wobk. This is the
point of the prayer of the psalmist. He wants God to show energy, to put forth energy,
to bestir himself in order to do something for his people. The poetical thought is of
God donnant, unconcerned with the trouble of his people. It is as if he would even
awaken him to activity. The expression must be treated poetically. It brings out the
idea that man needs Gbd's active strength, since man asks his help only when he feels
helpless. The saving needed is beyond man, so he has a high idea of the energy and
the power that must be required.

" 'Twas great to speak a world firom nought ;

'Twas greater to redeem."



w. Lxxx. 1— 19,] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 163

Apply to the redemption of the world from sin through our Lord Jesus Christ. What
activity, energy, skill, and power were required for the great salvation I

IL This STRENaTH of God's wisdom needed for saving wobe. The histories of
the Old Testament abundantly illustrate the fact, that God's times and ways of saving
•r« seldom such as man could have thought of. The wisdom of them was fully seen in
their issues ; but it was altogether beyond men, too strong for men to grasp and under-
stand. How Israel was to be saved from Egypt, or Assyria, or Babylon, men could
not tell. It was done in the times of Moses, and of Hezelsiab, and in the " Beturn,"
through the strength of the Bivine wisdom, combined with the strength of Divine
«nergy. Apply to the great salvation from sin. The Divine wisdom in it has been
the marvel of the ages, and it is marvellous still, deeper than even an ocean-line can
reach. " The wisdom of God in a mystery."

III. The btbbngth of God's love needed fob bavino work. This leads into
dmiliar ranges of thought. Our best deeds are done, and are best done, in the strength
and inspiration of our love. And we are bidden to try and realize that love of God in
iiuman redemption, which is " beyond all manner of so much." — R. T.

Ver. 3. — Tlie twmings and retwrnings of God. " Turn us again, God, and cause
thy face to shine." The expiession, " turn us," seems to have been used in the
prayers of the captives in Babylon ; they are represented as saying, " Turn again our
captivity, Lord, as the streams in the south I " The exiles are not praying for
repentance, but for a change in their circumstances — a change in the evident relations
«€ God to them. Their captivity seemed to them God's turning them away from him.
What they asked was a gracious returning to them. Putting the sentence in modern
form, it would read, " Turn to us again, God, and cause thy face to shine, and we
■hall be saved." Some render, " God, restore us I " which conveys the same idea.

L God's tcbnino away DECiiABES the need foe Divine juDaHENxs. If we
estimated life aright, we should think more of the presence and working of God in eur
life, as the Overruler, Bestrainer, Guide, who is ever moulding and moderating our
ranpulse, ever putting straight what we bend awry.^ And then we should regard aright
Qod's holding aloof, turning away, " drawing up into a cloud," and leaving us to the
miseries of our own self-ordering ; which miseries would become his correcting judg-
inents. This point may be effectively illustrated by God's word to Moses when Moses
was interceding in the matter of the golden calf. God proposed to withdraw his own
Pretence as Guide, Bestrainer, and Overruler ; and Moses kuew well that would prove
the severest of judgments. 'The same thing may be shown in the case of King Saul.
It is figured as the withdrawal of God's Spirit from him. Left without Divine
restrainings and overrulings, Saul runs down into woes that are Divine judgments.
So with Israel in captivity. They had so grieved God that he had " turned away,"
«nd left them to follow their own political devices. They sought Assyria, or they
■sought Egypt, and they would not seek Jehovah. They must come under Divine
judgments, and learn through them; but they brought the judgments on themselves.
And God's turning and leaving them alone was at once the necessary thing, and the
mnost merciful thing. When men are wilful, Divine severities are Divinest mercies.

II. God's tubninq-towaeds shows the time has comb fob Divine rbstobings.
ft is the sign that men have learned the lesson of their judgments and calamities,
mnd have come to a better mind. They have begun to realize what God turned away
means and involves ; they have begun to want the sight of God's face again, and the
-eheer of the shine or smile on his face. And when that is man's mood, God can turn
lound, and can enter again on those guiding, overruling, and restraining relations,
which then are rightly esteemed, Bunyan illustrates, in his 'Holy War,' very
effectively the turning away of Emmanuel, the consequent misery of Mansoul, the
Awakening desire for Emmanuel, and his gracious return. — B. T.

Ver. 4,— Z%« refusal of prayer, " How long wilt thou be angry against the prayer
«rf thy people ? " The sign of the anger was God's not heeding their cry, " They
Asked and received not, because they asked amiss." The Prophet Isaiah (i, 16) even
represents God as saying to his sinful people, " When ye spread forth your hands, I
will hide mine eyes from you: yea,- when ye make many prayers, I will not hear :



164 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. lxxx. 1— Ift

your hands are full of blood." And the prophet, for himself, says (lix. 2), " Toui
iniquities have separated between you and your God, and your sins have hid his face
from you, that he will not hear." And a psalmist expresses the true feeling when he
writes, " If I regard iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not hear me." " Angry
against the prayer " expresses quite a human kind of feeling. When men refuse our
request, our first thought is that they must be angry with ««. This, then, represents
man's thought and fear concerning God ; but it does not precisely represent the actual
fact. God is angry, as anxious, loving parents are angry. He refuses prayer for the
sake of the offerer. And parents know that it is often much harder to refuse a request
than tn grant it. The refusal is love, not anger. The exiles ask the question of the
text in an impulsive spirit, half complain ingly. We may ask quietly and calmly their
question. How long will God hold aloof from men's prayers ?

I. God nbveb befuses prayeb in "mere soveebiontt." Caprice or jealous
feeling must never be associated in our minds with God. " We speak of the Divine
sovereignty ; but sovereignty is not an arbitrary, capricious thing ; it is a righteous
and holy thing; and God must ever act in conformity with the unalterable principles
of his character." " There is no mystery in those temporary desertions with which
God sometimes visits his own people. The reason of them is to be found in themselven
—in their sinfulness, in their unsteadfastness, in their unfaithfulness." All Divine
withdrawals and temporary refusals mean discipline.

II. God mat hold aloof until judgment has done its wobk. Note that this
involves uncertainty as to time of restoration. Judgment acting on different moral
natures is prolonged according to the response different natures make to it. It would
be no kindness to resume gracious relations be/ore the disciplinary work was complete.

III. God mat hold aloof until humility tones the pbateb. Take humility
as representing the state of mind when self-will and self-pleasing are mastered.
Hnmility is holding our will in submission to God's will.

IV. God mat hold aloof until man is united in his pbateb. Part of a man
may pray for, and part of him may pray against. Will may pray for, heart may pray
against. Duty may pray for, feeling may pray against. Illustrate by the figure in
Eos. ii. 21, 22.

V. God may hold aloof until his answbb can be the fullest blessdjo.
Oftentimes to give too soon would but be to give o part. God waits till we are empty
of self, and can be filled with himself. — R. T.

Ver. 6. — " Tears to drink : " the mission of trouhlous experiences. " Givest them tears
to drink in great measure." Reference must be to the dreariness and hopelessness and
misery of the captives in Babylon. There was no other time in the national history
when the expression was so suitable. The misery is forcibly pictured in Ps. cxxxviL
When the eyes of the exiles were full of tears, it was bitterness indeed to be asked to
sing "one of the songs of Zion." " How could they sing the Lord's song in a strange
land ? " Eastern people are very expressive in their grief, and shed tears very freely ;
but the expression here is poetical. Men are thought of as having so much trouble in
their lot that they seemed to feed upon their tears. Stanley says, "The psalms of the
time answer to the groans of Ezekiel, the Lamentations of Jeremiah, as deep to deep.
No human sorrow has ever found so loud, so plaintive, so long-protracted a wail. We
see them in the places of their final settlement, olten lodged in dungeons with
insufficient food, loaded with contumely, their faces spat upon, their hair torn off, their
backs torn with the lash. There were the insults of the oppressors, there were the
bitter tears which dropped into their daily beverage, the ashes which mingled with
their daily bread." This subject may be profitably treated by recalling the fact that
our Lord Jesus is recorded to have wept tears on three occasions, and these occasions
may be regarded as representative. Jesus wept at the grave of Lazarus ; Jesus wept
in sight of unreceptive Jerusalem ; Jesus wept in the garden of Gethsemane.

L Thb mission of the tears of bebeayembnt. Tears seem specially sacrjd to
lach times. They are, indeed, nature's relief. We feel anxious when our bereaved
fiiends cannot weep. Tears are brain relief as well as emotional relief; but they are
the sign of the broken heart, the unavailing regret, the love that has become only a
memory. But see the mission of such tears. J. They call out sympathy, 2. They



w. ucxx. 1— 19.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 166

■atisfy our feeling that we ought to feel. 3. They honour our departed ftiends.
4. Tbey are silent prayeis which God heeds.

n. Thb mission 0? THE TEARS OF CONCERN FOR OTHERS. Illustrated by our
Lord's concern for Jesusalem. Observe that tears are not becoming while there is any
hope of their yielding to gracious influence. The tears come when those we would
bless seem determined to " resist the Holy Ghost." As long as Jesus could hope to
save Jerusalem, there was no room for tears. They came when Jesus was compelled
to say, " Now they are hid from thine eyes. Your house is left unto you desolate." We
weep when we are forced, in hopelessness, to let alone those whom, frcm our very hearts,
we desire to bless.

III. The mission of the teabb forced out bt mental strain. Illustrated by
our Lord's tears in Gethsemane. Times when we want to understand, and cannot ;
when we want to believe, and cannot ; when we want to obey, and cannot ; when we
want to see our way, and cannot ; when we want to submit, and cannot. Such was
the condition of the exiles. — B. T.

Ver. 8.— The vine-figure of God's people, A favourite figure with the prophets.
The metaphor is applied to Israel in Isa. v. 1 — 7 ; Jer. ii. 21 ; Ezek. xv. 6 ; xvii. 6 — 8.
There was a golden vine representing the nation, sculptured on the gate of the temple.
The association of the vine with Egypt has been disputed ; but the mural paintings at
Thebes, at Beni-Hassan, and in the pyramids contain representations of vineyards.
Boys are seen frightening away the birds from the ripe clusters ; men gather them
and deposit them in baskets, and carry them to the winepress. Two things are
suggested—

I. The vine as a fioube fob God's people. 1. The vine is a foreign plant, not
really belonging to Canaan. Quite possibly it had actually been introduced from
Egypt ; but its proper home seems to be the hilly region on the southern shcres of the
Caspian Sea. Israel, like the vine, was transplanted, not a native of Palestine — trans-
planted in order to accomplish a Divine purpose, remaining only so long as the Divine
Husbandman may think right. 2. The vine itself is a worthless plant ; its value lies
wholly in the fruit ti)at it bears. Vine-wood is altogether useless, too porous and light
to serve any good purpose. It only carries the sap that is to appear as luscious fruit.
So Israel was reminded that it had no merit as a nation ; it could only convey the
Divine life to men as it brought forth the fruits of righteousness. 3. The vine repre-
sented Israel because it is a plant which is so dependent, needs so much care, and has
such splendid possibilities. It must be held up ; it must be vigorously pruned and
thinned; it must be richly nourished. And so Israel needed Divine upholding,
discipline, and encouragement ; and that Divine care had been fully and freely given.

II. Man's tbeatment of his tines a figubb of God's treatment of his
PEOPLE. See the details given in Isa. v., and compare the description of planting a
vineyard, given by Van Lennep, in 'Bible Lands and Customs,' vol. i. p. 112. Note:
1. Careful selection of ground — soil and aspect are most important. So God selects
Palestine for the nation of Israel. Show the singular appropriateness of its situation,
and its characteristic features. 2. Fencing it in. This necessary because of the
enemies of the vine — little foxes that are cunning, wild boars and bears that are strong.
See the fencing in of Israel — on the west, by sea ; on the north, by mountains ; on the
east and south, by deserts. 3. Gathering out the stones. Because richness and depth
of earth are needed, and there should be no hindrance to the spreading of the roots.
So God dispossessed the nations that were occupying the soil. 4. Building a tower.
For a watchman to see approaching foes in time of the ripening. So God's guiding
«ye and hand were ever on his people. 5. Making a wine-vat. Implying full
expectation of fruitage. Ho God looks that his people bring forth " much fruit." — R. T.

Vers. 12, 13, — Bitter experiences as Divine chastisements. The wild boar is a
«ret.ture which abounds in all parts of Asia Minor, and it is the farmer's greatest
plague. It is specially mischievous in vineyards — what with eating and trampling
underfoot, it will destroy a vast quantity of grapes in a single night. Homer writes of

" A monstrous boar.
That levell'd harvests and whole forests tore."



166 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. lxxx. 1— 1ft.

The bitter experiences of the vineyard are of three kinds: 1. The vineyard loses it»
fence (ver. 12). 2. The beasts make it a ruin (ver. 13). 3. Found in hopeless con-
dition, it is at last cut down and burnt. So Israel began its national woes when it lost
the Divine Guard and Defence. Its enemies then gained their power and opportunity.
Illustrate from the supreme anxiety of Moses, because .Jehovah threatened no longer
to lead and guide the people ; also, from Joshua's trouble, when Israel lost its Divine
fence before Ai. See the consequences of the withdrawal of God's protection from the
first king, Saul. It may be said that circumstances sufficiently account for the national
calamities that befell Israel ; but it is of supreme importance that we see deeper than
the movement of circumstances, and trace the working of him who moves the circum-
stances. Withdrawing his special defence, and leaving a man to himself and to hi*
circumstances, is the severest form of Divine chastisement, because it implies that Qod
is grieved. The man or the nation has not only done wrong, he has done wrong in
such a way as to offend or insult God. There is no chastisement so hard as being
"left to our own devices." It involves our supreme humiliation. We then find
ourselves out, and learn that " it is not in man that walketh to direct his steps ; " and
we find our perils out. The child that loses its mother has to learn from what varied
forms of danger its mother preserved it ; and we find out what God's " compassing onr
path and lying down " means, when God, grieved with us, withdraws into a cloud.
When God held aloof from Israel, Assyria came in on the vineyard, like a wild boar,
and Babylon like a bear, trampling and destroying. In this, however, we are but to
see Qod's sternest form of chastisement, not vindictiveness, not mere punishing for the
sake of upholding authority, but chastisement with a view to correction. Grace
withdrawn that grace may come to be sought and valued. — B. T.

Ver. 18. — OoWs grace our best safeguard. " So will not we go back from thee."
This assurance implies that the people, in whose name the psalmist speaks, had fully
learned the lesson which God designed to teach them by the withdrawal, which was
chastisement, and involved bitter distress and humiliation. They had turned to God,
and God had turned, in mercy and in restoring grace, to them. The issue of bitter
experience was, that the people desired to be steadfast servants of God henceforth.
Compare the psalmist's personal exclamation, " Before I was afflicted I went astray,
but now will I keep thy word." But there is a yet deeper sign of their return to right-
mindedness. They do not merely make a promise, " So will not we go back from
thee ; " they acknowledge that they need Divine help in the endeavour to keep their
promise. They go on to say, " Quicken us, and we will call upon thy Name." That
is the supreme lesson which the discipline and the chastisement of life are to teach us
— our entire dependence on the Divine grace and upholding.

I. The pbouisb made bt the disciplined. A promise of steadfastness. The
disciples of Christ went back, and walked no more with him, because his higher,
spiritual truth was beyond their reach ; and, as they could not apprehend it, they were
offended by it. But these Israelites had wavered in their allegiance to Jehovah,
because they wanted to " follow the devices and desires of their own hearts." So the
result of their discipline was tliat most hopefully humiliating thing, the abating of
eelf-eonjidence. They felt their need of God, their dependence on God, and made theic
resolves that henceforth they would cleave closely to him. So far good. Resolves are
good ; but everything depends on the spirit in which they are made. Trust in the
resolve soon ends in worse failure.

II. The hope of keeping their promise, which the disciplined might
CHERISH. The hope that God's °race would be their inspiration and support. They
pray, "Quicken us," which not only means, "Give us life," but, "Renew to us life;"
" Ever keep up the energizing, the vitalizing, and the controlling." Life expresses
exactly that which we need, to change barren resolve into constant, active, and holy
endeavour. We need never fear " going back," if God will graciously quicken ua.
That grace is our sure defence from our weak selves. — R. T.

Vers. 1 — 19. — d'ocTs redemption. "It is not a bringing back out of exile that i»
here prayed for, for the people are still on the soil of their own country ; but in their
present feebleness they are no longer like themselves, but stand in need of Divine



w. I.XXXI. 1 — 16.]



THE BOOK OF PSALMS.



167



fakterrention, the shining forth of the hidilen countenance of God, in order again to
attain a condition that is in harmony with the promises." Suggests —

L.OOD HAS MADE A OLOBIOUS REDEMPTION POSSIBLE FOB UB. (Ver. 8.) Has

transplanted us from the darkness and slavery of Egypt into a glorious land of
promise.

II. By the abuse of oub pbitileoe we mat bbino oueselveb into aSEAT
FEEBLENESS ANB MISEBT. 1. God may seem not to answer our prayers. (Ver, 4.)

2. And to leave us to unavailing remorse. (Ver. 6.) 3. Appetite and passion may
destroy us by their ravages. (Ver. 13.)

in. God is still near to help all who earnestly desibe restoration.
1. He goes be/ore us as he went be/ore the Israelites in the ndldtrness. (Ver. 1.) As •
Shepherd. 2. He has also the power to help us. Dwells between the cherubim, the
symbnl of his earthly power; and is Lord of hosts — symbol of his heavenly power,

3. When we can see our duty and privilege in the light of QocPs face, we shall repent
and return. (Ver. 3.) That is, we must see them in the very strongest light before
we shall repent. — S.



EXPOSITION.



PSALM LXXXL



PbofebbOR Chetne regards thia psalm as
composed of " two distinct lyrical passages,"
accidentally thrown together (compare his
theory of Pss. xix., xxiv., xxxvi., Iv., Ixxvii.,
etc.); and certainly there is more reason
for this than can be adduced for his other
separations. It is difBcult to trace any
connection between the joyous opening
strophe (vers. 1 — 5) and the sad and
chastened monody which follows (vers.
6—16).

Vers. 1—5 appear to be the preface of
a song of thanksgiving, intended for public
recitation at one of the great public festivals
— either the Passover or the Feast of
Tabernacles,

Vers. 6 — 16 are part of a psalm of com-
plaint, wherein God expostulates with his
people.

Ver. 1- — Sing aloud unto God our Strength.
"Loud" singing is regarded as indicative
of earnestness and sincerity (see 2 Chron. xx.
19; Nell. xii. 42; Pss. xxxiii. 3; xcviii. 4,
etc.). (On God as Israel's " Strength," see
Pss. xxvli. 1 ; zxviii. 8 ; xlvi. 1 ; cxi. 7.)
Hake a joyful noise unto the God of Jacob.
The word translated "make a joyful noise"
is especially usel of the blare of trumpets
(Lev. xxiiL 24 ; Kumb. zxix. 1).

Ver. 2. — Take a psalm; or, lift up a song.
And bring hither the timbrel ; rather, strike
the timbrel. The pleasant harp with the
psaltery. The instruments ordinarily used
in the service of the sanctuary were harps,
psalteries, and o;mbals (1 Chron. xv. 16;
xvi. 5: XXV. 6; 2 Chron. v. 12; xxlv. 25;



Neb. xii. 27). Here the timbrel (cp) seems
to take the place of the cymbal.

Ver. 3. — ^Blow up the trumpet in the new
moon. There was a blowing of trumpets
at the beginning of every month (Numb.
X. 10), in connection with the appointed
sacrifices (Lev. xxviii. 11 — 15); so that
the monlh intended cannot, so far, be
fixed. As, however, the chief blowing
of trumpets was on the first day of the
seventh month (Lev. xxiii, 24), most com-
mentators re<;ard the psalm as composed for
this occasion. Tliere are some, however,
as Hengstenberg, Professor Cheyne, and
Professor Alexander, who consider it to l^e
a Passover psalm. In the time appointed ;
rather, at the full moon ; i.e. on the fifteenth
day of the seventh month, when the Feast
of Tabernacles was opened (see Numb. xxix.
12). Trumpets were probably blown then
also. On our solemn feast-day. The Feast
of Tabernacles is called kot' iioxh", "the
feast," in many passages of the Old Testa-
ment (see Professor Clieyne's comment on
this psalm, « Book of Psalms," p. 228).

Ver. 4. — For this was a statute for Israel,
and a law of the Ood of Jacob ; rather, this is
a law (Kay, Cheyne, Bevised Version). v><ee
the passages quoted in the preceding note.

Ver. 5. — This he ordained in Joseph for a
testimony. The special mention of "Joseph "
here is strange. Professor Cheyne explains,
"God appointed the Law to be valid in
northern as well as southern Israel." Heng-
stenberg and Professor Alexander account
for the expression by the pre-eminence of
Joseph during the sojourn in Egypt. When
he went out through the land of Egypt.
When he (Joseph) went out over (or,
across) the lanJ," (.e. at the time of the
Exodus. Where I heard a language that
I understood not. It can scarcely be
supposed that this clause belongs properly



168



THE BOOK OF PSALMS.



[PS. LXXXI. 1 — 16.



to ver. 5. It is rather an introduction to
the monody wherewith the psalm (as it has
come down to us) concludes— the mournful
complaint of God against his people. So
Professor Oheyne, who translates, "The
discourse of one whom I had not known (i.e.
of God) did I hear."

Vers. 6-16.— The "discourse" ig now
given. It commences somewhat abruptly,
and is, perhaps, itself a fragment, the he-
ginning of which is lost. God reminds
Israel of liis past favours (vers. 6, 7), ex-
horts them to faithfulness (vers. 8, 9),
promises them blessings (ver. 10), com-
plains of their waywardness (vers. 11, 12),
and finally makes a last appeal to them to
turn to him, and recover bis protection,
before it is too late (vers. 13 — 16).

Ver. 6. — I removed his shoulder from the
burden. In Egypt, burdens were borne
upon the shoulder, either simply held upon
it with both hands, or distributed Ijetween
the two shoulders by means of a yoke (see
Bawlinson's 'Herodotus,' vol. ii. p. 214).
His hands were delivered from the pots;
rather, from the basket ; i.e. the basket in
which the clay was carried before it was
made into bricks.

Ver. 7. — Thou calledst in trouble, and I
delivered thee (see Exod. ii. 23 ; iii. 7 ; xiv.

10, etc.). I answered thee in the secret
place of thunder. The pillar of the cloud
seems to be meant. In this, and from this,
God answered the cry of his people (Exod.
xiv. 24). I proved thee at the waters of
Meribah (Exod. xvii. 7). The "selah"
after these words marks a pause, during
which the people addressed might reflect
on the manifold mercies which God liad
vouchsafed to tliem in Egypt, in the wilder-
ness, and elsewhere.

Ver. 8. — Hear, my people (oomp. vers.

11, 13). Israel is still "God's people,"
however rebellious (vers. 11, 12). God has
not yet given them up. And I will testify
unto thee J or, "protest unto thee" (Kay,
Cheyne). Israel, if thou wilt hearken
unto me ; or, " if thou wouldst but hearken
unto me ! "

Ver. 9. — There shall no strange god be
in thee; neither shalt thou worship any
strange god (comp. Exod. xx. 3; Deut. v.
7). iSuch worship had evidently began,
and required to be forbidden afresb.

Ver. 10. — I am the lord thy Goi, which
brought thee out of the land of. Egypt.
The reminder was continually needed (see
Exod. XX. 2; Lev. xxvi. 13; Deut. t. 6;
Hos. xii. 9 ; xiii. 4). Open thy mouth wide,
and I will fill it (comp. 2 EingB xiii. 19).
God's gifts, both temporal and spiritual, are



proportioned to our eager longing for them.
As Christ could not do his miracles in one
place because of their unbelief (Mark yi. 5,
6), so God cannot give lavishly unless we
desire largely.

Ver. 11. — But my people would not hearken
to my voice (comp. Ps. Ixxviii. 10, 41, 56 ;
2 Kings xvii. 14 ; 2 Chron. xxxvi. 15, 16X
And Israel would none of me; literally,
would not obey me (see tlje Prayer-book
Version).

Ver. 12.— So I gave them up unto their
own hearts' lust. God's Spirit will not
always strive with men (Gen. vi. 3). After
a time, if they persist in evil courses and
disobedience to his commands, lie " gives
them up," withdraws from tbem, leaves
them to themselves, to the " lust," or rather
"stubboinness" of their own hearts — ^to
their own perverse wills and imaginations.
And they walked in their own counsels
(comp. Jer. vii. 24). This result is inevit-
able. If God no longer guides their thoughts
and enlightens their understandings, they
can but follow their own foolish counsels,
and the result cannot but be disastrous.

Ver. 13. — Oh that my people had heark-
ened unto me! rather, would hearken unto
me! (see Professor Driver's 'Hebrew Tenses,'
§ 145, and compare the Eevised Version).
And Israel had walked in my ways ! rather,
would walk I

Ver. 14. — I should soon have subdued
(rather, 1 should soon subdue) their enemies.
Israel is stiU surrounded by enemies, anxious
for his destruction. God could subdue them
and sweep them away in a moment, if he
pleased ; and would do so, if Israel would
repent and return to him. The appeal is to
the living Israel — the Israel of the psalmist's
time, which is given one more chance of
triumph over its enemies. And turned my
hand against their adversaries. Logically,
the two clauses should have been inverted,
since the subjugation of Israel's enemies
wuulil be the effect of God's hand being
turned against them.

Ver. 15. — The haters of the Lord. Israel's
enemies are always spoken of as God's
enemies also (comp. Fss. iii. 2, 7; ix. 3;
Ixviii. 1 ; Ixxix. 6, 7, etc.). They " hate "
Jehovah (Pss. xxi. 8 ; Ixxxiii. 2), not merely
as Israel's Protector, but as the Source of all
good, whereas they delight in evil. Should
have submitted themselves unto him; rather,
should submit themselves, or "should yield
feigned obedience" (Authorized Version,
margin). But their time (i.e. Israel's time)
should have endured for ever; rather, s/iouM
endure.

Ver. 16.— He should have fed them also;
rather, he should feed. With the finest of
the wheat; literally, with the fat of the
wheat (comp, Deut. xxxii. 14 and Ps. cxlvii.



PS. LXXXI. 1 — 16.]



THE BOOK OF PSALMS.



169



14). And with honey out of the rook should
I have satisfied thee ; rather, would I satisfy
thee. The expression, "honey out of the
rock," is taken from Dent, sxxii. 13. It
evidently means "honey of the best" —



native honey, stored by the bees in clefto
of the rocks. Of course, both the " wheat "
and the "honey" are metaphors, which
we are to regard as shadowing forth all
temporal and spiritual blessings.



HOMILETICS.

Ver. 13. — Ood's lamentation over man's lost opportunities. " Oh that my people,"
etc. I Among the saddest words ever spoken are those we utter concerning what might
have leen. Lost opportunities ; neglected duties ; mischance that was within a hair-
breadth of good fortune ; misunderstandings that a little candour or patience would
have prevented ; voices we do not listen to, but whose echoes hauat us ; the joy,
wealth, success, love, happiness, within our grasp, if we had not let ttiem slip; — what a
weight of meaning, depth of sadness, these put into the words, " It might have been " 1
How many lives are wearing themselves out in the gloom of failure or disappoint-
ment! what countless multitudes have closed in sorrow and shame, whose whole
course would have been different, if at some " parting of the ways," perhaps in the
early morning of life, they had not taken the wrong turn ! A more awful depth of
meaning and pathos beIon;;s to the closing verses of this psalm. God's lamentation
over man's lost opportunities. We speak of what might have been and has been ;
God speaks of what ought to have been on men's part, and what surely would have
been on his.

L God's view op human life. The Bible mode of regarding human life differs
from the way in which we naturally look at our own lives, by the same distinction
wliich marks off Bible history from ordinary history, Bible poetry from ordinary
poetry, Bible morality or ethics from those of ordinary moralists — supre7ne universal
reference to God. Account for it as you please, the Scriptures in this respect stand
apart from all other literature. Man naturally puts himself, as the old astronomers
the earth, as the centre of all things. The Bible teaches him that God is the Centre
as well as Source of all life (Eom. xi. 36). Even religious people talk and think of
religion as an important element in human life, essential to its true happiness, neglect
ef which is guilty and disastrous. The Bible speaks of and to men as made for God,
missing the whole purpose and blessing of life if estranged from him. So while we
look at what is, God's Word shows him beholding what ought to be. We picture what
might have heen, he tells us what would have been ; we hope or fear what may be, he
reveals what tuill be. We are absorbed in the present ; God shows us its root in the
past, its fruit in the future (Gal. vi. 7, 8). It may be asked — What room, then, for
repentance and pardon ? Is not this to throw us back imder the dominion and con-
demnation of law f Answer : God's laws are of two sorts : the law of love and duty,
fulfilled by willing obedience, which, therefore, man can disobey and break; and
natural laws — spiritual as well as material — which cannot be broken. For God to set
them aside vvoiid be to destroy, not to save. E.g. the thief, the liar, the drunkard,
may repent of his sin, and God will pardon it ; but the restoration of confidence, and
conscious sense of honesty, or the regaining ot health destroyed by intemperance, can
come only by the practice of the appropriate virtues.

II. The ebal tueninq-point of life. God's own voice here sets forth the
blessings which Israel not only might, but certainly would, have enjoyed, if they had
not flung them away wilfully, ungratefully, madly (vers. 14 — 16). What, then, hin-
dered V Where was the false step — "the parting of the ways"? Answer: vers. 11,
12. This was the secret of all Israel's calamities and misery. Note that the Eevised
Version here uses the present and the future (vers.. 13 — 16). The Hebrew equally
admits this rendering ; nothing forbids our combining both meanings. But the refer-
ence of the whole psalm is to the past. It begins with a shout of joy, referring to the
Feast of Trumpets, the beginning of the (civil) year, and the Feast of Tabernacles, at
full moon of the same month. Then looks back to the institution of these festivals, the
Law of Moses, the deliverance from Egypt. Then to the whole subsequei)t history —
one long record of rebellion and ingratitude (Jer. xxii. 21).



170 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. lxixl 1— 16.

The LEBSON is for us (1 Cor. x. 11). By " turning-point of life " I mean not some
one fatal crisis, at some special time (though such there are, in many lives), but the
guiding force, determining motive, master principle, which gives character to each day
as well as to the whole life ; makes each step an advance in the right path, or an error.
Obedience to the voice of Ood. 1. In his Word (John x. 27 ; xii. 47 — 50). 2.
Conscience, which is the inward echo of God's voice. 3. His providence. 4, His
Spirit, who alone can give the hearing ear and understanding heart. Here is some-
thing sadder yet : " Israel would none of me " (John v. 40, 42 ; viii. 47). To disobey,
to wander, to be lost, you need not resolve on self-destruction ; you need only to be
careless, let things drift, like one who sleeps when his boat is drifting towards the
rapids. You can be careless. God cares. " Oh that my people," etc. 1 (Luke xix. 41,
42 ; Matt, xxiii. 37).



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Ver. 10. — "Open thy mouth wide;" or, great expectations encouraged. There is no
one that we like less than a man who is always begging. Our way is to tell people
who ask of us, that they are not to come again, or that we can do but very little for
them. And those who ask know how we feel, and hence they plead, perhaps, that
they have never asked before, or that they never will again, or that they only ask for
a very little. Kow, it is not difScult to defend this our common conduct with sup-
pliants ; but what a contrast it offers to our God's dealing with us I He does not send
us away when we come to him, nor complain that we come so often, or that we ask so
much ; but, as here, he encourages our greatest expectations, and bids us " open our
mouth wide," etc. Such immense encouragement does he give to tis to all boldnesg
in prayer.

"Thou art coming to a King,
Large petitions with thee bring ;
For his grace and power are such.
None can ever ask too much,"

The psalmist had probably often noticed how the young birds open their mouths wide
for the food which they know the parent bird will give them, and for which, therefore,
they wait with such eager expectancy. And he points to this familiar fact, and bids
his countrymen in like manner expect blessing from God, for God will not disappoint
them. Now, on this subject, note —

I. That there abb some who nevbe open theib mouths at all. They do not
believe in prayer, they count it so much waste breath, and affirm that it avails no
more than the [jiteous cry of the hare when she knows that the hounds are upon her.
They urge that all things are governed by fixed law, and no desire of ours, however
fervent, can make the slightest alteration. Or else, they say that if what we ask for
be right for God to give, he will give it without our prayer; that if it be not right,
then, as certainly, he will not give it : he knows our need without our telling him.
But we have one short reply to all this, and we say to all such disbelievers in prayer-
Have you ever really prayed ? Myriads of believing souls there are who with one
voice will affirm, " I sought the Lord, and he heard me ; " and we prefer to believe
these who know that God heareth prayer, rather than you who have never really
prayed.

II. Thebe abb othebb who open theib mouths, but not "wide," m we are
here bidden to do. They pray, but they do not expect much to come from it. In
words they ask for great things, but they do not really believe they will have them.
Our Lord's command to us is, "When ye pray, believe that ye receive" (Mark xi. 24).
Kcw, in regard to temporal blessings, it may be that we cannot have confident expec-
tation that we shall have the precise favour we ask for ; but we ought to have such
expectation that that which is really best for us God will certainly give. But in
regard to spiritual blessings, such as deliverance from sin, for which, in words, we so
constantly pray, we ought to expect the very blessing itself. " The blood of Jesus



P8. Lxxxi. 1—16.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 171

Christ . . . cleanseth from all sin ; " there is, therefore, absolute warrant for expecting
such cleansing; and we need not think, though practically we do, that the blunder ol
» little lad known to the writer, is really the truth. In repeating the General Con-
fession, when he came to the words, " and there is no health in us," he substituted for
them, " and there is no help for it." And that is what so many practically think.
They remember their own grievous past, they know the force of long evil habit, and
their own wretched weakness, and they see the persistence of evil and sin everywhere,
even in the good ; and they come to the sorrowful conclusion that " there is no help
for it" this side the grave. They have no real expectation of deliverance, and, there-
fore, they do not get it. And yet people go on perpetually asking for it. The reason
of their not having is that they will not open their mouths wide, and so God cannot
fill them with his blessing. But —

III. NONB EVEB WILL, UNLESS THE CONDITIONS OF BUOH EXPECTATION BE FUL-

FILLED. There must be : 1. A mouth to open ; that is, power to believe. Now, we
all have that, and use it every day about other things. 2. Need of Ood's hlessing.
Unquestionably there is that. 3. Sense of this need. Consciousness of it, and distress
because of it. Hunger after God's blessing. 4. Will to believe. Trust is more a
matter of the will than of the reason. " I wiU trust, and not be afraid." Befiise to
doubt, resolve to believe. — S. 0.

Vers. 11, 12. — Given vp. Note —

I. The CONDITION contemplated. It meant : 1. No longer held hack from tin.
" Their own hearts' lust " was to lead them now. 2. No longer urged to goodness.
3. The Spirit no longer striving with them. 4. Divine chastisements abandoned. (Cf.
Isa. i. 5.) See the history of Israel for proof of all this. And it is true still, when a
soul is " given up" by God — when even his resources seem exhausted.

II. Its terrible coNSEQaENCES. 1. They are often natwaUy visible. A God-
forsaken people. Church, soul, can be readily recognized. Disaster, defeat, shame,
weakness, death, — ^these are some of the outward signs. 2. They are felt vriihin. (See
the history or Saul, 1 Sam. xxviii. 6.) Ah ! the inward misery of the soul given up
of God.

III. The invariable cause. (Hos. iv. 17 ; and see text.) 1. They would not
hearken to Ood's voice. Neither by his messengers, nor through conscience, nor in provi-
dence. 2. They would have none of God. They cared neither for his favour nor for
his frown.

IV. The Divine beluotanob to thus deal with them. (Ver. 13 ; Hos. xi. 8 ;
Matt, xxiii. 37 ; Luke xiii. 34.) — S. C.

Ver. 12. — Our own way our worst woe. Our text a declaration of God's dealing with
rebellious men. We note concerning it that —

I. It tells of a punishment which seems no punishment at all. Those
who rebelled so grievously Hgainst God were allowed to do just as they liked, to have
their own way as they pleased. 1. Now, our text does tell of punishment. It is not
a statement of indifference on the part of God, or of failure, but of his holy displeasure.
2. And it is a punishment of which we have many instances. As when Israel lusted
after flesh (Ps. Ixxviii. 30). And when they would have a king, and God gave them
Saul (1 Sam. xii. ; Hos. xiii.). The history of Balaam. Ephraim joined to his idols.
The devils asking and being allowed to enter the swine at Gadara. " Not this man,
but Barabbas ! " and they had their way. The prodigal would go into the far country.
And there are many other illustrations beside. 3. Qod is slow to resort to it. He
tries all other means first, 4. It convinces when none other will. Men are forced to
believe, then, that God was right and they wrong. 6. But it seems the reverse of punish-
ment. For the Law of God was to Israel a yoke which galled and fretted and chafed
them incessantly. Its "thou shalt not" met them at every turn of their lives. Now,
this punishment seemed to be deliverance from the yoke and licence to do as they pleased.
Where was the punishment in that ? S. And men think the same still. For to them
the service of God is so much restraint, religion a tight torturing ligature, which holds
them back from what they choose, and binds them down to what they would never
choose. And undoubtedly religion is a restraint and a bond. We are never to conceal



172 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [pb. lxxxi. 1—16.

this fact, and the really religious have no desire to. But men generally do not like it
at all, and are gkd to be rid of it.

II. But it is a punishment so teeeiblb that none oak bb mobk so. To be
given up to our own hearts' lust is God's most awful doom. 1. What would such
to-caned liberty he in other regions t Suppose the stars, instead of obeying their
Creator's laws, were each to wander at its own will ? Wiiere would music be if the
laws of harmony were not obeyed ? What home would that be where there was no
l^w? Or state, where anarchy prevailed? 2. And so in regard to the s<ml. Man
is made for God, and, as St. Augustine says, " Nostrum cor inquietum est donee
requiescat in te." It must be so. See the varied and appalling judgments of which
the Bible tells — the Deluge ; Sodom ; the destruction of Pharaoh, etc. What are
they all but the natural results of determined sin ? Better any punishment — even hell
itself — than that God should leave us alone, or give us up, as told of here.

Conclusion. Are you suffering under the hand of God now ? Then assuredly he
has not left you alone. Turn to him. Are you at ease in sin ? Then " Awake, thou
that sleepest I " You have need to. Are you serving God ? Then let all men know
that his service is perfect freedom, the delight of your soul. — S. C.

Vers. 13 — 16. — What might have been. These verses tell what Israel missed, but
might have had. And they are written for our learning. Note —

I. What God was prepaebd to do fob them. 1. Subdue their enemies. 2. Dis-
comfit their adversaries, 3. Conversions should have been numerous. 4. Eternal Ufe
should have been theirs. 6. And fulness of joy. And in reference to men now : God
waits to be gracious and to do all for them that corresponds to the blessings told of
here.

II. But none or this came to pass ; only the very opposite. In their character,
conduct, and condition, things went from bad to worse. Enemies not subdued ; their
adversaiies became stronger; sin rampant; their days few and evil ; want and misery
in their dwellings.

III. How SUCH result came about. 1. It was not God's will. CI. the tears of
Christ over Jerusalem. " How often would I have gathered thee," etc. ! 2. But it
was Israel's own fault. (Vers. 11, 12.) Thus it ever is.

IV. The sorkow of it all. God dishonoured ; the Holy Spirit grieved ; their
children and their neicrhbours led astray ; themselves given up of God ; and all this
need not have been. Dread the doom of such. — S. C.

Vers. 1 — 3. — The consecration of music. Instrumental music was associated with
the Mosaic festivals ; but the organization of music lor ordinary religious worship is
supposed to have been the work of David. The important differences between ideas of
music in the ancient East and in the modern West needs to be carefully shown. Noise
is chiefly considered in the East, harmonies are most valued in the West. Even the
chanting at religious services was more like that which we call " Gregorian " than like
the double tunes ordinarily used. Public services gained a new and attractive feature
when music was introduced into them ; and those gifted with the power of singing and
)ilaying were allowed to take part in them. Then public services rose from being bare
duty to become personal pleasure. Perhaps £)avid's work in consecrating to God's
worship poetical and musical gifts has never been worthily estimated. Thomson tells
us that " the Orientals know nothing of harmony, and cannot appreciate it when
heard." He went to a grand concert of instrumental musicians. " Seated on a raised
platform at one end of the room were half a dozen performers, discoursing strange
music from curious instruments, interspersed with wild bursts of song, which seemed
to electrify the congregation. They had a violin, two or three kinds of flutes, and a
taiubourine. One man sat by himself, and had a large harp." " No doubt the temple
service, performed by those who trained for it, stirred the deepest fountains of feeling
in the vast assemblies of Israel, at the great feasts."

L Tbx consecration of music and sons to God. All man's talents, gifts, and
endowments can be devoted to the service of God. Man has no power — poetical,
artistic, musical, dramatic, or practical — in the use of which he cannot or may not
serve God. Very strange was the notion once entertained that instrumental music



P8. Lxxxi. 1— 16.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 178

was not becoming to God's worship. And even yet there is a, strange limitation to
particular instruments, which alone are regarded as appropriate. We need to see more
clearly that every gift has its Divine sphere nf service.

II. The conseobation of mdsio and sons to man. Especially to man's artistic
culture, and to man's pleasant and healthy recreation. The gifted in this direction are
human benefactors. But we need to secure consecration to the highest and best
interests of man. The gifted should never pander to low tastes, or help to degrade
their fellows.

III. The conseobation op music and bono to the servioe op Gk)D thbouqh
THE BBBVioE OF MAN. Thls should be the high aim of all the gifted. In the use of
their gifts so to serve their fellow-men, as that God should be glorified through their
ministry. — E. T.

Ver, 4, — Authority in religion. " For this was a statute for Israel." Reference is
directly to the " blowing up the trumpet in the new moon." However that might be
done, because it was felt to be suitable, or because it was pleasant, it had to be done
because it was required ; and it would have to be done, whether men could recognize
its suitability or not, whether men found it pleasant or not. There is authority in
relation to religious observances ; some persons more readily recognize and respond to
that authority than others ; but all pious persons find somewhere and in something an
ultimate basis of appeal. For some it is the inspired Scriptures, for some it is the
witness of the universal Church, and for some it is the requirement of some duly
authorized teacher. There has always been discussion as to the proper centre of
authority in religion, and the universal Church is divided into sections by the variety
of opinion on this subject.

I. AUTHOBITT IN BELIOION MCST SATISFY MAN CONOEENING THE TRUTH. So many

men always have been, and some always must be, incompetent to decide perplexing
doctrinal or ethical questions for themselves. Some are unduly biassed by education ;
some have neither mental powers nor leisure time for carrying on thenecessary studies.
In every department of truth, most men take their opinions on the authority of others ;
and it is even more necessary, in regard to the higher truths of religion, that men
should have their standards and their guides. True, we have the Bible ; but men like
Anselm, Augustine, Calvin, and Wesley, with the great teachers of later days, have
been authorities in religious truth to thousands.

II. Authority in eeligion must limit man's vagaries. The speculative faculty
leads men, in these times, to wander in all sorts of unknown regions ; and produces a
restlessness and uncertainty which are seriously imperilling faith. Perhaps we read
men's books too much, and God's book too little. Happy they who can rest in the
" truths most surely believed among us," because they are declared with an authority
which they can recognize.

III. Authority in religion must enforce man's duties. Social life has changed
the conception of what is becoming to a Christian. We want guidance in the modem
endeavour to live the Christian life. Self-indulgence weakens our will, and we want
the help of distinct requirements in ordering our religious habits. But yielding to
authority must be kept within healthy limitations, and preserve personal independence
and responsibility. — R. T.

Ter. 5. — JTie wnhnovm tongue. " I heard a language that I understood not." It is

exceedingly difficult to trace the meaning of this sentence. The first suggestion is, that
it may refer to the sojourning Israelites not understanding the language of the Egyptians.
Another suggestion is, that Israel did not understand the voice of God when heard
from Sinai. Jennings and Lowe give a fresh and striking suggestion. They think
the sentence is the utterance of God when passing over Egypt to judge it ; and they
trauslate, speaking thus, " The saying, ' I know not,' I will hear." The reference is to
the boastful saying of Pharaoh, " Who is the Lord, that I should obey his voice? I
know not the Lord." And God is represented as saying, " I will hear his speech; I
will take notice of it; I will punish it." If we are to assume that Ood is speaking in
this verse, as he seems to be in ver. 6, then this reference to Pharaoh may be accepted.
Another idea is, that in this sentence the psalmist makes a sudden break, and abruptly



174 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. lxxxi. 1— 16.

exclaims, " The language of one I know not, I hear ; " and what he hears he proceed!
to tell in the following verses. God's voice sounded strange to him.

I. The unknoww voice of God. Illustrate by the direct speaking of God from
Sinai, which so alarmed the people. All close communications of God with men,
whether by vision or voice, are humbling, surprising, and overwhelming. Unknown,
in the sense of being unfamiliar ; and unknown because unexpected. G-od communi-
cates in the language of men, since he desires to be understood ; but bis will is usually
revealed through human agencies.

II. The unkkown lanouaoe or Egypt. This may be shown to have made part
of the burden and trouble of Israel, from which God so graciously delivered them. It
was the land of the stranger, and thedififerent language spoken by the inhabitants
constantly reminded Israel of its bondage and its hope.

III. The " UNKNOWN " de(x.abatiok of Fhabaoh. His saying, " I know not."
His declaring that Jehovah was to him unknown. His language about " not know-
ing" the God of the Hebrews. God took notice of the boastful speech ; for the declara-
tion that be did not know really meant that he did not care, and so he must be made to
know, by seeing and feeling the judgments which Jehovah executeth. It is necessary
to remember that Eastern poetical figures are often far-fetched, and very difficult to
trace.— R. T.

Ver. 7. — " The secret place of thunder.'" " Thunder-covert;" literally, " hiding-place of
thunder;" f.e. the darli thunder-clouds, from behind which God spoke to the Israelites.
Some writers find a reference to the pillar of cloud and fire, in which God appeared for
the guiding of Israel's journey. But there is no special reason for calling the pillar of
cloud a " thunder-cloud." The poet is, in a very general way, reviewing the Divine
dealings with Israel ; and here the troubles connected with the time at Sinai are clearly
referred to. The " hiding-place of thunder" is surely the " thick darkness where God
was " (Exod. XX. 21) ■when the Law was given from the " smoking mountain," amid
" thunderings and lightnings." The writer of the Epistle to the Hebrews rhetori-
cally contrasts the revelations from Sinai and from Zion (Heb. xii. 18 — 24). His
description of the revelation given from Sinai may help us to understand this poetical
figure, " the secret place of thunder." " Ye are not come unto a mount that might be
touched, and that burned with fire, nor unto blackness, and darkness, and tempest,
and the sound of a trumpet, and the voice of words ; which voice they that heard
intreated that the words should not be spoken to them any more." Thunder, then,
may be taken, poetically, as the characteristic of the Old Testament dispensation. We
must keep in mind two things: (1) the intensity of the thunder-noise in mountain
districts ; and (2) the peculiar Eastern sentiments about thunder. In illustration of (1),
Dr. Stewart gives the following experience of a thunder-storm at Mount Sinai. " Every
ball, as it burst, with the roar of a cannon, seemed to awaken a series of distinct echoes
on every side ; . . . they swept like a whirlwind among the higher mountains, becom-
ing faint as some mighty peal^ intervened, and bursting with undiminished volume
through some yawning cleft, till the very ground trembled with the concussion. . . .
It seemed as if the mountains of the whole peninsula were answering one another in a
chorus of the deepest bass. Ever and anon a flash of lightning dispelled the pitchy
darkness, and lit up the mount as if it had been day ; then, after the interval of a few
seconds, came the peal of thunder, bursting like a shell, to scatter its echoes to the
four quarters of the heavens, and overpowering for a moment the loud howlinga of the
wind." In illustration of (2), the fear produced by thunderings now may be shewn,
though superstitious ideas are checked by some measures of scientific knowledge.
The fear of thunder is shared by the animals in the fields. Thunder, then, is the
fitting illustration of the old dispensation; but unsuitable to the n«u? dispensation.
It fits the old because it impresses on man the sense of mystery ; it gives man an idea
oi force ; and it fills man's mind with /ear.

I. Thunder brings a sense of mystebt. In those days, how it comes was not
known. Always, when it comes is not known. It was, and it still is, something over
which men can only wonder. Show that this character is preserved in the God of the
Old Testament. He hides himself. " Clouds and darkness are round about him."
His voice is to man but as the inarticulate thunder. In some ages of the world, and in



PS. Lxxxi. 1— X6.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 175

Bome conditions of the race, mystery in God is the hest education ; it awakens the
spiritual faculties in child-ages, as it does in children.

IL Tbdndeb aiVEB man an idea of force. When he hears it, man feels there is

something wholly beyond his control. And force must be felt by the Israelites to lie

behind law. He who gives the Law must %e felt able to enforce its sanctioni. Joubert

' tells ns that the absolute rule of moral training is " force till right is ready." The

, thunderings and lightnings of Sinai impressed the force of the Divine authority.

/ III. Thundeb fills uen's minds with feab. If fear is not the highest motive

inspiring obedience, it is the necessary motive for many people, and the first motive for

•IL Fear is not lost, as the inspiration of obedience, in Cbristianity, it is only glorified

in love. " Perfect love casteth out fear." Storm and tempest clear the atmospbere,

»nd prepare for the warmth and quickening of the steady sunshine ; and so the thunder

»f the Old Testament prepares for the life-giving sunshine of the New. — B. T.

Ver. 9. — Z%e sole Ohj'ect of worship. This verse recalls to mind the second recitation
of the Decalogue in Deut. v. " In ver. 9 the key-note of the revelation of the Law from
Sinai is struck ; the fundamental command which opens the Decalogue demanderl
fidelity to Jehovah, and forbade idol-worship as the sin of sins." The claim of
Jehovah on the Israelites needs to be precisely described. God, as El, was very
generaUy, perhaps universally, known. But men went wrong, in relation to him, when
tliey began to make representations of him. Then two things happened : (1) di£ferent
representations became fixed to different localities and countries ; and (2) the represen-
tations came to be worshipped, rather than the spiritual Being whom they represented.
Israel was selected, as a nation, to preserve for the world the imperilled primary truth
of the unity and spirituality of God. So two things are firmly asserted as the basis of
God's revelation of his will to Israel.

I. God 18 THE ONE God of the whole earth. " Hear, Israel, the Lord thy
God is one Lord." " The God of the whole earth shall he be called." There are no
such things as " strange gods." An idol is a " nothing," a " vanity." God is God
alone. See the importance of this for Israel. Looking on the nations around them,
they might imagine that the gods of the nations were doing better for them than
Jehovah was doing for his people, and so they might be tempted to join service
to these strange gods with service to Jehovah. So they must learn that God was
really the G«d of all nations ; the one and only true God. In view of our work among
the heathen, we still must hold fast this primary and fnndamental truth — there is but
one God; and he is as truly the God of the heathen as of the civilized and the
Christianized.

IL God is the one Object of human worship. Man must worship. He feels
dependent. He must look out of himself for some one on whom to lean. He must be
sure that be on whom he leans is absolutely trustworthy. There never can be more
than one absolutely trustworthy Being. If right ideas be attached to God, we must
feel that there can only be one God. He must be the perfect realization of our highest
conceptions ; and therefore our admiration and our dependence will unite to make him
the sole Object of worship. He who knows God wants to worship no other. — B. T.

Ver. 10. — Sufficiency in Ood. " Open thy mouth wide, and I will fill it." What-
soever be the needs or the desires of God's people, there is abundance of grace for the
supplying of the needs, and the satisfying of the desires. Compare our Lord's saying
tc his disciples, " Hitherto have ye asked nothing in my Name ; ask, and ye shall
receive, that your joy may be full." The figure in the text is explained in Thomson's
' Land and the Book.' " It is said to have been a custom in Persia, that when the king
wishes to do a visitor especial honour, he desires him to open his mouth wide, and th<-
king then crams it full of sweetmeats, and sometimes even with jewels. And to thic
day it is a mark of politeness in Orientals to tear o£f the daintiest bits of meat for a
guest, and either lay them before him, or put them in bis mouth." In declaring himself
to be Israel's Gkid, and demanding the sole and entire worship of the people, Jehovah
graciously adds the assurance, that he is at once able and willing to meet and supply
all their need. He could not ask their entire trust if he was not efSoient to meet all
their wants. There was no call to seek the help of any strange god, for they were in



176 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps, txxxi. 1—18.

no sense straitened in Jehovah. This subject may be applieri to Christians by taking
illustrations, from the history of Israel's wanderings, of the loUowing points.

I. SuPFioiENCT IN God fob Israel's known needs. These concerned (1) daily
supply ; (2) wise guidance ; (3) efficient defence ; (4) patient bearing with infirmitieB ;
(5) provision for social relations and national requirements. So we can never think of
any want we have that is beyond God's supply.

II. SuFFioiBNOT IN GoD FOB Isbael's UNKNOWN NEEDS. For OUT Teal needg ar«
not those we find out for ourselves. Those are our superficial needs, and often not
even real needs. It introduces a surprise of grace to say there is the supply in God <A
all the needs of which he knows and we do not. Olten it is God's supplying ns that
brings the consciousness of the need. How good tbat God's grace is not limited by our
knowleHgel

III. SuFFioiENOT IN GoD IS ASSOCIATED WITH GOOD WILL. That gets expression
in gracious and satisfying assurances and promises. — B. T.

Ver. 11. — The sin of self-wiU. Observe that the sin of which complaint is here
made is not that Israel did not hearken, but that Israel would not hearken. God goes
in behind the acts of disobedience, and is concerned with the spirit of wilfulness which
found expression in the acts. The judgment of God upon them brings to view the
special feature of their sin. " So I gave them up to the obduracy of their heart, that
they should walk in their own counsels " (ver. 12).

I. Self-will as the bin into which men fell. Self-will is the perverted use
of free-will. Free-will could be self-will if man were an independent creature. Free-
will must not be self-will, because man is a dependent creature. Free-will became
self-will, because man allowed himself to be guided by what seemed " pleasant to the
eyes and good for food," rather than by what he knew to be the will of him on whom
he depended. Serving himself is the essence of sin for one who has been made
dependent — in every way dependent — ^upon God. What we have to counteract is the
delusion that man is an independent being, and therefore may " follow the devices and
desires of his own heart." Illustrate from Dan. v. 28.

II. Self-will as the sin from which men are delivered. There are penalties
into which men have brought themselves by their self-will, and from these they need
to be delivered. But it would be no effective redemption that dealt only with penalties.
Deliverance from self-willedness, in a dependent creature, can only be effected by
making him on whom he depends so infinitely attractive that he wins full trust and
obedience. And this is accomplished by God's manifestation of himself to men in the
Person, life, and sacrifice of the Lord Jesus Christ.

III. Self-wilIj as the sin into which the redeemed are in danger of falling
back. Illustrate from the Israelites, as redeemed unto the service of Jehovah, from
Egypt. Bring out (1) the open ways, and (2) the subtle ways, in which nowadays
Christians may be tempted to the self-trust which breaks them away from their
dependence on God. — E. T.

Ver. 13. — The sorrow of Ood. Occasioned by this — ^he could not do for his people
what he would. He would have delivered them from their foes, and fed them with the
finest of the wheat. They, by their conduct, compelled him to withhold his hand, and
even to smite instead of bestow. Compare the sorrow of Christ when looking from
Olivet upon Jerusalem. He mourns over what he would have done for its people; but
they " would not."

I. God's jot in the blessing of his people. Their temporal blessing, when the
state of their minds and hearts makes his giving temporal blessings the highest moral
and spiritual good to them. It is not merely that God " gives us all things richly to
enjoy ; " it is that he loves to give ; he finds his joy in giving. Illustrate from the
provisions made for Israel.

IL God'b sorrow because of the restraint of hib blessings. Sometimes he
cannot give temporal blessings, because the state of mind and heart of bis people would
turn them into moral and spiritual curses. See in the case of Israel ; how vain, self-
confident, and proud Israel would surely have become, if, taking no notice of its
character, its wilfulness, and murmuring, and rebellion, God had showered all con-



n. l.-TTTTT 1 8.]



THE BOOK OF PSALMS.



177



oriTttble good on the nation 1 It is the grief of love that it must restrain its gifts lest
th«7 should be misused.

A-PPLIOATION. If we lack good things that we desire, and think we need, let us
noYor explain the lack by the Divine unwillingness to bless, or by any vague notions
of Divine "sovereignty." God would give these things to us if, in view of our best
interests, be could. He is to be thought of as grieved that he cannot. And the
thought of his grief should incite ns to get rid of the hindrance that is on our side.
To the trustful, humble, obedient soul God's richest benedictions may safely come.
— B. T.

Yera. 13, 14 (compared with Isa. xlviiL 13). — Man's inconsideratioii. L Odd has
SFOEEir AND BEVEALED TO MAN THK WAY OP UFB. God's ways are the ways of life.
1. Ood's way is the way of law. Physical and moral and spiritual. " Whatsoever a
man soweth," etc. ; " To him that hath shall be given," etc. 2. Qod's way is the way
of love. 3. God's way is the way of faith. So that through it he dispenses pardon,
strength, and oomfort.

II. The sm of has is inconsidebation of God's ways. This leads to: 1. A
neglect of the Divine rule of life. An inconsiderate man is a man without understand.
ing, a man without a steadfast purpose, given over to pleasure and selfishness. 2. A
forfeiture of the Divine help against our difficulties. An inconsiderate man cannot
accept or use the Divine help.

IIL Goo's liAUENT OVER THIS INOONBIDEBATION. 1. It hindered him from a henevo-
lent exercise of hit power on their behalf. " I gave them up to the stubbornness of
their heart : " that was all God could do for them. 2. They are defeated by their
enemies in the battle of life. It is only by God's help we can conquer in the great
struggle we have to maintain. 3. Qod could not nomrish them with heavenly food.
(Deut. xzxii. 13.) The finest of the wheat and honey out of the rock. Like the
prodigal, they lived upon the husks. — S.



EXPOSITION.



PSALM LXXXn.



Two different explanations have been given
of the general bearing and intention of this
psalm — one, recently advocated by Professor
Cheyne, that it is a denunciation of the
angels whom God has put in charge of the
earth (see Dan. x. 13 — 21; xii. 1), on
account of the violence and injustice which
they have connived at and permitted ; the
other, that it is a denunciation of the human
judges in Israel, who are corrupt and op-
pressors of the people. The objection to
the former view is, first, that the angels are
nowhere else taxed with wrong-doing, or
with anything worse than folly (Job xv.
15) ; and, secondly, that it is inconceivable
that God should entrust the government of
the world to such imperfect and peccant
beings. Moreover, that God should threaten
his angels with death (ver. 7) is contrary to
the whole tone and spirit of the rest of
Scripture. The other interpretation is,
therefore, to be preferred. God, standing
amid the angelic host in heaven, denounces

PSALMS — II.



the unjust Judges who are bearing sway
over his people on earth. Tiie writer of the
psalm may well be the Asaph of David's
time. It consists of an exordium (ver. 1) ;
a body, composed of denunciation and threats
(vers. 2 — 7); and a conclusion, calling on
God to take Immediate action (ver. 8).

Ver. 1. — God standeth in the congregation
ef the mighty ; or, " in the congregation of
God " — " the Divine assembly " (see Job i.
6; ii. 1; Isa. vi 1, 2, etc.). M, in the
singular, can scarcely mean the "mighty
ones of earth." He jndgeth among the
gods. He "holds a court of judgment in
heaven, surrounded by the Divine ministers,
who will execute his behests" (Canon
Cook).

Ver. 2. — How long will ye judge unjustly 1
"The cry of the impatient Jehovah"
(Cheyne); eomp. Exod. x. 8; xvi 28; Numb,
xiv. 11, 27. And aooept the persons of the
wicked t Accepting men's persons is favour-
ing them unduly on account of their position
or outward circumstances. It was strictly
forbidden in the Mosaic Law (see Deut. i
17 ; xvi. 19 ; Lev. xix. 15).

Ver. 3. — Defend the poor and fatherless ;
i literally, jvdge them, " Do not deny them

N



178



THE BOOK OP PSALMS.



[P8. LXXXli. 1 8,



justice ; do not refuse to hear their cause "
(oomp. Isa. i. 23; Jer. T. 28). Do justice
to the afflicted and needy. After consent-
ing to hear their cause, be sure thou doest
them justice. These commands are coveit
reproaches.

Yer. 4. — Deliver the poor and needy. The
poor were terribly oppressed, and needed
"deliverance" (see Job xzix. 12; Isa, i
17; iii. 14, 15; Iviit 6; Micah iii, 2, 3).
Bid them out of the hand of the wioked ;
or, rescue them.

Ver. 5, — They know not, neither will
they understand. Scarcely " an aside from
the indignant judge," as Professor Cheyne
suggests, much less a remark interpolated
by the poet (Ewald, Hitzig). Bather a
complaint of human perversity, addressed
by Jehoyah to the augelio host who are
present (ver. 1). It is not an accidental
and excusable ignorance, but a wilful and
guilty one that is spoken of. They walk
on in darkness. Loving darkness rather
than light, because their deeds were evil
(John iii. 19), they walked in the way of
darkness (Pror. iL 13). All the foundations
of the earth are out of course ; rather, are
ihiiken. The fundamental bases on which
the life of man upon the earth rests, the
very principles of morality, are shaken, and
totter to their fall, when those whose place
it ia to administer jnatice pervert it and
deal out injustioe inHtfiad.



Ver. 6. — I have said, Ye are gods; t,e.
"in my Law I have called you gods" — I
have given you this lofty name (see Exod.
xxi. 6; xxii, 8, 9), since ye judge on my
behalf, "as my representatives" (Deut, L
17 ; 2 Chron, xiz. 6 ; Bom. xiii. 1, 2). And
all of yon are children of the Host High.
Not therefore "gods" in the strictest sense,
but possessing a derived, and so a qualified,
divinity.

Yer, 7, — But ye shall die like men. The
name of "gods," even the fact of your
being representatives of God, shall not save
you from condign punishment. Ye shall
be punished with death, as other wicked
men are punished (Pa. Ixxiii. 18). And
fall like one of the princes ; t.e. come to an
untimely end, as so many " princes " have
done (see Josh. xii. 9 — 24;,Judg. i. 7;
iii. 21 ; yii. 25 ; viii. 21, etc.). '

Yer. 8. — ^Arise, God, judge the earth.
The words of God (vers. 2 — 7) being ended,
the psalmist calls upon him to proceed at
once to judgment: but he does not limit
the judgment to Israel's unjust judges,
God Is asked to "arise" and "judge the
earth," i.e. the whole world (oomp. Ps, yii.
7, 8; Ivi. 7; lix. 5). For thou sbalt in-
herit ; or, " for thou doit inherit" " God is
the King of all the earth " (Ps. xlvii. 2),
not of Iraael only. All nations — ^the whole
world — must be regarded aa bia possession
at "inheritanoe,"



H0MILETIC8.

Ver. 1. — A view of human life from above. " God standeth.'eto. Earthly greatneas,
and God's supreme rale of rulers and judgment of judges, are the theme of this sublime,
brief psalm. The psalmist takes his stand on the watch-tower of inspired prophecy;
and gives, as the Bible is wont, a view of human life from aboTe, as seen, not in the
light of man's judgment, but God's (1 Sam. ii. 8 ; Luke L 62).

I. The office and dignity of bulees. In the administration of justice, and claim
to obedience — enforced, in the last resort, by death-penalty — they are ffod's represen-
tatives ; therefore here called " gods." The state, in its care of the lives, property,
duty, and welfare of its citizens, is a kind of earthly providence, entrusted by (Jod
himself with this authority (Bom. xiii. 1 — 4). Here is no reference or limitation to
any special iorm of government, monarchical or republican, aristocratic or demccratia
The right of man to rule over his fellow-men, in whatever particular form of govern-
ment, like the right of parents to the obedience and reverence of their children, can
come only from GtcA. Armies can compel submission. Popular will can create offices,
and choose men to fill them. But men could never create authority. It belongs to
Gk)d. In this doctrine of Scripture (and also of common sense) there is no shadow of
support for the slavish and monstrous doctrine of " the Divine right of kings," with
which the pulpits of England once resounded ; or to the claim that hereditary govern-
ment is more Divine and sacred than elective. What is " ordained of God " is the
maintenance of law and justice, for the welfare of the people and punishment of
wrong-doera, by lawfully constituted public authority.

II. God's sufbbmb bule and biohteoub judgment of gakthlt bulebb. 1. See
the special sins and failures with which the judges or princes of Israel are charged;
and the national disorder and danger thence arising (vers. 2 — 5), Merciful pity for rhe
poor, the oppressed, thoae bereaved of their natural protectors, is a strong characteristic



PS. Lxxxu. 1— 8.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 179

of Bible morality and religion (Jag. i. 27 ; iL 13). Justice is to be enforced for the
sake of mercy. We may say that Divine justice is part of Divine mercy ; " for God is
love." 2. Those high in rank and office are reminded that not only their authority,
but their life, is held from GK>d; at his pleasure every moment (ver. 7). The death of
great men is among the special means by which God's providence contests earthly
atfairs. The master-hand grows cold, and all the threads of policy it wove snap; the
reins it held dvop (Ps. czlvi. 3, 4). Therefore the only consolation to the devout
jiatriot, politician, or lover of men is in turning from the injustice, the instability,
the errors of human governments to the kingdom of Christ. The jMrayer of ver. 8 is
equivalent to our daily prayer, " Thy kingdom come I " Death, which is the ruin of
all other sovereignties, was the foundation of Christ's. What seemed its sudden
blood-red suaset was indeed its ruddy dawn (Heb. iL 9).

HOMILIES BY VABIOUS AUTHORS.

Vers. 1 — 8i—Corrvptio optimi pestima est. We have here a vind picture of the
corruption of men, supposed to he, and who should have been, the best in Israel. It
refers to the judges, and tells them how judges are judged (Acts xxiii. 3). And it may
be applied to all misuse of power or abuse of trust, where, when, or howsoever any may
be guilty thereof. This short psalm tells much concerning—

I. The Divine estimate of nations svoh as Isbael. They are " the congrega-
tion of God." This is the true rendering (cf. Numb, xxvii. 17; xxxL 16; Josh.
xxiL 16, 17). Israel is no mere fortuitous concourse of individuals, but a chosen
people, a congregation of God. They belong to him, are cared for by him; God
dwells in their midst, takes his place — " standeth" — among them. Such nations are
really theocracies, no matter what form of earthly government may exist. This name
for nations, " the congregation of God," likely, if recognized, to be of salutary power.
To the nation itself it will give self-respect, and tend to righteousness. To its
governors, a sense of responsibility, and a holy fear lest they abuse their high office.

II. The Divine method of bule. By means of vicegerents, who should derive
their authority from God, and who should embody in themselves the majesty of law,
and in whom men would look to find the most perfect earthly pattern of Divine attri-
butes of truth, and justice, and mercy, and impartiality. The name " gods " is there-
fore applied to the judges (see also ver. 6, and Exod. zxi. 6 ; xxii. 8, 28 ; iv. 16 ;
Perowne). And men are ever on the look out for such ; and that form of govemmf nt
is best by which such men are most surely placed in power, and men of an opposite
oharacter must surely excluded. And to better ensure such rulership is the intent
of the reminder that Qtxl himself will judge the judge. Nevertheless, we are shown
next —

III. Man's fbustbation of GK>d'8 fubfosb. (Ver. 2.) This has been a crying
evil, not in Israel alone, but -wherever God has been unknown or forgotten. The
pit>per duty of the judge is declared in vers. 3, 4 ; but this they have been far enough
from remembering or practising.

IV. The causes or stroH wbono. 1. llorcU blindness. "They know not." 2.
!l%ey care not to acquaint tJiemselvet with the Law of God. What little they do know
they understand not, and they harden themselves in their sin by their " walking in
darkness," their habitual practice of evil. There are ever the downward steps in
wrong. Then we are shown —

V. The terbible consequences of theib sin. 1. To society generally. " All the
foundations of the earth are out of course." That is, there is a general break-up of all
civil order ; anarchy and confusion inevitably ensue. It does not need the Bible to
show bow exceedingly bitter and evil a thing sin is. The facts of history and the obser-
vation of Qtod'B providence make that clear enough. 2. To the wrong-doers themselves.
They had been greatly exalted ; they had been regarded, in virtue of their sacred
office, as " gods," as " sons of the Most High ; " but by their abuse of their trust they
should be hurled down as other evil men, and fall low like as they had seen so many
evil princes fall. And this not in the natural cotu'se of events, but as the result of the
awful judgment of Gh>d.



180 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [P8. Lxxxn. 1—6

Conclusion. Prom all the injustices of earth we may turn to God (ver. 7), aad
appeal to his judgment. For — blessed be his Namel — we are the inheritance, the re»l
possession, not of ungodly' men, but of God. Our true Judge is the true "Son of the
Most High" (John x. 34— 38).— S. C.

Ver. 1. — The Judge of the judges. " He judgeth among the gods " — elohim, a term
sometimes used for those high in office (see Exod. xxi. 6; xxii. H, 28). Called god$
as being God's representatives. The psalm may be illustrated by the address ol
Jehoshapbat to the judges, given in 2 Chron. six. 6, 7. Our Lord gives the reason for
princes or judges being called " gods," in John x. 34, 35, the " Word of the Lord " came
to them, and gave them authority to speak and act in his name. Judges must feel
that God is with them in their judgments, and they dishonour him when they give
unjust or partial judgments. This may be illustrated from the custom of opening our
ns^ize courts. The idea is that thu queen actuaUy herself judges all causes, and
proclamation is made in her name. She acts through delegates, but the people are to
understand that, it' not in person, yet in reality, she is judging them. Judges who
act unworthily dishonour her. As " magistracy " was the most important work of
Eastern kings, the term " judge " was used, in a general way, for all positions of public
honour, authority, and responsibility. So we may take the term "judges" as suggest-
ing all kinds of official positions in which we may stand ; all places in which we are
put to rule or influence others ; and then we may see the claim God makes to stand
in relation to them all. He is the " Judge of all judges."

I. God acts THBOtroH thk juoaEB. That truth takes two forms, a lower and a
higher. In the lower form, all judges, all officials, all teachers, are the Lord's dele-
gates ; standing for him, speaking and doing in his name, expressing to men his wilL
This may be illustrated in Moses, Joshua, the so-called judges, the kings, and from
one point of view, the prophets. But, in the higher form, God is conceived as being
actually in the judge, and what he says and does can but convey to men God's will
concerning them. So our Lord said, the Father spoke by him. The true ruler and
teacher reaches this higher view. And the authority of the teacher is properly recog-
nized only when he is felt to be the voice of God.

IL God expects xroaES to be open to biu. So that he may work unhindered in
them. The openness is indicated in the mastery of all self-pleasing, and the full
willingness to be the Divine channel. All officers in Christ's Church, great and small,
need to watch themselves, lest they close up their powers, so that God cannot work
through them.

III. QoD TAKES STBiOT ACCOUNT OF HIS JUDOE3. Specially of this, whether they
gave to men his message ; and whether they gave it to men just as he would have it
given. — B. T.

Ver. 2. — Accepting the person. Jehoshaphat (2 Chron. six. 7), in addressing the
judges, reminds them that " with the Lord our God is no respect of persons, nor taking
of gifts " (see also 2 Sam. xiv. 14 ; Acts x. 84 ; Rom. ii. 11 ; Gal. ii. 6). This Hebrew
term, " accepting the person," or " accepting the face," is the equivalent of our term,
" show partiality to." The figure is taken from the Eastern custom of prostration
before a king or judge. The accejited suitor is commanded to " lift up his face," that
is, to rise up. The extent to which the bribery of judges is carried on in the East
may be illustrated by the following passage, referring to Egypt, by Mr. Lane. "The
rank of a plaintiff or defendant, or a bribe from either, often influences the decision of
the judge. In general the naib (deputy of the judge), and mooftee (chief doctor of
the law) take bribes; and the cadi (chief judge) receives from his naib. On some
occasions, particularly in long litigations, bribes are given by each party, and the
decision is awarded in favour of him who pays highest. This frequently happens in
difficult lawsuits; and even in cases respecting which the law is perfectly clear, strict
justice is not always administered, bribes and false testimony being employed by one
of the parties. The shocking extent to which bribery and suborning false witnesses
are carried on in Moslem courts of law, and in the tribunal of the cadi at Cairo, can
scarcely be credited." The psalmist pronounces the magistrates of his day to be
indifferent to justice, neglectful of their duties, venal and unscrupulous, and he warns



PS. txxxii. 1— 8.] THE P.^OK OF PSALMS. 181

them of the ruin they are bringing on society. St. James reminds us that this "undue
partiality," this "accepting the person," this showing preference for the rich, is not
confined to judges. It may be observed even in the relations of the Christian Church
(see Jas. ii. 1—4).

I. Thebe IB so " ACCEPTING THE PEHsoN " WITH GoD, This is distinctly (declared
by St, Peter (1 Pet. i. 17). " If ye call on the Father, who without respect of persons
judgeth according to every man's work." Certain settings of the Christian truth, those
known as Calvinistic, which put in prominence the Divine election, have been used oi-
misused to encourage an idea of " favouritism " in God. It is always better to regard
the Divine election as simply the all-wise selection of the most fitting person for the
work which has to be done. It is only a subtle form of self-conceit which makes u.s
imagine ourselves the special favourites of Heaven. " God accepteth no man's person."
" The Judge of all the earth does right."

II. ThBEE should be no " ACCEPTINQ THE PEBSON " WITH MEN. This, however,

must apply to official relations and duties, not to personal feelings and preferences. It
is the fruitful source of evils in the family, business, society, and the Church. The
least loved and the most unlovely folk in the world are the family pets, the society
pets.— R. T.

Ver. 3. — The claims of the pom: This verse suggests four classes. The " poor " are
those who have little or no money. The " fatherless " are those who have no defenders
and friends. The " afflicted " are those who have to bear actual suffering. And the
"needy" are those who have reasonable wants which they cannot satisfy. And in
these senses we have the poor always with us ; and whensoever we will we may do
them good. The immediate application of the passage is to persons in authority who
may defend the poor against private injustice or neglect. " They are to cause the
benefit of the administration of justice to tend to the advantage of the defenceless,
of the destitute, of the helpless, upon whom the Law-giver of Israel especially keeps
his eye." Moses solemnly cursed the man that " perverteth the judgment of the stranger,
fatherless, and widow " (Deut. xxviL 19). Matthew Henry has the following striking
sentences : " It is bad to rob any man, but most absurd to rob the poor, whom wo
should relieve ; to squeeze those with our power whom we should water with our
bounty; to oppress the afflicted, and so add affliction to them; to give judgment
against them, and so to patronize those who do rob them, which is as bad as if we
robbed them ourselves. Bich men will not suffer themselves to be wronged; poor
men cannot help themselves, and, therefore, we ought to be the more careful not to
wrong them." What, then, do the poor in every age reasonably claim from every one
who has means, or occupies a position of authority or influence ? Put under three
terms.

I. The foob olaiu justice. That which is their unquestionable right, in every
case, and under every circumstance. Not merely a right judicial decision in every
disputable question. Not merely fair treatment, if coming under any accusation. But
social justice — a right share of all citizen-privilege, and a righteous reward for all their
labour. It is not justice to take any sort of advantage of a man because be is poor.
In these days the poor are learning to make their demand for justice, as between man
and man, heard and heeded.

II. The pooe claim oonsibbbation. If anybody is to have an advantage, let it be
the poor folk. In every age there has been the tendency of the well-to-do to claim for
themselves all the consideration. The Christian spirit steadily resists this tendency ;
and the social movements of modern times may well be toned by the Christian spirit.

III. The foob claim help. This brings in the practical side al their claims, and
reminds of their actual sufferings and disabilities. See what help is required by the
four classes mentioned above. — B. T.

Ver. 4. — The national peril in the Tnal-administration of Justice. This subject is
illustrated by the rebellion of Absalom. That rebellion would not have been possible
if the confidence of the people had not been lost by David's neglect of the judgment-
seat. Absalom gained favour by craftily saying, " Oh that I were made judge in the
land, that every man which hath any suit or cause might come unto me, and I would



182 THE BOOK OiT PSALMS. [ps. lxxxii. 1—8.

do him justice 1 " (2 Sam. xt. 4). Those who search into the causes of great national
revolutions find they have always to take account of the influence on the people of
unfaithfulness in the judges, and lost public confidence that the right can be obtained.
This IS true of Western nations, but it is more true of Eastern nations, who know of
Justice as the decision of an ofScial, rather than as the execution of a recognized and
written law. Solomon gained public confidence by a wise and quick-witted judgment.
He in part lost public confidence by high-handed dealing with the people's complaints.
The prophets, in their complaints of the special evils of their times, give prominence to
the injustice of the judges, and their neglect of the causes of the poor. Still no crimes
are supposed to undermine more swiftly the public confidence, and produce more social
mischief, than those committed by mercenary judges, who give decisions in view of
their own interests, rather than on the basis of what is just and right. 1. Men look
for a riandard of righteousness higher than they can reach themselvea. They are
taught to look for that standard in the impartial public judges and magistrates. If
they find themselves disappointed in them, they readily get the feeling that there is
no standard right, and then they lose the check upon their own wilful, self-pleasing
doings. Public justice is found to be the necessary foundation and buttress of public
morality. 2. National life loses its inspiring example when the king, the magistrate,
and the official are found to do unjust things. Nations, as well as individuals, must
make their ideals, and realize them, or think they realize them, in some individuals.
Kings ought to be to their people realized ideals, and so living examples. And in
the more limited spheres, so should the judges be. A man easily goes to ruin when
he finds his realized ideal fail him. And so does a nation. There seems to be no
right when there is no public right; no right in its high places. Nations are rightly
severe on all judges who dishonour the seat of judgment. — B. T.

Ver. 6. — Oxir changing estimates of men. " I have said, Ye are gods . . . but ye
shall die like men." Life, in its progression, involves a process of " disillusioning."
The youth builds " castles in the air," " castles in Spain ; " but advancing life deals with
them as the growing sunshine deals with morning mists. We begin life with admiring
and trusting everybody; it is well for us if advancing life does not find us standing
beside the psalmist, and saying, "All men are liars." David thought Ahithophel was
a fast and faithful friend. He changed his ideas of him when he learned that " Ahithophel
was among the conspirators with Absalom." No more bitter experience do men ever
pass through than that of finding those they thought faithful " fail from among the
children of men." Here the difiSculty is the changed estimate we are sometimes com-
pelled to make of our public men. The psalm concerns those in authority and office.
The psalmist is distressed because he cannot think of them as he once thought, and as
he would like to think ; they had altogether fallen from the position in which he had
placed them.

L What men ouoht to be. There is a true and proper sense in which every man
is an official. Every man has some une dependent on him, and every man can exert
an influence, and be an influence, on some one. This may be put in another way —
Every man is somebody's ideal. In the text the judges are thought to be what they
ought to be — uncorrupt, simple, sincere; agents that convey the pure word and will of
God to men. And this is what every one of us who has influence on a fellow-man
should be. Those dependent on us should have good ground for making us their ideals.
Using the word in its Old Testament sense, men should look on us, and in their
admiration, say, " Ye are gods." We ought to be such in integrity, simplicity, and
nobility, as to make their saying so reasonable.

XL What hen pbove to be. Our ideas of them generally prove illusions, but then
is no reason why they should not change for hette/r ideas. They need not change for
the worse. But life proves a heavy strain for all men. Some are sanctified through
it, but some are deteriorated. The text contemplates those who prove unfaithful,
untrustworthy, and even come under the judgments of God, for special sins, as Adam
did. Impress that the ideal Christ never yet disappointed any man. There has never
been reason for changing our estimate of him. — B. T.

Ver. 8. — Ood^s inheritance in all nations. Bishop Perovvue translates this, "For



F8. LXZZin. 1 — 18.]



THE BOOK OP PSALMS.



183



thou hast all the nations for thine inheritance." Bishop Wordsworth says, " All
nations are thine inheritance. Thou gavest a special inheritance to Israel; but all
lands are thy Canaan, and all will be judged by thee." The term " inheritance " is
used in a somewhat unusual way, and what we regard as its precise meaning is not
to be pressed. The idea in the mind of the psalmist was that God is the rightful
Sovereign of the whole earth, and therefore he may be asked personally to correct the
evils of his representatives. An " inheritance " is here viewed as something which
<:omes to a man, and is absolutely his, over which he has entire control. Israel was God's
inheritance because entirely in his control. But those called gods, judges, princes, had
nothing that was theirs in any such sense. But every land and every people is, in
this way, God's inheritance. And when the subordinate servants fail anywhere, appeal
can be made to the absolute Ruler and Judge. Aglen puts the puint of the verse in
this way : " It is as if, despairing of the amending of the corrupt magistrates, the
poet, pleading for Israel, takes his case out of their hands, as Cranmer in the play
takes his case out of the hands of the council, and entrusts it to the great Judge of the
world, to whom, as a special inheritance, Israel belonged, but who was also to show
his claim to the submission and obedience of all nations." The point to work out ia
this — when we are troubled by thoughts of the injustice and untrustworthiness of men
in whom we ought to be able to conSde, we may find consolation in large compre-
hensive views of the supremacy of God— our God — over all the earth. In tliia way we
get helpful impressions of —

L God's experience. These failures that surprise and alarm us are no surprise to
the God of the whole earth. He has had to deal with such things and such people
over and over again. He knows how to deal with such cases.

II. God's intervention. When we see God as having all nations for his inherit-
«nce, we realize that he must, through long ages, and he must still, be constantly-
engaged in righting things ; holily interfering with wilful men, putting confused thiugb
straight. Then we are reassured. He can put right what jwrp^exes us. — B. T.

Vers. 1 — 8. — A solemn rebuke addressed to those who, pledged by their office to
uphold the Law, had trampled upon it for their own selfish ends.

I. God's belation to bulebs. (Ver. 1.) 1. He has anointed them to a Divint
work. They are to represent the justice and righteousness of God. 2. He holds them
responsible /w their manner of doing it. Judges them.

IL The bioht use and the abuse of besponsiblb poweb. (Vers. 2—4.) 1. Z%«
right use of power. To give justice and redemption to the poor and defenceless. To
defend the helpless and the oppressed. 2. The abuse of power, " To accept the
persons of the wicked " is to favour their cause on account of their position or station.

III. The oobbuption of bulebb dbmobalizes sooiett. (Ver. 5.) " The founda-
tions of the earth are out of course." 1. Z%« example of men high in station is more
influential than thatef others. 2, Law tmjusthf administered demoraiizes and diodes
a people. — .S



EXPOSITION.



PSALM LXXXm.



Tbx psalmist makes a passionate appeal to
God on behalf of Israel at a time of great
danger. A confederacy has been formed
among the surrounding nations, having for
its object the destruction of Israel's nation-
ality (ver. 4). The confederacy Includes
Edom, the Ishmaelites, Moab, the Hagar-
■encB, Gebal, Ammon, Amalek, Fhillatia,
and Tyre (vers. 6, 7); and It has the
support of Assyria (ver. 8). Much doubt
-exists as to the period of Israelite history



whereto the psalm and the events it oom-
memorates belong. The prevalent opinion
identiSes the movement with that made by
Moab, Ammon, and Edom, in the reign of
Jehoshapbat, whereof an account is given
in 2 Ohron. xx. (So Tholuck, De Wette,
Hengstenberg, Delitzsch, Kay, Canon Oook,
and Professor Alexander.) Another view
held is that the psalm belongs to the time
of Nehemiah, and to the attempt then
made to crush Israel by Sanballat, Geshem,
and Tobiah (see ' The Psalms chrouo
logically arranged,' by Four Friends, p



184



THE BOOK OF PSALMS.



[P8. LXXXIU. 1 — i8t



310). More recently. Professor Oheyne has
argaed strongly in favour of a Maocabean
date, and endeavoured to Identify tlie con-
federacy with that described in 1 Mace, v.,
which was put down by Judas Maccabssus.
A post-Oaptlvity date is, however, rendered
impossible by the mention, among the con-
federates, of Amalek and Assyria, whioh
had both ceased to exist before the time
of Nebuchadnezzar. We are thus thrown
back upon the first hypothesis, unless, in-
deed, a suggestion may be made that the
time of David is possible, and that the
occasion may be that described in 2 Sam.
X. ; 1 Chron. zix. Then only have we a
record of Asshur helping the children of
Lot (2 Sam. z. 16; 1 Chron. xix. 6, 16>

Metrically, the psalm divides into four
strophes, three of four verses each, and one
(the last) of six,

Yer. 1. — ^Eeep not then silence, God:
hold not thy peace, and be not still, God.
A crisis has come which calls for the Divine
interference. If his people are to be saved,
Qod must no longer sit still. Compare the
frequent calls on Grod to "arise" (Pss. iii.
7; vii. 6; xliv. 26; Ixviu. 1, etc.).

Yer. 2. — Per, lo, thine enemies; i.e.
Israel's enemies, who are also '' thine ene-
mies " (see the comment on Ps. bcxzi. 15).
Kake a tumult; literally, make u roaring,
like the roaring of the sea (comp. Ps. xlvi.
8 ; Isa. xvii 12). And they that hate thee
(compare " the haters of the Lord," in Ps.
Izzxi. 15). Have lifted up the head; i.e.
raised themselves up against thee — taken a
menacing attitude (comp. Judg. viii. 28).

Yer. 3. — They have taken crafty counsel
against thy people. Such a widespread
confederacy as tbat described below (vers.
6—8) cannot have been formed without
much secret consultation and plotting.
And consulted against thy hidden ones ;
i.e. " those whom thou hidest in the covert
of thy presence from tlie plottings of man "
(Ps. xxxL 20, Bevised Version; comp. Ps.
xxvii. 5).

Yer. i. — They have said. Come, and let
us cut them off from being a nation,
Tliis was the general object of Israel's
enemies at all times (2 Kings xxiv. 2; 2
Chron. xx. 11 ; Ps. cxxxviii. 7 ; 1 Maco. iii.
35 ; V. 2), and thus does not help much
towards determining the date of the occa-
sion here spoken of. That the name of
Israel may be no more in remembrance
(comp. Bxod. xvii. 14; Dent, xxxii. 26;
Pss. zxxiv. 16; cix. 13).

Yer. 5. — For they have consulted together



with one consent (comp. ver. S). They are
confederate against thee ; literally, have
entered into a covenant againtt thee. A
formal treaty seems to be intended.

Yer. 6. — ^The tabernacles of £dom. Edom
was always among the bitterest of Israel's
enemies, and naturally took a part in
almost every comliination that was made
against them. Though sometimes subju-
gated (2 Sam. viii. 14 ; 1 Kings xi. 15, 16),
it continued hostile during the whole
period of Israelite and Jewish history.
Hence the constant denunciations of the
prophets (Isa. xi 14; Jer. xxvii 3; xlix.
7—22; Ezek. xxv. 12—14; Joel iii. 19;
Amos ix. 12; Chad. 6—18; Mai. i. 4). And
the Ishmaelites. The IshmaeUtes were the
chief inhabitants of Northern Arabia (Gen.
xxv. 13 — 18). They do not often appear
among Israel's enemies. Of Moab. Moab^
on the contrary, is a persistent adversary
(see Numb, xxii 6; Judg. iii 12 — 30; 1
Sam. xiv. 47; 2 Sam. viii. 2; 2 Kings i 1;
iii. 4—27; xxvi. 2; 2 Chron. xx. 1—10).
And the Hagarenes. The " Hagarenes,"
or "Hagarites," are only mentioned here
and in 1 Chron. v. 10, 19—22. They were
probably a branch of the Ishmaelites, named
after Hagar, Islmiael's mother (Gen. xxv.
12). Their name occurs among those of
Aramaean tribes in the Assyrian inscrip-
tions.

Yer. 7. — Gebal. There is no reason tc
doubt that the Phoenician town of the name^
mentioned in Ezek. xxvii 9, and alluded to
in Josh, xiii 5 and 1 Kings v. 18, is meant.
A southern Gebal, in the vicinity of Edom,
is a fiction. Gebal was one of the most
important of the Phoenician cities from
the time of Shalmaneser II. (B.C. 828—810)
to that of Nebuchadnezzar (b.o. 635 — 560);
see the author's 'History of Phoenicia,*^
p. 79. And Ammon. Ammon, like Moab,
was a perpetual enemy of the Jewish people
from their entrance into Palestine to the
time of the Maccabees. And Amalek. The
Amalekites, on the contrary, disappear
from history from the time of their de-
struction by the Simeonites in the reisn of
Hezekiah (1 Chron. v. 42, 43). The Philis-
tines. Persistent enemies, like Edom, Moab,
and Ammon (see 1 Mace. v. 66). With the
inhabitants of Tyre. Tyre, in early times,
was friendly to Israel (2 Sam. v. 11 ; i Kings
V. 1 — 18 ; ix. 26 — 28), and is not elsewhere
mentioned as hostile until the reign of
Uzziah (Amos i. 9). She rejoiced, however,,
when Jerusalem was destroyed (Ezek.
xxvi. 2).

Yer. 8. — ^Assor also is joined with them.
This is the climax. Assyria — ^the great
empire — the most important of all the
kingdoms of the earth — has joined the
petty nations upon Israel's border, and



PS. Lxxxm. 1 — 18.]



THE BOOK OF PSALMS.



185



holds a place in the great confedeiaoy.
From the historical books it would appear
that this occurred but once, viz. in David's
great war with the Ammonites and their
allies (see the Intrnduction). They have
holpen the children of Lot ; {,e. the Moabites
and Ammonites (comp. Gen. xix. 37, 38;
Deut. ii. 9, 19). Moab and Ammon would
seem to have been the principal powers
engaged in the confederacy. The others
were tbeir helpers.

Ver. 9. — Do unto them as unto the Midian-
ites. The allusion is probably to the dis-
comfiture of the Midianltes by Gideon
(Judg. vii. 19—25; viii. 1—12). As to
Siseia, as to Jabin, at the brook of Kiscn
(see Judg. iv. 5).

Ver. 10. — Which perished at En-dor.
" Endor " is not mentioned in the narrative
of Judges ; but it was certainly in the
neighbourhood of Taanah and Megiddo,
which are mentioned (Judg. v. 19; see
Josh. xvii. 11). Ihey became as dung for
the earth ; •'.«. their carcases manured the
soil (comp. 2 Kings ix. 37 ; Zeph. i. 17).

Ver. 11. — Hake their nobles like Oreb, and
like Zeeb. " Oreb " and « Zeeb," the leaders
of the Midianitish host, were taken prisoners
and slain by the Ephraimites who pursued
after Midian (Jndg. vii. 25). Yea, all their
princes as Zeba, and as Zalmnnna. Zeba and
Zalmunna were the kings of Midian slain
by Gideon himself (Jndg. viii. 21).

Ver. 12, — Who said. Let ns take to onr-
selves the houses of Qod in possession;
rather, the homesteads of God ; or " the
pastures of God " (Ps. xxiii, 2), i.e. of God's
people, Israel.

Ver. 13. — my God, make them like a
wheel ; rather, liJee whirling dust — the dust
that is caught up by an eddy of wind, and
twisted round and round (see Isa. xvii.
13). As the stubble before the wind. Both
the "whirling dust" and the "stubble"
are images of what is lightest, most shifting,



and of least accoant (see Job xUi. 85;
XV. 7; xxi. 18; xU. 29; Isa. zl. 24; zlL 2;

Jer. xiii. 24 ; Mai. iv. 1).

Ver. 14. — As the fire bnmeth a wood, and
as the flame setteth the mountains on fire.
Cause them, i.e., to consume away and perish,
as a burning forest, or as blazing orash-
wood on a mountain-side.

Ver. 15. — So persecute them with thy
tempest, and make them afraid with thy
storm. There is some confusion of met^
phors; but the general meaning is clear.
God is called upon to exeonte vengeance
upon Israel's enemies by sweeping them
away with the storm and tempest of his
wrath (comp. Jnb ix. 17; Isa. xxix. 6).

Ver. 16. — riU iheir faces with shame;
i.e. cause their enterprise to fail, and so
bring them to shame and confusion of face.
That they may seek thy Name, Lord. A
merciful purpose lies behind the greater
number of Di trine visitations. They are
intended to scourge men into subnussion,
and cause them to turn to God. The
psalmist, being in full sympathy with God,
desires that bis merciful intentions may
have effect.

Ver. 17. — Let them be oonfonnded and
troubled for ever ; yea, let them be pat to
shame, and perish. Aa expansion of the
thought contained in the first clause of the
preceding verse, which must not be re-
garded as annulling the kind wish of the
second clause. Like HezeMah (Isa. zxxvii.
20), the psalmist desires nothing so much
as that " all the kingdoms of the earth may
know that Jeliovab, and he only, is God,"
and may turn to him in sincerity and truth.
It is for this end that he wishes them to be
brought low, even to the verge of destruction.

Ver. 18. — That men may know; rather,
that they may know. There is no " men " in
the original. That thou, whose name alone
is Jehovah, art the Host High over all the
earth (see the comment on ver. 16).



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Vers. 1 — 18. — Sovi-i^ilers. Dismissing from our consideration the probable
hiBtorical occasion of this psalm (for which see 2 Ghron. xx.), we take it aa a vivid
representation of the enemies and destroyers of the soul. Now —

I. Thebg abb snoH. Whoever yet sought to live the Divine life, and to walk with
God in faithful obedience, that did not speedily find out that there were enemies of bis
aeul such as are set forth here ? For see —

IL Theib ohabaoiebistios. 1. Numerom. What a vast horde are named as
Israel's foes (vera. 6 — 8) 1 And is not this true of our foes ? They are not single, or
few, or scattered ; but they seem arrayed in troops, and meet us at every turn of our
lives. 2. Atid very strong. Bead the history and see the dismay which filled the
minds of the devout Jehoshaphat and his people at the awful confederacy which had
come against them. And the half-despairing soul, often and often, is tempted to throw
down his weapons and to abandon a war in which he seems to have no possible hope of
victory. The world, the flesh, the devil are, any one of them, too strong for him ; how



186 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [fb. Lxxxm. 1— la



much more when confederate together, as they often are I 8. Untttd. (Ver. 6.) Every-
thing at times seems to be in league against the loul, as were Israel's enemies against
them, our Lord's enemies against him. They come from all quarters (tee yers. 6 — 8) ;
foes from the south and east are first named, then those from the west, and lastly those
from the north. Thus was Israel be^t and shut in with foea who, uoiially hostile to
one another, were now one in hatred to Israel. 4. Deadly, It was not a mere raU
against Israel, but a fixed purpose to utterly destroy (ver. 4^. And none other is Va»
purpose of our soul's adversaries — not merely to annoy or injure, but to destroy (1 Pet.
V. 8). 5. Subtle. (Ver. 3.) Like " a bolt out of the blue," so often is the assault
upon our soul. At an hour when we think not, in ways we never dreamt of, when off
our guard, when it seemed not only unlikely but impossible, — so does our crafty foe
assaiL

III. Thet seem sometimes to bb vioTOBions. (Ver. 2.) We seem to hear the
" tumult " of their loud exultation, and to see the haughty lifting up of the head.
So it seemed to Elijah (1 Kings xix.), so it has seemed to thousands of sore-beset onee
since.

IV. God appeabs to keep silent and inactive. (Ver. 1.) He seems to let
things "O their own way ; our cry does not avail; the bitter agony of our soul does not
seem to move him. This is terrible ; but the experience of Israel of old is, not unfre-
quently, that of God's Israel still — but only for a while.

V Help comes in kecolleotion. 1. That these enemies a/re confederate not so much
against us as against God. They are "thine enemies" (vers. 2, 5, 18). Therefore we
may look away from our weakness to the infinite power of God. 2. That Ood has vin-
diaUed his Name in days gone hy. (Vers. 9 — H.) Oh, it is blessed when in darkness
and difSoulty to remember God's deliverances of old, how completely our enemies were
overthrown, how he made them " like Oreb and like Zeeb " I Memories such as these
stay and strengthen the soul.

VI. Iseael's bpirh must be oubb. 1. There must be no idea of compromise.
Israel desired the complete extermination of their foes. There is a burning ferocity of
hate in these verses (9 — 17), which is utterly alien from the spirit of Christ towards
our human foes ; it is the spirit of the Old Testament, not that of the New. But in
regard to our spiritual foes, the would-be spoilers of our soul, we may, we should, we
must, cherish a spirit of imcompromising hate. 2. The honour of the Lord^» Name
must he owr motive. For his sake (vers. 16, 18) we are thus to pray. — S. C.

Ver. Z.—GocPs hidden ones. This name is especially applicable to Israel because of
the geographical position of their country. (Of. Numb, xxiii. 9, " The people shall
dwell alone.") They were away, off the beaten track of the nations, shut in, and, as it
were, bidden, by the deserts on the east and south, the sea on the west, and the
mountains on the north, from the rest of the world. But the expression in the text is
applicable to all God's people everywhere and always. They are his hidden ones.
And we note concuruing them —

I. The fact — thet aee hidden. 1. Their physical life Ood often hides from
those who would destroy it. Not always does ho do this, but often, as Peter from
Herod (Acts xii. ; and cf. Obadiah's hiding of the prophets, 1 Kings xviii. 4). And
how often God has hidden his servants in wildernesses, glens, mountain heights, cata-
combs, etc. I The adversary would fain have destroyed them all, as the wolf the sheep;
but they have not all been destroyed, the sheep yet outnumber the wolves. 2. Their
spiritual life is ever a hidden one. For it resides not in themselves, bat in another,
as the life of the branches is in the vine (John xv. ; Ool. iii. 3). The principles that
govern it are not known or understood or appreciated by the world. Its law of self-
sacrifice, meekness, etc. Except by tincertain conjecture, the world knows nothing of
its springs of action and its controlling motives. The practice of this life is also so
different from the world's life. It is meek, retiring, not loving notoriety ; it pursues »
lowly and unnoticed way ; it has no eye for worldly pomp, no ear for worldly applause.
It is not necessarily identified with any places, or seasons, or forms of worship, or order
of men ; but whilst generally using more or less of them, is independent of them aU. S.
And this condition of Ood'i hidden ones is of their own choice. (Ruth ii. 12 ; Fss. xoL 1 ;
cxliii. 9.) They love to have it so. The hidden life is, in their esteem, the blessed.



P8. 1.XXXIII. 1— 18.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 187

the secure, the eternal life. 4. It is God who hides them. (Of. Ps. xxxi. 20 ; John x. 28.)
He does this by his providential care and by keeping them in his own love. And tlie
luajority of them he has bidden from men Iselow in his own blessed presence in heaven.
The Church on earth is a little flock indeed, not absolutely, but in comparison with
the vast flock in the heavenly pastures, and there they are for ever hidden from all the
malice and might of men or of the devil.

II. What thib fact implies. 1. Their precioumess in the sight of Ood. Things
common and cheap we do not hide, or those for which we do not care. Jewels are
hidden oftentimes, and God calls his hidden ones his jewels (Mai. iiL 17). And huw
could they be other than precious, when we remember their cost I — " redeemed with the
precious blood of Chiist ; " each one was bought with that price. And God deems
them precious, also, for their own sakes. They can and will respond, ever more and
more perfectly, to that love in the heart of God which, like all love, yearns for response
Buch as they only can give. 2. Their peril. God would not have hidden them as be
has were they in no danger (see text). And how perpetually did our Lord bid us
" watch and pray " I The world, the flesh, the devil, are ever bent on doing us harm.
We are safe only as " our life is hid with Christ in God." 3. Obscurity. The world
knows UB not, even as it knew him not. See how all but unbroken is the absolute
silence of secular history as to the birth, life, death, and resurrection of our Lord, and
as to the history of his Church, until its marvellous growth and supernatural power
compelled its attention. And still, the fame, tavour, and honour of the world are things
which none of God's hidden ones may seek (John v. 41, 44). 4. Safety. (Fs. zci.,
the whole psalm.) 6. The love of him, whose hidden ones we are.

IIL To WHAT IT SHOULD LEAD. 1. To deep love of Ood. Whatever God has given
you, he has given and he can give nothing like this — numbering you among his hidden
ones. 2. To staying where you are. Dwell in the secret place of the Most High. 3.
To having done with forebodings, murmurings, and helpless grief. Should such as you
be chargeable with such things ? 4. To confession of GocPs love to you before your
fellow-men. 6. To all holy endeavours to bring others where you are. — S. C.

Ver. 1. — The mission of the Divine sHenee. The occasion of the psalm is clearly
some time of national peril from a confederacy of foes. The special distress is that,
while the national enemies are vigorously active, Qod, the Defender of Israel, seems to
be quiet, and even indifferent. The psalm is full of hope because, even while the fear
of indifference on the part of God distresses the writer, he turns to Ood with importu-
nate entreaties. The occasion may well have been the combination of Moab and
Ammon against Israel in the days of Jehoshaphat, which is narrated in 2 Chron. xx.
1 — 29 (notice the reference to Asaph in ver. 14). The summary of confederated
powers need not be regarded as more than a poetical expansion. A poet of Israel could
not know with historical exactness the precise constituents of the opposing force. He
gathers together all who were regarded as national foes. Bishop Perowne says, " The
poet is fully alive to the danger which threatens his nation. Look where he may, the
horizon is black with gathering clouds. Judah is alone, and bis enemies are compass-
ing him about. The hosts of the invaders are settling like swarms of locusts on the
skirts of the land. East, south, and west, they are mustering to the battle. The
kindred but ever hostile tribe of Edom on the border, issuing from their mountain
fastnesses; the Arab tribes of the desert; the old hereditary foes of Israel, Moab and
Ammon ; the Philistines ; — all are on the march ; all, like hunters, are hemming in the
lion who holds them at bay." The words used in this verse — "silence," "peace,"
"still" — involve the Divine refraining from both encouraging message and helpful
action. This Divine dealing, though frequent, is always specially trying to faith ; but it
is designed to be the culture of Hxat patience which is one of the best expressions of faith.

I. The Divine pbomibe of help. This is distinct, clear, full, unlimited. We may
he absolutely sure of the Divine help for every time of need. " God will help, and
that right early."

II. The DrviNB bestbaint fboh HELPiNa. llie disposition of the Divine love may
be to help at once. The decision of the Divine wisdom may be to withhold help for
a while. And as the Divine wisdom and love are in perfect harmony, love supporte
the decision for restraint. Bestraint is not refusal.



188 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [n. Lxxxm. 1— la

IIL Thb mission or thb bestbaiht to Isbakl's foes. It makes them pretume,
and 80 involves them in overwhelming calamities. Divine restraint leads the foe into
hopeless situations.

IV. Tbk misbioh of thk bestbaiht to God's people. It leads to self-revelation.
We find out the imperfectness of our trust in God when we are put to the strain of
waiting for his help. — B. T.

Ver. 2. — Hu/oes of the Church are the foes of Ood, The psalmist calls the enemies
•f his nation Ooft enemies. " Thine enemies make a tumult." But it would not be
a matter inteiesting to us, or one alraut which we could pray, if they were God's
enemies only. The point of importance is that they are God's enemies just because
they are ours. We &id the best relief from the fear of what they may do, in thinking
that God counts them to be hie enemies; and if we cannot defend ourselves from them,
God can defend us. So this realization that our enemies are God's enemies becomes
(1) a ground of appeal ; (2) a restful consolation ; and (3) a source of strength. Work
this out in relation to the Jewish nation. In a special and representative sense the
Jewish nation was Jehovah's nation. So the Church, as a spiritual body — the
kingdom of God — is Christ's Church. And as everything related to the Jewish nation
was of direct concern to Jehovah, and had his active interference as required, so
everything related to the Church is of direct concern to the living Christ ; and he, by
his presiding Spirit, ever actively interferes, as may be required. Passing within the
Church, the truth may be applied to each believer. His foes cannot be exclusively his.
Being bound up with Christ, Christ is bound up with all his interests. The believer's
friends are Clu'ist'B friends ; tlie believer's foes are Christ's foes.

L This belation connects God with the nation's fboobess. This is illustrated
in the history. A tribe of slaves came to be an ordered nation, through an experience
of good and evil. God was sympathetically and actively present in all the various
steps of the national progress. Apply to the development of the Christian Church
through a variety of hard and anxious experiences. Foes of heresy, persecution, etc.

II. This belation connects God with the nation's duastebs. Compare the
expression, " In all their affliction he was afflicted." There had been disasters in the
Jewish history, but God was in them for recovery aad for sanctifying. Apply to the
"dark ages" of the Christian history. Since our foes are God's foes, they cannot
overwhelm us. — B. T.

Vers. 3, 5. — Confederacy in evil designs. " They have taken crafty counsel against
thy people." "They have consulted together with one consent." Prayer-book
Version reads, "cast their heads together." The Prophet Micah has a striking
expression for this confederacy in evil — ^"And so they wrap it up" (Micah vii. 3)>
Cases of confederacy against God's people, that may be used as illustrations, are such
as the following: Chedorlaomer's confederacy against Canaan, which swept away Lot.
Combinations of northern nations agaiust Joshua and Israel. Confederacies in times
of the Judges; against Asa ; and against Jehoshaphat. Schemes of Samaritan parties
Hgainst rebuilding walls of Jerusalem, in the time of Nehemiah. A combination of
surrounding nations, in the time of the Maccabees, when the Jews restored the altar
which Antiochus had polluted. See also Eph. vi. 12 for the combinations against
spiritual religion; the confederacy of chief priest, scribe, Pharisee, Sadduoee, and
traitorous disciple, against Christ ; and the gathering together of the enemies of Christ
and his Church in the last days (Rev. xx. 8, 9). Other and striking illustrations may
be taken from Bunyan's 'Holy War,' which pictures various forms of confederacy
against Emmanuel and his " Mansoul." The point suggested is, that neither man, nor
any combinations of men, can ever get beyond God. Opening this, we may inquire —

I. Has God pboved himself able to deal with oases of oonpederact ? All the
above instances may be reviewed in order to answer this question ; and to them may
be added cases from Church history, and from personal experience. Luther's life
provides some good examples. Take the principle involved in the saying that " no
chain is stronger than its weakest link," and show how God has ever broken up
confederations for evil by the simplest agencies. He holds control of the forces that
bind men in a common purpose, and can loosen his hand when he pleases. Ther»



PS. Lxxxiii. 1—18.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 189

is no plotting for evil that is beyond Divine permissions. It is strange that we should
fear combinations of evil more than individual foes. We need to learn God's superi-
ority to them.

II. Abe cokfedebations fob evii, really as stbono as thbt seem to be ? There
is an element of weakness ia all human combinatioas. They are attempts to unite
varying wills and dispositions. This weakness is specially felt when combinations of
bad men are attempted, to secure bad ends. Self-willed and wrong-purposing men find
it hard to a2;ree together. Jealousies are sure to arise. Self-interests overmaster the
common interests. Elements of confusion are easily introduced. The confederates
turn their swords against each other, as the mixed host of Midiaa did in the days of
Gideon. Neither " craftiness " nor " confederacy " is out of the Divine control. — B. T.

Ver. 3.— Z%e Lord's hidden ones. " Those whom thou hast set apart and guarded
as thine own peculiar pussession." Those whom thou hast undertaken in a special
manner to protect. " Those whom God holds in the hollow of his hand ; those to
whom he is a wall of fire round about them, that none may do them hurt; those to
whom he says, ' He that toncheth you touoheth the apple of mine eye.'" Confidence in
the hiding of God is a familiar spirit to the saints of God. " Keep me as the apple of
the eye ; hide me under the shadow of thy wings " (Ps. xvii. 8) ; " In the time of trouble
he shall hide me in his pavilion ; in the secret of his tabernacle shall he hide me "
(Ps. xxvii. 5) ; " Thou shalt hide them in the secret of thy presence from the pride of
man ; thou shalt keep them secretly in a pavilion from the strife of tongues " (Ps. xxxi.
20) ; " He that dwelleth in the secret place of the Most High, shall abide under the
shadow of the Almighty " (Ps. xci. 1) ; " Tour life is hid with Christ in God " (Col.
iii. 3). This idea— that they are the Lord's hidden ones — ought to be still cherished
by God's people as a source of abiding restfulness.

I. Thet ABE " BIDDEN " IN BEI.ATI0N TO OUTWABD FOES. This is the point presented
in the text. It is illustrated historically. There is still a sense in which the Christian
may be said to have outward foes. Agents of the evil one are ever at work resisting
godly living and serving. It may be said that sometimes the foes reach the " hidden
ones " and injure them ; but from the high standing-ground of faith we can see this
distinction. When God permits a seeming foe to reach his "hidden ones," it ceases to
be a foe; it becomes God's angel on a ministry of blessing. That foe's work turns out
to be a part of the Lord's " biding."

II. Thet abe "hidden" in relation to afflictive oibcumstances. We miglit
think they should be hidden from all troubles and sufferings; hidden so that no
afiSictioDS should reach them. But this would be quite to misapprehend the Lord's
hidings. He hides in sorrow, not from sorrow. And that hidmg is altogether the
more important and precious. God's hiding of a man who is placed in afflictive
circumstances is the sweet marvel of Divine love. Illustrated by God's hiding of
suffering Job.

III. Thet abb " hidden " in belation to personal fbailties. The Lord's people
carry into his " secret place "frailties of disposition and character. These may become
evil forces, influencing Christian conduct and relations. So from the " unworthy self"
God hides his people. Life gains a high sense of security when we can worthily
realize the " Lord's hidings."— R. T.

Vers. 8 — ^11. — Prayer based on experience and on history. " Do unto them as unto
the Midianites." Prayers which apparently express a desire for revenge are often
misunderstood. Deliverance from national enemies of necessity involves the discom-
fiture and destruction of those enemies ; and therefore a poet may ask for that dis-
c^mfittirg, not because he is thinking of the harm done to the enemy, but because he
waata a figurative way of asking for the deliverance and safety of his people. Revenge
ful utterances are often no more than poetical forms, which are quite misused when
unduly pressed. And again, when we recall historical events, we are free from
revengeful feeling, though the calamities of beateu foes may be specially prominent in
our review. The prayer of the psalmist here is for a gracious Divine deliverance from
these confederated foes that threaten Israel. He fortifies his prayer with persuasions
drawn from the remembrance of God's previous deliverances, and he magnifies his



190 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. lxxxiu. 1— 18.

confidence in God's ability to help now, by thinking how overwhelming was the
destruction of God's enemies on other occasions. Compare our anxiety to know how
many were slain on the field of battle. The two victories specially recalled are those
of Deborah and Barak over the host of Sisera, and of Gideon over the mingled hosts of
Midianites. The subject suggested is the use we may make of Scripture knowledge ;
of the experiences of Christ's Church ; and of ourselves and our own lives. We stand
in the very midst of Divine dealings, Divine interventions, Divine deliverances. They
have been abundant in the past, and they have meant the effective mastery of all
kinds of foes.

I. Wb mat leabn that no stban&b oiecumstances sueeound TJ8. God's people
have, over and over again, been in precisely such conditions as we are in now. Our
trouble is no surprise to our (iod.

II. Wb mat feeelt oet fob Divine help, as those have dokb who have gone
BEFOBE vs. They cried; they were encouraged to cry. Ko limit was ever put on
the praying of earnest souls.

III. Wb mat use the expebiencb of othees ab the plea in oub fbatees. We
can always say, "Thou hast helped;" and so we can make a personal plea, and say,
" Lord, the Helper, help me !" Constantly, in Bible prayers, what God has been to
hispeople, and what he has done for them, is brought to hia mind.

IV. We mat have the fullest oonfidenoe that what GK)d has been he still
WILL BE. Eesister of the wicked, Overwhelmer of the proud. Defender of his
people. Deliverer of the imperilled saints. — B. T.

Ver. 13. — The figure of the " rolling thing." " my God, make them as a rolling
thing." A striking poetical figure, effective if applied to any light substance that la
rolled over, whirled round, and driven forward with a high wind. Dickens has a very
elaborate picture of wind-driven leaves in the opening part of 'Martin Chuzzlewit.'
The figure may be that of the whirlwind, which catches up the sand and hurls it
helplessly along; and this would be a good figure for the flight of a panic-stricken
army. But Thomson, in his ' Land and the Book,' gives point to the poet's figure by his
description of a very carious plant, known as the " gulgal," or " rolling thing." " It
is a wild artichoke. In growing it throws out numerous branches of equal size and
length in all directions, forming a sort of sphere or globe a foot or more in diameter.
When ripe and dry in autumn, these branches become rigid and light as a feather, the
]jarent stem breaks off at the ground, and the wind carries these vegetable globes
whithersoever it pleaseth. At the proper season, thousands of them come scudding
over the plain, rolling, leaping, bounding, with vast racket, to the dismay both of the
horse and his rider. An Arab proverb addresses this rolling thing thus : ' Ho, 'akkiib,
where do you put up to-night?' To which it answers as it flies, 'Where the wind
puts up.' They also derive one of their many forms of ciirsing from this plant.
• May you be whirled, like the 'akkftb, before the wind, until you are caught in the
thorns, or plunged into the seal ' If this is not the ' wheel' of David, I have seen
nothing in the country to suggest the comparison." This " rolling thing " is wholly
helpless in the strong hand of the wind. And the poet feels that even as helpless his
enemies would be, if the hand of God were upon them. The idea of their helplessness
interests him, because he is so fuU of /ear concerning their numbers and apparent
strength. A good illustration may be found in the case of the Syrians who came to
take Elisha, and were helpless in his hands, and actually led by him into the capital
city of their foes.

L Man oan neveb act AaAiNST God's people, save on Diyinb peemibsion.

II. Man mat bays in helplessness, if that permission is withheld.

ni. Man will have mibeeablt to fbbl his helplessness, if he attempts to
ACT without peemibsion. That which affrights God's people he/ore God arises to help
them becomes pitiable in its helplessness when God has arisen. — B, T.

Ver. 16. — The issue (f Divine Judgments on the wicked, "That they may seek thy
Name, Lord." This is a very remarkable qualifying of our idea that psalmists
prayed in a revengeful spirit for the destruction of the national enemies. In truth,
their supreme idea was the glorifying of God, and they asked for judgments because



P8. LXXXIT. 1 — 12.]



THE BOOK OF PSALMS.



191



through judgmentB would come the honouring of God's Name; and, in this honourinp,
the higher blessing for the foes themselves. Here the psalmist prays, " Fill their
faces with shame ; " but he sees in their humiliation the hope that they vill be drawn
to God.

I. We mat peat fob thb humiliation op cub enemies.

II. We may not fbat in view merelt of their sufferino.

in. We mat fbat, if we DEBIBE THEIB LASTINO good THBOCGH THEIB HtlMILtA*
TION.

lY. Ws HAT FBAT, IF WE SET BEFOBE OURBELTEB THB OLOBT OF GoD IN THEIB
BEGOYEBT.

It is a sign of triumph over hateful and revengeful feelings if we can pray God to
deal with our enemies in the wisdom of his righteous love. It is not befitting that the
Christian should ever think of judgments and punishments as merely destructive. To
him all judgment is remedial, all punishment is corrective. God will get honoui tn
his Name out of all his dealings. It should be shown that the "for ever" and the
" perish " of ver. 17 are to be treated as poetical terms. Or ver. 16 may be regarded
as the better view, which the psalmist was hardly able to keep to. Ver. 17 falls back
upon the harsher view of God's dealing with his foes. Christianity willingly lets pass
the harsher view, and sets ever more prominently before us the better and more
hopeful view. ' Speaker's Commentary ' on ver. 16 says, " This is a feeling altogether
peculiar to God's people." The object of all the judgments which the true prophet
desires is to bring all nations into subjection to God. Their calamities will be
converted into blessings, unless they persist in rebellion. — B. T.

Vers. 1 — 18. — What God is to his people. The following general truths may be
gathered up from this psalm.

L That sometimes the Chubob of God is thbeatened bt a combination of
KANT DANGEBB. As uow — by scieuce, philosophy, historical criticism, the spirit of
commerce and the spirit of mammon, and what is called a worldly spirit.

IL God and hib feofIiE abe one. (Ver. 6.) 1. One in the closest relation. Father
and children ; Redeemer and redeemed. 2. One in work and purpose.

IIL This oneness gives them confidence that God wUii. shield them fbom all
BEAL danobb. And therefore they cry to him for defence and deliverance in all times
of perplexity and danger.

IV. The past expebienoeb of the Chuboh btbenothen this confidence. Tlie
history of the Church shows that God has been her " Sun and Shield."

V. That the victobieb of the Chuboh ovbb vabiowb fobms of evil abe a
beyelation of the Name of God. (Ver. 18.) God thus makes himself known to
wicked men. " The end of all God's judgments, aa of all history, is the same— that all
should confess that be is One and Supreme. — S.



EXPOSITION.



PSALM LXXXIV.
Thib psalm, attributed (see title) to the
"sons of Eorah," or the Eorahite Levites
(see 1 Ohron. xxvi. 1; 2 Chron. xz. 19),
describes the blessedness of their position
as dwellers in the house of God, and
kee^rs of its thresholds. Its date is un-
cerJ«iu, but must fall earlier than the
Capiivity, since the temple is standing
(vers. 1--4, 10), and there is an anointed
king upon the throne (ver. 9).

The psalm falls into three equal stanzas
ar strophes, each of four verses, the ends of



the first and second stanzas being shown b;
the pause-mark, " selah."

Ver. 1. — How amiable are thy tabemaoles I
or, "how lovely are thy dwellings I " The
plural is used, as in Pes. xliii. 3; zlvi 4
(also Korahite); and ezxxii. 7, either be-
CHUse the temple was made up of several
compartments, or as a " plural of dignity."
Lord of hosts (comp. vers. 3, 8, 12).

Ver. 2.— My soul longeth, yea, even
fainteth for the courts of the Lord, These
expressions do not imply that the writer is
absent from the temple, but only that hii
delight in it is never satiated. Uy heart
and my flesh ; i.e. my whole nature. Crieth



192



THE BOOK OF PSALMS.



[PS. LXXXIV. 1 — 1&



out for the living God; rather, rejoiceth;^ or
"sings out a note of joy" unto the living
God. So Hengetenberg, who says, "The
verb ^-n is of frequent ooourrenoe in the
Psalms, and cdwayg signifies to rejoice."
Compare the comment of Professor Cheyne.

Yer. 3. — ^Tea, the sparrow hath found an
honse, and the swallow a nest for herself,
where she may lay her young. Both
sparrows and swallows abound in Pales-
tine. Canon Tristram found the nest of
a sparrow "so closely allied to our own
that it is difiBoult to distinguiah it," in a
chink of the Haiam wall at Jerusalem, near
the Golden Gate ('Land of Israel,' p. 182).
An anecdote related by Herodotus (i. 1 59)
shows that sparrows built about the Greek
temples. The general meaning of the
figure in this place seems to be, " If even
birds love to build their nests, as they do,
in the sacred precincts, how much more
reason has the believing heart to find its
home in the house of its God I " But the
psalmist thinks it enough to suggest the
parallel, and does not stop to carry it out.
Even tMne altars. The " altar " is put, by
metonymy, for the temple itself. Lord of
hosts, my King, and my God (comp. Ps. v. 2).

Ver. 4. — Blessed are they that dwell in
thy house. As the Korahite Levites did,
being " keepers of the gates " of the Lord's
house (1 Gbron. ix. 19; xxvi. 1). They will
be still praising thee. It is their privilege
-to be always praising thee. " The speaker
regards the temple as predominantly the
house of praise" (Cheyne).

Ver. 5. — Blessed is the man whose strength
is in thee. God is the " Strength" of all who
trust in hira. The psalmist seems to mean
that mere dwelling in the house of God is
not enough for blessedness. Trust in God
— having God tor one's Strength — is also
requisite (comp. ver. 12). In whose heart
are the ways of them; literally, tn whose
heart are highways. The "highways" in-
tended are probably those of holiness (comp.
Prov. xvi. 17 and Isa. zxzy. 8).

Ver. 6. — Who passing through the valley
of Baca make it a well ; rather, through the
valley of wef ping (t^v KotKd^arav K\av9fiSvos,
LXX.). So Hupfeld, Hengstenberg, Kay,
jmd the Revised Version ; compare Hosea's
"valley of Achor," i.e. "of Grief." When
the righteous pass through a time of suffer-
ing or calamity, they turn it into a time of
refreshment. IDie rain also filleth the pools ;
rather, the early rain (Joel ii. 23) oovereth
it with blessings. The rain of God's grace
mantles all the valley with a luxuriant
rag-fttatioii : in other words, the blessing of



God rests on those who act as above de-
scribed, and causes them ever to increase
in righteousness and true holiness.

Ver. 7. — ^They go from strength to
strength. Their spiritual course is one ol
continually greater vitality and vigour.
Every one of them in Zion appeareth before
God. Either "Bach in his turn appears te
render thanks and praise before God's holy
seat on Mount Zion ; " or " Each in his turn
shall appear before God's throne in the true
Zion, heaven."

Ver. 8. — Lord God of hosts, hear my
prayer. The prayer of ver. 9. Give ear,
God of Jacob (comp Pss. xx. 1 ; xlvi. 7,
11; Ixxv. 9; Ixxvi. 6; Ixxxi. 1, 4, etc.).

Ver. 9. — Bshold, God our Shield; ix.
"our Protection and Defence" (comp. Pss.
xxxiii. 20; lix. 11; Ixxxix. 18). And look
upon the face of thine anointed. Begard
our king with favour; let the light of thy
countenance shine upon him.

Ver. 10. — For a day in thy courts ii
better than a thousand; i.e. than any
number of days elsewhere. It is difficult
to trace any connection between these con-
cluding verses. They appear to consist of
distinct thoughts, which arise in the writer's
mind, and are jotted down as they occur to
him. One is a thought of loyalty, which
finds vent in a prayer for the king (ver. 9).
Another is a reflection of the main thought
of the psalm, the incomparable blessedness
of dwelling in God's house. A third (vers.
11, 12) is the joy and glory of perpetual
communion with God and trust in God.
See the remarks of Professor Cheyne ('The
Book of Psalms,' p. 237). I had rather he
a door-keeper in the house of my Ood;
literally, at the threshold; but the meaning
is well expressed by the Authorized Ver-
sion. " Door-keepers in the house of their
God" was exactly what the Korahite Le-
vites were (1 Oliron. ix. 19 ; xxvi. 1, 12 — 19).
Thau to dwell in the tents of wickedness.
As their ancestor, Korah, had done (Numb,
xvi. 26).

Ver. 11. — ^For the Lord God is a Sun and
Shield ; i.e. not only a " Shield " or protec-
tion, as he has been already called (ver. 9),
but also a "Sun," the source of life and
light, of joy and happiness (comp. Isa.
Ix. 19, 20 ; Mai. iv. 2). The Lord will givo
graoe and glory. Inward grace, outward
splendour and glory (Bev. xxi. 11 — 21).
Ko good thing will he withhold from them
that walk uprightly (see 1 Cor. ii. 9 ; 1 Tim.
iv. 8; and Ps. xxxiv. 10).

Ver. 12. — Lord of hosts, blessed is th«
man that trosteth in thee (comp. Ps. ii. 12>



PB. Lxxxiv.'l— 12.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 193



HOMILETICS.

Ver. 6. — Living water frcm hidden springs. "Passing ... a well." "The
valley of Baca," i.e. of weeping, or lamentation. The image is of a company of
pilgrims towards the holy city, whose way lies through a desolate, sterile valley. In
that " dry and thirsty land " many a traveller has fainted with thirst. Oa those
rugged rocks many a feeble or heedless foot has slipped, many a pilgrim fallen. But
if "the blessings of heaven above" and "the precious things of the earth" be denied,
there is yet " the blessing of the deep that worketh under." The pilgrims gird their
loins, pitch their tents, and dig deep. Cool treasures of living water from hidden
springs reward their toil. At morning they go on their way with a new song of praise,
and leave a blessing for those who follow.

I. Our WAT, AS pilgrims to the better land, lies through the valley op
TEARS. Sometimes, thoughtlessly or bitterly (in either case ungratefully), this name
is applied to human life as a whole. Untrue and unreasonable. If life has its dangers
and deserts, weary wastes, gloomy gorges, perilous passages, it has also breezy sunny
uplands, smiling valleys, fields of happy fruitful labour, quiet resting-places, cheered
by bright hopes, warm affections, pleasant memories. Many a light-hearted company
marches for leagues with unbroken ranks. It is as untrue that life is all sorrow, as
that it is all joy. But the valley of weeping has to be crossed. There are lives whose
whole course is within its shadow. The happiest path runs so near its border that at
any moment we may enter it ; perhaps soon to emerge ; perhaps not till the pilgrimage
be ended. No unfrequented spot. If we take account of bleeding or broken hearts
and shadowed hair all over the world — a life failing with each sound — we shall acknow-
ledge that in this wide sense earth may not untruly be called " the valley of tears."

II. HxDDEN WELL-SPBINGB OP COMFORT AND BLESSING are provided by Glod for
his children when passing through the valley of weepiug. Comfort under trial, blessing
through trial, hope beyond trial. 1. Sorrow for sin is the condition of the joy of for-
giveness (Matt, V. 4). Violent emotion is not necessary ; but a true sense of the jjuilt,
as well as evil, of sin. Peace with God precedes peace in God. The deeper the sorrow,
the sweeter the joy. Shallow views of sin are one of the chief dangers of our day ;
begetting shallow views of atonement, and of the relation of Christ's death to our sins
and " the sin of the world " (John i. 29 ; 1 John ii. 2). 2. &od's presence and love, our
Saviour's sympathy, the power of the Holy Spirit as " the Comforter," are felt in trouble
as at no other time. In the night the stars shine (Ps. xlvi. 1). To bear trouble
patiently is the part of a wise brave man, Christian or not; but comfort in trouble is
the exclusive privilege of the Christian. 3. The discipline of sorrow produces rich
fruits — stronger faith, deeper humility, a new sense of the value of prayer and of the
preoiousness of God's promises ; patience, courage, detachment from the world, power
to sympathize (Jas. i. 2, 3; 1 Pet. i. 6, 7; Heb. xii. 10; Ps. cxix. 67, 71). 4. "We
are saved hy hope" (Rom. viii. 24.) No grief so heavy as despair. None intolerable if
hope shines ahead. A hidden well (Col. iii. 3), but whose streams can refresh the
dreariest, weariest stages of pilgrimage (2 Cor. iv. 16 — 18). Christ's atonement lifis
from our heart the burden of the past. His sympathy and mediation bring every
moment of the present into living happy relation to God. But his resuirection and
ascension bind our own earthly life to the glorious immortal future (John xiv. 1 — 3,
19; Heb. vi. 19).

Ver. 10. — Delight in Ood's worship and service. " A day in thy courts," etc. Of
all the hundred and fifty holy songs composing the Psalter, none breathes a more
intense spirit of exalted devotion than this, or in language and imagery more poetical
and musical. It shares this character with other psalms ascribed to "the sons of
Eorah." Their ancestor Korah perished miserably in his rebellion against Moses and
Aatob, at the very door of the tabernacle (Numb. xvi.). Yet his descendants had the
charge of guarding the temple gates, no mean office (1 Chron. ix. 17 — 19 ; xxiii. 5 ;
xzvi. 1, 12); and were likewise leaders of the temple music, Heman being one ol them
(1 Chron. vi. 33 — 37 ; xxv. 1, 5). Although it often happens that the father's sins are
visited on the children, yet there is no unchangeable doom, no har sinister on their

PSALMS — II.



194 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. lxxxiv, 1— 12.

escutcheon, no barrier against iheir renewed consecration and acceptance. The senti-
ment of the text is — Deliyht in God's worship and service. " A day," etc. Secondly,
a single day so spent — in worship, such as every devout Israelite partook, and service,
the privilege of a Levite — outweighs in true joy and solid worth all the time spent in
mere worldly business or pleasure.

I. This is the lanouaoe op a heart which delights in God. Not every one
can say this. For a worldling it would be rank hypocrisy. In Malachi's day there
were those who said, " What a weariness 1 " (Mai. i. 13). Are there not even real
Christians for whom such a sentiiiient is an exaggeration ; whose sense of duty exceeds
their sense of privilege ; to whom the sabbath brings the shadows of constraint rather
than the lamp of joy ? Their worship has a slightly penitential flavour rather than a
rich fragrance of joy. They have not learned the secret of the son of Eorah (Ps. Ixiii.
4), or of David (Ps. Ixiii. 1 — 3). Joyless service is neither profitable nor acceptable.
These are heart-searching considerations. If we can venture to think of anything as
bringing sadness to our heavenly Father's heart, would it not be this — that his
children take small delight in drawing near to him? We live at too low a level,
among the clouds, when we might be in the sunshine and pure air of the mountain-top.

II. The soueoes of this delight abb manifold. 1. The joy of praise, worship,
adoration. Notice how inseparably praise and rejoicing are united in the Bible, especially
in this Book of Psalms. " 'J'hat God is what he is" (says John Howe) is the source of
infinite ]ov to his children. 2. The joy o[ personal communion with God. He is "our
God" (Ps.' xlviii. 14); «my God" (Ps. xlii. 1, 2, 6 ; Phil. iv. 19), 3. The joy ol/ellow-
ship with Oods people. (1 John i. 3.) Common prayer, harmonious praise, public worship,
have blessiijus and promises distinctively ttieir own. It was when all the hundred and
twenty "continued with one accord in prayer and supplication," the blessing of Pentecost
came. When " many were gathered praying," Peter was set free (comp. Acts iv. 24,
31). 4. The joy of service. A Christian, whether a minister or private Church-
member, can be more than " a door-keeper " — a door-opener ; setting wide the gate of
the city of refuge to the refugee from sin ; opening the door of the kingdom to the
young, and leading them through the gate Beautiful into the temple ; helping fellow-
believers to enter with boldness " into the holiest" (Heb. x. 19, 20). All that the
ancient psalmist found in the temple, we have, not in shadow, but reality — the one
sacrifice (Heb. x. 2, 4, 10, 12) ; the Divine Priest (Heb. viii. 1, 2) ; the true holy of holies
(Heb. ix. 8 — 12, 24) ; and in place of the ceremonial service of the Levites, to maintain
which the free-will offerings of the people were dedicated, the ministry of truth, the
relief of need and suffering the wide world over, and the spread throughout the world
of the gospel and kingdom of Christ (1 Pet. ii. 5). Which way does the balance
incline? which has really our heart's devotion and yields supreme delight — God's
service or the world's?



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Vers. 1 — 12. — The soul's sweet home. This is one of the Eorahite psalma, like Pss.
xlii., xliii., and some eight others. The late Dean Plumptre, in his ' Biblical Studies,'
pp. 163 — 166, gives reasons for concluding that they all belong to the reign of Hezekiah,
and were written by members of the Levitioal family of Korah. One or more of
them, it may be, hindered by the presence of the army of Sennacherib from going up
to the temple, as they had been wont to do, pours out his grief in these psalms. It
may have been so : we cannot certainly say. There have been two great interpre-
tations of this psalm — that which reads in it —

I. The lokgino of the servant of God after the worship of the sancthart.
This is the most general meaning found in it, as well as the most obvious. To this
day the sparrows fly round the Mosque of Omar as they flew about the (irecincts of
the temple which once stood on that same spot, as the writer of the psalm had often
noticed. There was

" No jutting frieze,
Buttress, nor coigne of vantitge, but these birds
Had Uiude their pendant bed."



T8. Lxxxiv. 1—12.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 195

The Korahites were (1 Chron. iz. 17) keepers of the door of the tabernacle, and, in
in Moses' time, watchmen at the entrance of the Levites' camp, and afterwards
<1 Chron. xxvL 1 — 19) were appointed as guardians of the temple doors (see Ter. 10
of this psalm). Tlie writer louses to be again at bis loved work in the courts of the
Lord. Hence he tells : 1. Of the loveliness of God's house, in his esteem. 2. Of his
intense desire for it. (Ver. 2.) His soul-yearning told upon his body, that he was as
■one in pain, and cried out. 3. Of the birds, the common sparrow, the restless swallow,
— even they seemed to him happier than himself, for they were where be would but
«ould not be. They were not banished, as he was, from the courts of the Lord. They
dwelt and had their home there, as he fain would. 4. Of the blessedness of his service.
It was a life of praise, and there is no life so blessed as this. They are made strong by
Ood; the joy of it brightened the long journeys, reached to the very roads, arid, bare,
and terrible, as many of them were. Yet nevertheless, in their hearts were ever
these " ways." The joy of the service to which they were going made the vale of
weeping a place of joy, the sandy waste a place of fountains ; yea, God did so bless
them with his grace as with the soft autumnal rains the cornlands are blessed after
the seed is sown. And the looked-for gladness made their numbers swell and grow by
additions that came in from all sides as the happy pilgrims went along, until every
vine of them a|ipeared before God in Zion. Then follows ; 6. I%e fervent prayer that
these hallowed seasons may be again given ; the names by which he appeals to God
telling probably of the hosts of enemies arrayed against the people of God. 6. He
■declares the reason wherefore he thus importunes the Lord of hosts. It was because
he counted the meanest service for God better than the best pleasures of sin. The
worst of the Church is better than the best of the world. And because of what God
himself was. 7. From all this learn — that the love of God's house is one sure mark
of God's people; that true worship is a well of delight, which gladdens all our life;
but that only they know it who have knowledge of God in tlieir own personal experi-
ence as their Sun and Shield.

II. The other interpretation of this psalm reads it as telling of the BLESSEDifESB
OF LIFE IN God. Yer. 1 distinctly affirms this: the earthly tabernacle being the
type of the soul in which God dwells. Ver. 2 declares that he cannot live without
God. Ver. 3 : he joyfully asserts that he lives in God ; his soul, though mean as the
sparrow, restless as the swallow, has yet found a rest, a dwelling-place, a home in God —
in God as seen in his altars, type of the sacrifice of Christ. Ver. 4 : he celebrates the
blessedness of such — their life is one continued song. Ver. 5 : and of those whose
strength — their confident trust — is in God, in whose heart are " ways '' for God ; he has
full right of way in them, they belong to him (Isa. xl. 3, 4). Ver. 6 : their sorrow
is turned into joy. Ver. 7 : their trust strengthens evermore ; they see God as they
worship. Vers. 8 — 11 are one fervent prayer that he who has told of this blessedness
may know it for himself : " Hear my prayer." And all this is true : the life in God
*8 blessed. — S. C.

Ver. 3. — Sanctuary birds. The sparrow and the swallow told of here are apt typei
•of those servants of God who find in him what these birds found in the temple. The
■comparison of the soul of one of God's people to a bird is not unusual (see Ps. xi.).
Note—

I. Some of theib ohabactbeisticb. 1. Such as are negative. They are not dis-
tinguished, like the eagle and many others, but of a very humble and lowly sort ; nor
powerful and strong ; nor beautiful ; nor valuable — " Are not two sparrows sold for ?
farthing ? "— ^nor numerous, that is, in comparison with the vast multitude of birds
generally ; nor, in themselves, attractive and beloved, like the dove. But neither are
they cruel like the eagle, nor " foul like the vulture, nor greedy as the cormorant, nor
bloodthirsty as the hawk, nor hardhearted as the ostrich, nor depending upon men for
support as the fowls of the farmyard, nor loving darkness like the owl " (Spurgeon).
All these negative qualities suggest the opposite ones in those who delight in God. But
there are also : 2. SkcA as are positive. They are the lowly ones, restless till they
find their home; seekers, — they "find" the rest they desire; true to their homes;
trustful, — in what strange places their nests are often found, under the eaves of cottages,
and in all manner of accessible places, where any one could reach them, but they seem



108 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. i.xxxiv. 1— la

to trust that no one will barm them 1 Are not these characteristics like those of (he
souls of whom these birds are the types ?

II. Their ekoodeagements. 1. There are the altart of Qod for them ; they bavs
not to provide such home. 2. When they come they are never driven away.

III. Their discoveries. They find : 1. A habitation, strong, comfortable, abiding
2. A home. The Church is a home for the soul.

IV. Their touxg. Their home is in the courts of the Lord. So will the faithful
servants of Grud seek that their offspring shall find their home in the Church of God.
"Children should be housed in the house of God. The sanctuary of God should foe
the nursery of the young." Happy those children whose parents seek for this above
allelsel— S. C.

Ver. 10. — Strange preferences. I, Those hebb naked. 1. That a day spent i»
OooPs courts is tetter than a thousand anywhere dse. But such preference makes it
certain that not any day in God's courts can be meant ; for too many days are spent
there which might just as well be spent elsewhere. They bring no good to any
one, but rather harm. For the worship on such days is but formal, hypocritical, hae
no heart in it. But the day the psalm tells of must be one in which the soul really
communes with God, in which God is worshipped in spirit and in truth. 2. That th»
humblest service in the house of Ood is better than the most rich and luxurious life in
the tents of wickedness. But here again the service meant must be the reverse of
formal, perfunctory, grudging ; for if the service were of such sort, one might almost as
well be in the tents of wickedness. And that dwelling in those tents cannot mean an
unwilling, a forced dwelling, like that told of in Ps. cxx. 5. Many servants of God
have had and still have so to dwell amongst wickedness; they are not happy in it,
would not be where they are could they help it, but they cannot. Hence if they be
"lights shining in the darkness," then they are rendering high semce to God, and
great shall be their reward. But the dwelling told of is one which is chosen and
loved. But, the psalmist says, the meanest place in God's house is better than that.
" I had rather be a door-keeper," etc.

II. Such prkferbncbs are vert strange. For few sympathize with them ; even
good people might be slow to make such affirmation about a single day in God's house
being better than a thousand anywhere else. Most people think that those who make
such choice are either madmen or fools. They are despised as enthusiasts, or hypo-
crites, or fanatics.

III. Nevertheless, such peeferences abb seal pacts. He who wrote this
psalm was but one of myriads more. He who does not put God first may have much
good about him, as had the young ruler told of in the Gospels, but he cannot have
eternal life.

IV. And thbt can be abundantly jtstified. 1. The first-named can — the one
day over the thousaud. For what gives value to time ? Not its duration, but its
employment, what you do with it. Which do we deem most worth — the compara-
tively short-lived empire of Greece, or the thousands of years of Chinese life — if life it
can be called? There may be one day in your life which you remember more than
whole years beside, for it more influenced and blessed you than all the myriad other
days which have gone by and are forgotten. It is the day filled with energies of the
mind, heart, spirit ; with memories of inspiring deeds ; with influences which teU upon
you and others. Cf. King Henry V.'s address to his soldiers at Agincourt —

"He that ontlivee this day and oomes safe home.
Will stand a tip-toe when this day is named," eto.

But the day of real worship and communion with God is a day more filled with energies^
memories, influences, than can any others be. How many of these others only drag
down the soul I but a day with God I 2. And so the humblest service for Ood is to be
preferred. For such service is shared in by the noblest, unites us to God, breaks the
chain of sin, prepares for heaven, robs care of its sting, etc. Therefore the psalmist's
choice is right ; let it be ours I — S. 0.

Ver. 1. — A test of our ipirittutl state. We may not find Davidic associations with



K. Lxxxiv. 1— 12.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 197

thia psalm. It was composed by one of the musically gifted family known as the
** sons of Eorah ; " and may be compared with Pss. xlii., xliv. They were a family of
L«Tites whose inheritance lay on the eastern side of the Jordan. "Dwelling on the
other side of Jordan, it was often impossible for them to reach Jerusalem. When
the river swelled and rose with the melting snows of winter, or with the heavy
tropical rains which fell on the northern hills and mountains, the fords of the Jordan
became impassable ; and the sons of Eorah, even though their turn of duty had come
round, were unable to go up to the house of the Lord. So, too, when the armies of
Assyria, or some other foe, were encamped round the city, and no Hebrew was per-
mitted to pass the line of siege, they were shut out from the worship of the temple
through all the summer months. Many, if not most, of their psalms appear to have
been composed at such times as these." The point suggested is that the spiritual
condition of this writer can be tested by his feelins; when deprived of religious privi-
leges. Was he glad of the ease and relief? Or did he pine for restoration? So it
may be shown that when Christians, through sickness or travelling, are separated
from their usual worshipping associations, their spiritual state may be appraised by
their feeling. Do they pine for them ; regretfully remember them, and wish they had
made better use of them ?

L Do WE LONa FOB God's worship ? It may be actually a possible thing for a
man to live a religious life without ever taking part in any public services. He is
• rara avis indeed who succeeds in accomplishing it. Most men not only yield to
Divine command and invitation, by sharing in sanctuary services, but they feel also
the positive necessity for such services, in the culture of their religious life, and the
satisfaction of their religious wants. When souls are alive unto God, they are sure to
desire to worship and praise him along with others. This is the natural religious
instinct. But it should be pointed out that the interest in God's worship may cease
to be spiritual ; it may become aesthetic ; it may even sink down to be a merely " formal
habit."

U. Is DUB LONOINO FOB God'b HOUSE AND WOBSHIP BGALLY A LONQINO FOB THB

SENSE OF HIS NEARNESS ? The expression in ver. 2, " for the living God," suggests
the deep spirituality of the writer. It was not the ritual he longed for, or the songs ;
it was the conscious presence of God, as the living Helper, Guide, and Comforter.
Compare the Christian yearning for the close and conscious presence of the living
Ohrist as Saviour and Sanctifier. — B. T.

Ver. 2.~-Ood fhe Living One. The precise expression here used is only found
besides in Ps. xlii. 2. "In the New Testament the name 'living God' is found in
St. Matthew's and St. John's Gospels, in the speech of Paul and Barnabas in the Acts
•(xiv. 14), in several of St. Paul's Epistles, four times in the Epistle to the Hebrews,
and once in the Bevelation." It is difficult to treat this subject as a universal
experience, because our hearts are so full of the risen and living Christ, God manifest
in the flesh, God manifest in the spirit. He is God, the living God, ever with us, as
Helper, Inspirer, Comforter, and Sanctifier; but we may helpfully try to take the
position of a " son of Korah," and begin by considering what the " living God " was
to him.

I. God thought of in man's meditations. Why did it not suffice this writer to
read his Bible, study and think about God, in the land beyond the Jordan? A man
■eaa have feast-times, times of spiritual refreshing, in the privacy of his home, and in
the midst of God's handiwork in nature. And every man ought to have such thoughts
of God; nourish and cherish them. But here is the /act of human experience — God
thought has never wholly sufficed and satisfied any human being yet, because man is
a composite being. He is not all thought. He has a body. And this very thinking
is dependent on the help that symbols — relative to the body— can bring. Devotees
may strive to become aU thought. They do not thus transcend human nature, they
degrade it. We must have more concerning our God than mere thinking about him ;
and therefore this Eorahite longs for his revealed Presence in the temple.

II. God bealized through appointed symbols. Pious souls have always recog-
nized a sense in which God is specially present in his sauctuaries, and in his sacra-
ments. God taught this to all the ages by the manifestation of his Presence in Jewish



198 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. lxxxiv. 1—12.



tabernacle and temple, by the brooding cloud and the Sheohinah light. What the
psalmist dwells on is, that he used to realize God's nearness when he looked on hia
dwelling-place, shared in his worship, and heard his priests. Urge that Dnly at
spiritual peril can men neglect the symbols of the presence and working of the living
God.

III. God felt in man's heakt and lite. This is the full realization of God as
the Living One, living and working in us. Show this is an advance on sentiment, or
mere thought of God, and on formalism, or mere outward worship of God. It is God
in us, the inspiration of all good. It is " Christ our Life." — R. T.

Ver. 3. — Envy at the birds. The man prevented from sharing in the public worship
of the temple thinks enviously of the very sparrows and swallows that flit through its
courts and build their nests under its eaves. Sparrows are very abundant in the Bast.
Swallows make their nests, not only in the vert'ndahs, but even in the rooms, within
the mosques, and in the sacred tombs. Josephus tells us that the outer courts of the
temple were planted with trees. " It is a singularly natural and beautiful conception
which makes the psalmist think of the birds haunting there, as seeking the protection
of God's altar for their young, and so enjoying a privilege which as yet he has not."
Evidently what is chiefly in his mind is the sense of peace and security which the
birds have who make their homes within the precincts of God's temple. No one dis-
turbs them. There are too many people about for birds of prey to venture near. In
the temple courts the poet thinks of them as away from all the " stress and strain " of
life. Compare " He that dwelleth in the secret place of the Most High shall abide
under the shadow of the Almighty."

I, The psalmist envies the birds theib security. Probalily he wrote when the
land was in a disturbed state, and there was no restfulness or safety for any one any-
where. And he must have felt this even more in the open and exposed district*
beyond the Jordan. Illustrate from the idea of "sanctuary," which was, in old times,
attached to the temples. Once within them, no foe could assail. Dr. Turner tells us
that in Samoa, the manslayer flies to the house of the chief of the village ; and in nine
cases out of ten he is perfectly safe, if only he remains there. See how jealously Jews
guarded their temple from the intrusion of strangers. In London of the olden time,
Whitefriars, Westminster, and the Savoy were sanctuaries for all criminals except
traitors. This feeling of security the Christian gains out of his daily apprehension of
the Divine presence and defence. Bound about him are the everlasting arms. He lives
within the overshadowing spiritual temple. " What can harm us, if we be followers-
of that which is good," and have God upon our side ?

II. The psalmist envies the birds their peace. Illustrate by dwelling fully
on that strange, yet delightful quietness, restlulness, solemnity, whicli come upon ns^
when we enter a cathedral. We feel as we feel nowhere else in the world. Our
feeling answers to that of the Jew when entering his temple. Show how nourishing;
to all the finest elements of soul-life that atmosphere of peace is. — B. T.

Vers. 5, 6. — The Joy of the pilgrims. In these verses there is a blending of the real
and the figurative ; the acJuaZ journey towards Zion is represented as accompanied with
ideal blessings of peace and refreshment. The poet has thought of the blessedness of
those who dwell constantly in God's house. Now he thinks of the blessedness of those
who are permitted to go there, and to tarry there for a while. And this leads him to
recall what happy times he had known, even in the journeys to Jerusalem. Perowne
says of the pilgrims to Zion, " Every spot of the familiar road, every station at which
they have rested, lives in their heart. The path may be dry and dusty, through a-
lonely and sorrowful valley, but nevertheless they love it. The pilgrim-bami, rich in,
hope, forget the trials and difficulties of the way; hope changes the rugged and stony
waste into living fountains." The valley of Baca was the valley which led up from
Jordan toward Jerusalem, and whose famous balsam trees wept balms. The thought
for our consideration is this — the hearts that are truly set on God, and filled with desire
to join in God's worship, will cheerfully bear, and successfully master, all the difficulties
that may be in their way. They make the very " valley of Baca " refreshing as a spring,

I. The Chbibtian pilqbim finds his wat lies THBonoH tallets of Baca.



P8. Lxxxiv. 1—12.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS, 199

Two explanations of this valley are given. Some say it means " wet, marshy places ; "
others say, " dry, sandy places." Clearly it means something trying and difficult for
pilgrims. We know well that there are difficulties in the way of our effiDrt to live the
godly life ; valleys of Baca in our pilgrim-route to the eternal temple of the holy. 1.
There are valleys of weeping ; sorrows, both outward and inward (valleys of balsam, or
weeping). 2. Valleys of unrelieved want; desert places. Illustrate the ever-varied,
ever-unquenchable thirst of the spiritual life.

II. A BBAVE, EARNEST SPIRIT WILL MAKE A WAT THROUGH THESE VALLEYS OP

Baca. Times of trouble we must have, but everything depends on the spirit in which
we approach them, and deal with them. The true heart is helped to triumph over the
difficulties of the way, by keeping ever in mind the end it has in view. Lead on to
show how the heaven of established holiness, and near communion with God, becomes
the inspiration to overcoming the difficulties of the way.

III. GrOD BBSPOKDS TO THE EARNEST MAN IN THE VALLEYS OP BaOA. If they dig

pools in the desert, God will be sure to fill them with his genial rains. God is to us in
blessing as we are to him in trust. — B. T.

Ver. 7. — Stages of spiritual progress. "The very journeys to the temple, often toil-
some and hazardous, take on a certain sacredness from memory, imagination, and
desire, insomuch that they can say that ' the highways to Zion are in their hearts.'
They remember how they wept with vague, almost joyful emotion as they pas>eil
through the valley of Baca, and how they went 'from strength to strength,' that is,
grew stronger and stronger, more and more joyful, as they topped the hills round
about Jerusalem." Illustrate by the growing; excitement we feel when nearing home
after a time of prolonged absence. Every mile finds us more and more anxious to catch
a sight of familiar scenes. It might be reasonably expected that the long and trying
joamey would make the pilgrims feel weary and indifferent. Instead of that, their
souls master their circumstances, and they are brighter and more cheerful at the end
than at the beginning. So do we see aged ChriAians who, for sunny faces and happy
ways altogether, put to shame young beginners in the pilgrim-path. They have evi-
dently gone " from strength to strength."

I. Spiritual pilobims must "keep on." According to the figures of the text,
they must not be stopping, or idling, or taking up any interests on the way ; day by
day, persistently, they must be going forward ; every day getting a day's march nearer
Zion. A pilgrim must just " keep on." So we are called to "patient continuance in
well-doing ; " to day-by-day persistent goodness ; and this of itself may become weari-
some. It is the hardest thing given us to do, this keeping on, day by day, in the
same scenes, and doing the same work. But it is never really a mere keeping on. We
may not realize the joy of it, but the fact is that, in keeping on, we are going " from
strength to strength."

II. In " KEEPING ON," SPIRITUAL PILGRIMS FIND THEMSELVES EVER BETTER ABIiH

TO KEEP ON. Every difficulty overcome means a higher strength to overcome diffi-
culties. Every joy felt in a spiritual triumph is cheer for dealing with new anxieties.
Every day of Christian life is a step; from it we get power to take a step higher. The
man who has lived well his Christian life to-day is in fact, and ought to be in feeling,
a stronger man to live his Christian life to-morrow. And so, making the day's experi-
ence a step up, he finds power and joy increasing as he nears the city of God, the
heavenly Jerusalem. A Christian life may be exhausting for the body, but "as the
outward man perishes, the inward man is renewed day by day." — R, T.

Ver. 9. — The shield-figure. In this psalm we find three names for God, " God of
hosts," " God of Jacob," " God our Shield." To Abraham God had said, " Fear not,
I am thy Shield, and thy exceeding great Reward." And in the fifth psalm we read,
"Thou, Lord, wilt bless the righteous; with favour wilt thou compass him as with a
shield." Moses exclaims (Deut. xxxiii. 29), " Happy art thou, Israel ! who is like
unto thee, people saved by the Lord, the Shield of thy help ? " And one of the later
psalms (cxv.) has this for a refrain, "0 Israel, trust thou in the Lord; he is their Help
and their Shield." The prayer of the text is urge'i by two metaphors — " Thou my
Shield ; " "I thine anointed."



200 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [.ps. lxxxiv. 1—12.

I. God may be thought of as cub Shield. Shields were peculiar to the hand-
to-hand warfare of ancient times. They were of two kinds — one very large, protecting
the whole body ; another smaller, used by light-armed troops very skilfully. They
were sometimes made of light wood, covered with bull's hide of two or three thick-
nesses, plated with metal; sometimes they were studded with nails or metal pins.
They were smeared with oil, both to prevent them from injury by weather, and to
render them so smooth that missiles might the more readily glance off. Show that
so varied and so complicated is religious life we are glad of the help of all kinds of
metaphor. A.s Christ is set under many names, so God is set under many relationg.
Christian life, conceived as a warfare, has its defensive and offetnsive sides. Under the
shadow of God, as a Shield, men find defence. Compare figure of the " strong Tower,"
into which " the righteous runs and is safe." There are times in our Christian warfare
when we can only act on the defensive. Then God is our Shield. Under the shadow
of God, as a Shield, attacks were made. Describe the ancient mode of attacking a
fortress, under shields placed together so as to make a protecting roof, which secured
the soldiers Irom hostile missiles. There is " offensive war " sometimes in Christian
life. Prevailing evils must be vigorously attacked. We may be sure of God's shield
in all acliive service. The psalmist here is writing as a civilian, and a Levite, and
thinks lovingly of God as his Defence from the perils of the pilgrim-way.

II. We mat think of oubselves as God's anointed. It is as though the
psalmist had said, "Becognize the face that is uplifted to thee." Though the term
" anointed " will suit David, it will equally suit the priest and the Levite, as set apart,
anointed for the special service of God's temple. If God has brought us into close
and loving relations of service to him, he has given us a plea to use in prayer. We
may say, " Look upon the face of thine anointed." — E. T.

Ver. 10. — The joy of doing little (kings for Ood. " I had rather be a door-keeper ; "
literally, "stand or lie on the threshold." A missionary tells us that in India the
office of door-keeper is truly respectable and confidential. Door-keepers of temples are
men of the greatest dignity and power ; whereas the psalmist was thinking of the
lowliest and most humble situation. " I would rather choose to sit at the threshold."
This is the situation of the devotee and the beggar. "Excuse me, sir, I pray you ; I
had better lie at the threshold than do that," is a frequent mode of expression among
Orientals. The psalmist prefers the situation and attitude of a beggar, at the threshold
of the house of the Lord, to the most splendid dwellings of the wicked. From 1 Ghion.
XX vi. 12 — 19 we learn that the sons of Korah, or Kore, were the porters of the gates
of the Lord's house. " To these ministers of the sanctuary none seem so blessed as
they who dwell in God's house, and are for ever praising him. To these keepers of
the temple gates one day in the sacred courts is better than a thousand spent else-
where ; and they would rather be door-keepers in the house of God than sit and be
served as chiefs in alien tents."

I. Little things abb as tedlt " service " as great ones. They are necessary
in their places. They are fitted to those of moderate or small capacities. To God the
little things of service are as acceptable as the great things. Find any earthly sphere,
and take the little things of it away. What an upset of the whole would result 1 The
door-keeper at the gate was as important in his way as the priest at the altar. We
can do our " little things " for God cheerfully, when we can fully realize that they are
service— just our service.

II. Little things can express ohabaoteb as teult as obeat ones. A little
pool can mirror the sun as truly as the widespreading lake. A dewdrop can refresh
the earth, in its way, as truly as the thunder-shower in its. God is the reader of
motives, and accepts the actor rather than the act. It often, indeed, takes more and
nobler character to do a small deed well than to do a large one. There is much to
help a priest to be noble ; there is but little to help a mere door-keeper, and he has to
fall back upon principle. Let but a man rightly esteem doing anything for God, and
he will be full of holy joy in being permitted to do some " little thing." — R. T.

Vers. 11, 12. — Conditional hestowmenta. What God is to his people, and what he
does for them, may be put into two figures, and expressed in two plain statements.



PS. Lixxiv. i— 12.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 201

But what he is to them, and what he does for them, depend on what they are in them-
Belves, and what they are toward him. This the sincerely good man is always willing
to recognize.

I. The DiviHE bbstowments. 1. Suggested by two figures. (1) " The Lord God
is a Sun." This figure for God is only used in this place. The sun in nature is the
source of light, life, warmth, beauty, fruitfulness. The psalmist seems, even in this
figure, to have God's defendings chiefly in mind. God is Light against darhriess, which
Easterns so greatly fear. (2) "The Lord God is a Shield." See this fignre treated in
the homily on ver. 9. We may add the picture of the tents of the army ranged in circles
round the king's tent, and forming an almost impregnable shield; so " the Lord is
round about his people." Some have suggested making one figure of the two, and
reading it, " The Lord God is a bright and shining Shield." They think reference
may be to the brazen shields, which were kept polished, so that, catching the sun's
rays, they might dazzle the enemy. 2. Suggested by two statements. (1) " The Lord
will give grace and glory." We may think of Divine bestowment exactly according
with human necessities. Orace fits into all present needs ; glory fits into all future
needs. But the psalmist probably used the terms as figures for the two things he
needed — help and success. (2) " No good thing will he withhold." A carefully qualified
promise. It does not say, " Nothing will he withhold." It is " no good thing ; " and
no one can decide what is good for us as he can who has the infinite knowledge, and is
the iuSuite Wisdom and Love.

II. The Divine conditions. "From them that walk uprightly.'' That being
regarded as the sure sign that the heart is right with God. A man may walk uprightly
before his fellows who is not heart-right with God. But this is quite certain — if a
man does not walk uprightly, he cannot be right with God. God is an unstinted
Giver ; we put the limitations by the failure of our faith, love, submission, and obedi-
ence. God would have his bestowments to be the best possible blessing to us ; aud
therefore they are withheld until it is quite plain that we are prepared to make the
best of them.— B. T.

Vers. 1 — 7. — 7%e glory of worship. L Helps us to ebalizb oub nbabnbss to
God. (Ver. 1.) " How lovely are thy dwellings 1 " or " the house where thou dwellest."

II. It is the sxfsession of the deepest lonoino of tee beabt and bocl.
(Ver. 2.)

III. It oives the sense of beino at houe with God. (Ver. 3.) He is at a
distance from the sanctuary ; and the birds of the air seem nearer God than he is.

IV. It intensifies the spirit of gratitude and pbaisb. (Ver. 4.)

V. We become conscious of a strength derived pbom God. (Ver. 5.)

VI. It creates springs of refreshment in the wilderness. In the weeping
vale (ver. 6). " The early rain cometh in with blessings."

VII. It constantly renews and increases our spiritual strength. (Ver. 7.)

VIII. It will bring us at length to the vision of God in heaven. (Ver.
7.)— S.

Ver. 11. — What God is to his people. I. Good men enjoy the grandest expbei-
enoes. 1. God is to them a Sun and Shield. These figures refer to our moral state
as dark and dangerous. Alienation of the soul from God is a state of darkness. God
is the Source of our light and life and joy. Our danger is — life is a great battle-field.
We have protection from God if we are on his side. The battle is his. 2. He gives
to them grace and glory. Grace is unmerited favour. The favour of God to man
has been in the exercise of his mercy. " Hath not dealt with us after our sins," etc.
Glory is the perfecting the work of grace, in the revelations and rewards of eternity.
The beginning, the continuance, and the end of life are from God. 3. He holds back
from them no good thing. This includes the bestowment of all real good. And he
has given us a proof and pledge in the gift of Christ. " If God spared not his own
Son, but delivered him up for us all," etc.

II. SoMB GOOD MEN DO NOT BNJOY THB FULL EXTENT OF THESE PROMISES. 1.

Because theit characters do not answer to the description of the text. They do not
walk uprightly, or only do so very imperfectly. None of us translates the theory



202



THE BOOK OP PSALMS.



[ps. Lxixv. 1 — 13b



of the Christian life into our actual practice. 2. They often mistake what are tlu
good things of life. Many things-, accounted good by the false judgments of the world,
are bad. Things good for some men are bad for others. Things good for us at one
time are bad at another. But the absolutely good things— good independently of all
circumstances— are meant in the text. To walk in God's light ; to see all thirds m
the light that falls from his character ; to enjoy his help and protection from spiritual
danger; to have his grace now and his glory in prospect ;— these are the good things
they enjoy who walk uprightly. — S.



EXPOSITION.



PSALM LXXXV.



This is a psalm written after a signal dis-
play of God's mercy towards Israel, but
when there was still much wanting 1 1 make
the condition of the people altogether
satisfactory. It consists of a thanksgiving
for the deliverance vouchsafed (vers. 1 — 3) ;
b, prayer for further and more complete
restoration to favour (vers. 4 — 7); and a
joyful anticipation of the granting of the
prayer, and of the bestowal on Israel,
ultimately, of all temporal and spiritual
blessings (vers. 8 — 13). There are no such
aistinct and definite allusions in the psalm
as to tie it down to any particular date;
but, on the whole, it would seem to suit
best either the time of Zerubbabel (Ezra
iii.; iv.) or that of Ezra and Nehemiah
(Ezra ix., x. ; Neh. ii. — vL).

Vers. 1 — 3. — The thanksgiving. God is
ihanked for two things especially : (1) for
having granted his people forgiveness of
their sins (vers. 2, 3) ; and (2) for having,
partially at any rate, removed his chasten-
ing hand from them, and given them a
return of prosperity (ver. 1).

Ver. 1. — Lord, thou hast been favourable
unto thy land ; or, " thou art become gra-
cious " (Kay, Clieyne) — a preceding time
during whicli God was not gracious is im-
plied (oomp. Ps. Ixxvii. 7 — 9). Thou hast
brought back the captivity of Jacob. It is
most natural to understand this of the re-
turn from the Babylonian captivity; but
possible that some lighter affliction may be
intended, since nuty is used, metaphorically,
for calamities short of actual captivity (see
the comment on Job xlii. 10).

Ter. 2. — Thou hast forgiven the iniquity
of thy people; thou hast covered all their
sin. God's remission of punisbment, and
restoration of his people to favour, was a
full indication that he had " forgiven their
iniquity " and " covered tlieir sins," This
was so vast a boon, that a pause for devout



acknowledgment and silent adoration
seemed fitting. Hence the " selah," which
is at the end of the second verse, not of the
first, as Hengstenberg states.

Ver. 3. — Thou hast taken away all thy
wrath. Forgiveness of sins implies the
cessation of wrath, though it does not neces-
sarily imply the cessation of (lunishmeut.
Thoii hast turned thyself from the fierce-
ness of thine anger. This expresses the
meaning better than the marginal render-
ing.

Vers. 4 — 7. — The prayer. Two things
are prayed for— first, that God will turn
the hearts of his people wholly towards
himself (ver. 4) ; and secondly, that he will
complete his work of deliverance by re-
moving the traces, that still exist, of bis
past anger (vers. 5—7). Israel is still in
a state of great distress and weakness, suf-
fering from the natural consequences of its
sins, which keep it depressed and sad.

Ver. 4. — Turn ns, Ood of our salvation.
Thou art turned to us (ver. 1) ; let us also
be turned to thee. We cannot turn of our
own mere wish to turn; we need thy helping
grace (oomp. Ps. Ixxx. 3, 7, 19). And cause
thine anger toward us to cease. Verbally,
this contradicts ver. 3, whence it has been
supposed by some to come from the mouth
of another speaker. But really there is no
contradiction, if we understand, botli here
and in the next verse, by God's anger, the
effects of his anger, which were still con-
tinuing (comp. Ezra iil. 12, 13 ; iv. 4 — 24 ;
ix. 2—15; Neh. i. 3 ; ii. 17 ; iv. 1—22; v.
1—19).

Ver. 5. — Wilt thou be angry with us for
ever ? This is equivalent to " Wilt thou
still go on punishing us ? " Wilt then
draw out thine anger to all generations?
or, " from generatinn to generation?" This
suits well the first period after the return
from the Captivity, when the depressed
condition of Israel continued for several
generations

Ver. 6. — Wilt thou not revive us again !
literally, wilt thou not return, and revive us t
(comp. Ps. Ixxi. 20). So Ezra prays God



P8. LXXXV. 1 — 13.]



THE BOOK OF PSALMS,



20»



to "give Israel a little revivino; in their
bondage" (Ezra ix. 8). That thy people
may rejoice in thee. The "revival" and
"rejoicing" came in Nehemiah's time,
when tlie dedication of tlie wall of Jeruaa-
lem was kept "with gladness, both with
thanksgiving, and with singing, with cym-
bals, psalteries, and with harps " (Xeh. xii.
27).

Ver. 7. — Show us thy mercy, Lord, and
grant ns thy salvation. Compare the de-
vout petitions of the Church morning and
evening, "O Lord, show thy meroy upon
us. And grant us thy salvation" (Order
for Morning and Evening Prayer).

Vers. 8 — 13. — The joyful anticipation.
The psalmist anticipates a favourable an-
swer to his prayer, and proceeds to note
down the chief points of it. God will
" speak peace to his people " (ver. 8), bring
his salvation near to them (ver. 9;, con-
trive a way by which " mercy and truth,"
" righteousness and peace," shall be re-
conciled (vers. 10, 11), shower blessings on
his land (ver. 12), and guide his people in
the way marked out by his own footsteps
(ver. 13).

Ver. 8. — I will hear what God the lord
will speak ; t.«. " I will wait now and hear
the Divine answer to my prayers" (oomp.
Hab. iii. 1, "I will stand upon my watcli,
and set me upim the tower, and will watch
to see what he will say unto me"). For he
will speak peace unto his people. He will
give them a gentle answer — one breathing
peace and loving-kindness. And to his
saints, And especially he will so answer
the Aite of hii people — the khasidim, " his
saints," or "loving ones." But let them
not turn again to folly (comp. Ezra ix.
10 — 14). If, after the deliverance that they
had experienced, they turned again to such
" folly " as had brought on their misfor-
tunes, it would make their end worse than
their bea;inning.

Ver. 9.— Surely his salvation is nigh them



that fear him; or, will be nigh. The an-
swer to the prayer in ver. 7. Thai glory-
may dwell in our land. Professor Cheyne-
asks, "What glory?" and suggests, "The
true Sheohinah, the manifested presence of
Israel's God." But it may be doubtful
whether anything more is meant than a-
return of eartlily glory and prosperity, such
as that for which Kehemiah laboured auA
prayed.

Ver. 10. — Mercy and truth are met to-
gether. God's mercy and God's truth are-
reconciled and brought into liarmony. The
psalmist does not say — probably dues not
know — how. He accepts the fact of the
reconciliation, which is revealed to liim
(ver. 8) by faith, and boldly announces-
it. The explanation was reserved for thfr
coming and teaching of Christ. Bighteous-
ness and peace have kissed eaon other.
"Kighteousneas" and "peace" are synony-
mous with "mercy" and "truth." Here
they are personified — "represented a»
angels in human form " (Cheyne).

Ver. 11. — Truth shall spring out of th»
earth (comp. Isa. xlv. 8). One result of the
reconciliation of God's mercy and truth,
shall be a growth of righteousness among
men. The pardoned people of God sliall
bring forth much fruit. And righteousness
shall look down from heaven. God's riglit-
eousness " looks down from heaven " (lik&
the sun), to draw up and mature the ieehle-
plant of man's righteousness, which, without
it, would come to nothing.

Ver. 12. — ^Tea, the Lord shall give that
which IB good ; i.e. shower blessings on hi»
land, botn spiritual and temporal. And our
land shall yield her increase. Other crops-
may be included, but the special reference
is to a large increase of good works.

Ver. 13. — Eighteousness shall go before
him. Prepare the way, i.e., for the restora-
tion of the people to Gud's favour (cum-
paie the first clause of ver. 11, and the
second of ver. 12). And shall set us in the
way of his steps ; i.e. cause his people ta
walk in the way marked out by his foot-
steps — I.e. by the indications of his will
either in nature or in the written Word.



HOMILETICS,

Ver. 6.— Revival. " Wilt thou not revive us again ; that thy people may rejoice in
thee?" The prayers of Scripture, like its promises, never grow old. They deal not
with the shanging .surface and oircumstaDces of life, but with its living heart and
•biding needs. So this prayer of the old psalmist is as fresh and fit %r our lips
to-day, as when the ink was wet in which he wrote. The same Spirit who inspired
him also " helpeth our infirmities."

I. The blessing sought: revival. This word has come to be often used for
• Beason of extraordinary religious activity, attended by numerous convprsions. But
it properly means the quickening, strengthening, elevating, of life already possessed •



204 THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [ps. lxxxt, 1— IS."

but perhaps feeble, declining, threatened with extinction. This must be God's work,
by tlie power of his Spirit. "Wilt thou not revive us?" All life, natural and
spiritual, is from God and in God. At the back of all force is his power ; at the back
of all causation, his will; at the back, of all law, his wisdom (Pss. zsxiii. 6; civ. 30).
But there is this wonderful and glorious difference between the realm of natural and
of spiritual life — in the outward material world we have to deal with laws ; the power
working under and behind those laws is inscrutably hidden. But in spiritual life it
is just Ood's power we have to deal with ; the laws according to which it is put forth
are mostly beyond our ken. In the natural world there is ample range for prayer ;
but in the spiritual we are shut up to prayer. We are to pray for daily bread, for
which we must work, as well as for forgiveness of sin, for which we cannot work.
But with this difference — the ungodly husbandman will reap his harvest, if he works
for it, though he does not pray; but pardou, and the grace of God's Spirit, will not
be gi\en to those who do not ask (Luke xi. 13; Jas. i. 5; 1 John i. 9).

II. How WILL THIS QUICKENED LIFE SHOW ITSELF ? lu : 1. LowUer humility. Deeper
consciousness of sin, need, weakness. That Church, of all the seven addressed in the
Apocalypse, which said, " 1 am rich, and have need of nothing," was the very one that
was in the very jaws of death (Rev. iii. 17). We put this note of revival first, because
our Lord puts it first in describing the character and blessedness of his true disciples
(Matt. V. 3 — 5). The first token of revived life in a frozen limb is intense pain ; the
flesh that is past feeling is past cure (see Eph. iv. 19 ; Prov. xxvi. 12). 2. Increased
spirit of prayer. More urgent habitual sense of need of prayer. Disposition to more
frequent prayer (however brief). Perhaps at first no increased freedom and delight,
but rather depressing sense of the weakness, coldness, unworthiness of our prayers.
More earnestness, especially in prayer for others. Stronger faith in God's promises
(jiot iti our own prayers'). Perseverance and patience. Out of all this must come,
sooner or later, both delight and power in prayer, the presence of the Holy Spirit with
our spirit, bringing our desires into harmony with God's will, and helping our infirmities.
3. Orowing love of Ood's truth. The Bible will be dearer to us, fuller of light and
help. Christ's word will abide in us (Col. i. 9 — 11). 4. Deeper, more inspiring,
controlling views of tile love of Ood in Christ. (Eph. iii. 16 — 19.)

III. Results of bevival. "That thy people," etc. The psalmist was thinking
of God's chosen nation, Israel. That is no hindrance to our application of both prayer
and promise. The conditions and forms of national life and of Church life are wholly
different from what they were then ; never can be tlie same. But principles abide.
Righteousness still exalts a nation. " Blessed is the people whose God is the Lord 1 " A
dead or lukewarm Church cannot be a joyful Church; nor a lukewarm worldly Christian
a joyful Christian. Suppose all English men, women, children, to become true, earnest,
loving disciples of our Lord Jesus, " filled with the Spirit; " the whole face of society
and national life would be changed, because its heart would be changed (Acts viii. 8).
Meanwhile, revival, with all its fruits, either in the Church or in the nation, must
begin in the hearts and homes of Christians. Then the joy of the Lord will be our
strength. All turns (remember) on this word, " thou." With God is life's fountain. In
him our bodies live : huw much more our spirits 1 (John xv. 5 ; Phil. ii. 13).

Ver. 8. — The purpose of Ood's gracious chastenings. " He will speak peace . . . but
let them not turn again to folly." The spirit of this psalm is compounded uf penitence
and praise, humility and hope; inspired by great troubles and great deliverances.
This verse expresses what we may call the moral, the very heart of the psalm ; the
golden link between the thanksgivings blended with confessions of vers. 1 — 7, and
the splendid promises of vers. 9 — 13. The lesson is twofold — first, that sin is folly,
most of all in God's people ; and secondly, that God's gracious purpose in chastening
is to keep us from sliding back into sin, turning again to fully.

I. Sin is follt. Q.d. it is acting in disregard of known consequences. The
Hebrew word here translated " folly " also means " hope " or " confidence " — the
blind confidence of one who knows that " the end of these things is death," yet listens
to the tempter who says, " Ye shall not surely die ; " that " the wages of sin is death,"
but counts on their not being paid. He sins in spite of warning, reason, experience ;
hoping he may seize " the pleasures of sin for a season," and yet escape its eternal con-



P8. Lxxxv. 1— 13.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 205

sequences. No man chooses perdition. But it comes to the same thing whether you
leap over a precipice or walk along the brink with your eyes shut. Sometimes the
sinner sins with open eyes, and, just because he knows the danger, flatters himself he
can stop in time. He is not on the hrinh—onXj on the gentle grassy slope ; but
involuntarily his steps quicken — he cannot stop — he is lostl A traveller through the
snow knows that the one fatal danger is to yield to sleep. " Only for five minutes,"
he says ; and closes his eyes, never to open again. Or a thirsty wayfarer in the desert
is warned that a spring is poisonous. The bones of those who have encamped near it
whiten the ground. " One draught only 1 " he says ; and presently his bones whiten
with the rest. Every one is ready to say, " He sought his fate ; has only himself to
blame." Are there none amongst us to whom conscience (if awake) would answer,
" Thou art the man " ? " Their eyes have they closed " (Matt. xiii. 15). They have
" forsaken the fountain of living waters " (Jer. ii. 13). They " heard the sound of the
trumpet, and took not warning " (Ezek. xxxiii. 5 ; Heb. x. 28, 29). If sin is folly,
the clearer the light, the greater the folly. Therefore the sins of Christians must be
the greatest folly. This does not apply to sins of infirmity, against which we are
watching, fighting, praying, of which the Christian ia sadly conscious, but which have
not "dominion over" him. But what these lead to, if we fail to watch, fight, pray:
willing yielding to temptation, wilful persistence in wrong, against conscience, loving
what we are pledged and bound to hate, ceasing to strive to please God ; — this is
indeed to " turn again to folly."

II. God's puepose in his dealings with his children is to prevent theib
TURNINO BACK TO SIN. This both iu his mercy and in his chastening. 1. In his
mercy. " I will hear," etc. God's purpose in forgiving sin is both to incline and to
enable us to forsake it. Its guilt is cancelled, that its power may be destroyed. Else
forgiveness were useless, wasted. The cross of Christ, constantly set forth in the New
Testament as the atonement for our sins, the reconciliation whereby we are brought
back to God (Rom. v. 9, 10), is as plainly set forth as the mightiest motive to holiness
(Gal. ii. 20 ; see the whole of Rom. vi.). 2. God's chastening discipline has the same
end in view (Heb. xii. 10, 11 ; Ps. cxix. 67, 71). The danger is real. Christians are
exposed to the ordinary temptations which beset human nature, though with diminished
force; and have some special temptations. We need constantly to open our hearts
to the force of all the motives here suggested. (1) God's forgiving mercy, and our
enjoyment of it (Rom. xii. 1). (2) God's chastening, and our experience of it. (3) God's
promises, and our hope. (4) God's warning, " Let them not turn again to folly," and
the unspeakable folly and misery of neglecting it. For the ransomed slave to run
back to slavery, the released prisoner to hanker after his cell and fetters, the man
restored to health to long for his sick-room, the blind whose eyes have been opened
to shut himself up in the dark, — seems less insane than for those who " have escaped
the pollutions of the world through the knowledge of the Lord and Saviour Jesus
Christ," to be " again entangled therein and overcome " (2 Pet. ii. 20 ; Heb. vi. 4 — 6).

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Vers. 1 — 13. — Temporal mercies of little avail without such as are spiritual. There
had been great outward mercies (see vers. 1 — 3). Probably the wonderful deliverance
of Judah, Jerusalem, and Hezekiah from the threatened might of Assyria was the
occasion of this burst of thanksgiving. But the psalmist — it may have been Isaiah
himself — ^whilst grateful, indeed, for God's deliverance, as he well might be, was never-
theless sore distressed at the spiritual condition of his countrymen (see Isaiah's denun-
siations of the wickedness of his people, ch. i. and passim). There needed, therefore,
to be an inward conversion as well as an outward deliverance such as they had experi-
snced. And until this spiritual reformation was brought about, the anger of God
rested on them still. Hence the prayer, " Revive us again," etc. In this psalm we
have —

I, Thankfux aokniwledoment of MERCIES RECEIVED. (Vers. 1 — 3.)

U. EaBNEST PRATERS FOB YET GREATER ONES. (Vers. 4 7.)

III. Confident belief that the Lord will answer. (Ver. 8.)



•206 THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [ps. lxxxv. 1—13.

IV. Joyful akticipation or the blessings the Lord will give. (Vera.
S— 13.)— S. C.

Ver. 6. — Revival. L Note the chief word of this verse : " bbvtve." It implies :
1. lAfe. The new creation has heen accomplished, the passing from death unto life has
tMkeu place. 2. But that life has declined, and therefore needt revival. How often
'this occurs I Our spiritual life is not as our natural life, which is weakest at the
beginning and end; but the spiritual life is strong in the vigour of its first love, nor
-does it ever at the last hour fall from God, but in the midst of the years, like the
wires of the telegraph between the posts, it often falls to its lowest. The causes are
not a few, but may he summed up in one — the not abiding in Christ. 3. The life
which has declined can he revived — the health and vigour come back again, the back-
sliding htt healed.

II. What it expeesses. It is an earnest prayer, an impassioned pleading for revival.
It means, " Oli that thou wouldst revive us again I " Now, this revtals : 1. Conscious-
ness of need. There may be the need, as at Laodicea, and no consciousness of it; but
when such prayer as this is heard, it shows that the soul is wide awake to its nteds.
"2. Distress on account of it. Earnest anxiety is aroused; the work of conviction has
'been done; this prayer proves it. 3. The confession of it, and the casting of the
soul on Gkid for its need being met ; and this could not be without there being also :
4. Confidence that God would answer his prayer. A child must see the look of " Yes "
in his father's face, or else he will soon give over asking ; but when he does see that
look, what a vehemency of asking then ensues 1 And so with the child of God here.
He has seen that look of " Yes " on the Father's face, and hence this confident earnest-
ness. Such are the characteristics of every such prayer as this. Note-
Ill. Its flea. " That thy people may rejoice in thee." So then it is plainly taught
that a low religious life and a joyous one are incompatible ; there must be a reviving
if there is to be rejoicing. Hence it is that to so many people religion seems rather a
■distress than a delight. They are, as it has been said, like a man with a headache ;
he would not hke to lose his head, but he is very uncomfortable with it. A man was
^nce invited to eat of some apples from a certain orchard, but he promptly declined.
His friend was much surprised, and asked him the reason. " Oh," said he, " I took of
some of your apples the other day, which were hanging over the hedge, and I am quite
sure I do not want any more of them." " Ah," said the other, " I am not surprised ;
those apples were a poor lot ; but I put them there on purpose for the hoys, who are
always taking what does not belong to them. But come into the middle of the orchard,
«nd try the fruit there, which is of a very different sort." And so it is with many
•Christians ; they take only the hard sour fruit of the religious life ; that which is lull
of delight is in the midst of the garden of God, whither as yet they have never
entered. It is good to be God's, servants at all, better, far better, to be of those who
rejoice, whose service of God is not a drudgery, but a delight ; best of all when the
fejoicing is in God, not in his blessings merely, but in him. God wants us to rejoice
in him ; the world will be more sm'ely won for God when more joy characterizes his
-servants, and for ourselves, it is the surest guarantee of steadfastness. — S. C.

Ver. 8. — " What Ood the Lord will speak." Note, by way of introduction, that we
jiave here : 1. A personal resolve. " I will hear." Some would not ; others could
not ; others would offer to hear for him and report ; but the psalmist makes the wise
resolve that he will hear for hinjself. It is ever best to go direct to God, and employ
no intermediaries. 2. It is also a firm resolve. Wheiher the word be rendered "I
-will," or " I would," or " let me hear," it denotes resolve. And no one will ever hear
•what God the Lord will speak unless his will be settled in that purpose. The devil
hates such hearing of God, and will do all in his power by raising up every kind of
.hindrance — who knows not this ? — to prevent it. 3. It is a sincere resolve. The hearing
means ijO mere listless listening, but it is that of the heart, with real desire to hear
■what God the Lord will speak. Therefore the hearing will be, as it ever should be,
attentive, prayerful, obedient. Consider —

I. The speakee. God the Lurd. Three things are taught. 1. That Ood the Liyrd
Mill speak. His very name involves this. He is the covenant God ; hence his name



P8. Lxxxv. 1— 13.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 207

Jebovah, Lord, is added, which declares him to be the God of Israel. Bat such name
indicates that he will not be heedless of his people's prayer. And he has spoken of
old time. Their records are full of the story of his interpositions in their times of need.
And it is what we should expect, the need of his speaking being so great. Bevelation,
incarnation, atonement, the work of the Holy Ghost, are all antecedently probable ;
man, God's offspring, needing tbem so terribly. 2. That we can hear. This is man's
distinction ; he is a spiritual being, and can receive messages from God, who is a Spirit ;
he does perpetually receive and respond to them : " When thou saidst. Seek ye my
face, my heart said," etc. 3. That what God speaks is what man needs to hear. Man
has heard enough of what his own sinful heart has to say, and of what his fellow-men
say, in their doctrines, imaginations, counsels, and a miserable hubbub and confusion
their discordant utterances make; but the psalmist resolves to come away from all
this, and hear God. It is our wisdom as well as his.

II. What he speaks. " Peace unto his people." 1. Peace with himself. They have
quarrelled with him, rebelled again and again, but now when they turn to him his
word shall be of peace. 2. And amangst themselves. " He stilleth . . . the tumult
of the people : " the nations shall learn war no more. 3. And in their own hearts.
"The Spirit beareth witness with our spirits," etc. (Rom. viii. ; Luke vii. 48). Mono
can over-estimate the worth of this peace, and none need be without it.

III. How DOES God speak ? 1. Authoritatively. " He speaks, and it is done." 2.
By his Spirit. 3. Through the Holy Scriptures, and by the voice of his providence
and the response of our conscience auu reason.

T?. The condition on which he speaks. "Let them not turn again," etc. 1. It
is implied that they have now turned from their folly. Note that name for sin ; some-
times it is called by far sterner names. But is it not " folly " ? All these prayers and
vows show that there has been repentance. 2. Let them not turn again. There is no
need that any should. And we never shall if we abide in Christ. — S. C.

Ver. 9. — The saints salvation, the land's glory. They who fear God may be sure
that he will come and save them, not alone for their own sake, but also for the sake
of the land in which they dwell. The salvation of any sinner is for the blessing of
very many. God has respect to others outside ourselves when he saves any one of us.
The glory of the whole nation is furthered thereby ; the blessing of the Church is the
blessing of the land. For in such land there dwells—

I. Spibituai. olobt. How God is worshipped, loved, praised; how mightily his
Spirit works in men's hearts, when he comes in saving power 1

II. Moral olobt. The work of God in men's souls ever " makes for righteousness."
Vice, profanity, and all ungodliness are abashed, and slink away when the power of
God is made known.

III. National olobt. For " righteousness exalteth a nation : " when once has such
a nation perished ?

IV. Sanctuary glory. To the Jew, the temple of the Lord was his glory. " The
joy of the whole earth is Mount Zion." And what are all our sanctuaries and services
if in them God's salvation is not seen?

V. Habvebt glort. (Cf. Ps. Ixvii., " Then shall the earth yield," etc.) There is
close connection between inward character and outward condition. — S. C.

Ver. 10. — Omr foes become our friends. It is difficult, indeed impossible, to say
what was the actual thought of the writer when he penned the words of our text ; for
they are true in several ways. He represents mercy and truth as going in different
directions, and with opposite intent, but they tneet, and are brought into harmony as
though at variance before. And it is the same with righteousness and peace; there
teemed no common course of action open to them ; they must be opposed ; but, lo ! they
embrace, and all discord ceases between them. Now, ^\here is such union of opposites
to be seen ? And we answer —

I. In God. In the wisdom of God when devising our salvation. Christ is the Wisdom
of God, because in him, whilst mercy has full scope, nevertheless, the Law is magnified
and made honourable. There was no compromise, no tampering with the holy Law of
Gud. although God did so love the world as to save it (John iii. 16). Love reigns.



'20S THE BOOK OF PSALMS. Fps. lxxxv. 1— la

yet the Law is fulfilled as it never was or could be before,and is magnified in infinitely
higher way than if in vindication of God's broken Law the whole human race had been
for ever condemned (cf. Eom. viii. 4). All this was shadowed forth by the tables of the
Law being placed within the ark of the covenant, on which rested the mercy-seat, and
whereon was spriakledthe atoning blood (1 John it. 2). Thus in God those attributes
which seemed to be and were hostile to us, and those which alone seemed our friends,
met together, were reconciled, and, as it were, kissed each other.

II. In man. Probably this was the thought of the psalmist. He is exulting in the
anticipation of the regenerated moral life of God's people when his salvation should
come to them ; cruelty and inhumanity should give way to mercy, and truth between
man and man should replace their too common falsehooti and lies; righteousness,
justice, fair dealing, should prevail instead of fraud and wickedness, and peace should
banish war. "Eaith should be carpeted with truth as with fair flowers, and be
canopied over by righteousness as with the beautiful sky, or as by night with the
glorious stars." Men should " serve God in holiness and righteousness without fear, all
the days of their life."

III. In Chbist. The text may be taken, has been so, as descriptive of the holy and
beautiful life of our Lord — of him " who did no sin, neither was guile found in his
mouth." In him, as in no other, those contrasted qualities of our humanity, which
la us are generally so ill balanced, found perfect equipoise and harmony. The Divine
symmetry and fair propoitioos of the holy life, " the breadth, and length, and depth,
and height" (Eph. iii. 18), were seen in all their beauty. He was " the perfect Man,
Christ Jesus," the lovely Image on which the saints gazed with perpetual, adoring
rapture, and grew towards whilst they gazed, and so became the saints, the holy ones,
they were. Yes, in him our text was indeed fulfilled. And —

lY. In gbace. (See 1 Cor. L 30.) What is the true Christian bat one who has
known in his own experience the power of the perfect Christ ? Some believe in a
Christ whom they have fashioned to themselves, as all fondness and compassion and
pity, who will not be stern with any one. Others conceive of him only as an awful
Judge, launching out the thunder-bolts of his wrath against wretched, sinful men. But
the grace which saves is that told of Titus (ii. 11 — 14). Grace includes mercy and
truth, righteousness and peace. — S. C.

Ver. 1. — Recognition of national mercies. This psalm belongs to the " sons of
Korah," and wo can hardly be wrong in associating it with the early years of the
restoration from the Babylonish captivity. " The psalm shows that union of thank-
fulness for restoration, of sense of present distress and weakness, and of bright
Messianic hope, which is especially characteristic of the writings of this period." " It
opens with an acknowledgment of God's goodness and mercy in the national restoration,
in terms which could hardly apply to any other event." Plumptre connects the
psalm with the Assyrian distress in the time of Hezekiah. Other writers, among
whom may be named Spurgeoii, insist on the Davidic authorship, and connect it with
distress from the Philistines. There is one grave peril attending the separation of
Christianity into small sections. The national relations of God are likely to be under-
estimated, and the merely local relations of God to individual experience, and to the
experience of small communities, over-estimated. While fully recognizing that God
bears close and saving relations to the individual, it may yet be properly urged that
he bears relation to each nation, is at the heart of its calamities and of its triumphs,
working for the nation now as truly as for the nation of Israel in the olden time.
Gk>d is in history. But this means that God is in history while the history is in the
making. And God should be discerned in political struggles, in social movements,
in philanthropic enterprises, in national deliverances. To many persons the national
thanksgiving for the recovery of the Prince of Wales from imperillinj^ illness, was
a delightful proof of the readiness of the English people to respond when God's hand
in the bestowment of national mercies is pointed out to them. Two things may be
illustrated and impressed.

I. Eeoognizing national mbkoibs IB A NATIONAL DUTY. Apply to Ordinary
mercies, such as are illustrated by the yearly harvest. Then the national heart turns
to God ; and a national voice of thanksgiving is uplifted to him. Apply to special



M. Lxxxv. 1— 13.] THE BOOK OP PSALMa 209

mercies, such as : 1. Preservation from, or reraoTal of, epidemic disease. 2. Mastery
of elements of social distmrbaDce. 3. Hopeful changes of political relationships.
4:. Victory for th« national army. 6. Bemoval of difficulties that put the national
peace in peril.

II. Helfino thb nation to becoonize its mebcies is thk dxttt of TBI
NATIONAL LEADEBB. More especially of those who believe la Q-od, and are consecrated
to the work of rendering witness for him. Mistake is often made by limiting the work
of God's ministers to the "spiritual" and "personal" parts of their work. Every
true minister is a leader of his people in recognizing Q-od's work in the nation, and in
renewing national thanksgiving and trust. — B. T.

Vers. 3 — 5. — Incomplete redemptions. While thanlsfully acknowledging all that
God has done for his people, the psalmist clearly sees that it was but the " fierceness "
of Gt3d's wrath from which he had turned, and that some of his wrath remained, seeing
that the work of national recovery was incomplete, and heavy burdens still pressed
on the people. Perowne recalls the circumstances of the exiles as Nehemiah found
them. They were "in great affliction and reproach." "It was only in the midst
of perpetual opposition and discouragement that he was able to carry on his work.
The bright prospect which was opening before the exiles had been quickly dashed.
They had returned, indeed, but it was to a desert land and a forsaken city, whose
walls were cast down, and her gates burned with fire; whilst jealous and hostile tribes
were ever on the watch to assail and vex them. Hence it is that the entreaty for
mercy follows so hard upon the acknowledgment that mercy has been vouchsafed."
As a person might look, in a depressed mood, on the returned exiles, God's redemption
was incomplete. Their restoration to their own land had brought them apparently no
rest, no consolation, no hope for the fnture.

L Tekbs is a sense in which God's bedemftiohs abe neveb oohflete. They
are always redemptions from some calamities, not redemptions from all calamities.
Every redemption is a beginning, holding within it the promise of something more
that God is about to do. Open this fully out by showing that a spiritual redemption
is to be followed by a bodily redemption. Christ wins the soul, and then proceeds
to win the whole human sphere, and eventually all creation. The great redemption
removes the soul-penalties of sin; but it is not a perfect redemption until it has
removed all the bodily penalties and disabilities of sin also. As a matter of Christian
experience, we always feel, with the apostle, as if redemption were something yet to
come. As we read our lives, they are still spheres for a divinely redemptive work.
The full salvation " is ready to be revealed in the last time." Bedemption thought
of as complete checks a living dependence. Bedemption thought of as incomplete
keeps us in close reliance on the present and ever-working Bedeemer.

II. Thebe is a sense in which God's bedeuftions abe eveb in fbooress.
They are only incomplete as the building at which the workmen are working.
Those exiles would be comforted as they realized God with them, delivering and
rescuing, and carrying, in practical detail, to its perfection his gracious redemptive
thought.— E, T.

Ver. 6. — Quickening as OocPs work. In his very striking image of the dry bones
in the valley, the Prophet Ezekiel, in a most emphatic way, declares that "quickening,"
" requickening," is the work of God, and of God alone. When man worjjs he must
stop short at imparting life, — that is beyond him. He may copy the forms of living
things, but at the end of all his works it must be said, " There is no breath in them."
God gives all life. " Thus saith the Lord God ; Come from the four winds, breath,
and breathe upon the slain, that they may live " (Ezek. xxxvii, 9, 10).

I. The Chtjbch of Chbist constantly needs beqdickenino. This is true of
all the ages. We have to take account of the ever-recurring tendency to flag and
faint and fail. Men have never been able to keep up to the high levels which they
may at times have attained. The whole history of Israel is a series of illustrations
of this truth. Back from all reformations and revivals Israel constantly fell into
indifference, or into formality. It may be shown that : 1. Times of special strain are
followed by rebounds. An army is never in such peril as in the relaxed hours that

FSALHS — ^11. »



210 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. lxxxv. 1— la.

follow a great victory. 2. Mere continuance tends to develop into formality. A»
with constant practice at the piano, the player comes to play without thinking.
3. Energetic people, who must be doing, are always in danger of neglecting the culture
ol the interior life. It may be well searchingly to examine ourselves, and see whether
we need requickening.

II. Eequickbning is in the power op God alone. We must not only admit
that as an abstract truth ; we must feel that as a truth bearing direct relations to
ourselves. The limit of man's doing may be illustrated by the garden plants. We
water them, and they do not care for our work, or respond to it. We can do little
more than wash the dust from their leaves, and moisten the air around them. God
rains his heavenly rains upon them, and they respond at once ; lift up their beads,
hold out firmly their leaves, and evidently feel the thrill of new life. One of the most
delightful and inspiring views we can get of God sees him ever at work, restoring
things that have gone wrong, and reviving things that are flagging. He is the Source
of all life, — that we admit. He is the Restorer and Bequickener of all life, — ^that we
want to feel.

IIL Whbthbb wb be bequiokenbd depends itpon ourselves. There are con-
ditions in us for which God ever waits. His work cannot be all that he would have
it be until we are in right condition. 1. We must see our need of requickening.
2. We must put away the self-indulging things which have been injuriously telling
on our life. 3. We must be in attitude of prayer — of united prayer. — R. T,

Ver. 6. — Revivals ; or, discerning the signs <^ the times. They who read the times,
with keen interest in the spiritual vitality of the Church, cannot fail to recognize
the need of spiritual revival. The features of religious life may, in essence, be those
characteristic of every age, but there may be subtleties and severities in their forms
and settings at particular seasons which make them unusually effective for evil.

I. One sign of oub times is vastly increased intelligenoe. Science has
developed. Literature has unfolded. Education has become a mania. In our pride
we are saying, " We are wiser than our fathers." But this is attended with perilous
moral evUs. It is so easy now to become proud in our imaginations, confident in our
reasoning, and scornful of the higher powers of the soul, in our admiration of the
powers of the mind.

II. Another sign is the intense pursuit of pleasure. Facilities are now
afforded for meeting the cravings of bodily pleasure which have nourished the cravings
into a soul-mastering passion. The world of landscapes, of art, of science, of music,
of poetry, of play, lays its treasures now at the feet of the poorest. And no good man
can begrudge the world's toilers the relief which these later days can provide. But
the passion for that which is pleasing is telling seriously on the sense of duty, and
even on the higher moral qualities, on the reserve and self-restraint, which belong
to the essence of noble character. What we like is coming to rule, rather than what
we ought.

III. Another sign is the pressure of business, and the hasting to be rich.
Typified in the man who regretted the compulsory Sunday rest, because then he had
no chance of making money. Success in life is fast becoming the modem Baal that
outrivals Jehovah.

IV. Another sign is the call fob intellectual and moral, batheb than
spiritual preaching. Men ask for " essays ; " they chafe under " persuasions."
They seek for "soothings; " they do not want "reproofs," "correction in righteousness,"
and inspirations to the pursuit of holiness.

V. Another sign is the multiplication op organized forms of Christian
WORK. Machinery taking the place of life. Men paying for the doing of what they
should do themselves. Christ claims our personal service, the expression of our soul's
vitality; and that claim can never be commuted for any money payment, or entrusted
to any substitute. If, then, we can see signs of the Church's falling from its vocation,
let us see that: 1. God must not be thought of as separated from the interests of
a decaying Church. To cease to connect God with its condition is the last stage of
a Church's decline. 2. God must be sought as the only Source of spiritual revival.
We cannot remedy spiritual evils by any form of personal effort, if those are made



PS. LxxxT. 1— 13.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 211

apart from depeDdence on God. 3. The revival of God's Church begins in the revival
of individual souls. — E. T.

Ver. 8. — Expectancy of grace. Illustrate by the words of the Prophet Habakkuk
(ii. 1), " I will stand upon my watch, and set me upon the tower, and will watoh to
see what he will say unto me." The psalmist had been praying for full restoration,
and gracious requickening of the national life. And the text reveals his attitude alter
prayer. Of answer he felt assured. Then for it he waits watchfully. His attitude
is one of expectancy. And that attitude honours God. The New Testament commends
" Maying," and " watching thereunto."

I. The attitude of expectancy gives value to the pbatbr. It declares that
the man's heart was in it ; that the subject was of vital interest to him ; and that he
believed in God as the " Prayer-answerer." It does more than this. It reveals that
in the prayer there was a true submission. The man who watches for answer cannot
but feel that the answer depends on the infinite wisdom and good will of his heavenly
Father. He who truly says, "Thy will be done," watches that he may know the
will, in order that ho may do it. A prayer that is not followed by watching is a
prayer of which God need take little heed, seeing it ia evident that the man who
prays cares but little about that for which he prays.

II. The attitude of bzfectakot shows firm qbif of the pbomises. What
the promises connected with prayer assure is answer — some kind of answer. But
not the particular form and kind of answer which we desire. The man of faith lays
hold of this promise of answer. No prayer is disregarded by God. If we may use
an earthly figure which is suggestive, he never leaves his letters unanswered. But
expectancy always links with suhmission, and leaves the form of answer to the Infinite
Iiove. Illustrate hy the response that came to the psalmist. The social and moral
evils, that seemed to limit the Divine restoration, were gradually mastered, and true
hearts can recognize, in gradual removal of evils, specific answers to their prayers.

III. The attitude of expectancy noueisheb the spibit of pbayeb. Because
it keeps up the sense of dependence on God ; and prayer is but the expression of that
dependence. It is a first impulse to pray, when the soul is full of the spirit of
dependence. Lose that, and the soul makes prayer the last thing. Keep that, and
prayer is always the first thing. Meeting our expectancy, Christ seems to say to us,
" According to your faith be it unto you." — B. T.

Ver. 8. — Self-pleasing is folly. "But let them not again turn to folly," or
presumption. Sometimes the infatuation of sin is meant by the term "folly."
Sometimes it is a synonym for " idolatry." Here the thing which is regarded as foulish
is "following the devices and desires of their own heart," rather than watching tor
and doing the will of their God. A book was written some years ago to show that
" all sin is folly." Wrong-doing, in the long run, serves nobody's real interests. And
it has often been shown that the skill devoted to evil schemes would have accomplished
valuable results, if only it bad been devoted to right and good things. The special
point in the text is, that the saints are those who have been set right, delivered from
self-pleasing, and it is folly indeed for them to turn back upon the old spirit and the
old ways.

I. That sklf-pleasinq is folly is shown by the natube op things. Man
is not an independent, self-ordered being. " It is not in man that walketh to direct
his steps." He is God's child, and is no more safe, going alone, than is any other
child.

IL That self-pleasing is folly is shown by the bxpebibnce of life. It is
but the fact that we have fallen into needless perplexities, difficulties, and sorrows,
when we have tried to take our own independent course. We never have been strong
and safe except when we leaned on God, and fully opened oui- heart and life to Divine
guidance. Find the things in life which have turned out to he foolish; and searchingly
inquire into the moods of mind and heart that were related to them.

III. That belp-pleasino is folly is declabed in the Divine Wobd. (Sea
Ps. xlix. 13, "This their way is their folly.") The self-pleasing of the Isrnelitis
is represented by the expression, " a stiff-necked and uncii cumcised generation ; " and



212 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. lxxxv. 1— 1&

in their history there are plentiful scenes of calamity into which their foolish self-
willedness led them. The psalmist earnestly deprecates a return upon such self-
pleasing which brings such needless difficulties. "He that sinneth," in his self-will,
" sinneth against his own soul." It is true that he is wicked before God ; but it is
also true that he is foolish, in view of his highest interests. — B. T.

Ver. 11. — Ood and man working together, "Truth springeth out of the earth; and
righteousness hath looked down from heaven." This is poetic phraseology, which more
prosaically may be stated thus : " When man is faithful to God, then Q-od will be found
faithful to man; and so God and man will work together for good." The psalmist
sees quite plainly that the incomplete redemption can only be comj^eted if the people
put away their evils, and show themselves fully loyal to God. But he is quite confident
that, if they do, then God wUl surely be faithful to them, and finish in them his work
of grace. That God is to men as men are to him, and that he and they must work
together if the full blessing is to be realized, was stated by an earlier psalmist.
" With the merciful man thou wilt show thyself merciful ; with an upright man thou
wilt show thyself upright ; with the pure thou wilt show thyself pure ; and with the
froward thou wilt show thyself froward." Open this subject by illustrating the
following topics : —

I. God and man in offosition. What God wants, man refusing. Show the
confusion thus caused. And the hopelessness of man's state, if he persists in " running
on the bosses of Jehovah's buckler."

II. God and uan in indiffebenob. This represents the more usual state of
things. Men are often not strong enough to actively resist ; but they say, " Who it
the Alnughty, that we should serve him?" And they say to him, "Depart from us;
we desire not the knowledge of thy ways I " But that indifference, which puts outside
the Divine love and lead, is every whit as perilous for us as active opposition.

IIL Gh>D AND MAN IN HABMONT. This is the ideal state — the relation designed
in man's creation. Here naturally come in evangelical teachings respecting the way
in which the designed harmony was lost, and the way in which that harmony can be
recovered. The beauty of the scene suggested by these figures should be dwelt on.
" This is a delicious scene. Earth yielding flowers of truth, and heaven shining with
stars of holiness; the spheres echoing to each other, or being mirrors of each other's
beauties. 'Earth carpeted with truth, snd canopied with righteousness,' shall be
a nether heaven. When God looks down in grace, man sends his heart upward in
obedience.''-'R. T.

Ver. 13. — Qod?» righteousness opening a way. " The meaning of this difficult verse
may probably be as follows : Bighteousness shall go before him (Jehovah), and shall
make his footsteps a pathway for his servants to walk in." " God's march of right
will leave a track wherein his people will joyfully follow." Aben Ezra curiously
explains this verse to mean, " He shall cause the man of righteousness to walk before
him, and makes his footsteps for a way to him." Plainly the verse must be treated
in the harmony of the psalm. Evidently the latter part is a vision of the spiritual
and temporal deliverances and blessings which would surely come to the exiles — though
now in much distress — if they turned heartily to Jehovah, and persisted in serving
him in truth and righteousness. Among the blessings anticipated was prosperous
harvesting from the land; and with this naturally goes safe guidance of national
affairs, and a way out of national difiSculties. God's faithfulness would go before the
people in all their public affairs, opening for them the way in which they should gc
(see the term "righteousness" in ver. 11).

I. GoD'b BIGHTEOUSNESS, OB FAITHFULNESS, IB ACTIVE FOB HIS PSOPLK'B GOOD.

It is " going before him ; " it is not quiescent. " God for us " means " Qod working
for us."

IL Clod's active bighteousness is tbiumphant oveb difficulties. Opening
ways implies that ways have been closed. Hindrances have blocked them.

UI. Good's active bighteousness wobks fob the completion of the bedemftivk
PVBFOn. There is an inspiring sense in which we may be sure that God must be true
to himself. If he has purposed a thing, he will surely overcome all difficulties in the



PS, LXXXVL 1 — 17.]



THE BOOK OF PSALMS.



213



way of it8 accomplishment. If he has planned the full redemptioo and sanctification
of believers, it does not matter how impossible that may seem to bin^; " God's righteous-
ness will surely go before bim, and make a way." — B. T.

Ver. 8. — Listening for Ood's voice. The psalm was written on the return from
Captivity.

I. The bubden of God's bfeeoh to man. Peace. Peace with him. 1. The way
of peace. 2. The nature of peace.

II. A determination to listen. Man listens to man. 1. According to the
claims of the speaker to be heard. 2. When the subject is interesting and imp'ortant.
3. When the subject is important to him. Then we give the closest attention.

III. The peaotical effect of God's speech. " Let them not turn again to folly,"
i.e. wickedness. The wickedness will then be aggravated. It is then so well known
to be wickedness. " If I had not spoken to them, they had not had sin ; but now they
have no cloke for their sin." — S.



EXPOSITION.



PSALM LXXXVI.
This is the prayer of an afSicted and humble
soul in a time of persecution (ver. 14), in-
termixed with outbuiBts of praise (vers. 5,
8—10, 15) and thankfulness (vers. 12, 13).
It is assigned in the title to David, and con-
tains nothing, eitlier in matter or style, to
make the ascription unlikely. Still, most
modern critics regard the psalm as probably
of a later date, and consider it the work of
a less gifted psalmist than David, If not
the production of a " great original mind,"
the psalm is nevertheless one of singular
sweetness and beauty.

Metrically, it seems to divide itself, like
Ps. Ixxxv., into three strophes, two shorter,
and one longer, the former being of five
verses each, and the latter of seven.

Vers. 1 — 5. — Prayer, the predominant note
of the entire psalm, holds almost exclusive
possession of the first strophe, only passing
into praise when the last verse is reached,
where the petitioner reminds God of his
loving-kindness and readiness to forgive.

Ver. 1.— Bow down thine ear, Lord,
hear me (comp. Ps. xxxi. 2 ; Prov. xxii. 17).
For I am poor and needy ; or, " I am afBicted
and in misery." Poverty in the ordinary
sense is scarcely intended.

Ver. 2. — Preserve my soul. It is one of
the special offices of God to " preserve the
souls of his saints " (Ps. xcvii. 10). He is
not only man's Creator, but his " Preserver "
(Job vii. 20 ; x. 12). For I am holy. The
psalmist does not mean to claim for himself
perfect holiness, but only that sincerity in
religion which God's servants may rightly
vindicate to themselves. thou my God,



save thy servant that trnsteth In thee (comp.
Pss. xxxiv. 22 ; xxivii. 40).

Ver. 3. — Be meroiful onto me, Lord ; for
I cry nnto thee daily ; rather, all day long
(Revised Version).

Ver. 4. — Bejoice the soul of thy servant.
The prayer rises from mere emreaties for
relief and recovery from a state of suffering,
into an earnest request for that which the
heart of man is ever longing for and seeking
after — gladness and joy. The faithful are
promised that they shall come ultimately to
a condition of exceeding great joy ; but even
saints are sometimes impatient, and want
their joy in this world and at once. For
unto tiiee, Lord, do I lift np my sonl (oomp.
Ps. XXV. 1, entitled, like this, " a Psalm of
David "). There is no more likely way of
attaining to spiritual joy than to be always
lifting up the soul to God.

Ver. 5. — For thou, Lord, art good, and
ready to forgive. The word translated
"ready to forgive," n^D, occurs here only;
but the context sufficiently fixes its mean-
ing, whicli is well expressed by the Ittieik^s
of the LXX. As God was "good" and
" forgiving," he would be likely to grant the
petitions just addressed to him. And plen-
teous in mercy nnto all them that call upon
thee (comp. Exod. xxxiv. 6 ; Joel ii. 13).

Vers. 6 — 10. — In this second strophe praise
is predominant. Prayer occupies two verses
only (vers. 6, 7) ; in the other three (vers.
8 — 10) God is magnified and glorified.

Ver. 6. — Oive ear, Lord, onto my prayer.
An echo of ver. 1. The psalmist begins, as
it were, afresh, calling God's attention to
himself, as if he had not yet spoken. And
attend to the voice of my supplications
(comp. Pss. xvii. 1 ; Iv. 2; Ixi. 1, etc.). That
God's ear is always attent to the prayers ol



214



THE BOOK OF PSALMS.



[PS. LXXXTI. 1 17



his people does not make it snperfluoua for
them to entreat his attention. He will listen
more favourably when besought to listen.

Ver. 7. — In the day of my trouble I will
call npon thee (oomp. vers. 1 and H). The
nature of the trouble is not distinctl v stated ;
but it appears to have been caused by
domestic rather than foreign enemies. For
thou wilt answer me (comp. ver. 5).

Ver. 8. — Among the gods there is none
like nnto thee, Lord (see the Song of Moses,
£)xod. XV. 11). The imaginary gods of the
heathen — ^not, perhaps, known to the psalm-
'st to be wholly imaginary — are probably
meant (oomp. Pes. Ixxvii. 19; Ixxxix. 6;
xcv. 3). Neither are there any works like
anto thy works, So in Deut. iii. 24, " What
god is there in heaven or in earth that can
do according to thy works ? "

Ver. 9. — ^AU nations whom thou hast made
shall come and worship before thee, Lord
(comp. Pss. Ixxii. 11, 17; Ixxxii. 8, etc.).
Since God had made all nations (Acts ivii.
26), it was safe to conclude that they would
all one day worship him. The prophecy,
however, still remains unfulfilled. And shall
glorify thy Name. Either with their lips, or
in their lives, or in both ways. Compare the
anticipations of Isaiah (Ixvi. 23), Zephaniah
(ii. 10), and Zeohariah (liv. 9, 16).

Ver. 10. — For thou art great, and doest
wondrous things. The " greatness " of God,
in reality most clearly manifested by the
facts of his ordinary providence, seems to
men in general, as it seemed to this psalmist,
especially indicated by the "wonders," or
" miracles " — rts^D: — which he wrought
(comp. Exod. XV. 11 ; Pss. Ixxii. 18 ; Ixxvii.
14). Thou art God alone (see 2 Kings xix.
15 ; laa. xxxvii. 16 ; xliv. 6, 8).

Vers. 11 — 17. — The third strophe is almost
equally divided between prayer and praise,
vers. 11, 16, and 17 being devoted to the
one; and vers. 12, 13, and 15 to the other.
Ver. 14 is of the nature of a complaint.

Ver. 11. — Teach me thy way, Lord; I
will walk in thy truth (comp. Pss. xxv. 4 ;
xxvii. 1 1 ; cxix. 33). Man cannot know
" the way of the Lord," unless he is taught
of God. The inward anointing of the
Spirit is needful to teach us what God
would really have ns do (1 John ii. 27). It
is only when we are thus taught that we
can " walk in his truth." Unite my heart to
fear thy Name. So Symmachus, who has
llyai(rov; Canon Cook, Dr. Kay, Hupfeld,
Professor Alexander, and the Revised
Version. Hengstenberg prefers "incline
my heart ; " and Professor Cheyne would
alter the text into accordance with the
LXX., EippavBiiTiD r) KapSla jxov, "Make
my heart to rejoice." But the textual



reading has the weight of authority in its
favour, and gives an excellent sense,
"Bring all my heart into unison, that it
may be wholly fixed on thee." Oompare
the following verse.

Ver. 12. — I will praise thee, Lord my
God, with all my heart ; i.e. " with an un-
divided heart." And I will glorify thy
Name (see ver. 9) for evermore. A belief
ill immortality is implied, if not formally
asserted.

Ver. 13. — For great is thy mercy toward
me (see ver. 5). And thou hast delivered
my soul from the lowest heU. The aotnal
deliverance was from death (ver. 14) ; but
death involved descent into Hades, so that
those who were delivered from the one were
at the same time delivered from the other
The expression translated " the lowest hell "
means no more than "Hades which is
beneath the earth." No comparison is made
of one part of Hades with another.

Ver. 14.— God, the proud are risen
against me (comp. Pb. cxix. 51, 69, 85, 122;
•nd also Ps. liv. 3). And the assemblies of
violent men have sought after my sonl;
rather, a crew of violent ones have lought
after my soul, or " plotted against my life "
(oomp. Pss. vii. 1, 2 ; xvii. 13 ; xxxv. 8, 4,
eto.). And have not set thee before them ;
i.e. " have given no thought to God, or how
he would act, whether he would allow their
wickedness or prevent it."

Ver. 15.— But thou, Lord, art a God full
of compassion. The appeal is to God's own
revelation of himself. He had declared
that he was " merciful and gracious, long-
suffering, and abundant in goodness and
truth, keeping mercy for thousands, for-
giving iniquity and transgression and sin "
(Exod. xxxiv. 6, 7) ; he could not, therefore,
desert the psalmist in his need. And
graoious, long-suffering, and plenteous in
mercy and truth (comp. above, ver. 5 ; and
see also Numb. xiv. 18; Joel ii. 13; Jonah
iv. 2).

Ver. 16.— Oh turn unto me, and have mercy
upon me. God had for a time turned his
face away from liis servant ; now he is en-
treated to turn it towards him, and, as a
consequence, to " have mercy upon him "
and deliver him. Give thy strength unto thy
servant. Only in God's strength can we
effectually contend against either our
spiritual or our temporal foes. If, however,
we ask him for strength, his strength will
be " sufficient for us " (2 Cor. xii. 9). And
save the son of thine handmaid. Either
" the son of one who was specially religious,"
like the mother of Timothy (2 Tim. i. 5),
or " the son of an Israelitish mother," there-
fore born and bred up in thy household.

Ver. 17. — Show me a token for good; i.e.
give me some sign — not necessarily •



P8. LXIXVl. 1 — 17.]



THE BOOK OF PSALMS.



216



ffliraoulous one — that thou art dealing with
me, not for evil, but " for good " (Jer. xxiv.
6), and that thou wilt grant me that which
I have requested of thee. That they whioh
hate me may see it. A risible token is there-
fore requested, not a mere inward conviction
or assurance (see 2 Kings xz. 8 ; Isa. Tii.



11). And be ashamed (comp. Pes. vi. 10 ,
Ivi. 17 ; cxix. 78, etc.). Beoanse thoa, Lord,
hast holpen me, and comforted me. The
psalmist's deliverance would be his enemies'
shame ; it would show tliat Qod was on hii
side, and against them.



H0MILBTIC8.

Ver. 11. — A eompreJiensive prayer. " Unite my heart to fear thy Name," etc. This
rich and elevated psalm is well called in the title " a prayer," rather than " a psalm."
It is more devout than poetical. Its distinctive character is the remarkable union of
intense personal feeling with large views of d-od's character and relation to mankind
^ver. 9). This has led critics to speak of it as " liturgical," overlooking the deep strain
of personal feeling, leading the psalmist even (ver. 16) to plead that he is the child s>f
a godly mother, as well as (ver. 2) that he is " holy "—q.d. either consecrated to Qca,
or one on whom God bestows grace.^ This petition, " Unite my heart," etc., is one of
great compass, grandeur, simplicity, bespeaking a heart already tized on God. It
•eeks —

L A BUFBEHE AFFEOTioir. A master-passion, to which all other desires and
affections shall be subordinate. The worldly mind, just because it is worldly, is torn
by conflicting desires — the preyof passions or feelings, each of which seeks mastery.
For the world (as St. John describes it, 1 John ii. 16) has no unity ; a mass of
contradictions, nvalries, inconsistent objects of desire. Only the heart which has
learned to say, " Thou art my Portion" (Ps. cxix. 57), has found the principle of
unity, the key-note which can put all the heart's pure and true affections in tune.

II. A BiNOLB AIM. A master-purpose, to which all other objects must yield, and
which gives back colour to the whole life. Successful men are characterized by
singleness and earnestness of aim. A limited and narrow man will carry his point,
if it be the one thing he lives for ; while men of splendid genius waste their poiirers,
and become splendid failures for lack of concentration and motive power (see Phil.
iii. 13, 14). The hottest diffused sunshine kindles no flame ; but concentrate but a
few rays with a glass on one point, and flame bnrsts forth. Supreme love to Christ,
and a single eye to his service and approval, give a unity to life which is a great
element of success, even in what we call worldly affairs (Col. iii. 3).

III. Undoubting conviction. Strong, unwavering faith. Doubt distracts, agitates,
unsettles, weakens (Jas. i. 8). A doubting temper, fond of dwelling on difficulties and
objections, is fatal to unity of mind, heart, and will. Doubts, if they assail you, are
neither to be timidly shrunk from nor idly played with, but honestly faced and fought.
But the grand secret of conviction is to dwell flrst and constantly on the poiitive
evidence of truth. If that is adequa-te, unanswerable, then a thousand questions we
cannot at present answer need not trouble us. They can wait ; but /ac<« will not wait.
Here is a great secret, not only of strength, but of rest. And in rest is a reservoir of
energy (Isa. xxvi. 3 ; John xiv. 1).

What grand possibilities there are in the Christian lifel If an Old Testament saint
could put up such a prayer, and have it answered, how much more may it be fulfilled
in our experience I



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Vers. 1 — 5. — The psalmisft prayers and pleas. We do not know for certain the
author, the date, or the circumstances of this psalm; nor for its ministry of help to us
is it needfnl that we should. It is the fervent utterance of a devout and believing
but distressed soul. Consider —

' In Isa. Ivii. 1 for "merciful men " we may render literally, "men of grace," whieb
seems to express this double idea.



216 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [pb. lxxxvi. 1—17.

I. The fbatebb. Even in these few verses we note : 1. How numerous they are I
" Bow down thine ear ; " " Preserve my soul ; " "Save me ; " *' Be merciful unto me ; "
"Bejoice the soul of thy servant." 2. How substantially the samel Bepetitions
need not be " vain repetitions ; " they are often the reverse of vaiu ; indeed, in many
moods of our soul, they are indispensable. The soul is slow and sluggish; its vi»
inerticB hftrd to be overcome, and it is found by many that repetition, "saying the same
words," is a great help in arousing thought and fixing the mind on the sacred duty
before it. 3. But varied inform. This is also very helpful in prayer. Stereotyped forms,
unless we be very watchful, will flow over the mind and never arouse a solitary thought.
It is good, therefore, to compel the mind to express itself in varied form ; for so our
prayer is likely to be both more real and more helpful. 4. And progressive in meaning.
The psalmist begins with simply entreating God to hear him, to give him audience ;
then he asks for his chief need to be supplied, and that he may be delivered, saved ;
then, that his unworthiness may be overlooked, that God would be merciful to him ;
and lastly, that the Lord would rejoice his soul, not merely preserve and save him, but
more — give him joy. It is ever an upward advance, as our prayer should be. 6. And
confident in trust. The opening petition is one of the many proofs that prior to the
Incarnation the saints of God had come to the full conviction of the humanity of Qod.
This cry that God would " bow down " his " ear " is one of those aDtbropomorphic, as
they are called, expressions, of which the Old Testament is so full. How often do we
read of the eyes, feet, hand, face, ear, of God I They are not mere figures ; but they
tell of the recognized truth that God was as we are — apart from our weakness, limitation,
and sin. And the psalmist has laid hold of this truth, and it is his encouragement as
he pours forth his prayer. Thus in a very real sense the prayers of the Jewish Church
were, as are ours, offered through Jesus Christ our Lord. They, as do we, came to the
Father by him ; for " no man cometh unto the Father but by me," said our Lord, nor
otherwise have any ever come.

XL The fleas ubqed. They are full of power, and in them, as in the prayers they
support, there is variety and advance in thought. 1. His deep need. (Ver. 1.) Unless
this be felt, there will never be real prayer. 2. His relationship to Qod. (Ver. 2.)
" For I am one whom thou lovest." This, the rendering of the margin, is preferable
to the text either of the Authorized Version, which is, " I am holy," or of the Bevised
Version, which is, " I am godly." It avoids the self-righteous tone which seems
inseparable from these readings, and declares his confidence begotten by &vours received
bom. God in the past. 3. His trust, i. His continued prayer. He had waited on the
Lord, confident that his trust would be sustained. 5. 2%e declared Name of Ood.
(Ver. 6.) He who believingly urges that cannot fail of the Divine aid according to his
need. — S, G.

Ver. 9. — Grace triumphant. The declaration of God's ultimate possession of all
hearts, which is involved in this verse, is found not here alone (cf. Psb. xxii. 27 ; Ixvi.
4; Isa. Ixvi. 18, 23; John xii. 32; Phil. ii. 10, 11, etc.); and, assuredly, it is the
spirit of the whole Scripture. And such considerations as the following sustain such
blessed belief.

I. That it ib a faith which so oommsnds itself to the consoienob of hen.
It is what ought to be, what we cannot help huping may be, that God's will may be
done everywhere and by all.

IL The opposite belief ib fbaotioally atheistical. For it necessitates that
we believe (1) that either God would save all men, but could not — in which case he
would not be God, because some other had evidently greater power than he ; or (2)
that God could save, but would not, which is plainly contradictory of the whole
Scripture, and, were it true, God would be no longer God. Either theory leads direct
to atheism.

III. It IB mOBEDIBLE THAT GOD WOULD HAVE CONTINUED TO OBBATE BEINQB WHOM

HK KNEW uuBT BTEBNALLT SIN AND BUFFEB. Creation iuvolves redemption. Had
he been unable to redeem, he would not have created.

IV. Chbibt was manifested to destroy the wobkb of THE DEVIL, But if any
M« tac ever unsaved, then Christ has not accomplished the work he came to do, and
the victory belongs not to him, but to Satan.



PS. LXxxvL 1— 17.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 211

V. The wobth of Chbibt's atonement. It is the propitiation for the sins of the
whole world. But some may say, " It is of no use to any one unless he trusts it." That
is so ; but our contention is that the resources of God are adequate to bring men to give
up their own evil will, and to cast 'themselves in penitence and trust on God. Has he
not already brought round the most stubborn of human wills? He knows how to
make the prodigal come to himself, and to say, " I will arise," etc.

VI. He has taught us to prat, " Thy will be done on eabth ab," kto. But
this is what our text predicts ; and he would not have bidden us pray that pra> er if it
was never to be fulfilled. All this is no encouragement to sin, for it teaches that God
will leave no means untried, no matter how terrible they may be, and for the hardened
sinner they will be terrible, to subdue to himself the perverse and unruly will of
man. — S. 0.

Ver. 11. — Fnie religion, and tvhat it calls for. I. The essence of all tbue
BELIQION IS THE FBAB OF GoD. " To fear thy Name," says the psalmist, and so saying
he sets forth the central nature of real religion. But this fear (1) is not the/ear which
has torment ; or (2) that which is simply the reasonable dread of penalty, — the fear of the
law-abiding citizen ; but it is (3) the fear begotten of love, — the fear of an affectionate
child, which makes it careful to obey. Whatever we love we are careful to obey the
laws of — whether it be art, science, parents. And so with the fear ot God. It is seen
in all saints.

II. Thebe can be no such BELIQION UNLESS THE HEABT BE IN IT. Intellect may
be there, Season give her assent. Approval may be expressed— tit often is. Deep
feeling experienced, this not unusual ; but unless the heart, the will — for this is the
real meaning of the word " heart " — be in our religion, we practically have none.

in. Nob THEN UNLESS THE HEABT BE UNITED IN IT. Somc miuds are uot fixcd
on anything ; they are perpetual waverers. Others are fixed, set, wrongly but " stead-
fastly to do evil." But they are blessed who are described in our text. Oh to be able
to say, " O God, my heart is fixed, my heart is fixed " 1 — S. 0.

Ver. 17. — Tokens for good. We remark upon the prayer contained in this
verse —

I. That buoh fbateb mat be an imfbofeb one. Our Lord said to the people of
his day, " Except ye see signs and wonders, ye will not believe." And how many
to-day are like these people I Now, such request for tokens is wrong: 1. When we
presume to select tokens for ourselves. God may allow this, as he did to Gideon in
connection with the fleece of wool; but it is very improper for us to be stipulating for
specific signs. With how many their religion is one dependent on their feelings, and
varies as they do 1 Naaman " turned, and went away in a rage " (2 Kings v.), because
God's prophet did not fulfil his idea as to the way in which he should be healed.
2. When we trust to a token more than we do to the Word of testimony. St. Peter,
though he had seen the glorious vision on the Transfiguration mount — a token for
good, if ever there was one — ^is yet careful to add, " But we have the more sure word of
prophecy." And of all our tokens, as well as all our opinions, we are bound tu bring
them " to the Law, and to the testimony," and there test them ; for " if they be not
according to this word, it is because there is no truth in them." Aud not a few of men's
fancied tokens have turned out to have no truth in them. 3. When we withhold faith
till ive have some token which we think will Justify it. (See Luke i. 18.) And when
the Jews demanded a sigo from heaven, as they were perpetually doing, it was refused
them, as such requests ever will be (cf. Luke i. 18).

U. SUOH FBATEB IB NEVER ONE WHOSE ANSWER IB ESSENTIAL. For without any

•uch special tokens as we might wish for, there is no child of God but has tokens
for good in abundance. 1. There is the Lord Jesus Christ. Is he not God's great and
eternal token for good to us? 2. And the fact that Oodhas created us, brought us into
being. Would he have done that had he meant evil to us ? " Known unto God are all
his works." 3. And the further fact that we have come to Christ, are trusting him now,
and the Holy Spirit is doing his blessed work in us still. 4. All the promises of Ood,
so exceeding great and precious, — are not all these tokens for good? AssuredW
they are.



218 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. lmxvi. 1—17.

III. But it is, at times, a pebmissibli: one. It was so in the case of the
psalmist. For in spite of all difficulties he looked to God ; his troubles drove him to
God, and to God only, and not to the help of men. Such a man was not one who
would arbitrarily select some given token, or who would trust it more than the Word
of God, or who would withhold his belief until it was given. But he desired it for the
coiwincement and discomfiture of his enemies, as well as for the confirmation of his
own faith.

IV. And God has often oivbn such tokens. Moses and the rod ; Gideon with the
fleece ; Bezekiah with his dial. And he gives the like still, in answers to prayer, in
providential help, in support under trial, in unlooked-for events.

V. The results which have followed. God's enemies have been ashamed.
See in Israel's history, when God gave them such tokens, how we read of their enemies
having " no more spirit in them." And still, when God visibly sustains his people,
unbelievers look on and are silent in fear, because conscious of the presence of God.
But let us remember that we are never without tokens lor good. — S. 0.

Yer. 1. — Mwiis clairm on God. Historical associations for this psalm cannot be
fixed with any confidence. It may be a fragment of David's which was enlarged and
adapted, in a later age, to liturgical purposes. Its fragmentary character must strike
every careful reader. It is suitable for any pious soul that is in distress, and is a
fitting utterance for our burdened hearts. The point before us now is, that the pious
soul feels it has claims on God, and may plead those claims in prayer before him.
Bight ideas of the sovereignty of the Divine mercy can be held along with clear
convictions of man's claims on God, if only we keep fully before us that the claims are
wholly based on relations in which G^d has been pleased to set himself. If he con-
descends, in his infinite love, to enter into covenant with his people, then we may
recognize that he puts himself into the limitations and obligations of the pledges he
takes. If we are faithful to our pledge in covenant, we can daim, that God should be
laithful to his pledge in the covenant. This is in part the feeling of the psalmist ; and
it' associated with a due dependence, humility, and submission, it is a right and worthy
feeling. A child has claims on his father ; and if he does so in a childlike spirit, he
may plead those claims before his father. It has been wisely said of our text, " This
is not the highest ground that can be taken in pressing for an answer to our prayer,
but it is a ground which God suffers us to take."

I. The pleas bt which the psalmist's fbater is ubqed. Notice that they
concern the psalmist himself, and the conditions in which he is placed. It may seem
unworthy thus to speak of himself; but if a man is to be sincere, he must say the
truth about himself; and no harm comes when he says it out to Ood, because we
cannot be boastful hefore Mm. In vers. 1 — 3 we find four descriptions of the psalmist
himself, made into pleas. 1. He is poor. This may refer to circumstances, but more
probably it is a word for humble-mindedness ; the feeling of the man who wants God
because he knows he cannot help himself. 2. He is needy. Which may mean in
distress, or may express an actual longing for, and crying for, God's help. 3. He is
holy ; which simply means, " one of thy saints ; " " one who is in the full covenant
relations with thee ; " " one whom thou favourest ; " " one whose habit of life is piety."
If this is true of us, it need not be a wrong thing to say so. 4. Trustful and prayer-
ful. Actually reliant ; honouring God by a full confidence. And God surely responds
to all who put their trust in him.

II. The pbaybr which the pleas are employed to urge. For Divine help.
1. Bow down to the poor. 2. Preserve the godly. 3. 8ave the trustful. 4. Be merci-
ful to him who cries. The requests for precisely adapted grace. — R. T.

Ver. 2. — Man's soul a sphere of Divine influence. " Preserve my soul." In the Old
Testament the term " soul " is often used as we use the term " life." But there always
seems within the term more or less perfect apprehension of the truth that the soul is
the man. The commonly received division of man's being is into " body " and " soul ; "
but a more scientific analysis divides into body — which includes animal soul, or life—
and spirit. The " tripartite division" is body, soul, spirit. As a moral redemption, the
work of Christ has brought prominently before us that man is a spiritual heing. As



M, Lxxxvi. 1— 17.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 219

Dr. Gteorge Macdonald expresses it, " We are accustomed to say that we are bodies,
and have souls ; whereas we should say — We are souls, and have bodies."

I. Man's soul is the sphere of Gob's moral traininq. We may see Ood in
history ; but his supreme interest is in characters, not in events. We may see Qod in
providence ; but we fail to see him aright, unless we trace the influeace of incidents
on our principles and on our spirit. Everything has a moral side and a moral mission.
Ood is ever moulding disposition and character, which are the shapings of the soul.
This is true oi every man. Humanity to God is a collection of spirits, or spiritual
beings, set for their moral training in varied bodily forms and relations.

II. Man's sonii is the sphere of God's redemptions. The mistake made about
Olirist the Saviour in the days of his flesh was quite a representative mistake. Men
thought he came to deliver a nation from foreign dominion ; whereas he came to save
souls from sin. The body-redemptions follow on as the natural consequences of the
spiritual redemptions. Gk)d's great work is saving souls from death. Therefore it is
that before we can hope that Christ and his work will ever be appreciated, we are
<;ompelled to awaken soul-anxiety ; or, in other words, seek to produce conviction of
sin. When our Lord's saving work is fully studied as a moral redemption, a quicken-
ing of souls with a Divine life rather than an adjustment of broken external relations,
the full mystery of it will be revealed and realized.

III. Man's sodl is the sphere of the Divine sanotiftinos. The present work
of the living Christ, realized by us as tlie inworking of the Holy Ghost, is not the
change of the things with which we have to do, but a change of the relations in which
we stand to the things ; a change wrought in us — wrought in the souls that we are.
This change, in effect, changes the charucter of the things with which we have to da
— II.T.

Ver. 8. — Ood inoomparablt. " Among the gods there is none like unto thee,
Lord." It may be asked — ^Why should God be compared with gods that Scripture so
vigorously declares are no gods ? It is enough to reply that all teachers must come
down to the level of those whom they would teach ; and begin by accepting their ideas
in order to lead them on and up to higher and worthier. Calvin puts this point welL
" Should any one assert that it is unseemly to compare God to the empty fictions, the
answer is easy ; the discourse is accommodated to the ignorance of men, because we
know how daringly superstitious men raise their whims above the heavens." The
psalmist has in view a basis of comparison which is foreign to our mode of thinking.
In his day the deities were conceived as limited and local beings, who belonged to
particular countries. If the general name Baal was used, some qualifying name was
added, which indicated the Baal worshipped in a particular district. With this idea
in their minds, men might say of Jehovah, "He is only the God of Palestine." This
view of God the whole Bible vigorously protests against, and claims for Jehovah sole
Divinity ; he is out of the range of so-called " gods ; " he cannot be compared with
any. 'This subject may be opened out, with present-day applications, by showing
that —

I. God is incomparable as the only uncaused Being.

II. God is incomparable as an unseen spiritual Being.

III. God is incomparable as an infinitely holy Beinq.

lY. God is incomparable as the one Beino who claims universal homage.

V. God is incomparable as the BEiKa who has absolute power over all things.

YI. God is the Being who requires a service of character, expressed in act and
conduct — not of conduct alone.

Scriptures dwell on this uniqueness of God (see Exod. xv. 11 ; Deut. iii. 24 ; Isa. xl.
etc.). Being what he is, God alone, God all-mighty, God all-holy, he rightly claimi
that we should love him and serve him, " with all our heart, and mind, and soul, and
strength." He must be first with us, because he stands forth before ua as incom-
parable. — B. T.

Yer. 9. — Ood glorifying his own Name. By letting that Name be known among
the Gentiles, so that they glorify him. At last all the world shall unite in lifting up
holy hands and loving hearts to God, and unite in singing, " Praise God, praise God ; "



220 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. lxxxvi. 1—17.

This conception of the universal acknowledgment of Jehovah is strange for an
exclusive Jew, and is a foreshadowing of Christian ideas. We are to think of God as
seeking the glorifying of his Name in this — that every creature made in his image
unites in the glorifying. " All nations shall come and worship." " The Gentile deities
being obviously inferior to Jehovah, the psalmist foresees that one day the Creator
will become known to the Gentiles, and the Church of God be extended without limit."
" The pious Jews believed that God's common relation to all would be ultimately
acknowledged by all men." The name of God is usually and properly regarded as any
term which gathers up and expresses the attributes and characteristics of God,
Illustrate by the way in which a simple term will express a scientific theory.

I. The name, ob names, God has given us op hiuself. The earliest name
men knew seems to have been JBi, which, in a general way, expresses the Oreatorship of
God. This name is common to the human race. It is found in the singular and
plural forms, and in combination with some other name, as El Shaddai. Then, one
race knew God in special covenant relations ; and as the covenant God he is known as
Jahveh, or Jehovah. As it the thing which man pledges to preserve were the truth
of the self-origination, unity, and spirituality of God I Then God found a name for
himself which would make constant appeal to man's experience of his dealings, and
called himself " the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob." Then God found precis;^
names for himself, suitable for individuals, or for the nation in particular circum-
stances. Compare the name for Abraham, " I am thy Shield; " for David, " The Lord
is my Shepherd ; " for the nation, " The Lord our Righteousness." Lead up to the
fixing of one name for God by the Lord Jesus Christ — " our Father." If God givea
us a name for himself, he pledges himself to all that is involved in the name. In
faithfulness to what it demands and involves, he will glorify it.

II. The name, ob names, men have given to God out of theib bxpeeibnce
OF HIS WATS. The work of a man's life may be represented as " finding a name of
his own for God." It may be the same that some one else has found, and yet be the
man's own. In faithfulness to what each man's name for God claims, each man
glorifies him. Then point out that God's name is glorified (1) by being duly sus-
tained ; (2) by being efiBciently responded to ; and (3) by being widely made known.
" Tell it out among the heathen that the Lord is King," and they will swell the chorus
of his praise. — B. T.

Ver. 11. — The desire to be whole-hearted. This verse contains a prayer " against
distraction and division of heart, of course with the desire of its being knit as a whole
to God." Perowne expresses the idea skilfully, " Suffer my heart no longer to scatter
itself upon a multiplicity of objects, to be drawn hither and thither by a thousand
different aims ; but turn all its powers, all its afl^ections, in one direction, collect them
in one focus, make them all one in thee." Our Lord impressed the importance of this
unity of aim and purpose by his teachings concerning " singleness of eye." And he
taught us the secret of unifying all our powers and affections. It can only be done by
making God and his service our Centre — " Seek ye first the kingdom of God and his
righteousness." To the earnest, right^hearted man, the tendency to distraction of
mind is a constant anxiety. He is troubled by distraction in devotion, in worship, in
motive, and in service. Consciousness of this forces the prayer of our text.

L DiSTBACTloN IN DEVOTION. All books ou the "interior life" deal with this diffi-
culty, and suggest methods by which it may be overcome. But even if good habits
can be formed, we are always liable to the intrusion of things in which, at the time,
we are specially interested — matters of business, engagements to be kept, etc. The
hurried character of modern private devotion puts in serious peril the unity of our
hearts in such seasons. The mind is sure to be elsewhere.

II. DiBTBACTiON IN WORSHIP. When the words are known, they may be spoken
while the mind is otherwhere. When the words are unknown, the mind may fail to
be exercised with them. The difference between times of devotion and worship lies in
this — ^in private devotion, the mind must be active ; in worship, another mind than
ours is active, and ours is passive and recipient. To the passive mind the intrusion of
other interests is easier than to the active mind. Therefore our worship should be
arranged so as to excite the active co-operation of all who take part in it.



ra. Lxxxvi. 1— 17.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 221

III, Distraction m motive. Probably none of us do things from absolutely pure
motives. If we read our hearts aright, we find evil and unworthy motives really
swaying us, when we half deceive ourselves with the idea that our motives are high
and noble. And at best the motives are " mixed." The self is prominent.

IV. Distraction in service. Our purpose may be to set God first, and with this
we may begin. But division of interests soon comes in, and we find that we are but
" following the devices and desires of our own hearts." There is hope in the desire to
be undivided, whole-hearted. We want a single, steady aim. We want to have no
object before our minds save the glory of God. And we want every force and faculty
of our being brought into a unity of consecration. — R. T.

Ver. 13. — The plea for more grace. What God has done is made into a ground for
pleading that he would do even more abundantly. A psalmist can ask great things
when he is well assured that he who has given much grace can give more grace. The
plea based on what God has done is made to include two things — soul-iedempticn,
life-benediction. These are well expressed in the Revised Version of Ps. Ivi. 13, " Pur
thou hast delivered my soul from death : hast thou not delivered my feet from falling '! "
The review is more complete in Ps. cxvi. 8, " For thou hast delivered my soul from
death, mine eyes from tears, and my feet from falling."

I., What God has done foe us shows us what he can do.

II. What God has done for us shows us what he will do.

III. What God has done for us gives us an argument to urge with him.

IV. What God has done sets us upon maintaining the conditions on which
THE blessings HAVE COME TO UB. For WO are not straitened either in God's power
or God's will. If straitened, it can only be because we fail to respond to the Divine
conditions. — R. T.

Ver. 15. — (?o<P» graciousness. "Full of compassion, and gracious, slow to anger,
and plenteous in mercy and truth." The term " gracious," as applied to God, brings
in ideas of tenderness, gentleness, considerateness, in dealing with those who are frail
and weak. It is like "pitiful," but does not imply conditions of special poverty or
distress. " Gracious " fits into God's ordinary ways with ordinary people. If we used
the term of our fellow-men, we should single out those who were sympathetic and
iweet-mannered and gentle-toned. It brings in a somewhat fresh, and a very attractive,
view of God, thus to associate the word "gracious " with him. The precise shades of
meaning that may be attached to the term will come to view upon a study of the
following passages : Exod. xxii. 27, " And it shall come to pass, when he crieth unto
me, that I will hear ; for I am gracious ; " Exod. xxxiv. 6, " And the Lord passed by
before him, and proclaimed. The Lord, the Lord God, merciful and gracious ; " 2 Sam.
xii. 22, "Who can tell whether God will be gracious to me, that the child may live ?"
Neh. ix. 17, " A God ready to pardon, gracious and merciful ; " Ps. iv. 1, margin, " Be
gracious unto me, and hear my prayer ; " Isa. ixx. 18, " And therefore will the Lord
wait, that he may be gracious unto you ; " Jonah iv. 2, " For I knew that thou art a
gracious God, and merciful, slow to anger, and of great kindness, and repentest thee of
the evil." Evidently the term is used to express God's relations with sinners, as
distinct from his relations with sin ; and it especially describes the Divine rusponse to
penitent sinners. " Grace," as favour, mercy, was the highest blessing under the Old
Testament dispensation. Joseph, in the fulness of his feelings on seeing his brother
Benjamin, cried, " God be gracious to thee, my son I " The synonyms of the term
" gracious " may be found suggestive — kindly, beneficent, benignant, condescending,
pleasing. Bring out the point that not only does God save and sanctify, but he saves
and sanctifies in a gentle, considerate, and delightful way. Put into a figure, he never
" breaks the bruised reed, or quenches the smoking flax." — R. T.

Ver. 17. — ITie cheer of Ood's tokens. It is a subject of inquiry that we find God
sometimes granting, and sometimes refusing to grant, signs and tokens. The reason
of bis various dealing appears to be this — ^be is willing to help weak faith; he is
unwilling to give opportunities to unbeilief. These points may be illustrated from Old
and New Testament narrative ; e.g, to Gideon God granted the sign or token of the



222



THE BOOK OF PSALMS.



[P8. Lxxxvn. 1 — 7.



"fleece," because Gideon wanted to believe, but needed help to believing. The
scribes and Pharisees who sought a sign, or token, of the Messiahship of Jesus were
refused, because they had no intention of allowing themselves to be persuaded by it,
but meant to turn it to account in intensifying their prejudice against Jesus. A pious
man may always freely ask Qod for a token ; but whether one is given to him will
entirely depend upon the attitude and mood of his mind, and upon th« Divine
judgment that a token will be a real good to him. Withholding the tokens for which
we long and pray is sometimes a form of Divine discipline. What is referred to by the
psalmist here is not a miraculous sign, such as Gideon had, but some evident striking
proof, in ordinary daily relations, of God's good will to him. Tholuck says, " Is it not
the fact that the more we recognize in every daily occurrence God's secret inspiration
guiding and contrulling us, the more will all which to others wears a common, every-
day aspect to us prove a sign and a wondrous work."

L The desibe fob tokens op God's oood will. Those reconciled to God want
to keep up the sense of reconciliation. Modern tokens may be expected in two ways.

1. In an evident ordering and controlling of our outward circumstances. We may see
the "good hand of our God upoa us for good." Doors opened. Ways made plain.
Hindrances taken out of the way. 2. In the comfortable sense of God's love in our
souls ; the inward communications of Divine grace.

II. The fubfose fob which the desibe was chebisred. That God's service
might be commended to others. And that the proofs of Divine favour might so
influence the foes of the psalmist, that the strain of their enmity might be relieved.
He felt that those who were bitter against him would change their ways if they taw,
by some plain sign, that God was on his side. — R. T.

Ver. 11. — Single-heartedness. " Unite my heart to fear thy Name."
L What is moLnDBD in the fbayeb ? 1. It is prayer against douUe-mindedness.
"The flesh lusteth against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh," ete. Two
masters in the house whom we alternately serve— the heavenly and the earthly. Two
steering the boat of our lives. 2. For wholeness or entireness of mind in the tervice of
Ood. That the divided heart may be made one. That the conflicting aims should be
, destroyed by the strength and superiority of the one aim — to love and serve God as
our Father.

II. The answeb to the fbateb wottld include: 1. A tense of oneness unth
Qod. Let a man honestly and truly give himself to God, and make no reserves ; let
him determine to be true and faithful, — then he comes at once into the secret oi faith
and acceptance and fellowship with God, and he keeps the secret pure and bright.

2. IHumphant strength. Secret of strength is concentration upon a supreme aim and
singleness of purpose. We cannot work out two plans of life that are in their nature
mutually/ exclusive. When we can set aside all compromises and serve God with a
united heart, we shall no longer be constantly baffled and defeated by our temptations,
but able to cry with joy, " Thanks be unto God, that giveth us the victory through our
Lord Jesus Christ I " 3. 2%is vnll give us real peace. The peace of conscious rectitude ;
feeling that our purpose is honest and simple— to be Christ's without reserve. The
peace of a great deliveranee ; and feel that we are the subjects of a great salvation.
The peace of a great fearlessness ; nothing to terrify the man who is at one with God ;
sits above all storms, and is secure and at home with God. — S.



EXPOSITION.



PSALM LXXXVn.

This short psalm, opening with the praise
of Zion, or of the Jewish Ohiuroh (vers. 1 — SX
passes into a glorification of the Ohuroh
universal, when all the nations have come
into it (vers. 4 — T). The glorifloation falls
under two heads — God's acknowledgment



of those who flock into his Ohuroh (vers.
4 — 6), and their acknowledgment of the
blessings whioh they receive through it.
The two "selahs" divide the psalm into
two stanzas, each of three verses, and a
short epode consisting of a single verse.

Vers. 1—3.— The praises of Zion. (1)
She is built upon the holy mountains ; (2)



P8. LXXXVH. 1 — 7.]



THE BOOK OF PSALMS.



223



God loves her pre-emineatly ; aad (3) a
glorious future is aasigued to her in the
counsels of Ood.

Ver. 1. — ^His foundatiou is in the holy
monutainB. God's foundation — the city
whioli he has founded — is "in the holy
mountains;" t.«. in the hill country of
Judna, a congeries of mountains, " holy,"
since they surround the holy city and belong
to the " holy land " (Zeoh. u. 12).

Yer. 2. — The lord loveth the gates of
Zion (comp. Ps. Ixxviii. 68). Uore than all
the dwellings of Jacob ; i.€. " more than all
the other dwellings" — more than Shiloh,
more than Kirjath-jearim, more than any
other of the ark's resting-places.

Ver. 3. — Qlorions things are spoken of
thee, city of Ood. The psalmist probably
refers in part to the predictions of older
prophets, but also in part to the revelations
made to himself, which he is on the point
of recording (vers. 4 — 7).

Vers. 4—6. — The Almighty is introduced
as making a revelation to the psalmist He
will canse the Gentiles to flock into hil
Church, even those who have been hitherto
the most bitter enemies of Israel (ver. 4),
and will place these strangers on a par with
such as have belonged to his Church from
their birth (vers. 4, 5, 6), admitting them to
every blessing and every privilege. The
Church, thus augmented, shall betaken nnder
his own protection, and "established," or
placed on a sure footing, for ever. Compare
our Lord's promise to St. Peter, " On this
rock will I build my Church, and the gates
of bell shall not prevail against it" (Matt,
xvi. 18).

Ver. 4. — I will make mention of Bahab ;
i.e. of Egypt. The contest requires this
meaning, which is found also in Fs. Ixxxix.
10 and in Isa. li. 9. Literally "Bahab"



means "pride, arrogance." And Babylon.
The fitting counterpart of Egypt, equally-
antagonistic to Israel, and equally lifted
up with pride and presumption. To them
that know me; rather, among them that
hnoiome; i.e. as belonging to them, included
in their number (comp. Isa. xix. 21, " And
the Lord shall be known to the Egyptians,
and the Egyptians $haU Jmow the Lord in
that day;" and see also Pss. Ixxii. 11, 17;
Ixxzii. 8 ; Isa. Ixvi. 23). Behold FhUistia,
and Tyre, with Ethiopia. Other hostile
nations (comp. Ps. Ixxxiii. 7 ; 2 Chron. xiL
3; xiv. 9 — 13). This man was born there.
There is no " man " in the original, and it
is better to understand " nation ; " this,
that, and the other nation— all those
mentioned, and others — are grafted into
Zion, and have a second birth there.

Yer. 5. — And of Zion it shall be said,
This and that man was born in her. A
repetition, but emphatic, and perhaps
intended to assert of individuals what in
the preceding verse was said of nations.
And the highest himsslf shall establish her ;
literally, arui he, the highest, ihall establish
her (comp. Matt. xvi. 18). 'The Church is
"established" on a Bock, for ever.

Ver. 6. — The lord shall count, when he
wxiteth np the people ; rather, the peoples,
(see ver. 4). That this man was born there.
He shall enregister every individual among
the converted nations as a true citizen of
Zion, entitled to all covenant privileges.

Yer. 7. — As well the singers as the
players on instruments; literally, and
tiagert as weU as dancers [i?mU say]. (On
dancing as an element of rtligious service,
see Exod. xv. 20; 2 Sam. vi. 16 ; Pss. Ixviii.
2S; czliz. 3; cl. 1.) The psalmist intends
to represent the converted nations as coming
in a grand procession, with songs and
dances, to celebrate their admisision to Ziou,
and there one and all exclaiming. All my
fresh springs — i.e. "all my sources of life,
and joy, and happiness " — are in thee. The
verse is possibly but a " fragment," as Pro-
fessor Cheyne supposes.



HOMILETIOS.

Ver. 3. — Vie glory of the Church. " Glorious things," etc. It is a glorious thing to
be a real Christian. Griorious because of the relation such a one holds to God and to
Christ — a child of God by faith in Christ Jesus (Gal. iv. 7 ; Rom. viii. 16, 17). Glorious
also because of his relation to the Church of God — a citizen of the heavenly city, a
member of the fellowship of saints, the brotherhood of the faithful, the spiritual body
of which Christ is the living Head (Col. i. 18 ; 1 Cor. xii. 13). But it is a glory hid
from worldly eyes — one of " the things of the Spirit of God " which are " spiritually
discerned " (1 Cor. ii. 14). Hence St. Paul's prayer (Eph. i. 18).

I. The oloey of the Chubce's histoby. If we would earnestly and wisely study
the histoiy which the Scriptures record, the inspiration of the Scriptures would speak
lor itself. .Because history is written on diflferent principles here from anywhere else.



224 THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [ps. Lxxsvn. 1— 7.

In these points (to name no others) : 1. Everywhere the hand of God is seen as tha
supreme factor in human affairs. Nut in miracle, except at those special crises and
occasions where miracles were the fittest means. These, not scattered at random, but
in groups, at certain junctures. But the constant presence and exercise of QooFs know-
ledge, purpose, power, goodness ; like the pressure of the atmosphere, never felt, never
absent. 2. Under God, character, personal and national, is seen to be the decisive force
in human life. The great men of the world have been great by ability, force of will,
genius, ciicumstances. Some distinguished men of genius, rulers, etc., have been
eminent saints ; but this is not the rule. Bible heroes are spiritual heroes. Their sins,
faithfully portrayed, were their weakness ; their victory was always the victory of faith,
prayer, godly sincerity (see Heb. xi.), " Faith " — not opinion, creed, speculation, but
undoubting trust in God, proved by and producing fearless obedience. This psalm
refers, of course, in its fi^rst meaning to the earthly Jerusalem. But it is full of pre-
dictions to be fulfilled only by the gospel of Christ and the outpouring of the Spirit
" on all flesh." The great lesson of the history of ancient Israel is in reality not that
which lies on the surface, in the political and national form of the Church, its rigid
laws, the glories of David and Solomon, the priestly rites and material splendour of
temple worship, but that which our Saviour taught, " My kingdom is not of this
world." Spiritual, not material forms govern human life.

II. The wviNQ, abiding presenob of God. (Ps. xlvi. 5.) Under the old dispensa-
tion, every possible means was used to impress and to symbolize this central truth ;
and at the same time to surround and guard it with an awe and majesty, without which
it would have been vulgarized and rendered spiritually powerless. Israel was never
suffered to forget that their God was also God of the whole earth. Almighty Creator,
universal Lord. The New Testament doctrine and promise of the Divine Presence il
given by our Saviour in a double form (1) to individual believers (John ziv. 21, 23) ;
(2) to his Church (ver. 18 ; Matt, xviii. 20). In the New Testament there are, in
fact, /our antitypes or spiritual realities typified by the tabernacle or temple; (1) our
Lord's human nature (John ii. 19 — 21) ; (2) the person of every true Christian (1 Cor.
vi. 19); (3) the Christian Church (Eph. ii. 20—22); (4^ heaven (Heb. ix. 11, 12, 24).

III. Its membership. Christians are citizens (Phil. iii. 20, Bevised Yersion ; Eph.
ii. 19 ; Heb. xii. 22 ; Gal. iv. 26). To an ancient Israelite, the glory of his citizenship
was its exclusiveness ; yet this psalm predicts the time when heathens and foes should
become " fellow-citizens," not by national subjection, but individual regeneration. This
truth, plentifully foretold by the Holy Spirit and the prophets, was yet so inscrutable
to the Jewish mind, that St. Paul calls it " the mystery hid from the beginning " (Eph.
iii. 4 — 6, 9) ; and the Christian Church at Jerusalem was overwhelmed with amaze-
ment when these predictions were fulfilled (see Acts x., xi. ; especially x. 10, 28, 45 ; xi.
3, 18). It is a shame that Christians have such narrow, ignoble views of the Church
of God. True views would be the death of sectarianism. The New Testament gives
two canons of membership in the universal Church — one inclusive, one exclusive.
(1) " By one Spirit are we all baptized into one body ; " (2) " If any have not the Spirit
of Christ, he is none of his."

rV. The final and eternal aLORY. (Eph. v. 27.) Typified by " the bride of the
Lamb," " the holy city. New Jerusalem " (Rev. xxi., xxii.).



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Vers. 1 — 7. — The hahitation of Ood. This psalm is true, whether we apply it —
I. To Israel of old, God's ancient people. That the writer had them in his mind,
there can be no doubt, whatever other applications we may make of his words. Like
the other psalms " for the sons of Korah," it most probably belongs to the days of
Hezekiah. The sons of Korah were the keepers of those " gates " which in this psalm,
as in Ps. Ixxxiv., they celebrate; and the triumph of which they tell harmonizes
with the glowing predictions of Israel as to the spiritual power and supremacy of
Israel. 1. This psalm speaks of the proud position of Zion, on the holy mountains, so
elevated, sacred, secure. 2. Of the Divine delight in her. God was to be worshipped
in all the dwellings of Jacob (see Lev. xxiii. 2) ; but his chief delight was in the



PS. Lxxxvn. 1— 7.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 225

united worship of all the people in his temple on Mount Zion, in the glorious feasts and
festivals that were celebrated there. 3. Of her glorious history. It may have been, as
some have supposed, that the psalm was sung at the public reception into the Jewish
Church of a number of converts from heathen nations, and that, as our Lord saw in
the coming of the Greeks to him (John sii.) the forerunners of the coming of all tlie
Gentiles — yea, of "all men" — so the psalmist foresees the conversion of all the nations
of whom he speaks to the Name of the Lord. And the change for them shall be so
great that it shall he as a new birth; whatever their native country may have been,
they were really " born " in Zion. And she shall produce many great and illustrioas
men. The word rendered " man" (ver. 5) denotes one of distinction and eminence, not
an ordinary person. In the great day of manifestation and triumph of the people of
God, the Lord himself shall own those born in Zion. 4. Of her great joy. The song
and the dance and all kinds of mirth shall characterize her ; she shall be a gladsome
city.

II. To THE Chubch of Christ. The psalm, read as part of the record of the
Church, tells : 1. Of her foundation, which is Christ. He is the chief Corner-stone.
" Other foundation can no man lay," etc. 2. Her position — in the holy mountains ;
that is, she is conspicuous — a city set on a hill, which cannot be hid ; the mountain of
the Lord's house, high and lifted up, visible from afar and on all sides. Secure, like-
wise, as a mountain fortress mightily defended. Has not the Church ever been so ?
And holy. This is her main characteristic ; she could not be the Church of Christ
without this. 3, The Lord's delight in her. She is the purchase of his blood, the
subject of his care, the reason of his providential rule. He who toucheth her toucheth
the apple of his eye. 4. The glorious things spoken of her. How all forms of hostility
yield to her — Bahab, the proud; Babylon, the cruel; Philistia, the fierce; Tyre, the
greedy of gain ; Ethiopia, the degraded ; — from all such she wins trophies for Christ.
The Church's mission is to gather in all nations for him. And see the heroes of the
faith that are " bom " in her : what a glorious roll-call that is I And the Lord himself
shall attest all this. What is the Epistle to the Ephesians bat a full declaration of
what the Church of Christ shall be and do and enjoy ? And other Scriptures declare
the same. And the history of the Church is evermore confirming this word. 6. Ber
abiding gladness. Real religion is the most gladsome thing this side heaven; it is a
never-failing spring of pure and elevating joy. Finally, this psialm may be applied to—

in. The individual believer. For he, too, is a habitation of God. 1. Founded
on the one Foundation — Christ. 2. Is as a holy moumtain — openly confessed, not
hiding out of si^ht, secure in God, holy. 3. Is the object of Divine delight. God loves
our natural life, but our spiritual life is that which he loves most — to foster and
develop and save that is the meanin>{ of all the disciplines, trials, and varied Divine
dealings with us. 4. Glorious things are spoken of him. As to the past, all his guilt
put away. As to the present, the hostile forces of the world — pride, cruelty, inward
corruption, ever worrying the soul, as Philistia did Israel, the lusts of the world, the horde
of degrading propensities — all these which war against the sotil shall-be subdued, and
the varied powers they usurped shall be given to God. And as to the future, what hath
God not promised for those who love him? And God will make such heart the means
of blessing to many others, and will own what has been done. 6. And he will fill such
heart with Joy. — S. 0.

Ver. 2. — The principles of the Divine preference. These are seen—

I. In thr greater love or God for Zion than for all thb dwellinos of
Jacob. Not a lew of those dwellings were spacious, magnificent, wealthy, adorned,
and inhabited by men who feared God; but yet, because in Zion God's glory was more
revealed, his gra«e seen, his truth declared, his people blessed, and because there that
in man which God ever most of all delights in — the spiritual life, the life of trust, of
love, of devotion to God — found its chief nourishment, expression, and delight,
therefore the Lord loved the gates of Zion more, etc.

II. In the chabactebs God approves. The name of Jacob suggests one of these
at first sight apparently strange preferences. " Jacob have I loved, and Esau have I
hated." How many people have been puzzled over that statement, endorsed as it is
by the actual dealing of God with the two men ? Esau was a man richly endued

PSALMS. — II. q



226 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. lxxxvu. 1— 7.

with gifts such as men everywhere have highly esteemed. He had courage, affection,
generosity, strength; whilst Jacob too seldom shows any quality which wins our
admiration, and far too often he is guilty of that which excites contempt. And yet
the Lord preferred him. The reason was that in him, however encrusted with what
was sordid, base, and mean, there was yet the germ and seed, the potency and promise,
of the life of God in his soul. There were reverence of and trust in God, and the
yearning after the better life ; there were the seeds of the life eternal, and they so sprang
up at last that God's chosen name fur himself was, " I am the God of Jacob." But in
Esau, with all his magnificence, courage, aod other virtues, there does not seem to have
been anything of the kind.

III. & THE COMPOSITION OF TUB SoHiPTURES. What large space is given to what
in human esteem seems the chronicling of very small affairs; whilst of the great
empires, events, and personalities of the world, scarce any note is taken — none at all,
except when and because they are brought into contact with the people of God I But
for that they would have been passed over in complete silence. Palestine — what a
little shred of the earth's surface it is I The Jews — what an insignificant people they
have always been 1 Tlieir great men — Abraham, Joseph, Moses, David, and the rest-
how small to ordinary human sight they appear 1 But how colossal were Egypt,
Assyria, Babylon, Greece, Rome, and their heroes ! Yet we learn scarce anything of
them from the Bible. And the explanation is the same : in the little land, and
amongst the despised people, the life of God was to be found as it was not in all the
mighty ones of the world.

IV. In cue Lord's fbefebence op grace to gifts. (See Luke x. 20.) His
disciples w«re ezul tant over their gifts, but he tells them to rejoice rather in that grace
which was the common inheritance of every faithful disciple. Gifts did not, and do
not necessarily, carry along with them the life of Gk>d in the soul ; but grace always
does.

Y. In the obdebino o? God's fbotidencb. What a series of changes does the
history of the world show 1 Empires rising, ialling, disappearing. What a fragment
of the history of the whole is all that the most learned know I Oblivion has covered the
records of well-nigh all peoples. They had their day ; were doubtless thought much
of by their contemporaries, and more of by themselves; they did, we may be sure,
many things — many of them, probably, great exploits, notable deeds. But who knows
anything ol them now? They all have " waxed old, like a garment, and as," etc.
(Heb. i. 12). But of the Church of God, the company of people who in all ages have
loved and feared his Name, there has been no disappearance, their name has endured
as none other has. God has preserved them alive, as it is this day.

VI. In the doctbine or the cross. How contemptible that seemed in the apos-
tolic age, and, to many, seems so still I Yet to it has been given power to effect a moral
change in mankind that nothing else has ever been capable of. Philosophy has done
her best ; but she left, notwithstanding all her teachings, the whole world lying in
wickedness. But " Christ and him crucified " was preached, and we know the result
of that. It was, as it is, " the power of God unto salvation unto every one that
believeth." Therefore has God put honour upon that preaching such as he has given
to tione other. Divine life is in it, as myriads of saved souls know, and it is not found
elsewhere.

Conclusion. Remember that God acts upon these same principles in our ovrn
individual life. He loves everything, however mean it may seem, which leads our
souls to him ; he cares for nothing, however much esteemed, that leads them away
from him. — S. C.

Ver. 6. — " The Lord shall count." There shall be a Divine census, a numbering of
the people by God, such as never yet has taken place. Nothing in Hezekiah's reign,
the probable date of this psalm, ever fulfilled the glorious promises here given. But it
shall be when Christ shall come aiain. Consider —

L The fact op such "writing up" of the people. 1. It shall be natioruU.
(Ver. 4.) 2. But individual also. The counting will be of this one, and that, and the
other; there will be no passing in a crowd. 3. It is attested by manv witnesses — ■
Scripture, reason, history, conscience.



P8, uaxvn. 1— 7.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 227



IL Its purpose. The gathering together of his own true people ; the inaking up of
his jewels ; the maDifestation of the sons of God. This is not done now, but shall tie.

IIL The whiter. The Lord himself. 1. He only can really know where to find
his people ; they are often found in strange places (ver. 4). 2. Be only can he
trvMted. Bigotry, superstition, dislike, would shut many out. Partiality, fondness,
love of sin, would let many in. God alone can judge.

IV. The names in it. Those only who have been " born '' of Qod. Shall we be
there?— S. C.

Ver. 2. — The Divine interest tn Zion. Taking Zion as a poetical name for Jerusalem,
the temple city, and as the representative of every place where public and united
worship is offered to Gbd. Zion is still, for us, the pious name for God's house. The
point prominent is this — that we should love God's house and worship is not in any
sense surprising ; but it is a surprise of condescension and grace that Ood should love
our sanctuaries, and find his pleasure in our worship. Yet even this we are permitted
to realize, and this the saints of God have realized. The historical associations of this
psalm cannot be fixed. It certainly does not belong to the Davidic age, for its outlook
is too wide, its spirit too liberal and too comprehensive. It may reflect the more
hopeful feeling of the returned exiles ; it does match precisely the feeling expressed in
some of the later chapters of Isaiah, notably the sixtieth. But it must be admitted that
a rigid exclusiveness rather than a liberal inclusiveness characterized the returned
exiles; and the psalm is altogether too generous for them. The suggestion that it
belongs to the time of Hezekiah is certainly to be preferred. When the Assyrian
(lower was humbled by the overthrow of Sennacherib, it seemed, to excited feeling, that
Judah was to be the world's deliverer, and Jerusalem was likely to become the centre
of a confederacy of delivered nations. That was the hope of Hezekiah ; it was the
promise of the moment, which gains expression in the psalm. In 2 Chron. xxxii. 22,
23, the events immediately following on the deliverance from Assyria are indicated.
" And many brought gifts unto the Lord to Jerusalem, and presents to Hezekiah King
of Judah ; so that be was magnified in the sight of all nations from henceforth."
Hezekiah piously recognized that all the honour coming to him was really due to God,
who had showed such favour to his servant, his city, and his people.

L GoD IS INTEBESTEO IN ZiON BECAUSE OF WHAT HE HAS DONE FOB IT. Illus-
trate how those whom we tend and care for— the babe, the invalid — creep into our
very hearts. So if we join in raising a new church building, how dear it becomes to
ns I God had given ages of care to his Zion, so it had become inexpressibly dear to him.
See the pathetic pleadings, which reveal deep feeling, as in Hosea.

IL God ib intebbbted in Zion because of what he can be to rr. We specially
love those for whom we feel we can do all they need. Illust. : mother's feeling for
her babe. God can " supply all oar need," and it must be infinitely pleasant to be able
to make " all grace abound."

III. God is interested in Zion because of what it can be to him. Zion can
need, and so draw out his fulness. Zion can trust, and so respond to his trustworthi-
ness. Zion can worship, and so glorify him. Zion can be beautiful, and so show forth
his praise. — B. T.

Ver. 3. — What can be said for our Jerusalem f " Glorious things are spoken of thee,
O city of God." In this joyous exclamation the poet of Hezekiah's time gathers up
the joy of the kingdoms round Palestine, which were relieved of their anxiety by
Jehovah's humiliation of Assyria. Jerusalem became the praise of everybody. It
had become the champion-deliverer of the nations. Its God had brought it glory. To
it every eye was gratefully turned. We may think what things were then said ; and
let them suggest things that may rightly be said now of our " city of God."

I. Glorious things were being said op the oiti itself. Events had turned
everybody's eyes towards it, and everybody began to see that " beautiful for situation,
the joy of the whole earth, is Mount Zion." Give account of the very striking position
«f the city ; its remarkable hills, precipices, and valleys ; and, accordin<; to the taste
•f the age, the architectural grandeur of its temple, its palaces, and its towers. When
we feel kindly towards a place or person, it is astonishing what excellent and lovely



228 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. Lxxxvn. 1— T.

things we can find in them. The church building in which we worship may really
be a very plain and poor building, but if it proves the house of (Jod to us, we iooii
think it beautiful, and almost worship its very stones.

II. Gl/ORIOUB THINGS WBEB BEINO SAID OF THE GOD OF THE CITY. Becall tho

idea of the age, that the gods were limited to particular cities and countries. So out-
siders associated Jehovah with Jerusalem and the Israelites, and, in recognizing the
deliverance which came to them through Israel, recognized it as the work of Israel's God.
See by way of illustration, how Nebuchadnezzar demands praise of Jehovah, when some
mighty work has shown his superiority to all surrounding gods. Work out what
things the nations round were likely to say of the God of Hezekiah. His power was
declared. His concern for his people was declared. His sovereign rights were declared.
His mercy was declared. God as Deliverer and Redeemer was declared. So now, iff
the attention of men is directed to us, to our example, our enterprise, our energy, our
success, it should be our supreme anxiety that the glorious things they say of ua
should really be said oiowr Ood, and of his grace in us. Observe this, too, that the
triumph over Sennacherib was not something which Hezekiah's people had accomplished
in their own strength, but something which Jehovah had accomplished through them
und for them. They had, therefore, no right to take the " glorious things that were
spoken " to themselves. Nor have we. Look as we may on what has been accom<
piished, we are compelled to say, "What hath God wrought?" And all the gloriona
things spoken of us we turn away, and have spoken of him. — B. T.

Ver. 6. — Privileges of a birthplace. Keeping the associations with the timet of
Hezekiah, we may see, in this verse, a poetical representation of the revival of the
nations, when the dread of Assyria was lifted off them. It was like a new birth Ut
them. They entered on a new experience, and on new relations. And as Zion waa
regarded as the centre and source of the deliverance — Jehovah from Zion — the nation*
are, in a poetical way, said to have their birth in Zion. It was thought of as the city
of the new birth of the nations. This figure may be applied to the spiritual birth of
individuals. Be they white or black, bond or free, from whatever clime they come^
they may properly be thought of as born in Zion, where

" Our dear Lord was cmoified.
Who died to save ui alL"

The Zion birthright belongs to every redeemed soul. " Salvation is of the Jews."

I. The FBiviLEaEs of oub natural birthplace. Curious is the admiration men
have for the town and neighbourhood in which they saw the light. And the places
of our birth have more to do with disposition, and with genius, than we are wont to
think. Our early surroundings may waken poetic or artistic instincts. Our town and
country may enjoy peculiar liberty, special advantages of education, etc. Illustrate by
the claims of seven towns to be the birthplace of the poet Homer, partly because it
honoured them to provide the first formative influences that reached the poet.

II. The peivilegeb of oub adopted birthplace. If actual life begins where
we were bom, our individuality, our life-work, our success, often begins somewhere
else. We begin again, in some place of our selection and adoption. And as we look
back in life, we can see how our surroundings and associations, in that new birthplace,
have been privileges, helping to make us what we have become. Many of us, giving
our birthplace, feel that we want to say, " We began to breathe at A, but we began to
live at B, and B we think of as our true birthplace." Like these nations which felt
they began really to live from the time of the Zion deliverance.

III. The pbitileges of ons spiritual bibthplaoe. The place where we began
to live unto God — began to live the soul-life. Many keep in dearest memory the
time, the place, the incidents, of their first realization of the redeeming love and
sufiBciency. For us that is Zion. The place where God met with us is our Zion.
And, in one sense, it is always Zion, for it is always in the presence of the cross on
which Jesus died. We feel we live by his " decease accomplished at Jerusalem."
— B. T.

Y«r, Ij^Various power* used in Ood't service. " Aa well the singers as the players-



ffs. Lxxxvu. 1— 7.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 229

on instruments." This expresses admiration of the services and ceremonies in connec-
tion with Jehovah's temple ; and it suggests the thought that Divine worship ought to
be made in every way delightful. But another thought is suggested by the marked
distinction made between the " singers " and the " pkyers." It is that the gifts and
endowments of men are very various, but whatever may be their variety, they can all
be taken up into the service of God and the service of God's people. Some can sing ;
then encourage them to sing. Some can play ; then use their skill in playing. Find
what a man can do, and accept, for God, just the service he can render.

L The bemarkablb variety of human gifts. Examine them first as simply
human gifts. Poetry, eloquence, art, science, government, do but, in the large, repre-
sent the thousaodfold lesser forms of endowment which fit men for their varied places
in life. Yet in common everyday life there is a place and a work for every one. Show
that this includes kinds of gifts with which we may have no personal sympathy, such
as mimicry, satire, humour, etc. Then examine those particular gifts which were
granted to the early Churches — tongues, prophecy, interpretation, etc. Bring out that
while each man has much in common with his fellows, each man also has something
special to himself, something which constitutes his individuality. In the line of the
Mse of that speciality will be found to lie his life-mission.

II. The possible use fob humanity op all human gifts. There is a danger
®f religious people unduly limiting the service of humanity. Sometimes, in an exclusive
spirit, pious persons speak as if there were no real service to humanity save that which
their religion sanctions. We may hold that all conceivable endowments may be
sanctified, and ought to be sanctified, by being used for God — consciously in God's
•ervice. But we had better be more generous in our thinking, and say that everything;
that helps lift a human burden, cheer a human soul, brighten a human life, relieve a
human strain, or perfect the human brotherhood, is the service of God. Some gifts bear
s character, or are so small in measure, that men think of them as the one-talented man
thought of his talent. But he thought wrongly, and so do they. In God's earth there
is nothing that has not its use. In God's world of men there is no gift without an
answering sphere. Singers and players shall both be there. — E. T.

Ver. 7. — Joy-fovntains in God. Prayer-book Version, " All my fresh springs shall be
in thee." Jennings and Lowe render, " All my well-springs [of delight] are singing aloud
Mke instrument-players because of [literally, ' in 'J thee." The " springs " are evidently
otir springs of gladness ; and the sentence is best given thus : " Both they that sing and
dance, all my fountains of delight are in thee ; " with this as the meaning, " every source
atlF pleasure, song, music, dancing, etc., was to be found in Zion." The psalmist is
fnaising Zion, not directly praising God : so his figures are naturally taken from the
pleasures of the holy city, and especially of the sacred temple and its services.
Remember that David had devoted genius and skill to the improvement of worship ;
had introduced music and poetry, until the old sombre ritual of Mosaism had become
glorified. The joy of God's everyday service ought to be illustrated by the brightness,
attiactiveness, and holy joy of our sanctuary services. Men ought to feel that it must
%B a joy to serve God always, because it is such an evident joy to serve God sometima.

I. Joy-fountains in G-od's worship.

II. Joy-fountains in daily life.

III. Joy-fountains in what God has done fob us.

IV. Joy-fountains in what God is doing for us.

V. Joy-fountains in God himself. " When all created streams are dried, his
fulness is the same."

Impress that true religion cannot be gloomy and depressing;. Its atmosphere of
trust is an atmosphere of gladness. We are saddened if we look down upon the path
•four feet ; or in upon our frail selves ; we need never be saddened if we look up — " look
«ff unto Jesus, the Author and Finisher of our faith." We may find ever fresh-flowing
springs of delight in God, and in this world of God's which is his Zion for us. — B. T.

Vers. 1 — 7. — The glory of the Church. I. In its foundation. " In the holy
mountains." 1. It is founded in the nature of God. In the Divine love. "The Lord
loTeth the gates of Zion," etc. 2. It is founded also in the nature of man. In hit



230



THE BOOK OP PSALMS.



[rs. iixxxviii. 1— la.



spiritual nature, affinities, and needs. The Church, therefore, has sacred foundations :
" and the gates of hell shall not prevail against her."

II. It is called the city of God. 1. It consists of the highest social rdationthipa.
LoTe, the bond that unites the citizens. 2. And of the Divinest order. Protected
and maintained by the constant presence of &od. 3. And of the truest wisdom.
(Ver. 4.) " Them that know me."

III. To BECOME A CITIZEN THERE A MAN MUST BE 8PIBITUALLY BOBN INTO IT. The

new birth is the condition of citizenship. " This man was born there." 1. Elte it can
never become a home to us. Not a congenial place to us. 2. We should not else he able
to enter into its highest privileges, rights, and obligations.

IV. It 18 THE HOME OP THE NEW-BORN MAN, IBRESPECTVB OP NATIONAL DI8TINCTI0K.

Jew and Gentile, bond and free, king and peasant, may find a home there.

V. It 18 THE FOUNTAIN OP ALL DiVINE AND HUMAN OOOD. (Vor. 7.) All the

truest and most real blessedness. — S.



EXPOSITION.



PSALM LXXXVIII.



Tbb most moTunfnl of all the psalms. After
one almost formal " word of trust " (ver. Xa),
the remainder is a coutinnous bitter cry of
complaint, rising at times into expostula-
tion (yers. 10 — 12), and almost into reproach
(ver. 14). The tone is that of the earlier
complaints of Job : and Job has been sup-
posed by some to be the writer. But this
is highly improbable. We may accept the
statement of the title, that the monody was
written by Heman the Ezrahite, who was
a contemporary of Solomon (1 Kings iv. 81).
It has no appearance of being composed at
a time of national afiSiction. All the com-
plaints are personal, and indicate long-
continued personal sutfering. The writer
seems to be without hope. Still, he does
not fall away from God, but continues to
call upon him and pray to him (vers. 1, 2,
9, 13).

Metrically, the psalm is almost without
divisions — "a slow, unbroken wail," ex-
pressive of " the monotony of woe."

Ver. 1. — Lord God of my salvation.
This is the one " word of trust," which
some get rid of by an emendation. But
the Septuagint supports the existing Hebrew
text ; and it is in harmony with the rest of
Scripture. The saints of God never despair.
1 have oried day and night before thee;
literiiUy, by day have I cried— by night
before thee ; a trembling, gasping utterance

(Kay)-

Ver. 2. — Let my prayer come before thee :
incline thine ear unto my cry (comp. Ps.
Ixxxvi. 1, 6).

Ver. 8. — For my soul is foil of troubles
(see Job x. 15). And my life draweth nigh



unto the grave; literally, mUo Sheol — the
place of departed spirits (comp. Job x. 21,
22).

Ver. 4. — ^I am counted with them that go
down into the pit ; i.e. " to the grave." I am
reckoned as one just about to die. I am as a
man tiiat hath no strength. All my strength
is departed from me; I am utterly feeble
and weak — a mere shadow of my former
self Physical weakness, something like
paralysis, seems to be meant.

Ver. 5. — Free among the dead ; or, " east
out among the dead." Placed with corpses,
as one that needs burial. Like the slain
that lie in the grave. Like those who are
thrown into a pit dug on a battle-field,
among whom there are often some who
have not breathed their last (see the
Prayer-book Version). Whom thou remem-
barest no more. We have already heard
the complaint that in death there is no
remembrance of God on the part of man
(Ps. vi. 5); now we have the converse
statement, that neither is there then any
remembrance of man on the part of God.
Tlie psalmist speaks, not absolute truth,
but the belief of his day — a belief which
vanislied when life and immortality were
brought to light by the gospel. And they
are out off from thy hand ; i.e. severed from
thee, shut up in a place where thou dwell-
est not (see Job x. 21, 22).

Ver. 6. — Thou hast laid me in the lowest
pit. The afflietiou whereof the psalmist
complains has come direct from the hand
of God. It is some severe stroke of
illness which has brought him to his last
gasp. The " lowest pit " is here metaphori-
cal — the deepest depth of calamity. In
darkness; literally, in darknesses, where
no ray of thy favour shines upon me. In
the deeps (comp. Ps. Ixix. 2, "deep waters,
where the floods overflow him "),

Ver. 7. — Xhy wrath lieth hard upon m&
Here the cause of all the psalmist's sulfei^



P8. LXX2TIU. 1 — 18.]



THE BOOK OP PSALMS.



231



ingB is touched ; God was angiy with him
(comp. ver. 16). And thoa hast afflicted
me with all thy waves (oomp. Fs. zlii 7,
" All thy waves and thy billows have gone
over me ").

Ver. 8.— Then hast pnt away mine ac-
quaintance far from me. Compare the
Bimilar complaint of Job (xix. 13, 14) ;
and see also Fs. xxxi. 11 ; and infra, ver.
18. Thou hast made me an ahomination
onto them. So Job (is. 31 ; six. 19 ; xxx.
10). It may bo suspected that the psalmist's
afiBiction was of a kind which made him
"unclean." I am shut up. Not in prison,
as Jeremiah (xxxii. 2 ; xxxiii. 1 ; xxxvi. 5),
but probably as unclean, or as suspected of
being unclean (see Lev. xiii. 4 — 33). And
I cannot come forth. I am not allowed to
quit my oliamber.

Ver. 9. — Mine eye monrneth by reason of
•ffiiotion ; or, " mine eye hath grown feeble "
(comp. Job xvii. 7). Lord, I have called
daily upon thee; or, "all day." I have
stretched out my hands unto thee. The
attitude of earnest prayer (comp. Job xL
13; Pa. Ixviii. 31, etc.).

Ver. 10. — Wilt thou show wonders to
the dead I Am I to receive no mercy till
I am dead? and then wilt thou work a
miracle for my restoration and deliverance ?
Shall the dead arise and praise theet
rather, the shades (rephaini) ; comp. Job
xxvi. 5. The word rephaim designates
the wan, shadowy ghosts that have gone
down to Hades (Sheol), and are resting
there. Shall these suddenly rise up and
engage in the worship and praise of God ?
The psalmist does not, any more than Job
(xiv. 14), expect such a resurrection.

Ver. 11. — Shall thy loving-kindness be
declared in the grave ? Wilt thou wait
till I am in my grave before thou showest
any mercy upon me ? or. Will not that be
too late ? Can thy faithfulness to thy pro-
mises be shown in destruction! literally,
in Abaddon; i.e. "perdition" — a name of
Sheol (cf. Job xxvi. 6; xxviii. 22).

Ver. 12. — Shall thy wonders be known in
the dark ? (compare above, ver. 10). And thy
righteousness in the land of forgetfulness 1
" The land of forgetfulness," or " of obli-
vion," is another name for Hades, or Sheol —
not that there are supposed to be no memories
of the past in it (Isa. xiv. 16, 17), but thut
all is faint and shadowy there, conscious-
ness but a half-consciousness, remembrance
but a half-remembrance.

Ver. 13. — But unto thee have I cried,
Lord ; literally, but a» for me, to thee have I
cried. The psalmist returns from the some-
what vague speculations of vers. 10 — 12 to
fact and to himself. He is not yet a mere



shade, an inhabitant of Sheul ; he is in the
Hesh, upon the earth ; he can still cry, and
does still cry, to Jehovah. There is thus
still a faint gleam of hope for him. And
in the morning shall my prayer prevent
thee. The psalmist will draw out God's
mercy, as it were, before its time, by im-
portuning him with early and continual
prayer (comp. vers. 1, 9).

Ver. 14.— Lord, why oastest thou off my
soult 'ihe p.-almist speaks here, like Job,
as one aggrieved. What has he done to be
"cast off"? He is evidently not aware of
having sinned any grievous sin, and does
not understand why he is visited with such
grievous sufferings. Why hidest thou thy
face from mel Perhaps it is his insensi-
bility, his unconsciousnesB of real sins and
shoitcomings, that has drawn down upon
the psalmist his chastisement.

Ver. 15. — I am afflicted and ready to die
from my youth up. This is a new point.
The psalmist's afflictions have not come
upon him recently. He does not merely
mean, as some have supposed, that, like
other men, as soon as he was born he began
to die, but speaks of something, if not abso-
lutely peculiar to himself, yet at any rate
rare and abnormal — a long continuance in a
dying state, such as could only have been
brought about by some terribly severe
malady. While I suffer thy terrors I am
distracted; literally, I have endured thy
terrors ; I am exhausted. (On the endurance
of God's "terrors," see Job vi. 4; ix. 34;
xiii. 21.) The natural result would be a
state, not of distraction, but of exhaustion.
(So Kay, and substantially Professor
Cheyne.)

Ver. 16. — Thy fierce wrath goeth over me.
" Overwhelms me ; " i.e. " like a fiery flood "
(see above, ver. 7). Thy terrors have out me
off. A different word is used for " terrors "
from that which occurs in ver. l.'i, and one
elsewhere occurring only in Job vi. 4. The
verb also is one characteristic of Job (vi.
17 ; xxiii. 17), and means " extinguish," or
" exterminate."

Ver. 17. — They came roundabout me daily
like water. God's terrors encompass the
psalmist "daily," or "all day long," like
water; i.e, like an overwhelming flood
(compare the first clause of ver. 16). They
compassed me about together; or, "they
compass me about in a mau."

Ver. 18. — Lover and friend hast thou put
far from me (oomp. ver. 8 and Job xix. 13).
And mine acquaintance into darkness ;
literally, and my intimatea [are'] darkness;
ie. "when I look for a friend or au
acquaintance, my eye meets nothing but
darkness," or " dark space."



232 THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [ps. lxxxviii. 1—18.



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Vera. 1 — 18. — The saddest psalm in the Psalter. For In well-nigh all others, though
there may be darkness of soul, a very night of darkness, yet we see the light arise ;
though we see " weeping endure for the night," yet we see also that "joy cometh in
the morning." But in this psalm we do not see such coming of joy. The believer
who wrote it was one who was called to "walk in darkness, and had no light."
But he is holding on ; he prays, and perseveres in prayer ; he reco<;nizes the hand of
God in his trouble. "Thou hast laid me," etc. (vers. 6 — 8). He oonlesses that God
is the Ijord God of his salvation (ver. 1) ; he attributes to God loving-kindness, faith-
fulness, power, and righteousness (vers. 11, 12) ; and he declares his purpose (ver. 13)
to continue in prayer. No doubt the light did come, though the psalm ends first.
"The believer in his worst time still continues to pray; God's rod flop:s his child not
from him, but to him. Our griefs are waves which wash us on to the rock. But never-
theless, the best child of God may be the greatest sufferer, and his suflerings may be,
as those told of here, utterly crushing, killing, and overwhelming." Kow let us
inquire —

L Why does God alu)W such suffeeino to oomb to hib people? We may
reply : 1. Buffering is the lot of all. The men of this world do not escape it more than
the servant of God, and, all things considered, probably they suffer more, because the
alleviations and consolations which belong to the child of God they know nothing of.
But if suffering, which is the lot of all, did not come to the child of God ; if faith were
the passport to immunity from those varied ills which flesh is heir to, what a crowd of
mere loaves and fishes seekers we should have I 2. For spiritual discipline. The soul
needs training, exercise, and development as much as the body, and how but by trial
can this be secured ? There is not one fruit of the Spirit that can he fully perfected
save in this way. 3. In self-revelation. Many men live continually in a perfect mist
ol mistake about themselves. How strong Peter thought himself I But his trial and
his sad fall revealed him to himself as nothing else could. 4. For driving us nearer
Ood. We do not wrench ourselves away from God, but we are perpetually in peril of
drifting, and this unconsciously. Hence we need to be from time to time roused to
this fact — that we have sot away from God, and that we must come back. 5. That we
fnay give testimony. The wtorld marks how the Christian bears trial ; if meekly,
patiently, both towards God and towards men, the world notes it, and confesses the
grace of God. 6. And that we may learn to sympathize. How could we if we knew
nothing of suffering ?

II. How ABB SUCH CONDITIONS BROUGHT ABOUT ? Through : 1. Circumstances. The
troubles of Hie, personal or relative — losses, bereavements, sickness, etc. 2. Wrong
thoughts of Ood. How many such there are in this psalm 1 A great deal that the
psalmist has said is exaggerated aud untrue. What he saya existed not in reality, but
in his own bewildered imagination. 3. Failure of hope fur the future. What terrible
things he says about death 1 To him the giave is all dark and dreadful. It is "the
pit," a mere charnel-house. Now, the Olii Testament writers, though they had not our
fulness of hope, yet had hope. But in this psalm the writer seems to have lost it.
Perhaps there had been : 4. Neglect of communion with Ood, If we fail here, farewell
to all joy in God, and when trouble comes it finds us all unprepared, and we go down
before it into the depths. 5. Love. For that which touches the beloved touches the
heart that loves. Uhrist loved us intensely, and became of necessity "the Man of
sorrows ; " for he saw and pitied our misery so much that it led him straight to Geth-
semane and the cross. And all love links itself to pain.

III. What to do under such conditions. 1. Inquire of Ood as to the cause of
your trouble, if you do not know what it is. 2. Eumble yourself beneath his hand.
Say over and over again, until your heart assents, " Thy will be done." 3. Get nearer
God than ever. This is what he desires to see you do. 4. Be careful to obey his every
command. 5. Oo and try to comfort other troubled ones. 6. Meditate much upon Ohrisfs
sufferings. Along such channels as these help, peace, rest, relief, will come. — S. C.

Vers. 10 — 12. — Mournful views of death. These verses are by no means the only



w. Lxxxviii. 1— 18.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 233

ones which set forth similar views. Their melaucholy is very profound. See
this in —

I. The DEsoRiPTioN OF THE HABITATION OP THE DEAD. The terms they use are
all sad. As : 1. " The pit" (Ver. 4.) " The lowest pit " (ver. 6). The idea is of a vast
profound subterranean cavern, into which no ray of light entered. Infernal regions
indeed. 2. " Destruction." (Ver. H.) A place where all living powers came to an end,
and death only reigued. ^.''Thedark." (Ver. 12.) And « darkness " (ver. 6). 4. " 7%e
land of forgetfulness" and silence. God had been their Light, their Joy, their Life;
but now they should know him no more. What wonder that they so shrank from
death I

II. The BLEBsmos of which thet webe depkived. The living might rejoice in
them, but never the dead. These blessings were ; 1. Knowledge of God's wonders.
The memory and experience of these were to the living their perpetual gladness ; but
the dead know and can know nothing of them. They are unhappy beings who kuow
aot anything, clean forgotten, out of mind — beings whom God himsulf remembers not.
2. God^s loving-kindness. (Ver. 11.) They had been wont to exclaim, " How excellent
is thy loving-kindness!" to pray that God would " continue" it; to declare that they
would " not conceal" it from all men, that they continually " thought of" it, that it
was "good," that it was "life," yea, "better than life." But now they were shut off
from it altogether. 3. God's "faithfulness." (Ver. 11.) This, too, they were wont
lovingly to extol (of. Pss. xxxvi. 5 ; xl. 10 ; Ixxxix. 1, 5, 8, 24, 33, etc.). But it was
gone from them in the grave. 4. God's righteousness. (Ver. 12.) This had been all
their trust and stay when living, but in the grave they knew it no more.

III. Thbib loss of AMi POWER. 1. They cannot praise God. (Ver. 10.) This
had been their joy on earth. 2. ITiey cannot see. It would be in vain that God's
wonders were displayed before thetn. 3. Tliey cannot hear. Therefore it would be of
no avail to declare God's loving-kindness to them. 4. They cannot know either the
wonders or the righteousness of God. 5. They have no power even tv stand on their
feet. ' Body, mind, and soul all stripped of their former powers. No wonder that
Hezekiah cried, in his dread of death, " The living, the living, he shall praise thee I "
And this was the belief of ajl the saints of the Old Testament.

IV. Questions that aeise fbom the fact of these views about death.
1. Are they true f Certainly not. In no one single particular are they true. The
believer does not after death abide in the grave, nor in <any pit, nor in the land of
destruction, of darkness, and of forgetfulness. He is " with Christ, which is far better "
(see New Testament, passim). 2. Were they ever true f In part they were. Christ
opened the kingdom of heaven to all believers. He was the Forerunner. None entered
into the heavens until Christ, " the Way," first entered. Until then the spirits of the
just were being safely guarded — the rendering (1 Pet. iii. 19) " in prison " is surely a
misleading one, suggesting, as it does, the idea of punishment, whereas the word only
signifies being " watched over," "guarded," " kept" — in the invisible world, in Hades, the
place of departed spirits. They were in an inferior, but not in an unhappy, condition.
It was called by the Jews " Abraham's bosom," " Paradise " (Luke xvi. 23 ; xxiii. 43).
And again and again in the Psalms we have utterances of bright though not definite
hope as to the future (Pss. xi. 7 ; xvi. 8 — 11 ; xvii. 15 ; xlix. 15, etc.). But they had
their seasons of despondency, and then this hope fled away, and they could speak only
as in these verses before us, which are bo very far from the complete truth. Even then,
blessed were the dead who died in the Lord 1 3. Why was omr better, brighter hope
withheld from them, so that they could hold such sad views as these ? The reply is to
be found in God's method of educating the race. Step by step, here a little and there
a little, progressively — such seems to have been the Divine plan. As we educate our
ehildien, so did God educate man (cf. Heb. i. 1). Our Lord taught the people, when he
was here oc earth, " as they were able to bear it." And such seems ever to have been
Cbd's way. It has been suggested (J. A. Proude) that, seeing how Egypt had perverted
the doctrine of a future life, making it the minister of all kinds of wrong, God kept any
clear knowledge of this life from Israel, concentrating their attention upon the present
life and ittt duties by means of present temporal rewards and punishments. It may
have been so; but the question is one beyond our puwer to fully answer. 4. Why it
the better hope given to ust To vindicate God (cf. 1 Cor. xv. 12 — 19). To sustain



234 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. lxxxvih. 1— !&

men's hope. " We are saved by hope." To qujckeii the love and pursuit of believera.
To deliver from the fear of death. AH this our hope does. — S. C.

Ver. 1. — Personal relations with God made a plea. " Lord God of my salvation."
This has heen called " the saddest of all the psalms." But it represents mental rather
than spiritual distress. It belongs to such an age as that of Solomon, and classes with
the Psalms of Asaph, the Book of Ecclesiastes, and the Book of Job. It is a psalm of
Eeman the sage ; but his wisdom is spoiled by the pessimistic view he takes of hit
circumstances and surroundings. The man who believes in God does not see clearly
unless he sees hopefully. Thino;s never can be "going to the had" if God is in them.
Dr. S. Cox calls this psalm, " Heman's Elegy," and he carefully marks its distinguish-
ing feature, and this helpfully aids the pulpit treatment of it. " Its sadness is that of
one who has wearied himself by much study of a lar^^e and varied experience, who has
thought of all things till all things hare grown doubtful to him, till he finds the trail
of the serpent in all the fairest scenes of human life, till he doubts his very doubts.
It is the intellectual sadness of one who, in long brooding over the wrongs and sorrows
of time, the frailty of man, the limitations of hum^n thought, the vanity of the ends
which men commonly pursue, the cravings which importune a satisfaction which they
never find, the mystery by which our being is encompassed, the impenetrability of a
future which nevertheless we must try to penetrate, has lost touch with the warm and
breathing activities of human life, and has sunk towards a pessimistic despair of the
life which now is on the one hand, and, on the other, into a prying and credulous
curiosity as to the conditions of the life which is to come. And that,, happily, is a
misery which is comparatively rare." The point proposed for illustration is the way
in which a personal anchorage of the soul in God may keep it steady under all kinds
of soul-distress, antl even the distress arising from mental perplexity.

I. O0B PEKSONAL RELATIONS WITH GoD MAT BE BECOGNIZED AND FELT. Illustrate

from the expression, " My God," in Ps. xxii. 1, as repeated by the Lord Jesus when on
the cross. See experience of Bible saints.

II. The PERSf)NAL RELATION BBINQS A SENSE OP SEOITBITT, BECAUSE IT IS BASED ON

God's relation to us. We feel him to be our God only because he is graciously
pleased to be our God. " We love him because he first loved us."
IIL The sense of personal relation with God steadies us amid the cHAKaiN-a

SCENES of life.

IV. The sense of personal relation with God keeps oub mind whbk wbestlino

WITH difficulties.

•V, The sense op personal relation with God gives us an unPAiLiNa plea in
SEEKING Divine help. — B. T

Ver. 2. — TTiefear that prayer wiU not he answered. With what historical conditions
nay we faiily associate and illustrate this psalm? Suggest — Uzziah smitten with
leprosy. Jeremiah cast into the dungeon. Hezekiah humbled by sickness. Job
crushed by accumulated suS'erings. Probably the case of Job provides the most
effective and varied illustration. When it pleases God to delay the answer, or to send
the answer in unexpected forms, it is our common temptation to think that he does
not mecm to answer. The plaint of the psalmist is that be " had cried unto God day
and night," and nothing seemed to have come of his crying. Happily this only drives
him the more earnestly to seek an answer. " Oh let my prayer come into thy presence I "
Spurgeon says, " His distress had not blown out the sparks of his prayer, but quickened
them into a greater ardency, till they burned perpetually, like a furnace at full blast."

I. Fear that prater will not be answered mat be reasonable. There may
be good ground for the fear in the character of the prayer itself. 1. Its tone may
indicate that we are not greatly interested in it ourselves. We cannot expect God to
be if we are not. 2. The prayer may have in it no note of submission. God cannot
heed prayer that does not express the cherished feeling, " Not as I will, but as thou
wilt." Delay often means God's waiting until we are in right moods. 3. There may
be in prayer a dictating to God the time and the way in which he shall answer. If so,
and his delay excites fears, those fears are most reasonable.

II. Feab that fbateb will not be answered mat be unbeasonabue. That U



PB. Lxxxviii. 1— 18.J THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 235

God's ways with us, though somewhat strange, may really give no occasion for such
fears. 1. Delay is not refusal. We know that our delay in responding to requests is
not refusal, and we are grieved if it is so taken. But in our case, too often, delayed
answer means neglect, which may be more cruel than refusaL It is full of gracious
assurance that, with God, delay no more means neglect than it means refusal. 2. Delay
may be answer. At least, it may be if we cau see that the moral answers God sends
are always more important than the material. Delay sets us upon thought, self-
searching, clearing oi' ourselves, and makes us at once simpler minded and more
earnest; and that is God's first «o«^aiiswer to our prayer. 3. Delay prepares for
answer. It may be God's time for looking round, so that the answer may be a better
one than he could have sent at once.

III. Fear that prayer will not be answered hat be mrwoRTHV. It will be if
in it there is any cherished doubt of God's power, or wisdom, or williDgDe68 to bless
us.— B. T.

Ver. 3. A soul full of troubles. These plaints are such as could only be uttered by

a diseased man — diseased in body or diseased in mind. The man felt " satiated with
evils." Hezekiah, suffering from his carbuncle, or Job, as he "scraped himself with
his potsherd," might be expected to read life as drearily and despondingly as the
psalmist did. " The psalm accumulates images to describe the pressure of trial upon
the frailty of human nature." Look at some of the troubles,

I. The brevity of human life. That does not impress us so much when the aged
are taken away, because we have become familiar with seventy as man's allotted
years ; and the aged seem to have completed their time, and rounded off their lives.
Nor does it impress us when young children die, because we have become familiar
nrith the perils of infancy. We feel it most when men are taken away in the "midst
of their days." Hezekiah, smitten in the prime of life, wails over the brevity of life,
saying, " I said, in the cutting off of my day, I shall go to the gates of the grave ; I am
deprived of the residue of my years. Mine age is departed, and is removed from me
as a shepherd's tent. I have cut off like a weaver my life." See the similar plaints
of Job. The corrective of this trouble is to measure life by deeds, not by years. He
lives long who does much.

II. Loss OF BODILY AND MENTAL STRENGTH. "I am as a man that hath do
strength." Perhaps there is nothing harder for active-minded, energetic men to
endure than conscious weakness. To many persons mental depression, resulting
simply from lowered vitality, is the supreme distress. Yet in these days the human
trial often takes this form. It is a triumph of grace to hold fast integrity even when
the very mind is clouded with weakness, and " like a mist our vigour flees away,"
until all that remains to us is " a fragile form, fast hasting to decay.' The corrective
is to see that even weakness is in the list of God's disciplinary agents.

III. Separation prom ordinary duties and relations. From ver. 8 we gather
that this was complicated by the fact that disease had taken offensive forms ; and this
brings to view the very marked and distressing features of Job's disease. No one can
fail to feel it hard to retire from loved scenes and associations, and to loose out of hand
loved duties. We think that no one can do them but ourselves, and no one can be to
our friends what we were. The corrective is to remember that God may provide rest-
times for his servants ; but he never bids them put their tools down, once for all, until
he knows that their work is done; and then no true-hearted man could wish to stay.
It may come to be the form of our final struggle with self, that we are called to give
np life's duties and life's relations at God's bidding. There is possible triumph even
over soul-troubles. — R. T.

Ver. 7. — Affliction conceived tu Divine wrath. " Thy wrath lieth hard upon me."
The word '' wrath " has now such meanings and suggestions for us, that it cannot be
wisely applied to God. The Prayer-book Version reads, " Thine indignation lieth
hard upon me, and thou hast vexed me with all thy storms." The word " indigna-
tion " better suggests official feeling in response to wrong-doing. " Wrath " suggests
personal feeling. It would be well, however, if we could keep " wrath " as the special
term to indicate the response of God to u an's sin. " He is angry with," wrathful



23« THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [ps. lxxxviii. 1— 18

towards, "the wicked every day.'' Perovvne translates by a very unsuitable word,
" Upon me thj/ury lieth hard." In his moments of deepest depression the man of
God ought not to associate /ury with his God, because it indicates feeling that is
beyond control, passion ; and we may never think of God as having lost self-control.
It must be borne in mind that we have in this psalm passionate utterances, not calm
and sober judgments. These are not the quiet, settled opinions of the psalmist ; they
are only passing feelings, belonging to a time of strain. They are his "infirmity."
Two things lead him to think and speak thus.

I. The bekse of bin makes affliction seem like Divine wbatb. When the son
of the widow of Zarephnth died, she rushed into the presence of Elijah, saying, "0
thou man of God, art thou come unto me to call my sin to remembrance, and to slay
my son ? " Her feeling is that which comes to us all in times of affliction. We ask
what we can have done to need thin visitation of Divine wrath. The Jews were sure
that either the man born blind or his parents must have sinned. The friends of Job
could find no explanation of Job's afflictions, save that he had come under the wrath
of God for some special sin. The Book of Job is written to show that this may be the
explanation of suffering, and it may not be. All through life, and often very painfully
at the close of life, the sense of sin embitters trial and suffeiing. Our relief comes
from feeling that all God's "wrath," shown in the afflictions of his people, is
disciplinary and corrective (see Heb. xii. 5 — 11).

II. The special fobms afflictiok sometimes takes compel us to think thet
ABE BiaNS OF Divine wbath. It is not so much their intensity as it is their special
character. Some kinds of affliction are specially distressing ; they are unsightly, or
offensive, or disgraceful. This is hinted at in the psalm. Even relatives shrank from
the sufferer. Take the case of Job. This was the bitterest feature of his trouble
Illustrate from such disease as leprosy, or from offensive forms of skin-disease.
Surely some special " wrath " in God must appoint us such a lot. And yet the truth
may be that this is but a burden of love. We are only being shown " how great
things we may be able to suffer for his Name's sake." — E. T.

Ver. 10. — Peerings into the futwe. "Wilt thou show wonders unto the dead?"
" It is both curious and instructive to mark how, throughout the psalm, whether it is
his own infirmity which he bewails, or the loss of friends, the mind of this wise man is
straining toward the great darkness in which so many of his lovers and companions
have been swallowed up, and into which he is himself about to pass. He is for ever
speculating on the physical and moral conditions of the world which lies in or beyond
that darkness. He cannot get away from the theme. Ho is for ever fingering it, and
returning to it." "He was for ever asking — Is the life beyond death a true life? is it
a life worth living? Will it redress the wrongs of time, and vindicate the ways of
God with men? Is the world to come a world of righteousness and charity and peace,
in which Truth will lift her veil, and all alienations and enmities will be swallowed up
in love?" Peerings into the future are natural; they may be healthy, they may be
unhealthy ; they depend very much on personal disposition, and quite as much on
particular circumstances. Concerning the future, enough is known to prove a constant
incentive to moral goodness ; so much is unknown that faith may be kept in lively
exercise. These points may be illustrated.

L Feebinob into the futube ABE NATUBAL. Man has never been able to accept
the idea that his life ends at death. Heathen and pagan religions meet the cry for
light on the world beyond death. Our friends die, but we cannot think them lost.
So many die young, just fitted fur life ; there must he life for them beyond. We must
die, but we cannot admit the idea that our real life ends at death. We are consciously
fitted, by our earth-life, for something more.

II. Peebinqs into the futube mat be HEALTHY. They will be if they bring •
vivid sense of the relation of the coming life to this life. If we see that the powers of
that life are the powers gained in this.

III. Peeeingb into the futube mat be ukhealtht. They will be if they become
time-consuming, vague, impractical speculations, which fritter away the powers of the
soul, and make present duties seem dull. The sitting in a window-seat and dreamily
peering into the west may be all veiy well, supposing the dreamer has got no house-



w. Lxxxvm. 1— 18.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 237

work to do. She would be wise to do her duty and leave the future alone. Unhealthy
speculation on the future is a modern religious epidemic, seriously injuring the vitality
of our Churches.

IV. Pbekinqs into the future depend on disposition and ciboumstanoe.
Some are speculative ; they cannot live in the actual, they are always imagining the
possible. They are always away yonder. No doubt they have their mission ; but we
are glad not to have too many of them, or the work of to-day would never get done.
When men are in illness, or at gravesides, or set thinking by national calamities, then
" peaiings into the future" are befitting, and may be helpful things. — B. T.

Ver. 13. — Prayer getting in front of Ood. " In the morning shall my prayer prevent
thee." The idea is a singular one, based upon the older meaning of the word
" prevent." Thinking of God under the figure of an earthly King, he conceives of
himself as a petitioner who is so intense in his desire that he reaches the palace gate
before the King is up. His prayer is there before the King is. To " prevent " now
means to "hinder." In older days it simply meant to "go before," to "anticipate."
The word is never used in the sense of " hinder," either in the Bible, as we have it, or
in the books of the age in which it was translated. But it should further be observed
that getting up very early in the morning to do a thing is a frequent Bible figure for
loing a thing earnestly, doing it with all your heart. It is still true of us that if we
are thoroughly in earnest about a matter, we can easily get up early in the moruiug
to attend to it. So this figure of the psalmist does but express his intense earnestness
in prayer, the fervency of his desire, his almost passionate waiting on God, that
makes him feel as if he could get before God, as if he could be there to plead before
Gk)d was there to hear. It can be but a figure of man's feeling. He never can be
ready before God is ; he cannot get before God. Man is always second in prayer ; God
ia always first in waiting to receive prayer.

I. Man tbinking he can bb fibst with God. He can get before his fellow-man,
and ask what his fellow has not thought about, and is not quite prepared to give.
And so, in bis intensity, man thinks he can even be first with God ; he thinks he can
ask what God has not thought about. He can tell God something. God does indeed
gently and graciously deal with impetuous and Impulsive souls, and let them freely
speak out all their hearts, and even think they have informed him a great deal. He
loves our confidences, even if they are intense ; but he must often smile as the mother
smiles on her impetuous boy, who tells her, as if it was something quite. new, what
she has suspected or known for a long time. But the earnestness that tries to be first
with God cannot fail to be acceptable to him.

II. Man finding out that God is always fibst with him. It comes to us
occasionally as a great surprise, that what we have asked God about so intensely, he
has been a long while attending to. He knew our need before we felt it, and let it
take shape as prayer. And that is one of the most important blessings that follow
prayer. Asking God's help in some things, we find out that God's help has all tlie
while been in everything, — R. T.

Ver. 14. — OocPs hidden face. "Why hidest thou thy face from me?" The
shinings, or the hidings, of the face are frequently referred to in the Psalms. Masters
and kings in the East show their dignity by speaking as little as possible. They
convey their wishes, and express their feelings, by their looks, or by simple movements
of their hands. So their servants and their courtiers anxiously watch their faces, to
see in them signs of approval, acceptance, and favour. If the king does not look at
them, turns his face away, hides his face from them, they know that they are out of
his favour; they fear that some mischief will befall them. And so, if a man brings
a petition to a king, it is enough answer if the king simply turns his face away, hides
his face; that ia a virtual refusal. Compare such poetical expressions as "Make thy
face to shine upon thy servants ; " " Lift up the light of thy countenance upon us ; "
" Why hidest thou thyself in times of trouble ? " " Verily thou art a God that hidcst
thyself."

I. God's hidings abe never mere acts of sovereignty. A thoughtful writer
says, "I know that some have maintained that God sometimes forsakes his people ia



238



THE BOOK OF PSALMS.



[ps. Lxxxix. 1 — 52.



tlio exercise of his sovereignty. I confess I do not understand this. It appears to me
that undue and unwarrantable liberties are often used with the sovereignty of God,
and that many things are laid to its account with which it is not chargeable. _We
speak of the Divine sovereignty. But sovereignty is not an arbitrary, capricious
thing; it is a righteous and holy thing; and God must ever act in conformity with
the unalterable principles of his character. Believe it, there is no such mystery as
some would make us think in those temporary desertions with which God sometimes
visits his own people. The reason of them is to he found in themselves — in their
sinfulness, in their unsteadfastness, in their unfaithfulness."

II. God's hidings are always expressions op Divine wisdom. They are spcial
modes of dealing, arranged in precise adaptation to particular persons, at particular
times, and under particular circumstances. Comfort lies in clearly seeing that God's
hidings are not common and usual dealings, and therefore if God deals thus with us, it
must be in wise and gracious adaptation /ust to us.

III. God's hidings are the BBoiNNiNas of his answers to ns. This may be
effectively illustrated by our Lord's treatment of the Syro-phosnician woman. He began
his answer by seeming indifference, and even seeming refusal, which drew forth her
noble intensity. — R. T.

Vers. 1 — 18. — Light in the darkness. This is the darkest, saddest psalm of all the
Psalms.

L A PICTURE OF THE MOST DESPAIRING MISERY. Scarcely possible to think that
such unalleviated misery ever existed. 1. Utter physical and mental weakness and
prostration. (Ver. 6.) As good as dead. 2. Utterly forsaken of all his friends.
(Vers. 8, 18.) And God had put them from him. 3. Cast off from Ood, by reason of
his wrath. (Vers. 7, 14, 15, 16.) He is abandoned utterly both of God and man ; i.e.
he thought so. But no one really is. 4. This misery had heen nearly lifeUmg.
(Ver. 13.)

II. BeBOIiUTE prater IS THE LAST REBODRCE OF THE PBOFOUKDLT MISERABLE.

1. His prayer was persistent. (Vers. 1, 13.) Day and night, morning and evening.

2. He makes the greatness of his affliction an argument for being heard. (Vers. 2, 3.)

3. He prays to know the "why" of Ood's wrath towards him. (Ver. 14.) The
affliction is a mystery the reason of which he would have made clear. He makes no
confession of sin as explaining the terrors of God from which he is suffering.

III. Some gleams of faith and hope breaking through the darkness of his
DESPAIR. 1. Ood is the Ood of his salvation. (Ver. 1.) Notwithstanding all he says
of his abandonment. 2. Ood is worthy of praise for his loving-kindness and faithfulness.
(Vers. 10, 11.) He could still believe in these. 3. He prays for the righteousness of
Ood to he manifested to him. (Ver. 12.) He cannot help uttering these deep-grounded
faiths that made him still cling to God in the most despairing moments. None can
abandon themselves to utter despair who have seen God in Christ as the Father. — S.



EXPOSITION.



PSALM LXXXIX.



At first sight, a psalm of praise ; but, in
reality, one of expostulation and complaint.
1'lie praises of God are sung in the opening
Stotion (vers. 1 — 37); they culminated in
tlie Davidical covenant. But this covenant
has been " made void," annulled. The
existino; state of things is directly contrary
to all its promises (vers. 38 — 45). How long
is this to continue ? Does not God's faith-
fnlness require the deliverance of Israel
and of the Davidical house from tlieir



calamities, and their speedy restoration to
his favour (vers. 46 — 51)?

Yer. 52 is no part of the psalm, but the
doxology which concludes the Book.

Vers. 1 — 4 are introductory to the first
section (vers. 1 — 37). They strike the key-
note, which is, first, praise of God's faith-
fulness generally (vers. 1, 2), and secondly,
praise of him in respect of the Davidical
covenant (vers. 3, 4).

Yer. 1. — ^I will sing of the mercies of the
Lord (or ever. " Fur ever ' ' is the emphatic



PB. LXXXIX. 1—52.]



THE BOOK OF PSALMa



239



phrasa The psalmist will oommemorate
God's meroies, not only lihen tliey are
oontinniug, but always. With my month
will I make knovn thy faithfnlness to all
generations ; literally, to generation and
generation.

Yer. 2. — For I have said, Uercy shall be
bnilt up for ever. A time shall come when,
out of whatever ruins, mercy shall be " built
up" — raised from the ground like a solid
edifice, and, when once raised up, shall
stand firm for ever. Thy faithfulness shalt
thou establish in the very heavens. At the
same time, God's faithfulness to hisjpromises
will be establialied " in the very heavens,"
i.e. conspicuously (see ver. 37).

Ver. 3. — I have made a covenant with my
chosen. There is an ellipse of "for tliou
hast said," which Professor Cheyne supplies.
God's promise to David is the entire founda-
tion of the psalmist's hope and conhdeiice.
He therefore jilaoes it briefly in tlie very
forefront — afterwards expanding it into the
beautiful passage, which forms more than
one-third of the entire composition (vers.
19— b7). 1 have sworn unto David my
servant (comp. 2 Sam. vii. 11 — 16; Fs.
cxxxii. 11).

Yer. 4. — ^Thy seed will I establish for
ever (see 2 Sam. vii 12, 13 ; Fs. cxxx. 12).
And build np thy throne to all generations.
The promises to David were not fulfilled in
the letter. After Zerubbabel, no prince of
the Davidio house sat on the throne of
David, or had temporal sway over IsraeL
The descendants of ^avid sank into ob-
scurity, and BO remained for five centuries.
Still, liowever, God's faithfulness was sure.
In Jesus Christ, of the seed of David, the
true King of the everlasting kingdom was
rai.-ed up — every pledge maile to David was
fulfilled. "Messiah the Frince," eternal
King of an eternal kingdom, appeared as
the true "Seed" intended, and began his
spiritual reign over the spiritual Israel,
which still continues, and will continue for



Vers. 5 — 37. — The psalmist carries out the
intention proclaimed in ver. 1, and proceeds
to "sing of the mercies of the Lord" at
great length. His song of praise divides
into two portions. From ver. fi to ver. 18
it is a general laudation of the Almiglity
for his greatness in heaven (vers. S — ^7), in
nature (vers. 9, 11, 12), and in the course of
his rule on earth (vers. 10, 13—18), after
which it passes into a laudation of him in
respect of what he had doue, and what he
had promised, to David (vers. 19 — 37).

Yer. 5. — And the heavens shall praise thy



wonders, Lord. " The heavens " here are
not the material heavens, as in Ps. xix. 1,
but the company of the dwellers in heaven.
God's praise fittingly begins with them.
Thy faithfulness also in the congregation of
the saints. The "congregation of the
saints" is the company of angels (oomp.
Job v. 1 ; XT. 15). Not on earth only
(Vers. 1,2), but in heaven also, God's " faith-
fulness " is the theme of song.

Yer. 6. — For who in the heaven can be
compared unto the Lord! God's angels
praise him, and only liim; since there is
none in heaven or earth to be compaied to
him. Who among tha sons of the mighty
can be likened unto the lord? "Tlie sons
of the mighty " are the angels (couip. Pa.
xxix. 1).

Yer. 7. — God is greatly to ba feared in
the assembly of the saints ; rather, in the
council of the holy ones (see the Revised
Yersiou). And to be had in reverence of
all them that are about him; or, abooe all
them, etc.

Ver. 8. — Lord God of hosts ; i.e. God of
the angelic hosts just spoken of. Who is a
strong Lord like unto thee ? rather. Who ii
strong like unto thee, O Jah 1 (comp. Exod.
XV. 11). Or to thy faithfulness round about
theel rather, as in the KeTiued Version,
and thy faithfulness it round about thee. It
has been said that " the two words ' mer-
cies ' and ' faithfulness ' are the refrain
of the psalm." The latter occurs six times
(vers. 1, 2, 5, 8, 24, 33), and " faithful " in
ver. 37.

Yer. 9.— Thou rulest the raging of the
sea. There is no reason why this should
not be understooB literally. God's power
over the sea is constantly put forward by
the sacred writers as very specially indi-
cative of his might and greatness (oomp.
Job xxxviii. 8—11; Ps. ovii.29; Prov. viii.
29; Jer. v. 22, etc.). When the waves
thereof arise, thou stillest them (comp. Pss.
Ixv. 7 ; ovii. 23—30 ; Matt. viii. 26, 27).

Yer. 10. — Thou hast broken Bahab in
pieces ; or, " thou didst break " once upon a
time, i.e. at the Exodus. (For the designa-
tion of Egypt under the term " Bahab," i.e.
"arrogant," see Job ix. 13; xxvi. 12;
Ps. Ixxxvii. 4 ; Isa. li. 9.) As one that is
slain; i.e. completely, utterly. Thou hast
scattered thine enemies with thy strong
arm (see Exod. xiv. 27—31 ; xv. 6).

Yer. 11.— The heavens are thine (comp.
Pad. viii. 3; xxxiii. 6; cxv. 16). The earth
also is thine (see Ps. xxiv. 1). As for the
world and the fulness thereof, thou hast
founded them (see Pa 1. 12).

Yer. 12.— The north and the south thou
hast created them : Tabor and Eermon shall
rejoice in thy Name, As in ver. 11 " heaven
and earth " stand lor all creation, the whole



240



THE BOOK OP rSALMS.



[ps. Lzxxix. 1 — 52,



of the material universe, bo here the fonr
points of the compass designate the same.
Tabor and Hermon undoubtedly represent
the west and tlie east. They present them-
selves to the poet's mind as standing over
against each other, one on this side, and the
other on that side, of Jordan.

Ver. 13. — Then hast a mighty arm ; lite-
rally, an arm v/ith might. Strong is thy
hand, and high is thy right hand. These
anthropomorphisms will disturb no one ;
they pervade the whole of Siripture.

Ver. 14. — Justice and judgment; oi,Hght-
eouBHesa and justice (01 ley ne). The psalm ist
here rises to a higher level — from that of
might to that of right. God is not merely
strong to do whatever he wills ; but all that
he wills is consonant with ri^ht and justice.
Are the habitation of thy throne ; rather,
the basis, or ''foundation." (So Kay.Clieyue,
and the Bevised Version.) Mercy and truth
shall go before thy face ; i.e. shall stand ever
in frout of thee; be thy inseparable com-
panions. Whatever thou doest ihall be
done " in truth and equity."

Ver. 15. — Blessed is the people that know
the joyful sound. The sound of devotional
joy appears to be intended — the sound
which went up from the sanctuary in the
great festival-times (see Numb. z. 1, 9 ; Lev.
XXV. 9; PdS. xxvii. 6; Ixxxi. 1, etc.). They
shall walk, Lord, in the light of thy
countenance. Herein consists especially
their blessedness (comp. Ps. iv. 6).

Ver. 16. — In thy Name shall they rejoice
all the day : and in thy righteousness shall
they be exalted. The "Name" ami the
" righteousness " of God form the glory of
the Church, and are a perpetual source of
rejoicing to her.

Ver. 17. — For thou art the Glory of their
strength; or, "the Ornament" — that in
which their strength and might as a people
culminate. And in thy favour our horn
shall be exalted. Thy favour towards us
exalts U3 among the nations.

Ver. 18. — For the Lord is out Defence;
and the Holy One of Israel is our King;
literally, /or to Jehovah belongs our shield,
and to the Holy One of Israel belongs our king.
The meaning seems to be that he who is
Israel's king and shield — i.e. the Davidical
monarch at the time — being under the
constant protection of the Almighty, all
must necessarily go well with the people at
last.

Ver. 19. — Then thou spakest; rather,
once, or "once upon a time," as Professor
Cheyne suggests. The allusion is to the
occurrence related in 2 Sam. vii. 4 — 17.
In vision (see 2 Sam. vii. 7). To thy holy
one; i.e. to Nathan the prophet. And
saidst. The psalmist reports the words of
the vision very freely, interweaving with



them thoughts drawn from various psalms;
expanding tliem, and sometimes heightening
the colours. I have laid help upon one that
is mighty ; I have exalted one chosen out of
the people (comp. 1 Sam. xvi. 1 — 13).
David was " mighty" from his youth — even
before he slew Goliath, as appears from his
slaughter of the lion and the bear (1 Sam.
xvii. ;i4— 36).

Ver. 20. — I have found David my servant
(comp. 1 Saiu. xvi. 1 ; Acts xiii. 22). With
my holy oil have I anointed him (see 1 Sam.
xvi. 13)

Ver. 21. — With whom my hand shall be
established ; i.e. " to whom I will give con-
tinual support " (see 1 Sam. xviii. 12, 14;
2 Sam. V. 10; vii. 9). Mine arm also shall
strengthen him (comp. ver. 13).

Ver. 22. — The enemy shall not exact upon
him ; nor the son of wickedness afflict him
(see 2 Sam. vii. 10, which has supplied the
very words of the second clause).

Ver. 23. — And I will beat down his foee
before his face, and plague them that hate
him (comp. 2 Sam. vii. 9).

Ver. 24.— But my faithfttlness and my
mercy shall be with him (oomp. Ps. Ixi. 7).
And in my Name shall his horn be exalted
(see 2 Sam. vii. 9).

Ver. 25. — I will set his hand also in the
sea, and his right hand in the rivers (comp.
Ps. Ixxii 8). " The sea " is probably the
Mediterranean, and " the rivers " the
Euphrates, with its canals and affluents
(see 1 Kings iv. 21, 24; Ps. oxxxvii. 1).
The promise of an extended dominion is
implied in 2 Sam. vii. 9.

Ver. 26. — He shall cry unto me, Thou art
my Father (comp. 2 Sam. vii. 14). My Qod,
and the Eook of my salvation (see 2 Sam.
xxii. 2, 3, 47).

Ver. 27. — Also I will make him my first-
born. There is but one true " Firstborn "
— " the Only Begotten of the Father." All
other so-called " firstborns " — as Israel
(Bxod. iv. 22), Bphraim (Jer. xxxi. 9),
David — are reflections or representatives,
in some way or other, of the real and only
true " Firstborn." ffigher than the kings
of the earth ; literally, the most high abova
the kings of the earth ; i.e. standing to the
other " kings of the earth " as " the Most
High " to bis angelic ministers.

Ver. 28. — My mercy will I keep for him for
evermore (oomp. 2 Sam. vii. 15, " My mercy
shall not depart away from him"). And
my covenant shall stand fast with him (see
2 Sam. vii. 16 ; xxiii. 5).

Ver. 29. — His seed also will I make to
endure for ever (comp. 2 Sam. vii. 16,
"Thine house and thy kingdom shall be
established for ever before me "). And his
throne as the days of heaven. " Thy throne
shall be established for ever ; " "I will



"S. Lxxxtx. 1 — 52,]



THE BOOK OP PSALMS.



241



establish his kingdom" (2 Sam. vii 12,
16)

Ver. 30. — ^If his children forsake my Law,
and walk not in my judgments (oornp. 2
Sam. vii. 14, "If lie commit iniquity, I
will chasten him with the rod of men ").
Solomun himself began the falling away
(1 Kings xi. 1 — 8). He was followed by
Behoboam (2 Chron. xii. 1), Ahaziah (2
Kings viii. 27), Joash (2 Ohron. ixiv. 17 —
24), Uzziah (2 Ohron. xxvi. 16—20), Ahaz
(2 Kings xyi. 2—18), Manasseh (2 Kings
xxi. 2—16), Amon (2 Kings xxi. 20—22),
Jehoahaz (2 Kings xziii. 32), Jehoiakim
(2 Kings xxiii. 37), JehoiacMn (2 Kings
xxiv. 9), and Zedekiah (2 Kings xziv. 19),
all of whom " did evil in the sight of the
Lord " — forsook his Law, and walked not in
hisjndgments.

Ver. 81. — If they break my statutes, and
keep not my commandments; rather, if they
profane my itatute$ ; i.e. make light of them,
either in their words or in their lives.

Ver. 32.— Then will I visit their trans-
gressions with the rod (comp. 2 Sam. vii.
14). " The rod " was used npon Solomon
(1 Kings xi. 14 — 40), Behoboam (1 Kings
zii 16—20), Ahaziah (2 Kings ix. 27),
Joash (2 Kings xii. 17—20), and all the
wicked descendants of David, as sufficiently
appears from the history of the divided
mngdom in Kings and Chronicles. God
visited their iniquity with stripes time after
time, and generation after generation.

Ver. 33. — Nevertheless my loving-kindness
will I not utterly take from him, nor suffer
my foithfnlness to fail. Compare the
original promise (2 Sam. vii. 15) ; and see
also 1 Kings xi. 12, 13, 34—39; xv. 4^ 5,
etc. The seed of David was not allowed to
fail, bat was continued on, until, in the
fulness of time, there was born into the
world, of David's seed and in David's city,
One in whom all the promises made to
David could be, and were, accomplished in
their utmost fulness.

Yer. 34. — My covenant will I not break,
nor alter the thing that is gone out of my
lips (comp. ver. 28, and the comment ad
loo.). With God is " no variableness, neither
shadow of turning " (Jas. i. 17).

Ver. 35. — Once have I sworn by my holi-
ness ; rather, one thing have I sworn. (On
God's oath to David, see vers. 3, 49, and Ps.
cxxxii. 11.) The present passage shows that
it was sworn " by his holiness " — t.e. by his
absolute moral perfection. That I will not
lie unto David ; {.e. that I will keep all my
promises to him. God, no doubt, always
and in every case " keepeth his promise for
ever " (Ps. oxlvi. 6) ; but in his mercy and
loving-kindness he condescended to give
David a special guarantee of his faithfulness
(n respect of the promises made to him.
PSALMS. — II.



Ver. 36. — His seed shall endure for ever
(comp. ver. 29). And his throne as the sun
before me; i.e. shall endure as the sun
(comp. Ps. Ixxii. 5 and 2 Sam. vii. 13).

Ver. 37. — It shall be established for ever
as the moon (comp. Ps. Ixxii. 7). And as a
faithful witness in heaven. Some under-
stand this expression of the moon; but, as
Professor Cheyne comments, "Who could
witnesii (or declare) that such great things
were true but Jehovah ? " (So too Delitzsch,
Kay, and Canon Cook.) If this be regarded
as the true meaning, it will be better to
translate, " the true witness." Job's citation
of God as his witness (ch. xvi. 19) is scarcely
parallel.

Vers. 38 — 45. — A sudden and complete
change here sets in. Bejoioing is turned
into mourning, eulogy into complaint. Not-
withstanding all the promises of God, not-
withstanding his inherent and essential
" faithfulness," the Davidical king and his
kingdom are at the last gasp. Seemingly,
every promise made has been broken, every
hope held out of good turned into an actuality
of eviL God is wroth with his anointed, has
made void the covenant with him, profaned
his crown and cast it to the ground, turned
the edge of his sword, and made him not to
stand in the battle; he has laid his land
open to the enemy, broken down its defences,
brought its strongholds to ruin, given it as
a spoil to all who pass by ; he has set up the
right hand of Israel's adversaries, caused
them to rejoice and triumph in Israel's dis-
grace and suffering; he has covered the
king with shame, and cut short the days
of his youth. How is this ? And what is
to be the end of it ?

Ver. 38. — But thou hast cast off and ab-
korred, thou hast been wroth with thine
anointed. The first " thou " is emphatic —
nriN, THOU, " the faithful Witness ; " thou,
who hast made all these promises, art the
very One who has falsified them all — who
hast "been wroth with thine anointed,"
abhorred (or rejected) him, and cast him off.

Ver. 39 Thou hast made void the cove-
nant of thy servant ; or, " abhorred "
(Cheyne, Bevised Version). The verb is a
very unusual one, occurring only here and
in Lam. ii. 7. Thou hast profaned his
crown by casting it to the ground (comp.
Pd. Ixxiv. 7). Tlie theocratic crown was so
holy a thing, that any degradation of it
might be regaided as a " profanation."

Ver. 40. — Thou hast broken down all his
hedges ; i.e. " all his defences " — the strong-

B



242



THE BOOK OF PSALMS.



[ps. Lxxxix. 1 — 52.



holds, that guarded the frontierB of the land,
were brought to ruin (comp. 2 Chron. xi.
5—10).

Ver. 41. — ^All that pass by the way spoil
him. This feature of the situation recalls
2 Kings xxir. 2, but might, no doubt, suit
also other times of distress. He is a reproach
to his neighbours; or, "he ta became a re-
proach " (comp. Neh. i. 3 ; ii. 17 ; Pss. xliv.
13 ; Ixxix. 4, etc.).

Yer. 42. — Thou hast set np the right hand
of his adversaries ; t'.e. " thou hast increased
their power and strength, exalted them, and
depressed him." Thou hast made all his
enemies to rejoioe (oomp. Ps. xxxt. 15,
" In mine adversity they rejoiced ; " and see
also Micah vii. 8; Chad. 10—12). Every
depression of Israel caused the neighbouring
nations, who alike feared them and detested
them, to rejoice.

Yer. 43. — Thou hast also turned the edge
of his sword ; literally, the rock of his sword.
It is not quite clear whether a "blunting of
the sword," or a " turning to flight of tliose
who drew the sword," is intended. In
either case the phrase implies military dis-
aster. And hast not made him to stand in
the battle; i.e. "hast caused him to give
way before his enemies." The words imply
defeat in the open field.

Yer. 44. — Thou hast made his glory to
oease ; literally, thou hast put an end to his
brightness; but the meaning is that given
in the text. And oast his throne down to
the ground (comp. ver. 39).

Yer. 45. — The days of his youth hast thou
shortened. This does not seem to mean an
actual cutting short by death (since the
Davidical king has beeu spuken of as alive
in vera. 38, 41, 43), but rather a cutting
short of youthful energy and vigour, a pre-
mature senescence, such as may well have
tallen upon Jehoiachin or Zedekiah. Thou
hast covered him with shame ; or, " heaped
siiamu upon him" — "covered liim up with
shame." Tiie phrase wuuld suit Jehoiachin,
who was kept in prison by Kebuchadnezzar,
and in " prison garments " (2 Kings xxv. 29),
for the space of thirty-five years.

Yers. 46 — 51. — The psalm ends with an
appeal to God — " How long " is the present
state of things to continue ? How long is
God's wrath to endure ? Will he not remem-
ber how weak and futile, how short-lived and
fleeting, the whole race of man is ? Will he
not bethink him uf his old lovlng-kiaJnesses
to David, and of the promises made to him,
and confirmed by oatli I Will he not there-
tore remove their reproach fi;om Israel, and



especially firom his anointed, on whom the
disgrace chiefly falls? To these questions
there can be but one answer. God will
assuredly make his faithfulness known (see
ver. 1>

Yer. 46. — How long, Lordi wilt thonhide
thyself for ever % (comp. Pss. xiii. 1 ; Ixxiv.
10; Ixxix. 5). Shall thy wrath bum like
fire ? i.e. furiously, without cessation, till all
be consumed.

Yer. 47. — ^Remember how short my time
is. Consider how short-lived is the whole
race of men. Come, therefore, to our deliver-
ance quickly. Wherefore hast thou made
all men in vain! literally, /or what vanity
thou hast made all the sons of men. Another
point suggested for God's consideration, as
fitted to call forth his compassion.

Yer. 48. — What man is he that liveth,
and shall not see death 1 Shall he deliver
his soul from the hand of the gravel An
expausion of the first clause of ver. 47.
Man's littleness, feebleness, and fleetingness
should draw forth the pity and loving-
kindness of God.

Ver. 49. — Lord, where are thy former
loving-kindnesses 1 or, "thy ancient mercies,"
those "sure mercies of David," whereof
Isaiah spoke (ch. Iv. 3). Which thou
swarest unto David in tiiy truth (comp.
ver. 35 and Ps. cxxxiLll).

Yer. 50. — Remember, Lord, the reproaoh
of thy servants; i.e. the reproach under
which all thy people lie so long as their
enemies are allowed to plunder and oppress
them at their pleasure (see vers. 40 — 44).
Bemember also how I do bear in my bosom
the reproach of all the mighty people. The
reproach under which his countrymen lie —
a reproaoh laid on them by "all the mighty
people " among whom they dwell — falls on
the psalmist's heart with especial weight
through his deep sympathy with all of
them.

Ver. 51. — Wherewith thine enemies have
reproached, Lord; wherewith they have
reproached the footsteps of thine anointed.
The reproach which rests upon the people
rests no less upon their king — upon his
"footsteps," his movements, all that he
does, " every step he takes " (Bishop
Perowne). This is an additional afiSiction
to the psalmist, and emphasizes his last cry
to God for mercy.

Yer. 52 — Blessed be the Lord for ever-
more. Amen, and Amen. This detached
verse, not necessarily from the same hand
as the rest of the psalm, winds up, with the
usual refrain, the Third Book.



PS. Lxxxix. 1— 52.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 243



H0MILETIC8.

Ver. 7. — The f tar of God. "God is greatly to be feared," eto. True religion
contains three indispensable elements — right beliefs concerning God; right feelings;
right conduct. If either be deficient, our religion will be proportionately injured or
worthless. Religion without faith is impossible. Religion without morality is a
mockery. Religion without feeling is lifeless and powerless. Preaching commonly
deals more with faith and duty than with feeling — i.e. affection, desire, emotion — for
two reasons : (1) Faith and duty supply the motives to feeling ; faith works by love.
(2) If we concentrate too much attention on our feelings, and cultivate them for their
own sake, they grow morbid or exaggerated. Yet this vast region of Christian experi-
ence is far too important to be left unexplored, uncultivated. The affection referred
to here is often spoken of in Scripture as synonymous with true religion — the fear of
God. Consider (1) its nature ; (2) its motives.

L Its natukb. 1. It is not terror ; the fear which " hath torment," which " perfect
love casteth out " (1 John iv. 18). Terror would drive us from God ; the fear the
Bible teaches begets trust, and draws us near to him (Pss. oxv. 11 ; xxii. 23 ; xxv.
14, etc.). Ungodly men, in the presence of sudden danger or impending death, often
pass in a moment from impious carelessness or defiant blasphemy to abject terror ; but
there is no more religion in the latter than in the former. 2. It is not a passing feeling,
hit a permanent hMt of mind. It is central and fundamental ; for without it love,
trust, gratitude, hope, obedience, would lack their truly religious character. Yet we
cannot sum it up in any single, simple phrase. It is the temper which prompts and
inspires worship (Fs. xcv. 6). It is awe of God's greatness, reverence of his majesty.
It is reverence for his authority, prompting obedience to his Law, submission to his
will. It is sensitiveness to his praise and blame, making the thought of displeasing
him intolerable. There is in it ever some mingling of that sort of terror with which
we contemplate tremendous power or awful danger, though in safety ; the precipice
over which we nearly fell ; the avalanche that swept by without touching us ; the
storm in which our &ail boat would have been wrecked had we not come ashore in
time (Luke xii. 5).

IL lis MOTIVES. 1. The revelation of God's omnipotence, omnipresence, infinite
wisdom, eternal being in the vastaess, order, variety, unity, of the universe (Ps. viii.
3, 4). 2. Our personal relation as creatures to our Creator (Acts xvii. 28). By
" saints " (" holy ones ") angels may here be meant ; they share with us this awful,
incomprehensible, ineffably intimate relation to God. 3. G^d's holiness, in itself and
in contrast with our selfishness (comp. Exod. iii. 5). 4. Gud's goodness and mercy
(see Hos. iii. 5, where Revised Yersion is a paraphrase. Authorized Version more
literal ; Jer. xxxiii. 9). Our Saviour's presence, gracious as it was, inspired intense awe
(Luke V. 8).

In former times, harsh and terrible views of God were often preached, out of all
harmony with not only New Testament, but Old Testament teaching (1 John iv. 8 ;
Exod. xxxiv. 6). At present an exaggerated reaction tends to thrust out of view the
awe-inspiring teaching of both Law and gospel as to the evil of sin and its penalties,
and to lose sight, in curious speculation about the nature and duration of future punish-
ment, of the two most important facts — ^its certainty, and its righteous severity (Rom.
i. 18j ii. 4— 12).

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Vers. 1, 2, 5, 8, etc. — Ood's faithfulness. This is the key-note of the psalm, the
beautiful strain which is heard over and over again in varied forma throughout.
There are pieces of music in which some one sweet air recurs repeatedly, now as if
amid the rush and roar of a tempest, anon, when the music has sunk down into
quietness ; you hear it now loud, now soft, now stirring in sonorous strains, now
soothing in plaintive gentle tones ; but it is the same air still. And the blessed
thought of the faithfulness of God thus recurs throughout this psalm. In ver. 1



244 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. lxxxix. 1—52.

praise celebrates it. " With my mouth will I make known," etc. Does it not deserve
this ? Who is there can deny the faithfulness of God ? He is ever true to his word.
Let us, then, openly confess it, and in the very confession the convictiou of it in our
uwn souls shall be deepened. In ver. 2 faith stays itself upon it. The verse seems
to be a sort of soliloquy. The speaker is encouraging his own trust by asserting hii
belief that mercy shall he built up for ever ; it shall not crumble away and come to
nought, but, like some glorious fabric that may take a long time for its completion, it
shall, nevertheless, be built up, and so built that it shall eternally abide. And as to
God's faithfulness, it shall be as are the heavens themselves — the very type of all that
is abiding, unchangeable, and the reverse of " the restless vicissitudes, the ever-shifting
shores, of earth." So did the soul of the psalmist speak to itself of God's faithfulness,
and thereby encourage itself to trust in him. Well will it be for us to talk to ourselves
in a similar way. In ver. 5 the angels of Ood praise it. " Thy faithfulness also is
praised in the assembly of the holy ones " (Perowne). That is, in the midst of the
angels of heaven, in that Church of the Firstborn, God's faithfulness is the theme of
their song. Compare the songs of the redeemed as given in the Apocalypse. Let us
get leady to join in that blessed choir by our now beginning a like song. In ver. 8
no hvman faithfulness can he compared ivith it. "What faithfulness is like unto thy
faithfulness ? " — so a great scholar renders the last half of ver. 8. And may we not all
of us ask the like question ? Not but what human faithfulness is a blessed fact ; there
have been those who have been faithful unto death to God and to their fellow-men.
Paul, when ready to be offered up, could declare, " I have kept the faith." And there
have been many such. But what is the fidelity even of the best of men, much more of
the mass of men, as compared to that of God? Hence are we bidden, " Put not your
trust in princes, nor in the son of man, in whom there is no help." Would that we
trusted God as we do men I In ver. 24 it is promised to his people. " My faithfulness
shall be with him." What a rebuke is this to our wretched yet ever recurring misgivings
and fears 1 It is one of the gifts of God that are " without repentance " (ct Bom. iiL 3).
In ver. 33 the sins of Qod^s people do but change its form, not its substance. God was
equally faithful in the sore distresses which he sent to Israel, as in the great benefits
and blessings which, when they were obedient, he bestowed upon them. He tuill
have all men to be saved (1 Tim. ii. 4). Therefore, if gentle means will not serve,
stern ones shall. In vers. 38 — 51 believing prayer pl&tds it as an all-preuailinq
pZeo.— S. C.

Ver. 2. — Mercy built up for ever. The psalmist seems to have before his mind the
picture of some glorious palace, whose foundation, laid broad and deep and strong, was
now uprising in majesty and beauty before him. He seems to see it rising tier on tier,
and course on course, and as he beholds it being gradually and gloriously up-built, his
adoration and praise burst forth, and he exclaims, " I will sing of the mercies of the
Lord for ever. What did he mean ? Probably the remembrance of God's mercy to
Israel was present to his thought — how that had been "built up; " more and more
added ; new favours, new enlargements, new communications of the Divine bounty
continually given, until Israel had risen to the height of her national glory ; — so had
God's mercy gone on, building up their state and filling them with good. In their
own history the text had been shown to be true. But it has other illustrations.
Take—

I. The salvation or the human baoe. It is the supreme instance of mercy
being built up for ever. 1. It hegan in the nature of Ood. For God is love, and
love longs for objects on which to lavish itself. Hence came creation, and then
redemption in all its successive stages of mercy. 2. The first promise after man had
fallen. 3. 2%« preservation of a righteous seed in such as Seth, Enoch, and those
who "called on the Name of the Lord." 4. The call of Abraham, the father of the
faithful, in whose seed all the families of the earth should be blessed. 5. The multi-
plication and redemption of his seed. 6. The giving of the Law. This was to be for
the nations as " a child-leader to lead us to Christ." And in spite of all corruptions, this
knowledge of God was preserved, and by the providence of God spread abroad widely.

7. Then the coming of Christ, of whom all the Law and the prophets did testify.

8. I%e baptism of the Holy ^rit at Pentecost, and the creation of the Christian



PS. Lxxxix. 1—62.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 245



Church. Thus step by step the glorious fabric of redeemed humanity has been thus
far built up ; and the building is still going on, and will go on

" Till the whole ransomed Church of God
Be saved, to sin no more."

II. The pebfeotinq of the individual boul. Trace the history of any one of
those whom God has redeemed, and in that individual's experience of the ways of God
there will be found further illustration of how " mercy is built up for ever." 1. In the
circumstances, whatever they were, which led the soul to realize its deep need. The
Holy Spirit uses all manner of means to bring this about. 2. In the surrender of the
wUl to Christ. Faith, believing, coming to Christ, are all, with other such expressions,
only different forms jf stating that the soul has given up its will to God. 3. Then the
indwelling qftlte Holy Ohost. From this results that sanctificatiou which is the " being
changed into Christ's image, from glory to glory." 4. The disciplines of Ood's pro-
vidence. All these are parts of the building process, unsightly, unlovely, repellant,
having no form nor comeliness in them, and yet in and through them mercy is being
built up, the work of God in the soul is advanced. 5. 2%e means of grace — prayers,
sacraments, Scriptures, work for God, to which he calls us — ^all are for our perfecting.

III. The recompenses op mebot. " Blessed are the merciful," said our Lord, and
it is so. Take as an hist ric illustration the founding of Pennsylvania, and the way in
which the Quakers dealt with the Indians. Other methods are but demonstrations of
the truth that they that take the sword perish by the sword. And it is so with
individuals. God loves mercy, and recompenses it ; he will build it up for ever.

CoNOLUBiON. 1. Bender praise to the Lord. For mercy is ever needed by us alL
2. Scfpe continually. For mercy is to be built up for ever : it wearies not ; it will, it
must, have its way at length. Hope, then, for the myriads yet unsaved ; God knows
how to build them in. And never despair of yourselves. 3- <?«* employed in this
hlesied building work. There is room for us all. 4. Weary not in showing mercy. It
is to go on for ever. If we meet with rude rebuff, still go on with the sacred toiL
God's mercy is built up for ever : be ours likewise I — S. C.

Vers. 15, IS. — " The joyf'vA sound." We do not know the circumstances which
occasioned this psalm, but we may fitly apply the words of our text to the revelation
of God in Christ. Now —

I. The gospel is a joyful sound. For: 1. It tells of forgiveness. This is the
need of all, the indispensable need, and is met only in Christ. Therefore the gospel,
which tells of Christ, and his atonement, and the full free forgiveness granted in
him to every penitent, believing soul, is a joyful sound. 2. Of a new nature. For-
giveness apart from this would be of little avail. But Christ is " made unto us . . .
sanctiflcation " (see Ezek. zxxvi. 25 — 31). 3. Of peace of soul — that inward calm and
rest of faith which, combined with the consciousness of pardon and purity in Christ,
constitute here and now a real heaven in the soul. 4. Of eternal life. Our joy abides.
For all these reasons the gospel is a joyful sound.

II. The people abb blessed who know this joyful sound. 1. In what they
possess. A new and happy relationship with God. 2. In what they are. 3. In the
inflv,ence they exert.

III. The effects that follow fbom such knowlbdqe are vbby precious. They
concern : 1. A man's life. " They shall walk, Lord, in the light of thy countenance,"
etc. A man must get through life some way : the question is — How ? But here is a way
told of which is, indeed, a good way. To walk in the light of God's countenance is to
have the consciousness of God's love resting on one. To know you have the love of a
valued friend is good : how much more that of God ! It gives serenity of heart, freedom
from lear, confidence of deliverance from all evil. 2. A man's spirit. " In thy Name
shall they rejoice," etc. Joy is essential to the healthy life of the soul, as light is to
that of the body. Now that in which they who are spoken of here rejoice is the Name
of God : " thy Name." But by the Name of God is meant an ihat which we find in
God. " He hath done all things well " is the verdict which their sotils promptly and
steadily pronounce. The man is bom again, renewed in the spirit of his mind, and
hence God is no longer a terror or a dislike to him, but " his exceeding Joy." 3. A



246 THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [ps. lxxxix. 1—52.

man's condition. " In thy righteousness shall they be exalted." Before their own
conscience ; for it is kept pure and void of offence. Before their fellow-men. la not
that so ? " Them that honour me I will honour," saith God. We see this every day,
Aud in the presence of God at last. " They shall be mine in the day when I make up
my jewels " (Mai. iii. 17).

lY. BnT IN OBDER TO ALL THIS WE UUST EKOW, BEALLT AND INWABDLT, THIS

JOYFUL SOUND. 1. FoT many professed Ghristians do not; and hence they show a
sad and unhappy contrast to what has been said. They do not seem blessed any way —
not in their daily life, nor in the spirit of their mind, nor are they "exalted" at all as
is here said. 2. The reason is that, though they may be familiar with the letter of the
gospel, they yet do not really know it. For to know the joyful sound is to realize
and to appropriate it, to heartily believe and obey it. 3. The conditions of such know-
ledge are : We must greatly desire it ; we must prepare for it, for however large our heart
may be, the Lord's grace will want all the room ; therefore if it be cumbered with other
and evil things, there will not be room for him. The Israelites at the Passover were
to put away the leaven. So must we put away all known sin. And then believe,
trust, and for yourself, the glad gospel message. So shall you come to really know it,
and our text shall be fulfilled for you. — S. C.

Ver. 17. — The exalted horn; or, the secret of strength. The horn is a constant
symbol of strength ; the exalted horn, therefore, of strength triumphant. Now, we
observe —

I. Strenoth is the great need of the SOUL OF MAN. Not physical strength,
nor intellectual, nor social, but spiritual. There may be knowledge, and good desire,
and religious emotions, and holy resolve ; but all these things leave a man weak unless
they be rendered effectual by a fervent will.

II. Its sbgbbt is the favour of God. For that favour : 1. Restores it. 2.
Sustains it. 3. Inspires it. 4. The loss of God's favour paralyzes it. We know how
the favour of men, their applause and encouragement, puts strength into us : how
much more the conscious favour of God 1 With that there is nothing a man will not
do and dare and be.

III. Those who abe in that favoub alone possess this seobet. We may
know of it, speak of it, extol it, commend it, and yet not be " in " it. We enter into
it : 1. By coming away from whatever cannot dwell urith it ; from all known sin especi-
ally. 2. By surrender of our will — our heart, that is — to God. 3. By keeping touch
with Ood, in habitual prayer, praise, and obedience. So we enter this favour, and
abide there. — S. 0.

Ver. 19. — " Chosen out of the people.'' This declaration, besides its main theme,
teaches us much concerning GK>d's exaltations of men. As : 1. Wherefore Ood exalts
men. It certainly is not to gratify mere selfish ambition. Those who climb up to
high places from such motives are certainly not set there by God, and will soon have
to climb down again. All history teaches the short-lived power of mere selfish ambi-
tion. But one motive we may regard as moving the Divine mind would be his love
for the exalted one. Now, there is no greater joy that ever comes to a good man
than that of being the means of great good to others. It is a pure delight, and of
intense kind. The love of Gk)d would, therefore, bestow such delight on his chosen
ones. His chief motive, however, is the good of others. What would have become of
Israel but for David ? Saul's rule was but another name for shipwreck of the state.
David saved it from such ruin. And the good of others, the people at large, is the
motive of all God's exaltations; other ends may be proposed and secured, but this is
assuredly the chief. The possession of power is, therefore, a tremendous responsi-
bility, and happy are the peoples whose rulers ever remember and practically recognize
this. And it is true of all power whatsoever, whether little or great. " No man liveth
to himself." 2. Svxih exaltation generally means great suffering. He who is the
supreme illustration of the truth of our text was " made perfect through suffering."
And it is ever so. What a terrible discipline David went through ere he attained the
throne I Moses too, and Paul, and God's heroes generally. Let us, then, remember
wherefore suffering is sent to any of us — that it is for our uplifting ; let us take care not



fs. LXXXTX. 1— 62.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 247

to hinder this purpose. 3. Emu Ood exalts — ^by choosing those whom he exalts not
by, but out of, the people. The people can rarely be trusted. G-o over the list of
mankind's greatest helpers and saviours, right up to our Saviour himself. Would the
people have chosen them ? They would far more likely have crucified them, as they
did the greatest of them all. The vox populi is the vox Dei only when it endorses the
previous choice of God. For men have seen that God has chosen for them, and they
willingly accept his choice." But the main theme of our text concerns : 4. Whom Ood
chooses — from " out of the people." Now, consider in this statement —

I. Its thdth. See this: 1. In the history of David, (Ps. Ixxyiii. 70, 71.) 2. In
well-nigh all deliverers of the people, from Moses downwards, from G-ideon to Garibaldi
— they have been ever " chosen out of the people." 3. In Christ our Lord. He was
indeed thus chosen. His royal descent from David availed him not, for the glory of
that race had utterly disappeared. Hence he was altogether of the people — by birth ;
associates ; social rank ; habits; education ; by his teaching, which was not at all " as
the scribes," but understood and welcomed by " the common people ; " by his life of
poverty ; by his death ; all the way alons;, from " the bare manger to the bitter cross,"
he was one of the people. It was a slave's death that he died. " He was rich, yet for
our sakes," etc.

n. The beasoks of this choice. 1. "The people" were the mass of mankind,
who needed to be saved. 2. One from themselves would better understand them. 3.
More readily sympathize. 4. God is wont to choose the foolish things of this world
{1 Cor. i. 27). 5. Christ's sharing the people's lot assured them of the love of God,
and so led them to turn to him, which is salvation. They learned so that " God is
love."

III. Its lessons. They are such as these: 1. 2%« approachableness of Ood.
Christ has shown us that he keeps no state to frighten us from his presence. Every-
body came to him, and may come to God. 2. The indispensalle condition of rendering
real help. (See Mark x. 43 — 45.) We must go down among those whom we would
bless. 3. Bow little worth are the great things of the worldl Power, wealth, rank —
Ood chose none of them, 4. Christ knows all about me ; for he, too, was one of the
people. I need not keep away. 5. Adore him. Does he not deserve it? thou
ever-blessed Lord I 6. Melp in the exaltation. For his throne, the throne of his exalta-
tion and which he delights in, is made of human hearts. Enthrone him, then, in your
heart.

"Take my heart, it is thine own;
It (hall be thy royal throne."

8.C.

Ver. 20. — " David my servant." The text reads on, " With my holy oil have 1
anointed him," and right down to ver. 37 we have the repeated declarations of God's
favour towards him. Now, this has seemed to many a choice most strange, and sorely
needing vindication. The statement concerning David — that he was " a man after
Ood's own heart " (1 Sam. xiii. 14 ; Acts xiii. 22) — has perplexed not a few. And we
unreservedly admit that —

I. God's choice op David does appbab stranqb. For what a category of crimes
his career as recorded in the Script\ires declares I In cold blood he slays two hundred
Philistines (1 Sam. xviii. 20 — 27). He leaves his wife Michal to face her father's rage,
when she had risked her own life to save his (1 Sam. xix. 11 — 17). He bids Jonathan
lie to his father (1 Sam. xx. 5, 6). He lies cruelly to Abimelechand the priests at Nob,
and then left them to Saul's vengeance (1 Sam. xxi. 1, 2 ; xxii. 9 — 19). He deceives
Achish (1 Sam. xxi. 10 — 15). He would, in revenge, have slain Nabal and all his
house (1 Sam. xxv. 2 — 38). He lies to King Achish, who had given him Ziklas, by
pretending that he had fought against Judah; and, to conceal his lie,he cruelly slaughters
the Geshurites and others (1 Sam. xxvii.). He takes terrible revenge on Amalek
(1 Sam. XXX. 1 — 17). Instead of punishing Joab, as he ought to have done, he utters
terrible imprecations against him (2 Sam. iii. 28, 29). He tortures the Ammonites
(2 Sam. xii. 27 — 31). He deals cruelly withMephibosheth, stripping him of all his pro-
perty, and giving it to Ziba (2 Sam. xvi. 1 — 4; xix. 24 — 30). He violates his oath to
Saul, that he would not slay his children ; nevertheless, he afterwards gave them up to



248 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. lxxxix. 1—52.

me Q-ibeonites, who hanged them (1 Sam. xxiv. 21 ; 2 Sam. xxi. 1 — ^9). And then
his great sin in the matter of Uriah — a sin in which no element of baseness, treachery,
cruelty, and lust was wanting ; and yet all the while he was a great psalm-singer
(2 Sam. xi. 2 — 17). He piously exhorts Solomon to walk in the ways of the Lord ; and
yet he himself kept his harem crowded with ever more women (2 Sam. v. 13 ; 1 Kings
ii. 3). His terrible death-bed charge to Solomon to slay Joab and Shimei. His impre-
catory psalms (see Ps. cix.). And we have no record of any'great good deeds to set off
against these other terrible ones. Yes ; it must be admitted that the choice of David
needs vindication. A loud professor of religion, and yet, etc.

IL But it can be vindicated. 1. Because the expression so much complained of
— David's being " a man ufter Ood's own heart" — refers, not to his personal chmucter,
hut to his official conduct. " He was called of God to restore the kingdom which Saul
had destroyed, to subdue the Philistines, etc. These purpose* he accomplished. So
far he was a man after God's own heart. His moral delinquencies are recorded that we
may know where the Divine approbation stops short " (F. D. Maurice). But we con-
fess we do not lay much stress upon this. 1 Kings xv. 1 — 5 does not bear it out. We
prefer to vindicate the Divine choice of David in another manner. 2. He was worthy
when the words were spoken of him, and for a long while after. Had he been always
uhat he afterwards became, such high commendation would not have been given.
Then : 3. Me knew no letter than to do as did all others. As to his life as au outlaw,
a kind of Oriental Bobin Hood, he was driven to it by the jealousy and hate of Saul ;
and as to his lies and stratagems, his ferocities and tortures, all such things were held
lawful in his day ; and, though they shock us as we read of them, they were held as
altogether right by his contemporaries. We must distinguish between the vitia tern-
poris and the vitia hominis (Farrar), and not condemn the man for not being altogether
different from and beyond the public sentiment of his age. 4. What he did knmo of
right he mainly did. See his patriotism, his courage, his military ability, the salva-
tion of his country from ruin. See his delight and his trust in God, and his deep
penitence for his sin. And see the unbounded honour and love of his people which he
won and kept. Is all this to go for nothing? 6. And remember how he was punished
for his sins. In his family. His sons had seen their father indulge himself: why
i'houldn't they ? (Kingsley). And in his nature he was punished. Its bent and bias
became horribly sensuaL Indulo:ence increased the evil, and so came about the shame-
ful tragedy of his adultery and Uriah's murder. It was not a sudden fall, he had long
been tending that way. And in his character. He never really recovered. He shufSes
shamefully to '.:si3 grave ; his courage, his self-control, his nobleness, well-nigh all gone.
One is remindea of King Lear —

" Vex not bis ghost ; oh, let him pass ;
He hates him,

That would upon the rack of this rough world
Stretch him out longer."

He dies a miserable and pitiful man, his last words being his charge to Solomon about
Shimei : " His hoary head bring thou down to the grave with blood." Think of that as
the last words of the David of the twenty-third psalm 1 What a melancholy falling
away 1 There is no favouritism in God. If his children sin, they suffer, and that
supremely. God loves them too much to let it be otherwise.

III. And 18 FULL OF INSTRUCTION FOE OURSELVES. We learn : 1. Thankfvlnest
that we are born in a more enlightened age ; that there would be shame now where
there was then no shame. 2. Strong religious feeling and profession are no certain
safeguards against sin, but only heighten its guilt. 3. Bepentance may be real, yet the
results of sin not be recalled. 4. We da/re never remit even for one day the waiting o/
our soul upon God in watchfulness and prayer. 5. The judgments of Ood against our
sin are his mercy to our sold. 6. He who forgave the contrite David forgives still.
— S.C.

Ver. 1.—A tingff in the dark. The previous psalm was written by a man in the
dark, who could pray, but could not sing. The writer of this psalm can both pray and
•ing. But there is an important difference between the "darknesses" of the two



PS. Lxxxix. 1— 62.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 24»

psalmists. Hem an suffered from severe bodily afflictions, such as are often attended
by severe mental depressions. Ethan was distressed by anxious public or national
conditions, -which concerned him in an official rather than in a personal way. His hope
in God was not clouded by bodily weakness. In him faith could triumph over fear.

I. Ethan's time of dabkness. "Ethan was born in the time of David, but
moulded chiefly by the infiijences, literary and religious, which characterized the age
of Solomon." There is no reason for rejecting the ancient reference of this psalm to the
reign of Eehoboam ; to the breaking up of the Davidic kingdom j and to the humiliating
invasion of Shishak, the Pharaoh of Egypt. Exactly what would then come to the
mind of the pious man was that the Davidic covenant seemed to have failed ; God was
not fulfilling the promise to establish David's seed for ever. "It was in the reign of
Behoboam, when ten tribes had forsaken their allegiance to the Davidic dynasty, and
the promise of the steadfastness of David's throne seemed suddenly revoked, that the
faithful worshippers would most readily recall the vision of Nathan, with its attendant
promises, and wonder where were the former loving-kindnesses which God sware unto
David in his truth. Appropriate to this period is the apparent allusion to the raids of
a foreign army." Distress tbat comes from public circumstances is rather intellectual
than emotional, and the struggle cannot be so severe as when there is introduced the
element of personal suffering. But they do invaluable service who can inspire the hope
of a nation in its dark hours ; for nations, too, " are saved by hope."

II. Ethan's sono in the time of dabkness. A song of faith in a time of fear.
A song of thankful memories in a time of present calamities. A song of joy in God
himself, when God's ways seemed " past finding out." A man can sing in the dark,
however dark it may be, and whatever form the darkness may take, only if he has
right thoughts of God, and can keep firm hold on God. Things may be perplexing ;
but if we know the doer of the things, and have full confidence in him, we can quietly
wait until his issues can be unfolded. Our song stops when we lose the sense of God's
relation to our circumstances. Keep the relation, and we can always sing of Ood, and
then we soon come to sing also of God's ways. — B. T.

Vers. 2 — t. — The security of God's pledged word. " Thy seed will I establish for
ever." The key-note of the psalm is the " faithfulness " of God to his word. " God
had entered into 'an everlasting covenant' with David, and had confirmed that
covenant with an oath. In the most absolute and unconditional form, God had pledged
himself to establish the kingdom of David and his seed for ever, to beat down all their
adversaries under their feet, and to maintain their throne as long as the sim and moon
should endure " (see 2 Sam. vil. 8 — 16 ; Isa. Iv. 3). The psalmist lived when men
were tempted to think God was forgetting his word, or failing to fulfil it. But he
persisted in it that, whatever appearances might suggest, God never forgot his word,
never failed to fulfil his word, and the covenant with David was being kept, in the
fullest and best sense, though it might prove to be a spiritual rather than a material
sense.

I. God's word must always be taken with God's meaning. So often men fix
their own meanings to what God says or promises, and then they are surprised and
disheartened because that does not happen which they expect. Take two illustrations.
Men said that God's covenant with David meant that there should always be a Davidic
kingdom, and always a member of David's house on its throne. That was man's
meaning put on God's words ; that was not God's meaning put into his own words.
So the Jews read into the prophecies their expectations of a temporal, delivering
Messiah, and the Messiah who came was no fulfilment of their dreams. We need to
learn that, whatever God says, using material terms and figures, is but illustrative of
spiritual fact or truth. David's perpetual kingdom is Messiah's spiritual kingdom.
Bead with God's meaning, God's word stands eternally true. And if spiritual sensi~
bilities are duly awakened and cultured, the spiritual meanings and spiritual fulfilments
come to be regarded as really the only important ones.

II. God's wobd to some must bk taken to bbpeesent God's purpose fob all.
Much mistake has been made by regarding God's covenants with individuals as mere
privileges of the individual. God puts his covenant into a form for some, that all men
may be helped to understand what his covenant with all men is. The illustrative



250 THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [ps. lxxxix. 1— 52,

character of all local covenants needs to be more fully apprehended, and more clearly
pointMd out. " Every Divine promise is but a limited expression of a general principle ;
every Divine covenant, even if it be made with a few, is nevertheless made for the
benefit of the many, and can only be an instance of his ways, an illustration of a mercj'
as wide as the heavens, and of a faithfulness which extends to all generations of
mankind."— R. T.

Ver, 5. — The Lord's saints. The Bible writers seem to think that the angels must
be referred to by this term. But God's people are certainly called " saints " in the
Fsalms, as in Ps. cxvi. 15. There may be intended a contrast between heaven and
earth in this verse. Heaven above and the earth below unite to praise the faithful-
ness of God. The term " saints" is one that we find difficult to apply, in a general
way, to God's people, because it seems to assume an actual and perfect holiness, which
we can neither find in ourselves nor ascribe to others. And, on the other hand, the
term " saints " has been deteriorated by its application to the hermit class, who^ by
bodily »usterities, have endeavoured to cleanse away sin and master passion. We have
but little admiration for " saints " after that pattern. The Old Testament term has a
clear, well-defined meaning. Its idea is " separated ones." It stands for all the people
of Israel regarded as separated unto God — his peculiar people. Then as " holiness " is
specially associated with God, and is his supreme requirement of those who belong to
him, God's saints, or separated ones, come to be thought of as " holy ones," and so we
get our modern idea of the saint. Giving the widest, and yet most searching,
application of the term, we may say —

L Th£ Lord's saiktb abe those who abb befabated fbom self. Illustrate this
by the contrast of the Israelite nation with the Gentile nations. God left the Gentiles
to a free experiment. By self-effort and self-service they were to win the highest
possibilities of humanity, if they could. Israel was taken out of this self-experiment,
t>eparated from the nations and from the self-service. So now the Christian is the man
who, in the world of self-interests, is separated from the self-seeking principle. The
Christian's Lord " pleased not himself." Christians do not " seek their own." Their
saintliness lies in this : " By love they serve one another."

II, The Lobd'b baintb abe those who abe befabated imro God. (1) That they
may praise his Name ; (2) carry out his mission ; (3) witness for his truth ; (4)
obey his will ; (5) catch and reflect his Spirit. So their saintliness comes to be godli-
ness, God-likeness, and this really is Christliness, Christ-likeness. The Christian saint
is the man in Christ, — ^B. T.

Ver, 6, — Comparisons with Jehovah. " Who in the heaven can bo compared unto
the Lord ?" It does not come to our minds to attempt any comparisons of God with
any one, because, according to our associations, there is no one on the same plane with
him, and so no comparisons are sufcgested. But in ancient times every nation had its
separate deity ; these deities were thought, by their worshippers, to be real and supreme,
and 80 comparisons with Jehovah could be made. They were made, by outsiders, to
his disadvantage; and they might well be made, by psalmist and prophet, to his honour
(see the eloquent comparisons in Isa. xl.). Here the psalmist is but assuring hin}self by
thinking high things of God, because the actual present dealings of God suggested
doubting thoughts. What God is always steadies our thinking when we are perplexed
by what God does. The comparison need not be fully elaborated ; the following points
may be illustrated,

I. God IB INCOMFABABLE IN FowEB. If God does a thing, we nay first of all say
he was under no compulsion to do it. He could have done otherwise. If he has put
forth his power in this particular way, we may be sure he willed to act this way, and
his will is based on perfect knowledge and absolute wisdom. Of no created being, of
no so-called deity, can it be declared that he has uncontrolled power, and yet the power
is in no way to be feared, because it is in the control of perfect intelligence, absolute
wisdom, ana infinite love.

XL €)0D IB INCOMFABABLE IN FUBiTT. Here the one idea on which we may dwell
is God's truthfulness, faithfulness, to his word. Scripture constantly asserts that God
never disappoints men. He is true to his word. This cannot be asserted of any created



PS. Lxxxix. 1—52.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 251

being, or of any so-called deity, whose word can only be the word of some created being
representing him. " Hath he said, and shall he not do it ? hath he spoken, and shall he
not make it good ? " " God is not a man, that he should lie."

III. God is incompaeablb in pity. It seems to the psalmist of Eehoboam's
distressed age as if God " had forgotten to be gracious." But he may rest his soul in
the confidence that none can pity like God ; and if Divine action should ever seem
strange, it can only he said that Qod^t pity is checking the action of what, in God, men
may think to he severity. — R. T.

Ver. 9. — Ancient sentimentt concerning the aea. Throughout the Scriptures the sea
is regarded as an object of fear ; its majesty, greatness, masterfulness, seem mostly tn
have impressed men. It had not then been tamed by human skill; the compass was
not known ; the few vessels were inefficiently constructed for ocean sailing, and they
seldom ventured out of sight of land. Scripture spealis of "the raging of the sea," of "the
raging waves of the sea," of its voice " roaring," of the " floods lifting up their voice,"
of the " wicked being like the troubled sea," of " those that go down to the sea " seeing
^ the wonders of the Lord, and his judgments in the deep," of the " great and wide sea,
wherein are things creeping innumerable." And even when it seems to have a gentler
thought, and says, " There go the ships," immediately it adds a note of power and fear,
" There is that leviathan, whom thou hast made to play therein."

L The sea was a symbol of bepabation, and so of the baethly teottblbs
THAT COME OUT OF SBPABATI0N8. When friends in those days were carried away over
the sea, they seemed to be utterly, hopelessly lost. We may have to some extent
mastered this feeling by making of the ocean a highway, and yet still our Friends are
more truly lost to us when the sea divides us than when the land does. And yet, in
family life, there are worse dividers than the sea.

n. The bea bbouoht the sufebmb sense of danoeb, and so symbolized the
PEBIL8 TO WHICH DAILY LIFE IS EXPOSED. The sea is cvcr raging as if it would
devour. The waters sink as if they would swallow us up, or rise as if they would cast
us out. In oui boats there is but an inch of wood between us and death. Yet our
real perils are those which come to our soul's life. '* Fear not them who can but kill
the body." What the sea may typify is far more important than what the sea
fiandOi

IIL The sea seemed to embody the idea of mysteby. We can never seem to
understand the sea ; never account for the sea ; never feel sure what it is going to do ;
never read the secrets it holds in its bosom. It is the symbol for us of the mysteries,
often so distressing, so agonizing, with which we are surrounded — mysteries of life, of
truth, of duty, of ourselves, of God, of eternity, which compel our life on earth to be a
"life of faith."

lY. The sea was an emblem of the ohanqeableness that ohabaoterizes
all baethly things. It is well called the troubled, restless sea ; and this wo feel
quite as truly in summer calm, when only gentle winds blow across it, as in winter
conflicts, when wild winds raise high the tides. It ever reminds us that " the fashion
of this world passeth away." Yet the psalmist could see God lestraining and using
■even the sea, and with this thought encourages our fullest confidence in him. — R. T.

Ver. 14. — Equity and righteousness. Prayer-book Version, " Righteousness and
equity are the habitation of thy seat;" Revised Version, "Justice and judgment are
the foundation of thy throne." The terms "justice," "righteousness," stand for the
abstract virtue; the terms "judgment," "equity," stand for the applications and
adaptations of justice to times, circumstances, and men. Equity is the law of right
applied to particular circumstances. The double assertion made concerning God is
that what he does is always right judged by the standards of righteousness, and always
right judged by the frailties and infirmities of men. Both these considerations help to
bring men full confidence in him, and assurance concerning his ways with them.

I. God's ways aeb always eight to the standard. " Righteousness is the
basis of his throne ; " the distinguishing feature of his rule. " Shall not the Judge of
all the earth do right?" If it be asked — Where is the standard of righteousness?
we may reply — ^In man's own moral sense. If he knows right from wrong, he must



252 THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [ps. lxxxix. 1— 55i»

know right. The appraisement man can make of his own acts involves his power tc
appraise act» which are said to be acta of Grod. But this caution needs to be fully
presented and illustrated — that the standard of right is not the sentiment of any single
individual, but the harmonious sentiment of all the race in all the ages. It is a human
standard, not an individual standard. There has grown up in the world a standard of
righteousness, which is now well established; by it the Rcts declared as God's may be
judged ; and it will always be found that inspired descriptions of righteousness are, in
effect, descriptions of the established human standard ; and that all acts of God com-
mended in the inspired record will stand the test of that established human standard.
It should be carefully shown that there is not one standard for man, and a differing
standard for God. Eight for God is right for man. Cases that seem doubtful are
simply cases misapprehended. Poets may say, " Whatever is is right." Pious men say,
" Whatever God does is right."

n. God's ways are always eight to the ciboumstanoe. There is a temporary
right as well as an eternal right. There is an uneducated right, and a cultured right,
dependent on conditions of conscience. There is a right at the moment, and a right for
ever. There is a right absolute, and a right in adaptation. Illustrate from the mother's
idea of right in relation to her child. She has to fit her right to the capacity and
condition of her child. There is a right form and setting and clothing of the eternal
right. So the psalmist may find God's right in the adjustment of his dealings with the
wilful and wayward Davidio king, Behoboam. — R. T.

Ver. 38. — Perplexities of preterit appearances. " But thou hast cast off, and abhorred,,
thou hast been wroth with thine anointed." The psalmist may have been reminded of
the hist king, Saul, from whom the favour of God was wholly removed, and he may
have feared that the same sad fate was reserved for David's grandson, Behoboam, in
spite of the very remarkable and apparently ever-enduring promises made to David.
Certainly, when he composed this psalm, everything did look very black. Behoboam
was acting very foolishly and very wilfully, and bringing himself and the nation into
what seemed overwhelming judgments. The king was humiliated, the kingdom was
prostrated, the people were perplexed; all the world seemed out of jont. All depended
on the point of view from which the psalmist regarded these " present appearances."
He might stand beside his fellow-countrymen, asl see them as they saw them, in a
strictly human light. . Or he might try to rise up to a place beside God, and see them
as God saw them — see them in the Divine light. Then he would know that " things
are not what they seem."

I. PGBPLEXITIEg OF FBE8ENT APPEABANCES PABTLY ABISE FBOM HAN'S IMPEBFEOT

VISION. He never sees more than parts of a thing at a time ; even as, with his bodily
vision, hk «an only see a front, a little of two sides, and nothing at all of the back.
What man cannot see often holds the key to the meaning of what he sees. Man's
mistakes are imperfect apprehensions. Concerning God, man may search all ways, and
yet be compelled at last to look on all the product of his toil, and say, " These are parts
of his ways." We never really know a thing until we know it all round, and all through ;
and we mistake when we attempt to judge appearances. If it seems that God has
forsaken David, and forgotten his covenant, we may confidently say, " Since God is what
he is, that cannot he which seems" Appearances here are deceitful.

II. FeBPLEXITIEB of FBESENT AFFEABANCEB ABE BEIiIEVED AS WE CAN EKTEB INTO

God's fubfoseb. Once apprehend that God is the Lord of discipline; the eternal
Father who chastises and corrects and trains his children, and then strangest appear-
ances begin to gain their meanings. They are seen to be as temporary as a boy's
flogging, and as truly the sign of a Father's anxious love. They are proofs that God
has not " forgotten to be gracious." " How did Ethan, in this psalm, find ground for
faith, for trust and hope ? Simply in the conviction that God had sent these calamities
in mercy, for correction, for discipline, and not for destruction." We can never read
appearances aright until we read them in the light of what we do know, or may know,
of God.— B. T.

Ver. 47. — The argument from the brevity of life. " Remember how short my time
is." This is the argument of an old man, who knows there can 1m but a " little while "



M. Lxxxix. 1—52.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 253



before his passing time, and is supremely anxious to see the ways of the Lord justified
while he is " in the land of the living." Compare Hezekiah's exclamation, when told
that he must die. As Ethan was born in the reign of David, and lived through the
forty years of Solomon's reign, he must have been an old man in the later time of
Rehoboam. In this psalm he gives us the last results of a long life of observation and
experience. Trusting fully in God's faithfulness, Ethan could grasp the idea that the
present depression of the nation was a temporary discipline ; but this only made him
the more earnestly plead with God that the discipline might be completed, and the
restoration might be granted, before he passed away.

I. First argument ; Because life is so fbail, do not ovbb-tbt it with pbb-
PLEXINO DEALINGS. The psalmist says, " How fleeting and frail life is 1 " It is a poor
thing, very weak ; it cannot stand over-much strain. He deprecates too severe trial in
the Divine discipline ; afraid of himself, lest faith should fail. The calamities falling
'upon David's nation seemed more than he could bear. He thought about them day
and night ; they suggested painful doubts. So he pleads his frailty before God, begging
that the calamities may not be carried to extremes, and the faith in God, which he
longs to keep, be quite overwhelmed. We can sympathize with Ethan. The strain of
modem conflict often seems as if it would overwhelm us. We are too weak, we think,
to bear any more. Learn of Ethan that we may plead our frailty with God, and ask
for gracious limitations of the strain under whicli we are put.

n. Second argument : Beoause life is so shobt, finish the coitbse of discipline

SPEEDILY, bo that I HAY ITNDEBSTAND THY DEALINQS, AND BEJOIOE IN THE ISSUES.

It is the argument of one who intensely longs for the honour of God to be manifested,
and for the highest well-being of God's people to be secured. Indeed, his very intensity
puts his faith in peril ; for he wants to see for himself, while he lives, God's honoui
vindicated, and God's word fulfilled ; he cannot be quite content with the assurance
that Gk)d is jealous of his own honour, and supremely concerned in his people's well-
being. It is impatience, but it is the impatience of a thoroughly earnest souL God's
work will go on, God's glory will be advanced, whether we die or live. — B. T.

Vers. 1 — 52. — ^The general subject — God's promise to David and his se«d— hut the
present state of things is a bitter contrast to the promise, and a prayer that Qod would
ramove the contrast. Suggests —

I. Teat God has bntebed into a oband covenant with mankind. Given us
the greatest and most precious promises. 1. Promises that relate to our highest nature.
" I will be a Father to them, and ye shall be my sons and daughters." 2. Huit relate
to our greatest calamity/. Redemption from sin and pardon to the penitent. 3. ITiat
relate to our endless being. The completeness and glory of the Divine work begun in
us here.

n. That God fulitlb his pabt of his covenant completely and pebfeotly.
1. Because the covenant was made out of his love, voluntarily. 2. Because Q-od is true
and faithful, and cannot deceive. 3. Because Qod has the power and ability to do all
that he promises. Not like men.

IIL It is we who defeat the purpose op God's covenant. 1. We transgress,
and bring upon ourselves pimishment. The consequences which God has attached to
transgression. 2. Our unreperiied sins take from us the power to receive the Divine
promises. " As many as received him, to them gave he power to become the sons
of God."

IV. But oub sin cannot alienate God's loving-kindness fbom us. (Ver. 33.)
1. He has sent Christ as the proof of this to a sinful world. 2. He sends his Spirit
into the heart to plead with us. 3. He is infinitely patient, waiting for our pmittnt
retmm. — S.



254



THE BOOK OF PSALMS.



[P8. ox. 1—17.



BOOK lY.



EXPOSITION.



PSALM XO.



The ascription of this psalm in the title
to Moses must be admitted to be very
remarkable. No other psalm is so ascribed.
Nor indeed is a date given to any other
earlier than the time of David. The psalm
itself, however, when examined, is found to
accord with the traditional date. Professor
Cheyne notes in it a " roughness," which is
presumably a sign of antiquity. Ewald says
of it, " The poem has in it something un-
commonly strilsing, solemn, sinking into
the depth of the Godhead. In contents and
language it is thionghont original and
powerful; and, as it is undoubtedly Tery
old, it would have been universally con-
sidered as correctly derived from Moses,
had we known exactly the reasons which
guided the collector." Hengstenberg, Kay,
Professor Alexander, and Dean Johnson
accept unhesitatingly the Mosaic authorship.
The psalm is termed, " A Prayer of Mosea,
the man of God." It is, however, only in
part a "prayer." Meditation occupies the
opening portion (vers. 1 — 6) ; complaint
follows (vers. 7 — 11); it is only with ver.
12 that prayer begins. (For the application
to Moses of the phrase, " man of God," see
Deut. xxxiii. 1 ; Josh. xiv. 6 ; Ezra iii. 2.)

Ver. 1 . — Lord, thou hast been our Dwelling-
place in all generations ; or, "our habitation"
(see Ps. xci. 9) ; comp. Ps. xxxii. 7, " Thou
art my Hiding-place." For well-nigh forty
years M 'Ses had had no fixed material
<lv\elling-place.

Ver. 2. — Before the mountains were
brought forth (comp. Prov. viii. 25). The
" mountains " are mentioned as perhaps the
grandest, and certainly among the oldest,
of all the works of God. Or ever thou hadst
formed the earth and the world; literally,
or thou gavest birth to the earth and the
world (comp. Deut. xxxii. 18). Even
from everlasting to everlasting thou iirt
God '(comp. Ps. xoiii. 2 ; Prov. viii. 23 ;
Micah V. 2 ; Hab. i. 12).

Ver. 3. — Thou tumest man to destruction;
or, "to dust" (comp. Gen. iii. 19). And
layest, Betum, ye children of men; i.e.



"return once more, and replenish the
earth." There may be an allusion to the
destruction of mankind by the Deluge, and
the repeopling of the earth by the descend-
ants of Noah, as Dr. Kay supposes ; or the
meaning may be that God is continually
bringing one generation of men to an end,
and then setting up another, having the
same control over human life that he hag
over inanimate nature (ver. 2).

Ver. 4. — For a thousand years in thy
sight are but as yesterday. Time has no
relation to God ; it does not exist for him.
"One day is with the Lord as a thousand
years, and a thousand years as one day "
(2 Pet. iii. 8). Therefore we must not judge
his methods of working by our own. When
it is past; rather, as it panes. And as a
watch in the night. To the sleeper a night-
watch seems gone in a moment.

Ver. S. — Thou earliest them away as with
• flood. This verse is to be connected with
ver. 3, " Thou sweepest mankind away ; " «'.«.
removest them from the earth, when it pleases
thee. They are as a sleep. Fantastic,
vague, forgotten as soon as it is over. In
the morning they are like grass which
groweth up (comp. Pss. zxxvii 2 ; Ixzii. 16 ;
xciL 7 ; oiii. 15 ; Isa. xl. 7).

Ver. 6. — In the morning it floniisheth,
and groweth up; in the evening it is oat
down, and withered (comp. Pss. oil 4, 11;
ciii. 15; Isa. xl 7; Jas. i. 10, 11).

Ver. 7. — For we are consumed by thine
anger. From the general reflections, and
the general consideration of human weak-
ness, which have hitherto occupied him,
the psalmist proceeds to speak particularly
of the weakness and sin of himself and his
own people, which have brought upon
them a painful visitation. God's anger is
hot upon them, and has " consumed " them —
not utterly, but so that they are greatly
" troubled " and cast down. By thy wrath
are we troubled. The expressions used
suit the time of the later wanderings in the
wilderness, when the generation that had
especially sinned was being gradually
" consumed," that it miglit not enter the
Holy Land.

Ver. 8. — Thou hast set our iiiquitieg
before thee. Instead of hiding his lace
from their iniquities, turning away from
them and overlooking thtm, God has placed
them steadily "before him," in the full
searching and scorching light of his owd



PS. ox. 1 — 17.]



THE BOOK OF PSALMS.



265



purity and holiness. And not only lias be
done this with the sins which they know of,
and whereof their consciences are afraid;
but be has set their secret sins also in. the
light of his countenance. (On man's
"secret sins," comp. Ps. ziz. 12, and the
comment ad Zoo.)

Yer. 9. — For all onr days are passed away
in thy wrath; or, "under thy wrath" —
"whilst thou art still angry with us"
(comp. Deut. zsxii. 15 — 25). We spend
our years — rather, bring our yean to an end
(Heogstenberg, Eay, Bevised Version) as a
tale that is told; rather, as a reverie, or
" as a murmur."

Ver. 10. — The days of onr years are three
score years and ten. This seems a low
estimate for the time of Moses, since he
himself died at the age of a hundred and
twenty (Deut. zxziv. 7), Aaron at the age
of a hundred and twenty-three (Numb.
zzzlii. 39), and Miriam at an age which
was even more advauced (Numb. zx. 1 ;
comp. Ezod. ii. 4). But these may have
been exceptional cases, and we have cer-
tainly no sufficient data for determining
what was the average length of human
life in the later period of the wanderings.
The suggestion has beeu made that it was
probably even shorter than that here men-
tioned. And if by reason of strength they
be fourscore years; i.e. "if, through ex-
ceptional strength in this or that individual,
they occasionally mount up to four score
years." Yet is their strength labour and
sorrow; rather, yet is their pride then but
labour and vanity. They may boast of
their age; but what real advantage is it to
them ? After seventy, the years draw nigh
when each man is torced to say, " 1 have
no pleasure in tiiem" (Ecoles. xii. 1). For
it is soon out off, and we fly away. More-
over, even if we live to eighty, our life
seems to us no more than a span, so soon
does it pass away, and we lake our de-
parture.

Ver. 11. — ^Who knoweth the power of
thine anger? Who can duly estimate the
intensity of God's anger against such as
have displeased him? Even according to
thy fear, so is thy wrath ; rather, or who
can estimate thy fury at the fear of thee
(».e. the proper fear) requires i The verse
is exegetical of ver. 9, and is intended to
impress on man the terribleness of God's
anger.

Vers. 12 — 17. — Prom complaint the
psalmist, in conclusion, turns to prayer —
prayer for his people rather than for him-
self. His petitions are, (1) that God will
enable his people to take to heart the
lessons which the brevity of life should
teach (ver. 12) ; (2) that he will cease from



his anger, and relent ooncerning them (ver.
13) ; (3) that he will onoe more shower his
mercies upon them, and oause tbeir afflic-
tion to be swallowed up in gladness (vers.
H, 15) ; (4) that he will show his glorions
doings to them and to their children (ver.
16); (5) that he will let his beauty rest
upon them (ver. 17) ; and (6) that he will
bless their doings, and establish them
(ver. 17).

Ver. 12. — So teach us to number our days,
that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom.
" Teach us," that is, " so to reflect on the
brevity of life, that we may get to our-
selves a heart of wisdom," or a heart that is
wise and understanding.

Ver. 13. — Beturn, lord, how long?
rather, turn, O Lord; i.e. "turn from thy
anger — how long will it be ere thou
turnest?" And let it repent thee concern-
ing thy servants. God " is not a man, that
he should repent" (Numb, zxiii. 19); and
yet from time to time " it repents him con-
cerning bis servants" (l)eut. xxxii. bti;
Ps. cxxxv. 14). He relents, that is, from
his fierce anger, allows himself to be ap-
peased, and has compassion upon those who
have provoked him.

Ver. 14. — Oh satisfy us early with thy
mercy; literally, satiny us in the morning
with thy mercy; i.e. "after a night of
trouble, give us a bright morning of peace
and rest." Iliat we may rejoice and be
glad all our days; rather, and we will
rejoioe and be glad, etc.

Ver. 15. — Make us glad according to the
days wherein thou hast afflicted us. Pro-
portion our time of joy to our time of
sorrow : as the one has lasted many long
years, so let the other. And the years
wherein we have seen evil; or, "sufiereii
adversity."

Ver. 16. — Let thy work appear unto thy
servants, and thy glory unto their childrea.
The "work" and the "glory" are the
same thing — some vast exertion of tlie
Divine power and majesty, which will
result in great good to his people. If we
accept the Mosaic authorship of the psalm,
the establishment of Israel in the land of
Canaan may reasonably be taken as the
" work " spoken of.

Ver. 17. — And let the beauty of the lord
onr God be upon us (comp. Ps. xlv. 24,
" Thou art fairer than the children of men ; "
Ps. xxvii. 4, " To behold the beauty of the
Lord ; " Isa. xxxiii. 17, " Thine eyes shall
see the King in his beauty "). The " beauty
of God" is upon us when we see and
realize the loveliness of his character. And
establish thou the work of our hands upon
us; yea, the work of our hands estabUsb



256



THE BOOK OP PSALMS.



fps. ox. 1—17



thou it. The repetition adda nothing,
except it be emphasis. God is asked,
tinally, to " establish the work" in which



his servants are engaged — ^to bless it ; that
is, to advance it and prosper it. The natur*
of the " work" ii n, t mentioned.



H0MILBTIC8.

Vers. 1, 2,— The fundamental truths of all religion. " Lord, thou hast been our
Dwelling-place," etc. This psalm is a monument of spiritual power. It possesses in
eminent degree the perennial freshness which so wonderfully belongs to Scripture.
Generations pass. Centuries mount up into thousands of years; but this ancient
psalm lifts up its voice with undecaying strength and sweetness. lit reminds us of a
granite pillar which casts its unchanging image on a river which flows past, as it has
flowed for ages. The inscription, cut thousands of years ago, is unworn by the finger
of time ; it is clear and sharp, as if cut yesterday. The psalm has been spoken of as
" perhaps the most sublime of human compositions, the deepest in feeling, the loftiest
in theologio conception, the most magnificent in its imagery " (Isaac Taylor), Even
those who question the tradition that it was written by Moses (perhaps more from the
habit of questioning than for any solid reason) are utterly at a loss to suggest who
-else can have been its author. Whether Moses or not, he " wrote as he was moved by
the Holy Ghost." These opening verses express the fundamental truths of all religion :
the eternal existence of God : the dependence of all other existence on him as Creator ;
and our personal relation to him as our Almighty Father and Friend — " our Dwelling-
place in all generations."

I. The etebnity or God. His underived, unchangeable, self-existent being,
independent of time. «' From everlasting . . . thou art God." The Hebrew word
means "duration," past or future; here, evidently, unlimited duration, or, as we say,
eternity. The eternity of God, like his immensity, his omniscience, omnipotence, one
of the truths reason cannot grasp, but is compelled to affirm. If we try to think of
boundless, actually infinite space, we are baffled. Yet the moment we try to imagine
<i hound, thought overleaps it. So we cannot comprehend a past eternity; yet the
moment we suppose a beginning, we cannot help asking — What was hefore t?Mt t The
greatest philosopher of Germany thought he had got rid of the perplexity by asserting
that time and space have no existence except in our minds. But this ignores the plain
fact that the whole universe, from the movement of suns and systems to the growth of
a grain of seed or the ticking of a watch, is based on the reality of time and space, and
governed by them. Faith accepts what reason cannot grasp; and falls down and
worships " him that liveth for ever and ever."

II. The dependence of au. otheb existence on the Self-existent, the
Etebkal. "Ere ever thou hadst formed," etc. All things, God excepted, had a
beginning (Heb. xi. 3 ; Bev. iv. 11 ; Bom. xi. 36). Here, again, philosophy has striven
hard to get rid of the necessity for creation ; to lead us to beUeve matter and force
eternal, and the parents of life, order, beauty, happiness. But the deepest science
assures us that the universe in its present state is far enough from either immutable or
everlasting ; that life can spring only from life ; and that the primary material of the
universe — atoms, or whatever else we like to call it — ^bears as clearly the marks of
being fitted to its work, by weight, measure, number, exact proportion, as the rudder
and screw of a ship, or the beam and fly-wheel of a steam-engine. Science, which is
nothing but the study of God's plans and methods of working, leads us back from all
vain imaginings to the throne of God. Our deepest thought, our widest, most learching
questionings of nature, cannot take us outside of St. Paul's simple, profound declaration,
" In him we live, and move, and have our being " (Acts xvii. 28).

ni. OuB personal belation to God. " Lord, thou hast been our Dwelling-place."
Our Eefuge, our Rest, our Home. All that we can learn of God, or conjecture concern-
ing him, would profit us nothing, if we do not say, " This God is our God for ever and
ever " (Ps. xlviii. 14). The same word and thought meet us in the sublime blessing
(Deut. xxxiii. 27). (Internal confirmation of Mosaic authorship.) The thought of
•God dwelling with his people, is frequent ; the great purpose of the tabernacle, with iti



PB.XC. 1— 17.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 257

covering cloud, and all connected with it, was to impress this idea (for the highest
fulfilment of which, see Eph. ii. 22 ; Rev. xxi. 3). But here God is himself our
Habitation. The whole range of Gentile religious thought cannot (I believe) produce a
parallel to this tender, attractive, yet glorious representation of God as the Eternal
Home of his people. Ip that most mournful, though beautiful psalm, in which the
psalmist can see nothing but the frailty and vanity of human life, and Faith struggles
not to lose her hold, he thinks of himself as " a sojourner " with God (Ps, xxxix. 12).
His fainting faith would have revived, had he said, " No I a sojourner with men, a
pilgrim on earth ; but at home with thee I "

Eemarks. 1. How clusp, tender, full of encouragement, is this relation I To what
does the heart cling more lovingly, trustfully, restfuUy, than to our home? 2. This
looks beyond this fleeting life, the shadowy brevity of which is so powerfully contrasted,
throughout the psalm, with the opening thought of God's eternity. We are never to
leave home (cf. Ps. xlviii. 14). Our Guide till death; our God for ever. Compare our
Lord's argument (Luke xx. 37, 38). 3. The unity of lie Church : "all generations"
of the long succession of believers have one Home (Heb. xi. 13, 16, 40). 4, Our Lord
Jesus claims to sustain this relation (John xv. 4 — 7 ; 1 John ii. 28).

Ver. 8. — " Secret sins." Nothing perishes. Nothing is forgotten. Things lost to
US are found elsewhere. Things that seem to perish do but pass into new forms. The
bursting bubble, the smoke scattered by the wind, the fallen leaf trampled into the
mire, vanish from our sight and sense ; but the atoms of which that puff of smoke is
made are as old as the world, and will endure while the world endures. The image of
that bubble, with its lovely colours, most lovely just before it bursts, may remain in our
memory, or may exercise the thought of scieniific minds, for years. The bud which
the perished leaf nourished may grow into a bough that will be green when generations
have passed; and the dust into which the dead leaf moulders may feed new life. How
much more in the spiritual realm I The acted deed, the spoken word, the conscious
thought, may seem to perish the instant it comes to birth. Memory may blot it that
moment from her tablet. But it is indestructible. It survives in its results. There
is a memory in which nothing ever fades ; an eye nothing is quick enough to escape
or bafSe ; a light from which no secret thing is hid. " Thou hast set," etc.

I. Sin naturally seeks concealment. The first impulse of the first sinners —
very foolish, but very natural — was to hide themselves from God (Gen. iii. 8 — 10).
Some sins those who commit them are anxious to hide from human knowledge. Shame
is the natural attendant of consciousness of wrong-doing. Only the most hardened and
debased " glory in their shame." Other sins, through self-ignorance, self-deceit, care-
lessness, or dulness of conscience, are a secret from the sinner himself (Ps. xix. 12).
Some sins — e.g. fraud of all kinds — are possible only by concealment. Self-interest,
not shame merely, prompts secrecy. So subtle is sin, that it often disguises itself as
virtue. Covetousness poses as prudence, spite as candour, pride as a delicate sense of
honour, obstinate ill temper as honest independence, envy, malice, and all uncharitable-
ness, as zeal for truth and for God. Even the sincerest Christian has cause to pray,
" Who can understand," etc. ? (Ps. xix. 12).

II. No 8IN IS HIDDEN FEOM GoD. An appalling contrast! What darker hiding-
place conceivable than the secret, silent depth of the heart ? But not only is it trans-
parent to God's view (Ps. cxxxix. 1, 12), he brings our secrets to light in the full
blaze of omniscience. Elsewhere the " light of God's countenance " means his favour,
the sunshine of his loving-kindness. But that is a different word in Hebrew ; the one
used here means not mere sunshine, but the sun (Gen. i. 14 — 16). Gkid's knowledge
of men's sins is such as is possible to God alone ; he knows each sin in its motives, its
exact magnitude, its issues in the sinner himself and towards others, its desert.
Yet this tremendous thought has its side of comfort. " He knoweth our frame "
(Ps. ciii. 14)— our weakness, ignorance, temptations. His justice excludes harshness.
He " has no pleasure in the death of him that dieth."

III. This knowledob is not to be kept becbbt. It is to be published to the
universe (Eccles. xii, 14). The frequent detection and punishment of the most carefully
concealed crimes is a faint anticipation of " the day " (Acts xviL 31 ; 2 Cor. v. IQ ;
Eev. ii. 23).

P8ALMS — II. S



268 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. xo. 1—17.

IV. Sin cannot be hidden ; bot it can be " covebed." (Pss. xxxii. 1 ; Ixxxv. 2.)
It can be "blotted out" (Isa. xliii. 25 j Acts iii. 19), "washed" (Ps. li. 2; 1 Cor. tl
11 ; Rev. vii. 14:). Only he who knows our sins could forgive or atone (Bom. ▼. 8).



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Vers. 1 — 17. — The Lord our Dwelling-place. There is no need to doubt the assigned
authorship of this psalm. It is in entire harmony with the facts and surroundings o(
Moses' and Israel's life in the wilderness. Observe —

I. The blessed fact. The Lord our Dwelling-place, which this psalm tells of at its
beginning. Weary wanderers as the Israelites were, with no settled resting-place, here
to-day, gone to-morrow, how blessed for them that there was refuge, a dwelling-place,
a home, in God I And this, Moses and such as he had realized and may realize still.
1. Here there may be, there is, perpetual change; but in God a settled abode. 2.
Here, weariuess and turmoil ; in God, rest and peace. 3. Here, continual disappoint-
ment ; in God, the souTi satisfaction. (Gf. Ps. Ixiii. 5.) 4. Here, perpetual peril ; in
Gud, per/tct security. 5. Here, the coldness and enmity of men ; in God, un/ailing
sympathy and love. Yes, God is the Home of the believing soul.

II. The sustainino power of this fact. It enables us to meet with calmness
the heart-bieaking events ot lile. The psalmist enumerates a number of them. 1, UTie
hievityofourlife. (Vers. 3 — 6.) 2. The real cavxe of human misery. (Ver. 7.) It
is our gin, and Gods displeasure thereat. Heace is it (ver. 9) that the sense of
tbat displeasure overwhelms us as with lightning-flash, and our lives are as a breath.
And so all life is sad, even at the best (ver. 10). 3. The fearfulness of the Divine
anger. (Ver. 11.) " Who knoweth the might of thine anger and thy wrath, accord-
ing to the fear that is due unto thee ? " (Perowne). None can even rightly estimate it,
much less over-estimate it.

III. The believeno pbateb to which it leads. 1. That we may not mist the
instruction which these sad facts should impart. The " wisdom " craved is that we
may make the Lord our Dwelling-place. 2. For brighter days. (Vers. 13 — 15.) 3. For
the promised salvation — ^the work and the glory of God (ver. 16). 4. For the beauty
of hoUness. There had been none of this in Israel in all these many years. 5. That
life may be worth living. Not a perpetual disappointment, such as it had been hitherto,
but that the work of their hands might be established (ver. 17). Such are some of
ihe prayers which the soul whose home is in God will be led to offer in view of the
brevity, the frailty, and the sinfulness of life. Let the Lord be our Dwelling-place, and
all is well. " Our life is hid with Christ in God."— S. C.

Ver. 1. — The glorious habitation. It has been remarked that we have Moses pre-
sented to us in three aspects — as poet (see his song at the Red Sea); as preacher (see
Deuteronomy and elsewhere) ; and as a man of prayer (see the closing verses of this
psalm). These three characters are not often combined, but when they are they make
the subject of them very powerful with God for man, and with man for God. And
the secriit of his eminence in each character was that his spirit's home was in God.
Note—

1. What does this mean? How can the Lord be our Dwelling-place? 1. It is
evident that a spiritual dwelling-place is meant. It is not a material habitation, such
as the body needs, but one for the spirit of man. 2. And the Loard is such a Dwelling-
place for our spirits. For if we be such as Moses was, men of God, then God will be
our spirits' home, because there they continually abide. Christ said, " Abide in me,"
and this they do, as a tuau's home is his dwelling-place. And chiefly because it is
there he not only dwells, but loves to dwell. Home is not a mere place : it is only
home when love dwells there. A man's habitation may be a hell for him, and it will
be if it be without love. But it is his home when his affections centre there, when
it contains those whom he dearly loves, and who in like manner love him. Then,
whether rich or poor, great or small, a palace or a pauper's hut, it is yet his home.
Now, God is the home of his people, not alone because they do dwell there, hut because
they love to dwell there (cf. Pss. Ixiii. ; xliii. 3, 5). 3. For in Qod there is rest for



»s. xc. 1— 17.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 259

tmr intellects. Even unbelievers have recognized this. A French philosopher in the
"days of the Bevolution said, " If it could be shown that th'xe was no God, we should
have to invent one." They felt that for the satisfaction of the understanding God was
3, necessity. In him we can see the adequate Canne and Creator of all things, and in
liis wisdom and power and goodness the mind finds rest. 4. And in him also there
4a met the cravings of our affections. Even the contemplation of God in his spiritual
attributes, in his exalted character, has been found to be full of delight to God's
servants ; but how much more when he is revealed to us in Christ I Then the heart
•goes out to him in a great rush of affection, as it beholds his infinite purity and good-
ness and love as these are seen in Christ our blessed Bedeemer. The heart of the
•believer gazes upon him until it grows toward him as the flowers grow toward the
■sun. 5. And the will — that lordliest faculty of our nature — finds in him its
Inspiration, Strength, and Guide, and loves to lose itself in the will of God.
Thus is the Lord our Dwelling-place, our spirit's Home, where it dwells, and loves
to dwell.

II. Who ABE THET THAT DWELL IN GoD? St. Johu, in his First Epistle, lays down
the marks of these blessed ones. 1, They are they who dwell in love. (1 John iv. 16.)
He who loveth not his brother cannot dwell in God, nor God in him. 2. They who
possess the Spirit of Ood. (1 John iv. 13.) 3. ITiey who openly confess him. (1 John iv.
15.) 4. They who keep his commandments. (1 John iii. 24.) Thus may we test our
eight to say, " Lord, thou hast been our Dwelling-place."

III. What comes or this dwelling in him ? 1. The unity of Ood's people. 2.
The worlcPs conversion, when it sees all God's people thus united (John svii. 21).

rV. How CAN WE ENTEB INTO AND ABIDE IN THIS BLESSED HOMS? (Johu xiv. 6.)

Christ is the Way. Give yourselves up to him. — S. C.

Ver. 4. — Ood's estimate of a thotuand gears. Note —

I. The obound of this estimate. It Is the eternity of God. He who is from
•everlasting to everlasting — God, the Eternal. There never was a period in which he was
not. He is more permanent than the most changeless things. 1. History teaches us
this. Push back so far as we can into the remote past, there we find the sure proof of
the IHvine existence and work. 2. Science teaches it yet more powerfully. Whether
we investigate the old rocks beneath our feet, or gaze upon the stars on high, both
«like teU of vast ages, millenniums upon millenniums, in which they have had their
being, and alike they proclaim God. 3. Revelation affirms the same.

XL Its beabonablenesb. Human analogies help us here. For our ideas of time are :

1. According to our own length of life. To short-lived creatures, such as the insects,
« day appears a vast stretch of time ; but to us, the days of whose years are three score
years and ten, and perhaps four score years, a day is scarcely any time at alL We think
A great deal of hidf a century, but what would one like Methuselah have thought of
it? Only an insignificant fraction of his life, not needing to be much counted of. The
angels of God also, what are our centuries to them ? Above all, God the Eternal, how
•could it be otherwise than that a thousand years should be to him as one day?

2. According to the magnitude and multiplicity of those matters which demand and
■occupy our attention. There are penple who live in very limited spheres, and who
■have scarcely anything to do — the idle rich, and many more. Their one idea is how
to kill time ; they hardly know how to get through it — their days are miserably long.
But take the man of affairs, who has large responsibilities resting upon him, the states-
man, the merchant, the governor of wide areas and of great numbers of men ; — these
have so much to attend to that the days are all too short and too few, and are gone
long before they can accomplish what they have to do. Apply this to the idea of
dod. How vast his dominion 1 how infinite the demands upon his thought and energy !
To him, therefore, a thousand years would be as one day. 3. Happiness or misery
also cannot but affect our estimate of time. The sufferer tossed with pain, the
prisoner in his dungeon, the exile, the miserable ones of all kiads, — how long, how
wearisome, are their days (Job vii. 4 ; Ps. cxxx. 6 ; Luke xvi. 23 — 25) ! On the other
hand, the happy ones, — ^how time flies with them ! And God is the blessed God — " the
blessed and only Potentate." All that can contribute to his joy is present to him
increasingly ; the evil that exists is but the evolution of good. Why should he not ba



260 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. xo. 1— IT.

blessed ? Oar sad days of pain, therefore, which seem to us like a thousand yeara, h*
knows not, hut only the joy which reverses such estimate of time.

III. Its beneficent beminders. All truths of Scripture have practical bearinga^
and this one assuredly has. 1. It deepens in tis the spirit of holy reverence. (Ps. viiL
3, 4.) 2. It loosens the power of this world over us. What poor things are all the
world's gifts, when seen in the light of God the Eternal I 3. It bids us he patient, and
not fret ourselves at the seemingly slow progress of good. 4, li ministers vnipeakable
consolation. We die, and leave our loved ones and our work ; but God ever liveth, and
they are in his charge. — S. 0.

Yer. 9. — " As a tale that is told." Yes, it is true ; we do spend our lives as is here
said. I know the word rendered " tale " may bear other meanings — a thought, a breath,
a meditation, a numbering (Exod. v. 8). But this in our text sets forth the psalmist'*
thought as well as, if not better than, any other. His view of life is a very sad one,
and is by no means true as concerns the blessed dead who die in the Lord. Their
lives are not all " labour and sorrow ; " still less are they " all passed away in " GK>d'a
wrath ; nor are they so vain and worthless as, in his sadness, the psalmist represents
them. His idea, in the similitude he here employs of "a tale, has in view th»
brevity, the trifling character, the speedy forgetfulness into which they fell ; but these
are not all the characteristics of a tale that is told. Oriental peoples are very fond of
short bright stories, and one who can tell such stories well is ever welcome amongst
them. The psalmist had no doubt often heard such recitals, and he says — So is man's
life. Well, it is so^

I. In that cub datb abb soon oveb. The tale that was told was never long, but
soon done, and room made for another. And so is it with our life, even at the longest,
and especially that portion of our life which is of paramount importance — the formative
character-fixing years. How soon they are over I And the life takes its bent and bias
from them, and generally continues so to the end. In the tale of most lives yon know
very soon how it will go on. The child is father to the man, and you can generally
foretell how it will wind up. Let such as are young, therel'ore, take heed to their
days, the days of their youth — they are all-important.

II. In its vaeibd character. There are tales told that are poor, mean, hurtful,
not worth the telling ; that stain the imagination, that incite to evil, and are doomed
to a speedy and contemptuous oblivion. But there are others of an entirely different
character. And so it is with men's lives — some evil, some blessed and good.

III. Ir BITHBE IS TO BE WOBTHT, THE ESSENTIAL ELEMENTS ABE THE SAMB.

1. Energy and activity. 2. Thought/uhiess. 3. Character must be revealed. 4. The
aim must be generous and high. 6. It must end weU. — S. C.

Ver. 11.— il/oj»'« tmder-estimatt of Ood'i anger. " Who knoweth," etc. ?

I. SouE DO NOT KNOW IT AT ALL. They do not believe in God at ail, or in a very
faint way. Hence they turn at once to what they term " natural causes," when the
judgments of God are abroad in the earth. " The fool hath said in his heart," etc.

II. Most men hate some idea of it. 1. From the Bible. The records of God's
wrath are there writ large — the Fall ; the Flood ; the destruction of Egypt ; the deaths
in the wilderness, whicli were probably the occasion of this psalm. 2. From what
they see. Vice and villainy come down with a crash from time to time, and men are
forced to confess, " Yerily there is a God that judgeth in the earth." 8. From sad
experience in their own hearts and lives. 4. From the frenzied f ears «f many godlesi
ones when death seizes them. Their last awful hours betray the knowledge of God's wrath.

III. But none enow it AOCOBDiNa to thk feab or God that is due. 1. They
cannot, because of the limitation of human faculties. 2. But they vmM not know it as
they might and should. The thought of it is a terror and torment to them. 3. But
they must, if they are to be saved. If we see not our need of Christ, we shall never
seek him. " Spirit of God's most holy fear," come to us, that we may come to theel
—8.0,

Ver. 12. — The right numbering of our days. There are certain seasons which come
round to men — birthdays, anniversaries, the clo^e of the year, and the like — wLicb



W.XO. 1— 17.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 261

seem to compel some sort of numbering of our days. The giddiest, the most thonght-
1ms and wnrlfllv', are, for the moment, constrained to recollect the flight of time, the
passing away of their life. Like as in dead of night, in the heart of a great city, when
Its business is hushed, and the traffic of its streets is still, the almost solitary passenger,
though thinking of quite other things, is startled and arrested by the sudden simul-
taneous sounding of the hour of the night from the multitudinous clocks and bell-
towers which are on every hand. In the rush and roar of the midday business, when
the full tide of the city's trade is sweeping on, their stroke and chime would hardly
have been heeded. But in this quiet hour, when all is still, the boom of the cathedral
bell or the chime from yonder tower floats along the deserted streets, and the wayfarer
cannot but take notice that another hour is gone. So in the quiet of thought, to which
such seasons as those I have referred to incline us, the evident fact of the passing away
of our days strikes upon our mind, and leads us to some sort of numbering of our days —
a numbering which may or may not be profitable, and which can only be so according
to the manner in which it is done. And this is the teaching of our text. It craves
the teaching of God, that we may so number our days as to apply, etc. That, then, is
the right numbering of our days which leads us to apply our hearts unto wisdom.
Therefore let us inquire —

L What is this wisdom to which we should apply cub hbabts? It is that
which leads us to so use this life as the preparation for the life eternal. This life is
our school, our training-ground, the scene of our education for eternity. What folly,
then, to waste and squander such a season I We chide sternly the boy who wastes his
school-time, but how many men throw away the opportunities which are given to them
in this school of life to prepare them for the real life which awaits ua when this is over I
To the foolish child we say, " School-time does not come twice." To many men the
same needs to be said. But we shall never use this life aright until we have sur-
rendered our wills — given our hearts — to God, that by his wonder-working grace he
may cleanse, and sanctify, and keep, and use them for himself. Then all will b« well.

II. How DOES THE BIGHT NUMBBBINO OP CUB DATS LEAD TO THE APPLYINO O?

<)0B HEABTS TO WISDOM ? Bccause it makes us realize how transitory our life is. This
is the burden of this psalm. But to really see this, to absolutely believe it, as few do, is
to think but little of this world. 1. 0/ its riches and glory. For if I know — not merely
think, but know certainly — that I must have done with them all in a very little time,
shall I care very much for them ? Would a prisoner in the condemned cell be greatly
elated if, the day before bis death, he was left a fortune? Would any struggle as they
do for this world's wealth if they knew that their lease of it was so brief? 2. And so,
too, of this worlcPs sorrows. Should we be so moved by them if we knew how little
time they lasted ? The martyrs were wont to strengthen their minds by this thought
«s they anticipated their cruel tortures and death. Paul says, " Our light afflictions
which are hut/or a moment." Hence he who rightly numbers his days lives above the
world, is independent of it, is free from its terrihle down-drag and tyranny. 3. And
he will, knowing the transitoriness of this life, seek/or that which is eternal.

III. Why ABE WE so slow to numbbb oue DATS ? 1. Because we do not like the
task. It breeds melancholy and fearful thoughts. 2. We persuade ourselves there is no
meed. We shall have plenty of time (cf. the rich fool). 3. We so love the world.
4. Doubt. The teachings of Holy Scripture and the Church are dimly seen, or doubted,
or, it may be, absolutely denied. Many more than we think are practical atheists.
Therefore we need to pray, " So teach us to number our days," or else we shall never
do it at alL — S. C.

Ver. 14. — The secret of satisfaction. I. Man ceaves fob satisfaction. He may
liave many advantages and gifts, much wealth, friends, health, and much beside ; and
these may divert, interest, and absorb him ; but they cannot really satisfy. His soul
will hunger still.

II. God's mercy alone can meet that obavino. For: 1. It puts out of the way
•all that hinders our satisfaction. The sense of guilt ; the tyranny of sin ; the burden
of care ; the fear of death. 2. It brings along with it the true elements of the soul's
satisfaction. Sense of acceptance with God ; uniform victory over sin ; perfect peace ;
the will and power to bless others; communion with God; abiding hope.



262 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. xc. 1—17.

III. But it must be sought eaklt. " In the morning " is the literal rendering.
1. Each day should be begun with the seeking with all intensity this blessed mercy of
God. 2. But especially should each life be so begun. The parents for their child at
its birth ; the child itself as soon as it is able to understand. What ills will be escaped,
what good ensured, if this be done 1

lY. The besult shajj. be the blessed life — ^heaven before you get there, — S, C.

Ver, 15. — " Make m glad." None can over-estimate the blessing that God's gift of
gladness is to us. How it sweetens intercourse, encourages work, lightens our burdens,
and helps us over many a difficult place! But there are forms of gladness to which no-
praise can be given. The laughter of fools is like " the crackling of thorns under a
pot " — so says Ecclesiastes. And the gladness of evil men over evil has poison in it,
notwithstanding all its loudness. And all mere man-made gladness is without perma-
nence or power to really help. The gladness that is of God's making, that is what the-
psalmist prayed for, and for which we also may well pray. Therefore let us observe-
its elements, in what it consists. And the fulluwing verses of the psalm clearly tell this.

I. God's woek must afpeab to us. That is, God's salvation — for that is empha.
tically his " work," and must be seen by us, and seen as our salvation. Here is the-
primary essential of all true gladness.

II. His GLOET ALSO. " And thy glory unto," etc. That is, God must be seen to
be the delight and joy of the soul. David speaks of God as " God, my exceeding joy."
This is what is craved in Ps. Ixiii., " To see thy power and thy glory, so as I have,"
etc. The soul must learn to delight itself in the Lord, as it will if the glory of God
be seen.

HI. The bbautt op the Loed cub God must bb upon us. That is, the gracious-
ness, gentleness, and goodness of the Lord's character; its purity, holiness, truth, and
righteousness; — these, which constitute the beauty of the Lord, and which are so mighty
in their attraction, that one asks, "Whom have I in heaven but thee?" (Ps. xvi.);,
these must be upon us. They are the adornment of the doctrine of God our Saviour.
They were, and are, all seen in Christ, and they irresistibly draw all men unto him.
And unless in some measure they are upon us, God cannot make us glad. Their absence
kills all gladness.

IV. OuB WORK MUST BE ESTABLISHED. " The Work of our hands, establish thou it."
To know that we are not labouring in vain, that when we let down the net Christ will
give the draught, yea, does so ; this is his establishing our work, and by it God doe»
make us glad.

Conclusion. Pray this prayer for your own sake, for your work's sake, for Christ'»
sake ; for gladness wins mauy hearts. — 8. C.

Ver. 1. — Ood a Dwelling-place. God our Home; the soul's Home, There seem to be
no sufficient reasons for rejecting the Mo-aio authorship of this psalm ; but this much
appears to be certain — the associations of the time of Moses form the machinery of the
psalm ; and there are no other associations which fit to it so well. During the last
forty years of his life, and during tlie long years of the desert-wanderings for Israel,
the people had no home, no resting-place ; they were constantly moving to and fro ; and
yet God was caring for them, preserving them from harm ; God was their Home. A
modern preacher has said, " There is one thins^ runs through the whole of the Scriptures
which is above every other that was ever before the Hebrew mind — it is that in which
God is represented as the Dwelling-place of his people, as the Home of the soul. It i»
an awful, incomprehensible, infinite thought; yet we can feel it and know it, not in
the same sense as if we were Buddhists or Brahmins, but, while awed by the grandeur,
never losing our personality in the infiniteness of the thought. All things in nature
seem to abide ever, constant and unchangeable, but they only seem. All things liave
the stamp of insecurity upon them; but how confidently secure God's people stand
in the eternal relationship of God to them ! " See what thoughts we associate
with home, and how far these may be applied to God as our "Home," our " Dwelling-
place."

I. Home is a place op ebi.ationships. Man enters into a variety of connection*
with his fellows; but his relationships, sanctified by love and service, centre in hi*



w. xo. 1— 17.J THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 268



home. Belationahip to Qoi as "our Father" makes his hoase our home, and our
brothers' home.

II. Home is a flaob of BEOUBrrr. It is our sanctuary. There we feel not only
that none will harm us, but that none ever want to harm us. We even feel that
nothing can harm us if we only are safe at home. And nothing ever can harm the
soul that is ir> the shelter of the " everlasting arms."

III. Home is a place of pebbokal interests. Bach one is concerned in the best
welfare of each of the others. It is full of mutual love-serrice. Nothing is paid for,
save by responsive love and service. So God may be thought of as personally concerned,
personally interested, in all for whom he finds a home.

IV. Home is a place of best. For those wearied and worn by toil or by trouble-
So we sing, " Oh rest in the Lord 1 "

V. Home is a place of kefugb. To which the traveller gladly returns from the
fatigue and peril of the way. To which the erring child, the prodigal, turns in the
penitent hour. So Gk)d is the Home of the sinful soul, ever the Father. — K. T.

Ver. 2. — Uie past, present, and future eternity of God. " There is something in the
psalm that is wonderfully striking and solemn, acquainting us with the profoundest
depths of the Divine nature " (Bwald). In contrast with the ever-passing, ever-
changing generations, God is the Abiding, Never-changing One. Independent of all
things that exist, God is before all, and is the absolute Creator and Controller of alL
The mountains have ever been man's best image of the stable and permanent, yet he
is helped to conceive of God as before the mountains, more stable than the mountains,
more enduring than the mountains. " From everlasting to everlasting " is, poetically,
" firom hidden time to hidden." There are <«m»-measures which we can use. There
•re ekmity-xaeasxaea of which we can only think ; they are now beyond our mental
grasp. The eternity-measures alone can be properly applied to God. Two things are
the subjects of meditation in the first two verses of this psalm — the Divine independ-
ence, and the Divine relations. God is the Absolute Being — the " I am." God is in
gracious, voluntary, relations — the " God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of Jacob." Beyond
us as the subject suggested may be, it does us good to try our minds with it, and fill
our souls with the wonder and the glory of it.

I. God was bbfobe all things. Philosophers try to persuade themselves that
matter is eternal ; or they fix upon the atom, or upon water, as the essential primary
thing. They are always driven back behind their conclusions, and urged to say whence
comes the atom or the moisture. There is no consistent thinking that does not bring
us to the conclusion that there was some self-existent, immaterial Being, who was the
absolute originator of all material existence, and still exists in complete and conscious
independence of everything he has made. He is beyond and above all the chances and
changes of his own handiwork,

II. God is in all things. Separable from them, but voluntarily interested in
them. The life and light of all this wondrous world we see. The poetical faculty
discerns his presence. Human experience attests his practical working. The religious
sentiment opens the eyes, and makes the recognition of God easy. When we say
aU things, we mean absolutely <dl, not merely tho^e which we are pleased to call
religious.

III. God will be aptee all things. This can but appeal to faith. To us the
time is inconceivable when things will no longer exist. Conceive the time when
material things exist no longer, you must think of God as still the One Being. In the
One who never passes, never changes, we may put the perfect trust.— R. T.

Ver. 5. — The lesson of the grass. " And fade away suddenly as the grass." The
strength of this poetical figure can only be fully recognized by those who know the
peculiarities of grass in the hot Eastern countries. " In the East one night's rain works
a change as if by magic. The field at evening was brown, parched, arid as a desert ;
in the morning it is green with the blades of grass. The scorching hot wind blows upon
it, and again before evening it is withered."

I. A LESSON FBOu THE FBAILTT OF THE OBA88. It is little more than a blades
Compare with plant, shrub^ or tree. A delicate trembling thing. It comes too sud-



264 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. xo, 1— 17,

denly, and grows too quickly, to give ub any impression of strength. So the apostla
reminds us that " all flesh " is as frail as grass. We are here to-day, tremble to-day,
and are gone to-morrow. " Surely every man's life is but a vanity."

II. A LESSON FBOM THE PEBILB OF THE SKASS. From iusect, from flood, from
drought, from wind, from the scythe of the mower. So are the perils that attend
human life many and varied. Hereditary tendencies, diseases, results of vice, unhealthy
situations and occupation, accidents. Well did the hymn-writer say—

"Strange that a harp of thousand strings
Should keep in tune so long."

A considerable proportion of a population die in infancy or in youth ; a vast proportion
die of preventible disease ; an alarming proportion die of Divine judgments on sinful
indulgence ; and a considerable proportion die through the uncertainty that attaches
to the worlsing of man-made machinery. " In the midst of life we are in death." " Be
ye also ready ; for in such an hour as ye think not, the Son of man cometh."

III. A LESSON FEOM THE BRIEF LIFE OF THE GRASS. Growing up in the morning,
and withered by night, it has but its little day in which to do its work. There can bo
no wasting of the lew moments, the " little while," which represent the human life of
even the longest-lived. The brevity of our life puts supreme importance into the
passing moment. " Now is the accepted time."

IV. A LESSON FBOU THE MISSION OF THE GRASS. Frail 88 it Is, brief as is its life,
the grass has Its work ; and it has but to be faithful to the measure of power it has,
and the length of time it abides. It has a mission to the soil, to the atmosphere, to the
cattle, and to man. So we have our mission ; it is precise to our powers ; it is limited
to the time of our sojourn. And, however little, it fits into the great plan of Gbd for
the well-being of the race, — B. T.

Ver. 6.—Beeret gin. The word used is a singular one, and may be rendered " our
secret " (character). " God needs no other light to discern our sins by but the light of
his own face. It pierceth through the darkest places ; the brightness thereof enlighteneth
all things, discoTers all things. So that the sins that are committed in deepest darkness
are all one to him as if they were done in the face of the sun. For they are done in
his face, that shines more, and from which proceeds more light than firom the face of
the sun. So that this ought to make us the more fearful to offend ; he sees us when
we see not him, and the light of his countenance shines about us when we think our-
selves hidden in darkness." " These words have a singular force if written by Moses,
who saw the splendour of God, and carried away upon bis person its manifest tokens."

I. SEOBET bin EBOABDBD as that WHICH WE WOULD GLADLY CONCEAL FEOM OTHERS.

Secrecy is always suspicious. " He that doeth truth cometh to the light, that his deeds
may be made manifest, that they are wrought in God." Secrecy may be duty ; in
public spheres it may be wise policy ; but when a man, in private life, does not wish
any one to know what he is doing, he is generally found to be doing something wrong.
The burglar, the coiner, the sensualist, want secrecy. They work in the dark ; they
go under feigned names; they hide themselves in the great cities ; they devise all sorts
of excuses to account for their time. If they succeed in deceiving their fellow.s, surely
their ways and works are " naked and open " to God, whose " eyes are in every place,
beholding the evil and the good."

IL Secret sin bbgardbd as that which we tbt to conceal from ourselves.
This point requires more searching treatment. 1. Natural disposition, and errors in
education, prevent men frum recognizing the sinfulness of their own sins. 2. Conscience
may be blunted so that it is no longer keen to witness against sin. 3. Strong will to
continue in sin sets men upon persuading themselves that their sin is not sin. Illustrate
from the sins of drinking, slandering, envying, etc. A man may deceive himself, but
God quickly tears away his " refuges of lies." God knows the man who does not know
himself. He puts the secrets into the " light of his countenance."

III. Secret sin bbgarded as that which we try to conceal fboh God. As
did Adam, by hiding among the trees. Men say, " The Lord shall not see ; " but no
man ever yet succeeded in closing the eye of Heaven. Men's most desperate effort is to
assert and prove that there is no God, and so no observer of their sin. They never



M.X0.1— 17.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 266

really succeed. Infidelity is the hopeless attempt to get rid of a Grod who sees, and
will be sure to Judge. — B. T.

Ver. 9. — Brief life as judgment on sin. This is the point thflt Is specially present
to the mind of the author of the psalm ; and it is the poiat specially impressed by the
historical associations of the psalm. " Human transitoriness, the creature made subject
to vanity, death in its much-disregarded connection with sin, — these and the awful con-
trast, God's eternity, his absolute disposition of men's lives, his mindfuluess of their
misdeeds, are here the theme of melancholy contemplatioa." Recall the fact that
during the thirty-eight years of the Israelite wanderings ia the wilderness, they were
subject to an extraordinary mortality, which was a direct judgment of Jehovah ou their
rebellion. A whole generation was punished, for the sin at Kadesh, by premature
death. All from twenty years old and upward perished during the following years, so
that only two representatives of the entire generation, Caleb and Joshua, actually
entered the promised land. It is true that Moses himself lived to be a hundred and
twenty years old, but his generation could not have reached a higher standard than
seventy or eighty years. I'he truth that " the wages of sin is death " is forcibly illus-
trated by the historical record of the wilderness-generation. We may trace the Divine
wisdom in giving the judgment on sin this particular form, of shortened life.

I. FnonoNaED life gives opfobtitnity fob increase of sin. See the case of the
antediluvian sinners, who went on sinning through long lives until they became hope-
lessly corrupt, and had to be swept away by the Flood. It may, indeed, be a severe
judgment to prolong a life, and a gracious judgment to shorten it.

XL The love and cLiNOiNa to life make SHOBTENiNa life a vest effective
JUDSMENT. Love of life is natural to man. It is the expression of his consciousness
of immortality, only it leads him to want his immortality here. The things wbich man
begins to do make it extremely trying to have tu leave them unfinished. Lite means
pleasant relationships, which man feels it a very bitter thing to break off.

in. Man's utteb helplessness in the fbesenob or eablt death makes this
FOBU OF judgment SPECIALLY HUMiLLATiNQ. To couquer, rise above, mate and master
everything, is man's supreme passion. Early death is God — it may be the neglected
God — mastering him. — B. T.

Ver. 10. — Length of life a doubtful good. Yet every one wishes to live long. Every
one imagines for himself an old age ; and an ideal human life includes it. And yet
there are but few who have the experience of old age who would really wish others to
share it. Not without good reason did the ancients say, " Those whom the gods love
die young." Length of life is a doubtful good, because —

I. The aged abe pot aside fbom the activities of life. Life goes past them :
opinions change; customs change ; business is changed. The old man no longer fits;
he must stand aside ; if he persists in keeping his place, he ruins his business, and
worries everybody. It is hard to have to live on into a time when we shall no longer
be of any use.

II. The aged must beab the bubden of failing powbes. See the description of
old age in Ecclesiastes. See the force of the terms "labour" and " sorrow " in the
text. The necessary weakening of the bodily faculties is accompanied — save in very
extreme cases — with corresponding failing of mental powers, and a trying limitation of
human interests. The old man ceases to belong to his day, and lives over again his
childish years. Sometimes aged helplessness, with disease, is most pitiful.

III. The aged sometimes have to beab the consequences of the sins of todth.
All sins ol sensuality and self-indulgence carry their inevitable penalties ; and if the
pressure of them be delayed by a well-regulated manhood, they come on a man with a
rush when the vitality is lowered by advancing age. A man bears " the sins of youth
in the bones of eld."

IV. The aged often find thbib heaviest tkoublb to be the loneliness ih
which they ABE LEFT. He who has had troops of friends dies at last tended by the
hireling. Loved ones die away or remove out of reach. The old man often says, as
did the Rev. William Jay, of Bath, in his advanced years, " My burying-ground is
richer than my church." To sensitive, affectionate souls, aged loneliness must ha the



268 THE BOOK OP PSALMa [pb. xo. 1— 17.

supreme woe. WiTe, children, friends, gone on before. How the old man must say to
himself continually —

" What is my nest to ma ? — mf empty nest 7 "

V. The aged sometimes have to bear dibtbebsino oibouhbtaboeb ab well ai
BODILY FBAILTT. To live on meaus exhausting the savings ; to be unable to earn ; to
have none to work for us. But life is in the Lord's hands, not ours. " If life be long,
we will be glad, that «e cau long obey." — E. T.

Ver. 12. — Numbering our days. That cannot mean merely counting them.
Whether they are to be few or many we know not. The rich and self-centred farmer
thought he could count his days, "Soul, thou hast much goods laid up for many
years." But the truth was that for him there was not even a " to-morrow." " This
night thy soul shall be required of thee." We can value, estimate, appraise our days.
We can realize their responsibilities, their work, their possibilities, their issues. When
should the numbering work be done? Will it do to leave it until we are on the
threshold of eternity ? In this matter " now is the accepted time." Number them as
you number the days of a holiday-time, so that you may crowd every day with the best
and worthiest things. Number them aright, and you will not fail to ask grace of God,
saying, " So teach us to number our days, that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom."

I. Days, to be well numbered, must be estimated in the light of eternity. How
changed a thing life would become to us if there were no eternity 1 Compare two lives,
one without, and one with, the thought of eternity. 1. Days may seem many ; they
are really but few. Seventy years is but a little while to look back on. See striking
Bible figures of our life — weaver's shuttle ; passing shadow; shepherd's tent ; breath of
mouth m winter. The generations are like the changing sentinel-watch in the night.
2. Days may seem to go slowly; they really hurry by. "Thou carriest them away aa
with a flood." Swifter than the post. 3. Days may seem to be made up of little
things ; really there is nothing little ; because eyerything has its bearing on the future,
on character ; and everything has eternal issues. It is a cause with a consequence. A
little pebble may make ripples that shall never die away.

II. Days well numbered will not allow the PUTTDua off of ddty. Every day
has its work. There is no possible overtaking the ends of life, save in daily faith-
lulness. If we are faithful every day, life cannot be unfinished. A foithfnl man can be
stopped at any time. He wants no time in which to get himself ready.

III. Days well numbered must seem too solemn for unaided sglf-exebtion.
The man who rightly values them will tremble to step on them alone. Even the
lesser claims of life overwhelm a thoughtful spirit. We all fail to be what we desire to
be, even in common life. Much more the higher. We have a soul to save, a crown to
win ; and there should be jewels in the crown. Can we do it alone ?— B. T.

Vers. 16, 17. — Prayer for Divine revealing of the mystery of life. This prayer, aa
referable to the Israelites, is a presage of the end of their pilgrimage, of their forgiveness,
and of their settlement in Canaan. The issue of present Divine dealings was a glory
which could only come to the children of the Mosaic generation. But Moses could
properly pray that what God was actually then doing — his work by his disciplinary
dispensations — might at once be revealed to his servants. To know what God is doing
with us is our best help in bearing what burdens God lays upon us. And when we
do know, we can even pray God to keep on his corrective work, whatever it may cost
us, and let our children realize the issues. The "beauty" of the Lord may be taken
as the Divine /avour ; or it may be a figure for the glory of the Divine presence. The
prayer seems to embrace two things.

I. That God's purpose should be made to appear. " Thy work." That prayer
is constantly rising from the hearts of men. We are always wanting to know the
meaning of Ufe ; the meaning of our lives ; the meaning of our lives at particular times.
What is God doing with us? Unto what, into what, is God leading us ? This is only
made known in answer to prayer, which reveals to Gt)d an attitude of mind and feeling
to which his purpose and his work can be explained. God holds the key to every
life-story.



PS. xci. 1—16.]



THE BOOK OP PSALMS.



267



II. That man's work should be establtshbd. This is the prayer of those who
feel the uncertainty of life, and fear that they will be unable to complete what they
have begun. The prayer may take two forms. 1. Permit me to finish the worls I
have started. 2. Let my children carry on to completion my work. Do not let it be
lost and useless, as an unfinished thing. "Establish thou the work of our hands upon
us." " When Moses prays that the ' children ' of the present generation may see God's
glory, he perhaps has in mind the exclusion of the latter from entrance into the land of
Canaan, it was only to their children that this, the culminating and most glorioua
blessing, was to be vouchsafed." — B. T.

Ver. 17. — Prayer and work. " And let the beauty of the Lord our God be upon
us : and establish thou the work of our hands upon us ; yea, the work of our haudi
establish thou it."

L That good men abb engaged in important wobk. Ood has a work to do ;
and the psalmist prays that it may be made manifest to their eyes. We desire to see
God's work — the revelations and exercises of his great power and love. But the thought
here is of our work. 1. It is divinely appointed. Not self-chosen. The great aim of
it is the same as God's — to save men, by our giving them all possible help. 2. This
work gives to life its chief valiie and interest. Living for the bodies and souls of others
is intrinsically more valuable than all the private ends we pursue.

II. Good men feel anxious fob the success of their work. They want it
established, made strong, prospered. Even as they aim to succeed in their temporal
work. On account of the intrinsic importance of the work itself. Because of the
consequences of the work in the future. " And thy glory unto their children." Good
men think not only of their own future, but of the future of Christ's Church. Because
of our future. It will soon be of the utmost consequence to us whether our work has
been established or not. Have we done anything, are we doing anything, that will
last — of a beneficent kind ?

IIL Good men feel that the success of their work depends on the BLBSsiNa
OF God. "Let thy beauty be upon us, and establish thou the work of our hands."
If our work is to be strong — be established — the strength must come from God. The
utmost we can do is to accomplish the outward conditions of success ; but God alone
can reach the heart of the sinner and sufferer to cleanse and comfort. Our work ought
to be beautiful, but God alone can give the beauty. If our work be the work of
gratitude, love, humility, and sdf-saarifice, it is God that has made it beautiful.

IV. That the Divine blessing on cub wobk is obtained by peateb. 1. God
has made prayer necessary to the success of spiritual work. Christ taught this con-
stantly, " Pray ye the Lord of the harvest," etc. ; " Thy kingdom come." 2. As a
matter of experience, the men who have prayed most over their work have succeeded
best. Their prayer expressed their earnestness audi faith — trust and spirit of depend-
ence. Observe how work and prayer are here conjoined. Prayer useless where there
is no work on hand. — S.



EXPOSITION.



PSALM XCL



This psalm, like the majority in the present
Book, is without a title. Jewish tradition,
however, ascribed it to Moses — a conclusion
which Dr. Kay and others accept as borne
out by the facts, especially by the many
close resemblances between it and Deut.
xxxii., xxxiii. Other critics, and they are
the majority, trace in it a different hand,
but regard it as suggested by Ps. xo.
The subject is the security of the man



who thoroughly tmsts in God. This subject
is worked out by an "antiphonal arrange-
ment " (Cheyne)^ — ^the first speaker deliver-
ing vers. 1, 2 ; the second, vers. 3, 4 ; then
the first responding with vers. 5 — 8 ; and
again the second with vers. 9 — 13. In
conclusion, a third speaker, making himself
the mouthpiece of Jehovah, crowns all by
declaring the blessings which God himself
will bestow upon his faithful ones (vers.
14—16).
This psalm is, apparently, liturgical.



268



THE BOOK OP PSALMS.



[ps. xci, 1 — 16.



and la "the most vivid of the litnrglcl
paalmB " (Oheyne). It has a oertaia resem-
blance to the speech of Eliphaz the Temanite
in Job T. 17 — 23, but stands at a higher
elevation.

Ver. 1. — He that dwelleth in the secret
place of the lilost High (comp. Pb. xc. 1).
He who has bis thoughts always on God U
said to "dwell in him" — to "make his
abode with him " — ^to " sit down in his secret
place." He has the Almighty, as it were,
for his constant companion. Shall abide
under the shadow of the Almighty. This ia
not "tautology." What is meant is that
"loving faith on man's part shall be met
by faithful love on God's part" (Kay).
God will extend his "shadow" over the
man who places himself under his pro-
tection.

Ver. 2.— 1 will say of the Lord. The
general sentiment is followed by a personal
application. "I, at any rate," says the first
speaker, " will place myself under this
powerful protection." He is my Befnge and
my Fortress (comp. Pss. xviii. 2 ; osliv. 2).
Uy God; in him will I trust (oomp. Pss.
xxix. 2; xxxi. 6; Ir. 23; Ivi. 3; Ixi. 4,
etc.).

Ver. 3. — Barely he shAll deliver thee. The
second speaker takes up the word, and
naturally changes the person. Addressing
the first speaker, he says — Yes, assuredly,
God shall deliver thee from whatever
dangers beset thee : a», first, from the snare
of the fowler (comp. Ps. cxxiv. 7 ; Prov. vi.
5) ; and, secondly, from the noisome pesti-
lence (comp. ver. 6), i.e. from all dangers
whatsoever — not more from these than from
others.

Ver. 4. — He shall cover thee with his
feathers ; rather, with hit pinions (see the
Revised Version ; comp. ver. 1 ; and see
Exod. xix. 4; Deut.xxxii.il). And under
his wings shalt thou trust; rather, shalt
t)Mu take refuge. His truth — i.e. " liis
faithfulness, tiis fidelity" — shall be thy
shield and buckler ; i.e. " thy protection."

Yer. 5. — Ihou shalt not be afraid for the
terror by night. Bobbers constituted the
chief " terror by night " (see Job xxiv. 14
—16; Jer. xlix. 9; Obad. 5); but night
attacks on the part of a foreign enemy were
not uncommon (Cant. iti. 8; Isa. xv. 1).
Nor for the arrow that flieth by day. Open
war is probably Intended, not sirocco, or
pestilence, or " the arrows of the Almighty "
(Job vi. 4). The man who trusts in God
will be specially protected in the peril of
battle.

Yer. 6. — Nor for the pestilence that
walketh in darkness. The plague-god is
personified and represented as stalkiug I



through the land in the hours of darkness.
Parallels have been found in the literature
of the Babylonians (see ' Babylonian and
Oriental Becord,' vol. i. 'p. 12) and else*
where. Nor for the destruction that wasteth
at noonday. The rare word, 3Bp, translated
"destruction" here and in Dent, xxxii. 24,
is rendered by the LXX. Sai/idviov, and the
entire phrase, " for the destruction tliat
wasteth at noonday," becomes inh aun-
•jTT^fiaTos Kal Satfioviov fieffTjfjL^pivov — " from
ruin and the demon of the midday " — by
which sunstroke would teem to be meant
(comp. Ps. cxxi. 6, '■ The sun shall not
smito thee by day ").

Ver. 7. — A thousand shall fall at thy
side, and ten thousand at thy right hand,
The meaning is, "Though a thousand, or
even ten thousand, should fall beside thee,
iu battle, or through pestilence, or tun-
atroke," yet — It shall not come nigh thee —
the danger, whatever it be, shall not touch
thy person ; thou shalt be protected from it.

Ver. 6.—<hXj with thine eyas shalt thou
behold and see the reward (or, " the recom-
pense") of the wicked; i.e. without
suffering anything thyself, thou shalt look
on, and see the punishment of the ungodly.
So Israel in the land of Goshen "looked
on," and saw the calamities of the
Egyptians.

Ver. 9. — Because thou hast made th*
lord, which is my Befage, even the Host
High, thy Habitation ; literally, for tlwu,
Lord, art my Befuge ; thou hast made the
Most Sigh thy Dwelling-place, which can
scarcely be made to yield a tolerable sense.
It is supposed that a word — piD^ — ^haa
dropped out, and that the verse originally
ran thus : " Because thou hast said, Jehovah
is my Befuge, and hast made the Most High
thy Dwellidg-place" (comp. vers. ], 2).
The second speaker for a second time
addresses tlie first.

Ver. 10.— There shall no evil befall thee,
neither shall any plague come nig^ thy
dwelling. The faitiiful man is to be pre-
served from evil of every kind. His very
" dwelling " is to be protected so that his
family may suffer no hurt.

Yer. 11. — ^For he shall give his angels
charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy
ways (comp. Ps. xxxiv. 7). The faithful
are under the constant care of angels (Heb.
L 14), who guide them and direct them
perpetually. Satan made a crafty use of
this promise wlien he tempted our Lord
(Matt. iv. 6: Luke iv. 10, 11). No doubt
it applies to him pre-eminently,, as the
specially "Faithful One."

Yer. 12. — They shall bear thee np in
their hands; rather, upon their hands —
lifting thee over difflcuUies and stumbling*
blocks. Lest thou dash thy foot against a



F8. xci. 1—16.]



THE BOOK OF PSALMS.



269



Btone (oomp. Piov. iii. 23, 24;. Moral
'inpediments nre, no doubt, chiefly meant.

Yer. 13. — Thou shalt tread upon the lioa
•nd adder. Conquered enemies prostrated
themselves before their conquerors, who, to
mark the completeness of the subjection,
placed a foot upon the prostrate form.
From this practice the metaphor of " tread-
ing under foot" for conquering became a
commonplace (see Pss. yii. 5; xlir. 5; Ix.
12, etc.). The " lion " here represents all
open and yiolent foes; the "adder," all
secret and malignant ones. The young lion
(kSphir, the liun in the height of his
strength) and the dragon (tannin, the most
dreadful form of serpent) shalt then trample
under feet. An emphatic repetition, irith
a certain heightening of the colour.

Ver. 14. — Because he hath set bis love
ttpon me (see Deut. yii. 7 ; x. 15). " By a
■udden and effective transition," as Frofetsor
Obeyne remarks, "Jehovah becomes the
speaker" of the concluding strophe. It
is not enough that the faithful should
encourage each other by their anticipations
of God's coming mercies, God himself now
speaks by the mouth of his prophet, and
makes promises in his own Person. I will
deliver him. A ratification of vers. 3, 7,
10—15. I will Mt him oa high; <••■



"exalt him above his fellows "—" bring
him to honour." Because he hath known
my Name. "Knowing God's Name"_ is
nearly equivalent to knowing him. It im-
plies, besides knowledge, faith and trust
in the Almighty.

Ver. 15. — He shall call upon me, and I
will answer him. This is equivalent to,
" Whenever he calls upon me, 1 will answer
him," or "I will grant all his prayers."
I will be with him in trouble (comp. Ps.
xlvi. 1). I will deliver him (see above, ver.
14). And honour him; or, "bring Mm to
honour " (compare " I will set him on high,"
in the preceding verse).

Ver. 16— With long life (or, length of
days) will I satis^ him. Length of days
is always viewed in the Old Testament as
a blessing, and a special reward for obedi-
ence (Exod. XX. 12; Deut. v. 16; 2 Kings
XX. 6; 2 Ohron. i. 11; Ps. xxi. 4; Pro v.
iii. 2, 16, etc.). It is only in the New
Testament that we learn how much " better "
it is "to depart, and be with Christ"
(Phil. i. 23). And show him my salvation
(comp. Ps. 1. 28) ; i.e, " make him experi-
ence what salvation is." "Salvation," as
Professor Oheyne observes, " is both an act
and a state " — an act on Giod'a part, a state
on man'iL



HOMILETIOS.

Ver. 11. — The angelt. " He shall give his angels charge," etc. The restful spirit
of absolute trust in God rises in this psalm to its loftiest height. It is a glorious
commentary on Isa. xxvi 3. The Divine answer at the close (vers. 14—16) shows
how near the Lord is to the soul that trusts him. Compare, as an equally glorious
New Testament parallel. Bom. viii. 31 — 39. St. Paul defies "angels and principali-
ties" of evil to harm God's children. Here holy angels are declared to be their
watchful helpers and guardians.

I. His angels. Angels sustain a most close, happy, exalted relation to God, of
nearness, love, service (Ps. ciii. 20 ; Luke L 19 ; Rev. v. 11).

II. ThBT abb OUB FBLLOW-SUBJEOTS and FBLLOW-8BBVANT8 IN THE HEAYBKLT

EINGDOU OF OUB BiSEN LoRD. (1 Pet. iiL 22 ; Rev, xxii, 8, 9.) Jesus, who received
their ministry on earth (Matt. iv. 11; Luke xxii. 43), commands it now (Bev.
xxii. 16).

III. Thbib mighty fowebs abb willingly and obediently exehcised in
mNiSTEBiNa TO the welfabe of God's childben. (Ueb. i. 14.) Note: They
minister to God /or his children. Their power is inconceivably great. One angel
was able to destroy Sodom and the other guilty cities. The same angel gently, though
firmly, led Lot out. One angel smote the firstborn (comp. Matt, xxviii. 2, 6 ; Acts
zL 7, etc. ; Matt. xxvi. 63).

IV. Anoels ABE to bk oub fellow-wobshifpebs and associates in the etebnai.
EOHE. (Luke XX. 36; Heb. xii. 22.)

Bemabks. 1. This case is minute as well as mighty (ver. 12). One fake step may
be fatal. Angels are examples of that thorough obedience which is "faithful in that
which is least." 2. It is our Father's care we are to recognize. " He shall give hie
angels charge." All their power, wisdom, care, love, flow from him as their Source.
His care and love are over each one of his children every moment. " Over Ihie to
\eep thee."



270 THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [ps. xot 1— 16.

Ver. 15. — Triie prayer. "He shall call," etc. This is the simplest view of prayer.
And in our present weakness, sin, need, that which comes most home, suits us most.
Prayer may extend far beyond the range of our own need, as in the first three
petitions of the Lord's Prayer. It may rise above petition into converse with God,
adoration, thanksgiving, consecration. But this is the alphabet of those loftier
lessons, " Ask and receive " (Luke xi. 9, etc. ; Ps. 1. 15).

L Fbateb IB A LAW OF God's oovebnment. He has ordained it among the con-
ditions of the blessings he is ready to bestow, as surely as he has ordained sowing as the
condition of reaping, or the dependence of the child on the parent (Matt. vii. 11). We
hear much in our day of laws ; and no wonder, for the progress of science depends on the
discovery of the laws which regulate nature. Rightly understood, they are the glorious
witness of which Ps. xix. 1 speaks. The mischief and folly come in wlien men erect
" laws " into an imaginary self-existence, and worship them as a sort of fetish, just as
in old times people worshipped imaginary powers in nature. A strange idolatry!
Laws can have no existence but in mind. In our minds they are truths which we
discover as constant amid the infinite, ever-changing variety of nature. In the
Divine mind they are the principles and rules according to which the Creator has
made, upholds, and rules the universe. Now, if prayer be one of the great laws which
God has ordained for human life, it must needs be in perfect harmony with all nature's
laws. God's laws cannot contradict one another. The so-called " scientific" objection
against prayer (which lias really nothing scientific in it) amounts to this — that if Qod
is influenced by prayer, so that he causes events which would not have happened had
prayer not been offered, nature must be irregular, and God irresolute. The answer is —
It is God's will that " men pray everywhere," as much as that the sun shall shine and
rain fall. He has built this universe as a temple. All nature is so imder his eye,
hand, will, that it is no more deranged by his granting our petitions than by a parent
granting a child's request (1 John v. 14, 16). Men can disobey, disbelieve, despise,
this great law of prayer. The difference between natural laws and laws for inteUigent
beings is just this — things cannot disobey God. Men can; but they must take the
consequences.

II. That God answebs fbateb is a fact of exfkbienok. The truth of any l»w
is verified by experience. So God says, " Prove me." The law of prayer is estabUshed
by the teaching of the whole Bible, by abundant express promises, by our Saviour's
example as weU as teaching. It has been tested constantly for thousands of years ; is
being tested hourly — nay, every minute. And the immense witness of experience is,
*' This poor man cried, and the Lord heard him." If experience can establish any fact,
it is this. But here is a difficulty. All prayers are not answered.



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Vers. 1 — 16. — The man that trusts in God. 1. We have his descbiftion. L E»
dwells in the secret place, etc. 2. Ee abides under the shadow of the Almighty.

II. His confession or faith. (Ver. 2.) The Lord is his Refuge, Fortress, the Joy
of his snul, his God, his constant Confidence.

III. His commekdation of God to othbes. (Vers. 3 — 13.) 1. As a sure Deliverer
from the hidden foe and from the devouring pestilence. 2. As Protector; like that of
the mother-bird over her young ; like that of shield and buckler to the soldier. 3. As
the Inspirer of confidence. (Ver. 5.) Against the midnight attack — the terror by
night (cf. Judg. vii.). Against open war, when the flight of arrows almost darkened
the sky. Against secret disease (ver. 6) and sudden death — the sickness that wasteth
at noonday. 4. As rescuing from the very jaws of death. Thousands falling all around,
but God's servant kept unharmed (ver. 7). Seeing only, but never experiencing, the
awful recompense of the wicked (ver. 8). 5. Ee gives the reason of this. (Ver. 9.)
He made the Lord his Refuge and his Habitation ; there no evil could come, nor any
plague. 6. Ee tells of the angdic ministries through which God thus guards his people ;
they keep and they upbear, so that no hurt shall come. Still more, they render the
man invulnerable (ver. 13). Forces terrible as the lion and subtle like the adder cannot



re. xci. 1—16.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 271

harm. Thus, from his own experience, the man that trusts in God commends him to

his fellow- luan. And next —

IV. The Divine approval AifD delight in both the man and his testimont.

At ver. 14 God begins tu speak. 1. Declaring his mind towards his faithful servant.

We may regard these verses (14 — 16) as a Divine soliloquy, in which God, well-
T pleased, meditates what he will do, and why, for his servant. He will deliver, exalt,

answer, keep near to, honour, satisfy with long life, and reveal to him the fulness of
^ his love. 2. Endorsing the testimony in the mind of him to whom it has been given.

Making him feel that it is all true, and that much m(jrb is true. Thus does God deal

with his faithfully witnessing servants, and for and through them to others. This

psalm is as true for to-day as for the day when it was written. Let us but thus trust

in God, confess, and commend him. — S. C.

Vers. 1 — 3. — Abiding vmder God's shadow. In order to understand this most
precious promise, inquire —

I. What is the secret place of the Most High? The idea of this "secret
place " is frequently met with. 1. Sometimes it tells of some secret hiding-place, sucii
as David often resorted to when a fugitive ; and the sure protection of God is likened
to such safe shelter. 2. At other times, the central tent of the commander of an army
seems to be meant, as in Ps. xxvii, 5, " He shall hide me in his pavilion," etc. The
-enemy would have to break throuuh rank after rank of the encamped army ere he
could reach the well-guarded central tent of the leader. So inaccessible to the foe, so
strongly placed was it, that it is taken as an emblem of our security in God. 3. But
it is to the most holy place of the tabernacle and temple that we think allusion is here
made. That sacred chamber was emphatically the secret place of the Most High. It
was entered but once a year, and then only by one person, the high priest, bearing
the blood of atonement. For all the rest of the year no footfall was heard in that
secret place, no eye looked upon the glory of God that shone forth there. That loneli-
ness told of the sad alienation that had sprung up between God and man through man's
«iu. But that secret place was the earthly dwelling-place of God. There, between
the cherubim, his glory shone forth, and there he was said to dwell.

XL But what is it to dwell thebe ? Literally, no man ever dwelt there. We
are driven, therefore, to seek the spiritual meaning of this word. And we note that :
1. Israel entered there in the person of the high priest, when he bore in his hand the
atoning blood, which he was about to sprinkle upon the mercy-seat. All Israel found
-entrance there in their high priest, their representative. And whilst they continued in
the faith of God, obeying and trusting him, they spiritually dwelt in that secret place,
and, as a fact, were under the shadow — the high priest was so literally — of the Most
High. No evil befell them, no plague came nigh their dwelling. It was well with
them indeed. 2. And we enter and dwell there when, in the name of the Lord Jesus
Christ, we come to God, pleading; his all-sufScient sacrifice and atonement, of which
the blood borne by the higb priest told. And we dwell there as we continue in that
precious faith. Then we, too, are under the shadow of the Almighty. The Law's
condemnation, sin's power, earthly care, death, and the grave, can do us no harm ; we
are under the sure and blessed shelter of our God. Next let us note —

III. The oharaoteristics of this indwelling. 1. The Lord is to us mur Refuge.
The Law's condemnation would fasten upon us but for this. And he is our Fortress —
the place of vantage whence we fight successfully the spiritual warfare. And he is
our God, in whom we trust; he is the confidence, the delight, the joy of our souls;
so that we say of him, " He is my God." 2. And all this we take personally, each
of us individually appropriating it. The Lord is not merely " a Refuge," but " my
Refuge," " my Portress," etc. 3. And we confess it. " I will say of the Lord," etc. ;
" With the mouth confession is made unto salvation.''

IV. The sure fruit of such dwelling in the secret place op the Most High.
We shall commend God to others. The rest of the psalm is one prolonged testimony
to the blessedness of thus dwelling in (iod. " Surely he shall deliver thee" etc. Are
we, then, thus individually and avowedly dwelling in God ? — S. C.

Ver. 2.— A tacred resolve. " I will say of the Lord." Consider—



272 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [P8. xoi. 1— 16L

I. SuoH EESOLVBS GENERALLY. It is good to make them ; for : 1. They are really
prayers. Underlying them there is the desire of the heart that God may give the
help needed to fulfil such resolve. 2. They are a blessed stirring up of the grace of
Ood that is in us. The will summons the soul to energy by means of such holy
resolves. 3. They are well-pleasing to Ood, for they are an actual endeavour to dfo
his will.

II. This besolvb. 1. iSee its nature. He would take the Lord as his " Refuge."
It is • confession of need and of trust. And as his " Fortress." He would need help
in his warfare ; he would rely on the Lord for it. As his God, his soul's Centre, Strength,
and Joy., 2. Se would do this now. 3. Openly. 4. Personally. 5. Hahitually.

III. What led to this besolvb. The experience of God's sheltering love of which
he tells in the first verse. He was dwelling in the secret place, was abiding in Christ,
and he found, as a fact of his experience, that he was sheltered from all evil.

IV. How THIS BESOLYE WAS SUSTAINED. By going and telling others of what God
had done for him, and would do for them. — S. C. '

Ver. 2. — " My Ood." These words come as a climax to all that profession of faith
which the former part of the verse contains. It is good to say of the Lord, " He ii
my Refuge " — to have gone to him, and found in him deliverance from all the guilt and
condemnation due to our sin, which otherwise would have overwhelmed us. But it
is better to have him as " oiir Fortress," so that, strong in his strength, we may fight
successfully the great battle against all the might of the wicked one. But it is ^t
of all, because a yet higher attainment, to be able to say of God, " He is my God," as
the psalmist does here. All that is contained in the former declarations is included in
this, and much besides. Blessed, indeed, is he who can say of the Lord, " He is mj
God." We all know what a charm belongs to that which we can call our own. Even
a child delights in any gift far more if it can call what is given its very own. And it
is the same with men. Possession enhances preciousness, and causes what is our own
to be clung to with a tenacity that would be wanting were it not " our own." We
know the poet's challenge to our patriotic pride when speaking of " my own, my native
land." And the man who will delight in God and cleave to him at all times is he
who most of all is able to say of him, " He is my God."

I. Let us EXPLAIN THE UEANINO of such Saying. 1. It does not mean that any mam
can have a monopoly of Ood so as to exclude all others. It is so with many of our
earthly possessions, but not at all so in our possession of God. On the contrary, he
who says of the Lord, " He is my God," is generally one who has learnt to say this by
the blessed influence of some other who himself has been able to say it. Aiid he ia
always one who desires that all others should be able to say it likewise. 2. But it
means that he has such conscious possession of and delight in Ood that he could not
have more were Ood his Ood only, and not the God of any one else. As with the eye,
it could not enjoy more of the light o^ the sun even if no other eye rejoiced in its light.
The joy of the light is not lessened, but greatly increased by, yea, is largely dependent
on, others enjoying it also.

II. Obsebve some of THOSE WHO HAVE SAID THIS. 1. Jodoh. At Bethel he had
been made to feel his deep need of God, and hence he vows that if God would bring
him back in peace, " then God shall be my God," etc. And this is the deep longing
of every convinced soul. 2. Miriam and Israel at the Bed Sea. They sang, " He is
my Otoi, and I will prepare him a habitation," etc. They knew of his redemption,
and in the joy of it claimed God as " my God." It is the spontaneous utterance of the
redeemed souL 3. Nehemiah, and many others, who thus continually speak of God.
They show how Qoi is the abiding Trust of the believer. 4. Our Lord on the cross
cried, "My Gtod, my God," etc. I And in him we learn how this precious truth is the
solid rock on which, in times of extremest distress, the soul rests itself. 6. And it it
the seal of salvoiion. In the Apocalypse we read amongst the promises "to him that
OTercometh," there shall be written on him " the name of my God," as if the fact that
be had so regarded and rejoiced in God were, as it is, the sure token of his belonging to
the city of God. Thus from the dawn of the Divine life in man to its consummation
in glory, the people of God have ever said of the Lord, " He is my God."

III. What is qtvolted in sdoh bayino. 1. The man feels it ; he has <A« wittuM



fs. xci. 1— 16.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 273

of the Spirit to the fact that God is his God. 2. He asserts it — openly confesses and
professes this truth, 3. He delights in it It is no mere abstract proposition, but a
pereunial spring to him of peace, purity, and power. 4. And others recognize it. When
no one but ourselves believes that that which we call ours is so, our possession of it is
doubtful and insecure; but when all acknowledge our possession, then it is ours. And
«o with him who rightly says of the Lord, " He is my God."

IV. How MAT ANT MAN COMB TO BAT THIS? The steps are: 1. Conviction of your
need, leading to fervent desire. 2. Consecration. This includes the renunciatioa of all
that would displease God, and the prompt obedience to all his will so far as you know
it. 3. Confession of this to God first, and then to man, that God is yonr God. 4. Con-
fidence. You are to keep believing that God accepts the surrender you have made.
And then comes : 5. Consciousness that it is so. The Spirit testifies to you. May we
all make this blessed ascent I — S. C.

Ver. 3. — The fowler's snare. It is a frequent usage of the psalmist's to compare the
soul of man to a bird (of. Pss. xX., Izxxiv., etc.). In the next verse God himself is
likened to the mother-bird that shelters her young under her wings. And, like a bird,
the soul of man is exposed to many dangers. Not alone such as are open and known,
but such as are bidden, secret, and subtle ; not alone from the hovering hawk, but also
from the crafty snare of the fowler. And with such souls as are contemplated in this
psalm, it is this latter peril which is the true image of that against which they need
to guard, and from which God alone can deliver them. The snare of the fowler — it is a
very suggestive similitude. Consider, therefore —

L The danoeb that thbeatens the believer. It is as a snare. 1. A concealed
peril. For the fowler to show himself, or to spread his snare in the sight of any bird,
would be to defeat the very object he has in view. Hence he conceals himself and his
snare both. And so also doth that crafty hunt/Cr who seeks for souls that he may
destroy them—

" Batan, the fowler, who betrays
Unguarded souls a thousand ways"—*

he does not venture to display openly the evil which he intends by the suggestions he
plies us with and the temptations which he puts in our way. Bather he transforms
himself into an angel of light (2 Cor. xi. 14). Thus craftily does he hide away from
us the real nature of the sin into which he would betray us. 2. Adapted to our nature.
The fowler does not seek to snare all birds in the same way, but he studies their nature
and likings and haunts, and so sets bis snare. And is it not just thus with our great
adversary ? He knows our weak points, where the chink in our armour is through
which his darts may enter. He knows where we are vulnerable, how we may be best
ensnared. That which would tempt one man would have no attraction, or but little,
for another. And Satan knows that. Ah t where should we be were it not for the
safe keeping of God ? 3. Attractively baited. How the devil lured Saul to persecute
the Church, by persuading him that he was " doing God service " 1 How Christian
people are often led to mingle in strange scenes, and to associate with those who are
no friends to Christ in their amusements and ways, on the pretext that so they may
bring these ungodly ones under good influence, and thus lead them on to something
better! The result is generally the reverse of what was expected. Satan has a vast
variety of these baits, and the souls are not a few that he has snared by means of them.
" It is only for once ; " " Don't listen to narrow, prejudiced people ; " " You can't help
your nature and disposition ; " " You can repent, and get forgiveness ; " — these are
some of the fowler's baits with which he tempts us into his snare. 4. Sometimes h«
uses decoys. " Beligious people do such things : why shouldn't you ? " 6. Sometimes
he employs several of them together. Old Master Quarles says —

** The close pursuers' busy hands do plant
Snares in thy substance; snares attend thy want|
Snares in thy credit ; snares in thy disgrace;
Snares in thy high estate ; snares in thy base ;
Snares tuck thy bed, and snares surround thy board;
Snares watch thy thoughts; snares attack tliy word{

PBALMB. — 11.



274 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps xcl 1—16.

Snares in thy quiet ; enares in thy commotion ;
Snares in thy diet ; snares in thy devotion ;
Snares lurk in thy resolves, snares in thy doubts ;
Snares lie within thy heart, and snares without ;
Snares are ahove thy head, and snares beneath; ,
Snares in thy sickness ; snares are in thy death."

There is not a place in which a believer walks that is free from them. Therefore let
us watch and pray.

II. OuE BIOH CONSOLATION IN VIEW Or THESE DANGERS. God will " surely " deliver
us from them. 1. He has promised to do so. 2. He has done so for his people in all
ages who have sought such deliverance. 3. Ghrist came to destroy the works of the
devU ; therefore, certainly, these snares.

III. The natubb of his dblivbeance. How does the Lord fulfil this word?
1. By not letting us fall into them. He keeps us from the evil, that it shall not touch
us. This is very blessed — more blessed than to be delivered out of the snare when we
have fallen therein. The elder brother was, after all, more to be envied than the
restored prodigal. We too much forget this. God has many means of holding ua
back from sin. Chief of all, by the indwelling of the Holy Spirit, giving us, as to Joseph,
a holy fear and an abiding love of God. '1. By rescuing us out of the snare. Yes, he
stands ready to do this. You fallen ones, he will do this for you. — S. 0.

Ver. 4. — " Just as a hen protects her brood." This is undoubtedly the image here.
Not the outspread wings of the cherubim, which overshadowed the ark of the covenant.
Nor the mighty pinions of the eagle, whose home was on the lofty crag, and her path
through the sunlit sky. But it is the homely image taken from the familiar scenes of
the farlnyard and the bam. It is in keeping with the gracious condescension of God
to employ such an emblem ; it is like the Lord himself, " full of grace and truth."
We would not have dared to make such a comparison ; but he has done so, likening
himself to the mother-bird, which fosters, cherishes, and protects her young. Let us
note —

I. The special blesbino hebe pbomised. It is the gracious protection of Ch>d. In
the closing sentence of this verse it ig likened to " shield and buckler." To Israel it
meant protection from outward calamity, such as pestilence and the destruction caused
by war; but to us it tells of all that spiritual guardianship we enjoy. From all the
guilt of former sin ; from the power of sin now; from the might of temptation ; from
the crushing power oi sorrow ; from the misery of a useless and, still more, a harmful
life; from the fear of death; from all these, and, when it will be well for us, from
outward ill as welL

II. The hanneb of its bestowhent. It comes through: 1. The all-availing
atonement of the Lord Jesus Christ. When this is pleaded and trusted in by the
sinner, his guilt is all taken away. 2. From the power of sin, by tlie regenerating grace
of the Holy Spirit, cleansing the heart and sanctifying our whole nature. 3. From
sorrow, by his 'providence homing it away ; or giving, as to Paul, grace sufficient to
sustain it ; or by removing its cause, 4. From the misery of a useless life, by tnsptr-
ing the soul tuith a desire for others' good, and by his Spirit, fitting for service. 6.
From fear of death, by the revelation of the far better life with Christ, to be entered on
at ouce when this life is done.

III. Otheb blebbinos that come along with this one. For the emblem employed
suggests not only protection from enemies, but much more than that. Picture to
yourself what the shelter of the wing of the mother-bird is to her young, and it will tell
of what the precious promise of our text means to the believing soul. 1. It means
hujipy content and comfort. " My soul shall be satisfied," and that richly — so Ps. Isiii.
declares. And the emblem of our text suggests it, even as the experience of God's
saints confirms it. The soul is happy in God, Dungeons as at Philippi and Home,
deathbeds, and desolations of all kinds have been irradiated with the blessed content
of those whom God has covered with his feathers, and who have put their trust under
his wings. 2. A life hidden with Ood. See how the young brood are hidden away
under their mother's wing I A life hidden from strife and malice and the world. 3.
Nearness to the heart of Ood. 'I'he young birds can feel the beat of their motber*!



P8. xoi. 1— 16.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 275

heart. So the soul of the sheltered one beholds and feels the love of God. 4. Perfect
peace.

IV. To WHOM ALL THIS IS PBOMisED. Not to any and everybody, but to those only
who dwell in the secret place of the Most High; that is, who abide, ever trusting, in
the Lord Jesus Christ. — S. C.

Vers. 11 — ^13. — " Eis angeh," The mention of them is introduced here in order to
show how the blessed promise of ver. 10 is fulfilled. The angels are continually
spoken of in Scripture. First of all, we read of them in connection with the story of
Hagar, and from thence onward the pages of Holy Scripture make perpetual references
to them. It, therefore, cannot but be important to us that we should understand, so
far as we may, what is written concerning them. For we cannot think that their work
and ministry are finished, and that now they have nothing to do with us, nor we with
them. We feel sure that the reverse is the truth. True, there has been much of
mere imagination in the representations that have been given of angels by poets,
painters, and preachers alike. They have been the makers of men's common ideas
concerning the angels, and have caused not a little misunderstanding and loss thereby.
But a careful study of the Scriptures will show that truth on this confessedly
mysterious and difiBcult theme is both attainable and full of profit. Consider —

L The bealitt of the anoelio world. 1. This the Scriptures plainly assert.
They are spoken of there in clear and positive manner, as to their high dignity, their
sanctity, power, blessedness, their heavenly home, their employments, vast numbers,
and immortality. All this is told of the holy angels. But there are evil ones likewise,
who are represented as serving under their prince, Satan, as the holy angels under
God. They are evil, wretched, full of malignity, and reserved for everlasting punish-
ment. 2. And this teaching is to he regarded as literally true. It is not, as some have
said, an accommodation to the popular beliefs of the day. 3. Analogy also confirms
this. Is not all life, from the lowest zoophyte up to the most gifted of the sons of
men, one continual ascent ? But why should the progression halt with man ? Why
should there not be an ascent beyond, as there is up to, ourselves ? All analogy leads
us to think there is, and to be on the look out and expectation for orders of beings that
may span the vast distance that separates man from God. And the Bible confirms this.

IL Theib natube. 1. Who and what are they f Much has been assumed concern-
ing them; as that they existed long before the creation of man; that they are
altogether different in nature from man ; that some of them kept not their first estate,
etc. 2. But may it not be that angeU are perfected men t The poet Young thus
write*—

" Why doubt we, then, the glorious tmth to sing ?
Angels are men of a superior kind ;
Angels are men in lighter habit clad.
High o'er celestial mountains winged in flighty
And men are angels loaded for an hour.
Who wade this miry vale, and climb with pain
And slippery step the bottom of the steep."

Why may not this be true ? For there is no being higher in nature than man, except
God himselfl If angels be different from men, why, then, were men created at all?
If, without all man's toil and pain, beings existed who could render to God the love,
worship, and service he desired, wherefore man's much sorrow and misery ? But if,
on the other hand, it be true that there is no other entrance on the annlic state than by
this weary life of ours, the mournful mystery of life has some light shed upon it. And
angels are often called men, and appeared as such. And our Lord said that in the
resurrection we shall be as angels ; and in the Epistle to the Hebrews (xii.) we are
said to have come to myriads of angels, and the following sentence shows that they
are the same as " the Church of the Firstborn, and the spirits of just men made perfect."
And the quotation by the writers of 2 Peter and Jude, from the same passage in the
apocryphal and unauthoritative Book of Enoch, need not stand in the way of the
reasonable and helpful belief we have been maintaining. Milton — that mighty
manufacturer of so much mischievous mistake — ^is the real author of men's commoii
beliefs about the angelic world. And they who hold such beliefs lose much.



276 THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [ps. xoL 1— 16.

IIL Theib office. They are said, in these verses : 1. To have charge of the people
of God. " Are they not all ministering spirits sent forth," etc. ? 2. They keep GocCb
servantt in all their ways. Perhaps by suggesting thoughts, purposes, and resolves.
But wo do not certainly know. If we could see them at their work, we should be in
peril of worshipping them, as St. John was. 3. They sustain them, upbear them, so
that not alone by great ills, but by little ones, they shall be unhurt. 4. They give
victorious power over all kinds of spiritual foes (ver. 13).

IV. The help that these truths bendeb. 1. The heavenly world and its employ-
ments become more real to us. We know that our work shall not be perpetual singing,
but high, holy, blessed service. 2. The mystery of life is lightened. Wo see whither
we are going, and wherefore here we have to suffer. 3. One chief pain of death %$
lessened. For we are not debarred from rendering service to those we leave behind.
The thought that we can no more help our loved ones is one of the pains of death.
But by this blessed teaching it is taken away. — S. 0,

Ver. 12. — The angels' charge of little things. To whom is this promise addressed?
Not to any and everybody indiscriminately, but only to those who dwell "in the
secret place of," etc. (ver. 1). Therefore it was edpecially applicable to our Lord. Some
have concluded, that, as this verse was made use of by Satan when he tempted
our Lord, the psalm is to be limited in its application to him only. But this is an
error. Satan quoted it; but, as he always does when he quotes Scripture — a noi
uncommon custom of his — he alters it; he left out the qualifying clause, "in all thy
ways." It is not in any ways that we can have the angels' care, but only in those
that are right. The promise is for all God's people, as they go about their own
proper and appointed ways. Next, let us ask, what is the meaning of the text ?
Our word " dash" is not a true rendering; the Hebrew word used is generally rendered
as in John zL, where our Lord speaks of a man not stumbling if he walks by day,
but as sure to do so if he walks at night in the dark. It means that then he would
be likely to strike against some stone in the way, and bo be tripped up. There is no
idea of violence in the word. When Satan used it, he meant to suggest to our
Lord that if the promise was that he should not even stumble over a stone, how
much more might he be sure of protection were he to cast himself down from the
pinnacle of the temple! The word, therefore, points to a very small and ordinary
matter — the being kept from fallng over a stone, as a mother would hold up her child
from such mishap. Now, the text teaches us —

I. AnOELB (CONCERN THEMSELVES ABOUT SUCH LITTLE TBIN08 AS THESE. This is Very

wonderful. For think of who and what the angels are; how great, glorious, holy,
blessed ; how high and august the office they fill, and the employments in which they
engage. And then think of their stooping to such work as this — the preventing of a
man stumbling against a stone. We know they concern themselves about the
salvation of the soul, for that is a great matter ; the soul so precious, that Christ was
content to die to redeem it. But that our feet may not even come in hurtful contaci,
with a stone — surely that seems beneath and unworthy of them. But this same truth
is told of in many other Scriptures; ct "The very hairs of your head are all
numbered ; " " Not a sparrow falls to the ground without your Father," etc. There-
fore it is true the holy angels have charge over the minute details of our lives, as wi.-
as over great events. The Lord's loving providence reaches down to all these little
things, of which our life is mainly made up. How blessed this truth is I All our life
cared for by the Lord 1

II. But WHAT IS LITTLE IN ITSELF MAY NOT BE SO IN ITS CONSEQUENCES. HoW

mighty are little things in the results that often flow from them I For the body, a
slight stumble may have lifelong consequences. For the soul, men fall little by little,
not by great crimes, but by a series of little sins. And so, too, for the rise of the soul.
We do not leap into heaven; but vre"grow in grace" — ever slight increase and
advance.

III. OuB BBAii DIFFICULTIES ARE IN coNKECTioN WITH THEM. Otherwise augcls
would not be put in charge over us. Many can keep from great sins who allow
themselves in little ones. " Take me the little foxes," etc. We either think we can
manage the little affairs of life, or we neglect them.



w. X01.1— 16.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS, 277

IV, Our strength against both little and great perils is in Christ. (Adaptac
from the late Canon Melville,)— S, C,

Vers. 14 — 16, — The beloved of the Lord, The marks and tokens of these are set forth
here,

I. They have set their love upon the Lord. Their hearts have turned to himi
away from sin, and now are " set," firmly fixed, upon him. Numbers of people feel a
passin°; aSection fur Christ ; their hearts burn within them for a while ; but the fire
soon dies down and out. But these have set their love, not their mere thought or
approval, upon him.

IL Thet have known his name. This is a higher degree. Their love has led to
their keeping near to him, and to constant intercuurse with him ; and so now they
have come to know him, as we say we know a dear and honoured friend, whom we
have tested and tried and never found wautin;;. So these have come to know God;
and, of course, they are " set on high," Such knowledge lifts the soul above the cares
and trials, the temptations and sorrows, of life. As the small birds, whom the hawk
seeks to prey upon, avoid their foe by keeping high above him, so do these, the Lord's
beloved, live above where the sins, snares, and sorrows of this world can do them
harm.

IIL Thbt prat effeotuallt, " He shall call upon me, and I will answer," The
life of prayer, the walk with God, ever characterizes these people. And they have
power in prayer — their prayers are answered. This cannot be said of all or most
prayers, ot which, so often, nothing seems to come. But it is otherwise here.

IV, In their TRoaBLES THE Lord is with them, " I will be with them," eto.
They will have trouble. They are Ood's jewels ; but as the jewel needs to be put on
the lapidary's wheel and ground ere it will reveal its brilliancy and worth, so do Ctoi'a
jewels. Therefore trouble cannot be escaped. But bearing it alone may be, and is,
by these people. See Paul and Silas in the dungeon at FMlippi, and the experience
of all the saints in all the ages all along,

V, And because they are the Lord's beloved, there ooubs to them : 1.
Deliverance. How could it be otherwise ? deliverance real, though not always visible
to our eye. 2, Honour. See the golden cross on the top of St. Paul's Cathedral : how
that tells of what this nation thinks of the Crucified One 1 All the nations praise him,
3, Eternal life. Long life indeed! 4. Satisfaction. "Thou, Christ, art all I
want." 5. The vision of the salvation of Ood. For himself; for those dear to him;
for the world, — S, C.

Ver. 15. — The response of Ood to his people. I. What this response is. 1. That
Ood will answer prayer. But on this, note : (1) That it is not the prayer of every
man, but only of those who have set their love upon God, and who dwell in the
secret place of the Most High. (2) That to them prayer is answered, but often in ways
other than they have expected. God will always give to them what is best; but that
may be far different from what they have thought, 2, He will he with them in trouble.
God is always with us ; but in our trouble he is more especially with us. This is
shown sometimes by his providential help, or by his grace sustaining us, 3. He will
deliver and honour. See this in such histories as that of Joseph,

I. What follows from it. That to the man of God the following things are
impossible : 1. Disappointment ; because God will answer. 2, Loneliness ; for God is
ever with him, and especially in trouble. 3. Disgrace ; for how can that be to those
whom he honours? 4, Defeat; for God will deliver. — S. C,

Ver. 1. — Our place of safety. The construction of this psalm is peculiar (see
exegetical notes). Ewald gives the best suggestion concerning its structure. Partly
the poet expresses his own feelings as from himself, and partly as if they were uttered
by another. He seems to listen to the thoughts of his own spirit till they become
clear and distinct, like some prophetic words, or some Divine oracle speaking to him
from without, and giving him thus the assurance and the consolation afresh which had
already sprung up in his heart. The associations of the psalm, and the authorship,
cannot with any certainty be traced, but the Jewish idea that it belongs to the age of



278 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [w. xoi. 1— 16.

Moses deserves consideration. Certainly the experiences of the wilderness-life give the
most effective illustration of both the figures and the sentiments of the psalm. Bishop
Wordsworth says confidently, " The scenery of the psalm is derived from the circum-
stances of the sojourn of Israel in the wilderness." Dean Plumptre says, " The psalm
is an echo, verse by verse almost, of the words in which Eliphaz the Temanite
describes the good man's life (Job v. 17 — 23)." Perhaps the two sentences of ver. 1
would be better read as a repetition, according to the customary construction of
Hebrew poets. "He that dwelleth ... he that abideth . . . shall say unto the
Lord." Working out the Mosaic association, show —

I. The wildbbnesb-peeils. As Moses would be impressed by them. Limited
food. Dangers of pestilence by remaining too long in a place. Active enemies.
Local difficulties, as from serpents. Temper of the people. Influence of mixed
multitudes. Wearying effect of constant changes, etc. We seldom fully realize the
persistent and exhausting anxieties of Moses. Sometimes even his life seemed to be in
danger.

II. The wildebness-safetibs. Moses could not help contrasting the holy quiet of
those forty days he had spent in the " secret place " with God, and the forty yewrs of
strain and stress he had spent with the stiff-necked and rebellious people. He must
often have yearned for a renewal of those restful hours. And yet the spiritual fact
and truth for him was that he did still " dwell in the secret place," he did still "abide
under the shadow of the Almighty;'" for this, in very truth, is a mood of soul-
experience, and not a mere bodily relationship. Moses with God in the mount does
but illustrate Moses with God always, resting and safe in his " shadow." — B. T.

Ver. 2. — Many names/or Ood. Finding various names is a common device of love.
The names seem to express the many-sidedness of our relationship. It must be
specially true of God that we stand in various relations to him, and are helped by a
variety of terms and names, which express those relations. There are four names
given to God in vers. 1, 2. God the Concealer is the " inaccessibly High One." God
the Shadower is the " invincibly Almighty One." God the Covenant-maker is
"Jehovah, the Lord." And God personally appropriated is "my God." Or it has
been put in this way : 1. We commune with him reverently, for he is the Most High.
2. We rest in him as the Almighty. 3. We rejoice in him as Jehovah, or Lord. 4. We
trust in him as El, the mighty God. Perowne's suggestion is more directly in harmony
with the psalm. " God is ' Most High,' far above all the rage and malice of enemies ;
' Almighty,' so that none can stand before his power ; ' Jehovah,' the God of covenant
and grace, who has revealed himself to his people ; and it is of such a God that the
psalmist says, in holy confidence, ' He is "my God," in whom I trust.'" Trying to
find the thoughts which one so circumstanced as Moses would attach to the terms, we
may say —

I. The " Most High " is above all babthlt changes. Unaffected by them in
such sense as can weaken his relations to them. We cannot interfere in disputes and
rlifSculties without prejudice. Often we cannot keep calm to form good judgment.
God can.

II. The " Almightt " is able to deal with all eabthly conditions. They can
never be so complicated that he cannot unravel them ; never so desperate that he
cannot master them. " With God all things are possible." If God does not interfere
in a case, the reason must be that he will not, because he can if he please.

III. The " LoBD, Jehovah " is under pledge to intbbpebe fob his people's good.
The name " Jehovah " was taken as the sign and seal of the covenant, as the rainbow
was taken as the sign of the nature-covenant. God, as Jehovah, may be thought of
as the " Faithful Promiser."

IV. The teem " my God " implies that God has been, in actual experience,
what the psalmist felt confident that he was. It is an important advance to be
able to say, " I know not only what God is, I know also what he has been to me." — B. T.

Ver. 3. — Limitations of temporal protection. The fact is patent. It demands
consideration. God does not always give protection from bodily evils to his saints.
On a house at Chester, that was spared in the time of plague, is the inscription, " God'»



M. xa. 1—18.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 279

providence is mine inheritance.'' But the man who lived there was not the only good
man in Chester at the time. Other good men were not thus protected. Evidently
the psalmist " accepts in all simplicity the belief in that which, but for sin and its
consequences, would be the law of human life — that visible blessing, and obedience to
the Supreme Buler of the world, must always go together. To us the faith is rather
that whatever betides us of outward fortune cannot touch the true life which is hid
in God." What we need to see is that the psalmist asserts the ever-working law, and
leaves us to find the limitations and exceptions that nrise in its practical working.

I. The EVEB-woRKlNO LAW. Temporal good attends upon piety. The world is
constructed and arranged to give this law a sphere. Just so far as natural relations
are kept simple, the law does work. " Honesty is the best policy." Goodness does
bring reward. Chastity does secure health. The fear of God does prove tp be
practical wisdom. The man of wise and restrained habits does stand the best chance
in time of epidemic disease. The diligent in business do succeed. " Bight is right."
Bight comes right. " Godliness has the promise of the life that now is."

II. The ever-manifest exceptions. These occasion the distress of men like Asaph,
who are too keen to detedt the dark side of things. Bighteous Job suffers. Tbe
wicked are in great power. The exceptions come through the disturbance of liivine
arrangements by man's wilfulness and sin. He makes his law cross the Divine law.
Then arises the necessity for modifications in the working of the Divine law. 1. The
allegiance of the good must be tested. 2. The results of that testing must be used as
persuasive examph to others. The Book of Job really wrestles with this difficulty.
The man who is "upright, fears God, and eschews evil" does not find himself
protected from all harm. And yet it is still true, Job in trouble was abiding in
« the shadow of the Almighty."— B. T.

Ver. 4. — ITie shielding of Ood?s faithfulness. " His truth shall be thy shield and
buckler." God's truth here is the certainty that he will keep to his word; the
psalmist's conviction of his *' truthfulness," " faithfulness." The " shield and buckler "
represent the defensive weapons of the older day of hand-to-hand fighting. Both •
large shield covering the whole body, and a light, quickly-moved shield, fastened to
the left arm, are included ; suggesting that the defendings of God are various, and in
precise adaptation to his people's need. He is their Defence, both in little perils and
in great ones. Get at the thought suggested by this expression of the text, by realizing
what our absolute confidence in the integrity of an earthly friend and fellow-worker
■does for us. Take the case of a trusted servant in a house of business. That man's
unquestionable uprightness is his master's shield. It shields him from anxiety and
•care. It shields him from over-pressure of toil. It shields him from all robbery and
wrong. So, too, with the faithful and honoured wife. Her "truth" shields her
husband from home worries, and all home disabilities. " The heart of her husband
-doth safely trust in her;" and so he can be shielded and at peace. Apply this to God.
It is not possible to think he can ever be below himself, or forgetful of his word, " on
which he has permitted us " to hope. We may get beyond all mere promises, and
assure our hearts in what God is. Illustrate by Luther's time of despondency. On
returning home, he found the house shut up, as if some one was dead in it, and his
wife dressed in mourning. He inquired what had happened, and she quietly and
-solemnly replied that " God was dead." It was an object-lesson for the desponding
Reformer, which he promptly learned. Long as God lives — and he lives for ever — he
surely is the Hiding-place and Shield of his people. To remove God, to bring down
our high thought of him, our absolute confidence in his eternal truthfulness and
integrity, would be to take away our shield, and leave us helplessly exposed to the
assaults of all our foes. — B. T.

Ver. 11. — Angel-agencies. For associations of " angels" with Moses and his times,
we may recall the New Testament saying, that the " Law was given by the disposition
of angels." Moses had associated angels with Abraham and Jacob; and when God
proposed to withdraw his personal guidance of Israel, he offered Moses to send " ao
angel " before them. It was a common belief, even among the heathen, that human
'beings have each their guardian genius ; but the psalmist here does not appear to refer



280 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. xol 1— 1&

to any such belief. We should obtain a worthier idea of the Bible representations of
jngels, if we regarded their sensible appearances as designed to illustrate God's abiding,
unseen spiritual agencies in the blessing of men. The term " angel " is properly applied
to any and every agency God uses to do his work of keeping, guiding, comfortiug, or
correcting men. God has redeemmg angels, afflictiQ<^ angels, destroying angels.
" He maketh winds his angels, flaming fire his ministers."

I. The anoel-ghaboe. Illustrate from the time of the destruction of the Egyptian
(irstborn. Then Israel in Goshen was in the charge of God's angel. Or refer to the
preservation of Moses, Aaron, Caleb, and Joshua in the times of sudden pestilence in
the desert. These were in the angel-charge. Or take the cast* of Elisha at Dothan,
when, seemingly in the power of the Syrians, he was really safe in the angel-charge.
Or see Peter in prison, likely enough to follow James to his fate. He really was in
the angel care and deliverance. Or take the case of the Uovenanter, who, escaping
from his foes, climbed into the hollow of an old tree, over the hole of which a spider at
once spun a great web, which made tbe pursuers feel sure no one could have crept
inside. That spider was God's angel.

II. The conditions of the anqel-oharqe. These the tempter kept back when he
urged Jesus to rely on, or rather presume on, the angel-charge. He repressed the
words, " Keep thee in all thy ways," which distinctly mean " a good man's ways,"
" the ways a good man ought to be taking." " Only in the ways of God's vocation,
and with a view to progress in those ways, have we a right to the promise." If we
want to do right, we may be sure of God's angel-help. We have no claim if we want
to do wrong. — B. T.

Vers. 12, 13. — Typical perils of the saints. (See also vera. 6, 6, 10.) Those dealt
with may be read in the light of wilderness-experiences. Then we hare: 1. The
common Eastern terror of the night, both as time of insecurity and time of spread of
disease. Thieves work at night ; sudden attacks of enemies are made at night ; the
angel of pestUence strikes at night ; wild beasts roam at Eight ; fires mostly break out
at night. 2. The dangers of sunstroke and lightning-flash, whieh are the "arrows that
Cy by day." 3. The diseases that breed in unsanitary ccsditiAns, and gain force to
sweep thousands away. 4. The open and subtle attacks oi t&e mimals of the desert.
The lion that attacks in front; the adder that bites the LeeL Bonar tells us that
" the putrid plague-fever often comes on 'i the night, while the patient is asleep; the
solstitial disease seizes in heat of harvest upon a man in open air, and cuts him off,
perhaps, ere evening. Now what of spiritual peril may these typify ?

I. The pebilb that connect with the coneoiousnebs of helflessnesb. At night
we can do nothing to ward off evils. So there are times in life when we feel to be in
circumstances which we cannot even try to control. The good man would be hope-
lessly distressed if he were compelled to think he was at the mercy of circumstances.
The psalmist knows that darkness and light are both alike to his protecting God.

II. The perils that comb through the overmastering of our efforts. In the
day we can watch, we can resist, we can order our conduct wisely, we can act promptly ;
and yet we are constantly finding the forces round us are bigger than we. Sunstroke
and lightning typify the things that will not be "accordirj: *^o our mind." But the
psalmist knows nothing is beyund the Divine restraint hat which happens is
permitted.

III. The perils that come to ub vioariouslt. Wo ure constantly suffering from
the sins and neglects of uthers. If we do right and our neighbour does wrong, both

nay have to sutler the consequences that re!<ult. Ar in case of infectious diseases. So
iational troubles reach the evil and the good alike.

IV. The perUiB that come through wilful wronq-boebs. Bepresented by the
violent "lion," and the insidious, treacherous "adder." The psalmist believes in Gkxi
as Restrainer of the wrath of men. — R. T.

Ver. 14. — Reasons in man fur the Divine favour. " Because he hath set his love
upon me." This verse begins what may be regarded as a poetical setting of the answer
which God gives to the fully-trusting soul. "God himself comes forward to establish
the faith of his servant, writes deeper iu the soul so great a consolation, and confirms



P8. xci. 1—16.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 281

the testimony of his servant. ' He hath set his love upon me ; he knoweth my name ,
he calleth upon me.' These are the marks of a true servant of God." It has beet
noticed that the words, " I will," are repeated six times in the last three verses of this
psalm: "I will deliver;" "I will set him on high;" "I will answer;" "I will be
with him in trouble ;"" With long life I will satisfy him;" "I will show him my
salvation."

I. The possibilities op oub feblino toward God. We may feel toward God al?
we can feel towards our fellow-men — faith, admiration, devotion, etc. We may even
go so far as to " set our love upon him " — make him to be our chosen one, our specially
loved one. What we do to help ourselves, in the efifort to " set our love " on oui
fellow-men, we may do to help in setting our love on God. Such things as (1)
cherish the thought of them ; (2) seek their company ; (3) try in every way to please
them.

II. The response God makes to men's bioht feelino towards him. This
response is found indicated in the assurances of this passage. 1. He gives to them an
answering affection. 2. He guards them with an ever- watchful defence. 3. He accom-
plishes for them mighty deliverances. 4. He grants them gracious exaltations. The
Divine favour comes on men because : 1. They make him their choice. 2. Becauie
they seek intimacy with him (implied in "knowing his Name"). 3. Because they
are ever making signs of their dependence on him. The signs being their daily and
their special prayers. — R. T.

Vers. 15, 16. — OocTs presence in time of trouble. "I will be with him in trouble."
Illustrate by presence of a friend in the time of sickness and distress. That firiend
may be imable to help, and yet the best of help comes from that friendly presence.
If God is with us in trouble, we are sure he can help and deliver. If he does not, it
can only be because he is doing kinder things for us, by letting the trouble stay. The
strain of feeling alone in time of trouble may be illustrated by a lonely walk through
a strange and dangerous country. " Have you ever walked on, mile after mile, until
it grew very dark, and there were no stars overhead, and no friendly voice or guide
anywhere ; and, as you grew very tired and faint and footsore, did it not seem as if the
way became more rough and stony at every step ? You can remember each time you
stumbled in the weary darkness against a stone, how the pain seemed to shoot hotly
through every nerve ; and the lack of light, and the uncertainty lest each step might
bear you over the precipice, — all this unnerved you. But how different if a loved
friend had been with you I and especially if it so happened that he knew the road and
the country well I " God's presence is the smnmum honum. All we can need is included
and involved in it. He really need not tell us what he will do for us ; it is enough if
he will be there. And so the Lord Jesus wrapped up everything for his disciples in
this one assurance, " Lo, I am with you all the days."

I. God's presence with us means the best possible limitation of oue troublk.

II. God's presence with us means abundant oomfobtinu under our trouble.

III. God's presence with us means the fulfilment op the mission of oub
tbouble.

IV. God's presence with us assures of a " happy issue out of all oub
afflictions."

God with us in trouble is the fact; but everything for us depends on our sensible
realization of the fact. — E. T.

Vers. 9, 10, 11. — The security of the saints, I. The DwELLisa-PLAOE of the oood
MAN — God. In such an abode we find : 1. Shelter, protection. (John xiv. 23.) 2.
Nutriment. 3. Best. i. Companionship.

II. The safety of this abode. 1. Omnipotent love encompasses him. 2. The
power of the good man to convert all things to his welfare. " All things are yours."

III. The guards and servants op the good man. The angels are God's mes-
sengers and ministers. 1. Ood employs innumerable invisible ministries to serve tie.
Angels and unseen powers " that walk the earth both when we wake and when we
sleep." 2. Innumerable visible ministries. "More servants wait on man than helj
take notice of" (see George Herbert's poem). — S.



282



THE BOOK OF PSALMS.



[ps. xcii. t — 16.



Vers. 14, 1 5. — The reward of trust in God. " Because he hath set his love upon ma,
therefore will I deliver him : I will set him on high, because he hath known my
Name. He shall call upon me, and I will answer him ; I will be with him in trouble ;
I will deliver him, and honour him."

I. What ABE THE QUALITIES THAT God VALUES MOST INCH ABACTEE? 1. Tht know-
ledge of his Name ; i.e. of his nature and character, now revealed to us more fully
than then, in the PtTson and work of Jesus Christ. 2. The setting our love upon him.
Because he is what he is, and because our love is the surest pledge of obedience to his
will. 3. Dependence upon God. Expressed by the habit of prayer — calling upon
him.

II. In what way God honours and eewards those qualities. 1. He will deliver
him in trouble. By giving him strength superior to all his trials. We cannot escape
trouble, but we can conquer it by the aid of the Spirit of God. 2. He will exalt him
to the possession of high honours. Give him a position of great security — high above
all danger. Aiad ot gteat influence and usefulness. This is high honour. S. Hewitt
answer his prayers. In the only ways in which a supremely good and wise Being will
answer the prayers of the erring and sinful — by giving them what they need, and not
always what they ask for. — S.



EXPOSITION.



PSALM XOIL



This pi^alm is entitled, " a Psalm or Bong
for the sabbath day," and was therefore,
we may conclude, intended for liturgical
use in the temple on that weekly festival.
Jewish tradition says that it was sung in
the morning at the time of the drink offering
of the first lamb. It was also, we are told,
recited on the second day of the Feast of
Tabernacles (' Middoth,' ii. S). The psalm
is altogether one of praise and thanks-
giving. It is optimistic, looking forward
to (he complete destruction of all God's
enemies (vers. 7—9), and the complete
triumph and happiness of bis faithful ones
<ver3. 10 — 14). Some Jewish commentators
viewed it as descriptive of the final sabbath
of the world's rest ; and so Athanasius, who
aays of the author, Aivti iKdmiv rj^v yivif-
aoixiVfiv av&Travtriv.

Metrically, the psalm seems to divide
into three portions, the first and second of
four verses each (vers. 1 — 4, 5 — 8), the third
of seven verses (vers. 9—15).

Ver. 1. — It is a good thing to give thanks
unto the lord (oomp. Ps. cxlvii. 1). By
" a good thing " is meant that which is at
once right and pleasant. And to sing
praises unto thy Name, Host High. Israel's
Lord, Jehovah, is also " the Most High over
all the earth " (Ps. Ixxxiii. 18), and should
at all times be thought of as both.

Ver. 2. — To show forth thy loving-kindness
in the morning, and thy faithfulness every



night. The suitableness of worship every
morning and evening has been almost
universally felt. The Mosaic Law pro-
vided for it by the establishment of the
morning and evening sacrifice (Sxod. xxiz.
38, 89), with the accompanying ritual.
Jewish piety added a noonday prayer (Ps.
Iv. 17; Dan. vi. 10), and Christian zeal
established the "seven hours of prayer."
Morning and evening still, however, remain,
by common acknowledgment, the most ap-
propriate times for worship.

Ver. 3. — Upon an instrument of ten
strings, and upon the psaltery. Some think
that only one instrument is intended here,
and translate, " Upon an instrument of ten
strings, even upon the psaltery " (or, " the
lute "). (On the character of the psaltery,
see the comment on Ps. xxxiii. 2.) ITpon the
harp with a solemn sound. . The reference
is clearly to the public service of the temple,
since in the private devotions of the faithful
instruments were not likely to be used.

Ver. 4.— For thou, Lord, hast made me
glad through thy work. It is difficult to
say what " work" is intended. Some have
supposed "the work of creation," as the
psalm is one " for the sabbath " (see title) ;
but perhaps the general " working " of God's
providence in the world is more probable.
(So Hengstenberg, Kay, and Cheyne.) I
will triumph in the works of thy hands.
A repetition for the sake of emphasis.

Ver. 5.— Lord, how great are thy works !
(oomp. Ps. xl. 5). Mighty and wonderful,
f.e., are the ways of Providence. And thy
thoughts are very deep (comp. Job xi. 8).

Ver. 6. — ^A brutish man knoweth not;
neither doth a fool understand this. A
rude, uncultivated man has no conception
of the wonderful depth of God's thoughts—



P8. xcn. 1 — 16.]



THE BOOK OP PSALMS.



283



the marvellousness of those counsels which
underlie the general scheme of things,
and make it what it is (oomp. Bom. xi.
33, 34).

Ver. 7. — When the wicked spring as the
grass; i.e. "spring up" — "flourish" (see
ver. 12) The difficulty is that which dis-
turbed Job (xxi. 7—21) and Asaph (Ps.
Izxiii. 2 — 15), viz. the prosperity of the
wicked. The present writer, however, is
not disturbed — ^he sees in their prosperous
condition nothing but a prelude to their
overthrow. And when all the workers of
iniquity do flonrish ; or, " do blossom." It
is that they shall be destroyed for ever;
literally, it is for their destruction far ever
(comp. Ps. Ixxiii. 18—20).

Ver. 8. — ^But thou. Lord, art most high
for evermore ; rather, art on high ; i.e. re-
mainest seated upon thy throne, unatl'ected
either by their efforts or by their fall.

Ver. 9. — For, lo, *;bine enemies, Lord,
for, lo, thine enemies shall perish. What-
ever else is uncertain, this at least is sure,
that ultimately God's enemies will perish.
The repetition adds the greatest force to
the passage. All the workers of iniquity
(comp. ver. 7) shall be scattered. Att of
them — every one (comp. Matt. vii. 28, " De-
part from me, ye that work iniquity '^.

Ver. 10. — But my horn shalt thon exalt
like the horn of an unicorn; rather, of a
viild ox. The Hebrew, like the Assyrian,
reym, is certainly a species of wild cattle,
whether the aurochs, or the bison, or the
buffalo, may be donbted. The psalmist
■peaks in the name of Israel, or of God's
faithful ones generally, and confidently
predicts their exaltation to glory and honour
simultaneously with the destruction of God's
enemies. I shall be anointed with fresh oil.
Oil was supposed to give vigour to the
frame: and "fresh oil," or "green oil,"
would be the most efficient and the best.

Ver. 11. — Mine eye also shall see my de-
sire on mine enemies (comp. Pss. liv. 7 ; lix.
10). The "desire" is probably that ex-
pressed in Fs. xci. 13. And mine ears shall
hear my desire of the wicked that rise up
against me. This is an unusual phrase,
but sufficiently intelligible. Triumph over
enemies is perceived both by the eye and
by the ear.

Ver. 12. — The righteous shall flonrish like



the palm tree. To an Oriental the palm is the
queen of trees. " Of all vegetable forms,"
says Humboldt, " the palm is that to which
the prize of beauty has been assigned by
the concurrent voice of nations in all ages "
('Aspects of Nature,' vol. iL p. 20, Engl,
trans.). Its stately growth.and graceful form,
its perpetual verdure, itslovely and luxuriant
fruit, together with its manifold uses (Strabo,
xvi. 1, § 14), give it precedence over all
other vegetable growths iu the eyes that
are accustomed to rest upon it. It is rather
remarkable that, in the Old Testament, it is
used as a figure for beauty only here and in
Cant. vii. 7. Man, in Ids most flourishing
growth, is ordinarily compared either to the
cedar (2 Kings xiv. 9 ; Cant. v. 15 ; Ezek.
xxxi. 3 — 9 ; Amos ii. 9, etc.) or the olive
tree (Judg. ix. 8, 9 ; Ps. lii. 8 ; Jer. xi. 16 ;
Hos. xiv. 6, etc.). He shall grow like a
cedar in Lebanon (see, besides the passages
already quoted, 2 Kings xix. 23 ; 2 Chron.
ii. 8; Jer. xxii. 23; Zech. xi. 1).

Ver. 13. — Those that be planted in tho
house of the Lord ; rather. Planted (or. Being
planted) in the home of the Lord, they. This
does not refer to the " trees " of the preceding
verse, but to the "righteous," who are
viewed as passing their days almost con-
tinually in the temple courts, and so as (in
a certain sense) " planted " there. The
passage has no bearing on the question
whether the temple courts were or were not
planted with trees. Shall flourish in tho
ooarts of our God (comp. Ps. Ixxxiv. 2, 10).

Ver. 14.— They shall still bring forth fruit
in old age; i.e. "even when they are old,
they shall etill bring forth fruit " — they shall
still glorify God by their good works. They
shall be fat and flourishing; literally, fat
and green. The metaphor of ver. 12 is still
kept up.

' Ver. 1 5. — ^To show that the Lord is upright.
The happy and flourishing old age of the
righteous (ver. 14; comp. Fs. xci. 16) is a
strong indication of God's faithfulness and
truth, showing, as its does, that he keeps
his promises, and never forsakes those that
put their trust in him (comp. Fss. xxvii, 10 ;
xxxvii. 25; Isa. xli. 17, etc.). He is my
Sook — rather, that he is my Boek — and that
there is no unrighteousness in him. Both
clauses depend on the " show " of the pre-
ceding hemistich.



HOMILETICS.

Ver. 1. — Psalmody, "It is a good thing," etc. Songs of praise are a very ancient
custom in the Church of God, David, " the sweet singer of Israel," and his brother
psalmists (Asaph and the rest) were inspired to provide a manual of devotion, public
and private, which will never fall into disuse while there is a Church on earth. But
long ages before, when Israel for the first time stood on safe ground, breathing free air



284 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. xcii. 1—15.

a mighty song of praise went up on the Red Sea shore ; in remembrance of which, in
St. John's visions of the heavenly glory, he heard the ransomed in the heavenly
temple sing " the song of Moses the servant of God " as well as " the song of the Lamb"
(Kev. XT. 3). There have been times in which the voice of holy song — ^at all events,
of congregational psalmody — has fallen silent, or nearly so. But these have not been
times of flourishing life, of growing piety. Times of great spiritual revival have
commonly been associated with a great outburst of praiseful song. "It is a good thing
to give thanks and to sing praises."

L First, because this past op worship most dibeotlt seeks God'b globt. Prayer
glorifies God indirectly in acknowledging our dependence on him, our sin and unworthi-
uess, our faith in his promises, and desire to serve him ; glorifies Christ, as our
Mediator, Sacrifice, Kedeemer, Master, " the Light of the world ; " glorifies the Holy
Spirit, by whom alone we can pray aright. So, again, the reading of Scriptures as Qod'i
Word ; the preaching ot the gospel as Ood's message ; and devout hearing, all glorify
God. But praise glorifies God directly as its sole purpose. We ourselves fade out of
view, or at least fall into the background. God fills our whole prospect, absorbs our
thoughts. We praise him, not only because "he is our God," "the Father of
spirits," but " for his excellent greatness " — for what Ood is in himself. We praise
the Son, not only as our own Saviour, but as " the Brightness of the Father's glory,
and the express Image of his Person." We praise the Spirit as " the Lord and Giver of
life." Praise is therefore the highest exercise of our powers ; the sublimest attitude
of a created spirit.

II. The singing of praise is futtino to the best use okb of oub noblest faoul-
TiES. God might have given us hearing without any sense of melody and harmony ;
speech without song. By the wonderful structure of our organs of speech and hearing,
and the capacity of harmonious vibrations bestowed on air and other substances, God
has prepared an inexhaustible store of music, a whole world of delight, of which we
might have been left without the slightest conception. And he has so tuned our
nature that joyous or pathetic emotions naturally break into song. "Is any merry?
let him slug psalms" (Jas. v. 13).

lU. Pbaise is meant and fitted (fitted, and thebefobe designed) to bi
THE MOST delightful PART OF WORSHIP. In prayer we gird on our armour, lay
bare our weakness, take hold on God's strength to save us. The Word read and
preached gives us manna from the skies, water from the rock ; but also smites with
the " two-edged sword," and at times lays us in the dust. But praise gives us wings ;
lifts us into the sunshine of God's countenance, within sight of the pearly gates and
jasper walls, within heaving of the " new song before the throne." It is that part of
earthly worship in which we come nearest to the worship of heaven.

IV. Lastly, praise is a rich means of grace, capable of a powerful beflex
ACTION ON OUR OWN SOULS ; helping to fill us with " love, joy, peace." Paul and Silas
felt this when in the dungeon they not only prayed, but " sang praises to God."

CioNOLUsioN. Enforce the duty of cultivating musical gifts and consecrating them ;
and of taking earnest part in Church psalmody.



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Vers. 1 — 15. — The eye-salve of praise. In this psalm we have —

I. The spirit of gladsome praise. (Vers. 1 — 4.) The writer had evidently
tried what praise could do, and the result of his testing it was this joyful outburst
of praise concerning praise. He tells of its essence — giving thanks ; of its expression-
singing ; its object — the Lord ; its seasons — morning and night ; its aids — music of all
kinds ; its inspiration — the gladness that came to him through the works of the Lord.

II. A DARK PBOBLBM. (Ver. 7.) The seeming triumph of ungodliness. This is
» problem which has baffled many, and the pain of it is heard in many a lamentation,
expostulation, and prayer. For good men have trembled lest it should be believed that
God was on the side of the ungodly.

III. That problem seen through by help of the spirit of praise. 1. It is seen
through. The psalmist has no doubt of what is the meaning of all that prosperity of



P8. xcn. 1—16.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 286

wickedness — " it is that they shall be destroyed for ever," " perish," and be " scattered."
The very climax of their exaltation had ushered in the moment of their falL It is so
tliat God forces ungodly men to consider their ways; less terrible appeals too often
stand no chance of any heed being given to them. 2. But for the spirit of praise,
this would not have been seen. The mist and fog of unbelief would have continued to
blind the soul's vision, and have left men in the darkness of doubt and despair. But
the heart that is glad in the Lord is quick-eyed to see the Lord's mind, and to discover
his purpose its none others can ; for praise is faith in vigorous activity, and before such
faith the tangled problems of life smooth themselves out.

IV. The becountino of the reasons of peaise. (Vera. 8 — 15.) The victory
over doubt which has just been gained lends added vigour to the spirit of praise, and
hence follows the recital of the many sources of praise which gladdened the psalmist's
heart. 1. That God was over all — Most High for evermore. "The Lord reigneth" — that
has been the solace and the joy of many a soul. 2. That the Lord's enemies, the men
who do their bad best to turn earth into hell, shall utterly perish. Blessed be God
that they shall, since they will not repent. 3. It shall be well with <Ae righteous.
(Vers. 12 — 14.) They shall flourish in beauty, permanence, glory and strength, like
the palm tree ; as the cedar they shall branch out on every side ; the house of the
Lord shall be their home, and, nurtured there, they shall not cease to enjoy and to
impart rich blessing from God.— S. 0.

Ver. 1. — It is good to give thanks. It is so for many reasons.

I. Because it is bight. God deserves our thanksgiving. 1. Did he not create
usrand so start us on the road to eternal life ? 2. Does he not preserve us, and bless us
daily with gifts innumerable ? 3. Has he not redeemed us by the sacrifice of his Sou ?
"For God so loved the world," etc. 4. Is not the Holy Spirit with us still, ever
seeking to lead us nearer God, and to sustain us in every hour of trial and sorrow ?
6. And have we not the blessed hope which stretches on into life eternal ? Yes ; it is
right to give thanks.

IL And it is pleasant. " Is any merry ? let him sing psalms," — so said St. James.
And they who know afQrm that the sense of God's love, which is the substance of
praise, is joy indeed.

III. And it bids us of cub pebsistent tobuentok — self. Self sinks out of
sight, and God alone is seen, and that is blessed.

IV. Doubt cannot abide it. " Come, Melancthon, let us sing a psalm, and drive
away the devil," — such was one of Luther's sayings. And praise does drive doubt
away.

V. Souls abe won to God bt it. It is winsome, comely, irresistibly attractive.
— S. 0.

Ver. 1. — Singing praise. An old writer, one John Wells, in his ' Morning Exercises,'
published in 1676, thus speaks on this theme.

I. SiNOiNO IS THE MUSIC OF NATUBE. The mountaiuB sing (Isa. xliv. 23). The
valleys sing (Ps. Ixv. 13). The trees sing (1 Chron. xvi. 53). And the air is the
birds' music-room, where they chant their musical notes.

II. SiNGiNO IS THE MUSIC OF OBDiNANCES. It IS told of Augustiuc how he was
moved to tears when be went into the church at Milan, and heard the singing there.
Beza relates a similar experience of himself. Jesus at the Last Supper sang the hymn :
it was the hundred and eleventh psalm and five others.

III. SiNOiNO IS THE MUBio OF SAINTS. They liave performed this duty when in
their greatest numbers (Ps. cxlix. 1). And in their greatest straits (Isa. xxvi. 19).
And in their greatest flight (Isa. xlii. 10, 11). And in their greatest deliverances
(Isa. Ixv. 14).

IV. Singing is the husic of angels. (Job xxxviii. 7 ; Luke ii. 13 ; Rev. v.

V. Singing is the music of heaven. — S. C.

Ver. 2. — Morning and evening exercises. I. Fob the mobnino. 1. It is to show
forth the Lord's loving-kindness. What a beautiful word this " loving-kindness " is !



286 THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [ps. xcii. 1—15.

It has been noticed by all devout readers of these psalms. One says, "It is a
duplicate deliciousaess; there are within it linked sweetnesses long drawn out. It
is a kind ef word with whicli to cast spells which should charm away all fears."
Some have derived the word "kindness" from "kinnedaeaa" the feeling which
we cherish to those who are near to us in our own families. And God's kindness to
his people is because he has made them of his own kin. He bids us call him
"Father," and he has given us "power to become sons of God" (John i. 12). And
forasmuch as amongst us the fact of being a man's "kin" may not involve, often
does not, that he should be to us "kind," therefore God's kindness is spoken of as
loving-kindness. A woman may show kindness to poor people, but to her own dear
child she will show loving-kindness — a much warmer and more tender feeling. And
this is that which God cherishes and manifests towards us. Nature, providence, and
grace all attest this. It is not true that Nature is immoral, harsh, bitterly cruel, " red
in tooth and claw," and needing to be supplemented by the gospel of Christ, if the
character of its Creator is to be regarded as beneficent (see Drummond's ' Ascent of
Man '). There is another and a gentler side belonging to it. And providence, if we
will but remember its educational purpose, and the graciousness of its common dealings,
will give clear testimony to the loving-kindness of the Lord. And so, chief of all, will
the grace of God attest this. " Ye know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that," et&
2. And this is to be our morning theme. (1) For then are we fresh and vigorous, and
the firstfruits of the day should be otTered. The dews of the Holy Spirit fall then
especially. (2) And we need preparation for all the day may bring ; it is sure to bring
temptation, and it may bring trial and trouble; yea, disaster and death may come.
But if our hearts be filled with the sense of the loving-kindness of the Lord, we are
ready for all that may be in store for us. (3) And we have had fresh proof of it in
the fact of spared life and renewed strength (cf. Keble's morning hymn). Now, all
this is true of the literal morning. But if we understand by the "morning," the
beginning of our life, its earlier days, what more fitting theme could there be for this
morning than the loving-kindness of the Lord ? And so, too, of the morning after the
night of sorrow, when Ood has cleared the clouds away. And without doubt we shall
find it good to do this in the blessed resurrection morn. Let us prepare for this by
showing forth God's loving-kindness now.

II. For niohtfaix. God's faithfulness is to be our theme then. And it is most
fitting. For we have experienced more of it. What he promised to give he has
given — provision for our wants ; protection ; guidance ; and deliverance from many a
snare of the devil. He has been faithful all along.

III. The bxekcise is to be a showing forth. In praise of heart and lip and
life rendered unto him ; and in open confession, and grateful obedience. — S. C.

Ver. 10. — The holy oU. We have here —

I. A TGRT BLESSED THING SPOKEN OF. Under this emblem the Holy Spirit is set
forth (Luke i v. 18). 1. The holy oil told of was especially sacred. (See Exod. xxx. 33 ;
Ps. Ixxxix. 20.) 2. It ennobled those on whom it was poured. Constituting them
prophets, princes, priests. 3. It invigorated and empowered for high service. This
is especially true of the Holy Spirit (Luke xxiv. 49). 4. It was a bond of union.
(Ps. cxxxiii. 1, 2.) And so the Holy Spirit (John xvii. 21; Eph. iv. 3). 6. It it
gladdening. (Ps. zxiii. 5 ; Heb. i. 9.) 6. Illuminating. (1 John ii. 27.) 7. Sweetly
fragrant. (John xii. 3.) In all these and yet other respects did the holy oil tell of
the blessed Spirit of God.

II. A VERY JOYFUL coNPiDBNGB EXPRESSED. " I thaU be anointed," etc. He does
not say, " I hope ; " but he is sure of what he afBrms. Now, the grounds of this con-
fidence are : 1. That it rested on Ood. He could not have spoken thus had it been
resting only on man. 2. We are united with C!hrist,Va»Ax\o\n\.oA One. " Of his fulness
we all receive." Z. The Holy Spirit dwells within us. i. The promises of Ood. So full,
numerous, clear, strong. 5. JTie experience of Ood^s people in all age». Daily strength
has been given for daily need. Therefore we may well believe the text.

III. An invaluable help to our spiritual life promised. 1. It banishes fear.
(1) The fear of poverty. Israel, though they had only the day's supply of manna, did
not fear for the morrow. Nor need we, for we know that, though the sun will set, there



P8. xcu. 1— 16.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 287

shall be light to-morrow, (2) The fear of temptation. We pray, " Lead us not into
temptation ; " but in spite of that, we may be so led ; but we need not fear — we shall be
anointed with fresh oil. (3) Of baclisIidiDg — that we shall fall away. (4) Of great
trials; if they corao, it will be well with us. (5) Of bereavements. We say, " What
shall we do then ? " But v, hen one prop is taken, another is given. 2. It inspires glad
hope. Of usefulness in Christ's service continued. Of full attainment in grace. Of
strength su£Scient for all need.

IV. A PAINFUL CONTRAST BuooESTED. The godless have no such hope. All that
sustains them is fast running out, and there is no further supply. What .shall they
do in the end thereof? They will have had their good things, and there are no
more. — S. C.

Ver. 12. — " Like the palm tree,'' So do the righteous flourish. The parallels are
many and striking.

I. Fob ufbiqhtnebs. The palm tree rears itself straight up into the air, erect,
stately, strong. True image of the really righteous. Crooked ways are not his.

IL Fob usbfulnebs. " The extensive importance of this tree is one of the most
curious subjects to which attention can be directed. A considerable part of the inhabit-
ants of Egypt, Arabia, and Persia subsist almost entirely upon its &uits. They boast
of its medicinal virtues. The camels feed upon the date stone. From the leaves they
make a variety of articles for domestic use. From the fibres of the boughs, thread,
ropes, and rigging are manufactured ; from the sap, a spirituous liquor is prepared ; and
the body of the tree furnishes fueL" And so in edl departments of life — the influence,
the example, the spirit, the words, and works of the righteous man are full of blessing.
See this supremely in Christ, the Righteous.

IIL For beadtt. In the Canticles the palm tree is often taken as an emblem of
beauty, as it well may be. And on the righteous man " the beauty of the Lord our
God " is seen, as in our Lord above all (John i. 14). Moral beauty is as real as
physical.

IV. I'oB FowEB. See its victory over all kinds of foes which threaten its life. It is
a root out of a dry groimd : the choking sand surrounds it, the burning heat scorches
~it, the fierce tempest beats upon it ; it is often wounded — its roots crushed with all
manner of weights, the elements, man, the beasts of the desert, all combine to injure
it ; but in spite of them all it rears its beautiful corona of leaves far on high, and
flourishes still. And so is it with the righteous (cf. Paul's psean of praise, his challenge
to earth and hell to harm him if they can, Bom. viii. 36 — 39).

V. Fob FBuiTFUiiNESs. It is the staff of life to the peoples amongst whom it is
found. And so the righteous (cf. John xv. 1 — 8).

VI. Fob oniDANoe. It is the sure sign of the presence of water (see Elim, Jericho,
etc.). Across the burning sands the caravan, parched with thirst, make for the cluster
of palms they see afar off, for they know that water is there. And so the righteous
should be and is a sign to the sin-wearied heart, which tells him where the living
waters are. " Let him that heareth say. Come."

VIL Fob permanence. It continues right on to old age to be all that has been
said. True emblem of the perseverance of the saints of God. — S. 0.

Vers. 13 — 15. — " Planted in the house of the Lord." Five subjects fall to be con-
sidered here.

I. The PLANTED ONES. The similitude is taken from the fact of trees being com-
monly planted in the quadrangles of Eastern houses ; there were trees in the temple
courts. Now, from this emblem we learn much about those persons whom it repre-
sents. 1. They must have had life in them. People do not plant dead things. So
ere ever any soul is planted in the house of the Lord, the Divine life must have begun
It may have been very feeble, but it was there. Many come to church, and regularly,
who have never been planted in the house of the Lord, because they are not " born
again." 2. UTtey are where they once were not. The tree had been transplanted, moved
from one place to another. So the soul of the man spoken of here. He has been
" translated out of the kingdom of darkness into," etc. ; he has passed " from death into
life ; " he has undergone a great and wonderful change. The process may have beer



288 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. sen. 1—16.

very painful ; the roots of our life seemed so to cling to our old state. But by one means
and another we liave been transplanted. " If any man be in Christ Jesus, he is a new
creature ; old thinjis have," etc. 3. And it was done for us, not by ourselves. We
were "born, not of the will of man, nor of the will of the flesh, but of the will of God."
Unless Christ saves us, we shall never be saved. We owe our all to the grace of God.
4. The roots have taken hold of the soil. (C. H. Spurgeon.^ We often make use of the
expression that a man has taken root in a place, meaning that he has settled down
there, and has found pleasure au'i good iu his surroundings, and is at home there. So
these people, these planted ones, find their home in the house of God. 6. And they
stay there. They are no mere birds of passage, but they dwell in the secret place of
the Most High, love the habitation of God's house, their soul's home is there. In
body they must often be absent, but in spirit never.

II. The pkosfebitt pbomised them. They " shall flourish in the courts of our God."

1. As a fact they do. What great saint ever set light store by the sanctuarv of God ?

2. And it is certain they will. There is the promise of God. There is the soui-uurture
which the sacred services of the sanctuary supply. There is the shelter and retreat
from the hostile forces of the world outside. There is the ever- watchful eye of the
husbandman. God cares for the trees planted there. He watches over them night
and day.

III. The pebmanence of all this. "They bring forth fruit in old age" (see
homily on this clause).

IV. The proof heeeby given op the chabacteb of God. 1. I%ey show " thai
the Lord is upright." They do this, for they, being righteous themselves, prove that he
who made them so is righteous. We judge by deeds. Bighteous souls are God's
deeds. 2. And they show his love also ; for he does not cast them off in the time of
their oM age, as most men do their servants ; but he puts yet more honour on them.

V. The personal testimony of the psalmist. " He is my Bock," etc. It is as
if he would say, " I know all this is true, for he is my Bock, and there is," etc It is
good to proclaim the truth of God, but he does it the more powerfully who can bear
testimony from his own experience. Then, are we willing to be planted in the house
of our God ? Go and tell him bo, and it shall be done unto you.— ^. 0.

Ver. 14. — " Fruit in old age." This is one of the blessed promises of God to his
faithful people. Consider —

I. What this fbuit is. 1. Much knowledge of OocCs ways. What are many
years granted to man for, but that he may attain to this knowledge and the practical
wisdom thence ensuing ? 2. SaTictity of character. The long discipline of life should
have trained his spirit to this, and confirmed him in the ways of God. 8. Patience,
Old age should " rest in the Lord, and wait patiently for him." 4. Heavenly mindedness.
They cannot but know how soon their hold on this world will be loosened ; and hence
it should be their endeavour to be ready for the better world of heaven ; their conver-
sation should be much in heaven. 5. Concern for the' solvation of others. Their exhor-
tations and testimony will have power, and should not be withheld. God will be
glorified and souls eternally blessed. Such is the fruit which old age should bring
forth.

II. Though supebnatdbal, it is not unreasonable. 1. It is supernatural. Old
a>;e is not the natural season for fruit. In the tree we do not look for it. The palm
tree is a rare exception. Nor in men. The outward roan perishes. Decay of nature
sets in. (See for beautiful description of old age, lilccles. xii. 1 — 7.) The mental facul-
ties and force become feeble. The courage and fearlessness of former days lapse into
the caution and timidity of old age. Only of God's people can it be said —

** Time, that doth all things else decay.
Still makes them flourish strong and fair."

2. But though fruit fu old age be supernatural, it may he reasonably looked for. From'
the nature of religion, the Divine life in the soul must grow, if it lives at all. Where
there is spiritual life there must be growth. From the force of holy habit, which
enables the righteous to be righteous still, and the holy to be holy still. From the
subsidence of the bodily passions, and so the absence of strong temptation, and from
the special aid of the Spirit of God according to his sure promise.



PS. son. 1—15.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 289

III. Some tbocble thbmsbltbs about it who should not. Many aged people
of Qod are distressed because they cannot — so they think — see any of this blessed
fruit. But this may be owing : 1. To mistaking feeling for fruit. They cannot
summon up those strong rapturous feelings in worship and prayer, and hence they fear
lest they have lost their religion. It is not so, for God looks not at feelings — they
come and go like the clouds — ^but at tiie heart, the will which alone is the true man.
That may be true to God when feeling is but faint and fitful, and has but little rapture
and glow. 2. To forgetfulness of the fact that " they also serve who only stand and
wait" Activity and toil are possible only to the strong and vigorous. Patient wait-
ing upon God, meek resignation to his wiU, — these are the fruits of old age, and are no
less acceptable to God than the strenuous activity of the young and strong.

IV. Some do mot tboublb themselves about it who should. For they bring
forth no fruit. The world has them too surely ; their hearts are not right with God.
They find fault with others, and complain that the former times were better than
these. The means of grace they do not avail themselves of, and they present the sad
spectacle of men from whom much might have been expected, but who yield little or
no fruit in old age.

y. It IB tHFiNiTELT DBBIBABLS. 1, For ow own peace and comfort, the esteem of
our fellow-Christians, and the approval of conscience, depend upon it. 2. Our pow»r
to help and bless others. For they will see and reverence fruit in old age, and will own
the power of Divine grace and the blessedness of it ; whilst, on the other hand, where
there is little or no such fruit, they will be confirmed in their own sin and harden
themselves yet more against God. 3. For Christ's sake. It will gladden and glorify bim.

VI. Its obeat ouabantbb and aids. 1. The abiding grace of Ood. " Without
me," said Christ, " ye can do nothing." 2. Self-examination. Ask of yourself whether
you are bringing forth fruit. 3. Diligent use of means of grace — ^prayer, study of the
Scriptures, attendance at the house of God, Holy Communion. 4. Definite endeavours
to bring others to Ood. Great is the help of such faithful aggressire work. 6. Bring-
ing forth fruit now ere old age comes. — 8. C.

Yer. 1. — A daily good work. Something the good man does every morning and
every night. The Talmud speaks of this psalm as being sung on the morning of the
sabbath at the drink offering which followed the sacrifice of the first lamb. What is
here said to be "a good thing" is the act of recognizing and acknowledging God's
direct relation to our lives. He is closely related to them. We may, and we ought
to, feel the relation, but it is right to say so, and it does us good to say so, day by day.
The psalm may be used as a plea for the value of morning and evening devotions and
worship. When Richard Baxter exerted so gracious an influence at Kidderminster,
one important part of his work was securing family prayer in every house. It is said
of the Christianized Fiji Islanders, that in every family there is morning and evening
worship. Moses provided for thank-offerings, because he understood human nature,
and knew that to the thankful the outward sign of thankfulness would be an addition
to thankfulness. " At all times man has mercies enough given him to make them a
subject of thankfulness unto God." In saying that giving thanks daily is a " good
thing," two ideas may be included. (1) It is a right thing. (2) It is a desirable,
delightfiil thing. If begun as duty, it will soon come to be a personal joy. We
have always abundant (1) cause for gratitude to God. We ought always to cherish
(2) the feeling of gratitude. And we only satisfy right impulses when we (3) make
due expression of our gratitude. But the point which may be opened with some fresh-
ness is suggested by the two terms used in ver. 2. The word " loving-kindness " is
associated with our morning praise ; the word " faithfulness " is associated with our
evening praise.

L What is Gk>D to us ween we make no conscious demands oh hiu ? We make
no demands iu our sleep. And what seems first to come to our thought, when we wake
in the morning, is the " loving-kindness " of God's preservations aild restorations.

"Throngh sleep and darkness safely bionght,
Restored to life, and power, and thonght."

IL What is God to us when we make oonboious demands oh Em? That
we do for every day, and all day long : for all the activities and relations of life. So

FSALM8 — II. u



290 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. xon. 1—16.

what comes to mind " every night" is God's * faithfulness" to the promises on which
we have been relying. — B. T.

Ver. 3. — The samctifying ministry of miisic. " Upon the harp with a solemn sound."
There seem to have been trumpet-blasts connected with the worship of Jehovah from
the time of its orderly arrangement by Moses. But what may be called distinguishing
music, the accompaniment of intelligent song, seems to have been introduced by
David. The association of music and song with worship changed public worship from
a ceremony to a service, from something done for men to something done hy men. It
made public worshipping personally pleasant to the worshipper ; glorified duty ;
kindled and exercised holy emotion. It seems a strange thing that objection should
ever have been made to the introduction of instrumental music into Divine worship.
On the principle of consecrating the use of all gifts and talents to the Divine service,
the gifts of varied music should have been taken over and sanctified. And the lutes,
and psalteries, and harps, and cymbals, of the older time, do but represent the comets
and violins and organs of this newer time. Not only artistically, but also devotion-
ally, music is a most valuable background to song, and it may be fairly urged that the
most beautiful, the most perfect, the most varied music the world can produce should
be associated with the sanctuaries of the Most High.

I. Music ministers to our sanctifying by its bestfxtlnebs. Nothing in the world
is 80 soothing to us. David's power on the half-mad king ISaul is but a type of the
infiuence of music that we feel. How often nothing will quiet the tossing, restless
sufTerer, imtil some one croons a holy song I Who does not feel the cathedral song
■teal into his very soul, hashing down every passion, and breathing peace? And
surely, tempest-tossed every week, we need sabbath music.

II. Music ministers to our sanctifying by its relation to oub emotions. Illustrate
by the march of a regiment to its music. The instant effect produced by dance-music.
The influence of tunes in the minor key, etc. Then our sensitiveness makes music,
well chosen and well rendered, an actual, moral, and religious force. Music may be a
means of grace.

III. Music ministers to our sanctifying by its winsoueness. See the crowds
attracted by Salvation Army bands ; or by services of song. The power of music to
vrin has not yet been fully realized by the Christian Church. — ^B. T.

Ver, 5. — Oo^s thyughts seen in God's works. " How great are thy works I and thy
thoughts are very deep." Reminding us of the fine passage in Isa. Iv. 8, 9, " For
my thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your ways my ways, saith the Lord.
For as the heavens are higher than the earth, so are my ways higher than your ways,
and my thoughts than your thoughts." The " thoughts " of God, his purposes and
plannings, bring him before us as a moral Being, the sublime moral Being. And just
as we read a man's character by his acts, so we may know God's mind by the study
of his works. A man is always greater, always better, than anything he does ; and
yet it is only from what he does that we can gain our apprehension of the man. So
God is infinitely above and beyond anything of his handiwork ; and yet only through
the handiwork can we get to know him. It is not enough to say that God's moral
government is illustrated in nature ; we must say that God himself — and it is in what
God is we find the secret of the character of his government — is known through the
works of his hands. The point suggested by the first sentences of this verse is that
the more man studies God's works, the more he feels their greatness, their mystery,
their beyondness. And then be can no longer be surprised that God's thoughts and
purposes, the higher moral ends he ever keeps in view and works towards, should be
deep, altogether out of his reach.

I. The known bevealing what can be known of God. We can undenstand
much of God's handiwork. We can see God's purpose in much, and use many things
as God designed they should be used. We can see the moral message in much of
God's work. So argues St. Paul, in Acts xiv. 15 — 17 ; Bom. i. 19, 20. We may
know, thus, all the natural attributes of God, and gain also some apprehension of the
moral attributes. But what can be known of God in this way must always bs
incomplete.



PS. xcn. 1— 15.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 291



II. The unknown bevealing that there is an unknown in God. " His thoughts
are very deep;" quite beyond man's plummet. There is mystery in Nature. She
holds secrets which even man's science cannot force her to disclose. And those mys-
teries declare that there must be deeper mysteries in him who holds the secret of them
all. Ee is more mysterious than they, — ^B. T,

Ver. 6. — Eyes dimmed to spiritual things. Two terms are used to describe those
who are unable to discern either the greatness of God's works or the depth of God's
thoughts. " A brutish man." "A fool." The distinction between them seems to be
this — a " brute " cannot, and a " fool " mU not, see spiritual things. But both inca-
pacity and self-willedness are regarded as sins. The brutish man has made himself
brutish ; and the fool encourages his self-will. The Prayer-book Version gives " unwise "
for " brutish." But the Hebrew words suggest, for " brutish," the mere animal nature,
the man who lives for his appetite ; and for " fool," the stupid, inconsiderate man.
" In the one case the moral sense has not come into play at all ; in the other it is over-
grown by sensuality, so that spiritual discernment, insight into the glories of the
Divine mind, are impossible."

L In some men the rAouLTT of bpibitual disoebnmbnt needs to be aeoused.
In a sense this is true of every man. The spiritual faculty is dormant, as is the
mental faculty. The educational element has its place in material as well as in
spiritual knowledge. Usually, in religious spheres, the spiritual faculty is cultured.
But vast masses of humanity, at home and abroad, have little chance of getting beyond
the animal stage. The psalmist, however, is evidently thinking of those who volun-
tarily imprison their thoughts and interests in the things of the flesh and sense. To
be • natural brute when we may be a man, is an infinite pity ; to be a willing brute
svhen we might be a son of God, is an infinite shame.

n. In some men the faculty of spibitual disoebnhent needs to be deltvebed.
It has been aroused. It has had times of power. But business, pleasure, intellectual
pride, material interests, have dimmed it. The man has become a " fool " to his best
interests. He has persistently limited his vision to this world, until he has come
really to believe that there is no world but this.

Press this conclusion : We are responsible for our attitude towards spiritual things ;
and for our capacity to apprehend spiritual truths. If we pamper the body, we shall
be sure to dim the spiritual vision. — B. T.

Ver. 7. — The instability of the success of the ungodly, "Spring as the grass." In
Eastern countries, after a time of drought, the grass responds with marvellous sudden-
ness to the refreshing rains. But the grass which grows so swiftly is as swiftly cut
down by the blazing sunshine or the scorching wind. The sudden success of the
ungodly was a surprise and distress to God's people, who looked on temporal success
as a special sign of Divine approval. It seemed to them as if, after all, God was
practically on the side of the wicked. In drearier moments they might even think
that God made fair promises to the good, but gave the actual blessings to the ungodly.
The relief which the saints of olden time found for this their distress is not just the
relief which we should provide now. They, like Asaph, went into the sanctuary of
God, and there they came to understand the end of the wicked. Beally, their high
places were slippery places; and in God's time they were "cast into destruction."
There is a certain measure of comfort in the thought that things gained by unright-
eousness are insecure. But it is a higher standpoint that enables ua to see that no
success is worth having that has no righteousness at the heart of it. God is the secret
of all stability, and God is not in a thing, unless goodness is the characteristic of the
thing. Goodness always tends to permanency. Bible history is full of illustrations of
the instability of all success attained by the ungodly. If a man's gains are secure for
his own life, they are squandered by his sons. In the north of England the uncertainty
of sudden prosperity is enshrined in a popular saying, " The first generation buys the
carriage; the second generation rides in the carriage ; the third generation pawns the
carriage." See the cases of Pharaoh, Nebuchadnezzar, Haman, Herod ; and note also
our Lord's parable of the " rich fool."

L The success of the wicked is unstable in the natuee of things. L



292 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. xcn. 1— 1&.

They who overreach are always in danger of being overreached. 2. The wicked are
always making enemies, who are quick to avenge tiiemselves, if opportunity offers.
3. The wicked make mistakes which dissipate all their gains.

II. Thk success of the wioeed is unstable because, sooner ob LAiEit, God
18 bube to deal with it. He tests foundations; if they are not found righteous,
the grandest houses of attainment will surely fall. — ISL. T.

Ver. 10. — ITie stability of human good lies with Ood. God exalts the horn. God
anoints with oil. " The horns in animals, where tlie Creator alone planted them,
were their weapons of defence ; and man, who lays all nature under tribute to eiurich
his stores of images and figures, very early made it synonymous with power, and then
for what that will always confer upon the possessor. To exalt the horn means to
advance in power, honour, and dominion." The unicorn of Scripture is, in all proba-
bility, the wild buffalo. Abb^ Hue, in his travels, tells of having heard of an animal
resembling the unicorn of heraldry ; but we can hardly regard his work as trustworthy.
Horns were, and are still, worn by the women of the Lebanon ; but the psalmist is
much more likely to take his figure from the common features of animal life than
from merely local customs of women. The figure of " anointing with fresh oil " is not
easily explained. Atteation is due to the suggestion that the use of oil in the toilet
was the sign that a man was in health. When a man was sick, he refrained from his
customary use of oil. So being anointed came to be the sign of good health. And
established health is one of God's best blessings. So we get the two ways in which
God secures the stability of the good.

I. He lifts them out of, keeps them above, theib oiboumstanoeb. Things
may be always tending toward pulling down, depressing their horn. God is always
raising it up, and keeping it up. This is a familiar thought to the psalmists : " He
brought me up also out of a horrible pit, and out of the miry clay, and set my feet
upon a rock, and established my goings ; " " Hold thou me up, and I shall be safe."

n. He eenews theib own viooub and vitality. And so his people are able to
keep wrestling with evils, and winning victories over circumstances. God is the secret
of stability, because he is both in the circumstances and in us. " What can harm you,
if ye be followers of the thing that good is ? " What, indeed, seeing that " he who is
for you is more than all that be against you," I They who upset your good, must shift
God's relations to it, before they can reach you. — B. T.

Ver. 12. — Grace and strength characterizing the righteous. Palm trees are types of
grace. Cedar trees are types of strength. The palm gracefully rises from the plain,
and bears a beautiful crown of fruits and leaves. The cedar strikes its roots wide and
deep into the everlasting hills, and securely spreads forth its great branches through
ages of winters. Perhaps trees were actually planted in the courts of the temple, as
they are in the courts of mosques nowadays ; but the characteristic forms of palm and
cedar are alone required for the teaching of this verse, which will go into this sentence,
" They who by daily worship rest their life in communion with God, shall find the
secret of unbroken freshness and undying stability."

I. The beauty of the biohteoub. Observe the distinction between the two
" flourishings " — the flourishing of the wicked, and the flourishing of the righteous.
The one is wholly a matter of outward, material good ; the other is primarily a matter
of personal character. The wicked may flourish by reason of what he Itas ; and that
can be easily taken from him. The godly man flourishes by reason of what he »»/
and that can never be taken from him. Against that the " gates of hell cannot pre-
vail." The flgure of beauty given in the palm suggests uprightness, gracefulness,
gentleness, aboveness, fruitfulness, and secret sources of renewal for its life. If the
palm tree was an ideal for a poet, we have a better model than they ; we may say,
" The righteous shall flourish as did the Man Christ Jesus." And what grace and
beauty shone forth from him I It is not enough that we who bear his name are good,
we must be beauti/ui.

II. The btbenqth of the biqhteous. Strangely men associate weakness with
gentleness; and think beautiful Christly souls are out of place in this workaday
world. So the figure of the " cedar " is joined to the figure of the " palm." The ced^-



PS. xcii. 1— IB.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 293

Is the atrongest of all the trees. Not only is there the great grip of the mountaiQ,
but the wood is firm and lasting. So we need to have the texture of our souls firm
and strong — the strength of our grip of God ever behind and supporting all our beauty
of form and grace of relation. — B. T.

Ver. 13. — 'Hie testimony of old age to God's faithfulness. Perowne thinks allusion may
be to the " date-palm, which, when it reaches maturity, produces three or four hundred
pounds weight of fruit, and has been known even to produce six hundred pounds
weight." In contrast with the prosperity of the wicked, which is but for a moment,
the prosperity of the righteous is declared to be long-lived. The aged are spared
among us, not for any direct work they can do, but for the testimony they can render
to the faithfulness and mercy of God. Over and over again we may hear them saying,
" I have been young, and now am old, yet have I never seen the righteous forsaken,
nor his seed begging bread." Godly old age testifies, on the basis of its personal,
lengthened, and varied experiences, of three things.

I. Gbace byes adaptkd. According to the promise, " As thy day, so shall thy
strength be."

II. Gbaoe eveb aboukdins. According to the promise, " God is able to make all
grace abound, so that ye, having all sufBciency unto all good things, may abound unto
every good word and work."

lU, Gbace eveb continuinq. As we sing in onr hymn—

**Hl9 grace shall to the end

Stronger and brighter shine."

And according to the promise, " I will never leave you, nor forsake you." John Owen
says, " When believers are under all sorts of bodily and natural decays, and, it may
be, have been overtaken with spiritual decays also, there is provision made in the
covenant to render them fat, flourishing, and fruitful — vigorous in the power of internal
grace, and flourishing in the expression of it in all duties of obedience. Blessed be
God for this good word of grace that he hath given us such encouragement against all
the decays and temptations of old age which we have to conflict withal." — B. T.

Vers. 1 — 8. — Joyful worship. " Celebrates in joyful strain the greatness of God's
works, and especially his righteous government of the world, as manifested in the
overthrow of the wicked, and the prosperity and final triumph of the righteous."

I. A eooD MAN bsjoioes m the BiaHTEOus woBK OF God. (Ver. 4.) 1. Because
Ood's work is a work of loving-kindness. (Ver. 2.) 2. It is a work of faithfulness or
truth. (Ver. 2.) He fulfils every word of promise and every threat of judgment. 3.
Ood's good work it on a vast scale. (Vers. 6 — 8.) It is universal, embracing the
heavens and the earth, extending throughout the universe. " God is in the height,
supreme for evermore." 4. But Ood^s way of accomplishing his righteous purpose it
not always opmly manifest. (Ver. 5.) " His thoughts are very deep." His methods
of work are often deeper than we can fathom.

IL That the joy of the good man in God seeks exfbesbion and uttebanoe
IX WOBBHIP. " It is a good thing." 1. It becomes a necessity of ou/r nature. If the
emotion of praise is in us, it demands expression ; as the poet must sing, and the artist
must paint. Worship thus becomes acceptable to God, and a means of our own eleva-
tion. 2. Worship such as this becomes the habit of the soul. " In the morning . . . every
night," and on the sabbath day. 3. The true worshipper will call to his aid cUl that
will help him to utter his emotions. The voice and other instruments — ^public service
and ministry. 4. But it is only to our spiritual intelligence that worship becomes
necessary. (Ver. 6.) **▲ brutish man kuoweth not; neither doth a fool understand
this.'— S



•^v*



THE BOOK OF PSALMS.



[P8. xan. 1 — &



EXPOSITION.



PSALM xcin.



Like the preceding, a psalm of praise.
Jehovah is set forth as manifesting him-
self in the character of King. He robes
himself in majesty, and reigns openly. The
world, unstable as it may seem, is in reality
fixed under his sway. His throne, i.e. his
rnle, has been established from everlasting
(vers. 1, 2). Yet there is resistance to his
sway. The waters toss themselves ; i.e. the
powers of the world array themselves in op-
position to God (ver. 3). Vainly, however .
Ood in heaven is mightier than they (ver.
i). His might is especially shown in his
"house" and In his "testimonies." The
latter are " sure," the former is inviolate.

Ver. 1. — ^The Lord reigneth; rather, tt
become King CiPafftKevaiv, LXX.); comp.Pss.
X. 16 ; xlvii. 6; lovi. 10; xcvii. i,etc. God
is regarded as having for a time laid aside, or
bidden, his sovereignty, but as now at length
coming forward and inaugurating the theo-
cracy. The writer may have in his mind
some recent manifestation of Civine power,
or he may be anticipating the final estab-
lishment of the reign of Messiah. He is
clothed with majesty ; or, " he hath robed
himself in majesty " (Cheyne). The Lord is
clothed with strength, wherewith he hath
girded himself; literally, the Lord is clothe,
he hath girded himself, with strength (comp.
" Awake, awake, jmt on strength, O arm of
the Lord," Isa. li. 9). The world also is
stablished, that it cannot be moved When
God " takes his kingdom," he firmly estab-
lishes his sway over the earth, with its in-
habitants, in such sort that " it cannot be
moved " — it can suffer no violent agitation
or disturbance.

Ver. 2. — ^Zhy thioae is established of old.



Though God from time to time comes for-
ward, as it were, and asserts his sovereignty,
yet it is no new rule that he sets up. He has
always been the King both of heaven and
earth. Thou art from everlasting. Not
merely from " of old," but from all eternity
(comp. Ps. xc. 2 ; Prov. viii. 23 ; Isa. liiii.
15; Micah v. 2; Hab. i. 12).

Ver. 3. — The floods have lifted np, Lord,
the floods have lifted np their voice. By " the
floods " seem to be meant the world-powers,
God's enemies ; perhaps especially Egypt,
Assyria, and Babylon. Invading hosts are
constantly compared to " floods" or "rivers "
in (Scripture (see Isa. viii. 7, 8 ; xxviii. 2 ;
xvii. 12, 13; lix. 19; Jer. xlvi. 8, etc.).
The floods lift up their waves ; or, " their
din," "their roaring" (comp. Ps. Ixv. 7,
" Which stilleth the noise of the seas, the
noise of their waves, and the tumult of the
people").

Ver. 4. — The Lord on high (comp. Fs. xoii
8) is mightier than the noise of many
waters; literally, than the voices of many
waters (comp. ver. 3). As the waters re-
present angry nations, the poet speaks not
only of their " noise," but of their " voices."
Yea, than the mighty waves of the sea ; or,
" the glorious breakers of ocean " (so Kay ;
and comp. Exod. xv. 10).

Ver. 5. — Thy testimonies are very sure.
God's " testimonies " are his commandments,
considered as witnesses to man of his nature
and his will respecting them. They are
" very sure," i.e. firm and unalterable, par-
taking of liis unchangeability (Jas. i. 17).
Holiness becometh thine house, Lord, for
ever. " Holiness " here seems to mean
" sanctity," " inviolability " (Kay, Cheyne ;
comp. 1 Sam. vi. 20; Isa. vi. 13). This is
a tacit appeal to God to keep his temple
free from all profanation and pollution in
the future. The psalmist does not really
ask that it shall continue inviolate " for
ever," but "to length of days/'t.s. for an
ample period.



HOMILETICS.

Ver. 2. — The eternity of Ood. "Thou art from everlasting." There are t-uths
self-evident, yet incomprehensible. We can neither doubt nor grasp them. Light,
which reveals all things else, dazzles, even blinds, if we gaze on it. So these truths, in
whose light reason sees all things, baffle and confound our reason. One of these is the
eternity of God. We speak of time sometimes as " flying," as though we ourselves
■tood still. Sometimes of ourselves as " travelling on." Either way, we feel that
eternity is behind us, not increased by our past years; eternity is before us, undi-
minished as the future becomes present. Ood fills eternity (Isa. Ivii. 15). Human
language is employed in the Scriptures (Rev. i. 4 ; iv. 8). But with Ood reason assures



P8. xcin. 1— 6.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 295

us, can be no past, present, future, as with creatures. He is (Ps. xc. 2). The eternity
of Qod, as taught in the Scriptures, is —

I. A PROOF OP DivQtE INSPIRATION. The wonder of God's works is never so clearly
seen as when we compare with man's (e.g, in the microscope). Heathen mythologies
and philosophies utterly fail here. Painful, pitiable, to see the struggles of the ancient
Greek mind to grapple with this problem, in the monstrous fables of the origin of the
gods, or in its ever-shifting theories and guesses of philosophers. The Oriental mind,
mystic, subtle, contemplative, lost itself in labyrinths of speculation. The Hindus
distinguish the original fountain of being from the Creator, and even to the Creator no
temples are built, nor worship offered. " Gods many and lords many " come between
him and the worshipper. The Bible only shows us the eternal Creator as the Father
of spirits. Its whole purpose is to teach us tiow near God is to us, and bring us near to
him. This could never be man's invention; it is God's own voice.

II. Yet this is a contemplation pitll op awe. One of the strongest motives to
rvorship. Our cold Northern temperament, commercial hardness, keen pursuit of know-
ledge we can prove and analyze, frigid intellectualism, indispose us to worship. An
Englishman may have " an idol in his heart " — sojnething he puts in place of God ;
but he cannot comprehend why a Hindu falls down before an image. Yet worship is a
real, deep need of the human heart. God's eternity is presented in the Scriptures, not as
mere doctrine to be believed, but in the language of worship (see texts quoted above).

III. A BEAUTipnL, EBASSURIN& CONSIDERATION. 1. Eest for our thought, our heart,
our love. Let all else change, Ood abides. " God is love." 2. Light on the mystery
of God's dealings. If at such a moment, or critical turn, we could see good emerging
from evil, the perplexity caused by the long continuance of sin and misery would be
almost removed (Ps. xciv. 3). But God is working for eternity, in eternity (2 Pet.
iii. 8, 9).

IV. This glorious attribute is ascribed to the Lord Jesus, and claimed by him.
(Heb. xiii. 8; Bev. i. 8, 11 ; xxii. 13, 16.)

Conclusion. Show the bearing of this doctrine on sin ; on salvation ; on Christian
work.

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Vers. 1 — 5. — « The Lord reigneth." Note —

L The proposition to be proved — that "the Lord reigneth." The psalmist
describes : 1. 1%e royal roles. " He bath clothed himself with majesty." The sacred writers
seem to have drawn their ideas of the regal splendour of God, not so much from the
magnificence of Oriental potentates, as from the gorgeous glow of the heavens — the sun
by day, the moon and stars by night. Further, " he hath girded himself with strength."
This seen in the steady march of the heavenly bodies, never breaking rank, never
failing to appear in due course, never wearying by long continuance. 2. The per-
manence of his rule. " The world established, that it cannot be moved." The order
of his universe cannot be broken. And so it has ever been, " from everlasting."

II. The proof. The psalmist likens the wild tumult of the peoples in rebellion
against God to the fury of a storm at sea. The roar of the breakers dashing against
the rocks, the thunder of the surf upon the shore, the fierce agitation of the storm-
tossed waves as they lift themselves on high, — all this is the vivid picture which
suggests to the mind the worse, because the wicked, rage of a rebellious people or of a
rebellious soul. And how terribly true the likeness isl The souls of men setting
themselves against God, in wrath and rage against him, and scornfully rejecting and
renouncing his authority 1 But as he hushes the storm so that there is a great calm, in
like manner doth he still the wrath of man, and makes it to praise him (ver. 4). How
often he has done this I

IIL The deduction. It is twofold. 1. 2%a< Qod is faith/id. Men may utterly
rely upon his word. Fools that we are, we often fail thus to trust him, and follow
instead the miserable maxims of men of the world. But, nevertheless, God remaineth
true. 2. That holy obedience it our wisdom. We cannot have God on our side if we
wander from his ways — ^it is impossible. Let us, then, be on the side of God. Wisdom,
gratitude, duty, love for our fellow-men, all urge this. — S. C.



296 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [w. xoin. 1—5.

Ver. 1. — " It Ood dead f " Mrs. Beecher Stowe relates an incident whioh once gave
to a speech which Frederick Douglas was delivering a startling; and almost over-
whelming power. Douglas was descanting, in his usual impassioned manner, upon the
wrongs and miseries of the negro race. Warming with his subject, and waxing more
and more indignant with their persecutors, he seemed to lose all patience, and at last
said that they must henceforth trust in the strength of their own right arms, seeing
that it was in vain otherwise to hope for deliverance. At this moment there arose a
tall, aged negress, who, while perfect silence reigned in the hall, said, in a voica not
loud, but deep, " Frederick, is God dead?"— S. Cf.

Ver. 1. — TJie Qod ofvengeomce. To many it seems a strange prayer that God ihoiild
show himself in this character. Therefore consider —

L What TENOEAnrcK ig. 1. It is not the same at revenge, a human, an evil, and
often unjust thing. Bevenge is what men delight in when they have received some
injury at the hands of their fellow-men, and hence is never right, hut ever condemned
of G^od. But: 2. Vengecmce is the avenging of public wrong, the upholding of justice
and righteousness, and essential to the preservation of society and of all human well-
being. Therefore it may well be prayed for. See Milton's appeal, " Avenge, Lord,
thy slaughtered saints," etc. Now, concerning this vengeance of God, note further —

IL Its bealitt. The history of mankind is marked by it. Again and again has
God thus visited guilty men. The Bible, secular history, personal observation, expe-
rience, all attest it. Therefore when in the future life the Scriptures warn us of l^e
vengeance, how can any dare to regard it as impossible ?

in. Its one and onlt exoitino OAnsB — Human sin. Not a man's circumstances
nor anything that he cannot help, but only his sin, conscious, wilful, persisted-in sin.
Id this psalm there are set forth some of these sins, which cry to God for vengeance.

IV. Its biohteocskebs. We confess this now when we see men who have steeped
themselves in crime brought to judgment, and just doom passed upon them. And in
the future there will be no vengeance that does not command the heartfelt confession
from all beholders, that God is righteous who judgeth so.

V. Its tbrkibleness. " Fools make a mock at sin ; " did they know its doom, their
mockery would soon cease. Even in this world the vengeance of God often utterly
overwhelms the sinner. Well may the psalmist ask (Ps. xc. 11), " Who knoweth
the power of thine anger?" etc. It is immeasurable.

VL Its cebtaintt. It may be delayed, and for a long while seemingly evaded, but
sooner or later it surely comes.

VII. Its chosen highway. It is along the path of little sins. The ungodly
falletb by little and little. The mere cobwebs of separate single sins hecome at length
twisted and transformed by the law of habit into the strenuous ligaments which bind the
soul over to eternal sin.

VIII. Its abbest. Let the sinner repent and flee for shelter to Christ. — S. 0.

Ver. 1. — Hie King-figure for Ood. Prayer-book Version, "The Lord is King."
The sentence would be more precisely rendered " has become King," for some particular
manifestation of Jehovah's kingly rule was then occupying the psalmist's attention ; but
what that manifestation was cannot be discovered. Some associate the I'salm with the
returned captives, who, in some sense at least, re-established the theocracy. It repre-
sents the religious joy of the people in the setting up of Jehovah's kingdom, and the
realized presence of Jehovah as the spiritual King ; but the setting is that of a poet,
who has a wider sphere from which to draw his figures than the religious man has.
It needs attention that the King-figure for God is not altogether satisfactory, because
kingship is not a natural relation; it cannot beeithera permanent or universal relation.
Kingship represents a human expediency. God made families; these naturally organize
into tribes. For families and tribes the rulers are fathers and patriarchs. Men made
cities and nations, and invented kingships to centralize the governmental systems
which they designed. The figure of king should therefore always be applied to God,
and to the Messiah, with great care and caution. The actual kings who have ruled
over nations, though they may, in some things, fitly represent God, in other things are
wholly unworthy of him. And an ideal king is difficult to create mentally. It was



P8. xom. 1— 6.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 297

the peculiarity of the Jew, that he harl no earthly, visible king, Jehovah unseen yet
ever present, was to the nation of Israel, all, and more than all, that human kings
were to the nations around them. But this high view of the Divine Kingship l8rael
proved unable to maintain. It is that spiritual theocracy which the Lord Jesus came
to restore.

I. The King-fioube fob God deolabeb his auoubt foweb. Take the Eastern,,
rather than Western, idea of the king. In the East kings are regarded as the embodi-
ment of all kinds of power. At first they were chosen because of bodily size and
strength, as was king Saul. Notions of Divine power were connected with them. So
Israel's God was thought of as the Omnipotent, All-controlling One.

II. The Kinq-fioubb for God declabes his abiding fbesence. A king absent
from his kingdom is inconceivable. If he is away, some one must take his place. So
God as King is with his people.

IIL The Kinq-figvbe fob Gk>D deolabes his gbaoioub pubfosb. For a king
ought to be the " father of his people ; " supremely concerned for their highest well-
being. And God reigns with a view to securing righteousness, which is, for man, the
supreme blessing, — K. T.

Ver. 1. — The eomplettnest of Bivint Creation. " The world also is established, that
it cannot be moved." It is a remarkable illustration of the mistakes made in explaining
the poetical figures of God's Word, that Calvin appealed to this passage as proving that
the earth is motionlesR, which it is not. What the psalmist rejoices in is the com-
pleteness of the Divine creation. It needed no one tu put to it a finishing touch.
Man's handiwork always needs finishing off. We may illnstrate by the complicated
machine which man may make. However complete it may be, no one thinks of its
going alone, without any supervision and attention ; and no one thinks of doubting its
completeness because it receives such attention. Yet men so often persist that if God's
creation is perfect, it must be independent ; it must need no attention and no repair,
even if self-willed men do interfere with it.

I. Completeness ueans that the things hade abe pebfect and sufficient.
We may cot think that God made all he could make. What he made was relative to
the particular moral beings he designed. They were to be beings with five senses, and
creation was to be fitted to those five senses. Of everything God made it was declared
that it was good, not necessarily the best possible to God's thought, but the best
possible for God's purpose. Show that man, in all the ages, has never of himself been
able to improve a single thing God has made. He has only improved things by
bringing out the latent possibilities God put in the things. As with developed fiowers,
roses, etc.

IL Completeness means that the laws ruling the relations of things abb
ONOK FOB ALL FIXED AND DEFINED. Much is made of the fixity and certainty of the
" laws of nature." Too much cannot be made of it. " The law of the Lord," in
creation, "is perfect." But in every set of laws it will be found that law qualifies, and
limits, and even crosses, law in actual working. It is so with the laws of nature.
And the best perfection is seen in the fact that the laws will work with each other
harmoniously. Illustrate how the laws of life and of death work into each other
throughout creation.

IIL Completeness means that a living will pttEsiDES oteb all things and
the working of all laws. Nothing can be moved, in the sense of being changed ;
but everything is within the Divine adjustment, and the confidence of the psalmist
•rises from the conviction of the actual present Divine rule. — B. T.

Ver. 2. — The distinction between God and God's handiioork. "Thou art from ever-
lasting," Thou wast before the world was. He was. He made the earth, and all that
therein is. " In the beginning GKid." His name is the " I am." " The first and
foundation-stone of the great temple of revealed truth is a declaration which grasps all
space, all being, all time, and bids us see before them, above them, and altogether
independent of them — One lonely, infinite Being, having life in himself. When there
was no heaven and no earth, in the silent dark eternities, in the beginning, there was Gh>d.
The first chapter of Genesis is evidently " designed to impress on us that the world was



298 THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [ps. xoni. 1—5.

not created by chance, by self-generation, by impersonal powers of nature, or by many
agents acting either in harmony or in antagonism. God is distinct from all that he
has made." Bishop Wordsworth says, on Gen. i. 1, " The declaration of this verse
opposes the Pantheist, who says, ' The world is God ; ' the Peripatetics, who say, ' The
world exists from eternity ; ' the Stoics, who say, ' The world was made by Fate and
Necessity ; ' the Epicureans, who say, ' It arose from a fortuitous concourse of atoms ; '
the Persians and Manichaaans, who say, ' It arose from the antagonism of two rival
powers;' the Gnostics, who say, 'It was made by angels, or emanations of jeons;'
Hermogenes, who says, 'It was made out of matter co-eternal with God;' and the
modern notion, that it arose out of the spontaneous agency and evolution of self-
developing powers." The distinction between a man and the machine he makes is
clear enough ; but the complication of thought, in relation to God, arises from the fact
that he makes the material of which he makes the machine of creation. Illustrate the
distinction along the following lines.

I. CeBATION had a BEGINNING; THE CrBATOB HAD NONB.

II. CbEATION IB A MATERIAL THING; THE CbBATOB IS A SPIEITTJAL BeINO.

III. CbEATION, as we know IT, MAY BE ONE OF MANY CBEATI0N8 ; THE CbEATOB,
AS WE KNOW HIM, 18 THE OeIGINATOB OF THEM ALL.

IV. CbEATION is SUBJECT TO CHANGE; THE CrEATOE IS UNCHANQEABLB.

V. CbEATION has but a TEMPOBABT existence; THE CbEATOB 18 ETERNAL.

" From everlasting to everlasting thou art God ; " " Of thy years there is no ending "
<2 Pet. iii. 10).— E. T.

Ver. 3. — The irresistible power of floods. Though we have experience of disastrous
floods, the full force of the figure can only be felt in Eastern and in mountainous lands.
The "spate "in Scotland, the wady-floods of Palestine, and the gigantic overflow of
such rivers as the Tigris and the Euphrates, or the awful desolations of Chinese rivers
when the embankments give way, alone provide adequate illustration of such texts as
this now before us. If we take Mosaic associations for this psalm, then desert wady-
floods will be in the poet's mind. If we take the associations of the returned captives,
then the awful floods of the Babylon rivers will be in his mind. In a previous homily
the Jewish dread of the sea has been recalled. The Mosaic associations may include
reference to God's control of the waters of the Bed Sea, and using them as agents of liis
judgment on Pharaoh. One forcible illustration of a wady-flood will indicate the force
of this poetic figure, and help us to realize what he must be who can mate and master
even such floods. A traveller was at Nazareth when a sudden but violent storm arose.
The rain fell in torrents ; and in the course of an hour a river flowed past the convent
door, along what lately was a dry and quiet street. In the darkness of the night were
heard loud shrieks for help. The flood carried away baskets, logs of wood, tables, and
fruit-stands. At length, a general alarm was given. Two houses, built on the sand,
were undermined by the water, and both fell together, while the people in them
escaped with difficulty. Loosened waters have been for man, in every age, the type
of the masterful, the uncontrolled. Man never feels his helplessness so much as in
presence of loosened waters. He can fight with fire ; he can do nothing with water,
when it once gets free.

I. The poweb of God is seen in his masteet of watebs. See especially the
impression produced by the crbssing of the Bed Sea, and the destruction of the
Egyptians. See same impression from crossing of Jordan. Great nations are likened
to floods. And they too are fully within Divine control.

II. The powbb of God manifest is seen in his mastebt of watebb. Two
striking scenes : Walking on the waters. Quelling the storm on Galilee with a word
of command. — E. T.

Ver. 5. — Ood in revelation the same as God in nature. "Thy testimonies are very
sure." The use of this word "testimonies" in other psalms suggests that God's
witness to man in his revealed Word is meant by it. The unity of the psalm would,
however, be preserved if we regarded the " testimonies " here as those which God
makes to man through nature. The point of the verse is usually set forth in such a
way as this : " The permanence of the covenant, and of the outward signs that attest



4'8. xom. 1— 5.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 299

it, is to the Israelite proof of the superiority of the Divine power over the fprces of
nature." " The moral Law is a truer evidence of the existence of God than the uniformity
of natural law."

I. Revelation nevbb conteadiots nature. When there are seeming contra-
dictions, it is necessary to inquire whether we have the testimony of nature clear or
confused. For man, interfering with Nature's order, has confused her witness. And
so it is necessary to inquire whether we have the revelation pure and simple, since there
is often a material difference between what God has revealed, and what man makes of
that which is revealed. The contradictions belong to the man mark put on revelation
and nature. Both are from one baud and mind, and are in absolute harmony.

II. Revelation oonpiems natube. Set out an orderly scheme of nature-religion ;
carefully fix its principles; and you will surely find they are the first principles of
revelation. Indeed, revelation only comes to support primary principles of nature-
religion, because men overlay them with manufactured religious systems. Nature-
worship is quite a different thing from natural religion.

ni. Revelation enlarges upon nature. Nature sets forth mainly what may be
called the physical attributes of God — power, wisdom, etc. In a general way it shows
God's goodness, and, declaring that qualities attach to actions, prepares for tiie realiza-
tion of God as Judge, Eewarder, and Punisher. Revelation deals fully with God's moral
qualities and relations ; and has for its climax the disclosure of the Divine redemptive
purpose, which, as wrought out, upholds every primary attribute of God that nature
exhibits.— R. T.

Ver. 6. — Holiness the characteristic of Divine authority. The word " houae " has been
taken to mean God's earthly temple. And some writers can see an allusion to the
newly built temple of Zerubbabel. But it is better to regard the term " house " in the
light of the psalm; and then it evidently means this world of created things and
created beings, which God controls and rules. The psalm deals with the Kingship of
God ; his absolute power and authority in his world ; and this last clause seems designed
to meet the question which is at once called forth by the cumparison of Jehovah with
earthly kings. It would be an awful thing if we could know nothing of the character
of the Being set in rule over us, who has such absolute, such irresistible, power. Our
Ood may have it ; for he is " holy in all his ways, and righteous in all his works."

I. Holiness rules acoohdino to the perfect standard.

II. Holiness works towards the highest ends.

III. Holiness is consistent with needful bevbritibs.

IV. Holiness inoludes patient considerations.

The rule of God can therefore be fully acquiesced in. Infinite goodness unites with
infinite wisdom ; these combine with infinite power ; and all are toned by the infinite
righteousness, which proves to be the infinite charity. Men may say rejoicingly, "The
Lord God omnipotent reigneth," because they may be quite sure that "holiness
characterizes his rule." — R. T.

Vers. 1 — 5. — The psalm celebrates the majesty of Jehovah as Creator and Ruler of
ike universe. Three principal thoughts —

I. God is able to overcome the pibrobbt opposition of his fobs. The " floods "
and " many waters " and " mighty waves " are figures denoting the angry and turbulent
opposition of his foes. But he is mightier than and high above them all. 1, He is
actual King, and reigns over the whole universe. (Ver. 1.) He hath girded himself
with strength for the subjugation of his enemies. 2. He created man and nature.
{Ver. 1.) " The world is established, that it cannot be moved." It stands fast by bis
will and power. 3. His righteous sway and government are of eterrud duration.
(Vers. 2, 4.) And cannot be overthrown by the utmost power of man.

II. God 18 not onlt able but faithful to fulfil the fbomibbb he has
MADE. (Ver. 6.) Promises of deliverance from captivity, and of safety and salvation.

III. Because God is mighty and faithful and holt, he will preserve his
Church inviolate. (Ver. 5.) God dwells with his Church and people, and is the
guarantee of their holiness and perfection. — S.



300



THE BOOK OF PSALMS.



[P8. xciv. 1— 2a.



EXPOSITION.



PBALM XCIV.



This pBalm is primarily (vers. 1 — 11) ft " cry
for Tengeance on Israel's oppressors, passing
into an appeal for more faith to God's own
people " (Oheyne). In the latter half (vers.
12 — 23) the psalmist comforts himself with
the thought that God will assuredly protect
his own, and bring destruction upon the
evil-doers (vers. 12 — 23). Metrically, the
psalm is made up of four strophes — the first
of seven verses (vers. 1 — 7); the next of
four (vers. 8 — 11); the third of eight (vers.
12—19) ; and the last of four (vers. 20—23).
Vers. 1 — 7. — The cry for vengeance. Israel
is suffering oppression — not, however, from
foreign enemies, but from domestic tyrants
(vers. 4— 6). Innocent blood is shed; the
widow and the orphan are trodden down.
God, it is supposed, will not see or will not
regard (ver. 7). The psalmist, therefore,
cries out to God to manifest himself by
taking signal vengeance on the evil-doers
(vers. 1, 2).

Ver. 1. — lord God, to whom Tengeanoe
belongeth (comp. Deut. xxxii. HS, " To me
belongeth Tengeance and recompence ; "
and Jer. li. 56, where God is called " the
Lord God of reoompences," as he is here —
literally — " the Ijord God of vengeances ").
God, to whom vengeance belongeth, show
thyself; or, " shine forth " — make thy justice
to appear ; show thyself in thy character of
a Ood who will by no means dear the
guilty (Exod. ixxiv. 7).

Ver. 2. — Lift up thyself (comp. Ps. vii,
6 ; Isa. xxxiii. 10). " Bouse thyself," that
is, "from thy state of inaction" — come and
visit the earth as Judge. Thou Judge of
the earth (comp. Gen. xviii. 25 ; Ps. Iviii.
11). Bender a reward to the proud ; rather,
render a recompeme — as the same phrase is
translated in Lam. iii. 61.

Ver. 3. — Lord, how long shall the wicked,
how long shall the wicked triumph 1 " How
long 7 " is the continual cry of the psalmists
to God, as it is of the souls under the altar
(Rev. vi.lO; comp. above, Pss. vi. 3; xiii.
1,2; XXXV. 7; Ixxiv. 10; Ixxix. 5; Ixxxix.
46; zo. 13). It is a cry of weakness and
impatience, but has an element of faith in
it, on which God looks with favour.

Ver. 4. — How long shall they utter and
speak hard things ? rather, they pour forth,
they utter arrogant things; literally, arro-
gance. And all the workers of iniquity



boast themselTes ; or, "oarry themselves
proudly " (Oheyne).

Ver. 5. — They break in pieces thy people,
Lord ; or, " crush," " oppress " (comp. Isa.
iii. 15; Prov. ixii. 22, where the verb is
evidently used, not of foreign foes, but of
domestic oppressors). And afflict thine heri-
tage ; or, " thine inheritance " — those whom
thou hast taken to be thy " peculiar people "
(Deut. xiv. 2), thine own exclusive possession.

Ver. 6. — They slay the widow and th»
stranger, and murder the fatherless (comp.
Isa. i. 17—23; x. 2; Ezek. xxii. 6 — 9; MaL
iii. 5; also Ps. x. 8—10).

Ver. 7. — Yet they say, The Lord shall not
see (comp. Ps. x. 11, 13). Foreign enemies
did not suppose that Jehovah would not
gee, but trusted that their own gods were
stronger than he, and would protect them
(2 Kings xviii. 33—35). Neither shall the
Qod of Jacob regard it. "The God of
Jacob" would not be a nntiiral expression
in the mouth of Israel's foreign foes. Thev
knew nothing of Jacob. But it was an
expression frequently used by Israelites
(Gen. xlix. 24 ; Pss. xx. 1 ; xlvi. 7 ; Ixxv.
9; Ixxvi. 6; Ixxxi. 1, 4; Isa. ii. 3; xli. 21 ;
Mioah iv. 2, etc.).



Vers. 8 — 11. — The appeal to Israel. The
oppressors thought that their conduct would
not be observed by God, or would not be
taken into account. The psalmist appeals
to them not to be so brutish and foolish
(ver. 8), and argues, from the first prin-
ciples of natural theology, that God must
see and hear (ver. 9). If he ohaatisea the
heathen, why should he not also punish
them (ver. 10) ?

Ver. 8. — Vnderstand, ye brutish among
the people (comp. Ps. xoii. 6). That there
were among God's people some so" brutish "
as to suppose that God either did not see
or did not regard their misdoings, appears
also from Ps. z. 11, 13. And ye fools, when
will ye be wise 1 When will ye put away
your folly, and allow Wisdom to enter into
your hearts ? She is always crying in the
streets : when will ye consent to listen
(comp. Prov. i. 20—23) ?

Ver. 9. — ^He that planted the ear, shall
he not hear ? he that formed the eye, shall
he not see t This argument for a real, per-
sonal, intelligent God appears here, for the
first time. It is of irresistible force. " Can
it be possible that God, who planned and
made the curious mechanism of hearing and
vision, is himself without those faculties, or
something analogous to them ? Must he not'



^s. xoiv. 1 — ^23.]



THE BOOK OF PSALMS.



801



hear those cries, and see those outrages,
which men, wlio are his creatures, see and
hear ? Is it conceivable that he cau be an
unobservant and apathetic God ? " (CUeyne).

Yer. 10. — He that ohastiseth the hea.thett,
shall not he correct t i.e. if God does not
leave even the heathen vrithout rebukes
and chastisements, shall he not much more
punish those amon^ his own people who do
amiss? He that teaoheth man knowledge,
shall not he know? Our version supposes
an ellipse, which it fills up with great bold-
ness, producing a very excellent sense. But
the insertion made does not appear neces-
sary (see the Revised Version).

Ver. 11, — The Lord kuoweth the thoughts
•f man. Not only does the Almighty see
and know all the actions of men (ver. 9),
but he is even acquainted with their
thoughts (comp. Fss. vii. 9 ; xxvi. 2 ;
oxxxix. 17; Isa. Ixvi. 18; 1 Cor. iii. 20).
That they are vanity (comp. Eccles. ii. 14,
15).

Vers. 12 — 19. — The blestedneu of the
righteout. The psalmi&t proceeds to console
and comfort himself by considering in how
many ways the righteous man is blessed.
1. God chastises him. 2. God teaches him.
3. God gives him a time of rest. 4. God
never forsakes him. 5. God judges him
righteously. 6. God helps him against
evil-doers (vers. 16, 17). 7. God upholds
14m when he is in danger of falling. 8.
Hoi inwardly comforts his soul.

Yer. 12. — Blessed is the man whom thon
ohastenest, lord. The blessedness of
•chastening appears in Dent. vii. 3 ; 2 Sam.
viL 14, 15; Job v. 17; Ps. Ixxxix. 32, 33;
ProT. iii. 12 ; and is the main point of
Elihu's teaching in Job xxxiii. 15—30.
It is not, as some have argued, entirely
a New Testament doctrine. Unassisted
human reason might discover it. Greek
poets noted the connection between iraBiTy
and /iaBeiv. Our own great dramatist draws
upon his experience when he says —

" Sweet are the uses of adversity ;
Which, like the toad, ugly and venomous,
Bears yet a precious jewel in his head."

.And teachest him out of thy Law. The
existence of " the Law," and the general
knowledge of it by God's people, is assumed
here, as elsewhere in the Psalms (see espe-
cially Fs. cxix.). Also it is assumed that
" the Law " is a revelation from God.

Yer. 13. — That thon mayest give him rest
irom the days of adversity. Trials and
afflictions are means to an end, and the
intended end is " rest " and peace. " There
remaineth, therefore, a rest to the people of



God " (Heb. iv. 9). Until the pit be digged
for the wicked (comp. Pss. ix. 1 ; xxxv. 7, 8).

Yer. 14. — For the Lord will not cast off
his people, neither will he forsake his in-
heritance (comp. Deut. iv. 31 ; 1 Sam. xii.
22; 1 Kings vi. 13; Isa. xli. 17). However
long God's chastisements continue (see ver.
3), the faithful may be sure that God has
not forsaken, and never will forsake, them,
since " he forsaketh not his saints, but they
are preserved for ever" (Ps. xxxvii. 28).
The promise is made equally to the faithful
individuals ("his saints") and to faithful
Churches ("his people," " his inheritance ").

Yer. 15. — But judgment shall return unto
righteousness. " Judgment," i.e. God's
actual award of good and evil upon the
earth, which has seemed to be divorced
from justice, while the ungodly have proi-
pered and the pious been afflicted (vers.
3—6), shall in the end " return unto right-
eousness," i.e. once more, evidently, conform
to it and coincide with it. And all the
upright in heart shall follow it ; i.e. " and
then all honest-hearted men shall recognize
the fact, see it, and rejoice in it."

Yer. 16. — ^Who will rise up for me against
the evil-doers 1 or, who wUl stand up for
me against the workers of iniquity t But
meanwhile, until this happy time come,
what is the condition of the godly? Are
they not left a prey to the evil-doers, at
their mercy, without a champion? The
answer is given in the next verse.

Yer. 17. — Unless the Lord had been my
Help, my soul had almost dwelt in silence.
No ; they are not without a champion ;
Jehovah is their Help. It is a part of their
blessedness (ver. 12), that they are preserved
in life and protected from the wicked, by
God himself. Otherwise they "had soon
dwelt in silence." Their soul had gone
down to the pit, to the abj'ss of Sheol, the
silent land (comp. Ps. cxv. 17).

Yer. 18.— When I said, Uy foot slippeth;
thy mercy, Lord, held me np. Another
respect in which the godly, even though
snffeiing affliction, are blessed. God nphold«
their tottering feet, and, when they are in
danger, keeps them from falling.

Yer. 19. — In the multitude of my thoughts
within me; rather, my various tkoaghU,
"my busy thoughts." Sardppim (as Dr
Kay observes) "are anxious, perplexing,
branchings of thoughts," such as continu-
ally vex faitjiful yet doubting souls. Thy
comforts delight my soal Internal comfort
is given by God himself to the perplexed
and troubled in spirit, whereby they are
" delighted," or, rather, " soothed and
solaced."

Yers. W— 23.— The dettruetion of the evil-
doen. There can be no fellowship between



302



THE BOOK OF PSALMS.



[P8. xoiT. 1— 2a.



light and darkness — between God and evil-
doers, especially those who carry unt their
wicked poiposes under the forms of law
(ver. 20), and go the length of condemning
innocent blood (ver. 21). Such persons
God, who defends the righteous (ver. 22),
will assuredly bring to utter destruction
(ver. 23).

Ver. 20. — Shall the throne of iniquity have
fellowship with theel The interrogative
is here, as so often, an emphatic negative.
By " the throne of iniquity " is meant
iniqnity in high places, wickedness en-
throned upon the judgment-seat, and thence
delivering its unjust sentences. Oppressors
in Israel made a large use of the machinery
of the law to crush and ruin their victims
(see Isa. i. 23; x. 1, 2; Amos v. 7; vi. 12,
etc). Which frameth mischief by a law;
t.e. which effects its mischievous purposes
by means of the decrees of courts (comp.
1 Kings xxL 10— 13>



Ver. 21. — ^They gather themselves together
against the soul of the righteous, and con-
demn the innocent blood (oomp. 2 Kings
xxi. 16; xxiv. 4; Ps. x. 8; Prov. vi. 17;^
Isa. i. 21 ; lix. 3, 7 ; Jer. vii. 6; xxii. 8, 17,^
etc.). A Messianic allusion is possible, but
not necessary.

Ver. 22. — But the Lord • my Defence;
and my Ood is the Book of my refuge (comp.
Pb. xviii. 2).

Ver. 23. — And he shall bring upon them
their own iniquity. Most manifestly when
he makes them fall into their own snare
(Pss. vli. 15; XXXV. 8; Mi. 6; cxli. 9, 10).
but really also whenever he punishes them
for their sins. And shall out them off; or,
"destroy," "exterminate" them. In their own
wiokedness ; or, " by their wickedness." The
wicked man is otten "hoist with his own
petard." Yea, the Lord our God shall out
them off. The repetition, like that in ver.
1, is emphatic, and solemnly confirms the
entire section (vers. 20 — 23).



H0MILBTIC8.

Ver. 8. — The taints perplexity at the triumph of tin. "Lord, how long? "etc.
This question, which the inspired psalmist, in the anguish of his spirit, could not help
putting, is not one of those which are solved by the lapse of time. Bather it grows
more urgent. Thousands of years have rolled by since these words were written, and
still the awful mystery confronts us which St. Paul so forcibly describes — sin reigning
unto death. It is true that in each particular case " the triumphing of the wicked is
short" — at least, compared with eternity. True, also, that nothing can shake the
truth of the promise, which runs through the whole Bible, that, come what may, " it
shall be well with the righteous " — eternally well — and that " all things shall work
together for good to them that love God." Nevertheless, when we think, if we could
wield absolute power with unerring knowledge, how eagerly we should make short
work with injustice, cruelty, tyranny, lawless crime, we cannot but marvel at the
spectacle, prolonged age after age, of our heavenly Father " making his sun to rise on
the evil and on the good, and sending rain on the just and on the unjust." The
psalmist assumes the fact as unquestionable, and reverently, yet urgently, appeals to
God, as the Judge of the earth — How long is it to be suffered to continue ?

I. First, HERE 18 THE mrDENIABLE FACT, WHICH WOULD ASTONISH US INFINITELY
MORE THAN IT I(OEB, IF WE WERE NOT BO FAMILIAR WITH IT. " The wicked triumph."

1. They do so every day, often for long years, in two ways — when they are strong enough,,
by defying justice ; and when they are crafty enough, by evading justice. It is the
former of these which egpecially awakens the indignatiou and distress of the psalmist.
He sees might, which ought to be the servant of right, become the ally of wrung ; and
justice poisoned at its fountain. It is the spectacle which meets us on every page of
•history. Joseph a slave and an exile in the dungeon, while his brothers are peacefully
feeding their flocks in Canaa^ and his wicked, false accuser is dwelling in a palace.
Pharaoh blaspheming on the throne, and God's people bleeding and weeping under
the lash. Sail in his court, and David hiding in dens and caves. Nebuchadnezzar at
the height of earthly glory, and God's faithful servants in the fiery furnace. Herod
worshipped as a god, and James slain with the sword. Nero on the judgment-seat,
and Paul a prisoner at his bar. Popes receiving Divine honours, and martyrs for
Christ burning at the stake. Ages roll on, and' still, in one form or another, this
hideous anomaly bears witness that we live in a world whose whole moral frame is
disordered. True, as those ages roll, the/ show us another side to the picture. Joseph



P8. xciv. 1—23.] THE BOOK, OF PSALMS. 303

In power, and bis bretbrea trembling before bim. Pbaraob's boat burled in tbe waters
or bleaching on the shore, and Israel free. Saul stark on Gilboa, and David crowned
and yictorioug, Nebuchadnezzar a maniac, herding with beasts. Herod eaten of
worms. Nero a wretched suicidej hooted out of life with curses. But still, successors
arise. History repeats itself. The One Arm which could strike down oppression,
not only here and there, now and then, but everywhere and for ever, seems to delay the
blow (Eccles. viii. 11). Still the cry goes up, which St. John heard from the souls
beneath the altar, " How long, O Lord ? " In our own land, thanks be to God, we
must look back two hundred years if we would see tyranny and injustice openly
triumphing on the throne and on the judgment-seat, and Q-od's servants exiled,
starved, imprisoned merely for preaching the gospel. Englishmen have almost torgot-
.ten that such things ever were in England. But we see crime continually evading
justice, and even successfully concealing itself behind a mask of respectability. One
terrible vice — drunkenness — has this mitigating circumstance, that it cannot long be
concealed, and the mischief and misery it works cannot be denied. But if dishonesty,
extortion, gambling, false speaking, secret immorality, could in like manner be brought
to view, it would be found (alas !) that the crimes human law can reach are but a
firaction of crimes actually committed against the Law of God. 2. There is a wider and
deeper view we cannot help taking. The power of sin is the power of Satan. He is
expressly declared to be " the prince of this world," " the god of this world," who
blinds the minds of " them that believe not." Apart from this, neither the extreme
wickedness of men nor the slow progress of Christ's kingdom and gospel can be
accounted for.

II. Is THEBE NO ANSWER TO THIS OBT WHICH HAS QONB UF FOB BO MANY A0E8

FBOM God's people to his thbone? The tempest of his vengeance does not
awaken. The lightning does not strike the tyrant, the slave-dealer, the seducer, the
assassin. The earthquake does not yawn under guilty cities. Satan is not yet chained.
But yet, to the ear of faith there comes from God's Word an answer; not, indeed, such
as to end the trial of faith, by clearing away the whole mystery of God's dealings ;
but enough to sustain faith, nourish patience and courage, kindle hope and stimulate
laboiur. How long t 1. Long enough to answer those Divine purposes for which sin
was at first permitted to enter, and the wicked — wicked men or wicked spirits — ever
to exist at alL We cannot avoid seeing that it was possible for God to have prevented
sin from ever existing ; if in no other way (of which we cannot judge), at all events by
refraining from creating beings, angels or men, capable of sin. The lower creatures
are incapable of sin, and, therefore, incapable also of obedience to moral law and uf
likeness to God. God has seen fit to create beings capable of loving him, knowing
him, obeying him ; therefore capable of sinning against him. Knowing infiniiely
better than we the mischief and misery of sin, he has seen it worth while to allow
room for sin to display its character and consequences. And we may well believe the
lessons thus taught will never be forgotten or need repeating in eternity. 2. Long
enough to reveal the infinite preciousness of the Divine atonement for sin — the blood
of Jesus Christ which cleanseth from all sin | and the glorious power of Divine love,
truth, and grace ; the power, that is, of God's Spirit to restore even souls dead in sin
to God's likeness. 3. Long enough to perfect that trial of faith and discipline of
character, by means of which God is training, in a world of temptation, sorrow, sin, and
death, those whom he redeems " from this present evil world," for a life of perfect
holiness and endless joy. 4. Long enough to show beyond all question God's patience
and long-suffering, " not willing that any should perish ; " and to justify his righteous-
ness when at last he will " render to every man according to his deeds " (Bom. ii. 2—
11 ; John y. 22| 2 Pet. iii. 9, 10).



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Ver. 3. — " How long shall the wicked triumph t" L Suppose thbt netbb did.
1. 2%en the devil wovM he right when he asked, " Doth Job serve God for nought ? "
He meant to say that men serve God only from selfish, interested motives. 2. Men
would want to tin, though from fear they hdd hack. The heart would remain



304 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. xonr. 1—23.

unchanged, character would be the same. 3. Z%e essential discipline and test of the
righteotu would be destroyed. We are tested when, though we see the wicked triumph,
we still cleave to God. 4. 2%e wicked would wax worse and worse. " The strength of
sin is the Law." 5. It wotUd he a confession that men cannot he governed hy higher
motives than earthly gain.

IL Suppose thbt always did. 1. Earth would hecome hell, because of the wicked-
ness of them that dwell therein. 2. The faith and fear of Ood would disappear.

III. Suppose they sometimes do. This ia the case. And sometimes they appear
generally to triumph. Nevertheless, it is not always, nor for long. But the present
order avails : 1, To glorify Ood hy the fidelity of his people. 2. To lift them to a
higher life. 3. To convince the world of the reality of the faith the believer holds. — S. CL

Vers. 8 — 10. — An argument all should understand. I. Its NATtrBB. It is an
argument from what we see in ourselves to what exists in God. If God has given to
us certain powers, such powers must exist in him.

II. Its fobce. It is inconceivable that it should be otherwise. A man must have
brutalized his soul, and become a fool, not to see this. God is not as man is — the
mere employer of force which he does not and cannot create, but he is behind all force,
its Creator and Source.

III. Its sAFEauAED. 1. For this argument needs guarding. If it be said that the
presence of faculties in ourselves proves the existence of them in God, which is the
argument in these verses, then might it not be said God is the author of the sin that
is in tis as well as the good, of that which is wrong as well as of that which is right ?
The heathen thought so, and hence they regarded their gods as altogether like them-
selves—embodiments of not merely good qualities, but also of lust and hate and all
abomination. The idea of a holy God they never knew. And sinful men now often
«ay, " God made us so," and thus cast on him the responsibility for their sin. " He that
planted in me the love of sin, doth he not love it too ? " So they falsely reason. 2. But
■how must such wrong extension of the argument of these verses be met f By noting that
man has not merely the '■powers of thought, feeling, will, bat also of conscience. This
last is the regal, the judicial faculty, and decides what is of God, and what is only the
product of our corrupt nature. Apart from conscience, there could be no right or
wrong, but it infallibly tells, by its " excusing and accnsing," how far we may go In
arguing from what we see in ourselves to what exists in God. Else a man might say,
" He that made me to lust, shall he not Inst? " The ancient Greeks and the whole
heathen world did say this.

lY. Its mingled (x>mpobt ahd wabkino. 1. As to the contort this argument
supplies. (1) It shows that all our gifts are of God. " It is he that planted the ear," etc.
(ct. Jas. L 1& — 18). As we think of the manifold advantages that come to us through
these gifts of God, and what joy, can we fail to see the beneficence of our God ? (2) That
they are reflections of God, mirrors, minute indeed, but yet true, of what he is. There-
fore my thought tells of thought in him ; my love, of bis, my conscience, of moral
judgment in him. It is our Lord's argument (Matt. viL 9 — 11 ; Luke xv.). But :
2. There is warning liketaise. Against pride : " What hast thou that thou nast not
received ? " Against envy. We are as God willed us to be, and, if we be but obedient,
equally well-pleasing in his sight. Against triSing with sin. If we condemn it, and
will to punish it if unrepented of, that condemnation and that will reveal what is yet
more in God. They tell of judgment to come. — S. 0.

Yers. 12, 13. — A strange Beatitude, These verses contain more than this, but all
they contain is linked on to this. Therefore consider —

I. Tee stbange Beatitude. " Blessed is the man whom thou chastenest." Wherein
is the blessedness ? We reply : 1. Because of what such chastening often reveals. If he
were not really a child of God, he would not endure it ; he would start aside and rebel.
An infidel told a minister of Christ, who has been stricken with total bUndness, that if
God served him so, he would curse him to his lace. Then this minister — well known
to the writer — bore his testimony to the wonderful grace of God, how his soul had been
kept in peace, and that he could and did rejoice in God,'notwithstanding all his trouble.
The text is like the last of the Beatitudes, " Blessed are ye when men shall persecute



PS. xoiv. 1— 23.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 805

you," etc. (Matt, v.). The endurance, and, yet more the meek acquiescence in it, are
a real revelation from God, that such a man is one of the Lord's very own. To know
iAo< is blessedness indeed. 2. Because of what itis/ollowed by. The Lord teaches him
out of his Law. We are all of us laggard scholars; some of us are too proud to learn.
But God's chastenings have a wonderfully humbling and softening effect, and bring the
soul into the blessed and indispensable condition for receiving the teachings of God.

3. Because of what it ministers. " Rest from the days of adversity." They cannot
trouble him. A while ago some works were being carried on at Dover pier ; the men
had to go down deep in diving-bells to reach their work. One evening one of the men
was drawn up, the day's work being done, and went to his home. It suddenly occurred
to him that he had left one of his tools on the stone which he hail been working at.
That night a furious storm raged, and the sea was lashed into a wild tumult. When
at length on the following day the man went back to his work, he made up his mind
that he should never again see the tool he had left the previous day. But lol when he
got down to the depths where he had been at work, there was his tool, just where he
had left it the night before. The fury of the storm had not penetrated so far down ; it
only had power on the surface ; in the depths beneath all had been quiet and still. So
is it with the soul of him to whom God gives rest from the days of adversity. His
soul is in the depths of God's love, where no power of adversity can reach. And this
has been proved true a thousand times, and will be for us all if we be really the Lord's.
And by-and-by the adversity itself shall depart ; it continues only " until the pit be
digged for the wicked." Then there shall be rest without as well as within. Now he
can have only the inward rest, and blessed indeed is that ; but then externally as well
as internally be shall be at rest.

n. A STEBN NEOESSITT. The destruction of the wicked ; for that is what the wor>1s
just quoted mean. For until then God's people cannot be perfected, but then tliey
shall. Many object to this stern doctrine. They say God is too merciful ever to let
such doom fall upon any soul. But what about his own people? K they cannot enter
into God's rest until what is here said is fulfilled, does not this make it altogether likely
that it will be fulfilled ; yea, that it must be ? If mercy to the wicked be cruelty to
the righteous, as it is, what is it likely that God will do? There can be but one
answer.

III. A TEBRiBLB ONLOOK. " The pit digged," etc. 1. These words assert the fict
that such retribution will surely corae. Scripture evermore aifirms it. Conscience
confirms the Scripture, and observed facts in the constant acting of God's providence —
the awful retributions that we see do actually come on the wicl;ed — ^attest the same
awful truth. 2. Thfy tell the nature of this retribution. " The pit." It brings up
before the mind the dark horror which awaits sin. 3. Its gradual approach. Tlie |)it
is not yet dug, but is being made ready. It becomes wider and deeper every day.

4. Those who are preparing it. Gk>d aud the sinner himself. In an awful sense he is
a " co-worker with God." 5. Its loud appeal. " Stop the digging I " If man stops, God
will ; he will not go on if you will not. Turn to him, and he will deliver you out of
the horrible pit (Ps. xl. I).— S. C.

Ver. 19. — The throng of our thoughts. It is not difficult to see how the experiences
which are more or less plainly referred to in this psalm should produce a " multitude
of thoughts." The text reminds us that —

I. Thoughts come in throngs. To one standing on the golden gallery that surmounts
the dome of St. Paul's in Lomlon, and looking down on the streets below, the sight of
the thronging multitudes of people, hastening hither and thither, each intent on his or
her own business, the traffic never ceasing, is very striking. How the people come and
go, some one way, some anuther, crossing and recrossing each other, never still for a
moment, — it is all a picture of the ^ninds of most men. Who could count or remember
the multitude of thoughts that pass and repass, that come and go across the pathways of
the mind ? It is an incessant traffic, a concourse that is never still. And they are of
all kinds, good, bad, and indifferent, grave and gay, coming one scarce knows whence^
and going one as little knows whither.

II. Many of them often leave the soul sad. There are those of an opposite
character, and by God's mercy they are the most numerous and ordinary. And there

F8AI.US — a. X



806 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [pa. xoiv. 1—23.

are people who seem never to think seriously at all — the mere butterflies of life. But
the Christian cannot be one of them. We know what our Lord said of the " wayside "
hearers. The good seed never takes root there. But the soul awakened to things that
are eternal must often think seriously, and, not seldom, sadly likewise. It was so with
the writer of this psalm. To him also the enigmas of this unintelligible world came
clamouring for solution, as they do still. " Lord, how long shall the wicked triumph ? "
(ver. 3). That was to him one of the many inexplicable and heart-saddening facts of
fife. And how many minds are to-day agitated, perplexed, well-nigh shipwrecked,
and their lives darkened by the mysteries they must meet, but cannot comprehend ?
But-
Ill. God has frovided belief fob sncH soiniS. Indeed, much more than simply
relief. He lias provided " dslight " tor them. Unquestionably — blessed be his holy
Name for it I — God has done this. The testimony of saints in all ages has shown that
God giveth " songs in the night." See the life and letters of men like Paul ; above all,
listen to " the Man of sorrows" himself telling of his "joy," and praying that it may
" be fulfilled " in his disciples. And there are children of God now plunged in poverty
or pain, or both, and yet who know and confess that God is their " exceeding Joy."

IV. This is accomplished bt means of his " comfoets." " Thy comforti
delight," etc. 1. They are of Ood. Those that this world supplies could never accom-
plish this. 2. They come through various channels. Sometimes through Nature — her
calm and beauty and grandeur uplift the soul. Or through revelation. Think of all
the "exceedlno; great and precious promises." Or through providence. Or by his
Spirit in the soul. This best of all.

V. The condition is — tbust ib God. — S. 0.

Ver. 1, — A Ood of vengeance*. Aglen, in EUicott's ' Commentary,' proposes to
render, " God of retributions, Jehovah, God of retributions, shine forth." The idea in
the term "vengeances" would be better expressed by the term " avengements." GK>d
is thought of as the great Goel-Avenger of his oppressed and afSicted people, and
therefore the One to whom appeal should be made in any particular time of distress.
The word "vengeance" includes the idea of heated personal feeling. The word
" avengement " sets prominently family relations and duties. The Apostle St. Paul
expresses this thought of God, when he commands that "no man go beyond and
defraud his brother in any matter, because that the Lord is the Avenger of all such "
(1 Thess. iv. 6). The "avenger of blood" is a familiar figure in the Mosaic constitu-
tion. But Moses only adopted and modified an original tribal institution. The main
functions of the Hebrew Goel, Avenger, or Redeemer, were three. 1. If any Hebrew
had fallen into penury, and been compelled to part with his ancestral estate, the family
avenger was bound to redeem it and restore it. 2. If any Hebrew had been taken
captive, or had sold himself as a slave, the goel had to buy him back, and set him
free. 3. If any Hebrew had suffered wrong, or had been killed, the goel had to exact
compensation for the wrong, or to avenge the murder. It is evident that the psalmist
lived in a time when wickedness triumphed in high places. We may think of the
reign of Ahab and Jezebel, when the condition of Jehovah's prophets and people seemed
to be hopeless ; they could only cry mightily to God, seeking his preservations and
his deliverances. The psalmist had no confidence in the existing rulers, who should
have been the avengers of all the poor, the wronged, and the distressed. He had con-
fidence in God, of whom it can be said, " Vengeance is mine, I will repay."

I. Man cannot avenge himself. 1. Because those who wrong him are often
quite beyond his reach or control. 2. Because he has not at command the requisite
forces. 3. Because he is not self-master enough to temper justice with mercy. 4.
Because he cannot be strictly judicial, but is sure to spoil his avengings by introducing
personal feeling. 6. Because he is in grave peril of injuring himself in his avengings.

II. Man may bestfully let God avenqe him. 1. Because his power is sufficient.
2. His self-restraints are perfect. 3. His time is best. 4. His avengings prove to be
blessings both for the wronged and for the wrong-doer. — R. T.

Ver. 2. — " The Judge of all the earth.'' The older Scriptures constantly set God forth
w the actual, living Judge, concerned now in his Divine magistracy, deciding causes,



w. xciv. 1— 23.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 307

▼indicating the oppressed, punisbiDg the wrong-doer. The idea of some one single
judgment-day, in the far future, when all earth-complications are to he put straight,
and all earth-evils are to be rectified, does not appear to have been in the minds of Old
Testament saints. It may be that the New Testament figure of the "judgment-seat
4>f Christ " has unduly limited the Christian idea of the present and ever-continuous
judging of G-od. It may be that this present judging needs to be set more clearly
before the Christian mind. Our notion of the Judge is of one who, at a fixed time,
holds a grand assize ; and this notion helps to shape our figure of a single final judg-
ment. But the Israelite thought of judging, magistracy, as the most important con-
tinuous function of his king, which every faithful king would exercise daily, sitting in
the gate to hear and decide all causes that might be presented, and so coming into
constant judicial relation to the life of the people. Shifting God's judgment on to a
future great assize should not be allowed to loosen our Christian sense of God's present
rule as involving a present magistracy, and present punishments and rewards. Bead
life aright, and the signs of a present Divine magistracy will abundantly appear.

I. God the Judoe ib DiBTiNQUisHnio in difficult cases. Illustrate from the
niei prius courts. Constantly in life we find ourselves bewildered. We do not know
what to think, or what to do, or where to go. We are in danger of being carried away
by the merely attractive. If we will but wait, God wiU surely decide for us, and
make the right/or ue quite unquestionable.

II. God the Judge is BECooNiziNa and bewabdinq the biohteous. We never
liave any doubt of this until we become impatient, and want the recognition at once.
Because the Judge is also the Sanctifier, he may delay the reward which he decides to
lie due. But he is keen to notice everything that is good.

m. God the Judob is the Punishes of all the wicked. We need never be
deceived by the apparent prosperity of the unjust. It is part of their judgment. It
ia making them top-heavy in preparation for some irremediable fall. — B. T.

Ver. 3. — Hie tether of the ungodly. " How long shall the wicked triumph ? " Men
ask this question only when they cannot see the rope, or the chain, which keeps the
movements of the ungodly within strict limitations. In Jersey and Guernsey the
«attle are not left free in the fields, but are tethered so that they can only feed within
« defined circle ; and the visitor is interested in the different lengths of tether allowed
to each animal. Bunyan represents his pilgrim as alarmed at the lions at the entrance
to the palace Beautiful, and reassured when told that they were chained, and the
4shains did not permit of their reaching the middle of the pathway : he would be quite
«afe if he kept to the middle. The waves lift up themselves, and sometimes seem as
if they would overwhelm ; but God holds the waters in the hollow of his hand, puts
his limitations even on their storm-time swellings. The martyr-souls are represented
in Bev. vi. 10 as crying from imder the altar of God, " How long, Lord, holy
and true, dost thou not judge and avenge our blood on them that dwell on the
«*rth?"

I. The tetheb of the unoodly is fixed fob the honoub of God. He will
not permit his Name to he dishonoured or his work to be hindered. Nebuchadnezzar
finds he has reached the limit of his tether when he begins to boast himself against
'Ood. Herod reaches his limit when, unreproved, he allows the people to shout concern-
ing him, " It is the voice of a god, and not of a man." Because God is and must be
supreme, every man is under limitations. Against that men fret, but they can only
hopelessly fret.

n. The tetheb of the ungodly is fixed fob the safety of Ctoo's people.
" What can harm you if ye be followers of that which is good ? " The figure is
presented of Satan, the deceiver and persecutor of the saints, as bound for a thousand
years. He is always bound. See the figure of Satan, in the Book of Job, obliged to
get Divine permission ere he can touch Job, or a thing that Job has. Even the
malice of persecuting ages, and the shameless wickedness of the Inquisition, were in
3}ivine limitations.

III. The tetheb of the traooDLT is fixed in the intebebtb of the ungodly
THEH8ELVE8. Illustrate from the antediluvians. Their life-tether was about a
thousand years, so they became gigantic in wickedness. What would proud, vidous



308 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. xoit. 1— 2a.

men become now, if they could get free from Divine restraints ? Mercy puts limits oa
the wicked. — R. T.

Vers. 9, 10. — From man to God. The argument here is, that whatever powers are
found in man are surely found in him who made man. The workman mnst have in
him everything that gains expression in his work. A machine is an embodiment of
thought, and the thought is altogether higher than the machine. Here the point is —
men hear the cry of the oppressed ; men see the sufferings of the godly ; then they
may be quite sure that God both sees and hears ; and they must seek some better
explanation of his delayed help than can be found by assuming his ignorance or indif-
ference. " Whatever is in man must be in the Power that made man — ^whether by
evolution out of lower natures or otherwise it matters not — and whatever exists in thas
Power must show itself in active energy in the direction of man's history " (Barry).

I. Man IB ALWAYS BEADY TO HELP HIS BUFFEBING NEiaHBOUB. Man as man is.
Some men, self-centred and self-seeking, are not. All true men are sympathetic
toward sufferers, easily roused to champion the oppressed, and vigorous against the
violent wrong-doer. History is full of illustrations of the sacrifices men will make in
behalf of the innocent and oppressed. No doubt the advancing civilization, which
crowds cities, tends to put the disabled and oppressed out of sight and hearing ; but
let their condition come into view, and then men are ready with generous hand and
gift, prepared to help. The psalmist is dealing with those who pleaded that, in th»
humiliations and distresses of his time, there were no more than signs of human
sympathy and help; and who groaned that these were proving quite ineffective.

IL Goo IS ALWAYS BEADY TO HELP HIS suFFEBiNa PEOPLE. First, this is abso-
lutely certain — he can see and hear. And this is quite as certain — he does see and
hear. Then why does he not immediately intervene ? To get the reason we most
always take a large and comprehensive view of God's rule. And especially we must
remember that he is the Gt)d of the wrony-doeras well as of the saint; of the oppressor
as well as of the oppressed. And it may be that the need of the hour is cTutstenmg for
the good, and this may require that the evil be maintained as the chastening agency.
— R.T.

Ver. 11. — The vanity of men's idea of the Divine indifference. " The Lord knoweth
the thoughts of man, tiiat they are vanity." Clearly the reference is not a general one,
to the common and usual thoughts of men, but a special one to the particular thoughts
about the delay of God's vindication of the oppressed, which was at the time distress-
ing the psalmist (see ver. 7). The idea that God does not regard the suffering of hia
people, and will not intervene in their behalf, is characterized as " vanity," a foolish,
baseless, and altogether unsoxmd notion. This idea concerning God is sometimes the
doubt of the pious soul, as in Isa. xl. 27 ; here it is the reproach of the ungodly. The
doubt of the pious soul is properly met by Divine comfortings and assurances ; the
reproach of the ungodly is properly met by scornful and withering reproof. " So far
from ' not seeing,' ' not regarding,' as these brutish persons fondly imagine, Jehovah
reads their inmost thoughts and devices, as he reads the hearts of all men, even though
for a time they are unpunished " (see 1 Cor. iiL 20).

L SnoH TEOUOHTB ABE VANITY BECAUSE THEY ABE UNTBUE. They do not answer
to the facts. If God be God, he must know what is going on ; he must be controlling
everything ; he must be working toward the blessing of the good. Such thoughts are
untrue if tested (1) by right knowledge of God ; (2) by the assurances and promises of
God ; (3) by the history of bis dealings with men ; (I) by the personal experiences of
believers.

II. SUOE THOUGHTS ABB VANITY BECAUSE THEY ABE UNWORTHY. The men who

encourage them are not in a right state of mind. Men ought to trust God, not doubt
him. Men ought to be quick to observe everything that can nourish confidence. If
God's ways ever seem perplexing, our assumption should always be in favour of their
wisdom and loving-kindness. It is unworthy of men to doubt God in one thing, seeing
he gives them such abundant reason for trusting him in a thousand things. He is
" too good to be unkind."

III. Such thoughts abb vanity because they abe unstable. They are but



es. xciv. 1— 23.] TUE LOOK OF PSALMS. 309

the feelings of tlie hour ; they are based on no careful considerations. Men take them
up when they are vexed at not getting what they wish, or not having things accord-
ing to their minds. The moods of the hour may well be called " vanity." — R. T.

Ver. 12. — The triumph of the vncked may he the chastening of the righteous. It
alters everything when we can see our trouble to be Divine chastening. Look on it as
human oppression, the masterfulness of unprincipled magistrates, the persecution of an
idolatrous Jezebel, the scheme of those who cherish enmity against the righteous, and
our trouble is hard to bear ; everything noble in us rises up to resist. But have a
supreme faith in Ood ; feel sure of his comprehensive ruling ; apprehend that he works
for the highest moral ends, and uses even the self-will and the wrong-doing of men as
agents in the accomplishing of his loving purposes; — and then the soul goes down into
the quietness of a holy submission, and out of its enduring sings its songs of hope,
«ven as apostles sang their joy in God when in the dungeon at Philippi. We can
never read life aright until we can fully receive the idea of the Divine chastening.
" Whom the Lord loveth he chasteneth, and scourgeth every son whom he receiveth."
Illustration may be found in God's dealings with his ancient people. In Egypt, iu
the days of the judges, and in the age of the later kings, we find what, at first sight,
seem to be pure calamities. But we are helped to read them aright, and then we see
that they are chastenings, designed to secure the moulding and the correcting of God's
people. See also the story of the patriarch Job. There, too, we have calamities, but
we are taught to see in them chastenings, and chastenings of the highest order, not
meant to secure mere correction, but designed to effect the noblest spiritual culture.

I. Wk mat mistake if we read the teiumph op the wicked from below.
That is, as those actually crushed down under it. Suffering prevents both right feeling
and right thinking.

IL We mat mistake ip we bead the triumph op the wicked from the level.
That is, as those who are not suffering themselves, but are watching the depressions
and woes of God's people. So far as earthly issues are concerned, we can see no goo i
in the trouble. Indeed, evil seems better off than good.

III. We can onlt read the triumph of the wicked from above. From God's
point of view. Then we can see how things fit, and what things work towards. The
wicked are only his staff with which he chastises his children for their good. — E. T.

Ver. 19. — 2%e comfortable thoughts Ood gives. They are the thoughts God starts in
our minds concerning himself. The "multitude of thoughts " here sugtrest " anxious
thoughts," " distractions ;"" divided or branching thoughts." Keep before the mind
that this psalm was written in some time of personal or national anxiety, which was
causing very grave perplexity. Multitude of thoughts, complexity, conflict of thoughts.

I. Our multitude op thoughts. A suitable and suggestive term. A true descrip-
tion. Have you ever tried to watch the process of the mind in ordinary times or in
special times? Explain how the law of association brings up not one string of orderly
thoughts, but various series, which branch and cross and conflict one with the other.
Past, present, future, bring in their various thoughts. The importance of good order-
ing of thoughts, to the pious man, may be seen from these considerations. 1. Sin
lingers in them. 2. Character is exhibited to Gud as much by them as by our
actions ; for " as a man thinketh in his heart, so is he." 3. The power of religion is
first felt in them. 4. They are the real springs of action, and they give character to
«ar action.

n. God'b comforting thouqhts. He gives comforting assurances for us to think
about. God makes himself a Key-thought to the thoughts that we should cherish.
Illustrate how the godly soul may fill his mind with the " exceeding great and precious
promises," and how these will be always ready to come up, to dispel distracting thoughts,
«nd soothe troubled thoughts. God's comforts are thoughts that realize God as the
holy Father, Christ as the elder Brother, the Spirit as the present Guide, and " all
things working together for good."

IIL The dutt of chebishino God's oomfoetin(j thoughts. They will ease our
distress ; they will recall us to trust ; they will put a " song into our mouth." We may
cherish them by full acquaintance with God's Word, which is the great storehouse of



310 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. xov. 1— 11-

Divine though t-suggestions, and hy daily communion with Ood, which is sure to start
fresh comfortiogs in our souls. — B. T.

Ver. 20. — Man't rival law. " Frameth mischief by a law." " Making legislation •
means of wrong." The idea is that, in the psalmist's time, the courts of justice were
corrupt ; and man's law, instead of being in harmony with God's Law, and its expre»-
gion, had become a rival. It had come to do what God's Law never does. It worked
towards injustice and unrighteousness. God's Law is " holy, and the commandment
holy and just and good." The thing that seemed so unbearable to the psalmist was,
that the tyrants of his day claimed to be acting according to law, seeking to hide their
unrighteousness by a holy name.

L Submission to lawful authobity is a pbiuabt belioious duty. Inculcated
by Old Testament and New. Felt to be the right thing. Necessary to the individud
and national well-being.

II. Resistance to unlawful authokitt is a primaby belioious dutt. Unlaw-
ful authority is that which conflicts with the authority of Gh>d. All law that hw
claims on men is the translation, for particular relations, of the Law of God. Unless
we can be sure that a thing can stand the Divine Law-test, we are not bound to render
obedience.

III. The case of the text is, however, more subtle than this. It brings before nm
lawful authority abused, and Divine Law dishonoured in its applications. And it may
be difficult for men to see what is their duty in such a case. The psalmist seems to
see his way clearly. He 8ug°;ests that we should submit to the injustice, and ciy
mightily to God, that he would turn the hearts of the rulers. And he is right. To
right law wrongly administered we should present submission, for history abundantly
proves that through suffering the wrong-doing of rulers is best revealed. But submis-
sion wovdd be wrong if mea had not the profound conviction that GK)d rules the rultrep
and is the Avenger of all the persecuted and oppressed, — B. T.

Vers. 1 — ^23. — Divine retribution certain. The psalm may be distributed under tb*
following heads.

I. A PBAYEE FOB THE PUNISHMENT OF WICKED OPPBESSOBB. (Vers. 1, 2.) Probablj

in anticipation of the Assyrian invasion.

II. The obouns op the pbayeb — the insolent and atheistic spikit of their
OBUEL WOBK. (Vcrs. 3—7.) They murder the fatherless, and say, " Jehovah seetb
not."

III. The blindness and contempt of God they show. (Vers. 8 — 11.) All sii>
implies this.

IV. The BLESSED ebst and confidence of those who ABE chastened and taught
of God. (Vers. 12 — 15.) "Judgment caunot always be perverted — cannot always
fail."

V. The deep conviction of God's righteousness derivbd fbom past expebi-
ENOB. (Vers. 16—19.)

VI. As anticipation of BBTRIBUTION ALBEADY accomplished upon the WIOKBIk.

(Vers. 20— 23.)— S.



EXPOSITION,
PSALM XOV.



This is a liturgical psalm, probably com-
posed for the temple service, and still used
in the synagogue as one of the Friday
evening psalms which introduce the sabbath.
The Western Church lias adopted it into
its daily "Order for Prayer" — a position
which it ooutiunes to occupy in our own



Matins. It consists of two parts (vers-.
1 — 7 and vers. 7—11), bo strongly con-
trasted, that separatist critics suggest an
accidental combination of two quite unoon-
nected fragments (Professor Oheyne). But
a deeper and more penetrating exegesis
sees in the composition two trains of thought,
purposely set over agaiust each other— one
joyous, the other plaintive; one setting



ea. xov. 1—11.]



THE BOOK OF PSALMS.



311



forth the "goodness" of God, the other his
"severity" (Bom. xi. 22); one inviting to
joy and thankfulness, the other to self-
examluatiou and repentance ; one calling
to mind God's greatness and loving-kindness,
the other bringing into prominence man's
weakness and danger.

In the Septuagint the psalm ia ascribed
to David, and this view seems to have been
taken by the writer of the Epistle to the
Hebrews (Heb. iv. 7). But modern critics
ate generally of opinion that the style is not
that of the Davidioal psalms.

Vers. 1 — 7o. — ^The song of praise. This
seems to terminate with the words, "We
are the people of his pasture, and the sheep
of biB hand."

Yer. 1. — come, let ns sing unto the
Lord. From this opening phrase, whicli
finds an echo in vers. 2 and 6, this psalm
has been called "The Invitatory Psalm."
As it invited the Jews, so it now invites
Christian congregations, to join in the
worship of the sanctuary. Let us make a
joyful noise to the Bock of oar salvation
(oomp. Pes. xxxiii. 3 ; xoviii. 4). Loudness
of voice was regarded as indicating earnest-
ness of heart (see 2 Chron. xx. 19; Ezra lii.
13; Neh. xii. 42, etc.). The expression,
" Rock of our salvation" is taken from Deut.
xxxii. 15 (comp. 2 Sam. xxii. 47 ; Ps. Ixxxix.
26). It is well paraphrased in our Prayer-
book Version, "the strength of our salvation."

Yer. 2. — Let us come before his presence
with thanksgiving. Our fint duty, when
we come before God's presence, is to thank
him (see the Exliortation in the Order for
Daily Prayer). And make a joyful noise unto
him with psalms. A " psalm " is properly
a "song of praise" — the natural concomi-
tant of thanksgiving.

Yer. 3. — For the Lord is a great God.
Thanks and praise are due to God, in the
first place, because of his greatness (see Ps.
cl. 2). " Who is BO great a god as our God ? "
(Ps. Ixxvii. 13) ; " His greatnea is unsearch-
able" (Ps. cxlv. 3). And a great Kins;
above all gods ; i.e. " a geat King above all
other so-called gods " — above the great of the
earth (Ps. Ixxxii. 1, 6), above angels (Deut.
X. 17), above the imaginary gods of the
heathen (Exod. xii. 12, etc.).

Yer. 4. — In his hand are the deep places
of the earth; the strength of the hills is
his also; rather, the mmmita of the moun-
taini are his also. The meaning is that all
the earth is his, from the highest heights to
the lowest depths.

Yer. 5. — The sea is his, and he made it
(see Gen. i. 9; Fs. civ. 24, 25). And his



hands formed the dry land (see Gen. i.
9, 10).

Yer. 6. — come, let us worship and bow
down: let us kneel. The outward and
visible worship of the body is required of
man, no less than the inwaid and spiritual
worship of the soul. Before the Lord our
Maker ; i.e. " who has made us what we
are — created us, redeemed us, taken us to
be his people " (comp. Deut. xxxii. 6 ; Pss. c.
3; cii 18; cxlix. 2; Isa. xxix. 23; xliii.
21 ; xliv. 2, etc.).

Yer. 7a. — For he is our God. A second,
and a more urgent, reason for worshipping
God. Not only is he a " great God " (ver.
3), but he is also ''our God" — our own
God — brought into the closest personal
relationship with us. And we are the
people of his pasture, and the sheep of his
hand (comp. Pss. Ixxiv. 1 ; Ixxix. 13; Ixxx.
1, etc.). We are led by hira, tended by
him, fed by him, folded by him. We owe
everything to his shephtTding.

Yers. 76 — 11. — The warning against way-
wardness. This is delivered in four, or
rather four and a half, verses, and com-
mences with the words, " To-day if ye will
hear his voice."

Ver. 76. — To-day. This word, standing
prominently forward as it does, is a start-
ling call, intimating that the time is come
for a momentous decision. If ye will hear
his voice. God ia crying to his people —
will they hear, or will they forbear? If the
former, all will go well ; if the latter, than
assuredly they shall not enter into his rest.
The " voice " intended proceeds to give the
warning of vers. 8 — 11.

Yer. 8.— Harden not your heart, as in
the provocation ; rather, as at Meribah (see
Exod. xvii. 2 — 7). And as in the day of
temptation in the wilderness; rather, and
as in the day of Massah. The children of
Israel " tempted " God, and " chided " with
Moses at Massah (or Meribah) in the
wilderness, where water was first given
them out of the rock. Their descendant!
are warned not to follow the example of
their forefathers.

Ver. 9. — When your fathers tempted me
(see Exod. xviL 2, 7). Proved me; or,
" tested me " — put my power and goodness
to the proof. And (rather, even) saw my
work ; i.e. " saw the water gush forth from
the rock, when at my command Moses struok
it " (Exod. xvii. 6).

Yer. 10. — Forty years long was I grieved
with this generation; rather, with that
generation— the generation that tem|.itedGod
in the wilderness (see the Bevised Version).
And said. It is a people that do err in thehr
heart; literally, a people of iBanderers in heart



312



THE BOOK OF PSALMS.



[PS. xov. 1 — 11.



are these; i.e. "not only are they a people
whose feet wander (Ps. cvii. 4), but their
hearts also have wandered and gone astray
from my paths." And they have not known
my ways. "My ways — the ways of my
ODmmaiidmeiits — are unknown to them, un-
trodden by them."

Ver. 11. — Unto whom I sware in my
wrath; rather, so that that I eware in my
wrath, or "wherefore I sware in my wrath"
(for the oath itself, see Numb. xiv. 21 — 23 ;
and comp. Deut. i. 34, 35). That they
should not enter into my lest The " rest "



originally intended was that of Canaan,
when " the Lord gave rest unto Israel from
all their enemies round about " (Josh, xxiii.
1). But Canaan was a type of the lieavenly
rest; and the warning given to the Israel
of his ilay by the present psalmist is to be
regarded us a warning that, if they followed
in tlie steps of tlieir toietathers, they might
miss of that final and crowning " rest,"
which, after tlie wilderness of this world is
traversed, still " reiuaineth for the people of
God" (see Heb. iu. 7—19; iv. 1— 9>



HOMILETICS.

Ver. S. — Public worship. " come, let us worship." This sublinie psalm belongs
to the Christian Church co less than to ancient Israel; in a sense, more. For the
series of psalms to which it belongs have a prophetic character — they look forward
to the kingdom and gospel of Christ. Times without number chanted by white-robed
priests and Levites in the temple court, to the clang of trumpets, harps, and cymbals,
they nevertheless outstretch the narrow bounds of the old covenant. In Ps. c. (the
crown of this series) the widest invitation is given to all nations to join in worshipping
Jehovah as their God.

I. An invitation to worship. Wliat is worship f Our English word means
honour and reverence paid to worth — worth-ship. It stands here for a Hebrew word,
literally meaning " to fall " or " prostrate one's self ; " i.e. (according to Eastern usage) by
kneeling, and touching the ground with the forehead. So Abraham before the angels ;
Joshua (Josh. v. 14); the heavenly worshippers in St. John's vision (Rev. iv. 10).
So when our Lord was on earth (Luke v. 12) ; and elsewhere. So it follows : " bow
down . . . kneel before the Lord." Bodily movements are the natural expression of
inward emotions. So then spiritual worship is the corresponding feeling; prostration
of soul — the knees of the heart. It is the acknowledgment of our dependence; we
must add, our sinful un worthiness ; and of the infinite worth, majesty, glory, holiness,
of our Maker. It is reverence, homage, admiration, carried to the highest pitch —
adoration. Other feelings, affections, motives, may enter into worship— wonder,
gratitude, joy, love, obedience, trust. But worship takes all these, and lays them on
the altar, as a whole burnt offering, consumed in the flame of holy awe. All the
■entimenti which go to make up worship may be claimed by fellow-creatures; but
only in measure and limit. Not only self-respect, but jealous regard for God's supreme
claim, place such limits. Therefore Cornelius was rebuked by St. Peter, and St. John
by the angel (Acts x. 26 ; Rev. xxii. 8, 9). But when we behold all good and glorious
attributes united in the One Infinite, Self-existent, Eternal Being, the Source of all
iither being, life, joy, goodness, perfection, reason itself tells us that our worship should
be unlimited, absolute. Only blindness, coldness, hardness of heart, and unbelief can
prevent the full response of our souls to this invitation. " O come," etc.

n. An INVITATION TO PUBLIC UNITED WORSHIP. "Let US Worship." Worship is
worthless if not spiritual (John iv. 22—24). Outward forms without spiritual reality
may even be hurtful, dangerous, deadly. And perhaps silent worship may be the
highest worship : " groanings which cannot be uttered " (Rom. viii. 26). But public,
united, vocal worship has great advantages. It prevents our worship from sinking
into mere contemplation and meditation. These are most important aids. But worship
Is not truly worship unless it is actual converse with God — calling on him, drawing
near to him, bowing our souls in his glorious presence. Vocal united prayer or praise
greatly helps this — helps us to feel the reality of hia presence, and that not only are
we thinking of him and addressing him, but that he hears and answers.

III. This invitation has a mbanino and poweb foe Cheistians, immeasurably
transcending all that it could have for saints of old under the old covenant. Worship
has regard not only to what God is in himsd/, but what he is to us. The pious



PS. XOT. 1— 11.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 313

Israelite worshipped him as "our Maker," the Judge of all the earth, the God of Israel —
of Abraham and his children. Christian worship talses in all these considerations.
But think what it adds 1 After this manner pray we, " Our Father, who art in heaven ! "
We worship the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. We see the glory of God
in the face of Jesus Christ. We have fellowship with the Father and the Son. We
have received, not the spirit of fear, but the spirit of sonship, teaching us to say, " Abba,
Father 1" We have access with boldness through the blood of Jesus. The darkness
is past, and the true light shineth (Eph. i. 2, 3 ; iii. 14 ; 2 Cor. iv. 6 ; 1 John i. 3 ;
Bom. viii. 15 ; Eph. iii. 12 ; Heb. x. 19 ; 1 John ii. 8). Wonderful is the longing desire,
holy boldness, nearness to God, of many of the ancient saints (Ps. xlii. 1, 2, and
many other passages)! What ought owr worship to be, standing on so far higher
a level, where in privilege and knowledge "the least in the kingdom of heaven" is
greater than the greatest of tbem 1

Conclusion. 1. The possession of spiritual life is an indispensable condition to the
offering of spiritual worship (John iv. 24). 2. Public worship is not only a means of
blessing, a privilege, an enjoyment ; it is a high and solemn duty. Christians should
take earnest pains to fit themselves for takmg part in it. 3. Those who lead the
praises of the Church (choristers) have a sacred ministry, calling for consecration of
heart as well as ear and voice or (organist's) fingers.



HOMILIES BY VAEIOUS AUTHORS.

Vers. 1—11. — The invitatory psalm. It has been thus called in Christian Liturgies
throughout Christendom, and chiefly because of its fervent invitation to praise. But
it is also an equally earnest invitation to hearken and to believe. Let us take that
which stands at the beginning, and consider —

I. The invitation to peaisb. In this is shown : 1. To whom the praise is to be
rendered. It is to Jehovah, the Rock of our salvation. 2. Think of the many minis-
tries which the word " rock " reminds us of. Shade : for God was to his people as " the
shadow of a great rock in a weary land ; " and he is so still. Defence : " Thou art my
Rock and my Fortress." Strength : " Thou hast set my feet upon a rock." Supply :
" He smote the rock," etc. (Pss. Ixxviii. 20 ; Ixxxi. 16). Dwelling-place : we read both
in Isaiah and Jeremiah of " the inhabitants of the rock." Such were the ideas that
gathered round this name of the Lord which the psalm summons men to praise. 3.
The manner of the praise. It was to be by joyful song and resonant shout, with
thanksgiving and with psalms. So hearty, so jubilant, so universal, so emphatic, was
to be the praise of the Lord. But in ver. 6 there is the call to yet more profound
adoration and worship, since yet higher manifestations of God's grace are to be com-
memorated. Therefore note : 4. The reasons/or all this worship. And (1) because of
what God is — supreme over all the gods of the heathen ; (2) because of his rule over
the whole earth — its depths, its heights, the sea, and the land ; (8) because — and here
comes the summons to the higher praise spoken of— of what God is to his people —
their Maker, their God, the Giver of their peace and rest (cf. Ps. xxiii., " He maketh
me to lie down in green pastures ") ; so his people are " the people of his pasture." He
is also their Guide, Defender, Ruler — " the sheep of his hand." Such are the grounds
— and surely they are adequate — for this reverent and yet exultant worship. And they
all remain still.

II. The call to hbab God's voice. (Ver. 8.) For as the former verses had
told of the rich and lofty privileges of the people of God, so these tell of their great
peril — the peril of unbelief. This had been their ruin in days gone by, in all that
weary forty years. Nothing else could harm them ; but this wrought all their woa
(cf. Heb. iv. 6 — 9). And what was true of old and of Israel, is true to-day and of our-
selves. The righteous live by faith ; no unbeliever can enter into God's rest.

III. The call to faith. For this is the condition of our obtaining the prize of
our high calling. The rest of God is God's reward to his faithful people — a rest not
alone in heaven hereafter, but here and now, whilst in this world, which Christ pro-
mises to give, and does ^ive. Saints of old knew it; saints to-day enter into it.
Christ dwelt in it, and so may we — if we believe. — S. C.



3U THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. xov. 1— 11.

Ver. 1. — Everyhody called to praise Qod. The call to offer God joyful thanksgiving
is made to. everybody, without qualiScation or limitation. It may be that certain
forms of Divine worship are properly reserved for those who are in certain states of
mind, or have voluntarily entered into certain relations; but the common duties of
thanksgiving rest on all humanity — the claims of the God of providence and mercy
should be felt, and should be responded to, by every man made in the Divine image.
A strange notion has been allowed to gain some acceptance, that praise and thanks-
giving from the unconverted can never be acceptable to God. The Scriptures give
no countenance whatever to such a notion. Every man is invited to praise God as
well as he can. What God resists is insincerity. It does not matter how imperfect
the praise may be, if it is but sincere. The terms of the text imply the union of music
and song in God's worship. The psalmist invites to a full burst of instrumental and
vocal music, which will use up all kinds of human talents. Being a general call, it is
a call to worship God with thanksgiving, which every man may be expected to feel ;
not with penitence, which only a few may feel.

I. All men mat jom m becoonizino what Odd is to all men. 1. God the
Creator. Open out the idea that what God could say of his daily handiwork, " Behold,
it is very good," man, observing the further workings, the operations, of what God haa
made, can repeat after him. Explain that, in a large way, man could always, by
observation, see the goodness of God in creation ; in minute detail man's science sees
it still. 2. Ood the Provider, " Giving to all their meat in due season." Here show
that the extraordinary, such as provision of manna, only illustrates the ordinary, God
giving all their daily bread. 3. Ood the Saviow. In the lower sense of Preserver,
Defender, Deliverer, from the common ills and perils of life. Apart, then, from all
theological distinctions, all men should praise God.

II. Some men mat join in becoqnizino what God is to bome men. 1. Some
men have special personal experiences of God's dealings. 2. Some men know God as
their Saviour from sin. — R. T.

Vers. 4, 5. — The beautiful and sublime calling to devotion. There is a remarkable
diversity in the psalms. Some express the struggling of earnest souls with the moral
diCBculties and mysteries of life (see Asaph's psalms). Some express the varieties
of experience characterizing individual religious experience (see Ps. xlii.). The psalm
now before us is one that expresses the influences of the varied aspects of nature upon
the cnlture of religious life and feeling (see also Pss. xix., civ., cxlvii.). These poetical
nature-psalms are as true to humanity, as necessary and as helpful, as those whose
influence seems more direct. Man's Bible is poetical. It should be, because the
poetical is one of man's faculties. It is the side of his nature on which he is set in
harmony with the suggestive in material creation. By the poetical faculty we need
not mean the power of making poetry. It is the power to receive and respond to
the impressions made on us by God's handiwork. Nothing quickens and nourishes
the faculty as religion does. Faith and hope are nearly allied to imagination ; and
they cannot fail to culture it. In this psalm it is evident that the beautiful and
sublime in nature is impressing the psalmist, filling him with reverence, leading him
to personal devotion, and inciting him to call upon others to share with him in
worship.

I. The obeat things of natdbe impbess all men. Many of us may seem to be
under grave disadvantage, because we live in a crowded oity, a man-made city, an
unsesthetic city. But even cities cannot wholly shut out the changing moods of nature.
Smoke cannot hide the firmament, the sunshine, or the stars. Business cannot make ug
unmindful of tlie seasons, the winds, and the rains. Men's buildings cannot alter the con-
formHtion of the ground that makes the landscapes. And the very disabilities of city
peo(ile only make them more open to nature-influences when they can get away into
the country. The beautiful and sublime will not always produce their due impression
on us. Poets are not always equally sensitive. So much depends on our circumstances
and on our moods. And therefore how important is the spirit in which we go into
the country ; the kind of society we seek there ; and especially the quietness, the
loneliness, we gain in which we may listen to nature's voice) Crowded trains, crowded
piers, crowded seashores, crowded lodgings, too easily crowd men out of their spiritu-



P8. xov. 1— 11.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 316

ality. Can we recall times when nature has home upon us with all its holiest force ?
At such times we were our real selves, our noblest selves ; God touched us with his
nature-hand, and we felt the touch. Illustrate by the impressions of moor, mountain,
seashore, sunset, or tempest. Upon Uavid the voice of nature fell often, and found
an exquisite sensitiveness that was partly his disposition, and partly his piety.
Believe, then, in kinness between yourself and the grand in creation; and learn to
expect that nature-messages will come to you.

II. The gbeat things of natubb oai.Ii true-heabtbd mkit to devotion and
WORSHIP. To many men, warped and biassed by education and association, the great
things (if hills aud seas and skies speak only of a higher power. If man is simple,
true-heaited, they speak of the personal being of God. " The sea is his." The
psalmist does not merely assert a/oci; he asserts a man's /eeZm^r concerning the fact.
We can have no reverence, no devotion, for the vague thing — a power. Reverence and
devotion can only be felt m relation to a living being. So we must guard our faith
in God, the living God. If open-hearted, nature makes us feel the kinness of man
with creation in its daily dependence on God. " He is our God, and we are the people
of his pasture, and the sheep of his hand." Our minds, receiving impressions of glory
from earth and sky, transfer them to God. If this his handiwork be so glorious and
80 gracious, what must he himself be? And if all things depend on him, how should
we bow before him, and worship? " Oh how I fear thee, living God ! " But a further
impression comes. That which fills us with reverence and worship is God's voice
to humanity, and it reaches the whole brotherhood of men. So we become dissatisfied
with lonely worship, and want to say, with the psalmist, " Come, let ui worship and
bow down." Search, then, and see what is the influence of the holiday-times of life
upon us. Have they made us more reverent, more devout, more earnest in our
religious life and service? Do they give us a worthier sense of the value of common
worship ; and fill us with a holier determination " not to forsake the assembling of
ourselves together, as the manner of some is " ? — R. T.

Ver. 6. — Associated and public prayer, 1. In meeting together for public prayer,
we follow the impulses of our own hearts, as well as obey the commands of our God.
Prayer and worship are connected with our whole relation to God. God is in direct
relation to the spirits that we are. We feel this, and therefore we must pray for
spiritual blessings. God is in direct relation to the bodies that we have. They are
his making, the care of his providence. They are subject to weariness and disease;
they are the mediums of our virtue and of our vice. Out of the sense of the relation
of our bodies to God, we are impelled to pray for temporal blessings. And God is also
in close relation to our associations with one another — to our associations as families,
as Churches, as fellow-worshippers, and as citizens. Our best welfare, in all these
relations, depends on him who is Lord of all natural laws, Lord of storms. Lord of
harvests. Lord of sunshine. Lord of the wrath of men, and Lord too of their wealth.
Let any man feel this, as every true man, every thinking man, must feel it, and that man
will be impelled by his own spirit to meet with others, and say to others, " come,
let us worship and bow down : let us kneel before the Lord our Maker." God deals
with us collectively here on earth. We may not think of separate Churches in heaven ;
of organized families in heaven. There are no towns, with distinct town interests, in
heaven ; no nations, with national qualities and national interests, in heaven. It is
peculiar to our present human scenes that God deals with us collectively. This need
not relieve our sense of individual responsibility. We do but show what a basis is
laid for collective prayer, for public worship, in this fact, that God deals collectively
with us. He can punish individuals in another world for their individual wrong-
doings. He can only punish nations, as nations, for their national wrong-doings, in
this sphere. Collectively, God regards us ; then collectively we should pray, collectively
we should worship^ collectively we should live for God. The man that refuses to
join in public worship is breaking away from his humanity; and denying the gracious
conditions and responsibilities under which God has placed him. It is a more familiar
truth, that sharing in public worship is the direct command of our God. 2. What are
the reasons which keep men from the performance at all, or from the due performance
of this duty of public worship? To put our reasons out into the full blaze of the light



&16 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. xot. 1— 11.

Is often sufficient to wither them up, and to make us altogether ashamed of them.
Perhaps some persuade themselves to say, " Your worship is not really intended for us :
it is for Christians, and we do not want to intrude." It is a mistake. God's worship
is for men, all men, all God-made men, whether they fit in with our idea of what God
would have them he or not. Some stay from public worship because they cannot
arrange their domestic affairs so as conveniently to attend it. Be sure that you have
really tried and failed, before you rest in this excuse. Most stay away from sheer
indifference, from the carelessness which settles down over souls that willingly live
to self and sin. Some men are indisposed to worship; and it is this indisposition
with which we have to deal. 3. Under the terms, " associated, and public worship,"
three forms may be indicated. (1) Family prayer. When the devoted Hichard Baxter
lived in Kidderminster, it is said there was not a house in which the evensong of
praise might not be heard, and the uplifted prayer of earnest hearts. The rush of
modern business life has swept away much family prayer. (2) Social prayer. Times
when two or three meet together, ^o plead the promise made to two of the disciples
who agree to ask. The smaller meetings are specially fruitful in spiritual blessings.
(3) Public prayer. The services of the sanctuaries. The spiritual antitypes of the old
temple worship at Jerusalem, " whither the tribes go up." Public worship sustains, as
nothing else can do, our dependence on God, the Creator, the Provider, the Redeemer.
" He made us, and not we ourselves ; " " He redeemeth our life from destruction." He
" sent his Son into the world, that we might live through him." Then surely we ought
" to worship and bow down." — ^B. T.

Ver. 7. — Our moral rdations with Ood. "People of his pasture, and the sheep of his
hand." Some writers try to amend this sentence, because the poetical figure seems
complicated. It is much better to leave it in its poetical suggestiveness. It indicates
familiarity with Eastern shepherding. The shepherd lives with his flock day and
night ; feels for them a personal affection ; tends them in all their times of need with
his own hands. So the Eastern sheep and shepherd figures, for God and his people,
are stronger and more suggestive than we can realize if we keep ourselves to Western
shepherd associations. In so carefully putting people into one sentence, and sheep into
the other, the psalmist reminds us that God's sheep are moral beings, and the mere
physical relations of shepherds to their sheep do but represent and illustrate the moral
relations in which God stands to his people as moral beings. So we rise into a sphere
in which we need the help of another figure — that of the father and his family. The
" Lord our Maker " here brings God before us as the Universal Creator ; and as the
Founder of the Israelite nation.

I. OUB MORAL RELATIONS WITH GOD INCLUDE OUE 0HARA0TER8. Illustrate from

the shepherd's estimate of each sheep. But the end at which the shepherd aims is
health, fatness. The end at which God aims is cultured, developed, perleoted character.
And this is the Divine aim for every man, and the Divine work in every man. If we
can see the issue more plainly reached in some men than in others, this need not dim
our confidence that the work is going on in all.

II. Gob MORAL RELATIONS WITH GoD INCLUDE OUB MOODS. For no man can
study human nature without observing that men are constantly acting, on occasion,
out of harmony with their characters. The difficulty of dealing wisely with children
lies in their occasional strange lapses and oddities. God bears shepherd-like relation
to the odd moods of his moral beings.

III. OuB MORAL RELATIONS WITH GoD INCLUDE OUB SINS. This brings US iuto

a very familiar field, and opens to view the redeeming and sanctifying work of God.
These moral relations of God to us are the real reason why we should "worship and
boi^ down."— R. T.

Ver. 8. — Divided feeling in, man. The psalmist assumes that they wish to hear
God's voice, aud yet there is danger of their hardening their heart. That double
feeling is constantly to bo found in men. They are for ever putting stumbling-blocks
in their own way. The head will often hinder the heart, and the heart will often hinder
the head. Man is a single being, and he is his own true self only when all the forces
of his nature act in harmony together. But man can make himself into a dual being,



w. xov. 1— 11.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 317

and start a strifs within himself that will prove morally destructive. Illustrate by
the devil-posseased in the time of Christ. There was strife in the men. Their will
pulled one way, the mastering will that was upon them pulled the other. Or take
the modern case of delirium tremens. Here in our text we have the power which lies
in man to hinder himself. He may " harden his heart," and so silence every high
and noble desire he may feel. This hardening of the heart is always a man's own act
to begin with, and God's act to finish with. A man sets himself upon resisting right
impressions and persuasions ; he finds it easier a second time and a third ; he is harden-
ing so that the persuasions have little effect, and Grod at last puts his seal on the
hardening, and the persuasions roll off altogether.

I. When a man wants to worship God, he can habden his hbabt by
BNC0URA8ING DOUBTS. Somc One is ever ready to whisper, " Is there a God at all ? If
there is, is he really a good God ? If he is good, might he not have done a great deal
more for you ? " Give room to such doubts, and all interest in worship will soon take
to itself wings and flee away.

II. When a man wants to worship God, he can harden his heart by
MURMURINGB. Illustrate from the historical allusion to Meribah (Exod. xvii. 1 — 7).
If anybody wants to murmur, he can easily find something to murmur about. There
is a sunny side and a dark side to almost everything ; and, if a man chooses, he can
see only the dark side ; and, if he does, he will surely spoil all desire for worship, all
grounds for thanksgiving. — E. T.

Ver. 8. — The sin of tempting God. Tempting God is putting him to the test, as
if you did not feel quite sure of him, and could not fully trust him. The idea of the
word is " assay," " test," as the refiner does metals, or as the chemist or analyst may
do to substances submitted to him. It is always implied that the man who proves
the thing either does not know what it is or is uncertain about it. It is just that
ignorance and uncertainty which God's people never should have concerning him. It
is that doubting God which makes all attempts to test and prove him altogether wrong.
Take the case of Israel at Meribah, and show that, in view of the Divine deliverances,
guidings, providings, and defendings, any attempt to prove whether God really cared
for them, and could help them, was absolutely unworthy; it amounted, indeed, to an
insult offered to their covenant-King.

I. Putting God to the proof mat be pbrmissiblb. But the conditions are
very clear. If a man wants to believe, and wants encouragement to faith, God will
permit him to put him to the proof. This is illustrated, in a very different way, by
the sign of the fleece asked by Gideon. The rightness or wrongness of asking the
sign depended entirely on the state of Gideon's mind and feeling. He wanted help
to belief, so he may put God to the test. Circumstances may arise now which may
allow of our proving God; but that work should never be attempted save at the
utmost strain.

II, Putting God to the proof is generally unpebmissible. Because generally
it implies doubt of God's power, or faithfulness, or mercy. See the mood of the
Israelites; and see the spirit in wliicb the scribes and Pharisees came, putting Jesus
to the test. They di(i not want to believe in him. They wanted to get something
which would encourage their unbelief. So Jesus refused, saying, " There shall no sign
be given unto them." Keep right attitudes and moods of mind, and right relations
with God, and then it will never come into our minds to attempt to put him to the
test.— B. T.

Ver. 11. — Divine Judgments on the unbelieving. " They should not enter into my
rest." As the reference is clearly to the murmurings of the Israelites at Meribah, the
" rest " referred to can only be the anticipated rest of settlement in the promised land
of Canaan. The writer of the Epistle to the Hebrews finds a further meaning, or rather
guggestion, in the word; but we may seek for the first and direct teaching of the
passage. 1. Notice that God is said to have been grieved with the effort made to test
or tempt him ; but his grief is not to be thought of as distress, it is rather that he was
"moved with indignation," and therefore found an immediate and severe judgment
necessary. 2. Notice that the basis of all the wrong in Israel is recognized as unbelief f



318 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. xcv. 1—11.

bat that is not here an intellectual bid, it is a heart-sin ; it is not " inability to believe,"
it is " untrustfulness," and untrustfulness when Grod had laid down such abundant
.grounds for their trust. 3. Notice that the judgment fell upon the generation, and
not upon the race. In all God's judgments that recognize personal failings, we may
And personal suffering and loss, but no frustration of the Divine purposes. The untrust-
fiil generation died in the wilderness ; but the race, in good time, entered and possessed
the " rest " of Canaan. 4. Notice that our own human feelings enable us to understand
the Divine indignation. All good men love to be trusted. You can never so sorely
try a good man as by failing to trust him. This applies even more strongly to those
who are in close, loving, family relations with us. The supreme indignity, to our humble
view, is a son failing to trust a good mother. Work out the various relations in which
God, the infinitely Good One, stood to Israel, and stands to us ; and so bring to view
the shame of our untrustfulness, and the reasonableness of our coming under disci-
plining Divine judgments. — E. T.

Vers. 1 — 11. — Public worship — its necessity and advantage. I. Its natubk.

1. Thanlcsgiving and praise. (Vers. 1, 2.) We need special seasons for thinking over
our privileges and cultivating gratitude, and the utterance of the spirit of praise.

2. Adoration and prayer. (Ver. 6.) God's love thus a cause for our cleansing.
Christ's promises and grace inexhaustible. Who can drink the river of his love dry ?
Confession and supplication. 3. Listening to the voice of God. (Ver. 7.) In his
spoken Word and in our own hearts. Hearing what God speaks to us is as much
worship as our speaking to God.

II. Reasons op wokship. 1. God's supremacy. (Vers. 3 — 5.) Hero is the theme
of the loftiest praise ; a reason for the largest prayers ; and an argument for sub-
mission to his perfect will. 2, God's tender guardianship. " He is our God ; and we
are the people of his pasture, and the sheep of his hand." intimate relationship to him :
" our Ood." Living upon his bounty ; " people of his pasture." We are being guided
by him : " sheep of his hand." 3. Ood's oath against those who are hardened.
"Unto whom I sware in my wrath that they should not enter into my rest." 4. Ee i*
the Bock of our salvation. (Vet. 1.) The eternal Foundation and Shelter of the
soul. — S.

Vers. 4 — 6. — The material universe and its lessons. " In his hand are the deep places
of the earth : the strength of the hills is his also. The sea is his, and he made it; and
his hands formed the dry land." The material universe suggests —

I. The peofound mtstbey of belf-existenoe. Is it eternal, self-existent; or
has it come from God in the way of direct creation or evolution ? Self-existence an
impossible conception, whether of the universe or of God ; but it is also impossible
to avoid it and find a substitute; only impossible to conceive of two self-existences.

II. If the uirivBKSE is evolved fbou God, then it must be a bevelation of
PAST OF HIS NATDBE. Shows that God takes delight in material strength and beauty
as well as in spiritual. The infinite variety of conceptions embodied. The infinite
skill in the construction of the infinitely little and the infinitely great. But this only
of a part of his nature, and that not the highest.

ni. Manifestation of powee. "Who by his strength setteth fast the mountains,
being girded with power." Seas and mountains only functional examples of his power.
The vastness of the universe. The child that Augustine saw ladling the sea into
a hole in the sand. " Not more impossible than for you to empty the nniverse into
your intellect."

IV. The material unitbbbe oenebatkb in us the sense or weakness and
iKBiQNiFioANOE. But mind, conscience, heart, are the only things that are eternally
great. Mountains will melt, and seas dry ma. " He is our Ood ; and we are the people
of his pasture, and the sheep of his hand. " It is he that hath made us, and not we
ourselves." We are hit children. — S.



PS. icvi. 1 — 13.]



THE BOOK OF PSALMS.



81»



EXPOSITION.



PSALM XCVI.

. This psalm occurs, with very little change,
in 1 Chron. xvi. 23 — 33, and is there (ver.

^ 7) ascribed to David. It is also entitled,
" A Psalm of David," in the Septuagint.
But the phraseology and the style, espe-
cially the frequent iteration (vers. 1, 2, 7,
8, 13), belong to the later Hebrew. If
David, therefore, was the original author,
we must suppose a reconstruction of the
composition at a later period. The psalm is
one entirely devoted to praise. It sets forth
Jehovah, first, as the Greater and Wonder-
worker of old (vers. 1 — 6) ; secondly, as the
present Buler of the earth and its inhabi-
tants (vers. 7 — 10); and, thirdly, as the
comin°; Judge of all men (vers. 10 — 13).

Metrically, the psalm consists of four
stanzas, the first three of three verses each,
and the last of four.

Ver. 1. — ling unto the Lord • new long
(comp. Pss. xxxiii. 3; zcviiL 1; czliv. 9;
oxlix. 1 ; Isa. xlii. 10). This clause doei
not occur in 1 Ohroo. xvi. It seems to
belong to the seoond recension of the psalm,
when it was recast to suit some "new"
oooasion. Sing unto the Lord, all the earth.
So in Isa. xlii. 10, " Sing unto the Lord a
new song, his piaise from the end of the
earth," The psalmist at once malies known
his " universalism " by calling on the whole
earth to join in his song of praise (comp.
Ps. Ixvi. 1, 4). This psalm has been well
called " a missionary hymn for all ages."

Ver. 2. — Sing unto the Lord, bless his
Name (cf. Pss. o. 4 ; cxlv. 1, 10, 21, etc.).
Show forth his salvation from day to day ;
or, mihUsh hit lalvation (^evayye\((f(r8e,
LX&.); i.e. " make it known " — " spread the
good tidings."

Ver. 3. — ^Declare his glory among the
heathen. Publish God's praise, not only
in Israel, but to the ends of the earth. Let
all mankind hear the joyful news (comp.
Pss. ii. 8; xlvii. 1, 8; oxxxviiL 4). His
wonders among all people ; rather, among
all the peoples ; i.e. " all the nations of the
earth " (see ver. 7).

Ver. 4. — 7or the Lord is great (comp. Ps.
zcv. 3a), and greatly to be praised. What-
ever is "great" excites onr admiration,
and naturally calls forth our praise. God's
greatness is such that he needs to be
" greatly praised." He is to be feared above
all gods (comp. Ps. xcv. 3b, and the com-
ment ad loo.).



Ver. 5.— 7or all the gods of the nations
are idols ; rather, vanities, or nothings. In
the original there is a play upon the words
— the elohim of the nations are mere elilim.
Elllim is a favourite designation of the
heathen gods in Isaiah. Compare the
statement of St. Paul, " We know tliat an
idol is nothing in the world " (1 Cor. viii. 4).
But the Lord made the heavens. That
which is nothing can do nothing, can make
nothing. How far superior is Jehovah,
wlio " made the heavens " (comp. Gen. L
1 ; Isa. xlii. 5 ; xliv. 24) !

Ver. 6. — Honour and majesty are before
him. Another paronomasia — hdd vl-haddr.
Dr. Kay translates, " grandeur and
majesty ; " Professor Cheyne, " glory and
grandeur." Strength and beauty are in
his sanctuary. The original phrase used
seems to have been, ''Strength and glad-
ness are in his place " (1 Chron. xvi. 27)—
terms suiting the simplicity of David's
time. When the psalms came to be used in
the temple service, loftier language was
more fitting. The whole passage has pro-
bable reference to the glory of God as seated
between the cherubim in the first temple.

Ver. 7. — Give unto the Lord, ye kindredi
of the people; rather, O ye families of the
peoples. A renewed appeal to the heathen
to join in the song of praise (comp. ver. 1).
Give nnto the Lord glory and strength.
" Give " must be understood in the sense of
" ascribe " (see Professor Cheyne's transla-
tion, and compare the Prayer-book Version).
Both this and the next verse are echoes of
Ps. xxix. 1, 2.

Ver. 8. — Give unto the Lord the glory
due unto his Name ; literally, the glory of
his Name. Bring an offering, and come
into his courts. The parallel expression in
1 Chron. xvi. 29 is, " Come before him."
" Courts" would be inappropriate until the
temple was buiM. (For the bringing of " an
offering" (minchah') by the Gentiles, see
Mai. i. 11.)

Ver. 9. — worship the Lord in the beauty
of holiness (comp. 1 Chron. xvi. 29; Ps.
xxix. 2). This is generally explained as
"holiday attire," or "in vestments suited
to holy service," but may include, besides
vestments, the other material accessories of
Divine worship Fear before him, all the
earth ; or, trenMe before him (comp. Ps.
xcvii. 4). The fear of God is constantly
inculcated by the psalmists, not only as
"the beginning of wisdom" (Ps. cxi. 10),
but as required of every man during faia
whole life (Pss. xix. 9; xxxiv. 9; xl. 3;
Ixiv. 9; Ixxxvi. 11 ; cxix. 63, etc).

Ver. 10.— Say among the heathen that



320



THE BOOK OF PSALMS.



[ps. xcvi. 1 — 13.



the Lord leigneth (oomp. Pes. zciii. 1 ;
xcvii 1 ; xoix. 1), The world also shall he
estahlished that it shall not be moTed.
When God takes hia throne, and manifestly
reignB, the earth is at once " established,"
settled, placed on a firm footing (see the
comment on Ps. xciii. 1, where exactly the
same words occur). He shall judge the
people righteously (comp. ver. 13). God,
the Deliverer of old time (vers. 3, 4), God,
the King of the whole earth (ver. 10a), is
also (jod the Judge, who gives sentence on
the " peoples " with equity.

Ver. 11. — Let the heavens rejoice, and let
the earth be glad. "An appeal for the
sympathy of nature " (Cheyne) ; comp. Isa.
xliv. 23 ; Jer. li. 48. If the final coming
of Messiah's kingdom be the event alluded
to in ver. 10, as is quite possible, the calling
on heaven and earth to rejoice may indicate
a real renovation of the material universe,
such as to liring it into harmony with the
newly established spiritual conditions of
the period (oomp. Isa. Ixv. 17 — 25; Eev.
xxi. 1 — 4). Let the sea roar, and the ful-
ness thereof (comp. Ps. xovlii. 7). The sea
is to show its joy by raising its voice, and
" roaring," or " mundering."



Ver. 12.— let the field be joyful ; i.e. "the
cultivated ground." And all that is there-
in. Its vines, its olives, its other fruits, and
its harvests. Then shall all the trees of
the wood rejoice before the Lord. Lebanon
and Bashan shall rejoice equally with
Carniel and Sharon. The whole earth
shall " break forth into singing " (see Isa.
xliv. 23).

Ver. 13. — ^For he eometh, for he cometh
to judge the earth (see above, ver. 10). This
is given as the leason for the burst of joy.
God's coming to judgment is the establish-
ment of moral order in the place of moral
disorder upon the earth, and the inaugura-
tion of a reign of love, peace, and happiness
(oomp. Isa. Ixv. 18 — 25). He shall jndgo
the world with righteousness (see above,
ver. 10, and oomp. Ps. ix. 8). The judg-
ment which the psalmist lias speciaUy in
view is, " not a retributive, but a gracions
judging, by which controversies are adjusted
aud prevented, and the law of love intro-
duced into the life of the people " (Heng-
stenberg). And the people with his truth ;
rather, the peoples; i.e. all the natioui on
the face of the earth.



HOMILETICS.

Ver. 5. — Idolatry. Thus it was three thousand years ago. Thus, to an extent m
astounding as melancholy, it is to-day. Population of globe estimated at fourteen
hundred millions ; if so, one thousand millions heathen. Considering the prevalence
permanence, antiquity, of idolatry, that these words and many like these should have
been written when and where they were, is no unsubstantial proof of the superhuman
authorship, Divine inspiration, of Old Testament Scriptures. History presents no more
impressive and significant sight than that of the little nation of Israel, holding a tiny
comer of earth not twice the size of Yorkshire, hemmed in by mighty empires and
ancient civilizations, often crushed by their irresistible weight; with absolutely no
advantage over other peoples in the struggle for life, save their religion ; yet maintain-
ing for Mteen centuries their single-handed witness to the foundation-truth of religion,
and protest against the perverted faiths of the world. (1) The causes of idolatry ; (2)
its evil; (3) our duty.

I. The causes of idolatbt. How to account for this terrible and amazing fact

the widespread, long-continued prevalence of idolatry? No single origin can be
historically verified. Worship of forces and forms of nature, of ancestors, of deified
heroes, of symbols or personified attributes, of partial and degraded conceptions of the
one living God, or fading traditions of his worship,,— all these have their place in the
labyrinth of the history of national faiths. The theory propounded with immense
assurance and edat a generation ago, that fetishism was the parent of polytheism, and
the worship ol many gods crystallized into the worship of One, has shared the fate of
theories which facts are forced or invented to fit, in place of theory being fitted to fact.
Degraded superstitions of barbarous nations have the clear marks of being dust and
dregs of ruined faiths (most striking illustration in the history of Madagascar, where
proverbs still bore witness to God, while idols were bundles of sticks and rags).
American Indians (types, according to Sir W. Dawson, of pre-historic men), among
remnants of decayed civilization, have preserved the ancient faith in "the Great
Spirit." Greece and India bear witness to the fact that the worship of nature preceded
thkt of deities in human shape. In China, where the emperor once a year publicly



PS. XCVL 1—13.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 821

WowTiips " the God of heaven," and where worship of ancestors is the strongest form
of religion, Buddhism, dating only some five centuries B.C. — at first a system of
atheistic morality — has been transformed into idolatry. The two most amazing proofs
of the ail-but irresistible tendency of human nature are found in the history of Israel
and the history of Christianity. From the time of Joshua's successors to the Baby-
lonian Captivity, the incurable propensity of rulers and people to idolatry is scarcely a
less striking feature of Israel's history than the steadfast witness of the prophets and
of the faithful remnant against it and on behalf of the truth. Christianity itself,
whose glorious message to the heathen was — to turn from dumb idols to the living God,
became in five centuries* so encrusted with the worship of saints, the Virgin, the Host^
relics, images, that when Mohammed drew the sword against idolatry, he reckoned
Christians among idolaters. What is, then, the explanation ? We find in it (1) man's
need of worship— his " feeling after God." (2) In all which makes men shrink from
worshipping the Holy One, who says to his worshippers, " Be ye holy, for I am holy."
St. Paul gives the true philosophy of religion (Rom. i. 18 — 25).

II. Tee evil of idolatby. People ask — Is not this greatly overrated? Does there
not lie in the heart of idolatry a craving after God ? Is it not better to worship an
idol (as a symbol, it may be, of an unseen power) than not to worship at all — ^blind
reverence better than none? Answer; Granting this, it does not change the fact that
idolatry has death at its root, and death as its fruit (Jer. ii. 13). Blind reverence
brings no fruit of blessing into life, pardon, love of goodness, strength for duty, comfort
in trouble, moral renewal, or spiritual life. To be Godless is to be Christless, hopeless
(Eph. iL 12). False substitutes for God do not prepare the heart to know and love
him, but harden and close it a<:ainst his voice. And for the most part idolatry brings
the grossest immorality in its train.

in. The ddtt, therefore, of delivering from the curse of blind, false, degrading
worship a thousand millions of mankind, and spreading in its place the true knowledge
of the ever-living Creator, the Father of spirits, and the glad tidings of reconciliation
to him, and life eternal, as his children by faith in Chnst Jesus, ia one of the noblest,
happiest, most imperative, to which Christians are called.



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORa

Vers. 1— ^. — Songs and sermons. We have both in these verses. There is a three-
fold summons to sing unto the Lord, and a similar threefold summons to speak for the
Lord. Such psalms as this never contemplate a religion which can be hid away and
held in secret. The passionate love which breathes in this psalm must have vent or
die. There is here no coming to the Lord by night, or being secretly a disciple for
fear of the Jews, but the psalm is an open, full, joyous confession of the soul's delight
in the Lord. And such confession takes this double form.

I. SoNO. This is called for : 1. Because owr love to the Lord sJundd be amongst those
deep and intense feelings which demand the fullest utterance of which thesotd is capable.
Plain prose will serve for ordinary communications, but when the soul is deeply stirred,
as it should be, by the love of God, then song becomes a necessity. See in the Scriptures
how the rapt utterances of psalmist and prophet inevitably clothe themselves in poetical
form. 2. Because it is so attractive. It tells of a glad, bright, winsome religion, of
sunshine in the soul and joy in the heart, all which in this sad, weary, sin-stricken world
cannot but be infinitely attractive. Therefore God would have his people sing. 3. And
becatise it is the noblest form of utterance. Music and poetry combine to invest the
suul's deepest and holiest thought in the most perfect garment of praise. 4. And the
long is to be a new song. Eyery day is a new day, and brings with it material for
a new song.

"New mercies, each returning day.
Hover around us while we pray ;
New perils past, new sins forgiven.
New thoughts of God, new hopes of heaven."

6. And universal. This is our desire, and, if so, its expression commits ns to do our

F8ALMS — n. T



322 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [pb. xcvi. 1—13.

best to unite " all the earth " in this song. 6. It is to he gratefid. " Bless his Name."
What abundant reason there is for such gratitude I Happy they who thus sing unto
the Lord I

II. Sermons. These also are called for — fervent, holy speech for God. Not necessarily
set discourses such as we understand by sermons. These, but not these alone, nor these
at all, if God has not given us the needed capacity ; but God-prompted, loving words
spoken for him — these all can speak, and should do so as opportunity is given. Such
speech is described, as was the song, in a threefold way.' 1. Showmg forth God's
salvation. And this from day to day. This can be done, and perhaps best done, by
what we are and do— by our life as well as by our lips ; yet let not the latter be silent,
as they too often are, to our own and others' great loss. 2. Declaring his glory among
the heathen. There is no need to go far away to find these heathen. They are all
around us. Tell them of the glory of his character, his Word, his service, his Spirit
dwelling withio, his eternal rest by-and-by. 3. His wonders among ail people. Not
the good people only — ^it is easy to talk before them ; but among the unsaved, tell them
what a wonderful Saviour Jesus is. — S. C.

Ver. 3. — The spirit of missionary work. Amongst the brighter signs of the times in
which we live must be reckoned the universal anxiety, now in so many ways mani-
fested, on the part of Christian people for the spread of the message of Christ's salva-
tion both at home and abroad. The whole psalm overflows with thankfulness and
delight, and in it is found this summons to missionary work. Now, in a human com-
position we should say that it was uoskilled and lacking in true art if there were
introduced an idea which marred the unity of the whole, which was out of harmony
with its spirit and incongruous with its main intent. But in an inspired composition
like this psalm we can be quite sure that there would be no such incongruity. But
then it follows that this summons to missionary service must be in keeping with the
spirit of this psalm, or it would not be found where it is. Therefore we note —

I. The spirit of bono is in harmony with missionary service. For think of
what this service is. It is : 1. To preach. Not to amuse by gaudy ceremonial. Men
are not so won to Christ. And not to conjure as by mvstic sacramental grace.
But to preach. This is what Christ commanded, what the text bids, what such as
Paul gloried in, what God ever blesses. And it is a joyful service. True preachers
own this as they feel that those to whom they speak are moved and touched, and are
conscious in their own souls of the inspiration of their theme — a theme with which
none other can compare. For: 2. It is to preach Ood's salvation. That which the text
calls " his glory," " his wonders." Now, we know how pleasant it is to be the bearer
of happy tidings — say, to a distressed household, a heart trembling with fear. And
such is the work of the preacher of the salvation of God. He goes to the consciously
guilty, and tells them of free forgiveness in Christ ; to the sin-enslaved, and tells them
of complete deliverance from the accursed tyranny under which they groan ; to the
sorrow-stricken, and tells them of him who shall wipe away all tears ; to the dying,
and tells them of him who, when he had overcome the sharpness of death, opened the
kingdom of heaven to all believers. Such is the missionary's joyous task. 3. And to
preach this to all. None are to be left out. One who had been the means of rescuing
many from a watery grave through the breaking of a sheet of ice on which they had
been joyously skating, tells how all his joy was marred by the fact that he had been
compelled to leave many unsaved. So if we were limited, and not suffered to go to
all with the glad tidings of God's salvation, we should feel our joy marred indeed.
But because it is for all, therefore is our joy great. 4. Thus he is a co-worker with
Christ. In fellowship with him. This is an enhancement of the gladness of the work.
A regiment is honoured by distinction won by one of its soldiers ; a whole family, if
one member wins high place. How much more the missionary when Christ is
co-worker with him ! And : 5. It is a work which has not been in vain. What glorious
results have been achieved ! what trophies won ! Therefore we say this service is in
liarmony with glad song.

II. And this spirit of glad sono is needed fob such service. For: 1. Men
will not care for that vhich, so far as they can see, does you little or no good. But
when they see that the laith of Christ is tiie sunshine of our lives, then they will ba



P8. xcvi. 1— 13.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 323

more ready to believe. Do we let men see this ? And : 2. It alone is strong enough
for the work. Let me tell you a parable. There was a tyrant who sought to oppress
the inhabitants of a certain land. The better to do this he built a strong castle, built
it deep and high, and placed it at the entrance of a valley which led to the land he
sought to oppress. A little stream ran along that valley near the foundation of his
fortress ; but he heeded not that, sure it could do no harm. Many who loved that
land felt very sad as they saw the oppressor's power; but yet they hoped that some-
how his power would be overthrown. And so it came to pass. The summer went on
and the autumn rains came, and the little rivulet became a rapid stream, and began to
gnaw away at the foundations of that grim castle ; but it could not do much harm.
But the winter storms came, and the stream swelled into a strong river, and began to
be dangerous to the tyrant's fortress, so that he, at length, did feel fear. But matters
grew worse ; the winter was over, and the snow high up on the mountains which shut
in the valley began to melt, and the river went on increasing in its might till, one wild
night, the great reservoirs of waters that had been gathering all the winter through
suddenly burst, and with a rush and a roar raged til down the valley, the waters bear-
ing with them a vast mass of timber, stones, trees, earth, and all kinds of material ; and
they came down upon the tyrant's castle and overwhelmed it, sapping its foundations
and tearing down its walls till it had perished out of sight. Such the parable. The
interpretation is not far to seek. Heathendom is that fortress, and the prince of dark-
ness he who built it. The rill, the stream, the river, the torrent, represent respectively
the force of the motives which assail the strength of heathendom. The sense of fear,
of duty, of pity, of glad joy in God. It is this last which alone avails ; the others do
but little, though some much more than the rest. "The joy of the Lord is our
strength."

III. Th« spirit of song shall be given to those who engage in THI8 SEBTIOB.

For joy comes in the service of the Lord — true joy. Be not content until you know
this joy, for not till then will you effectually serve. — S. 0.

Ver. 6. — Strength and beauty. It is supposed that this psal m was composed for the
dedication of the temple at Jerusalem; but it existed in the time of David, though it
was doubtless used in the service of the second temple. The previous reference of the
strength and beauty told of here is to the massive foundations and the solid structure
of the temple,— such was its strength; and the " beauty " told of the lavish adornments
and the varied splendour and richness which characterized all the appointments of the
house of the Lord. In very real and literal sense " strength and beauty were in his
sanctuary."

I. Thbt are the DISTINGUISHING MARKS OF ALL Qod's WORKS. " Jchovah made
the heavens " — so we read in ver. 5 ; and assuredly they are seen there. And look where
we will, it is the same. See the account of the Creation.

II Thbt SHOULD BE IN OUR SANCTUABIB8 To-DAT. It is a public dishonouring
of God if men are content that the sanctuaries in which they worship should be mean
and ill-appointed, as so many of them are, whilst in their own houses no costly
expense is spared and no adornment withheld (see Hag. i. 4). On the other hand, the
magnificent churches, minsters, abbeys, which still remain in this and other lands, have
throughout all the long centuries since they were built borne silent but eloquent
testimony to the reverence, love, and devotion towards God which dwelt in the hearts
of their builders, and which it was their profoimd conviction ought to dwell in the
hearts of aU. Meanness and miserable selfishness often skulk behind the plea of
spirituality of worship, and that the heart is all that God desires.

III. They are essehtlai. to the welfare of ant Chuboh. 1. Strength must
he there. Not necessarily the strength of wealth, or intellect, or social rank, but
spiritual strength — that strength which springs fi:om a firm and living faith universally
and tenaciously held, manifesting itself in conscientious adherence to the truth and
unsullied righteousness of life, and nourished by fervent prayer and diligent use of all
the means of grace. If such strength be wanting, then the glory of that Church has
departed, and her decay and dissolution and degradation are at band. Ecclesiastical
organization and money and property may keep up the scaffolding and outworks of
such Church for a while, but ere long they too wUl fail, and the Church must die.



324 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. xovi. 1— 1».

But with such spiritual strength, the gates of hell cannot prevail against it. 2. And
there must be ieauty also. " The beauty of holiness," in which we are bidden " worship
the Lord " (ver. 9). By this we understand that moral and spiritual beauty, such as
were pre-eminent in our Lord ; that winsomeness and grace, that attractiveness of love
and pity and compassionate helpfulness, that beautiful grace of which St. Paul in
1 Cor. xiii. has so much to say, that sweet reasonableness and evident sincerity, and
that holy peace and joy which union with Christ imparts, — such is the beauty, the
only real beauty, which should be in the Church of the living God.

IV, And they should ohabactbrizk the temple of the soul. 1. Strength
born of faith and love, which holds the soul true to Christ and causes it to be rooted
like the oak, and grounded like the deep foundations of a temple, so that it can never
be moved. 2. Then heauty. The superstructure, fair in form and symmetrical, that
arrests the attention and awakens the delight of tlie beholder — that holy beauty of
Christ-like character, which, with strength also, he is waiting and willing to impart to
every faithful soul.— S. C.

Ver. 8. — "Bring an offering, and come into his courts." This psalm is one continuous
appeal for all to render praise unto the Lord. Not men alone, though they, of course,
chief of aU, are to join in the song unto the Lord; but the heavens, the earth, the sea,
the fields, the trees, — aU are to testify to their Creator's praise. And the psalm tells of
a threefold expression of this joy in" God. 1. The song. All are to join in; no stopping
to inquire into the motives, but all are to sing (ver. 1). It will be good even for evil
men, as well as the people of God, to unite in his praise. It may help them to pass over
to the side of God's people. 2. Preaching. The very idea of missions as here set forth
is the overflowing, the exuberance, of the Church's joy. So only can missions really
succeed (see homily on ver. 3). 3. Offerings. Of these we would specially speak.
For our text lays down—

I. The duty of offeeino to God. 1. 2%e witnesses to this will of God are numerous.
(1) The patriarchs. See their sacrifices. Noah's offerings. Abraham's tithes (Gen. xiv.
20). Jacob's vow (Gen. xxviii. 22). (2) The Jews. The tithes they had to pay amounted
to nearly a third of their income. The treasury was a constituent part of the temple, and
large sums were continually cast in there (Mark xii. 41 — 43). (3) The early Church.
They had a common fund (Acts ii, 44, 45), Paul and Barnabas (Acts xi. 29, 30) gathered
for the poor of Jerusalem. Paul from the Corinthians (1 Cor. xvi, 1), Christ said,
" It ia more blessed to give than to receive " (see parable of unjust steward, Matt. xxiv.
6, etc.). 2. The need of it is so great. Think of the multiplied objects which call for
such offerings. The Church of God needs such aid for the maintenance of her
ministers, her fabric, her mi&sions, and her varied religious agencies. The poor rightly
claim our help. If we have not compassion for them, how dwelleth the love o( God
in us? Our own spiritual life demands that we make such offerings. The only way
to overcome that idolatry of money which seduces so many is to give it away in wise
and Christian manner. If we hoard and keep it, the love of it will drive out the love
of God.

II. The manneb of fulfilldto this duty. 1. Presenting it in the house of Ood
when we come to worship. This was the custom of the Jews (see 1 Chron, xvi, 1).
Also of the early Christian Church (see 1 Cor. xvi. 1 ; 2 Cor. viii. and ix.). St. Paul'g
argument on this matter is very interesting and noteworthy. He was very anxious to
relieve his own countrymen; to fulfil his own promise (Gal. ii. 10); to prove the
reality of the faith of the Gentile Churches and their love to their Jewish brethren,
and thus to heal the breach that so sadly severed the Jewish and Gentile Churches.
Hence he was very anxious about this collection, and hence, also, he would be sure to
seek out the best means for securing it. Hence he directed that there should be the
weekly Lord's day storing for this end (1 Cor. xvi. 2). Now, as this plan is so good,
and no other is so commended to us, we may regard it as having special claim on
our attention. 2. For it has great advantages. It takes away the temptation to
neglect of this duty which arises from : (1) The largeness of the offering asked. What
is given week by week is not felt as when a great sum is asked for all at once,
1,2) Delay of offering. (3) Infrequency. (4) Dependence upon the excitement of the
moment Moreover : (6) It makes worship more rtal. (6) It is far more productive



PS. xovi. 1— 13.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 325

(7) It is a witness-bearing for Christ. (8) It nourishes our own spiritual life. But,
of course, this especial manner of offering is not obligatory, though it has especial
sanction.

III. The motive. Love to Christ (2 Cor. viii. 9). That is the only worthy and
reliable motive. Others are sure to break down sooner or later, and to miserably fail
in securing the end sought after. Let Christ possess a man's heart, all else will go
along with that. — S. C.

Ver. 1. — The call for a new song. "The series of psalms to which this belongs is by
nearly all commentators a^isigued to the period immediately succeeding the seventy
years' captivity. The joyous feelings, the glorious expectations, the marked repetition
(both in matter and style) of the later prophecies of Isaiah, their rhythmical character
suggesting that they were intended for liturgical pur[]Oses, coiubine to identify them
with this period." Take this idea of historical connection, and the newness of the song
called for is at once explained. God is spoken of as beginning to reign, and as coming
to judge, or rule ; and this precisely represents the feeling of the returned exiles, who
were setting up a new theocracy. They were restoring, beginning again, their theocratic,
social, and religious system. The altar of burnt offering was new. The temple was
new. The order of worship was new. And if the Divine relations were not new, they
were at least fresbly realized. On the call to song, H. W. Beecher suggestively says,
" The wings God has given us to fly up to him are the wings of song. The lyrical
element is the best expression of feeling. All forms of experience have been touched
in the poetry of chant and song. Singing is the process by which iatellectual proposi-
tions can be converted into emotion and heart-expression." The point for us is this —
a new age finds a new song to God. Illustrate from the Book of Eevelation, which
presents the white-robed host singing a new song, because no song can ever have risen
before for a completed redemption. The Christian's is a new song, because it is that
fresh thing, a soul's joy in God revealed and apprehended in Christ Jesus. Illustrate
the following topics from the circumstances of the returned exiles.

I. New subjects fob sokq. Divine faithfulness. Divine mercy. Renewed national
life. Freedom to worship God according to the dictates of their own conscience.
Signs of Divine favour. Eealization of the Divine presence. We can always find
subjects for new songs in our new and ever-varying circumstances.

II. New forms of sonq. Every generation makes its own hymns. Davidic psalms
may be partly used by the exiles ; but the thoughts and emotions of the hour called
for an immediate and natural expression. The thoughts of God in these psalms are
new. Note especially the idea of God as " coming to reign."

III. New feelings to express in sono. Contrast the depressed moods of the time
of captivity, and Has joyous moods of the time of restoration. In Babylon they hung
their harps on the willows, and could not sing. When back at Jerusalem they called
for harp and song with which to praise the Lord, — R. T.

Ver. 3. — The law of Christian missions. The " heathen " of the Old Testament
match the " Gentiles " of the New, Testament. " Gentiles," as our Lord used the term,
means " those who do not know of God as the Father in heaven." And " heathen "
means " those who do not know God as the One, the Spiritual, and the Holy." But
in referring such an- expression as this to missions, we are using for our purpose the
language, not precisely discerning the psalmist's meaning. In desiring that God's
glory should be declared among the heathen, the retiuned exile did not think of, or
wish for, the conversion of the heatlien to the faith and service of Jehovah. He only
wanted everybody to know of his new liberty and dignity, and of the great things his
God was doing for him. It was as if Englishmen went everywhere to tell what great
things God had done, and was doing, for England. Active effort to convert the world
to Judaism has never been made, and is not being made now. The truly missionary
idea is introduced by Christianity. There is a sense in which the exclusiveness of the
Jews was broken down by the Captivity. Jews were then scattered over the earth ;
but they were only silent missionaries wherever they went. They witnessed for
Jehovah by what they were, rather than by what they said. Wherever they went
they founda sort of belief in one God, clouded over by an active belief in many gods.



826 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. xovi. 1— 18.

Thii U the cbaracteristic of all heathenism ; and we too readily miss seeing the idea of
one supreme God, which is really the root-relisious idea of man everywhere ; the idea
to whioh the higher revelation makes its appeal. The law of Chrisliian missions, and
missions in all ages, is this — If any man has a higher and better view of Qoi than his
neighbour, he is bound to tell it to his neighbour.

L The Jew had a betteb view of God than his NEiaHBOiTBS. Take especially
the Jew of the Restoration, to whom the primary truths concerning God seemed as &
freshly revealed. He knew of three truths that are fundamental to right conceptions
of God. 1. The unity of God. 2. The spirituality of God. 3. The holiness of God.
Show that these were higher views of God than were entertained in either Babylon or
among the neighbouring Samaritans, Ammonites, etc. What responsibility, then,
rested on the Jew, specially to show that good doctrine bears good fruit ?

II. The Christian has a bbttbe view of God than his NBiaHBOURS. He knows
God in the face of Jesus, through the Sonship of Jesus as the Father, as the Forgiver
of sin, and as the Forgiver on the basis of one ever-acceptable sacrifice for sin. — B. T.

Ver. 6. — The God of heaven. This seems to have been the Babylonian name for the
God of the Jews. " Lord of heaven ; " " King of heaven." It expresses the apprehen-
sion guned by the Babylonians (see Nebuchadnezzar's acknowledgment, Dan. v. 37).
It intimates that Jehovah, though an all-powerful God, was in no sense a local God,
with a limited kingdom and ordinary earthly claims. To call God the "God of
heaven " is at least making a beginning towards the realization of him as spiritnal.

I. Gods of earth. Explain the strictly local and limited area of the kingdoms
possessed by idol-gods. Bel belonged to Babylon; Ea to Egypt. There were " gods
of the hills and gods of the valleys." There were distinct conceptions of, and
representations of, Baal for each country and almost for each city. Jealous over their
own particular divinity, no missionary idea found place in the ancient world. Nobody
wanted to share his god with any one else. (A striking exception to this is found ic
the proselyting spirit of Jezebel.) Curiously, the god of the limited district was con-
ceived as almighty within his limits. Even when the world-conquering idea took
possession of nations, such as Assyria, Babylonia, Persia, Grecia, Borne, in no case did
propagating the religion become a primary inspiration. The conquerors freely left the
conquered their local religion. So we can see the force with which the local limitations
of the gods took possession of the ancient mind.

II. UoD OP HEAVEN. Observe the strong contrast. Jehovah is unlocalized, above
earth, and doming all the earth. It is impossible to express, not only the superiority,
but also the essential difference, of Jehovah in more brie'f and succinct terms. Down
on earth, a multitude of small spaces, each with a petty deity. Up above, ruling from
rim to rim, the one eternal God. The all-hallowing dome is heaven. This was more
strikingly apprehended when the prevailing idea was that earth was a flat surface,
with the blue heaven fitting to it like the cover of a dish. Work out these points
concerning the " God of heaven." 1. His forces are not exclusively material. He does
control the material, but he commands the spiritual. 2. His forces are working
universally. We can thiuk of no sphere in which we may not find their operation.
3. His forces claim for him universal recognition. See how the Christian revelation
has taken this figure for God, and glorified it. — R. T,

Ver. 8. — Offeringt associated with worship. Oriental custom demands that every
person seeking an audience with a king shall offer him a present. An Eastern traveller
writes, " It is counted uncivil to visit in this country without an offering in hand.
All great men expect it as a kind of tribute due to their character and authority, and
look upon themselves as affronted, and indeed defrauded, when this compliment is
omitted." For illustration, reference may be made to Saul, anxious about a present
for the man of God ; to the gifts, gold, frankincense, and myrrh, offered by the Magi
to the infant Saviour; and to the Malagasy custom known as making "hasina."
Offerings to the gods involve the heathen, oftentimes, in ruin, so exorbitant are the
demands made by the priests. The psalmist is full of the idea of God as the actual,
present, though unseen, King of the nation, and he is thinking of the offering as the
acknowledgment of allegiance, the outward ciign of loyalty. There is no idea of God's



M. xcvi. 1—13.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 327

needing offerings ; the psalmist thinks only of what is fitting on the part of the people.
Distinguish hetween taking an honourable share in the support of Christian worship,
and making offerings as a sign of loyalty. See imder what conditions offerings are still
acceptable, showing first how far the King-figure for God may be used by us.

I. Offebinqb fob God must be seasonable. That term includes two distinct
things : (1) proportionate ; (2) thoughtful. There may be times when an impulsive
gift is acceptable ; but as a rule no proper gift can be made to God save upon due
consideration of all our claims. God asks but a proportion of our time, our land, or
our labour. Our care should be to get and keep an honourable proportion. There is
some danger in our over- valuing mere impulsive acts. They " loom large " to our view.
Whereas the man who, thoughtfully estimating his means, sets aside his offering for
God, lays a far nobler gift on God's altar. It is a gift of mind, and not uf merely
excited feeling.

II. Offerings fob God must be made to match iNDiviDUAiiS. Two young pigeons
for a mother if she be poor. Two mites for a widow ; but gold for the rich. The gift
should match means and good will.

III. Offbbings fob God must be expressive of offebed self. To God there can
be no value in things. What he asks foi-, and can alone accept, is the spiritual offering
of the man himself — his will, his love. This can find expression in a material offering.
God will only receive the offering when it is the voice of the man. — R. T.

Ver. 9. — The essential feature of Qod^s worship. " worship the Lord in the beauty
of holiness." This is also read, "in the glorious sanctuary," and "in holy vestments."
The Authorized Version is the more poetic sentiment, and may therefore be preferred.
The expression is given in 2 Chron. xx. 21, where Jehosh&phat, in sen<iing forth his
army, " appointed singers who should praise the beauty of holiness." Holiness is the
key-note of the worship of Jehovah ; but it is the key-note of the worship of no other
god. " Had a medal been struck in praise of Jupiter, who is the best of the pagan
gods, on one side might have b^en engraved ' Almightiness, omnipresence, justice ; ' and
on the reverse, ' Caprice, vengeance, lust.' " But the association of beauty with holiness
now requires our attention. The best idea may be gained by thinking of ripe fruit ;
if it is really healthy and ripe, it cannot help having a Koom on. That bloom is the
beauty of ripeness. " Beauty is a combination of elements according to the laws of
harmony; the more beautiful the parts or elements, and the more perfect the har-
monious combination, the higher the beauty." Then we must find the elements that
go to make a worship so holy that, both in God's sight and in man's, it should be
beautiful. Worship that can be thought of as showing the "beauty of holiness"
must he —

I. Lawful. It may not be sufiSciently recognized that public worship was arranged
for, authorized. There is no room for self-will. There may be different views as to
the ultimate authority for forms of worship. If it is to be "holy," the elements of
mere self-willedness and pleasure must be excluded.

II. Pure. "Be ye clean that bear the vessels of the Lord." This was at once
typified and testified by the clean white linen garments of the priests, and by their
washing before engaging in their offices. Bodily purity did but represent the moral
purity God requires.

IIL SiNCEBE. This brings before us the condition of the will. God's great reproach
is levelled at the divided mind. That worship cannot be acceptable in which the man's
hand is one way and his heart is another. Worship is only ceremony and routine
unless a man's heart is in it. Absolute simple-mindedness is the heauty of worship,
the lloom on the frait.

IV. Chebbful. The psalmists constantly remind us of the joyousness of worship.
It excited high emotions. Lifted out of all drudgery to become a holy delight, we feel
still the " beauty of holiness " in God's glorious sanctuary and exalted worship. — R. T.

Vers. 11, 12. — Natwre-sympathies. There is a strange and wonderful response of
material nature to the spiritual moods of men. Faces may not change, but expressions
on faces change continually, and even seem different to different individuals. And so
nature keeps the same, but seems ever-varying to us, according as our moods are to it.



828 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. xcvi. 1— 13>

Lowth says on this Terse, "Nothing can excel that noble exultation of universal
nature, which has been bo often commended. Poetry here seems to assume the
highest tone of triumph and exultation, and to revel, if I may so express myself, in all
the extravagance of joy." Keep in mind that nature is represented as suffering in
consequence of the sin of man. It may well exult with man in the redemption which
uplifts out of suffering both him and it (Eom. viii. 20 — 23). In a very well-known
discourse, Dr. H. Bushnell illustrates these two propositions : (1) U-od has hidden
powers of music in things without life; (2) when they are used, in right distinctiooB
or properties of sound, they discoinrse what we know — what meets, interprets, and
works our feeling, as living and spiritual creatures.

, L NATnBE-sYMPATHiEs WITH MAN IN HIS INNOCENCE. Show the kin-uess between
the Garden of Eden and the man put into it.

II. Natdee-stmpathies with man in his fall. Bringing forth thorns, eto.
Ground cursed for man's sake. A well-known artist has a picture of Adam and Eve
after their fall. They are seated, in utmost distress, at a distance from each other,
and what seems to divide them is a hideously shaped tree, the trunk of which seems to
take almost demon form. The artist made nature kin to our fallen parents.

III. Natuee-sympathies with man in his moods. Illustrate tms by the darkness
which fell behind the cross of Jesus when he died. See also the effect of the shading
olives on Jesus in Gethsemane. Compare the harvest psalms — ^the corn, etc., shouting
for joy in response to the glad and thankful moods of men.

IV. Natube-stmfathies with man in his bedemftion. For illustration, seo
Isa. xi. 6 — 9, where the very beasts are poetically represented as affected by the peace
of eternal purity which one day shall come to men. — B. T.

Ver. 13. — The coming Judge. Compare the idea of God's coming to judge with the
basisaidea of all this series of psalms, that God was heginning to reign, setting up
again his kingdom among his restored people. Here the Judge is put poetically for
the King, because deciding cases, magistracy, is the main feature of Eastern kingship.
Absalom enticed the people from their allegiance to David by a half-veiled promise of
considerateness, if not favouritism, in the king's work of judging. The first thing
recorded of Solomon is an act of skilful judgment. The association of this passage
with a " day of judgment" is purely a Christian association. God the Judge is simply
God the active, present Buler and King. But we may see the element of judging as
punishing, in the verse, if we take the standpoint of the returned exiles; for any
intervention of God for the salvation of his people necessarily involves some judgment
on those from whom they are delivered ; and so the redeeming King is found to b&
also a Judge. Just as the idea of God's " coming to judge" endangered the .sense of
his actual presence and actual working as Ruler and Judge, so the idea of Christ's
second coming may be so entertained as to spoil the living sense of his actual presence
and abiding relations with his people. The idea of a continual appraisement of human
action, of a Divine judgment, with adequate rewards and punishments, as always going
on, is coming more and more into Christian thought, and is replacing the older idea of
the delegation of everything to a final assize-day. Two things are indicated in this
verse of the text, as characteristic of God's rule or judgment.

L It 18 etebnally bioht. " With righteousness shall he judge." Find the
absolute standard of right, and all God's kingly ways will be found in precise accord-
ance with it.

II. It is adapted to cuboumstanoeb. " With equity shall he judge.'' Equity is
righteousness applied to the Individual as placed in particular circumstances. — B. T.

Vers. 1 — ^13. — How and why Jehovah is to he worshipped. L With a nbw bono.
(Yer. 1.) Praise that shall celebrate the new revelation of himself, which he is about
to make in a new era of the world. Constantly new revelation.

XL By oklbbratino the satino wobs which God is doino in the wobld. (Ver.
2.) His coming to judge the people righteously, and thus to save them. Saving men
every day.

IIL By publishinq his ohabaoteb and wobk throuoh the whole eabtb. (Vers.
1, 3.) This is a strongly missionary psalm : " Among the heathen ; " "Among all people."



re. xcvii. 1 — 12.]



THE BOOK OP PSALMS.



329



IV. Beoaubb of his exclusive; Deity. (Vers, 4, 5.) The idol-gods of the nations
have so existence; an idol is nothing. But Jehovah is faithful and righteous and
omnipotent.

V. Because of the globt of his crbatite wobk. (Ver. 6.) " But the IJord made
the heayens."

VI. Because of hib manifestations of himself to tbue wobshippbbs. (Vers.
6 — 9.) He reveals his honour and majesty, shows them his beauty and strength.

VII. His biqhteous oovernment seoubes the obdeb and steadfastness of the
world. (Ver. 10.) Despotic kings and turbulent peoples seem to shake the world
and make it insecure — ^the moral world.

VIII. The tbue worshippbb feels that all natubb is in stmpatht with hib
DEVOTION. (Vers. 11, 12.) To him in his highest moods the heavens rejoice, and the
earth is glad ; the sea thunders forth the praises of God, and the trees of the forest
clap their hands; for all sea that God is coming forth to assume the supreme and
universal reign, — S.



EXPOSITION.



PSALM XOVII.



Another liturgical psalm on the advent of
Christ. The psalmist sees him take posses-
sion of his throne, but, this time, rather in
judgment than in meroy. His accession
is described with the usual features of a
theophany (vers. 1 — 6; comp. Pes. xviii.
7—15; 1. 3—6; Ixxvii. 14—19). The im-
pression made on the inhabitants of the
earth, whether idolatrous heathen (ver. 7),
or faithful Israelites (vers. 8, 9), is then
given. Finally, a practical lesson is drawn
from the event prophesied, viz. "Let the
Israel of Ood hate evil, and rejoice in the
Lord and in his holy Name" (vers. 10—12).
Metrically, the psalm consists of four
stanzas, each of three verses. There is
nothing in its contents to fix its date.

Ver. 1. — The Lord reigneth ; or, the Lord
has become King — has ascended his throne
(comp. Fss. zciii. 1; xcvL 10). Let the
earth rqoice. When God condescends to
appear on earth, the earth is bound to
rejoice. His coming cannot but improve
the condition of affaird. Let the multitude
of isles (literally, the many isles) be glad
thereof. Even " the i-iles " — the abode of
the Gentiles — are to feel joy, for they, too,
at whatever cost (ver. 3), will be benefited.

Ver. 2. — Clonds and darkness are round
atnnt him (comp. !Exod. xiz. 16, 18 ; Deut.
iv. 11; V. 22; 1 Kings viii. 12). The
" ditrknesB " does not belomg to the nature
of God, who " is Light, and in him is no
daikness at all" (1 John i. 5), but to the
inter-relationship between God and man,
in which are involved problems that man
cannot solve. Bighteousness and judgment
are the habitation of his throne; rather.



the fonndation of hit throne — ^the firm basis
on which it is immovably fixed.

Ver. 3. — A fire goeth before him. So
long as there is evil in the world, the " fire "
of God's wrath must necessarily " go before
him " at each theophany, to sweep the evil
from his path (see Isa. xlii. 25). It is in
this sense that "our God is a consuming
fire" (Heb. xii. 29). And bumeth up his
enemies reimd about (comp. Ps. 1. 8; Matt
xiii. 30).

Ver. i. — His lightnings enlightened the
world. Here the tenses ctiange from present
to past — not, however, that any past event
is alluded to, but merely to mark prophetic
certainty. The psalmist, rapt in vision,
sees the future as past. Lightnings play a
part in almost all theophanies (Exod. xix.
16 ; Job xxxvii. 1 — 5 ; Psa. xviii. 13 ; Ixxvii,
18, etc.). The earth saw, and trembled
(comp. Judg. V. 4 ; Pss. Ixviii. 8 ; cxiv. 7).

Ver. 5. — The hills melted like wax at the
presence of the Lord (comp. Judg. v. 5;
Isa. Ixiv. 1 ; Micah i. 4). The earth itself
is regarded as not only shaken (ver. 4), but
as melting and crumbling away at the
descent of God from heaven to earth (comp.
2 Pet. iiL 10). At the presence of the Lord
of the whole earth (comp. Josh. iii. 11, 13;
Micah iv. 13 ; Zech. iv. 14 ; vi. 5).

Ver. 6. — The heavens declare his right-
eousness (comp. Ps. 1. 6 ; Matt. xxiv. 29. 30).
By signs in the heavens it is proclaimed
that the Lord has come to judgment. And
all the people see (rather, have seen) his
glory; literally, aU the peoples; i.e. all the
nations of the earth (comp. ver. 1).

Ver. 7. — Confounded be aU they that
serve graven images, that boast themselves
of idols. Professor Cbeyne transposes this
verse and the next, but without any
necessity. It is quite natural that the
effect of the theophany on God's enemies
should be noted fira. The effect is that



330



THE BOOK OP PSALMS.



[ps. xovn. 1 — 12.



they are " oonfounded," or rather, eovered
with thame. The display of real Divine
power makes manifest the impotenoy of the
idols, and puts their worshippers to the
blush. Worship him, all ye gods. The
theophany is a call on the false gods to
worship the true God.

Yer. 8. — Zion heard, and was glad (oomp.
Ps. iWiii. 11). To Zion, the Church of
God, the company of his saints, the theo-
phany brings, not shame, but rejoicing.
The Iiord comes for their relief, for their
deliverance, for their exaltation. And the
daughters of Judah rejoiced. The "daughters
of Judah" are the other cities of Judeea
besides Jerusalem. In a Chrislian sense,
they maybe taken to represent the irregularly
organized Ohurches, which will participate
in the general joy of the faithful at Christ's
final coming. Because of thy judgments,
Lord. It does not show any vindictive feel-
ing, if the saints, persecuted so long, " rejoice "
when an end is put to their sufferings by
the final judgment of the wicked.

Ver. 9.— For thou, Lord, art high above
all the earth; rather, art the Most High
(eliun) above all the earth (see the Bevised
Version). Thou art exalted far above all
gods (comp. ver. 7, end see also Ps. Ixxxiii.
18). No comparison can be made between
Jehovah and the heathen gods. He ia
"exalted" far, far above them.

Ver. 10. — Te that love the Lord, hate
evil. The psalmist ends his strain with an
exhortation to the faithful — an exhortation.



first of all, to "hate evil." God hates evil
(Ps. xlv. 7) ; evil will separate them from
God, evil will be their destruction. There-
fore let them hate and abhor it. It ia
indifference to evil, that, more than anything
else, lays men open to the assaults of Satan.
He preserveth the souls of his saints, He
(i.e. Jehovah) watches tenderly over the
souls of his saints — his holy loving ones,
and preserves them in being, keeps them
from destruction, and delivereth them out
of the hand of the wicked.

Ver. 11.— Light is sown for the righteous
(oomp. Ps. oxii. 4, " Unto the upright
there ariseth light in the darkness "). God
sheds the rays of his grace on the path of
the righteous man, enlightens his under-
standing, and illumines his spirit perpetually.
And gladness for the upright in heart.
Together with "light," he sheds abroad
"gladness," the irrepressible joy which
comes from a sense of his favour and
protection.

Ver. 12. — Bejoioe in the Lord, ye righteous.
Such being the blessedness of the righteous,
they are finally exhorted to " rejoice in the
Lord," t.e. to show forth their gratitude to
God in psalms and hymns of joy (comp.
Pss. xxxii. 11; xxxiii. 1 — 3), and to give
thanks to him at the remembrance of his
holiness; or rather, to give thanks to hi»
holy menmrial, which is the same as giving
thanks to his Name (oomp. Fs. xxx. i, and
the comment ad loo.').



HOMILETICS.

Ver. 1. — Ood^s sovereignty. " The Lord reigneth." To a thoughtful, loving, earnest
Christian heart, the spectacle of prevailing disorder, wrong, misery, in this world (to-day
as in past ages) is a source of sometimes almost unbearable wonder and grief. Then
it is unspeakable consolation to remember "the Lord reigneth" (Ps. xi. .3, 4). As
from his own sin and troabie he takes refuge in God's love; so from the apparent
triumph of evil, in God's righteous rule. God's Kingship or sovereignty involves these
three : (1) supreme power ; (2) rightful authority ; (3) exercise of this power and
authority in actual government.

I. SuPEBME powEB. " If wc Speak of strength, lo ! he is strong." " With God all
things are possible." No design, no emergency, to which his power is not equal. He
is the Source — the Creator — of all other power. The forces of nature, the wills and
faculties of men — of all creatures, lower or higher than men — have their root and being
in him ; hang on his sovereign will (Ps. xxxiii. 8, 9). We must not think of God's
power apart from his wisdom (Ps. cxlvii. 5). Nor of these apart from his love (Ps.
cxlv. 9, 10). Blind unconscious force — the universe of atheism — is the most frightful
of all conceptions. Force guided by loveless wisdom is an impossible idea, for it would
have no motive for exercise. But it is " the Lord " who reigns ; and " God is love."

II. EiGHTFUL AUTHOBiTT. The righteous self-evident claim to absolutc and Universal
obedience. Power without right would be tyranny. Bight without power would be
an empty shadow — crown without sceptre. The right to obedience, and power to
enforce it (or punish disobedience), together make up authority. Therefore to those
attributes of power, wisdom, and love, we must add righteousness. " The sceptre of his
kingdom is a right sceptre." While nature and Scripture proclaim that he does reign.



M. xcvii. 1—12.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 331

reason and conscience declare that he ought to reign. 1. The right of absolute owner-
ship is his (Ps. 0. 3). He lias created us. 2. Of infinite hene/action. All we have
or hope for, or ever can enjoy, is his free gift. 3. Of perfect and sole fitness, infinite
<ihility, to rule the uniTewe he has created and owns. Knowledge which nothing,
great or small, escapes. Power which upholds all in being, and which, if he please to
«xert it, none can resist. Goodness which no demand can overtax.

III. AoTCAL BXBROISE OP GOVERNMENT. (Ps. ciii. 19.) "He doeth according to
his will," etc. (Dan. iv. 36). He has bound all nature with a chain of love which
natural forces and existences cannot even seek to break. He has ^iven to man and
other spiritual creatures, with reason to apprehend duty, and conscience to approve our
fulfllnnent or condemn our neglect, a will endued with the mysterious power of
disobeying his law, resisting his wilL Without this we should be incapable of willing,
reasonable, loving, conscientious obedience. Men therefore do disobey God ; and the
direct result of disobedience is the misery and death which fill our world (Jas. 1.
13 — 15). But man's disobedience cannot relax God's authority, or alter the fact that
over all he reigns and rules. And this supreme authority is in the hands once nailed
to the cross (John v. 22, 23 ; Matt, xxviii. 18 ; Eph. i. 21—23 ; Rev. v. 12, 13).

Ver. 10.^2%e hatred of sin. "Ye that love the Lord, hate evil." On the darkest,
most puzzling of all questions — the origin of evil — the Bible leaves us quite in the
dark. Old and New Testaments are alike silent. This would be very astonishing if
the purpose of Scripture were to make deep philosophers or subtle theologians. We
cease to wonder when we understand, what people have come to see more clearly in
these days than formerly, that the object of God's Word is to " make wise unto
salvation ; " to teach us to know God and to know ourselves, and to bring us home
to God. In a word, it is the very same as the angel declared to be the purpose of the
Incarnation, "He shall save his people from their sins" (Matt. i. 21). Therefore,
while the Bible is dumb as to all questions of curiosity, it has a plain answer to such
practical questions as, " What is sin ? How ought we to regard it ? " Sin in conduct
is disobedience to God; in character, unlikeness to God. The first sin was an act of
deliberate disobedience. Sin in every form is " that abominable thing " which our
Father hates. Therefore we ought to hate it with perfect hatred. " Ye that love the
Lord, hate evil 1 " We may take these words (1) as a description ; (2) as a command.

I. Hatred of sin a ohabaotbsistic fbatdbb op those who love God. It is
to be expected of them ; is peculiar to them ; is a mark by which they may be known.
It may be objected that this hatred of evil is felt by multitudes who make no pretence
to love God. Every just man hates injustice — to others as much as to himself. Every
benevolent man hates cruelty ; every honest man, knavery ; every sober man, intemper-
ance ; every one of pure life, impurity. All this without reference to God. This is
so ; and just here lies the difference. The Bible deals with evil not merely as wrong
done to man, but first and foremost as tin against God. So the sinner is taught to seo
it (Ps. li. 1 — 4), So the saint laments it in others (Ps. cxix. 136, 158). So God
regards it, both in judging and in pardoning (Ps. 1. 21 ; Exod. xxxiv. 6, 7 ; Hos. vii. 2 ;
Pb. xxxii. 1, 2). To set forth the complete teaching of Scripture on this would ba
practically to quote the whole Bible. If we wanted a title lor the Scriptures, we might
write on the back, " The story of sin, and how God deals with it." Real hatred of sin,
then, springs from the Holy Spirit's teaching. An ungodly man may hate and despise
many kinds of sin ; but not as sin — breaking God's Law, dishonouring God, hateful in
his sight, inconsistent with love to him. So also an ungodly heart may admire and
delight in many kinds of goodness ; but not because goodness and holiness are God's
likeness, the fulfilment of his Law, and pleasing to him. Love of what God loves ;
hatred of what God hates ; — tMs is the supreme test of character ; in one word, sympathy
with God (John xiv. 21, 24). Our Saviour is in this, as in all else, our perfect Model
His habitual calm and gentleness, the stress he lays on doing good to those who hate
or injure us, and his meek submission to immeasurable wrong, are apt to conceal from
lis his unsparing condemnation of sin. Ko denunciations of Old Testament prophets
Are more severe than our Lord's warnings concerning the impenitent cities, the hypo-
■oritical Pharisees, the guilty city of Jerusalem, the unfaithful servants. Nothing la
the Bible is more terrible than his words to those who have tried to combine religious



332 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. xcvii. 1—12.

profession with a sinful life : " I never knew you ; depart from me, ye that work
iniquity."

II. Therefore this command combs to us, we mat sat, with the whole Bibl»
AT ITS BACK — all the motives of the gospel added to all the motives of the Law.
The words of the old Hebrew psalmist should have tenfold force in the ears and hearts
of Christian believers, " Te that love the Lord, hate evil." Reasons for hating sin are-
to be found in every page of human history ; in every home and heart throughout the
world. It is hateful as the source, directly or indirectly, of all the misery which
pervades the world. Hateful as degrading, deforming, debasing, human nature; for
which reason sin is so constantly represented in Scripture by the loathsome image of
defilement (Job ix. 30, 31). Hateful because "the end of those things is death"
(Rom. vi. 21). What the Bible precisely means, what Otoi means, by the death of a
soul has been of late years fiercely controverted. I feel no warrant or wish to dogmatize.
I only point out here that the tendency of sin, unforgiven, unrepented, unremoveu, is
to the extinction of all that is worth calling " life." Even one tingle sin, lying, e.g., or
pride, or gluttony, if it were to gain absolute unchecked mastery, would render the
man hopelessly selfish, blind to duty, incapable of nobleness, unfit for society, unfit, in
a word, to live. But it is not by any or all of these reasons that we are here urged to
" hate evil." It is by hve. " Ye that love the Lord." Love to God and love of evil
are the two most irreconcilable opposites in the universe. One must be fatal to the
other. We could not love Gori, at least not aright, did we not know that " his work is-
perfect," etc. (Deut. zxxii. 4). The supreme truth that " God is love " involves his
eternal abhorrence of sin, for sin is the deadly foe of love. The opposite of love is
selfishness ; and sin and selfishness are so closely connected that some of the deepest
thinkers have reckoned them identical. Perhaps it is true to say that the essence of
sin is want of love to God ; and where love is absent, selfishness rushes in to fill the^
void. Accordingly, the great crowning proof of God's love is declared to be that which
is at the same time God's crowning condemnation of sin, " the death of his Son " (Rom.
V. 10). Our Lord himself declares this to be a new and glorious reason for his Father's-
love (Isa. X. 17). The crucial test of his own love (John xv. 13). Of God's love to the
world (John iii. 16 ; 1 John iv. 9, 10). In sight of the cross let us learn how to
" hate eviL"



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Vers. 1 — 12. — Jehovah is King. The subject of this psalm, as of the whole group to
which it belongs, is the reign of Christ. Some glorious revival in the Jewish Church
so uplifted the thought of the writer of these psalms that he sees, as if already present,
that blessed advent and reign of the Lord which, whilst it must be the confusion of
his advers^aries, must also be the everlasting joy of his faithful people. We observe —

L The affirmation of these fsalms — that Jehovah is King. " The Lord reigneth."
The writer has no doubt of it at all. Therefore: 1. He bids the whole earth rejoice,
even to its uttermost parts, the scattered islands of the sea. 2. He admits that much
mystery remains. " Clouds and darkness are," etc. 3. Nevertheless, he affirms that
righteousness and judgment are the habitation of his throne. The Lord is enthroned,
and righteousness and judgment shall be habitually upheld. 4. Nature bea/rs witness-
to him. Lightnings, earthquakes, volcanoes, the earth melting like wax, symbolize
his majesty and power. 5. The heathen are confounded, whilst his people,for abundant
reasons (ver. 9), rejoice.

II. The general denial of this affirmation, which is met with in our day.
There are not a few who say that the Lord will reign ; but that, as yet, the state of
the world is getting worse and worse, and will do so until the coming of the Lord,
when he will brmg all evil to an end. They look forward to that second coming of
the Lord as the great hope of the Church. Hence it is only as having tne ngnt and
the power to reign, and as now and then manifesting that power, that, at present, the
Lord can be said to reign. They believe that the Lord shall reign, not that he does.
But note —

III, The New Testament confirmation of this psalm. 1. It everywhere dedaret-



M. xcvii. 1— 12.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 333

that the Lord is King, is reigning now. Because such is the just conclusion from its
-constant statements that the coming of Christ was " at hand ; " that generation in
which our Lord lived was not to pass away until the coming of his kingdom. Some
standing around him — so he declared — should not taste of death till they had seen him
■coming in glory. And with this all the teachings of the apostles agree. They tell of
the Lord's coming as " at hand." They believed that some of them should remain and
be alive at his coming. " The Isingdom of heaven is at hand," n as the burden of their
preaching j they went everywhere proclaiming that, and the coming of the Lord as its
inauguration. But if our Lord has not come, then how are his words, and the words
■of his apostles, whom the Holy Spirit was to lead into all truth, to be understood?
We shrink from saying that they were mistaken, and, unwittingly, taught error.
Therefore we believe that he has come, and that he is indeed and in truth reigning
Jiow. 2. And the objection — Why, then, is evil so rampant f — is met by St. Paul's
statement in 1 Cor. xv. 23 — 26. There the reign of Christ is plainly declared, and
tbat " he must reign till he hath put," etc. (ver. 25), evidently implying that, though
he doth reign, yet there will be enemies still to be subdued, and this will be only a
gradual process. His coming was not to put an end all at once, in a moment, to all
'evil;^but it should ultimately be done. 3. And this is still being done. Let the
laws and customs of Christian nations tell. They are evil enough in many parts still,
but will any one dare to say that the lot of humanity is as dark now as it was in our
Lord's day ? Has he done nothing for us ? Who will say that ? And let the growth
■and increased parity of the Church — far short, doubtless, of what they should and will
be — also tell. And the Lord's work by his Spirit in the individual believing souL
Are we not conscious that he is more and more putting all our spiritual foes under bis
feet ? Therefore we believe that the Lord has come, and that he reigneth.

IV. The blessed eesults op this belief. 1. 2%e need for twisting the Scriptures
■is taken away. We can read them in their plain and obvious meaning. 2. The infi'ld's
■taunt is silenced. Gibbon sneers at the Christian's belief, taking it for granted that the
Lord has not come. And many to-day base their unbelief on the glaring contradiction
between the Scriptures and the doctrine of so many Christians that Christ has not yet
come. 3. We are not fighting a losing hatile. The state of the world is not darkening
drear — as so many say — but brightening. The Church has not to wait for, but to
rejoice in, his presence. 4. Death, in the old dread meaning of the word, is abolished.
6. Satan is judged, fallen, condemned. We, whilst trusting in Christ, need have no
fear. The Lord is King. — S. 0.

Ver. 1. — " The Lord reigneth." On this truth we observe^

L It was the faith of all Holy Sobiptube. The Law, the Prophets, the Psalms
— these especially — the Gospels, the Epistles, and the Bevelation, all alike declare this
faith, and in varied form utter their " Alleluia, for the Lord God omnipotent reigneth."

II. This faith is commended to us by its neveb-failino pbuitfulnkss in all
MANNEB OF GOOD. Some beliefs which men have long and largely held have died away,
and men have willingly let them die ; but this faith is too blessed that we should
lightly let it perish. It imparts peace to the mind amid all the vicissitudes of life ;
vigour to the will, strengthening it for strenuous action ; and power for the help and
comfort of our fellow-men.

III. It is, nevebtheless, obeatly doubted and denied. 1. In some because of
the sad and insoluble problems of this present life. Life seems to them an inextricable
tangle, not worth living, all vanity and vexation of spirit. 2. In others, the teachings
of science seem not only to remove Qoi so far away, but throw doubt on his existence
altogether. 3. In others, the increased sensitiveness to human suffering has caused the
mind to recoil from doctrines and beliefs which were unquestioningly held by our fore-
fathers, and the sight of the mass of unrelieved misery which crushes beneath its awful
weight the multitudes of mankind in aU ages and lands has begotten the dark doubt in
minds not a few, whether there be an omnipotent and beneficent God at all. Perhaps
men's doubts of this faith were never more widespread than they are now.

rV. But its bvidbnces, notwithstandino, abb evebywhbbb. 1. In the natural
•world, the power, wisdom, and beneficence of the Creator are, in spite of many mysteries,
■«learly to be seen (see Drummond's 'Ascent of Man'). 2. In the order of Ood's



334 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. xcvii. 1—12.

providence, when men will obey its laws. 3. In the history of the Ohurch. 4. In the
experience of the individual believing soul.

v. And this faith mat be attained to by whosoeveb will. The path is—
obedience. " He that doeth my will shall know of the doctrine," etc. Befuse to
cherish doubt. " I will trust, and not be afraid." — S. 0.

Ver. 10. — Good haters. These are sadly wanted. Evil is not hated as it ought to be,
as in this verse it is commanded to be. The world and the Ohurch alike are suffering
from need of those who hate well. The world is left without guidance, and the Church
without strength, or honour, or joy.

I. Thebe are uant who hate keitheb oood kob evil. L 2%e^ do not hate
goodness. They would be shocked to be told they did. They often say fine things
about it, and, like Herod with John the Baptist, do " many things " because of it. They
do not practise it much — never, unless it is conventional and in good form. Still, they
do not hate it. It would be almost better if they did. For then they could not
deceive themselves as now they do. They imagine all is well with them, simply
because they do not openly oppose goodness. Though not with it, they are, so they
flatter themselves, not against it. It was specially to such that our Lord spoke hit
stern, solemn word, " He that is not with me is against me." They are the would-be
neutrals. Our Lord likens them to the " house swept and garnished," from which one
devil is gone out, but who soon comes back with seven others worse. The publicans
and harlots, who know and feel their sin, go into the kingdom of heaven before such.
2. And assuredly they do not hate evil. If it be very gross and flagrant, they will
condemn it, but if it comes to them in plausible and specious garb, as it generally does,
they make excuses for it, and allow it both in themselves and others. The devil has
it pretty much his own way so far as these people are concerned. He fears none but
those who hate evil.

II. But those who loye the Lobd must hate evil. 1. /( stands to reason.
Such hatred of evil is but the necessary consequence and concomitant of the love of the
Lord ; where the one is, the other is also, 2. X%ey will do so always and everywhere.
Most and first of all in themselves. Not only in its outward manifestations, but iu its
secret spring — the heart from whence it proceeds. It is of no use fulminating against
evil in others whilst we cherish it in ourselves. This they deeply feel, and hence their
perpetual prayer is for the " clean heart." And they will hate evil in others also.
They will not connive at it, nor in any way countenance it ; their lives will be a witness
and protest against it, they will be " the salt of the earth."

III. The motives that ubqe them aee full op fobce. I. Sin it the curse of
humanity. Its steps are blood-marked all through the world's history. It " brought
death into the world, and all our woe ; " and as it was, so it is still. 2. It slew our
Lord. How would we feel towards the murderer of our dearest friend ? 3. Whenever
we in any degree allow it in ourselves, it weakens and humiliates us, and brings darkness
into our souls. 4. It is life or death with us. If we do not destroy it, it will destroy
us. 6. It robs us of power over others, save to do them harm.

IV. But this hatred of evil needs to be dilisbntlt cherished. For we are
in peril of getting ui-ed to it, and so of acquiescing in it as a thing that cannot be
helped. Therefore ; 1. Pray the Holy Spirit to Jill you with the love of Christ.
2. To reveal you to yourself. 3. Walk in the light. 4. Confess at once if you have
sinned. 5. Openly commit yourself on the Lord^s side. 6. Attack evil wherever
possible. 7. Pray without ceasing. — S. C.

Ver. 11. — The seed of light. The sacred writers often use strange metaphors; as
here, light is said to be " sown for the righteous." Milton uses the same figure of the
dew —

** Now Morn, her rosy steps in th' eastern olime
Advancing, sowed the earth with Orient pearL"

But let us get beneath the strange fi^rure, and ask —

I. What DOES it MEAN? 1. What is meant by light f It is a constant symbol for
joy, gladness (Esth. viii. 16 ; Ps. xxvii. 1, etc.). And, on the other hand, sorrow ia
likened to darkness. 2. What does the word " sown " mean f It is a very sugge«t»v»



P8. xcvn. 1— 12.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 836

word. It teaches that the Beed of joy is : (1) Scattered abroad. And so it is for G> id's
people; they find it everywhere, and often in most unlikely places. As Paul and Silas
in their dungeon at Fhilippi. (2) For a time out of sight. The seed, when sown, is so.
See this in our coal-beds. Light is sown there. Let there be the application of a due
amount of heat, and the light will flash forth that was sown by the sun long ages ago.
And in like manner, the grace of God has stored up joy and gladness in places where
you would never have looked fur thern. Light is sown in them, and, though now out
of sight, will in due time break forth (Ps. cxxvi. 5). Then (3) certainly not lost.
Sometimes it seems as if our light had gone from us tor ever. But it is not sc ; the
losses, bereavements, trials of all kinds which darkened our life, they are but the
furrows of the field into which the seed has been cast, and by which it is for the
time buried. But as the farmer does not count his seed sown as seed lost, but quite
otherwise, so should our thought be. (4) Bat is in the care and keeping of God.
(5) Will come back multiplied. (6) And glorified (cf. 1 Cor. xv. 42 — 44). We are
wont to speak of "God's acre," the old and beautiful name for our churchyards, and
they are full of sown light. But all our life is a field thus sown. And there are many
harvests, the resurrection morn chief of them all. Yet other fields are the Holy
Scriptures, God's providence, the Holy Spirit's work. Light is sown for the righteous
in all these. But the question will arise —

II. Is IT ALL TBUB ? And we reply : 1. 2%e order of nature seems to affirm it.
How often has the righteous career been trampled upon and apparently destroyed, but
it has sprung up again I 2. The Scriptwres assert it unhesitatingly, and furnish per-
petual proof, that the light of the righteous is never lost, but only sown preparatory to
a blessed harvest. 3. And our heart's deepest convictions confirm it. We could not
live without this faith.

III. What then ? 1. The instincts of our nature are not mocked. We were made
for the light, ibr blessedness, and the righteous shall realize it. 2. What a terrible
thing that any should be self-excluded — as the ungodly are — from the number of those
for whom this word is spoken 1 3. Be patient when some of your light is taken from
you. It is wanted for seed. 4. Yield your hearts to Christ, that by his blessed Spirit
he may make them righteous. 6. Look on to the harvest. — S. C.

Ver. 11. — The seed of light. (Another outline.) The text leads us to consider —

I. Whence what lioht of gladness and jot we havb has oomb. The seed
was sown : 1. At the Creation, 2. In Qod's plan of providence. 3. In the gift of Christ.
4. In the ministry of the Holy Spirit in the Church, the Scriptures, and in our own soul.

II. Where what of light wb have lost ib gone. 1. Into Qod's keeping. 2. As
seed. 3. For increase and ylory.

III. Whitheb we must look fob what we would havb comb back. 1. In the
way of submission to Qod's will. (1 Pet. v. 6.) 2. To the Holy Spirit's work in our
souls. 3. To the unfolding of God's providence. 4. In the endeav(mt to help a/nd
comfort others. 5. To the resurrection morn, and the heavenly home. — S. 0.

Ver. 12. — Giving thanks for God's holiness. The psalm tells of the Lord coming in
majesty and righteousness to judge the world. And here at the end of the psalm the
writer remembers this judgment and the holiness which characterized it, and bids all
righteous men rejoice.

I. We are commanded to do this — to " give thanks at the remembrance of his
holiness." 1. " His holiness." It means not alone his righteous deeds, but yet more
his righteous character ; not alone for what he does, but for what he is in himself. He
cannot be tempted of evil, cannot be moved away from perfect righteousness. God is
holy in all his ways. 2. We are to give thanks for this. We are ready to give thanks for
God's providential love and for his redeeming grace ; but for his holiness we commonly
cherish reverence and awe rather than joyful praise. This is wrong, and we are bidden
here rejoice and give thanks. 3. And this whenever we remember his holiness. We do
so in retrospect, looking back upon the righteous acts of the Lord. And we do so in
prospect, anticipating the time when his will shall be done on earth as in heaven. We
are to stay ourselves on the faith that he cometh to judge the earth, and that he shall
judge the people righteously.



336 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. xcvn. 1— 12.

II. It 18 ASSUMED THAT WE ABE RIGHTEOUS. Such, in the first part of the verse,
are distinctly appealed to. For only such can obey this command. To the ungodly
the holiness of God is hateful ; it is to him a constant and awful threatening, a dark
cloud lowering over his life ; he shrinks from coming into contact with it. How
fearful are, often, the death-beiis of such men ! And until we are regenerate, and know
that we are accepted in Christ, the holiness of God must excite in us fear rather than
thanksgiving.

III. And that there aee oood reasons for such thanksgivino. And there are;
for: 1. The holiness of God is the sure pledge and guarantee of our redemption.
The atoning work of Christ, on which our redemption rests, is no plan whereby €h>d'g
love may be satisfied at the expense of his holiness. For nowhere is that holiness more
conspicuous than in that atonement. It magnifies the Law, and makes it honourable
as nothing else could (cf. Rom. viii. 1, 2). The tables of the Law in the ark of the
covenant, on which the mercy-seat rested, symbolized the eternal fact that God's mercy
rests on righteousness ; his love is sustained by and based upon his holiness. 2. And it
is the assurance of our own holiness, that we shall be made like him. For whatever be
the character of any man, one sure effect of it will be that he seeks to make his
surroundings like himself. And so the holy God must seek to make his people holy;
he cannot be satisfied until they are holy as he is holy. 3. And of ow eternal blessed-
ness. Could sin enter heaven, it would cease to be heaven — it would be the world over
again. But nothing can enter heaven that defiletb. " Without holiness no man shall
see the Lord." 4. And of the kingdom of God upon earth. The curse wrought by
the Fall shall be banished by the redemption of God. Not in us alone, but in humanity
at large, shall God's blessed holy will for our sanctification be done on earth as it is in
heaven.

IV. And that there need be no reasons why ant of trs shouIiD not "oivb
THANKS AT," ETC. For the two essentials for our thus giving thanks are ours in Christ.
1. Tfe can he reconciled to God in him. Until we are we cannot be thankful for his
holineae. But if we will come away from our sins, and confess them, and believe in
him, then we shall be reconciled to God, and to us shall be given the new nature, the
regeneration, without which we cannot even see the kingdom of God. 2. And um
may he sanctified hy the Holy Spirit, Not forgiven only, but saved from sin itself
(see Ezek. xxxvi. 25, 27). And when this is done, then the very thoughts of our
heart will be changed, and whereas we could not heretofore do aught but tremble at
the remembrance of God's holiness, now we shall rejoice and give thanks.— S. C.

Ver. 2. — What God seem^, and what God i$. The figures of this verse are evidently
taken from the scenes connected with the giving of the Law on Mount Sinai. Then
" clouds and darkness " were the surroundings, and from these men might get a cursory
and an unworthy impression of God ; but then "justice and judgment" were declared to
be the " pillars of his throne," and if men would but go beyond the appearances, they
would apprehend God aright, and even discern the mission and tbe mystery of the
symbols in which he appeared to them.

I, What God bbbms to oub imperfect vision. What could Israel see when the
people dared to look up to the holy mount ? Compare with what Moses saw who was
on the holy mount. " And Mount Sinai was altogether on a smoke . . and the
smoke thereof ascended as the smoke of a furnace, and the whole mount quaked
greatly " (Exod. xix. 18). For proper apprehension of God we are under two disad-
vantages : 1. Distance. 2. Sin. Distance makes it difScult for us to see things
clearly ; and difficult for us to get them in the right perspective. Sin brings a dimness
of the moral and spiritual vision — somewhat as drunkenness gives a double vision; and
so the clouds round about God prove to be sin-clouds in our own eyes. And sin
brings a strange fear, because man can never separate sin from consequences, and he
cannot help feeling that God will see that the consequences come. So our sin makes
3. " darkness " about God.

II. What God is to oub cultured vision. That vision has to be cleansed before
it can be cultured. Illustrate cultured vision by the trained eyesight of the sailor or
of the scientific man. We at first may see nothing; gradually as we fix our gaze, and
think as we gaze, we can see much. Cultured spiritual vision gradually gains right



w. xcvii. 1— 12.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 887

apprehension of what God is, and sees two things as absolutely necessary to the fitting
idea of him. 1. He is eternally right in the principles that sway him. 2. He is
practically right in the application of those principles. These two things are indicated
in the abstract word " righteousness " and the concrete word '* judgment." It may
be shown how necessarily related these two are. If Gh)d is right, we may be confident
that his ways are right. If we can see his ways are right, we know that he is
right.— R. T.

Vers. 3 — 5. — 2%e tign of the storm-god (comp. Exod. xix.; xx. ; Hab. iii.; Heb. xii
18 — 21 ; see also Ps. Ixxvii. 17, 18). There is here an evident reference to an Eastern
thunderstorm. Lightning and thunder, among all superstitious peoples, are regarded as
special manifestations of the Deity. To us storms are but nature-forces, having their
intensity, and their comings and goings, according to ordinary nature-laws. But poetry
can now do, better than superstition, what superstition has done in all ages and in aU.
lands. We inquire what the " storm-sign " tells concerning God. The one common
feeling in tempest is the sense of the presence of an august and awful force that is
uncontrollable by man, but controllable by God. In addition to this it may be said
. that the storm-witness for God is universal ; it is rendered in every land and in every
age. Point out that in Jewish history storms are directly associated with the destruction
of Gh>d's foes, and the deliverance of Gt)d's people, as in the case of Sisera. See also
the revelation of God to Elijah, at Horeb, in the wild storm and the still small voice.
The storm-voice says concerning God —

I. He has AuatiST fokcbs at command. Nature-forces are sublime in themselves,
but they represent moral and spiritual forces far more sublime.

n. His FORCES ABE ALTOGETHER OUT OF mak's LIMITATION. Tempest makes us
feel this. All the combined powers of all humanity could not stop a flash of lightning
or silence a peal of thunder. What makes the storm so trying to us is the sense it
brings of our utter helplessness. But that lesson man needs to learn in » thousand
ways, and over and over again.

III. His FOBOEB MAT BE USED IN MISSIONS OF juDOMENT. The lightning Strikes
some. The storm may damage much. And though we may not say in a particular
case the lightning-stroke is a particular judgment on the individual, we do properly
get the impression of God's power to carry out the Divine threatening.

IV. His F0BCB8, however used, help us fully TO REALIZE HIMSELF. There is
constant danger of men's being satisfied with one-sided views of God. Christianity
exalts his loue; therefore it is needful to qualify our view of God by the nature-
teachings and the older revelations. — B. T.

Ver. 7. — Men's own gods. The figures which men worshipped in the olden time
were either shaped of wood or molten metal; but in either case they were hand-
carved or hand-graven, finished off by man's skill ; and to set prominently the fact of
man's share in their making, they are called "graven" images. It does not matter
what form a man's god may take — whether it be a creation of his hand or of his
imagination ; the thing that makes it an idol, a vanity, an altogether unworthy thing,
is that it is his, Man is a dependent creature. He did not make himself; he has a
Maker. He does not want a God ; he has a God. Whatever a man makes is less than
the man. The god a man makes must be an itiferior being to himself; and so cannot
be really his God.

I. The INFLUENCES ON MEN OF woBSHiFPiNO THEiB OWN ooDS. As they have no
standard beyond themselves, there is no hope of their rising higher in intellectual or
moral attainments. And men make their gods to represent what they like — their
pleasures. So their gods are always actually lower than their best selves, and the
worship of them must debase and degrade them. This is abundantly illustrated by the
immorality of all heathenism, both formal and intellectual.

IL The oonsequekces of men's woRSHippiNa theib own gods. They must come
into a "confounding." Life brings round the strain-times when the helplessness of
idols is revealed. Illustrate by the helplessness of the Baal-priests in the great testing-
day of Carmei. Intellectual idols, in which men boast themselves now, can provide no
cheer for sorrow, no light for death.

rsALus. — u. ■



338 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. xcvu. 1—12.

m. The influences on men of woeshippino the one God. They have the
inspiration of an absolute standard. They can always see in God whai they ought to
be, what they might be, and what they should strive to be. They can always find in
God something beyond tliem, something that they are not. High thoughts of God
draw us on to noble attainments.

IV. The 0ONBEQUEN0E8 OF men'b woEBHippiNQ THE ONE GoD. They are never
"confounded." They do receive Divine help. They are lifted above all fear of nature-
forces or of human forces that may be arrayed against them.— B. T.

Ver. 10. — Our attitude toward evil. " Hate evil." In Scripture the term " evj'' *
is employed in two senses — calamity and wrong-doing. We can only " hate evii '
when it stands for wrong-doing. But it is necessary to carefully distinguish between
hate of the wioag-doer and hate of the yiiang-doing. The first is never right,
the second is always right. We are to hate our own wrong-doing, and to hate
other people's. The term " hate " is also used in Scripture in two senses. Some-
times it means "feel intense dislike towards;" sometimes it means "put in the
second place of your regard." The use of the term as applied to evil, and as repre-
senting the attitude towards evil of those who love God, may be seen in the other
synonymous terms used in the Bible. 1. To hate is to eschew. A strong term, applying
to something found unpleasant in the mouth, and therefore cast out. Of Job as an
upright man it is said, " He feared God, and eschewed evil." 2. To hate is to depart
from. So the psalmist (xxxiv. 14) bids us " depart from evil, and do good." 3. To
hate is to aihor. The Apostle Paul (Bom. xii. 9) bids us " abhor that which is evil,
cleave to that which is good." Gibbes says, " A man may know his hatred of evil to
be true, first, if it be universal : he that hates sin truly hates all sin. Secondly, true
hatred is fixed; there is no appeasing it but by abolishing the thing hated. Thirdly,
hatred is a more rooted affection than anger ; anger may be appeased, but hatred remains
and sets itself against the whole kind. Fourthly, if our hatred be true, we hate all
evil, in ourselves first, and then in others. Fifthly, he that hates sin truly hates the
greatest sin in the greatest measure. Sixthly, our hatred is right if we can endure
admonition and reproof for sin, and not be enraged." The points that may be opened
and illustrated are these —

L The hate we cherish fob evil is an inwabd feelino. Show the natural
repulsion of the pure-minded from foul conversation. Those who love God become
like-minded with God ; and so inwardly feel sin to be " the abominable thing.*

II. The hate vtb chebish fob evil will find outwabd expression. 1. In
separation from it. 2. In resistance of it. 3. In fighting with it. But never in any
persecution of, or unauthorized attempts to punish, the wrong-doers. — R. T.

Ver. 10. — Our Soutrpreserver. It has always been a source of questioning and
doubting to anxious-minded men, such as the Psalmist Asaph, that God does not
always preserve the bodies, or the circumstances, of his servants. But this ought to be
no surprise to those who apprehend that God promises to preserve the sovl ; and he
may, sometimes, be actually preserving the soul by not preserving the body. But
perhaps this involves the higher Christian idea of the soul. In the older Scriptm'e, and
sometimes in the newer, the word "soul" is equivalent to "life; " and preservation of
natural life is the thing assured. Take the promise in its twofold sense.

I. God PBE8BKVB8 ouB NATURAL LIFE. We press that truth into the familiar
saying, " Man is immortal till his work is done." Nothing can ever touch a man's life
save on God's permission. Evil of circumstance can never of itself rise to that height.
Illustrate by the permissions and restrictions given to the " Satan " of the Book of
Job. But our Lord raises an argument on God's care of our life. He who keeps alive
will surely provide. The Preserver of our soul is surely the Provider of our need.
What we may ever need of deliverance is guaranteed in the grace of our Preserver.
Keeper always. Redeemer at call of our need.

II. God preserves our spiritual life. That is our supreme treasure ; or rather,
that is our true, our permanent self. Natural, animal life we do but share with the
animals, and we can have it but for a time ; circumstances are only the surroundings
of uur time of probation. They may all go, and we remain. What we are, when wo



?fc xcvn. 1— 12.] THE BOOK OP PSALMa 839

have done with circumstances, and have ended our animal life, is the matter of
flupreme concern to us. It is, then, the soul-character that God preserves and
delivers; as the apostle says, "He will keep that we have committed to him unto
the great day." Not a thing we have, and say we own, is safe. All may take wing
«nd flee away. But with ahsolute confidence we may say, " He shall preserve our
•oul."— B. T.

Ver. 11. — The harvest for the righUout, " Light is sown." Light is the type of
«verything pleasant. Perhaps it is conceived of here as hidden, like seed, in the
ground. God's people no more see light about their paths than men can see seeds in
the ground. They walk in darkness. But the seeds are there, and the light is there.
And one day there will surely be revealings both for the seeds and the light — a
harvest of the seeds, a harvest of the light. Perowne and others think that the verb
" sown " is to be taken in the sense of " scattered," " dififused ; " but the figure of light
«8 hidden at present and waiting for a revealing day, is certainly more poetical and
suggestive. Professor Grove gives the material for an effective illustration. " Marvel-
lous as it may appear, light can actually be bottled up for use. Take an engraving
which has been kept for some days in the dark ; expose it to full sunshine — ^that is.
Insulate it — for fifteen minutes ; lay it on sensitive paper in a dark place, and at the
«nd of twenty-four hours it will have left an impression of itself on the sensitive
paper, the whites coming out as blacks." Take " light " for vindication and blessing,
«ee —

I. LiOHT FOB THE BIOHTE0178 IB AOTUALLT IN EXISTENCE. They may not see it,
but that does not matter. The farmer does not see his seed. God's response to all
goodness is immediate ; but he often keeps his response a secret until the right time
for revealing comes. There is comfort and strength in knowing that the light exists.

IL LiOHT FOR THE BiOHTEOUS IB IN oooD KBEFiNa. As the earth keeps the seed,
«o God keeps vindication, full deliverance, and blessedness for the righteous. See the
figure of martyr-souls safely kept under the altar, only crying, " How long, Lord,
bow long ? " There is comfort and strength in knowing that the light is safe.

in. Light fob the bighteoits must bbeak fobth some dat. As surely as
grass-blades will show from the seeds, and loaded wains carry home the harvest. The
time for breaking forth will be God's time, and that is, in every way, the best
time.— B. T.

Ver, 12. — The inspiration of cherished memories. " Give thanks at the remembrance
of his holiness." Why does not the psalmist say, " at the thought of his holiness " ? See
that his point is this — you may be full of perplexity as you try to understand God's
dealings with you just now ; but you can always get comfort from thinking of God's
ways with you in the past. And then you can very easily argue from what God has
always been to what God surely is.

L The pleasure of oub cherished memories. We love to live in the past. Like
the old soldiers, we are always " fighting our battles o'er." As we grow older, we find
more and more pleasure in thinking of our early days — school-day scenes ; youthful
friendships ; opening struggles ; first love. But the Christian finds his great interest in
tracing God's guiding hand. He has no doubt at all about God's goodness and mercy
«a he leads over his past. Life seems to him dotted over with pillars, on which over
and over again he has written his " Ebenezer." And the " rightness," the " holiness,"
of God is the thing that so much impresses him. He can see how God led, and where
he led, and can say, " It was a good way." Yerily the " Lord is righteous in all his
ways, and holy in all his works."

II. The aboument from oub cherished memories. Whatever may be the appear-
ance of things, God is the Unchangeable One ; the Bock ; the same yesterday, to-day,
and for ever. If we know what be was, we know what he is. The better we know
what he has been, the more fiilly and clearly we know what he is doing. No friend
can bear that we should doubt that he will always be what we know him to be. We
ourselves are distressed when those about us seem to fear lest we should be other than
they know us to be. Never distrust God. All the ages tell what he has done, and
what he toas, and what he is. — B. T.



340



THE BOOK OF PSALMS.



[P8. XCVIII. 1 ft



Ver. 2. — 2?ie Divine character and government. "Clouds and darkness are round
about him : righteousness and truth are the foundation of his throne."

I. We ABE OFTEN IN DOUBT AND DIFFICULTY ABOUT THE DiVINE OHAKAOTEB ASB

OOVEENMENT. " Clouds and darkness are round about him." We cannot reconcile all
we see with : 1. Divine omnipotence. Abortions. The means do not attain the end.
2. Divine wisdom,. Or the wisdom was 'not perfect. 3. Divine justice. 4. Divitte



IL An ovibpowebing conviotion that the Divine charaoteb and qovernmes*
ABE PEBFBCT, 1. We feel that we are incapable judges of an infinite phm. We only
see a part, therefore we cannot understand the whole. 2. What we can see and under-
ttand gives us unbounded faith in Ood in reference to what we cannot understand.
3. We feel assured that Ood is able to overrule what seems evU for final good. "All
things work together for good." — S.



EXPOSITION.



PSALM xovra.

..UOTHXB pealm of joy on the coming of God
to jndge the earth (ver. 9). It is entitled
■imt>ly "a psalm," and has no very peculiar
features. Metiioally, It is best viewed as
composed of three strophes of three verses
each. The first strophe gives the grounds
of praise (vers. 1 — 3); the next describes
the method of praise (vers. 4 — 6) ; the third
contains a call on all nature to join in the
praise (vers. 7 — 9).

Ver. 1. — sing unto the Lord a new song
(oomp. Ps. xcvl., which opens similarly).
The faithful and wise steward is ever bring-
ing out of his treasures things whioli are
at once old and " new." For he hath done
marvelloTis things. The " marvellous things"
wliich God has done for man coustitute
the first ground for pr.iising him. These
marvels may be either those of his ordinary

Srovidenoe, or special interpositions and
elivernnces. His right hand, and his holy
arm, hath gotten him the victory; rather,
hath wrought salvation for Mm (see the
Revised Version; and comp. Isa. liz. 16;
Ixiii. 5).

Ver. 2. — The Lord hath made known his
salvatioa; i.e. "has manifested his power
to save." The psalmist looks back upon the
deliverance of ver. 9, as though it were
accomplished. His righteousness hath he
openly showed in the sight of the heathen.
God has vindicated in the eyes of all the
nations upon earth the righteousness of his
rule over mankind.

Ver. 3. — He hath remembered his meroy
and his tmth towards the house of Israel.
The judgment of the nations involves meroy
and deliverance to Israel, which is oppressed
by them ; and thus manifests God's faith-
fulness towards them. All the ends of the
earth have seen the Balvation of our God
(oomp. ver. 3 and Isa. lii. 10).



Ver. 4.— Hake • Joyfal noise unto tli*
Lord, all the earth. God is to be praised
heartily — with a loud and ringing voioa.
The body is to unite with the soul in giving
him thanks, and to perform its part vigor-
ously and with ze^il (comp Pss. v. 3 ; Ixvi.
1 ; Ixxxi. 1 ; xov. 1, 2 ; o. 1, etc.). And in the
praise of God tAe wAo2e earf A is to join. Make
a loud noise, and rejoice, and sing praise;
rather, break forth, and sing for joy, and
sing praise (see the Revised Version).

Ver. 5. — Sing unto the Lord with the
harp ; i.e. " with a harp accompaniment" It
is fitting that in the praises of God instru-
mental music should be joined with vocal
melody (comp. Exod. xv. 2U ; 2 Sam. vi. 15 ;
1 Ohron. xv. 16, 28; xvi. 6; 2 Chron. v. 12,
13; Ezra iii. 10; Neh. xii. 27, etc.). With
the harp, and the voice of a psalm ; or, the
voice of melody (Revised Version).

Ver. 6. — WilJi trumpet and sound of
comet; rather, with clarions and voice of
trumpet. The chaisoteeroth are "the straight
trumpets, such as are seen on the Aroh of
Titus, uBod by the priests foi giving signals"
(Kay). The shophdr is the ordinary curved
or rounded trumpet or horn. Hake a joyfal
noise before the Lord, the King; literally,
before the King, Jehovah. (On the use of wind
instruments in the temple service, see 1
Chron. xv. 24, 28; 2 Ohron. v. 12; Ezra
iii. 10.)

Ver. 7. — Let the sea roar, and the fulness
thereof (see above, Ps. xovi. 11, where the
same phrase ocours). The call on the
inanimate things of nature to rejoice ia
grounded on man's sympathy with nature,
which makes him desire, and half believe,
that nature may sympathize witli him.
The world, and they t^at dwell therein
(comp. Pa. xxiv. 1).

Ver. 8. — Let the floods clap their hands.
This bold metaphor occurs only here and
in Isa. Iv. 12, where the " trees " are askeil to
"clap their hands." Let the hills be joyful
together before the Lord; or, sing for jop



M. icviii. 1 — 9.]



THE BOOK OF PSALMS.



su



iogeOier; i.e. join with the rest of nature in
expressing gladness.

Ver. 9. — For he oometh to jndge the
«arth. Nature, inanimate and animate,
may well be asked to rejoice when God
I to judge the earth — since he is sure



to judge it aright. 'With righteousness
shall he judge the world, and the people
with equity. " God by his righteous judg-
ment will bring tlie whole earth from a state
of sorrow into a state of salvation and joy "
(Hengstenberg).



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Ver. Xt—JehovaKs victories. This psalm is almost an echo of Ps. xcvL, and, like
that, tells of the triumphant issue of the Lord's great battle. No doubt the psalmist
had some special event in the history of God's people in his mind — some glorious
victory given to them; but his words here bring to our thoughts God's spiritual
Tictories, far larger and wider triumphs than any that Israel ever knew. Consider,
therefore —

I. The viotobies of the Lobd which this fsalu beminds ns of. 1. There is that
^>f the past — for humanity generally, for the whole world. Mankind was in sore distress ;
and he had no help in himself, he had become the devil's prey. But how was this to
be remedied ? The Incarnation, the Atonement, the gift of the Holy Ghost, were the
•newer. And so now for every child of man who will avail himself of it, there is full
salvation provided. The guilt of our sin, our corrupt nature, and the holy Law of
God, were all against us ; but in this great victory of the Lord, guilt was put away,
man's evil nature subdued, and the Law honoured as it had never been or could be
before. Well may we say with St. Paul, "Thanks be to God, who giveth us the
victory through our Lord Jesus Christ " (1 Cor. xv. 57). 2. There is that of the
present — that which the individual believer rejoices in for himself. The sense of
condemnation is gone, the power of sin is broken, the tyranny of the devil trampled
on, the might of sorrow and care gone, the fear of death vanished, and eternal life
won — that is the victory which is given now to many a believing soul, to every soul
who will have it. 3. 2%a< of the future — that of the Church triumphant, when every
foe is vauquished, when all that have tried and troubled us is no more, and when we
are presented " faultless before the presence of the Lord's glory with exceeding joy."

II. What is hebb baid of them. 1. They are marvellous. Are they not so?
Think of what stood in the way of each. 2. They are all of Ood. " His right hand,
and his holy arm, hath," etc. How evident this is ! Did ever any hear of a really
■a ved soul saying aught else than this ? And: 3. They are victories of believers. Not
of mere compassion, still less of mere power, but it was " bis holy arm " that triumphed.
The law of righteousness and truth was maintained. 4. They demand a new song.
And they have it, and will for evermore. Let us be in that choir. — S. C.

Vers. 7 — 9. — Man's relation to the natural world. In a beautiful sermon on these
Terses by the late Rev. T. C. Mnlayson, M.A., to which this homily is greatly indebted,
he remarks, that when piety and poetry are married to each other, such a song as this
is the offspring of their marriage ; he notes also the unhappy rarity of this ucj'on.
Where piety is, there, all too often, imagination is conspicuous by its absence, and
■uch absence is regarded with much complacency, and as a thing desirable rather than
otherwise. On the other hand, where the gift of a rich imagination has been bestowed,
how sadly often it is divorced from all piety ! But in this psalm, as in so many others,
the two have been united, and the outcome is such an inspired burst of poetry as we
have in these verses. In this exalted spiritual condition the soul sees its true relation
to the natural world. The soul regards the world of nature —

L Ab its sebvant. There is a tone of lordship and mastery in these verses. The
sea, the earth, the floods, and the hills are bidden to take their parts in the great
anthem of praise. The psalmist seems to be issuing his orders to them, and they are
as servants ready to obey. It is here as in Ps. viii. All things are put beneath him,
he is lord of all. Man has been placed on the earth, not merely to occupy, but to
subdue and to rule over it. As generation after generation passes away, this rulership
becomes ever more complete. By patient study of the laws of the great Over-lord of



342 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. xoviii. 1—9,

all, man, the under-lord, has leamt to bind the forces of nature, and to make them
execute his will. They are his servants under him, and he says to this one, " Come,"
and it cometh, and to another, " Gu," and it goeth. And so here he utters his command,
" Let the sea roar," etc.

II. As FELLow-woBSHiPFER. The scsnes, the sounds, the movements of nature are
to the soul of the psalmist not merely scenes and sounds and movements, but show
that, like himself, nature is a worshifiper "before the Lord." Not that nature, tho
dead material world, canot itself reader worship; only the soul can do that. And
only a soul itself filled with the spirit of worship, can see and hear in the natural
world what appears to be worship, joy, and praise. We speak of sacred music, but no
sound ot choir, or or>:an, or instrument of any kind can utter sacred music unless it
express sacred thought in some soul. But let the soul be filled with such high, holy
thought and emotion, and, lo 1 all nature becomes one vast choir, and its varied sounds
one glorious anthem of praise,

III. As SHABEB TOGETHEB WITH HIUSELF IN THE VICT0BIE8 OF God's OBAOE. Thft

soul sees along with its own redemption, the redemption of nature (Rom. viiL 19
— 21 ; Ps. Ixvii. 6). The soul of the psalmist is looking on to the full victory of the
Lord over all his foes, and the consequent redemption, of man, and the earth likewise,
under the Lord's righteous rule ; and so he calls on all the powers of nature to join
with him in praise.

IV. As, LIKE HIMSELF, GLAD IN Goo. The undcTout soul fails to see this, but the
eye purged with the love of God in Christ beholds continually in all that is fair,
beautiful, and good in the natural world — and how much there is of this! — the heart of
nature praising God (see Eeble's hymn, "There is a book, who runs may read"). — S. C.

Ver. 1. — I%e Lord's victory. "His right hand, and his holy arm, hath gotten him
the victory." This is to be treated as a joy-song of the returned Exiles, who regarded
themselves as delivered and restored, because their God had fought for them, overcome
all their foes, and mastered all their hindrances and difficulties. It was not their right
hand that had gotten them the victory. It was God's right hand that had gotten him
the victory, of which they were permitted to reap the full benefit. This victory
quickened thought, and brought to mind the assurances of the Prophet Isaiah, e.g,
" The Lord hath made bare his holy arm in the eyes of all the nations ; and all the
ends of the earth shall see the salvation of our God " (Isa. lii. 10). And the victory
brought to view the older Israelite history, from the great Bed Sea victory and onward.
It was plain enough that God had been always getting the victory, always redeeming,
always recovering, rescuing, and restoring, always the Saviour. The type of the
Divine relations with the people is given in the redemption from Egypt, and then
Israel lifted a joy-song, acknowledging concerning Jehovah, "Thy right hand, O
Lord, is become glorious in power ; thy right hand, Lord, hath dashed in pieces
thine enemy." For a chorus to their song the women sang, " Sing ye to the Lord, for
he hath triumphed gloriously ; the horse and his rider hath he thrown into the sea."

I. The victoeies which the Lobd has won. Illustrate: 1. Those won in the
older ages, and kept on record in the Old Testament. 2. Those won in the times of
Christ, and kept on record in the New Testament. 3. Those won in the ages of the
Christian Church, especially in the missionary ages. 4. Those of which we have
personal experience, as bearing relation to our past distresses.

II. The fight in which the Lobd is now engaged. It is not enough to say that
it is with evil in all its forms ; it is also with the consequences of evil in all their
varieties : as these affect the race, the nation, the society, the family, or the individual.
We recognize the fight, we do not always see that it is the Lord fighting — the Lord
with us in the fight.

III. The victoeies which the Lord will win. " His bow ever abides in strength ; **
" He goeth forth conquering and to conquer." He will conquer in the one. He will
conquer in the many. One day the final Victor over all evil will " deliver up the
kingdom to the Father, and God shall be all in all." — R. T.

Ver. 3. — The LorcPs memory. This is regarding God as if he were a man, and acted
•8 men act. Men find the memory of kindnesses they have done become a plea for



P8. xcviii. 1— 9.J THE BOOK OP PSALMS. «4«

showing further kindness. To have ever helped any one gives them a sort of natural
claim on us to help them again. So the psalmist, full of joy in the hlessings God was
giving his people in his day, felt quite sure that God must have been recalling,
remembering, what great things he had done, in olden days, for 'his people. We think
our great pleas to urge before God are our needs and our deserts. But these are alto-
gether surpassed by the pleas we may use. God's honour, God's promise, and what
Gk)d has already done for us. But herein lies an important distinction between God's
feelings and man's. Only the very noblest among men fail to be annoyed when past
favours are made into a plea for new gifts. We are annoyed at the beggar who comes
again and again so hopefully, because he has so often come successfully. God loves
to bless those whom he has blessed. We may never think of him as tiring of blessing.

I. What mat we think the Lord remembers ? See two things. (1) That Le
had to be very gentle and merciful toward us. (2) That he had to keep his promise
to help us. Remembers his mercy and truth ; his loving-kindness and faithfulness.
See what persuasion to new " mercy and truth " is in such quickened memory. 1.
The exercise of the passive graces puriSes and ennobles character, and makes us more
able to exercise them, and more anxious to find objects on which to exercise them.
Do some act merely for a person, and you may find it tiresome to have to do it again.
But show a kindness, be merciful, pitiful, tender, gracious, and you will want to be
all these over and over again. 2. Every claim upon a man of truth is an establishing
and confirming of his truth, and makes him more determined that men shall have
absolute trust in his word. If it be thus with men, how much more so with God I

II. How MAT WE VENTURE TO QUICKEN THE Lord's mbmort ? By telling him freely
what is in our memories concerning his dealings. This is the way of love. The lover
tells his loved one his memories, and that is the best quickening of hers. — R. T.

Vers. 5 — 7. — Showing our joy in God. It must strike every reader of the Psalms
that the call to give expression to the joy felt in God is very frequent. We are con-
stantly made to feel that the people did not readily come up to the psalmist's stand-
point. Emotionally he could not raise them to his level, and their flagging and
dragging seems sometimes to worry him. But the intensely earnest man, the man of
cultured spiritual feeling, the pious poet-soul, always has this trouble, and is always
in danger of misapprehending his fellows because they seem unable adequately to
respond to him. He does not realize that he may be no better standard, since he is
above average, than they are who are below average. The man in advance does us all
good by lifting us all higher, if he fails to lift us to his own level. If we cannot sing
and praise aa the psalmist does, we can all sing and praise better because the psalmist
chants so nobly. Illustrate this point by referring to David, the royal psalmist,
actually beginning in the tabernacle a service of song. No doubt some were heartily
with him from the first, but many must have given him trouble. Some were tire-
somely indifferent. They would not come, but they would give no reasons for not
coming. Some opposed, and we can well imagine some of the grounds of their opposi-
tion. So it always is and always will be. We may qualify the trouble this may
cause us by remembering that the signs and expressions of religious feeling greatly
differ, and we cannot reasonably expect all persons to express themselves as we do.
What we may look for, and work for, is some expression of what is in men's hearts
toward the Lord. Let them break out into songs and music, if that will best utter
their hearts. Let them abound in good works, if they like that voice for their souls
better. The main thing is this — if a man has any joy in God in his soul, let him
find out how to give it voice, so that God and men may know of it.— B. T.

Vers. 1 — 9. — Universal salvation. "The last great revelation, the final victory of
QoA, when his salvation and his righteousness, the revelation of which he has promised
to the house of Israel, shall be manifested both to his own people and to all the nations
of the earth."

L God has BEVBAMa) a gbeat salvation fob the world. (Vers. 1 — 3.) Dis-
tinguished by three great things. 1. Bighteousness, (Ver. 2.) Reveals his righteous-
ness in and by means of Christ in order to secure our righteousness. Righteousness the
most comprehensive description of the Divine character and work. 2. Mercy, or



344



THE BOOK OP PSALMS.



[pS. XCES. 1 — &



loving-kindness. (Ver.'S.) Loving-kindness towards the sinful and unworthy. Mercy
and righteousness compatible — mercy a part of righteousness. 3. Truth, or faithful-
ness. (Ver. 3.) " Loving-kindaess and faithfulness, the two attributes expressive of
God's covenant relationship to his people." He fulfils all the promises, and more than
all the promises, which his mercy has made.

II. The jot which this salvation should create. (Vers. 4 — 9.) 1. The
intensity i^ this joy. (Vers. 4 — 6.) To be uttered by all possible means and instru-
ments. " A joyful noise." The human voice is to be aided and supplemented by
instrumental music to give more intense expression to it. 2. The extent of the joy.
(Vers. 7 — 9.) The sea is to take up the song; and the floorls all to clap their hands;
and the mountains are to rejoice together. The whole earth is to rejoice, because God
comes to bring it from sin and sorrow into a state of salvation and joy. The poet
projects himself into the grandest material objects, and they become sympathetic with
his joys and sorrowB. — S.



EXPOSITION.



PSALM XCIX.



HzBB we have the last of the series of
Second Advent psalms, which began with
Ps. xciii. The first of them, the fifth, and
the last, commeuoe in the game way — with
the watchword, " The Lord reigneth." The
first and last lay special stress on holiness,
as God's leading characteristic, and as
required by him (Fss. xoiii. 5 ; xcix. 3, 5, 9).
Delitzach has called this psalm " the earthly
echo of the seraphic Trisagion." It resolves
the concentrated declaration, "Holy, holy,
holy, is the Lord of hosts " (Isa. vi. 3), into
three distinct and separate cries, " Holy is
he" (ver. 3); "Holy is he" (ver. 5); and
" Holy is the Lord our God " (ver. 9). This
refrain divides the psalm into three unequal
portions, viz. vers. 1 — 3; vers. 4, 5; and
vers. 6—9.

Ver. 1. — The Lord reigneth (see the com-
ment on Ps. xciii. 1). Let the people
tremble; literally, the peoples; i.e. all the
nations upon earth. He sitteth between the
cherubim ; rather, he hath his seat upon the
cherubim (oomp. Ps. Ixxx. 2) . The imagery
is taken from the internal economy of the
Jewish temple, where the Sheohinah was
enthroned above the cherubic forms that
overshadowed and guarded the ark. Let the
earth be moved ; or, quake (comp. Ps. oxiv. 7).

Ver. 2. — The lord is great in Zion.
Primarily great among his faithful ones,
among whom his greatness is especially
shown. And he is high above all the people
(or rather, peoples). Secondarily great, or
" high," among the nations which do not
acknowledge him, but are forced to tremble
before him (see ver. 1).

Ver. 3. — Let them praise thy great and
teiiible Name. Even the Gentiles, after



conversion, will praise the Lord, sing o(
him, and bless his Name. (On the " great-
ness " and " terribleness " of God, see Exod.
XV. 11; Deut. vii. 21; x. 17: Neh. i 5; iv.
14; Ps. Ixviii. 35, etc.) For it is holy;
rather, holy is he. This may be a suggestion
to those about to praise God — a putting
of words into their mouth ; or it may be aa
almost involuntary outburst of praise on the
part of the psalmist.

Ver. 4. — The King's strength also loveth
judgment. "The king" is here the Lord,
Jehovah (see Ps. xoviii. 4). His " strength,"
or might, "loves," and is always combined
with, right (oomp. Isa. IxL 8, " I the Lord
love judgment"). Thou dost establish equity.
The pronoun is emphatic : " Thou,: even
thou" — nearly equivalent to " thou only " —
"dost establish equity." Thou — again em-
phatic — " thou, even thou " — executest
judgment and righteousness in Jacob ; i.e.
govern est thy people Israel with strict and
absolute justice.

Ver. 5. — Exalt ye the Lord our God
(comp. ver. 9; and see also Ps. oxviii. 20
and Isa. xxv. 1). And worship at his foot-
stool. The " footstool of God " is everywhere
(except in Isa. Ixvi. 1) the ark of the
covenant, which he that sat upon the cheru-
bim touched, as it were, with his feet (see
1 Chron. xxviii. 2; Pd. cxxxii. 7; Lam. ii
1 ; Isa. Ix. 13). Israel is called upon to
worship God as he sits in his holy temple^
enthroned above the cherubim, with big
feet upon the mercy-seat. For he is holy;
rather, as in ver. 3, holy is hei

Ver. 6. — Moses and Aaron among his
priests. Moses, though not called a priest
in the Pentateuch, performed many priestly
acts, such as sprinkling the blood of the
covenant at Mount Sinai (Exod. xxiv. 6 — 8),
Betting in order the tabernacle (Exod. zl.
18 — 33), consecrating Aaron and his sons
(Lev. viii. 6 — 30), interceding for the people
(Exod. xxxii. 30—32 ; Numb. xiv. 13—19),



P8. xcix. 1—9.]



THE BOOK OF PSALMS.



846



etc. He is therefore, not improperly, here
included anLong God's priests. And Samuel
among them that oall upon his Name,
Samuel was not a priest, but a simple
Levite (1 Chron. vi. 16—28). He was,
however, a powerful intercessor with God,
a righteous man whose effectual fervent
prayer availed much. He is united with
Moses by Jeremiah, as having weight with
God through his prayers (Jer. xt. 1 ; see
also 1 Sam. xii. 19 — 22). They called upon
the Lord, and he answered them (see Deut.
xi. 19; X. 10; 1 Sam. xii. 17, etc.).

Yer. 7. — He spake nnto them in the
cloudy pillar (see Exod. xxxiii. 9, " And it
ame to pass, as Moses entered into the
tabernacle, the cloudy pillar descended, and
stood at the door . . . and the Lord talked
with Moses"). They kept his testimonies,
and the ordinance that he gave them, Moses
was known as "the servant of the Lord"
(Deut. xxxiv. 5; Josh. i. 1, 2, etc.). He
was " faithful in all his house, as a servant "
(Heb. iii. 5). Aaron was " the saint of the
Lord " (Ps. ovi. 16). This general obedience
was, however, departed from in some few
instances (see the comment on yer. 8).

Yer. 8. — Thou answeiedst them, Lord



our God (eomp. ver. 6, ad fin.'). Thou wast
a God that forgavest them ; literally, a for-
giving God wast thou to them. Both Moses
and Aaron " angered God at the waters of
strife" (Ps. cvi. 32; Numb. xx. 12, 13),
Aaron angered him still more by sanction-
ing the idolatry of the golden calf (Exod.
xxxii. 1 — 24). God pardoned both of them
these and other sins, but not without in-
flicting punishment for the sins. Though
thou tookest vengeance of their inventions.
God's " severity " extended even to these
blessed saints, Moses, Aaron, and Samuel.
The former two were expressly excluded
from the land of promise for their conduct
at Meribah (Numb, xx. 12) ; and Samuel's
judgeship seems to have been brought to
an end through his undue leniency towards
his sons Joel and Abiah (1 Sam. viii. 1 -5).
Yer. 9. — Exalt the Lord our Ood, and
worship at his holy hill. Repeated from
ver. 5, with the slight variation that
"his holy hill" is substituted for "his
footstool " — Zion, on which the temple
stood, for the sanctuary of the temple itself.
For the Lord our God is holy ; rather, /or
holy it the Lord our God (comp. vers. 3
and S).



HOMILBTICS.

Ver. 6. — Samuel. The venerable figure of Samuel forms the living link between
two great and very diverse stages in the history of ancient Israel. He was the last of
the judges (Acts xiii. 29), he was the first of the prophets (Acts iii. 24). Not that
there were no prophets between Moses and Samuel (Judg. iv. 4 ; 1 Sam. ii. 27), but
from his time the prophetic gift and oEBce took that leading pla<!e which belonged to
it down to the days of Malachi. As judge, Samuel's administration brought to a close
the period of anarchy recorded in the Book of Judges ; as prophet, he was commis-
sioned to choose and anoint the first King of Israel ; and, on Saul's proving himself
utterly unable to understand his position as the Lord's servant, and thus unfit to
reign, to declare his deposition, to anoint David, and probably to train him for his high
office, and to promise to the seed of David an eternal throne and kingdom. The life
and character of Samuel present at least three grand lessons and lines of thought (to
be treated in different discourses).

I. Samuel an example of a oonsecbatbd life. A consecrated childhood the
preparation for one of the noblest, purest, grandest, and most useful lives history
records. When we think of Samuel, the image that most naturally rises to our view
(as Dean Stanley observes) is not of the aged ruler and seer, v^ith his unshorn grey
locks on his shoulders (1 Sam. 1. 11 ; xii, 2), but of " the child Samuel " (1 Sam. i. 27, 28 ;
ii. 11, 18, 21 ; iii. 1 — 10, 19). Excepting the holy Child Jesus, there is none other in
Scripture whose childhood and early piety, consecration, and inspiration are thus
prominently recorded. The whole life is of a piece; "Wild excesses in youth ar«
often followed by energy, by zeal, by devotion. We read it in the examples of
Augustine, of Loyola, of John Newton . . . But it is no less certain that they are
rarely, very rarely, followed by moderation, by calmness, by impartial wisdom . . .
whatever else is gained by Budden and violent conTersions, this is lost. Whatever else,
on the other hand, is lost by the experience of evil, by the calm and even life that
needs no repentance, this is gained. . . . Samuel is the chief type, in ecclesiastical
history, of quiet growth, of a new creation without conversion " (Stanley's ' History of
the Jewish Church," i. 364, 365). To such a childhood, the key-note of which was



346 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. xoix. 1— 9i

" Speak, Lord ; for thy servant heareth," the grey-headed saint could look back in his
public appeal to the nation (1 Sam. xii. 2 — 6). Seldom has so great a life been so blame-
less. This view of Samuel's life and character appeals : 1. To the young. You may
neglect or throw off the fear and love of God, faith and prayer and duty, and yet be
converted and saved, like the poor prodigal; but you will have flung away life's
morning, robbed God of the firstfruits of life, forfeited the honour and happiness that
crown a consecrated life, and the right to say with St. Paul, Acts xxiii. 1 ; xxiv. 16 ;
xxvi. 4, 5; 2 Tim. i. 3. 2. To parents. Samuel was consecrated to God by his
mother's faith and prayers before be had any knowledge or choice. 3. To teaehera of
the you/ng. The teacher who has trained one Samuel has richer reward and higher
honour than one who has crammed a hundred prize-winners.

II. Samuel ak example of the power of pbater. His name, "Heard of
God " (g.d. granted in answer to praj'er), was the memorial of his mother's broken-
hearted supplications (1 Sara. i. 11, 26, 27). The first thing recorded of his childhood
is that he " worshipped the Lord " (1 Sam. i. 28), " ministered to the Lord " (1 Sam.
ii. 11, 18 ; iii. 1). His brief prayer (most of the mightiest recorded prayers are brief),
" Speak ; for thy servant heareth " (iii. 10), contains the very concentrated spirit of
prayer, the open ear of faith, the loving heart of obedience. Therefore it is not
wonderful that Samuel's prayers had great power (1 Sam. vii. 8, 9 ; xii. 17, 18, 19, 23).
Prayer was his refuge in trouble (1 Sam. viii. 6; xv. 11). The text specially com-
memorates him "among them that call upon his Name." The truth of the necessity,
duty, and value of prayer, and of the fact that God does indeed answer prayer, is one
in which the teaching of the Old and New Testament Scriptures is most completely
and emphatically one. The Christian could not afford to dispense with this witness —
loses much if he does not constantly feed his faith on it. Promises of prayer, and
commands to pray, are even fuller and more emphatic (if possible) in the New Testa-
ment ; but the Old Testament backs these up vrtth the experience of two thousand
years; and nearly two thousand years more have supplemented this experience, and
tested and verified these promises. If there is a truth verified by human experience,
it is this — that God hears prayer (John xvi. 23, 24 ; Jas. v. 16).

III. The relation of religion to national life. Christians make a tremendous
mistake when they suppose they may neglect the Old Testament Scriptures. The
New Testament Scriptures unfold a fuller gospel, richer promises, a clearer manifes-
tation of Divine love, a world-embracing message. But in the history of ancient Israel
lessons were taught, experiments made, problems solved for the Church and for man-
kind in all ages. God vrill not either repeat or unteach them. Woe to us if we despise
them, especially in an age in which the Christian Church is so loudly called to face
the social, national, and international problems of to-day ! 1. National life and well-
heing need religion as their only secure foundation. Samuel, as prophet-judge, not a
military leader, like Othniel or Gideon, but a judge lecause he was a prophet, repre-
sented God in relation to Israel, and Israel in relation to God (see 1 Sam. vii. 2 — 15).
All the miseries which befell Israel during the centuries from Joshua to Samuel were
from one cause — their provoking the Lord. When deliverance followed repentance,
the monument set up was not a military trophy of their prowess, but a religious
memorial (1 Sam. vii. 12). The special relation of Israel to God, constituted at Sinai, was
doubtless unique, but the underlying principles are good for all time, all nations (Prov.
xiv. 34). Life, private or public, is alone securely founded on truth. Righteousness —
q.d. justice, good faith, temperance, purity, doing as you would be done by, — this is
the sure basis of national well-being. And the only safeguard is true religion. 2. Yet
Law is impotent to maintain true religion or spiritual life. The experiment (we may
with reverence say) was bound to be tried. A universal religious society, like the
Christian Church, was in earlier ages alike inconceivable and impossible. The national
form of the Church was the only practicable. The history of Israel is the history of the
failure of this experiment. (1) First, the people themselves were tried. Endowed with
laws they could neither repeal nor improve, sanctioned by God himself; with tribal
and municipal magistrates, partly elective, partly hereditary; with an elaborate system
of public religion, and careful provision for home education and public teaching; and
with a pei'fect land system, — Israel was placed in uniquely favourable circumstances.
The Book of Judges is the record of their trial, during some four centuries, and utter



P8. xcix. 1—9.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 847

failure. (2) Next, at the nation's own wish, kinga wore tried for some five hundred
years. A few splendid examples showed what good a wise, strong, pious ruler might
effect if he understood his position as the servant of Jehovah aud the father and yet
brother of his subjects. But on the whole, national failure was yet more shameful,
ending in the Babylonian captivity. Samuel's life forms the link between these two
stages. Bemarkable that priestly government was guarded against by special funda-
mental laws — the denial to Levi of any inheritance, and dispersion of the sacerdotal
tribe throughout Israel. Samuel was a Levite, but the only priest-judge, Eli, was a
sad failure. (3) Lastly, after the Captivity, came the rule of the teachers — scribes and
rabbis— or, as we should say, clergy and universities, with an episode of priestly
sovereignty under the Maccabees. The Gospels describe the utter and woeful failure
of this last stage (see Matt, xxiii. and parallel passages ; Gal. iii. 21). 3. Where the
Law failed, what can the gospel do for national life f Christianity brought to an end
the national pre-eminence of Israel, putting all cations on a level ; but much more-
substituting, as the supreme rule of life, for public law personal obedience to Christ
(Isa. xliv. 3—5 ; Heb. viii. 7—13). There are four possible relations of the Church to
the State. (1) Identical, as in Israel. (2) The Church ruling the State, which is the
theory of Rome. (3) The State ruling the Church, whicli has been tried in various
forms from Constantine's days. (4) The pervading influence of the Church as a
spiritual community in the persons and lives of its members, moulding and inspiring
legislation, policy, manners, business, and every form of public and social life (Isa.
Ix. 21 ; Bev. xL 15).



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Ver. 6. — " The Lord our Ood is hdy." " This is the last of the series of royal psalms,
of psalms which celebrate the coming of Jehovah as King. The first of the series ia
Ps. xciii. This opens with the announcement that ' Jehovah is King ; ' passes on to
tell that his throne has been from everlasting, that he made the world, and that he
rules it — rules the raging of the elements and the convulsions of political strife, of
which that is the figure — ^and then concludes with one brief glance at his revelation of
himself to his people, and the distinguishing glory of the house in which he deigns to
dwell, ' Holiness becometh thine house for ever ' " (Perowne). Three times over in this
psalm is this declaration made of the Lord's holiness : After the setting forth of his
great and terrible Name (ver. 3); then after telling of his equity, judgment, and
righteousness (ver. 5) ; and after the naming of the great saints of God who called on
his Name, and to whom a gracious answer was vouchsafed (ver. 9). Consider —

I. The mbanino of this repeated word, " The Lord our God is holy." 1. It tells
of his own personal nature and character. That he is of too pure eyes to behold
iniquity ; that not, as is the case oftentimes with men, holy deeds may hide an unholy
heart, but ttiat in all his thoughts, purposes, and in his inmost being, he is holy. 2,
Of the constant character of his actions. For the trial of his people's faith he may at
times seem to favour the ungodly and to cause the unrighteous to prosper, yet this is
never because he is really on their side, but for quite other reasons ; the main stream
of his providential dealing is and has ever been clear on the side of righteousness and
holiness, and hence men have learned that the Lord is holy in all his ways, and
righteous in all his works. 3. Of his sympathies. Men have believed and been
confident that, however dark their circumstances, the love and favour of God, the
shining of his countenance, have been towards his people, and that they knew it (cf.
Ps. iv. 6, 7).

II. Its truth. This is shown : 1. By his acts and ways. The review of God's
dealings with men — his tender mercies to them that fear him, and his fierce wrath
against evil-doers, all have proved this sure truth. 2. By those whom he has chosen to be
his chief and most honoured servants. (See ver. 6.) Not the evil, the worldly, the
impure, but such as these saints of God here told of. 3. The ritual of the Law. This
also taught the same truth. The gods of the heathen made no pretensions to holiness
or demand for it, but the Lord demanded it always and everywhere, and above all
things else. Hence, that this may be impressed and indelibly engraved upon the mindj



348 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. xcix. 1— 9.

of Israel, the whole ritual and manner of worship of the Law was arranged. 4. By hu
revealed Word and will. Holy Scripture makes clear the mind of God in this matter.
5. By the operations of his Spirit in their hearts. That inward witness for God ever
sought to lead men to holiness. They could be in no doubt as to the Divine will, and,
therefore, as to the Divine character.

III. Its unspeakable impoetanoe. Such great stress and emphasis was laid upon
it for many reasons. 1. It kept up a perpetucd protest against sin. Before this truth
wickedness could not stand. 2. It furnished a standard by which to judge of all other
religions. Did they or did they not lead to holiness? 3. It implied a constant inspira-
tion towards the pursuit of holiness. It encouraged such pursuit, for it revealed the fact
that God loved holiness, since he himself was holy. 4. It wa» the essential preparation
for the kingdom of God.

IV. Itb OBUaATioN. 1. To exalt the Lord God. In their hearts' worship and
adoration ; in their open confession of his Name ; in their faithful obedience to his
will. 2. Worship at his footstool. Such worship was his due. It aided the realization
of God's presence, deepened the conviction of his holy and perfect nature, roused
the affections of the heart, strengthened the resolves of the will, and helped mightily
towards the attainment of like holy character in themselves. — S. C.

Ver. 8. — Forgiveness consistent with vengeance. This is a strange statement, but it
is what this verse and numerous others and many facts beside clearly declare. There-
fore, that we may the better understand this apparent contradiction, consider —

L The MBANma of the teems employed. There are three : 1. " Thou answeredst
them." That is, answered their prayers for forgiveness of the people. Moses, Aaron,
Samuel, had each this in common — that once and again they were intercessors with God
on behalf of Israel who had sinned (Numb. ziv. 13, etc. ; xvi. 47 ; 1 Sam. xii. 19, etc.).
And their intercession was eflfectual. Nevertheless, vengeance followed. 2. " Thoufor-
gavest them." What is God's forgiveness ? It is not the mere letting off of punishment.
That may be done, often is done, but there is no forgiveness. And it is distinctly said
here that God did forgive, though he did not forego punishment. It is true that the
word " though " in this verse should rather be rendered " and ; " but this alteration
does not really alter the sense, the two seemingly incompatible ideas of forgiveness and
vengeance are linked together all the same. But they are not incompatible ideas if we
consider what God's forgiveness really is. What is a father's forgiveness of his child ?
" Let us remember our own childhood, our children, if we have any, and how we do
with them. What makes the little face fall, and the tears come to the eyes ? Is it
your taking down the rod from behind the door, or the grave disapprobation in your
face, and the trouble and rebuke in your eyes ? It is not only the buffet from the
father's hand that makes the punishment, but still more the disturbance and the
displeasure of the lather's heart that makes the child's punishment. And forgiveness
is not complete when the father says, ' Well, go away ; I will not hurt you,' but when
he says, ' Well, come, I am not angry with you ; I love you still.' The taking the
child to the father's heart is the forgivenefs " (Maclaren). And such is God's forgive-
ness — the taking back of his sinful child to his heart again. If that were not done, no
mere remission of penalty could ever make the soul blessed. The soul of man is so
constituted that it would say over and over again, "Never mind the penalty; I can
bear that if only I have the love." Forgiveness, therefore, is the putting away of
anger from the heart of God towards the sinner. 3. " Vengeance." This does not
mean revenge. The punishment of a criminal by the state is not an act of revenge,
but the due maintenance of righteous law — a maintenance necessary for the preservation
of society, and oftentimes for the reformation of the criminal himself. And so when
God allows and, indeed, causes the consequences of the sinner's crime to dog his foot-
steps, and darken his life, and cause him sore sorrow, he may, he does, do that for
reasons altogether consistent with the love which has already led him to forgive the
sin and to receive the sinner back into his heart's love again.

II. The teuth the text declares. That prayers may be answered and
forgiveness bestowed, and yet vengeance taken. 1. This is so. See case of Moses and
Aaron; they were forgiven men, beloved of the Lord, yet their penalty — exclusion
from Canaan — was never removed. David (2 Sam. xiL 10) was forgiven, but the



M. xcix. 1—9.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 349



penalty was exacted. All his after-life testified to the truth here declared. Israel :
they were forgiven, but for their unbelief none of them entered into their rest. And it
is so still. How niany a forgiven child of God is yet bearing in weakened health, in
tarnished reputation, in stern poverty, in enfeebled will, in recurring fierce temptation,
in shortened and saddened life, the consequences of former sin 1 But there is no doubt

that they are forgiven and true children of &od ; and yet And it probably will be

so. Until the ends and purposes for which these penalties are exacted are fulfilled,
how can they come to an end ? They are inflicted in love, not wrath, and love must
hold us down to the endurance of tbem until that which is desired is attained. Hence :
2. Such retribution is consistent with forgiveness. For though the outward penalty be
continued, its character is changed. It is now not a token of anger, liut a means of
blessing. For such sufferings deepen our hatred of sin, drive us to God in prayer, keep
as lowly before God and man in humility, make us ever watchful and compassionate
to other tempted ones, enable us to glorify God amid all, maintain the truth of God's
holy law of retribution. If along with forgiveness there came at once remission of all
penalty, we should think that God did not care much for sin, and certainly we should
not. But they will cease when their purpose is accomplished.

III. The lessons it teaches. 1. Bate sin. 2. Bob it of its sting by turning to
Christ in repentance, by submission to his will, by careful obedience in the future, and
by daily, hourly trust in his grace. 3. Fiyht against it in others. 4. Exalt the Lord
Jesus Christ, who makes us more than conquerors over it. — S. 0.

Ver. 1. — 2%« permanency of God's reign. " He sitteth between the cherubim."
Jennings and Lowe render, " Jehovah has become King, the peoples tremble ; (even)
he that sits upon the cherubim, the earth shakes." There is a designed contrast. The
peoples tremble, the king is established firm ; the earth shakes, the throne of the king
is steady and unmoved. The figure of God as sitting on the cherubim is difficult,
because we cannot be quite sure of the idea» Israelites had of the position and relations
of the fire-symbol of God in the holy of holies. In Ps. Ixxx. L God is presented as
" sitting throned above the cherubim ; " and the idea here is probably " aiove the
cherubim" rather than "on the cherubim." Then we get a clear meaning. The
cherubim represent all created beings superior to man, all supersensual beings; and
Qod is to be thought of as beyond and above even them, as superior to them as to the
people of this earth, and as unaffected by conceivable changes in them as he is unaffected
by the commotions of earth. The more usual way of explaining the figure is given by
Spurgeon, thus : " In grandeur of sublime glory, yet in nearness of mediatorial conde-
scension, Jehovah revealed himself above the mercy-seat, whereon stood the lil^eness
of those flaming ones who gaze upon his glory, and for ever cry, ' Holy, holy, holy.
Lord God of hosts.' "

I. God's reiqn established. Keep the associations of the restored exiles. They
set up agaia the theocratic kingdom, and conceived of Jehovah as coming again to
leign. So tl^ey naturally recalled the old sign of his presence and rule, the Shechinah-
light which shone above the mercy-seat, which the cherubic figures guarded. The sign
of the lapse of the nation from Jehovah was the fading or removing of that light.
Kow the restored exiles rejoiced in the resumption of Jehovah's reign, and in figure
presented it as God taking his seat again above the cherubim. God takes the throne
only when hearts are willing to receive him.

LL God's beion cosfirmed. The satisfaction of the psalmist evidently is in the
fact that God means to stay enthroned. He is conceived of as unaffected by the
trembling of the people or the shaking of the earth. There is even a more striking
poetical figure. If even the cherubim were to tremble, or shake, or fail, God's reign is
too confirmed to be affected by it. We may think of him as "above the cherubim."
Absolute reliance on him may find expression in loyal and loving service of him.
— B.T.

Ver. 3. — TTie holiness of God. Revised Version, " Holy is he." The refrain of the
psalm is found in these words. Possibly it was given as a response by the congregation.
What is prominent here, however, is not the purity that is in holiness, as the majesty
that is in it, the severity that is in it. The psalmist is full of the " greatness " and



350 THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [P8. xoix. 1— 9.

the " terriblonesB " of the Divine Name, and this makes him say it is reverend, it ia
awe-inspiring. It is one of the serious evils of our day, that tlie more august and
solemnizing views of God seem to be lost. There is so little now of the " submission
of holy awe." Even iu acts of homage and worship we have to fear the encroachments
of an undue familiarity. Hebrews luay let reverence pass into superstition when they
refuse to pronounce the Divine name, but it is to run to the opposite and even more
dangerous extreme when we, at the lightest provocation, take the holy Kame upon our
lips. To-day we need to put deeper and more searching and more awe-inspiring
meanings than ever into the " great and terrible Name " of the All-holy One. It is not
" holiness " as a Divine attribute, but " holiness " as making a Divine claim, which we
have here to consider.

L The Divinb holiness a8 a claim fob wobship. 1. Take " holiness " as ideal,
absolute perfection, the sublimest idea of being that man can possibly reach. Where-
ever man finds that, in whomsoever he finds that, he is bound to worship. Show that
man can think a holiness which neither be nor any other has ever, or can ever, reach.
Ood is presented as the perfect realization of that thought, so for God man has the
highest reverence. 2. Take " holiness " as finding expression in righteousness and
faithfulness. Then every review of the Divine dealings wakens in us the spirit of
worship. There is so much to thank God for, to trust God for, to honour God for.

IL The Divine holiness as deciding the oharaoteb op wobship. There is a
tone of familiarity and lightness in much that is called " worship," which, though not
wrong, is unbecoming and unworthy. We need say no evil of those who put noise and
excitement in place of reverence, but we may urge that an atmosphere of quietness,
solemnity, awe, are becoming to God's house. Beverence, humility, self-restraints,
submissive awe, are befitting his worship of whom it is said, " Holy is he." — B. T.

Ver. 5. — Our place at Ood's footstool. "And worship at his footstool;'' "Worship
at his holy hill ; " " Thus saith the Lord, The heaven is my throne, and the earth is
my footstool. Where is the house that ye build unto me ? and where is the place of
my rest ? " (Isa. Ixvi, 1). To understand this figure two things must be considered :
{1) the peculiarity of Eastern thrones; (2) the peculiarity of Eastern salutations.
Eastern thrones were high erections, so that the king, seated in his place, might be
exalted (see expression in psalm) high above the people. The seat was reached by a
series of steps ; the bottom step was known as the " king's footstool," and the suppliant
for the king's mercy, or the man who brought presents as signs of loyalty, showed his
humility and reverence by venturing no further than the footstool. Solomon had made
a throne of ivory, overlaid with gold, which had six steps, with six lions on each side.
Salutations in the East were very elaborate, and approaches to a superior, especially
when a request had to be made, involved bending right to the ground.

I. Eeepino at a distance as a sign of humility and awe. Illustrated bj
Moses turning aside to see the bush that was buruing, but was not being consumed.
He heard a Divine voice saying, " Draw not nigh hither ; put off thy shoes from oft
thy feet, for the place whereon thou standest is holy ground." When the people were
facing the Mount Sinai, whereon God was manifesting his glory, extreme care was
taken to keep the people at a becoming distance. " Take heed to yourselves, that ye
go not up into the mount, or touch the border of it ; whosoever toncheth the mount
shall be surely put to death." The symbol of the Divine presence was placed in the
dark chamber known as the holy of holies, and no one dared go near, save the high
priest once a year, and then not without incense and blood. These are picture-
teachings of the humility in worship we must cherish, which will be our " spiritual
distance-keeping."

II. Keeping on the bottom step as a sign of oub godly feab. It is the
suppliant's proper place ; but it is more especially the place for that suppliant who
knows his sin, asks for forgiveness, yet justly fears the king's indignation. Until the
king reaches out his golden sceptre to be touched, a sinful suppliant dare venture no
further than the bottom step. And that is our fitting place, because we never can go
into the Divine presence without the sense of our sin filling us with godly fear. — R.T.

Ver. 6. — Model worshippers. The reason for recalling these three worshippers



PS. xoix. 1—9.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 861

belonging to the olden times, and these three only, does not immediately appear. And

it is singular to find both Moses and Aaron classed as priests. Probably, before the

appointment of the Levitical priesthood, Moses had been the priest as well as leader of

the people. The thought appears to be that men may now call upon and worship Gud

with the assured confidence that he receives worship and answers prayers even as he

' has always done. As specimens of God's ways with his people who seek him, Moses

, and Aaron are brought as types of those who otfer worsbip; and Samuel is brought as

/ a type of those who present supplications. So the two sides of worship are presented,

praise and prayer.

I. Moses and Aabon the models of worship as pbaise. This ia the Godward
side of worship. It is knowing God, offering Uod his due, recognizing the Divine
mercies and judgments, making offerings due unto his Name. And Moses and Aaroa
represent worship as presented in God's own appointed way, in the line of his own
arrangements. This brings in the element of obedience, and every true act of worship
is an act of obedience, and an expression of the spirit of obedience. Worship may
be wholly praise, and God says, " Whoso offereth praise glorifieth me." From the
worship-system of Moses and Aaron, show what are the essential elements of all
acceptable worship, such as aduratioo, thanksgiving, confessions, and expressions of
dependence. Symbolic rites only belong to particular times and people, but the spirit
which the rites symbolize is required in every age and of every people. The underlying
spirit of Mosaism is the spirit of al! true and acceptable worship to-day.

II. Sauuel the model of wobshif as pbayeb. Probably Samuel is chosen
because prayer was recognized as the most marked peculiarity of his life. He would
spend nights in prayer. He seems to have had a peculiar cry, or scream, in prayer.
Now, prayer is not essential to all worship ; but prayer is true worship, because the act
and expression of dependence on God is one of our best ways of doing honour to his
Name. So the model worsliip is a holy blending of praise and prayer. — B. T.

Ver, 8. — The Answerer of the worship/id. " Thou answeredst them, Lord our God."
It is prayer as worship which is here more especially dealt with. Gtxl responds to
man's homage. The context brings the following points before us.

I. God made known his claim to homage and wobshif. See ver. 7, " He spake
unto them in the cloudy pillar." The cloudy pillar being regarded as the emblem of
God's miraculous interpositions and various revelations, God declared himself to be
their God, and demanded their entire reverence aud obedience. He gave them his
testimonies, and set his ordinances plainly before them. So we must feel that, the full
revelations of God having come to us, we know distinctly what our service should be.

IL Thet besfonoed to God's olaim bt wobshifful obedience. Observe the
blending of two things : " They kept the testimonies, or laws, and the ordinances, or
religious regulations, that he gave them." Note that of this obedience and worship
Moses and Aaron are made types in one age, and Samuel in another ; but the response
of the people Israel is assumed as represented by the types. It is not enough that we
know God's testimonies and ordinances; our proper response is the fixed habit of
worshipful obedience.

III. 600 BECOONIZEB AND BEWABDS SUCH OBEDIENT BE8P0NSB. That U the

"answering" which is here referred to. 1. We may always be sure of the Divine
recognition of sincere worship, let its form be prayer or praise. 2. We may have good
hope of its acceptance. 3. We are sure of a first answer in the blessing that worship
brings to our own hearts. 4. We may even think our loyalty brings the blessing to
others of an inspiring example. 5. And beyond all our imagination, God is wont to
give direct answers to prayer, and gracious, comforting acknowledgments and rewards
to worshipping souls. — ^B. T.

Ver. 8. — The limitations of Divine forgiveness. The " inventions " here are simply
"doings;" but the word seems to imply "self-willed doings." So we read, "God
made man upright ; but he has sought out many inventions." There is no allusion to
"scientific discoveries." When we read the passages in which Divine forgiveness
seijms so absolutely assured, it is necessary that we bear in mind how the Divine
forgiveness may be absolute in the Divine purpose, yet must be limited in Divine



352



THE BOOK OF PSALMS.



[ps. o. 1 — 5.



application. We can at once think of two limitations. 1. The exigencies of Grod'a
universal rule. 2. The moral condition of those whom God would forgive.

I. FOBOIVEHESB LIMITED BT THE EXISENOIEB OF 6od's UNIVERSAL BULE. That

demands the recognition, and the adequate punishment, of all acts of wilful sin. God
has ordered the relation of things in nature so that suffering certainly attends sin, and
calls attention to the character of sin. In the interests of the race, that relation must
be maintained ; it must never for one moment even seem to be doubtful. Even in
God's chosen people wilful wrong-doing must be duly punished ; and so even when God
forgives the wilfulness, he does not interfere with the punishments. Of this Moses
and Aaron present striking instances. They sadly failed in the matter of the smitten
rock. They were forgiven, but the penalty of their sin came on them. They died on
this side Jordan, with their life-hope unrealized.

II. FoBttlVBKESS LIMITED BV THE MOBAIi CONDITION OF THOSE WHOM GoD WOULD

FOBOrvE. We do not sufficiently realize that God would have his forgiveness prove
the best possible moral blessing to those whom he forgives. Forgiveness only blesses
those who are in a mood to receive forgiveness. And so we see that punishment, along
with forgiveness, may be necessary in order to get the forgiven into proper soul-moods.
Christ taught that his disciples could not be forgiven unless they were forgiving.
They must be in right mood to receive. So there are holy limitations even to the
Divine free forgiveness. — B. T.

Vers. 1 — 9. — Tht holy Ood infinitely worthy of our worship. I. Because of his
UNIVERSAL BUPBEMACT. (Vers. 1 — 3.) His power exercised for the ends of goodness.
" He is great in Zion," the most beneficent institution.

n. Because he bules fob the establishment of bight and tbutb. (Vers.
4, 6.) He is setting up throughout the world righteous order, establishing the
dominion of right and justice.

III. Because he eeabs and answers those who pbat to him. (Vers. 6, 7.)
Grants them their need ; speaks to their minds ; reveals his Law and his will to them ;
still guides as he guided his ancient people.

IV. Because he is mbbciful to the penitknt. (Ver. 8.) " Then wast a God
that forgavest them."

V. Because he punishes the impenitent. (Ver. 8.) This is as great a necessity
of his nature and rule as that he should pardon the penitent. He is holy.— S.



EXPOSITION.



PSALM 0.
Thi hundredth psalm lias for its title, " A
Psalm of praise," or "of thanksgiving,"
and to this description it well answers.
There is not a single mournfnl note in the
composition. God is praised from the
beginning to the end, and all the earth is
called upon to join in blessing and thank-
ing him. It has been suggested that it
was probably written to be chanted by a
festive procession as it approached and
entered tlie temple (see ver. 4). The whole
rum on without any break or division.

Ver. 1. — Hake a joyful noise nnto the
Iiord (oomp. Ps. xov. 1, 2, and tlie oomment
ad toe.). All ye lands; literally, all the
earth,

Ver. 2. — Serve the Lord with gladness.
" Gladness " is the emphatic word. Almost



every clause of the psalm contains some
snch call. Come before his presence with
ringing ; or, with a cry of joy.

Yer. 3. — ^Enow ye that the lord he ia
God ; or, be sure — " recognize the fact as a
certainty " (see the Prayer-book Version).
It is he that hath made us, and not we onr-
selves; or, accor<ling to unother reading,
and his are we. This latter reading is pre-
ferred by De Wette, Kay, Gheyne, and the
Revised Version. But the other, which
was the reading of the LXX., and is sup-
ported by the Vulgate and the old com-
mentators generally, should, however, be
retained, as yielding a better sense (see the
arguments of Hengstenberg, ' Commentary
on the Psalms,' vol. iii. p. 201, Engl, trans.).
We are his people, and the sheep of hU
pasture (oomp. Pss. Izziv. 1; Ixxiz. 18;
xov. 7).

Ver 4. — Enter into his gates with thankf-
giving, and into his courts with praiae.
The mention of " gates " and " courts " points



n. o. 1 — 6.]



THE BOOK OP PSALMS.



853



primarily to the temple-trorship, but the
reference may be, as Professor Alexander
suggests, *' typical or metaphorical " rather
than literal, and may extend to all the
&ithfn) and to all places of worship. Be
thanktnl unto him ; or, give thanks unto him
(Bevised Version). And bless his Name
{oomp. Pss. xcvi. 2 ; cxlv. 21).

Ver. 5. — For the Lord is good (oomp,
1 Chron. xvi. 34; 2 Chron. v. 13; vii. 3;
E!zra iii. 11 ; Pss. cvL 1 ; ovii. 1 ; oxviii. 1,
29; cxxT. 8; oxxxvi. 1; cxlv. 9, etc). Hia



mercy is everlasting; literally, his merey it
for ever. Compare the frequent refrain,
" His mercy endureth for ever " (Pss. cxviii.
1—4, 29; cxxxvi. 1—26, etc.). And hli
truth (or, his faithfulness) endureth to all
generations ; literally, to generation and
generation. All men's hope is in God's
"faithfulness," that he will keep his pro-
mises to them — pardon them, deliver them,
cleanse them, and give them rest in his
kingdom for ever.



H0MILETIC8.

Ver. 1. — 2%e Joy of service. (Sermon for missions.) In this short psalm a note is
flonnded which echoes, and will never cease to echo, through the world. The trumpet
of jubilee is blown, not for Israel, but for all mankind. Brief as this psalm is, it is one
of the most wonderful portions of Scripture, glowing with self-evident light of inspira-
tion, not poetic, but prophetic, Divine. This first verse exhibits the three characteristic
features of the whole psalm — its caihoUcity ; its Joyfulness ; its hope and promise.

I. Here, in the very heart of Old Testament Scriptures, is an anticipation of Christ's
world-wide command (Mark xvi. 15 ; Matt, xxviii. 19). No trace of either national
«xclu8iveness or ecclesiastical bigotry. God's temple is throwa open to all mankind
{ver. 4). " CJourts," not the " court of the Gentiles " merely. All men alike are invited
to say, " His we are [see margin] ; we are his people." It is impossible to explain
such words from Jewish 4ips, such feelings in Jewish hearts, but by Divine inspiration
(cf. Gal. iii. 8).

II. Jot nr God ib one or thb most mabkkd featubes of the Psalms. In this
psalm it rises to its highest pitch. Worship is a native instinct and need of the
human heart; and heathen worship was often attended with tumultuous rejoicing.
But not joy in God^s holiness (Pg. zcvii. 10 — 12) ; in our belonging absolutely to him
fPs. cxix. 94) ; in his righteous rule (Ps. xcviii. 6, 9) ; in his mercy and truth (ver. 6).

These streams of joy are from a higher source ((ral. v. 22).

III. This psalm can be fullt undbbstood onlt taken with Pss. xciii. 95 — 99.
The whole series not only celebrates, but foretells, the coming of Jehovah to "judge,"
ije. to rale and reign over the whole world (comp. Ps. Ixxii.). Such bold world-wide
hopes would be utterly inexplicable as mere poetic dreams of Jewish imagination, and
«an be explained only as inspired prophecies and promises; so they would be wholly
unmeaning and fictitious apart from their fulfilment in Christ (John v. 22, 23 ; xiL
32 ; Matt, xxviii. 18).

Conclusion. The enterprise of Christian missions is the most joyful work in the
world; the proclamation of the most joyful news to every human being, an the
«athority of God's command, in the light of God's glorious promises.



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHOBS.

Vers. 1 — 5. — Jubilate. This psalm, which comes at the close of the magnificent
series of royal psalms, which tell of the reign of Christ Jehovah, has been called their
^oxology. It seems to have been sung during the thank offering in the temple service
(Lev. vii. 12). " Luther would have immortalized his name had he done no more
than written the majestic air and harmony to which we are accustomed to sing this
psalm, and which, when the mind is in a truly worshipping frame, seems to bring
heaven down to earth, and to raise earth to heaven, giving us anticipations of the pure
and sublime delights of that noble and general assembly in which saints and angels
shall for ever celebrate the praises of God." The psalm " is all ablaze with grateful
adoration, and has, for this reason, been a great favourite with the people of God ever
since it was written." It bids us " make a joyful noise unto the Lord." It means "a

PSALMS — IL 2 A



364 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. o. 1— 6.

glad shout, such as loyal 'subjeots give when their king appears among them." Now,
let us consider this subject of thankful praise which it brings so prominently before
us. Let us glance at —

I. The holt dutt to which we abb summoned. 1, Our hearts are to he full of
thanksgiving. It is no mere outside worship which is told of here, but such as wells
up from the deepest fountaios of a grateful and glad heart. 2. We are to openly avov
that thankfulness. It is not, though beginning in the heart, to stay there. Openly,
loudly, joyfully, we are to let all men know our delight in God. 8. We are to Join
with others in this service of praise. There is to be no standing aloof or pleading that
we can worship God as well at home. We are to go with the multitude to keep holy
day. 4. And it is to be all tmto t?ie Lord. Choirs and congregations alike are to
remember this.

II. The ORonNDB oh which this summons is based. 1. " 2%« Lord, he is God."
Our Jehovah, so good and gracious, is Gud Almighty also. Not only a Saviour who
would fain bless and save us ; but who has all power — ^is mighty to save. 2. Hie it
our Creator, and so responsible for our leing. " It is he that hath made us," etc,
(ver. 3). 'Ihis is a most blessed fact. When we see what men and women are, so
corrupt and evil, we often wonder wherefore God perpetuates the race. But he does
so ; he takes all the responsibility of it. What treasure store of hope for humanity
lies in this act I 3. He is our King and Shepherd. " We are his people, and," etc.
(ver. 3.) We are under his wise, holy, strong government ; we are provided for by
his loving care, led along as his sheep in his pasture. 4. He is good, eternally merdftd,
and true. (Ver. 6.)

III. The cultivation of this thankful spirit. Many sadly fail here. They
have no song, only a perpetual dirge, and against many the condemnation is written,
"Neither were they thankful." Now, how may we cultivate this thankful spirit?
1. We must remove the hindrances. They are such as these : The miserable habit of
looking enviously at what other people have, but which we have not, forgetting all
the while what of good we nevertheless have. What folly this ! and yet how common I
and what a fruitful source of unbappiness, and of unthankfulness it is I And many
are wont to look habitually on the dark side of their experience, and scarcely at all
on the other and bright side. This is why St. Paul bids ns, amid our prayers and
supplications, to mingle thanksgivings, since this compels us to look at the bright side,
in order to find out what we have to be thankful for. And then, too, our sad habit of
regarding our ordinary mercies as mere matters of course is another sad hincirance of
the thankful spirit. When health is restored after sore illness, how thankful we are I
but the months and years of health which may follow give ample time to forget our
thankfulness, and to let uur gratitude die because we do not see anything extraordinary
about our experience of God's goodness. Now, we must set ourselves to get rid of these
evil ways if we would be habitually thankful. 2. Then there are, positive aids to this
blessed spirit. Such as taking right views of life, remembering its brevity and its
educational purpose. We are not at home here, and we cannot expect on a journey
the comforts of home. And a school — and such is this life — is certainly not as a home,
as his father's house, to a child. Then think much of our mercies. Accustom yourself
to go over them in youjf'thoughts, and to render thanksgiving for them. And when
mist'ortunei come, makd the best, not the worst, of them. Remember how much worse
it might have beeUy/f t is told that " when the New England colonies were first planted,
the settlers endui'^ many privations and difiiculties. Being piously disposed, they
laid their distresses before God in frequent days of fasting and prayer. Constant
meditation on such topics kept their minds gloomy and discontented, and made them
disposed even to return to their Fatherland with all its persecutions. At length,
when it was proposed to appoint a day of fasting and prayer, a plain, common-sense
old colonist was in the meeting, and remarked that he thought they had brooded long
enough over their misfortunes, and that it seemed high time they should consider
some of their mercies — that the colony was growing strong, the fields increasing in
harvests, the rivers full of fish, and the woods of game, the air sweet, the climate
salubrious, and their homes happy ; above all that, they possessed what they came
for, full civil and religious liberty. And therefore, on the whole, he would amend
their resolution for a fast, and propose in its stead a day of thanksgiTing. His advice



P8. 0. 1— 6.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 356



was taken, and from that day to ibis the festival has been an annual one." Ah !
would that we bad men of this spirit, and would make the best, not the worst, of uur
misfortunes I " The bee when in a flower from which it cannot get nectar, gets the golden
farina, out of which it builds its cells, and so it rolls up its little legs against the stamens,
till they look large and loaded as golden store, and, thanking the flower as sweetly as il
it had been full of honey, gladly humming, it flies home with its wax. Yes, and
herein lies God's moral. If our flowers have no honey, let us be glad of the wax." The
same writer who gives the above illustrations tells how the good, though self-willed,
George III., when he had lost all our American colonies, and thousands of oui troops
had been slain, and millions upon millions of debt incurred, nevertheless, not to be
outdone in piety by the Americans, ordered a day of thanksgiving. He was asked
by a pious clergyman what the thanksgiving was to be for — ^was it to be for any of the
above-named facts? He pressed the king for an answer^ho replied energetically,
" Thank God it is not any worse." Tes ; there is something to be thankful for in all
circumstances, if we will only be open-eyed to note it,/Eemember, too, that our evils
are but blessings in disguise. ' " Light afSictions y^o St. Paul called them — " which
are but for a moment, and which work for us," etc. Above all, let us give our hearts to
Christ. Yield them to him, as he bids us do ; and as he will by his blessed Spirit fill
them with all other good things, so he will shed abroad in them this grace also, the
spirit of thankfulness.

lY. Beasons roB such onLTivATiOK. 1. Our circumstances demand U : we have
cause for thankfulness. 2. It vnll greatly Hess others. For a glad, thankful spirit is
winsome and attractive Christwards, whilst the opposite spirit cannot but repeL 8.
For our own sake. It will brighten all our life, whilst if, owl-like, we dwell in darkness,
we shall come to love it, and be as dim-sighted and night-haunting as they. 4. And
doesnot theLord our Qodand Saviour deserve all owrpraise 1 Therefore, jubilate. — S. C.

Ver. 2, — Olad service. " Serve the Lord with gladness." So singa the psalmist, and
his teaching has been echoed by the wisest of human teachers. " Gira me the man
who singB at his work ; " so writes Carlyle.

" A merry heart goes all the day,
Your sad tires in a mile-a."

So teaches Shakespeare. Kow glad service is what God asks for here. But^

I. It is all too babe. That it is so is evident ; for : 1. Look at the comitenances
of those who pro/ess to serve God. How grave, gloomy, austere, they seem I how seldom
they ripple out into sunny smiles ! This characteristic of the Puritans has hiad not a
little to do with the disfavour in which they have long been and are still held by our
countrymen generally. A common epithet for earnestly religious persons was that
they were " serious people." Certainly they were not thought to " serve the Lord
with gladness." 2. Bead their writings. Their hymns, even, are either sad or stern,
and as to their books and sermons, they are full of grave, earnest, and often terrible
teaching; but " gladness " is conspicuous chiefly by its absence. And theii prayers
are the same. As if God were a tyrannical Taskmaster, and not our loving Father.
3. Listen to their teachings. How much too dull and sombre these are I 4- Observe
their worship. How bare and uninspiring I how destitute of beauty and bri^'htness I
how much too often it depresses rather than uplifts I 6. Ask our own consciences.
Must they not own the general absence of gladness in our service of the Lord ? 6. If
it be asked — Why is this gladness so raret the answer is that with some the sense of
sin, the remembrance of their much transgression, is ever before them ; with others,
the mystery of life, the presence of earthly sorrow; with others, the tyranny of
inward sin ; with others, misunderstanding and misreading of the Gospel ; and with yet
others, and most, the want of real trust in God. We are so slow to take God at his
word, and when he says he has forgiven us, to believe that he has really done so.

n. BCT OLADNEBB DT TBE LoBD, THOUGH SO BABE, 18 TET MOST BXASONABLB.

Whether we think : 1. 0/ the Lord whom we serve. How good and grarious he is 1
2. Or of the service itself. How healthful, right, blessed both for oursel es and for
others! 3. Or of the wages. " The recompense of the reward." We are al little better
than eleventh-hour workers, and yet for us there is the whole day's wage.



356 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. c. 1— 5,

III. And ALOKi, EFFECTUAL. 1. It ts SO in our secular work. Slave-work, task-
work, is never like that of free men. All the heart Is taken out of it if it be not glad
service such as only free men can render. 2. Yet more in the seruice of the Lord.
See the elder son in the parable of the prodigal. He had no joy in his service, and
fcenoe how harsh and unloving he became 1 This is why St. Paul is for ever rejoicing
that we are not under law, but under grace. So only will real service be rendered.

IV. And it ought to be. See in that same parable the father's reply, " Son, thou
art ever," etc. He was surprised at such a spirit in his son ; it ought to have been so
different. But if it was wrong for that elder brother, who never transgressed, how
much more wrong for us who have transgressed, and yet have been freely forgiven <
Pray, therefore, not only that you may serve the Lord, but that you may serve hin
" with gladness."— S. 0.

Ver. 3. — The gonpel of our creation. "It is he that hath made us, and not we
ourselves." This declaration was held to be a gospel. It occurs in a psalm that may
well be regarded as a universal psalm. It is not for Jesus only, but for " all people
that on earth do dwell." And amongst the reasons wheiefore it calls on all to be
joyful in the Lord, there is this one — that "it is he that hath made us," etc.

I. Now, WE CANNOT CONCEIVE OF GoD AS AOTINO WITHOUT MOTIVE. And

II. ThEBEFOBE THBBK must have BEEN MOTIVE FOE THE CBBATION OF MAN. We

can trace reasons and evidence of purpose in all God's works, and hence we are sure
there must have been such when he created man.

III. And this motive must have been gbaoious ob the bevebbe. 1. It could
not have been the reverse; for, whether we look at the structure of man's body, where
all seems so adapted to secure health and happiness ; or whether we look at man's
mind, the source to him of such unspeakable good ; or whether we think of man's
dwelling-place, this earth on which he lives, and which is so stored with all that
ministers to his comfort, delight, and well-being; — whichever way we turn there is
proof abundant that no malignant motive, or any the reverse of gracious, could have
prompted the creation of man. 2. Therefore we are shut up to the conclusion that love,
grace, goodness, can alone explain what we see aU around us and in ourselves.

IV. But IP THE motive was a gbacious one, what was rr ? For answer : 1. We
look to our own constitution, for that is the nearest idea we can have of Ood who made
us in his own image. And we find : 2. That the purest pleasure springs from love —
loving others and being loved by them. Why is home so blessed, but because there
they are whom we tenderly love, and who love us in like manner ? 3. But love that
has stood trial and testing is the most precious of all. If, in spite of every inducement
to be untrue to us, love has been faithful, how precious that 1 4. But all this reveal*
the reason* wherefore God hath made us, and placed us where we are. He desured
objects on whom he might lavish his love, and who would love him, in whose love
is our eternal life. And that love would be more precious and more fruitful unto our
eternal life in proportion as it endured test and trial (cf. 1 Pet. i. 7). Hence we are
born into a world of temptation, for so only can our love be perfected. 5. But sucA
temptation will in no case le greater than we can hear. A father may let his sen
enter for a contest which he knows his son can and will, if he rightly strive, come
out with honour; but he would not let him enter where defeat was certain and
inevitable. And so our heavenly Father will not suffer us to be tempted above that
we are able, though what we are able for we have to endure, because it is good for us
[bat we should. He will submit no child of his to what must issue in ultimate defeat.
We cannot conceive of his having created us, knowing that that would be the final
Issue.

V. Thebefore we sat that the fact of oub cbeation bt God is a vebt gospel
with which the gospel that " God so loved the world," eta ^ohn iii. 16), fitly and
beautifully harmonizes. Yes, we may well be joyful in the Lord, because it is " he
that hath made us," etc. — S. 0.

Ver. 5. — "Hi* truth endureth." Test this declaration.

I. As to what God himself is. He is ever true. None of the miserable motives
which lead men to be untrue can have any power with him. Examine aU his works,



PS. ft 1—5.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 357

whether in nature, providence, or grace, and in all it will be found that he act8 con-
sistently with himself.

II. As TO HIS WoBD OF TRUTH. That is contained in the Holy Scriptures, and
whether we appeal to the testimony of conscience, or to that of history, their witness
agrees to and afBrms the declaration of our text.

III. As TO HIS FAITHFULNESS. The onus prohandi lies on those who deny this.
Where can it be shown that one of his promises, when rightly understood, has ever
failed? What thing hath he spoken that hath not come to pass? Trace the records
of the Bible, and they form a great cloud of witnesses to this truth. Trace the course
of providetioe, and its varied events all show that his truth endureth. Trace the
experience of God's people, and it is the same. Let the following quotation illustrate :
" Now instead of talking you biioli to ancient or modern history, I would like to take
you to the history of your mother or of your grandmother. I think of my dear
grandfather, and of what he used to say to me. If he were here to-night — I am glad
he is not, because he is in heaven, and that is a much better place for him ; but if lie
could come from heaven, and could talk as he used to do when he was here on earth,
he would say, ' Ah, my boy, I did find him a faithful God.' He had a large family
and a small iucome, but he loved his Lord, and he would not have given up his
preaching of the gospel for anything, not even for an imperial crown. He has told me
often how the Lord provided for him. He bad a little farm to get his living; upon it,
and he had a cow which used to give milk for his many children, and one day when
he came up to the cow it fell back with the staggers, and died. Grandmother said,
'James, how will God provide for the dear children now? What shall we do for
milk?' 'Mother,' said he, 'God said he would provide, and I believe he could send
us fifty cows if he pleased.' It so happened that on that day a number of gentlemen
were meeting in London — persons whom he did not know — were sitting as a committee
for the distribution of money to poor ministers, and they had given it to all who had
asked for it. My grandfather had never asked for any ; he liked to earn his own
money. He did not send any petition or appeal. Well, after the gentlemen had
distributed to all who had asked there were five pounds over, and they were consider-
ing what they should do with this balanae. 'Well,' said one, ' there is a Mr. Spurgeon,
down at Stambourne, in Essex, a poor minister; he stands in need of five pounds.'
' Oh,' said another, ' don't send him five pounds : I will put five to it ; I know him ;
he is a worthy man.' ' No,' said another, ' don't send him ten pounds ; I will give
another five pounds, if some one else will put a fourth five to it.' The next morning
came a letter with ninepence to pay. Grandmother did not like to pay ninepence for
it ; but there was twenty pounds in it, and as my grandfather opened it, he said, ' Now
can't you trust God about an old cow?' These things I tell you, and you smile,
and well you may ; but, oh, my soul laughs, and my face laughs on both sides when
I think how faithful God has been to me. He has never lied unto me, or failed me, or
forsaken me ; but has kept his word to this moment in every respect " (Spurgeon).
But such experience as this the whole army of the saints of God can furnish instances
of. It is no solitary example.

IV. Thbebfokb believe foe all THE FUTURE. Go forward with a cheerful courage,
thou child of God, fully persuaded of what all the past of all the people of God
abundantly proves, that his truth shall endure, and that he " will never leave thee
nor forsake thee."— S. 0.

Ver. 2. — Service with gladness. " Make a joyful noise ; " " Serve the' Lord with
gladness ; come before his presence with singing." It does not appear that anything
in the nature of a song-service was connected with the Mosaic tabernacle. David
systematized, if he did not actually introduce, that element. And it made a vital
change. Previously the Divine worship had been a ceremony ; from that time it became
a service. Previously it had been an affair exclusively of priests; from that time it
became an affair of priests and people. Singing is the portion of service in which the
people can share. Instrumental music, in the olden time, was not the refined exjjres-
sion of various moods of feelings that we know. Noise was thought more of than
harmony; though the stringed instruments must have been capable of delicate
expression. Just as children now express their joy by noisy "hurrahs!" so the



358 THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [i*. a 1— 5

Hebrews expressed joy hy great shouts, loud blasts, and noisy clangings. What we
may properly learn is that the elements of joy and gladneu, which find their easiest
and best expression in music and song, are the proper accompaniment of all worship
offered to God. It has been pointed out that " thanksgiTing and praise are the highei
elements of worship, and so the essence of the worship of heaven ; confession and
prayer belotjg to the imperfection of earth.

I. G-LADNESS m THE 8EBTI0E OF God'B BOITSG IS BEOOMINa. In vleW of God'.s

gracious ways with us. They who receive gifts from friends are cheered and gladdeneci
by the gifts ; and we are receiving fresh gifts from our heavenly Friend continually.
Dulness and sadness would say that God's favours are little valued. As the thing thai
is fitting, becoming, God's people should nourish a bright, cheery, hopeful, happy
spirit.

IL Gladness in the sebtioe of God's house is HOMOUBiNa. Note that it has
ever been this feature that has made Divine service attractive. And the supreme
anxiety of each generation has been to get brightness into its service that will make it
attractive. So joy in God's house honours God by winning men to him.

III. Gladness in the service of God's house is inspibino. We are consciously
helped by sunny cheerful services. Nothing carries away our cares, doubts, fears, like
joining together in holy song. " The joy of the Lord is our strength." — R. T.

Ver. 3. — The sovereign rights of God our Maker. " It is he that hath made us."
This might truly enough be the exclamation of an individual ; but it is a public
psalm, suns at public worship, and it is the expression of a nation. Special interest
attaches to it as the language of a restored nation, one that has begun again its national
career. It must be associated with the circumstances of the returned exiles, and it is
their rejoicing in their new national relations with God. We may cover the entire
subject suggested if we take —

I. God as the Makeb of the individual. 1. It is true that God made man. The
design, the capacities, the possibilities, and the relations of man, are all and wholly
the Divine idea and the Divine handiwork. It is well to see clearly that man's own
creative power stops short at I'^e. Man can make forms ; he can quicken no forms into
life. But we want to see more impressively the truth that God made each man.
However the individuality of men may surprise us, we may be sure that we never can
get an individuality which was not the Divine thought. Man makes neither himself
nor his peculiarity. Then God, as our Maker, has first claims on those he has made.

II. God as the Makeb, ob Poundbe, of the nation. Take " nation " as type of all
kinds of ways in which men combine together. What is true of the nation is true of
the family and of the Church ; we are to recognize God as the Arranger of, and Presider
over, all forms of human combination. Illustrate from the way in which God created
the nation of Israel. Note that the creation of a nation is no simple and sudden act ;
it is a long process, a shaping and using of various agencies. God selected the nation's
beginning, disciplined a set of tribes through long generations, provided a location for
it, etc. The fact of the making of a nation being a prolonged work should not prevent
our seeing that it is God's work. Illustrate by the ' Making of England.' So God,
as the Nation-maker, has the first claim on the nations he has made.

III. God is the Makeb, in the sense of Bemakeb, of the nation. For
nations seem at times to break up, and require remaking. Illustrate by Israel's
experiences in the days of the Captivity, and our England's in the days of the Stuarts.
In this remaking we too easily overvalue the human agents. God alone can remake ;
and the agents are his agents to do his work. — B. T.

Ver. 4. — Blessing the Divine Name. " Bless his Name.* The name stands for the
Being named. It does but gather up and focus his most glorious and gracious attributes.
The distinction on which we may dwell is this — It is fitting that we render thanks to
God, in our loving recognition of what he has done for us. It is fitting that we should
bless his Name as we recognize what he must ie, who has done for us such good and
gracious things. Possibly a distinction may be made between thanking God, as a
duty which every one who receives his bounties ought to perform ; and blessing God,
which is the expression of that personal feeling towards God which only his own



M.al— 5.] THE BOUK OF PSALMS. 35a

redeemed people can cherish. We thank those who do us a kindness ; we bless those
who evidently show their personal love to us in the kindness they do us.

I. Recoonition op the Divine dealings which calls fob thanksuivino. See
in life the: 1. Divine providings. We have wanted no good thing. 2. Divine
guidings. So that we can say, " It has been a good way wherein the Lord our God
has led us." 3. Divine overrulings. We can in some measure already see that " all
things do work together for good." Since God " giveth us all things richly to enjoy,"
what should we do but be thankful ? Illustrate by Moses calling upon tlie people to
review their wildemess-Iife for forty years, in order that, in renewed thankfulness and
trust, they might bind themselves for ever to God's service (see Deut. viii.).

II. RECOaNITION OK THE DiVINE LOVE IN THE DiVINB DEALINGS WHICH CALLS

FOB BLESSING. This requires the opened, quickened, spiritual vision. Character is
shown in all action, but only the thouglitful minds watch for it, and find pleasure in
dwelling on it. And so many are quite satisfied with the things God does, and do not
concern themselves with the revelations in them of the character of the Doer. So they
cannot rise up to the height of "blessing his holy Name." But to the spiritually
quickened, the reading concerning God himself in his doings is the unceasing delight ;
and in the revelations of his love made to them they learn to " bless bis Name." — R. T.

Ver. 5. — The goodness of Qod. Tiie word " good" is used as the one supremely suitable
for Qod. But we are not left to our own guidance to find out what is included in
the term. We are told that God's goodness is made up of two things : (1) his mercy ;
(2) his truth. "Goodness is a very comprehensive quality. It is love, kindness,
benevolence, that which leads you to wish well and to do good to those around you;
and the earth is full of the goodness of the Lord, because it is so full of his works and
ways, which are the fruits and manifestations of his goodness."

I, The qoodnebs of God as mebcy. He is gracious, kind, pitiful. Mercy ii the
grace of our dealing with those who are weaker than we are ; and with those who have
wronged us. It has in it the idea of " dealiug otherwise with us than according to our
stem deserts." Take this as chief point, and illustrate from God's gracious ways with
his people Israel. Make this provide for a careful reading of our own life-histories, so
as to discern tlie Divine mercies in them.

II. The goodness of Goo as tbuth. Here his faithful promise-keeping. And it
is noticed that there is this steadfast sameness of God to all generations. He always
has been, and he always will be, " the faithful Promisor." " Hath he said, and shall
he not do it ? " Deal with this point in the same way. Find proofs of the Divine
faithfulness in the story of ancient Israel; and make what is found illustrate the faith-
fulness and truth of the Divine dealings with us. For practical applications, show :
1. " The goodness of God ought to be one of the strongest barriers that can be raised
up against sin. 2. The goodness of God should 'lead us to repentance.' 3. The
goodness of God should lead us to do good to others. 4. The goodness of God to us in
tlus world should inspire us with confidence in his goodness to us in the world to come."
The goodness of God may be thought of as the infinite fountain ; the mercy of Ood is
the ever freshly flowing stream ; and the eternal truth and righteousness is the ocean
out to which God's mercy flows. — ^B. T.

Vers. 1 — 5. — Worship. L The call to the worship of God. 1. It it to he the

worship of Joyful song. (Vers. 1, 2.) Not the worship of silent thought, but of glad
utterance. True fear and joy not incompatible. 2. It is to be universal worship.
(Ver. 1.) " All ye lands," or " All the earth " — Gentiles as well as Jews. 3. It is to be
the worship of thankful gratitude. (Ver. 4.) In remembrance of all the Divine benefits
and mercies received. No mention of confession of sin, or petition for blessing.

II. The grounds ob bbasons op the call to worship. 1. He is the only true
Ood as distinguished from the gods of the heathen. (Ver. 3.) " Be ye sure that
Jehovah he is God." 2. Ee hathmade us, and therefore we are his property. (Ver. 3.)
" It is he that hath made us, and we are his." And we cannot yet fully understand
what use he is going to make of us. 3. He is our Guide and Sustainer, our Shepherd.
(Ver. 3.) " We are his people, and the sheep of his pasture." We are dear to him as
the sheep are to the shepherd. He is the good Shepherd pre-eminently. This is also



■.vo



TEE BOOK OF PSALMS.



[fs. CI. 1— &



' iTe-emiiMDt character of Christ. 4. His goodness and merey an everlasting,
(\i'r. 6.) Not only enduring and constant, but unbounded by any limits. 5. He
I ulfils Hit promises from generation to generation. (Ver. 5.) " His truth " here
means hit uithfulness — the fulfilment of the word or promise that he has spoken.— S.



EXPOSITION.



F8ALU0L

This psalm describes the rightful conduct
and proper principles of action of an Israelite
king. It is regarded by some as a portrait
of an ideal ruler, dramatically put into his
mouth; by others, as an actual address to
Ood by a real ruler, making profession of
his intentions, and asking God to aid him
(ver. 2). The " title " of the psalm, both
in the Hebrew and the Septuagint, which
ascribes it to David, favours the latter view.
Ewald and He Wette, who maintain the
Davidical authorship, note the simplicity,
depth, and concentration of the thought
as wholly worthy of the reputed writer.

Metrically, the psalm divides itself into
two stanzas, each of four verses. In the
first stanza (vers. 1 — 1) the writer declares
the principles on which he intends to act
in his private life. In the second (vers.
5—8) he enunciates those by which he
means to be guided in his government of
the people.

Ver. 1. — ^I will sing of mercy and judg-
ment. The writer does not mean that he is
about, in this present psalm, to sing of God's
mercy and justice, but that be will make it
one of the rules of his life to do so. Unto
thee, Lord, will I sing; or, " will I make
melody " (Cheyne, Kay).

Ver. 2. — I will behave myself wisely in a
perfect way (comp. Ps. xviii. 22; Isa. xxvi.
7). The psalmist aspires after "perfeot-
nesB." Then feeJing his inability to walk
in the perfect way by his own strength, he
cries to God for aid — when wilt thou
come unto me ? " Unless," i.e., " thou come
unto me, I cannot keep one of these resolu-
tions. O Lord, come quickly." I will walk
within my house with a perfect heart. It
is not only the " way," or conduct, that
requires to be " perfect," but the " heart "
also, or the motives from which the conduct
springs.

Ver. 3. — I will set no wicked thing before
mine eyes ; or, no hane thing (Revised Ver-
sion) ; " no villainous thing " (Cheyne,
Kay) ; oomp. Deut. xv. 9. I will set before
me notliing of this kind, " as an object either
of imitation or of attainment." I hate the



work of them that turn aside; literally, (ka
doing of acts that swerve ; i.e. " that depart
from the right way." It shall not cleave t»
me, If such a thing "seized on him un-
awares, he would shake it off as a thing
accurse'i " (Kay); comp. Deut. xiii. 17.

Ver. 4. — A froward heart shall depart
from me ; i.e, I will put away from me all
perversity of heart; I will root it out and
rid myself of it. I will not know a wicked
person. This is a possible meaning, but it
is better to translate, with our Bevisers, " I
will know no evil thing." The " principles
of private conduct" may be summed up
under the four heads of (1) devotion ; (2>
endeavour after perfectness ; (3) avoidance
of evil ; (4) hatred of it.

Ver. 5. — Whoso privily slandereth his
neighbour, him will I cut off. (On the
heiaciusness of slander, see Fss. zv. 3 ; xxxi.
13; 1. 20, etc.) It is probably not meant
that the slanderer will be put to deaths
but only that he will be banished, at any
rate from the cotirt, and, so far as possible,
put down. Him that hath an high look
and a proud heart will not I suffer. " Lofty
looks " and a " proud heart " are again con-
joined in Frov. xxi. 4, Solomon showing that
he paid attention to his father's lessons.
David himself disclaims both in Ps. cxxxi. 1.

Ver. 6. — Mine eyes shall be upon the
Mthful of the land ; i.e. " my favour shall
be shown to them ; I will give them help
and encouragement." That they may dweU
with me ; i.e. " frequent my court," either
as of&cials or as simple courtiers. He that
walketh in a perfect way (see the coimnent
on ver. 2). He shall serve me ; i.e. " shall
be promoted to office under my government."

Ver. 7. — He that worketh deceit shall not
dwell within my house. It is the duty of ft
king to see, not only that his own ways are
blameless, but that his entire household is
well ordered, and consists of righteous
persons (comp. Job i. 5). "Deceit" here
means " wickedness " generally. He that
telleth lies shall not tarry in my sight;
literally, shall not he established ; i.e. shall
not keep his position in my court, but be
banished from it. " Lying " is one of the
sins which the psalmists denounce most
frequently (see Pss. xxxi. 18; xl. 4; lii. 8;
Iviii. 8; lix. 12; Ixii 4; Ixiii. 11; cziz.
163, etc.).

Ver. 8. — ^I will early destroy all the wicked
of the land ; literally, eacA morn vnU I root



pa. 01. 1—8.]



THE BOOK OF PSALMS,



361



out aU the wieked of the land ; i.e. <* day after
day I will make it my endearonr, not only
to keep my palace free from evil-doers, but
to cleanse tlie whole land of them." David
is determined to exercise that just severity
vrhicb is a part of the duty of kings (Bom.
xiii. 4), and not to be that curse to a
Qountry — a weak and over-indulgent ruler
(see Oalvln, ad loo.}. That I may out off all
wicked doeri from the city of the Lord. So



long as there were " wicked doera in the
land, they would be sure to flock to Jeru-
salem, eince the capital always attracts
the criminal classes. David ia especially
anxious that Jerusalem, which he has made
" the city of the Lord " (2 Sam. vi. 12— 19)^
shall be kept free from the pollutions of
evil-doers, but, to effect this object, he must
purge the whole land. The spirit breathad
is that of Fs. XT. 1--5.



HOMILETICS.

Vers. 1 — 8.—Four/eatwrea of true piety. The psalmist has before him the fashion-
ing of his future lile; he records his purpose of heart as he cherishes it before God.
Applying his words, not to his own royal estate with its peculiar obligations, but to
the ordinary conditions of human life, we have four features of all genuine piety.

L A FULL, INTELLIGENT GBATITUDE. "I will slng of mercy and of judgment
[righteousness] " (ver. 1). We are to cultivate and express (" I will »ing ") thankfulness
for all that God does for us — for his mercy and for his judgment. 1. For every kind
of mercy; for all forms of hindness and benefaction — creation, preservation, provision;
for forgiveness and reception into his kingdom ; for long-continued patience with us
through the years of an immature and imperfect Christian life; for the promised
inheritance he offers us, which is immeasurably beyond our desert. 2. For all his
ways of righteousness ; for the justice he has done to us in bringing our integrity into
the light, and establishing us in the confidence and favour of our brethren ; in honour-
ing our industry and fidelity ; also for the righteousness he has shown in overturning
the designs, or in humbling the pretences, or in overthrowing the institutions, of the
guilty; and even for his righteousness as shown in his chastening of ourselves,
purging us of our folly and error and impurity. Perhaps at first we can go no further
than silently submit to this last form of Divine judgment ; but " afterwards," when
" the peaceable fruit of righteousness " has been gathered (Heb. xii. 11), we can open
our lips and " sing."

IL A DEVOUT SENSE OF DEPENDENCE ON Go0. " Oh wheu wilt thou come unto me ?"
(ver. 2). It is significant that the psalmist interjects this petition between two
utterances of his purpose. It is as if he said, " I will do the thing that is right and
wise ; but I know I cannot accomplish anything without thy helpful, thine effectuat-
ing power." He felt as Moses did when he said, " If thy presence go not with us,"
etc. (Exod. xxxiii. 15). It is a deep sense of our deiiendence which is the essence of
our devotion. If we have not this, prayer is an act of mere formal obedience ; if we
have it in our heart, prayer is the certain, spiritual, and acceptable outcome. In the
prospect of the future, in the conduct of our life, in the prosecution of all Christian
work, it is essential that we hold fast, and that we appropriately express, this con-
sciousness of our need of the presence and the power of God.

IIL A FIXED FUBFOSE OF INTEORITT. It is vaiu indeed to sing and pray, if we do
not intend to depart from all iniquity (see Ps. Ixvi. 18). But if the purpose of our heart
is toward God and righteousness, we may be sure that the faintest cry is beard. The
psalmist here resolves to act uprightly ; he will walk within his house with a perfect
heart— he will "show piety at hmne;" he will discharge his kingly duties with all
conscientiousness; he will uphold and honour the faithful (see ver. 6); he will remove
the wicked from place and power (see vers. 4, 5, 7, 8) ; he will spare no one, he will
spare nothing, that he may build up " the city of the Lord " (ver. 8). True piety will
maiiifest itself in these three directions : 1. It will be seen at home, in all purity,
guardianship on the one hand or obedience on the other, kindness, patience, unselfish-
ness, forgiveness, 2. It will be exercised in the daily occupation, and show itself in
fidelity, honesty, truthfulness, thoroughness, equity, considerateness, 3. It will shine,
with clear and steady light, in the samctvary, revealing itself in constancy of worship,
activity in service, heartiness in co-operation.

IV. Sacbed self-resfeot. The psalmist was resolved that nothing vricked should



362 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. oi. 1— 8.

"cleave to him;'' he would not have it "before his eyes" (ver. 3); he would
"destroy all the wicked" (ver. 8), so that neither his own presence nor his country
should be dishonoured or contaminated. Piety will have a. supreme concern for its
own purity ; it will guard its heart most carefully against every one and everything
th»t would hurt or would defile ; it will extirpate the thoughts which stain the soul ;
it will burn the books which pollute the mind ; it will not allow anything which is
unholy and unworthy of a Christian disciple to enter the sanctuary of the soul ; it will
know how to be merciless to the flesh, that it may be true to the spirit (Matt. v. 29,
30) ; it will " keep the heart beyond all keeping," knowing that " out of it are the
issues of life.'



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Vera. 1—8. — 2%e eecret of a happy life. The psalm is evidently one composed an
the occasion of the setting up of a new order of things in the home or in the State, or
in both, and it tells of the psalmist's holy resolves in regard to himself, and his conduct
in his household and amongst men generally. And they are wise resolves.

I. They CONCBEN HIMSELF. (Ver. 2.) " I will behave myself," etc. Here we must
begin if our life is to be worthy and happy. Therefore : 1. The psalmist considers hit
ways. He will behave himself wisely. It was not enough that he had lull and clear
knowledge, and frequent good purposes and desirea, and just opinions and trae beliefs ;
what he was concerned about was as to his conducti his behaviour. And that is the
all-important thing ; the others have their value as they influence that. 2. And
his desire and purpose were that he should behave himself " wisely." In what vast and
such variety of ways men — especially those in high station — behave themselves I
" Man, vain man, dressed in a little brief authority," etc. But here was one who
would sink mere self-pleasing, and the suggestions of pride and power which his high
station would bring to his mind, and, like Solomon, his one desire was to behave
himself wisely. 3. And his conviction was that the way of righteousness, the perfect
way, was alone the way of wisdom. 4. And that for all this he needed the abiding
presence and blessing of Ood. " Oh when wilt thou come," etc. ? (ver. V). Surely this
man began well I

II. HiB HOME-LIFE. " I will walk within my house," etc. He would " show piety
at home." If it be not there, it does not matter where else it is. There, where it is
more difficult, because we are more off our guard, and contact with wife, children,
servants, is so close that there is more peril of friction and irritation than in the more
distant and guarded intercourse with the world outside. A man has need of "a
perfect heart," upright, faithful, and true, if his home-life is to be what it should be.

III. His dbalinqs with his fellow-mbn. He divides these into three classes:
1. Those whom he will avoid. They are the froward, the slanderer, the proud, the
deceitful. Woe to the man whose companions are of such a sort! sorrow and shame
will be his lot. 2. Those whom he will choose. " The faithful of the land ; " they who
walk with God. Such companions and servants do minister much to our peace and
happiness. 3. Hwsefor whom he imll have no tolerance. The wicked-doers. Kindness
to them, whilst they persist in wickedness, is cruelty and wrong to the innocent, the
godly, and to the city of the Lord. "Te that love the Lord, hate evil" — so we are
told (Ps. xcvii. 10). And, indeed, if there be not such intolerance, it is because the
love of God is weak within us (cf. Rev. ii. 6, 16). The psalmist may haTe meant by
"cutting off" the putting of them to death. A monarch such as David would have
deemed that quite right. But it is a power too great for human hands to wield. Ovir
part will be to cut off the prompters to sin in our own hearts, to slay evil passions and
unholy desires there ; then, by earnestly seeking the conversion of the ungodly, to cut
them off from their sin. — S. C.

Ver. 1. — " Mercy and judgment." The psalmist says he will sing of these; and if
it were David who wrote this psalm, he had good reason for such song. And who of
us is there that, in looking back over our life, has not reason for the like song?
But—



PS. a. 1—8.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 363

I. There was a time in man's life when there was neither merot nor judo-
MENT. 1. In Paradise, before sin had entered, there was no occasion for mercy ; for
raeicy implies unworthiness and guilt. But these there were not. Man received love,
bounty, goodness, but not mercy. Only a sinner can receive that. This is why thn
redeemed sinner will sing more loudly than the angels, who have never known what
sin is. 2, And so, too, there was not jvdgment. No anger darkened the face of God :
no need for the chastisements and disciplines of life. But this time will never com«<
again.

IL There wiiiL be a time when men will enow but one of these. 1. Mercy
only will he known in heaven. The time for chastisement and punishment will be
gone. (Jod will have wiped away every tear. It will be mercy without judgment.
2. But jvdgment only will he known in hell. Mercy comes not there ; for hell is a state
of mind rather than a place, and the mind that has its Qt place there must be forsaken
ere mercy can come and do its work. The father's welcome was not given to the
prodigal imtil he had come away from the " far country." 3. But here Judgment and
mercy are ilended. They are the warp and woof of life ; but yonder they will stand
apart; where the one comes, the other cannot.

III. At present men abb the subjects of both. This is a certain fact. It was
true of David, of Israel, of our Lord Jesus Christ, for because of both mercy and
judgment he came into the world. And it is true of Ood's dealings with humanity
generally.

ly. AND BOTH ARE TO BE THE SUBJECT OF OUR soNO. 1. For think whot would have
heen the consequences had man received nothing hut mercy. See what prosperity often
does now, and always will, unless diligently guarded against by faith and prayer.
"How hardly shall they that have riches enter iaiu tlie kingdom of Godl" (and cf.
Ps. xvii.). But : 2. Had Ood dealt with man only in the way of jvdgment, the results
would have been no less disastrous; men would have hated God, broken out into wild
rebellion, or laid down in despair. 3. And think of the service hoth render. The mercy
of God brightens all our life, and makes up in us the love of God. " We love him
because he first loved us." This is especially true when we behold the mercy of God
in Christ. But bis judgments also are blessed for us. "Before I was afflicted I went
•stray " (Ps. cxix.). They bridle and curb the lawless will ; they make manifest to
our souls the bitter evil of sin. "Blessed is the man whom thou chastenest "— so
said the saints of old ; and it is true still. 4. And of the characteristics of both. Of
mercy — so free, so great, so abiding, so seasonable, so undeserved. Of judgment — its
purpose, its profitableness, its alleviations, its limit to the present life and never
beyond our power to endure. 6. But som« ting of neither. Not of mercy, for they
regard not God as its giver; not of judgment, for they deem it only ill fortune. 6.
Some sing only of one. Of mercy, for that is easy to sing about. Some only of
judgment, — they believe only in a God of judgment, not in "our Father." 7. Let
us ling of both. — S. 0.

Yer. 2. — Showing piety at home. Ps. c. is all about praising the Lord. This psahn
is all about a holy life. The sequence of the two seems to teach that the best way of
praising the Lord is by such a life as this psalm tells of. The time of the psalm's
composition seems to have been when David was crowned king of all Israel, and his
new government was about to begin. It has been well said that in this psalm David
was both merry and wise. We have here —

I. A WISE AND HOLT BESOLVE. "I will behave myself," etc. See: 1, It begins
with himself. If only everybody would begin there I But so many are for trying to
put others right before they are right themselves. 2. It refers to his conduct. " I
will behave" How we behave — ^not how we talk, think, profess, desire, but how we
behave — is the all-important thing. That is what men will judge us by, and by which
we shall influence others. 3. It declares his deliberate resolve. That he would behave
himself wisely. Some would have said, " grandly," or " merrily," or "just as I please ; "
but this man says, " wisely." Oh that we all would make such choice as this, especially
those who are in the morning of their lives I David made this choice because he felt it
w necessary. He was a king, and a foolish king is a nation's trouble. And he was
a king surrounded by many perils. And the same resolve suits all sorts and condition*



364 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. oi. 1—8.

of men. Moreover, David felt that he would be wise only as he walked in a perfect
way, Tlie right way is the wise way, and vice versd. "The fear of the Lord is the
beginning of wisdom." Turn to the right, and keep straight on. 4. And that he made
up his mind about it. "I toill behave," etc. See what a number of "I wills" and
"shalls" there are in this psalm. Tou may say, "He did not keep his resolve."
That is true ; but probably he would have fallen yet more deeply had he never made
such resolve as this. Such resolves are good to make. They commit you on the side
of God ; especially the resolve to be openly and always on the Lord's side.

II. A FBEVBNT OBT FOB GRACE TO KEEP IT. " Oh when wilt thou come unto me?"
1. This is an interruption, but no hindrance. Holy thought and prayer may interrupt,
but they do not hinder, our work. The haymaker, stopping to whet his scythe, does
not hinder his work, but helps it. So does such a. prayer as this. 2. It is a eonfemion
of utter taeakness in himself apart from God, and a cry for God to come and abide with
him. The holiest resolves, without much cry to God for grace to keep them, come to
nothing.

IIL The test laid down whereby it should be known whether he was keeping it.
There should be such test. 1. David lays down this — his conduct at home. " I will
walk within my house," etc. 2. We are truly what we are at home. In the world we
have to be reserved and cautious ; in the Church we show our best side ; but at home
our true character is revealed. And, alas 1 some people can be saints at church and
devUs at home, and hence are no saints at all. 3. But ive cannot be right at home
unless our heart he right with Ood. It is a matter of the heart, and the heart given
to God. Let parents remember this. If you would have a happy, heaven-like home,
let your hearts be perfect with God. — S. C.

Ver. 3. — Wicked things. I. Wb oasnot help BEEnna wiokbd things, bbt ws abk
NOT TO bet them befobe oub etes. That is : 1. Ee will not think of them. They may
be where he cannot but see them ; but he will turn away his eyes from them, and his
thoughts likewise. 2. He will not sympathize with or desire them. They have a fatal
attraction, and appeal to our nature where it is most susceptible of temptation. 3.
He win not strive after them. However gainful they may be, their wickedness shall
bar all endeavours after them.

II. We ABE to hats them. There is to be, not the mere negative grace of not
choosing them — that is much — but there is to be the further positive grace of hatred
towards them. Now, to help us herein, think of: 1. The harm wickedness has done to
men generally. What havoc it has wrought, and is working still I Could the world
be but rid of its sin, its sorrows would not trouble us much. 2, The harm wrought in
yowr own soul. 3. The dishonour done to Christ. 4. And let your hatred of wicked-
ness take practical form,. Attack the fortress of sin, fight against it wherever you find
it, make aggressive effort against it and for the cause of Christ. So will this hatred
blessedly grow.

III. When wickedness seeks, as it will, to cleave unto us, we abb to oast
IT off. 1. See how our Lord did this. " Get thee behind me, Satan ! " Sin will try
to adhere to you; but spurn it at once. 2. Consider how to do this. Prayer will
greatly help; for sin is its direct antagonist. One must destroy the other. They
cannot coexist. Plead and trust the promises of God to help you. Avoid the
occasions of sin. Carry the war into the enemy's country; not merely resist, but
attack. Military writers all insist on the advantage against a foe of attacking, not
waiting to be attacked. And, without doubt, aggressive work for Christ, a fighting
faith, is an immense advantage and safeguard. — S. 0.

Ver. 5. — Slanderers. I. There abb such people. David had to do with many of
them — Doeg, Cush, Ziba, etc. And such ever haunt the precincts of courts. And
they exist stilL Note their characteristics. 1. 2%e^ are not men who merely speak
evil of their fellow-men. No good man likes to do this. But sometimes it has to be
done — in giving evidence in courts of law; for the sake of vindicating or warning
others. Our Lord spoke evil of the scribes and Pharisees. But he did so because, not
only was his witness true, but it was necessary to be given, for the people at large were
deceived by them. And he spoke freely before their face, and never because of mere



fs. 01. 1— 8.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 365

personal dislike and antipathy, though he could not but have felt that, but for the
iiake of the many whom they were leading astray. And he affirmed only what he knew
to be true. When, then, we have to ijpeak evil of another, let us speak only as Christ
did — faithfully, openly, and for the sake of others rather than our own sake. Such evil-
speaking is not slander. 2. What, then, is slander t It is the speaking evil on hear-
say rather than proof, or on half-knowledge ; it is generally cowardly, " backbiting "
Ps. XV. calls it. The man would be ashamed to say it openly. The motive is
malignant — seeking to do evil, or, if not that, there is a culpable carelessness as to the
truth, which is almost as bad. This is what the psalmist seems to mean when he
says, " Thou shalt destroy them that speak leasing."

II. Great is the evil that thet do. 1. Often to the victim of their slander.
(See Edna Lyall's ' Autobiography of a Slander.') Cf. Shakespeare, ' Othello '-•

"Who steals my parse steals trash . . .
But he that filches from me my good name^
Bobs me of that which not enriches him.
And makes me poor indeed."

There are men in every rank of life whose whole career has been blighted by some
cruel slander, which, often carelessly rather than maliciously, has been set going. 2. To
the hearer of them. A shadow has come over your intercourse with the slandered one ;
confidence is destroyed or much shaken ; you are drawn nearer to that mad state of
mind which led David to say, " All men are liars." You don't know whom to trust.
3. To the slanderer himself most (fall. If it has been spoken carelessly, as it so often
is, and he comes to know of the evil he has wrought, it will be a lifelong regret to him.
If it has been done out of malice, then he has done not a little to harden his con-
science, to sear it as with a red-hot iron. Furthermore, he has incurred the anger of
Gh)d, to whom slander is abhorrent (Ps. t. 6), and ooe of whose chief commands is,
"Thou shalt not bear false witness," etc. And he loses his own self-respect; he
carries about with him the consciousness of his crime and shame, and, when found out,
as he is all but sure to be, he is the object of the merited scorn of bis fellow-men,

HL How TO DEAL WITH THEM. " Him will I cut off," says our text. 1. No doubt
David wouM deal with such men m the ruthless, despotic way of an Eastern king.
There would be but short shrift for such with him. 2. And so Ood will deal with
them, unlets they repent. 3. And so, in principle, should we deal with them. Be stern
with the man who brings the slander; shun the company of such ; warn others against
him; compel the man to say openly what he has said in secret. 4. tiuch stern
treatment necessary, for we are all prone to this sin. A burning coal thrown out in
the road soon becomes dead ; but cast it into a heap of straw, and then what conflagra-
tion ensues ! The first pictures the fate of a good report of your neighbour — nothing
comes of it. The second pictures the fate of an evil report — how that spreads fa-<t and
far I And slander iB destructive of all brotherhood and confidence between man and
man. It flagrantly violates our Lord's golden rule, " Do unto others as you would," etc.

CoNOLirsiON. 1. Are you the victim of slander f Pray for your enemy, and forgive
him ; then go and tell him of his fault. 2. All are in danger of this sin. Therefore
seek to have your heart filled with love ; let the mind be in you which was also in
Christ, then slander will become impossible to you. — S. 0.

Ver. 1. — The Divine mercy arid judgment. This "king's song" may reasonably be
associated with the beginning of David's reign. Then we must regard " mercy and
judgment " as attributes of the Divine Eing. David desired to frame his own rule,
and his own kingdom, after the Divine pattern. He meditates on the mercy and
righteousness of God till his heart glows with the thought of their surpassing excellence,
as seen in the Divine government ; and he longs to have these kingly virtues trans-
ferred into his own life and reign. That seems to be the first connection of the text,
and such thouj;hts and desires are in every way suitable for a king. But we are not
kings ; and so we are set upon finding associations with the king's words which may
fit them to our circumstances, and make them expressive of our feeling. Eeviewing
God's dealings with us —

L We can sing of mebct. That is a very comprehensive word. It includes the



366 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [P8. oi. 1— 8.

Divine compassions, forbearances, long-sufferings, and considerations. But there is a
special tone in the word. It fits exactly into God'? ways with us frail, sinful men.
It would hardly be fitting to speak of God's mercy to the angels who have "kept their
first estate." It is not the term we should choose by which to express his relations
with them. We know the word in our human spheres. It expresses the clemency of
the king towards rebel subjects. The guilty man sues for mercy. When the royal
rights are vindicated, we hope that justice will be tempered with mercy. We know
the word in our own home-spheres and relations. Fathers and mothers are merciful
towards their wayward, wilful children, considerate, patient, gentle, pitiful, hopeful.
And " like as a father pitieth his children, so the Lord pitieth them that fear him."
Many of us have now no father or mother in these earthly spheres ; but could we put
our idea of the old child-relations in the old home into a single word, that word would
have to be " mercy." No other word would worthily gather up their patient, pitiful
gentleness. And that word best expresses our sense of our heavenly Father's dealings
with us. It is so suitable because it always carries with it the assumption of the
Irailty and wilfulness of those to whom it is shown. Only when people try us do we
show them mercy. Then let us see if we are not really needing God's mercy. 1. It is
now a good many years since you discovered your easily besetting sin. Then it ought
to have been done with long ago, driven out altogether. But it is there still, spoiling
your best things, making trouble for yourself, and for all around you. Then you know
what is meant by God's mercy. 2. When this year began you made high resolves;
but after the first flush of feeling passed, you never made any really earnest effort to
carry them out. Verily God has a call to be merciful. 3. God's mercy to us ought to
have made us merciful to one another. And just in this we are constantly failing.
Who could bear to think of the life he has yet to live, if he might no longer hope in
God's mercy ? Mercy bears with us. Mercy is pitiful and kind. Mercy in Qod is not
mere good feeling ; it is active, ever doing for us something kind,

II. We can 8INQ OP JDDQMBNT. This may stand for " righteousness," or justice
finding practical expression. We can always have this satisfaction — God's meroy is
righteous. It is never weak indulgence. God never steps aside of the right in order to
do • kindness. But that is hardly the precise association of the word that we want.
It is rather " the corrective recognition of our faults." It is our holy joy, that our
Father-God will never leave our faults and failings, our waywardnesses and self-willed-
nesses, alone. He is ever correctively dealing with them. Punishment, as a vindica-
tion of violated law, and as the firm reassertion of defied authority, is almost entirely
a human conception ; it can only be applied to the dealings of our heavenly Father
with extreme caution. It is far safer for us to think of God's punishments as always
paternal ; and paternal punishments are, primarily, corrective. And what child could
do well without corrections ? 1. Divine corrections may come as the natural results of
our wilfulness. 2. They come as testing losses ; or as wearying strain ; or as painful
sickness ; or as that long, long-enduring which is the supreme soul-test.

III. Wb must take OAEB that WB sing or these two TOOETHEE— " HEBCX "

AKD "judgment." It is the blending of them that so brings out the charm of the
Divine ways with us. Illustrate by the bright light made by combining the
flames of oxygen and hydrogen gas. Never can God's full glory shine out until we
learn to blend his mercy and judgment. Mercy that cannot judge cannot be the
mercy of our heavenly Father. Judgment that is not tempered with mercy cannot
characterize our heavenly Father's dealings. — B. T.

Ver. 2. — Eome^eUgion. " I will walk within my house with • perfect heart." The
royal author may be using the term " house " as a figure for the kingdom he rules ;
but it is better to keep the term to his private and domestic sphere. Only he who can
rule his own house is fit to rule the Church of God. Whatever a man s professions
may be, and whatever the exactness and abundance of a man's ritual observances may
be, a man's religion is never really a better thing than it shows itself to be in his own
home. The home is the first and nearest sphere in which the religious life finds
expression. In the home-sphere it should have its fullest force. Beligion begins at
home. It always should expand outward from the home. " It is in vain to talk of
holiness if we can bring no letters testimonial from our holy walking with our relations,"



P8. 01. 1—8.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. B67

" It is easier for most men to walk with a perfect heart in the Church, or even in th«
world, than in their own families."

I. EoME-BELiaiON ooGHT TO BE EAST. Because usually the atmosphere is healthy
and inspiring. If we are the heads of the house we can give the tone to the house. If
we are but members, still our well-being is the care of all, and if religion is our concern,
we are, usually, at least unhindered. For our religious habits and duties we can easily
make or find fitting time and place. But this ease of home-religion may come to be a
temptation and peril. Men, in every sphere, reach their noblest things by mastering
opposition. They tend to lose nobility and enterprise when a thing is easy. Easy
religion very readily becomes weak religion. Religion cannot bear indulgence; it
needs the bracing of hardship.

II. HouE-BELiGioN OUGHT TO BE BTEADVABT. Because!there are no Buddennesses, and
no great variations, in the experiences and temptations of home to sway the religious
barometer. The psalmist means by a " perfect heart " one quietly, steadily, persistently
set on the right, the kind, and the good. The finest thing we can say of the pious man
at home is that he is " always the same." It is in homes we can most fully exhibit
that great grace, " patient continuance in well-doing."

III. HoME-RELiaiON ouoHT TO BE BEAUTIFUL. Bccause home is the sphere in which
natural amiability and personal affection find their freest expression. And these, when
sanctified by sincere and earnest piety, cannot fail to make attractive characters.
Appeal to all experiences thus. Are not the Christians you most admire and love those
who were beautiful for Christ in home-spheres ? — B. T.

Ver. 4. — The feeling of pious souls concerning self-will. " A froward heart shall
depart from me : I will not know a wicked person." The idea in the word " froward "
is " twisted," or " perverse." The idea in the word " wicked " is " wilful," " self-willed,"
" lawlessness." " What David, therefore, disclaims is the reckless self-will, acknow-
ledging no law of right, which is the temptation of despotic royalty, and was hereafter
the secret of his own great sin."

I. Fiona SOULS see self-will as the boot of bin. Take man as the creatwe
of God. Manifestly he is dependent on God. He has no independent rights, and no
independent will. He has a free-will within the necessary limits of the creature, but
as that free-will finds exercise, it can get no better standard than the sovereign and
perfect will of the Creator. The supreme triumph of man's free-will is his full, laving,
hearty acceptance of the Divine will. Adam sinned when he put his self-will in
opposition to God's will. Describe bow you may the various forms that human iniquity
can take (Gal. v. 19 — ^21), the informing spirit of them all is self-pleasing, self-wilL
Therefore pious souls see clearly that their witness and work is not the mere cleansing
of conduct, but the rooting out of the very fibres of self-will, which thread their souls
as couoh-grass threads the fields, or cancers thread the body. Parents must deal with
self-will in their children ; kings must deal with self-will in their ofBcials ; Christians
must deal with self-will in themselves and in the world.

II. PlOUB SOULS BEE SELF-WILL AS THE ONE THING TO BEBI8T. Many may be

occupied with special forms of temptation, and with what they discover to be their
" easily besetting sins." So they are occupied with the expressions of things rather
than with the causes. Illustrate from the various treatment of skin-diseases. That
treatment alone is hopeful which deals with the fountain of mischief. But the psalmist
is dealing with self-will in others, rather than in himself. There is a self-reliance which
is good, if kept within due bounds. It is the spring of enterprise ; it is the spirit of the
man who conquers circumstance. But it may easily become masterfulness, tyranny,
pursuit of ends irrespective of means, and then pious souls feel repugnance, and may
rightly show repugnance. The self-willed man is not a Gk)d-fearing man. — B. T.

Ver. 5. — 2%« sin of the slanderer. "Privily slandereth his neighbour." Modern
law cannot reach the slanderer unless his slander has produced pecuniary loss to him
whom he has slandered. Eastern kings judged on principles of equity, and not according
to written rules or established precedents, so they could punish all slanderers. To a king
the term includes the jealous informer who tries to breed suspicion, and the sycophant
who flatters the king, and speaks evil of others in order to obtain place and favour.



368 THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [ps. oi l-«.

L The slandgber ib a uisrhief-uaeeb. His interest is taken not by anything
good, but by something evil. Every true and good man covers over, hides, smothers
down, the evil, because it is like fire — let it spread, and it will do a world of mischief.
The slanderer fixes on the tiny spark of evil, fans it until it flares, and consumes repu-
tations and ruins lives. Gossip 1b the slanderer's weapon. Malice is his inspiration.
Sell-conceit is his guide. Uften pure devilry makes a man start the evil suspicion
which makes the mischief of broken hearts and untold misery. It is no excuse for the
slanderer, when made to face the consequences of his slander, to say, " I did not mean
it." As mischief-makers, gossiping women are worse than men.

II. Tbe slanderer is a thief. He does not steal men's goods; he steals what is
of far more value to man than what he has — he steals his reputation. Estimate the
difiBculty every man finds in building up a character. It may fall, like a house of
cards, before the suspicion started by the slanderer; that suspicion may stick to a man
for life, and he may find it impossible to recover his place. The robbery of the
slanderer is oftentimes irremediable.

III. The blakdebeb is a detebiobatob of himself. The most serious injury
a man can do to his own moral nature is to give expression to the suspicious, or
malicious, temper. If a good man or woman ever find themselves betrayed into
becoming the originators of a slander, they feel the bitterest regrets and most searching
humiliations. Tbe bad man who finds he has slandered, and will be humbled by no
regrets, belongs to the devil, and will have to find his home with him. — B. T.

Ver. 6. — The sin of the arrogant. " Him that hath an high look and a proud heart."
Prayer-book Version, " a proud look, and high stomach ; " literally, " pu£fed-up heart ; "
" wide of heart ; " " puffed up and blown out." Perhaps the idea includes the
"ambitious men," who think so much of themselves that they are jealous and
mischievous if any one seems to be preferred before them. Trapp says, " Pride will
sit and show itself in the eyes as soon as anywhere." Home lias this good note:
" Detraction, ambition, and avarice are three weeds which spring and flourish in the
rich soil of a court. The psalmist declareth his resolution to undertake the difficult
task of eradicating them for the benefit of his people, that Israelites might not be
harassed by informers, or repressed by insolent and rapacious ministers. Shall we
imagine these vices less odiuus in the eyes of that king whose character was composed
of humility and charity ; or will Christ admit those tempers into the court of heaven,
which David determined to exclude from his court upon earth?"

I. The arrogant measure themselves bt a weong standard. A man may
seem to have lair reason for being proud who compares himself with his fellow-men.
It may be honest truth that he is better bred, more refined, better educated, and more
intelligent than they. But then the standard is so poor. Let him appraise himself by
comparison with those who are better bred and better educated than himselfl Nay,
let him measure himself by the proper, the Divine, standard; then will the loftiest-
minded man be compelled to say after the psalmist, " My goodness extendeth not to
thee, only to the saints that are in the earth."

II. The abrooant boast theuselveb against God. Pride is the open claim to
independence ; the declaration of conscious self-sufficiency. The proud man needs no
God, and knows no God. He never can come into right relations with God until he
can get rid of that pride. All who do boast themselves against God may be reminded
of that day when the " lofty looks of man shall be bowed down, and the Lord alone
slitll be exalted."

III. Tee arrogant abe out of bight belations with men. The right relations
are thus expressed : " By love serve one another." The arrogant man serves nobody,
only expects everybody to serve him. So he never gains love, and never receives
love-service. — R. T.

Yer. 6, — 3%e ertcouragemtnt of the vmright, " Mine eyes shall be upon the faithful
of the land." Such only wonld the king seek for ; such only would he gather to
his court.

I. The upright abb always wanted. Men of probity and integrity are ever being
sought for. For all service character is the supreme fitness. K it seems otherwise,



PB. 01. 1— 8.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. «69

and we find isolated instances in which the unprincipled seem to prosper, let us think
of the thousand cases in which character even triumphs over ability, and much more
oyer unscrupulousness. If a man has character, he has a commodity that is always
marketable.

II. The upbight abk always tbusted. Illustrate by Joseph in Egypt, Nehemiah
at Susa, and Daniel at Babylon. . In that trust is the fullest recognition of the value of
character.

III. The ufbight abb always bewabded. Depend upon it, kings always know
when they have good counsellors, and masters know when they have faithful servants.
And it is always the aim of masters to encourage those who serve them well. Say
what men will, it is most largely true that the best things of this world come to the
good. And it can always be said, with absolute confidence, that God is on the side of
the upright, " the Bewarder of all those who diligently seek him." — 'R. T.

Ver. 7. — The sin of the wUruthful. " He that telleth lies shall not tarry in my
sight." There is no sin that is more difficult to deal with, when once it has become
established. Many children are untruthful because they have vivid imaginations, and
though their wordj match what they see, what they see does not strictly accord with
the actual facts. These cases require the most careful and judicious treatment at the
hands of parents and teachers, if the child-habit is not to develop into a confirmed
untruthfulness. But there are some children who seem to be born liars — their word can
never be trusted. Only the sternest discipline can correct an evil which, if left unchecked,
must inevitably ruin the life. And some children are made untruthful by fear ; and
by their statements always being treated suspiciously ; and by their being constantly
set upon inventing excuses.

I, The UNTBUTHFini ham bins asainbt himself. He confuses his own sense of
right and wrong ; destroys his moral sense, until he discovers that he cannot trust
faimsell

" To thine own self be trne^
And it mnst follow, as the night the day,
Thou canst not then be false to any man."

II. The tTNTEUTHPUL MAN SINS AOAINBT HIB FELLOW-MAN. Por Only tnlth Can

guide us aright. If those whom we trust and obey are not true, our way cannot be safe.
Illustrate by the man who goes an unknown road, and receives untruthful directions.
See in business affairs what mischiefs untruthfulness can make. Every man has an
absolute right to demand from his fellow-man a precise accordance between statement
and fact. Show that secrecy, withholding, may be as effectually untruthful as any
statement. We are bound to be true in every form in which we express ourselves to
our fellows. Point out what self-restraints are required, if we are to be absolutely true
in tones, and looks, and silences, and speech.

ni. The untbuthfdl man sinb aoainbt Qod. Who "requireth truth in the
inward parts." This introduces familiar considerations, on which no special suggestions
are needed. — B. T.

Vers. 1 — 8. — The ideal of a royal Ufe ; or, Dwvid^e mirror of a monarchy I. Hib
PERSONAL LIFE, 1. He sought the union of loving-kindness and right in his oton
character. (Ver, 1.) As a Divine union found in the King of kings, and therefore the
subject of his song. 2. Ee would seek to follow the perfect way with or hy means of a
perfect heart. (Ver. 2.) He would give earnest heed to whatever was right, and
pursue it with an undivided heart. 3, Me would live in the closest feUowsh^ with Ood.
(Ver. 20 " When wilt thou come nnto me ? "

IL Hjs domestic life. (Vers. 3, 4.) How he would walk in "his house." 1. WiU
not allow himself to think of amy wicked design or action. (Ver. 3.) Nothing in his
home-life that is unworthy of a king. 2. ffe will he guilty of no wifaithfulness.
(Ver. 3.) They who "turn aside" are the unfaithful. Delitzsch says he "hates
excesses ; " all temptations to this he will shake off from himself. 3. He wUl not hnov
fdlowshvp vnth a false or "froward" heart, (Ver. 4.) No commerce with those whose
policy is one of craft and deceit.

psalms — u. 2 B



370



THE BOOK OF PSALMS.



[P8. ca. 1—28.



III. He will MAiNTikiN A PUEE couBT-UFB. (Vers. 6 — 7.) 1. Se will diteowragt
all forms of untruthfulness and pride. Slander and deceit and lies he will not tolerate
(vers. 6 — 7). 2. 7%ose who serve him in high offices must he faithful men. (Ver. 6.)

IV. He will bule the oitt and the state so as to BBura in the beion of
BiGHTEonsNBss. (Ver. 8.) "Early," equivalent to "in the morning." Courts of law
were held in the early morning. A dream which has its fulfilment in the vision of th«
New Jerusalem (Rev. xzi. 27). — S.



EXPOSITION.



PSALM OIL
The "title" of this psalm is altogether
peculiar, being " a Prayer for the afflicted,
when he faints, and pours out his complaint
before Jehovah." This is clearly a general
direction for the use of the psalm by afBicted
persons, either universally, or, at any rate,
when in circumstances resembling those of
the writer. The writer appears to have
belonged to the period of the Captivity,
and probably to the later portion of it (ver.
13). It has been conjectured that he is
Daniel ; but there are no sufficient grounds
for assigning the composition to any special
individual. It is the voice of a representa-
tive sufferer in Babylon, mourning over his
own afflictions and those of his nation.

The psalm consists of three main por-
tions : first, a complaint, prefaced by an
appeal to God for aid (vers. 1—11); secondly,
a confident expression of an assured hope
and trnst in a speedy deliverance (vers.
12 — 22): and thirdly, a contrast between
human weakness and Ood's strengtii and
unchangeableness, resulting in a conviction
that, whatever becomes of the writer, the
seed of Israel will be preserved and estab-
lished before God for ever (vers. 23 — 28).

Ver. I. — Hear my prayer, Lord, and let
my ory come unto thee (comp. Pss. zxvii. 7 ;
xxxix. 12 ; liv. 2 ; Iv. 1, etc.). ** Stereotyped
expressions," but the fittest to express a
sufferer's urgent need.

Ver. 2. — ^Hide not thy face from me (so in
Pss. xxvii. 9 ; Ixix. 17 ; cxliii. 7). As the
" light of God's countenance " is the greatest
of all goods (Ps. iv. 6), so its withdrawal is
the worst of evils. In the day when I am
in trouble ; literally, in the day of my trouble,
or of my straits. Incline thine ear unto me
(comp. Pss. xvii. ti; Ixxi. 2; Ixxxviii. 2,
etc.). In the day when I call, answer me
speedily. Compare the versicles of our
Prayer-book, " O God, make speed to save
us ; O Lord, make haste to help us."



Ver. 8. — Tor my days are consumed like
smoke; or, according to another reading
(ne'vs, instead of icrra), "are consumed into
smoke," i.e. "disappear, pass away into
nothingness." And my bones are burned as
an hearth. Dr. Kay translates, " My bones
tmotUder like a firebrand," which is better
(compare the Prayer-book Version, and see
Lev. vi. 2 and Isa. xxxiii. 14). (For the
sentiment, see Pss. xxxi. 10; xxxii. 8;
xlii. 10.)

Ver. 4. — Uy heart is smitten. As with •
stroke from the sun (see Ps. cxxi. 6 ; Hos.
ix. 16). And withered like grass. As grass
upon the house-tops (Ps. cxxix.6), or, indeed,
in any exposed place under an Eastern sun.
So that I forget to eat my bread ; literally,
for I forget, etc. The fact is adduced as a
proof of the heart's condition (comp. Job
xxxiii. 20 ; 1 Sam. i. 7 ; xx. 34, eta).

Ver. 5. — By reason of the voice of my
groaning ; i.e. " by reason of the affliction
which causes my groaning." Uy bonei
cleave to my skin; literally, to my flesh, but
the Authorized Versionrigbtly expresses the
meaning (comp. Job xix. 20 ; Lam. iv. 8).

Ver. 6. — I am like a pelican in the wilder«
ness. The Hebrew word here rendered
" pelican " is elsewhere in our version trans-
lated by "cormorant" (Lev. xi. 7; Deut
xiv. 17 ; Isa. xxxiv. 11 ; Zeph. ii. 11) ; but
it is now generally believed that the peli-
can is iotended (compare the Septuagint
ire\(Kttvi, and see Mr. Honghton's letter ia
the Academy, April .5, 1884, and the ver-
sions of Hengstenberg, Kay, Cheyne, and
our Bevisers). The pelican is a bird which
haunts marshy and desolate places. It
abounds in the Lake Huleh in Northern
Galilee (Thomson, ' The Land and the
Book,' p. 260). I am like an owl of the
desert ; or, " of the ruins." The owl haunts
ruins in the East no less than in our own
country (Layard, 'Nineveh and Babylon,'
p. 484, note).

Ver. 7. — I watch, and am as a sparrow
alone upon the house-top. Sparrows are
very common in Palestine. Dr. Thomson
says that he has often heard a sparrow
which had lost its mate, uttering " by the
hour" its sad lament, seated upon a house-
top (' The Land and the Book,' p. 43).



P8. cii. 1— 28.J



THE BOOK OP PSALMS.



371



Yer. 8. — Uine enemies reproach me all
the day. The reproach of their enemies
was always felt by the Israelites as a bitter
aggravation of their afSictions (see Pss. xlii.
10; iliv. 13—16; Ixxix. 4; Ixxx. 6, etc.).
They that are mad against me are sworn
agidnBt me; rather, ute me as their curse
(comp. Jer. xxix. 22). It was a common
form of cursing among the Israelites to wish
a man the same fate as had befallen some
one whose unhappiness was notorious.

Ver. 9. — For I have eaten ashes like
lir«ad; i.e. "the 'ashes' of humiliation
have been my food. I have, as it were, fed
on them." A literal mingling of ashes with
his food is not to be thought of. And
mingled my drink with weeping (comp.
Pss. xlii. 3 ; Ixxx. 5).

Yer. 10. — Because of thine indigrnatios
and thy wrath. " The bitterest ingredient
of onr cup of sorrow," says Dean Johnson,
" is to know that it is owing to Jehovah's
wrath and fierce anger for sin." For thou
hast lifted me up, and cast me down. " Ele-
vated me," •'.«. " only to cast me down, and
■o make my affliction the greater." The
allusion is probably to the former prosperity
of the speaker, and of Israel generally, in
their own land, and their present misery in
Babylon (compare, however. Job zzvii. 21 ;
zzx. 22).

Yer. 11. — Uy days are like a shadow that
declineth ; literally, thai lengthen!, as shadows
do when the day declines (comp. ver. 24).
The psalmist, like his nation, is old before
his time ; the shades of evening have come
upon him, when he should have been in bis
midday brightness. And I am withered
like grass (comp. ver. 4). The "I" here
ia emphatic Ojm) — not only is the psalmist's
heart withered, but he himself ia altogether
scorched and dried up.

Yer. 12. — The second part of the psalm
here begins. Against the complaint is to
be set the confident hope and consolation.
But thoo, Lord, shalt endure for ever. God
does not " wither " or decay — God aud God's
purposes " endure for ever." It matters not
that Israel is brought so low, and seems at
the last gasp ■ God can raise up his people,
and will do so in his own good time (vets.
13 — 17). And thy remembrance unto all
generations ; or, thy memorial (Bevised Yer-
sion); see Exod. iii. 15. God's "remem-
brance," or "memorial," consists iu the
recollection, that his faithful ones have, of
his historically manifested attributes. If
this recollection is never to pass away, his
faithful ones must remain also, to keep
it up.

Yer. 13. — ^Ihon shalt arise, and have mercy
upon Ziou (comp. Pss. iii. 7; xii. 5; Ixviii.
1). God is said to " arise," when he bestirs
himself to take vengeance on his enemies.



and deliver his saints out of their bands.
The "Zion," on which he wouFd "have
mercy," was not the city only, but the
people belonging to it. For the time to
favour her (or, pity her), yea, the set time,
1b come. By "the set time" is probably
meant the time fixed by Jeremiah for the
termination of the Captivity and the restora-
tion of Jerusalem (Jer. xxv. 11, 12; xxiz.
10), and alluded to by Daniel in Dan. ix. 3.
This time, the psalmist says, approaches.

Yer. 14. — ^For thy servants take pleasure
in her stones (comp. Isa. Ixiv. 10, 11 ; Lam.
iv. 1 ; Neh. ii. 13; iv. 2). To this day the
same affection is shown by Israelite pilgrims
at the " Jews' Wailing-Plaoe." And favour
(rather, pity) the dust thereof. The rubbish
in which the stones lay (Neh. iv. 2) seems
to be intended.

Yer. 15. — So the heathen shall fear the
Kame of the Lord (comp. Isa. lix. 19). The
restoration of Jerusalem could not but im-
press great numbers of the heathen, and
tend to the enlargement of Jehovah's king-
dom. And all the kings of the eatth thy
glory. Oriental hyperbole, if confined to
the immediate effeoto of the rebuilding of
the earthly Jerusalem ; but simple truth, if
extended to the establishment on earth of
the new and heavenly Jerusalem (Isa. IzT.
17—25; Bev. xxi. 1—24).

Yer. 16. — ^When the Lqrd shall build up
Zion ; rather, because the Lord hath huilt up
Zion. The psalmist, in prophetic ecstasy,
sees the future as past. The verbs in this
and the next verse are all preterite. He
shall appear in his glory; rather, hath ap-
peared in hit glory (see Isa. xl. 5).

Yer. 17. — He will regard the prayer of
the destitute, and not despise their prayer ;
rather, he hath regarded . . . and hath not
despised (see the Hevised Yersion). The
word translated " destitute " is elsewhere
(Jer. xvii. 6) only used as the name of a
shrub — probably the dwarf juniper, still so
called by the Arabs. The dwarf juniper
has " a gloomy stunted appearance " (Tris-
tram), and well symbolizes the Israel uf the
Captivity period, dry and withered, like a
wretched desert shrub.

Yer. 18. — This shall be written for the
generation to come; or, let it be written;
ypa<t)iiTa oSti), LXX. The mercy of God in
restoring his people to their own land and
city must be recorded in writing, as his
past mercies have been (Exod, xvii. 14;
Dent. xxxi. 19), for the edification of fntur*
generations. The record was made by Ezra
and Nebemiab. And the people which shall
he created shall praise the Lord. Bestored
Israel is spoken of as a new creation (comp.
Ps. xxii. 31 ; Isa. xliii. 7, 21). It was, in-
deed, a sort of resurrection from the dead
(see Ezek. xxxvii. 1 — 10). (For the '* praise "



372



THE BOOK OF PSALMS.



[ps. on. 1—28.



immediately rendered, see Ezra iii. 10, 11 ;
vi. 16—22 ; Neh. xii. 27—43.)

Ver. 19. — For he hath looked down from
the height of his sanctuary. God's true
sanctuary is the heaven of heavens wherein
he dwells. Earthly sanctuaries are but
shadows of this. From heaven did the Lord
behold the earth (comp. Exod. li. 23—25).
As God in the days of old had looked down
on the afBiction of his people in Egypt, so
did he now "look down" and "behold"
their sufferings in Babylon.

Yer. 20. — To hear the groaning of the
prisoner (see Bxod. ii. 24, "God heard
their groaning;" and comp. Exod. iii. 7;
vi. 5). To loose those that are appointed to
death; literally, the sons of death (comp.
Ps. Ixxix. 11). Captive Israel regarded its
life in Babylon as little better than death
(see Ezek. xxxvii. 11).

Ver. 21. — To declare the Name of the Lord
in Zion ; rather, as in the Bevised Version,
that men may declare. The great object of
Israel's restoration was the glory of God —
that Jew and heathen, joined together in
one, might unitedly bless God, and praise
hii glorious Name. The complete fulfilment
was, of course, only after the coming of
Ohrisi And his praise in Jemsalem. Espe-
oially in the "new Jerusalem" (see the
comment on ver. 15).

Ver. 22. — ^When the people (rather, the
peopUe) are gathered together, and the
kingdomi, to serve the Lord (comp. Pes.
xxii. 27; Ixviii 29—32; Isa. xlix. 6, 7,
18,eto.}.

Vers. 23— 28.— The third strophe begins
with an acknowledgment of weakness — a sort
of "renewed complaint" (Hengstenberg).
But from this there is an ascent to a higher
oonfldence than any displayed previously —
a confidence that God, who is everlasting
(vers. 24 — 27), will perpetually protect his
people, and, whatever becomes of the exist-
ing generation, will establish their seed
before him for ever (ver. 28).

Ver. 23. — He weakened my strength in
the way. The reading " my strength "
(T13) is greatly to be preferred to that of
"his strength" (ina), which cannot be
made to yield a tolerable meaning. It ia
jadioioasly adopted by Professor Oheyne,



who translates, " He has brought down my
strength in the way," and explains "the
way" as "the journey of life." So also
Eosenmiiller and Hengstenberg. He short-
ened my days; i.e. "made me grow old
prematurely" (comp. ver. 11).

Ver. 24. — ^I said, my God, take me not
away in the midst of my days. Compare
the complaint of Hezekiah (Isa. xxxviii. 10).
A pious Israelite regarded himself as en-
titled to a fairly long life, which was
promised him directly (Exod. xx. 12) and
by implication, since it was only the wicked
that were " not to live out half their days "
(Ps. Iv. 23). Thy years are throughout all
generations. Dathe and Professor Cheyne
translate, "O thou, whose years are
eternal." But the Hebrew will scarcely
admit of this rendering.

Ver. 25. — Of old hast thou laid the founda-
tion of the earth (comp. Isa. xlviii. 13). And
the heavens are the work of thy hands (see
Gen. i. 1, 7: ii. 4; Pi. Ixxxix. 11; Heb.
LIO).

Ver. 26. — They shall perish. The coming
destmction of the world that now is, is very
frequently declared in Holy Scripture (see
Isa. IL 6; Ixv. 17; Mntt. xxiv. 35; Mark
xiii. 31 ; Lnke xii. 33; 2 Pet. iii 7, 10, 12).
But thou shalt endure. With the perishable
nature of the whole material creation, the
psalmist contrasts the absolute eternitv of
God (comp. ver. 12 ; also Pa. iz. 7 ; Heb. i
11). Tea, all of them shall wax old like a
garment (comp. Isa. li. 6). Ai a vestnxo
Shalt thou ohtmge them, and they shall be
changed. Compare the prophecies of "a
new heaven and a new earth" (Isa. Iv. 17;
Ixvi. 22 ; 2 Pet. iii. 13 ; Bev. xxi 1).

Ver. 27. — Bnt thou art the same ; literally,
but thou art He (comp. Isa. xliv. 4 ; xlvi.
4) ; i.e. " tliou art the one eternal and un-
changeable existence — the one reality."
And thy years shall have no end. It is by
an accommodation to human modes of
thought that God's " years" are spoken of.
An eternal existence is a unity — not made
np of years and days.

Vei. 28.— The children of thy servants
shall continue. " The nation descended
from those who served thee of old shall
continue," or, " abide " — i.e. not only con-
tinue to exist, but have a permanent abid-
ing-place (comp. Fss. xxxviL 39 ; Ixix. 36).
And their seed shall be establidied before
thee (oomp. Jer. xxz. 20).



HOMILBTIOS.

Vers. 1 — 11. — Affliction. " Many are the afflictions of the righteons * — even of the
righteous, and sometimes these are almost, if not altogether, overwhelming. We expect
to find suffering and sorrow among the guilty, but experience teaches us that It is—

L The ocoabional pobtion of the godly. Seldom, indeed, is the good man



P8. cii. 1—28.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. ^ 373

reduced to such distress as that described in the text ; yet it does occur ; troubles do
sometimes accumulate where they seem least deserved or least uecessary. But if not
found in this degree, yet they are found in company with: 1. Bodily pain (wet. 3),
or weakness, or lingenng disease, or some form of physical privation. There may be
associated: 2. Depression of spirit; so that food is distasteful (ver. 4), and the simple
comforts of life bring no enjoyment ; fair scenes give no pleasure to the eye, sweet
sounds have no charm for the ear. There may be added : 3. Loneliness ; either because
(1) friends have lost faith, and have deserted ; or (2) because the dejected spirit declines
all human fellowship, and retires to a disconsolate obscurity (vers. 6^ 7). 4. Added to
these may be positive enmity and opposition (ver. 8). Perhaps the evil which is
hardest to be borne is the accusation or the insinuation of misconduct made by former
friends, who are now the most cruel of enemies, and who use the language of reproach
or innuendo. Beside all this is : 5. A painful sense of departure (vers. 3, 11). The
mind is oppressed by the thought that, like the lessening shadow, life is going ; the
opportunity for clearing reputation, for doing good work, for taking a good position, foi
reaping any of the fruits of toil, is rapidly being consumed; it will soon be gone, and
then the best of life will have been lost. It is the servant of God who is sometimes
called upon to " eat ashes like bread," and to " mingle his drink with his tears " (ver. 9).
But even in the midst of his distress and of his perplexity there will be —

II, A DEVOUT BEFEBENOE TO THE WILL OF OoD. The Sufferer is a man who has
mens consda recti; he is the victim of injustice; he wonders why he is thus assailed,
thus brought low ; but he does not question the presence or the ordering of Divine
providence. God has allowed it all : " Thou hast lifted me up, and cast me down."
The Christian man in similar distress has learnt of Christ that calamity is not always
a sign of Divine displeasure (Luke xiii. 1 — 5); he does not therefore speak about " thy
wrath and anger." Moreover, he has learnt of his Master that persecution is often the
h^hest honour (Matt. v. 10 — 12); and from his apostle that affliction is often not
punitive at all, but curative ; the evidence, not of Divine anger, but of Fatherly love
and wisdom (Heb. xii. 3 — 11). He therefore accepts what he suffers as the will of God
concerning him, assured that it has a gracious purpose, and u ill work a spiritual and
eternal good that will more than outweigh the physical and temporal distress.

III. The appeal to God. (Vers. 1, 2.) 1. It is a real relief to utter his thought in
the conscious presence of God; the very recital of his griefs in God's ear brings some
comfort. To tell all our troubles to a sympathetic friend, even when we do not expect
him to be able to help us, is a relief to us ; how much more to breathe them into the
ear of him who has the most perfect sympathy with every one of his people (Matt,
viii. 17 ; Heb. iv. 15) ! 2. We may confidently count on our heavenly Father's help.
It is the natural, and therefore the right, thing for us, in our moment of spiritual
agitation, to use the language of earnest, if not agonizing entreaty, and to let earnest-
ness pass into importunity (" hear me speedily ") ; it is altogether wise and right to
continue in prayer for Divine succour when that seems to be delayed ; but it is needful,
for true sonship and perfect service, to rest calmly assured that God does always hear
our prayer, and that he will help us, either by delivering us from our evil condition,
sooner or later, here or hereafter, or by so multiplying his sustaining grace that we
shall positively triumph in our endurance (2 Cor. ii. 14 ; ix. 10, 11).

Vers. 13 — 22. — Qod's ca/refor his people (Ghrisfs care for his Qhurch). The psalm
passes from the individual to the nation or the society, and we have an earnest, effectual
appeal for Divine pity and restoration. Primarily a[iplicable to the ancient people of
God, it applies as well to the recurring necessities of the Christian Church. We
have —

I. The community (the Chuboh) in sore distress. It is in a position to receive
the mercy — the pity and the redemption of the Lord (ver. 13). Its state is one of
destitution (ver. 17) ; it is brought very low, is naked, is helpless.

II. Its appeal to the Divine Saviour. We are weak and powerless, " but thou,
O Lord, shalt endure for ever " (ver. 12) ; thou art the Eternal and the Almighty One ;
" thou canst save, and thou canst heal." When the captain and the crew have done
their utmost, and shipwreck seems inevitable, they can and they do "cry unto the
Lord" (Ps. ovii.). Man's extremity is God's opportunity. When from every human



374 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [P8. cii. 1—28.

point of view the case is hopeless, then all hearts turn their thought to heaven, then
every voice is raised in earnest supplication. Nothing is too hard for the Lord.

IIL The grounds of its affeal. 1. The duration of its distress. Has not the
time fully come for God's favour (ver. 13) ? Zion must have endured her appointed
time of tribulation (see Ps. xc. 13 — 17). 2. The disinterested attaehment of its friends
(the disciples of the Lord) (ver. 14). Its very ruins are dear to them ; they cleave to
it in its extremity. 3. The spiritual well-being of those outside its borders (ver. 15).
Let Zion be exalted, and then those who are now either indifferent or hostile will be
gained ; in their hearts will be planted the fear of the Lord, the love of Jesus Christ.
4. The glory of God, the hallowing of his Name, the exaltation of the Redeemer (vers.
16, 21, 22). 5. The character of the pitiful Father. To regard the destitute, to hear
the groaning of the prisoner, to save from death, — is that not just what his people may
rightly ask of the benignant and compassionate Saviour? Our heavenly Father is
never nearer to us, or likelier to hear and help us, than when our hour is darkest and
our hearts are saddest.

IV. Its lasting ibstte. (Ver. 18.) The interposition of God, and his redeeming
grace, will not only command the wondering attention of the living ; it will go down
to the generations yet unborn, and those who " will be created " in distant days will
believe and praise.

Vers. 23 — 28. — The mortality of man and the eternity of Ood. The psalmist returns
to his own personal condition ; he considers himself as one who has but a narrow span
of life, and even that small span is likely to be shortened ; his heart is troubled at the
thought of —

L The beevitt and unobetaiutt of ode mobtal life. 1. The hngth of our
life is regarded by us very differently, according to the portion of it which we have
spent. In youth it seems long, and we are eager to get on further, we anticipate the
coming years; but in age it seems short indeed, and we wish we were younger than we
are. Many, immersed in cares or pleasures, have no time to measure the life they are
fast expending ; but to the thoughtful (as well as to the merely imaginative) human
life seemi a painfully short time in which to sustain its pure and holy relationship*,
in which to gather its fruits of leamiog and wisdom, in which to do its work and
achieve some solid and enduring task. All too soon does that shadow decline, all too
quickly do the flowers wither (see ver. 11). 2. And this pensiveness is deepened by
the thought of the uncertainty of life. Sudden sickness comes, and the strong man in
his prime is laid on the bed of death. The fatal accident occurs, and men and women
are removed in an hour from the scenes of their activity, the homes of their affection.
The land mourns its prince, its statesman, its scholar; the Church deplores its ruler,
its minister, its counsellor ; the home laments its head, its mistress, its ornament, —
that one that should long have stayed and been its strength and joy. But in sharp
and striking contrast with this is —

II. Tee eternity of God. 1. He \s from everlasting. Our finite mind cannot
possibly comprehend the idea of the infinite. We cannot take into our imagination the
absolutely boundless past. But we can think of that which was indefinitely and
immeasurably remote, and consider that God was long before that. We think of the
ages behind ui, when the first foundations of the earth were laid, and we reflect that all
that vast and unknown period counts not even one degree of the time that God has
been. 2. He is to everlasting. Similarly, we look on to that distant hou;, incon-
ceivably far away, when our planet itself will be consumed or be congealed, or even to
the time when the whole sidereal system will be dissolved, and we think that that
immense tract of time will not count one unit of " the years of the right hand of the
Most High." 3. He is the Unchangeable One. Not that the idea of boundless temporal
duration inclndes that of moral and spiritual constancy ; but it suggests it, and it may
be said to imply it ; for surely it is only the Unchangeable that could be and would be
the Eternal. So that while we are placing our mortality in contrast with the immor-
tality of God, we may also place our fickleness and unreliableness in contrast with hie
immutability, and give the fullest meaning to the words, " thou art the same " (see
Jas. i. 17; Eeb. xiii. 8).

III. The bedeemino thought. The j isalmist seems to feel that God, out of th«



n. en. 1—28.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 375

exceeding riches of his eternity, might well bestow upon him a few more years of lifel
(ver. 24). But he closes with the relieving thought that the children of Qod's servants
will dwell in the land, that they will find a home there from which they will not be
driven, and that their children will still be found in happy occupation, through coming
generations (ver. 28). We have, in this Christian dispensation, a far more precious
consolation. That is twofold. It consists of: 1. The fact that the briefest human
life, spent in the service of Ood and of man, holds a worth which no arithmetic can
compute, no wealth can weigh. 2. The truth that a holy life on earth conducts to •
blessed and glorious immortality beyond. " They shall perish, but thou shalt endure.*
So also shall we, and otir years shall have no end ; for " be that doeth the will of
Ood abideth for ever."



HOMILIES BY VABIOUS AUTHORS.

Vers. 1 — ^28. — Light arising in darkness. The authorship and therefore the date
of this psalm cannot be certainly fixed, ur whether it be a national or an individual
utterance ; probably it is the latter. The alternations of thought and feeling are very
noteworthy. We have —

I. Eabnest pbateb. (Vers. 1, 2.) There is an ascending scale, reaching to a
climax. 1. Thai the Lord would hear. " Hear, Lord." 2. For dose access. " Let
my cry come unto thee." Do not hear me from afar, but come near to me. 3. For
gracious hearing. " Hide not thy lace," etc. ; when I see thee, let not thy face be
averted, but graciously turned to me. 4. For attentive hearing. " Incline thine ear ; "
as one anxious to hear bends down his ear, that he may more easily hear what is said.
5. For prompt reply, " Answer me speedily ; " let there be no long delay. It is a
blessed thing when our troubles and distresses lead us to Qod in prayer, and in prayer
thus earnest and believing.

II. Sad complaint. There are lune verses of this (vers. 3 — 11). They tell of:
1. The swift approach of death. (Ver. 3.) As fuel in fierce heat and flame is swiftly
consumed, so is it with bis life. 2. Of his bitter sorrow. (Yer. 4.) All its strength
knd joy smitten, as is the grass with the sun-stroke, so that he cares not to live, forgets
to eat bread. 3. His wasted form. He is worn as a skeleton, his bones cleave to his
flesh. 4. His utter loneliness. (Yer. 6.) As the cormorant of the wilderness (Zeph. ii.
14 ; Isa. xxxiv. 11), and as the owl. The owl is called in Arabic, " mother of the ruins."
S. His cruel enemies. (Ver. 8.) These, when they curse, point to him as an example
of misery ; when they would imprecate vengeance on any, they ask that those whom
they curse may be wretched as the psalmist. 6. His abiding and unrelieved sorrow.
(Ver. 9.) It mingles with all his food. 7. The cause of it. The Divine displeasure.
" God's wrath has seized and hurled him aloft, only to cast him, as worthless, away "
(cf. Isa. xxii. 18). 8. 2%e result of it iM. Death is close at hand. Kot improbably
some exile dying far away in Babylon poured forth this bitter complaint. As the
groans of a sick man are a relief, so is the outpouring of our trouble to God a relief to
the burdened heart. It is ever well so to do. But now, out of these depths comes —

III. DrviNB couFOBT. There are eleven verses of this (vers. 12 — 22). And this
comfort is drawn : 1. From, the remembrance of the Vernal Ood. (Yer. 12.) God does
not die, though man does ; God lives to carry on his work when men pass away. 2. The
conviction that Zion's redemption is at hand. (Yer. 13.) He gathers this from the
fact that the minds of the people of God were turned to the fallen Jerusalem (cf. Keh.
i. — iL 3). There were probably many conferences and much interest and prayer in
regard to Zion (ver. 14) ; and the psalaiist recognizes in all this one of the evidences
that God's set time to be gracious to Ziou has come. 3. The anticipation of the blessed
results that shall follow on Zion's restoration. (Vers. 15, 16.) This is ever the harbinger
of the world's conversion. 4. His grateful sense of the exceeding goodness of God
which is to be made manifest (vers. 17 — 22). He thinks of the destitute, of the
prisoner groaniog in his misery, of those appointed unto death, and of the blessed help
and deliverance that shall come to them all, and his heart leaps up in praise. But
next we see —

IV. Sadness seeking to come BACf aoa-in. (Ver. 23.) As is the way of sadness.



376 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. oii. 1— 28.



it haonto the soul, and, though banished awhile, it will return. It was so with the
psalmist. The remembrance of his own sore trouble comes over him again, and he
bursts out in this piteous lament, " He weakened my strength in the way," etCq and
he cries, " my Gk)d, take me not away," etc. But God does not leave him ; such
holy troubled souls never are left. We next see —

V. Sadness aoain dbiven away. (Vers. 25 — 28.) His trust is restored ; for :

1. He remembers the eternai God. This had been his comfort before (vers. 1, 2) ; and
now it comes to his help once more. " Thou art the same, and thy years," etc. (ver. 27).
And then he thinks of : 2. His children. They shall be established before God (ver. 28).
And so the light again ariseth in the darkness. — S. 0.

Ver. 7. — '' A» a sparrow alone." A sad, a not unseldom, and often a salutary, con-
dition this. For the soul, when thus left alone of men, retreats into the sure sweet
shelter of the love of God. We are apt to think we can do very well without that
when the smiles and favour of our fellow-men rest upon us. But unquestionably it is
a sad and painful condition, however it may be caused.

I. So, OFTEN, THE SOUL SEEMS TO BE. The world says it : " God hath forsaken
him ; persecute him and take him." And the soul itself says the same : " Why art
thou so far from me, God ?" It is a frequent complaint. Even our Lord knew this
distress. " My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me ? " But he was then, and
all God's children were and are wrong ; for Ghxl never forsakes his people (John xvi.
31, 32). They may think he does.

II. So, AT TiUES, IT WILL BE. But this is iu regard to the world. The soul must
" come out, and be separate " (2 Cor. vi. 17 ; cf. homily on Jer. xiL 9, " The specUed
bird," p. 325, vol. L).

III. So EVER IT MUST BE IN BEOABD TO GoD IN THE woBLD. There ckn be no
compromise. — S. 0.

Ver. 16. — " When the Lord shall build up Zion." L What is this wobk hebs
SPOKEN OF? The building up of Zion. 1. By the conversion of individual souU.
The true Church can be built up in no other way. 2. By the public eonfesgion of their
faith on the part of these converted ones. If they refuse this, how can the Church be
built up? 3. By their union in the fellowship of the Church. They must openly
range themselves on the Lord's side in this his appointed way. 4. By the full sancti-
fication of these converts. This is a further gift of grace, and it is the privilege of all
who will fully consecrate themselves to the Lord, and then trust him to accomplish
his own will in them — even their sanctifioation (I Thess. iv. 3). Thus are they
qualifie>i to become co-workers with God in the further upbuilding of his Church.
5. By their becoming builders for Qod — agoing forth to make converts and win others.
Such is this blessed work.

II. What is here said of it ? 1. It is the Lord's work. Many may oo-operate,
but apart from God he can do nothing. 2. It will be a gradual work. The very idea
of building implies this. 3. That from various causes it may be at a ttandstill, or
almost so. Who does not know this ? Oh, these miserable lulls in the work, these
ebb-tides in the flow of holy zeal, faith, and love I It is so in the Church and in the
individual souL 4. ITiere are speisial timet for this upbuilding. (Cf. vers. 13, 14.) A
hallowed excitement on the matter is felt, a sacred and deep sorrow because of Zion'i
desolation (of. Nehemiah). A faithful ministry is raised up. Such are some of the
indications of the set time to favour Zion having come. 5. Oreat glory accrues to Ood.
The building of his Church is God's greatest glory, that for wmch he put forth hii
greatest power, that on which he lavished his greatest love, even the gift of Christ.
That glory appears in the poorness of the instruments he employs (1 Cor, L 26 — 30) ;
in the setting aside of man's chief agencies, their great churches, hierarchies, and
priesthoods; in the discomfiture of the innumerable and mighty adversaries which
stand in the way of this work. All this is taught here.

ni. The homentoub oonolusions that follow. 1. The work shall surely he done.
" I win build my Church," said Christ. It is not a mere possibility, but a fixed will.

2. As to our duty. To be patient. To inquire what is our relation to this work. Are
we helping or hindering f Are we ourselves forming part of this glorioua building, or ara



rt. oil. 1—28.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 377

we wilfully refusing, as we can do, to have part or lot therein ? If we are of the Lord's
Zion ourselves, are we striving to win others? Many fail here. Let us be found
workers together with Qod. — S. C.

Ver. 17. — " The prayer of the destitute." L A tbde desobiption op man's spibitdaIi
OOKDITION. He is destitute, not merely badly off; and he is without expectation, and
without power of his own to better his condition.

II. A WISE coxnrsEL that we all should follow. That we should wait upon
Gk)d in fervent prayer and earnest cry. There is nothing else that we can do. Tber«
is nothing better that we could do. There is nothing that has ever succeeded so well.
There is no fear that, notwithstanding the Lord's greatness and majesty, he will
disregard us.

IIL A GLORIOUS ENoonBAOEitiENT TO FOLLOW THIS couKSEL. The text is a pMa
declaration of what the Lord will do, not merely of what we may desire he should do.
Our Lord was surrounded by destitute people, who begged ot him, and he never sent
one away unblessed. And when he comes in his power he will do the same. Only
let us remember that we must come as destitute. — S. 0.

Ver. 24. — lAves taken away in the midst. I. What lives abe these ? 1. They
are not those of little children. They have not yet come to the midst of their days.
And the sadness that overwhelms us when they die is, after a while, lit up with the
conviction that they rest in the love of God, and can never know the sins and sorrows
which men and women cannot but know. 2. But they are lives matwre, but not aged —
lives in the full meridian of their strength. Of such the psalmist is here speaking.
3. And there are others, and yet more sad. For old age has been denied to many of
God's beloved ones — to the well-beloved Son himself, for he was one of those who
seemed to be taken away in the midst of their days, in the very prime of his manhood
and his service. We may desire length of days ; many and worthy motives prompt
such desire ; but it is often refused. God may have some better thing for us and for
our beloved ones, and so we have to go. But the real sadness is not in such shortened
lives, but in those which end, it may be, not literally in the midst of their days, but
with the real purpose of life unachieved. God's forgiveness not gained because never
sought after. The regenerate nature, indispensable for entrance into the kingdom of
God, never desired, and therefore never striven for in faith and prayer, and therefore
never given. The good works by which God should be glorified, and his fellow-men
cheered and blessed, never wrought, bis day's work all undone. The bright hope of
eternal life with God never valued, never cherished, and now never to be realized;
death coming on the man with all its sting, and the grave exulting in its victory.
These are the real incompleted lives by side of which the sorrow over mere brevity of
earthly life is but small indeed. God grant our lives may not be thus really cat off in
the midst I

II. Whebefobe abb they so DEPBEOATED? See how piteous is the psalmist's
supplication. Wherefore this ? Because for him, like Moses, who —

" Da the very verge did stand.
Of the blessed promised land,"

but yet was never permitted to enter ; so the psalmist feared that in the restoration of
his own people to Zion he should not live to share. But for all, life is such a blessing
when the purpose for which it was given is attained ; that for men to die without that
purpose being attained is sad indeed. Think of life's capacities: what glory it may
bring to God 1 what blessing to one's fellow-men 1 what peace, purity, and joy to one'i
own self 1 And all this which might be, not attained 1

IIL But this need not befall ant one. He who will commit his way unto
the Lord shall find that the Lord will bring it to pass. He shall not be one who goes
about asking — ^Is life worth living ? and voting it all a failure. God did not bring us
into existence for nothing, or without gracious purposes of good in regard to us. He
sets before us life and death, and we are free to choose. Alas 1 many sin-blinded ones
mistake the one for the other, but " whosoever will may take of the water of life
freely."— S. G.



378 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. cii. 1— 28.

Ver. 1. — 2%e prayer of the afflicted. It ia uncertain whether in this psalm we have
an expression of personal feeling in a time of personal Buffering, or an idealizing of the
afflicted nation. If we take the former view, personal and national views must be
regarded as blended. If we take the latter view, we may give heed to Bishop Words-
worth's suggestion, that the psalm was composed by Nehemiah when he went by night
to examine the walls of Jerusalem, and was so deeply affected by the ruinous condition
which he found. Bible writers prefer to associate the psalm with the later days of
the Exile, when the sufferings of the Lord's people had become almost unendurable,
and the time prophesied for the length of the Exile was nearly cc:zpleted. It is the
prayer of a patient sufferer for himself, and for the Jerusalem that lies in ruins. The
sorrow of the psalmist has in it no touch of doubt or repining. But he does feel the
difficulty and mystery of the Divine delays. That is, indeed, one of our gravest
sources of anxiety. If God is acting, we are well assured and comforted. He is mani-
festly present ; we feel his presence — that is enouglu But when he delays, we easily
get the impression that he is holding aloof ; that he is indifferent ; that he is not heeding
our prayer. Then, with the psalmist, we begin prayer by praying to be heard and heeded.

I. The PRATKB op the afflicted SHOUIiD be a confidential imFOLDIKO, NOT A

COMPLAINT. Complaint of God must always be wrong and unworthy. No pious man
can ever be placed in any circumstances of distress in which he gains the right to
complain of God. No pious man keeps his piety and ever wishes to complain. Sub-
mission to the infinitely wise, strong love is absolutely essential to piety. " Thy will
be done," and borne. But the pious soul is invited to the fullest confidences with
God. He may speak out his feelings fully and freely. Great relief comes in times of
trouble by giving our confidence to a trustworthy friend; and God permits us freely to
complain to bim.

II. The PBATiSB OF the afflicted shoitij* be a sism of faith, not of fkab.
Ths faith should assure (1) of Gbd's attention ; (2) of God's sympathy ; (3) of God's
ability to help ; (4) of God's wisdom in delaying his intervention. 1. Fear would be
a dishonour to our past of Divine deliverances. 2. Fear would tell of our circumstances
mastering our souls. 3. Fear would show suspicion of the Divine power and promise.
We ask God to " hear our prayer," because we know that is just what he is doing. — R. T.

Vers. 3 — 5w— 2%« dytreasion attending bodily pain. The point of this pathetio
complaint on which we just now dwell is given in ver. 4. " My heart is smitten, and
withered like grass." There may be pain of body, and sorrow of circumstance, but
these only become seriously distressing when they affect our minds, our spirits. " As
the smitten flower no longer drinks in the dew, or draws up nutriment from the soil,
so a heart parched with intense grief often refuses consolation for itself and nourish-
ment for the bodily frame, and descends at a doubly rapid rate into weakness,
despondency, and dismay."

I. Some fobus of disease involve depression of sfibits. Certain types of stomach
and kidney disease have depression as a neci^ssary symptom. So certain brain and
nerve diseases. Then depression is not to be dealt with as a moral, but as a physical,
evil. This feature of disease is specially trying to the Christian, who longs to keep
ever alive his joy in God. And it makes extremely painful the duties of those who
watch and tend the sick. Such may often gain patience fur bearing work by treating;
depression as but a symptom of disease.

II. Depbusbion of sfibits is oftentimks misconceived. 1. By the good man.
Often leads him to think he has been deceiving himself, and has never known the
grace of God. As well say, when there are clouds in the sky, tliat they prove we were
mistaken when we believed the sunshine warmed us. Varying moods offering do not
affect spiritual /acts. Depressions belong to the sphere of the feelings, the emotions;
they do not belong, necesiiarily, to the sphere of the vnll. If the will were set against
God, we should never be depressed about it. 2. By those who are in relations with
the good man. They are easily carried away by his despondencies, and they are filled
with fear concerning him. The low-spirited will often .say and write bitter things
against themselves; and we are always wise to make no decisions about them and
form no opinions concerning them, while they walk in darkness. " At even-tide it
shaU be light."



M. on. 1—28.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 379

III. Depbession of bpibitb oallb foe all-teiumphino patience. Oa those who
have to deal with such persons, patience has its perfect work. (1) We think how much
patience the depressed require from their fellows ; but (2) can we conceive aright of
the infinite patience God has with them ? For at such times they not only say bitter
things against themselves, they say bitter things against God. — B. T.

Vers. 6, 7. — The londinest of the afflicted. Bemoved from the interests and activities
of life, the bed-ridden sufferer feels as if left alone; his very weakness and helpless-
ness make him feel lonely ; there must be long hours of the day when he is actually
mlone, and long, sleepless hours of the night when he seems all alone ; and he must go
altogether alone down into the "valley of the shadow." Here the psalmist uses as
figures three birds which were regarded, in his day, as types of loneliness. The pelican
is the bird of the swamp ; the owl is the night-bird of the desolate ruin ; the sparrow
is melancholy when it loses its mate. Tristram describes the pelican as sitting motion-
less for hours after it has gorged itself with food, its head sunk on its shoulders, and
its bill resting on its breast. There is a bird in Western Asia, sumetimes called a
sparrow, which has a custom of sitting solitary upon the habitation of man. It never
associates with any other, and only at one season with its own mate ; and even then
it is often seen quite alone upon the house-top, where it warbles its sweet and plaintive
strains, and continues its song, moving from roof to roof.

I. Loneliness as an element of trouble. There is a forced loneliness, and
there is a taught loneliness. That sought loneliness may be right, worthy, useful;
but it may also be wrong, trying to others, and making needlessly difficult the work
of the nurse. Those who would cheer us by their presence are too often frowned
away. Sick people fail sometimes in due self-restraint; they become self-centred,
and inconsiderate of the feelings of others. The wish to be alone may be quite
wrong.

II. LoNELiNESB AB A CALL TO Cbbibtian btmpatht. Waiting-times of pain seem
very long ; waiting-times of mere necessary resting without pain may even seem
longer. The visit of mere good cheer is Christian service. The sight of another fi&ce,
the sound of another voice, the touch of another hand, are full of truest relief and
comfort. Ease the lonely hours of every sick friend within your reach.

III. LONELINEBS AB AN APPEAL FOB DiTINE UANIFE8TATI0N. That is the point We

have in the psalm. God is the Supreme Friend of the lonely heart Compare " Alone,
yet not alone, because the Father is with me." Jesus on the cross is the sublime
model of loneliness; yet he could say, "My God, my Godl"— B, T.

Ver. ip. — The reed bitterness of human affliction, "And that because of thine
indignation and wrath." The conscience of sin makes men regard affliction as Divine
judgment. For man, God's favour is life, God's frown is death — death of peace,
pleasure, hope. Man can lose everything and be rich if he can keep the sense of
gracious relations with God. Man can keep everything, and be poor and miserable,
if he has lost the sense of God's favour. While this is true' of every man, it is in an
especial manner true of the man who has once known the joy of God's smile and favour.
It is stich a man who feels the bitterness of human affliction when it is seen as Divine

i'udgment. The Book of Job represents the struggle of good men to get right views of
luman affliction. And what comes out so clearly from its discussions is, that no one
explanation will suffice. It may be Divine judgment; but Job's friends are wrong
when they say that it must be. It may be Divine chastisement for correction ; but
it would be a mistake to say that it is always chastisement. It may be pure testing,
simple culture, God's way of nourishing the good, and not involving the removal of
any bad. When a sufferer can see suffering to be Divine culture, or even Divine
.chastisement, his trials lose their bitterness. But it is always hard to be compelled to
call suffering Divine judgment.

I. This mat be the tibw of cub tboubleb that others take. It is the view
Job's friends took at once, and they would hear nothing else. Job had at least secretly
sinned, and his suffering was his judgment. Of Messiah it is said, " We did esteem him
stricken, smitten of God, and afflicted." It is what we first think of others, and what
others first think of us. But it had better never be spoken, for it may not be true.



380 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. cii. 1—28.



and it will certainly add to the sufferer's burden. What a mistake to think of the
suffering Jesus as a malefactor !

n. This mat be the view op cub tboubles that we oubselves take rightly.
It may he the explanation. And some heart-searching is proper at the beginning of
all times of affliction. Perhaps we have been going astray, or becoming wilful or
negligent. There are "secret faults," "presumptuous sins," "leavings of first love,"
which must be dealt thus with. God's people have to come into Judgments which will
mark the character of their sins, and into chastiseTnents which will deliver tbem from
their power.

m. This mat be the view of dub teoublbb that we ouesblveb take wbonqlt.
Many good Christians are too ready to think evil of themselves, and write bitter
things against themselves. Absolute sincerity and truthfulness should be sought, even
in dealing with our own faults and failings. We may even confess too much. — R, T.

Vers. 12, 25 — 27. — Changing tdf; changing world} unchanging Ood. A very
favourite contrast with psalmists and poets.

I. A contbast based on a fact. The fact is that man's life is changeable and
brief. This is true of a man's bodily life, intellectual life, and life of relations. It is
impressed on a man in iiis times of sickness, especially when sickness comes breaking
into and breaking up his plans, as in the case of king Hezekiah. Here the psalmist
puts the fact into two figures — the passing shadow, the quickly withered grass.
Precisely the metaphor is taken from the lengthening, that is, the evening shadow,
which Kasbi thus explains : " When it is the time of evening the shadows lengthen,
but when it is dark they are no longer discernible, but come to an end and go." The
figure of the short-lived grass is one of the most familiar in the Bible. It is more
striking in the hot Eastern countrie!:, where blasting winds come, than with us. The
contrast is the Divine continuity and persistency. The cedars outlive the storms of
many winters, but die at last. They endure through some generations, but fall at last.
God survives all kinds of winters, and lasts through all generations. The successions
of the afSicted have always the Divine Healthy One to whom they can look. They
may comfort themselves with the assurance that what he was, he is, and ever wUl he.

II. A oontbast based on an imaqination. Nobody really knows anything about
the earth perishing, and the heavens being folded up, though scientific men venture
now to calculate the actual number of years that the earth may be expected to last.
Yer. 25 is poetry, and based on Eastern knowledge and ideas of the form of earth and
heaven. We can imagine all material things changing and passing. We know that
nothing created retains its form long. And yet certain things of creation seem per-
manent and immovable. We speak of the " everlasting mountains," the " solid earth,"
the "infinite heavens." But think of the mountains shaken down, the earth shifted
from its place, and the heavens folded up, and then God is the same, unaffected ; nay,
he is the supreme force that crumbles the mountains, refashions the earth, and rolls up
the heavens that he " spread abroad."

God stands in absolute contrast with (1) all our experiences, and (2) with all our
imaginations. The fiux and reflux characteristic of material things never affect him
" whose years are throughout all generations." — R. T.

Ver. 16. — Ood glorified in fulfilling his promises. The psalmist has evidently in
mind the anticipated return of the exiles, and the rebuilding of Jerusalem, and the
re-establishment of the Jehovah-worship. By his servants the prophets God had
made distinct promises to his people of a return from the Captivity. He had even
fixed a precise time, though the date from which the seventy years were to be reckoned
was not clearly defined. But seventy years of humiliation is a long time in which to
keep up faith and hope. Many were likely to fail under the strain, and to say, " Our
way is hid from the Lord, and our judgment is passed over from our God ; " " God
bath forgotten to be gracious." Better souls, like this psalmist, kept faith in God,
sung in their hope, and were filled with confidence tha,t God would keep his time, that
he did not really tarr}', and that he would surely be glorified, before all men, as the
« Faithful Promiser."

L GoD OLOBiFiED IN KKEPiNQ HIS WORD. " Hath he Said, and shall he not do it f



PS. oiii. 1— 22.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 881

faath he spoken, and shall he not make it good ? " Men sometimes are neither right
nor wise in keeping their word, hecause they had promised unadvisedly, had spoken
impulsively; there had heen no sufficient thought behind their promise. That fear
«an never be applied to Qod. We may always be sure that efficient knowledge and
-adequate thought lie behind all his promises. And these come fully to view when
the blessings promised are realized. God is glorified to our view when his word is
kept, because we read Mm through the blessing his fulfilled promise becomes to us.

II. OoD SLOBirisD m the ways in which he fulfils bis pbomiseb. For he fulfils
them through the orderings of his providence, and these are often full of surprises,
which excite our admiration of the Wonder-worker. Illustrate from the providential
order that brought about the return of the exiles. Who could have expected Gyrus
to appear on the scene ?

III. Qod olobified in the times he abbanoes fob the fulfiluemt of his
FBOMISES. He promised restoration from Babylon, and we can see that the time chosen
was the only time when, in any sense, an independent Jewish national life could be
resumed. The shiftings of authority in the great Eastern nations made that possible
jttst then. ISo the coming of Messiah is declared to have been just at the " fulness of
times" — the precise time of the world's peace, and of the universal sway of Bome, when
he could be the " Saviour of the world." — B. T.

Vers. 23, 24. — Prayer for renewal of imperilled life. All love life, and desire to
have it prolonged. But the psalmist does not ask for its renewal on merely personal
grounds. He pleads that he is so sure G-od's restoring mercies are just at hand ; and,
if he could see them realized, he could die in peace. Compare Simeon's song as he
held the Babe-Saviour. Death coming when a man is in the very midst of life's work
is the most trying of human experiences. We always feel intensely sorry for Moses,
-though he was so aged, because he must leave his life-work incomplete. See the
intense distress of Uezekiah, because his " purposes were broken off." This was the
special bitterness of his grief: " I said, I shall not see the Lord, even the Lord, in the
land of the living." So with this psalmist of the Exile. He shrank from dying just
at the time when he was expecting that manifestation of the Divine power for which
he had been so long hoping and waiting. To die on this side of our promised land is
always hard work. Death is dreaded in the midst of (1) manhood ; (2) prosperity ;
(3) responsibility ; (4) spiritual growth ; (5) Christian work, etc.

I. The mission or death in the midst or life to uim who dies. Show how
supreme a moral test it may be. It tries a man's submission. It reveals incomplete-
ness of culture. It shows what an undue hold the world may have gained on a man.
It puts him on proving the power of prayer. It humbles him by showing that he is
not so essential to the well-being of humanity as he had thought. Sickness, imperil-
ling life, coming to a man in the midst of his days, often proves to be a most humbling
«nd sanctifying experience.

II. The mission of death in the midst or life to those who have to live on.
Nothing so effectively convinces of the uncertainty of life. Nothing better pleads for
the faithful doing of the duty of every hour. Nothing more effectively convinces that
no man is necessary to God's work in the world. It teaches us that as our life-work
may be " rounded off" at any moment, it should always be ready for " rounding off."
The imperilled may pray for renewed life and lengthened days, but not in any uncon-
ditional way, since length of life is no supreme and necessary good. Such prayer must
wait on the holy wilL — B. T.



EXPOSITION,

PSALM cm.



A FBALM of joy and thanksgiving for God's
manifold mercies, especially for his loving-
kindness in forgiving sin and transgression
i(vers. 3, 8 — 12, 17) passing into adoration



of him npon his heavenly throne (ver. 19),
and a call on all creation to praise him
(vers. 20—22). The "title" assigns the
psalm to David, and this view of its author-
ship is taken by Hengstenberg and Pro-
fessor Alexander. But other critics set; in



382



THE BOOK OF PSALMS.



[ps. cm. 1—22.



" certain Aramaic terminations" indications
of a later date. Whoever the author, we
must regard the composition as less " the
outbreathing of gratitude from one indi-
vidual spirit " than " intended to be used as
a national thanksgiving " (Kay).

The psalm divides itself into four por-
tions : the first (vers. 1 — 5) an outburst of
praise for blessings granted by God to eaoli
man severally ; the second (vers. 6 — 14) an
enumeration of his loving-kindnesses towards
his Church as a whole ; the third (vers. 15 —
18) a representation of man's weakness and
dependenoe on God ; and the fourth (vers.
19 — 22) a glance at God's unchanging
glory, and a call upon all his creation to
bless and worship him.

Ver. 1. — Bless the Lord, my sonl. Be-
peated in ver. 2; also at the end of the
psalm; and again in Fs. civ. 1, 35. To
"bless" is more thaa to praise; it is to
praise with affection and gratitude. The
psalmist calls upon his own soul, and so on
each individual sonl, to begin the song of
praise, whioh is to terminate in a general
chorus of blessing from all creation (vera.
20 — 22). And all that is within me. ■* AU
my whole nature — intellect, emotion, feel-
ing, sentiment — ^brain, heart, lungs, tongue,"
etc. Bless his holy Name; i.e. his mani-
fested Personality, whioh is almost the same
thing as himself.

Yer. 2. — Bless the Lord, my sonl. Be-
petition, in Holy Scripture, is almost always
for the sake of emphasis. It is not " vain
repetition." Our Lord often uses it: "Verily,
verily, I say unto yon; " " My God, my God,
why hast thou forsaken me ? " " Peed my
sheep . . . Feed my sheep." And forget not
all his benefits (comp. Deut. vi. 12 ; viii. 11,
14, etc.). Man is so apt to " forget," that he
requires continual exhortation not to do so.

Ver. 3. — Who forgiveth all thine iniqui-
ties. This is the first and greatest of
" benefits," and is therefore placed first, as
that tor which we ought, above all else, to
bless God. God's forgiveness of sin is a
frequent topic with the psalmists (see Fss.
XXV. 11, 18; xxxii. 1; li. 9; Ixxxv. 2;
Ixxxvi. 5, etc.). Who healeth all thy
diseases. This is best understood literally
— not aa mere " parallelism." Among the
greatest blesaingu which we receive of God
is recovery from sickness.

Ver. 4. — Who redeemeth thy life from
destraction. When sickness seema about
to be mortal, or when danger threatens from
foes, God often steps in and "redeems"
men — i.e. saves them, rescues them (see Fss.
IvL 18; oxvi. 8 ; Isa. xxxviiL 16, 20). Who



orowneth thee with loving-kindness and
tender mercies (comp. Fss. viii, 5 ; xviii.
50 ; xxiii. 6, etc.).

Ver. 5 —Who satisfleth thy mouth with
gODd things. So Dean Johnson and onr
Revisers. But the rendering of ny by
" mouth " is very doubtful. The original
meaning of the word seems to have been
"gay ornament," whence it passed to
"gaiety," " desire of enjoyment," "desire"
generally (t^i/ i'mSvidan aov, LXX.). Dr.
Kay translates, "thy gay heart; ' Frofessor
Cheyne, "thy desire." God satisfies the
reasonable desires of his servants, giving
them "all things richly to enjoy " (1 Tim.
vi. 17), and " satisfying the desire of every
living thing" (Ps. oxlv. 16). So that thy
youth is renewed like the eagle's ; rather,
like an eagle (comp. Isa. zl. 31). The mean-
ing is, not "thy youth is renewed as an
eagle's youth is," for an eagle's youth is not
renewed ; but " thy youth is renewed, and
is become in its strength like an eagle-"

Ver. 6. — The Lord ezecnteth righteous-
ness and judgment ; literally, righteoume»»et
and judgment! ; i.e. " acts of rigliteousness
and acts of judgment." For all that sre
oppressed. The care of God for the " op-
pressed " is a marked featnre of Holy Scrip-
ture (see Ezod. ii. 23 — 25 ; iii. 9 ; Jndg. it
18 ; vi. 9 ; Job xxxv. 9—14 ; Fss. ix. 9 ; z.
18 ; Ixzix. 21 ; cxlvi. 7; Isa. i. 17, etc.).

Yer. 7. — ^He made known his ways unt«
Hoses. God's ways are " past finding out "
by man (Bom. zi. 33); they must be " made
known" to him. God made them known
to Moses by the revelations which he gave
him, especially those of Sinai. His acts
unto the children of Israel. The rest of
the Israelites were tanght mainly by God's
"acts" — not that his words were concealed
from them, but because

" Segnius irritant animum demissa per
aures,
Quam qute sunt oculis subjeota fidelibus."

Ver. 8. — The Lord is merciful and gra-
cious, slow to anger, and plenteous in mercy.
This was a part of the revelation made to
Moses (Exod. xxxiv. 6), whose words the
psalmist closely echoes, botli here and in
Ps. Izzzvi. 15 (comp. also Fss. oxi. 4 ; oxii.
4; ozlv. 8).

Yer. 9. — He will not always chide; or,
contend (see Isa. Ivii. 16 ; and comp. Jer. iii.
5, 12), God will relent from his anger and
forgive men, after a while. He will not be
"extreme to mark what is done amiss."
Neither will he keep his anger for ever.
He is not implacable. He will accept re-
pentance and amendment (Ezek. xviii. 27).
He will accept atonement (1 John ii. 2).

Yer. 10. — He hath not dealt with us after
our sins ; nor rewarded us (rather, requited



P8. cm. 1—22.]



THE BOOK OF PSALMS,



888



m) according to onr iniquities. Ood never
pnnisbeB men bo much as they deserve to
be pnniBbed; "in his wrath be" always
" tbinketh upon mercy,"

Yer. 11. — For as the heaven is high above
the earth, so great is his mercy toward
them that fear him (comp. Fs. xxxvi. 5,
"Thy mercy, O Lord, is in the heavens,
and thy faithfulness reaoheth unto the
olouds"). The metaphor is bold, yet in-
adequate ; for God's mercy is infinite,

Ver. 12. — As far as the east is from the
west, so far hath he removed onr transgres-
sions from us. God's mercy is the cause,
the removal »f sin the result. The two are
eommenaurate, and are "described by the
largest measures which the earth can afford."

Ver. 13, — Like as a father pitieth his
children, so the Lord pitieth them that fear
him (comp. Deut. xxxii. 6; Job x. 8; Isa,
xxix. 16; Ixiii. 16; Ixiv. 8, etc.). (For the
nature of the " fear " spoken of, both here
and in ver. 11, see the description in vers,
17, 18.) It must be a fear that produces
obedience, or, in New Testament phrase,
that is a "godly fear" (Heb. xu. 28).

Yer. 14.— For he knovreth onr frame; or,
our formation (Kay) — the manner in which
we were formed (see Gen. ii, 7). He re-
membereth that we are dust (comp. Gen.
ii. 7 ; iii. 19 ; six. 27 ; Job zxxiv. 15, etc.).

Yer. 15. — As for man, his days are as
grass. Here is a new departure. From
the loving-kindness and mercy of God the
psalmist passes to the weakness and help-
lessness of man. Man is like grass (Fss.
xxxvii. 2; xc. 5, 6; oli. 11; Isa. xl. 6 — 8,
etc.). His days fleet and fade. He never
"continueth in one stay." As a flower of
the field (comp. Job xiv. 2 ; Isa. xxviii. 1 ;
xl. 6; Jas. i. 10; 1 Pet. i. 24, etc.). He
flourisheth ; t'.e. he oometh up in full
vigour, glorious to look upon, rejoicing in
his youth and strength, but within a little
time he fadeth, falleth away, or is "cut
down, dried up, and withered." There is
no strength or stability in him.

Yer. 16. — For the wind paaseth over it,
and it is gone; literally, if it not. The
burning sirocco, the wind of the desert,
variously named in various places, blows
Dpon the flower, and almost immediately
scorches it np. So man, when he ilourishes
most, is for the most part brought low by
the wind of su£fering, trouble, sickness,
calamity, and sinks out of sight. And the
place thereof shall know it no more ; rather,
Irtows it no more. Seeing it not, forgets it,
aH if it had never been. So with the greatest
men — they pass away and are forgotten
(oomp. Job vii. 10). •

Yer. 17. — But the mercy of the Lord is
from everlasting to everlasting upon them
that fear him (comp. vers. 11, 13). Tbrougli



this "everlasting mercy" of God, man,
though so feeble and fragile, does not wholly
pass away, but continues to be the recipient
of God's bounty. And his righteonsness
unto children's children. God's " righteous-
ness " is his everlasting justice, by which he
gives to men according to their deserts.

Yer. 18. — ^lo such as keep his covenant;
i.e. "to the faithful" — to those who, not-
withstanding many lapses and many short-
comings, are yet sincere in heart, aud seek
to do his will. Such persons remember his
commandments to do them,

Ver. 19. — The lord hath prepared (or,
eetablished) his throne in the heavens. In
conclusion, the incomparable majesty of God
is set before us, in contrast witli tbe feeble-
ness of man, and he is put forward as the
one and only flt Object of worship, alike to
the spiritual (vers, '20, 21) and the material
creation (ver. 22a), as well as to the psalmist
himself (ver. 22&). treated on his everlast-
ing throne, he challenges the adoration of
the whole universe. And his kingdom mleth
over all (oomp. Pa. xlvii 2 ; Dan. iv. 34, 35).

Yer. t20. — Bless the Lord, ye his angels
(oomp. Ps. oxlviii. 2). That excel in strength.
The angels that " excel in strength " — lite-
rally, are mighty in strength — may best be
understood as those called in the New Tes-
tament "archangels " (1 Thess. iv. 16 ; Jude
9), the highest of the glorious beings that
stand around the throne of God (Rev. viii.
2, 6 ; X. 1) and execute his behests. Theso
are they that, in an especial sense, do his
commandments, hearkening onto the voice
of his word.

Yer. 21. — Bless ye the Lord, all ye his
hosts. Here the inferior angels seem to be
meant — that "multitude of the host of
heaven" which appeared to the shepherds
on Christ's natal day (Luke ii. 13), and
which is elsewhere often referred to in Holy
Scripture (see Pss. xxiv. 10 ; cxlviii. 2 ; Isa.
xl. 26 ; Matt. xxv. 31 ; Mark viii. 38 ; Luke
ix. 26; Heb. xii. 22; Jude 14). Ye minis-
ters of his (comp. Fs, civ. 4) that do his
pleasure. The inferior, no less than the
superior, ranks of angels continually carry
out the will of God, being "ministering
spirits, sent forth to minister for them who
shall be heirs of salvation" (Heb. L 14).

Ver. 22. — Bless the Lord, all his works in
all places of his dominion (comp. Fi^s. xix.
1—4; exlv. 10; cxlviii. 7— 13). The "works
of God " — i.e. his material universe — cannot,
of course, he said to "bless" God in the
same sense that men and angels do; but,
in u language of their own, they set forth
his glory, and to the poetio mind seem truly
to sing his praise. The " Snng of the Three
Children" is a natural outburst from devout
heurts. Bless the Lord, my soul (comp.
ver. 1, and the comment ad ho.).



384 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. cm, 1—22.



HOMILETIOa

Vers. 1 — 6. — Oo^t goodness to ourselves. The psalmist begins by addressing bimself ;
be has before bim his own personal experience during a long (or lengthening) life; and
be finds ample reason for full, heartfelt gratitude. Of the " benefits " he has received,
he gives —

I. A BECiTAL OF THEM. They include : 1. The Divine mercy when he has sinned
(ver. 3). These sins have been (1) very many ; (2) of various kinds, including not
only smaller and greater wrong-doings, but the long catalogue of omissions — of submis-
sion and service unrendered; (3) they may have been aggravated and of a deep dye;
(4) they may have been committed in all the many relationships and through all the
successive stages of human life. 2. Divine restoration. (Yers. 3, latter part, and 4.)
And this is inclusive of (1) restoration from daily weariness and exhaustion ; (2) recovery
from the less serious ailments and evils to which every one is subject; probably
(3) bringing back from the grave when dangerous illness has brought low. 3. All the
loving-kindnesses which make life beautiful and glad (ver. 4). The excellency of
human love, the comforts of borne life, the sacred joy of worship. 4. The continuance
of Divine protection and replenishment to later life (ver. 5). God had satisfied his
prime (marginal reading, Revised Version) with good things — had so visited and
renewed bim in his manhood, that now, instead of a growing feebleness, he felt the
vigour and hopefulness of youth ; perhaps he was far enough on the way to be said to
be " still bringing forth fruit in old age." He calls on himself to cherish —

II. A BEMEMBBANCX OF THEM. " Forget uot," eto. (ver. 2). Antecedently that
seems impossible; certainly in the case of any one claiming to be devout. Yet it
is quite possible for us to be (1) so sensible of our own agency in securing our comforts
as to lose sight of the Divine action, and so to overlook them ; or to be (2) so occupied
with present cares and pleasures, or with future claims, that we may be regardless of
them (see Deut. vi. 12 ; viii. 11 — 18). What the wise and good man will desire for
himself is that he will constantly carry with him a deep sense of Qod's abounding
goudnesi to him through all his course. This will lead to— -

III. FULL-TOIOED AND FULL-HEABTED UTTEBANOK OF PBAI8K. (YefS. 1, 2.) Qod'l

praise is not to be rendered by an occasional and formal " returning of thuiks " either
at the table or in the church. It is to be a daily offering, and one that comes from the
heart as well as from the lips. " All that is within us," the whole range of our faculties,
is to combine to speak and to sing his pnuse. Gratitude to God for his abiding and
abounding goodness to us, both as citizens of this world and as his children, should be
a very leading and powerful factor in our soul, making our character beautiful with
spiritual worth, and our life resonant with holy song.

Vers. 6^18. — 2%e conjidence of GocPs children. These strong, sostaining words call
us to consider —

I. To WHOM THE Divine assubaitoeb abe oivbn. It is clear that they are given
to the servants of God. The thought runs through the whole passage (see vers. 11, 13,
18). Where this is not explicitly stated, it is to be understood (see particularly ver. 12).
Those may not claim the fulfilment of promises to whom they were not made. First
enter the service of Christ, and then look up for all the blessings assured to those who
believe in him.

IL These Divine assttbanoeb themselves. 1. The overthrow of evU, and the
consequent deliverance of the good (ver. 6). God " executes righteousness and judg-
ment" in two ways — sometimes by a Divine intervention, when he overturns the designs
of the wicked, and at the same time redeems his people (fi.g. the Jews from Pharaoh
and from Haman and from Sanballat) ; more often by the constant outworking of
those righteous laws which are always acting on behalf of rectitude against iniquity
(see Ps. xxxiv. 15, 16). 2. Divine patience. (Ver. 2.) God is "slow to anger." It
was said of a noble modern ruler that, under great provocation, he was " slow to smite,
and swift to spare." Of how many might the opposite be said ? Our God is " slow to
anger." His displeasure is awakened, his condemnation uttered, only when it would be
unrighteousness to remain unmoved and silent. 3. Divine mercy. (Vers. 10—12.)



P8. cm. 1—22.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 388

Instead of inflicting pain, poverty, misery, death — the wages of sin — God has (1^ spared
to us our life and our health ; (2) multiplied to us our comforts and our joys ; (3) offered
to us, in Jesus Christ, a full restoration to his Divine favour ; (4) planted within our
hearts the seeds of piety and holiness ; (5) made us heirs of eternal life. The mercy of
OtoA, in Christ Jesus, has such immeasurable heights and breadths (vers. 11, 12).
4. Divine pity. (Ver. 13.) Nothing can exceed the pity of the parent for his or her
child when in pain or trouble. Then the very tenderest and strongest as well as the
purest emotions of the human heart are stirred. "As one whom his mother com-
forteth" — with such perfect sympathy, such exquisite tenderness — does God comfort
us (Isa. Ixvi. 13). God's pity for his children is felt (1) in their various distresses, and
may be counted upon in all time of need (see Heb. iv. IS, 16) ; (2) in their spiritual
endeavours and struggles, when the work is hard, and the soul is weak, and the issue
is uncertain. And here we have, as we may well rejoice to hare, the assurance of :
6. Divine considerateness. (Ver. 14.) Christian service is imperfect ; our character is
blemished, and our work is faulty ; but it is sincere ; it is rooted in faith ; it is animated
by love ; it is purified by prayer. And he who accepted the service of his apostles in
the garden, " knowing their frame " and the weakness of the flesh (Matt. xxvi. 41) ; he
who has owned and blessed the spiritual endeavour and the earnest labouis of his people
in every age and in. every Church since then ; — will accept our service and crown our
labours now, though in the one and in the other we fall far short even of our own ideaL
Well, indeed, woiUd it be if we made as generous allowance for one another as our
Master makes for us all. 6. Divine contimtance. (Vers. 15 — 17.) With the brevity
of all human things we contrast the continuance of the Divine. We ourselves pass
away and are forgotten, but God's mercy and his righteousness remain for ever. We
can always count on them. Men may be very true and very kind, but they pass to
where they cannot reach and help us. Let us commit ourselves to the goodness and
the faithfulness of God, for on that we may build with absolute security. This is the
true confidence of the children of God. But we are reminded in one verse (7) of —

IIL The only hope of the sislotal. God revealed himself, " his ways, and his
acts," to Moses, but grace and truth have come by Jesus Christ (John i. 17). In the
gospel God has revealed himself as the Divine Father, who waits to receive his way-
ward but penitent children. Those that are obdurate and impenitent may not plead
his promises, may not appropriate to themselves the sustaining assurance which apply
to other persons. But they may — they must — return in humility aud in faith to the
Father whom they have forsaken ; and, once at home with him, ihey may rest in bis
loving favour and rejoice in his upholding Word.

Vers. 19 — 22. — The range of QodHt rule and claim. We have here—
I. The wide kanqb of God's bule. (Ver. 19.) If his throne were " prepared "
anywhere on earth, while within sight of a few, it would be out of sight of and, in that
sense, far away from many cities and provinces ; but being " prepared in the heavens,"
it is (in thought and feeling) in view of all, and is thus near to all, and " his kingdom
ruleth over all." " The Lord looketh from heaven, he beholdeth sdl the sons of men ;
from the place of his habitation he looketh upon all the inhabitants of the earth "
(Ps. xxxiii. 13, 14). To our imagination, ana therefore practically to ourselves, the
heavens are much nearer to us, much more "central," than any Jerusalem could be.
Every kingdom, every city, every human home, is in the regard, under the control,
subject to the rightful sway, of the Divine Sovereign.

IL The fulness of the Divine claim. God's claim : 1. Ascends to the highest
intelligences ; the " angels that excel in strength " owe to him their homage ; they do,
indeed, hearken and obey. 2. Descends to inanimate nature. All his works praise
him ; unconsciously they " declare his glory."

** There's not a plant nor flower below
But makes his glory known."

3. Includes all that come between. Whatever or whoever are intended by the " hosts "
and " ministers " of ver. 21, it is certain that the psalmist included the children of men.
It may, indeed, be said that it is impossible to conceive of any of God's creatures or
children who owe him so much as we do. For our creation, our endowment, our

F8ALUS — U. 2



38« THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [pb. ojn. 1— 2a

temporal mercies, our redemption at an infinite cost, and for all the Divine love, patience,
considerateness (see above), we have been receiving from him, we owe him " perpetual
songs of praise."

III. The THORonoHNEsa of dub service. 1. Our praise is to be the devout
expression of our deep feeling ; much more than a reverent attitude or an appropriate
deliverance : " all that is within us " (ver. 1) is to come forth in grateful utterance ; our
song is to express our soul ; it is to be the natural, unbidden voice of our homage, onr
attention, our love, our submission, our consecration. 2. We may be concerned about
the piety of our neighbour ; but the firiit thing to do is to address ourselves : " Bless
the Lord, my soul I "



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Vers. 1 — 5. — A pattern of praise. This psalm is all praise ; there is no supplica-
tion in it. It has helped myriads to praise God, and the secret of such help is that the
psalmist was himself filled with the spirit of praise, and it is the blessed contagion of
that spirit that helps us to-day as in the days of old. And it is a pattern of all true
praise. It is so in these ways.

I. In its object. 1. It is praise of the Lord. All is addressed to him, and is foi
him. 2. And in his holiness. " Bless his holy Name." What a happy fact this reveals
as to the psalmist and all who sincerely adopt his words I We can bless God for his
beneficence and mercy and goodness, but only a holy soul can bless him for his
holiness. Such soul delights not merely in the kind acts of God, but in the pure and
perfect character of God.

II. Its methods. It shows us how we should praise the Lord. 1. Personally.
" Bless the Lord, my soul ! " It is not a work to be handed over to any choir or any
people whatsoever. It is to be our own personal work. 2. Spiritiud. It is to be the
sottTs work. Poetic speech, eloquent phrase, beantifnl music, skilled song, — all count
for nothing if the soul be not in the work, 3. Whole-hearted. " All that is within
me." Intellect, memory, imagination, affection, will, all the energies of our spiritual
nature, should be engaged. 4. With set purpose. See how he calls on himself, stirs
himself up to this holy work, repeats his exhortation and protests against that one
chief cause — forgetfulness — of our failure to render praise. " Forget not any of his
benefits." This is how we should praise the Lord.

III. Its reason. He tells wherefore we should bless the Lord. 1. For forgiveness.
This our first necessity ; all else availi not without that (cf. Mark ii. 5). 2. For the
healing of the soul. It would be but a poor salvation if soul-healing did not follow
forgiveness, for without the latter we should soon he back to our sins again (2 Pet. ii.
22). I'herelore we need this healing of the soul. And it is promised (see Ezek.
xxxvi. 25). 3. For penalty in this life averted. He "redeemeth thy life from
destruction." God does not redeem our life from all the consequences of our sin
(Ps. xcix. 8), but from the worst he does. The forgiven man may have to suffer much
in consequence of his past sins, but it is as nothing compared with what he would
have had to suffer had he not been forgiven. The comfort of God's Spirit, power to
witness for Christ, victory over sin, hope bright hope of life eternal, — all these are his ;
his life is redeemed from destruction. 4. For, next, Qod crowneth tvith lomng-kindnets.
See all this illustrated in the story of the prodigal son — forgiven, healed, redeemed,
crowned, the ring, the robe, the shoes, the feast, were for him ; and what answers to them
yet is the crowning told of here. 5. For satisfaction with good. This also awaits us :
would we but trust God more, we should know it fur ourselves. They who walk with
God, abide in Christ, know what it is. Let us not rest until we know it for ourselves.
6. For youth of soul renewed. (See homily on this subject.) The outward man may,
■will, decay, but the inward man shall be renewed day by day.

IV. Its results. What a history it would be if we could only trace out what this
psalm has done for God's saints in all a^es ! What spiritual victories it has won I what
Btiengtii it has imparted ! what holy joy I Christian, sing this pi-alm more heartily, so
that many poor lost ones, hearing its sweet evangel, u,ay turn and with you bless the
Lord.— S. C.



PS. cm. 1—22.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 88T

Ver. 5. — Renewed youth. How can that be? We must grow old. Every day
brings us nearer to old age, and there is no escaping it except by premature departure.
We pass on by stages which succeed each other in regular and well-marked order from
infancy to the last scene of all, the second childhood, which finds us " lans teeth, eyes,
taste— everything." With all of us age creeps on apace, but almost unnoticed. Now,
«ur ideal of age shifts. Children think all grown-up people old, and some very old.
But when men come to the verge of three score years and ten, they will often flatter
themselves that even yet they are not old. But there are certain unmistakable signs
which no observant man can fail to notice, and which remind him that the day of life
is on the wane. Phydcal fatigue ; less of elasticity and power ; he gives in sooner than
he did when strain is put on his strength. I%e way the young treat us. In Thackeray's
beautiful story, 'The Newcomes,' he pictures the colonel sitting in his cheerless room, and
hearing his boy and his friends singing and making merry overhead. He longed to
join them and share in it; but the party would be hushed if he went in, and he would
4;ome away sad at heart to think that his presence should be the signal for silence
among them, and that his son could not be merry in his company. " We go into the
-company of young men like Chris Newcome and his friends ; they cease their laughter
anii subdue their talk to the gravity which is supposed to be fit for the ears of the
seniors. Then we know, too plainly to be mistaken, what has befallen us ; we are
growing older; the stamp of middle age is upon us." But if the juniors do not bring
home the fact to us, the conduct of the seniors does. Old men have confidence in our
judgment, grow civil as they see we are approaching to their side, and have arrived at
an age when it should be no longer true that " knowledge comes, but wisdom lingers."
They think they can trust no man, and they consult us as they never would have done
had not the dew of our youth long ago disappeared. Yes; we must grow old. And
why should we regret it? It is an honour and reward which are given of Qoi.
'" Thou shalt come to thy grave in a full age, as a shock of com," etc. The Bible
never speaks of " the dreary gift of years ; " and if, in melancholy mood, Moses asserts that
which, thank God, is so often untrue, that in the years of old age " their strength is
but labour and sorrow," the general tone of the Bible tells that days "long in the
land " are God's own reward to his people. But whether we be content or no at the
inevitable advance of age, there is the fact, and hence the question comes again — How
-can a renewed youth be ? " Can a man enter the second time into his mother's womb,
«nd be born 1 " Now —

I. The text declabeb the fact of benewed touth. And this in no mere
poetic sense, but literally and truly. It says, " like the eagle," which year by year
renews its plumage, and so seems to renew its vigour and activity along with its new
garment. 1. Bvit the renewal of our youth is not physical. Though the bodily life be
sustained and nourished by appropriate food and rest, yet, in spite of this, the physical
energies succumb to the decay of nature. The outward man not only does, but must,
perish. The reservoir gets lower, the constant drain is but inadequately repaired,
and by-and-by our life has all run out. No dixir vitce can prevent this. It is inevitable.
2. But the renewal told of in the text is spiritital. As in Job xzxiii. 23 — 26, where not
physical, but spiritual, rejuvenescence is the theme. " They go from strength to
strength ; " " They that wait upon the Lord shall renew their strength ; " " Whoso liveth
and believeth on me," said our Lord, " shall never die." Of Moses it is said that his eye
was not dim, nor his natural force abated. What an illustration have we in the life of
St. Paul of this ever-renewed youth I 3. 2%e characteristics of youth helong to such.
Capacity for progress, growth, development. It is never too late for them. " It doth not
yet appear what we shall be." Hopefulness. The path of their life is lit up by the sun-
shine of the love of God, and it grows brighter and brighter. Enjoyment. The keen
relish for all that is delightful is one of the blessed appanages of youth, and that which
13 like to it is part of the blessedness of that rejuvenescence of which we are speaking.
Fulness of joy in his presence is theirs. Innocence, also. " The wicked one toucheth
them not." Strength and vigour. They are as athletes in the contests which they
have to wage : in the spiritual conflicts they fight, " not uncertainly, as one that beateth
the air," but theirs is " the good fight," not only for the object for which it is waged,
but for its manner and issue also. Such is this renewed youth.

II. Explains its secret. " He satisfleth thy mouth with good things." Christ



388 THE BOOK OF PSALMS, [ps. cm. 1—22,

is the Bread of their life, and they live by him. His are the " good things " by which
they are sustained. This is the renewing of the Holy Ghost, which accounts for their
renewed youth. They eat the flesh of Christ, and drink his blood; he is their living
Bread. They follow his footsteps, they drink into his Spirit; the mind which wag in
Christ is formed in them, and they grow up into him in all things.

III. Encotjkaoes vs to make it our own. Is youth yet ours ? Then by yielding
our young hearts to the Lord Jesus Christ, let xis receive from him that eternal life,
that life of the Spirit, whose youth is ever renewed. But if youth has passed away
fur us, let us in like manner renew it, and gain agaia all those blessed characteristics,,
only in far higher degree and manner, which are God's gift to them that are young.
— S. 0.

Ver. 9. — "Se will not always chide." This psalm is full of the recital of things to
be thankful for, and of expectation that we be thankful. Amongst these things, this
fact declared in our text is one. And —

I. We shodld be thankful that it is only ohidino, not something worse. God
is speaking to his own children, not to the world of the ungodly. These latter he is
angry with every day, and sternly punishes, and if they repent not he will destroy
them. But though God chide his children, there is not the severity, nor the lack of
alleviation, nor the endlessness and hopelessness, which characterize his dealings with
hardened and ungodly men.

II. That thbbb is such chiding. " For what son is he whom the father chastenetb
not ? " (Heb. xii. 7). If God did not make sin full of smart and pain, we should be
sure to go back to it again. But when the world sees that there is no partiality with
God, that his own children have to suffer even as, and often far more than, others when
they do wrong, this tends to beget a holy fear. Yes ; blessed be God for our chiding t

III. That even this will have an end. When we repent of our sin, when
God's purpose is fulfilled, when we enter heaven. " Therefore humble yourselves,"
etc.— a C.

Vers. 13 — 18. — Wherefore another gospel when we have this t It should seem as if
no gospel could be more full, precious, clear, and heart-uplifting than this. It is
paralleled but not surpassed by St. John's word, " God is love." Why, then, was it
needful for Christ to come in order to reveal to us another gospel? Have we not
everything here, in this utterance of the Old Testament, and in those others in the
same Old Testament, which are like unto it ? What more, then, could be needed ?
We reply —

I. The mission of Christ was needed in obdbr to revive and quicken the
KNOWLEDGE OP THE TRUTH OF THE LOVE OF GoD. It had been, when our Lord came,
so limited, petrified, and practically lost, that it was almost as if it had not been.
Pharisaism and Sadduceeism had so overlaid or lessened it, that only a few elect souls
knew of it or believed it. God's Fatherhood was not much more in our Lord's day
than a dead letter.

II. To MAKE it real TO MEN. True, our text stood there in the psalm, but the-
life of the Lord here on earth could alone make it stand out as a real, living truth.
Then there was held up — placarded, as St. Paul says (Gal. iii. 1) — before the eyes of
all men, what the pity and love of God could do and endure for the sake of sinful
men. And so, as our Lord said, " 1, il I be lifted up, will draw all," etc.

III. To ENSURE ITS BEING SPREAD ABROAD. The Jcws, WO Well kuow, would ncvcr
have allowed this. Their inveterate exclusiveness and scorn of all other nations
would have kept it to themselves alone. It was necessary that Christ should come
and command his disciples to " go into all the world, and preach," etc.

IV. To REVEAL ITS ENLARGED SCOPE AND AIM. Life and immortality were brought
to light by the gospel. Death, till Christ came, kept its sting, and the grave it»
victory, but he took both away. Such were some of the reasons wherefore God became
man, and lived and suffered and died in the Person of Christ. Doubtless there are
others, but amongst them all that horrible one, so sadly dear to theologians of m
bygone age, is not to be found — that it was to turn the heart of God from auger t«
love, for God was and eternally is Love.' — S. 0.



w.cm. 1— 22.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 389

Ver. 13. — The pity of God. I. The full, olbab deolabation op this is foond
«)Ni<T IN THE Bible. 1. It is not in ancient mythology. The gods of the heathen were
strong and much else, but not pitiful. 2. Nor in Nature. How heartless, how
cruel, how utterly unsympathizing, she is ! The dearly loved, the precious, the
innocent, suffer, die in thousands, and Nature has not a solitary tear for thein. 3. Nor
in society. Law, the bond of society, cannot pity, it can only enforce its commands.

IL Nevebthelbss, suggestions or it abe to be fotjnd. The lower animals seem
to have no affection for their offspring ; but : 1. Such suggestions are traceable amongst
the higher orders of animal life. See the affection of the mother bird or beast. See
the affection of the dog for his master. And of the horse. A blackbird has been
known to care for and feed a young robin that had fallen from its nest. 2. And
amongst men. Not much amongst savages ; but pity advances as we observe the
iiigher races and the more civilized.

IIL But fab mobb is human pity seen in the human family and home. 1. There
we get the idea most of all realized. " Like as a father," etc. God has made use of our
happy familiarity with parental love and pity to teach us what he himself is. 2. And
there we learn what pity is and will do. It will inflict pain. Every father and mother
do, but not, if they be wise, in anger, in revenge, or in passion, or carelessly, but
ever out of love, for the sake of the child.

IV. Thus wb leabn the pity of God. 1. It will inflict pain if for owr good.
2. But such infliction does not argue that the sufferer is shut out from the love of Ood.
Man's punishments too often are utterly loveless. See how we treat our criminals,
both in prison and when they come out. What a contrast to the Lord's way I See
how the father of the prodigal forgave, but the elder brother did not. See the parable
of the two debtors. 3. It hids us trust it utterly and for ever. — S. C.

Ver. 19. — The kingdom of Ood. The psalm does not go about to prove — Scripture
never does — the existence of God, nor the fact that he exercises dominion over us ; it
takes both for granted, and proceeds to speak of the nature and obligations of the
Divine rule. That rule is here asserted. Note —

I. Its ohabaotekistios. 1. Its basis and foundation. These are immutably right.
His is not the mere right of might, but a far higher thing, the might of right. Not
tuvofus alone, but l^owrla. 2. Its extent. This is so vast, that not alone is our eyesight
aided with all conceivable telescopic power far outstripped, but even our thought fails
to grasp in its comprehension, or even in its imagination, the wide range either of the
material or moral universe over which God reigns. 3. Its regulating law. That law
is holy, just, and good, and clothed with power to enforce its sacred sanctions. Its
moral perfection is seen supremely in the atoning work of our Lord Jesus Christ.
4. Its purpose and aim. These are the highest possible. The glory of God is to be
secured, that glory on which the well-being of the whole universe depends. Let Gtoi
be banished from his throne, and straightway chaos comes again. And the highest
well-being of his creatures. The two are never antagonistic, but joined in inseparable
union. Where one is, there is the other. 5. Its duration. For ever and ever. Such
are the characteristics of this blessed and glorious kingdom, whose subjects consist
only of regenerated souls — souls that can say, "Oh how I love thy Law! it is my
meditation all the day."

II. The effect which oub faith in this Divine kingdom should have upon us.
1. Obedience. To know God's will shovild be to obey. " Blessed are they that keep
his commandments." 2. Praise. What truer gospel can there be that such a rule is
that under which we live ? 3. Trust. We cannot always understand the ways of
God ; they are high above our thought ; but we can ever trust, and that is ever good.
■4. Confident hope. " He must reign till he hath put all enemies," etc. And he will
Ao this.— S. C.

Ver. 22. — Tht peril of the spiritual guide. Such is the title which a great preacher
has given to a sermon on this text. The subject is sugsested by Its closing words.
The psalmist had been summoning angels and all the works of the Lord to bless the
Iiord, and, as if he remembered that he might he —

L Calling othbbs to pbaisb the Loed, and yet neglecting it himself, he adds.



300 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. cm. 1—22

" Bless the Lord, my soul ! " 1. And this it a real possibility and a terrible peril.
Like as a guide to the loveliest scenes of nature may lead a traveller to different points
of view, which will show the glorious landscape at its best, and may expatiate on the
beauties that are to be seen, yet may himself be not in the slightest degree stirred or
moved by what he calls on the traveller to admire. He has come to be so familiar
with it all ; he has said the same thing so many times, it is part of his professional
talk ; he has seen all these glorious things so often, that they have lost their power to
affect him. At first it was otherwise ; he had become a guide to these scenes becaus©
he so delighted in them. But that was a long time ago. He had thought that ho
could not spend his life more happily than in conducting others to these same beautiful
places, and showing them their glories. But all that enthusiasm has long passed, and
he is now a mere professional guide. 2. And so, the great preacher to whom I hava
referred points out, it may be with, the spiritual guide — the minister of Christ, the
teacher of others in holy things. He may have begun with enthusiasm for the blessed
truths and the bright prospects to which he was to lead others; he had such joy in
them himself, that to show to others these things seemed an employment to which h»
might, as in fact he did, give his whole life and soul. But alas 1 he has got so familiar
with it all ; the work has become such a routine, that all the old zest and glow and
enthusiasm are gone, and he too has become a mere professional guide. God help him
and all such 1 This is the periL

IL The safeguard is, by continual meditation, prayer, and obedience to the Lord,
to maintain the freshness, the force, and the " first love." And this safeguard is sure.
— S. 0.

Yer. 3. — Ood the Healer of disease. Though this psalm is one of the most familiar,
both its authorship and its particular occasion are quite unknown. Early in the
psalm this text comes. It is part of a review of God's personal mercies to the psalmist,
but it is doubtful whether the psalmist referred to times of bodily disease and bodily
healing, or to the soul-diseases which answer to " iniquities." In view of the way in
which Eastern poets loved to repeat their thought with slightly altered phraseology,
it is quite possible that the text may read, " Who forgiveth all thine iniquities, and
healeth all thy soul-diseases — those soul-conditions of frailty and infirmity, out of
which iniquities come." But, however that may be, it is oertaiuly true that God is
the Healer of all men's diseases. The work of the physician must always be traced
back to the Divine Physician, who alone has proved to be the recuperative Ibroe in
human vitality. God has healed us again and again through the agency of the doctor
and the medicine.

I. What is said about men's sicknesses in the Old Testament ? Abraham
and Isaac died of sheer old age. So indeed did Jacob, but there is a fuller reference
to his ending. For all that appears in the record, neither the patriarchs nor their
families suffered any sicknesses during their lives. Evidently, these experiences of
sickness were not then seen in their relation to character, and so tliere was no need to
leave any narratives concerning them. Sickness is reckoned with under the Mosaic
system, but in a very peculiar way. It was treated as an outward sign and conse-
quence of sin; both the sick person and those who tended him being treated aa-
"unclean." To limit this rule because, in its working, it occasioned very serious
family and social disturbance, one particular lorm of disease — that most typical form
of disease, leprosy — was taken as the representative of all forms, and the law of the
" unclean " was strictly enforced in relation to it. Judaism never suggests the idea
that character is cultured by the experience of sickness ; and so even its priests and
Levites offer no example of tending the sick poor. Sickness, in the old economy,
served its purpose simply as the outward sign of God's judgment on sin. When Job'a
friends came to comfort him, they could think of no other view of sickness than this,
though Job felt sure that there must be a higher meaning, if only he could reach it..
In the historical books the references to sickness — other than great pestilences — are
very brief. One king suffered from internal disease, and one had the gout, but there
is only one instance in which any details of a sickness are given, and in that case
the relation of it to character first clearly appears. Hezekiali, in the middle of hie
reign, but before any son and heir was born to him, was smitten down with a bad kind



PS. oiu. 1— 22.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 391

of boil or carbuncle, whicli put his life in peril. He turned to God in his distress,
and gained from God recovery. Evidently he prayed the prayer of faith. As evi-
dently the^ Prophet Isaiah prayed for him the prayer of faith. And yet it is signifi-
cantly told us that means were used to ensure his recovery, " Now Isaiah had said. Let
them take a cake of figs, and lay it for a plaister upon the boil, and he shall recover."
The Book of Job is not a discussion of the question — What ought a godly man to do
who is smitten with sickness ? Its subject is rather this — ^What moral ead can explain
the Divine permission of sickness f One king was seriously reproved because, when he
was ill, he " sought unto the physicians, and not unto God." But the wrong was not
in hLi seeking the help of the physicians, but in his failing to seek God first, and to
let him send him to the physicians. All we can say about this matter, in connection
with the Old Testament, is that when moral considerations began to prevail over cere-
monial ones, a truer and worthier view of sickness began to gain power. Then sickness
was seen to be one of the great moral agencies by means of which God wrought bis
higher work in characters and in souls.

II. What is said about sickness in the Gospels ? Our Lord, as a moral and
spiritual Teacher, our Lord as a Saviour, found in men's sicknesses, infirmities, and
disabilities his best agencies for reaching their souls with saving influences. To him
suffering was the issue and consequence of sin. And so it was to everybody in his day.
Sickness illustrated sin. Suffering produced moods of mind in men which laid thera
open to his higher influence. So he worked very largely for and among sick people,
always trying to get their sicknesses sanctified to them, even in the very act of healing
or removing them. He revealed fully to the world the moral relations of sickness, the
moral possibilities that lie in sickness. Our Lord's dealing with it is unique, not so
much because it was supernatural, as because it was moral. He dealt with it only as
a means of securing soul-healing. Since Christ's time, sickness, disease, and disability
have taken rank among God's remedial agencies, God's character-culturing agencies,
God's sanctifying agencies.

III. What is said about siokmebs in the Epistles ? The apostles never claimed
to exert any independent powers. They always healed " in the Name of Christ."
They conceived of themselves as holding that special ability in trust for particular
ends in the propagation of the gospel. They did not heal everybody. They only
healed when the healing could make a way for the gospel, draw attention to it, or
prove its Divine origin. And the historical fact is that the power of healing passed
away with the first generation of disciples. It is found, in later ages, only in separate
and highly endowed individuals, to whom has been entrusted a genius for healing.
The case of the Apostle Paul is a remarkable one. He had the gift of healing. He
did heal the father of Publius. But he was not carried away by the gift he possessed.
He held all his gifts under the most careful restraints. His friend and fellow-labourer,
Epaphroditus, was " sick, nigh unto death," but St. Paul put forth no power to heal
him. God had mercy on him, and restored him in the ordinary way. Trophimus was
left at Miletum sick, but it did not enter the apostle's mind that he, or the elders,
could have cured him if they had tried. St. Paul himself had some bodily infirmity
which he calls a " thorn in the flesh," but he simply prayed about it, as we pray about
such things now. The reference made to this matter by the Apostle James has been
gravely misunderstood. It must be read in the light of the chief point he deals with
in his Epistle, viz. that faith which cannot get expression in action is not acceptable
faith, it is mere sentiment. Anointing sick people with oil was no religious ceremony
in the days of the apostle. Using oil in the toilet was simply the sign of health.
Those who prayed in faith for the healing of the sick should show their faith by
acting as if their prayer was answered. Get the sick man up, dress him, anoint him,
in the full confidence that God answers prayer. So Jesus said to the man with the
withered hand, " Stretch forth thine hand I " If he believed, he would do what Christ
told him, and find power come in so doing.

In every age God has healed diseases through his own appointed healing agencies ;
and those we must use in faith. — B. T.

Ver. 4. — 7%e Divine crown on man. " Who crowneth thee with loving-kindness and
tender mercies." What various answers could be given to the question — What is the



392 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. cm. 1—22.

true crown of a man's life ? " No doubt the .term " crown " may be used in a variety
of senses. Tlie psalmist seems here to think of the crown as that which bedecks and
beautifies; and he makes us think of the crown of flowers on the May queen, rather
than of the jewelled crowns on wealthy kings. So the question comes to be — What is
the trae adornment, or enrichment, the true decoration, of a human life ? Then the
answer comes — It is what God gives a man beyond his mere necessities, in the rich
outpouring of Divine loving-kindness and mercy. It may be put in this way — The
Divine provisions are crowned with Divine hestowments.

I. Divine pkovisions. We cannot be surprised that Grod, as Creator, should supply
all the reasonable needs of his creatures ; or that God, as Father, should supply all the
wants of his children. There is a certain oblisation resting on God that arises out of
his relationships. There is a fairly good sense in which the creature and the child
may be said to have claims on God, to which, if he be God, he must respond. " The
eyes of all wait upon thee, and thou givest them their meat in due season." But the
limit of the claim to necessities should be clearly shown. And real necessities are
very few, and can be easily defined. Try to conceive the change, in life and relations,
if God were now to draw back from us everything but our actual necessities. St. Paul
could say, "I have all, and abound,"

II. Divine bestowments. Illustrate by the luxuries and delicacies that the house-
wife provides beyond the necessaries of the table and the house. She enriches, or
crowns, her provisions. So with our Father-God. He meets need, but goes beyond
need to give us all things "richly to enjoy." All the extra things, all the pleasant
things, all the pretty things, of life, are bestowments of the Divine loving-kindness and
tender mercies. If we may think of God's duty in what he provides, we may think
of his personal love to us in what he bestows.

Then show that personal love can never rest satisfied with its objectB being merely
provided for ; it never can rest until they are happy — happy up to the very limit
of their power to be happy. What must God the Father's idea of happiness for his
^arth-children be ? With that he would crown them. — E. T.

Ver. 6. — The Lord of the oppressed. The point set forth prominently is that God is
actively engaged in securing the interests of the oppressed. That goes into the word
used, " executeth." We might think of justice and judgment as the pillars of God's
throne, and yet conceive of binii as only announoing his just decisions ; leaving to
others the work of carrying them out. To put it in a formal way, the legislative rights
of God may be recognized, but the executive rights of God may be denied. We may
fuUy hold both truths of fact. God does pronounce his own judgments ; God does
execute his own sentences. The figure for God is especially effective in Eastern
countries, where justice is so often perverted, and the oppressed have no chance if they
happen to be poor. Illustrate by our Lord's parable of the unjust judge and the
importunate widow. All the oppressed and poor may be absolutely sure that
Jehovah will considerately hear their cases, deal with perfect uprightness in relation
to their trouble, and carry out his decisions, whatever they may involve.

I. The Lobd op the oppbessed heeds the oppressed. The poor often find it
nearly impossible to get their cases brought before the magistrates, judges, or kings of
earth. It is the righteousness of God that he is right towards every one ; all may
seek, and none ever seeks in vain. There is absolute freedom given to every man and
woman under the sun to tell out the trouble to the Lord. And we may have absolute
faith that no tale of human need was ever poured out before God, and disregarded by
him. It is a beginning of hope, that the Lord surely heeds us.

II. The Lord op the oppbessed acts for the oppressed. God's decisions never
merely lie on a statute-book, like many acts of earthly courts and parliaments. If God
decides a thing, it has to be carried out ; nay, he himself presides over the carrying it
out. We are to have confidence in the Divine energy and activity. " Commit thy
way unto the Lord, and he will bring it to pass." How, when, where, he will execute
his judgments, we may not anticipate ; it is enough for an oppressed soul to know that
Ood is acting for him. " He will bring forth our righteousness as the light, and our
judgment as the noon-day."

III. The Lord of the oppressed acts upon the oppressobs. It is not merely



P8. oiii. 1— 22.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 893

that the oppressed are delivered or defended ; it is that those who have injured them
feel the weight of Divine indignation. Judgment is in one sense for the oppressed, and
in another sense for the oppressors. — R. T.

Ver. 9. — Chiding, hut not keeping on chiding. " He will not always chide." A
prophet prays, "0 Lord, correct me, but in measure." The supreme danger of all
who are in positions of authority over others — parents, teachers, masters — is that they
may chastise beyond the requirements of the particular case ; they may continue the
chiding under the impulse of feeling, when judgment requires its strict limitation.
They who chide when in a passion always over-chide ; they try to satisfy their feeling
— and it is vmrestraiued feeling — rather than the actual demands of the case. Now, the
psalmist has the utmost satisfaction in God, because he is quite sure that God never
over-chides. There never yet was one unnecessary stroke given by the Lord'l rod,
Tliat complaint no man ever yet fairly made.

I. God need not ovee-ohidb. Either by making the chiding over-severe or by
keeping it on too long. He need not : 1. Because he is never carried away by feeling.
God is the infinitely self-restrained One; and so he is always himself, and perfectly
competent to deal with every case. 2. Because he has the infinite power to estimate
influences and results. This is often the explanation of man't over-chiding. He cannot
follow influences, and so see quickly when his object is attained. And it may be added
that God has power to stop chidings. Man has not. He may be compelled to keep
on awhile a training-work he has begun, because, even if he could stop it, he would do
serious mischief by stopping it. The omniscience and omnipotence of God prevent
him from ever needing to over-chide.

II. God does not oyeb-ohide. For the assurance of this, appeal may be made to
the experience of God's people in all ages. Their marvel always has been, and always
will be, that God should put such strict limitations on his chidings, and accomplish
such an " exceeding and eternal weight of glory " by such " light afflictions." This
complaint no child of God, who was in his right mind, ever made ; certainly no child
of God ever had a right to make.

That God will surely chide us is our ground of assurance. Our self-wUlednesB will
never be left alone, to ruin us. That God will never over-chid* is our abounding
consolation. — R. T.

Ver. 10. — The measure of the Divine dealings. The point made by the psalmist
is that God's dealings with men are not measured with the same measure as man's
dealings with his fellow-men. If we think precisely we shall admit that God does
deal exactly with us "after our sins;" but it is as our sins are divinely estimated.
When man proceeds to recognize and punish sins, he deals with sins, rather than with
sinners; and metes out his punishments according to standard, with no consideration
for the individual. Man, when he authoritatively punishes, is not supposed to make
allowances. Judges administer law irrespective of persons. Clemency, ' with us, is
left to the supreme authority behind the judge ; and only comes in after the judge has
given his judgment according to standard. Man's law concerns acts, not motives.
God's judgments are after another standard. God judges sinners, not merely sins.
God unites the clemency of the king with the justice of the magistrate. God makes
all reasonable allowances. God considers the force of human frailty. God estimates
circumstances and motives. Then God's is the higher standard, but it is one which
only the God of infinite wisdom and perfect righteousness can use. This may be
worked out along two lines.

I. The mbasubb op Divine dealing is what ib possible fob the baob. God
never measures humanity by the standard he provides for the angels. He never
measures humanity /a^^era by the standard he provides for humanity intact. He does
not measure the race in its savage condition with the standard for the race civilized.
He does not make one absolute standard to apply equally to every branch of the race.
He is mindful of, and considerate towards, all forms of racial peculiarity and disability.
Carefully show the distinction between an absolute standard of morals, and an absolute
setting, or application, of that standard. If God deals with a morally fallen and frail
race, he lets mercy help justice to fix the standard.



394 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. cm. 1—22.

II. The measure ok Divine OEALUias is what is possible to the individual.
This is fully treated under ver. 14. One point only need be mentioned. In every sin
committed by the individual the element of heredity has to be taken into account.
The sin is not absolutely and entirely the maiCs own. Yet man can never measure
this heredity ; so hi* measures will never sufiBce for deciding the Divine judgments
and dealings. — E. T.

Ver. 12. — Limitless forgiveness. What figures will best suggest the entireness of
the removal ot man's sin, when God, in his infinite goodness and mercy, deals with it
and removes it ? That question is specially interesting because, when man is forgiven
his sin, he finds it so hard to get rid of the memory of it. In a sense it may be said
that a man " never forgives himself." There is always, therefore, the danger that a
man will transfer his own feeling to God, and persuade himself that, though God may
forgive, he never really /or^refa. The psalmist, speaking after the manner of men,
and using terms fur God which can only in strictness apply to men, declares that God
can, and does, and will, utterly forget ; " remember our sins no more." The voluntary
Divine forgetfuiness is a sublime conception. Jeremiah (1. 20) has this declaration,
" In those days, and in that time, saith the Lord, the iniquity of Israel shall be sought
for, and there shall be none ; and the sins of Judah, and they shall not be found."
Three figures set before us the liraitlessness of God's forgiveness.

I. The distance of east fbom west. (See text.) " Ply as far as the wing of
imagination can bear you, and if you journey through space eastward, you are further
from the west at every beat of your wing." The distance from north to south can be
measured. There are north and south poles — fixed points. There are no eastern or
western poles. From every point alike in the circuit of the world the east extends
in one direction, the west in the other. Thus the traveller westward may be said to
be ever chasing the west without coming nearer to it.

II. Removal behind the back. (Isa. xxxviii. 17, "For thou hast cast all my
sins behind thy back.") Two ideas are suggested : 1. "Behind the back" is a strong
figure for "out of sight" and "out of mind." 2. " Casting " behind the back implies
resolute purpose. It is as if Ood had thoroughly made up his mind that he would
never look upon them again; he had done with them for ever.

III. Theowino into the sea. (Micah vii. 19, "Thou wilt cast all their sins
into the depths of the sea.") Nothing brings to us the sense of hopeless, irretrievable
loss, like dropping a thing into the fathomless depths of mid-ocean. If our sins are
cast into the sea, we shall never see them more.

God's gracious dealings with our sins depend on our right dealings with them. Only
sins that we have put away from ourselves by repentance can God put away from ug
by his full and free forgiveness. — E. T.

Ver. 14. — " This hody of our humiliation." There is a truth revealed in God's Word
which secTiis to have a painful side. God is to us as we are to him. " Thou renderest
to every man according to his work;" "With the froward thou wilt show thyself
froward." It is a truth which needs careful qualifications. We have one such in
this text. God's ways with us are taken upon due consideration of our bodily frailty.
There may be a right or a wrong excuse drawn from the weakness of human nature.
We certainly are under limited conditions, and these must be duly considered.

I. God's ways with us aee taken with full knowledge of our bodies.
Observe that "frame" is more than "body." This vehicle of the human spirit is
wholly the plan of God. 1. Its actual parts, powers, relations, are known to him.
" Fearfully and wonderfully iLade." Illustrate hand, eye, brain. 2. The special tone
and habit of each individual are known to him. We may think of him studying each
one as a parent does the disposition of each child. 3. The conditions due to hereditary
taint and to civilization. Some have a great fight with bodily and mental taint or
bias. And there are special influences of disease, and mischievous results often follow
it. 4. The general frailty, the passing away, the gradual decaying of the vital
powers. God knows and estimates.

II. God's ways with us are taken with full knowledge of the connection
between our bodies and our minds. Minds are spiritual things, but they work



PS. cm. 1—22.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 395

through a material frame. The brain is the central machine, to which are attached
the separate machines of the senses. The force of the machine is the blood. The
spiritual operations of the mind are helped or hindered by the condition of the body.
Illustrate a speck in the brain, or weakness in the heart. Sometimes we cannot think
— we must just be still. Sometimes we feel depressed, and a sombre tone is put on our
thinking. We fret over such things, until we remember that our God knows all.
He expects no more work from us than he knows we can do ; and he never counts
the times of repairing and refreshing our bodily machine to be idle or wasted times.

III. God's ways with us abb taken with full knowledsb of the connec-
tion BETWEEN OUR BODIES AND ouB RBLiGHON. What he asks from eaoh of us is
just this — the noblest religious life we can reach under our existing body-conditions.
We fret to be free from the body, as St. Paul apparently did : " Who shall delivei
me from the body of this death ?" But precisely the test under which eaoh one of u»
is placed is this — Can you live a godly life in that body of yours, and under those
precise body-conditions of yours ? Only when you can will God find it fitting to
entrust you with the immortal and incorruptible body. Our religious life is a thing
of varying moods. Sometimes our " title is clear ; " sometimes *' our feet are firm ; "
sometimes our "head is lifted up;" sometimes we "walk in darkness, and have no
light ; " sometimes we say, " All these things are against me ; " " I shall one day perish
by the hand of Saul." The very variety unduly troubles us, and we fear lest God
should regard us as unstable. But he " knows our frame." Christian joy is very closely
linked with bodily health, and Christian gloom with bodily disease. Some diseases
spoil the vision. And the body is the great spoiler of the soul's vision. The glorious
attainment of the religious life is to get above body-hinderings ; to become master of
our bodies in Christ ; to " know how to possess the vessels of our bodies in sanctification
and honour." Feeling this to be the great aim in life leads to the excesses and extrava-
gances of hermits and devotees. Remember, then, two things : 1. God sees souls. 2.
God duly reckons for the body. It may be that we shall be surprised to find what
soul-progress we have really made, when the body-clog drops ofi'. This tender and
considerate representation of God is full of comfort to us. But then God has not left
this sentence to lie in his Word as a general statement. He has taken our frame on
himself, so that he might gain experimental knowledge of it. Jesus is the Brother-
Man of sorrows. We may think of God's ways with us as based on the experience of
Jesns. And if God's omniscience is a reason for trust, how much more is Christ's
human experience 1 — E. T.

Ver. 18. — The blessedness of covenant-keepers. Prayer-book Version, " Even upon
such as keep his covenant." A distinctly Israelite point of view. If this be regarded
as a psalm of the returned Exiles, the reference is a striking one. Judgment had fallen
upon the nation because it had forsaken the national covenant. The restoration was
a resuming of the old covenant-relations. And therefore the supreme anxiety of the
Exiles would concern " keeping this new, this restored covenant." It may be observed
thai the Lord's gracious dealings are always to be thought of as strictly conditional.
"The blessings of the covenant are no inalienable right. Children's children can only
inherit its blessings by cleaving to it."

L CovENANT-EBEPEBs BEMBMBER THEiB FLEDSB. It may have been taken by
themselves. It may have been taken in their names by their fathers. It may be
freshly taken after a time of lapse. It is a ground of obligation. It is a source of
inspiration. It should be kept ever in mind. Illustrate by the oath of loyalty taken
by the servants of a king ; or by the pledge taken in marriage ; or by covenants entered
into by those who unite in a common undertaking. See the value of special seasons —
sacramental seasons — when covenant-pledges are forcibly brought to mind. There is
a new covenant in Christ Jesus. It is to that covenant we are pledged ; and that
covenant we do well to keep in mind. (Some useful covenant-reminders may be
indicated.)

II. CoTENANT-EEEPEBS Aiu AT OBBDIENOE. Sentiment, however good, cannot
suffice them. Feelings, as mere feelings, cannot honour God. True covenant-keepers
try to " remember God's commandments," his requirements under the covenant, with
the distinct and full intention to do them, and not merely know what they are, or



396 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. cm. 1—22.

fed that they are wise and good. The Lord Jesus searchingly said, " If ye know these
things, happy are ye if ye do them 1 "

Bbvibw. 1. Set forth what the Lord's covenant was for Israel, and U for u. 2.
Point out how the responsibilities of the covenant may be kept ever before onr minds
and hearts. 3. Impress that the only acceptable keeping of the covenant is the con-
ijtant, loving, hearty obedience of all its requirements. — B. T.

Vers.l — 5. — Oratittide for uribowided mercies. I. The soul tJBGBHTLT sumhoned
TO PBAiSE GloD FOB HIS oooDNEBB. Inward praise, not the praise of the lips, it here
called for — spiritual, not bodily worship.

n. The whole inwahd man is to becount to itself the mercies of God. 1.
Every power he has — tnemory, heart, and reason — ^is to assist in recognizing the Divine
benefits he has received. 2. Our temptation and danger are to forget. And we are to
resist and conquer forgetfulness and ingratitude. Especially apt to forget the mercies :
1. That we receive in common with others. 2. The mercies that are uninterrupted by
constraint. 3. Mercies of a spiritual nature.

III. A THANKFUL SCBVET OF THE FaTHEBLT MEBCIEB OF GOD. " The pOCt Calls

upon his soul to arise to praiseful gratitude for God's justifying, redeeming, and renew-
ing grace." 1. The forgiveness of all his sins. 2. Recovery from bodily sickness and
infirmity. Sin, the sickness of the soul ; disease, the sickness of the hody ; and God
is the Physician of both. 3. Deliverance from threatened death. The pit — a name
of Hades — the abode of the departed. 4. Loving-kindness and tender mercies make
him rich and royal. Like a king, they crown him. 6. No real want of the soul is left
unsatisfied. "Shall not want any good thing;" "Open thy mouth wide, and I will
fill it." 6. His strength is thus constantly renewed. (Isa. zl. 31.) " They that wait
upon the Lord," etc—S.

Ver. 13. — The pity of the Lord. "Like as a father pltieth his children, so the Lord
pitieth them that fear him." In the Old Testament revelation of God there are bursts
and flashes of light in startling contrast to the ordinary conceptions of him under tllctt
dispensation. There are grand conceptions of his power, omniscience, wisdom, and
providence prevailing ; but sometimes there are the tenderer conceptions of his good-
ness and mercy, as in the Psalms and prophets.

I. The EEAS0N8 OF God's pity. Pity is sympathy for persons on account of weak-
ness, suffering, or calamity. God feels pity for us : 1. On account of our weakness.
" He knoweth our frame ; he remembereth that we are dust." We are poor and insig-
nificant compared with the spiritual and mighty angels. We are allied to the dust in
one important part of our nature. And we are but children in the germ and infancy
of our being. How weak we are in the body to contend against the mighty forces of
nature, to encounter accident, to endure suffering ! How weak in mind ! how ignorant 1
how feeble in the power of our convictions 1 how poor in the power of our will ! 2. He
pities us for owr sins and mistakes. In how many ways do we go wrong, not of set
purpose, but unwittingly ; or from the force of education and outward circumstances !
We sin through ignorance. And we sin with knowledge. And God pities the sinner
while he punishes. If he did not pity, he would not punish. Punishment is love
seeking to recover the sinful child, God's anger is nothing but love chastising. 3.
He pities us in our sufferings. He would not be a Father If he did not. Some of our
sufferings are sent by him — such as we could not avoid. " But he doth not willingly
afflict nor grieve the children of men." Many of our sufferings are self-incurred — suck
as we might have avoided. But he, nevertheless, pities us then.

II. The nature of God's pity. That of a lather. 1. A father's pity is helpful.
A neighbour's pity or a friend's is not always helpful ; they are either unwilling or
unable to relieve and help us. But a father will do all in his power to help his child.
And has not God helped us in our low estate by coming to us in the Person of his
Son ? He has not sat and looked on and done nothing. 2, It is bountiful. Infinite
in disposition to help, and in resources for our relief. " Exceeding abundantly." God
said to the Jews, " What more could I have done for my vineyard ? " And surely, in
view of the gospel, he might say the same to us. Only one thing to limit his help —
his Kelp is to enable us to help ourselves. What we can do for ourselves that he



PS. ciY. 1 — 35.]



THE BOOK OF PSALMS.



397



leaves to ns. His aim is to make us strong and great. 3. Hia pity is endv/ring.
Human pity is soon exhausted. " But the mercy of the Lord is from everlastini;
to everlasting." It has borne with each of us very long, and will continue to the
end. — S.



EXPOSITION.



PSAIiM CIV.
" The psalmist, in a time of seveTO trouble,
arieing from the power of the heathen, seeks
consolation in reflecting on the greatness
of God in nature." So Hengstenberg,
correctly. The main topic of the psalm
(vers. 2 — 32) is thus the greatness of God
as seen in bis works. A direct ascription
of praise precedes (ver. 1) and follows
(vers. 33 — 35) the description of God's
wonders in nature.

Ver. 1. — Bless the Lord, my soul (see
the comment on Ps. ciii. 1). Lord my God,
thou art very great. The key-note is etruck
at once. All the rest will he nothing but a
development of this vast theme— God's
greatness. Thou art clothed mth hononr
and majesty; or " thou hast robed thyself
in glory and grandeur " (Oheyne).

Ver. 2. — Who ooverest thyself with light
as with a garment. Light was the first
thing created (Gen. i. 3), before either the
heaven (Gen. i. 6 — 8) or the earth (Gen. i.
9, 10). In light God, the invisible, as it
were, enshrouds himself, making it the
image of his hidden glory. Who stretchest
out the heavens like a curtain; or, "a
canopy" (oomp. Isa. xl. 22; xlii. 5; xliv.
24). The metaphor is taken from the
stretching out or " spreading out " of a
tent (see Isa. zl, 22).

Ver. 3. — Who layeth the beams of his
chambers in the waters. God forms himself
an upper chamber, as a dwelling-place, in
" the waters that are above the firmament "
(Gen. i. 7), as a man builds himself an upper
chamber with beams and rafters. Who
maketh the clouds his chariot (comp. Isa.
xix. I, "Behold, the Lord rideth upon a
thick cloud"). Who walketh upon the wings
of the wind (comp. Ps. xviii. 10). The
anthropomorphism will be pardoned for
the sake of the beauty of the imagery.

Ver. 4. — Who maketh his angels spirits.
Professor Cheyne renders, "Wlio maketh his
messengers of winds;" and so (in substance)
Jarohi, Aben-Ezra, Bosenmiiller, Professor
Alexander, and even Hengstenberg. The
difSculty in adopting this rendering is that
furnished by the application of the passage
in Heb. i. 7 ; but the arguments of
Hengstenberg go far to meet that difficulty.
It is to be noted that our Bevisers, while



admitting either rendering, have preferred
that of Professor Cheyne. And his ministers
a flaming fire; or, "his ministers of flame
and fire."

Ver. 5. — ^Who laid the foundations of the
earth ; rather, as in the margin, who
founded the earth upon her basee ; i.e. fixed
the earth in its place, on bases — not
necessarily material bases — which keep it
steadily where it is (comp. Job xxvi. 7).
That it should not be removed for ever
(comp. Ps. xciii. 1).

Ver. 6. — Thou ooveredst it with the deep,
as with a garment (see Gen. i. 9). A
watery covering was spread at first over
the whole earth, and enveloped it like a
garment. The waters stood above the
mountains. The highest inequalities of
the land were concealed under the watery
integument.

Ver. 7.— At thy rebuke they fled. It
required only a few words from God (Gen.
i. 9) for the whole surface of the earth to
be changed. The waters "fled" — ^they
sbifted their place — removed from some por-
tions of the earth's surface, and " gathered
themselves together" into others, allowing
the dry land to appear. Elevations and
depressions of the laml must have at the
samu time occurred. At the voice of thy
thunder they hasted away (comp. Job xl.
9, " Hast thou an arm like God, or canst
thou thunder with a voice like hit ? "). The
voice of God, especially when he speaks in
" rebuke," is as thunder.

Ver. 8. — They go up by the mountains;
they go down by the valleys ; rather, they
went up mountains ; they went dinon valleyt.
In the general commotion of the waters,
as they "hasted away," sometimes vast
waves swept over mountain-tops, sometimes
huge floods washed down the courses of
valleys — a graphic description of the scene
which no eye saw, but which the poet
flgures to himself — a turmoil and confusion
beyond that even of the great Deluge itself
(see Gen. vii. 17 — 19; viii. 1—3). Unto the
place which thou hast (rather, hadst)
founded for them. The ocean-bed, which
had, in intention, been already prepared to
receive them.

Ver. 9. — Thou hast set (or, didst set)
a bound that they may not (rather, might
not) pass over (comp. Job xxxviii. 10, 11;
Jer. V. 22). TheDeluge is for the time beyond
the ken of the poet, who is singing God's



398



THE BOOK OP PSALMS.



[P8. CIV. 1 — 35.



greatness in nature, and in the general laws
under which he has placed it. Neither
turn again to cover the earth. This law,
once broken by the miracle of tlie Deluge,
was thenceforth made absolute and inviol-
able (Gen. ix. 15).

Ver. 10. — He sendeth the springs into the
valleys; rather, into the water-courses, or
torrent-bede — dry for the greater part of the
year, but deriving life and beauty from the
tprin^B which, after rain has fallen, flow
into them. Which run among the bills;
literally, between the hills (i.e. the hill-
slopes on either side) they wend their way.

Ver. 11 —They give drink to every beast
of the field, God's mercy is " over all his
works" (Ps. cxlv. 9). He careth for the whole
animal creation (see Exod. xx. 10 ; zxiii. 19;
Deut. XXV. 4; Pss. civ. 27; cxlv. 15, 16;
Jonah iv. 11, etc.). The wild asses quench
their thirst. Herodotus (iv. 192) says that
wild asses are Sttotoi— i.e. " do not drink " —
but modern travellers declare the contrary.
They diink infrequently, and are so shy,
ti>at at such times they rarely fall under
human observation.

Ver. 12, — By them; i.e. " by the springs"
(see ver. 10). Shall the fowls of the heaven
have theix habitation. Birds need water
as much as any other animals, and in dry
tracts frequently congregate at the springs.
Which sing (or, utter a voice) among the
branches of the trees which in the East
spring up wherever there is moisture.

Ver. 13.— He (i.e. God) watereth the
hills from his chambers (comp. ver. 3), The
mountains themselves, even their highest
tops, are not left dry. Where springs can-
not reach, rain falls from God's " chambers "
in the sky, and spreads equal refreshment.
The earth is satisfied with the fruit of thy
works. The whole earth — mountains, hills,
plains, valleys — is thus "satisfied," ».«.
sufficiently supplied with water, by the
means which God has elaborated.

Ver, 14, — He causeth the grass to grow
for the cattle. The results of God's careful
arrangements are now spoken of. In the
first place, grass — fodder of every kind — is
provided for the beasts on which man's life
so greatly depends — a boon both to man
and beast, of inestimable value. Next, there
is brought forth herb for the service of
man — i.e. for his direct service — vegetables
and fruits for his food ; spicy shrubs for his
delectation; flax, papyrus, seffiron, aloes,
etc., for his use. That he may bring forth
food out of the earth. That man himself
may by liis labour, by the cultivation of the
natural products, obtain trom the earth the
food suitable to him.

Ver. 15. — And wine that maketh glad the
heart of man. The food suitable to man
consists, first, of wine, which gladdens his



heart (comp, Judg. ix, 13); secondly, of
oil to make his face to shine, or give him a
cheerful countenance ; and thirdly, of bread,
which Btrengtheneth man's heart, which is
" the staff of life," and the main sustenance
of the entire body. It was the glory of the
promised land to produce in abundance
these three essentials (Deut, viii. 8 : xi. 14 ;
2 Kings xviii. 32),

Ver. 16. — The trees of the Lord are full
of sap; rather, are satisfied, or hac» their
fill; i.e. drink in sufficiently God's rain, so
tiiat they grow up and flourish amazingly.
Sven the cedars of Lebanon (see Pss. xxix.
5, 6; xcii. 11), These are particularized ae
the grandest of God's vegetable productions
known to the psalmist (comp. Judg. ix. 15 ;
1 Kings iv. 33; 2 Kino;s xiv. 19; Isa. ii.
13 ; Ezek. xxxi. 3). Which he hath planted
(comp. Numb. xxiv. 6).

Ver, 17. — Wherein the birds make their
nests (comp. above, ver. 10). As for the
stork, the fir trees are her honse. Again,
God's care for the animal creation is in the
psalmist's mind. As the grass is "caused
to grow /or tlie cattle" (ver. 14), so trees —
even the grandest — are partly intended for
the birds.

Ver, 18. — ^The high hills are a refuge for
the wild goats. Even the desolate ranges
of the higher mountains are designed by
God for the good of his creatures. They
f qrnish a refuge for the ibex, or wild goat,
when the hunter presses on him; and, if
they cannot give him food, give him safety.
And the rocks for the conies ; rather, for
the marmots. Marmots still inhabit Pales-
tine, though they are rarely seen ; " conies,"
i.e. rabbits do not. The marmots are "a
feeble folk, that make their houses in the
rocks " (Prov. xxx. 26).

Ver, 19, — He appointed the moon for
seasons (comp. Gen. i, 14), The Jewish
festiTiils depended greatly on the moon,
the Passover being celebrated at the time
of the full mooa of the first month (Gxod.
xii. 6), and the other festivals depending
mostly on the Passover. And the snn
knoweth his going down. Observes the
laws, that is to say, appointed for him.

Vers. 20, 21. — Thou makest darkness,
and it is night. The mention of the moon
and sun introduces a picture of night (vers.
20, 21) and a picture of the day (vers. 22,
23). TThe day draws in — darkness descends
— ^night is come. At once there is a stir in
the animal world, Man has gone to his
rest; but the time is arrived wherein all
the beasts of the forest do creep forth. The
primeval jungle is alive with motion and
sound. All the animals are on the alert,
seeking their prey. The young lions are
heard above all; they roar after their
prey, and seek their meat from Ood. The



PS. oiv. 1—35.]



THE BOOK OF PSALMS.



899



•wful sound of their hungry roar drowns
almost all other sounds, and shakes with
terror the hearts of those that hear. Sud-
denly, however, night turns into day —

Vers. 22, 23.— The sun ariseth. Bright
beams of light flame up the eastern sky;
and earth basks in tlie sun's smile. But
it is a si°;nal to the lions and tlie other
wild beasts to withdraw. They gather
themselves together, and lay them down
in their dens. Hiding themselves from the
eye of day, and retreating into places where
they are safe. Then it is the turn of
humanity to reappear. Humanity wakes
up; and man goeth forth unto his work
and to his labour until the evening; i.e.
man proceeds to his appointed task, which
is "work" — once a curse (Gen. iii. 17 — 19),
now a blessing (Eph. iv. 28).

Ver. 2i. — Lord, how manifold are thy
works ! This is a parenthetic ejaculation,
from wliich the psalmist cannot refrain,
as he contemplates creation so tar. It breaks
the continuity of his description fvers. 2 —
32), but not unpleasingly. In wisdom hast
thou made them all (comp. Pro v. iii. 19,
"The Lord by wisdom hath founded the
earth ; by underetanding hath he established
the heavens "). (On the " wisdom " of God,
as shown in creation, see the whole series
of 'Bridgewater Treatises.') The earth is
full of thy riches ; or poaeessions (comp. Ps.
cv. 21). " The earth is the Lord's, and the
fulness thereof" (Ps. zziv. 1). Creation
gives the right of ownership.

Yer. 25. — So is this great and wide sea ;
rather, yonder sea too (is thy work), so great
and wide-stretching. Wherein are things
Greeping(rather, moving tAi'n^g) innumerable.
The abundant life of the sea, even in its
depths, is the admiration of all naturalists.
Tens of thousands of microscopic shells
have been brought to light by the dredger's
labours almost everywhere. Both small
and great beasts. Microscopic shell-fish
on the one hand; seals, walruses, sharks,
whales, on the other.

Yer. 26. — There go the ships. These
may seem out of place among the works
of God. But are they not his, in a certain
sense ? Did he not contemplate them when
be made the sea, and make it to some
extent for them? And did he not give
men wisdom to invent and perfect them?
There is that leviathan. "Leviathan" is
here probably the whale, which may in
early times have frequented the Mediter-
ranean. Which thou hast made to play
therein; or, to play with him. So the
LXX. (^juiroffE'" auTqJ) ; and, among mo-
derns, Ewald, Hitzig, Olshausen, Kay,
Oheyne, and our Eevisers (in the marurin).
The anthropomorphism is not beyond that
of other passages.

Yer. 27. — These wai* •sU. upon thee ; that



thou mayest give them their meat in due
season (oee vers. 14, 23). As cattle have
"grass," and lions "meat," from God, so
every kind of animal receives from the same
source its proper food.

Ver. 28. — That thou givest them they
gather; literally, thou givest to them; they
gather. Thou openest thine hand, they are
filled with good; or, "are satisfied with
good " (Kay, Eevised Version).

Ver. 29. — Thou hidest thy face, they are
troubled. If God withdraws the light of
his countenance from any living thing, in-
st.mtly it feels the loss. It is "troubled,"
cast down, confounded (comp. Ps. xxx. 7).
Thou takest away their breath, they die.
As the living things have life from God, so
they have death from him. Not one of
them perishes but he knows it, and causes
it or allows it (see Matt. x. 29). And return
to their dust. Beturn, i.e., to the dead
matter out of which they were created.

Ver. 30. — ^Thou sendest forth thy spirit;
or, thy breath. As God " breathed into
man's nostrils the breath of life " (Gen. ii,
7), so it is an efiSuence from him that givea
life to every living thing. They are created :
and thou renewest the faoe of the earth.
As after the Deluge (see Gen. vii. 4 ; viii
17).

Ver. 31.— The glory of the lord shall
endure for ever ; rather, let tAe glory of the
Lord, etc. The psalmist prays that there
may be no further interruption of the glo-
rious course of nature besides the Deluge,
which has come into his thoughts in con-
nection with the destruction of animal Ufe
(ver. 29). Henceforward he trusts and
prays that the Lord shall rejoice in lua
works, and not again repent him that he
lias maile them (Gen. vi. 7).

Ver. 32. — He looketh on the earth, and it
trembleth (comp. Pss. xviiL 7 ; oxiv.7). The
earth " trembles," as knowing that it can be
destroyed at any moment. He tonoheth the
hills, and they smoke; or, the mountains —
the strongest portions of the earth (Pss.
zxxvi. 6 ; Ixv. 6) — " smoke " when he
touches them (see Exod. xix. 18 ; Deut. iv.
11; Ps. oxliv. 5).

Vers. 33 — 35. — The peroration (like the
opening) is simple praise of God himself,
considered in himself. All his life the
psalmist will praise God (ver. 33) — ^his soul
shall praise him (ver. 35), he will be glad
in him (ver. 34) ; finally, he calls upon all
men to join in his praise (jet. 35, last
clause).

Ver. 3.S. — I will sing unto the Lord ai
long as I live (comp. Pss. Ixiii. 4 ; cxl vi. 2) :
I will sing praise to my Gol while I have
my being. An echo of the prece^'u^ hemi-
stich.



400



THE BOOK OF PSALMS.



[P8. CIV. 1 — 3&



Ver. 34. — My meditation of him shall he
Bweet ; rather, may my meditation be pleasing
to him ! (Kay, Cheyne, Bevieed Version). I
will he glad in the Lord (comp. Pss. xxxii.
11 ; xxxiii. 1, etc.). Eejoicing in the Lord
is a form of praising him.

Ver. 35. — Let the sinners be consTuned
out of the earth; t.e. "Let the great blot
upon creation — sin and sinners — exist no
more. Let the harmony upon the earth be
complete, by the elimination of this ''one
janiug string." And let the wicked be no



more. Bepetition for the sake of emphasis.
Bless thou the Lord, my soul. Then,
when tills blot ia removed, when the trials
of the godly, from tlie persecutions and
vexations of sinners, are over, it will be the
part of my eoul, with greater heartiness
than ever, to "bless the Lord." Praise yo
the Lord. Then, too, all mankind may well
be called upon to join in a chorus of praise
and blessin°;, and to sing, as saints and
angels sing in the courts of heaven, " Hall»-
lujah I " (Kev. xix. 1, 3, 4, 6).



HOMILETICS.

Vers. 1 — 35. — The greatness of God, This psalm, charged with the truest poetry,
sings of the greatness of God (ver. 1) and of the heritage of man. The subjects are
inseparably mingled. Of the former we have suggested to us —

I. His gloet. (Vers. 1, 2, 31.)

n. His foweb. (Vers. 3- — 9.) The winds are his messengers; the fire is hii
servant ; the clouds are his chariot ; the waters flee at his command ; the ocean stays
at the bound he has drawn.

m. His wisdom. (Vers. 5, 10.) Nowhere is his wisdom more apparent than in :
1. Providing for the security of the earth. The diurnal and annual rotation (with
which vje are familiar), giving us our change of night and day, and also of our seasons,
in no way interferes with the sense of our security, while it brings into view the
wonderful wisdom of God (see ver. 24). 2. In the provision of water for his thirsting
creatures. The beautiful circulatory system, by 'which the vapour is drawn up from
the seas and the lakes, carried as clouds by the winds, drawn down by the hills and the
trees, purified by the earth through which it passes, comes forth as the springs which
flow down in the streams and rivers through the land, and. end their course by
replenishing the -sea, — ^this is another striking instance of those " manifold works "
" made in Divine wisdom."

IV. His fbovidential goodness. 1. In supplying water for man and beast
(vers. 10 — 13). 2. In providing nourishment (vers. 14 — 16). 3. In giving shelter
and protection to the weak — to the bird, to the goat, to the cony (vers. 17, 18).
4. In dividing time into seasons (ver. 19 ; see Gen. i. 14) ; so that we can calculate
with perfect accuracy the incoming and outgoing of the tides, as well as the return of
summer and winter. 5. In the amplitude of the gift of life. Not only are the air and
the earth full of happy life, but so is the " great and wide sea " (ver. 25). All these
innumerable hosts of living things — ^insects, birds, beasts, fishes — are spending a happy
life in their own element, and after their own instincts. Who can form any conception
of the sum of sentient life and enjoyment at any moment upon this earth ? 6. In
providing the materials for locomotion. Those ships of ver. 26 are suggestive of all the
forces at our command, every year becoming greater, for moving rapidly over land and
sea, indefinitely promoting the circulati'.)n of produce and intercourse between man and
man. All these instances of Divine beneficence are suggestive of —

y. His obaoe to his human children. For : 1. If God cares so much for bird and
beast, he will care very much more for us, his children by faith in Jesus Christ. 2. If
he provides so bountifully with the necessaries of mortal life, we can well believe that
he has made ample provision for our spiritual and eternal good.

Vers. 1 — 35. — The heritage of man. The psalmist sirjgs of the greatness of God
(sw>ra), and also of the fair heritage bestowed upon us. This includes —

L SuFFioiBNOT AND VABiBTY OF FOOD. " Thoso [all the living creatures, including
man, that have been specified] wait on thee, that thou mayest give them their food,
etc. (ver. 27); and the "herb" (ver. 14), for the service of man, stands for all the
variety of fruits and vegetables with which our need is met and our taste is gratified.
The constant supply of necessary and of palatable food is no small part of our heritage



P8. oiv. 1—35.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 403

II. Strength and hbalth. The gift of bread which " strengtheneth man's heart "
is suggestive of all the bountiful provision God has made for building up our bodily
frame, raising it from infantile helplessnesB to manly vigour, and frequently restoring
from the weakness of disease to the wholeness and capacity of health. Strength is the
normal condition, and if we conformed to the laws of nature, i.e. to the will of God, it
would be the general and the lasting condition.

III. Happiness. The " wine that makes glad the heart of man " may well stand
for all those gifts of God which stimulate and gladden the soul, which give sparkle
•nd joyousness to human life ; e.g. the good wine of human fellowship, and that of
honourable enterprise, and that of generous helpfulness.

IV. Labodb. For while oppressive toil is an evil and a part of the penalty of lin,
wholesome and regular activity, developing muscle and nerve, ministering to health,
conducing to moral soundness, resulting in many kinds of we^tb, is a true blessing to
our race.

V. Rest. God makes the darkness, in which the wild beasts come forth for their
prey (vers. 20, 21), but in which also man lies down to rest ; and the sleep which
comes with the night is as welcome as the labour which comes with the day (ver. 23).
The invigoration which comes between the evening and the morning, fitting the body
and the mind for new life, is one of God's kindest gifts to man.

VI. Jot in God and in his service. (Vers. 33, 34.) The act of contemplation
when God (with his loving-kindness) is the Object of our thought, and the service of
praise, are specified ; but these are suggestive of oil the blessedness which springs from
piety and devotion. All reverent thought, all worship, all sacred study and sacred
song, all Christian service rendered "as unto God," all really religious offerings, — all
this is a large part of the human heritage. And it all demands of us the frequent
utterance (vers. 1, 35) as well as the deeply cherished spirit, of gratitude and praise.

Ver. 28. — God gives — we gather: harvest thanksgiving. J. God'b gift in the
HARVEST. God gives ; 1. The soil. 2. The seed. 3. The forces which make the seed
extract the virtues of the soil. 4. The sunshine, the rain, and the wind, which miuister
to the growth of the blade, and which ripen the grain. 5. The intelligence which
enables us to cultivate the ground, to acquire the art of agriculture (Isa. zxviii. 26).

II. Our HUMAN SHARE IN IT. We " gather." There are places where the gathering
is aU that man has to do; e.g. the bread-fruit in the tropics. But usually "gathering"
includes more than that' — it includes the preparation of the soil, sowing, weeding,
watering, etc. To the production of the harvest there goes not a little human thought,
skill, labour. Where, then, is —

III. God's goodness in it? 1. Onr share is very much the smaller. 2. God's
gifts are bestowed on us with such ceaseless constancy, never failing through all the
ages of human existence, and in spite of the ingratitude, the atheism, or even the
idolatry, of the husbandmen. .3. God's requirement of our labour is an instance of
Divine goodness, to be added to, not subtracted from, his other loving-kindnessei (see
supra).



HOMILIES BY VAEI0U8 AUTH0B8.

Vers. 1 — 35. — OocPs love for living creatures. This psalm celebrates and prores it.
For, see —

I. He has placed them everywhere. The sea, the air, the land, all teem with
it, as this psalm tells. And the lower life points to the higher, and proclaims that when
God's will is done, that, too, shall fill earth and heaven.

II. He bas abundantly provided for them. Food, habitation, refuge (vers.
16 — 18). And Christ came, that we might have life, and have it more abundantly.
" He is able to save to the uttermost." Full provision for fulness of life is made.

III. And suitably likewise. The trees for the birds' nests, the hills and rocks
for those creatures that dwell there. And so his grace is according to our need. He
bas a niche for each of us to fill, which will suit none els* so well, and he prepares
us for the place in which he would have us be.

psalms — II. 9 9



402 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps, civ. 1—35.



IV. And all hib obeatuees but ourselves gladly accept his fkovision.
They never refuse his bounty, but depend on it always. Bach makes its way to its
own home. Christ is the soul'fi home : shall we turn away from that ? — S. C.

Ver». 1, 2. — Ute psalm of creation : the first day. This psalm should be read in
connection with the story of God's creating the heaven and the earth.

I. It begins by the psalmist sbekino to attune hib soul fob his study of thk
woBKB OF 6oD. 1. Ee viould that the Lord should he praised, amdhy himself espedally.
" my soul " (cf. Ps. ciii.). If the study of nature were entered on with this desire, how
far more fruitful it would be I None of the good that has resulted from that study
would be lost, but much of the incidental ill that too often accompanies it would be
avoided. Science would be transfigured into worship, with all the moral and spiritual
advantages that worship brings. 2. Then there is the spirit of awe. " Thou art very
great." 3. 0/ adoration. " Clothed with honour and majesty." It is not the mere
power, skill, and ingenuity of the Creator that strike the psalmist's soul, but the
moral characteristics of God, which bring to him honour and majesty as they ought to
do. A study so begun cannot but be fruitful of good.

II. Then hk speaks of the wobk of the fibst day — the obeation of the lioht.
He does not tell, as Genesis does, of what preceded that, but comes at once to the
blessed and final result. 1. 2%ere had been a previous creation. " In the beginning
God created," etc. Without doubt it had all been fair and beautiful, as in the moral
creation ; for there, too, man was made in the image of God, perfect, upright, without
sin. 2. But ere the light ivas formed, a sad change had come. We find that " the earth
was without form," etc. Chaos reigned. Moreover, the waters seem to have rushed
in, and darkness brooded over all. What a true picture of the moral condition ere the
spiritual light came ! Disorder, subjection to sio, impenetrable ignorance, the dark-
ness of the soul. 3. Hiere must have been, ere this, tome terrible shock which turned
OocTs far-off original creation into the hideous deformity of which Oen. i. 2 tdls.
Certainly it is so with man's moral nature. God made him in his own image. He is,
until regenerated, the victim of a moral chaos. There must have been some " fall,"
some terrible catastrophe, which changed man, made in God's image, into what we
know unregenerate human nature to be. 4. But, at with the earth and heaveni, to with
ndeemed man, there hat come a blessed change. God shed abroad the light, covered him-
self with it " as with a garment " (ver. 2). This is how God began the creation work.
" Let there be light." There had been, indeed, the Spirit brooding over the lace of the
deep, but the first manifestation of the creating work was in the creation of the light.
And is it not ever so ? Does not God always begin thus bis regenerating nrork ? The
man comes to see himself as he really is — how wretched, miserable, apart from God ;
how hopeless, helpless, and every day getting worse; and then comet h the further
light of God in Christ (2 Cor. iv. 6). And then, as the forlorn earth yielded itself to
the plastic hand of the Creator, to be formed and fashioned as he willed, so, under the
power of the light of the soul, it yields itself in like manner. And the Spirit of God
is the Author of all this. We know not how long he may have been brooding over
the darkness in the one case or the other, only that the light was through him. This
'mpartation of light is ever his work. When he comes he convicts the world of sin,
of righteousness, and of judgment : that is the first and preparatory work. God says,
" Let there be light," and there is light. The result is that when God comes into the
soul he seems to be clothed with light, so widespread, so intense, is the illumination of
the soul. The peril is lest any should quench that light, or, having seen it, should
cease to walk in it. What wonder, when the light is seen and welcomed, there should
be • quickened conscientiousness, a scrupulosity and carefulness, which hitherto the
soul had never known I

IIL Let us fbay that that fibst day's wobk hay bk done in ub. So only
can we truly know ourselves in God ; so only can we enter on that career which all
along shall have the favour of God and end in the eternal rest.— S. C.

Ver8._2 — 4. — The psalm of creation : the second day. In Genesis we have simply the
declaration of how God created the firmament, or the expanse, and what was effected
by it. Here we have nothing said of the creation of the firmament, but only of its glory



P8. oiT. 1— 35.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 403



as the habitation of God. That firmament— the glorious new-lit cloud-caprisoned and
Btar-bespangled heavens, whose beauty and splendour far surpass all human power to
set forth, and which is here spoken of as the palace of God — was the creation of the
second day. The dose of the first day saw the creation of the light., but there was as
yet no life possible. For that there was needed the gift of God which we call the
atmosphere, the air we breathe, that without which no life of plant or animal could
be. That wide expanse which surrounds our earth, and in which we live, and move,
and have our being, '* softer than the softest down, more impalpable thau the finest
gossamer, it leaves the cobweb undisturbed, and scarcely stirs the lightest flower
that feeds on the dew it supplies ; yet it bears the fleets of nations on its wings, and
crushes the most refractory substances with its weight." But that which is named
in Genesis is its power to separate the waters that lie on the surface of the earth from
those that float above it. Ani this it does, first drawing them up in vapour from the
sea, and then suspending them in cisterns of clouds, but casting them down again
in snow, rain, or dew, when they are required. But all this is full of sacred suggestion
in regard to the things of the soul. And this —

L Is ITS nPLiFTiNO. 1. That which the atmogphere doeafor the cold dark waters
which enshrouded the earth, those waters, fit type of the sin-laden soul of man, — that
does the hlessed breath of Qod accomplish far.the human soul. That desolate round
earth was taught as it were the law of sacrifice, and yielded up itself to the encom-
passing breath of God. At once the vapours uprose along the unseen channels of the
air, and are no longer desolate and deadly waters, but are transformed and transtigurer!
into the glorious heavens. 2. And this is what it taught also by the ancient law of
sacrifice. The worshipper brought his sacrifice, telling of his own will and desire to
be surrendered to God — the blood, symbol of the will, was poured out ; the body that
had thus yielded its very life was placed on the altar, and the fire fastened upon it and
transformed that cold, material, dead body into a spiritual thing, so that it seemed on
the wings of the fire to mount up to God. 3. And this is all true of the human soul.
Let that yield itself to the breath of God, and give itself up to the will of God, rising
up to him in that blessed self-surrender, and it will be indeed " born again."

II. Ih its glorification. 1. See the glorious heavens. 2. See QoA dwelling in
the place of sacrifice. 3. See the present indwelling of God in the surrendered soul,
and the soul dwelling with God in the eternal glory hereafter.— S. 0.

Vers. 6 — 18. — The psalm of creation : the third day. On all this the preacher will
compare Milton's magnificent lines ('Paradise Lost'). The opening verse of this
section was laid hold of by those who opposed Galileo, as with equal reasonableness or
unreasonableness like verses are laid hold of in like controversies now — as utterly con-
tradicting the conclusions to which his investigations had led him. Ever since there
has been a clearer perception that the poetry of the Bible is poetry, and is to be judged
by its appropriate laws. In the former homily we traced suggestions of the law of
self-surrender to God ; in this there are yet others on the same theme. The verses of
this section tell of the separation of the land, the other part of the created earth, from
the waters, and the fruitfulness that then followed. The deep mountains were still
beneath the waters : " Above the mountains did the waters stand." There has been
already an uplifting of the waters by means of the creation of the atmosphere, and
their glorification in consequence. Now we are to see another aspect of the law of self-
surrender in the blessed service of the waters, in the ministry they fulfil. In this
section, therefore, as in the corresponding one in Genesis, which tells of the creation
work of the third day, we have the twofold command.

I. To THE WATBB8. 1. They were to " be gathered togetJter into one place." Here,
in the psalm, this is poetically described as the result of the Divine rebuke. The
terrible volcanic action by which the mountains were uplifted and the deep valleys
hollowed out, and the consequent downrush of the waters, is told of as if it were the
thunder-Toice of God bidding them haste away.

" Immediately the mountains huge appear
Emergent, and, their broad, bare backs upbeav*
Into the clouds, their tops ascend the sky;



404 THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [ps. oiT. 1— 35.

So high as heav'd the tnmid hills, so low
Down sunk a hollow bottom, broad and deep.
Capacious bed of waters," etc.

So Milton renders yer. 7. " The mountains rose, the Talleys sank down into," etc.
Thu8 by this emergence of the dry land the waters of the wild seas, hitherto flowing
everywhere, are appointed their bounds, over which they may not pass. Straitened,
shut in, subdued, and beaten back are they, as they never were before, for such is their
Creator's will. The life of the ocean wave seems a poor affair compared with what it
was. But is it so? 2. See, now, the ministry of the waters. It is told of in ver. 10
ouwards. On the wings of the air the waters send up of their strength, and they thus
mount on high, and in the form of snow, and dew, and rain they fall on mountain,
valley, hill, and plain ; and then, by means of moss and glacier and tree (see Hugh
Macmillan's beautiful sermon on ' Mountain Springs '), God sendeth forth the springs
along the valleyg. Thus he " watereth the earth from his chambers : and the earth is
satisfied with the iruit of his work " (ver. 13). Thither come the beasts of the field,
and from the branches of the trees, which love to dwell where the springs are, the
birds fly down, and alike quench their thirst. And grass and herb, corn, vine, and
olive, and the noblest trees, are sustained, and myriad creatures of God are blessed ;
And even the barren rocks, the steep precipices, and the high mountains, are for the
good of some — the wild goats and the conies make these their home. Is it not all a
parable ? The waters, at the command of God, give up their strength, and they become
the glorious heavens, the visible palace of God. And this is not all. They now render
unspeakable service ; life, and beauty, and strength, and joy spring into existence as the
result of their ministry, and this psalm is the song tbereor. 3. And so also is it with
the surrendered soul. Yield it up to God in loving self-sacrifice, and he will glorify
that soul and use it for the blessings of others far and wide.

XL To THE LAND. Take it, as so often has been done, as a type of, or rather as
suggestive of, man regenerate. See God's will for him as pictured here. 1. He is to
live a separate life. Hitherto earth and sea had been mingled together, as man in the
world, but now God's will is this — separation. 2. And this separation is to he evident.
" Let the dry land appear." There must be no hiding away, but open confession ot
God. 8. And fruitful of good. The earth was to yield "grass," the common excel-
lences of the renewed nature, and not these only, but those more precious, and yet
more precious still (see vers. 14 — 16). But all this : 4. Is the work of Ood. What
God commands he is able to secure. Be but passive to his will, and all will be brought
to pass. 5. The old life will seeh to regain its power. (Ver. 9.) But will not be able ;
for : 6. 2%e new life will he sustained and kept satisfied in Ood. (Ver. 13.) — S. C.

Ver, 19. — The psalm of creation : the fourth day. The order of Genesis is departed
from, the moon being named first ; nor does the psalm tell of the purpose for which the
sun, moon, and stars were formed, as does Genesis ; nor does it speak at all of the stars.
Now, the relation which the " two great lights " — the sun and moon — bear to this
earth sets forth the relation which Christ and his Church bear to the human soul.
For—

I. Thk sun is a true type of the Lobd jEsns Chhibt. 1. Ee is called " the
Sun of Righteousness," " the Light of the world," and by other titles which are drawn
I rum the sun and its relationship to the world. And when we think what that is, how
all creature life and knowledge and joy seem to depend upon it, we cannot wonder that
amongst the noblest of the heathen the sun was worshipped as a living deity. If it
were not God, then it was "the brightness of his glory and the express image of his
I erson." The heathen mind, ignorant of the revelation of Christ, could find no nearer
embodiment of its thought of God. 2. See the avowed purpose wherefore the sun was
made. It was to rule the day. How emphatically it does this we all know. 3. And
in that condition of the enlightened soul, when it has passed out of the darkness and
the day is come, the Divine idea is that Christ it to rule — that every thought and
faculty are to be subject to him. As the psalm declares that there is nothing hid from
the heat thereof, so there is nothing in our whole life and bein^ that is not to come
under Christ's control. 4. The day is also the season of activity. We are to work
while it is called to-day. Men do this in common life ; and where Christ, the true Sun



PS. oiv. 1— 35.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. M)5

of the soul, has lisen, that soul will arise and tuil in him and for him. He prompts, lie
enables the activities of the spiritual life. 5. The day, with its light, stands alio for
joy and hrightness. How the natural world rejoices in the light ! And the gladness of
the soul is in him who is the true Light. There can be no real gladness till he comes.
" Thou hast put joy and gladness into ray heart, more than," etc. (Ps. iv. 7).

IL Thk moon. 1. The world is yet in darkness. That tells more truly of its
spiritual condition than the day. We speak of this enlightened age, but the words are
mockety when we remember man's preseut alienation from God. 2. But as the moou
was to give light by night, so in this darkness of man's spiritual condition the Church
of Christ is to give light. She is commissioned for this very end. 3. But as the moon
gives light only wlieu reflecting the light of the sun, so the Church can be the world's
light only as she reflects the light of Christ. She has none of her own. But when she
iloes, how fair and beautiful she is! and how great the service she renders (Cant. vL 10) I
4. And the purpose of these great lights is to divide the light from the darkness. How
almost instantaneously Christ and those who are truly his act in the world as such
dividers I It was said uf Clirist that through him " the thoughts of many hearts should
be revealed " (Luke ii. 35). Then —

III. The stars. These represent the individual Christians, giving their light, as
does the moon, by leflection. And all these are for signs to men. — S. C.

Vers. 25, 26. — The psalm of creation : the fifth day. The corresponding verses to
these are in Gen. i. 20—23, and they tell of the creation of the inhabitants of the sea
iind of the air — the fish who, by means of fins, navigate the sea ; and the birds who,
by means of wings, navigate the air. But as it is in this psalui, so it is in Genesis—
the creation of the terrestrial forms of animal life follow on that of the other forms, all
of which are to be crowned by God's highest work, the creation of man, which is the
especial work of the sixth day. Let us, therefore, consider these different forms of
animal life, aW. of which were to be made subject to man. They are in three groups.

I. Those of the sea. 1. The sea, in the Scriptures, is continually taken as the
symbol of that which is turbulent, ttimultuous, restless, violent. (Ps.lxv. 7.) And so the
sea answers in our nature to those passions in man which are so like the sea. Oh,
what shipwrecks they have caused! what widespread ruin and devastation! But when
God recreates our nature, theu even these strong and seemingly ungovernable passious
shall be made to further his glory. Men wonder now that God has formed them with
such wild, unruly tendencies. But we forgtt that these are for our discipline and
spiritual education. They are given us to subdue and conquer, not that they should
subdue us. And when we do conquer them, great is our reward. The wild, turbulent
sea has been subdued by man, for see, " there go the ships ; " man has made it his
obedient servant, and it perpetually fulfils his will. And so shall it be with that
part of our nature which is like the sea for turbulence. Passion wisely controlled,
whether it be love, or anger, or ambition, shall bless, and not curse, as now, for want of
such control, they too often do. 2. Look at the fruitfulness of the sea. The infinitely
abundant and varied life it sustains, from the great sea-monsters who play therein,
down to the minutest insect which makes there its home. 3. And the sea has been
termed "the life-blood of the land" What do we not owe to it? And so, when God
regenerates our nature, our passions, transformed into holy energies and Christ-like zeal,
shall be for the glory of God and the good of our fellow-men.

n. The aib. The sky, the firmament of heaven, so lofty, glorious, beautiful, may
stand as the symbol of the imagination, that high endowment of the human soul.
How often that has been made the home of that which is evil, unclean, and hateful to
God 1 But, as at the first, this also, when regenerated, shall glorify God. The thought
that soars, the love that sings, the heart made pure, shall each avail itself of this fair
firmament, and " on wings, as eagles," shall mount aloft to God.

III. The kabth. The new earth type of the renewed nature. We are told of the
creatures that were formed. They tell, according to Scripture usage, of the dispositions
and character of the regenerate nature : service, wisdom, strength. So we interpret the
cattle, the serpent, the beast of the forest. — S. 0.

Ver. 23. — The psalm of creation: the sixth day — the creation of man. We ask —



406 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. civ. 1—35.

I. Whtt did God create man ? Many think that life is not worth living. Exist-
ence is so mucli pure misfortune. The denial of the Chriatian faith and hopeless
pessimism seem ever to go together. But a preliminary question may he asked —
Why did God create anything?

II. We reply : 1. Ood is love, and one necessity of sueh nature is that Jie should find
objects on which to lavish that love. It cannot remain unexercised. Creation, there-
fore, seemed to be a necessity of luve. 2. But another need is that such love should
meet with response. Love yearns for response, to be met by an answering love. But
this involved the necessity of the creation of beings who should not be moved by
mere instinct, but should possess mind, intelligence, and the capacity of love. Hence
was requisite something more than any of the already created inhabitants of the seas,
the air, or the land, could supply. A different, a higher being had to be brought into
existence ; man was needed, since he only could render the response the heart of the
Creator desired. All other creatures could obey the laws of their being; man could
love the Law-giver. 3. And yet another craving of the Divine love, as of all like
pure love, is for worthy response. It cannot bear that the response it yearns for
should be given to inferior objects; it desires to be chosen and preferred above all
these. But such worthy response of deliberate choice can only be made when counter-
objects of attraction are present. Therefore, that such choice may be possible for us,
we are placed in a world where all around us are myriad lures and baits appealing to
all sides of our nature, and many of them with mighty power. Hence is it that the
love of his people is so precious in his esteem, for it means that they have turned their
backs upon all these rivals of God, and have given to him the love he asks for and
deserves. 4. And even this love is capable of enhancement in his esteem. It is so
when, as with Job, it clings to God in spite of sorest trial and distress ; when the man
is in the very depths, when to all outward appearance everything is lost and thrown
away by such clinging to God; when it has to hang on by naked faith, as at some
time or other it has had to do in all God's saints, and with some of them, as in the
martyr ages, it has had to be always so. But love like that, oh how precious is it I
how grateful to the heart of God ! We can tmderstand somewhat of this when some
dear child of ours, rather than grieve or disappoint us, has readily endured persecution
and pain. What do we not think of that child ? What proof of our love will we
withhold from him ? 5. But such proof of our love, or of that of Ood, cannot be given
unless there has been the previous trial. And that is why we are placed in a world of
trial, often cruel, proloDged, and severe. We are thus given the opportimity of winning
the highest prizes of the kingdom of God. Hence man has to go "forth to his work,'
and to his labour until the evening." Life is no child's play for him, no place of mere
sensuous enjoyment. If he chooses to make it so, he'shuts himself out of the kingdom
of God. No cross, no crown. Only so can we win back the image of God in which
we were first created. This is " the prize of our high calling." — S. C.

Ver. 30. — Voices of the spring. We are following a good Bible precedent, as well
as yielding to an almost irresistible suggestion, when we seek to listen awhile to some
of those teachings of God which he addresses to us through the spring. The references
to this season are frequent in the pages of Scripture. They tell of the sowing and
the seed-time, the springing of the corn, and the varied voices, scenes, and processes of
the spring. He who wrote that sixty-fifth psalm had often noticed the earth upturned
by the plough, and how the rain loosened the clods, and the hard ridges were made
soft with showers, and settled down to the level of the furrows after the corn-seed had
been cast in, and so God blessed " the springinjr thereof." And he who wrote this paalm
from which our text is taken, had often witnessed the wonderful bursting forth of
life after the winter was over and gone, and he here celebrates God's mighty working :
" Thou sendest forth thy Spirit, aud they are created : thou renewest the face of the
earth." And the eye ol our Lord, the great Teacher, once and again fell upon some
sower in the spring-time going forth to sow, and he tells, in the first of all his parables,
of the varied fate of the scattered seed. And be tells, too, how the devil knows the fit
season for sowing seed ; for when the great husbandman had cast good seed into his
field, then the enemy came and sowed tares, which, when the good seed sprang up,
appeared along with it to its hurt and harm. From beginning to end, by our Lord



PS. CIV. 1—35.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 407

and by his apostles, and by the holy men of old who spake as they were moved by the
Holy Ghost, the allusions to the seed-time and the spring are constant, and they
constitute a positive direction to us to keep open eye and mind and heart for the
lessons such seasons have to impart. Those lessons are very many. We can but note
a few of them. And —

I. Does not bprino speak to us of God as the Lobd and Givee of life? For :
1. Life is starting from every pore of nature. The whole face of the earth heaves and
throbs with an inexhaustible tide of life ; every spot teems with the beginnings of new
life. Who does not feel impressed with the unspeakable affluence of him who is its
fountain ? Every wood and grove, every hedgerow and field, every garden and
pasture, bear witness to his bounty. Where but a few weeks before all was sombre
and silent, bare, and seemingly lifeless, now, what a change has come over the scene !
The grey clouds of winter have been replaced by the bright blue skies, the brown
carpet of fallen leaves has yielded to the beautiful green with which the grass has
covered the woodland ways. The till now hushed grove is resonant with song and
the murmur of innumerable insects. The bare skeleton-like branches of the trees are
laden with glorious foliage, and the stripped hedges are all clothed again with leaves
and blossoms and flowers. Fulness of life everywhere; this is the common character-
istic which meets the eye throughout the wholo realm of nature at this beautiful
season of the year. 2. And with what wondrous care all this m accomplished I As
silently, as irresistibly as the tender blade pushes its way up through the heavy soil
which, one wo\ild think, must for ever hold it down. But slender as is that newly
formed blade, yet to that which hath no might God increaseth strength, and so in due
time it appears above ground, for God maketh it to grow. 3. And how quietly all
this goes on I What a contrast to the noise and strain, the fret and toil, the loud din,
and all the other accompaniments of man's strenuous labour 1 Here, as was said of
Solomon's temple —

" No hammer fell, no pondetons axes rung ;
Like some tall palm the mystic fabric sprung,"

4. But whilst all this is interesting to observe in the natural world, it is yet more delight-
ful to look upon the Divine energy of life which each spring-tide shows as a promite
and pattern of the higher spiritual life, which, with equal generosity, God shall one
day cause to spring forth before all the nations. Why should it not be ? If all this
fulness of life be lor the lower creation, shall the higher, the moral and spiritual, be
left unblessed? " If God so clothes," etc. True, the lower life has to do with material
things, and the higher with spiritual But can that be any bar to him who called us
into being, even as each spring he calls into being the full life we see around us ? K,
in consistency with that lower nature, he gives the new life, can he not, in conustency
with man's higher nature, cause that also to be born again and to enter into the new
and better life ? He has done so already with one and another of us, even as he did
with all the children of God in all the ages all along. In perfect harmony with man's
freedom, he yet found means to convert, regenerate, and fully sanctify such as Paul,
John, and myriads more. And — all, glory to his Name 1 — he is doing this every day.
Therefore we accept, not deny or doubt, the blessed prophecy of the spring. And let
us each one take it for ourselves.

II. As LoviKO ALL THAT IS BEAUTIFUL, See the wealth of beauty which every-
where spring presents, in colour ; song ; fragrance ; beauty everywhere. Then, if God so
loves beauty, let him have it. In our worship, our sanctuaries, most of all in our character.
In this last God himself will help us. The beauty of the Lord our God shall be upon
ui even as, and yet more than, it is upon all the grace of fiature in this blessed spring-tide.

III. Ab pbedictinq and pbomisino the eesubbection of THE DEAD. (Of. 1 Cor.
XV.) If God gives new life and form to bare grain, shall he not to human souls ? " And
to every seed its own body." Spring is the perpetual resurrection-parable.

IV. As ADDKE88INO TO D8 MOST EARNEST APPEAL. " Work wMle it is Called to-day ; "
" Now is the accepted time," etc. If the husbandman waste the spring season, what
hope of harvest can he have ? Its days run along, and will soon be gone.— S. 0,

Ver. SO.— The spiritual spring. The natural is as the spiritual —

L Ix WHAT IT IS, An awakening {rum seeming death. In regard to the soul.



408 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. «▼. 1— 36.

St. Paul Bpeaks of its condition ere its spring as actually " dead." Certainly to all
appearances it was so. But when the grace of Qod comes to the soul, then it awakes,
as doth the earth in spring. There had been long preparation for it. Christ uses all
manner of means to accomplish this. It is all his work.

IL In what it possesses. New life. So in nature, so in grace. If the manifesta-
tions of the new life in nature are beautiful, yet more are they in grace. See the fruits
of the Spirit, " Love, joy, peace," etc And we are to go on to this ; not to be satisfied
with conversion only ; there must be the new life. And Christ, who began the work,
will carry it on.

III. In what it leads to. Spring is the forerunner of summer with all its flowers,
and autumn with all its harvests. And so is the spiritual spring the forerunner of
all the glorious possibilities of the spiritual harvest. All its holiness and joy of
service, etc. — S. 0.

Ver. 31. — The Lord's joy in hit works. Then joy is an element in God's nature.
He is " the happy and only Potentate." When we see what a large element it is in
our nature, how we delight in it, how we seek after it, we might argue that in
being in the Divine image, God must rejoice ; and in the text we are distinctly told
he does. And —

L In his woeks in thb natubai. world. 1. Eowheautiful they are I They clearly
show the Divine love of beauty. The vision of beauty delights us ; and the lavish
hestowment of it shows that it delights God. 2. Mow ianumerable / All powers of
cumpucation utterly break down when we try to enumerate the works of God. The
psalm tells of many, but how far many more are left unnamed? God cannot turn
his gaze in any direction but he will behold the works of his band. 3. And how
varied! " Lord, how manifold are thy works 1 " not many only. 4. And how successful I
" In wisdom hast thou made them all." What joy a human inventor has, when,
after long study and toil, he at length has discovered how to secure the successful
working of that which he has made! The old story of the ancient philosopher
rushing from his bath, and crying " Eureka I " because he had hit upon the solution of
some knotty problem which had long perplexed him, is an illustration of the inventui's
joy. And the observation of the smooth, successful working of his Divine plans
cannot but be a further element of joy, even to him. 6. Yet more, because so heneficent.
His creatures are " filled with good " by what he has done. While they delight u«
they also delight him.

II. In providence. 1. Here, perhaps, we pause. We think of the darker side of
life — of the unspeakable suffering, of the bitter sorrows, of the dread problem of evih
And of not a little of this we are compelled to say, " It is the Lord's doing." The
beautiful other side of life — happy homes, successful work, health, love, strength, and
all the rest ; we can see how fruitful of joy to both giver and receiver it must be ; but
this dark side, what of that ? How can the Lord rejoice in that ? 2. Wdl, remember,
Ood sees the whole of life ; we only a mere fragment of it. The shipbuilder enters his
yard. Dust, din, clatter, intolerable noise, and dirt and disorder meet him on every
hand. The gaunt ribs of some ship on the stocks are the occasion of all this. But
the shipbuilder looks quite pleased. Why is this? Because he has in his mind the
vision of the completed ship, when fair, graceful, strong, she spreads her sails, and,
laden with rich cargo, she sails the ocean like a thing of life. He sees her in all her
future glory, to which all that now is leads the way. The application is easy. Wa
believe, with the poet —

"■That nothing walks with aimless feet;
That not one life shall be deetroy'd.
Or cast as rubbish to the void.
When God hath made the pile complete."

* Known unto God are all his works from the beginning ; " and we stay our sonli on
that sure truth, and we spurn the atheistic suggestions which have no proof, and only
land ug in deeper darkness than before.

IIL In his spiritual works. Forgiveness, peace, purity, power, eternal lifeu ])•
w« co-operate with him in these ? — S. G.



PS. OTV. 1— 35.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 409

Ver. 34. — The blessed meditation of God. The text is true —

I. Beoatjsk such meditation bo aids both knowledoe and hemobt.

II. It warms the heart. " Whilst I was musing the fire burned," etc. (Pb. xxxix.^

III. DbLIVEKS us FflOM SINFUL THOUGHTS.

rV. Rouses the eneboibs of our will fob dutt.

V. Pbomotes qbeatlt cub advance in the life of Gov.

VI. Profitably fills up the maboins and odd moments of oub Tiua.

YIL PuBaES oub ETssiaHT, 80 that we see the silver lining of the clouds that
distress us.

VIII. Enables us to oonvbbse with God, and to enjoy him, aa otherwise wa
could not. — S. C.

Vers. 2 — 4. — Nature-flgures of the Divine glory. These are of peculiar interest,
because they appeal to man universally; the language of nature is the common,
universal language. Only when men attempt to express their ideas and feelings by
the languages of the tongue do they get into confusions and misunderstandings and
separations. There is hope of reuniting humanity if it can be brought to heed the
voice and witness of nature. Dr. Chalmers shows the connection of this psalm with
the preceding one. "It begins, as does Ps. ciii., with the view of God's goodness, but
on a different subject ; the former psalm being addressed to God, as sitting on a throne
of grace; the present psalm to God, as sitting on a throne of nature and of creation;
and never have the works of God, and his sovereignty over them, been so magnificently
let forth. The glory of the Divine is made palpable, in this psalm, through the
medium of the senses."

I. The Lobd'b vestubb. Observe that no attempt is made in Scripture to describe
God himself. He can only be known through revelations of himself that he is pleased
to make. The immaterial can only be known through the material. God must take
form, because man can only apprehend the formal. Moses could only see the " back
parts," the after-glow, when the sun had passed down beyond the edge. Elders only
saw a " paved work of sapphire." Isaiah only saw an incense-veiled thro



sapphire." Isaiah only saw an incense-veiled throne. We can

see God's garments, and argue from them what he must be who is clothed with such a
vesture. Wliat a glorious thing is light, sun-rays, sunshine 1 Mysteriously pure;
transcendently fine ; surpassingly beautiful 1 It is the robe of God. Koyal robes are
supposed to represent, with some fitness, royalty. It is true of God that no conceiv-
able robe can be worthy to represent him ; it can do no more than suggest him. A
young woman gained her sight at the age of twenty-three, by the help of a surgical
operation. Looking out upon a sunlit landscape, she exclaimed, "Oh, how beautiful!
I never dreamt of anything so beautiful as this." What is he " whose robe is the
light"?

IL The Lobd's tent. By "the heavens" the psalmist means the firmament, the
vast blue dome that spans the earth. No doubt the firmament was then conceived as
a solid sheet spread out as are the curtains of a tent. The earth was as a tent-floor,
and those long lines of light which we see between heaven and earth in times of
moisture, which do indeed seem to rest in or spring out of the sea, are thought of, by
the iisalmist, as the poles or pillars of the tent. After unfolding this figure, show that
estimates of the wealth and greatness and power of a king are formed from the
splendour of his palace and its appointments. Then what must he be whose canopy

III. The Lobd'b ohabiot. It is not the terror of tempest-clouds that is in the poet's
mind. It is the ever-fascinating sailing of the clouds across the sky, at the impulse
of the upper winds. The moving of the vast masses of billowy clouds, ever taking
fresh and more fantastic shapes, and now silvered with the midday sun, or tinted with
wondrous colouring in the evening light, is a perpetual wonder and joy to all sensitive
souls. We iudge the status and wealth of our fellow-men by their eqmpages. What,
then, must he he who " maketh the clouds his chariot," and, m place of mere horses,
is borne away on « the wings of the wind " ? So the nature-figures bnng home to our
minds the sublimity of God. These things-the heavens, the light, the c ouds, the.
winds— are the sublimest things that come into the field of human knowleage and
observation. They are not God, they are onl^ somethmg God has made; only



410 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. oiv. 1—36.

something God uses; only snraethina; tliat may suggest what cannot be altogether
conceived. Impress that rightly reverent, adoring, wondering views of God ought to be
encouraged. We all need to have his glory as well as his grOfCe ever kept before us.
Professor Agassiz even points out the irajiortance of right impressions of God to the
scientific man. "I tell you that my experience in prolonged scientific investigations,
convinces nje that a belief in God, a God who is behind and within the chaos of
vanishing points of human knowledge, adds a wonderful stimulus to the man who
attempts to penetrate into the regions of the unknown." — B. T.

Ver. 4. — Natv/re-forcea are Divine ministries. The precise rendering of this verse is
discussed in the Exposition. Now we treat it as a poetical suggestion, which fits
into the general plan of the psalm. It is a hymn of admirations of the eternal King.
The first part of the psalm sees the glory of the King through the splendour of his
court or palace surroundings. The second part of the psalm sees the glory of the King
in the provisions, the order, the arrangements, the happiness, of his kingdom. At the
court, the psalmist is moved by the sublimity of the "light" as God's robe, the blue
dome of the sky as God's tent-curtain, and the wind-driven clouds as his chariot.
And he further notices the grandeur of the royal attendants, the courtiers, who wait
to do the royal bidding. All the forces of nature are at the Divine command, and the
force tliat represents them all — the force that is most mysterious and sublime — is the
foice of lightning. Illustrate what a marvel of human power and i-kill it seems to be
I hat man has, in some measure, chained the lightning, and compelled it to yield him
lic;bt, and to cany liis messages. What, then, must he be who has used the lijjhtning
force in his service through all the long generations? The figure is a sublime and
suggestive one. All the august and awful nature-forces are conceived as ministrants
in the court of the eternal King. Illustrate by the vision of Isaiah ; the six attendan*^
seraphim.

I. The botal ministers declare the olobt of the obeat Kino. When an
impression is to be made on us of the magnificence of Solomon, we are told the numbei'
and the dignity of his attendants and courtiers. Their nobility assures us that he
must be yet more noble on whom they wait. Then show how grand are the forces of
nature — ^physical, chemical ; rain, sunshine, wind, fire, electricity, etc. ; or take storms,
famine, plague. What must he be who is daily served by such ministrants ?

II. The eotal ministers illustrate the operations of the Kino. They execute
his behests, carrv out his plans ; they execute his thoughts ; and so we can read his
mind in their doings. 1. The multitude of his ministers suggests that he is con-
tinuously working, ceaselessly active. Some of these nature-forces are always at work
for him. 2. The skill of his ministers suggests that he is ever efficiently working.
These nature-forces can do what he wills. 3. And the mystery of his ministers
reminds us how we are made to feel the surprises of the Divine wisdom. — B. T.

Ver. 5. — The King it the Creator. " Who laid the foimdations of the earth."
Having filled his soul with adoring thoughts of God, by considering his palace, his
surroundings, and his attendants, the psalmist goes out into the kingdom of this
eternal King, to see what he can learn of him from the provisions, and order, and
adaptations, and rule of his dominions. And then an introductory thought comes to
him. This eternal King not only founded this kingdom, he actually made everything
in it, " The sea is his, and be made it, and his hands formed the dry land." High
honour is given to the man yihofoimdg a kin<:dom. What honour is due to him who
absolutely originates the great, mysterious, complex, nature-kingdom ? Bible-writers
see in the psalm a sketch of creation. Browne calls it " a bright and living picture of
God's creative power, pouring life and gladness throughout the universe." But the
reference to creation is only a brief, passing, introductory one ; and what the psalmist
fully dwells on is the marvel of the Divine order and rule in the earth-sphere as
created.

I. The shaping of thinob is the eternal Kino's ibea. Take but the infinite
varieties of form for material things — a crystal, a tree, a mountain, a weed ; or for
animated things — a bacillus, a mammoth, a dragon-fly, an albatross, a worm, a man ; —
and our minds are overwhelmed , by the efibrt to imagine the ideas of all formi



rs. oiv. 1— 35.J THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 4H

fashioned in one intellect. There is no form of being that was not first of all a thought
of God. He is the Foundation of all. If original forms modify and change, it is only
according to God's ordered laws.

II. The foweb of thlnqs is the bteknal Eino's endubmbnt. For there ia
nothing made that can really be called dead. Everything has a possibility of doing
something. Even a stone caa hold moisture on its under side. Metals have their
chemical properties, and the very dust can at least combine. In higher ranges of being
each creature has its power and its mission. And the power in things is ordered, not
just developed. What must he be who is Source of power in everything?

III. The belation of thikos ib the etebnal King's aebanqembnt. Everything
is connected with everything else. Nothing in the world is isolated. Everywhere
there is flux and reflux. Everything is touching something, and influencing it by the
touch. What must he be who devised all relations and all their consequences ? — E. T.

Vers. 6 — 13.— Water-witnesses to the glory of Ood. The psalmist dwells most
lovingly on the various wonders of God's ways with the water; and nothing more
readily influences us than masses of waters, or falling waters, or gentle streams, or
pouring rains. Poetically, man is very sensitive to the manifold forms in which God
arranges this one simple thing — ^water. And nothing brings to man such a sense of
irresistible power as loosened waters.

L The levellino of the watebs. (Vers. 5 — 8.) Evidently the poet is conceiving
the original condition of the earth, when God dealt with it to make it the abode of
man. Then it is conceived as a solid mass, surrounded by an envelope of watery mist,
which rose higher than the tops of the mountains. The ancients did not apprehend
the circular form of the earth, and so mists rising above the mountains presented to
them no difficulty. The poet sees this mist dispelled by the command of God, and
any one who has seen the mists roll away, in a mountain district, will fully appreciate
his figures. They do seem to " go up by the mountains and down by the valleys."
But in the Divine leading, the issue is that the waters gather into their various
appointed places, and the dry land appears. What intangible, fickle things these
mists seem to be I Then how glorious must he be at whose bidding they move I

IL The contbolling of the watebs. (Yer. 9.) This impression is best associated
with the sea. Sometimes, when it is driven high by wind and tide, its destructive
possibilities seem overwhebning. Yet even then we calmly take our place on the tide-
line, and feel sure God's bound of silver sand will be an effective defence. When he is
plei^ed to loosen his control, the world is flooded again, as in Noah's days. What
must he be who holds in restraint the great wide sea?

IIL Thb euflotino of the watebs. Even more wonderful than the restraining
of the sea in bounds is the storing of the waters in the thousandfold cisterns of the
hills, whence they come forth in perennial springs to supply the creatures of Gkid.
More wonderful is the continuous uplifting of the great sea into the sky, where it may
form the banks of clouds, which, at fit times and seasons, burst over the earth, and,
falling in chemically enriched drops, fertilize the earth, and make it bring forth food
for beast and man. What must be the glory of him who is the God of the springs,
and the God of the rain, to whom the waters are but an ever-obedient ministry ? — R. T.

Ver. 20. — The Divine mission of the darkness. " Thou makest darkness, and it is
night." What arrests the attention of the psalmist is the twofold mission of the
darkness. It is a call to activity for some creatures ; it is a call to rest for others. In
a very striking article, Isaac Taylor showed that there were only one or two nights in
each year that could be considered absolutely dark, and those few nights had a peculiar
mission, which made them essentials in the economy of nature. Darkness is properly
regarded as the resting-tinie of the creatures. It is, indeed, a restin;j for the vegetable,
as well as animal, creation; though the term "resting" can only be used in a limited
sense, because there are activities maintained in the darkness. Too long continuance
under one set of influences has a deteriorating effect on moral natures. The impres-
sive illustration of this is the majesty of human transgression when men's lives were
prolonged by centuries. Darkness is sent to break men's lives and relationships up into
small pieces. God cannot trust frail man with more than some twelve hours at a time.



412 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. cnr. 1—35.

I. Dabkkess fbotides best fob the weaby. Show the actual physical influence
of darkness on men's bodies, on the muscular and nervous systems. Best is essential
for man when bis labour is merely routine labour of the body ; but bovir much more
essential is it in these modern conditious, when the toil overwears also the brain and
the heart I Recumbency may restore wearied limbs ; darkness alone is chemically efficient
to restore wearied brains. But it is a thought full of seriousness, that nearly one-half
of a man's brief life is spent in unconsciousness. The wakeful hours in which rested
faculties may find their spheres, ought to be jealously watched and wisely used. Man
only " goeth forth to his work and to his labour untU the evening."

U. DaBKNESS PB0TIDE8 THE CHANCE OF BEaiNNINQ AGAIN. It COmCB and stOPS a

man, gives him the opportunity of looking at his work ; it shunts him aside awhile ;
and then, with returning light, the man can try again. He need not keep on the bad
way of yesterday. There has been a gap of darkness. He can do better to-day.
Hope for man lies in beginning afresh day by day. — B. T.

Yer. 24. — Poet-thoughts concerning the Creator. This psalm has been called a
poetic version of Gen. i., " a panorama of the imiverse viewed by the eye of devotion."
It is connected with Ps. ciii., which reviews Clod's dealings in the realm of grace.
That psalm comes first, because only through our personal knowledge of Qod do we
gain the true understanding of the God of nature. From nature alone man gains
ideas of power, and even of malice ; so he makes many gods, and they are chiefly gods
to /ear. The good man, through his faith in God, finds good in seemin<;ly evil things,
and fears nothing. But this psalm represents the poet's observation of nature, not
that of the scientific man. Sentiment, not minutely described fact, is befitting to a
psalmist. Science must always be for the few among ns ; pious-toned observation is
for all of us. In this verse we have the impression produced by religious meditation,
which dwells not on the things, but on God's relation to the things.

I. The wisdom of God seek in his wobks. Marvellous is the development of • few
laws, and the harmonious interaction of these laws ; they work into each other so that
the order of the universe is never really broken. Then every individual thing is
adjusted to its mission and its sphere. There is a strange and wonderful power of
repair and recovery everywhere. Things do not really fail or die; they do but pass
from one form of service to another.

II. The bights of God becoonized in all his wobks. " Thy possessions." Then
our so-called " rights " are only " trusts." We have nothing. Possession belongs only
to God. We are the children born of a Father who owns a large estate. We enjoy,
we use, we serve our Father in the use. But we can never enter into any sort of
separate and individual " possession " while our Father lives. Are we, then, sensitive
as a pious poet is in the midst of mighty and beautiful nature? Are we only
interested, in a scientific sort of way, in things t or do we know how to enter into the
very heart of things, and let them du their true work — make God precious to us ? — B. T.

Ver. 24. — The manifoldness of Ood's works. What profusion, what variety, there
is in God's works 1 How inexhaustible must be the Divine ideas I "When trees
blossom, there is not a single breast-pin, but a whole bosom-full of gems. The leaves
have so many suits, that they can throw them away to the winds all summer long.
What unnumbered cathedrals has he reared in the forest shades, vast and grand, full
of curious carvings, and haunted evermore by tremulous music I and in the heavens
above how do stars seem to have flown out of his hands faster than sparks out of a
mighty forge ! " (Beecher). " Mineral, vegetable, animal — what a range of works is
suggested by these three names ! No two, even of the same class, are exactly alike,
and the classes are more numerous than science can number. Works in the heavens
above, and in the earth beneath, and in the waters under the earth; works which
abide the ages; works which come to perfection and pass away in a year; works
which, with all their beauty, do not outlive a day ; works within works, and works
within these; who can number one of a thousand?"

I. Manifold implies variety. Here distinguish between the sameness of those
creative and providential laws which regulate everything, and those multitudinous and
ever-varied forms and shapes in which those ever-working laws can present thinga.



PS. oiv. 1— 35.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 413

God makes all things on principle, but no two things are precisely alike. The leaves
of a tree and the faces of a flock are. infinitely varied. What an impression we should
have of God if a procession could pass before us of specimens only of every kind of
insect form, or bird form, or beast fonul What a mind to conceive these million
shapes I

IL Makxfoldness implieb design. Once get the die stamped, and you make as
many coins as you please to a pattern. But if every coin is different, there must have
been a precise design in the making of each. Bach coin would embody a thought.
It must be true of the varying creatures of God. He must have planned each.

III. Manifoldness implies adaptation. Everything has its place and relation.
For nicety of fitting it is precisely shaped. God does not make mere things, but
things to go into positions ; and every variety of form and of force is the product of
considerations and calculations of the Divine mind. — B. T.

Ver. 27. — Absolute dependence upon Qod. " These wait all upon thee, that thou
mayest give them their meat in due season." AU vegetable and animal life depends
on appropriate food; and though sometimes the food is at the creature's hand, it
usually has to be sought. God has arranged the economy of nature so that each
creature is skilled to find its own food. The dependence of creation on the Creator
may be made effective to an audience by an illustrative instance such as the following :
The fox has sly and skilful movements; but it is not always noticed how God helps
the fox apart from his cunning. The red colour of his coat is found to have a strangely
paralyzing effect on his prey, so that they are quite unable to flee from him. The
psalmist, in trying to raise high and adoring thoughts of the eternal King by exami-
nation of his kingdom, is especially impressed with the signs of the King's presence,
interest, care, and providing everywhere. It is not a creation set going, and left to
go ; it is sustained, provided for, continually.

I. Fob upk we are dependent on God. God wakens us from nightly sleep, and
sets new time upon our store.

IL Fob bbnewed powers wk abb dbpendbnt on God. Yet how seldom we thank
God for our sound minds !

III. Fob health we abe dependent oh God. Modern discoveries concerning; the
germs of disease that float around us and thrive within us, make us wonder that health
is retained so well and so long.

IV. Fob food we are dependent on God. Since he gives us the means to get it,
and provides it for ua, year by year, as the harvest of his earth.

Visiting the Zoological Gardens, and noticing the variety of creatures, and the
variety of food required to meet the needs and daily conditions of each one, we were
set wondering over the Divine response to the dependence of all living things. He
giveth " them," each one, " their meat "—that which is precisely suitable for each one
—in due season, or whenever the need of each one really rises into a cry. " Our
sufficiency is of God." Dependence on him meets with response from him, which
claims our thankfulness and our service. — B. T.

Ver. Za.— Renewed life : a spring sermon. L Spbiho awakens in D8 the sense of
LITE. The life of nature is a symbol of the spiritual renewal of the Christian. The
renewal of the lieaH, the conscience, and the will. . i, t

II Awakens the sense of beautiful life. What a banquet for the eye/ what
fraa'rance, as if an angel swung a censor full of the odours of celestial flowers! how
th7«or is regaled ! The life of the believer in Christ ought to be the most beautiful
below the skies. The serene and tender loveliness of spiritual affections and actions
is nobler than all the graces of outward beauty. ,, . ui t

III Thb sense of peoqbessive life. It is the season of growth. A parable ot
soiritial life. 1. When growth ceases, then decay U'jins. 2. Material growth ts span-
Umeous ; spiritual growth the result of self-effort. The flowers of the field neither toi
nor spin ; but we grow by the power of will and purpose. 3. 31aterzal and spiritual
growth ore often irregular. Does not proceed at a uniform rate. , ^ . ..

IV It 18 prophetic life. The gardens and the fields prophesj' a harvest of fruit
•nd grain. 1. The present life is only a prophecy of our immortal life. Our knowledge,



4U



THE BOOK OF PSALMS.



[p8. cv. 1 — 46.



our desires, our powers of spiritual action, are all in their infancy ; the summer glory
of our being is to be reached elsewhere. 2. The present experience of the Christian it
only a prophecy of future experience. As the bud and blossom predict the fruit ; or
the first ear uf com predicts the whole harvest. Admonitory thought to us. Spring
ia full of promise ; but some of its promises will never be fulfilled. How many of the
young never fulfil the promise of their early days, but turn out miserable abortions 1 — S.



EXPOSITION.



PSALM OV.



This b Bometimes called a "Hallelujah
psalm," since it ends with that phrase. It
is a Bong of praise to God for his dealings
with his people, resembling in its general
obaiacter Fs. Izxviii. The opening passage
is nearly identical with 1 Chron. xvi. 8 — 22,
and is thought to have been the original
from which that passage was taken (Heng-
atenberg, Cheyne). The first six verses are
an exhortation to praise, and oonstitute
the "introduction." The remainder is an
account of God's mercies to Israel as a
nation, traced historically from the time of
the covenant with Abraham to the occu-
pation of the land of Canaan.

The "introduction" forma a strophe by
itself. It ia usual to divide the historical
portion into strophes ; but this can only be
done arbitrarily, there being no really
marked divisions.

Vers. 1 — 6. — The psalmist exhorts the
seed of Abraham (ver. 6) to give thanks to
God and call upon his Name (vers. 1 — 3);
to make him known among the Gentiles
(ver. 16); to seek him and his strength
(ver. 4); and to bear in mind his marvellous
works (ver. 5). The " works " intended
are those of his providential government of
mankind, and especially those of his rule
and government over his people Israel.

Yer. 1. — give thanks unto the Lord
(comp. Pss. ovi I ; ovii. 1 ; oxi. 1 ; cxzzvi.
1 ; cxxxviii. 1). Call upon his Name ; t.«.
call upon him with prayer and praise, " ac-
cording to his historically manifested glory "
(Uengstenberg). Hake known his deeds (or,
" his doings ') among the people ; rather,
among the peoplee ; i.e. the heathen nations
(comp. Pss. xviii. 49; Ivii. 9; Isa. xii. 4).

Ver. 2. — Sing unto him, sing psalms unto
him ; or, " make melody unto him " (Gbeyne) ;
i.e. praise his Name (ver. 1) with song
and music. Talk ye of all his wondrous
works (comp. Ps. cxix. 27, 46). TJiose who



are full of gratitude to Ood for all his
mercies that he has voucbsafed them cannot
refrain ftom speaking of his goodness when
they converse with others.

Ver. 3. — Glory ye in his holy Name (comp.
Ps. xxxiv. 2, "My soul shall glory in the
Lord"). As worldly men glory in their
strength and riches, so the saints of God
glory in God. Let the heart of them rejoice
that seek the Lord (comp. Ps. xxxiii. 21).

Ver. 4. — Seek the Lord, and his strength:
seek his face evermore. Turn to the Lord,
not from him; boek his favour, his support*
the light of his countenance.

Ver. 5. — ^Bememher his marvallons works
that he hath done (see ver. 2). These
" wondrous works " are apter ttian anything
else to stir up the heart to gratitude and
thankfulness to God; and therefore they
naturally lead on to the utterance of praise
and thanksgiving. His wonders ; or,
" miracles " — ri, repara outoS, LXX. — such
as those touched on in vers. 27 — 36 and
39 — 41. And the judgments of his mouth.
His sentences upon sinners, as upon the
Egyptians (vers. 28, et seqq.) and upon the
Canaanites (vers. 11, 44).

Ver. 6. — ye seed of Abraham his
servant; ie. "his faithful and obedient
t'uilower " (see below, ver. 42 ; and comp.
Gen. xxvi. 24 ; GaL iii. 9). Ye children of
Jacob his chosen; rather, hit chosen one*.
The word is in the plural, and must
be referred, not to "Jacob," hut to
" children."

Ver. 7. — He is the Lord our Ood ; rather,
he, Jehovah, it our €hd. The psalmist
now commences the praise of Jehovah in
his own person, acting as spokesman for
his people; and first of all declares his
Godhead; next, his universal dominion.
His judgments are in all the earth; «.e.
"his sentences, decrees, laws, have •
universal range, and command the obedienoa
of all men."

Ver. 8. — He hath remembered his core-
nant for ever. Thirdly, the psalmist praises
God's faithfulnesa God entered into a
covenant with Israel, and that covenant
still holds good. He has not forgotten it,
and will never forget it. It is the word
which he commanded to a thousand gene-
rat.ons (comp. Deut. vii. 9). Professor



PS. iiv. 1 — 45.]



THE BOOK OP PSALMS.



416



Cheyne concludes, from thin passage, that
the psalm was not written during the
Captivity. But surely a captive in Babylon
might Ijave had faith enough to believe
that God had not abolished, but only
Buspendeii, liis covenant.

Yer. 9. — Wbioh covenant he made with
Abraham (see Gen. xv. 18). A promise
was given even earlier (Gen. xii. 14, 15);
but it Is not spoken of as a "coveuant."
And his oath unto Isaac. The "oath"
was originally sworn to Abraham (Gen.
zxii. 16); but a further promise to
" perform the oath " was given to Isaac
(Gen. xxvi. 3).

Ver. 10. — And confirmed the same nnto
Jacob for a law (see Gen. xxviii. 18). And
to Israel ; i.e. to Jacob, after he had given
him the name of Israel (see Gen. xxxv. 12).

Ver. 11. — Saying, Unto thee will I give
the land of Canaan (see Gen. xiii. 15;
xvii. 8 ; xxvi. 3 ; xxviii. 13). The lot of
your inheritance ; literally, the cord,or line,
of your inheritance (comp. Ps, Ixxviii. 55),
The words are not found among the
promises made to the patriarchs, but are
perhaps regarded by the writer as implied
in them. When the allotment of Canaan to
the several tribes was made, recourse was
doubtless had to the measuring-line.

Ver. 12. — ^When they were but a few
men in number ; literally, when they were
men of number; i.e. when they could be
easily counted. A few scores at the utmost,
or, with their entire households, a few
hundreds (Gen. xiv. 14; xxxiii. 1). Tea,
very few, and strangers in it ; t.«. " in the
land of Canaan " (comp. Exnd. Ti. 4).

Ver. 13. — When they went from one
nation to another. Abraham " went from "
Ur of the Chaldees to Haian of the
Syrians, from Uaran to Canaan, from Canaan
to Philititia, and once as far as Egypt.
Isaac and Jacob were also wanderers, though
not to the same extent. From one kingdom
to another people. Chaldea, Philistia, and
Egypt were "kingdoms; " the Syrians and
Canaanites, " peoples."

Ver. 14. — He suffered no man to do them
wrong: yea, he reproved kings for their
sakes. The reference is to the punishment
inflicted on the Pharaoh of Abraham's time
(Gen. xii. 17), and on Abimeleoh of Gerar
(Gen. XX. 3, 7, 18).

Yer. 15. — Saying, Touch not mine
anointed; literally, mine anointed ones; i.e.
those consecrated to my service, as were
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. And do my
prophets no harm (comp. Gen. xx, 7; xxvii.
27—29 and 39, 40 ; xlix. 3—27). The actual
words of this verse do not occur in Genesis,
but they express the lesson which God's
dealings with Pharaoh and Abimeleoh
taught the kings and peoples.



Yer. 16. — Moreover he called for a famine
npou the land To " call for a famine " is
the same thing as to create a famine.
What God "calls for" immediately ezisti
(see Gen. i. 3). "The land" intended ia
the land of Canaan. He brake the whole
staff of bread (comp. Lev. xxvi. 26; Isa. iii.
1). Bread is called a " staff," as the great
support of life. (For the severity of the
famine in Canaan, see Geo. xii. 1; xlii. 5;
xliu. 1.)

Yer. 17. — He sent a man before them,
even Joseph. This is the real sense, though
it is not fully expressed in the Hebrew. On
the providential seading of Joseph into
Egypt, see his own words, " God did send
nie before you, to preserve life " (Gen. xlv.
5). Who was sold for a servant (oomp.
Gen. xxxiii. 28, 36 ; xxxix. 1).

Yer. 18.— Whose feet they hurt with
fetters : he was laid in iron ; rather. Ait
loul entered into iron. In Genesis nothing
more is said than that Joseph " was bound "
in the prison (Gen. xl. 3). But the psalmist
knows what imprisonment was in those
ear^ times.

Yer. 19. — Until the time that his word
oame; i.e. "oame true," "came to pass"
(oomp. Dent, xviii. 22; Jer. xvii. ih).
Joseph's "word oame," when the chief
butler was restored to favour, and the chief
baker hanged (Gen. xl. 20—22). The
word of the Lord tried him. It is difBcult
to decide what " word of the Lord " is
meant. Hengstenberg suggests "the
promise of the possession of Canaan." But
this had not been made to him. Dean
Johnson thinks that there is an " implied
promise " to Joseph himself in Gen. xxxvii.
5, 9, etc. — a promise that he should bo raised
tu an eminent rank above his brethren, and
that it was this promise which, during the
time of his afidiotion, " tried " or tested liim.

Yer. 20. — The king sent and loosed him
(see Gen. xii. 14). Even the ruler of the
people. Pharaoli, ruler of the Egyptians.
Let him go free; i.e. made him a free man,
instead of a prisoner and a slave.

Yer. 21. — He made him lord of his house,
and rnler of all his substance (see Gen.
xii. 40).

Yer. 22. — To bind his prinees at his
pleasure. The kings of Egypt were despots,
and could imprison any subject. Joseph,
as the Pharaoh's alter ego (Gen. xii. 40, 44),
would, ot course, be able to do the same.
And teach his senators wisdom. As being
wiser than any of them (Gen. zli. 38, 89).

Ver. 23.— Israel also came into Egypt;
and Jacob. (For the conjunction of both
names of the patriarch, see ver. 10, For
the journey of the Patriarch from Canaan
into Egypt, see Gen. xlvi. 1 — ^7.) So-
journed in the land of Ham ; or, tmt



tl6



THE BOOK OF PSALMS.



[pa. or. 1 — 45



o eojowmer. Ab a " stranger" and a
" sojourner," Jacob charged his sons not to
bury bim in Egypt, but in tlie land of
Canuan, with his fathers (Gen. xlix. 29; 1.
5). (For tbu use of the periphrasis, " land
of Ham," instead of Egypt, see below, rer.
27 ; and comp. Pa. cvi. 22.)

Ver. 24. — And he increased his people
greatly (comp. Exod. i. 7, 12, 20). And
made them stronger than their enemies. So
the Fiiaraoh who introduced the hard bond-
age, "The people of the children of Israel are
more and mightier than we " (Exod i. 9).

Ver. 25. —He tnmed their heart to hate
his people. Not by direct action on their
heart, but by prospering Israel until their
jealousy was stirred. To deal snbtilly with
his servants (comp. Exod. i. 10). <

Ver. 26. — He sent Moses his servant. The
mibsiou of Moses is related in Exod. iii.
10 — 18; iv. 1 — 9. And Aaron whom he
had chosen. (For Aaron's mission, see
Exod. iv. 14—17.)

Ver. 27. — They showed his signs among
them ; literally, the matters of his signs ; i.e.
his long series of signs. Aaron showed the
earlier signs generally (Exod. vii. 10, 19,
20; viii. ti, 17), Moses the later ones ^Exod.
ix: 10, 23 ; x. 13, 22). And wonders in the
land of Ham (comp. ver. 23 and Ps. ovi. 22).
Yer. 28. — He sent darkness, and made it
dark (see Exod. x. 21—23). And they
rebelled not against his word. If the " not "
is to stand in this passage, it must be
referred to Moses and Aaron. Professor
Cheyne, however, following the Septuagint
and Peshito versions, boldly cancels the
"not."

Ver. 29. — ^He turned their waters into
blood, and slew their fish (comp. Exod. vii
20, 21).

Ver. 30. — Their land brought forth frogs
in abundance (Exod. viii. 6). In the
chambers of their kings (see Exod. viii. 3 ;
and comp. ver. 8).

Ver. 31.— He spake, and there came
divers sorts of flies. The 'ar6h is now
generally thought to be either the dog-fly
(,Kvi/6iivia, LXX.) or some sort of beetle
<eee the comment on Exod. viii. 21). And
Uce in all their coasts; rather, gnats (see on
Exod. viii. 17).

Ver. 82. — He gave them hail for rain (see
Exod. ix. 23). And flaming fire in their
land ; i.e. lightning, described in Exod. ix.
23 as " fire that ran along upon the ground."
Ver. 33. — He smote their vines also and
their fig trees. The hail "smote every
lierb of the field, and brake every tree of the
field" (Exod. ix. 25; comp. Pss. Ixxviii.
47). The sceptical objection that Egypt
liaid no vines has long been given np. And
brake the trees of their coasts. Hail,
though it cannot " break " trees of any size.



may do great damage to the leaves and the
smaller branches.

Vur. 34. — He spake, and the locusts came
(see Exod. z. 13, 14). And caterpillars.
Either a kind of locust, or the locnst at one
period of its growth. Nut mentioned in
Exodus. And that without number (see
Exod. X. 14, 15).

Ver. 35. — And did eat np all the herbs in
their land, and devoured the fruit of their
ground (oomp. Exod. x. 15, "They [t.«.
the locusts] did eat every herb of the land,
and all the fruit of the trees which the hail
had left").

Ver. 3ti. — He smote also all the firstborn
in their land (see Exod. xii. 29). The chief
of all their strength (comp. Ps. Ixxviii. 51).
Ver. 37. — He brought them forth also
with silver and gold (Exod. xii. 35, 36;
comp. iii. 21, 22). And there was not one
feeble person among their tribes; literally,
there was not one that stumbled among their
tribes, or among Ms tribes. Probably there
were many feeble persons, who were carried
on beasts of burden, or in carts, or by their
friends. But all those who walked had
strength given to them, and did not stumble
by 'the way (comp. Isa. v. 27).

Ver. 38. — Egypt was glad when they
departed (see Exod. xi. 1, H ; xii. 31, 33),
For the fear of them fell upon them. The
Egyptians "were urgent upon the people,
that they might send them out of the land
in haste; for they said. We be all dead
men " (Exod. xii. 33).

Ver. 39.— He spread a cloud for a cover-
ing. The " pillar of the cloud " is intended.
It was a " covering " to the Israelites on
the night of the passage of the Bed Sea
(Exod. xiv. 19, 20), and perhaps also to
some extent in the wilderness, when it may
have sheltered them from the sun's rays
(Hengstenberg) ; but its main purpose was
to direct them on their way (Exod. xiv. 21),
to tell them when to move and when to
stop, and how long to stop (Exod. xl, 36 —
38). And fire to give light in the night.
By night the " pillar of the cloud" became
a "pillar of fire," shedding a certain
radiance around, and giving the people
under all circumstances sufBoient light
(Exod. xiii. 21 ; xl. 38).

Ver. 40. — The people asked, and he
brought quails ; literally, they asked (oomp.
Exod. xvi. 3, 13; Numb. xi. 31). And
satisfied them with the bread of heaven.
The " bread of heaven " is the manna, which
was given to the Israelites continuously
from their first encampment in the wilder-
ness of Sin (Exod. xvi 14, 15) to their
first Passover in Canaan (Josh. v. 12). The
quails seem to have been given only twice.
Ver. 41. — He opened the rook, and the
waters gushed out (see Exod. xvii. 6, 0, aad



P8. cv. 1— 49^] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 417



Vnmb. XX. 8 — 11). They ran in the dry
places like a river. A poetical exaggeration
of Numb. XX. 11, " The water came out
abundantly, and the congregation drank,
and their beasts also."

Ver. 42. — For he remembered his holy
promise, and Abraham; i.e. his covenant
with Abraham to bring liis seed into the
Holy Land. His servant (comp. ver. 6).

Yer. 43. — ^And bronght forth his people
with joy, and his chosen with gladness,
The " bringing forth " intended is that of
the Israelites from the wilderness into
Canaan. It was naturally attended with
much "joy " and " gladneas."



Ver. 44. — And gave them the lands of
the heathen (see Josh. vlii. — xli.). And
they inherited the labour of the people ;
rather, of the peoplet (comp. Deut. vi. 10, 11).

Ver. 45. — That they might observe his
statutes, and keep his laws. This was
God's purpose. How far Israel was from
carrying it out appears from the historical
books generally, and perhaps still mora
from the writings of the prophets (see
2 Kings xvii. 7—23; 2 Chron. xxxvi. 14 —
17; Isa. i. 2—23; Jer. ii. 5—37; Hos. iv.
1 — 18, etc.). Praise ye the lord (comp.
Fss. civ. 35 ; ovi. 1, 48 ; cxi 1 ; oxii. 1 ; cxiii
l,eto.).



HOMILETICa.

Vers. 1— 46.— 2%« testimony of history. God reveals himself in many ways ; of these
one 18 found in human history. All history may be studied, that we may understand
his Divine thought and purpose ; but more especially sacred history, his dealings with
his ancient people. The psalmist is continually returning to this as a source of striking
and convincing illustration. Among other lessons brought out by this psalm are the
following : —

I. His PAiTHFOiiNESs. (Vers. 8 — 11, 42 — 44.) Though, in the midst of oppression
and misery in Egypt, it may have seemed that he had forgotten his covenant, it was
not so. He remembered it (see Exod. ii. 24). So it often seems to us, when we wait
long for deliverance. We are inclined to ask, " Why hast thou forgotten me?" (Ps.
xlii. 9). But when " the end of the Lord" is seen, then we reprove our tnistlessnest
and adore his faithfulness.

IL His GOODNESS IN ADVERSITY. (Vers. 12 — 15.) As God sheltered his people,
though " few in number, yea, very few," and held back the threatening hand of the
strong so that in their days of pilgrimage they were preserved, so has he guarded bis
people in all ages, not suffering the great world-powers to crush them ; thus does he now
manifest his presence and his power to individual men as they walk the checkered
path of life.

IIL His BEDEEMiNG LOVB. (Vers. 20 — 22, 26, 27.) God's redeeming kindness
-shown to Joseph in his bondage and humiliation, and then to the whole nation in its
captivity and suffering is an anticipation and a type (1) of his delivering grace shown
to us, his children, as we find ourselves first entangled or enthralled, and then graciously
extricated or enlarged ; (2) of his redemption of our race in the gospel. A greater than
Moses was " sent " — that " Servant of the Lord " (Isa. lii.), before whom " kings should
shut their mouth ; " who should work out a salvation compared with which the deliver-
ance from Egyptian bondage was small indeed.

IV. The mystbht of his ways. (Vers. 16 — 19.) The famines which afflicted
Canaan (see Gen. xii. 10 ; xxvi. 1), which ultimately brought Israel into Egypt, and
the disgrace and hard durance of Joseph, were " trying " to the faith of those who
passed through them. God does try us now, and " the trial of our faith,," in dark and
mysterious times, is intended to draw us nearer to himself, and to deepen the roots of
our confidence in him. A faith exercised when the way was always plain and pleasant
would be a poor and feeble thing ; the piety that did not trust when it could not see
would be of little worth.

V. The mastery of apparent impossibilities. (Vers. 40, 41.) He who gave
"bread from heaven" and "water from the rook" can interpose and save in the
darkest hour, in the direst necessity. Nothing is too hard for the Lord; certainly not
our own particular embarrassment.

VL His leadership. (Ver. 39.) God led Israel in a way as well a» hy a way
which they knew not — a way his people could not possibly have imagined. So he leads
his children now. We cannot predict either the means by which our God will guide
us, or the path by which he will conduct us to our home.

MALMS — ^11. 2 ■



418 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [rs. ov. 1— 45.

Vn. His pubpobb m oim prospebitt. (Vers. 43 — 45.) Jehovah brought his
people into the land of promise in order " that they might observe his statutes," i.e. in
order that they might become a holy nation ; for the end of all providential bounty and
of all redeeming kindness is character, moral and spiritual worth. God enriches us, he
redeems and reinstates us, in order that we may attain unto his own likeness, may be
" partakers of his own holiness." Not comfort or enjoyment, but ennoblement, abiding
worth, is the true end to which all blessings lead.

Vers. 1 — 5. — The response of man to the providence of Ood. What should be oui
attitude toward God in view of all his providential dealings with us?
L Praise. " give thanks," etc. ; " Sing unto him."

II. Pbater. " Seek the Lord, and his strength : seek his face."

III. GoNSiDEBATiON. We must remind ourselves of his works (ver. 5).

IV. Saobed jot is him. (Ver. 3.)

V. PuBLioATioN. " Make known his deeds among the people.*



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORa

Vers. 1 — 45. — "He watching over Israel slumiers not nor sleeps.'" I. A blessed
BETBOSFECT. 1. Se knows it is blessed, because, ere the psalmisc sets it down, he
summons, in intensely earnest, varied, and emphatic way, all people to give thanks unto
the Lord. 2. And he fells them wherefore they should hearken to his Word — ;beoause the
Lord "hath remembered his covenant for ever," etc. (ver. 8). 3. Then comes the
covenant history. He tells what the covenant was (ver. 11), with whom it was
made (ver. 9), and to whom confirmed (ver. 10). Then he tells of the apparent
improbability of its fulfilment (ver. 12), yet how God guarded them (ver, 15). Then
how strangely his work was carried on : sending dread famine (ver. 16), and making
them exiles in Egypt ; sending Joseph, whom he had wonderfully prepared to be their
helper in Egypt (vers. 17 — ^23). Then, when they were sufficiently multiplied, stirring
up their nest there by means of the persecution they had to bear. Then came the
mission of Moses and Aaron, and the ten plagues, so that at length Pharaoh was glad
to let them go (ver. 38). Then the triumphant exodus and the perpetual help in the
wilderness, ending in the promised Canaan when the people were prepared for it (vers.
44, 45). So did God lead his people by a right way, and so will he ever, though, as
with Israel, the way may often seem very strange, unlikely, and the reverse of what
we should have thought.

II. Its lessons. 1. Ood^s covenants ever come true, however unlikely and even
impossible they may at times seem to be. 2. That it is a terrible thing to stand in
opposition to them (vers. 14, 27 — 37). Let us beware how we hinder the work of God.
3. (Jod knows where to find and how to prepare his ministers in this work. " He
sent Joseph ; " " he sent Moses " (vers. 17, 26). They who are to be chief in service
have generally first to be chief in suffering. 4. 3%e aim of God's covenant is the
creation of a holy people (ver. 45). 5. The rememhrance of God's leading will ever be
blessed. — S. 0.

Ver. 4. — Successive steps heavenward. I. The ftrst is beekino the Lobd.
1. We are slow enough to do this. We will try, as did the writer of Ecolesiastes,
almost everything ere we turn to the Lord. 2. But the Lord desires that we should.
Hence the plain declarations of his Word. Also the orderings of his providence. God
will not let us have rest outside of himself. He is ever stirring up our nest. Thus
he would compel us to own our need of him. 3. And there is the Holy Spirit's con-
victing work. And when that is done, it leads to this first blessed step heavenward —
seeking the Lord.

II. Seeking his steenqth. For though it be difficult to persuade men to take the
first step, it is yet more difficult to keep them trusting in and faithful to the Lord.
The real test is whether we abide in Christ. And we shall not unless we seek Otod't
strength. All the batteries of hell will be turned against us to destroy our soul-life,
and we shall indeed need to be strengthened " with all might by God's Spirit in our



P8. «nr. 1— 46.] THE BOOK OF PSALMa 419



Inner man." That strength will come to us as we are : 1. Diligent in prayer. 2. Faith-
fvl in confession of Christ. 3. Feeding upon the Divine Ward. 4. Trying to save
others. 5. Keeping on helieving.

III. SBBKHfa HIS FAOK EVBBMOBE. 1. This tells of the joy of the Lord which comes
to ns when his face shines upon us. Let us be children of the light ; keep on the sunny
side of the way. Let there be joy in our service, not mere duty, doing which gets to
be very dull work after a while. The elder son in the parable (Luke xv.) was a mere
duty-doer, and he had no joy in his service, and therefore had no welcome for his poor
prodigal younger brother. 2. If we would serve Qod effectually, pray for " the Joy of
GocPs salvation.'" (Ps. li.) Then shall we teach transgressors, and get them converted
to God. 3. All this is possible. We may have much of heaven l»fore we eet there
— S.O. ^ ,

Ver. 12. — " Wlien they were hut a few." If we look back to the beginnings of all
great enterprises and movements amongst men, this is what might have been said of
them all. There was a time when those who were associated with them " were but a
few." So was it after the Deluge (1 Pet. iii. 20; of. also Neh. ii. 12). And see the
beginnings of the Christian Church. Small like a grain of mustard seed. Now we are
prone to be much discouraged when we see only a few caring for the things of God ;
and we are much elated when we see crowds of people, multitudes, uniting themselves
with the professing Church. We may be wrong in both cases. Certainly we are when
the fact of mere fewness casts us down. Let such despondents remember —

L That it is quality, not quantitt, that is to bb oonsidebbd. A living dog
is better than a dead lion. Bigness is not strength. See the composition of the Bible.
What great space is given to a little insignificant people, and the stories of their
ancestors — a people who inhabited a mere shred and corner of the world, and who were
just nothing at all compared with the vast empires that stretched themselves out on all
sides of them I But it was because in this little handful of people the Divine life had
its home, and that in them, under God, the kingdom of God on earth depended, that,
therefore, their history is all-important, and a special providence watched over them.
And do not we know, in our experiences, the blessed force which • few, and even less
than a few, thorough and wholly consecrated Christians exert, compared with what a
erowd of the common sort ever accomplish?

IL Fbwness makes no diffeeekob to God. (Cf. 2 Chron. xiv. 11 ; 1 Cor. i.
27, 28.) How many were the men who "turned the world upside down" (Acts
xvii. 6)?

III. The bealization of cub own weakness, which oohes to us when thbbs

ABE BUT A FEW, 18 ONE OF THE CONDITIONS OF God's WOKKINO. Our Lord had to

make Peter feel what a poor creature he was before he could be used as an apostle ; and
hence came Peter's fall.

IV. A FEW BECOME A HOST IF GoD LEAD. We may be but a row of ciphers ; but
if God stand at our head, then they are no longer mere ciphers. And this is not a
mere figure of speech, but an actual fact demonstrated over and over again (cf. the
vision, 2 Kings vi. 17).

V. His special pbomises abb fob the few. " Where two or three are gathered,"
etc. (Matt, xviii. 20). And that promise has constantly been fulfilled.

VI. The few abb his kspboial oabb. (See vers. 12 — 16.) And in the history
of missions, the little handful who have gone to this country and that, though perse-
cuted, and their ranks thinned by disease and death, yet have they been strengthened
to hold on until they have won the battle God sent them to wage. What may not one
Goi-fiUed soul do ? Bead the history of Gideon to show thiS. And a company of
them. If, then, " where there were but a few," there was no failure in the purpose and
promise of God, let us rest assured that in like circumstances now there will be no
failure. And let us stir ourselves up to lay hold on God. — S. 0.

Ver. 19. — Joseph's trial. It has been remarked that in every leaf the whole tree is
mirrored — root, trunk, branches, leaves (Macmillan). And so each member of Christ's
mystical body resembles him in the way by which he is led. This especially true of
Josepji. "Now that he ascended, what is it but that he also descended first into the



420 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. ov. 1—46.

lower parts of the earth?" These words, supremely true of our Lord, are true also of
his servants. They must descend ere they ascend. The text teaches us —

I. That the Lobd has a wobd or bioh promise for each one of his people.
Joseph had his word; so likewise have all like him. We may not he ahle to discern
it so clearly as Joseph did, but our lives reveal it more and more, and ultimately we
shall clearly know what all alonn; it has been.

II. That much time mat elapse, and many obsta(3les have to be overcome,
EBB THAT WOBD BE FULFILLED. See this in history of Joseph. Years had to roll by,
and everything seemed to say that his word never could come true. And so of the
promise of the kingdom of God, whether in one individual soul or in the world at
lartip. How long it is in coming, and how hopeless it often seems 1

III. And until that word come to pass it is a soke tbial. For in the case
of Joseph, that word tried him. 1. By being the cause of his trial. If the Lord had
never sent those dreams, none of his troubles would have come. And when the word
of God's grace comes to a soul now, how often it stirs up a very hornet's nest, both of
inward and outward trial I " I came not to send peace on earth, but a sword." How
true that word has ever been I 2. By deepening the trial. What a bright, joyous
picture that was which Joseph saw before his eyes when the word of the Lord came to
him in his dreams ! But when stripped of his coat of many colours, then flung into
a pit, then sold to the Ishmaelites, then horribly because so falsely accused, then
imprisoned, — what a contrast all this 1 How the light of the glad word made more
dense the darkness of his dungeon! 3. Bi/ embittering it. What keenness of disap-
pointment, what anguish of heart, the iron entered into his soul I 4. By the dreadful
doubtt which its non-fulfilment could not but occasion. How hard to keep believing
under so hard and undeserved a lot ! 6. And yet more, not only his faith, but his love
to Ood, would be tried. Could it be that God loved him if he let all this shame and
sorrow come upon him. (cf. Ps. xlii.) ? 6. Then he was tried by being led to cdmost
wish that he had never received such a word. Would it not have been better if he had
been like the rest of his brothers, to whom no such word came?

IT. But though the word be delayed, it will come to pass. It did so for
Joseph; it does for all like him. Wherefore be of good cheer. And the more,
because —

v. All that weary time was well-spent time. It was a discipline indis-
pensable if he were to fitly fill the high station for which God had designed him.
And so it ever is.— S. C.

Ver. 1. — Ood in history. " Tell the people what things he hath done" (Prayer-book
Version). As the word rendered " people " is a plural, the prominent idea seems to be
the duty of making the God of history, whose working is so evident in the Jewish
history, known to the heathen. If we can read history aright, and see God's working
in it, we must read it aloud, so that others may be helped to find what we have found.
Reviews of history are always interesting, and were specially pleasing to the Jews, who
regarded themselves as a specially favoured nation. History at first is but a collection
of facts, then it becomes the estimate of relations, causes, and results, which we call the
philosophy of history. But that philosophy is not complete or satisfactory which fails
to recognize the overruling and modifying Divine force which moves history to pre-
ordained ends. He only reaches the true philosophy of history who finds God in history.
In this psalm we have such a reading of the national history as the Jewish exiles would
undertake when the prospect of return to Canaan was near. We have to see the special
points of view from which they would conduct their review. The thing prominent in
their minds was, that God was about to redeem them from captivity, and to restore
them to their own land ; so they read the story of their race to find God's redemptions.
And they were easy to find when men looked for them in such a mood.

I. God's eedemption of Israel prom the Egyptian famine. This was at the
very outset of the national history. The famine affected the neighbouring countries,
»nd God made Egypt a refuge for his redeemed people. Deliverance by quiet
providences.

II. God's bedemption or Isbael from the Egyptian bondage. For the place
of refuge presently became a place of slavery. This deliverance was accompanied with ,



PB. cv. 1—45.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 421

displays of august power, which reached their climax in the death of the Egyptian
firstborn. Deliverance by miraculous interventions.

III. God's bedemption of Israel fbom its own wilfulness. God's deliverance
of a man is never complete while it deals exclusively with his circumstances and
surroundings. A man is not redeemed until he is redeemed from his bad self. The
nation was not redeemed until God's gracious working within it had been completed.
We see this in scenes of the wilderness-journey. We see it all through, up to the great
Babylonish captivity. Eedemption comes by Divine discipline. — E. T.

Ver. 4. — Seeking the LorcPs face. The idea of reviewing the history is prominent,
but the psalmist recognizes how much depends on the spirit in which that review is
done, if any real moral and religious benefit is to be derived from it. Bead it as one
who is seeking for signs of the Lord's presence and power. Bead it in such a mood
and way that upon you shall rest signs of Divine favour. Let the result of it be that
you will seek to have the shinings of the face on you, which you can see made all the
glory of the history.

I. Seeking the Lobd himself. This may be taken as referring to adequate
knowledge of God. This is not in itself sanctifying ; for men may know without
loving. But it is the proper beginning. Seek to know God. Fearlessly take all his
workings into account ; both those easy to understand, and those difficult. Never shirk
any facts. Only he who is willing to see the revelation of himself which God has
made in history all round and all through, will ever get to know God worthily.
So much mistake is made by deciding beforehand who and what God is, and then
selecting, from the revelations of his Word and works, only what will support our pre-
arranged conceptions. Few of us yet know worthily the unity of the many-sided God.

II. Seeking the Lobd's stebnoth. Signs of the Divine power in history. Now,
our impression of strength is but a small one while we keep in the material regions,
and see only what a man can lift, what he can pull, or what he can carry. The really
strong man is he who can master difficulties, put things straight, prove himself mightier
than opposing forces, and even opposing forces in combination. This is the strength of
the Lord God, of which we want to find signs ; and precisely signs of this — the Lord,
the Overcomer, mastering all hostile forces — we find abundant in the Old Testament
history.

III. Seeking the Lord's face. The full face looking at us is the sign of favour.
The downcast face is the sign of disapproval. What the child of God wants is to live
with his Father's full open face smiling upon him. " When thou saidst. Seek ye my
face, my heart said unto thee, Thy face, Lord, will I seek." We may read God's dealings
in such a spirit as to win God's favour in the reading. — B. T.

Ver. 8. — Covenant faithfulness. The psalmist, as a just returned, or as a speedily
returning, exile — one just making preparations for his return — ^is anxious to be right-
hearted in relation to this new national restoration, and he is anxious to help others to
be right-hearted. So he thinks over aloud his personal experiences of God's dealings
with himself (Ps. ciii.) ; the marvels of God's handiwork in nature (Ps. civ.) ; the
overrulings of Divine providence in the national history (Ps. cv.) ; and the causes for
national humiliation (Ps. cvi.). The leading idea before us, in this and the following
psalm, is this. God and Israel entered into mutual covenant. Bead the national story
how you may, you will find that God has always been faithful to his pledges in that
covenant, and the people have constantly been unfaithful. The marvel of mercy is
that God's patient and persistent faithfulness triumphs at last over man's wilfulness
and unfaithfulness.

I. God made covenant with his people in old times. It is not only that God
made promises; the marvel of Divine grace is, that God should condescend to stand on
man's platform, and join with man in putting himself under solemn pledge. Covenant-
making is an idea of early tribal times, when legal documents could not be written and
signed. Illustrate God's covenant with Abraham, which was renewed again and again.
Dwell on the fact that there were two persons, and two sets of conditions, in a covenant ;
and each was released if the other broke his terms. Lead on to show how the name is
preserved in relation to the mission of our Lord Jesus Christ.



422 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. or. 1—45.

II. QOD WAS ALWAYS FAITHFUL TO HIS PLEDGES IN COVENANT. This the pSalmist

treats as an unquestionable historical fact. God was true to Abraham, Isaac, Israel in
Egypt, Joseph. True to covenant in dealing with Pharaoh, Israel's oppressor. True
in bringing Israel at last to the promised land. Providences are only rightly read as
God's fulfilment of his covenant. That which is true of Israel is true of our personal
lives. God has been to us Provider, Guide, Baler, and Overrules

III. God mat be fully tbubted to pkovb faithful in new soeneb. This is
the appeal which the psalmist makes to the returning exiles. God has ever been
faithful to your fathers ; he will be faithful to you. So our trust is in what we know
God to le ; and we know him by what he has done, and does. He is the " faithful
Promiser ; " we may fully trust him. — E. T.

Ter. 15. — Divine defence. " Touch not mine anointed ones " (Revised Version).
The reference is evidently to the patriarchs ; and they are spoken of in the light of
later associations, classified with those who received special Divine communications.
" They were as kings and priests before God; therefore they are called ' his anointed ; '
they had the word, they knew the spirit of the Lord, therefore they are his ' prophets.' "
(Illustrate the term " prophet " from Gen. xx. 7.) The psalmist had some special
instances in bis mind, which he regarded as representative of the Divine defence that
is always overshadowing God's faithful people. They are cases in which the three
great patriarchs moved into the territory of alien or alienated people, and were preserved
from all harm.

I. Divine defence of Abbaham in Canaan, Eavpr, and Gbbab. Journeying
into Canaan, which was then occupied by several nations, we might have expected his
coming to have excited jealousy, if not fear. His tribe was large, his flocks and herds
were abundant; he must have eaten up the land as he passed through it. But the
Divine defence was over him, and his course was practically unhindered. He never had
to fight for any position. God made his way. In Egypt, and again in Gerar, he was
placed in much anxiety, and in some peril, by the licentious customs of the age. But
the Divine defence was over him and his — no evil befell him ; and even the seeming
evil proved to be for his own moral good, and for other people's.

XL DrviNB defence of Ibaao in Philistia. From a similar anxiety to that which
Abraham had experienced, and from the strife which arose about the wells that Isaac
digged. It is well to notice that, in the matter of the wells, the Divine defence worked
along with Isaac's wise self-restraint, and refusal to make quarrels.

III. Divine defence of Jacob in Syria, and in Esau's oountby. Laban of
Syria was far more of an enemy than a friend to Jacob. How much the patriarch had
to endure ! But God ever watched over him. The supreme peril of Jacob's life was that
return to Canaan which involved his meeting the justly offended Esau. Even then we
find him within the Divine defence. — R. T.

Vers. 17 — 22. — I%e mission oj Joseph. "He had sent a man before them" (Prayer-
book Version). The point is, that God had been beforehand, foreknowing how the
famine would affect Jacob's tribe, and getting preparations made for affording necessary
relief when the testing- time came. Joseph, relative to his family, was a forerunner;
one sent on first in order to prepare the way. But herein is a remarkable thing — the
providences that brought round to him the power to save his family, involved his own
personal sufferings. An illustration of the trath that we can never do the highest
good to men save at the cost of self-sacrifice, and burden-bearing. Our Lord saved the
world through suffering for it. The mission of Joseph is usually treated in its relation
to Egypt, but the psalmist considers the mission entirely in its relation to the covenant
people of God. Joseph was disciplined so as to save them. Joseph saved them in their
time of peril. Joseph's salvation brought them into a special Divine discipline. These
three points are suggested and illustrated in this psalm.

I. Joseph was disciplined so as to sate his family. A man must gain the
mastery of himself before he can gain true power to serve others. See the providences
which brought Joseph into circumstances which provided moral discipline. 1. The
trust Fotiphar placed in him. 2. The moral temptation to which he was exposed.
3. The delay in the vindication of his innocence. The effect of that delay is given by



P8. or. 1—46.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 423

the figure, " the iron entered into his soul." We can see that this mastery he gained
over himself prepared him to master the hatred he must have felt towards the brethren,
who planned his murder, and accomplished his enslaving. The greatness of the
disciplinary triumph can only he fairly judged in view of the intense, uncontrolled
feelings of vengeance characteristic of that age.

n. Joseph saved his family in their time of febil. Had the famine been
only a temporary one, due to a single failure of the Nile, Joseph might have sent
supplies to Canaan ; but only the position and power ho had gained in Egypt enabled
him to meet the case of seven years' famine.

ni. Joseph's salvation brought his family into a special Divine discipline.
And so worked out the providential designs cpncerning the race. Joseph's personal
experiences iu Egypt were, in a way, repeated in his race. They came into severe
Egyptian discipline, by means of which they were prepared to exchange the wandering
tribal for the settled national life. Impress, that God works moral ends through
disciplinary experiences. — E. T.

Vers. 23 — 25. — DiicipUnary experience. It is singular that in ver. 25 God should
be spoken of as the agent in turning the hearts of the Egyptians to hate his people.
Some would soften the expression, and make it mean only that God suffered the
hostility arising from the increase of the people. But there is no difficulty when once
we see that God's dealings with us are disciplinary ; that he uses the ordinary events of
life for his disciplinary purposes, and that in a poem he may be said to arrange and
control the events which he uses for his moral ends.

I. All human life is disoiplinaby. It is precisely this that ennobles human
life, and distinguishes it fi-om the life of the brute. The events and relations of life do
nothing for the animal save complete its animal nature. The events and relations of
life mould and train man. He is the better or the worse, morally, for every incident of
bis career, and for every person with whom he comes in contact. To say that a thing
is testing, or trying, is to say that it has a eultwring force in it ; it has a moral aim.
Self-mastery can only be won through discipline.

II. Discipline comes thbouqh thinqs that abe qood. Hare, in the case of
Israel, our attention is directed to that swift increase of population which is the best
idea of national good (ver. 24). It is representative of the successes which God often
gives men. But the disciplinary feature of world-success is not sufficiently recognized.
No severer strain is put on men's characters than that which comes by letting them
triaceed. Gaining wealth or fame has overstrained many a man. Moral character
failed under the strain.

m. Discipline gomes thbouoh teinos teat abe mystebious. The sphere of
the mysterious enlarges as we grow in knowledge and experience. The young student
can explain everything. The grey-haired professor can explain nothing. Discipline
comes by finding that we cannot know. It tests whether we can believe, and let faith
give its tone to life. Science boasts that it knows, but science can do nothing without
the scientific imagination ; and that brings in the element of uncertainty.

IV. Discipline comes theough things that abb evil. This is true in both
senses of the word " evil," which may mean " wicked " or " calamitous." Israel was
disciplined through the hatred of Pharaoh, and also through the sufiferings of their lot.
The sanctifying power of affliction for Christians is often dwelt on; the disciplinary
power of hard and trying circumstances, for every one, need* fuller and wiaer
treatment. — B. T.

Ver. 2,1. — Delivering judgmtnte. The "signs" here mentioned are the " plagues"
which Jehovah sent on Egypt for the humbling of its weak but obstinate Pharaoh.
They were "judgments" for Egypt; they were first steps of "deliverance" for Israel.
So the psalmist, regarding them from the standpoint of God's dealing with his anceiton,
very properly treats them as " delivering judgments." All Divine judgment* are two-
(ided : we see what tiiey are to those who are judged ; we ought to see what they are
to those who are called to learn through the judgments.

I. V^HAT ABE DlVnra JUDGMENTS TO THOSE WHO BHDUBB THEM? Such the plaguei

were to Pharaoh and the Egyptians. Observe that the question really at issue was, the



424 THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [ps. ov. 1—45.

relative claim and ability of the Egyptian gods and Israel's God. Then it is easy to
see (and Dean Stanley, in his ' Jewish Church,' vol. i. p. 102, helps us to illustrate)
that the plagues demonstrated the helplessness of the idols, and the supreme power of
Jehovah. And that is the proper issue of all Divine jadgments. They are intended
to break us off from all forms of self-trust, and to convince us of the supreme authority
and power of God, who is " known by the judgments that he exeouteth." " When his
judgments are abroad in the earth, the inhabitants of the world will learn righteousness."

II. What are Divine judoments to those who watoh them? Such were the
Israelites, whose territory of Goshen was not affected by the plagues. But they were
in danger of taking up with the idolatry of Egypt ; they found it hard to keep true to
the unseen Jehovah. So the judgments they did but observe, and did not feel, exerted
a similar influence on them. They convinced them of the utter helplessness and
uselessness of the Egyptian gods. They proved that the unseen Jehovah-God was
practically effective in the actual scenes of nature and life. They even saw more than
this. The judgments which thus fell on those who held them in bondage, were plainly
beginnings of God's deliverance for them. If they seemed to tighten the Egyptian hold,
they really loosened it. And when the series of judgments reached their climax,
Pharaoh and his Egyptians were ready enough to thrust them out. So, while to those
who come under Divine judgments they prove humblings; to those who watch and
learn, they seem to be Divine deliverances. — R. T.

Vers. 40, 41. — !Z%« sin of trying to make terms with God. " The people asked, and
he brought quails." The sin of this does not immediately strike the reader. It is not
said that the people asked for quails. What we are to understand is, that Ckid was
graciously and wonderfully providing their staple food for the people : manna-food from
the skies, spring waters from the rocks. But the people were discontented with what
God, in his infinite wisdom and love, provided, and wanted to arrange with God what he
should provide. They wanted to make terms with God ; and that meant taking the
arrangement of their affairs out of the hands of God, and managing them for themselves ;
or, rather, making God manage them at their dictation. From this point of view wa
see their sin plainly enough. God met their desires, but brought upon them a most
humbling judgment through the very obtaining of what they wished. He showed them
how utterly incapable they were of managing for themselves, and ordering their own
lives, by giving them the meat they desired, in plenty, and letting them do what they
would with it. See the consequence. Quails were wholesome enough when eaten in
moderation. The people devoured them unrestrainedly; they showed no sort of
moderation ; and the consequence was a disease which became epidemic, and swept
away multitudes. On the monument for those dead men tbis inscription might well
have been put, " Never try to make terms with God."

1. See this sin in the light of what God is. Take the attributes, and show
that God must both know, and be able to do, what is every way wisest and best. Who
understands our real needs as God does ? Who controls all things as God does ? Take
the Father-name which we are permitted to use for God, and show how wrong children
are who attempt to dictate to their father as to what he shall provide.

IL See this sin in the light of what God had done. AU Jehovah's relations
with his people had been gracious and considerate. They had never wanted any good
thing. Defence had been close alongside danger, and provision ready for all need.
Signs of distrust and murmuring were most unbecoming.

III. See this bin in the lioht of what the people were. Had they any
right to the confidence that they knew what was good for tliem better than God did?
Their past should hare taught them submissiveness and humility. — B. T.

Vers. 1 — 6. — Ood in history. " The mighty acts of Jehovah for his people from the
first dawn of their national existence are recounted as a fitting subject for thankfulness,
and as a ground for future obedience."

I. God has wonderfully revealed himself in history. 1. By his marvellou*
work of love. To the Jews and to the world, Christianity a grand historical embodi-
ment and exhibition of the love of God. 2. By his everlasting faithfidnest. As
witnessed in the fulfilment of his promises and th<°eateningB to the Jews and the



P8. ovi. 1—48.]



THE BOOK OF PSALMS.



425



Christian Church. Gort departs neither from his word nor his plan. 3. By his righteous
judgments upon the wickedness of men and nations. His righteousness is the guarantee
both for his rewards and his punishments. Doing right is as much a part of the Divine
character as doing good ; i.e. justice and beneficence are both necessary to a perfect
being. 4. By the publication of his law to mankind, (Yer. 5.) " The judgments of
his mouth " are the utterances of his moral law which he has given by the deliverances
of Moses and of Christ.

II. How THIS REVELATION SHOULD BE EEOEivED. 1. With r^oidng gratitude and
thanksgiving. This one of the highest parts of the worship of God. Joyful gratitude
is love, and when this is followed by obedience, then God is worshipped most acceptably.
2. With devout meditation. Thought, meditation, is necessary to understand the
smallest fact of life; but infinitely necessary to interpret the stupendous facts of
redemption. 3. With a spirit of earnest inquiry. We have only just begun to
understand the Divine work, and if " the angels desire to look into these things," how
much more eager should we be to bend over them with inquiring thought 1 We are
only in the incipient stages of spiritual intelligence. — S.



EXPOSITION.



PSALM CVL



Tms li the first of the strictly " Hallelujah
psalms " — i.«. of the psalms beginning with
the phrase " hallelu-Jah " — which are Pss.
ovi., ozi., oxii., cziii., czzxv., ozlvi,, cxlvii.,
oxlviii., cxlix., and oL Eight of these
ten (all but ozi., czli.) also end with the
phrase. Pss. oiv., cv., and ozvii. end with
it, but do not begin with it. This psalm
has a general resemblance to Pss. Ixzviii.
and cv., but carries the historical sketch
to a later period, and makes more pointed
allusion to the Babylonish captivity (vers.
11 — 16). It consists of an introduction
(vers. 1 — 5), comprising praise and prayer ;
an historical sketch, which is mainly a con-
fession uf the sins of the people (vers. 6 —
46) ; and a conclusion, in which prayer and
praise are again united, as in the
introduction.

Ver. 1. — Praise ye the Lord (comp. Pss.
civ. 35; cv. 4S). give thanks unto the
Lord (so in Ps. cv. 1). Even in their
greatest afflictions, the Israelites were bound
to give Gk)d thanks. His mercies always
exceeded his punishments. For he is good
(see the comment on Ps. o. 5). For his
meroy endnreth for ever. According to
Chronicles, this phrase was used at the
dedication of David's tabernacle (1 Chron.
xvi. 34, 41), and again at the dedication
of the temple (2 Chron. v. 13). It here
first occurs in the Psalms.

Ver. 2. — Who can utter the mighty acts
of the Lord ? (comp. Ps. 1. 2 ; and for the
impossibility of expressinp; God's greatness,
see Job xL 7—9; Ps. xoii. 5; Isa. xl. 12—



17 ; Bom. xi. 83—36). Who can show forth
all his praise? ije. "all the praise really
due to him."

Yer. 3. — Blessed are they that keep judg-
ment, and he that doeth righteousness at
all times. No distinction of meaning is
intended between " keeping judgment " and
" doing righteousness." The second clause
merely repeats the first

Yer. 4. — Bemember me, Lord, with the
favour that thou bearest unto thy people.
A prayer for individual blessing, not very
usual in a psalm concerned with national
sins and national deliverances. Professor
Cheyne compares the parenthetic utterances
of Nehemiah (^feh. v. 19; xiii. 14, 22, 31),
but doubts whether the entire passage
(vers. 4, 5) is not an interpolation. visit
me with thy salvation (comp. Pus. xviii 35 ;
Ixxxv. 7).

Yer. 5. — That I may see the good of thy
Ohosen; or, the good fortune, the prosperity,
of thy chosen ; i.0. their happiness when
they are rleased &om the captivity, and
return to their own land (comp. ver. 47).
That I may rejoice in the gladness of thy
nation ; i.e. " the gladness " that would be
theirs when re-established in their own
country (see Ezra iii. 12; vl. 22). That I
may glory with thine inheritance; or,
triumph.

Vers. 6—46. — The psalmist now enters on
his main subject — the transgressions of
Israel in the past, and God's manifold,
mercies vouchsafed to them. These he
traces from the time of the Exodus (ver. 7)
to that of the Babylonish captivity (ver. 46).

Yer. 6. — We have sinned with our fathers
(comp. Lev. xxvi 40; 1 Kings viii. 47;.
Ezra ix. 6, 7 ; Neh. i. 6, 7; ix. 16—18, 26.-



126



THE BOOK OF PSALMS.



[P8. cn. 1—48.



Dan. LX. 5—8). We have committed ini-
quity ; or, "dealt perversely " (Kay). We
have done wickedly. The confeBsion ia as
broad and general as possible, including aU
under sin — the " fathers " from Moses down-
wards, the whole nation from the time of its
settlement in Canaan, and even the afflicted
exiles in Babylon. Their gnilt is empha-
sized by tlie use of three verbs, each more
forcible than the last.

Ver. 7. — Our fathers understood not thy
wonders in Egypt ; rather, considered not —
did not give serious thought to them ; took
them as matters of course, and so were not
impressed by them. They remembered not
the moltitnde of thy mercies (comp. Ps.
Ixix. 16; Isa. Ixiii. 7; Lam. iii. 32; and
infra, ver. 45). But provoked him ; rather,
were rebellioui (sea the Bevised Version),
At the sea, even at the Bed Sea (comp.
Exod. xiv. 11, 12).

Yer. 8. — Nevertheless he saved them for
his Name's sake, that he might make his
mighty power to be known. (On this
motive for the mighty works done in Egypt,
see Exod. vii. 5; xiv. i, 18; xv. 11 — 16.)

Yer. 9. — He rebuked the Bed Sea also
(comp. Ps. civ. 7, " At tby rebuke they
[i.fl. the waters] fled;" see also Isa. L 2;
Nah. i. 4). The Hebrew poets constantly
represent God's dealings wUh inanimate
nature in terms proper to his dealings with
Ids rational creatures, thus personifying
material things. And it was dried up (see
Exod. xiv. 21, 22). So he led them through
the depths, as through the wilderness
(comp. Isa. Ixiii. 13). Midbar, the word
translated " wUderness," is properly a
smooth stretch of down, very level, and
suited for sheep-walks.

Yer. 10. — ^And he saved them from the
hand of him that hated them. The Pharaoh
of the Exodus, whose "hatred" had been
shown by bis oppression (Exod. ii. 23;
iii. 9 ; v. 6 — 19), his prolonged refusal to
let Israel go, and final pursuit of tliem, and
attempt to destroy them on the western
shore of the Red Sea (Exod. iiv. 5—10).
And redeemed them from the hand of the
enemy. The deliverance from Egypt, typi-
fying man's deliverance from sin, is con-
stantly spoken of as a " redemption " (Pss.
Ixiiv. 2 ; ovii. 2 ; Exod. vi. 6, 7 ; xv. 16, etc.).

Yer. 11. — And the waters covered their
enemies (see Exod. xiv. 28—30; xv. 10).
There was not one of them left. The words
of Exod. xiv. 28 (last clause) are almost
exactly followed. (On the true meaning of
the expression, see the ' Pulpit Commen-
tary' on Exod. xiv., p. 314.)

Yer. 12. — Then believed they his words.
Bo in Exod. xiv. 31, " The people feared the
Lord and believed the Lord " — believed,
that ia, when they could no longer dis-



believe. They sang his praise. The allu-
sion is to the " Song of Moses " (Exod. xv.
1 — 18), In which the Israelites generally
joined (Exod. xv. 1, 20).

Yer. 13. — They soon forgat his works;
literally, they hatted and forgat his marks.
Their gratitude and devotion were short-
lived. They almost immediately forgot the
omnipotence and extreme goodness of Ood
towards them. They " murmured " at
Marah (Exod. xv. 24), complained in the
wilderness of Sin (Exod. xvi. 3), " lusted "
(Numb. xi. 4), " tempted God," eto. They
waited not for his counsel ; i.e, "they did
not wait for the development of God's plans
respecting them, preferring (ver. 43) their
own counsel" (Kay).

Yer. 14. — But lusted exceedingly in the
wilderness; literally, " lusted a lust." The
expression is taken from Numb. xi. 4, where
it is translated in the Authorized Version
by " fell a - lusting." The lust was for
" flesh," and for " the fish, the cucumbers,
the melons, and the leeks, and the onions,
and the garlic, which they did eat in Egypt
freely " (Numb. xi. 5). And tempted Qod in
the desert (comp. Ps. Ixxviii. 18).

Yer. 15. — And he gave them their request.
By sending the quails (Numb. xi. 81, 82).
But sent leanness into their soul. By
" leanness " is meant dissatisfactioh or dis-
gust. After eating freely of the quails for
a full month, the food became " loathsome "
to them (Numb. xi. 20). Whether it
actually produced the pestilence which
followed (Numb. xi. 33), or whether that
was a separate and distinct affliction, it is
impossible to determine (compare, on the
whole subject, Ps. Ixxviii. 18—31, and the
comment ad Zoo.).

Yer. 16.— They envied Uoses also in the
oamp. The writer passes now to the sin of
Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, with their
followers, which was " envy " or jealousy of
the high position assigned by God himself
(Exod. iii. 10; iv. 1 — 17) to Moses and
Aarou (comp. Numb. xvL 1 — 3). These
"gainsayers" (Jude 11) maintained that
they had as much right to be priests as
Moses and Aaron, since "all the congrega-
tion was holy " (Numb. xvi. 3). And Aaron
the saint of the Lord ; or, the holy one. It
is rather Aaron's official sanctity (Lev. viit
2 — 12) than his personal holiness that is
intended. (Compare the use of the phrase
" man of God " in 1 Kings xiii. 1, 4, 6, eto.)

Yer. 17. — The earth opened and swallowed
up Dathan (see Numb. xvi. 31 — 33). And
covered the company of Abiram. It is asked
why there is no mention of Korah here, and
suggested that he owed his escape from
mention to the favouritism of the Levitioal
" temple - poets " (Oheyne). But the real
reason seems to be that Korah was not



PS. en. 1 — 48.]



THE BOOK OF PSALMS.



427



" swallowed up;" he and his company were
destroyed by fire, and are alluded to in
Ter. 18 (bo Hengstenberg).

Ver. 18.— And a fire was kindled in their
company (see Numb. xvi. 35, 40 ; ixvi. 10).
The flame burned up the wicked. Eorah
auii his " company " were more " wicked "
than Dathan, Abiram, and their followers,
since they had received a favour from God
which ought to have satisfied them (Numb,
svi. 9, 10), and since they ought to hare
been better instructed in the Law than
ordinary Israelites. Hence Korah alone is
mentioned in Jude 11.

Ver. 19. — They made a calf in Eoreb
(comp. Exod. xxxii. 4; Deut. ix. 8—16).
And worshipped the molten image; rather,
a molten image (comp. Exod. xxxii. 4, 24 ;
Deut. ii. 12, 16). The sin was not only
against the light of nature, but was ex-
pressly forbidden by the second command-
ment (Exod. XX. 4, 5).

Ver. 20. — Thus they changed their glory
into the similitude of an ox that eateth
grass; i.e. they exchanged the spiritual
revelation of Jehovah, in all his glorious
attributes, for a material emblem, which
would naturally suggest low and unworthy
thoughts of the supreme Being. So Schultz
and Oheyne. The expression, " an ox that
eateth grcui," emphasizes the contempt of
the writer for a people who could so act.
He has, probably, in hia thoughts not only
the golden oal^ but the Apis bulls of
Egypt

Ver. 21. — They forgat God their Saviour
{comp. ver. 13). "God their Saviour" is
" God who had so recently saved them out
of the hands of Pharaoh." Which had done
great things in Egypt. The allusion is
principally to the long series of " plagues."

Ver. 22. — Wondrous works in the land of
Ham (comp. Pes. Ixxviii 51; ct. 23, 27,
for the expression " land of Ham ; " and for
the "works" themselves, see Exod. vii. —
zii.). And terrible things by the Bed Sea
(see Exod. xiv. 24, 27—30).

Ver. 23. — Therefore he said that he would
destroy them; literally, and he said. On
the apostasy at Sinai, God expressed to
Moses an intention to destroy the entire
people of Israel, save only himself, and to
"make of him a great nation" (Exod.
xxxii. 10; comp. Deut. ix. 14, 25). Had
not Moses his chosen stood before him in
the breach. Moses was " chosen " by God
to lead the Israelites out of Egypt (Exod.
iii 10), and forced to accept the office
(Exod. iv. 1 — 17). When Israel angered
God at Sinai, he " stood in the gap," like
a braTe soldier guarding his city when the
■enemy has breached the wall (Exod. xxxii.
11 — 13, 31 — 34). To turn away his wrath,
4est he should destroy them. God was



ready to have destroyed all Israel, and to
have raised up a new Israel out of the
descendants of Moses, had not Moses
pleaded vrith extreme earnestness on the
people's behalf (Exod. xxxii. 32).

Ver. 24. — Yea, they despised the pleasant
land. The psalmist passes to the considera-
tion of another sin. Alter the ill report of
the spies (Numb. xiii. 27—33), the Israel-
ites " despised " the land promised to them
(Numb. xiv. 31), and relinquished all desire
for it. They were ready to have turned
back into Egypt (Numb. xiv. 3). They
believed not his word; i.e. his promise to
give them the laud (Gen. xv. 18—21;
Exod, ixiii. 31, etc.).

Ver. 25. — But murmured in their tents.
The "murmuring" intended is undoubtedly
that mentioned io Numb. xiv. 1 — 4. The
phraseology employed is from Deut. i 27.
And hearkened not unto the voice of the
Lord ; i.e. hearkened not to the many pro-
mises which God had made to drive out the
Canaanitish nations before them (Exod. iii.
17; vi. 8; xv. 15— 17, etc.).

Ver. 26. — Therefore he lifted up his hand
against them (comp. Numb. xiv. 30, mar-
ginal rendering). The phrase is used with
reference to the uplifting of the hand which
accompanied an oath. To overthrow them
in the wildtCmess (see Numb. xiv. 29, 32,
37). The death in the wilderness of the
entire generation which had set out from
Egypt, save only Joshua and Caleb, is the
"overthrow" intended.

Ver. 27. — ^To overthrow their seed also
among the nations. Like Ezekiel (Ezek.
zx. 23), the writer regards the Babylonish
captivity as in part a punishment for the
sins committed in the wilderness. And to
scatter them in the lands (comp. Lev. zxvL
33 ; Deut. xxviii. 64). The Israelites were
punished, not merely by being carried into
captivity, but by being completely broken
up as a nation, and "scattered" widely
over Western Asia — some in Gozan and on
the Khabour (2 Kings xvii 6), some in
Haran (1 Chron. v. 26), some in " the cities
of the Modes" (2 Kings xviii. 11; Tobit L
14; iii. 7), others in Babylonia (2 Kings
xxiv. 14 — 16 ; 2 Chron. xxxvi. 20 ; Bzek. i.
1 — 3, etc.). The " scattering " has in later
times increased ever more and more.

Ver. 28. — They joined themselves also
unto Baal-peor (see Numb. xxv. 3). The
exact expression used in the Pentateuch is
repeated. It signifies a mystic union, such
as was supposed to exist between a heathen
god and his worshippers, and to be kept up
by sacrificial meals and the like. "Baal-
peor" — i.e. "the Lord of Pehor" — is pro-
bably identified with Ohemosh. And ate
the sacrifices of the dead. The correspond-
ing phrase in Numbers (xxv. 2) is, "the



428



THE BOOK OP PSALMS.



[ps. oTi. 1 — 48.



BBorifieeB of their gods,'' who were " dead,"
OS opposed to the true living God.

Ver. 29. — Thus they provoked him to anger
with their inventions ; or, with their doingi.
And the plague; rather, a plague. Brajce
in upon them. The judicial slaughter in-
flicted by command of Moses (Numb. xxy.
4 — 8) is called here, as it is also in Numb,
ixv. 8, 9, 18, " a plague."

Ver. 30. — ^Then stood up Fhinehas, and
executed judgmant (see Numb. xxv. 7, 8).
Some critics, however, translate hhs< by
"mediated" (Kay, Cheyne). And so the
plague was stayed (comp. Numb. ixv. 8).

Ver. 31. — And that was counted unto
him for righteousness (comp. Numb. xxv.
11 — 13, and see also Eccles. xlv. 23, 24;
1 Mace. ii. 26, 54). ITnto all generations for
evermore. The praise awarded to Phine-
has, here and in Numb, xxv., is an ever-
lasting testimony to him, though the " ever-
lasting priesthood" of Numb. xxv. 13 has
passed away.

Ver. 32. — They angered him also at the
waters of strife; or, "at the waters of
Meribah " (Revised Version, Kay, Chevne) ;
comp. Numb. xx. 2, 10, 13. So that it went
ill with Hoses for their sakes. Moses was
not punished for the people's sin, but for
his own sill (Numb. xx. 10 — 12), to which
theirs led The expression, "for their
sakes," is used looiely (comp. Deut. i. 37 ;
iii 26).

Ver. 33. — Because they provoked his
spirit, so that he spake unadvisedly with
his lips. One man's sin often leads to
anotlier's, but does not necessitate it. The
people "provoked Moses' spirit" by their
murmurs and reproaches (Numb. xx. 3 — 5).
Moses, being provoked, made his rash
utterance (Numb. xx. 10). He was vexed,
impatient, carried away by a gust of pas-
sion, and made the unfitting speech, " Hear
now, ye rebels; must we fetch you water
out of the rook ? " speaking as if the power
were his own.

Ver. 34. — ^They did not destroy the nations,
concerning whom the Lord commanded them.
This is reckoned as another sin. Israel, once
eomiortably settled in Palestine, with sufS-
oieut room for its numbers, did not carry
out the Divine command to "destroy," or
"cast out," the Canaanitish nations, but was
content to share the land with them. " The
childien of Benjamin did not drive out the
Jebusites who inhabited Jerusalem " (Judg.
i. 21); "neither did Muoasseh drive out the
inhabitants of Beth-shean and her towns,
nor Taanach and her towns; nor the in-
habitants of Dor and her lowns " (Judg. i.
27); "neither did Bphraim drive out the
Canaanites that dwi It in Gezer " (Judg. i.
29); nor "Zebulon the inhabitants of
Kitron, nor the inhabitants of Nahalol "



(Judg. i. 30) ; " neither did Asher drive out
the inhabitants of Accho" (Judg. i. 31);
nor "Naphtali the inhabitants of Beth-
shemesh and Beth-anatb " (Judg. i. 33) ; nor
Dan the Amorites, who "would dwell in
Mount Heres in Aijalon, and in Shaalbim"
(Judg. i. 35). It was not compassion that
restrained them, but love of ease, idleness,
one of the seven deadly sins; and tlie
results were those described in the next
verse.

Ver. 35. — But were mingled among the
heathen^ and learned their works. This
was the effect of the continuous contact.
" Evil communications corrupted good man-
ners." The command to exterminate, which
to modems seems so terribly severe, and
almost cruel, was undoubtedly based upon
God's foreknowledge of the fact, that other-
wise there would be contact, and if contact,
then contamination. (For the actual fiict,
see Judg. ii. 11—13, 19; iii. 6, 7; vi. 25;
X. 6, etc.)

Ver. 36. — And they served their idols :
which were a snare unto them; or, which
became a mare unto them. The idols
worshipped were especially Baal and Ash-
toreth — the nature-god and nature-goddess,
sometimes identifiud with the lun and
moon. These alone are mentioned in the
time of the Judges. Afterwards, how-
ever, Ohemosh, Molecb, Bemphan, the god»
of Syria, and perhaps Ammon of Egypt,
were added to the catalogue (1 Kings xi.
7; 2 Kings xxi. 19; 2 Chron. xzviiL 23;
Acts vii. 43).

Ver. 37. — Yea, they sacrificed their 8on»
and their daughters unto devils. The
Moloch sacrifices of children by their
parents are evidently intended (comp. Lev.
xviii. 21 ; Deut. xviii. 10 ; 2 Kings iii. 27 ;
Jei-. vii. 31 ; Ezek. xxiii. 37, etc.). (For
the identitication of the false gods of the
heathen with " devils," comp. Lev. xvii. 71 ;
Dent, xxxii. 17; 2 Chron. xi. 15; 1 Oor.
X. 20, 21.) It is argued by some that
the use of the word " devils," or " demons,"
here does not imply that the objects of thfr
worship were evil spirits. But it is difiScult
to see what else can be meant.

Ver. 38. — And shed innocent blood, even
the blood of their sons and of their daughters.
Infants, who could have committed no
actual sin, were the ordinary victims in the
Moloch sacrifices (see Jarchi on Jer. vii,
31; Diod. Sic, xx. 14; DoUinger, 'Jnden-
thum nnd Heidenthum,' i. 427, Engl,
trans.). Whom they sacrificed unto the idols
of Canaan. Bloody offerings of tl lis horribl»
kind were made, not only to Moloch, but
also to Baal (Jer. xix. 5), to (Jhemosh (2:
Kings iii. 27), and perhaps to other deities.
And the land was polluted with blood. Con-
trary to the commandment given in Deut.



PS. ovi. 1 — 48.]



THE BOOK OF PSALMS.



42S



xxxy. 33, "Ye shall not pollute the land
wherein ye are." The "innocent blood"
shed in the land is often declared to have
been the especial cause of God's anger
iigainst Israel, and of hia final casting
away of his inheritance (2 Kings xxiv. 4;
Isa. lis. 7 : Jer. vil. 6 ; xxii. 3, 17, etc.).

Ver. 89. — Thus were they defiled with their
own works, The heathen " works," which
they adopted from them (ver. 35), had
become " their own works," and made them
a "defiled" and "polluted" people. And
went a- whoring with their own inventions ;
i.e. "becamespirituallyadnlteroua," deserted
God, and were unfaitliful to him (comp.
Ezek. xxiii. 2—21 ; Hos. ii. 2—5).

Ver. 40. — Therefore was the wrath of the
Lord kindled against his people (comp. Ps.
Ixxviii. 58, 59). Insomuch that he abhorred
•his own inheritance (see Ps. Ixxviii. 62).
It justly increased God's anger that
the sinners were his own people, his own
inheritance.

Ver. 41. — ^And he gave them into the
hand of the heathen. This is the great
lesson taught by Jewish history, and
especially impressed upon us by Judges
and Chronicles. When a nation sins, it is
delivered over to its enemies, partly for
punishment, partly to lead it to repent-
ance. Israel was delivered into the hand,
first, of Mesopotamia (Judg. iii. 10), then
of Hoab (Judg. iii. 12), next of the
Philistines (Judg. iii. 31), then of the
-Canaanites (Judg. iv. 2), later on of Midian
(Judg. vi. 1), still later of Ammon (Judg.
X. 7 — 18), and then of the Philistines onoe
more (Judg. xiii. 1}— on each occasion
because of some flagrant sins, and suffered
chastisement until it repented. So we are
told in Chronicles with respect to the in-
vasions of Shisbak (2 Chron. xii. 2 — 5), of
Pul (1 Chron. v. 25, 26), of Tiglath-pileser
(2 Onron. xxviii. 19, 20), and of Nebuchad-
nezzar (2 Chron. xxxvi. 13 — 17), that they
were on account of the people's transgres-
sions. God " slew " them, that they might
"seek him," and the ordinary result was,
that they " turned themselves, and inquired
after God." And they that hated them
ruled over them, Chushan-rishathaim for
eight years (Judg. iii. 8), Bglon for eighteen
(Judg. iii. 14), Jabin for twenty (Judg. iv.
3), the Midianites for seven (Judg. vi. 1),
the Ammonites for eighteen (Judg. x. 8),
the Philistines for forty (Judg. xiii. 1).

Ver. 42.— Their enemies also oppressed
them (see Judg. iv. 8 ; x. 8 ; 1 Sam. ix. 16 ;
etc.). And they were brought into subjeotion
under their hand. (For pictures of the
"subjection," see Judg. iv. 6 — 11; 1 Sam,
xiii. 19, 20.)

Ver. 43.— Many times did he deliver them.
By Othniel (Judg. iii. 9), by Ehud (Tudg.



iii. 15—29), by Shamgar (Judg. iii. 31), by
Deborah and Barak (Judg. iv. 4 — 24), by
Gideon (Judg. vii. 19 — 25), by Jephthah
Judg. xi. 12 — 33), bv Samson (Judg. xv.
(8—20), and finally by David (2 Sam. v.
22—25). But they provoked him with their
counsel ; rather, tliey were rebellious in their
courifel (see the Revised Version). And
were brought low for their iniquity; rather,
in their iniquily (comp. Lev. xxvi. 39).

Ver. 44. — Nevertheless he regarded their
affliction ; or, " he saw them in their
trouble," i.e. he looked on them, and had
regard to them (sej 2 Kings xvii. 13; 2
Chron. xxxvi. 15). When he heard their
cry. As God " heard the cry " of his
people, when they sutfered oppression in
Egypt (Exod. ii. 23; iii. 7, 9), so also in
their other oppressions (Judg. iii. 9, 15 ; iv.
3; vi. 6; X. 10; 1 Sam. xii. 10, 11, etc.),
if they did but humble themselves and
"cry" to him, lie always hearkened and
gave them deliverance (1 Chron. v. 20;
2 Chron, xii. 7; xiv. 11, 12; xx. 4—24;
xxxii. 20, 21 ; xxxiM. 11—13).

Ver. 45. — And he remembered for them
his covenant. According to the promise in
Lev. xxvi. 42. And repented according to
the multitude of his mercies (oomp. Exod.
xxxii. 14 ; 2 Sam. xxiv. 16 ; 1 Ohron. xxi.
15; Jer. xxvi. 19, etc). The expression
is anthropomorphic, and must be understood
so as not to clash with the declaration,
" God is not a man, tihat he should repent "
(1 Sam, XV. 29).

Ver. 46. — He made them also to be pitied
of all those that carried them captives,
Solomon had prayed that so it might be
(1 Kings viii. 50). The fact that com-
passion was shown to many of the captives
appears from 2 Kings xxv. 27 — 30 ; Dan, i,
8—5, 19; ii. 49; iii. 30; vi. 28; Ezra i.
4—6; Neh. i. 11; ii. 1—8.

Ver. 47. — The historical portion of the
psalm here ends, and the writer, in a brief
epilogue, returns to the topio of prayer (see
vers. 4, 5), only substituting now for the
personal supplications of the prologue, a
general prayer for the entire nation, and
especially for its deliverance from captivity.
"It can scarcely be doubted," as Dean
Johnson well observes, "that the words of
ver. 47 refer to deliverance from the Baby-
lonish captivity," which was the only one
that involved the dispersion of the whole
people, and the suspension of the liturgioal
offering of thanks and praise.

Ver. 47. — Saveus, Lordonr God. Contrast
with this the " remember me" of ver. 4. The
review of the national history has quickened



430



THE BOOK OF PSALMS.



[P8. an, 1 — 48l



the pBalmist'B sympathies and widened them.
Previously he prayed only for himself. Now
it will not content him unless the people
generally are "saved." And gather ns
from among the heathen. (On the wide
dispersion of the Israelites at the time of
the Babylonian captivity, see the comment
on vcr. 27.) To give thanks unto thy holy
Name, and to triumph in thy praise. This
is spoken of as the consequence of the
gathering together. Dispersion could not,
of course, prevent the rendering; of praise
and thanks by individual Israelites (Dan.
vi. 10) ; but it had stopped the united
liturgical expression of them. On the
restoration of the Israelites to their own
land, this was resumed (Ezra iii. 8 — 11).



Ver. 48. — Blessed be the Lord 0od ot
Israel from everlasting to everlasting.
This verse is not so much a part of the
particular psalm, as a mark that here another
Book of the Psalms has reached its ci in-
clusion (comp. Pss. xli. 13 ; Izzii. 19 ;
Ixxxix. 52). The form has, however, been
modified so as to make it run on smoothly
with the Terse immediately preceding.
And let all the people say. In their praises
and thanks to God (see ver. 47). Amen.
Praise ye the Lord. The other terminal
psalms end with " Amen and Amen ; " hero
alone do we have "Amen. Praise ye the
Lord," the intention being evidently that
the last words of the psalm should be aa
eoho of the first (see ver. X),



HOMniETIOS.

Vers. 1 — 6. — 2%« spirit o/godlmesa. This, under all dispensations, is —

L Thk spieit of thankfulness. (Ver. 1.) The godly man is he in whose mouth

the praise of the Lord is found continually, because the spirit of gratitude is deep in

his heart.
n. The spibit of teustfulnbss. (Ver. 1.) " His mercy endureth for ever.'' To

what the past has witnessed the future will testify. "Surely goodness and mercy

shall follow," etc. (Ps. zxiii.).

III. The bpieit op bevbbenok. (Ver, 2.) The godly man stands uncovered, awed,
filled with a sense of the nearness and greatness of Ood, sensible of the wonderful
works of his holy and mighty hand. This whole world is the temple of God, and
every act of ours should be a sacrifice.

IV. Thk 8PIBIT OF obedience. (Ver. 3.) The godly man is earnestly desirous of
" keeping judgment and doing righteousness," of preserving inward integrity and
bringing forth its fruits; and this because (1) it is a blessed thing to be right; (2)
filial obedience secures the loving favour of the Divine Father ; (3) it is attended with
a variety aud continuity of blessings ; it brings a large reward.

V. The spieit of ooNsciotrs dependence on Gk)D. (Ver. 4.) He who is " of God "
knows well that it is only as God enlarges and enriches him that he will be blessed
indeed; therefore he lifts his heart in daily prayer for God's "remembrance" and his
" salvation." He knows the need of perpetual supplies and of frequent interposition
from above.

VL The spieit of sacbbd, booial jot. (Ver. 6.) It is not a truly Christian spirit
to restrict our hope and our joy to our own well-being. This should continually
overflow ; it should spread and circulate far and wide. We should enter into the spirit
of Moses and of Paul in their magnanimity (see Exod. xzxii. 31, 32 ; Rom. ix. 3).
Our joy is never so pure, so elevating, so noble, as when we are sharing it with others,
and are rejoicing in their blessedness as well as, and as much as in our own

Vers. 6 — 39. — Sin in many forms. It is not only the psalmist who says, " I will
confess my transgressions unto the Lord" (Ps. xxxii. 5). It becomes us all to say,
•' We have smned ... we have committed iniquity ' (ver. 6). Sin takes many
forms, as this psalm makes clear. We may be guilty of —

T. Sinful failubb to undeestand. (Ver. 7.) As the children of Israel " under-
stood not God's wonders in Egypt," so we guiltily fail to recognize the wonderful
working of the Divine hand, not only in human history and in domestic experience, but
also in the daily and hourly ministries of nature, and in the ordering of our individual
life (see Jas. i. 16, 17).

II. Sinful foegetfulnbss. (Vers. 7, 21, 22.) 1. We also " remember not the
multitude of his mercies," oblivious of all that God has been doing for us and in ua



PS. cvi. 1— 48.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 431



through all our days. 2. We are too ready to forget the special deliverances which,
at the time of their ocourreace, we resolved to keep continually before our eyes; we
allow them to be hidden, and to disappear beneath the engagements and excitements
that supervene.

III. The sin of fitfulnbss. (Vers. 12, 13.) Is not the Dirine Master grieved
with us when he has to think of us as he did of his own apostle, who ia a few hours
passed from loud profession to positive denial (see John xiii. 36-38)? Spiritual
tiokleness is a very grave offence j it is also particularly injurious.

IV. Thk sot of unrestrained appetite. (Ver. 14.) In this case it led to
unhallowed importunity; to a request that became an impious demand, and that
brought down retribution (ver. 15). More often such "lust* of the flesh conducts to
other evils — to bodily deterioration, to loss of self-respect, to injury wrought on others,
to ruin and to death.

V. The sin of envt. (Vers. 16—18.) To envy those who are distinguished from
ourselves by the favour of God is most unworthy and culpable. Instead of being
grateful to the Divine Giver for bestowing so great a blessing as a strong and helpful
man, we cherish a spirit that is mean and selfish. It is a common but a serious sin.

VI. The bin of idolatry. (Vers. 19, 20, 28.) The guilt of idolatry is in the
substitution of the creature for the Creator, rendering that honour to the visible or the
human which is due only to the Divine (see Rom. i. 19 — 25). '

VII. The bin of unbkuef ; leading here (vers. 24, 25) to discontent, to the loss of
inheritance, to cowardly inactivity; leading, in our case, to the neglect of God's Word
and will, to continuance in spiritual obduracy, to a fatal forfeiture of eternal lif«.

VIII. Imperfect obedience, warfare, separation. (Vers. 34, 35.) (1) To leave
undone any duty of any kind to which our Lord is calling us, in discharge of what we
owe to ourselves, or to our neighbours, or to our kindred, or to our race ; (2) to fail to
subdue and cast forth from our soul the evil dispositions and unholy principles which
are there, when Christ claims us as his own; (3) to admit to close familiarity those
who are alien in spirit'and opposite in belief to ourselves ; — this is to fall short of " the
will of God in Christ Jesus, and it is to lay for ourselves a " snare," through which
we may fall into grievous wrong.

Ver. 15.^ — Outward prosperity, inward decline. Let no one think that Ck)d's
goodness to us is to be measured by the degree in which he satisfies our craving. It
may be that the worst thing that can happen to us is to secure (1) the bodily grati-
fication, or (2) the unhallowed ambition, or (3) the unfavourable friendship on which
we have set our hearts. God's truest kindnesses are often found in his withholding
or his removing the objects of our regard. He " breaks our schemes of earthly joy,"
that we " may find our all " in him and his service.

Ver. 20. — Ow Ood our glory. The "glory" of Israel was found, as this verse,
indicates, in the God whom her sons worshipped ; not in her cultivated fields, not in
her varied scenery, not in her peculiar civilization, not even in her temple and its
rites, but in her God. No other contemporary nation worshipped one, pure, righteous,
pitiful God, who sought the well-being, material and spiritual, of all his children.
Well may we, to whom God has revealed himself in Jesui Christ, claim that our God
is the glory of our land.

Vers. 44, 46. — The hope of the exUe. Israel in exile had no hope at all, but in the
mercy and the faithfulness of her redeeming God (Lev. xxvi. 41, 42). When a human
soul is far away from God, and can sing no song of joy in the " strange land " of sinful
alienation ; when it is brought very low with a sense of Divine disapproval, and of a
future which it dare not face ; when it shrinks from the society of those with whom it
once had sweet and sacred fellowship, and shuns the eye of human piety ; — there is one
thing to remember, one refuge in which to hide — the boundless mercy and the inviolable
Word of God. That will not fail a human soul at its very worst. Up that pathway
there is an escape from the " lowest hell " to the highest heaven.



432 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. ovi. 1—48.



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Vers. 1 — 48. — The " nevertheless " of OotPs mercy. This is actually expressed in
ver. 44, but it is the theme of the whole psalm. Note concerning it —

I. It implies pebvious and terrible pbovooation. And, indeed, there had been
such : 1. Jn sins actually committed. What a catalogue of them the psalm contains 1
Sin at the very beginning (ver. 7). The former psalm reviewed the history of God's
people as a subject for adoring praise, because of God's never-failing care. Here, also,
a " Hallelujah ! " is raised, in view of the same history, because of God's never-failing
forgiveness. And the sins that needed this forgiveness are confessed here — the short-
lived gratitude (ver. 13); the shameful murmuring (ver. 15); the wicked envy (ver.
16) ; the disgraceful idolatry (ver. 19) ; their anbelief (ver. 24) ; their sacrifices to
iBaal-peor (ver. 28) ; their murmuring at Meribah (ver. 32) ; their disobedience (ver.
34). What a melancholy list it is ! And this is not all ; for see : 2. Vie mercies of
God despised. (Ver. 13.) 3. Their treatment of Moses. (Vers. 16, 23, 32.) 4, Their
hardened resistance, so that God's punishments had no power to cliange their evil
•will (cf. John i. 5). Yes, there had been provocation indeed.

II. It fboolaims the infinite compassion and forbearance of God. Sin is the
dark foil on which the brightness of God's mercy is all the more seen. That is why
the angels of God can never render the praises of the redeemed. What a marvel it
is that he should have spared Israel! It is equalled only by the marvel of his
sparing us.

III. When the soul becomes conscious of all this, it is overwhelmed nr
OEATiTtTDE, LOVE, AND PRAISE. See the Opening of this psalm and its close. Thus is
God's mercy the spring and abiding impulse of the new Hfe unto him. See the well-
known verse —

** Oh the sweet wonders of that cross

On which my Saviour groaned and died I
Her noblest life my spirit draws
From his dear wounds and bleeding sida."

S. C.

Ver. 3. — The blessedness of the holy life. I. Such life is possible. It would not
be spoken of here and throughout the Scriptures as it is, if it were only an ideal but
not a possible life. Surely, if sin be the abominable thing which God hates, he must
have contemplated, in his redemptive work, our deliverance from it. What is the first
and great commandment, but a command to cherish that spirit towards God which is
-the sprins of the holy life ?

II. It is entered into bt a definite way. 1. By self-surrender, which consists
in the abandoning of whatever we know to be contrary to the will of God ; giving it
up, though it be dear as the right hand or eye ; and in the surrender of all our powers
and possessions to the absolute control and direction of God. 2. Then, when we have
thus given ourselves wp to Qod, we are to believe that he accepts us, and we are to Iceep
trusting him, day by day and hour by hour, to cleanse us by the blood of Christ from
all sin. If we will persevere in this surrender and trust, nothing can hinder our
entering into this holy life. Then —

UI. It is most blessed. 1. For what it escapes: the misery of a condemning
conscience; of paralyzed power — for none can effectually work for God if they are
al)iding in sin; of knowing that your infiuence has been evil rather than good; of
God's face hidden from you. 2. For what it wins : the blessedness of inward peace ;
of confidence towards God ; of power with God for man, and with man for God ; of the
possession of God's loving-kindness, which is better than life (Ps. Ixiii.), and of assured
hope. When the people of God live this life, then there will be a turning to God on
tlie part of the world, as now there is not, and for long ages has not been. For men
will see that God's people possess a secret spring of joy, and peace, and purity, and
■strength, and they will come to covet it with a great desire (vers. 4, 5). — S. C.

Vers. 4, 5. — A holy aspiration. It is threefold (see ver. 5), and it is preceded by



PS. cvi. 1—48.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 4SS

earnest prayer for that grace of God which, in the psalmist's belief, was indispensable
for its fulfilment.

I. The aspiration. L " That I may see the good of thy chosen." He regards God's
people as the subject of a Divine choice; as, indeed, they are. There were many
others who, to human eyes, seemed more worthy and more likely to bring glory to
God. But Grod had chosen them. And he had appointed "good" for them. Good
outwardly, in the possession of the promised land ; good inwardly, in the possession
of God's Holy Spirit and the Divine Law written on their hearts; good inatru-
mentally, in the blessed influence they should exert on others (cf. Ps. IxviiA And tJI
this abiding evermore. And this he craved to see ; that is, to share in. It is a gocc
desire. 2. " That I may rejoice in the gladness of thy nation." He believed bTael to
be God's nation ; as, indeed, the true Israel of God are. And he believed that the
mark of their life was gladness. In their best days Israel was a glad people (?8. cxiiv.
16). And the Israelite, indeed, is ever a happy man. We are made for gladness —
the ways of the Lord lead surely to it ; but men do not believe this. Neverthelesfs
these " ways are ways of pleasantness," etc. (Prov. iii. 17). And in this gladness tl<e
psalmist would share. 3. " That I may glory with thine inheritance." Note, agaH^
the title given to the people of God. They will glory in God himself, for he is their
" exceeding joy ; " in what he has done for them, in them, through them. What
themes for glorying there are in all this I " Worthy is the Lamb," etc. (Bev. v. 12).
Now, this holy aspiration is preceded 1^ yer. 4.

II. The fbateb for what is needed for its fulfilment. He prays : 1. " Bemember
me, Lord, loith," etc. What a humble prayer it is I as if he feared he might be
overlooked and forgotten, and felt that he deserved to be. And what a holy prayer I
And it is one that has never yet been refiised. 2. " Visit me," etc. He would that
Gk)d wouiid have compasion on him, and actually bring him his salvation. — S. 0.

Yer. IS. — " But sent leanness into their sotd." Eibroth-Hattaavah, or "the gravei
of lust." So the place has been named, for it testified to the terrible truth declared in
our text. The history to which it refers is familiar enough. And what followed for
Israel has followed again and again, and does so still.

I. See instances of rr. 1. Jsrad here. The leanness in their souls was caused by •
sense of God's condemnation — they knew they had done wrong ; terror of his wrath ;
hardening of the^ hearts in sin ; the plague that followed. 2. Israt^s desiring a king
(Hos. xiii. 11). 3. Judas. He had plotted and planned, and thought success was sure;
but when he saw Jesus was condemned, those thirty pieces of silver burnt him as with
the fires of hell. 4. 2%e rich fool. His desire for wealth had been granted ; but the Lord
had said, "Thou fool" (cf. also 2 Sam. xiii. 15). The full purse and the lean soul are




xxi. 20). ^ .

II. The causes op it. 1. Not necessary. If God give us our heart's desire, that
need not send leanness into our soul. Of. Ps. cxvi.: there was no "leanness" there,
but the reverse. And, indeed, the sense of God's favour and help does aid the soul'i
true life. 2. But are fownd in the motive of the prayer, which may be sinful and
selfish only; and in the use we make of the answer. If we love God's gifts better than
the Giver of them, then "leanness" will be sure to follow.

TTT. The lessons of it. The lines which follow tell them —

" Not what we wish, but what we want,
Oh let thy grace supply I
The good, unasked, iu mercy grant;
The Ul, though asked, deny."

8. O.

Ter. 1.— Goodness u graciousnesi. "For he is gracious" (Prayer-book Version).
The term which the Authorized Version and Eevised Version render "good, th«
Prayer-book renders "gracious;" and so Is BUg^ested what is perfectly true when
applied to God, that goodness is graciousness. The goodness of God dwelt on in this

PSALMS — II. "



4S4 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [w. ovi. 1—48

psalm is his patience and long-suffering gentleness witli his most trying and wilful
people. Ps. cv. treated Israel chiefly as the passive recipient of Divine favom'. Ps.
cvi. portrays Israel as continually set in opposition to Jehovah ; faithful only whec
afflicted, and succoured only to apostatize again. Eight illustrative instances are given.

I. GtooBNESs IN THE LiOHT OF HAN'S RELATION TO GoD. In that light goodness
is rightnes$; it is accordance with an authoritative standard. A good man is a good
creature who is right with his Creator, a good servant who is obedient to his master,
• good son who does the will of his father. This being man's goodness, and man's
idea of goodness, he tries to transfer it to God, who then becomes the eternally right
One. The " Judge of all the earth does right." God is good in the sense of being
right, in the sense of willing that which is right, and in the sense of approving those
who do the right. " Righteous in all his ways, and holy in all his works."

n. Goodness in the lisht of God's belations with man. In this psalm with
man corporate. But the national relations do but illustrate the personal and individual.
Here comes in a difficulty. God, the infinitely right One, dealing with creatures who
were right in all purpose and endeavour, would not need to show the special character-
istics that are gathered into the word " gracious." God had to deal with a nation
that was wayward, wilful, and self-pleasing, with a stiff-necked generation, one that
was troublesome as any spoiled child. Goodness in dealing with such a nation must
show itself as patience, pitifulness, considerateness, gentleness, or, to sum up in one
word, " graciousness." Illustrate it as (1) goodness that can chastise ; (2) that can
limit chastisement ; (3) that can restore, and give fresh opportunity ; (4) that cannot
be wearied out ; (6) that gives the fullest influence to all qualifying considerations ;
(6) that keeps on hoping for the best, and working for it. It may also be shown that
the gracious goodness of God makes necessary judgments inflicted on some edncational
•nd moral forces for the warning and guiding of all, — B. T,

Ver. 7. — The roots of disahedienee. It is not sufficient to say that the root of dis-
obedience is " wilfulness." Fairly reading human nature, we can find other roots from
wliich it springs. In the history of the people Israel we can see that they did not
always sin from sheer wilfulness. Sometimes they had really lost their faith-hold of
Jehovah, and som«times the burdens and trials of the way brought them into condi-
tions of despondency ; and unbelief and despondency became roots of disobedience. It
is nsual to treat the conduct of the Israelites without giving due consideration to
their difficult, perilous, perplexing, and wearisome circumstances. Sightly viewed, it
would have been the supreme human marvel if they had not failed in obedience and
trust. Think what a mighty host it was, yet how imperfectly organized. Think of the
strain of their manifest peril at the Bed Sea, and the exceeding toil and weariness of
their climb up the wadies to Sinai. Think of the diffictdty, in that arid region, of
providing food and water for so many creatures. Think kindly of them, and though
the sense of their sin is not lightened, considerateness for the sinners is nourished.
The disoliedience that roots in unbelief, or in despondency, puts men into the pitiful-
ness and mercy of their God.

I. Disobedience booted in unbelief. Here a distinction is necessary. Here is
an unbelief which is wilful, which a man chooses, and for which he seeks reasons, and
this is wholly sinful, and needs humbling punishment. And there is an unbelief
which is the natural human response to difficult and trying circumstances, which seem
to force doubts upon us. All are liable to this kind of unbelief in sharing the trials of
human life. But there is a Divine gentleness ic the dealing with the disobedience
which has its root in this unbelief.

II. DisoBEDiBNOE BOOTED IN DESFONDENOT. This reminds us how differently things
affect different dispositions. Some are naturally despondent. They always see the dark
sides, are ever ready to give up in despair. And this spirit often leads to failing
obedience. Men have not spirit enough to do what they ought. But God " knoweth
our frame."— B, T.

Ver. 16. — Orati/ying sinful wants create* sinful wants. " And he gave them their
desire : and sent leanness withal into their soul " (Prayer-book Version). These
people longed for food of a luxurious character ; they asked for it, received what they



M. ovi. 1— 48.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 43S

«sked, aod discovered that self-indulgence nourished appetite into passion, which
'Carried them away beyond all possibility of self-restraint. Indulgence involved loss of
moral power. Feed the body and you will inevitably starve the soul, bring " leanness
into the soul." " The gratification of wilful and presumptuous desire begets only an
intenser sense of want." Chateaubriand tells how the " Meschaceb^, soon after leaving
its source among the hills, began to feel weary of being a simple brook, and so asked
for snow from the moimtains, water from the torrents, rain from the tempests, until,
its petitions granted, it burst its bounds, and ravaged its hitherto delightsome banks.
At first the proud stream exulted in its force, but seeing ere long that it carried desola-
tion in its ilow, that its progress was now doomed to solitude, and that its waters were
for ever turbid, it came to regret the humble bed hollowed out for it by nature, the
-birds, the flowers, the trees, and the brooks, hitherto the modest companions of it)
tranquil course." In Numb. xi. 4 we are told that " the mixed multitude that was
among them fell a-lusting," and the Israelites joined them in crying for flesh to eat.
What ought they to have done ?

I. SnrruL dssibes will sometimes abisg even in good uen. Wanting what is
4iot provided, or what is contrary to the Divine will, under the urgings of bodily
passion, is a constant experience. It is even illustrated in the idea of making bread
-out of stones, to satisfy hunger, which came to Jesus in the wilderness. Every man
must take account of the fact that his bodily passions may at any time become
iemptations.

II. Sinful desibes must be bepbessed within safe limits. And this we do
by refusing to let them tay anything or do anything. Compelled silence soon weakens
ihem. That power of self-mastery a man may have and hold if he gains it in the first
occasion of straggle with uprising desires ; but it is very hard to vrin again if once it is
lost.

III. Sinful desibes indulged gain buinous mabtebt. The common law of
-wanting to do a thing again which we have once done acts in this. And all indulgence
itends to weaken moral power. Illustrated by the drunkard and by the devil-posses-
fiions (Legion) of the New Testament. — R. T.

Ver. 16. — The character of Aartm. "The saint of the Lord." Perowne renders,
•" the holy one of Jehovah." The word " saint " is equivalent to " set apart one,"
•"consecrated priest." "The term denotes ofiScial sanctity — that derived from a
Divine consecration. It will be remembered that Korah, Dathan, and Abiram denied
the privileges of the priesthood on the ground that all the congregation were holy,
•every one of them, and that Moses replied, ' The man whom the Lord doth choose,
te shall be the holy one ' " (Numb. xvi. 3 — ^7). Every man, to be studied fairly, must
be viewed both in his public and his private character. Officialism may but present
to us a character put on. It may be the fair and honest expression of what a man
really it.

I. The chabacteb of Aaeon as a man. It has been summarized in this way :
"" Aaron was of an impulsive character, leaning for the most part on his brother, but
occasionally showing, as is not infrequent with such minds, a desire to appear inde-
pendent." It must be borne in mind that Aaron received no such personal revela-
tions from God as Moses received, and that he never occupied other than a sirbordinate
l)lace, and so never felt the sanctifying pressure of supreme responsibility. He was a
man who could follow, but could not lead ; who could serve, but could not rule. There
•are such among us; men who are good and trustworthy servants, but who ruin every
business of which they have control. And these very men are often like Aaron,
hankering after the positions for which they are unfitted. There is tinder of jealousy
In such men at the success of others, which a spark will easily set alight. Aarons can
carry out ; they cannot initiate. . j , .

'II. The ohabactbr of Aaron ab a peiest. This office smted hmi jjrecisely,
■because in it he could be wholly occupied with providing details. A priest is a man
^ho is not required to have a will of his own. A course is prescribed ; he is to be
4oyal in following out that course. Aaron's official character comes out well, but it
was subject to some severe strains. He would have kept all right if things had con-
*inued in their regular routine. Routine does not weary the Aaron-type of man.



486 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. ovi. 1— 4»».



But the unusual upset him. He felt nervous. He could not decide and stand firm i.
he let others overrule him, and unduly influence him ; he could not rely on his own
judgment ; he tried to master difiSculties in the weakest of ways, by compromises,
— R.T.

Vers. 19, 20.^The sin of the golden calf. "They changed their glory for the like-
ness of an ox that eateth grass " (Revised Version). " Into the similitude of a calf
that eateth hay " (Prayer-l»ok Version). The idea is that the revelation of God as aa
unseen spiritual Being, requiring the service of righteousness, was the distinguishing
glory of Israel. But this revelation they did not rightly value, but, at the first oppor-
tunity, bartered it away for a material god, of sensual character, who was served by
the licence of self-indulgence. In this they were not merely disobedient ; they showed
their incapacity for high things, their unfitness to become the agents of God's most
gracious designs for the human race. The sin was a fourfold one.

I. It was the bin of disobedience to command. It should be clearly shown
that Israel was bound to obedience to Jehovah before the Decalogue was given. The
scene of Sinai is improperly called the giving of the Law ; it is properly the formu-
lating of the Law. The people owned allegiance to the God of their fathers, to the
God who had delivered them from Egypt ; and their willingness to obey was actually
pledged afresh before Moses ascended the mount (see Exod. xix. 7, 8). They were
bidden wait to receive a communication from God ; they disobeyed, and acted without
direction. Disobedience is often due to the restlessness that cannot wait.

II. It was the bin op unfaithfulness to trust. The spirituality of God was-
the supreme national trust. Neither Abraham, Isaac, nor Jacob ever saw God, but he
was a real Power in their lives. In Egypt God was never seen, but he did mighty
dseds. Put fully, the unity, spirituality, and holiness of Jehovah were committed to-
the care of the Abrahamic race, and that race was to preserve these truths while the
rest of the world freely experimented on constructing religions and deities for itself.
To make idolatrous images of God, the spiritual Being, was unfaithful to trust.

IIL It was the bin of "following the devices of theib own eeabts." Or
self-willedness. They asked what they liked, as if they were independent ; not what
God liked, as if they were dependent on him. The essence of sin for a creature is self-
will. Triumph over self-will is the supreme aim of religion. That golden calf was a-
self-willed thing ; as such there could be no religion in it. Through, and by means of,,
that golden calf the people did but worship themselves ; what they personified wa»
their own wUl, not God. Men deceive themselves when they fashion their own gods ;
they can only rightly take Gcod. as revealed to them.

IV. It was the sin of dibhonourino God. The symbol they chose was an insult.
True, their associations in Egypt suggested no other ; and perhaps the ox was in some-
sense their national symbol. So their god was the personified nation. The spiritual
Jehovah is degraded in men's minds when associated with a mere beast. — B. T.

Ver. 23. — Moses as mediator. " Had not Moses his chosen stood before him in the
breach, to turn away his wrath, lest he should destroy them." " The intercession of
Moses is compared to the act of a brave leader, covering with his body the breach
made in the walls of his fortress." See the figure as given in Ezek. zxii. 30. The
account of Moses' intercession is found in Exod. xxxii. 10 — 14. The point on which
we dwell is the fitness of Moses to be the mediator on this occasion.

I. The fitness ASisiNa from his official position. He was the agent appointed
by God, through whom his will might be sent to the people. He was the representa-
tive of the people, appointed by them to conduct all negotiations with Jehovah in their
name. He was the proper person ; and foreshadows the Lord Jesus Christ as revealer
of God to men, and negotiator for men with Gorl.

II. The fitness abisins from the confidenoeb Moses had won. He had gained
both power and right by his faithful service of the people, and by his holy familiarity
with God. We may say that God had proved him, and so had confidence in him.
And the people had proved him, and knew well that they had no better friend. Christ
is " beloved Son," and our best Friend.

III. The fitness arising from the personal feeling of Moses. He ww



iPB. OTi. 1— 48.J THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 437

«upremeiy indignant at tlie sin of the people ; so much so as to have lost his self*
control, and flung down the tables. That right feeling towards the sin fitted him to
mediate. He made no excuse ; he could but plead for pardon, A man with no ade-
.iquate sense of the iniquity could not have been acceptable as a mediator. But Moses
was also snpremly pitiful towards the erring people, and this gave him the fitting
tenderness in pleading for their forgiveness. So in Christ we find deepest impressions
■of the evil of sin, uniting with supreme love for the sinners.

ly. The fitness abisiko from tbe tiooub of Moseb' rule. God knew that
Moses could punish ; and if the more t^erious judgment on the sin was removed, still
ihere must be such punishment as would adequately impress the evil of the sin. Moses
was a 'fitting mediator, because God was assured that he would not neglect this educa>
4ive and disciplinary judgment. God, if we may so speak, graciously yielded to Moses'
persuasions, because he knew that his honour was safe in Moses' hands. So Christ in
iiis mediation " magnifies the Law, and makes it honourable." — B. T.

Ver. 30. — The atonement of Phinehas. (SeeNumb.xxv.il — 13.) " Phinehas, hlm-
«elf perhaps a judge in authority, became the type of a righteous zeal, exercising sum-
mary vengeance, informal and unbidden, against outrage on decency and on rever-
ence for God " (Dr. Barry). " It is a picture of the one zealous man rising up from
the midst of the inactive multitude, who sit still and make no effort." The incident
occurred toward the close of the wanderings, when the Israelites were in the neighbour-
liood of Moab. Unable t* gain the right to curse Israel — as Balaam wished, and as it
-would have paid him well to do — Balaam persuaded King Balak to allow free inter-
course between his people and them. " Let the Israelites fall into immorality and
Bin, and then their God will destroy them, and your end will be accomplished." The
scheme succeeded. The vice and iniquity of Israel was full in God's sight, and the
immediate execution of the Divine judgment was commanded. Some great public
act of vindication was called for ; such a manifest upholding of the Divine authority
and holiness as would make a sin-cover, occupy the Divine attention, gain the Divine
approval, and be a basis on which judgment might be stayed. Phinehas was the man
■to do it. A flagrant case of unlawful intercourse had occurred, and when hesaw the
wicked couple he " rose up from among the congregation, and took a javelin in his
band, and he went after the man of Israel into the tent, and thrust both of them
through, the man of Israel and the woman. So the plague was stayed from the children
of Israel."

I. Phinehas was zealous fob the honoub of Jehovah.

II. His public act op vindication made a bin-cover.

III. Because of that bin-covbe , Jehovah's judgment might be stated.

See, then, what we must look for in the great atonement, made for us by the Son
«f God, is some fltting vindication of the outraged honovu: of God our Father, and so
-restored relations. Reconciliation can only come with solemn honouring of God's
authority and claim by some public act of loyalty. Scripture presents to us different
things that made atonement. A man's prayer made atonement (case of Moses). An
act of ofiScial duty made atonement (case of Aaron). An act of judgment made atone-
ment (case of Phinehas). We are left to think what act of Christ's made atonement for
m aH—R. T.

Vers. 43, 44. — The Divine pity and patience. The exiles, when about to return to
-tbeir own land, were brought to repentance by their sense of the goodness of God to
them. In the spirit of penitence, the psalmist, a devout exile, reviews the national
tiistory, and finds that over and over again his people had to be penitent for their sins,
and over and over again their God found them space and opportunity for repentance.
Now, that exile read the national history aright, and he helps us in the endeavour to
■read our lives aright, and find in them ever-recurring proofs of the Divme pity and
patience with the wilful and the wayward. ti, ^ ^ u

I. Some of the bourobb whence come our sins. 1. Fear. Illustrate by provo-
cation at Bed Sea (ver. 7). 2. Lust. Inordinate desire. Putting God to the test
<ver. 14). Envy. 3. Story of Dathan (ver. 17). 4. Unspirituality. Incident of the
calf (ver. 19). 5. Impatience. Despising the pleasant land, because it did not come



438 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. ovi. 1— 49.

to them at once (ver. 24). 6. Licence. Case of immorality at Beth-peor (yer. 28) 7-
Distrust. Waters of strife (ver. 32). 8. Imperfect obedience, a sign of self-will. They
did not destroy the Canaanites, which they' were commanded to do (ver. 34).

IL The sorrows wbioh ocr sins have caused oood men. These help us to-
realize how bad those sins must be. See what sorrow Moses felt in connection witl»
the sin of the golden calf. See what sorrow Aaron felt in the matter of Dathan's-
rebellion. See what sorrow Phinehas felt in the matter of Baal-peor.

IlL The pitifui. patience with which God has ever dealt with odb sins.^
1. Waiting until we came to a better mind. Let evil do its own work ; it will be sure-
to punish and humble. God often does so much for us by doing nothing, leaving us-
to suffer the natural consequences of our sins. 2. Helping us by chastisements to»
come to a better mind. There may be occasions on which the infinite wisdom decides-
that it is better not to wait, because there may be active leaders in the evil, or strong:
self-will, which needs to be dealt with at once. Judgment for some, as in DathanV
case, may be chastisement for all. The worst thing that could happen to us would ho-
to be finally " let alone." If God is in our life — acting in our life — all is right, how-
ever trying the circumstances of life may be. — B. T.

Vers. 40 — 46. — Man's misery and God's comjpassion. " The design of the whol*
psalm is to awaken the people to a lively consciousness of the truth, that though therv
is much of sin in us, there is much more of grace in God ; " that " where sin abounded,,
grace did much more abound." Suggests —

I. God loves all his creatures, but hates theib bins. (Ver. 40.) That is^
he makes us feel sensible that he is for ever opposed to oiir evil conduct, and creates in.
UB a terror of the consequences of our sins — the punishment they entail.

II. Part of the punishment of sin is that we abb given over to itb-
TTBANNT. (Ver. 41.) Give ourselves over. This is a natural consequence, a Divina
law of our constitution, and is a galling and terrible penalty of the habit of transgression,.
Our passions come thus to rule over us, instead of our ruling over them.

III. When we attempt to resist this tyranny, we find that oub slavebt
18 MORE OPPRESSIVE THAN WE THOUGHT. (Ver. 42.) Men often may make som*
effort to break off from evil ways, but discover that they are under a heavier bondage-
to their sins than they had supposed. This, too, is a part of the punishment of sin —
its enfeebling, debilitating influence.

IV. Men whom Gou seems to have delivered from their sins, after a timk
RETURN TO THEIR FORMER INIQUITY. (Ver. 43.) They are then brought low, or
impoverished, or weakened — lower than they were before, because now they begin to-
lose all hope of recovery. House " swept and garnished " is prepared for the return,
of sevenfold powers of evil, that rule more absolutely than ever.

V. Such helpless misery excites the Divine compassion. (Ver. 44.) " Lik»
as a father pitieth his children, so the Lord pitieth them that fear him." God pitier
those whom he cannot save — because of their unwillingness. " How often would I have
gathered thee as a hen doth gather her chickens under her wings, and ye would not I ""

VI. God does not repent till men repent. (Ver. 45.) God does not change-
his laws to relieve the disobedient from suffering ; but when they change from dis-
obedience to obedience, the result is so great that God seems to them to have changed.
To row against the current and to row with the current seems like rowing upon »
different river. — S.



flOMILETICAL INDEX



TO



THE BOOK OF PSALMS.



VOLUME IL



PSALM LVL

nmn rAoi
The ExpreBBion and the Result of

Faith ... ... ... ... 2

The Experience of God's Mercy a

Ground for Hope ... ... 3

Fear and Deliverance ... ... 4

Vows ... ... ... ... 5

The Struggle and Victory of Faith ... i



PSALM LVIl

One of God's Bescues ... m.

" Mercy and Truth "
Expectation and Assurance of De-
liTerance ... ...

PSALM LVIIL

Unjust Judges

A Bold Protest against Unrighteous
Judges ... ... ...



PSALM LIX.




Waiting upon God .„


•••


PSALM LX.




Despondency and its Antidote


■ ••


Assurance in Prayer ...


•••


PSALM LXL





The Power of Prayer in Trouble
A Cry from the Wilderness



10

a

13



16
17



18

18



PSALM

THEHI

A Psalm of Testimony

Waiting ...

Steadfastness

"Laid in the Balance"

Omnipotence

Dmger and Safety



LXIL



20
21

21
21
22

22



PSALM LXIIL

An InTOoation and a Vovr ... ...

Soul-thirst ... ... ...

Sublime Things ... ... .»

PSALM LXIV.

"Bitter Words"

" Man's Inhumanity to Man " ...

Danger and Faith ... ...

PSALM LXV.

The Prlvflege and Duty of Prayer ...

The LesBonB of Harvest ... ...

Harvest Thanksgiving ... ...

Defeat and Victory ... ...

Thanksgiving for Com ... ...

Beasona for praising God ... ...

PSALM LXVL

Holy Fear a Seasonable Element of

True Spiritual Worship...

Prayer hindered by Allowed Sin ...



23

25
25



27

28
28



32
32
33
33
34



86
37



INDEX.



THEME

God in History ... ... ...

The Best Evidence for Christ

Worship...

An Inyitatiou to study God's Mar-
vellous Works towards Men

Vows fulfilled and Experiences re-
lated ••• ... ... ...

PSALM LXVIL

" God be merciful," etc. ... ...

A Song of Salvation ... ...

TJuiversal Joy ... ... ...

A Missionary Psalm ... m.

PSALM LXVIIL

Joy in God ... ... ...

"A Plentiful Rain" ...

The Ark and Christ ... ...

Comfort for the Desolate ... ...

God's Love-gifts to his People ...
The Ascension
God's Gentleness ...
The Entry of God into his Sanctuary

on Zion ... ... ...

PSALM LXIX.

The Psalmist in Three Aspects m.

x^PAlSS ■>■ ■•• ••• •«•

Three Greatest Things ... ...

Suffering and Prayer ... ...

Joyful Hopes and Vows of Thanks-
giving for Salvation ... ...



" Help I'



PSALM LXX.



PSALM LXXl



Strong Confidence ... ...

Godly Old Age ...

The Suffering Bighteous Man in his

Old Age

Persistent Hope and Increasing Praise

PSALM LXXIL

Messiah's Beign ... ... „•

The Glory of Christ's Kingdom m.
Christ on the Tlirone
The Effect of the Anger of a perfectly
Bighteous King



PAGE

37
38
39

39

40



41
41

42
42



47
48
49
50
50
51
51

62



56
57
57
58

58



59



61
63

63

61



66

68
68



PSALM LXXIIL

THEHE rASB

Divine Guidance ... ... m. 73

Strength in Weakness ... ... 74

The Grievous Conflict of the Flesh
and the Spirit, and the Glorious

Conquest of the Spirit at the Last 76

Asaph's Trial and Deliveraaoe ... 76

Narrow Escapes ... ... ... 77

Much Ease, much Peril ... ... 77

The Doings of Ungodly Prosperity ... 78

Supreme Deli°:ht in God ... ... 79

The Failing Flesh and the Strengthen-
ing God ... ... ... 80

Drawing Near to God, a Good Thing 80

The Solution of a Great Problem .m 81

PSALM LXXIV.

God's Cause that of his People ... 84

Hell's Carnival ... ... ... 86

" We see not our Signs " ... ... 87

Summer Teachings ... ... 88

Winter ... ' ... ... ... 89

The Destructive Work of Man and the

Constructive Work of God u. 90



PSALM LXXV.

The Essence, Certainty, and Preciona-

ness of Divine Bevelatlon ... 92

The Undaunted One ... ... 92

The Uplifting God 93

Help laid on One that is Mighty ... 93

The Uplifted Horn and the Stiff Neck 94

The Lord's Cup for ns ... ... 94

A Pious Buler's Purposes and Con-
fidences ... ... ... 95

The Divine Name and Names ... 96

Eeasonings from the Divine Activity 97

God's Set Time for Judgment ... 97

The Self-lifted Horn ... ... 98

Divine Promotions through Divine

Providences ... ... ... 98

The Dregs for the Wicked... ... 99

"The God of Jacob" ... „. 99

Horns cut off ... ... ... 100

The Bighteous Judgment of God ... 101

PSALM LXXVL

The Will of Man and the Will of God 102

The Triumphs of God ... ... 103

Great because Known ... ... 104

The Fear of God ... ... „. 104



INDEX.



iU



THEKS

"The Wrath of Man"
Ways of knowing God
The Localization of God



PAGE

105
105
105



The Betuming Conqueror; or, God

glorified in hia Triumph over Evil 106

The Power of the Lord's Bebuke ... 107

The Divine Anger ... ... 107

With God Judgment is Salvation ... 108

Man's Wrath bringing Praise to God 108

Following up our Vows ... ... 109

A Psalm of Tiiamph «, ». 109

PSALM LXXVn.

The Temptation and the Befnge ... 112
The Profound Mystery which sur-
rounds all Thoughts of God ... 112
From Darkness to Dawn ... ... 114

God's Way in the Sanctuary m. 115

The Mysteries of Providence . ... 115

Complaining to God ... ... 116

The Mission of Mental Depressions ... 117

Occupations for Sleepless Nights ... 117

The Cheer of Hallowed Memories ... 118

Possible Exhaustion of God's Mercies 118

A Supreme Mental Distress ... 119

A Bemedy for Troubled Hearts ... 120

The Holiness of Divine Dealings ... 120

God's Unknown Ways ... ... 121

God the Shepherd of his People ... 121

Befnge in God's Unchangeableness... 122

Sick-bed Promises ... •« 122



PSALM LXXVIIL

The Heart's Desire gratified
Mercy remembered in Wrath
Warnings against Unbelief
History a Parable ...

Beligious Education ...

Becreant Epluaim ...

The Bock ... ...

National Judgments ...

The Tenacity of Sin
The Determined Sinner's Begular
Bound ... ••• ••• 135

The Worship that God hates ... 136

Provoking God ... ... ••• 137

How oft did they provoke? ... 137

Limiting God ... ... ••• 137

"A Deceitful Bow" ... ••• 138

God tnmed against his People ... 139
God's Chosen Ones ... 139



„. ISO

... 131

... 132

... 133

... 133

... 134

... 184

... 134

... 135



The Besponaibility of Hearers ... 140

Teaching by Parable ... ... 140

Our Mission to the Coming Generation 141

The Bad Example of Ephraim ... 141

God's Marvellous Doings ... ... 142

Heart-tempting of God ... ... 143

God's Call to trust fully ... ... 143

The Grievous Sin of Insincerity ... 144

The Grace of Diviue Selections ... 145

The Divine Object of Bevelation ... 145

God's Tender Mercy ... ... 143



PSALM LXXIX.



«. 148
... 149



" For the Glory of thy Name '

An Imprecatory Psalm

"Brought very Low" ... ... 150

The Heathen Taunt „. ... 150

Times of Persecution ... ... 150

Expected Limitations of the Divine

Wrath... ... ... ... 151

Praying against our Enemies ... 152

The Trouble of our Old Sins ... 152

Purging away Sins ... ... 153

The Cry of the Prisoner ... ... 154

Divine Belationships our Best Plea

in Prayer ... ... ... 155

Prayer for Deliverance from Suffering 155

PSALM LXXX.

A Oiy of Weakness, a Prayer of Faith 158

The Obembim ... ... ... 158

Beal Salvation ... •» ... 159

The Vine of God 160

Going back from God ... ... 161

Throned above the Cherubim— a Con-
ception of God ... ... ... 162

God's Strength needed for Saving

Work 162

The Turnings and Beturnings of God 163

The Befusal of Prayer ... ... 163

"Tears to Drink:" the Mission of

Troublous Experiences ... ... 164

The Vine-figure of God's People ... 165
Bitter Experiences as Divine Chastise-
ments ... ... ... ... 165

God's Grace our Best Safeguard ... 166

God's Bedemption ... ... 166

PSALM LXXXL

God's Lamentation over Man's Lost

Opportunities ... ... ... 169



INDEX.



TBEHl FAOa

"Open thy Month Wide J " or, Great

Ezpeotatioiu enoouraged ... 170

Oiven up ... ... ... 171

Our Own Way onr Worst Woe ... 171

What might have been ... ... 172

The Conseoration of Mnsio ... 172

Authority in Beligion ... ... 178

The Unknown Tongae ... ... 173

" The Secret Place of Thnnder " ... 174

The Sole Object of Worship ... 175

SufBolenoy in GK>d ... ... 175

The Sin of Self-wiU 176

The Sorrow of God ... ... 176

Man's Inoonsideration ... m. 177

PSALM T.XXXI1

A Yiew of Human Life from Above 178

Comtptio Optimi Pettima eat ... 179

The Judge of the Jndges ... ... 180

Accepting the Person ... ... 180

The OlainiB of the Poor ... ... 181

The National Peril in theMal-adminii-

tration of Justice ... ... 181

Our Changing Estimates of Men ... 182

Gk)d'8 Inheritance in All Nations ... 182

A Solemn Bebuke ... ... 183

PSALM LXXXm.

Soul-spoilers ... ... ... 185

Ood's Hidden Ones ... ... 186

The Mission of the Divine Silence ... 187
The Foes of the Church are the Foes

of God 188

Confederacy in Evil Designs ... 188

The Lord's Hidden Ones ... ... 189

Prayer based on Experience and on

History ... ... ... 189

The Figure of the Boiling Thing ... 190
The Issue of Divine Judgments on

the Wicked ... 190

What God is to his People... ... 191

PSALM LXXXIV.

Living Water from Hidden Springs... 193

Delight in God's Worship and Service 193

The Soul's Sweet Home ... ... 194

Sanctuary Birds ... ... ... 195

Strange Preferences ... ... 196

A Test of our Spiritual State ... 196

God the Living One 197

Bnvy at the Biidi ... ... 198



THXHX rAOB

The Joy of the Pilgrims ... m. 198

Stages of Spiritual Progress ... 199

The Shield-figure... ... ... 199

The Joy of doing Little Things for

God ... ... 200

Conditional Bestowments ... ... 200

The Glory of Worship ... ... 201

What God is to his People ... ... 201

PSALM LXXXV.

Bevival ... ... ... 203, 206

The Purpose of GM's Gracious

Chastenings ... ... ... 204

Temporal Mercies of Little Avail

without such as are Spiritual ... 205

"What God the Lord wiU speak" ... 206
The Saints' Salvation, the Land's

Glory ... ... ... ... 207

Our Foes beoome our Friends ... 207

Beeognition of National Meroiea ... 208

Incomplete Bedemptions ... ... 209

Quickening as God's Work ... 209
Bevivals ; or, Discerning the Signs of

the Times ... ... ... 210

Expectancy of Graoe ... ... 211

Self-pleasing is Folly ... ... 211

God and Man working together ... 212

God's BighteousnesB opening a Way 212

Listening for God's Voice ... ... 213

PSALM LXXXVL

A Comprehensive Prayer ... ... 215

The Psalmist's Prayers and Pleas ... 215

Grace Triumphant ... ... 216

True Beligion, and what it calls for... 217

Tokens for Good ... ... ... 217

Man's Claims on God ... ... 218

Man's Soul a Sphere of Divine In-
fluence ... ... ... 218

God Incomparable ... ... 219

God glorifying his own Name ... 219

The Desire to be Whole-hearted ... 220

The Plea for More Graoe ... ... 221

God's Graciousness ... ... 221

The Cheer of QrfA'a Token* ... 221

Single-heartedness ... ... 222

PSALM LXXXVn.

The Glory of the Church ... ... 223

The Habitation of God ... ... 224

The Frinoiples of the Divine Prefer-
ence ... ... ... ... 225



INDEX.



IHBME PAGI

"The Lord shall count" 226

The Divine Interest in Zion ... 227

What can be said for our Jerusalem? 227

PlivilegeB of a Birthplace ... ... 228

Various Powers used in God's Service 228

Joy-fountains in God ... ... 229

The Glory of the Church ... m. 229

PSALM LXXXVIU.

The Saddest Psalm in the Psalter ... 232

Mournful Views of Death ... ... 233

Personal Kelations with God made a

Plea ... 234

The Fear that Prayer will not be

answered ... ... ... 234

A Soul Full of Troubles ... ... 235

Affliction conceived as Divine AVrath 235

Peerings into the Future ... ... 236

Prayer getting in Front of God ... 237

God's Hidden Face 237

Light in the Darkness ... ... 238

PSALM LXXXIX.

The Fear of God ... ... ... 243

God's Faithfulness ... ... 243

Mercy bnilt up for Ever ... ... 244

"The Joyful Sound" 245

The Exalted Horn ; or, the Secret of

Strength ... 246

" Chosen out of the People " ... 246

"David my Servant" ... ... 247

A Singer in the Dark ... ... 248

The Security of God's Pledged Word 249

The Lord's Saints 250

Comparisons with Jehoyah... ... 250

Ancient Sentiments concerning the Sea 251

Equity and Righteousness... ... 251

Perplexities of Present Appearances 252
The Argument from the Brevity of

Life 252

God's Promise to David and his Seed 253

PSALM XO.

The Fundamental Truths of All Be-

ligion ... ... ... ■■■ 256

" Secret Sini" 257

The Lord onr Dwelling-place ... 258

The Glorious EaUtation ... ... 258

God's Estimate of a Thousand Tears 259

"As a Tale that is told" 260

Man's TTuder-estimate of God's Anger 260



THBMS PAGB

The Bight Numbering of our Days ... 260

The Secret of Satisfaction ... ... 261

" Make ua Glad" 262

God a Dwelling-place ... ... 262

The Past, Present, and Future Eternity

of God ... ... ... 263

The Lesson of the Grass ... ... 263

Secret Sin ... ... ... 264

Brief Life as Judgment on Sin ... 265

Length of Life a Doubtful Good ... 265

Numbering our Days ... ... 266

Prayer for Divine Revealing of the

Mystery of Life ... ... 266

Prayer and Work... ... ... 267



PSALM XOI.






The Angels


••.


269


True Prayer


...


270


The Man that trusts in God


••.


270


Abiding under God's Shadow


...


271


A Sacred Resolve...


...


271


"My God"


...


272


The Fowler's Snare


...


273



" Just as a Hen protects her Brood " 274

"His Angels" ... ... ... 275

The Angels' Charge of Little Things 276

The Beloved of the Lord ... ... 277

The Response of God to bis People ... 277

Our Place of Safety ... ... 277

Many Names for God ... ... 278

Limitations of Temporal Protection... 278

The Shielding of God's Faithfulness 279

Angel-agencies ... ... ... 279

Typical Perils of the Saints ... 280

Reasons in Man for the Divine Favour 280

God's Presence in Time of Trouble ... 281

The Security of the Saints ... ... 281

The Reward of Trust in God ... 282



PSALM xon.



Psalmody ... ... «

The Eye-salve of Praise ... .,

It is Good to give Thanks ... .,

Singing Praise ... ... .,

Morning and Evening Exercises
The Holy Oil

" Like the Palm Tree "

" Planted in the House of the Lord "
"Fruit in Old Age"

A Daily Good Work 289

The Sanctifying Ministry of Musio... 290
God's Thoughts seen in Otoi'a Works 290



283

284
285
285
285
286
287
287
288



INDEX.



Eyes dimmed to Spiritual Things ... 291
The Instability of the Success of the

Ungodly ... ... ... 291

The Stability of Human Good lies

with God ... ... ... 292

Grace and Strength characterizing the

BighteouB ... ... ... 292

The Testimony of Old Age to God's

Faithfulness ... ... ... 292

Joyful Worship ... ... «. 293



PSALM XCUI.



M. 294



The Eternity of God

•' The Lord reigneth "

"Is God Dead?"... ^ ... 296

The God of Vengeance ... ... 296

Tho Eing-fignre for God ... ... 296

The Completeness of Divine Creation 297
The Distinction between God and

God's Handiwork ... ... 297

The Irresistible Power of Floods ... 298
God in SeTelation the same as Ood in

Nature ... ... ... 298

Holiness the Oharacteristio of Divine

Authority 299

Jehovah as Creator and Baler of the

Universe ... ... ... 299

PSALM XOIV.

The Sainf 8 Perplexity at the Triumph

of Sin... ... ... ... S02

" How long shall the Wicked

triumph?" ... ... ... 308

An Argument all should understand 304

A Strange Beatitude ... ... 304

The Throng of our Thoughts ... 305

A God of Vengeances ... . ... 306

« The Judge of aU the Earth " ... 306

The Tether of the Ungodly ... 307

From Man to God ... ... 308

The Vanity of Men's Idea of the

Divine Indifference ... ... 808

The Triumph of the Wicked may be

the Ohastening of the Bighteous ... 809

The Comfortable Thoughts God gives 309

Man's Bival Law ... ... ... 310

Divine Betribntion Certain ... 310

PSALM XCV.

Public Worship ... ... ... 812

The Invitatory Psalm ... ... 313

Everybody called to praise God ... 814



THEME TA.am

The Beautiful and Sublime Calling to

Devotion ... ... ... 814

Associated and Public Prayer ... 315

Our Moral Belations with God „, 816

Divided Feeling in Man ... m. 316

The Sin of tempting God ... ... 317

Divine Judgments on the Unbelieving 317
Public Worship— its Necessity and

Advantage ... ... ... 318

The Material Universe and its

... ... ••« olS



PSALM XOVL

Idolatiy ... ... ... n. 820

Songs and Sermons ... m. 821

The Spirit of Missionary Work ... 322

Strength and Beauty ... ... 323

" Bring an Offering, and come into his

Courts" 324

The Call for a New Song ... ... 325

The Law of Christian Missions ... 325

The God of Heaven ... ... 326

Offerings associated with Worship ... 326
The Essential Feature of God's Wor-
ship ... ... ... ... 327

Nature-sympathies ... ... .S27

The Coming Judge ... ... 328

How and why Jehovah is to be wor-
shipped ... ... ... 82C



PSALM xcvn.



God's Sovereignty
The Hatred of Sin
Jehovah is King ...
"The Lord reigneth'
Good Haters ...
The Seed of Light



... 830

... 331
... 332
... 333
... 334
334, 335



Giving Thanks for God's Holiness ... 335

What God seems, and what GK>d is ... 336

The Sign of the Storm-god... ... 837

Men's own Gods ... ... ... 337

Our Attitude toward Evil ... ... 338

Our Soul-preserver ... ... 838

The Harvest for the Bighteous ... 339
The Inspiration of Cherished Memo-
ries ... ... ... ... 339

The Divine Character and Gk>vem-

ment ... ... ... ... 840

PSALM xovra.

Jehovah's Victories ... ... 841

Man's Belation to the Natural World 341



INDEX.



Ttt



The Lord's Victory
The Lord's Memory
Showing our Joy in Ood
Universal Salvation



PASS

842
312
343
843



PSALM XCIX.

Samuel ••• ••• ••• •» 845

" The Lord onr God is Holy " ... 347

Forgiveness oonsistent with Vengeance H48

The Permanency of Gk>d's Beign ... 349

The Holiness of Ood ... ... 349

Onr Place at God's Footstool ... 350

Model Worshippers ... m> 350

The Answerer of the Worsbipfnl ... 351

The Limitations of Divine Forgiveness 351
The Holy God infinitely Worthy of

Worship M, — — 352



PSALM a

The Joy of Service m. ... 853

Jnbilate ... ... w. ... 353

Olad Service ... ... — 855

The Gospel of onr Creation m. 856

"His Truth endureth" ... ... 856

Service with Gladness ... ... 357

The Sovereign Bights of God our

Maker. 858

Blessing the Divine Name ... 358

The Goodness of God ... ... 859

Worship... aM Mt M. 859



PSALM OJ.






Four Features of True Piety


...


861


The Secret of a Happy Life


*M


362


" Mercy and Judgment " ...


M.


362


Showing Piety at Home ...


...


363


Wicked Things ...


...


364


Slanderers


...


364



The Divine Meroy and Judgment ... 365

Home-religion ... ■■• ••• 366

The Feeling of Pious Souls concerning

Solf-wUl 367

The eiin of the Slanderer .m ... 367

The Sin of the Arrogant ... ... 368

The Encouragement of the Upright... 368

The Sin of the Untruthful 369

The Ideal of a Eoyal Life j or, David's

Mirror of a Monanh .^ ... 369



PSALM Oil

THKHI rxGI

AfiBiction ... ... ... 373

God's Care for his People (Christ's

Care for his Church) ... ... 373

The Mortality of Man and the

Eternity of God ... ... 374

Light arising in Darkness ... ... 375

"As a Sparrow alone" ... ... 376

"When the Lord shall build up

Zion" ... ... 376

"The Prayer of the Destitute" ... 377
Lives taken away in the Midst ... 377
The Prayer of the AfiBloted ... 378
The Depression attending Bodily Pain 378
The Loneliness of the A£Qicted ... 379
The Beal Bitterness of Humau Afflic-
tion ... ... ... ... 379

Changing Self ; Changing World ;

Unchanging God ... ... 380

God glorified in fulflUing his Pro-
mises ... ... ... ... 380

Prayer for itenewal of Imperilled Life 381



PSALM OIIL

God's Goodness to ourselves m. 384

The Confidence of God's Children ... 384

The Bange of God's Bule and Claim 385

A Pattern of Praise ... ... 386

Benewed Youth ... ... ... 387

"He will not always chide" ... 388
Wherefore another Gospel when we

have this? ... ... ... 888

The Pity of God ... ... ... 389

The Kingdom of God ... „. 389

ThePeril of the Spiritual Guide ... 389

God the Healer of Disease... ... 390

The Divine Crown on Man... ... 391

The Lord of the Oppressed ... 392

Chiding, but not keeping on chiding 393

The Measure of the Divine Dealings 393

Limitless Forgiveness ... ... 394

" This Body of our Humiliation " ... 394

The Blessedness of Covenant-keepers 395

Gratitude for Unbounded Mercies „. 396

The Pity of the Lord ... ... 396

PSALM OIV.

The Greatness of God ... m. 400

The Heritage of Man ... ... 400

God gives — we gather : Harvest

Thanksgiving ... ... ... 401



TiB



INDEX.



PA'OK

God's Love for Living Creatures ... 401

The Psalm of Creation : the First Day 402
The Psalm of Creation: the Second

Day ... ... ... ... 402

The Psalm of Creation: the Third

Day 403

The Psalm of Creation : the Fourth

Day ... ... ... ... 404

The Psalm of Creation : the Fifth Day 405
The Psalm of Creation: the Sixth

Day — the Creation of Man ... 405

Voices of the Spring ... ... 406

The Spiritual Spring 407

The Lord's Joy in his Works ... 408

The Blessed Meditation of God ... 409

Nature-figures of the Divine Glory ... 409

Nature-forces are Divine Ministries... 410

The King is the Creator ... ... 410

Water-witnesses to the Glory of God 411

The Divine Mission of the Darkness 411

Poet-thoughts concerning the Creator 412

The Manifoldness of God's Works ... 412

Absolute Dependence upon God ... 413

Benewed Life : a Spring Sermon ... 413

PSALM CV.

The Testimony of History ... ... 417

The Besponse of Man to the Provi-
dence of God ... ... ... 418

"He watching over luael slnmbers

not nor sleeps " ... ... 418

BncoessiTe Steps Heavenward m. 418



... 419
.:. 419
420,434
... 421
... 421



THEHI

" When th«j were bnt a Few "
Joseph's Trial ... ...

God in History ... ...

Seeking the Lord's Face ...
Covenant Faithfulness ...

Divine Defenoe ... ... ... 422

The Miuion of Joseph ... ... 422

Discipliaary Experience ... ... 423

Delivering Judgements ... ... 423

The Sin of trying to make Terms with

God M. ... ... M. 424

PSALM CVL

The Spirit of Godliness ... m. 480

Sin in Many Forms ... ... 430

Outward Prosperity, Inward Decline 431

Our God our Glory „. ... 431

The Hope of the Exile ... ... 431

The " Nevertheless " of God's Meroy 432

The Blessedness of the Holy life ... 432

A Holy Inspiration ... ... 432

"But sent Leanness into their Soul " 433

Goodness is Graciousness ... ... 433

The Boots of Disobedience... ... 484

Gratifjring Sinful Wants creates Sinful

Wants... ... ... ... 494

The Character of Aaron ... ... 435

The Sin of the Golden Calf «. 486

Moses as Mediator ... ... 436

The Atonement of Phinehas •.. 437

The Divine Pity and Patience ... 437

Man's Misery and Qod's Oompasdon 438



■•L!l!.



I- 11 ■ !■!






I



f ':■■.!:
...•i'llEG



I



's.ii



W



1, -"i;'



|!it>'



'><-Q



• 1 T.-T






Si Ah



, I . I , I ' I ■



■■' . ' ii! ii!i''!i''



H. !



Tin.



. " I .



M!



■lliui!''-'-



'T.



::ia:i'5"';i:?''!:i''!i;!!!!'"L



i'iiJ|iii'i'=' ■'"■'!■■.

'•*' li*!' I ■i;i<'ii'' ■','■-
