eS : te Library 3 


SCHOOL OF THEOLOGY | 


_ AT CLAREMONT. 


| WEST FOOTHILL AT COLLEGE AVENUE - 
_ CLAREMONT, CALIFORNIA 


Ps ope 


: od ae 
She ee ee 


ae 
i g-b 714% 
noid oe 


he 
eel 
CZz 
Se Obs 


x 


2 


oe 


THE BIBLE AND THE CROSS 


WORKS BY THE SAME AUTHOR 


THE ANALYSED BIBLE 

3s. 6d. each volume 
. GENERAL REVIEW OF GENESIS TO ESTHER 
. GENERAL REVIEW OF JoB TO MaLacur 
. GENERAL REVIEW OF THE NEW TESTAMENT 
. THE GosPEt or St. JoHN 
. THE Book oF Jos 
. THE EPISTLE TO THE ROMANS 


Aub W HH 


THE CRISES OF THE CHRIST. 33s. 6d. net 
THE SPIRIT OF GOD. 3s. 6d. 

CHRISTIAN PRINCIPLES. 1s. 6d. net 

THE PRACTICE OF PRAYER. 1s. 6d. 

THE PARABLES OF THE KINGDOM. 2s. 6d, net 


MOUNTAINS AND VALLEYS IN THE MINIS- 
TRY OF JESUS. 1s. net 


THE MISSIONARY MANIFESTO. 2s. net 


THE TEACHING OF THE LESSON. A Pocket 
CoMMENTARY. 1s. net 


THE WESTMINSTER BOOKLETS. 6d. each. 
London: HoppER & STouGHTON 


THE BIBLE AND 
THE CROSS 


BY 


G. CAMPBELL MORGAN, D.D. 


HODDER AND STOUGHTON 
LONDON MCMIX 


Theol ogy Pi brary 


SCHOOL OF 7 EOLOGY 
AT (Cleat ONT 


ae -ornia 


Printed by Hazell, Watson & Viney, Ld., London and Aylesbury. 


CONTENTS 


I 


Tue Deartu or Jesus: Unnaturat 


II 


Tue Deata or Caurist: Suprr- 


NATURAL 


Il 


Tue Deaty or tHE Lorp: REcon- 


CILING 


IV 


Tue Cross AND THE SINNER 


PAGE 


19 


37 


57 


vi CONTENTS 
Vv 


Tur Cross AND THE SAINT : eee 


VI 


Tuer Cross AND THE AcEs To Come. 10] 


THE DEATH OF JESUS: 
UNNATURAL 


I 


THE DEATH OF JESUS: 
UNNATURAL 


““Ye men of Israel, hear these words: Jesus of 
Nazareth, a Man approved of God unto you by 
mighty works and wonders and signs, which God 
did by Him in the midst of you, as ye yourselves 
know ; Him, being delivered up by the determinate 
counsel and foreknowledge of God, ye by the hand 
of lawless men did crucify and slay.” —Acrts ii. 22, 28. 


“Ye denied the Holy and Righteous One, and 
asked for a murderer to be granted unto you, and 
killed the Prince of Life.”—Acrs iii. 14, 15. 


rT \HE present series of studies assumes 

that the Christian religion is the 
religion of the Lord Jesus Christ, and. 
that the Bible is its authoritative exposi- 
tion. 

Of the Christian system, the Cross of 
Christ is the central truth. It is at once 
a profound mystery, and a most glorious 
revelation. As to its deepest and hidden 
method it is a mystery; in its unveiling 
of the heart of God, and in the declara- 

¥ 3 


4 THE DEATH OF JESUS: 


tion of the possibility of the forgiveness of 
sins, it is a revelation. 

Our purpose is to gather about the Cross 
in order that we may consider it in the 
light of Bible teaching. I shall endeavour 
resolutely to avoid making any appeal to 
speculations or philosophies which are not 
founded on acceptance of the authority of 
Scripture. 

The two passages which indicate our 
starting-point contain much teaching with 
which I do not propose now to deal. I 
refer to them because they set forth certain 
truths of supreme importance to our argu- 
ment. The quotations are taken respectively 
from the first and second discourses of Peter, 
delivered in the power of the outpoured 
Spirit. It has often been pointed out 
that a comparison of the Apostles before 
and after Pentecost reveals a most re- 
markable change in them, resulting from — 
the coming of the Spirit. In nothing was 
this change more marked than in their 
attitude to the Cross. In the last days 
of our Lord’s ministry, during which He 
foretold His Cross with great distinctness, 
these men quite honestly believed that the 
Cross would inevitably mean the defeat of 


UNNATURAL 5 


His purpose, and disaster to His enterprise. 
Immediately after the reception of the 
Spirit they referred to the Cross in such 
language as to make it plain that there 
had come to them an entirely new con- 
ception of its meaning. | 

In each of these passages Peter empha- 
sised two facts: first, that of the sinlessness 
of Jesus; and secondly, that of the sin 
of His murder. The sinlessness of Jesus 
is declared in the first in the words, “ Jesus 
of Nazareth, a Man approved of God unto 
you by mighty works and wonders and 
signs, which God did by Him in the midst 
of you, as ye yourselves know.” ‘The mean- 
ing of the Apostle is perfectly plain. He 
affirmed that the Man Jesus was proven by 
His miracles and wonders and signs to be 
a perfect Man. 

When, in the second passage, the Apostle 
charged those to whom he spoke with 
having slain “the Holy and Righteous 
One,” his words were carefully chosen. 
The word “holy” describes inward purity, 
which is the perfection of character. The 
word “righteous” describes active recti- 
tude, which is perfection of conduct. Thus 
_ Peter affirmed that Jesus Whom they slew 


| 


6 THE DEATH OF JESUS: 


was both “holy,” that is, pure in character ; 
and “righteous,” that is, true in conduct. 

He moreover, in each case charged upon 
the men to whom he was speaking that 
their putting to death of a sinless Man 
was an act of sin. We are thus con- 
fronted with a _ problem which we are 
compelled to recognise, and of which we 
must attempt to find the solution. That 
solution is not found in these passages, 
and we shall not reach it in this study. 
The matter of first importance is that we 
should recognise the problem. 

Let me state that problem briefly. In 
the midst of that universe which the Bible 
declares to be under the government of 
God, the one perfect Man in all human 
history is put to death by the hands of 
sinful men. Men of impure character slay 
the one Man of purity of character. Men 
of unrighteous conduct put to death the 
one Man of righteous conduct. The fact 
thus barely stated suggests the problem. 

Let us attempt to see this more clearly. 

This we shall do if we consider the 
teaching of the Bible concerning death 
and Jesus; for such consideration must in- 
evitably reveal the fact that the death of 


UNNATURAL 7 


Jesus was unnatural—that is, something 
out of the regular order, something that 
demands explanation beyond that which 
accounts for the death of other human 
beings. 


I 


What does the Bible teach concerning 
death? In answer to that inquiry I shall 
first state the case in general propositions, 
and then make one or two references to 
particular passages of Scripture. The Bible 
teaches that death in the case of man is 
the direct outcome of sin, and the penalty 
thereof. It declares, moreover, that death 
essentially consists in the separation of the 
spirit of man from the Spirit of Life, which 
is the Spirit of God. It further teaches 
that this separation of the spirit of man 
from the Spirit of God involves ultimately, 
if not immediately, the separation of man’s 
spirit from man’s body. It finally teaches 
that the separation between the spirit of 
man and the Spirit of God may be an age- 
abiding separation. In this connection it 
must carefully be borne in mind that this 
teaching refers to human nature, which is 


ES —————— 


8 THE DEATH OF JESUS: 


more than animal nature. Between the 
two there is a great gulf fixed. Whatever 
the process of human creation may have 
been, the Scripture clearly teaches that man 
became a “living soul” by the direct act of 
God, and that there is an impassable gulf 
between man, and every other form of life. 
This moreover, is acknowledged true as 
the result of investigation, as well as in 
the light of Scripture teaching. I do not 
think it necessary for me to argue that at 
length, yet it is necessary to state it if we 
are to understand the meaning of death in 
the case of man. Man is the offspring of 
God, made in His image, and in His like- 
ness. That declaration has no reference 
to anything that is merely physical or 
animal in man’s life. Human personality 
to-day has a physical basis, an animal tene- 
ment in which man dwells; but, according 
to the uniform teaching of Scripture, man 
is essentially spirit, as God is Spirit. Death, 
therefore, fundamentally and finally is the 
separation of the spirit of man from the 
Spirit of God. It is, moreover, a penalty, 
and a penalty ceases to be a penalty if the 
person upon whom it is imposed cease to 
exist. 'The death penalty is essentially that 


UNNATURAL 9 


of the separation of man, as a spirit, from 
God Who is Spirit. The issue of this 
separation is separation between the spirit 
of the man and his body, though that may 
not immediately follow the fundamental 
separation. Death as separation may be- 
come age-abiding. 

According to the Genesis story, the 
warning given to the first man was, “ In 
the day that thou eatest thereof thou shalt 
surely die”; and in the day of their dis- 
obedience our first parents died, in that 
they were separated by that act from God. 
After they had sinned God said, “ Dust 
thou art, and unto dust shalt thou return.” 
This word was not uttered until sin had 
been committed. That was the sentence 
of death. The spirit of man in the moment 
of its rebellion lost its connection with the 
Spirit of God, and the separation between 
his spirit and his body commenced. 

In the Epistle to the Romans, in one 
of the briefest phrases, Paul declared that 
“through one man sin entered into the 
world, and death through sin.” I am not 
proposing to argue these subjects in the 
light of any human philosophy, or even 
of scientific knowledge, and yet in passing 


10 THE DEATH OF JESUS: 


I am constrained to say that no man of 
science has ever been able to explain the 
reason why all men die. .The teaching of 
Scripture is that death is the outcome of 
sin. Had there been no sin there would 
have been no death. This, of course, 
applies only to the human race. In the 
animal world, and indeed, through all the 
lower forms of life, death was the end of 
being; but when it invaded the human 
race it came as the direct result of sin 
and as its penalty. In the obedient life 
there is no place for death. As in the 
case of Christ, life passes from the pro- 
bationary to the larger and fuller experience 
by transfiguration or metamorphosis. Man 
sinning is immediately dead in the deepest 
meaning of the word, in that he is alienated 
from God. The issue of that is separation 
from his body, and finally his age-abiding ~ 
separation from God. 'To summarise the 
rapid survey: death is the wage of sin, _ 
its issue, its result, its penalty. All that 
pall which rests upon humanity to-day by 
reason of death is demonstration of the 
government of God. Whether the sinner 
be rich or poor, high or low, bond or free, 
he cannot escape the penalty of his sin. 


UNNATURAL 11 


II 


In the light of this consideration we now 
turn to our second inquiry as to the teach- 
ing of Scripture concerning Jesus. I. am 
careful for the moment not to speak of 
Him as Christ or Lord, but only by the 
name by which He was known in Nazareth, 
by which His disciples and His familiar 
friends knew Him—the name which marks 
Him out as a Man among men. Concerning 
Him the Scripture teaches that He was 
absolutely sinless, and that in that respect 
He was an exception in human history. 
He made this claim for Himself in many 
ways; but two illustrations will suffice. In, 
an atmosphere surcharged with criticism He 
declared, “I do always the things that are 
pleasing to Him.” It is impossible to 
imagine these words having been spoken by 
any other. The great teachers of the world, 
saints of bygone ages, and the saints of 
to-day, have all confessed their own failure. 
Jesus made no such confession, but rather 
declared that He always pleased God. The 
other quotation occurs in the same sur- 
roundings. He challenged the men who 
were criticising His claims, as He asked 


12 THE DEATH OF JESUS: 


them, “ Which of you convinceth Me of 
sin?” and to this challenge their only 
answer was silence. 

Turning from His own testimony to that 
of others recorded in the New Testament, 
we find that at His baptism, God said, 
“This is My beloved Son, in Whom I am 
well pleased.” On the Mount of Trans- 
figuration, to the astonished disciples the 
Voice out of heaven made the same declara- 
tion. And again, when Jesus approach- 
ing the hour of His passion, prayed, 
“Father, glorify Thy name, the an- 
swering Voice declared, “I have both 
glorified it, and will glorify it again.” 
Thus the testimony of God, Who is the 
sworn foe of all evil, the One Who can by 
no means clear the guilty, affirmed the 
sinlessness of Jesus. 

The testimony of His own disciples was 
equally clear. Peter called him “the Holy 
and Righteous One”; John wrote of Him, 
“In Him is no sin”; and Paul declared 
of Him that He “ knew no sin.” 

Impartial witnesses—that is, those not 
to be found among the number of His 
disciples—gave utterance to the same truth. 
The one voice raised on His behalf in the 


= 


UNNATURAL 13 


hour of His sorest need—that of Pilate’s 
wife—referred to Him as “ that righteous 
Man.” The malefactor, dying by His side on 
the Cross, declared, “’This Man hath done 
nothing amiss.” ‘The Roman centurion, ob- 
serving Him in the awful hour of death, 
said, ‘‘ Certainly this was a righteous Man.” 

The testimony of evil men is the same, 
The time-serving and scheming Pilate, who 
fain would have saved both his conscience 
and his position, thrice declared, “I find 
no crime in Him.” That was the language 
of a judge. Charges had been brought 
against Jesus. Pilate investigated them, 
and this was his verdict. Judas, in the 
terrible hour when the consciousness of the 
guilt of his treachery broke upon his soul, 
hurried into the presence of the chief priests, 
and, flinging down the ill-gotten silver, cried 
in remorse, “I have sinned in that I have 
betrayed innocent blood.” 

Or finally, take the testimony of an evil 
spirit who declared to Jesus, “I know Thee 
Who Thou art, the Holy One of God.” 

Thus upon His own testimony, upon the 
testimony of God, upon the testimony of 
His disciples, upon the testimony of im- 
partial witnesses, upon the testimony of evil 


14 THE DEATH OF JESUS: 


men, upon the testimony of a demon, we 
declare that Jesus of Nazareth was sinless. 

‘Yo the accuracy of that testimony the 
centuries bear witness. Men who deny all 
we believe concerning the deeper mystery 
of the Person of Jesus yet admit the sin- 
lessness of His human life. Through nine- 
teen centuries no reputable critic of Jesus 
has ever questioned this claim. 

All this finally leads to the conclusion 
that the death of Jesus was unnatural— 
that is to say, it was out of the true order 
of human life according to the economy of 
God. Death is the outcome of sin. Jesus 
was sinless. Nevertheless He died. I have 
taken so long to state the problem because 
it is only as we are arrested by the unique- 
ness of this death, by the strangeness of it, 
by the baffling perplexity of its problem, 
that we are ever likely to discover its true 
meaning. 

These then, are the problems which arise. - 
If Jesus were only man as I am man, then 
according to the teaching of the Bible con- 
cerning death and concerning Himself, His 
death violated the moral order of the 
universe. We speak to-day of the problem 
of pain, of the problem of evil, as these 


UNNATURAL 15 


are revealed in the conditions and circum- 
stances of human life the world over. I 
admit them all; but without hesitation 
declare that no event in human history, 
no circumstance of human suffering, has 
ever been chronicled which is so over- 
whelmingly perplexing as this death of 
Jesus. If He were man merely as I am, 
sharer of my nature, and nothing more, 
and were perfectly sinless, then His death 
constitutes the ‘severest reflection on the 
righteousness of the government of God 
that the world has ever seen. Here is a. 
problem that demands examination. There 
must be some meaning in this death beyond 
anything that appears as the result of 
surface observation. To find the explana- 
tion I must turn to other passages of 
Scripture than those with which we com- 
menced the present study. 

Suffering and death resulting from sin 
demonstrate the righteous government of 
God. I know there are mysteries on the 
plane of our every-day life. Until this hour 
we see the righteous suffering for the guilty 
in some lower sense. And yet all that we 
call righteous are also sinners, and in their 
suffering do but enter into the fellowship 


16 THE DEATH OF JESUS 


of that which results from the sin in which 
they also share. Here however, is a case 
of an absolutely sinless One—a case of One 
Who, to use that marvellous phrase of the 
New Testament which we too little under- 
stand, was “separate from sinners,”—handed 
over, as Peter distinctly declares, “ by the 
determinate counsel and foreknowledge of 
God” to a violent death at the hands of 
lawless men. 

Our proposition then is, that the suffer- 
ing and death of Jesus demand some ex- 
planation. If He be indeed only man, and 
if He be sinless as He claimed to be, as 
God declared Him to be, as men witnessed 
Him to be, as devils owned Him to be, and 
yet died; then His death is the crime of all 
crimes, and in it the moral order was vio- 
lated as nowhere else. , 

We pause here. The death of Jesus is 
unnatural. We ask for an explanation. 
We shall only find it as we turn to a fuller 
revelation of Scripture concerning Him and 
His death than the scope of this study has 
permitted. At the moment we have arrived 
at this point; death is the wage of sin; 
Jesus was sinless, and therefore, He ought 


not to have died. Why did He die? 4, 


THE DEATH OF CHRIST: 
SUPERNATURAL 


II 


THE DEATH OF CHRIST: 
SUPERNATURAL 


**T lay down My life, that I may take it again. 
No one taketh it away from Me, but I lay it down 
of Myself. I have power to lay it down, and I have 
power to take it again. This commandment 
received I from My Father.”—Joun x. 17, 18. 


1 es is not at all surprising to read what 

immediately follows this declaration, 
“There arose a division again among the 
Jews because of these words. And many of 
them said, He hath a devil, and is mad; 
why hear ye Him? Others said, These are 
not the sayings of one possessed with a 
devil. Can a devil open the eyes of the. 
blind ?” 

I sometimes think that no words of our- 
Lord which have been recorded for us have. 
received less serious attention than these, 
and yet they constitute the very heart of © 
all His teaching concerning Himself and 
His mission. 

19 


20 THE DEATH OF CHRIST: 


I do not propose to consider this passage 
alone or exhaustively. JI have read it 
because it seems to me the most remarkable 
statement Jesus ever made concerning His 
death; and because, in association with 
other words of His, it will enable us to 
follow a little further the teaching of the 
Bible concerning the Cross. ” 

The problem of the death of Jesus con- 
sidered in our previous study is solved when 
we contemplate it from the standpoint of 
what the Scriptures teach concerning the 
meaning of His title—the Christ. The 
death of Christ was supernatural because 
Christ was supernatural. 

I am very conscious of the awkwardness 
of that word supernatural. All the things 
of which we speak as supernatural are only 
supernatural to our finite knowledge and 
understanding. The things of which we 
speak as miraculous are only so because we 
know certain laws, but are not acquainted 
with the whole economy of God. In the 
ages to come, and in the light of the Father’s 
house, we shall not speak of these things as 
supernatural, we shall discover that they are 
all in harmony with the nature of God. 
For the sake of accommodating our medita- 


SUPERNATURAL 21 


tion on this subject to the necessities of our 
present limitation we are however compelled 
to speak of the death of Christ as super- 
natural. If we speak of Jesus as the Man 
of Nazareth only, sinless, spotless, undefiled, 
then we affirm that His death was unnatural, 
that is, out of the regular order. When 
we see Him as Christ, we are driven to the 
conclusion that His death was supernatural. 

Let us then consider the teaching of our 
Lord concerning Himself, and concerning 
His death, in order to make certain deduc- 
tions concerning the death of Christ from 
that teaching. 


I 


First then, the teaching of Christ con- 
cerning Himself. The word Christ is, of 
course, the Greek form of the Hebrew word 
Messiah. Passing in review the occasions 
upon which our Lord made use of the word, 
we shall see what was His conception of its 
meaning, and what He intended men to 
understand thereby. 

I find in the course of the four gospels 
that He is quoted as referring to the title 
directly or indirectly as applied to Himself 
ten times. 


22 THE DEATH OF CHRIST: 


His first claim to be the Christ was made 
where of all places one would least expect 
to find it ; not to the Hebrew people, but in 
Samaria ; not to Samaria as represented in a 
large assembly, but to Samaria as represented 
in a woman; and, most astonishing of all, to 
Samaria as represented in a woman of sin 
and shame. He had uttered in ‘her hearing 
that wonderful declaration that “ the hour 
cometh, when neither in this mountain, nor 
_in Jerusalem, shall ye worship the Father 
. .. the hour cometh, and now is, when the 
true worshippers shall worship the Father 
in spirit and in truth: for such doth the 
Father seek to be His worshippers” ; and she 
having replied, “I know that Messiah 
cometh; when He is come, He will declare 
unto us all things,” He said, “I that speak 
unto thee am He.” 

The next occasion of definite reference to 
the title was at Ceesarea Philippi, when He 
questioned the disciples as to what men said 
about Him. Peter having answered, “Thou 
art the Christ, the Son of the living God,” 
He commanded them that they were to tell 
no man that He was the Christ. 

His next reference to the fact that He 
was the Christ was incidental. John had 


SUPERNATURAL 23 


told Him that they had forbidden one whom 
they had seen casting out devils in the name 
of Jesus, because he followed not with them. 
Jesus rebuked him, declaring that those who 
were not against Him weresfor Him, and 
then said this simple but significant thing, 
revealing His estimate of the dignity of the 
title Christ ; ‘“‘ Whosoever shall give you a 
cup of water to drink, because ye are Christ’s, 
verily I say unto you, he shall in no wise 
lose his reward.” 

A little further on in His ministry, after 
discoursing on the sheepfold, the flock, and 
the Good Shepherd, the people were strangely 
perplexed, andisent a deputation who said, 
“Tf thou art the Christ, tell us plainly”; and 
He replied, “I told: you, and ye believe 
not; the works that I do in My Father’s 
name, these bear witness of Me.” ‘Thus He 
claimed to be the Christ, and declared that 
the truth of His claim was demonstrated by 
His works. 

Next in order is-the occasion when He 
challenged the rulers concerning the mean- 
ing of Messiahship, “ What think ye of the 
Christ ?” The question did not mean, 
What do you think of;Me? He asked them 
what their religious conception was of the 


24 THE DEATH OF CHRIST: 


Messiah for whom they were looking. 
“Whose son is He?” They said, “'The Son 
of David.” He did not contradict them, but 
asked another question, “ How then doth 
David in the Spirit call Him Lord?” The 
problem as He presented it to them revealed 
His own conception of the meaning of the 
title; Christ is Son of David, of his very 
nature ; yet Lord of David, and thus in some 
way superior to him. 

Almost immediately after this conflict 
with the rulers He said to His disciples, 
One is your Master, even the Christ.” 
You will need guidance and direction; the 
Christ will be your one Master, one Guide, 
one Director. 

A little later He warned them, saying, 
“'There shall arise false Christs.” “If any 
man shall say unto you, Lo, here is the 
Christ, or, Here; believe it not.” “For 
many shall come in My name, saying, I am 
the Christ : and shall lead many astray.” 

A little later He again spoke of Himself 
as the Christ, “This is life eternal, that they 
should know Thee the only true God, and 
Him Whom Thou didst send, even Jesus 
Christ.” 


At the end the high priest challenged 


SUPERNATURAL 25 


Him, “I adjure Thee by the living God, that 
hou tell us whether Thou be the Christ, the 
Son of God.” ‘The three Evangelists give 
different answers, and there is every reason 
to believe that the whole of them were given. 
Matthew gives His reply as, “ Thou hast 
said”; Mark as simply, “I am”; Luke 
tells us that He parried them with a state- 
ment which was a rebuke, “If I tell you, ye 
will not believe: and if I ask you, ye will 
not answer.” 

Finally, on the other side of the Cross 
He made use of the same title, thus; 
“ Behoved it not the Christ to suffer these 
things, and to enter into His glory? ... 
It is written, that the Christ should suffer 
and rise again from the dead the third day, 
and that repentance and remission of sins 
_ should be preached.” 

From the teaching of all these references 
I make these deductions. 

According to Christ’s own estimate of the 
meaning of the title, Christ is first Son of 
Man, David’s Son; but He is also Son of 
- God, David’s Lord. The title fits a Person 
Who is of human nature, but Who is 
infinitely more than of human nature. 

The mission of Christ—I am not now 


26 THE DEATH OF CHRIST: 


speaking of its process or its method, but 
of its ultimate intention—according to His 
own conception, was to give the knowledge 
which leads to worship, to give that know- 
ledge which in itself is age-abiding life. “ This 
is life eternal, that they should know Thee 
the only true God, and Him Whom Thou 
didst send, even Jesus Christ.” The mission 
of the Christ was that of bringing men to 
such knowledge of God as should constrain 
them to the attitude of worship, and give 
them age-abiding life. 

His teaching moreover, reveals His con- 
ception of the process by which the Christ 
would accomplish that work to be that of 
suffering, dying, rising from the dead, ‘and 
giving men repentance and remission of sins. 


II 


Secondly, the teaching of Christ concern- 
ing His own death. I shall now still further 
restrict our outlook to the Gospel of John. 
Repeated reference is made therein to an 
hour toward which Christ was evidently 
looking, At Cana of Galilee, when His 
mother suggested that He should work a 
miracle, He said, “Mine hour is not yet 
come.” When a little later we find Him 


SUPERNATURAL av 


in the temple, and opposition and hatred 
were stirred up against Him, and men would 
fain have laid hold on Him, it is declared 
that they could not do so, “because His 
hour was not yet come.” Still later, while 
He was teaching in the treasury, men de- 
sired to arrest Him, and again the declara- 
tion is made, “ His hour was not yet come.” 
When the Greeks were asking to see Him, 
He said, “The hour is come that the Son 
of Man should be glorified.” 'The reference 
was evidently to the Cross, for immediately 
He said, “ Except a grain of wheat fall into 
the earth and die, it abideth by itself alone.” 
The Paschal discourses are introduced by the 
statement that Jesus, “knowing that His 
hour was come . . . having loved His own 
which were in the world, He loved them unto 
the end”; and later, in the course of them, 
He distinctly declared to His disciples, 
“The hour cometh, yea, is come, that ye 
shall be scattered, every man to his own, 
and shall leave Me alone: and yet I am not 
alone, because the Father is with Me.” 
Finally, in the great intercessory prayer, He 
said, ‘‘ Father, the hour is come.” 

That is a rapid survey, but it helps us to 
see that from the very beginning Christ 


28 THE DEATH OF CHRIST: 


knew that the culminating fact in His 
ministry was death. 

Then examine the facts of His death as 
recorded by John. Jesus, despised and re- 
jected of men, passed down into the sombre 
shade of Gethsemane’s olive-garden, and 
spent a night of anguish. Suddenly, to- 
wards daybreak, there was seem the lurid 
glare of torches; and Judas came with 
armed men and a mob. Jesus confronted 
them, with that poor little handful of men 
standing behind Him. JHe asked them 
naturally, “ Whom seek ye?” The answer 
was quick and ready, “ Jesus of Nazareth.” 
He said, “I am,” and they fell backward 
to the ground. There is no possibility of 
escape from the conviction that there was 
something—whether in the tone of the 
voice or in the flash of the eye, I know not 
—by which these men were made conscious 
of power which they feared; and for the 
moment they dared lay no arresting hand 
upon Him. There followed an almost 
greater marvel. These men recovered them- 
selves, persuaded themselves in all likelihood, 
as men can so easily do, that the vision 
was nought, that the flaming glory was 
only a phantasm. Herein is the wonder | 


SUPERNATURAL 29 


that He Who could so say, “I am,” as to 
compel men to prostration and to over- 
powering weakness, permitted Himself to 
be bound. This was a demonstration of 
the truth of His assertion, “ No man taketh 
My life from Me, I lay it down of Myself.” 
This was Jesus of Nazareth, but He was 
more. This is a mystery, a marvel, but 
yet it is the solution of the first problem. 
So much was He Jesus of Nazareth that 
they could seize Him and bind Him; so 
much more was He than Jesus of Nazareth 
that, when He but said, “I am,” they be- 
came as dead men in His presence. 

I follow Him along the sorrowful way to 
Pilate’s judgment-bar, and watch the per- 
plexity of Pilate. Some day, when you are 
in doubt about Jesus, about His Deity, 
about His imperial, lonely, splendid dignity, 
read that story again. I now touch it at 
one point only. Pilate, perplexed, astonished, 
and harassed, at last looked into the face of 
this Man in the loneliness of the inner 
chamber to which he had taken Him, and 
said in effect; You know I have power over 
you; you are in my hands. Jesus looked 
back into the face of Pilate and said, “ Thou 
wouldest have no power against Me, except 


30 THE DEATH OF CHRIST: 


it were given thee from above.” From that 
time Pilate worked hard to set Him free, 
but he was unable to do it. The explana- 
tion is to be found in His declaration, “I 
lay down My life . . . no one taketh it 
from Me.” 

Once again, I pass beyond that scene in 
Pilate’s hall to the Cross itself. “Here I can 
only speak in halting words. The longer 
I live, the less I can say in the actual pre- 
sence of that Cross. Yet God help us to 
see this. In all the mystery of the wound- 
ing and the darkness never lose sight of the 
regal dignity of His dying. When He knew 
that all things were accomplished He said, 
“TI thirst.” That is Jesus of Nazareth. 
Then He said, “It is finished: and He 
bowed His head, and gave up His Spirit.” 
That is the Christ, dying by His own will 
and act. 

In the light of these considerations it is 
evident that He clearly apprehended His 
death, but He definitely accepted it as the 
issue of His ministry. There were moments 
when His soul was troubled, when He said, 
“Now is My soul troubled”; but He also 
said, “Father, glorify Thy name.” Thus 
He triumphed. 


SUPERNATURAL 31 


Finally, the death of Jesus was accom- 
plished. 'That is the word used in one of 
the synoptic gospels. Moses and Elijah 
talked, not of the death He should die, but 
of the exodus He should “ accomplish.” In 
our last study we saw the hands of lawless 
men murder Jesus, and so far as they were 
concerned it was murder brutal and wicked : 
and, if I want to know what sin is, I do not 
consult any new philosophy, but that Cross. 
In this study we see the deeper matter. 
Peter said, “Jesus of Nazareth .. . ye by 
the hand of lawless men did crucify and 
slay”; but Peter also said, “ Him, being 
delivered up by the determinate counsel 
and foreknowledge of God.” This Christ, 
Who is God’s Son as well as David’s Son, 
David’s Lord as well as David’s Heir, this 
One went to the Cross, died at His own 
time and by His own choice, apprehending 
the death, accepting the death, accomplish- 
ing the death. 

From this study we may make these de- 
ductions. Christ was supernatural, and 
therefore His death must be considered in 
the light of that fact. Jesus of Nazareth 
was Man of my manhood, but He was 
more. When we speak of His death we 


32 THE DEATH OF CHRIST 


must not speak of it merely as the death 
of aman. We must take into account His 
supernatural nature when we would under- 
stand His death. Therefore the death of 
Christ was unique. ‘There are some wonder- 
ful stories of dying, heroic dying, dastardly 
dying, noble dying, ignoble dying ; but this 
story is unmatched in literature. 

If this be only a dream, a fancy, then I 
am constrained to say, as I am always con- 
strained to say in the presence of these 
stories, in God’s name, find’: me the man 
who dreamed it. My affirmation is that no 
man could have dreamed this. It is unique, 
lonely. It is the story of the death of One 
Who was at once Son of God and Son of Man. 

It was a death in which the conscious- 
ness of God and the consciousness of man 
were identified. God’s consciousness of man 
found expression when the dying One said, 
“My God, My God, why hast Thou forsaken 
Me?” ‘That was the cry of God as He 
gathered into His own heart all the con- 
sciousness of humanity in its lack of Him. 

Man’s consciousness of God found ex- 
pression as the One upon the Cross said, - 
“It is finished,” and “Father, into Thy 
hands I commend My Spirit.” 


SUPERNATURAL 33 


If you would write the truth of the 
Cross in the briefest words you must borrow 
the language of the Apostle and write it 
thus, “ God was in Christ, reconciling the 
world unto Himself.” 

The death of Jesus, if He were a Galilean 
peasant only, was unnatural; but the death 
of this Christ Who is more than man, was 
supernatural, and this explains that. 

This study teaches us that the subject is 
beyond us, and that we can only under- 
stand the purpose of such dying, as God 
reveals the meaning to us. It is outside 
the ken of our philosophy. It is beyond the 
reach of our speculation. It baffles the 
wildest flight of our imagination. That 
God in man should stoop to death creates 
a new wonder, a new amazement, and I 
am constrained to ask the, reason of such 


dying. 


THE DEATH OF THE LORD: 
RECONCILING 


Ill 


THE DEATH OF THE LORD: 
RECONCILING 


“You . . . hath He reconciled in the body of 
His flesh through death.”—Cotossians i. 21, 22. 


HE Cross and Resurrection of Jesus 
completely altered His disciples’ con- 
ception of Him. It is only necessary to 
read carefully the gospel stories, and then 
immediately, and in contrast, the story 
contained in the Acts of the Apostles, to 
see that the attitude of these men toward 
their Master was entirely changed. I am 
not suggesting for a single moment that 
they did not love Him and believe in 
Him before the Cross; but I do most 
certainly affirm that they did not under- 
stand Him. A new conception of His 
Lordship came to them as a result of 
His Resurrection from among the dead. 
This resulted in a new conception of the 
Cross. The Cross had appeared to them 
as supreme tragedy, by which all their 
37 


38 THE DEATH OF THE LORD: 


hopes were put out, all their expectations 
disappointed. The Cross became to them 
the supreme victory, the very way of the 
life which they preached. Before the Cross, 
they had called Him Lord, Master, Teacher ; 
but only in the sense of Teacher, Exemplar, 
Leader. After the Resurrection the title 
Lord meant infinitely more than before, for 
as its light flashed upon the Cross they 
came to know Christ as they had never 
known Him before. This new conception 
of the Lordship of Jesus is most clearly 
set forth in the writings of the Apostles ; 
and nowhere more clearly than in the 
chapter from which the statement is taken 
which is the basis of our meditation. 

We are now to consider the death of the 
Lord; and we use the word Lord, not in 
that earlier, simpler, and incomplete sense in 
which the disciples used it while Jesus was 
still with them; but in that larger, fuller, 
more wonderful sense in which they used 
it after Pentecost, when they looked back 
to the Cross through the fact of the Resur- 
rection, in the light of the Spirit. 

We have considered the death of Jesus 
of Nazareth as perfect Man, and declared it 
was unnatural. We have considered the 


RECONCILING 39 


death of Christ, and declared it to be super- 
natural, a death which cannot be measured 
by any other. Now we come to the con- 
sideration of the meaning of that death in 
the economy of God, as revealed to the 
holy Apostles and writers of the early 
Church ; and we affirm that the death 
which was unnatural if you measure it by 
human standards, supernatural if you look 
upon the Person and glory of Christ, was 
a reconciling death when He is seen as 
Lord in the full meaning of the title. 


E 


Let us first examine the contextual 
teaching concerning the Lordship of Jesus. 

In the earlier part of the chapter we find 
the Person to Whom the Apostle refers. 
An actual Person within human compre- 
hension is certainly referred to, as the 
phrase “the body of His flesh” signifies. 
In the thirteenth verse these words occur, 
“Who delivered us out of the power of 
darkness, and translated us into the king- 
dom of the Son of His love.” In the third 
verse we find these words, “ We give thanks 
to God, the Father of our Lord Jesus 
Christ.” 


40 THE DEATH OF THE LORD: 


This then, is the selfsame Person con- 
cerning Whom we have been speaking in 
previous studies as Jesus of Nazareth, and 
the Christ. He Who was at once David's 
Son and David’s Lord is now spoken of by 
the Apostle in all the full and gracious 
dignity of title, name, and office, as “ the 
Lord Jesus Christ.” It is of this Person 
that the Apostle affirms, “ You... hath He 
reconciled in the body of His flesh through 
death.” 

Between these outstanding verses are 
statements which reveal what the Apostle 
meant by the Lordship of Christ. In them 
he declares what the relation of this Person 
is to God Himself; what the relation of 
this Person is to the whole creation ; and, 
finally, what the relation of this Person is 
to the new creation, the Church. His re- — 
lation to God is expressed in the words, — 
‘Who is the Image of the invisible God” ; 
His relation to creation in the words, “In 
Him were all things created, in the heavens 
and upon the earth, things visible and 
things invisible, whether thrones, or domin- 
ions, or principalities, or powers ; all things 
have been created through Him, and unto 
Him, and He is before all things, and in 


RECONCILING 4] 


Him all things consist”; His relation to 
the Church in the words, “He is the Head 
of the Body, the Church; Who is the Be- 
ginning, the Firstborn from the dead; that 
in all things He might have the pre- 
eminence,” 

That is the ultimate teaching of the New 
‘Testament concerning the Lordship of Christ. 
First, He is Lord by the right of His re- 
lation to the Father. He is the Image, the 
Representation, the Unveiling, the Manifes- 
tation of the invisible God, Who has no 
manifestation save through Him. The 
declaration is not that He became the 
Image of God; but that He is the Image 
of God; He is always the Image of God. 
Or, to use the tenses of human limitation 
in speaking of the abiding etemities, He 
was the Image of God long ere time began, 
ere creation came into being; He will be 
the Image of God in all the ages yet to 
come; He is the One through Whom God 
is always manifest to created beings. 
Whether they be principalities or powers 
in the heavenly places; or things of time 
and sense ; whoever they may be, and when- 
ever they may exist, and wherever their 
habitation may be, God is revealed to them 


42 THE DEATH OF THE LORD: 


through this Person. That one fact sets 
Him at once in the place of Lordship over 
creation; He is indeed, therefore, ‘ Kine 
or Kines, anp Lorp or Lorps,” absolute 
and supreme. 

But He is Lord also by virtue of His 
immediate relation to the Creation. All 
created things exist through the act of 
this Person. The One Whom men called 
Jesus was infinitely more than a Man of 
His own age; He was indeed the Word 
through Whom creation came into being 
and He is the One Who upholds all things 
by the Word of His power; all things 
consist in Him. 

Finally, He is Lord by the mystery of 
His relation to the Church; He is the 
Head of the Church. The two expressions 
which the Apostle uses here concerning this 
Person in His relation to the first creation, 
and to His Church, are full of meaning. 
When he speaks of the relation of Christ 
to the first creation he refers to Him as 
** The Firstborn of all creation.” When he 
speaks of His relation to the Church he 
describes Him as “The Firstborn from the 
dead,” a far more remarkable thing. “The 
Firstborn of all creation” suggests that all 


RECONCILING 43 


created things came in the power of His 
essential life. He commanded and it was 
done. “The Firstborn from the dead” sug- 
gests a renewed life, won out of the mystery 
of death. 

In the Roman letter this selfsame Apostle 
declares, ‘‘ Concerning His Son, Who was 
born of the seed of David according to the 
flesh, Who was declared to be the Son of 
God with power, according to the Spirit of 
Holiness, by the resurrection of the dead, 
even Jesus Christ our Lord.” This con- 
sciousness of the Lordship of Christ resulted 
from Resurrection and Pentecost. 

This Lord Jesus Christ is the Image of 
God, the Manifestation of God; He is the 
originating Creator, and the sustaining 
might in the universe; He is the One Who 
came back out of the experience of death, 
with a new light upon His brow, and new 
life in His gift. He is the Lord of all, and 
is declared to be so with power, by the 
Resurrection from among the dead. 

Let us now examine this word reconciled. 
The Greek word signifies, quite literally, 
an exchange—that is, in this use, a change 
in relationship, the bringing into fellowship 
of things which have been opposed. In our 


44 THE DEATH OF THE LORD: 


text we have a strengthened form of the 
word, which means to fully change, and 
therefore suggests complete reconciliation. 
Both that and the word commonly used 
suggest change back to an original inten- 
tion. Reconciliation is return to true position 
and relationship. 

Wherever. this word is used in.the New 
Testament in regard to man’s relation to 
God, it indicates a change in man, and not 
in God. ‘“ We were reconciled to God,” 
“God Who hath reconciled us to Himself,” 
“Reconciling the world unto Himself,” “ Be 
ye reconciled to God,” “'That He might 
reconcile both unto God,” “To reconcile 
all things unto Himself,” “You ... now 
hath He reconciled . . . to present you 
. . » before Him.” While that grouping of 
Scriptures is incomplete, in that the con- 
text in every case is omitted, it does help 
us to see that the reconciliation of God and 
the sinner, of which the New Testament 
treats, is not God’s reconciliation to the 
sinner, but the sinner’s reconciliation to 
God. This is not a distinction without a 
difference. A clear understanding of it and 
determined adherence to that method of 
expression will throw much light upon this 


RECONCILING 45 


death of Christ, through which our recon- 
eiliation has been made possible. It is not 
that through the death of Christ, God may 
be turned back to the sinner; it is that 
through the death of Christ the sinner may 
be turned back to God. ‘This is quite 
. radical and quite important. It does re- 
cognise a change in the Divine attitude, 
from that which man had any right to 
expect; not an actual change, for God 
never turned His back upon the sinner. 
The only occasion in which we find any- 
thing approaching God’s forsaking man is 
in the mystery of the Cross. God never 
turned His face away from man. Some- 
times, in moments of anguish, men have 
been constrained to speak of themselves as 
God-forsaken. It is never true. Some- 
times, in great consciousness of sin, men are 
constrained to think God has abandoned 
them. It is not so. God has never, never 
turned His back upon a sinner. 

But now let us carefully remember that 
He must have done so but for this passion 
which the mystery of the Cross reveals, 
Yes, but then there is this mystery of the 
passion, and because of it God never. turned 
His back upon a sinner. Man has turned 


46 THE DEATH OF THE LORD: 


his back upon God. Man has set his face 
toward the far country. It is for him to 
turn his face toward God. It is man who 
needs reconciliation to God. By saying this 
I am not lowering the standard of Divine 
holiness. In this use of the word reconcilia- 
tion the New Testament standard of Divine 
holiness is never lowered. Man éannot be 
reconciled to God in his sin. What is 
needed is not God’s reconciliation to man, 
but man’s reconciliation to God, and that 
is impossible while he is still living in sin. 
This attitude of welcome and love is not 
the attitude man has any right to expect. 
If I have turned my back upon my Father's 
home, and have broken His heart, and 
destroyed His substance, and wronged His 
name, what right have I to expect that His 
face will still be toward me? I have a 
right to expect quite another attitude. We 
all talk much about our rights. Do we 
understand that our only right is that of 
eternal banishment from God’s presence ? 
We have none other, not only because we 
are of sinful nature, but because we are 
sinful actually. The right of every self- 
centred soul who has sinned against heaven 
is banishment from God. Yet God’s 


RECONCILING AT 


mightiest work, His greatest concern, is 
that men should be reconciled to Him. 

The reconciliation of God was the result 
of His own action as revealed in Christ, 
and needed no persuasion. The reconcilia- 
tion of man must be by persuasion. Yet 
there can be no reconciliation of holiness 
to guilt, to sin, to wrong, save by the way 
of the Cross, save by the way of that for 
which the Cross stands, and which the Cross 
reveals. 

How is it that God never turned His back 
upon man? With His holiness insulted, 
His righteousness denied, with that law upon 
which the safety of the universe depends 
violated, why did He not abandon man ? 
The deepest answer to that question is to 
be found in the briefest statement, “ God 
is love.” Yet if I said no more than that 
I should do violence to the whole of 
Scripture revelation. Love cannot deny 
light. Light is an integral part of love. 
We have never understood the truth about 
God when we separate between His light 
and His love, between His righteousness 
and His mercy. God is the stern and 
unbending foe of sin because He is love. 
If you can persuade me to believe that 


48 THE DEATH OF THE LORD: 


God will excuse sin in any life, or under 
any circumstances, in that moment you 
persuade me that God is not love. It is 
the passion of His heart, the deep love of 
His nature which makes Him the sworn 
enemy of sin, and will never allow Him to 
sign a truce with it in individual life, in 
society, in the nation, in the world, or in 
the universe. 

Theologians have often told us that love 
is one of the attributes of God. Love is © 
the sum total of the attributes. Love is to 
the attributes of God what character is 
to the characteristics of a man. Break up 
character, and you may speak of character- 
istics. Break up the essence of God, and 
you may speak of attributes. Gather the 
whole of the characteristics, and know them 
in their true relationships, and you know 
character. Gather the attributes together, 
and the sum total is love. It is because ot 
love that God never turned His back upon 
man; but that love is the sternest foe of 
sin. 

Love is nevertheless mightier than sin. 
It suffers, and upon the basis of that 
suffering, is able to forgive, and in no 
other way. Love gathered into its own 


RECONCILING 49 


consciousness all the issue and outcome of 
man’s rebellion, and the only thing which 
love can never forgive by the way of its 
suffering is refusal to be forgiven by love 
through suffering, The only sin which is 
unpardonable is the sin of rejecting the 
testimony of love in Jesus by the Holy 
Spirit. Jf 1 will. not .reesive forgiveness 
based upon righteousness, which is the out- 
come of the suffering of love, the very love 
and suffering of God Himself, then God 
Himself, for love of His universe, cannot 
recelve me into fellowship with Himself, 
These are the essential facts. It is by the 
way of Calvary that we have learnt these 
truths. In the mystery of the dying of 
this Person, the Lord Jesus Christ, there 
was wrought out into visibility that infinite 
and eternal truth. Do not imagine for one 
single moment that by the dying of the 
Man Jesus of Nazareth, apart from the fact 
that He was other than Man, the race has 
been redeemed. Do not for a single moment 
imagine that by the dying of a Man upon 
the Cross, God was persuaded to change His 
attitude toward man. That which we see 
in the Cross did not begin at the point of 
the material Cross. The Lamb was slain 
4 


50 THE DEATH OF THE LORD: 


from the foundation of the world. In the 
moment in which man sinned against God, 
God gathered into His own heart of love 
the issue of that sin, and it is not by the 
death of a Man, but by the mystery of the 
passion of God, that He is able to keep 
His face turned in love toward wandering 
men, and welcome them as they turn back 
to Him. Had there been no passion in 
His heart, no love, no suffering of Deity, 
no man could ever have returned to Him. 
Had He been none other than holy and 
righteous, and had there been no emotion, 
no tenderness, then He might have vindi- 
cated His holiness by the annihilation of 
the race. To know what God is we listen 
to some of the verses of the Old Testament. 
Go back to the beginning of beginnings 
and hear the voice in the dark, “ Adam, 
where art thou?” My beloved and revered 
friend, Dr. Henry Weston, said: “That is 
not the call of a policeman; it is the wail 
of a Father over a lost child.” Hosea, 
out of his own heart’s sorrow, expressed 
the feeling of God’s heart concerning the 
wandering, “ How shall I give thee up, 
‘Ephraim ?” That is God’s attitude toward 
all sinning men. He has gathered up 


RECONCILING 51 


into His own Being, not by mechanical’ 
effort, but by the very necessity of His 
nature, all the suffering which issues from sin. 

Men did not know it, and could not 
understand it; and therefore God came 
into human form and human life, to the 
actuality of human suffering, on the green 
hill and upon the rugged Cross, working 
out into visibility all the underlying, 
eternal truth of the passion of His love, 
that men seeing it, might understand it, 
and put their trust in Hini. Therefore by 
this actual historic and material death, the 
reconciliation of man is alone possible. 

“You ... hath He”—the Image of. 
God, the Creator of worlds, the Head of 
His Church—“ reconciled in the body of His _ 
flesh through death.” Not that He recon- 
ciled God to man, for he was God Himself ; 
but that He through that death has made 
possible the reception to Himself of sinning 
men, and that through that death He makes 
His great appeal to man in his rebellion, 
calling him to turn back to God. 

What is the need of man to-day? Why 
are men afraid of God? Those of you who 
are His own children fear the Lord and 
cling to Him. The man who does not 


52 THE DEATH OF THE LORD: 


know God is afraid that God will hurt him. 
Those who know Him are afraid lest they 
should hurt God. The difference is radical. 
One is slavish; the other is filial. One drives 
us away from Him; the other keeps us close 
to Him. 

Why is the man who slavishly fears God 
afraid? I will tell you. Go back to the 
early Genesis story. At the end of the 
day the man is hiding. Why did he hide? 
Had God changed? No. Man hid because 
he had changed—he had sinned.. That is 
why men are afraid of God. It is because 
of their sin. They are afraid of God, and 
the fear keeps them at a distance from Him, 
and the fear is born first of all of actual sin, 
and then of consciousness of paralysis and 
inability to please Him. 

God answers that fear in the Cross. He — 
declares by that Cross that sin is borne, | 
carried, put away. He affirms by that — 
Cross that, though men are afraid of Him, 
He loves them with such love as never — 
can be expressed or measured in human — 
words. He announces by that Cross, that | 
at infinite cost, by the mystery of the | 
passion which knows no human measure- 
ment, He gives pardon and new life. 


RECONCILING 53 


Then there is nothing for me to do other 
than to look into the face of Jesus, Who 
is Lord, and say, “ He loved me, and gave 
Himself for me.” 

Theory of Atonement? Nay, verily, but 
the great fuct of Atonement. Explanation 
of the Cross? Nay, verily, but the great 
healing Jove that wins through suffering ; 
and will receive us just as we are, if 
we will turn our eyes from man to Him; 
and will blot out all our sin, and make us 
all He would have us to be. 


THE CROSS AND THE SINNER 


IV 
THE CROSS AND THE SINNER 


““In whom we have our redemption through His 
blood, the forgiveness of our trespasses, according 
to the riches of His grace.” —Epuusrans i. 7. 


5 sense of God as personal involves 

conviction of His supremacy. It has 
been objected that personality ought not 
to be predicated of God, because person- 
ality implies limitation; but that is to 
misinterpret personality. It is of man that 
personality cannot be perfectly predicated, 
because man is limited. Perfect personality 
is unlimited, God alone is perfect in person- 
ality. _ 

The sense of the supremacy of God creates 
the consciousness of sin. If our doctrine 
of God lose the note that affirms His 
personality, our doctrine of sin will lose 
the note that brings conviction. If God 
be known as personal and sovereign, man 
is conscious of sin. We may call it by 
any name we please—I care nothing for the 

57 


58 THE CROSS AND THE SINNER 


name; we may speak of it as failure, as 
missing the mark, as coming short; the 
fact remains that directly man is conscious 
of God, and of His supremacy in the 
universe, he is also conscious of the fact 
that he has come short of the Divine re- 
quirement. That is conviction of sin. I 
am not now accounting for this widespread 
conviction, but I affirm that it is present. 

I go one step further. The sense of God 
as personal perpetually causes a desire to 
be free from sin; or, in other words, a 
desire for forgiveness, These three things 
are interdependent. To destroy in either 
order is to destroy wholly. Deny the 
doctrine of the personality of God, and 
you immediately weaken the consciousness 
of sin, and consequently man becomes care- 
less about forgiveness. Let a man become 
careless concerning forgiveness of sin, it is 
because his conception of sin is not that of 
disobedience, and such weakening invariably 
issues from some conception of God that 
dethrones Him from the place of actual 
supremacy in the universe. 

The message of the Christian evangel is 
to the sinner—that is, to the man who 
is conscious of God, and of his own failure ; 


THE CROSS AND THE SINNER 59 


and who, in the deepest of his heart, would 
fain be free from failure. The message of 
the Cross is to that man. While the 
ultimate meaning of the Christian message 
goes out into that sinless life which lies 
beyond the present one, it begins with the 
forgiveness of sins. The first thing that 
Christ says to the soul who turns to Him 
is, “Thy sins are forgiven.” That is not 
final; it is elementary. But it is funda- 
mental. 

In this text we discover: first, this first 
issue of redemption, “forgiveness”; in the 
second place, the method of redemption, 
“through His blood”; and finally, the 
source of redemption, “the riches of His 
grace.” The Apostle moves back from the 
initial experience, and indicates the channel 
through which it comes, until finally, in 
one phrase full of beauty, he reminds us 
of the source from which the stream flows 
forth. 

“The forgiveness of our trespasses”; that 
is the first issue of redemption. “Through 
His blood”; that is the method of re- 
demption. “The riches of His grace”; 
that is the fountain head of redemption, the 
spring amid the eternal hills whence the 


60 THE CROSS AND THE SINNER 


great river flows. Or to state these things 
in the other order. The fountain head: 
“the riches of His grace.” The channel 
through which the river flows: “through 
His blood.” The gift the river brings: “ the 
forgiveness of our trespasses.” 


I \ 

First, then, “ the forgiveness of our tres- 
passes.” This is so universally understood 
as a need—observe carefully that I do not 
say the method is universally understood— 
this is so universally understood as a need, 
that I do not propose to dwell upon it, 
save to emphasise the strength of the 
thought as it is here stated. 

Sir Oliver Lodge has declared that the 
intelligent man to-day does not think about 
sin. I believe the intelligent man does 
think about sin, because he has to face 
the fact of sin. He may call it by other 
names. He may invent scientific termino- 
logy to describe the fact of which he is 
conscious; but the fact is there, and the 
intelligent man never shuts his eyes to facts 
—he faces them. 

Because man is universally conscious of 
sin, he is also conscious of the need for 


THE CROSS AND THE SINNER 61 


forgiveness. He may not explain the need 
as I would. He may have lost his sense 
of relationship to the throne of the Eternal. 
He may speak of forces where I speak of 
God. But there is no man who knows his 
failure who does not, in the deepest of him, 
wish it had not been, wish it could be 
undone, regret the fact of it. The passion 
for perfection is one of the common in- 
heritances of the human heart. No man is 
really, in his deepest life, content with 
imperfection. Every man admires _per- 
fection. Every man would if he could 
realise it in every department of life, 
There is no man who loves sin. He may 
love the things that sin suggests to him, 
but every man is against his own sin. 

In this text the Apostle makes use of two 
words, which we must note—“ trespasses,” 
and “forgiveness.” The etymology of the 
Greek word here translated “ trespasses ” 
suggests a falling out—a falling out of line. 
Trench says that the word means falling, 
where one ought to have stood upright, 
whether wilfully or not. It is the fact of 
falling. This word you will find, as you 
study the New Testament, is used sometimes 
of what we in these days call the smaller 


62 THE CROSS AND THE SINNER 


sins, or faults; but it is also used of the 
final and most awful sin of actual and 
absolute apostasy. It is an inclusive term. 
It is a word which includes all those devi- 
ations from the will of God which trouble 
the soul of man. Swiftly and silently think 
back over the line of your own life. Tres- 
passes! There they lie, back through the 
years. If we could undo some of them! 
Peccadilloes, faults, deviations from the 
straight line of duty ; tragedies, vulgarities 
are all there! The word sweeps over the 
whole of them. I am not discussing the 
mystery of original sin. The Apostle does 
not refer to it here, save as these are the 
fruit of the underlying principle, save as 
these are the apples of Sodom growing out 
of the root which in itself is poisoned. 
The etymology of the Greek word trans- 
lated “forgiveness” suggests freedom. The 
root idea is that of being “sent out,” “sent 
forth.” This particular word is variously 
translated in the New Testament, “ deliver- 
ance,” “liberty,” “ remission,” “ forgiveness.” 
Let the text be read with some of these 
words substituted, “In Whom we have our 
redemption through His blood, the deliver- 
ance of our sins,” “the liberty of our sins,” 


THE CROSS AND THE SINNER 63 


“the remission of our sins.” It is a word 
which recognises all the bondage into which 
our sins have brought us, of guilt, of 
pollution, of power; and declares that by 
this redemption we are set free therefrom. 
Not free merely from the penalty. I did 
not name the penalty—not that the penalty 
is not included—but I named the things, 
which being removed, the penalty is also 
removed. Penalty is a consequence. For- 
giveness is liberty from the guilt of sin, 
liberty from the pollution of sin, liberty 
from the power of sin. Forgiveness means 
far more than saying; Never mind, I will 
pass it over, I will make no further refer- 
ence to it.’ God never forgives that way. 
He never violates the cosmic order by 
lightly passing over the activity of disorder 
which wrecks and ruins human life and 
human history. New Testament forgive- 
ness I can never extend to my own child. 
I cannot free my child from the guilt of 
wrong done. I cannot cleanse my child 
from the pollution which has gathered upon 
his mind as the result of wrong done. I 
cannot break the power of habit in my 
child through forgiveness. Consequently, 
whenever I try to illustrate Divine forgive- 


64 THE CROSS AND THE SINNER 


ness by human I fail; for the symbol can- 
not perfectly convey the infinite meaning. 
Forgiveness is to be set loose from sins, 
their guilt gone, their pollution ceased, their 
power broken. That is what the world 
needs. ‘This is what the Christian message 
declares, and what Jesus Christ offers to 
men first. It is the beginning; it is not 
the last: thing; but, blessed be God, it is 
the first! ik 


we have our redemption through His blood.” 
It is impossible to read the New Testa- 
ment without noticing the constancy o: 
this figure. All the writers and teache rs 
make use of it in one way or another. 
** Purchased with His own blood,” “Justi- 
fied by His blood,” “Having made peace 
through the blood of His Cross,” ‘“Re- 
deemed, not with corruptible things, with 
silver or gold . . . but with precious blood 

. even the blood of Christ,” “If we 
walk in the light, as He is in the light, 
we have fellowship one with another, and 
the blood of Jesus Christ, His Son, cleanseth 
us from all sin.” These are but illustra- 


THE CROSS AND THE SINNER 65 


tions. Reverently we ask; What is the 
meaning of it? 

There are those who have taken objec- 
tion to it, and have attempted to express 
the truth in some other way. They ask for 
a new terminology. I never object to new 
terminology — indeed, I prefer new ter- 
minology for a new thing, to the old 
terminology robbed of its essential heart 
and life and meaning. I am told we need 
a new terminology, and that it will be safe 
for us to say, “redemption through His life.” 

Let us think of this. It is perhaps by 
consideration of the suggested phrase that 
we shall begin to see the meaning of the 
great and awful and appalling words, “ re- 
demption through His blood.” Is it not 
true that blood is life? Perfectly true. 
Under the Mosaic economy the require- 
ments in this respect were direct and 
stringent. Either in so many words, or 
in other words equivalent, the declaration 
is repeated, ‘“‘ The blood is the life.” These 
things were written long before science had 
come to illuminate them. I need hardly 
stay to remind you that men have only 
known anything concerning the circulation 
of the: blood for about two and a half 

5 


66 THE CROSS AND THE SINNER 


centuries; yet that discovery, in all its 
wonderful unfolding and explanation, does 
but add infinite meaning to the old Mosaic 
word. Scientific men tell us that in blood 
there are certain vital facts: resistance, so 
that the blood, in healthy life, maintains its 
temperature as against heat and cold; 
organisation, so that if you break in upon 
the flesh, and close it again, the organism 
will be renewed by the action of the blood ; 
fluidity, so that the blood contains in fluid 
form that which tends to solidity; and 
finally, hear the mystery of it! death, the 
final proof of life. ‘The blood is the life.” 

Remember that the flesh in man is the 
outward symbol of the man himself. Re- 
member that the essential in human life 
is the spirit. Yet the blood most perfectly 
sets forth the essential. “The blood is the 
life.” It is a purely physical declaration, 
yet an absolutely true one. 

The Bible however, does not teach tue 
a man is saved by that principle, but by ; 
the shedding of blood. Salvation is not 
through life lived, but through life poured — 
out. It is not by the life of Jesus that we — 
are redeemed ; but by His life given up in — 


the pain and suffering of a shameful death, — 


THE CROSS AND THE SINNER 67 


of which death there is no sufficient symbol 
or method of expression other than that of 
the shedding of blood. Redemption is pro- 
vided, not by the richness of His life pos- 
sessed, but -by the suffering of His life 
poured out. As the blood in the physical 
life is the symbol of the spiritual, so in 
the actual outpouring of the blood of the 
Man of Nazareth there was symbolised that 
infinite mystery of essential Love bending 
to suffering and pain and death, gathering 
into itself that which is against itself in 
inherent principle, and suffering, in order 
that through that suffering there might be 
accomplished something which cannot be 
accomplished without it. It is through the 
shedding of blood that there is remission. 
The moment we destroy this outward 
symbolism of words, we inevitably begin to 
contradict the infinite mystery which lies 
behind them, and which they do symbolise, 
The moment we begin to say there is no 
virtue in the actual blood, the physical 
blood of long ago, we are on the verge of 
denying the lonely, separate suffering of 
God in Christ, through which, and through 
which alone, it is possible for forgiveness, 
which is at once freedom from the guilt 


68 THE CROSS AND THE SINNER 


and pollution and power of sin, to be pro- 
nounced upon men. I lay this emphasis 
here because, as I have said, the question 
‘is often asked; Why may we not get rid 
of the phrasing, Cleansed by blood, and say, 
Cleansed by life? Because when we get . 
rid of the phrasing we get rid of the truth. 
It is not by the life, but by the life laid 
down; not by the richness and beauty of 
the ideal, but by the mystery of its break- 
ing and buffeting and suffering and death 
that it is possible for forgiveness to be 
pronounced. 

Concentrating the thought for a moment 
upon the Man Jesus, knowing that He is 
but the window through which we look into 
the infinite and eternal mystery which lies 
behind, let us very carefully understand 
that not by the beauty of the human 
example can He forgive sins; not by all 
the rich glory of the wonderful life that 
holds us in its thrall and fascination can 
He pronounce absolution ; but only as that 
life was bruised, a symbol of the very 
bruising of the Infinite, for “God was in 
Christ.” There can be no divorce between 
God and Christ if we would understand the 
Cross. 


THE CROSS AND THE SINNER 69 


Ill 


We pass to the last of these thoughts, 
which takes us back to the original source— 
“the riches of His grace.” Our freedom 
from sin is through “the riches of His 
grace.” The death which makes possible 
our freedom from sin is through “the 
riches of His grace.” What a revelation 
of God we have here! I pause for poverty 
of words and for lack of ability to lead 
you to these great heights. One can speak 
of the realm of conscious sin, for how have 
we known it! One can say something in 
the realm of suffering through which we 
have been pardoned, or may be pardoned, 
for we know the Cross! But when man 
tries to pass behind these matters and come 
into those far-reaching, infinite things, ex- 
pressed in this word, “the riches of His 


> what can we say? We can only” 


grace,’ 
reach these heights by coming again through 
the Cross. In the Cross the nature of God 
is revealed in His attitude toward the 
sinner. It is that of grace; not something 
sickly and sentimental, but the great ne- 
cessity of loving; Love in action—that is 
grace; or, if you will, Love itself, that 


70 THE CROSS AND THE SINNER 


which precedes action, the thought, the 
will, the purpose; and we see the heart 
and nature of God in this unveiling of 


His thought and purpose toward sinning , 


man. 

Grace in the heart of God was not 
created by the Passion. The Passion was 
created by the grace. The work of the 
Cross, this blood redemption; the redemp- 
tion of which blood and _blood-shedding 
are the only fit sign and symbol—this work 
of the Cross did not persuade God to 
graciousness. God’s grace did compel this 
Passion of the Cross, and therein is a revela- 
tion of the nature of God. 

Therein also is unveiled the will of God 
in the work He did for the sinner. When 
man has sinned and is guilty and polluted 
and paralysed, in order to his saving, Love 


~ 


~ 


will go to the uttermost extreme. We > 


never know all the beauty of the declara- 
tions concerning love on the human plane 
until we see them placed in the light of 
the heavenly revelation. “ Love is strong as 
death,” mightier than the grave. Love will 
break through every barrier. The will of 


God becomes revealed in the light of this. 


great Cross, 


THE CROSS AND THE SINNER 71 


But more. Not only the nature of God 
and the will of God are revealed, but also 
the power of God. All these things are in 
our word “ grace.” Grace is that which is 
born amid the eternal hills; but it is also 
the river which proceedeth from the throne 
of God and of the Lamb. Notice Paul’s 
word, “ the riches of His grace,” the fulness 
of His grace. There is a measurement for 
His gree. Take another of Paul’s phrases, 
“the viches of His glory.” What gleams 
of it ve have had in creation, in govern- 
ment, n prophetic song and vision, in the 
hope tiat is in our heart of the ultimate 
victoris! “The riches of His glory” is 
the measurement of “the riches of His 
grace.” As is His glory, so is His grace ; 
so thai this selfsame Apostle, writing to 
Titus, brings the two things into juxtaposi- 
tion. ‘ The grace of God hath appeared, 
bringing salvation to all men, instructing 
us, to the intent that, denying ungodliness 
and waldly lusts, we should live soberly and 
righteusly and godly in this present world, 
looking for the blessed hope and appearmg 
of the glory of our great God and Saviour 
Jesus Christ.” In that great passage the 
thougit of Paul was fixed upon the two 


72 THE CROSS AND THE SINNER> 


advents of Jesus: the appearing of grace 
when He came, the appearing of glory 
when He comes ; the appearing of grace in 
the loneliness of His first advent, His 
ministry, His patience, and His dying ; the 
appearing of glory in the splendour of His 
second advent, and the triumph of His 
administration. Can you measure this ? 
When you can measure this you can measure 
that. When you can understand the nean- 
ing of the glory which at last shall triumph, 
in the hope of which we rejoice evn in 
affliction and limitation, then you can under- 

stand the fulness of His grace. | 
A spurious, latter- -day refinement, vhich 
objects to the mention of blood, is) both 
sickly and sinful. A deeper sentiment 
would be conscious that the awful Hlood- 
shedding of the Son of God is the most 
terrible revelation of the meaning o° sin, 
and is in itself proof of the dire ne ssity 
for such means of salvation. Do 46 let 
us forget this. I want to utter this with 
all the solemnity of conviction. I pity 

from my heart the man who tells r 

objects to the phrasing concerning b 
I pity him, for he is suffering from a soft, 
a 


: 


sentimental ignorance of his own heart 


THE CROSS AND THE SINNER 73 


ignorance of the actual deceitfulness and 
heinousness of sin. 

They say that the Cross of Jesus is 
vulgar! I know it. Never was there any- 
thing so vulgar in human history as the 
Cross of Jesus! But where is the vulgarity ? 
It is in the sin that mauled Him and put 
Him there. It is your vulgarity. It is my 
vulgarity. It is the vulgarity that lies and 
cheats, that is impure, that laughs at sin, 
or speaks of it as though it were some- 
thing to be pitied. It is the vulgarity 
that has lost its sense of the high throne 
of God and the white purity of His heaven. 
It is the vulgarity of the age which drags 
God off His throne and makes Him merely 
a force in His creation, and denies right- 
eousness and purity. That is the vulgarity 
that lifted the Cross! Sin is so vulgar that 
it can only be dealt with by that which 
violates the essential life of God. The 
Cross? Yea, verily; but the rough, brutal 
Roman gibbet was only the expression in 
time of something far more terrible. 
Those two pieces of timber and a dying 
Man! Awful, terrible; but infinitely worse 
was the pain of God, which was invisible 
save through that Cross. In His rich grace 


74 THE CROSS AND THE SINNER 


He took hold upon sin and expressed, in 
the suffering of His only Son, its vul- 
garity. 

Thank God, He did more, for that very 
Cross of blood and shame is radiant with 
the glorious light of the infinite Grace ; for, 
even at the cost of such suffering as makes 
poor half-cultured man _ shudder, Love, 
determined on man’s salvation, accomplished 
it. Yes, disease is vulgar; but the mother 
and the nurse who touch it, to heal it, are 
not vulgar. Contact with it in order to 
heal it is not vulgar. I come to the Cross 
to bow my head in shame, and smite my 
breast with remorse. Vulgar Cross; but 
that in it which is vulgar is my sin. Shining 
through it is the light that comes from 
the throne; and flowing through it is the 
great river of His grace. 

Now hear me in this final word. You 
tell me that the only atonement possible 
to me is by my own suffering upward to 
something higher. If you could persuade 
me that God could be satisfied with such 
salvation, I cannot be satisfied with it. 

“Out, damned spot!” That is the true 
cry of human nature. The stain cannot 
be removed without blood, and that which 


THE CROSS AND THE SINNER 75 


is infinitely more, and deeper, and_pro- 
founder, and more terrible than blood, of 
which blood is but the symbol—the suffering 
of Deity. 

Blessed be God, this is the evangel for 
me. Oh soul of mine, guilty, polluted, 
paralysed, we have “our redemption 
through His blood, the forgiveness of our 
trespasses.” There my conscience finds 
rest. There I begin a new life, lifting my 
eyes toward the ultimate ages, God’s last 
purpose for me made possible because He 
is able to forgive my sins. 


THE CROSS AND THE SAINT 


V 
THE CROSS AND THE SAINT 


“* Becoming conformed unto His death.’ 
Puiviprians iii, 10. 


eee brief passage of Scripture occurs 

in the midst of a wonderful piece of 
spiritual autobiography, in which Paul re- 
vealed the bearing of past experiences and 
of future expectations upon his then present 
life. 

In the first part of the passage we are 
presented with a picture of the days before 
Christ apprehended him, as the Apostle 
declared to the Philippian Christians that, 
if there were any man who considered he 
had the right to boast in the flesh, he, Paul, 
had a greater right. 

He next referred to a moment in his life 
when his whole outlook was changed, when 
his conceptions of things were radically 
revolutionised, so that he was able to write, 
“What things were gain to me these have 

79 


80 THE CROSS AND THE SAINT 


I counted loss.” It was a moment when 
he gathered up all the things which hitherto 
had been most precious to him, and casting 
them beneath his feet, trampled on them 
as worthless. It was a moment of which 
worldly men would speak as the occasion 
of a great renunciation, or of a great fool- 
hardiness. In that hour he had turned his 
back upon his ambitions and upon all the 
things he had valued most ; and they were 
not mean things, they were not base things, 
they were not ignoble things; they were 
the things of nationality, of blood, of 
morality, and of religion. Nevertheless, the 
vision he saw was of such nature as to make 
these most sacred things of his life psec 
in his eyes as refuse, 

He then declared, that from the moment 
when Christ apprehended him, his one 
ambition, an ambition which had become 
an all-consuming passion, and constituted 
the driving force of his life, was that he 
might apprehend Christ. 

That ambition he described in brief but 
suggestive words, “That I may know Him, 
and the power of His Resurrection, and the 
fellowship of His sufferings, becoming con- 
formed unto His death.” 


THE CROSS AND THE SAINT 81 


These last words do not describe the 
consummation of his ambition; they rather 
reveal his conviction as to the only condi- 
tion upon which that ambition could be 
realised. 

“Becoming conformed unto His death” 
is not the ultimate experience; it is the 
initial condition. The Apostle did not mean 
to say ; I desire to know Him, and the power 
of His Resurrection, and the fellowship of 
His sufferings, and then finally; I desire 
to be conformed unto His death. He 
intended rather to say; I desire “to know 
Him, and the power of His Resurrec- 
tion, and the fellowship of His  suffer- 
ings,” by “becoming conformed unto His 
death.” 

All those who have been apprehended. of 


_ Christ, who have seen the vision, and. heard 


the voice, and known experimentally His 
victory over them, share the Apostle’s desire 
to know Him, to know the power of His 
Resurrection, to know the fellowship of His 
sufferings. This desire can only be fulfilled 
as they become “ conformed unto His death.” 
Every living experience of Christianity 
begins at the Cross. The experience of the 
Cross is not final, but it is fundamental. 


6 


82 THE CROSS AND THE SAINT 


We are not dealing in our present con- 
sideration with that value of the Cross with 
which our last subject had to do. Therein 
we considered the fact that the Cross is 
the manifestation of an activity of God in 
Christ, in which activity man in his sinful 
nature can have no part, but out of which 
activity a value is provided, which man 
must receive as the free gift of infinite 
grace. 

We are now attempting to deal rather 
with the subject of that identification with 
Christ in His Cross, without which there 
can neither be true knowledge of Him- 
self, nor experience of the power of His 
Resurrection, and of the fellowship of His 
sufferings. 

This distinction can hardly be over-em- 
phasised. The relation of the Christian to 
the Cross by faith is twofold ; it is first that 
from which he escapes by Christ’s presence 
there; it is then that into identification 
with which he must come, if he would find 
his way into realisation of the Resurrection 
life which lies beyond. 

Our first relation to the Cross is that of 
the sense that in it, God in Christ ex- 
perienced that from which we escape. 


THE CROSS AND THE SAINT 83 


I see the crowd in Pilate’s hall, 
I mark their wrathful mien. 
Their shouts of “ Crucify ” appal, 
With blasphemy between. 
But of that shouting multitude 

I know that I am one. 


In this first approach to the Cross, man 
finds his place not on the Cross, but in the 
company of those who have put Christ 
there. Each one standing before it has to 
confess; It is my sin that binds Him to 
the tree, and not the nails which have been 
driven through His hands and His feet. 
He is there in my place. The height, the 
depth, the length, the breadth of it we 
cannot measure. ‘The infinite mystery of 
it we can never fathom, for at the centre 
is God. We can no more lay our measure- 
ment upon the mystery of that atoning 
death than we can compress Deity into the 
compass of our finite understanding. In this 
sense we approach the Cross empty-handed, 
to receive the great and inestimable gift 
of grace “without money and_ without 
price.” 

That gift being received, by our accept- 
ance of it we become identified with the 
underlying principles which have their 


84 THE CROSS AND THE SAINT 


supreme manifestation in the Cross. It is 
ours therefore, reverently to inquire what 
those underlying principles are, in order that 
we may understand what the Apostle meant 
when he spoke of becoming “conformed 
unto His death,” or in the Galatian letter, 
of being “ crucified with Christ.” 


I 


First, then, the Cross was the supreme 
demonstration of Christ's absolute confor- 
mity to the will of God. That principle 
might be expressed in other terms. We 
might speak of His submission to the will 
of God, of His abandonment to the will 
of God, of His acquiescence in the will of 
God, Nevertheless, even though it may 
appear as though I were making a distinction 
without a difference, to my own mind there 
are suggestions in all these words of the 
possibility of elements which were not 
present. Submission may presuppose a 
previous rebellion, Abandonment and ac- 
quiescence are words which may leave upon 
‘the mind the impression that there had 
been some difficulty which was overcome by 
voluntary surrender. The word “con- 


THE CROSS AND THE SAINT 85 


formity” does not include any such 
ideas. 

The will of God has been the master- 
passion of the life of Jesus. That may be 
granted without argument. It is clearly 
evident that in the mind of Christ there 
was the ever-present consciousness that the 
will of God was ultimately that of suffering 
and sorrow through which it would be 
possible for Him—that is, God—to com- 
municate His grace to men. Thrice 
voluntarily in the story of the life of Jesus, 
we discover Him choosing the will of God 
even while He knew that it included suf- 
fering, sorrow, and shame: at His baptism, 
when He consented to be numbered with 
the transgressors; on the Transfiguration 
Mount, when He discussed with heavenly 
visitors the accomplishment of His exodus ; 
on the occasion of the expressed desire of 
the Greeks to see Him, when, although His 
soul was troubled, He prayed, “ Father 
glorify Thy name.” He revealed the 
fact of His conformity to the will of 
God. 

Thrice He overcame temptation in the 
power of His conformity ; first, in the wilder- 
ness, when He declined to accept the 


86 THE CROSS AND THE SAINT 


suggestion that He should possess the 
kingdoms by a moment’s homage to Satan ; 
secondly when, in answer to the suggestion 
of Peter that He should spare Himself 
He rebuked him in language full of unutter- 
able sternness ; and finally, in Gethsemane, 
in the mystery of that hour of agony, out 
of which He cried. “Father, ifs Thou be 
willing, remove this cup from Me ™. and 
immediately added, “ Nevertheless, not My 
will, but Thine be done.” In the Cross we 
see the ultimate expression of this conformity, 
as our eyes rest upon a Man, not entering 
into conflict with God, but acting in con- 
formity with His will. 

Being “ conformed unto His death,” then, 
means that we begin our life where He 
finally expressed the master-passion of His 
own; and that as we receive the benefit 
of that Cross, coming to us as a gift of 
grace, by such reception we consent that 
henceforth our lives shall be mastered by 
the principle which He therein finally ex- 
pressed. Becoming “conformed unto His 
death” means conformity to the will of 
God—that will, chosen as a principle, dis- 
covered in its plan, and obeyed in its pro- 
gramme, 


THE CROSS AND THE SAINT 87 


It may be affirmed that this does not 
seem to be a difficult thing. It is perfectly 
true that it is not difficult when once 
the will has actually yielded; but it is in 
that act of yielding that the experience 
of the Cross is encountered. Conformity to 
the death of Christ does not consist in 
singing hymns about the will of God, or 
rejoicing in the intellectual apprehension 
of its perfection. It means rather the 
actual testing of every desire, and every 
affection thereby. All those which are out 
of harmony with that will must be de- 
stroyed. When the will of God is truly 
chosen as a principle, we no longer ask ; 
What will our neighbours think? but; 
What will God think? no longer, What 
do we desire? but, What does God desire ¢ 
no longer, What line of action will be 
pleasing to ourselves ? but, What will please 
God? 

Moreover, the principle must operate not 
merely in the great crises, but in the com- 
monplaces of life. It is in these that 
we are made or marred. No man was ever 
ruined in a crisis, whose moral fibre had 
not already been weakened in the common- 
places. Reverently looking at the Cross 


88 THE CROSS AND THE SAINT 


again, recognising it as the ultimate ex- 
pression of the conformity of Jesus to the 
will of God, we remember the life which 
led to it, and recall some of its revealing 
declarations. “JZ seck . . . the will of 
Him that sent Me”; “ My meat is to do 
the will of Him that sent Me”; “I do 
always the things that are pleasing to Him.” 
Thus through all His life the mystic music 
of His declarations revealed the inner 
passion, the inspiration of His life; until 
at last, in continuity of co-operation with 
the will of God, He took His way to the 
Cross. 

Becoming *‘‘conformed unto His death” 
means that we take up the Cross daily, and 
follow Him; that we consent to deny self 
and enthrone Him; that whether it be in 
the hour of some supreme choosing, or 
for the constant decisions of the passing 
moments ; whether it be as to the calling 
which we are to follow, or as to the next 
thing we are to do; whether it be as 
to the choice of a life partnership, or 
as to the selection of the acquaintances 
of the passing days,—there is to be but 
one question asked; What is the will of 
God? 


THE CROSS AND THE SAINT 89 


Those who have most fully entered into 
this experience will say that this is not 
death; and what they affirm is certainly 
true. Death is the way into life. That 
life is described in the previous language of 
the Apostle, “to know Him, and the power 
of His Resurrection, and the fellowship of 
His sufferings.” That life however, is never 
entered but by becoming “ conformed unto 
His death” ; and in the moment in which we 
yield ourselves to the mastery of the will 
of God we inevitably pass through the ex- 
perience of crucifixion. 


II 


In the second place, the Cross was the 
place of Christ’s utter outpouring of Him- 
self in the service of men. As we look 
again upon Christ crucified, three things 
are evidently set forth before our eyes: 
Christ’s estimate of man’s value; His answer 
to man’s sin; and His method for man’s 
saving. 

No one who has truly seen the Cross of 
Christ can’ ever again speak of hopeless 
cases. He who declares that humanity is 
hopeless is looking at ##, rather than at 


90 THE CROSS AND THE SAINT 


the Cross. Christ knew what we speak of 
as the hopelessness of humanity. He stood 
amidst the men of light and leading in His 
own day, and said, “If ye then, being evil, 
know how to give good gifts unto your 
children.” “ Being evil!” He was familiar 
with human philanthropy, and.that good- 
ness of heart of which to-day we hear much, 
for did He not say, “Ye give good gifts 
unto your children”? but He also said, “Ye, 
being evil,” and said it of men who mani- 
fested kindness of heart. When we know 
His estimate of evil, such language seems 
to be of the essence of pessimism. When 
we turn to the Cross we find that, while 
it still recognises the fact of the evil of 
the human heart, it nevertheless reveals 
in unmistakable manner His estimate of 
humanity. Being evil, it is yet possible 
of redemption; it is worth dying for. He 
saw the stain, and understood its degrada- 
tion and hopelessness as we cannot, save 
as we see it with His eyes. He was not 
deceived about human nature. “ Being evil,” 
nevertheless He died for men whom He 
thus described. 

I repeat therefore, that no man who has 
looked into the love-lit eyes of the dying 


THE CROSS AND THE SAINT 91 


Christ can ever speak of another as hope- 
less. That is what His Cross meant. ‘Tell 
me what you will about the pollution of 
the heart; I know it—I am human. Tell 
me what you will about the forces of evil 
that drive men astray from birth; I know 
them well, and no new-born philosophy 
can rid me of them. Yet over against all 
such declarations set this other fact ; Christ 
considered that man, in the image of God, 
marred, bruised, broken, spoiled, was yet 
worth dying for. 

“ Becoming conformed unto His death” 
means that we take that estimate of hu- 
manity. If we come to the Cross with 
empty hands to receive the gifts of grace, 
and rejoicing in our gifts, neglect humanity, 
we are traitors, renegades, blasphemers ; we 
crucify Christ afresh. If on the other hand, 
we come to the Cross of Christ with empty 
hands to receive the gifts of grace, and then 
hasten in the Passion of the Cross to break 
our bread to hungry men, to share our life 
with dying men, we are “becoming con- 
formed unto His death.” 

“ Becoming conformed unto His death ” 
means also that we answer man’s sin as He 
answered it, by pouring out our lives in 


92 THE CROSS AND THE SAINT 


sacrificial service, understanding that we can 
only help in the saving of men by dying for 
them. 

The lonely mystery of the pain of God 
is apart from us, but out of it flows the 
river, and of that river we drink and live. 
When we do so, we are committed to the 
principle from which the river flows, and 
henceforth we must have fellowship with 
His sufferings. When we accept His great 
salvation, we commit ourselves to fellowship, 
and thus enter into a contract of partner- 
ship. He poured out Himself for us, and 
“becoming conformed unto His death” 
means that henceforth we pour out our 
lives for others. 


Ifl 


And finally, the Cross was Christ’s path- 
way toward His crowning. We chose that 
pathway as against the suggestion of Satan, 
which was that of compromise; as against 
the suggestion of men, which was that of 
self-pity. He chose it because it was accord- 
ing to the purpose of God. He could have 
reached His throne in no other way. 
Through abandonment to the will of God 
and service of humanity, both at the utmost, 


THE CROSS AND THE SAINT 93 


the throne was reached. He might have 
made for Himself, as other men have done, 
a throne lasting a few years. He might, 
perchance, have created a dynasty continuing 
for centuries. But He could not have 
ascended the throne of empire, and held it 
through all ages, except by the way of His 
Cross. It was along the highway of His 
dying that He passed into the spaciousness 
of His reigning. 

So also if we would reign in life we 
must be at the end of ourselves. We must 
give ourselves up for the sake of others, 
It is by the Cross that we triumph, not by 
policy, not by prudence, not even by passion, 
but by conformity to His death. 

What throne do we covet? All the 
lesser thrones that are based on dust, I 
dismiss as unworthy of consideration. What 
place do we. really desire of beneficent 
power, of helpful influence? Whatever it 
may be, there is but one way to find it, 
and that is by way of the Cross. We 
cannot reign in life until we have done 
with our own ambitions. It is always 
after some night of bruising and breaking 
that Jacob becomes Israel. Do not let 
us pity the man who limps, if his limping 


94 THE CROSS AND THE SAINT 


is the result of a night spent by the 
Jabbok. There is a limp which is a patent 
of nobility. In some lonely vigil of the 
night, when 


I lay in dust life’s glory dead, 
then 


From the ground there blossoms red, 
Life that shall endless be. 


Thank God for those who are facing the 
great campaign, the flush of youth upon 
their cheek, the gleam and glow of health 
in their eye; spiritually ambitious, de- 
siring to reign in life, as preachers, teachers, 
witnesses, as winners of souls; but let all 
such remember they must die in order to 
live, they must be conformed to His death 
in order to be transformed by His life from 
cumberers to conquerors. 

Surely, if from that infinite unveiling of 
the Passion of God in the Cross, we are 
ready to take the gift of love, we ought to 
be prepared to answer the call of Christ 
which asks us, seeing that we have received 
the gift, to enter into fellowship with the 
Giver. 

What is the hindrance? The question is 
asked, but none can answer it for another. 


THE CROSS AND THE SAINT 95 


The hindrance is often the fear of men, the 
fear of persecution, the dread of the world’s 
misunderstanding. All such fear is evidence 
of lack of faith in the One Who calls us 
to fellowship with Him in the Cross. We 
are afraid of the sequence of abandonment 
to the will of God. We are like the men 
of Gadara. Jesus landed on their shore, 
and there found men devil-possessed ; and 
found also an unholy traffic in swine. He 
flung the devils out of the men into the 
swine, and destroyed the traffic. The men 
of Gadara immediately said; Prevent His 
coming nearer. If upon the shore He 
rebukes us thus, and destroys our profits, 
what will He do if He be permitted to 
enter into our cities ? 

In answer to all difficulties, what shall 
we say? ‘There is but one reply; Consider 
Him, behold Him, meditate upon Him, 
understand Him. He was rich. Can we 
measure that ? Can we measure His riches ? 
An Apostle spoke of “the unsearchable 
riches of Christ”! But, though He was 
rich, yet “for your sakes He became poor.” 
Can we measure that? Can we measure His 
poverty? Consider Him. As we do so He 
says to us : 


96 THE CROSS AND THE SAINT 


“T gave My life for thee, 
What hast thou given for Me?” 


Let us hold up the idol to which we 
cling in the light of His Cross. Let us 
bring that forbidden thing with which 
we should have parted long ago, into the 
presence of His Cross. Let us hold our 
fears face to face with His courage. Let 
us command our lack of faith to consider 
His ability to help and keep. 

That is the final answer to all faltering 
in the presence of His Cross. If we can 
but see Him, we shall be willing to stretch 
out these hands that they may be nailed to 
His Cross. If we look at the Cross we 
cannot do it! If we look at our hands we 
dare not do it! But if we consider Him, 
we can, we dare, we do. “ Becoming con- 
formed unto His death.” His death; it is 
the vision of the Christ that woos us to 
willingness to die. 

“Becoming conformed unto His death.” 
What then? We shall know Him, we shall — 
know the power of His Resurrection, we 
shall have fellowship with His sufferings. 
Let the chapter be read again. Before we 
are through we shall discover the word 
“conformed” once more. But now the 


THE CROSS AND THE SAINT 97 


writing is not “conformed unto His death.” 
It is “the body of our humiliation . . . con- 
formed to the body of His glory.” 

So, by identification with the Cross, the 
saint passes into identification with the 
glory which is to follow. 


THE CROSS AND THE AGES 
TO COME 


VI 


THE CROSS AND THE AGES 
TO COME 


“Through Him to reconcile all things unto 
Himself, having made peace through the blood of 
His Cross; through Him, I say, whether things 
upon the earth, or things in the heavens.”— 
Coxossians i. 20, 


O consideration of these words can be 
satisfactory which does not recognise 
that they are part of a greater whole. The 
Colossian letter was written with the express 
purpose of correcting prevailing error. It 
is both interesting and instructive to note 
in passing that the erroneous teachers are 
not named, neither is the heresy stated. 
Paul was too wise to give gratuitous adver- 
tisement to the teaching or the teachers. 
If there are differences of opinion concern- 
ing the errors which he wished to correct, we 
are certainly in no doubt concerning the 


truth which he set forth. The subject of 
101 


102 THE CROSS AND 


the Colossian letter is pre-eminently that of 
the glories of the Christ in His relation to 
His Church. Its supreme word concerning 
Christ is, “It was the good pleasure of the 
Father that in Him should all the fulness 
dwell.” The supreme word concerning the 
Church is, “In Him ye are made full.” It 
is the letter of the pleroma, a_word which 
cannot be translated without losing some- 
thing in the process; although, if our word 
fulness be permitted its simplest and 
sublimest significance, it conveys the true 
idea. 

The letter then, is the result of the 
conviction of the Apostle that a true 
understanding of the fact of the fulness of 
Christ, as it constitutes the fulness of the 
Church, will correct all false philosophies. 

The passage, of which the words we are 
about to consider form a part, consists of 
one of the most remarkable declarations 
of the New Testament concerning the 
greatness of the Person of Christ, and the 
greatness of His work. These are both 
dealt with in their relation to God, to 
creation, and to the Church. 

The greatness of His Person is set forth, 
first in His relation to God, in the words, 


THE AGES TO COME 103 
' “The Image of the invisible God”; secondly, 


in His relation to creation, in the words, 
“The Firstborn of all creation. . . . In Him 
all things consist”; thirdly, in His relation 
to His Church, in the words, “ He is the 
Head of the Body, the Church . . . the First- 
born from the dead.” 

The teaching concerning the greatness of 
His work is inseparably connected with 
that concerning the greatness of His Person. 
In regard to His work as Revealer of God, 
“Tt was the good pleasure of the Father 
that in Him should all the fulness dwell.” 
In regard to His work with relation to that 
creation of which He is at once the Source 
and Sustenance, His mission is expressed 
in the words, “ To reconcile all things unto 
Himself.” Finally, His work concerning the 
Church, of which He is the Head, is ex- 
pressed in the declaration, “ You, being in 
time past alienated and enemies in your 
mind in your evil works, yet now hath He 
reconciled.” 

Thus it will be seen that these two three- 
fold statements answer each other. Let us 
make that still more evident by stating 
them as three twofold statements. 

The greatness of Christ’s Person in rela- 


104 THE CROSS AND 


tion to God is that He is “the Image of 
the invisible God.” The greatness of His 
work in relation to God is seen in the fact 
that “it was the good pleasure of the 
Father that in Him should all the fulness 
dwell.” 

The greatness of His Person in relation 
to creation is that He is “the Firstborn of 
all creation . . . and in Him all things 
consist.” The greatness of His work in 
relation to that creation is expressed in the 
words, “To reconcile all things unto Him- 
self .. . whether things upon the earth, 
or things in the heavens.” 

The greatness of His Person in relation 
to the Church is that “He is the Head 
of the Body, the Church.” The greatness 
of His work in relation to the Church is 
that of the reconciliation of individuals, 
in order that they may be built into the 
Church. 

The fulness of the Person creates the 
fulness of the work. The immeasurable 
glory of the Christ as He is, creates the 
immeasurable grace of the Christ as to 
what He is able to do in the centre, and to 
the ultimate circumference, of the universe 


of God. 


THE AGES TO COME 105 


The special message of the particular 
words selected for our present meditation 
is that God; through Christ the Image of 
God, the Firstborn of creation, the Head 
of the Church ; by the blood of His Cross, 
does reconcile, not merely individual souls, 
but “all things . . . whether things upon 
the earth, or things in the heavens.” 1 am 
perfectly conscious of the stupendousness 
of the theme. It is that of the ultimate 
meaning of the Cross. We shall endeavour 
to consider its teaching concerning the 
sphere of the reconciliation, the nature of 
the reconciliation, and the supply of the 
reconciliation. 


i 


The sphere of the reconciliation is declared 
in the words, “all things . . . things upon 
the earth, or things in the heavens.” 

When describing the glory of Christ in 
creation, the Apostle declared, “In Him were 
all things created, in the heavens and upon 
the earth,” but when he speaks of recon- 
ciliation, he uses the opposite order, “things 
upon the earth . . . things in the heavens.” 
The creative order was that of the heavens 
first, and then of the earth. The recon- 


106 THE CROSS AND 


ciling order is that of the earth first, and 
then of the heavens. It is not for us now to 
enter upon any discussion as to whether this 
planet of ours is indeed, as Dr. Wallace 
has suggested, the centre of the created 
universe. It is perfectly certain that there 
are far-stretching reaches of creation about 
which we know nothing. It is enough for 
us at the moment to recognise the fact that, 
for the purpose of our apprehension of the 
meaning of life, we are compelled to deal 
with the universe as circling about the earth 
on which we live. That may not be the 
ultimate truth. I do not know. Recognis- 
ing this necessity, the Apostle shows that 
the reconciliation begins here, and then 
affects all the heavens. That which demands 
reconciliation is here, but that which is here 
has exerted its influence to the uttermost 
bound of the creation of God. 

This conception of the world at once 
lifts it, and our theme, into highest dignity 
and vastest importance. If we can but 
grasp it, it will deliver us from all mean 
thinking about our own lives, about our 
own sin, and about our own redemp- 
tion. 

It is evident that the apostolic phrase, 


THE AGES TO COME 107 


“things upon the earth,” does not include 
man. He is first, and to him the Apostle 
returns presently. The phrase, as used in 
this statement, is equivalent to that of 
Jesus in His commission, “the whole 
creation,” a phrase which this same writer 
made use of in his letter to the Romans. 
The sphere of reconciliation then is first 
that of the “things upon the earth.” 

That is not however the phrase which 
arrests and almost startles us so much as 
the one which follows it, “things in the 
heavens.” This all-inclusive and compre- 
hensive term has reference first to angels, 
those unfallen intelligences described else- 
where as “ thrones, dominions, principalities, 
powers.” These are all in some way in- 
cluded in the reconciliation which Christ 
wrought by His Cross. 

This conception is a most remarkable 
recognition of the cosmic unity of the 
universe. Man is seen at the centre. Below 
him are all created things—things of the 
earth. Beyond him are the far-reaching 
realms which he is utterly incapable of 
perfectly understanding during the period 
of his earth-life. At the centre of every- 
thing Paul sees the Cross, and declares 


108 THE CROSS AND 


that by that Cross God reconciles all things 
unto Himself. 

And yet the phrase, “things in the 
heavens,” takes us one awful step further. 
The sphere of reconciliation is not only man, 
not merely the things of the earth beneath 
him, not alone the created things of the 
heavens above him; it is that of the very 
Being of God. Let us remember the words 
of the Psalmist : 


Mercy and truth are met together ; 
Righteousness and peace have kissed each other. 


Omitting for a single moment the declara- 
tion that these have met and kissed, let 
them be considered in separation. They 
all exist in the nature of God; mercy and 
truth, righteousness and peace. If we may 
reverently think of God as apart from the 
mystery of evil, we at once recognise the 
perfect harmony of these things. Mercy, 
which does not mean the pity that excuses, 
but the tenderness that bends over in love; 
truth, which is integrity and uprightness, 
that which is stable and builds; righteous- 
ness, which is a straight line without devia- 
tion ; peace, which is absolute safety,—all 
these co-exist in the nature of God. _ 


THE AGES TO COME 109 


The introduction into the universe of 
the principle of sin necessarily breaks up the 
harmony of these, and there is created the 
necessity for reconciliation within the very 
Being of God. God is a God of truth. In 
His universe a being violates truth. How 
is it possible for Him to bend in tenderness 
and love over such a one, whose action 
threatens the stability of the universe? God 
is the God of righteousness—that is, of 
that which cannot deviate from absolute 
rectitude. The introduction into the presence 
of essential Righteousness of that which 
contradicts it must make peace impossible. 
It is not by the caprice of a God Who is 
a despot, but because of the necessity of 
the essential facts of His Being, that the 
moment sin existed in the universe there 
was need for reconciliation, if mercy and 
truth are to meet together, or righteousness 
and peace are to kiss each other. 


Il 


This consideration of the suggested sphere 
of reconciliation leads us immediately to our 
second line of consideration—that, namely, 
of the nature of reconciliation, which is ex- 


110 THE CROSS AND 


pressed in the words, “unto Himself,” or 
more literally, “ with reference to Himself.” 
Here again we begin on the lowest level, 
“things upon the earth.” 

What is the nature of the reconciliation 
which is necessary to the restoration of 
order? Fallen man misrepresents God, and 
so misgoverns nature. The result is chaos 
instead of cosmos, disorder instead of order. 
The only reconciliation which is worth 
while is the vanishing of chaos and the 
establishing of cosmos, the setting up of 
order in the place of disorder; or, in the 
words of the great prayer which Jesus taught 
His disciples, the supreme necessity is that 
His name should be hallowed, His kingdom 
should come, His will should be done on 
earth as in heaven. The reconciliation of 
things on earth is that of their restoration 
to the government of God, and the con- 
sequent restoration of a perfect order through- 
out the world, of man, and of all beneath 
him in the scale of being; the healing of 
the wound, the closing of the breach, the 
gathering together into one of all things 
that have been scattered. 

What then is the reconciliation that is 
necessary in the heavens? Peter declared 


THE AGES TO COME 111 


in his letter that “angels desire to look 
into” the things of the sufferings of Christ 
and the glory that should follow. ‘ Look 
into” is the translation of a strong word 
which means to peer into, to examine care- 
fully. Bending over the world, the angels 
saw sin and suffering culminating in the 
experience of Christ. We must ever think 
of the angels as finite, of all these unseen 
principalities and powers as limited. We 
must remember that while loyal to the 
government of God, and serving Him with 
perfect satisfaction, they nevertheless watch 
the processes without perfect foreknowledge 
of the issues. It is impossible to remember 
this without recognising the fact that their 
looking into these things is of the nature of 
inquiry. I am not suggesting that there 
was even incipient rebellion in the high 
places. There was surely an expectation 
that there would be some explanation of 
the mystery of that which they necessarily 
recognised as a rupture in the nature of 
God, resulting from the presence of sin in 
the universe. Angels needed an answer to 
such inquiry. 

Again reverently we take a further step. 
Reconciliation, in order to completeness, 


112 THE CROSS AND 


must be such that in the Being of God 
there shall be possible the continued activity 
of mercy and truth, of righteousness and 
peace, so that violence is done to neither. 


nee 


All this leads us finally to the considera- 
tion of the supply of the reconciliation which 
is revealed in the words, “Peace through 
the blood of His Cross.” The Gnostic 
teachers were suggesting the necessity for 
the intermediation of angels. They were 
declaring the need for ascetic practices, 
urging voluntary humility and even the 
worship of angels. Paul, recognising the 
necessity for reconciliation, not merely as 
between man and God, but throughout 
the universe, in the heavens as well as the 
earth, declares that it is provided in the 
“blood of His Cross.” 

In this connection it is necessary to repeat 
a warning and utter a solemn protest against 
the idea that when we speak of the Cross 
we refer only to a Roman gibbet, and to 
the death of a Man thereon. If He of 
the Cross were Man only, then all this 
writing of the Apostle is not only foolish, 


THE AGES TO COME 113 


but vile dreaming, mirage, and nightmare, 
a delusion and a snare. On the other hand, 
if He of the Cross be the Image of the 
Invisible God, the original Creator and 
Sustainer, the Firstborn out of the mystery 
of death into life, then in the presence of 
His Cross I begin to tremble, and yet to 
believe the declaration that through that 
Cross He reconciles all things unto Himself 
upon the earth and in the heavens. 
Through that Cross there is first the 
reconciliation of things upon the earth, 
This is established first by the creation of 
peace with God in the case of man, and 
then in the peace of God throughout the 
order over which redeemed man_ reigns. 
The process is a slow one as mortals count 
time. The travail is an agony, the conflict 
is unto death, but the victory is assured ; 
and that victory is the reconciliation of all 
things upon the earth, first of man to God, 
and then of the whole creation to man 
in that peace of God which issues from the. 
establishment of His throne, and the right 
relation thereto of all the kingdom. 
Through that Cross also there is the 
reconciliation of things in the heavens. We 
call to mind again the picture of angels 
8 


114 THE CROSS AND 


desiring to look into these things. As they 
did so, they became conscious of the pro- 
foundest depth of the mystery in the hour 
when Jesus died. It was the mystery of 
which we spoke in our first study, that of 
the death of a pure and sinless, and there- 
fore, deathless Being. Personally, I can 
have no doubt about the literal accuracy 
of the Bible story that in the hour of that 
death the sun was darkened. My wonder 
sometimes is that it ever shone again. 'The 
angels saw in the mystery a revelation. 
They knew the Person Whom they saw 
die, and recognised that the death of the 
Christ must have some profound signifi- 
cance in the economy of God. Through 
the death of the Lord they beheld man 
reconciled to God. They saw the salvation 
provided for the sinner in his loosing from 
his sins. ‘They saw the resultant co-opera- 
tion of the saints as, conformed to His dying, 
they came to living knowledge of Himself, 
shared the power of His Resurrection, and 
entered into the fellowship of His sufferings. 
They saw these saints bearing through to 
lower reaches of God’s creation the renew- 
ing forces which had remade their own 
lives, 


THE AGES TO COME 115 


What effect, think you, had that working 
out into visibility of the passion and power 
of the love of God upon the watching 
angels? It was for them a new unveiling 
of God. In that Cross they saw Him as 
they had never seen Him. The essential 
Light of Deity shone whiter, for holiness 
was vindicated as never before. The essential 
Love of Deity shone redder, for compassion 
was manifested more perfectly. The essential 
Life of Deity was realised more fully, for 
all its values were revealed more absolutely. 
I can imagine that, as the Lord Jesus Christ 
died, and all the issues of His dying were 
’ revealed to them, angels borrowed the song 
of the Psalmist, and chanted to the measure 
of their own perfect music : 


Mercy and truth are met together ; 
Righteousness and peace have kissed each other. 


Reverently we come to the last fact in 
our consideration of this supply of recon- 
ciliation. Over two hundred years ago 
John Leland, a Baptist minister of Massa- 
chusetts, preached a sermon which he 
entitled, “The Jarrings of Heaven Recon- 
ciled by the Blood of the Cross,” in which 
he attempted to set forth a picture of the 


116 THE CROSS AND 


high courts of. heaven and of the conflict 
within the very nature of God as the result 
of the presence of sin in the universe. The 
sermon may accurately be described as highly 
imaginative, but that is not a condemnation. 
There are matters so high that we can never 
hope to reach them save by the exercise of 
imagination. 

We speak of law and love, of truth and 
grace, of justice and mercy, and so long as 
sin does not exist, there is no controversy 
between any of these. If there be no sin, 
law and love are never out of harmony with 
each other; truth and grace go ever hand 
in hand ; justice and mercy sing a common 
anthem. If the law be broken, what is love 
to do? If truth be violated, how can grace 
operate? In the presence of crime, how 
can justice and mercy meet? This is the 
problem of problems. It is not a problem 
as between God and man. It is not a 
problem as between God and the angels. It 
is a problem as between God and Himself, 
It is answered in the Cross. “God was in 
Christ,” from eternity, in the days of human 
manifestation, and surely also in the hour 
of the Cross. Thus, by the way of all the 
suffering consequent upon the conflict within 


THE AGES TO COME Ly 


His own nature, He found the way of re- 
conciliation. By suffering wrought out into 
human history, and in the sight of all the 
ages through the Cross, He demonstrated 
that love meets law as it suffers, and fulfils 
it; grace satisfies the demand of truth by 
meeting all the issues of its violating ; and 
mercy can operate upon the basis of justice, 
not because God has smitten and afflicted 
other than Himself; but because, in a mystery 
which baffles and bruises the intellect as it 
attempts to encompass it, God has gathered 
the whole into His own heart, and suffered 
to reconcile all things unto Himself. 

Thus, as Christ is the Centre, Source, and 
Goal of the universe, His Cross is the centre, 
source, and goal of reconciliation. The 
Ephesian letter is the complement of the 
Colossian. In that the Apostle teaches that 
through the Church the wisdom of God is 
to be manifested to principalities and powers 
in the heavenly places, Christ and His 
ransomed people are to exercise a ministry 
beyond that of to-day, which is initial and 
preparatory, through all the coming ages. 
That ministry is to be that of an unveiling of 
the profoundest thing in the heart of God: 
the love which, operating through self- 


118 THE CROSS AND 


abandonment and _ sacrifice, ransomed, re- 
deemed, and remade lost humanity. The 
angels will hear the music of love as they 
have never heard it, as the ransomed sing, 
“the old, old story of Jesus and His love.” 
Sons of the morning are they, unfallen 
intelligences, who have never known the 
misery of sin, or its pollution; but they 
must hush their high anthems while the 


ransomed sing : 


He loved us, and gave Himself for us. 


Thus for all the universe and for the 
ultimate ages ever proceeding in beauty from 
the Being of God, the Cross will abide the 
supreme revelation of God, through which 
all creation will come to an understanding 
of His holiness and His love, the deepest 
and truest things of His Being. 

What a theme for imagination, which 
nevertheless, is utterly incapable of encom- 
passing all the glorious truth. We dream 
of the birth of ceaseless ages, of new 
creations, springing like fresh mornings 
from His wisdom and His might; and as 
in unfailing procession they appear, Christ 
and His ransomed Church will sing to ther 
the song of redemption, and while they 


THE AGES TO COME 119 


know the might and majesty of God in 
the wonder of their life, they will only 
come to a true apprehension of His heart 
as we tell them that He loved us, and 
“loosed us from our sins by His blood.” 


In the Cross of Christ I glory, 
Towering o’er the wrecks of time; 

All the light of sacred story 
Gathers round its head sublime. 


If by that Cross all things in the heavens 
are to be reconciled, and infinite peace is 
to follow, I dare trust it, notwithstanding 
all my sin and all my weakness. By the 
way of that Cross I am reconciled to God, 
and through it I find rest, infinite, eternal, 
undying. At last my rest shall be rest 
with the whole creation, for the cosmic 
order will be restored through the mystery 
of God’s suffering as revealed in the Cross. 


Printed by Hazell, Watson & Viney, Ld., London and Aylesbury. 


A Wott 


Schoo! of Theology 


DR. G. CAMPBELL MORGAN 


“Dr. G. Campbell Morgan’s Bible Commentary, ‘The Analysed Bible,’ 
is very welcome. It will be of the greatest help to Bible students by 
leading them to do what Dr. Campbell Morgan has done to such good 
purpose, ..., read and study the Bible for themselves, and make its 
contents and teaching ther own. Dr. Morgan’s large Bible Class at 
Westminster Chapel is a splendid testimony to what Bible teaching can 
do, and a fine reminder of the place it should occupy in the ministry and 
life of the Churches.”—Rev. Principal W. H. GrirritH THomas, D.D 


THE ANALYSED BIBLE 
By the REV. G. CAMPBELL MORGAN, D.D. 


Price 3/6 each volume. 
(1) General Review of Genesis to Esther. 
(2) General Review of Job to Malachi. 
(3) General Review of the New Testament. 
(4) The Gospel of St. John. 
(5) The Book of Job. 
(6) The Epistle to the Romans. 


THE MISSIONARY MANIFESTO 


“In his latest book Dr. Campbell Morgan shows how clearly 
he has grasped the present situation. Commencing with a 
lucid exposition of the four-fold commission furnished by the 
four Gospels, he passes on to consider the Authority of the 
King, and the Evangel to Creation... . Among Dr. Morgan’s 
most valuable books the one before us will take a foremost 
place.”—Chrisiian. 


hE CRISES OF (THE CHRISE 


“Preachers will obtain from it many suggestions for sermons, 
and the intelligent layman will have his mind braced and his 
heart quickened by its perusal,”—Dazily News. ; 


CHRISTIAN PRINCIPLES 


“Much as many owe to Dr. Campbell Morgan, we feel this to be 
one of the most useful books that have come from his pen.”— 
Christian. 


LONDON: HODDER AND STOUGHTON 


9 


DR. G. CAMPBELL MORGAT 


THE PRACTICE OF PRAYER 


“Those especially who have heard Dr. Campbell Morgan speak 
on the subject of prayer will heartily welcome his thoughtful 1/6 | 
and suggestive book, ‘ The Practice of Prayer.’”— Christian. 


THE SPIRIT -OF-GOD 


“(This is what many would call a clear book; it teaches clear, 
definite doctrine on a subject that the Bible is content to leave 3/6 
rather indefinite.”—Christian World. 


THE PARABLES OF THE KINGDOM 


An excellent book. Wehave many commentaries on the parables, 2/6 
but nothing more luminous and practical than this. net. 


MOUNTAINS AND VALLEYS 
In the Ministry of Jesus 


This book is got up tastefully for presentation purposes. It 1/- 
has the suggestiveness and spiritual quality associated with all net. 
Dr. Morgan’s utterances. 


THE TEACHING OF THE LESSON 


A Pocket Commentary on the International Sunday School 1/- 
Lessons for 1910. net 


THE WESTMINSTER BOOKLETS 


(1) To Die is Gain. (2) The Fulfilment of Life. 
(3) Enoch. 6d. each. 


These neatly appointed little booklets are the first of a series of dis- 
courses on Christian life and its problems, They are quite in Dr. 
Morgan’s best style, and are full of help and suggestion. 


) LONDON: HODDER AND STOUGHTON 


ei ioe ; 
? ne — 
4 Maa 
ae ad Pao] ea) 


= 3 “ 

~ BT453 .M6 
Morgan, G. Campbell (George Campbell), 
The Bible and the cross / 


L 


= 4 
oa 
ASs3 
Mé 
THEOLOGY LIBRARY 


SCHOOL OF THEOLOGY AT CLAREMONT 
CLAREMONT, CALIFORNIA 


Allott 


‘= a a 
i A, re a en Z 


; 
. ¢ 
7 ae > eee ee ee 


- 7 7 7 7 7 
» 34 
eh Ee 7 PN a a oi 


7 


i 
Teh: 7. se
