^^^-:i!!i!?%> 


NOV  22  1905 


Division      354-'^  ' 


1  r- 


I 


THE 


BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR 


OR 


Anecdotes,  Similes,  Emblems,  Illustrations; 
Expository,  Scientific,  Geographical,  His- 
torical, and  Homiletic,  Gathered  from 
a  Wide  Range  of  Home  and  Foreign 
Literature,     on    the    Verses    of    the    Bible 


BY 


Rev.  JOSEPH   S.   EXELL,   M.A. 


DEUTERONOMY 


♦TV^^^WJ^ 


New  York         Chicago         Toronto 

Fleming   H.    Revell   Company 

London    and    Ed»nburgh 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTEEONOMY. 

The  name  of  the  Book. — ^The  ordinary  name  of  the  book  is  derived  through 
the  LXX  (Aevre pouSfjitov)  and  Vulgate  {Deuteronomium),  from  the  one  sometimes 
employed  by  the  Jews,  mishneh  Tiattdrah,  **  repetition  of  the  law."  This  name  was 
probably  suggested  by  the  text  xvii.  18,  in  which  the  expression  rendered  **  a  copy 
of  this  law  "  was  anciently  construed  as  referring  to  Deuteronomy  only.  This  is 
probably  not  the  right  sense  of  the  phrase,  but  the  title  borrowed  from  it  indicates 
correctly  enough  the  character  and  contents  of  the  book.  From  another  point 
of  view,  some  of  the  rabbinical  writers  have  styled  Deuteronomy  "the  Book  of 
Keproofs  "  ;  whilst  others  denoted  this,  as  they  did  the  other  Books  of  Scripture,  by 
the  first  two  Hebrew  words  occurring  in  it.  {T.  E.  Espin^  D.D,,  in  *'Sj>eaker's 
Convmeviary") 

The  ohaeacter  of  the  Book. — The  speeches  exhibit  a  striking  unity  of  style  and 
character.  They  are  pervaded  by  the  same  vein  of  thought,  the  same  tone  and  tenor 
of  feeling,  the  same  peculiarities  of  conception  and  expression.  They  exhibit  matter 
which  is  neither  documentary  nor  traditional,  but  conveyed  in  the  speaker's  own  words. 
Their  aim  is  strictly  hortatory  ;  their  style  earnest,  heart-searching,  impressive,  in 
passages  sublime,  but  throughout  rhetorical ;  they  keep  constantly  in  view  the  cir- 
cumstances then  present,  and  the  crisis  to  which  the  fortunes  of  Israel  had  at  last 
been  brought.  Moses  had  before  him  not  the  men  to  whom  by  God's  command  he 
delivered  the  law  at  Sinai,  but  the  generation  following  which  had  grown  up  in  the 
wilderness.  Large  portions  of  the  law  necessarily  stood  in  abeyance  during  the 
years  of  wandering  ;  and  of  his  present  hearers  many  must  have  been  strangers  to 
various  prescribed  observances  and  ordinances.  Now,  however,  on  their  entry  into 
settled  homes  in  Canaan  a  thorough  discharge  of  the  various  obligations  laid  on 
them  by  the  covenant  would  become  imperative  ;  and  it  is  to  this  state  of  things 
that  Moses  addresses  himself.  He  speaks  to  hearers  neither  wholly  ignorant  of 
the  law,  nor  yet  fully  versed  in  it.  Much  is  assumed  and  taken  for  granted  in  his 
speeches  ;  again,  on  other  matters  he  goes  into  detail,  knowing  that  instruction  in 
them  was  needed.  Sometimes,  too,  opportunity  is  taken  of  promulgating  regula- 
tions which  are  supplementary  or  auxiliary  to  those  of  the  preceding  books  ;  some 
few  modifications  arising  out  of  diff'erent  or  altered  circumstances  are  now  made  ; 
and  the  whole  Mosaic  system  is  completed  by  the  addition  of  several  enactments 
(chaps,  xii.-xxvi.)  of  a  social,  civil,  and  political  nature.  These  would  have  been 
whoUy  superfluous  during  the  nomadic  life  of  the  desert ;  but  now,  when  the  per- 
manent organisation  of  Israel  as  a  nation  was  to  be  accomplished,  they  could  not  be 
longer  deferred.  Accordingly  the  legislator,  at  the  command  of  God,  completes  his 
great  work  by  supplying  them.  Thus  he  provides  civil  institutions  for  his  people 
accredited  by  the  same  Divine  sanctions  as  had  been  vouchsafed  to  their  religious 
rites.    {Ibid.) 

The  date  and  authoeship  of  the  Boom.— The  difficulties :— The  diflficulties 
in  the  way  of  accepting  the  Mosaic  authorship  of  Deuteronomy,  contained  in 
Deuteronomy  itself,  are  of  two  classes — 1.  Those  passages  which  plainly  bear  to  have 


Ti  INTRODUCTION  TO  TEE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY, 

been  written  after  the  time  of  Moses,  and  after  the  people  had  settled  in  Canaan. 
(1)  The  rerv  first  passage  in  the  book,  *'  These  are  the  words  which  Moses  spake 
to  the  whole  of  Israel  on  the  other  [A.  V.,  ihis\  side  of  Jordan,"  &c.  The  writer 
of  this  passage,  according  to  the  literal  meaning,  wrote  on  the  west  or  Canaan  side 
of  Jordan  ;  and  Moses  spoke  ' '  the  words  "  on  the  east  or  Moab  side.  Therefore, 
inferentially,  Moses  was  not  the  writer.  (2)  The  passage  which  gives  an  account  of 
tie  death  and  burial  of  Moses— ixxiv.  5  and  6.  (3)  The  passage  (xxxir.  1)  where  the 
Lord  is  said  to  have  showed  Moses  " all  the  land  of  Gilead  unto  Dam." — Dan,  it  is 
maintained,  was  not  known  as  Dan  at  that  time,  but  as  Laish  (Judg.  xviii.  27-29). 
2.  Other  passages,  which  though  not  distinctly  anachronisms,  yet  in  their  natural 
meaning  imply  that  a  considerable  time  had  elapsed  between  the  period  at  which 
the  events  happened  and  that  at  which  they  were  recorded.  (1)  Thus  iii.  14,  "  Jair 
the  son  of  Manasseh  took  all  the  country  of  Argob  unto  the  coasts  of  Geshuri  and 
Maachathi,  and  called  them  after  his  own  name,  Bashan-havoth-jair,  unto  this  day." 
The  time  that  elapsed  between  the  taking  of  the  Bashan  cities,  or  "  Jair's  livings,'* 
and  the  date  of  Moses'  speech  was  at  most  only  a  few  months.  Mosea  could  hardly 
have  used  such  an  expression  as  "  to  this  day '  in  such  a  case.  (2)  Again,  xxxiv.  6, 
"  No  man  knoweth  of  his  sepulchre  unto  this  day  "  ;  and  ver.  10,  "  And  there  arose 
not  a  prophet  since  in  Israel  like  unto  Moses."  (3)  "  The  Horims  also  dwelt  in  Seir 
beforetime  ;  but  the  children  of  Esau  succeeded  them,  when  they  had  destroyed 
them  from  before  them,  and  dwelt  in  their  stead,  as  Israel  did  unto  the  land  of  his 
possession,  which  the  Lord  gave  unto  them  "  (ii.  12).  The  natural  inference  from 
the  words  in  italics  is  that  the  whole  passage  was  written  after  Israel  had 
"destroyed"  the  Canaanites  and  "dwelt  in  their  stead."  (4)  "Only  Og  king  of 
Bashan  remained  of  the  remnant  of  giants  ;  behold  his  bedstead  was  a  bedstead  of 
iron  ;  is  it  not  in  Rabbath  of  the  children  of  Ammon  ?  "  (iii.  11 ).  The  natural  infer- 
ence here  is  that  the  writer  was  "  referring  to  an  antiquarian  curiosity"  instead  of 
something  which  had  been  quite  recently  in  use,  and  probably  seen,  as  Og  himself 
had  been  seen  and  slain  by  the  people  whom  Moses  was  now  addressing.  These 
anachronisms,  real  or  apparent,  present  no  serious  difficulty  w?ien  taken  by  theviselves. 
Apart  from  possible  individual  explanations,  there  is  nothing  unnatural  in  the  sup- 
position that  a  later  inspired  writer,  or  writers,  should  have  re-edited  the  book, 
contributing  explanatory  notes,  and,  after  the  manner  of  the  time,  inserting  them  in 
the  text  instead  of  putting  them  in  the  margin — nay,  that  such  writer,  or  writers, 
should  have  compiled  both  the  beginning  and  the  end  of  the  book,  or  the  whole 
historical  setting  of  the  Central  Iaw  Book  (chap.  v.  1  to  xxvi.  16).  II.  The  diffi- 
culties which  we  encounter  in  attempting  to  reconcile  the  law  as  given  in  Deuter- 
onomy  with  the  law  as  given  in  Elxodus,  Leviticus,  and  Numbers  are  not  in  them- 
selves very  serious  matters.  They  are  considerably  more  serious,  however,  in  their 
combined,  or  cumulative,  than  in  their  individual  aspect ;  and  then  they  are  much 
less  easily  disposed  of  than  the  first  class,  because  they  are  of  a  more  systematic 
character,  and  inhere  in  the  substance  of  the  work.  1.  The  chief  differences  in  the 
legal  provisions  are  almost  all  connected  with  the  priests  and  the  Levites — their 
position  with  respect  to  each  other,  and  the  tithes  and  dues  or  perquisites  by  which 
they  were  maintained.  (1)  The  emoluments  of  the  priests  are  to  some  extent  differ- 
ent from  those  which  are  assigned  to  them  in  the  previous  books.  (2)  The  emolu- 
ments of  the  Levites  are  different,  their  habitations  also,  and  their  general  position, 
(3)  But  what  differs  most,  and  is  most  significant,  is  the  relative  position  of  priests 
and  Levites  in  Deuteronomy  and  in  the  former  books.  In  the  former  books  the 
priests  are  "the  sons  of  Aaron  "  ;  in  Deuteronomy  they  are  "the  sons  of  Levi,"  or 
the  Levites.  In  the  former  books  the  priests  are  the  servants  of  Jehovah — they 
"stand  before  Him  to  minister  unto  Him."  The  Levites  are  the  servants  of  the 
priests,  given  to  them  to  minister  unto  them.  In  short,  in  Leviticus  **  there  is  a 
sharp  distinction  drawn "  between  the  priests  and  the  Levites  ;  in  Deuteronomy 
there  is  no  distinction  whatever.  All  priests  are  Levites,  and  all  Levites  may 
become  priests.  There  is  apparently  no  danger  now,  as  there  was  in  the  days  of 
Eorah,  of  the  earth  opening  her  mouth  and  swallowing  up  a  Levite  who  "  sought 
the  priesthood."  2.  The  tone  of  the  laws  in  Deuteronomy,  it  seems  to  be  admitted 
on  all  hands,  is  different  from  that  of  the  laws  in  the  previous  books — being  more 
advanced,  more  humane,  more  merciful,  more  spiritual.  3.  Then  the  style  of 
Deuteronomy  differs  undoubtedly  from  the  style  of  the  former  books  of  the  Penta- 
teuch, in  a  way  that  gives  the  impression  that  the  book  is  the  work  of  a  different 
writer,  and  of  a  somewhat  different  age.  It  is  more  rounded,  more  flowing  and 
BOBtained,  more  cultivated,  more  modem — displaying,  if  with  reverence  it  may  b« 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY, 


spoken,  more  literary  art.     The  diction  also,  though  not  differing  much  from  that 
of  the  previous  books,  is  nevertheless  marked  by  certain  frequently  recurring  phrases 
which  are  not  to  be  met  with  in  those  books.     Explanations  of  all  these  discrep- 
ancies have  been  offered.    It  cannot  be  said,  however,  that  any  one  of  them  is 
altogether  satisfactory.     Most  of  them  are  hypothetical  or  conjectural— drawn  from 
what  is  probable  rather  than  from  what  is  known.     1.  With  regard  to  the  discrep- 
ancies in  the  legal  provisions— (a)  It  is  argued  generally  that  these  are  such  as,  from 
the  nature  of  the  case,  are  likely  to  be  found  in  a  summary  of  the  law  delivered  m  a 
short  parting  address.     On  such  an  occasion  it  was  only  to  be  expected  that  the 
great  lawgiver  should  overlook  minute  details  and  nice  distinctions,  and  dwell  only 
on  the  leading  provisions,     (b)  It  was  natural  also,  for  two  obvious  reasons,  that 
Moses  should  at  the  last  opportunity  make  some  alterations  in  the  law  and  some 
additions  to  it.     (a)  After  forty  years  experience  of  their  working  some  modifications 
in  the  laws  would  suggest  themselves.     (6)  Then  the  entire  change  in  the  condition 
and  circumstances  of  the  people  consequent  on  the  approaching  change  from  the 
wilderness  to  Canaan  would  almost  necessitate  some  corresponding  changes  in  the 
laws.     What  suited  the  one  condition  would  not  suit  the  other.     2.  A  change  m  the 
tone  of  the  laws  was  also  most  natural.     The  people  were  being  gradually  educated 
up  to  a  higher  moral  and  spiritual  level,  and  forty  years  must  have  produced  a  con- 
siderable difference  in  their  state.     3.  As  to  style,  there  are  two  obvious  reasons  why 
the  style  of  Deuteronomy  should  difler  from  that  of  the  previous  books,  though  the 
whole  were  written  by  Moses— (a)  The  style  of  most  writers  changes  with  age  and 
experience,  and  that  of  Moses  could  hardly  be  the  same  at  the  close  of  his  long 
career  as  it  had  been  in  his  earlier  days.     Certain  improvements  in  the  matter  of 
ease  and  flow,  and  strict  accuracy  of  expression  were  almost  inevitable.     (6)  Further, 
the  solemnity  of  the  occasion— that  of  Moses'  final  address  to  the  people  at  the  close 
of  their  long  wanderings,  and  on  the  eve  of  his  own  death,  could  not  fail  to  lend  a 
colour  and  complexion  to  his  style,  imparting  to  it  increased  warmth  and  flow. 
These  reasons  for  a  difference  in  the  laws  and  in  the  style  and  tone  of  Moses'  address 
seem  so  natural  and  probable  that  we  are  apt  to  take  it  for  granted  that  they  are, 
of  themselves,  quite  sufficient  to  account  for  any  apparent  discrepancy  or  incongruity. 
But  the  critic  takes  nothing  for  granted.     He  examines  the  different  books  with  the 
exact  methods,  and  the  great  and  ever-growing  interpretative  aids  of  the  present 
day;  and  he  inquires  if  the  apparent  discrepancies  are  such  as  are  likely  to  have 
been  caused  by  the  above  preconceived  causes.     His  answer,  in  most  cases,  is  m  the 
net'ative.     1.  As  to  the  discrepancies  in  the  Laws— (a)  The  compression  necessary 
va\n  abridgment  would  cause  the  occasional  omission  of  details,  but  not  the  substi- 
tution of  one  thing  for  another.     Nor  can  it  be  said  that  any  space^is  saved  by 
calling— (a) The  priests  "sons  of  Levi,"  instead  of  "sons  of  Aaron     ;  (6)  Or  by 
stating  the  priests'  portion  of  a  peace-offering  as  "  the  shoulder,  the  two  cheeks,  and 
the  maw"  (Deut.  xviii.  3),  instead  of  as  "the  breast  and  the  right  leg"  (Lev.  vii. 
31-34)  ;  (c)  Or  by  enacting  that  the  people  should  eat  the  firstlings  in  a  feast  at  the 
sanctuary  (Deut.  xiv.  23,  xv.  20),  instead  of  assigning  them  entirely  to  the  priests 
(Numb,  xviii.  8).     Such  discrepancies  cannot  be  explained  as  omissions  of  unim- 
portant details  due  to  compression,     (b)  Neither  can  they  be  accounted   for  as 
alterations  of  the  laws  or  additions  thereto  necessitated  by  the  transition  from  the 
wilderness  to  Canaan,     (a)  There  is  nothing  in  the  nature  of  the  discrepant  pro- 
visions to  give  colour  to  such  an  assumption.     (6)  Neither  is  it  consonant  with  the 
tenor  of  the  history  of  the  legislation  to  expect  that  any  changes  should  be  made  in 
the  laws ;  those  in  the  middle  books  as  well  as  those  in  Deuteronomy  were  given 
for  the  use  of  the  people  when  they  entered  Canaan  ;  many  of  them,  m  fact,  were 
incapable  of  being  put  in  force  in  the  wilderness.     2.  As  to  the  diff"erent,  the  more 
humane  and  spiritual  tone  of  Deuteronomy,  this,  it  is  maintained,  can  hardly  be 
accounted  for  on  the  supposition  that  the  interval  between  the  writing  of  the  books 
was  so  short,  as  it  must  have  been,  if  they  were  all  written  in  the  wilderness.    3.  The 
difference  of  style,  again,  is  such  as  to  infer  not  only  a  much  greater  difference 
of  time,  but  also  a  difference  of  writer.     The  last  chapters  of  Numbers  date  from 
the  same  place  (the  plains  of  Moab),  and  within  a  few  weeks  of  the  same  time  as 
Deuteronomy,     (a)  The  style  of  these  chapters  differs  as  much  from  the  style  of 
Deuteronomy  as  does  that  of  any  other  part  of  the  middle  books,  and  agrees  witti 
the  latter  rather  than  with  the  former,     {h)  But  again,  it  is  denied  that  in  point  of 
fact  the  style  of  Deuteronomy  does  differ  from  the  style  of  the  middle  books,  as  the 
style  of  an  old  man  differs  from  the  style  of  the  same  man  when  young,  or  as  the 
style  of  the  same  man  differs  on  an  ordinary  and  on  a  solemn  and  affecting  occasion. 


Tiii  INTRODUCTION  TO  TEE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY. 

On  the  contrary,  it  differs  rather  as  the  style  of  one  man  differs  from  the  style  of 
another  man  of  a  different  cast  of  mind,  of  a  different  degree  of  culture,  and  also  of 
a  different  and  probably  a  somewhat  later  age.  III.  DiflBculties  which  arise  from 
the  books  which  follow  Deuteronomy  in  the  canon.  The  argument  here  falls 
naturally  under  two  heads — 1.  The  books  which,  so  far  as  they  refer  to  the  law 
as  giyen  in  Deuteronomy,  appear  to  agree  with  the  hypothesis  that  Moses  was  the 
giver  of  that  law,  and  delivered  it  much  as  we  now  have  it,  to  Israel  at  the  close 
of  the  forty  years'  wanderings.  (1)  The  Book  of  Joshua,  which  is  a  sort  of  continua- 
tion of  Deuteronomy,  and  is  now  generally  by  critics  classed  with  the  five  books  of 
the  Pentateuch  (the  whole  being  spoken  of  as  the  Hexateuch),  is  the  book  to  which 
we  naturally  turn  first  for  proof  that  the  law  which  Deuteronomy  represents  as 
having  been  given  by  Moses  to  the  people,  was  known  and  in  force  among  the  people. 
Such  proof  we  do  find,  though  it  is  not  quite  suflSciently  distinct  and  definite,  nor 
yet  so  free  of  doubt  as  to  the  date  of  the  passages,  as  to  be  altogether  conclusive. 
Besides  undoubted  references  and  quotations,  there  are  two  important  instances  of 
agreement.  The  first  is  the  carrying  out  by  Joshua  (Josh.  viii.  30  seq.)  of  the 
command  given  by  Moses  in  Deut.  xxvii.  2  seq.,  as  to  what  the  people  should  do 
when  they  passed  over  Jordan.  The  second  is  the  prompt  and  determined  resist- 
ance made  by  the  majority  of  the  tribes  of  Israel,  to  an  attempt  made  by  the  two 
and  a-half  trans- Jordanic  tribes  to  break  the  most  important  and  distinctive  law  of 
Deuteronomy — the  law  of  the  one  Altar.  The  commandment  of  Moses  in  Deut. 
xxvii.  embraces  a  great  many  particulars :  the  setting  up  of  great  stones  on  Mount 
Ebal,  and  plastering  them  ;  the  writing  upon  them  of  "  all  the  words  of  the  law  "  ; 
the  building  an  altar  to  the  Lord  of  "whole  stones  "  on  which  no  iron  tool  should 
be  lifted  up  ;  the  placing  of  six  tribes  on  Moimt  Gerizim  to  bless  the  people,  and  six 
upon  Mount  Ebal  to  curse  them.  This  command  is  carried  out  to  the  letter  in 
almost  every  particular  by  Joshua,^  and  the  reason  assigned  is  that  it  was  a  command 
of  Moses  **  written  in  the  book  of  the  law  of  Moses  "  (Josh.  viii.  31).  Joshua  read 
on  the  occasion  all  the  words  of  the  law.  "  There  was  not  a  word  of  all  that  Moses 
commanded  which  Joshua  read  not "  (34-35).  This  passage  is,  as  it  stands,  one  of 
undoubted  weight.  It  bears  clear  witness  apparently  to  the  existence  in  the  time 
of  Joshua  of  a  part  of  Deuteronomy  which  is  quoted  as  the  Book  of  the  Law  of 
Moses.  The  natural  inference  is  that  the  whole  Book  of  Deuteronomy  was,  at  the 
time,  in  the  keeping  of  the  priests,  to  whom  Moses  in  Deuteronomy  is  represented 
as  having  committed  it ;  and  that  Joshua  had  it  before  him  when  he  was  thus 
carrying  out  its  instructions  to  the  very  letter.  This  is  the  natural  inference,  but 
it  does  not  amount  to  a  certainty.  The  language  is  not  sufficiently  precise.  "The 
Book  of  the  Law  of  Moses  "  may  have  been  considerably  different  from  the  present 
Book  of  Deuteronomy.  "The  Law  of  Moses,"  which  Joshua  wrote  "upon  the 
stones,"  may  have  differed  considerably  from  the  present  law  book  of  Deuteronomy 
(v.  1  to  xxvi.  16).  It  may  have  been  only  the  short  law  of  Sinai(Exod.  xx.  to  xxtii.) ; 
or  even  but  a  part  of  the  same — little  more  possibly  than  "  the  ten  words."  Then, 
it  is  affirmed,  there  is  an  element  of  uncertainty  as  to  the  date  of  the  passage  which 
tends  to  detract  from  its  authority.  The  passage  does  not  accord  well  with  its 
present  position  in  the  book,  and  it  is  found  in  a  different  place  in  the  Septuagiut, 
and  hence  it  has  been  argued  that,  judging  from  analogy,  it  is  possibly  an  inter- 
polation from  Deuteronomy  by  a  late  writer ;  and  that  anyhow  its  authority  is 
doubtful.  (2)  The  only  other  books  which  appear  to  manifest  anything  approaching 
to  a  distinct  agr-eement  with  Deuteronomy  as  to  the  Mosaic  authorship  of  that  book 
are  certain  books  of  the  New  Testament.  There  are  two  passages  of  Deuteronomy, 
each  of  which  appears  to  be  referred  to  in  two  places  of  the  New  Testament, 
namely,  Deut.  xxiv.  1  and  Deut.  xviii.  15.  Deut.  xxiv.  1  contains  a  precept 
regarding  divorce — strictly  speaking,  forbidding  re-marriage  of  a  divorced  woman 
^th  the  man  from  whom  she  has  been  divorced.  This  passage  seems  to  be  cited  by 
our  Lord  as  Moses'  permission  of  divorce  (Matt.  xix.  8).  St.  Mark's  (x.  5)  report 
of  our  Lord's  words  makes  the  citation  still  more  distinct,  for  it  contains  the  words, 
"he  (Mosee)  wrote  you  this  precept."  Again,  the  passage,  Deut.  xviii.  15,  is 
quoted  almost  verbatim  twice  in  the  Book  of  Acts  (iii.  22,  vii.  37)  by  St.  Peter  and 
St.  Stephen,  as  the  words  of  Moses — "  Moses  truly  said,"  &c.   Now  the  natural  con- 

*  The  only  material  difference  between  the  injunction  and  the  execution  lies  apparently 
in  (he  stones.  Moses  enjoins  for  the  inscription  of  the  Law  the  erection  and  plastering  of 
"great  stones  "  different  from  those  of  the  altar.  Joshua  seems  to  inscribe  the  Law  on 
fhe  stones  of  the  altar. 


INTRODUCTION  TO  TEE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  \x 

elusion  undoubtedly  is  that  all  these  sacred  authorities  are  quoting  Deuteronomy  as 
the  actual  composition  of  Moses.  Yet  the  conclusion,  though  natural,  is  not  inevit- 
able. It  may  be  that  Moses  wrote  "  that  precept,"  but  yet  did  not  write  that  book  ; 
he  may  have  delivered  that  prophecy,  and  yet,  if  he  wrote  it  down  at  all,  he  may 
have  done  so  in  a  book  which  has  been  embodied  in  or  superseded  by  the  present 
Book  of  Deuteronomy.  2.  The  books  following  Deuteronomy  in  the  canon,  and 
which  do  not  exhibit  an  agreement  with  it,  are  the  historical  books,  which  give 
account  of  the  affairs  of  the  people  from  the  period  of  their  settlement  in  Canaan  by 
Joshua  till  the  time  of  Josiah,  and  also  the  prophetical  books  which  date  from  the 
same  period.  The  difficulty  is  that  the  practice  of  Israel,  as  seen  even  in  its  leading 
men,  its  prophets,  priests,  judges,  kings,  does  not  accord  with  the  precepts 
laid  down  in  Deuteronomy,  either  in  ecclesiastical  or  in  civil  matters.  If  the 
Deuteronomic  law  was  known  at  all,  it  appears  to  have  been  almost  entirely  ignored 
in  practice.  (1)  In  ecclesiastical  matters  the  chief  rules  laid  down  in  Deuteronomy 
regarding  sacrifice,  the  great  act  of  solemn  worship,  the  meeting  point  between 
Jehovah  and  His  people,  appear  to  have  been  almost  entirely  neglected,  (i)  Instead 
of  there  being  only  one  altar  for  the  nation,  the  people  continued  to  offer  sacrifice  as 
they  had  done  all  along  at  a  multitude  of  shrines — such  asShechem,  Mizpeh,  Bethel, 
Gilgal,  Hebron,  Bethlehem,  Beersheba,  Kadesh,  &c.,  and  all  this  while  there  was 
a  central  sanctuary  at  Shiloh,  afterwards  at  Nob,  and  finally  at  Mount  Zion. 
(ii)  And  the  offering  of  sacrifice,  instead  of  being  confined  to  the  Levite  priests, 
appears  to  have  been  practised  almost  indiscriminately  by  men  of  all  the 
tribes  —  by  kings,  by  leaders,  by  judges,  by  fathers  of  families.  Separate 
answers  are  given  by  the  upholders  of  the  old  views  to  each  of  the  critical 
objections.  Most  of  these  answers,  however,  are  purely  hypothetical,  based  chiefly 
on  the  state  of  unsettlement  and  confusion  which  prevailed  in  Israel  during  great 
part  of  the  period  in  question.  As  to  the  use  of  a  plurality  of  sanctuaries,  Keil 
and  writers  of  his  school  refuse  to  admit  the  alleged  fact,  explaining  away  the 
instances  which  are  cited  in  proof— some  of  them  as  being  doubtfiil,  others  as  being 
exceptional,  "justified  by  the  appearance  of  an  angel  of  God"  ;  but  Principal 
Douglas,  one  of  the  very  latest  writers  on  that  side,  does  not  dispute  the  fact, 
though  he  explains  it  in  a  way  which  is  not  altogether  satisfactory.  He  maintains 
that  this  sacrificing  at  a  number  of  the  old  patriarchal  shrines  was  an  irregular 
expedient,  to  which  Samuel  and  other  pious  men  were  driven  by  the  necessities  of 
the  times,  in  order  to  prevent  the  total  cessation  of  all  public  worship— a  temporary 
falling  back  on  the  old  law,  when  the  new  law  had,  by  the  fall  of  Shiloh  and  the 
captivity  of  the  ark,  become  impracticable.  It  is  possible  that  this  explanation 
may  be  the  tnie  one ;  but  it  is  altogether  hypothetical.  There  is  nothing  in  the 
history  to  afford  it  any  distinct  countenance  or  support.  As  to  the  offering  of 
sacrifices  by  men  not  belonging  to  the  Levitical  priesthood,  the  natural  impression 
which  the  history  leaves  on  the  mind  is  that  this  was  the  case.  There  are  two 
general  arguments,  however,  which  to  some  minds  appear  sufficient  to  dispose  of 
most  of  the  cases  in  point,  (a)  When  a  king  or  a  prophet  is  said  to  offer  sacrifice, 
this  may  mean  no  more  than  that  he  did  so  through  the  regular  Levitical  priest. 
(6)  Again,  the  greater  includes  the  less.  Prophets  like  Samuel,  Elijah,  and  even 
David — men  inspired  by  God,  and  in  continual  direct  communication  with  Him — 
were  more  than  prieste,  and  were  exempt  from  ceremonial  laws  which  bound 
ordinary  men.  They  might  at  any  moment  obtain  the  Almighty's  direct  command 
or  permission  to  offer  sacrifice,  or  perform  any  sacred  rite.  The  Almighty  can  at 
any  time  dispense  with  His  own  laws.  There  are,  of  course,  some  cases  which  do  not 
come  distinctly  under  either  of  the  above  heads,  such  as  that  of  the  sons  of  David, 
who  are  called  priests  (2  Sam.  viii.  18),  and  who  performed  sacrifice.  Probably, 
however,  the  main  defect  in  the  evidence  for  the  prevalence  at  this  period  of  a 
knowledge  and  practice  of  the  Deuteronomic  law  lies  here,  as  under  the  last  head, 
in  the  absence  of  all  indication  in  the  sacred  text  that  there  was  in  any  of  the  cases 
referred  to  the  slightest  departure  from  law  or  ordinary  practice.  (2)  Besides  these 
Deuteronomic  rules  regulating  the  essentials  of  sacrifice,  there  are  at  least  other  two 
rules  bearing  on  sacrifice  which  seem  to  have  been  equally  unknown  to  the  writers 
and  actors  of  the  middle  period,  (i)  There  is  the  prohibition  (Deut.  xvi.  22) 
against  the  erection  of  a  ma9§eba,  or  sacred  pillar,  or  stone  set  up  like  Jacob's 
pillar,  in  connection  with  a  sanctuary,  yet  Joshua  (Josh.  xxiv.  26)  erects  such  a 
ma99eba  at  Shechem.  Samuel  erects  one  between  Mizpeh  and  Shen  (1  Sam.  vii.  12). 
Solomon  erected  two  in  the  porch  of  the  temple  (1  Kings  vii.  21).  Isaiah  foretells 
the  erection  of  such  a  maj^eba  as  a  sign  of  the  conversion  of  Egypt  (Isa.  xix.  19). 


X  INTRODUCTION"  TO  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY, 

(ii)  The  permission  giren  (Deut.  xii.  15)  to  kill  And  eat  animals  without  first 
offering  them  in  sacrifice.  It  is  inferred  from  what  Hoeea  says  (chap.  ix.  8  and  4) 
that  that  prophet  had  no  knowledge  of  any  such  permission.  Thus  far  as  to  the 
disagreements  in  these  books,  between  the  ceremonial  practice  of  the  people  and  the 
ceremonial  law  laid  down  in  Deuteronomy.  3.  In  ciril  matters  the  only  rery 
important  disagreement  regards  the  law  of  the  kingdom,  which  appears  to  have 
been  altogether  unknown.  The  law  in  Deuteronomy  (chap.  xrii.  14)  not  only 
sanctions  the  appointment  of  a  king  by  the  people  of  God,  but  lays  down  rules  to 
regulate  the  appointment.  Yet  when,  in  course  of  time,  the  people  demand  to  have 
a  king  appointed,  the  demand  is  treated  as  an  unheard  of  thing,  and  a  grievous 
insult  to  the  majesty  of  Jehovah,  who  is  regarded  as  the  proper  king  of  His  people. 
The  demand  is  so  treated  not  only  by  the  leaders  of  the  people — Samuel  and  Gideon 
— but  also  by  Jehovah  Himself  (Judg.  viii.  23 ;  1  Sam.  viii.  7).  Unlooked  for 
agreements : — ^Thus  far  as  to  the  disagreements  that  are  met  with  in  the  subsequent 
books  where  agreements  are  looked  for.  The  agreements  that  are  met  with,  where 
not  agreements  but  rather  disagreements  or  contrasts  are  looked  for,  are  the 
following — 1.  Style.  The  style  of  Deuteronomy,  instead  of  differing  from  the  style  of 
these  later  books,  agrees  wonderfully  with  the  style  of  certain  of  them  that  date  seven 
or  eight  hundred  years  after,  or  about  the  time  of  the  captivity,  especially  with  the 
style  of  Jeremiah,  and  the  Books  of  Kings.  It  is  the  lofty,  impressive  poetical  style 
of  Jeremiah.  2.  Diction  and  phraseology.  There  is  a  striking  resemblance  between 
the  diction  and  phraseology  of  Deuteronomy  and  those  of  these  books.  The  number 
of  phrases  and  images  common  to  both  sets  of  books  may  be  seen  at  full  length 
(with  chapter  and  verse)  in  several  critical  works  (Davidson,  Colenso).  3.  Then 
apart  from  laws — The  subjects  on  which  Moses  dwells  by  precept  and  prophecy  and 
warning  seems  to  indicate  that  many  of  the  events  in  the  history  of  the  kingdom  of 
Israel  and  Jndah  had  already  happened,  and  were  known  to  the  writer  as  facts — 
such  as,  for  example — (a)  *'  The  reference  to  the  danger  likely  to  arise  to  the  state 
from  the  king  multiplying  to  himself  *  wives '  and  *  silver  and  gold '  and  *  horses.' " 
This  warning,  it  is  thought,  was  suggested  by  the  case  of  Solomon.  (6)  The 
reference  to  **the  worship  of  the  sun  and  moon  and  the  host  of  heaven,"  This 
again  is  believed  to  have  been  suggested  by  the  idolatries  of  Manasseh's  reign, 
(c)  Then  Deuteronomy  iv.  25-28  is  thought  too  distinct  a  reference  to  the  captivity 
of  the  ten  tribes  to  have  been  written  before  that  event.  The  ten  tribes  were  then 
"scattered  among  the  nations,  and  left  few  in  number  among  the  heathen,"  &c. 
Explancdions : — These  alleged  agreements  are  thus  explained  by  the  critics  on  the 
other  side.  1  and  2.  The  agreement  between  the  style,  diction,  and  phraseology  of 
Jeremiah  and  Deuteronomy  arises  merely  from  imitation.  The  Book  of  Deuter- 
onomy had  been  rescued  from  its  long  neglect  by  Hilkiah  when  Jeremiah  was  a 
comparatively  young  man.  It  doubtless  made  a  great  impression  upon  him,  as  it 
did  upon  others,  ana  nothing  was  more  natural  than  that  he  should  seek  to  form  his 
style  in  every  way  upon  such  an  excellent  model.  3.  As  to  the  apparent  references 
to  events  in  the  history  of  the  kingdoms,  they  are  simply  prophecies.  Moses,  as  an 
inspired  prophet,  saw  into  the  future,  and  knew  what  transgressions  the  people 
would  fall  into,  and  warned  them  beforehand  of  the  consequences.  Rejoinders : — 
1  and  2.  To  these  answers  the  critics  rejoin  that  if  Jeremiah  was  so  great  an 
imitator  of  Deuteronomy,  it  is  strange  that  he  makes  no  direct  reference  to  the 
book — a  fact  which,  however,  would  be  very  natural  on  the  supposition  that  he  was 
himself  the  writer  of  it.  3.  As  to  the  explanation  of  the  historical  allusions  by 
prophecy,  it  is  maintained  that  it  is  contrary  to  prophetic  practice  to  predict  with 
any  circumstantiality  of  detail  things  which  are  yet  in  the  womb  of  the  far  future. 
'*  A  prophecy  springs  out  of,  or  directs  itself  to  meet,  the  circumstances  of  the  time." 
The  theories: — 1.  The  Interpolation  theory.  This  theory  assumes  that  Moses 
is  the  original  author  of  Deuteronomy,  and  also  of  the  other  four  books  of  the 
Pentateuch,  yet  the  books  have  undergone  many  and  great  alterations  since  they 
left  his  hand ;  other  inspired  men  having  at  different  times  introduced  additions 
and  modifications  of  the  laws,  to  adapt  them  to  changed  times.  This  theory  has 
probably  been  seldom  carried  beyond  the  stage  of  suggestion,  and  some  of  those  who 
suggest  it  would  apparently  shrink  from  admitting  its  applicability  to  the  explana- 
tion of  any  particular  discrepancies.  It  is  difficult  to  see  how  interpolation  can  be 
denied,  except  by  the  admission  of  the  much  more  radical  alternative  of  late  author- 
Bhij).  Interpolation  must,  in  fact,  form  part  of  any  adequate  theory  that  may  be 
devised ;  but  of  itself,  interpolation  cannot  explain  some  of  the  difficulties,  such  as 
the  discrepancy  between  the  style  of  Deuteronomy  and  that  of  the  foregoing  books, 


INTRODUCTION'  TO  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  xi 

and  the  discrepancy  between  the  precepts  of  Deuteronomy  and  the  practice  of  the 
following  books.  The  theory  of  interpolation  may,  however,  be  supplemented  by 
what  may  be  called — 2.  The  late  Codification  theory,  generally  known  as  the  theory 
of  Delitzflch,  though  in  substance  it  was  suggested  two  hundred  years  ago  by 
Witsins.  This  theory  assumes  that  Moses  spoke  and  wrote  down  the  Deuteronomio 
law,  as  in  Deuteronomy  he  is  represented  to  have  done,  but  maintains  that  he  did 
not'  write  down  the  law  as  given  in  the  foregoing  books,  having  only  delivered  it 
orally  to  the  priests,  who,  as  several  passages  show  (Deut.  xvii.  11,  xxiv.  8,  xxxiii. 
10 ;  Lev.  x.  11,  xv.  31),  were  bound  to  keep  up  and  communicate  to  the  people  a 
knowledge  of  the  law.  The  priests  either  committed  the  laws  to  memory,  or  took 
notes  of  them.  In  whatever  way  the  laws  were  preserved,  however,  they  were  not 
fully  written  out,  or  reduced  to  a  system,  or  "codified,"  till  some  time  after  the 
people  were  settled  in  Canaan— perhaps  "ages  after."  Before  the  time  for  codifica- 
tion came,  a  number  of  changes  may  have  been  made  in  the  laws  by  Divine 
authority  ;  and  thus  there  is  shown  a  probable  cause  for  the  difference  both  of  style 
and  of  law  between  Deuteronomy  and  the  previous  books.  There  are  two  facts 
which  lend  great  probability  to  the  chief  assumption  on  which  this  theory  rests, 
namely,  that  Moses  did  not  himself  write  the  law  in  Exodus,  Leviticus,  and  Numbers, 
(a)  In  the  text  of  these  books  Moses  is  only  said  to  have  written  small  specified 
portions  of  them  (Exod.  xxiv.  4-7,  xxxiv.  27,  xvii.  14  ;  Numb,  xxxiii.  2).  {h)  The 
very  fact  of  his  delivering  to  the  people  and  writing  down  the  law  in  considerable 
detail  on  the  eve  of  his  death,  seems  to  imply  that  he  had  not  written  it  down 
before.  The  only  serious  diflSculties  which  this  theory  does  not  account  for  are  the 
discrepancies  between  Deuteronomy  and  the  subsequent  books,  namely,  the  want  of 
agreement  between  the  practice  of  the  people  and  the  precepts  of  Deuteronomy,  and 
the  want  of  contrast  between  the  style  of  Deuteronomy  and  that  of  the  subsequent 
books.  The  two  sets  of  discrepancies  pointing  in  the  same  direction,  the  latter  set 
is  regarded  as  corroborative  of  the  former  ;  and  the  united  witness  of  the  two  is  held 
by  a  large  proportion  of  critics  to  be  conclusive  as  to  the  late  composition  and 
authorship  of  Deuteronomy.  This  conclusion,  it  is  admitted,  is  at  first  sight 
undoubtedly  startling  and  unsettling.  To  deny  that  Moses  is  the  author  of  a  book, 
great  part  of  which  consists  professedly  of  verbatim  reports  of  Moses'  speeches, 
written  down  by  Moses  himself,  is  apparently  to  offer  a  flat  contradiction  to  the 
plain  testimony  of  the  book  itself.  It  is  maintained,  however,  that  this  difficulty 
IS,  in  reality,  much  less  serious  than  at  first  sight  it  appears,  and  that  in  judging  of 
it  we  are  too  apt  to  be  misled  by  our  modern  notions  and  traditional  prejudices. 
The  diflSculty  is  capable,  it  is  argued,  of  an  explanation  which  is  in  no  way  deroga- 
tory to  the  authority  or  the  inspiration  of  Scripture.  The  mode  of  this  explanation 
constitutes — 3.  The  literary  expedient,  or  literary  fiction  theory.  According  to  this 
theory,  the  chief  part  of  Deuteronomy  is  put  into  the  mouth  of  Moses — not  because 
Moses  actually  spoke  or  wrote  it,  but  because  the  laws  are  substantially  the  laws  of 
Moses — laws  for  which  "Moses  left  the  materials,"  and  which  it  was  expedient  to 
continue  to  publish  under  the  name  of  Moses.  Some  prophet  (probably  Jeremiah) 
was  commissioned  by  the  Almighty  to  prepare  this  new  edition  ;  and  of  course  he 
was  authorised  and  instructed  to  make  certain  alterations  in  the  laws  to  adapt  them 
to  the  changed  times.  Now  ancient  writers,  in  expounding  a  man's  ideas  or  prin- 
ciples, naturally  threw  their  exposition  into  the  form  of  a  speech  delivered  by 
the  man  himself.  Hence  the  many  eloquent  speeches  in  Livy  and  other  ancient 
historians,  which  are  plainly  the  composition  of  the  historian  himself,  no  report 
having  ever  been  preserved  of  them.  Again,  ancient  writers  had  no  idea  of  the 
modern  expedients  of  notes  and  appendices  ;  and  hence  an  editor  simply  interwove 
his  corrections  and  additions  with  the  text  of  his  author,  just  as  the  author  would 
have  done  had  he  re-published  his  work  himself.  Thus  the  modem  prophet  or 
editor  re-cast  the  laws  of  Moses  much  as  Moses  himself  would  have  re-cast  them  had 
it  fallen  to  him  to  publish  a  new  edition  of  them  during  his  own  lifetime  ;  and  the 
editor  wrote  them  in  Moses'  name,  both  because  Moses  was,  under  God,  the  real 
author  of  the  laws,  and  because  Moses'  name  would  carry  greater  weight  than  his 
own.  If  we  have  difficulty  in  accepting  this  view,  it  is  because  we  are  "guilty  of 
the  mistaken  practice  of  taking  our  modern  notions  of  literary  form  and  propriety, 
and  thrusting  them  back  into  the  simplicity  of  early  times."  No  doubt  there  is 
much  force  in  this  reasoning.  Yet  this  theory  is  so  opposed  to  our  modem  notions 
of  fitness  and  propriety,  that  only  the  most  rigorous  and  conclusive  demonstration 
of  its  truth  will  ever  secure  for  it  general  acceptance  by  the  Church.  In  the  opinion 
of  the  writer  the  time  has  not  yet  come  for  pronouncing  with  any  confidence  on  the 


xii  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY. 

comparative  merits  and  claims  of  these  three  theories,  far  less  for  deciding  that  any 
one  of  them  supplies  a  full  and  adequate  explanation  for  all  the  complex  facts. 
1.  It  may,  however,  be  safely  assumed  that  the  first  or  Interpolation  theory  will 
never  be  generally  accepted  as  entirely  adequate  by  itself.  2.  The  late  Codification 
theory  of  Delitzsch,  as  accounting  for  a  large  proportion  of  the  facts  without  any 
startling  assumptions  or  bewildering  reversal  of  established  beliefs,  commends  itself 
naturally  to  all  candid  and  earnest  men  who  have  weighed  carefully  the  difiiculties 
of  the  question.  To  see  this  theory  established  by  irrefragable  proofs  would  afford 
undoubted  satisfaction  to  many  anxious  inquiring  minds.  3.  It  must  not  be  con- 
cealed, however,  that  the  third  or  literary  expedient  theory  is  by  far  the  more 
popular  amongst  critics.  With  them  the  Deuteronomic  question  becomes  merged  in 
the  general  question  of  the  origin  of  the  whole  historical  books.  The  writer  of 
Deuteronomy,  according  to  these  authorities,  was  only  one  of  at  least  four  or  five 
writers,  who  at  different  periods,  as  original  writers  or  as  suppleraenters,  took  part 
in  the  composition  of  the  historical  books,  and  he,  like  the  others,  can  be  tracked 
by  peculiarities  of  style,  diction,  and  phraseology  through  most  of  the  books,  from 
the  commencement  till  near  the  period  of  the  captivity.  This  theory  is  of  a  more 
sweeping  character  than  any  of  those  which  have  been  framed  for  the  solution  of 
the  Deuteronomic  difficulty ;  but  in  reality  it  cannot  be  said  to  involve  much  if 
any  additional  difficulty.  It  is  of  comparatively  small  importance  to  what  author 
or  authors  we  are,  under  the  guidance  ot  the  Spirit,  indebted  for  the  composition  of 
those  books  which  claim  for  themselves  no  particular  author,  one  inspired  writer 
being,  for  purposes  of  revelation,  as  good  as  another.  Then  as  to  the  composite 
nature  of  the  books — the  alleged  fact  that  different  parts  have  been  written  by 
different  prophets  and  at  different  times — this  fact,  keeping  inspiration  in  view,  can 
in  no  wise  detract  from  the  authority  of  the  books  ;  while  it  helps  greatly  to  explain 
apparent  anomalies  and  contradictions.  In  short,  it  is  rather  in  its  wider  divergence 
from  traditional  belief  than  in  any  necessary  consequences  which  are  involved  in  it 
that  iie  alarming  feature  of  this  theory  consists.     ( W.  Walker,  LL.D.) 

The  Contents  of  the  Book. — (a)  A  title  (chap.  i.  1-5  inclusive).  This  title  is 
twofold,  and  states  (1)  that  these  words  were  spoken  to  all  Israel  by  Moses  between 
Sinai  and  Kadesh-barnea,  in  view  of  their  first  attempt  at  the  conquest  of  Canaan. 

(2)  That  all  this  law  was  declared  {i.e.  apparently  re-delivered  and  written  (chap. 
i.  5))  in  the  eleventh  month  of  the  fortieth  year,  immediately  before  they  actually 
entered  the  country,  and  after  Sihon  and  Og  had  already  been  overcome.  {h)  An 
introductory  discourse  (chaps,  i.  6,  iv.  40  inclusive),  followed  by  the  appointment 
of  three  cities  of  refuge  on  the  eastern  side  of  Jordan,  in  the  territory  conquered  by 
Moses.  In  this  discourse  Moses  reviews  Israel's  journey  from  Sinai  to  the  banks  of 
Jordan,  for  the  purpose  of  exhortation,  dwelling  upon  those  points  only  which  bear 
directly  on  the  enterprise  in  prospect — the  passage  of  Jordan,  the  conquest  of  the 
seven  nations,  and  the  position  of  the  chosen  people  in  the  promised  land,  (c)  The 
Deuteronomy  proper,  or  repetition  of  the  law  (chap.  iv.  44  to  end  of  xviii. ).  This 
contains— (1)  A  title  (chap.  iv.  44-49).     (2)  Repetition  of  the  Decalogue  (chap,  v.). 

(3)  Its  exposition,  and  this  (a)  generally,  as  creating  a  certain  relation  between  the 
people  of  Israel  and  their  God,  who  had  given  them  this  law  (chaps,  vi.  to  xi. )  ; 
(/S)  particularly,  in  relation  to  the  land  which  God  was  giving  them.  This  land  is 
considered— (i)  As  the  seat  of  the  worship  of  Jehovah  (chaps,  xii.  1  to  xvi.  17). 
(ii)  As  the  seat  of  His  kingdom  (chap.  xvi.  18  to  end  of  xviii.).  (iii)  As  the  sphere 
of  operation  of  certain  particular  rules  of  person,  property,  society,  and  behaviour 
(chap.  xix.  to  end  of  xxvi.).  (4)  Its  enactment,  as  the  law  of  the  land  of  promise, 
written  on  Mount  Ebal,  and  enforced  by  blessings  and  cursings  (chap,  xxvii.). 
(5)  Its  sanction  in  Israel,  for  all  time,  by  a  most  tremendous  denunciation  of  rewards 
and  penalties,  in  force  even  to  this  day  (chap,  xxviii. ).  {d)  The  second  covenant, 
which  is  to  follow  the  Sinaitic  covenant,  and  to  redeem  Israel  from  its  curse,  "the 
covenant  which  the  Lord  commanded  Moses  to  make  with  the  children  of  Israel  in 
the  land  of  Moab,  beside  the  covenant  which  He  made  with  them  in  Horeb  "  (chaps, 
xxix.,  XXX.).  («)  Conclusion.  Moses' resignation  of  his  charge  to  Joshua.  Delivery 
of  the  law  to  the  priests  and  elders,  and  of  the  book  to  the  Levites  (chap.  xxxi.). 
Moses' last  song  (chap,  xxxii.),  blessing  (chap,  xxxiii.),  and  death  (chap,  xxxiv.). 
(C.  H.  Waller,  M.A.) 

Gospel  Hints  in  the  Book.— Hastily  reading  the  whole  book,  it  may  be 
described  as  a  Book  of  Law,  and  little  else  ;  yet,  reading  it  more  attentively,  it  will 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  xiii 

be  found  that  even  in  Denteronomy  there  are  evangelical  lines  full  of  the  very  love 
and  tenderness  of  God.  The  cities  of  refuge  may  be  described  as  Gospel  cities  ;  the 
protection  of  the  birthright  as  an  interposition  of  mercy  ;  the  very  battlement  upom 
the  house  is  the  law  respecting  the  neighbour  exemplified  rather  than  merely  uttered 
in  words ;  the  protection  of  the  dam  is  full  of  evangelical  suggestion ;  and  the 
measuring  of  stripes,  so  as  not  to  exceed  forty,  shows  that  the  law  was  restrained  by 
wisdom  and  mercy.  Unquestionably,  the  curses  pronounced  upon  disobedience  in 
the  twenty-eighth  chapter  are  like  a  very  storm  poured  down  from  the  heights  of 
heaven  ;  but  in  the  same  chapter  the  blessings  pronounced  upon  obedience  show 
that  high  above  all  law  there  reigns  the  spirit  of  love  and  pity.  In  the  thirty-first 
and  following  chapters  Moses  prepares  to  give  up  his  leadership,  and,  in  doing  so, 
he  tenderly  encourages  the  people  to  persevere,  and  in  paternal  tones  cheers  the 
heart  of  Joshua  in  view  of  the  tremendous  task  about  to  be  assigned  him. 
{J.  Parker,  D.D.) 

The  Book  viewed  in  connection  with  the  Personal  Character  of  Moses. 
— No  examination  of  this  latest  portion  of  the  Pentateuch  can  possibly  be  satisfactory 
which  omits  to  view  it  in  the  closest  connection  with  the  character  of  Moses  himself. 
The  personality  of  the  great  lawgiver  is  never  absent  from  the  pages  of  his  work  ; 
and  that  personality  is,  with  one  only  exception,  the  grandest  in  all  history.  Those 
rarest  of  characters  among  men,  who  appear  at  the  great  crises  of  human  action — 
Noah,  Abraham,  Moses,  St.  Paul — are  all  characters  of  slow  growth  and  late  ripe- 
ness  ;  and,  which  is  remarkable,  they  are  at  their  best  at  the  very  last.  The  slow 
growth  gives  toughness  of  mental  fibre,  just  as  the  oak  requires  a  century  to  attain 
its  maturity,  but  then  may  last  for  five  hundred  years  or  more,  whilst  the  quickly 
growing  pine  as  quickly  decays.  So  it  is  with  men.  The  smaller  and  shallower  the 
nature,  the  more  quickly  and  easily  it  reaches  its  best.  Rapid,  precocious,  facile, 
the  performances  of  such  are  the  wonder  of  their  contemporaries.  But  in  a  few 
years,  when  the  perfervidus  vigor  of  youth,  and  the  restless  impulse  which  it  gives, 
is  spent,  they  subside  into  very  ordinary  specimens  of  human  nature  ;  whilst  the 
larger  and  deeper  nature  goes  on  with  added  power  and  accelerating  force  till  it 
reaches  the  confines  of  the  end.  Of  such,  it  may  be  emphatically  said,  was  Moses. 
His  training  had  been  long  and  various.  He  was  "  learned  in  all  the  wisdom  of  the 
Egyptians,"  and  shared  doubtless  every  advantage  of  that  hieratic  culture  of  which 
modern  research  has  come  upon  so  many  traces  of  late.  The  rich  and  varied  life 
of  the  governing  class  in  Egypt — the  most  highly  cultured,  probably,  then  exist- 
ing throughout  the  world — in  which  he  had  luxuriated  for  forty  years,  must  have 
drawn  out  and  stimulated  his  faculties  as  the  heat  of  the  forcing-house  does 
flowers.  His  nature  must  have  been  fully  developed  by  the  end  of  this  period. 
Nursed  by  indulgence  and  popularity  and  splendour  into  its  fullest  growth  as  it  was, 
it  says  a  good  deal  for  its  essential  nobility  that  it  bore  without  sourness  or  perma- 
nent distortion  the  piercing  blast  of  adversity.  Two  shocks  came  upon  him  one 
after  another— the  utter  and  instant  failure  of  his  attempt  to  unite  Israel  under 
himself  as  their  leader  ;  and  then  the  compulsory  exchange  of  wealth  and  rank  in 
Egypt  for  the  solitary  life  and  the  humble  labour  of  a  shepherd  wandering  from 
oasis  to  oasis  in  the  Arabian  desert  at  the  back  of  Midian.  The  one  bad  developed, 
the  other  braced,  his  powers.  And  after  this  came  to  him  the  cares  of  leadership — 
the  endurance  of  that  vast  strain  of  anxiety  and  care  which  attends  the  re-shaping 
of  a  nation.  Such  responsibilities  make  men  grey  before  their  time,  and  by  this 
consideration  we  may  judge  in  some  degree  of  the  magnificent  elasticity  and  vital 
force  of  the  nature  of  the  man  who  was  called  by  God  to  bear  all  this  for  forty 
years,  and  even  then  have  it  recorded  of  him  that  "his  eye  was  not  dim,  nor  his 
natural  force  abated."  It  is  the  outcome  of  all  this  long  and  arduous  experience 
that  we  are  to  see  in  the  addresses  which  make  up  the  Book  of  Deuteronomy.  The 
patriot,  the  legislator,  the  founder  speaks  there  in  almost  every  line  no  less  than 
the  bearer  of  the  law  and  messenger  of  Jehovah.  The  reminiscences  of  experience 
common  to  the  speaker  and  his  hearers ;  the  quoriim  pars  magna  fuimus,  which 
form  the  burden  of  almost  every  chapter,  are  characteristic— too  characteristic  to  be 
overlooked,  too  natural  and  persistent  to  have  been  invented.  The  book  forms 
unconsciously  the  doge  of  the  speaker.  And  therefore,  let  us  say  in  passing,  it  is 
that  we  feel  small  sympathy  with  those  who  find  in  the  supposed  inability  of  Moses 
at  the  outset  of  his  mission  to  speak  to  Pharaoh,  the  proof  that  these  lengthy  and 
rhetorical  discourses  cannot  be  his.  It  is  not  Moses  the  fugitive,  the  adventurer, 
it  is  not  Moses  the  untried,  or  rather  the  unsuccessful,  whom  we  have  set  before  us 


xir  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY. 

in  the  opening  words  of  Deuteronomy  ;  it  is  Moses  the  aged,  th«  tried  in  war  and 
peace,  the  ruler  over  Israel  for  forty  years — a  king  in  all  but  name.  Such  reapon- 
sibilities  as  he  had  borne  crush  feeble  natures  indeed,  but  they  ennoble  strong 
ones.  And  therefore,  even  had  it  been  the  case  that  Moses  was  originally  a  man  of 
slow  and  hesitating  speech  (Exod.  iv.  10),  we  must  look  upon  that  weakness  as  having 
been  eradicated  by  the  slow  lapse  of  years,  by  the  habit  of  command,  and  the  steady 

growth  of  all  his  powers.  .  .  .  The  Book  of  Deuteronomy  may  be  called  a  popular 
igcst  of  the  Mosaic  Law.  It  includes  a  good  many  details,  and  all  the  great 
principles  npon  which  that  law  is  constructed.  It  is  plain,  simple,  popular,  not 
showing  continual  repetitions,  because  its  author  knew  the  exceeding  density  and 
•*  slowness  of  heart"  of  the  people  with  whom  he  had  to  deal.  If  we  compare  one 
of  the  earliest  of  the  Mosaic  institutes,  the  Ten  Commandments,  with  the  "  curses  " 
in  Dent.  xxviL  15-26,  which  are  one  of  the  latest,  and  are  obviously  modelled  upon 
them,  we  shall  see  how  great  was  Moses'  skill  in  statecraft,  and  how  much  he 
appreciated  the  advantages  of  perfect  plainness,  teaching  by  concrete  instances  and 
continual  repetition.  It  is  a  further  proof  of  this  practical  wisdom  that  the  book  is 
directed  to  be  read  aloud  once  every  seven  years  at  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles  before 
the  assembled  tribes  (xxxi.  10,  11),  i.e.  in  the  Sabbatical  year,  when  the  nsual 
culture  of  the  land  was  intermitted,  and  the  Israelites  had  leisure  to  assemble  for 
the  purpose.     We  cannot,  indeed,  suppose  that  this  far-seeing  intention  of  the  law- 

E'ver  was  carried  out.  This  beneficent  provision  also,  like  so  many  parts  of  the 
iw,  probably  remained  inoperative.  But  that  such  an  expedient  should  have  been 
enjoined  is  sufficient  of  itself  to  constitute  an  extremely  strong  prejudicium  in 
favour  of  the  early  date  of  the  book.  Quite  other  modes  of  publication  were 
in  vogue  by  the  time,  «.^.,  of  the  captivity ;  the  Sabbatical  years  themselves 
had  ceased  to  be  observed  ;  and  we  may  ask  what  conceivable  forger  would  have 
invented  a  mode  of  publication  of  the  Law  of  which  no  one  (on  the  rationalistic 
hypothesis)  had  ever  heard,  and  which  would  strike  him  as  altogether  inadequate  to 
the  requirements  of  a  great,  and  by  that  time  widespread,  population  ?  Similarly,  the 
requirements  to  be  fulfilled  by  a  king  of  Israel,  which  are  often  quoted  as  a  proof  of 
the  lateness  of  the  date  at  which  it  was  composed,  seem  to  us,  on  the  contrary,  a  proof 
of  its  antiquity.  For  in  what  age  could  such  a  list  oipostvlanda  have  originated  if 
not  in  the  Mosaic  ?  In  the  days  of  the  early  kings  ?  But  it  is  the  exact  point  of  the 
rationalistic  case  that  the  Law  was  then  entirely  unknown  ;  and  we  presume  no  one 
would  seriously  maintain  that  a  forger  would  compile  the  book  with  such  great  care 
and  skill,  and  then  put  it  by  for  a  hundred  and  fifty  years  to  mellow  and  get  aged,  as 
sham  antiques  are  buried,  with  the  intent  that  it  should  come  out,  say  a  hundred 
years  later,  after  the  writer  himself  was  dead,  to  deceive  every  one  into  the  belief  that 
it  was  authentic.  Nor  could  it  well  have  originated  under  the  later  kings,  who,  for 
the  most  part,  violated  in  their  ascent  to  power  and  in  their  lires  every  one  of  its 
prescriptions.  It  would  hardly  have  been  a  safe  undertaking  during  thoee  times  of 
sudden  and  illegal  violence,  when  the  royal  power  was  literally  (like  the  Turkish 
power  has  always  been)  without  any  check  save  that  of  superior  force,  to  have  been 
known  to  have  thrown  a  sort  of  doubt  over  the  royal  title  in  a  book  to  appear 
during  the  life  of  the  writer.  If  it  did  not  appear  at  once,  then  motive  would,  as 
in  the  former  case,  be  wanting  ;  and  besides,  we  come  upon  admitted  historical 
notice  of  the  book  by  that  time.  And  thus  one  line  of  investigation  after  another 
leads  us  back  to  the  earlier  date  which  the  book  itself  claims,  (fihureh  Quarterly 
Review,) 


THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR 

DEUTERONOMY. 


CHAPTER  L 

Ybbs.  1-8.  Tbese  be  the  -vrords  whicli  Moses  spake  tmto  all  Israel  on  this  side 
Jordan  in  the  wilderness. — Moses'  discourse  to  Israel: — I.  The  date  of  this 

BKRICON  WEIGH  MoSES  PREACHED  TO  THE  PEOPLE  OF   ISRAEL.      A  great  auditory 

no  question  he  had,  as  many  as  could  crowd  within  hearing,  and  particularly  all  tho 
elders  and  officers,  the  representatives  of  the  people ;  and  probably  it  was  on  the 
Sabbath  day  that  he  delivered  this  to  them.  1.  The  place  where  they  were  now 
encamped  was  in  the  plain,  in  the  land  of  Moab  (vers.  1,  5),  where  they  were  just 
ready  to  enter  Canaan,  and  engage  in  a  war  with  the  Canaanites.  Yet  he  discourseth 
not  to  them  concerning  military  affairs,  but  concerning  their  duty  to  God  ;  for  if  they 
kept  themselves  in  His  fear  and  favour.  He  would  secure  to  them  the  conquest  of  the 
land  ;  their  religion  would  be  their  best  policy.  2.  The  time  was  near  the  end  of  the 
fortieth  year  since  they  came  out  of  Egypt.  So  long  God  had  borne  their  manners, 
and  they  had  borne  their  own  iniquity  (Nvmib.  xiv.  34) ;  and  now  a  new  and  more 
pleasant  scene  was  to  be  introduced,  as  a  token  for  good,  Moses  repeats  the  law  to 
them.  Thus,  after  God's  controversy  with  them  for  the  golden  calf,  the  first  and 
surest  sign  of  God's  being  reconciled  to  them  was  the  renewing  of  the  tables.  There 
is  no  better  evidence  and  earnest  of  God's  favour  than  His  putting  His  law  in  our 
hearts  (Psa.  cxlvii.  19,  20).  II.  The  discourse  itself.  In  general,  Moses  spake 
nnto  them  "all  that  the  Lord  had  given  him  in  commandment"  (ver.  3),  which 
intimates,  not  only  that  what  he  now  delivered  was  for  substance  the  same  with 
what  had  formerly  been  commanded,  but  it  was  that  God  now  commanded  him  to 
repeat.  He  gave  them  this  rehearsal  and  exhortation  purely  by  Divine  direction. 
G^  appointed  him  to  leave  this  legacy  to  the  Church.  He  begins  his  narrative 
with  their  removal  from  Mount  Sinai  (ver.  6),  and  relates  here — 1.  The  orders  God 
gave  them  to  decamp  and  proceed  in  their  march  (ver.  6,  7).  **  Ye  have  dwelt  long 
enough  in  this  mount."  That  was  the  mount  that  burned  with  fire  (Heb.  xii.  18), 
and  gendered  to  bondage  (Gal.  iv.  24).  Thither  God  brought  them  to  humble  them, 
and  by  the  terrors  of  the  law  to  prepare  them  for  the  land  of  promise.  There  He 
kept  them  about  a  year,  and  then  told  them  they  had  dwelt  long  enough  there,  they 
must  go  forward.  Though  God  bring  His  people  into  trouble  and  affliction,  into 
spiritual  trouble  and  affliction  of  mind.  He  knows  when  they  have  dwelt  long  enough 
in  it,  and  will  certainly  find  a  time,  the  fittest  time,  to  advance  them  from  the 
terrors  of  the  spirit  of  bondage  to  the  comforts  of  the  spirit  of  adoption  (Rom.  viii 
16).  2.  The  prospect  He  gave  them  of  a  happy  settlement  in  Canaan  presently : 
"Go  to  the  land  of  the  Canaanites  "  (ver.  7).  Enter  and  take  possession ;  it  is  all 
your  own.  "  Behold,  I  have  set  the  land  before  you"  (ver.  8).  But  when  God 
commands  us  to  go  forward  in  our  Christian  course,  He  sets  the  heavenly  Canaan 
before  us  for  our  encouragement.  {Matthew  Henry,  D.D.)  Moses  spake  .  .  , 
according  nnto  aU  that  the  Lord  had  given  him. — A  Ood-given  sermon : — Moses 
spoke  what  the  Lord  had  commanded  him  ;  in  othw  words,  Moses  gave  the  people 
what  God  had  given  him  (Acts  iii.  6).  Though  the  words  were  Moses',  the  thing 
uttered  was  of  God.  Some  speak  according  to  the  wisdom  of  the  world :  they  can 
tell  much  about  its  craft,  villainy,  hollowness  ;  and  they  preach  selfishness,  more  or 
less  refined,  as  a  means  of  personal  defence,  and  the  true  source  of  success.     Some 


2  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  r. 

speak  according  to  one  thing,  others  according  to  something  else.  Moses  spoke  accord- 
ing to  what  God  had  given  him.  He  therefore  spoke  God's  truth.  I.  Becausb 
Moses  spoke  God's  truth  he  uttered  what  would  be  advantageous 
TO  THE  PEOPLE.  The  path  of  happiness  is  the  way  of  wisdom.  Wisdom  is 
happiness  as  well  as  pleasant  (Prov.  viii. ).  True  wisdom  is  the  fear'of  God  (Job 
xxviii.  28).  The  man  who  declares  God's  truth  instructs  in  wisdom  and  leads  men 
to  happiness.  Happiness  is  what  men  are  seeking.  Those  who  conduct  others  into 
happiness  meet  an  universal  want.  II.  Because  Moses  spoke  what  God  gave  him, 
HE  COULD  SPEAK — 1.  With  courage.  2.  With  power.  III.  Because  Moses  spoke 
what  God  gave  him  to  speak,  he  relieved  himself  of  responsibility.  1.  Com- 
missions are  sometimes  entrusted  to  men  by  God  which  they  are  afraid  to  execute. 
They  thereby  entail  calamity  upon  themselves  and  all  connected  with  them  (Jonah). 

2.  Duties  imposed  by  God,  if  neglected,  bring  desolation  on  the  man  and  his  family 
— Achan  (Judges  vii.).  3.  Knowledge,  wisdom,  visions  of  the  Divine  glory  are 
vouchsafed  to  men  to  be  used  for  the  improvement  of  the  world,  the  upholding  of 
the  Church,  and  the  honour  of  God.  4.  Money,  influence,  opportunity  is  entrusted 
to  many  in  these  days.  Such  is  not  to  be  lavished  on  ourselves.  God  gave  it ;  He 
expects  it  to  be  used  in  His  service.  {J.  Saurin.)  On  this  side  Jordan,  &c. — 7%« 
tporth  of  the  present : — Moses  repeated  the  law  as  soon  as  he  had  opportunity,  and 
circumstances  required  it.  He  did  not  wait  till  the  promised  land  was  entered. 
The  work  of  to-day  was  not  delayed  till  the  morrow.  It  was  done  at  once.  He  did 
it  where  he  was — in  the  land  of  the  Gentiles— surrounded  with  heathen — in  the 
country  of  foes.  Trapp  with  no  little  humour  remarks  on  these  words,  "And  he 
was  not  long  about  it.  A  ready  heart  makes  a  riddance  of  God's  work,  for  being 
oiled  with  the  Spirit,  it  becomes  lithe  and  nimble  and  quick  of  despatch."  Three 
practical  hints— I.  What  is  to  be  done  do  at  once.  Moses  on  this  side  of  Jordan 
began  to  speak.  Had  Moses  been  a  boy  at  school  he  would  not  have  put  off  his 
prayers  till  he  got  home,  where  there  were  no  schoolfellows  to  chaff.  He  would  have 
said  them  then  and  there.  II.  Do  not  think  that  there  will  be  a  more 
propitious  time  than  the  present.  1.  Dallying  with  duties  does  not  diminish 
difficulties.  2.  Delay  positively  increases  difficulties.  Power  unused  decreases.  If 
duty  is  deferred  a  day  we  are  a  day's  wasted  strength  the  weaker.  (3)  We  know 
what  is  to  be  done  now  ;  to-morrow  it  may  be  forgotten.  Cares  of  life  may  usurp 
attention.  The  duties  are  pushed  aside— choked  down — killed.  Weeds  grow  faster 
than  com.     Cares  and  duties  come  quicker  than  time.     III.  Do  some  good  things 

IN  THIS  LIFE — in  THE  DESERT,  SO  CALLED,  ON  THIS  SIDE  JORDAN.      Do  UOt  Wait  till 

heaven  is  reached,  that  angels  alone  may  be  witness  of  your  good  deeds.  Moses  did 
not  defer  till  the  promised  land  was  reached.  He  did  what  he  was  able  out  of  the 
promised  land.  It  was  well  he  did.  He  never  reached  Canaan.  Had  he  put  off  all 
till  then,  nothing  would  have  been  done.  {Ibid.)  God's  address  to  dispeople: — 
I.  God,  in  His  address  to  His  people,  enjoins  action.  "Not  slothful"  is  the 
apostolic  command.  *  *  Ye  have  dwelt  long  enough. "  The  time  of  inactivity  is  over. 
*"rum  you,  take  your  journey."  God  enjoins  on  His  people  to  be  like  Himself. 
He  is  ever  active.  The  whole  seven  days  round  His  energies  are  going  forth  in 
creating  and  blessing.  Not  less  active  than  the  Father  is  the  Son.  Week-day  and 
Sabbath  He  exerted  Himself  to  make  man  happier  and  the  world  brighter.  His 
reason  for  this  He  gives  in  John  v.  17.  It  is  not  unnatural,  therefore,  that  God 
seeks  in  His  people  qualities  so  largely  developed  in  Himself.  God  does  not  want 
idlers  in  His  vineyard.  Man  was  put  into  the  garden  of  the  world  to  work  (Gen.  ii. 
15).  However,  God  permits  some  rest.  life  is  not  all  work.  Storm  and  calm, 
battle  and  peace,  make  history.  But  still  the  law  of  life  and  growth  is,  the  more  we 
do  within  certain  limits  the  more  we  are  able  to  do.  This  is  true  both  physically 
and  spiritually.  People  of  impaired  health  by  proper  exercise  become  strong.  The 
moraUy  weak  are  strengthened  by  the  exercise  of  trial.  The  more  kind  a  man  tries 
to  be,  the  more  he  is.  So  with  faith,  patience,  hope.  II.  God  advises  with 
regard  to  the  nature,  direction,  and  extent  of  this  action.  1.  Nature  of 
the  action.  Let  it  be  action  with  a  purpose  in  view.  Have  an  aim  in  life.  **  Go  to 
the  mount  of  the  Amorites."  2.  Direction  of  the  action.  Two  hints  with  regard  to 
that — (1)  Let  it  go  forth.  It  does  not  do  for  a  man's  action  to  turn  in  on  himsell 
Uniform  selfishness  is  as  injurious  as  constant  introspection ;  and  ceaseless  intro* 
spection  is  as  ruinous  as  unmixed  selfishness.  Live  for  others  as  well  as  self; 
work  for  others.     (2)  This  is  modified  by  another  hint.     Go  to  what  is  near  first. 

3.  Extent  of  the  action.  Begin  at  the  near,  then  proceed  to  what  is  more  remote,  till 
the  whole  world  is  affected  by  your  life,  e.g, — (1)  First  to  the  plain.    Bead  part  of 


CHAP.  I.]  DEUTERONOMY, 


the  Bible  easUy  understood  and  applied.     Interpret  providence  as  far  as  you  can 
trace  a  Father's  hands.    What  cannot  be  understood  leave  for  a  future  day  and 
clearer  lights.     (2)  After  this  go  to  the  hill.     Do  not  mind  a  difficulty  sometimes. 
A  little  adversity  strengthens  the  souL     Trust  is  perfected  in  suflfering.    (3)  Now 
you  may  proceed  to  the  vale.    There  is  the  * '  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death  "— ' '  the 
valley  of  humiliation"— "the  valley  of  vision."    Here  the  soul  is  quickened  and 
brought  into  that  region  of  experience  that  Paul  designates  as  being  *'  hidden  with 
Christ  in  God."    (4)  Thus  prepared  with  "the  whole  armour  of  God,     go  to  the 
"south."    Here  were  hills  infested  with  foes.    So  the  Christian,  after  mounting 
the  Hill  of  Transfiguration  with  Christ,  where  for  a  moment  the  Divine  glory  is 
manifested,  has  to  go  back  again  to  a  world  where  man  has  to  contend  with  demons 
(Matt.  xvii.  14-18),  where  he  has  to  grapple  with  many  a  spiritual  foe,  wolves  m 
sheep's  clothing,  the  lion  that  seeks  to  devour,  the  subtle  serpent.    (5)  Then  comes 
the  reward.     Having  gone  to  the  "  south,"  the  people  might  turn  aside  to  the  sea. 
So  does  God  bring  the  Christian  after  long  and  hard  toil  to  gaze  into  those  depths  of 
love  and  grace  which  are  as  oceans  mirroring  the  midnight  skies.     (6)  After  such 
revelation  of  God's  glory  and  power  the  people  of  God  can  go  forth  to  war  with  the 
Canaanite.     The  kingdom  of  Christ  is  extended  to  Lebanon  (the  far  north)— to  the 
river  (the  far  east).     The  whole  world  is  filled  with  the  glory  of  the  Lord.    IIL  God, 
IN  His  adbbess,  points  out  how  bightly  directed  action  will  bring  its 
OWN  REWARD.     ' '  Behold,  I  have  set  (Heb.  '  given ')  the  land  before  you  :  go  in  and 
possess."    1.  True  work  is  sure  to  bring  recompense  of  some  kind.     It  brings 
external  reward.     A  day's  work  brings  the  day's  wages.    The  sowings  of  spring  are 
followed  by  the  harvests  of  autumn.     It  brings  an  internal  reward  in  a  man  s  own 
nature  and  being.     2.  Show  what  work  is.      Distinguish  work  from  pleasure. 
Pleasure  is  the  expending  of  energy  without  any  end  or  purpose  save  the  sensations 
caused  by  the  act  of  waste,  whereby  pleasure  has  been  defined  as  "dissipating  enjoy- 
ments" ;   work  is  energy  expended  for  a  purpose.    In  its  idea  it  is  conservative. 
Work  is  action  to  get  a  return  for  the  energy  so  spent,  both  to  recuperate  and 
increase  the  power  thus  employed.     Pleasure  seeks  nothing  save  the  sensation  ;  work 
demands  a  recompense.     God  promises  to  work  its  recompense.         Go  m  and 
possess. "    {lUd. )        The  discmrse  delivered  hy  Moses  .—The  faithful  servants  of  the 
Lord,  with  advancing  years  and  experience,  frequently  acquire  increasing  reputation 
for  wisdom,  integrity,  and  disinterested  philanthropy,  as  well  as  pious  zeal  for  the 
glory  of  God.     While  they  draw  nearer  to  the  heavenly  world  they  often  seem  to 
breathe  a  purer  air,  and  all  their  words  have  a  heavenly  savour;  their  motion 
accelerates  as  they  approach  their  rest ;  their  earnestness  increases,  when  they  can 
be  influenced  by  no  earthly  motive;  and  their  confidence  and  comfort  acquire 
strength  in  defiance  of  the  approaching  king  of  terrors.    Under  such  circumstances 
their  instructions  are  doubly  impressive,  and  frequently  have  a  durable  effect  upon 
the  survivors.    They  should  then  seize  every  occasion  of  reminding  the  people  of  the 
wisdom,  power,  truth,  and  love  of  God,  as  manifested  in  His  dealmg  with  them : 
and  there  are  times  when  they  may  also,  consistently  with  deep  humility,  speak  of 
their  own  conduct,  their  love  to  souls,  their  faithful  labours,  their  self-denial,  and 
patient  sufferings  in  the  arduous  work  about  which  they  are  engaged ;  m  order  to 
obviate  prejudice,  and  to  obtain  a  more  favourable  attention  to  further  exhortations. 
But  it  is  likewise  necessary  to  show  the  people  their  transgressions,  that  they  may 
be  duly  humbled ;  to  warn  them  against  the  fatal  effects  of  unbelief  and  sin ;  to 
point  out  the  advantages  of  confidence  in  God  and  obedience  to  Him  ;  and  to  unite 
confessions  of  their  own  imperfection  and  sinfulness,  both  to  avoid  gmng  needless 
offence,  to  suggest  encouragement,  and  to  excite  personal  h\imiha.tion.     {Thomas 
Scott.)        Ordered  from  the  m/mntain ;— God  knows,  then,  how  long  we  have  been 
here  or  there.     He  keeps  the  time  ;  He  knows  when  we  have  been  * '  long  enough    m 
one  place.     "  Ye  have  dwelt  long  enough  in  this  mount."    We  may  get  tired  even 
of  mountains.     Wherever  we  live  we  need  change.     We  are  ordered  down  off  the 
mountain.      Soon  after  we  have  said,  It  is  good  to  be  here,  the  Leader  proposes 
that  we  should  go  down  again.     He  will  not  have  any  heaven  built  upon  earth  ;  He 
will  never  allow  us  to  build   permanently  upon   foundations  that  are  themselves 
transitory.     There  are  many  mountains  to  come  down— mountains  of  supposed 
strength,  when  the  very  robustest  man  must  lie  down  and  say,  "  I  am  very  weary, 
tired  to  exhaustion  "  ;   mountains  of  prosperity,  when  Croesus  himself  must  come 
down,  saying,  "  I  am  a  poor  man;  let  the  meanest  slave  serve  me,  for  I  cannot 
longer  serve  myself."    Then  there  is  the  coming  down  that  is  inevitable— the  time 
when  God  says  to  every  one  of  us,  "  You  have  been  long  enough  on  the  mountain 


4  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap,  i, 

of  time ;  pass  through  the  grave  to  the  hills  of  heaven,  the  great  mountains  of 
eternity."  Sometimes  we  think  we  have  been  too  long  on  the  mountain,  and 
wonder  when  He  will  come  whose  right  it  is  to  bring  the  sheep  into  the  fold ;  wo 
say  in  our  peevishness — not  always  impious,  but  rather  an  expression  of  weakness — 
Surely  we  have  been  forgotten ;  by  this  time  we  ought  to  have  been  with  the 
blessed  ones  ;  the  night  is  coming  on  quickly,  and  we  shall  be  drenched  with  dews. 
So  long  are  some  men  kept  outside,  on  the  very  top  of  the  hill,  where  very  little 
grass  grows— bare,  rocky  places.  But  God  cannot  forget ;  we  must  rest  in  Hia 
memory  ;  He  puts  Himself  even  before  a  mother  who  may  forget  her  sucking  child, 
but  He  has  pledged  Himself  never  to  forget  His  redeemed  Church.  But,  having 
ordered  His  people  away  from  the  mountain,  where  can  they  take  up  their  abode  ! 
We  find  the  answer  in  the  seventh  verse.  God  has  many  localities  at  His  com- 
mand, so  He  disperses  the  people,  setting  them  '* in  the  plain,"  "in  the  hills,"  "in 
the  vale,"  "by  the  seaside,"  and  "unto  the  great  river,  the  river  Euphrates." 
What  space  God  has  1  "In  My  Father's  house  are  many  mansions" — in  My 
Father's  house  are  many  localities.  Why  do  we  choose  our  own  place  ?  Did  ever 
man  dispute  the  Divine  sovereignty  without  regretting  his  encounter  with  the 
Eternal  Will  ?  Why  have  any  will  ?  Were  we  serving  wooden  gods,  mechanical 
deities,  divinities  of  our  own  creation  or  invention,  we  might  dispute  with  them, 
point  out  what  possibly  they  may  have  overlooked,  and  draw  bolder  programmes ; 
out  if  God  is  the  only-wise,  if  Gcd  is  love,  if  God  is  light,  if  God  died  for  us  in  the 
person  of  His  Son,  why  not  say,  Not  my  will,  but  Thine  be  done :  take  me  to  the 
mountain  or  the  plain,  the  hills  or  the  vale,  the  seaside  or  the  river ;  the  taking 
itself  shall  be  as  a  vision  of  heaven  1  {J.  Parker,  D.D,)  A  stationary  position 
deffrading : — I  remember  hearing  a  naturalist  describe  a  species  of  jelly-fish  which, 
he  said,  lives  fixed  to  a  rock,  from  which  it  never  stirs.  It  does  not  require  to  go 
in  search  of  food,  because  in  the  decayed  tissues  of  its  own  organism  there  grows  a 
kind  of  seaweed  on  which  it  subsists.  I  thought  I  had  never  heard  of  any  creature 
so  comfortable.  But  the  naturalist  who  was  describing  it  went  on  to  say  that  it  is 
one  of  the  very  lowest  forms  of  animal  life,  and  the  extreme  comfort  which  it  enjoys 
is  the  very  badge  of  its  degraded  position.  Ck>  in  and  possess  the  land. — T?ie 
hlessedness  and  glory  of  the  promised  larid : — I.  To  give  a  spiritual  description 

OF  THE  LAND  WHICH  JeHOVAH  HATH  PROPOSED  AS  THE  END  OF  OUR  PILGRIMAGE, 
AND  OF  WHICH  WE   ALL  PROFESS   TO   BE  IN  SEARCH.        1.    It   is   a   land  tO  whose 

delightfulness,  beauty,  and  fertility  Jehovah  Himself  had  borne  the  most  ample 
and  undoubted  testimony.  2.  But  the  land  of  Canaan  was  not  merely  a  country 
known  by  description,  however  magnificent  and  encouraging,  as  well  as  unchange- 
ably true,  the  testimony  of  God  might  be  concerning  it.  The  spies  who  had  b^u 
sent,  in  whatever  guilty  unbelief  their  mission  originated,  had  searched  it  out,  from 
Dan  even  to  Beersheba;  and  they  had  brought  with  them  of  the  grapes,  and 
pomegranates,  and  figs,  that  the  people  might  see,  and  taste,  and  judge  for  them- 
selves. And  what  was  this  except  a  type  of  Christ,  the  true  Vine,  some  clusters  of 
which  the  searching  eye  of  faith  may  see  1  8.  It  is,  moreover,  a  land  of  promise ;  and 
here  is  the  leading  feature  of  its  peculiar  preciousness.  Jehovah  saith  not  that 
Canaan  is  a  country  which  His  people  might  inhabit,  if  they  could  win  it  in  their 
own  strength  ;  for  then,  where  were  the  weapons  of  their  successful  warfare,  and 
where  the  might  in  which  to  overcome  their  enemies  ?  But  it  is  a  land  which,  in 
the  exercise  of  His  free  and  sovereign  grace.  He  made  over  to  them — not  giving  it  to 
them  because  they  were  a  great  nation,  for  they  were  the  fewest  of  all  people,  but 
because  He  loved  them.  fl.  The  injunction  given  by  Jehovah  to  His  people 
— "Go  in,  and  possess  the  land"  ;  and,  as  it  is  added  in  the  twenty-third  verse, 
where  the  command  and  promise  are  repeated,  "Fear  not,  neither  be  discouraged." 
The  kingdom  of  heaven  suffereth  violence,  and  the  violent  take  it  by  force.  Never 
imagine  that  the  Canaan  which  you  profess  to  seek  will  be  your  own  without  a  war- 
fare. Fight  valiantly,  pray  fervently,  trust  implicitly,  and  you  will  be  made  more 
than  conquerors.  Neither  doubt  nor  distrust  the  sure  promise  and  inviolable 
covenant  of  an  unchangeable  God.  Oh,  how  keenly  should  this  Scripture  rebuke  all 
loiterers  in  the  holy  war  !  We  profess  to  love  and  follow  Jesus,  but  when  He  criea 
"  Go  up  and  possess  the  land,"  we  willingly  linger  in  the  desert  of  our  own  coldness 
and  worldly  love.  {R.  P.  Buddieom. )  Enlargement—a  New  Year's  address : — 
John  Foster,  in  one  of  his  admirable  essays,  speaks  of  truth  as  presenting  to  the 
inquirer's  view  a  beautiful  and  spacious  landscape,  divided  into  delightftU  gardens, 
green  meadows,  so  that  wherever  he  casts  lus  eyes  he  beholds  some  beautifal  plant 
or  flower  of  truth.    You  have  entered  into  this  goodly  land  of  truth,  "G«  in  and 


CHAP.  I.]  DEUTERONOMY. 


possess  it "  ;  extend  this  year  your  knowledge  of  it,  make  its  riclies  yoTir  own  price- 
less possession.  God  has  given  unto  us  intellectual  power  ;  and,  having  bestowed 
this  blessing  upon  us.  He  requires  that  we  do  our  utmost  in  order  to  secure  mental 
culture.  Truth  has  many  departments,  but  truth  in  its  highest  form  is  presented 
to  us  in  Holy  Scripture.  What  a  realm  of  beauty  and  fertility  is  present^  to  us 
here  !  Let  us  "go  in  and  possess  this  land."  And  let  us  "go  in"  feeling  that  we 
are  entering  a  large  land  ;  not  mistaking  for  the  whole  a  little  tract  we  have 
traversed,  but  convinced  that  there  are  unexplored  regions  yet  to  be  brought  to 
light.  Oh,  to  be  delivered  from  all  narrowness  in  reference  to  our  conceptions  of 
truth,  and  specially  of  truth  bearing  upon  our  spiritual  weal !  There  are,  I  know, 
certain  teachings  which  are  to  be  regarded  as  foundation  teachings,  as,  for  instance, 
the  Divinity  and  Incarnation  of  Christ,  the  Atonement  of  Jesus,  His  victory  over 
death.  His  resurrection,  &c.  But  whilst  holding  these  great  verities  of  eternal 
truth  unswervingly,  let  us  come  to  the  study  of  this  Book  of  God  believing  that 
there  are  hidden  treasures  here,  and  which  He  will  reveal  to  us  by  His  Spirit  if  we 
carry  on  our  investigation  in  the  spirit  of  patience,  thoughtfulness,  courage,  and 
prayer.  One  of  the  most  beautiful  conceptions  of  heaven  we  can  possibly  form  is  that 
of  its  being  "the  land  of  uprightness  "  ;  perfect  purity,  complete  rectitude  prevail- 
ing. And  whilst  it  is  true  that  heaven  "  remaineth  to  the  people  of  God,"  it  is  also 
true  that  they  who  have  believed  enter  it  even  here.  The  blessings  flowing  to  us 
through  our  union  to  Christ  are  present,  and  the  elements  which  constitute  the 
character  of  the  glorified  in  heaven  are  to  mark,  in  a  growing  measure,  God's  servants 
who  are  still  on  earth.  Be  it  ours,  then,  to  go  on  developing  in  all  the  excellencies 
of  the  Christian  character.  There  is  a  realm  which  must  be  described  as  one  of  sin 
and  death,  of  bondage  and  darkness.  Oh,  to  possess  that  land,  and  to  transfer  it  to 
Christ,  that  thus,  under  the  influence  of  His  Spirit,  its  evil  may  give  place  to  purity, 
its  slavery  to  liberty,  whilst  through  its  chambers  of  death  life  may  spread  !  This 
is  our  mission  as  the  followers  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  In  calling  us  into  union  with 
Himself  He  calls  us,  in  fact,  into  sympathy  with  Him  in  His  glorious  purpose  of 
effecting  the  ultimate  deliverance  of  the  world  from  the  captivity  of  evil.  When  we 
speak  of  possessing  the  world  for  Christ,  what  difficulties  present  themselves  to  our 
view  !  How  vast  is  the  territory  yet  to  be  covered  !  How  inapproachable  many  of 
its  tracts,  so  that  noble  lives  are  sacrificed  by  the  way,  or  reach  their  destination  only 
to  die  !  How  unhealthy  the  climates,  and  how  unyielding  the  superstitions  !  How 
the  work  is  impeded,  too,  by  the  policy  of  governments,  taking  the  carnal  weapons 
where  we  would  use  the  spiritual,  and  introducing  the  soldier  where  we  would  plant 
the  missionary.  Truly,  there  are  many  hindrances.  But  we  will  not  despair.  It  is 
the  cause  of  God  in  which  we  are  enlisted.  When  He  works,  who  shall  hinder  I 
(;S'.  D.  milman,  B.A.) 

Vers.  9-18.  And  I  spake  unto  yon  at  that  time,  saying,  I  am  not  able  to  bear 
you  myself  alone. — The  promised  increase  pleaded: — I.  The  glorious  being 
ADDRESSED.  "The  Lord  God  of  your  fathers."  1.  In  His  essential  character  as 
Lord  God.  (1)  In  creation.  (2)  In  providence.  (3)  In  redemption.  2.  In  His 
relative  character.  "  Lord  God  of  your  fathers."  (1)  Literally  in  its  application  to 
Israel.  The  Lord  God,  who  called  Abraham,  blessed  Isaac,  and  named  Jacob  ;  who 
delivered  His  people  from  the  proud  yoke  of  Pharaoh  ;  guided,  guarded,  and 
supplied  them  in  the  wilderness ;  gave  them  the  rich  land  of  promise.  Surely 
Israel  might  well  sing,  "There  is  no  God  like  unto  the  God  of  Jeshurun."  Then  let 
us  apply  it — (2)  To  many  of  our  fathers  after  the  flesh.  Many  of  our  fathers  served 
and  trusted  in  the  living  God.  How  they  spake  of  God,  "Behold  I  die,  but  serve 
God,  and  He  will  be  with  you."  Is  not  their  memory  still  sweet  ?  3.  The  subject 
has  a  general  application  to  oiir  spiritual  predecessors.  Those  early  Christian 
fathers  who  had  to  witness  before  the  pagan  world,  and  who  passed  through  horrid 
persecutions,  and  yet  were  supported  and  made  successful  in  spreading  the  Gospel 
through  the  world.  II.  The  comprehensive  petition  presented.  "Make  yon," 
&c.  In  the  petition  are  two  parts,  multiplication  of  numbers  and  the  Divine 
blessing.  III.  The  ground  op  encouragement  adduced.  "  As  He  hath  pro- 
mised." Now,  God  did  promise  Abraham.  Observe  some  of  the  traits  of  these 
promises.  They  are — 1.  Absolute  in  their  nature.  He  has  not  said  He  will  multiply 
the  Church  if^(l)  Her  friends  are  active  and  willing.  No.  But  He  will  make  His 
people  willing  in  the  day  of  His  power.  (2)  If  the  governments  of  the  world  and  the 
great  of  the  earth  are  favourable ;  but  it  is  written,  "They  shall  bring  the  gold  of 
Sheba/'  &e.     2.  They  are  numerous.    Scattered  over  the  whole  extent  of  revelation* 


THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  r. 


3.  They  have  been  principally  made  to  Christ.  4.  Partially  fulfilled.  Application. 
1.  The  divinity  of  our  religion.  2.  The  benevolence  of  our  religion.  3.  The  final 
triumphs  of  our  religion.  4.  The  bearing  of  our  subject  on  the  religious  instruction 
of  the  rising  generation.  {J.  Bums,  D.D.)  The  blessing  of  a  numerous  progeny  : 
— I.  That  children  ought  to  be  esteemed  blessings,  and  that  he  who  has  a 
numerous  offspring  ought  to  be  thankful  to  God  for  them.  This  is  a  blessed  thing, 
for — 1.  Such  a  man  is  a  public  blessing  to  the  kingdom  in  which  he  lives  ;  for  the 
riches  of  a  kingdom  consists  in  the  number  of  its  inhabitants.  2.  A  nimierous  off- 
spring is  a  valuable  blessing  with  respect  to  private  families,  and  that  mutual  com- 
fort and  support  which  those  who  came  originally  out  of  the  same  loins  yield  to  one 
another.  These  bonds  are  inseparable  when  the  same  interests  are  bound  by  natural 
itfTection.  3.  A  nimierous  offspring  is  a  valuable  blessing  to  the  parent  himself.  The 
Jew  looked  forward  to  the  Messiah  being  born  of  his  family  ;  the  Christian  can  see 
a  new  heir  of  righteousness.  There  is  joy  in  their  birth  ;  there  is  pleasure  in  their 
after-life  if  the  child  is  trained  aright,  ll.  God  is  the  sole  Author  and  Dis- 
poser OF  these  blessings  (Psa.  cxxvii.  8).  This  blessing  is  called  an  heritage.  An 
heritage  is  an  estate  got  by  ancestors,  and  descends  to  us  lineally  without  our  pains- 
taking. God  is  our  Ancestor,  from  whom  we  enjoy  all  favours.  Three  lessons  are 
gathered  from  the  subject  of  this  verse.  1.  Let  those  who  have  no  children  leam 
from  hence  to  wait  with  patience  the  Divine  pleasure,  to  continue  in  prayer  and 
alms-deeds,  and  to  be  fruitful  in  good  works ;  and  if  they  have  not  children  after  the 
flesh,  they  will  have  a  multitude  who  will  call  them  blessed,  and  who  in  the  endless 
ages  of  eternity  will  be  to  them  as  children.  2.  Let  those  who  have  a  numerous 
family  of  children  be  thankful  to  God  for  bestowing  these  blessings  on  them,  and  use 
their  utmost  endeavour  to  make  them  blessings  indeed,  by  grounding  them  in  the 
principles  of  religion,  and  bringing  them  up  soberly  and  virtuously  to  some  lawful 
calling.  3.  Those  who  have  had  children  and  are  deprived  of  them,  either  by 
natural  death  or,  which  is  worse,  by  any  unfortunate  accident,  may  hence  leam  to 
resign  themselves  to  the  will  of  God,  and  entirely  to  depend  on  His  good  providence. 
{Leiais  Atterbury.)  Numerical  increase: — In  this  part  of  his  narrative  he  in- 
sinuates to  them — 1.  That  he  greatly  rejoiced  in  the  increase  of  their  numbers.  He 
owns  the  accomplishment  of  God's  promise  to  Abraham  (ver.  10).  You  are  as  the 
stars  of  heaven  for  multitude  ;  and  prays  for  the  further  accomplishment  of  it  (ver. 
11).  God  make  you  a  thousand  times  more.  This  prayer  comes  in  a  parenthesis  ; 
and  a  good  prayer  prudently  put  in  cannot  be  impertinent  in  any  discourse  of  Divine 
things  ;  nor  will  a  pious  ejaculation  break  the  coherence,  but  rather  strengthen  and 
adorn  it.  But  how  greatly  are  his  desires  enlarged  when  he  prays  that  they  might  be 
made  a  thousand  times  more  than  they  were  !  We  are  not  straightened  in  the  power 
and  goodness  of  God  ;  why  should  we  be  straightened  in  our  own  faith  and  hope, 
which  ought  to  be  as  large  as  the  promise  ?  It  is  from  the  promise  that  Moses  here 
takes  the  measure  of  his  prayer,  the  Lord  bless  you  as  He  hath  promised  you.  And 
why  might  he  not  hope  that  they  might  become  a  thousand  times  more  than  they  were 
now,  when  they  were  now  ten  thousand  times  more  than  they  were  when  they  came 
down  into  Egypt,  above  two  hundred  and  fifty  years  ago  ?  Observe,  when  they  were 
under  the  government  of  Pharaoh  the  increase  of  their  numbers  was  envied,  and 
complained  of  as  a  grievance  (Exod.  i.  9) ;  but  now,  under  the  government  of  Moses, 
it  was  rejoiced  in,  and  prayed  for  as  a  blessing,  the  comparing  of  which  might  give 
them  occasion  to  reflect  with  shame  upon  their  own  foUy  when  they  had  talked  of 
making  a  captain  and  returning  to  Egypt.  2.  That  he  was  not  ambitious  of  mono- 
polising the  honour  of  the  government  and  ruling  them  himself  alone  as  an  absolute 
monarch  (ver.  9).  Magistracy  is  a  burden.  Moses  himself,  though  so  eminently 
gifted  for  it,  found  it  lay  heavy  on  his  shoulders  ;  nay,  the  best  magistrates  complain 
most  of  the  burden,  and  are  most  desirous  of  help,  and  most  afraid  of  undertaking 
more  than  they  can  perform.  3.  That  he  was  not  desirous  to  prefer  his  own 
creatures,  or  such  as  should  underhand  have  a  dependence  upon  him  ;  for  he  leaves 
it  to  the  people  to  choose  their  judges,  to  whom  he  would  grant  commissions  ;  not 
tD  be  turned  out  when  he  pleased,  but  to  continue  as  long  as  they  approved  them- 
selves faithful  (ver.  13).  We  must  not  grudge  that  God's  work  be  done  by  other 
hands  than  ours,  provided  it  be  done  by  good  hands.  4.  That  he  was  in  this 
matter  very  willing  to  please  the  people,  and  though  he  did  not  in  anything  aim  at 
their  applause,  yet  in  a  thing  of  this  nature  he  would  not  act  without  their  approba- 
tion. And  thev  agreed  to  the  proposal  (ver.  14).  The  thing  which  thou  hast  spoken 
is  good.  This  he  mentions  to  aggravate  the  sin  of  their  mutinies  and  discontents 
after  this,  that  the  government  they  quarrelled  with  was  what  they  themselves  had 


CHAP.  I.]  DEUTERONOMY, 


consented  to  ;  Moses  would  have  pleased  them  if  they  would  have  been  pleased. 
5.  That  he  aimed  to  edify  them  as  well  as  to  gratify  them ;  for — (1)  He  appointed  meu 
of  good  characters  (ver,  15),  wise  men,  and  men  known — men  that  would  be  faithful 
to  their  trust  and  to  the  public  interest.  (2)  He  gave  them  a  good  charge  (vers.  16, 
17).  Those  that  are  advanced  to  honour  must  know  that  they  are  charged  with  busi- 
ness, and  must  give  account  another  day  of  their  charge.  (3)  He  chargeth  them  to 
be  diligent  and  patient ;  hear  the  causes.  Hear  both  sides,  hear  them  fully,  hear 
them  carefully,  for  nature  hath  provided  us  with  two  ears ;  and  he  that  answereth  a 
matter  before  he  heareth  it,  it  is  folly  and  shame  to  him.  The  ear  of  the  learned 
is  necessary  to  the  tongue  of  the  learned  (Isa.  1.  4).  (4)  To  be  just  and  impartial : 
judge  righteously.  Judgment  must  be  given  according  to  the  merits  of  the  cause, 
without  regard  to  the  quality  of  the  parties.  The  natives  must  not  be  suflfered 
to  abuse  the  strangers  ;  no  more  than  the  strangers  to  insult  the  natives,  or  to 
encroach  upon  them.  The  great  must  not  be  suffered  to  oppress  the  small,  nor  to 
crush  them  ;  no  more  than  the  small  to  rob  the  great,  or  to  affront  them.  No  faces 
must  be  known  in  judgment,  but  unbribed,  unbiassed  equity  must  always  pass 
sentence.  (5)  To  be  resolute  and  courageous.  You  shall  not  be  afraid  of  the  face  of 
man.  But  not  overawed  to 'do  an  ill  thing,  either  by  the  clamours  of  the  crowd,  or 
by  the  menaces  of  those  that  have  power  in  their  hands.  And  he  gives  them  a  good 
reason  to  enforce  this  charge  ;  for  the  judgment  is  God's.  You  are  God's  vice- 
gerents ;  you  act  for  Him,  and  therefore  must  act  like  Him  ;  you  are  His  representa- 
tives, but  if  you  judge  unrighteously  you  misrepresent  Him.  The  judgment  is  His, 
and  therefore  He  will  protect  you  in  doing  right,  and  will  certainly  call  you  to 
account  if  you  do  wrong.  And  lastly,  he  allows  them  to  bring  all  difficult  cases  to 
him,  which  he  would  always  be  ready  to  hear  and  determine,  and  to  make  both  the 
judges  and  the  people  easy.  {Matthew  Henry,  D.D.)  The  execution  of  a  nation's 
laws  .-—The  constitution  of  a  man's  body  is  best  known  by  his  pulse  ;  if  it  stirs  not 
at  all,  then  we  know  he  is  dead  ;  if  it  stirs  violently,  then  we  know  him  to  be  in 
a  fever  ;  if  it  keeps  an  equal  stroke,  then  we  know  he  is  sound  and  whole :  in  like 
manner  we  may  judge  of  the  estate  of  a  kingdom,  or  commonwealth,  by  the  manner 
of  execution  of  its  laws.     {J.  Spencer.) 

Ver.  19.  That  great  and  terrible  wilderness.— JfcmoroJ^  experiences : — There 
are  some  things  that  are  never  to  be  forgotten  in  life.  There  are  troubles  whose 
shadow  is  as  long  as  life's  whole  day.  The  troubles  are  past,  but  the  shadow  is  still 
there  ;  the  victory  is  won,  but  the  battle  seems  still  to  be  booming  in  our  ear.  We 
are  miles  and  miles  away  from  the  desert — yea,  half  a  continent  and  more — but  who 
can  ever  forget  "all  that  great  and  terrible  wilderness  "  ?  Yet  life  would  be  poor 
without  it.  The  memory  of  that  wilderness  chastens  our  joy,  touches  our  prayer  into 
a  more  solemn  and  tender  music,  and  makes  us  more  valiant,  because  more  hopeful, 
in  reference  to  all  the  future.  There  cannot  be  two  such  wildernesses  in  the  whole 
universe.  "We  are  the  better  for  the  wildernesses  of  life,  and  we  cannot  escape  them. 
Oh,  that  great  and  terrible  wilderness!  It  comes  after  us  now  like  a  ghost;  it 
darkens  upon  our  vision  in  the  dream-time ;  we  repeat  the  journey  in  the  night 
season,  and  feel  all  the  sleet  and  cold,  all  the  dreariness  and  helplessness  of  the  old 
experience.  How  many  a  joy  we  have  forgotten  ;  but  we  cannot  play  with  "that 
great  and  terrible  wilderness."  The  very  pronouncement  of  the  words  makes  us 
cold.  It  was  "great"  ;  it  was  "terrible"  ;  it  was  a  "wilderness."  But,  rightly 
trodden,  its  barren  sand  made  us  men  ;  taken  in  the  right  spirit,  we  thought  we  saw 
in  it  the  beginning  of  the  garden  of  God.  Every  man  does  not  pass  through  exactly 
the  same  wilderness  ;  it  is  not  needful  that  he  should  do  so  in  order  to  confirm  this 
doctrine— namely,  that  in  all  lives  there  are  gi-eat  dreary  spaces  that  we  approach  with 
fear  and  traverse  almost  with  despair.  What  are  the  thoughts  that  such  a  review 
should  excite  ?  Can  we  look  back  upon  that  way,  through  all  the  great  and  terrible 
wilderness,  without  remembering  the  Divine  help  which  we  received  ?  God  was  God 
in  the  wilderness  ;  God  looked  at  us  through  the  darkness,  and  there  wa|  no  blaze  of 
anger  in  His  eye.  Who  can  forget  the  touch  that  came  upon  our  bummg  brow  in 
the  night-time  ?  Who  can  forget  the  ever-branching  tree  just  by  the  side  of  the  bitter 
pool  ?  Who  can  forget  the  clump  of  palm-trees  where  no  palm-trees  were  expected  ? 
Who  can  cease  to  remember  the  voice  of  leadership — the  strong,  authoritative  man 
who  came  amongst  us  like  a  revelation  from  God,  and  spoke  broad  words  in  broad 
tones,  and  was  a  tower  of  strength  to  us  in  the  time  of  our  weakness,  and  wonder, 
and  fear — the  sympathetic  pastor,  the  mighty  preacher,  the  kind  friend,  the  one  who 
understood  us  wholly  through  and  through  \    Then,  is  there  no  Divine  purpose,  th« 


8  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  I. 

recollection  of  whicli  may  sustain  us  in  traversing  wildernesses  and  lonely  deserts  1 
Who  made  the  world  ?  Is  the  world  a  fatherless  thing,  a  self-rounded  thing  that 
may  split  up  at  any  moment,  or  is  there  method  in  it  ?  Is  there  a  God  above  it  ?  Is 
there  a  throne  anywhere  ?  And  the  King,  is  He  but  a  name  or  an  echo  ?  I  see  pur- 
pose in  my  life ;  I  see  it  now — "Thou  hast  done  all  things  well."  I  did  not  think 
so  at  the  time  ;  I  should  have  made  the  wilderness  a  mile  shorter,  but  it  was  on  the 
last  mile  that  I  saw  the  brightest  angel.  I  would  have  come  to  honour  and  renown 
sooner  ;  but  I  see  now  that  the  very  movements  were  ticked  ofiF,  and  that  a  moment 
earlier  would  have  been  a  mistake.  "I  would  have  come,"  says  another  Christian 
man,  * '  to  a  sense  of  competency,  and  comfort,  and  household  security  ten  years  ago  ; 
but  in  my  soul  I  see  that  ten  years  ago  I  could  not  have  borne  what  I  now  carry 
gracefully. "  Thou  hast  done  all  things  well.  I  would  not  have  had  seven  graves  in 
the  cemetery,  nor  two,  nor  one  ;  but  I  see  now  that  I  am  the  richer  for  the  seven  ;  I 
would  not  now  have  it  otherwise.  They  are  my  best  estate ;  I  have  property  in 
them  ;  I  grow  my  choicest  flowers  there  ;  there  I  meet  with  the  angels  that  under- 
stand me.  There  is  a  method  in  all  this ;  I  accept  it ;  I  will  bow  down  before 
it ;  I  will  kiss  the  rod  that  lacerated  me  to  the  bone ;  it  was  in  my  Father's 
hand.  Then  is  there  to  be  no  human  gratitude  springing  out  of  all  this  ? 
Is  ours  to  be  a  false  life  —  an  unsympathetic  existence  ?  As  we  have 
received  help  of  God,  let  us  give  help  to  others.  (/.  Parker,  D.D.)  The 
utility  of  sandy  deserts : — If  we  do  not  at  once  see  the  use  of  a  thing  which  is 
unbeautiful,  we  are  apt  to  disdain  it  altogether.  Utility  or  beauty  we  demand  as  a 
characteristic  of  everything.  But  let  it  be  constantly  remembered  that  our  limited 
vision  and  knowledge  often  prevent  our  discerning  the  uses  which  exist  in  things. 
Do  not  be  deceived  by  the  mere  appearance.  The  sandy  deserts  which  one  might 
have  been  inclined  to  consider  as  mere  encumbrances  on  the  earth  are  of  high  import- 
ance in  creating  winds.  They  send  off  vast  streams  of  hot  air  into  the  higher 
regions  of  the  atmosphere,  and  hence  the  cooler  air  off  the  coasts  is  sucked  away  in 
an  opposite  direction.  The  deserts,  indeed,  may  be  regarded  as  vast  suction -pumps 
placed  at  certain  stations  on  the  earth,  to  create  useful  winds  and  help  the 
transport  of  moisture  to  lands  that  are  in  want  of  it.  But  for  the  Thibetan 
deserts  there  would  have  been  no  south-west  monsoon ;  and  without  the  monsoon 
the  fertile  plaios  of  Hindostan  would  have  been  a  waste  of  sand.  {Scientific 
Illustrations.) 

Ver.  21.  The  Lord  .  .  .  liath  set  the  land  before  thee. — TTie  heritage  of  grace : — 
There  is  a  heritage  of  grace  which  we  ought  to  be  bold  enough  to  win  for  our  own 
possession.  All  that  one  believer  has  gained  is  free  to  another.  We  may  be  strong 
in  faith,  fervent  in  love,  and  abundant  in  labour ;  there  is  nothing  to  prevent  it ; 
let  us  go  up  and  take  possession.  The  sweetest  experience  and  the  brightest  grace 
are  as  much  for  us  as  for  any  of  our  brethren.  Jehovah  has  set  it  before  us  ;  no 
one  can  deny  our  right ;  let  us  go  up  and  possess  it  in  His  name.  The  world  also 
lies  before  us  to  be  conquered  for  the  Lord  Jesus.  We  are  not  to  leave  any 
country  a  corner  of  it  unsubdued.  That  slum  near  our  house  is  before  us,  not 
to  baffle  our  endeavours,  but  to  yield  to  them.  We  have  only  to  summon 
courage  enough  to  go  forward,  and  we  shall  win  dark  homes  and  hard  hearts 
for  Jesus.  Let  us  never  leave  the  people  in  a  lane  or  alley  to  die  because  we 
have  not  enough  faith  in  Jesus  and  His  Gospel  to  go  up  and  possess  the  land. 
No  spot  is  too  benighted,  no  person  is  so  profane  as  to  be  beyond  the  power  of 
grace.  Cowardice,  begone !  Faith  marches  to  the  conquest.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
The  folly  of  unbelief: — Moses  recounted  what  had  occurred  in  the  wilderness  of 
Paran  about  two  years  after  the  Israelites  went  out  of  Egypt.  They  had  reached 
Kadesh  on  the  verge  of  the  Negeb  or  South  Country.  They  resolved  to  send  spies 
before  them  to  reconnoitre.  This  resolve,  as  the  sequel  proved,  showed  a  want  off 
faith  on  the  part  of  many,  and  even  a  determined  desire  on  the  part  of  some  to  find 
an  excuse  for  returning  to  Egypt.  The  majority  of  the  spies,  while  extolling  the 
country,  magnified  the  difficulties  which  seemed  to  be  on  the  path  to  its  conquest. 
Only  two  of  the  spies  were  on  the  Lord's  side.  But  the  latent  unbelief  of  the  people 
brushed  aside  their  arguments.  Only  too  late  the  people  repented  of  their  folly, 
and  were  driven  back  before  the  Amorites  to  their  forty  years  of  wandering.  Moses 
dwelt  on  this  incident  because  it  showed  the  folly  and  punishment  of  unbelief,  and 
■was  thus  a  warning  example.  So  it  is  to  the  Christian  Church  (1  Cor.  x.  6).  It 
Bhow8--.I.  Some  hindrances  to  faith.  1.  The  history  is  typical  of  what  often 
occurs  in  the  Christian  life.    Many  come  to  the  borders  of  the  kingdom  of  God  and 


I.]  DEUTERONOMY. 


fail  to  enter.  2.  The  causes  of  failure  are  similar,  the  chief  cause  is  unbelief. 
Because  of  this  the  Israelites  could  not  enter.  The  proofs  God  had  given  of  His  power 
and  willingness  aggravated  this  unbelief.  Every  step  of  the  journey  proved  the 
Divine  goodness.  But  they  forgot  all  God  had  done.  Unbelief  frustrated  all.  3.  So 
is  it  with  individual  men.  Barriers  to  entrance  to  the  Divine  kingdom  are  raised 
by  themselves.  They  do  not  trust  in  the  Divine  promises.  They  are  troubled  by 
the  thought  that  they  are  too  sinful — that  they  must  repent,  prepare  themselves, 
&c.  But  salvation  does  not  depend  on  these  things,  though  they  may  show  that  our 
hearts  are  set  on  it.  The  slave  who  is  offered  freedom  does  not  need  to  attempt  to 
purchase  it.  So  sinful  men  may  enter  the  strait  gate  in  the  Divine  strength, 
through  Christ.  It  was  not  their  preparedness  that  entitled  the  Israelites  to  enter 
into  the  land  of  promise,  but  their  faith  in  the  Divine  promises.  II.  Difficulties 
IN  THE  WAY  OF  SPIRITUAL  PROGRESS.  (1)  The  desert  life,  the  hardship  of  conquest, 
were  not  to  the  taste  of  many  of  the  Israelites.  In  Egypt  they  enjoyed  many  luxuries 
now  denied  them.  So  not  a  few  wished  to  return  to  Egypt.  But  this  was  folly — the 
way  to  death,  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  enraged  Pharaoh.  (2)  This  is  a  faint  type 
of  those  who  turn  their  backs  on  the  spiritual  kingdom,  lured  by  the  pleasures  of  the 
world.  (3)  Do  not  let  any  think,  as  some  in  Israel  seemed  to  do,  that  if  God  intends 
us  to  overcome  He  will  enable  us  to  do  so  without  effort.  Israel  could  not  possess 
Canaan  till  the  Amorites  and  other  foes  were  overcome,  the  strong  cities  overthrown, 
&c.  This  the  Israelites  in  unbelief  thought  could  not  be  accomplished.  (4)  This  is 
the  plea  of  many  at  the  entrance  of  the  spiritual  life.  The  way  is  too  difficult,  the 
enemies  are  too  strong,  we  cannot  overcome.  But  the  New  Testament  word  is,  "If 
God  be  for  us,  who  can  be  against  us  ? "  Christ  has  commanded  us  to  strive  and 
agonise  to  enter.  (5)  Let  no  man  be  deterred  by  this.  Every  noble  life  is  a  struggle. 
Good  men,  from  the  very  constitution  of  things,  must  suffer.  Even  goodness  incar- 
nate was  rewarded  by  the  world  with  a  cross.  These  difficulties  are  raised  by  the 
adversary.  (6)  There  are  some  events  peculiarly  saddening.  A  ship  wrecked  at  the 
harbour  mouth — a  runner  fainting  when  close  to  the  goal — an  heir  bartering  his 
inheritance  for  a  mess  of  pottage.  But  sadder  still — a  sight  fit  to  make  angels 
weep — is  it  to  see  an  heir  of  immortal  glory  turning  from  his  father's  house  back  to 
the  far  country  and  the  swine  troughs  !    (  W.  Frat^  Scott.) 

Ver.  26.  Our  brethren  have  discouraged  our  heart.— Do  not  he  discouraged  .-—To 
be  discouraged  is  to  lose  one's  energy  and  vitality.  When  a  man  is  discouraged  he  is 
of  no  use  ;  his  power  has  gone  out  of  him.  Courage  is  a  large  and  noble  quality,  and 
necessary  in  all  the  relations  of  life.  It  is  not  merely  shown  in  the  boldness  which 
confronts  danger  and  is  self-possessed  in  peril.  It  also  is  needed  to  face  other  diffi- 
culties promptly,  to  do  one's  duty  cheerfully  when  the  hope  of  success  is  small ;  to 
stand  alone  for  the  truth  and  right ;  not  to  be  discouraged  by  disappointment,  nor 
by  the  censures  and  reproofs  of  the  hostile,  nor  by  the  indifference  of  the  unsym- 
pathising.  In  short,  courage  is  the  quality  which  is  opposed  to  all  discouragement. 
No  wonder  people  admire  courage.  It  is  indispensable  to  nobleness  of  life.  How 
much  courage  some  men  and  women  display  in  taking  on  themselves  new  responsi- 
bilities, in  going  promptly  to  perform  untried  and  difficult  duties,  in  keeping  up  the 
struggle  of  life  amid  many  discouragements.  Courage  is  a  virtue  needed  by  women 
no  less  than  by  men.  How  many  poor  women  there  are  who  work  on  to  support 
their  families,  rising  early  and  going  late  to  bed,  and  eating  the  bread  of  care.  They 
keep  their  children  tidy  and  neat,  keep  them  at  school,  exhaust  every  contrivance  to 
maintain  themselves,  try  every  possible  means  of  overcoming  the  daily  difficulties  of 
life,  and  so  hold  on,  year  after  year,  when  strong  men  might  have  been  discouraged 
and  have  given  up.  I  think  as  much  heroism  is  shown  every  day  in  such  ways  as 
by  the  soldiers  who  hold  an  important  position  in  a  battle  against  overwhelming 
odds.  There  is  no  more  important  work  in  this  world,  no  greater  duty,  than  to  help 
others  to  keep  up  their  courage.  He  is  our  best  friend  whose  words  of  cheerful  con- 
fidence give  more  life  to  our  heart,  and  he  is  our  enemy  who  by  his  words  of  doubt 
and  his  spirit  of  fear  saps  this  ardour,  and  takes  from  us  our  courage.  And  yet  how 
many  there  are  whose  habit  it  is  to  look  at  the  dark  and  discouraging  side  of  life. 
They  dwell  on  the  faults  and  follies  of  men  ;  they  retail  every  petty  scandal  they 
hear  ;  they  exaggerate  the  amount  of  evil  in  the  world  ;  they  suggest  a  low  and  selfish 
motive  as  the  root  of  good  actions  ;  they  quench  the  ardour  of  generous  enthusiasm 
by  a  cold  scepticism.  Whenever  we  have  talked  with  such  persons  we  have  been 
inclined  to  say,  ' '  Our  brethren  have  discouraged  our  heart. "  {J.  F.  Clarice. )  Dis- 
couragers : — Here  is  a  man  like  a  cloud,  and  a  cloud  without  any  silver  lining.     He 


10  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

gets  between  you  and  the  sun.  He  makes  everything  dark.  He  puts  the  worst  con- 
structions, and  attributes  the  worst  motives,  and  takes  the  darkest  view.  You  do 
not  like  to  meet  the  murksome  man.  You  do  not  wish  to  be  overcast.  Perhaps 
to-day  you  are  hopeful.  You  have  difficulties,  but  by  God's  blessing  you  can  work 
out.  Your  church  is  struggling,  but  you  think  you  see  a  brighter  day.  You  have 
some  sorry  apples  in  your  basket,  but  you  have  gotten  the  big  ones  on  top.  You 
have  a  skeleton  or  two  in  your  closet,  but  they  are  out  of  sight.  The  sun  is  shining 
to-day  up  on  the  high  places  and  valleys  of  your  landscape.  And  here  comes  that 
human  cloud,  with  his  shadow  creeping  on  before  him.  You  avoid  him.  You  take 
the  other  side  of  the  street.  Because  you  know  in  ten  minutes  he  would  get  all  the 
small  apples  on  the  top  of  your  basket.  He  would  have  all  the  skeletons  out  of 
your  closet,  because  he  likes  their  company.  You  escape  him,  because  you  do  not 
want  him  to  cool  your  iron,  for  it  is  hot  and  you  have  made  up  your  mind  to  strike 
it.  Such  a  man  may  be  a  Christian ;  but  he  has  a  great  besetting  sin,  which  he 
must  watch  and  pray  against.  Let  him  add  this  petition  to  his  litany :  From  all 
blue  devils ;  from  all  dismal  dejection  ;  from  all  bilious  despondency ;  from 
all  funereal  gloom,  and  from  all  unchristian  hopelessness — good  Lord,  deliver  us. 
{R.  S.  Barrett.) 

Ver.  31.  The  Lord  thy  God  bare  thee  as  a  man  doth  bear  his  son. — The  paternal 

upholding  of  God : — These  words  are  part  of  a  discourse  delivered  by  Moses  to  all 
Israel,  in  the  plain  over  against  the  Red  Sea.  Some  of  the  most  tender  Divine 
utterances  are  to  be  found  in  the  books  of  Moses.  The  subject  of  the  text  is  the 
paternal  upholding  of  God.  I.  Glance  first  at  what  we  may  call  our  history. 
There  is  a  history  appertaining  to  each  of  us,  a  story  of  our  life.  It  has  been 
written,  though  not  with  a  pen,  and  it  is  inscribed  on  the  mind  of  God.  "We  study 
the  biographies  of  others,  and  neglect  the  story  of  our  own  lives.  II.  The  next 
thing  is,  God  in  our  history.  The  chief  agents  in  our  history  are  God  and  our- 
selves. God  is  in  a  good  mother,  God  is  in  a  wise  father,  God  is  in  a  competent 
tutor,  God  is  in  useful  companions,  God  is  in  holy  social  influences,  and  God  is  in 
the  ministry  of  angels  ;  while  bad  parents,  and  bad  teachers,  and  evil  companions, 
and  devils,  have  acted  upon  us  by  God's  permission.  God  is,  on  these  grounds,  in 
all  our  history.  Those  passages  which  seem  to  present  prominently  the  mother 
contain  God,  and  they  contain  more  of  God  than  they  do  even  of  the  mother. 
From  no  portion  of  the  story  of  life  can  we  exclude  God.  His  purpose  and 
thought  and  will  are  in  each  part  and  in  the  whole.  Every  step  we  take  works  out 
some  part  of  the  plan  of  life  which  He  has  laid  down  for  us,  so  that  God  is  in  our 
history,  in  a  certain  sense,  far  more  than  we  ourselves  are  in  it.  III.  Now,  seeing 
that  God  is  in  our  history,  what  does  that  history  express  with  reference 
to  God  ?  It  shows  God's  upholding  of  us.  God  bare  thee  when  thou  seemedst  to 
thyself  to  walk  alone.  There  are  seasons  in  which  you  appear  to  design  and 
arrange,  but  you  have  only  been  rough-hewing,  as  the  mason  sometimes  rough 
hews  for  the  sculptor,  and  even  this  rough-hewing  has  been  under  Divine  direction. 
God  bare  thee  when  thou  wast  carried  by  others,  and  the  Lord  thy  God  bare  thee 
when  thou  wast  thyself  inactive,  and  no  fellow-creature  seemed  to  be  ministering 
to  thee.  Then  He  held  thy  soul  in  life,  and  kept  thy  feet  from  falling.  He  has 
also  borne  with  thee.  A  most  important  part  of  bearing  thee  is  this.  IV.  The 
great  point,  however,  of  this  passage  is,  the  paternal  character  of  the  Divine 
SUSTENANCE.  We  each  have  a  history,  and  God  is  in  it,  and  the  upholding  of 
God  is  expressed  by  it.  But  that  upholding  is  paternal.  "The  Lord  thy  God 
bare  thee  as  a  man  doth  bear  his  son."  Now  let  us  break  this  up  a  little.  We 
may  say  that  a  man  bears  his  son  by  taking  charge  of  him,  and  by  being  respons- 
ible for  him.  We  may  say  that  a  man  bears  his  son  by  working  for  him,  and  by 
being  a  sort  of  subordinate  providence  over  him.  We  may  say  that  a  man  bears 
his  son  by  teaching  him,  in  due  time,  to  act  and  to  work  for  himself.  We  may 
say  that  a  man  bears  his  son  when  he  shows  patience  towards  his  ignorance  and 
folly,  pity  towards  his  sorrows,  forbearance  towards  his  faults,  and  love  for  his 
person.     And  thus  does  God  sustain  those  who  trust  and  fear  Him.     V.  There  arb 

OBLIGATIONS  AND  DUTIES  THAT  SPRING  FROM  THESE  TRUTHS.      1.  In  the  first  place, 

if  *'  God  bears  us  as  a  man  bears  his  son,"  we  ought  to  be  quiet  from  the  fear  of  evil. 
Keal  evil,  while  God  is  bearing  us  as  a  man  his  son — evil  in  the  sense  of  real 
calamity — cannot  happen  to  us.  2.  If  "God  bear  us  as  a  man  his  son,"  we  ought 
to  be  careful  for  nothing.  God  cares  for  us.  What  have  we  to  do  with  care? 
"What  have  we  to  do,  in  many  circumstances,  with  responsibility  ?    We  are  respousibla 


CHAP.  I.]  DEUTERONOMY.  11 

for  finding  out  God's  "will,  and  for  doing  that  will  with  all  our  might,  but 
beyond  where  is  our  responsibility  ?  Are  we  responsible  for  consequences  ?  Is  the 
husbandman,  for  example,  responsible  for  the  harvest?  He  is  responsible  for 
breaking  the  clods  of  the  field,  and  for  ploughing,  and  for  tilling  the  ground  ;  he 
is  responsible  for  the  choice  of  the  seed,  for  the  way  in  which  it  is  sown,  for  the 
treatment  of  the  field  after  seed  is  sown  ;  but  is  he  responsible  for  the  clouds  ?  Is 
he  responsible  for  the  rain  ?  Is  he  responsible  for  frost  ?  Is  he  responsible  for 
light  or  for  darkness  ?  Is  he  responsible  for  the  calm  or  for  sunshine  ?  The  man 
may  plough  to  perfection  and  sow  most  carefully  and  treat  his  ground  most  scien- 
tifically, but  there  is  something  more  than  that  which  man  can  do  required  for  the 
increase  of  the  earth  ;  and  that  something  more  is  God's  care,  not  man's.  3.  If 
**  God  bear  us  as  a  man  his  son,"  we  ought  lovingly  to  trust  Him.  Obey  Him  and 
honour  Him,  and  when  God  tries  your  confidence  in  Him  take  care  that  this  con- 
fidence comes  forth  from  the  trial  like  gold  purified  seven  times.  Eventually  you 
shall  be  free  from  such  trials,  but  now  God  often  exposes  you  to  them.  The 
results  of  God's  guidance  and  the  results  of  God's  upholding  are  now,  in  some 
respects,  or  at  least  in  some  of  their  results,  very  much  like  unripe  fruit — green, 
sour,  bitter,  but  as  months  roll  on  these  results  will  become  like  ripened  fruit, 
beautiful,  sweet,  and  mellow,  a  picture  to  the  eye,  and  as  honey  to  the  taste. 
{S.  Martin,  D.D.)  Ood's fatherly  care : — There  is  nothing  of  which  men  know  less 
than  of  themselves.  They  do  not  understand  how  their  own  characters  are 
formed  ;  they  stand  in  great  doubt  as  to  their  own  moral  states  before  God.  They 
cannot  judge  or  take  account  of  themselves,  much  less  of  their  fellows.  It  is  a 
great  comfort  to  know  that  there  is  One  who  perfectly  knows  all  that  is  in  us,  and 
all  that  concerns  us,  and  who  will  take  us  for  just  our  real  worth.  It  is  a  comfort 
to  trust  in  God.  Oh,  when  a  little  child  is  weary,  marching  through  a  desert 
towards  his  home,  when  he  feels  that  he  has  no  longer  strength  to  travel,  nor 
wisdom  to  direct  his  way,  how  glad  is  he  to  have  his  father  take  him  in  his  arms 
to  rest  him  !  And  when  the  chUd,  just  before  falling  asleep,  raises  his  eyes  for  one 
more  glance  at  the  face  above  him,  and  sees  it  firm  and  calm  and  set  for  home, 
how  sweetly  he  resigns  himself  to  slumber,  confident  that  all  is  well !  And  thus 
do  we,  in  the  weary  march  through  life,  sometimes  love  to  recline  upon  the  bosom 
of  the  Eternal  Traveller,  and  take  our  hour  of  rest  confiding  in  our  God.  {E.  W. 
JBeecher,) 

Ver.  32.  In  tMs  thing  ye  did  not  believe  the  Lord  your  fioCL— Partial  truth  .— 
These  are  the  great  battles  of  the  world.  Not  the  clang  of  swords  and  the  roar  of 
kingdoms,  but  the  conflict  of  man  with  God, — man  calling  God  a  liar  ;  these  are  the 
disastrous  and  fatal  wars.  We  think  ourselves  refined  because  we  shrink  from  the 
taste  of  hot  blood,  and  then  go  and  secretly  disobey  the  God  that  made  us.  We  are 
often  called  upon  to  contemplate  what  may  be  called  partial  faith.  We  have  faith 
in  spots ;  we  are  mainly  bruises  of  unbelief,  wounds  of  unconfessed  but  deadly 
atheism  ;  yet  here  and  there,  leopard-like  or  zebra-like,  we  are  studded  with  pieces 
of  detached  piety.  How  true  this  is  let  every  man  bear  witness  on  his  own  account. 
We  do  believe  some  things,  but  generally  they  are  things  of  no  importance.  We 
believe  things  that  cost  us  nothing.  Who  believes  the  thing  that  has  a  Cross,  wet 
with  red  blood  in  the  middle  of  it  ?  We  are  all  partially  religious,  whimsically 
religious,  religious  after  a  very  arbitrary  and  mechanical  fashion.  It  is  marvellous 
how  the  conscience  is  trained  in  little  dots  and  short  lines,  and  how  the  total  man- 
hood is  left  in  a  practically  atheistic  condition.  We  see  what  is  meant  by  partial 
faith  when  we  contemplate  a  vision  which  comes  before  us  every  day  of  our  life, 
and  that  is  the  vision  of  partial  character.  Where  is  there  a  man  that  is  all 
reprobate  ?  The  son  of  perdition  occurs  but  now  and  then  in  the  rolling  transient 
centuries.  Who  is  there  who  has  not  some  good  points  about  him  ?  How  we 
magnify  those  points  into  character.  The  chain  is  no  stronger  than  its  weakest 
link.  Would  you  trust  a  chain  thirty  links  long  if  you  were  sure  that  one  of  the 
links  was  very  weak  ?  You  are  no  stronger  than  your  weakest  point ;  study  that 
weak  point ;  repair,  amend,  or  remove  it,  or  replace  it  by  some  point  worthy  of  the 
rest  of  the  character.  That  would  be  common  sense,  that  would  be  downright  lo^c 
worthy  of  the  market-place.  Why  not  accept  it  and  realise  it  ?  We  all  believe  in 
providence.  Which  providence  ?  how  much  providence  ?  in  what  seasons  do  we 
believe  in  providence  ?  We  are  great  believers  in  blossoming- time,  but  what  faith 
have  we  when  the  snow  upon  our  path  is  six  feet  deep  and  the  wind  a  hail  and 
frost  I    The  Lord  has  many  fine-day  followers.    When  a  man  has  had  ten  thousand 


12  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

pounds  unexpectedly  left  to  him,  he  is  prone  to  sing,  "God  moves  in  a  mysterious 
way."  He  is  mayhap,  notwithstanding  his  psalm-singing,  a  hypocrite  ;  he  does 
not  understand  the  meaning  of  faith,  which  is  self-transformation  into  the  very 
bosom  of  God.  We  often  hear  of  some  persons  who  are  remarkably  sound  on  certain 
doctrines.  I  dread  to  hear  of  any  man  who  is  particularly  sound  on  any  one 
doctrine,  because  I  have  the  suspicion  that  he  is  magnifying  his  soundness  upon 
that  doctrine  that  he  may  ingratiate  himself  into  my  confidence  so  far  as  to  inocu- 
late me  with  some  peculiar  heresy  of  his  own.  As  we  have  said  before,  what  would 
be  thought  of  any  man  who  was  partial  to  certain  letters  of  the  alphabet,  and 
remarkably  sound  upon  the  consonants,  or  who  held  two  of  the  vowels  with  moat 
pious  and  clinging  faith,  who  would  lay  down  his  intellectual  life  for  the  vowel  a 
and  for  the  vowel  o,  but  who  would  take  leave  to  cherish  his  own  suspicions  with 
regard  to  the  soundness  of  the  other  vowels  ?  What  of  the  man  who  is  strong  upon 
the  letter  6,  but  a  little  heretical  upon  the  letter  z  ?  This  is  God's  charge  against 
us  by  the  mouth  of  His  prophets  and  apostles — "Yet  in  this  thing  ye  did  not 
believe. "  We  must  not  only  be  careful  about  what  we  do  believe,  but  about  what  we 
do  not  believe.  Do  we  really  believe  in  providence  ? — in  the  shepherdly  God,  in 
the  fatherly  God,  in  the  motherly  God,  in  the  God  of  the  silent  step,  who  comei 
with  the  noiselessness  of  a  sunbeam  into  the  chamber  of  our  solitude  and  desolation! 
Do  we  really  believe  in  the  God  who  fills  all  space,  yet  takes  up  no  poor  man's  room, 
and  who  is  constantly  applying  to  broken  or  wounded  hearts  the  balm  that  grows 
only  in  old  sweet  Gilead  ?  Do  we  believe  that  the  very  hairs  of  our  head  are  all 
numbered  ?  I  am  not  so  old  in  faith  as  mighty  Habakkuk,  I  could  see  many  trees 
blighted  without  losing  my  faith  ;  but  there  is  one  tree,  if  aught  should  happen  to 
any  single  branch  or  twig  of  that  tree,  my  soul's  faith  would  wither.  What,  then, 
can  be  my  faith,  if  it  is  true,  and  it  is  true,  that  a  chain  is  no  stronger  than  its 
weakest  link  ?  We  believe  in  prayer.  How  much  ?  At  what  time  do  we  believe  in 
prayer  ?  Are  there  not  periods  of  agony  in  life  in  which  we  dismiss  all  around,  and 
look  with  dumb  sorrow  upon  the  unheeding  heavens  ?  It  is  in  vain  that  we  say 
we  believe  in  prayer,  and  that  we  lament  for  those  who  do  not  pray,  if  our  prayer 
does  not  stand  us  in  good  stead  in  the  hour  and  article  of  life's  extremest  agony. 
Remember  the  possibility  of  our  having  a  partial  faith,  a  partial  faith  in  providence, 
a  partial  faith  in  prayer,  and  remember  that  the  chain  is  no  stronger  than  its  weakest 
point ;  and  if  in  this  thing  or  that  we  do  not  believe  the  Lord  our  God,  we  may  strike 
the  rest  of  our  faith  dead  as  with  a  sword-stroke.  Lord,  save  me,  or  I  perish  I 
What  we  want,  then,  is  an  all-round  faith  ;  in  other  words,  what  we  want  is  an  all- 
the-year-round  faith.  But  our  faith  comes  in  fits  and  starts.  Perhaps  this  may  be 
accounted  for  by  the  fact  that  we  have  confounded  the  word  creed  with  the  word 
faith.  Creed  is  weather,  faith  is  climate  ;  creed  is  a  variable  alphabet,  faith  is  an 
eternal  poetry.  We  live  on  faith,  we  walk  by  faith  ;  without  faith  we  have  no  life. 
As  to  our  creed,  take  it,  leave  it,  read  it,  despise  it,  adopt  it,  do  what  you  like  with 
it,  but  faith  abides  for  ever,  sometimes  requiring  new  words  and  new  modes,  but 
never  changing  its  inward  and  Divine  substance  and  meaning.  Let  every  man 
apply  this  text  to  himself.  Let  no  man  charge  another  about  this  merely  occasional 
or  spasmodic  faith.  Now  and  again  we  hear  men  say.  My  faith  could  not  rise  to 
that  height.  Sometimes  I  may  ask  for  a  little  patience,  now  and  again  I  may  say, 
Give  me  time.  Lord,  Thou  knowest  all  things.  Thou  knowest  that  I  love  Thee. 
That  is  the  true  faith.  So  long  as  that  love  lingers  in  the  heart  hell  shall  not  have 
thee,  nor  the  gates  of  hell  prevail  against  the  rock  on  which  you  build.  This  ia 
very  serious.  This  reflection  makes  life  very  solemn.  Some  of  us  have  thought  too 
much  that  we  could  take  up  our  faith  and  set  it  down,  that  we  may  believe  a  little  of 
this  and  a  little  of  that ;  some  of  us  have  not  thought  much  of  the  roundness  of  the 
orb  of  faith.  Let  us  not  give  way  to  censoriousness  upon  others.  You  do  not  know 
how  hard  it  is  for  some  men  to  believe.  It  may  be  comparatively  easy  for  you  and 
me  to  believe.  But  we  who  are  strong  should  bear  the  infirmities  of  the  weak  ;  we 
should  be  patient  with  the  slow,  we  should  desire  that  other  men  may  know  the 
joy  and  the  blessedness  and  the  triumph  and  the  glory  of  the  full  life.  {J.  Parker, 
D.D.) 

Ver.  33.  To  show  you  by  what  way  ye  should  go.— The  Bible  like  the  pillar  of 
doud  and  fire : — I.  As  thb  pillar  of  cloud  and  fieb  was  a  blessing  to  the 
Jews,  so  is  the  Bible  a  blessing  to  all  ages.  1.  Consider  the  characteristics 
of  the  Bible  as  set  forth  by  those  of  the  pillar.  That  pillar  had  its  own  history. 
(1)  It  was  Divine  in  its  origin.     It  was  not  a  common  cloud,  nor  yet  an  exhalation 


CHAP.  I.]  DEUTERONOMY.  18 

from  the  marshy  ground.  It  was  evidently,  from  the  history,  a  supernatural  pheno- 
menon. Does  not  the  Word  of  God  give  light,  and  show  the  path  of  duty  when 
all  is  dark  around  ?  Is  not  its  glorious  guidance  given  in  the  perplexities  of  this 
wilderness  ?  All  the  raging  storms  of  this  life  diminish  not  its  lustre.  (2)  The 
Bible,  like  the  pillar,  is  exactly  fitted  for  the  object  for  which  it  is  designed.  **It 
is  a  light  to  my  path  and  a  lamp  to  my  feet,"  said  the  Psalmist.  '* Oh,  how  I  love 
Thy  law  ;  it  is  my  meditation  all  the  day."  *'  How  sweet  are  Thy  words  unto  my 
taste  !  yea,  sweeter  than  honey  to  my  mouth  !  "  (3)  The  pillar  had  two  sides,  and 
so  has  the  Bible.  The  pillar  was  the  same  to  all  in  itself,  but  it  looked  light  and 
gave  light  to  the  Lord's  hosts,  and  it  looked  dark  and  cast  a  deep  shadow  as  seen 
by  their  opponents.  Such,  too,  is  the  Bible.  To  the  child  of  God  it  is  all  good,  all 
cheering ;  to  the  ungodly  it  is  all  dark  and  terrible.  It  speaks  of  God's  power. 
The  power  of  God  is  the  hope  of  the  Christian,  for  it  is  power  to  help  ;  but  the 
power  of  God  is  the  terror  of  the  ungodly,  for  it  is  power  to  punish.  2.  Consider 
the  general  influence  of  the  Bible  on  the  world  as  illustrated  by  the  influence  of  the 
cloud  upon  those  who  went  with  it.  The  cloud  benefited  many  who  never  knew 
or  felt  its  value.  In  the  camp  of  Israel  there  were  many  who  were  very  thought- 
less, as  there  are  many  in  every  age,  yet  did  they  enjoy  the  light  and  heat  and 
guidance.  They  owed  much  of  their  comfort  to  that  mystic  cloud,  but  never  felt 
or  even  thought  of  their  obligation.  Just  so  is  it  in  reference  to  the  Bible.  Its 
influence  is  found  in  many  a  home  where  it  is  not  acknowledged.     II.  Some  of 

THOSE  V7H0  WERE  BLESSED  BY  THE  LIGHT  AND  COMFORTS  OF  THE  MYSTIC  CLOUD  WERE 
BARRED  AT   LAST    FROM    CaNAAN,    AS    SOME  WHO  HAVE  BEEN  BLESSED  BY    BiBLE 

TRUTH  WILL  NEVER  FIND  THEIR  WAY  TO  HEAVEN.  When  that  man  on  yon 
northern  hills  was  surrounded  by  thick  mist — when  in  that  mist  he  lost  his  way  and 
was  overtaken  by  the  chill,  dark  night,  and  lost  his  footing  on  the  narrow  ledge 
along  which  the  path  led  him,  and  fell  headlong  into  the  deep  abyss  and  was  killed 
— the  sight  was  very  sad.  But  I  can  point  you  to  a  sadder  scene  than  that.  It  is 
to  see  a  man  walk  over  some  terrible  precipice  when  the  sun  of  heaven  is  shining  to 
show  his  danger,  and  his  eyes  are  open  to  it.  But  the  saddest  sight  of  all  is  to  see, 
lost  for  ever,  men  and  women  who  have  been  instructed  in  the  Bible.  Many  who 
know  the  way  to  heaven  come  short  of  it  through  unbelief.     III.  Those  who  were 

FAITHFUL  to  GoD  WERE  LED  BY  THE  MYSTIC  CLOUD  TO  CaNAAN  ;  SO  SHALL  ALL 
BELIEVERS  BE  LED   BY  THE  WORD  OF   GOD   TO   HEAVEN.      Out  of  all  the  people  who 

left  Egyptian  bondage  only  two  entered  the  land  of  promise,  Caleb  and  Joshua.  The 
benefits  of  the  fiery  cloud  were  lost  upon  the  rest.  The  cloud  led  them  over 
Jordan,  and  left  them  safe  in  possession  of  the  land.  Thus  it  ever  is.  Those  who 
are  faithful  to  God  find  His  Word  their  guide  and  comfort  to  the  end.  Its  pro- 
mises turn  their  darkness  into  day,  and  calm  all  storms  of  inward  fear.  {Evan 
Levds,  B.A.) 

Ver.  36.  Because  lie  hath  wholly  followed  the  Lord. — Following  the  Lord  fully : 
— You  want  to  be  a  Christian,  meanwhile  your  heart  is  set  upon  getting  riches. 
You  would  store  your  mind  with  the  learning  and  wisdom  of  the  world,  you  wish  to 
gain  repute  as  a  good  talker  in  company,  and  a  convivial  guest  at  the  social  board. 
Ambition  prompts  you  to  seek  fame  among  your  fellows.  Well,  I  shall  not 
denounce  any  of  these  things,  but  I  would  use  every  persuasion  to  induce  you  who 
are  believers  in  Christ  to  renounce  the  world.  If  Christ  has  redeemed  you  He  has 
henceforth  a  claim  on  you  as  His  servant,  and  it  is  at  your  peril  that  you  ta,ke  up 
any  pursuits  that  are  inconsistent  with  a  full  surrender  of  yourself  to  Him.  Why 
many  Christians  never  attain  to  any  eminence  in  the  Divine  life  is  because  they 
let  the  floods  of  their  life  run  away  in  a  dozen  little  rivulets,  whereas  if  they  cooped 
them  up  in  one  channel  and  sent  that  one  stream  rolling  on  to  the  glory  of  God, 
there  would  be  such  a  force  and  power  about  their  character  that  they  would  live 
while  they  lived.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Following  the  Lord  fully : — It  ought  to  be 
the  great  care  of  every  one  of  us  to  follow  the  Lord  fully.  We  must  follow  Him 
universally,  without  dividing  ;  uprightly,  without  dissembling  :  cheerfully,  without 
disputing ;  constantly,  without  declining ;  and  this  is  following  Him  fully. 
{Matthew  Henry.)  Self -concentration  on  God:— "No  man  makes  progress  in  any 
branch  of  human  thought  or  science  without  this  first  condition — ^the  habit  of 
pinning  himself  down  wholly  to  the  subject  in  hand,  and  rigidly  restraining  all 
other  thoughts.  You  must  bring  your  instrument  to  a  point  before  it-  will 
penetrate,  to  an  edge  that  it  may  cut ;  and  only  firm  concentration  of  oneself  on 
the  matter  before  us  will  do  that.      Alas !  how  little  of  this  patient  prolonged 


14  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  fcHAP.  i. 

concentration  of  interested  thought  on  onr  dear  Lord  do  even  the  best  and 
devoutest  of  us  employ  !  And  as  for  the  ordinary  Christian  life  of  this  day,  what  a 
sad  contrast  does  it  present  to  such  an  ideal.    {A.  Maclarent  D.D.) 

Ver.  81.  Joshua  .  .  .  Enconragre  liim.— Encourage  your  minister : — Joshua  was  a 
young  man  in  comparison  with  Moses.  He  was  about  to  undertake  the  onerous 
task  of  commanding  a  great  people.  He  had,  moreover,  the  difficult  enterprise  of 
leading  them  into  the  promised  land,  and  chasing  out  the  nations  which  possessed 
it.  The  Lord  commanded  Moses  therefore  to  encourage  him,  that  in  the  prospect 
of  great  labour  he  might  not  be  dismayed.  I.  God,  even  oue  God,  is  geaciously 
CONSIDERATE  OF  His  SEEVANTs,  and  would  have  them  well  fitted  for  high 
enterprise  with  good  courage.  ^  He  does  not  send  them  as  a  tyrant  would  send  a 
soldier  upon  an  errand  for  which  he  is  not  capable,  nor  does  He  afterwards  with- 
hold His  succour,  forgetful  of  the  straits  to  which  they  may  be  reduced  ;  but  He  is 
very  careful  of  His  servants,  and  will  not  let  one  of  them  perish.  The  Lord  our 
God  hath  strong  reasons  for  being  thus  considerate  of  His  servants.  1.  Are  they 
not  His  children  ?  Is  He  not  their  Father  ?  Does  He  not  love  them  ?  Now,  none 
of  us  would  send  a  child  of  ours  upon  a  difficult  enterprise  without  being  anxious  for 
his  welfare.  We  would  not  put  him  upon  a  trial  beyond  his  strength,  without  at 
the  same  time  guaranteeing  to  stand  at  his  side  and  make  his  strength  equal  to  his 
day.  2.  Moreover,  the  Father  Himself  is  concerned  as  to  His  honour  in  all  that 
they  do.  If  any  servant  of  God  shall  fall,  then  God's  name  is  despised.  The 
daughters  of  PhUistia  rejoice,  and  the  inhabitants  of  Ekron  triumph.  His  honour 
is  too  much  concerned  ever  to  permit  this.  Ye  feeble  ones,  to  whom  God  hath  given 
to  do  or  to  suffer  for  His  name  s  sake,  rest  assured  that  He  hath  His  eye  upon  you 
now.  He  cannot  leave  you,  unless  He  can  cease  to  be  "God  over  all,  blessed  for 
ever."  3.  Observe  well  how  far  the  tender  consideration  of  God  for  His  servants 
extends  !  He  not  only  considers  their  outward  state,  and  the  absolute  interests  of 
their  condition,  but  He  remembers  their  spirits,  and  loves  to  see  them  of  good 
courage.  11.  God  uses  His  own  people  to  encourage  one  another.  He  did 
not  say  to  the  angel,  "Gabriel,  there  is  My  servant  Joshua,  about  to  take  the 
people  into  Canaan — fly  down  and  encourage  him.**  God  never  works  needless 
miracles.  Gabriel  would  not  have  been  half  so  well  fitted  for  the  work  as  Moses. 
A  brother's  sympathy  is  more  precious  than  an  angel's  embassy.  To  whom,  then, 
should  this  work  of  encouraging  the  people  be  committed  ?  1.  Surely  the  elders 
should  do  it ;  those  of  riper  years  than  their  fellows.  I  know  of  nothing  more 
inspiriting  than  to  hear  the  experience  of  a  grey-headed  saint.  I  have  found  much 
spiritual  comfort  in  sitting  at  the  feet  of  my  venerable  grandfather,  more  than 
eighty  years  of  age.  2.  Not  the  aged  only,  but  the  wise  in  the  family  should  be 
comforters.  All  believers  are  not  equal  in  knowledge.  Oh,  ye  that  have  searched 
the  Scriptures  through  and  know  its  promises,  be  sure  to  quote  the  promises  of  God 
to  trembling  hearts,  and  especially  to  those  engaged  in  arduous  labour  for  the 
Master.  Comfort  them.  Repeat  the  doctrine  of  God's  faithfulness ;  say  to  them, 
"He  wiU  be  with  thee,  He  will  not  fail  thee,  neither  forsake  thee:  fear  not, 
neither  be  dismayed."  Oh,  that  the  wise-hearted  in  the  Lord's  family  would  be 
thus  employed  at  all  times.  3.  Nor  can  I  doubt  that  the  happier  sort  of  Christians 
ought  always  to  be  engaged  in  comforting  the  mournful  and  sorrowing.  You  know 
whom  I  mean  ;  their  eyes  always  sparkle ;  wherever  they  go  they  carry  lamps 
bright  with  animation,  sunshine  gleams  in  their  faces,  they  live  in  the  light  of 
God's  countenance.  4.  Let  the  brother  of  low  degree  be  likewise  encouraged  by 
those  who  are  rich  among  you.  You  may  frequently  breathe  comfort  into  a 
desponding  spirit  by  seasonable  help.  III.  I  advance  to  the  object  that  is  upper- 
most in  my  mind.  I  believe  there  is  a  special  occasion  for  the  exercise  of  this  duty 
of  encouraging  one  another  in  the  case  of  the  minister  and  Church  in  this  place.  It 
is  a  fresh  enterprise  surrounded  with  peculiar  difficulties,  and  demanding  special 
labour.  It  is  a  work  so  solemn  that  if  you  do  not  encourage  your  minister  your 
minister  will  probably  sink  down  in  despair.  Remember  that  the  man  himself 
needs  encouragement  because  he  is  weak.  Who  is  sufficient  for  these  things  ?  To 
serve  in  any  part  of  the  spiritual  army  is  dangerous,  but  to  be  a  captain  is  to  be 
doubly  exposed.  The  most  of  the  shots  are  aimed  at  the  officers.  There  are  all 
sorts  of  discouragements  to  be  met  with.  Professing  Christians  will  backslide. 
Those  who  do  remain  will  often  be  inconsistent,  and  he  will  be  sighing  in  his  closet, 
while  you,  perhaps,  are  thanking  God  that  your  souls  have  been  fed  under  him. 
Encourage  your  minister,  I  pray  you,  wherever  you  attend — encourage  him  for  your 


CHAP.  I.]  DEUTERONOMY.  15 

own  sake.  A  discouraged  minister  is  a  serious  burden  upon  the  congregation. 
"When  the  fountain  gets  out  of  order  you  cannot  expect  water  at  any  of  the  taps  ; 
and  if  the  minister  be  not  right  it  is  something  like  a  steam  engine  in  a  great 
manufactory— eveiybody's  loom  is  idle  when  the  motive-power  is  out  of  order.  See 
that  he  is  resting  upon  God  and  receiving  His  Divine  power,  and  you  wOl  all  know, 
each  Sabbath  day,  the  benefit  of  it.  This  is  the  least  thing  you  can  do.  There  are 
many  other  things  which  may  cause  you  expense,  effort,  time,  but  to  encourage  the 
minister  is  so  easy,  so  simple  a  matter,  that  I  may  well  press  upon  you  to  do  it. 
Perhaps  you  will  say,  '  *  Well,  if  it  is  so  simple  and  easy,  tell  us,  who  are  expecting 
to  settle  down  in  this  place,  how  we  can  encourage  the  minister  here."  Well,  you 
can  do  it  in  several  ways.  1.  You  can  encourage  him  by  very  constant  attendance. 
Those  who  are  going  from  place  to  place  are  of  no  use  to  anybody  ;  but  those  are  the 
truly  useful  men  who,  when  the  servants  of  God  are  in  their  places,  keep  to  theirs, 
and  let  everybody  see  that  whoever  discourages  the  minister,  they  will  not,  for  they 
appreciate  his  ministry.  2.  Again,  let  me  say,  by  often  being  present  at  the  prayer- 
meeting  you  can  encourage  the  minister.  3.  Again,  you  can  all  encourage  the 
minister  by  the  consistency  of  your  lives.  I  do  not  know  when  I  ever  felt  more 
gratified  than  on  one  occasion  when,  sitting  at  a  church  meeting,  having  to  report 
the  death  of  a  young  brother  who  was  in  the  service  of  an  eminent  employer,  a  little 

note  came  from  him  to  say,  "  My  servant,  Edward  ,  is  dead.     I  send  you 

word  at  once  that  you  may  send  me  another  young  man  ;  for  if  your  members  are 
such  as  he  was,  I  never  wish  to  have  better  servants  around  me. "  I  read  the  letter 
at  the  church  meeting,  and  another  was  soon  found.  It  is  a  cheering  thing  for  the 
Christian  minister  to  know  that  his  converts  are  held  in  repute.  (C.  H.  Spurge&n.) 
Uncouragement : — I.  The  text  supposes  that  difficulties  will  be  encountered. 
In  the  Christian  life  there  are  many  obstacles.  1.  Difficulties  made  by  ourselves. 
2.  Difficulties  arising  from  the  conduct  of  others.  3.  Difficulties  expressly  sent  by 
God  to  test  His  servants.  II.  The  text  gives  a  command  to  suemount  these 
DIFFICULTIES.  We  should  encourage  our  fellow-Christians.  1.  To  meet  their 
trials  with  patience.  2.  Steadily  to  fight  till  they  conquer  them.  3.  To  profit 
by  them.  III.  The  text  contains  A  lesson  for  every  Christian  preacher 
AND  teacher.  "Encourage" — 1.  The  penitent  sinner.  2.  The  young  believer. 
8.  The  weU-tried  saint.  {J.  W.  Macdonald.)  The  Christian  pastor  avccmraged 
"by  his  flock : — You  need  not  be  told  that  those  clergymen  who  enter  into  the 
spirit  of  their  office  are  oppressed  with  discouragements  of  various  kinds.  These 
it  is  incumbent  on  you  to  anticipate,  and  as  far  as  lies  in  your  power  to 
prevent  ;  a  measure  far  more  easy  to  effect  than  a  removal  of  them  after  they 
have  actually  taken   place.     I.  He   is    liable    to    discouragement    arising 

FROM     fear     as     to     THE    INEFFICACY    OF    HIS    PUBLIC    AND    PRIVATE    LABOURS. 

1.  "Encourage  him  "  by  your  regular  attendance  on  the  public  worship  of  God.  Let 
it  ever  be  remembered  that  attendance  on  the  House  of  God  is  not  a  matter  of  choice, 
but  a  sacred  duty.  2.  "  Encourage  him  "  by  endeavouring  to  derive  personal  benefit 
from  his  ministry.  3.  "  Encourage  him  "  by  endeavouring  to  counteract  his  fears — 
in  manifesting  your  readiness  to  co-operate  with  him  in  all  his  efforts  to  do  good. 
It  is  heartless  work  to  labour  alone.  4.  "Encourage  him"  by  praying  for  him. 
6.  "Encourage  him"  by  informing  him  of  the  success  of  his  labours,  whether  on 
yourselves  or  on  others.     II.  A  second  source  of  ministerial  discouragement 

REGARDS  THE  UNFAVOURABLE  IMPRESSIONS  LIKELY  TO  BE  MADE  ON  SOME  MINDS  BY 

THE  FAITHFUL  DISCHARGE  OF  HIS  PROFESSIONAL  DUTIES.  Let  it  be  your  delight  to 
"encourage"  your  minister  by  following  him  with  patience  and  docility  in  all  his 
researches  into  the  inexhaustible  treasures  of  inspiration.     III.  Another  species 

OF  MINISTERIAL  DISCOURAGEMENT  SOMETIMES  ARISES  FROM  FEAR  RESPECTING  THE 
FAILURE  OF  THE  AFFECTION  OF  OUR  PEOPLE  AND  THE  DIMINUTION  OF  OUR  OWN 
"USEFULNESS  SHOULD  WE  CONTINUE  LONG  TO  LABOUR  AMONGST  THEM.      There  are 

some  who  will  show  less  forbearance  to  a  minister  than  to  others ;  and  who,  not 
satisfied  with  exciting  the  hostility  of  their  families^  labour  by  partial  statements  i 
of  their  own  case  to  create  a  general  prejudice  against  him.  Contentions  in  parishes  i 
and  in  churches  have  often  caused  clergymen  to  sigh  for  a  place  in  the  desert,  that 
they  might  leave  their  flocks  and  go  from  them  ;  indeed,  they  have  made  them  long 
for  that  place  "where  the  wicked  cease  from  troubling  and  where  the  weary  are  at 
rest."  Encourage  your  minister,  therefore,  by  endeavouring  to  be  "all  of  one 
jnind."  As  Christians,  you  must  walk  in  love.  {T.  Gibson,  M.A,)  Salutary 
encouragement : — A  gentleman  travelling  in  the  northern  part  of  Ireland  heard  the 
Toices  of  children,  and  stopped  to  listen.    Finding  the  sound  came  from  a  small 


16  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  II. 

building  used  as  a  school-house  he  drew  near  ;  as  the  door  was  open  he  went  in  and 
listened  to  the  words  the  boys  were  spelling.  One  little  fellow  stood  apart,  looking 
yery  sad.  **  Why  does  that  boy  stand  there  ?  "  asked  the  gentleman.  "Oh,  he  is 
good  for  nothing,"  replied  the  teacher.  "There  is  nothing  in  him.  I  can  make 
nothing  of  him.  He  is  the  most  stupid  boy  in  the  school. "  The  gentleman  was 
surprised  at  his  answer.  He  saw  the  teacher  was  so  stern  and  rough  that  the 
younger  and  more  timid  were  nearly  crushed.  After  a  few  words  to  them,  placing 
his  hand  on  the  head  of  the  little  fellow  who  stood  apart,  he  said,  "One  of  these  days 
you  may  be  a  fine  scholar.  Don't  give  up  ;  try,  my  boy — ^try. "  The  boy's  soul  was 
aroused.  A  new  purpose  was  formed.  From  that  hour  he  became  anxious  to  excel, 
and  he  did  become  a  fine  scholar.  It  was  Dr.  Adam  Clarke.  A  minister's 
encouragement : — I  remember  to  have  preached,  years  ago,  at  a  watering-place  in  the 
Virginia  mountains,  at  the  dedication  of  a  new  church.  The  people  were  all  strangers 
to  each  other ;  and  as  he  went  away  my  friend  said  (who  had  a  right  to  speak  so 
familiarly),  "I  wonder,  my  dear  fellow,  that  you  could  be  animated  at  all  to-day  ; 
for  we  are  all  strangers,  and  things  were  pretty  cold  I  thought."  "Ah,  but,"  the 
preacher  replied,  "you  did  not  see  old  brother  Gwathmey,  of  Hanover,  who  sat 
there  by  the  post.  The  first  sentence  of  the  sermon  caught  hold  of  him,  and  it  kept 
shining  out  of  his  eyes  and  his  face,  and  he  and  the  preacher  had  a  good  time 
together,  and  we  didn  t  care  at  all  about  the  rest  of  you."  Timely  encouragement : — 
As  Luther  was  passing  to  the  assembly-room  of  the  Diet  a  noted  commander,  George 
Von  Frundesberg,  touched  him  on  the  shoulder,  and  said,  "  My  dear  monk,  thou 
art  now  about  taking  a  step  the  like  of  which  neither  I  nor  many  a  commander  on 
tiie  hardest-fought  battlefield  has  ever  taken.  If  thou  art  right  and  sure  of  thy 
cause,  proceed  in  God's  name,  and  be  of  good  cheer;  God  will  not  forsake  thee.'* 
{Little' s  Historical  Lights.)  Encouragement  needed: — Lord  Lytton,  in  his  essay 
on  the  efficacy  of  praise,  tells  a  story  of  Mr.  Kean,  who,  when  performing  in  some 
city  of  the  United  States,  came  to  the  manager  when  the  play  was  half  over,  and 
said,  "  I  can't  go  on  again,  sir,  if  the  pit  keeps  its  hands  in  its  pockets.  Such  an 
audience  would  extinguish  iEtna."  Upon  this  the  manager  told  the  audience  that 
Mr.  Kean,  not  being  accustomed  to  the  severe  intelligence  of  American  citizens, 
mistook  their  silent  attention  for  courteous  disappointment,  and  that  if  they  did  not 
applaud  Mr.  Kean  as  he  was  accustomed  to  be  applauded,  they  could  not  see  Mr. 
Kean  act  as  he  was  accustomed  to  act.  Of  course,  the  audience  took  the  hint,  and  as 
their  fervour  rose,  so  rose  the  genius  of  the  actor,  and  their  applause  contributed 
to  the  triumphs  it  rewarded. 


CHAPTER  IL 

Vebs.  1-7.  Te  have  compassed  this  mountain  long  enough :  turn  yon  northward. 

— A  sermon  for  the  new  year : — Such  were  the  words  which  the  Lord  spoke  to 
Moses,  after  the  children  of  Israel  had  been  compassing  Mount  Seir  "many  days." 
There  are  a  great  many  "mountains"  which  a  great  many  people  "compass  in 
the  present  day.  Some  of  them  mountains  indeed — mountains  of  doubt  and 
difficulty  and  sin  ;  some  of  them  molehills,  which  the  very  pilgrims  in  their 
blindness  verily  believe  to  be  mountains  ;  some  of  them  little  hills  of  pride  and 
obstinacy,  the  paths  round  which  have  become  all  beaten  down  because  the 
pilgrim  feet  have  so  long  trod  them.  "Turn  you  northward"  is  the  command 
required.  Anything  is  better  than  the  old  going  round  and  round  and  coming  to 
the  same  place  again.  * '  Northward  "  may  mean  hard  fighting,  but  it  will  mean 
great  victory.  I.  Monotony  the  ordinary  Christian  experience.  1.  See  it  as 
regards  the  Christian  life.  How  many  Christians  have  much  the  same  experience 
year  after  year.  We  talk  about  "growth  in  grace,"  and  trust  we  are  makini:  some 
"progress,"  but  if  many  of  us  were  to  examine  ourselves  should  we  not  find  that 
our  experience  diflFered  little  from  that  of  our  early  Christian  life  ?  Thousands  of 
people  are  lapsing  into  a  monotonous  experience.  "There  is  no  standing  still 
in  the  Christian  life, "  we  hear  it  said.  That  may  be  true,  but  it  is  also  true  that 
there  is  a  great  deal  of  moving  round  and  round.  Compassing  the  mountain  is 
the  experience  of  not  a  few.  2.  See  it  as  regards  Christian  work.  The  ideal  of 
Christian  work  is  the  same  in  all  ages.     It  is  the  conversion  of  the  world.     But  the 


CHAP.  II.]  DEUTERONOMY,  17 

method  of  its  accomplishment  varies  vdth  times  and  peoples  and  circumstances. 
And  the  Church  or  worker  is  wise  which  adapts  the  method  to  the  requirements 
of  the  hour.  But  how  we  like  to  keep  to  the  old  work  and  do  it  in  the  old  way  ! 
And  how  apt  we  are  also  to  keep  to  the  very  same  kind  of  work.  There  is  work, 
I  grant,  which  can  best  be  done  by  the  man  who  has  done  it  for  many  years,  but 
there  is  other  work  which  would  be  done  all  the  better  if  the  worker  were  changed 
sometimes.  The  question  is,  are  we  putting  the  same  enthusiasm  into  our  work 
•which  we  put  into  it  at  the  commencement?  But  there  is  danger  lest  "com- 
passing the  mountain  "  should  become  monotonous.  Even  the  most  holy  occupa- 
tion needs  varying  at  times,  as  every  preacher  will  testify.  A  change  often  benefits 
both  worker  and  work.  Then  monotony  is  near  akin  to  sluggishness.  Somehow 
or  other  that  "mountain  "  of  work  takes  longer  and  longer  to  "  compass."  I  long 
that  God's  voice  should  speak  to  them  as  it  did  to  Moses,  "Ye  have  compassed 
this  mountain  long  enough."  See  it  as  regards  Christian  thought.  The  great 
verities  of  our  holy  religion  do  not  change.  Truth  is  eternal  as  God  Himself. 
But  how  apt  we  are  to  live  and  move  roimd  a  little  "mountain  "  of  thought  of  our 
own.  We  made  it  ourselves  years  ago,  and  were  very  pleased  with  it  then.  "We 
do  not  stop  to  think  whether  it  suits  us  now.  Surely  we  should  always  be  having 
grander,  newer  thoughts,  nobler  impulses  from  the  Most  High.  He  has  ever 
greater  truths  to  teach,  ever  fresh  secrets  to  tell.  There  are  ever  fresh  treasures 
of  learning  to  be  ransacked.  Ideas  of  Christian  life  and  thought  are  ever 
maturing.  "Turn  you  northward"  is  the  needed  cry.  II.  Progress  the  proper 
E.TJLE  OF  LIFE.  Says  Godet,  "Man  was  made  in  the  image  of  God.  He  is  not 
therefore  condemned,  like  the  lower  animals,  to  move  incessantly  in  the  same 
circle.  His  progressivity  has  no  limit  but  that  of  the  absolute  good  to  which  he 
aspires."  The  emblem  of  human  life  is  a  spiral,  not  a  circle  !  Just  so  !  Man 
must  continually  "move  on."  If  he  goes  round  he  must  at  the  same  time  go  up. 
It  will  be  easy  to  show  that  this  is  God's  purpose  concerning  us.  1.  Monotony  is 
contrary  to  the  constitution  and  course  of  nature.  These  point  to  progress.  New 
forms  of  life,  of  thought,  of  government  are  being  continually  evolved.  Nothing 
continues  the  same  but  God  and  His  eternal  truth.  2.  Monotony  is  contrary  to 
God's  dealings  with  the  human  race.  God  has  not  dealt  with  us  in  a  circle.  He 
has  ever  led  His  people  forward.  3.  Monotony  is  contrary  to  the  spirit  of  the  age. 
The  age  is  one  of  progress.  New  inventions  are  showered  upon  us  week  by  week. 
4.  Monotony  is  contrary  to  the  teaching  of  God's  "Word.  There  are  three  things 
among  many  others  which  I  may  point  out  are  contrary  to  monotony,  but  anal- 
ogous to  progress.  (1)  Growth.  This  is  self-evident,  and  I  have  no  need  to  do 
more  than  mention  it.  "Grow  in  grace"  is  the  command  of  Scripture,  and  all 
kinds  of  growth  should  be  seen  in  the  character  of  the  true  Christian.  There 
should  be  inward  growth,  the  life  becoming  firmer  and  stronger ;  there  should  be 
outward  growth,  the  life  developing  in  all  the  more  visible  graces  of  the  Spirit ; 
there  should  be  upward  growth — upward  to  God,  to  holiness,  to  heaven ;  there 
should  be  downward  growth — the  roots  of  the  Christian  life  becoming  even  more 
firmly  planted  in  the  soil  of  God's  love.  (2)  Enthusiasm.  I  can  imagine  that 
when  first  the  children  of  Israel  commenced  to  "compass"  the  "mountain" 
they  did  so  with  a  great  deal  of  interest.  But  after  this  "compassing"  the 
"  mountain  "  had  proceeded  "  many  days,"  interest  would  decrease  and  enthusiasm 
would  disappear.  The  summons  "Turn  you  northward"  would,  however,  call 
out  all  the  old  interest  and  enthusiasm,  and  would  come  as  a  grateful  relief  from 
the  monotony  of  the  past.  And  in  our  weakness  our  enthusiasm  requires  some- 
thing new.  Further,  the  command  "Turn  you  northward"  not  only  generated 
enthusiasm,  but  required  it.  It  was  much  easier  to  continue  the  task  of  "com- 
passing the  mountain  "  than  to  "  turn  northward."  They  had  become  accustomed 
to  the  old  circular  progress.  There  were  difficulties  "northward."  And  so  it  is 
with  us  in  the  present  day.  To  "turn  northward"  requires  enthusiasm.  It 
would  be  much  easier  and  pleasanter  to  go  the  old  round,  to  live  the  old  life. 
(3)  Enterprise.  This  is  another  thing  contrary  to  monotony,  but  analogous  to 
progress.  It  required  no  enterprise  to  compass  the  mountain  after  they  had  been 
engaged  in  that  task  "many  days."  But  when  they  began  to  "  turn  northward" 
enterprise  was  implied  and  required  at  once.  And  surely  enterprise  is  required 
to-day.  In  every  sphere  of  our  life  in  this  world  it  is  to  be  found.  And  yet  in 
work  for  Christ  by  some  it  is  hardly  known  except  by  name.  Why  should  we  be 
content  to  go  along  the  old  beaten  tracks?  Why  should  we  not  strike  out  new 
ones  for  ouraalvee,  or  follow  without  hesitation  where  the  Guiding  Hand  indicates  ? 


18  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it. 

A  thing  has  not  always  to  be  because  it  has  been.  (^W.  E.  Sellers.)  A  new 
departure: — The  story  with  which  this  order  is  connected  in  the  annals  is  found 
in  Kumb.  xxi.  12-35.  I.  The  new  departure  in  Israel's  wandering.  Only  a 
few  particulars  will  be  necessary  in  order  to  show  us  the  pertinency  to  an  anni- 
versary service  which  the  ancient  narrative  will  bring.  1.  Past  experience  was  in 
the  word  "compassed."  2.  Future  experience  was  in  the  word  "northward." 
For  they  all  knew  that  in  that  direction  lay  Canaan.  The  time  was  complete,  the 
retribution  was  fulfilled,  a  young  generation  had  arrived  upon  the  stage  of  action. 
So  another  forward  movement  was  ordered,  this  time  in  the  line  of  progress 
towards  the  Jordan  and  the  covenanted  land  of  promise.  Evidently  a  great 
historical  crisis  is  reached  at  last.  The  deadlock  of  rebellious  will  is  broken. 
Humanity  shows  a  quickening  of  life  once  more.  This  is  what  in  modem  times 
is  called  "  a  new  departure  " ;  and  this  is  what  renders  the  incident  suggestive  as 
a  religious  symbol  for  our  present  employment.  II.  The  new  departure  in  our 
WORK  to-day.  The  last  week  in  December  is  what  merchants  call  "inventory 
time."  Thoughtful  religious  people  use  it  often  for  taking  account  of  spiritual 
stock.  Let  the  past  be  left  behind  ;  our  hopes  are  all  in  the  future ;  we  have 
compassed  that  mountain  with  its  twelve  peaks  long  enough  ;  it  is  time  to  "turn 
northwards."  ^  III.  The  new  departure  in  each  believer's  history.  So  vivid 
appears  this  illustration  that  it  might  easily  be  made  to  serve  for  a  permanent 
exhortation  to  the  churches.  Three  grand  principles  in  ordinary  spiritual  life  are 
exhibited  in  the  image  employed.  1.  All  true  Christians  have  mountains  to 
compass.  Sometimes  our  duties  are  mountains,  sometimes  our  trials.  Some 
have  more  mountains  than  others  have.  Some  have  harder  ones  than  others 
have.  Some  make  mountains  out  of  what  would  be  only  molehills  to  those  who 
are  braver  than  they  are.  But  this  will  be  the  lesson  :  God  gives  all  His  children 
mountains  to  compass.  2.  All  true  Christians  must  compass  their  mountains. 
There  can  be  no  rebellious  refusal  of  the  task  God  sets  for  us.  There  is  no  room 
for  any  ingenious  evasion  of  His  commands.  There  can  never  be  permitted  any 
sudden  leaping  over  or  flying  across  the  difficult  ridge  of  duty.  There  can  be  no 
changing  mountains  with  each  other  in  the  hope  of  getting  easier  ones.  3.  God's 
sovereignty  decides  when  the  mountain  is  compassed  long  enough.  There  is  a 
period  set  for  continuance  and  for  cessation.  Long  enough — for  the  mountain's 
sake.  Real  work  has  to  be  done  slowly  and  patiently.  Some  tasks  there  are 
which  cannot  be  at  all  hurried.  (1)  Long  enough — for  our  own  sakes.  Certain 
disciplines  must  be  wrought  out  upon  our  characters.  Dispositions,  like  finest 
wines,  require  what  can  be  done  for  them  only  by  time  and  silence.  Jehovah  was 
preparing  these  people  for  Canaan  before  He  suffered  a  single  one  of  them  to  enter. 
(2)  Long  enou^— for  others'  sake.  The  principle  of  division  of  labour  is  here 
involved.  Vicarious  suffering  is  the  rule  for  the  redeemed  race  who  follow  Christ, 
who  was  cut  off,  and  not  for  Himself.  These  young  Israelites  were  held  back  to 
give  the  older  people  decorous  space  in  which  to  die  (chap.  ii.  14).  (3)  Long 
enough— for  the  Lord's  sake.  He  asks  us  to  labour  on  and  wait  till  He  tells  us 
what  it  is  all  for.  IV.  The  new  departure  in  church  life.  Our  admonitions 
grow  rapidly  now,  for  the  field  of  application  for  the  figure  is  wider.  1.  To  some 
who  now  hear  this  call  it  will  be  the  language  of  rebuke.  "Ye  have  compassed 
this  mountain  long  enough. "  It  is  of  no  use  to  stay  here  any  longer  ;  the  chance 
is  lost.  It  is  like  Jesus  saying  to  His  disciples  in  slumber,  "Sleep  on  now." 
Duty  is  sometimes  neglected  until  the  man  is  withdrawn  from  the  charge.  2.  To 
some  who  now  hear  it  this  call  will  be  the  language  of  comfort.  "Ye  have 
compassed  this  mountain  long  enough."  Oh,  how  fine  a  thing  it  is  to  look  back 
upon  a  hard  work  carried  well  and  patiently  through  into  grand  success !  Leave 
the  old  toil  now  ;  let  the  bent  form  straighten  up  ;  let  the  tired  shoulder  rest.  3.  To 
some  it  will  be  the  language  of  command.  "  Ye  have  compassed  this  mountain 
long  enough  ;  turn  you  northward."  Yes ;  tium  northward  straight  to  anotiier 
mountain,  and  another  ;  for  there  is  no  discharge  in  that  war  !  Is  it  your  birth- 
day ?  Then  one  mountain  is  well  compassed  ;  take  a  new  one.  Is  it  the  anni- 
versary of  your  first  communion  ?  One  good  mountain  compassed  ;  now  again ! 
And  the  soul  is  all  alive  with  fresh  exhilaration  from  the  hill-climbing.  4.  For 
to  some  this  call  is  the  language  of  encouragement.  "Ye  have  compassed  this 
mountain  long  enough ;  turn  you  northward.  '  And  northward  lies  the  land  of 
covenant  promise ;  every  mountain  now  passed  brings  us  nearer  to  the  end  of 
them.  It  grows  a  little  gladder  in  the  sunshine  and  clearer  in  the  atmosphere  ;  it 
like  attaining  the  last  hill  and  catching  the  gales  from  beyond  the  river. 


CHAP.  11.]  DEUTERONOMY,  19 

{C.  S.  HoMnson,  D.D.)  The  Divine  recall  to  duty : — I.  If  we  do  not  follow 
God's  plan,  if  we  neglect  our  duty,  we  are  losing  time.  The  Israelites  lost 
thirty  years  by  disregarding  the  call  of  duty,  and  we  too  are  always  losing  time 
when  we  obey  not  God's  commands.  II.  By  commanding  the  Israelites  to 
leave  the  mountain  and  turn  northward,  God  was  teaching  His  people 

THAT  there   is   NO   BETTER  DEFENCE  TO  A  LIFE  OF  OBEDIENCE  THAN   LIFE   ITSELF. 

It  is  evident  that  the  children  of  Israel  stayed  by  the  mountain  partly  for  purpose 
of  self-defence.  III.  By  commanding  the  people  to  leave  the  mountains  and  turn 
northward,  God  was  teaching  them  that  their  work  was  not  done  until 

THEY  HAD  CONQUERED  THEIR  ENEMIES.     IV.  GOD  SAID,  "TURN  YOU  NORTHWARD," 

FOR  THAT  WAS  THE  WAY  TO  Canaan.  {J.  L.  Williams,  B.A.)  A  short  account 
of  the  long  story  of  Israel  in  the  wilderness : — We  compassed  Mount  Seir  many  days 
(ver.  1).  Nearly  thirty-eight  years  they  wandered  in  the  deserts  of  Seir  ;  probably 
in  some  of  their  rests  they  stayed  several  years,  and  never  stirred  :  God  by  this  not 
only  chastised  them  for  their  murmuring  and  unbelief,  but — 1.  Prepared  them  for 
Canaan,  by  humbling  them  for  sin,  teaching  them  to  mortify  their  lusts,  to  follow 
God,  and  to  comfort  themselves  in  Him.  It  is  a  work  of  time  to  make  souls  meet 
for  heaven,  and  it  must  be  done  by  a  long  train  of  exercises.  2.  He  prepared  the 
Canaanites  for  destruction  ;  all  this  time  the  measure  of  their  iniquity  was  in  the 
filling ;  and  though  it  might  have  been  improved  by  them  as  a  space  to  repent,  it 
was  abused  by  them  to  the  hardening  of  their  hearts.  3.  Orders  given  them  to  turn 
towards  Canaan.  Though  God  contend  long,  He  will  not  contend  for  ever ;  though 
Israel  may  be  long  kept  waiting  for  deliverance  and  enlargement,  it  \s-ill  come  at  last. 

4.  A  charge  given  them  not  to  annoy  the  Edomites.  (1)  They  must  not  offer  any 
hostility  to  them  as  enemies  (vers.  4,  5).  Meddle  not  with  them,  (a)  They  must 
not  improve  the  advantage  they  had  against  them  by  the  fright  they  would  be  put 
into  upon  Israel's  approach.  They  shall  be  afraid  of  you,  knowing  your  strength 
and  numbers,  and  the  power  of  God  engaged  for  you ;  but  do  not  you  think  that 
their  fears  making  them  an  easy  prey,  you  may  therefore  prey  upon  them  ;  no, 
take  heed  to  yourselves.  There  is  need  of  great  caution,  and  a  strict  government 
of  our  own  spirits,  to  keep  ourselves  from  injuring  those  we  have  an  advantage 
against.  Or,  this  caution  is  given  to  the  princes  ;  they  must  not  only  not  meddle 
vnth  the  Edomites  themselves,  but  not  permit  any  of  their  soldiers  to  meddle  with 
them,  (b)  They  must  not  revenge  upon  the  Edomites  the  affront  they  gave  them 
in  refusing  them  passage  through  their  country  (Numb,  xxiii.  21).  Thus  before 
God  brought  Israel  to  destroy  their  enemies  in  Canaan  He  taught  them  to  forgive 
their  enemies  in  Edom.  (c)  They  must  not  expect  to  have  any  part  of  their  land 
given  them  for  a  possession ;  Mount  Seir  was  already  settled  upon  the  Edomites, 
and  they  must  not,  under  pretence  of  God's  covenant  and  conduct,  think  to  seize 
for  themselves  all  they  could  lay  hands  on.     Dominion  is  not  founded  in  grace. 

5.  They  must  trade  with  them  as  neighbours :  buy  meat  and  water  off  them,  and 
py  for  what  they  bought  (ver.  6).  Religion  must  never  be  made  a  cloak  for 
injustice.  The  reason  given  (ver.  7)  is,  because  God  hath  blessed  thee,  and 
hitherto  thou  hast  lack^  nothing;  and  therefore— (1)  Thou  needest  not  beg; 
scorn  to  be  beholden  to  Edomites  when  thou  hast  a  God  all-suflScient  to  depend 
upon.  Thou  hast  wherewithal  to  pay  for  what  thou  callest  for,  thanks  to  the 
Divine  blessing ;  use  therefore  what  thou  hast,  use  it  cheerfully,  and  do  not  sponge 
upon  the  Edomites.  (2)  Therefore  thou  must  not  steal.  Thou  hast  experienced 
the  care  of  the  Divine  Providence  concerning  thee  ;  in  confidence  of  which  for  the 
future,  and  in  a  firm  belief  of  its  all-sufficiency,  never  use  any  indirect  methods 
for  thy  supply.  Live  by  thy  faith,  and  not  by  the  sword.  {Matthew  Henry,  D.D.) 
For  He  knoweth  thy  walking  through  this  great  wilderness. — Comfort  in  the 
wilderness : — I.  A  fact  general.  He  knoweth  thy  walking  through  this  great 
wilderness.  "Wilderness  and  a  complete  barrenness  are  not  synonymous  in  Scripture. 
There  were  palms  of  Elirn,  and  wells  of  Marah,  and  beautiful  withdrawn  places 
where  the  grass  grew ;  and  yet  it  was  a  wilderness  great  and  often  terrible.  After 
all,  like  such  a  wilderness  is  life.  It  is  not  all  a  wilderness.  There  are  pleasant 
places  in  it,  and  homes,  and  loving  hearts.  This  is  the  fact  general — that  the  usual 
human  life  has  a  good  deal  of  wilderness  in  it.  Life  is  a  wilderness  because — 1.  Of 
its  mystery.  2,  Of  its  discipline.  3.  Of  its  unreached  ideals.  4.  Of  its  transitori- 
ness.  5.  Of  its  enemies — Egyptians,  Amalekites,  Midianites,  Edomites,  Moabites, 
Amorites  throng  against  it.  II.  A  fact  personal.  He  knoweth  thy  walking 
through  this  great  wilderness.  The  personal  fact  is  that  you  must  thread  your  way 
through  this  strange,  great  wilderness  of  a  life.     Nobody  can  tread  the  path  for 


20  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  il 


you.  The  decisions  of  it  you  must  make.  The  results  of  your  decisions  you  must 
abide.  III.  The  gikding  comfort  fob  us.  He  knoweth  thy  walking  through 
this  great  wilderness.  1.  He  knoweth  sympathisingly.  It  is  such  meaning  God's 
knowing  always  carries  in  the  Scripture.  2.  He  knoweth  in  detail.  Thy  walking ; 
precious  truth  this  of  the  Divine  omniscience  of  us.  3.  He  knoweth,  taking  account 
of  thy  weakness.  How  tender  God  was  toward  these  Israelites  !  4.  He  knoweth, 
wisely  providing.  Think  how  all  the  various  discipline  of  the  wilderness  wandering 
issued  in  the  change  of  the  Israelites  from  a  mob  to  a  nation.  IV,  What  then  ? 
1.  I  can  walk  the  way.  2.  I  shall  not  be  lost.  3.  I  shall  reach  Canaan.  4.  I  have 
comfort  for  the  journey.  ( W.  Hoyt. )  These  forty  yeaxs  the  Lord  thy  God  hath 
been  with  thee;  thou  hast  lacked  nothing. — Forty  years: — I.  Look  back  upon 
THE  PAST.  1.  What  strikes  me  in  Moses'  review  is  this,  the  prominence  which  he 
gives  to  God  in  it.  Here  let  me  note  that  our  own  retrospect  of  the  past  will,  if  we 
are  genuine  Christians,  have  in  it  many  bright  lights  of  the  conspicuous  presence  of 
God,  making  the  pathway  here  and  there  like  holy  ground.  2.  A  very  leading  point 
is  the  blessing  which  God  gave.  Our  text  says  He  has  blessed  all  the  works  of  our 
hand.  I  suppose  that  alludes  to  all  that  Israel  had  a  right  to  do ;  the  Lord  multi- 
plied their  cattle,  He  increased  their  substance,  He  guided  them  in  their  marches, 
He  protected  them  in  their  encampments.  There  were  some  things  in  which  He  did 
not  bless  them.  They  wanted  to  go  up  into  the  promised  land  against  His  com- 
mandment, and  the  Amalekites  smote  them ;  He  did  not  bless  them  there.  God 
does  not  bless  the  sins  of  His  people,  for  if  He  did  it  would  bring  on  them  the 
tremendous  curse  of  being  happy  in  the  ways  of  evil.  3.  Again,  in  our  retrospect  of 
the  past  we  should  notice  the  perfection  of  the  Lord's  sympathetic  care.  Observe 
the  words,  "He  knoweth  thy  walking  through  this  great  wilderness."  He  has 
known  our  rough  paths  and  our  smooth  ways,  the  weary  trudging  and  the  joyous 
marclung ;  He  has  known  it  all,  and  not  merely  known  it  in  the  sense  of  omni- 
science, but  known  it  in  the  sense  of  sympathy.  4.  We  have  had  also  what  is 
better  than  this  during  our  forty  years,  the  special  presence  of  God.  "These 
forty  years  the  Lord  thy  God  hath  been  with  thee. "  He  has  not  been  ashamed  to 
be  with  us,  though  we  have  been  despised  and  ridiculed.  Whenever  we  have 
prayed  we  have  hsd  audience  with  Him  ;  when  we  have  worked  we  have  seen  His 
mysterious  hand  working  with  us ;  when  we  have  trembled  we  have  felt  the  tender 
arms  sustaining  us ;  when  we  have  been  in  bodily  pain  He  has  made  our  bed 
in  our  sickness.  The  best  of  all  is  God  with  us,  and  in  this  sign  we  conquer. 
6.  Again,  we  have  had  much  cause  to  bless  the  Lord  for  the  abundance  of  His 
BuppUes.  "Thou  hast  lacked  nothing."  Some  things  which  we  could  have 
wished  for  we  have  not  received,  and  we  are  glad  they  were  denied  us.  Children 
would  have  too  many  sweets  if  they  could,  and  then  they  would  be  surfeited  or  be 
ill.  Walking  on  in  the  path  of  Providence,  trusting  in  the  Lord,  what  have  we 
lacked  ?  II.  But  now  we  must  take  the  second  head,  which  is— Forty  years  in  the 
wilderness  should  teach  us  much  of  service  for  the  present.  I  do  not  say  that  it 
will  do  so,  for  we  do  not  all  grow  wiser  as  we  grow  older,  but  it  ought  to  be  so. 
Folly  is  bound  up  in  the  heart  of  many  a  man,  and  it  takes  much  of  the  rod  to 
whip  it  out  of  him.  1,  Experience  is  a  noble  teacher,  but  we  are  dull  scholars ; 
yet  at  any  rate  we  ought  to  have  learned  to  continue  trusting  in  God.  2.  Experi- 
ence should  also  give  us  greater  ease  in  confiding  in  the  Lord.  Use  is  said  to  be 
second  nature,  but  in  your  case  grace  has  given  you  in  very  deed  a  real  second 
nature,  and  this  by  use  should  have  grown  stronger  and  more  prevalent.  3.  Forty 
years  of  Divine  faithfulness  should  teach  us  also  a  surer,  quicker,  calmer,  and 
more  joyous  expectation  of  immediate  aid  in  all  times  of  strait  and  trial :  we 
should  learn  not  to  be  flurried  and  worried  because  the  herds  are  cut  off  from  the 
stall,  and  the  harvest  is  withered,  for  we  know  from  abundant  proofs  that  "The 
Lord  will  provide."  4.  Forty  years  of  blessing  should  teach  each  of  us  to  believe 
in  holy  activity.  **The  Lord  thy  God  hath  blessed  thee  in  all  the  works  of  thy 
hand."  Some  people  believe  in  God's  blessing  the  dreams  and  theories  of  their 
heads,  and  their  prayers  are  unattended  by  action.  They  believe  in  His  blessing 
them  when  they  are  scheming  and  putting  fine  plans  on  paper,  or  when  they  meet 
at  a  conference  to  talk  about  how  to  do  Christian  work.  I  believe  in  God's 
blessing  the  actual  work  of  our  hand ;  He  waters  not  the  seed  which  we  talk  of 
sowing,  but  that  which  we  actually  scatter.  5.  Forty  years'  experience  ought  to 
have  taught  us  to  avoid  many  of  the  faults  into  which  we  fell  in  our  early  days. 
It  is  a  great  pity  when  advancing  age  teaches  men  rather  to  avoid  their  virtues 
than  their  follies.     6.  You  will  have  observed  that  the  text  mentions  twice  *  *  The 


CHAP,  ni.]  DEUTERONOMY,  21 

Lord  thy  God."  All  throrgh  the  chapter  it  is  always  that — "Jehovah  thy  God." 
Here  we  have  mention  of  His  covenant  relationship,  in  which  He  is  ever  most 
dear  to  us.  Shall  we  not  at  this  time  renew  our  own  personal  covenant,  and  take 
our  God  to  be  ours  afresh  ?  We  read  that  Isaac  was  forty  years  old  when  he 
married  Rebecca.  Let  us  have  a  new  wedding-day  ourselves,  and  give  ourselves 
over  again  to  the  Husband  of  our  souls,  even  Jesus  the  well-beloved.  HI.  Thb 
FTTTTJRE.  Having  come  so  far  on  our  journey  as  to  have  reached  forty  years,  we 
are  bound  to  feel  a  powerful  influence  upon  us  as  to  the  future.  How?  I  will 
borrow  our  remarks  from  the  context.  1.  Read  in  the  second  chapter,  second 
verse,  **  And  the  Lord  spake  unto  me  saying,  Ye  have  compassed  this  mountain 
long  enough:  turn  ye  northward."  What  way  was  northward,  then?  Why, 
toward  Canaan.  Forty  years  wandering  up  and  down  in  the  wilderness  is  enough, 
now  turn  your  faces  towards  Canaan  and  march  heavenward.  It  is  time  we  all 
had  our  faces  turned  heavenward  more  completely.  The  time  past  may  suffice  us 
to  have  wrought  the  will  of  the  flesh,  now  let  us  cry,  "Heavenward,  ho.  Pull  up 
the  anchor,  spread  the  sails,  and  let  us  away  to  the  fair  country  whither  Jesus  has 
gone  before  us.  2.  The  next  thing  we  should  learn  is  indifference  to  this  world's 
heritage.  The  next  verse  says,  "Ye  are  to  pass  through  the  coast  of  your 
brethren  the  children  of  Esau,  which  dwell  in  Seir  ;  and  they  shall  be  afraid  of 
you  ;  take  ye  good  heed  unto  yourselves,  therefore :  meddle  not  with  them  ;  for 
I  will  not  give  you  of  their  land,  no,  not  so  much  as  a  foot  breadth  ;  because  I 
have  given  Mount  Seir  unto  Esau  for  a  possession."  Esau  sold  his  heritage,  and 
had  his  mess  of  pottage,  let  him  have  it ;  keep  you  the  birthright,  and  never  think 
of  putting  your  spoon  into  his  mess.  The  world  is  for  worldlings.  What  do  you 
want  with  it?  3.  Let  us  learn  from  the  past  to  cultivate  independence  of  spirit. 
"Ye  shall  buy  meat  of  them  for  money,  that  ye  may  eat ;  and  ye  shall  also  buy 
water  of  them  for  money,  that  ye  may  drink."  He  is  indeed  a  man  of  God  who  has 
learned  to  walk  uprightly,  and  no  longer  leans  upon  the  creature,  nor  practises 
policy  to  win  his  way.  4.  Once  again,  after  forty  years  in  the  ^vilderness  God  would 
have  His  people  learn  generosity  of  spirit.  The  Edomites  were  very  much  afraid  of 
the  Israelites,  and  would,  no  doubt,  have  bribed  them  to  let  them  alone,  but  Moses 
in  effect  says,  "  Do  not  take  anything  from  them  ;  you  have  no  need  to  do  so,  for 
you  have  never  lacked  anything,  and  God  has  been  with  you.  They  are  afraid 
of  you ;  you  might  take  what  you  please  from  them,  but  do  not  touch  even  the 
water  from  their  wells  without  payment."  Oh,  that  we  had  a  generous  spirit,  that 
we  were  not  for  oppressing  others  in  any  degree  whatever,  feeling  that  we  have 
too  much  already  given  us  by  God  to  be  wanting  to  tax  any  man  for  our  own 
gain.  5.  The  spirit  of  freedom  from  murmuring  should  be  in  us  after  forty 
years  of  blessing.  Jarchi  tells  us  that  this  exhortation  meant  that  they  were 
not  to  pretend  to  be  poor.  You  know  how  many  do  so  when  it  is  likely  to  save 
their  pockets.  6.  Lastly,  we  ought  for  the  future  to  show  more  confidence  in 
God  if  we  have  had  forty  years  of  His  love  :  we  should  have  more  confidence 
in  working  for  Him  that  He  will  bless  us,  more  confidence  as  to  our  personal 
weakness  that  He  will  strengthen  us,  more  confidence  as  to  the  unknown  future, 
that  through  the  great  and  terrible  wilderness  He  will  be  with  us,  and  that 
through  the  last  cold  stream  He  will  still  be  our  companion  ;  more  confidence 
that  we  shall  behold  the  light  of  His  countenance,  and  more  confidence  as  to 
the  supply  of  all  our  needs,  for  as  we  have  lacked  nothing,  so  all  things  shall  be 
freely  supplied  till  we  cross  the  river  and  eat  the  old  com  of  the  land.  (C.  H, 
Spvrgeon.) 


CHAPTER  IIL 

Vers.  1-11.  So  the  Lord  our  God  delivered  into  our  bands  Og-  also,  king  of 
Bashan. — Mastery  of  formidable  enemies: — See — 1.  How  they  got  the  mastery  of 
Og,  a  very  formidable  prince.  (1)  Very  strong,  for  he  was  of  the  remnant  of 
the  giants  (ver.  11).  His  personal  strength  was  extraordinary;  a  monument 
of  which  was  preserved  by  the  Ammonites  in  his  bedstead,  which  was  shown 
as  a  rarity  in  their  chief  city.  You  might  ^ess  at  his  weight  bv  the  materials 
of  his  bedstead  ;  it  was  iron,  as  if  a  bedstead  of  wood  were  too  weak  for  him  to 
trust  to.     And  yon  might  guess  at  his  stature  by  the  dimensions  of  it :  it  was  nine 


22  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  hi. 

cubits  long,  and  four  cubits  broad  ;  which,  supposing  a  cubic  to  be  but  half  a  yard, 
was  four  yards  and  a  half  long,  and  two  yards  broad  ;  and  if  we  allow  his  bed  to  be 
two  cubits  longer  than  himself,  and  that  is  as  much  as  we  need  allow,  he  was  three 
yards  and  a  half  high,  double  the  stature  of  an  ordinary  man,  and  every  way 
proportionable ;  yet  they  smote  him  (ver.  3).  When  God  pleads  His  people's  cause 
He  can  deal  with  giants  as  with  grasshoppers.  No  man's  might  can  secure  him 
against  the  Almighty.  His  army  likewise  was  very  powerful,  for  he  had  the 
command  of  sixty  fortified  cities,  besides  un walled  towns  (ver.  5) ;  yet  all  this  was 
nothing  against  God's  Israel,  when  they  came  with  commission  to  destroy  him. 
2.  He  was  very  stout  and  daring  ;  he  came  out  against  Israel  to  battle  (ver.  1).  It 
was  wonder  he  did  not  take  warning  by  the  ruin  of  Sihon,  and  send  to  desire  condi- 
tions of  peace  :  but  he  trusted  to  his  own  strength  and  so  was  hardened  to  his  own 
destruction.  Those  that  are  not  awakened  by  the  judgments  of  God  upon  others, 
but  persist  in  their  defiance  of  heaven,  are  ripening  apace  for  the  like  judgments 
upon  themselves  (Jer.  iii.  8).  God  bid  Moses  not  fear  him  (ver.  2).  If  Moses 
himself  was  so  strong  in  faith  as  not  to  need  the  caution,  yet  it  is  probable  the 
people  needed  it ;  and  for  them  these  fresh  assurances  are  designed,  *'  I  will  deliver 
him  into  thine  hand."  Not  only  deliver  thee  out  of  his  hand,  that  he  shall  not  be 
thy  ruin ;  but  deliver  him  into  thy  hand,  that  thou  shalt  be  his  ruin,  and  make 
him  pay  dear  for  his  attempt.  He  adds,  "Thou  shalt  do  unto  him  as  thou  didst 
unto  Sihon  "  ;  intimating  that  they  ought  to  be  encouraged  by  their  former  victory 
to  trust  in  God  for  another  victory ;  for  He  is  God,  and  changeth  not.  2.  How 
they  got  possession  of  Bashan,  a  very  desirable  country.  They  took  all  the  cities 
(ver.  4),  and  all  the  spoil  of  them  (ver.  7) ;  they  made  them  all  their  own  (ver.  10), 
so  that  now  they  had  in  their  hands  all  that  fruitful  country  which  lay  east  of 
Jordan,  from  the  river  Amon  unto  Hermon  (ver.  8).  Their  conquering  and  possess- 
ing of  these  countries  was  intended  not  only  for  the  encouragement  of  Israel  in  the 
wars  of  Canaan,  but  for  the  satisfaction  of  Moses  before  his  death ;  because  he  must 
not  live  to  see  the  completing  of  their  victory  and  settlement,  God  thus  gives  him 
a  specimen  of  it.  Thus  the  Spirit  is  given  to  them  that  believe,  as  the  earnest  of 
their  inheritance  until  the  redemption  of  the  purchased  possession.  {Matthew 
Henry ^  D.D.)  Review  and  prospect: — Is  it  not  remarkable  that  good  causes  and 
good  men  should  meet  with  constant  opposition  ?  We  are  now  perusing  the  history 
of  a  journey  which  was  undertaken  by  Divine  direction,  and  again  and  again  we 
come  upon  the  fact  that  the  journey  was  from  end  to  end  bitterly  opposed.  Were 
this  matter  of  ancient  history  we  might,  in  a  happier  condition  of  civilisation  and 
in  a  happier  mood  of  mind,  dispute  the  theory  that  Israel  travelled  under  Divine 
direction  and  guidance ;  but  this  very  thing  is  done  to-day  in  our  country,  in  all 
countries,  in  our  own  heart  and  life.  Never  man,  surely,  went  to  church  without 
some  enemy  in  the  form  of  temptation,  suggestion,  or  welcome  in  other  directions, 
seeking  to  prevent  his  accomplishing  the  sacred  purpose.  He  who  would  be  good 
must  fight  a  battle  ;  he  who  would  pray  well  must  first  resist  the  devil.  This 
makes  life  very  hard  ;  the  burden  is  sometimes  too  heavy  ;  but  the  voice  of  history 
so  concurs  with  the  testimony  of  conscience,  and  the  whole  is  so  corroborated  by 
the  spirit  of  prophecy,  that  we  must  accept  the  discipline,  and  await  with  what 
patience  God  Himself  can  work  within  us  the  issue  of  the  tragic  miracle.  Is  there 
no  compensatory  consideration  or  circumstance  ?  The  Lord  Himself  must  speak 
very  distinctly  in  some  conditions  and  relations  of  life.  "And  the  Lord  said  unto 
me."  That  is  how  the  balance  is  adjusted.  In  the  one  verse,  Og,  king  of  Bashan  ; 
in  the  next  verse — Jehovah.  Thus  the  story  of  our  life  alternates — now  an  enemy, 
now  a  friend  ;  now  the  fight  is  going  to  be  too  severe  for  us  and  we  shall  certainly 
fall,  and  now  the  Lord  of  hosts  is  in  the  van,  and  kings  are  burned  by  His  presence 
as  stubble  is  burned  by  the  fixe.  What  was  the  Divine  message  ?  It  was  a  message 
adapted  to  the  sensitiveness  of  the  circumstances:  "Fear  him  not;  for  I  will 
deliver  him,  and  all  his  people,  and  his  land,  into  thy  hand."  Get  rid  of  fear,  and 
you  increase  power.  He  wno  is  strong  in  spirit  is  strong  all  through  and  through 
his  nature  ;  he  who  is  only  muscularly  strong  will  fail  in  the  fight.  The  brave 
heart,  the  soul  alive  with  God — that  will  always  conquer.  Let  us  live  and  move  and 
have  our  being  in  God.  What  was  the  consequence  ?  We  read  the  story  in  the 
fourth  verse :  "  And  we  took  all  his  cities  at  that  time,  there  was  not  a  city  which 
we  took  not  from  them,  threescore  cities,  all  the  region  of  Argob,  the  kingdom  of 
Og  in  Bashan."  Opposition  to  God  always  means  loss.  There  is  no  bad  man  who 
is  successful.  Do  not  let  us  interpret  the  word  "successful"  narrowly  and 
partially,  as  if  it  were  a  term  descriptive  of  mere  appearances  or  momentary  rela* 


CHAP.  III.]  DEUTERONOMY.  23 


tionships.     In  the  partial  acceptation  of  the  term  the  proposition  will  not  bear 
examination  ;  but  in  discussing  great  spiritual  realities  we  must  take  in  the  full 
view ;  and,  fixing  the  attention  upon  that  view,  the  proposition  remains  an  inde- 
structible truth— that  no  bad  man  is  really  prosperous.      He  has  no  comfort.     He 
eats  like  a  glutton,  but  he  has  no  true  enjoyment ;   out  of  his  bread  he  draws 
no  poetry,  no  thought,  no  fire  ;  it  is  lost  upon  him,  for  he  is  an  evil  eater.     In  his 
apparent  wealth  he  is  miserably  poor.     If  it  could  be  proved  that  a  man  can  oppose 
God  and  be  truly  happy,  the  whole  Christian  kingdom  would  be  destroyed  by  that 
proof.     The  word  of  the  Lord,  as  written  in  the  Book,  is  against  the  possibility. 
But  what  became  of  Og,  the  king  of  Bashan  ?    We  read  in  the  eleventh  verse, 
"  Behold  his  bedstead,"  &c.      What  an  ending  !      How  appropriate  !      How  bitter 
the  satire  !    Og,  king  of  Bashan,  came  out  to  fight  the  people  of  God  ;  a  few  verses 
are  written  in  which  battles  are  fought  and  cities  taken,  and  at  the  end  the  bedstead 
of  Og  is  nearly  all  that  remains  of  the  mighty  king  of  Bashan  !     This  is  worthless 
fame  ;  this  is  the  renown  that  is  pitiable.     But  there  is  no  other  renown  for  wicked 
men :  they  will  leave  a  name  in  history,  but  a  name  the  children  will  laugh  at ; 
they  will  leave  behind  them  a  memorial,  but  the  memorial  itself  shall  be  an  abiding 
sarcasm.     The  Lord  turneth  the  counsel  of  the  wicked  upside  down  ;  the  Lord  will 
laugh  at  the  wicked  man  and  have  all  his  devices  in  derision.     His  bedstead  wiU 
be  remembered  when  he  himself  is  forgotten ;  he  will  be  spoken  of  in  the  bulk  and 
not  in  the  quality  ;  he  will  be  measured  like  a  log ;  he  will  be  forgotten  like  an 
evil  dream.     The  righteous  shall  be  had  in  everlasting  remembrance.     Who  would 
be  wicked  ?    Who  would  oppose  God  ?    Who  would  not  rather  coalesce  with  the 
heavens,  and  pray  that  the  Spirit  of  God  would  work  in  the  human  heart  the  miracle 
of  reconciliation  with  things  eternal  and  celestial  ?    (/.  Parker,  D.D.)       King  Gel's 
bedstead  .'—Vfhy  did  not  the  Bible  give  us  the  size  of  the  giant  instead  of  the  size  of 
the  bedstead  ?    Why  did  it  not  indicate  that  the  man  was  eleven  feet  high,  instead 
of  telling  us  that  his  couch  was  thirteen  and  a  half  feet  long  ?    No  doubt  among 
other  things  it  was  to  teach  us  that  you  can  judge  of  a  man  by  his  surroundings. 
Show  me  a  man's  associates,  show  me  a  man's  books,  show  me  a  man's  home,  and  I 
will  tell  you  what  he  is  without  your  teUing  me  one  word  about  him.     Moral  giants 
and  moral  pigmies,  intellectual  giants  and  intellectual  pigmies,  like  physical  giants 
or  physical  pigmies,  may  be  judged  by  their  surroundings.    That  man  has  been 
thirty  years  faithful  in  attendance  upon  churches  and  prayer  meetings  and  Sunday 
schools,  and  putting  himself  among  intense  religious  associations.      He  may  have 
his  imperfections,  but  he  is  a  very  good  man.     Great  is  his  religious  stature.      That 
other  man  has  been  for  thirty  years  among  influences  intensely  worldly,  and  he  has 
shut  himself  out  from  aU  other  influences,  and  his  religious  stature  is  that  of  a 
dwarf.     But  let  no  one  by  this  thought  be  induced  to  surrender  to  unfavourable 
environments.     A  man  can  make  his  own  bedstead.     Chantrey  and  Hugh  Miller 
were  born  stonemasons,  but  the  one  became  an  immortal  sculptor,  and  the  other  a 
Christian  scientist  whose  name  will  never  die.     The  late  Judge  Bradley  worked  his 
way  up  from  a  charcoal  burner  to  the  bench  of  the  supreme  court  of  the  United 
States.    Yes,  a  man  can  decide  the  size  of  his  own  bedstead.    Notice  furthermore,  that 
even  giants  must  rest.     Such  enormous  physical  endowment  on  the  part  of  king  Og 
might  suggest  the  capacity  to  stride  across  all  fatigue  and  omit  slumber.     No.     He 
required  an  iron  bedstead.     Giants  must  rest.     Not  appreciating  the  fact,  how 
many  of  the  giants  yearly  break  down  !    Giants  in  business,  giants  in  art,  giants  m 
eloquence,  giants  in  usefulness.     Let  no  one  think,  because  he  has  great  strength 
of  body  or  mind,  that  he  can  afford  to  tiltle  with  his  unusual  gifts.      King  Og,  no 
doubt,  had  a  sceptre,  but  the  Bible  does  not  mention  his  sceptre.     Yet  one  of  the 
largest  verses  of  the  Bible  is  taken  up  in  describing  his  bedstead.     So  God  all  up 
and  down  the  Bible  honours  sleep.     Adam,  with  his  head  on  a  pHlow  of  Edenic 
roses,  has  his  slumber  blest  by  a  Divine  gift  of  beautiful  companionship.      Jacol^ 
with  his  head  on  a  pillo^v  of  rock,  has  his  sleep  glorified  with  a  ladder  filled  with 
descending  and  ascending  diigels.     Christ,  with  a  pillow  made  out  of  the  folded-up 
coat  of  a  fisherman,  honoms  slumber  in  the  back  part  of  the  storm-tossed  boat. 
One  of  our  national  sins  is  robbbry  of  sleep.     Walter  Scott  was  so  urgent  about 
this  duty  of  slumber  that,  when  aniving  afc  a  hotel  where  there  was  no  room  to 
sleep  in,  except  that  in  whioli  there  was  a  corpse,  inquired  if  the  deceased  had  died 
of  a  contagious  discitoe,  and,  when  assured  he  had  not,  took  the  other  bed  in  the 
room  and  fell  into  profoundest  slumber.     Those  of  small  endurance  must  certainly 
require  rest  if  even  the  giant  needs  au  iron  bedstead.     Notice  furthermore,  that 
God's  people  on  the  way  to  Canaan  need  not  be  surprised  if  they  confront  some  sor* 


24  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  ut 

of  a  giant.  Had  not  the  Israelitish  host  had  trouble  enough  already  ?  No  !  Red 
Sea  not  enough.  Water  famine  not  enough.  Long  marches  not  enough.  Opposi- 
tii.n  by  enemies  of  ordinary  stature  not  enough.  They  must  meet  Og,  the  giant  of 
the  iron  bedstead.  Do  you  know  the  name  of  the  biggest  giant  that  you  can 
possibly  meet — and  you  will  meet  him  ?  He  is  not  eleven  feet  high,  but  one 
hundred  feet  high.  His  bedstead  is  as  long  as  a  contiuent.  His  name  is  Doubt. 
His  common  food  is  infidel  books  and  sceptical  lectures,  and  ministers  who  do  not 
know  whether  the  Bible  is  inspired  at  all  or  inspired  in  spots,  and  Christians  who 
are  more  infidel  than  Christian.  You  will  never  reach  the  promised  land  unless 
you  slay  that  giant.  Kill  doubt,  or  doubt  will  kill  you.  Another  impression  from 
my  subject.  The  march  of  the  Church  cannot  be  impeded  by  gigantic  opposition. 
That  Israelitish  host  led  on  by  Moses  was  the  Church,  and  when  Og,  the  giant,  he 
of  the  iron  bedstead,  came  out  against  him  with  another  host — things  must  have 
looked  bad  for  Israel.  Moses  of  ordinary  size  against  Og  of  extraordinary  dimen- 
sions. Besides  that,  Og  was  backed  up  by  sixty  fortified  cities.  Moses  was  backed 
up  seemingly  by  nothing  but  the  desert  that  had  worn  him  and  his  army  into  a 
group  of  undisciplined  and  exhausted  stragglers.  But  the  Israelites  triumphed. 
The  day  is  coming.  Hear  it,  all  ye  who  are  doing  something  for  the  conquest  of 
the  world  for  God  and  the  truth,  the  time  will  come  when,  as  there  was  nothing 
left  of  Og,  the  giant,  but  the  iron  bedstead,  kept  at  Eabbath  as  a  curiosity,  there 
will  be  nothing  left  of  the  giants  of  iniquity  except  something  for  the  relic  hunters 
to  examine.  {T.  Be  Witt  Talmage.)  The  last  of  the  giants : — We,  in  our  war- 
fare, have  many  giants  to  contend  against.  As  we  go  through  our  wanderings 
there  are  many  places  waste  and  wild  as  the  tangled  brakes  and  rugged  rocks  of 
Argob,  in  the  land  of  Bashan.  We  have  our  wildernesses  of  temptation  to  pass  over. 
In  those  wildernesses  are  many  giants  bigger  than  Og,  more  terrible  than  Anak, 
vaunting  with  greater  insolence  than  Goliath  of  Gath.  Perhaps  you  have  conquered 
many  of  them.  Is  it  so  ?  Do  they  lie  smitten  and  vanquished  at  your  feet  ? 
Envious  man,  have  yon  bound  envy  hand  and  foot  and  put  him  without  your  house 
and  home  ?  He  is  not  dead,  only  chained.  Beware  lest  in  some  unguarded  moment 
he  should  be  freed,  and  lead  you  captive  with  the  accumulated  power  of  long  repose 
and  the  increased  caution  brought  about  by  his  former  defeat.  Is  the  evil  spirit  of 
anger  vanquished  which  was  formerly  of  such  gigantic  proportions !  Or  does  it 
still  rise  at  will  from  its  bedstead  to  which,  in  prosperous  sunshine,  when  nothing 
crosses  us  or  thwarts  us,  it  voluntarily  retires  ?  Is  it  bound  there,  or  does  it  merely 
lie  there  in  hiding,  with  no  cords  of  religion  to  compel  its  slumbering  inactivity  ? 
There  are  also  Bunyan's  giants,  some  dead,  some  living — giants  Pope  and  Pagan 
sadly  disabled,  giants  Maul  and  Slaygood  also  disabled — giant  Despair,  still  living 
in  his  dark  dungeon  with  Mrs.  Doubting  his  terrible  wife.  Giant  Despair  tells  men 
and  women  to  kill  themselves,  tells  them  God  will  never  forgive  them,  shuts  them 
up  in  his  grim  castle,  and  how  can  they  escape  ?  Those  pilgrims  found  a  key  called 
**  Hope."  With  Hope  in  the  breast  adversity  may  be  borne.  The  giant  of  Lust  is 
a  mighty  giant  also.  And  of  all  other  giants  the  most  dangerous  to  some  natures. 
Many  a  sinner  and  some  saints  have  found  this  the  Og  which  has  been  last  van- 
quished. God  says,  "Fear  not."  Will  you  fear  when  your  Maker  tells  you  not  to 
fear  ?  Shall  we  not  rather  go  and  do  our  best  against  the  sin  that  still  struggles 
in  our  souls  and  would  fain  bring  us  to  destruction  t    {S.  B.  James,  M.A.) 

Vers.  23-26.  Thou  hast  be^on  to  show. — Revelation  always  new : — **Thou  hast 
begun."  That  is  all  He  can  do.  Always  beginning,  never  ending — that  is  the 
mystery  and  that  is  the  glory  of  the  Divine  revelation.  When  we  come  to  see  that 
all  things  are  but  in  the  bud,  and  can  never  get  out  of  it,  we  shall  begin  to  see  the 
greatness  of  God.  How  pitiable  is  the  condition  of  the  man  who  has  worn  out 
anything  that  has  in  it  real  life,  poetry,  meaning,  and  application  to  the  affairs  and 
destinies  of  life  !  We  must  not  take  our  life-line  from  such  vagrants.  We  must  be 
made  to  see  and  feel  that  everything  has  eternity  in  it.  We  shall  be  real  students 
and  worshippers  when  we  say  about  the  moors  so  desolate,  and  the  sea  so  melan- 
choly, and  the  forest  even  in  December,  "  Lo  f  God  is  here,  and  I  knew  it  not ;  this 
is  none  other  than  the  house  of  God,  and  this  is  the  gate  of  heaven."  We  should 
be  wiser  if  we  were  not  so  clever.  If  we  could  consider  that  all  things  are  yet  in 
plasm  and  beginning  and  outline  and  suggestion,  we  should  remit  to  a  longer  day 
the  discussion  and  the  settlement  of  questions  which  now  constitute  the  riystery 
and  torment  of  our  intellectual  life.  A  beautiful  period  of  life  is  that  in  which  a 
man  begins  to  see  the  shaping  of  a  Divine  porpoee  in  Mb  own  ezistMioe.    Some 


CHAP.  111.]  DEUTERONOMY.  25 

ran  remember  the  time  when  the  meaning  of  words  first  came  really  to  the  mind. 
What  a  light  it  was,  how  content  was  the  brain  ;  the  whole  mind  rose  up  and  said, 
"This  is  something  really  gained,  and  can  never  be  lost."  A  similar  sensation 
comes  to  men  who  live  wisely.  In  their  childhood  they  did  not  know  what  God 
meant  them  to  be,  so  they  proposed  many  things  to  their  own  imagination  ;  then 
early  life  came,  and  things  began  to  settle  into  some  kind  of  hazy  outline  ;  then 
manhood  came,  with  all  its  ex|>eriences  and  with  all  its  conflicts,  and  at  last  there 
was,  as  it  were,  a  man's  hand  building  the  life,  putting  it  into  square  and  shape 
and  proportion,  and  flushing  it  with  colour.  Then  we  began  to  see  what  God 
meant  to  be  the  issue  of  our  life.  He  made  us  great,  small,  strong,  weak,  rich, 
j)Oor  ;  but  if  we  have  lain  in  His  hands  quietly,  gently,  obediently,  and  lovingly, 
we  see  that  poverty  is  wealth  and  weakness  is  strength.  A  holy  thought  of  this 
kind  has  sanctified  the  whole  purview  and  issue  of  life,  so  that  men  can  now  say, 
"That  is  the  Lord's  doing,  and  it  is  marvellous  in  our  eyes."  When  the  Lord 
undertakes  the  outbuilding  and  shaping  of  a  life,  none  can  hinder  it.  "0  Lord 
God,  Thou  hast  b^n  to  show  Thy  servant  Thy  greatness."  Throughout  the 
Bible  God  is  never  represented  as  a  dwindling  quantity.  God,  in  other  words,  do^ 
not  grow  less  and  less,  but  more  and  more.  When  our  imagination  is  exhausted 
God's  light  has  already  begun  to  shine.  Age  after  age  has  come  and  has  written 
upon  its  record  these  words,  "  He  is  able  to  do  exceeding  abundantly  above  all  that 
we  ask  or  think."  God  has  always  reserved  to  Himself  the  use  of  the  instrument 
of  education  which  we  call  surprise.  We  have  never  anticipated  God.  When  we 
have  gone  out  early  in  the  day  it  has  been  by  the  assistance  of  His  light.  If  He 
had  not  kindled  the  lamp  we  could  not  have  taken  a  step  upon  our  journey.  God 
surprises  us  with  goodness.  We  think  we  have  partaken  of  the  very  best  He  can  give 
US,  and,  lo  !  when  we  have  drunk  again  of  the  goblet  of  Divine  love  we  say,  "Thou 
hast  kept  the  good  wine  until  now."  It  is  in  that  spirit  of  hopefulness,  in  that 
everlasting  genesis,  we  must  live  ;  then  we  shall  be  young  for  ever.  {J.  Parker^ 
D.D.)  I  pray  Thee,  let  me  go  over  and  see  the  good  land  that  is  heyond 
Jordan.  .  .  .  But  tlie  Lord  .  .  .  would  not  hear  ■m^.— Man's  sin  and  God's  toill: — 
When  we  read  the  history  of  a  nation  as  we  do  in  the  Old  Testament,  we  cannot  but 
be  struck  by  the  extent  to  which  a  nation  depends  upon  its  representative  men.  Its 
ambitions,  virtues,  and  hopes  may  be  what  you  please,  but  they  must  find  visible 
embodiment  and  capable  instruction  in  some  great  and  commanding  personality. 
One  lesson  of  the  opening  chapter  of  Deuteronomy  is  that  nations,  as  a  rule,  are  not 
very  sympathetic  with  those  on  whom  the  burden  of  their  aflfairs  is  laid.  They 
heap  responsibilities  upon  their  leaders,  and  leave  them  to  carry  weights  beyond 
human  strength.  They  hardly  think  of  their  limitations  as  men  like  themselves, 
who,  besides  the  public  duties  which  they  discharge,  have  a  spiritual  life  of  their 
own  to  care  for,  a  conscience  of  their  own  to  keep  right  with  God,  a  spiritual  ladder  to 
climb,  individual  convictions,  and  a  soul  to  save.  They  do  not  consider  that  God 
is  looking  on  at  the  trial  of  a  strong  but  weary  spirit,  while  men  may  be  doing  their 
best  to  make  the  trial  to  turn  out  to  his  hurt.  This  passage  shows  us  this  great 
man  in  the  last  year  of  his  life.  The  dying  of  Moses  had  been  extended  beyond  the 
common  measure  of  humanity,  and  his  experience  had  been  as  various  as  his  life  had 
been  prolonged.  He  had  seen  the  courts  of  Pharaoh  ;  he  had  dwelt  in  the  tents  of 
Midian  for  forty  years,  and  for  forty  years  more  he  had  never  escaped  from  the 
pressure  of  the  tens  of  thousands  of  Israel.     He  knew  the  worry  of  his  public 

gjsition,  and  he  knew  also  the  awful  message  of  God.  The  greatest  figure  in  the 
Id  Testament,  as  far  as  we  can  judge  greatness,  his  heart  was  most  deeply  pledged 
to  his  people,  and  the  promise  God  made  to  them.  The  day  was  long  passed  when 
he  had  identified  himself  with  Israel  for  weal  or  woe.  At  the  close  of  his  long  life 
— with  the  wonderful  experience  of  what  God  had  done  lying  behind  him— what 
was  the  thought  that  rises  to  Moses'  lips  ?  It  is  that  all  this  has  only  been  enough 
to  awaken  hope—"  0  Lord  God,  Thou  hast  begun  to  show  Thy  servant  Thy  great- 
ness and  Thy  mighty  hand."  The  mysterious  name  of  God,  which  our  Bible 
translates,  *•  I  am,"  has  been  rendered  by  some  scholars,  "  I  will  be ;  I  will  do 
what  I  will  do.  It  is  My  very  nature  to  be  a  God  of  unimaginable  promise,  doing 
for  thase  who  look  to  Me  far  more  than  they  can  ask  or  think."  I  believe  that 
rendering  is  as  legitimate  as  the  more  metaphorical  one.  At  any  rate,  this  is  the 
conception  of  the  Divine  nature  which  experience  has  enforced  upon  Moses.  At 
the  end  of  his  long  life  he  can  only  feel  that  God  has  begun  to  show  His  greatness. 
If  he  is  sure  of  anything,  it  is  that  God  can  do  more  and  will  do  more  than  He  has 
done  yet.    His  very  name  is  a  name  of  promise.    Now,  that  is  a  worthy  spirit  withj 


26  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  III. 

which  to  come  to  the  close  of  one's  life.  Death  is  a  decisive  end  for  us — the  close  of 
all  our  work  on  this  scene.  But  if  we  have  been  in  the  company  of  God  and 
learned  to  know  Him,  we  will  not  measure  His  work  by  anything  we  have  seen. 
Though  our  strength  is  spent,  He  has  no  more  than  indicated  His  purpose  and 
excited  His  people's  interest  and  hopes.  When  St.  Paul  was  ready  to  die  he  wrote 
to  Timothy,  "  I  have  finished  my  course."  But  if  he  had  been  able  to  see  what 
we  see  now,  would  he  not  have  exclaimed,  as  Moses  did,  **  0  Lord,  Thou  hast 
begun  "  ?  There  is  a  famous  passage  in  Latin  poetry  in  which  the  founder  of  the 
Roman  race  is  taken  to  the  end  of  the  world  and  shown  the  fortunes  of  posterity. 
The  grand  figures  of  later  history  pass  in  magnificent  procession  before  his  eyes. 
But  what  Moses  felt  was  far  better  than  any  such  vision.  He  had  faith  that  the 
work  which  had  been  so  much  to  him  was  in  God's  hands,  and  that  though  his  part 
in  it  was  all  but  over,  God's  was  only  beginning.  It  is  easier  to  apply  this  considera- 
tion to  New  Testament  times.  When  the  last  of  the  Apostles  died,  what  had  God 
done  in  the  world  ?  He  had  kindled  His  little  sparks  of  light  here  and  there  in  the 
darkness  of  heathendom.  But  the  whole  framework,  the  whole  spirit  of  society 
were  pagan.  A  society  like  that  in  which  we  live,  in  which  there  is  an  instinctive 
recognition  of  Christ  as  final  moral  authority,  in  which  children  are  baptized  in  His 
name — such  a  society  was  beyond  the  Apostles'  vision,  and  perhaps  beyond  their 
conception.  The  Lord  had  more  to  do  for  the  world  than  they  had  seen.  It  is  the 
same  now.  Generation  after  generation  passes,  men  grow  old  and  grey  and  die  in 
the  work  of  the  Lord,  yet  that  work  is  ever  beginning.  We  see  the  authority 
of  Christ  extending  even  in  Christendom.  We  see  the  application  of  His  will 
becoming  more  constant  and  thorough.  They  grow  old,  not  to  be  pessimists,  not  to 
lose  hope  in  the  world  because  their  own  eyes  are  dim  or  their  natural  force  abated, 
but  with  their  hearts  young  within  them  ;  eager  and  interested  in  what  God  is 
doing  ;  sure  that  the  best  is  yet  to  be.  Moses,  with  this  noble  faith  in  God's  purpose, 
offered  passionate  prayer  to  God — "  I  pray  Thee  let  me  go  over  and  see  the  good 
land."  We  can  hardly  imagine  the  interest  of  Moses  in  Canaan.  It  was  the  land 
of  the  fathers — Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob.  It  was  the  land  God  had  chosen  as  the 
inheritance  of  Israel.  It  was  the  goal  of  forty  years'  wanderings.  It  was  at  length, 
for  the  second  time,  and  after  a  faithless  generation  had  perished  in  the  wilderness, 
within  their  sight.  It  was  not  God's  wiU  that  Moses  should  live  to  see  the  conquest 
of  Canaan.  There  are  people  so  deeply  interested  in  the  evolution  of  things — as  to 
^hat  practical  applications  electricity  will  be  put,  what  Socialism  will  do  in  the  way 
of  reconstructing  society,  what  will  be  the  position  of  Christianity  and  the  Church, 
what  will  become  of  the  Chinese  and  Turkish  empires — that  they  can  pray  to  be 
kept  alive  to  see  the  end.  And  if  they  are  not  they  may  leave  the  world  with  a 
keen  sense  of  disappointment.  What  was  the  sin  of  Moses  ?  At  first  sight  it 
seems  very  strange.  Moses  has  this  testimony  given  him  in  the  Bible — that  he 
was  meek  above  all  men.  Yet  he  was  not  always  meek.  He  was  hot  and  hasty  in 
his  youth  when  he  slew  an  Egyptian,  and  the  sin  of  his  youth  flared  up  one  fatal 
moment  as  he  struck  the  rock.  At  last  his  sin  found  him  out,  and  excluded  him 
from  the  Holy  Land.  I  can  imagine  some  one  feeling  that  in  this  matter  Moses 
was  hardly  dealt  with,  and  that  the  inexorableness  of  God  is  painful  to  con- 
template. No  doubt  it  is  meant  to  impress  us  that  way.  Believe  it  in  time,  all 
young  men  and  women.  There  are  good  things,  the  best  things,  the  only  things 
you  will  one  day  care  for,  that  sin  makes  impossible  ;  a  single  bad  action  can  forfeit 
hopes  that  you  will  never  be  able  to  redeem.  It  pan  draw  an  invisible  line  round 
about  you — a  line  invisible  to  every  one  except  God  and  you — that  you  cannot  cross. 
Moses  is  presented  here  to  us  learning  one  of  the  hardest  of  all  lessons— the  accept- 
ance of  God's  will  as  it  is  determined  by  our  own  sins.  Often  our  repentance  is  no 
better  than  a  desire  to  escape  the  penalty  of  our  faults.  But  our  hope  lies  in 
accepting,  not  in  rebelling  and  struggling  against,  the  consequences  which  God  has 
attached  to  our  sins.  To  learn  humility,  to  learn  that  God  knows  the  discipline 
which  is  best  for  us,  to  learn  to  walk  softly  and  accept  as  His  will  restrictions  and 
losses  which  our  sins  have  brought  with  them — that  is  the  secret  for  restoring  the  soul. 
Rebellion  does  no  good.  Unbelieving  despondency  does  no  good.  What  is  requirwi 
is  that  the  punishment  of  our  sin  be  recognised  as  what  it  is,  and  taken  as  God's 
will  for  our  good.  It  is  never  pleasant,  how  could  it  be  ?  The  most  awful  thing  in 
the  world,  it  has  been  said,  is  the  unpardoned  sin,  and  the  next  is  sin  which  nas 
been  pardoned.  To  accept  the  punishment  of  our  iniquity  is  to  have  experience  of 
both  of  these,  and  we  need  it  to  make  us  hate  sin  as  we  should.  For  remember, 
though  Moses'  prayer  was  not  granted,  we  are  not  to  suppose  that  his  sin  was  not 


CHAP.  III.]  DEUTERONOMY.  27 

forgiven.  It  is  striking  tliat  in  the  New  Testament  Moses  appeared  in  glory  and 
talked  with  Jesns  of  the  death  He  should  accomplish  in  Jerusalem.  Thus  all  the 
limits  which  sin  had  imposed  upon  his  life  had  vanished  ;  thus  he  saw  how  far  the 
grand  work  of  God  had  progressed.  Thus  his  mind  still  looked  forward  to  the  great 
event  in  which  that  great  work  should  be  consummated  in  the  death  of  Jesus  on 
the  Cross.  Moses  talked  of  that,  for  that  was  his  hope  as  it  is  ours.  It  is  not  true 
that  the  consequences  of  sin  are  immutable.  If  that  were  so  there  would  be  no 
Gospel.  By  God's  will  they  abide  for  a  time,  but  there  is  a  world  in  which  curse 
shall  be  no  more.  It  is  not  true  that  the  limitations  of  sin  and  its  deformities  are 
seen  even  in  heaven.  But  God's  answer  to  Moses'  prayer  did  not  end  with  His 
refusal.  "  Charge  Joshua,  and  encourage  him,  and  strengthen  him,  for  he  shall  go 
over  before  this  people,  and  he  shall  cause  them  to  inherit  the  land  which  thou  shalt 
see."  The  natural  effect  of  despair  is  that  we  lose  heart.  We  lose  interest  in  our 
work  when  the  accomplishment  of  it  is  a  thing  in  which  we  have  no  interest.  We 
are  not  going  to  be  there,  why  spend  ourselves  as  though  we  were  ?  To  speak  like 
that  is  to  forget  that  the  work  is  not  ours.  It  is  God  s.  Our  interest  is  not  to  be 
limited  as  if  it  were  a  private  concern  of  our  own.  It  is  a  mark  of  true  goodness 
when  a  man  can  admire  and  encourage  his  successor,  and  keep  up  his  interest  and 
hope  in  the  common  cause,  though  active  participation  in  its  affairs  has  become 
impossible  for  him.  We  sometimes  see  men  who  have  been  great  leaders  retire 
with  a  bad  grace.  They  looked  askance  at  those  carrying  on  their  work.  They  are 
more  ready  to  be  critical  and  sulky  than  to  cry,  *'  Well  done."  They  are  under  no 
obligation  to  encourage  their  successors  !  Over  against  this  set  these  words  of  God 
to  Moses,  "  Charge  Joshua."  Possibly  there  are  some  whose  own  sins  have  inflicted 
losses  which  are  very  hard  to  bear.  We  might  have  entered  the  land  of  promise. 
We  might  have  been  men  and  women  infinitely  different  from  what  we  are- 
brighter,  happier,  richer  in  our  souls.  Well,  what  does  God  say  after  our  dis- 
appointments ?  He  says  what  He  said  to  Moses  :  Do  not  be  selfish,  do  not  sulk  j 
do  not  let  your  disappointments,  bitter  as  they  are,  cast  a  shadow  over  your  family 
or  over  the  church.  Digest  it  in  solitude.  But  beyond  everything,  get  above 
Pisgah  and  see  the  goodly  mountain  of  Lebanon,  and  then,  with  the  glory  of  that 
prospect  on  your  face,  turn  to  those  whose  hearts  are  cold  within  them,  whose 
spirits  are  broken,  and  cherish  and  encourage  and  strengthen  them.  Tell  them 
what  God  has  prepared  for  those  who  love  Him,  and  rejoice  with  them  that  they 
will  inherit  the  land  which  you  have  only  seen  from  afar.  (/.  Denney,  D.D.) 
Moses  UTianswered : — 1.  Our  first  consideration  is  that  the  case  before  us  does  not 
disprove  God's  willingness  to  hear  and  answer  prayer.  2.  Our  second  consideration 
is  that  God  does  not  always  answer  in  just  our  way.  The  two  things  which  Moses 
wanted  were  these— (1)  To  enter  the  Promised  Land.  He  did  not,  indeed,  cross  the 
Jordan  into  the  earthly  Caanan  ;  but,  closing  his  eyes,  he  opened  them  on  a  vision 
of  heavenly  beauty  such  as  he  had  never  dreamed  of.  (2)  He  wanted  to  see  **  the 
work  of  his  hands  established  upon  him  "  (Psa.  xc.  16,  17).  This  also  was  given  in 
manifold  measure.  The  influence  of  Moses  was,  under  God,  the  controlling  factor  in 
the  theocracy.  His  name  has  always  been  revered  among  the  Jews.  3.  Our  third 
consideration  is  that  no  prayer  is  true  prayer  unless  it  is  offered  in  the  filial  spirit. 
Some  supplications  are  nnfilial  in  their  presumptuous  boldness.  Other  supplications 
are  unfilial  in  their  servility.  {Eomiletic  Review.)  The  prayer  which  God 
denied  : — 1.  Observe  that  Moses  here  calls  his  own  sin  to  remembrance. 
The  plank  which  broke  beneath  one's  weight  is  not  apt  to  be  kept  as  a  sacred  relic 
or  treasured  with  fond  affection.  The  place  associated  with  some  sin  whose  memory 
makes  us  blush,  or  some  blunder  so  foolish  as  to  be  worthy  only  of  an  idiot,  is  not 
a  place  which  we  delight  to  revisit.  Therefore  it  is  the  more  remarkable  that  when 
Moses,  in  life's  latest  hour,  reviews  God's  mercy  to  His  people,  he^  should  not  pass 
over  the  one  great  blunder  and  sin  of  his  own  career.  But  with  the  finger  of 
transparent  honesty  he  touches  the  sorest  spot  in  his  memory.  II.  Obseevb  why 
God  denied  Moses'  appeal.  1.  We  must  not  forget  that  what  Moses  sought  from 
God  was  a  temporal,  not  a  spiritual  blessing.  2.  Perhaps,  too,  God  ma^  have 
refused  the  appeal  of  Moses  because  it  humbled  him  and  made  him  feel  his  com- 
plete dependence  on  God's  grace  to  save  him.  3.  It  may  be,  too,  that  the  Divine 
refusal  was  only  a  part  of  the  process  by  which  God  was  fitting  Moses  for  a 
better  inheritance  than  Canaan.  When  the  denial  of  his  prayer  was  first  made 
there  were  yet  two  years  before  him  ere  his  earthly  pilgrimage  should  end. 
Into  those  two  years  God  was  crowding  the  final  work  of  preparation  of  His  servant. 
Said  Beethoven  once  of  some  famous  musical  composer,   "He  would  have  been 


28  THE  BIBLIGAL ILLUSTBATOB.  [chap.  hi. 

a  great  mnsician  if  he  had  only  been  terribly  and  mercilessly  criticised."  {,Bp. 
Chmey.)  The  petition  of  Moses  to  fforf :— Here  Moses  teacheth  us  how  to  pray. 
He  beginneth  first  and  telleth  Grod  that  He  hath  begun  to  show  him  favour  ;  and 
well  might  Moses  so  say,  for  he  was  no  sooner  born  but  the  Lord  began  to  show  him 
His  greatness,  in  saving  him  when  he  was  cast  into  the  river,  &c.  If  all  that  the 
Lora  hath  done  for  him  till  this  time  be  considered  he  had  great  cause  to  say,  "O 
Lord,  Thou  hast  began  to  show  Thy  servant  Thy  greatness."  Herein  Moses  in  some 
part  showeth  himself  thankful  for  that  he  had  received,  trusting  thereby  to 
entreat  God  to  continue  His  benefits  and  loving-kindness  towards  him,  which  is  a 
thing  which  pleaseth  God.  He  is  not  like  one  who  sitteth  in  his  door  and  seeth  one 
day  by  day  come  by  him  and  salute  him,  and  yet  taketh  no  acquaintance,  so  that  if 
he  stand  m  need  of  him,  either  he  knoweth  not  where  he  dwelleth  ;  or  else,  because 
he  is  not  acquainted  with  him,  he  is  abashed  to  ask  anything  of  him.  Moses  is  not 
such  a  one,  but  he  is  acquainted  with  the  Lord,  who  so  often  passed  by  him  ;  and 
therefore  he  now  saith,  "  Thou  hast  begun,"  &c.  Next,  Moses  challengeth  all  the 
idol  gods,  and  telleth  them,  that  amongst  them  all  there  is  not  one  of  them  that 
can  do  like  his  God.  So  God,  when  He  is  opposed  and  set  against  His  enemies,  is 
then  most  glorious,  and  confoundeth  them  all  (Psa.  Ixxxix.  6).  Now,  Moses  pro- 
oeedeth  in  his  prayer,  saying,  "I  pray  Thee,  let  me  go  over,"  &c.  Here  Moses 
prayeth  like  one  of  us,  who  are  always  craving,  but  never  hath  respect  to  the  will 
of  God,  to  say,  "Thy  will  be  done."  What  is  this  mountain  Lebanon  ?  Surely 
Moses  meaneth  the  place  where  the  temple  should  be  built,  and  God  honoured  ; 
for  after  that  Joshua  had  quietly  possessed  the  land  of  Canaan,  he  only  builded  a 
tabernacle  (Josh,  xviii,  1)  wherein  to  call  upon  the  Lord.  Now  it  foUoweth  in  the 
text,  "But  the  Lord  was  angry  with  me,"  &c.  So  soon  as  Moses  changed  his 
prayer  God  turneth  from  him,  and  will  not  hear  him  ;  so  soon  we  make  God  to 
forsake  us,  if  we  do  not  according  to  His  will.  Moses  showeth  the  cause  why  God 
would  not  hear  hiqi ;  although  he  were  a  great  man,  and  in  high  authority,  yet  he 
is  not  ashamed  to  confess  his  fault.  So  we  see  that  where  sin  is,  there  prayer  is  not 
eflFectual ;  so  that  if  we  will  hope  to  receive  by  prayer  anything  at  God's  hands,  we 
must  first  remove  and  take  away  the  cause  of  our  hindrance,  which  is  sin,  before  we 
can  receive  the  thing  we  pray  for.  God,  when  Moses  had  prayed,  did  not  grant  his 
request,  but  was  angry  with  him  ;  but  lest  Moses  should  be  quite  discouraged.  He 
straightways  mitigated  His  anger,  and  biddeth  him  be  content  and  speak  no  more 
unto  Him  of  that  matter.  God  doth  not  bid  him  that  he  should  not  pray  any  more 
unto  Him,  but  that  he  should  pray  no  more  for  that  thing.  First,  God  biddeth 
him  to  be  content ;  as  if  He  should  have  said.  Although  thou  mayesb  not  enter 
into  the  land,  yet  I  will  content  thee  otherways.  Thus  God  would  have  us,  in  what 
estate  soever  we  be,  to  be  content  with  our  calling,  for  it  is  His  appointment.  God 
is  so  merciful  that,  though  we  are  not  able  to  pray  aright,  yet  He  considereth  our 
prayers,  and  turneth  all  to  the  best  for  our  good  ;  not  granting  our  request  many 
times,  but  a  better  thing  than  we  do  desire  of  Him.  Who,  then,  will  oflFend  so 
merciful  and  loving  a  Father  ?  Let  us,  seeing  God  is  so  merciful  unto  us,  take  heed  that 
we  abuse  not  His  mercies,  lest  in  so  doing  we  provoke  Him  unto  judgment.  Now, 
God  hath  told  Moses  that  he  shall  not  go  into  the  land.  He  beginneth  to  teach  him 
how  he  shall  do  to  see  it,  and  biddeth  him  go  up  into  the  top  of  Pisgah,  and  cast 
his  eyes  eastward,  and  westward,  and  northward,  and  southward,  and  behold  it,  &c. 
As  a  bird  stayed  with  a  little  string,  or  a  strong  man  in  swimming  held  back  by  a 
small  twig,  so  a  little  sin  stayeth  this  great  captain,  that  he  cannot  come  within  the 
land  of  Canaan.  First,  God  is  angry  with  him,  and  envies  him  altogether,  as 
though  he  were  not  worth  so  much  as  go  up  to  the  mount.  Thus  we  may  see  how 
one  of  the  least  sins  is  able  to  turn  from  us  all  the  goodness  and  all  the  favour 
which  God  beareth  to  us.  After,  God  commands  Moses  to  go  up  to  the  mouut. 
Here,  Moses  obeyeth  God's  commandment  ;  but  if  he  had  been  like  many  a  mur- 
muring man  he  would  have  denied  to  go  up  to  the  mount,  saying,  What  banquet  is 
this  to  me,  but  a  dainty  dish  set  before  one  forbidden  to  eat  ?  But  Moses  had 
rather  die  than  anger  the  Lord  again  when  He  had  bid  him  be  content.  This  we 
may  learn  of  Moses,  to  be  content  with  our  calling,  whether  we  have  little  or  much  ; 
for  God  contented  Moses  as  well  with  the  sight  of  Canaan  as  those  who  possessed  it. 
So  when  God  hath  not  ordained  us  to  see  gi-eat  sul)stance,  as  He  hath  some  of  our 
brethren,  yet  because  we  should  not  be  discontent  He  will  give  us  as  much  pleasure 
at  the  sight  of  them  in  others  as  though  we  ourselves  enjoyed  them.  Many  things 
might  Moses  have  objected  which  might  have  hindered  him  from  going  up  the 
mount;  for  surely  it  must  needs  be  a  grief  to  him,  when  he  considered  that  great 


CHAP.  III.]  DEUTERONOMY. 


pain  whicb  he  had  taken  in  bringing  them  through  the  wilderness,  and  conducting 
them  forty  years  together ;  and  now,  when  he  had  no  farther  to  go,  but  eren  over 
Jordan,  to  be  taken  away  then  ;  and  another,  which  never  took  any  pains,  possess 
all  his  labours :  this,  I  say,  must  be  a  great  and  intolerable  thing  to  flesh  and 
blood  ;  for  when  one  hath  laid  a  foundation  and  another  comes  and  builds  upon  it, 
surely  he  will  think  himself  hardly  dealt  withal.  Such  is  our  nature  j  and  yet,  not- 
withstanding all  this,  Mosea  is  content.  He  knoweth  that  God  doth  him  no 
wrong,  but  is  just  and  merciful  also.  He  blesseth  all  alike,  as  Jacob's  children 
were  blessed  (Gen.  xlix.).  Moses,  so  long  as  he  was  upon  the  plain  ground,  could 
not  see  the  type  of  heaven  ;  but  when  he  was  upon  the  mount  ne  saw  it  before  he 
came  to  heaven  itself.  So  let  us  even  now  scale  the  mount  as  Moses  did,  that  we 
may  see  and  consider  those  joys  ;  which  thing  shall  serve  to  reclaim  our  hearts  from 
earthly  matters.  As  Peter  went  up  the  mount  to  see  Christ's  glory,  and  Moses 
went  up  the  mount  to  see  the  land  of  promise,  so  let  us  ascend  from  these  earthly 
things  to  the  contemplation  of  heavenly.  Now,  Moses  is  in  his  prospect  as  David 
was  in  his  tower.  Here  he  must  prepare  himself  to  die,  while  he  is  looking  upon 
the  land  which  so  long  he  hath  been  in  coming  to.  Who  would  not  have  grieved  at 
this,  that,  after  so  long  as  forty  years'  travel  in  hope  to  possess  it,  he  should  now 
in  the  end  be  content  with  a  sight  of  it,  and  so  vanish  away  !  Yet  Moses,  for  all 
this  murmureth  not,  but,  like  Job,  taketh  it  patiently.  And  as  he  was  upon  the 
mount  where  God  vanished,  so  here  he  is  upon  the  mount  and  vanisheth  away  him- 
self ;  as  it  appeareth  (chap.  xxiv.  6).  So  good  rulers  are  taken  away  in  a  time  when 
death  is  least  suspected.  As  Lot  was  taken  away  before  the  people  of  Sodom  knew, 
as  is  showed  (Gen.  xix.  10)  ;  so  we  see  that  when  our  time  is  come,  and  our  glass 
run  out,  that  neither  our  riches,  nor  our  wits,  nor  our  friends,  nor  anything  that  we 
have  in  this  world,  can  carry  us  any  further.  No,  no  more  than  Moses  could  go 
over  this  Jordan.  {H.  Smith. )  The  good  land  that  is  beyond  Jordan  .-—It  is 
there,  a  seer  has  seen  it ;  and  God  gave  him  words  to  paint  the  vision  for  us.     A 

food  land  ;  glorious  in  beauty,  yet  homelike ;  familiar  in  every  form  and  feature, 
ut  still  a  transfigured  world.  It  is  the  hope  that  lights  the  way  of  the  wilderness 
— the  hope  that  we  may  one  day  behold  the  glories  of  a  creation  which  has  been 
"delivered  from  the  bondage  of  corruption  into  the  glorious  liberty  of  the  sous 
of  God."  None  believe  that  the  present  is  final.  Men,  dreaming  of  a  delivered 
humanity,  have  dreamed,  too,  of  a  delivered  world.  A  world,  a  home  to  dwell 
in,  not  cursed  as  this  is,  with  all  its  prophetic  beauty — a  world  without  wastes, 
marshes,  lava-floods,  blights,  famines,  plagues— a  world  that  will  fit  a  redeemed,  as 
this  fits  a  fallen,  nature — a  world  whose  paths  shall  be  the  pathways  of  angels, 
whose  sun  shall  be  the  face  of  God.  In  Egypt,  man's  toil  is  the  prominent 
feature ;  man  made  its  fertility :  in  Canaan,  God's  bounty  is  the  prominent 
feature ;  "It  drinketh  water  of  the  rain  of  heaven."  Egypt  is  the  field  in 
which  a  man,  by  the  low  form  of  labour,  might  exist  amply  ;  Canaan  the  home 
in  which  a  man,  by  joyful  concert  with  God,  might  nobly  live.  I.  It  was  a 
LAND,  a  good  land,  the  slope  of  that  goodly  mountain,  even  Lebanon,  which 
Moses  looked  upon  ;  it  was  a  land  of  promise,  which  God  had  prepared.  Canaan 
was  in  a  sense  the  heaven  of  Israel's  hope ;  the  more  heavenlike,  perhaps,  because 
it  was  so  fair  a  feature  of  our  world  ;  because  it  was  a  home  in  which  a  man, 
a  family,  a  nation,  could  nobly  dwell.  A  world  behind  the  veil  is  the  instinctive 
belief  of  every  human  spirit ;  a  world,  with  all  the  attributes  of  a  world  like  this, 
in  which  all  the  promises  of  this  fractured  creation  shall  be  realised,  wherein  no 
hope  shall  be  frustrated,  no  cord  of  association  broken,  which  has  been  consecrated 
by  holy  communion  here.  This  is  man's  vision,  inseparable,  too,  from  his  con- 
dition here.  Imagination  !  we  may  say  ;  blank  dreams,  no  more !  and  pass  it  by. 
Imagination  surely  !  but  who  inspired  the  imagination  ?  Who  but  the  Being  who 
is  the  Maker  of  the  reality,  which  He  has  kept  for  ages  before  the  imagination 
of  the  world  ?  I  accept  imagination  here  as  a  witness  to  reality.  The  wise  here 
are  the  wise  for  ever,  for  to  be  wise  is  not  simply  to  know ;  wisdom  takes  cognis- 
ance of  what  is  common  to  the  two  worlds.  Nothing  which  has  been  truly, 
reverently  learnt  will  need  to  be  unlearnt.  The  faithful  students  of  God's  hand 
in  the  visible  are  learning  to  know  His  mind  through  the  whole  sphere  of  the 
invisible ;  they  are  familiar  here  with  the  things  which  the  angels  desire  to  look 
into ;  and  pass  at  once  from  the  training  school  of  the  Spirit  into  the  inner 
circle,  the  elect  spirits  which  are  next  the  throne.  "A  goodly  land  beyond 
Jordan."  A  real,  substantial,  homelike  world.  II.  The  images  which  are  em- 
ployed by  the  sacred  writers  as   most  expressive  when  they  are  treating  of  heaven 


80  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  hi. 

AKE  ALL  BORROWED   FROM  THE   HIGHER  FORMS   OF  THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF    MAN'S 

SOCIAL  AND  NATIONAL  LIFE.  All  that  Society  on  earth  aims  at  and  misses,  the  grand 
order  of  human  relations,  the  majestic  procession  of  human  activities,  of  which, 
marred  and  crippled  as  they  are  on  earth,  the  wisest  and  noblest  have  not  ceased  to 
dream,  shall  there  be  realised,  with  Christ  the  King  visibly  in  the  centre  of  it,  and 
the  angels  attendant  to  watch  the  actors  and  applaud  the  results.     III.  That  good 

LAND  BEYOND  JORDAN  HAD  SOME  HEAVEN-LIKE  FEATURE  HEREIN  ;   it  waS  tO  be  the 

theatre  of  the  highest  and  holiest  human  association,  under  conditions  most  favour- 
able to  the  most  perfect  development,  and  in  an  atmosphere  of  life  which  God's 
benediction  should  make  an  atmosphere  of  bliss.  This  is  joy,  this  is  glory,  to  dwell 
nobly,  purely,  faithfully  with  men  under  the  smile  of  God.  (/.  B.  Brown,  B.A.) 
Heaven  upon  earth: — We  take  the  words  of  Moses  before  us  as  appropriate  to 
indicate  the  earnest  aspiration  of  the  Christian  heart  after  "the  rest  and  the 
inheritance  of  the  saints."     I.  Now  observe,  this  cry  may  be,  after  all,  merely 

SENTIMENTAL,  AND  IN  SUCH  A  CASE  IT  CANNOT  BE  TOO  STRONGLY  CONDEMNED.      One 

of  the  great  dangers  to  which  we  are  exposed  in  the  religious  life,  in  our  songs  and 
prayers  and  utterances,  is  that  of  cherishing  high,  forced,  fictitious  emotions,  and 
of  going  altogether  beyond  our  real  feelings.  What  we  want  is  holy  feeling,  trans- 
muted into  Christly  living  and  Christly  service.  The  prospect  of  a  bright  life 
beyond  should  have  the  effect  upon  us  of  making  the  present  life  very  happy. 
11.  Again,  this  cry  may  be  the  result  of  maturity  and  ripeness,  and  then 
THE  spirit  prompting  IT  IS  BRIGHT  AND  BEAUTIFUL.  I  see  oue  who  is  a  great 
sufferer.  It  has  pleased  God,  in  the  order  of  His  inscrutable  Providence,  to  lay 
him  aside  from  the  activities  of  life  for  months,  or  even  years.  And  the  sorrow 
has  been  sanctified.  He  has  not  sought  relief  in  cherishing  a  stoical  spirit  or  by 
looking  to  earthly  sources,  but  with  a  full  consciousness  that  suffering  is  wisely 
and  graciously  designed,  he  has  looked  upwards  and  has  found  in  God  almighty- 
strength.  Despite  adverse  influences,  he  has  been  moving  onwards  towards  the 
haven  of  eternal  rest.  And  thus  he  has  become  ripened  and  matured,  thoroughly 
weaned  from  earth  ;  his  heart  has  long  been  in  heaven,  his  treasure  lies  there, 
and  fittingly  he  longs  for  the  hour  of  full  release,  and  cries,  with  a  chastened 
spirit,  wholly  resigned  to  the  Divine  will  and  full  of  expectant  hope,  "I  pray 
Thee,  let  me  go,"  &c.  III.  And  now  let  us  specially  notice  that  there  is  an 
aspiration  after  heaven  which  may  be  fittingly  cherished  at  any  and  every  stage 
of  life :  even  aspiration  after  those  moral  excellences  which  constitute 
THE  perfection  OF  THE  HEAVENLY  LIFE.  1.  Hcaven  is  "  the  good  land,"  for  it  is 
free  from  sin.  Then  be  it  ours  to  desire  heaven's  purity,  and  even  here  to  break 
away  from  the  enthralment  of  evil.  2.  Heaven  is  "  the  good  land,"  for  it  is  the 
realm  where  there  is  realised  in  all  its  perfection  the  vision  of  God.  Then  be  it  our 
desire  to  have  granted  unto  us  here  this  vision  ;  let  us  seek,  through  Divine  help, 
to  become  possessed  of  a  heart  right  loyal  to  the  Divine  will,  in  which  evil 
passions  and  desires  have  been  dethroned,  and  in  which  has  been  set  up  the 
spiritual  kingdom  of  God  ;  that  so,  being  renewed  and  sanctified,  God  may  even 
now  be  apprehended  by  us.  ' '  Blessed  are  the  pure  in  heart,  for  they  shall  see 
God."  3.  Heaven  is  "the  good  land,"  for  it  is  the  realm  of  light.  Endless 
progression  in  knowledge  characterises  its  inhabitants.  Then  be  it  ours  to  cry 
for  "more  light"  here,  and  to  seek  the  influences  of  the  Revealer  of  truth,  that 
under  His  guidance  we  may  "grow  in  grace,  and  in  the  knowledge  of  our  Lord 
and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ,"  4.  Heaven  is  "the  good  land,"  for  it  is  the  land  of 
rest  and  peace — rest  from  sin,  rest  from  temptation,  rest  from  care,  rest  from 
harassing  and  perplexing  doubt ;  calm,  unruffled,  perfect  rest.  Then  let  us  see  if 
we  cannot  get  an  earnest  of  this  even  whilst  we  sojourn  in  this  world,  by  accepting 
the  gracious  invitation  of  Him  who  has  said,  "  Come  unto  Me  all  ye  that  labour," 
&c.  5.  And  heaven  is  "the  good  land,"  for  it  is  the  land  where  prevails  concord 
and  love.  No  note  of  discord  is  heard  there,  no  strife  of  parties  prevails  tliere ; 
unity  and  love  reign,  and  shall  reign  there  eternally.  Be  it  ours  to  aspire  here 
after  this  characteristic  of  the  heavenly  life.  Let  us  avoid  all  narrowness  and 
exclusiveness,  and  cherish  the  spirit  which  finds  expression  in  the  benediction — 
**  Grace  be  with  all  them  that  love  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  in  sincerity."  Whatever 
lack  of  charity  others  may  show  towards  us,  let  there  be  no  lack  of  this  on  our  part 
towards  them.  {S.  D.  Hillman. )  Longings  for  the  land : — 1.  Moses'  desire 
TO  enter.  1.  It  was  strong  and  deep  ;  the  strongest  desire  of  his  soul  in 
regard  to  anything  earthly.  Is  our  longing  for  the  heavenly  Canaan  as  vehement 
as  his  for  the  earthly?    2.    It  was  a   holy  desire.      There  was  nothing  carnal 


CHAP.  III.]  DEUTERONOMY.  31 

in  it ;  nothing  of  self.  It  was  tlie  desire  of  a  holy  man  for  a  share  in  the 
fulfilment  of  the  Divine  promise.  3.  It  was  a  patriotic  desire.  Canaan  was 
his  true  fatherland,  though  he  had  never  dwelt  in  it.  4.  It  was  a  natural 
desire.  Though  brought  up  in  ease,  for  now  eighty  years  he  had  been  a 
dweller  in  tents  in  the  wilderness,  a  man  without  a  home.  How  natural  that 
he  should  be  weary  of  the  desert,  and  long  for  a  resting  place  !  5.  It  was  a 
desire  connected  with  the  welfare  of  his  nation.  Israel  was  to  be  blest  in  that  land 
of  blessing,  and  he  desired  to  see  his  nation  settled  in  the  Lord's  land.  6.  It 
was  a  desire  connected  with  the  glory  of  God.  He  knew  that  God  was  about  to 
choose  a  place  wherein  to  set  His  name,  and  to  show  His  glory.  He  had  once 
before  pleaded,  "Show  me  Thy  glory  ";  and  what  could  be  more  desirable  in  his 
eyes  than  that  he  should  see  the  manifestation  of  this  glory,  and  witness  the 
mighty  power  of  God  in  the  land  which  he  knew  was  to  be  the  centre  and  stage  of 
all  these?  11.  His  akgtjments  (ver.  24).  The  first  part  of  his  argument  is, 
"  Thou  hast  showed  me  the  beginning,  wilt  not  Thou  show  me  the  end  ? "  It  is 
natural,  even  in  man's  works,  when  we  have  seen  the  beginning,  to  desire  to  see 
the  end,  and  to  expect  that  he  who  has  shown  us  the  one  will  show  us  the  other. 
Moses  feels  as  if  he  would  be  tantalised,  almost  mocked,  by  not  seeing  the  end.  He 
argues  that  God's  willingness  to  show  him  the  beginning  is  a  pledge  of  His 
■willingness  to  show  him  all.  We  may  all  use  this  argument.  Thou,  who  hast 
for^ven  me  past  sin,  wilt  Thou  not  forgive  all  present  and  all  future  sin  ? 
(Phil.  i.  6. )  The  second  part  of  his  argument  is,  that  to  stop  here  would  leave  so 
much  undiscovered  of  His  greatness  and  mighty  hand,  that,  for  the  sake  of  the 
glory  to  be  unfolded  and  the  power  to  be  revealed,  he  might  expect  to  be  allowed 
to  enter.  So  great  is  the  undiscovered  glory  of  God,  and  so  desirous  is  God  to 
reveal  it  to  us,  that  we  may  use  this  argument  with  Him  respecting  anything  we 
desire.  The  third  argument  looks  at  the  very  little  already  seen — only  a  glimpse. 
Moses  pleads  this  little,  and  because  of  it  asks  to  enter  Canaan.  He  had  seen 
much  of  God's  power,  yet  he  speaks  as  if  it  were  little  ;  not  as  if  undervaluing  the 
past,  but  still  feeling  as  if  it  were  comparatively  nothing.  So  all  that  we  have 
tasted  hitherto  is  small.  It  is  in  the  ages  to  come  that  He  is  to  show  the  exceed- 
ing riches  of  His  grace ;  and  hence  we  may  call  the  past  a  little  thing,  and  use 
it  as  an  argument  with  God.  III.  God's  answek.  It  sounds  stern  ;  yet  is  the 
answer  of  wisdom  and  love.  1.  The  anger.  2.  The  refusal.  3.  The  prohibition. 
IV.  God's  condescending  gkace.  Entrance  is  denied,  but  a  full  vision  of  the 
land  is  granted  (ver.  27).  He  strains  His  purpose  (if  one  may  speak  so)  as  far  as 
possible,  without  breaking  it.  The  actual  request  is  denied,  but  something  as  like 
it  and  as  near  to  it  as  might  be  is  accorded.  What  a  favoured  child  does  Moses 
seem,  even  in  this  very  scene  of  apparent  sternness !  0  love  that  passeth  know- 
ledge !  0  condescension  of  God,  to  what  depths  of  indulgent  tenderness  wilt  Thou 
not  stoop  !  1.  What  one  sin  can  do.  One  sin  cost  Adam  Paradise  ;  one  sin  costs 
Moses  Canaan.  In  the  case  of  Moses  it  is  the  more  startling,  because  it  is  a  for- 
given sin,  and  he  is  a  forgiven  sinner.  His  sin  is  forgiven,  yet  it  leaves  a  stain 
behind  it ;  it  traces  a  testimony  to  its  unutterable  evil  on  the  person  of  the  sinner. 
2.  What  God's  inflexibility  is.  He  cannot  change.  He  cannot  call  that  no  sin 
which  is  sin  ;  nor  that  a  small  sin  which  is  a  great  sin  ;  nor  that  a  private  sin 
which  was  a  public  sin.  His  purpose  is  not  the  easy,  pHable,  changeable  thing 
which  ours  is.  He  is  the  God  only  wise,  only  righteous,  only  mighty,  and  is 
therefore  above  all  such  vacillations.  3.  What  the  grace  of  God  is.  Many  waters 
cannot  quench  it,  nor  the  floods  drown  it.  To  what  lengths  it  will  go  in  order  to 
pardon  a  sinner  or  to  bless  a  saint !  {H.  Bonar,  D.D.)  Consolation : — ^There  are 
many  things  in  a  man's  life  which  he  desires  ;  but  these  may  come  and  go,  and 
yet  leave  the  real  life  of  the  man  little  touched.  But  there  are  few  men  who  have 
not  had  once  and  again  in  their  life,  certainly  once  at  least,  some  great  object  on 
which  they  set  their  whole  heart — some  vision  that  towered  over  all  others,  as 
Lebanon  now  did  to  the  eye  of  Moses — some  ideal,  some  supreme  good,  that 
kindled  their  brightest  and  most  impassioned  hours.  I.  What  God  refuses  to 
GRANT.  Take  a  man  who  has  set  his  heart  on  some  plan  of  life.  It  may  have  been 
one  of  ambition.  He  has  worn  himself  out  to  attain  it.  Every  line  of  his  life 
converges  to  it ;  but  at  length  comes  his  Waterloo,  and  he  is  dethroned  for  ever. 
It  may  be  some  creation  of  learning  or  genius.  .  He  has  brooded  over  it  in  chaos, 
he  has  gathered  slowly  all  the  materials,  he  is  about  at  last  to  shape  them  by  the 
skill  and  vivify  them  with  the  light  of  the  soul  within  him ;  but  the  fire  grows 
dim,  and  at  last  dies  ont,  and  the  great  design  and  the  yearning  desire  stand  apart 


82  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  nr. 

for  ever.  It  is  unachieved,  and  he  carries  the  broken  plan  to  the  grave  with  him  ; 
he  himself  is  cat  down,  while  the  harvest  of  hia  life  is  left  to  waste  ungathered  in 
the  darkening  fields.  Or  it  may  be  some  post  of  honour  and  influence.  But 
when  the  time  comes  to  seize  it  another  steps  in,  and  you  are  left  empty-handed. 
Then,  too,  there  are  higher  visions — visions  of  the  moral  and  spiritual  order — left 
unfulfilled.  Who  has  not  felt  times,  say,  of  conversion,  when  there  rose  upon  the 
soul  the  sweet  Divine  dawn  of  Christ's  salvation,  trembling  over  it«  calmed  waves 
and  revealing  transcendent  worlds  of  beauty  ;  or  of  revival,  when  at  a  new  turn  on 
the  road  some  heavenly  vision  met  us  and  blessed  us  with  **  a  joy  unspeakable  and 
full  of  glory  "  ;  or  of  comfort,  when  hope  sprung  immortal  out  of  some  dark  grave 
beside  which  we  sat  crushed  and  alone ;  or  of  a  strange  strength  from  on  high, 
when  we  had  almost  altogether  perished  ?  Such  seasons  have  been  ;  but  see  how 
some  failing  to  pass  over  the  temptation  that  crossed  unexpectedly  our  path,  some  mean 
passion  laying  its  arrest  on  our  onward  march,  some  looking  away  from  the  great 
Lebanons  of  nearness  to  God,  and  fellowship  with  the  very  death  and  resurrection 
of  Christ,  kept  us  from  our  last  crowning  step  ;  and  the  supreme  attainment  of  our 
lives  was,  on  this  side  the  grave  at  least,  lost  for  a  while,  it  may  be  for  ever. 
II.  Why  God  refused  to  grant  the  prayer  of  Moses.     1.  The  sin  of  Moses. 

2.  It  was  the  last  stroke  of  God's  chisel  that  Moses  needed  to  clear  away  his  last 
infirmity.  3.  It  lifted  Moses  to  a  nobler  elevation  of  character — more  unselfish, 
more  Divine.  4,  It  was  an  opportunity  such  as  Moses  never  had  before  of 
honouring  God,  in  the  midst  of  disappointment,  before  all.  IV.  What,  because 
OF  REFUSAL,  GoD  THE  MORE  GRANTS.  1.  A  larger  outpouring  of  grace  into  the 
heart  of  Moses.  Grace  of  forgiveness,  grace  of  restored  joy  of  GcS's  salvation, 
grace  of  broken  bones  rejoicing,  grace  of  fresh  communion.  2.  The  speedier 
crossing  the  Jordan  of  death  into  the  life  everlasting.  {Prof.  W.  Graham,  D.D.) 
God's  refusal  of  desire: — 1.  Natural  to  wish  to  eater  Canaan  as  an  object  of 
curiosity,  of  which  he  had  heard  so  much  ;  still  more  as  an  object  of  hope,  which 
had  been  promised  so  long  with  every  enhancement.  This  animated  the  people 
to  leave  Egypt,  and  encouraged  them  in  the  desert.  This  was  the  end,  the 
recompense  of  their  toils  for  forty  years,  and  now  they  had  nearly  reached  it. 
How  painful  to  miss  the  prize  when  the  hand  was  seizing  it — to  have  the  cup 
dashed  even  from  the^lip  !  2.  Yet  the  desire  was  refused.  God  sometimes  refuses 
the  desires  of  His  servants,  even  the  most  eminent.     He  does  this  in  two  ways. 

3.  Sometimes  He  does  it  in  love.  What  is  desired  might  prove  dangerous  and 
injurious.  In  many  cases  must  a  wise  and  good  parent  distinguish  between  wishes 
and  wants  !  A  child  may  wish  for  liberty,  and  want  restraint ;  for  a  holiday, 
and  want  schooling ;  for  dainties,  and  want  medicine.  Here  the  parent  must  act, 
not  according  to  the  wish,  but  the  welfare  of  the  child.  How  much  better  for 
the  Jews  had  God  turned  a  deaf  ear  to  their  importunity  !  Who  knows  what 
is  good  for  a  man  in  this  life  ?  No  one  but  God— the  good  God.  4.  He  sometimes 
refuses  in  anger.  Wrath  is  incompatible  with  love  ;  but  anger  is  not :  anger  may 
even  flow  from  it.  Though  Christians  cannot  be  condemned,  they  may  be 
chastened  :  and  the  law  of  the  house  is,  that  if  the  children  obey  not.  He  will  visit 
with  the  rod.  Hence  those  saved  eternally  may  fall  under  present  rebuke,  and 
be  refused  many  things  on  which  they  set  their  heart.  By  such  conduct  Provi- 
dence teaches  submission  to  His  people,  and  the  evil  of  sin  to  others.  5.  Yet 
his  desire  was  partially  indulged.  The  command  to  get  on  the  top  of  Pisgah 
was  not  to  tantalise  him,  but  to  be  a  mitigation  of  the  severe  sentence.  The 
preservation  of  his  sight  fitted  him  for  the  gaze — the  prospect  showed  him  how 
worthy  the  country  was  of  all  that  had  been  said  about  it ;  and  would  give  him 
high  views  of  the  truth  and  goodness  of  God  in  His  covenant  vdih.  Abraham,  Isaac, 
and  Jacob.  With  this  also  was  the  influence  of  Divine  grace  which  satisfied  him 
and  made  him  content  with  his  condition.  While  his  mind  was  raised  to  things 
above,  in  type  and  emblem,  to  a  better  country,  into  wliich  he  was  immediately  to 
enter— and  there  would  be  no  want  of  Canaan.  Thus  in  judgment  God  remem- 
bers mercy,  and  though  He  cause  grief  yet  will  He  have  compassion.  ( JV. 
Jay.)  The  long  journey : — 1.  We  learn  from  this,  first  of  all,  tliat  one  sin  may 
shut  us  out  of  heaven.  Moses  had  committed  a  sin  long  ago  ;  since  then  he  had 
done  God  good  service,  yet  that  sin  was  not  forgotten,  it  shut  him  out  of  the 
promised  land.  Sin  always  brings  its  own  j^unishment,  at  some  time  or  other,  and 
in  some  way  or  another.  Some  sins,  like  some  seeds,  grow  up  and  bear  their 
bitter  fruit  very  quickly.  Others  lie  hid  for  a  long  time,  but  they  bear  fruit. 
2.  Learn  next,  that  doiiig  good  does  not  atore  for  a  past  sin.      "  All  our  obediences,'- 


CHAP,  m.]  DEUTERONOMY.  33 

says  an  old  writer  of  the  Churcli,  *'  cannot  blot  out  one  sin  against  God."  When 
we  have  forgotten  our  sins,  God  remembers  them,  and  though  not  in  anger,  yet  He 
calls  for  our  arrears.  If  Moses  died  the  first  death  for  one  fault,  how  shall  they 
'*  escape  the  second  death  for  sinning  always  "  ?  Do  not  think  that  the  old  sins  of 
your  past  lives  are  of  no  importance  because  you  may  have  been  living  decent  lives 
of  late.  **  I  pray  thee,  let  me  go  over,  that  I  may  see  the  good  land  that  is  beyond 
Jordan."  Some  of  us,  who  have  wandered  these  many  years  in  the  wilderness, 
long  very  eagerly  for  that  "rest  which  remaineth  for  the  people  of  God."  Many 
a  one  is  tempted  sometimes,  when  the  sorrow  is  very  sharp  and  the  road  very 
rough,  to  cry  with  David,  "  Oh  !  that  I  had  wings  like  a  dove,  for  then  would  I  flee 
away  and  be  at  rest."  Many  a  one,  whose  earthly  work  is  not  yet  finished,  is 
tempted  sometimes  to  say,  "I  pray  Thee,  let  me  go  over,  that  I  may  see  the  good 
land  that  is  beyond  Jordan."  Wishing  for  Paradise  will  not  take  us  there.  For 
us  all  there  is  a  work  to  be  done,  and  a  given  time  to  do  it  in.  A  quaint  old  writer 
tells  us  that  "God  sends  His  servants  to  bed  when  they  have  done  their  work." 
Our  journey  through  this  world  must  be  one  of  watching,  of  fighting,  of  praying, 
and  of  waiting,  and  when  that  is  over  our  Master  will  give  His  beloved  sleep. 
When  the  American  saint  and  hero  "  Stonewall  "  Jackson  was  dying,  he  said,  "  Let 
us  cross  the  river,  and  rest  under  the  shade  of  the  trees  "  ;  so  may  we  one  day 
hope  to  cross  the  river  of  death,  and  to  see  the  good  land  that  is  beyond 
Jordan,  and  to  rest  under  the  shadow  of  the  Tree  of  Life,  "  whose  leaves 
are  for  the  healing  of  the  nations, "  {H.  J.  Wilmot-Buxton,  M.A.)  The  request  df 
Moses :— I.  In  regard  to  the  prayer  itself,  it  may  be  remarked — 1.  That  the 
desire  it  expressed  was  a  very  natural  one.  He  had  been  looking  forward,  it  may 
be,  to  years  of  honourable  service  and  rich  enjoyment,  and  he  might  mourn  in  the 
cutting  off"  of  his  days,  that  he  was  to  go  to  the  gates  of  the  gi-ave,  and  say,  as 
Hezekiah  did  under  like  prospects,  in  the  sadness  of  his  heart,  "  I  shall  not  see  the 
Lord,  even  the  Lord  in  the  land  of  the  living.  I  shall  behold  man  no  more  with 
the  inhabitants  of  the  world."  2.  The  desire  expressed  was  a  benevolent  one.  It 
was  dictated  by  his  regard  to  the  welfare  of  the  people.  It  was  a  desire  that  he 
might  be  spared  to  assist  in  effecting  their  settlement  in  the  land  of  Canaan,  and 
in  establishing  such  order  as  might  promote  their  prosperity  as  a  nation  there. 
3.  The  desire  expressed  may  be  regarded  as  a  pious  one,  as  having  been  prompted 
by  devout  aflFection.  What  he  had  already  seen  had  convinced  him  that  there  is 
no  god  in  heaven  or  in  earth  that  could  do  according  to  His  works  and  according 
to  His  might ;  but  he  felt  that  there  were  wonders  yet  to  be  shown  in  the  intro- 
duction of  His  people  into  the  promised  land  and  their  establishment  there,  which 
might  fill  his  mind  with  increasing  admiration  and  joy  in  beholding  them.  II.  We 
proceed,  then,  in  the  second  place  to  notice  some  of  the  reasons  for  which,  as 
WB  MAY  conceive,  THIS  PRAYER  OF  MosES  WAS  DENIED.  These  may  have  been 
Buch  as  the  following — 1.  To  mark  the  Divine  displeasure  with  a  part  of  his  conduct. 
2.  To  convey  a  lesson  of  reproof  and  instruction  to  Israel.  ' '  The  Lord  was  wroth 
with  me,"  says  Moses,  "for  your  sakes."  There  was  displeasure,  then,  with  their 
conduct,  as  well  as  with  that  of  Moses,  manifested  in  his  removal.  And  God,  by 
taking  him  away,  might  design  to  tell  them  that  they  were  not  worthy  of  such 
a  leader.  3.  It  was  in  order  to  satisfy  in  another  manner,  and  more  fully,  the 
affections  and  desires  which  were  expressed  by  His  servant.  The  prospect  of  it 
showed  him  how  worthy  the  land  was  of  all  that  the  Lord  said  concerning  it.  The 
reality  exceeded,  we  may  conclude,  aU  that  imagination  had  pictured.  But  there 
was  more  in  the  vision  enjoyed  than  the  gratification  of  a  natural  curiosity — there 
was  what  satisfied  benevolent  and  pious  affection.  He  saw  the  end  of  his  cares 
and  toils  for  the  people  attained,  and  the  truth  and  goodness  of  God  in  His  covenant 
with  Abraham  and  Isaac  and  Jacob  vindicated.  And  the  vision  with  which  he  was 
favoured  may  have  been,  as  it  were,  the  seal  of  his  own  reconciliation  to  the  God  whom 
he  had  offended,  who  now  came  to  take  him  to  a  more  glorious  recompense  than  if 
he  had  been  spared  to  reign  there  for  long  years  over  the  tribes  of  Israel.  And  may 
we  not  conceive  that  when  he  saw  the  good  land  that  was  beyond  Jordan  he  knew 
that  he  saw  in  type  and  emblem  the  better  country — that  is,  the  heavenly,  which 
lies  beyond  death's  dark  river.  The  patriarchs  who  before  sojourned  in  it  as  in  a 
strange  land  showed  that  it  was  thus  regarded  by  them,  and  the  same  faith  by 
which  they  walked  dwelt  in  him  who  recorded  their  history.  {J.  Hendei-^on,  D.D.) 
Holy  ardour  after  a  heavenly  state : — I.  From  what  principle  does  this  dksiki; 
AFTER  A  heavenly  STATE  ARISE  ?  1.  From  having  formed  a  right  estimate  of  the 
^r«sent  world.     He  has  passed  through  the  world  not  as  a  cynic.     He  has  mixed  in 

3 


34  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  lit 

the  world's  society,  he  has  tasted  some  of  its  pleasures,  he  has  acquired  some  of  its 
riches,  he  has  enjoyed  some  of  its  esteem  ;  yet,  by  the  grace  of  God,  he  has  been 
taught  to  see  that  "  vanity  of  vanities  "  is  inscribed  **  on  all  the  world  calls  good  or 
great."  2.  From  having  realised  the  blessings  of  true  religion.  3.  From  strong 
faith  in  the  unspotted  honour  and  integrity  of  Him  who  has  promised  this  good  land 
to  us.  The  Christian  believes  what  God  has  graciously  revealed  of  this  heavenly 
state.  II.  What  are  thb  evidences  of  youe  truly  desiring  a  heavenly 
STATE.  1.  Earth  loses  its  attraction.  2.  Religion  assumes  its  personal  importance. 
**  Let  me  go."  3.  There  will  be  a  restlessness  of  desire  while  absent  from  the  Lord. 
They  feel  that  this  is  not  their  rest.  4.  Death  will  lose  its  terrors.  III.  Let  me 
NOW  urge  you,  by  some  appropriate  motives,  to  aim  at  the  attainment  of 
this  holy  ardour  after  a  heavenly  state.  1.  Be  convinced  that  it  is  attain- 
able. Oh,  how  many  Christians  there  are  who  stop  short  of  this  holy  state  of  mind  ! 
They  seem  to  be  quite  satisfied  if  they  can  but  arrive  at  heaven,  and  never  manifest 
any  anxiety  to  attain  that  perfection  which  is  the  great  preparation  for  its  enjoy- 
ment. 2.  Be  assured  also,  that  this  state  is  desirable.  It  is  desirable  that  you 
should  be  thus  dead  to  this  world  and  alive  to  that  which  is  to  come,  on  several 
accounts.  (1)  Consider  the  personal  advantage  to  the  individual.  (2)  But  you 
should  aim  for  this  holy  ardour,  because  of  the  benefit  likely  to  result  to  others. 
Can  such  a  city  be  set  on  a  hill,  and  not  observed  ?  Impossible.  Such  a  city 
must  be  admired.  (3)  And  by  this  you  will  also  be  an  honour  to  the  religion 
you  profess.  (4)  Hereby  God  wiU  be  glorified.  {C.  Hyatt.)  Ardour  after  the 
heavenly  Canaan : — If  we  take  this  prayer  in  its  spiritual  sense  we  shall  find  in  it 
much  to  elevate  our  hopes  and  views  beyond  the  passing  scenes  of  time,  and  to 
fix  them  on  the  more  permanent  realities  of  that  eternal  world  to  which  we  are  all 
quickly  approaching.  **I  pray  Thee,"  says  Moses  to  God,  "let  me  go  over  and  see 
the  good  land."  The  words  of  this  prayer  imply  a  strong  desire,  a  heartfelt  eager- 
ness, on  the  part  of  the  person  uttering  them,  to  see  the  good  land,  and  not  alone 
to  see  it,  but  to  enter  it  and  enjoy  its  pleasures.  I.  Now  we  are  naturally  led  to 
the  inquiry,  From  whence  arises  this  feeling  in  the  Christian's  heart — this 
EAGERNESS  TO  SEE  THE  GOOD  LAND  ?  I  should  Say,  from  his  having  taken  a  proper 
estimate  of  the  world.  The  Christian  has  been  taught  to  look  above  it  and  its  low 
concerns  to  nobler  objects,  to  heaven  and  heavenly  things,  as  the  supreme  object 
of  his  ambition  and  as  his  incorruptible  and  undefiled  portion.     II.  Now,  what 

PROOFS  HAVE  WE  THAT  WE  ARE  DESIRING  THIS  "GOOD  LAND,"  THIS  BETTER  AND 

HEAVENLY  COUNTRY  ?  If  we  are  looking  forward  to  be  with  God  in  heaven  we  are 
now  endeavouring — 1.  To  sit  loose  to  the  things  of  this  world.  2.  Another  proof 
of  our  earnestly  seeking  this  heavenly  country  is,  that  we  are  now  making  religion 
our  chief  concern,  that  it  is  the  most  important  matter  we  have  at  heart,  that  our 
worldly  engagements,  of  what  nature  soever  they  may  be,  are  all  secondary  to  the 
interests  of  the  soul.  3.  Another  evidence  that  we  are  advancing  towards  the 
heavenly  Canaan  is  that  sin  is  becoming  a  matter  of  habitual  distaste  to  us.  (J", 
L.  F.  Russell,  M.A.)  The  refusal: — Disappointment — the  very  word  has  an 

unpleasant  ring ;  but  who  is  fully  able  to  describe  the  painfulness  of  the  reality 
which  this  word  indicates  ?  Just  picture  to  yourself  a  traveller  making  his  prepara- 
tions in  another  portion  of  the  world  to  visit  his  dearest  friends  once  more  before 
he  dies.  For  years  he  has  been  making  his  arrangements  with  the  utmost  care- 
fulness ;  at  the  appointed  time  he  has  embarked  with  ail  his  property,  and  he  has 
safely  managed  through  the  greater  portion  of  his  journey,  though  most  dangerous. 
But  suddenly  there  rises  up  a  violent  storm  that  makes  the  masts  and  tackling 
crack,  the  frail  craft,  though  in  view  of  the  desired  haven,  sinks  to  the  bottom,  and 
the  wanderer,  who  came  expecting  rest  within  the  circle  of  his  friends,  finds  but  a 
grave  down  in  the  gloomy  depths.  "How  sad  a  picture  !  "  you  exclaim.  It  is  no 
sadder,  we  reply,  than  the  reality  of  many  lives  on  earth.  The  public  Ufe  of  Moses, 
as  Israel's  lawgiver  and  guide,  is,  as  it  were,  a  picture  set  within  a  frame  of  two 
great  disappointments.  The  first  is  the  occasion  when,  on  slajring  the  Egyptian,  he 
fancies  that  his  brethren  should  acknowledge  him  as  their  deliverer,  and  finds  him- 
self most  cruelly  betrayed ;  the  second,  when  he  sees  he  is  refused  an  entrance  to 
the  promised  land.  I.  There  kneels  in  prayer  a  godly  man  to  whom,  as  wb 
can  see  at  once,  such  intercourse  with  God  is  not  a  duty  merely,  or  a 
habit,  but  a  pleasure  and  delight.  Must  we  now  picture  Moses  in  the  stillnesa 
of  the  tent  of  witness,  or  in  the  boundless  temple  of  creation,  or  in  the  solitude  of 
waking  night  ?  It  is  enough  for  us  that  he  now  ventures,  aU  alone  with  God,  to 
place  upon  his  lips  the  prayer  that  had  been  already  lying  heavily  upon  his  heart 


CHAP.  III.]  DEUTERONOMY,  35 

for  days  and  weeks,  and  he  receives  the  answer  which  you  know  so  well,  but  which 
produced,  upon  a  heart  like  this,  such  an  amount  of  grief.  Well  may  we,  first  of 
all,  speak  of  dark  dealing  in  God's  providence.  For  who  is  he  whom  we  now  see 
driven  from  the  throne  of  grace  with  such  inexorable  severity  ?  Is  it  a  wicked  man, 
to  whom  the  wise  king's  words  apply  in  all  their  force,  "  He  that  turneth  away  his 
car  from  hearing  the  law,  even  his  prayer  shall  be  an  abomination  "  ?  Nay,  but  it  is 
the  special  favourite  of  God,  who  often  could  succeed,  by  powerful  intercession,  in 
averting  from  a  hundred  thousand  guilty  heads  the  sword  of  justice  when  it  had 
been  raised  to  smite.  What  does  he  ask,  that  he  thus  stirs  the  wrath  of  Him  to 
whom  he  speaks  ?  Some  special  recompense,  perhaps,  for  years  of  toil ;  or  possibly, 
release  from  that  most  arduous  post  which  he  approached  with  such  reluctance. 
Nay  ;  he  merely  asked  for  a  free  entrance,  a  short  stay,  in  the  evening  of  his  life, 
in  that  inheritance  which  God  had  promised  to  the  fathers.  How  was  that  prayer 
expressed  ?  Was  it  with  an  excessive  urgency,  unsteady  faith,  in  an  uncourteous 
tone  ?  Nay  ;  he  himself  is  not  afraid  to  own  that  he  but  asked  a  favour  as  a  guilty 
one  ;  and  it  is  quite  impossible  to  listen  to  his  prayer  without  perceiving  there  the 
spirit  of  profound  humility  and  the  most  hearty  gratitude.  .  .  .  Are  there  not  many 
who  have  had  such  an  experience  as  Moses  underwent  ?  A  lovely  prospect  smiled  on 
you,  a  pilgrim  on  life's  path ;  it  seemed  to  you  a  very  Canaan  of  terrestrial  luxury ;  then 
you  put  forth  your  strongest  efforts  to  attain  that  height  and  call  the  treasure  yours. 
Alas  !  you  see  the  palm-trees  of  Canaan,  but  it  is  not  permitted  you  to  rest  beneath 
their  shade.  Where  would  I  stop,  even  if  out  of  the  book  of  each  man's  life  I  wished 
to  do  no  more  than  indicate  the  chief  among  the  sealed-up  pages  bearing  the  super- 
scription '  *  Unanswered  prayers  "  ?  Verily,  the  Lord  did  not  without  good  reason  say 
of  old  that  He  would  dwell  in  the  thick  darkness.  II.  But  is  it  beally  He,  the 
Only  Wise,  the  Gracious  One,  the  God  unchangeable  in  righteousness,  who 
DV«rELLS  IN  this  DARKNESS  ?  Before  you  hesitate  to  answer  this  in  the  affirmative,  look 
back  a  moment  from  the  valley  opposite  Bethpeor,  where  the  conclusion  of  this  chapter 
places  you,  to  Kadesh,  which  you  know  so  well.  Such  a  refusal,  which,  viewed 
in  itself,  seems  almost  quite  inexplicable,  harsh,  at  once  appears  in  another  light, 
when  you  have  heard  not  merely  what  the  heart  of  Moses  says,  but  also  what  his 
conscience  tells.  We  know  full  well  there  is  a  thread — often,  indeed,  invisible,  yet 
natural,  and  such  as  none  can  break — which  forms  a  bond  between  our  conduct  and 
our  destiny ;  and  if  the  history  connected  with  each  one  of  you  were  accurately 
known  to  us,  it  would  be  far  from  difficult  to  prove  that  God  has  really  good  reason 
for  the  choice  He  makes  of  such  steep  paths  for  some.  At  one  time,  weak  in  body, 
you  pray  vainly  for  recovery  of  health  and  strength,  and  you  exclaim,  "How  dark 
my  path  !  "  But  did  you  not,  in  younger  days,  employ  your  powers,  when  they 
were  fresh,  as  instruments  of  sin  ?  May  not  your  present  suflFering,  besides,  be  a 
sharp  thorn  that  must  remind  you,  through  the  flesh,  how  deeply  you  once  fell  ? 
Or  yet  again,  some  wretched  father  may  be  now  beseeching  God  to  bring  his  lost 
son  back  into  his  arms  and  to  the  home  of  God — but  all  in  vain  ;  the  blinded  one 
holds  on  in  the  broad  path  that  leads  to  death.  But  have  you  ever  thought  upon 
the  time  when  your  own  mother  vainly  urged  you  to  forsake  the  sinful  path  ?  and 
have  you  also  said  within  yourself,  * '  I  am  but  punished  now,  in  my  own  family,  for 
sins  committed  in  my  youth  "  ?  III.  But  our  sphere  of  contemplation  tends  to  widen 
out  on  every  side.     It  is  not  merely  to  the  previous  history  of  Moses,  but 

ALSO  TO  the  needs  OF  ISRAEL,  THAT  Vi^E  MUST  LOOK  TO  FIND  THE  TRUE  SOLUTION  OF 
the  ENIGMA  CONNECTED  WITH  THE  FIRM  REFUSAL  TO  ACCEDE  TO  HIS  BEQUEST.       If 

we  mistake  not,  the  providence  of  God  becomes  apparent  here  after  His  righteous- 
ness ;  and  when  we  take  a  step  still  further  in  advance,  we  find  that  we  can  readily 
extol  Him  for  a  wise  arrangement  in  His  providence.  Moses  was  but  a  man ;  it  is 
impossible  that  one  man  should  do  everything  ;  it  must,  too,  be  acknowledged  that 
he  was  more  fitted  to  guide  Israel  through  the  wilderness  than  lead  them  into  Canaan. 
When  we  so  rashly  raise  a  loud  complaint  because  our  prayers  remain  unanswered, 
do  we  not  far  too  frequently  forget  that  we  are  here  not  for  ourselves,  but  with  and 
for  each  other ;  and  that  He  who  makes  provision  for  the  wants  of  all,  without 
respect  of  persons,  frequently  must  quite  withhold  something  from  one,  that  the 
fulfilment  of  his  wishes  may  not  turn  out  for  another's  injury  ?  How  much  more 
lightly  would  our  disappointments  press  on  us  had  selfishness  less  influence ;  and 
what  a  multitude  of  instances  does  history  afford  in  which  God  often,  in  His 
wisdom,  gave  no  answer  to  men's  prayers — at  least,  delayed  His  answer — so  that  in 
what  saddens  us  there  might  be  found  a  germ  of  what  would  work  for  others'  good. 
IV.  But  SOME  one  may  reply,  It  surely  must  have  saddened  Moses'  heart  to 


86  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iii. 

THINK   THAT   HE  HAD    BEEN    INCITED   TO    THE    SACRIFICE    OF   HIS    OWN    PERSONAL, 

LEGITIMATE  DESIRE  FOR  Israel's  BENEFIT.  Such  an  objection  might  be  called  a 
fair  one,  if  the  man  of  God,  through  what  he  was  deprived  of,  had  been  really  too  great 
a  loser  in  the  case.  But  just  as  many  a  hard,  uncomely  shell  often  conceals  a  kernel 
of  the  sweetest  fruit,  so  it  is  with  God's  chastisements  ;  the  very  rods  employed  in 
smiting  drop  with  blessing  from  the  Lord.  He  is  deprived  of— yes,  Canaan  ;  and 
that  word  means — does  it  mean  everything  ?  No,  in  the  eye  of  faith  it  is  not  every- 
thing ;  it  merely  seems  so  to  the  mind  of  Moses  now  Canaan  is — ami  how  could  it 
be  otherwise  ? — his  earthly  ideal ;  but  ideals  seldom  gain  by  being  realised,  and  even 
the  Land  of  Promise  offers  no  exception  to  the  melancholy  rule  that  there  is  far 
more  pleasure  in  desire  than  even  in  the  actual  enjoyment  of  prosperity.  But  will 
it  be  impossible  to  forfeit  Paradise  even  in  Canaan  ?  Shall  sin  be  unknown  there  ? 
Shall  death  have  no  dominion  there  ?  Does  it  make  such  a  mighty  difference  to 
one  like  Moses  whether  death  takes  place  on  Nebo  or,  a  few  months  later,  upon 
Zion  hill  ?  for  surely  to  such  minds  and  hearts  the  whole  earth  is  a  land  of  sojourn- 
ing, where  all  is  strange.  Has  he  been  thinking  of  the  daily  cross  he  must  expect, 
because  within  the  first  few  weeks  he  only  looks  upon  sad  scenes  of  blood  and  tears, 
and  afterwards  finds  out  that  Israel  has  certainly  changed  for  the  better  as  regards 
their  dwelling-place,  but  not  in  heart  ?  Many  an  earnest  prayer  for  longer  life^  is 
utterly  refused,  that  so  the  eye,  closed  ere  the  day  of  evil  comes,  may  not  perceive 
the  misery  to  follow  us.    V.  "We  place  ourselves  upon  the  stand-point  of  thb 

"WORLD   to    come,    AND   THEN    THE  BLESSING  IN  DISGUISE    APPEARS  TO  US    AS  AN 

ETERNAL  GROUND  OF  GRATITUDE.  But  do  you  not  yet  feel  convinced,  with  us,  that 
Moses  has  received  the  punishment  of  his  offence  wholly  within  this  present  life, 
and  that  the  temporary  loss  has  been  abundantly  made  up  by  God  in  heaven? 
"Well  may  we  rest  assured  that  all  the  friends  of  God  will  have  much  cause  for 
gratitude  in  heaven,  but  more  especially  for  this — that  He  has  said  so  often,  in  this 
•world,  through  His  strong  love,  ' '  No  more  of  this  ! "  But  do  we  not  begin  to  find 
this  out  even  on  this  side  of  the  grave  ?  Many  of  you,  in  silent  admiration,  must 
acknowledge  that  the  principle  of  everlasting  joy  would  never  have  been  drawn  out 
in  your  hearts  had  not  the  Lord  been  pleased  to  lead  you  through  this  world  by 
paths  where  pains  and  crosses  are  familiar  things.  But  the  poor  heart,  that  has 
been  cured  of  lusting  by  the  sorrow  it  has  felt,  finds  constantly,  in  overwhelming 
measure,  how  the  All-sufficient  One,  in  a  most  wondrous  way,  makes  up  for  what 
He  has  withheld  by  giving  us  Himself.  {J.  J.  Van  Oosterzee,  D.D.)  The  desire 
of  Moses : — The  east  side  of  Jordan  had  been  conquered,  Moses  and  the  people  had 
experienced  the  nearness  and  help  of  Jehovah  ;  and  Moses  had  exhorted  Joshua  to 
press  on  without  fear.  It  was  then  that — I.  The  desire  to  enter  Canaan 
AWOKE  ANEW  IN  THE  HEART  OF  MosES — 1.  A  prayer,  coloured  by  deep  emotion, 
came  from  his  heart  like  a  forest  stream  breaking  its  way  through  a  narrowing 
ravine,  and  then  dashing  over  the  falls.  2.  Was  it  possible  that  the  man  of  God 
should  cry  out  for  what  lay  behind  in  a  conquered  desire  ?  The  power  of  earthly 
hopes  over  the  heart  must  be  remembered.  Moses  remained  Moses — and  liis  heart 
remained  a  man's  heart,  which  only  conquers  after  fresh  straggles,  which  relin- 
quishes hope  only  when  the  Highest  unmistakably  strikes  through  these  hopes  and 
uproots  the  desires  of  the  heart.  3.  It  was  the  hour  of  conquest  where  joy  filled 
the  hearts  of  the  Israelites.  Was  it  not  natural,  then,  that  the  old  desire  should 
awaken  amid  this  outburst  of  joyful  hope  ?  and  that  his  tongue  should  utter  that 
Th  -       -    -  -  - 


of  which  his  heart  was  full?  The  words  of  the  prayer  show  that  "the 
mountain  and  Lebanon  "  were  before  his  eyes  ;  and  it  was  in  view  of  them  tTiat  he 
again  prayed  and  must  again  submit.  11.  Moses'  reception  of  the  answer  to 
HIS  PRAYER.  1.  We  all  understand  this  fluctuating  of  the  human  heart.  "By 
the  grave  we  stand  in  silence  and  sow  the  seed  of  tears. "  But  the  Easter  sun  rises, 
and  in  its  brightness  flowers  bloom  on  the  graves.  Easter  bells  ring.  In  this  Easter 
gladness  sorrow  is  stilled  and  the  heart  finds  peace.  It  conquers  througii  Him  who 
has  swallowed  up  death  in  victory.  2.  Yet  does  sorrow  never  return  ?  We  must 
remember  that  grace  leaves  the  heart  a  human  heart  still.  "  Grace  blameth  not  thy 
sighing,  but  makes  it  still  and  pure."  The  heart  still  retains  its  deep  emotions, 
desires,  love,  hope,  longing,  and  sorrow  ;  and  it  would  be  an  evil  day  for  men  when 
tears  did  not  bring  relief,  nor  the  words  of  the  tongue  express  the  emotion  of  the 
heart.  3.  When  a  fervent  desire  or  deep  sorrow  fills  the  believing  heart  it  finds 
relief  in  prayer — which  sometimes  bursts  forth  like  a  pent-up  stream.  So  it  was 
here  with  Moses.  He  entered  on  this  conflict  in  prayer,  ana  his  heart  found  rest 
only  when  the  clear  answer  came.     4.  The  poet  is  right  when  he  thinks  such 


CHAP.  IV.]  DEUTERONOMY.  87 

conquest  impossible  on  the  plane  of  the  world.  "The  heart  that  here  in  sorrow 
sails  by  a  storm -swept  shore  gains  peace,  but  on  that  morrow  when  it  shall  beat 
no  more."  But  it  is  othei-wise  in  the  kingdom  of  God.  Moses,  in  his  words  to  the 
people,  showed  that  he  had  overcome  and  attained  to  rest.  In  his  heart  he  was 
victorious  when  he  was  led  by  God  in  His  answer  to  his  prayer  to  the  sepulchre  of  his 
earthly  hopes.  His  heart  did  not  break — the  foaming  waves  and  jagged  rocks  did 
not  wreck  his  faith.  We  almost  hear  the  words,  "Not  my  will,  but  Thine  be  done." 
III.  Are  such  decisive  and  unmistakable  answers,  such  as  this  given  to 
Moses,  given  from  on  high  now  ?  1.  Answers  in  view  of  which  all  question- 
ings and  grievings  cease,  all  petitions  withdrawn,  and  prayer  ends  in  submission, 
thanksgiving,  and  victory.  2.  Not  precisely  as  they  came  to  Moses,  who  lived  in 
such  close  communion  with  the  Invisible,  since  only  thus  in  that  time  could  Divine 
Revelation  progress ;  nor  as  in  later  times  to  the  apostle  (2  Cor.  xii.  9).  To  the 
apostles  as  instruments  of  revelation  the  eternal  world  came  nearer  than  to  ordinary 
men.  3.  Yet  even  to  ordinary  Christian  men  there  come  indications  and  messages 
from  above  which  cannot  be  misunderstood.  Not  every  day — not  always  when  we 
desire,  but  in  the  events  of  life,  in  the  ordering  of  circumstances,  in  the  indications 
of  the  end  of  life  drawing  near,  answers  are  often  given  as  clear  and  definite  as  in 
the  words,  "Let  it  suffice  thee,"  &c.  And  he  who  understands  God's  Word  and 
has  hid  it  in  his  heart,  like  Moses  looks  steadily  towards  Pisgah.  The  spirit  over- 
comes and  looks  toward  the  earthly  Canaan,  but  only  to  leave  it.  Let  the  heart 
turn,  let  the  eye  look  upward  to  the  Canaan  above  !  ( W.  Granhoff. )  Unanswered 
prayers: — I  remember  many  years  ago  one  Sunday  afternoon  I  sat  in  an  upper 
room  by  the  side  of  a  coffin  in  which  lay  the  body  of  a  dear  child — no  matter  whose 
child.  A  small  boy  came  to  me  with  a  deep  feeling,  and,  showing  how  far  some- 
times children  penetrate  into  the  deep  mysteries  of  life  and  spiritual  things,  said  to 
me  :  "Uncle,  I  want  to  ask  you  something."  I  said,  "Well?"  Said  he,  "Does 
God  always  give  us  what  we  ask  Him  for  ? "  And  I  hardly  knew  what  to  answer, 
and  I  said,  "Why  do  you  ask?"  Said  he,  "Because  I  asked  Him  to  spare  my 
dear  little  cousin,  and  He  didn't  do  it,  and  I  do  not  know  what  to  think  about  it." 
The  child  touched  bottom.  We  have  all  had  the  same  difficulty.  I  said  to  him, 
"  Suppose  that  your  father  should  send  you  off  to  boarding-school,  and  should  say 
to  you,  as  he  bade  you  good-bye,  '  Now,  if  you  want  anything,  just  ask  me  for  it, 
and  I  will  send  it  to  you.'  You  do  not  suppose  that  he  meant  to  say  that  he  would 
send  you  anything  that  would  not  be  best  for  you  ?  Now,  God  says,  *  Ask,  and  it 
shall  be  given  you ' ;  but  He  does  not  say  that  He  will  give  us  anything  that  is  not 
best  for  us."  And  I  said,  "Does  that  help  you  any?"  And  he  said,  "I  think  I 
see,"  Now,  that  is  just  as  far  as  I  have  ever  been  able  to  go — "I  think  I  see."  But 
do  you  not  see  that  right  here  is  the  very  privilege  of  praying  to  God  ?  Why,  if 
God  should  give  us  everything  we  ask  Him  for,  the  very  best  and  wisest  of  us  would 
almost  be  afraid  to  pray.  How  many  times  good  people  have  prayed  for  certain 
things,  and  they  did  not  get  them.  Many  years  afterwards  they  saw  that  it  would 
have  been  a  thousand  pities  if  God  had  given  them  what  they  asked  for.  When  we 
shall  climb  the  shining  steeps  of  heaven,  and  from  the  light  of  the  eternal  world 
look  back  on  this  enigma  of  human  life,  we  shall  have  nothing  for  which  to  praise 
God  more  than  for  not  having  given  us  everything  for  which  we  asked  Him  here  on 
earth.  He  knows  how  to  give.  He  sees  what  is  best.  So  what  first  may  seem  one 
of  the  greatest  discouragements  may  be  a  blessing  in  disguise.  (/.  A.  £roadus, 
D.D.) 


CHAPTER  IV. 

Yess.  1-40.  Now  therefore  hearken,  0  Israel,  nnto  the  statutes  and  onto  the 
Judgments,  which  I  teach  you,  for  to  do  them,  that  ye  may  live,  and  go  in  and 
possess  the  land. — Hoses'  discourse : — 1.  In  general  it  is  the  use  and  application  of 
the  foregoing  history.  It  comes  in  by  way  of  inference  from  it  (ver.  1).  This  use  we 
should  make  of  the  review  of  God's  providences,  we  should  by  them  be  quickened  to 
duty  and  obedience.  The  histories  of  ancient  times  should,  in  like  manner,  be 
improved  by  us.  2.  The  scope  of  his  discourse  is  to  persuade  them  to  keep  close  to 
God,  and  to  His  service,  and  not  to  forsake  Him  for  any  other  god,  nor  in  any 
instance  to  decline  from  their  duty  to  Him.    Now,  observe  what  he  saith  to  them 


38  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  it. 

witli  a  great  deal  of  Divine  rhetoric :  First,  by  way  of  exhortation  and  direction  ; 
secondly,  by  way  of  motive  and  argument,  to  enforce  his  exhortations.     I.  See  here 

HOW   HE   CHARGES   AND   COMMANDS   THEM,  AND   SHOWS  THEM  WHAT  IS  GOOD,  AND 

WHAT  THE  Lord  required  of  them.  1.  He  demands  their  diligent  attention  to 
the  Word  of  God,  and  to  the  statates  and  judgments  that  were  taught  them. 
''  Hearken,  0  Israel."  He  means  not  only  that  they  must  now  give  him  the  hearing, 
but  that  whenever  the  book  of  the  law  was  read  to  them,  or  read  by  them,  they 
should  be  attentive  to  it.  2.  He  charges  them  to  preserve  the  Divine  law  pure  and 
entire  among  them  (ver.  2).  Keep  it  pure,  and  do  not  add  to  it ;  keep  it  entire,  and 
do  not  diminish  from  it.  Not  in  practice  ;  so  some  :  Ye  shall  not  add,  by  commit- 
ting the  evil  which  the  law  forbids ;  nor  diminish,  by  omitting  the  good  which  the  law 
requires.  Not  in  opinion  ;  so  others  :  Ye  shall  not  add  your  own  inventions,  as  if  the 
Divine  institution  were  defective  ;  nor  introduce,  much  less  impose,  any  rites  of 
religious  worship  other  than  what  God  has  appointed  ;  nor  shall  ye  diminish,  or  set 
aside,  anything  that  is  appointed  as  needless  or  superfluous.  God's  work  is  perfect ; 
nothing  can  be  put  to  it,  or  taken  from  it,  but  it  makes  it  the  worse  (Eccles.  iii.  14). 
3.  He  charges  them  to  keep  God's  commandments  (ver.  2),  to  do  them  (vers.  5,  14), 
to  keep  and  do  them  (ver.  16),  to  perform  the  covenant  (ver.  13).  Hearing  must 
be  in  order  to  doing  ;  knowing  in  order  to  practice.  God's  commandments  were  the 
way  they  must  walk  in,  the  rule  they  must  keep  to.  What  are  laws  made  for  but  to 
be  observed  and  obeyed  ?  4.  He  charges  them  to  be  very  strict  and  careful  in  their 
observance  of  the  law  (vers.  9,  15,  23).  Those  that  would  be  religious  must  be  very 
cautious,  and  walk  circumspectly.  Consider  how  many  temptations  we  are  com- 
passed about  with,  and  what  corrupt  inclinations  we  have  in  our  own  bosoms.  5.  He 
charges  them  particularly  to  take  heed  of  the  sin  of  idolatry,  which  of  all  other 
they  would  be  most  tempted  to  by  the  customs  of  the  nations,  were  most  addicted 
to  by  the  corruption  of  their  hearts,  and  would  be  most  provoking  to  God,  and  of 
most  pernicious  consequence  to  themselves  (vers.  15,  16).  Two  sorts  of  idolatry  he 
cautions  them  against.  (1)  The  worship  of  images,  however  by  them  they  might 
intend  to  worship  the  true  God,  as  they  had  done  in  the  golden  calf ;  so  changing 
the  truth  of  God  into  a  lie,  and  His  glory  into  shame.  Let  this  be  a  caution  to  us 
to  take  heed  of  making  images  of  God  in  our  fancy  and  imagination  when  we  are 
worshipping  Him,  lest  thereby  we  corrupt  ourselves.  There  may  be  idols  in  the 
heart  where  there  are  none  in  the  sanctuary.  (2)  The  worship  of  the  sun,  moon,  and 
stars  is  another  sort  of  idolatry  they  are  here  cautioned  against  (ver.  14).  This  was 
the  first  and  most  ancient  idolatry  of  all  other,  and  the  most  plausible,  drawing  the 
adoration  to  those  creatures  that  not  only  are  in  a  situation  above  us,  but  are  most 
sensibly  glorious  in  themselves,  and  most  generally  serviceable  to  the  world.  It  is 
intimated  here  how  strong  the  temptation  is  to  sense;  for  the  caution  is,  "Lest 
thou  shouldst  be  driven  to  worship  them  "  by  the  strong  impulse  of  a  vain  imagina- 
tion, and  the  impetuous  tori'ent  of  the  customs  of  the  nations.  Yet  he  shows  how 
weak  the  temptation  would  be  to  those  that  would  use  their  reason  ;  for  these  pre- 
tended deities,  the  sun,  the  moon,  and  stars,  were  only  blessings  which  the  Lord 
their  God,  whom  they  were  obliged  to  worship,  had  imparted  to  all  nations.  It 
is  absurd  to  worship  them,  for— They  are  man's  servants,  were  ordained  to  give 
light  on  the  earth  ;  and  shall  we  serve  those  that  were  made  to  serve  us  ?  They  are 
God's  gifts  ;  He  has  imparted  them.  Whatever  benefit  we  have  by  them  we  owe  it  to 
Him.  It  is  therefore  highly  injurious  to  Him  to  give  that  honour  to  them  which  is  due 
to  Him  only.  6.  He  charges  them  to  teach  their  children  to  observe  the  law  of  God 
(vers.  9,  10).  (1)  Care  must  be  taken  in  general  to  preserve  the  entail  of  religion 
among  them,  and  to  transmit  the  knowledge  and  woi"ship  of  God  to  posterity ;  for 
the  kingdom  of  God  in  Israel  was  designed  to  be  perpetual,  if  they  did  not  forfeit  the 
privilege  of  it.  (2)  Parents  must,  in  order  hereunto,  particularly  take  care  to  teach 
their  own  children  the  fear  of  God,  and  to  train  them  up  in  an  observance  of  all  His 
commandments.  7.  He  charges  them  never  to  forget  their  duty  (ver.  23).  Though 
God  is  ever  mindful  of  the  covenant,  we  are  apt  to  forget  it ;  and  that  is  at  the 
bottom  of  all  our  departures  from  God.  Care  and  holy  watchfulness  are  the  best 
helps  against  a  bad  memory.  These  are  the  direcliions  and  commands  he  gives 
them.  II.  Let  us  see  now  what  are  motives  or  arguments  with  which  he 
BACKS  these  exhortations.  How  doth  he  order  the  cause  before  them,  and  fill 
his  month  with  arguments  ?  And  a  great  deal  he  has  to  say  on  God's  behalf.  Some 
of  his  topics  are  indeed  peculiar  to  that  people,  yet  applicable  to  us.  But  upon  the 
whole  it  is  evident  that  religion  has  reason  on  its  side,  the  powerful  charms  of 
which  all  that  are  irreligious  wilfully  stop  their  ears  to.    1.  He  urges  the  greatness. 


CHAP.  IV.]  DEUTERONOMY.  39 

glory,  and  goodness  of  God.  Did  we  consider  what  a  God  He  is  with  whom  we 
have  to  do,  we  would  surely  make  conscience  of  our  duty  to  Him,  and  would  not 
dare  to  sin  against  Him.  He  reminds  them  here  that  the  Lord  Jehovah  is  the  one 
only  living  and  true  God.  That  He  is  a  consuming  fire,  a  jealous  God  (ver.  24). 
That  yet  He  is  a  merciful  God  (ver.  31).  It  comes  in  here  as  an  encouragement  to 
repentance,  but  might  serve  as  an  inducement  to  obedience,  and  a  consideration 
proper  to  prevent  their  apostasy.  Shall  we  forsake  a  merciful  God  who  will  never 
forsake  us,  as  it  follows  here,  if  we  be  faithful  unto  Him?  Whither  can  we 
go  to  mend  ourselves?  2.  He  urges  their  relation  to  this  God,  His  authority 
over  them,  and  their  obligations  to  Him.  The  commandments  you  are  to 
keep  and  do  are  not  mine,  saith  Moses,  not  mv  inventions,  not  my  injunc- 
tions, but  they  are  the  commandments  of  the  Lora,  framed  by  infinite  wisdom, 
enacted  by  sovereign  power.  3.  He  urges  the  wisdom  of  being  religious  (ver.  6). 
"For  this  is  your  wisdom  in  the  sight  of  the  nations."  In  keeping  God's  com- 
mandments they  would  act  wisely  for  themselves.  This  is  your  wisdom.  It  is  not 
only  agreeable  to  right  reason,  but  highly  conducive  to  our  true  interest  (Job 
xxviii.  28).  They  would  answer  the  expectations  of  their  neighbours,  who,  upon 
reading  or  hearing  the  precepts  of  the  law  that  was  given  them,  would  conclude  that 
certainly  the  people  that  were  governed  by  this  law  were  a  wise  and  understanding 
people.  4.  He  urges  the  singular  advantages  they  enjoyed  by  virtue  of  the  happy 
establishment  they  were  under  (vers.  7,  8).  (1)  Never  was  any  people  so  privileged 
in  speaking  to  God  (ver.  7).  It  is  the  character  of  God's  Israel,  that  on  all  occasions 
they  call  upon  Him,  in  everything  they  make  their  requests  known  to  God.  They 
do  nothing  but  what  they  consult  Him  in  ;  they  desire  nothing  but  what  they  come 
to  Him  for.  Those  that  call  upon  God  shall  certainly  find  Him  within  call,  and 
ready  to  give  an  answer  of  peace  to  every  prayer  of  faith  (Isa.  Iviii.  9).  This  is  a 
privilege  which  makes  the  Israel  of  God  truly  great  and  honourable.  What  can  go 
further  than  this  to  magnify  a  people  or  person  ?  (2)  Never  was  any  people  so 
privileged  in  hearing  from  God  by  the  statutes  and  judgments  which  were  set  before 
them  (ver.  8).  Observe  that  all  the  statutes  and  judgments  of  the  Divine  law  are 
infinitely  just  and  righteous,  above  the  statutes  and  judgments  of  any  of  the  nations. 
The  having  of  these  statutes  and  judgments  set  before  them  is  the  true  and  trans- 
cendent greatness  of  any  nation  or  people  (Psa.  cxlvii.  19,  20).  It  is  an  honour  to 
us  that  we  have  the  Bible  in  reputation  and  power  among  us  ;  it  is  an  evidence  of  a 
people's  being  high  in  the  favour  of  God,  and  a  means  of  making  them  high  among 
the  nations.  They  that  magnify  the  law  shall  be  magnified  by  it.  5.  He  urges 
God's  glorious  appearances  to  them  at  Mount  Sinai  when  He  gave  them  this  law. 
(1)  What  they  saw  at  Mount  Sinai  (ver.  11).  They  saw  a  strange  composition  of  fire 
and  darkness,  both  dreadful  and  very  awful.  He  tells  them  again  (ver.  36)  what 
they  saw,  for  he  would  have  them  never  to  forget  it.  He  showed  thee  His  great  fire. 
It  gave  an  earnest  of  the  day  of  judgment,  in  which  the  Lord  Jesus  shall  be  revealed 
in  flaming  fire.  As  he  reminds  them  of  what  they  saw,  so  he  tells  them  what  they 
saw  not ;  no  manner  of  similitude  from  which  they  might  form  either  an  idea  of  God 
in  their  fancies,  or  an  image  of  God  in  their  high  places.  (2)  What  they  heard  at 
Mount  Sinai  (ver.  12).  The  Lord  spake  unto  you  with  an  intelligible  voice,  in  your 
own  language,  and  you  heard  it.  This  he  enlargeth  upon  towards  the  close  of  his 
discourse  (vers.  32,  33,  36).  They  heard  the  voice  of  God  speaking  from  heaven. 
God  manifests  Himself  to  aU  the  world  in  the  works  of  creation,  without  speech  or 
language,  and  yet  their  voice  is  heard  (Psa.  xix.  2).  But  to  Isi-ael  He  made  Himself 
known  by  speech  and  language,  condescending  to  the  weakness  of  the  Church's 
infant  state.  They  heard  it  out  of  the  midst  of  the  fire,  which  showed  that  it  was 
God  Himself  that  spoke  to  them  ;  for  who  else  could  dwell  with  devouring  fire  ? 
They  heard  it,  and  yet  lived  (ver.  33).  It  was  a  wonder  of  mercy  that  the  fire  did 
not  devour  them,  or  that  they  did  not  die  for  fear,  when  Moii*  liimself  trembled. 
(3)  Never  any  people  heard  the  like.  He  bids  them  inquire  of  former  days,  and 
distant  places,  and  they  will  find  this  favour  of  God  to  Israel  wdthout  precedent  or 
parallel  (ver.  32).  This  singular  honour  done  them  called  for  singular  obedience. 
6.  He  urges  God's  gracious  appearances  for  them  in  bringing  them  out  of  Egypt,  from 
the  iron  furnace,  where  they  laboured  in  the  fire,  forming  them  into  a  people,  and 
then  taking  them  to  be  His  own  people,  a  people  of  inheritance  (ver.  20).  This  he 
mentions  again  (vers.  34,  37,  38).  Never  did  God  do  such  a  thing  for  any  people. 
(1)  They  were  thus  dignified  and  distinguished  ;  not  for  anything  in  them  that  was 
deserving  or  inviting,  but  because  God  had  a  kindness  for  their  fathers.  He  chose 
them.     7.  He  urges  God's  righteous  appearance  against  them,  sometimes  for  their 


40  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  nr. 

sins.  He  instanceth  particularly  in  the  matter  of  Peor  (ver.  34).  He  also  takes 
notice  again  of  God's  displeasure  against  himself  (vers.  12,  22).  "The  Lord  was  angry 
with  me  for  your  sakes."  Others  suffering  for  our  sakes  should  grieve  us  more  than 
our  own.  8.  He  urges  the  certain  benefit  and  advantage  of  obedience.  This  argu- 
ment he  begins  with,  "  That  ye  may  live,  and  go  in  and  possess  the  land  "  (ver.  1).  And 
this  he  concludes  with,  "  That  it  may  go  well  with  thee,  and  with  thy  children  after 
thee  "  (ver.  40).  He  reminds  them  that  they  were  upon  their  good  behaviour,  their 
prosperity  would  depend  upon  their  piety.  If  they  kept  God's  precepts  He  would 
undoubtedly  fulfil  His  promises.  9.  He  urges  the  fatal  consequences  of  their 
apostasy  from  God,  that  it  would  undoubtedly  be  the  ruin  of  their  nation.  This  he 
enlarges  upon  (vers.  25-31),  where  God's  faithfulness  to  His  covenant  encourageth 
us  to  hope  that  He  will  not  reject  us  though  we  are  driven  to  Him  by  affliction.  If 
we  at  length  remember  the  covenant,  we  shall  find  that  He  has  not  forgotten  it. 
Now  let  all  these  arguments  be  laid  together,  and  then  say  whether  religion  has  not 
reason  on  its  side.  None  cast  off  the  government  of  their  God  but  those  that  have 
first  abandoned  the  understanding  of  a  man.     {Matthew  Henry,  D.D.)  God's 

dealings  vnth  His  people : — I.  In  reviewing  the  gracious  dealings  of  God  towards  us, 

THE  GREAT  DIFFICULTY  IS  TO  KNOW  AT  WHAT  POINT  TO  BEGIN.       As  a  people,   and 

as  individuals,  to  God  alone  are  we  indebted  for  the  multiplied  sources  of  hope  and 
enjoyment.  We  live  under  a  mild  and  well-balanced  constitution,  and  under  the 
shadow  of  equitable  laws.  We  possess  a  fruitful  soil  and  temperate  seasons.  We 
enjoy  an  open  Bible,  and  therefore  have  the  full  light  of  Divine  revelation.  We  are 
favoured  likewise  with  a  pure  faith  and  the  reformed  religion.     II.   **Heaeken 

THEREFORE,    O  ISRAEL,"  WAS  THE  INFERENCE  OF  MoSES  ON  A  REVIEW  OF    THE 

DEALINGS  OF  GoD  TOWARDS  THE  Jews  :  "Hearken,  therefore,  to  His  statutes  and 
judgments  so  as  to  do  them."  The  Scriptures,  both  of  the  Old  and  New  Testament, 
contain  the  records  of  God's  will,  and  His  statutes  for  us.  To  hearken  to  these  pre- 
cepts we  are  bound  both  by  duty  and  by  gratitude.  These  are  the  strongest  forces 
which  can  be  applied  to  the  mind  of  man.  III.  By  obedience  only  can  wb 
SECURE  MERCIES  YET  TO  COME.  Of  tMs  Moses  wamcd  the  Israelites  :  "  Now  there- 
fore hearken,  0  Israel,  unto  the  statutes  and  unto  the  judgments,  which  I  teach  you, 
for  to  do  them,  that  ye  may  live,  and  go  in  and  possess  the  land  which  the  Lord  God 
of  your  fathers  giveth  you."  The  promises  vouchsafed  to  them  had  reference  to 
temporal  things.  These  could  only  be  secured  by  obedience.  The  promises  granted 
to  us  in  the  Gospel  relate  both  to  time  and  to  eternity,  for  "Godliness  is  profitable 
unto  all  things,  having  promise  of  the  life  that  now  is,  and  of  that  which  is  to 
come."  {H.  J.  Hastings,  M.A.)  Hearken! — Moses  called  upon  Israel  to 
"  hearken."  Who  can  hear  ?  Who  has  ever  met  a  man,  in  any  congregation,  that 
could  listen  ?  What  is  wanted  to-day  may  be  described  as  good  hearers.  It  is  not 
given  to  man  to  rush  away  from  his  business,  place  himself  down  suddenly  in  the 
sanctuary,  and  call  for  revelations  that  he  can  appreciate.  Men  must  be  prepared 
to  hear  as  well  as  prepared  to  preach.  To  "hearken"  is  not  a  mechanical 
exercise.  The  word  "hearken"  is  charged  with  profound  meaning;  it  represents 
the  act  of  acute,  vital,  profound,  fervent  attention.  He  who  "hearkens"  is  in  an 
attitude  of  eagerness — as  if  he  would  complete  the  speech,  anticipate  it,  or  elicit 
from  the  speaker  a  broader  eloquence  by  the  gratitude  and  expectancy  of  his  own 
attention.  Would  that  they  who  say  much  about  speaking  would  learn  the  elements 
of  good  listening  ! — so  learned,  they  would  be  dispossessed  of  themselves,  their  ears 
would  be  purged  of  all  noises  and  tumults  and  rival  competitions  ;  and  importunity 
being  dismissed,  anxiety  being  suspended,  and  the  soul  set  in  a  posture  of  expecta- 
tion, would  receive  even  from  slow-speaking  Moses  statutes  and  precepts  solemn  as 
eternity,  and  rich  as  the  thought  of  God.  "He  that  hath  ears  to  hear," — not  for 
noises  to  please, — "  let  him  hear."  Such  hearing  is  almost  equal  to  praying  ;  such 
listening  never  was  disappointed.  {J.  Parker,  D.D.)  The  Bible  the  ivisdom  of  a 
nation : — Consider — I.  That  the  Bible  brings  greatness  to  a  nation  ;  because 
— 1.  When  received  and  obeyed,  it  brings  God's  blessing  with  it.  2.  It  elevates  the 
national  character.     11.  That  it  is  the  duty  of  all  to  have  a  personal 

ACQUAINTANCE  WITH  THE  SCRIPTURES,  AND  TO  INSTRUCT  THE  YOUNQ  IN  THXM. 
(S.  Hay  man,  B.A.) 

Ver.  4.  But  ye  that  did  cleave  tinto  tlie  Lord  yoTir  God.— 1%«  blessedness  of  cleav- 
ing to  the  Lord : — Moses  spoke  like  a  father  during  the  closing  days  of  his  life  to 
those  who  "were  then  alive."  There  is  a  reference  here  to  the  multitudes  who  had 
Dedlen  in  the  desert  because  they  did  not  cleave,  &c  They  cared  not  for  SLim  who  had 


CHAP.  IV.]  DEUTERONOMY.  41 

delivered  them.  Moses  reminds  them  of  the  declension  of  many  to  the  idolatry  of 
Baal  Peor,  to  which  they  were  tempted  by  those  who  wished  to  bring  a  curse  on 
Israel.  He  recalls  the  terrible  punishment  which  overtook  the  sinners  (Numb,  xxv.). 
But  those  who  cleaved  to  the  Lord  remained  in  life.  This  was  to  be  an  example  to 
the  people  to  whom  Moses  spoke,  when  they  realised  in  this  how  truly  the  Lord  is  a 
jealous  God.  I.  The  special  regard  of  Jehovah  for  those  who  cleave  to 
Him.  1.  He  watches  over  their  temporal  existence,  and  does  not  permit  it  to 
be  snatched  away  like  that  of  many  sinners,  unexpectedly  and  before  the  times. 
2.  True,  we  do  not  now  think  that  an  early  death  is  a  punishment  for  falling  away 
from  God.  With  us  it  is  not  the  same  as  with  Israel.  Their  reward  was  iirst  the 
earthly  Canaan.  To  us  is  the  promise  of  a  heavenly  inheritance.  Then  to  die  was 
to  lose  the  promised  land  ;  now  it  is  the  way  of  entrance  to  the  heavenly  country. 
Therefore  the  Lord  often  takes  some  of  those  who  cleave  to  Him  early  from  earth,  as 
if  they  were  His  specially  favoured  ones.  3.  Still,  one  has  often  the  impression  that 
some  are  called  hence  sooner  than  should  have  been.  And  this  may  seem  either  a 
mark  of  favour  or  the  reverse — of  favour,  since  the  poor  sinner  is  saved  from  further 
sinning,  and  may  be  brought  to  himself  before  death's  solemn  advent ;  or  of  unfavour, 
since  it  seems  as  if  it  ought  to  have  been  otherwise.  II.  The  special  help  and 
deliverance  given  to  those  who  cleave  to  God.  1.  Those  who  cleave  to  Him 
experience  deliverance  from  sickness,  from  trouble  and  death  ;  in  war  and  pestilence, 
so  that  they  are  not  suddenly  snatched  away  ;  whilst  many  others — although  we  dare 
not  judge  who — who  are  accustomed  to  Hve  according  to  their  lusts,  have  Uttle  safe- 
guard. 2.  At  all  events,  what  Moses  says  in  regard  to  this  life  applies  to  us  in  regard 
to  the  future  life.  There  it  will  be  declared,  "  None  is  lost  who  have  cleaved  to  the 
Lord,  *  they  are  alive  every  one  this  day.' "  3.  Whereas  those  will  not  be  found  who 
have  never  sought  after  God  or  His  Son  Jesus.  4.  If  we  would  live  in  time  and 
eternity,  then  we  must  cleave  to  the  Lord,  **fleo  from  idolatry"  and  all  the 
abominations  that  cleave  to  it.     {J.  C,  Blumhardt.) 

Vers.  5,  6.  Keep  therefore  and  do  them;  for  tMs  is  your  wisdom  and  your 
understanding. — The  toisdom  of  being  holy : — Moses,  the  man  of  God,  having,  by  the 
appointment  of  heaven,  delivered  to  the  Israelites  most  excellent  laws  and  command* 
ments,  pathetically  exhorts  them  in  this  chapter  to  keep  those  laws  and  observe  thos« 
commandments.  1.  That  these  laws  and  statutes,  which  God  gave  the  Israelites, 
contained  in  them  an  inestimable  treasure  of  wisdom,  for  those  words,  "This  is 
your  wisdom,"  may  refer  to  the  statutes  and  judgments,  the  wise  and  well-ordered 
laws  which  were  given  to  the  people.  Or,  secondly,  these  words  may  be  applied  to 
the  keeping  of  those  laws  and  statutes,  "Keep  them  and  do  them,  for  this,"  i.e. 
this  keeping  and  doing  of  them,  "is  your  wisdom  and  your  understanding."  Your 
diligent  observing  and  practising  of  these  laws  and  statutes  are  an  eminent  part  of 
wisdom.  The  best  and  chiefest  wisdom  is  to  be  religious,  and  to  live  in  the  fear  of 
God.  And  this  is  the  sense  of  the  great  Lawgiver  in  my  text,  "  Keep  and  do  the 
statutes  and  judgments  which  I  have  taught  you,"  saith  he,  "for  this  is  your 
wisdom  and  understanding."  As  much  as  to  say,  he  that  lives  a  holy  and  godly  life, 
he  that  walks  innocently  and  uprightly,  and  conscientiously  observes  the  Divine 
laws,  doth  truly  deserve  the  name  of  a  wise  man.  I  will  show  you  that  a  virtuous 
and  righteous  man  is  master  of  the  greatest  understanding  and  highest  prudence, 
and  that  to  be  good  and  wise  are  one  and  the  same  thing.  I  premise  this,  then, 
that  there  are  two  essential  parts  of  true  wisdom.  The  first  is  to  understand  and 
judge  aright  of  things,  to  think  of  them  as  indeed  they  are  ;  the  second  is  to  act 
according  to  the  appreciation  and  judgment  of  things,  to  shun  the  evil  which  we 
discover  to  be  such,  and  to  choose  and  embrace  what  we  know  to  be  right  and  good. 
This  I  offer  as  an  exact  idea  of  true  wisdom  ;  and  accordingly  you  shall  see  that  the 
person  who  leads  a  virtuous  and  holy  life  is  the  only  wise  man.  First,  then,^  he 
hath  the  truest  notions  and  conceptions  of  things,  he  hath  arrived  unto  a  right 
discerning  of  what  is  just  and  good.  His  understanding  (which  is  the  basis  of  all 
religion)  is  duly  informed,  and  his  principles  are  the  best  and  truest.  Error  and  a 
depraved  judgment  being  the  source  of  the  greatest  immoralities  in  the  world,  a 
wise  man  first  of  all  endeavours  to  lay  aside  all  vitiated  opinions.  His  care  is 
therefore  to  remove  all  wrong  opinions  and  mistakes  about  things.  He  labours  to 
think  aright,  and  to  bring  himself  as  soon  as  may  be  to  true  apprehensions.  Now, 
then,  holy  and  righteous  men  may  be  believed  to  have  attained  to  this  first  part  of 
true  wisdom,  because  they  have  right  notions  of  themselves,  their  souls  and  bodies, 
of  the  things  of  this  world  and  of  God  the  Supreme  Governor  of  all.    The  other 


42  TEB  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it. 

essential  part  of  wisdom  is  to  act  according  to  this  apprehension  and  judgment  of 
things,  to  live  according  to  these  excellent  notions  and  maxims.  And  here  I  shall 
further  demonstrate  to  you  that  piety  and  wisdom  are  terms  convertible,  and  that 
it  is  impossible  to  be  wise  unless  we  be  religious.  In  general,  then,  I  say  this,  for 
a  man  to  act  according  to  his  knowledge,  to  live  according  to  what  he  possesseth,  is 
an  argument  of  a  wise  man,  and  the  contrary  is  great  folly  and  weakness.  Certaiidy, 
the  Author  of  the  Christian  religion  would  not  institute  anything  that  is  contra- 
dictory and  inconsistent  with  itself ;  and  yet  such  should  Christianity  be  after  the 
rate  of  some  men's  behaviour,  who,  glorying  in  the  name  of  Christians,  act  in 
opposition  to  the  laws  and  rules  of  Christianity.  That  is  the  best  religion,  and 
worthy  of  its  heavenly  Author,  which  displays  itself  in  the  actions  and  deportments 
of  men,  which  restrains  them  from  beloved  vices,  checks  their  most  pleasurable 
lusts,  and  is  ever  visible  and  operative  in  their  lives.  Most  men  know  and  every 
day  experience  the  world  to  be  vain,  vice  to  be  dangerous,  and  integrity  and 
honesty  to  be  the  choicest  possessions  ;  and  yet  herein  they  betray  their  prodigious 
folly,  that  their  lives  and  practices  are  no  ways  suitable  to  those  notions  ;  for  they 
inordinately  love  the  world,  and  prosecute  its  vanities  ;  they  live  as  if  there  were 
no  danger  at  all  in  the  commission  of  sin,  and  they  act  as  if  honesty  were  the 
blemish  of  a  man's  life.  Thus  they  walk  antipodes  to  themselves,  they  run  counter 
to  their  own  persuasions,  they  baffle  their  own  judgments,  they  contradict  their 
own  apprehensions.  This  is  the  guide  of  the  world,  and  it  savours  of  the  highest 
imprudence  and  folly  imaginable.  It  must  be  an  act,  then,  of  great  wisdom  to  walk 
accurately  and  circumspectly.  1.  He  must  needs  be  voted  for  a  wise  man  who 
makes  choice  of  the  greatest  good,  and  pitcheth  on  the  chief  and  best  end,  and 
minds  the  things  of  the  highest  concernment.  This  no  sober  and  intelligent  person 
can  deny  ;  and  by  this  it  is  that  a  godly  man  proves  himself  to  be  the  possessor  of 
true  wisdom  (Psa.  iv.  6).  The  folly  of  men  is  seen  in  nothing  more  than  in  their 
huge  mistakes  about  their  chief  good  ;  and  therefore  here  every  good  man  ia 
exceeding  cautious,  and  with  great  deliberation  chooseth  that  which  he  knows  to 
be  absolutely  good  and  indispensably  necessary.  And  what  is  that  ?  Happiness. 
And  what  is  that  happiness  ?  It  is  briefly  this,  to  live  in  the  enjoyment  of  God,  to 
love  Him  and  to  be  loved  by  Him,  to  partake  of  His  favour  here  and  of  His  glory 
hereafter.  2.  He  that  is  truly  wise  after  he  hath  propounded  to  himself  and 
chosen  the  chiefest  good,  will  find  out,  and  then  use  the  best  and  fittest  means  for 
the  attaining  of  that  end.  And  on  this  account  likewise,  holiness  is  the  best 
wisdom.  The  Christian  man  sits  down  and  seriously  considers  the  method  which  is 
prescribed  him,  in  order  to  his  happiness,  recollecting  that  peremptory  decision  of  St. 
Peter,  "  Neither  is  there  salvation  in  any  other,  for  there  is  no  other  name  under 
heaven  given  among  men,  whereby  they  must  be  saved."  This  is  the  method 
which  the  Gospel  prescribes,  this  is  the  plain  road  to  heaven,  and  he  resolves  to 
continue  in  it  to  the  end  of  his  days.  3,  True  wisdom  teacheth  us  to  regard  this 
end  and  these  means  in  the  first  place,  and  to  employ  ourselves  about  them 
betimes.  Where  delays  and  demurs  may  prove  exceedingly  dangerous  a  wise  man 
counts  it  his  interest  to  make  haste,  and  to  make  sure  of  his  happiness  the  first 
thing  he  doth.  No  prudent  person  will  trust  to  that  which  is  uncertain,  frail,  and 
flitting.  4.  It  is  approved  wisdom  to  part  with  a  lesser  good  that  we  may  make 
ourselves  sure  of  a  far  greater,  and  to  undergo  some  lighter  evils  to  put  ourselves 
out  of  danger  of  falling  into  those  which  are  more  heavy  and  grievous.  The  fencer 
receives  a  blow  on  his  arm  to  save  his  head.  In  a  great  tempest  the  richest 
lading  is  cast  into  the  sea,  to  secure  the  vessel  and  the  passengers'  lives.  We  are 
willing  to  recover  health  and  prolong  life  by  abstinence  and  great  severity  on  the 
body.  We  are  contented  to  be  sick  that  we  may  be  well.  We  submit,  to  save  our 
life,  to  the  loss  of  a  limb ;  we  let  a  part  go  to  save  the  whole.  All  these  actions 
are  thought  to  be  resjulated  by  right  reason,  and  were  ever  recorded  as  instances  of 
human  prudence.  And  on  the  same  score  must  he  that  is  truly  religious  be  con- 
cluded to  be  the  owner  of  singular  prudence  and  discretion.  He  denieth  himself 
the  sinful  pleasures  of  the  world,  and  by  that  means  assures  to  himself  those 
pleasures  which  are  at  God's  right  hand  for  evermore.  5.  It  is  certain,  and  it  will 
hardly  meet  with  any  gainsayer,  that  that  person  proves  himself  to  be  wise  and 
prudent  who,  seeing  the  uncertainty  and  changeableness  of  this  present  state, 
makes  certain  provision  for  the  future.  This  is  the  wisdom  of  a  godly  man  ;  he 
takes  a  prospect  of  the  other  world  whilst  he  stands  upon  this.  1.  The  poor 
pretenders  to  wisdom  are  baffled,  and  the  mere  shows  and  semblances  of  it  in  the 
world  are  utterly  disgraced.     You  must  know,  then,   that  there  is  a  seeming 


CHAP.  IV.]  DEUTERONOMY.  43 

counterfeit  wisdom  ;  and  there  is  a  real  and  substantial  wisdom,  which  justly 
deserves  that  name.  2.  From  what  hath  been  said  there  is  a  plain  discovery  of 
true  and  substantial  wisdom.  I  have  let  you  see  that  it  is  a  very  large  and  com- 
prehensive thing:  it  consists  both  in  knowledge  and  practice.  It  is  not  only  a 
right  judgment  of  those  things  which  are  Divine,  and  appertain  to  faith  and 
obedience,  but  it  is  acting  according  to  that  knowledge  and  judgment  of  those 
Divine  matters.  3.  That  hence  we  have  a  demonstration  of  the  excellency  of 
religion  and  a  holy  life,  and  consequently  a  prevalent  motive  to  the  embracing  of 
them.  There  cannot  be  a  greater  incentive  to  godliness  than  this,  that  it  is  the  gi'eatest 
wisdom.  This  doctrine  concerns  us  all.  Seeing  the  fear  of  the  Lord  is  the  beginning, 
the  head,  the  main  part  of  wisdom,  let  it  be  our  chief  study  how  we  may  fear  and 
worship  God  aright,  and  walk  uprightly  in  the  whole  course  of  our  lives,  and  let 
ns  be  afraid  of  nothing  so  much  as  ofiFending  God  and  doing  that  which  is  sinful. 
{J.  Edivards,  D.D.)        The  injliience  of  revealed  truth  ujjon  a  nation : — I.  That  the 

POSSESSION  OF  THE  REVEALED  TRUTH  OF  GOD  IS  THE  MOST  DISTINGUISHED  PRIVILEGE 

OF  A  NATION.  1,  It  is  the  duty  of  every  man  thus  possessing  the  revelation  which 
God  has  given  to  acquaint  himself  with  it.  2.  As  God  has  thus  made  it  the  duty  of 
every  individual  to  inquire  and  to  learn,  so  has  He  secured  to  them  the  means  of 
instruction,  by  raising  up  an  order  of  men  whose  business  it  is  to  teach  ;  to  make 
known  the  statutes  and  judgments  which  He  has  given.  3.  We  see  this,  likewise, 
in  the  solemn  duty,  binding  on  every  parent,  to  teach  these  statutes  and  judgments 
to  his  children.     II.  That  from  the  general  diffusion  of  this  truth  those 

PRACTICAL  results  CAN  ALONE  BE  EXPECTED  VTHICH  SHALL  MAKE  THESE  SOLEMN 

WORDS  APPLICABLE  :  **  Surely  this  great  nation  is  a  wise  and  understanding  people." 
1.  You  will  all  allow,  that  in  proportion  as  a  nation  is  made  righteous,  in  that 
proportion  it  becomes  wise  and  great.  2.  We  may  calculate  with  certainty  on 
another  effect.  Whenever  the  truth  of  God  is  extensively  diffused  through  a 
nation  its  morality  will  be  improved.  3.  A  nation  will  be  thus  made  wise  and 
understanding,  because  it  will  be  preserved  from  dangerous  errors,  and  especially 
from  wasting  infidelity.  4.  Another  great  effect  of  the  general  diffusion  of  the 
truth  of  God  is  the  establishment  of  civil  order  and  peace.  5.  The  greatest 
happiness  will  result  from  this  general  diffusion  of  the  revealed  truth  of  God. 
(R.  Watson.)  Britain's  privileges  and  obligations: — I.  As  a  nation  we  enjoy 
VALUABLE  ADVANTAGES  AND  BLESSINGS.  1.  Liberty.  2.  Political  power  and 
eminence.  3.  Diffusion  of  God's  Word.  Number  and  influence  of  pious  and  holy 
men.     II.  That  our  valuable  advantages  and  blessings  as  a  nation  place  us 

UNDER  momentous   OBLIGATIONS   TO   THE   GoD   BY  WHOM   THEY   WERE   BESTOWED. 

1.  An  obligation  to  gratitude,  2.  An  obligation  to  repentance.  3.  An  obligation  to 
the  maintenance  and  diffusion  of  Divine  truth.  {J.  Farsons.)  The  Bible  the 
wisdom  of  a  nation: — Parting  words  are  generally  impressive  words.  In  this, 
the  last  of  the  books  of  the  Pentateuch,  Moses  delivered  to  the  people  of  Israel  his 
parting  counsels.  He  sets  before  them,  in  words  of  expostulation  and  warning, 
good  and  evil — life  and  death.  And  not  only  does  he  give  them  these  impressive 
exhortations,  but,  foreseeing — for  God  was  pleased  to  give  him  a  revelation  of  it 
(Deut.  xxxi.  16) — that  their  deceitful  hearts  would  turn  aside,  he  utters  the 
plainest  predictions  of  the  judgments  which  have  since  overtaken  them.  We  see, 
then,  that  Israel's  safety  was  identified  with  her  adherence  to  pure  and  undefiled 
religion.  At  the  time  when  all  the  nations  of  the  earth  beside  were  in  darkness, 
she  was  made  the  depository  of  the  knowledge  of  the  true  and  only  God.  Still, 
while  these  things  are  so,  and  while  we  cannot  admit  the  idea  of  a  peculiar  people 
in  the  sense  in  which  Israel  was,  it  is  impossible  for  those  who  acknowledge  that 
"the  Lord  is  King,"  and  that  He  is  "Judge  of  all  the  earth,"  to  doubt  that,  as 
with  individuals,  so  with  nations,  a  high  measure  of  Divine  favour  involves  of 
necessity  a  proportionate  degree  of  national  responsibility.  Holding  those  feelings, 
we  shall  be  brought  to  acknowledge  that,  nationally,  we  have  ourselves  much  in 
the  sight  of  God  to  answer  for.     I.  In  the  first  place,  then,  the  Bible  brings 

GREATNESS  TO  A  NATION,  BECAUSE,  WHEN  RECEIVED  AND  OBEYED,  IT  BRINGS  God's 

blessing  WITH  IT.  The  glory  of  Israel  was  the  presence  of  Jehovah  amongst 
them.  There  was  no  nation — to  use  the  words  of  Moses  in  the  text — that  had  God 
so  nigh  them  as  had  they.  In  their  journeys  through  the  wilderness  He  was 
visibly  present  in  the  pillar  of  cloud ;  and  afterwards,  in  the  temple  which  was 
founded  on  Mount  Moriah  to  His  praise,  the  Holy  of  holies  suflBciently  indicated 
to  them  His  special  abode  with  them.  When  He  departed  from  them  their  safe- 
guard was  withdrawn :  the  enemy  made  Jerusalem,  hitherto  invincible,  a  heap  of 


44  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

stones.  Similarly,  our  own  land,  at  the  period  of  the  Reformation,  received  the 
Holy  Scriptures,  and  since  then,  in  their  possession  and  use,  has  obtained  from 
God  innumerable  blessings :  religion  has  extended  itself  in  renewed  vitality 
amongst  us ;  and  this  great  nation  has  become  a  wise  and  understanding  people. 
But,  apart  from  the  security  which  the  fear  of  the  Lord  brings  with  it,  we  shall 
see  that— II.  The  Bible  brings  greatness  to  a  nation  because  it  elevates  the 
NATIONAL  CHARACTER.  I  do  not  Seek  to  palliate  our  multitudinous  sins.  Still,  even 
now,  Britain  I  do  believe  to  be  the  stronghold  of  pure,  because  scriptural,  religion. 
The  Bible  is  not  yet  dethroned  from  the  affections  of  her  people  ;  and,  for  this  reason, 
the  beisis  of  the  national  character  is  yet  sound.  III.  The  duty  of  personal 
acquaintance  with  the  Scriptures,  and  of  instructing  the  young  out  of 
them.  {S.  Haymany  B.A.)  Security  of  the  established  religion  the  wisdom  of  the 
nation ;— I.  The  exercise  of  religion  is  the  principal  end  of  every  govern- 
ment, AND  consequently  AN  ACT  OF  THE  TRUEST  WISDOM.      1.  It  Is  of  nO  small 

advantage  to  the  mutual  correspondence  of  the  members  of  a  community  that  religion 
is  agreeable  both  to  the  natural  tendency  of  every  particular  man's  mind,  and  the 
general  conseut  of  all  nations  interweaving  it  in  their  several  constitutions.  Because 
as,  on  the  one  hand,  whatever  notion  is  so  universal  cannot  be  destroyed  without  the 
gi'eatest  violence  to  human  nature  ;  so,  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  an  obvious  fixed  point 
in  which  all  the  members  may  the  most  easily  be  supposed  to  centre,  and  will  in 
course,  if  duly  cultivated,  be  not  only  a  bond  of  union  between  God  and  man,  but 
also  between  one  man  and  another.  2.  The  many  happy  consequences  and  natural 
good  effects  of  religion  are  so  serviceable  to  a  state  as  upon  the  most  cogent 
arguments  to  recommend  the  exercise  of  it  to  every  wise  government  as  its  principal 
end.  (1)  It  was  wisely  ordained  of  our  ancestors,  that  as  well  great  pleadings  as 
noble  actions  should  begin  with  devotion,  because  without  the  aid  of  heaven 
nothing  can  be  prudently  undertaken  or  ever  rightly  succeed.  For  certainly  as  it 
is  evident  from  reason  that  the  power  of  the  Almighty  extends  to  the  rewarding  or 
punishing,  the  advancing  or  destroying  every  nation,  as  their  actions  please  or 
displease  Him,  so  will  ordinary  reading,  and  even  common  experience,  assure  us 
that  God  does  actually  interpose  in  all  governments.  (2)  But  further,  religion  is 
not  only  the  truest  support,  and  therefore  ought  to  be  the  chief  end  of  eveiy 
government  with  respect  to  the  unforeseen  and  unaccountable  blessings  of  Provi- 
dence which  attend  it,  but  also  with  respect  to  its  own  natural  good  effects  in  the 
influence  which  it  has  upon  the  several  members  of  a  society,  {a)  If  we  consider 
the  governing  part  of  a  nation.  As  nothing  can  temper  the  greatness  and  power 
of  a  prince  more  than  a  just  sense  of  religion,  so  neither  can  anything  more 
recommend  him  to  the  love  and  reverence  of  his  people.  (6)  If  we  consider  what 
shall  render  people  most  tractable  and  obedient  to  governors,  we  shall  find  that 
Christianity  must  certainly  have  the  most  beneficial  effect.     II.  A  settled  form 

OF  RELIGION  IS,  AS  THE  MEANS,    MOST   CONDUCIVE  TO   THAT  END,  AND   THEREFORE 

AN  IMPROVEMENT  OF  THE  WISDOM.  For  however  religion,  naturally  speaking,  may 
not  consist  in  form,  and  we  may  allow  that  a  person  supposed  separate  from  aU 
community  may  practise  it  without  any  form  ;  yet,  besides  that,  even  in  that  case 
the  want  of  a  fixed  method  may  create  many  inconsistencies,  and  in  time  destroy  his 
religion.  So  that  though  forms  are  not  always  of  the  essence  of  the  thing  formed, 
yet,  at  least,  they  are  the  means  of  promoting  and  even  preserving  it ;  and  accord- 
ingly in  all  acts  of  government,  in  the  sessions  of  all  great  councils,  there  are 
settled  methods  of  proceeding ;  and  particularly  in  the  practice  of  the  law,  there 
are  forms  of  process,  terms,  garb,  rules  of  court,  and  other  formalities  which, 
though  not  the  essence  of  the  law,  yet  are  the  means  of  the  execution  of  it.  The 
same  reason  therefore  which  prescribes  a  settled  form  to  aU  other  acts  of  society 
prescribes  it  to  religion  also.  1.  It  is  to  be  feared  lest  too  great  a  latitude  of 
worship  should  destroy  religion  itself,  and  the  liberty,  as  nowadays  stretched 
beyond  the  design  of  the  toleration  of  every  man  serving  God  in  his  own  way, 
should  end  in  not  serving  Him  at  all.  2.  Supposing  Christianity  in  general  were 
not  endangered  from  a  boundless  latitude,  nor  liable  to  be  lost  in  the  confusion ; 
yet,  at  least,  the  better  part  of  it.  Protestantism,  must  needs  run  a  mighty  hazard 
from  so  unlimited  a  variety.  3.  A  boundless  latitude  of  worship  may  not  only 
prove  destructive  to  religion  in  general,  and  Protestantism  in  particular,  but,  what 
even  men  of  the  loosest  principles  ought  to  be  concerned  for,  will  also  disturb  the 
peace  of  a  nation.  For  as  religion  has  not  only  the  most  universal,  but  even  the 
most  powerfol  sway  over  men's  minds,  so  it  will  be  heard  wherever  it  pleases  to 
exert  its  voice ;  and  the  very  calves  of  Dan  and  Bethel  shall  be  able  to  divide  the 


CHAP.  IV.]  DEUTERONOMY.  45 

kingdom  of  Israel  from  that  of  Judah.     III.  A  due  provision  for  the  security 

AND  ADVANCEMENT  OF   SUCH   A   SETTLED   FORM    IS   THE  ONLY  COMPLETION  OF  THAT 

wisdom.  With  regard  to  this  Hotion  was  it  that  our  pious  reformers  established 
it  by  law,  and  for  a  further  security  did  their  successors  appoint  penalties  and 
settle  a  test.  {John  Savage,  M.A.)  The  national  greatness  of  Britain,  its 
causes,  dangers,  and  preservation: — Canaan  was  evidently  the  glory  of  all  the 
earth,  and  Israel  the  most  renowned  of  aU  people ;  in  wealth,  in  intelligence,  in 
honour,  and  in  victory  the  Hebrew  nation  exceeded  all  the  nations  by  which  it 
was  surrounded.  Now,  England  is  a  great  nation,  and  compared  even  with 
enlightened  countries,  it  assumes  an  imposing  splendour  ;  and  if  viewed  in  contrast 
even  with  the  cultivated  nations  of  the  continent  of  Europe,  it  stands  at  the  head 
of  them  all.  Its  commercial  enterprise,  its  civil  and  religious  character,  its 
indomitable  industry,  its  multiplied  comforts,  and  the  distinguished  reputation 
which  it  has  in  all  the  nations  of  the  earth,  place  it  alone — far  above  any  other 
country.  It  is  natural  for  a  man  to  look  at  England,  and  to  ask,  **How  is  this  ?" 
And  having  discovered  the*  fact  of  this  greatness,  and  the  causes  of  it,  the  inquiry 
naturally  suggests  itself,  '*  How  is  this  greatness  to  be  peri)etuated  and  increased  ?" 
I.  The  CAUSES  of  Britain's  greatness.  1.  The  first  thing  mentioned  in  the 
text,  and  which  is  presented  throughout  this  book,  is  that  the  nation's  greatness 
consists  in  having  the  knowledge  of  the  true  God  ;  and  this  is  peculiar  in  respect 
to  England.  God  is  nigh  unto  this  nation,  and  has  given  it  the  knowledge  of 
Himself,  and  this  is  the  foundation  of  our  prosperity.  2.  Another  cause  mentioned 
in  the  text,  and  which  may  also  be  ascribed  to  Britain,  is  our  multitudinous 
and  wonderful  deliverances.  If  any  one  will  open  the  pages  of  history  and  read 
them,  he  will  see  how  this  country  has  risen  among  the  nations  of  the  earth  by 
the  remarkable  power  of  the  hand  of  the  Lord.  3.  Another  means  which  this  text 
prescribes  is  the  institution  and  preservation  of  the  Christian  ministry.  This 
agency  has  distributed  knowledge — this  has  nerved  the  people  with  right  principles 
— this  has  taught  them  industry,  benevolence,  and  all  the  social  virtues — and, 
above  all,  it  has  exhibited  to  the  people  the  way  of  salvation  by  Christ,  and  furnished 
motives  to  holiness,  and  to  every  kind  benevolent  act,  of  which  even  the  learned 
amongst  the  heathen  were  all  ignorant.  4.  Again,  the  text  points  out  another 
means  of  promoting  this  greatness,  and  that  is  the  communication  of  religious 
knowledge  to  the  young.  5.  Another  point  is  the  influence  of  a  prajdng  com- 
munity ;  "for  what  nation  is  there  so  great,  who  hath  God  so  nigh  unto  them,  as 
the  Lord  our  God  is,  in  all  things  that  we  call  upon  Him  for  ? "  What  a  multitude 
of  praying  people — formed  by  the  Gospel — live  in  Britain !  This  has  doubtless 
been  a  greater  security  to  her  than  all  her  wooden  walls,  or  than  all  her  large 
armies.  Prayer  is  a  benevolence  which  any  man  can  confer  on  kings  or  on  states- 
men, and  the  only  thing  very  many  have  to  do  with  them  is  to  pray  for  them. 
5.  I  will  mention  one  other  source  of  her  gi-eatness,  and  that  is  her  unrestricted 
possession  of  the  Divine  Word,  and  the  laws  of  the  land  being  largely  founded  on 
the  laws  of  that  book.  What  a  blessing  has  the  Bible  been  !  Among  our  mercies 
are  the  statiites  and  laws  by  which  we  are  governed  taken  principally  from  this 
book.  Much  imperfection,  it  is  true,  still  remains  in  these  laws  ;  and  many  of  us 
have  grievous  complaints  to  make  about  them  ;  but,  viewed  as  a  nation  amongst 
other  nations,  there  are  no  laws  like  those  of  Britain,  because  they  more  closely 
conform  to  the  laws  of  God  than  those  of  any  existing  nation  ;  and  they  are 
being  brought  nearer  to  the  blessed  book  of  God  ;  but  still,  as  they  are,  they  are 
looked  upon  with  envy  as  the  glory  of  the  world.  II.  The  dangers  to  which  the 
POSSESSION  OF  this  GREATNESS  EXPOSES  US.  The  first  which  Moses  presents  to 
them  was  self-conceit.  If  not  very  watchful  over  prosperity,  luxuriousness,  the 
indulgence  of  fleshly  appetites,  indolence,  and  neglect  of  others,  come  in  with  it — 
taking  rest,  and  lying  down  in  the  nest  which  we  have  made  so  comfortable  for 
ourselves,  and  never  looking  over  it  to  see  the  miseries  of  those  who  have  not  got  a 
nest,  and  for  whom  it  is  our  duty  to  assist  in  making  one,  that  they  may  be  as 
happy  as  we  are.  See  how  these  sins  are  abroad  amongst  us  ! — how  prevalent  are 
pride  and  forgetftdness  of  God,  Sabbath  profanation,  rejection  of  the  Gospel, 
luxuriousness,  prodigality,  and  many  other  sins.  III.  The  means  of  preserving 
AND  OF  PERPETUATING  THIS  GREATNESS.  There  are  two  modcs  of  doing  this,  which 
are  particularly  referred  to  in  the  text.  The  first  is  personal  piety,  and  the  second 
the  instruction  of  the  rising  generation.  1.  Amidst  the  greatness  and  dignity  of 
Britain  there  is  reason  to  fear  that  personal  piety  is  falling  oflF.  Never,  as  a  nation, 
was  Britain  more  exalted  ;  yet  observe,  while  this  exaltation  continues,  all  sections 


M  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  nr. 

of  the  Chnrch  are  complaining  of  the  want  of  vital  fire.  With  a  few  exceptions 
the  Churches  represent  trees  that  have  not  been  rained  upon — they  want  those 
ehowers  from  heaven  which  fill  the  heart  with  gladness  and  piety.  It  is  of  tiie 
utmost  moment  that  your  piety  should  be  of  the  highest  stamp,  and  that  you  may 
maintain  and  improve  it,  you  must  labour  ;  it  must  be  your  ambition — ^your  holy 
joy — to  be  a  sort  of  being  above  everybody  else  in  the  Church.  Nothing  can  com- 
pensate for  the  loss  of  communion  with  God  in  the  closet ;  and  if  you  are  addicting 
yourselves  to  any  of  the  fond  pleasures  of  the  day — mis-spending  your  time  which 
has  been  taken  by  popular  opinion  from  your  employers,  and,  instead  of  devoting 
yourselves  to  the  work  of  God,  enjoying  pleasures  and  amusements — if  you  are  doing 
this,  your  poor  soul  will  suflFer,  and  you  will  require  more  heavenly  grace  to  sustain 
you  than  before.  2.  Another  thing  the  text  proposes  is  religious  instruction  in  the 
family:  "Teach  thy  sons,  and  thy  sons'  sons."  The  way  to  pardon  and  peace 
through  the  Cross  must  be  made  known  ;  this  great  subject  must  not  be  kept  back 
from  the  children.  {James  Sherman.)  ^Hie  conditions  of  national  greatness : — 
You  see  from  this  that  the  fame  and  wisdom  of  Israel  are  to  be  tested  solely  by  her 
obedience  to  the  laws  of  God.  For  every  nation  under  the  sun  there  is  no  other 
criterion.  Mankind  has  many  tests  :  God  has  but  one.  If  the  ideal  of  the  nation 
be  righteous,  she  wUl  be  great  and  strong.  If  the  ideal  of  the  nation  be  base  or 
evil,  she  will  sooner  or  later  perish  because  of  her  iniquity.  I.  The  ideal  of  many 
nations  has  been  delight  in  war.  They  have  not  cared  to  have  any  annals  which 
were  not  written  in  blood.  Such  a  people  were  the  Assyrians  of  Scripture.  In  the 
hall  of  Sargon,  that  king  has  had  himself  represented  stabbing  and  butchering  his 
captives  with  his  own  hands  ;  and,  in  the  one  domestic  scene  found  among  these 
sculpturings  of  horror  and  bloodshed  (you  may  see  it  in  the  British  Museum),  the 
son  of  Sennacherib  is  seated  in  a  vine-clad  arbour  at  a  feast,  opposite  to  him  is  his 
queen  among  her  maidens,  and  close  behind  the  queen  hangs  from  the  branch  of  a 
palm-tree  a  ghastly  human  head,  with  an  iron  ring  driven  through  the  lip.  Well, 
did  it  prosper,  this  bloody  city  ?  Read  the  prophet  Nahum  for  answer,  and  you 
will  see  how  soon  it  passed  away  in  fire  and  sword,  amid  the  wrath  and  hatred 
of  the  nations.  And  did  war-loving  Egypt  fare  better  ?  We  see  the  serried  ranks 
of  the  numberless  archers,  we  read  the  pompous  enumeration  of  the  victories  of  her 
Rameses ;  but  Egypt  snapped  like  one  of  her  own  river-reeds  before  the  might  of 
Persia,  and  the  fellaheen  have  scooped  their  millstones  out  of  the  face  of  the 
Rameses,  the  most  colossal  statue  in  the  world.  II.  But  there  has  been  another 
ideal  of  nations — not  war  in  its  cruelty,  but  general  glory  ;  not  the  tyranny  and 
vengeance  of  armies,  but  their  pomp  and  fame.  This,  until  she  learnt  wisdom  by 
bitterly  humiliating  experience,  was  the  ideal  of  France.  The  nation  which  follows 
glory  follows  a  ** will-o'-the-wisp"  which  flickers  over  the  marshes  of  death ;  the 
nation  which  follows  duty  has  its  eye  fixed  on  the  polar  star.  III.  Again,  many 
nations  in  the  East,  from  natural  slavishness  and  indolence  of  temperament,  in  the 
West  from  unwarrantable  fetish-worship  of  the  mere  letter  of  Scripture,  and  even 
that  grossly  misinterpreted,  have  cherished  the  grovelling  idea  of  absolutism— the 
crawling  at  the  feet  of  some  royal  house,  the  deification  of  some  human  divinity. 
So  it  was  under  the  cruel  despotisms  of  Asia  ;  so  it  was  under  the  wicked  deified 
Caesars  ;  so  it  was  for  whole  cycles  in  China  ;  so  it  was  till  quite  recently  in  Russia. 
From  this  debased  notion — that  mankind  has  no  nobler  destiny  than  to  be  made 
the  footstool  of  a  few  families ;  that  kings  have  a  right  Divine  to  govern  wrong ; 
that  nations  ought  to  deliver  themselves,  bound  hand  and  foot,  to  the  arbitrary 
caprices  of  men  who  may  chance  to  be  as  despicable  as  a  Sardanapalus,  a  Nero,  or 
a  John— the  blood,  and  the  good  sense,  and  the  God-fearing  manhood,  and  the 
mighty  passion  for  liberty  in  the  breasts  of  our  fathers  saved  us.  IV.  Other  nations, 
again,  many  of  them,  have  had  as  their  ideal  the  gaining  of  wealth  and  thirst 
for  gold.  Of  all  false  gods,  at  once  the  meanest,  and  the  one  who  most  assumes  the 
air  of  injured  innocence  and  perfect  respectability,  is  Mammon.  What  has  this 
kind  of  wealth  ever  done  for  men  and  for  nations  ?  Was  ever  any  man  the  better 
for  having  coffers  full  of  gold  ?  But  who  shall  measure  the  guilt  that  is  often 
incurred  to  fill  them  ?  Men  do  not  disbelieve  Christ,  but  they  sell  Him.  By 
individual  superiority  to  Mammon,  let  us  help  England  to  rise  superior  to  this 
base  idolatry.  "You  glory,"  said  Oliver  Cromwell,  "in  the  ditch  which  guards 
your  shores.  I  tell  you,  your  ditch  will  not  save  you  if  you  do  not  reform  your- 
selves." V.  Once  more  ;  if  some  nations  have  had  a  false  idea  of  absolutism,  many, 
and  especially  modern  nations,  have  had  a  false  ideal  of  liberty.  There  is  no  ideal 
more  grand  and  inspiring  than  that  of  true  freedom.      But  what  is  freedom  ?     It  is 


CHAP.  IV.]  DEUTERONOMY,  47 

the  correlative  of  order ;  it  is  the  function  of  righteousness.  Its  home,  too,  like 
that  of  law,  is  the  bosom  of  God  ;  its  voice  the  harmony  of  the  world.  Liberty  is 
not  the  liberty  to  do  wrong  unchecked.  To  be  free  is  not  synonymous  with  infinite 
facilities  for  drunkenness,  any  more  than  it  is  synonymous  with  infinite  facilities  for 
burglary ;  but  to  be  free,  as  Milton  said,  is  the  same  thing  as  to  be  pious,  to  be 
temperate,  and  to  be  magnanimous — 

"He  is  a  freeman  whom  the  truth  makes  free  ; 
And  all  are  slaves  beside." 

The  description  "every  man  did  that  which  was  right  in  his  own  eyes,"  which  is 
rapidly  becoming  our  national  ideal,  is  a  description  not  of  heroic  freedom,  but  of 
hideous  anarchy.  A  man's  liberty  ends_,  and  ought  to  end,  when  that  liberty 
becomes  the  curse  of  his  neighbours.  "Oh  Liberty,  what  crimes  are  committed  in 
thy  name  ! "  YL  What,  then,  is  a  great  nation's  one  and  only  true  ideal, 
IF  it  is  to  be  indeed  a  wise  and  understanding  people  ?  The  frivolous  may 
sneer  and  the  faithless  may  deride,  but  it  is  duty  and  it  is  righteousness.  That  is 
as  much  the  law  of  Christ  as  it  is  the  law  of  Sinai.  If  a  nation  be  not  the  uplifter 
of  this  banner  it  is  nothing,  and  it  is  doomed  in  due  time  to  fall.  And  that  is 
why  the  Bible,  when  men  will  read  it  by  the  light  of  truth  and  not  of  pseudo- 
religious  theories,  is  still  the  best  statesman's  manual.  For  it  will  teach  him 
several  things.  It  will  teach  him  that  progress  is  the  appointed,  inevitable  law  of 
human  life,  and  that  it  is  a  deadly  error  to  suppose  that  we  are  sent  into  the  world 
only  to  preserve  and  not  to  improve  ;  and  it  will  teach  him  to  honour  man  simply 
as  man,  and  to  regard  all  men,  from  the  highest  to  the  lowest,  as  absolutely  equal 
before  the  bar  of  justice.  It  will  teach  him  that  always  and  invariably  the  unjust 
gains  and  the  immoral  practices  of  the  class  must  be  put  down  in  the  interests  of 
the  community,  and  that  the  interests  of  the  community  are  subordinate  always  to 
those  of  the  nation.  And  it  will  teach  him  that  the  true  glory  of  nations  lies,  not 
in  the  splendid  misery  of  war,  but  in  the  dissemination  of  honourable  happiness, 
and  the^  encouragement  of  righteousness,  and  the  suppression  of  vice.  And  it  will 
teach  him  that  the  true  wealth  of  a  nation  is  not  in  gold  and  silver,  but  in  the 
Bouls  of  strong,  contented,  and  self-respecting  men.  When  statesmen  have  learnt 
all  these  lessons  they  will  not  be  long  in  learning  others.  Nations  will  aim  at  only 
Buch  conditions  of  life  and  government  as  shall  make  it  easy  to  do  right  and  diffi- 
cult to  do  wrong.  Statesmen  will  not  toil  for  reward  ;  they  will  hold  allegiance  to 
the  loftiest  ideal  of  their  faith  in  Christ  dearer  than  all  the  glories  of  place  and  all 
the  claims  of  party.  Like  Edmund  Burke,  they  will  bring  to  politics  "a  horror  of 
crime,  a  deep  humanity,  a  keen  sensibility,  a  singular  vivacity  and  sincerity  of 
conscience."  Like  Sir  Robert  Peel,  they  will,  amid  all  the  chequered  fortunes  of 
their  career,  be  able  to  turn  from  the  storm  without  to  the  sunshine  of  an  approv- 
ing heart  within.  They  will  not  be  afraid  to  cut  against  the  grain  of  godless 
prejudice  ;  they  will  not  be  sophisticated  by  the  prudential  maxims  of  an  immoral 
acquiescence :  they  will  sweeten  with  words  of  justice  and  gentleness  the  con- 
flicts of  party  ;  they  will  be  quick  to  the  encouragement  of  virtue  ;  and  they 
■will  be  firm  and  fearless  to  the  prompt,  inflexible  suppression  and  extirpation — so 
far  as  powers  of  government  can  do  it — of  all  open  and  soul -destroying  vice. 
{Dean  Farrar.) 

Vers.  7,  8.  And  what  nation  is  there  so  great,  that  hath  statutes  and  jndg- 
xnents  so  righteous  ? — A  righteous  Bible : — The  appeal  of  Moses  is  the  eternal 
appeal  of  the  Bible.  That  is  the  appeal  to  common  sense  and  to  common  honesty. 
The  commandments  are  not  described  as  eloquent,  marvellous  intellectual  concep- 
tions, great  advances  in  ethical  thinking.  Moses  asks,  What  other  nation  can 
produce  a  Bible  so  righteous !  Any  Bible  must  go  down  that  is  not  righteous 
above  all  other  things,  how  high  soever  the  varied  attributes  by  which  any  book 
may  be  characterised.  What  is  the  moral  tone  of  the  Bible  ?  Pure,  righteous, 
true,  holy.  What  are  the  great  commandments  of  the  Book?  "Love,"  "love," 
—twice  love.  The  first  object  ?— "  God  "  ;  the  second  ?— "  thy  neighbour. "  This  is 
the  strength  of  the  Bible ;  and  we  can  all  begin  at  this  point  to  inquire  into  the 
remainder  of  the  Book.  Men  may  ask  bewildering  questions  about  the  archaeology 
and  the  so-called  science  of  the  Bible,  and  may  even  puzzle  the  uncultured  reader 
with  many  a  question  relating  to  spiritual  mysteries  ;  but  taken  from  end  to  end, 
the  Bible  is  charged  with  righteousness :  it  will  have  the  neighbour  loved  as  the 
xnaa  himself;  it  will  have  the  harvest  like  the  seed-time  ;  it  wm  insist  upon  right 


48  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  it, 

balances  and  fall  weights  ;  it  will  have  no  concealed  iniquities  ;  it  carries  its  candle 
of  flame  with  fire  never  kindled  upon  earth  into  the  secrets  of  the  mind  and  the 
chambers  of  the  soul  and  the  hidden  places  of  motive  and  purpose  and  ultimate, 
but  unexpressed,  intent.  The  Word  of  God  is  sharp,  sharper  than  any  two-edged 
sword,  piercing  to  the  dividing  asunder  of  the  joints  and  marrow.  It  is  a  righteous 
Word.  The  Bible  has  a  thousand  weapons  in  its  armoury  :  not  the  lightest,  not 
the  weakest  is  its  magnificent  morality,  its  heavenly  righteousness,  its  incorruptible 
integrity.  It  shakes  off  the  wicked  man  ;  it  will  have  no  communion  with  dark- 
ness J  it  strikes  the  liar  on  the  mouth  ;  it  avoids  the  unholy  follower.  This  is — 
let  us  repeat — the  argument  of  Moses,  and  it  is  the  eternal  argument  of  Christianitnr. 
(./■.  Parker,  B.  D. )  The  Bible  and  civilisation : — Wendell  Phillips  once  saia : 
**The  answer  to  the  Shaster  is  India ;  the  answer  to  Confucianism  is  China  ;  the 
answer  to  the  Koran  is  Turkey  ;  the  answer  to  the  Bible  is  the  Christian  civilisation 
of  Protestant  Europe  and  America."  (/.  S.  Gilbert,  M.A.)  The  national  utility 
of  the  Bible : — It  is  impossible  to  estimate  the  amount  of  evil  which  mankind  would 
experience  in  their  civil  capacity  were  the  Scriptures  no  longer  considered  of  Divine 
origin,  nor  constituted  the  ultimate  standard  of  all  moral  and  political  obligation. 
All  reverence  for  the  laws  would  cease,  for  the  lawgiver  would  have  only  his  own 
authority,  or  the  mere  glimmerings  of  the  law  of  nature,  to  enforce  his  commands  ; 
while  those  who  had  to  obey  the  laws  would  soon  have  every  just  and  equitable 
principle  banished  from  their  minds,  and  every  sacred  feeling  obliterated  from  their 
bosoms.  The  whole  fabric  of  society  would  soon  go  to  pieces  if  men  were  removed 
beyond  the  sphere  of  the  public  and  private  sanctions  of  scriptural  morality.  {J. 
Blakey, )  The  glory  of  Israel : — Moses  reminds  the  people  that  God  has  chosen 

them  as  His  special  possession,  and  that  this  had  been  shown  during  forty  years, 
and  that  if  they  would  remain  a  people  for  ever  blessed  it  must  be  under  the  protec- 
tion and  blessing  of  God.  They  were  highly  favoured  above  all  other  peoples — for 
Jehovah  the  true  God  was  theirs,  and  would  be  known  among  His  people  by  this 
gracious  name.  And  all  the  peoples  around  saw  how  great  things  God  had  done  for 
Israel — how  gloriously  and  graciously  He  had  led  His  people.  This  was  one  reason 
why  Israel  should  cleave  to  the  Lord,  who  would  plainly  thus  reveal  Himself  as  the 
true  God,  the  Holy  One  of  Israel.  From  all  this  Israel  should  have  learned — I.  To 
PRIZE  HIGHLY  THEIR  RELATION  TO  GoD.  1.  They  should  have  learned  to  realise 
what  it  was  to  be  under  the  peculiar  care  of  God,  and  how  great  and  glorious  was 
their  fellowship  with  Him.  Theirs  was  not  merely  to  be  a  great  and  glorious  history 
in  the  past.  God  was  not  merely  to  be  the  God  who  had  mightily  manifested  Him- 
self to  their  fathers,  and  then  withheld  His  presence.  Rather  there  was  the  promise 
that  if  they  continued  to  call  upon  Him  wonderful  manifestations  of  grace  and  help 
would  be  given.  2.  How  blessed  Israel  was  so  long  as  they  continued  to  call  on 
God,  prayed  for  His  protection  in  faith,  and  kept  in  the  way  of  His  commandments  ! 
It  was  no  hard  thing  to  draw  near  to  God.  Priest  and  prophet  were  given  to  pre- 
pare the  way,  and  each  Israelite  might  experience  the  truth  of  the  text  for  himself. 
But  it  was  otherwise  with  Israel.  In  them  we  see — II.  The  danger  of  neglecting 
TO  CALL  UPON  GoD.  1.  Israel  went  on  their  own  way,  according  to  their  own  will  ; 
and  in  order  that  they  might  not  be  stopped  by  listening  to  the  voice  of  reason  they 
no  longer  called  upon  God ;  they  no  longer  sought  His  near  presence.  2.  There- 
fore, however  He  would  have  been  pleased  to  draw  near  to  them.  He  could  do 
so  no  more,  because  they  desired  it  not.  Thus  did  Israel,  and  even  when  they 
inquired  of  His  way  they  did  not  follow  it.  3.  How  speedily,  therefore,  were  they 
brought  low  ;  for  all  depended  on  their  calling  on  God,  and  Him  alone.  III.  The 
SPIRITUAL  Israel  must  call  on  God.  1.  Even  among  the  early  believers  to  whom 
with  visible  manifestation  the  Holy  Ghost  came,  whose  voice  and  counsel  they 
might  ever  hear,  there  was  the  temptation  to  walk  more  according  to  the  flesh  than 
according  to  the  Spirit.  Some  neglected  to  hear  His  voice,  and  gave  themselves  up 
to  the  lusts  of  the  flesh.  2.  Then  true  believing  calling  on  God  ceased,  the  Lord 
came  no  more  nigh  to  them,  and  the  Holy  Ghost  was  grieved.  3.  Let  us  learn  in 
simple  faith  to  pray  to  and  call  upon  Him.  Then  should  we  hope  that  all  things 
would  again  become  new  in  ns,  would  be  otherwise  with  us  ;  and  how  glorious  could 
our  lives  become  !     {J.  C.  Blumhardt. ) 

Ver.  9.  Only  take  heed  to  thyself,  and  keep  thy  soul  diligently,  lest  thou  forget 
the  thing's  which  thine  eyes  have  seen. — An  imjwrtant  admunition : — I.  In  what 
respects  wr  ake  bound  to  ''take  heed  to  "  ourselves.  1.  Take  heed  to  your 
health.     When  this  is  gone,  how  tedious  and  tasteless  is  life  !     The  wretched  sub- 


CHAP.  IV.]  DEUTERONOMY.  49 

ject  of  disease  is  ready  to  exclaim  (Job  xii.  4,  13-15),  Oh,  what  pain  are  some  poor 
creatures  doomed  to  bear !  But  in  numberless  instances  some  of  the  severest 
afflictions  to  which  mankind  are  subject  are  the  fruits  of  their  own  folly.  Keep 
the  body  under :  let  your  diet,  your  rest,  your  well-regulated  tempers  tend  to  the 
health  of  the  human  frame,  not  to  its  destruction.  2.  Take  heed  to  your  character. 
"  A  Christian  is  the  highest  style  of  man."  In  this  quality  is  associated  every  holy 
temper  and  disposition.  There  is  faith  with  its  eagle  eye,  love  with  its  burning 
flame,  peace  with  its  placid  smile,  humiKty  with  its  lowly  aspect,  patience  with  itl 
soothing  balm,  and  as  much  of  the  heavenly  treasure  as  can  be  conveyed  into  an 
earthen  vessel.  Therefore  "take  heed  to"  attain  this  character;  and  then  be 
careful  to  preserve  it.  (1)  You  may  forfeit  your  Christian  character  by  levity. 
Christian  cheerfulness  is  widely  different  from  worldly  and  unhallowed  mirth. 
(2)  You  may  forfeit  your  Christian  character  by  a  haughty,  high-minded  disposition. 
There  is  no  evil  in  the  world  so  hostile  to  religion  as  pride.  (3)  You  may  forfeit 
your  Christian  character  by  your  tongue.  (4)  This  may  be  done  by  neglecting  your 
relative  duties.  3.  Take  heed  to  your  souls.  They  are  dark,  and  must  be  en- 
lightened ;  guilty,  and  must  be  pardoned  ;  enslaved,  and  must  be  redeemed ; 
polluted,  and  must  be  sanctified  ;  in  danger,  and  must  be  saved.  4.  Take  heed  to 
your  time.  Time  wasted  is  existence  lost ;  used,  is  life.  Therefore  part  with  it 
as  with  money,  sparing  it,  and  never  paying  a  moment  but  in  purchase  of  its 
worth.  5.  Take  heed  to  your  conduct.  (1)  Let  it  be  consistent.  See  to  it  that 
you  are  in  reality  what  you  pretend  to  be.  (2)  In  order  that  your  conduct  may  be 
consistent,  let  it  be  regulated  by  the  Word  of  God.  In  the  balances  of  the  sanctuary 
weigh  your  principles  and  actions  (Isa.  viii.  20).  II.  The  eeasons  why  the  advice 
IN  THE  TEXT  SHOULD  BE  FOLLOWED.  1.  The  character  of  the  speaker  is  the  first 
motive  I  will  bring  before  you.  It  is  the  eternal  Jehovah  ;  "the  God  in  whose 
hand  your  breath  is,  and  whose  are  all  your  ways  "  (Dan.  v.  23).  2.  The  reason- 
ableness of  the  requisition  is  another  argument  why  you  should  "take  heed 
to "  yourselves.  Even  animals  which  are  governed  by  mere  instinct  "take  heed  to " 
themselves.  In  many  cases  they  refuse  to  eat  what  would  be  injurious  to  them, 
and  fly  from  danger  the  moment  they  perceive  it ;  and  shall  reason  fail  to  do  for 
you  what  instinct  accomplishes  for  them?  (Jer.  viii.  7.)  3.  The  dangers  that 
await  you  afford  another  reason  for  the  adoption  of  the  advice  in  the  text.  Had 
you  literally  to  walk  in  a  road  beset  -with  snares,  where  you  were  liable  to  be 
entrapped  every  moment,  would  not  the  perils  of  your  path  be  a  sufficient  induce- 
ment for  you  to  ' '  take  heed  to  "  yourselves  ?  And  do  not  more  fearful  dangers  await 
you  in  your  spiritual  career  ?  {R.  Treffry.)  On  experience — its  use,  its  neglect,  and 
its  abuse : — I.  Under  the  first  head,  that  of  its  use,  it  may  be  said,  in  general,  that 

THERE   IS   no  KNOWLEDGE   SO   USEFUL  AS  THAT  WHICH  IS  GAINED   BY  EXPERIENCE. 

1.  Events  are  better  remembered  than  precepts,  and  indeed  it  seems  but  just  that 
that  acquisition  should  turn  out  to  be  valuable  which  is  so  often  dearly  paid  for 
with  tears.  He  who  heeds  not  the  warnings  of  his  elders,  or  his  books,  to  abstain 
from  excess,  may  be  taught  by  sickness  a  lesson  of  moderation  which  he  will  not 
forget.  Severe  losses  may  now  induce  him  to  be  prudent  and  provident  who  never 
till  now  could  be  brought  to  believe  that  prodigality  begat  want,  or  that  riches  had 
wings.  2.  Besides  the  great  personal  benefits  which  flow  from  experience,  it  is  also 
the  source  of  more  extended  usefulness.  For  the  guidance  of  life  and  conduct, 
there  is  no  kind  of  wisdom  which  we  can  so  confidently  and  beneficially  communi- 
cate as  the  lessons  of  experience.  And  it  is  the  high  gratification  of  the  virtuous 
old  man  that  the  trials  which  he  has  borne,  the  successes  which  he  has  enjoyed, 
place  at  his  disposal  the  best  means  both  of  ensuring  his  own  security,  uprightness, 
and  of  relieving  the  perplexities  and  guiding  the  steps  of  the  young  and  inex- 
perienced. He  who  has  gathered  wisdom  from  many  years  can  impart  to  others 
the  legacies  which  each  year  has  left  him,  and  live  while  they  are  enjoyed,  nor 
grow  any  poorer  by  making  others  richer.     II.  It  is  a  melancholy  truth,  that 

WISDOM  WHICH  MAY  BE  SO  EASILY,  I  MIGHT  SAY  NATUBALLY,  ACQUIEED  IS  OFTEN 

NEGLECTED ;  wisdom,  too,  which,  as  we  have  seen,  is  so  useful  in  the  direction  of 
our  conduct,  and  in  our  intercourse  with  others.  There  is  hardly  a  more  pitiable 
object  than  a  man  who  cannot,  or  will  not,  learn  wisdom  from  experience ;  one 
who,  to  use  the  expressions  of  our  text,  forgets  the  things  which  his  eyes  have  seen, 
and  they  depart  from  his  heart  all  the  days  of  his  life.  To  brood  over  our  cares, 
and  too  fondly  to  indulge  our  sorrows,  and  thus  unfit  ourselves  for  the  active  duties 
of  life,  is  indeed  imchristian  and  irrational ;  but  both  religion  and  reason  require 
ti8  to  contemplate  and  force  instruction  from  every  wayward  event  for  our  future 
4 


60  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  it. 

security  and  quiet ;  like  Jacob,  to  hold  every  heaven-sent  grief  with  which  we  hav« 
wrestled,  and  not  to  let  it  go  till  it  has  blessed  us.  We  are  wrong  in  being  always 
so  very  anxious  to  drive  away  unpleasant  thoughts  ;  we  must  let  them  remain  till 
they  have  cured  us  ;  we  might  as  well  drive  away  the  surgeon  from  our  doors  who 
came  to  perform  a  painful  though  necessary  operation.  We  must  learn  to  look 
upon  the  occurrences  of  life  not  as  insulated  facts,  but  as  borrowing  illustration 
from  the  past,  and  reflecting  it  upon  the  future.     III.  Of  the  neglect  of  expebi- 

ENCEWE  SHOULD  SPEAK  WITH  CONCERN,  WITH  PITY,  OR  WITH  REPROBATION, — OF  ITS 
ABUSE  WE  CAN  SPEAK  ONLY  WITH  THE  MOST  UNQUALIFIED  ABHORRENCE.      By  the 

abuse  of  experience  I  mean  experience  in  the  arts  of  the  world  employed  not  to  warn, 
but  to  ensnare  the  simple  and  unsuspecting,  and  experience  of  its  vices  employed  not 
to  admonish  but  to  correct  innocence.  {H,  W.  Beecher.)  The  spiritual  benefits 
of  retrospection : — It  is  to  be  feared  that  to  many  (so  habitually  unmindful  are  they 
of  what  they  have  been  permitted  to  witness,  both  in  the  wider  sphere  of  public 
and  the  more  contracted  one  of  private  life)  experiences  are  somewhat  like  the  stem- 
lights  of  a  ship,  which  serve  to  illumine  only  that  part  of  the  water  over  which  she 
has  just  sailed.  It  is  far  otherwise  when,  through  the  agency  of  supernatural  grace 
communicated  in  answer  to  the  prayer  of  faith,  experience  is  sanctified,  for  it  then 
becomes  strongly  conducive  to  spiritual  health.  If  it  be  the  province  of  Hope  to 
paint  the  bow  of  promise  upon  the  cloud,  it  is  that  of  Memory  to  gather  rays  of  the 
light  of  direction  from  the  past,  and  to  cause  them  to  shine  upon  the  path  of 
religio\is  duty,  which  is  beset  by  so  many  temptations  that  every  encouragement  is 
needed,  lest  the  travellers  "faint  because  of  the  way."  Now,  in  directing  your 
attention  to  some  of  the  functions  which  a  religiously  disciplined  memory  performs 
in  connection  with  the  life  of  faith — I.  I  would  first  ask  you  to  observe  that  it  is 

ONE  OF  ITS  OFFICES  TO  TEACH  CHRISTIANS  TO  KEEP  A  MORE  ACCURATE  REGISTER  OF 
THEIR  MERCIES   THAN   THEY   ARE   NATURALLY   DISPOSED   TO   DO  ;   to    train  them  in 

resistance  of  the  dangerous  tendency  to  dwell  with  circumstantial  precision,  and  often 
even  selfish  exaggeration,  upon  their  trials.  It  is  Memory's  office  to  embalm  their 
blessings,  to  preserve  them  from  the  decay  to  which  time  and  the  influence  of  an 
evil  world  would  otherwise  subject  them.     II.  Memory  has  also  functions  of 

MOMENTOUS  IMPORTANCE  IN  CONNECTION  WITH  THE  TRUE  REPENTANCE  tO  whioh  We 

are  called  by  Him  who  alone  can  enable  us  to  "sorrow  after  a  godly  sort,"  It  is 
the  office  of  a  rightly  trained  memory  to  remove  the  concealments  by  which  we 
seek  to  hide  our  delinquencies  from  ourselves,  to  dwell  with  emphasis  upon  passages 
in  our  history  from  referring  to  which  we  would  naturally  desire  to  escape,  to  keep 
the  unwelcome  but  wholesome  truth  of  our  unworthiness  before  us  that  we  may 
really  feel  our  need  of  pardon  and  earnestly  seek  it  where  alone  it  can  be  found. 
In  cases,  too  (which  it  is  to  be  feared  are  very  far  from  uncommon),  in  which 
spiritual  declension  has  begun — cases  of  "backsliding  in  heart" — the  memory  of 
the  past  has  much  to  eff'ect  in  connection  with  the  restoration  of  those  who  have  so 
declined.  The  contrast  which  memory  would  lead  them  to  institute  between  the 
comparatively  happy  time  when  they  kept  in  the  way  of  duty  and  the  troublous 
time  when  they  forsook  it  has  been  one  which,  rendered  practically  influential  by 
the  operation  of  the  Spirit  of  Grace,  has  led  them  back  to  tread  that  path  in  which 
only  rest  can  be  found  for  the  soul.  Scripture  is  replete  with  testimony  to  the 
value  of  the  past  in  preparing  us  for  doing  God's  will  in  that  portion  of  the  future 
which  may  be  granted  us,  teaching  those  who  are  to  take  our  places  when  we  are 
called  away  by  the  inevitable  summons  to  be  iu  their  time  ready  to  "  serve  their 
generation  according  to  that  will."  To  this  consideration,  namely,  that  of  the 
responsibility  which  rests  upon  us  to  do  all  that  lies  in  our  power  to  bring  up  "the 
rising  generation "  in  the  service  of  Christ,  we  are  led  by  the  words  of  the  final 
clause,  "Teach  them  thy  sons,  and  thy  sons'  sons."  If  those  addressed  in  the 
words  of  the  text  could  refer  their  children  to  the  past  for  lessons  of  spiritual 
wisdom,  they  who  are  living  under  the  new  and  better  covenant  cannot  fail  to  find 
counsels  in  the  retrospect  of  their  experience  to  impress  upon  youthful  minds. 
They  may  tell  how  they  have  seen  evidences,  how  the  fond  hopes  of  religious 
parents  can  be  blighted  by  the  uuKodliness  of  children,  how  they  have  seen  health 
shattered  by  intemperance,  brilliant  prospects  clouded  by  yielding  to  the  allure- 
ments of  a  world  at  enmity  with  God  !  They  may  tell  how  they  have  witnessed 
exemplifications  of  the  truth  of  those  words  quoted  by  an  inspired  Christian  teacher 
from  an  heathen  author,  "Evil  communications  corrupt  good  manners."  Or  they 
may  turn  from  painful  to  ple-asurable  reminiscences.  They  may  tell  of  instances 
of  the  beneficial  results  of  "the  nurture  and  admouitioa"  iu  which  childreix  wer» 


CHAP.  IV.]  •       DEUTERONOMY.  51 

brought  up  to  live  for  Christ.  They  may  speak  of  homes  lightened  by  the  joy 
imparted  to  souls  influenced  by  the  grace  of  God.  (C.  E.  TisdaZL)  Diligent 
soul-keeping: — I.  What  soul-keeping  is.  It  is  the  keeping  of  a  living  being,  and 
not  of  a  mere  inanimate  thing.  To  have  the  charge  of  a  priceless  jewel  is  only 
the  matter  of  wrapping  it  carefully  up,  putting  it  away  in  a  safe  place,  and  giving 
it  an  occasional  look.  But  it  is  an  altogether  different  matter  to  have  the  charge 
of  a  child.  That  means  constant  attention,  perpetual  claim  on  wisdom  and  self- 
denial.  And  soul-keeping  is  the  charge  of  a  living  being.  Keeping  a  living  crea- 
ture, 80  as  to  help  it  to  maintain  vigour  and  grow  into  its  very  best,  means — 
1.  That  we  must  get  to  know  and  understand  it ;  and  such  a  knowledge  includes 
the  peculiarities  of  the  individual  as  well  as  the  general  characteristics  of  the  class 
or  species  to  which  it  belongs.  It  means — 2.  That  we  must  adapt  our  ways  to  it, 
putting  ourselves  upon  all  efforts  and  upon  all  restraints  that  may  be  necessary 
in  order  to  do  our  very  best  in  its  behalf.  But  it  also  means — 3.  That  in  some 
things  we  make  it  take  our  ways,  for  it  is  the  most  serious  responsibility  of  our  trust 
that  we  have  to  put  the  impress  of  our  own  will  and  our  own  example  on  the  living 
being  we  have  in  charge.  We  must,  in  some  things,  adapt  ourselves  to  it,  and  in 
some  other  things  make  it  shape  its  conduct  to  our  wish.  If  we  can  take  the  deeper 
view,  we  may  apprehend  that  the  soul  is  the  self.  But  just  now  another  view  will 
be  more  suggestive  to  us.  We  are  to  think  of  the  "soul"  as  a  trust  from  God — a 
"  self"  given  to  ourselves  to  keep  for  God,  a  living  being  put  into  our  charge,  as 
men  put  an  animal  from  foreign  climes,  or  a  plant,  into  our  care.  And  this 
becomes  our  chief  life-concern — to  keep,  in  health,  in  vigour,  in  all  due  activity, 
that  living  thing,  our  soul.  A  figure  may  be  taken  from  the  ways  of  our  doctors. 
It  is  true  that  they  are  concerned  with  the  forms  and  features  and  expressions  of 
positive  disease  ;  but  they  have  a  trust  which  is  of  far  more  importance.  Our 
vitality  is  committed  to  their  care.  And  mothers  follow  along  the  same  lines. 
They  are  watchful,  indeed,  of  every  spot  on  the  body  or  Aveakness  in  the  limb 
of  their  chOdren ;  but  wise  mothers  are  most  anxious  about  keeping  up  the  vitality, 
nourishing  the  very  springs  of  life.  There  are  the  possibilities  of  throwing  off 
the  germs  of  disease,  and  unfolding  into  ideal  completeness  of  beauty,  in  man- 
hood or  womanhood,  if  only  the  life  can  be  kept  in  health  and  vigour.  And  so 
the  Christian  should  be  supremely  concerned  about  the  trust  he  has  from  God, 
and  keep  "his  soul  with  all  diligence."    II.  What  kinds  of  care  it  involves. 

1.  We  must  be  watchful  of  what  goes  into  it.  We  put  injurious  things  out  of  the 
way  of  children  ;  but  we  too  often  fail  in  the  equally  important  duty  of  putting  evil 
things  that  seek  entrance  out  of  the  way  of  our  souls.     But  our  Lord  reminded  us — 

2.  That  we  should  be  equally  watchful  of  what  comes  out.  He  said,  "Out  of  the 
heart  proceed  evil  thoughts,  .  .  .  and  these  defile  the  man."  This  is  the  complica- 
tion of  our  "keeping."  We  have  to  check  the  soul  from  giving  expression  to  the  bad 
things  that  are  in  it,  because  they  grow  strong  by  expression.  But  the  kind  of  care 
involved  in  soul-keeping  may  be  put  in  another  way.  It  includes — 1.  Taking  care  of 
the  soul's  atmosphere.  We  say  of  plants  and  of  persons,  ' '  The  climate  does  not  agree 
with  them  :  they  never  will  be  healthy  while  they  remain  in  it ! "  Our  scientific 
teachers  tell  us  that  there  is  one  element  in  the  air  we  breathe  which  is  absolutely 
essential  to  our  bodily  health  and  vigour  ;  they  call  it ' '  ozone. "  He  who  would  keep 
his  soul  must  find  for  it  atmospheres  of  trust,  and  reverence,  and  humility,  and  love. 
2.  Taking  care  of  the  soul's  food.  The  soul-life  may  be  regarded  as  partly  emotional 
and  partly  intellectual.  The  proper  food  for  the  emotional  is  all  that  goes  under 
the  name  of  prayer.  The  proper  food  for  the  intellectual  is  all  that  goes  under  the 
name  of  truth.  Add  this,  that  there  is  a  practical  side  to  the  soul-life,  the  food  of 
which  is  duty,  and  we  know  that  which  it  is  fitting  we  should  provide — prayer, 
truth,  duty.  3.  Taking  care  of  the  soul's  neighbours.  "Evil  communications 
corrupt  good  manners."  They  who  would  "keep  their  souls"  should  not  even 
"stand  in  the  way  of  sinners":  much  less  can  they  venture  to  "sit  in  the  seat  of 
the  scornful."  III.  What  difficulties  have  soul-keepeks  to  overcome  I  Theii 
name  is  "Legion. "  But  we  may  profitably  fix  our  attention  on  two.  1.  The  outward- 
ness of  men's  interests  nowadfays.  We  live  in  the  street,  and  the  hall,  and  the 
drawing-room,  rather  than  in  the  prayer-chamber,  and  the  "  tower  of  vision  "  ;  and 
this  makes  soul-keeping  so  hard.  2.  The  pressure  of  bodily,  and  business,  and 
family  claims.  Like  Dr.  Chalmers,  we  are  "bustled  out  of  our  spirituality."  Our 
time  is  seized  upon  by  the  "  world,"  and  when  he  has  done  his  daily  will  with  us  we 
are  weary,  too  weary  for  the  things  of  God.  He  who  would  keep  his  soul  must  meet 
and  master  these  difficulties,  and  persistently  set  first,  in  his  seekings,  "the  kingdom 


62  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

of  God  and  His  righteousness."  {The  Weekly  Pulpit.)  On  the  heriefits  of  experieiice 
and  reflection : — The  great  source  of  all  human  knowledge  is  experience  ;  and  that 
experience  which  teaches  us  practical  wisdom,  and  informs  us  of  the  many  evils 
that  constantly  wait  on  life,  is  acquired  chiefly  by  observation  and  reflection.  The 
historian  makes  it  his  peculiar  glory  that,  by  faithfully  recording  the  fates  of 
kingdoms,  by  delineating  the  virtues  which  raised  some  to  magnificence,  and  the 
vices  which  brought  others  gradually  to  destruction,  he  anticipates  the  future  by  a 
true  representation  of  the  past,  and  teaches  men  wisdom  by  the  examples  of  others. 
But  though,  from  the  short  period  of  human  life,  the  narrowness  of  our  views,  and 
other  causes,  we  are  obliged  to  recur  to  the  experience  of  those  who  went  before  us 
for  almost  all  our  knowledge  ;  yet  the  few  events  that  happen  to  ourselves,  or  that 
fall  within  the  circle  of  our  own  observation,  make  a  far  more  lasting  impression 
on  us,  and  have  a  much  greater  influence  over  the  heart.  I.  First,  let  me  exhort 
you,  when  you  "ponder  in  the  path  of  life,"  not  to  let  the  remembrance  of  your 
DISAPPOINTMENTS,  whatever  they  might  have  been,  "depart  from  your  hearts." 
If  the  sufferance  of  them  has  been,  grievous,  let  the  remembrance  of  them  be  profit- 
able. If  they  have  crossed  your  inclinations,  or  withheld  from  you  fancied  pleasures, 
let  them  not  die  away  without  producing  their  proper  effect  in  moderating  the 
passions  and  inspiring  that  patient  fortitude  which,  aided  by  prayer,  will  enable 
us,  amidst  all  the  storms  of  life,  to  maintain  a  character  of  dignified  composure, 
resignation,  and  contentment.  II.  Next  to  the  disappointments  of  life,  I  wish  you 
to  reflect  on  the  sorrows  which  you  might  have  experienced.  As  the  land  is  more 
grateful  to  the  mariner  after  his  vessel  has  been  dashed  against  the  rocks,  and  he 
himself  has  struggled  with  the  waves  of  life,  so  is  the  recovery  of  peace  to  those 
who  have  escaped  the  storms  of  adversity.  Many  are  the  advantages  we  derive 
from  this  severe  monitor,  if  we  knew  how  to  enjoy  them.  She  seldom  fails  to 
soften  and  improve  the  heart.  III.  Let  me  now  direct  your  attention  to  a  subject 
in  which  we  are  all  equally  interested— I  mean  "the  house  of  moijening"  anb 
THE  CHAMBERS  OF  DEATH.  Here  also  let  us  endeavour  to  learn  what  lessons  experi- 
ence would  teach  us.  It  is  not  in  the  giddy  and  fantastic  scenes  of  pleasure  that 
the  mind  improves  in  wisdom  or  in  vu'tue  ;  these,  for  the  most  part,  are  acquired  by 
habits  of  reflection,  and  by  taking  such  views  of  human  affairs  as  dispose  the  soul 
to  thought  and  meditation.  For  this  cause  the  "  house  of  mourning  "  is  a  house 
replete  with  instruction,  and  is  on  that  account  wisely  preferred  to  the  "house 
of  feasting."  It  is  there  that  our  religious  principles  acquire  an  energy  not  to  be 
derived  perhaps  from  any  other  source.  It  is  there  that  those  truths  which  were 
announced  to  us  as  glad  tidings  from  heaven,  and  those  duties  which  are  founded 
on  reason  and  contemplation,  are  strengthened  and  improved  by  the  softest  and 
most  powerful  emotions  of  the  heart.  In  these  melancholy  moments  we  feel  our 
own  weakness  and  see  the  vanities  of  life.  Temptations  to  guilt  and  misery  no 
longer  court  us  imder  the  delusive  forms  of  pleasure,  and  sin  appears  in  all  its 
native  deformity.  We  confess  the  vice  and  folly  of  every  mean  pursuit,  and  the 
mind  flees  to  the  religion  of  Christ  for  comfort  and  support.  {J.  Hewlett,  B.D.) 
"  Take  heed  to  thyself,'^  <fcc. ; — In  the  business  of  life  there  are  three  parties  con- 
cerned, three  parties  of  whose  existence  it  behoves  us  to  be  equally  and  intensely 
conscious.  These  three  are  God  on  the  one  hand  and  our  own  individual  souls 
on  lihe  other,  and  the  one  Mediator,  Jesus  Christ,  who  alone  can  join  the  two  into 
one.  1.  There  is  all  the  difference  in  the  world  between  saying.  Bear  yourselves 
in  mind,  and  saying,  Bear  in  mind  always  the  three,  God  and  Christ  and  your- 
selves, whom  Christ  unites  to  God.  For  then  there  is  no  risk  of  selfishness, 
nor  of  idolatry,  whether  of  ourselves  or  of  anything  else ;  we  do  but  desire  to 
keep  alive  and  vigorous,  not  any  false  or  evil  life  in  us,  but  our  true  and  most 
precious  life,  the  life  of  God  in  and  through  His  Son.  But  what  we  see  happen 
very  often  is  just  the  opposite  to  this.  The  life  in  ourselves,  of  which  we  are 
keenly  conscious,  never  for  an  instant  forgetting  it,  is  but  the  life  of  our  appetites 
and  passions,  and  this  life  is  quite  distinct  from  God  and  from  Christ.  But  while 
this  life  is  very  vigorous,  our  better  life  slumbers  ;  we  have  our  own  desires,  and 
they  are  evil,  but  we  take  our  neighbour's  knowledge  and  faith  and  call  them  our 
own,  and  we  live  and  believe  according  to  our  neighbour's  notions  ;  so  our  nobler 
life  shrinks  up  to  nothing,  and  our  sense  of  truth  perishes  from  want  of  exercise. 
2.  In  combining  a  keen  sense  of  our  own  soul's  life  with  the  sense  of  God  and 
of  Christ  there  is  no  room  for  pride  or  presumption,  but  the  very  contrary.  We 
hold  our  knowledge  and  our  faith  but  as  God's  gifts,  and  are  sure  of  them  only 
go  far  as  His  power  and  wisdom  and  goodness  are  our  warrant.    Our  knowledge, 


CHAP.  IV.]  DEUTERONOMY,  53 

in  fact,  is  but  faith ;  we  have  no  grounds  for  knowing  as  of  ourselves,  but  great 
grounds  for  believing  that  God's  appointed  evidence  is  true,  and  that  in  believing 
it  we  are  tni sting  Him,  {T.  Arnold,  D.D.)  Israel  admonished : — I.  The  evil 
ANTICIPATED — forgetfulness  of  their  own  past  experience  of  God's  gracious  dealings. 
"Lest  thou  forget  the  things  which  thine  eyes  have  seen,"  &c,  1.  We  cannot 
suppose  that  Moses  thought  it  possible  they  should  so  far  lose  all  traces  of  these 
events  as  that  they  should  not,  by  any  circumstance,  be  brought  to  remembrance. 
2.  But  these  things  might  be  so  forgotten — so  little  and  so  lightly  thought  of,  as 
to  depart  from  "their  hearts,"  so  as  to  have  no  influence  there.  No  correcting 
influence ;  error  might  be  corrected  by  a  heart-aff'ecting  remembrance  of  God's 
distinguishing  judgments  and  mercies  (vers.  3,  4),  but  such  remembrance  would 
be  necessary.  No  chastening  influence,  such  as  that  inten'ied  in  vers.  5-20 ; 
consequently  no  cheering  influence,  such  as  vers.  36-40  might  impart.  In  short, 
**the  things  which  their  eyes  had  seen  "might  be  so  forgotten  as  to  produce  no 
saving  effect.  3.  And  Christians  are  as  liable  to  this  calamity  as  the  Israelites 
were.  4.  The  greatness  of  the  evil  may  be  inferred  from  the  greatness  of  the 
punishment  threatened — the  loss  of  God's  gracious  presence  for  direction,  defence, 
Ac,  (ver.  7) ;  the  loss  of  Canaan  (ver.  27) ;  and  the  heaviest  of  temporal  calamities 
(ver.  26,  and  xxviii.  16).  II.  The  prrventives  recommended.  "  Only  take 
heed  to  thyself,  and  keep  thy  soul,"  &c.  The  text  suggests  the  necessity  of— 
1.  Holy  jealousy.  "Take  heed;  keep  thy  soul,"  Nothing  is  more  dangerous 
than  self-sufficiency  and  presumption  ;  a  vain  confidence  in  what  is  called  "a  good 
heart."  Moses  intimates  that  the  soul  needs  watching  and  keeping.  2.  Holy 
vigilance.  Only  take  heed,  and  keep  thy  soul  diligently.  This  advice  is  necessary 
because  of  our  natural  disposition  to  wander,  and  because  of  the  allurements  to 
which  we  are  exposed  Grace  may  raise  and  sustain  us.  The  soul  may  wander 
on  wicked  things  ;  and  such  is  its  weakness  that  no  man  can  say  into  what  sin  he 
may  not  fall.  David  fell  into  adultery  and  murder.  Therefore  "keep  thy  soul 
diligently."  Resist  beginnings.  But  we  are,  perhaps,  in  greater  danger  from 
things  which  do  not  shock  our  sense  of  propriety,  &c.,  but  which  serve,  nevertheless, 
to  divert  our  minds,  and  so  to  prevent  a  steady  attention  to  "the  one  thing  need- 
ful," such  as  business,  company,  amusement,  literature,  &c.  Therefore  "keep  thy 
soul "  within  proper  bounds.  Watch  her  motions,  and  check  them  ere  they  become 
irregular  or  excessive,  3.  Holy  exercises.  Indolence  is  at  once  disgraceful  and 
injurious,  Satan  finds  the  idle  employment.  What  has  been  already  advised 
includes  much  of  exercise.  But  in  addition  we  may  say,  Diligently  meditate  on 
God's  gracious  dealings  with  you  in  former  days,  and  examine  what  progress  you 
make  (chap.  viii.  2,  11-18).  Diligently  pray  for  a  continuance  and  increase  of  His 
favours.  {Sketches  of  Four  Hundred  Sermons.)  Memory  in  religion :— Let  us 
just  a  moment  longer  think  about  memory,  and  what  we  owe  to  it.  Our  sense  of 
personal  identity  is  due  to  memory.  If  we  had  no  memory  of  the  past  our  lives 
would  be  a  series  of  links  not  joined  into  a  chain,  and  a  host  of  beads  without  any- 
thing to  string  them  together  ;  there  would  be  nothing  to  show  us  or  make  us  feel 
that  our  life  yesterday  or  to-day  had  any  special  connection,  or  were  pages  in  the 
same  book  of  history  of  the  same  person  ;  and  with  the  loss  of  this  sense  of  personal 
identity  would  go  all  sense  of  personal  responsibility  and  of  continuous  or  energetic 
action.  We  would  always  be  falling  back  again  to  our  old  starting-point,  and 
would  lose  every  night  what  we  gained  every  day.  But  memory  is  the  subtle 
weaver  that  weaves  all  the  various  movements  and  events  of  every  day  into  one 
continuous  whole,  into  one  conscientiously  responsible  and  permanent  life.  The 
memory,  then,  is  most  necessary  for  the  acquisition  of  wisdom.  It  i^  by  the  golden 
grain  of  experience  treasured  up  in  memory  that  we  grow  rich  in  practical  wisdom. 
Some  people,  indeed,  never  seem  to  learn  by  what  they  pass  through.  They  live  in 
the  present  moment,  without  thought  of  yesterday  and  mthout  hope  of  to-morrow, 
and  all  that  happens  is  apparently  forgotten  just  as  soon  as  it  is  over.  It  is  a  pre- 
cious gift,  then,  that  Ged  has  given  to  us  in  memory,  and  its  cultivation  is  indis- 
pensable and  its  proper  use  for  all  manhood  and  for  all  useful  life.  And  now  in  our 
text  Moses  seeks  to  enlist  this  great  power  of  memory  on  the  side  of  religion — 
"Lest  thou  forget,"  he  says.  And  if  Moses  could  thus  appeal  so  forcibly  to  the 
people  in  his  day,  calling  upon  their  memories  to  witness  what  God  had  done  for 
them  in  Egypt  and  the  desert,  entitling  Him  to  their  grateful  and  obedient  services, 
how  much  more  may  our  memory  be  appealed  to  in  these  days.  While  it  is  true, 
however,  that  the  memory  to  which  Moses  appeals  has  such  a  marvellous  power,  yet 
diseases  and  defects  of  memory  are  very  common.     There  is  no  part  of  our  complex 


54  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

mental  system  whicli  is  so  liable  to  get  disordered  as  memory.  Certain  events  of 
the  past  seem,  at  times,  to  pass  from  the  spirit's  vision  when  disease  is  beginning, 
even  things  which  we  should  fancy  a  man  could  never  forget — his  own  home,  his 
relatives,  and  his  ordinary  work.  Even  when  there  is  no  actual  disease,  yet  serious 
and  dangerous  defects  of  memory  are  very  common.  A  slovenly  and  unreliable 
memory  is  a  very  common  fault.  We  forget  things  because  we  are  not  interested  in 
them.  As  we  hear  a  fact  which  appeals  to  something  in  us,  satisfying  some  desire, 
supplying  some  want,  we  appropriate  it  at  once,  we  allow  the  tendrils  of  affection 
and  desire  to  twine  around  it,  and  we  fondly  treasure  it  in  our  hearts.  Then  we 
will  remember  it  for  ever,  and  can  recall  it  in  every  hour  of  need.  We  might  say, 
in  fact,  that  defects  of  memory  arise  from  improper  training.  We  do  not  learn  to 
concentrate  our  mind  upon  our  work  ;  we  do  not  know  how  to  fix  our  attention  ;  we 
do  not  make  an  effort  to  understand  things  we  read  and  hear.  Take  the  reading  of 
a  book.  Many  readers  turn  over  page  after  page,  having  read  each  of  them,  as  they 
assure  themselves,  but  nothing  on  any  page  makes  any  impression  upon  them,  or 
only  some  striking  incident  or  accident.  Now,  such  defects  of  memory  can  be  cured 
to  a  very  large  extent  before  they  run  into  permanent  weakness  or  mental  disease, 
and  while  we  have  the  opportunity  surely  it  is  worth  our  while  to  make  an  earnest 
and  continuous  effort  to  tr^  to  do  it.  And  so  with  regard  to  religion.  The  root  of 
much  error  and  evil,  of  many  difl&culties  in  life  and  transgressions  in  action,  lies  in 
sins  of  memory.  We  remember,  all  of  us,  the  facts  of  Bible  history,  but  we  have 
never  cared  to  acknowledge  their  application.  Now  there  are  many  things  which 
tend  to  increase  the  defects  of  memory  when  we  have  to  do  with  religious  things. 
There  is  often  no  one  to  remind  us  of  the  lessons  we  have  learned  or  the  promises  we 
have  made  ;  there  is  often  no  one  to  check  us  for  our  forgetfulness  and  wanderings, 
no  voice  from  heaven  speaks  to  us,  no  instantaneous  punishment  falls  upon  us  for 
neglecting  and  forgetting  them.  Besides,  the  things  that  it  is  necessary  for  us  to 
remember  often  produce  pain  when  they  are  recalled,  and  the  fear  of  pain  paralyses 
our  memory,  while  the  rush  of  the  world  and  of  life  sweeps  us  on  to  other  thoughts 
and  other  things.  If  we  only  felt  the  importance  of  remembering  these  things  the 
work  would  be  half  done.  I  know  a  lady,  a  Sabbath-school  teacher  in  the  town  of 
Newport,  who  has  had  the  unique  record  that,  as  scholar  and  teacher,  she  has 
attended  a  school  in  that  town  for  fifty-two  years  without  a  break.  To  her  it  was  a 
matter  of  supreme  importance  to  be  in  her  place  Sabbath  after  Sabbath,  and  every- 
thing in  her  week's  work  was  arranged  accordingly.  There  was  no  danger  that  she 
would  ever  be  absent  or  forget  her  Sabbath  school  when  the  hour  for  going  to  it 
arrived.  If  we  get  into  the  habit  of  forgetting  our  duty  and  the  promise  of  God  we 
are  at  the  mercy  of  foes  and  in  danger  of  the  wrath  of  God,  as  Moses  said  ;  for  God 
does  not  forget.  But  even  to  remember  well  is  not  enough.  It  is  but  a  means  to 
an  end.  There  are  some  people  who  have  prodigious  memories,  and  they  are  very 
proud  of  it ;  some  even  make  their  livelihood  by  it.  They  can  repeat  a  whole  book 
after  they  have  once  read  it.  Often  such  a  memory  is  only  a  wonder  passing  across 
the  sky  of  life  like  a  comet,  and  leaving  no  light  and  blessing  behind.  Sometimes 
it  is  a  sign  of  mental  disease,  so  that  the  other  faculties  of  mind  will  soon  be  clouded. 
A  splendid  memory  is  a  good  thing,  but  it  needs  to  be  balanced  by  good  judgment 
and  needs  to  be  actively  used  if  it  is  to  be  the  blessing  it  ought  to  be.  When  we 
turn  to  religion  we  find  that  there  are  many  people  who  can  remember  well  religious 
facts  and  doctrine,  and  arguments  to  prove  them,  but  what  use  is  it  to  them  ?  Does 
it  lead  them  to  exercise  self-control  or  self-denial  ?  Alas,  no  !  If  memory  is  to  be 
of  use  to  us  we  must  be  true  to  memory  as  to  conscience,  we  must  be  warned  by 
what  has  happened  in  the  past  in  the  spiritual  world  ;  it  must  never  be  forgotten, 
so  that  we  never  go  wilfully  into  the  same  temptation  or  commit  the  same  mistake 
twice.  In  the  verse  out  of  which  our  text  is  taken,  and  at  the  end  of  it,  there  is  one 
thing  specially  mentioned  as  necessary  if  memory  is  to  be  of  use,  and  that  is,  that 
the  things  we  remember  we  must  teach  to  others.  "  Teach  them  thy  sons,  and  thy 
sons'  sons,"  and  thus  help  to  fix  them  in  our  mind  in  an  accurate  and  orderly 
fashion.  There  is  not  one  in  this  audience,  I  fancy,  to  whom  the  text  does  not 
appeal.  It  appeals  to  the  young,  "  Lest  thou  forget."  You  are  strong  and  hopeful, 
and  ever  pushing  up.  There  are  some  things  a  man  can  never  forget  with  safety. 
"  As  a  man  sows,  so  shall  he  reap  :  for  all  these  things  God  will  bring  thee  into 
judgment."  This  text  appeals  to  the  prosperous.  You  look  back  with  honest 
pride  upon  the  days  when  others  started  side  by  side  with  you,  with  all  the  advan- 
tages you  had,  but  they  have  fallen  far  behind  and  you  have  gone  right  ahead. 
Everything  you  have  touched  has  turned  to  gold.     Oh,  the  text  appeals  to  you. 


CHAP.  IV.]  DEUTERONOMY.  55 

There  is  no  spot  on  earth  more  slippery  or  dangerous  than  the  mountain-top  of 
prosperity.  It  is  God  who  has  given  thee  the  power  to  get  wealth  and  all  these 
blessings,  and  He  will  continue  them  to  you  as  a  blessing  as  long  as  you  use  them 
to  the  glory  of  His  Name.  Our  text  appeals  to  the  poor  and  lowly.  The  hand  of 
God  has  been  heavy  upon  you.  Through  no  fault  of  your  own  you  have  fallen 
behind  in  the  race  of  life.  The  text  comes  home  to  you,  "Lest  thou  forget."  It 
may  be  that  sometimes  bitter  thoughts  take  possession  of  your  heart,  envious 
thoughts  against  your  fellows,  and  you  are  tempted  to  wrap  yourselves  up  in  selfish 
misanthropic  thoughts,  and  then  you  lose  all  the  benefit  of  all  the  lessons  that  God 
has  been  taking  so  much  trouble  to  teach  you.  But  there  is  no  danger  if  you  will 
only  remember  that  God  rules  the  world,  that  God  makes  no  mistake,  that  God  has 
promised  to  make  all  things  work  for  good  to  those  who  love  Him.  (  W.  Park,  M.A.) 
Lest  we  forget : — How  good  a  gift  is  memory  !  Of  all  the  gracious  benefits  con- 
ferred on  mortal  men  by  God  there  is  none  more  useful,  none  more  precious.  By 
memory  we  are  enabled  to  lay  by  a  store  of  precious  thoughts  and  gracious  remini- 
scences against  the  days  to  come.  By  memory  we  can  stud  our  minds  with  promises 
and  precepts  from  the  Word  of  God,  as  the  midnight  heavens  are  studded  with  the 
twinkling  of  stars.  But  alas  !  memory  has  fallen  with  the  rest  of  our  powers.  Do 
you  not  know  from  sad  experience  how  readily  evil  is  retained  ?  "When  you  would 
fain  erase  it  from  the  page,  the  dark  letters  still  appear.  Things  that  we  thought 
we  had  with  a  tenacious  grip  are  torn  away  from  us,  or  slip  from  our  grasp,  and  the 
place  that  knew  them  knows  them  no  more.  Our  memories  have  failed  us.  By  a 
good  memory  I  mean  a  memory  that  lets  slip  that  which  is  not  worth  holding,  and 
holds  as  with  a  death-grip  that  which  is  most  worth  preserving.  I.  Notice  first,  that 
God  graciously  gives  warning  of  the  danger.  Is  not  this  right  good  of  Him  ? 
1.  He  knows  us  thoroughly — better,  far  better,  than  we  know  ourselves.  The 
people  of  His  choice  were  prone  to  forget  Him,  therefore  did  He  constantly  sound 
this  warning  note.  To  them,  I  suppose,  it  seemed  impossible,  certainly  iniprobalile, 
that  they  would  forget  the  things  that  their  eyes  had  seen.  Forget  Egypt,  the 
furnace  of  iron  ?  You  would  have  thought  that  these  experiences  had  been  burned 
into  them  by  the  very  fire  of  the  fm-nace  through  which  they  passed.  Forget  their 
redemption  and  deliverance,  the  night  of  the  Passover,  and  the  passage  of  the  Red 
Sea  ?  Forget  God,  who  had  delivered  them  times  out  of  number,  who  had  spoken 
to  them  out  of  the  midst  of  the  fire  ?  This  same  sad  principle  holds  good  to-day. 
"We  used  to  think  that  the  experiences  of  our  early  Christian  life  would  linger  with 
us  and  influence  us  for  good  through  all  our  days.  As  one  who  says  "  I  will 
remember,"  and  makes  a  knot  in  his  handkerchief  in  order  to  assist  his  memory, 
and  then  forgets  why  he  made  the  knot,  so  our  efforts  to  remember  God  and  the 
things  of  God  have  proved  fruitless.  Are  you  not  aware — let  it  be  a  matter  for 
sorrowful  confession  if  so — that  you  have  sometimes  forgotten  that  you  have  been 
purged  from  your  old  sins  ?  You  have  been  indulging  in  them  again.  That  looks 
as  if  you  had  forgotten  the  cleansing  from  them.  The  peril  still  exists,  but  to  be 
forewarned  is  to  be  forearmed.  Moreover,  God  knows  just  when  and  where  this 
peril  is  likely  to  be  greatest.  If  you  will  turn  to  Deut.  vi.  12  you  will  understand 
my  meaning  better.  There  is  much  meaning  in  the  "then."  "?ou  must  read  what 
precedes  it  in  ver.  10.  There  is  no  season  so  perilous,  in  this  particular,  as  the 
season  of  prosperity.  The  fear  is  that  when  all  things  are  crowding  into  us,  God 
should  be  crowded  out.  You  will  find  it  comparatively  easy  to  remember  God  and 
to  recollect  His  dealings  with  you  in  the  past  when  laid  upon  a  bed  of  sickness,  or 
when  bereaved  or  troubled.  Sometimes  God  permits  these  dispensations  to  give 
us  a  pause  in  the  rush  of  life,  and  opportunity  to  call  to  remembrance.  II.  He 
SUPPLIES  VALUABLE  INSTRUCTION.  He  does  not  content  Himself  with  waving  a  red 
flag  before  us ;  He  stops  the  train,  and  gives  instructions  to  the  driver  and  the 
guard.  "  Take  heed  to  thyself."  It  means  literally,  "  Be  watchful."  This  is  just 
where  we  fail,  as  a  rule  ;  the  watch-tower  is  deserted.  Strengthen  the  guard  rather 
than  reduce  it,  and  see  to  it  that  everything  that  would  enter  the  mind  is  challenged 
as  it  approaches,  and  that  all  that  would  go  out  that  should  remain  within  the  walls 
is  prevented  from  passing  through  the  portals.  "  Keep  thy  soul  diligently."  It  is 
the  same  idea  as  we  have  already  mentioned.  As  one  might  call  to  another  whom 
he  saw  to  be  in  danger,  "  Look  out, — look  out !  "  Here  is  a  fiu*ther  instruction, 
*' Teach  them  thy  sons,  and  thy  sons'  sons."  "For  whose  benefit,  think  you,  is 
this  instruction  given  ?  for  that  of  the  sons  and  of  the  grandsons  ?  Yea,  verily  j 
but  do  they  reap  all  the  benefit  ?  I  tell  you,  sirs,  one  of  the  best  ways  to  remember 
things  that  are  most  worth  remembering  is  to  pass  them  on  to  others.     III.  I  have 


56  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

this  further  to  say,  that  He  peovides  welcome  aids  to  memoey.  He  remembers 
our  frame,  He  knows  that  we  are  but  dust ;  therefore  does  He  come  to  our  assistance. 
He  calls  us  like  little  children  to  His  kindergarten  school,  and  makes  the  learning 
easy.  There  are  ways  of  schooling  the  mind  and  training  the  memory  ;  there  are 
certain  aids  and  helps.  The  law  of  association  serves  a  good  purpose  in  this  respect, 
and  object  lessons  lend  always  a  pleasing  succour.  Certainly  it  is  so  in  the  things 
of  God.  To  Israel  God  gave  the  Passover,  constantly  repeating  it  to  remind  them 
of  that  wondrous  night  when  He  brought  them  out  of  the  house  of  bondage  with  a 
high  hand  and  an  outstretched  arm.  To  Israel  He  gave  the  varied  ritual  of  the 
Mosaic  dispensation,  that  they  might  never  forget  the  doctrines  of  sin  and  of  salva- 
tion, and  va&t  without  the  shedding  of  blood  mere  is  no  remission.  To  Israel  He 
gave  the  ark,  in  which  was  the  pot  of  manna,  Aaron's  rod  that  budded,  and  the 
tables  of  stone.  All  these  were  aids  to  memory.  After  just  this  fashion  God  deals 
with  His  spiritual  Israel,  providing  aids  to  memory,  lest  we  forget.  Heavenly  influ- 
ences are  with  us  constantly,  angel  ministries  work  for  our  help  and  succour  ;  holy 
exercises,  if  we  do  but  engage  in  them  in  the  right  spirit,  tend  in  the  same  direction. 
Prayer  brings  us  to  the  mercy-seat,  and  sends  us  full-handed  home.  Praise  puts  a 
harp  into  our  hands,  and  causes  us  to  sing  our  thankfulness  to  God.  The  ordinances 
of  worship  and  opportunities  for  service  all  help  to  keep  us  in  touch  with  heaven,  and 
to  keep  our  hearts  aglow  with  godliness.  The  Word  is  one  of  God's  aids  to  memory. 
You  can  hide  the  Word  of  the  Lord  in  your  heart,  lest  you  forget.  I  would  have 
you  remember,  too,  that  the  ordinances  that  the  Saviour  has  established  are  for  this 
same  purpose.  Think  of  believers'  baptism.  The  Lord's  Supper  is  instituted  for 
this  same  purpose ;  it  is  a  reminder  of  all  that  has  passed  in  connection  with  our 
spiritual  experience.  **  This  do,"  said  He,  *'  in  remembrance  of  Me,"  How  often  we 
pray  the  prayer  of  the  dying  thief,  "Lord,  remember  me."  It  is  a  right  good 
prayer.  Mothers  may  forget  their  children  rather  than  that  Jesus  should  have  ua 
out  of  His  mind,  but  I  tell  what  is  possible — that  you  and  I  should  forget  Him. 
{Thomas  Spurgeon.)  Memory  aided  by  sight  and  instruction : — We  may  have  no 
memory  for  words  :  had  we  committed  the  lesson  to  an  intellectual  recollection  we 
might  have  been  excused  for  forgetting  somewhat  of  its  continuity  and  exactness  ; 
the  point  is,  that  we  are  called  to  remember  things  which  our  eyes  have  seen.  The 
eye  is  meant  to  be  the  ally  of  the  memory.  Many  men  can  only  remember  through 
the  vision  ;  they  have  no  memory  for  things  abstract,  but  once  let  them  see  clearly 
an  object  or  a  writing,  and  they  say  th<^y  can  hold  the  vision  evermore.  God's  pro- 
vidence appeals  to  the  eye ;  God's  witnesses  are  eye-witnesses—  not  inventors,  but 
men  who  can  speak  to  transactions  which  have  come  under  their  immediate  and 
personal  observation  ;  they  have  seen  and  tasted  and  handled  of  the  Word  of  Life. 
What  a  loss  it  is  to  forget  the  noble  past!  How  treacherous  is  the  memory  of 
ingratitude  ;  all  favours  have  gone  for  nothing ;  all  kind  words,  all  stimulating 
exhortations,  all  great  and  ennobling  prayers — forgotten  in  one  criminal  act.  To 
empty  the  memory  is  to  silence  the  tongue  of  praise  ;  not  to  cherish  the  recollection 
is  to  lose  the  keenest  stimulus  which  can  be  applied  to  the  excitement  and  progress 
of  the  soul.  On  the  other  hand,  he  whose  memory  is  rich  has  a  song  for  every  day  ; 
he  who  recollects  the  past  in  all  its  deliverances,  in  all  its  sudden  brightnesses,  in 
all  its  revelations  and  appearances,  cannot  be  terrified  or  chased  by  the  spirit  of 
fear  ;  he  lives  a  quiet  life,  deep  as  the  peace  of  God.  Can  Moses  suggest  any  way  of 
keeping  the  memory  of  God's  providences  quick  and  fresh  ?  He  lays  down  the  true 
way  of  accomplishing  this  purpose :  **  Teach  them  thy  sons,  and  thy  sons'  sons," — 
in  other  words,  speak  about  them,  dwell  upon  them,  magnify  them,  be  grateful  for 
them  ;  pxt  down  the  day,  the  date,  the  punctual  time  when  the  great  deliverances 
occurred,  and  when  the  splendid  revelations  were  granted  ;  and  go  over  the  history 
line  by  line  and  page  by  page,  and  thus  keep  the  recollection  verdant,  quick  as  life, 
bright  as  light.  What  a  reproach  to  those  Christians  who  are  dumb  !  How  much 
they  lose  uho  never  speak  about  God  !  To  speak  of  the  mercies  of  God  is  to 
increase  the  power  of  witness  at  another  point.  We  first  see,  then  we  teach.  The 
teaching  of  others  is  not  to  come  until  there  has  been  clear  perception  on  our  own 
part.  The  eye-witness  is  doubly  strong  in  whatever  testimony  he  may  make  :  not 
only  can  he  tell  a  clear  story  from  end  to  end,  he  can  sign  it  with  both  hands,  he 
can  attest  it  with  the  certainty  and  precision  of  a  man  who  has  seen  the  things  to 
which  he  sets  his  signature.  Our  Christianity  amounts  to  nothing  if  it  is  not  a 
personal  experience.  {J,  Parker,  D.D.)  Teach  them  thy  sons. — Instruction  of 
children : — An  Englishman  visiting  Sweden,  noticing  their  care  for  educating 
children  who  are  taken  from  the  streets  and  highways  and  placed  in  special  schools. 


CHAP.  IV.]  DEUTERONOMY.  ST 

inquired  if  it  were  not  costly.  He  received  the  suggestive  answer,  **Yes,  it  is 
costly,  but  not  dear.  We  Swedes  are  not  rich  enough  to  let  a  child  grow  up  in 
ignorance,  misery,  and  crime,  to  become  a  scourge  to  society  as  well  as  a  disgrace 
to  himself."  {The  Lantern.)  Training  of  children: — As  Alexander  the  Great 
attained  to  have  such  a  puissant  army,  whereby  he  conquered  the  world,  by  having 
children  bom  and  brought  up  in  his  camp,  whereby  they  became  so  well  acquainted 
and  exercised  with  weapons  from  their  swaddling  clothes  that  they  looked  for  no 
other  wealth  or  country  but  to  fight ;  even  so,  if  thou  wouldst  have  thy  children 
either  to  do  great  matters,  or  to  live  honestly  by  their  own  virtuous  endeavours, 
thou  must  acquaint  them  with  painstaking  in  their  youth,  and  so  bring  them  up  in 
the  nurture  and  admonition  of  the  Lord.  [Cawdray.)  The  echo  of  childhood's 
years : — One  of  the  most  memorable  incidents  of  my  boyhood  was  the  hearing  of  a 
remarkable  echo  at  a  famous  health  resort.  Long  after  the  voice  had  sounded  there 
came  back  the  echo  of  it,  so  distinct  and  clear  as  to  seem  a  response.  Is  not  the 
echo  a  parable  of  life  ?  Childhood's  years  cannot  be  recalled,  nor  its  actions 
repeated  ;  yet  they  will  re-echo  for  us  in  the  coming  days  sounds  of  gladness  or  of 
sorrow  as  their  character  may  have  been.  Through  the  corridors  of  memory  the 
melody  of  a  pure,  noble,  and  unselfish  youth  will  be  heard,  gladdening  the  heart  of 
age  when  the  days  of  action  have  given  place  to  the  days  of  reminiscence.  {Great 
Thoughts,) 

Ver.  14.  That  ye  might  do  them.—  Krwwledge  and  practice : — L  God  is  the  one 

GREAT   SOURCE   BOTH   OF   TRUTH   AND   OF  AUTHORITY.       1.    The   office   of  eVCry  trUC 

teacher  is  to  unfold  the  revelation  of  the  Eternal,  whether  in  nature,  in  history,  or 
in  the  written  Word.  2.  The  office  of  every  true  lawgiver  and  ruler  is  to  expound 
and  enforce  the  precepts  and  commandments  of  the  Lord  of  lords.  There  is  no 
Bound  knowledge,  and  no  law  worthy  of  reverence,  which  does  not  emanate  firomthe 
Supreme.     11.  True  religion  corresponds  to  the  composite  nature  of  man, 

AS    A   being    possessed    OF    INTELLIGENCE   AND   ENDOWED    WITH    WILL.       1.    FalsC 

religions  are  one-sided :  they  either  embody  certain  theories  and  doctrines  and 
neglect  morality,  or  they  prescribe  certain  services  without  basing  them  on  eternal 
truth.  2.  Judaism  appealed  to  the  understanding  in  its  many  statements  regarding 
God  and  regarding  human  life  ;  it  appealed  to  the  practical  nature  in  its  rigid  pre- 
scriptions of  duty,  its  rigid  prohibitions  of  sin.  3.  Christianity  is  the  highest 
example  of  the  combination  of  the  doctrinal  and  the  moral,  laying  a  foundation 
of  truth  and  love,  and  rearing  upon  it  an  edifice  of  obedience  and  holiness. 
in.  Acceptable  obedience  consists  in  at  once  receiving  the  Gospel  and 
DOING  the  will  OF  Christ.  An  empty  profession  of  faith  and  a  soulless  conformity 
of  conduct  are  alike  repugnant  to  a  heart-searching  God.  The  true  Christian 
shows  his  faith  by  his  works.     {Family  Churchman, ) 

Ver.  20.  The  Lord  hath  taken  yon  ...  to  be  unto  Him  a  people  of  inheritance.— 

jThe  chosen  of  the  Lord : — I.  The  people  alluded  to.  1.  The  title  they  may  claim. 
*'The  chosen  of  God."  2.  The  mercy  shown.  "The  Lord  hath  taken  you." 
8.  The  practical  result.  "Hath  brought  you  forth."  (1)  A  wonderful  work. 
(2)  Miraculous.  (3)  Wise.  (4)  All-sufficient.  (5)  Complete.  IL  The  place 
whence  removed.  "The  iron  furnace."  1.  The  rigour  of  the  imprisonment. 
2.  The  bitterness  of  the  position.  The  land  of  Egypt  is  always  used  in  Scripture  to 
represent  the  kingdom  of  Satan.  And  so  the  idea  here  developed  is  the  deliverance 
of  God's  Church  (1)  from  the  dominion  of  the  devil,  the  power  he  exercises  over  the 
soul,  and  the  rigour  of  his  exactions  ;  (2)  from  the  servitude  of  sin,  and  its  cruel, 
unremitting  slavery  of  toil ;  (3)  from  the  alienation  of  a  distant  land — a  country 
which  is  not  our  home.  God's  grace  and  power  has  accomplished  all  this  on  our 
behalf.  III.  The  position  provided.  It  is  worthy  of  notice  that  this  position  is 
not  one  of  mere  selfish  gratification.  It  is  one  that  promoted  first  and  chiefly  the 
glory  of  God.  There  are  two  particulars  given.  1.  God  selected  and  delivered  His 
people  that  they  may  be  His  people-  This  is  a  condition  of  high  honour — to  be  the 
people  of  the  Most  High  is  worthy  of  an  archangel.  It  is  a  condition  of  blessed 
security.  The  people  of  God  are  as  the  apple  of  His  eye.  He  will  guide  and  protect 
them  as  the  most  precious  treasures.  It  is  a  position  of  glorious  anticipation. 
2.  God  selects  His  people  that  they  may  be  His  inheritance.  {Preacher's  Analyst.) 
God's  heritage : — Israel  was  the  only  people  on  earth  chosen  by  God  of  old.  This 
came  to  pass  because  of  the  faith  of  Abraham.  God  was  the  God  of  Abraham's 
posterity.    The  choice  was  absolute  and  universal.    All  might  go  forth  from  Egypt. 


58  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

Young  and  old,  man  and  wife,  sick  and  sound,  &c.,  &c.  In  brief,  all  that  pertained 
to  the  people  might  go  forth  over  the  Red  Sea  and  sing  God's  praise.  How  great, 
then,  was  the  Divine  mercy !  And  what  hope  does  this  give  us  in  view  of  the 
thought  that  there  will  be  many  received  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven — a  number 
greater  and  more  comprehensive,  it  may  be,  than  men  sometimes  think.  I.  Israel 
WAS  God's  heritage.  1.  He  calls  them  His  heritage.  He  desired  at  least  to  have 
one  spot  on  earth  whilst  as  yet  all  earth  was  subject  to  the  prince  of  this  world. 
Such  could  only  come  through  a  faithful  man,  who  had  become  free  from  this  servi- 
tude. Such  was  Abraham,  who  was  commanded  to  sojourn  in  Canaan.  This  land 
God  chose  as  His  own ;  and  the  people  to  whom  He  gave  it  were  to  be  inheritors 
of  the  land,  and  therefore  a  people  of  inheritance  unto  Him.  2.  Thus  Moses 
warned  them  that  in  this  land,  which  was  a  consecrated  land,  no  idolatry  must 
find  place.  It  was  to  be  separated  from  all  lands  in  which  the  prince  of  this  world 
had  sway.  The  land  remained  consecrated  to  God,  His  peculiar  possession  even 
when  defiled  by  the  people,  i.e.  when  it  took  on  the  character  of  a  heathen  land, 
and  because  of  this  was,  for  a  time,  forsaken,  as  during  the  Exile.  II.  The  whole 
EARTH  IS  NOW  God's.  1.  Since  Christ  died  Canaan  ceased  to  be  the  especially  holy 
land  consecrated  to  God.  Now  the  whole  earth  belongs  to  Him,  for  now  the  prince 
of  the  world  has  been  ousted.  Every  spot  is  now  God's  holy  land,  where  God's 
children  gather  together — where  the  true  God  and  Jesus  Christ  whom  He  hath  sent 
are  worshipped.  Humanity  is  now  God's  heritage,  purchased  by  the  blood  of  Christ. 
2.  The  idea,  therefore,  that  Israel  will  again  have  to  occupy  Canaan  as  God's 
inheritance  has  no  support,  for  the  whole  earth  is  the  Lord's,  all  is  equally  His,  as 
once  Canaan  was.  God  will  have  Himself  to  be  acknowledged  everywhere  as  once 
He  was  in  Canaan.  Wherefore,  then,  now  a  holy  land  in  opposition  to  other  lands  ? 
Now  we  sing  with  the  angels,  "Holy,"  &c.,  "the  whole  earth  is  full  of  His  glory," 
i.e.  the  glory  of  God  is  to  be  extolled  now  everywhere  as  once  in  Canaan.  There- 
fore the  Lord  said  to  His  disciples  :  "  Blessed  are  the  meek,"  &c. — not  only  citizens 
of  the  erstwhile  holy  land  only,  but  of  the  whole  world.  3.  May  we,  through  our 
faith  and  our  reliance  on  God  and  Him  whom  He  has  sent,  make  ev^ery  place  holy 
ground,  as  the  possession  of  God's  inheritance.  For  He  fills  all  with  the  fulness  of 
His  Divine  glory,  or  will  yet  fill  all.  {J.  C.  Blumhardt. )  God's  deliverance  of  Israel 
out  of  the  iron  furnace : — First,  for  the  terms  of  their  deliverance,  to  speak  of  them, 
which  are  here  propounded  two  manner  of  ways,  in  the  general  and  in  the  particular. 
The  general,  Egypt.  The  particular,  the  furnace  of  iron.  I.  We  begin  first  of  all  with 
the  general  proposition,  which,  though  it  be  last  in  order  of  Scripture,  yet  is  first  in 
order  of  nature,  and  that  is  Egypt.  This  was  the  place  which  they  were  delivered 
from,  which  when  we  have  considered  how  miserable  a  place  it  was,  and  especially 
to  them,  we  shall  see  the  greatness  of  their  deliverance.  The  place,  I  say,  in 
general  was  Egypt,  which  we  find  these  Israelites  to  be  very  often  put  in  mind  of 
in  Scripture  upon  all  occasions  (Deut.  v.  15,  xvi.  12,  xxiv.  18,  22).  1.  It  was 
a  place  of  exile  or  peregrination.  This  the  Scripture  does  very  much  insist  on. 
That  they  were  strangers  in  the  land  of  Egypt  (Psa.  cxiv.  1).  The  world  to  the 
children  of  God  is  but  as  the  land  of  strangers.  It  is  heaven  which  is  their  proper 
home  and  their  Father's  house.  It  should  make  them  the  more  willing  to  go  when 
God  calls  them  by  seasonable  dissolution,  in  that  here  they  are  but  in  a  land  of 
strangers.  That  was  not  all,  nor  the  main  thing,  which  was  considerable  in  Egypt. 
2.  It  was,  moreover,  a  land  of  idolaters.  There  is  matter  of  pollution.  It  was  hard 
for  Israel  to  be  long  in  Egypt,  and  not  in  a  great  measure  to  partake  with  them  in 
their  idolatries.  Oh,  it  is  a  great  mercy  to  be  kept  from  sinful  allurements,  especially 
considering  what  inclinations  are  in  ourselves  to  the  closing  with  them,  we  have 
a  nature  in  us  which  is  like  dry  tinder  to  these  sparks.  And  therefore  to  be 
prevented  from  the  occasion  is  so  much  the  greater  advantage.  As  there  is 
pollution  in  these  things  in  regard  of  nature,  so  there  is  offensiveness  in  regard  of 
grace.  Evil  examples  and  temptations,  if  they  do  not  defile  us,  yet  they  cannot  but 
offend  and  grieve  us  and  expose  us  more  to  sin,  so  they  trouble  us  and  expose  us 
more  to  grief,  prove  wearisome  and  tedious  to  us.  There  is  also  danger  in  them,  too, 
in  regard  to  the  consequents.  Danger  both  to  body  and  soul.  For  ourselves,  let  us 
bless  God  that  He  has  graciously  given  us  the  opportunities  of  knowledge,  and 
delivered  us  from  the  Egypt  both  of  Paganism  and  Popery.  II.  The  second  is  as 
it  is  laid  down  in  particular,  and  that  is  the  iron  furnace  (1  Kings  viii.  51 ; 
Jer.  xi.  4).  1.  First,  here  is  aflfiiction  in  general  compared  to  a  furnace  (Isa.  xlviii. 
10).  Afflictions  are  the  fiery  trial  to  test  God's  people,  and  purge  away  the  dross 
(1  Pet.  iv.  12).     2.  For  this  affliction  in  particular  which  now  happened  to  Israel,  it 


CHAP.  IV.]  DEUTERONOMY.  59 

is  called  the  iron  furnace.  Both  in  the  letter  and  in  the  moral.  In  the  letter. 
First,  because  those  furnaces  which  they  WTOught  in  were  such  as  in  which  iron 
was  melted.  And  so  from  the  work  they  were  employed  in,  furnaces  of  iron.  But 
then  secondly,  of  iron  in  the  moral.  First,  an  hard  and  laborious  employment. 
Iron  is  an  emblem  of  severity.  Then,  secondly,  as  from  the  sharpness  of  it,  so 
from  the  continuance  of  it  likewise  (Psa.  cvii.  20).  The  use  which  we  are  to  make  of 
this  observation  to  ourselves  is  therefore,  first,  not  to  wonder  at  it,  or  to  think  much 
of  it,  but  to  expect  it.  The  refiner  puts  the  gold  into  the  furnace,  and  the  potter 
puts  the  clay  into  the  fire,  and  both  of  them  to  very  good  purpose  ;  and  so  does 
God.  Again,  we  should  be  careful  to  find  afflictions  to  have  this  eflBcacy  upon  us, 
to  wit,  of  refining  us.  III.  The  Author  of  their  deliverance,  and  that  is 
EXPRESSED  HERE  TO  BE  GoD  HiMSELF  THE  LoRD.  1.  First,  it  is  He  alouc  hath  the 
bowels,  it  is  He  alone  that  hath  the  strength.  Deliverance  of  others  out  of  trouble 
is  an  act  of  pity  and  compassion.  Now,  none  but  only  God  has  so  much  of  this 
in  them  towards  the  Church ;  we  shall  see  in  the  book  of  the  Lamentations  the 
complaining  of  the  want  of  commiseration  in  others  towards  her  ;  but  this  God  hath 
in  Him  abundance.  2.  Secondly,  none  but  He  hath  the  strength.  The  adversaries 
of  the  Church  are  potent,  and  therefore  need  to  have  one  of  power  to  deal  with 
them.  And  this  is  God  Himself ;  the  Almighty  and  All-sufficient.  Therefore  still 
let  Him  be  both  repaired  to,  as  also  acknowledged  in  such  providences  as  these 
are.  IV.  The  manner  of  it.  This  we  have  expressed  in  two  words,  "Taken 
you  and  brought  you  forth."  Though  one  might  have  served  the  turn  for  the 
signification  of  the  deliverance,  yet  two  are  made  use  of  to  make  it  so  much  the 
more  emphatical.  1.  First,  an  emphasis  of  appropriation,  "taken  you,"  that  is,  laid 
claim  unto  you,  as  a  man  that  seizes  upon  that  which  is  his  own  when  it  is  in  the 
hand  of  strangers.  2.  Secondly,  as  there  is  in  it  an  emphasis  of  appropriation, 
so  likewise  an  emphasis  of  affection.  "He  hath  taken  you,"  that  is,  with  a  great 
deal  of  tenderness  and  regard  unto  you  (Deut.  xxii.  11).  "Hath  brought  you," 
and  this,  as  well  as  the  other,  hath  a  double  force  in  it.  1.  First,  there  is  power 
in  it.  "Bring  you  forth, "that  is,  forced  you  forth,  whether  your  enemies  would  or 
no.  2.  Secondly,  there  is  also  solemnity  in  it.  "He  brought  them  forth,"  i.e.  in 
triumph,  as  with  a  strong  hand  so  with  a  stretched-out  arm,  as  the  Scripture  also 
expresses  it  (Deut.  v.  15).  Now,  from  both  these  expressions  together  we  see  the 
thing  itself  sufficiently  declared,  that  God  did  at  last  deliver  His  people  out  of 
captivity  (Psa.  Ixxxi.  6,  8,  13).  Though  God  suffers  His  servants  sometimes  to  fall 
into  the  hand  of  their  enemies,  yet  He  does  at  length  free  them  from  them.  This 
He  doth  upon  divers  considerations.  First,  out  of  His  own  compassion  (Psa.  ciii.  9  ; 
Isa.  Ivii.  16).  Secondly,  out  of  respect  to  His  people,  lest  they  should  be  discouraged 
and  provoked  to  evil  (Psa.  cxxv.  3).  Thirdly,  out  of  regard  to  the  enemies,  lest 
they  should  insult  (Deut.  xxxii.  26,  27).  Let  this,  therefore,  be  the  use  which  we 
make  of  it  to  ourselves.  First,  to  expect  it,  whereas  yet  it  is  not.  Secondly,  to 
acknowledge  it,  and  to  improve  it  there  where  it  is.  And  so  much  may  suffice  to 
have  spoken  of  the  first  general  part  of  the  text,  namely,  the  deliverance  itself.  V.  The 
END  OR  CONSEQUENT  OF  THIS  DELIVERANCE,  and  that  we  have  in  these  words,  "To 
be  unto  Him  a  people  of  inheritance  as  ye  are  this  day."  In  which  passage  we  have 
again  two  particulars.  First,  the  design  itself,  and  secondly,  the  amplification  of 
it.  The  design  itself,  "  To  be  unto  Him  a  people  of  inheritance."  The  amplification 
of  it.  "  As  y  e  are  this  day. "  I  begin  with  the  first,  namely,  the  design  itself,  "  To  be 
unto  Him  a  people  of  inheritance. "  This  is  that  which  God  aimed  at  concerning  Israel. 
Now,  this  may  again  admit  of  a  double  interpretation,  either  so  as  for  Him  to  be 
their  inheritance,  or  else  so  as  for  them  to  be  His.  The  Scripture  makes  mention 
of  either  in  sundry  places.  First,  for  Him  to  be  theirs.  This  is  the  privilege  of 
God's  people.  That  the  Lord  Himself  is  their  portion  and  inheritance,  and  so  ex- 
presses Himself  to  be  to  them  (Psa.  xvi.  5).  David,  speaking  of  himself,  "The  Lord 
is  the  portion  of  mine  inheritance,  and  of  my  cup :  Thou  maintainest  the  lot."  And 
so  of  Levi  it  is  said,  that  the  Lord  is  his  inheritance  (Deut.  x.  9).  And  the  Church, 
(Lam.  iii.  24)  "The  Lord  is  my  portion,"  &c.  This  is  a  great  comfort  to  the  godly, 
and  to  those  which  are  most  destitute  amongst  them,  to  live  upon  the  power  of  this 
truth,  what  though  they  have  none  of  the  great  inheritance  of  the  world.  Yet  as 
long  as  they  have  a  portion  in  God  they  have  that  which  may  abundantly  satisfy 
them,  and  keep  them  from  dejection,  forasmuch  as  from  henceforth  no  good  thing 
shall  be  wanting  unto  them,  "  He  that  overcometh  shall  inherit  all  things."  How 
BO?  It  follows  in  the  next  words,  "And  I  will  be  his  God,"  &c.  (Rev.  xxi.  7). 
The  second  is  for  them  to  be  His.     This  is  another  thing  which  the  Scripture  makes 


60  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it. 

mention  of  (Psa.  xxxiii.  12  ;  Deut.  xxxii.  9  ;  Psa.  xxviii.  9).  An  inheritance 
contains  three  things  in  it.  First,  some  good  and  advantage.  Secondly,  peculiarity 
and  propriety  of  interest.  Thirdly,  succession  and  derivation  of  it  to  posterity. 
Now,  according  to  all  these  notions  of  it  does  God  make  choice  of  His  people  to  be 
an  inheritance  to  Himself,  This,  therefore,  first  of  all  teaches  us  what  we  ourselves 
should  be,  namely,  such  as  are  wholly  devoted  and  consecrated  to  Him  (1  Cor. 
vi.  20).  We  are  the  inheritance  of  God,  therefore  we  should  not  suffer  Satan  to  get 
possession  of  us,  nor  any  evil  to  prevail  upon  us.  Secondly,  here  is  matter  of 
comfort  to  the  true  Church  and  people  of  God,  that  being  His  inheritance  He  wiU 
therefore  take  care  of  them  and  protect  them,  and  keep  them  from  eviL  I  desire 
now,  further,  to  enforce  it  as  a  duty  which  is  belonging  to  you  to  take  care  of  it 
especially  ;  we  should  all  in  our  several  opportunities  endeavour  the  continuance  of 
the  Church  in  succeeding  time.  That  God  may  have  to  Himself  a  portion  and 
people  of  inheritance,  even  when  we  are  in  our  graves.  This  is  done,  first  of  all, 
by  being  good  in  our  own  generation.  Secondly,  by  taking  care  of  others,  and 
educating  them  in  His  fear.  Now,  further,  we  may  look  upon  it  also  as  a  con- 
sequent, and  so  see  the  connection  of  these  two  both  together.  How  did  God, 
bringing  His  people  forth  out  of  Egypt,  make  them  to  be  to  Him  a  people  of 
inheritance,  namely,  thus  far,  as  they  had  now  larger  opportunities  for  the  serving 
of  Him  afforded  unto  them  than  while  they  were  in  Egypt,  they  were  there 
restrained  in  regard  of  the  idolatrous  people,  which  they  were  mingled  withal,  but 
now  being  escaped  they  were  more  at  liberty.  This,  therefore,  is  the  advantage 
which  we  should  still  make  of  such  opportunities  (Luke  i.  74,  75).  And  so  much 
of  the  first  particular  observable  in  this  second  general,  namely,  the  design  itself  to 
be,  &;c.  The  second  is  the  amplification  of  it.  "As  ye  are  this  day."  In  which 
clause  we  have  three  things  especially  hinted  to  us  concerning  God.  First,  the 
accomplishment  of  His  purposes.  Secondly,  the  certainty  of  His  promises. 
Thirdly,  the  continuance  of  His  performances.  Now,  from  hence  wiU  foUow  another 
point  as  our  duty,  which  is  here  also  to  be  observed,  and  that  is,  that  we  are 
accordingly  to  call  them  to  our  minds,  and  so  from  thence  make  them  fresh  unto 
us,  as  if  done  at  this  present  time.  It  is  that  which  Moses  endeavours  to  make 
these  Israelites  do  here  in  the  text,  who  reminds  them  of  a  mercy  which  was  done 
many  years  ago  for  them,  as  if  it  had  been  done  for  them  just  at  that  time.  This 
is  the  scope  of  this  narration,  and  this  also  hath  been  the  practice  of  the  saints  of 
God  in  other  places  (Psa.  Ixxviii.  1,  6).     {T.  Hortoii,  D.D.) 

Vers.  21,  22.  I  must  die  in  tliis  land,— TAe  death  of  Moses : — 1.  Though  a  life 
may  appear  to  us  to  receive  the  crown  of  failure,  it  may  for  all  that  be  acceptable 
in  God's  sight.  No  life  on  earth  is  complete,  for  its  completion  and  fulness  is 
destroyed  by  sin.  Just  as  a  man  in  things  temporal  often  falls  short  of  being 
successful,  so  does  a  man  in  things  eternal.  But  the  latter  knows  his  life  will 
receive  its  completion  hereafter.  2.  God  is  very  strict  with  His  children.  The 
service  of  God  is  not  to  be  trifled  with.  If  we  are  careless  we  may  prevent  our- 
selves from  obtaining  some  spiritual  success  in  this  world  which  might  be  a 
crowning  point  to  our  life.  3.  Moses  was  alone  at  his  death.  We  must  die  alone. 
Our  friends  cannot  pass  through  the  dark  valley  with  us.  But  stay — must  we  be 
really  alone  ?  The  Prince  of  Life  wiU  be  with  us  with  His  rod  and  staff,  if  we  ask 
Him.  4.  Moses  could  not  lead  the  Israelites  into  Canaan  ;  that  was  the  work  of 
Joshua.  Moses,  by  giving  us  the  moral  law,  cannot  lead  us  into  heaven.  The  moral 
law  in  the  hand  of  Moses  is  unable  to  accomplish  that  which  the  precious  blood  of 
Jesus  alone  can  do.     Is  Jesus  our  Leader  ?    {The  Weekly  Pulpit.) 

Ver.  24.  Even  a  jealous  God. — The  jealousy  of  God : — The  assertion  that  such  a 
quality  as  this  belongs  to  God  as  one  of  the  attributes  of  His  moral  character 
involves  a  number  of  deep  and  awful  considerations ;  they  seem  to  include  the 
love  as  weU  as  the  holiness  and  justice  of  the  Deity  in  one  complex  idea  ;  and  to 
form,  from  the  union  of  these  qualities  in  one  attribute  of  jealousy,  a  touching,  as 
•well  as  a  tremendous,  picture  of  His  feelings  towards  us.  For  let  us  remark,  first, 
that  the  existence  of  jealousy  in  God  implies  the  previous  existence  of  love.  If 
He  had  not  loved  us  Himself  He  would  have  been  indifferent  to  our  dispositions 
towards  Him.  If  He  had  not  felt  that  love  was  due  from  us  to  Him,  as  a  return 
for  love  already  exercised  towards  us,  He  would  not  have  resented  its  being  with- 
held, nor  made  use  of  this  phrase  as  declaratory  of  the  state  of  His  affections.  In 
agreement  with  this  idea  we  find  that  jealousy  in  God  is  never  spoken  of  except 


CHAP.  IV.]  DEUTERONOMY.  61 

with  a  reference  to  those  whom,  in  one  sense  or  other,  He  has  called  and  chosen  as 
His  own  ;  whose  love  therefore  He  has  a  right  to  claim  as  due  to  Himself,  in  virtue 
of  some  covenant  relation ;  and  whose  love  He  has  excited  by  some  previous  exer- 
cise of  favour  and  benevolence.  Any  wandering  of  affections,  any  deviation  from 
the  truth  of  allegiance,  however  slight  it  may  seem  to  the  eye  of  indifference, 
carries  wounds  and  provocation  to  that  of  jealousy,  and  we  may  therefore  say 
that  such  behaviour  as  this,  when  existing  in  the  people  of  God,  is  calculated  to 
excite  in  Him  a  feeling  of  resentment  analogous  to  that  which  unrequited  love  and 
infidelity  excite  in  the  heart  of  man.  Let  us  also  remark  that  tliis  attribute  is 
peculiar  to  the  true  God,  to  the  Jehovah  of  our  worship.  The  idols  of  heathenism 
were  imagined  to  be  ready  to  share  their  honours  with  another,  and  were  never 
supposed  to  object  to  the  devotions  which  were  paid  to  deities  of  other  names  or 
of  other  lands.  They  felt  that  they  had  no  exclusive  prerogative  to  power.  They 
felt,  or  rather  their  worshippers  felt,  that  even  while  they  were  the  objects  of 
adoration,  they  had  no  absolute  dominion.  And  what  was  then  true  with  regard 
to  them  is  equally  true  with  regard  to  the  idols  and  idolaters  of  the  world  at 
present.  They  have  no  jealousy  of  one  another.  They  are  only  jealous  of  God, 
and  exhibit  no  feelings  of  the  sort  except  when  He  is  the  object  of  attraction. 
Again,  let  us  remark  that  the  natural  objects  of  jealousy  are  the  affections  of  the 
heart.  Justice  may,  in  some  respects,  be  thought  to  fulfil  the  object  of  jealousy, 
but  justice  is  a  gross  and  inactive  feeling  in  comparison  with  jealousy.  The  slights 
and  wanderings  which  inflict  anguish  unspeakable  on  the  heart  cannot  be  put  into 
a  balance  and  have  the  extent  of  their  criminality  noted  by  weight.  How,  then, 
can  we  imagine  that  justice  is  the  only  attribute  with  which  those  are  concerned 
whose  duty  it  is  to  love  God  with  all  their  heart,  and  who  are  directed  to  worship 
Him  in  spirit  and  in  truth,  if  they  would  worship  Him  acceptably  at  all  ?  Under 
faith  in  this  attribute  of  God  it  is  not  merely  actual  sin  that  we  are  told  to  depre- 
cate in  ourselves,  or  in  others,  but  it  is  the  love  of  other  things  than  God.  Have 
we  gone,  for  instance,  to  seek  pleasure  in  the  company  of  His  enemies  ?  Have  we 
sought  our  bread  in  ways  which  are  not  His  ?  Have  we  looked  for  comfort  and 
peace  and  enjoyment  in  other  objects  than  in  His  favour  ?  Have  we  been  betrayed 
into  forgetfuhiess  of  His  love  in  the  hour  of  trial  ?  Have  we  felt  coldly  in  His 
service  ?  Whatever  our  own  opinions  may  have  been  on  such  subjects,  and  what- 
ever may  be  the  system  of  the  world,  we  cannot  deny,  and  we  cannot  doubt,  that 
these,  and  all  such  wanderings  of  the  heart,  must  be  provocations  to  a  jealous  God. 
It  is  perhaps  from  considering  in  this  manner  the  attribute  of  jealousy  in  God 
that  we  are  best  able  to  appreciate  the  dauger  of  what  is  commonly  called  the 
world.  The  world  sees  the  justice  of  God,  and  the  world  fears  it,  and  therefore  it 
is  cautious  of  advising  anything  which  may  seem  to  provoke  it.  But  if  the  words 
of  our  text  be  true — "If  the  Lord  our  God  be  a  consuming  fire,  even  a  jealous  God," 
what  are  the  teiTors  of  His  justice  compared  with  those  of  His  jealousy  ?  Com- 
pared with  jealousy,  justice  seems  a  cold,  deliberating  principle.  It  comes,  but  its 
very  name  implies  that  it  comes  slowly  and  maturely.  It  comes,  but  it  may  be 
pleaded  with  ;  it  may  be  reasoned  against ;  it  may  be  retarded  or  mollified  by  our 
reasonings.  But  jealousy  is  like  fire.  It  comes  to  act,  to  consume  ;  and  little  has 
the  world  gained  for  its  votaries  by  teaching  them  to  try  not  to  offend  the  justice 
of  God,  while  it  encourages  them  daily  to  provoke  His  jealousy.  For,  lastly,  let  us 
remark  on  this  subject  the  violence  of  those  feelings  which  jealousy  brings  into 
action.  Do  we  not  see  that  among  ourselves  it  bursts  at  once  the  tenderest  ties  of 
which  the  heart  of  man  is  conscious  ?  Founded  on  justice  as  its  principle,  but 
quickened  by  resentment  in  its  action,  it  seems  the  most  tremendous  quality  which 
we  are  capable  of  provoking  against  ourselves ;  and  indeed,  as  it  is  peculiarly 
directed  against  that  which  is  thought  to  be  of  all  sins  the  most  offensive — the  sin 
of  ingratitude — and  of  ingratitude,  not  for  favours,  but  for  love — it  may  well  excite 
terror  in  those  against  whom  it  may  be  directed  from  our  Maker.  Let  us  close 
this  subject  with  considering  the  degree  in  which  we  ourselves  may  be  in  danger  of 
experiencing  its  exercise.  If  jealousy,  which  arises  from  love  and  proceeds  only 
from  love,  is  to  be  in  proportion  to  that  love  which  it  proceeds  from,  what  jealousy 
can  be  compared  to  that  with  which  God  is  jealous  now  towards  His  people  \ 
{E.  Itaikes,  M.A.) 

Vers.  29-31.  If  from  thence  thou  slialt  seek  the  Lord  thy  Qo6^—Oonver9ums 
encouraged : — I.  First,  then,  there  is  a  time  mentioned.  "  If  from  thence  thou 
Shalt  seek  the  Lord.  .  .  .  When  thou  art  in  tribulation,  and  all  these  things  are 


62  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  iv, 

come  upon  thee,  even  in  the  latter  days."  1.  The  time  in  which  the  Lord  bids  you 
seek  Him,  0  you  unforgiven  ones,  is,  first  of  all,  **  from  thence  " — that  is,  from  the 
condition  into  which  yon  have  fallen,  or  the  position  which  you  now  occupy. 
To-day,  even  to-day,  He  bids  you  seek  Him  "  with  all  your  heart  and  with  all  your 
soul."  2.  With  regard  to  the  time  of  turning,  it  is  well  worthy  of  our  notice  that 
we  are  specially  encouraged  to  turn  unto  the  Lord  if  we  are  in  a  painful  plight. 
Our  text  says,  "  When  thou  art  in  tribulation."  Are  you  sick  ?  Does  your  weak- 
ness increase  upon  you  ?  Are  you  apprehensive  that  this  sickness  may  even  bo 
unto  death  ?  When  thou  art  in  such  tribulation,  then  thou  mayest  return  to  Him. 
A  sick  body  should  lead  us  the  more  earnestly  to  seek  healing  for  our  sick  soul. 
Are  you  poor,  have  you  come  down  from  a  comfortable  position  to  one  of  hard 
labour  and  of  scant  provision  ?  When  thou  art  in  this  tribulation,  then  turn  to 
the  Lord,  for  He  has  sent  thee  this  need  to  make  thee  see  thy  yet  greater  necessity, 
even  thy  need  of  Himself.  3.  Notice  further,  when  you  feel  that  the  judgments  of 
God  have  begun  to  overtake  you,  then  you  may  come  to  Him  :  "  When  thou  art  in 
tribulation  and  all  these  things  " — these  threatened  things — "  are  come  upon  thee." 
4.  There  is  yet  one  more  word  which  appears  to  me  to  contain  great  comfort  in  it, 
and  it  is  this,  "even  in  the  latter  days."  It  is  a  beautiful  sight,  though  it  is 
mingled  Avith  much  sadness,  to  see  a  very  old  man  become  a  babe  in  Christ — to  see 
him,  after  he  has  been  so  many  years  the  proud,  wayward,  self-confident  master  of 
himself,  at  last  learning  wisdom  and  sitting  at  Jesus'  feet.  They  hang  up  in  the 
cathedrals  and  public  halls  old  banners  which  have  long  been  carried  by  the  enemy 
into  the  thick  of  the  fight.  If  they  have  been  torn  by  shot  and  shell,  so  much  the 
more  do  the  captors  value  them :  the  older  the  standard  the  more  honour  is  it,  it 
seems,  to  seize  it  as  a  trophy.  II.  But  now  look  at  the  way  appointed.  To  find 
mercy,  what  are  we  bidden  to  do  ?  "If  from  thence  thou  shalt  seek  the  Lord  thy 
God."  1.  We  have  not,  then,  to  bring  anything  to  God,  but  to  seek  Him.  We 
have  not  to  seek  a  righteousness  to  bring  to  Him,  nor  seek  a  state  of  heart  which 
will  fit  us  for  Him,  but  to  seek  Him  at  once.  Salvation  is  not  by  doing,  nor  by 
being,  nor  by  feeling,  but  simply  by  believing.  We  are  not  to  be  content  with  self, 
but  to  seek  the  Lord.  Being  ourselves  unworthy,  we  are  to  find  worthiness  in  Jesus. 
2.  We  are  also  to  grasp  the  Lord  as  ours,  for  the  text  says,  "  Thou  shalt  seek  the 
Lord  thy  God."  Sinners, 'that  is  a  part  of  saving  faith,  to  take  God  to  be  your 
God  ;  if  He  is  only  another  man's  God,  He  cannot  save  you  ;  He  must  be  yours  to 
trust  and  love  and  serve  all  your  days,  or  you  will  be  lost.  3.  Now,  mark  God's 
directions — "If  thou  seek  Him  with  all  thy  heart  and  with  all  thy  soul."  There 
must  be  no  pretence  about  this  seeking.  If  you  desire  to  be  saved,  there  must  be 
no  playing  and  trifling  and  feigning.  The  search  must  be  real,  sincere,  and 
earnest,  intense,  thorough -going,  or  it  will  be  a  failure.  4.  The  text  further  adds 
that  we  are  to  turn  to  Him.  Did  you  notice  the  30th  verse — "  If  thou  turn  to 
the  Lord  thy  God  "  ?  It  must  be  a  thorough  turn.  You  are  looking  now  towards 
the  world — you  must  turn  in  the  opposite  direction,  and  look  Godward.  It  must 
not  be  an  apparent  turn,  but  a  real  change  of  the  nature,  a  turning  of  the  entire 
soul  ;  a  turning  with  repentance  for  the  past,  with  confidence  in  Christ  for  the 
present,  and  with  holy  desires  for  the  future.  Heart,  soul,  life,  speech,  action,  all 
must  be  changed.  5.  Then  it  is  added,  "and  be  obedient  to  His  voice,"  for  we 
cannot  be  saved  in  disobedience  ;  Christ  is  not  come  to  save  His  people  in  their  sins, 
but  from  their  sins.  III.  Thirdly,  the  text  contains  very  rich  encouragements. 
How  does  it  run  ?  1.  "  For  the  Lord  thy  God  is  a  merciful  God  ;  He  will  not  for- 
sake thee."  Catch  at  that,  sinner, — "  He  will  not  forsake  thee."  If  He  were  to  say, 
*'  Let  hhn  alone,  Ephraim  is  given  unto  idols,"  it  would  be  all  over  with  you  ;  but 
if  you  seek  Him,  He  will  not  say,  "  Let  him  alone,"  nor  take  His  Holy  Spirit  from 
you.  You  are  not  yet  given  up,  I  hope,  or  you  would  not  have  been  here.  2.  And 
then  it  is  added,  "Neither  destroy  thee."  You  have  been  afraid  He  would  ;  you 
have  often  thought  the  earth  would  open  and  swallow  you  :  you  have  been  afraid  to 
fall  asleep  lest  you  should  never  wake  again  ;  but  the  Lord  will  not  destroy  you  ; 
nay,  rather  He  will  reveal  His  saving  power  in  you.  3.  There  is  a  sweeter  word  stUl 
in  the  29th  verse,  "Thou  shalt  find  Him  if  thou  seek  Him."  What  more,  poor 
sinner,  what  more  dost  thou  want  ?  4.  Then  there  are  two  reasons  given  :  ' '  For 
the  Lord  thy  God  is  a  merciful  God."  Oh  guilty  soul,  the  Lord  does  not  want  to 
destroy  you.  Judgment  is  His  strange  work.  Oh  soul,  God  has  such  a  care  for 
man.  He  waits  to  be  gracious,  and  His  Spirit  goes  forth  towards  sinners  ;  there- 
fore return  to  Him.  5.  Now  dwell  upon  that  last  argument — "He  will  not  forget 
the  covenant  of  thy  fathers."    The  covenant  always  keeps  open  the  path  between 


CHAP.  IV.]  DEUTERONOMY.  63 

God  and  man.  The  Lord  has  made  a  covenant  concerning  poor  sinners  with  His 
Son  Jesus  Christ.  He  has  laid  help  upon  One  that  is  mighty,  and  given  Him  for  a 
covenant  to  the  people.  He  evermore  remembers  Jesus,  and  how  He  kept  that 
covenant  ;  He  calls  to  mind  His  sighs  and  death-throes,  and  He  fulfils  His  promise 
for  the  great  Sufferer's  sake.  God's  grace  has  kept  His  covenant  on  the  behalf  of 
men  ;  God  is  even  eager  to  forgive,  that  He  may  reward  Christ,  and  give  Him  to 
see  of  the  travail  of  His  soul.  (C.  E.  Spurgeon.)  Seeking  God:— I.  What  is 
INVOLVED  IN  SEEKING  GoD  ?  1.  A  sense  of  dissatisfaction  with  distance  from  Him. 
When  men  have  all  they  want  they  do  not  set  out  upon  a  quest.  Only  the  heart 
that  feels  the  destitution  and  misery  of  being  without  God  will  address  itself  to  this 
quest.  2.  A  conviction  that  God  is  to  be  found.  Men  do  not  seek  for  fruits  and 
grain  upon  the  ocean,  but  they  seek  them  with  assurance  from  the  soil  they  till. 
Doubtless  many,  searching  in  the  wrong  direction,  have  exclaimed,  "Who  can,  by 
searching,  find  out  God  ? "  But  those  who  look  for  the  Eternal  in  His  Word,  and 
especially  in  the  person  of  His  Son,  cannot  look  in  vain.  3.  The  seeking  for  God 
to  be  successful  must  be  sincere,  earnest,  diligent— i. e.  "with  all  thy  heart  and 
with  all  thy  soul  "—more  eagerly  and  resolutely  than  men  in  the  East  sought  for 
hidden  treasure,  than  men  seek  for  health,  knowledge,  wealth  or  fame.  Those  who 
thus  seek  for  Christ—"  the  pearl  of  great  price  "—are  not  far  from  Him.  III.  What 
IS  PROMISED  TO  THOSE  WHO  THUS  SEEK  GoD  ?  1.  They  shall  find  the  Object  of 
their  desire  :  "They  that  seek  Me  early  shall  find  Me."  Not  like  the  search  for 
the  philosopher's  stone,  which  men  foolishly  wasted  life  in  endeavouring  to  find. 
2.  They  shall  find  God  in  Christ.  8.  In  Christ  they  shall  find  "rest  to  their  souls," 
joy,  life  eternal.  They  who  find  Christ  find  Him  never  to  lose  Him,  or  aught  that 
He  bestows.  {Famihj  Churchman.)  Great  sinners  encouraged  to  return  to  God : 
— I.  A  FEW  CASES  TO  WHICH  THIS  LANGUAGE  APPLIES.  1.  "  I  have  gone  great 
lengths  in  sin.  I  was  a  drimkard  and  blasphemer.  God  has  now  brought  me  into 
trouble  ;  I  cannot  live  long,  and  yet  fear  to  die."  "  But  if  from  thence  thou  shalt 
seek  the  Lord,"  &c.  2.  "  I  was  born  of  religious  parents;  I  was  long  weary  of 
religion,  and  wished  to  be  free.  At  length  my  father  died,  and  I  gave  myself  up  to 
evil,  and  now  no  one  cares  for  my  soul."  " But  if  from  thence,"  &c.  3.  "My  con- 
duct has  been  correct  and  orderly;  but  I  have  prided  myself  upon  it ;  I  have  lived  a 
Pharisee.  Now  I  feel  the  need  of  something  with  which  to  appear  before  God." 
Well,  "  If  from  thence,"  &c.  4.  "  I  have  made  a  profession  of  religion  and  thought 
well  of  my  state,  but  indulged  in  secret  sins,  and  afterwards  in  outward  transgres- 
sions, and  noAV  I  am  an  outcast ;  every  one  shuns  me."  "  But  if  from  thence,"  &c. 
5.  "  Though  I  have  not  lost  my  character,  yet  I  have  lost  my  peace  of  mind  ;  I  am 
a  backslider."  "  But  if  from  thence,"  &c.  II.  The  grounds  on  which  this  en- 
couragement RESTS.  {A.  Fuller.)  Th^ penitent  certain  of  acceptance  ;— I.  Now, 
the  first  thing  that  strikes  us  in  this  address  is,  that  it  is  based  upon  the  antici- 
pation THAT  the  Jews  would  abuse  their  Maker's  blessings  ;  that  comfort 
would  breed  luxury,  and  luxury  would  wean  the  heart  from  God ;  that  His  place 
would  be  usurped  by  idols,  till  He  should  be  provoked  to  withdraw  His  favour 
and  protection.  All  this  is  foreseen  as  the  natural  propensity  of  the  human  heart. 
And  yet,  though  evil  is  spoken  of  as  the  inevitable  consequence  of  sin,  the  case 
was  not  desperate  ;  however  disgraced  they  might  be  by  the  tyranny  of  men, 
or  degraded  by  the  bondage  of  Satan,  they  might  still  find  mercy  from  the  Being 
they  had  incensed.  But  there  is  another  feeling  which  is  met  by  the  gracious 
assurance  of  our  text,  which  is  very  apt  to  prove  a  stumbling-block  to  those 
whose  eyes  are  newly  opened  to  their  sins.  II.  We  might  persuade  ourselves 
that  God  will  not  utterly  cast  oflf  those  who  seek  Him  in  sincerity  and  truth  ; 
BUT  how  can  we  tell  whether  our  feelings  are  earnest  enough,  and 

PURE    enough,    and    ABIDING    ENOUGH     TO    PREVAIL    WITH    HiM     TO    LISTEN   TO 

OUR  PRAYER?  As  long  as  we  thought  we  might  trifle  with  safety  we  put 
off  religion  to  a  more  convenient  season  ;  and  it  was  not  till  our  fears  became 
intolerable  that  we  besought  Him  heartily  that  He  would  save  us ;  but  terror 
is  not  conversion,  and  who  will  ensure  that  the  present  feelings  will  be  lasting 
if  the  danger  be  withdrawn?  or  who  can  tell  whether,  indeed,  they  are  any- 
thing but  a  foretaste  of  eternal  torment  ?  Again,  would  not  the  world  continue 
to  be  dear  to  us  if  its  gifts  were  not  embittered  by  Providence  ?  We  turn  to  God  in 
our  trouble  ;  but  it  is  the  mere  selfishness  of  those  who  find  that  they  have  no 
other  comforter.  Will  He  be  satisfied  with  such  a  worthless  offering  as  this  ?  Oh  ! 
well  may  Scripture  say  that  "His  ways  are  not  as  our  ways,"  when  it  declares  at 
the  same  time  that  such  applications  are  welcome  to  Him.     We  bring  to  Him  little 


64  TEEBIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ir< 

but  disappointed  hopes  and  blighted  feelings  and  enfeebled  health  ;  we  have  tried 
every  broken  cistern  before  we  would  apply  to  the  fountain  ;  and  even  when  we 
come  at  last,  we  corae  rather  to  escape  impending  punishment  than  from  any 
regret  for  having  violated  our  duty  towards  Him  ;  and  yet  He  scorns  us  not.  The 
aged  sinner,  who  is  totteiiug  towards  the  tomb,  he  may  bring  the  poor  remains  of 
an  ill-spent  life,  and  find  himself  received  at  the  eleventh  hour.  The  widowed 
mourner,  who  placed  all  her  happiness  below  till  death  snatched  it  from  her,  she 
may  turn  to  the  God  of  all  consolation,  and  find  Him  a  husband  to  herself,  and  a 
father  to  the  fatherless  around  her.  The  convert,  in  all  his  new-born  indignation, 
though  he  is  sensible  that  he  is  more  anxious  to  escape  the  wrath  to  come  than  the 
evil  which  provokes  it,  shall  be  accepted  according  to  that  he  hath,  and  more  shall 
be  imparted  for  his  improvement.  I  do  not  say  that  such  motives  are  the  purest 
or  the  strongest  by  which  we  can  be  actuated ;  but  I  say  the  question  is  whether 
our  hearts  are  really  changed  or  no,  and  not  in  what  motive  the  change  may  have 
originated.  Do  you  ask,  then,  whether  your  feelings  are  such  as  will  prevail  upon 
God  to  listen  to  your  prayers  ?  Prove  them  by  acting  immediately  and  persever- 
ingly  upon  them.  The  tree  is  known  by  the  fruit  which  it  produces ;  and  those, 
be  sure,  are  proper  feelings  which  bring  you  in  a  state  of  humiliation  to  the  Cross 
of  Christ.  (/.  Stainforth^  M.A.)  God  to  be  found  by  seeking: — I.  Notice  a 
FEW  CASES  TO  WHICH  THIS  LANGUAGE  APPLIES.  1.  The  openly  profane  and 
immoral.  2.  Those  who  were  religiously  educated.  3.  The  formal  professor. 
4.  The  backslider.  The  dying  sinner.  II.  Observe  the  grounds  on  which 
THE  encouragement  RESTS.  1.  The  character  of  God.  2.  The  work  of  Christ. 
3.  The  promises  of  the  Gospel.  4.  Scriptural  examples  of  pardoned  and  accepted 
sinners.  III.  Improve  the  subject.  1.  It  takes  away  all  ground  of  excuse  from 
the  impenitent.  2.  It  takes  away  all  ground  of  despair  from  the  contrite.  {G, 
Rrooks.)  Those  that  seek  God  shall  find  Him: — At  one  place  to  which  I  went 
I  saw  a  dear  soul  to  whom  I  put  the  question,  "Are  you  converted?"  "I  was 
once" — given  with,  oh,  such  a  disconsolate  aspect! — **I  was  once,  but  that  is  all 
gone.  I  was  a  worker  for  Him  once,"  he  said,  with  a  sob,  "but  it  is  all  different 
now."  My  heart  went  out  to  that  one.  Why  ?  There  is  a  fire  in  a  room,  and 
you  are  crouching  in  a  cold  corner,  far  away  from  the  fire.  You  do  not  say  that 
the  fire  has  forsaken  you.  Oh  no,  you  have  left  the  fire ;  conscious  of  that  fact, 
you  go  back  to  it,  and  are  soon  again  basking  in  its  warmth.  Ah,  those  who  seek 
Him  find  Him,  and  He  is  so  loving  and  so  forgiving,  in  spite  of  all  the  hard  thoughts 
which  you  had  of  Him.  ' '  Though  your  sins  be  as  scarlet,  they  shall  be  white  as 
snow;  though  they  be  red  like  crimson,  they  shall  be  as  wool."  {W.  Haslam.) 
Earnest  seeking  successful : — Success  in  this  world  comes  only  to  those  who  exhibit 
determination.  Can  we  hope  for  salvation  unless  our  mind  is  truly  set  upon  it  ? 
Grace  makes  a  man  be  as  resolved  to  be  saved  as  the  beggar  was  to  get  to  Jesus 
and  gain  his  sight.  "I  must  see  him,"  said  an  applicant  at  the  door  of  a  public 
person.  "  You  cannot  see  him,"  said  the  servant ;  but  the  man  waited  at  the  door. 
A  friend  went  out  to  him  and  said,  "You  cannot  see  the  master,  but  I  can  give  you 
an  answer  ;  "No,"  said  the  importunate  pleader,  "  I  will  stay  all  night  on  the  door- 
step, but  I  will  see  the  man  himself.  He  alone  will  serve  my  turn."  You  do  not 
wonder  that,  after  many  rebuifs,  he  ultimately  gained  his  point.  It  would  be  &n 
infinitely  greater  wonder  if  an  importunate  sinner  did  not  obtain  an  audience  from 
the  Lord  Jesus  If  you  must  have  gi-ace,  you  shall  have  it.  If  you  will  not  be  put  off 
you  shall  not  be  put  off.  Whether  things  look  favourable  or  unfavourable,  press  on 
till  you  find  Jesus,  and  you  shall  find  Him.  {G.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Trouble  often 
drives  people  to  God: — There  is  a  story  told  that  in  the  olden  time.Artaxerxes  and 
another  great  king  were  engaged  in  a  furious  fight.  In  the  middle  of  the  battle  an 
eclipse  happened,  and  such  was  the  horror  of  the  warriors  that  they  made  peace 
then  and  there.  Happy  will  you  be  if  your  trouble  will  cause  you  to  fly  to  the  arms 
of  God.  If  you  tell  your  troubles  to  Him  you  put  them  into  the  grave  ;  if  you  roll 
your  burden  anywhere  else,  it  will  roll  back  again  like  the  stone  of  Sisyphus.  The 
springs  at  the  base  of  the  Alpine  moimtains  are  fullest  when  the  summer  sun  has 
dried  and  parched  the  verdure  in  the  valleys  below.  The  heat  that  has  burned  the 
arid  plains  has  melted  mountain  glacier  and  snow,  and  increased  the  volume  of  the 
mountain  streams.  Thus  when  adversity  has  dried  the  springs  of  earthly  comfort, 
the  saint  has  the  fulness  of  the  springs  of  salvation.  The  heart  reached  by 

adversity : — ^The  four  seasons  once  determined  to  try  which  could  quickest  reach  the 
heart  of  a  stone.  Spring  coaxed  the  stone  with  its  gentle  breezes,  and  made  flowers 
encircle  it,  and  trees  to  shoot  out  their  branches  and  embower  it,  but  «11  to  no 


CHAP.  IV.]  DEUTERONOMY.  65 

purpose.  The  stone  remained  indifferent  to  the  beauties  of  the  spring,  nor  would  it 
yield  its  heart  to  its  gentle  caresses.  Summer  came  next,  and  caused  the  sun  to  shine 
on  the  stone,  hoping  to  melt  its  obdurate  heart ;  but  though  the  surface  of  the  stone 
grew  warm,  it  quickly  became  cold  again  when  not  under  the  influence  of  the  summer 
sun's  rays.  Summer  thus  being  unable  by  any  degree  of  warmth  to  penetrate  the 
flinty  nature  of  the  stone,  gave  place  to  autumn.  Believing  that  the  stone  had  been 
treated  with  too  much  kindness,  the  autumn  withered  the  flowers  and  stripped  the 
trees  of  their  leaves,  and  threatened  and  blustered,  but  still  the  stone  remained 
impassive.  Winter  came  next.  First  it  sent  strong  winds,  which  laid  the  stone 
bare,  then  it  sent  a  cold  rain,  and  next  a  hard  frost,  which  cleaved  the  stone  and  laid 
bare  its  heart.  So  many  a  heart,  which  neither  gentleness,  warmth,  nor  threats  can 
touch,  is  reached  by  adversity.     {,A.  Freeman.) 

Ver.  32.  Ask  now  of  the  da3rs  that  are  v^t.— Inquiry  of  the  past ;— 1.  The  past 
may  refer  to— (1)  General  history.  So  in  context.  (2)  Individual  life.  So  we 
take  it  now.  2.  Inquiry  of  the  past.  (1)  Some  do  not  think  of  the  past.  This 
arises  _  from— (a)  Thoughtlessness.  (6)  Guilt,  (c)  A  false  philosophy.  (2)  It  is 
our  wisdom  to  "ask  of  the  days  that  are  past."  (a)  Because  the  past  is  in  existence 
now.  (6)  Because  for  the  past  we  are  responsible,  (c)  Because  the  past  is  full  of 
useful  lessons.  I.  Ask  of  past  blessings.  How  have  they  been  received  ?  1.  The 
blessings.  (1)  Material.  (2)  Spiritual.  Prayers  answered,  inspiring  and  uplifting 
influences  imparted,  help  rendered,  soul's  need  supplied,  strength  in  trial,  light  in 
darkness,  wisdom  in  ignorance,  discipline  to  purify  and  perfect.  2.  Their  reception. 
Have  they  been  received— (1)  As  from  God?  (2)  As  undeserved  mercies?  (3)  In 
a  thankful  spirit?  II.  Ask  of  past  opportunities.  How  have  they  been  used? 
1.  Opportunities  of  getting  good.  (1)  Mental  good.  (2)  Moral  good.  Have  they 
been  turned  to  profit,  or  lost  for  ever?  2.  Opportunities  of  doing  good.  (1)  To 
the  bodies  of  men.  (2)  To  the  souls  of  men.  Instructing  the  ignorant,  guiding 
the  perplexed,  comforting  the  sorrowful,  rebuking  the  sinner,  reclaiming  the  erring, 
speaking  the  word  in  season,  &c.  III.  Ask  of  past  sins.  Have  they  been  repented 
of  and  pardoned  ?  1.  Sins  of  omission.  2.  Sins  of  commission.  (1)  Against  God. 
Irreverence.  Unsubmissiveness.  Ingratitude.  Unfaithfulness.  (2)  Against  man. 
Injustice.  Untruthfulness.  Uncharitableness.  {Homilist.)  The  days  thai  are 
jpast: — An  imperial  philosopher,  having  divided  time  into  the  past,  the  present, 
and  the  future,  says,  we  should  give  the  past  to  oblivion,  the  present  to  duty,  and 
the  future  to  Providence.  Now,  we  admire  two  of  these  admonitions.  We  readily 
give  the  future  to  Providence,  and  we  ought  to  give  the  present  to  duty,  so  that 
"whatsoever  our  hands  find  to  do,  we  may  do  it  with  our  might."  But  we  can 
never  consent  to  give  the  past  to  oblivion.  *'  God  requires  that  which  is  past,"  and 
He  requires  us  to  remember  it.  I.  The  past  days  of  others,  those  who  havb 
LIVED  BEFORE  US.  1.  See  that  your  aim  in  this  be  not  only,  or  principally,  mere 
amusement ;  but  endeavour  to  derive  lessons  mental  and  moral,  and  religious 
instruction,  from  the  characters  and  the  events  recorded.  2.  Secondly,  beware 
how  you  place  implicit  confidence  in  history.  Endeavour  to  distinguish  between 
fiction  and  truth.  3.  Relinquish  the  prejudice  which  Solomon  assails  when  he 
says,  "  Ask  not  why  the  former  days  were  better  than  these,  for  thou  dost  not 
wisely  concerning  this  matter."  No,  the  thing  is  not  tme  ;  we  ought  to  be  wiser 
than  the  ancients,  for  we  are  much  more  ancient  than  they.  Certainly,  the  world 
is  older  now  than  it  was  ages  ago.  Surely  mankind  are  not  incapable  of  intellectual 
or  moral  progression  and  improvement.     II.  Those  of  youeselves  :  those  which 

TOU  HAVE    PASSED  THROUGH    IN    YOUE  OWN    HISTORY  AND    EXPERIENCE.      These 

oome  nearer  home,  and  are  more  easily  reviewed  and  compared.  There  is 
something  very  solemn  in  the  thought  of  days  that  are  past;  past,  never  to 
return,  while  their  moral  results  remain  for  ever  as  subjects  of  future  respon- 
sibility. And  who  has  not  to  reckon  upon  days  that  are  past  ?  for  time,  like 
tide,  stays  for  no  man.  1.  Let  us  ask,  then,  what  they  have  to  say  concerning  the 
world.  Mr.  Savage  has  strikingly  remarked,  "I  never  knew  any  of  the  people  of 
the  world  praise  it  at  parting."  Nor  need  we  wonder  at  this :  we  should  wonder 
if  they  did.  They  have  been  too  much  in  it,  they  have  seen  too  much  of  it,  they 
have  been  too  much  deceived  by  it,  to  recommend  it  to  others,  when  dying,  from 
their  own  history  and  experience.  2.  "Ask  the  days  that  are  past"  what  they 
have  to  say  concerning  yourselves.  Have  they  not  shown  you  many  things  with 
which  you  were  formerly  unacquainted,  and  filled  you  with  surprise  and  regret  f 
Ah  1  how  many  convictionfi  have  you  violated,  how  many  resolutions  have  you 

s 


66  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

broken?  Instead  of  the  paradise  you  promised  yourself,  you  hare  found  your- 
selves in  a  wilderness.  Have  not  your  dependencies  often  proved  broken  reeds— ^ 
not  only  unable  to  sustain  your  hopes,  but  which  have  '*  pierced  you  through  with 
many  sorrows"  1  And  yet  will  not  these  *'  days  that  are  past"  also  tell  you  some- 
thing else  ?  "Will  they  not  tell  you  that  life  has  been  at  least  a  chequered  scene  ? 
If  you  have  been  in  the  wilderness,  have  you  not  found  grace  in  the  sanctuary  ? 
Have  you  not  had  there  the  fiery,  cloudy  pillar  to  guide  you  ?  Have  you  not  had 
the  manna  to  sustain  you  ?  Have  you  not  had  the  waters  from  the  rock  to  refresh 
you  ?  Have  you  not  had  some  of  the  grapes  of  Eshcol  ?  3.  **  Ask  of  the  days  that 
are  past  "  what  they  have  to  say  concerning  the  Scriptures.  (1)  Have  they  not 
tended  to  confirm  them  ?  (2)  Have  they  not  tended  to  explain  them  ?  (3)  Have 
they  not  tended  to  endear  them  ?  4.  '*  Ask  the  days  that  are  past "  what  they  have 
to  say  concerning  our  Lord  and  Saviour.  Ask  them  whether  He  has  not  been  a 
good  Master  ;  whether  you  cannot  say  at  the  end  of  ten,  or  twenty,  or  thirty,  or 
forty,  or  sixty  years,  "Thou  hast  dealt  well  with  Thy  servant,  0  Lord."  Ask  them 
whether  He  has  not  been  your  powerful  Helper  and  your  kindest  Friend.  Three 
conclusions  are  derivable  from  this: — (1)  The  first  is,  that  you  commit  yourselves 
to  God  by  prayer,  that  you  may  be  prepared  for  all  your  future  days,  whatever  may 
be  their  complexion.  (2)  Secondly,  that  you  should  beware  of  presumption ;  that 
you  should  leave  off  devising,  and  say,  * '  The  Lord  shall  choose  my  inheritance  for 
me."  (3)  Thirdly,  you  should  equally  guard  against  despondency  ;  for  though  you 
know  not  what  your  future  days  may  be,  you  know  that  nothing  they  contain  in 
them  will  happen  by  chance.  One  thing  you  know,  that  "all  the  way  of  the  Lord" 
towards  you  will  be  "mercy  and  truth."  One  thing  you  know,  that  "all  things 
work  together  for  good  to  them  that  love  God."  {W.  Jay.)  The  voice  of  ^ 
fast : — Time  is  a  great  mystery.  *  *  Time, "  says  Carlyle,  * '  is  for  ever  very  literally  a 
miracle — a  thing  to  strike  us  dumb  ;  for  we  have  no  word  to  speak  about  it. "  Strictly 
speaking,  it  is  we  who  move,  and  time  stands  still,  although  the  contrary  appears 
to  be  the  case  ;  as  to  travellers  in  any  speedy  kind  of  locomotion,  the  objects  close 
at  hand  seem  to  flit  rapidly  past  them,  whereas  they  know  that  it  is  themselves 
that  are  in  motion.  Of  nothing  are  we  more  slow  to  think  than  of  the  nature  and 
value  of  time,  both  as  regards  its  highest  present  uses  and  its  relation  to  that 
eternity  from  which,  by  Divine  fiat,  it  was  first  drawn,  and  into  which  it  shall  finally 
return.  "The  past"  is  a  very  solemn  word.  It  is  irrevocably  gone,  marked  on 
the  part  of  us  all  by  manifold  follies  and  sins  ;  replete  with  painful  accusations  of 
conscience.  Although  the  past  is  so  irrevocably  gone  from  our  reach  that  it  cannot 
be  used  for  the  purpose  for  which  it  was  originally  given, — that  of  living  in  its 
duration  to  God, — yet  a  serious  review  of  the  past  year,  for  instance,  may  and,  if 
rightly  made,  must,  be  productive  of  profit  to  us  all.  Just  as  the  ship  which  has 
been  totally  wrecked,  although  it  can  no  more  traverse  the  sea,  yet  its  shattered 
planks  may  be  rendered  serviceable  for  many  useful  purposes.  Let  us  ask  of  the 
days  that  are  past— I.  That  we  mat  entektain  a  humbling  consciousness  op 
OUR  OWN  unprofitableness  in  the  use  we  have  made  of  our  time.  Con- 
stituted as  we  are,  it  is  imperative  upon  us  that  we  should  give  much  of  our  atten- 
tion to  the  care  of  the  body  and  to  the  regulation  of  our  temporal  affairs  ;  yet  it  is  a 
humbling  reflection  that  beings  possessed  of  such  amazing  capacities  as  those  enfolded 
in  every  human  soul,  should  have  so  much  of  their  attention  engaged  in  things 
which  bear  unequivocal  marks  of  insignificance.  Much  of  the  past  year  has  passed  in 
sleep,  in  providing  and  partaking  of  food,  in  humble  domestic  arrangements,  in  the 
dull  routine  of  business  or  the  idle  lassitude  of  relaxation.  And  who  amongst  us 
can  plead  guiltless  to  such  charges  as  these  ?  Who  can  say  of  the  past  year,  ' '  Its 
time  has  gone  just  as  I  could  have  wished  ;  I  could  not  desire  any  future  year  to  be 
better  spent  than  this  has  been "  ?  Alas !  none.  II.  That  we  may  have  a 
grateful  sense  of  the  Divine  goodness  and  forbearance.  III.  That  wb 
MAY,  BY  Divine  help,  resolve  to  correct  in  the  future  those  things 
WHICH  have  been  EVILS  IN  THE  PAST.  {J.  Foster. )  The  goodness  of  God  dis- 
played in  creation,  providence,  and  redemption : — I.  View  the  text  as  the  language 
of  a  contemplative  and  spiritual  mind,  retired  from  the  cares  of  the  world,  survey- 
ing WITH  PIOUS  delight  THE  WONDERS  OF  CREATION,  and  tracing  in  all  the 
works  of  God  the  glory  and  goodness  of  their  Almighty  Maker.  Universal  nature 
proclaims  the  glory  of  God.  This  earth  which  we  inhabit,  the  ground  upon  which 
we  tread,  declare  to  us  the  greatness  and  mercy  of  the  Almighty.  How  great  is  its 
beauty  !  How  beneficial  its  fruits  !  By  its  liberal  provision  all  former  generations 
have  been  supported,  and  from  its  unexhausted  magazines  and  varied  resources 


CHAP.  IV.]  DEUTERONOMY.  67 

all  nations  are  supplied  with  food  and  raiment.  When,  from  the  inanimate  creation, 
the  Christian  turns  his  views  to  the  animal  world,  he  traces  there  the  footsteps  of 
the  Almighty,  and  the  operations  of  His  hand.  The  beasts  of  the  field,  the  fowls  of 
the  air,  and  the  fish  of  the  sea,  their  shape  and  figure,  their  infinite  variety,  the  fit 
season  of  their  production,  their  skill  in  procuring  food,  and  especially  their  utility 
to  man,  all  testify  that  the  earth  is  replenished  with  the  Creator's  goodness.  Man 
himself  is  the  perfection  of  this  lower  world.  Let  the  Christian,  from  himself  and 
the  wonders  around  him,  rise  to  the  contemplation  of  the  heavenly  bodies.  These 
celestial  luminaries  instruct  as  well  as  shine.  And  perhaps,  could  we  wing  our 
way  "  beyond  this  visible  diurnal  sphere,"  and  soar  above  these  rolling  planets,  we 
should  discover  other  suns,  other  stars,  other  and  perhaps  nobler  systems,  estab- 
lished through  the  boundless  regions  of  space.  But  here  inquiry  stops ;  here  our 
views  terminate  ;  yet  from  such  a  survey  of  the  heavens  and  the  earth  we  feel  an 
elevating  impulse :  we  are  lost  in  wonder  and  admiration.  II.  Consider  the  text 
AS  THE  REFLECTION  OF  A  CHILD  OF  PROVIDENCE,  after  a  serious  and  devout  review 
of  the  dispensations  of  God  to  himself  and  to  others.  Nothing  yields  us  so  certain 
a  conviction  of  the  providence  of  God,  or  evinces  so  fully  its  extent,  equity,  and 
care,  as  the  consideration  of  the  experience  of  it  which  we  ourselves  have  had.  It 
will  therefore  be  the  frequent  and  delightful  employment  of  good  men  to  recall  the 
memory  of  God's  great  goodness,  and  to  reflect  upon  the  measures  of  His  provi- 
dence with  them  in  former  years.  They  gratefully  contemplate  the  Divine  care 
which  protected  them  from  many  dangers.  But  with  still  greater  satisfaction  the 
Christian  reflects  upon  the  care  of  providence  extended  to  his  spiritual  concerns. 
To  Thee,  my  God,  I  ascribe  all  the  glory  and  the  praise  of  all  that  I  am,  and  all 
that  I  enjoy  !  To  the  silent,  secret,  eff"ectual  influences  of  Thy  Spirit  I  owe  the 
pleasures  of  religion  which  I  experience ;  to  the  unseen  hand  of  Thy  providence 
conducting  me  through  the  mazes  of  the  world  I  ascribe  that  comfortable  situation 
in  life  which  I  have  attained.  But  the  Christian  confines  not  his  contemplations 
upon  providence  to  himself,  or  the  inconsiderable  transactions  of  his  own  life.  He 
extends  his  prospect,  and  sees  God  ruling  over  all ;  he  views  the  Almighty  sitting 
upon  His  throne  of  justice  and  judgment,  dispensing  to  every  man  a  just  propor- 
tion of  good  and  evil,  according  to  the  counsel  of  His  sovereign  will.  Numberless 
events  in  the  course  of  providence,  indeed,  are  to  him  dark  and  intricate ;  he 
cannot  penetrate  into  their  causes,  nor  assign  any  satisfactory  reason  for  them.  But 
he  checks  every  hasty,  unguarded  thought  and  expression  upon  the  subject.  He 
knows  that  only  a  small  corner  of  the  plan  of  Divine  administration  is  made  known 
to  him ;  how  these  partial  evils  shall  promote  the  general  good,  and  display  the 
glory  of  the  sovereign  Disposer,  he  cannot  now  explain.  But  a  scene  far  more 
bright  and  joyous  opens  upon  the  Christian's  view  in  the  conduct  of  the  Almighty 
respecting  the  redemption  of  man.  He  contemplates,  with  astonishment,  that  plan 
of  wisdom  and  grace  into  which  angels  desire  to  look.  He  views  the  kingdom  of 
Christ  advancing  in  the  world,  mean  and  contemptible  in  its  origin,  opposed  in  its 
progress  by  the  hostile  persecuting  spirit  of  the  rulers  of  the  world,  yet  gathering 
strength  from  every  wound,  spreading  far  and  wide,  including,  in  process  of  time, 
a  great  part  of  the  habitable  world,  and  now  established  on  such  solid  permanent 
foundations  as  affords  warrant,  even  upon  principles  of  human  probability,  for 
believing  that  no  weapon  formed  against  its  interests  shall  finally  prosper.  These 
are  subjects  which,  to  the  pious,  contemplative  Christian,  aff'ord  inexhaustible 
matter    of   delightful  meditation    and    praise.     III.  Consider  the  text  as    the 

BREATHINGS   OF   THE   CHRISTIAN  WHEN   ADORING    THE   UNSEARCHABLE   RICHES   OF 

Christ  Jestjs,  and  ascribing  all  his  salvation  to  unmerited  sovereign  grace.  This 
is  the  noblest  theme  of  all.  A  Christian  beholds  with  delight  the  Supreme  Judge 
passing  an  act  of  indemnity,  and  acquitting  the  sinner  from  the  charge  of  guilt, 
restoring  to  favour  and  adopting  him  into  His  family.  I  conclude  with  a  few 
practical  inferences : — 1.  Consider  how  unsearchable  must  be  the  greatness,  and  how 
ineff'able  the  glory,  of  that  God  who  does  so  great  things  for  the  children  of  men. 
2.  Observe  the  ingratitude,  the  guilt,  and  danger  of  impertinent  sinners,  who  remain 
at  ease  without  God  and  without  Christ  in  this  life.  3.  Let  the  children  of  God  give 
glory  to  their  heavenly  Father  for  all  His  mercies.  (,A.  Bonar.)  Did  ever  people 
hear  the  voice  of  God  speaking  out  of  the  midst  of  the  fire  ? — The  speciality  of  the 
Bible : — This  is  the  eternal  challenge  of  the  Bible.  The  appeal  may  be  regarded  as 
a  call  to  the  study  of  comparative  religion.  There  are  many  religions  in  the  world ; 
gather  them  up  into  one  view,  extend  the  inquiry  far  and  wide,  through  time  and 
space,  and  see  whether  the  Bible  does  not  separate  itself  from  all  other  books  by 


«8  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  m 

miracles  that  cannot  be  rivalled  and  by  excellences  that  cannot  be  equalled.  The 
Bible  simply  wants  to  be  heard,  to  be  read,  and  to  be  understood.  It  asks  nothing 
from  its  ablest  teachers  but  a  paraphrase  true  to  its  own  spirit  and  tone.  It  will 
not  haye  addition  ;  it  will  have  expansion  :  it  will  not  be  decorated  from  the  out- 
side ;  it  asks  that  its  root  may  have  full  scope  to  express  in  leaf  and  blossom  and 
tud  and  fruit  all  the  bloom  of  its  beauty  and  all  the  wealth  of  its  uses.  This  is  the 
position  Moses  occupies  :  we  cannot  amend  the  position ;  we  accept  it.  Note  the 
Bpeoiality  which  Moses  fixes  upon.  He  asks  a  question — "  Did  ever  people  hear 
the  voice  of  God  speaking  out  of  the  midst  of  the  fire,  as  thou  hast  heard,  and 
Kve  1 " — ^if  so,  prove  it.  The  challenge  is  not  a  lame  one.  The  Bible  awaits  the 
evidences.  We,  if  earnest  men,  should  be  in  quest  of  the  best  book,  without  asking 
who  wrote  it  or  by  what  authority  was  it  written.  If  it  speak  to  us  as  no  other 
tK>ok  can  speak,  we  are  bound  to  accept  it.  Christianity  says  in  eflfect — What  other 
religion  is  there  that  deals  with  sin  as  I  deal  with  it  ?  1  do  not  ignore  it ;  I  do  not 
hasten  over  it ;  I  do  not  treat  it  as  a  mere  incident,  or  a  cutaneous  affection  which 
superficial  means  may  subdue  and  which  proper  attention  may  remove.  What 
other  religion,  theory,  philosophy,  grapples  with  sin  as  Christianity  does  ?  It  will 
penetrate  it,  cleave  it  asunder,  analyse  it,  search  into  it,  and  never  rest  until  it  gets 
out  of  the  soul  the  last  fibre  of  the  bad  root,  the  last  stain  of  the  fatal  poison.  Let 
us  be  fair  to  facts  ;  whether  we  are  in  the  Church  or  out  of  the  Church,  whether 
we  belong  to  this  section  or  to  that  section,  do  let  us  in  common  decency  acknow- 
ledge that  Christianity,  come  whence  it  may,  does  grapple  with  infinite  energy  with 
sin.  The  appeal  of  Christianity  also  is — "Ask  now  of  the  days  that  are  past, 
which  were  before  thee  since  the  day  that  God  created  man  upon  the  earth,  and 
ask  from  the  one  side  of  heaven  unto  the  other,"  whether  any  other  religion  tries 
to  make  the  same  kind  of  men  that  Christianity  makes  ?  Let  us  judge  the  tree  by 
its  fruit.  We  are  not  superstitious  or  fanatical  or  narrow-minded  ;  we  do  ask  the 
question,  and  insist  upon  an  answer,  Does  any  other  religion  make  such  men  as 
Christianity  makes  ?  Here  Christianity  must  be  judged  by  its  purpose,  by  its  own 
written  woi-d  and  claim,  and  not  wholly  by  the  men  themselves,  because  we  are  still 
in  the  land  of  bondage  in  many  particulars :  we  are  in  the  flesh  ;  we  suffer  from  a 
thousand  weaknesses  ;  Christianity,  therefore,  must  be  judged  in  its  declared  inten- 
tion regarding  the  culture  of  manhood.  What  kind  of  men  does  Christianity  want 
to  make  ?  Weak  men  ?  It  never  made  one  weak  man.  Stroiig  men,  valiant  men, 
men  of  the  keenest  mind,  men  of  the  largest  judgment,  men  oi  the  most  generous 
disposition ;  if  that  is  the  kind  of  men  Christianity  wants  to  make,  where  is  the 
religion  that  can  excel  or  equal  Christianity  in  that  purpose  ?  Produce  the  men  ! 
Judge  by  facts.  Where  Christianity  has  entered  into  a  life,  what  has  it  done  with 
that  life?  Can  it  be  proved  that  Christianity,  fairly  understood  and  thoroughly 
received,  has  soured  the  temper,  narrowed  the  sympathies,  dwarfed  the  noble 
ambitions  of  the  soul  ?  Has  Christianity  ever  made  unhappy  homes,  unrighteous 
parents  ?  Let  the  challenge  be  thoroughly  understood  and  frankly  replied  to. 
Christianity  lives  visibly  in  the  Christian.  Christianity  wants  to  put  away  all  other 
evidence,  argument,  and  wordy  encounter,  and  to  be  able  to  say.  Judge  me  by  my 
children  ;  judge  me  by  my  believers  ;  I  am  what  they  are.  Therefore,  if  the  Church 
of  the  Living  God  could  stand  up  complete  in  the  purpose  of  its  Redeemer  and 
Sanctifier,  the  snowy  pureness  of  its  character,  the  lofty  dignity  of  its  moral 
temper  would  abash  every  assailant  and  silence  every  accuser.  Do  not  be  harsh,  or 
point  with  mocking  finger  to  some  poor  weak  soul,  and  say.  If  this  man  represents 
Christianity  we  do  not  want  to  know  further  what  Christianity  is.  Christianity 
can  only  be  judged  by  the  Book  which  reveals  it,  by  the  Christ  who  founded  it, 
and  by  the  noble  history  which  has  surrounded  it.  So  we  accept  and  repeat  this 
challenge.     {J.  Parker,  D.D.) 

Ver.  35.  Unto  thee  it  was  shewed. — All  national  and  individual  responsibility 
to   God  peculiarly  applicable  to  Britain,  both  as  a   Church  and  State : — I.    That 

WHILE  ALL   NATIONS   AND   ALL   PEOPLE  ARE   BOUND   TO   SERVE   THE   LORD,  and  are 

accountable  to  Him  for  so  doing  or  not,  according  to  the  opportunities  they  possess 
and  the  privileges  with  which  they  are  favoured  for  knowing  His  character  and 
learning  His  truth  and  will,  some  nations  and  people  are  more  peculiarly 

ENGAGED    THUS   TO    SERVE  HiM,    AND    ARE   UNDER   A    CORRESPONDENT  DEGREE    OF 

responsibility  for  doing  so  OR  NOT  ;  because  some  nations  and  people  are  more 
highly  favoured  than  others  in  all  these  respects,  and  are  distinguished  by  greater 
pnvileges  and  opportunities  for  knowing  and  doing  the  Divine  will  than  many 


CHAP.  IV.]  DEUTERONOMY. 


others,  who  are,  notwithstanding,  all  accountable  unto  God.  Now,  in  order  to 
place  this  truth  in  its  proper  light,  let  us  suppose  a  case  whose  propriety  and 
certainty  few,  we  expect,  will  be  disposed  to  dispute.  And,  to  begin  with 
— 1.  Individuals,  let  us  suppose  the  case  of  one  man,  born  and  bred  a  pure 
heathen  ;  another,  brought  up  with  some  degree  of  opportunity  for  gaining  the  true 
knowledge  of  God,  &c.,  in  civilised  life  ;  and  a  third,  in  the  same  condition,  in  full 
possession  of  the  Word  of  truth  and  salvation.  The  great  law  of  man's  universal 
responsibility,  amidst  all  this  variety  of  condition,  equally  applies  to  them  all. 
But  the  advantages  which  the  one  possesses  over  the  other  bind  the  one  in  a  more 
powerful  manner  to  the  duty  enforced.  And  when  you  arrive  at  the  greatest 
measure  of  privilege,  do  you  not  behold  its  accompanying  claims  rising  to  the  same 
point,  and  bearing  an  even  requisition  with  the  highest  elevation?  2.  Nations. 
Nations  are  nothing  more  than  vast  numbers  of  individuals,  located  in  various  parts 
of  the  earth,  and  cemented  by  certain  laws  and  regulations  in  orderly  and  social 
compact.  The  same  truths,  therefore,  which  apply  to  one  person  will  surely 
extend  to  ten  thousand,  or  to  as  many  millions,  of  the  human  family  thus  connected 
together.  3.  Whether  the  doctrine  we  inculcate  is  founded  upon,  and  stands  in 
agreement  with,  the  pure  Word  of  God.  Did  not  the  very  mercies  and  privileges 
which  the  Lord  bestowed  upon  Israel  lay  them  under  peculiar  obligations,  and  bind 
them  in  an  especial  manner  to  love  and  serve  Him  ?    II.  Where  does  the  trttth 

THUS  PROPOUNDED  AND  ESTABLISHED  FALL  IN  ITS  FULL  WEIGHT  ;  AND  TO  WHOM: 
DOES  IT  MORE  PECULIARLY  APPLY  IN  ALL  ITS  AUTHORITY  AND  AGGRAVATION  ?      The 

inquiry  evidently  regards  the  past  and  the  present  time.  1.  The  past  time.  Where, 
in  the  ages  that  are  passed,  are  we  to  look  for  such  a  nation  or  people  1  Must  we 
not  at  once  fix  our  attention  upon  Israel  of  old,  and  say,  Thou  art  that  nation,  and 
thou  art  that  people  ?  What  wonders  did  God  work  on  their  behalf!  What  large 
and  unmerited  mercies  did  He  bestow  on  them  !  What  astonishing  deliverances 
did  He  vouchsafe  to  them !  But  must  our  inquiries  terminate  here  ?  2.  The 
present  time.  Many  nations  are  presented  to  our  view.  Some  great  and  strong  ; 
others  weak  and  debased.  Some  altogether  enshrouded  in  heathen  blindness ; 
others  groaning  under  Mohammedan  tyranny  and  delusion.  Some  rent  with 
internal  convulsions  ;  others  sitting  down  in  comparative  quiet.  Some,  once 
mighty  and  renowned,  merged  in  the  general  streams  of  rival  powers,  and  known  no 
more  as  separate  kingdoms,  except  in  the  records  of  their  ancient  exploits  and 
fame.  But  amidst  all  this  national  and  political  chaos  presented  to  our  view  can 
we  fix  on  no  spot  which  in  a  more  especial  manner  is  more  highly  favoured  than  any 
other  ?  Yes,  we  can.  Like  some  tall  majestic  oak  amidst  the  underwood  of  the 
forest,  or  like  the  cloud-capped  mountain  contrasted  with  the  hillocks  of  the  plain, 
or  like  the  stately  man-of-war  amidst  the  wharfage  of  the  port,  there  is  one 
nation  amidst  all  the  diversified  tribes  of  man  which  stands  thus  conspicuous  in  the 
view,  and  thus  crowned  with  privileges  and  blessings  !  Oh  England,  my  beloved 
place  and  nation,  thou  wearest  this  crown  !  thou  standest  on  this  elevation  !  Not 
only  in  common  with  all  others,  but  above  and  beyond  all  others,  hast  thou  been 
blessed  and  crowned  with  loving-kindness  and  tender  mercies  !  What  hath  not 
the  Lord  done  for  thee  ?  (1)  As  a  nation.  Hath  He  not  raised  thee  from  small 
beginnings  to  unexampled  greatness  ?  Hath  He  not  brought  thee  from  a  poor 
degraded  state  of  heathen  misery,  in  which  thy  forefathers  were  sunk,  to  be  at  once 
the  mistress,  the  envy,  and  the  glory  of  the  world  ?  And  in  the  course  of  thy 
experience,  from  thy  low  original  to  thy  present  greatness,  hath  not  the  Lord  often 
wrought  for  thee  by  a  mighty  hand  and  by  a  stretched-out  arm  ?  And  art  thou 
not  bound,  in  proportion  to  what  He  hath  done  for  thee  ?  Oh  !  beware  lest  thou 
stand  as  conspicuous  in  ingratitude  and  guilt  as  thou  art  in  privilege  and  blessing  ! 
But  are  national  distinctions  and  advantages  all  that  the  Lord  hath  done  for  thee  ? 
Are  not  thy  privileges— 2.  As  a  church,  as  great  as  thy  mercies  as  a  nation  1  He 
hath  not  left  thee  without  witness  ;  not  merely,  as  He  testified  to  the  heathen, 
"giving  rain  from  heaven,  and  fruitful  seasons,  and  filling  our  hearts  with  food 
and  gladness " ;  but  as  He  deals  with  His  own  inheritance,  sending  to  thee  the 
truths  of  His  Word  and  the  messages  of  His  salvation.  Do  we,  as  a  nation,  church, 
or  people,  live  up  to  these  privileges,  and  bring  forth  the  fruit  which  God  so  justly 
requires  at  our  hands  ?  Are  the  mercies  we  possess  prized  as  they  ought  to  be  ? 
Are  they  improved  as  they  ought  to  be  ?  Is  God  honoured  and  glorified  as  He 
ought  to  be  ?  Is  the  Gospel  of  peace  valued  as  it  ought  to  be  ?  Is  the  Word  of  life 
received  as  it  ought  to  be  ?  Do  we  walk  in  the  statutes  and  ordinances  of  God  a« 
we  ought  to  do?    (22.  ShiUler.)        The  revelation  of  God :^l.  In  His  name.     Is 


70  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

it  answered,  "  That  is  only  a  word  "  ?  But  what  are  words  ?  People  do  not  forge 
and  utter  words  as  they  please.  They  cannot  be  made  or  unmade  by  votes  of 
assemblies  or  edicts  of  kings.  They  are  chronic.  They  come  into  existence  by  a 
law  of  nature.  They  are  carved  out  of  unstable  air  by  a  supernatural  power.  To 
call  God's  Word  or  name  "  priestcraft "  is  itself  cant.  A  set  of  priests  could  no  more 
have  created  it  than  tliey  could  an  ocean  or  a  mountain  range.  Matthew  Arnold 
says,  "God  means  the  Biilliant  in  the  sky."  But  what  makes  it  to  shine,  and  to 
wear  the  blue  firmament  for  a  robe  ?  There  could  have  been  no  name  if  no  Lord, — 
as  no  names  for  plant,  beast,  earth,  sea,  but  that  these  things  were,  and  to  do  aught 
in  His  name  is  to  do  it  by  His  strength  and  for  His  honour.  Caesar  may  be  a  myth, 
and  Eve  in  the  garden  a  tale,  but  no  appellations  can  overrate  the  Eternal.  II.  In 
His  work  :  what  He  does  shows  what  He  is.  All  the  phrases  which  sceptics 
think  so  lightly  of  are  but  the  labels  of  His  wonders.  "But  all  the  Bibles,"  says 
the  denier,  are  human  compositions  written  in  time  :  show  me  the  sacred  books  that 
existed  before  the  men  did,  I  will  admit  they  were  from  God  ! "  But  did  the  pen- 
men, indeed,  originate  the  subject  of  their  books  ?  Was  not  their  stint  set !  We  do 
not  affirm  a  God  out  of  us.  What  is  out  of  us  is  not  so  easy  to  say.  The  whole 
creation  is  somehow  in  our  thought.  I  have  a  feeling  that  fetches  down  from  Orion. 
My  imagination  girdles  the  Pleiades.  God  is  not  less  to  me  because  He  exists  not 
externally  but  in  the  consciousness  of  my  own  bosom,  and  I  cannot  dismiss  my 
guest.  If  no  characters  by  Him  were  ever  entered  on  a  paper  leaf,  stone  tablet  from 
Sinai,  or  Egyptian  column,  do  we  not  find  His  engraving  in  living  organisms  and 
on  the  vast  layers  of  the  globe  ?  "  Providence  "  is  one  of  these  obstinate,  indestruct- 
ible words  in  the  daily  discourse  of  mankind.  A  great,  forthreaching,  unbaffled,  and 
unending  plan,  a  purpose  through  the  ages,  one  must  be  worse  than  colour-blind 
not  to  see,  with  a  steady  accomplishment, — style  it  fitness,  adjustment,  design,  as 
you  will.  Not  a  nook  of  nature  but  is  His  workshop,  not  an  event  without  His 
procedure.  III.  In  His  nature,  or  image.  Had  He  left  no  sign-manual  of  His 
authorship  in  our  frame  all  else  were  to  us  a  dumb  show.  Why  do  beasts  and 
insects  not  perceive  the  drift  of  the  plot  on  this  broad  external  stage  ?  Because, 
even  in  their  innocence,  they  cannot  yet  come  to  themselves,  and  in  themselves 
find  their  Father.  But  what  features  of  His  face  are  unveiled  to  us  ?  1.  First,  of 
sincerity,  the  open  look.  Why  can  we  not  be  free  from  this  candid  bond,  but 
that  the  Divinity  reveals  within  us  His  essence  of  truth,  as  a  claim  beyond  con- 
venience or  uses  of  the  hour,  so  infinite  that  no  liar  can  be  content  till  he  has 
confessed  ?  After  what  long  and  stubborn  perjury,  from  at  last  being  convinced  by 
some  CO -conspirator  that  falsehood  is  kindest  and  best,  a  quickened  conscience  forces 
the  wretched  deceiver,  man  or  woman,  in  mutual  crime,  to  own  at  last  even  the 
forswearing,  and  throw  off  the  disguise  that  hinders  peace  with  God  !  2.  Next,  the 
line  of  rectitude  in  this  countenance  we  pray  God  to  lift  upon  us,  and  which  He 
never  quite  withdraws.  Truth  is  right  speech,  and  righteousness  is  true  conduct. 
If  your  neighbour  will  not  rest  in  any  wrong  you  do  him,  you  will  be  the  last  to 
be  satisfied  with  your  own  unfairness,  because  Deity  is  equity  in  your  vital  parts. 
3.  There  is  one  more  lineament  in  that  face  whose  glance  we  cannot  escape :  it  is 
goodness.  But  the  goodness  must  be  more  than  doting  on  one  person,  however 
winsome  and  dear.  I  know  an  earnest  love  ;  but  God  save  me  from  an  exclusive  one, 
and  keep  me  from  wishing  or  enduring  the  monopoly  of  a  human  heart !  We  may- 
be partial  to  one  person,  Tike  the  sun  flattering  some  mountain-top  or  blazing  back 
from  some  windowed  tower  as  he  rises  or  sets  ;  but  be  we  also  impartial  as  the  sun, 
making  the  whole  earth  his  reflection  and  flinging  his  radiance  through  the  sky. 
IV.  In  the  healthful  exercise  of  our  powers.  We  find  God  in  innocent 
pleasures  as  in  solemn  forms,  as  parents  are  as  much  pleased  with  their  children's 
gambols  as  with  their  deferential  requests.  The  little  orthodox  boy,  repeating  his 
prayers  so  punctually  in  his  countrv  cot,  said  one  morning,  "Good-bye,  God  :  I  am 
going  to  Boston  to  stay  a  fortnight  ;  he  not  having  been  taught  how  that  sublime 
Presence  would  smile  on  him  amid  all  the  sights  of  tlie  city,  as  when  the  soul  was 
commended  to  Him  in  sleep.  The  small  girl  was  pious  in  a  more  rational  way 
who,  going  home  from  her  first  dance,  ere  she  put  off  her  pretty  dress,  fell  on  her 
knees  to  thank  God  for  the  pleasure  He  had  given  her  at  the  children's  ball.  God 
is  the  problem  whose  last  and  clearest  solution  is  in  the  corollary  of  duty,  which, 
as  Kant  says,  is  the  practical  reason  piecing  out  the  ladder  to  climb  to  Him,  where 
the  speculative  ends.  In  this  transparency  of  conscience  all  the  vexing  riddles 
conclude.  With  a  dogged  satisfaction,  in  dire  extremity,  it  helps  us  to  stand  at  our 
post  and  do  our  office^  as  the  old  Cumberland  still  fired  her  guns  when  sinking  to 


CHAP.  IV.]  DEUTERONOMY.  71 

her  gunwale.     There  was  something  in  those  sailors,  as  in  all  faithful  unto  death, 
not  going  down  !     {C.  A.  Bartol,  D.D.) 

Ver.  39.  Consider  it  in  thine  heart,  that  the  Lord  He  is  God  in  heaven  above, 
and  upon  the  earth  beneath.— T^e  relation  of  man  to  God: — We  must  have  God 
before  we  can  understand  Him.  We  must  receive  Him  into  our  loving  trust  before 
we  can  make  any  advance  in  knowing  what  He  is,  what  are  His  qualities  and  His 
attributes,  and  what  is  all  the  meaning  that  is  written  in  His  infinite  heart.  I  am 
delighted  to  tell  again  and  again  of  the  poor  woman  who,  upon  being  interrogated 
by  her  minister  concerning  formal  divinity,  before  she  could  be  admitted  as  a  guest 
at  the  Lord's  table,  was  utterly  unable  to  answer  a  single  question  ;  whereupon  the 
minister  informed  her  that  she  was  not  fit  to  be  admitted  to  the  table  of  the  Lord. 
*'  Sir,"  said  she,  with  womanly  feeling  and  pathos,  *'  I  can't  answer  these  questions, 
but  I  could  die  for  Him."  That  is  religion  !  Not  answering  questions  only,  not 
being  able  to  enter  into  critical  disquisitions,  but  sending  the  heart  out  to  receive 
God  into  its  trust  and  love.  Hence  the  exhortation  of  the  text,  "  Consider  it  in  thine 
heart."  You  may  consider  the  question  in  the  intellectual  region,  and  get  little  or 
nothing  out  of  the  considerations.  When  the  heart  knows  its  own  hunger  and  its 
own  bitterness,  then,  in  that  sad  but  holy  hour,  the  heart  may  get  some  hold  upon 
the  idea  of  God.  I  can  imagine  the  man  of  average  education  and  intelligence, 
whom  I  am  imaginatively  addressing,  asking  me  some  such  question  as  this.  How 
is  it  that  God  does  not  show  Himself  more  clearly  to  us  than  He  does,  and  so 
put  an  end  to  all  uncertainty  concerning  Himself?  I  answer.  Are  we  capable  of 
understanding  what  is  and  what  is  not  the  proper  degree  and  method  of  Divine 
manifestation  ?  Is  it  becoming  in  men,  who  cannot  certainly  tell  what  will  happen 
in  one  single  hour,  that  they  should  write  a  programme  for  God,  and  appoint  the 
way  of  the  Almighty  ?  These  things  cause  me  to  say  that  religious  questions,  if 
they  are  to  be  profitably  considered  at  all,  must  be  considered  in  a  deeply  religious 
spirit.  You  can  make  no  advancement  in  this  learning  unless  you  bring  a  right 
heart  with  you.  That  is  the  beginning.  There  was  a  peculiar  controversy  or 
conversation  in  my  garden  the  other  day ;  it  quite  entertained  me.  There  were, 
after  those  heavy  rains,  two  worms  that  had  struggled  out  of  the  earth,  and  found 
their  way  upon  the  wet  green  grass  ;  and  they  began  to  talk  in  a  very  decided  and 
mocking  manner  about  myself.  One,  the  elder  and  better-to-do  of  the  two,  said, 
**  Eh,  eh,  eh  !  We  have  been  told  that  this  garden  has  an  owner  or  somebody  that 
takes  care  of  it,  that  nourishes  the  roots  of  things,  and  that  altogether  presides 
over  the  affair.  Eh,  eh,  eh,  I  never  saw  him.  If  there  is  such  an  owner,  why 
doesn't  he  show  himself  more  clearly  ? — why  doesn't  he  come  to  the  front  and  let 
us  see  him,  eh  ? "  And  the  leaner  one  of  the  two  said,  **That  is  an  unanswerable 
argument.  I  never  saw  him.  There  may  be  such  a  being,  but  I  care  nothing  about 
him  ;  only,  if  he  is  alive,  why  don't  he  show  himself  ? "  They  quite  wriggled  in 
contemptuous  triumph  ;  yet  all  the  while  I  was  standing  there,  looking  at  the  poor 
creatures,  and  hearing  them  !  I  could  have  set  my  foot  upon  them  and  crushed 
them  ;  but  I  did  not.  There  is  a  way  of  wasting  strength  ;  there  is  also  a  way  of 
showing  patience.  But  the  worms  could  not  understand  my  nature.  I  was  standing 
there,  and  they  knew  me  not !  What  if  it  be  so  with  ourselves  in  the  greater  ques- 
tions ?  Proceeding  with  our  statement  respecting  the  revelation  of  God,  I  have 
now  to  ask  you  to  believe  with  me,  as  a  matter  of  fact — 1.  That  we  stand  to  God 
in  the  relation  of  dependants.  That  is  our  actual  position  in  life.  "What  hast 
thou,  that  thou  hast  not  received  ? "  Let  a  man  begin  his'  studies  there,  and  he 
will  become  correspondingly  reverent.  Have  you  genius  ?  Who  lighted  the  lamp  ? 
Have  you  health  ?  Who  gave  you  your  constitution  ?  Do  you  find  the  earth 
productive?  "Yes."  Who  made  it  productive?  "I  did.  I  till  it;  I  supply 
all  the  elements  of  nourishment  needful ;  I  did."  Did  you  ?  Can  you  make 
it  rain?  Can  you  make  the  sun  shine?  If  a  man  once  be  started  on  that 
course  of  reflection,  the  probability  is,  that  he  who  begins  as  a  reverent 
inquirer  will  end  as  a  devout  worshipper.  2.  Then  I  ask  you  to  believe, 
in  the  next  place,  that  the  very  fact  of  being  dependent  should  lead  us  to  be 
very  careful  how  we  measure  the  sovereignty  and  the  government  of  God.  He 
has  made  us  servants,  not  masters.  We  are  little  children,  not  old  beings,  in 
His  household  and  universe.  We  are  mysteries  to  ourselves.  We  need  not  go  from 
home  to  seek  mysteries.  3.  I  have  to  ask  you,  in  the  third  place,  to  believe  that 
the  very  fact  of  the  mystery  of  our  own  life  should  be  the  beginning  and  the  defence 
of  our  faith  in  God.     Reason  from  yourself  upwards.    There  is  a  way  out  of  thd 


72  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [ciiap.iv. 

human  to  the  Divine.  It  is  a  commendable  course  of  procedure  to  reason  from  the 
known  to  the  unknown.  If  you  are  such  a  mystery  to  your  own  child,  if  the 
philosopher  is  such  a  mystery  to  the  uninstructed  man,  if  you  are  such  a  mystery 
to  yourself— why  may  there  not  be  a  power  around  more  mysterious  still,  higher  and 
nobler  yet  ?  Reason  from  yourselves — from  your  own  capacities  and  your  own 
resources.  Is  not  the  maker  greater  than  the  thing  made  ?  Take  away  the  idea  of 
God  from  human  thinking,  and  mark  the  immediate  and  necessary  consequences. 
This  is  a  method  of  reasoning  which  I  commend  to  the  attention  of  young  inquirers 
who  are  earnest  about  this  business.  The  method,  namely,  of  withdrawment.  If 
a  man  doubts  concerning  God,  I  shall  withdraw  the  idea  of  God  from  human 
thinking,  and  see  the  necessary  consequences.  If  a  man  has  any  argument  to 
adduce  against  Christianity,  take  Christianity  out  of  the  country,  and  see  what  will 
be  left.  Take  out  the  doctrine,  take  out  the  practice,  take  out  not  only  Christian 
theology,  but  Christian  morality,  and  see  how  many  hospitals  would  be  left,  and  how 
many  penitentiaries,  infirmaries,  schools,  and  asylums  for  the  deaf  and  the  dumb 
and  the  blind  and  the  idiotic.  So  take  away  the  idea  of  God  from  human  thinking, 
and  see  the  immediate  and  inevitable  consequences.  There  is  no  God  ;  then  there 
is  no  supreme  supervision  of  human  life  as  a  whole  ;  for  none  could  have  the  eye 
that  could  see  the  whole  orbit  of  things.  We  see  points,  not  circumferences. 
There  is  no  God  ;  then  there  is  no  final  judgment  by  which  the  wrongs  of  centuries 
can  be  avenged  ;  there  is  no  heart  brooding  over  us  to  which  we  can  confide  the 
story  of  our  sorrow,  or  tell  the  anguish  of  our  pain.  Set  God  again  on  the  throne, 
and  all  that  makes  life  worth  having,  even  imaginatively,  comes  back  again.  Set 
God  upon  the  throne,  and  all  things  take  upon  them  a  new,  true,  beautiful  meaning  ; 
there  is  hope  of  judgment,  and  a  certainty  that  right  will  eventually  be  done. 
Shall  I  ask  you  to  remember — observe,  I  still  speak  to  my  scholar  whom  I  assume 
to  be  diligent  and  earnest — that  our  little  day  has  been  too  short  to  know  the  full 
mystery  of  God  ?  When  an  infant  of  yours  has  gone  to  school,  do  you  expect  the 
little  one  to  come  back  at  twelve  o'clock  on  the  first  day  and  be  able  to  read  you  a 
chapter  even  out  of  the  simplest  book  ?  You  are  an  old  man  ;  yes,  but  a  young 
being,  an  infantile  being.  Very  old  indeed,  if  you  think  of  insuring  yourself,  or 
buying  another  estate,  or  laying  out  a  great  sum  of  money — very,  very  old  indeed  ; 
but  if  you  are  talking  of  the  universe,  you  are  the  insect  of  a  moment — hardly 
born  !  But  you  wish  to  read  the  book  called  the  Universe  thi-ough  at  one  sitting, 
like  a  cheap  novel.  Thou  art  of  yesterday,  and  knowest  nothing  ;  and  I,  thy 
teacher,  what  am  I  but  a  man  who,  having  seen  one  ray  of  light  amid  thick  and 
terrible  gloom,  come  to  thee  and  stand  here  that  you  may  see  the  same  beautiful 
revelation  !  All  this  shows  us  what  our  spirit  ought  to  be.  He  who  comes  to 
school  with  this  spirit  will  learn  most  and  learn  it  most  quickly.  And  this  let  me 
tell  you,  young  man,  the  greatest  men  I  have  ever  known  have  been  the  most 
humble,  docile,  self-distrustful.     {J.  Parker ^  D.D.) 

Yer.  40.  Thou  shalt  keep  therefore  His  statutes,  and  His  commandments,  .  .  . 
that  it  may  go  well  with  thee. — A  command  and  a  promise : — I.  Moses  enjoins  an 
OBLIGATION,  WHICH  IS  EEALLY  THE  HIGHEST  PRIVILEGE.  1.  Israel's  relation  to  God. 
(1)  In  contrast  with  Gentile  beliefs — polytheistic — each  nation  its  own  God  ;  mostly 
debased  forms  of  human  passion.  (2)  Jehovah  proclaims  Himself  only  God, 
others  His  subjects  (Jer.  x.  7  ;  Psa.  xxii.  28) ;  but  they,  His  one  people  (chap.  xxxiL  9). 
(3)  Moses  bids  them  realise  that  they  are  the  prerogative  nation  of  the  world 
(Exod.  xix.  6).  (a)  By  His  presence  among  them.  (6)  By  keeping  command- 
ments, (c)  Of  this,  love  of  God  must  be  the  root.  2.  The  grounds  of  this  relation. 
(1)  "Not  thy  righteousness."  (2)  *' Love  for  thy  fathers."  II.  Moses  holds  out 
A  promise.  Each  Israelite  had — 1.  A  full  life — long  share  of  temporal  blessings. 
2.  Then  partly  realised  by — (1)  Rescue  from  Egypt  (chap.  iv.  20) ;  and  (2)  Then 
their  recent  first  victory,  taking  possession  of  the  land  (Numb.  xxi.  33-35).  3.  But 
partly  in  store.  (1)  Jordan  to  be  crossed,  and  (2)  Canaan  won.  4.  Thus,  in  spite  of 
their  dastardly  unworthiness,  promise  ripened  to  performance.  (R.  Hayman,  D.D.) 
Penalty  of  disregarding  commands : — On  the  bridge  of  a  good  steamer  was  the 
captain  giving  the  right  course,  N.-by-W.  67°.  He  had  taken  account  of  eddies 
and  currents.  The  second  officer,  leaving,  perhaps,  the  currents  out  of  considera- 
tion, came  and  directed  the  helmsman  to  make  it  N.-by-W.  57°,  but  to  bring  the 
ship  round  so  gently  that  the  captain  would  not  notice  it.  The  result  was  a  disas- 
trous wreck.  If  we  refuse  to  hearken  to  God's  voice,  and  we  disobey  His  cooi- 
mands,   our  lives  will  be  wrecked,   and  all  our  hopes  of  happiness    shattered. 


C3HAP.  1V.3  DEUTERONOMY,  73 

Obedience  indispensable  : — Suppose  I  have  a  son,  say  ten  years  old,  and  I  want  him 
to  go  to  school  until  he  is  fifteen  or  twenty  years,  but  he  has  just  set  his  will  against 
mine.  He  says,  '*  I  refuse  to  go  to  school  for  another  day."  I  tell  you  that  that 
child  will  be  unable  to  do  one  thing  to  please  me  until  he  goes  to  school.  He  may 
make  all  the  sacrifices  he  may  have  a  mind  to,  he  may  go  out  and  earn  two  or 
three  shillings  a  day,  and  bring  every  penny  to  me  ;  but  I  do  not  want  his  money, 
I  want  his  obedience.  What  God  wante  is  obedience.  (Z>.  L,  Moody.)  Obedience 
to  Ood  is  conducive  to  our  welfare  : — Another  peculiar  excellency  of  our  religion  is, 
that  it  prescribes  an  accurate  rule  of  life, — most  agreeable  to  reason  and  to  our 
nature ;  most  conducive  to  our  welfare  and  content,  tending  to  procure  each  man's 
private  good,  and  to  promote  the  public  benefit  of  all,  by  the  strict  observance 
whereof  we  bring  our  human  nature  to  a  resemblance  of  the  Divine  ;  and  we  shall 
also  thereby  obtain  God's  favour,  oblige  and  benefit  men,  and  procure  to  ourselves 
the  conveniences  of  a  sober  life  and  the  pleasure  of  a  good  conscience.  For  if  we 
examine  the  precepts  which  respect  our  duty  to  God,  what  can  be  more  just, 
pleasant,  or  beneficial  to  us  than  are  those  duties  of  piety  which  our  religion 
enjoins  ?  What  is  more  fit  and  reasonable  than  that  we  should  most  highly  esteem 
and  honour  Him  who  is  most  excellent  ;  that  we  should  bear  the  sincerest  aff"ection 
for  Him  who  is  perfect  goodness  Himself,  and  most  beneficial  to  us  ;  that  we  should 
have  the  most  awful  dread  of  Him  that  is  infinitely  powerful,  holy,  and  just ;  that 
we  should  be  very  grateful  to  Him  from  whom  we  received  our  being,  with  all  the 
comforts  and  conveniences  of  it ;  that  we  should  entirely  trust  and  hope  in  Him 
who  can  and  will  do  whatever  we  may  in  reason  expect  from  His  goodness — nor  can 
He  ever  fail  to  perform  His  promises  ;  that  we  should  render  all  due  obedience  to 
Him  whose  children,  servants,  and  subjects  we  are  ?  The  practice  of  such  a  piety, 
of  a  service  so  reasonable,  cannot  but  be  of  vast  advantage  to  us,  as  it  procures 
peace  of  conscience,  a  comfortable  hope,  a  freedom  from  all  terrors  and  scruples  of 
mind,  from  all  tormenting  cares  and  anxieties.     (7.  Barrow.) 

Vers.  41,  42.  Then  Moses  severed  three  cities  on  this  side  Jordan,  that  the  slayer 
might  flee  thither. — The  cities  of  refuge : — The  cities  here  mentioned  were  called 
the  cities  of  refuge.  They  were  appointed  by  the  command  of  God  Himself ;  and, 
after  the  Israelites  had  crossed  the  river  Jordan  and  entered  the  land  of  Canaan, 
three  more  were  set  apart  on  the  other  side  of  the  river  for  the  same  purpose. 
I.  What  there  was  remarkable  in  their  institution,  in  the  circumstances 
THAT  distinguished  THEM.  They  were  then  so  well  chosen,  ^vith  such  attention 
to  the  design  proposed,  that  no  part  of  the  country  was  more  than  half  a  day's 
journey  from  some  one  of  them.  II.  Behold  in  these  cities  of  refuge  an 
EMBLEM  OF  THE  REDEMPTION  PROVIDED  IN  THE  GosPEL.  See  in  the  fugitive  a 
fitting  likeness  of  those  who  flee  for  refuge  to  the  hope  set  before  them  in  Christ 
Jesus.  The  ancient  city  of  refuge  stood  on  high,  easy  to  be  seen  of  all,  holding  out 
safety  to  those  who  needed  it.  Even  so  hath  Jesus  Christ  been  lifted  up  on  the 
Cross,  that  the  eye  of  faith  may  be  turned  to  Him,  and  the  hope  of  salvation  arise 
in  the  heart  of  the  penitent  believer.  The  road  that  led  to  the  cities  of  refuge  was 
broad,  plain,  and  straight ;  there  was  nothing  to  hinder  the  feet  of  him  who  fled 
along  it.  And  is  the  highway  of  God's  salvation  less  plain,  less  open,  less  direct  ? 
On  the  roads  that  led  to  the  cities  of  refuge  way-marks  were  set  up  to  guide  the  feet 
of  the  fugitive.  Even  so  are  the  ministers  of  Jesus  now  commissioned  to  guide  the 
ignorant  and  warn  the  wandering,  and  to  cry  aloud  to  all,  "This  is  the  way,  walk 
ye  in  it."  The  gates  of  the  city  of  refuge  stood  open  day  and  night.  And  so  do 
the  gates  of  the  city  of  our  God,  the  New  Jerusalem.  Christ  ever  stands  ready  to 
embrace  in  the  arms  of  His  mercy  the  soul  that  seeketh  Him.  The  city  of  refuge 
was  bound  to  support  those  who  fled  to  it  for  protection.  And  in  the  house  of  the 
living  God  there  is  bread  enough  and  to  spare.  The  city  of  refuge  was  for  all,  as 
well  for  the  stranger  as  for  one  bom  in  the  land.  And  in  Christ  Jesus  there  is 
neither  Jew  nor  Greek,  bond  nor  free,  male  nor  female.     III.  The  conditions  on 

WHICH   HE  WHO  FLED  TO   ONE   OF   THE   CITIES   OF   REFUGE  WAS   ENTITLED   TO   THE 

PRIVILEGES  THEREOF.  First,  leaving  all  behind,  he  must  flee  for  his  life,  nor  ever 
stop  till  sheltered  within  the  appointed  walls.  Again,  when  once  received  within 
the  city,  he  must  not  leave  it,  no,  not  for  a  moment,  lest  the  avenger  of  blood  fall 
upon  him,  and  he  die.  Have  you  fled  to  Christ  ?  Abide,  then,  in  Him  :  forsake 
not  the  safe  shelter  of  His  fold :  go  not  from  under  the  shadow  of  His  wing. 
(C.  Blencowe,  M.A.) 


74  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 


CHAPTER  V. 

y 

Vers.  1-5.  The  Lord  our  God  made  a  corenant  with  us  in  Horeb. — The  promul- 
gation of  the  law: — God  was  ever  wonderful  in  His  works,  and  fearful  in  His 
judgments— but  He  was  never  so  terrible  in  the  execution  of  His  will  as  now  in 
the  promulgation  of  it.  Here  was  nothing  but  a  display  of  grandeur  in  the  eyes, 
in  the  ears  of  the  Israelites,  as  if  God  meant  to  show  them  by  this  how  dreadful 
He  could  be.  In  the  destruction  of  the  first  world  there  were  clouds — in  the 
destruction  of  Sodom  there  was  fire ;  but  here  were  fires,  smoke,  clouds,  thunder, 
earthquakes,  and  whatsoever  might  work  more  astonishment  than  was  ever  in  any 
vengeance  inflicted.  And  if  the  law  were  thus  given,  how  shall  it  be  required  ? 
If  such  were  the  proclamation  of  God's  statutes,  what  shall  be  His  tribunal  ?  The 
trumpet  of  an  angel  called  to  the  one — the  voice  of  the  archangel,  and  the  trumpet 
of  God,  shall  summon  us  to  the  other.  Of  the  one,  Moses,  who  alone  witnessed 
it,  saith,  "God  came  with  the  multitude  of  His  saints"  ;  in  the  other,  thousand 
thousands  shall  minister  unto  Him,  and  ten  thousand  times  ten  thousand  shall 
stand  before  Him.  In  the  one,  Mount  Sinai  only  was  in  a  flame, — all  the  world 
shall  be  so  in  the  other.  In  the  one  there  were  thunders  and  fires  ;  in  the  other,  a 
fiery  stream  shall  proceed  from  Him,  whereby  the  elements  shall  melt  with  fervent 
heat — the  heavens  and  earth  shall  be  dissolved — they  shall  flee  away,  and  have  no 
place.  God  would  have  Israel  see  that  they  had  not  a  Governor  whose  commands 
might  be  neglected  or  trifled  with  ;  and  therefore,  before  He  gives  His  people  a  law. 
He  shows  them  that  He  can  command  heaven,  earth,  water,  fire,  air,  by  the  mere 
signification  of  His  will — thus  teaching  them  that  it  was  a  fearful  thing  to  displease 
such  a  Legislator,  or  violate  such  statutes— while  they  beheld  the  elements  examples 
of  that  obedience,  which  man  should  always  yield  to  his  Maker.  0  royal  law, 
and  mighty  Lawgiver  !  How  could  they  think  of  having  any  other  God,  that  had 
such  evidence  of  the  Divine  power  of  the  God  of  Israel  ?  How  could  they  think 
of  making  any  resemblance  of  Him,  whom  they  could  not  see,  but  whom  they 
knew  to  be  infinite  ?  How  could  they  dare  to  profane  His  name,  who  proclaimed 
Himself  to  them  by  the  incommunicable  name  of  Jehovah  ?  How  could  they 
refuse  to  observe  His  sacred  day,  when  they  saw  Him  command  those  luminaries 
by  which  days  and  years  are  measured  ?  How  could  they  refuse  to  render  honour 
and  fear  to  those  who  derive  their  authority  from  God,  when  they  saw  Him  able  to 
assert  His  own  and  maintain  that  of  His  vicegerents  upon  earth  ?  How  could  they 
think  of  killing,  when  they  were  so  strongly  aff'ected  with  the  fear  of  Him  who  thus 
manifested  Himself  able  to  save  and  to  destroy  ?  How  could  they  think  of  the  flames 
of  impure  desires,  who  beheld  such  fires  of  vengeance  ?  How  could  they  think  of 
stealing  from  others,  when  they  saw  who  was  Lord  of  heaven  and  earth,  from  whom 
their  neighbour  derived  all  his  possessions  ?  How  could  they  think  of  speaking 
falsely,  when  they  heard  the  God  of  truth  speak  in  so  tremendous  a  voice?  How 
could  they  think  of  coveting  what  was  another's,  when  they  saw  how  weak  and 
uncertain  a  right  they  had  to  what  was  their  own  ?  Lord,  to  us  was  this  moral 
law  delivered,  as  well  as  to  them.  The  letter  and  ceremonial  is  passed  away  ;  the 
spirit  remains,  and  shall  remain  to  the  end  of  time.  There  had  not  been  such  state 
in  Thy  promulgation  of  it,  if  Thou  hadst  not  intended  it  for  eternity.  How  should 
we,  who  comply  with  human  laws  to  avoid  some  trifling  forfeiture,  how  should  we 
fear  Thee,  0  God,  who  art  able  to  cast  both  soul  and  body  into  hell !  {Bp.  Hall.) 
Who  axe  all  of  us  here  alive  this  day.— i^br  the  last  day  of  the  year .— I.  This 

TEXT  APPLIES  TO  MANY  THIS  DAY  TO  WHOM  IT  WAS   NOT  APPLICABLE   LAST  YEAR. 

Thousands  have  been  born  in  the  course  of  this  year.  II.  The  text  applied  to 
MANY  LAST  YEAR  TO  WHOM  IT  IS  NOT  NOW  APPLICABLE.  They  Were  then  alive,  but 
now  they  are  inhabitants  of  the  tomb,  and  their  souls  have  entered  the  eternal 
state.  Of  these,  many  classes  might  be  specified.  1.  Some  who  were  expecting 
it.  Aged,  infirm,  aflSicted,  who  were  daily  awaiting  their  dismissal.  2.  Some  who 
■were  reckoning  on  many  years  to  come.  Young,  healthy,  hearts  full  of  life ;  but 
they  perished  as  the  flower.  "Their  sun  went  down  while  it  was  yet  day." 
8.  Some,  we  fear,  died  unprepared.  Aliens  to  God ;  strangers  to  repentance, 
faith,  and  holiness.  4.  Many,  we  trust,  died  in  the  Lord.  Race  ended ;  warfare 
accomplished  ;  crown  received  ;  for  ever  with  the  Lord.  III.  The  text  is  applic- 
able TO  ALL  those  NOW  ASSEMBLED.  "We  are  all  alive  here  this  day."  1.  And  it 
is  wonderful  that  we  are  so.  Amidst  so  many  dangers,  diseases,  and  death.  2.  Is 
entirely  owing  to  the  goodness  and  patience  of  God.     3.  We  are  alive  under 


CHAP,  v.]  DEUTERONOMY.  75 

increasing  responsibilities.  Many  blessings  have  been  given  to  us  this  year,  for  all 
of  which  we  must  give  an  account :  talents,  time,  opportunities,  Sabbaths,  sermons, 
&c.  4.  Being  alive  should  fill  us  with  hearty  gratitude  to  God.  Our  lips,  hearts, 
and  lives  should  show  forth  His  praise.  5.  As  we  are  alive,  let  us  now  resolve  to 
live  more  than  ever  to  God,  and  for  eternity.    IV.  It  is  highly  probable  that  the 

TEXT  IS  NOW  APPLICABLE  TO  SOME  HERE  FOR  THE  LAST  TIME.      {J.  Bums,  D.D.) 

Ver.  6.  I  am  the  Lord  thy  God. — The  mission  of  law: — In  a  general  sense 
law  is  the  manner  in  which  an  act  shall  be  performed.  In  civil  life  it  is  a 
legislative  declaration  how  a  citizen  shall  act ;  in  morals  it  is  a  rule  of  con- 
duct proceeding  from  one  who  has  the  right  to  rule,  and  directed  to  those 
who  have  the  ability  to  obey.  In  this  sense  laws  are  mandatory,  prohibitory, 
permissive,  according  to  the  object  to  be  obtained,  commanding  what  shall  be 
done,  forbidding  what  shall  not  be  done,  permitting  what  may  be  done.  There 
is  an  antagonism  prevailing  in  our  country  and  in  other  lands  against  the 
authority  of  these  old  mandates  received  by  Moses  from  the  hand  of  the  Almighty. 
It  is  difficult  to  understand  that  some  who  assert  the  uniformity  of  nature,  or  what 
they  are  pleased  to  call  "material  law,"  yet  seek  to  emancipate  themselves  from 
moral  obligation,  which  is  natural  law.  They  declare  for  absolute  liberty ;  that 
man  should  be  governed  by  his  own  tastes,  desires,  and  passions  ;  that  he  should 
gratify  himself  without  interference  from  society  or  the  restrictions  of  law.  It  is 
enough  to  say  that  man  is  not  constituted  for  such  conditions  of  liberty,  for 
restraint  seems  to  be  as  beneficial  as  law  itself.  Man  is  organised  restriction,  ever 
subject  to  consequences  and  penalties.  He  cannot  pass  a  certain  boundary  with- 
out peril ;  he  is  a  living  code  of  law.  Unlimited  gratification  is  the  right  of  no  man. 
Such  is  his  constitution  that  man  can  think  so  far,  can  see  so  much,  can  eat  and 
drink  to  such  a  degree,  can  sleep  so  long,  endure  so  much,  and  beyond  this  he  can- 
not go.  He  is  ever  within  the  embrace  of  law — "Thus  far  shalt  thou  go,  and  no 
farther."  It  is  true  of  him  in  his  worst  and  in  his  best  estate.  The  law  of  limita- 
tion is  as  prevalent  as  law  itself.  Atoms  and  worlds,  liquids  and  solids,  plants  and 
animals  are  bounded  by  limitations.  Flowers  bloom,  trees  grow,  fish  swim,  birds 
fly,  beasts  roam,  lightnings  flash,  thunders  peal,  winds  blow,  oceans  roll,  all  within 
limitations.  The  gem  is  crystallised,  the  dewdrop  is  moulded,  trees  are  carbonised, 
rocks  metallised,  clouds  become  rain,  and  the  sun  sends  forth  his  wealth  of  health 
and  beauty,  all  within  limitations.  Throw  off"  this  law  of  restriction,  and  the  roots 
of  the  trees  would  take  hold  of  the  foundations  of  the  earth  and  their  branches 
would  sweep  the  stars  ;  throw  it  off",  and  man's  growth  would  be  perpetuated  until 
his  brow  reached  the  heavens.  Throw  it  off",  and  the  planets  would  rush  in  wildest 
confusion.  Man  is  no  exception  in  this  higher  nature ;  excess  is  ruin.  He  must 
not  encroach  upon  the  domain  of  the  Infinite.  His  vices  are  bounded  by  conse- 
quences and  penalties.  Excessive  gratification  multiplies  his  sorrows  and  hastens 
him  to  a  premature  grave.  He  is  boundless  in  nothing  but  intelligence  and  virtue  ; 
in  these  he  can  approach  the  Infinite,  but  never  reach  Him.  This  is  his  highest 
ideal.  Man  hates  restraint ;  his  foolish  cry  is,  **  Give  us  liberty  or  give  us  death  "  ; 
but  such  liberty  is  without  order.  Natural  liberty  is  acting  without  the  restraints 
of  nature  ;  civil  liberty  is  acting  with  abridged  natural  freedom  ;  moral  liberty  is 
acting  within  the  limitations  of  moral  law.  There  is  a  diff"erence  between  the  power 
to  disobey  and  the  right  to  disobey.  A  citizen  may  have  the  power  to  take  the  pro- 
perty of  another,  but  not  the  right.  There  is  nothing  more  wholesome  for  a  man 
to  realise  than  the  certainty  of  law,  immutable,  inflexible,  inexorable.  Law  is  a 
Shylock ;  the  consequences  of  violation  are  sure  to  come.  There  is  nothing  more 
majestic  and  solenan  than  the  eternity  of  law.  Human  enactments  are  repealed, 
human  obligations  are  for  a  term  of  years ;  but  the  obligations  of  the  law  of  God 
will  last  while  He  is  on  the  throne  of  the  universe.  In  our  aversion  to  restraint  we 
are  tempted  to  ask,  Who  is  Jehovah,  that  we  should  obey  ?  What  is  the  ground  of 
obligation  to  Him  ?  Civil  government  has  authority  over  us,  because  of  the  social 
relations  which  the  Creator  has  established  between  man  and  man,  and  because  of 
common  consent ;  parental  authority  springs  from  relationship,  but  God's  authority 
has  its  source  in  absolute  possession.  He  made  us,  and  not  we  ourselves ;  we  are 
the  offspring  of  His  power— "Ye  are  not  your  own."  Herein  is  the  eternal  fitness 
of  things.  From  this  is  the  greatest  good.  The  power  to  enforce  His  commands 
may  be  the  subordinate  reason  for  obedience,  but  it  is  not  the  highest.  A  giant  is 
not  necessarily  a  ruler ;  might  is  not  right.  We  must  look  for  a  more  beneficent 
reason.    Certain  special  duties  may  derive  their  apparent  obligati6us  from  certain 


76  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

relations.  Endowed  with  intelligence,  I  should  adore  God  for  His  wonderful  works. 
Possessing  life,  reason,  and  affections  and  other  sources  of  happiness  incident  to 
my  being,  I  owe  Him  gratitude  founded  on  natural  sentiment  and  demanded  by  all 
that  is  reasonable.  But  these  relations  are  not  necessarily  the  reason  of  obedience, 
nor  does  His  right  to  rule  me  and  my  duty  to  obey  Him  flow  out  of  His  will.  Why 
has  He  the  right  to  will  me  to  do  thus  and  thus  ?  But  if  we  look  a  little  deeper,  a 
little  closer,  we  shall  discover  that  His  right  to  will  and  my  duty  to  obey  are  from 
His  absolute  possession.  That  right  has  no  limitation.  It  can  never  be  transferred, 
or  alienated,  or  destroyed.  "The  heavens  are  Thine,  the  earth  also  is  Thine:  as 
for  the  world  and  the  fulness  thereof,  Thou  hast  founded  them."  It  is  a  law  of 
nations  that  the  first  discoverer  of  a  country  is  esteemed  the  rightful  possessor  and 
lord  thereof ;  that  the  originator  of  a  successful  invention  has  unquestionable 
dominion  of  the  property  therein  on  the  score  of  justice ;  that  the  author  of  a 
beneficent  truth,  whether  in  the  domain  of  science,  government,  or  religion,  has 
priority  of  claim  to  the  honour  and  benefits  thereof.  These  things  have  reached 
the  majesty  of  international  law  ;  hence  the  long  and  vexatious  controversies  touch- 
ing the  relative  claims  of  Columbus  and  Amerigo  Vespucci  as  to  the  discovery  of  this 
country ;  the  rival  claims  of  Gutenberg  and  Faust  touching  the  invention  of  the 
art  of  printing ;  the  first  demonstration  of  the  circulation  of  the  blood,  whether 
Harvey  or  Fabricius  or  Padua ;  who  first  identified  lightning  and  electricity, 
whether  Abb4  NoUet  or  our  own  Franklin,  and  whether  Darwin  or  Wallace  is 
the  author  of  the  theory  of  natural  selection.  Men  and  nations  have  jealously 
guarded  and  vindicated  this  right  of  priority  of  claim  ;  for  its  maintenance  battles 
have  been  fought  and  empires  have  toppled  to  their  fall.  When  a  man  comes  into 
the  possession  of  a  block  of  marble  by  discovery  or  presentation  or  purchase,  and 
adds  to  its  value  by  his  deft  fingers  with  mallet  and  chisel,  and  sculptures  thereon 
some  bird,  or  man,  or  angel,  it  is  the  consent  of  mankind  that  he  has  an  additional 
claim  to  that  piece  of  marble  growing  out  of  the  right  of  possession  and  the  success 
of  his  skill.  '  *  Thy  hands  have  made  me  and  fashioned  me. "  {J.  P.  Newman,  D.  D. ) 
God's  laws  of  life : — In  the  present  day  we  hear  and  read  a  great  deal  concerning 
law.  "  The  laws  of  nature  '  is  a  much  more  common  expression  now  than  in  the 
days  of  our  forefathers  ;  for  the  study  of  nature,  the  investigation  of  its  wonders, 
and  the  examination  of  its  phenomena  are  now  more  thorough  and  general  and 
successful  than  they  used  to  be  ;  and  the  progress  of  science  has  made  this  expres- 
sion very  familiar  to  us.  All  things  are  in  subjection  to  law,  in  the  heavens  above, 
and  in  the  earth  beneath  ;  all  things,  from  a  world  to  a  sand-grain,  from  a  mighty 
constellation  to  a  rounded  pebble,  from  "  the  great  and  wide  sea"  to  the  tiny  dew- 
drop,  from  the  giant  banyan  tree  to  the  lowly  shrub,  from  "behemoth"  to  the 
insect,  are  subject  to  law.  "The  laws  of  nature,"  instead  of  excluding  the  God  of 
nature,  are  the  beautiful  expression  of  His  thought  and  will.  The  order  of  the 
universe  has  originated  in  the  mind  of  Him  who  created  it.  As  Hooker  finely  said, 
•*  Law  has  its  seat  in  the  bosom  of  God,  and  its  voice  is  the  harmony  of  the  world." 
God's  moral  law  was  given  to  man  as  an  intelligent  and  moral  being.  This  law  is 
written  in  man's  nature.  A  philosopher  said  that  two  things  "  filled  his  soul  with 
awe — the  starry  heaven  above,  and  the  moral  law  within."  But  if  the  law  was 
already  found  in  man's  conscience,  what  need  was  there  to  proclaim  it  on  Mount 
Sinai?  1.  First,  because  the  record  was  becoming  obscure  through  growing  de- 
pravity ;  the  letters  were  defaced,  the  moral  sense  was  blunted.  Sir  Walter  Scott's 
"  Old  Mortality"  renewed  the  inscriptions  on  the  old  moss-grown  tombstones,  cut 
out  with  his  chisel  and  hammer  the  letters  which  time  and  decay  had  nearly 
obliterated.  But  there  was  no  teacher  among  the  heathen  that  could  renew  the 
inscription  on  man's  nature,  and  restore  the  defaced  letters,  and  remove  the  grime 
that  had  gathered  around  them.  The  conscience,  like  all  the  other  faculties,  needed 
education  and  training.  2.  Secondly,  it  was  necessary  that  Israel  should  have  a 
Divine  standard  of  conduct.  Having  just  been  delivered  from  the  house  of  Egyptian 
bondage,  and  having  been  contaminated  by  the  influence  of  Egyptian  idolatry,  it 
was  necessary  that  they  should  have  a  rule  of  life  that  was  clear  and  unmistak- 
able. They  needed  a  revealed  and  written  standard  of  duty.  3.  Thirdly, 
it  was  necessary,  in  order  to  preserve  to  all  coming  ages  God's  judgment  of  what 
man  ought  to  be,  God's  ideal  of  man's  life.  A  revelation  by  word  of  mouth 
would  not  suffice  ;  for  oral  tradition  would  in  time  be  corrupted.  There  are  some 
human  laws  that  are  necessary  for  some  peoples,  and  not  for  others  ;  but  this  is  the 
same  in  every  climate  and  country — among  the  Esquimaux  in  the  land  of  ever- 
lasting snows,  and  among  the  dusky  tribes  of  Africa,  among  the  civilised  nations  of 


CHAP,  v.]  DEUTERONOMY.  77 

Europe,  and  among  savages,  among  rich  and  poor,  learned  and  unlearned,  Jew  and 
Greek,  "Barbarian,  Scythian,  bond  and  free."  And  this  law  is  unchangeable  in 
its  character.  Physical  laws  may  be  suspended  by  other  or  higher  laws  ;  as  animal 
food  is  preserved  by  salt,  and  gravitation  is  overcome  by  life.  "Till  heaven  and 
earth  pass,  one  jot  or  one  tittle  shall  in  no  wise  pass  from  the  law,  till  all  be  ful- 
filled." I  fear  that  in  the  present  age  we  are  in  danger  of  losing  sight  of  God  as 
our  Ruler.  We  dwell,  and  rightly,  on  the  revelation  of  the  Fatherhood  of  God. 
"  Our  Father."  What  name  so  attractive  and  beautiful  and  helpful  as  this  ?  But 
He  is  also  King  ;  He  sways  a  sceptre  of  righteousness  ;  He  exercises  dominion  ;  He 
claims  obedience  ;  He  demands  service.  "  I  will  put  My  laws  into  their  mind,  and 
write  them  in  their  hearts."  "And  God  spake  all  these  words."  God  is  the 
Eternal  Home  of  righteousness,  and  He  has  made  known  His  righteous  will  to  men. 
* '  God  spake. "  Sin  had  put  an  end  to  the  communications  between  earth  and  heaven ; 
but  God  broke  the  silence.  It  would  be  terrible  to  think  of  God  dwelling  in  the 
heavens,  and  not  saying  a  word  to  us.  The  Psalmist's  cr^  was,  "  Be  not  silent  to  me, 
lest  I  be  like  them  that  go  down  into  the  pit."  In  this  introduction  or  preface  to 
the  words  of  the  law  we  see  the  grounds  on  which  He  claims  authority  over  men,  and 
demands  their  obedience  and  homage  and  service  ;  these  grounds  are — His  relation 
to  them,  and  His  merciful  deliverance  of  them.  I.  His  relation  to  them.  "  I  am 
the  Lord  thy  God."  He  was  the  God  of  their  fathers  ;  He  had  called  Abram  out  of 
TJr  of  the  Chaldees  from  among  idolaters ;  He  was  the  fear  of  Isaac  ;  He  M'as  the 
helper  of  Jacob.  And  here  He  says  to  their  descendants,  "  I  am  the  Lord  thy  God," 
or  "  I  am  Jehovah,  thy  God."  This  was  the  name  by  which  He  made  Himself  known 
to  Moses  from  the  burning  bush.  God  was  now  about  to  unfold  the  meaning  of  the 
name  in  the  history  of  His  people.  It  denotes  His  eternal  self-existence.  "  I  am 
Jehovah,  I  change  not."  Change  is  essential  to  finite  beings;  to  their  glory,  and 
blessedness,  and  peace.  Without  progress — and  progress  implies  change— a  man's 
life  anywhere  would  be  wretched.  Thank  God  we  may  be  changed  ;  for  to  be  fixed 
in  our  present  state  of  ignorance  and  sin  and  weakness  would  be  untold  misery. 
But  God  changes  not ;  and  this  is  His  glory.  He  is  so  perfect  that  no  change 
could  make  Him  wiser,  or  holier,  or  more  blessed  than  He  is.  Like  the  fire  in  the 
bush,  His  glory  is  flaming  through  the  universe  ;  but  it  does  not  depend  upon  the 
universe  for  its  existence.  And  this  name  not  only  denotes  essential  existence,  but 
it  was  also  the  covenant  name  of  God,  and  contained  the  promise  of  future  mani- 
festation ;  and  this  was  very  appropriate  on  the  threshold  of  Jewish  history,  when 
the  horde  of  Egyptian  slaves  were  about  to  be  converted  into  an  army  of  brave  men. 
"  I  am  Jehovah,  thy  God."  He  was  entering  into  a  close  relation  to  them.  And 
He  is  now  entering  into  a  covenant  relation  with  all  who  trust  in  His  name.  Our 
God.  Jehovah,  our  God  !  The  Self-existent,  our  God  !  The  Ruler  of  all  things, 
our  God  !  The  All-sufficient,  the  Eternal  on  our  side  !  What  grander  revelation 
can  we  have  than  this  ?  The  unity  of  the  nation  is  indicated  in  the  use  of  the 
singular  pronoun,  "  I  am  Jehovah,  thy  God,  which  have  brought  thee  out."  The 
Psalmist  said,  "  I  will  sing  praise  to  my  God."  And  this  was  the  keynote  of  many 
of  the  Psalms,  "  My  God  " — mine  personally,  mine  consciously,  mine  for  ever.  One 
man  claiming  God  as  his  own  !  You  may  tell  me  that  God  is  ruling  the  universe, 
guiding  the  stupendous  worlds.  But  what  about  me  ?  I  have  my  sorrows,  my 
burdens,  my  hopes,  my  grave  before  me.  "Whom  have  I  in  heaven  but  Thee? 
and  there  is  none  on  the  earth  that  I  desire  beside  Thee."  II.  The  other  ground 
on  which  He  claims  authority  over  men  is  found  in  the  merciful  deliverance 
He  has  wrought  out  on  their  behalf.  "  Which  have  brought  thee  out  of  the 
land  of  Egypt,  out  of  the  house  of  bondage."  Egypt  was  the  home  of  civilisation, 
of  culture,  of  art,  of  power.  Into  Egypt  Abram  came  in  his  wanderings  ;  the 
children  of  Jacob  went  down  there  in  time  of  famine  ;  Joseph  ruled  as  prime 
minister  there  ;  it  was  the  nursery  of  Abraham's  race  ;  and  there  they  grew  to  be  a 
great  people.  What  was  the  object  of  mentioning  this  event  inthe  introduction  to 
the  law  ?  Was  it  not  to  show  that  God's  claims  to  obedience  are  based  on  His 
faithfulness,  and  that  love  is  the  parent  of  law  1  The  people  were  first  freed,  and 
then  they  received  the  law.  God  manifests  Himself  on  our  behalf,  and  then  claims 
our  obedience.  We  cannot  liberate  ourselves  from  the  bondage  of  sin  ;  for  this  is  a 
slavery  which  neither  millions  of  money  nor  the  exploits  on  battlefields  can  destroy, 
a  slavery  which  no  Emancipation  Act  can  terminate.  But  One  has  interposed  for 
us;  the  Paschal  Lamb  has  been  offered;  "Christ  our  passover  was  sacrificed  for 
us."  According  to  the  course  of  history,  the  law  precedes  the  Gospel ;  but  in  the 
experience  of  the  saved  sinner  the  Gospel  precedes  the  law.     There  is  gratitude  felt 


78  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  tcHAP.  v. 

for  the  redemption  from  bondage,  and  that  gratitude  leads  to  obedience  and  con- 
secration. ' '  His  delight  is  in  the  law  of  the  Lord. "  {James  Owen. )  The  preface 
to  the  Decalogue  .—I.  He  makes  way  to  the  obeying  of  His  laws  by  propound- 
ing His  sovereign  power  :  I  am  the  Lord  thy  God,  I  am  Jehovah,  the  only  true 
God  ;  I  am  self-existent,  and  I  give  being  unto  all  things.  My  essence  is  eternal 
and  unchangeable  ;  I  do  what  I  please  in  heaven  and  earth  ;  My  power  and  dom- 
inion are  infinite.  This  is  a  very  suitable  introduction  to  the  commandments.  It  is 
a  prevalent  motive,  a  powerful  argument  to  induce  us  to  yield  obedience  to  whatever 
God  shall  be  pleased  to  propound  as  our  duty.  Besides,  '"rhou"  signifies  the 
equality  of  the  obligation  ;  God  speaking  to  all  the  people  as  to  one  man,  that  every 
person  may  think  himself  concerned  to  obey,  and  that  no  man  may  plead  exception. 
This  Lord,  this  Jehovah,  who  here  speaks,  is  God  over  all ;  His  authority  and 
sovereignty  are  unlimited.  IL  Not  only  the  sovereignty,  but  the  goodness  of 
God  is  mentioned  here  as  an  argument  of  obedience — "I  am  the  Lord  thy 
God,  who  brought  thee  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt,  out  of  the  house  of  bondage."  We 
have  by  the  gracious  undertakings  of  Christ  been  brought  out  of  the  house  of 
bondage,  delivered  from  that  captivity  and  slavery  wherein  Satan  and  our  own 
guilt  had  involved  us.  This  Divine  philanthropy,  this  transcendent  beneficence, 
together  with  all  the  other  blessings,  mercies,  and  favours  conferred  upon  us,  are 
forcible  engagements,  yea,  strong  allurements  to  obedience.  {J.  Edwards,  D.D.) 
Introduction  to  the  Decalogue  : — The  Ten  Commandments  stand  alone,  not  only  in 
the  Old  Testament,  but  in  the  moral  development  and  education  of  our  race.  They 
form  the  groundwork,  the  bed-rock,  on  which  all  goodness  and  morality  are  built. 
I.  Some  interesting  particulars  in  the  record  of  these  Ten  Commandments. 

1.  There  are  two  distinct  versions,  differing  considerably  in  detail,  yet  in  substance 
identical.  Inspiration  is  concerned  with  great  realities,  not  with  trivialities  ;  and 
both  Exodus  and  Deuteronomy  are  right  when  they  tell  us  these  were  the  words 
God  spake,  if  we  do  not  interpret  that  statement  to  mean  that  it  pledges  us  to 
believe  the  verbal  accuracy  of  each  record.  Two  accounts  of  the  same  occurrence 
may  be  absolutely  true,  and  yet  differ  considerably  in  mere  verbal  correctness. 

2.  They  are  never  called  the  Ten  Commandments  in  the  Old  Testament,  usually 
'*The  Ten  Words,"  or  "The  Testimony."  This  fact  is  not  unimportant,  for  the 
term  * '  word  "  conveys  a  richer  idea  of  a  revelation  from  God  than  the  word  ' '  com- 
mandment. "  A  commandment  is  a  law  binding  on  those  who  hear  it,  but  is  not 
necessarily  a  revelation  of  the  character  of  the  person  who  gives  it ;  but  "the  word 
of  the  Lord  "  is  not  merely  an  utterance  of  God,  but  a  revelation  from  God.  The 
same  truth  is  conveyed  in  the  name  most  frequently  given  to  the  Ten  Command- 
ments in  the  Old  Testament,  "  The  Testimony."  It  is  God's  own  utterance  of  His 
will  to  His  people,  of  His  revelation  concerning  Himself,  of  what  He  bids  them  do. 

3.  The  number  of  the  commandments  is  significant.  There  are  ten,  and  ten  is  the 
only  complete  number.  After  we  count  ten  we  begin  again,  for  ten  completes  the 
number  of  the  primary  digits.  (1)  The  law  God  gives  to  His  people  is  a  complete 
code  of  moral  goodness.  "The  law  of  the  Lord  is  perfect,"  as  the  Psalmist  sings  ; 
it  lacks  nothing  ;  it  is  full,  and  rounded,  and  complete  ;  and  if  we  keep  this  law  we 
shall  be  perfect  men.  (2)  The  natural  division  of  the  number  ten  into  two  halves  of 
five  each  suggests,  I  think,  a  second  truth.  If  ten  be  the  symbol  of  completeness, 
five  must  necessarily  be  an  incomplete  number,  for  it  wants  the  other  five  to  make 
it  complete  ;  and  so  the  one  half  of  the  Decalogue  is  incomplete  without  the  other. 
No  one  who  is  religious  without  morality  is  a  good  man  ;  no  man  who  is  moral 
without  being  religious  is  a  good  man.  4.  It  is  hardly  correct  to  say  that  the  first 
live  commandments  relate  to  duty  to  God,  and  the  second  five  to  the  duty  to  man, 
for  the  Fifth  Commandment  touches  the  honour  due  to  parents  ;  but,  on  the  other 
hand,  there  is  another  simple  and  underlying  principle  that  explains  and  justifies 
the  division  of  the  Ten  Commandments  into  two  equal  halves  of  five  each.  There 
was  a  well-known  and  rational  division  in  ancient  ethics  between  piety  and  justice. 
Piety  always  included  in  ancient  morals  the  idea  of  filial  reverence.  Reverence 
itself  is  perhaps  the  better  word  for  the  goodness  in  the  first  five  commandments  ; 
righteousness  is  the  better  word  for  the  goodness  commanded  in  the  second  five.  If 
we  bear  this  in  mind  we  shall  at  once  discern  the  reason  for  the  division  of  the  two 
laws  into  two  equal  halves.  The  first  five  inculcate  reverence  to  God,  and  to  those 
who  on  earth  represent  God  in  the  human  relation  ;  the  second  five  teach  the  duty 
of  righteousness — that  is,  of  right  conduct  as  between  man  and  man.  And  notice 
that  not  one  of  the  commandments  of  the  second  table,  as  it  is  called,  that  which 
touches  himian  duty,  has  any  sanction  attached  to  it.     On  the  other  hand,  in  the 


CHAP,  v.]  DEUTERONOMY.  79 


first  half,  the  commandments  which  concern  reverence,  we  find  a  sanction  attached 
to  the  second,  third,  fourth,  and  fifth  laws,  while  in  the  second  table  there  is  none. 
The  reason  for  this  is  obvious.  All  human  duty  and  human  rights  are  reciprocal. 
They  need  nothing  more  than  their  own  statement  to  secure  their  obligation! 
II.  Thb  limitations,  from  an  ethical  standpoint,  of  the  Ten  Commandments! 
1.  With  the  exception  of  the  last,  the  Tenth  Commandment,  all  deal  with  actions 
alone,  and  it  is  remarkable  that  the  only  one  of  the  ten  that  does  pass  beyond 
external  action,  and  forbids  evil  thought,  "Thou  shalt  not  covet,"  was  the  com- 
mandment that  led  to  St.  Paul's  conversion,  or  at  any  rate  to  his  conviction  of  sin 
(Eom.  vii.  7).  2.  The  Ten  Commandments,  with  two  exceptions,  are  negative  in 
fonn.  **Thou  shalt  not"  occurs  eight  times,  "Thou  shalt"  only  twice.  To 
forbid  wrong-doing  is  absolutely  necessary,  but  the  not  doing  of  wrong  is  not  the 
highest  ideal  of  morality.  III.  The  incompleteness  and  limitations  and  defects  of 
the  Ten  Commandments  are  best  seen  if  we  take  one  of  them  and  compare  it 
"WITH  THE  LAW  OF  Christ.  "  Thou  shalt  do  no  murder,"  for  example,  is  one  of 
these  Jewish  laws  as  necessary  and  as  binding  to-day  as  when  it  was  first  spoken. 
But  now  compare  it  with  the  law  of  Christ,  as  declared  in  the  Sermon  on  the 
Mount  (Matt.  v.  21,  22).  We  see  at  once  the  contrast.  Christ's  law  is  higher  and 
more  spiritual  than  the  law  of  Moses.  And  so  with  all  these  Ten  Coniinaudments. 
The  Decalogue  does  not  from  any  point  of  view  represent  an  ideal  and  perfect  code 
of  ethics.  As  moonlight  or  starlight  is  to  sunlight,  so  the  Ten  Commaudments  are 
to  the  law  of  Christ.  One  often  wonders  what  would  be  the  effect  on  the  moral  life 
of  the  Church  if  at  the  regular  services  on  the  Sunday  there  was  the  recital,  week  by 
week,  of  the  laws  of  Christ,  or,  at  any  rate,  of  some  of  them,  followed  each  one,  it 
may  be,  by  the  prayer,  "  Lord  have  mercy  upon  us,  and  incline  our  hearts  to  keep 
this  law."  IV.  Notice  the  significant  fact  tiiat  the  law  of  God  was  not  given 
TO  His  people  until  their  redemption  from  Egvpt  was  completed.  This  is 
the  Divine  order— redemption  by  the  passover  sacrifice,  and  shedding  of  the  blood 
of  the  innocent  lamb,  then  the  giving  of  the  law.  This  was  the  order  in  Judaism, 
and  in  Christianity  the  same  significant  order  is  preserved.  We  are  first  redeemed 
by  the  precious  blood  of  Christ  from  the  curse  and  power  of  sin,  from  death  ;  and 
then  we  are  bidden  to  keep  the  law  of  Christ.  The  Divine  order  is  not,  "Do 
this  and  live,"  but,  "Live  and  do  this":  redemption  first,  obedience  after- 
wards. This  order  is  not  an  arbitrary  and  unmeaning  one.  It  lies  in  the  eternal 
necessities  of  our  being.  Can  a  dead  man  do  anything  ?  Can  a  corpse  obey  a 
single  command  ?  Can  it  even  hear  one  ?  And  if  we  are  "dead  in  trespasses  and 
sins,"  our  first  need  is  not  a  law,  but  a  life:  first  deliverance  from  the  doom  of 
sin,  first  redemption,  and  then,  and  not  till  then,  the  sinner,  saved  from  the 
prison-house  of  death,  falls  at  his  Lord's  feet  and  cries,  "Lord,  I  am  Thy  ser- 
vant, I  am  Thy  servant.  Thou  hast  loosed  my  bonds."  {G.  S.  Barrett,  D.D.) 
The  preface  .—I.  The  lawgiver  is  their  God.  Men  are  naturally  religious  ;  that 
is,  they  have  a  fear  of,  a  reverence  for,  some  powerful  Being  who  has  power  to  do 
them  good  or  evU,  and  whose  favour  they  wish  to  enjoy  ;  that  Being  is  their  God, 
and  they  are  His  people.  The  gods  of  the  heathen  are  false  gods.  There  is  but 
one  living  and  true  God,  the  God  of  the  Bible,  the  God  of  Israel.  Whom  should 
Israel  obey  but  their  God  ?  He  has  made  them,  rules  over  them,  has  care  of  them ; 
He  knows  their  nature,  knows  what  is  good  for  them,  knows  what  they  should  do 
and  be  ;  He  will  seek  only  their  good  and  their  perfection  ;  He  will  speak  only  what 
it  is  best  for  them  to  hear.  II.  The  lawgiver  is  their  Redeemek.  This  is  an 
additional  reason  for  obedience.  For  who  can  so  well  rule  and  govern  the  free  as 
He  who  made  them  free  ?  And  whom  are  freemen  bound  to  obey  but  Him  who 
redeemed  them  ?  But  some  one  may  ask.  Why  should  there  be  laws  for  the  free  ? 
Why  combine  law  and  freedom  ?  Is  it  for  the  mere  exercise  of  arbitrary  power  as 
sovereign  Lord  ?  He  is  Sovereign,  and  is  the  source  of  all  power  and  law.  But  He 
has  man's  good  in  view.  Laws  are  needful  for  the  imperfect.  Children  get  rules  ; 
as  they  grow  up  into  the  mind  of  the  father,  minute  and  multiplied  rules  begin  to 
cease,  because  the  law  is  now  in  them,  and  is,  as  it  were,  part  of  them.  III.  The 
lawgiver  is  Jehovah.  This  name  conveys  a  third  reason  for  obedience.  It  indi- 
cates that  God  is  self-existent,  eternal,  and  unchangeable  (Malachi  iii.  6).  Surely, 
then,  Jehovah  is  a  precious  covenant  for  Israel's  God,  and  for  Israel  to  know  Him 
by.  It  speaks  of  Him  as  the  eternally  unchangeable  One,  and  therefore  ever  faithful 
and  true,  to  be  trusted  most  fully.  Conclusion— 1.  Freedom  and  law  are  both  of 
God,  and  therefore  perfectly  compatible  and  harmonious.  2.  Freedom  and  holiness 
go  together.     {Jos,  Matthew,  B.D.)       The  Decalogue  .-—I.  There  is  first  to  be  noted!. 


80  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  r. 


THE  ASPECT   IN  WHICH   THE   GREAT   LAWGIVER   HERE   PRESENTS   HiMSELF    TO    HiS 

PEOPLE  :  "  I  am  Jehovah,  thy  God,  who  have  brought  thee  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt, 
out  of  the  house  of  bondage."     Jehovah,  the  unchangeable  and  eternal,  the  great 
I  am  ;  this  alone,  had  it  been  all,  was  a  lofty  idea  for  men  who  had  been  so  long 
enveloped  in  the  murky  atmosphere  of  idolatry  ;  and  if  deeply  impressed  upon  their 
hearts,  and  made  a  pervading  element  in  their  religion  and  polity,  would  have 
nobly  elevated  the  seed  of  Israel  above  all  the  nations  then  existing  on  the  earth. 
But  there  is  more  a  great  deal  than  this  in  the  personal  announcement  which 
introduces  the  ten  fundamental  precepts ;  it  is  His  faithful  love  and  suflBciency 
for  all  future  time,  to  protect  them  from  evil  or  bring  them  salvation.     II.  Yet 
it  did  not  the  less  on  that  account  assume— being  a  revelation  of  law  in  form  as 
well  as  substance,  IT  could  not  but  assume — A  predominantly  stringent 
AND  imperative  CHARACTER.     The  loviug  Spirit  in  which  it  opens  is  not,  indeed, 
absent  from  the  body  of  its  enactments,   though,   for  the  most  part,  formally 
disguised ;   but  even  in  form  it  reappears  more  than  once  —  especially  in  the 
assurance  of  mercy  to  the  thousands  who  should  love  God  and  keep  His  com- 
mandments, and  the  promise  of  long  continuance  on  the  land  of  rest  and  blessing, 
associated  respectively  with  the  second  and  the  fifth  precepts  of  the  law.     But 
these  are  only,  as  it  were,  the  relieving  clauses  of  the  code  :   the   law  itself,  in 
every  one  of  the  obligations  it  imposes,  takes  the  imperative  form — "Thou  shalt 
do  this,"  "Thou  shalt  not  do  that"  ;  and  this  just  because  it  is  law,  and  must 
leave  no  doubt  that  the  course  it  prescribes  is  the  one  that  ought  to  be  taken,  and 
must  be  taken,  by  every  one  who  is  in  a  sound  moral  condition.     Still,  the  negative 
is  doubtless  in  itself  the  lower  form  of  command ;  and  when  so  largely  employed 
as  it  is  in  the  Decalogue,  it  must  be  regarded  as  striving  to  meet  the  strong 
cmi-ent  of  evil  that  runs  in  the  human  heart.     III.  Viewing  the  law  thus,   as 
essentially  the  law  of  love,  which  it  seeks  to  protect  as  well  as  to  evoke  and  direct, 
LET  us  GLANCE  BRIEFLY  AT  THE  DETAILS,  that  we  may  sce  how  entirely  these  accord, 
alike  in  their  nature  and  their  orderly  arrangement,  with  the  general  idea,  and 
provide   for   its   proper   exemplification.     As    love   has   unspeakably  its   grandest 
object  in  God,  so  precedence  is  justly  given  to  what  directly  concerns  Him — 
implying  also  that  religion  is  the  basis  of  morality,  that  the  right  adjustment  of 
men's  relation  to  God  tends  to  ensure  the  proper  maintenance  of  their  relations 
one  to  another.     God,    therefore,   nmst  hold  the  supreme  place  in  their  regard, 
must  receive  the  homage  of  their  love  and  obedience  ;  and  this  in  regard  to  His 
being,   His  worship,  His  name,  and  His  day.     The  next  command  may  also  be 
taken   in  the   same  connection — a   step  further  in   the   same   line,   since  earthly 
parents  are  in  a  peculiar  sense  God's  representatives  among  men.     This,  however, 
touches  on  the  second  division  of  moral  duty,  that  which  concerns  men's  relation 
to  each  other  ;  and  according  to  the  particular  aspect  in  which  it  is  contemplated, 
the  tifth  command  may  be  assigned  to  the  first  or  to  the  second  table  of  the  law. 
Scripture  itself  makes  no  formal  division.     Though  it  speaks  frequently  enough  of 
two  tables,  it  nowhere  indicates  where  the  one  terminates  and  the  other  begins — 
purposely,  perhaps,  to  teach  us  that  the  distinction  is  not  to  be  very  sharply  drawn, 
and  that  the  contents  of  the  one  gradually  approximate  and  at  last  pass  over  into 
the  other.     And  finally,  to  show  that  neither  tongue,  nor  hands,  nor  any  other 
member  of  our  body,  or  any  means  and  opportunities  at  our  command — that  not 
these  alone  are  laid  under  contribution  to  this  principle  of  love,  but  the  seat  also 
and  fountain  of  all  desire,  all  purpose  and  action — the  Decalogue  closes  with  the 
precept  which  forbids  us  to  lust  after  or  covet  wife,  house,  possessions,  anything 
whatever  that  is  our  neighbour's — a  precept  which  reaches  to  the  inmost  thoughts 
and  intents  of  the  heart,  and  requires  that  all  even  there  should  be  under  the 
control  of  a  love  which  thinketh  no  evil,  which  abhors  the  very  thought  of  adding 
to   one's   own  heritage   of  good  by  wrongfully  infringing  on  what  is   another's. 
Viewed  thus  as  enshrining  the  great  principle  of  love,  and  in  a  series  of  commands 
chalking  out  the  courses  of  righteous  action  it  was  to  follow,  of  imrighteous  action 
it  was  to  shun,  the  law  of  the  two  tables  may  justly  be  pronounced  unique — so 
compact  in  form,  so  orderly  in  arrangement,  so  comprehensive  in  range,  so  free 
from   everything  narrow  and    punctilious — altogether    the    fitting    reflex   of   the 
character  of  the  Supremely  Pure  and  Good  in  His  relation  to  the  members  of  His 
earthly  kingdom.     (P.  Fairbaim,  D.D.)        Rules  for  the  understanding  of  tlie 
Decalogue: — For  the  right  understanding  of  the  Ten  Commandments  these  rules 
are  to  be  observed — 1.  That  the  law  is  perfect,  and  bindeth  every  one  to  full 
conformity  in  the  whole  man  unto  the  righteousness  thereof  and  imto  entire 


CHAP,  v.]  DEUTERONOMY.  81 

obedience  for  ever,  so  as  to  require  the  utmost  perfection  of  every  duty  and  to 
forbid  the  least  degree  of  every  sin.  II.  That  it  is  spiritual,  and  so  reacheth  the 
understanding,  will,  affections,  and  all  other  powers  of  the  soul,  as  well  as  words, 
■works,  and  gestures.  III.  That  one  and  the  same  thing,  in  divees  respects, 
IS  required  or  forbidden  in  several  commandments.  IV.  That  as  where  a  duty 
is  commanded  the  contrary  sin  is  forbidden,  and  where  a  sin  is  forbidden 
THE  CONTRARY  DUTY  IS  COMMANDED  :  SO,  where  a  promise  is  annexed,  the  contrary 
threatening  is  included  ;  and  where  a  threatening  is  annexed,  the  contrary  promise 
is  included.  V.  That  what  God  forbids  is  at  no  time  to  be  done  ;  what  He 
commands  is  always  our  duty,  and  yet  every  particular  duty  is  not  to  be  done  at 
all  times.     VI.  That  under  one  sin  or  duty,  all  of  the  same  kind  are  forbidden 

OR    COMMANDED,    TOGETHER    WITH     ALL     THE     CAUSES,     MEANS,     OCCASIONS,    AND 

appearances  THEREOF,  and  provocations  thereunto.  VII.  That  what  is  forbidden 
or  commanded  to  ourselves  we  are  bound,  according  to  our  places,  to  endeavour 
THAT  it  MAY  BE  AVOIDED  OR  PERFORMED  BY  OTHERS,  accordiiig  to  the  duty  of  their 
places.  VIII.  That,  in  what  is  commanded  to  others,  we  are  bound  according  to 
our  places  and  callings  to  be  helpful  to  them,  and  to  take  heed  of  partaking 
with  others  in  what  is  forbidden.     {Thomas  Ridglet,  D.D.) 

Ver.  7.  Thou  shalt  have  none  other  gods  before  J/Le.—Our  duty  towards  God : — 
The  word  "gods  "  in  this  passage  may  be  regarded  as  denoting  not  only  the  various 
objects  of  religious  worship,  but  also  all  the  objects  of  supreme  regard,  affection,  or 
esteem.  To  acknowledge  Jehovah  as  our  God  is  to  love  Him  supremely,  to  fear  before 
Him  with  all  the  heart,  and  to  serve  Him  throughout  all  our  days  in  absolute  preference 
to  every  other  being.  As  this  is  the  only  true,  natural,  and  proper  acknowledgment 
of  God,  so,  when  we  render  the  same  service  to  any  creature,  we  acknowledge  that 
creature  as  our  god.  In  this  conduct  we  are  guilty  of  two  gross  sins.  In  the  first 
place,  we  elevate  the  being  who  is  thus  regarded  to  the  character  and  station  of  a 
god ;  and  in  the  second  place,  we  remove  the  true  God  in  our  hearts  from  His  own 
character  of  infinite  glory  and  excellence,  and  from  that  exalted  station  which  He 
holds  as  the  infinite  ruler  and  benefactor  of  the  universe.  This  sin  is  a  complica- 
tion of  wickedness  wonderfully  various  and  dreadful.  1.  We  are  in  this  conduct 
guilty  of  the  grossest  falsehood.  "We  practically  deny  that  Jehovah  is  possessed  of 
those  attributes  which  alone  demand  such  service  from  intelligent  creatures  ;  and 
on  the  other  hand,  assert  in  the  same  manner  that  the  being  to  whom  we  render 
this  service  is  invested  with  these  attributes.  2.  In  this  conduct  also  we  are  guilty 
of  the  greatest  injustice.  This  evil  is  likewise  twofold.  First,  we  violate  the  rightful 
claim  of  Jehovah  to  the  service  of  intelligent  creatures  ;  and  secondly,  we  render  to 
a  creature  the  service  which  is  due  to  Him  alone.  The  right  which  God  has  to 
this  service  is  supreme  and  unalienable.  He  is  our  Maker  and  Preserver.  The 
obligations  arising  from  this  source  are  not  a  little  enhanced  by  the  fact  that  the 
service  which  He  actually  requires  of  us  is  in  the  highest  degree  profitable  to 
ourselves,  our  highest  excellence,  our  greatest  honour,  and  our  supreme  happiness. 

3.  "We  are  also  guilty  of  the  vilest  ingratitude.  From  the  wisdom,  power,  and 
goodness  of  God  we  derive  our  being,  our  blessings,  and  our  hopes.  Learn — 
1.  That  idolatry  is  a  sin  of  the  first  magnitude.  2.  That  all  mankind  are  guilty  of 
idolatry.  Covetousness  is  styled  "idolatry"  by  St.  Paul,  and  "stubbornness"  by 
the  prophet  Samuel.  3.  "With  these  observations  in  view  we  shall  cease  to  wonder 
that  mankind  have  been  so  extensively  guilty  of  continual  and  enormous  sins 
against  each  other.  Sin  is  one  undivided  di«position.  It  cannot  exist  towards 
God  and  not  towards  man,  or  towards  man  and  not  towards  God.  It  is  a  wrong 
bias  of  the  soul,  and  of  course  operates  only  to  wrong,  whatever  being  the  opera- 
tion may  respect.  That  which  is  the  object  of  religious  worship  is,  of  course,  the 
most  sublime  object  which  is  realised  by  the  devotee.  "When  this  object,  therefore, 
is  low,  impure,  when  it  is  fraught  with  falsehood,  injustice,  and  cruelty,  it  still 
keeps  its  station  of  superiority,  and  is  still  regarded  with  the  reverence  due  to  the 
highest  known  object  of  contemplation.  Thus  a  debased  god  becomes  the  founda- 
tion of  a  debased  religion,  and  a  debased  religion  of  universal  turpitude  of  character. 

4.  Hence  we  see  that  the  Scriptures  represent  idolatry  justly,  and  annex  to  it  no 
higher  punishment  than  it  deserves.  .5.  These  observations  teach  us  the  •wisdom 
and  goodness  of  God  in  separating  the  Jews  from  mankind,  as  a  peculiar  j  eople  to 
Himself.  6.  "We  learn  hence  also  the  malignant  nature  of  atheism.  7.  "We  see 
with  what  exact  propriety  the  Scriptures  have  represented  the  violation  of  our 
immediate  duty  to  God  as  the  source  of  all  other  sin.     Impiety  is  plainly  the 

6 


82  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  r. 

fountain  of  guilt,  from  which  flows  every  stream.  Those  who  are  thus  false, 
unjust,  and  ungrateful  to  God  will,  of  course,  exhibit  the  same  conduct  with  respect 
to  their  fellow-creatures.  {T.  Ihoight,  D.D.)  On  the  idolatry  of  the  Hebrews : — 
The  proneness  of  the  Hebrew  nation  to  fall  into  idolatry  presents  to  us  a  very 
extraordinary  appearance.  The  Jews  were,  indeed,  a  gross  people,  but  not  more 
80  than  other  nations  in  the  same  period  of  improvement.  On  the  contrary,  they 
appear  to  have  been  more  civilised  than  their  contemporaries,  and  the  very  foun- 
dation of  the  difficulty  is  that  they  were  infinitely  more  enlightened.  I.  In  the  first 
place,  we  may  believe  that  the  causes,  whatever  they  weke,  which  influenced 

ALL  the  other  NATIONS  OF  THE  EARTH  IN  THAT  PERIOD,  AND  LED  THEM  TO  IDOLATRY, 

OPERATED  ALSO  UPON  THE  HEBREW  NATION.  One  of  the  first  errors  of  men  in  religion 
probably  was  that  the  Supreme  God  was  too  great  to  trouble  Himself  with  the 
afifairs  of  this  lower  world.  Hence  flowed  easily  all  the  other  errors.  The  first 
idolatry  was  a  mixed  idolatry.  It  did  not  exclude  the  true  God.  It  only  associated 
other  gods  with  Him.  At  last  He  was  forgotten,  while  they  continued  to  be  remem- 
bered. Here,  then,  we  may  search  for  one  cause  of  idolatry  among  the  Hebrews. 
"We  must  also  mention  the  rage  of  the  times  as  another  cause.  While  the  idea  was 
yet  new,  mankind  were  universally  employed  in  developing  it ;  and  while  they  were 
intent  on  fixing  the  administration,  and  marking  the  different  departments  of  the 
supreme  government,  they  received  every  new  divinity  who  was  offered  to  them 
with  all  the  ardour  of  a  new  discovery.  The  pleasure  of  the  process  was  corre- 
spondent. It  gratified  the  imagination  by  peopling  all  nature  with  ideal  beings, 
and  it  flattered  men's  ideas  of  the  various  and  the  vast  by  showing  that  their 
number,  their  natures,  and  their  employments  might  be  infinitely  multiplied.  "We 
may  join  to  these  considerations  the  indulgence  which  this  religion  offered  to  the 
passions.  II.  But  the  Hebrews  were  not  only  influenced  by  causes  common  to  them 
with  all  the  nations  of  the  earth  in  that  period,  but  also  by  causes  which  week 
PECULIAR  TO  THEIR  OWN  NATION.  1.  Their  local  situation.  They  were  placed 
between  two  powerful  empires,  the  Egyptian  and  the  Assyrian.  The  fame  of  these 
two  powerful  nations  was  well  known  to  the  Hebrews,  and  they  aspired  to  share  it. 
Accustomed  to  ascribe  everything  to  Divine  agency,  it  would  occur  to  them  that 
the  cause  of  their  greatness  must  be  owing  to  the  gods  whom  they  worshipped,  and 
that,  if  they  reverb  the  same  gods,  they  might  have  the  same  success.  2.  But  the 
chief  cause  of  the  repeated  lapses  of  the  Hebrews  into  idolatry  lay  deeper.  "We 
must  search  for  it  in  their  civil  constitution  and  the  political  parties  of  their  state. 
The  institution  of  the  kingly  office  produced  a  material  change  in  the  government 
of  the  Hebrews.  It  immediately  gave  rise  to  two  great  political  parties,  which 
continued  to  distract  the  state  from  the  reign  of  Saul  until  the  Babylonish  captivity. 
The  original  government  of  the  Hebrews  was  a  theocracy.  This  was  the  legal 
principle  from  which  their  laws  and  constitution,  both  civil  and  religious,  flowed. 
The  kings  of  the  Hebrews  were  not  kings  in  any  sense  in  which  that  word  is  now 
used.  The  Supreme  Being  was  the  real  legislator  ;  their  kings  were  mere  substitutes 
of  the  Sovereign,  and  were  understood  to  act  under  His  appointments.  "Whenever 
a  king  of  bad  principles  arose,  who  wished  to  aggrandise  his  own  power  and  to  free 
himself  from  the  authority  of  his  superior,  the  first  measure  which  he  would  adopt 
for  this  purpose  would  be  to  withdraw  the  nation  as  much  as  possible  from  the 
reverence  which  they  owed  to  God  Almighty.  This  he  could  not  do  better  than  by 
introducing  a  number  of  other  gods  and  leading  the  nation  to  offer  worship  to  them. 
Men  arranged  themselves  on  the  one  side  or  the  other,  not  only  according  to  their 
political  views,  but  also  according  to  their  characters  and  dispositions.  Idolatry 
would  attract  the  young  and  the  inexperienced,  who  admired  the  great  empires, 
and  would  consequently  be  ambitious  of  imitating  them.  Idolatry  would  also 
attract  all  the  vicious  and  the  sensual,  who  were  under  the  dominion  of  the  grosser 
passions,  and  would  therefore  naturally  lean  to  the  religion  which  indulged  them. 
The  Hebrew  idolaters  did  not  mean  to  exclude  their  own  God.  They  only  joined 
other  gods  with  Him.  They  might  probably,  too,  admit  that  their  own  God  was 
the  greatest,  or  even  that  He  was  supreme  God,  and  the  rest  His  ministers.  By 
these  or  other  means  they  might  reconcile  idolatry  to  their  own  worship.  {John 
Mackenzie,  D.D.)  The  First  Commandment: — The  affirmative  part  is.  Thou 
shalt  have  Jehovah  for  thy  God.  The  negative  part  is.  Thou  shalt  have  no  other 
God.  This,  therefore,  is  that  which  is  the  very  substance  of  this  commandment : 
There  shall  be  unto  thee  a  God,  and  I  am  that  God.  If  you  ask  what  is  enjoined 
in  this,  I  answer,  no  less  than  the  whole  service  and  worship  of  God,  and  our 
behaving  ourselves  towards  Him  as  such.    But  more  particularly  to  display  tho 


CHAP,  v.]  DEUTERONOMY.  83 

contents  of  this  commandment,  it  is  requisite  that  we  discourse  both  of  the  inward 
and  outward  worship  of  God,  for  both  these  are  contained  in  this  Divine  precept. 
It  enjoins  that  service  which  consists  in  the  employment  of  the  head  and  heart,  and 
also  that  of  the  body  and  outward  actions.  Under  the  first  are  commanded  these 
following  duties — 1.  The  believing  of  a  God  (Heb.  xi.  6).  2.  Being  persuaded  that 
there  is  but  one  God.  3.  The  believing  of  His  Word.  4.  Right  apprehensions  con- 
cerning God's  glorious  attributes  and  perfections.  5.  Thinking  and  meditating  on 
Him  and  His  Divine  perfections.  6.  To  the  acts  of  our  understanding  must  be 
added  those  of  our  will  and  affections,  and  consequently  we  are  to  have  a  high 
respect  and  observance  of  the  Divine  Author  of  our  being,  the  glorious  God  ;  we 
are  to  admire  Him,  we  are  to  rejoice  in  Him.  But  the  chief  of  the  affections  which 
are  most  celebrated  in  the  Holy  Scriptures  are  fear,  and  hope,  and  love,  of  which 
therefore  I  am  obliged  more  distinctly  and  amply  to  speak.  (1)  First,  an  awful  fear 
and  dread  are  due  to  God,  and  are  the  genuine  issue  of  those  conceptions  which  we 
ought  to  frame  of  Him.  Fear  is  a  passion  that  naturally  flows  from  the  serious 
contemplation  of  the  greatness  and  power  of  God,  and  of  His  impartial  justice  in 
punishing  offenders.  He  that  hath  this  fear  stands  in  awe  of  God,  though  no 
punishment  should  ensue,  for  he  reckons  that  sin  itself  is  a  punishment.  Filial  fear 
is  founded  in  love.  Having  thus  briefly  displayed  the  nature  of  the  fear  of  God,  I 
will  in  the  next  place  show  what  are  the  natural  effects  and  fruits  of  it.  We  owe  it 
to  this  fear  that  we  are  not  inconsiderate  and  rash  and  furious  in  our  prosecutions. 
And  on  the  other  hand,  we  are  kept  by  it  from  security,  for  it  begets  watchfulness 
and  circumspection.  Hereby  we  weigh  all  our  actions  and  undertakings,  and  ask 
ourselves  whether  they  will  be  pleasing  to  God.  (2)  To  hope  in  God  is  another 
Divine  affection  which  is  included  in  this  first  commandment.  He  that  hopes  in 
God  cheerfully  expects  that  God  will  support  him  under  and  deliver  him  from  evil, 
and  at  last  glorify  him.  (3)  Again,  ardently  to  love  God  is  another  main  thing 
enjoined  in  this  commandment.  And  truly  to  love  that  Being  who  is  most  amiable 
and  most  perfect  is  but  the  natural  effect  which  the  contemplation  of  such  loveliness 
and  perfection  should  produce  in  us.  But  there  is  an  outward  service  and  worship 
which  this  commandment  enjoins  also.  This  is  adoration,  a  religious  reverence 
and  homage  performed  by  the  body  by  all  external  acts  of  religion.  This  is  a 
visible  expression  of  the  inward  esteem  we  have  of  a  person.  So  this  worship  we 
are  now  speaking  of  is  an  extrinsic  sign  of  that  inward  reverence,  fear,  hope,  trust, 
love  which  were  mentioned  before.  And  the  conjunction  of  these  is  necessary,  for 
first  God's  image  was  imprinted  on  the  body  as  well  as  the  soul,  and  therefore  both 
must  be  sanctified,  both  must  be  instruments  of  religion.  Besides,  they  are  assistant 
to  one  another  by  reason  of  that  intimate  union  which  is  between  them,  so  that 
they  jointly  advance  the  concerns  of  religion.  And  then  we  are  to  remember  that 
Christ  redeemed  not  only  our  souls  but  our  bodies  ;  therefore  we  are  to  serve  Him 
with  both.  (1)  First,  this  must  be  done  by  our  words  and  speeches.  There  must 
be  a  vocal  expressing  of  the  sense  we  have  of  God's  perfections.  The  most  notable 
instances  of  this  kind  of  external  and  audible  worship  are  these  three — (a)  A 
speaking  reverently  of  God  and  all  things  belonging  to  Him.  (&)  Open  profession 
of  the  name  of  God  and  of  the  holy  religion  which  we  have  embraced,  (c)  Prayer, 
including  confession,  petition,  praise,  and  giving  of  thanks.  (2)  Secondly,  this 
worship  must  be  discovered  in  bodily  gesture  (Psa.  xcv.  6).  (3)  The  true  worship 
which  is  due  to  the  eternal  God  is  discovered  by  the  actions  of  the  life.  The  true 
adorer  of  the  Divine  Being  is  known  by  his  frequent  exercises  of  mortification  and 
abstinence,  his  guarding  himself  from  outward  objects  that  may  promote  tempta- 
tion, by  watching  over  his  bodily  senses,  his  addicting  himself  to  temperance  and 
chastity,  his  acts  of  righteousness  and  justice  towards  his  brethren.  We  must 
live  according  to  that  sense  we  bear  in  our  minds  of  a  Being  so  perfect  and  so 
worthy  to  be  adored.  To  obey  God,  to  live  a  pure  and  holy  life,  and  to  discharge 
a  good  conscience  in  everything,  are  the  height  and  perfection  of  this  duty,  and 
are  indeed  the  most  acceptable  worship  we  can  perform  to  God.  And,  to  sum  up 
all,  worshipping  of  God  implies  that  we  and  they  endeavour  to  be  like  Him.  After 
all,  I  must  add  this,  that  the  chief  worship  which  is  here  enjoined  is  that  which 
is  seated  in  the  inward  man,  the  soul.  Now,  that  this  is  chiefly  here  meant  I 
gather  from  this,  that  the  other  three  commandments  of  this  first  table  relate  most 
of  all  to  outward  worship,  for  they  forbid  bowing  down  to  images,  and  taking  God's 
name  in  vain,  and  profaning  the  Sabbath  Day.  Thence  I  argue  that  the  inward 
and  mental  worship  of  God  is  that  which  is  principally  aimed  at  in  this  first 
precept  of  the  law.     I  take  it  to  be  the  great  design  of  this  commandment  to  enjoia 


8i  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  t. 

inward  and  spiritual  religion.    Next  I  come  to  the  negative  part  of  this  command- 
ment, i.e.  to  show  what  sins  are  forbidden  by  it.     1.  First,  atheism  is  directly 
opposite  to  the  duty  required  of  us  in  this  first  precept  of  the  moral  law.    This 
atheism  is — (1)  In  thought  (Psa.  xiv.  1).     (2)  There  is  atheism  of  the  tongue  as 
well  as  of  the  heart    There  are  those  who  openly  disavow  the  belief  of  a  deity, 
and  are  so  impudent  as  to  proclaim  it  to  the  world.     (3)  There  are  atheists  not  onrf 
in  thoughts  and  words,  but  in  actions.     These  are  they  that  acknowledge  a  God, 
but  yet  live  as  if  there  were  none.     They  behave  themselves  as  if  there  were  no 
omniscient  eye  to  take  notice  of  what  they  do,  as  if  there  were  no  Supreme  Ruler  to 
punish  their  miscarriages.     Of  these  men  the  apostle  speaks  (Tit.  i.  16).     2.  Super- 
stition, as  well  as  atheism,  is  forbidden  in  this  commandment.     For  this  we  are  to 
know,  that  there  are  two  extremes  in  religion,  one  in  the  defect,  which  is  neglect 
and  contempt  of  God  and  His  worship,  profaneness,  and  even  atheism  itself ;  the 
other  in  the  excess,  which  is  a  vain  and  unnecessary  worship,  and  this  is  superstition. 
The  former  proceeds  from  a  fond  conceit  of  reason  without  fear ;  the  latter,  from 
fear  without  right  reason.     The  first  is  a  defiance  of  religion  ;  the  second  makes  it 
a  sordid  thing.     The  one  makes  men  irreligious  and  profane  ;  the  other  fills  them 
with  false  imaginations  and  needless  terrors.     We  have  seen  in  the  general  that 
superstition  is  an  overdoing  in  religion  ;  but  more  particularly  to  explain  the  nature 
of  it — (1)  It  is  doing  more  in  religion  than  is  required  by  God.     (2)  It  is  doing  that 
which  is  in  itself  commanded,  but  with  a  false  principle.     (3)  It  is  a  being  over- 
concerned  about  things  that  are  merely  circumstantial  or  indifferent.     And  withal, 
consider  the  pernicious  nature  of  superstition.     To  conclude,  this  is  a  base  and 
servile  temper,  void  of  all  that  generous  freedom  which  should  attend  true  religion. 
It  is  unworthy  of  a  noble  spirit,  and  unbecoming  a  true  worshipper.     It  is  one  of 
the  foulest  blemishes  that  a  person  or  a  church  can  be  defaced  with.     (3)  Idolatry 
is  condemned  by  this  commandment.     It  is  having  that  thing  or  being  for  a  god 
which  hath  no  divinity  in  it.     Here,  then,  is  a  threefold   idolatry  forbidden — 
1.  That  which  is  moral,  which  is  an  immoderate  affecting  or  prosecuting  of  anything 
that  is  not  our  chief  good.     It  is  setting  our  hearts  wholly  on  any  finite  and  worldly 
object.     All  wilful  sinners,  all  those  that  delight  in  the  practice  of  what  is  vicious, 
are  such,  for  they  make  their  lusts  their  chief  good,  and  so  in  a  manner  make  them 
their  gods.     This  is  moral  idolatry.     2.  There  is  polytheism,  or  pagan  idolatry,  i.e. 
the  believing  and  worshipping  of  a  multiplicity  of  deities,  even  among  the  works 
of  the  creation,  as  of  the  sun,  moon,  and  stars,  &c.     As  the  atheist  maintains  that 
there  is  no  God,  so  the  Gentile  worshipper  is  for  making  everything  a  god.     3.  The 
last  sort  of  idolatry  is  that  which  hath  a  mixture  of  the  worship  of  the  true 
God  with  it.     From  the  sacred  history  in  Exodus  xxxii.  5  we  may  inform  ourselves 
that  the  Israelites  worshipped  Jehovah  and  the  golden  calf  at  the  same  time. 
They  sometimes  worshipped  the  Lord  and  Baal  together,  which  Elijah  objects  to 
them  in  1   Kings  xviii.   21.     This  medley  of  religious  worship    you  will    find 
among  the  strange  nations  which  were  transplanted  into  Samaria  (1  Kings  xvii. 
41).     They  feared  the  Lord  and  served  their  graven  images.     {J.  Edwards,  D.D.) 
The  only  true  God : — The  truth  of  the  existence  of  the  Supreme  is  always  assumed 
in  the  Scriptures;  it  is  not  proved.     For  proof  the  Bible  says,  "See  previous 
volumes."    The  universe  and  man's  moral  nature  attest  His  existence.     Some- 
times "the  wish  has  been  father  to  the  thought"  ;   and  men  who  "do  not  like 
to  retain  God  in  their  knowledge"  have  said  in  their  heart,  "There  is  no  God." 
The  idea  of  God  is  universal.     It  has  been  said  that  some  of  the  tribes  of  Africa 
are  so  degraded  as  apparently  to  have  no  idea  of  a  Supreme  Power ;  but  if  this  were 
correct  it  would  be  the  exception  and  not  the  rule.     Some  men  are  bom  blind,  but 
the  rule  is  that  men  should  see.     "If,"  says  Professor  Blackie,  "there  be  races  of 
reasonable  beings  who  have  no  idea  of  a  cause,  it  is  just  the  same  thing  as  if  we 
were  to  find  in  any  Alpine  valley  whole  races  of  crdtiris,  or  anywhere  in  the  world 
whole  races  of  idiots ;   they  are  defective  creatures  such  as  no  naturalist  would 
receive  into  his  normal  description  of  one  of  nature's  types ;  such  as  roses,  for 
instance,  without  fragrance,  horses  without  hoofs,  and  birds  without  wings.     Any 
type  of  things,  indeed,  as  well  as  man,  may,  by  a  combination  of  untoward  influ- 
ences, be  curtailed  and  stunted  into  any  sort  of  degradation."     And  Livingstone 
affirmed  that  among  the  most  ignorant  tiibes  in  the  interior  of  AMca  may  be 
found  the  idea  of  a  Supreme  Being.     "There  is  no  necessity  for  beginning  to  tell 
the  most  degraded  of  these  people  of  the  existence  of  a  God,  or  of  the  future  state, 
the  facts  being  universally  admitted.     Everything  that  cannot  be  accounted  for  by 
common  causes  is  ascribed  to  the  Dei^,  as  creation,  sudden  death,  &c.     *How 


CHAP,  v.]  DEUTERONOMY,  85 

curiously  God  made  these  things ! '  is  a  common  expression,  as  is,  *  He  was  not 
killed  by  disease,  he  was  killed  by  God  ! ' "  The  Israelites  believed  in  the  Eternal 
God  ;  but  they  had  just  been  delivered  from  a  land  where  there  were  "gods  many 
and  lords  many"  ;  and  this  was  the  commandment  that  fell  on  their  ears,  "Thou 
shalt  have  no  other  gods  before  Me."  It  has  been  said  that  the  existence  of  other 
gods  is  not  denied  in  these  words  ;  but  they  mean  that,  while  every  nation  had  its 
own  god,  Jehovah  was  to  be  the  God  of  the  Israelites.  Nothing  is  said  of  the 
existence  or  non-existence  of  other  divinities;  but  "Thou  shalt  have  no  other 
gods."  The  prohibition  addressed  to  them,  "  Thou  shalt  have  no  other  gods,"  was 
tantamount  to  a  declaration  through  the  universe,  "I  am  God,  and  there  is  none 
else;  I  am  God,  and  there  is  none  like  Me,  declaring  the  end  from  the  beginning." 
There  can  be  but  one  God.  This  truth  may  be  contrasted  with  the  dualism  that 
was  prominent  in  some  of  the  heathen  systems  of  religion.  According  to  the  old 
Persian  belief,  there  were  two  co-eternal  beings  who  divided  the  government  of  the 
world  between  them.  One  of  them  was  regarded  as  the  principle  of  light,  the 
source  of  all  good  ;  and  the  other  was  the  principle  of  darkness,  the  source  of  all 
evil.  This  was  an  attempt  to  solve  the  pr(»blem  of  the  existence  of  evil  in  the 
universe.  "To  us  there  is  but  one  God."  When  this  word  was  spoken  on  Mount 
Sinai,  polytheism  was  common  among  all  nations.  Among  the  heathen  there  were 
numberless  divinities.  The  different  parts  of  nature  were  presided  over  by 
diiferent  deities ;  different  events  in  history  were  under  the  control  of  different 
rulers;  different  nations  and  tribes  had  their  friends  and  enemies  among  the 
conclave  of  the  gods.  There  was  a  god  of  the  hills,  a  god  of  the  valleys,  a  god  of 
the  rivers,  a  god  of  the  seas.  There  was  a  god  inflicting  disease,  and  a  god 
removing  it;  a  god  sending  pestilence,  and  famine,  and  war,  and  a  god  arresting 
them  ;  a  god  bestowing  bountiful  harvests  and  commercial  prosperity,  and  another 
inflicting  judgments  and  calamities.  But  we  learn  that  there  is  one  God  of  all  the 
earth,  of  all  its  forces,  and  elements,  and  laws  ;  one  God  in  all  events,  in  the  fury 
of  the  storm,  in  the  march  of  the  pestilence,  in  the  desolations  of  war ;  one  God 
for  all  nations  and  realms.  And  this  truth  mny  be  also  placed  in  contrast  with  the 
pantheism  found  in  ancient  systems,  and  revived  in  some  modern  philosophical 
speculations.  The  idolater  deifies  parts  of  the  universe,  the  pantheist  deifies  it  all. 
The  universe  is  God  ;  there  is  nothing  but  the  universe ;  everything  is  a  part  or 
modification  of  God.  The  distant  star  is  a  part  of  God  ;  the  flower  at  your  feet 
is  a  part  of  God.  You  are  a  little  drop  from  the  ocean  of  the  Godhead,  and  your 
highest  bliss,  your  most  glorious  destiny,  is  to  cease  individually  to  be,  and  to  be 
absorbed  in  the  All,  which  is  God.  He  is  "before  all  things."  When  there  was 
no  material  universe,  when  not  a  stone  of  the  temple  had  been  laid,  when  not  a 
star  had  been  kindled.  He  was  ' '  inhabiting  eternity "  ;  the  worlds  might  be 
blotted  out,  the  stars  might  be  quenched,  yet  He  would  remain,  the  First  and  the 
Last,  the  Alpha  and  the  Omega.  It  may  be  alleged  that  this  truth  of  the  unity 
of  the  Godhead  also  uproots  the  orthodox  evangelical  belief  that  acknowledges 
Christ  as  the  incarnate  God.  and  the  Holy  Spirit,  not  as  a  mere  influence,  but  as  a 
Divine  Person.  But  the  revelation  of  the  unity  of  God  is  not  more  clear  than  that 
of  God  as  Father,  Son,  and  Spirit.  "  Holy,  Holy,  Holy  is  the  Lord  God  of  hosts  ; 
the  whole  earth  is  full  of  His  glory."  We  may  say  that  the  unity  of  the  Divine 
existence  is  reflected  in  the  unity  of  nature.  There  may  be  discords,  and  yet  there 
is  harmony  underlying  and  pervading  all,  thus  teaching  that  the  universe  in  all  its 
forms  and  changes  is  the  product  of  one  mind.  "I  will  praise  Thee,  for  I  am 
fearfully  and  wonderfully  made  ;  marvellous  are  Thy  works,  and  that  my  soul 
knoweth  right  well. "  The  style  and  expression  and  colours  and  characteristics  of 
some  of  the  great  paintings  have  been  studied  so  thoroughly  by  some  artists,  that 
they  will  immediately  say  of  a  picture.  This  is  Rubens,  or,  This  is  Raphael.  And 
the  spirit  and  style  of  the  writings  of  great  poets  are  so  well  known  to  some 
enthusiastic  students,  that  they  will  say  of  a  new  poem,  This  is  Tennyson,  or,  This 
is  Browning.  So  the  works  of  God  testify  of  Him  ;  we  see  His  hand,  His 
signature  ;  there  is  only  One  who  could  do  it,  the  One  God.  And  here  let  me  say, 
accustom  yourselves  to  associate  the  name  and  presence  of  God  with  nature  around 
you.  A  flower  is  doubly  precious  when  it  is  presented  by  a  lover's  hand.  And  the 
flowers  would  be  to  us  more  beautiful,  and  the  bread  we  eat  more  swe«t,  if  we  felt 
that  they  came  from  an  Infinite  Father's  hand.  The  unity  of  design  in  nature 
serves  to  emphasise  the  words  spoken  on  Sinai,  "Thou  shalt  have  no  other  gods 
before  Me."  Now,  this  revelation  of  the  Divine  existence  suggests  to  us  many 
thoughts  which  1  shall  not  enlarge  upon.     1.  It  suggests  to  us  the  blessedness  of 


86  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

the  Divine  nature.  There  is  no  contrariety,  no  strife,  no  division  of  counsel. 
2.  Again,  this  truth  invests  with  authority  the  demands  made  upon  our  service  as 
intelligent  and  responsible  beings.  If  there  were  more  than  one  God,  the  question 
might  be  asked,  What  God  are  we  to  obey?  3.  Also,  we  may  learn  that  Ho 
demands  the  homage  and  affection  of  our  whole  nature.  The  one  God  requires  the 
whole  heart,  united  in  itself  in  one  love.  The  unity  of  our  nature  is  secured  only 
by  our  love  to  God.  There  is  no  other  power  that  can  do  it.  Self-interest  may 
try,  pleasure  may  try,  ambition  may  try,  but  the  nature  is  still  divided  ;  and 
conscience,  instead  of  expressing  its  approval,  is  like  Mordecai  at  the  gate,  refusing 
to  bow  the  knee.  The  unity  of  Germany  was  a  dream,  until  the  enthusiasm  of  the 
different  states  was  aroused  by  the  menaces  of  a  common  enemy  ;  and  in  the  fire  of 
that  enthusiasm  they  were  welded  together  into  one  empire.  The  unity  of  man's 
nature  is  a  dream  until,  by  the  fire  of  God's  love,  all  his  powers  and  faculties  and 
emotions  are  fused  into  one.  The  whole  man  is  to  be  given  to  God.  There  are 
many  who  are  ready  to  unite  in  the  confession,  "I  believe  in  God  the  Father 
Almighty,  the  Maker  of  heaven  and  earth,"  who  are  only  uttering  words,  as  a 
child  first  lisping  his  ABC,  without  attaching  any  definite  meaning  to  the 
words,  and  without  the  heart's  emphasis  on  the  words.  Is  our  belief  in  God  a 
tradition,  or  a  real  living  faith  ?  Is  He  our  God  ?  Do  we  acknowledge  His  presence  ? 
Do  we  worship  Him  in  truth  ?  {James  Owen. )  Duties  required  in  the  First 
Commandment : — I.  We  are  obliged  to  know  God.  This  supposes  that  our 
understanding  is  rightly  informed  as  to  what  relates  to  the  Divine  perfections, 
which  are  displayed  in  the  works  of  creation  and  providence.  But  that  knowledge 
which  we  are  to  endeavour  to  attain,  who  have  a  brighter  manifestation  of  His 
perfections  in  the  Gospel,  is  of  a  far  more  excellent  and  superior  nature  ;  inasmuch 
as  herein  we  see  the  glory  of  God  the  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost ;  or  behold  the 
perfections  of  the  Divine  nature,  as  displayed  in  and  through  a  Mediator ;  which 
is  that  knowledge  which  is  absolutely  necessary  to  salvation  (John  xvii.  3).  By 
this  means  we  not  only  know  what  God  is,  but  our  interest  in  Him,  and  the 
foundation  which  we  have  of  our  being  accepted  in  His  sight.  II.  We  are  further 
commanded  to  acknowledge  or  make  a  visible  profession  of  oitr  subjection 
TO  God,  and  in  particular  to  Christ  as  our  great  Mediator.  His  name, 
interest,  and  glory  should  be  most  dear  to  us  ;  and  we  are,  on  all  occasions,  to 
testify  that  we  count  it  our  glory  to  be  His  servants,  and  to  make  it  appear 
that  He  is  the  supreme  subject  of  desire  and  delight  (Psa.  cxlii.  5,  Ixxiii.  25). 
III.  We  are  further  obliged  by  this  commandment  to  worship  and  glorify 
God,  pursuant  to  what  we  know,  and  the  profession  we  make  of  Him  as 
the  TRUE  God  and  our  God.  1.  We  must  make  God  the  subject  of  our  daily 
meditation.  2.  We  are  to  honour,  adore,  and  fear  Him  for  His  greatness.  3.  As 
God  is  the  best  good,  and  has  promised  that  He  will  be  a  God  to  us,  so  He  is  to 
be  desired,  loved,  rejoiced  in,  and  chosen  by  us.  4.  As  He  is  a  God  of  truth,  we 
are  to  believe  all  that  He  has  spoken,  and  in  particular  what  He  has  revealed  in 
His  promises  or  threatenings,  relating  to  mercies  which  He  will  bestow,  or 
judgments  which  He  will  inflict.  5.  He  is  able  to  save  to  the  utmost,  and 
faithful  in  fulfilling  all  His  promises,  we  are  to  trust  Him  with  all  we  have 
from  Him,  and  for  all  those  blessings  which  we  hope  to  receive  at  His  hands. 
6.  When  the  nam^  interest,  and  glory  of  God  is  opposed  in  the  world  we  are  to 
express  an  holy  zeal  for  it.  7.  Since  He  is  a  God  hearing  prayer,  we  are  daily  to  call 
upon  Him,  "0  Thou  that  hearest  prayer,  unto  Thee  shall  all  flesh  come."  8.  As 
He  is  the  God  of  all  our  mercies,  we  are  to  praise  Him  for  them.  9.  His  sovereignty 
and  dominion  over  us  calls  for  subjection  and  obedience,  and  a  constant  care  to 
please  Him,  and  approve  ourselves  to  Him  in  all  things.  10.  As  He  is  a  holy, 
jealous,  and  sin-hating  God,  we  are  to  be  filled  with  sorrow  of  heart  when  He  is 
offended,  either  by  ourselves  or  others.  11.  A  sense  of  our  unworthiness  and 
daily  infirmities  should  excite  us  to  walk  humbly  with  God.  ( Thomas  Ridglet,  D.  D. ) 
The  First  Commandment : — I.  The  most  obvious  lesson  of  this  commandment  is  that 
IT  forbids  polytheism,  the  worship  of  many  gods.  We  are  not  to  allow  any  god 
to  share  the  throne  of  Jehovah.  Although  in  former  times  idolatry  was  one  of  the 
chief  perils  of  the  Jews,  and  was  the  common  religion  of  ancient  Greece  and  Rome, 
polytheism  is  scarcely  a  peril  for  us.  II.  There  is  manifestly  contained  in  this 
commandment  AN  implicit  denial  of  all  atheism.  The  command,  "  Thou  shalt 
have  none  other  gods  before  Me,"  rests  on  the  assumption  that  there  is  one  true 
and  living  God.  The  law  therefore  forbids  atheism  as  being  a  denial  of  God.  Now, 
atheism  is  really  of  two  very  diff'erent  kinds :  one  that  is  purely  speculative  or 


CHAP,  v.]  DEUTERONOMY.  87 

theoretical ;  and  the  other,  and  a  far  more  common  kind,  practical  atheism.  1.  Of 
that  purely  speculative  atheism  which  denies  the  existence  of  God  there  is  very 
little  in  the  present  day.  There  may  be  exceptional  thinkers,  both  in  this  country 
and  in  Germany,  who  would  commit  themselves  to  a  definite  denial  of  the  existence 
of  God,  but  men  like  Darwin  and  Huxley,  or  Tyndale  and  Herbert  Spencer,  are 
never  found  asserting  there  is  no  God.  They  are  too  wise  and,  let  me  add,  too 
reverent  to  commit  themselves  to  such  an  unprovable  assertion.  The  speculative 
atheism  of  to-day  calls  itself  agnosticism.  It  does  not  say  that  there  is  no  God  ; 
all  it  affirms  is,  we  cannot  prove  that  there  is  one.  We  know  nothing  whatsoever 
about  the  hidden  and  mysterious  cause  which  lies  at  the  back  of  all  phenomena  ;  we 
know  that  there  is  something,  and  this  something  is  the  only  reality  of  the  universe, 
but  what  it  is  we  cannot  tell.  "The  power,"  Mr.  Herbert  Spencer  says,  "which, 
the  universe  manifests  to  us  is  utterly  inscrutable."  "Such  a  power,"  he  goes  on 
to  say,  "exists,  but  its  nature  transcends  intuition  and  is  beyond  imagination." 
Now,  what  I  desire  to  say  about  this  modified  form  of  atheism,  calling  itself  agnos- 
ticism, is  that  it  is  really  as  deadly  a  form  of  atheism  as  the  coarser  atheism  which 
openly  declared  there  was  no  God.  The  agnostic  himself,  such  a  man  as  Herbert 
Spencer,  may  be  a  man  of  all  moral  excellence,  for  men  often  live  on  the  beliefs 
which  they  nave  denied,  just  as,  to  use  Mr.  Balfour's  striking  illustration,  parasites 
often  live  on  the  trees  which  they  have  destroyed.  But  agnosticism  itself,  the 
assertion  that  if  there  be  a  God  we  cannot  know  Him,  is  as  fatal  to  all  human 
goodness  as  the  denial  that  there  is  a  God.  During  the  reign  of  terror  the  French 
were  declared  to  be  a  nation  of  atheists  by  the  National  Assembly  ;  but  a  brief 
experience  convinced  them  that  a  nation  of  atheists  could  not  long  exist,  Robes- 
pierre then  proclaimed  in  the  Convention  that  belief  in  the  existence  of  a  God  was 
necessary  to  those  principles  of  virtue  and  morality  upon  which  the  Republic 
was  founded.  2.  There  is  another  kind  of  atheism  that  is  most  common, 
the  atheism  that  we  find  in  the  streets,  in  the  homes,  in  the  hearts  of  a  large 
number  of  people,  and  that  I  have  called  practical  atheism  ;  and  this  is  as  sternly 
forbidden  by  the  First  Commandment  as  the  intellectual  denial  of  God.  And 
when  I  speak  of  practical  atheism  I  mean  the  atheism  of  the  heart  and  not  of 
the  head,  the  atheism  of  the  life  and  not  of  the  reason,  the  atheism,  in  one  word, 
of  that  man  to  whose  daily  life  it  would  make  no  kind  of  difference  if  there  were  no 
God.  III.  This  commandment  forbids  all  idolatry.  Coarse  and  material 
idolatry  is  impossible  to-day  ;  but  there  are  other  kinds  of  idolatry  than  the 
worship  of  idols.  1.  Consider  the  idolatry  of  pleasure  ;  and  this  may  take  one  of 
two  forms,  either  the  pursuit  of  sensual  pleasure  or  the  passion  for  amusement. 
Now,  the  coarse  degrading  pursuit  of  sensual  pleasure  is  not  unknown  even  in  the 
present  day.  There  are  those,  St.  Paul  tells  us,  "whose  god  is  their  belly  "  ;  and  I 
suppose  there  are  such  men  to  be  found  in  England  to-day,  men  who  have  little 
pleasure  beyond  the  pleasures  of  the  table,  whose  appetite  and  taste  are  as  sensitive 
to  the  delights  of  eating  and  drinking  as  the  ear  of  the  musician  or  the  eye  of  the 
artist  is  to  what  delights  them  ;  and  then  again,  there  is  the  lower  form  of  sensual 
pleasure,  the  fulfilling  of  the  lusts  of  the  animal  nature  ;  but  the  common  form  of 
the  idolatry  of  pleasure  is  found  in  the  pursuit  of  amusement.  It  is  one  of  the 
most  pressing  dangers  of  the  present  day.  When  I  see  the  eager  race  for  amusement 
to-day,  when  I  find  young  men  alert  and  excited  if  a  sailing  match  or  a  football 
contest  or  a  tennis  tournament  or  a  cricket  match  is  taking  place,  willing  to  give 
up  any  engagement  so  as  not  to  miss  their  favourite  pleasure  ;  and  when  I  see  these 
same  yoimg  men  indifferent  to  all  higher  aims — the  pleasures  of  reading,  of  music, 
of  art,  and  above  all  of  religion  ;  when  I  notice  how  easily  excuses  are  found  for 
absence  on  Sunday  from  worship,  how  readily  the  house  of  God  is  neglected  for  the 
cycle  ride,  or  the  river,  or  the  seashore,  I  cannot  help  saying  to  myself,  the  idolatry 
of  pleasure  is  one  of  the  commonest  of  all  the  idolatries  of  modern  life.  2.  Another 
form  of  idolatry  is  seen  in  the  love  of  money,  and  of  all  idolatries  it  is  the  most 
frequent  in  our  modern  world  ;  for  the  one  idol  that  never  lacks  worshippers  is  the 
idol  of  gold.  I  remember  in  this  city  a  man  dying  many  years  ago  who  was  one 
of  these  lovers  of  money.  He  had  amassed  a  large  fortune,  no  part  of  which  ever 
came  to  any  charity ;  and  as  he  was  lying  upon  his  deathbed  he  sent  for  his 
minister,  who  naturally  thought  the  dying  man  wished  to  speak  to  him  of  heavenly 
things,  of  his  own  soul,  of  religion,  of  God.  The  minister  went  to  see  him,  and 
when  he  reached  the  bedside,  and  almost  before  he  could  speak,  the  poor  miserable 

idolater  of  money  said  :  * '  Oh,  Mr. ,  I  am  so  glad  you  have  come  ;  I  want  to 

ask  you  if  you  can  tell  me  the  price  of  those  shares  to-day,"  mentioning  some 


88  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

company  in  which  he  was  interested.  I  am  not  saying  that  the  desire  to  grow  rich 
is  idolatry,  or  that  a  man  who  bends  his  energies  to  make  money  in  the  week  is 
sinning  against  God.  He  may  be  sinless  in  all  this,  and  he  is  sinless  if  he  desires 
money,  not  for  its  own  sake,  not  for  self-enjoyment,  but  for  the  use  and  blessing  it 
may  be  to  others  ;  if  he  puts  God  first,  and  money  always  second.  None  the  less, 
there  are  many  in  peril  of  reversing  this.  3.  The  last  form  of  idolatry  to  which  I 
shall  allude  is  the  idolatry  of  love.  There  is  something  so  beautiful  in  human  love 
that  it  seems  hardly  possible  to  speak  of  it  as  an  idolatry  ;  and  yet  none  the  less 
it  may  become  so.  There  are  those  whom  Satan  could  never  tempt  through  the 
flesh,  who  have  never  felt  a  single  sensual  temptation,  who  have  no  interest,  or  little 
interest,  in  amusement,  and  very  little  care  for  money,  and  no  desire  to  grow  rich  ; 
but  who,  nevertheless,  are  tempted  through  the  affections,  tempted  to  make  an  idol 
of  some  human  love,  to  put  lover  or  husband  or  wife  or  child  on  the  throne  of 
the  heart  where  God  ought  to  be.  "Love  me,"  said  a  wise  and  devout  girl  to  her 
lover, — **  love  me  as  fervently  as  you  will,  but  take  care  you  love  God  better  than 
you  love  me."  She  knew  too  well  the  peril  of  this  idolatry  of  the  heart.  Possibly 
the  commonest  form  this  idolatry  takes  to-day  is  seen  in  the  worship  of  children. 
By  a  bedside  a  woman  once  knelt,  praying  with  streaming  eyes.  On  that  little  bed, 
cold  and  still  in  death,  lay  her  only  child.  She  had  literally  worshipped  it,  and 
now  God  had  taken  her  child  from  her.  Listen  to  what  that  kneeling,  weeping, 
broken-hearted  mother  is  saying,  the  words  are  only  sobs  :  "  Oh  my  God,  it  is  hard, 
Thou  only  knowest  how  hard  for  me  to  bear  it.  I  thank  Thee  Thou  hast  taken  my 
darling  to  Thyself.  I  loved  my  boy  too  well— I  loved  him  more  than  I  loved  Thee. 
I  made  him  my  idol ;  now  Thou  hast  broken  my  idol,  and  I  have  only  Thee  to  love. 
My  God,  forgive  my  sorrow.  I  will  not  love  my  boy  any  less.  I  will  love  Thee 
more,  more  than  I  ever  loved  him."  (G^.  S.  Barrett,  D.D.)  No  excuse  for 
idolatry  now : — There  is  but  one  excuse  for  idolatry,  namely,  ignorance  ;  and  there 
are  cases  in  which  even  that  fails  to  justify  us.  If  a  man  does  not  know  God  he 
cannot  worship  Him  ;  but  if  he  lives  in  a  place  where  God  has  revealed  Himself 
perfectly,  and  where  he  may  have  the  light  if  he  will,  then  the  last  excuse  for 
idolatry  is  swept  away.  Take  the  commandment  as  applied  to  God's  ancient  people. 
Have  you  ever  thought  how  much  there  was  which  might  have  excused  idolatry  in 
those  days  of  old  ?  Not  only  the  coming  of  Jesus,  but  all  the  great  discoveries  of 
science  during  the  last  hundred  years,  have  made  idolatry  more  sinful  than  ever. 
In  the  days  when  the  imagination  of  the  superstitious  peopled  every  windstorm  with 
demons,  when  lightnings  and  thunders  were  mysteries  unsolved  and  unsolvable, 
there  was  some  excuse  for  the  man  who,  in  his  ignorance  of  God,  became  a  fire  or 
devil  worshipper  ;  but  in  these  days  of  analysis,  when  we  get  to  the  root  of  nature's 
sights  and  sounds,  finding  them  to  be,  after  all,  not  inexplicable  and  mysterious, 
but  processes  and  manifestations  of  a  system  of  rigid  law,  the  excuse  for  our  idolatry 
is  gone.  Natural  phenomena  being  accounted  for  within  the  realm  of  law,  man 
must  acknowledge  a  law-giver  ;  and  every  discovery  of  science,  within  the  last  fifty 
years,  has  made  God  more  real  to  the  hearts  of  men  who  are  looking  for  Him  and 
are  willing  to  see  Him.  Every  scientific  explanation  of  the  mysterious,  and  of 
that  which  savoured  of  witchcraft,  makes  the  sin  of  worshipping  anything  in 
the  place  of  God  more  heinous.  The  more  brilliant  the  light  of  the  Divine 
outshining,  the  more  dark  is  the  sin  of  idolatry.  {G.  Campbell  Morgan.) 
Sins  forbidden  in  the  First  Commandment: — The  sins  forbidden  in  this  com- 
mandment may  be  reduced  to  two:  atheism  and  idolatry.  I.  The  instances 
IN  WHICH  PRACTICAL  ATHEISM  DISCOVERS  ITSELF.  1.  They  are  chargeable  with 
it  who  are  grossly  ignorant  of  God,  being  utter  strangers  to  those  perfections 
whereby  He  makes  Himself  known  to  the  world,  or  who  entertain  carnal  concep- 
tions of  Him,  as  though  He  were  altogether  such  an  one  as  ourselves.  2.  When 
persons,  though  they  know,  in  some  measure,  what  God  is,  yet  never  seriously 
exercise  their  thoughts  about  Him,  which  forgetfulness  is  a  degree  of  atheism,  and 
will  be  severely  punished  by  Him.  3.  When  persons  maintain  corrupt  doctrines 
and  dangerous  heresies,  subversive  of  the  fundamental  articles  of  faith  and  contrary 
to  the  Divine  perfections.  4.  When  we  repine  at  His  providence,  or  charge  God. 
foolishly,  and  go  about  to  prescribe  laws  to  Him,  who  is  the  Governor  of  the  world 
and  may  do  what  He  will  with  the  work  of  His  hands.  5.  When  we  refuse  to 
engage  in  those  acts  of  religious  worship  which  He  has  appointed,  or  to  attend 
on  His  ordinances,  in  which  we  may  hope  for  His  presence  and  blessing.  6.  When 
•we  behave  ourselves,  in  the  conduct  of  our  lives,  as  though  we  were  not  accountable 
to  Him  and  had  no  reason  to  be  afraid  of  His  judgments.    II.  Thb  AQaRAYATiONS 


CHAP,  v.]  DEUTERONOMY.  89 

AND  DREADFUL  CONSEQUENCES  OF  THIS  SIN.  It  is  Contrary  to  the  light  of  nature 
and  the  dictates  of  conscience,  a  disregai-ding  those  impressions  which  God  has 
made  of  His  glory  on  the  souls  of  men.  And  in  those  who  have  been  favoured 
with  the  revelation  of  the  grace  of  God  in  the  Gospel,  in  which  His  perfections 
have  been  set  forth  to  the  utmost,  it  is  a  shutting  our  eyes  against  the  light,  and 
casting  contempt  on  that  which  should  raise  and  excite  in  us  the  highest  esteem 
of  Him  whom  we  practically  disown  and  deny.  It  is  directly  opposite  to  and 
entirely  inconsistent  with  all  religions,  and  opens  a  door  to  the  greatest  degree  of 
licentiousness.  III.  To  consider  this  commandment  as  foebiddino  idolatry  : 
which  is  either  what  is  more  gross,  such  as  that  which  is  found  among  the 
heathen,  or  that  which  is  more  secret,  and  may  be  found  in  the  hearts  of  all. 
1.  As  to  idolatry  in  the  former  sense,  together  with  the  rise  and  progress  thereof, 
in  considering  the  first  rise  of  it  we  may  observe — (1)  That  it  proceeded  from  the 
ignorance  and  pride  of  man,  who,  though  he  could  not  but  know,  by  the  light  of 
nature,  that  there  is  a  God  ;  yet  being  ignorant  of  His  perfections,  or  of  what  He 
has  revealed  Himself  to  be  in  His  Word,  was  disposed  to  frame  those  ideas  of  a 
Ood  which  took  their  rise  from  his  own  invention.  Accordingly  the  apostle  says, 
*'When  ye  knew  not  God,  ye  did  service  unto  them  which,  by  nature,  are  no  gods." 
(2)  When  iniquity  abounded  in  the  world,  and  men  cast  contempt  on  the  ordinances 
of  God,  they  invented  and  worshipped  new  gods.  (3)  Hereupon  God  gave  them  up 
to  judicial  blindness,  so  that  they  worshipped  the  host  of  heaven,  as  the  apostle 
says  the  heathen  did.  (4)  As  to  what  concerns  the  idolatry  which  was  practised 
among  the  Israelites.  That  took  its  rise  from  the  fond  ambition  which  tliey  had 
to  be  like  other  nations  who  were  abhorred  of  God,  counting  this  a  fashionable 
religion,  2.  That  idolatry  which  is  sometimes  found  among  Christians.  (1)  Self 
may  be  reckoned  among  those  idols  which  many,  who  make  profession  of  the  true 
religion,  pay  a  greater  regard  to  than  to  God.  This  we  may  be  said  to  be  guilty 
of;  in  which  respect  we  are  chargeable  with  heart  idolatry — When  we  reject  or 
refuse  to  give  credit  to  any  of  the  great  doctrines  contained  in  Divine  revelation, 
unless  we  are  able  to  comprehend  them  within  the  shallow  limits  of  our  own 
understandings.  This  is  no  other  than  a  setting  up  our  own  understanding,  which 
is  weak  and  liable  to  err,  in  opposition  to  the  wisdom  of  God,  and,  in  some  respects, 
a  giving  superior  glory  to  it.  When  we  are  incorrigible  under  the  various  rebukes 
of  providence,  and  persist  in  our  rebellion  against  God,  notwithstanding  the 
threatenings  which  He  has  denounced  or  the  judgments  which  He  executes.  This 
also  discovers  itself  in  our  affections,  when  they  are  either  set  on  unlawful  objects, 
or  immoderately  pursue  those  that  would  otherwise  be  lawful  ;  when  we  love  those 
things  which  God  hates,  or  covet  what  He  has  expressly  forbidden.  There  is  a 
more  subtle  kind  of  idolatry,  whereby  self  enters  into  religious  duties.  Thus  when 
they  attempt  to  perform  them  in  their  own  strength,  as  though  they  had  no 
occasion  to  depend  on  the  Almighty  power  of  God  to  work  in  them  that  which  is 
pleasing  in  His  sight.  And  we  are  further  guilty  of  this  sin  when,  through  the 
pride  of  our  hearts,  we  applaud  ourselves  when  we  have  performed  some  religious 
duties,  and  expect  to  be  justified  thereby ;  which  is  a  setting  up  self  as  an  idol 
in  the  room  of  Christ.  And  lastly,  when  self  is  the  end  designed  in  what  we  do 
in  matters  of  religion,  and  so  robs  God  of  that  glory  which  is  due  to  His  name. 
(2)  There  is  another  idol  which  is  put  in  the  room  of  God,  and  that  is  the  world. 
When  our  thoughts  are  so  much  engaged  in  the  pursuit  of  it  that  we  grow 
not  only  cold  and  remiss  as  to  spiritual  things,  but  allow  ourselves  no  time 
for  serious  meditation  on  them,  or  converse  with  God  in  secret.  When  the  world 
has  our  first  and  last  thoughts  every  day.  When  we  pursue  the  world,  without 
depending  on  God  for  His  blessing  to  attend  our  lawful  undertakings.  When  our 
hearts  are  hereby  hardened,  and  grow  cold  and  indifferent  in  religion,  or  when  it 
follows  and  disturbs  us  in  holy  duties,  and  renders  us  formal  in  the  discharge 
thereof.  When  the  riches,  honours,  and  pleasures  of  the  world  have  a  tendency  to 
quiet  our  spirits,  and  give  us  full  satisfaction,  though  under  spiritual  declensions 
and  destitute  of  the  special  presence  of  God,  which  is  our  greatest  happiness. 
When  we  fret  at  the  providence  of  God  under  the  disappointments  we  meet  with 
in  our  secular  aff'airs  in  the  world.  When  we  despise  the  members  of  Christ  because 
they  are  poor  in  the  world,  are  ashamed  of  His  Cross  and  refuse  to  bear  reproach  for 
His  sake.  (3)  There  is  another  instance  of  heart-idolatry,  namely,  when  we  adhere 
to  the  dictates  of  Satan,  and  regard  his  suggestions  more  than  the  convictions  of 
OVLV  own  consciences,  or  the  Holy  Spirit.  Satan's  design  in  his  temptations  is  to 
turn  us  away  from  God,  and  when  we  are  drawn  aside  thereby  we  may  be  said  to 


90  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

obey  him  rather  than  God.  {Thomas  Ridglet,  D.D.)  Having  God: — I.  OuE  rack 
must  have  a  God.  We  cannot  escape  the  sceptre  and  the  supervision  of  the  Creator. 
II.  Nations  must  have  a  God.  The  words  of  this  law  were  addressed  to  the  people  of 
Israel.  Neither  kings  nor  senates  nor  majorities  can  avoid  national  responsibility. 
Constitutions  may  not  recognise  Him,  but  the  Divine  administration  is  not 
dependent  upon  human  enactments.  III.  The  individual  soul  must  have  a 
God.  The  law  of  the  universal  holds  the  unit.  I  must  have  a  God.  Not  one  soul 
can  drop  out  of  the  all-embracing  government  of  God.  IV.  There  are  two  ways  of 
having  a  God.  First,  by  the  necessity  of  His  government,  which  will  not  surrender 
one  soul  to  any  other  authority ;  and  second,  by  the  voluntary  choice  of  the  soul 
who  takes  the  God  who  is  king  by  right  of  creation,  to  his  heart  as  Father  and 
Redeemer,  delighting  in  Him  as  his  all-suflficient  portion.  V.  Man  may  have 
MANY  GODS.  1.  Through  the  perversion  of  the  religious  faculty,  as  when  the 
powers  that  must  worship  something,  having  lost  the  perception  of  the  true, 
invisible  God,  are  directed  towards  visible  things,  first  as  symbols  and  then  as 
substance — sun,  moon,  stars,  statues,  stones,  birds  of  the  air,  beasts  of  the  field, 
and  loathsome  reptiles  of  the  ground.  2.  Through  the  prostitution  of  all  the 
faculties,  as  when  the  powers  given  us  by  the  Creator  to  be  used  exclusively  for 
His  glory  (which  invariably  includes  our  highest  good)  are  employed  with  selfish 
aims,  God  being  forgotten.  Then  are  the  objects  of  our  love  and  delight  the 
"gods"  we  serve.  VI.  Man  should  have  but  one  God  —  the  one  Lord  God  — 
Jehovah.  1.  Because  of  what  this  one  God  is :  the  Self-existent,  the  Almighty, 
the  Eternal,  the  Unchangeable,  whose  throne  is  from  everlasting,  and  whose  power 
and  glory  are  only  equalled  by  His  holiness  and  justice  and  love  and  mercy. 
2.  Because  of  what  this  one  has  done.  He  is  our  Creator,  and  has  preserved  us. 
But  more  than  this,  it  is  He  who  has  redeemed  us.  3.  Because  of  what  man  needs. 
Honour,  ease,  friendship,  wealth,  power,  are  all  insufficient  to  meet  the  wants 
of  the  immortal  mind  of  man.  In  the  midst  of  all  their  best  benefactions  man 
cries  out  for  something  better.  Man,  made  for  God,  is  in  misery  without  God. 
4.  Because  of  the  train  of  miseries  which  must  follow  in  the  service  of  many  gods, 
or  of  any  but  the  one  God.  In  the  Hebrew  the  expression  "before  Me  "  signifies 
"before,  upon,  or  against  My  face."  He  who  has  any  other  than  the  true  God, 
thereby — (1)  Hides  God's  face  from  himself,  so  that  He  does  not  see  God,  nor  look 
toward  Him,  nor  rest  assured  of  God's  presence.  He  is  full  of  doubts  and  un- 
certainties. The  world  is  dark,  for  His  face  is  hidden  from  which  the  light  shines. 
(2)  He  hides  himself  from  God's  face — from  the  smiles  of  approval  and  the  words 
of  blessing.  No  "well-pleasing  in  My  sight"  comes  with  its  sweet  inspiration  and 
consolation  to  his  soul.  He  is  seen  by  the  Almighty  as  through  a  thick  cloud,  and 
the  Almighty  delighteth  not  in  him.  (3)  His  idolatries  "before"  or  "against  the 
face  "  of  God  antagonise  God.  He  defies  his  Maker.  He  calls  for  His  vengeance, 
and  when  the  thrones  of  the  idols  perish  before  the  indignation  of  the  Almighty, 
all  who  bow  at  these  thrones  shall  also  perish.  VII.  Man  in  "having  "  God  has  all 
THINGS.  He  has  infinite  resources  of  wisdom,  poAver,  and  grace  at  command, 
according  to  the  "exceeding  great  and  precious  promises"  of  God,  who  is  "able 
to  do  exceeding  abundantly  above  all  that  we  ask  or  think."  He  has  peace,  deep 
and  abiding.  He  has  joy,  full  and  unfailing.  He  has  hope,  clear  and  unquestion- 
ing. He  has  love,  fervent,  abounding,  and  all-controlling.  He  has  "all  things" 
of  this  world,  and  the  "better  things  "  of  the  world  to  come.  VIII.  Let  us  look 
at  this  "word"  of  the  law — the  first  of  the  "ten  words"  in  the  light  of  the 
New  Testament.  First,  there  were  "ten  words,"  or  commandments.  They 
were  prohibitory,  monitory,  and  minatory.  "Thou  shalt  not"  rings  through  the 
code  of  Sinai.  In  the  New  Testament  these  are  reduced  to  "two."  "On  these 
two  commandments  hang  all  the  law  and  the  prophets."  Nay,  we  find  them  all  in 
one.  One  law  !  One  word  !  and  this  one  word  is  Love.  IX.  God  led  Israel  out  of 
bondage,  but  not  out  of  the  pains  of  discipline  and  trial.  He  brought  them 
out  of  Egypt  to  learn  this  law,  but  led  them  to  Sinai  by  way  of  the  Red  Sea  and 
the  desert  of  Sin,  and  the  perils  of  Rephidim,  and  through  the  midst  of  the  fierce 
Amalekites.  Thus  are  God's  people  led  to-day  to  the  heights  where  His  law  is 
revealed.  The  way  is  dark  and  desolate  and  full  of  danger,  but  He  who  leads  us 
has  lessons  for  us  to  learn  :  lessons  about  Himself ;  lessons  which  we  are  slow  to 
receive  and  prone  to  forget ;  but  He  bears  with  us  and  brings  us  on  our  way — His 
way — sustaining  and  comforting  and  aiding  us.  {J.  H.  Vincent,  D.D.)  Possess- 
ing God : — If  we  are  not  to  have  other  gods  in  His  presence,  then  by  every 
principle  of  logic  we  are  to  have  Him,     "  I  am  the  Lord  thy  God,  and  thou  shalt 


CHAP,  v.]  DEUTERONOMY,  91 

have  Me."  How?  As  the  patriot  has  his  country  which  is  by  birth  or  natural- 
isation the  land  he  calls  his  own,  wherein  are  the  institutions  in  which  he  takes 
honest  pride,  and  the  principles  for  which  he  is  willing  to  die  ;  that  is  his  country, 
so  man  is  to  have  his  God.  As  the  woman  has  her  husband,  chosen  from  out  all 
the  sons  of  men,  to  whom  she  surrenders  her  all,  a  heart  for  a  heart,  a  life  for  a 
life,  a  soul  for  a  soul,  and  in  whom  she  has  placed  implicit  confidence,  in  the  one 
who  led  her  to  the  bridal  altar  and  swore  to  be  true  to  her  in  good  report  and  evil 
report,  "for  better,  for  worse,  for  richer,  for  poorer,  in  sickness  and  in  health,  till 
death  us  do  part,"  to  the  exclusion  of  all  other  men,  so  is  she  to  have  her  God,  to 
the  exclusion  of  all  other  divinities.  "Thou  shalt  have  Me."  (/.  P.  Nevmian, 
D.D.)  Lord,  Thou  alone  art  God  : — Every  true  head  of  a  family  lays  down  rules 
according  to  which  the  household  is  regulated.  God,  as  the  Father  of  all,  here 
makes  known  the  rules  by  which  His  great  family  are  to  regulate  their  lives.  He 
introduces  those  rules  with  a  brief  but  pregnant  preface.  "I  am  the  Lord" — "a 
word  of  thunder,"  says  Luther:  "thy  God" — a  word  of  blessing — "thou  shalt 
have  none  other  gods  before  Me."  It  would  seem  as  if  the  command  must  be  self- 
evidently  rational.  But  it  means  that  we  ought  above  all  to  fear,  love,  and  trust 
God.  God  says:  "Give  Me  thine  heart " — thy  whole  heart.  We  keep  this  com- 
mand when  we — L  Fear  God  supremely.  1.  Each  commandment  is  like  a  coin 
stamped  on  both  sides.  On  the  one  side  the  image  is  forbidding,  even  terrible.  It 
delineates  the  prohibition,  "Thou  shalt  not."  The  other  is  beautiful — it  gives  the 
precept.  Look  at  the  first  commandment  on  its  two  sides — the  one  shows  the 
idolater,  the  other  the  child  of  God.  2.  When  men  fear  aught  else  but  God  they 
are  idolaters.  They  bow  before  images  of  terror,  e.g.  want,  sickiess,  death,  the 
judgment  of  men,  &c.  3.  But  we  ought  to  fear  God  because  "  He  is  a  great  God  "  ; 
"He  commands  and  it  is  done,"  &c.  He  sends  sickness  and  health,  &c.  In  His 
hands  are  life  and  death.  He  is  Judge.  "It  is  a  fearful  thing  to  fall  into  the 
hands  of  the  living  God."  Therefore  "the  fear  of  the  Lord  is  the  beginning  of 
wisdom."  4.  But  to  fear  God  for  this  reason  only  would  be  not  to  fear  Him,  but 
His  rod.  This  is  a  slavish  fear  :  such  "  fear  has  punishment."  But  if  children  of 
God  we  must  avoid  what  would  offend  Him.  "How  shall  I  do  this  great  wicked- 
ness and  sin  against  God  ? "  Let  this  fear  ever  be  yours  in  every  circumstance  and 
condition  in  life.  A  proud  sceptic  wrote  :  "  A  poor  miserable  life  it  is  to  be  con- 
stantly in  fear  !  What  will  they  ever  accomplish  who  are  always  asking  the  ques- 
tion, '  Is  this  right  that  I  have  undertaken  what  I  am  doing  ? '  How  weakly  and 
fearfully  do  such  take  their  stand  in  a  world  where  courage  and  quick  decision  are 
needed  in  order  to  achieve  anything,  who  plague  themselves  with  puerile  scruples 
of  conscience  and  stand  ever  in  dread  of  an  unseen  Judge  !  "  No,  we  say.  The  man 
who  fears  God  is  freed  from  every  other  fear.  And  true  courage,  endurance,  &c., 
are  to  be  found  only  among  God-fearing  men,  e.g.  the  Swiss  at  Lempach  praying. 
"They  pray  for  mercy,"  said  an  Austrian,  "but  from  God,  not  from  us,  and  what 
that  means  we  shall  soon  experience."  The  apostles  :  "We  must  fear  God  rather 
than  men."  II.  Love  God  supremely.  1.  When  men  love  any  person  or  thing 
more  than  God  they  are  idolaters  as  much  as  those  who  serve  idols,  e.g.  Mammon. 
2.  Others  do  not  cherish  mammon  in  their  hearts.  On  the  contrary,  they  squander 
what  they  possess  to  minister  to  their  lusts  and  appetites.  "  Whose  end  is  destruc- 
tion." 3.  Others  cry  out,  "I  deserve  to  have  honour  among  my  fellows,  their 
esteem,"  &c.  Ask  yourself,  do  you  esteem  this  more  than  the  honour  that  comes 
from  God  ?  4.  Others  cry,  "  My  wife,  child,  &c.,  is  the  being  most  dear  to  me,"  &c. 
Try  your  heart  as  to  whether  they  have  a  higher  place  in  your  heart  than  God, 
and  whether,  therefore,  you  are  an  idolater.  5.  If  you  would  escape  from  this 
idolatry  hear  what  God  says  :  "My  son,  give  Me  thine  heart."  Hear  what  David 
says  of  Him:  "I  will  love  Thee,  0  Lord,  my  strength,"  &c.  (Psa.  xvii.  1,  2).  If 
He  is  all  this  to  us  we  must  love  Him.  III.  Trust  God  supremely.  1.  Manifold 
are  the  troubles  and  dangers  we  meet  on  the  way  through  life  ;  and  in  view  of  this 
not  only  heathens  but  Christians  trust  in  dead  idols.  When  men  put  their  trust  in 
aught  but  God  they  become  idolaters.  2.  When  a  poor  man  trusts  in  a  rich  friend 
alone,  a  sick  man  thinks  only  of  the  skilled  physician,  an  embarrassed  man  trusts 
to  his  own  unaided  wisdom,  or  a  dying  man  declares,  "  I  have  at  all  times  lived 
righteously,  I  shall  not  be  condemned,"  they  are  idolaters.  "Let  not  the  wise  man 
glory  in  his  wisdom,"  &c.  3.  Rather  give  God  your  heart,  and  rest  all  your  hope 
in  Him.  In  trouble  look  to  Him  as  the  true  helper  and  be  confident.  Though  the 
last  handful  of  meal  and  drop  of  oil  be  reached,  &c.,  trust,  and  all  will  bu  well. 
Kemember  His  word,  "  I  am  the  Lord  thy  God."    This  heavenly  Father  will  feed, 


92  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  y. 

help,  &c.,  in  due  time;  and  even  when  His  ways  seem  dark,  remember  His 
wonders  of  old.  {K.  H.  Caspan.)  The  First  Commandment: — ^This  command- 
ment may  be  regarded  as  settling  the  first  principle,  the  fundamental  article  of  the 
Jewish  creed,  and  as  prescribing  the  first  of  Jewish  duties.  And  the  article  is  of 
universal  obligation.  The  article  of  faith  is  the  Divine  unity  ;  the  article  of  duty, 
the  exclusive  worship  and  service  of  that  one  God.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that 
idolatry  on  the  part  of  Israel  was  the  primary  and  most  offensive  breach  of  the 
covenant.  1.  What  dishonour  it  did  to  Jehovah,  the  one  God  !  What  must  have 
been  the  impression  on  the  minds  of  the  heathen  when  their  idols  were  preferred 
by  Israel  to  their  own  Jehovah  !  2.  Such  conduct  was  strongly  interdicted,  as 
involving  in  it  the  foulest  ingratitude.  3.  Idolatry  stood  not  alone.  The  worship 
given  to  these  other  gods  was,  in  itself  and  in  its  accompaniments,  made  up  of  all 
that  was  otherwise  odious  in  God's  sight.  How  just  the  designation  of  these 
idolatries  by  Peter,  "abominable  idolatries."  {R.  TFardlaw,  D.D.)  Renouncing 
idolatry: — The  first  time  I  went  to  Nelson  River  I  was  troubled  while  on  my 
journey  with  violent  attacks  of  the  cramp,  which  caused  me  to  fall  forward,  com- 
pletely doubled  up.  Then  one  of  my  Indians  would  take  hold  of  me  by  the 
shoulders,  and  another  by  the  feet,  and  pull  me  out  straight,  then  sit  on  me  to 
keep  me  so.  On  such  occasions  I  would  say,  "Well,  if  I  get  back  from  this 
journey,  I'll  never  go  to  another.  Neither  the  society,  the  Church,  nor  God 
demands  it "  ;  but  as  soon  as  I  got  all  right  I  took  back  the  cowardly  words.  When 
I  got  to  the  Nelson  River  I  found  that  the  people  for  miles  around  had  gathered 
together,  and  there  were  hundreds  awaiting  my  arrival.  Poor  people,  they  had 
never  heard  the  name  of  Christ.  I  preached  from  John  iii.  16  as  earnestly  as  I 
could,  then  asked  the  people  what  they  thought  of  my  sermon.  Immediately  all 
eyes  were  turned  towards  the  chief.  He  rose,  and  coming  to  the  front,  gave  one  of 
the  finest  orations  it  has  ever  been  my  lot  to  hear.  He  was  a  natural  orator,  and 
every  time  I  heard  him  I  was  always  filled  with  admiration.  His  speech  was  to  the 
effect  that  for  years  he  had  lost  faith  in  the  pagan  gods.  When  he  saw  God  in 
nature,  how  He  provided  for  His  people,  he  said,  "Surely  that  God  cannot  be 
pleased  with  the  idle  beating  of  a  drum  or  the  rattling  of  a  conjurer's  wand. "  And 
pointing  to  the  conjurers  and  medicine  men  who  skulked  on  the  outskirts  of  the 
crowd,  the  only  ones  who  did  not  welcome  me,  he  exclaimed,  "  These  medicine  men 
can  tell  you  that  for  years  I  have  had  no  god  ;  but  this  God  whom  you  speak  of, 
shows  by  His  grace  and  goodness  that  He  is  the  only  living  and  true  God,  and  Him 
only  will  I  serve."  That  chief  M*as  worthy  of  the  words  he  spoke,  for  ever  after  he 
was  an  earnest  and  consistent  Christian,  showing  forth  the  power  of  the  Gospel. 
{Egerton  Young.) 

Vers.  8-10.  Thou  shalt  not  make  thee  any  graven  image. — The  Second  Command- 
ment:— The  Second  Commandment  contains,  like  all  the  commandments,  a  great 
principle — the  great  principle  that  God  can  be  sought  and  found,  not  by  outward 
forms,  but  only  by  the  clean  hands  and  the  pure  heart.  The  First  Commandment 
bids  us  to  wor  jiip  the  one  God  exclusively  ;  the  Second  Commandment  bids  us  to 
worship  Him  spiritually.  The  First  Commandment  forbids  us  to  worship  false  gods  ; 
the  Second  Commandment  forbids  us  to  worship  the  true  God  under  false  forms. 
What  is  the  primary  meaning  of  the  Second  Commandment  ?  Did  it  forbid  the  arts 
of  painting  and  sculpture  ?  Probably  to  the  Jews  it  did,  as  to  this  day  it  does  to 
the  Mohammedans,  who  adorn  their  mosques  and  temples  only  with  patterns  and 
arabesques.  Among  half-emancipated  serfs  it  was  necessary  to  discourage  the 
plastic  arts  ;  they  needed  the  teaching,  not  of  painters  and  sculptors,  but  of 
prophets;  nevertheless,  the  literal  force  of  the  words,  "Thou  shalt  not  make 
to  thyself  a  graven  image,"  not  made  with  the  idea  of  paying  to  it  any  sort  of 
religious  reverence,  is  therefore  not  against  the  letter  of  the  commandments.  But 
why  was  it  necessary  to  say  to  the  Jews,  amid  the  thunders  of  Sinai,  "Thou  shalt 
not  make  unto  thee  any  graven  image  "  ;  and  why  is  it  still  necessary  to  republish 
that  commandment  to  Christians  ?  The  answer  to  that  question  is,  Because  there 
is  in  the  human  mind  a  perilous  tendency  to  worship  idols  which  needs  to  be 
incessantly  resisted.  Men  are  too  carnal,  too  sensuous,  coo  inherently  superstitious 
to  be  content  with  a  pure,  simple,  spiritual  religion.  It  is  so  much  easier  to  bow 
the  head  than  to  cleanse  the  heart ;  so  much  easier  to  multiply  outward  services 
than  to  be  kind  and  truthful  and  humble.  The  advent  of  Christ,  so  far  from 
abrogating  this  Second  Commandment,  has  re-enacted  it  with  tenfold  emphasis. 
And  has  Christendom  kept  it  I    I  think  that  in  two  ways  Christians  have  danger- 


CHAP,  v.]  DEUTERONOMY, 


ously  infringed  upon  its  proMbitions.    They  have  done  so  by  material  images.     In 
many  of  the  niches  of  this  abbey  we  see  that  the  statues  have  been  removed  from 
them.     Who  did  it  ?    The  Puritans.     And  why  ?    Because  lamps  had  been  hung 
and  incense  had  been  burned  before  those  stony  idols.     Were  they  not  right  ?    The 
almost  invariable  result  of  the  use  of  inferior  means  for  producing  religious  excite- 
ment is  to  mistake  the  excitement  for  the  religion,  it  is  to  substitute  ultimately  the 
excitement  for  righteousness,  it  is  to  base  our  religion  upon  a  lie,  that  the  gilded 
thing  of  our  idolatry  is  necessary  to  make  God  any  nearer  to  us  than  before.     The 
crucifix,  for  instance,  is,  it  seems  to  me,  both  a  dangerous  and  unwarrantable 
material  symbol.      In  the  first  four  centuries  Christians  shrank  from  representing 
Christ  at  all.      In  the  year  402  the  highly  orthodox  and  universally  respected 
Bishop  of  Salamis  tore  down  a  curtain  in  a  church  in  Palestine  because  it  had 
woven  on  it  an  image  of  Christ ;  he  declared  that  a  picture  of  Christ  was  contrary 
to  the  Christian  religion,  and  bade  the  astonished  priest  use  it  for  a  shroud  of  some 
pauper.     The  early  Christians  for  many  centuries  shrank  as  from  an  impiety  from 
representing  Christ  as  dead,  or  at  the  moment  of  His  death.      Even  when  they 
began  to  use  the  symbol  of  Christ  they  made  it  a  triumphant  not  a  morbid  symbol. 
It  has  been  truly  said  by  a  wise  teacher  that  the  prostration  of  the  soul  before  the 
mere  image  of  the  dying  Christ  makes  our  worship  and  our  prayer  unreal ;  we  are 
adoring  a  Christ  who  does  not  exist ;  He  is  not  on  the  Cross  now,  but  on  the  throne  ; 
His  agonies  are  past  for  ever  ;  He  is  at  the  right  hand  of  God.     But  without  sinking 
into  these  errors,  it  is  fatally  possible  for  us  to  break  the  Second  Commandment  by 
making  to  ourselves  a  false  ideal  of  Christ.     The  proper  meaning  of  "  idols  "  is  that 
in  which  the  great  Lord  Bacon  uses  the  word— shadowy  images,  subjective  phan- 
toms, wilful  illusions,  cherished  fallacies.     There  are  idols,  he  says,  inherent  in  the 
soul  of  man,  which,  like  an  unequal  mirror,  mingles  its  own  nature  with  that  which 
it  distorts— idols  of  the  market-place,  false  conceptions  of  God,  which  spring  from 
men's  intercourse  with  one  another,  and  from  the  delusive  glamour  of  words :  idols 
of  the  school,  false  notions  which  come  from  the  spirit  of  sect  and  system,  and  party 
and  formal  theology.     And  even  the  God-Man,  Christ  Jesus,  may  be  monstrously 
misinterpreted  to  us.     To  Michael  Angelo  he  was  an  avengeful,  wrathful  Hercules, 
hurling  ten  thousand  thunders  on  the  demon-tortured  multitude  for  which  He  died. 
To  many  schoolmen  His  sole  ideal  was  the  self-absorption  of  the  monkish  cloister. 
Priests  have  offered  us  a  dead  Christ  for  the  living  Christ,  an  agonised  Christ  for  the 
living  Christ,  an  ecclesiastical  Christ  for  the  Divine  Christ,  a  sectarian  Christ  for 
the  universal  Christ,  a  petty,  formalising,  pharisaical  Christ  for  the  Royal  Lord  of  the 
great,  true  heart  of  manhood  ;  a  Christ  far  off  in  the  centuries  instead  of  a  Christ  ever 
nigh  at  hand  ;  a  Christ  of  an  exclusive  fold  for  the  Christ  of  the  one  great  flock  ;  a 
Christ  of  Rome,  or  Geneva,  or  Clapham,  or  Oxford  for  the  Christ  of  the  eternal 
universe  and  of  the  heavens  and  aU  worlds.     How  then,  in  conclusion,  are  we  to 
escape  from  these  idols  ?    When  the  Empress  Constantina  asked  Eusebius,  the  most 
learned  prelate  of  his  day,  to  send  her  as  a  present  a  likeness  of  Christ,  he  replied, 
with  hardly  suppressed  indignation,  "What  do  you  mean,  Empress,  by  a  likeness  of 
Christ  ?    Not,  of  course,  an  image  of  Him  as  unchangeable,  not  of  His  human  nature 
glorified.     Such  images,"  he  said,  "are  forbidden  by  the  Mosaic  law,  that  we  may 
not  seem  like  idolaters  to  carry  about  our  God  in  an  image.     Since  we  confess  that 
the  Saviour  is  God  and  Lord,  we  prefer  to  see  Him  as  God,  and  if  you  set  a  value  on 
images  of  the  Saviour,  what  better  artist  can  there  be  than  the  God- Word  Himself?  " 
Thus  he  referred  the  Empress  to  the  Gospels  to  learn  what  Christ  really  was.  If  you 
will  search  and  read  those  Gospels  diligently  for  yourselves,  with  minds  washed 
clean  of  prejudices,  private  interests,  and  partial  affections  ;  if  you  will  read  them 
with  open  eyes  and  souls  cleansed  from  idols,  you  will  then  see  what  Christ  was,  and 
will  need  no  image  or  false  human  conception  of  Him  ;  you  will  see  Him,  stern, 
indeed,  to  the  Pharisee  and  to  the  hypocrite,  yet  large-hearted,  human,  loviug, 
tender  to  sorrow  with  an  infinite  tenderness,  merciful  and  compassionate  even  to  the 
guiltiest  of  the  children  who  would  come  with  tears  to  Him.    {Dean  Farrar. )      God 
is  a  Spirit:— "Thou  shalt  not  make  unto  thee  any  graven  image,"  &c.  (Exod.  xx. 
4-6).     The  first  word  on  Sinai  declares  that  there  is  but  one  God  ;  the  second  word 
teaches  us  that  God  is  not  to  be  worshipped  under  any  visible  representation  or  form. 
Isaiah  asks,  "To  whom,  then,  will  ye  liken  God  ?  or  what  likeness  will  ye  compare 
unto  Him  ? "     In  the  early  ages  of  history  there  were  no  images  of  the  Deity  known. 
Herodotus,  when  writing  of  the  manners  and  customs  of  the  Persians,  says,  "They 
have  among  them  neither  statues,  temples,  nor  altars  ;  the  use  of  which  they  censure 
aA  impiouSj  and  a  gross  violation  of  reason,  probably  because,  in  opposition  to  tha 


94  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  V, 

Greeks,  they  do  not  believe  that  the  gods  partake  of  our  human  nature.  Their 
ciistom  is  to  offer  from  the  summits  of  the  highest  mountains  sacrifices  to  Jove,  dis- 
tinguishing by  that  appellation  all  the  expanse  of  the  firmament."  The  worship  of 
the  heavenly  bodies  was  the  earliest  form  of  idolatry,  and  Moses  warns  against  it : 
"Take  good  heed  lest  thou  lift  up  thine  eyes  unto  heaveo,  and  when  thou  seest  the 
sun,  and  the  moon,  and  the  stars,  even  all  the  host  of  heaven,  shouldest  be  driven  to 
worship  them,  and  serve  them."  The  origin  of  idolatry  may  be  traced  to  this  fact, 
that  men  looked  about  for  some  visible  representations  of  the  invisible  Deity,  and 
that  in  course  of  time  the  image  or  the  symbol  became  a  substitute  for  the  Deity 
Himself.  Men  looked  for  God  everywhere,  and  they  could  not  see  Him  ;  they  could 
see  the  stars  crowning  the  night  with  glory,  they  could  see  the  sunlight  flooding  the 
universe,  and  they  said,  "The  sun  and  the  stars  shall  be  to  us  an  image  of  the  all- 
glorious  Deity,  a  symbol  of  His  greatness,  and  power,  and  goodness."  But,  as  time 
advanced,  the  symbols  themselves  were  deified,  and  the  sun,  and  the  moon,  and  the 
stars,  even  all  the  host  of  heaven,  were  worshipped  and  served.  The  Israelites, 
then,  were  forbidden  to  set  up  an  image  of  the  true  God  ;  not  only  forbidden  to  wor- 
ship false  gods,  but  also  forbidden  to  make  any  image  of  the  true  God.  When  Aaron 
made  the  golden  calf,  and  Jeroboam  the  son  of  Nebat  made  similar  images,  in  both 
instances  it  was  the  worship  of  Jehovah  as  represented  by  the  image  that  was 
intended  ;  and  in  both  instances  a  connecting  link  with  Egypt  is  afforded  us  in  the 
sacred  narrative.  In  the  case  of  Aaron  we  have  the  fact  of  Egypt  having  been  the 
birthland  of  the  sinning  people  ;  while  in  the  case  of  Jeroboam  we  have  the  fact  that 
it  was  after  a  long  residence  in  Egypt,  in  the  court  of  Shishak,  that  he  devised  this 
worship.  The  prophets  of  Jehovah  denounced  it ;  and  in  the  Second  Book  of 
Kings  the  fall  of  the  kingdom  is  expressly  attributed  to  the  gods  of  Jeroboam. 
Animal-worship  was  common  among  the  Egyptians ;  a  multitude  of  beasts,  birds, 
and  fishes  were  regarded  and  served  as  representatives  of  their  deities ;  the  hawk,  and 
the  crocodile,  and  the  serpent,  and  the  lion,  and  the  wolf,  and  other  creatures,  were 
the  forms  under  which  the  gods  were  worshipped.  We  believe  that  the  masterpieces 
of  art,  whether  in  painting  or  sculpture,  have  a  refining  and  elevating  influence  on 
those  who  admire  and  study  them.  But  art  is  not  necessarily  religious,  and  some  of 
the  ages  in  which  art  has  flourished  were  not  remarkable  for  their  purity  or  refine- 
ment. Painting  and  sculpture  were  not  forbidden  by  this  second  word  of  the  law — 
and  we  read  of  the  forms  of  the  cherubim  in  the  temple — but  no  image  was  to  be  set 
up  as  an  object  of  worship  ;  and  the  influence  of  this  prohibition  upon  the  history  of 
the  Jews  is  perceived  in  the  fact  that  no  painters  or  sculptors  have  ever  risen  among 
them.  They  have  had  poets  and  musicians,  but  no  painters  ;  and  while  among  the 
Greeks  Phidias  and  Praxiteles  were  carving  the  statues  that  became  the  wonders  of 
the  world,  on  the  roll  of  Hebrew  worthies  we  find  the  name  of  no  painter  or 
sculptor.  It  is  remarkable  that  in  the  four  Gospels  we  have  no  description  of  the 
person  of  our  Lord,  no  hint  as  to  His  stature,  or  His  face.  Art  has  embodied  its 
loftiest  conceptions  of  that  Divine  face  on  the  canvas,  but  Raphael's  "Transfigura- 
tion," Holman  Hunt's  "Light  of  the  World,"  Dore's  "Christ  leaving  the 
Prsetorium,"  Munkacsy's  "Christ  before  Pilate,"  marvellous  as  they  all  are  as 
works  of  genius,  do  not  satisfy  the  soul  that  has  entered  into  fellowship  with  the 
Perfect  life,  and  who  feels  that  there  is  an  unspeakable,  infinite  beauty  in  Him. 
It  is  one  of  the  strangest  things  in  the  history  of  the  world  that  a  rational,  intelligent 
being  should  take  a  piece  of  metal,  or  of  wood,  and  mould  it  into  a  certain  shape, 
and  then,  investing  it  with  the  attributes  of  divinity,  fall  down  before  it,  and  pray 
to  it,  and  worship  it.  Well  might  the  inspired  prophet  wield  the  lash  of  satire  when 
speaking  of  it.  He  says,  ' '  The  carpenter  stretcheth  out  his  rule  (Isa.  xliv.  13),  falleth 
down  unto  it,  and  worshippeth  it,  and  prayeth  unto  it,  and  saith,  deliver  me,  for 
thou  art  my  god."  This  is  done,  not  by  a  little  child  who  nurses  and  talks  to  the 
doll  as  if  it  were  a  living  creature  ;  but  by  an  intelligent  man,  who  can  conduct  busi- 
ness, frame  wise  laws  for  a  nation,  discuss  great  moral  problems,  or  speak  eloquently 
in  the  forum  or  the  school ;  this  man  falls  down  before  the  idol,  the  toy,  the 
nonentity,  and  saith,  "Deliver  me,  for  thou  art  my  god."  Idolatry  robs  Jehovah 
of  His  honour,  and  it  is  therefore  denounced  as  a  crime,  an  injustice,  an  oflfence 
against  the  Majesty  on  high.  "Ye  shall  bear  the  sins  of  your  idols,  and  ye  shall 
know  that  I  am  the  Lord  God."  Would  not  a  true  patriot  look  with  indignation 
upon  a  foeman's  flag  planted  on  England's  shore  ?  Would  not  his  desire  be  to 
trample  that  flag  in  the  mire,  or  tear  it  to  ribbons,  and  unfurl  the  old  English 
standard  that  "has  braved  a  thousand  years  the  battle  and  the  breeze"  ?  And  the 
apostle  looked  upon  idol-worship  in  Athens  as  the  flag  of  an  enemy  on  the  territory 


OHAP.  v.]  DEUTERONOMY.  95 

of  God,  as  the  occupation  by  an  enemy  of  the  palace  that  belonged  to  God.  Idolatry 
was  the  sin  to  which  the  Jews  were  most  prone.  Surrounded  by  heathen  nations, 
and  forgetful  of  the  mercies  they  had  received  from  Jehovah,  they  were  often  con- 
taminated with  idol-worship  ;  and  even  Solomon  forsook  the  temple  of  Jehovah  for 
an  idol-grove.  This  image-worship  is  prohibited  by  this  second  word  of  the  law ; 
how,  then,  did  Rome  deal  with  this  prohibition  ?  With  the  cunning  craftiness  of 
men  who  lie  in  wait  to  deceive,  it  omitted  this  word  from  the  Decalogue,  and 
divided  the  last  commandment  into  two,  in  order  to  make  up  the  number  ten.  The 
idolatry  practised  in  the  Romish  Church  is  one  of  the  signs  of  its  apostasy,  and  of 
the  certainty  of  its  doom  ;  for,  as  Max  Mtiller  says,  "One  of  the  lessons  which  the 
history  of  religions  certainly  teaches  is  this,  that  the  curse  pronounced  against  those 
who  would  change  the  invisible  into  the  visible,  the  spiritual  into  the  material,  the 
Divine  into  the  human,  the  infinite  into  the  finite,  has  come  true  in  every  nation  on 
earth. "  Consider,  then,  the  reasons  by  which  this  prohibition  is  enforced.  1.  He 
is  a  jealous  God.  Our  character  will  receive  its  form  and  impress  very  much  from 
the  notions  we  entertain  of  God.  If  we  regard  Him  as  an  impassive,  emotionless, 
heartless  Being,  who  is  too  high  to  take  any  interest  in  this  world,  who  is  not 
affected  by  our  sorrows,  by  our  circumstances,  by  our  entreaties,  who  requires  not 
our  worship,  then  the  effect  will  be  that  we  shall  meet  indiflference  with  indiflference, 
we  shall  lead  careless  lives,  we  shall  not  be  watchful  in  the  formation  of  a  character 
that  will  never  be  inspected  by  the  eyes  of  Divinity.  "  How  doth  God  know  ?  Can 
He  judge  through  the  dark  cloud  ? "  But  if  we  regard  Him  as  the  righteous  and 
merciful  Father,  who  is  looking  with  pity  on  His  rebellious  children,  the  effect  will 
be  seen  in  our  penitential  return  to  Him,  and  in  our  desire  to  please  Him  and  serve 
Him.  Now,  this  verse  reveals  to  us  something  of  the  nature  and  character  of  God. 
He  is  a  personal  Being,  not  an  abstraction,  not  a  mere  force  ;  not  a  tendency  or  (as 
Matthew  Arnold  puts  it)  "a  power  not  ourselves  that  works  for  righteousness," 
whatever  such  a  phrase  may  mean.  To  worship  a  God  who  is  nothing  more  than 
that  would  be  like  paying  homage  to  a  sum  in  algebra,  or  praying  to  a  theorem  in 
Euclid,  or  worshipping  the  Gulf  Stream.  He  is  a  personal  Being,  who  loves,  who 
may  be  offended,  who  is  jealous  ;  not  jealous  lest  He  should  suffer  any  diminution  of 
His  glory  and  blessedness  through  man's  sin,  but  jealous  lest  sin  should  deface  and 
destroy  the  nature  He  accounts  so  precious.  His  jealousy  is  His  love  on  fire,  love 
wounded,  love  insulted,  love  incensed.  If  your  son  were  led  astray  by  evil  com- 
panions, if  your  daughter  became  the  prey  of  the  tempter,  and  fell  from  the  fair 
Eden  of  purity  to  the  hell  of  »n  abandoned  life,  would  you  not  be  jealous  and  angry  ? 
Man  is  God's  child  ;  and  when  the  child  is  led  astray,  and  becomes  an  Absalom,  with 
the  fire  of  defiance  in  his  eye  and  the  weapon  of  hostility  in  his  hand,  it  is  no 
wonder  that  God  is  jealous.  2.  He  punishes  His  enemies.  "  Visiting  the  iniquity 
of  the  fathers  upon  the  children  unto  the  third  and  fourth  generation,"  &c.  Right 
across  the  brightness  of  the  world  lies  the  dark  shadow  of  suffering.  It  is  there, 
whether  you  believe  the  Bible  or  not.  We  see  everywhere  that  moral  characteristics 
and  physical  infirmities  and  sufferings  are  transmitted  from  one  generation  to 
another.  And  this  principle  of  hereditary  transmission  is  recognised  in  the  Bible. 
The  Jews  said,  "Our  fathers  have  sinned,  and  are  not,  and  we  have  borne  their 
iniquities."  And  these  words  of  doom  were  pronounced  by  Christ,  "That  the  blood 
of  all  the  prophets  which  was  shed  from  the  foundation  of  the  world  may  be  required 
of  this  generation  ;  from  the  blood  of  Abel  unto  the  blood  of  Zecharias,  who  perished 
between  the  altar  and  the  temple  ;  verily  I  say  unto  you,  it  shall  be  required  of  this 
generation."  Do  you  not  see  this  principle  illustrated  in  daily  life?  Children 
inherit  the  physical  constitution,  the  propensities,  the  diseases,  the  wealth  or 
penury,  the  glory  or  disgrace  of  their  parents.  Sometimes  men  are  proud  of  their 
ancestors,  and  they  "borrow  merit  from  the  dead,"  and  if  a  baronet  or  lord  has  ever 
appeared  in  their  family,  they  forget  not  to  proclaim  the  fact.  Good  and  evil  are 
transmitted  from  one  generation  to  another.  But  though  a  man  may  suffer  on 
account  of  the  sins  of  his  ancestors,  yet  the  suffering  is  never  in  the  nature  of  retribu- 
tion, unless  the  man's  own  guilt  has  called  for  it.  If  the  penalty  goes  down  to  the 
third  and  fourth  generation,  then  they  are,  God  says,  "the  third  and  fourth 
generation  of  them  that  hate  Me."  And  although  innocent  children  may  suffer 
the  consequences  of  the  sins  of  their  parents,  yet  those  consequences  are  temporal ; 
in  another  world,  and  in  the  coming  day  of  account,  every  one  will  be 
judged  personally  and  separately  ;  the  son  will  not  be  punished  for  the  sins  of  his 
parents,  nor  will  he  be  excused  on  the  ground  of  the  righteousness  of  his  parents. 
A  man  feels,  and  rightly,  that  he  is  not  responsible  for  his  grandfather's  sins  ;  but 


96  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  T, 

he  may  be  in  some  measure  responsible  for  the  conduct  of  his  children,  and  eyen 
grandchildren.  And  men  are  entreated  to  act  wisely  for  the  sake  of  their 
descendants— to  be  good  and  to  do  good  for  the  sake  of  othera.  The  Israelites 
gathered  round  the  base  of  Sinai  were  the  founders  of  a  new  nation,  a  nation  that 
was  to  play  an  important  part,  that  would  have  a  name  in  history  to  the  end  of  time, 
and  if  the  fountain-head  were  defiled,  the  streams  would  be  muddy  also.  3.  And 
He  blesses  His  friends.  "  And  showing  mercy  unto  thousands  of  them  that  love  Me 
and  keep  My  commandments" — unto  thousands  of  generations.  "  Where  sin  hath 
abounded,  grace  hath  much  more  abounded."  **  Mercy  rejoiceth  against  judgment." 
There  is  mercy  shining  even  in  the  law.  In  the  midst  of  the  storms  of  Sinai  mercy 
is  appearing  like  a  quenchless  star.  I  have  said  that  moral  qualities  are  transmitted, 
as  well  as  physical  features.  Lying  had  become  so  characteristic  of  the  inhabitants 
of  Crete  that  the  apostle  quoted  the  proverb,  "  The  Cretans  are  always  liars."  And 
habits  of  industry  and  temperance  and  truthfulness  may  go  down  like  healthy 
blood  from  one  generation  to  another,  even  to  thousands  of  generations.  But  do  not 
think  that  the  renewing  grace  of  God  in  the  heart  may  be  transmitted  from  sire  to 
son,  or  that  the  spiritual  life  will  flow  down  with  the  natural  life  from  fathers  and 
mothers  to  their  children.  Inherited  dispositions  backed  by  education  and  example 
may  do  much  to  secure  this  result,  but  every  child  must  seek  for  himself  "the  good 
part  that  shall  never  be  taken  away  from  him."  It  is  not  the  godliness  of  the 
parents,  Ijut  the  mercy  of  God,  that  goes  down  unto  thousands  of  generations,  and 
converts  them  into  generations  that  love  Him  and  keep  His  commandments. 
{James  Ovjen.)  The  Second  Com7nandment : — I.  What  is  strictly  and  pro- 
perly PROHIBITED  IN  THIS  COMMANDMENT  ?  It  is  quite  manifest  that  the  pro- 
hibitory statute  relates  exclusively  to  religion— to  such  images  as  were  made  to  be 
*' worshipped  and  bowed  down  to"— nothing  else,  and  nothing  more.  They  were 
not  only  to  have  no  other  gods  besides  Jehovah,  but  were  not  to  worship  Jehovah 
Himself  under  any  similitudes.  1.  Such  representations  of  the  true  God  as  are  here 
interdicted  were  probably  the  origin  of  the  whole  idolatrous  system.  The  Second 
Commandment,  I  apprehend,  ought  to  be  regarded  both  as  a  prohibition  of  what  in 
itself  was  wrong  ;  and,  at  the  same  time  as  a  guard  to  the  first,  that  they  might  not 
only  be  kept  from  embracing  directly  the  idolatries  of  the  surrounding  countries,  but 
also  from  introducing  a  practice  in  the  worship  of  their  own  Jehovah  which  tended 
to  lead  them  ultimately  into  the  same  errors.  2.  The  commandment  was  evidently 
designed  to  cherish  just  conceptions  of  the  spiritual  nature  of  Jehovah,  and  of  the 
corresponding  spirituality  of  the  worship  He  required.  3.  Spiritual  conceptions  of 
God's  nature  are  connected  with  spiritual  conceptions  of  His  worship.  The  awful- 
ness  of  felt  incomprehensibility  is  an  impression,  in  regard  to  the  Infinite  Spirit — the 
great  object  of  our  worship,  incomparably  more  desirable  and  beneficial,  than  one 
of  gross  material  familiarity.  There  is  sublimity  in  it.  And  there  is  in  it  the 
impression  of  constant  nearness.  Whereas  when  the  worship  is  associated  with 
material  emblems,  the  mind,  from  the  force  of  habit,  becomes  incapable  of  realising 
the  presence  of  the  Deity  when  the  emblem  with  which  that  presence  is  associated  is 
absent.  II.  The  reason  annexed  to  this  commandment.  1.  What  is  meant  by 
Jehovah  when  He  designates  Himself  ** a  jealous  God"  ?  2.  The  manner  in  which 
this  Divine  jealousy  operates,  or  manifests  itself.  "Visiting  the  iniquities."  (1)  The 
' '  visiting  of  the  iniquities  of  the  fathers  upon  the  children  "  formed  no  part,  nor 
was  it  at  all  a  principle,  of  the  judicial  law  in  Israel.  On  the  contrary,  it  was 
peremptorily  interdicted  (chap.  xxiv.  16  ;  2  Kings  xiv.  6).  It  was  Jehovah  Himself, 
in  His  own  judicial  and  providential  administration,  that  was  to  exemplify  the 
principle  in  its  actual  application.  (2)  If  Jehovah  retained  the  principle  and  the 
application  of  it  in  His  own  hands,  this  shows  it  to  have  been  a  principle  that  could 
admit  of  being  entrusted  to  none  but  Himself.  He  alone,  the  omniscient  God,  was 
capable  of  distinguishing  in  what  cases  it  would,  without  a  violation  of  equity,  be 
put  in  practice.  (3)  Judgments  and  coiTections  of  a  national  description,  if  they 
were  to  be  executed  at  all,  could  not,  in  the  nature  of  things,  be  executed  otherwise. 
They  unavoidably  involved  the  children  of  the  present  generation  ;  and,  if  continued 
for  a  series  of  successive  years,  involved  all  those  of  the  generations  following. 
(4)  There  were  cases,  they  were  frequent  indeed,  in  which  the  children  themselves 
persisted  in  the  sins  of  their  fathers.  (5)  It  appears  to  be  on  this  priucijjle  that 
Jehovah  reasons  with  His  ancient  people,  in  the  eighteenth  chapter  of  the  Book  of 
Ezekiel,  and  vindicates  His  procedure  from  their  capricious  and  sullen  objections  to 
it.  In  the  spirit  of  pride,  and  dissatisfaction,  and  self- vindication,  ihey  were  laying 
their  own  sufferings  to  the  door  of  their  fathers'  sins.     But  Jehovah  puts  it  to  their 


CHAP,  v.]  DEUTERONOMY.  97 

consciences  whether,  on  the  supposition  of  the  sins  of  their  fathers  being  put  out  of 
the  account,  and  His  "judging  them  after  their  own  sins,"  their  sufferings,  as  His 
judicial  visitation,  would  be  removed  or  lightened.  (6)  There  are  still  cases  remain- 
ing, and  in  them  lies  the  principal  difficulty,  in  which  the  innocent  appear  to  suffer 
with  the  guilty  ;  unoffending  children  with  their  criminal  parents  ;  families  with 
their  guilty  heads  (Josh.  vii.  24,  25  ;  Numb.  xvi.  27-34,  &c.).  In  regard  to  these, 
let  the  following  considerations  be  attended  to : — First,  the  retribution  must  be  viewed 
as  confined  to  the  present  life.  Secondly,  the  number  actually  involved  in  the  sin 
and  its  personal  guilt,  it  is,  in  such  instances  as  those  referred  to,  difficult  for  us  to 
ascertain— how  far,  in  each  of  the  two  cited,  for  example,  the  wives,  the  sons,  and 
the  daughters,  and  others  took  part  themselves,  directly  or  indirectly,  in  the  crime. 
We  know  that  Ahab  was  stirred  up  by  .Jezebel ;  so  might  Achan  by  his  wife,  and  so 
might  Korah,  Dathan,  and  Abiram.  Thirdly,  when  little  children  suffered,  who 
could  take  no  part  in  the  trespass,  and  contract  no  personal  guilt,  it  was  in  their 
case  only  temporal  death  coming  upon  them  in  another  way  and  at  an  earlier  time 
than  it  might  otherwise  have  come.  (7)  It  may  further  be  observed,  that  the 
declaration  is  in  harmony  with  numberless  facts  in  the  ordinary  administration  of 
Divine  providence.  How  often  do  the  vices  of  intemperance,  incontinence,  and 
extravagance  entail  disease  and  misery  on  a  man's  immediate  and  even  more  distant 
offspring !  (8)  How  striking  and  delightful  the  contrast  between  the  extent,  re- 
spectively, of  the  visitation  of  iniquity  and  the  showing  of  mercy.  To  all  without 
exception — individually,  who  "love  Him  and  keep  His  commandments,"  He 
"showeth  mercy."  But  the  contrast  is  between  the  third  and  fourth  generation  on 
the  one  side,  and  the  thousandth  on  the  other.  The  contrast  is  designed  to  intimate 
and  impress  the  Divine  delight  in  mercy.  III.  The  idolatry,  or  rather  the 
IMAGE-WORSHIP,  OF  THE  SO-CALLED  CHRISTIAN  Church.  It  is  Very  strange,  and 
shows  the  inconsistency  of  error,  and  how  "  hard  bestead  "  it  sometimes  is  for  some- 
thing to  say  for  itself,  that  the  setting  up  of  the  brazen  serpent  has  been  cited 
as  an  instance  of  reverence  due  to  images,  as  if  the  command  to  the  Israelites 
to  look  to  it  had  been  a  command  of  worship  to  the  object  looked  at.  The 
best  reply  to  this  is  simply  to  point  to  what  became  of  the  brazen  serpent ; 
what  was  done  to  it  for  the  very  reason  of  its  having  become  an  object 
of  idolatrous  reverence  and  superstitious  reliance.  {R.  fFardlaw,  D.D.)  The 
Second  Commandment:—!.  What  it  forbids.  II.  The  reason  for  the 
PROHIBITION.  To  ascertain  this  let  us  inquire  why  man  makes  an  image  or  a 
picture  to  help  him  in  his  worship.  The  answer  may  be  briefly  stated — the  spiritual 
sense  in  man,  that  which  realises  God,  is  dead.  None  who  know  what  it  is  to  live 
and  walk  with  God  amid  the  work  of  the  week  would  derive  help  from  an  image 
placed  in  front  of  them  when  they  worship.  By  the  new  birth  of  the  Spirit  they 
have  had  the  spiritual  consciousness  restored  :  so  that  they  know  God,  and  are  able 
to  commune  directly  with  Him.  If  a  man  crave  help,  it  is  thereby  proven  that  he 
lacks  spiritual  consciousness.  This  very  lack  renders  him  incapable  of  creating 
anything  which  gives  a  proper  representation  of  God.  God  knew  that  if  men  who 
had  lost  their  sense  of  Him  and  His  presence  made  something  to  represent  Him,  it 
would  be  a  false  representation,  and  men  would  thereby  get  false  notions  of  Him, 
even  as  they  sought  to  worship.  Look  at  the  matter  from  another  point  of  view. 
In  the  instant  that  man  sets  up  a  representation  of  any  description  to  help  him  to 
realise  God  he  denies  that  which  is  essential  in  God.  Limitlessness  lies  at  the 
heart  and  centre  of  the  thought  of  God,  and  the  moment  a  man  makes  an  image  he 
denies  the  essence  of  God.  The  thought  of  God  produced  by  a  false  representation 
of  Grod  will  produce  character  that  is  false.  In  effect  God  says  to  man,  "  Thou  shalt 
not  attempt  to  liken  Me  to  anything  :  because  every  effort  of  that  kind  must  result 
in  failure,  and  must  re-act  upon  man  to  his  abiding  injury."  III.  Ways  in  v^^hich 
THE  COMMANDMENT  IS  BROKEN  TO-DAY.  What  is  the  pricst  ?  An  attempt  to 
reveal  God  to  my  heart,  in  order  that  I  may  worship  Him.  Wherever  a  man  gives 
his  soul  away  to  the  priest,  because  he  imagines  tnat  he  is  getting  to  know  God 
through  the  priest,  the  latter  become  to  the  man  an  image  and  an  idol.  In  every 
case  where  this  has  been  done  man's  conception  of  God  has  suffered,  and  the  result 
has  been  the  degradation  of  the  worshipper.  The  same  danger  is  seen  with  regard 
to  ritual.  An  ornate  service,  beautiful  and  sesthetic  surroundings,  are  supposed 
to  create  the  conditions  of  true  worship.  We  ask  what  is  the  result  of  all  this  upon 
the  spiritual  nature  of  man  ?  Are  the  men  and  women  who  go  over  to  ritualism  in 
any  form  becoming  more  spiritual  ?  When  ornate  service  is  put  in  the  place  of 
the  rights  of  individual  souls  we  are  as  great  idolaters  as  were  the  men  of  olden 

7 


98  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  v. 

days,  who  made  graven  images  or  painted  pictures,  and  fell  down  to  worship  them. 
Turning  from  that  higher  level,  we  remember  how  much  is  said  to-day  about 
worshipping  God  through  nature.  I  love  the  flowers,  the  valleys,  the  hills,  the 
sunshine,  the  birds  ;  but  I  say  to  you,  that  no  man  ever  reaches  God  through  nature. 
Men  do  get  to  nature  through  the  God  who  made  it.  Let  a  man  be  right  with 
God,  and  he  will  find  the  mystic  key  that  unlocks  all  nature  for  him  ;  but  the  men 
who  try  to  climb  to  God  through  nature  never  succeed.  The  new  cult  of  hupoani- 
tarianism  is  really  an  attempt  to  worship  God  through  human  nature  ;  but  it  is  a 
sorry  business.  If  this  new  idea  of  God  is  expressed  in  the  individual  or  in  the 
sum-total  of  the  race,  let  it  be  remembered  that  God  Himself  becomes  guilty  of  all 
the  awful  things  which  have  blotted  the  page  of  human  history— a  terrible 
thought !  IV.  The  solemn  warning  and  the  gracious  promise  linked  to  the 
COMMANDMENT.  If  in  youT  worship  you  put  something  in  the  place  of  God,  if  you 
come  under  the  influence  of  worship  which  is  an  attempt  to  put  something  between 
God  and  man :  then  you  are  not  only  harming  yourself  but  your  child.  The 
probability  is  that  your  idea  of  worship  will  be  transmitted  to  your  child,  and  your 
child's  idea  of  worship  will  be  transmitted  to  his  child,  so  that  the  wrong  that  you 
do  yourself  when  you  misrepresent  God  is  a  wrong  which  you  are  doing  to  your 
child  like\vise.  That,  I  believe,  is  the  first  and  simple  meaning  of  the  words  used 
in  connection  with  this  commandment.  But  we  proceed  to  notice  the  gracious 
promise  standing  side  by  side  with  the  warning :  **  Showing  mercy  unto  thousands." 
That  is  to  say,  if  a  man  sweeps  the  idols  away,  and  gets  into  living  connection  with 
God,  worshipping  Him  without  anything  between,  the  result  will  be  that  his  child 
will  thus  worship,  and  his  child's  child  will  most  likely  so  worship.  {G.  Campbell 
Morgan.)  The  idolatry  of  civilised  men:— We  sometimes  wonder  what  to  us 
instructed  Christians,  who  cannot  conceive  ourselves,  even  in  imagination,  bowing 
down  to  a  graven  image,  what  can  be  any  longer  the  lesson  of  the  Second 
Commandment.  What  is  the  use  of  repeating  it?  Can  we  even  imagine  the 
temptation  to  do  so  ?  But  are  there  no  other  things,  the  idols  of  refined  and 
civilised  men,  no  other  "likenesses"  than  were  known  in  old  time,  "of  things 
that  are  in  heaven  above,  or  in  the  earth  beneath,  or  in  the  water  under  the  earth," 
to  which  worship  is  done,  subtle,  profound,  and  absorbing, — idols  which  occupy  the 
place  of  God,  or  perhaps  profess  to  represent  Him,  —idols  which  meet  us  at  every 
turn,  and  which  need  and  justify  the  reiterated  command,  ' '  Thou  shalt  not  bow 
down  to  them,  nor  worship  them  "  ?  1.  For  instance,  God  is  all-powerful,  almighty, 
and  we  worship  Him  who  is  the  Maker  and  Ruler  of  all  things.  But  the  world,  as 
we  know  it  and  have  to  do  with  it,  is  full  offerees  and  necessities,  whose  origin  and 
law  is  lost  in  darkness,  which  we  cannot  trace  beyond  a  little  way  back,  which  seem 
self-originated  and  self-acting.  They  are  awful,  tremendous,  irresistible,  irreversible. 
They  seem  blind  and  aimless.  We  are  powerless  in  their  grasp  if  we  oppose  them ; 
if  we  can  use  and  direct  them,  it  is  still  as  blind  and  deaf  and  unchangeable  and 
senseless  forces.  They  bind  us  fast  in  their  chain  ;  they  cut  across  the  field  of 
human  will  and  feeling  and  purpose,  reckless  of  the  havoc  they  make,  of  the  hopes 
they  disappoint.  In  the  onward  roll  and  tide  of  what  seems  a  boundless  ocean,  com- 
prehending all  things,  from  the  hypothetic  atom  or  the  microscopic  cell  and  germ  to 
the  farthest  sun,  the  moral  world,  as  we  know  it,  seems  swamped  and  lost.  They 
care  neither  for  good  nor  bad.  Tliey  bind  us  with  bonds  which  oppress  and  crush 
us.  This  tremendous  side  of  nature  is  an  idea  which  enlarging  knowledge  has 
brought  home  to  our  generation  with  a  sharpness  and  definiteness  never  recognised 
before.  It  fills  and  occupies  minds,  till  even  the  consciousness  of  will  becomes  over- 
shadowed and  cast  into  the  background,  a  phenomenon  or  a  doubt.  And  with  this 
dread  image  before  men's  minds  there  grows  up  a  terrible  religion  of  despair. 
Nature,  in  its  garb  of  fate  and  necessity,  has  shut  out  God.  2.  There  is  a  religion  of 
literature.  Literature,  the  record  and  image  of  the  thoughts,  impressions,  and  feel- 
ings of  men,  in  the  most  diversified  conditions  and  in  the  most  diversified  expres- 
sion, is  one  of  the  gifts  which  have  been  made  to  our  time :  a  gift,  a  real  and 
inestimable  gift  it  is  ;  a  strange  and  new  one,  distributing  without  stint  to  the  many 
what  used  to  be  the  prerogative  and  treasure  of  the  few  ;  opening  more  and  more  the 
inexhaustible  wonders  of  the  intellect  and  the  character  of  man  ;  placing  within 
increasing  range  access  to  all  that  is  loftiest  and  wisest,  most  perfect  and  noblest 
in  what  men  now  and  before  us  have  thought  and  said  ;  leaving  us  utterly  without 
excuse  if,  with  the  very  highest  placed  within  our  reach,  we  choose  the  refuse  and 
the  vile.  But  it  is  a  dazzling  gift,  a  gift  which  makes  men  think  that  there  can  be 
nothing  to  match  it,  nothing  beyond  it.     Is  not  this  enough  for  the  heart  and  soul 


CHAP,  v.]  DEUTERONOMY.  99 

of  man,  of  man  at  least,  cultivated,  civilised,  instructed,  enlightened  ?  Is  it  not 
enough  for  his  meditations,  his  aspirations,  his  secret  acts  of  devout  homage  and 
devout  uplifting  of  the  spirit  ?  Will  not  the  religion  of  great  books  and  great 
thinkers,  the  religion  of  genius  and  poetic  truth,  be  a  sufficient  religion?  3.  There 
is  a  mysterious  power  in  the  world,  a  mysterious  endowment  given  to  man,  one  of 
the  most  wonderful  and  lofty  of  all  his  prerogatives — the  sense  of  beauty.  Is  it  sur- 
prising that  art  should  almost  become  a  religion — a  worship  and  an  enthusiasm 
in  which  the  wondrous  shadows  of  God's  glory  take  the  place  of  God  Himself, 
in  His  holiness.  His  righteousness,  His  awful  love  ?  It  is  not  surprising  ;  but  alas 
for  us,  if  we  yield  to  the  temptation  !  The  love  of  beauty,  in  work  and  speech  and 
person,  was  the  master-passion  of  the  reviving  intelligence  of  Italy  :  it  attracted,  it 
dominated  all  who  wrote,  all  who  sang,  all  who  painted  and  moulded  form.  Out  of 
it  arose,  austere  and  magnificent  indeed,  yet  alive  with  all  instincts  of  beauty,  the 
Divina  Commedia,  the  mighty  thought  of  Lionardo  and  Michael  Angelo,  the 
pathetic  devotion  and  deep  peace  of  the  Lombard,  Tuscan,  Umbrian  schools  ;  but  to 
w^hole  generations  of  that  wonderful  people — from  the  fresh  sonnet-writers  and 
story-tellers  of  the  closing  middle-age,  Guido  Caralcanti  and  Boccaccio,  to  the  com- 
pleted refinement  of  the  days  of  the  great  Venetian  masters  and  Ariosto — the  wor- 
ship of  the  beautiful,  as  the  noblest,  worthiest  devotion,  stood  in  the  place  of  truth, 
of  morality,  of  goodness,  of  Christian  life.  This  idolatry  of  beauty  brought  its 
own  punishment,  the  degeneracy  and  deep  degradation  both  of  art  and  character. 
4.  Yes  ;  the  world  in  which  we  now  pass  our  days  is  full  of  great  powers.  Nature  is 
great  in  its  bounty,  in  its  sternness,  in  its  unbroken  uniformity  ;  literature,  art,  are 
great  in  what  they  have  created  for  us  ;  beauty  is  great  in  its  infinite  expressions  : 
but  these  are  not  the  powers  for  man — man,  the  responsible,  man,  the  sinner  and  the 
penitent,  who  may  be  the  saint — to  fall  down  and  worship.  They  are  to  pass  with 
the  world  in  which  we  have  known  them,  the  world  of  which  they  are  part ;  but  man 
remains,  remains  what  he  is  in  soul  and  character  and  affections.  They  at  least  feel 
this  who  are  drawing  near  to  the  unseen  and  unknown  beyond  ;  they  to  whom,  it 
may  be,  these  great  gifts  of  God,  the  spell  and  wonder  of  art  and  of  literature,  the 
glory  and  sweet  tenderness  of  nature,  have  been  the  brightness  and  joy  of  days  that 
are  now  fast  ending — they  feel  that  there  is  yet  an  utter  want  of  what  these  things 
cannot  give  :  that  soul  and  heart  want  something  yet  deeper,  something  more 
lovely,  something  more  Divine,  that  which  will  realise  man's  ideals,  that  which  will 
complete  and  fulfil  his  incompleteness  and  his  helplessness, — yes  ;  the  real  likeness  in 
thought  and  will  and  character  to  the  goodness  of  Jesus  Christ.  "My  flesh  and 
my  heart  faileth  ;  but  God  is  the  strength  of  my  heart,  and  my  portion  for  ever." 
Man  has  that  within  him  which  tells  him  in  presage  and  parable  of  greater  and 
more  ^wful  things  than  anything  he  can  admire  and  delight  in  yet :  he  has  that 
without  him  which  certifies  him  that  his  hopes  and  aspirations  are  justified  ;  that 
when  these  precious  things  of  the  present  must  pass  with  the  world  to  which  they 
belong  there  is  laid  up  for  him  what  "eye  hath  not  seen,  nor  ear  heard,  neither 
have  entered  into  the  heart  of  man,  what  God  hath  prepared  for  them  that 
love  Him," — sinlessness,  strength,  peace,  the  vision  of  God.  {Dean  Church.) 
For  I  the  Lord  thy  God  am  a  jealous  God. — The  Lord  is  a  jealous  God:—' 
1.  First,  He  is  so  in  respect  of  idolatry.  "They  moved  Him  to  jealousy  with 
images"  (Psa.  Ixxviii.  58).  "Behold  at  the  gate  of  the  altar  this  image  of 
jealousy"  (Ezek.  viii.  5) — a  more  provoking  place  than  if  it  had  been  in  a  less 
holy  spot.  Take  Mohammedanism,  where  the  idol  of  a  false  prophet  stands  in 
the  place  of  the  Lord's  Anointed  ;  or  Socinianism,  where  the  idol  of  human  reason 
usurps  the  place  of  Divine  Revelation  ;  and  these  two  are  neither  better  nor  worse 
than  the  idolatry  of  the  pagan  or  papal  falsehood  :  they  are  equally  the  erection  of 
man  against  God,  and  of  human  reason  as  opposed  to  the  Word  of  God.  2.  God  ia 
a  jealous  God  in  respect  of  all  the  self-righteousness,  worldly-mindedness,  creature 
dependences,  pride,  formality,  or  whatever  other  carnal  principle  would  exclude 
spiritual  humility,  and  in  fact  set  up  idols  in  the  heart,  under  the  Reformed  religion 
we  profess,  although  in  itself  a  purer  form  of  Christianity  than  any  other.  3.  God 
is  a  jealous  God  in  respect  more  especially  of  His  honour  among  His  peculiarly  pro- 
fessing people.  "  What  do  ye  more  than  others  ? "  "  Are  there  not  with  you,  even 
with  you,  sins  against  the  Lord  your  God  % "  The  Lord  looks  here  for  proportionate 
fruit,  which  yet  He  finds  not.  An  unsanctified  carriage  dishonours  our  heavenly 
Father,  and  provokes  His  jealousy.  A  barren  and  unfruitful  walk  does  this  also. 
A  discontented  and  repining  spirit  has  the  same  effect.  (Christian  Observer.) 
Visiting  the  iniquity  of  the  fathers  upon  the  children.^rA«  ^ns  of  the  fathers 


100  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha^.  v. 

visited  on  the  children : — Among  the  several  motives  used  1>y  God  to  discourage  men 
from  breaking  His  most  holy  laws  is  the  fear  of  punishment  He  is  often  pleased  to 
inflict  in  this  life.  Let  us  offer  some  vindication  of  this  way  of  God's  dealing  with 
mankind  in  visiting,  upon  some  extraordinary  occasions,  the  iniquity  of  the  fathers 
upon  the  children,  or  the  sins  of  one  generation  on  succeeding  ages.  1.  Then  it 
will  be  of  some  use  to  us,  in  order  to  free  the  doctrine  of  the  text  from  the  difficulties 
that  may  seem  to  accompany  it,  to  consider  the  more  than  ordinary  malignity 
of  those  sins  which  God  is  provoked  to  visit  upon  the  offspring  of  wicked 
parents.  The  sin  more  particulaily  pointed  at  in  the  text  is  that  of  idolatry,  which 
is  a  sin  of  a  heinous  nature.  2.  Again,  whereas  it  is  said  in  the  text  that  God  will 
visit  the  sins  of  the  fathers  upon  the  children,  this  visitation  must  be  understood 
to  imply  no  more  than  the  infliction  of  temporal  evils  only.  For  as  the  virtues  of 
parents,  how  eminent  soever,  will  not  be  imputed  for  righteousness  to  a  degenerate 
posterity,  so  neither  will  their  vices.  3.  And  to  proceed  yet  further,  even  the 
temporal  evils  denounced  by  God  in  the  text  against  the  offspring  of  notoriously 
wicked  parents  are  there  supposed  (ordinarily,  at  least)  to  extend  no  further  than  to 
the  third  and  fourth  generation  of  them  that  hate  Him  ;  which  period  of  time  is 
therefore  conceived  to  be  mentioned  to  satisfy  us  that  God  primarily  and  more 
especially  designs  to  punish  sin  in  the  immediate  authors  of  it,  since  it  may  be  pre- 
sumed— and  is  often  true,  in  fact — that  wicked  parents  may  live  to  see  themselves 
thus  punished  in  those  that  come  out  of  their  loins  ;  whereas,  on  the  contrary,  the 
goodness  of  Almighty  God  is  such  an  overbalance  to  His  vindictive  justice  that  He 
has  likewise  declared  that  He  will  show  mercy  unto  thousands  of  them  that  love 
Him  and  keep  His  commandments.  4.  Add  to  this,  that  the  temporal  curse  pro- 
nounced in  the  text  must  ordinarily  be  allowed  to  be  conditional  only — that  is,  to 
take  place  no  otherwise  than  as  wicked  parents  shall  continue  obstinate  in  the 
practice  or  defence  of  those  sins  by  which  they  had  provoked  the  Divine  vengeance 
— which  condition,  it  must  be  confessed,  may  be  superseded  by  a  thorough  re- 
pentance ;  and  when  it  is  so,  it  may  please  God  to  respite  the  execution  of  His 
sentence,  or  to  mitigate,  as  there  shall  be  sufficient  reason,  the  severity  of  it. 
5.  Lastly,  for  a  more  clear  and  full  vindication  of  the  justice  of  God's  proceeding 
in  visiting,  upon  some  special  occasions,  the  sins  of  the  fathers  upon  the  children,  it 
will  be  necessary  that  we  consider  further  the  character  and  qualifications  of  those 
persons  upon  whom  He  determines  to  visit,  in  the  manner  above  mentioned,  the 
sins  of  their  forefathers.  For  we  must  not  imagine  that  He  punishes,  even  with 
temporal  evils  (according  to  the  usual  methods  of  His  providence),  the  sins  of  guilty 
parents  on  a  guiltless  offspring.  On  the  other  hand,  there  are  several  ways  by 
which  the  descendants  from  a  wicked  stock  may  make  the  guilt  originally  con- 
tracted by  their  fathers  in  some  measure  their  own,  either  by  treading  in  the  steps 
of  their  ancestors  —  which  is  not  unusual,  considering  the  powerful  influence  of 
their  bad  principles  and  examples,  strongly  inclining  them  to  such  an  imitation, 
by  which  and  other  means  family  vices,  as  well  as  diseases,  become  hereditary — or  by 
presuming  to  justify  or  to  palliate  the  malignity  of  the  transgressio»s  committed 
by  them  ;  or  yet  further,  by  not  humbling  their  souls,  under  a  just  and  lively  sense 
of  the  heinousness  of  them  ;  or  lastly,  by  some  personal  crimes  of  their  own,  no  less 
notorious,  which  may  justly  provoke  God  to  take  occasion  from  thence  to  visit  both 
their  own  and  the  iniquity  of  their  parents  upon  them.  In  which  several  cases  we 
have  no  reason  to  arraign  the  justice  of  God's  dealings  with  mankind.  Also  those 
judgments  of  God,  how  severe  soever,  may  always  be  improved  to  the  spiritual 
and  often  temporal  advantage  of  those  on  whom  they  light,  if  they  are  not  wanting 
to  themselves  in  making  a  proper  use  of  them  ;  which  is  so  evidently  true,  in  fact, 
that  temporal  evils  are  sometimes  the  only  means,  under  God,  of  reclaiming 
societies  of  men,  as  well  as  private  persons,  from  the  guilt  of  the  most  daring  and 
presumptuous  sins.  {John  Felling,  D.D.)  A  jealous  God: — In  this  glorious 
description  three  points  are  misunderstood,  and  therefore  demand  explanation.  He 
says,  "I  am  a  jealous  God."  In  his  learned  book  on  the  Study  of  Words,  Dean 
Trench  has  given  us  a  chapter  on  the  "mutation  of  language,"  showing  how  a  word 
may  change  its  meaning  through  the  lapse  of  years.  Perhaps  no  word  in  our 
language  has  been  more  abused  than  the  word  "jealous."  In  the  Scriptures  it  has 
a  double  significance.  Primarily  it  implies,  "  I  am  sensitive  of  My  rights  and 
honour."  And  who  is  not?  He  who  is  indifferent  to  his  rights  and  honour  is 
unworthy  of  manhood  ;  for  underlying  this  sensitiveness  is  the  appreciation  of  high- 
born character,  out  of  which  come  those  forces  that  make  men  good,  powerful,  and 
dignified.    This  is  the  meaning  of  Elijah,  when  he  said,  "  I  have  been  very  jealous 


CHAP,  v.]  DEVTERONOMY,  101 

for  the  Lord  God  of  hosts" — that  is,  "I  have  been  very  sensitive  as  to  Thine 
honour  ;  I  have  proclaimed  Thy  majesty  and  declared  Thy  law  on  the  plains  of 
Esdraelon,  on  the  summit  of  Gilboa,  and  on  the  heights  of  Mount  Carmel ;  I  have 
risked  everything  because  I  knew  that  Thou  hadst  Thy  rights  and  honour,  and  that 
I  was  set  for  their  defence."  St.  Paul  uses  the  term  in  another  signification,  im- 
plying a  solicitude  and  deep  concern  for  the  welfare  of  others  :  "I  am  jealous  over 
you  with  godly  jealousy  " — that  is,  "I  am  deeply  solicitous  for  your  happiness ; 
my  concern  is  profound."  It  is  in  this  endearing  sense,  as  if  the  Almighty  had 
said,  "I  cannot  allow  My  creatures  to  place  themselves  in  a  position  wherein  I 
cannot  love  and  bless  them. "  Could  we  ask  more  of  the  Infinite  Father  than  to  be 
solicitous  for  His  children,  that  they  may  not  place  themselves  in  the  position  of 
idolaters  and  thereby  forfeit  His  gracious  blessing  ?  As  a  patriot,  true  and  ardent, 
might  say,  "I  cannot  allow  my  country  to  be  placed  in  a  position,  by  a  false 
administration,  by  the  enactment  of  unrighteous  laws,  by  the  adoption  of  a  foreign 
policy,  whereby  it  would  be  excluded  from  the  favour  of  Jehovah  and  the  pros- 
perity which  springs  from  its  principles  and  history."  And  so  a  true  husband 
would  say,  * '  I  cannot  permit  my  wife  to  place  herself  in  such  a  state  wherein  I  can- 
not love  and  cherish  her."  No  true  man  is  indifferent  to  the  welfare  of  the  woman 
he  has  wedded,  nor  would  he  expose  her  love  and  person  to  companionship  fraught 
with  temptations  and  dangers  ;  to  do  so  would  prove  his  unworthiness  of  husbandry 
and  of  honourable  manhood.  A  husband  is  the  eternal  guardian  of  the  wife  of  his 
bosom.  He  is  to  protect  her  to  the  last  degree  ;  to  preserve  her  honour  he  is  to 
sacrifice  everything,  even  life  itself.  In  this  loftier  sense  Jehovah  says,  "I  am  a 
jealous  God  ;  do  not  worship  idols,  and  thereby  place  yourselves  beyond  the  limita- 
tions of  My  love  and  benediction."  There  is  another  declaration  in  this  ancient 
law  capable  of  an  explanation  reflective  of  a  better  and  truer  view  of  our  sovereign 
Creator  :  "Visiting  the  iniquity  of  the  fathers  upon  the  children  unto  the  third  and 
fourth  generation."  The  old  interpretation  is  both  false  and  cruel,  that  **  the  Lord 
of  heaven  holds  the  children  responsible  for  the  sins  of  their  parents."  Hoav 
monstrous  this  conception  of  the  Creator  !  To  vindicate  Himself  against  such  a 
degrading  charge  He  has  left  on  record  this  answer  :  "The  fathers  shall  not  be  put 
to  death  for  the  children,  neither  shall  the  children  be  put  to  death  for  the  fathers : 
every  man  shall  be  put  to  death  for  his  own  sin."  What,  then,  is  the  meaning  of 
this  extraordinary  expression  ?  The  term  "iniquity"  is  not  equivalent  of  punish- 
ment. He  does  not  say  that  He  visits  the  punishments  due  the  fathers  on  the 
children  to  the  third  and  fourth  generation,  but  simply  declares  a  great  truth, 
brought  out  distinctly  by  the  most  eminent  scientists  of  our  day,  that  the  law  of 
transmission  is  a  fact,  that  the  past  is  handed  down,  that  virtuous  and  vicious 
tendencies  are  transmitted  from  generation  to  generation.  The  whole  history  of 
the  world  is  in  proof  of  this ;  every  man  is  a  living  illustration  of  a  fact  which 
cannot  be  denied.  Our  physical,  intellectual,  and  moral  characteristics  are  an 
inheritance.  Men  are  bom  liars,  thieves,  murderers,  as  others  are  born  truth -loving, 
the  soul  of  honour,  and  tender  of  the  life  of  every  living  thing.  Gibbs,  the  pirate, 
was  a  pirate  from  his  mother's  womb  ;  the  elder  Booth,  the  famous  tragedian,  who 
could  personate  murder  on  the  stage  with  such  apparent  actuality  that  his  auditors 
cried  ' '  Murder,  murder ! "  yet,  from  his  birth  to  his  death,  was  tender  of  every- 
thing that  had  life.  It  is  one  of  the  proverbs  in  all  literature  that  men  are  born 
poets,  orators,  warriors.  Julius  Csesar,  Mark  Antony,  Columbus,  Voltaire,  and 
David  Hume  represent  this  great  law  of  transmission,  whose  characteristics  were 
inherited,  and  were  as  conspicuous  in  childhood  as  in  their  riper  years.  In  these 
words  of  His  law  God  only  proclaims  what  He  had  already  written  on  the  whole 
order  and  constitution  of  nature.  Herein  He  applies  this  law,  in  its  operations,  to 
the  transmission  of  idolatrous  tendencies  to  the  third  and  fourth  generation.  The 
"third  and  fourth"  may  here  be  proverbial,  as  the  terms  "seventh"  and  "tenth" 
are  proverbial ;  and  it  is  a  significant  and  historical  fact  that,  in  the  history  of  the 
Jews,  it  requires  three  or  four  generations  for  the  taint  of  idolatry  to  run  its  course 
and  become  extinct.  The  Hebrew  captives,  on  their  return  from  Babylon,  were  no 
longer  idolaters.  Whatever  their  offence  may  have  been,  charged  against  them 
prior  to  their  exile,  the  generation  who  came  from  the  banks  of  the  Tigris  and  of 
the  Euphrates,  and  who  were  of  the  third  and  fourth  generations,  were  free  from 
the  sin  which  led  to  the  captivity  of  their  ancestors.  Here,  then,  is  simply  a 
declaration  of  the  operation  of  a  law  which  we  recognise  in  the  dog  that  caresses 
us,  in  the  horse  which  carries  us,  in  the  flowers  that  cheer  us,  in  almost  every- 
thing   that   lives.     We   have  seen  the  son  inherit  the  evil   tendencies  of   his 


102  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  r. 

father,  and  have  witnessed  the  results  of  a  vicious,  prodigal  life  of  a  father 
through  succeeding  generations.  If  fault  is  found  with  the  teachings  of  the 
Bible  in  this  regard,  fault  must  be  found  with  the  order  of  nature.  And  it  is 
as  remarkable  as  true,  that  what  can  be  affirmed  of  individuals  may  be  of  nations  ; 
for  this  law  of  transmission  binds  national  life  as  it  does  the  life  of  individuality. 
"What  we  are  to-day  we  are  under  the  operation  of  this  fearful  law,  and  what 
American  generations  may  be,  through  unnumbered  centuries,  will  be  under  the 
operation  of  this  same  marvellous  law  of  heritage.  It  is  in  this  light  that  when 
Jehovah  speaks  of  visiting  the  iniquities  of  the  fathers  upon  the  children  to  the 
third  and  fourth  generations  He  speaks  of  the  taint  of  idolatry,  and  utters  a  fact 
for  which  all  history  stands  in  proof.  There  is  a  third  point  in  this  wonderful 
picture  worthy  a  moment's  consideration — God  declares  Himself  a  discriminating 
judge,  "that  will  by  no  means  clear  the  guilty."  And  who  would  have  Him  clear 
the  guilty  ?  Out  of  this  question  grows  the  deeper  one,  Shall  we  have  government 
or  no  government  ?  A  government  without  justice  is  unworthy  the  name  thereof. 
Law  that  can  be  infracted  with  impunity,  where  no  penalties  are  executed  for  the 
violation  thereof,  is  unworthy  the  honourable  designation  of  law.  If  the  right  to 
punish  inheres  in  the  family  and  in  organised  society,  why  may  we  not  assume  that 
it  is  in  accord  with  the  government  of  the  Infinite  Sovereign  of  the  universe  ?  A. 
system  of  pains  and  penalties  is  everywhere  prevalent.  We  may  make  a  distinc- 
tion between  penalties  and  consequences,  yet  the  issue  is  the  same — pain  attends 
transgression  of  law.  The  whole  universe  moves  in  orderly  procession.  The 
uniformities  of  nature  declare  that  order  is  the  first  law  of  heaven.  Man  is  no 
exception  to  this  rule  of  administration.  He  is  a  living,  walking  code  of  law,  and, 
whatever  his  religious  faith  or  his  purpose,  he  suffers  if  he  sins.  There  is  more 
beneficence  in  the  prohibitions  of  law  than  in  the  permissions  and  mandates. 
Doubtless  the  Almighty  had  a  choice,  in  the  creation  of  man,  whether  His  noble 
creature  should  be  a  machine,  whose  every  act  should  be  automatic  and  subject  to 
another's  touch,  or  whether  he  should  be  dignified  with  the  sovereignty  of  liberty, 
to  stand  or  fall  for  himself,  to  obey  or  disobey,  to  live  in  harmony  or  in  dissonance 
with  his  Creator.  Man's  crown  of  glory  is  liberty.  Liberty  means  free  will,  free 
will  means  government,  government  means  law,  law  implies  penalty,  penalty  im- 
plies pain.  The  Almighty  could  have  been  simply  our  Creator,  and  been  indifferent 
to  our  acts  and  the  results  of  our  actions  ;  but  in  the  boundlessness  of  His  benefi- 
cence He  has  placed  us  under  the  rule  of  justice,  and  in  keeping  thereof  there 
is  great  reward.  {J.  P.  Newman^  D.D.)  Our  twofold  heritage: — Let  a  man, 
righteous  or  unrighteous,  be  punished  for  a  crime  he  has  not  committed,  how  his 
sense  of  justice  is  outraged  ! — what  burning  resentment  springs  up  within  him 
against  those  who  inflict  it  upon  him  !  His  quarrel  is  with  his  feUow-men,  with  aU 
the  world,  if  it  condemn  him,  innocent,  to  suffer  with  the  guilty.  There  is  nothing 
in  the  nature  of  things  which  decrees  that  that  law  shall  be  so,  and  not  otherwise. 
Of  all  the  laws  framed  by  man,  one  thing  only  may  be  safely  predicted,  that  by 
man  they  will  be  changed.  The  laws  which  are  framed  by  any  nation  may  be  good, 
but  they  cannot  stand  for  ever.  They  are  the  embodiment  of  that  nation's  con- 
ception of  justice.  But  that  conception  must  become  larger  as  the  nation's  mind 
and  heart  grow  greater.  If  we  knew  justice  in  the  abstract,  then  the  work  of  our 
law-makers  would  be  comparatively  easy ;  all  their  task  would  be  to  apply  their 
knowledge  to  the  concrete.  But  we  cannot  know  absolute  justice,  therefore  we 
should  be  content  if  our  changing  laws  are  steps  ever  leading  upwards  to  our  ideal  of 
perfectly  just  relationship.  But  there  are  other  greater  laws  than  these — laws  which 
do  not  denote  the  progress  of  time,  but  stand  through  time  the  representatives  of 
the  eternal ;  remain,  amid  a  world  of  change,  the  symbols  of  the  unchangeable, 
working  themselves  out  unerringly  and  unpityingly.  Surely  to  rebel  against  such 
laws  is  only  to  invoke  despair.  We  are  all  proud  to  call  ourselves  the  heirs  of  past 
ages.  But  to  be  the  victims  of  them — does  that  not  seem  hard  ?  The  old  theological 
dogma  of  predestination,  the  doctrine  which  taught  that  mankind  was  divided  into 
elect  and  non-elect,  that  ere  a  man  was  his  doom  was,  and  he  might  not  pass  it, 
seems  to  us  peculiarly  revolting.  The  injustice  of  it  could  not  but  arouse  and 
inflame  the  worst  passions  in  a  strong  nature.  It  was  the  death-knell  of  striving 
and  aspiration.  That  it  was  an  evil  doctrine  few  will  be  found  to  deny.  Why, 
then,  did  it  live  so  long  and  die  so  hard  ?  Simply  because  there  was  a  measure  of 
truth  in  it.  But  the  truth  in  it  was  pushed  to  an  extreme  and  became  falsehood. 
Science  restated  the  law  in  her  own  terms.  She  does  not  pursue  the  unhappy 
individual  beyond  the  grave  and  through  all  eternity  with  her  doom  of  predestined 


CHAP,  v.]  DEUTERONOMY.  108 

and  unalterable  evil.     She  simply  delivers  him  up  to  the  law  she  has  discovered, 
and  repeats  in  language,  and  with  proofs  that  cannot  be  gainsaid,  "  The  sins  of  the 
fathers  are  visited  upon  the  children."    The  law  of  heredity  is  one  which  is  filling  a 
larger  and  larger  place  in  the  science  and  thought  of  our  day.     Its  influence  is  traced 
in  our  physical  organism,  in  our  mental  endowments,  and  in  our  moral  power.     Men 
who  have  made  mental  diseases  their  special  study  tell  us  that  our  work,  worry, 
violent  grief  or  pain,  all  these  and  the  many  kindred  ills  which  tend  to  induce 
madness,  are  not  to  be  reckoned  for  number  against  the  cases  in  which  the  influence 
of  heredity  can  be  clearly  traced.     And  putting  aside  these  cases  of  what  we  may 
call  accidental  insanity,  and  considering  only  the  hereditary,  we  find  that  always 
the  progenitor  of  it  was  sin.     But  not  only  do  the  sins  of  our  fathers  descend  upon 
us  in  sutlering  of  body,  or  in  varying  peculiarities  of  mind  ;  they  find  us  out  in  our 
moral  nature  as  well,  in  a  predisposition  to  like  sins  as  our  forefathers  sinned,  in  a 
weakness  of  our  will  before   certain   temptations.     It  is   an   appalling  thing.     It 
wakes  within  us  a  new  fear  of  our  fellows  and  a  new  dread  of  ourselves.     Is  there  a 
grown-up  man  or  woman  who  cannot  furnish  an  analogy  from  his  own  experience  ? 
After  we  have  striven  and  agonised  and  prayed,  and  by  sore  trial  and  long  strife 
have  built  up  habits  of  virtue  to  ourselves,  have  we  never  seen  them  all  fall  off  from 
us  and  known  ourselves  stripped  and  naked  of  our  virtue  and  our  strength,  one  with 
the  weakness  and  sin  that  beset  us,  knowing,  even  in  the  midst  of  our  frenzied  cry  to 
be  kept  back  from  that  sin,  that  we  shall  have  surrendered  our  will  to  it  ?    And  so 
our  sin-convicted  souls  let  go  their  much-prized  doctrines  of  free  will,  and  own  their 
will  fettered  by  low  desires,  in  bondage  to  the  sins  of  the  past ;  and  in  our  misery 
we  grasp  at  the  truth  in  the  doctrine  of  heredity  that  in  the  dogma  of  predestination 
we  scoff'ed  at  and  denied.     But  there  is  another  side  to  the  law.     The  second  part  of 
our  text  proclaims  it  to  us — "showing  mercy  unto  thousands  of  them  that  love  Me 
and  keep  My  commandments."    The  phraseology  of  the  position  of  the  two  clauses 
leads  us  into  an  eiTor  which  only  thought  on  the  subject  can  correct.     The  entire 
text  calls  up  before  our  mental  vision  two  distinct  classes  of  people.     On  the  one 
hand  we  see  the  suff"ering  descendants  of  sinful  progenitors  working  out  the  law  unto 
the  third  and  fourth  generations  ;  on  the  other  hand  we  see  the  happy  thousands 
who  love  God  and  keep  His  commandments,  delighting  themselves  in  His  mercy, 
or,  as  the  marginal  note  of  the  Revised  Version  permits  us  to  put  it,  we  see  the 
mercy  of  God  upon  those  who  keep  His  commandments,  descending  through  a 
thousand  generations.     But  when  we  look  at  it  more  closely  we  see  that  we  have 
been  deceived  into  making  such  a  division.     In  real  life  such  a  division  is  not 
possible.     These  are  the  two  extremes  between  which  all  men  are  comprehended. 
Further,  as  there  is  not  one,  nor  ever  has  been,  who  is  wholly  evil  or  wholly  good, 
it  follows  that  while  there  is  not  one  of  us  who  does  not  sufl"er  in  some  degree  from 
the  sins  of  those  now  dead,  also  there  is  not  one  of  us  who  is  so  poor  as  not  to  have 
the  heritage  of  God's  mercy  bequeathed  to  us  from  some  progenitor  who  has  won  it 
for  us  by  loving  God  and  keeping  His  commandments.     Science  tells  us  the  self- 
same tale.     It  is  not  only  evil  that  persists,  but  good  also.     We  do  not  hear  so 
much  about  it.     We  all  know  and  think  too  much  of  the  evil  that  is  in  the  world, 
and  too  little  of  the  good.     And  so  we  turn  towards  pessimism,  and  call  our  dark 
imaginings  truths.     The  sins  are  visited  unto  the  third  and   fourth  generation. 
God's  mercy  extends  unto  a  thousand  generations.     What  a  wealth  of  meaning  and 
truth  is  hidden  there  !     Think  of  the  numbers  merely.     Three  or  four,  even  genera- 
tions,  we  have  no  difficulty  in  figuring  to  ourselves.     They  exist  at  one  time  among 
us.     But  a  thousand  generations  !    The  imagination  exults  in  the  comparison  between 
three  and  four  and  a  thousand.     But  let  us  consider  the  truth  of  it  as  attested 
by  our  reason  and  experience.     Evil  has  two  ends,  and  two  only,  which  are  possible 
to  it.     The  one  is  that  it  shall  be  overcome  of  good,  and  by  being  so  its  history 
becomes  merged  in  that  of  good,  and  its  existence  as  evil  is  ended  ;  the  other  is  that 
it  shall  persist  until  it  die.     The  inevitable  tendency  of   evil  is  toward  self- 
destruction.     Evil  repeated  and  repeated  does  not  gain  strength  and  power  by  every 
repetition.     For  a  time  it  does,  but  by  and  by  at  every  repetition  it  becomes 
weaker ;  each  reproduction  of  itself  means  a  fresh  drain  upon  a  vital  power  that 
has  no  perennial  fount  of  life  to  draw  upon,  so  that  it  becomes  exhausted.     The 
imagination  even  cannot  conceive  of  a  thing  growing  ever  increasingly  evil,  till  it  is 
wholly  so,  and  yet  continuing  to  live.     But  we,  who  know  good  and  evil  struggling 
together  within  ourselves,  are  tempted  to  think  the  one  as  great  as  the  other  because 
it  is  as  close  to  us.     "  The  sins  of  the  fathers  are  visited  upon  the  children  unto  the 
third  and  fourth  generation  "—that  is  truth  !    Yes,  the  surface  of  truth.     The  mercy 


lOi  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  V. 

of  God  is  unto  a  thousand  generations — that  is  truth  ! — yes,  fundamental  truth,  the 
secret  of  our  nature,  the  source  of  our  undying  hope.  And  that  truth  we  find 
everywhere.  If  we  examine  our  store  of  experience  and  observation  we  find  it 
written  there.  And  if  we  bid  our  intellect  pronounce  upon  it,  she  divorces  good 
from  evil  that  we  may  see  the  nature  of  each.  She  shows  us  evil,  cut  off  from  the 
good  to  which  it  clings,  hurling  itself  in  headlong  flight  down  to  everlasting 
nothingness.  She  shows  us  good,  following  the  law  of  its  nature,  climbing  with 
slow,  sure  step  the  heights  of  heaven.  {A.  H.  Moncur  Sime.)  The  law  of 
heredity : — Even  moral  qualities  are  often  inherited,  for  the  spring  is  poisoned  at  the 
fountain  head,  and  the  water  is  never  pure  again.  Uncleanness,  untruthfulness, 
passion, — how  often  we  can  too  sadly  trace  in  them  the  evil  likeness  of  the  sin  of 
the  parents.  Let  us  not,  however,  exaggerate  the  truth.  God  never  charges  a 
child  with  the  guilt  of  its  parents'  sin.  The  most  awful  result  of  sin,  its  guilt  in 
God's  sight,  is  never  transmitted.  It  was  on  this  point,  amongst  others,  that  the 
older  Calvinism  made  shipwreck  of  itself.  It  taught  that  children  were  guilty 
before  God  because  of  the  sin  of  their  first  parents  ;  that  we  were  chargeable  with 
the  guilt  of  Adam's  sin,  and  were  liable  to  eternal  death  for  it ;  and  in  saying  this 
Calvinism  outraged  the  conscience  of  humanity,  and  it  fell  because  of  the  outrage. 
God  does  make  a  child  to  suffer  for  the  sin  of  his  parents,  but  He  never  imputes 
guilt  without  personal  transgression.  Everjrthing  else  that  results  from  sin,  its 
physical  degradation,  mental  incapacity,  moral  infirmity  of  will,  depraved  tastes 
and  appetites,  inward  bias  to  evil,  all  these  are  the  evil  legacy  that  sin  hands  down 
from  father  to  child  ;  and  all  are  included  in  this  solemn  law  :  "for  I  the  Lord  thy 
God  am  a  jealous  God,  visiting  the  iniquity  of  the  fathers  upon  the  children,"  &c. 
It  may  be  said  that  this  does  not  relieve  the  difficulty  of  this  command.  Why,  it 
may  be  asked,  does  a  righteous  and  loving  God  ever  allow  an  innocent  child  to  suffer 
for  the  sins  of  his  parents  ?  I  answer  that  it  may  be  impossible  for  us  to  give  a 
complete  reply  to  this  question,  but  there  are  some  considerations  which  serve 
materially  to  alleviate  the  difficulty.  1.  Let  us  not  forget  that,  however  we  may 
explain  it,  the  facts  remain.  If  there  were  no  Bible,  no  revelation  of  God  in  Christ, 
the  tragic  effects  of  heredity  would  remain.  2.  And  still  more  let  us  bear  in  mind 
— and  this  seems  to  me  profoundly  important — that  the  law  of  heredity  is  not  a  law 
meant  to  curse,  but  rather  intended  to  bless  man.  In  other  words,  the  fact  that  the 
iniquity  of  the  fathers  is  visited  on  the  children  is  only  part  of  a  wider  law,  that 
moral  and  physical  qualities  are  transmitted,  a  law  that  was  meant  to  secure  an 
entail  of  blessing  on  posterity,  and  not  a  heritage  of  woe.  A  "godly  seed,"  what  a 
wealth  of  untold  blessing  there  is  in  these  words  !  If  we  read  the  Old  Testament, 
nothing  is  more  significant  than  to  notice  how  this  law  of  the  inheritance  of  blessing 
is  repeated  again  and  again.  (Gen.  xviii.  19.)  (Psa.  cii.  28.)  (Prov.  xx.  7.) 
(Psa.  xlv.  16.)  May  we  not  see  this  law  in  operation  before  our  eyes  to-day  ?  Are 
there  not  homes  we  know  which  have  been  blessed  for  their  parents'  sake  ?  3.  And 
thirdly,  we  may  see  that  even  in  the  solemn  sanction  to  this  law  there  is  a  larger 
inheritance  of  blessing  promised  than  of  evil.  If  we  look  at  the  margin  of  Revised 
Version  we  shall  find  the  true  rendering,  not  "thousands,"  but  "unto  a  thousand 
generations."  (Compare  Deut.  vii.  9.)  We  stand  now  in  the  full  sunshine  of  this 
beneficent  law.  One  question  remains.  Why  is  this  sanction  to  this  law  introduced 
here  ?  I  think  the  reply  is  two-fold.  First,  there  was  in  the  solemn  sanction  to 
the  law  a  special  warning  to  the  Jews  against  the  peril  of  image  or  idol  worship.  It 
would  descend  to  their  children,  and  would  involve  them  as  well  as  their  forefathers 
in  its  punishment.  Unhappily,  they  found  this  only  too  true.  Generation  after 
generation  of  Israelites  suffered  from  the  idolatry  of  their  parents.  It  was  not  until 
the  fierce  fires  of  the  dispersion  and  the  exile  in  Babylon  had  burned  out  the  last 
remnants  of  idolatry  from  the  heart  of  the  nation  that  they  obeyed  this  law.  Then 
there  was  another  and  more  general  reason  for  this  warning,  ana  one  that  applies  to 
all  nations  as  well  as  the  Jews.  The  worship  of  false  gods,  and  the  false  worship  of 
the  true  God  are  crimes  against  the  holiness  and  majesty  of  the  Eternal  God,  and  as 
such  are  visited  therefore  with  the  most  tremendous  penalties.  False  religion 
vitiates  the  family  and  the  nation  as  well  as  the  individual.  There  are  nations  in 
Europe,  for  instance,  which  are  suffering  to-day  because  this  law  of  God  has  been 
wickedly  broken.  {G.  S.  Barrett,  D.D. )  Iticitements  to  keeping  God's  commands : — 
The  "ten  words"  are  prefaced  with  the  declaration,  "I  am  the  Lord  thy  God"  ; 
now  He  declares,  "  I  the  Lord  thy  God  am  a  jealous  God — showing  mercy."  Our 
fathers  declared  that  these  words  of  God  are  "terrible  to  His  foes,  gracious  to  His 
friends."    Consider — I.  How  this  zeal  of  His  wrath  is  manifested  towaed 


CHAP,  v.]  DEUTERONOMY.  105 

THOSK  WHO  HATE  HiM.  1.  This  is  shown  in  various  examples  in  the  New  TestAment. 
Punishment  follows,  like  a  dark  shadow,  the  footsteps  of  the  criminal.  Indeed,  one 
has  merely  to  look  around  on  the  world  to  see  how  true  this  is.  What  is  the 
meaning  of  the  proverb,  "As  men  live  so  it  fares  with  them"?  It  means  that 
men  had  observed  and  noticed  that  when  a  man  sinned  by  excess  against  a  sound 
body  and  against  reason,  it  fared  ill  with  him  !  The  body  became  sickly,  the  mind 
weak ;  that  when  a  man  is  discontented  with  an  honest  calling,  or  manages  care- 
lessly the  goods  entrusted  to  him,  it  fares  ill  with  him.  His  trade  does  not  support 
him,  his  possessions  vanish,  his  end  is  want,  beggary,  or  crime.  To  the  unfaithful, 
kc,  will  come  home  the  proverb,  "God  punishes  one  rogue  through  another,"  &c. 
2.  Does  this  mean  that  sin  is  punished  naturally  ?  Yes.  ' '  Sin  is  the  destruction 
of  a  people."  God  has  so  formed  the  world  that  this  is  the  result.  3.  But  God's 
zeal  against  those  who  hate  Him  is  manifested  in  ways  which  we  cannot  under- 
stand ;  e.g.,  how  often  examples  proving  the  proverbs,  "Ill-gotten  gain  never 
prospers,"  "It  does  not  come  to  the  third  generation,"  come  before  men  !  So,  too, 
the  saying,  "The  pitcher  goes  to  the  well  until  it  is  broken."  Many  begin  a  god- 
less course  apparently  with  success,  until  at  some  moment  the  word  comes,  "Thus 
far  and  no  farther,"  and  in  a  moment  the  fabric  formed  by  evil  deeds  is  shivered 
in  fragments.  "The  mills  of  God  grind  slowly,  but  they  grind  exceeding  small." 
"They  who  drink  deep  must  finish  with  the  lees."  4.  But  God's  hand  often  ia 
seen,  as  it  were,  visibly  in  this  terrible  work.  Duke  Rudolph  of  Swabia,  who 
rebelled  against  the  emperor,  over  eight  hundred  years  ago,  when  his  hand  was  cut 
oflf  in  battle  he  cursed  the  bleeding  stump,  and  said  with  a  sigh,  "This  was  the 
hand  with  which  I  swore  fealty  to  the  Emperor  Henry."  So  with  people:  the 
Canaanites — the  Romans  under  the  late  empire.  5.  This  word  is  terrible  to  God's 
enemies,  and  although  many  an  evil-doer  seems  to  prosper,  yet  could  we  see  his 
heart !  The  evil  man  carries  a  tormenter  within  him.  '  *  An  evil  conscience  is  as 
a  fire  in  the  bosom" — it  is  a  mirror  that  reflects  every  sin.  With  pleasure  the 
prodigal  leaves  the  father's  house — with  pain  he  must  return,  if  ever  he  does.  And 
to  the  evil  man  the  thought  of  death  is  like  the  thought  of  the  executioner  to  the 
criminal.  6.  But  suppose  that  punishment  does  not  come  here,  that  the  sinner's 
conscience  is  hardened,  and  that  he  meets  death  suddenly  without  a  thought  of 
past  or  future— what  then  ?  Let  who  will  call  him  happy.  Not  even  the  heathen 
did  that,  but  considered  that  the  reward  would  follow.  And  thus,  too.  Scripture 
declares  that  the  reward  of  unrepented  evil-doing  shall  follow  the  sinner  into  the 
invisible.  Them  that  hate  Me — and  there  are  many  who  may  not  be  classed  with 
murderers,  thieves,  &c.,  who  do  so  ;  mockers  of  religion,  &c.,  despisers  of  God's 
revealed  Word  and  law.  7.  And  that  the  sins  of  the  fathers  are  visited  on  the 
children  is  a  fact  of  actual  experience.  The  enemy  of  the  faith,  who  brings  up  his 
children  to  despise  religion,  &c.,  is  taking  the  moral  foundation  from  his  child's 
life.  The  children  of  prodigals  may  be  beggars,  the  children  of  the  debauchee 
inherit  a  weak  and  feeble  frame,  it  may  be,  &c.  This  is  the  order  of  the  world. 
Yet  to  the  children  this  is  intended  to  be  a  salutary  cross  teaching  them  to  avoid 
the  sins  of  their  parents,  for  God  has  also  said,  "The  son  shall  not  bear  the 
iniquity,"  &c.  (Ezek.  xviii.  20).  II.  Consider  how  the  zeal  of  God's  love  is 
SHOWN  towards  THOSE  WHO  LOVE  HiM.  1.  He  shows  mercy  unto  thousands — unto 
many  generations — of  those  who  love,  and  show  their  love  in  keeping  His  command- 
ments. Not  that  we  can  gain  or  purchase  the  Divine  mercy  by  keeping  perfectly 
the  Divine  law.  No  man  can  do  this.  2.  But  God  shows  mercy  to  them  that  love 
Him.  It  is  well-pleasing  to  Him  when  men  seek  to  keep  His  commandments  out 
of  love  to  Him — not  from  amiability  of  character  merely,  or  from  fear  of  punish- 
ment, or  with  a  view  to  present  or  future  reward,  but  from  love  to  God.  3.  If  we 
love  God  because  He  has  first  loved  us,  and  sent  His  Son,  &c. ,  because  we  know 
Christ  and  the  riches  of  His  grace,  and  seek  to  show  our  gratitude  to  Him  by  doing 
His  will — these  God  sees  in  upright  hearts  which  love  Him,  and  because  of  this 
goodwill  He  spurns  not  our  imperfect  eff"orts  to  serve  Him.  "Thou,  Lord,  dost 
bless  the  righteous,"  &c.  (Psa.  v.  12).  Many  a  pious  man  may  be  poor  and  of  little 
account  in  the  world — his  life  seems  poor  in  joy,  &c.  Yet  ask  him  how  it  fares 
with  him,  and  you  will  find  that  amid  his  poverty  he  can  rejoice  in  this  blessedness 
of  the  righteous.  4.  "Say  to  the  righteous  that  it  shall  be  well  with  him,"  &c. 
(Isa.  iii.  10).  It  is  not  their  lot  to  sow  and  not  reap,  to  labour  and  yet  lack  bread, 
to  build  and  yet  be  roofless,  &c.  A  blessing  shall  rest  on  their  labour,  &c.  ;  their 
children  shall  rise  up  and  call  them  blessed  ;  whilst  the  godless  shall  not  see  when 
good  comes,  and  in  the  end  shall  be  like  chaff  which  the  wind  drives  away  (Psa.  i. ). 


106  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  y. 

5.  It  is  they  who  believe  that  "the  blessing  of  the  Lord  maketh  rich"  who  shall 
stand  fast  in  evil  days.  They  trust  in  God's  friendship  and  fear  not  the  worid's 
enmity ;  they  go  not  with  the  multitude  to  do  evil,  but  walk  in  the  ways  of  God. 
The  Lord  may  prove  and  try  them,  but  it  is  that  they  may  stand  more  firmly  in  His 
strength  ;  but  He  will  make  the  crooked  straight  before  them.  The  morning  may 
be  dark,  but  the  day  will  brighten.  "  If  I  must  choose,"  said  a  good  man,  "I 
had  liefer  sow  in  rainy  weather,  and  reap  in  fair  weather,  than  sow  in  fair  weather 
and  reap  in  rain  "  (Psa.  cxxvi. ).  6.  And  the  blessing  of  the  Lord  shall  continue  on 
the  house  of  the  righteous— to  a  thousand  generations.  Of  the  tree  planted  by 
watercourses  it  is  said  "his  leaf  shall  not  wither."  The  righteous  children  of 
the  righteous  shall  inherit  the  blessing.  Well  said  the  apostle,  "Godliness  is 
profitable  unto  all  things,"  &c.  (1  Tim.  iv.  8).     {K.  H.  Caspari.) 

Yer.  11.  Thou  shalt  not  take  the  name  of  the  Lord  thy  God  in  vain. — The 

Third  Commandment : — I.  What  is  required  in  it.  This  supposes  that  it  is  an 
indispensable  duty  for  us  to  make  mention  of  the  name  of  God.  II.  The  sins 
FORBIDDEN  IN  THIS  COMMANDMENT  ;  and  accordingly  we  violate  it  by  not  using  the 
name  of  God  in  such  a  way  as  it  is  required.  This  includes  in  it — 1.  The  not  making 
any  profession  of  religion,  as  being  afraid  or  ashamed  to  own  that  in  which  the  name 
of  God  is  so  much  concerned.  2.  Persons  take  the  name  of  God  in  vain,  when,  though 
they  make  a  profession  of  religion,  yet  it  is  not  in  such  a  way  as  God  has  required, 
and  this  is  done  by  using  His  attributes,  ordinances,  or  works,  in  which  He  makes 
Himself  known,  in  an  unbecoming  manner.  3.  The  name  of  God  is  taken  in  vain  by 
blasphemy,  which  is  a  thinking  or  speaking  reproachfully  of  Him,  as  though  He  had 
no  right  to  the  glory  that  belongs  to  His  name.  4.  This  commandment  is  broken  by 
not  using  religious  oaths  in  a  right  manner,  or  by  violating  them  ;  and,  on  the  other 
hand,  by  all  sinful  and  profane  oaths  and  cursing.  5.  This  commandment  is  also 
broken  by  murmuring,  curiously  prying  into,  and  misapplying  God's  decrees  or 
providences,  or  perverting  what  He  has  revealed  in  His  Word,  i.e.  when  we  apply 
things  sacred  to  profane  uses,  and  have  not  a  due  regard  to  the  glory  of  God,  which 
is  contained  therein.  6.  This  commandment  is  further  broken  by  making  use  of 
God's  name  as  a  charm  ;  as  when  the  writing  or  pronouncing  some  name  of 
God  is  pretended  to  be  an  expedient  to  heal  diseases  or  drive  away  evil  spirits. 
7.  This  commandment  is  further  broken  by  reviling  or  opposing  God's  truth,  grace, 
and  ways  ;  whereby  we  cast  contempt  on  that  which  is  most  sacred,  and  lightly 
esteem  that  which  He  sets  such  a  value  on  and  makes  Himself  known  by. 
III.  The  REASONS  annexed  to  THE  Third  Commandment.  And  these  are  taken 
— 1.  From  the  consideration  of  what  God  is  in  Himself,  as  He  is  the  Lord,  whose 
name  alone  is  Jehovah  ;  whereby  He  puts  us  in  mind  of  His  sovereignty  over  us, 
and  His  undoubted  right  to  obedience  from  us,  and  hereby  intimates  that  His 
excellency  should  fill  us  with  the  greatest  reverence  and  humility,  when  we  think 
or  speak  of  anything  by  which  He  makes  Himself  known.  Moreover,  He  reveals 
Himself  to  His  people  as  their  God,  that  so  His  gi-eatness  should  not  confound  us,  or 
His  dread,  as  an  absolute  God,  whom  we  have  offended,  make  us  despair  of  being 
accepted  in  His  sight.  Therefore  we  are  to  look  upon  Him  as  our  reconciled  God 
and  Father  in  Christ,  which  is  the  highest  motive  to  obedience.  2.  The  observation 
of  this  commandment  is  further  enforced  by  a  threatening  denounced  against  those 
that  break  it.  {Thomas  Ridglet,  D.D.)  On  taking  God's  name  in  vain: — The 
'"'  Name  of  God  "  meant  much  more  than  the  mere  breathing  of  an  articulate  word 
by  which  men  spoke  of  Him.  It  meant  God  in  His  reality,  in  His  immanence, 
in  His  eternity.  To  take  His  name  in  vain — that  is,  to  no  purpose — is  to  trifle  with 
Omnipotence  ;  it  is  to  treat  Him  as  though  He  were  not.  Thou  takest  His  name  in 
vain  when  thou  triest  to  forget  or  ignore  Him,  to  live  without  Him,  more  defiant 
than  the  very  devils,  to  believe  yet  not  to  tremble.  Observe,  there  is  no  menace 
here.  It  is  the  awful  statement  of  an  eternal  fact.  If  by  godlessness,  and  dis- 
obedience, and  hypocrisy  thou  art  taking  God's  name  in  vain,  thou  art  guilty  ;  and 
if  responsible,  thou  must  bear  the  consequences  whatever  they  should  be.  Being 
guilty,  how  can  He  hold  thee  guiltless  who  seeth  through  all  shams  and  is  the  very 
God  of  truth  ?  But  it  is  too  sadly  possible  to  make  life  itself  one  long  act  of  taking 
God's  name  in  vain.  Take,  by  way  of  illustration,  the  great  world  of  business  with 
which  so  many  of  us  are  in  one  way  or  another  connected.  Is  there  a  man  whose 
work  is  scamped  work  ?  Is  there  a  man  who  is  engaged  in  the  accursed  branch  of 
trade,  which  sells  spirits  to  drunkards  or  savages,  or  the  owning  of  low  gin-shops,  or 
tenements  unfit  for  human  habitation  and  often  let  for  immoral  purposes,  or  any- 


CHAP,  v.]  DEUTERONOMY.  107 

thing  which  gravitates  to  the  misery  of  mankind?  Is  there  a  man  who  sweats  his 
workers,  defrauds  them  of  their  wages,  grinds  the  faces  of  the  poor,  excusing  him- 
self by  custom,  treating  human  beings  as  though  they  were  mere  chattels  and 
implements  of  trade?  Is  there  a  man  who  has  made  large  sums  of  money  by 
plausible  astute  bargains,  palmed  off  under  the  form  of  honourable  agreement  upon 
the  unsophisticated  ignorance  of  non-business  men  ?  Well,  all  such  men  spend  their 
lives  in  taking  God's  name  in  vain,  for  they  spend  their  whole  lives  in  conditions 
which  defy  the  fundamental  laws  of  that  Being  whom  they  profess  to  serve.  The 
Third  Commandment  is  far  more  searching  than  this.  A  man  may  be  utterly 
respectable,  a  woman  may  be  perfectly  moral,  yet  both  of  them  guilty  of  this  sin, 
and  what  one  has  called  the  great  slugs  of  commonplace  and  cant  may  be  leaving 
their  slimy  trails  all  over  their  lives.  The  human  being  who  is  rendering  no  single 
true  and  self-denying  service  to  his  fellow-men,  the  life  that  ignores  God's  essential 
requirement  that  we  should  love  our  neighbour  as  ourselves,  is  a  life  that  He  will 
not  hold  guiltless — a  life  that  takes  His  name  in  vain.  Nor  does  it  matter  in  the 
least  if  in  the  man  or  in  the  priest  this  selfishness  turns  into  the  form  of  some 
religionism.  Not  only  is  that  religion  no  religion  which,  loving  its  party  more  than 
the  Church,  goes  on  to  love  the  Church  more  than  God,  and  ends  by  loving  itself 
more  than  all.  Surely  then,  in  conclusion,  this  is  an  intensely  searching  command- 
ment. If  we  examine  it,  every  one  of  us  may  well  be  afraid  lest  we,  in  not  any 
slight  or  venial  manner,  but  most  guiltily,  take  God's  name  in  vain.  Let  us 
search  ourselves  with  candles  and  see  whether  by  profanity,  falsity,  malice,  sloth, 
self-indulgence,  lust,  worldliness,  greed,  or  merely  nominal  profession,  we  in  our 
whole  lives  have  hitherto  been  taking  God's  name  in  vain  ;  let  us  seek  forgiveness 
where  alone  it  can  be  found.     {Dean  Farrar.)  The   Third  Commandinent : — 

I.  Has  our  conveesation  been  always  such,  as  that  there  was  never  anything  dis- 
honourable to  His  glory,  and  always  everything  suited  to  do  Him  honour?  1.  Has 
there  been  nothing  dishonourable  to  God  upon  our  lips  ?  Have  we  profaned  God's 
name,  taking  it  in  our  mouths  lightly,  irreverently,  and  without  design  of  doing 
Him  honour  ?  Have  you  never  treated  irreligiously  God's  Word,  and  the  truths  it 
contains  ?  And  this,  whether  by  disputing  against  what  it  saith,  or  by  indecently 
using  the  expressions  of  it  ?  Have  you  never  spoken  lightly  of  God's  ordinances.  His 
day,  sacraments.  His  worship,  and  especially  the  preaching  of  the  Word,  wherein 
we  are  most  apt  to  offend  because  it  comes  to  us  through  the  hands  of  men  ?  Have 
you  never  spoken  rashly  of  God's  people  ;  too  hastily  judging  and  censuring  them  ; 
too  readily  receiving  and  propagating  evil  reports  concerning  them  ;  running  them 
down  for  their  infirmities,  and  giving  a  malicious  turn  to  their  graces ;  and  so 
miscalling  the  profession  of  Christ?  Have  you  never  spoken  disrespectfully  of 
God's  providence  and  grace?  (Chap.  viii.  17,  ix.  4.)  Have  you  never  spoken  dis- 
honourably of  God's  promises  ?  2.  Has  our  conversation  been  always  not  only  not 
dishonourable,  but  such  as  in  everything  was  suited  to  glorify  God?  Have  we 
always  in  circumstances  required  spoken  for  God  ?  (Psa.  cxix.  46. )  Also,  when  we 
have  been  speaking  of  God,  have  we  always  done  it  with  all  that  reverence  which 
became  us  towards  Him,  so  as  to  exalt  Him,  and  express  a  lively  sense  upon  our 
hearts  of  His  being  that  glorious  God  we  say  He  is  ?  II.  In  conduct  have  you  not 
been  guilty  of  taking  God's  name  in  vain  ?  1.  Negatively  :  has  there  been  nothing 
in  your  conduct  dishonourable  to  that  Jehovah  whose  servant  you  profess  yourself 
to  be  ?  (1)  Consider  your  general  calling  as  Christians,  have  you  done  nothing 
dishonourable  to  the  name  of  Jesus  therein  ?  Looking  back  on  your  past  years  can 
you  say,  "  I  am  pure  from  the  blood  of  all  men  "  ?  Have  you  in  no  instances,  at  no 
time,  set  before  the  world  an  example  dishonourable  to  your  Lord  ?  What,  did  you 
never  show  forth  any  pride,  anger,  envy,  resentment  ?  (2)  Besides  our  general,  we 
have  all  of  us  a  special  calling,  and  it  is  peculiarly  needful  we  should  all  inquire  if 
we  have  not,  by  our  conduct  therein,  dishonoured  God's  holy  name.  Did  you 
never  betray  your  truth  through  idleness,  vanity,  company-keeping,  desire  of  man's 
favour  ?  Did  you  never  pervert  it  to  the  ends  of  pride  and  vain-glory  ?  Has  the 
world  never  seen  anything  in  your  conduct  respecting  your  calling  which  has  been 
dishonourable  to  the  Christian  name  ?  2.  The  positive  side.  Have  we  so  conducted 
ourselves  always  in  our  general  and  special  calling  as  might  most  tend  to  glorify 
God's  name  ?  The  Scripture  is  express  (Matt.  v.  16).  (1)  In  our  general  calling, 
have  we  been  always  shining  lights  ?  Was  the  will  of  God  our  rule  always,  and  our 
onh'  rule  ?  Have  we  been  always  examples  of  faith  and  heavenly-mindedness,  hope 
and  charity,  meekness  and  humility,  patience  and  contentedness,  diligence  and  zeal  ? 
(2)  Also,  in  our  special  callings,  have  we  done  all  we  might  for  God's  glory  ?    Have 


108  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  y. 

we  been  faithful,  diligent,  cheerful,  unwearied,  upright  day  after  day  in  our  Father's 
work  ?  Have  we  always  said  in  our  hearts,  thus  and  thus  shall  God  be  glorified, 
and  has  this  stirred  us  up  to  labour  and  not  to  faint  ?  {S.  Walker ^  B.A.)  Tka 
Third  Commandment: — I.  The  nature  of  this  sin  may  be  advantageously 
unfolded  by  considering  it  as  it  respects  the  name  and  the  works  of  God.  The  name 
of  God  is  profaned,  that  is,  treated  with  irreverence — 1.  In  perjury  or  false  swear- 
ing. 2.  When  the  name  of  God  is  used  in  any  light,  irreverent  manner,  the  same 
sin  is  committed.  3.  We  are  guilty  of  this  sin  also  when  we  invoke  the  name  of 
God  lightly  and  irreverently  in  prayer,  or  without  that  seriousness,  humility,  and 
religious  awe  which  are  indispensable  to  the  acceptable  performance  of  this  duty. 

4.  A  still  more  heinous  transgression  of  the  same  nature  is  using  the  name  of  God 
irreverently  in  the  solemn  act  of  dedicating  the  soul  to  Him  in  the  covenant  of 
grace.  5.  As  this  sin  respects  the  works  of  God,  or,  in  other  words,  whatever  He 
has  done,  declared,  or  instituted,  the  profaneness,  whenever  it  exists,  is  exactly  the 
same  in  its  nature,  but  diflferent  in  the  mode  of  its  existence.  In  all  instances 
included  under  that  head,  it'  is  directed  against  God  immediately ;  but  mediately  in 
those  now  referred  to  ;  the  irreverence  being  poiated  immediately  against  the  works 
themselves,  and  through  them  against  their  author.  God  is  often  treated  with 
irreverence — (1)  In  the  works  of  creation  and  providence.  The  works  of  creation 
and  providence  are  merely  manifestations  of  their  Author.  In  all  of  them  His 
character  is  more  or  less  visible ;  His  wisdom,  power,  and  goodness ;  His  omni- 
science and  immutability.  Whenever  we  complain,  murmur,  or  ridicule  them,  the 
ridicule  is  not  against  the  works  themselves,  but  their  Author.  (2)  The  same 
irreverence  is  abundantly  exercised  towards  the  Word  of  God.  The  Scriptures 
are  not  infrequently  made  the  object  or  the  means  of  sport  and  jesting.  The 
same  irreverence  is  exercised  when  the  Scriptures  are  neglected.  The  same  irrever- 
ence is  exercised  towards  the  Scriptures  when  we  do  not  duly  respect  their 
authority.  Of  the  same  nature  is  the  contempt,  obloquy,  and  ridicule  often 
cast  upon  the  Scriptures.  (3)  This  irreverence  is,  perhaps,  not  less  exercised 
towards  the  institutions  or  ordinances  of  God.  II.  The  guilt  of  this  sin  is 
evident — 1.  From  the  tenour  of  the  command.  2.  This  sin  is  an  immediate 
attack  on  God  Himself,  and  is  therefore  peculiarly  guilty.  3.  Profaneness  is  in 
most  instances  a  violation  of  peculiarly  clear  and  peculiarly  solemn  inducements 
to  our  duty.     4.  Profaneness  is  a  sin  to  which  there  is  scarcely  any  temptation. 

5.  Profaneness  is  among  the  most  distinguished  means  of  corrupting  our  fellow- 
men.  6.  Profaneness  prevents  or  destroys  all  reverence  towards  God,  together 
with  all  those  religious  exercises,  and  their  happy  consequences,  of  which  it  is  the 
source.  III.  The  danger  of  this  sin.  1.  Profaneness  is  eminently  the  source  of 
corruption  to  the  whole  character.  Almost  all  moral  attributes  and  employments 
operate  mutually  as  causes  and  effects.  Thus  irreverence  of  thought  generates 
profaneness  of  expression,  and  profaneness  of  expression,  in  its  turn,  generates 
irreverence  of  thoughts.  Thus,  universally,  the  mind  moves  the  tongue,  and  the 
tongue,  again,  in  its  turn,  moves  the  mind.  The  person  who  speaks  evil  will  always 
think  evil.  2.  Profaneness  is  a  sin  which  is  rapidly  progressive.  Every  act  of 
profaning  the  name,  perfections,  works,  words,  and  worship  of  God,  is  obviously  a 
presumptuous  attack  upon  this  glorious  Being.  The  sinner,  having  once  dared  so 
far,  becomes  easily  more  daring ;  and  passes  rapidly  from  one  state  of  wickedness 
to  another,  until  he  becomes  finally  hardened  in  rebellion  against  his  Maker. 
That  most  necessary  fear  of  God,  which  is  the  great  restraint  upon  sinful  men,  is 
speedily  lost.  The  sinner  is  then  left  without  a  check  upon  his  wickedness.  At 
the  same  time  the  tongue  is  a  most  convenient  instrument  of  iniquity,  always  ready 
for  easy  use.  We  cannot  always  sin  with  the  hands,  and  are  not  always  sufficiently 
gratified  by  mere  sins  of  thought.  The  sins  of  the  tongue  are  perpetrated  alike  with 
ease  and  delight  every  day,  and  in  every  place,  where  even  a  solitary  individual  can 
be  found  to  listen.     Hence  transgressions  of  this  kind  are  multiplied  wonderfully. 

3.  Profaneness,  particularly  that  of  the  tongue,  naturally  introduces  men  to  evil 
companions,  and  shuts  them  out  from  the  enjoyment  of  those  who  are  virtuous. 

4.  Profaneness  exposes  men  to  the  terrible  denunciation  of  the  text.  1.  These  obser- 
vations exhibit  in  a  strong  light  the  depravity  of  the  human  heart.  2.  These 
observations  teach  us  the  goodness  of  God  in  alarming  mankind  concerning  this  sin 
in  so  solemn  a  manner.  3.  Let  me  warn  all  those  who  hear  me  to  shun  profaneness. 
(1)  To  this  end,  fix  in  your  minds  a  solemn  and  controlling  sense  of  the  evil  and 
danger  of  this  sin.  Feel  that  you  will  gain  nothing  here,  and  lose  everything  here- 
after.    (2)  Under  the  influence  of  these  views,  keep  the  evil  always  at  a  great 


CHAP,  v.]  DEUTERONOMY.  10» 

distance.  Mark  the  men  who  are  profane  ;  and  avoid  their  company  as  you  would 
avoid  the  plague.  (3)  Carefully  avoid  mentioning  His  great  name  on  any  except 
solemn  occasions  ;  and  in  any  manner  which  is  not  strictly  reverential.  4.  Let  mo 
solemnly  admonish  the  profane  persons  in  this  assembly  of  their  guilt  and  danger. 
{T.  Dwight,  D.D.)  The  Third  Commandment: — I.  The  nature  of  the  sin 
roBBiDDEN.  1.  The  abuse  and  violation  of  oaths.  The  command  is  clearly  violated 
when  we — (1)  Swear  to  the  truth  of  what  we  either  know  to  be  false,  or  to  the  false- 
hood of  what  we  know  to  be  true,  or  to  the  truth  or  falsehood  of  what  we  do  not 
know  to  be  either  true  or  false.  (2)  When  we  swear  to  do  what  we  know  we  cannot 
do,  what  we  do  not  intend  to  do,  or  what  we  intend  to  do,  but  not  in  the  sense  in 
which  we  arc  aware  our  oath  of  engagement  is  understood  by  those  who  require  it, 
and  for  whose  assurance  it  is  given.  2.  Profanity  of  speech.  3.  Hypocrisy  in  wor- 
ship. And  this  hypocrisy  may  be  either  deliberate  or  thoughtless.  All  careless, 
heartless,  irreverent  worship  of  God,  involves  a  taking  of  His  name  in  vain.  Is  not 
the  Lord's  name  profaned  and  taken  in  vain  by  every  man  who  calls  himself  by  it 
and  belies  his  profession  by  his  character — professing  that  he  knows  God,  while  in 
works  he  denies  Him  ?  4.  Irreverence  of  heart.  The  man  who  can  laugh  at  another 
taking  God's  name  in  vain,  virtually  takes  that  name  in  vain  himself.     II.  The 

GUILT    AND    DANGER    OF    THE    PROHIBITED    SIN.       "The   Lord   will   UOt  hold    him 

guiltless, "  &c.  {R.  Wardlaw,  D.D.)  The  Third  Commandment : — I  begin  with 
the  precept  itself,  and  there  first  it  will  be  necessary  to  show  what  is  meant  by  the 
name  of  God.  By  this  we  are  to  understand — 1.  God  Himself,  His  Divine  being 
and  essence ;  for  in  the  holy  writings  name  is  put  for  the  person  or  thing  that  is 
named.  2.  That  which  is  more  strictly  and  properly  called  His  name,  i.e.  the  title 
of  God  or  Lord  which  is  given  to  Him.  3.  The  properties  and  attributes  of  God. 
4.  His  works  and  actions.  5.  His  ordinances  and  worship.  6.  His  words,  i.e.  the 
Holy  Scriptures.  And  in  brief,  all  things  appertaining  to  God.  To  take  (or  as  the 
original  word  more  properly  signifies),  to  take  up  a  name,  is  to  mention  or  rehearse 
it.  Thus  the  Psalmist  saith  with  relation  to  false  gods  and  idols,  and  the  sacrifices 
and  oblations  which  were  offered  to  them,  he  will  not  take  up  their  names  into  his 
lips  (Psa.  xvi.  40,  and  so  in  Psa.  1.  16).  And  a  name  is  then  said  to  be  taken  in 
vain  when  it  is  used  in  an  undue,  unfit,  and  unlawful  manner.  1.  This  command- 
ment condemns  those  who  question  the  being  and  essence  of  God.  2.  By  virtue  of 
this  commandment  all  irreverent  mentioning  of  the  very  title  or  name  of  God  is 
vicious.  The  common  using  of  the  name  of  God  or  Lord,  as  is  done  by  most  people, 
the  asking  of  alms  in  God's  name,  or  Christ's  name,  as  is  done  by  beggars  generally, 
is  a  profanation  of  those  holy  names.  3.  Then,  this  precept  of  the  moral  law  lets 
us  know  that  we  must  not  by  any  irreligious  manner  of  speaking  profane  the 
Divine  attributes,  for  these  also  are  meant  by  the  name  of  God.  A  near  approach, 
to  this  blasphemy  is  the  common  deportment  of  men  ;  they  excessively  fear  them 
that  can  kill  the  body,  but  they  disregard  what  the  Almighty  is  able  to  execute  ; 
they  do  in  effect  say  that  the  Divine  power  is  inferior  to  that  which  is  bodily  and 
finite.  God's  purity  and  holiness  are  also  blasphemed  by  those  who  assert  Him  to 
be  the  author  of  sin  ;  or  who  lay  their  faults  upon  God  Himself,  or  who  maintain 
that  He  takes  no  notice  of  the  sinful  miscarriages  of  the  faithful,  and  is  never 
displeased  with  them.  God's  justice  is  profaned  either  by  men's  questioning  it,  or 
disputing  about  the  equity  of  it,  or  by  not  expressing  a  sufficient  fear  of  so  terrible 
an  attribute.  God's  mercy  is  abused  on  the  one  hand  by  presumptuous  boastings  of 
the  benefits  of  it,  and  on  the  other  hand  by  words  of  despondency  and  despair. 
God's  infinite  knowledge  and  wisdom  whereby  He  directs  all  things  to  the  best 
ends,  are  blasphemously  dishonoured,  not  only  by  an  atheistical  disowning  of  them, 
but  by  preferring  our  own  shallow  conceits.  God's  truth  and  faithfulness  are 
reproached  by  us,  when  we  doubt  of  the  reality  of  them,  or  when  we  speak 
unbecomingly  of  them,  as  if  we  gave  no  credit  to  the  Divine  word  and  promises. 
4.  The  unlawfulness  of  speaking  irreverently  concerning  God's  works  and  actions 
(for  they  likewise  are  included  in  His  name)  is  here  discovered.  First,  it  is  a  great 
sin  to  disparage  the  works  of  God's  creation.  It  is  related  of  Alphonsus,  the  tenth 
king  of  Castile  (he  that  was  called  the  wise,  because  of  his  skill  in  philosophy  and 
astronomy),  that  he  blasphemously  bragged  that  he  could  have  ordered  things 
better  in  the  heavenly  bodies  than  God  had.  And  Plempius,  a  physician  of  no 
mean  account,  seems  to  find  fault  with  the  structure  of  the  eye,  and  pretends  it 
might  have  been  amended.  Some  have  lately  been  so  audacious  as  to  blemish  the 
make  of  the  earth,  and  to  represent  it  in  several  respects  unworthy  of  its  Creator. 
Others  are  heard  to  complain  that  there  are  a  great  number  of  creatures  in  the 


110  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap,  r, 

world  that  are  made  for  no  use.  But  certainly  this  is  a  great  degree  of  profana- 
tion, because  whatsoever  God  made  is  the  product  of  His  wisdom.  Therefore  on 
that  very  account  we  ought  to  believe  that  it  is  some  ways  worthy  of  Him.  Far  be 
it  from  us  then  to  disparage  it.  Secondly,  it  is  an  equal  crime  to  speak  ill  of  God's 
Avork  of  providence,  to  find  fault  with  His  conduct  in  the  world.  And  yet  this  is 
a  very  common  miscarriage,  and  sometimes  the  very  best  men  are  incident  to  it. 
Job  cursed  the  day  of  his  birth,  and  impatiently  wished  for  death,  and  was  very 
much  dissatisfied  with  the  afflictive  circumstances  he  was  under.  David,  Jeremiah, 
Jonah,  and  some  others  who  have  a  good  character  in  Scripture,  are  sometimes 
heard  to  murmur  at  the  Divine  dispensation  ;  but  these  were  but  transient  fits,  and 
soon  vanished.  Those  of  a  profane  spirit  retain  this  temper  a  long  time,  yea, 
indeed,  upon  all  occasions  {i.e.  whenever  their  condition  is  dangerous  or 
calamitous)  their  speeches  discover  the  inward  rancour  of  their  minds,  and  their 
hellish  disgust  of  God's  dealings  with  them.  But  nothing  can  be  more  irrational, 
for  as  we  are  creatures  we  are  dependent  beings,  and  subsist  by  our  Creator's 
bounty,  and  therefore  we  are  to  be  wholly  at  His  disposal.  5.  So  do  they  likewise 
who  irreverently  make  their  addresses  to  God  in  His  worship  and  ordinances,  for 
these  are  included  in  His  name.  How  frequently  is  this  commandment  broken  in 
men's  prayers,  whUst  they  profane  this  holy  duty  by  rash  and  impertinent 
multiplying  of  words,  by  using  vain  repetitions  (Matt.  vi.  7)  unbecoming  this 
solemn  exercise  of  devotion !  In  hearing,  likewise  as  well  as  praying,  men  take 
God's  name  in  vain  when  they  receive  the  Divine  message  in  a  negligent  manner, 
when  they  do  it  without  attention  and  reverence,  but  especially  when  they  take  no 
care  to  practise  what  they  hear.  This  is  done  in  fasting  and  all  other  external 
acts  of  humiliation  where  there  is  not  a  real  intention  of  glorifying  God  by 
abandoning  their  sins  and  reforming  their  lives.  Then  for  the  sacraments  ;  how 
many  take  God's  name  in  vain  whilst  they  celebrate  them  without  a  right  under- 
standing of  what  they  do,  and  without  a  sense  of  the  great  work  they  undertake, 
and  without  a  desire  to  reap  some  spiritual  benefit  by  them.  6.  The  Word  of  God, 
the  holy  writings  of  the  Old  and  New  Testament,  whereby  He  makes  Himself  and 
His  will  known  to  mankind,  are  comprehended  under  His  name,  and  the  profaning 
of  these  are  taking  His  name  in  vain.  Again,  God's  Word  is  abused  by  perverting 
the  meaning  of  it,  and  wresting  it  to  wrong  purposes.  This  is  done  by  all 
heretics  and  false  teachers.  They  constantly  quote  the  Bible,  but  at  the  same 
time  distort  it  and  make  it  speak  what  they  please.  Lastly,  seeing  all  that  is 
sacred  and  religious  and  hath  reference  to  God  is  expressed  by  His  name,  it  follows 
that  taking  God's  name  in  vain  includes  actions  as  well  as  words,  and  therefore 
takes  in  everything  that  is  done  whereby  God's  name  is  profaned.  In  this 
commandment,  then,  are  forbidden  all  those  actions  whereby  a  dishonour  is 
brought  upon  our  religion,  and  the  name  of  God  is  evil  spoken  of.  Thus  we  see 
what  sins  are  forbidden  in  this  commandment,  you  see  what  vast  numbers  of  men 
in  the  world  take  God's  name  in  vain.  And  yet  the  chief  transgression  of  this 
commandment  is  yet  behind,  which  I  will  in  the  next  place  distinctly  consider  ; 
and  I  purposely  defer  it  till  now,  that  I  may  discourse  of  it  by  itself  and  give  a  full 
^account  of  it.  The  unlawful  using  of  God's  name  in  swearing  is  the  more 
particular,  special,  and  direct  breach  of  this  precept  of  the  moral  law.  This  in  a 
more  signal  manner  is  taking  God's  name  in  vain.  First,  I  will  inquire  into  the 
true  nature  of  an  oath.  Secondly,  I  will  inquire  what  an  unlawful  oath  is,  or  what 
that  swearing  is  which  is  taking  God's  name  in  vain.  1.  That  it  is  unlawful  to 
swear  by  any  feigned  deity  or  idol  ;  for  we  must  swear  by  the  true  God  only.  But 
if  you  ask,  how  is  this  properly  an  oath,  seeing  here  is  no  swearing  by  the  true 
God  ?  I  answer,  there  is  an  invocation  of  God  even  in  the  swearing  by  idols,  for 
those  that  swear  by  these  take  them  to  be  true  gods,  or  they  place  them  in  the 
room  of  the  true  God.  2.  To  swear  by  any  creature  must  needs  be  unlawful, 
because  this  part  of  worship  is  due  only  to  God.  3.  To  swear  by  any  gifts  and 
endowments  of  the  body  or  mind,  or  by  the  life  and  soul  of  ourselves  or  others,  is 
utterly  unlawful.  4.  Seeing  an  oath  is  to  be  used  only  in  some  weighty  matter, 
it  follows  that  swearing  in  common  discourse,  or  upon  a  trifling  account,  or  rashly 
and  unadvisedly,  is  unlawful.  First,  I  say,  it  is  highly  wicked  to  swear  in  our 
ordinary  conversation  and  discourse,  which  yet  is  the  reigning  vice  of  this  age ; 
for  there  are  great  numbers  of  men  everywhere  that  can  scarcely  open  their  mouths 
without  an  oath.  The  only  proof  of  these  men's  acknowledging  such  a  being  as  a 
God,  is  their  swearing  by  Him.  And  yet  this  swearing  is  a  proof  that  they  own 
no  God  J   for  if  they  did,  certainly  they  would  not  be  customary  swearers,  and 


CHAP,  v.]  DEUTERONOMY.  Ill 

unhallow  so  sacred  a  thing  as  an  oath.     Secondly,  therefore,  it  cannot  but  be  very 
criminal  to  swear  upon  every  trifling  account,  on  every  trivial  occasion,  in  every 
ludicrous  matter.     In  the  most  foolish  occurrences  God  s  name  is  jnade  use  ot 
Whilst  they  are  at  their  recreations,  in  the  midst  of  their  jestmg,  they  wiU  not 
forbear  to  do  this.     Thirdly,  to  swear,  though  it  be  in  a  weighty  matter,  rashly  and 
unadvisedly,  is  a  great  crime.     For  this  being  a  religious  act,  it  requires  delibera. 
tion      Fourthly,  seeing  oaths  must  be  in  a  lawful  matter  only,  it  follows  that  such 
oaths  as  these  are  absolutely  unlawful.     1.  To  swear  things  that  we  know  to  be 
false.     And  accordingly  you  will  find  that  the  Hebrew  word    '  shua     (which  with  a 
preposition  before  it  is  here  rendered  "  in  vain  ")  is  the  same  with     false    (Ezek.  xu. 
24  •  Hos  xii.  9).     2.  To  oblige  ourselves  by  oath  to  do  that  which  is  not  m  our 
choice  and  power,  is  unlawful.     3.  An  oath  which  is  prejudicial  to  our  neighbour  a 
right  is  unlawful,  because  the  matter  of  it  is  so  ;  for  it  is  agamst  the  law  of  God 
and  man  to  bind  ourselves  to  anything  that  we  know  wiU  prove  injurious  to 
another.     "Thou  shalt  swear  in  judgment"  (or  justice)  "and  in  righteousness 
rjer  iv.  2).     Therefore  to  swear  to  do  unjustly  cannot  be  lawful.     Lastly,  to  sum 
up  all,  you  may  conclude  that  to  be  an  unlawful  oath  which  engages  you  to  commit 
any  sinf  anything  that  is  derogatory  to  God's  glory  and  honour.     I  proceed  now  to 
the  third  thing  1  undertook  under  the  negative  consideration  of  this  commandment, 
namely,  to  endeavour  to  dissuade  from  the  practice  of  unlawful  swearing,  by  showmg 
the  heiiousness  of  it.     And  here  I  will  distinctly  refer  to  both  the  kinds  of  oaths 
before  mentioned:  those  used  in  common  conversation,  and  those  that  are  false 
and  injurious  to  our  neighbours.     First,  as  to  those  which  are  used  m  ordinary 
discourse,  thmk  of  it,  how  high  a  profanation  they  are  of  God  s  name  which 
ought  to  be  used  with  all  reverence.     It  has  been  well  observed  that  there  is  no 
temptation  to  this  vile  sin.     The  corrupt  nature  of  man  can  allege  somethmg  for 
other  vices,  but  the  irreverent  abusing  of  God's  name  hath  nothmg  to  tempt  men 
to  it      It  satisfies  no  appetite,  no  vicious  affection  or  inclination,  as  covetousness, 
lust,  pride,  ambition,  revenge,  &c.     Which  shows  that  it  is  an  mexcusable  crime, 
and  that  nothing  can  be  pleaded  for  it.     To  this  purpose  consider  further,  that  he 
that  swears  falsely  injures  God,  his  brethren  and  timself.     He  is  injurious  to  the 
first,   and  that  in  general,  because  he  profanes  that  name  which  ought  to  be 
sanctified  :  and  more  particularly,  because  when  he  appeals  to  God   and  yet  swears 
to  a  lie,  he  either  imagines  that  the  Divine  Being  knows  not  the  truth,  and  so 
imputes  ignorance  unto  Him  to  whose  eyes  all  things  are  naked  and  open ;  or  he 
persuades  himself  that  He  is  not  displeased  with  falsehood  and  so  he  denies  His 
holiness  ;  or  else  he  derogates  from  His  power,  and  imphes  that  He  is  not  able  to  be 
avenged  on  the  liar.     Secondly,  he  is  injurious  to  his  neighbours,  because  hereby 
all  converse  is  spoilt,  or  society  ruined.     Thirdly,  a  fa  se  swearer  injures  himself 
he  apparently  hazards  his  own  soul ;  for  he  binds  himself  over  to  the  just  judgment 
of  the  Almighty,  yea,  he  solemnly  calls  upon  God  to  execute  this  vengeance  upon 
him.     Thus  having  done  with  the  negative  part  of  this  commandment,  wherein 
hath  been  showed  what  the  sins  are  which  we  are  to  abstain  from,  I  proceed  to  the 
aflarmative.  where  I  am  to  show  what  is  enjoined  us.     And  what  is  it  but  this  ? 
namely,  to  perform  the  contrary  virtues  and  duties.     That  is  we  must  vigorously 
assert  the  being  and  essence  of  God  ;  we  must  reverence  His  holy  name,  and  more 
especially  whe£  we  have  occasion  to  make  use  of  it  m  lawful  and  necessary  oaths. 
We  must  mention  God's  titles  with  seriousness  and  awe.     His  glorious  attnbi^es 
and  perfections  are    to    be  discoursed  of  with  reverence ;    and  so  are  all  Mis 
actions  and  works,  whether  of  creation  or  providence,  or  redemption.     In  tHis 
commandment  is  required  that  we  worship  God  with  a  due  sense  of  His  trans- 
cendent majesty,  that  we  decently  and  solemnly  behave  ourselves  in  all  parts 
of  Divine  adoration,  that  we  celebrate  the  ordinances  and  institutions  of  Christ 
in  a  becoming  manner,  that  we   be  reverent,   hearty,   and    fervent  m  all  our 
religious  addresses,   and    that  we  worship  God    in    spirit    and    m  truth,     but 
the   main   things  which   are   more   immediately  contained  in  it  are  these  twcn-- 
1.  Invocating  of  God's  name  by  solemn  oaths  when  we  are  called  to  it.     2.  Ter- 
forming  the  oaths  we  make.     First,  by  virtue  of  this  part  of  the  Decalogue  we  may. 
and  we  ought  to,  swear  on  lawful  occasions.     It  requires  us  to  invoke  God  s  name 
in  the  way  of  religious  oaths.     For  these  were  always  a  part  of  religion  ;  whence 
swearing  is  sometimes  put  for  God's  service  and  worship,  and  the  open  profession 
of  it  (Ecclea.  ix.  2  ;  Jer.  xii.  16).     In  an  oath  praise  and  honour  are  given  to  God  ; 
to  His  infinite  knowledge  and  wisdom,  that  He  knows  what  we  say ;  to  His  holi- 
jiess,  that  He  loves  truth  and  abhors  falsehood  ;  to  His  power  and  justice,  that  Me 


112  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  V. 

can  and  will  avenge  the  latter.  Thus  swearing  is  a  great  act  of  piety  and  worship, 
if  it  be  performed  as  it  ought  to  be.  Further  to  evince  the  lawfulness  of  this 
practice,  I  will  appeal  both  to  Scripture  and  reason.  As  to  the  former,  it  is  evident 
that  swearing  is  commanded  as  a  duty.  In  Deut.  vi.  13  it  is  not  only  said,  "  Thou 
shalt  fear  the  Lord  thy  God,  and  serve  Him  "  ;  but  "thou  shalt  swear  by  His  name." 
If  you  think  yourselves  obliged  by  this  text  to  fear  and  serve  God,  you  are  equally 
engaged  by  it  to  swear  by  His  name,  namely,  when  you  are  lawfully  called  to  it. 
This  duty  likewise  is  implied  in  the  law  (Exoa.  xxii.  27,  28).  Again,  this  is  grounded 
not  only  on  positive  commands  in  Scripture,  but  on  the  examples  and  practice  of 
holy  men  recorded  in  those  sacred  writings.  They  swore  themselves,  and  they 
caused  others  to  swear.  There  are  abundant  instances  of  the  former  (Gen.  xxi. 
31,  xxvi.  31,  xxxi.  53  ;  Josh.  xiv.  9  ;  1  Sam.  xx.  3,  xxiv.  22).  The  latter  is  con- 
firmed by  several  examples,  as  that  in  Gen.  xxiv.  3.  Secondly,  not  only  Scripture 
but  reason  obliges  us  to  make  use  of  oaths  in  a  pious  and  religious  way.  There 
are  laudable  ends  of  swearing  which  render  it  a  reasonable  service.  I  have  already 
showed  that  it  is  an  act  of  worship  towards  God,  and  it  is  as  certain  an  act  of 
charity  and  righteousness  towards  men.  For  it  is  sometimes  absolutely  necessary 
for  discovering  the  truth,  for  the  detecting  of  wicked  actions,  for  helping  men  to 
recover  their  rights,  and  to  be  instated  in  what  is  their  own.  Oaths  are  (as  the 
apostle  observes,  Heb.  vi.  16)  to  be  a  remedy  against  disputes,  and  therefore  are  of 
great  use  in  litigious  cases.  They  are  sometimes  requisite  as  a  badge  of  loyalty 
and  subjection,  and  to  express  our  obedience  to  princes.  But  notwithstanding  this, 
I  am  clearly  of  opinion  that  these  two  things  are  included  in  the  words  of  our 
Saviour  and  the  Apostle  James — 1.  That  Christians  should  as  much  as  possible 
abstain  from  swearing.  2.  That  these  professors  of  the  purest  religion  should 
attain  to  such  an  integrity,  such  faithfulness  and  sincerity,  that  an  oath  should 
be  altogether  unnecessary,  and  that  Christians  should  be  believed  and  trusted  upon 
their  bare  words.  Thus  I  have  finished  the  first  grand  thing  contained  in  the 
affirmative  part  of  this  commandment,  namely,  using  God's  holy  name  in  solemn 
swearing.  We  are  authorised  by  this  precept  to  have  recourse  unto  religious  oaths 
on  lawful  occasions.  The  second  great  thing  enjoined  us  is  this,  to  perform  our 
oaths,  to  do  according  to  what  we  swear.  Both  the  negative  and  affirmative 
branches  of  this  commandment  are  thus  represented  to  us  by  our  Saviour,  "Thou 
shalt  not  forswear  thyself:  thou  shalt  perform  unto  the  Lord  thine  oaths"  (Matt, 
v.  33).  This  latter  is  that  which  I  now  urge,  namely,  that  we  take  care,  after  we  have 
sworn,  to  act  according  to  that  solemn  obligation.  Let  us  remember  that  there  is 
no  dallying  here.  An  oath  is  an  engagement  of  the  highest  nature  imaghiable, 
and  therefore  it  must  be  a  very  heinous  offence  to  neglect  it,  much  more  to  violate 
it.  Whatever  we  have  by  this  sacred  tie  bound  ourselves  to  we  must  punctually 
observe,  unless  it  be  these  following  cases — 1.  Unless  it  be  in  a  matter  that  is 
unlawful  in  itself.  2.  Unless  it  be  of  such  persons  who  at  the  time  of  their 
swearing  were  not  sensible  of  what  they  did.  3.  In  some  cases  an  oath  is  not  to 
be  looked  upon  as  obligatory,  if  it  was  imposed  by  mere  violence  and  compulsion, 
and  the  party  was  not  left  at  all  to  his  freedom  and  choice  ;  for  then  it  is  not  a 
voluntary  act,  and  consequently  not  a  moral  one,  and  therefore  is  of  no  force. 
4.  We  must  faithfully  perform  what  we  have  sworn,  unless  the  person  or  persons 
to  whom  the  oath  was  made  will  remit  the  performance  of  it.  We  cannot  release 
ourselves  ;  but  if  he  or  they  will  recede  from  their  right  which  they  have  in  our 
engagement,  then  we  are  no  further  engaged.  5.  Our  oath  binds  us,  unless  there 
was  a  condition  tacitly  implied  in  it.  The  last  thing  I  undertook  to  treat  of,  is 
the  reason  of  this  commandment,  * '  For  the  Lord  will  not  hold  him  guiltless  that 
taketh  His  name  in  vain."  Which  contains  in  it  these  two  things — 1.  That  God 
will  not  clear  such  a  one  of  the  fault ;  He  will  not  look  upon  him  as  a  pure, 
innocent  person  ;  He  will  reckon  him  a  guilty  person,  one  that  is  a  great  sinner. 
This  being  added  to  this  commandment,  and  none  of  the  rest,  marks  out  this  sin 
of  taking  God's  name  in  vain  as  very  heinous.  2.  It  is  more  plainly  comprehended 
in  this  clause  that  God  will  not  clear  such  an  offender  from  punishment ;  He  will  be 
avenged  on  all  that  are  thus  guilty.  There  is  a  flying  roll  against  swearers  in  Zech. 
V.  4  which  is  very  frightful,  for  a  dreadful  curse  is  written  in  it :  "I  will  bring  it 
forth,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts,  and  it  shall  enter  into  the  house  of  him  that  sweareth 
falsely  by  My  name  ;  and  it  shall  remain  in  the  midst  of  his  house,  and  shall 
consume  it  with  the  timber  thereof  and  the  stones  thereof."  Goods  gotten  by 
swearing  falsely  and  by  breach  of  faith  are  like  the  leprosy  spoken  of  in  the  law 
that  infected  even  the  walls  of  the  house ;  they  are  the  ruin  of  the  family,  they 


CHAP,  v.]  DEUTERONOMY.  118 


are  a  curse  upon  whatever  is  enjoyed  or  possessed.  God  will  not  be  mocked,  He 
will  take  notice  of  the  profanation  of  His  name,  and  He  will  not  always  let  impunity 
be  the  attendant  of  it.  Which  is  the  purport  of  St.  James's  words  (chap.  v.  12). 
(/.  Edwards,  D.D. )  Against  swearing : — Now  consider  some  of  the  reasons  given 
for  swearing,  and  some  of  the  arguments  alleged  in  its  defence.  1.  One  of  the 
most  usual  excuses  of  the  common  swearer  is,  that  he  has  got  such  a  habit  of  it, 
that  he  does  not  know  when  he  otfends.  This  may  be  said  perhaps  with  equal  truth 
of  many  other  ill  habits,  but  is  in  fact  not  the  least  extenuation  of  their  guilt ; 
it  is,  indeed,  rather  an  aggravation  of  it,  for  to  what  a  degree  must  we  have 
offended  before  we  become  so  hardened  as  not  to  be  sensible  whether  we  offend  or 
not.  2.  Another  excuse  of  the  common  swearer  is,  that  he  really  means  no  harm 
— this  is  a  curious  plea  ;  he  is  daily  perhaps  insulting  his  God  to  His  face,  and  he 
thinks  to  atone  for  it  by  saying  that  he  means  no  harm  !  3.  A  third  set  of  swearers 
are  those  who  profess  that  they  are  obliged  to  it ;  they  say  that  their  oaths  are 
merely  intended  to  procure  belief  to  their  assertions,  or  give  importance  to  their 
c«mmands,  reproofs,  and  menaces.  To  say  nothing  of  the  reflection  which,  by 
such  a  defence,  these  persons  throw  on  their  own  veracity  and  dignity,  it  is  much 
to  be  suspected  that  the  end,  which  they  propose  to  themselves  by  the  violation  of 
a  plain  precept  of  their  religion,  is  not  attained.  As  to  the  plea — that  the  orders, 
the  reproofs,  or  the  threats  of  a  person  in  authority,  are  more  efficacious  from 
being  attended  with  imprecations,  it  is  liable  to  the  same  objection  which  I  have 
just  made ;  when  oaths  and  curses  are  used  on  every  occasion,  they  are  no  more 
regarded  than  other  words,  they  are  looked  on  as  coming  of  course,  and  those  to 
whom  they  are  directed  are  not  influenced  by  them  in  any  additional  degree. 
4.  I  shall  conclude  with  observing  that  there  are  many  to  be  met  with  who  would 
be  shocked  at  the  idea  of  plain,  downright  swearing,  with  whom  it  is  yet  grown 
into  a  custom  to  approach  very  near  to  it ;  they  dare  not  take  the  name  of  their 
Creator  in  vain  in  a  direct  manner,  but  show  the  badness  of  their  intentions  by 
disguising  solemn  words,  till  they  are  less  disgusting  to  the  ear,  though  equally 
offensive  to  the  judgment.  These  half-bred  reprobates  prove  that  they  would  be 
wicked,  if  they  durst ;  and  I  know  not  whether  the  consciousness  of  being  wrong, 
which  their  caution  declares,  does  not  augmen t  their  criminality.  ( G.  Haggitt.,  M.A.) 
The  law  of  reverence : — This  command  is  susceptible  of  a  threefold  violation — by 
sacrilege,  by  blasphemy,  by  profanity.  Sacrilege  is  the  desecration  of  things  sacred 
to  the  Almighty.  Blasphemy  is  the  ill-treatment  of  the  person  of  God.  It  is  the 
aspersion  of  His  glorious  character,  it  is  the  denial  of  His  existence,  it  is  the 
attempt  to  alienate  the  afi'ections  of  His  friends  from  His  person  and  His  throne. 
Blasphemy  is  committed  when  His  providence  is  held  in  contempt.  His  attributes 
depreciated.  His  creation  set  at  nought,  His  wisdom  ridiculed,  and  His  claims 
treated  with  scorn.  In  the  exaltation  of  His  glorious  person  He  is  far  beyond  the 
insults  of  His  creatures.  He  does  not  demand  our  reverence  because  it  would  add 
to  His  glory,  but  because  of  the  reflex  influence  on  the  reverential  mind  and  upon 
His  intelligent  creation.  To  reverence  His  glorious  person  is  to  exalt  our  own  con- 
dition.  How  profound  the  reverence  of  Christ  for  the  person  of  His  Divine  Father ! 
What  feelings  of  obedience,  what  entireness  of  consecration,  what  unfailing  loyalty 
He  displayed  !  There  are  three  ways  in  which  men  profane  the  name  of  God — by 
false  oaths,  by  useless  oaths,  and  by  profane  oaths.  And  how  many  are  the  evils 
of  this  prevalent  social  vice  !  It  destroys  good  taste,  which  naturally  belongs  to  an 
accomplished  gentleman  ;  it  is  subversive  of  self-oontrol.  He  is  a  slave  to  his 
passions  who  is  a  slave  to  his  voice.  How  vast  are  the  motives  against  this  social 
vice  !  God  has  said,  "  I  will  not  hold  him  guiltless  that  taketh  My  name  in  vain." 
This  prohibition  is  benevolence  acting  by  law  ;  it  is  for  man's  sake.  When  the  last 
profane  tongue  is  silent  in  the  grave,  and  the  soul  that  used  it  is  with  the  lost,  then 
the  glorious  God  will  live  surrounded  by  the  highest  hierarchy  of  angels  ;  cherubim 
will  fold  their  wings  in  reverence  to  cover  their  faces  in  His  presence,  and  will 
banquet  His  ear  with  songs  of  praise.  While  He  cannot  be  personally  affected  by 
the  language  of  the  profane,  yet  profanity  traduces  the  soul,  wrecks  the  stamina  of 
our  moral  being,  corrupts  the  fountain  of  life.  {J.  P.  Newman,  D.D.)  Hallowed 
he  Thy  Name  .-—The  name  of  an  object  is  that  by  which  we  distinguish  it  from 
every  other  object.  The  name  of  a  person  is  that  by  which  we  distinguish  him 
from  any  other  person.  The  name  may  be  chosen  without  any  thought  of  adaptation 
or  fitness.  It  may  be  chosen  arbitrarily,  or  it  may  be  descriptive  of  the  person  or 
object.  We  read  that,  "Out  of  the  groimd  the  Lord  God  formed  every  beast  of  the 
field,  and  every  fowl  of  the  air,  and  brought  them  unto  Adam,  to  see  what  he  would 

8 


114  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  T. 

call  them ;  and  whatsoever  Adam  called  every  living  creature,  that  was  the  name 
thereof."    The  names  of  persons  in  the  Bible  are  always  significant.     Abram,  "the 
lofty  father,"  became  Abraham,  "the  father  of  a  great  multitude."    Jacob,  "the 
supplanter,"  became  Israel,  "the  prince  of  God."    There  is  unutterable  importance 
attached,  then,  to  the  greatest,  the  Highest  Name.     Poor  savages  in  their  ignorance 
and   superstition  have  been  groaning,    "Tell  me  Thy  name."    The  Greeks  and 
Romans,    with  their  civilisation  and  culture  and  learning,   were  repeating  the 
entreaty,  "Tell  me  Thy  name."     And  to-day,  in  Hindooism,  with  its  unnumbered 
gods,  in  Buddhism  with  its  dreams,  and  in  other  false  systems  of  religion,  there  is 
the  same  sad  undertone  to  be  heard,  "Tell  me  Thy  name."     In  agony,  in  uncer- 
tainty, often  in  despair,  the  cry  is  uttered  ;  and  what  more  important  question  can 
come  from  the  human  heart  than  this,  "  What  is  the  name  of  God  ? "    There  is  very 
much,  then,  said  in  the  Bible  about  the  name  of  God.     His  name  means  His  revealed 
character;  it  is  not  a  mere  title.     The  word  "Highness"  may  be  associated  with 
great  moral  debasement.     The  word  "Majesty"  may  be  associated  with  meanness. 
The  word  "Grace"  may  be  associated  with  conduct  that  is  ungracious.     The  title 
may  be  a  sign  of  dignity  and  honour  when  there  is  no  dignity  or  honour  in  the 
person  wearing  it.     The  name  of  God  is  not  a  mere  title  of  honour.     Nor  does  it 
mean  the  entire  character  of  God  ;  for  there  is  no  name  that  can  reveal  it  fully. 
Language  is  insufficient  to  reveal  man's  being  fully  ;  after  all  that  is  written  and 
spoken,  there  is  much  still  lying  unrevealed.    The  channels  of  language  are  too 
narrow  to  hold  the  overflowing  river  of  human  thought  and  feeling.     We  may  form 
some  conceptions  of  God,  but  we  cannot  call  the  idea  we  have  of  Him,  His  name, 
except  so  far  as  that  idea  is  in  harmony  with  the  revelation.     Jehovah  is  the  great 
name  in  the  Old  Testament ;  Father  is  the  great  name  in  the  New.     Eternal  Being 
is  Eternal  Love.     "  I  have  declared  unto  them  Thy  name."     "Holy  Father,  keep 
through  Thine  own  name  those  whom  Thou  hast  given  Me."    1.  To  take  God's  name 
in  vain  is  to  use  it  in  confirmation  of  a  falsehood.     To  take  an  oath  is  to  declare 
solemnly  that  we  are  in  the  presence  of  God,  and  that  He  hears  our  words,  and  that 
in  our  testimony  we  appeal  to  Him  as  the  searcher  of  hearts,  and  the  judge  of 
character.     And  to  make  this  appeal  in  confirmation  of  a  falsehood  is  a  terrible 
crime  against  God  and  against  society.     To  think  lightly  of  an  oath  is  to  think 
lightly  of  God.     Lying  lips  are  an  abomination  unto  Him.     2.  This  is  also  a  warning 
against  all  profanity.     This  sin  is  not  so  common  now  as  in  olden  times.     Then  a 
gentleman  could  hardly  speak  without  uttering  an  oath  ;  now  a  profane  swearer  is 
excluded  from  all  decent  society.     It  is  said  that  this  vice  was  so  prevalent  in  the 
days  of  Chrysostom  that  he  delivered  no  less  than  twenty  sermons  against  it,  and 
yet  found  it  too  hard  for  all  his  reason  and  rhetoric,  till  at  length  he  entreated  and 
begged  his  hearers  to  leave  off  that  sin,  if  for  no  other  reason,  yet  that  he  might 
choose  another  subject.     3.  This  word  also  forbids  any  unmeaning,  thoughtless  use 
of  the  Divine  name.     "The  fear  of  the  Lord"  is  the  common  Old  Testament 
expression  for  true  piety.     I  would  rather  have  the  reverence  that  borders  on  super- 
stition than  the  boldness  which  glides  into  profaneness  or  blasphemy.     Give  me  the 
reverence  of  Samuel  Johnson,  who  never  passed  a  church  without  uncovering, 
rather  than  the  inconsistency  of  the  man  who  says  that  all  places  are  equally  sacred, 
and  acts  as  if  there  were  no  sacred  spot  on  earth.     Give  me  the  solemn  awe  with  which. 
the  Puritan  spoke  of  the  authority  and  righteousness  of  God,  rather  than  the  liberty 
which  the  religious  demagogue  takes  with  the  great  and  holy  name.     God  is  jealousr 
of  the  honour  of  His  name.     Every  man's  good  name  is  dear  to  him  ;  it  is  worth 
more  than  his  property,  worth  more  than  his  exalted  position.     And  God's  name  in 
dear  to  Him.     It  was  a  frequent  plea  with  ancient  saints  in  their  supplications  for 
help,  "And  what  wilt  Thou  do  unto  Thy  great  name?"     Let  us  "exalt  His  name 
together."     "Oh  that  men  would  praise  the  Lord  for  His  goodness,  and  for  His 
wonderful  works  to  the  children  of  men  ! "     God  be  thanked  for  the  promise, 
"  From  the  rising  of  the  sun,  even  irnto  the  going  down  of  the  same.  My  name  shall 
be  great  among  the  Gentiles ;  and  in  every  place  incense  shall  be  offered  unto  My 
name,  and  a  pure  offering ;  for  My  name  shall  be  great  among  the  heathen,  saita 
the  Lord  of  hosts."     {James  Oioen.)        Profanity : — Now,  we  have  five  reasons  why 
the  name  of  God  should  not  be  taken  in  vain.     1.  It  is  useless.     Did  curses  ever 
start  a  heavy  load  ?    Did  they  ever  unravel  a  tangled  skein  ?    Did  they  ever  collect 
a  bad  debt?    Did  they  ever  accomplish  anything?    Verily,  the  swearer  is  the 
silliest  of  all  dealers  in  sin.     He  sins  gratis.     He  sells  his  soul  for  nothing.     2.  It  is 
cowardly  to  swear.     3.  To  swear  is  impolite.     Can  he  who  leads  every  sentence 
with  an  oath  or  a  curse,  wear  the  name  and  garb  of  a  gentleman  ?    This  reminds 


CHAP,  v.]  DEUTERONOMY.  115 

me  of  that  incident  of  Abraham  Lincoln,  who  said  to  a  person  sent  to  him  by  one 
of  the  Senators,  and  who  in  conversation  uttered  an  oath  :  "I  thought  the  Senator 
had  sent  me  a  gentleman.  I  see  I  was  mistaken.  There  is  the  door,  and  I  bid  you 
good-day."  Profanity  indicates  low  breeding.  It  detracts  from  the  grace  of  con- 
versation. It  is  an  evidence  of  a  weak  brain  and  limited  ideas.  4.  Swearing  is 
wicked.  It  springs  from  a  mere  malignancy  of  spirit  in  man  against  God,  because 
He  has  forbidden  it.  As  far  as  the  violation  of  the  command  of  God  is  concerned, 
the  swearer  is  equally  guilty  with  the  murderer,  the  unchaste  person,  the  robber, 
and  the  liar.  Whose  is  this  name  which  men  roll  off  the  lips  of  blasphemy  as 
though  they  were  speaking  of  some  low  vagabond  ?  God  !  In  whose  presence  the 
highest  and  purest  seraphim  veil  their  faces,  and  cry  in  notes  responsive  to  each 
other,  * '  Holy  !  Holy !  Holy !  Lord  God  of  Hosts  !  "  Every  star  in  the  heavens 
flashes  rebuke  into  your  face  ;  every  quivering  leaf,  every  lurid  shaft  of  lightning, 
every  shock  of  thunder,  all  the  voices  of  the  tempest,  the  harping  angels,  and  the 
very  scoflSng  devils  rebuke  you.  5.  Swearing  is  a  dangerous  sin.  The  Third  Com- 
mandment is  the  only  one  in  the  Decalogue  to  which  is  affixed  the  certainty  of 
punishment.  It  was  a  capital  offence  under  the  Levitical  law  (Lev.  xx.  10). 
Profane  swearer,  whether  you  think  so  or  not,  your  oath  is  a  prayer — an  appeal 
to  God.  Be  thankful  that  your  prayer  has  not  been  answered.  The  oaths  that 
you  utter  may  die  on  the  air,  but  God  hears  them,  and  they  have  an  eternal 
echo.  {M.  G.  Peters.)  Thou  shall  not  take  the  7iame  of  the  Lord  thy  God  in 
vain : — With  what  the  heart  is  full  the  mouth  runs  over.  If  in  men's  hearts  there 
is  the  spirit  of  the  idolater,  &c.  "Mouth  and  heart,"  says  the  proverb,  "are  but  a 
span  apart."  "  The  heart  is  the  spring,  the  tongue  is  the  stream."  I.  The  trans- 
gression. 1.  The  name  of  the  Lord.  There  are  terms  by  which  we  speak  of  God 
— the  Lord,  Almighty,  the  Son,  &c.,  &c.  ;  terms,  also,  which  remind  us  of  Him, 
and  tell  of  His  power,  &c. — the  Gospel,  &c.,  the  sacrament.  Cross,  heaven,  &c.  All 
such  terms  we  are  not  to  misuse.  2.  The  command  is  against  swearing.  Swearers 
are  to  be  found  everywhere,  of  every  age  and  condition.  The  young  boy,  the  old 
man,  greyheaded  and  feeble,  &c.,  who  curse  about  nothing  and  about  every  thing — 
in  wrath,  at  work  or  play,  everywhere  and  in  every  position.  Every  street  and  lane 
witnesses  the  transgression  of  this  commandment.  How  can  it  go  well  with  any 
who  curse  more  than  they  pray?  3.  The  command  is  against  false  swearing — 
against  false  oaths.  In  every  oath  conscience  should  speak.  And  it  matters  not 
whether  the  perjury  is  committed  for  self  or  for  others,  or  in  company  with  many, 
or  whether  it  be  in  regard  to  a  promise,  to  allegiance,  &c.  4.  The  command  is 
against  needless  oaths— men  are  not  to  swear  about  trifles.  In  common  life  the 
rule  is  "swear  not  at  all."  Will  none  believe  you  unless  your  words  are  clinched 
by  an  oath  ?  Shame  upon  you,  then  !  5.  The  command  forbids  lying  or  deceiving 
in  God's  name  ;  it  is  against  hypocrisy.  Every  preacher  of  the  Gospel  should  bo 
penetrated  with  the  spirit  of  the  apostle  (Gal.  i.  8).  Yet  there  are  many  who  are 
false  prophets  (Jer.  v.  31).  They  appeal  to  Scripture  against  Scripture,  and  destroy 
those  weak  in  the  faith.  Those  break  this  command  who  misuse  the  Bible 
and  Bible  phrases  ;  who,  e.g.,  mock  at  the  sin  of  a  David  and  leave  his  repentance 
unnoticed  ;  who  read  the  Bible  to  oppose  it — making  the  Word  of  Life  to  become  a 
word  of  death ;  who,  in  common  conversation,  use  as  exclamations  the  name  of 
God,  Christ,  &c.  ;  who  mock  among  themselves  at  the  Christian  faith,  and  yet  in 
the  presence  of  men  approach  the  table  of  the  Lord.  To  all  such  the  command 
says,  "The  Lord  will  not  hold  him  guiltless  that  taketh  His  name  in  vain." 
II.  The  fulfilling  of  the  command.  1.  Whilst  we  are  not  to  misuse  God's 
name,  at  the  same  time  we  must  not  neglect  it.  What  kind  of  friendship  would 
that  be  with  one  whose  name  is  never  on  our  lips  ?  So  with  the  name  of  God.  It 
must  not  be  used  in  cursing,  &c.,  but  in  time  of  need  we  must  call  upon  Him. 
2.  Not  only  in  time  of  need,  however.  It  were  a  poor  friendship  that  would  lead  us 
to  think  of  our  friend  only  in  hours  of  need.  We  must  '  *  call  upon  the  name  of  the 
Lord"  in  all  conditions  and  circumstances — in  joy  as  in  sorrow,  in  our  outgoing 
and  incoming,  in  our  work  as  in  our  worship,  &c.  3.  But  we  must  not  only  be  led 
to  call  on  God  in  prayer — at  the  memory  of  His  goodness  and  grace.  His  might  and 
majesty,  we  should  "praise  His  great  and  holy  name."  And  whilst  those  who 
break  this  command  have  their  favourite  oaths,  &c.,  we  shall  have  our  favourite 
expressions  in  prayer  and  praise.  4.  It  is  also  oftentimes  a  sacred  duty  to  praise 
God,  as  Polycarp  saw  it  to  be  before  his  judges  when  he  was  asked  to  curse  Christ. 
"How  could  I  curse  my  King  who  has  saved  me?"  So  for  thirty,  forty,  or  fifty 
years  He  has  followed  us  with  blessing.     Is  it  not  our  duty  openly  to  praise  His 


116  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  v. 

name  ?  5.  We  should  remember  also  God's  name  with  thankful  gratitude.  '*  Bless 
the  Lord,  0  my  soul,  and  forget  not  all  His  benefits."  In  the  world,  in  heaven  and 
earth,  in  the  history  of  humanity  and  of  His  Church,  His  praise  is  written — and  in 
our  individual  lives.  The  centuries  and  millennia  proclaim  His  praise  ;  but  so  also 
do  yesterday  and  to-day — the  morning  on  which  you  awoke  refreshed,  and  the 
night  which  brought  you  and  yours  peace  and  rest  (Psa.  xcii.  1,  2).  6.  We  must 
thank  God  for  everything,  even  for  the  Cross  He  sends.  Thus  thanksgiving  is  often 
harder  than  supplication.  When  we  can  render  both  we  have  learned  a  noble  art. 
If  our  life  pass  in  prayer  and  thanksgiving,  then  it  will  follow  a  true  course,  and 
men  will  see  therein  how  true  it  is. 

*'  With  thy  God  to  begin — with  Him  to  end, 
This  is  the  fairest  way  thy  life  can  tend." 

{K.  ff.  Caspari.)  Conneciion  of  this  commandTnent  vrith  what  precedes : — It  is 
apparent  how  closely  connected  this  third  Word  is  with  what  has  gone  before.  As  if  it 
were  said,  Jehovah  alone  is  God  :  this  one  God  Jehovah  is  to  be  suitably  worshipped  ; 
nay,  in  the  use  of  His  name,  and  in  all  our  transactions  with  Him,  this  God 
Jehovah  is  to  be  regarded  most  reverently.  Surely  all  the  knowledge  we  have  of 
God,  supplied  to  us  by  His  names  and  titles,  His  Word  and  works,  is  calculated  to 
convince  us  of  His  greatness  and  majesty,  and  how  very  worthy  He  is  of  fear  and 
reverence  from  every  one  of  us.  This  third  Word  is  connected  with  the  preceding 
also  in  the  reason  here  assigned.  For  the  shadow  of  God's  jealousy  is  thrown 
over  this  command,  as  we  read  that  God  will  not  hold  guiltless  the  breakers  of  it, 
or  that  He  will  not  let  such  pass  unpunished.  Then,  again,  the  fact  that  God  is  in 
covenant  with  Israel,  and  Israel  in  covenant  with  God — "Jehovah  thy  God" — does 
not  make  it  at  all  the  more  becoming  that  they  should  take  undue  liberties  with  any- 
thing connected  with  Him.  Even  in  this  loving  fellowship  He  is  ever  God,  Jehovah 
thy  God,  and  as  such  to  be  reverently  regarded.  We  must  make  no  use  of  our 
covenant  standing  to  drag  Him  down,  as  it  were  ;  or  in  any  way  injure,  or  cause  to 
be  injured.  His  glory,  and  do  Him  gross  irreverence.  That  is  not  how  we  do  with 
even  the  friendships  and  the  fellowships  of  earth.  And  if  any  one,  especially  a 
greater  than  ourselves,  have  made  us  his  friends,  we  do  not  thus  abuse  the  friend- 
ship or  the  fellowship.  If  we  have  due  regard  for  our  friend  we  never  take 
advantage  of  the  friendship  to  do  him  injury,  to  treat  him  with  disrespect,  or  bring 
him  dishonour.  In  Parliament  it  is  esteemed  extremely  unbecoming  to  drag  in  the 
name  of  the  king  unnecessarily  into  party  debate.  Even  if  no  misrepresentation 
be  made  it  is  an  unbecoming  and  irreverent  thing  to  do,  and  to  be  rebuked.  If 
that  be  so  as  regards  the  great  ones  of  this  world,  how  much  more  is  it  to  be  the 
case  in  the  relation  of  men  to  the  mighty  God  !  How  unpardonable  is  irreverence 
towards  Him,  the  wanton  disregarding  of  His  high  and  holy  position,  the  tampering 
with  the  sacredness  of  His  name,  or  of  anything  of  His !  {Jas.  Matthew,  B.D.) 
The  sin  of  profane  swearing : — 1.  It  is  a  sin  that  points  more  directly  than  almost 
any  other  against  the  Supreme  Lord  of  all,  the  Majesty  of  the  universe.  It  is  a 
direct  affront  put  upon  Him.  Would  men  but  think  whose  name  it  is  they  are 
abusing,  by  associating  His  purity  with  all  that  is  vile,  His  truth  with  all  that  is 
false,  and  His  greatness  with  all  that  is  mean,  there  should  no  further  argument  be 
needed  to  impress  the  guilt  of  the  practice  upon  their  minds,  and  to  make  "their 
hearts  meditate  terror  "  at  the  thought  of  committing  the  trespass.  2.  It  is  a  sin 
eminently  prejudicial  to  men.  The  swearer  may  think  otherwise.  His  words,  he 
may  allege,  are  his  own  ;  and  the  guilt  of  it,  be  it  what  it  may,  lies  with  himself. 
On  himself  comes  all  the  evil.  But  no  mistake  can  be  more  palpable.  The 
example  is  eminently  pernicious,  and  especially  to  the  young  and  inexperienced. 
And  such  language  reduces  in  society  the  tone  of  that  first  and  highest  of  principles, 
reverence  of  God.  3.  It  may  be  added  further,  that  of  all  sins  it  is  the  most 
profitless,  that  to  which,  therefore,  there  is  the  least  of  tangible  and  appreciable 
temptation — the  most  "unfruitful"  of  all  the  "unfruitful  works  of  darkness." 
{R.  Wardlaw,  D.D.)  Swearing  a  costly  habit: — The  Rev.  Professor  Lawson, 
minister  of  Selkirk,  had  a  medical  attendant  who  used  oaths.  Dr.  Lawson  sent 
for  the  physician  to  consult  him  about  his  health.  Having  learned  what  his 
symptoms  were,  the  M.D.  exclaimed  (with  an  oath),  "You  give  up  that  vile  habit 
of  snuffing ;  unless  you  give  it  up  (oath),  you'll  never  recover."  "  It's  rather  a 
costly  habit,"  replied  Dr.  Lawson,  "and  if  it  is  injuring  me,  I  must  abandon  it. 
But  you,  too,  my  dear  doctor,  cherish  a  bad  habit — that  of  swearing — and  it  would 


CHAP,  v.]  DEUTERONOMY.  117 

comfort  yonr  friends  much  were  you  to  give  it  up."  "It's  not  a  costly  habit  like 
yours,"  rejoined  the  physician.  "Very  costly,  indeed,  you'll  find  it,"  said  the  pro- 
feasor,  "when  you  receive  the  account."  Prof anity  a  mean  vice : — Profaneness 

is  a  mean  vice.  Accordin*::  to  general  estimation  he  who  repays  kindness  with 
contumely,  he  who  abuses  his  friend  and  benefactor,  is  deemed  pitiful  and  wretched. 
And  yet,  oh  profane  man  !  whose  name  is  it  you  handle  so  lightly  ?  It  is  that  of 
your  best  Benefictor  !  {J.  Chapin.)  Prof  anity  a  silly  vice : — Profaneness  is  an 
unmanly  and  silly  vice.  It  certainly  is  not  a  grace  in  conversation,  and  it  adds 
no  strength  to  it.  There  is  no  organic  symmetry  in  the  narrative  that  is  ingrained 
with  oaths  ;  and  the  blasphemy  that  bolsters  an  opinion  does  not  make  it  any  more 
correct.  Our  mother  English  has  variety  enough  to  make  a  story  sparkle,  and  to 
give  point  to  wit ;  it  has  toughness  enough  and  vehemence  enough  to  furnish  sinews 
for  a  debate  and  to  drive  home  conviction,  without  degrading  the  holy  epithets  of 
Jehovah.  Nay,  the  use  of  those  expletives  argues  a  limited  range  of  ideas,  and  a 
consciousness  of  being  on  the  wrong  side.  And,  if  we  can  find  no  other  phrases 
through  which  to  vent  our  choking  passion,  we  had  better  repress  that  passion. 
{Ibid.) 

Vers.  12-15.  Keep  the  Sabbath  Aay.— The  Fourth  Commandment:—!.  Here  i8 
BESTING  FROM  ORDINARY  EMPLOYMENTS.  When  a  man  does  his  work,  his  thoughts 
and  tongue  and  hands  are  engaged  in  it.  Consequently,  on  this  day  of  rest,  there 
must  be  not  only  a  ceasing  from  the  actual  labour  of  the  hands,  but  neither  the 
tongue  nor  thoughts  may  be  engaged  upon  our  worldly  matters  and  affairs. 
Examine  wl'at  your  Sunday  thoughts  have  been.  Have  you  always  in  thought  and 
mind  been  in  heaven  that  day,  having  left  your  worldly  cares  and  aflairs  out  of 
sight  behind  you  ?  Then  again,  have  you  not  spoken  your  own  words  on  this  day  ? 
Look  back  and  see  if  there  be  no  records  against  you  in  the  book  of  God  of  worldly 
affairs  negotiated  on  the  Sabbath  day.  II.  I  go  on  to  help  you  in  the  farther 
inquiry  whether,  supposing  you  have  rested  from  worldly  affairs,  you  have  also 
SANCTIFIED  THAT  REST.  According  to  the  interpretation  which  common  practice 
puts  on  this  commandment,  the  words  might  run  thus,  "Remember  the  Sabbath 
day  to  take  thy  pleasure  therein."  In  general,  the  Sabbath  is  sanctified  when  it  is 
spent  with  God  in  humble  and  thankful  acknowledgments  of  His  love  in  creating 
us,  and  of  His  infinite  mercy  in  redeeming  us  by  Jesus  Christ,  who  is  gone  into 
heaven  to  prepare  a  place  for  us.  Then  we  should  be  examining  our  hearts  and 
lives,  humbling  ourselves  for  our  sins,  stirring  up  the  grace  that  is  in  us,  exercising 
repentance,  faith,  hope,  and  charity  ;  above  all  looking  forward  to  the  rest  that 
remaineth  for  the  people  of  God  (Heb.  iv.  9).  And  think  you,  is  not  one  such  day 
better  than  a  thousand  ?  Oh,  what  do  they  lose  who  make  the  Sabbath  a  day  of 
carnal  pleasure  ?  But  more  particularly  the  sanctification  of  this  rest  lies  within  the 
compass  of  these  three  things.  1.  Public  exercises.  2.  Private  exercises.  3.  Reli- 
gious communication.  III.  The  third  thing  contained  in  a  due  observance  of 
the  Lord's  day  is  A  right  aim  in  ceasing  from  worldly  labours,  and  in  exer- 
cising the  religious  observances  just  mentioned.  Now  the  righteousness  of  the  aim 
is  when  there  is  a  correspondence  between  our  design  in  keeping  and  God's  design  in 
instituting  the  Sabbath.  1.  Has,  then,  our  design  in  the  observance  we  have  paid 
to  the  Sabbath  principally  been  to  glorify  God  ?  2.  Has  your  aim  in  sanctifying 
the  Lord's  day  been  the  sanctification  of  your  own  soul?  {S.  Walker,  B.A.) 
The  Sabbath  vxls  made  for  man: — Herbert  Spencer  says,  "  Ask  how  it  happens  that 
men  in  England  do  not  work  every  seventh  day,  and  you  have  to  seek  through 
thousands  of  past  years  to  find  the  initial  cause.  Ask  why  in  England,  and 
especially  in  Scotland,  there  is  not  only  a  cessation  from  work,  which  the  creed 
interdicts,  but  also  a  cessation  from  amusement,  which  it  does  not  interdict ;  and  for 
an  explanation  you  must  go  back  to  successive  waves  of  ascetic  fanaticism  in 
generations  long  dead."  Let  us  consider  this  "  initial  cause,"  and  inquire  whether 
this  great  thinker  is  correct  in  his  statement  in  regard  to  what  he  calls  "  the  creed," 
and  its  relation  to  amusement.  There  are  some  who  say  that  the  Jewish  Sabbath, 
or  the  Puritan  Sabbath,  ought  to  be  observed  now.  There  are  others  who  affirm 
that  all  distinctions  of  days  have  passed  away  ;  that  all  days  should  be  spent  in  the 
fear  of  God.  What  would  a  friend  think  of  your  treatment  of  him  if,  when  he 
visited  you,  you  gave  him  one  room  in  your  house,  and  promised  to  see  him  an  hour 
or  two  in  the  week,  but  would  not  let  him  come  to  your  shop,  to  your  office,  to  your 
family  ?  It  is  thus  many  men  treat  God.  The  Sunday  is  one  room  in  the  house  of 
life,  into  which  they  come  professedly  to  commune  with  God  for  an  hour  or  two ; 


118  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

and  then  they  leave  Him  for  the  whole  week.  All  days  are  to  be  spent  in  His 
service.  Ellicott  says,  "The  Sabbath  of  the  Jews,  as  involving  other  than  mere 
national  reminiscences,  was  a  shadow  of  the  Lord's  day  ;  that  a  weekly  seventh  part 
of  our  time  should  be  specially  devoted  to  God  rests  on  considerations  as  old  as  the 
creation ;  that  that  seventh  portion  of  the  week  should  be  the  first  day  rests  on 
apostolical,  or  perhaps,  inferentially  (as  the  Lord's  appearances  on  that  day  seem 
to  show)  Divine  usage  and  appointment."  Whether  this  is,  as  Alfora  says, 
"transparent  special  pleading,"  or  not,  and  whether  it  is  right  to  call  the  Jewish 
Sabbath  "the  shadow  of  the  Lord's  day,"  I  stay  not  to  inquire;  but  there  is 
nothing  in  the  apostle's  language  that  is  inconsistent  with  the  Divine  institution 
of  the  day  of  rest.  The  law  was  a  shadow,  Christ  is  the  substance :  He  has 
fulfilled  the  law.  We  obtained  salvation,  not  by  obeying  the  law,  but  by  receiving 
Christ ;  and  then  the  law  that  was  written  on  tables  of  stone  is  written  on  our 
hearts,  and  "  love  is  the  fulfilling  of  the  law."  A  seventh  portion  of  time  for  rest 
and  worship  is  a  right  thing,  not  merely  because  we  find  it  commanded  in  the  law,  but 
because  our  nature  demands  it.  Idolatry  was  sinful  before  the  lightnings  of  Sinai 
played  around  its  granite  cliffs  ;  profanity  was  sinful,  perjury  was  sinful,  theft  was 
sinful,  before  the  voice  of  God  was  heard  from  that  tabernacle  of  darkness.  If  no 
law  had  been  written  it  would  have  been  wrong  to  worship  images,  or  bear  false 
witness  against  a  neighbour.  And  Christians  observe  the  Lord's  day,  not  simply 
or  chiefly  because  this  law  of  the  Sabbath  was  given  on  Sinai,  but  because  the  law 
of  love  is  written  in  their  hearts ;  and  they  know  they  honour  Christ  and  benefit 
themselves  by  such  religious  observance.  "  Remember  the  Sabbath  day,  to  keep  it 
holy."  The  word  "remember"  must,  I  think,  imply  the  previous  existence  of  the 
institution.  We  have,  however,  no  account  of  a  Sabbath  in  the  times  of  the 
patriarchs :  the  name  is  not  mentioned  ;  and  the  only  reference  to  it,  if  we  may 
take  it  as  such,  was  in  the  special  sacredness  attached  to  the  number  seven,  and  in 
the  custom  of  dividing  time  into  weeks  of  seven  days.  But  the  name  appears 
before  the  delivery  of  the  law,  and  in  a  connection  that  makes  it  probable  that  the 
observance  of  the  seventh  day  was  already  practised  by  the  Israelites.  In  the 
account  of  the  gathering  of  the  manna,  Moses  speaks  of  "the  rest  of  the  holy 
Sabbath  unto  the  Lord."  "And  Moses  said,  Eat  that  to-day,  for  to-day  is  a 
Sabbath  unto  the  Lord  ;  to-day  ye  shall  not  find  it  in  the  field.  Six  days  ye  shall 
gather  it ;  but  on  the  seventh  day,  which  is  the  Sabbath,  in  it  there  shall  be  none." 
The  reasons  assigned  for  the  institution  were — 1.  To  commemorate  the  rest  of  God 
after  His  work  of  creation.  This  rest  does  not,  of  course,  imply  anything  like 
fatigue  or  exhaustion  ;  but  it  denotes  that  God's  purpose  was  fulfilled,  that  His 
work  in  creating  the  universe  was  finished.  2.  It  was  intended,  also,  to  remind 
them  of  their  deliverance  from  Egyptian  bondage.  "And  remember  that  thou 
wast  a  servant  in  the  land  of  Egypt,"  &c.  3.  And  the  Sabbath  was  also  given  as 
a  pledge  of  the  covenant  between  God  and  His  people.  "I  gave  them  My 
Sabbaths,  to  be  a  sign  between  Me  and  them,  that  they  might  know  that  I  am  the 
Lord  that  sanctifieth  them."  Such  was  the  Jewish  Sabbath :  its  object  and  the 
manner  in  which  it  was  to  be  kept  were  distinctly  stated ;  and  through  many 
centuries,  despite  the  periods  of  apostasy  and  judgment,  it  was  "a  delight,  holy  to 
the  Lord,  honourable."  But  before  the  advent  of  Christ  the  scribes  had  added  to 
the  law  innumerable  explanations  and  enactments,  which  were  deemed  as  binding 
as  the  original ;  and  we  find  that  the  Pharisees  again  and  again  submitted  to  Christ 
the  question  of  Sabbath -keeping.  They  would  not  for  much  travel  beyond  the  limit 
of  a  Sabbath-day's  journey,  and  yet  their  feet  were  swift  to  shed  blood  ;  they  kept 
the  Sabbath,  but  they  passed  over  the  judgment  and  the  love  of  God,  and  they 
persecuted  the  Holy  One  and  the  Just.  What  did  Christ  say  in  regard  to  the 
Sabbath  ?  He  said  that  it  was  lawful  to  do  good  on  the  Sabbath  day  ;  He  said  also, 
"  The  Sabbath  was  made  for  man,  and  not  man  for  the  Sabbath."  Man  was  made 
to  serve  and  glorify  God  ;  and  all  institutions  that  help  him  in  the  pursuit  of  this 
end  are  his  servants.  Man,  with  his  two  hands  for  labour,  with  his  mind  that 
can  think  of  God,  and  his  heart  that  can  love  God,  is  greater  than  all  material 
nature,  greater  than  forms  of  government,  greater  than  religious  ordinances.  They 
are  good,  as  they  minister  to  him.  The  laws  of  the  family  are  intended  for  the 
welfare  of  the  family ;  the  laws  of  the  school  for  the  welfare  of  the  school :  they 
are  important  as  such.  But  the  child  is  greater  than  the  rules  ;  they  are  meant  to 
serve  him,  and  are  appointed  for  his  sake.  "The  Son  of  man  is  Lord  also  of  the 
Sabbath  day."  The  Representative  Man,  the  Head  of  humanity,  the  King  of  the 
race,  is  Lord  also  of  the  Sabbath  day.     He  does  not  say  anything  about  the  repeal 


CHAP,  v.]  DEUTERONOMY.  119 

of  the  Sabbath.  His  followers  should  meet  on  the  first  day  of  the  week,  to  contem- 
plate a  greater  work  than  creation,  to  celebrate  a  more  glorious  redemption  than 
that  of  Israel  from  Egyptian  slavery.  On  the  first  day  of  the  week  He  rose  from 
the  dead,  according  to  the  Scriptures.  On  that  day  He  manifested  Himself  to  Mary 
Magdalene,  to  the  other  women,  to  Peter  alone,  to  the  two  disciples  on  the  way  to 
Emmaus,  and  to  the  assembled  apostles  in  the  upper  room ;  and,  a  week  later,  to 
the  apostles  again,  when  the  doubting  Thomas  was  present,  was  convinced,  and  con- 
strained to  say,  "My  Lord  and  my  God."  Then  the  day  of  Pentecost  in  that 
year  fell  on  the  first  day  of  the  week,  when  the  promise  of  the  Father  was  fulfilled. 
Here,  then,  is  the  authority,  the  only  authority,  we  have  for  the  observance  of  the 
first  day  of  the  week.  First,  that  the  assemblies  of  Christians  in  the  days  of  the 
apostles  took  place  on  this  day.  Secondly,  the  confirmation  afforded  by  tradition 
and  usage  ever  since.  ' '  This  is  the  day  which  the  Lord  hath  made  ;  we  will 
rejoice  and  be  glad  in  it."  1.  It  is  to  be  observed,  then,  as  a  day  of  rest  from 
all  unnecessary  labour.  The  seventh  day  may  be  exchanged  for  the  first ;  the 
minute  details  relating  to  its  observance  may  pass  away  with  the  Mosaic  economy ; 
but  it  will  remain  for  ever  true  that  a  seventh  portion  of  time  is  to  be  employed  as 
a  Sabbath.  Man  the  worker  needs  one  day  in  the  week  for  rest.  Life  is  like  a 
lamp;  keep  the  light  low,  do  not  burn  all  the  oil  too  soon.  2.  It  is  also  to  be 
observed  as  a  day  of  spiritual  refreshment.  The  Sabbath  was  made  for  man,  for 
the  whole  man  ;  not  only  for  bones  and  muscles,  but  also  for  mind,  and  heart,  and 
soul.  "I  was  in  the  Spirit  on  the  Lord's  day  ";  there  are  many  who  could  say,  **  I 
was  in  bed  on  the  Lord's  day."  But  the  soul  cannot  sleep,  and  provision  should 
be  made  for  its  necessities.  There  is  a  religious  instinct  in  man  :  it  is  not  the  result 
of  education,  it  is  not  the  creation  of  priestcraft,  for  the  very  existence  of  the  priest 
proves  that  there  was  beforehand  a  religious  element  in  the  minds  of  the  people. 
Our  spiritual  nature  cries  out  for  God,  and  God  gives  us  a  Sabbath  to  save  us 
from  becoming  slaves  of  toil,  and  from  burying  our  noblest  thoughts  and  aspira- 
tions in  a  grave  of  materialism  and  lust.  3.  And  it  is  to  be  a  day  of  gladness.  It 
is  to  be  a  /S'w?i-day,  a  bright  day,  and  a  day  of  holy  gladness  and  rejoicing.  What 
signal  triumphs  of  the  Gospel  have  been  won  on  this  day.  It  has  often  brought 
healing  to  the  wounded  heart,  and  joy  to  the  sorrowful  spirit,  and  succour  to 
the  tempted  and  timid.  Its  light  has  been  as  the  light  of  seven  days,  and  it 
has  always  come  with  healing  in  its  wings.  {James  Owen.)  Observance  of 
the  LordJs  day  instead  of  the  Sabbath: — 1.  That  it  does  not  in  the  least  derogate 
from  the  honour  of  God  to  change  the  Sabbath  from  the  seventh  to  the  first 
day  of  the  week.  It  would,  indeed,  derogate  from  the  glory  of  God,  if  He  should 
take  away  one  Sabbath  and  not  institute  another  ;  for  then  He  would  lose  the 
honour  of  that  public  worship,  which  He  has  appointed  to  be  performed  to  Him, 
on  that  day.  Moreover,  if  there  be  a  greater  work  than  that  of  creation,  to  be 
remembered  and  celebrated,  it  tends  much  more  to  the  advancing  the  glory  of 
God  to  appoint  a  day  for  the  solemn  remembrance  thereof,  than  if  it  should  be 
wholly  neglected.  And  to  this  we  may  add  that  if  all  men  must  honour  the  Son, 
even  as  they  honour  the  Father,  then  it  is  expedient  that  a  day  should  be  set  apart 
for  His  honour,  namely,  the  day  on  which  He  rested  from  the  work  of  redemption, 
or,  as  the  apostle  says,  "ceased  from  it,  as  God  did  from  His."  2.  It  was  expedient 
that  God  should  alter  the  Sabbath  from  the  seventh  to  the  first  day  of  the  week  ; 
for — (1)  Hereby  Christ  took  occasion  to  give  a  display  of  His  glory,  and  in  particular 
of  His  sovereign  authority,  to  enjoin  what  time  He  would  have  us  set  apart  for  His 
worship  under  the  Gospel  dispensation.  (2)  We,  in  the  observation  thereof,  signify 
our  faith,  in  a  public  manner,  that  Christ  is  come  in  the  flesh,  and  that  the  work 
of  our  redemption  is  brought  to  perfection  ;  and,  consequently,  that  there  is  a  way 
prepared  for  our  justification  and  access  to  God,  as  our  God,  in  hope  of  finding 
acceptance  in  His  sight.  3.  All  the  ordinances  of  Gospel  worship  have  a  peculiar 
relation  to  Christ ;  therefore  it  is  expedient  that  the  time  in  which  they  are  to  be 
performed,  under  this  present  Gospel  dispensation,  should  likewise  have  relation  to 
Him  ;  therefore  that  day  must  be  set  apart  in  commemoration  of  His  work  of 
redemption,  in  which  He  finished  it,  and  that  was  the  first  day  of  the  week. 
(Thomas  Rklglet,  D.D.)  How  the  Lord's  day  is  to  be  sanctified:—!.  That  we 
ARE  TO  PREPARE  OTJR  HEARTS  and,  with  such  foresight,  diligence,  and  moderation, 
to  dispose  and  seasonably  to  dispatch  our  worldly  business,  that  we  may  be 

MORE  FREE  AND  FIT  FOR  THE  BUSINESS  OF  THAT  DAY.     That  Icads  US  to  COUSider  the 

duties  to  be  performed  preparatory  to  the  right  observing  the  Lord's  day  ;  and,  in 
order  hereunto,  we  ought,  the  evening  before,  to  lay  aside  our  care  and  worldly 


120  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  t. 

l)U8me8S,  that  our  thoughts  may  not  be  diverted  or  taken  up  with  unseasonable 
concerns  about  it.  This  is  a  duty  very  much  neglected.  Thus  many  keep  their 
shops  open  till  midnight,  and  by  this  means  make  encroachments  on  part  of  the 
morning  of  the  Lord's  day.  And  to  this  we  may  add  that  all  envyings,  contentions, 
evil  surmising  against  our  neighbour  are  to  be  laid  aside,  since  these  will  tend  to 
defile  our  souls  when  they  ought  to  be  wholly  taken  up  about  Divine  things. 
Moreover,  we  are  to  endeavour  to  bring  our  souls  into  a  prepared  frame  for  the 
duties  of  the  Lord's  day  the  evening  before,  by  having  our  thoughts  engaged  in 
those  meditations  that  are  suitable  thereto.  IL  We  are  now  to  consider  what  we 
AEB  TO  REST  AND  ABSTAIN  FROM  ON  THE  Lord's  DAY,  namely,  not  only  from  things 
sinful,  but  what  is  in  itself  lawful  on  other  days.  1.  As  for  those  things  which  are 
sinful  on  other  days,  they  are  much  more  so  on  the  Sabbath.  2.  We  break  the 
Sabbath  by  engaging  in  things  that  would  be  lawful  on  other  days,  and  that  in  two 
particular  instances  here  mentioned.  (1)  When  we  engage  in  worldly  employments. 
(2)  The  Sabbath  is  violated  by  recreations,  which  we  are  therefore  to  abstain  from. 
in.  When  it  is  said,  in  this  Fourth  Commandment,  that  thou  shalt  do  no  manner 
of  work  on  the  Sabbath  day,  there  is  an  exception  hereunto  in  works  of  necessity 
AND  MERCY.  1.  Let  the  necessity  be  real,  not  pretended  ;  of  which  God  and  our 
own  consciences  are  the  judges.  2.  If  we  think  that  we  have  a  necessary  call  to 
omit  our  attendance  on  the  ordinances  of  God  on  the  Sabbath  day,  let  us  take  heed 
that  this  necessity  be  not  brought  on  us  by  some  sin  committed.  3.  If  necessity 
obliges  us  to  engage  in  secular  employments  on  the  Lord's  day,  as  in  the  instances 
of  those  whose  business  is  to  provide  physic  for  the  sick,  let  us,  nevertheless,  labour 
after  a  spiritual  frame,  becoming  the  holiness  of  the  day.  4.  As  we  ought  to  see 
that  the  work  we  are  engaged  in  is  necessary,  so  we  must  not  spend  more  time 
therein  than  what  is  needful.  5.  If  we  have  a  necessary  call  to  engage  in  worldly 
matters,  whereby  we  are  detained  from  public  ordinances,  we  must  endeavour  to 
satisfy  others,  that  the  providence  of  God  obliges  us  hereunto  ;  that  so  we  may  not 
give  offence  to  them,  or  they  take  occasion,  without  just  reason,  to  follow  their  own 
employments,  which  would  be  a  sin  in  them.  IV.  We  are  to  sanctify  the 
Sabbath  by  spending  the  whole  day  in  the  public  and  private  exercises  of 
God's  worship,  and  herein  to  maintain  a  becoming  holy  frame  of  spirit  from 
THE  beginning  OF  THE  DAY  TO  THE  END  THEREOF.  Therefore— 1.  In  the  beginning 
thereof,  let  not  too  much  sleep  make  intrenchments  on  more  of  the  morning  of  the 
day  than  what  is  needful,  particularly  more  than  what  we  allow  ourselves  before 
we  begin  our  employments  on  other  days.  And  let  us  be  earnest  with  God  in 
prayer,  that  He  would  prepare  our  hearts  for  the  solenm  duties  we  are  to  engage 
in.  Let  ns  consider  the  Sabbath  as  a  very  great  talent  that  we  are  entrusted  with  ; 
and  that  it  is  of  the  greatest  importance  for  us  to  improve  it,  to  the  glory  of  God 
and  our  spiritual  advantage.  2.  While  we  are  engaged  in  holy  duties,  especially 
in  the  public  ordinances  of  God's  worship,  let  us  endeavour  to  maintain  a  becoming 
reverence  and  filial  fear  of  God,  in  whose  presence  we  are,  and  a  love  to  His  holy 
institutions,  which  are  instamped  with  His  authority.  Let  us,  moreover,  watch  and 
strive  against  the  first  motions  and  suggestions  of  Satan,  and  our  corrupt  hearts, 
endeavouring  to  divert  us  from  or  disturb  us  in  holy  duties.  Let  us  also  cherish, 
improve,  and  bless  God  for  all  the  influences  of  His  Holy  Spirit  which  He  is 
pleased  at  any  time  to  grant  to  us  ;  or  lament  the  want  thereof  when  they  are  with- 
held. 3.  In  the  intervals  between  our  attendances  on  the  ordinances  of  God's  public 
worship  we  are  to  engage  in  private  duties,  and  worship  God  in  and  with  our 
families.  4.  The  Sabbath  is  to  be  sanctified  in  the  evening  thereof,  when  the  public 
ordinances  are  over  ;  at  which  time  we  are  to  call  to  mind  what  we  have  received 
from  God,  with  thankfulness,  and  how  we  have  behaved  ourselves  in  all  the  parts 
of  Divine  worship  in  which  we  have  been  engaged.      (Ibid.)  Sanctify  the 

SaJbhath: — I.  The  sins  forbidden.  1.  The  omission  of  the  duties  required.  This 
is  a  casting  away  a  great  prize  put  into  our  hands.  2.  The  careless  performance  of 
holy  duties  ;  that  is,  when  our  hearts  are  not  engaged  in  them,  or  we  content  our- 
selves with  a  form  of  godliness,  denying  the  power  thereof.  3.  When  we  profane 
the  day  by  idleness.  II.  The  reasons  annexed.  1.  It  is  highly  reasonable  that 
we  should  sanctify  the  Lord's  day,  since  He  is  pleased  to  allow  us  six  days  out 
of  seven  for  the  attending  to  our  worldly  aff'airs,  and  reserves  but  one  to  Himself. 
2.  Another  reason  annexed  to  enforce  our  observation  of  the  Sabbath  day  is  taken  from 
God's  challenging  a  special  propriety  in  it :  thus  it  is  called  the  Sabl'ath  day  of  the 
Lord  thy  God,  a  day  which  He  has  consecrated  or  separated  to  Himself,  and  so  lays 
claim  to  it.    Therefore  it  is  no  less  than  sacrilege,  or  a  robbing  of  Him,  to  employ 


CHAP,  v.]  DEUTERONOMY,  121 

it  in  anything  but  what  He  requires  to  be  done  therein.  3.  God  sets  His  own 
example  before  us  for  our  imitation  therein.  4.  The  last  reason  assigned  for  our 
sanctifying  the  Sabbath  is  taken  from  God's  blessing  and  sanctifying  it,  or  setting 
it  apart  for  a  holy  use.  To  bless  a  day  is  to  give  it  to  us  as  a  particular  blessing 
and  privilege ;  accordingly  we  ought  to  reckon  the  Sabbath  as  a  great  instance  of 
God's  care  and  compassion  to  men,  and  a  very  great  privilege,  which  ought  to  be 
highly  esteemed  by  them.  Again,  for  God  to  sanctify  a  day  is  to  set  it  apart  from 
a  common  to  a  holy  use;  and  thus  we  ought  to  reckon  the  Sabbath  as. a  day 
signalised  above  all  others  with  the  character  of  God's  holy  day ;  and  as  such,  it 
is  to  be  employed  by  us  in  holy  exercises,  answerable  to  the  end  for  which  it  was 
instituted.  {Ihid.)  Remember  the  ^aJ6a«A .-—The  word  "remember"  is  set  in 
the  beginning  of  the  Fourth  Commandment,  from  whence  we  may  observe  the  great 
proneness,  through  worldly  business  and  Satan's  temptations,  to  forget  the  Sabbath. 
We  may  also  learn  from  hence  the  importance  of  our  observing  it,  without  which 
irreligion  and  profaneness  would  universally  abound  in  the  world.  And  to  induce 
us  hereunto  let  it  be  considered — 1.  That  the  profanation  of  the  Sabbath  is  generally 
the  first  step  to  all  manner  of  wickedness,  and  a  making  great  advances  to  a  total 
apostasy  from  God.  2.  The  observing  of  it  is  reckoned  as  a  sign  between  God  and 
His  people.  It  is,  with  respect  to  Him,  a  sign  of  His  favour  ;  and  with  respect 
to  men  it  is  a  sign  of  their  subjection  to  God,  as  their  King  and  Lawgiver,  in 
all  His  holy  appointments.  3.  We  cannot  reasonably  expect  that  God  should 
bless  us  in  what  we  undertake  on  other  days  if  we  neglect  to  own  Him  on 
His  day,  or  to  devote  ourselves  to  Him,  and  thereby  discover  our  preferring 
Him  and  the  affairs  of  His  worship  before  all  things  in  the  world.  {Ibid,) 
The  Fourth  Commandment : — Now  you  will  observe  that  the  Fourth  Commandment 
is  a  twofold  commandment  of  labour  and  of  rest.  There  is  nothing  Judaic  about  it ; 
it  is  a  command  for  the  whole  race  of  man.  "Six  days  shalt  thou  labour,"  but 
that  thy  labour  may  not  be  degradingly  and  exhaustively  wearisome ;  that  the  man 
may  not  become  a  mere  machine,  worn  by  the  dust  of  its  own  grinding ;  that  the 
thread  of  sorrow,  which  runs  through  all  labour,  may  never  wholly  blacken  into 
despair;  that  the  thread  of  joy  entwined  with  it  may  be  brightened  into  spiritual 
intensity  and  permanence — therefore,  * '  The  seventh  day  is  the  Sabbath  of  the  Lord 
thy  God  :  in  it  thou  shalt  do  no  manner  of  work."  I  need  scarcely  touch  on  the 
change  from  the  seventh  to  the  first  day  of  the  week ;  but  whether  we  keep  the 
Sabbath  or  Sunday,  the  Fourth  Commandment,  in  its  eternal  and  moral  aspect, 
bids  us  to  keep  one  day  in  the  seven  holy.  And  how  are  we  to  keep  it  holy  ?  Let  us 
look,  first,  at  the  Old  Testament.  Search  it  through,  and  you  will  find  two  rules, 
and  two  only,  of  Sabbath  observance— rest  and  gladness.  "  In  it  thou  shalt  do  no 
manner  of  work,"  and  "This  is  the  day  which  the  Lord  has  made  ;  we  will  rejoice 
and  be  glad  in  it."  The  Christian  Sunday,  then,  like  the  Jewish  Sabbath,  is 
primarily  God's  gift  to  us  of  rest  and  joy.  We  need  both.  Blessed  is  drudgery  ; 
but  blessed,  too,  is  rest  when  work  is  done.  The  man  that  works  seven  days  a  week 
instead  of  six  will  pay  the  penalty  in  peevishness  and  enfeeblement,  and  will  break 
down  sooner  and  enjoy  life  less.  Many  a  brain-worker  has  sunk  into  a  premature 
grave  or  died  wretchedly  by  his  own  hands  because  he  despised  God's  law  of  rest. 
But,  if  we  are  agreed  that  Sunday  should  be  a  day  of  rest,  it  is  still  most  necessary 
for  us  to  understand  that  it  must  be  a  holy  rest  and  not  an  ignoble  rest.  Let  not 
ours  be  the  Puritanic  Sunday  of  gloomy  strictness,  for  "This  is  the  day  the  Lord 
hath  made;  we  will  rejoice  and  be  glad  in  it";  let  not  ours  be  the  foreign  Sunday 
of  frivolity  and  pleasure-seeking  ;  let  not  ours  be  the  pharisaic  Sunday,  with  petty 
rules  and  restrictions,  for  God  has  bidden  us  to  stand  fast  in  the  liberty  wherewith 
He  has  made  us  free.  Bishop  Hackett  was  content  with  this  wise,  beautiful,  and 
manly  rule  :  "Serve  God,  and  be  cheerful."  Yet,  if  you  ask  for  further  principles, 
not  details,  I  will  offer  four  plain  and  simple  ones  which  yet  include  everything — 
three  negative  and  one  positive.  Negatively  :  Let  not  your  Sunday  be  slothful. 
If  to  many  Sunday  only  means  a  heavier  sleep  and  a  more  gluttonous  dinner  than 
usual,  it  is  not  only  wasted  but  desecrated  ;  it  becomes  less  holy  than  even  con- 
tinuous labour,  clogging  instead  of  expanding  the  wings  of  the  soul,  and  strengthen- 
ing instead  of  controlling  the  lower  passions  of  the  body.  Next :  Let  not  our 
Sunday  be  merely  frivolous.  In  Liverpool  the  result  of  a  religious  census,  taken 
very  recently,  showed  that  out  of  600,000  of  the  population  scarcely  more  than  one 
in  a  hundred  attended  the  service  of  any  Christian  religion.  And  among  the  more 
educated  classes,  if  novels  be  any  indication  of  modern  society,  as  I  suppose  they 
»re,  I  find  in  a  recent  novel  no  less  than  three  Sundays  described,  and  they  are  all 


122  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

spent  in  indolent  pleasure,  without  a  hint  that  any  one  of  the  characters,  whether  the 
hero  or  heroine,  so  much  as  thought  of  entering  a  place  of  Christian  worship.  Is 
it  the  Sunday  of  God's  children  and  fellow-labourers,  or  the  Sunday  of  worldlings 
in  a  decadent  civilisation  ?  Is  it  the  Sunday  of  Christian  men  and  women,  holy  to 
the  Lord  and  honourable,  or  of  creatures  who  have  no  duties  to  perform,  no  souls 
to  save  ?  Thirdly :  Let  not  our  Sunday  be  purely  selfish.  We  come  then  to  the 
positive  principle.  Let  our  Sunday  rest  be  gladly  spiritual,  a  day  of  Christian  wor- 
ship and  Christian  thought,  a  day  not  only  to  rest  us  but  also  to  ennoble,  a  day  to 
remind  us  whence  we  come  and  whither  we  go,  and  who  we  are.  Beside  us  and 
around  is  the  world  with  its  pomps  and  vanities ;  before  us  is  virtue,  is  duty,  is 
eternity.  The  Sabbath  is  to  be  a  bridge  thrown  across  life's  troubled  waters,  over 
which  we  may  pass  to  reach  the  opposite  shore.  For,  as  the  Sunday  calls  on  the 
worldly  to  give  place  to  the  spiritual,  to  lay  aside  the  cares  and  labours  of  earth 
for  the  repose  and  holiness  of  heaven,  so  it  is  but  a  type  of  the  eternal  day  when  the 
freed  spirit,  if  true  to  itself  and  to  God,  shall  put  on  for  ever  its  robe  of  immortal 
holiness  and  joy.  (Dean  Farrar.)  Sunday  aids  moral  vision: — "One  day," 
writes  a  traveller,  "as  I  was  passing  a  Pennsylvania  coal  mine,  I  saw  a  small  field 
full  of  mules.  The  boy  who  was  with  me  said,  *  Those  are  the  mules  that  work  all  the 
week  down  in  the  mine,  but  on  Sunday  they  have  to  come  up  into  the  light,  or  else 
in  a  little  while  they  go  blind. ' "  It  seems  to  me  that  what  is  necessary  for  mules 
is  no  less  necessary  for  men.  Keep  men  buried  in  this  world's  business  for  the 
whole  seven  days,  and  they  would  soon  lose  the  very  faculty  of  spiritual  vision, 
having  no  eye,  ear,  or  heart  for  Divine  things.  Make  Sunday  a  working  day,  and 
you  degrade  man  into  a  mill-horse,  and  that  a  blind  one.  {J.  Halsey.)  Brought 
up  to  keep  the  Sabbath : — About  thirty  years  ago  a  Girvan  shoemaker  emigrated  to 
British  Columbia,  on  the  Western  shores  of  North  America,  to  try  his  fortune  on 
the  Caribou  diggings,  then  attracting  many  people.  After  passing  through  his  own 
share  of  hardships,  he  arrived  at  the  diggings,  and  wrought  hard  though  unsuccess- 
fully till  he  had  spent  his  money,  and  became,  in  miners'  phraseology,  "broke." 
Being  a  Scotchman,  however,  he  had  provided  for  this  eventuality,  by  bringing  with 
him  a  few  tools  with  which  he  resolved  to  start  shoemaking  at  the  diggings.  Next 
day,  being  Sunday,  he  was  lying  in  his  tent  despondent  enough,  when  a  tall  miner 
entered  with  a  pair  of  long  boots  slung  over  his  shoulder.  ' '  Is  the  shoemaker  here  ? " 
asked  the  new  arrival.  The  reply  was  that  he  would  be  here  on  Monday.  "  If  I 
am  not  mistaken  you  are  the  shoemaker  yourself."  "  Well, "  said  our  friend,  "what 
though  I  be  ?"  "Now,  look  here,"  said  the  miner  with  an  oath,  "  I  have  travelled 
five  miles  to  come  here,  and  I  won't  leave  this  tent  till  you  mend  my  boots."  The 
cobbler  looked  up  for  a  moment,  and  thought  of  turning  him  out  by  force,  but  all 
at  once  the  recollection  of  the  Sabbath  day  came  to  him,  and  so,  dropping  his  eyes, 
he  replied  :  ' '  You  see,  sir,  I  come  from  Scotland,  where  the  Sabbath  is  respected  j 
and  I  have  never  wrought  on  the  Sabbath  yet,  and  please  God  I  don't  mean  to 
begin  now."  The  miner  made  no  answer,  and  the  cobbler  looked  up,  when,  to  his 
amazement,  he  saw  the  big  tears  dropping  over  his  cheeks.  All  at  once  the  man 
flung  the  boots  on  the  ground  with  these  words  :  ' '  God  help  me  !  I  was  brought  up 
to  respect  the  Sabbath  too,  but  nobody  respects  anything  in  this  God-forsaken 
country.  Take  the  boots,  and  mend  them  when  you  can  "  ;  whereupon  he  left  the 
tent.  The  shoemaker  ultimately  started  a  store  in  Victoria,  British  Columbia, 
called  the  "Scotch  House,"  where  he  prospered  exceedingly.  He  is  now  dead,  but 
the  business  is  still  carried  on  by  his  son,  who  was  in  that  district  not  many  years 
ago.  The  Sabbath  as  a  spring-tide : — Coleridge  looked  forward  with  great  delight 
to  the  return  of  the  Sabbath,  the  sacredness  of  which  produced  a  wonderful  effect 
on  the  temperament  of  that  Christian  poet.  To  a  friend  he  said,  one  Sunday 
morning,  ' '  I  feel  as  if  God  had,  by  giving  the  Sabbath,  given  fifty-two  springs  in 
every  year."  A  worthy  example: — We  have  all  heard  of  Jenny  Lind,  the  famous 
Swedish  singer.  Here  is  a  good  story,  which  shows  her  faithfulness  to  God.  On 
one  occasion,  when  she  was  in  Stockholm,  the  capital  of  Sweden,  the  king  was 
going  to  have  a  musical  festival  at  his  palace  on  the  Sabbath  day.  He  sent  an 
invitation  to  this  great  singer  to  come  and  take  part  in  these  exercises.  But  she 
declined  the  invitation.  Then  the  king  waited  on  her  in  person,  and  commanded 
her  to  come  to  his  entertainment.  This  was  a  very  high  honour  for  a  king  to  show 
to  one  of  his  subjects.  Most  persons  would  have  gone  under  these  circumstances. 
But  Jenny  Lind  still  begged  to  be  excused.  And  when  the  king  asked  for  her  objec- 
tions she  said,  "Please,  your  majesty,  I  have  a  greater  King  in  heaven  to  whom  I 
must  be  faithful.     I  cannot  do  what  your  majesty  desires  without  breaking  the 


CHAP,  v.]  DEUTERONOMY.  123 

commandment  of  my  heavenly  King,  and  offending  Him.  So  please  excuse  me 
for  declining  to  do  what  your  majesty  wishes."  That  was  noble.  Few  persons 
would  have  had  the  courage  to  show  their  faithfulness  under  such  circumstances  as 
Jenny  Lind  did.  "  /  canH  afford  it " : —  "  Just  come  and  work  awhile  in  my  garden 
on  Sunday  mornings,  will  you,  Jim  ?"  said  a  working  man,  with  his  pick-axe  over  his 
shoulder,  to  an  old  hedger,  who  was  working  by  the  side  of  the  road.  Jim  took  off 
his  cap  and  made  a  bow  to  the  speaker,  and  then  said,  "No,  master,  I  can't  afford 
it."  " Oh !  I  don't  want  you  to  do  it  for  nothing.  I'll  pay  you  well  for  the  work." 
"Thank  you,  master,  but  I  can't  afford  it."  "Why,  man,  it  will  put  something  in 
your  pocket,  and  I  don't  think  you  are  too  well  off."  "  That's  true  ;  and  that's  the 
reason  why  I  say  I  can't  afford  it."  "Can't  afford  it!  Why,  surely,  you  don't 
understand  me."  "Yes,  I  do;  but  I'm  not  quick  of  speech.  Please  don't  snap 
me  up,  and  I'll  tell  you  what  I  mean.  It's  very  true,  as  you  say,  that  I'm  not  well 
off  in  this  world.  But  I've  a  blessed  hope  of  being  better  off  in  the  world  to  come. 
My  Lord  and  Saviour  has  said,  '  I  go  to  prepare  a  place  for  you,  that  where  I  am 
there  ye  may  be  also.'  I  learned  that  text  more  than  twenty  years  ago,  and  it  has 
been  a  great  comfort  to  me."  "Well,  but  what's  that  got  to  do  with  your  saying 
in  answer  to  my  offer—'  I  can't  afford  it'  ? "  "  Why,  no  offence  to  you,  sir,  but  it's 
got  all  to  do  with  it.  If  I  lose  my  hope  in  that  better  land,  I  lose  everything.  My 
Saviour  says  I  must  keep  the  Sabbath  day  holy.  If  I  break  His  command  I  shall 
not  be  prepared  for  the  place  He  is  preparing  for  me.  And  then  all  my  hope  is 
gone.  And  this  is  what  I  mean  by  saying,  '  I  can't  afford  it. '  "  The  Sabbath 
before  Moses: — Does  the  law  of  gravitation  depend  upon  the  tradition  that 
Newton  saw  an  apple  fall  to  the  ground  ?  Does  the  law  of  electricity  depend  upon 
the  tradition  that  Franklin  drew  the  lightning  from  the  clouds  with  a  kite  ?  As 
little  does  the  law  of  rest  and  refreshment  for  one  day  in  seven  depend  upon  any- 
thing that  was  said  by  Moses  or  to  Moses  three  thousand  years  ago.  The  Sabbath 
law  of  rest  and  refreshment  is  written  in  the  needs  of  the  human  race.  God  did 
not  first  command  it  then  ;  is  still  commanding  it  now.  All  human  experience 
points  to  this  law.  All  life  interprets  it.  The  body  cries  out  for  it,  the  mind  cries 
out  for  it,  the  soul  cries  out  for  it,  the  very  physical  organisation  of  the  animals 
cries  out  for  it.  {Lyman  Abbott,  D.D.)  Six  days  shalt  thou  l^^i0^xr.— Labour : 
its  dignities  and  problems  .-—How  often  has  this  Fourth  Commandment  been  misinter- 
preted as  dealing  only  with  the  question  of  rest,  as  inculcating  the  sanctity  of  wor- 
ship and  the  beauty  of  Sabbatic  peace  !  Does  it  not  also  lay  down  the  universal  law 
of  labour  ?  Does  it  not  set  forth  the  sanctity  of  toil  and  the  beauty  of  holy  activity  ? 
I.  First,  let  trs  think  of  the  great  fact  of  the  universal  necessity  of  labour. 
"Six  days  shalt  thou  labour  and  do  all  thy  work"  :  that  is  the  one  supreme, 
inexorable  law  for  all  the  sons  of  men.  "  In  the  sweat  of  thy  brow  thou  shalt  eat 
bread,"  said  God  to  Adam,  and  He  has  been  saying  it  ever  since  to  all  the  genera- 
tions of  men.  There  is  no  method  by  which  life  can  be  sustained,  developed, 
ennobled  except  by  the  method  of  toil — either  by  hand,  or  foot,  or  brain.  There  is 
no  endowment  of  Nature  which  ever  brings  anything  to  fruitfulness  in  human 
life  without  labour.  Nature  works  ;  but  when  she  works  for  man  she  only  works 
with  man.  She  will  only  minister  to  him  when  he,  through  constant  toil,  seeks  to 
minister  to  himself.  The  general  good  of  humanity— as  well  as  the  meeting  of 
the  wants  of  humanity — is  effected  by  the  labour  of  each  individual.  This 
necessitates  at  once  not  only  division  of  labour,  but  degrees  and  diversities 
of  labour.  There  is,  first  of  all,  the  labour  which  is  termed  bodily  labour,  which 
tends  to  provide  and  then  to  distribute  the  resources  of  the  world  we  live  in.  But 
we  must  add  to  this  another  sortof  work— the  work  of  the  mind— ingenuity,  thought, 
mental  exertion,  invention,  before  the  organisation  and  progress  of  society  can  be 
effected.  To  ascertain  and  interpret  the  great  vital  and  spiritual  forces  which  this 
world  half  discloses  and  half  conceals,  is  the  work  of  the  mental  powers  of  men. 
The  world  of  to-day,  as  we  see  it,  and  enjoy  it,  and  use  it,  is  the  fruit  of  the  labours 
of  those  who  have  lived  in  it  in  the  past ;  and  its  beauties,  its  utilities,  its  wonder- 
ful ministrations  to  man's  varied  and  increasing  wants  will  only  be  maintained  by 
the  labours  of  those  who  live  in  it  now,  and  who  shall  succeed  us  when  we  pass  out 
of  it  and  are  no  more.  II.  I  would  speak  now  of  the  dignity  of  labour.  And 
I  base  the  term  "dignity  of  labour"  upon  the  fact  that  all  labour  is  of  Divine 
appointment.  Not  only  has  God  laid  upon  us  the  necessity  of  labour,  but  He  has 
so  constructed  us  that  without  labour  we  fail  to  find  any  satisfaction  in  life.  Like 
the  strings  of  the  harp  and  the  lute,  our  capacities  and  powers  only  make  music 
when  they  vibrate.     The  active  man  is  not  only  the  useful  man,  but  if  he  is  working 


124  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  y, 

on  right  lines  and  by  right  methods  lie  is  the  happy  man.  "We  hear  a  great  deal  in 
low-class  newspapers  about  the  degradation  of  toil  and  the  hard  lot  of  the  working 
man.  No  toil  is  of  itself  degrading  ;  no  work  ought  to  be  the  producer  of  hard- 
ships. Nothing  is  low  ;  nothing  is  mean  if  it  be  useful.  Talk  of  degrading  toil — 
there  is  no  such  thiu.[,'.  If  theie  is  one  man  more  degraded  than  another  it  is  the 
man  who  does  nothing  for  the  world  but  stare  at  it  and  suck  the  sweetness  out  of 
it.  There  is  a  common  impression  abroad  that  a  gentleman  is  a  man  who  has 
sufficient  means  to  live  without  working.  A  gentleman  is  the  man  who  does  his  duty 
in  that  spliere  into  which  natural  fitness  has  led  him,  or  circumstances  drawn  him, 
honestly,  purely,  devotedly,  and  in  the  fear  of  God.  It  is  a  case  of  character,  not 
of  possession  ;  of  attainment,  not  of  inheritance  ;  of  qualities  of  soul,  not  of  a 
luxurious  environment.  Character  is  the  crown  of  life.  Deeds  are  the  pulse  of  time. 
The  sweat  of  honest  toil  is  a  jewelled  crown  on  the  brow  of  the  toiler.  III.  I  pass 
now  to  consider,  in  the  light  of  what  I  have  been  stating,  some  of  thb  pkoblems 

CONNECTED  WITH  THE  LOWER  PHASES  OF  LABOUR  IN  OUR  MODERN  LIFE.       I  Say 

lower  phases  of  labour,  because,  fortunately,  the  higher  phases  tend  more  and  more 
to  settle  their  own  problems.  In  the  law,  in  medicine,  in  art,  in  the  great  world  of 
science,  labour  is  not  harassed,  circumscribed,  and  hindered  by  the  thousand  and 
one  questions  that  are  keeping  the  labouring  classes  in  the  lower  phases  of  labour 
in  perpetual  turmoil.  There  are  three  problems  afifecting  the  labour  market  at  the 
present  moment,  on  which  I  will  endeavour  to  throw  some  light.  1.  There  is  first 
the  great  problem  of  how  to  keep  the  labour  market  full  at  the  bottom.  Every  man 
has  a  right  to  choose  the  calling  in  which  he  thinks  he  can  best  minister  to  his 
own  and  others'  good  ;  but  the  false  notions  as  to  the  qualifications  of  elementary 
education,  and  the  imaginary  stigma  which  is  attached  to  rough  labour,  are  ruinous 
alike  to  the  towns  which  they  are  filling,  and  to  the  country  which  they  are  empty- 
ing. There  is  no  stigma  attached  to  honest  and  useful  labour  ;  there  is  necessarily 
no  disqualification  for  society,  or  for  enjoyment  in  any  occupation  that  is  a  source 
of  benefit  to  the  world.  An  honest,  enlightened,  educated  farmer  is  equal  to  a  maa 
of  the  same  qualities  in  any  of  the  professions.  These  facts,  if  apprehended  by  the 
so-called  "  lower  classes,"  would  go  far  to  solve  one  of  the  great  problems  of  the 
labour  question  of  to-day.  2.  The  second  problem  is  that  connected  with  the 
hours  of  labour.  You  know  that  there  is  a  loud  cry  for  an  eight  hours'  day  ;  and 
there  are  some  who  think  that  Parliament  ought  to  pass  a  Bill  forbidding  employers 
of  labour  in  collieries,  mines,  and  certain  manufactories  to  work  their  employees 
more  than  eight  hours  out  of  every  twenty-four.  I  do  not  so  think.  The  remedy 
is  to  be  found  in  fair  combination  and  honest  co-operation  on  the  part  of  the  men, 
and  in  a  just  and  equitable  temper  on  the  part  of  employers.  If  you  once  employ 
legislation  in  this  matter,  where  are  you  to  stop  ?  Will  you  give  an  eight  hours' 
day  to  the  clergyman — who  oftentimes  has  to  work  (at  least,  I  speak  for  myself) 
twelve  and  fifteen  hours?  Will  you  forbid  the  doctor  to  visit  his  patients,  and 
to  give  medical  advice  for  more  than  eight  hours  ?  Legislation,  moreover,  implies 
a  certain  amount  of  equality.  But,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  there  is  nothing  more 
unequal  than  men's  capabilities  for  labour.  What  positively  wearies  one  man  to 
work  at  for  six  hours,  another  can  stand  cheerfully  and  unweariedly  for  twelve 
hours.  An  Act  of  Parliament  compelling  the  lazy  in  all  classes  of  the  community 
to  do  some  useful  work  every  day  would  be  of  far  greater  benefit  to  humanity  than 
any  Government  restrictions  on  the  hours  of  labour.  3.  There  is  one  other  problem 
which  I  will  mention — the  subject  of  livery;  the  badge  of  servitude.  There  is  a 
strong  feeling  possessing  certain  classes  of  the  community  that  humble  labour  ought 
not  to  be  stamped  with  the  regalia  of  its  character  ;  that  a  domestic  servant,  e.g.y 
ought  not  to  be  compelled  to  dress  in  a  manner  which  proclaims  her  a  domestic 
servant.  What  does  it  mean  ?  Just  this.  If  it  is  a  disgrace  to  be  a  servant  no 
honest  man  or  decent  woman  ought  to  engage  themselves  as  such.  If  it  is  right,  if 
it  is  honest,  if  it  is  consistent  with  one's  freedom  and  all  those  things  that  pertain 
to  manhood  and  womanhood,  why  object  to  be  known  as  what  you  are — a  servant  ? 
There  is  nothing  more  degrading  in  a  servant's  cap  than  in  a  judge's  wig.  A 
respectable  servant  is  as  worthy  of  respect  as  her  mistress.  Service  is  no  disgrace. 
(  W.  J.  Hocking.)  The  healthful  tendency  of  work : — Physical  work  promotes  the 
circulation  of  the  blood,  opens  the  pores  of  the  skin,  gives  tone  to  the  respiratory 
organs,  helps  the  functions  of  digestion,  strengthens  the  muscles,  adds  supple- 
ness to  the  joints,  enlivens  the  senses,  quickens  the  nerves,  regulates  the  passions, 
and  benevolently  tends  to  build  up  the  general  constitution.  Mental  and  moral 
work  clears  the  understanding,  empowers  the  will,  keens  the  perception,  awakens  the 


CHAP.  v»]  DEUTERONOMY.  125 


conscience,  informs  the  judgment,  enlarges  the  memory,  rectifies  the  aflFections.  In 
one  word,  the  tendency  of  work  is  to  promote  and  sustain  the  mental  and  physical 
organisation  in  an  uninterrupted  action  of  health,  until  by  the  fiat  of  nature,  or  as 
the  result  of  accident,  or  by  the  ravages  of  disease,  it  shall  be  broken  up  and  dis- 
solved in  death.  Man  is  kept  in  life  by  work,  and  dies  either  because  he  will  not  or 
because  he  cannot  work.  Work,  a  law  of  nature : — The  law  of  nature  is,  that  a 
certain  quantity  of  work  is  necessary  to  produce  a  certain  quantity  of  good  of  any 
kind  whatever.  If  you  want  knowledge  you  must  toil  for  it ;  if  food  you  must  toil 
for  it;  and  if  pleasure  you  must  toil  for  it.  {J.  Euskin.)  The  Lord  thy  God 
bronght  thee  out  thence. — The  moral  exodus  .-—Look  at  this  change  as  an  emblem 
of  that  great  moral  revolution  which  has  taken  place  in  the  soul  of  every  genuine 
Christian,  and  which  is  essential  to  the  spiritual  well-being  of  every  man.  I.  It  is 
A  BLESSED  CHANGE.  1.  A  woudcrful  emancipation.  2.  Wrought  by  the  Almighty. 
8.  Through  human  instrumentality.    II.  It  is  a  memorable  change.    *  'Remember.  '*' 

I.  To  inspire  with  gratitude  to  Deliverer.  2.  To  promote  spirit  of  contentment. 
3.  To  establish  confidence  in  God.  (Homilist. )  Remember  Egypt  .-—We  are  prone 
to  remember  the  palaces  and  pleasures  of  Egypt ;  God  admonishes  us  to  remember 
its  slavery.  The  memory  of  our  former  state  should  be— I.  An  antidote  to  dis- 
content. Though  the  labours  and  trials  of  the  wilderness  were  many,  yet  in  Egypt 
we  had  more.  If  we  labour,  it  is  not  to  make  bricks  without  straw— not^  ior 
another,  but  for  our  own  profit.  II.  A  stimulant  to  zeal.  Remembering  Egypt, 
let  us  press  on  toward  Canaan  ;  give  no  advantage  to  our  enemies.  III.  A  rea.son 
FOR  obedience.  He  who  graciously  delivered  us  has  right  to  our  service.  If  we 
made  bricks  for  Pharaoh,  "what  shall  we  render  unto  the  Lord?"  If  fear  pro- 
duced activity,  how  much  more  should  love !  IV.  Wings  for  faith  and  hope. 
Remember  that  the  God  who  could  deliver  from  Egypt  can  bring  to  Canaan.  He 
who  has  begun  the  work  will  complete  it.  V.  A  call  to  humility.  I  was  but  a 
servant,  a  slave ;  I  owe  all  to  my  Deliverer.  Without  Him  I  were  a  slave  again 
{R.  A.  Gh'iffin.)  ^ 

Ver.  16.  Honour  thy  father  and  thy  mother.— TAe  Fifth  Commandment  .—I.  The 
duties  of  children  are,  in  the  language  of  the  Decalogue,  summed  up  in  one  word, 
"honour "—"Honour  thy  father  and  thy  mother."  No  word  could  well  have  been 
more  happily  chosen.  The  duties  required  by  it  seem  to  be  reducible  under  three 
general  heads:  1.  Reverence.  There  may  occur  cases  in  which  the  parental 
character  is  as  far  as  possible  from  all  that  could  inspire  either  reverence  or  love. 
But  still,  how  much  soever  this  may  be  the  case,  there  is  a  respect  due  to  the 
person  of  a  parent,  for  the  very  relation's  sake ;  just  as  there  is  an  official  respect 
due  to  the  person  of  a  magistrate  on  account  of  the  station  he  occupies,  indepen- 
dently of  the  claims  of  personal  character.  This  respect  is  not  the  dictate  of  any 
servile  fear.  It  is  associated  with  love,  and  is  proportional  to  it.  It  might  be 
defined  a  reverential  familiarity.  2.  Obedience.  3.  Maintenance.  This,  of  course, 
comes  into  application  only  in  certain  circumstances,  but  the  obligation  is  universal! 

II.  The  motives  to  the  fulfilment  of  this  duty  are  necessarily  very  much  the  same 
as  the  motives  to  other  duties.  1.  The  express  command  of  God.  Notice  the 
extraordinary  energy  of  the  Word  of  God  on  this  subject  (Exod.  xxi.  17 ;  Lev. 
XX.  9  ;  Deut.  xxvii.  16 ;  Prov.  xx.  20,  xxx.  17).  And  such  declarations  of  the  Old 
Testament  have  their  confirmatory  counterparts  in  the  New  (Col.  iii,  20  ;  2  Tim. 
iii.  2,  3  ;  Rom.  i.  30).  Observe  with  what  characters  the  "disobedient  to  parents" 
are  classed.  2.  The  manner  in  which  God  has  made  the  paternal  and  filial  relation 
the  image  of  that  which  subsists  reciprocally  between  Himself  and  His  people. 
We  are  taught  to  cry  unto  Him— "Abba,  Father  ! "  And  this  is  ever  felt  by  the 
renewed  soul  to  be  the  most  delightful  and  endearing  view  of  the  Divine  Being. 
3.  The  obvious  propriety  and  equity  of  the  precept.  "This  is  right."  Nature 
Itself  teaches  this.  The  very  use  of  the  phrase  "natural  aff'ection"  implies  this 
lesson.  The  instinct  is  strong  on  the  part  of  both  parent  and  child.  Yet  the 
affection  of  the  child  is  not  solely  instinctive,  but  in  no  smaU  degree  springs  from 
the  early  experience  of  affection  and  care  and  kindness  on  the  part  of  parents. 
I  might  show  you  also  how  right  it  is  on  the  twofold  ground  of  the  law  of  equity 
and  the  law  of  gratitude.  4.  The  special  promise  annexed.  How  is  it  to  be 
understood  as  to  Israel  ?  How  as  to  us  ?  (1)  As  to  the  former  question  it  is  only 
needful  to  say  that  it  cannot  be  understood  as  a  promise  of  long  life  to  ever\^ 
obedient  child  individually.  Were  it  so  interpreted,  then  no  dutiful  son  or  daughter 
in  the  land  of  Israel  could  ever  have  died  young.    The  language  refers  evidently 


126  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

to  the  continued  possession  of  Canaan  by  the  people  collectively,  not  to  longevity 
in  that  land  to  each  obedient  individual.  (2)  How  is  this  promise  to  be  understood 
as  to  us  ?  The  land  of  Canaan  consisted  in  this,  in  its  being  the  subject  of  promise 
and  its  being  obtained  by  faith — a  faith  manifested  in  obedience,  "working  by 
love."  The  heavenly  inheritance  must  be  obtained  in  the  same  way.  {R.  Ward- 
law,  D.D.)  The  Fifth  Commandment: — Those  who  consider  the  circumstances 
of  the  case,  and  the  large  share  which  symmetry  always  played  in  the  mind  of  the 
Jews,  will  readily  believe  that  on  those  two  tables  which  lay  enshrined  in  the 
Ark,  the  Ten  Words  were  carved  in  their  briefest  form,  each  occupying  a  line, 
and  that  there  were  five  on  the  first  and  five  on  the  second  table.  It  may  be 
objected  that  then  this  Fifth  Commandment,  the  law  of  reverence  to  parents, 
which  is  a  duty  to  man,  will  stand  with  the  first  four  commandments,  which  are 
duties  to  God.  But  it  is  the  special  dignity  of  this  commandment  that  it  is 
a  direct  part  of  our  duty  to  God.  Our  parents  are  not  merely  our  neighbours ; 
they  stand  to  us  in  a  special  and  in  a  Divine  relation.  During  our  early  years  they 
stand  to  us  in  the  place  of  God.  "  Honour  thy  father  and  thy  mother."  We  are 
bidden  to  honour  because  love  is  instinctive  and  spontaneous.  If  honour  towards 
our  parents  is  love  combined  with  reverence,  the  love  must  be  honour  touched  with 
emotion.  The  word  "honour  "  includes  love.  There  can  be  no  true  honour  without 
love.  Of  course  a  reciprocal  duty  is  implied.  The  obliteration  of  this  instinct  on 
either  side  is  one  of  the  worst  signs,  on  the  one  hand,  of  savage  dishumanisation, 
on  the  other  of  civilised  degeneracy.  Filial  affection,  however,  though  instinctive, 
may  depend  on  education.  The  Jews,  from  whose  wisdom  we  may  learn  so  much, 
insisted  upon  it  with  intense  earnestness.  It  lay  at  the  basis  of  the  first  sweet 
patriarchal  life.  The  modern  canaille  of  the  world  care  nothing  for  their  parents, 
but  only  for  themselves  ;  but  the  deepest  feelings  of  the  best  men  have  been  always 
mingled  with  their  love  to  their  parents.  The  sacredness,  or  shipwreck,  of  this 
love  has  furnished  to  literature  some  of  its  most  impassioned  themes.  Nor  is  it 
otherwise  in  history.  Many  of  the  most  pathetic  scenes  in  the  records  of  human 
life  turn  on  parental  and  filial  love.  Think  of  Aaron's  stricken  silence  when  his 
two  eldest-born,  Nadab  and  Abihu,  died  by  the  fire  of  God,  and  Aaron  held  his 
peace.  Think  of  Jacob's  wail  over  his  lost  Joseph.  Think  of  the  hero  David's 
outburst  of  weeping  over  Absalom.  Think  of  the  noble  Pericles  placing  the  wreath 
on  the  brow  of  his  dead  boy,  turning  aside  to  hide  the  tears,  the  strong  heart  at 
last  broken,  which  amid  all  the  calamities  of  war  and  pestilence  and  the  murmurs 
of  the  people  had  continued  unsubdued.  Think  of  Titus,  so  moved  by  the  false 
accusation  of  intriguing  against  his  father  that  he  hurried  back  from  Jerusalem  with 
headlong  speed  and  burst  into  Vespasian's  presence  with  tears,  '*  Veni,  jmter  ;  Feni, 
pater — I  have  come,  my  father  ;  I  have  come. "  Think  of  our  proud  Norman  King 
Henry  I.  : 

**  Before  him  passed  the  young  and  fair. 

In  pleasure's  reckless  train  ; 
The  seas  dashed  o'er  his  son's  bright  hairj 

He  never  smiled  again." 

Or  of  Henry  II.,  when  among  the  signatures  of  his  other  rebellious  children 
he  saw  the  name  of  his  youngest  and  best-loved  John.  Or  the  great  Frederick 
Barbarossa  crying  out  bitterly  on  his  son's  death,  "  I  am  not  the  first  who  have 
suffered  from  disobedient  sons,  and  yet  have  wept  over  their  graves."  Think 
of  the  wretched  Henry  IV.  of  Germany,  treacherously  arrested  by  his  own  son, 
falling  on  his  knees  before  him  with  the  cry,  "  Oh,  do  not  sully  thy  honour  and 
thy  name  ;  no  law  of  God  obliges  a  son  to  be  the  instrument  of  Divine  vengeance 
against  a  father ! "  Again,  how  often  has  the  thought  of  a  mother  been  present 
even  at  the  closing  moments  of  life  t  When  the  young  and  gallant  boy.  Prince 
Conradin  of  Hohenstauff"en,  last  of  his  race,  was  dragged  to  the  scafi'old  at  the  age 
of  sixteen,  undaunted  to  the  last  he  flung  the  gage  of  defiance  among  the  multitude, 
but  as  he  bowed  his  fair  young  face  over  the  block  he  murmured,  '  *  Oh,  my  mother, 
how  deep  will  be  thy  sorrow  at  the  news  of  this  day  !  "  And  when  Sir  John  Moore 
lay  dying  on  that  disastrous  field  of  Corunna,  the  name  of  his  mother  was  the  last 
upon  his  lips.  The  truest  men  have  never  blushed  to  give  public  proof  of  this  filial 
devotion.  No  record  of  the  late  James  Garfield,  the  murdered  President  of  the 
United  States,  won  him  warmer  sympathy  than  the  manly  kiss  which  he  gave 
to  his  aged  mother  before  the  assembled  multitudes  on  the  day  of  his  supremest 
elevation.     I  can  but  glan-ce  at  a  difficulty.     "Are  we  to  honour  those  who  are 


CHAP,  v.]  DEUTERONOMY.  127 

dishonourable  ?  Are  we  to  reverence  those  to  whom  no  reverence  is  due  ? "  I 
answer  that  we  must  not  be  like  those  Jews  whom  Christ  so  bitterly  rebuked 
because  they  tried  to  shift  off  one  duty  by  another.  Our  parents  have  loved  us, 
their  children,  in  spite  of  all  our  intractableness,  our  waywardness,  our  indifference. 
Are  the  children  to  show  no  forbearance  to  the  sins  of  their  parents  ?  Alas,  for 
earth  if  unworthiness  is  to  sever  the  bonds  of  love  and  of  duty !  The  bonds  of 
nature  which  unite  us  to  every  member  of  our  families  are  indissoluble  bonds. 
I  knew  a  mother  once  whose  boy  was  convicted  of  stealing  at  school.  She  lived 
in  the  outskirts  of  a  little  town,  and  so  deeply  did  her  boy's  shame  weigh  on  her 
spirits  that  for  years  afterwards  it  was  only  in  the  deep  twilight  that  she  would 
ever  enter  the  streets  of  the  town  by  which  she  lived.  St.  Paul  calls  this  Fifth 
Commandment  "the  first  commandment  with  promise,"  and  at  that  promise  I 
must  now  glance.  But  perhaps  you  will  be  troubled  with  a  doubt  whether  this 
promise  holds  true.  Good  sons,  alas  !  die,  cut  off  in  the  flower  of  their  youth,  who 
dearly  loved  their  parents  and  truly  honoured  them.  Yes,  but  that  death  may  be 
in  God's  sight  the  reward— longer  days  in  the  better  land.  Oh,  is  it  not  true  that, 
as  a  rule,  the  promise  literally  holds  good,  both  to  nations  and  individuals  ? 
Individually,  even  the  boy  who  loves  and  honours  his  parents  will,  as  a  rule,  be 
more  prosperous,  be  longer  lived,  be  more  happy,  be  more  blessed,  than  the  bad 
son.  It  is  so  in  the  nature  of  things.  A  distinguished  oflBcer  in  the  army  told  me 
that,  in  the  experience  of  a  long  life,  he  had  found  that,  and  exactly  the  same  had 
been  said  to  him  by  an  old  admiral,  who  said  of  all  the  midshipmen  who  had  passed 
under  his  rule  he  had  never  known  one  fail  to  turn  out  well  who  wrote  weekly  his 
loving  letter  to  his  home.  "  Show  me  a  boy  who  loves  his  mother,"  says  a  recent 
writer,  "and  I  will  show  you  one  who  will  make  a  faithful  friend,  a  noble  lover, 
and  a  tender  husband :  show  me  a  boy  to  whom  home  life  has  no  attraction,  because 
it  is  too  slow,  and  I  will  show  you  never  to  trust  that  man  with  anything  which 
constitutes  the  happiness  of  others."  But  the  main  intention  of  the  promise  was 
not  individual,  it  was  national ;  and  all  history  has  contributed  its  national  fulfil- 
ment. --The  corner-stone  of  the  national  life,"  it  has  been  said,  "is  the  hearth- 
stone." Why  was  one  Spartan  worth  ten  other  Greeks  upon  a  battlefield  ?  It  was 
because  Spartan  boys  were  trained  in  parental  obedience.  Nor  was  it  otherwise 
with  Rome  in  her  noblest  days.  The  irresistible  grandeur  which  arrayed  her 
warriors  to  conquer  was  founded  on  the  paternal  authority.  Coriolanus  spared 
Rome  only  at  the  tears  of  his  mother,  Volumnia  ;  and  when  Virgil  wrote  the  great 
epic  of  the  Republic  he  could  find  no  gi-eater  name  for  his  hero  than  Paier— father, 
and  Filius — faithful.  When  Greece  produced  perfumed  dandies  like  Alcibiades, 
and  when  Rome  produced  a  jewelled  debauchee  like  Otho,  God  began  to  wipe  out 
their  glory  as  when  one  wipeth  a  dish  and  turneth  it  upside  down.  And  when 
Napoleon,  who  knew  something  of  the  glory  of  nations,  was  asked  what  was  the 
chief  want  of  the  French  nation,  he  replied  in  the  one  word,  "Mothers."  "Oh, 
thou  who  hast  yet  a  mother, "  said  Richter,  ' '  thank  God  for  it. "  Do  not  burden  long 
years  by  remorse  for  unthankfulness  to  parents,  for  though  you  may  show  tender- 
ness to  the  living,  it  is  too  late  for  kindness  to  the  dead.  When  King  James  IV., 
of  Scotland,  was  a  boy  he  stood  against  his  father  in  arms.  He  made  his  manhood 
one  long  penance  for  that  sin.  In  remembrance  of  it  he  wore  under  his  robe  an 
iron  belt,  and  to  that  iron  belt  every  year  he  added  a  new  link  an  ounce  in  weight 
that  the  penance  might  be  heavier  every  year.  And  we  have  all  one  father  to  whom 
we  are  unthankful  and  rebellious  children  ;  God's  prodigals,  to  whom  His  only 
begotten  Son  on  earth  gave  such  loving  obedience.  God's  prodigals  are  we  all.  By 
seeking  the  aid  of  His  Holy  Spirit  to  obey  His  commandments,  we  become  more  and 
more  His  true  children,  "  accepted  in  the  Beloved."  {Dean  Farrar.)  The  Fifth 
CommandmeiU  .-—Observe  it  is  not  said,  bear  a  natural  affection  toward  thy  father 
and  mother,  but  honour  and  reverence  them.  Natural  affection  there  will  be  till 
children  grow  altogether  reprobate  ;  but  there  may  be  much  of  this  where  there 
is  little  or  nothing  of  the  reverence  commanded.  A  child  who  is  very  wicked 
toward  God  may  have  much  natural  affection  for  his  parents.  But  to  honour  and 
reverence  them  as  bearing  God's  authority  and  from  a  sense  of  duty  to  God,  this 
IS  the  main  point  and  the  only  mark  of  a  truly  dutiful  child.  First,  there  must  be 
an  mward  acknowledgment  of  their  dignity  and  authority  upon  the  heart.  Secondly, 
there  must  be  an  outward  expression  thereof  in  a  becoming  behaviour.  1.  From 
hence  it  is  evident  that  the  first  duty  of  children  to  parents,  and  that  also  without 
which  they  can  do  no  part  of  their  duty  to  them  upon  a  right  principle,  is  to 
reverence    them  as  immediately  appointed  by  God  to  direct    their    education. 


128  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  t. 

Honour  them  ;  have  regard  to  their  authority  over  you.  Respect  that  authority 
as  God's  appointment.  2.  The  second  duty  of  children  is  cheerfully  and  humbly 
to  attend  unto  their  parents'  instructions.  When  parents  are  teaching  their 
children  the  ways  of  God,  examining  into  their  conduct,  showing  them  the  sin- 
fulness of  their  nature  and  the  danger  of  such  and  such  wrong  courses  ;  when 
they  ate  warning  them  of  the  evil  of  certain  sins  they  are  most  liable  to,  as  self- 
Avill,  idleness,  pride  ;  when  they  are  giving  their  children  directions  on  these  heads, 
and  requiring  their  careful  observance  of  them,  they  are  acting  in  the  character  of 
parents  ;  and  it  is  the  duty  of  children  humbly  to  hearken  and  carefully  to  observe 
such  instructions.  3.  The  third  duty  of  children  is  cheerfully  to  submit  to  the 
parents'  discipline.  By  this  I  mean  the  religious  discipline  or  government  of  the 
family.  4.  It  is  the  duty  of  children  cheerfully  to  submit  to  the  corrections  of 
their  parents  and  humbly  to  profit  by  them.  By  correction  I  mean  any  method 
the  parent  uses  for  restraining  the  vices  of  his  children.  (1)  They  must  be 
humbled  for  their  fault  whatever  it  be,  whether  lying,  or  swearing,  or  idleness,  or 
company-keeping,  or  whatever  else.  They  must  not  deny  they  have  done  amiss, 
and  set  about  to  excuse  themselves,  as,  if  they  could  escape  their  parents'  displeasure, 
all  were  well  enough.  (2)  They  must  be  grieved  for  having  incurred  their  parents' 
displeasure.  For  that  they  must  principally  be  grieved,  and  not  for  the  correction 
they  have  brought  on  themselves.  (3)  They  must  submit  to  the  chastisement ; 
not  be  angry  with  their  parents  for  doing  their  duty  to  them,  but  confess  they 
deserve  and  need  the  correction.  A  hard  lesson  for  a  proud  heart.  (4)  They 
must  seek  God's  forgiveness  and  their  parents'.  5.  Have  you  cheerfully  submitted 
to  the  disposals  of  your  parents  ?  Children  of  the  one  sex  must  not  affect  any 
other  schools  or  callings  than  their  parents  provide  for  them,  nor  those  of  the  other 
such  dress  or  pleasure  as  their  parents  do  not  see  fit  for  them.  6.  It  is  the  duty  of 
children  to  submit  reverently  to  the  directions  of  their  parents  in  all  lawful  things. 
{S.    Walker,   B.A.)  The  First   Commandment  with  promise: — Maurice  says, 

"Many  writers  begin  with  considering  mankind  as  a  multitude  of  units.  They  ask. 
How  did  any  number  of  these  units  form  themselves  into  a  society  ?  I  cannot 
adopt  that  method.  At  my  birth  I  am  already  in  a  society.  I  am  related,  at  all 
€vents,  to  a  father  and  mother.  This  relation  is  the  primary  fact  of  my  existence. 
I  can  contemplate  no  other  facts  apart  from  it."  This  commandment,  then,  has 
respect  to  the  home-life.  Home  is  one  of  the  sweetest  words  in  our  language  ;  it 
speaks  to  us  of  heaven.  It  has  been  '*  childhood's  temple  and  manhood's  shrine  "  ; 
it  has  been  the  safeguard  of  purity,  the  shield  against  temptation,  the  bulwark 
of  all  that  is  true  and  holy.  Many  a  young  man  has  been  checked  in  his  career  of 
wickedness,  and  awakened  to  thoughtfulness  and  penitence  by  the  remembrance  of 
his  early  home.  Here  is  the  place  where  domestic  virtues  are  cultivated,  where 
the  seeds  of  character  are  dropped  into  the  mind  and  heart,  where  the  holiest 
affections  are  kindled,  and  around  which  undying  memories  and  associations  gather. 
The  mariner,  as  he  treads  the  deck  in  the  night  watches,  the  missionary  and  the 
emigrant  remember  with  gratitude  and  affection  the  old  home  ;  and  the  Australian 
settler  sends  up  a  cheer  for  the  old  land,  and  still  calls  it  by  the  sweet  name  of 
"  Home."  It  does  not  require  a  palace  to  make  a  home.  There  may  be  no  archi- 
tectural beauty,  or  abounding  wealth,  or  costly  furniture,  or  more  costly  paintings, 
or  great  luxuries  ;  the  dwelling  may  be  a  humble  one.  While  children  are  com- 
manded to  honour  their  parents,  the  parents  are  to  see  to  it  that  they  deserve 
honour.     Cowper  said — 

*'  My  boast  is  not  that  I  derive  my  birth, 
From  loins  enthroned,  or  nobles  of  the  earth  ; 
But  higher  far  my  proud  pretensions  rise, 
The  son  of  parents  passed  into  the  skies." 

It  is  a  blessed  thing  to  be  able  to  say  truly.  My  father  was  an  upright  man,  a 
truthful,  conscientious  man,  a  Christian  man  ;  my  mother  taught  me  to  pray,  siie 
prayed  for  me.  As  Thomas  Fuller  says,  the  good  parent  "showeth  them,  in  his 
own  practice,  what  to  follow  and  imitate ;  and  in  others  what  to  shun  and  avoid. 
For  though  *  the  words  of  the  wise  be  as  nails  fastened  by  the  masters  of  the 
assemblies,'  yet,  sure,  their  examples  are  the  hammer  to  drive  them  in,  to  take  the 
deeper  hold.  A  father  that  whipped  his  son  for  swearing,  and  swore  himself  while 
he  whipped  him,  did  more  harm  by  his  example  than  good  by  his  correction." 
Let  the  parents  be  worthy  of  honour  ;  and  let  the  children  learn  to  **  honour  their 


CHAP,   v.] 


DEUTERONOMY.  129 


father  and  mother."  This  is  God's  command  ;  and  it  is  enforced  by  the  obligations 
under  which  we  are  laid  to  our  parents.  And  there  is  a  promise  annexed  to  this 
command.  Paul  speaks  of  it  as  "the  first  commandment  with  promise  —the  tirst 
that  has  a  specific  promise  attached  to  it.  And  the  promise  is  "that  thy  days 
may  be  long  upon  the  land  which  the  Lord  thy  God  giveth  thee.  The  penalty  of 
disobedience  to  this  command  was  death.  "  He  that  revileth  his  father  or  his 
mother  shall  surely  be  put  to  death."  "  If  a  man  have  a  stubborn  and  rebellious 
son,  which  will  not  obey  the  voice  of  his  father,  or  the  voice  of  his  mother,  and  that, 
when  they  have  chastened  him,  will  not  hearken  to  them :  then  shall  his  father 
and  his  mother  lay  hold  on  him,  and  bring  him  out  unto  the  elders  of  his  city,  and 
unto  the  gate  of  his  place  ;  and  they  shall  say  unto  the  elders  of  the  city,  Ihis  our 
son  is  stubborn  and  rebellious,  he  will  not  obey  our  voice  ;  he  is  a  glutton  and  a 
drunkard.  And  all  the  men  of  his  city  shall  stone  him  with  stones,  that  he  die  :  so 
Shalt  thou  put  evil  away  from  among  you;  and  all  Israel  shall  hear,  and  tear 
And  when  the  people  stood  on  Mount  Gerizim  and  on  Mount  Ebal  one  of  the 
maledictions  that  came  from  the  summit  of  the  latter  was  this.  Cursed  be  he  that 
setteth  light  by  his  father  or  his  mother  "—and  all  the  people  responded  Amen. 
The  curse  fell  on  Ham  and  his  descendants  for  dishonouring  his  father.  And  when- 
ever you  see  a  family  or  a  people,  among  whom  these  filial  and  parental  ties  are  lax, 
vou  see  the  beginning  of  the  curse  that  will  surely  fall.  But  here  is  a  promise  to 
the  obedient,  "That  thy  days  may  be  long  upon  the  land,  &c.  This  was  not  only 
true  to  the  Jews,  but  it  is  true  now.  Blessings  rest  on  the  heads  of  obedient,  m 
contrasted  with  disobedient  children.  The  Jews  were  about  to  possess  Canaan  ;  and 
as  the  Canaanites  would  be  cast  out  because  of  their  sins,  so  the  Israelites  would  keep 
the  land  only  by  their  obedience.  Sin  in  their  case,  as  in  the  case  of  the  Canaanites, 
would  produce  bitter  fruit;  but  obedience  would  be  blessed.  And  this  was  the 
.greatest  earthly  blessing  they  could  obtain,  long  life  in  the  promised  land.  It  is 
also  true  now  that  obedience  to  God's  laws,  a  holy  character,  tends  to  the  preserva- 
tion of  physical  life  and  vigour.  {James  Owen.)  The fouwiation  comrrmndment  : 
—I  The  keeping  of  this  commandment  produces  a  certain  temper  of  mind 
WHICH  WE  CALL  MEEKNESS.  So  far  as  anything  like  peace  can  be  obtained  in  this 
world  it  can  only  be  obtained  hy  obedience  to  God  ;  and  this  cannot  be  shown  but 
by  obedience  to  those  whom  He  has  set  over  us.  II.  The  temper  of  obedience  being 
therefore  the  very  foundation  of  all  true  piety,  God  has  so  appointed  it  that 

MEN    should   be   ALL   THEIR   LIVES    IN    CONDITIONS    OF    LIFE    TO    EXERCISE    AND 

PRACTISE  THIS  HABIT  OF  MIND,  first  of  all  as  children  under  parents,  then  as 
servants  under  masters,  as  subjects  under  kings,  as  all  under  spiritual  pastors,  and 
spiritual  pastors  under  their  superiors.     III.  It  is  in  this  temper  of  meekness 

ABOVE  ALL,  THAT  ChRIST  HAS  SET  HiMSELF  BEFORE  US   AS   OUR  PATTERN.      Chnst 

was  willingly  subject  to  a  poor  carpenter  in  an  obscure  village,  so  much  so  as  even 
to  have  worked  with  him  at  his  trade.  He,  alone  without  sin,  was  subject  to 
sinful  parents.      IV.  The  more  difficult  it  is    for  children  to  pay  this 

HONOUR  AND  OBEDIENCE  TO  PARENTS  WHO  MAY  BE  UNWORTHY,  THE  MORE  SURE 
THEY   MAY    BE    THAT   IT    IS    THE    NARROW    WAY  TO    LIFE   AND   THE    STRAIT   AND 

difficult  GATE  BY  WHICH  THEY  MUST  ENTER.  True  love  Will  cover  and  turn 
away  its  eyes  from  sins  and  infirmities.  For  this  reason  there  is  a  blessing  unto 
this  day  on  the  children  of  Shem  and  Japheth,  and  a  curse  on  the  descendants  of 
Ham.  (Plain  Sermons  by  Contributors  to  ' '  Tracts  for  the  Times. '  )  Revereii^  due  to 
parents  .—B.OUOUT  your  parents,  i.e.-l.  Obey  them.  2.  Respect  them.  3.  Treat 
their  opinions  with  regard.  4.  Treat  their  habits  with  respect.  5.  Provide  for 
them    when    sick,   weary,    old,    and   infirm.      {A.    Barnes,    D.D.)  Duty  of 

children.— I.  Children  are  bound  to  rkgard  their  parents  with  respect 
AND  reverknce  AT  ALL  TIMES.  Particularly  these  exercises  of  hlial  piety  are— 
1.  To  exist  in  the  thoughts.  Here  the  whole  course  of  filial  piety  begins  ;  and  if 
not  commenced  here  will  never  be  pursued  with  any  success.  Thoughts  are  the  soul 
of  all  duty.  His  affections  towards  them  ought  ever  to  be  reverential,  grateful, 
warm,  and  full  of  kindness.  2.  The  same  exercises  of  filial  piety  are  to  be  mani- 
fested in  the  words  of  children.  3.  The  same  spirit  ought  to  appear  m  all  the 
deportment  of  children.  II.  Children  afe  bound  to  obey  the  commands  of 
their  parents.  This  obedience  ought  to  be— 1.  Uniform  and  faithful.  2.  Ready 
and  cheerful.  III.  Children  are  bound  to  do  whatever  will  reasonably 
contribute  to  the  happiness  of  their  parents,  whether  commanded  or  not. 
1  Every  considerate  child  will  feel  his  filial  duty  strongly  urged  by  the  excellence 
of  this  conduct,  and  the  odiousness  of  filial  impiety.     2.  Considerate  children  will 


130  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  T. 

find  another  powerful  reason  for  filial  duty  in  the  pleasure  which  it  gives  their 
parents.  3.  The  demands  of  gratitude  present  a  combination  of  such  reasons  to 
every  such  child  for  the  same  conduct.  4.  The  great  advantages  of  filial  piety 
present  strong  reasons  for  the  practice  of  it  to  children  of  every  character.  5.  The 
declarations  of  God  concerning  this  important  subject  furnish  reasons  at  once  allur- 
ing and  awful  for  the  exercise  of  filial  piety.  6.  The  example  of  Christ  is  a  reason 
of  the  highest  import  to  compel  the  exercise  of  filial  piety.  {T.  DwigM,  D.D.) 
The  duty  which  children  owe  their  parents : — The  duty  which  children  owe  to  their 
parents  arises  so  naturally  out  of  the  relation  between  them  that  the  Lord  Himself 
makes  His  appeal  on  this  very  ground,  in  pleading  His  own  cause  with  His  people 
and  His  own  rights  over  them.  "A  son  honoureth  his  father,  and  a  servant  his 
master  :  if  then  I  be  a  father,  where  is  Mine  honour  ?  and  if  I  be  a  master,  where  is 
My  fear  ?  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts  "  (Mai.  i.  6).  A  son  honoureth  his  father.  It  is 
natural,  it  is  right  and  fitting  that  he  should  do  so.  I.  The  motive  of  this  duty 
MUST  BE  A  REGARD  TO  THE  WILL  OF  GoD  (Eph.  vi.  1).  "Children,  obey  your 
parents  in  all  things,  for  this  is  well-pleasing  unto  the  Lord  "  (Col.  iii.  20).  Honour, 
then,  and  obey  your  parents  in  the  Lord,  from  a  desire  to  please  Him,  and  a  regard 
to  His  commandments.  1.  These  directions  show  on  what  foundation  a  parent 
should  study  to  have  his  authority  placed  :  the  sure  foundation  of  the  authority  of 
God.  It  is  "a  delegated  authority.  As  such  from  the  very  first  he  should  use  it.  As 
such  he  should  seek  as  much  as  possible  to  have  it  from  the  very  first  recognised. 
Let  the  child  very  soon  learn  that  it  is  God  who  has  committed  him  to  your  care 
and  subjected  him  to  your  control  ;  and  as  he  grows  to  maturity,  be  you  content  to 
have  not  the  first,  but  the  second  place  in  his  respect  and  love.  It  may  be  very 
gratifying  to  your  parental  pride  to  see  how  much  he  will  do,  and  how  much 
he  will  sacrifice,  for  the  sake  of  pleasing  you.  But  it  is  far  more  important 
to  perceive  that  he  does  all  and  sacrifices  all  in  obedience  to  you,  for  the  sake 
of  pleasing,  not  you,  but  that  God  who  has  commanded  him  to  honour  you. 
2.  It  is  on  the  commandment  of  God,  then,  that  this  duty  of  honouring 
father  and  mother  must  rest.  Do  not  trust  your  discharge  of  this  duty  to 
natural  affection,  or  natural  conscience,  or  reason,  or  gratitude,  or  honour.  Alas ! 
these  are  all  frail  supports  of  any  human  virtue.  You  may  think  that  you  are 
treating  your  parents  with  all  the  reverence  which  the  highest  notions  of  the 
parental  character  could  require.  But  you  do  not  honour  them  at  all  in  any 
real  religious  spirit,  except  in  so  far  as  you  honour  them  for  the  sake  of  that  great 
God  who  first  of  all  subdues  you  to  Himself  and  then  subjects  you  to  them.  3.  It 
may  be  remarked  that  the  view  now  given  of  the  duty  which  children  owe  to  their 
parents  is  altogether  independent  of  the  character  and  qualifications  of  parents  and 
the  opinion  which  children  may  have  of  them.  (1)  Are  your  parents  unfit  for 
their  high  charge,  or,  in  your  estimation,  unworthy  of  it  ?  Have  they  failed  to 
secure  your  confidence,  your  esteem,  your  love  ?  Still  you  will  feel  that  deference 
is  due  to  them  "in  the  Lord."  You  will  be  willing,  on  His  account,  to  honour 
them,  "bearing  all  things,  believing  all  things,  hoping  all  things,  enduring  all 
things,"  if  by  any  means,  for  your  sakes,  they  may  be  themselves  brought  to  honour 
Him  for  whose  sake  you  so  dutifully  honour  them.  (2)  Are  your  parents  such  as 
your  hearts  could  wish  ?  Are  they  like-minded  with  yourselves — possessors  of  the 
same  grace  ?  Blessed  is  your  lot,  believing  children  of  believing  parents.  Yours  is 
an  easy  task,  to  honour  a  father — a  mother — so  truly  honourable.  Still,  forget  not 
the  special  commandment  of  God,  It  is  not  enough  that  you  honour  them 
as  all  Christians  honour  one  another,  as  high  in  rank,  made  kings  and 
priests  to  God.     You  must  further  honour  them  simply  as  parents.      II.  The 

EXTENT   OF   THE   DUTY   WHICH   AS   CHILDREN  YOU   OWE   TO   YOUR   PARENTS  may  be 

gathered  partly  from  a  review  of  some  of  the  particular  precepts  and  instances  in 
Holy  Scripture  on  this  subject,  and  partly  from  the  application  of  the  general 
prinr  le  of  this  direction,  "Honour  thy  father  and  thy  mother,  as  the  Lord 
thy  L  -^  hath  commanded  thee."  1.  On  the  subject  of  filial  duty  the  Word  of 
God  is  very  full  and  explicit  in  its  precepts  and  examples.  Thus — (1)  Respect, 
reverence  in  heart,  speech,  and  behaviour,  is  strongly  enjoined  (Lev.  xix.  3 ; 
Deut.  xxvii.  16  ;  Prov.  xxviii.  24).  (2)  Obedience  also  is  enjoined — obedience 
both  active  and  passive.  You  are  to  do  the  will  of  your  parents.  You  are  to 
submit  to  their  chastisements  (Prov.  i.  8,  iii.  1).  2.  The  general  principle  of  this 
direction  confirms  the  view  of  its  extent  which  these  particular  precepts  and  instances 
give.  "  Honour  thy  father  and  thy  mother,  as  the  Lord  thy  God  hath  commanded 
thee."     The  ground  or  reason  of  this  duty  is  the  commandment  of  God.     The  duty 


CHAP,  v.]  DEUTERONOMY.  131 

therefore  must  be  as  extensive  as  the  commandment,  which  is  altogether  unlimited. 
No  exception  is  allowed  ;  no  room  left  for  any  reservation.  {R.  S.  Candlish,  D.D.) 
Honour  thy  father  and  thy  mother: — This  command  begins  the  second  "table"  of 
the  law,  which  is  occupied  with  our  duties  toward  our  fellow-men.  We  are  to  fear 
and  love  God ;  but  in  that  fear  and  love  lies  the  ground  of  our  reverence  for  His 
representatives.  This  commandment  does  not  concern  children  alone.  Every  man 
has  his  part  in  it — in  youth,  manhood,  and  age.  Order  is  to  reign  in  all  conditions 
of  life — a  Divine  order.  Rulers  in  home,  state,  and  church  rule  according  to  this 
order,  and  are  to  be  obeyed  according  to  the  will  of  God.  I.  The  Divine  oPwDEr 
IN  THE  HOME.  1.  Parents  who  spend  toilsome  days  and  sometimes  sleepless  nights 
in  order  to  provide  for  their  children,  hope  that  in  old  age  they  will  be  cared 
for  by  these  children.  How  often,  alas  !  is  it  otherwise,  and  the  parents  are 
regarded  as  a  burden  by  undutiful  children  !  They  blame  the  evil  times,  &c., 
whilst  the  real  cause  lies  in  their  own  forgetfulness  of  God's  Word,  their  own 
careless  lives,  and  lax  fulfilment  of  their  parental  duties.  2.  Why  ought  children 
not  to  despise  their  parents?  Because  in  them  they  honour  the  Divine  order. 
They  have  a  holy  office.  God  has  given  them  a  part  of  His  power,  His  right,  His 
majesty.  Serve  them,  children.  Be  helpful  to  them  in  labour,  in  sickness,  in  age  ; 
help  them  from  your  superfluity,  and  even  in  your  poverty  as  you  may.  Comfort 
them,  pray  for  them,  obey  them.  Do  what  they  require,  even  when  it  is  hard  to  do 
so  ;  and  when  they  depart,  let  it  be  said  to  their  honour  that  they  have  left  God- 
fearing children.  Love  and  esteem  them.  Give  thera  a  chief  place  in  your  heart. 
Remember  how  they  cared  for  you  in  youth,  &c.,  and  think  that  neglect  of  them 
can  never  lead  to  blessing  (Prov.  xx.  20,  xxx.  17,  &c.).  And  if  father  and  mother 
are  gone  from  earth,  or  if  you  have  left  your  home,  remember  you  are  still  servants 
and  children  of  the  heavenly  King  and  Father.  II.  The  Divine  order  in  the 
State.  1.  Princes  and  governors  must  also  be  held  in  honour  as  appointed  by 
God.  But,  say  some,  all  rulers  are  not  the  fathers  of  their  people  ;  many  of  them 
seem  to  live  for  themselves  rather  than  for  the  people,  &c.  There  is  a  cheap  kind 
of  popularity  to  be  earned  by  the  propagation  of  such  ideas  at  the  present  day. 
Think  of  what  would  be  the  result  if  any  man  of  honour  subjected  to  the  same 
criticism  as  those  in  high  places — every  word  noticed  and  every  action,  every  hasty 
exclamation,  everything  misconstrued,  and  added  thereto  lies,  &c. — how  would  the 
life  of  many  even  good  men  appear  after  such  an  ordeal  ?  2.  Princes  and  rulers 
also  are  men  like  ourselves,  neither  better  nor  worse.  They  are  like  the  parents  we 
are  commanded  to  honour  ;  and  like  them,  they  are  to  be  honoured  because 
ordained  by  God.  And  if  children  hear  their  parents  lightly  slandering  "the 
powers  that  be,"  those  children  may  be  expected  to  become  rebellious.  3.  Then  we 
must  remember  that  even  a  bad  government  is  better  than  none  at  all.  A  slave  is 
he  who  obeys  those  in  authority  simply  from  fear  of  the  sword.  A  freeman  obeys 
according  to  the  will  of  God.     III.  The  Divine  order  in  Church  and  school. 

1.  These  also  are  of  the  Lord.  They  are  appointed  to  instruct  the  Church  and  the 
youth  of  the  nation,  to  exhort,  warn,  &c.     For  this  they  shall  give  an  account. 

2.  Tht  young  ought  to  honour  them.  Those  who  despise  them  despise  those  whom 
God  has  appointed  to  this  honourable  office.  It  is  no  glory  to  make  a  man's 
office  hard  and  bitter  to  exercise.  3.  Those  set  over  the  community  as  pastors 
should  receive  this  honour.  "To  pass  by  the  church  and  school  is  the  shortest 
way  to  Bridewell, "  says  the  proverb.  And  who  are  sometimes  to  blame  for  this? 
Careless  parents,  as  the  thief  asserted  when  he  said,  "My  father  built  the  gallows 
— and  he  wasn't  a  carpenter."  On  the  parents'  attitude  toward  the  Church  and 
her  pastors  will  depend  the  children's,  very  likely,  in  later  years.  4.  And  if 
young  people  are  taught  to  despise  those  whom  God  has  appointed  ministers 
of  His  word,  what  will  be  their  attitude  to  the  Word  itself?  Men  should 
honour  in  those  appointed  to  the  office  of  teachers  and  preachers  the  Divine 
order  by  which  men  are  trained  intellectually  and  spiritually.  {K.  H.  Caspari.) 
Filial  reverence : — The  Emperor  Decimus  intending  and  desiring  to  place 
the  crown  on  the  head  of  Decius  his  son,  the  young  prince  refused  it  in 
the  most  strenuous  manner,  saying,  "I  am  afraid  lest,  being  made  an  emperor, 
I  should  forget  that  I  am  a  son.  I  had  rather  be  no  emperor  and  a  dutiful 
son,  than  an  emperor  and  such  a  son  as  hath  forsaken  his  due  obedience. 
Let  then  my  father  bear  the  rule  ;  and  let  this  only  be  my  empire — to  obey 
with  all  humility,  and  to  fulfil  whatsoever  he  shall  command  me."  Thus  the 
solemnity  was  waived,  and  the  young  man  was  not  crowned — unless  mankind 
shall  say  that  this  signal  piety  towards  an  indulgent  parent  was  a  more  glorious 


182  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  T. 

diadem  to  the  son  than  that  which  consisted  merely  of  gold  and  jewels.  That 
thy  days  may  be  prolonged,  and  that  it  may  go  well  with  tiiee.— The  promise  of 
long  life  and  prosperity : — 1.  That  the  lives  of  some  good  men  have  been  short, 
need  not  be  proved.  2.  How  such  dispensations  of  Providence  may  be  accounted  for, 
consistently  with  this  promise.  (1)  When  God  takes  His  saints  out  of  the  world 
when  young,  it  is  sometimes  a  peculiar  instance  of  compassion  to  them,  in 
taking  them  from  the  evil  to  come.  (2)  They  are,  at  their  death,  possessed  of 
a  better  world,  which  is  the  best  exchange.  (3)  Old  age  is  not  a  blessing, 
unless  it  be  adorned  with  grace.  3.  We  shall  now  inquire  how  far,  or  in  what 
respects,  we  are  to  hope  for  and  desire  the  accomplishment  of  the  promises  of 
temporal  good  things.  (1)  Temporal  good  things  are  not  to  be  desired  ultimately 
for  themselves,  but  as  subservient  to  the  glory  of  God  ;  and  long  life  in  particular 
is  a  blessing  so  far  as  it  affords  more  space  to  do  service  to  the  interest  of 
Christ  in  the  world.  (2)  They  are  to  be  desired  with  an  entire  submission  to 
the  will  of  God,  and  a  resolution  to  acknowledge  that  He  is  righteous, 
and  to  magnify  His  name,  though  He  deny  them  to  us,  as  considering 
that  He  knows  what  is  best  for  us,  and  may  do  what  He  will  with  His 
own.  (3)  We  are  to  desire  that  God  will  give  us  temporal  good  things  in 
mercy,  as  pledges  of  eternal  happiness,  and  not  in  wrath.  Thus  the  Psalmist  says, 
"  There  be  many  that  say,  Who  will  show  us  any  good  ?  Lord,  lift  Thou  up  the 
light  of  Thy  countenance  upon  us."  4.  We  shall  now  inquire  with  what  frame 
of  spirit  we  ought  to  bear  the  loss  of  temporal  good  things,  which  we  have  been 
encouraged  by  God's  promise  to  hope  for.  In  answer  to  this,  let  it  be  considered 
that  if  God  does  not  fulfil  His  promise  in  the  way  and  manner  which  we  expect  in 
granting  us  temporal  good  things,  yet — (1)  We  must  justify  Him,  and  condemn  our- 
selves ;  for  none  can  say  that  he  does  not  forfeit  all  blessings  daily.  Therefore  we 
are  to  say  He  is  a  God  of  infinite  faithfulness,  but  we  are  unfaithful,  and  not  stead- 
fast in  His  covenant.  (2)  We  are  not  to  conclude  that  our  being  deprived  of 
temporal  good  things  which  we  expected  is  a  certain  sign  that  we  have  no  right  to 
or  interest  in  those  better  things  that  accompany  salvation  ;  as  the  wise  man  says, 
"No  man  knoweth  either  love  or  hatred  by  all  that  is  before  him."  (3)  We  are  to 
reckon  the  loss  of  temporal  good  things  as  a  trial  of  our  faith  and  patience,  and 
endeavour,  under  such  disappointments,  to  make  it  appear  that  the  world  was  not 
the  main  thing  we  had  in  view,  but  Christ  and  spiritual  blessings  in  Him  were  the 
spring  of  all  our  religion.  5.  It  may  farther  be  inquired,  What  are  those  things 
that  tend  to  make  a  long  life  happy,  for  which  alone  it  is  to  be  desired  ?  And  it 
may  be  observed  that  though  in  the  promise  annexed  to  the  Fifth  Commandment 
we  have  no  mention  of  anything  but  long  life,  yet  the  apostle,  when  explaining  it, 
adds,  that  they  shall  have  a  prosperous  life,  without  which  long  life  would  not  be  so 
great  a  blessing.  Thus  he  says,  ' '  That  it  may  be  well  with  thee,  and  thou  mayest 
live  long  upon  the  earth."  Now  there  are  three  things  which  tend  to  make  a  long 
life  happy.  (1)  Experience  of  growth  in  grace,  in  proportion  to  our  advances  in  age, 
according  to  that  promise,  ' '  They  shall  bring  forth  fruit  in  old  age  ;  they  shall  be 
fat  and  flourishing."  (2)  When  we  retain  our  natural  abilities,  and  that  vigour 
of  mind  which  we  have  formerly  had.  This  some  are  deprived  of  through  the 
infirmities  of  old  age,  whereby  they  may  be  said  to  outlive  themselves.  (3)  Old  age 
is  a  blessing  when  our  usefulness  to  others  in  our  day  and  generation  is  continued, 
'{Thomas  Ridglet,  D.D.)  Confide  in  yoitr parents : — Make  them,  above  all  others, 
^our  confidants.  They  are  the  best  and  most  disinterested  friends  you  will  ever  have 
in  this  world.  Cultivate  the  habit  of  consultation  with  them.  On  things  great 
and  small  seek  their  advice.  A  daughter  will  never  come  to  shame,  a  son  never 
to  dishonour,  that  does  so.  Especially  consult  them  in  relation  to  your  reading 
and  your  companions.  There  is  to  me  something  very  beautiful  in  the  intimacy 
of  the  father  and  a  son,  to  see  them  walking  side  by  side,  perhaps  arm  in  arm, 
in  familiar  converse  in  the  street,  the  old  man  and  the  young  in  all  the  confidence 
of  a  hallowed  friendship !  It  gives  a  satisfaction  like  a  fair  broad  landscape  at 
sunset.  I  know  stalwart  sons  who  to-day  consult  their  mothers  as  in  the  days  of 
yore,  when  they  stood  little  higher  than  her  knee — they  are  not  low  in  my  esteem, 
and  I  deem  those  mothers  very  happy  in  them.  Nor  need  we  confine  these  thoughts, 
wholly  to  sons.  The  beauty  of  intimacy  between  parent  and  child  is  not  theirs 
alone.  When  does  a  daughter  appear  so  attractive  as  when  showing  her  love  to 
father  or  mother — as  when  employed  in  some  way  lightening  their  cares  or  relieving 
their  burdens  ?  It  would  not  be  far  froni  wrong  were  I  to  say  to  a  young  man  who 
is  looking  with  some  degree  of  interest  for  a  life  companion  : — Would  you  know 


CHAP,  v.]  DEUTERONOMY.  133 

what  kind  of  a  wife  she  will  make  upon  wliom  now  you  have  your  eye  ?  Ask  what 
kind  of  a  daughter  she  is  now.  If  she  be  indolently  selfish,  leaving  care  and  work 
to  her  mother ;  especially  if  she  be  unloving  or  undutiful,  beware  of  her  ;  she  is  not 
likely  to  make  you  happy.  If  she  be  an  affectionate  and  self-denying  daughter,  if 
she  is  intimate  and  confidential  with  her  parents,  you  have  in  that  the  best  promise 
of  happiness  in  the  future.  The  eye  of  mother  or  father,  beaming  with  delight  as 
it  rests  upon  a  daughter's  form,  moving  lightly  in  their  presence,  is  an  unspoken 
recommendation  of  untold  value.  But,  whether  the  eye  of  friend  or  admirer  is 
observing  her  or  not,  a  daughter  should  cultivate  this  feeling  of  confidential  intimacy 
with  her  parents  ;  there  is  safety  in  it  for  her  and  unbounded  happiness  for  them. 
The  secret  of  success : — A  Christian  merchant,  who,  from  being  a  very  poor  boy,  had 
risen  to  wealth  and  renown,  was  once  asked  by  an  intimate  friend  to  what,  under 
God,  he  attributed  his  success  in  life.  *'To  prompt  and  steady  obedience  to  my 
parents,"  was  his  reply.  "In  the  midst  of  many  bad  examples  of  youths  of  my  own 
age,  I  was  always  able  to  yield  a  ready  submission  to  the  will  of  my  father  and 
mother,  and  I  firmly  believe  that  a  blessing  has,  in  consequence,  rested  upon  me  and 
upon  all  my  efiforts." 

Ver.  17.  Thou  shalt  not  kill. — The  Sixth  Co7nmandment  .-—Yirst,  we  are  here 
forbidden  to  injure  our  own  flesh  ;  to  desire  our  own  death  out  of  impatience  and 
passion,  or  in  any  way  to  hasten  our  end,  and  bereave  ourselves  of  life.  1.  It  is  a 
sin  against  ourselves,  and  against  that  natural  principle  of  self-love  and  self-preser- 
vation which  is  implanted  in  us,  and  which  is  the  rule  of  our  love  to  others,  which 
renders  the  sin  more  heinous,  because  it  is  a  plain  contradiction  to  the  law  of 
nature.  2.  This  is  a  crime  against  others,  as  well  as  against  ourselves.  For  the 
community  hath  a  share  in  us,  and  therefore  when  we  destroy  ourselves  we  injure 
the  public.  And  then  more  especially  we  wrong  the  family  which  hath  an  interest  in 
us,  and  of  whom  we  are  a  part.  3.  This  is  a  crime  against  God  as  well  as  against 
ourselves  and  our  brethren.  He  is  a  self-slayer,  and  an  enemy  of  the  workmanship 
of  God.  And  this  workmanship  is  no  less  than  the  image  of  God,  for  in  the  image 
of  God  made  He  man  (Gen.  ix.  6).  Further,  this  is  an  offence  against  God  because 
it  is  a  distrust  of  His  providence  and  His  management  of  future  events.  Vibius 
Virius,  a  Roman  senator,  prevailed  with  twenty-four  senators  to  drink  poison  with 
him,  before  Hannibal  entered  the  city  of  Capua,  and  so  they  died  unanimously  with 
resentments  of  their  country's  deplorable  condition,  but  were  not  so  religious  as  to 
confide  in  the  Divine  Providence.  Cato  fell  on  his  sword  and  slew  himself,  that 
he  might  not  fall  into  the  hands  of  Julius  Caesar.  Demosthenes  drank  poison  and 
ended  his  life  that  he  might  be  sure  not  to  be  apprehended.  Cleopatra  killed  herself 
that  she  might  not  be  taken  by  Augustus.  And  others  have  despatched  themselves 
on  like  grounds,  namely,  because  they  were  uncertain  of  the  future  event  of  things, 
and  they  had  not  faith  enough  to  rely  on  Him  who  governs  the  world,  4.  This 
must  be  voted  to  be  a  very  heinous  offence  if  we  respect  the  source  and  principles 
from  whence  it  is  derived.  As  generally,  from  fear  and  cowardice,  which,  possessing 
the  minds  of  some  men,  have  caused  them  to  make  all  the  haste  they  could  out  of 
the  world,  lest  they  should  be  overtaken  with  the  miseries  that  attend  it.  Even  the 
ancient  Roman  courage  was  stained  with  this  pusillanimity.  This  argues  a  poor 
impotent  spirit.  But  on  the  contrary,  it  is  truly  brave  to  bear  calamity  contentedly. 
Another  ill  principle  from  whence  self-murder  proceeds  is  pride.  Cowardice  and 
pride  are  often  coupled  together.  A  haughty  and  a  dastardly  spirit  meet  in  the  same 
persons.  Hannibal,  beaten  by  Scipio,  scorned  to  see  himself  in  disgrace,  and 
poisoned  himself.  Mark  Antony  and  Cleopatra  being  conquered  by  Augustus, 
scorned  to  survive  their  greatness,  and  to  submit  to  the  conqueror.  Yea,  it  is 
probable  that  Cato  slew  himself  in  an  arrogant  humour,  being  loth  to  truckle  to  him 
who  had  vanquished  Pompey.  Another  source  of  this  wicked  practice  is  impatience 
and  discontent.  When  these  are  deeply  rooted  in  men's  minds  they  sometimes  put 
them  upon  this  fatal  enterprise.  Thus  Pilate,  turned  out  of  his  place,  and  fallen 
under  the  emperor's  displeasure,  abandoned  the  world.  Themistocles,  the  famous 
and  renowned  captain  of  the  Athenians,  being  banished  by  them,  and  brought  into 
disgrace  and  poverty,  sought  for  a  redress  of  his  melancholy  by  poison.  Porcia,  when 
she  heard  of  the  untimely  death  of  her  husband  Brutus,  like  Cato's  own  daughter, 
put  an  end  to  her  life  by  swallowing  burning  coals.  And  discontent  is  the  general 
and  most  common  spring  of  this  evil  I  am  speaking  of.  Lastly,  when  discontent  and 
impatience  ripen  into  despair,  the  persons  thus  possessed  do  often  fling  themselves 
out  of  the  world,  and  will  not  be  persuaded  to  stay  here  any  longer.     Which  was 


134  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  r. 

the  case  with  Saul,  Ahithophel,  and  Judas.  And  now,  after  all  these  brief  hints,  I 
question  not  but  it  will  be  freely  granted  that  self-murder  is  a  very  heinous  crime, 
and  therefore  deservedly  forbidden.  If  you  ask  whether  we  must  wholly  despair  of 
the  salvation  of  those  that  kill  themselves,  I  answer,  If  this  violence  done  to  them- 
selves proceed  merely  from  any  of  the  causes  before  mentioned,  I  conceive  we  cannot 
entertain  any  hope  of  such  persons.  And  my  reason  is,  because  this  is  their  volun- 
tary act,  and  in  itself  vicious,  and  they  have  not  time  to  repent  of  it  when  it  is  done. 
But  we  must  not  judge  so  severely  concerning  those  whose  violent  laying  hands  on 
themselves  is  the  immediate  effect  of  a  distempered  body  and  a  disordered  mind. 
It  is  most  probable  that  no  man  shall  answer  for  any  miscarriage  that  is  wholly 
caused  by  the  violence  of  a  disease  or  the  distraction  of  the  brain.  The  reason 
of  my  assertion  is  this,  because  whatever  fault  may  be  committed  in  such  a  case, 
it  is  not  a  man's  free  and  voluntary  act,  and  consequently  is  not  his  own,  and 
therefore  shall  not  be  charged  upon  him.  But,  secondly,  this  commandment 
respects  not  only  ourselves,  but  others,  and  those  chiefly ;  wherein  not  only  the 
gross  act,  but  all  inclinations  towards  it,  are  forbidden  ;  as  hatred :  for  "whoso- 
ever hateth  his  brother  is  a  murderer"  (1  John  iii.  15).  That  is,  he  is  a  murderer 
in  his  heart,  which  God  chiefly  looks  after.  And  all  envy  ;  for  this  passion  lies  not 
idle,  but  will,  if  possible,  procure  mischief  to  those  that  it  is  fixed  upon  :  whence 
envy  and  murder  are  joined  together  in  Rom.  i.  29.  And  all  undue  anger  and 
wrath  are  here  forbidden,  as  Christ  Himself  hath  interpreted  this  commandment 
(Matt.  V.  21,  22).  Anger  is  a  degree  of  murder  in  the  interpretation  of  the  Gospel. 
And  in  itself  it  is  a  disposition  to  it,  for  wrath  is  cruel,  and  anger  is  outrageous 
(Prov.  xxvii.  4).  Here  also  might  be  mentioned  the  wishing  of  other  men's  death, 
or  the  contriving  of  it,  which,  without  doubt,  are  condemned  by  this  commandment. 
Joseph's  brethren  intended  his  death,  for  "they  conspired  against  him  to  slay 
him  "  (Gen.  xxxvii.  18).  There  is  not  only  the  murder  of  the  heart,  but  of  the  tongue. 
For  we  find  that  reproachful  words  are  referred  by  our  Saviour  Himself  to  this 
commandment  of  not-killing  (Matt.  v.  21,  22).  He  that  takes  away  his  brother's 
good  name  is  in  the  next  capacity  to  rob  him  of  his  life.  He  that  maliciously  uses 
his  tongue  against  his  neighbour  is  diposed  to  use  a  weapon  against  him  when  he 
finds  opportunity.  Aristophanes,  who  scoffed  at  Socrates  in  his  plays,  was  one  of 
the  conspirators  against  his  life.  Next,  I  am  to  mention  those  actions  which  are 
disallowed  by  this  commandment.  As,  first,  the  hurting  of  the  bodies  of  others, 
though  their  life  be  not  concerned.  The  impairing  of  the  bodily  strength  and 
health  of  any  person  is  here  forbid.  So  is  all  oppression,  extortion,  and  persecution. 
"  Her  princes  in  the  midst  thereof  are  like  wolves,  ravening  the  prey,  to  shed  blood, 
to  get  dishonest  gains"  (Ezek.  xxii.  27);  where  it  is  evident  that  tyranny  and 
oppression  in  rulers  are  shedding  of  blood,  and  are  a  kind  of  murder.  We  are  for- 
bid also  to  countenance  any  persons  in  their  attempts  of  taking  away  a  man's  life.  He 
that  any  way  abets  this  action,  he  that  connives  at  it,  is  guilty  of  it.  Too  much 
severity  in  taking  away  a  man's  life  is  disallowed  by  this  commandment.  So  we 
read  of  a  French  soldier,  who  was  the  first  man  that  mounted  the  bulwark  of  a 
"becsieged  fort,  whereupon  ensued  the  gaining  of  it.  But  the  general  first  knighted 
iiim,  and  then  hanged  him  within  an  hour  after  because  he  did  it  without  command. 
Judges  and  jurors,  and  persons  concerned  in  courts  of  judicature,  where  capital  causes 
are  tried,  may  soon  be  found  offenders  if  they  be  not  very  cautious  here.  For  if 
they  be  any  ways  assisting  towards  the  condemning  of  the  innocent,  they  incur  the 
imputation  of  bloodshed.  The  like  do  physicians  if  they  carelessly  administer  their 
medicines,  and  value  not  the  lives  of  men  ;  if  they  rashly  make  experiments  on 
their  patients,  and  are  perfidious  in  their  art.  This  I  will  add,  in  the  next  place, 
that  to  engage  in  an  unjust  war  is  forbidden  in  this  commandment,  for  it  is  unlawful 
killing.  For  here  men  are  hired  to  make  a  slaughter  of  others ;  killing  is  a  trade 
and  an  art.  Fighting  of  duels  falls  under  the  prohibition  of  killing.  Lastly,  here 
IS  forbidden  the  actual  taking  away  of  another's  life,  and  that  unlawfully.  For 
-every  taking  away  another  man's  life  is  not  unlawful,  and  therefore  is  not  murder. 
Here,  then,  it  is  necessary  that  I  distinctly  show  in  what  cases  the  actual  taking 
away  of  a  man's  life  is  unlawful,  and  in  what  cases  it  is  lawful.  First,  then,  under 
the  old  dispensation,  when  God  was  pleased  in  an  immediate  way  to  stir  persons  up 
to  effect  what  He  intended  should  be  brought  to  pass,  it  was  lawful  for  a  man  to 
take  away  another's  life,  if  he  had  an  extraordinary  impulse  from  God  to  do  it. 
Thus  Moses  killed  the  Egyptian,  Phineas  slew  Zimri  and  Coshi,  Samson  destroyed 
the  Philistines,  Elias  put  to  death  Baal's  priests,  Ehud  stabbed  Eglon,  Jehoiada 
killed  the  she-tyrant  Athaliah.     These  are  rare  and  extraordinary  examples,  and 


CHAP,  v.]  DEUTERONOMY.  135 

were  founded  on  the  Jus  Zelotarum,  whereby  it  was  lawful  for  private  men  immedi- 
ately stirred  up  by  God  to  punish  open  wickedness  even  with  death.     This  right  of 
zealots  is  not  now  allowable  ;  nor  was  it  lawfully  practised  always  by  the  Jews,  and  it 
grew  at  last  to  notorious  villainy,  as  in  the  Jewish  war.     But  I  am  to  speak  of  what 
is  lawful  under  the  settled  dispensation  of  the  Gospel,  and  therefore — Secondly,  I 
assert  that  it  is  lawful  to  take  away  a  man's  life  in  the  way  of  public  justice  on 
notorious  criminals.     This  is  to  be  done  by  appointed  magistrates  and  officers,  and 
as  they  are  such,  for  these  have  authority  and  power  to  punish  malefactors  even 
with  death  (Gen.  ix.   6,  xxvi.  11  ;  Deut.  xvii.  6,  7  ;  Josh.  i.  18  ;  Rom.  xiii.  4  ; 
Acts  XXV.  11).     Thirdly,  in  a  lawful  and  just  war  it  is  no  sin  to  take  away  a  man's 
life.     We  may  kill  our  enemies  in  a  just  cause,  because  we  execute  justice  in  so 
doing.    Fourthly,  we  may  take  away  another  man's  life  in  case  of  necessary  defence, 
that  is,  when  we  are  constrained  to'  it  in  defence  of  our  own  lives.     Fifthly,  this 
may  be  done  in  the  necessary  maintaining  of  public  justice,  and  the  conservation  of 
public  peace.     Sixthly,  if  a  man  kills  a  person  by  chance  or  misadventure,  this  is 
not  to  be  reckoned  a  sinful  and  unlawful  act.     But  excepting  these  limitations,  there 
is  no  taking  away  a  man's  life  but  it  is  to  be  reckoned  unlawful  and  downright 
murder.     For  it  is  the  wilful  killing  of  an  innocent  person,  and  that  is  the  thing 
that  is  here  forbidden.     I  am  in  the  next  place  to  assign  the  reasons  of  the  prohibi- 
tion, or  to  show  what  are  the  arguments  against  this  killing  which  is  here  forbidden. 
They  are  these  two  :  the  sinfulness,  and  the  danger  of  it.    1.  The  shedding  of  man's 
blood  i^  forbid  because  of  the  sinfulness,  the  absolute  depravity  and  enormity  of  it. 
We  find  it  is  that  which  our  nature  recoils  at  most  of  all.    The  very  name  of  murder 
strikes  a  terror  into  the  hearts  of  all  that  are  not  become  wholly  insensible.     The 
wild  and  savage  brutes  have  a  courtesy  for  those  of  their  own  species,  and  seldom 
prey  upon  and  devour  one  another.     It  must  therefore  be  veiy  repugnant  to  human 
nature  to  shed  the  blood  of  mankind.     Besides,  a  man's  life  is  the  most  precious 
thing  he  is  oMTier  of,  and  is  the  foundation  of  all  other  blessings  and  enjoyments  : 
wherefore  all  is  parted  with  for  this,  and  all  hardships  are  undergone  to  secure  this. 
All  the  laws  and  constitutions  of  magistrates  aim  at  the  preservation  of  this,  either 
directly  or  indirectly.     I  proceed  next  to  the  danger  and  punishment  which  attend 
this  sin,  which  is  another  reason  of  the  prohibition.     All  sin  is  troublesome  and 
penal,  but  this  of  murder  especially.     It  lies  heavy  on  the  conscience.    It  hath  been 
known  that  after  the  commission  of  this  horrid  act,  the  guilty  parties  have  not  been 
able  to  enjoy  a  minute's  rest,  but  have  shifted  from  one  place  to  another,  and  have 
rather  choaen  to  be  their  own  executioners  than  to  live  to  be  their  own  tormentors. 
And  as  this  sin  is  most  clamorous  in  the  sinner's  own  breast,  so  the  voice  of  it  is 
heard  the  soonest  in  heaven.     "  The  voice  of  thy  brother's  blood  crieth  to  Me  from 
the  ground,"  saith  God  to  Cain,  that  first  murderer  (Gen.  iv.  10).     All  sins  speak, 
but  this  crieth.  _  And  that  we  may  avoid  this  horrid  crime,  it  will  be  necessary  to 
observe  these  brief  rules.    1.  We  are  to  beware  of  covetousues^,  and  all  greedy  desire 
of  wealth,  and  riches,  and  worldly  possessions.     Naboth's  vineyard  was  coveted  by 
Ahab,  and  this  put  him  on  contriving  Naboth's  death.     2.  Let  us  curb  ambitious 
thoughts  and  a  desire  of  being  great,  lest  these  administer  to  bloodshed.    Abimelech 
killed  three  score  and  ten  of  his  brethren  to  get  to  the  throne.     The  next  direction 
is,  that  Ave  put  a  check  to  lust  and  lewdness ;    for  these  have  too  often  proved 
the   forerunners   of   bloodshed.       Uriah's   wife   is   unlawfully  desired    by   David, 
therefore  he  must  be  taken  out  of  the  way,  that  David's  lust  may  be  satisfied. 
Herod,  to  gratify  a  lewd  woman,  struck  off  the  Baptist's  head.     Also,  be  careful  to 
avoid  all  licentiousness,  evil  company,  and  debauchery,  and  particularly  excess  in 
drinking  ;  for  these  proceed  in  time  to  this  extremity  of  wickedness.     Again,  be  not 
forgetful  to  suppress  the  inward  springs  and  roots  of  actual  murder,  and  those 
are  pride,  hatred,  envy,  revenge,  and  excess  of  anger  ;   which  are  indeed  them- 
selves a  kind  and  degree  of  murder,  as  I  have  shown  before.     This  likewise  must 
be  enjoined,  that  we  avoid  the  outward  occasions  of  this  sin,  and  whatever  leads  and 
prepares  to  it.     We  should  carefully  shun  all  bloody  shows  and  inhuman  spectacles, 
which  are  incentives  to  cruelty.     Lastly,  pray  we  unto  God  with  great  earnestness 
and  fervour,  in  the  language  of  the  Psalmist  (Psa.  li.  14),  that  we  may  be  kept 
by  the  Divine  assistance  and  influence  from  the  guilt  of  bloodshed  and  slaughter, 
of  what  kind   soever.     {J.   Edwards,   D.D.)         The  Sixth  CammandrMnt :—The 
primary  aim,  of  course,  of  the  commandment  is  to  inculcate  reverence  for  human 
life.     Man  is,  or  rather  should  be,  a  sacred  thing  to  man.     But  for  the  tendency  of 
the  selfishness  which  makes  every  bad  man  his  own  idol,  each  man's  life  would  be 
thus  sacred  in  each  man's  eyes.     It  is  Christianity  that  has  made  it  so.     The 


136  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  T. 

Romans  would  assemble  by  myriads  in  the  amphitheatre  to  see  men  hew  each  other 
to  pieces  for  their  amusement.  In  China,  in  Dahomey,  in  all  savage  countries, 
human  life  is  utterly  cheap  ;  in  Christian  countries  it  is  infinitely  precious.  When 
the  body  of  poor  George  Ebbens  was  cut  and  dashed  to  pieces  on  the  rocks  above 
Niagara,  tens  of  thousands  of  spectators  assembled  on  the  shores  of  the  river  to  help 
him  if  possible,  and  one  universal  sob  shook  the  heart  of  the  whole  mighty  multi- 
tude when  that  poor  unknown  boy  missed  his  leap,  and  was  swept  over  the  rushing 
Falls.  Only  the  lowest  nations,  only  the  basest  or  the  most  pernicious  men,  care 
not  who  perishes  so  their  interests  be  fed.  Was  there  ever  a  more  wicked 
speech  uttered  than  that  of  Napoleon  I.,  when  Prince  Metternich  told  him 
that  his  plan  would  cost  the  lives  of  100,000  men,  and  he  haughtily  replied, 
"A  hundred  thousand  men!  What  are  a  hundred  thousand  men  to  me?" 
Metternich  walked  to  the  window  and  flung  it  open,  exclaiming  with  indig- 
nation, "Sire,  let  all  Europe  bear  that  atrocious  sentiment."  The  Sixth  Command- 
ment, taken  as  the  Rabbis  took  it,  and  as  it  ought  to  be  taken,  in  connection 
with  the  First,  was  meant  as  a  check  to  this  hateful  egotism.  You  will  say, 
that  the  commandment  forbidding  murder  is  needless  to  most  men  now ;  there 
is  scarcely  one  man  in  a  million  who  becomes  a  murderer.  How  that  may  be  I 
know  not.  It  is  thought  by  some  that  more  murders  by  far  are  committed  than 
are  ever  detected,  and  that  many  a  child,  for  instance,  as  well  as  many  a  mother, 
has  been  done  to  death,  directly  or  indirectly,  even  for  so  mean  a  bribe  as  an 
insurance  fee.  A  murderer  is  by  no  means  always  a  dull,  bestial,  and  ferocious 
soul.  Many  a  tender  and  delicate  man,  who  dreamed  as  little  of  being  a  murderer 
as  we  do,  has  become  a  murderer  out  of  greed,  or  envy,  or  fury,  or  to  hide  some 
awful  shame,  or  as  the  sequel  of  indulged  passion,  or  of  a  life  made  reckless  by 
gambling  or  debauchery.  Some  of  these  have  left  behind  them  a  terrible  warning 
of  the  slow  degrees  by  which  temptation,  smouldering  at  the  basis  of  the  life,  has 
leaped  in  one  moment  into  the  uncontrollable  flame  of  a  great  crime  which  shows 
itself  to  be,  not  a  sudden  aberration,  but  the  necessary  result  and  epitome  of  long 
years  of  secret  baseness.  Now,  which  of  us  is  wholly  free  from  one  or  other  form 
of  this  murderous  sin  so  common  and  so  rank  ?  Anger :  how  many  almost  pride 
themselves  on  being  irritable !  They  think  it  shows  magnanimity,  whereas  it 
only  shows  weak  pride  and  lack  of  self-control.  What  an  abyss  of  crime  has 
anger  often  hurried  men  into!  Then  there  is  what  is  called  "bearing  a  grudge." 
How  often  has  one  heard  on  vulgar  lips  those  wretched  sajangs,  "I'll  pay  him 
out !  "  "  I'll  put  a  spoke  in  his  wheel !  "  "I  owe  him  one  for  that  \"  "I  will  give 
him  as  good  as  he  gave ! "  Sometimes  this  becomes  a  feeble  spite,,  sometimes  it 
deepens  into  a  sullen  revenge  that  has  turned  men  into  raging  maniacs,  and  women 
into  frightful  demons.  But  the  spirit  of  this  commandment  is,  "  Avenge  not  your- 
self, neither  give  place  unto  wrath."  And  if  many  of  yon  leave  religious  hatred 
to  priests,  is  there  no  one  here  who  has  been  gnilty  of  that  murder  of  the  soul 
which  may  often  in  God's  sight  be  more  heinous  than  the  murder  of  liodies  ?  He 
who  lends  to  a  younger  and  Aveaker  brother  some  impure  book  in  which  in  ten 
minutes  he  may  read  himself  to  death,  he  who  acts  to  some  comrade,  whom  he 
calls  his  friend,  as  the  torch-bearer  to  sin  ;  he  who  first  plants  the  seeds  of  hell  in 
the  soul  of  one  of  Christ's  little  ones ;  he  who  leads  another  over  the  thin  border- 
line of  wrong  by  teaching  him  to  lie,  or  to  gamble,  or  to  drink,  or  to  devastate  the 
inner  sanctities  of  his  own  being,  may  be  in  God's  sight  a  ten  times  worse  murderer 
than  many  who  have  been  hanged.  Again,  all  selfish,  guilty,  oppressive  trade 
is  murder  in  God's  sight.  Once  more,  in  conclusion,  there  is  a  spirit  of  murder 
even  in  cold  indifference  and  callousness  to  human  misery.  {Dean  Farrar.)  The 
Sixth  ComrrMndmcnt  :—\.  The  disposition  of  heart  it  enjoins  us  to  bear  one 
towards  another.  1.  Thou  shalt  not  bear  an  envious,  but  thou  shalt  bear  a  com- 
placential  spirit  towards  others.  Envy,  strictly  speaking,  is  that  inward  hatred 
of  another  for  some  good  thing  he  has,  which  we  have  not,  but  wish  for.  2.  As 
we  may  not  bear  an  envious,  so  neither  may  we  bear  a  revengeful  temj^er  towards 
any  of  our  neighbours,  but  must  be  disposed  in  meekness  of  spirit  towards  all  and 
every  one  of  them.  We  must  consider  that  by  this  commandment  those  dispositions 
which  are  the  direct  contraries  to  this  revengeful  spirit,  and  which  fall  under  the 
general  word  meekness,  are  enjoined  upon  us.  (1)  We  must  bear  a  kind  and 
courteous  temper  of  heart  towards  others,  as  being  members  of  ourselves  ;  we 
and  they  being  of  one  blood,  and  having  the  same  Father.  (2)  A  disposition  to 
construe  everything  in  the  best  part.  (3)  Another  part  of  this  meekness  is  a 
forgiving  temper.     (4)  A  peaceable  temper  is  another  branch  of  meekness.     3.  But 


CHAP,  v.]  DEUTERONOMY,  137 

we  may  not  be  of  a  cruel,  but  must  be  of  a  compassionate  disposition.  As  we 
may  not  rejoice  in  others'  sins,  so  may  we  not  lead  any  into  sin ;  as  those  do 
who  take  pleasure  in  making  others  drunk,  or  in  putting  them  upon  any  kind  of 
wickedness.  Nor,  finally,  may  we  encourage  any  sin  by  our  example  and  conduct. 
II.  We  must  indulge  neither  envy,  revenge,  nor  cruelty  in  OUK  tongues  ;  but 
from  a  real  affection  one  towards  another,  our  words  must  be  charitable  and 
kind.  III.  Our  conduct.  Thou  shalt  not  do  any  damage  to  thy  brother  in 
soul  or  body,  but  shalt  do  him  all  the  good  thou  canst  in  both.  {S.  Walker,  B.A.) 
Rights  of  Life : — There  is  a  nobility  in  life.  It  is  a  grand  thing  to  live.  Whether 
in  the  ephemera  of  an  hour  or  the  eagle  of  a  century,  the  flower  of  a  day  or  the 
yew-tree  of  a  thousand  years,  the  infant  of  a  week  or  the  man  of  threescore  and 
ten,  life  is  a  glorious  fact.  Life  is  everywhere  ;  it  is  the  only  thing  of  which  God 
seems  prodigal.  There  is  life  in  the  earth  and  on  the  earth,  in  the  sea  and  on  the 
sea,  and  throughout  the  vast  expanse  of  the  atmosphere.  Give  the  microscopist 
more  light,  and  he  will  reveal  the  existence  of  more  life.  It  is  not  possible  to 
conceive  of  life  devoid  of  grandeur.  Whatever  may  be  the  misery  incident  to 
existence,  to  live  is  preferable  to  annihilation.  The  lease  of  life  varies  in  animals 
and  in  plants.  In  some  it  is  a  song,  a  thrill  of  love  ;  in  others  it  sweeps  through 
the  centuries.  What  life  is,  is  one  of  the  deepest  of  all  mysteries.  The  answer 
has  baffled  the  chemist,  the  biologist,  and  physiologist,  who  have  toiled  in  vain  on 
this  splendid  theme.  But  whatever  may  be  our  definitions,  life  seems  to  be  an 
impartation  rather  than  a  creation.  There  is  but  one  life  in  the  universe — the  life 
of  God.  The  Scriptures  are  accurate  in  the  assertion  that  "in  Him  is  life,"  which 
has  a  depth  of  meaning  to  command  our  keenest  thought  and  widest  research. 
The  old  Hindus  entertained  this  loftier  conception  of  life  as  an  impartation,  and 
said  that  all  human  lives  were  parts  of  the  Infinite  Life,  and  as  drops  of  water 
return  to  the  ocean,  so  all  souls  return  to  the  Infinite  Father  by  absorption. 
Underlying  this  description  there  is  a  deep  thought,  but  by  them  misunderstood 
and  misapplied  ;  for  all  imparted  lives,  whether  of  men  or  of  angels,  will  retain 
their  individuality  for  ever.  But  life  is  of  immense  importance  primarily  to  the 
individual,  secondly  to  society  at  large.  To  the  individual  it  is  the  beginning  of 
his  immortality,  given  for  the  noble  purpose  of  self-development  and  for  that  pro- 
bation from  which  he  is  to  enter  upon  the  exalted  state  of  his  blissful  eternity. 
Who  can  contemplate  a  thought  so  sublime  without  placing  the  highest  value  upon 
our  mortal  existence  ?  To  the  individual,  life  is  the  unfolding  of  his  character  ;  it 
is  the  accumulation  of  those  forces  which  enter  so  largely  into  his  destiny,  and  to 
destroy  such  a  life  is  to  interrupt  the  great  process  of  nature  and  cheat  man  of 
his  inalienable  rights.  Among  civilised  men  there  are  two  estimates  of  the  import- 
ance and  value  of  human  existence — one  of  vanity  and  contempt,  the  other  of 
dignity  and  power.  From  whatever  standpoint  human  life  is  viewed,  its  grandeur 
is  conspicuous.  The  fact  is  recognised  by  all  governments,  under  all  civilisations. 
Human  law  conceives  an  immeasurable  distance  between  the  life  of  a  man  and  that 
of  an  animal.  The  organic  law,  "Thou  shalt  not  kill,"  condemns  murder,  suicide, 
duelling,  war,  intemperance,  malice,  indifference,  and  unkindness.  The  crime  of 
homicide  consists  primarily  in  three  things  :  the  destruction  of  the  image  of  God  ; 
for  one  human  being  to  lay  his  hand  upon  another  is  to  lay  that  hand  on  the  image 
of  God,  and,  in  a  certain  sense,  upon  God  Himself.  It  is  usurpation  of  the  pre- 
rogative of  the  Sovereign  of  the  universe,  who  has  the  right  to  create  and  the  right 
to  destroy.  It  is  also  the  interruption  of  the  unfolding  of  that  individuality  to 
which  all  have  an  unquestionable  right,  and  he  who  interrupts  that  unfolding 
commits  a  crime  against  mankind.  It  is  robbing  society  of  an  individual  life, 
the  influences  of  which  might  have  gone  forth  as  so  many  beneficent  streams 
issuing  from  the  fountain  of  goodness.  Society  depends  largely  upon  its  individual 
component  parts,  out  of  which  come  public  opinion  and  public  conscience.  By  the 
protection  of  the  individual  society  reaps  the  golden  harvest  of  purity,  charity,  and 
devotion.  But  the  original  law  is  not  confined  to  homicide  ;  it  has  a  vaster  ampli- 
tude and  a  more  solemn  comprehension.  The  deaths  from  homicide  are  but  a 
fraction  of  the  whole  number  who  annually  depart  this  life.  There  is  a  looseness 
in  public  sentiment  touching  the  right  of  suicide.  It  is  a  mistake  to  suppose  that 
suicide  is  largely  from  cowardice.  The  greatest  characters  in  history  have  thus 
ended  their  existence.  There  is  such  a  thing  as  despair.  It  may  spring  from 
temperament,  sickness,  misfortune,  unbelief,  bereavement,  intemperance.  How 
vast  the  army  of  suicides  headed  by  Samson,  Saul  the  son  of  Kish,  Hannibal,  Cato, 
and  Brutus !    There  is  a  question  among  some  physiologists  of  to-day,  and  the 


138  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

question  is  coining  to  the  front  more  and  more,  whether  life  is  worth  saving  in, 
those  afflicted  with  a  chronic  disease,  who  are  beyond  the  scope  of  science,  for 
\\  hoin  there  is  no  known  restoration.  Is  it  true  science  to  perpetuate  the  life  of 
Euch  ?  May  not  the  dictates  of  reason  and  of  love  suggest  that  in  their  case  life 
should  be  permitted  to  end  in  a  superinduced  sleep,  in  the  interests  of  a  common 
humanity  ?  This  is  not  a  new  thought.  It  is  as  old  as  Plato,  who  suggested  that 
the  science  of  medicine  was  designed  only  for  those  who  have  temporary  and 
curable  ailments.  But  a  truer  science  should  place  a  higher  estimation  upon 
human  existence  and  cherish  life  until  the  last  respiration.  This  ancient  law  of 
Mount  Sinai  not  only  covers  the  extreme  cases  of  murder  and  suicide,  but  all 
causes  leading  to  premature  death.  A  blasted  life  by  dissipation  is  only  another 
form  of  self-destruction.  The  Divine  law  of  life  is  as  minute  in  its  application  as 
it  is  comprehensive  in  its  requirements.  Where  life  is  imperilled,  from  whatever 
cause,  a  refusal  to  aid  the  helpless  and  comfort  the  distressed,  when  within  the 
range  of  possibilities  to  aid  and  rescue,  the  law  condemns  such  refusal  as  violative 
of  its  benign  spirit.  The  law  makes  each  man  the  preserver  of  the  life  of  every 
other  man.  The  dictates  of  reason  and  the  precepts  of  religion  demand  that  you 
should  rescue  a  man  from  a  burning  house,  from  a  watery  grave,  from  a  state  of 
starvation.  In  its  higher  range  of  thought  it  demands  the  advancement  of  those 
sciences  which  preserve  health  and  prolong  human  existence.  There  is,  however, 
a  vaster  sweep  in  this  law  of  life,  comprehensive  of  those  sanitary  conditions  which, 
are  promotive  of  human  existence.  In  its  grander  sweep  this  beneficent  law  of  life 
includes  the  existence  of  nationalities.  The  right  of  a  nation  to  defend  itself  on 
the  principles  of  justice  tallies  with  the  right  of  the  individual  to  defend  himself. 
But  what  shall  we  say  about  those  wars  for  glory,  for  empire,  for  commerce  ?  {J.  P. 
Neioman,  D.D.)  Thou  shalt  not  kill : — Beginning  with  this  commandment,  God 
lays  down  the  rules  to  be  observed  by  men  in  relation  to  their  fellows.  To  kill,  to 
murder,  to  slaughter,  &c. ,  are  words  which  make  us  tremble.  Man's  life  is  precious 
to  him — he  gives  it  up  with  a  struggle  ;  and  God  takes  it  under  His  especial 
protection.  Man  has  been  made  in  the  image  of  God,  and  His  image  must  be 
honoured  in  every  human  life.     Notice — I.  How  this  command  is  transgressed. 

1.  In  old  catechisms  this  commandment  is  illustrated  often  by  two  pictures — the 
fulfilment  of  it  by  the  picture  of  the  good  Samaritan,  the  breaking  of  it  by  Cain 
with  the  club  with  which  he  slew  his  brother.  Thus,  whoever  acts  as  Cain  did — 
whatever  the  weapon  he  uses — transgresses  this  command  (Gen.  ix.  6).  And  it  is 
seldom  that  the  Divine  order  regarding  this  is  escaped — not  even  here  vindicated. 
A  drop  of  blood,  the  lethal  weapon,  a  footprint,  a  chance  word,  the  pangs  of 
remorse,  &c.,  will  bring  the  deed  to  light.  Blood  unjustly  shed  cries  for  vengeance  ; 
and  any  one  deprived  of  life — even  though  a  child  or  man  in  extremity — is 
murdered.  The  life  which  God  has  given  God  alone  may  take  ;  and  one  is  not 
guiltless  even  when  he  risks  his  own  life  in  the  deadly  encounter.  2.  The  com- 
mandment also  forbids  the  maiming,  wounding,  or  injuring  the  body  of  at)other. 
When  the  man  inflamed  by  drink  injures  another,  when  a  man  attacks  his  foe  in 
the  descending  darkness,  &c.,  there  also  lurks  the  spirit  of  murder.  3.  But  the 
tongue,  too,  may  wound  bitterly.  There  is  an  art  by  which,  through  insult  or 
reviling,  a  neighbour  is  deeply  wounded  and  bears  about  the  scars  for  many  a  year. 
4.  But  the  Word  of  God  requires  more.  It  requires  that  the  roots  from  whence 
those  murderous  words  or  actions  spring  should  be  torn  up  (Matt.  v.  22).  Such 
roots  are  anger,  hatred,  envy,  malignity,  revengefulness  (1  John  iii.  15,  &c.).  He 
Avho  laughs  and  is  glad  when  another  weeps  because  of  misfortune,  &c.,  has  the 
spirit  of  the  murderer  (Prov.  xxiv.  17).  Nor  must  any  take  on  themselves  the 
rewarding  of  unrighteousness  without  waiting  for  God's  time  (Rom.  xii.  19).  In 
the  spirit  of  revenge  lurks  the  spirit  of  murder.  II.  Notice  how  the  command 
IS  OBEYED.  1.  We  must  turn  away  from  the  image  of  Cain  and  look  on  that  of 
the  good  Samaritan — save  those  who  are  in  danger  of  being  murdered.  If  we  see 
one  in  danger  of  losing  life,  say  not  with  Cain,  "Am  I  my  brother's  keeper?" — 
pass  not  by  with  priest  or  Levite.  Let  us  cultivate  the  spirit  of  the  peasant  who 
saved  the  lives  of  the  bridge-keeper  and  his  family  when  the  bridge  had  fallen, 
bringing  them  in  the  light  skiff  through  the  raging  flood  and  crashing-in  drift 
safely  to  the  shore  and  then  going  his  way,  putting  aside  every  offer  of  reward. 

2.  We  must  also  help  men  in  time  of  need.  If  we  neglect  the  hungry  when  we 
have  plenty  and  refuse  to  succour  the  sick,  we  are  not  fulfilling  this  command 
(Isa.  Iviii.  7-10).  3.  But  not  only  does  God  seek  to  take  a  poisoned  root  out  of 
man's  heart  by  this  command,  but  to  implant  another  which  will  bring  forth  tliQ' 


CHAP,  v.]  DEUTERONOMY.  139 


fruit  of  love  and  mercy  (Col.  iii.  12).  4.  "We  are  to  live  in  love  and  peace  even  with 
our  enemies.  God  has  forgiven  us  much  ;  we  also  must  learn  to  forgive  our 
enemies,  &c.  "  Love  is  like  dew,"  says  the  proverb  ;  "it  falls  on  roses  and  nettles 
alike."  If  your  foe  comes  to  you  saying,  "Let  us  be  at  peace,"  he  comes  in  the 
spirit  of  this  command.  But  even  if  he  does  not  thus  come,  but  goes  forth  to  do 
what  is  unjust,  then  "heap  coals  of  fire  on  his  head"  by  gentle  forbearance;  and 
remember  ever  the  promise,  "Blessed  are  the  peacemakers,  for  they  shall  be  called 
the  children  of  God."  "They  who  turn  aside  disputing  and  striving  turn  the 
curses  into  a  blessing,"  says  the  proverb.  5.  Although  animals  are  not  made  "in 
the  image  of  God,"  yet  mercifulness  to  his  beast  is  part  of  the  adornment  of  a 
Christian  man's  character.  The  man  who  starves  or  overdrives  his  beast  sins 
against  the  spirit  of  this  command.  The  tormenter  of  animals  may  become  the 
slayer  of  men.     Let  the  spirit  of  love  reign.     {K.  H.  Caspari.) 

Ver.  18.  Neither  Shalt  thou  commit  adiUtery.— TAe  Seventh  Commandment  .-—The 
original  word  which  our  translators  restrain  to  committing  adultery  is  of  a  large 
signification,  and  comprises  all  kinds  of  uncleanness  and  lewdness.  So  that  all 
unlawful  lust  and  carnal  pleasure  is  here  forbidden,  and  we  are  enjoined  to  preserve 
chastity  in  every  kind  and  degree.  I  begin  with  the  sins  forbidden.  1.  Polygamy, 
or  having  more  wives  and  husbands  than  one  at  one  time,  is  here  condemned  ;  for 
this  is  contrary  to  the  primitive  institution  and  law  in  Gen.  ii.  24.  2.  Divorce,  as 
we  learn  from  our  Saviour's  interpretation  of  this  commandment  in  Matt,  v,  31,  32. 

3.  Incest,  that  is,  lewdness  committed  with  those  that  are  our  near  kindred.  That 
we  may  particularly  know  who  these  are,  they  are  set  down  distinctly  in  Lev.  xviii. 

4.  Fornication,  which  is  the  defiling  of  an  unmarried  woman.  5.  Adultery  is  a 
direct  sin  against  this  commandment,  and  is  the  particular  kind  of  uncleanness 
which  is  expressly  named  in  it.  This  sin  is  extremely  heinous,  because  there  is  not 
only  an  injury  done  to  the  woman,  by  setting  her  into  a  course  of  unfaithfulness 
and  even  downright  perjury,  and  thereby  hazarding  the  salvation  of  her  soul,  but 
to  the  man  also  in  whom  she  is  concerned,  by  robbing  him  of  the  incommunicable 
right  he  hath  in  his  wife.  This  proves  it  to  be  the  highest  injustice  ;  and  it  might 
be  added  that  this  injury  admits  of  no  reparation.  On  which  score  perhaps  death 
was  inflicted  on  the  adulterer  by  the  Mosaic  law  (Lev.  xx.  10).  And  other  law- 
givers, even  among  the  Pagans,  punished  this  notorious  offence  with  the  loss  of 
life.  There  are  other  lewd  practices  forbidden  by  this  commandment,  among  which 
rape,  or  ravishing  of  a  woman,  is  one.  Here  is  forbidden  voluntary  self-pollution, 
or  persons  committing  folly  alone  on  their  bodies.  For  which  kind  of  disorder 
Onan  was  punished  by  the  hand  of  God  :  the  Lord  slew  him  (Gen.  xxxviii.  10). 
Here  is  likewise  forbidden  all  immoderate  use  of  carnal  pleasure.  And  lastly,  here 
is  condemned  all  unnatural  lust,  as  sodomy  and  bestiality,  which  are  both 
mentioned  together,  and  branded  with  the  titles  of  abomination  and  confusion  in 
Lev.  xviii.  22,  23.  Thus  far  I  have  spoken  of  the  actual  sins  of  uncleanness  which 
are  comprehended  in  this  commandn;ent.  1.  This  commandment  strikes  at  all 
unclean  thoughts  and  desires.  Our  Saviour  acquaints  us  that  there  is  the  adultery 
of  the  heart  (Matt.  v.  28).  Namely,  when  the  thoughts  and  inward  inclinations  of 
the  mind  are  corrupted,  and  are  a  preparative  to  outward  defilements.  2.  There  is 
the  adultery  of  the  eye,  which  we  learn  from  the  Saviour's  exposition  of  this 
commandment_  (Matt.  v.  28),  where  looking  on  a  woman  to  lust  after  her,  because 
the  heart  or  mind  which  gives  denomination  to  all  moral  actions  is  engaged  here  ; 
and  this  it  is  which  diffuses  the  defilement  into  the  outward  senses.  3.  There  is 
the  adultery  and  uncleanness  of  the  tongue  :  for  if  wanton  looks  are  adulterous, 
then  obscene  words  are  of  the  same  nature.  "Wherefore  the  apostle  commands  the 
Colossian  Christians  to  put  away  filthy  communication  out  of  their  mouths  (Col. 
iii.  8).  As  he  had  before  left  this  prohibition  with  the  Ephesians,  "  Let  no  corrupt 
communication  proceed  out  of  your  mouth"  (Eph.  iv.  29).  And  again,  the  very 
mentioning  of  lewd  things  is  forbid  (Eph.  v.  3,  4,  12).  4.  Next,  there  is  the  adultery 
of  the  ear,  that  is,  listening  to  such  kind  of  discourse  as  is  filthy,  delighting  to  be 
entertained  with  lascivious  talk,  with  obscene  songs,  and  unchaste  poems,  with 
which  this  age  abounds.  5.  And  so  it  doth  that  of  lascivious  gestures,  and  whatso- 
ever tends  to  the  promoting  of  lust — as  lascivious  dresses,  and  all  manner  of  entice- 
ments to  unchaste  practices.  I  will  in  the  next  place  propound  the  reasons  and 
arguments  which  we  are  to  make  use  of  against  it.  And  some  of  these  are  proper 
to  Christianity  ;  that  is,  they  were  never  used  by  heathen  moralists,  but  are  to  be 
found  only  in  the  apostolical  writings  ;  as  those  three  which  we  meet  with  together 


140  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  t. 

in  1  Cor.  vi.  6,  15,  18-20.  Then  again,  there  arp  arguments  against  this  sinful 
practice,  taken  from  the  spiritual,  the  temporal,  and  the  eternal  evil  which  attends 
it.  Thus  I  have  been  all  this  time  in  pursuit  of  the  negative  part  of  this  command- 
ment. I  proceed  now  to  the  affirmative,  which  is  the  plain  reverse  of  what  hath 
been  said,  and  may  be  comprised  in  few  words.  We  are  enjoined  here  to  be  chaste 
and  pure  in  our  minds.  We  are  enjoined  likewise  to  preserve  our  bodies  pure,  and 
all  parts  of  them,  the  tongue,  the  eye,  the  countenance,  the  ear,  and  all  the  avenues 
or  organs  of  bodily  sense  of  perception.  We  are  to  take  care  that  our  deportment 
be  modest  and  grave,  and  so  well  regulated  and  ordered  that  we  discover  nothing  of 
wantonness.  Moreover,  this  commandment  requires  that  we  use  all  the  means 
and  helps  which  are  useful  in  order  to  the  preservation  of  our  chastity,  and  the 
preventing  of  uncleanness.  Sobriety  and  temperance  in  eating  and  drinking. 
Avoiding  occasions  of  provocation  to  lascivious  thoughts  or  actions.  Diligence  in 
the  calling  which  Providence  has  placed  us  in.  Solemn  resolutions  and  vows. 
A  deep  sense  and  great  dread  of  the  Almighty,  and  of  His  judgments.  All 
these  particulars  contain  in  them  the  most  sovereign  remedies  against  lust, 
and  helps  to  the  exerting  of  the  contrary  virtue.  But  there  is  one  yet  behind, 
and  that  is  this :  in  order  to  chastity  and  purity  lead  a  conjugal  life.  {J. 
Edimrds,  D.D.)  The  Seventh  Commandment : — I.  The  command.  The  command 
is  a  simple,  unqualified,  irrevocable  negative.  "Thou  shalt  not !  "  No  argument 
is  used,  no  reason  given,  because  none  is  required.  The  sin  is  of  so  destructive  and 
damning  a  nature  that  it  is  in  itself  sufficient  cause  for  the  stern  forbidding.  1.  It 
is  a  sin  against  the  individual.  This  needs  no  proof.  Nature  visits  the  sin  with 
the  heaviest  penalties  in  every  department  of  the  complex  being  of  man.  The 
terrible  results  of  unchaste  life  in  the  purely  physical  realm  are  such  as  cannot  be 
named  here.  Every  man  of  science  will  bear  his  testimony  to  the  awful  demand  that 
nature  makes  for  purity,  and  will  assert  that  she  has  no  pity  for  the  unclean.  2.  It 
is  a  sin  against  the  family.  The  sacredness  of  motherhood  and  childhood,  and 
the  demands  they  make  upon  the  care  and  thought  of  all,  are  secjared  and  met  in 
the  Divine  institution  of  marriage.  Wherever  the  rights  of  the  marriage  relation- 
ship are  violated  and  set  aside,  God's  provision  for  both  is  broken  down,  and  the 
disastrous  result  of  the  breakdown  of  the  family  circle  and  entity  results.  When 
the  family  is  destroyed  as  a  perfect  whole  by  the  sin  of  unchastity,  an  incalculable 
harm  is  done  to  the  children.  There  is  no  more  heart-breaking  announcement  in 
the  newspapers  than  that  which  declares  that  in  the  granting  of  a  decree  nisi,  the 
charge  of  the  children  has  been  given  to  one  parent.  Therein  lies  the  destruction 
of  the  family  after  the  Divine  pattern,  and  the  sin  that  leads  to  it  is  indeed  terrible 
for  this  reason  also.  3.  It  is  a  sin  against  society.  Society  is  a  union  of  families. 
Every  attempt  to  create  society  upon  any  other  basis  is  wicked,  and  ends  in  disaster. 
The  sin  which  blights  the  marriage  relation  and  destroys  the  family  is  the  enemy 
of  all  true  socialism.  All  the  things  that  may  be  had  in  common  can  only  so  be 
shared,  as  it  is  for  ever  understood  that  communism  in  the  realm  of  sex  is  the  most 
damnable  sin  against  the  commonwealth.  4.  It  is  a  sin  against  the  nation.  The 
greatness  of  a  people  depends  upon  the  purity  and  strength  of  the  people,  and  in 
every  nation  where  the  marriage  relation  is  violated  with  impunity  the  virus  of 
death  is  surely  and  certainly  at  work.  5.  It  is  a  sin  against  the  race.  No  man  can 
deny  his  accountability  for  a  share  in  the  development  or  destruction  of  the  race. 
The  solidarity  of  humanity  is  more  than  a  dream  of  visionaries.  It  is  an  indisput- 
able fact.  Every  life  is  contributing  its  quota  of  force  to  the  forces  that  make  or 
mar.  All  are  hindering  or  hastening  the  perfect  day.  The  crime  of  prolonging 
sorrow  and  agony  lies  at  the  door  of  every  impure  human  being.  6.  It  is  a  sin 
against  the  universe.  The  life  of  the  universe  is  love.  The  origin  of  all  is  love, 
for  "God  is  love."  The  propagation  of  all  is  love.  From  the  highest  form,  that 
of  the  unity  of  the  marriage  relation,  through  all  the  lower  spaces  of  action,  love  is 
the  law  of  growth.  The  lair  of  the  wild  beast  is  fiercely  guarded  by  the  love  that 
holds  it  sacred.  The  nesting  of  the  birds  is  token  of  the  impulse  of  the  love-life 
that  throbs  through  all  creation.  The  bee  that  carries  the  pollen  from  flower  to 
flower  is  the  messenger  of  the  same  instinct.  Love  is  everywhere.  The  sin  of 
lustful  unchastity  is  the  violation  of  love,  blighting  and  destroying  it.  7.  It  is  a 
sin  against  God.  (Rev.  xxi.  8.)  11.  Application  of  the  command  to-day. 
There  are  certain  signs  of  the  times  which  point  to  the  necessity  for  a  re-statement 
of  this  commandment.  The  first  of  these  is  the  tendency,  which  is  only  too  appar- 
ent, to  loosen  the  binding  nature  of  the  marriage  tie.  There  seems  to  be  an 
increasingly  popular  notion  that  the  marriage  relation  is  a  civil  one  only.     This  ia 


CHAP,  v.]  DEUTERONOMY.  141 

a  vital  error.  It  is  wholly  Divine.  Another  sign  of  the  times  in  this  direction  is 
the  filthy  fiction  which  has  polluted  the  realm  of  literature  in  recent  years,  fiction 
in  which  the  marriage  relation  is  treated  with  amused  pity,  and  whoremongers  and 
adulterers  are  pitied  and  excused,  if  not  defended.  Then,  again,  is  there  not  a 
growing  danger  of  ministering  to  impurity  in  the  multiplication  on  every  hand  of 
callings  for  women  which  throw  them  among  men  and  give  them  wages  which  are 
insuflftcient  ?  Then  how  one  would  thank  God  if  some  word  that  was  not  prudish  or 
narrow  might  be  spoken  to  the  women  of  this  country  about  their  dress.  Thp  half- 
dress  of  the  society  woman  is  surely  a  sign  of  reversion  to  type,  and  has  in  it  the 
pandering  to  animalism  which  has  for  ages  been  the  curse  of  the  marriage  relation. 
And  yet  once  more.  There  is  an  anomaly  that  dies  hard  in  the  distinction  that  is 
being  made  between  the  guilt  of  man  and  woman  in  this  matter  of  unchastity. 
"When  General  Booth  issued  that  remarkable  book,  Darkest  England^  he  said,  in 
defence  of  his  using  the  word  "fornication,"  "Why  not  say  [prostitution ?  For 
this  reason :  prostitution  is  a  word  applied  to  one  half  of  the  vice,  and  that  the 
most  pitiable.  Fornication  hits  both  sinners  alike."  The  importance  of  that  state- 
ment cannot  be  over-estimated.  Until  the  man  who  sins  is  branded  with  as  deep 
a  scar  as  is  the  woman,  that  public  opinion  which  shields  him  is  guilty  of  com- 
plicity with  this  vice  which  is  deadly  and  damning.  III.  The  Christian  ethic. 
After  all  that  has  been  said,  there  yet  remains  the  most  searching,  withering  words 
of  all  to  repeat.  They  fell  from  the  lips  of  the  Incarnate  Purity  in  that  manifesto 
of  His  kingdom  which  He  gave  to  His  disciples  during  the  days  of  His  sojourn  on 
the  earth.  '*  I  say  unto  you,  that  every  one  that  looketh  on  a  woman  to  lust  afier 
her  hath  committed  adultery  with  her  already  in  his  heart,"  &c.  (Matt.  v.  28-32.) 
{G.  Camjjhell  Morgan. )  The  Seventh  Commandment: — As  we  are  men,  and  so  the  one 
part  of  our  composition  is  body,  we  have  all  animal  appetites  in  common  with  other 
sensitive  creatures  ;  hunger,  thirst,  and  the  like,  are  common  to  us  with  all  the 
animal  world.  But  then,  seeing  we  are  reasonable  beings  also,  and  should  be 
religious,  God  will  have  these  animal  appetites  kept  in  due  subjection,  and  directed 
according  to  the  measures  He  has  prescribed  for  that  purpose  :  that  is  to  say,  no 
animal  appetite  must  be  allowed  to  usurp  a  place  that  does  not  belong  to  it,  but 
must  be  kept  within  such  bounds,  and  ordered  by  such  rules  as  God  hath  set  it. 
And  so  it  is  regarding  that  animal  appetite  more  specially  designed  in  this  command- 
ment. I.  It  requires  us  to  be  chaste.  1.  Inward  chastity  is  keeping  the  heart  for 
God,  not  sufferiijg  it  to  be  defiled  by  any  unchaste  and  filthy  delights.  2.  Chastity 
is  also  outward,  expressive  of  that  purity  of  heart  which  lodges  within.  II.  Tem  per- 
ANCE  is  the  other  duty  required  by  this  commandment.  By  temperance  is  meant 
a  holy  moderation  concerning  meat,  drink,  sleep,  and  relaxation.  1.  Intemperance 
is  prohibited  for  its  own  sake.  2.  Intemperance  is  not  only  prohibited  as  it  is 
sinful  in  itself,  but  also  as  it  gives  occasion  to  and  nourishes  lust.  And  this  a  life 
of  indolence  does :  it  is  the  very  food  of  lust  (Ezek.  xvi.  49,  50  ;  Jer.  v.  7,  8). 
Thus  what  made  the  Sodomites  so  wanton  but  fulness  of  bread  ?  What  made  Lot 
commit  such  dreadful  incest  with  his  own  daughters  but  drunkenness  ?  (Gen.  xix. 
81-36.)  Or  what  filled  David,  or  his  son  Amnon  after  him,  with  so  much  lust  but 
a  fit  of  sloth  and  idleness  ?  (2  Sara.  xi.  2,  xiii.  1-14.)  "  I  keep  under  my  body, 
and  bring  it  into  subjection,"  saith  St.  Paul  (1  Cor.  ix.  27).  Well,  and  liow  did 
he  do  this  ?  1.  Be  moderate  in  the  use  of  meats  and  drinks,  and,  as  need  is,  give 
yourselves  to  fasting  and  abstinence.  2.  Be  diligent  in  your  calling.  Labour  keeps 
the  mind  employed,  and  the  body  under ;  whereas  sloth  both  genders  lust  and 
gives  it  opportunity.  3.  We  must  be  aware  of  the  recreations  we  use,  and  how  we 
use  them.  (S.  Walker,  B.A.)  The  Seventh  Commandment: — I.  The  aggrava- 
tions, MORE  especially,  OF  THE  SINS  OF  FORNICATION  AND  ADULTERY  ;  which 
may  also  with  just  reason  be  applied  to  all  other  unnatural  lusts.  1.  They  are 
opposite  to  sanctification,  even  as  darkness  is  to  light,  hell  to  heaven.  2.  These 
sins  are  inconsistent  with  that  relation  we  pretend  to  stand  in  to  Christ  as  members 
of  His  Body,  inasmuch  as  we  join  ourselves  in  a  confederacy  with  His  profligate 
enemies.  3.  They  bring  with  them  many  other  sins,  as  they  tend  to  vitiate  the 
affections,  deprave  the  mind,  defile  the  conscience,  and  provoke  God  to  give  persons 
up  to  spiritual  judgments,  which  will  end  in  their  running  into  all  excess  of  riot. 
II._  The  OCCASIONS  of  these  sins,  to  be  avoided  by  those  who  would  not  break 
this  commandment ;  and  these  are — 1.  Intemperance,  or  excess  in  eating  or  drink- 
ing (Gen,  xix.  31).  2.  Idleness,  consisting  either  in  the  neglect  of  business,  of 
indulgincr  to  much  sleep,  which  occasions  many  temptations  (2  Sam.  xi.  1,  2). 
3.  Pride  in  apparel,  or  other  ornaments,  beyond  the  bounds  of  modesty  (Isa.  iii.  16, 


142  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  t. 

&c. ;  2  Pet.  ii.  7,  8).  4.  Keeping  evil  company  (Prov.  vi.  27,  32).  III.  As  for  the 
REMEDIES  AGAINST  IT,  these  are  :  an  exercising  a  constant  watchfulness  against  all 
temptations  thereunto ;  avoiding  all  conversation  with  those  men  or  books  which 
tend  to  corrupt  the  mind,  and  fill  it  with  levity,  under  a  pretence  of  improving 
it ;  but  more  especially  a  retaining  a  constant  sense  of  God's  all -seeing  eye.  His 
infinite  purity  and  vindictive  justice  (Gen.  xxxix.  9).  [Thomas  ' Ridglet,  D.D.) 
Neither  shall  thou  commit  adultery : — In  the  Sixth  Commandment  God  takes  under 
His  protection  the  body  and  life  of  man.  But  a  man  should  also  love  his  wife 
as  himself,  &c.  (Eph.  v.).  Here,  then,  God  takes  the  married  spouse  under  His 
protecting  care,  and  honours  marriage  ;  and  as  the  enemy  of  souls  calls  up  some 
passion  which  militates  against  each  of  these  commands,  against  this  he  sends  the 
serpent  of  the  lust  of  the  flesh  which  creeps  softly  into  men's  hearts.  More,  he 
turns  the  breaking  of  this  command  into  a  jest — a  jest  likely  to  end  where  the 
laughter  is  turned  into  "weeping  and  gnashing  of  teeth."     Consider — I.  Ho\y  we 

MAY   RIGHTLY   REGARD   THE   MARRIED   ESTATE.       1.  ThoSC  iu  OUr  day  who  deSire   to 

overturn  the  Divine  order  of  things  begin  by  attacking  Christian  marriage.  Their 
aim  is  so  clearly  evidenced  that  none  can  mistake  it.  But  there  are  others,  even  in 
the  Christian  Church,  who,  knowingly  or  not,  support  this  outrage  by  seeking  to 
make  marriage  an  entirely  civil  contract.  God  forces  His  blessings  on  none  ;  but 
Christians  will  not  consider  this  a  proper  view  of  marriage.  They  will  regard  it  as 
a  Divine  order  (Gen.  ii.  18),  in  which  man  and  wife  are  bound  in  Him  in  love  and 
faithfulness  till  death  shall  separate  them.  2.  Marriage  is  to  be  regarded  as  an 
holy  estate,  and  blessed.  The  children  of  parents  who  thus  think  of  marriage  will 
rise  and  call  them  blessed,  whilst  men  shrink  from  the  adulterers  as  promise- 
breakers,  perjurers,  faithless ;  and  if  any  one  thinks  there  is  not  much  in  an 
adulterous  act,  if  it  be  not  known,  he  or  she  acts  like  a  heathen  and  despises  this 
Divine  order.  3.  It  sometimes  happens  that  where  a  time  of  wickedness  in  a 
nation  has  been  followed  by  a  period  of  punishment  it  is  found  that  the  downward 
course  was  begun  by  a  disregard  of  the  honour  of  marriage,  e.g.,  the  Greek  and 
Roman  people,  and  France  before  the  Revolution.  Where  marriage  is  no  more 
honoured  judgment  is  near  at  hand.  Then  unchastity  becomes  shameless  ;  the 
number  of  children  bom  out  of  wedlock  increases;  sin,  shame,  disorder,  &c., 
prevail,  and  judgment  at  last  descends  (Heb.  xiii.  4).  II.  How  shall  men  best 
ARRANGE  FOR  THE  MARRIED  STATE  ?  1.  Our  forefathers  Said  three  things  were 
necessary — to  begin  well,  continue  well,  end  well.  How  shall  we  begin  well  ? 
The  proverb  says,  "Marriages  are  made  in  heaven";  and  certainly  to  begin  well 
we  must  begin  with  God.  What  Eliezer  of  Damascus  did  for  his  master's  son  we 
must  each  do  ourselves — begin  with  God.  If  we  do  not,  then  there  is  little  wonder 
if  the  proverb  comes  true,  "Marry  in  haste,  repent  at  leisure."  Begin  with  the 
wise  counsel  of  Christian  parents  also.  2.  How  shall  men  best  continue  in  this 
state  ?  Let  each  love  and  honour  his  (or  her)  partner  in  life  (Eph.  v.  28,  29).  In 
this  relationship  we  need  to  have  wisdom,  self-denial,  patience,  forbearance,  sub- 
mission ;  but  all  these  are  comprehended  in  love.  But  each  must  also  honour  the 
other.  Where  such  honour  is  there  will  be  love — as  Christ  loved  the  Church. 
3.  How  shall  men  end  the  married  state  best?  When  they  say,  "We  shall 
continue  it  in  God  until  He  shall  end  it  in  death."  There  is  a  way  by  which 
marriage  can  be  dissolved  before  death — the  only  way — through  adultery.  This 
really  disannuls  man-iage  in  the  very  fact ;  and  even  if  it  be  hidden,  God  Himself 
will  take  it  in  hand  (Heb.  xiii.  4).  Many  an  adulteress  or  adulterer  goes  abroad 
with  bold  forehead  and  bids  defiance  to  the  world.  But  Scripture  simply  places 
them  with  the  godless,  thieves,  &c.,  and  says  such  shall  not  inherit  the  kingdom 

of  God.      III.  How  SHALL  men  best  prepare  THEMSELVES  FOR  ENTRANCE  ON  THE 

MARRIED  STATE  ?  1.  We  must  fear  and  love  God,  so  that  we  may  live  virtuously 
and  chastely  in  word  and  deed.  Remember  that  your  body  is  the  temple  of  the 
Holy  Ghost.  Young  men  and  women  should  seek  to  enter  this  state  in  an 
imblemished  manhood  and  womanhood.  Avoid  unchaste  thoughts,  words,  looks, 
unchaste  songs  or  jests,  &c.  The  heart  and  thoughts  should  be  clean.  "Blessed 
are  the  pure  in  heart."  2.  "There  are  two  things  unheard  of  in  the  world,"  said 
a  famous  pious  man,  "unrewarded  virtue  and  unpunished  vice."  Young  men  and 
maidens,  flee  occasions  to  vice.  "Where  wine  goes  in  shame  goes  out,"  &c. 
Avoid  evil  companionship.  "Better  alone  than  in  bad  company."  Opportunity 
makes  thieves ;  so,  too,  it  makes  adulterers.  Avoid  those  whose  tongues  are 
unchaste.  Often  a  word  is  like  a  spark  to  powder.  "If  a  worm  is  at  the  heart 
the  tree  will  fall."     Do  not  be  ashamed  of  shamefacedness.     "If  you  blush  it  is 


CHAP,  v.]  DEUTERONOMY.  143 

God  warning  you."  "Shame  prevents  disgrace."  Flee  from  idleness.  It  is  a 
root  of  much  evil.  Guard  your  youth.  Virtue  and  a  good  name  are  a  rich  dowry 
to  which  God  will  add  much  interest.  [K.  H.  Caspari.)  The  crime  of  adultery : 
— When  I  look,  he  said,  at  the  iniquities  which  abound  in  the  present  day  in  our 
cities,  I  feel  the  time  has  come  to  cry  aloud  and  spare  not.  If  it  be  necessary  for 
men  to  live  in  adultery,  and  if  they  must  go  to  the  house  of  the  harlot,  I  don't 
know  a  quicker  way  down  to  hell  than  that  is.  Any  man  who  can  give  up  his 
virtue,  and  turn  away  from  a  home  of  purity,  and  stoop  so  low  as  to  go  the  way  of 
the  strange  woman,  his  ruin  will  be  sure  and  very  quick.  How  many  a  young  man 
who  follows  her  path  goes  down  quicker  than  that  !  He  must  have  money,  and  he 
soon  begins  by  robbing  his  employer,  as  one  crime  leads  to  another,  and  at  last  his 
conscience  becomes  so  seared  that  he  tries  to  make  it  out  to  be  a  necessity.  But 
does  God  make  a  mistake  when  He  says,  "  Thou  shalt  not  commit  adultery,"  and 
excuse  you  because  you  cannot  control  your  passions  ?  It  may  be  that  you  ruin 
some  man's  daughter  or  wife  :  then  some  man  will  probably  ruin  yours  by  and  by. 
There  was  one  place  in  America  where  I  touched  upon  this  sin  ;  and  a  man  of 
violent  temper  said  if  his  wife  had  been  there  she  would  have  slapped  me  in  the 
face.  But  within  a  week  it  transpired  that  he  was  actually  living  with  the  wife  of 
another.  Oh,  adulterer !  what  will  you  do  when  God  shall  bring  you  into  judg- 
ment ?  The  sins  committed  in  darkness  and  in  secret  He  will  bring  unto  light. 
Do  not,  therefore,  believe  that  God  will  not  bring  you  into  judgment,  for  it  is  only 
a  question  of  weeks  or  months,  or  at  most  a  few  short  years.  {D.  L.  Moody.) 
An  adulterer's  miserable  end : — There  has  recently  died  in  the  South  of  England  a 
captain  who  in  years  past  was  engaged  in  watching  the  coast  of  Africa  in  order 
to  the  stoppage  of  the  slave  trade.  He  had  been  successful  in  capturing  several 
cargoes  of  slaves.  These,  consisting  largely  of  young  African  girls,  were  taken  on 
board  the  captain's  vessel.  For  liberty  !  Yes  ;  so  it  was  heralded  to  the  world — 
but  according  to  the  commander's  own  confession,  for  "shameful  treatment  in  his 
cabin."  A  gentleman  well  known  thus  describes  the  captain's  confession  at  the 
close  of  his  shameful  life  :  "  I  am  afraid  to  be  alone  at  night.  The  faces  of  those 
black  girls,  with  their  eyes  of  fire  and  shrieks  of  despair,  fill  my  room  and  my 
vision."  And  in  this  miserable  state  he  died.  Who  need  affect  surprise  that  there 
is  a  hell  to  localise  such  monsters  in  ?  These  awful  confessions  were  made  in 
the  vain  attempt  to  alleviate  the  fearful  agony  of  a  conscience  whose  torment 
anticipated  the  coming  judgment  before  the  bar  of  Christ.  {Christian  Herald.) 
Purity  in  literature : — Of  late  years,  I  am  afraid,  there  has  been  a  distinct  retro- 
gression in  the  conscience  of  the  nation,  so  far  as  national  purity  is  concerned.  For 
example,  some  of  the  novels  published  to-day  deal  largely,  if  not  entirely,  with 
subjects  of  which  no  pure-minded  man  or  woman  ever  speaks.  Not  long  ago  a 
certain  novel  was  issued  from  the  press  that  was  as  poisonous  in  its  effects  on  the 
.soul  as  sewer-gas  is  on  the  })ody.  It  was  one  of  those  books,  as  Mr.  Lowell  once 
said,  which  if  read  make  you  feel  that  you  need  to  be  sprinkled  with  some  disinfect- 
ing fluid  in  order  to  get  rid  of  the  infection.  Some  years  ago  a  distinguished  public 
man  said  that  when  he  was  a  boy  at  one  of  our  public  schools  he  had  put  into  hia 
hand  by  an  evil  companion  a  bad  book,  and  that  for  years  after  reading  it  he  could 
not  get  rid  of  the  stain  it  had  left  on  his  mind.  It  is  impossible  to  exaggerate  the 
evil  done  by  such  an  unclean  publication.  *'  Art  for  art's  sake  "  is  their  watchword, 
and  the  result  of  this  debased  conception  is  works  which  are  not  literature  and  not 
art,  which  smell  of  the  sewer,  and  are  only  fit  to  be  burned.  The  man  who  writes  a 
book  that  incites  to  impure  thought  is  on  the  same  moral  level  as  the  man  who 
makes  adultery  easy.  It  tends  by  a  swift  and  easy  path  to  the  violation  of  this 
Seventh  Commandment.     [O.  S.  Barrett,  D.D.) 

Ver.  19.  Neither  shalt  thou  steal. — The  Eighth  Commandment: — I  will  consider 
the  negative  and,  secondly,  the  positive  part  of  the  commandment.  For  the  first, 
the  negative  part,  to  wit,  what  is  forbidden  here,  we  are  to  know  that  it  extends  to 
ourselves  as  well  as  to  our  neighbours.  I  begin  with  the  former.  We  are  forbid 
to  wrong  ourselves  as  to  our  goods  and  possessions.  We  are  to  do  nothing  that 
will  impair  our  own  estates  and  livelihood.  Wherefore  one  main  thing  disallowed 
of  in  this  commandment,  as  it  respects  ourselves,  is  living  without  a  calling,  or 
wholly  neglecting  our  calling,  and  living  in  idleness  (Prov.  xix.  15).  Idleness  is 
the  way  to  beggary  ;  and  this  is  the  way  to  that  theft  which  injures  others. 
Whence  the  Hebrew  ministers  say,  "  He  that  brings  not  up  his  son  to  some  lawful 
calling  and  employment  teaches  him  to  steal."     Idleness  naturally  disposes  men  to 


144  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  v: 

robbery.  Those  that  work  not  steal  from  others.  Drones  filch  honey  from  the 
bees  who  take  pains  for  it.  Again,  a  man  is  a  thief  to  himself  by  niggardli- 
ness and  denying  himself  those  things  which  are  fitting  for  his  maintenance, 
though  God  has  given  him  great  abundance.  But  by  being  penurious  he  deprives 
himself  of  the  comfort  which  he  might  take  in  the  enjoyment  of  them.  This  is 
self- felony.  Others  are  guilty  of  this  by  a  contrary  extreme,  that  is,  wastefulness 
and  prodigality.  They  steal  from  themselves  by  being  lavish  above  their  income. 
But  this  commandment  doth  more  signally  respect  our  dealings  with  our  neigh- 
hours,  and  therefore  I  will  chiefly  insist  on  it  under  that  consideration,  and  show 
what  sins  are  forbidden  by  it.  To  begin  with  the  lowest  instance  of  stealing,  here 
is  forbid  covetousness,  that  is,  an  unlawful  desiring  of  other  men's  goods  and 
possessions.  This  is  a  degree  of  theft,  or  an  immediate  tendency  to  it.  But 
actual  stealing  is  that  which  this  commandment  chiefly  strikes  at,  and  of  that  I 
shall  speak  next.  It  is  a  taking  away  that  which  is  none  of  ours.  Or  more  fully 
thus,  it  is  an  unjust  taking  away  or  detaining  from  any  man  what  is  his  proper 
goods,  either  without  his  consent  or  without  the  warrant  of  some  superior 
authority.  This  is  the  true  notion  of  theft,  and  it  is  the  sin  here  condemned. 
This  is  either  open  or  secret ;  the  former  is  called  robbery,  which  is  an  open  and 
violent  taking  away  of  another's  goods,  as  when  one  on  the  highway  with  force  of 
weapons  doth  this.  The  other  sort  of  theft,  called  by  us  larceny,  is  taking  away 
privily  from  another  that  which  is  his  without  his  knowledge  or  in  his  absence. 
These  are  downright  thieves  ;  but  there  are  several  other  ways  of  defrauding  our 
neighbours,  as  encroaching  on  our  neighbours'  lands,  called,  in  the  Mosaic  law, 
removing  the  landmarks,  which  were  ever  esteemed  inviolable,  even  among  the 
Gentiles.  Likewise  all  oppresf<ion  and  extortion  and  screwing  of  our  neighbours  in 
any  kind  whatsoever  is  here  forbid.  Yea,  denying  of  alms  to  those  that  are  really 
in  want  is  a  sort  of  thievery,  for  we  are  not  absolute  proj^rietors  of  what  we  have, 
but  are  stewards,  and  therefore  we  are  obliged  to  dispense  some  part  of  that  we  have 
to  our  brethren  that  are  in  want.  If  we  do  otherwise,  and  show  ouiselves  hard- 
hearted to  our  distressed  neighbours,  we  rob  them  of  their  right,  we  detain  from 
them  what  is  their  due.  I  might  reckon  ingratitude  also  among  the  other 
instances  of  defrauding  others,  for  we  are  bound  to  show  ourselves  thankful  to 
those  who  have  done  us  kindnesses.  And  as  there  is  injustice  done  to  single 
persons,  so  likewise  to  the  public,  for  there  is  a  public  right  in  which  the  whole 
community  is  concerned.  And  in  the  imperial  law,  and  so,  indeed,  in  the  law  of 
nature,  it  is  commended  to  the  care  of  all  that  the  commonwealth  suffer  no 
detriment.  And  the  good  of  the  community  is  to  be  preferred  to  our  own  private 
profit.  Yea,  indeed,  these  two  may  be  said  to  be  joined  in  one,  for  our  own  interest 
is  involved  in  that  of  the  public.  When  the  community  is  wronged,  every  indi- 
vidual person  feels  the  effects  of  it,  more  or  less.  Unto  the  things  forbidden  by  this 
commandment  are  to  be  reduced  all  cheats  and  circumventions,  all  articles  of 
tricking  and  imposing  upon  others.  There  are  three  particulars  more  behind, 
namely — 1.  First,  theft  or  deceit  in  buying  and  selling,  in  trading  and  mer- 
chandising, is  here  forbid.  The  buyer  is  guilty  of  deceit  when  he  knows  the 
condition,  use,  and  advantage  of  what  he  buys  better  than  he  that  sells  it,  and  yet 
cunningly  dissembles  it,  and  thereby  purchases  it  at  a  cheaper  rate  than  it  is 
worth.  The  seller  also  is  guilty  of  theft  when  (1)  he  obtrudes  upon  the  buyer  bad 
wares  instead  of  good,  or  (2)  he  takes  an  unreasonable  price  for  them  that  are  good. 
I  might  add,  and  that  most  truly,  that  as  there  is  a  deceitfulness  and  theft  in  over- 
rating what  is  exposed  to  sale,  so  there  is  in  selling  of  commodities  at  too  low  a 
rate.  He  that  doth  this  not  only  defrauds  himself  by  undervaluing  his  goods,  but 
he  defrauds  others  of  the  same  calling  by  getting  away  their  custom.  2.  Next  I 
am  to  speak  of  sacrilege,  which  is  a  theft  of  another  and  a  higher  kind,  for  it  is 
robbing  of  God,  and  impairing  or  alienating  of  what  is  sacred  and  separated  to 
holy  uses.  The  off"ence  of  sacrilege  reaches  to  places,  times,  persons,  and  things. 
I  proceed  now  to  the  affirmative  part  of  the  commandment,  namely,  what  is 
required  of  us.  This  part,  as  well  as  the  other,  hath  respect  both  to  ourselves  and 
to  others.  1.  First,  it  concerns  ourselves.  We  are  obliged  by  virtue  of  this  com- 
mandment to  do  ourselves  right,  to  get  and  preserve  such  worldly  goods  as  are 
for  our  convenience  and  welfare.  We  are  to  be  content  with  our  own,  and  not  to 
covet  other  men's  estates.  We  are  to  be  moderate  and  prudent  in  our  expenses. 
On  the  other  hand,  we  are  to  take  care  that  we  be  employed  in  some  lawful 
business  and  honest  calling.  2.  But,  secondly,  our  duty  enjoined  in  this  com- 
mandment hath  respect  to  our  neighbours,  and  that  I  am  next  to  consider.     We 


CHAP,  v.]  DEUTERONOMY.  145 

must  suffer  them  to  enjoy  their  wealth  and  estate,  and  we  must  help  them  in  it. 
This  is  a  general  description  of  that  justice  and  righteousness  towards  men  which 
this  commandment  requires.  Before  I  proceed  to  particulars,  I  will  show  what  is 
the  spring  and  root  of  this  righteousness,  what  is  the  great  rule  and  standard  of  it, 
and  I  will  endeavour  to  illustrate  it  by  propounding  some  instances.  Without 
doubt  the  great  and  standing  rule,  as  well  as  spring,  of  justice  towards  men  is 
that  command  of  our  Saviour,  "  All  things  whatsoever  ye  would  that  men  should 
do  unto  you,  do  ye  even  so  to  them"  (Matt,  xii.),  which  is  thus  expressed  in 
Luke  vi.  31,  **  As  ye  would  that  men  should  do  to  you,  do  ye  also  to  them  like- 
wise." I  come  now  to  the  particular  acts  of  justice  and  righteousness  which  are 
required  in  this  part  of  the  Decalogue.  We  are  enjoined  here  to  be  true,  just,  and 
exact  in  our  traffic  and  commerce.  There  ought  to  be  great  integrity  in  making  of 
contracts,  and  as  great  in  keeping  them.  Particularly  in  buying  and  selling  there 
ought  to  be  great  faithfulness  and  sincerity.  There  must  always  be  a  just  proportion 
between  the  price  and  the  thing  sold.  This  is  justice,  and  this  is  religion,  and 
they  both  go  together.  To  which  purpose  it  is  observable  that,  according  to 
Moses'  law,  the  standards  of  all  weights  and  measures  were  kept  in  the  sanctuary, 
and  it  was  part  of  the  priest's  work  to  oversee  these  (1  Chron.  xxiii.  29),  which 
shows  that  we  ought  to  use  great  fidelity  in  our  dealings  and  bargains,  and  to 
transact  them  out  of  conscience  and  a  sense  of  our  religion  which  obliges  us  to  it. 
Again,  this  commandment  requires  that  we  show  ourselves  just  and  upright  in 
paying  our  debts.  Further,  this  requires  of  us  to  make  satisfaction  for  injuries, 
to  repair  all  hurts  and  wrongs,  to  restore  what  was  unjustly  taken  from  others. 
Examples  of  this  are  Jacob  and  his  sons  (Gen.  xliii.  12,  21),  Samuel  (1  Sam.  xii.  3), 
Zaccheus  (Luke  xix.  8).  Restitution  is  an  inseparable  ingredient  of  justice,  for  this 
bids  us  give  to  every  one  his  own.  We  are  obliged  by  the  laws  of  justice  and 
righteousness  to  be  grateful  to  our  benefactors,  to  acknowledge  their  courtesies,  to 
pray  for  them,  and  to  make  returns  as  our  condition  will  permit.  By  the  same 
law  of  justice  we  ought  to  relieve  the  poor,  to  supply  the  wants  and  necessities  of 
those  that  are  in  distress.  The  same  commandment  that  forbids  theft  enjoins 
charity  and  beneficence.  I  may  add  that  justice  extends  even  to  the  dead.  To  do 
the  dead  right,  as  well  as  the  living,  is  an  act  of  religion ;  and  accordingly 
executors  and  those  that  are  left  to  see  the  will  of  the  deceased  performed  ought  to 
act  in  this  affair  with  a  good  conscience  and  to  do  what  is  just.  Besides  justice 
to  single  persons,  there  is  also  the  same  due  to  the  community,  for  man  is  made 
for  society,  and  calculated  for  converse  and  friendship.  To  this  affirmative  part 
belongs  also  equity,  which  mitigates  the  rigour  of  severe  justice  and  tempers  it 
with  benignity.  The  office  of  this  virtue  is  to  exact  of  others  less  than  we  might, 
for  the  sake  of  peace,  and  to  yield  to  them  more  than  they  could  look  for,  and  that 
for  the  same  reason,  namely,  to  prevent  long  disputes  and  to  maintain  peace.  To 
what  hath  been  said  this  must  be  added,  that  some  people  are  more  particularly 
concerned  in  this  commandment,  for  though  all  are  to  observe  the  rules  of  justice, 
yet  this  is  more  especially  incumbent  on  those  who  are  in  places  of  magistracy. 
\j.  Edwards,  D.D.)  Desiring  to  live  honestly  in  all  things: — This  word  implies 
that  it  is  right  to  own  property  ;  that  it  is  perfectly  just  and  legitimate  for  one  to 
possess  goods  to  which  no  one  else  can  lay  claim.  It  is  natural  to  desire  to  possess 
property,  to  have  some  "portion  of  goods "  you  can  call  your  own.  I  almost  think 
that  the  gratification  and  pleasure  with  which  a  little  child  finds  a  pocket  in  his  new 
dress  are  rooted  in  this  instinctive  desire  of  possession.  We  may  speak  of  man's 
labour  and  ingenuity,  the  will  of  God,  and  the  law  of  the  land,  as  the  grounds  of 
right  to  property.  That  such  a  right  exists  few  will  deny,  and  there  are  many 
advantages  resulting  from  it.  As  Paley  says,  "  It  increases  the  produce  of  the  earth. 
The  earth,  in  climates  like  ours,  produces  little  without  cultivation,  and  none  would 
be  found  willing  to  cultivate  the  ground  if  others  were  to  be  admitted  to  an  equal  share 
of  the  produce.  It  prevents  contests.  War  and  waste,  tumult  and  confusion,  must  be 
unavoidable  and  eternal  where  there  is  not  enough  for  all,  and  where  there  are  no 
rules  to  adjust  the  division.  It  improves  the  conveniency  of  living.  This  it  does  in 
tw©  ways.  It  enables  mankind  to  divide  themselves  into  distinct  professions,  which 
is  impossible  unless  a  man  can  exchange  the  productions  of  his  own  art  for  what 
he  wants  from  others,  and  exchange  implies  property.  Much  of  the  advantage  of 
civilised  over  savage  life  depends  upon  this.  When  a  man  is  from  necessity  his  own 
tailor,  tent-maker,  carpenter,  cook,  huntsman,  and  fisherman,  it  is  not  probable  that 
he  will  be  expert  at  any  of  his  callings.  Hence  the  rude  habitations,  furniture, 
clothing,  and  implements  of  savages,  and  the  tedious  length  of  time  which  all  their 

10 


146  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  r, 

operations  require.     It  likewise  encourages  those  arts  by  which  the  accommodationa 
of  human  life  are  supplied,  by  appropriating  to  the  artist  the  benefit  of  his  dis- 
coveries and  improvements,   without  which  appropriation  ingenuity  will  never  be 
exerted  with  effect."     But  while  the  institution  of  property  has  its  advantages,  the 
vast  inequality  in  the  social  conditions  of  men  carries  with  it  many  disadvantages, 
and  is  the  source  of  much  evil  and  misery.     Hence  the  c^  for  communism,  the 
social  theories  that  have  been  propounded,  the  destructive  forces  that  are  secretly 
and  ceaselessly  working  in  Russia,  and  Germany,  and  France.    And  many  who  have 
not  fallen  into  open  crime  are  ready  to  declare  war  against  society.     They  ask.  Why 
are  we  compelled  to  toil  like  slaves,  while  others  are  rolling  in  wealth,  and  spending 
it  on  their  amusements  and  lusts  ?    Why  does  Lazarus  beg  at  the  gate  and  Dives 
feast  in  the  palace  ?    Is  it  the  ordination  of  God  ?    Then  God  is  unjust,  partial, 
tyrannical.     Is  it  the  arrangement  of  society  ?    What  society  ?    The  arrangement  is 
a  cruel  one  ;  it  is  a  conspiracy  of  the  rich  against  the  poor  ;  of  capital  against  indus- 
try :  "let  us  break  their  bands  asunder,  and  cast  away  their  cords  from  us." 
These  words  appear  in  a  book  in  Russia — "  And  when  we,"  the  socialists,  "  get  the 
upper  hand,  then  will  we  rid  mother  Russia  of  all  her  oppressors.   Then  shall  we  be  at 
liberty  to  set  up  our  peasant-brotherhood,  in  which  there  shall  be  neither  *  mine  * 
nor  'thine,'  neither  gains  nor  oppressions,  but  there  will  be  labour  for  the  common, 
weal,  and  among  all  men  brotherly  aid.     Wrong  must  be  utterly  rooted  out,  and 
Right  must  be  set  on  foundations  that  will  last  for  ever."    We  do  not  hear  much  of 
this  doctrine  in  our  own  country.     A  writer  in  the  Contemporary  Review  says  : 
"Multitudes  cherish  a  faith  in  the  omnipotence  for  good  of  a  well-intentioned 
government ;  and  in  those  lands  where  socialism  is  most  potent  there  have  been  facta 
to  foster  this  belief.     The  Russian  has  seen  the  effect  of  the  Jiat  of  the  emperor  in 
reconstituting  the  rural  life  of  his  subjects  ;  why  should  not  the  same  power  be 
exercised  on  behalf  of  the  artisan  as  well  ?    The  German  feels  the  potent  grip  of 
militarism  at  every  turn  ;  why  should  this  force  not  be  used  for  social  rather  than 
dynastic  gain  ?    No  nation  possesses  such  a  heritage  of  political  experience  as  ours, 
and  none  has  yet  attained  to  so  much  political  wisdom  ;  it  is  this  that  has  prevented 
our  impoverished  masses  from  joining  in  the  widespread  cry  for  a  total  reorganisation 
of  our  social  system."    Socialism  would  be  no  remedy ;  it  would  be  a  disease  far 
more  terrible  than  the  one  it  was  intended  to  heal.    This  word  of  the  law,  then, 
implies  the  sacredness  of  property,  "Thou  shalt  not  steal."    Not  only  the  burglar, 
and  the  pickpocket,  and  the  swindler  are  the  transgressors  of  this  law,  but  all  who 
by  misrepresentation  enrich  themselves  at  the  expense  of  their  neighbours.     There 
are  many  other  applications  of  this  law  which  I  might  dwell  upon.     "Thou  shalt 
not  steal."     A  man  steals  from  his  family  when  by  his  indolence  or  his  intemperance 
he]neglects  its  interests,  and  provides  not  for  those  of  his  own  household.     A  man 
may  steal  from  himself  by  frittering  away  opportunities,  squandering  money,  wast- 
ing time,  and  abusing  the  energy  that  might  be  employed  for  some  high  and  useful 
ends.     A  man  may  steal  from  God.     "Will  a  man  rob  God  ?    Yet  ye  have  robbed 
Me."    To  withhold  from  Him  that  which  belongs  to  Him,  the  attention  of  the 
intellect,  the  love  of  the  heart,  the  service  of  the  life,  is  to  rob  Him,  to  wast«  our 
Lord's  money,  to  embezzle  our  Master's  property.    Be  just,  then,  in  all  your  relations  ; 
be  true,  be  honest.    {James  Owen. )        On  theft ;— I.  The  nattjre  of  the  vice  of  theft. 
1.  The  meanness  of  this  vice.     Every  decent  man,  if  he  has  pride  in  anything,  has  a 
pride  in  appearing  upon  an  equal  footing  at  least  with  the  members  of  his  own 
society.     He  will  not  choose  to  be  indebted  for  the  mere  means  of  living  to  any 
man,  but  to  depend  upon  himself,  and  be  obliged,  as  much  as  possible,  to  himself. 
While  his  health  and  hands  are  left  him  he  will  account  it  the  most  reproachful 
oijjection  which  can  be  made  to  him  that  he  is  a  burden  to  the  society  or  to  any 
individual  of  it.     The  thief  is  the  character  which  is  in  every  respect  the  reverse  of 
this.     He  neither  possesses  respect,  nor  seems  to  wish  for  it.     He  has  an  evil  and 
a  base  mind,  which  has  no  sense  of  honour  nor  of  credit.     Instead  of  aspiring  to 
his  own  place  in  society,  he  aspires  to  no  place  ;  instead  of  making  it  his  pride  to 
depend  upon  himself,  he  thinks  of  nothing  but  how  he  may  subsist  himself  upon 
others.     2.  The  vice  of  theft  is  not  only  mean  itself,  but  inconsistent  with  the 
yery  existence  and  great  end  of  society.     In  vain  has  nature  directed  and  Scripture 
taught  us  to  make  provision  for  our  necessities,  if  the  thief  or  robber  is  allowed 
to  intercept  it.     In  vain  will  we  select  our  superfluities,  and  reserve  them  for  our 
future  occasions,  if  the  base  part  of  our  species  are  allowed  to  pick  our  stores  and 
possess  themselves  of  the  fruits  of  our  laboiurs.     II.  Thb  causes  from  which  thia 
vice  commonly  proceeds.     1.  There  is  often  an  original  dififerenoe  among  minda 


CHAP.  ▼.]  DEUTERONOMY.  147 

themselves.  Some  minds  seem  to  be  naturally  base  and  ill-disposed.  They 
possess  a  natural  turn  for  shuffling  and  a  dexterity  in  deceit.  They  will  prefer  at 
any  time  a  gain  which  they  can  obtain  by  trick  to  the  same  gain  which  they  might 
obtain  by  fair  dealing.  2.  As  there  are  some  who  are  naturally  base-minded,  and 
seem  originally  to  have  been  made  of  bad  materials,  there  are  many  more  who  were 
once  virtuous,  but  are  degenerated.  (1)  Some  are  led  to  dishonesty  from  the 
obscurity  and  false  shame  of  poverty,  (a)  They  consider  themselves  as  removed 
from  notice,  and  become  careless  of  their  own  conduct.  (6)  They  are  ashamed  to 
discover  their  situation  and  to  ask  assistance  and  relief.  The  shame  lies  not  in 
asking  assistance,  but  in  deserving  to  be  reduced  to  that  necessity.  At  any  rate, 
we  must  not  add  one  meanness  to  another,  and,  after  contriving  to  be  burdensome 
to  our  neighbours,  contrive  next  to  rob  and  plunder  them.  (2)  Another  cause 
which  leads  men  to  commit  theft  is  covetousness.  The  love  of  gain,  when  it 
takes  full  possession,  can  bear  no  rival  in  the  heart.  It  puts  every  other  principle, 
good  and  bad,  to  flight.  The  covetous  man,  from  the  moment  he  bows  before  it, 
acknowledgeth  no  superior  power.  It  is  the  religion  in  which  he  is  sincere,  and 
the  one  only  god  whom  he  worships  without  hypocrisy.  There  is  no  vice  which 
approaches  so  nearly  to  theft  as  covetousness.  The  distinction  is  very  slight 
between  the  man  who  strongly  desires  what  is  mine  and  the  man  who  takes  it. 
(3)  As  some  are  led  to  commit  theft  from  covetousness,  others  are  led  to  commit 
the  same  vice  from  prodigality.  It  is  remarkable  that  in  the  natural  world 
extremes  meet,  and  that  even  in  morals  they  produce  often  the  same  effect. 
Nature  directs  us  simply  to  store  up  our  superfluities  and  reserve  them  for  our 
future  wants.  The  covetous  man  stores  up  more  than  he  ought  ;  the  prodigal 
stores  up  much  less.  The  covetous  man  amasses  everything  ;  the  prodigal  throws 
everything  away.  The  one  goes  beyond  the  intentions  of  nature  ;  the  other  by  no 
means  fulfils  them.  The  prodigal  is  under  the  dominion  of  vile  habits  and  gross 
passions.  He  gorges  the  present  without  reflecting  on  the  future.  He  seems 
born  to  waste  and  to  consume.  He  never  thinks  on  want  or  suspects  that  matters 
are  to  be  any  otherwise  than  as  they  are.  It  is  easy  to  predict  the  effects  of  this 
character.  If  a  man  waste  his  substance  he  must  come  to  poverty.  If  he  acquire 
habits  he  must  iudulge  them.  If  he  consume  in  one  day  the  provision  of  seven  he 
must  think  of  some  way  to  supply  the  expenses  of  the  other  six.  Sensual  habits 
besides  debase  the  mind  and  render  it  mean  and  worthless.  In  this  situation 
what  is  he  to  do  ?  He  must  borrow  or  he  must  steal.  (4)  The  last  cause  of  theft 
which  I  shall  mention  here  is  idleness.  There  is  not  a  more  ample  source  than 
this  of  vice  and  of  disgrace.  Idleness,  with  respect  to  the  bulk  of  mankind,  pro- 
duces want,  and  want  must  be  supplied.  But  from  whence  is  the  supply  to  come  ? 
An  indolent,  idle  man  cannot  exert  himself,  or,  if  he  can,  he  will  not.  His  good 
qualities  are  destroyed  and  bad  ones  implanted  in  their  room.  He  has  acquired 
habits  of  expense  from  which  he  cannot  disengage  himself,  and  of  vice  which  he 
cannot  conquer.  He  is  entangled  in  bad  company,  and  soon  finds  himself 
engaged  in  bad  practices.  He  has  neither  resolution  to  relinquish  the  one,  nor 
virtue  to  surmount  the  other.  His  decline  is  therefore  rapid,  and  his  destruction 
sudden  and  inevitable.  Lessons :  1.  The  first  conclusion  which  presents  itself  is 
the  necessity  of  employing  the  active  and  able  part  of  our  existence  in  acquiring 
that  provision  which  is  necessary  to  support  the  infirm  and  disabled  parts  of  it. 
This  goes  to  the  source  of  the  disorder.  Every  man,  when  he  sets  out  in  life, 
ought  to  ask  himself  this  plain  question.  Whether  he  chooses  to  depend  upon  him- 
self or  to  come  upon  the  public  ?  He  has  but  this  alternative,  and  must  at  last 
do  one  of  these  two  things.  If  he  choose  the  first,  there  is  no  covetousness,  nor 
even  any  uncommon  solicitude,  necessary.  He  has  only  to  exert  himself  and  be 
careful.  But  then  he  must  do  it  while  he  can,  and  not  think  that  his  youth  is  to 
last  for  ever.  If  you  would  not  know  the  fond  pang  of  a  parent's  heart  brood- 
ing over  the  wants  of  his  children  ;  if  you  would  not  invite  temptation  ;  if  you 
would  not  embrace  vice  and  disgrace,  work  diligently,  work  while  it  is  to-day. 
2.  Avoid  with  the  utmost  circumspection  the  causes  which  lead  to  this  vice  upon 
their  own  account.  Covetousness,  prodigality,  idleness,  and  theft  belong  all  to  the 
same  family.  They  are  all  a  monstrous  perversion  of  nature,  and  the  certain 
marks  of  a  vitiated  mind.  {John  Mackenzie,  D.D.)  Bights  of  iwoperty : — Is 
it  a  crime  to  be  rich  ?  Against  whom  is  the  offence  committed  ?  Against  God  ? 
Against  man  ?  Against  society  ?  Underlying  the  amplest  fortunes  are  inflexible 
truth,  incorruptible  honesty,  incomparable  honour.  Poverty,  competence,  and 
affluence  are  the  three  financial  conditions  of  man,  in  each  of  which  there  may 


148  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

be  sainthood.  Poverty  may  be  as  vicious  upon  the  morals  of  character  and 
life  as  wealth.  Is  it  misanthropic  to  be  rich  ?  Dp  large  possessions  in  land  and 
money  sour  the  milk  of  human  kindness  that  flows  through  the  veins  of 
humanity  ?  To  whom  are  we  indebted  for  those  houses  of  charity  whose  gates 
of  mercy  stand  open  night  and  day  ?  "Who  are  the  founders  of  those  libraries 
which  spread  their  ample  feast  before  mankind?  The  universities  and  colleges 
of  our  country  are  the  monuments  of  the  rich.  Is  it  unpatriotic  to  be  rich? 
In  the  three  great  wars  for  the  Union  the  rich  poured  forth  their  wealth  as  the 
rain  descends  upon  the  just  and  upon  the  unjust.  Love  of  country  rose  supreme 
above  the  love  of  money.  Wealth  is  not  disloyalty.  The  capitalists  of  this  country 
supported  the  Government  in  the  darkest  hour  of  the  rebellion,  when  the  national 
treasury  was  in  sore  distress.  Is  it  tyranny  to  be  rich  ?  Do  wealth  and  oppres- 
sion go  hand  in  hand  ?  Are  slavery  and  opulence  born  of  the  same  parentage  ? 
Wilberforce  was  rich,  yet  foremost  in  the  abolition  of  slavery  in  the  British  colonies. 
Gerrit  Smith  died  worth  his  millions  ;  yet  he  was  the  most  eloquent,  most  ardent, 
most  benevolent  of  abolitionists.  Is  it  impiety  to  be  rich  ?  Is  poverty  essential 
to  godliness  ?  Are  beggars  the  only  saints  ?  What,  then,  shall  we  do  with 
Abraham,  who  was  very  rich  in  cattle,  in  silver,  and  in  gold  ?  Christ  would  not 
have  had  a  decent  tomb  had  it  not  been  for  the  rich  Joseph  of  Arimathea.  The 
acquisition  of  wealth  is  a  Divine  gift.  Industry  and  frugality  are  the  laws  of 
thrift.  To  amass  great  fortunes  is  a  special  endowment.  As  poets,  philosophers, 
and  orators  are  born  such,  so  the  financier  has  a  genius  for  wealth.  By  intuition 
he  is  familiar  with  the  laws  of  supply  and  demand.  He  seems  srifted  with  the 
vision  of  a  seer  of  the  coming  changes  in  the  market ;  he  knows  when  to  buy  and 
when  to  sell  and  when  to  hold  fast.  He  anticipates  the  flow  of  population  and  its 
eff'ect  upon  real  estate.  "The  Lord  thy  God  giveth  thee  the  power  to  get  wealth  " 
(chap.  viii.  18).  Against  these  natural  and  lawful  rights  to  the  possession  of 
property  is  the  clamour  for  the  distribution  of  property  among  those  who  have 
not  acquired  it,  either  by  inheritance  or  skill  or  industry.  It  is  a  communism 
that  has  no  foundation  either  in  the  constitution  of  nature  or  in  the  social  order 
of  mankind.  It  is  the  wUd,  irrational  cry  of  labour  against  capital,  between  which, 
in  the  economy  of  nature  and  in  political  economy,  there  should  be  no  common 
antagonism.  There  is  a  wealth  of  muscle  and  a  wealth  of  brain  and  a  wealth  of 
character.  He  is  a  labourer  who  does  productive  work  ;  he  is  a  capitalist  who  has 
five  dollars  or  five  hundred  thousand  dollars.  Capital  may  be  a  tyrant,  and  labour 
may  become  a  despot.  Wealth  has  the  noblest  of  missions.  It  is  not  given  to 
hoard,  nor  to  gratify,  nor  for  the  show  of  pomp  and  power.  The  rich  are  the 
almoners  of  the  Almighty.  They  are  His  disbursing  agents.  When  the  wealth  of 
capital  joins  hands  with  the  wealth  of  intellect,  the  wealth  of  muscle,  and  the 
wealth  of  goodness  for  the  common  good,  then  labour  and  capital  vdll  be  esteemed 
the  equal  factors  in  giving  every  man  life,  liberty,  and  the  pursuit  of  happiness.  The 
right  to  property  is  founded  in  nature,  sustained  by  organised  society,  and  protected 
by  the  sanctions  of  the  Divine  law.  The  right  has  its  origin  in  a  prior  fact,  that 
each  human  being  is  a  distinct  individuality,  adapted  to  all  the  purposes  of  self- 
government  and  responsible  to  God  and  to  society  for  the  manner  in  which  his 
powers  are  employed.  By  his  physical  nature  he  is  connected  with  the  universe 
which  is  modified  to  supply  his  wants.  He  has  a  right  to  use  his  body  as  he  will, 
provided  such  use  is  not  an  interference  with  the  equal  rights  of  his  fellow-men. 
Possessing  an  intellect,  he  has  a  right  to  the  products  thereof.  Endowed  with  a 
soul  of  sensibilities,  passions,  and  aspirations,  he  has  the  inherent  right  to  seek 
happiness,  always  recognising  a  common  right  in  each  of  his  fellow-creatures.  By 
this  physical,  intellectual,  and  spiritual  endowment  man  is  made  for  society,  and 
each  individual  in  his  social  capacity  is  bound  to  every  other  individual  by  the  law 
of  reciprocity.  If,  by  the  constitution  of  nature,  a  man  has  a  right  to  himself,  he 
has  also  an  equal  right  to  that  which  may  result  from  the  innocent  use  of  his 
bodily  and  mental  powers.  The  result  is  what  men  call  property.  In  all  well- 
regulated  society  every  man  is  accorded  the  right  to  possess  that  which  he  has 
made  and  the  power  of  control  over  the  same.  The  Creator  treats  this  right  as  a 
self-evident  fact,  directs  His  mandates  against  every  act  violative  of  the  same  and 
against  the  temper  of  mind  from  which  such  violations  may  proceed.  In  harmony 
therewith  human  governments  among  their  first  acts  protect  this  individual  right, 
and  treat  the  off'ender  thereof  as  guilty  of  a  wrong,  and  punish  him  accoidingly. 
Upon  the  recognition  of  this  right  depend  the  existence  and  progress  of  society. 
Ignore  this  right,  and  no  one  would  labour  more  than  is  sufl&cient  for  his  individujj 


CHAP,  v.]  DEUTERONOMY,  I49 

subsistence.     A  nation  of  thieves  would  be  a  nation  of  barbarians.      If  such  are 
the  principles  and  consequences  involved  in  this  right  of  property,  what  are  the 
violations  of  this  right?     The  burglar  takes  the  property  of  another  without 
the  knowledge  and  consent  of  the  owner— this  is  theft ;  the  highwayman  takes  the 
property  of  another  with  his  knowledge,  but  without  his  consent.     Not  less  guilty 
IS  he  who  presents  wrong  motives  for  the  purposes  of  gain,  who  excites  groundless 
fears,  circulates  false  reports,  inflames  personal  vanity,  and  awakens  avarice  for 
the  puiyoses  of  illegal  gain.      A  broker  on  'Change  who  causes  false  information 
to  be  circulated  for  the  purpose  of  raising  or  depressing  the  market  seeks  profit  by 
deep  rascality.      God  says  to  such  a  man,   "Thou  shalt  not  steal."     Among  the 
prevalent  causes  of  the  violation  of  man's  right  of  property  are  a  corrupt  public 
sentimen^  an  inordinate  love  of  wealth,  an  extravagance  which  amounts  to  prodi- 
gality     Society  scourges  the  thief  of  necessity,  but  pities  the  thief  of  fashion.     He 
who  steals  a  loaf  of  bread  to  feed  his  starving  family  is  sent  to  jail,  but  he  who  is 
successful  m  bold,  dishonourable  speculation,  by  which  others  are  ruined,  is  caressed 
by  society.  ^  Why  is  ic  that  official  dishonesty  is  considered  less  disreputable  than 
dishonesty  m  a  private  citizen  ?     A  public  man  guilty  of  many  flagrant  sins  is 
treated  with  consideration,  while  the  private  individual,  less  guilty,  is  shunned  as  a 
pestilential  criminal.     Does  the  dignity  of  his  office  cover  him  like  a  cloak  ?    Does 
his  position  of  trust  and  power  commend  him  to  our  respect  ?    If  from  the  official 
who  reflects  public  sentiment  we  turn  to  the  private  life  of  a  nation,  we  shall  not 
be  surprised  to  discover  the  inordinate  love  of  riches  a  prevalent  and  fruitful  cause 
of  the  violation  of  the  ancient  law  of  property.      Such  is  the  greed  for  gain  that 
justice    truth,  honesty,  are  set  at  defiance.     Men  combine  in  vast  monopolies  to 
control  vast  wealth.      All  must  bow  to  this  shrine  of  Mammon.      What  is  the 
dominant  thought  in  the  life  of  the  world  to-day  ?    Is  it  the  value  of  education  « 
the  purity  of  marriage  ?  the  elevation  of  the  labouring  classes  ?    Is  it  not  revenue' 
private  and  public  ?     Out  of  this  condition  of  things  come  financial  panics  with 
the  regularity  of  clock-work.     The  bold  attempt  is  made  to  force  prosperity— to  get 
rich  m  a  day.     As  well  might  a  man  attempt  to  force  the  harvest.      The  most 
conspicuous  representative  of  the  inordinate  love  of  wealth  is  the  financial  prodigy 
who  attracts,  lures,  ruins.      Wise,  careful,  honourable  financiers  rarely  fail    and 
rarely,  if  ever,  are  they  the  cause  of  financial  panics ;  but  rather  the  financial 
prodigy    whose  brilliancy  dazzles,  whose  success  captivates,  whose  unscrupulous- 
ness  is  hidden  by  the  splendour  of  his  operations.     Closely  allied  with  this  invasion 
of  the  rights  of  property  is  the  prevalent  vice  of  gambling,  the  abuse  of  an  innocent 
pastime.      It  ignores  the  law  of  equivalent.      It  is  something  for  nothing.      The 
highest  motives  impel  to  keep  the  law  of  property.     Nature  insists  upon  the  recog- 
nition of  her  rights.     Providence  is  upon  the  side  of  the  honest.     Law  throws  its 
muniments  of  protection  around  the  honourable  possessions  of  man.      Honesty 
leads  in  the  path  of  personal  safety.     Peace  of  mind  is  the  certain  reward      The 
happiness  of  others  is  the  benediction  attained.     The  future  opens  its  golden  gates 
XT  .^Jose  who  have  obeyed  the  inspired  behest  of  Heaven.      {J.  P.  NewZxn.) 
m%tner  shall  thou  steal  .-—God  has  divided  the  world's  goods  diversely.     To  one  He 
has  given  mueh  to  another  little.    This  has  been  since  the  beginning.     No  attempt 
to  alter  this  order  of  things  has  succeeded.     That  which  God  has  given  to  the 
individual  is  called  his  property  or  possession  ;  and  in  this  commandment  God 
throws  a  shield  over  men's  possessions,  be  they  great  or  small,  and  says  to  each, 
inou  Shalt  not  steal."     When  do  we  keep  this  commandment?    I.  When  we 

DO  NOT  ACQUIRE  OUR  NEIGHBOUR'S  PROPERTY  UNJUSTLY.       1.  Of  thieving.      Lutl  eP 

says :  It  is  the  meanest  occupation,  yet  the  most  widely  practised  profession  on 
eartn  ;  and  if  one  considers  the  world  in  its  various  conditions  it  will  be  foun^i  to 
*m!^  ic^^i  ^'  ^^  *  ™*°  waylays  another  and  takes  his  gold,  we  call  him 
a  robber.  If  another  breaks  into  a  house  and  carries  off  money  or  clothing,  &c. 
we  call  him  a  thief;  and  of  him  who  receives  the  stolen  property  we  say  "The 
receiver  is  as  bad  as  the  thief."  3.  But  he  who  invades  his  neighbour's  acres,  who 
removes  his  neighbour's  landmark,  or  takes  produce  from  his  neighbour's  field 
even  though  he  plead  necessity,  is  still  a  thief.  4.  So,  too,  is  the  man  who  gets 
gam  by  adulterated  goods  or  false  dealing,  the  merchant  who  uses  false  weights 
or  measures,  who  passes  off  spoiled  or  inferior  wares  as  fresh  and  good  "the 
artisan  who  gives  "scamped"  work  for  good  pay,  the  purchaser  who  passes' false 
com,  the  extortioner,  the  servant  or  official  who  neglects  duty,  the  beggar  who  by 
labour  might  earn  a  .lay's  wage,  the  man  who  finds  what  has  been  lost  and  maki 
no  effort  to  trace  the  owner.      5.  And  it  matters  not  whose  possession  is  thub 


150  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  t, 

wrongly  appropriated.  The  Government  steals  when  it  receives  the  taxes  of  the 
people  and  does  not  apply  them  for  the  good  of  the  people,  but  for  its  own  fads 
and  designs  ;  but  the  subject  also  steals  when  he  seeks  to  avoid  the  legal  taxation. 
The  child  steals  when  it  takes  or  sells  what  belongs  to  the  parent ;  but  the  parent 
steals  when  he  squanders  in  play  or  debauchery  the  wife's  or  children's  portion, 
or  what  should  be  given  them  for  daily  bread.  It  would  be  impossible  to  enumerate, 
briefly  or  at  all,  all  methods  of  theft  and  robbery  ;  and  the  victims — "God  is  the 
avenger  of  all  such. "  II.  When  we  do  not  uncharitably  permit  our  neighbour 
TO  BE  despoiled  OF  HIS  POSSESSIONS.  1.  Many  who  lose  their  property  have  not 
to  lament  theft  or  deceit,  but  the  carelessness  of  those  who  should  have  warned  and 
helped  them,  e.g.,  the  guardian  who  permits  his  ward  to  squander  his  property  or 
is  careless  as  to  the  investment  and  safety  of  that  property ;  the  neighbour  who 
sees  what  damage  his  neighbour's  servants  or  children  are  doing  and  does  not  warn 
him  :  such  deal  unjustly.  2.  So,  too,  do  those  who  damage  their  neighbour's 
trade  or  credit.  Rather  we  are  to  aid  our  neighbour  to  increase  and  protect  his 
possessions,  as  the  apostle  has  said  (1  Pet.  iv.  10).  3.  In  the  sight  of  men  what 
you  possess  is  your  own ;  in  the  sight  of  God  it  is  simply  lent.  It  is  His,  and 
should  be  used  according  to  His  will.  If  God,  therefore,  requires  that  we  should 
give  or  lend  in  order  to  increase  or  protect  our  neighbour's  possessions,  we  should 
do  so.  "Give  to  him  that  asketh,"  &c.  (Matt.  v.  42).  4.  Further,  Scripture  says, 
"Give  thy  bread  unto  the  hungry,"  &c.  (Isa.  Iviii.  7).  Not  that  the  lazy,  work- 
shirking  beggar  or  the  child  who  is  being  trained  in  beggary  are  to  be  directly 
relieved,  for  this  would  be  to  have  part  in  sin  ;  but  whenever  we  are  convinced  that 
the  truly  poor  and  needy  are  before  us  we  are  to  consider  them  as  sent  of  God  for 
our  help.     "He  that  giveth  to  the  poor  lendeth  to  the  Lord,"  &c.     III.  When  we 

ARE  CAREFUL  THAT  OUR  POSSESSIONS  DO  NOT  UNHAPPILY  BECOME  TO  US  OCCASIONS 

OF  SIN.  1.  We  must  be  careful  that  we  have  not  to  blush  at  the  question  as  to  how 
we  obtained  our  possessions.  Gold  on  account  of  which  tears  are  shed — tears  of 
poverty,  of  the  deceived — will  burn  in  the  heart.  Better  to  be  Bartimaus  the 
beggar  than  Ahab  and  Achan  the  thieves,  or  as  the  miser  who  on  his  death-bed 
lamented  that  the  gold  which  had  once  been  to  him  like  rose-leaves  on  which  he 
could  sleep  peacefully  now  appeared  to  be  like  thorns  and  thistles  and  red-hot 
needles.  2.  We  must  guard  against  idleness.  He  who  is  idle  may  soon  come  to 
poverty  ;  and  if  he  cannot  dig  and  is  ashamed  to  beg,  he  may  take  to  thieving. 
This  applies  as  well  to  those  who  have  no  need  to  labour  for  daily  bread.  To 
every  man  some  work  is  given,  and  "labour  has  a  golden  foundation."  3.  Beware 
of  extravagance.  He  who  squanders  his  possessions  in  play  or  drunkenness,  &c., 
has  no  right  to  say,  "I  spend  what  is  my  own."  No,  it  is  God's  possession — the 
possession  of  his  children  and,  if  they  have  enough,  of  God's  poor.  The  prodigal's 
fate  is  mostly  an  evil  one.  "The  young  free-liver  becomes  the  old  beggar." 
4.  Beware  of  avarice.  "Many  treasures,  many  snares."  To  him  whom  Mammon 
never  satisfies  sufficiently,  who  will  sooner  forego  love  and  mercifulness  than 
goods  and  gold,  his  possessions  are  occasions  of  sin.  Avarice  increases  with  gain 
during  the  years — binds  its  cords  on  rich  and  poor  alike,  makes  the  heart  stony,  and 
is  indeed  a  "root  of  all  evil."  Many  a  one  would  not  go  about  with  disturbed 
mind  and  troubled  heart,  a  broken  promise,  and  the  curse  of  the  betrayer  on  the 
conscience,  had  such  an  one  remembered  that  Mammon  is  a  merciless  lord  and 
gives  evil  rewards  to  his  servants.  "What  shall  it  profit  a  man  ?"  &c.  5.  Beware 
of  envy.  * '  A  man's  life  consisteth  not  in  the  abundance  of  the  things  which  he 
possesseth."  Men  may  have  wealth  and  yet  sorrow  and  misery  enough.  "Poverty 
and  riches  lie  not  in  chests,  but  in  the  soul."  He  is  rich  who  combines  godliness 
with  contentment.  Modest  and  honourably  acquired  possessions  are  like  a  graceful 
fountain,  full  of  water  (like  the  widow's  cruse),  which  fills  many  pitchers  and  yet 
is  not  exhausted.  "From  a  small  fountain  we  may  satisfy  our  thirst  as  well  as 
from  a  great  one.*'  6.  Set  not  your  hope  on  riches.  The  riches  which  water 
engulfs,  fire  destroys,  rust  eats,  worms  gnaw,  and  thieves  steal  are  truly  uncertain 
riches.  7.  Let  both  rich  and  poor  put  their  hope  in  God.  With  Him  men  can 
be  poor  or  rich  without  sin ;  and  He  has  given  the  promise,  "  I  will  never  leave 
thee,"  &c.  And  where  poor  and  rich  can  grasp  this  promise,  then  what  Solomon 
says  takes  place.  (JT.  H.  Caspari.)  Stealing: — ^This  commandment  strikes  at 
many  different  forms  of  stealing,  which  are  being  practised  to-day.  1.  Perhaps  it  is 
hardly  necessary  to  say  anything  concerning  the  simple  act  of  purloining  articles 
belonging  to  other  persons.  People  seem  to  forget,  e.g.^  that  to  borrow  a  book  and 
not  to  return  it  is  a  theft.    2.  The  sin  of  stealing  is  terribly  prevalent  in  the  matter 


CHAP.  Y.]  DEUTERONOMY,  151 

of  fraudulent  getting.  Unjust  weights,  false  measures,  lying  advertisements,  *&c. 
3.  The  whole  habit  of  gambling  is  of  the  essence  of  theft,  and  this  for  the  reason  that 
it  is  a  means  by  which  men  come  into  possession  of  property  which  is  a  violation 
of  both  the  laws  upon  which  property  may  alone  be  held.  A  man  who  gambles, 
whether  by  play  or  betting,  puts  into  his  pocket  money  for  which  he  gives  to  the 
person  from  whom  he  takes  it  no  adequate  return,  money  for  which  he  has  done 
no  honest  work  ;  and  by  the  very  act  he  robs  the  man  from  whom  he  receives, 
and  violates  the  law  of  love.  4.  The  commandment  is,  moreover,  violated  by  all 
such  as  enrich  themselves  by  means  that  rob  their  fellow-men  of  the  inalienable 
rights  of  human  beings.  The  wealth  that  is  tarnished  by  a  death-rate  higher  than 
is  necessary  is  ill-gotten  gains,  and  they  who  spend  their  days  in  the  enjoyment  of 
such  wealth  are  branded  in  the  light  of  the  perfect  law  of  God  as  thieves— thieves, 
indeed,  by  the  side  of  whom  Bill  Sykes,  the  burglar,  is  a  hero,  for  in  the  prosecu- 
tion of  his  unlawful  practices  he  risks  his  life  ;  but  these  men  risk  nothing  but  the 
lives  of  their  fellow-creatures.  5.  The  commandment  is  broken  again  and  again 
every  day  within  the  great  realm  of  capital  and  labour.  How  often  to-day  might  the 
words  of  James  (v.  4)  be  quoted  with  advantage.  It  is  lamentable,  but  equally  true, 
that  many  a  working  man  robs  his  master  in  that  he  withholds  his  fair  share  of  honest 
labour  while  he  takes  his  wage.  6.  Principles  apply  to  individuals  and  to  nations 
with  equal  force.  This  being  so,  this  eighth  word  of  the  Decalogue  is  a  severe 
denunciation  of  the  false  imperialism  which  is  growingly  manifest  through  all  the 
nations  of  the  world.  Strong  peoples  have,  without  cause,  stolen  the  land  of  the 
weaker.  "Weak  nations  have  been  handed  over  to  the  control  of  new  Powers  with- 
out reference  to  their  own  rights,  and  to  the  wrong  of  those  so  dealt  with.  {G. 
Campbell  Morgan.)  Stealing  in  business: — 1.  One  of  the  common  transgressions 
of  this  law  is  entirely  a  modern  sin.  I  refer  to  those  dishonest  Limited  Liability 
Companies  which  are  so  frequently  floated.  False  prospectuses  are  issued,  hopes  of 
gain  which  is  never  made  are  held  out  to  investors.  The  men  who  wilfully  promote 
a  dishonest  company  are  as  really  thieves  as  the  burglar  who  breaks  into  the  house 
and  forcibly  appropriates  its  plate.  2.  A  closely  connected  form  of  stealing  is  found 
in  the  over-capitalisation  of  some  companies  which  are  formed  to  take  over  and  to 
work  a  prosperous  private  concern.  3.  The  same  principle  applies  to  the  lesser 
businesses  of  the  world.  A  tradesman,  for  instance,  who  sells  his  customer  goods 
of  inferior  quality  to  that  of  the  sample  that  leads  the  customer  to  purchase,  or  who 
adulterates  more  expensive  goods  with  a  cheaper  product,  and  then  sells  them  as 
genuine  or  pure,  may  or  may  not  be  punishable  by  the  law,  but  he  is  a  thief  in  the 
sight  of  God,  he  is  robbing  the  purchaser  as  truly  as  if  he  put  his  hand  into  his  pocket 
and  stole  his  purse.  A  short  time  ago  I  was  talking  to  a  commercial  traveller  of  a 
certain  person  whom  we  both  knew,  and  whose  name  had  an  unsavoury  reputation 
in  the  town  in  which  he  lived.  I  said,  "He  is  a  very  sharp  man  of  business,  is  he 
not? "  and  the  reply  was,  "  Yes,  he  is  too  sharp  to  be  honest."  In  other  words,  he 
was  a  thief,  living  by  deceiving  seller  and  buyer  alike.  4.  Let  us  not,  however, 
forget  that  there  may  be  dishonest  buyers  quite  as  truly  as  dishonest  sellers  of  goods. 
A  man  who  purchases  goods  without  the  means  of  paying  for  them,  and  who  does  it 
deliberately,  is  as  really  a  thief  as  the  man  who  purloins  them.     {G.  S.  Barrett, 

Ver.  20.  Neither  shalt  thou  bear  false  witness.— TTie  Ninth  Commandment:— 
I  will  speak  first  of  the  negative  part  of  this  commandment ;  secondly,  of  the 
affirmative.  Under  the  former  are  forbidden  these  two  things  :  first,  more  largely  all 
evil-speaking  that  may  be  any  ways  hurtful  to  our  neighbours ;  and  then  more 
particularly  all  evil-speaking  that  tends  to  the  hurt  of  our  neighbours,  with  respect 
either  to  their  lives  or  goods,  or  good  name,  especially  the  last,  which  is  more 
eminently  concerned  in  this  commandment.  First,  more  generally  all  the  abuses  of 
the  tongue  are  here  forbidden  ;  all  evil-speaking  that  may  any  ways  prove  hurtful 
to  others.  Nay,  those  words  and  speeches  which  are  unprofitable  are  forbid  by 
this  commandment,  for  these  in  some  kind  are  hurtful  to  others.  Thus  far  the 
tongue  off'ends  against  the  souls  of  our  neighbours.  Secondly,  more  particularly 
here  is  forbid  that  evil-speaking  which  is  hurtful  to  the  bodies,  estates,  and  good 
names  of  our  brethren.  Hitherto  I  have  spoken  of  that  injury  which  is  done  to 
our  neighbours  by  words  in  our  common  converse  ;  now  I  proceed  to  speak  of  the 
injury  done  by  them  in  public  courts  of  judicature.  For  bearing  false  witness  is 
either  judicial,  when  a  man  is  called  to  speak  the  truth  publicly  ;  or  extrajudicial, 
between  man  and  man  in  a  more  private  manner.    David  complained  that  false 


152  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  y. 

witnesses  did  rise  up,  and  laid  to  his  charge  things  that  he  knew  not  (Psa.  xxxr. 
11).  The  Jewish  priests  sought  false  witnesses  against  Jesus  to  put  Him  to  de«th 
(Matt.  xxvi.  59).  And  at  last  came  two  false  witnesses  (ver.  60).  And  their 
particular  accusation  is  set  down  in  the  next  verse.  We  read  that  the  Jews  set 
up  false  witnesses  against  Stephen,  who  said,  "This  man  ceases  not  to  speak 
hiasphemous  words  against  this  holy  place  and  the  law "  (Acts  vi.  15).  This  is 
a  great  sin,  and  the  rather  because  witnesses  in  judicial  courts  are  under  the 
obligation  of  an  oath  to  deliver  the  truth,  on  which  account  they  involve  them- 
selves in  the  guilt  of  perjury.  Not  only  witnesses,  but  all  that  have  business  in 
public  courts,  and  appertain  to  the  law,  are  nearly  concerned  in  this  command- 
ment. Thus  I  have  treated  of  the  several  faults  and  miscarriages  of  the  tongue 
that  are  comprised  under  this  commandment.  It  remains  now  that  I  ofiFer  the 
reasons  why  we  should  regulate  these  disorders,  and  that  I  prescribe  the  method 
how  this  may  be  eflFected.  Under  the  first,  I  will  do  these  two  things.  First,  in 
general  show  why  we  should  redress  the  abuses  of  the  tongue.  Secondly,  why 
more  particularly  that  abuse  of  it  which  consists  in  lying  and  slandering.  As  to 
the  former  of  these,  the  reasonableness  of  it  will  appear  from  these  ensuing 
particulars.  First,  on  the  tongue  hangs  the  greatest  good.  "What  man  is  he  that 
desireth  life,  and  loveth  many  days,  that  he  may  see  good  ?  Keep  thy  tongue  from 
evil,  and  thy  lips  from  speaking  guile  "  (Psa.  xxxiv.  12,  13).  Secondly,  because  it  is 
the  source  of  so  many  and  so  great  evils  (James  iii.  6).  Thirdly,  we  are  to  answer 
at  the  last  day  for  our  words  as  well  as  our  actions  (Matt.  xii.  36,  37).  In  the  next 
place,  more  particularly  I  am  to  give  the  reasons  why  we  should  refrain  from  lying 
and  slandering.  I  will  speak  distinctly  of  both.  First,  there  are  very  great 
reasons  why  we  should  abstain  from  telling  of  lies  ;  they  are  such  as  these  :  1.  We 
are  to  do  it  by  virtue  of  the  Divine  precept,  "Keep  thee  from  a  false  matter"  (Exod. 
xxiii.  7).  This  is,  be  not  any  ways  accessory  or  assisting  in  promoting  of  that 
which  is  false,  but  abstain  from  it,  and  show  thy  dislike  of  it.  2.  It  is  base  and 
ignoble  to  tell  a  lie.  3.  It  is  clearly  against  the  use  and  ends  of  speech.  4.  It  is 
odious  to  God.  5.  It  is  abominated  by  men.  6.  It  is  the  work  of  the  devil.  My 
next  task  is  to  show  how  and  by  what  means  we  may  restrain  the  abuses  of  the 
tongue.  First,  we  must  avoid  too  much  speaking,  and  use  ourselves  to  silence  and 
reservedness.  In  the  multitude  of  words  there  wants  not  sin  (Prov.  x.  19).  There- 
fore here  we  ought  to  restrain  ourselves,  and  to  utter  things  with  deliberation. 
Secondly,  we  are  to  look  to  our  hearts,  and  to  keep  them  with  all  diligence  ;  for  the 
tongue  follows  the  motion  of  the  heart,  and  our  words  are  the  product  of  our  inward 
disposition.  Thirdly,  to  cure  most  of  the  maladies  of  the  tongue,  be  careful  that 
you  be  not  busybodies  in  other  men's  matters.  Fourthly,  avoid  excess  in  drink, 
and  the  company  of  those  that  are  addicted  to  that  vice.  For  such  persons 
generally  have  no  guard  on  their  tongues.  When  the  wine  inflames  the  company, 
then  this  wild-fire  flies  about.  Fifthly,  avoid  passion,  the  drunkenness  of  the 
mind.  None  off"end  more  with  their  tongues  than  the  angry  and  choleric.  Where- 
fore the  remedy  against  the  evil  of  the  tongue  prescribed  by  St.  James  is  meekness 
(chap.  iii.  ver.  13).  Hitherto  I  have  mentioned  those  abuses  of  the  tongue  which 
are  directly  forbid  in  this  part  of  the  Decalogue.  Now  I  shall  take  notice  of  that 
which  may  be  reduced  to  it,  and  that  is  unlawful  censuring  and  judging  of  our 
neighbours.  For  I  go  upon  that  rule  which  I  grounded  on  Christ's  exposition  of 
the  commandments,  namely,  that  the  inward  acts  of  the  mind  which  have 
reference  to  the  external  acts  of  sin  forbid  in  these  commandments  are  also  here 
forbid.  Judging  of  our  neighbours  is  a  disposition  of  mind  that  prepares  the  way 
for  bearing  false  witness  against  them,  for  making  use  of  our  tongues  to  their 
hurt.  Wherefore  it  is  remarkable  that  speaking  evil  of  our  brother,  and  judging 
our  brother,  are  coupled  together  (James  iv.  11).  This  latter,  then,  is  at  least 
condemned  in  this  commandment,  it  being  an  inward  witnessing  of  the  mind,  and 
so  is  a  false  testimony  borne  against  our  brethren.  Judging  others  is  unlawful 
either  in  respect  of  the  matter  or  the  manner  of  this  judging.  As  to  the  matter  or 
objects.  First,  it  is  unlawful  to  judge  peremptorily  of  our  neighbours  from  their 
former  actions,  and  what  they  themselves  once  were.  Secondly,  as  we  must  not 
rashly  judge  of  men  from  their  actions  before  their  conversion,  so  not  altogether 
from  those  after  it.  For  we  are  to  remember  that  the  best  men  are  not  free  from 
their  frailties  and  infirmities.  Thirdly,  judge  not  of  the  secret  thoughts  of  men. 
This  is  a  prerogative  that  God  only  can  claim.  Men's  hearts  are  sometimes  better 
than  their  lives,  and  therefore  this  should  check  us  in  our  judging  of  them. 
Pourthlyj  jadge  not  men  for  thiags  indifferent.    Not  for  any  opinion  or  practice 


CHAP,  T.]  DEUTERONOMY.  15^ 

disagreeing  from  ours  in  matters  of  that  nature.  Fifthly,  judge  not  from  common, 
accidents  and  events,  such  as  worldly  crosses,  poverty,  disgrace,  sickness,  and 
diseases.  Judge  not  from  these  concerning  the  guilt  of  any  person.  As  we  have 
little  reason  to  think  our  own  state  good,  because  it  is  prosperous,  so  we  have  as 
little  to  censure  and  condemn  another's  because  it  is  calamitous.  Sixthly,  judge 
not  of  the  future  and  eternal  state  of  any,  nor  of  the  decrees  of  God  concerning 
them.  Thus  far  as  to  the  matter  or  object  of  our  judging.  Next,  as  to  the  manner 
or  principle  and  motive,  it  is  unlawful  in  any  case  to  judge  and  censure  our 
neighbours  on  weak  and  insufficient  grounds.  As  first,  on  surmises  and  con- 
iectures.  Secondly,  all  judging  of  others  is  unlawful  that  is  grounded  on  bare 
reports  and  flying  rumours.  Common  fame  hath  been  a  liar,  and  therefore  she 
must  not  be  trusted.  Thirdly,  that  judging  and  censuring  is  very  blamable  that 
proceeds  from  prejudice  and  prepossession.  And  again,  judging  of  others  is 
unlawful  when  the  person  that  exercises  this  severity  is  guilty  of  the  same  errors 
and  miscarriages  which  he  condenms  in  them  (Rom.  ii.  1).  Hitherto  of  the 
negative  part  of  this  commandment ;  now  for  the  affirmative.  First,  this  com- 
mandment obliges  us  to  use  our  tongues,  to  bear  witness  with  them.  It  is  not  an 
indifferent  thing  whether  we  speak  or  not.  For  speech  distinguishes  us  from 
dumb  animals,  and  therefore  we  act  contrary  to  our  nature  if  we  imitate  those 
mute  creatures  and  affect  to  be  speechless.  We  know  that  reason  and  religion 
bid  us  employ  that  useful  member  which  God  hath  furnished  us  with,  and  they 
acquaint  us  that  it  is  a  sin  to  do  otherwise.  Secondly,  it  is  required  by  this 
commandment  that  we  make  use  of  our  speech  for  good  and  useful  purposes. 
Though  we  differ  from  brutes  as  to  speech,  yet  if  we  speak  without  reason  the 
difference  is  but  little  between  them  and  us.  For  barely  to  speak  is  no  excellency 
of  itself.  To  form  and  pronounce  certain  words  is  not  denied  to  parrots  and  some 
other  birds.  Wherefore  there  must  be  something  else  to  commend  the  gift  of 
speaking,  and  that  is  reason.  Thirdly,  it  is  more  particularly  enjoined  here  that 
we  speak  truth,  and  thereby  edify  our  brethren.  The  virtue  opposite  to  lying  is 
truth.  The  duty  that  is  opposed  to  bearing  false  witness  is  bearing  true  witness. 
In  two  cases  more  especially  we  should  be  very  careful  of  speaking  what  is  true. 
First,  in  religious  matters.  Secondly,  when  we  converse  with  children  and  young 
people.  Thirdly,  this  commandment  requires  us  to  preserve  and  maintain,  as 
much  as  in  us  lies,  the  good  name  of  our  neighbours.  This  doth  not  imply  that 
we  should  take  no  notice  of  the  faults  that  are  in  them,  or  that  we  should  praise 
the  bad,  and  commend  those  whom  we  know  to  be  such,  and  so  make  no  distinc- 
tion between  light  and  darkness,  good  and  evil.  But  the  duty  is,  that  we  seek  not 
out  for  occasion  to  speak  ill  of  others  :  that  as  we  observe  what  is  faulty  in  them, 
and  reprove  them  for  it,  so  we  take  notice  of  what  is  really  commendable,  and 
applaud  it.  (J".  Edwards,  D.D.)  The  false  witness: — This  is  the  ninth  word  of 
the  law,  and  you  will  observe  that  all  these  words  were  not  only  spoken  by  God, 
but  also  derive  their  authority  from  the  nature  of  God.  The  announcement  *'  I  am 
Jehovah  "  might  be  made  before  every  one  of  them.  If  the  question  were  asked, 
Why  should  we  not  lie  ?  why  ought  we  to  tell  the  truth  ?  the  answer  would  be 
that  lying  is  not  only  a  moral  injury  to  the  man  himself,  and  to  society,  but  also 
contrary  to  the  nature  of  God,  who  is  true  in  Himself  and  in  all  His  works. 
A  man  may  injure  his  neighbour  not  only  by  crimes,  but  also  hj  words,  by  a  false 
testimony,  by  slander,  by  backbiting.  And  unless  he  be  right  in  his  relations  to 
men,  he  cannot  be  right  in  his  relations  to  God.  The  tree  as  it  grows  must  receive 
nourishment  and  support  from  the  earth  in  which  it  is  planted,  from  the  air 
that  plays  through  its  branches,  from  the  dew  and  the  rain  that  come  down  upon 
it ;  but  it  also  receives  help  from  the  sun  that  is  millions  of  miles  away  from  it, 
and  that  sends  his  vivifying  beams  to  the  leaves  and  to  the  trunk  and  to  the 
very  roots.  And  man  finds  himself  in  this  world  sustaining  divers  relations ; 
relations  to  the  family,  to  society,  to  the  state,  and  higher  than  all,  and  more 
important  than  all,  to  God.  And  so  closely  linked  together  are  all  these  relations, 
that  he  cannot  do  wrong  in  his  relations  to  men  without  doing  wrong  in  his  relations 
to  God.  You  cannot  strike  the  link  that  binds  you  to  your  fellow-man  without 
touching  the  link  that  binds  you  to  God.  I.  What  does  it  forbid  ?  It  forbids 
perjury,  as  the  Third  Commandment  does  ;  but  there  it  is  prohibited  as  a  dishonour  to 
God,  and  here  it  is  prohibited  as  an  injury  to  our  neighbour.  This  word  forbids  all 
wilful  and  malicious  damage  to  a  neighbour's  reputation.  It  forbids  censoriousness, 
suspiciousness,  the  hasty  and  erroneous  judgment  of  character.  The  man  who  has 
«  warn  in  his  own  eye  is,  strange  to  say,  quick  to  detect  the  mote  in  his  brother*» 


154  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

eye.  There  are  many  things  to  be  considered  in  judging  character.  The  man's 
natural  temperament,  his  training,  his  education,  his  circumstances,  these  are  to  be 
considered.  God  takes  them  all  into  account,  and  there  is  many  a  poor  fellow 
picking  oakum  in  prison  who  is  not  so  guilty  in  God's  sight  as  some  magistrates  on 
the  bench.  This  word  of  the  law  forbids  all  harmful  conversation  about  others. 
It  has  been  said  that  you  need  not  mind  your  own  business,  as  there  are  very  many 
who  will  mind  it  for  you.  There  are  "  busybodies"  now,  as  in  the  apostle's  time, 
who  go  from  house  to  house  to  publish  the  last  piece  of  scandal.  A  story  grows 
like  a  snowball ;  swells  like  a  cairn,  when  every  passer-by  is  adding  a  stone  to  the 
heap.  "The  words  of  a  tale-bearer  are  as  wounds;  and  they  go  down  into  the 
innermost  parts. "  It  is  an  easy  thing  to  find  fault  ;  for  there  is  nothing  perfect 
among  men.  Every  character  is  defective  ;  every  Christian  work  is  defective  ;  and 
just  as  I  have  torn  to  pieces  many  a  sermon  I  have  written,  to  begin  again,  so  much 
of  our  Christian  work  might  be  torn  to  pieces,  in  order  to  begin  again.  It  is  so 
easy,  therefore,  to  find  fault.  There  is  an  old  fable  to  this  effect,  that  Jupiter 
loaded  a  man  with  two  wallets— the  one  filled  with  his  own  vices,  being  slung  at 
his  back  ;  the  other,  heavy  with  his  neighbour's  faults,  being  hung  in  front,  so  that 
he  always  saw  the  latter,  and  seldom  or  never  saw  the  former.  II.  Consider  some 
OF  THE  REASONS  WHY  WE  SHOULD  OBEY  THIS  LAW.  I  have  already  said  that  as  it 
is  given  by  the  true  God,  the  God  of  truth,  this  is  the  supreme  and  all-sufl5cient 
reason  for  us.  But  there  are  other  considerations  which  are  also  important.  For 
example,  let  us  remember  the  value  of  a  good  name ;  it  is  "rather  to  be  chosen 
than  great  riches."  A  good  character  is  better  than  property,  better  than  fame, 
better  than  life.  Regard  it  as  a  sacred  thing,  and  do  not  injure  it.  And  let  us 
remember,  also,  our  relations  to  our  fellow-men.  "  Thou  shalt  not  bear  false  witness 
against  thy  neighbour."  A  ruler  asked  Jesus,  "Who  is  my  neighbour  ?"  and  He 
replied  in  the  parable  of  the  Good  Samaritan.  The  word  "neighbour"  means,  I 
suppose,  nigh-boor,  the  boor  or  countryman  who  is  nigh.  But  Christ  gave  to  the 
word  a  much  deeper  and  broader  significance.  Help  the  weak,  and  you  will  be  a 
neighbour  to  him  ;  relieve  the  needy,  and  you  will  be  a  neighbour  to  him  ;  bind  up 
the  wounds  of  the  poor  sufferer,  and  you  will  be  a  neighbour  to  him.  Show  that 
your  religion  means  love,  neighbourliness  ;  and  then  not  only  your  neighbour's  life 
and  property,  but  his  good  name  also,  will  be  sacred  in  your  sight.  Look  upon 
your  neighbour  as  your  brother,  inheriting  the  same  nature,  beset  by  the  same 
infirmities,  defiled  by  the  same  sin,  exposed  to  the  same  suffering,  at  last  finding  a 
grave  in  the  same  earth.  {James  Owen.)  On  calumny  and  detraction: — This 
appears,  perhaps,  only  to  forbid  a  false  oath  in  a  court  of  justice  to  the  prejudice  of 
a  fellow-creature,  but  in  reality  it  comprehends  and  prohibits  every  sort  of  injury 
which  the  tongue  of  one  man  can  do  to  the  character  of  another.  The  most  atrocious 
of  these  is  clearly  that  which  seems  to  have  been  more  particularly  in  the  contem- 
plation of  the  legislator,  the  solemn  affirmation  before  a  magistrate  of  what  we  know 
to  be  untrue  to  the  injury  of  another.  The  next  degree  of  guilt  in  the  violation  of 
this  commandment  is  that  of  him  who  affirms  in  private  life  what  he  knows  to  be 
false  with  an  intention  of  wounding  the  reputation  of  his  neighbour.  The  injury 
done  to  the  person  defamed  is  often  as  grievous  as  what  he  would  have  received  from 
a  false  testimony  in  a  court  of  justice  ;  his  character,  his  livelihood  perhaps,  which 
frequently  depends  on  that  character,  are  the  sacrifice.  A  third  offender  against 
this  commandment  is  he  who  repeats  to  the  detriment  of  another  reports  which  he 
has  picked  up  in  conversation,  not  indeed  knowing  them  to  be  false,  but  which  he 
might  reasonably  presume  to  be  so,  or  which  at  least  he  does  not  know  to  be  true, 
nor  indeed  is  he  solicitous  about  the  truth  of  them.  He  thinks  he  has  a  right  to 
repeat  them.  Supposing  that  he  had,  is  such  a  repetition  generous  ?  is  it  doing  as 
he  would  wish  others  to  do  by  him  ?  But  he  is  deceived  in  the  matter  of  right ;  he 
can  have  none  to  affirm  anything  which  may  injure  the  character  of  another,  of  the 
truth  of  which  he  is  not  absolutely  certain.  Another  kind  of  evil-speaking  by 
which  this  commandment  is  transgressed,  and  the  reputation  of  our  neighbour 
injured,  is  the  fixing  on  him  in  general  terms  a  bad  character ;  calling  him,  for 
example,  covetous,  proud,  foolish,  or  hypocritical,  assigning  to  him  any  ill  propen- 
sity in  the  gross,  without  mentioning  any  particular  instances  of  it.  Another  mode 
of  gratifying  his  passion,  which  the  calumniator  practises,  is  by  miscalling  good 
qualities,  or  attributing  them,  and  the  actions  which  arise  from  them,  to  bad  or 
interested  motives.  Now,  he  who  is  guilty  of  this  is  eminently  a  slanderer,  since  he 
asserts  a  thing  to  my  prejudice  of  the  truth  of  which  he  must  be  doubtful ;  for  how 
can  any  other  person  possibly  know  my  heart  ?    A  fourth  slanderer,  and  perhaps 


CHAP,  v.]  DEUTERONOMY.  166 

the  most  pernicious  of  all,  vents  his  calumnies  under  the  disguise  of  benevolence  ; 
and  with  an  affectation  of  candour,  pretending  to  vindicate  those  whom  he  has 
heard,  or  feigns  that  he  has  heard,  attacked,  overwhelms  them  with  the  deeper 
obloquy.  I  have  still  further  to  observe  that  there  are  scandalous  ears  as  well  as 
scandalous  tongues,  and  that  he  who  encourages  such  kind  of  conversation,  by 
greedily  and  with  pleasure  listening  to  it,  who,  though  he  does  not  concur,  shows 
plainly  how  much  he  delights  in  it ;  who,  by  artful  questions  and  affected  doubts, 
draws  on  the  calumniator  to  launch  out  and  to  expatiate,  is  scarcely  less  guilty  than 
the  person  whose  vice  he  thus  fosters,  and  manifests  that  he  approves.  I  shall 
now  proceed  to  point  out  the  chief  motives  by  which  men  who  are  guilty  of  this 
odious  vice  are  actuated,  and  in  so  doing  evince  its  wickedness.  1.  The  destroyer 
of  character  is,  I  think,  most  commonly  actuated  by  pride  ;  it  so  happens  that 
from  the  desire  of  distinction,  which  in  a  greater  or  less  degree  is  felt  by  all  men, 
we  have  established  in  our  own  mind  a  sort  of  competition  for  it  with  every  one 
around  us  :  we  are  desirous  of  surpassing,  or  at  least  of  having  the  fame  of  surpass- 
ing, them  in  whatever  excellences  fall  within  our  sphere.  2.  A  second  root  of 
scandal  and  detraction  is  envy.  This  is  very  similar  in  its  nature  to  the  species  of 
pride  above-mentioned,  but  yet  it  is  not  quite  the  same  ;  it  is  even  still  more  hate- 
ful. 3.  A  third  origin  of  this  vice  is  malice  ;  we  have  received  from  our  neighbour 
some  real  or  imaginary  injury,  which  has  provoked  our  dislike  of  him ;  perhaps 
it  is  not  in  our  power  to  avenge  ourselves  any  other  way,  or  not  in  our  idea  to  an 
adequate  degree,  we  therefore  commence  an  attack  on  his  character,  vilify  and  abuse 
him  on  all  occasions,  disparaging  his  merits,  and  aggravating  his  failings  whenever 
we  have  opportunity.  4.  I  will  just  mention  one  other  ground  of  scandal,  and 
that  is  vanity.  If  the  esteem  of  his  fellow-creatures  be  of  any  value  in  his  eyes, 
let  him  remember  that  he  of  all  others  stands  the  least  chance  of  possessing  it ;  the 
inventor  of  slander,  the  propagator  of  calumny,  is  the  object  of  universal  contempt 
and  abhorrence.     {G.  Haggitt,  M.A.)        The  Ninth  Commandment :— I.  As  far  as 

WE  CAN  WE  MUST  PRESERVE  A  GOOD  OPINION  OF  OUR  NEIGHBOUR  IN  OUR  HEARTS. 

And  therefore  these  three  things  fall  evidently  under  the  censure  of  this  command- 
ment. 1.  A  censorious  disposition.  2.  Rash  judging.  3.  A  willingness  to  hear  of 
the  fault  of  others.  Which  three  are  so  connected  together  that  there  is  no  dividing 
them.     II.  The  other  duty  required  by  this  commandment  is,  that  according 

TO  OUR  power  WE  DO    MAINTAIN  HIS   CHARACTER   IN    THE  WORLD.      And   SO  theSB 

three  other  things  fall  also  under  the  censure  of  this  commandment.  1.  Going 
about  to  lessen  the  real  attainments  of  our  neighbour,  which  is  detraction.  2.  Laying 
a  charge  against  him  that  does  not  belong  to  him,  which  is  slander.  3.  Discovering 
his  real  faults  needlessly,  which  is  evil-speaking.  III.  From  this  account  you  may 
SEE  WHAT  AN  ENEMY  YOUR  TONGUE  IS  TO  YOUR  SOUL,  and  what  a  pervcrsc  nature 
there  is  within  you  to  set  on  fire  your  tongue.  1.  Above  all  things  in  the  world 
pray  for  a  new  heart.  The  chief  transgressions  of  this  commandment  are  vdthin  ; 
and  you  know  also  it  is  out  of  the  abundance  of  the  heart  the  mouth  speaketh. 
2.  Enjoin  this  upon  yourself,  never  to  speak  of  the  faults  of  others  unless  absolutely 
obliged  to  it.  {S.  Walker,  B. A.)  The  Ninth  Commandment:—!.  "What  are 
THE  DUTIES  REQUIRED  ?  Thcsc  are — 1.  Our  endeavouring  to  promote  truth  in  all 
we  say  or  do,  and  that,  as  to  what  either  concerns  ourselves  or  others.  As  to  what 
concerns  ourselves,  we  are  to  fence  against  everything  that  savours  of  deceit  or 
hypocrisy,  and  in  our  whole  conversation  endeavour  to  be  what  we  pretend  to  be, 
2.  This  commandment  obliges  us  to  endeavour  to  promote  our  own  and  our  neigh- 
bour's good  name.  (1)  Our  own  good  name,  which  consists  not  in  our  having  the 
applause  of  the  world,  but  in  our  deserving  the  just  esteem  thereof,  and  in  our  being 
loved  and  valued  for  our  usefulness  to  mankind  in  general.  And  this  esteem  is 
not  to  be  gained  by  commending  ourselves,  or  doing  anything  but  what  we  engage 
in  with  a  good  conscience  and  the  fear  of  God,  (2)  We  are  to  endeavour  to  main- 
tain the  good  name  of  others  ;  and  in  order  thereto,  we  must  render  to  them  those 
marks  of  respect  and  honour  which  their  character  and  advancement  in  gifts  or 
grace  calls  for,  yet  without  being  guilty  of  servile  flattery  or  dissimulation.  II.  The 
SINS  FORBIDDEN  THEREIN,  which  are  contained  in  that  general  expression  *' bearing 
false  witness."  This  may  either  respect  ourselves  or  others.  A  person  may  be  said 
to  bear  false  witness  against  himself,  and  that  either  in  thinking  too  highly  or 
meanly  of  himself.  But  that  which  is  principally  forbidden  in  this  commandment 
is  a  person's  bearing  false  witness  against  his  neighbour,  and  that  when  he  either 
endeavours  to  deceive  or  do  him  prejudice,  as  to  his  reputation  in  the  world ;  the 
one  is  called  lying,  the  other  backbiting  or  slandering.     III.  To  consider  it  as 


156  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  r. 

FORBIDDING  OTJE  DOING   THAT  WHICH  IS   INJURIOUS  TO   OUR   NEIGHBOUR'S   GOOD 

NAME,  EITHER  BY  WORDS  OR  ACTIONS ;  and  this  is  done  two  ways — either  before 
his  face  or  behind  his  back.  1.  Doing  injury  to  another,  by  speaking  against  him 
before  his  face.  It  is  true,  we  give  him  hereby  the  liberty  of  vindicating  himself. 
Nevertheless,  if  the  thing  be  false  which  is  alleged  against  him,  proceeding  from 
malice  and  envy,  it  is  a  crime  of  a  very  heinous  nature.  Sometimes  that  wmch  is 
the  highest  ornament  and  greatest  excellency  of  a  Christian  is  turned  to  his  reproach. 
This  sin  is  attended  with  many  aggravations  ;  for  God  reckons  it  as  a  contempt  cast 
on  Himself.  2.  The  injury  that  is  done  to  others  by  speaking  against  them  behind 
their  backs.  This  they  are  guilty  of  who  raise  or  invent  false  reports  of  their 
neighbours.  This  is  done  in  various  ways.  (1)  By  pretending  that  a  person  is  guilty 
of  a  fault  which  he  is  innocent  of.  (2)  By  divulging  a  real  fault  which  has  been 
acknowledged  and  repented  of,  and  therefore  ought  to  be  concealed  ;  or  when  there 
is  no  pretence  for  making  it  public,  but  what  arises  from  malice  and  hatred  of  the 
person.  (3)  By  aggravating  or  representing  faults  worse  than  they  are.  (4)  By 
reporting  the  bad  actions  of  men,  and  at  the  same  time  overlooking  and  extenuating 
their  good  ones,  and  so  not  doing  them  the  justice  of  setting  one  in  the  balance 
against  the  other.  (5)  By  putting  the  worst  and  most  injurious  construction  on 
actions  that  are  really  excellent.  (6)  By  reporting  things  to  the  prejudice  of 
others,  which  are  grounded  on  such  slender  evidence  that  they  themselves  hardly 
believe  them,  or  at  least  would  not,  had  they  not  a  design  to  make  use 
thereof,  to  defame  them.  {Hiomas  Ridglet,  D.D.)  False  vntness: — We  may 
frequently  observe  that  men  who  would  abhor  the  thought  of  violating  the 
property  of  another  by  direct  methods  of  oppression  will  nevertheless  invade  the 
characters  of  others  with  defamation,  and  destroy  a  reputation  without  remorse. 

1.  What  are  the  different  senses  in  which  a  man  may  be  said  to  bear  false 
WITNESS  against  HIS  NEIGHBOUR  ?  1.  The  highest  degree  of  guilt  forbidden  by  this 
law  of  God  is  false  testimony  in  a  literal  sense,  or  deliberate  and  solemn  perjury  in 
a  court  of  justice,  by  which  the  life  of  an  innocent  man  is  taken  away,  the  rightful 
owner  stripped  of  his  possessions,  or  an  oppressor  supported  in  his  usurpations. 

2.  He  that  attacks  the  reputation  of  another  by  calumny  is  doubtless,  according  to 
the  malignity  of  the  report,  chargeable  with  the  breach  of  this  commandment.  To 
invent  a  defamatory  falsehood,  to  rack  the  invention  for  the  sake  of  disguising  it 
with  circumstances  of  probability,  and  propagate  it  industriously  till  it  becomes 
popular  and  takes  root  in  the  minds  of  men,  is  such  a  continued  act  of  malice  as 
nothing  can  palliate.  Neither  is  the  first  author  only  of  a  calumny  a  false  witness 
against  his  neighbour,  but  he  likewise  that  disseminates  and  promotes  it,  since  without 
his  assistance  it  would  perish  as  soon  as  it  is  produced,  would  evaporate  in  the  air 
without  effect,  and  hurt  none  but  him  that  uttered  it.  It  may  happen,  indeed,  that 
a  calumny  may  be  supported  by  such  testimony,  and  connected  with  such  prob- 
abilities as  may  deceive  the  circumspect  and  just ;  and  the  reporter  in  such  cases 
is  by  no  means  to  be  charged  with  bearing  false  witness  ;  because  to  believe  and 
disbelieve  is  not  in  our  power  ;  for  there  is  a  certain  degree  of  evidence  to  which  a 
man  cannot  but  yield.  He,  therefore,  who  is  deceived  himself  cannot  be  accused 
of  deceiving  others,  and  is  only  so  far  blamable  as  he  contributed  to  the  dishonour 
or  prejudice  of  another  by  spreading  his  faults  without  any  just  occasion  or  lawful 
cause.  There  is  another  occasion  made  use  of  by  which,  if  this  fault  should  escape 
from  censure,  many  others  might  enjoy  the  same  advantage.  It  is  urged  by  some 
that  they  do  not  adopt  the  tale  till  it  is  generally  received,  and  only  promote  what 
they  cannot  hinder.  But  how  must  wickedness  be  controlled  if  its  prevalence  be  a 
reason  for  compliance  ?  3.  There  is  yet  another  way  by  which  we  may  partake,  in 
some  measure,  of  the  sin  of  bearing  false  witness.  That  he  who  does  not  hinder 
the  commission  of  a  crime  involves  himself  in  the  guilt  cannot  be  denied  ;  and  that 
his  guilt  is  yet  more  flagrant  if,  instead  of  obstructing  he  encourages  it,  is  equally 
evident.  He  therefore,  that  receives  a  calumny  with  applause,  or  listens  to  it  with, 
silent  approbation,  must  be  at  least  chargeable  with  conniving  at  wrong,  which  will 
be  found  no  trivial  accusation  when  we  have  considered — II.  The  enormity  of  the 
SIN  OF  BEARING  FALSE  WITNESS.  The  malignity  of  an  offence  arises  either  from 
the  motives  that  prompted  it  or  the  consequences  produced  by  it.  If  we  examine 
the  sin  of  calumny  by  this  rule  we  shall  find  both  the  motives  and  consequences  of 
the  worst  kind.  1.  The  most  usual  incitement  to  defamation  is  envy,  or  impatience 
of  the  merit  or  success  of  others ;  a  malice  raised  not  by  any  injury  received,  but 
merely  by  the  sight  of  that  happiness  which  we  cannot  attain.  This  is  a  passion  of 
all  others  the  most  hurtful  and  contemptible ;  it  is  pride  complicated  with  laziness  ; 


CHAP,  v.]  DEUTERONOMY.  157 

pride  which  inclines  ua  to  wish  ourselves  upon  the  level  with  others,  and  laziness 
which    hinders  us   from  pursuing  our   inclinations  with  vigour  and    assiduity. 
Calumnies  are  sometimes  the  offspring  of  resentment.     When  a  man  is  opposed  in 
a  design  which  he  cannot  justify,  and  defeated  in  the  prosecution  of  schemes  of 
tyranny,  extortion,  or  oppression,  he  seldom  fails  to  revenge  his  overthrow  by 
blackening  that  integrity  which  effected  it.     No  rage  is  more  fierce  than  that  of  a 
villain  disappointed  of  those  advantages  which  he  has  pursued  by  a  long  train  of 
wickedness.     He  has  forfeited  the  esteem  of  mankind,  he  has  burdened  his  con- 
science and  hazarded  his  future  happiness  to  no  purpose,  and  has  now  nothing  to 
hope  but  the  satisfaction  of  involving  those  who  have  broken  his  measures  in  mis- 
fortunes and  disgrace.     By  wretches  like  these  it  is  no  wonder  if  the  vilest  arts  of 
detraction  are  practised  without  scruple,  since  both  their  resentment  and  their 
interest  direct  them  to  depress  those  whose  influence  and  authority  will  be  employed 
against  them.     But  what  can  be  said  of  those  who,  without  being  impelled  by  any 
violence  of  passion,  without  having  received  any  injury  or  provocation,  and  without 
any  motives  of  interest,  vilify  the  deserving  and  the  worthless  without  distinction, 
and,  merely  to  gratify  the  levity  of  temper  and  incontinence  of  tongue,  throw  out 
aspersions  equally  dangerous  with  those  of  virulence  and  enmity  ?     2.  The  con- 
sequences of  this  crime,  whatever  be  the  inducement  to  commit  it,  are  equally 
pernicious.     He  that  attacks  the  reputation  of  another  invades  the  most  valuable 
part  of  his  property,  and  perhaps  the  only  part  which  he  can  call  his  own.    Calumny 
can  take  away  what  is  out  of  the  reach  of  tyranny  and  usurpation,  and  what  may 
enable  the  sufferer  to  repair  the  injuries  received  from  the  hand  of  oppression.     The 
persecutions  of  power  may  injure  the  fortune  of  a  good  man,  but  those  of  calumny 
must  complete  his  ruin.     Calumny  differs  from  most  other  injuries  in  this  dreadful 
circumstance.     He  who  commits  it  never  can  repair  it.     A  false  report  may  spread 
where  a  recantation  never  reaches  ;   and  an  accusation  must  certainly  fly  faster 
than  a  defence,  while  the  greater  part  of  mankind  are  base  and  wicked.     The  effects 
of  a  false  rejKirt  cannot  be  determined  or  circumscribed.     It  may  check  a  hero  in 
his  attempts  for  the  promotion  of  the  happiness  of  his  country,  or  a  saint  in  his 
endeavours  for  the  propagation  of  truth.     III.  What  keflections  may  best 
ENABLE  US  TO  AVOID  IT  ?   The  Way  to  avoid  effects  is  to  avoid  the  causes.    Whoever, 
therefore,  would  not  be  tempted  to  bear  false  witness  must  endeavour  to  suppress 
those  passions  which  may  incite  him  to  it.     Let  the  envious  man  consider  that  by 
detracting  from  the  character  of  others  he  in  reality  adds  nothing  to  his  own  ;  and 
the  malicious  man,  that  nothing  is  more  inconsistent  with  every  law  of  God  and 
institution  of  men  than  implacability  and  revenge.     If  men  would  spend  more  time 
in  examining  their  own  lives,  and  inspecting  their  own  characters,  they  would  have 
less  leisure  and  less  inclination  to  remark  with  severity  upon  others.     They  would 
easily  discover  that  it  will  not  be  to  their  advantage  to  exasperate  their  neighbour, 
and  that  a  scandalous  falsehood  may  be  easily  revenged  by  a  reproachful  truth. 
{S.  Johnson,  LL.D. )        Neither  shall  thou  hear  false  witness  against  thy  neighbour : — 
"Beyond  our  life,  our  spouse,  our  temporal  possessions  we  have  another  treasure, 
i.e.  honour  and  a  good  reputation,  therefore  God  wills  that  we  should  not  rob  our 
neighbourof  good  name,  forbearance,  justice." — Luther.    The  world  is  false.    *'He 
who  seeks  faithfulness  may  kindle  a  light  in  clear  day  and  yet  scarcely  find  it." 
Honour  is  a  precious  possession — it  is  before  gold.     Thus  God  takes  it  under  His 
protection  and  says,  "  Thou  shalt  not  bear  false  witness,"  &c.     To  make  the  mean- 
ing clear  we  shall  ask  and  answer  three  questions.     1.  What  is  false  witness  ? 
1.  People  generally  think  of  bearing  witness  in  a  court  of  justice.     In  this  view 
a  judge  may  be  a  false  witness  when,  like  Pilate,  he  knowingly  condemned  the 
innocent,  &c.     The  accused,  like  Achan.     It  is  bearing  false  witness  for  one  to  con- 
ceal the  truth,  and  to  deny  it,  even  when  force  is  used.     Even  the  smallest  village 
may  furnish  examples  of  the  truth  that  false  witness-bearing  from  hate,  good-will 
to  others,  or  self-interest  never  brought  blessing,  but  sooner  or  later  brought  the 
Divine  judgment.     2.  But  false  witnessing  is  not  confined  to  the  courts  of  justice — 
in  the  home  and  in  the  &ti-eet  and  field  it  finds  place— nor  even  when  evident  lying 
is  practised.     A  false  word  from  a  false  heart,  and  a  true  word  from  a  false  heart 
are  both  false  witnessing.     Liars  are  false  witnesses,— how  many  a  strife  have  they 
raised  !     The  betrayer  is  a  false  witness.     We  are  not  to  be  silent  concerning  evil, 
however— to  hide  mischief  ' '  in  order  to  preserve  peace. "     This  is  to  betray  righteous- 
ness.    But  those  who  betray  secrets  which  can  be  kept  with  good  conscience  ;  who 
pry  into  their  neighbour's  concerns  in  order  with  malicious  glee  to  spread  abroad 
any  supposed  weakness,  &c.  ;  those  who  under  the  guise  of  friendship  creep  into 


158  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

the  confidence  of  men  and  betray  them  to  the  unfriendly — these  are  traitors  whose 
evil  report  remaineth,  e.g.,  Judas.  They  are  false  witnesses  also  who  take  up  an 
evil  reproach  against  their  neighbour  (Psa.  xv.  2) ;  so,  too,  are  backbiters.  Against 
open  liars  men  can  defend  themselves,  but  not  against  the  sneaking  backbiter, 
who  ends  with  his  hypocritical — "but  I  don't  want  it  to  be  known  more  widely," 
&c.  "Words  spoken  in  innocence  are  wrested  so  that  they  seem  criminal,  &c. 
"Honey  is  in  their  mouth,  but  gall  in  their  heart."  Every  word  from  a  false 
heart,  be  it  blame  or  praise,  &c.,  is  false  witness ;  and  "a  false  witness  shall  not 
remain  unpunished."  II.  How  are  we  to  prevent  the  false  witxess-beab- 
INO  OF  OTHERS  ?  1.  God  has  so  ordered  that  lying  in  the  long-run  never  comes  to 
good.  Slander  does  not  live  long,  and  even  at  the  worst,  if  there  is  no  justice  for 
you  on  earth,  there  is  in  heaven.  We  must  ever  seek  to  speak  good  of  our  neigh- 
bour. **  There  would  be  no  thieves  if  there  were  no  receivers,"  so  there  would  be  no 
slanderers  if  there  were  no  listeners.  "The  slanderer  has  the  devil  in  his  tongue," 
said  Luther  ;  "and  he  who  listens  has  him  in  his  ear."  Show  to  a  slanderer  a  deaf 
ear,  a  reproachful  look,  a  closed  door,  and  if  you  cannot  escape  him,  then 
you  must  not  be  silent.  If  he  has  the  heart  to  slander  your  friend  you  must 
have  the  heart  to  censure  his  lies,  &c.  "  Honour  and  a  good  name  are  easily 
injured  "  ;  therefore  so  speak  to  the  injurer  of  another's  reputation  until  he  blush 
■with  shame,  and  if  the  slanderer  speaks  truth,  then  seek  if  possible  to  put  forward 
something  praiseworthy  in  him  who  is  slandered.  2.  True,  there  are  things  that 
are  evil,  godless,  &c. ,  and  they  must  be  called  by  their  right  names,  and  hypocrites, 
wolves  in  sheep's  clothing,  must  not  be  spared.  3.  There  are,  however,  sometimes 
actions  and  words  which  are  difficult  to  class.  And  there  are  men  who  have  two 
sides  to  their  characters.  Then  we  must  remember,  "love  bears  all,  believes  all 
things,  hopes  all  things,"  &c.  4.  If  all  were  so  to  act,  if  each  were  a  faithful 
Jonathan,  or  Ahimelech,  or  Gamaliel,  then  Doegs  and  Ahithopliels  and  Judases 
would  fail.  But — the  slanderer  lurks  in  all  our  hearts — we  don't  need  to  seek 
Pharisees  in  Jerusalem  only.  Therefore — III.  How  shall  we  keep  our  own- 
tongue  FROM  false  witness-bearing  ?  1.  The  tongue  is  ruled  by  the  heart.  The 
mouth  will  give  utterance  to  righteousness  if  the  heart  is  righteous.  ' '  From  a  good 
root  comes  good  fruit."  Silence  is  an  art  which  many  do  not  learn  during  a  long 
life.  "  Make  a  grave  of  thine  ears,  and  close  it  up  until  duty  compels  thee  to  speak," 
say^  Luther.  2.  If  you  will  speak,  then  watch  your  words.  "A  word  spoken  is 
like  an  arrow  shot  from  the  bow  " — who  can  outdistance  it  ?  who  recall  it  ?  There 
are  no  harmless  lies.  Even  what  is  stated  from  amiability  {e.g.,  when  an  indolent 
or  unfaithful  servant  is  testified  to  as  faithful,  diligent,  &c. ),  but  which  is  not  con- 
sonant with  truth,  is  false  witness-bearing.  3.  Rash  judgments  of  others  often  lead 
to  false  witnessing.  "  Don't  do  to  others,"  &c.  Readiness  to  believe  what  is  said 
to  another's  harm  is  also  a  species  of  this  transgression.  When  Luther  stood  before 
his  accusers  he  almost  fainted  after  much  speaking,  and  Duke  Erich  sent  him  a 
refreshing  draught  in  a  silver  cup,  with  the  injunction  to  refresh  himself.  Anxious 
friends  whispered  that  the  Duke  was  his  enemy,  and  that  there  might  be  poison  in 
the  draught.  But  Luther  drank  it  and  gave  thanks,  saying,  "As  Duke  Erich  has 
remembered  me  now,  so  may  God  remember  him  in  the  last  hour."  4.  Do  not 
speak  bitterly  of  one  who  was  once  your  friend.  Although  he  has  failed  you,  do 
not  become  his  enemy.  5.  It  may  be  a  duty  sometimes  to  say  something  hard  of 
one  in  whose  presence  you  stand  in  order  to  save  an  innocent  or  inexperienced 
person  from  danger.  Then  ask  first :  *  *  Dare  I  say  before  this  man's  face  what  I 
would  say  of  him  behind  his  back  1 "  and  then  do  it  clearly  and  unshrinkingly. 
Our  Redeemer,  a  John,  a  Paul,  are  our  examples.  6.  Above  all,  covet  the  honour  of 
having  this  said  of  you  :  "This  man  means  what  he  says."  Blessed  is  he  whom 
the  Searcher  of  hearts  sees  to  be  a  Nathanael  (John  i.  47).  {K.  H.  Caspari.) 
Rights  of  faine: — Cast  into  the  mould  of  changeless  instinct,  the  ant  of  to-day  is 
not  wiser  than  the  ant  in  Solomon's  time,  which  has  not  improved  the  architecture 
of  those  mansions  into  which  at  all  times  it  has  garnered  its  stores.  The  bee  of 
this  century  is  no  more  skilful  than  the  famous  bees  of  Hymettus,  and  has  made 
no  improvement  in  the  form  and  beauty  of  its  cells.  The  beaver  of  our  times  con- 
structs his  habitation  on  the  same  plan  as  of  yore.  But  man  is  the  exception  to 
this  changeless  and  otherwise  universal  law.  The  beggar  may  become  a  millionaire, 
the  peasant  a  prince,  the  private  soldier  a  commantler  of  armies,  the  fool  a  philo- 
sopher, the  sinner  a  saint.  This  desire  and  this  capacity  are  everywhere  recognised. 
Civil  government  offers  to  the  best  citizens  its  largest  immunities  and  highest 
honours.     In  Jehovah's  moral  government  full  r^ -cognition  is  given  to  man's  ability 


CHAP,  v.]  DEUTERONOMY.  159 

to  rise  to  greatness.  We  are  commanded  to  "covet  the  best  gifts."  The  scholar 
may  aspire  to  all  knowledge,  the  man  of  business  to  all  attainable  wealth,  the  citizen 
to  the  highest  stations  in  life,  and  all  to  the  noblest  achievements,  to  the  widest 
influence,^  and  to  the  most  honourable  distinctions.  Such  aspirations  have  been 
realised  in  the  past,  and  may  be  in  all  time  to  come.  The  desire  for  this  pre- 
eminence is  an  evil  when  it  is  gratified  in  defiance  of  God  and  of  human  rights. 
From  such  a  heart  God  is  excluded  :  the  shrine  is  selfishness  ;  the  idol  is  self! 
When  supreme  this  desire  has  given  birth  to  a  brood  of  the  most  devilish  passions. 
Vanity  begets  hypocrisy  ;  pride,  haughtiness ;  jealousy,  hatred  ;  envy,  murder. 
Some  men  attain  to  greatness,  but  it  is  the  greatness  of  infamy.  When  this  desire 
is  gratified  by  the  sacrifice  of  principle  to  policy,  of  character  for  reputation,  it  is 
highly  censurable.  Two  things  are  dear  to  mankind — character  and  reputation. 
If  a  man  has  a  right  to  life,  liberty,  and  property,  he  has  also  a  right  to  his 
character,  and  every  injury  done  thereto  is  an  infringement  of  a  natural  right  and 
a  crime  against  society.  Character  is  what  a  man  is,  in  his  present  intellectual, 
social,  and  moral  condition.  Character  is  the  wealth  of  the  soul,  the  only  wealth 
of  which  some  are  ever  possessed.  It  is  the  most  substantial  possession  for  this  life 
and  the  life  to  come.  Gold  cannot  purchase  it.  It  comes  to  the  individual  in 
compliance  with  the  requisitions  of  law  and  by  the  assistance  of  those  gracious 
influences  which  descend  from  heaven.  Many  a  man  is  bad  to-day,  having 
degenerated  from  original  innocence  and  a  high  state  of  purity,  because  he  did 
not  resist  the  assaults  upon  his  personal  character.  Reputation  may  be  lost  and 
regained,  but  to  restore  character  is  the  work  of  God.  There  may  be  a  beautiful 
correlation  between  the  public  estimation  of  a  citizen  and  what  he  is  in  all  the 
depth  and  breadth  of  his  being.  Character  and  reputation  should  go  hand  in 
hand  and  present  a  proximity  closer  than  the  proposition  and  demonstration  of  a 
geometrician ;  but  it  is  too  often  true  that  a  citizen  wrongfully  estimated  by  the 
public  is  the  favourite  of  heaven  ;  while,  on  the  other  hand,  he  may  be  reprobated 
by  heaven  and  yet  held  in  high  esteem  by  his  fellow-men.  In  a  general  sense, 
reputation  is  public  opinion,  and  may  be  good  or  bad,  true  or  false.  If  true  and 
good  it  is  the  source  of  wealth,  honour,  and  happiness.  To  succeed  in  any  of  the 
pursuits  of  life,  the  individual  must  be  in  repute  both  for  capability  and  honour. 
The  mechanic  must  be  in  repute  for  skill  in  his  handicraft ;  known  among  his 
fellow-craftsmen  as  one  deft  in  any  given  form  of  mechanism.  All  can  readily  see 
the  financial  value  of  reputation.  To  blast  that  reputation  is  to  rob  a  man,  and 
the  chief  difference  between  a  robber  and  a  slanderer  is  that  sometimes  you  can  find 
the  stolen  property  on  the  robber,  but  never  on  the  slanderer.  How  much  of  human 
happiness  there  is  in  what  we  call  reputation !  It  is  the  joy  of  most  men  to  be 
held  in  esteem  by  their  friends  and  neighbours.  For  fame  men  have  sacrificed 
everything.  All  men  sigh  for  recognition.  It  is  born  with  our  birth  ;  it  grows  with 
our  years.  If  these  are  acceptable  facts,  confirmed  by  our  experience  and  observa- 
tion and  recognised  by  law,  human  and  Divine,  then  what  anathema  is  too  terrible 
to  pronounce^  upon  him  who  deliberately  ruins  the  fair  fame  of  another,  or  what 
punishment  is  too  great  to  decree  against  him  ?  Fow  despicable  the  man  who, 
whether  for  wealth,  position,  or  glory,  seeks  to  rise  upon  the  ruins  of  another,  whose 
prospects  he  has  blighted,  whose  peace  he  has  ruined,  whose  fame  he  has  tarnished  ! 
Were  defamation  to  become  a  universal  custom,  what  a  blow  it  would  be  to  the  very 
foundations  of  society !  What  would  become  of  families,  of  friendships,  of  com- 
munities, if  every  failing  should  be  proclaimed  upon  the  housetop  ?  What  are  the 
compensations  to  men  who  gain  pre-eminence  by  such  despicable  means?  They 
inay  attain  to  glory.  All  this  is  bewitching ;  but  let  us  behold  the  troubled  life  of 
him  who  has  thus  attained  to  honour.  What  disquietude  of  soul ;  what  sensitive- 
ness to  every  report ;  what  anxiety  is  excited  by  every  change  of  public  sentiment ; 
what  servility  of  soul  to  the  great,  what  hypocritical  smiles  to  constituents,  what 
self-degradation  before  mankind  !  Whether  defamation  is  by  tongue  or  pen,  it 
is  forbidden  by  the  organic  law  that  flashed  its  authority  amid  the  thunders  of 
Mount  Sinai.  All  evil-speaking  may  not  be  slander.  It  is  proper,  when  the  ends 
of  justice  are  to  be  subserved,  to  bear  testimony  against  crimes,  for  he  who  conceals 
a  crime  renders  himself  party  to  the  off'ence.  It  is  within  reason  to  give  publicity  to 
the  faults  of  others  in  self-defence,  as  when  an  innocent  person  is  wTongfully 
accused  and  the  guilty  party  is  not  suspected.  At  all  times  the  innocent  man 
has  a  right  to  vindicate  himself.  It  is  not  evil-speaking  to  caution  the  innocent 
against  the  wiles  and  wicked  intentions  of  the  bad.  It  is  both  justice  and  charity. 
Nor  is  violence  done  to  law  and  justice  when  allusion  is  made  to  the  evil  acta 


160  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  r. 

of  another,  when  such  hare  been  made  known  either  by  the  offender  himself  or 
by  the  providence  of  God.  Yet  such  allusions  should  be  tempered  with  pity  and 
discretion,  and  not  made  with  hatred  and  pleasure.  But  this  liberty  of  speech  is 
carried  to  excess  and  abused  when  general  conclusions  are  drawn  from  a  single  evil 
act.  No  one  act  is  the  fair  exponent  of  any  man's  character.  A  single  illiberal 
act  does  not  prove  a  man  covetous,  any  more  than  one  act  of  charity  proves  him  to 
be  beneficent.  In  the  treatment  of  human  actions  what  a  world  of  difference  there 
is  between  candour  and  calumny  !  When  a  man  relieves  a  beggar  in  the  streets 
candour  would  ascribe  it  to  a  generous  emotion,  but  calumny  to  vanity  of  ostenta- 
tion. When  a  man  stops  short  in  a  career  of  prosperity  and  resigns  himself  to 
the  mercy  of  his  creditors,  candour  pleads  the  cruelty  of  misfortune,  but  calumny 
whispers  of  midnight  excesses,  habitual  licentiousness,  extravagant  dissipations. 
Where  candour  hesitates,  calumny  assumes  the  tone  of  authority.  When  the 
former  demands  investigation  and  proof,  the  latter  gives  confident  decisions. 
Candour  suspends  judgment  for  more  light,  calumny  draws  conclusions  and 
thunders  invectives.  When  candour  is  for  checking  the  malicious  report,  cali'a:ny 
opens  its  brazen  throat  and  gives  to  it  publicity,  calling  upon  the  wings  of  iiie  wind 
to  spread  it  abroad.  Candour  demands  hesitation  at  two  points,  when  the  merit  of 
an  action  is  disguised  by  the  uncertainty  of  evidence  and  the  ambiguity  of  its  com- 

Elexion — when  the  accused  has  the  right  to  the  benefit  of  the  doubt.  And  candour 
esitates  in  assigning  a  motive  for  actions,  for  motives  are  hid  by  the  veil  of  im- 
penetrable secrecy.  Candour  never  insinuates.  " Charity  thinketh  no  evil."  Half- 
truths  and  false  truths  are  slanders.  A  half-truth  is  one  side  of  a  question,  and 
may  be  the  bad  side.  Facta  are  false  when  out  of  their  logical  and  historical  con- 
nection. Facts  should  balance  each  other,  and  should  be  expressive  of  the  whole 
truth,  and  nothing  but  the  truth.  Some  natures  are  too  deep  to  be  understood. 
Some  natures  are  transparent,  some  translucent,  some  opaque.  There  are  those 
so  constituted  that  they  cannot  manifest  themselves,  and  so  go  through  the  world 
misunderstood  and  misrepresented.  Many  a  man  is  unknown  beyond  the  circle  of 
his  family  and  immediate  friends.  Chief  among  the  sources  of  slander  is  malice. 
A  man  succeeds  in  business,  in  art,  in  war,  in  professional  life,  and  when  his 
success  is  beyond  question  some  detracting  reason  is  assigned  for  his  success. 
Nobler  impulses  would  ascribe  that  success  to  genius.  And  what  an  abuse  of  the 
holy  mission  of  language  is  the  violation  of  this  Divine  law  of  fame  !  It  is  a  law 
of  our  being  that  the  words  we  utter  excite  in  others  corresponding  emotions. 
Familiarity  with  wrong  diminishes  our  abhorrence  thereof.  Speak  an  unkind  word 
against  a  man,  and  it  will  open  a  fountain  of  hatred  against  you  ;  speak  kindly  of 
an  enemy,  and  his  enmity  is  slain.  {J.  P.  Nevmian,  D.D.)  The  Ninth  Com- 
mandment : — I.  The  simple  intention  of  the  commandment.  It  demands  truth 
in  the  statement,  directly  or  indirectly  made,  by  man  to  man,  concerning  man. 
The  intercourse  of  men  with  each  other  is  to  depend  upon  actual  facts  of  character, 
conduct,  and  capability.  II.  How  the  commandment  may  be  violated.  1.  By 
false  evidence  given  in  courts  of  justice.  2.  By  the  lie  invented  and  distributed  with 
malicious  intention.  3.  By  repetition  of  some  report  without  careful  investigation. 
4.  By  a  hint,  a  suggestion,  or  an  adroit  question.     Stigma  has  been  cast  upon  many 

a  fair  reputation  by  such  a  question  as,  "  Have  you  heard  about  Mr. ?"    The 

answer  being  given  in  the  negative,  the  questioner  says,  "Ah,  well,  the  least 
said  soonest  mended."  Nothing  further  can  be  drawn  from  him,  but  an  unfavour- 
able impression  has  been  created,  and  the  innuendo  had  all  the  deceiving  eflFect  of 
false  witness.  5.  By  silence.  6.  By  the  imputation  of  ulterior,  selfish,  or  sordid 
motive.  "Ah,  yes  ;  he  knows  what  he  is  doing."  " The  gift  was  only  a  sprat  to 
catch  a  mackerel."  "He  knows  what  side  his  bread  is  buttered  on."  6.  By 
flattery.  To  utter  unwarranted  praise,  to  give  a  testimonial  of  character,  or  to 
recommend  a  man  simply  out  of  friendship  for  him,  while  we  know  him  to  be 
unworthy  of  the  testimony  we  bear,  is  to  inflict  injury  upon  the  person  to  whom  he 
is  thus  recommended.  III.  Application  to  present-day  questions.  1.  This  sin 
is  terribly  prevalent  among  individuals  to-day.  It  would  be  a  somewhat  startling 
revelation  if  records  could  be  taken  of  all  the  conversations  at  afternoon  teas, 
Dorcas  meetings,  and  all  those  institutions  at  which  women  do  congregate.  There 
is  no  doubt  that  men  are  also  guilty  of  much  wrong-doing  in  this  way,  but  it  seems 
a  peculiarly  favourite  form  of  iniquity  among  women.  2.  Nations  and  societies,  as 
well  as  individuals,  may  be  guilty  of  the  sin  of  false  witness.  It  seems  to-day  the 
perpetual  habit  of  certain  sections  of  the  Press  to  impute  motives  to  foreign  nations, 
and  for  politicians  to  heap  contumely  and  abuse  on  their  opponents.    Half  the  unrest 


CHAP,  v.]  DEUTERONOMY.  161 

in  Europe  may  be  said  to  be  due  to  false  witness  borne  by  one  nation  against 
another  through  the  Press.  {G.  Campbell  Morgan.)  The  remedy  against  evil 
speaking  .-—What  is  the  remedy  for  all  this  evil  ?  Is  it  not  to  cultivate  sedulously 
•within  ourselves  certain  good  and  wholesome  principles  of  thinking  and  speaking 
which  will  be  our  best  safeguard  against  the  sin  of  bearing  false  witness  ?  1.  Let  us 
maintain  the  precious  habit  of  accuracy  of  speech.  '*  Accuracy,"  said  Davison,  **  is 
of  the  noble  family  of  the  truth."  Let  us  guard  ourselves  at  all  times  against 
exaggeration  or  diminution  of  the  truth.  When  we  speak,  let  us  say  the  thing  as  it 
is.  2.  Let  us  seek  that  generous  and  kindly  spirit  that  believes  good  rather  than 
evil  of  a  neighbour.  It  is,  happily,  possible  to  reach  the  habit  of  kindly  thought,  of 
generous  tolerance  and  charitable  belief ;  and  just  as  the  atmosphere  on  the  higher 
Alps  is  too  pure  for  poisonous  microbes  to  live  in  it,  so  this  habit  will  generate  in 
our  heart  and  life  an  atmosphere  in  which  all  that  is  uncharitable  and  bitter  and 
base  and  false  will  utterly  perish.  3.  Let  us  remember  the  great  principle,  that  the 
more  we  diflFer  from  a  man  or  a  politician  or  a  church,  the  more  anxiously  and 
scrupulously  should  we  seek  to  be  fair  and  just  in  all  our  estimates  and  judgments 
of  him.  4.  Let  us  never  forget  that  all  men,  howsoever  much  they  may  differ  from 
us,  are  our  neighbours,  are  our  brothers,  and  in  the  light  of  this  great  brotherhood, 
this  larger  and  nobler  kinship,  only  realised  perfectly  in  Christ,  let  us  interpret  this 
command.     {G.  S.  Barrett ^  D.D.) 

Ver.  21.  Neither  shalt  thou  desire. — The  Tenth  Commandment : — Nothing,  be  it 
ever  so  mean,  is  to  be  coveted  which  belongs  to  another,  if  it  be  to  his  loss  and 
detriment.  Wherefore  it  is  observable  that  this  commandment  is  thus  briefly 
expressed  by  the  Saviour  (Matt.  x.  19).  Defraud  not,  take  not  away.  Christ  Himself 
made  this  alteration  of  the  word  in  the  last  commandment,  and  knew  best  the 
meaning  of  it.  He  makes  coveting  and  defrauding  the  same,  because  he  that 
inordinately  desires  that  which  is  another's  doth  it  to  his  wrong.  To  wish  any- 
thing hurtful  to  others  is  unlawful,  though  we  never  outwardly  act  what  we  design. 
"He  that  deviseth  to  do  evil  shall  be  called  a  mischievous  person"  (Prov.  xxiv.  8). 
He  merits  that  denomination  on  the  account  of  those  purposes  of  mischief  which 
are  in  his  heart.  And  as  the  Decalogue,  so  the  Gospel  declares  this  truth.  Our 
Saviour  interprets  lascivious  desires  to  be  lascivious  deeds  (Matt.  v.  28).  This  is 
the  Christian  law,  that  the  inward  fault  is  to  be  accounted  for ;  the  will  alone 
makes  us  obnoxious,  though  we  proceed  no  further.  We  are  forbid  not  only  to 
entertain  any  intentions  and  wishes,  but  any  imaginations  and  thoughts  tending  to 
the  hurt  of  others.  Secondly,  I  come  to  speak  of  the  affirmative  part,  or  the  duties 
enjoined  in  this  commandment.  Here,  then,  we  are  bid  to  act  out  of  an  inward 
principle  of  holiness.  The  law  doth  not  only  exact  of  us  external  obedience,  but 
internal  sanctity.  And  the  Gospel  doth  this  much  more,  it  enjoins  us  not  only  to 
cleanse  our  hands,  but  to  purify  our  hearts  (James  iv.  8).  As  we  must  take  care 
of  our  lives,  so  we  must  expel  all  vicious  appetites,  lusts,  and  desires  out  of  our 
minds.  We  must  regulate  our  intentions  and  purposes,  and  rectify  our  thoughts 
and  imaginations.  This  likewise  is  required  of  us  in  the  affirmative  part  of  this 
commandment,  that  we  desire  and  wish  in  our  hearts  all  good  to  our  neighbours ; 
that  we  be  so  far  from  coveting  what  is  theirs,  that  we  continually  aim  at  their 
welfare,  and  employ  our  thoughts  in  promoting  it.  Besides,  this  is  another  part 
of  the  positive  precept,  that  we  be  content  with  what  is  our  ovvti.  We  are  bid  here 
to  acquiesce  in  God's  providence,  and  to  rest  satisfied  with  the  condition  He  hath 
placed  us  in.  In  short,  then,  if  we  would  have  the  general  simi  of  both  the  negative 
and  affirmative  part  of  this  commandment,  it  is  thus  comprised  in  the  apostle's 
words,  "Let  your  conversation  be  without  covetousness,  and  be  content  with  such 
things  as  ye  have  "  (Heb.  xiii.  5).  Here  is  forbidden  an  inordinate  coveting  of  what 
we  have  not,  and  a  being  discontented  with  what  we  have.  So  that  I  think  I  shall 
accomplish  the  design  of  this  commandment  by  treating  distinctly  of  these  two, 
covetousness  and  contentment.  I  begin  with  the  former.  First,  as  to  its  nature. 
It  is  an  inordinate  desire  after  those  worldly  goods  which  we  have  not,  and  which 
it  is  not  fitting  we  should  have.  I  say,  it  is  an  excessive  desire  after  those  things. 
And  this  is  one  main  thing  that  constitutes  the  sin  of  covetousness,  as  we  may 
gather  from  the  description  of  it  in  the  sacred  writings.  Those  who  are  addicted 
to  it  are  said  to  be  greedy  of  gain  (Prov.  i.  19).  And  covetousness  itself  is  set  forth 
by  that  greedy  creature  the  horse-leech  with  its  two  daughters,  i.e.  its  double- 
forked  tongue  wherewith  it  continually  sucks  blood  (Prov.  xxx.  15).  This  compar- 
ison is  used  to  express  the  insatiableness  cf  those  persons'  desires  who  are  given  to 

II 


162  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ▼. 

avarice.  Secondly,  as  covetousness  is  an  immoderate,  so  it  is  an  inordinate  and 
irregular  desire  of  worldly  goods.  For — 1.  It  is  a  desire  of  them  as  they  are  our 
neighbour's.  And  thereby  is  intimated  to  us  that  the  covetous  have  an  evil  eye,  and 
grudge  at  the  good  of  others.  They  are  angry  that  they  have  not  a  monopoly  of 
worldly  riches,  and  it  grieves  them  that  any  one  hath  a  share  of  them  besides  them- 
selves. 2.  The  inordinacy  of  this  avaricious  desire  of  the  things  of  this  world  con- 
sists in  this,  that  it  is  a  longing  after  them  as  the  chief  good.  Riches  are  desired 
by  the  covetous  for  themselves  wholly,  and  are  reckoned  as  the  greatest  happiness. 
In  the  second  place,  I  am  to  display  the  evil  and  mischief  of  this  sin.  And  this  I 
will  do  by  showing — (1)  Covetousness  and  the  love  of  the  world  are  the  source  of 
most  sins  in  men's  lives  (1  Tim.  vi.  9).  There  is  no  kind  of  sin  almost  that  you  can 
mention  but  it  springs  from  this  root.  Covetous  persons  break  all  the  command- 
ments. There  is  no  sin  but  it  will  thrive  upon  such  a  root,  there  is  no  vice  but  this 
will  supply  nourishment  to  it.  But  a  good  conscience  cannot  grow  upon  it,  and 
nothing  that  is  virtuous  can  prosper.  (2)  And  so  I  proceed  to  the  second  particular, 
which  will  give  us  a  further  account  of  the  evil  and  mischief  of  covetousness, 
namely,  that  it  is  the  source  of  punishment.  And  here  I  will  show  first  that  this 
vice  is  its  own  punishment.  The  same  judgment  befalls  the  covetous  that  befell 
Korah  and  his  company,  they  are  swallowed  up  of  the  earth,  and  they  cannot 
extricate  themselves  out  of  this  misery.  This  greedy  appetite  never  suflFers  him  to 
say,  It  is  enough  :  but  in  the  fulness  of  his  sufficiency  he  is  in  straits  (Job  xx.  22). 
And  we  are  told  by  another  wise  man,  that  "  He  that  loveth  silver  shall  not  be  satis- 
fied with  silver  ;  nor  he  that  loveth  abundance  with  increase  "  (Eccles.  v.  10).  This 
is  the  genuine  effect  of  covetousness,  and  this  impossibility  of  being  satisfied  is  a 
continual  torment.  Again,  these  persons,  as  they  torment  themselves,  so  they  are 
judicially  punished  by  God.  Sometimes  the  hand  of  God  blasts  them  immediately, 
as  Gehazi  was  smitten  with  leprosy.  Sometimes  they  are  found  out  by  the  magis- 
trate, and  made  sacrifices  to  justice,  as  Achan  with  his  golden  wedge.  And  some- 
times through  the  judgment  of  God  men  of  violence  are  permitted  to  spoil  them  of 
what  they  have  so  sordidly  raked  together.  At  other  times  we  see  that  they  are 
abruptly  cut  off  in  the  career  of  their  covetous  pursuits  (Jer.  xvii.  11).  Sometimes 
they  are  their  own  executioners,  as  the  covetous  Judas  was.  Lastly,  the  covetous 
are  punished  in  another  world.  The  third  and  last  thing  I  undertook,  which  was 
to  offer  proper  remedies  against  this  inordinate  desiring  of  the  things  of  this  world. 
The  general  expedient  is  that  we  must  study  to  moderate  our  appetites  and  affec- 
tions, we  must  take  pains  with  ourselves  to  bring  our  souls  into  a  right  temper,  for 
it  is  the  mind  that  causes  all  the  disturbance  in  us  ;  wherefore,  if  this  be  not  duly 
disposed,  no  condition  wiU  please  us,  and  we  shall  be  perpetually  craving  and 
uneasy.  The  more  particular  rules  are  these — 1.  Know  and  remember  this,  that 
riches  and  abundance  are  commonly  indulged  to  the  worst  of  men,  and  hence  you 
may  conclude  they  are  of  no  great  worth.  Christ  chose  poverty,  and  left  it  as  a 
portion  to  His  disciples,  and  the  holiest  men  have  been  denied  the  riches  of  this 
world.  Let  us  meditate  on  this,  in  order  to  the  disengaging  of  our  souls  from  a 
covetous  desire  after  wealth  and  abundance.  2.  Observe  the  design  of  God's 
afflicting  hand.  Remember  this,  that  He  sends  outward  crosses  on  purpose  to 
diminish  our  immoderate  longing  after  these  things.  3.  Divert  your  worldly 
designs  by  those  that  are  spiritual.  Mind  these  things,  which  are  of  the  highest 
nature  :  covet  earnestly  the  best  gifts ;  labour  to  be  rich  towards  God.  Be  always 
earnestly  seeking  the  graces  of  God's  Spirit,  commimion  with  Him,  and  His  love 
and  favour.  Thus  cure  your  malady  by  revulsion.  4.  Always  carry  in  your  eye 
the  other  world,  and  then  you  will  be  cured  of  your  immoderate  longings  after  this. 
Look  up  to  heaven  and  contemplate  that,  and  then  the  earth  will  seem  to  be  but  a 
poor,  shrivelled  point.  Thus  I  have  propounded  the  proper  remedies  which  you 
may  successfully  make  use  of  for  the  extirpating  of  covetousness  and  the  im- 
moderate love  of  the  world.  And  because  you  can  do  nothing  of  this  without  the 
Divine  aid,  forget  not  to  be  frequent  in  prayer.  I  come,  then,  now  to  that  which 
is  the  positive  part  of  this  commandment,  namely,  contentedness.  And  here  I  am 
to  show— 1.  The  true  nature  of  it.  2.  The  excellency  and  benefit  of  it.  3.  The 
means  of  attaining  it.  First,  I  will  give  an  account  of  the  true  nature  of  content- 
ment. And  this  we  may  learn  from  what  hath  been  said  concerning  covetousness, 
for  true  contentment  is  opposite  to  covetousness,  and  therefore  is  rightly  defined  a 
cessation  of  all  covetous  desires,  and  an  acquiescing  in  what  we  have.  Content- 
ment therefore  denotes  these  two  things :  first,  that  the  desire  of  what  is  absent 
is  taken  off  j  secondly,  that  there  is  a  satisfaction  in  what  is  present.    For  this  ia 


CHAP,  v.]  DEUTERONOMY.  163 

certain,  that  our  ease  and  comfort  consist  in  having  what  we  desire,  and  in  being 
pleased  with  what  we  have.  Now,  then,  if  a  man  desires  something  and  yet  wants 
it,  or  hath  something  and  is  not  pleased  with  it,  he  cannot  possibly  be  contented. 
Here,  then,  is  the  noble  art  of  Christianity  to  take  off  the  edge  of  our  appetites, 
to  qualify  or  to  quench  our  thirst,  and  also  to  make  us  in  love  with  the  present,  to 
bring  our  minds  to  an  acquiescence  in  the  condition  that  God  places  us  in.  Thia 
latter  is  the  chief  thing  in  contentment,  and,  indeed,  comprehends  the  other ;  for 
if  we  contentedly  enjoy  the  present,  we  shall  not  enlarge  our  desires  to  things  that 
are  absent.  This  is  enioined  us  by  the  apostle  in  Heb.  xiii.  5,  "Be  content  with 
such  things  as  ye  have,'  or,  "with  the  present  things,"  for  so  it  should  be  translated. 
Secondly,  the  excellency  and  benefit  of  contentment  are  to  be  treated  of.  First,  this 
must  needs  be  a  very  excellent  grace,  because  it  argues  a  brave  and  generous  spirit. 
Secondly,  it  is  attended  with  pleasure  as  well  as  honour.  Thirdly,  it  is  also  profitable 
(1  Tim.  vi.  6).  A  contented  mind  is  impregnable.  We  are  rich  with  a  treasure  that 
none  but  ourselves  can  rob  us  of.  Fourthly  and  lastly,  to  sum  up  all  in  a  word, 
contentment  makes  us  happy.  Now,  he  that  hath  arrived  to  the  art  of  content- 
ment must  needs  be  happy,  because  his  will  and  the  things  he  converses  with 
exactly  suit  with  one  another.  The  third  thing  is  to  show  what  are  the  proper 
means  of  attaining  this  excellent  grace  of  contentedness.  Here  I  will  propound 
these  following  directions : — First,  in  order  to  contentment  it  is  necessary  that  we 
understand  aright  the  true  nature  and  disposition  of  the  things  of  this  world,  that 
we  form  right  conceptions  concerning  them.  In  the  first  place,  we  must  know  that 
they  are  in  their  own  nature  indifferent.  They  are  not  really  good,  and  so  not  the 
proper  objects  of  our  desires.  Consider  this,  and  be  content.  Secondly,  let  us 
consider  how  little  will  suffice  us,  and  how  unnecessary  the  abundance  of  the  things 
of  this  world  is.  Thirdly,  another  effectual  way  to  procure  contentment  is  to  make 
a  balance,  and  indifferently  to  poise  both  your  crosses  and  your  blessings.  If  you 
will  take  the  pains  to  lay  the  latter  in  one  scale,  as  well  as  the  former  in  another, 
you  will  make  them  even,  though  one  seemed  to  you  to  be  weightier  than  the  other. 
Have  you  never  heard  that  the  wind  and  tempest  which  battered  the  vessel  and  tore 
its  sails  drove  it  at  last  to  the  desired  haven  ?  Valerius  Maximus  tells  us  of  one 
in  a  Tyrian  ship  who  was  struck  into  the  sea  by  a  wave  on  one  side,  and  presently 
another  wave  on  the  other  side  of  the  ship  hoisted  him  up  into  it.  So  with  respect 
to  those  things  which  we  are  now  speaking  of,  there  is  an  abundant  requital.  When- 
ever there  is  any  loss  or  adverse  event  there  is  constantly  some  compensation  goes 
along  with  it — at  least,  if  we  rightly  and  skilfully  improve  the  adverse  accident,  for 
thereby  we  may  turn  blanks  into  prizes.  There  is  never  anything  taken  from  us 
but  we  may  find  there  is  some  supply  made  for  it,  or  else  there  is  something  yet 
left  behind  that  may  make  us  forget  our  loss.  Wherefore  under  this  head  let  me 
advise  you,  instead  of  reckoning  up  what  you  have  not,  to  consider  what  you  have  ; 
and  this  will  lead  you  to  contentment.  You  can  never  sufficiently  thank  God  for 
letting  you  enjoy  the  use  of  your  hands,  your  feet,  your  eyes,  your  tongue,  for 
these  are  much  greater  things  than  any  you  can  name  that  you  are  destitute  of. 
Consider  that  you  have  your  liberty,  which  is  an  unspeakable  blessing ;  that  you 
are  provided  for  daily  with  a  sufficient  portion  of  meat  and  drink ;  that  you  have 
not  only  necessary  food,  but  raiment ;  that  you  have  a  habitation  to  shelter  you 
from  the  injury  of  the  weather.  Consider,  likewise,  that  if  we  labour  under  some 
particular  grievance,  yet  God  generally  continues  to  us  some  blessing  which  makes 
amends  for  it.  Set,  then,  your  health  against  your  poverty,  and  know  that  some 
wealthy  persons  would  purchase  the  former,  though  they  had  the  latter  into  the 
bargain.  Or  perhaps  you  are  afflicted  with  an  unhealthful  state  of  body,  with  pain 
and  torture.  But  then  you  may  be  supported  under  this  grievance  by  reflecting  on 
those  considerable  mercies  which  God  hath  not  deprived  you  of,  as  a  competent 
allowance  of  the  other  good  things  of  this  life  —  the  help  of  physicians,  many 
obliging  friends  and  relations,  a  good  name,  &c.  Fourthly,  in  order  to  contented- 
ness, it  is  requisite  that  we  be  not  solicitous  about  the  future.  Our  present  ease 
depends  much  on  our  behaviour  as  to  the  future.  Therefore  here  we  are  to  regulate 
ourselves,  and  to  take  care  that  we  be  not  inquisitive  and  anxious  about  the  events 
that  are  to  come,  "Better  is  the  sight  of  the  eyes  than  the  wandering  of  the 
desire,"  saith  Solomon  (Eccles.  vi,  9).  It  is  better  to  enjoy  the  good  things  that 
are  present  and  before  our  eyes  than  to  follow  after  future  and  uncertain  objects 
with  vain  inquiries  and  wishes,  for  "this  walking  of  the  soul,"  as  the  Hebrew  in 
this  text  elegantly  hath  it,  this  ranging  of  our  minds,  will  certainly  create  us 
trouble  and  dissatisfaction.     Wherefore  let  us  confine  ourselves  to  the  present,  and 


164  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  r. 

thankfully  enjoy  that,  and  not  trouble  our  thoughts  with  what  shall  befall  us  here- 
after. Fifthly,  to  cherish  and  preserve  in  him  this  excellent  frame  of  spirit,  he 
strives  to  learn  the  art  and  skill  of  making  the  best  of  all  that  happens  to  him. 
Sixthly,  be  not  dejected  and  discouraged  by  what  the  men  of  the  world,  who 
liave  their  portion  in  this  life,  are  wont  to  suggest  to  you.  Lastly,  be  thoroughly 
convinced  of  the  Divine  Providence  which  rules  the  world  and  takes  care  of  us,  and 
firmly  depend  and  rely  upon  this,  and  then  it  is  impossible  you  should  be  discon- 
tented. Seeing  Infinite  Wisdom  governs  the  world  and  manages  all  things  to  the 
"best  ends  and  purposes,  we  may  fully  persuade  ourselves  that  all  things  shall  work 
together  for  our  good.  {J.  Edwards,  D.D.)  The  Tenth  Gommandnunt : — Observe, 
first,  that  this  is  a  unique  commandment.  Search  all  the  laws  of  all  the  world, 
and  you  will  not  find  one  which  resembles  it.  Human  laws  can  only  prohibit 
crimes  of  which  human  eyes  can  take  cognisance ;  the  hearts  of  men  are  beyond 
their  reach.  The  tyrant  can  only  command  the  outward  obedience  of  his  slave, 
but  he  cannot  subdue  the  fierce  rebellion  which  rages  in  that  slave's  heart.  He 
makes  no  attempt  to  order  what  he  is  impotent  to  enforce.  The  unique  com- 
mand which  prohibits  not  only  commissions  but  concupiscence  can  be  uttered  by 
God  alone.  And  herein  the  ten  commands  on  Sinai  anticipated  the  eight  beatitudes 
of  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount.  The  law  says,  "Thou  shalt  not  desire"  ;  the  Gospel 
says,  "Blessed  are  the  pure  in  heart."  It  is  a  commandment  pre-eminently 
spiritual ;  it  cuts  at  the  root  of  all  formalism  and  all  hypocrisy ;  it  shows  that  each 
man  is  not  what  he  seems  to  be  to  men,  but  what  he  is  in  the  eyes  of  God.  The 
lesson  which  the  Tenth  Commandment  teaches  us  is  that  God  must  be  obeyed,  not 
■with  eye  service  as  men  pleasers,  but  with  singleness  of  heart.  Even  the  heathen 
say  that  the  God  with  whom  we  have  to  do  is  one  with  whom  nothing  avails  except 
heart  obedience.  "Wickedness  and  injustice,"  says  Aristotle,  "lie  in  the  inten- 
tion." "He,"  says  Juvenal,  "who  thinks  in  silent  wickedness  within  himself 
incurs  the  guilt  of  the  deed."  And  this  command  is  tender  as  well  as  unique,  for 
it  is  designed  to  save  us  from  error ;  it  is  meant,  not  to  terrify  us,  but  to  train  ;  it 
reveals  to  us,  as  with  a  flash  out  of  God's  eternity,  when  and  how  the  work  of  our 
life  has  to  be  done  ;  it  shows  us  that  there  is  no  sound  cure  for  any  disease  without 
the  removal  of  the  cause.  The  literal  meaning  of  the  commandment  is,  "Thou 
shalt  not  excessively  or  wrongfully,  thou  shalt  not  unlawfully  or  irregularly,  desire 
anything  which  thou  canst  not  innocently  and  uprightly  possess. "  Perhaps  you 
think,  "What  harm  can  a  mere  desire  do  when  I  have  not  even  expressed  it? 
What  wrong  can  there  be  in  such  an  airy  nothing,  such  an  impalpable  thought  ? " 
The  answer  is  twofold.  First,  that  airy  nothing,  that  impalpable  thought,  as  you 
call  it,  is  a  very  real  thing.  It  is  seen  in  heaven,  it  is  heard  in  heaven,  in 
heaven  it  needs  forgiveness,  and  consequently  that  thought  will,  if  dwelt  upon,  be 
certainly  the  prolific  mother  of  all  sins.  It  is  the  cockatrice's  egg  which  brings 
forth  the  vapour  of  the  fiery  flying  serpent.  Guilty  longings  are  the  avant-couriers 
of  the  performance  of  guilty  lusts  concealed  in  the  guise  of  a  harmless  infant,  the 
guilty  curiosity,  the  guilty  lingering  on  the  confines  of  temptation.  The  guilty 
wish  pushes  open  the  wicket  gate,  and  then,  when  it  has  done  so  it  springs  into 
the  menacing  stature  of  a  giant  demon.  The  sole  way  to  keep  ourselves  from  the 
infinite  possibility  of  sin  is  only  to  follow  the  exhortation  of  St.  James  :  "  Cleanse 
your  hearts,  ye  sinners ;  purify  your  hearts,  ye  double-minded. "  It  is  with  the 
latter  form  of  concupiscence,  with  the  covetousness  which  is  idolatry,  that  the 
extension  of  the  coromandment  chiefly  deals.  It  warns  us  against  the  greed  of 
accumulation  and  the  thirst  for  gold.  This  commandment  says  to  our  England  of 
to-day,  "  Which  wilt  thou  be,  the  freeman  of  Christ  or  the  bond  slave  of  Mammon  ? 
Which  wilt  thou  be,  an  example  to  the  world  or  its  corrupter?  Rich  thou  art 
beyond  all  nations,  and  art  ever  becoming  more  and  more  rich.  But  wealth 
means  weal,  means  well-being;  it  does  not  mean  riches  and  woe  to  thy  weal." 
But  this  commandment  teaches  us  something  more  than  contentment,  lovely, 
indeed,  and  full  of  happiness  as  a  virtue.  Utter  content  is  but  the  passive  form 
of  the  most  fruitful  of  all  virtues— it  is  self-sacrifice.  But  he  who  has  ceased  to 
desire  will  rejoice  also  to  abstain ;  he  who  desires  to  cease  that  selfish  greediness 
for  what  does  not  belong  to  him,  or  what  he  ought  largely  to  share  with  others,  will 
be  eager  to  give  with  wise  generosity — he  will  find  that  herein  is  happiness.  St. 
Edmund  of  Canterbury,  one  of  our  sweet  English  saints,  used  to  leave  his  money 
on  the  sill  of  the  window  of  his  staircase  for  any  one  to  take  who  would,  and 
sometimes  he  would  sprinkle  dust  over  it,  saying,  "Ashes  to  ashes,  dust  to  dust." 
Another  greAt  man  said,  "We  have  no  time  to  get  rich ;  the  expulsive  power  of 


CHAP,  v.]  DEUTERONOMY.  165 

good  affections  leaves  no  time  for  meaner  passions."  The  lives  of  sucli  saints 
poured  silent  contempt  on  gold,  and  how  great  is  their  reward  !  They  are  uplifted 
above  the  base  temptations  which  surround  the  toiling,  moiling  multitude.  Self- 
abnegation,  the  subdual  of  concupiscence,  means  that  the  soul  is  satisfied  with 
God.  Dissatisfaction  is  the  necessary  curse  of  worldly  life.  "Vanity  of  vanity," 
says  one  of  the  best-known  novels  of  the  century,  **  which  of  us  has  what  he  desires, 
and  having  it  is  satisfied?  Answer  me,  children  of  the  world,  votaries  of  self- 
indulgence,  slaves  of  gold;  answer  me,  and  confess  your  misery."  Covetousness 
means  a  curse,  but  he  who  gives  all  to  Christ  gains  all  from  Christ ;  he  who  will 
lose  his  life  for  Christ's  sake  shall  always  find  it.  Can  you  imagine  a  more 
struggling  and  apparently  miserable  lot  than  that  of  some  poor  harmless  missionary 
in  the  depths  of  Africa  ?  Not  long  ago  a  dying  missionary  wrote  home  from  the 
wilds  of  Africa :  "Tell  my  family  and  all  my  friends  that  I  rejoice  to  have  left  all 
for  Christ.  Were  my  sacrifice  to  make  again,  I  think,  as  I  lie  here  dying  in  a 
strange  land,  I  would  make  it  again  a  thousand  times.  I  would  not  change  my  lot 
for  aU  the  happiness  of  the  world."  "This  German  beast,"  says  Leo  X.,  "cares 
nothing  for  gold," — a  strange  phenomenon  when  all  the  priests  and  all  the  world 
cared  so  much  for  gold ;  but  because  Luther  did  not  care  for  gold,  and  lived  and 
died  a  very  poor  man,  it  raised  the  hearts  of  myriads  of  men  to  seek  their  treasure 
where  he  had  done — in  things  above,  where  Christ  sitteth  at  the  right  hand  of  God. 
{Dean  Farrar.)  The  Tenth  Commandment: — For  settling  the  true  sense  of 
these  words  it  will  be  needful  to  remark— First,  that  in  the  nine  former  command- 
ments there  has  been  direction  given  for  every  inward  and  outward  act  of  duty 
owing  to  God  or  man,  and  all  the  sinful  conduct  contrary  thereto  has  been  pro- 
hibited and  condemned.  Secondly,  that  the  design  of  the  whole  law  being  evidently 
to  make  sin  fully  known,  that  design  would  not  be  answered  by  it  if  there  had  not 
been  a  particular  commandment  in  it  which  should  condemn  those  sinful  desires  of 
our  nature  which  are  the  principles  of  all  sinful  acts  whatever.  In  the  seventh 
chapter  to  the  Romans  St.  Paul  does  most  plainl}^  interpret  this  Tenth  Command- 
ment as  condemning  the  natural  desires  of  our  depraved  hearts.  And  lest  it  should 
be  wondered  that  no  other  desires  are  here  mentioned  than  those  which  refer  to  the 
second  table,  the  reason  is  that  all  the  sinful  desires  of  our  nature  are  only  after 
the  things  prohibited  in  the  second  table.  The  sin  of  our  nature  against  the  first 
table  is  to  have  no  desire  after  God  ;  and  therefore,  there  being  in  our  nature  no 
desire  after  God,  that  desire  only  that  is  in  our  nature  can  be  condemned,  namely, 
desire  after  earthly  and  sensual  things,  both  which  are  expressly  mentioned  in  this 
commandment,  coveting  our  neighboiir's  house  being  an  earthly  desire,  and  covet- 
ing his  wife  a  sensual  one.  But  yet,  that  all  desires  after  the  things  and  enjoy- 
ments of  this  present  time  might  not  seem  to  be  disallowed  and  sinful,  the  com- 
mandment also  gives  us  to  understand  how  we  shall  make  a  distinction  between 
those  desires  after  present  things  which  spring  from  our  corrupted  nature  and  are 
in  themselves  sinful  and  such  as  are  innocent  and,  indeed,  in  our  present  circum- 
stances, necessary.  Thou  shalt  not  desire  anything  that  is  thy  neighbour's,  for  to 
desire  what  is  another's  for  thy  convenience  or  gratification  issues  directly  from  the 
carnality  and  worldliness  of  thy  nature,  and  plainly  proves  an  inclination  for  present 
things  which  is  neither  consistent  with  love  to  God  nor  man.  Nay,  and  many  times 
the  really  sinful  desire  will  be  clothing  itself  under  the  guise  of  necessity,  and  pre- 
tend necessity  where  there  is  really  none.  Can  we  suppose  King  Ahab  was  in  real 
want  of  a  garden  of  herbs  ?  Is  it  not  more  probable  that  some  scheme  of  indulgence 
or  pomp  made  him  conceive  he  wanted  Naboth's  vineyard,  and  that,  for  any  matter 
of  necessity  in  the  thing,  he  could  as  well  have  done  without  it  ?  Should  I  attempt 
to  enumerate  aU  those  various  lustings  and  desires  that  pass  through  our  hearts 
without  being  permitted  to  make  a  settlement  there,  and  yet  are  forbidden  by  this 
commandment,  the  undertaking  would  be  endless.  Yet  it  will  be  needful  to  give 
some  sort  of  account  of  them.  First,  thou  shalt  not  covet  or  have  any  sinful 
desires  in  thy  heart  after  thy  neighbour's  dignity.  And  here  all  those  sudden 
risings  of  heart  against  the  authority  of  God  in  the  persons  of  those  he  has  set  over 
us  come  in  and  are  condemned.  Secondly,  thou  shalt  not  lust  after  thy  neighbour's 
life ;  thou  must  not  have  a  motion  to  his  hurt  in  soul  or  body  within  thy  heart. 
All  envious,  revengeful,  unmerciful  suggestions  against  him  are  contrary  to  charity, 
and  rise  out  of  a  depraved  nature.  Thirdly,  thou  shalt  not  covet  thy  neighbour's 
wife.  All  manner  of  sensuality  being  also  condemned  by  the  Seventh  Command- 
ment, all  motions  towards  it  fall  under  the  censure  of  the  tenth.  Fourthly,  thou 
shalt  not  covet  thy  neighbour's  goods.    What  I  now  speak  of  is  not  the  sin  of  covet- 


166  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  r. 

ousness,  nor  that  devising  of  theft  before  it  is  committed,  but  that  which  is  at  the 
bottom  of  both — the  sinful  stirrings  of  corrupt  nature  after  the  interests  of  the 
world,  in  which  our  foolish  hearts  do  naturally  trust.  You  have  not  wished  to 
have  your  neighbour's  goods  by  fraud  or  force,  I  allow  ;  but  have  you  never  wished 
any  of  them  yours  from  the  instigation  of  a  world-trusting  heart  ?  Fifthly,  thou 
shalt  not  lust  after  thy  neighbour's  good  name.  The  meaning  of  this  is,  thou 
mayest  never  have  in  thy  heart  one  suggestion  of  envy  because  thy  neighbour  i3 
better  than  thou,  of  hatred  because  his  virtues  reprove  thy  vices,  of  displeasure 
because  he  will  follow  his  conscience  sooner  than  thy  will,  of  delight — no,  not  in 
the  least  degree — in  hearing  of  or  beholding  his  sins.  This  is  desiring  hurt  to  thy 
neighbour's  name.  Yea,  though  thou  dost  not  approve  any  of  these  suggestions, 
but  art  really  displeased  with  them  and  wouldest  never  more  know  them,  yet  they 
are  thy  sins.  What  has  been  said  may  suffice  to  show  the  design  of  this  last 
commandment,  and  therein  the  sad  sinfulness  of  our  nature.  {S.  Walker,  B.A.) 
The  Tenth  Commatidment : — The  first  thing  which  this  commandment  teaches  us 
is  that  all  desire  is  wrong  when  we  set  qui*  hearts  upon  a  thing  which  we  cannot 
fairly  and  justly  obtain.  Ahab  and  Jezebel  broke  it  when  they  took  Naboth's 
vineyard.  Is  it  ever  right  to  desire  ?  And  what  makes  a  desire  right  or  wrong  ? 
Here  we  are  all  full  of  wishes  and  desires.  Desire  is  one  of  the  great  motive  forces 
of  the  world.  If  we  had  no  desires  we  should  have  no  progress.  It  is  a  sense  of 
want  that  makes  us  exert  ourselves,  and  very  often  bring  to  pass  a  great  many 
results  which  we  never  set  before  ourselves  as  ends.  What,  then,  is  to  be  our 
criterion  ?  Desire  is  not  a  wrong  thing  in  itself.  Desire  of  learning  is  not  wrong  ; 
desire  of  success,  say,  in  an  examination,  or  in  our  future  career  in  life,  is  surely 
not  wrong  ?  Roughly,  very  roughly,  speaking,  success  is  the  guarantee  from  out- 
side that  we  were  right  in  pursuing  such  and  such  a  course,  in  using  our  talents  in 
such  and  such  a  way ;  while  failure,  speaking  again  very  roughly,  seems  to  mean 
that  we  have  wasted  our  time,  or  mistaken  our  vocation.  It  is  not  always  so,  of 
course.  Desire  is  not,  it  may  be  repeated,  a  wrong  thing  in  itself.  When  is  it 
wrong?  1.  When  we  desire  things  that  are  unworthy  of  us,  as  when  Nero  wished 
to  be  applauded  as  a  stage-performer,  or  when  a  great  man,  like  Browning's  **  Lost 
Leader,"  is  led  aside  from  his  path  by  the  offer  of  some  petty  title  or  distinction  ; 
and,  alas  !  if  we  look  into  our  own  hearts,  we  shall  often  find,  almost  with  a  sudden 
shock  of  shame  and  dismay,  how  miserably  petty  are  some  of  the  objects  around 
which  our  imagination  is  building  its  castles  in  the  air.  2.  Again,  desire  is  wrong 
when  it  throws  us  off  our  balance,  and  makes  us  take  a  one-sided  view  of  life. 
3.  Desire  is  clearly  blamable  when  we  allow  it  to  absorb  us  and  make  us  forgetful 
of  the  needs  of  others.  4.  Again,  desire  is  wrong  when  indulged  in  such  a  way  that 
the  failure  of  what  we  desire  makes  us  discontented.  5.  Again,  if  our  ambition, 
our  love,  our  desire,  makes  us  forgetful  of  God,  is  it  not  worse  still  ?  There  is, 
however,  one  other  thing  I  should  like  to  say.  Primarily,  and  roughly  speaking, 
God  does  fulfil,  or  shows  us  how  to  accomplish,  our  wishes.  There  is  a  decided 
<a  priori  probability  that  we  shall  get  what  we  want.  As  an  exquisite  fragment  of 
Greek  poetry  tells  us,  Hesperus  (the  evening  star)  brings  everything  home :  the 
sheep  to  the  fold,  and  the  child  to  the  mother.  So  we  may  say  of  the  evening  of 
life,  in  very  many  cases,  it  has  brought  to  the  man  or  the  woman  the  objects  of 
lifelong  desire.  **  All  things,"  as  we  say,  **  come  round  to  him  who  waits."  But 
it  is  also  possible  to  have  a  wrong  desire  fulfilled,  and  to  mourn  its  fulfilment  as 
our  bitterest  misfortune.  "  Occidat  dum  imperet  (Let  him  kill  me  if  he  only 
reign  !),"  said  Agrippina  of  Nero,  and  her  aspiration  was  terribly  realised.  The 
thirty  pieces  of  silver  were  the  "desire"  of  Judas  Iscariot !  How  often  do  we  see 
this  stiU !  The  moment  we  try  to  force  God's  will  we  desire  wrongly,  and  are 
sure  to  repent  of  it.  {Elizabeth  Wordsworth.)  Law  of  purity: — The  last  of 
the  Ten  Commandments  is  the  most  important ;  it  relates  to  the  heart,  out  of 
which  are  the  "issues  of  life."  It  is  a  law  that  cannot  be  broken  by  any  word 
that  man  may  speak,  by  any  act  that  he  may^  perform.  It  is  descriptive  of  char- 
acter, and  supposes  a  moral  state  out  of  which  flow  all  motives,  desires,  thoughts, 
words,  and  deeds.  All  the  other  commandments  are  violated  by  an  act  or  a  word  ; 
but  the  tenth  is  supremely  mental  in  its  scope  and  purpose.  In  this  last  of  the 
Divine  ten  precepts  is  the  law  of  desire.  To  covet  is  to  desire  the  "forbidden 
fruit."  It  is  not  external,  but  internal ;  it  relates  to  what  a  man  thinks  and  feels. 
A  desire  is  a  conception,  a  wish,  an  inclination,  an  aspiration,  which  may  or 
may  not  lead  on  to  action.  The  penalty  is  not  stated.  Will  it  not  be  exclusion 
from  God  ?    The  great  thought  is  desire  within  the  limitations  of  law.    There  is 


CHAP,  v.]  DEUTERONOMY,  167 

a  pleasurable,  beneficent,  lawful  exercise  of  desire.     There  is  a  covetousness  thaft 
is  right  and  commendable.     We  are  commanded  to  "covet  earnestly  the  best 

fifts,"  and  to  "covet  to  prophesy" — that  is,  to  teach  the  way  of  the  Lord, 
ntense  desire  is  indispensable  to  success.  What  were  life  without  aspiration? 
Desire  nerves  the  soul,  stimulates  the  intellect,  animates  the  mind.  Men  may 
aspire  to  all  knowledge,  to  the  largest  wealth,  to  the  highest  honours,  to  the 
greatest  achievements,  to  the  widest  influence,  to  boundless  usefulness,  to  all 
attainable  purity ;  but  God  must  be  supreme  ;  principle  the  rule  ;  charity  the  end. 
A  man  may  desire  a  wife,  but  not  another's ;  a  horse,  but  not  his  neighbour's ;  a 
trusty  servant,  but  not  to  the  disadvantage  of  an  employer  ;  an  ox,  an  ass,  a  field, 
but  not  to  the  injury  of  its  owner.  How  execrable  the  man  who  lessens  the 
esteem  of  a  husband  for  the  woman  he  has  wedded  and  then  ingratiates  himself 
in  the  affections  of  that  alienated  wife  that  he  may  have  her !  The  imagination 
is  the  domain  wherein  the  law  of  purity  operates,  ana  therein  should  hold  supreme 
sway.  No  other  mental  faculty  is  so  potent  in  the  formation  of  the  character  and 
in  giving  direction  to  the  destiny  of  men  and  nations.  The  imagination  rules  the 
world  for  good  and  evil.  The  sacred  writers  couple  the  imagination  with  the 
heart,  which  is  neither  accidental  nor  incidental,  but  is  done  with  intelligent 
intent.  It  is  to  remind  us  of  the  immense  power  of  this  masterful  faculty  over 
the  great  passions  of  our  nature.  To  capture,  control,  purify,  refine,  elevate  this 
dominating  power  of  the  soul  is  the  mission  of  the  law  of  purity:  "Casting  down 
imaginations,  and  every  high  thing  that  exalteth  itself  against  the  knowledge  of 
God,  and  bringing  into  captivity  every  thought  to  the  obedience  of  Christ."  How 
beneficent  is  the  imagination  when  subject  to  law ;  how  malevolent  its  influence 
when  unrestrained  and  lawless  !  Like  the  reason  and  the  memory,  the  imagination 
is  subject  to  discipline  and  the  sovereign  will  of  man.  This  law  of  purity  demands 
a  passive  state  and  an  active  manifestation.  Christianity  is  the  religion  of  the 
imagination.  Christ  is  the  only  religious  Teacher  known  to  man  who  demands  of 
His  people  a  moral  condition  antecedent  to  act  of  devotion.  If  God  is  not  a 
respecter  of  persons  He  is  of  character,  and  that  He  has  foreordained  unto  eternal 
life.  Christ's  demand  for  a  moral  condition  antecedent  to  all  mental  and  physical 
action  is  in  harmony  with  the  order  of  nature.  There  is  a  passive  state  of  our 
muscular  forces  and  intellectual  powers  upon  which  the  active  depends,  and  of 
which  the  active  is  the  living  expression.  If  the  arm  is  strong  to  defend,  there 
must  be  healthfulness  in  the  muscles  thereof.  If  the  faculties  of  the  mind  respond 
to  the  will,  there  must  be  latent  vigour  in  the  intellect.  Man's  moral  nature  is 
both  passive  and  active,  and  experience  is  in  proof  that  as  is  the  passive  so  is  the 
active.  If  the  affections  respond  only  to  objects  of  purity,  if  the  conscience  only 
to  the  voice  of  right,  if  the  will  only  to  the  call  of  duty,  there  must  be  inherent 
purity  and  strength  in  all  our  moral  powers  when  quiescent.  Christ  is  the  Saviour 
and  Sovereign  of  the  heart  wherein  He  incarnates  purity.  He  must  be  at  the 
fountain-head  of  life,  that  the  issues  thereof  may  be  Divine.  And  it  is  a  matter  of 
experience  that  with  purity  there  comes  an  intellectual  elevation,  a  sharpening  and 
quickening  of  all  the  mental  powers,  whereby  the  "perfect  man  in  Christ"  discerns 
more  readily  between  right  and  wrong ;  and  the  heavenly  calm  that  reigns  in  all 
his  being,  and  the  "perfect  peace "  wherein  he  is  ever  kept,  conduce  to  tran- 
quillity of  intellect,  correctness  of  taste,  candour  of  intention,  carefulness  of 
judgment,  and  impartiality  of  decision.  The  imagination  acts  directly  on  the 
moral  character,  and  by  its  abuse  the  will  is  weakened,  the  mental  energy  is 
dissipated,  and  the  whole  life  is  polluted.  Purity  and  happiness  are^  inseparable. 
In  nothing  more  is  the  beneficence  of  the  Creator  apparent  than  in  His  ordination 
that  happiness  here  and  hereafter  shall  flow  out  of  the  character  of  a  man.  The 
blessings  of  human  life,  such  as  honourable  birth,  liberal  education,  ample 
fortune,  high  social  position,  renown  among  men,  abundance  of  health,  and  length 
of  days,  may  contribute  to  the  repose  of  soul  and  add  to  the  joy  of  life  ;  but  these 
can  never  be  the  radical  source  of  happiness.  The  whole  history  of  the  world  is  a 
proof  that  happiness  never  flows  into  a  man,  but  rather  flows  out  of  him.  And 
what  is  tnie  of  earth  will  be  true  of  heaven.  Such  was  the  conception  of  the 
Psalmist,  who  sings,  "I  shall  be  satisfied,  when  I  awake,  with  Thy  likeness."  {J.  P. 
Newman,  D.D. )  Neither  shalt  thou  desire  thy  neighbours  wife  .-—This  command- 
ment is  in  brief,  "Thou  shalt  not  covet"  ;  or,  to  put  it  positively,  Give  Me  thine 
heart.  Give  it  not  to  the  world  and  all  its  store.  Thus  beginning  and  end  of  the 
Ten  Words  are  united— the  circle  completed.  "He  who  keeps  the  first  com- 
mandment," said  one  of  the  fathers,   "possesses  the  spring  of  all  good  works  and 


168  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  t. 

rigliteoasiiess,  t.«.  the  love  of  God ;  and  he  who  keeps  the  last  commandment 
checks  the  fountain  of  all  sin,  namely,  evil  desire,  whence  flow  all  wicked  works  " 
(1  John  iL  15).  What  does  this  command  require  of  us  ?  1.  That  we  should  not 
YIELD  TO  BVIL  DESIRES.  This  is  the  easiest  requirement.  1.  The  story  of  Ahab 
and  Naboth's  vineyard  is  a  terrible  example  of  the  result  of  yielding  to  covetous- 
jiess.  Yet  how  many  Ahabs  are  there  who  lust  after  their  neighbour's  house,  &c., 
and  who,  when  the  neighbour  has  come  down  in  the  world  and  a  friendly  hand 
jnight  raise  him,  do  not  stretch  out  that  hand,  but  eagerly  seize  hold  of  the 
coveted  possession  1  2.  How  many  are  there  also  who,  out  of  envy  and  covetous- 
ness,  will  disturb  the  peace  of  a  household — raising  discord  between  man  and  wife, 
between  servant  and  master !  Not  more  than  one  in  ten  can  be  found,  perhaps, 
who  would,  on  the  contrary,  seek  to  reconcile,  in  love  and  faithfulness,  husband 
and  wife,  and  how  many  will  seek  to  draw  a  good  and  faithful  servant  even  from 
a  friend's  service,  with  promise  of  higher  wages,  &c.  !  How  many  will  either 
possess  themselves  of  what  is  another's ;  or,  if  that  cannot  be,  with  the  wickedest 
meanness  seek  to  destroy  or  spoil  the  possession !  3.  In  this  commandment 
God  puts  a  check  on  the  sin  and  evil  desires  which  haunt  men's  hearts  like 
savage  creatures,  ready  to  break  forth  in  shameful  deeds.  He  knows  that  wicked 
desires  manifest  themselves  universally :  envy,  which  covets  a  neighbour's  goods ; 
hate,  which  seeks  a  neighbour's  undoing ;  fleshly  lusts,  which  flame  out  in 
debauchery,  pride,  vanity,  &c.  But  the  apology  of  men,  "Sin  was  stronger  than 
I,"  will  not  stand  ;  but  "Let  not  sin  reign"  (Rom.  vi.  12).  II.  That  we  should 
JTOT  NOUEISH  EVIL  DESIRES  IN  OUR  HEARTS.  This  is  a  much  harder  endeavour. 
1.  Men  can  weaken  and  repress  such  desires,  but  they  can  also  excite,  foster, 
and  indulge  them.  The  poor  boy  who  fled  from  the  shelter  which  had  been 
accorded  to  him  through  the  frost  and  snow  of  a  winter's  night,  until  the  desire 
to  steal  which  the  ticking  of  a  watch  aroused  in  him  had  vanished,  thus  bravely 
conquered  evil  desire.  2.  Many  who  have  not  seized  a  neighbour's  possession 
have  yet  coveted  it,  and  have  not  put  restraint  on  this  desire.  Some  would  not 
injure  a  neighbour,  but  are  yet  rejoiced  when  misfortune  falls  on  him.  The 
envious  man  may  never  attempt  to  ruin  another's  happiness ;  yet  if  the  evil 
thoughts]  were  clearly  brought  to  the  light  of  day,  how  would  he  himself  shrink 
from  them !  3.  Even  when  such  evil  desires  do  not  blossom  into  deed,  yet  they 
are  reckoned  even  as  deeds  in  the  pure  light  of  heaven.  Adultery  and  uncleanness, 
murder  and  revenge,  envy  and  anger,  are  classed  as  "works  of  the  flesh."  4.  We 
may  not  prevent  evil  thoughts  coming  into  our  minds,  but  we  may  take  care  that 
they  gain  no  footing  within  us.  "You  can't  prevent  the  birds  flying  about  your 
head,  but  you  can  prevent  them  from  building  nests  in  your  hair,"  said  Luther. 
Through  labour,  prayer,  remembrance  of  God  and  our  Saviour  we  can  give  evil 
thoughts  no  place  in  our  hearts.  III.  That  we  should  have  no  evil  thoughts 
IN  CUE  HEARTS.  This  is  the  most  difficult  endeavour.  1.  "Thou  shalt  be  holy, 
for  I  am  holy."  "Be  perfect  as  your  Father  in  heaven  is  perfect."  It  is  not 
enough  that  we  should  repress,  &c.,  these  evil  desires;  we  must  seek  to  banish 
them  entirely.  Not  only  must  the  weed  be  repressed  ;  it  must  be  uprooted.  Can 
we  do  this  %  Let  us  hear  the  apostle  (Rom.  vii.  18-35).  2.  But  here  our  power 
has  an  end.  Like  the  young  man  who  came  to  the  Saviour,  we  may  keep  out- 
wardly, in  api>earance,  all  the  commandments ;  yet  this  command  is  put  here  to 
show  us  that  yet  we  have  not  attained — that  our  hearts  are  not  yet  fully  temples 
of  God ;  that  though  our  lives  might  seem  perfect  to  men,  yet  God  calls  us  by 
nature  lost  and  ruined.  Thus  before  God  stand  those  who  say.  To  do  good  is 
the  best  religion.  Truly,  in  doing  good,  religion  manifests  itself ;  but  to  attempt 
by  our  own  little  display  of  common  honesty,  &c.,  to  make  ourselves  rich  before 
God,  and  to  despise  the  Christian  faith,  is  vain.  To  say  that  this  good-doing  is 
the  best  religion  is  to  lie.  3.  God  looks  on  the  heart.  He  measures  the  actions 
by  the  heart.  He  looks  not  merely  on  the  stamp  which  the  coin  bears,  but  at  the 
metal  from  which  it  is  formed  above  all.  Woe  to  us  were  there  no  other  way  to 
life  than  perfectly  keeping  the  commandments !  But  thank  God,  we  have  our 
Christian  faith.  The  blessing  we  gain  from  an  earnest  consideration  of  this  com- 
mandment is  that  it  brings  home  the  fact  that  salvation  is  not  by  the  law  alone, 
and  makes  us  eager  to  learn  the  good  news  which  is  called  the  Gospel,  and  which  tells 
US  that  "  the  just  shall  live  by  his  faith."     {K,  H.  Caspari.) 

Ver.   22.   These  words  the  Lord  spake.— T'Ae  voice  of  (?oc?;— "God   spake.'* 
Think  of  it,  worshipper  of  lust  and  greed,  worshipper  of  self,  worshipper  of  the 


CHAP,  v.]  DEUTERONOMY,  169 

many-headed  monster  of  thine  own  evil  desires,  worshipper  of  no  God  !    Think  of 
it,  Sabbath-breakers  who  seek  only  your  own  pleasure  on  the  Lord's  Day !    Think 
of  it,  ye  who  dishonour  and  are  ungrateful  and  disobedient  to  father  and  mother  ! 
Think  of  it,  ye  whose  hearts  are  fuU  of  violence,  cruelty,  and  malice  !     ' '  God  spake 
these  words  and  said."    Try  to  realise  what  God  is,  and  with  it  that  He  speaks 
and  that  ^  He  is  still  spealung  these  words  to  thee.     What  words  ?    Very  few ! 
Men  multiplied  indefinitely  the  necessaries  which  God  had  not  made  many.    The 
summary  of  the  first  table  is  the  fear  of  God  ;  of  the  second,  the  love  to  our  neigh- 
bour.    Brief,  then,  as  they  are,  the  commandments,  and  with  them  the  whole 
scope  and  range,  the  origin  and  sum-total  of  man's  duty,  are  summed  up  in  two 
monosyllables,  "Love,"  "Serve."    The  Jews  split  the  Ten  Commandments  into 
613  positive  and  negative  precepts  and  prohibitions.     We  can  reduce  them   to 
one.     St.  Paul  reduced  them  to  the  one  word  **  Believe."    St.  John  reduced  them 
to  the  one  word  "Love."    Thank  God  for  their  simplicity;  thank  God  that  the 
wayfaring  man,  yea,  and  even  fools,  need  not  err  therein.     Thank  God,  that  while 
men  may,  if  they  like,  devote  their  whole  souls  to  small  observances,  doctrinal 
technicalities,  that  which  God  requires  as  alone  necessary  for  any  one  of  us  is 
righteousness,  and  righteousness  depends  on  love.     A  young  Gentile  went  to  the 
great  doctor,  Shammai,  and  said  to  him,  "I  will  become  a  Jew  if  you  will  teach  me 
the  whole  law  while  I  stand  on  one  leg,"  and  the  angry  Rabbi  drove  him  out  of 
the  house  with  blows.     But  when  he  went  with  the  same  words  to  the  rival  of 
Shammai,  the  sweet  and  noble  Hillel,  Hillel  gently  answered,  "That  is  easy,  my 
son  ;  never  do  to  any  one  what  you  would  not  Jike  him  to  do  to  you.     That  is  iho 
whole  law;  all  tlie  rest  is  commentary  and  fringe."     The  Gentile  was  converttcl, 
but  the  Rabbi  was  wrong.     Christ  when  He  was  asked  by  the  young  ruler,  "What 
must  I  do  to  inherit  eternal  life  ? "  did  not  thus  dissever  the  Golden  Rule  from  its 
force  and  sanction,  He  did  not  divorce  the  second  table  from  the  first ;  He  said, 
"Keep  the  conimandments ;  love  God  with  all  thy  heart" — that  is  the  first  table  ; 
"and  thy  neighbour  as  thyself" — that  is  the  second.     He  knew  that  man  canr.ot 
love  God  his  Father  unless  he  loves  man  his  brother  ;  and  that  he  cannot  love  man 
the  brother  aright  or  at  all  unless  he  loves  his  Father  God.     In  conclusion  then,  so 
far  as  man's  whole  duty  is  concerned,  all  the  rest  of  Scripture  is  but  a  commentary 
upon  the  Ten  Commandments ;  it  either  exhorts  us  to  obedience  by  arguments,  or 
allures  us  to  it  by  promises,  or  frightens  us  from  transgressions  by  threatenings,  or 
excites  us  to  the  one  and  restrains  us  from  the  other  by  examples  recorded  in  its 
histories.     And  when  all  this  has  been  in  vain  to  keep  us  back  from  sin,  still 
God  does  not  leave  us  nor  forsake  us.     The  covenant  of  Jehovah-shammah,  "The 
Lord  is  there,"  becomes  the  covenant  of  Jehovah-Tsidkenu,  "The  Lord  our  Right- 
eousness."    As  the  atoning  blood  is  sprinkled  before  the  broken  tables  of  the 
Law  it  teaches  us  we  have  indeed  all  sinned,  but  that  with  God  in  Christ  there  is 
mercy,  and  with  Him  is  plenteous  redemption.     Christ  Himself  is  "the  end  of  the 
law  unto  righteousness  to  every  one  that    believeth."     {Dean    Farrar.)        He 
added  no  more. — The  completeness  of  the  commandments: — These  words  may  be 
very  sad,  or  they  may  be  very  joyous.     They  would  be  sad  if  the  Lord  had  turned 
away ^  in  anger,  saying,  ' '  I  will  not  speak  again  unto  you  "  ;  but  they  may  be 
very  joyous,  yea,  musical  after  a  heavenly  sort,  when  God  has  said  just  enough  to 
meet  the  necessity  and  the  weakness  of  man,  and  when  He  forbears  to  add  one 
word  that  would  overtax  his  strength  and  throw  his  dying  hope  into  melancholy 
and  despair.    You  have,  then,  something  like  completeness  of  law  in  these  Ten 
Commandments.     Certainly  you  have  what  may  be  called  temporary  complete- 
ness ;  that  is,  a  completeness  adapted  to  the  circumstances  under  which  they  were 
delivered.     God  could  have  added  more  ;  He  need  never  have  stopped  :  He  might 
have  been  writing  now— but  does  He  delight  to  overburden  us  with  technicality,  or 
even  with  legislation  of  any  kind  ?     His  delight  is  to  give  us  as  little  as  may  be 
needful  for  proper  discipline  and  to  secure  loyal,  loving,  and  suflScient  obedience. 
Does  He  give  law  to  vex  you  ?     To  prove  you,  not  to  bewilder  and  distract  your 
memory.     Has  He  written  all  the  universe  over  with  commandments?     He  has 
written  the  universe  over  with   promises  and  blessings,  and  here  and   there  His 
commanding  word  is  written  ;  for  too  many  promises  and  benedictions,  untempered 
by  those   severer  words,  might  lead   us  into   presumption,  might  turn  away  all 
our  attention   from   the   deeper  and    severer  studies    and   pursuits  of   life,    and 
might  end  in  making  us  molluscous,  and   not  strong  and  grand.      Now,  this  is 
the  kiud  of  authority  before  which  I  bow  with  love  and  thankfulness.     {J.  Parker, 
D.D.)        Perpetual  ohligation  of  tlve  mo^-al  law: — The  moral  law  is,  from  its  very 


170  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  v 

nature,  unchangeable,  and  of  perpetual  obligation  ;  nor  can  we  read  the  history  of 
its  promulgation  without  seeing  that  the  greatest  care  was  taken  to  distinguish  it 
hom.  all  other  laws,  and  more  especially  from  those  judicial  and  ceremonial  laws 
which  were  given  for  the  special  guidance  of  the  Jewish  people.  I.  The  law  is 
OUE  SCHOOLMASTER  TO  BRING  TJS  TO  CHRIST.  Lcighton  truly  says,  "It  is  a  weak 
conceit,  arising  upon  the  mistake  of  the  Scriptures,  to  make  Christ  and  Moses  as 
opposites.  No,  Moses  was  the  servant  in  the  house  and  Christ  the  Son  ;  and 
being  a  faithful  servant,  he  is  not  contrary  to  the  Son,  but  subordinate  to  Him." 
By  showing  us  what  God  requires,  the  law  discloses  to  us  our  own  manifold  trans- 
gressions, for  by  the  law  is  the  knowledge  of  sin.  ^  It  conveys  to  us  much  and 
important  instruction  concerning  God  and  concerning  ourselves.  It  teaches  us 
His  holiness  and  our  unholiness,  His  righteousness  and^  our  unrighteousness,  His 
infinite  perfections  and  our  fallen  and  imperfect  condition.  Thus  the  law,  when 
listened  to  in  the  spirit  of  reverence  and  godly  fear,  must  produce  conviction  of 
sin,  and  prepare  the  soul  for  the  reception  of  Christ.  It  is  our  schoolmaster  for 
this  great  end,  that  by  holy  discipline  and  faithful  teaching  it  may  lead  us  to  Him 
in  whom  alone  salvation  is  to  be  found,  and  of  whom  we  read  that  "Christ  is  the 
end  of  the  law  for  righteousness  to  every  one  that  believeth."  II.  The  law  is  thb 
PERPETUAL  rule  OF  DUTY  TO  ALL  WHO  BELIEVE  IN  Christ.  In  our  Diviuc  Surety 
we  see  that  the  law  has  been  perfectly  fulfilled,  its  honour  maintained,  and  its 
demands  fully  satisfied.  And  through  His  Almighty  power,  whose  purpose  is  from 
everlasting,  the  righteousness  which  the  Lord  Jesus  presented  to  the  law  is  imputed 
to  His  people — it  is  unto  all  and  upon  all  them  that  believe.  It  is  the  spotless  robe 
in  which  they  are  accepted  now  at  the  throne  of  grace,  and  in  which  they  shall  be 
presented  hereafter  faultless  before  the  throne  of  glory.  How  vainly  do  they  talk 
who  speak  of  the  abrogation  of  the  moral  law  !  They  forget  that  He  has  said,  and 
will  perform  it,  "I  will  put  My  laws  into  their  minds,  and  write  them  in  their 
hearts,  and  I  will  be  to  them  a  God,  and  they  shall  be  to  Me  a  people."  Well, 
then,  might  the  apostle  triumphantly  exclaim,  "Do  we  make  void  the  law  through 
faith?  God  forbid;  yea,  we  estabUsh  the  law."  Trusting  in  the  Saviour,  the 
believer  is  secure ;  but  if  his  faith  is  genuine  and  sincere,  he  will  ever  seek  to  have 
that  mind  in  him  which  was  also  in  Christ  Jesus,  and  he  will  be  constrained  to  say, 
as  the  Psalmist  did,  "Oh,  how  love  I  Thy  law  :  it  is  my  meditation  all  the  day  ! " 
{W,  Mven,  B.D.) 

Ver.  24.  (Sod  doth  talk  with  man,  and  lie  liveth. — Talking  with  God: — 
There  is  no  doubt  that  Adam  was  originally  made  for  converse  with  his  Maker. 
The  voice  of  the  Lord  had  no  terrors  for  him  until  he  had  sinned.  From  that  time 
forth  the  voice  of  the  Lord  was  in  itself  calculated  to  strike  terror  into  man.  And 
as  man  shrank  from  God's  talking  to  him,  so  we  may  feel  assured  he  shrank  from 
talking  to  God ;  and  so,  except  in  a  very  few  cases,  such  as  Enoch  and  Abraham 
and  Job,  and  such  holy  men,  a  spirit  of  estrangement  was  set  up.  The  great 
remedy  is  provided  for  us  by  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  He  has  taught  us  to  call  the 
Most  High  our  Father.  "Our  Father  which  art  in  heaven."  He  has  by  this  one 
name  given  us  many  reasons  why  we  may  go  to  God  at  all  times,  and  talk  with 
Him.  Some  reader  of  these  pages  is,  perhaps,  timid,  and  shrinks  from  the  idea 
altogether.  He  says,  I  reverence  God  too  much  to  embrace  this  idea  of  talking 
with  Him  ;  I  can  pray,  and  praise,  but  not  talk.  Well,  to  begin  with,  what  is  your 
prayer  but  one  half  of  talking,  your  telling  Him  what  you  want  ?  And  what  is  the 
answer  to  prayer  but  the  other  half  of  talking — His  telling  you  that  He  has  heard 
and  granted  your  petitions  1  But  let  us  not  insist  on  this,  but  rather  turn  to  the 
word  "Father,"  which  Jesus  has  taught  us  to  use.  We  cannot  imagine  a  father 
living  in  the  same  house  as  his  child,  and  never  speaking  to  him  ;  never  wishing 
to  be  spoken  to  by  him.  Our  common  notion  of  a  father,  our  experience  of  the 
relationship  forbids  the  thought.  Now  there  are  not  two  kinds  of  fatherhoods ; 
that  of  God  is  essentially  the  same  as  ours,  only  it  is  perfect  (Matt.  vii.  11).  To 
come  now  to  this  talking  itself.  There  are  various  kinds  of  talking.  Prayer  is  no 
doubt  a  talking  with  God,  but  we  shall  not  dwell  upon  it  here.  We  mean  by 
"talking"  something — if  we  might  so  express  ourselves  with  reverence — more 
free,  less  set,  than  our  regular  prayer.  This  talking  is  very  independent  of  place  ; 
of  church,  or  bedside,  or  our  ordinary  spot  for  prayer — and  of  times — of  the 
morning,  or  noontide,  or  evening  prayer  ;  it  has  nothing  whatever  to  do  with  them. 
Much  of  this  talking  is  carried  on  when  we  are  walking  about,  or  perhaps  in  the 
train,  or  in  the  streets,  or  in  snatches  of  time  in  business  hours.    And  sometimes  this 


CHAP,  v.]  DEUTERONOMY.  171 


talking  is  carried  on  without  any  particular  aim.  We  are  not  of  set  purpose  offering 
adoration,  or  putting  up  prayer.  We  talk  just  because  our  hearts  like  to  be  in  com- 
munion with  Him  ;  and  we  wish  to  say  we  love  and  honour  Him.  But  what  good 
will  come  of  all  this  ?  1.  To  begin  with,  our  talking  to  God  involves  His  talking  to 
us.  _  He  never  allows  His  people  to  keep  on  speaking  to  Him,  without  taking  any 
notice  of  them,  or  making  any  answer.  That  would  not  be  fatherly  on  His  part.  By 
His  Spirit  and  by  His  providence  He  answers  us  in  tui-n.  2.  In  such  talking  we 
might  acquaint  ourselves  much  with  God,  and  be  at  peace.  How  much  slavish  fear 
—how  much  death-fear  would  take  its  departure,  if  we  were  accustomed  to  talk  as 
with  a  friend  with  that  One,  in  whose  hands  are  all  things,  in  that  land  whither  we 
are  going  !  3.  How  near  would  this  habit  keep  us  to  God  in  all  our  daily  life  !  We 
never  could  stray  far  from  Him  if  we  kept  it  up.  Matters  which  may  be  of  the 
utmost  moment,  though  we  know  it  not,  and  which  would  never,  perhaps,  have  been 
the  subject  of  prayer  and  so  of  blessing,  will  thus  be  brought  before  Him,  and  be 
remembered  by  Him  for  good.  4.  And  when  the  time  of  need  comes  for  strong 
prayer,  this  habit  will  be  at  work— it  will  give  us  encouragement.  The  God  we  have 
so  often  talked  to  will  be  no  stranger.     (P.  B.  Power,  M.A.) 

Ver.  27.  Speai  thou  unto  us  all  that  the  Lord  our  God  shall  speak  unto  thee.— 

The  duty  of  ministers : — I.  It  is  his  special  business  and  privilege  to  approach 

"WITH  FEEQUENCY  INTO  THE  PRESENCE  OF  GOD,  AND  TO  KEEP  UP  AN  INTIMATE  AND 

FAMILIAR  INTERCOURSE  WITH  HiM,  that  he  may  obtain  ejilarged  disclosures  of  His 
will,  and  receive  fuller  manifestations  of  His  character  and  excellence.  1.  That  one 
and  the  principal  source  of  their  information  in  reference  to  Divine  things,  is  the 
inspired  Word  of  God.  2.  The  Christian  minister  is  to  "go  near,  and  hear  what  the 
Lord  God  says,"  by  a  close  and  enlightened  attention  to  the  dispensations  of  Provi- 
dence. 3.  The  Christian  minister  is  to  "go  near,  and  hear  what  the  Lord  God  says," 
in  the  frequent  and  fervent  exercise  of  secret  prayer.  II.  The  other  department  of  dfuty 
attached  to  the  ministerial  office,  as  suggested  by  the  text,  is  the  declaration  of 
THE  MIND  OF  GoD  TO  THE  PEOPLE.  1.  He  is  to  spcak  uuto  the  people  only  what  God 
speaks  unto  him.  2.  He  is  to  speak  all  that  God  speaks  to  him.  He  must  away 
with  that  base,  time-serving  principle,  that  would  smooth  down,  or  expunge 
altogether,  the  holy  truths  of  God,  to  meet  the  vitiated  tastes  of  degenerate  men. 
{Alex.  Fisher.)  Israel's  commendable  request : — I.  It  bespoke  just  feelings  op 
God's  terrible  majesty,  and  their  own  littleness.  It  was  the  beginning  of  a 
right  acquaintance  with  Him.  The  meeting  at  Sinai  was  a  corrective  at  once  for 
profane  indifference  and  self-righteous  security ;  it  exhibited  what  God  was.  They 
had  hitherto  heard  of  Him  by  the  hearing  of  the  ear,  but  then  their  eyes  saw  Him ; 
they  were  abashed  and  trembled.  Who  among  the  listening  myriads  could  harbour 
light  thoughts  of  Him  with  that  quaking  mountain  in  their  sight,  and  that  voice 
rolling  in  their  ears  ?  Who  among  them  but  must  have  felt  his  self-importance 
annihilated  in  that  blaze  of  glory,  and  the  conviction  filling  all  his  soul,  "that  men 
could  not  be  profitable  unto  God,  nor  was  it  any  gain  to  Him  that  they  made  their 
ways  perfect "  ?  The  majesty  of  Jehovah  burst  upon  them  in  its  true  proportions  and 
splendour.  Was  it  any  wonder  that  they  removed  and  stood  afar  off  ?  Was  it  not  a 
proper  feeling  that  led  them  to  retire  from  the  presence,  fearful,  submissive,  and 
adoring  ?  II.  It  was  further  agreeable  to  God  because  it  bespoke  a  new  formed 
conviction  of  the  strictness,  dignity,  and  purity  of  the  Divine  law.  The 
imperfect  knowledge  of  God  in  which  they  had  hitherto  lived  must  have  been 
attended  with  very  false  or  defective  notions  concerning  the  requirements  of  the  law 
and  the  measure  of  their  own  obedience.  It  is  hard  to  say  what  their  views  upon 
the  subject  may  have  been,  but  it  is  not  unwarrantable  to  suppose  that  they  did  not 
differ  herein  from  their  fellow-sinners  of  all  times,  whose  error  it  has  always  been 
to  underrate  the  demands  made  on  them,  and  to  overrate  their  own  payment  of 
obedience.  One  thing  is  certain,  that  they  have  first  discovered  an  imbending 
strictoess  in  the  law  for  which  they  were  not  prepared,  a  minute  and  severe  exaction 
which  astonished  and  confounded  them.  Before  this,  their  ideas  of  obedience  might 
have  been  lax— a  few  transgressions  seeming  of  little  importance ;  and  provision,  they 
might  have  thought,  was  made  in  the  law  for  human  weakness,  so  as  to  admit  to  the 
credit  of  the  doers  of  the  law  all  not  stained  with  gross  crimes  or  perverse  immorali- 
ties. But  a  far  better  lesson  was  taught  them  when  they  were  brought  forth  by  Moses 
to  meet  with  God  :  they  learned  that  sin  of  any  the  smallest  kind,  in  thought  even, 
was  a  transgression  of  the  law,  and  that  every  sin  was  capital.  Commandment  after 
commandment,  as  it  came  from  God's  voice,  only  confirmed  their  condemnation, 


172  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

Overcome  with  alarm,  fearing  lest  each  successive  declaration  of  His  will  should  be 
the  reiteration  of  their  doom,  they  took  advantage  of  the  first  pause,  and  eagerly 
requested  to  be  relieved  from  their  most  uncomfortable  condition.  III.  The  chief 
propriety  of  the  Israelites'  request  lay  in  this  :  that  it  bespoke  their  sense  of  the 
NECESSITY  OF  A  MEDIATOR — of  somc  ouc  to  go  between  them  and  the  dread  Majesty 
of  Heaven.  Conscious  that  their  sins  had  separated  them  from  their  God,  they 
desired  one  to  be  the  channel  of  free,  unrestrained  communion  with  Him  ;  one  who, 
without  the  terrors  of  the  Godhead,  could  make  known  the  Divine  will  as  he  should 
receive  commandment,  and  take  back  to  the  Eternal  their  submission  and  their 
requests.  Accordingly,  because  they  could  not  think  of  a  better,  they  selected  Mosea 
for  this  office.  But  the  wisdom  of  Jehovah  knew  better  how  to  supply  their  need, 
and  shortly  after  made  known  to  them  His  intentions  in  this  matter  (Deut.  xviii.  15). 
You  know  that  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  gave  ample  proof  that  He  was  this  prophet 
who  should  come  into  the  world.  He  is  the  only  one  who  can  effectually  mediate 
between  guilty  man  and  his  offended  God.  Moses  exceedingly  feared  ;  but  Jesus 
cannot  be  disturbed  by  the  awfulness  of  His  own  Godhead  ;  yet  He  has  veiled  that 
Godhead  in  our  human  nature,  that  we  may  come  with  boldness  to  the  throne  of 
grace,  no  longer  panic-struck  by  the  sight  of  Sinai.  He  can  best  speak  to  us  the 
things  that  God  shall  say,  for  He  is  in  the  Father,  and  the  Father  in  Him.  Such  a 
Mediator  God  has  given,  according  to  His  promise ;  and,  because  a  sense  of  our 
need  of  a  Saviour  is  the  best  preparation  for  accepting  the  Saviour,  God  approved 
the  words  in  which  the  Israelites  expressed  such  a  sense.  {R.  Henderson^  M.A.) 
We  will  hear  it,  and  do  it.— The  diUy  of  hearers : — 1.  That  it  is  their  duty  to  hear, 
by  which  we  mean  it  is  their  duty  to  place  themselves  within  the  reach  of  hearing, 
the  Gospel ;  that  is,  it  is  incumbent  on  them  to  be  regular  in  their  attendance  upon 
public  ordinances.  2.  That  it  is  their  duty  to  hear  with  attention.  It  is  incumbent 
on  them  to  collect  their  scattered  thoughts,  and  ridding  their  minds  of  subjects 
of  inferior  weight,  to  direct  them  with  perseverance  to  the  truths  which  they 
assemble  to  hear.  3.  That  it  is  their  duty  to  hear  with  candour.  It  is  enjoined 
upon  us  to  divest  ourselves  of  all  prejudices  and  partial  affections,  whether  in  refer- 
ence to  the  truths  that  are  set  before  us,  or  to  the  person  that  declares  them  ;  that 
it  is  our  duty  to  avoid  captiousness  and  disingenuity,  and  to  hear  with  sincerity 
of  mind  all  that  the  Lord  God  says.  4.  That  it  is  their  duty  to  hear  with  faith. 
"We  must  believe  the  record  that  God  has  given  of  His  Son.  5.  That  it  is  their 
duty  to  hear  with  a  view  to  obedience.  "We  will  hear,"  said  the  Israelites, 
"and  do  it."  Christianity  is  throughout  a  practical  system.  Though  the  method 
of  salvation  which  it  reveals  is  entirely  of  grace,  and  accomplished  by  Divine 
agency,  to  the  utter  exclusion  of  human  merit,  it  nevertheless  does  enjoin 
unreserved  obedience  to  the  Divine  law,  and  furnishes  motives  of  the  greatest 
efficacy  to  dispose  us  to  yield    it.      {Alex.   Fisher.)  The  pastor's    question 

and  the  people's  answer:—!.  The  pastor's  question.  "What  shall  I  say  unto 
them?"  (Exod.  iii.  18.)  The  Christian  minister  is  an  agent,  not  a  principal. 
He  is  a  messenger  charged  with  the  delivery  of  a  message ;  but  he  does  not 
originate  that  message,  he  receives  it  at  the  hand  of  another,  and  he  is 
only  responsible  for  its  faithful  delivery.  This  was  the  case  with  Moses  :  "The 
God  of  your  fathers  hath  sent  me  unto  you."  (1)  What  are  the  essential  truths 
which  Scripture  reveals  to  us,  and  which  it  is  absolutely  necessary  for  us  to  know  ? 
(2)  What  proportion  do  these  truths  bear  to  one  another,  and  also  to  other  truths 
not  essential  ?  What  is  their  relative  magnitude  and  importance  ?  (3)  How  may 
the  several  truths  be  harmonised  ?  Again,  Scripture  occupies  itself  with  two  great 
thoughts :  the  one  having  man  as  its  centre ;  the  other  God.  The  thought  con- 
cerning man  is  concerning  man  as  a  sinner :  the  thought  concerning  God  is  concern- 
ing God  as  a  Saviour :  and  the  two  streams  of  thought  unite  in  the  further  idea, 
that,  namely,  of  salvation.  Thus,  to  the  pastor's  question,  "What  shall  I  say  unto 
him  ? "  answer  may  be  given  thus.  Declare  to  thy  people,  on  the  authority  of 
God,  their  responsibility  as  men,  and  their  ruin  as  sinners.  But  it  is  not  enough 
that  man  should  know  himself  as  a  sinner  ;  such  knowledge,  if  it  stand  alone,  can 
issue  only  in  despair.  God  has  revealed  Himself  not  only  as  "  a  just  God, "  but 
also  and  emphatically  as  "  a  Saviour."  II.  The  people's  answer.  Our  responsi- 
bility is  a  joint  responsibility.  So  far  as  we  faithfully  expound  God's  Word  to  our 
people,  they  are  to  receive  it  "not  as  the  word  of  men,  but,  as  it  is  in  truth, 
the  Word  of  God."  Now  this  implies  that  they  hear— 1.  Willingly.  Not  because 
custom  requires  or  respectability  demands.  2.  Attentively.  The  willing  hearer 
is  commoidy  an  attentive  hearer.     Lydia  "attended  unto  the  things  which  were 


CHAP,  v.]  DEUTERONOMY.  173 


spoken  of  Paul."  3.  Thoughtfully.  Attention  is  one  thing,  thought  is  another. 
4.  Honestly,  by  which  I  mean  without  prejudice,  with  a  single  desire  to  know  the 
will  of  God,  and  with  the  fearless  unreserved  purpose  of  doing  it  when  known. 
•'We  will  hear  it  and  do  it."  5.  Prayerfully.  Apart  from  the  Divine  blessing 
and  the  teaching  of  the  Holy  Spirit  we  preach  and  we  hear  in  vain.  And  for  that 
Divine  gift  we  must  pray.     {E.  Bayley,  D.D.) 

Vers.  28,  29.  The  Lord  heard  the  voice  of  your  "words.— God's  hearing  the  voice 
of  the  words  ojf  Eis  people :— I.  We  may  learn,  from  what  is  here  said,  that  God 
notices  and  approves  such  religious  professions  and  engagements  as  are  in  accord- 
ance with  His  Word,  and  by  which  we  bind  ourselves  to  do  His  will.     "  I  have 
heard,"  He  here  says,  "  the  voice  of  the  words  of  this  people."     It  is  still  true  that 
He  hears  all  the  words  that  are  spoken  by  men  upon  earth,  that  He  hears  them 
not  as  one  by  whom  they  are  unregarded,  but  as  one  who  marks  them  as  indica- 
tions of  character,   and  to  whom  we  must  answer  for  what  they  have  expressed. 
What  need  have  we  to  pray,  "Set  a  watch,  0  Lord,  before  my  mouth  ;  keep  the 
door  of  my  lips  "  !     But  here  the  words  which  God  testifies  that  He  had  heard  with 
approval  were  those  which  spoke  the  resolution  adopted  to  obey  and  serve  Him ; 
and  will  He  not  take  special  notice  of  such  words,  observe  whether  they  have  been 
sincerely  uttered,  and  whether  the  resolutions  they  expressed  are  acted  on  1    2.  God 
greatly  desires  that  we  should  adhere  to  our  religious  professions  and  engage- 
ments.    "  0  that  there  were  such  an  heart  in  them  !  "  He  said  of  the  people  who 
avowed  their  intention  to  hear  and  to  do  all  that  He  should  speak  unto  them  by 
the  mouth  of  His  servant  Moses.      3.  It  remains  to  be  proved  whether  we  will  act 
up  to  our  professions  and  engagements  to  be  the  Lord's.     "0  that  there  were 
such  an  heart  in  them  ! "  God  said  when  He  heard  the  voice  of  the  words  of 
the  people ;  an  heart  that  is  corresponding  to  their  words,  a  mind  and  will  to  do 
according  to  what  they  had  spoken.     How  lamentable  often  are  the  inconsistencies 
which  may  be  observed  between  the  professions  of  men   and  their  practice,  the 
changes  which  may  take  place  from  devotional  feeling  to  utter  worldly-mindedness  ! 
What  a  difference  between  the  man  calmly  seated  at  the  table  of  the  Lord,  his 
heart  opening  to  every  solemn  and  soothing  impression,  constrained  to  resolve 
that  he  will  live  to  Him  who  died  for  hiui  and  rose  again,  and  the  same  man  it 
/may  be  in  the  market,  engaged  in  the  bustle,  hearing  the  clamour,  and  yielding  to 
the  various  incitements  which  may  be  offered  to  covetous  desire,  or  angry  conten- 
tion, or  intemperate  indulgence  !     But  when  we  consider  these  things  it  becomes  us 
to  be  jealous  over  ourselves,  to  consider  deeply  what  we  have  undertaken.     4.  That 
with  our  adherence  to  the  engagements  we  have  undertaken  to  be  the  Lord's 
and  to  serve  Him,  our  present  and  our  eternal  interests  are  connected:  "0  that 
there  were  such  an  heart  in  them,  that  they  would  fear  Me,  and  keep  all  My  com- 
mandments alway,  that  it  might  be  well  with  them,  and  with  their  children  for 
ever  !  "     Our  portion  of  this  world's  good  may  be  scanty,  but,  thus  blessed,  it  will 
suffice  for  all  our  wants  in  regard  to  the  body  and  the  life  that  now  is  ;  and  even  if 
subjected  to  privations,  we  shall  be  sustained  under  them  by  the  assurance  of  a 
Saviour's  sympathy.     We  may  find  a  religious  life,  a  life  of  faith  m  the  Son  of 
God  and  of  obedience  to  His  commandments,  effectual  to  promote  even  our  present 
well-being.     Who  so  blessed  as  the  man  who  fears  the  Lord  aright,  and  walks  with 
Him  in  truth  ?    His  views  and  feelings  and  prospects  may  all  partake  of  cheerful- 
ness ;  they  are  all  brightened  by  the  light  of  hope.     In  the  benevolent  and  devout 
affections  which  go  forth  to  his  fellow-men  and  rise  to  his  Father  in  heaven,  he  has 
in  him  a  well  of  living  water  springing  up  unto  everlasting  life.     {J.  fferiderson, 
D.D.)         A  sacramental  meditation:—!.  God  is  witness  to  every  word  which  we 
utter,  especially  to  our  solemn  engagements  to  be  His  servants.     2.  Those  that 
say  they  will  hear  and  do  what  God  commandeth  say  well,  and  He  is  pleased  with 
such  declarations  and  resolutions.     3.  The  great  God  wishes  that  they  who  make 
good  resolutions  would  keep  them.      4.  It  would  be  happy  for  the  professors  of 
religion  if  they  would  abide  by  their  good  resolutions  and  act  consistently.^    It 
would  be  well  with  them  if  there  were  always  such  an  heart  in  them  as  there  is  at 
those  solemn  seasons.     The  expression  plainly  intimates  that  it  is  never  truly 
well  with  mankind  till  they  keep  God's  commandments,  till  they  keep  all  His 
commandments ;  yea,  till  they  keep  them  always.      This  is  what  God  expects. 
Good  resolutions  without  a  consistent,   sincere  obedience,  will  not  be  accepted. 
Our    happiness    will    be  ensured.     It  will,   as    these    words   intimate,    entail    a 
blessing  on  our  children.     Yea,  it  will  be  well  with  us  for  ever.     {J.    Orton.) 


174  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  t. 


They  have  well  said  all  tliat  they  liave  spoken.  0  that  there  were  such  an  heart 
in  them  \— Perfect  obedience : — In  tMs  Divine  saying  there  are  several  principal 
things  concerned.  1.  First  there  is  a  testimony  of  the  great  love  of  God.  The 
words  are,  very  expressively,  the  words  of  love  and  mercifiU  regard.  They  strongly 
testify  God's  fatherly  concern  and  disposition  to  do  good  towards  His  people. 
2.  There  is  a  more  melancholy  feeling  of  regret  that  the  people  would  not  be  found 
answering  to  this  disposition  of  Divine  love.  God  does  not,  indeed,  plainly  say 
that  the  people  had  not  "  such  an  heart,"  as  is  described  in  the  text— an  heart  to 
**  fear  Him,  and  to  keep  all  His  commandments  always  " ;  neither  does  God  say 
that  they  would  not  have  such  an  heart ;  yet  the  impression  left  by  the  words  is, 
that  there  would  be  a  failure  on  the  part  of  men,  when  God  had  done  in  His  vine- 
yard all  that  could  be  done,  to  keep  it  and  to  bless  it.  3.  It  declares  where  the 
fountain  of  obedience  must  be  ;  namely,  in, the  "heart."  There  is  the  source  of 
duty,  as  so  many  other  scriptures  testify  :  **  Out  of  thi^i  abundance  of  the  heart  the 
mouth  speaketh."  So  it  is  said  of  the  righteous  man,*"Tbe  law  of  his  God  is  in 
his  heart,  and  his  footsteps  shall  not  slide."  So,  again,  "Thy  words  have  I  hid 
within  mine  heart,  that  I  should  not  sin  against  Thee."  4.  It  is  said,  not  simply 
"My  commandments,"  but  "all  My  commandments."  And  this  difference  will 
not  be  lost  upon  reflecting  hearers.  It  is  the  building  of  integrity  upon  sincerity. 
It  reminds  us  of  the  necessity  of  yielding  to  God,  not  a  partial  and  divided 
obedience,  but  an  entire  one.  5.  The  word  "always"  is  added,  to  guard  us  -^ 
against  "weariness  in  well-doing,"  as  the  words  before  it  are  directed  to  guard  us 
against  an  imperfect  and  indolent  aim.  How  many  will  be  good  for  a  while,  and 
yet  not  endure  to  the  eud  !  How  many  begin  a  fair  course,  and  break  off  from  it ! 
How  many  precepts  and  warnings  are  given  us  in  Scripture,  specially  to  guard 
US  against  this  very  thing  !  6.  It  testifies  the  providential  love  and  care  of  God 
towards  His  people  from  generation  to  generation ;  inasmuch  as,  after  the  pre- 
ceding wish,  the  words  run,  "that  it  might  be  well  with  them  and  with  their 
children  for  ever  !  '*  This  is  certainly  a  very  striking  and  touching  proof  of  Divine 
regard.     It  strongly  confirms  the  doctrine  of  an  eternal  Providence.     It  also  speaks 

Sowerfully  towards  the  maintenance  of  an  hereditary  faith — a  faith  in  the  true  and 
ving  God,  handed  down  from  father  to  son,  until  the  purpose  of  God  in  creating 
man  for  this  world  shall  have  been  fully  answered,  and  "  the  fashion  of  this  world  " 
shall  then  "pass  away."  (/.  K.  Miller.)  Free-tvill .-—Consider— 1.  "  Fear  Me, 
and  keep  My  commandments  always."  The  Ten  Commandments  are  not  worn  out 
and  antiquated ;  they  contain  a  moral  element,  a  root  of  right  action  and  right 
principle,  which  not  only  cannot  be  dispensed  with,  but  must  be  enlarged  upon. 
All  contain  a  moral  principle— love  to  God,  love  to  man.  But,  as  our  Lord  says, 
Christians  must  not  content  themselves  with  the  observance  of  these  Ten  Com- 
mandments. Perfection  must  be  our  aim.  Our  love  for  man  must  be  modelled 
after  God's  love,  deep,  catholic,  unbounded  ;  and  our  love  for  God  must  be 
reciprocal  to  His  for  us,  an  unrestrained  overflowing  gratitude,  an  unreserved 
devotion,  an  exhaustless  loyalty.  To  keep  His  commandments  we  must  go  to  the 
root  of  them.  2.  "  0  that  there  were  such  an  heart  in  them,  .  .  .  that  it  might 
be  well  with  them."  Plainly,  then,  the  keeping  of  God's  commandments  ensures 
welfare.  "  If  thou  wilt  enter  into  life,  keep  the  commandments."  People  talk  of 
the  burden  of  obeying  God  ;  it  is  tiresome,  say  they,  and  a  thankless  thing  to  be  v^ 
strict  and  religious.  Those  who  do  not  try  the  pleasure  of  piety,  of  course  will 
not  understand  that  there  can  be  any  comfort  in  it.  But  there  is  more  pleasure 
in  serving  God  than  in  any  other  course.  Ah  !  men  may  love  the  world,  but  the 
world  will  not  satisfy  the  needs  of  their  inner  souls.  But  the  fear  of  God  does 
bring  peace.  There  is  an  inward  satisfaction,  a  consciousness  of  having  done  the 
right  thing,  which  makes  the  heart  glow  with  pleasure  ;  not  unfrequently,  but  not  i^ 
always,  an  outward  blessing  in  earthly  advantages— quite  as  often  as  in  the  case  of 
the  unprincipled — but,  what  is  more  than  all,  there  is  the  peace  of  looking  onwards. 
A  step  further.  When  the  great  plimge  is  made,  and  the  soul  finds  itself  in  the 
world  beyond,  where  silver  and  gold  will  not  buy  comforts,  and  intellect  and  sinews 
are  powerless  ;  there,  in  "the  life  which  knows  no  ending,"  will  those  who  have 
feared  God,  and  believed  in  His  Word,  and  kept  His  commandments,  find  to  their 
joy  that  it  is  well  with  them  :  the  treasures  of  that  kingdom  will  be  theirs :  the 
honours  of  heaven,  the  pleasures  of  spiritual  enjoyment,  will  be  their  own,  when 
nothing  else  can  give  pleasure  nor  relief.  3.  But  mark  :  "Keep  My  command- 
ments always."  Stesuifast,  continuous,  patient,  must  our  obedience  be  ;  not  hot 
and  cold  in  the  service  of  God ;  not  a  week  of  church-going  and  a  week  of  dissipa- 


CHAP,  v.]  DEUTERONOMY.  175 

tion.  Piety  consists  in  settled  habits  of  love  to  God  and  man  :  and  if  your  breath 
passes  away  at  the  moment  when  your  evil  spirit  has  the  upper  hand,  what  then  ? 
4.  Again,  ' '  0  that  there  were  such  an  heart  in  them  that  they  would  keep  ..." 
Here  we  have  a  Divine  assertion  of  man's  free-will.  It  lies  vdila.  ourselves  to 
choose — to  do,  or  not  to  do,  the  will  of  God.  He  does  not  force  us  to  be  good,  nor 
prevent  us  from  being  good.  There  is  something  in  every  heart,  if  honest  enough 
to  look  at  itself,  which  says,  "  It  rests  with  thee,  with  thyself,  whether  thou  wilt 
serve  God  or  not."  It  is  perfectly  true,  "  By  grace  ye  are  saved  ;  and  that  not  of 
yourselves,  it  is  the  gift  of  God":  yet  St.  Peter  says,  "Grow  in  grace,"  that  is, 
enjoins  growth  ;  and  therefore  growth,  somehow,  is  in  our  own  power.  We  talk  of  our 
micontrollable  impulses  ;  but  self-control  is  in  our  own  hands,  and  may  be  acquired 
ty  practice.  You  stand  at  a  high  window,  or  on  the  edge  of  a  cliff,  you  look  down, 
ana  an  unaccountable  impulse  prompts  you  to  jump  down,  to  certain  death,  you 
know.  Is  it  not  at  such  a  moment  in  your  power  to  draw  back  ?  If  you  let  the 
eensation  linger,  it  takes  a  decided  shape ;  you  cannot  say  what  may  happen,  yon 
may  jump  down.  But  you  can  draw  back  at  once.  If  you  play  with  ^he  tempta- 
tion, you  wiU  soon  find  it  stronger  than  your  will ;  but  not  at  first,  for  there  is  a 
promise  of  a  way  of  escape  from  every  temptation.  In  other  words,  you  can  resist ; 
the  aid  of  God,  which  rises  above  all  false  notions  about  fate,  is  guaranteed  to 
you.  {G.  F.  Prescott,  M.A.)  Man's  true  attitude  lefore  God: — There  were  three 
sentiments  referred  to  when  God  declared  of  the  Israelites  that  they  had  well  said 
all  that  they  had  spoken.  1.  That  sinners  must  be  consumed  if  they  stood  by 
themselves  before  God  in  His  majesty.  2.  That  they  need  a  Mediator.  3.  That 
a  Mediator  once  appointed  must  be  unflinchingly  obeyed.  And  forasmuch  as  God 
distinctly  avouches  His  approval  of  that  which  the  Israelites  had  uttered,  we  learn 
at  once  that  to  have  a  4read  of  His  majesty,  a  desire  for  an  Intercessor,  and  a 
determination  to  obey,  make  up  the  characteristics  which  the  Creator  searches 
after,  and  delights  in,  amongst  His  creatures.  "We  have  now  to  show  that  the 
three  sentiments,  into  whose  expression  this  speech  is  reducible,  do  virtually 
recognise  the  leading  truths  of  religion  ;  and  there  will  then  be  no  difficulty  in 
understanding  why  God  should  have  declared — '  *  I  have  heard  the  voice, "  &c.  Now 
we  suppose  that  the  secret  spring  of  all  impiety  and  all  irreligion  is  the  want  of  a 
due  sense  of  the  awfulness  of  God.  Oh  !  for  the  trumpet  peal,  the  thunder,  and 
the  lightning  which  heralded  and  announced  the  presence  of  the  living  God  on 
Sinai !  Something  of  the  like  scene  takes  place,  something  of  the  like  instrumen- 
tality is  introduced,  whenever  the  Holy  Spirit  effects  the  work  of  conversion.  The 
man  is  made  actually  to  feel  that  God  is  to  be  reverenced,  feared,  and  dreaded ; 
that  He  is,  and  must  be,  a  consuming  fire  to  His  adversaries.  And  then,  when 
man  is  brought  to  the  discovering  by  the  law  the  infinite  number  of  his  offences 
against  God,  and  the  distinct  impossibility  that  any  one  should  be  forgotten  or 
overlooked— then,  for  the  first  time,  can  he  be  said  to  know  rightly  the  awfulness 
of  God ;  and  then,  for  the  first  time,  will  he  be  softened  in  heart,  and  stricken  in 
spirit,  and  confess  from  his  very  soul  that  the  Almighty  is  terrible.  But  we  go 
on  to  inquire  what  course  it  will  be  which  the  awakened  man  adopts  when  made 
thoroughly  conscious  that  God  is  thus  awful  ?  It  is  enough  if  he  discern  but  some- 
thing of  the  spirituality  of  the  law,  of  its  infinite  demands,  of  its  unmitigated 
penalties ;  for  he  instantly  perceives  that  it  were  as  idle  to  think  of  grasping  the 
sun  and  the  stars  as  of  obeying  this  law  for  himself,  and  there  is  at  once  wrought 
in  man  the  persuasion  that  he  cannot  stand  in  his  own  strength  and  in  his  own 
merit,  face  to  face  with  his  Maker.  He  will  be  ready  to  lie  down  in  the  dilst,  and 
leave  himself  to  be  crushed  beneath  the  weight  of  indignation,  unless,  indeed,  he 
can  find  some  being  mighty  enough  and  pure  enough  to  rise  as  an  intercessor,  and 
plead  his  cause  with  the  Most  High.  Add  to  this  the  third  sentiment,  and  the 
ulustration  of  our  text  will  be  complete.  "Speak  thou  unto  us  all  that  the  Lord 
our  God  shall  speat  unto  thee,  and  we  will  hear  and*  do  it."  You  understand 
from  this  that  the  Israelites.  Jiad,  so  far,  right  apprehensions  of  the  office  of  the 
Mediator,  as  the  expression  may  witness — not  6nly  to  shield  them  from  wrath,  but 
to  teach  them  their  duty.  There  is  no  lack  under  the  Gospel  dispensation  of  a 
readiness  to  be  delivered  by  Christ  from  the  anguish  which  is  the  portion  of  those 
who  die  unregenerated.  But  unless  Christ  Jesus  be  received  under  all  His 
characters,  it  is  not  possible  that  He  should  be  received  under  any.  Prophet, 
Priest,  and  King  to  His  Church,  I  must  submit  to  His  teaching,  and  I  must  bow 
before  His  sceptre,  if  ever  I  look  to  be  reconciled  by  His  sacrifice.  Those  whom 
He  washes  in  His  blood,  He  instructs  as  a  master,  and  reigns  over  as  a  monarch. 


176  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

{R.  Melvill,  B.D.)  The  heart  depraved: — I.  What  is  meant  by  the  teem 
"heart,"  as  used  in  this  passage  and  those  which  coerespond  with  it? 
The  same  mind  has  a  gre^t  variety  of  acts.  When  it  acts  in  one  manner,  we  call  the 
mind  thus  dieting,  reason ;  when  it  acts  in  another  manner,  we  call  it  conscience. 
In  view  of  its  constant  production  of  feelings  and  emotions,  we  call  it  the  heart,  or 
will.  Thus,  the  term  "heart "  is  used  to  denote  the  mind,  in  respect  to  its  capacity 
to  exercise  feelings  towards  God,  His  law.  His  government.  l.'What,  then,  is  the 
character  of  the  natural  heart  ?  This  is  answered  by  the  Word  of  God.  All  the 
acts  of  the  natural  heart  are  declared  to  be  sinful.  Whatever  of  evil  exists  in  an 
individual  of  the  human  family,  is  charged  ultimately  on  his  heart.  All  evil,  in 
thought,  word,  or  deed,  is  described  as  having  its  origin  here.  2.  This  doctrine  is 
confirmed  by  the  fact  that  God  has  promised  to  renew  the  hearts  of  His  people. 
If  Divine  energy  is  requisite  to  turn  the  hearts  of  men,  and  to  renew  them  in 
righteousness,  then  their  depravity  is  truly  alarming.  3.  This  view  is  confirmed 
by  the  prayers  recorded  in  the  Scripture  for  the  renovation  of  the  heart.  4.  This 
view  is  sustained  by  the  representations  which  the  Scriptures  make  of  its  renova- 
tion (Prov.  xxi.  1  ;  Phil.  ii.  13  ;  1  Cor.  xii.  4-6 ;  Eph.  i.).  The  reclaiming 
of  us  from  walking  in  the  lusts  of  the  flesh  and  of  the  mind,  and  our  recovery  from 
the  control  of  our  own  hearts,  and  our  creation  in  His  image,  are  declared  to  be 
not  of  works,  but  of  grace ;  and  as  new  creatures  the  saints  are  declared  to  be  His 
workmanship,  created  anew  unto  good  works.  II.  Have  we  no  control  over  the 
feelings  and  desires  of  our  minds  ?  This  branch  of  the  subject  is  exceedingly 
important.  It  is  admitted  that  the  mind  has  some  indirect  control  over  the 
feelings  and  desires.  But  though  the  turning  away  of  the  eyes  and  the  mind  from 
meditating  evil,  and  the  contemplation  of  objects  which  are  noble  and  excellent, 
may  actually  make  a  wide  difference  in  the  external  character  of  men,  and  in  the 
internal  exercise  of  the  unholy  feelings  and  desires,  yet  it  is  to  be  remembered  that 
the  human  heart,  under  all  these  operations,  remains  the  same.  If,  after  a  long 
period,  the  eyes  are  again  suffered  to  behold  transgression,  and  the  mind  to 
meditate  it,  there  will  be  'found  in  every  unregenerate  bosom  the  same  unholy 
feelings  and  the  same  elements  of  iniquity.  Nor  is  it  possible  for  the  mind,  by  its 
own  resolution,  to  hush  them  into  silence.  Let  a  strong  affection  seize  the  heart, 
and  it  controls  and  determines  the  volitions,  but  is  not  determined  by  them. 
Though  their  exercise  may  be  checked,  yet  no  power  but  that  of  Him,  who  com- 
manded the  winds  and  the  waves  to  be  still,  can  destroy  them,  and  produce  in 
their  place  the  "holiness  without  which  no  man  shall  see  the  Lord."  III.  All 
BEINGS  ACT  FREELY.  The  holy  beings,  who  stand  around  the  throne  of  God,  act 
according  to  the  law  of  God,  and  with  this  the  holy  desires  and  feelings  of  their 
hearts  correspond.  The  saints  in  this  life  act  freely.  Their  souls  are  renewed. 
The  wicked  act  freely.  They  indulge,  in  different  degrees,  the  desires  and  feelings 
of  their  hearts.  These  flow  forth  spontaneously,  and  all  the  determinations  of 
their  minds  to  neglect  what  God  has  required,  or  to  do  what  He  has  forbidden,  are 
produced  by  them.  Thus  they  sin  freely.  But  it  may  here  be  asked,  are  they  not 
equally  free  to  be  holy  ?  To  this  I  reply,  that  I  know  of  no  other  hindrance  except 
their  own  hearts.     "Ye  will  not  come  unto  Me,  that  ye  might  have  life."     IV.  If 

ANY    shall    EVENTUALLY   BE   SAVED   IT   MUST    BE   ASCRIBED    ALTOGETHER   TO    THE 

WILL  OF  God.  I  know,  indeed,  that  this  doctrine  is  not  apt  to  be  agreeable 
to  the  mass  of  mankind.  But  why  should  it  not  be?  It  is  a  truth — it  is  a 
melancholy  truth — that  the  race  of  man  has  ruined  itself.  It  is  a  sad  truth 
that  our  hearts  are  depraved.  It  is  a  mournful  fact  that  we  will  not  come 
to  Christ.  Why,  then,  should  we  not  rejoice  to  hear  that  God  is  better  to  us 
than  we  are  to  ourselves?  Why  should  we  not  for  ever  praise  Him  for  His 
unspeakable  gift?  (J.  Foot,  B.D.)  Good  resolutions  heard  by  God: — God 
has  heard  our  religious  resolutions  and  engagements.  First  our  private  ones 
— that  we  would  watch  against  such  a  tempter,  pray  for  grace  to  resist  such  a 
temptation,  to  redeem  the  time  and  honour  the  Lord  with  our  substance. 
Secondly,  our  more  public  and  solemn  ones ;  when  we  joined  ourselves  to  His 
people,  went  to  His  table,  and  over  the  memorials  of  His  dying  love  said  "  Hence- 
forth by  Thee  only  will  I  make  mention  of  Thy  name."  But  talking  and  doing 
are  two  things.  Even  amongst  ourselves  one  goes  little  way  without  the  other. 
Actions  speak  louder  than  words.  What  is  lip  service  in  religion!  (W.  Jay.) 
Character  not  to  be  estimated  by  speech : — Speech  is  one  of  the  most  uncertain 
criterions  to  judge  of  character  as  to  reality  or  degree  of  religion.  From  education, 
reading,  and  hearing,  persons  may  learn  to  talk  well,  may  surpass  othera  far  better 


CHAP,  v.]  DEUTERONOMY.  177 

than  themselvep,  as  an  empty  vessel  sounds  louder  than  a  full  one,  and  a  sBallow 
brook  is  more  noisy  than  a  deep  river.  Some  speak  little,  concerning  themselves 
especially,  for  fear  of  deception,  or  lest  they  should  appear  to  be  what  they  are  not. 
Baxter  says,  in  his  life  of  Judge  Hale,  "I  feared  he  was  wanting  in  experimental 
religion,  as  he  seldom  spoke  of  his  own  spiritual  views  and  feelings.  But  upon 
better  acquaintance  I  found  out  my  mistake.  He  had  heard  from  many  so  much 
hypocrisy  and  fanaticism  that  he  was  urged  towards  the  extreme  of  silence."  The 
champion  of  truth  has  defended  its  purity  and  importance,  contended  earnestly  and 
as  far  as  argument  and  evidence  goes,  wisely  for  the  faith.  He  has  well  said  all 
that  he  has  spoken.  But  where  is  the  spirit  of  truth,  the  meekness  of  wisdom,  the 
mind  ol  Christ  ?  Another  in  the  sanctuary  has  acknowledged  in  language  equally 
beautiful  and  true,  "We  have  erred  and  strayed  from  Thy  ways  like  lost  sheep, 
&c.  He  has  well  said  all  that  he  has  spoken.  But  where  is  the  broken  heart,  the 
contrite  spirit  ?  How  often  after  these  confessions  is  the  sermon  founded  upon 
them  disliked,  and  the  preacher  condemned  !  A  third  has  gone  to  his  brethren  in 
distress  and  justified  the  ways  of  God  to  man,  but  does  he  justify  God's  dealings 
with  himself  in  time  of  trouble  ?  He  has  well  said  all  that  he  has  spoken,  but 
reminds  us  of  Job's  language,  "  Behold  thou  hast  instructed  many,  and  thou  hast 
strengthened  the  weak  hands.  Thy  words  have  upholden  him  that  was  falling,  and 
thou  hast  strengthened  the  feeble  knees.  But  now  it  is  come  upon  thee,  and  thou 
faintest ;  it  toucheth  thee,  and  thou  art  troubled."  Men  mistake  themselves, 
though  often  sincere  as  they  are  earnest.  They  do  not  distinguish  between  impulse 
and  disposition,  outward  excitement  and  inward  principle.  {Ibid.)  That  it 
might  be  well  with  them. — Human  happiriess: — I.  Obedience  to  Divine  laws 
IS  ESSENTIAL  TO  THE  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  w^ORLD.  God's  laws  are  not  arbitrary 
institutes ;  they  rise  out  of  the  constitution  of  things ;  they  are  not  made  for  the  sake 
of  the  Sovereign,  but  for  the  sake  of  the  subject.  II.  Righteousness  in  man  is 
ESSENTIAL  TO  THIS  OBEDIENCE.  A  right  heart  is  a  heart  that  both  fears  and  loves 
God  supremely.     III.  The  great  desire  of  the  Eternal  Father,  in  relation 

TO    HUMANITY,    IS    THE    EXISTENCE    OF    THIS    RIGHT  -  HEARTEDNESS.       {HomUlst.) 

The  inward  frame  should  correspond  with  the  &iitivard  profession  : — I.  That  jien 

OFTEN  MAKE  WHAT  OUGHT  TO  BE  THE  MOST  SOLEMN  TRANSACTIONS  WITH  THE  LORD 
ABOUT  THEIR    SOUL's  CONCERNS  BUT   SOLEMN   TRIFLING   WITH   HiM.       1.  Show  how 

far  a  man  may  go  in  engaging  himself  to  the  Lord,  and  yet  after  all  he  may  be  but 
trifling.  2.  Show  wherein  this  trifling  and  slight  work  in  such  a  weighty  business 
doth  appear.  (1)  It  appears  in  persons  engaging  themselves  to  the  Lord,  without 
being  at  pains  to  prepare  themselves,  and  bring  up  their  hearts  to  the  duty. 
(2)  When  people  engage  themselves  to  the  service  of  the  Lord,  but  do  not  give  their 
hearts  to  Him.  (3)  When  people  have  any  secret  reserves  in  their  closing  with 
Christ,  as  is  the  case  when  the  heart  is  not  well  content  to  take  Christ  with  what- 
soever may  follow  this  choice  (Luke  xiv.  26).  (4)  When  people  overlook  the  Medi- 
ator in  their  covenant  of  peace  with  God,  but  transact  Avith  God  for  peace  and  pardon 
without  respect  to  the  atoning  blood  of  Christ.  (5)  This  is  turned  into  solemn 
trifling  with  God  by  people's  not  taking  Christ  for  all,  but  only  for  making  up  that 
of  which  they  may  come  short ;  thus  endeavouring  to  patch  up  a  garment  of  their 
own  righteousness  and  of  His  together.  (6)  By  persons  making  a  covenant  of 
works  with  Christ ;  the  tenor  thereof  is,  that  if  Christ  will  save  their  souls  they 
shall  serve  Him  as  long  as  they  live.  (7)  Persons  lay  hold  on  Christ  with  a  faith 
of  which  the  mighty  power  of  God  was  not  the  forming  principle  (Eph.  i.  19) ;  but 
is  merely  the  product  of  a  person's  natural  faculties.  3.  Point  out  how  people  come 
to  turn  such  solemn  work  into  mere  trifling,  (1)  Because  they  have  no  due  con- 
sideration of  the  worth  and  preciousness  of  their  souls,  they  do  not  suitably  value 
the  great  salvation  (Matt.  xxii.  5).  (2)  Because  they  know  not  their  own  hearts 
and  their  deceits  (Jer.  xvii.  9).  (3)  Because  sin  has  never  been  made  bitter  enough 
to  them.  (4)  Because  they  are  hasty  and  indeliberate  in  their  engaging.  They 
fall  a-building  ere  they  count  the  cost  (Matt.  xiv.  25) ;  what  is  rashly  done  is  but 
slightly  done  in  this  matter.  (5)  Because  they  have  never  got  a  sufficient  discovery 
of  their  own  utter  weakness  and  insufficiency.  4.  We  make  some  application. 
This  doctrine  may  help  us  to  see  the  reason  why  so  many  return  with  the  dog  to 
his  vomit.  There  is  an  error  in  the  first  concoction.  That  you  may  beware  of  this 
we  would  exhort  you  to  make  sure  work  in  your  transacting  with  the  Lord.  Oh, 
do  not  trifle  in  so  important  a  concern  !  To  guard  you  effectually  against  this  con- 
sider the  following  things — (1)  Consider,  this' is  to  put,  so  far  as  you  can,  a  solemn 
cheat  on  the  great  God  (Gal.  vi.  7).  (2)  It  is  to  put  a  solemn  cheat  on  your  own 
12 


178  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  r. 

souls ;  you  tlius  deceive  your  own  souls.  If  you  trifle  with  God  you  will  find  at 
length  a  sad  disappointment  (Isa.  1.  11).  (3)  Consider  the  weight  of  the  matter; 
the  salvation  or  damnation  of  the  soul  is  no  small  business  ;  if  you  manage  it  right 
you  may  get  your  salvation  sealed  ;  if  not,  see  Luke  xiv.  24.  (4)  Consider,  if  you 
thus  trifle  with  God  in  this  matter,  you  will  be  discovered.  (5)  Consider  that  you 
have  a  deceitful  heart.  (6)  If  you  make  sure  work  you  will  find  the  eternal  advan- 
tage of  it.     II.  That  a  heart  sincerely  and  suitably  corresponding  with 

THE  PROFESSION  OF  A  COVENANTING   PEOPLE  IS  A  MOST  VALUABLE   AND  EXCELLENT 

thing.  1.  We  are  to  show  what  such  a  heart  is  ;  and  on  this  head  the  particulars 
shall  be  mostly  taken  out  of  the  context.  We  observe— (1)  That  it  has  a  view  of 
the  majesty  and  glorious  perfections  of  that  God  with  whom  we  have  to  do  (Deut. 
V.  24).  (2)  It  is  tilled  with  the  fear  of  God.  (3)  It  is  a  humble  heart.  (4)  It  is  a 
heart  full  of  wonder  at  the  goodness  of  God,  His  condescension  and  patience  towards 
sinners  (vers.  24  and  26).  (5)  It  is  a  heart  convinced  of  the  need  of  a  Mediator, 
and  resolved  to  employ  Him  in  all  causes  betwixt  God  and  them  (ver.  27).  (6)  It 
is  a  heart  taking  the  Lord  only  for  their  God.  They  professed  they  would  have  no 
more  to  do  with  idols,  though  it  was  not  long  ere  their  hearts  turned  to  their  old 
bias  (Exod.  xxxii.  8).  (7)  It  is  a  heart  for  the  Lord's  work  (ver.  27).  It  is  a  heart 
which  inclines  the  man  who  has  taken  Christ's  enlisting  money  to  fight  His  battles  ; 
which  willingly  stoops  to  the  yoke  of  Christ's  commandments,  and  is  set  to  walk  in 
the  way  of  obedience.  It  is  a  heart  reconciled  to  the  law  of  God.  (8)  It  is  a  heart 
that  has  high  and  honourable  thoughts  of  God  (ver.  24).  (9)  It  is  a  heart  which 
the  voice  of  God  has  reached  (ver.  24).  (10)  It  is  a  heart  which  takes  up  with  the 
Lord  for  its  God,  even  when  He  appears  in  the  glorious  robes  of  His  perfect  holiness. 
(11)  It  is  a  heart  sensible  of  that  vast  distance  which  sin  has  made  betwixt  God  and 
the  soul,  which  has  got  such  a  sight  of  its  own  sinfulness,  and  God's  holiness,  that 
it  sees  there  is  no  transacting  with  God  but  by  a  Mediator  (ver.  27).  (12)  It  is  a 
heart  reconciled  to  the  whole  law  of  God  (ver.  27).  It  is  not  every  heart  which  is 
such.  They  only  have  it  "who  walk  not  after  the  flesh,  but  after  the  spirit "  (Rom. 
viii.  1).  (13)  It  is  a  heart  which  is  for  taking  the  law  only  out  of  Christ's  hand  as 
Mediator  (ver.  27).  The  Mediator  first  makes  the  peace  between  God  and  the 
sinner,  then  bids  the  man  work.  (14)  It  is  a  heart  ready  for  obedience  (ver.  27). 
2.  Show  that  such  a  heart  is  a  most  valuable  thing.  It  must  be  so  ;  for — (1)  Such 
a  heart  is  God's  delight :  "0  that  there  were  such  an  heart  in  them  !  "  This  would 
give  content  to  the  heart  of  Christ.  (2)  It  is  that  heart  without  which  the  largest 
profession,  and  the  most  express  covenanting  with  God,  is  little  worth.  Without 
this  heart  men  do  but  as  the  Lord's  enemies,  they  lie  unto  Him.  (3)  The  want  of 
this  heart  is  very  grievous  to  the  Spirit  of  Christ.  (4)  God  accepts  of  the  duty,  and 
is  well  pleased  with  the  bargain,  where  there  is  such  a  heart :  "0  that  there  were 
such  an  heart  in  them  ! "  There  wants  no  more  to  complete  the  bargain  betwixt 
them  and  Me.  Then,  as  they  call  Me  their  God,  so  would  I  call  them  My  people 
by  a  saving  relation.  But  where  such  is  not,  the  contract  betwixt  Christ  and  the 
soul  is  written  indeed,  but  it  is  not  signed.  (5)  Where  there  is  such  a  heart  God 
will  be  well  pleased  with  the  person,  and  accept  the  duty,  though  it  have  many 
defects  ;  albeit  He  be  not  pleased  with  these  defects,  yet  in  mercy  He  will  overlook 
them  :  **  0  that  there  were  such  an  heart  in  them  !  "  As  if  He  had  said,  0  if  they 
were  but  honest  in  the  main,  I  would  not  be  severe  on  them  for  every  escape.  The 
Lord  will  use  the  indulgence  of  a  father  for  such  infirmities.  (6)  They  will  never 
prove  steadfast  in  the  Lord's  covenant  without  such  a  heart :  "0  that  there  were 
such  an  heart  in  them  !  "  They  have  spoke  fair,  but  they  will  never  keep  a  word 
they  say,  for  they  have  not  such  a  heart.  "For  their  heart  was  not  right  with 
Him,  neither  were  they  steadfast  in  His  covenant  "  (Psa.  Ixxviii.  37).  The  heart  is 
the  principle  of  actions  ;  such  a  heart  is  the  principle  of  perseverance  ;  and  there 
can  be  no  steadfastness  without  a  principle  (Matt.  xiii.  6).  (7)  Such  a  heart 
enriches  the  man  who  has  it.  Christ  is  yours  ;  all  is  yours — pardon,  peace,  and  every 
blessing.     III.  That  the  work  of  covenanting  with  the  Lord  is  slight  work, 

WHEN  IT  IS  NOT  HEART-WORK  ;  OR,  THAT  SOLEMN  COVENANTING  WITH  THE  LORD  IS 
BUT  SOLEMN  TRIFLING  WITH  HiM,  WHEN  THE  WORK  OF  COVENANTING  IS  NOT  HEART- 
WORK.  1.  To  produce  some  evidences,  that  solemn  covenantiu£c  is  often  nothing  but 
solemn  trifling,  and  not  heart- work.  It  is  of  importance  that' jou  may  be  stirred 
up  to  take  heed  to  the  deceits  which  we  may  discover  in  this  weighty  business. 
With  this  view,  we  observe — (1)  That  apostasy  and  defection  from  the  good  ways 
of  the  Lord,  persons  returning  again  openly  to  the  same  courses  which  they 
pursued  before.     This  is  an  evidence  (2  Pet.  ii.  19-22  ;  Matt.  xii.  45).     (2)  When 


CHAP,  v.]  DEUTERONOMY.  179 

some  lusts  are  maintained  in  Christ's  room.  (3)  Persons  making  their  covenant 
with  the  Lord  a  cover  to  their  sloth  and  a  pander  to  their  lusts.  (4)  The  bar- 
renness of  the  lives  of  professors,  nothing  of  the  fruits  of  holiness  appearing  in 
their  lives.  (5)  The  having  no  communication  of  the  life  of  grace  Irom  Christ 
to  the  soul  (John  xiv.  19).  If  the  soul  be  tnily  united  to  Christ,  it  will  partake 
of  the  root  and  sap  of  the  vine  (John  vi.  57).  (6)  The  having  no  contentment 
in  Christ  alone.  2.  Show  when  covenanting  is  not  heart-work,  but  a  trifling 
business.  It  is  so — (1)  When  the  soul  is  not  divorced  from  sin.  The  heart  is 
naturally  glued  to  sin,  and  it  is  impossible  that  the  heart  can  at  once  be  both 
for  the  Lord  and  lusts  (Matt.  vi.  24).  The  first  marriage  must  be  made  void 
before  a  second  can  be  made  sure.  (2)  When  the  soul  is  not  divorced  from  the 
law  (Rom.  viii.  4).  (3)  When  the  soul  comes  not  heartily  and  freely  to  the 
Lord  in  His  covenant  (PsA.  Ixxviii.  34-37).  The  Lord  will  not  meet  that  soul. 
He  cares  not  for  persons  giving  the  hand,  when  they  do  not  give  Him  their 
hearts.  (4)  When  the  soul  comes  to  the  Lord  in  His  covenant  for  peace  to  their 
consciences,  but  not  for  victory  over  their  lusts.  (5)  When  the  soul  accepts  of 
conditional  promises,  but  does  not  accept  of  and  receive  the  Lord  Himself  in 
absolute  promises.  (6)  When  there  is  not  an  absolute  resignation  of  will  to  God. 
3.  Show  the  danger  of  trifling,  and  not  making  heart-work  of  this  weighty 
business.  This  will  appear  if  we  consider — (1)  That  the  Lord  rejects  the  work 
(Mai.  i.  13).  (2)  That  it  puts  men  more  securely  in  Satan's  grips  than  before. 
In  this  sense  that  holds  true  which  you  have  in  Isa.  xxviii.  22.  (3)  That  it 
exposes  men  to  spiritual  strokes  (Jer.  xlviii.  10).  (4)  That  however  quietly 
people  may  get  it  carried  in  life,  it  will  bring  them  a  sad  disappointment  at 
death.      (T.  Boston,  D.D.)        National  ha2}2>iiiess  atid  j^fosjierity  : — 1.  That  God 

IS  SEEIOUSLY  CONCERNED  FOE  THE  GOOD  AND  HAPPINESS  OF  NATIONS  AND 
KINGDOMS,    AS  WELL  AS   THAT   OF   PARTICULAR   PERSONS  ;    AND   MORE   ESPECIALLY 

OF  THOSE  NATIONS  THAT  PROFESS  His  TRUE  RELIGION.  1.  Since  it  appears 
that  God  sits  at  the  helm  and  steers  all  the  affairs  of  mankind,  and  that  public 
societies  are  more  especially  the  objects  of  His  providence,  methinks  this  con- 
sideration should  be  a  good  antidote  against  all  those  troublesome  fears  we  are 
apt  to  disturb  ourselves  with  about  the  success  of  public  matters.  2.  This 
doctrine  ought  to  teach  us  to  depend  altogether  upon  God  Almighty,  and  upon 
Him  only,  for  the  good  success  of  our  affairs,  either  in  Church  or  State,  when- 
ever they  are  in  a   doubtful  or  dangerous  condition.     II.  That   the  happiness 

AND  PROSPERITY  OF  NATIONS  IS  TO  BE  ATTAINED  THE  SAME  WAY  THAT  ANY 
PARTICULAR     MAN's     HAPPINESS     IS,    THAT     IS    TO     SAY,     BY    FEARING     GOD,    AND 

KEEPING  His  COMMANDMENTS.  Name  any  nation  that  was  ever  remarkable  for 
justice,  for  temperance,  and  severity  of  manners,  for  piety  and  religion,  that 
did  not  always  thrive  and  grow  great  in  the  world,  and  that  did  not  always 
enjoy  a  plentiful  portion  of  all  those  things  which  are  accounted  to  make  a 
nation  happy  and  flourishing.  And  on  the  other  aide,  when  that  nation  has 
declined  from  its  former  virtue  and  grown  impious  or  dissolute  in  manners,  we 
appeal  to  experience  whether  it  has  not  likewise  always  proportionably  sunk  in 
its  success  and  good  fortunes.  III.  That  virtue  and  piety  do,  in  their 
OWN  nature,  tend  to  promote  the  welfare  and  happiness  of  peoples 
AND  nations.  As,  on  the  other  hand,  all  vice  and  irreligion  is  destructive  of 
human  society.  And  this  without  respect  to  any  appointment  or  decree  of  God 
that  things  should  be  managed  in  this  way  ;  but  purely  in  the  very  nature  of 
the  thing.  {Ah}).  John  Sharp.)  The  anxiety  of  God  for  the  welfare  of  Hit 
people : — The  way  to  be  happy  is  to  obey  God.  And,  though  by  nature  we  are 
inclined  to  question  this,  and  think  to  find  more  enjoyment  in  self-indulgence, 
yet  experience  proves  that  the  way  to  be  happy  is  to  obey  God.  It  is  sin 
which  makes  men  miserable,  and  keeps  them  so.  But  "godliness  has  promise 
of  the  life  that  now  is,  as  well  as  of  that  which  is  to  come."  And  thus,  when 
God,  in  my  text,  called  His  people  to  obedience,  it  is  that  it  may  be  well  with 
them,  and  with  their  children  after  them  for  ever.  I.  The  source  of  obedi- 
ence. This  is  the  heart.  All  Christian  obedience  flows  from  the  heart.  And 
thus  the  Psalmist  says  :  *'  When  Thou  shalt  enlarge  my  heart,  I  will  run  in  the 
way  ot  Thy  commandments."  We  are  to  love  God,  worship  God,  and  obey  God 
from  the  heart.  Tliere  can  be  neither  genuine  love,  nor  worship,  nor  obedience, 
unless  our  hearts  are  engaged  :  ' '  Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God  with  all 
thy  heart."  God's  claim  is,  "My  son,  give  Me  thy  heart."  God's  appeal  in 
the  Gospel  is  addressed  to  our  hearts  ;    and  for  this   reason — that    "out  of  tha 


180  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

heart  are  the  issues  of  life."  It  is  the  state  of  the  heart  which  distinguishes  the 
righteous  from  the  wicked  ;  and  it  is  the  heart  which  influences  the  conduct : 
it  is  the  root  which  supports  the  tree,  and  makes  its  fruit  either  corrupt  or 
good  ;  and  therefore  God  speaks  to  our  hearts  in  the  Gospel.  He  appeals  to  our 
gratitude.  He  endeavours  to  enlist  our  affectious.  He  interests  our  hopes.  He 
hinds  us  to  Himself  hy  a  sense  of  benefit.  He  provokes  us  to  love  and  to  good 
Morks  by  reminding  us  what  great  things  He  has  done  for  our  sakes.     II.  The 

NATURE  AND   EXTENT   OF   THE     OBEDIENCE    AVHICH     IS     REQUIRED   FROM     US.      We 

are  to  fear  God,  and  to  keep  all  His  commandments  always.  We  are  to  keep 
all  God's  commandments,  and  we  are  to  keep  them  always.  1.  And,  first,  God 
requires  universal  obedience.  It  is  the  only  obedience  which  will  be  accepted  by 
God  ;  He  will  not  own  a  partial  obedience  or  a  divided  heart.  It  is  the  only 
obedience  which  will  give  us  confidence  with  God.  "Then,"  says  the  Psalmist, 
"  I  shall  not  be  ashamed,  when  I  have  respect  unto  all  Thy  commandments." 
Our  obedience  must  go  to  the  length  and  breadth  of  the  requirement.  We  must 
make  no  exceptions.  What  God  enjoins  we  must  do  ;  and  what  He  demands 
we  must  resign.  To  be  His,  we  must  be  His  wholly  ;  and,  without  exception, 
our  aim  must  be  to  keep  all  His  commandments,  and  this  always.  2.  Our 
obedience  must  be  constant,  as  well  as  universal.  We  can  obtain  no  discharge 
from  Christ's  service  except  by  apostasy  ;  and,  even  then,  the  law  is  in  force, 
though  we  have  disowned  the  authority.  In  other  services,  a  man  may  engage 
for  a  year  or  a  day,  and  with  the  term  of  servitude  the  obligation  to  serve  is 
cancelled  ;  but  nothing  can  release  us  from  the  Saviour's  blessed  service.  And 
if  we  are  really  His,  we  have  no  wish  to  be  discharged.  We  love  our  Master  : 
v/e  love  His  service  :  we  are  content  with  our  wages.  III.  The  reward. 
"That  it  may  be  well  with  thee,  and  with  thy  children  for  ever."  In  keeping 
God's  commandments  there  is  great  reward  ;  and,  to  re[)eat  the  sentiment 
^vit]l  which  I  began,  the  way  to  be  happy  is  to  obey  God.  Indeed,  God  has 
promised  that  it  should  be  so  ;  and  none  of  God's  promises  can  fail.  You  have 
a  promise  implied  in  the  text.  You  have  a  similar  one  in  Isaiah:  "0  that  thou 
haJst  hearkened  to  My  commandments  !  then  had  thy  peace  been  as  a  river, 
and  thy  righteousness  as  the  waves  of  the  sea"  (xlviii.  18).  Reward  is  a  bold 
word  for  one  of  a  sinful  nature  ever  to  use  ;  but  God  has  pronounced  it,  and 
we  need  not  be  afraid  of  what  He  has  sanctioned.  He  connects  obedience  with 
reward,  even  in  this  world.  And,  when  I  look  back  upon  life,  I  see  written 
as  with  a  sunbeam,  "It  shall  be  well  for  them  that  fear  God,  and  keep  all 
His  commandments."  It  is  an  eternal  necessity,  founded  on  the  constitution  of 
things.  "Great  peace  have  they  which  love  Thy  law."  And,  just  as  sobriety 
and  industry  and  talent  and  integrity  will,  to  a  certain  extent,  secure  a  man 
success  in  the  affairs  of  this  life,  so  obedience  to  God  entails  God's  blessing. 
There  is  a  promise,  too,  for  the  good  man's  children  ;  and,  blessed  be  God,  it  is 
often  made  good  in  this  world.  It  is  well  with  his  offspring  for  his  sake. 
His  example  had  been  their  pattern  ;  his  name  is  their  recommendation  and 
passport ;  and  his  memory  is  bequeathed  as  a  blessing,  long  after  he  has  been 
gathered  to  his  fathers,  and  has  bid  the  world  and  all  it  contains  an  eternal 
adieu.  {J.  Saitdford,  M.A.)  Divine  solicitude  for  man's  salvation: — I.  The 
SOLICITUDE  HEME  MANIFESTED.  1.  Prompted  by  His  relationship.  2.  Prompted 
by  His  ownership.  3.  Prompted  by  His  love.  II.  The  wish  expressed.  This 
wish  certainly  implies  the  natural  evil  of  man's  heart,  an  evil  which  is  well  nigh 
incredible.  The  heart  is  hard  as  stone.  It  is  so  callous  that — 1.  It  will  not  bo 
impressed  by  fear.  Even  while  Moses  was  receiving  the  commandments,  they 
^vent  and  made  a  molten  image,  and  forgot  the  great  Jehovah.  2.  It  refuses  to 
be  crushed  by  judgment.  How  terrible  the  outward  judgments  visited  at  various 
times  on  the  Israelites  !  Plagues,  wars,  famines,  pestilence,  serpents.  Yet  they 
were  not  one  whit  the  more  obedient.  How  many  the  inferior  judgments  visit^ 
on  God's  people  still — bereavements,  sorrows,  trials,  disease  !  But  they  are  none 
the  more  obedient.  3.  It  is  unwilling  to  be  propitiated  by  love.  III.  The 
REASON  assigned.  It  Is  for  our  own  sakes  God  desires  obedience.  1.  There  is  no 
happiness  in  opposition  to  God.  2.  There  is  no  happiness  apart  from  God. 
Lessons  :  (1)  If  we  want  it  "to  be  well  with  us,"  let  us  see  to  it  that  we  are 
walking  in  His  ways,  which  are  ways  of  pleasantness.  (2)  And  then  what  an 
encouragement  we  have  in  the  text!  God  yearns  for  our  obedience.  Then  He 
will  assist  us  in  the  difficult  attainment.  {Preachers  Analyst.)  TJie  blessings 
that  attend  a  religious  life : — Let  us   attentively  consider   God's   earnest  desire, 


CHAP,  v.]  DEUTERONOMY.  181 

and  the  rewards,  which  are  here  said  to  be  dispensed  by  Him  upon  all  those  who 
do  their  utmost  to  attain  to  it.  The  former  ot  these  is  thus  expressed  :  "to  fear 
God,  and  to  keep  all  His  commandments  always."  "The  fear  of  God"  is  a 
common  scriptural  expression  for  the  duties  consequent  upon  a  just  sense  of  the 
relation  in  which  we  stand  to  Him,  as  our  Creator,  Preserver,  Redeemer,  and 
future  Judge.  For  this  relation  embraces  two  things.  It  regards  the  All -'wise 
and  All-powerful  Maker  of  the  universe  as  the  exalted  Being  on  whom  we  have 
to  depend  for  every  temporal  and  every  spiritual  good,  and  whose  will  it  should 
be  our  pleasure  to  perform.  And  it  next  re^^ards  ourselves  as  the  poor  beings  of 
a  day,  whose  breath  is  in  their  nostrils,  and  the  imagination  of  whose  hearts  is 
only  evil  continually,  admitted  by  covenant  to  be  His  children.  It  is  this 
view  of  the  relation  in  Avhich  we  stand  to  God  that  renders  the  "fear  of  the 
Lord  "  equivalent  in  meaning  to  the  fullest  obedience  to  His  commandments. 
Let  us  now  turn  our  meditations  upon  the  powerful  motive  proposed  by  God  for 
our  "fearing  Him,  and  keeping  all  His  commandments  always."  This  motive  is 
"that  it  may  be  well  with  us  and  with  our  children  for  ever."  That  we  may 
value  this  motive  properly,  let  us  consider  in  what  manner  this  blessing  of  God 
will  attend  His  faithful  and  obedient  servants.  In  its  very  nature,  religion  may 
be  said  to  secure,  more  certainly  than  anything  else,  all  the  worthy  objects  of 
man's  desire,  and  to  bring  with  it  all  that  properly  deserves  the  name  of  blessing. 
Food  and  raiment,  domestic  comfort,  health  and  safety,  and  length  of  days,  are 
among  the  common  temporal  advantages  of  a  religious  life  ;  that  is,  of  a  life  of 
active  labour  or  usefulness,  recommended  by  honesty,  temperance,  humility,  and 
innocence — in  short,  by  the  usual  virtues  of  the  Christian  character.  But  this 
natural  course  of  things,  as  we  call  it,  is  not  that  which  attends  every  man  in 
this  life  ;  nor  does  the  Gospel  hold  out  the  same  promises  of  temporal  good  as 
the  law  did.  It  often  pleases  the  Almighty  to  try  those  that  are  His  by  a 
vaiiety  of,  perhaps,  apparently  severe  dispensations.  And  yet,  in  the  njidst  of  these 
afflictions,  with  respect  to  the  principal  concern  of  life — the  state  of  the  soul, 
and  of  their  future  prospects — it  must  be  well  with  them  ;  they  must  have 
higher  and  better  joys  than  other  men.  Their  views  and  sentiments,  their  hopes 
and  desires,  their  feelings  and  ambition,  have  been  regulated,  raised,  and  refined. 
So  true  it  is,  that  "all  things  work  together  for  good  to  them  that  love  God"  ; 
and  that,  although  "  no  chastening  for  the  present  seemeth  to  be  joyous,  but 
grievous  ;  nevertheless,  afterward,"  &c.  But  whether  such  spiritual  discipline 
falls  to  the  Christian's  lot  or  not,  it  is  "well  with  him,"  in  reality,  under  all 
the  occurrences  of  life  ;  and  if  he  is  not  so  outwardly,  or  makes  to  himselt 
imaginary  troubles,  from  gloomy  and  distorted  views  of  religion,  let  it  not  be 
imputed  to  the  Gospel  or  any  inherent  fault  of  Christianity.  Let  us  proceed  to 
enumerate  a  few  other  of  the  blessings  which  are  promised  by  God  to  attend 
the  conscientious  profession  of  it.  In  the  Christian  dispensation,  of  acceptance 
and  adoption  by  God,  the  believer  is  mercifully  promised  pardon  for  sin  upon 
repentance  and  faith  in  the  great  Mediator  of  the  covenant  into  which  he  has 
been  admitted.  Another  blessing  is  this.  All  his  prayers  are  heard.  But  it  is 
"well  with"  the  man  that  fears  God  in  another  respect.  He  is  blest  with 
sound  judgment,  and  the  best  of  knowledge,  upon  the  great  concern  of  life. 
He  is  made  "wise  unto  salvation."  To  use  the  words  of  the  Psalmist,  he 
"understands  righteousness,  and  judgment,  and  equity,  yea  every  good  path," 
and  may,  therefore,  look  with  pity  upon  the  many  arts  and  devices  of  those 
who  mistake  the  nature  of  real  wisdom,  or  consider  anything  as  worthy  of  all 
their  study  which  has  not  heaven  for  its  scope  or  end.  The  last  blessing  of 
the  truly  religious  man  which  I  shall  now  mention,  is  this — that  it  will  be 
"well  with  him"  hereafter.  His  present  trust  and  confidence  in  God  and  His 
promises— his  full  and  zealous  obedience  to  all  His  commandments  always— will 
be  repaid  at  length  by  an  eternity  of  bliss.  {A.  B.  Evaiis,  D.D.)  The  young 
Christian  armed : — I.  A  w^oed  of  warnino.  The  fervent  desire  here  expressed 
implies  a  sense  of  danger,  and  the  probability  that  many  would  not  continue 
in  the  fear  and  lommau'lments  of  God.  It  is  not  by  a  single  resolution,  how- 
ever firm,  or  by  a  sincle  effort,  however  strong,  that  a  war  like  this  can  be 
concluded.  The  man  who  thinks  so,  vastly  underrates  the  power  of  his  spiritual 
enemies,  and  does  but  build  his  house  ujton  a  foundation  of  sand,  which,  when 
the  tempests  of  trial  come,  will  give  way  beneath  him.  Nay,  more,  while  this 
is  true  of  all,  it  is  especially  true  of  young  believers,  who  are  going  forth  for  the 
first  time  to  assay  their  armour  in  the  battle.     Let  me  very  briefly  point  out  to 


182  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  Ichap.  v. 

you  some  sources  of  this  especial  danger.  1.  There  is  a  risk  in  the  very  vehe- 
mence of  your  present  resolutions.  Your  souls  are  now  all  on  fire  ;  you  stand 
adoring  before  the  -wondrous  truths  of  a  redeeming  God,  and  of  an  endless  eternity. 
In  the  I'ervency  of  that  holy  enthusiasm,  difficulties  seem  to  vanish,  and  tempta- 
tions to  be  as  nothing  ;  and  you  are  liable  to  go  forth,  therefore,  overrating 
your  strength,  ond  thinking  that  it  will  always  be  with  you  as  it  is  at  the 
present  moment.  2.  Another  danger  arises  from  your  inexperience  ;  and  this  in 
two  points.  As  to  the  world  around  you,  you  are  but  standing  as  yet  upon  its 
very  tlireshold,  untried  by  the  sense  of  individual  responsibility,  and  untaught 
b}"^  the  actual  cares  of  life.  You  see  before  you  the  future,  with  its  bright  points, 
while  its  trials  are  mercifully  hidden  from  you.  You  are  like  a  traveller,  who 
from  some  hill-top  looks  down  upon  the  smiling  valley  beneath,  radiant  with  a 
thousand  lights,  and  spread  before  the  eye  in  all  its  grace  and  beauty.  He  sees 
all  the  blended  beauties  of  the  scene,  but  the  dangers  which  lie  before  his  path 
are  hidden  from  him  in  the  distance.  So  you,  in  your  view  of  your  natural  life, 
see  its  hopes  and  pleasures,  while  the  troubles,  labours,  and  anxieties  which 
will  be  blended  with  them  are  unseen  by  you  as  yet.  There  is,  consequently,  a 
risk  lest  you  value  it  too  highly  in  the  estimate  of  the  worth  of  the  two  worlds 
to  which  you  belong.  And  there  is  the  greater  danger  of  this,  because  in  your 
view  of  the  spiritual  life  your  inexperience  has  an  effect  exactly  the  reverse  of 
what  it  has  in  your  temporal.  Here  you  see  all  its  difficulties,  its  self-denials,  its 
privations  ;  but  the  deep  peace  it  brings,  the  wondrous  glimpses  of  God,  which 
cheer  the  soul  meanwhile,  as  Stephen  was  cheered,  when,  through  the  opened 
heavens,  he  saw  the  Son  of  Man  sitting  at  the  right  hand  of  God — these  as  yet 
you  know  not :  these  remain  to  be  experienced,  and  can  no  more  be  told  in  words, 
than  you  can  communicate  to  the  dull  canvas  the  gleaming  radiance  of  a  noon- 
tide sun.  3.  There  is  a  peculiar  danger  in  the  very  buoyancy  and  animation  of 
spirits,  and  that  disposition  to  thoughtlessness,  which  characterise  our  early  years. 
These  things,  if  guided  by  grace,  may  indeed  but  give  a  greater  constancy  to 
zeal,  and  a  warmer  fervency  to  love  ;  but  unless  they  are  carefully  watched  and 
disciplined,  they  may  likewise  lead  into  sore  temptations,  may  open  many  a  path  of 
danger,  and  even  seduce  you  unawares  into  sin.  II.  A  woni)  of  encouragement. 
If  the  text  clearly  implies  danger,  it  implies  with  equal  clearness  the  possibility  of 
that  danger  being  overcome.  He  wbo  knoweth  all  things,  and  from  whose  omni- 
science is  not  hidden  either  one  outward  temptation  or  one  inward  thought,  would 
never  impute  as  a  fault  to  the  soul  that  which  was  beyond  its  power.  It  is  very 
needful  that  this,  too,  should  be  borne  in  mind  ;  for  with  what  courage  shall  we 
wage  a  hopeless  war,  or  attempt  to  accomplish  anything,  if  we  feel,  crushing  our 
spirit  all  the  while,  the  conviction  that  success  is  impossible  ?  Here,  however,  all 
is  possible,  if  we  have  but  the  heart  to  do  it — if  there  be  in  us  no  hesitating 
thoughts,  no  doubtful  purposes,  no  affections  which  cling  still  to  the  world. 
Observe  how  everything  is  supposed  to  be  easy,  if  this  one  thing  were  but  possessed 
— "0  that  there  were  such  an  heart  in  them  !  "  not  such  as  beats  naturally  in  the 
breast  of  man,  self-willed,  carnal  in  its  tastes,  shrinking  in  unholy  repugnance  from 
God,  and  finding  in  the  things  that  perish  its  choicest  treasure,  but  such  a  heart  as 
turns  simply  and  wholly  to  the  redeeming  Saviour,  a  heart  quickened  with  a 
heavenly  life.  III.  A  avord  of  advice.  1.  If  you  are  earnestly  desirous  of 
fighting  this  holy  warfare,  and  attaining  by  God's  help  these  promises,  never 
permit  yourselves  to  neglect  the  means  of  grace.  If  you  are  not  in  earnest,  do  not 
deceive  yourselves  with  a  name  ;  but  have  the  courage  to  appear  to  your  own  hearts 
what  you  really  are — strangers  to  the  promises,  and  aliens  to  the  covenant  of  grace. 
2.  Let  me  press  upon  you  the  duty  of  a  daily  self-examination.  3.  Look  well  to 
the  character  of  those  whom  you  choose  as  the  friends  and  companions  of  your  life. 
{E.  Garhett,  M.A.) 

Ver.  33.  That  ye  may  live,  and  .  .  .  prolong  your  days. — Pro.yyerity  and 
adversUy : — I.  We  fall,  I  conceive,  into  a  very  inaccurate  method  of  speech,  when 
we  say  that  the  prize  which  God  proposes  to  His  people  is  set  forth  in  one  of  these 
clauses  ;  the  duty,  or  performance  by  which  they  are  to  earn  that  prize,  in  the 
other.  iloses  teaches  his  countrymen  that  God  has  conferred  upon  them  the 
highest  prize  which  man  can  conceive,  freely  and  without  any  merit  on  their  part. 
II.  Is  there  no  duty,  then,  enjoined  in  the  words  of  my  text  ?  Does  it  merely  speak 
of  a  blessing  or  a  privilege?  Certainly  when  it  is  said,  "Ye  shall  walk  in  all  the 
ways  which  the  Lord  your  God  hath  commanded  you,"  it  must  be  meant  that 


CHAP.  VI.]  DEUTERONOMY.  183 

there  was  something  required  on  the  part  of  the  creature  as  well  as  something 
bestowed  by  the  Creator.  If  we  believe  that  an  actual  living  being  to  whom  we 
are  related  has  put  us  in  this  way,  and  that  it  is  a  way  of  dependence  upon 
Himself,  we  can  understand  how  the  preservation  of  it  becomes  a  duty  to  Him ; 
we  begin  in  fact  to  know  what  duty  is.  If,  finally,  we  believe  that  He  who  puts 
us  in  this  way  is  the  only  person  who  can  keep  us  in  it,  or  prevent  us  from 
going  out  of  it,  we  may  feel  that  His  command  is  itself  a  power  ;  that  it  does  not 
merely  say,  "Thus  and  thus  you  must  do,  thus  and  thus  you  must  not  do"  ;  but, 
"This  will  I  enable  you  to  do,  this  will  I  prevent  you  from  doing."  III.  We  come 
then  at  length  to  this  class  of  blessings  which  are  shortly  gathered  up  in  the 
words:  "That  ye  may  live,  and  that  it  may  be  well  with  you,  and  that  ye  may 
prolong  your  days  in  the  land  which  ye  shall  possess."  It  is  here  signified  in  very 
simple,  clear  language,  which  admits,  I  conceive,  of  no  double  sense,  that  a  people 
in  a  right,  orderly,  godly  state  shall  be  a  well-doing  people ;  a  people  with  all  the 
signs  and  tokens  of  strength,  growth,  triumph  ;  a  people  marked  for  permanence 
and  indefinite  expansion.  I  cannot  put  another  meaning  upon  thase  words ;  I 
should  think  that  a  wish  to  dilute  their  force  was  a  proof  of  the  greatest  careless- 
ness about  the  authority  from  which  they  proceed,  as  well  as  of  the  most  shocking 
inhumanity.  If  it  be  the  distinction  of  saints  and  spiritual  men  that  they  do  not 
trouble  themselves  about  the  external  prosperity  of  a  land,  that  they  do  not  care 
whether  the  oxen  are  strong  to  labour,  whether  the  sheep  are  bringing  forth 
thousands  and  ten  thousands,  whether  there  is  no  complaining  in  the  streets  ;  if 
they  are  so  occupied  in  the  future  as  to  have  no  interest  in  the  present,  too  busy 
v,'ith  their  souls  to  have  leisure  for  thinking  about  the  ruin  which  may  be 
threatening  the  bodies  of  their  fellow-men  —  then  I  say  at  once  Moses,  David, 
Isaiah,  Jeremiah,  were  not  saints  and  spiritual  men.  Since  they  held  that  God's 
order  was  the  perfectly  right  and  living  order,  they  could  not  but  think  that  all 
disorder,  all  WTong  and  death  which  had  invaded  it,  must  have  come  through 
man's  neglect  to  fulfil  the  part  which  had  been  assigned  him  ; — through  his 
unwillingness  to  till  and  subdue  the  earth  which  he  was  meant  to  till  and  subdue  ; 
through  his  idleness  and  distrust  and  self-seeking,  his  refusal  to  walk  in  the  ways 
which  God  had  commanded.  IV.  And  therefore  it  cannot  be  true— the  Avhole  history 
of  the  Jews  declares  it  not  to  be  true— that  the  blessings  of  adversity  were 
unknown  to  them,  were  reserved  for  a  later  period.  Which  of  tlie  good  men  of  the 
Old  Teistament  was  not  proved  in  a  furnace  ?  Into  whose  soul  did  the  iron  at 
some  time  not  enter?  It  was  not  because  they  believed  in  God's  promises  to 
their  nation,  and  were  sure  that  its  outAvard  prosperity  must  and  Avould  at  last 
correspond  to  its  inward  health  and  vitality  ;  it  was  not  because  they  longed  for 
the  earth  to  bring  forth  and  bud,  to  have  heaps  of  corn  upon  it,  that  its  presses 
might  burst  forth  with  new  wine  ;  it  was  not  on  this  account  that  they  had  to 
endure  less  of  inward  sadness,  or  fewer  reproaches  from  the  kings  and  priests 
and  people  to  whom  they  spoke.  No  ;  the  more  strong  their  feeling  was  that 
God  had  chosen  their  nation  and  made  a  covenant  with  it,  the  greater  was  the 
struggle  with  their  individual  selfishness.     {F.  D.  Maurice,  M.A  ) 


CHAPTER  VI. 


Ver.  4.  The  Lord  onr  God  is  one  'LoxCi.—Of  the  unity  of  God :— I.  Why  God  is 
CALLED  THE  LIVING  GoD.  1.  In  opposition  to,  and  to  distinguish  Him  from,  dead 
idols  (Psa.  cxv.  4-6  ;  1  Thess.  i.  9).  2.  Bocause  God  is  the  fountain  of  life,  having 
all  life  in  Himself  (John  v.  26).  and  giving  life  to  all  things  flse.  All  life  is  in  Him 
and  from  Him.  (1^  Natural  life  (Acts  xvii.  28  ;  ]  Tim.  vi.  18).  (2)  Spiritual  life 
(Eph.  ii.  1).  (3)  Eternal  life  (Col.  iii.  4).  II.  Why  God  is  called  the  true 
God.  To  distinguish  Him  from  all  false  or  fictitious  gods  (1  Thess.  i.  9).  There 
is  a  twofold  truth.  1.  Of  fidelity  or  faithfulness.  Thus  God  is  true— that  is, 
faithful.  But  that  is  not  the  truth  here  meant.  2.  A  truth  of  essence,  whereby  a 
thing  really  is,  ar^d  does  not  exist  in  opinion  only.  The  meaning  is,  that  there  is 
a  true  God,  and  but  one  true  God.  III.  That  there  is  but  one  God.  1.  The 
Scripture  is  very  express  and  pointed  on  this  head  (chap.  vi.  4  ;  Isa.  xliv.  6  ;  Mark 
xii.  32  ;  1  Sam.  ii.  2  ;  Psa.  xviii.  31  ;  Isa.  xlvi.  9  ;  1  Cor.  viii.  4,  6).     2.  This  truth 


184  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vi. 


is  clear  from  reason.  (1)  There  can  be  but  one  First  Cause,  which  hath  its  being 
of  itself,  and  gave  being  to  all  other  things,  and  on  which  all  other  things  depend, 
and  that  is  God  ;  for  one  such  is  sufficient  for  the  production,  preservation,  and 
government  of  all  things ;  and  therefore  more  are  supertluous,  for  there  is  no  need 
of  them  at  all.  (2)  There  can  be  but  one  Infinite  Being,  and  therefore  there  is  but 
one  God.  Two  infinites  imply  a  contradiction.  (3)  There  can  be  but  one  inde- 
pendent Being,  and  therefore  but  one  God.  (a)  There  can  be  but  one  inde- 
pendent in  being;  for  if  there  were  more  gods,  either  one  of  them  would 
be  the  cause  and  author  of  being  to  the  rest,  and  then  that  one  would  be  the 
only  God  ;  or  none  of  them  would  be  the  cause  and  author  of  being  to  the 
rest,  and  so  none  of  them  would  be  God,  because  none  of  them  would  be 
independent,  or  the  fountain  of  being  to  all.  (6)  There  can  be  but  one 
independent  in  working.  For  if  there  were  more  independent  beings,  then  in 
those  things  wherein  they  will  and  act  freely  they  might  will  and  act  contrary 
things,  and  so  oppose  and  hinder  one  another  ;  so  that,  being  equal  in  power, 
nothing  would  be  done  by  either  of  them,  (4)  There  can  be  but  one  omnipotent. 
(5)  The  supposition  of  a  plurality  of  gods  is  destructive  to  all  true  religion.  For  if 
there  were  more  than  one  God,  we  would  be  obliged  to  worship  and  serve  more  than 
one.  But  this  it  is  impossible  for  us  to  do,  as  will  appear  ii"  ye  consider  what 
Divine  worship  and  service  is.  Religious  worship  and  adoration  must  be  per- 
formed with  the  whole  man.  (6)  If  there  might  be  more  gods  than  one,  nothing 
would  hinder  why  there  might  not  be  one,  or  two,  or  three  millions  of  them.  No 
argument  can  be  brought  for  a  plurality  of  gods,  suppose  two  or  three,  but  what  a 
man  might,  by  parity  of  reason,  make  use  of  for  ever  so  many.  Hence  it  is  that 
when  men  have  once  begun  to  fancy  a  plurality  of  gods,  they  have  been  endless  in 
such  fancies  and  imaginations.  {T.  Boston,  D.D.)  Trinify  and  'unify  :—\.  The 
Scriptural  Trinity  implies  that  God  is  One.  So  far  from  being  against  tlie 
cardinal  truth  of  God's  unity,  it  actually  assumes  it.  The  Trinity  of  our  faith 
means  a  distinction  of  persons  within  one  common  indivisible  Divine  nature.  If 
we  ask.  What  is  .the  chief  spiritual  benefit  which  we  derive  from  the  knowledge  of 
the  unity  of  God  ?  the  answer  is  this  :  The  unity  of  God  is  the  only  religious  basis 
for  a.  moral  law  of  perfect  and  unwavering  righteousness.  It  is  a  unity  of  moral 
character  in  the  Ruler,  and  therefore  of  moral  rule  in  the  universe.  It  is  such  a 
unity  as  excludes  all  conflict  within  the  Divine  will,  all  inconsistency  in  the  Divine 
law,  all  feebleness  in  the  Divine  administration.    II.  What  religious  advantages 

DO  WE  REAP  from  THE   FRESH  CHRISTIAN   DISCOVERY  OF  A  TRINITY  WITHIN   THIS 

UNITY  OF  THE  DiviNE  NATURE  ?  1.  To  this  question  we  answer,  that  the  doctrine 
of  the  Trinity  has  heightened  and  enriched  our  conception  of  the  nature  of  God. 
2.  This  doctrine  affords  a  basis  for  those  gracious  relations  which  it  has  pleased  God 
to  sustain  towards  us  in  the  economy  of  our  salvation.  {J.  Oswald  Dykes,  D.  D. ) 
One  God:— I.  The  belief  in  one  God  gives  rest  to  the  active  man  ;  it  satisfies 
his  intellectual,  his  moral,  his  emotional,  his  spiritual  being.  II.  In  the  field  of 
scientific  research  this  faith  inspires  us  with  a  confident  hope  of  reduci^cg 
ALL  phenomena  TO  LAW,  siucc  all  proceed  from  one  hand,  and  express  one  creative 
will.  This  faith  supplies  that  which  physical  science  lacks  and  yet  requires— namely, 
a  prime  mover  and  a  sustaining  power.  III.  In  morals  this  faith  acts  most  power- 
fully UPON  OUR  will,  and  rouses  us  to  exalt  the  higher  nature  and  repress  the 
lower.  Polytheism  deifies  the  human  passions.  But  if  there  be  only  one  God, 
then  our  highest  aspirations  must  give  us  the  truest  image  of  Him.  IV.  Faith  in 
one  God  brings  peace  to  the  mourner  and  to  the  suffering,  for  we  know  that 
He  who  now  sends  the  trouble  is  the  same  God  whose  kindness  we  have  felt  so 
often.  Having  learned  to  love  and  trust  Him,  we  are  able  to  accept  suffering  as 
the  chastisement  of  a  Father's  hand.  If  there  were  gods  many,  wo  could  regard 
the  troubles  of  life  only  as  the  spiteful  acts  of  some  malevolent  deity ;  we  must 
bribe  his  fellow-gods  to  oppose  him.  V.  Upon  one  God  we  are  able  to  concen- 
trate all  the  powers  of  the  soul,  our  emotions  are  not  dissipated,  our  religious 
efforts  are  not  frittered  away  upon  a  pleasing  variety  of  characters,  but  the  image 
of  God  is  steadily  renewed  in  the  soul,  and  communion  with  God  grows  ever  closer. 
{F.  R.  Chapman.)  The  Lord  our  Ood:—l.  The  supremacy  of  the  Lord.  The 
one  Being — incomparable,  unrivalled.  1.  As  regards  His  existence.  Alpha  and 
Omega.  Uncreated.  Independent.  From  everlasting.  2.  As  regards  His  decrees. 
Consummate  wisdom.  3.  As  regards  His  operations.  Needs  no  assistance.  Makes 
no  mistakes.  4.  As  regards  His  faithfulness.  The  one  immutable  God.  5.  As 
regards  His  love.     Admits  no  rival.     Has  no  equal.    6.  As  regards  His  claims. 


CHAP.  VI.]  DEUTERONOMY.  185 

The  only  Being  who  has  a  right  to  our  praise,  service,  love.  II.  The  relationship 
OF  the  Lord.  "Our  God."  1.  Has  made  a  covenant  with  us  (Exod.  vi.  4-8; 
Heb.  viii.  6).  2.  Has  adopted  us.  3.  Has  endowed  us.  With  Himself.  His 
power,  wisdom,  &c.,  are  all  at  our  service.  4.  Has  owned  the  relationship. 
III.  The  command  of  the  Lord.  "Hear,  0  Israel."  God  would  have  us  think 
much  on  this  twofold  theme — what  He  is,  and  what  He  is  to  us — 1.  To  check 
presumption.  2.  To  stimulate  faith.  3.  To  increase  devotedness.  4.  To  dissipate 
fears.  5.  To  impart  comfort.  6.  To  fire  love.  {R.  A.  Griffin.)  The  one 
Jehovah : — Knowledge  as  to  the  fact  that  there  is  one  God  is  of  high  importance 
to  its  possessor.  In  connection  with  this  statement,  as  to  its  importance,  it  may 
l)e  predicated  that  evidence  has  never  been  adduced  to  prove  that  there  is  more 
than  one  God — the  one  Jehovah.  Evidence  upon  evidence,  however,  can  be  adduced 
to  prove  that  there  is  one  God,  the  Creator  of  the  ends  of  the  earth,  the  Upholder 
and  Proprietor  of  all  things.  In  evidence  of  this,  we  have  only  to  look  around  us 
upon  the  things  that  exist ;  for  they  all  speak  of  God  as  the  Great  First  Cause  of 
their  existence.  For  the  sake  of  argument,  however,  let  it  be  supposed  that  the 
proposition  is  submitted  that  there  are  more  Gods  than  one,  how  could  this  pro- 
position be  supported  ?  How  could  there  be  any  being  equally  high  with  the 
Highest,  or  equally  excellent  with  the  Most  Excellent — two  super-superlatives  ? 
The  idea  is  not  tenable.  Not  so,  however,  is  it  with  the  idea  that  there  is  one  God, 
one  Supreme  Ruler  in  the  universe  ;  and  from  whom  the  universe  itself  had  its 
origin.  This  idea  has  manifold  support ;  and,  from  among  the  many  evidences 
that  might  be  adduced  in  support  of  it,  reference  may  be  made  to  that  unity  of 
design  which  is  manifest  throughout  all  the  works  of  God  :  as  in  these  works,  so 
far  as  they  can  be  surveyed  by  the  human  mind  in  present  circumstances,  this 
unity,  embracing  simplicity,  testifies  to  the  infinite  wisdom  and  power  of  a 
Designer.  The  extent  to  which  this  truth  might  illustratively  be  carried  out  can 
only  be  glanced  at  in  present  circumstances.  New  countries,  for  example,  are 
constantly  discovering  themselves  to  the  eye  of  the  traveller  ;  and  yet,  go  where  he 
may,  he  still  finds  that  the  old  laws  of  nature,  by  the  appointment  of  Heaven, 
come  into  view.  Many  new  plants  may  be  found  on  foreign  shores  ;  yet  all  of  them 
indicate  the  necessity  of  their  continuance  to  exist  in  the  adhesion  of  the  pollen  of 
the  stamens  to  the  gummy  stigma  of  the  pistil.  Yes  ;  and  new  animals  may  be 
found  in  different  parts  of  the  globe.  Whatever  their  variety,  however,  they  are 
all  maintained  by  the  same  earth,  cheered  by  the  sam<e  sun,  invigorated  by  the 
same  breath,  and  refreshed  by  the  same  moisture.  Go  where  we  will  the  elements 
act  upon  each  other,  the  tides  uniformly  fluctuate  ;  and  true  to  its  index  is  the 
instrument,  when  properly  adjusted,  by  which  the  ship  may  be  steered.  Man, 
too,  go  where  we  may,  has  the  same  origin,  the  same  general  external  construction, 
and  the  same  characteristics  by  which  he  is  distinguished  from  creatures  of  a 
lower  gi'ade.  Now  whence,  or  for  what  purpose,  does  this  uniformity  of  design 
exist?  The  text  replies — "The  Lord  our  God  is  one  Lord,"  one  self-existent,  all- 
wise,  and  independent  Jehovah,  and  of  whose  existence  and  attributes  there  is 
incontrovertible  evidence,  not  only  in  things  that  exist,  but  in  the  unity,  simplicity, 
and  harmony  of  those  principles  Avhich  operate,  with  marvellous  uniformity, 
throughout  every  department  of  the  material  world.  In  Him,  as  thus  revealed,  we 
have  a  God  to  adore,  worthy  of  our  worship,  worthy  of  our  confidence,  and  whose 
goodness  may  Avell  captivate  with  thrilling  emotions  every  afTectionate  impulse  of 
the  soul.  But  an  awful  question  here  comes  into  my  mind.  Is  this  one  Jehovah, 
so  plainly  revealed,  my  God  ?  How  can  I,  without  arrogant  presumption,  cherish 
the  thought  that  I  may  find  acceptance  in  the  sight  of  Him,  compared  with  whom 
I  am  as  "nothing;  less  than  nothing,  and  vanity"?  His  greatness,  and  my 
insignificance  ;  His  holiness,  and  my  impurity,  seem  to  repel  every  ground  on 
which  the  hope  of  acceptance  with  Him  would  seek  to  rest.  Through  what 
medium,  honouring  to  God,  can  His  favour  ever  reach  this  poor  heart  of  mine  ? 
How  can  condescension,  in  God,  to  take  notice  of  me,  ever  accord  with  His  own 
infinite  purity,  justice,  and  dignity  ?  The  case  transcends  my  reason :  it  is  too 
great  for  me.  I  am  as  one  utterly  out  at  sea  in  a  frail  bark,  without  a  rudder  or 
a  hand  to  guide  it.  Here,  in  this  labyrinth  of  perplexity,  the  great  Jehovah  might 
have  left  me  to  the  guidance  of  my  own  mental  wanderings  till  the  long  night  of 
death  had  closed  over  my  head.  But  in  great  goodness  He  has  not  left  me  thus  1 
With  a  condescension  upon  which  created  intelligence,  of  itself,  never  could  have 
reckoned,  He  has  unfolded  to  me  the  mystery,  that,  while  there  is  only  one  God, 
there  are  yet,  in  the  essence  of  this  one  God,  or  Godhead,  three  distinct  personalities 


186  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vi. 

— the  Father,  the  Son,  and  the  Holy  Ghost— each  of  them  fulfilling  a  separate 
department  in  the  economy  of  human  redemption ;  and  that,  while  thus  separate 
in  their  gracious  manifestations,  they  are  nevertheless  one  as  to  undivided  essence. 
The  day  now  begins  to  dawn  somewhat  upon  my  hitherto  benighted  soul ;  and 
though  its  light  be  dim  amid  the  darkness  through  which  it  comes,  there  is  in  it  an 
intimation  that,  like  the  dawn  of  morn,  its  light  shall  increase.  Be  it  borne  in 
mind,  however,  that  the  revelation  indicated  is  only  intended  to  suit  the  infancy 
of  our  existence  in  the  life  that  now  is;  and  that  while  it  does  not  tell  us  all 
that  in  due  time  we  shall  be  made  to  know,  it  tells  us  all  that  our  present 
circumstances  require.  {Thos.  Adam.)  The  unity  of  nature  j^roclaims  one 
intelligent  Mind: — Owing  to  the  imperfection  and  limitation  of  our  powers,  we 
are  obliged  to  deal  with  fragments  of  the  universe,  and  to  exaggerate  their 
differences.  But  the  more  profound  and  varied  our  study  of  the  objects  of  Nature, 
the  more  remarkable  do  we  find  their  resemblances.  And  we  cannot  occupy  our- 
selves with  the  smallest  province  of  science  without  speedily  becoming  sensible  of 
its  intercommunication  with  other  provinces.  The  snowflake  leads  us  to  the  sun. 
The  study  of  a  lichen  or  moss  becomes  a  key  that  opens  up  the  great  temple  of 
organic  light.  If  we  could  understand,  as  Tennyson  profoundly  says,  what  a  little 
flower  growing  in  the  crevice  of  a  wayside  wall  is,  root  and  all,  and  all  in  all,  we 
should  know  what  God  and  man  are.  And  the  same  unbroken  gradation  or 
continuity  which  we  trace  throughout  all  the  parts  and  objects  of  our  own  world 
pervades  and  embraces  the  whole  physical  universe — so  far,  at  least,  as  our  know- 
ledge of  it  at  present  extends.  By  the  wonderful  discoveries  of  spectrum  analysis, 
we  find  the  same  substances  in  sun,  moon,  and  stars  which  compose  our  own  earth. 
The  imagination  of  the  poet  is  conversant  with  the  whole,  and  sees  truth  in 
universal  relation.  He  attains  by  insight  the  goal  to  which  all  other  knowledge  is 
finding  its  way  step  by  step.  And  the  Christian  poet  and  philosopher,  whose  eye 
has  been  opened,  not  partially,  by  the  clay  of  Nature's  materials,  worked  upon  by 
human  thought  so  that  he  sees  men  as  trees  walking,  but  fully  and  perfectly,  by 
washing  in  the  fountain  opened  for  sin  and  uncleanness,  whose  pure  heart  sees 
God  in  everything,  and  in  God's  light  sees  light — he  stands  at  the  shining  point 
where  all  things  converge  to  one.  Wherever  he  turns  his  inquiring  gaze,  he  finds 
"shade  unperceived  so  softening  into  shade,  and  all  so  forming  one  harmonious 
whole,"  that  not  a  link  is  wanting  in  the  chain  which  unites  and  reproduces  all, 
from  atom  to  mountain,  from  microscopic  mass  to  banyan  tree,  from  monad  up  to 
man.  And  if  the  unity  of  the  tabernacle  proved  it  to  be  the  work  of  one  designing 
mind,  surely  the  unity  of  this  greater  tabernacle,  this  vast  cosmos,  with  its  myriads 
of  parts  and  complications,  proves  it  to  be  no  strange  jumbling  of  chance,  no 
incoherent  freak  of  fortuity,  but  the  work  of  one  intelligent  Mind  having  one 
glorious  object  in  view.  {Hugh  Macmillan,  LL.D.)  The  unity  of  God: — 
1.  Here  religion  and  philosophy  are  in  accord.  The  saints  and  the  scientists  alike 
maintain  the  unity  of  God.  Authority  and  reason  go  thus  far  together.  God 
must  be  one  ;  cannot  be  other  than  one.  2.  The  revelation  of  God  is  of  necessity 
progressive.  All  education  is  progressive,  because  all  knowledge  is  conditioned  by 
the  mind  of  him  who  knows.  You  may  take  a  whole  ocean  of  water,  but  you  can 
get  only  two  pints  of  it  into  a  quart  cup.  The  water  is  conditioned,  limited,  by 
the  cup.  Thus  is  knowledge  conditioned  by  the  mind.  3.  The  highest  truth 
which  the  mind  can  touch  is  truth  about  God.  The  supreme  knowledge  is  know- 
ledge of  God.  But  this,  like  all  other  knowledge,  is  conditioned  by  the  mind  of 
him  who  knows.  God  changes  not ;  but  year  by  year  in  the  life  of  a  man,  and 
age  by  age  in  the  life  of  the  race,  the  conception  of  God  changes.  It  is  like  the 
ascent  of  a  hill  which  overhangs  a  plain.  The  plain  does  not  change,  does  not  get 
wider,  mile  by  mile,  as  the  beholder  climbs.  No,  the  beholder  changes.  The 
higher  he  gets,  the  more  he  sees.  4.  Thus  religion  grew  out  of  belief  in  God  as 
many,  into  belief  in  God  as  one.  Some  see  a  trace  of  this  old  change  out  of  the 
polytheistic  into  the  monotheistic  idea  of  God  in  the  fact  that  in  the  beginning  of 
the  Bible  the  Hebrew  name  of  God  is  plural,  while  the  verb  which  is  written  with 
it  is  singular.  Men  began  to  see  that  the  gods  of  their  imperfect  creed  were  but 
personifications  of  the  attributes  of  the  one  God.  5.  It  was  a  hard  lesf^on  to  learn. 
It  is  evident  in  the  Old  Testament  that  faith  in  the  unity  of  God  won  its  way  little 
by  little.  The  best  men  held  it,  but  the  people  in  general  were  slow  to  believe  it. 
Even  in  the  Psalms,  God  is  often  spoken  of  as  the  greatest  of  the  gods.  6.  All 
religion,  however  imperfect  and  mistaken,  is  an  endeavour  after  a  better  know- 
ledge of  God.     And  as  men  grow,  they  are  able  to  know  more — to  know  more  about 


CHAP.  Yi.]  DEUTERONOMY,  187 


everything,  even  abont  God.  God  is  able  to  reveal  Himself  more  and  more.  At 
first,  every  tree  is  a  god.  Then  there  is  a  god  of  the  trees,  and  then  of  all  the 
universe  and  of  man  included  in  it.  God  is  known  as  one.  7.  We  have  not  yet 
learned  all  the  truth  of  God.  We  are  not  universally  sure,  e.g.,  that  God  cares  moro 
for  deeds  than  creeds.  But  we  have  learned  that  God  is  one  ;  we  have  abaudoned 
polytheism.  8.  We  believe  in  God  the  Father,  and  we  believe  in  God  the  Son,  and 
we  beiieve  in  God  the  Holy  Ghost.  But  there  is  one  God,  and  there  is  none 
other.  The  word  "person,"  which  the  old  creed-makers  used  to  express  these 
different  ideas  of  God,  has  given  rise  to  endless  confusion.  With  us  a  person  is  an 
individual.  But  this  word  "person  "  comes  into  English  out  of  Latin,  and  in 
Latin  was  a  blundering  translation  of  a  wiser  word  in  Greek.  It  means  "distinc- 
tion." There  is  one  God  in  threefold  distinction.  The  Divine  nature  is  complex 
as  our  human  nature  is.  And  there  are  three  ways  of  thinking  about  God,  cor- 
responding to  the  being  of  God,  ways  which  are  not  only  true  but  essential,  so  that 
if  we  are  to  think  of  God  aright  we  must  think  of  Him  in  all  these  three  ways. 
(1)  God  is  the  source  of  life,  the  infinite,  the  eternal— the  Father.  (2)  God  has 
manifested  Himself  to  us— so  that  we  may  know  Him  and  love  Him,  and  know  that 
He  loves  us— in  the  plainest  and  most  universally  understood  of  all  possible  mani- 
festations, in  a  human  personality  ;  the  Word  become  flesh— the  Son.  (3)  And 
God  is  ever  present  with  us,  speaking  to  all  men  everywhere,  in  the  past  and  in  the 
present,  teaching,  warning,  inspiring— the  Holy  Spirit.  9.  Thus  the  Christian 
doctrine,  taking  that  old  truth  that  "  God  is  one,"  and  holding  to  it,  draws  new 
truth  out  of  it.  It  is  an  advance  upon  monotheism,  as  that  was  upon  polytheism. 
It  meets  the  longings  of  the  heart.  It  answers  the  eager  questions  of  the  race. 
{George  Hodges,  D.D.) 

Ver.  5.  Thou  Shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God.— TAe  love  of  God:— \.  This  verse  is 
the  meeting-point  of  the  law  and  the  Gospel.  Very  wonderful  it  must  have  sounded 
In  the  ear  of  Israel.  To  be  bidden,  not  only  or  chiefly  to  fear  Him  as  the  God 
revealed  in  lightnings  and  thunderings  and  voices  on  Sinai ;  not  only  or  chiefly  to 
keep  themselves  from  provoking  a  wrath  so  awful,  a  jealousy  so  sensitive  and  so 
terrible  ;  but  to  love  Him,  to  love  Him  as  the  whole  of  duty,  to  love  Him  notwith- 
standing—nay, partly  because  of— His  incommunicable  glory !  2.  The  words  are 
very  strong,  very  touching  :  "With  all  thine  heart."  Let  the  affections,  even  the 
emotions,  find  in  God  their  object  and  satisfaction.  "And  with  all  thy  soul." 
Let  the  immortal  thing  within  thee,  let  the  everlasting  being  which  thou  art,  come 
out  towards  this  Lord  God,  and  devote  itself,  in  the  central  life,  in  the  m.oving 
will,  to  Him  as  its  Creator,  Owner,  Father,  Saviour,  Comforter.  "And  Avith  all 
thy  might."  Not  with  the  feeblest,  but  with  the  mightiest  of  all  thy  faculties  of 
thou.i^ht  and  speech  and  action— with  the  mightiest  of  all,  at  their  mightiest,  in  a 
devotion  of  which  man  is  the  priest  and  self  the  sacrifice.  -3.  Two  things  lie  on 
the  surface  of  the  text.  (1)  The  first  is,  the  testimony  here  borne  to  God.  He 
asks  our  love.  What  an  idea  must  this  give  of  His  character  !  We  all  know  how 
it  draws  us  towards  a  man  to  know  that,  being  active,  manly,  strong,  and  support- 
ing many  burdens  of  care,  and  work,  and  thought,  and  responsibility,  he  also  has 
a  warm  heart- nay,  even  is  womanly  in  his  tenderness ;  craves  affection ;  is 
touched  by  the  response  of  gratitude  ;  loves  love  ;  has  even  a  void  place  within  till 
love  fills  it.  Does  not  this  raise  him  in  your  esteem  ?  The  tenderness  is  the  cona- 
plem'^nt  of  the  strength.  (2)  And  what  is  this  love  which  God  asks  of  us  ?  It  is 
not  different  in  kind,  it  differs  only  in  direction,  from  that  which  we  give  one  to 
another.  Think  what  love  is,  as  you  give  it  to  your  nearest  and  best  beloved. 
Think  of  it  in  its  spring  in  the  heart ;  think  of  it  in  its  course  day  by  day  ;  think 
of  it  as  it  prompts  the  word  and  the  act  that  shall  give  pleasure  ;  think  of  it  as  it 
makes  presence  a  delight  and  separation  a  sorrow ;  think  of  it  as  it  wrings  from 
your  soul  the  sob  of  anguish  when  you  have  vexed  or  wounded  or  wi'onged  the 
object  of  it — and  there,  in  those  experiences  common  to  all  of  us,  you  have  the 
affection  which  God  Himself  here  calls  love,  and  which  He  asks  of  us.  4.  And  now 
reflect  upon  the  mighty  consequences  and  inferences  of  this  demand.  See  how 
it  deals  with  life— the  life  of  men,  the  life  of  nations— in  so  far  as  it  is  received. 
(1)  There  is  a  thirst,  in  all  of  us,  for  liberty.  Some  men  idolise  liberty  -,  care  not  if 
it  run  to  licence  ;  abhor,  not  tyranny  alone,  but  authority  ;  ask,  "Who  is  lord  over 
us?"  or  mingle  truth  and  falsehood,  saying,  "Even  in  religion  there  can  be  no 
obligation."  See  in  this  text  how  God  offers  liberty.  He  bids  us  love.  He  would 
make  us  free  by  one  great  Abolition  Act.     He  would  strike  off  the  fetters  of  religion 


188  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vi. 

itself.  (2)  There  is  another  cry  of  the  age — and  that  is,  equality.  An  impatience 
of  differences ;  an  obliteration  of  distinctions,  clamoured  for  on  the  one  side — on 
the  other,  half-yielded,  half-resisted  ;  selfishness  resisting — vanity,  whether  the 
yanity  which  would  discern,  or  the  vanity  which  would  lead,  or  the  vanity 
which  would  please  this  echoing  the  cry  and  yielding.  This  is  one  cry  of 
equality.  Another  is  the  impatience  of  God  in  equalities  —  those,  I  mean, 
which  He  keeps  in  His  own  power :  differences  of  constitution,  of  fortuue, 
or  circumstance ;  differences  which  make  one  man  prosperous  and  another 
unsuccessful,  etc.  Now  we  see  how  the  offer  of  God's  love  bears  upon  all 
these  things.  If  all  may  have  this — and  if  nothing  but  this  can  satisfy,  endure, 
give  peace,  or  survive  death — where  is  inequality  ?  Where,  in  a  moment  or  two 
will  it  be  ?  (3)  It  is  needless,  yet  delightful,  to  record,  in  harmony  with  the  last 
reflection,  the  operation  of  this  love  of  God  upon  the  unity  of  the  human  brotlier- 
hood.  Philanthropists,  as  well  as  revolutionists,  talk  much  of  fraternity.  Christians 
know  that  brotherhood  hangs  upon  falsehood ;  that  only  they  who  love  from  the 
heart  "Him  that  begat"  will  ever  love  from  the  heart  **  the  begotten  of  Him." 
{Dean  Vaughan. )  The  great  comma7idment  of  Moses  and  Christ  recommended  to 
Jews  and  Christians  :—l.  I  am  to  consider  the  nature  and  excellency  of  that 

TEMPER  OF  MIND  WHICH  YOU  ARE  TO  EXERCISE  TOWARDS  THE  JeHOVAH  OF  ISRAEL. 

If  you  are  men  and  have  the  feelings  of  humanity,  I  need  not  explain  to  you  what 
love  is.  Without  it,  the  names  of  father,  son,  brother,  friend,  and  every  charity  of 
life,  are  vanity  and  a  lie.  But,  though  I  refer  to  your  hearts  for  the  feeling  of  the 
temper  we  speak  of,  yet  remember  that  as  it  varies  in  purity,  in  strength,  and 
tenderness  towards  our  connections  on  earth,  so  will  it  differ  much  more  when 
exercised  towards  the  Lord  our  God.  The  love  of  God  is  founded  in  just  apprehen- 
sions of  His  character.  The  very  idea  of  God  should  contain  in  it  all  possible  per- 
fection in  an  infinite  degree.  There  is  no  weakness  in  Him  that  thou  shouldest 
despise  Him  and  cast  off  His  fear.  He  hath  not  burdened  thee,  that  thou  shouldest 
be  weary  of  His  service.  He  hath  not  wronged  thee,  that  thou  shouldest  hate  Him 
and  break  His  commandments.  The  love  of  God  is  also  founded  on  a  due  sense  of 
His  mercies.  He  hath  given  us  life,  and  breath,  and  all  things  ;  and  in  Him  we 
live,  move,  and  have  our  being.  He  is  perfectly  good  in  Himself,  and  perfectly 
good  to  us,  and  to  love  Him  with  all  our  heart  and  to  serve  Him  with  all  our 
strength  is  our  rational  sei-vice.  If  we  do  not,  the  very  stones  will  cry  out  again.«t 
our  ingratitude,  and  evil,  as  well  as  good,  angels  will  condemn  us  when  we  are 
judged.  Consider  how  honourable  this  temper  of  love  is  to  the  blessed  God,  and 
to  His  happy  worshippers.  It  exhibits  Him  in  the  lovely  and  confidential  character 
of  the  Universal  Father,  the  Father  of  mercies,  and  the  God  of  all  hope  and  of  all 
consolations.  It  sheds  the  oil  of  gladness  on  all  the  springs  and  wheels  of  duty, 
and  makes  His  service  perfect  freedom.  For  love  is  liberal  in  its  gifts,  unwearied 
in  its  services ;  it  casts  out  tormenting  fear,  and  indulges  no  suspicion  in  the 
unlimited  confidence  it  reposes  on  the  God  of  our  salvation.  Finally,  it  is  a  prin- 
ciple of  universal  obedience  to  all  God's  commandments,  to  all. men,  at  all  times, 
and  under  all  circumstances.  Love  is  the  ruling  affection  of  every  soul  of  man, 
and,  though  false  to  every  other  principle,  to  this  he  will  be  ever  true,  as  the 
needle  to  the  pole.  For  where  a  man's  treasure  is,  there  will  his  heart  be  also  ; 
/and  if  the  love  of  God  exist  in  the  soul,  it  will  regulate  and  subject  to  itself  every 
^  other  principle.  If  we  reject  this  Divine  principle,  how  shall  we  supply  its  place  ? 
Faith  itself  is  unprofitable  but  as  it  worketh  by  love.  Obedience  is  a  lifeless  form 
of  godliness  but  as  it  is  animated  by  the  spirit  of  love.  II.  The  measure  of  that 
TEMPER  YOU  ARE  COMMANDED  TO  EXERCISE  towards  the  Lord  your  God:  "Thou 
shalt  love  Him  with  all  thine  heart,  and  with  all  thy  soul,  and  with  all  thy  strength. " 
The  love  so  strongly  marked  is  of  no  ordinary  character.  It  is  pure,  grateful, 
strong,  affectionate,  fervent,  and  reverent  ;  specifically  different  from  all  earthly 
affection.  As  the  light  of  the  sun  darkeneth  all  other  lights,  so  doth  the  love  of 
God  absorb  other  principles.  It  requires  us  cheerfully  to  recognise  Jehovah  as  Father 
of  our  spirits,  the  God  of  our  lives,  and  the  Lord  of  our  possessions  :  as  entitled  to 
dispose  of  us,  of  our  wives,  our  children,  our  fortunes,  our  time,  our  talents,  our 
reputation,  and  our  influence,  when  and  how  He  pleaseth.  Nor  is  this  requisition 
unreasonable  or  unrighteous.  For  we,  and  all  we  have,  are  His.  He  loveth  us 
better  than  we  love  ourselves.  He  is  wise,  under  every  circumstance  of  life  and 
death,  to  know  what  is  best  for  us,  in  this  world  and  in  the  next ;  and  His  power 
is  able  to  effect  all  His  goodness  shall  prompt  and  His  wisdom  shall  contrive.  In 
the  absolute  surrender  of  ourselves  to  Him  lieth  all  our  honour,  our  happiness,  and 


CHAP.  Yi.]  DEUTERONOMY,  189 


our  security.     What  greater  honour,  then,  0  ye  Jews,  can  Christians  show  to  the 
venerable  Moses  than  to  make  this  precept  regulate  every  secret  of  their  souls  ? 
Ihis  may  appear  wonderful,  and  it  would  be  so,  indeed,  were  Christianity  opposed 
to  Judaism.     But,  in  truth,  they  are  one  and  the  same  religion,  as  the  light  of  the 
dawil  18  the  same  as  the  light  of  the  day,  as  the  rough  outline  is  the  same  as  the 
living  picture,  finished  by  the  same  great  Master.     It  was  to  establish  the  law  of 
love,  as  well  as  to  atone  for  sin  and  to  procure  the  Holy  Spirit,  that  our  Immanuel 
sealed  His  love  to  God  and  man  on  tlie  altar  of  His  Cross.     We  love  Him  because 
He  so  loved  us,  and  His  love  constraineth  us  to  love   His  enemies  and  ours 
III.  Apply  the  subject  to  Jews  and  Christians.     And,  first,  I  address  myself 
to  both.    Do  you  love  Jehovah  your  God  with  all  your  heart  ?    That  is,  better  than 
you  love  the  world  and  all  that  is  in  it  ?    Better  than  life  itself?    If  any  man  think 
he  love  God,  how  doth  he  prove  the  fact  ?     "  If  ye  love  Me,"  saith  GodL  "  keep  Mv 
commandments."     "This  is  the  love  of  God,"  saith  the  true  worshipper,  "  that  we 
keep  His  commandments,  and  His  commandments  are  not  grievous."    Ye  Jews 
ye  must  be  circumcised  with  the  circumcision  not  made  with  hands    not  of  the 
letter  but  of  the  Spirit ;  whose  praise  is  not  of  man,  but  of  God.    Ye  Christians  ye 
must  be  born  again,  not  of  water,  but  of  the  Spirit.     Hearken,  0  men  of  Israel 
Had  your  fathers  believed  Moses,  they  would  have  believed  Christ.    Had  they  loved 
God,  they  would  have  received  Him  who  came  forth  from  God.     {Melville  Home  ) 
•1  ^^^^^^.  God:— In  this  publication  of  His  law  God  clothes  Himself  with  this 
title,      The  Lord  thy  God"— I.  With  reference  to  His  gracious,  external  inter- 
positions m  behalf  of  that  people.     II.  To  intimate  the  gi-acious  tendency  of  this 
seemingly  severe  revelation.     III.  And  its  connection  with  the  offer  and  communi- 
cation of  God  according  to  the  method  of  His  grace.     But  there  are  two  inferences 
falsely  made  from  this  preface  which  ought  to  be  avoided.     1.  That  an  assured 
apprehension  of  God,  as  ours,  is  the  beginning  of  religion,  and  that  this  must  go 
before  all  beneficial  knowledge  of  God  and  His  law,  whereas  there  nmstbe  a  spiritual 
knowledge  of  God  and  His  law  in  the  order  of  nature  necessarily  antecedent  to  any 
such  apprehension  of  God,    other^visc   we   have  no  just  ideas  of  Him  whom  we 
apprehend  (but  embrace  an  idol),  nor  of  the  footing  on  which  we  do  apprehend 
±lim.     2.   Ihat,  after  reconciliation  with  God,  a  man  hath  nothing  to  do  with  His 
law.     To  overturn  such  fancies  it  is  to  be  observed  that  the  doctrine  of  the  law  of 
T-  ^}?.^   .'^1^^~}-  In  subserviency  to  the  glorification  of  God  by  the  exercise 
ol  justifying  faith  in  Jesus  Christ.     2.  For  the  government  of  one  who  is  justified 
m  walking  towards  heaven.     It  is  chiefly  in  order  to  the  first  of  those  uses    to 
awaken  men  to  flee  to  Christ,  that  I  mean  to  speak  at  this  time  from  the  text 
Ihere  are  no  Christians  on  earth  exempted  from  the  necessity  of  exciting  them- 
selves to  faith  in  this  way,  unless  there  are  Christians  whose  faith  needs  not  to  be 
increased  or  exercised.     I.  I  am  to  open  the  sources  of  the  obligation  of  the 
LAW  OF  God  as  they  are  exhibited  in  this  expression  of  the  text,  ' '  The  Lord  our 
God  IS  one  Lord."   Two  preliminary  observations  may  here  be  mentioned.    (1)  That 
the  grounds  of  the  obligation  of  the  law  of  God  upon  intelligent  creatures  are  of 
an  unsearchable  and  incomprehensible  nature.     I  mean  not  that  it  is  impossible 
for  us  to  have  a  sufficient  knowledge  of  this  matter.     If  this  were  the  case,  it  would 
be  vam  to  say  anything  on  this  subject.     But  I  mean  that,  after  the  gi-eatest  pro- 
gress m  such  resources,  faith  must  be  maintained  as  to  the  immensity  of  the  elory 
of  God  as  surpassing  all  knowledge.     (2)  That  there  is  in  us  an  exceeding  Ireat 
strength  of  spiritual  darkness  or  blindness  in  this  matter.     They  only  who  have  a 
deep  and  tender  sense  of  these  two  things,  their  own  blindness  and  the  mysterious 
sublunity  of  these  subjects,  have  such  a  humility  of  mind  as  is  suitable  to  such 
inquiries.     1.  It  appears  from  the  text  that  the  chief  source  of  the  obligation  of  the 
law  of  God  must  be  searched  for  and  found  in  God  Himself.      (1)  It  is  evident 
from  the  nature  of  the  demands  of  the  law  of  God,  that  they  cannot  be  justified' 
unless  on  supposition  of  there  being  such  things  in  the  nature  and  character  of  God 
as  do  of  themselves  entitle  Him  to  such  service.     (2)  The  certainty  of  this  truth 
concerning  the  origin  of  the  obligation  of  the  law  of  God  appears  from  the  considera- 
tion  of  the  penalty  annexed  to  the  violation  of  this  law.     (3)  Every  other  argument 
enforcmg  the  law  of  God   derives  its  chief  force  from  its   connection  with   this 
primary  source  of  moral  obligation.     Because  I  am  created  a  reasonable  beinff  I 
am  bound  to  love  God.     But  whence  is  it  that  my  reasonable  nature  is  a  precious 
benefit  ?    Is  it  not  because  hereby  I  am  capable  of  the  sight  and  enjoyment  of  God 
m  His  mfinite  beauty?     In  this  view  the  benefit  of  creation  may  be  said  to  be 
mtiiute.     (4)  This  is  expressly  adduced  in  the  Scripture  as  the  foundation  of  the 


190  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  Tl. 

authority  of  the  law  of  God.  So,  in  the  preceding  chapter,  "I  am  the  Lord 
thy  God."  The  first  and  radical  idea  is,  "I  am  Jehovah."  I  am  what  I  am. 
(5)  Obligations  to  obedience  from  consideration  of  Divine  judgments  and  mercies  are 
expressly  resolved  into  this  when  the  knowledge  of  God's  being  what  He  is  is  spoken 
of  as  the  issue  of  these  things,  as  is  manifest  (Ezek.  xxviii.  22-26).  2.  It  appears 
from  the  text  that  the  sources  of  the  obligation  of  the  law  of  God  are  to  be  found 
in  those  excellences  of  the  Godhead  which  are  most  peculiar  and  distinguishing. 
Here  it  is  to  be  considered  that  the  excellences  of  God  are  justly  distinguished  into 
those  which  are  called  communicable  and  those  which  are  called  incommunicable. 
With  respect  to  both  these  sorts  of  excellency  He  is  incomparable.  As  to  those 
which  are  called  communicable  excellences,  because  some  degree  of  something  like 
them  is  imparted  to  other  beings,  God  is  distinguished  from  His  creatures  by  the 
degi-ee  and  manner  in  which  He  possesses  these  excellences.  But  the  most  dis- 
tinguishing quality  of  the  manner  in  which  God  possesses  communicable  perfections 
is  their  being  united  with  His  incommunicable  glories.  It  is  by  these  last  that  God 
is  chiefly  distinguished  from  other  beings,  that  He  hath  an  immense  fulness  of 
such  kinds  of  beauty  as  in  no  degree  can  be  found  in  any  created  being.  3.  It  may 
also  be  inferred  from  the  text  that  the  obligation  of  the  law  of  God  is  primarily 
derived  from  those  excellences  of  the  Godhead  which  chiefly  constitute  the  harmony 
of  all  Divine  excellences,  or  the  bond  of  union,  in  consequence  of  whi -h  all  the 
fulness  of  the  Godhead  is  one  whole.  "The  Lord  our  God  is  one  Lord  " — that  is, 
in  the  midst  of  the  immense  variety  of  excellences  which  are  found  in  Him,  there 
is  a  marvellous  unity  and  harmony,  so  that  there  is  no  division,  jarring,  or  separa- 
tion, but  one  glorious  whole,  in  which  all  things  are  compacted.  4.  The  source  of 
the  obligation  of  the  law  of  God  lies  in  that  one  essence  which  is  equally  and  fully 
possessed  by  each  of  the  three  persons  in  the  Godhead.  Application  :  1.  Beware  of 
despising  these  truths  as  abstruse  and  unintelligible.  2.  I  call  and  invite  every  one 
of  you  to  employ  Jesus  Christ,  the  Prophet  of  the  Church,  to  instruct  you  savingly 
in  these  things.  3.  Let  those  who  have  been  called  into  the  light  attend  to  these 
exhortations  (1  Pet.  ii.  1,  2,  3,  8,  9,  11,  12).     II.  To  give  a  general  explication 

OF  THE   NATURE  OF   THAT  LOVE   TO  GoD  WHICH   IS   DEMANDED  AND  PRESCRIBED   IN 

His  LAW.  Here  the  following  preliminary  remarks  are  to  be  attended  to  :  1.  That 
Ave  are  now  to  speak  of  the  love  of  God  not  as  it  is  found  in  saints  on  earth,  mingled 
with  contrary  corruptions,  but  as  it  is  prescribed  in  the  law  of  God,  and~as  it  is  found 
in  such  creatures  as  are  perfectly  conformed  thereto.  2.  It  is  difficult  for  us  to  attain 
just  aud  lively  conceptions  of  the  nature  of  this  perfect  love,  because  we  never  had 
any  experience  of  it — no,  not  for  a  moment.  3.  Such  a  knowledge  of  it  is  attain- 
able as  is  sufficient  to  answer  the  purposes  of  the  glory  of  God  which  are  intended 
to  be  answered  in  this  life,  such  as  to  excite  high  thoughts  of  the  glorious  excellences 
of  God  as  appearing  in  His  law,  to  discover  the  preciousness  of  the  righteousness 
of  Christ,  the  imperfection  of  our  present  attainments,  the  necessity  of  progress, 
and  the  amiableness  of  that  sta.te  of  perfection  which  is  the  "prize  of  the  high 
calling  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus."  4.  Our  thoughts  may  be  assisted  and  elevated  on 
this  subject  by  considering  the  highest  attainments  of  Christians  on  earth,  and 
adding  perfection  of  purity  and  continuance  thereto.  I  shall  now  apply  myself 
to  the  direct  consideration  of  this  most  fundamental  subject,  namely,  "  What  is  that 
perfection  of  love  to  God  prescribed  in  His  holy  law  ? "  1.  What  are  those  views 
and  character  of  God  in  which  He  is  contemplated  while  perfect  love  is  exercised  ? 
(1)  I  observe  that  God  in  the  whole  of  His  character,  so  far  as  in  any  degree 
revealed  to  the  creature,  is  the  object  of  perfect  love.  "God  is  light,  and  in  Him 
is  no  darkness  at  all " — no  spots  or  blemishes,  notliing  to  allay  or  abate  the  splen- 
dour of  His  amiableness.  "  He  is  altogether  lovely."  (2)  More  particularly  He  is 
so  in  His  incommunicable  fulness  of  excellence,  beauty,  and  perfection.  (3)  In 
His  communicable  perfections.  Whatever  amiableness  is  found  in  the  creation,  so 
far  as  is  consistent  with  infinite  perfection,  is  found  in  God  in  a  Divine  manner. 
(4)  As  He  is  the  author  of  all  that  is  good  in  the  creation.  (5)  As  He  is  the  last 
end  of  all,  for  the  sake  of  whose  glory  aU  things  exist  and  all  events  happen.  (6)  As 
He  is  the  benefactor,  lover,  and  judge  of  intelligent,  created  beings.  (7)  As  He 
is  the  enemy  and  avenger  of  evil.  (8)  As  He  is  the  supporter  and  recompenser  of 
good.  (9)  In  His  unknown,  hidden,  and  unsearchable  fulness,  which  is  implicitly 
loved.  2.  The  different  motions  of  the  faculties  of  the  soul  in  bringing  forth  the 
actings  of  this  love  may  be  represented  in  this  order.  (1)  The  first  principle  of 
spiritual  motion  being  the  will,  or  the  soul,  as  choosing  and  inclining  itself  towards 
what  is  suitable  to  its  taste  and  inclination,  so  in  this  perfect  love  l£ere  is  a  Divine 


CKAr.  VI.]  DEUTERONOMY.  191 

.instinct  and  disposition  of  the  will  by  which  the  whole  soul  is  turned  towards  God. 

(2)  Hereby  the  faculties  of  the  understanding  aio  stirred  up  to  inquire  after  God. 

(3)  There  is  a  disposition  to  faith  concerning  what  God  is,  before  the  soul  sensibly 
sees  Him.  (4)  And  to  seek  and  take  in  that  marvellous  light  by  which  He  is 
sensibly  discovered.  (5)  Tlien  the  will,  having,  by  means  of  the  understanding, 
found  its  object,  embraces  it,  and  rests  in  it  in  such  actings  as  are  afterwards  to  be 
mentioned.  (6)  Then  the  understanding  is  stirred  up  to  go  forward  in  taking  in 
more  of  God,  and  this  awakens  new  actings  of  the  will,  and  these,  again,  new  exer- 
tions of  the  understanding.  3.  In  the  course  of  these  motions  of  the  faculties  of  a 
perfect  creature,  the  various  acts  of  love  in  their  distinct  kinds  and  in  their  connec- 
tion with  each  other  are  brought  forth.  (1)  Esteem,  which  is  the  accounting  a 
thing  valuable,  excellent,  precious.  (2)  Desire,  as  to  present  enjoyment  and  the 
securing  endless  possession,  and  hence  valuing  the  intimations  of  Divine  love,  &c. 
(3)  Delight,  complacency,  rest.  (4)  Zeal ;  delighting  in  the  honour  of  God.  Bene- 
volence. (5)  Self-denial ;  preferring  the  interest  of  God  to  ourselves.  Disposition 
to  suffer  for  Him.  (6)  Undervaluing  the  whole  creation  in  comparison  of  Him. 
(7)  Loving  the  creation  in  subordination  to  Him.  Thus  the  creation  is  first  thrust 
away  ;  and  then  embraced.  (8)  Gratitude  for  the  person's  self  and  others.  (9)  Dis- 
position to  acts  of  worship  and  beneficence,  in  which  this  love  appears  clothed 
with  its  fruit.  Application  :  1.  Give  glory  to  God,  the  author  of  this  law.  2.  See 
the  greatness  of  our  fall  from  a  state  of  perfect,  uninterrupted  love  to  a  state  of 
enmity.  3.  See  the  preciousness  of  that  redemption  by  which  men  are  restored  to 
a  state  of  perfect,  endless  conformity  to  this  spotless  standard.  {John  Love,  D.D.) 
Supreme  love  of  God: — I.  The  command.  1.  None  will  dispute  for  a  moment  God's 
right  to  the  affection  of  all  His  creatures.  Surrounded  as  we  are  by  the  amazing 
proofs  of  God's  love  to  us,  hourly  as  we  are  the  recipients  of  His  bounty,  it  is  to  the 
lasting  disgrace  of  every  member  of  the  human  family  that  such  a  command  as 

vy^  this  should  be  needed.  2.  But  will  the  mere  command  produce  love  ?  No,,  it  will 
not.  The  severest  injunctions,  the  most  formidable  threatenings,  are  insufficient 
to  produce  love  in  the  human  heart.  The  penalties  attached  to  disobedience  may 
excite  a  slavish  fear,  but  they  cannot  excite  love.  A  child  does  not  love  its  parent 
because  commanded  to  do  so  ;  it  may  obey  that  parent  by  the  outward  act,  but  to 
excite  love  something  more  is  needed  than  a  command.  And  that  something  more 
is  found  in  the  affectionate  kindness  and  watchful  care  of  the  parent,  and  this  it  is 
which,  shown  in  a  thousand  varied  ways,  calls  forth  the  love  and  affection  of  the 
child.  If  I  want  my  neighbour  tu  love  me,  it  is  not  by  merely  expressing  the  wish 
for  it  that  I  shall  gain  his  affection,  but  by  embracing  every  opportunity  for  the 
exercise  of  benevolent  feelings  towards  him.  And  thus  it  is  that  the  love  of  God 
will  be  awakened  within  the  heart  of  any  one  of  us.  And  therefore,  in  exhorting 
you  to  obey  the  command,  "Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God."  we  should  set 
before  you  those  dealings  of  God  towards  you  which  are  calculated  to  kindle  in  your 
breasts  the  emotions  of  love.  II.  Its  extent.  What  is  the  degree  of  love  which 
God  demands  ?  1.  It  must  be  gupreme — with  all  the  heart.  You  are  to  love  God 
not  as  you  love  your  friends,  your  relatives,  your  children,  but  above  all  things. 
He  will  allow  no  rival  to  share  with  Him  the  throne  of  your  heart's  affections. 
Not  even  any  lawful  affection  must  be  set  above  that  which  we  give  to  God,  much 
less  the  love  of  sin  or  of  the  world.  2.  It  must  be  an  intelligent  love — with  all  the 
soul  or  understanding.  By  this  you  will  have  a  clear  perception  of  why  you  love 
God,  and  of  the  many  motives  which  should  excite  you  to  give  Him  your  heart's 
undivided  affections.  The  thoughtful  Christian  will  see  the  reasonableness  of  the 
adoration  he  pays  to  God.  3.  It  must  be  also  a  strong  and  fervent  love — '*  with  all 
thy  might " — a  love  deeply  rooted  in  the  heart,  and  so  closely  intertwined  with  all 
your  thoughts  and  feelings  as  to  defy  the  power  either  of  sin  or  Satan  to  tear  it 
from  your  breast.  {R.  Allen,  M.A.)  On  God's  love  of  being  loved :— One  of  the 
loudest  outcries  of  present-day  scepticism  against  Christianity  is  that  it  is  based 
on  an  anthropomorphic  or  too  manlike  view  of  the  nature  of  God,  which  is  said  to 
be  degrading  to  the  Unseen  Everlasting  Cause,  and  to  be  contrary  to  scientific  fact. 
Now  clearly  there  must  be  some  limits  to  thinking  of  God  as  "such  an  one  as 
ourselves."  When  men  have,  for  example,  represented  the  Divine  nature  by 
fabricating  and  consecrating  an  image  of  the  human  body,  as  in  the  case  of  the 
whole  idolatrous  world  ;  or  when  they  have  conceived  of  the  Divine  character  in  the 
moral  likeness  of  wicked  men,  as  in  the  ease  of  nearly  all  the  gods  and  goddesses 
of  paganism,  there  is  reason  in  the  outcry  of  these  sceptics  and  in  the  demand  for 
loftier  and  purer  ideas  of  the  Deity.     But  where  objection  is  made  to  the  formation 


192  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vi. 

of  ideas  of  the  Divine  nature  based  on  any  similarity  to  man's  nature,  or  to  ideas 
of  the  Divine  providence  based  on  our  notions  of  great  and  small — as  if  so  small  a 
world  as  this  and  so  minute  a  creature  as  man  were  unworthy  of  the  special  atten- 
tion of  an  Infinite  Being — then  the  objection  is  in  fact  founded  on  another  kind  of 
anthropomorphism  or  too  much  manlikeness — an  error  which  is  at  least  as  vulgar  as 
that  which  it  condemns,  and  then  the  basis  of  so-called  scientific  unbelief  is  open 
to  the  same  accusation  which  it  brings  against  the  Christian  faith.  For,  of  all 
indefensible  notions,  this  must  be  the  most  indefensible — that  the  Infinite  Being 
measures  the  value  of  objects  in  proportion  to  their  size.  Does  any  man  really 
believe  that  if  there  be  a  God  at  all  who  is  an  intelligent  Being,  even  if  He  were 
only  as  intelligent  as  a  man  may  be,  that  He  values  things  chiefly  according  to 
their  cubic  contents,  so  that  what  you  call  a  "little"  world  has  no  chance  of  the 
notice  of  the  Everlasting  Mind  ?  Everything  that  we  know  here  of  mind  leads  us 
to  conclude  very  differently.  Men  do  not  value  each  other  chiefly  according  to  their 
size,  or  anything  else,  when  they  are  educated  into  some  right  perception.  The 
noblest  nations  have  not  inhabited  the  largest  territories.  It  is  not  the  largest 
buildings,  the  largest  works  of  art  which  are  of  the  highest  value.  We  may  be 
certain,  then,  to  begin  with,  that  suns  and  planets  do  not  rank  in  the  Creative 
Mind  according  to  their  cubic  contents.  He  who  made  man  in  His  own  image  of 
reason  and  love  cannot  possibly  account  man  unworthy  of  notice  because  of  his 
littleness.  Nothing  is  too  gi-eat  for  the  Mightiest  One,  and  nothing  is  too  minute  for 
His  care.  But  now  comes  for  consideration  the  deeper  question  of  the  nature  of 
God,  as  capable  or  incapable  of  real  feeling  towards  man — as  caring  or  not  caring 
for  our  affection — so  as  to  be  fitted  to  win  our  love  to  Him,  a  personal  and  everlast- 
ing love.  Nothing  is  clearer  in  the  Sacred  Writings  than  that  they  all  alike  represent 
God  not  only  as  essential  Love,  but  as  asking  for  our  love,  and  delighting  in  it,  as 
the  love  of  His  children,  to  whom  He  has  given  all  things.  God's  love  of  being 
loved  is,  perhaps,  the  foremost  quality  of  the  Divine  Nature  as  described  to  us  in 
revelation.  Consider  how  strange  it  would  be  if  God  were  not  such  a  Being  as  this 
— if  the  Creator  of  all  sensitive  souls  were  the  One  Spirit  devoid  of  real  sense  and 
feeling.  Oh,  surely  this  great  world  of  sense  and  feeling  was  born  out  of  a  nature 
all  sentient  and  vital,  and  rose  like  some  form  of  beauty  from  a  wondrous  ocean  of 
Deity,  full  of  the  life  whence  she  sprang.  Consider,  too,  what  an  effort  seems  to  be 
made  in  the  physical  world  to  convey  to  our  minds  on  all  sides  the  impression  that 
there  is  real  and  personal  feeling  towards  man  in  the  Most  High.  Does  not  every 
living  form  in  plant  or  flower,  every  delicious  landscape,  or  breadth  of  ocean,  lighted 
with  the  radiance  of  the  morning  or  the  evening  sun,  breathe  forth  to  us  the  feeling 
of  some  unseen,  but  not  far  distant,  and  Omnipotent  Artist,  who  loves  His  children  ? 
But  it  is  true  that  our  sense  affords  no  suflBcing  revelation  to  the  soul.  She  cries 
out  still  for  the  Living  God.  We  require  a  richer,  fuller,  nearer  communion,  and 
we  have  it  in  Christ.  In  Jesus  Christ  the  Infinite  is  revealed,  not  only  as  a  Person, 
but  as  one  "full  of  compassion."  And  now  we  are  more  ready  for  the  reception 
of  the  truth  that,  if  "God  is  Love,"  it  follows  that  next  to  the  satisfaction  of  His 
own  Almighty  love  in  blessing  His  creatures,  and  saving  the  lost  by  His  own  sacri- 
fice, that  Nature  must  seek  for  its  sweetest  delights  in  the  love  of  His  children. 
And  this  is  the  revealed  but  too  often  forgotten  fact  that  God  loves  to  be  loved.  .  .  . 
When,  then,  of  old,  God  spake  by  Moses,  "Thou  shalt  love,"  &c.,  this  was  not  the 
terrible  and  menacing  demand  of  a  Potentate  requiring  love  as  a  debt,  and  threat- 
ening its  non-payment  with  perdition.  But  it  was  Eternal  Love  crying  out  for  the 
love  of  a  world  of  revolted  souls,  and  determined  not  to  rest  until  it  conquered  the 
rebellion  by  the  sacrifice  of  itself.  But  what  that  union  of  souls  with  God  will  be 
in  eternity,  in  the  embrace  which  no  created  power  can  unlock,  and  which  the 
Uncreated  never  will,  no  earthly  tongue  can  tell.  The  infant  spirit  will  have  grown 
up  to  its  adult  and  angelic  strength,  and  the  faint  answering  smile  of  its  earlier 
days  shall  have  passed  into  the  effulgent  sunlight  of  an  intelligent  and  immortal 
passion — a  love  for  ever  strengthening  in  the  experience  of  the  Love  Divine,  and 
thrilling  the  Infinite  Nature  with  the  gladness  that  the  saved  alone  can  give  it, 
because  they  alone  love  with  the  ardour  kindled  by  redeeming  grace.  {E.  White. ) 
God  must  be  laved: — A  man  is  not  a  Christian  because  he  is  socially  loving  and 
kind  any  more  than  a  person  is  a  good  son  because  he  loves  his  brothers  and  sisters, 
leaving  out  his  father  and  mother.  Men  would  not  wish  to  be  treated  by  their 
children  as  they  propose  to  treat  their  Father  in  heaven.  They  would  not  be  satis- 
fied to  have  their  sons  and  daughters  act  on  the  principle  that  to  love  each  other  is 
the  sufficient  and  only  way  by  which  children  ought  to  love  their  parents.     I  should 


CHAP.  VI.]  DEUTERONOMY.  193 

not  like  to  hear  my  children  say,  "To  be  kind  to  each  other,  and  not  care  for  father 
and  mother,  is  the  way  for  us  to  be  good  children  towards  them."  {H.  IF.  Beecher.) 
The  service  of  the  heart : — All  men  know,  or  think  they  know,  what  love  is.  The 
poets  have  sung  its  praises,  and  the  philosophers  have  analysed  it,  and  the  moralists 
have  assigned  it  a  niche,  under  one  name  or  another,  among  their  virtues  ;  but  all 
have  alike  regarded  it  as  too  irrational,  too  capricious,  too  transitory  a  thing  to  be 
au  aiequate  foundation  for  morality.  Christianity  alone  has  made  love  at  once  the 
guide  and  goal  of  life,  the  condition  of  perfection,  the  fulfilling  of  the  law.  The 
principle  of  love  is  universal,  without  being  abstract,  it  is  a  fact,  a  plain,  obvious, 
palpable  reality,  which  all  men  agree  to  recognise,  and  to  recognise  as  ultimate  and 
fundamental.  Its  analogues  are  broadcast  throughout  the  universe,  from  the  laws 
of  gravitation  upwards.  It  is  universal,  it  is  real,  and  further,  it  is  vital.  It  is  its 
own  dynamic.  It  lives  and  grows  and  expands  and  fructifies,  and  sows  its  fiery 
contagion  broadcast  with  an  importunate,  an  imperious  necessity  of  its  own  inner 
nature,  which  admits  of  neither  help  nor  hindrance  from  without.  The  command, 
therefore,  to  love  appeals  to  an  instinct  which  is  co-extensive  with  humanity,  which 
is  real  beyond  touch  of  controversy,  and  endowed  with  a  vital  force  that  is  exclu- 
sively its  own.  But  the  very  instinctive  nature  of  love  often  misleads  men  into 
many  other  fallacies,  owes  its  plausibility  to  its  containing  half  a  truth.  Love  is 
indeed  irresistible  ;  many  waters  cannot  quench  it.  But  like  other  irresistible  forces 
^  — the  lapse  of  a  river,  the  electric  energy,  the  current  of  a  flame— it  can  be  guided, 
and  by  guidance  be  controlled.  **  Learning  to  love"  is  too  deep-set  a  phrase  in 
our  language  ever  to  have  arisen,  if  the  act  which  it  describes  were  after  all  impos- 
sible. And  love,  like  the  instincts  in  a  being  that  is  rational,  not  only  can  be,  but 
must  be,  directed  by  the  will,  as  the  sole  condition  of  attaining  its  true  end.  To 
assist  us  to  that  end  let  us  look  at  love  as  we  find  it  among  men.  In  the  first  place, 
love  is  a  relation  existing  between  persons.  The  will  need  not  have  for  its  field  of 
exercise  more  than  a  law,  nor  the  mind  more  than  an  abstract  object ;  but  it  is  only 
in  a  derived  and  secondary  sense  that  we  can  speak  of  loving  anything  other  than 
a  person.  ^  We  may  love  him  for  the  possession  of  this  or  that  attribute  of  loveli- 
ness ;  but  it  is  the  self  behind  the  attributes — the  person — that  we  love.  And  then, 
though  we  cannot  analyse  this  mysterious  element  of  our  being,  we  may  see  one 
thing  about  it  clearly,  that  it  moves  between  two  poles — desire  and  sacrifice.  The 
family,  the  earliest  home  of  love,  shows  both  these  elements  in  their  simplest  form. 
The  love  of  the  child  for  the  parent  is  one  of  simple,  unreflective,  self-referent 
desire;  that  of  the  parent  for  the  child  one  of  increasingly  unselfish  sacrifice. 
Both  factors,  of  course,  coexist,  but  in  each  case  one  predominates,  and  gives 
character  and  colour  to  the  whole.  To  love  is  to  be  lifted  or  degraded  by  our  love, 
in  proportion  as  we  repudiate  or  welcome  the  law  of  sacrifice.  The  forms  which 
that  sacrifice  may  take  are  infinite,  but  the  fact  of  it  needs  no  proof.  Love,  then, 
as  we  know  it,  is  a  relation  between  persons,  founded  on  desire,  tending  to  self- 
sacrifice,  needing  for  its  true  development  the  guidance  of  the  will.  And  further, 
it  is  never  stationary.  It  withers  unless  it  grows,  and  in  growing  gathers  purity, 
intensity,  perfection.  This  is  the  faculty  which  we  are  bidden  to  enlist  wholly  in 
God's  service:  "Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God  with  all  thy  heart."  How  is 
this  to  be  done  ?  Difl'erent  forms  of  personal  beauty,  different  graces  of  mind  or 
character,  wake  the  love  of  different  men.  But  once  let  a  man  be  confronted  by 
the  congenial  character,  the  appropriate  grace,  and  nature  does  the  rest.  So  with 
the  love  of  God.  He  attracts  us  through  many  avenues.  Our  part  is  to  direct  our 
mental  vision  by  the  will ;  and  then 

"  We  needs  must  love  the  highest  when  we  see  it." 

But  it  is  in  this  direction  of  our  vision  that  we  fail.  Our  eyes  are  feeble,  and  we 
cannot  bear  the  light.  "  He  left  not  Himself  without  witness,"  but  we  interpret  it 
amiss.  The  simplest  of  all  witnesses  is  our  natural  desire  for  God.  * '  All  men 
yearn  for  the  gods,"  said  the  Greek.  "My  soul  is  athirst  for  God,"  said  the 
Hebrew  poet.  In  spite  of  such  utterances,  a  century  ago  philosophers  could  still 
maintain  that  religion  was  artificial.  But  in  the  light  of  our  larger  knowledge  this 
is  no  longer  possible.  For  however  far  we  look  back  over  India,  or  Babylon,  or 
Egypt,  or  abroad  over  the  savage  inmates  of  the  islands  of  the  sea,  the  religious 
instinct  is  there  ;  not  merely  a  fear,  or  a  sense  of  infinitude,  but  a  yearning,  a  desire, 
the  beginning  of  a  love.  So  universally  is  it  found  to  be  part  of  our  primitiv* 
endowments,  that  zoologists  have  proposed,  for  their  special  purpose,  to  classify  man- 
kind as  "  the  religious  animal. "  This  desire  is  the  foundation  of  all  our  love.  Our 
13 


194  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vr. 

capacity  for  loving  God  and  our  capacity  for  loving  man  are  one  and  the  self-same 
thing.  Or  to  put  it  otherwise,  we  have  an  infinite  capacity  for  loving,  which  points 
to  an  Infinite  Being  as  its  only  final  object.  Limit  your  love  exclusively  to  any 
finite  thing  or  person,  and  what  is  the  result,  and  why  ?  Sooner  or  later  it  will 
begin  to  flag ;  it  will  fail ;  it  will  become  disgust ;  and  that  because  you  have 
thought  to  limit  what  never  can  be  limited.  We  are  all  of  us  endowed,  then,  with 
an  emotional  capacity,  whose  final  cause  is  the  love  of  God.  And  every  phase  of 
human  emotion  should  be,  and  may  be  if  we  will,  a  stage  in  the  training  of  this 
faculty  for  its  destined  end  and  goal.  There  is,  for  instance,  the  love  of  nature — 
of  the  beauty  of  earth  and  sea  and  sky,  and  of  all  the  various  life  with  which  they 
teem.  Contemplate  nature,  and  its  loveliness  will  strengthen  and  develop  your 
emotions,  but  in  doing  so  will  point  them  on,  with  in-esistible  suggestiveness,  to 
One  lovelier  than  itself.  And  then  there  is  the  love  of  art.  Art  selects  and  re- 
arranges nature,  with  a  view  to  bring  its  lessons  more  intimately  home.  Our  duty 
is  to  use  all  art  that  will  kindle  our  emotions  nobly,  but  sternly  to  forego,  even  in 
what  may  seem  the  neutral  region  of  amusement,  all  that  is  insidiously  poisonous 
to  us,  and  yet  may  innocently  brighten  and  help  the  lives  of  other  men.  This  fact 
needs  insisting  on  ;  for  artistic  influences  elude  observation,  and  we  are  hardly 
aware  of  how  profoundly  painting,  music,  drama,  poetry,  and  the  immense  litera- 
ture of  fiction  mould  and  modify  for  good  or  evil  every  fibre  of  our  modern  life. 
Again,  there  is  the  love  of  humanity,  the  most  universal  of  all  schools  of  love.  In 
the  early  dawn  of  aff'ection  we  idealise  our  dear  ones  with  an  instinctive  insight 
that  is  in  truth  prophetic  of  what  they  may  one  day  be.  But  here  and  now  they 
are  finite  beings — weak,  sinful,  incomplete.  Differences  of  taste  and  temper,  in- 
adequacies, imperfections,  cannot  but  disclose  themselves,  as  time  goes  on.  But 
if  our  love  be  true,  we  shall  learn  to  eff'ace  our  selfishness  in  helping  other  lives  to 
ovei'come  their  insufiiciencies  ;  and  every  sacrifice  this  costs  us  will  deepen  our 
power  of  sympathy ;  we  shall  feel  not  only  for  the  grace  and  beauty,  but  for  all  the 
pathetic  frailty  of  the  struggling  human  soul ;  and  as  we  learn,  by  loving  more 
profoundly,  the  limitless  nature  of  our  love,  we  shall  see  that  its  only  adequate 
satisfaction  is  in  God— "Nor  man  nor  nature  satisfies  whom  God  alone  created." 
There  is  one  more  school  of  affection ;  but  we  can  only  learn  its  lessons  if  we  come 
to  it,  at  least  in  some  degree,  prepared  ;  for  it  is  the  school  of  bereavement.  To  the 
idolater  of  nature,  or  of  art,  or  of  humanity,  we  know  what  the  shattering  of  his 
idol  means— hopeless,  helpless,  impotent  despair  ;  weeping  and  wailing  and  gnash- 
ing of  teeth.  And  yet  it  was  not  meant  to  be,  it  never  need  be,  so.  If  once  we 
have  risen  to  realise  that  what  we  love  on  earth  can  have  derived  its  loveliness  from 
no  other  source  than  God,  bereavement,  however  bitter,  is  full  of  earnest  meaning. 
Our  concern  is  with  the  fact  that  bereavement  reveals  to  us  new  and  mysterious 
vistas  in  the  life  of  love.  All  along  we  have  seen  that  sacrifice  of  one  kind  or 
other  must  be  j^resent.  But  bereavement  shows  us  how  intensely  real  that  sacri- 
fice must  be.  All  else  seems  to  vanish  before  it ;  and  the  very  name  of  love  acquires 
an  awfulness  which  makes  its  light  misuse  seem  blas})hemy.  Such  are  the  common 
means  by  which  we  may  learn  to  fulfil  the  commandment,  "Thou  sh alt  love  the 
Lord  thy  God  with  all  thy  heart."  The  genius  can  dispense  with  the  ordinary 
methods  of  education  ;  and  so  too  can  the  saint ;  but  for  most  of  us  it  is  otherwise. 
The  tilings  that  lie  around  us,  the  stuff"  that  life  is  made  of,  the  field  of  our  daily 
exercise — nature,  art,  society,  marriage,  friendship,  partings,  death — these  are  the 
appointed  channels  that  should  guide  the  heart  to  God.  Our  mistake  is  to  think  such 
things  indifferent,  as  if  there  were  a  neutral  region,  neither  good  nor  ill.  Nothing 
is  indiff"erent,  except  to  our  blindness.  Every  object  of  human  interest  lifts  us  up 
or  drags  us  down.  (/.  R.  IlUngworth,  M.  A.)  Love  of  God  the  best  basis  of  life : — 
There  was  once  a  great  painter  who  had  three  scholars.  They  were  all  anxious  to 
learn  the  secret  of  their  master's  power,  and  become  great  painters  themselves.  The 
first  spent  all  his  time  in  the  studio  at  his  easel.  He  copied  incessantly  the  great 
master's  pictures,  studying  deeply  into  their  beauties,  and  trying  to  imitate  them 
with  his  own  brush.  He  was  up  early,  and  was  the  last  to  leave  the  workroom  at  night. 
He  would  have  nothing  to  do  with  the  master  himself,  attended  none  of  his  lectures, 
never  went  to  him  'wdth  any  question,  nor  spent  any  time  in  talking  with  hira.  He 
wanted  to  be  his  own  director,  and  make  his  own  discoveries,  and  be  self-made. 
This  scholar  lived  and  died  without  notice,  and  never  expressed  on  canvas  a  single 
one  of  the  noble  characteristics  of  his  master.  The  second  scholar,  on  the  contrary, 
spent  little  time  in  the  studio,  scarcely  soiled  his  palette,  or  wore  out  a  brush.  He 
attended  every  lecture  on  art,  was  constantly  asking  questions  about  the  theories  of 


CHAP.  VI.]  DEUTERONOMY,  195 

perspective,  of  colouring,  of  light  and  shade,  of  grouping  figures,  and  all  that,  and 
was  a  zealous  student  of  books.     But  for  all  his  study  he  died  without  producing  a 
sin-^le  worthy  picture  to  help  and  delight  mankind  and  perpetuate  his  master's 
glory.     The  third  was  as  zealous  in  the  practical  work  of  the  artist  as  tlie  first,  and 
as  zealous  in  the  theoretical  as  the  second,  but  he  did  one  thing  which  they  never 
thought  of  doing :  he  came  to  know  and  love  the  master.     They  were  much  together, 
the  young  artist  and  the  older  one,  and  they  had  long  talks  about  all  phases  of  an 
artist's  lile  and  work.     So  close  and  continual,  in  fact,  was  their  comnnnnon  that 
they  grew  to  talk  alike,  and  think  alike,  and  even,  some  said,  to  look  alike.     And 
it  was  not  long  before  they  began  to  paint  alike,  and  on  the  canvas  of  the  younger 
glowed  the  same  beauty  and  the  same  majesty  that  shone  from  the  canvas  of  his 
master.     The  parable  is  not  hard  to  interpret.     If  the  Christian  has  been  seeking 
to  know  God,  and  express  God's  beauty  on  the  canvas  of  his  human  life,  it  has  been 
in  one  of  these  three  ways.     If  it  has  been  by  the  way  of  practical  living  merely,  by 
attempting  with  one's  own  unaided  wisdom  and  power  to  be  kind  and  helpful  and 
influential,  the  attempt  has  failed.     If  it  has  been  by  the  way  of  theory  merely,  if 
by  searching  of  books  alone  the  Christian  has  sought  to  find  out  God,  he  has  failed. 
Our  search  for  a  noble  and  inspiring  and  fruitful  basis  of  life  will  succeed  only  as, 
without  by  any  means  neglecting  good  deeds  or  study,  we  seek  with  all  the  might  of 
the  spirit  God  has  given  us  for  communion,  personal  love  and  communion,  with  the 
Spirit  who  made  our  spirits,  until,  in  Jesus'  words,  we  are  one  with  Christ,  even  as 
He  is  one  with  the  Father.        How  to  begin  to  love  God  .-—It  will  not  be  so  difl&cult 
for  you  to  love  God  if  you  will  only  begin  by  loving  goodness,  which  is  God's  like- 
ness, and  the  inspiration  of  God's  Holy  Spirit.     For  you  will  be  like  a  man  who 
has  long  admired  a  beautiful  picture  of  some  one  whom  he  does  not  know,  and  at 
last  meets  the  person  for  whom  the  picture  was  meant— and,  behold,  the  living  face 
is  a  thousand  times  more  fair  and  noble  than  the  painted  one.     You  will  be  like  ft 
child  which  has  been  brought  up  from  its  birth  in  a  room  into  which  the  sun  never  U 
shone,  and  then  goes  out  for  the  first  time,  and  sees  the  sun  in  all  his  splendour 
bathing  the  earth  witi  glory.     If  that  child  has  loved  to  watch  the  dun,  narrow 
rays  of°li^t  which  shone  into  his  dark  room,  what  will  he  not  feel  at  the  sight  of 
that  sun  from  which  all  those  rays  had  come  !    Just  so  will  they  feel  who,  having 
loved  goodness  for  its  own  sake,  and  loved  their  neighbours  for  the  sake  of^  what 
little  goodness  is  in  them,  have  their  eyes  opened  at  last  to  see  all  goodness,  without 
flaw  or  failing,  bound  or  end,  in  the  character  of  God,  which  He  has  shown  forth  in 
Jesus  Christ  our  Lord,  who  is  the  likeness  of  His  Father's  glory,  and  the  express 
image  of  His  Person,  to  whom  be  glory'and  honour  for  ever.         Our  obligation  to  love 
God  .—If  a  great  potentate  did  make  subject  unto  thee  his  whole  kingdom  and  a,ll 
his  dominions,  nobles,  and  strong,  powerful  men,  nay,  all  his  subjects,  and  did 
command  them  to  guard,  defend,  preserve,  to  clothe,  cure,  and  feed  thee,  and  to 
take  care  that  thou  shouldest  want  nothing  at  all,  wouldst  thou  not  love  him  and 
account  him  to  be  a  loving,  bountiful  lord  ?    How,  then,  oughtest  thou  to  love  the 
Lord  thy  God,  who  hath  kept  nothing  back  for  Himself,  but  appointed  to  thy  ser- 
vice all  that  is  in  heaven,  and  from  heaven,  and  all  that  is  upon  earth,  or  anywhere  ? 
For  He  wants  no  creature  for  Himself,  and  hath  excepted  nothing  from  thy  service, 
neither  in  all  the  hosts  of  holy  angels,  nor  in  any  of  His  creatures  under  the  stars. 
If  we  will,  they  are  ready  to  serve  us  ;  nay,  hell  itself  must  serve  us,  by  bringing  upon 
us  fear  and  terror,  that  we  may  not  sin.     {John  Amdt. )     Why  we  ought  to  love  God  :— 
1.  We  ought  to  love  God.    It  is  our  duty  to  love  God.    We  are  commanded  to  love  God. 
The  Old  Testament  and  the  New  Testament  unite  in  emphasising  that.    It  is  not  likely, 
however,  that  this  text  ever  persuaded  anybody  into  loving  God.     Love  laughs  at 
injunctions,  pays  no  heed  to  duty,  absolutely  cannot  be  commanded.    Obedience  can 
be  got  that  way,  but  love— never  !     It  is  of  the  very  nature  and  essence  of  love  that 
it  must  grow  in  a  willing  heart.     Love  is  the  manifestation  of  an  untrammelled 
choice.     2.  It  may  be  that  God  set  temptation  within  the  reach  of  man,  that  He 
might  thus  make  it  possible  for  us  really  to  love  Him.     The  test  of  love  is  preference. 
Love  comes  out  into  the  light,  and  is  discovered  when  there  is  a  choice  to  be  made    ' " 
between  two,  or  for  or  against.     The  best  way  in  the  whole  world  for  a  man  to  show 
his  love  for  God  is  to  say  "  no  "  to  the  devil,  and  to  stand  up  on  the  side  of  God. 
But  we  must  not  do  that  because  we  are  commanded  to  do  it,  because  we  are  afraid 
not  to  do  it,  but  because  we  want  to  do  it,  if  there  is  to  be  any  real  love  in  it. 
3.  The  purpose  of  this  command  is  not  to  establish  obedience,  but  to  proclaim  an 
ideal.     The  spirit  of  it  is  not  that  we  must  love  God  becauise  we  must,  but  that  God 
wants  us  to  love  Him.     "We  love  Him  because  He  first  loved  us."    4.  Christ  ii 


196  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap,  vl 

the  only  authoritative  teacher  of  the  love  of  God.  (1)  He  taught  God's  love  for 
man  in  the  hlessed  words  that  He  spoke.  He  looked  up  to  the  great  God  and  called 
Him,  and  taught  us  to  call  Him,  by  that  loving  name  "Father."  (2)  His  life, 
even  more  than  His  words,  was  a  revelation  of  God.  God  is  like  Christ,  and  it  is 
not  hard  to  love  Christ.  How  can  anybody  help  loving  Christ?  And  whoever 
loves  Christ,  loves  God.  (3)  He  taught  the  love  of  God  for  us  in  the  death  that  He 
died.  We  wonder  if  pain  and  love  can  really  go  together,  and  behold  !  here  they 
are  together  at  the  Cross  of  Jesus.  [George  Hodges ^  D.D.)  Love  for  Ood  a  real 
motive  power : — It  is  said  that  one  of  the  greatest  statesmen  that  we  have  ever  had, 
having  gone  to  hear  an  evangelical  preacher,  was  heard  growling  as  he  left  the 
church,  "Why,  the  man  said  that  we  were  to  love  God,"  evidently  thinking  that 
the  very  height  of  unreasonableness.  And  when  Wilberforce  attacked  the  fashion 
of  religion  in  the  beginning  of  the  nineteenth  century,  this  was  the  point  on  which 
he  fixed — that  not  only  was  God  not  loved,  but  people  did  not  even  think  that  to 
lore  God  was  reasonable.  Going  to  work  philosophically,  he  demonstrated,  first, 
that  what  he  called  passion — meaning  love — is  the  strongest  force  in  human  affairs ; 
and  secondly,  that  religion  requires  exactly  such  a  stimulus,  because  of  the  difficul- 
ties that  it  has  to  overcome.  We  are  now  living  in  a  far  warmer  atmosphere  every- 
where than  that  in  which  Wilberforce  was  living,  and  we  have  no  difficulty  in 
acknowledging  the  power  of  emotion,  or  passion,  or  love  in  any  department  of 
human  affairs.  In  politics,  it  is  enthusiasm  that  carries  the  statesman  through. 
In  war,  it  is  enthusiasm  that  makes  heroes.  It  was  the  passion  of  friendship  that 
made  Jonathan  able  to  lay  a  kingdom  at  David's  feet.  Love  between  the  sexes  is 
the  grand  mainspring  of  human  refinement  and  industry,  and  affection  in  the  home 
sweetens  adversity,  and  enables  even  the  weak  to  bear  up  under  intolerable  burdens. 
But,  my  people,  there  is  one  kind  of  love  for  which  the  human  heart  was  made 
which  is  deeper  and  more  influential  than  any  other  kind,  and  that  is  the  love  of 
God.  I  daresay  that  you  and  I  would  claim  that  we  had  tasted  the  other  kinds  of 
love,  perhaps  all  the  kinds,  and  we  know  well  their  power  of  developing  energy  and 
rewarding  endeavour,  and  sweetening  what  is  bitter  in  life  ;  but  let  me  press  this 
question  home  on  you — do  we  know  the  highest  love  of  all  ?  has  this  blossom  burst 
yet  on  the  tree  of  our  being — love  to  our  Father  in  heaven  ?  It  is  to  be  what  we 
call  an  absorbing,  an  overmastering  love,  pervading  the  whole  being,  and  setting 
every  power  within  us  in  motion.  If  the  love  of  God  be  in  us  anything  like  the 
absorbing  and  over-mastering  passion  that  Jesus  means  it  to  be  it  Avill  lead  us  also 
to  love  everything  belonging  to  God — His  day.  His  house,  His  people,  His  call,  and 
so  forth  ;  and  wherever  there  is  any  deep  love  for  the  Sabbath,  or  the  Bible,  you 
will  find  when  you  come  to  the  bottom  of  it,  that  it  is  due  to  love  of  God  Himself, 
wakened  in  the  heart  in  the  way  that  I  have  indicated.  But  there  is  especially  one 
part  of  worship  which  Jesus  connects  very  closely  with  the  love  of  God,  and  that  is 
prayer.  You  know  those  who  love  miist  meet.  The  oftener  they  meet  the  higher 
rises  the  flame  of  love,  and  prayer  is  the  trysting-place  between  God  and  the  soul. 
(J.  Stalker,  D.D.) 

Vers.  6-9.  These  words  .  .  .  shall  be  in  thine  heart. — The  Scriptures  to  he  laid 
to  heart,  and  diligently  taught : — I.  The  words  concerning  which  the  command  is 
GIVEN,  THEIR  NATURE  AND  IMPORTANCE.  1.  Their  supcmatural  origin.  2.  The 
extraordinary  manner  in  which  God  has  sanctioned  them,  in  the  signs  and 
wonders  performed  by  those  who  spoke  or  wrote  the  things  declared  in  them. 
3.  The  evident  excellence  and  useful  tendency  of  their  contents,  "to  make  us 
wise  unto  salvation."  II.  The  command  given  concerning  these  things.  1.  We 
must  not  be  indifferent,  but  deeply  impressed  with,  and  concerned  about,  these 
things ;  that  is,  about  Divine  revelation  in  general,  its  truth,  its  importance,  its 
contents;  and  about  that  religion  set  forth  in  this  passage,  as  above  explained, 
consisting  in  the  knowledge  and  love  of  God.  2.  We  must  see  that  this  is  religion, 
and  this  alone  ;  and  that  if  we  rest  short  of  this,  we  rest  short  of  religion.  3.  We 
must  be  concerned  to  have  proper  views  of,  to  experience,  and  to  practise  this 
religion.  III.  The  obligations  which  lie  upon  us  to  obey  this  command. 
1.  Gratitude  ;  for  this  book  lays  us  under  great,  yea,  in6nite  obligations.  Consider 
what  would  have  been  our  condition  hiw  we  not  had  the  Bible — how  ignorant, 
sinful,  and  miserable  !  2.  The  express  command  of  God,  who  gave  us  the 
Scriptures,  lays  us  under  an  indispensable  obligation  :  He  is  our  Creator,  Bene- 
factor, Redeemer,  Lawgiver,  and  Judge.  He  solemnly  enjoins  us  to  have  these 
things  in  cor  hearts.     3.  The  example  of  our  Lord  Jeaus  Christ  and  His  apostles 


CHAP.  VI.]  DEUTERONOMY.  I97 


&c.,  who  all  made  these  things  the  subjects  of  their  chief  study  and  discourse  from 
day  to  day.  4.  Compassion  for  and  love  to  our  children— mortal  and  immortal 
beings  ;  to  whom,  under  God,  we  have  given  being,  and  who  are  committed  to  our 
care  by  Him,  the  great  proprietor  and  governor  of  all,  who  says,  ' '  All  souls  are 
Mine."  5.  Our  own  interest  should  influence  us  ;  and  that  for  time  and  for 
eternity.^  For  if  we  have  not  God's  Word  in  general,  and  the  knowledge  and  love 
of  God  in  particular,  in  our  own  hearts,  we  shall  be  miserable  here,  and  perish 
everlastingly  hereafter.  And  if  we  do  not  inculcate  these  things  on  our  children 
and  dependants,  and  those  on  whom  we  might  inculcate  them,  and  they  perish, 
God  will  require  "their  blood,"  their  souls,  at  our  hands.  (/.  Benson.)  An 
ever-present  religion : — I.  Religion  claims  to  take  a  foremost  place  in  human 
AFFAIRS.  The  law  is  to  be  everywhere  set  forth  clear  and  conspicuous.  As  the 
ancient  E^ptians  are  said  to  have  worn  jewels  on  the  forehead  and  arm  inscribed 
with  sacred  words  and  amulets,  and  as  the  Mohammedans  now  paint  over  their 
doors  sentences  from  the  Koran,  such  as  "God  is  the  Creator,"  "God  is  one,  and 
Mahomet  is  His  prophet,"  so  the  Jews  carried  on  their  bodies,  and  wrote  upon 
their  houses,  some  of  the  most  important  passages  of  their  law.  Such  a  practice 
was  liable  to  the  abuse  of  ostentatious  vanity.  But  are  not  we  in  danger  of  falling 
into  the  opposite  fault  through  the  intense  reserve  in  which  we  hide  our  religious 
life  ?  When  we  do  recognise  the  right  of  religion  to  take  its  true  place  in  the 
world,  what  shall  we  dare  to  set  before  it  ?    This  right  is  based  on  two  grounds : 

1.  The  essential  value  of  the  subjects  treated  by  it.  2.  The  authority  which  it 
carries.  Our  religion  must  not  be  a  mere  matter  of  taste,  of  sentiment,  and  of 
philosophic  speculation.  It  must  be  regarded  as  obedience  to  the  wUl  of  our 
supreme  Lord  and  Master.  II.  Religion  needs  to  be  constantly  impressed  upon 
us.  We  do  not  have  to  set  up  maxims  about  our  streets  urging  us  to  make  haste 
to  get  rich,  nor  in  our  houses  to  prevent  us  from  forgetting  our  daily  meals.  But 
the  spiritual  appetite  is  less  keen,  and  requires  to  be  whetted  by  constant  teaching, 
by  "line  upon  line  "  and  "precept  upon  precept."  III.  Religion  must  begin  in 
THE  HEART.  It  is  impossible  to  have  religion  in  the  outer  life  unless  it  grow  from 
within.  Nothing  is  easier  than  to  put  on  the  show  of  it.  Any  one  can  hang  texts 
about  his  house.  But  to  infuse  real  religion  into  the  home  is  impossible  except  it 
grow  out  of  inward  spiritual  devotion.  The  fruit  cannot  grow  without  a  root.  To 
be  in  the  heart  the  Divine  Word  must  be— (1)  In  the  understanding,  not  merely 
heard  of  in  meaningless  words,  nor  practised  in  mechanical  acts,  but  intelligently 
realised.  (2)  In  the  memory,  not  read  for  a  moment  and  forgotten  as  soon  as  the 
book  is  closed,  but  carried  in  the  mind,  its  sacred  truths  haunting  the  thoughts. 
(3)  In  the  affections,  not  coldly  contemplated,  but  lovingly  cherished.  To  this 
end  Aye  must  seek  the  aid  of  God's  Holy  Spirit  to  enable  us  to  read,  mark,  learn, 
and  inwardly  digest  His  truth.  IV.  Religion  should  grow  out  into  every 
BRANCH  OF  LIFE.  Though  it  begins  in  the  heart  it  cannot  contain  itself  there 
for  ever;  if  the  fountain  is  ever  bubbling  up  it  must  issue  in  the  flowing 
stream.  When  there  is  life  in  the  root  it  is  impossible  to  prevent  the  tree 
from  breaking  out  into  leaves,  sooner  or  later.  Like  the  sunlight  pervading 
hill  and  plain,  like  the  fragrant  odour  of  incense  penetrating  to  the  inmost 
recess  of  the  sanctuary,  true  religion  must  spread  itself  abroad,  and  reach 
down  to  the  minutest  details  of  life.  {W.  F.  Adeney,  M.A.)  Words  in  the 
heart: — 1.  The  style  of  the  Book  of  Deuteronomy  is  unlike  that  of  the  preceding  ■ 
books  of  the  Pentateuch,  and  this  may  be  accounted  for  by  the  fact  that  the 
contents  are  very  different.    The  language  of  Deuteronomy  is  in  the  main  hortatory. 

2.  The  law-giver  is  seen  in  this  book  to  be  full  of  zeal  for  God,  and  of  earnest 
desire  for  the  well-being  of  the  people.  His  exhortations  to  obedience  have  been 
truly  said  to  be  "deeply  fraught  with  holy  and  patriotic  feeling."  3.  There  is 
something  of  a  valedictory  tone  throughout  these  pages.  The  forty  years'  wanderings 
are  almost  concluded,  and  the  death  of  Moses  is  near  at  hand.  Moses,  giving 
injuiictions  to  Israel  before  his  departure,  is  typical  to  the  final  commands  of  Jesus 
Christ  before  His  Ascension.  I.  The  v^^ords  were  to  be  in  their  heart. 
1.  What  words  ?  The  commandments  of  God,  as  summed  up  in  the  verses  which 
precede  the  text.  Having  first  asserted  the  truth  that  "  God  is  a  Spirit,"  for  the 
people  were  reminded,  when  the  Lord  spake  unto  them  out  of  the  midst  of  the  fire, 
that  they  "heard  a  voice,  but  saw  no  similitude"  (chap.  iv.  12);  so  now,  the 
Unity  of  the  Godhead  is  clearly  revealed:  "The  Lord  our  God  is  one  Lord.'* 
Further,  Moses  drew  from  the  doctrine  of  the  Divine  Unity  that  God  must  be  the 
sole  Object  of  Israel's  love  and  obedience— of  a  devotion  which  claimed  "all"  the 


198  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap  vr. 

heart  and  soul  and  might  for  its  rightful  exercise.  2.  These  words  were  to  be  in 
their  heart,  or  "  upon  "  their  heart,  as  something  written  and  engraven  upon  the 
memory.  This  faculty  was  to  be  the  treasure-house  of  the  Law  of  God.  Con- 
stantly in  Holy  Scripture  exhortations  and  institutions  had  for  their  object  the 
prevention  of  forgetfulness  of  the  Divine  Law  and  Divine  mercies :  "  My  son, 
forget  not  My  Law"  (Prov.  iii.  1).  The  Sabbath  was  a  reminder  of  Creation  ;  the 
Passover,  of  the  deliverance  from  Egypt ;  and  twelve  stones  were  set  up  for  a 
memorial  of  the  passing  over  Jordan.  To  remember  the  presence  of  God  and  the 
commandments  of  God  and  His  goodness  was  a  stringent  duty,  for  these  were  to 
form  the  guide  of  life  and  the  stimulus  of  devotion.  3.  To  forget  God  was  a  sin  in 
itself.  ''Beware  lest  thou  forget  the  Lord,"  the  prophet  continues,  especially  in  days 
of  affluence  and  prosperity  in  Canaan.  It  was  Moses'  reproach — almost  his  dying 
reproach  :  "Of  the  Rock  that  begat  thee,  thou  art  unmindful,  and  hast  forgotten  God 
that  formed  thee  "  (chap,  xxxii.  18).  And  forgetfulness  of  God  leads  to  all  sin. 
IL  "Thou  shalt  teach  them  diligently  unto  thy  children."  1.  There  never 
was  a  time  when  this  Divine  command  needed  more  to  be  accentuated  than  at  present. 
Secular  education  is  only  partial  education ;  it  omits  to  train  the  moral  and 
spiritual,  the  higher  elements  of  our  being.  '  It  has  been  wisely  said  by  a  French 
statesman,  ''Strong,  delinite,  religious  convictions  constitute  the  real  strength  of 
any  country."  He  might  have  added,  "  of  any  soul."  2.  Religious  instruction 
of  the  young  is  necessary,  because  God  commanded  it.  That  is  a  clear  and  definite 
ground  to  go  upon,  for  all  who  believe  the  Scriptures.  Further,  it  stands  to  reason 
that  if  religion  is  to  be  our  guide  in  the  midst  of  a  sinful  world,  we  want  that  guide 
for  all  ages.  Childhuod  as  well  as  maturity  belongs  to  God,  and  must  be  sanctified 
by  God.  The  image  of  the  Child  Christ,  with  the  words,  "Hear  ye  Him,"  placed 
by  Dean  Colet  over  the  master's  chair  in  St.  Paul's  Grammar  School,  was  his  way 
of  showing  the  importance  o.  religious  education,  and  of  teaching  children  that 
they  should  follow  Christ  and  be  made  like  unto  Him,  if  they  would  become  true 
men  and  women.  3.  Moreover,  youth  is  the  time  when  powers  are  fresh,  and  the 
truths  which  God  has  revealed  can  be  best  taken  in  and  assimilated.  ' '  Remember 
now  thy  Creator  in  the  days  of  thy  youth  "  (Eccles.  xii.  1).  It  is  the  time  for 
acquiring  deep  convictions  and  of  forming  habits  (Prov.  xxii.  6).  4.  Youth  is  an 
age  when  we  are  more  liable  to  be  led  astray  by  passion  and  the  first  taste  of  the 
world  ;  and  therefore  the  restraining  and  blessed  influences  of  religion  are  the 
more  necessary.  III.  Lessons.  1.  To  strive  to  remember  the  Diviue  commands 
and  the  presence  of  God.  2.  "In  the  heart."  Not  merely  an  intellectual  action, 
as  "  learning  by  heart,"  though  this  is  important ;  but  by  loving  obedience  to  God, 
and  devotion  to  Him.  3.  To  teach  religion  to  thy  children.  A  ground  for  forcing 
the  importance  of  religious  instruction  in  our  schools,  and  that  definite.  The  text 
says,  "  these  words. "  4.  But  further,  a  lesson  for  parents,  upon  whom  the  task 
devolves,  that  in  the  home,  as  well  as  at  the  school,  the  children  should  be  instructed 
in  the  truths  of  Christianity,  as  the  most  momentous  of  parental  duties.  {Canon 
Mutchings,  M.A.)  The  duties  arid  privileges  of  pious  parents: — I.  The  duties 
OF  believing  parents.  1.  Love  to  God  is  the  first  and  great  duty  of  every  moral 
being.  Without  this  there  can  be  good  neither  in  the  individual  nor  in  his 
life  and  actions.  2.  The  Word  of  God  should  be  the  object  of  constant  and 
unremitting  study.  This  is  a  work  for  life.  3.  The  Word  of  God  should  dwell 
in  the  heart  of  the  believer  richly  ;  and  at  all  times,  and  in  all  places,  it  ought  to 
be  the  chief  employment  of  his  mind.  This  leads  to  saving  knowledge  of  God  and 
of  His  will  ;  and  this,  by  the  teaching  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  will  make  the  believer 
"wise  unto  salvation,"  and,  by  the  blessing  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  will  do  so  likewise 
unto  his  children.  4.  We  should  make  the  Word  of  God  known  to  others — such 
as  our  friends,  our  associates,  our  neighbours,  and  that,  too,  as  extensively  as 
possible.  Thus  tlie  believer  is  kept  constantly  in  communion  with  God  by  love, 
and  by  the  Scriptures  ;  and  thus  he  becomes  more  and  more  conformed  to  God's 
image  every  day.  5.  But  the  believer  should  make  known  the  Word  of  God  to  the 
world  as  far  as  possible,  by  recommending  it,  and  by  circulating  it,  as  far  as 
possible,  amongst  his  necessitous  fellow-creatures.  IL  The  privileges  of  pious 
PERSONS.  1.  They  are  great  gainers  themselves  ;  for,  by  "loving  the  Lord  their 
God  with  all  their  heart,"  they  have  the  experience  of  heaven  begun  in  their  soul : 
all  is  life,  power,  readiness,  willingness,  and  ability  to  do  the  whole  will  of  God — 
and  heaven  just  consists  of  this  in  perftction.  This  gives  satisfaction  ;  this  gives 
"joy  and  peace  in  believing."  2.  They  are  great  gainers,  because  their  whole 
intellectual  powers  are  satisfied  with  Divine  influences ;  their  understanding  is 


CHAP.  VI.]  DEUTERONOMY.  199 

satisfied  with  knowledge  of  the  Divine  nature,  the  Divine  perfections,  the  Divine 
persons,  the  Divine  wUl,  the  Divine  promises,  the  Divine  blessings,  and  the  Divine 
word.  3.  They  are  gi-eat  gainers,  because  the  whole  man,  soul  and  body,  with  the 
members,  powers,  and  faculties,  are  dedicated  to  God,  and  are  employed  in  His 
service  and  enjoyment.  This  is  employment  for  the  real  Christian  both  in  this 
world  and  the  next.  All  Christians  should  daily  be  thus  occupied,  for  this  is 
answering  the  end  of  their  creation.  1.  But  another  unspeakable  privilege  is 
comprehended  in  our  text,  and  tliat  is,  "These  words  which  I  command  thee  this 
day,  shall  be  in  thine  heart."  This  is  to  be  conformed  to  the  Divine  image;  this 
is  to  be  like  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  2.  Another  unspeakable  privilege  is  com- 
prehended in  our  text,  and  that  is,  the  instruction  and  edification  of  children. 
3.  This  privilege  is  extensive,  and  may  embrace  not  only  the  children,  but  also 
the  servants,  and  all  others  connected  with  the  family,  by  consanguinity,  friend- 
ship, or  otherwise.  4.  The  believer's  privilege  extends  to  all  men,  as  far  as  in  his 
power.  Thus,  the  circle  extends  from  the  point — self— round  the  circumference 
of  the  globe  !  How  exalted  the  consideration  of  being  instrumental  in  the  hand 
of  God,  of  being  so  extensively  useful  in  increasing  the  Church  on  earth,  and  the 
Church  in  heaven  —  of  profiting  the  souls  and  bodies  of  men  —  of  promoting  the 
glory  of  God  both  in  time  and  through  eternity  !  {Jos.  Kiddy  D.D.)  Familiarity 
tcUh  the  Word  of  God:— I.  The  words  of  God  ake  the  treasure  of  the  heart. 
Wherever  they  be,  if  they  are  not  in  the  heart  they  fail  to  answer  the  Divine 
intention.  They  are  made  for  the  heart,  and  the  heart  is  made  for  them.  Let 
them  be  there  first,  and  it  Avill  follow  that  they  will  be  everywhere  else  where  they 
are  needed.  II.  The  words  of  God  are  the  theme  of  the  conversation. 
There  is  a  picturesque  completeness  in  the  enumeration  of  the  occasions  upon  which 
these  words  are  to  be  talked  of— at  home,  abroad,  evening,  and  morning.  Though 
His  words  in  origin,  they  are  our  words  in  use.  III.  The  words  of  God  are  thb 
ornament  of  the  life.  The  Jews  adorned  their  persons  with  texts  of  Scripture, 
written  upon  papyrus  or  parchment,  and  enclosed  within  little  boxes  or  cylinders, 
which  were  worn  upon  the  hand  or  the  brow  :  an  emblem  of  their  intimacy  and 
familiarity  with  Divine  truth,  and  to  us  a  reminder  that  our  life,  our  politics,  bur 
literatui'e,  our  art,  should  all  be  governed  by  the  principles  and  motives  presented 
in  revelation.  IV.  The  words  of  God  are  the  law  of  the  home  and  house- 
hold. Scraps  of  Scripture  were  suspended  by  the  threshold  of  the  house  surely  to 
intimate  that  in  a  sense  every  Israelite's  home  was  a  temple  sacred  unto  the  Lord. 
Our  households  are  protected,  and  guided,  and  hallowed,  when  the  Divine  Word 
is  their  supreme  authority.  V.  The  words  of  God  are  the  inheritance  of  our 
children.  Whatever  parents  fail  to  do  for  their  offspring,  to  bequeath  to  them, 
let  them,  above  all  things,  hand  down  to  them  the  precious  and  sacred  deposit  of 
truth,  teaching  diligently  unto  their  children  what  they  themselves  have  received 
from  those  who  have  gone  before  them.  {Homilist.)  The  Bible  not  too  good 
to  he  used : — Some  years  ago  I  had  occasion  to  send  a  parcel  to  an  honest,  hard- 
working bricklayer  who  lived  in  the  country.  It  contained,  besides  sundry  little 
presents  for  his  wife  and  children,  a  trowel  for  his  own  use,  made  in  a  superior 
way,  with  a  mahogany  handle  ;  and  often  did  I  fancy  that  I  saw  him  hard  at  work 
with  the  trowel  in  his  hand.  Last  summer,  being  in  the  neighbourhood,  I  called 
at  the  cottage  of  the  honest  bricklayer,  when,  to  my  surprise,  I  saw  the  trowel 
which  I  had  sent  him  exhibited  over  the  chimney-piece  as  a  curiosity.  It  had 
been  considered  too  good  to  use,  and  consequently  had  never  been  of  the  slightest 
use  to  its  owner.  {George  Mogridge.)  Thou  shalt  teach  them  diligently  nnto 
thy  children. — On  the  religious  instruction  of  children : — I.  To  mention  some  of 
those  things  which  parents  are  commanded  to  teach  their  children. 
1.  In  the  first  place,  then,  inculcate  upon  them  an  early  reverence  for  God.  Teach 
them  this  duty  even  before  they  can  understand  who  and  what  He  is  ;  and  let 
them  see  it  exemplified  in  yourselves,  by  your  seriousness  in  speaking  of  Him,  and 
by  your  humility  in  every  act  of  Divine  worship.  2.  Teach  them  also  an  early 
value  for  the  Scriptures.  Let  them  know  that  the  Bible  is  the  Word  of  God  ;  that 
it  is  the  best  book  in  the  world  ;  that  it  is  more  to  be  desired  than  gold  ;  and  that, 
if  it  were  not  for  the  discoveries,  instructions,  and  promises  contained  in  it,  they 
and  you,  and  all  mankind,  would  be  ignorant  and  wretched  beyond  imagination. 
3.  Let  them  also  acquire  an  early  sense  of  a  future  state.  Most  children  are 
giddy  and  thoughtless.  The  trifling  engagements  of  the  present  hour  are  all  that 
they  regard ;  and  it  often  happens  that  the  world  with  its  baubles  strikes  so 
strongly  upon  their  imaginations,  and  fixes  such  an  early  and  rooted  prejudice  isk 


200  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  VI. 

its  faTOur  as  is  not  easily  eradicated.  You  should,  therefore,  endeavour  to 
convince  them,  as  soon  as  possible,  that  the  present  state  is  only  a  passage  to 
another.  4.  Forget  not  to  inculcate  upon  them  an  earlv  love  to  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ.  Take  the  first  opportunity  to  inform  them  of  their  obligations  to  Him ; 
and  let  them  know  that  if  they  have  any  comfort  in  this  world,  or  any  hopes  as  to 
a  future,  they  owe  it  all  to  the  kindness  of  the  blessed  Redeemer.  5.  Habituate 
your  children  to  the  early  practice  of  prayer.  II.  To  suggest  some  directions  to 
PARENTS  IN  THIS  IMPORTANT  AND  DIFFICULT  WORK.  1.  Take  care,  then,  to  be 
well  instructed  yourselves.  2.  Begin  with  them  very  early.  3.  Continue  your 
instructions  with  diligence  and  perseverance.  4.  It  is  also  of  great  importance  that 
you  maintain  a  proper  authority.  5.  I  would  further  advise  you  to  accommodate 
yourselves  to  their  tempers  and  capacities.  6.  Be  concerned  especially  to  set  them 
a  good  example  ;  walk  before  them  in  the  way  in  which  you  would  have  them  go  ; 
and  show  them,  by  your  practice,  that  you  by  no  means  require  impossibilities. 
Let  them  see  in  you  the  amiableness  and  advantages  of  self-government  and 
universal  piety.     7.  Sanctify  all  by  your  prayers.     III.  The  encottragements 

WHICH    PARENTS    HAVE    TO    TEACH    THEIR    CHILDREN    DILIGENTLY.      Nature    and 

grace,  reason  and  religion  urge  this  strongly.  1.  It  will  be  a  good  evidence  of 
your  own  sincerity.  2.  It  is  also  the  best  proof  of  love  to  your  children.  It 
should  encourage  you  in  the  discharge  of  this  duty  to  consider  that  it  is  the  best 
means  of  promoting   the  glory  of  God  and  the  revival  of   decaying    religion. 

3.  These  pious  efforts  will    also    comfort  you  on  the  death  of  your  children. 

4.  That  an  attention  to  the  spiritual  welfare  of  your  children  will  afford  you 
unspeakable  consolation  in  the  hour  of  your  death.     IV.  To  obviate  some  of 

THE   MOST    COMMON    AND    MATERIAL   OBJECTIONS    AGAINST    THIS    IMPORTANT    AND 

NECESSARY  DUTY.  Various  are  the  excuses  that  are  made  ;  but  they  are  generally 
dictated  by  indolence,  rather  than  by  real  conviction.  Some  object  their  want  of 
ability.  **  We  would  gladly  instruct  our  children,"  you  say,  "but  we  are  ignorant 
ourselves.  Ministers  are  the  fittest  persons  to  undertake  it,  for  it  is  a  part  of  their 
office."  If  your  ignorance  be  real  and  not  merely  a  pretence  to  silence  conscience, 
if  you  really  do  not  know  the  plain  principles  of  religion,  it  is  high  time  for  you 
to  learn.  Had  you  your  own  souls  only  to  attend  to,  it  were  a  shame  to  continue 
unacquainted  with  the  glad  tidings  of  salvation.  But  if  you  only  mean  that  you 
know  not  how  to  communicate  that  little  knowledge  which  you  have  to  your 
children ;  that  you  cannot  talk  to  them  so  pertinently  and  fluently  as  others ;  I 
answer  that  not  strength  of  genius,  but  a  willing  mind  is  required  ;  and  if  you  once 
undertake  it,  you  will  find  your  abilities  increase  by  exercise.  Others  object  their 
want  of  time.  But  while  you  have  sabbaths  you  surely  cannot  plead  want  of  time 
for  the  neglect  of  your  duty.  Remember  that  you  must  all  find  time  to  die. 
Iiet  me  beseech  you  to  attend  to  this  duty,  which  will  contribute  greatly  to  make 
your  death-bed  easy.  Others,  again,  object  their  want  of  success.  But  do  you 
expect  to  pass  through  the  world  without  difficulties  and  discouragements  ?  You 
have  met  with  disappointments  in  your  worldly  business,  and  yet  you  did  not 
presently  give  it  up  in  despair.  It  is  more  than  probable  that  your  want  of 
success  may  be  traced  to  some  guilty  defect  in  yourselves.  But  if  you  have  been 
never  so  diligent  and  faithful,  and  with  little  apparent  success,  persevere  notwith- 
standing. The  last  thing  you  say  to  them  may  reach  their  hearts.  The  last  effort 
which  you  make  may  be  successful.  You  will,  at  least,  "deliver  your  own  souls  "  j 
and  you  will  have  the  testimony  of  a  good  conscience.  {S.  Lavington.)  The 
importance  of  scriptural  educaJion: — The  truth  that  the  "Word  of  God  is  God's 
instrumentality  for  reforming  and  saving  man,  is'  the  foundation  of  our  present 
argument  for  the  religious  education  of  our  children.  We  would  enlarge  the  mind, 
elevate  the  character,  and  ennoble  the  nature  of  c  r  children  ;  we  would  lift  them 
up  above  the  mere  degradation  of  working  anim;  s  ;  we  would  ennoble  them  so  as 
to  give  them  a  capacity  for  intellectual  enjoyment  and  rational  happiness  ;  we  would 
wish  to  make  them  not  only  loyal  and  faithful  .subjects  of  their  earthly  sovereign, 
but  devout  servants  of  the  King  of  kings  ;  we  Avould  endeavour  to  cheer  them  amidst 
the  privations  and  agonies  of  poverty  they  are  frequently  called  to  endure,  with  a 
view  of  the  glorious  hopes  that  are  created  in  us  by  the  Christianity  of  the  Scrip- 
tures ;  and  it  is  because  we  desire  this  that  we  would  give  them  a  Christian  edu- 
cation. We  live  in  times  when  thrones  are  utterly  shaken  to  pieces,  when  sceptres 
are  shivered  to  atoms  ;  a  moral  earthquake  is  heaving  the  foundations  of  society. 
In  times  like  these  we  may  well  turn  our  thoughts  to  the  right  instruction  of  our 
children ;  in  times  like  these,  when  the  freedom  of  the  press  has  been  proclaimed, 


CHAP.  VI.]  DEUTERONOMY,  201 

when  all  men  seem  to  be  speculating  as  to  the  best  means  of  securing  national 
prosperity  and  individual  happiness  ;  in  times  like  these,  fraught  with  incalculable 
evil,  as  well  as  with  immeasurable  good  ;  in  times  like  these,  so  peculiar,  so  start- 
ling, we  may  well  apply  ourselves  to  the  imparting  of  the  sound  principles  of  true 
religion  to  our  children,  that  so  those  who  are  now  the  youth  of  our  land  may  grow 
up  to  be  a  rightly-instructed  as  well  as  holy  people.  We  have  seen  in  that  nation 
which  hath,  in  a  century  gone  by,  flung  aside  the  law  of  God  and  lightly  regarded 
the  Word  of  Jehovah,  judgment  following  judgment,  in  revolution  following  revo- 
lution. Truly  there  is  a  judgment  from  heaven  upon  that  nation  that  will  not 
acknowledge  God,  and  who  lightly  esteem  the  Word  of  God.  But  if  we  would 
express  ourselves  thus  strongly  of  the  neglect  of  the  Word  of  God  in  education,  we 
would  also  express  ourselves  strongly  in  reference  to  the  blessedness  of  the  country 
where  that  Word  is  honoured  by  being  employed  in  the  education  of  the  people. 
Education  without  religion  is  education  without  God,  and  therefore  education  M'ith- 
out  the  blessing  of  God  ;  and  if  we,  in  the  education  we  impart  to  our  children, 
naingle  the  truths  of  our  holy  religion  with  everything,  we  shall  draw  down  a  bless- 
ing upon  our  homes  and  happiness  upon  our  hearts  ;  we  shall  be  blessed  in  our 
mountains  and  in  our  valleys,  and  the  whole  land  will  be  glad  and  rejoice  in  the 
presence  of  God.     (if.  H.  Seymour,  M.A.)        Family  training :— I.  When  the 

FAMILY  HAS  BEEN  CONSTITUTED  IN  ACCORDANCE  WITH  God's  NATURAL  LAWS, 
PARENTS  MAY  HAVE  ENCOURAGEMENT  THAT  ALL  THE  LAWS  OF  NATURE  ARE  WORK- 
ING IN  THEIR  FAVOUR.  Like  produccs  like.  This  tendency  may  be  modified,  and 
in  extreme  cases  overruled,  by  antagonistic  laws  ;  nevertheless,  this  is  the  course 
that  is  provided  for.  And,  with  a  single  exception  here  and  there,  children,  com- 
prehensively regarded,  tend  to  become  what  their  parents  were,  and  their  parents. 
They  represent  their  ancestry.  And  this  is  as  true  morally  as  in  feature,  in 
intellect,  or  in  any  ordinary  disposition.  Nothing  shows  more  strikinsrly  the  power 
of  blood  and  this  great  law  than  the  recuperative  power  of  diH'erent  kinds  of  men 
when  they  have  fallen  into  evil.  Anybody  can  fall  into  evil.  The  dillerence 
between  one  man  and  another  is  not  in  their  slipping  into  the  river,  but  in  their 
extricating  themselves  when  they  have  once  slipped  in.  Everybody's  child  may 
fall  into  temptation  through  inexperience  ;  but,  after  having  fallen  into  temptation, 
it  is  not  everybody's  child  that  can  recover  himself.  The  child  of  parents  that  have 
the  resiliency  of  a  moral  constitution  will  be  apt  to  recover  himself ;  whereas,  the 
child  of  parents  that  have  no  such  resiliency  will  be  apt  to  go  from  bad  to  worse, 
clear  down  to  the  desolating  end.  II.  While  this  general  tendency  should  encourage 
us,  IT  MAY  ALSO  INSPIRE  HOPEFULNESS,  in  Special  cascs  and  diflaculties.  1.  Many 
of  the  infelicities  of  our  children  spring  more  from  our  ignorance  than  from  any  evil 
that  is  in  them.  Your  child  has  in  many  respects  just  the  same  tendencies  that 
you  have.  Yet  we  treat  our  children  almost  as  if  we  were  not  to  bear  their  burdens, 
to  be  conscious  of  their  tastes  of  mind,  and  to  administer  according  to  their  wants. 
2.  Many  dangerous  traits  in  childhood,  that  would  be  exceedingly  discouraging  if 
they  were  to  hold  on,  will  disappear  in  later  life,  and  that  too  by  the  force  of  natural 
causes.  Children,  you  know,  have  to  run  through  certain  diseases  of  the  body.  So 
they  do  of  the  mind.  There  are  times  when  children  will  lie.  There  are  periods 
when  children  will  steal.  There  seems  to  be  mumps  of  obstinacy,  and  rash  of 
irritability,  and  measles  of  lying — and  there  are  no  measles  half  so  bad  as  those. 
And  many  parents,  seeing  these  early  indications,  reason  upon  them  in  this  way  : 
"How  could  this  child  do  that  thing ?  Why,  as  far  back  as  I  can  remember,  I  did 
not  doit."  How  is  it  with  your  husband?  Suppose  he  says  :  "Though  I  never 
consciously  told  a  lie,  my  child  lies  inveterately  ;  and  what  will  become  of  it  ? "  I 
will  tell  you  what  will  become  of  it.  If  the  child  has  a  tendency  to  this  perversion, 
it  will  require  all  your  care,  both  of  personal  instruction  and  institutional  training, 
to  keep  his  childhood  from  developing  into  a  manhood  of  deceit.  But  if  you  are 
careful  to  train  the  child  aright,  just  as  quick  as  the  whole  of  its  nature  is  developed, 
one  part  will  take  care  of  other  parts,  and  help  other  parts.  3.  Many  of  the 
deficiencies  of  children,  and  of  the  difficulties  of  managing  them,  arise  from  the 
fact  that  the  stimulating  nature  of  society  and  civilisation  in  our  day  develop  the 
child  prematurely,  and  that  he  cannot  be  held  properly  until  the  forces  of  life  are 
concentrated  upon  him.  If  you  want  your  children  to  behave,  you  must  give  them 
something  to  do.  Society  is  the  training-gi'ound  of  the  human  race.  It  is  a  school 
of  practice,  where  God  means  that  men  shall  be  disciplined.  Your  child  must  go 
into  that  society  and  that  life  ;  and  if  you  have  brought  him  up  richt,  he  mnv  ])ow 
and  then  swerve  from  the  right  course,  but  the  probabilities  are  that  he  will'  come 


202  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vi. 

out  right  in  the  end.  4.  Many  of  the  faults  of  children  are  only  the  rude  forms  of 
excellences  that  are  not  yet  ripened.  I  should  be  very  sorry  to  have  a  man  judge 
of  my  Duchess  pears  by  tasting  them  now,  in  July.  I  should  hate  to  have  a  man 
judge  of  my  Delaware  grapes  by  tasting  them  now.  They  are  sour  enough.  But  a 
great  many  parents  taste  their  children's  qualities  when  they  are  children  ;  and, 
because  they  do  not  taste  good,  they  are  very  much  alarmed.  There  are  many 
things  to  be  done  before  a  man  is  ripened.  There  is  much  juice  to  be  changed  and 
elaborated  in  the  child  before  it  can  be  brought  to  its  normal  condition.  5.  Let  me 
speak  of  one  or  two  of  those  qualities  which  secure  our  children,  and  which  are 
very  few  and  very  simple.  (1)  Bring  up  your  children  in  the  habit  of  openness  of 
conduct  and  truthfulness.  (2)  The  next  element  is  self-respect,  or  the  habit  of 
acting,  not  from  what  others  may  think,  nor  from  what  may  be  the  consequences 
to  yourself  of  profit  or  loss  ;  but  from  a  sense  of  what  is  befitting  to  you — in  other 
words,  making  a  man's  own  self  more  important  to  him  than  all  external  considera- 
tions. (3)  The  other  element  is  conscience.  Truthfulness,  honour,  and  conscience 
— train  for  these  three  qualities.  Talk  with  your  children  about  them.  Interpret 
them  to  them  by  your  conduct.  Now,  if  you  bring  your  children  up  with  these 
three  traits,  you  have  the  soil,  and  you  can  raise  anything  you  please  on  that  soil. 
{H.  W.  Beecher.)  Children  taught  Christian  truths: — Children  should  be  taught 
the  principles  which  they  understand  not.  1.  That  they  might  have  occasion  much 
to  think  of  the  things  that  are  so  much  and  commonly  urged.  2.  That  if  any 
extremity  should  come,  they  might  have  certain  seeds  of  comfort  and  direction  to 
guide  and  support  them.  3.  That  their  condemnation  might  be  more  just,  if 
having  these  so  much  in  their  mouths,  they  should  not  get  something  of  them  into 
their  liearts.  (J.  Trapp. )  On  the  religious  and  moral  education  of  the  young : — • 
I.  In  what  the  young  should  be  instructed.  1.  It  is  the  duty  of  parents  to  teach 
them  to  form  just  sentiments  of  the  Deity.  Just  views  of  the  perfections  and 
character  of  God  are  necessary  to  all  acceptable  worship  ;  they  elevate  the  intellec- 
tual and  moral  faculties,  and  excite  in  the  heart  many  pleasing  emotions.  2.  The 
young  should  be  instructed  in  the  statements  of  Scripture  respecting  the  fall  and 
the  ruin  of  man.  3.  The  young  must  be  instructed  in  the  mission  and  character 
of  the  Redeemer,  and  in  the  regards  which  they  owe  to  Him.  4.  There  are  certain 
qualities  which  you  ought  to  cultivate  in  the  young,  by  setting  before  them  their 
necessity  and  their  importance.  Teach  them  reverence  for  things  sacred.  The 
name  of  God  demands  their  fear.  Teach  them  to  venerate  the  Word  of  God.  Show 
them  how  "  He  hath  magnified  it  above  all  His  name,"  by  the  bright  impressions 
of  a  Divine  origin  which  He  hath  impressed  on  it,  by  the  important  purposes  which 
He  accomplishes  by  it,  and  by  appointing  it  to  be  the  rule  of  judgment  when  the 
quick  and  the  dead  shall  be  summoned  to  meet  the  Lord  in  the  clouds.  Children 
should  be  taught  to  respect  the  worship  of  God.  Suffer  them  not  to  be  absent  from 
your  family  devotions  without  a  real  necessity  ;  and  beware  of  performing  these  in 
that  hurried,  careless,  or  languid  manner  which  will  induce  them  to  think  lightly 
of  domestic  worship.  Children  should  also  be  taught  to  venerate  the  wise  and  the 
good,  and  to  consider  the  Christian  virtues  as  constituting  the  noblest  respectability. 
The  saints  may  be  depressed  by  poverty,  and  scorned  by  those  whose  respect  is 
attracted  only  by  the  titles  and  the  wealth  of  this  world,  but  they  are  the  excellent 
of  the  earth.  Inculcate  the  reverence  which  is  due  to  the  Divine  government  of  the 
world,  and  which  will  maintain  faith  and  patience  till  calamitous  times  are  past, 
and  preserve  from  that  wantonness  and  insolence  in  prosperity  by  which  the  good- 
ness of  God  is  so  often  abused.  Mercy  is  another  quality  which  you  should  labour 
to  cultivate  in  the  hearts  of  the  young.  To  impress  the  lessons  of  mercy  on  the 
heart,  some  have  wisely  recommended  it  to  parents,  to  make  children  their  instru- 
ments in  dealing  their  alms  to  the  poor,  and  in  giving  instruction  to  the  neglected. 
The  books  which  you  put  into  the  hands  of  your  children,  should  be  such  as  are 
adapted  to  cherish  benevolence.  Sobriety  is  another  quality  which  you  ought  to 
cultivate  in  the  young.  I  mean  not  to  intimate  that  you  should  labour  to  repress 
the  sprightliness  of  childhood  and  the  vivacity  of  youth,  or  to  recommend  a  mean, 
sordid,  and  gloomy  temper.  There  are  gaieties  in  which  they  should  be  indulged, 
and  to  debar  them  from  these  is  to  make  them  detest  religion,  and  count  a  father's 
house,  where  all  is  morose  and  cheerless,  no  better  than  a  prison.  But  while  you 
allow  them  to  rejoice  in  their  youth,  check  all  merriment  that  is  unseasonable, 
unbecoming  their  characters,  or  excessive  in  degree.  They  must  be  taught  to  keep 
their  appetites  and  passions  under  the  control  of  reason,  and  to  shun  every  pleasure 
which  may  be  dangerous  to  innocence.    Justice  is  another  quality  which  must 


CHAP.  VI.]  DEUTERONOMY.  203 

be  cultivated  in  ttie  young.  Children  often  discover  an  impatient  desire  to  possess 
whatever  strikes  their  fancy  :  but  in  this  they  ought  not  to  be  gratified.  Children 
must  also  be  taught  to  maintain  a  strict  regard  for  truth.  Lying,  in  children,  often 
arises  from  vanity  and  envy,  from  a  wish  to  aggi'andise  themselves,  and  to  depreciate 
the  merits  of  others.  To  guard  them  against  this  practice  they  should  be  told  how 
disgraceful  it  is  deemed  by  men,  and  how  odious  it  is  in  the  sight  of  God ;  that 
what  is  gained  by  lying  is  but  a  poor  compensation  for  the  dread  of  detection,  and 
for  the  infamy  which  it  brings ;  that  the  liar  forfeits  all  the  confidence  of  the 
world  ;  that  this  is  the  character  of  the  devil,  that  he  is  the  father  of  lies  ;  and  that 
none  who  love  or  make  falsehoods  shall  be  permitted  to  enter  the  heavenly  city. 

5.  Children  must  be  taught  to  look  up  to  the  Holy  Spirit  for  light,  grace,  and 
comfort.  There  are  many  things  mysterious  both  in  the  nature  and  manner  of  the 
Spirit's  operations ;  but  you  can  find  statements  in  Scripture  sufficiently  plain  to 
enable  you  to  teach  them  what  they  may  derive  from  Him.  The  Holy  Ghost  is  the 
Spirit  of  wisdom  and  revelation  in  the  doctrines  of  Christ ;  and  you  must  assure 
them  that  it  is  He  alone  who  can  exhibit  Divine  truth  in  its  glory  and  power,  and 
that  without  His  illumination  no  instructions  of  yours,  or  of  the  holiest  and  wisest 
teachers,  can  impart  to  them  saving  knowledge.  He  is  also  a  Spirit  of  Holiness ; 
and  you  must  teacli  them  that  the  qualities  which  they  ought  to  cultivate  must  be 
implanted  by  Him,  and  that  whatever  semblances  of  tlie.se  may  be  exhibited  by 
unrenewed  men,  are  produced  by  no  sound  principle,  influenced  by  no  proper 
motive,  and  are  devoid  of  all  stability.  You  must  likewise  explain  to  them  that 
He  is  the  Comforter  whom  Christ  sends  to  cheer  His  disciples  amidst  all  their 
sorrows ;  and  that  by  His  influence  martyrs  have  gloried  in  tribulation,  and  the 
righteous  hope  in  their  death.  To  Him  they  must  look  for  support  in  every 
afflicting  incident ;  and  you  may  assure  them  that  the  pious  heart  shall  find  Him 
ready  to  relieve,  when  other  comforters  are  silent,  and  other  friends  are  no  more. 

6.  The  young  should  be  led  to  serious  views  of  death,  judgment,  and  eternity.  Lead 
their  views  to  the  heavenly  world,  where  the  good  are  for  ever  happy  in  their 
Father's  house,  and  in  a  land  where  sin,  and  sorroAv,  and  death  are  unknown ; 
where  they  are  employed  in  the  everlasting  celebration  of  their  Redeemer's  love  ; 
where  His  image  sheds  over  them  the  perfection  of  beauty  ;  where  there  is  social 
intercourse  without  jealousy  or  rivalship,  perpetual  worship  without  languor,  and 
pleasures  that  never  lose  theii"  relish.  IL  The  manner  in  wniCH  that  instkuction 
SHOULD  BE  COMMUNICATED  AND  ENFOECED.  1.  The  instructions  which  you  communi- 
cate must  flow  from  the  heart.  Unless  you  feel  a  love  of  the  truth,  and  a  zealous 
concern  to  impart  it,  your  lessons  will  be  delivered  in  a  manner  so  cold  that  your 
children  will  hear  them  with  no  interest.  They  easily  discern,  when  you  speak 
from  conviction  and  feeling.  Instructions  which  are  marked  by  parental  afl"ection 
and  pious  solicitude  will  awe  the  giddiest  into  attention,  and  soften  the  most 
stubborn.  2.  The  lessons  of  religion  and  morality  should  be  taught  with  diligence. 
Much  attention  will  be  requisite  to  find  out  the  evil  principles  which  are  most  likely 
to  influence  your  children,  and  the  quarter  in  which  they  are  most  vulnerable-  by 
temptation ;  and  when  you  are  aware  of  these,  you  must  labour  to  mortify  their 
corrupt  propensities,  and  to  guard  what  is  most  exposed  to  danger.  3.  The  young 
must  be  instructed  frequently.  In  walking  with  them  on  the  highway  or  through 
the  fields  there  are  many  objects  which  call  your  attention  to  these  lessons  ;  and  in 
teaching  them  to  contemplate  the  scenes  of  nature  in  the  spirit  of  devotion,  you 
will  cherish  in  them  a  relish  for  the  purest  pleasures,  and  open  to  them  a  source  of 
unfailing  entertainment  during  the  whole  of  life.  Your  duty  requires  many  of  you 
to  leave  your  dwellings  early  in  the  morning,  yet  go  not  forth  till  you  have  given,  if 
it  is  possible,  a  serious  counsel  to  the  young.  It  may  work  in  their  minds  during 
your  absence,  and  will  probably  suggest  such  a  thought  as  this,  "My  father's  heart 
must  be  strongly  set  on  my  being  wise  and  good,  since  he  can  never  leave  me  with- 
out urging  me  to  it."  In  the  evening,  ere  you  retire  to  rest,  forget  not  to  ask  how 
they  have  spent  the  day,  and  what  improvement  they  have  made  since  you  left 
them.  The  idea  of  such  an  inquiry  will  be  a  powerful  incitement  to  the  diligence 
of  your  children.  On  the  morning  of  the  Lord's  day  your  instructions  should  com- 
mence as  early  as  possible.  Improve  every  incident  that  happens  in  the  family,  or 
in  the  neighbourhood,  to  enforce  religious  instruction.  I  shall  only  state  further 
on  this  topic  this  short  maxim,  "Let  instruction  be  your  daily  task,  and  it  will  be 
your  daily  pleasure."  4.  Instruction  should  be  communicated  in  a  familiar  manner. 
Your  ideas  must  be  expressed  in  simple  language,  and  illustrated  from  objects  with 
which  they  are  acquainted.     5.  Your  instructions  must  be  enforced  by  a  suitable 


204  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  ti. 

example.  Piety  appears  most  venerable  in  a  father's  devotion,  and  love  to  Christ 
most  delightful  in  a  mother's  praise.  Nowhere  does  integrity  seem  so  noble  as  in 
a  father's  abhorrence  of  all  that  is  base  and  deceitful ;  nor  charity  so  lovely  as  in  a 
mother's  sympathy  with  the  mourner.  Nowhere  does  patience  appear  more  amiable 
than  in  their  silence  while  in  agony  ;  nor  faith  more  triumphant  than  in  the  support 
which  it  gives  them  in  their  last  struggle,  and  in  their  last  farewell.  6.  Prayer  to 
God  must  accompany  all  your  instructions.  You  must  pray  that  your  children  may 
be  enlightened  by  the  spirit  of  wisdom  ;  that  their  tempers  may  be  softened  by  the 
grace  of  meekness  ;  that  their  hearts  may  be  sanctified  by  the  washing  of  regenera- 
tion ;  that  their  education  may  be  blessed  by  the  care  of  heaven,  and  their  lives 
adorned  with  the  fruits  of  holiness.  Let  these  prayers  be  sometimes  put  up  before 
them.  In  such  a  situation  the  young  will  be  led  to  such  reflections  as  these,  "Can 
I  continue  an  enemy  to  that  God  whose  mercy  a  parent  is  now  imploring  for  me  ? 
Can  I  cherish  these  evil  propensities,  the  destruction  of  which  he  now  supplicates  ? 
Shall  I  despise  those  graces  which  he  entreats  the  Father  of  goodness  to  work  in 
me  ?  or  turn  away  my  ear  from  that  law  which  he  wishes  may  be  written  on  my 
heart  ? "  III.  Some  motives.  1.  Let  parents  consider  that  the  vows  of  God  are 
upon  them.  "When  your  children  were  baptized  you  acknowledged  that  it  was  your 
duty  to  train  them  up  in  the  nurture  and  admonition  of  the  Lord,  and  solemnly 
engaged  before  God  and  His  Church  to  perform  it.  And  can  your  conscience 
permit  you  to  be  inattentive  to  the  best  interests  of  the  children  of  your  vows  ? 
2.  Consider  the  examples  which  are  set  before  you  to  direct  and  encourage  you  in  this 
duty  (Gen.  xviii.  19 ;  Psa.  xxxiv.  11).  3.  Consider  how  much  the  success  and  the 
happiness  of  your  children  in  life  depend  on  your  early  care.  Nothing  is  so  likely 
to  secure  success  in  any  business  or  profession,  as  industry  and  sobriety,  justice  and 
truth.  And  you  know  how  much  happiness  depends  on  the  state  of  the  mind,  and 
on  the  nature  of  the  habits.  Evil  passions  will  make  the  heart  wretched  in  the 
midst  of  honours  and  abundance,  while  piety  and  contentment  will  keep  the  soul 
in  peace  in  every  affliction.  Habits  of  fickleness  and  indolence,  precipitance  and 
indecision,  will  involve  men  in  perplexities,  losses,  and  disgrace.  By  the  counsels 
of  religion,  you  secure  for  them  a  companion  and  a  monitor,  who  will  abide  with 
them  when  you  depart  to  the  Father,  and  who  will  talk  with  them  when  you 
are  silent  in  the  grave.  4.  I  appeal  to  your  regard  to  the  Church,  and  to  your 
country.  Can  you  bear  the  thought  that  the  institutions  which  you  delighted 
to  support  will  be  deserted  by  your  children  ?  5.  I  may  plead  with  you  from  the 
regard  which  you  feel  for  your  own  credit  and  happiness.  Impious,  profligate,  and 
thriftless  children  will  be  the  bitterest  of  your  sorrows.  On  the  other  hand,  virtuous 
children  are  the  honour  of  their  parents.  There  is  no  friend  on  whom  the  old  man 
can  lean  with  such  pleasure  as  on  the  son  in  whom  the  kind  affections  are 
strengthened  by  Christian  principle  ;  and  nowhere  is  the  aching  head  so  easy  as  on 
the  pillow  which  filial  piety  has  smoothed.  6.  The  common  neglect  of  this  duty 
should  excite  you  to  perform  it.  7.  Think  on  the  efforts  which  are  now  made  to 
corrupt  the  rising  generation.  If  the  lessons  of  religion  are  not  taught,  vice  and 
folly  will  seize  on  the  unoccupied  mind,  and  acquire  an  influence  there  which  no 
future  exertions  may  be  able  to  subdue.  8.  Consider  what  comfort  the  discharge 
of  your  duty  will  yield  you  in  the  death  of  children.  IV.  Reflections  and  exhor- 
tations. 1.  What  a  blessing  to  the  young  has  the  Bible  been !  Happy  are  the 
families  which  dwell  under  its  shadow.  2.  Let  parents  lay  up  in  their  memories 
the  counsels  and  motives  which  they  have  heard.  Listen  to  no  suggestions  that 
would  detach  you  from  your  duty.  3.  Let  little  children  be  thankful  to  God  if  they 
have  parents  who  teach  them  the  good  ways  of  the  Lord.  Endeavour,  by  your 
meekness  and  docility,  to  render  their  duty  more  and  more  pleasing.  4.  Let  the 
young,  whose  parents  are  still  continued  with  them,  beware  of  imagining,  that 
because  they  are  now  near  to  manhood  they  are  above  their  counsels.  Solicit  their 
advice  in  your  perplexities,  and  open  your  hearts  to  them  in  your  sorrows.  Give 
them  the  satisfaction  of  seeing  in  your  temper  and  conduct  the  fruit  of  their  early 
toils;  and  let  them  have  reason  to  say  that,  so  far  from  disappointing  them,  you 
are  wiser  and  better  than  they  hoped.  {H.  Belfrage.)  Religious  education: — 
What_  is  the  true  idea  in  the  religious  instruction  of  the  young !  It  is  that  they 
have  in  them  a  moral  and  spiritual  nature  to  be  unfolded,  or,  in  other  words,  an 
original  capacity  for  religious  thought,  feeling,  faith,  and  affection.  It  is  indeed  a 
great  idea,  to  be  realised  only  by  a  long  and  arduous  process,  carrying  the  soul  not 
only  far  away  from,  but  infinitely  above,  its  original  rudimental  state,  where  the 
powers  of  good  and  evil,  as  yet  unstirred,  slumber  together.     To  the  negative  care 


CHAP.  VI,]  DEUTERONOMY. 


205 


of  not  hurting  the  child  must  be  added  the  positive,  of  helping  him  according  to 
his  great,  pressing  want.     We  need  not  fear  to  lay  a  vigorous  hand  upon  his  spirit 
m  prosecuting  this  work.     For  that  spirit  is  not  the  already  delicately  shaped,  per- 
fect excellence  some  suppose,  like  beautiful  frostwork,  which  a  breath  may  mar ; 
or  frail  porcelain,   exquisitely  fashioned,   which  is  easily  shattered;  but  an  unde' 
veloped  ability  to  fear  and  love  and  serve  God,  which  we  are  by  all  means,  and 
with  all  our  might,  to  stimulate  and  bring  forth.     It  is  a  work  of  difficulty.     As  the 
apostle    says,    "First  is   that  which  is   natural,   and  afterwards  that  which  is 
spiritual."    Leaving  out  extraordinary  cases  of  those,  on  the  one  hand,  apparently 
sanctified  from  birth  with  singular  tenderness  of  conscience  and  nobleness  of  feel- 
ing,  or,  on  the  other  hand,  of  a  strangely  stubborn  and  incorrigible  temper— the 
being  we  have  to  deal  with,  beheld  not  as  transfigured  by  our  imagination,  but  in 
his  real  condition,  is  a  being  of  undeveloped  spiritual  nature.     Nor  is  this  all. 
While  the  germ  of  the  spirit  is  in  him,  the  germ  of  what  in  Scripture  is  called  the 
fiesh  IS  in  him  too.     He  is  capable,  not  only  of  religion,  but  of  selfishness,  irrever- 
ence,  falsehood,  unkindness,  impurity.     You  may  have  seen  the  German  drawing 
of  "the  game  of  chess,"  in  which  a  youth  plays  with  the  devil,  the  stake  being  his 
soul ;  while  the  guardian  angel  bends  as  a  good  genius  over  the  contest.    That  game 
IS  in  the  heart :  our  task  is  to  encourage  and  assist  the  good  principle  against  the 
bad.     But  the  difficulty  is  not  only  within.     From  the  evil  that  is  in  the  world  too, 
from  the  general    level  of  human  conduct,  flows  a   mighty  stream  of  influence, 
tending  to  carry  the  child  either  into  sin  or  a  mean  mediocrity  of  character.     How 
lift  him  out  of  that  stream  ?    How  get  him  above  the  unworthy  temper  that  not 
only  arises  within,  but  predominates  around  and  insinuates  itself  into  him,  like  an 
unwholesome  atmosphere,  at  every  pore  ?     I  have  but  one  comprehensive  means  or 
instrument  to  propose,  and  that  is  Christian  truth— which  Christ  in  His  own  prayer 
relies  upon  to  sanctify  His  disciples.     Truth  is  the  magazine  and  armoury,  by  win- 
ning  which  into  our  possession  and  vigorously  bringing  to  bear  upon  our  object,  we 
can  effect  our  threefold  object  of  developing  the  spiritual  nature,  subordinating  the 
animal  nature  to  its  right  place  and  proportions,  and  giving  a  check  or  antidote  to 
the  corruptions  of  the  world.     But  it  must  be  truth  taught  and  exemplified ;  for 
otherwise  it  is  hardly  the  truth,  but  only  its  body  without  the  soul— truth  flowing 
audibly  from  the  lips  and  silently  from  the  character— truth  in  our  conduct,  feel- 
ings,  affections,  and  principles,  as  well  as  in  our  patient  speech  and  persuasion. 
In  the  religious  education  of  a  child,  you  aim  at  a  great  eff'ect.     Do  you  complain 
that  you  see  little  fruit  from  your  exertions  ?    But  have  you  put  in  motion  a  power 
or  cause,  great  in  correspondence  to  the  effect  you  would  produce  ?    If  not,  you  are 
as  unreasonable  as  the  man  spoken  of  in  Scripture  who  would  build  a  tower  without 
counting  the  cost,  or  as  it  would  have  been  to  expect  the  fountain  of  refreshing 
waters  to  gush  up  in  our  sight,  before  the  rock  had  been  bored  and  the  quicksand 
bridged  to  conduct  the  stream.     The  moral  faculty,  in  an  immortal  soul,  is  not  a 
flower  like  that  which  opens  in  the  morning  to  shut  at  night,  but  nearer  resembling 
the  century-plant ;  and  we  must  be  content  to  nurse  it  through  grade  after  grade  of 
growth,  slowly  approximating  the  bright  consummation,  which,  even  in  the  saint, 
IS  but  partially  revealed  in  this  earthly   life.     Only  for  our  good  cheer,    in  this 
gradual  and  perhaps  tardy  process,  let  us  have  faith  in  the  law  of  cause  and  effect, 
as_ operating  no  less  surely  in  the  moral  than  in  the  material  world.     No  more  cer- 
tainly will  the  sonorous  church-bell   answer  to  its  clanging  tongue,  calling  us  to 
worship,  or  the  liquid  water  spread  its  successive  circles  from  the  falling  stone,  or 
our  own  voice  penetrate  the  listening  ear,  than,  sooner  or  later,  will  the  sincere  and 
vital  truth  we  utter  or  practically  manifest  produce  an  influence  upon  all  within  our 
sphere,  especially  upon  the  susceptible  young.     As  the  engineer  in  the  steamship 
or  at  the  locomotive,  if  he  observe  the  wheels  slacken,  increases  the  speed  by 
mcreasmg  the  power,  acts  on  the  circumference  by  first  acting  on  the  centre,  and 
quickens  the  pulsations  of  that  great  heart  of  brass  and  iron  which  he  wields,  that 
he  may  hasten  the  motions  of  his  car  or  vessel ;  or  as  the  aeronaut,  if  his  balloon 
will  not  carry  the  given  weight  into  the  atmosphere,  does  not  sceptically  sit  down 
to  repine,  but  only  sets  to  work  to  generate  more  of  the  buoyant  force  ;  so  are  we 
not  to  be  dispirited  and  unbelieving,  when  our  moral  ends  in  the  minds  and  lives  of 
the  young  are  not  accomplished  as  rapidly  as  we  desire,  and  they  do  not  rise  to  the 
height  of  purity  above  the  world  we  would  fain  see  them  maintain :  but  we  are  to 
replenish  our  own  spiritual  stores,  and  clear  a  new  passage  for  the  perhaps  obstructed 
waters  of  that  well  Avithin,  which  springeth  up  into  everlasting  life.    If  the  explosion, 
the  precipitate,  or  the  transparency  does  not  foUow  upon  the  mingling  of  the  chemist's 


20«  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vr. 

ingredients,  as  lie  expects,  he  attributes  tlie  failure  of  his  experiment,  not  to  any 
mysterious  fatality  or  insuperable  hindrance,  but  at  once  to  his  neglect  of  some  of  the 
requisite  conditions  ;  for  nature  does  not  lie,  or  ever  prove  treacherous.  If  the  archi- 
tect's roof  settles  or  his  tower  leans,  he  judges  he  has  made  some  mistake  in  his 
foundation,  his  materials,  or  construction.  If  the  artist's  canvas  presents  an  untrue 
portraiture,  his  eye  has  been  at  fault  as  to  the  colouring,  or  his  hand  in  the  pro- 
portions. If  a  political  movement,  business-plan,  worldly  speculation,  or  trial  in 
husbandry,  turns  out  badly,  there  has  been  some  want  of  discernment,  contrivance, 
or  forecast.  So  the  failure  of  our  moral  experiment  upon  the  hearts  of  the  young 
indicates  the  absence  of  some  necessary  ingredient.  The  weakness  of  our  spiritual 
building  proves  that  we  have  taken  the  sand  for  our  basis,  instead  of  having  been 
at  the  pains  to  penetrate  to  the  rock.  And  if  there  be  no  success,  no  return,  no 
fruit,  from  our  religious  calculation  and  culture,  the  first  and  most  likely  inference 
is,  that  we  have  not  endeavoured  wisely,  anticipated  prudently,  grappled  vatla.  the 
real  difiiculties,  taken  advantage  of  favouring  circumstances,  or  well  prepared  this 
living  soil  for  the  seed  of  God's  Word.  I  know,  and  do  not  forget  the  peculiarity 
involved  in  the  fact,  that  we  are  not  working  in  gross  matter,  as  wood  or  stone,  or 
dealing  with  such  things  as  the  wind  and  the  rain  in  our  planting,  or  wielding  the 
mechanical  elements  of  any  earthly  economy ;  but  trying  to  impress  a  spiritual 
substance,  essaying  to  guide  a  self-moving  and  free  being,  whose  liberty  and  inclina- 
tion and  individuality  of  nature,  whose  situation  and  exposure  to  change  and 
temptation  beyond  our  reach,  give  a  singular  character  to  the  terms  upon  which 
we  can  stand  with  or  approach  him.  But  all  this  does  not  make  void,  or  even  for 
a  moment  bring  into  the  slightest  question,  the  principle  that  has  been  laid  down. 
Whatever  may  be  done  to  the  child  by  others,  or  whatever  he  may  do  to  himself, 
our  action  upon  him  will  nevertheless  tell  the  full  tale  of  its  own  quality  and 
amount.  The  ship  sailing  across  Atlantic  seas  may  be  retarded  by  the  shell-fish 
that  fastens  on  her  smooth  sides,  or  be  swept  out  of  her  course  by  the  Gulf-stream  ; 
nevertheless,  the  breezes  of  heaven,  that  have  blown  upon  her,  have  produced  their 
entire  effect ;  and  she  would  have  been  more  retarded  or  further  diverted,  had  those 
breezes  intermitted  their  constancy,  or  abated  their  stress.  Much  of  the  force  in 
all  machinery  is  lost  in  friction  ;  but  the  artisan  does  not  therefore  doubt  the  virtue 
of  the  central  motive-power,  however  much  of  it  may  be  neutralised  on  the  way. 
So  our  exertions,  whether  cancelled  by  hindrances  or  producing  their  free  results, 
are  fnlly  reckoned  in  a  positive  or  negative  way.  And  we  know  that  God  Himself 
conspires  with  our  enterprise  ;  that  we  are  humble,  privileged  co-workers  with  Him  ; 
setting  our  action  in  the  line  with  His  friendly  providence  ;  fulfilling  what  will  ever 
more  reveal  itself,  as  dearer  to  Him  than  the  making  of  worlds,  kindling  of  suns, 
and  balancing  of  constellations  ;  sowing  our  seed,  and  preparing  its  tender  sprout 
and  blade  for  the  dew  He  promises  of  His  Spirit,  and  the  rain  that  will  descend 
of  His  grace.  Said  a  wise  elder  in  the  ministry  of  the  Gospel  to  a  younger 
labourer  in  the  vineyard,  "If  you  want  to  save  the  souls  of  your  people, 
you  will,"  So,  if  it  be  the  real  absorbing  object  of  your  desire  and 
devotion  to  lead  your  little  flocks  into  the  ways  of  pleasantness  and  peace, 
you  will  at  least  set  them  in  that  blessed  direction.  And  what  reward  of  your 
labours  greater  than  even  their  partial  and  commencing  success  ?  What  should 
one  so  desire  to  do  in  the  life  he  lives  in  this  world,  as  to  give  to  a  soul  the 
tendency  of  virtue,  and  inflame  it  with  the  love  of  God  ?  {C.  A.  Bartol.)  (ht 
the    religimts  instruction   of   the   young: — I.  To    discoui-se    of   the   cluster    of 

ADMONITIONS    CONTAINED    IN    THE    WORDS    OF    MY    TEXT.       1.    TheSC    admouitionS 

are  addressed  to  the  children  of  Israel  and  to  every  one  who  professes  to  be  an 
Israelite  indeed.  2.  That  little  children  must  be  instructed  with  patience  and 
perseverance.  3.  That  the  statutes  and  judgments  of  the  Lord  should  habitually 
be  the  conversation  of  His  people,  in  the  presence  of  their  children  and  domestics. 
3.  That  the  statutes  and  commandments  of  the  Lord  should  be  constantly  kept  in 
view,  habitually  read  and  remembered.  5.  That  the  doctrines  of  Divine  revelation 
and  the  laws  of  heaven  are  to  be  perpetually  practised.     II.  To  specify  some  of 

THE  REASONS  WHY  GREAT  ATTENTION  IS  TO  BE  PAID  TO  THE  DUTY  RECOMMENDED  IN 

MY  TEXT.  1.  The  authority  of  heaven  binds  you  to  this  duty.  2.  The  love  of  God 
and  of  Christ  should  constrain  you  to  the  discharge  of  these  duties.  3.  The  near 
relation  in  which  you  stand  to  them,  and  the  engagements  under  which  you  have 
come  for  them,  should  excite  you  to  the  discharge  of  this  duty.  4.  You  are  obliged 
to  discharge  this  duty,  that  the  entail  of  religion  may  not  be  cut  off  from  your 
family.     5.  The  consideration  that  this  is  the  way  to  be  a  blessing  both  on  the 


CHIP.  VI.]  DEUTERONOMY.  207 

rising  Church  and  the  rising  State,  should  excite  you  to  the  discharge  of  this  duty. 
Lessons :  1.  From  what  has  been  said,  let  .such  as  have  been  negligent  in  teaching 
their  children  and  the  rising  generation  in  the  knowledge  of  the  statutes  of  the  Lord, 
he  convicted  and  reclaimed.  2.  Learn  to  begin  this  pleasant  and  important  task 
as  soon  as  you  possibly  can.  3.  Consider  that  this  is  the  leading  duty  which 
you  ought  to  discharge  towards  your  children  and  the  rising  generation.  4.  Learn 
from  this  subject  to  expect  difficulties  and  discouragements  when  instructing  your 
children  in  the  ways  of  the  Lord.  5.  That  you  must  not  think  of  rolling  the 
burden  of  the  Religious  instruction  of  your  children  from  ofiF  your  own  shoulders. 
{John  Jar  dine.)  Parental  obligations : — L  The  command.  1.  It  emanated  from 
the  highest  authority,  the  Lord  Jehovah.  2.  Fraught  with  the  utmost  importance  ; 
extending  both  to  the  cultivation  of  personal  religion  and  to  the  furtherance  of 
youthful  piety  by  the  special  inculcation  of  Scripture  truth.  3.  Demands  implicit 
obedience.  IL  To  whom  giten.  To  iloses,  as  the  temporal  head,  legislator,  and 
judge  of  Israel,  was  confided  the  solemn  and  important  charge  of  carrying  into 
execution  the  commands  of  Jehovah.  Thus,  as  a  wise  and  faithful  legislator,  he 
"spake  unto  the  people  all  that  the  Lord  God  had  spoken  unto  him"  (ver.  27, 
&c.) ;  to  the  intent  "that  they  should  make  them  known  to  their  children,  that 
they  might  set  their  hopes  in  God,  and  not  forget  the  works  of  God,  but  keep 
His  commandments  "  (Psa.  Ixxviii.  5-7).  III.  How  far  the  conduct  of  Moses 
IS  WORTHY  OF  OUR  IMITATION.  Although  the  Divine  command  delivered  to  Moses 
was  intended  for  the  Israel  of  God  collectively,  he  regarded  it  as  having  reference 
to  them  also  individually  ;  and  consequently,  as  obligatory  upon  himself,  and 
intended,  like  every  other  Divine  command,  for  the  real  happiness  of  man.  Oh, 
ever  let  us  receive  the  Word  and  command  of  God  first  for  our  own  individual 
instruction ;  for  it  behoveth  us,  amid  all  our  anxiety  to  impart,  by  personal 
exertions  or  by  pecuniary  supplies,  the  Word  of  God  to  others,  to  take  good  heed 
that  we  ourselves  have  "  received  that  Word  with  pure  affection  "  into  our  own 
hearts.  Thus  received,  it  will  be  the  grand  stimulus  to  personal  holiness  and  to 
individual  activity  in  the  service  of  God.  And  besides,  being  brought  through 
grace  to  "hope  in  God's  Word,"  it  is  also  a  source  of  unspeakable  comfort ;  and  it 
furnishes  the  believer's  plea  with  God — "Remember  the  Word  unto  Thy  servant, 
upon  which  Thou  hast  caused  me  to  hope."  And  when  his  hope  is  beclouded,  or 
his  faith  is  "faint  and  sickly"  in  the  hour  of  languishing  and  depression,  the 
believer  can  say,  "This  is  my  comfort  in  my  affliction  :  Thy  Word  hath  quickened 
me  ;  Thy  statutes  have  been  my  song  in  the  house  of  my  pilgi-image. "  Nay,  more, 
he  can  say,  with  the  written  Word  of  God  in  his  heart — with  Christ,  the  Eternal 
Word,  formed  therein  "the  hope  of  glory,"  "Whom  have  I  in  heaven  but  Thee? 
And  there  is  none  upon  earth  that  I  desire  beside  Thee"  (Psa.  Ixxiii.  25).  This 
gracious  and  happy  state  of  mind,  we  shall  do  well  to  imitate  the  conduct  of 
Moses,  in  regarding  the  command  as  specially  obligatory  upon  ourselves.  But  is 
not  the  conduct  of  Moses  in  his  social  or  domestic  character  also  highly  worthy 
of  our  imitation?  Parents,  do  you  love  your  children?  I  know  that  you  do. 
Availing  himself,  therefore,  of  the  period  of  childhood  and  youth  (when  the 
mind  is  most  impressible,  and  impressions,  good  or  bad,  most  permanent),  the 
Christian  parent  seizes  upon  every  opportunity  for  the  inculcation  of  those 
principles  which  will  best  regulate  the  afl'ections  of  the  lieart  and  guard  against 
temptations  to  outward  sin;  nay,  more — "which  are  able  to  make  wise  unto 
salvation  through  faith  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus."  But  what  was  worthy  of 
imitation  in  the  judicial  and  legislative  conduct  of  Moses  ?  All  should  respect  the 
authority  of  God  as  revealed  in  His  Word— the  one  grand  standing  statute-book  of 
the  King  of  heaven,  which  ought  to  be  the  basis  of  every  law  enacted  by  the  kings 
of  the  earth.  The  perfection  of  human  law  is  the  measure  of  the  approximation 
of  its  principle  to  the  Divine.  The  real  prosperity  and  happiness  of  a  nation  will, 
therefore,  always  be  in  exact  ratio  with  its  practical  knowledge  of  the  Word  of  God. 
Lawgivers,  and  all  who  are  entrusted  with  the  administration  of  the  law — magis- 
trates, and  all  who  bear  office  under  them — would  do  well  to  imitate  the  zeal  and 
fidelity  of  Moses,  in  enforcing  by  precept  and  example  the  inculcation  of  the  Word 
of  God  as  a  national  concern.  {M.  Seaman,  D.D.)  The  necessity  amd  advan* 
tages  of  early  religious  education: — I.  What  need  there  is  of  the  earliest 

INSTRUCTIONS,  WITH  THE  MOST  CONSTANT  CARE  AFTERWARDS  TO  REINFORCE  THEM, 
IN  ORDER  TO  MAKE  AND  KEEP  MEN  WISE,  VIRTUOUS,  AND  RELIGIOUS.      To  expreSS  thij 

to  US  by  similitudes  both  just  and  beautiful,  some  philosophers  compare  a  human 
fioul  to  an  empty  cabinet  of  inexpressible  value  for  the  matter  and  workmanship, 


208  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap,  tj, 

and  particularly  for  the  wonderful  contrivance  of  it,  as  having  all  imaginable  con- 
veniences within  for  treasuring  up  jewels  and  curiosities  of  every  kind.  But,  then, 
we  ourselves  must  collect  and  sort  them,  and  we  shall  ill  deserve  such  a  present 
from  the  Maker  if  we  keep  it  empty  or  fill  it  with  trifles  ;  nay,  if  we  do  not,  as  we 
have  opportunity,  furnish  and  enrich  it  with  whatsoever  is  of  use  or  worth  in 
art  or  nature.  This  ought  indeed  to  be  the  main  business  of  our  lives.  Others, 
with  equal  truth  and  justice,  have  likened  the  minds  of  children  to  a  rasa  tabula, 
or  white  paper,  whereon  we  may  imprint  or  write  what  characters  we  please,  which 
will  prove  so  lasting  as  not  to  be  effaced  without  injuring  or  destroying  the  beauty 
of  the  whole ;  even  as  experience  shows,  and  the  son  of  Sirach  advises,  "  My  son, 
gather  instruction  from  thy  youth  up  :  so  shalt  thou  find  wisdom  till  thine  old 
age"  (Ecclus.  vi.  18).  These  first  characters  therefore  ought  to  be  deeply  and 
beautifully  struck,  and  the  learning  they  express  should  be  of  great  price.  And 
this,  if  timely  care  be  taken,  may  be  done  with  ease,  because  the  mind  is  then  soft 
and  tender,  and  because  truth  and  right  are  by  the  nature  of  things  as  pleasant  to 
the  soul  as  light  and  proportion  to  the  eye  or  as  sweet  as  honey  to  the  taste  (Pro v. 
xi.  10  ;  xxiv.  13,  14).     II.  What  advantages  ake  likely  to  follow  from  such 

INSTRUCTIONS  AND  SUCH  CARE,  AS  WELL  TO  THE  PERSONS  WHO  ARE  OBJECTS  OF 
THEM   AS   TO   THE    COMMUNITIES    WHEREIN    THEY    LIVE.       1.    As    to   pcrSOUS  them- 

selves.  Without  a  good  education  the  best  natural  parts  would  profit  little,  and  could 
never  exert  and  show  themselves  to  advantage.  Men  would  be  raised  thereby  no 
higher  than  savages  in  knowledge  or  virtue,  and  might  degenerate  into  that  ignor- 
ance and  brutality  which  travellers  relate  of  Hottentots.  Good  natural  parts  are 
indeed  like  jewels,  which  in  their  natural  state  show  little  of  their  worth  and  few 
of  their  inherent  beauties,  till  the  skill  and  labour  of  the  artist  have  taken  off 
their  roughness,  decked  them  with  light,  discovered  their  different  waters  and 
colours,  and  spread  through  every  part  an  amazing  brightness  and  glory.  Edu- 
cation, after  like  manner,  if  it  have  its  perfect  work  upon  a  human  soul,  will 
throw  out  to  view  and  give  a  lustre  to  every  latent  virtue  and  perfection  which 
otherwise  might  never  have  made  an  appearance,  much  less  a  figure,  in  the 
world.  Thus,  likewise,  to  speak  in  vegetable  metaphors,  the  choicest  seeds  will 
prove  of  no  value  if  we  sow  or  plant  them  in  bad  ground  where  they  will  decay 
or  die  ;  and  if  they  fall  into  good,  they  will  be  overrun  and  choked  with  weeds, 
which  are  ever  most  rank  in  the  richest  soils,  unless  constant  care  be  taken  to 
root  them  out.  They  certainly  can  never  grow  and  flourish  in  any  soil  so  as  to 
bring  their  natural  fruit  to  perfection,  without  cultivating,  manuring,  watering, 
pruning,  and  all  the  other  arts  of  skilful  management  that  the  best  of  gardeners 
or  husbandmen  can  exercise.  2.  Without  having  any  view  to  the  good  and 
happiness  of  private  persons,  a  religious  and  wise  education  of  children  is  of  so 
great  concern  to  the  communities  wherein  they  live,  that  in  all  the  best  ordered 
governments  of  old  time,  public  care  was  taken  of  it ;  and  in  some  of  them  it  was 
thought  right  and  necessary  to  take  them  wholly  out  of  the  hands  of  bad,  ill- 
judging,  or  over- fond  parents,  and  to  place  them  in  public  schools  and  seminaries. 
And  though  the  natural  claim  of  parents  may,  all  things  considered,  be  the  best, 
yet  we  shall  see  great  reason  for  the  other  practice  if  we  consider  too  that  religion 
and  virtue  is  the  only  true  cement  of  all  society ;  that  the  principles  of  both 
must  be  conveyed  by  education  ;  and  that  (as  private  vices  spread  their  poison 
through  the  whole  community)  most  of  the  disorders,  mischiefs,  and  confusions 
which  disturb  and  harass  any  state,  or  the  members  of  it,  may  be  justly  charged 
upon  the  want  of  it.  {John  Donne,  D.  D. )  Child  trained  for  Christ : — A  father 
whom  I  knew  had  a  son  who  had  long  been  ill  and  whose  end  was  approaching. 
One  day  when  he  came  home  the  mother  told  him  that  their  child  was  like  to  die, 
and  the  father  went  at  once  to  his  bedside.  ' '  My  son,  do  you  know  that  you  are 
dying  ? "  said  he.  "  Then  I  will  be  with  Jesus  to-night,"  was  the  answer.  "  Yet, 
father,"  he  added,  "don't  you  grieve  for  me,  for  when  I  get  to  heaven  I  will  go 
straight  to  Jesus  and  tell  Him  that  you  brought  me  to  Him  when  I  was  a  child." 
(Z>.  L.  Moody, )  The  Bible  the  standard  of  education : — If  we  do  not  adopt  the 
Bible  as  our  standard  in  training  the  young,  combined  training  is  impossible.  If 
in  moral  principles  every  man  is  his  own  lawgiver,  there  is  no  law  at  all,  and  no 
authority.  You  may  train  a  fruit  tree  by  nailing  its  branches  to  a  wall,  or  tying 
them  to  an  espalier  railing ;  but  the  tree  whose  branches  have  nothing  to  lean  upon  but 
air  is  not  trained  at  all.  It  is  not  a  dispute  between  the  Scriptures  and  some  other 
rival  standard,  for  no  such  standard  exists  or  is  proposed.  It  is  a  question  between 
the  Bible  as  a  standard  and  no  standard  at  all.     But  training  without  an  acknow- 


CHAP.  VI.]  DEUTERONOMY,  209 


ledged  standard  is  nothing— is  an  empty  form  of  words,  by  which  ingenious  men  amuse 
themselves.     There  are  some  who  would  borrow  from  the  Bible  whatever  moral  prin- 
ciples they  have,  and  yet  are  unwilling  to  own  the  Scriptures,  in  their  integrity,  as  an 
authority  binding  the  conscience  ;  because,  if  it  is  binding  in  one  thing,  it  is  binding 
in  all.     {W.  Amot.)        A  whole  family  trained  for  God : — I  happened  to  know  two 
aged  ministers  of  the  Gospel.     One  of  them  told  me  that  he  prayed  that  he  might 
never  have  a  child  who  was  not  a  child  of  God  by  faith  in  Jesus  Christ.     God  gave 
him  ten  children,  and  he  said  to  me,  on  his  dying  bed,  "Nine  of  my  children  are 
God's  children,  and  I  am  dying  full  of  faith  that  the  tenth  will  be  also  His."     It 
was  my  privilege  to  be  the  instrument  in  God's  hands  of  leading  the  tenth  to  the 
Saviour.     ( W.  Grant. )        Training  of  children  .-—The  first  thing  to  be  instOled 
into  the  minds  of  children  is  to  fear  God.     This  is  the  beginning,  the  middle,  and 
the  end  of  wisdom.     Next,  they  ought  to  be  induced  to  be  kind  to  one  another. 
Great  care  ought  to  be  taken  to  guard  against  speaking  on  improper  subjects  in 
their  presence,  since  lasting  impressions  are  made  at  a  very  early  age  ;  on  the  con- 
trary, our  conversation  ought  to  be  on  good  and  instructive  topics.     Imperceptibly 
to  themselves  or  others,  they  derive  great  benefit  from  such  discourse,  for  it  is  quite 
certain  that  children  take  the  tinge  either  of  good  or  evil,  without  the  process  being 
discovered.     {Philip  de  Momay.)        Eeligious  training: — "It  is  already  a  hard 
case  with  me,"  the  Queen  says,  when  she  speaks  of  the  pressure  of  public  business 
which  prevented  her  from  giving  to  the  little  Princess-Royal  all  the  attention  she 
wished, ''that  my  occupations  prevent  me  from  being  with  her  when  she  says  her 
prayers."    And  we  may  quote  entire  the  note  of  instructions  in  respect  to  religious 
training  which  the  young  mother  of  twenty -five  put  down  for  the  guidance  of  her 
deputies  in  this  important  work  :  "  I  am  quite  clear  that  she  should  be  taught  to 
have  great  reverence  for  God  and  for  religion,  but  that  she  should  have  the  feeling  of 
devotion  and  love  which  our  Heavenly  Father  encourages  His  earthly  children  to 
have  for  Him,  and  not  one  of  fear  and  trembling  ;  and  that  the  thoughts  of  death 
and  an  after  life  should  not  be  presented  in  an  alarming  and  forbidding  view,  and 
that  she  should  be  made  to  know  as  yet  no  diflFerence  of  creeds."      Training 
of   children:— B&    very    vigilant    over    thy  child    in  the    April   of  his  under- 
standing, lest  the  frost  of  May  nip  his  blossoms.     While  he  is  a  tender  twig, 
straighten  him  ;  whilst  he  is  a  new  vessel,  season  him  ;  such  as  thou  makest  him| 
such  commonly  shalt  thou  find  him.     Let  his  first  lesson  be  obedience,  and  his 
second  shall  be  what  thou  wilt.     Give  him  education  in  good  letters,  to  the  utmost 
of  thy  ability  and  his  capacity.     Season  his  youth  with  the  love  of  his  Creator,  and 
make  the  fear  of  his  God  the  beginning  of  his  knowledge.     {F.  Quarles. )        Training 
children  for  God  at  the  start  of  life  .—I  do  not  think  I  was  ever  so  much  impressed 
by  a  picture  as  I  was  by  one,  although  it  was  only  a  rough  woodcut,  that  I  saw  in 
Chamouni,  Switzerland.     It  was  a  representation  of  a  group  of  people  that  had  been 
trying  a  few  months  before  to  climb  the  Alps.     You  know  that  people  who  climb 
the  Alps  have  a  rope  put  around  the  waist,  and  guides  go  first  and  guides  come  after. 
The  rope  connects  them  all  together,  so  that  if  one  slips  the  others  may  save  him 
from  fatality.     Well,  this  group  of  eight  or  ten  people  were  on  the  side  of  the 
mountain,   all  tied  together,  passing  along  on  a  very  slippery  place,   and  one 
slipped  and  dropped,  and  the  others  slipped  and  were  going  down  this  precipice, 
when  one  man  with  more  muscular  power  than  the  others,  halted  on  the  ice— stuck 
his  feet  into  the  iceberg  and  halted  ;  but  the  rope  broke  !     Fifty  years  from  now, 
at  the  foot  of  that  glacier,  the  rest  will  be  found.     Here  is  a  whole  family  bound 
together  by  a  cord  of  affection  wandering  on  tbe  slippery  places  of  worldliness  and 
sin.     All  given  up  to  the  world.     No  Christ  in  that  family.     All  bound  together 
and  on  the  slippery  places.     Passing  on  down,  the  father,  at  fifty  years  of  age, 
strikes  his  foot  on  the  Rock  of  Ages,  and  halts.     But  the  rope  broke  !  the  rope 
broke  !     A  ship-carpenter  in  New  York  walks  up  and  says  :  "  That  vessel  has  been 
gone  three  days  at  sea.     Why,  there  is  a  timber  in  that  vessel  that  ought  not  to 
have  been  there.     It  was  worm-eaten. "     Or,  "I  had  a  timber  put  in  that  ship  that 
was  the  wrong  kind  of  wood.     Oh  !  I  am  so  sorry  about  it,  I  am  so  very  sorry.     I 
will  correct  it.     I  have  another  piece  of  timber  to  put  in  the  place  of  it."     Correct 
it  I    That  ship  went  down  last  night  in  a  cyclone.     Oh  !  the  time  to  train  our 
children  for  God  and  for  heaven  is  at  the  start ;  it  is  at  the  start.     {T.  de  Witt 
Talmage.)        Write  them  upon  the  posts  of  thy  houBe.— God's  laws  to  be  remem- 
hered: — 1.  At  the  time  this  command  was  given  there  were  few  written  copies 
of  the  whole  law,  and  the  people  had  it  read  to  them  only  at  the  Feast  of  Taber- 
naclee.     God,  therefore,  seemed  to  have  appointed,  at  least  for  the  present,  that 
14 


210  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vr. 

some  select  sentences  of  the  law  should  literally  be  written  upon  their  gates  and 
walls,  or  on  slips  of  parchment  to  be  worn  about  their  wrists  or  bound  upon  their 
foreheads.  2.  The  spirit  of  the  command,  however,  and  the  chief  thing  intended, 
undoubtedly  was  that  they  should  give  all  diligence,  and  use  all  means  to  keep 
God's  laws  always  in  remembrance  ;  as  men  frequently  bind  something  upon  their 
hands  or  put  something  before  their  eyes  to  prevent  forgetfulness  of  a  thing  that 
they  much  desire  to  remember.  But  the  Jews,  forgetting  the  spirit  and  design  of 
this  precept,  used  these  things  as  superstitious  people  do  amulets  or  charms.  They 
used  also  to  put  these  slips  of  parchment  into  a  piece  of  cane  or  other  hollow  wood, 
and  fasten  that  to  the  door  of  their  houses,  and  of  each  particular  door  in  them,  and 
as  often  as  they  go  in  and  out  they  make  it  a  part  of  their  devotion  to  touch  the 
parchment  and  kiss  it.     {J.  Wilson. ) 

Vers.  10-12.  Cities  which  thou  buildedst  not. — The  Divine  transference  oj  man's 
property: — I.  God's  right  to  the  secular  property  of  men.  Not  merely  the 
land,  but  also  all  productions  of  labour,  belong  to  Him.  II.  The  fate  of  all 
EARTHLY  POSSESSIONS.  The  Only  property  that  we  can  retain,  that  we  can  carry 
with  us,  and  which  can  bless  us  wherever  we  go,  is  moral — the  property  of  a  holy 
character.  III.  The  principle  of  entail  in  God's  government  of  man.  One 
man  labours,  and  another  man  enters  into  his  labours.  So  it  has  ever  been,  so  it  is 
now.  1.  It  is  so  politically.  2.  Socially.  3.  Religiously.  IV.  A  type  of  a  good 
TIME  THAT  IS  COMING.  The  Church  shall  take  the  property  of  the  world.  V,  The 
primary  condition  of  man's  well-being  in  EVERY  AGE.  "  Bcwarc  lest  thou 
forget  the  Lord."  1.  That  forgetfulness  of  the  Lord  is  an  immense  evil.  2.  That 
worldly  prosperity  exposes  us  to  this  immense  evil.  {Homilist.)  Bewaxe  lest 
thou  forget  the  Lord. — Tlie  dangers  of  prosperity,  and  the  means  of  avoiding  them : — 
I.  The  DANGERS  OF  PROSPERITY.  One  danger  to  be  apprehended  from  prosperity  is, 
that  a  man  may  thereby  be  led  to  forget  God  as  the  Author  of  his  blessings,  and  the 
Sovereign  Disposer  of  those  events  which  have  issued  in  success.  Alienation  of  heart 
from  God  is  the  result  of  our  fallen  state.  Should  prosperity  come  upon  us  unex- 
pectedly, without  any  previous  effort  on  our  part,  there  is  fuel,  as  it  were,  applied 
to  the  unhallowed  fire  within,  which  causes  the  natural  carnality  of  our  hearts  to 
exhibit  itself  with  a  force  before  unknown.  Should,  however,  man's  prosperity  in 
this  world  be  the  result  of  well-directed  efforts  of  his  own,  there  is  a  temptation  lest 
we  should  forget  God  who  has  given  us  power  to  succeed  in  our  endeavours,  lest  we 
should  attribute  to  our  own  strength  or  wisdom  what  is  due  chiefly  to  Him  of  whom 
we  have  received  our  all,  and  to  whom  all  the  praise  is  due.  But  we  may  notice 
other  dangers  connected  with  worldly  prosperity.  There  is  a  security  sometimes 
issuing  out  of  it  which  is  altogether  inconsistent  with  man's  frail  and  uncertain 
tenure  (Psa.  xxx.  6,  xlix.  11  ;  Job  xxix.  18  ;  Luke  xii.  16,  19,  21).  We  should  not 
undervalue  the  blessing  of  temporal  welfare  ;  it  is  God's  gift,  and  ought  to  be 
enjoyed  with  thankfulness  in  Him.  It  is  then  sweetest  when  it  is  possessed 
as  the  fruit  of  His  goodness  towards  us,  and  when  we  consider  ourselves  as 
accountable  to  Him  for  the  use  of  it.  But  dependence  upon  our  worldly  treasures 
is  at  once  irreligion  and  folly.  To  look  for  happiness,  as  issuing  out  of  any- 
thing in  this  present  world  independent  of  God,  is  to  search  for  bright  colours  in 
the  dark — is  to  mistake  the  end  of  our  being,  and  to  occupy  ourselves  with  a  fruit- 
less toil,  II.  Methods  by  which  these  dangers  may  be  counteracted. 
1.  First  and  chiefly :  God  must  be  before  our  eye&  "We  should  enshrine  Him  in  our 
heart  and  memory,  not  only  as  our  omnipotent  Creator,  but  as  our  Protector  —as  our 
Governor — as  "the  Author  and  Giver  of  all  good  things" — as  the  Sovereign  Dis- 
poser of  all  events — by  whom  the  ravens  are  fed,  and  the  lilies  of  the  field  do  grow 
and  clothe  themselves  with  beauty.  2.  Another  means  for  avoiding  the  danger  of 
prosperity  is  this  :  meditation  upon  God.  Our  danger  arises  from  thinking  too 
much  of  ourselves.  To  overcome  this  danger  we  must  meditate  often  upon  God  ; 
upon  His  goodness,  glory,  and  majesty.  3.  But  last  of  all,  that  we  may  not  be 
overwhelmed  by  the  dangers  which  threaten  us  from  worldly  prosperity,  we  must 
meditate  much  and  deeply  upon  the  superior  glory  of  eternal  realities.  Our  hearts 
must  be  imbued  with  the  love  of  Christ.  Our  hearts  must  dwell  on  His  matchless 
grace  in  dying  for  us.  In  this  way  we  must  endeavour  to  form  some  estimate  of 
the  glorious  salvation  which  is  in  store  for  us  hereafter.  Against  the  riches,  honours, 
and  comforts  of  this  present  world  we  must  set  the  riches  which  no  moth  corrupteth, 
the  honour  which  cometh  only  from  God  ;  the  consolations  of  His  Spirit,  and  the 
happiness  of  the  redeemed.     {H.  J.  Hastings,  M.A.)        Sudden  prosperity  fatal  to 


<;hap.  VI.]  DEUTERONOMY.  211 

religim  .—I.  That  a  just  sense  of  the  Supreme  Being  is  the  best  security 
FOR  A  man's  virtue.     I  Say  a  just  seBse,  because  wrong  apprehensions  of  the  Deity- 
have  generally  had  a  very  unhappy  intiuence   on  the  interests  of  virtue  ;  as  is 
evident  to  every  one  who  compares  the  religion  and  manners  of  the  heathen  world. 
This  was  probably  the  reason  why  Moses  was  so  solicitous  to  suppress  all  personal 
representations  of  the  Deity  through  his  whole  economy ;  he  knew  very  well  that 
the  people  would  naturally  borrow  their  idea  of  God  from  the  representations  they 
saw  of  Him,  and  that  the  idea  of  their  God  would  be  the  measure  of  their  morality. 
There  are  few  things  that  have  contributed  more  to  the  extent  of  vice  than  the 
hope  of  secrecy,  which  vanishes  at  the  very  apprehension  of  a  Being  who  seeth  m 
secret.     But  our  idea  of  the  Deity  stops  not  here  ;  we  consider  Him  not  barely  as  a 
spectator  of  our  actions,  but  as  a  judge  of  them  too  ;  and  he  must  be  an  insolent 
offender,  indeed,  who  will  dare  to  commit  a  crime  in  the  sight  of  Him  who  he  knows 
will  judge  him,  who  he  is  sure  will  condemn  him  for  it.     The  hope  of  reward  and 
fear  of  punishment  add  fresh  vigour  to  the  cause  of  virtue.     II.  This  sense  op 
God  is  often  much  effaced,  sometimes  absolutely  lost,  in  a  state  of 
ease  and  affluence.     The  observation  of  Moses  has  its  foundation  m  nature, 
is  evident  to  experience,  and  confirmed  by  a  greater  than  Moses,  who  tells  us  how 
difficult  it  is  for  those  who  trust  in  riches  to  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God  ;  and 
we  find  how  difficult  it  is  for  those  who  have  them  not  to  trust  m  them.     When 
we  are  under  any  immediate  presence  of  affliction,  when  we  are  despised  and 
deserted  by  men,  we  look  upon  God  as  a  present  help  in  trouble  ;  but  that  exigence 
is  no  sooner  over  than  we  begin  to  see  Him  at  a  great  distance.     We  no  longer  call 
to  heaven  for  that  satisfaction  which  we  can  now  find  from  earth,  but  depend  upon 
the  second  cause  for  that  support  which  can  never  be  attained  but  from  the  First. 
We  be^du  to  fancy  ourselves  established  even  beyond  the  reach  of  providence,  or 
the  possibility  of  change.     There  is  something  in  the  very  nature  of  ease  which  is 
ai.t  to  eiieryate  the  mind  and  introduce  a  languid  effeminacy  into  all  its  faculties. 
The  senses,  by  an  habitual  indulgence,  gain  ground  upon  the  understanding  and 
usurp  the  province  of  reason,  which  must  inevitably  decline  in  proportion  as  the 
sensiial  affections  prevail ;  the  spirit  becomes  less  willing  as  the  flesh  grows  more 
weak  ;  we  sink  into  an  indolent  oblivion  of  our  Maker,  and  fall  amongst  the  number 
of  those  who  are  "lovers  of  pleasures  more  than  lovers  of  God."     It  is  obvious  to 
observe  here,  that  as  every  corruption  in  our  principles  is  followed  by  proportionate 
decay  in  our  practice,  so  every  corruption  in  our  practice  is  attended  with  an  equal 
decay   in  our   principles  ;  from  whence   it   appears   that  religion  and   virtue   are 
inseparably  united,  they  must  flourish  and  fall  together  ;  they  are  lovely  m  their 
lives^  and  in  their  deaths  they  cannot  be  divided.     III.  A  state  of  ease  and 
affluence,  as  it  tempts  us  strongly  to  lose,  so  it  lays  us  under  greater 
obligations  to  retain  and  improve  that  sense  of  God  upon  our  minds.     You, 
who  inhabit  threat  and  goodly  cities  which  you  did  not  build,  who  inherit  houses 
full  of  all  good  things  which  you  did  not  fill ;  you,  whose  fortunes   seem  to  be 
showered  upon  you  directlyl  from  heaven,  while  others  are  forced  by  the  sweat  of 
their  brows  to  raise  them  from  the  earth  ;  as  you  are  blessed  with  higher  degrees 
of  the  bounties  of  God,  so  are  you  more  enunently  obliged  to  preserve  a  stronger 
sense  of  them.     Your  duty  increases  with  the  eminence  of  your  station   and  your 
oblic^ations  to  it  are  multiplied   by  the  number  of  your  advantages.     IV.  I  shall 
now  point  out  to  you,  in  the  last  place,  some  of  those  means  which  seem  most 
likely  to  preserve  and  improve  those  conceptions  upon  our  minds.     And  1 
think  there  can  be  no  better  than  those  which  Moses  recommends  to  the  Israelites 
in  vers.  6,  7.     When  you  thus  begin  and  end  your  day,  when  you  thus  open  your 
morning  and  close  your  evening,  you  cannot  absolutely  forget  the  Lord,  especially 
if  you  make  Him  the  subject  of  your  conversation  too.     The  next  direction  is,  to 
teach  the  commandments  of  God  to  your  children  ;  but  a  man  cannot  well  teach 
that  to  another  of  which  he  is  ignorant  himself.     And  every  time  you  endeavour  to 
imprint  a  sense  of  God  upon  the  minds  of  your  children,  you  must  necessarily  make 
so  strong  an  impression  of  it  upon  your  own  that  you  can  never  be  able  to  forget 
the  Lord.     (T.  Ashton,  D.D.)        Forgetfulness  of  God.— It  is  remarkable  how 
frequently  in  the  Book  of  Deuteronomy,  when  God  is  giving  His  final  summary  of 
instructions  to  the  Israelites,  the  warning  is  repeated,  that  the  Jewish  Church  forget 
not  God  and  His  dealings  with  them  in  connection  with  their  deliverance  from 
Egypt.     Such  warnings  strike  us  the  more  forcibly,  because  the  people  to  whom 
they  were  addressed  had  come  into  the  closest  contact  with  God,  and  had  been 
favoured  with  the  dearest  visible  evidences  of  His  presence.     To  have  seen  Jesus  m 


212  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vi. 

the  flesh,  to  have  witnessed  His  miracles,  these  would  have  been  privileges  the 
memory  of  which  could  have  never  passed  away.     Now,  all  such  reasonings  are  mere 
self-deception.     That  there  is  a  deep  fallacy  involved  therein  is  manifest  from  the 
fact  that  the  Jewish  Church,  which  had  the  most  abundant  ocular  demonstration 
of  God  and  of  His  power,  is  so  repeatedly  cautioned  ac^ainst  this  forgetfulness  of 
God.     "With  this  fact  impressed  upon  our  minds  it  will  be  profitable  to  consider 
the  ways  in  which  forgetfulness  of  God  displays  itself.     1.  This  tendency  will  be 
perceived  in  respect  to  God  Himself.     We  acknowledge  that  it  is  in  God  that 
we  live  and  move  and  have  our  being  ;  yet  we  rarely  find  a  sustained  recog- 
nition   of   God.     We    do     not    walk    day    by    day    as    seeing    by   the    eye    of 
faith  Him  who  is  Invisible.     What  an  importance  would  it  give  to  life  could  we 
attain  to  that  deep  sense  of  the  consciousness  of  God's  immediate  presence  and 
majesty  which  is  implied  in  the  brief  but  full  description  of  the  spiritual  life  of 
those  of  whom  it  is  recorded,  that  they  walked  with  God.     2.  But  besides  this 
forgetfulness  of  God  in  His  abstract  nature  and  perfections,  we  trace  this  evil  in  a 
similar  forgetfulness  of  Him  in  His  operations.     God  in   His  glorious  majesty 
dwelleth  in  the  highest  heavens,  but  in  His  operations  and  providential  dealings 
He  is  ever,  as  it  were,  coming  down  to  earth  and  meeting  us  closely  and  continually 
in  the  pathway  of  our  lives.     Every  comfort  is  held  out  to  our  acceptance  by  the 
hand  of  God  ;  in  every  trial  we  may  trace  the  discipline  of  God.     But  this  we  over- 
look :    human  agency,   second  causes,   personal    etfort,   self-dependence,   come  in 
between  us  and  God.     Backsliding  Israel  at  length  reached  this  point,  that  they 
knew  not  that  it  was  God  who  gave  them  their  corn  and  wine  and  oil,  and  multi- 
plied their  silver  and  gold,  which  they  prepared  for  Baal.     3.  Forgetfulness  of  God 
also  displays  itself  in  respect  to  that  covenant  which  He  has  made  with  us  in  Christ. 
The  Jewish  Church  had  a  special  warning  upon  this  head :  Take  heed  unto  your- 
selves, lest  ye  forget  the  covenant  of  the  Lord  your  God  which  He  made  with  you. 
A  covenant  with  man  is  not  disregarded  nor  trifled  with.     We  are  less  scrupiilous 
with  respect  to  God.     Our  covenant  with  God  goes  beyond  that  of  the  Jewish 
Church,  in  that  it  brings  Christ  before  us  in  His  finished  work,  and  no  longer  veiled 
in  types  and  shadows.     All  that  God  can  give  to  sinful  man  is  our  covenant  portion 
in  the  Son  of  His  love,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,     4.  Another  painful  feature  of  this 
infirmity  is  to  be  found  in  the  forgetfulness  of  the  Lord  Jesus  as  our  Saviour.     It  is 
noted  as  one  point  in  the  sinfulness  of  Israel,  that  they  forgat  God  their  Saviour, 
who  had  done  great  things  in  Egypt.     The  Passover  was  to  be  the  means  of  main- 
taining a  devout  remembrance  of  this  deliverance.     In  like  manner  the  Lord's 
Supper  was  to  be  a  commemorative  ordinance  to  keep  ever  before  the  minds  of  His 
people  a  lively  remembrance  of  their  greater  deliverance  by  the  death  and  sufferings 
of  the  Redeemer.     Do  this,  says  our  Lord,  in  remembrance  of  Me.     The  grace  and 
condescension,  the  tender  love  and  never-failing  compassion  of  the  Saviour,  His 
suff"erings,  and  agony,  and  death,  fade  from  our  recollection.     5.  We  may  notice 
one  other  form  of  this  forgetfulness  of  Divine  things.     In  addition  to  those  ordinary 
influences  of  the  means  of  grace  upon  the  soul  which  the  believer  experiences,  there 
are  some  occasions  of  special  blessing.     Some  striking  or  alarming  providence  of  God 
brings  us,  as  it  were,  into  His  immediate  presence  ;  under  the  preaching  of  the 
Word,  or  in  the  prayerful  study  of  it,  the  mysteries  of  spiritual  ti-uth  are  opened  to 
the  mind  ;  it  is  a  time  of  bright  light,  of  quickened  aff"ections,  of  holy  aspirations, 
of  heavenly  communion  with  God.     In  the  moment  of  such  ecstasy  we  feel  how 
good  it  is  to  be  here,  and  imagine  that  we  shall  go  forth  with  the  holy  influence  of 
such  a  season  abidingly  with  us.     It  is  a  new  era  in  our  spiritual  life.     We  can 
never  be  again  engrossed,  as  in  times  past,  with  the  vanities  of  time.     Yet  the 
memory  here  again  betrays  its  trust.     Forgetfulness  of  the  heights  which  we  have 
reached  lowers  the  tone  of  our  spiritual  life  ;  coldness  creeps  over  the  soul ;  and  it 
is  well  if  we  escape  the  state  of  backsliding  Israel,  when  she  "went  after  her  lovers, 
and  forgot  Me,  saith  the  Lord."    6.  This  forgetfulness  of  God  cannot  be  confined  to 
any  one  period  of  life  ;  it  meets  us  everywhere.     As  we  look  back  upon  the  sins  of 
our  youth,  this  rises  up  as  one  of  the  most  overwhelming.     Amidst  the  buoyant 
spirits  of  our  early  days,  and  the  cheerfulness  of  home,  and  the  freshness  of  our  first 
affections,  where  was  God  ?    What  place  did  He  occupy  in  our  minds  and  in  our 
hearts?     "Remember  now  thy  Creator  in  the  days  of  thy  youth."    But  as  years 
pass  on,  and  manhood  succeeds  to  youth,  other  objects  engross  the  thoughts  to  the 
exclusion  of  God.     The  cares  and  anxieties  attendant  upon  the  start  in  life,  the 
turmoil  of  business,  the  engrossing  and  ensnaring  contact  with  the  world, — these 
present  no  atmosphere  favourable  to  the  cultivation  of  habitual  converse  with  God. 


CHAP.  VI.]  DEUTERONOMY.  213 

Nor,  if  we  follow  on  our  search  into  advanced  life,  do  we  find  it  otherwise.  Grey 
hairs  and  decreasing  strength  would  seem  to  give  a  sufficiently  solemn  warning  to 
prepare  to  meet  God  ;  but  it  is  remarkable  how  entirely  indifference  and  insensibility 
to  Divine  things  mark  an  old  age  which  succeeds  a  manhood  of  worldliness  and  a 
youth  of  thoughtlessness.  Thus  does  forgetfulness  of  God  accompany  the  worldly 
man  through  eveiy  period  of  his  earthly  life  ;  and,  in  the  case  of  the  believer,  the 
danger  is  equally  present,  and  forms  a  main  element  in  the  severe  conflict  of  his 
inner  life.  But  though  sin  has  introduced  this  infirmity  into  our  fallen  nature, 
God  has  not  left  us  without  a  remedy.  The  evil  may,  through  grace,  be  counter- 
acted and  overcome ;  and  in  order  to  this,  the  following  suggestions  are  offered  to 
the  earnest  Christian.  1.  Realise  the  danger.  Understand  that  the  memory  has 
a  tendency  to  betray  its  trust,  and  neglect  its  duty  in  that  which  relates  to  God. 
There  are  many  circumstances  in  our  ordinary  life  which  never  pass  away.  Let  a 
man  be  exposed  to  shipwreck,  or  to  a  railway  accident,  the  horrors  of  the  scene 
would  be  ever  before  him.  There  are  many  scenes  of  domestic  interest  which  never 
lose  their  freshness.  But  it  is  otherwise  in  our  spiritual  life  ;  and  we  should  know 
it  and  feel  it.  Many  an  Israelite  probably  thought  that  he  never  could  forget  the 
passage  through  the  Red  Sea,  or  the  terrors  of  Mount  Sinai ;  but  they  did  forget 
them.  And  so  we  think  that  the  strong  impression  and  deep  conviction  is  to  abide 
with  us.  Or  we  think,  perhaps,  that  though  gone  for  a  while,  it  is  only  hidden  in 
some  secret  place  of  memory's  storehouse,  and  when  needed  will  be  produced  again. 
But  we  are  mistaken  ;  and  when  we  sit  down  to  recall  the  past  dealings  with  God, 
memory  retains  little  beyond  the  bare  fact ;  all  the  lesser  yet  perhaps  more  striking 
and  instructive  peculiarities  of  the  dispensation  are  lost.  2.  With  this  danger 
realised  we  next  observe  the  need  of  much  diligence  and  pains  to  counteract  it. 
The  natural  faculty  of  memory  differs  greatly  in  its  power  in  different  individuals  ; 
but  when  weak,  either  generally  or  in  any  particular  respect,  we  have  recourse  to 
certain  means  and  helps  for  assisting  and  strengthening  it.  A  careful  and  systematic 
classification  of  events,  or  the  aid  of  a  Memoria  Technica,  or  a  well-arranged  common- 
place book,  will  go  far  to  supply  the  deficiencies  of  memory.  Men  will  think  no 
I^ains  too  great  which  will  enable  them  thus  to  master  the  events  of  history  or  the 
facts  of  science.  But  when  we  pass  from  the  subjects  of  human  learning  to  the 
record  of  God's  dealings  with  the  Church  and  our  own  souls,  all  such  efforts  on  our 
part  are  deemed  useless  and  superfluous.  "We  must  be  careful,  too,  in  carrying  out 
into  corresponding  action  any  impressions  which  have  been  made  upon  our  ndnds, 
so  as  to  fix  them  in  the  character  by  habits  resulting  from  them.  And  we  must 
note  any  dealings  of  God  with  us  in  jiroviilence  or  in  grace  which  seem  calculated 
to  bring  us  nearer  to  Himself,  in  patient  dependence  or  in  grateful  love.  3.  In  the 
use  of  these  and  like  helps  it  is  necessarily  implied  that  the  soul  will  be  seeking  by 
earnest  prayer  the  effectual  aid  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  We  have  viewed  this  forget- 
fulness of  God  as  an  inseparable  consequence  of  our  fallen  nature,  and  one  which  no 
amount  of  outward  and  sensible  evidence  or  impression  can  of  itself  obviate,  as  the 
case  of  the  Israelites  fully  proves.  A  similar,  and  even  stronger,  proof  is  presented 
in  the  case  of  the  apostles.  They  had  enjoyed  unrestrained  intercourse  with  our 
blessed  Lord  for  several  years.  His  conversation,  His  teaching,  never  could  be 
forgotten.  Yet  the  mere  moral  and  physical  effects  of  this  teaching  would  be 
counteracted  by  the  weak  and  treacherous  nature  of  human  memory  ;  and  hence 
our  Lord  promises  a  direct  operation  of  the  Holy  Spirit  to  remedy  this  infirmity: 
"The  Holy  Ghost,  whom  the  Father  will  send  in  My  name,  He  shall  teach  you  all 
things,  and  bring  all  things  to  your  remembrance,  whatsoever  I  have  said  unto 
you.'      {Christian   Observer.)  The   danger  of  forgetting  God: — I.  The  tend- 

ency THAT  THEEE  IS  IN  US  TO  FORGET  GoD.  1.  Forgetting  the  presence  of 
God.  2.  Forgetfulness  of  God  in  worship.  3.  Forgetting  the  commandments  of  God. 
4.  Forgetting  God's  redeeming  love.  II.  The  cause  of  FOR(iETFULNEss  of  God. 
Prosperity.  III.  The  danger  of  this  forgetfulness.  Now,  just  let  me  show 
you  that  the  Scripture  tells  us  that  they  "shall  be  turned  into  hell"  who  forget 
God.  "  Now  consider  this,  ye  that  forget  Gk>d,  lest  I  tear  you  in  pieces,  and  there 
be  none  to  deliver  ! "  But  the  danger  of  living  without  God  is  the  danger  of  dying 
without  God ;  and  the  man  that  dies  without  God  dies  without  hope.  You  will 
recollect  that  God  in  a  special  manner  complains  of  this  with  leference  to  His 
ancient  people.  In  the  first  chapter  of  Isaiah  we  are  told  that  He  had  nourished 
and  brought  up  childien,  but  that  Israel  had  rebelled  against  Him  ;  that  the  ox 
knew  his  owner,  and  the  ass  his  master's  crib,  but  Israel,  God's  own  people,  did  not 
consider.     Are  there  not  many  amongst  you  that  do  not  consider  ?    Are  there  not 


214  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  vr. 

some  amongst  us  that  have  forgotten  God  ?  But  so  strongly  has  the  Scripture  laid 
down  the  danger  which  awaits  the  forgetters  of  God,  that  we  find  that  God  in  a 
special  manner  has  condescended  to  help  us  that  we  may  remember  Him.  For 
instance,  let  us  look  at  the  very  text,  and  at  that  part  of  the  text  to  which  I  was 
referring  just  now.  "Beware  lest  thou  forget  the  Lord,  which  brought  thee  forth 
out  of  the  land  of  Egypt,  from  the  house  of  bondage. "  Why,  what  gi-eat  things 
God  has  done  for  us  to  remind  us  of  redeeming  love  !  What  a  blessing  it  is  that 
we  have  a  special  ordinance,  which  it  is  impossible  to  approach  with  any  light  in 
our  minds,  without  reflecting  that  it  represents  the  dying  love  of  Jesus,  and  is,  as 
it  were,  bidding  us  ask  ourselves  whether  we  have  a  thankful  remembrance  of  the 
death  of  Christ !  What  a  blessing  it  is  that  God  has  appointed  men  in  a  special 
manner  to  go  forth  and  to  preach  that  Gospel  which  shall  remind  their  fellow- 
sinners  of  that  same  redeeming  love !  God  has  done  everything  to  prevent  our 
forgetting  Him,  and  lead  us  to  consider  our  ways,  and  consider  our  personal 
relationship  to  Him,  to  consider  our  daily  dependence  upon  Him  for  the  things  of 
this  life,  and  to  consider  our  complete  dependence  upon  Him  for  the  things  of  the 
life  to  come.  {Bp.  Villiers.)  Beware  of  prosperity : — Mark  the  conception  which 
Moses  formed  of  all  advancing  civilisation.  How  much  we  have  that  we  have  not 
done  ourselves  !  We  are  born  into  a  world  that  is  already  furnished  vnth.  the 
library,  with  the  altar,  with  the  Bible.  Men  born  into  ci^alised  countries  have  not 
to  make  their  own  roads.  We  are  born  into  the  possession  of  riches.  The  poorest 
man  in  the  land  is  an  inheritor  of  all  but  infinite  wealth,  in  every  department  of 
civilisation.  In  the  very  act  of  complaining  of  his  poverty  he  is  acknowledging  his 
resources.  His  poverty  is  only  poverty  because  of  its  relation  to  other  things  which 
indicate  the  progress  of  the  ages  that  went  before.  Young  men  come  into  fortunes 
they  never  worked  for ;  we  aU  come  into  possessions  for  which  our  fathers  toiled. 
We  could  not  assemble  in  God's  house  in  peace  and  quietness  to-day  if  the  martyrs 
had  not  founded  the  Church  upon  their  very  blood.  Men  to-day  enjoy  the  liberty 
for  which  other  men  paid  their  lives.  Coming  into  a  civilisation  so  ripe  and  rich, 
having  everything  made  ready  to  our  hands,  the  whole  system  of  society  telephoned 
so  that  we  can  communicate  with  distant  friends  and  bring  them  within  hearing,  the 
table  loaded  with  everything  which  a  healthy  appetite  can  desire — all  these  things 
constitute  a  temptation,  if  not  rightly  received.  Moses  drew  the  picture,  and  then 
said,  "Beware."  In  the  time  of  prosperity  and  fulness,  "then  beware  lest  thou 
forget,"  &c.  Prosperity  has  its  trials.  Poverty  may  be  a  spiritual  blessing.  The 
impoverishment  and  punishment  of  the  flesh  may  be  religiously  helpful.  There 
are  anxieties  connected  with  wealth  as  well  as  with  poverty.  The  high  and  the 
mighty  amongst  us  have  their  pains  and  their  difficulties,  as  well  as  the  lowliest  and 
weakest  members  of  society.  Ever  let  men  hear  this  word  of  caution,  "  Beware." 
When  the  harvest  is  the  best  harvest  that  ever  was  grown  in  our  fields,  then 
**  beware."  When  health  is  long-continued  and  the  doctor  an  unknown  stranger  in 
the  house,  then  "beware."  When  house  is  added  to  house  and  land  to  land,  then 
"beware."  Men  have  been  ruined  by  prosperity.  {J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Danger  of 
prosperity  ■' — Many  are  not  able  to  suffer  and  endure  prosperity  ;  it  is  like  the  light 
of  the  sun  to  a  weak  eye ;  glorious,  indeed,  in  itself,  but  not  proportioned  to  such 
an  instrument ;  Adam  himself  (as  the  Rabbins  say)  did  not  dwell  one  night  in  para- 
dise, but  was  poisoned  with  prosperity,  with  the  beauty  of  his  fair  wife,  and  a 
beauteous  tree  :  and  Noah  and  Lot  were  both  righteous  and  exemplary,  the  one  to 
Sodom,  and  the  other  to  the  old  world,  so  long  as  they  lived  in  a  place  in  which  they 
were  obnoxious  to  the  common  suffering  ;  but  as  soon  as  the  one  of  them  had 
escaped  from  drowning  and  the  other  from  burning,  and  put  into  security,  they  fell 
into  crimes  which  have  dishonoured  their  memories  for  above  thirty  generations 
together,  the  crimes  of  drunkenness  and  incest.  Wealth  and  a  full  fortune  make 
men  licentiously  vicious,  tempting  a  man  with  power,  to  act  all  that  he  can  desire 
or  design  viciously.  (Bp.  Taylor.)  Forgetfulness  through  prosperity  :—^iro\\mg 
along  the  banks  of  a  pond,  Gotthold  observed  a  pike  basking  in  the  sun,  and  so 
pleased  with  the  sweet  soothing  rays  as  to  forget  itself  and  the  danger  to  which  it 
was  exposed.  Thereupon  a  boy  approached,  and  with  a  snare  formed  of  a  horsehair 
and  fastened  to  the  end  of  a  rod,  which  he  skilfully  cast  over  his  head,  pulled  it  in 
an  instant  out  of  the  water.  "Ah  me  ! "  said  Gotthold,  with  a  deep  sigh,  "how 
evidently  do  I  here  behold  shadowed  forth  the  danger  of  my  poor  soul !  When  the 
beams  of  temporal  prosperity  play  upon  us  to  our  heart's  content,  so  grateful  are 
they  to  corrupt  flesh  and  blood  that,  immersed  in  sordid  pleasure,  luxury,  and 
security,  we  lose  all  sense  of  spiritual  danger,  and  all  thought  of  eternity.     In  this 


CHAP.  VI.]  DEUTERONOMY.  215 


state  many  are,  in  fact,  suddenly  snatched  away  to  the  eternal  ruin  of  their 
souls."  Forgetfuhiess  of  God  hut  too  msi/ ;— The  solemn  possibility  is  the 
possibility  of  forgetting  God  and  God's  providence  in  human  life.  We  may 
not  have  endeavoured  to  expunge,  as  by  an  express  and  malicious  effort;  but 
memory  is  treacherous  ;  the  facidty  of  recollection  is  otherwise  than  religiously 
employed,  and  before  we  are  quite  aware  of  what  has  been  done,  a  complete  wreck 
has  been  wrought  in  the  memory  of  the  soul.  There  will  settle  upon  the  intel- 
lectual faculties  themselves,  and  upon  the  senses  of  the  body,  a  stupi(^ty  amounting 
to  sinfulness.  The  eye  is  meant  to  be  the  ally  of  the  memory.  Many  men  can 
only  remember  through  the  vision  ;  they  have  no  memory  for  things  abstract,  bnt 
once  let  them  see  clearly  an  object  or  a  writing,  and  they  say  they  can  hold  the 
vision  evermore.     {J.  Parker,  D.D.) 

Ver.  13.  Fear  the  Lord  thy  God,  and  serve  ^B^m,— Moses'  serious  and  affectionate 
4iharge  to  Israel:— I.  A  Solemn  charge  given.  1.  Hear  the  Word  of  the  Lord. 
This  message  is  neglected  or  abused— (1)  By  those  who  seldom  or  never  attend  a 
place  of  public  worship  :  let  such  consider  how  they  will  be  able  to  account  for 
their  negligence  (Heb.  ii.  1-3).  (2)  By  those  who  visit  places  of  worship,  but  who 
sleep  when  they  should  hear  (Rev.  iii.  14-19).  (3)  By  those  who  are  usually 
engaged  in  worldly  contemplations  while  under  the  sound  of  the  Word  (Amos  viii.  5). 
Hence  the  charge  is— 2.  Observe  the  Word  of  the  Lord.  Observe— (1)  The  doctrinal 
truths  taught — respecting  God's  claim  on  us  ;  and  God  has  claims  on  us  as  our 
Creator,  Preserver,  Benefactor,  &c.— respecting  our  obligation  to  obedience,  from 
gratitude,  fear,  hope,  &c.  (2)  The  preceptive  part  of  what  is  taught— concerning 
both  outward  and  inward  obedience,  and  the  discrepancy  between  our  conduct  and 
spirit  and  the  extensive  requirements  of  the  holy  law  (Mark  xii.  30,  31).  (3)  The 
promissory  and  encouraging  part  of  what  is  taught— respecting  the  freeness  and 
plenitude  of  Divine  grace,  to  pity  and  pardon  our  transgressions  (Isa.  i.  18) ;  to 
purify  our  hearts  (Ezek.  xxxvi.  25-27)  ;  and  to  help  our  infirmities  (Isa.  xli.  10; 
Heb.  iv.  14-16).  The  observance  required  is,  however,  principally  in  reference  to 
practice.  3.  Obey  the  Word  of  the  Lord.  "  Observe  to  do  it."  This  refers  to 
what  in  ver.  1  Moses  called  "  the  commandments,  the  statutes,  and  the  judgments 
which  the  Lord  your  God  commanded."  II.  Important  benefits  proposed.  As 
a  stimulus  to  the  Israelites  to  devote  themselves  to  the  service  of  Jehovah,  Moses 
proposes— 1.  Their  safety;  their  well-being— "that  it  may  be  well  with  thee." 
By  way  of  contrast,  look  at  chap.  iv.  23-26,  xxvii.  26,  xxviii.  16-20.  Disobedience 
always  exposes  to  danger,  to  destruction.  But  "say  ye  to  the  righteous  "—the 
obedient  believer — "it  shall  be  well  with  him."  He  shall  be  well  instructed  (Psa. 
XXV.  9 ;  1  John  ii.  20) ;  well  defended  (chap,  xxxii.  9-11) ;  well  provided  (Psa. 
xxxiv.  10  ;  Phil.  iv.  19).  It  shall  be  well  with  such,  not  only  through  life,  but 
also  at  death  (Psa.  cxvi.  15) ;  at  judgment  (Matt.  xxv.  34  ;  2  Thess.  i.  10) ;  and 
for  ever  (Psa.  xvi.  11).  But  we  must  return  to  observe  that  Moses  proposes — 
2.  Their  prosperity— " that  ye  may  increase  mightily."  This  may  have  respect 
—(1)  To  an  increase  of  wealth—"  houses  full  of  all  good  things,"  &c.  (ver.  11).  Or— 
(2)  To  an  increase  of  numbers  (chap.  vii.  13).  In  the  former  case  they  would  have  an 
increase  of  their  means  of  enjoyment ;  in  the  latter  they  would  more  "mightily" 
resist  and  overcome  their  enemies  (chap.  vii.  24);  and  in  both  they  might  with 
less  difficulty  and  greater  cheerfulness  attend  on  the  services  of  the  Most  High. 
We,  as  Christians,  may  expect  prosperity  of  a  higher  order.  1.  Individually,  we 
may  be  blessed  with  a  sense  of  pardoning  love,  and  fellowship  with  God  through 
His  Son  (1  John  i.  3)  ;  may  be  enriched  with  the  fruits  of  the  Divine  Spirit,  "love, 
joy,  peace,"  &c.  (Gal.  v.  22,  23);  strengthened  with  "might  in  the  inner  man" 
(^ph.  iii.  16);  and  continue  to  "grow  in  grace,"  &c.  (2  Pet.  iii.  18).     Hence  we 

5  V  •  ®^^^^®^  to  bear  temptation  more  easily ;  and  in  our  conflict  with  Satan 
and  his  servants,  our  having  prospered  "mightily"  will  appear  in  our  effectual 
resistance  and  our  final  triumph.  And  hence— 2.  While  the  members  of  churches 
adorn  their  profession,  we  may  hope  that  the  churches  collectively  will  receive  an 
accession  of  members  who,  won  by  our  Christian  deportment,  shall  glorify  God  on 
our  behalf.  {Sketches  of  Four  Hundred  Sermons.)  Serve  God:— I.  What  is 
IT  TO  SERVE  God?  1.  To  dedicate  ourselves  wholly  to  Him.  (1)  Our  souls, 
understandings,  wills,  affections.  (2)  Our  bodies.  (3)  Our  estates.  (4)  Our  gifts. 
(5)  Our  authority.  (6)  Our  time.  2.  To  make  His  laws  the  rule  of  our  lives  3.  To 
endeavour  to  please  Him  in  all  things.  II.  Why  serve  God  ?  He  is  our  Maker, 
Preserver,    Redeemer,    &c.     III.    Exhortation.      "Serve  God"— 1.   Spiritually. 


216  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vi. 

2.    Obediently.      3.   Willingly.       4.   Cheerfully.       6.    Faithfully.       6.   Humbly. 
7.   Thankfully.      {W.Stevens.) 

Vers.  14,  15.  Tliou  shalt  not  go  after  other  gods. — The  forbidden  path: — In  all 
our  hearts  there  is  a  tendency  to  depart  from  God,  to  forget  what  He  commands, 
"to  go  after"  what  He  forbids.  This  forbidden  path  is  described.  1.  It  is  entered 
by  many.  The  path  of  "the  people,"  "the  gods"  of  the  age.  Idolatry  of  every 
kind  is  the  root  and  nourisher  of  error  and  superstition — the  expression  and  epitome 
of  human  nature — the  foul  dishonour  to  God  and  His  supremacy.  "  Go  not  after 
other  gods  to  serve  them  and  to  worship  them  "  (Jer.  xxv.  6).  2.  It  is  offensive  to 
God.  It  stirs  up  God's  anger  and  rouses  His  jealousy.  Bishop  Patrick  observes 
that  we  never  find  in  law  or  prophets,  anger,  or  fury,  or  jealousy,  or  indignation 
attributed  to  God,  but  upon  occasion  of  idolatry.  3.  It  is  destructive  in  its  end. 
"  Destroy  thee  from  off  the  face  of  the  earth.  Idolatry  corrupts  the  body  and 
petrifies  the  heart.  Like  a  withering  mildew  it  overspreads  the  earth  and  blights 
the  nations.  The  warning  voice  from  above  should  be  heard  :  "Ye  shall  bear  the 
sins  of  your  idols,  and  ye  shall  know  that  I  am  the  Lord  God."  {J.  Wolfendxde.) 
Jealousy  the  shadow  of  love : — All  sin  is  a  caricature  of  virtue,  and  sin  never  looks 
so  shameful  as  when  we  put  it  beside  the  virtue  which  it  caricatures.  The  Bible 
seems  to  attribute  human  passions  to  God.  He  is  a  jealous  God,  an  angry  God, 
But  jealousy  and  anger  are  distortions  of  virtue,  as  the  face  of  the  man  in  anger  is 
a  distortion  of  the  same  face  in  repose.  The  very  passions  of  men,  rightly  inspired 
and  rightly  guided,  are  Divine.  For  this  very  reason,  wrongly  caused,  wrongly 
inspired,  wrongly  glided,  they  are  the  more  detestable.  What  is  worse  than 
jealousy  ?  Read  of  it  in  Othello.  ,  But  is  jealousy  always  wicked  ?  Was  it  wicked 
in  Elijah  when,  looking  out  upon  a  devastated  and  desolate  kingdom,  with  Israel's 
allegiance  swept  away  from  God,  he  cried  out  in  agony  of  prayer  to  Him,  "I  have 
been  jealous  for  Th^  name,  0  Lord  of  Hosts "  ?  Was  it  wicked  in  Paul  when, 
writing  to  the  Corinthians,  who  had  at  one  time  held  firmly  to  their  love  for 
Christ,  and  had  been  swept  away  from  their  allegiance,  the  apostle  cries  out,  "  I 
am  filled  with  a  godly  jealousy  for  you  "  ?  Jealousy  is  the  shadow  love  casts ; 
and  the  greater  the  love  the  greater  the  possibility  of  the  shadow.  Jealousy  is  the 
revulsion  of  feeling  against  that  which  assails  love.  And  as  the  musician,  full  of 
keenness  of  ear  and  ecstasy  of  pleasure  in  fine  music,  revolts  against  a  discord,  so 
the  soul  that  is  rich  in  love  and  sensitive  to  all  the  pulsations  of  love  revolts  against 
whatsoever  impinges  upon  and  violates  love.     [Lyman  Abbott.) 

Ver.  16.  Ye  shall  not  tempt  the  Lord. — Christ  tempted  through  unbelief :— We 
know  that  though  God  cannot  be  tempted  with  evil,  He  may  justly  be  said  to  be 
tempted  whenever  men,  by  being  dissatisfied  with  His  dealings,  virtually  ask  that 
He  will  alter  those  dealings,  and  proceed  in  a  way  more  congenial  to  their  feelings. 
Suppose  a  man  to  be  discontented  with  the  appointments  of  Providence,  suppose 
him  to  murmur  at  what  the  Almighty  allots  him  to  do  or  to  bear  :  is  he  not  to  be 
charged  with  the  asking  God  to  change  His  purposes  ?  And  what  is  this  if  it  is  not 
tempting  Grod,  and  striving  to  induce  Him  to  swerve  from  His  plans,  though  every 
one  of  those  plans  has  been  settled  by  Infinite  Wisdom  ?  Or  again,  if  any  one  of  us, 
notwithstanding  the  multiplied  proofs  of  Divine  loving -kindness,  question  whether 
or  not  God  do  indeed  love  him,  of  what  is  he  guilty,  if  not  of  tempting  the  Lord, 
seeing  that  he  solicits  God  to  the  giving  additional  evidence,  as  though  there  was 
a  deficiency,  and  challenges  Him  to  a  fresh  demonstration  of  what  He  has  already 
abundantly  displayed  ?  In  short,  unbelief  of  every  kind  and  every  degree  may  be 
said  to  tempt  God.  For  not  to  believe  upon  the  evidence  which  He  has  seen  fit  to 
give  is  to  provoke  Him  to  give  more,  offering  our  possible  assent  if  proof  were 
increa,sed  as  an  inducement  to  Him  to  go  beyond  what  His  wisdom  has  prescribed. 
And  if  in  this,  and  the  like  sense,  God  may  be  tempted,  what  can  be  more  truly 
said  of  the  Israelites  than  that  they  tempted  God  in  Massah  1  Was  there  ever  a 
people  for  whom  so  much  had  been  done,  on  whose  behalf  so  many  miracles  had 
been  wrought,  or  for  whose  protection  there  had  been  such  signal  displays  of 
Omnipotence  ?  And,  indeed,  we  are  perhaps  not  accustomed  to  think  of  unbelief 
or  murmuring  as  a  tempting  God,  and  therefore  we  do  not  attach  to  what  is  so 
common,  its  just  degree  of  heinousness.  Yet  we  cannot  be  dissatisfied  with  God's 
dealings,  and  not  be  virtually  guilty  of  tempting  God.  It  may  seem  a  harsh 
definition  of  a  slight  and  scarcely  avoidable  fault,  but  neyertheless  it  is  a  true 
definition.     You  cannot  mistrust  God,  and  not  accuse  Him  of  want  either  of  power 


CHAP.  VI.]  DEUTERONOMY.  217 

or  of  goodness.  So  that  your  fear,  or  your  despondency,  or  your  anxiety  in  circum- 
stances of  perplexity  or  peril  are  nothing  less  than  the  calling  upon  God  to  depart 
from  His  fixed  course— a  suspicion,  or  rather  an  assertion,  that  He  might  proceed 
in  a  manner  more  worthy  of  Himself,  and  therefore  a  challenge  to  Him  to  alter 
His  dealings  if  He  would  prove  that  He  possesses  the  attributes  which  He  claims. 
But  it  is  now  in  His  mediatorial  rather  than  His  Divine  capacity  that  we  would 
wish  to  show  you  how  Christ  may  be  tempted.  There  is  a  great  general  similarity 
between  the  two  cases,  for  in  both  the  Supreme  Being  is  tempted  if  we  practically 
undervalue  what  He  has  done  for  us — throw  scorn  upon  the  proofs  already  given 
of  His  love,  and  thus  virtually  challenge  Him  to  do  more  or  give  greater.  Ah,  this 
may  be  putting  neglect  of  Christ  and  His  Gospel  under  an  unusual  aspect ;  but  prove 
to  us,  if  you  can,  that  it  is  not  just.  We  affirm,  that  by  every  refusal  to  tiu-n 
from  your  sins,  and  to  seek  that  repentance  and  remission  which  Christ  died  to 
procure,  and  lives  to  bestow,  you  are  as  literally  guilty  of  tempting  Christ  as  were 
the  Israelites  in  the  desert,  when  they  provoked  God  by  their  repining  and  unbelief. 
You  tempt  Him  precisely  in  the  sense  in  which  the  Israelites  tempted  God,  by 
practically  denying  that  what  has  been  done  on  your  behalf  has  bound  you  to  His 
service ;  and  therefore,  by  practically  demanding  that  He  interfere  again  and 
again,  and  with  mightier  tokens  of  supremacy  and  compassion.  And  how  little 
had  been  done  for  the  Israelites  by  God  in  comparison  with  what  has  been  done  by 
Christ  Jesus  for  us  !  It  was  much  that  God  had  wrenched  from  the  neck  of  a 
captive  people  the  yoke  of  an  oppressor ;  but  think  of  your  emancipation  from  the 
thraldom  of  Satan  !  By  plague  and  prodigy  had  the  Egyptians  been  discomfited : 
but  what  is  this  to  death  vanquished,  the  grave  rifled,  and  heaven  opened  by  the 
triumphs  of  the  Mediator  ?  God  gave  the  people  manna  from  heaven  ;  but  what  is 
this  to  Christ  giving  the  true  bread— His  own  flesh — for  the  life  of  the  world  ?  The 
taberuable  was  set  up,  and  Aaron,  with  the  Urim  and  Thummim  on  his  breast, 
could  intercede  with  God,  and  gain  oracular  response ;  but  what  is  this  to  our 
haying  a  High  Priest  within  the  veil,  having  at  His  disposal  all  the  gifts  of  the 
Spirit  ?  Ay,  if  it  show  great  hardness  of  heart,  great  ingratitude,  great  perverse- 
ness,  that  men  who  had  seen  waters  turned  into  blood,  and  the  sea  divided,  and 
the  food  brought  in  profusion  by  the  stretching  forth  the  rod  of  the  lawgiver, 
should  have  been  fretful  and  mistrustful  in  every  new  trial,  what  is  evidenced  by 
our  conduct  if  we  continue  to  be  careless  and  unbelieving — we  before  whose  eyes 
Christ  Jesus  is  evidently  set  forth  crucified  amongst  us  ?  I  dare  no  longer  compare 
that  tempting  of  God  with  which  the  Israelites  were  charged,  with  that  tempting  of 
Christ  of  which  numbers  amongst  ourselves  are  continually  guilty.  It  were  to  say 
that  a  temporal  deliverance  and  a  temporal  Canaan  gave  as  great  evidence  of  the 
love  of  the  Almighty  towards  men,  and  of  infinite  power  being  engaged  in  their 
succour,  as  redemption  from  everlasting  death,  and  an  inheritance  that  fadeth  not 
away.  Oh,  no !  there  is  sameness  in  the  mode  of  temptation,  but  there  is  vast 
difference  in  the  degree  of  guiltiness.  Yet  the  Israelites  were  terribly  visited.  And 
*'  how  shaU  we  escape  if  we  neglect  so  great  salvation  "  ?    {E.  Melvill,  B.D.) 

Vers.  20,  21.  When  thy  son  asketh  thee. — Remembrances  of  holy  privileges: — 
We  are  also  favoured  with  Divine  ordinances,  as  were  the  Israelites ;  and  for  the 
same  purpose,  for  a  pious  testimony  to  keep  alive  upon  the  earth  a  remembrance 
of  God's  surpassing  love.  As  to  them  pertained  "the  adoption  and  the  glory  and 
the  covenants  and  the  giving  of  the  law  and  the  service  of  God  and  the  promises," 
so  to  us  pertain  the  gracious  promises  of  life  and  salvation,  and  all  the  privileges 
and  ordinances  of  the  Christian  covenant.  So  that  when  children,  as  reason  begins 
to  dawn,  and  they  find  themselves  growing  up  amid  certain  religious  ordinances, 
shall  ask  the  meaning,  we  may  always  be  able  to  point,  with  humble  gratitude,  to 
the  origin  and  intent  of  every  duty  and  service.  The  lisping  babe  is  given  to  hear, 
prchance  is  taught  to  sing,  of  the  cross  which  was  traced  on  its  forehead  in 
infancy;  and  the  pious  motker  is  asked.  What  did  it  signify?  She  will  point 
with  tenderness  to  the  Cross  of  Christ,  to  the  sacrifice  of  the  spotless  Lamb ;  and 
the  holy  emblem,  thus  stamped  upon  the  youthful  mind  and  heart,  may  be  there 
for  ever  fixed  by  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God,  as  a  living  image  of  the  truth  in  Jesus,  as 
an  everlasting  memorial  of  His  dying  love.  The  child  lifts  up  its  hands  in  prayer ; 
and  wherefore  lifted  up  ?  To  its  Father  in  heaven  ;  to  the  mercy-seat  at  which  a 
Saviour  pleads  ;  and  from  which  the  Holy  Spirit,  with  His  manifold  gifts,  is  sent 
down,  gifts  for  childhood  and  youth,  for  manhood  and  age :  and  this  in  obedience 
to  that  Saviour's  word  (Matt.  vii.  7  ;  John  xiv.  13,  xv.  16),    The  child  learns  to 


218  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  vi/ 

read  ;  the  Bible  is  opened  ;  and  every  page  is  fraught  with  grace,  is  glowing  with 
mercy.  Here  are  tender  invitations  which  the  youngest  can  understand  and  feel. 
And  thus  our  youth  have  in  their  hand  a  constant  remembrancer  of  God 
Almighty's  goodness  ;  the  Word  written  by  the  Spirit,  and  taught  by  the  Spirit, 
to  each  obedient  heart  of  old  and  young.  The  points  are  but  few,  respecting 
children,  upon  which  we  can  now  touch ;  but  there  is  yet  another,  which  marks 
rather  the  transition  state  between  the  child  and  the  man,  at  least  where  greater 
responsibility  begins.  The  children  of  the  Church  are  brought  to  the  bishop  to  be 
confirm^ :  and  here  is  a  mighty  memorial.  All  the  privileges  of  holy  baptism  are 
then  placed  in  view,  and  impressed  powerfully  on  the  heart.  And  over  the  whole 
of  our  Christian  life  and  walk  the  tokens  and  reminiscences  of  God's  goodness  are 
plentifully  spread  ;  in  all  our  Divine  ordinances  and  services,  and  in  all  our 
providential  experiences.  Every  Sabbath,  what  a  blessed  memorial !  How  does 
it  remind  us  of  the  great  Creator,  and  of  His  resting  from  all  His  works  !  how  of 
our  own  rest  in  Him  and  in  heaven  !  There  is  likewise  that  holy  rite  and  service 
which  the  Lord  Himself  appointed  with  His  dying  breath  as  the  sacramental 
emblem  of  His  love.  This  is  the  most  perfect  of  all  the  testimonies  :  a  perpetual 
representation  of  the  sacrifice  before  the  Church,  for  the  benefit  of  the  faithful,  for 
the  conviction  of  all ;  a  perpetual  application  of  it,  through  the  power  of  the  Spirit, 
to  the  believer's  heart  and  soul.  And  our  faithful  Church,  in  all  her  constitution 
and  services,  has  acted  upon  this  monitory  plan  ;  has  sought  to  stir  up  continually 
"the  pure  minds  (of  her  children)  by  way  of  remembrance"  ;  and  to  keep  the 
wonders  of  Divine  grace,  one  after  another,  always  before  our  eyes.  At  various 
seasons  of  the  year  she  sets  before  us  the  marvellous  acts  of  redeeming  love, 
all  that  Jesus  has  done  and  suffered  on  our  behalf :  the  mystery  of  His  holy 
incarnation ;  His  holy  nativity  and  circumcision ;  His  baptism,  fasting,  and 
temptation  ;  His  agony  and  bloody  sweat ;  His  cross  and  passion ;  His  precious 
death  and  burial ;  His  glorious  resurrection  and  ascension,  and  the  coming  of 
the  Holy  Ghost.  And  besides  her  faithful  dealing  on  these  great  occasions, 
she  is  continually  bringing  to  view  other  objects  also,  other  tokens  of  love, 
other  means  of  grace,  of  high  importance  to  be  borne  in  mind  and  diligently 
observed.  The  lives  and  deaths  of  her  apostles  and  martyrs  are  set  in  order, 
as  so  many  patterns  of  righteousness,  so  many  beacons  of  grace,  &c.  And 
there  are  other  dealings  of  God  with  us  to  be  treasured  in  the  memory  ;  the 
mercies  of  His  providence  and  of  His  grace  experienced  in  our  own  persons.  We 
have  been  cast  on  a  bed  of  sickness  ;  who  raised  us  up  ?  in  danger,  who  delivered 
us  ?  in  the  deep  of  affliction,  who  sent  the  Comforter  ?  We  have  sinned  :  we 
have  been  alarmed  ;  we  repented,  prayed,  promised,  and  were  spared  ;  and  should 
not  that  holy  season,  should  not  all  these  days  of  grace,  be  kept  in  mind  ?  Let  us 
not  unfrequently  shut  up  the  busy  present,  and  muse  upon  the  solemn  past.  God 
give  us  grace  to  deal  faithfully  ;  to  prize  the  privileges,  to  look  upon  the  blessings 
showered  down  upon  us,  to  keep  them  in  grateful  remembrance,  and  so  fix  our 
affections   upon    the    one    thing  needful.      (/.    Slade,    M.A.)  Questions  arid 

answers : — Suppose  that  one  wholly  uninstructed  as  to  Christian  faith  and  doctrine 
and  practice  should  ask  us — What  mean  yel — account  for  yourselves  ;  what 
are  you  doing?  and  why  do  you  act  as  you  do  ? — it  would  be  pitiful  to  the  point 
of  unpardonableness  if  in  the  presence  of  such  an  inquiry  we  were  dumb  ;  our 
speechlessness  would  show  that  our  piety  is  a  mere  superstition.  It  is  surely, 
therefore,  incumbent  upon  us  to  be  able  to  give  some  reason  or  explanation 
for  the  faith  and  the  hope  that  are  in  us.  We  cannot  adopt  a  better  reply 
than  the  answer  suggested  by  Moses.  No  originality  of  answer  is  required. 
The  leader  of  Israel  gave  the  only  reply  that  will  stand  the  test  of  reason  and 
the  wear  and  tear  of  time.  All  we  need  is  in  this  paragraph.  Adopting  this  reply, 
what  answer  should  we  mak«?  to  the  kind  of  inquirer  now  supposed  ?  We  should, 
first  of  all,  make  the  answer  broadly  historical.  We  are  not  called  to  invention, 
or  speculation,  or  the  recital  of  dreams  :  we  do  not  want  any  man's  impressions 
as  a  basis  of  rational  and  universal  action  ;  we  call  for  history,  facts,  realities, 
points  of  time  that  can  be  identified,  and  circumstances  that  can  be  defined  and 
have  a  determinate  value  fixed  upon  them.  We  could  enlarge  the  answer  which 
Israel  was  to  give,  and  ennoble  it.  We,  too,  were  in  a  house  of  bondage.  That 
must  be  our  first  point.  The  house  was  dark  ;  the  life  of  the  prison  was  intolerable  ; 
no  morning  light  penetrated  the  dungeon  ;  no  summer  beauty  visited  the  eyes  of 
those  who  were  bound  in  fetters.  Human  nature  had  gone  astray.  The  Christian 
argument  starts  there.     All  Christian  doctrine  is  founded  upon  that  one  fact,  or 


C3HAP.  VI.]  DEUTERONOMY.  219 

tears  direct  and  vital  relation  to  it.  "We,  too,  could  add  with  Israel,  human  nature 
■was  Divinely  delivered.  The  action  began  in  heaven.  No  man's  arm  delivered 
us  ;  no  man's  eye  could  look  upon  us  with  pity  that  was  unstained  and  unenfeebled 
by  sin.  God's  eye  pitied  ;  God's  arm  was  outstretched  to  save.  Then  we  could 
continue  the  reply,  and  say  the  Divine  deliverance  was  attested  by  many  ' '  signs 
and  wonders."  The  nature  of  the  miracles  may  have  undergone  considerable 
change,  but  their  inner  meaning  is  an  eternal  truth  :  it  abides  through  all  the  ages, 
for  every  purpose  of  God  in  the  miracles  which  were  wrought  was  a  purpose-  of  life, 
growth,  holiness,  transformation  into  His  own  image.  The  purpose  is  in  reality 
the  miracle.  That  being  so,  the  miracles  never  cease,  for  to-day  the  Gospel 
performs  nothing  less  than  the  miracle  of  making  the  dead  live,  and  the  blind  see, 
and  the  dumb  speak  in  new  and  beauteous  eloquence.  In  the  next  place,  still 
following  the  idea  laid  down  by  Moses,  we  must  make  this  answer  definitely 
personal:— "thou  shalt  say  unto  thy  son"  (ver.  21).  Speak  about  yourselves, 
about  your  own  vital  relation  to  the  historical  facts.  The  history  is  not  something 
outside  of  you  and  beyond  you :  it  is  part  and  parcel  of  your  own  development, 
and  your  development  would  have  been  an  impossibility  apart  from  the  history ; 
let  us,  therefore,  know  what  this  history  has  done  for  you.  The  answer  will  be 
poor  if  it  be  but  a  recital  of  circumstances  and  occurrences  and  anecdotes — a 
vague,  although  partially  reverent,  reference  to  ancient  history.  The  man  who 
speaks  must  connect  himself  with  the  thing  which  is  spoken.  The  answer  is  still 
incomplete.  It  is  broadly  historical,  and  therefore  can  be  searched  into  by  men 
who  care  for  letters  and  events  and  ancient  occurrences  ;  the  answer  is  definitely 
personal,  and  therefore  the  character  of  the  witness  has  to  be  destroyed  before  any 
progress  can  be  made  with  his  particular  view  of  the  history  ;  now  the  answer 
must,  in  the  third  place,  be  made  vitally  experimental.  The  twenty-fifth  verse 
thus  defines  this  conclusion  :  "  And  it  shall  be  our  righteousness,  if  we  observe  to 
do  all  these  commandments  before  the  Lord  our  God,  as  He  hath  commanded  us." 
One  targum  says,  "it  shall  be  our  merit."  The  general  meaning  would  seem  to 
l)e — "it  shall  be  accounted  unto  us  for  righteousness":  the  attention  and  the 
service  shall  not  be  disregarded  or  put  down  into  any  secondary  place,  but  what  we 
do  in  the  way  of  attention  and  observance  and  duty  and  service  shall  be  reckoned 
unto  us  as  a  species  of  righteousness.  What  is  the  meaning  to  us  in  our  present 
state  of  education  and  our  present  relations  to  one  another  ?  The  meaning  is  that 
out  of  the  history  and  out  of  the  present  relations  to  that  history  there  will  come 
a  quantity  which  is  called  character.  God  is  all  the  while  forming  character.  His 
object  has  been  to  do  us  "good  always,  that  He  might  preserve  us  alive,  as  it 
is  at  this  day."  "Without  the  righteousness  where  is  the  history  ?  "Without  the 
character  what  is  the  value  of  our  personal  testimony  ?  "We  may  be  speaking 
from  a  wrong  centre — from  mental  invention,  from  intellectual  imagination,  from 
spiritual  impulse,  from  moral  emotion  ;  we  may  not  be  standing  upon  vital  facts 
and  spiritual  realities.  The  outcome,  then,  is  righteousness,  character,  moral 
manhood,  great  robustness  and  strength,  and  reality  of  life.  The  Christian  man's 
history  is  to  himself  worthless  if  it  be  not  sealed  by  character.  (/.  Parker,  D.D.) 
Children's  questions: — Children  often  break  upon  their  parents  with  very  tough 
questions,  and  questions  that  wear  a  considerable  looking  towards  infidelity.  It 
requires,  in  fact,  but  a  simple  child  to  ask  questions  that  no  philosopher  can 
answer.  Parents  are  not  to  be  hurried  or  flurried  in  such  cases,  and  make  up 
extempore  answers  that  are  only  meant  to  confuse  the  child,  and  consciously  have 
no  real  verity.  It  is  equally  bad  if  the  child  is  scolded  for  his  freedom  ;  for  what 
respect  can  he  have  for  the  truth  when  he  may  not  so  much  as  question  where^  it 
is  ?  Still  worse,  if  the  child's  question  is  taken  for  an  evidence  of  his  superlative 
smartness,  and  repeated  with  evident  pride  in  his  hearing.  In  all  such  cases  a 
quiet  answer  should  be  given  to  the  child's  question  where  it  can  be  easily  done, 
and  where  it  cannot,  some  delay  should  be  taken,  wherein  it  will  be  confessed  that 
not  even  his  parents  know  everything.  Or,  sometimes,  if  the  question  is  one  that 
plainly  cannot  be  answered  by  anybody,  occasion  should  be  taken  to  show  the  child 
how  little  we  know,  and  how  many  things  God  knows  which  are  too  deep  for  us — 
how  reverently,  therefore,  we  are  to  submit  our  mind  to  His,  and  let  Him  teach  us 
when  He  will  what  is  true.  It  is  a  very  great  thing  for  a  child  to  have  had  the 
busy  infidel  lurking  in  his  questions,  early  instructed  in  regard  to  the  necessary 
limits  of  knowledge,  and  accustomed  to  a  simple  faith  in  God's  requirement,  where 
his  knowledge  fails.  {H.  BusTinell.)  Let  the  Bible  speak: — The  mother  of  a 
family  was  married  to  an  infidel,  who  made  a  jest  of  religion  in  presence  of  his  own 


220  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  yi. 

children  ;  yet  she  succeeded  in  bringing  them  all  up  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord.  I 
one  day  asked  her  how  she  preserved  them  from  the  influence  of  a  father  whose 
sentiments  were  so  openly  opposed  to  her  own.  She  answered:  "Because  to  the 
authority  of  a  father  I  did  not  oppose  the  authority  of  a  mother,  but  that  of  God. 
From  earliest  years  my  children  have  always  seen  the  Bible  upon  the  table.  This 
Holy  Book  has  constituted  the  whole  of  their  religious  instruction.  I  was  silent 
that  I  might  allow  it  to  speak.  Did  they  propose  a  question  ;  did  they  commit  any 
fault ;  did  they  perform  any  good  action  ;  I  opened  the  Bible,  and  the  Bible 
answered,  reproved,  or  encouraged  them.  The  constant  reading  of  the  Scriptures 
has   alone  wrought   the   prodigy   which   surprises   you."     {A.  Ma)iod.)  The 

significancy  of  the  Jewish  passover  : — The  ordinances  of  Israel  were  the  ordinances 
of  a  redeemed  people,  and  they  were  the  signs  and  memorials  of  the  fact  of  their 
redemption.  Selecting  the  passover,  then,  as  the  most  prominent  of  these  ordin- 
ances, let  us  inqmre  what  it  was  designed  to  teach.  1.  In  the  first  place,  we  see 
in  it  a  memorial  of  Divine  sovereignty.  Could  the  Jew  look  back  upon  the  history 
of  his  forefathers,  and  doubt  that  it  was  not  their  own  might  nor  their  own  wills 
that  carried  them  forth  from  the  land  of  tears  ?  2.  Again,  we  see  in  it  a  memorial 
of  Divine  goodness  and  truth.  It  was  a  promise  that  God  would  not  forget,  that 
Abraham's  seed  should  inherit  the  land  of  Canaan  ;  and  now  that  he  was  in  pos- 
session of  all  this,  was  it  not  well  that  Abraham's  child  should  be  reminded  of  what 
had  been  done  for  him  ?  In  the  passover,  then,  he  learned  how  true  and  gracious 
the  Lord  had  been  to  him  and  to  his  fathers.  What  would  he  trace  but  mercy  and 
faithfulness  in  all  His  ways  ?  3.  These  were  the  aspects  of  the  ordinances  as  they 
looked  Godward  ;  but  there  were  others  which  reminded  him  of  his  own  personal 
position.  Could  the  Jew,  for  example,  forget  the  Egyptian  yoke,  as  he  stood  up, 
year  after  year,  his  loins  girded  and  staff  in  hand,  to  eat  the  Lord's  passover  ?  Is 
it  not  a  little  remarkable,  that  though  they  have  lost  the  Sacrifice,  this  is  the  only 
ordinance  the  Jews  celebrate  to  this  day  ?  Even  in  a  strange  land,  and  at  such  an 
interval  of  time,  they  fail  not  to  call  to  remembrance  the  bondage  of  Pharaoh. 
How  often  does  God  set  this  before  His  people  in  the  course  of  His  dealings  with 
them  !  '  *  Thou  wast  a  servant  in  the  land  of  Egypt. "  He  frequently  reminds  them. 
He  would  have  kept  them  in  a  due  subordination,  that  they  might  not  be  lifted  up 
to  their  own  destruction.  4.  But  we  see  in  the  passover,  lastly,  a  memorial  of 
present  deliverance.  As  long  as  the  Jew  could  celebrate  it  in  his  own  land,  he  was 
reminded  of  his  deliverance  from  Egypt.  In  this  respect  the  redemption  of  Israel 
from  the  house  of  bondage  has  been  always  a  present  blessing.  As  a  nation,  and 
therefore  as  a  type  of  the  Christian  Church,  they  have  never  been  enslaved  a  second 
time  in  Egypt.  Once  delivered,  they  were  delivered  for  ever  from  that  bondage. 
Most  truly,  therefore,  could  the  Jewish  parent  teach  his  son — "  We  were  Pharaoh's 
bondmen  in  Egypt."  That  was  a  past  history  of  terrible  suffering  and  disgrace, 
and  the  remembrance  of  it  could  call  up  nothing  in  the  heart  of  a  faithful  Jew 
but  thankful,  peaceful  joy.  The  passover,  consequently,  was  eminently  a  joyous 
festival  ;  it  was  a  feast  upon  a  sacrifice  ;  it  was  a  celebration  of  Divine  mercies, 
and  of  the  entire  destruction  of  the  Egyptian  yoke.  And  is  not  the  Christian 
ordinance  and  history  a  counterpart  of  this?  {W.  Harrison,  M.A.)  The  Lord 
brought  us  out  of  Egypt. — Deliverance  from  Egypt : — It  has  been  said  that  the 
eai-th  is  but  the  shadow  of  heaven,  and  that  things  therein  are  each  to  other  like, 
more  than  on  earth  is  thought.  This  may  be  a  great  truth,  for  in  the  Scriptures 
earthly  things  are  used  as  types  and  symbols  of  heavenly.  It  is  so  in  the  words 
that  I  have  read  to  you.  Egypt  was  the  symbol  of  captivity,  darkness,  and  death  ; 
and  the  land  of  promise,  the  type  of  heaven,  where  there  is  freedom,  light,  and  life 
without  end.  And  so,  the  deliverance  of  the  Israelites  out  of  the  bondage  of  Egypt 
by  the  mighty  hand  of  God,  and  their  entrance  into  the  land  of  Canaan,  are 
typical  of  our  deliverance  from  the  bondage  of  sin  and  the  devil,  and  entrance  into 
the  kingdom  of  heaven,  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Saviour.  Hence  we  shall  con- 
sider these  words :  first  in  their  literal  sense ;  and,  secondly,  in  their  spiritual 
meaning.  I.  First,  we  shall  consider  these  words  in  theie  literal  sense. 
Nearly  four  thousand  years  ago,  a  period  soon  after  the  deluge,  Egypt  appears  to 
have  had  its  kings  and  princes,  and  to  have  been  great  as  a  kingdom  of  this  world. 
Nor  is  it  only  remarkable  for  its  antiquity,  but  also  for  its  physical  phenomena,  its 
worldly  wisdom,  its  idolatry,  and  its  monuments.  It  was  peopled  by  the  descend- 
ants of  Ham,  and  was  dedicated  to  him,  and  therefore,  from  the  earliest  times, 
in  the  hiero^yphics  and  Scripture,  it  was  called  "  the  land  of  Ham."  Now  Ham, 
as  a  deity,  was  reverenced  as  the  sun,  and  no  doubt  he  was  the  sole  introducer  oi^ 


CHAP.  VI.]  DEUTERONOMY,  221 


ihir'^.S^'L^^  the  sun  after  the  deluge.  That  Egypt  was  addicted  to  sun-worship 
there  can  be  no  doubt;    for  it  is  not  only  seen  ki  the  hieroglyphics  or^creS 

eS^Kowpv  "^'2  -^  "^'"",'  ^^,^^^^^*^  of  its^most  ancient  names^  The  thiw  of 
Egypt,  however,  being  so  closely  connected  with  astronomical  principles  under^nfc 
as  many  changes  as  the  planets  themselves.  Heuce  it  is  thafthTe  are^  many 
and  yanous  opinions  upon  it.  One  thing  is  clear,  that  they  paid  ^^t  honour  to 
G^m3±i  n-^  «°^PWed  them  as  representatives  of  the^  deS!  ThS 

God  manifested  Hi^  power,  and  mercy,  and  faithfulness.     His  power  in  del  verinTa 
defenceless  people  from  the  oppression  of  one  of  the  greatest  mHiUry  nations  oTtle 
ancient  world  ;  and  His  mercy  in  giving  them  the  knd  of  Canaanfand  His  faith 
SlThem  ^it 'w°Vn   '^'^  ^^!?^  ^'  '^^''  ^^^^  Abraham, 'tha?  He  would 

fuR  xt??'      h^Z      ^^  ""-iT  "^'^'l^''  ^^"^  SPIEITFAL  MEANING  OF  THE  WORDS  OF 

OUR  TEXT.  And  here  it  will  assist  us  very  much  to  know  that  Egypt  had  several 
names  ;  and  we  have  found,  after  much  research,  that  under  whate^r  name  ^e<S^ 
templatethis  land  of  spiritual  darkness,  we  perceive  the  same  rcTt  ^ndsourcS^of 
post-diluvian  idolatry-Ham  associated  ^-ith  the  sun  ;  and  along  whatever  Hnrwa 
pursue  our  investigations  in  the  etymology  of  this  land  of  spiritual  wickldn^  we 
Zlr  1  E^nt  g^^\  Here  let  us  leari'a  lesson  on  worlSly  wiiom  a^'^mln 
power.  1.  Eqpt  was  the  mother  of  learning  and  of  gross  idolatry  •  of  worldly 
light  and  spiritual  darkness.     It  was  sacred  for  a  time  to  the  p&cal  s^   Sbe 

TdTrkne^s'aL'^dlt'i''  V""'  "S'T'  "^^^'-^^^.^  ''  ^^^  ^IrlT^uT^^^^l 
?n^  ft.3^1^  ^-  ^^I^'^^.  "-^  pyranudical  temples  to  the  sun,  symbolis- 
bo^P,  ^cfl  ^^^^"^.J"*^^?^*'  ^^*  ^*™  »«  f^ll  of  darkness  andde^men^ 
bones  as  the  pyramids  themselves.  In  human  language,  Egypt,  with  itTvariou^ 
Lr?h  'h-ST^'  ^^-.Vi  ^  ^^l^^^g^-ge  of  heaven,  darknessf  ?n  rhflanguTeTf 
Henc;  it^hatE^nTfi.^^^^  language  of  heaven,  d^th  and  cormpf^on 

nence  it  is  that  Egypt  in  the  Scnptures  symbolises  the  present  world  It  was  the 
source  of  worldly  wisdom  andgioss  idolatry.     The  Egyptians,  prrfe^i^g  them^lve! 

We  're^'^he  wTdoir'?  \?'  *'^  t^'^K''  '"^'^  ^^^  ^  foolishT^  whh  G^"^ 
vve  read   the  wisd^  of  this  world  m  the  ruins   of  Egypt.  Assyria    Palestine 

SiTKen?^^orold  ^'^  kingdomsof  thisworldmay  build  tYeVr'n^^iL  thertkf aJ 
fi  iT  f  .  V  ^^^  nevertheless  they  shall  be  wasted,  and  their  palaces  shall  be 
tb«f  Z*'  ^^}''  ^^^^•^-  2-.  ^^y^'^  ''  synonymous  with  the  world,  ani  we  know 
its  E^Xn  /\'''°'''^  Tr""  ^"^-  ^^*  ^«'  ^^'''^''''  ^«t  off  the  wo^d,  ^d 
wLlT^^  /■  n  ^^/^°^««'  T'^,  Its  enmity  to  God  and  truth.  Let  us  turn  from  X 
wali  wo?fl^^"  f  'T'  ^^'^^?''''  ?^^'  ^°^  d^^th  ;  let  us  come  out  oM  'kt  us 
The  div  Vnw'^'i^'^^r^"^^^ '  ^^^  \^  ^"^^  ^  «^^d^^^  ^f  ^^Sht  and  children  of 
+Stv  i^V  l  v^'^  deliverance  of  the  Israelites  from   Egyptian  bondage  was 

typical  of  our  deliverance  from  sin  and  Satan.  We  know  very  weU  how  er^at 
the  oppression  of  E^t  was.  We  know  that  their  cries  pieS  The  clouds^and 
found  their  way  to  the  throne  of  God,  and  He  came  down  to  deliver  them  •  and 
StrnT^/p'"^  this  by  His  own  power,  and  wisdom,  and  mercy  Indg^e  them 
the  land  of  Canaan    and  a  code  of  Divine  laws.     Now  this  fainthr  shadows  forth 

I  morf  .T.r?  "^  "^^  """"^^"^  ^^■"™.  ^^'  ^l^^^-y  °^  ^i"  ^^d  the  de^vU  thanuS  ch 
a  more  cruel  slavery  never  oppressed  the  family  of  man.     Our  text  aduiitJ  a  still 

?vlil'l  ^jf.^P^f  *'  namely,  that  the  entrance^f  the  IsraeliL  Lto  cTnaan  was 
lE^-  /.*¥  ^^trance  into  heaven  of  all  true  believers.  Of  that  -lorious  pkce 
LfJ^?*''*  '"'T.  "I  '^'^^  ^''  b^*  ^l^^dows  dim  and  dark  "  The  Israelite 
Ihe  dlS^irTl^""^'.^  ^?.*\'  ^"^^,  °^  ^^^^^  ^ith  the  earnest  longTng  of 
clearer  ^Tf  f/  '""'J"'  *^'  ^'T'^^^  ^^"^^°  '  ^^^  ^'^7?  ^ur  title  to  ft  is 
blood  ^f  rbr.-«\  ^^^,  ^^e^J^fly^inhentance,  purchased  for  us  with  the  precious 
dwell  on  is?/  f  f  '*  \^'K^  ^^'^  ^^  ^^  *^^  P^^«^  ^f  God  through  faith.  We 
{A  jZs!)        '  '''''  ^"^'^  ^""^  °^  ^^'  ^''  ^^''''  ^^  ^ith  Christ  in  God! 

Ver.  23.  He  brought  us  out  from  thence,  that  He  might  brine-  na  in      Th^ 

of  anS?!^^  /A.  zV.JW-.^  ./  Israel  .-There  were  m^  thin^^nThe  hktory 
rhrkt?!    pf^'l''^'^^  "'P^^   themselves  in    the  history  or  experience  of  the 

?ue  r.  mi  ik  ti?^'  ''^'  ^7.^^  ''^''^''^  —1-  ^^d'«  a^swHo  man's 
question  .  What  is  the  meaning  of  human  life  ?  Everywhere  we  see  be^innimra 
and  advances,  but  where  are  the  issues  or  ends!  Hum^  life  Tn  geneiS^^T 
beginnings  or  outgoings,  but  who  can  foresee  its  incomings  ?  We  may  r^Jrd 
human  life  as  a  promise  or  as  a  prophecy,  but  to  many  f  is  aUo  an  Lolfble 
problem.      Throughout  the  kii.gdom  of  nature  we  find  e^Xg^mpS  yelj 


222  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vi. 

plain.  We  find  nothing  of  the  nature  of  chance  or  caprice.  Certain  causes  are 
invariably  followed  by  certain  definite  eff'ects.  From  the  greatest  planets  to  the 
tiniest  plants,  all  things  are  under  the  operation  of  fixed  laws.  Everything  comes 
to  pass  in  its  time,  and  with  all  the  beauty  of  that  ' '  order  which  is  heaven's  first 
law. "  Things  in  the  natural  world  are  thus  ordered  in  all  things  and  sure.  Are 
they  not  equally  so  before  God  in  the  moral  and  spiritual  worlds  ?  Verily  He 
knows  all  our  outgoings  and  incomings,  our  sittings  down  and  risings  up  ;  He  is 
entirely  acquainted  with  us  in  all  our  ways.  He  knows  the  end  from  the  beginning 
in  every  case.  There  are  no  accidents  witli  Him,  and  He  is  never  taken  by  surprise. 
God  has  no  new  thoughts,  and  He  makes  no  new  discoveries  ;  the  darkness  and 
the  light  are  both  alike  to  Him  alw^ays.  2.  This  reveals  God's  purpose.  God's 
purposes  may  be  far  beyond  the  scope  of  human  vision,  but  they  are  fixed  as  the 
laws  of  the  material  universe  ;  they  may  lie  far  beyond  the  hills  and  mountains  of 
man's  higher  thoughts  and  best  conceptions,  but  they  are  realities  and  pregnant 
•with  good,  and  they  are  always  being  fulfilled  in  the  experience  of  His  own  people. 
God  has  done  something  that  man  might  do  something  else,  and  that  something 
else  man  must  either  do  or  perish.  What  has  God  done?  3.  God's  work.  "He 
brought  us  out  from  thence."  It  was  not  Moses  that  brought  them  out.  Moses 
himself  was  only  a  weak  instrument.  In  wisdom  he  might  be  greater  than 
Lycurgus,  in  skill  greater  than  Alfred,  in  eflBciency  more  powerful  than  Cromwell, 
in  patriotism  greater  than  Washington  ;  but  the  work  to  be  done  required  Divine 
wisdom  and  power.  Moses  was  an  efficient  agent  because  God's  Spirit  v/as  in  him 
to  will  and  to  do  as  God  required.  4.  Man's  work.  Man  must  ever  be  regarded  as 
left  to  the  freedom  of  his  own  will,  for  he  was  so  created.  When  God  completed 
the  work  of  creation.  He  said  in  eff'ect,  "It  is  finished.  Take  the  earth, 
Adam,  as  I  have  made  it ;  till  it,  and  live  on  it ;  make  the  l)est  of  it ;  have 
dominion  over  it."  When  God  completed  the  w^ork  of  man'o  redemption  on 
the  Cross,  He  said,  "It  is  finished.  Take  it,  ye  children  of  men,  and  work 
out  your  own  salvation."  When  God  took  the  Hebrews  out  of  Egypt,  He  said 
in  eff'ect,  "Follow  My  servant  Moses  through  good  and  evil  report,  and  I'll 
take  you  into  the  land  which  I  sware  unto  your  fathers."  In  other 
words,  God  promised  to  save  them  only  if  they  were  willing  and  obedient. 
But  alas!  they  were  neither  willing  nor  obedient,  and  hence  we  read,  "they 
entered  not  in,  because  of  unbelief."  They  were  willing  to  go  out,  because  ot" 
their  bitter  bondage,  but  they  were  not  willing  to  go  on,  because  of  the  trials 
and  sorrows  of  the  wilderness.  They  were  discouraged  because  of  the  way.  5.  The 
Hebrews  were  a  typical  people — (1)  Of  true  believers.  Those  who  went  out  and 
went  on  and  went  into  the  land  were  typical  of  those  who  with  the  heart  believe 
in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  They  are  willing  to  follow  the  Lamb  whithersoever 
He  goeth.  They  have  tested  His  promises  and  His  character  in  the  alembic  of 
their  own  Christian  experience  ;  they  have  weighed  His  claims  in  the  balances  of 
Christian  thought  and  meditation  until  the  fire  burned  within  them,  and  they  felt 
"unspeakably  obliged"  to  go  after  Him  ;  and  so  they  "press  towards  the  mark  for 
the  prize  of  the  high  calling  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus."  Their  faith  and  love  and 
religion  being  alike  practical  they  work  towards  purity,  progress,  and  perfection. 
(2)  Of  unbelievers.  Those  of  the  Hebrews  who  entered  not  in  because  of  unbelief, 
typify  those  who  in  every  age  confound  their  life  with  their  limbs  and  their  souls 
with  their  senses.  These  sceptics  must  ever  be  as  "  hewers  of  wood  and  drawers  of 
water,"  even  in  this  world.  Success,  even  in  this  world,  implies  a  high  ideal — faith, 
indomitable  energy,  and  perseverance.  With  these,  men  even  of  average  mental 
powers  will  succeed,  and  without  them  they  must  abide  in  the  wilderness  of  circum- 
stances. While  holding  by  the  Bible  doctrine  of  Divine  sovereignty,  we  also  hold 
by  the  fact  that  God  helps  those  who  help  themselves.  Only  hardships  can  make 
hardy  men.  Brave  soldiers  and  good  sailors  are  manufactured  by  forced  marches, 
wars,  and  through  storms.  The  best  and  bravest  men  become  perfect  through 
suffering.  {J.  K.  Campbell,  D.D.)  Profit  and  loss: — Israel,  brought  out  of 
Egypt,  for  awhile  wandered  in  the  wilderness.  But  they  were  not  left  in  the  wil- 
derness ;  it  was  no  part  of  God's  purpose  to  leave  them  there  ;  He  brought  them  out 
from  the  house  of  bondage  that  He  might  give  them  the  land  large  and  good.  I.  The 
text  has  direct  teaching  for  us  when  the  Divine  Spikit  leads  us  otjt  of  the 
CARNAL  LIFE.  "  He  brought  us  out  from  thence."  The  redeeming  God  finds  us  in 
the  Egypt  of  the  fleshly  mind  and  the  worldly  life  ;  finds  us  under  a  harsh,  debasing 
rule  ;  finds  us  full  of  bitterness  ;  and  by  His  good  Spirit  He  moves  us  to  go  forth  to 
a  freer,  brighter  life.     Let  us  be  sure  that  we  permit  Him  to  bring  us  thoroughly  out 


CHAP.  VI.]  DEUTERONOMY.  223 

of  the  sordid,  sensual  past.  To  a  large  extent  it  was  the  ruinous  mistake  of  Israel 
that  they  never  truly  and  fully  got  out  of  Egypt.  They  remembered  it  too  fre- 
quently, they  talked  about  it  too  much,  they  recalled  far  too  often  and  too  vividly 
its  coarse  pleasures.  Conversion,  regarded  etymologically  or  Scripturally,  means  a 
total  change,  an  emphatic  turning  of  the  back  on  the  far  country,  the  steadfast 
setting  of  the  face  to  Jerusalem.  See  to  it  that  you  cast  no  lingering  look  behind  ; 
drop  the  entangling  friendships,  the  compromising  habits,  the  unseemly  tempers  of 
the  old  guilty,  godless  life.  But  be  absolutely  sure  that  if  you  heartily  renounce  the 
carnal  life  God  will  bring  you  into  a  rich  inheritance.  The  first  experiences  of  the 
wilderness  were  very  strange  to  the  Israelites.  All  their  habits  of  life  had  been 
suddenly  changed  :  they  had  lost  the  leeks  without  getting  the  pomegranates  ;  and 
in  those  days  of  transition  they  became  impatient  and  disobedient.  Had  they  per- 
severed a  little  all  would  have  come  gloriously  right.  It  is  often  thus  with  newly- 
converted  men  and  women  ;  there  is  an  intermediate  state  in  which  the  old  world 
has  been  renounced,  and  in  which  the  new  Avorld  has  not  been  realised,  and  this 
intermediate  state  is  full  of  peril  to  the  pilgrim  soul.  Wait,  trust,  hope,  persevere, 
and  the  inheritance  shall  grow  upon  you.  It  is  grand  enough  to  be  worth  a  little 
waitii]g  for.  We  are  all  familiar  with  a  certain  class  of  emigrants  who  go  forth  with 
rosy  expectations  to  distant  lands,  and  who  soon  return  utterly  disappointed.  In 
starting  the  liigher  life  we  have  need  of  patience,  patience  that  will  not  make  us 
ashamed.  Following  on  to  know  the  Lord,  new  interests  will  spring  up,  new 
friendships  will  inspire,  new  hopes  will  dawn,  new  activities  absorb  and  delight,  new 
charms  Avill  disclose  themselves  in  work  and  worsliip,  new  and  richer  meanings  will 
shine  through  all  things.  II.  The  text  is  a  message  for  us  when  the  Divine 
Pkovidence  suddenly  and  radically  changes  our  circumsi  ances.  Life  is 
continually  changing,  but  in  some  periods  its  whole  aspect  is  changed  by  some 
unexpected  event,  and  we  go  out  as  Israel  went  out  of  Egypt,  as  their  father  went  out 
not  knowing  whither  he  went.  Some  event  occurs  breaking  up  the  business  which 
seemed  so  weU  established,  and  the  merchant  driven  from  his  old  anchorage  is  in  fear 
of  quicksands  amid  strange  waters.  The  working  man  with  the  least  ceremony  is 
discharged  from  the  berth  in  which  he  has  been  able  to  secure  for  himself  and  others 
daily  bread,  and  in  the  crowded  labour  market  must  find  himself  a  fresh  job  as  best 
he  may.  We  are  familiar  with  facts  like  these  in  this  world  of  vicissitude,  but  who 
can  express  all  the  uncertainty  and  solicitude  and  sorrow  they  imply  ?  It  is  a  time 
of  peculiar  exposure,  suffering,  and  peril  to  the  creatures  of  the  sea  who  have  shed 
their  old  shell,  and  not  yet  got  a  new  one  ;  and  birds  of  passage  often  perish  in 
multitudes  on  their  journey  from  one  land  to  another.  So  the  Christian,  turned  out 
of  his  nest,  stripped  of  his  shell,  experiences  a  phase  of  life  full  of  peril  to  faith  and 
temper  and  character.  The  disruption  of  our  circumstances  is  frequently  followed 
by  serious  and  even  fatal  moral  and  religious  consequences.  But  be  sure  that  if  you 
fear  God  and  follow  His  leading  He  has  brought  you  out  of  the  familiar  life  that  He 
may  give  you  a  richer  inheritance.  When  one  door  shuts  another  opens.  But  you 
say,  ' '  Will  the  door  that  opens,  open  upon  a  situation  as  pleasant  as  the  old  ? "  It 
may  open  upon  one  a  great  deal  better.  Most  men  who  have  found  their  way  to 
fortune  owed  their  success  to  the  fact  that  some  door  or  other  was  once  slammed  in 
their  face  ;  but  even  should  the  opening  door  open  on  a  more  sombre  situation,  be 
sure  that  it  opens  up  to  you  possibilities  of  far  grander  character  and  experience.  ^  I 
say,  then,  if  God  is  leading  you  out  of  the  old  set  of  associations,  do  not  be  afraid  ; 
He  is  preparing  you  for  something  better,  preparing  something  better  for  you. 
When  God  brought  the  Pilgrim  Fathers  out  of  this  country  they  tasted  to  the  full 
the  bitter  sorrows  of  dispossession  ;  for  dreary  months  they  were  tossed  in  the  May- 
Jlower,  and  then  found  it  hard  work  to  get  foothold  upon  the  strange  coast.  But  in 
due  time  God  brought  them  into  the  good  land,  giving  them  liberty  of  conscience 
and  all  else  that  makes  life  worth  living.  Whatever  else  may  come  to  pass  you  shall 
finally  acknowledge  that  disinheriting  you,  transporting  you,  God  has  brought  you 
into  a  deeper  faith,  a  stronger  character,  and  set  your  feet  in  a  large  place  of  moral 
wealth  and  spiritual  blessing.  III.  The  text  is  full  of  encouragement  as  through 
the  Divine  grace  we  pass  into  a  new  year.  Time  is  even  a  greater  leader 
than  Moses,  conducting  us  out  of  the  familiar  into  the  unknown.  We  attempt  to 
settle  ourselves  in  what  we  conclude  to  be  a  fairly  happy  condition  of  things,  to 
adjust  our  ideas,  interests,  and  hopes  to  a  fixed  and  permanent  environment,  but  it 
is  all  in  vain.  But  let  us  not  repine.  He  brings  us  out  from  thence  that  He  may 
bring  us  in  to  give  us  the  land.  Dispossessed  so  many  times,  it  is  that  we  may  be 
made  meet  for  an  inheritance  incorruptible,  undeliltd,  and  that  fadeth  not  away. 


224  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  vi. 

Sir  Samuel  Baker  writes  in  his  diary  as  he  penetrates  the  great  unknown  land,  "It 
is  curious  in  African  travel  to  mark  the  degrees  of  luxury  and  misery  ;  how  one  by 
one  the  wine,  spirits,  bread,  sugar,  tea,  &c.,  are  dropped  like  the  feathers  of  a 
moulting  bird,  and  nevertheless  we  go  ahead  contented. "  And  despite  the  fact  of 
their  constantly  dropping  the  conveniences  of  civilised  life  they  might  well  go 
ahead  contented,  for  were  not  their  eyes  every  day  looking  upon  the  wonders  of  a 
new  land  of  surpassing  wealth  and  splendour?  Our  earthly  losses  are  richly  com- 
pensated in  the  growing  wealth  of  our  spirit.  Let  us  take  care  that  by  our  discon- 
tent and  unbelief  and  disobedience  we  do  not  permit  some  painful  and  perilous 
hiatus  to  come  between  the  losses  of  the  material  life  and  the  accessions  of  the 
grace  and  glory  of  the  higher  life ;  let  us  grow  into  the  diviner  as  we  grow  out 
of  the  coarser.  IV.  The  text  has  gracious  consolation  for  us  when  the  Divine 
WILL  ENDS  this  MORTAL  LIFE.  We  do  uot  take  kindly  to  that  last  disposses- 
sion. "We  brought  nothing  into  this  world,  and  it  is  certain  that  we  can 
carry  nothing  out."  We  cannot  take  out  as  much  as  Israel  took  out  of 
Egypt.  But  let  not  our  faith  fail  us.  He  brings  us  out  from  this  terres- 
trial life  that  He  may  bring  us  into  the  celestial.  Cicero  tells  of  a  prisoner 
who  had  always  lived  in  prison  ;  he  had  never  once  seen  the  outer  world.  And 
so  when  he  had  become  an  old  man,  and  they  began  for  some  reason  or  other 
to  pull  down  the  walls  of  his  prison,  he  broke  into  bitter  lam  en  tings  because  they 
would  destroy  the  little  window  through  whose  bars  he  had  got  the  only  bit  of 
light  that  had  ever  gladdened  his  eyes.  He  did  not  understand  that  the  falling  of 
the  walls  would  let  him  into  a  broad,  bright  world,  would  open  to  him  the  wide 
glories  of  sun  and  sky  and  summer.  And  so  when  we  see  the  body  sinking  ruinous 
in  decay  it  seems  as  if  we  were  about  to  lose  everything,  forgetting  that  the 
senses  are  but  the  dim  windows  of  the  soul,  and  that  when  the  body  of  our 
humiliation  is  gone  the  walls  of  our  prison-house  are  gone,  and  a  new  world 
of  ii^nite  light  and  beauty  and  liberty  bursts  upon  us.  {W,  L.  WatUnson.) 
Coming  hack  again : — We  are  face  to  face  with  a  great  providential  plan.  Men  do 
not  go  out  and  in  by  haphazard  if  they  be  wise  men,  true  in  heart,  obedient  in 
will.  There  are  no  outlying  provinces  and  colonies  on  which  the  Sovereign's  eye 
does  not  rest.  We  must  not  bring  ourselves  out.  How  prone  man  is  to  do  this  ! 
He  will  handle  himself.  It  is  comforting,  it  is  self-elevating,  it  has  a  look  of 
business  and  energy  about  it ;  as  who  should  say,  I  am  awake,  I  will  do  this  with 
mine  own  hand.  Why  bring  yourselves  out?  You  cannot  take  yourselves  back 
again.  A  continual  restraint  of  the  appeals  and  voices  and  seductions  that 
would  carry  us  from  the  providential  way  is  part  of  the  discipline  of  life.  Do  not 
take  yourselves  out  of  anything  ;  for  God's  sake  and  your  own,  let  your  lives  alone. 
If  you  are  always  taking  up  the  ti-ee  to  see  whether  it  is  growing  you  will  make 
growth  impossible.  Only  when  God  brings  us  out  will  God  bring  us  in.  We  are 
too  much  given  to  tempting  God,  saying.  We  will  make  a  bad  bargain,  and  ask 
God  to  complete  it  and  make  it  up  to  us  as  if  we  had  done  nothing  foolish  ;  we  will 
adventure  ourselves  down  this  unfamiliar  road  ten  miles,  and  when  we  find  we  are 
on  the  wrong  path  we  can  begin  to  pray.  Why  will  not  men  look  at  both  ends  of 
a  covenant,  an  arrangement,  or  action  ?  Give  your  whole  life  every  day,  and  every 
hour,  and  every  moment,  to  God,  saying,  "Jesus,  still  lead  on"  ;  saying.  Except 
Thy  presence,  Thou  covenant  God,  go  with  me,  take  me  not  up  hence  :  I  weary  for 
something  else,  I  pant  for  some  new  opportunity  ;  but  if  it  be  Thy  will  that  I 
should  not  go,  then  make  me  glad,  if  not  with  rapture,  yet  with  quiet  content  of 
soul.  God  brought  His  people  out  of  bondage  that  He  might  bring  thera  into 
liberty.  Bondage  is  a  large  word,  signifying  a  large  experience,  and  signifying 
also  an  experience  that  is  necessaiy — that  is  to  say,  an  essential  part  of  any  true 
solid  and  perpetual  growth.  We  are  all  in  the  bondage  of  littleness.  God  is 
continually  leading  us  out  of  littleness  that  He  may  bring  us  into  largeness.  We 
shall  know  whether  God  brought  us  out  of  our  littleness  by  the  largeness  into 
which  we  have  entered.  If  our  charity  is  larger,  if  our  impulses  are  nobler,  if  our 
prayers  take  upon  themselves  a  new  grandeur  of  desire,  then  know  that  it  was  God, 
whose  key  turned  the  lock,  it  was  God  whose  voice  called  us  out  of  our  dwarfed  estate 
into  largeness  of  manhood.  There  is  a  bondage  of  darkness,  a  bondage  of  bigotry, 
a  bondage  of  thinking  that  we  are  the  people,  and  the  temple  of  the  Lord  are  we  ; 
and  all  people  who  do  not  go  with  us  are  wrong,  benighted,  and  foolish.  God  will 
lead  us  out  of  these  misconstructions  of  others  that  He  may  lead  us  into  a  true 
appreciation  of  our  brethren.  Somerimes  God  leads  us  out  of  wealth  that  He  may 
lead  us  into  it.    If  God  takes  away  our  wealth  He  means  to  give  us  more  and  more  ; 


CHAP.  VI.]  DEUTERONOMY, 


225 


If  God  IS  at  the  beginning  of  Job's  distresses  He  will  be  at  the  completion  of  Job's 
llTl' V  T  P  VJ*"  *t^'^^'  ^  into  his  own  hands  he  shall  fightit  with  his  own 
hand,  but  if  God  begin  to  stnp  him  and  to  bruise  him  we  must  wait  until  the  latter 
end  comes  and  then  interpret  the  purpose  and  the  scheme  of  heaven.  Things 
must  not  be  judged  m  their  fermenting  processes  ;  they  must  be  judged  when  gS 
says  concerning  each  of  them  It  is  finished.  God  brings  us  out  of  fouth  that  He 
may  bringus  into  manhood.  That  is  His  purpose.  Youth  itself  is  good  and  l^eautiful 
excellent,  but  not  enough.  God  leads  us  out  of  the  letter  that  He  may  brZ  us 
iw  1  ftr'^'l  •  A  ^°«*  «f  ^«  ^^:  P"soners  of  the  letter.  At  the  first  it  is  necess^a?y 
that  literal  bondage  should  test  us  ;  but  we  are  not  under  God's  guidance  fully  and 
consentingly  unless  we  are  daily  growing  away  from  the  letter-not  to  make  theletter 
a  stoanger  or  to  isolate  ourselves  from  it,  but  growing  away  from  the  letter  aa  the 
edifice  grows  away  from  the  foundation,  and  as  the  tree  grows  away  from  the  root^ 
not  leaving  It,  but  carrying  it  up  to  higher  significance,  into  blossom  and  fruitful- 
?t!?^;c.  ^^.^*^^  ^  familiar  saying  amongst  us  which  is  not  true  ;  we  say  of  certain 

ftepH  '  T/  *'  --^  ^  ^  •  \-  ^^.^  ^^ri  ^'  °°^^^"g  i^  *11  Ht^rature^so  hanl  ^ 
these  letters ;  there  is  no  reading  m  aU  the  world  so  hard  as  the  alphabet.  It  is 
n  the  alphabet  that  we  find  the  difficulty  ;  the  years  will  come  and  go,  and  then 
the  mechanical  will  be  forgotten,  because  we  have  entered  into  a  spiritual  con- 
sciousness,  and  now  everything  that  is  mechanical  and  arbitrary  is  under  our  feet  • 
we  are  masters  of  that  department  of  the  situation.  It  is  even  so  with  God's  Book  • 
It  IS  even  so  with  God  s  own  Son.  The  Apostle  Paul  says,  -  Henceforth  we  know 
no  man  after  the  flesh,  yea,  though  we  have  known  Christ  after  the  flesh,  yet 
henceforth  know  we  Him  no  more."  The  reader  does  not  know  the  alphabet  in 
the  sense  of  that  alphabet  being  an  irritation  or  an  exasperation  to  him  He 
Jnows  It  80  well  that  he  is  not  conscious  of  knowing  it.  Thus  the  letter  may 
be  translated  into  the  spirit ;  thus  the  creating  Hand  and  the  redeeming  blood  may 
be  earned  up  into  what  is  called  the  Holy  Ghost-the  final,  the  eternal  Personality^ 
Have  ye  received  the  Holy  Ghost?  God  thus  leads  us  out  of  law  that  He  may 
bring  us  into  grace.  The  law  is  hard,  the  law  is  graven  on  stone  or  written  in 
iron.  We  must  paas  through  that  school  of  the  law,  we  must  obey  ;  but  obedience 
makes  law  easy  and  gracious.  "Practice,"  we  say,  "makes  perfect."  That  little 
maxim  has  its  application  to  things  spiritual ;  doing  the  will,  we  learn  the  doctrine  • 
obeying  the  law,  we  come  into  the  grace.  We  shall  know  how  far  we  have  grown 
in  the  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  by  the  ease  and  the  delight  which  we  realise  in 
obedience  and  service  and  sacriface.  God  has  led  some  of  you  out,  and  you  do  not 
know  where  to.     There  is  no  need  for  you  to  know.     Let  God  alone.     Did  He  place 

CitTnn'r  ^?  ;  ^.r^  ^"'i  'f^''^  v.  ^^^'^^^  *^*^  y°"  ^^«  ^^^  y^^^  providential 
position  Then  stop  there.  But  by  taking  one  step  across  the  road  I  could  do 
wonders  !  So  you  may  :  how  long  ivill  the  wonders  last  ?  What  are  these  yellow 
wonders,  these  rocket  blazes  of  earth  ?  Better  have  a  crust  with  God  than  try  to 
banquet  on  the  wind.  How  sweet  it  is  to  realise  the  providence  of  life  •  how 
comtorting  to  know  that  everything  we  say,  think,  or  do,  is  of  consequence  to  God  ' 
iL'/     X\  .1     }  TJuetenml  purpose  :-Jl  glance   at  the  text  will  suffice 

to  show  that  the  honour  of  Israel's  redemption,  from  beginning  to  end,  is  due  to 
Israels  God  No  mention  is  made  of  any  other  power;  God  and  God  alone  is 
responsible  for  Israel.  Twas  He  that  brought  His  people  out,  'twas  He  also  that 
led  them  in  So  may  it  be  with  us,  for  our  salvation,  too,  is  of  the  Lord.  The 
other  thought  IS  almost  as  manifest,  namely,  that  God's  redemptive  work,  from  its 
iniual  stage  to  its  glorious  consummation,  is  a  scheme  or  plan  which  He  conceived 
in  His  loving  heart,  and  wrought  out  by  His  mighty  hand.  It  is  not  the  result  of 
Haphazard  nor  of  casual  thought.  It  is  no  experiment,  no  after-thought,  but  the 
outcome  of  a  settled  and  unalterable  purpose.  "  He  brought  us  out,  thit  He  might 
brmg  us  in.  I.  Salvation  is  of  God.  Israel's  redemption,  from  first  to  Iwt 
was  Jehovah  8  doing.  Notice  this,  will  you,  that  the  Lord  our  God  in  the  matter 
ot  our  salvation  both  bnngs  us  out  and  brings  us  in.  From  Him  we  received  our 
first  convictions  ;  tis  He  that  wakes  withm  the  slumbering  soul  the  earliest  desire 
for  better  things.  ^  And  just  as  certainly  as  that  God  works  in  ua  those  earliest 
ajpir^ons  and  desires,  so  certainly  does  He  crown  the  work  at  last.  1.  Note,  first 
that  He  b^gs  us  out.  How  was  it  with  these  people  in  the  early  days  ?  We  have 
here  a  short  record  of  their  wonderful  experiencT'^"  We  were  Pharaoh's  bondmen 
^¥r'     .     .  ^  ^9Ji^  brought  us  out  of  Egypt  with  a  mighty  hand."    They 

Zhi'^'f^'S'^i.'^'^^r?^^^^^"^^-^^^^  '^^^'  ^'^  ^««t  interposed  on 
their  behalf.    He  heard  their  cry.     The  things  that  accompany  our  salvation  are 


226  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vi. 

not  less  remarkable  than  the  wonders  God  wrought  in  the  land  of  Ham.  He  has 
had  pity,  and  shown  His  mighty  power  to  us-ward.  His  compassions  hare  not 
failed  in  our  case,  and  He  has  wrought  miracles  that  eclipse  altogether  the  wonders 
that  Zoan  saw.  2.  Equally  true  is  it  that  He  brings  us  in.  Canaan  was  a  long 
way  from  Egypt,  but  the  Lord  had  determined  to  do  the  work  thoroughly. 
It  was  not  enough  to  cross  the  Bed  Sea,  nor  even  to  pass  the  desert ;  the  chosen 
people  must  ford  the  Jordan,  and  enter  the  promised  land.  Oh,  believe  me,  the 
Lord  is  prepared  to  do  just  this  in  the  realm  of  spirituals  for  aU  His  believing 
people.  Whom  He  justifies  them  He  also  sanctifies,  and  whom  He  sanctifies  them 
He  also  glorifies.  He  is  all  our  salvation  and  all  our  desire.  At  the  first  He  gives 
US  by  His  Spirit  all  needed  grace  that  we  may  come  repentingly,  look  beUevingly, 
and  go  on  our  way  rejoicingly.  'Tis  He  produces  joy,  and  peace,  and  hope,  and 
love.  II.  And  this  salvation  is  the  result  of  planning.  God's  purpose  and 
God's  power  go  together.  As  I  have  told  you  already,  there  was  a  scheme  at  the 
back  of  this.  They  did  not  happen  or  come  to  pass  by  chance ;  they  were  all 
devised  and  designed  by  the  loving  Father.  I  do  not  think  that  we  should  marvel 
particularly  at  this.  "We  ourselves  have  plans  and  purposes.  They  do  not  always 
come  off,  it  is  true  ;  too  often  we  fail  to  see  what  we  have  hoped  to  view,  and  our 
best  laid  plans  deceive  and  disappoint  us.  Not  so  with  God  ;  all  that  He  arranges 
for  surely  comes  to  pass,  for  His  power  and  His  purpose  go  hand  in  hand.  Now 
apply  this  to  our  case  and  to  spiritual  things.  1.  Thank  God  there  was  a  loving 
thought  in  His  dear  heart.  I  know  not  when  it  first  sprang  up.  God  has  never 
been  aught  but  love,  and  I  cannot  conceive  that  there  could  ever  have  been  a  time 
when  He  had  not  set  His  heart  upon  the  salvation  of  men  whom  He  would  yet 
create,  and  who  He  knew  would  sin.  You  do  not  wonder  either,  that,  having  such 
a  thought  in  His  heart  toward  us,  it  found  expression  in  words.  2.  The  gracious 
promise  proclaimed  the  loving  purpose.  3.  Then  came  the  mighty  deed,  the  baring 
of  His  arm,  the  showing  of  His  mighty  power,  the  deliverance  of  His  people  from 
the  heel  of  the  tyrant — a  deliverance  so  complete  that  they  did  not  leave  so  much 
as  a  hoof  behind  them.  Not  they  and  their  children  merely,  but  their  cattle  and 
their  chattels  were  all  delivered  from  the  house  of  bondage.  4.  Then  began  the 
ceaseless  care  of  Jehovah  towards  His  people.  He  did  not  lead  them  over  the  Red 
Sea  that  He  might  forsake  them  in  the  desert,  nor  did  He  conduct  them  across  the 
desert  that  He  might  see  them  drown  in  the  Jordan.  No,  no  !  He  led  them  all 
the  way  ;  nothing  interfered  with  His  purpose  ;  there  were  obstacles,  but  He  over- 
came them.  He  did  not  bring  them  out  from  Egypt  merely  as  a  demonstration  of 
His  power  ;  as  one  of  the  great  powers,  for  instance,  will  make  a  naval  demonstration, 
and  secure  a  certain  result,  and  then  it  is  all  past  and  over.  This  was  only  the  first 
step  and  stage  in  the  glorious  process  of  complete  deliverance  for  Israel,  and  of  the 
fulfilling  of  a  gracious  promise  ratified  by  oath  to  Abraham.  He  did  not  bring  them 
out  that  He  might  slay  them  in  the  wilderness,  as  the  enemies  of  Israel  insinuated 
when  they  heard  how  He  punished  them.  Certainly  He  did  not  bring  them  out 
that  they  might  go  back  again,  as  they  themselves,  alas  !  were  prepared  to  do  when 
they  got  into  difficulties.     Grace  is  glory  in  the  bud.     {Thomas  Spurgeon.) 

Yer.  24.  The  Lord  commanded  us  to  do  all  these  statutes. — The  moral  signifi' 
eance  of  God's  laws : — The  doctrine  of  this  text  is  that  God's  laws  are  for  the  good 
of  His  subjects  ;  that  the  basis  of  all  His  laws  is  benevolence ;  that  their  foundation 
is  love.  I.  This  fact  is  well  attested.  1.  In  the  nature  of  the  commands. 
2.  In  the  experience  of  His  subjects.  The  loyal  have  ever  been  the  happiest. 
II.  This  fact  reveals  the  Divine  character.  1.  Unbounded  love.  2.  Complete 
wisdom.  3.  Absolute  independence.  III.  This  fact  explains  the  condition  of 
all  human  happiness.  What  is  it  ?  Not  the  search  for  it  as  an  end.  * '  He  that 
seeketh  his  life  shall  lose  it. "  Obey,  because  it  is  right  to  obey  the  Infinitely  Holy 
and  the  Supremely  Good.     {U.  R.  Thomas.)  Obligation,  nature,  and  advantages 

of  religion : — I.  The  obligation  of  religion.  "The  Lord  commanded  us." 
1.  The  will  of  God  is  the  proper  ground  of  moral  obligation.  2.  The  will  of  God, 
as  made  known  to  us,  is  the  statement  and  rule  of  religion.  II.  The  particular 
NATURE  of  religion.  1.  " To  fear  the  Lord  our  God" — the  mind  constituted  so 
as  that  certain  afi'ections  may  be  produced  by  certain  objects.  The  true  knowledge 
of  God  will  produce  reverence,  admiration,  and  dread.  At  first  this,  with  a  deep 
sense  of  guilt,  will  be  the  spirit  of  bondage  unto  fear.  When  the  Spirit  of  adoption 
is  received  the  fear  is  filial,  reverential,  producing  hatred  to  sin.  2.  "To  do  all 
these  statutes."    Religion  is  to  be  practical  and  external,  as  well  as  experimental 


CHAP,  vii.]  DEUTERONOMY.  227 

and  internal.  (1)  It  is  not  talking  about  the  Divine  laws,  but  doing  them.  (2)  It 
is  not  doing  what  we  please,  but  the  commands  of  God.  (3)  It  is  not  selecting 
such  as  we  prefer,  but  doing  "all  tbese  statutes."  (4)  It  is  not  doing  them  care- 
lessly, but  with  due  thought :  observe.  (5)  It  is  not  doing  them  formally  or  to 
please  man,  but  in  reference  to  God  Himself;  "before  the  Lord."  (6)  Obedience 
is  not  to  be  in  opposition  to  the  covenant  of  mercy,  but  connected  with  it ;  "before 
the  Lord  our  God."  III.  Value  and  advantages  of  religion.  1.  "It  shall  be 
our  righteousness."  Mercy  comes  only  through  merit  and  intercession  of  Christ. 
Is  at  first  received  only  by  faith.  Still,  He  is  Author  of  eternal  salvation  only  to 
them  that  obey  Him.  For  Christ's  sake  continued  obedience  to  the  law  of  our 
dispensation  is  the  channel  of  continual  acceptance.  2.  "For  our  good  always." 
We  enjoy  the  favour  of  God,  and  the  light  of  His  countenance  is  our  happiness. 
His  providence  takes  care  of  us.     His  glory  will  receive  U3.     {O.  Cubitt.) 


CHAPTER   VII. 

Vers.  2-4.  Thou  Shalt  smite  them,  and  utterly  destroy  them. —  Wars  of  the 
Israelites: — There  is,  perhaps,  no  point  on  which  the  weakness  of  human  nature 
is  more  clearly  shown  than  in  the  difficulty  of  treading  the  right  path  between 
persecution  on  the  one  hand,  and  indiflference  to  evil  on  the  other.  For  although 
we  are,  it  may  be,  disposed  according  to  our  several  tempers  more  to  one  of  these 
faults  than  to  the  other,  yet  I  fear  it  is  true  also  that  none  of  us  are  free  from  the 
danger  of  falling  into  them  both.  If  we  have  to-day  been  too  violent  against  the 
persons  of  evil  men  whom  we  do  not  like,  this  is  no  security  against  our  being 
to-morrow  much  too  forbearing  towards  the  practices  of  evil  men  whom  we  do 
like  ;  because  we  are  all  apt  to  respect  persons  in  our  judgment  and  in  our  feelings ; 
sometimes  to  be  too  severe,  and  sometimes  too  indulgent,  not  according  to  justice,  but 
according  to  our  own  likings  and  dislikings.  Nor  is  it  respect  of  persons  only  which 
thus  leads  us  astray,  but  also  our  own  particular  sympathy  with,  or  disgust  at 
particular  faults  and  characters.  Even  in  one  whom  we  may  like,  on  the  whole,  there 
may  be  faults  which  we  may  visit  too  hardly,  because  they  are  exactly  such  as  we 
feel  no  temptation  to  commit.  And  again,  in  one  whom  we  dislike  on  the  whole, 
there  may,  for  the  same  reason,  be  faults  which  we  tolerate  too  easily,  because  they 
are  like  our  own.  There  is  yet  a  third  cause,  and  that  a  very  common  one,  which 
corrupts  our  judgment.  We  may  sympathise  with  such  and  such  faults  generally, 
because  we  are  ourselves  inclined  to  them  ;  but  if  they  happen  to  be  committed 
against  us,  and  we  feel  the  bad  effects  of  them,  then  we  are  apt  to  judge  them 
in  that  particular  case  too  harshly.  Or  again,  we  may  rather  dislike  a  fault  in 
general,  but  when  it  is  committed  on  our  own  side,  and  to  advance  our  own  interests, 
then  in  that  particular  case  we  are  tempted  to  excuse  it  too  readily.  There  are 
these  dangers  besetting  us  on  the  right  hand  and  on  the  left,  as  to  our  treatment  of 
other  men's  faults.  And  in  Scrij)ture  we  find  very  strong  language  against  the 
error  on  either  side.  A  gi-eat  deal  is  said  against  violence,  wrath,  uncharitableness, 
harsh  judgment  of  others,  and  attempting  or  pretending  to  work  God's  service  by 
our  own  bad  passions,  and  a  great  deal  is  also  said  against  tolerating  sin,  against 
defiling  ourselves  with  evil-doers,  against  preferring  our  earthly  friendships  to  the 
will  and  service  of  God.  Of  these  latter  commands  the  words  of  the  text  furnish 
us  with  a  most  remarkable  instance.  We  see  how  strong  and  positive  the  language 
is  (ver.  2) ;  and  the  reason  is  given  (ver.  4).  It  is  better  that  the  wicked  should  be 
destroyed  a  hundred  times  over,  yea,  destroyed  with  everlasting  destruction,  than 
that  they  should  tempt  those  who  are  as  yet  innocent  to  join  their  company.  And 
if  we  are  inclined  to  think  that  God  dealt  hardly  with  the  people  of  Canaan 
in  commanding  them  to  be  so  utterly  destroyed,  let  us  but  think  what  might  have 
been  our  fate,  and  the  fate  of  every  other  nation  under  heaven  at  this  hour,  had 
the  sword  of  the  Israelites  done  its  work  more  sparingly.  The  Israelites  fought  not 
for  themselves  only,  but  for  us.  Whatever  were  the  faults  of  Jephthah  or  of 
Samson,  never  yet  were  any  men  engaged  in  a  cause  more  important  to  the  whole 
world's  welfare.  Their  constant  warfare  kept  Israel  essentially  distinct  from  the 
tribes  around  them,  their  own  law  became  the  dearer  to  them  because  they  found 
such  unceasing  enemies  amongst  those  who  hated  it.    The  uncircumcised,  who 


228  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  vii. 

kept  not  the  covenant  of  God,  were  for  ever  ranged  against  those  who  did  keep 
it.  It  might  follow  that  the  Israelites  should  thus  be  accounted  the  enemies  of  all 
mankind,  it  might  be  that  they  were  tempted  by  their  very  distinctness  to  despise 
other  nations ;  still,  they  did  God's  work  ;  still,  they  preserved  unhurt  the  seed  of 
eternal  life,  and  were  tne  ministers  of  blessing  to  all  other  nations,  even  though 
they  themselves  failed  to  enjoy  it.  But  still  these  commands,  so  forcible,  so 
fearful — to  spare  none — to  destroy  the  wicked  utterly — to  show  no  mercy — are  these 
commands  addressed  to  ns  now  ?  or  what  is  it  which  the  Lord  bids  us  do  ? 
Certainly,  He  does  not  bid  us  shed  blood,  or  destroy  the  wicked,  or  put  on  any 
hardness  of  heart  which  might  shut  out  the  charity  of  Christ's  perfect  law.  But 
there  is  a  part  of  the  text  which  does  apply  to  us  now  in  the  letter,  thereby 
teaching  ns  how  to  apply  the  whole  to  ourselves  in  the  spirit.  "Be  ye  not 
unequally  yoked  together  in  marriage  with  unbelievers.  For  what  concord  hath 
Christ  with  Belial?  It  is,  indeed,  something  shocking  to  enter  into  so  near  and 
dear  a  connection  as  mamage  with  those  who  are  not  the  servants  of  God.  It  is 
fearful  to  think  of  giving  birth  to  children  whose  eternal  life  may  be  forfeited 
through  the  example  and  influence  of  him  or  of  her  through  whom  their  earthly 
life  was  given.  But  though  this  be  the  worst  and  most  dreadful  case,  still  it  is  not 
the  only  one.  St.  Paul  does  not  only  speak  against  marriage  with  the  unbelievers  ; 
lie  speaks  also  no  less  strongly  against  holding  friendly  intercourse  with  those  who 
call  themselves  Christ's,  yet  in  their  lives  deny  Him  (1  Cor.  v.  11).  We  need  not 
actually  refuse  to  eat  with  those  whose  lives  are  evil ;  but  woe  to  us  if  we  do  not 
shrink  from  any  closer  intimacy  with  them  ;  if  their  society,  when  we  must  partake 
of  it,  be  not  painfully  endured  by  us,  rather  than  enjoyed.  We  may  put  away 
from  among  ourselves  that  wicked  person  ;  put  him  away,  that  is,  from  our 
confidence,  put  him  away  from  our  esteem ;  put  him  altogether  away  from 
our  sympathy.  We  are  on  services  wholly  different  ;  our  masters  are  God  and 
Mammon  ;  and  we  cannot  be  united  closely  with  those  to  whom  our  dearest 
hopes  are  their  worst  fears,  and  to  whom  that  resurrection  which,  to  the  true 
servant  of  Christ,  will  be  his  perfect  consummation  of  bliss,  will  be  but  the  first 
dawning  of  an  eternity  of  shame  and  misery.  {T.  ArTwld,  D.D.)  DestimMion  of 
the  Canaanites : — The  extermination  of  the  Canaanites  forces  itself  on  the  attention 
of  the  most  careless  reader  of  the  Old  Testament.  We  cannot  deny  that  there 
is  a  difficulty  which  needs  explanation  :  we  cannot  doubt  that  such  a  judgment  was 
meant  to  give  to  every  age  a  solemn  and  needftd  warning.  1.  In  the  first  place,  it 
behoves  us  to  understand  that  this  destruction  was  not  a  punishment  for  idolatry. 
The  war  of  Israel  in  Canaan  did  not  resemble  a  crusade.  The  Canaanites  perished, 
not  because  they  had  bowed  down  to  false  gods,  or  refused  to  worship  the  true  God, 
but  because  they  had  made  themselves  utterly  abominable.  This  is  clear  from 
Leviticus  xviii.  24.  The  Canaanites  perished  because  the  earth  could  no  longer 
bear  them  :  the  safety  of  the  whole  demanded  their  extirpation.  2.  We  observe, 
further,  that  they  did  not  perish  without  warning.  The  sites  of  Sodom  and 
Gomorrah,  once  like  the  garden  of  Eden  in  loveliness,  withered  and  burnt  up  by 
fire  from  heaven,  and  at  length  turned  into  a  bituminous  lake,  showed  the  end  of 
those  sins  by  which  the  land  was  defiled.  It  was  a  memorial  not  to  be  forgotten. 
The  Dead  Sea  was  a  phenomenon  which  forced  the  inquiry,  "Wherefore  hath  God 
done  this  ? "  The  forty  years'  sojourn  in  the  wilderness  was  not  only  fraught  with 
blessing  to  Israel  and  instruction  to  the  Church,  but  it  gave  to  the  Canaanites  time 
to  consider  and  repent.  It  produced  this  effect  on  Rahab  and  on  the  Gibeonites, 
who  humbled  themselves  under  the  hand  of  God  and  were  spared.  The  rest  of  the 
nations  of  Canaan  heard  and  feared,  but  repented  not.  We  may  not,  then,  marvel 
that  the  cup  of  wrath  which  such  habitual  and  audacious  wickedness  had  filled  was 
deep  and  deadly.  Yet  the  destruction  is  not  without  its  parallels.  Many  modern 
campaigns  have  produced  a  greater  loss  of  life  and  far  intenser  misery.  The  sword 
appals  us  by  its  fierceness  ;  but  it  is  more  merciful  than  the  famine  and  the 
pestilence,  which  in  our  own  days  have  ravaged  large  portions  of  the  globe.  It  cuts 
short  the  suspense  which  is  more   grievous   than  death  ;   it  inflicts  no  lingering 

i)ain.  Besides,  this  was  the  only  judgment  in  which  idolaters  would  have  seen  the 
land  of  the  God  of  Israel.  Had  they  perished  in  thousands  by  want  or  disease 
they  would  have  attributed  this  to  the  displeasure  of  Moloch  or  Baal.  But  they 
ever  regarded  battle  as  the  trial  of  deities.  So,  when  the  iron  chariots  had  been 
broken  in  the  valleys,  and  the  rocky  fastness  and  fenced  city  had  failed  to  protect 
the  Anakim,  all  who  felt  the  sword  of  Israel  and  all  to  whom  the  tidings  came 
were  forced  to  confess  that  Jehovah  was  to  be  feared  above  all  gods.     Hence  wo 


CHAP.  VII.]  DEUTERONOMY.  229 

may  see  what  Israel  and  all  other  nations  were  to  learm  from  these  wars  in 
Canaan.  1.  They  learnt,  first,  God's  absolute  sovereignty,  His  right  and  property, 
in  the  life  of  man,  and  therefore  in  everything  by  and  for  which  man  lives.  If, 
then,  the  Canaanite  had  no  property  in  his  life,  nor  power  to  retain  it  when  God 
demanded,  it,  we  dare  not  claim  more  than  stewardship  of  anything  that  we  call 
ours.  The  largest  possessions,  the  richest  intellectual  gifts,  are  less  than  the  life. 
These,  then,  are  at  the  disposal  of  Him  who  is  the  Lord  of  life.  If  we  use  them 
as  God's  servants  they  will  secure  to  us  everlasting  possessions  ;  but  from  the 
unfaithful  steward  shall  be  taken  even  that  which  he  seemeth  to  have.  2.  Again, 
God  manifested  that  man  hath  something  better  than  life.  Our  hearts  may  be 
harrowed  or  sickened  at  the  thought  that  the  sword  of  Israel  struck  down  not 
only  the  boastful  warrior,  but  the  feeble  woman  and  the  blooming  child  and 
the  infant  at  the  breast.  But  the  same  suffering  and  death  of  the  weak  and  the 
graceful  and  the  pure  is  continually  forcing  itself  on  our  attention  in  every 
epidemic,  in  public  calamities,  and  in  the  more  frequent  casualties  of  private  life, 
in  Indian  and  Syrian  massacres,  and  even  at  the  birth  of  Christ  Himself,  when 
Rachel  was  weeping  for  her  children.  All  this  piercing  and  cutting  down  of  the 
young  and  the  tender  and  the  promising  would  be  inexplicable  if  we  had  not  the 
revelation  of  a  higher  life,  for  which  suffering  and  the  contact  with  suffering 
are  the  preparation.  (J/".  Biggs,  M.A.)  A  noble  resolve: — Eliza  Embert,  a 
young  Parisian  lady,  resolutely  discarded  a  gentleman  to  whom  she  was  to  have 
been  married  the  next  day  because  he  ridiculed  religion.  Having  given  him 
a  gentle  reproof  for  some  impropriety,  he  replied  tbat  *'  a  man  of  the  world  would 
not  be  so  old-fashioned  as  to  regard  God  and  religion."  Eliza  immediately 
started;  but  soon  recovering  herself,  said,  "From  this  moment,  as  I  discover  you 
do  not  respect  religion,  I  cease  to  be  yours."  The  danger  of  amorally  vitiaied 
atmosphere : — Some  time  ago  the  following  strange  occurrence  happened  at  St. 
Cierge,  a  village  in  the  Jura.  The  principal  room  of  an  inn  there,  known  as  the 
Cerf,  was  lighted  by  a  hanging  petroleum  lamp,  above  which  had  been  placed,  for 
the  protection  of  the  ceiling,  a  metal  plate.  In  course  of  time  the  woodwork 
above  the  plate  became  desiccated,  and  one  evening  it  took  fire,  and  when  the 
innkeeper  and  his  family  retired  to  rest  was  all  aglow — a  fact,  however,  which  they 
do  not  seem  to  have  noticed.  From  the  ceiling  the  fire  was  communicated  to  the 
room  above,  and  was  first  discovered  by  a  neighbour,  who,  early  next  morning, 
observing  smoke  issuing  from  the  door,  gave  an  alarm,  when,  as  none  of  the 
inmates  could  be  aroused,  the  door  was  broken  open.  The  fire,  having  gone 
on  smouldering  without  bursting  into  flame,  had  done  little  material  damage,  and 
was  easily  extinguished ;  but  all  the  people  in  the  house — the  landlord,  his  wife 
and  sister — were  dead.  After  the  manner  of  country  people,  they  had  firmly 
closed  their  windows  before  going  to  bed,  and  the  smoke,  having  no  exit,  had 
asphyxiated  every  one  of  them.  In  like  manner  those  who  allow  a  morally 
vitiated  atmosphere  to  surround  them,  and  willingly  inhale  its  pestiferous  fumes, 
wither  and  become  spiritually  suffocated.  The  loss  of  spiritual  tone : — Animals 
that  live  in  two  elements  are  awkward  in  both.  Do  we  find  it  diflScult,  even  after 
the  most  innocent  and  unexceptionable  entertainments,  to  brace  the  soul  for  its 
devotions  ?  Do  not  our  pinions  flap  languidly  as  we  attempt  our  upward  flight  ? 
And  is  it  not  the  case  that  many  of  the  so-called  amusements  which  men  pursue 
are  in  the  last  degree  unfavourable  to  those  exercises,  without  a  constant  applica- 
tion to  which  the  highest  zones  of  religious  experience,  the  snowy  summits  of  a 
pure  spirituality — those  glistening  peaks  that  are  the  first  to  catch  the  auroral  glow 
of  the  rising  Sun  of  Righteousness,  and  the  last  to  lose  His  evening  beams — cannot 
be  reached  and  maintained  ?  To  spoil  a  harp,  you  need  not  rudely  break  its  strings 
and  batter  its  sounding-board.  Remove  it  from  one  temperature  to  another,  and 
the  mischief  is  done.  We  cannot  say  that  people  are  not  hurt  by  these  things 
because  they  are  not  made  openly  and  scandalously  vicious.  I  maintain  that  a  man 
has  sustained  a  dire  and  irreparable,  though  a  subtle,  and  at  first  impalpable  injury, 
when  he  has  lost  his  spiritual  tone.     {J.  Halsey.) 

Yer.  9.  Tbem  tbat  love  Him  and  keep  His  commandments. — Love  Ood,  and  keep 
His  commandTnents : — The  love  of  God,  according  to  the  Scripture  notion  of  it,  is 
a  duty  easy  to  be  comprehended.  And  the  text  before  us,  which  attaches  so  great 
a  reward  to  this  grace,  does,  at  the  same  time,  show  us  what  it  means  in  saying 
that  God  keepeth  covenant  and  mercy  with  them  that  love  Him  and  keep  His 
commandments.    For  the  latter  words  fix  and  ascertain  the  meaning  of  the  former, 


2S0  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vir. 

ind  give  us  to  understand  that  he  who  keepeth  God's  commandments  is  he  that 
loveth  Him.  Nor  are  the  laws  and  commandments  of  God,  by  the  keeping  of 
which  is  evidenced  our  love  of  Him,  so  hard  to  be  understood.  For  He  hath 
marked  out  the  great  lines  of  our  duty  by  His  works  of  creation  and  providence, 
and  hath  clearly  filled  them  up  in  His  holy  Scriptures.  "  By  these  He  hath  showed 
thee,  0  man,  what  is  good."  I  proceed  to  the  main  design  of  this  discourse,  which 
is,  to  lay  before  you  the  reasons  and  motives  of  loving  and  obeying  God,  which  the 
text  offers,  from  His  nature  and  promises.  The  name  of  God  implies  all  that  is 
excellent  and  adorable  ;  and  here,  in  the  first  place,  by  the  title  of  Lord  added  to 
it,  directs  our  view  to  His  dominion  and  sovereignty,  by  which  He  hath  a  right  to 
our  submission  and  obedience.  We  were  created  by  His  power,  and  are  sustained 
by  His  providence.  We  are  bom  the  subjects  of  His  kingdom,  which  ruleth  over 
all  ;  and  are  the  children  of  the  family  of  which  He  is  the  great  Father  and  Lord  ; 
who  allots  to  every  one  his  rank  and  condition  in  it,  and  expects  from  all  an  account 
of  their  works.  Our  passage  through  life  is  compared  to  a  voyage  over  a  great 
ocean,  where  we  must  wander  and  be  lost,  without  somewhat  to  direct  us  through 
it.  But  our  safe  and  certain  direction  is  the  law  of  God,  in  which  we  have  not  less 
reason  to  rejoice  than  "they  who  go  down  to  the  sea  in  ships  and  do  business  in 
great  waters  "  have  in  beholding  and  observing  the  signs  and  constellations  by  which 
they  govern  their  course  over  the  face  of  the  deep.  For  mariners,  who  sail  in  such 
tempestuous  weather  that  neither  sun  nor  stars  in  many  days  appear,  are  not  in  a 
state  of  greater  perplexity  and  danger  than  man  would  be  left  in  without  the  laws 
and  commandments  which  God  has  set  forth,  as  so  many  lights  and  signs  from 
heaven  to  guide  him  securely  through  this  voyage  of  life.  We  read  that,  in  certain 
climates  of  the  world,  the  gales  that  spring  from  the  land  carry  a  refreshing  smell 
out  to  sea,  and  assure  the  watchful  pilot  that  he  is  approaching  to  a  desirable  and 
fruitful  coast  when  as  yet  he  cannot  discern  it  with  his  eyes.  And,  to  take  up 
once  more  the  comparison  of  life  to  a  voyage,  in  like  manner  it  fares  with  those  who 
have  steadily  and  religiously  pursued  the  course  which  heaven  pointed  out  to  them. 
We  shall  sometimes  find  by  their  conversation  towards  the  end  of  their  days,  that 
they  are  filled  with  hope,  and  peace,  and  joy,  which,  like  those  refreshing  gales 
and  reviving  odours  to  the  seaman,  are  breathed  forth  from  paradise  upon  their 
souls,  and  give  them  to  understand  with  certainty  that  God  is  bringing  them  unto 
their  desired  haven.  But  to  return  to  our  proper  argument.  The  wisdom  of  God 
is  incapable  of  being  misled  itself,  and  His  goodness  of  misleading  us  ;  and  there- 
fore the  precepts  which  He  hath  given  for  the  government  of  our  lives  must  be 
excellently  framed  to  the  perfection  and  happiness  of  our  nature.  His  laws,  which 
enjoin  the  worship  and  honour  of  Himself,  which  command  us  to  honour  our 
parents,  to  do  justice,  and  to  love  mercy,  which  forbid  us  to  injure  the  life,  the 
peace,  the  property  of  our  neighbour,  are  evidently  framed  for  the  general  good  of 
mankind.  And  this  we  are  mostly  willing  to  allow.  But  there  are  some  cases 
which  the  laws  of  God  treat  as  sinful,  wherein  we  are  fondly  apt  to  imagine  that 
the  injunction  is  rigorous  which  forbids  us  to  follow  the  bent  of  our  inclinations, 
when,  as  appears  to  us,  no  injury  is  done  to  others.  Yet  God  is  gracious,  alike  in 
His  restraints  and  in  His  allowances.  Some  things  which  He  hath  forbidden 
prove  injurious  to  others,  if  not  directly,  yet  in  their  consequences.  Some  waste 
our  time,  divert  our  thoughts  from  worthy  objects,  and  prevent  our  usefulness,  to 
which  God  and  society  have  a  right ;  some  consume  our  substance,  to  which  our 
families,  or  the  poor,  have  a  claim  ;  some  impair  the  health  of  the  body,  which 
we  have  no  right  to  destroy,  and  which,  being  lost,  men  become  uncomfortable 
to  themselves,  dissatisfied  with  others,  and  disposed,  perhaps,  even  to  repine 
against  that  providence  which  hath  left  them  to  reap  the  fruits  of  their  own 
folly.  In  the  meanwhile  those  better  principles  and  purer  sentiments  of  the  mind, 
without  which  religion  and  virtue  cannot  subsist,  grow  weak  and  faint,  or  are 
blotted  out.  Evil  courses,  in  the  expressive  language  of  Scripture,  "take  away 
the  heart "  ;  that  is,  they  deprive  men  of  their  judgment  and  darken  their  under- 
standing ;  it  may  be,  in  the  affairs  of  the  world,  but  most  undoubtedly  in 
those  things  which  are  spiritually  discerned.  We  are  in  this  life  as  children 
in  a  state  of  education,  training  up  for  another  condition  of  being,  of  which,  at 
present,  we  know  but  little  ;  only,  we  are  assured  that  "flesh  and  blood  cannot 
inherit  the  kingdom  of  God "  ;  that  its  enjoyments  are  of  a  spiritual  nature, 
corresponding  more  with  the  faculties  of  the  soul  than  with  the  present  constitu- 
tion of  the  body.  The  restraints,  therefore,  under  which  we  are  laid,  and  which 
seem  grievous  to  us,  as  children,  are  parts,  no  doubt,  of  a  wise  and  gracioua 


CHAP.  VII.]  DEUTERONOMY, 


231 


discipline  which  IB  to  qualify  us  for  a  heavenly  inheritance,  and  is  so  necessary 
a  preparation  for  it  that  we  cannot  otherwise  see  God  or  ente^  into  the  joy  of  oS 
fS!?;...  f^"?'  *^'^'f°^^'  >^  ^y^^  particulars,  and  in  others  faith,  which  is  the 
evidence  of  things  not  seen,  will  assure  the  mind  of  the  Christian  that  every  branch 
of  the  law  of  Goa  is  most  worthy  to  be  honoured  and  obeyed,  as  proceedfng Tom 
infinite  loving-kindness  and  goodness  to  man.  Is  any  one,  then,  who  professed 
himself  the  servant  of  the  Lord  called  by  Him  to  a  trial  of  his  obedience,  whelSru 
some  hardship  or  peril  must  be  undergone?  Let  him  call  to  mind  how  much 
harder  trials  they  who  loved  and  feared  God  formerly  have  undergone  ^TetXm 
cons^.  er  how  great  things  men  of  noble  and  ingenuous  natures  will  lo,  even  for  an 
earthly  commander;  and  let  him  recollect  that  he  is  serving  a  Master  who  never 
faileth  to  succour  those  who  trust  in  Him,  and  in  whose  service  he  cannot  lose  the 
p.onased  reward.  For  He  is  the  faithful  God  who  keepeth  covenant  and  mercy! 
And  heie  I  am  led  to  the  last  observation  proposed,  namely,  the  encouragement  to 
]  I  1  ''•"!'"/  ^""^"^  ^^''  consideration,  that  the  Almighty  is  our  Deliverer 
^TZn^nDt)  """^  ^^  ^'^^^  ^^  ^^  blessed  "Son  Jesus  Chri^rTr: 

Ver.  16.  Thou  shalt  consume  aU  the  people.— TA^  destruction  of  the  Canaanites  — 

L  The  destruction  of  the  Canaanites  was  in  conformity  with  the  ordinary 

PROCFDURE  OF  GOD  IN  THE  MORAL  GOVERNMENT  OF  THE  WORLD.       If  He  choOSe    in 

frZ'^?"  ''"T'  ^M^^^  -1  ^°^*i^^  ^it^  a  flood  Of  waters,  at  another  with  fire 
It  ^r^\  n  T^^T  ""'^^.^  ^'^?^y  epidemic,  at  another  with  the  scourge  of 
ZtrnTnl?    TT  t""'  ^  ^"''*'°''  ^^^  propriety  of  His  choice  in  the  weapon  of 

tTT^T.l  J}'  ^^^  ^^STRUCTION  OF   THE  CanAANITES  WAS  IN  PUNISHmVnT  OF 

f  Jn.     fi,  7  '^^VF^'^  TOWARDS  THEMSELVES.     The  vilest  practices  were  rife 

^^..3^;^  ^^^\.  ^^^^\  ""^""y.  ''^^'^^''"  ^^  *  «y«t®°^  of  sorcery,  sensuality,  and 
IS^r-y;  f  ^^"o^K^""'  ^^  ^^'^"°*  ^^^^^  ^'^^^iP  «^^ibit  the 'Vilest  features  of 
ll^^A    ft^"^'  1?^''"  ^^17  g°^«  ^«^«  demons  (Psa.  cvi.  37).    Human  sacrifices  we^ 
offered  at  their  shrines      The  grossest  abominations  were  practised  in  their  orgi^ 
If  such,  then,  was  the  bght,  what  would  the  darkness  be?"^  In  other  words,  if  tS 
was  the  religion  of  the  country,  what  would  the  vices  of  the  people  be?    Ill  Thb 
DESTRUCTION  OF  THE  Canaanites  WAS  A  SPIRITUAL  safeguard  to  the  IsraemtS 
We  are  tempted  to  ask  whether  it  was  well  that  the  Israelites  should  be  made  the 
f  n  l?ci  "^T.    ,  ^^^-  '  '^''*^  ^^"^  *^^^^  ^^^*^^^  °^*^'     Would  they  not  be  tempted 
Jp.W«    ?  *  ""^^^J  subordination  to  God's  purpose,  and  to  take  up  the  cause  ^ 
ral  Tfl/?P'f  fanaticism?    Again,  would   not  the   part  to  which  they  were 
called   tend   k)   foster  m   them  cruelty  and  recklessness  of  human  life?    On  the 
contrary,  we  find  that  the  snare  of  the  Israelites  lay  in  the  opposite  direction,  and 
fpniS^f'"'''  '^-r  ""^'^  'T^^  ^^  'P^""  *^"°  ^  ^^^y-     No  t^en  appears  of  any 
wh^!  fY       /?^''V  '''■  '^1'''''  ^^''^^^  ^'^°  impressed  upon  the  national  minZ 
S  f^  T   ""^fJ  ^l^sons  that  were  thus  taught  them  are  apparent.     In  no  way 
could  the  Israelites  have  been  so  forcibly  convinced  of  the  hatefulness  of  idolatry 
11%  ^"^PJ"*^  ?s  when  they  themselves  were  made  God's  ministers  of  vengeanci 
?W  .V  ^^"/"^/^^  ^^^i«-    .They  were  thus  made  witnesses  against  themselves  should 
^  FpV.If.f  °^*  ^'^'  abominations.    IV.  The  destruction  ?f  the  Canaanites  was 
^ECESSARY  FOR  THE  MORAL  PRESERVATION  OF  THE  WORLD.     Clearly  it  was  an  act 
b  tT.:7  ''  f'  little  children  of  the  Canaanites,  who  were  cut  off  befoi'e  They  knew 
act  of^£       ^'t  ^^'^'  ■  ^^  f'  ^!'^'^''''  *^^  extirpation  of  these  nations  was  an 
for  evi^wJ;       ?""  crippled  and  curtailed  as  the  Canaanites  were,  their  influence 
the  w^Ll  h        '^'''''1 '  ^^.*  ^^^  ^t^  remained  in  larger  bodies,  and  especially  had 
the  women  been  spared,  piety  would  soon  have  become  unknown  among  the  ^ople 
ot  God.     But  If  the  destruction  of  the  Canaanites  was  an  act  of  mercy  to  Israel 
?he  XrirlH  *^";  'P"^*"'^  safety  it  follows  that  it  was  not  less ^a  mercy  to 
entirrfprnllJ  f    '    1  "^"^^ ""' mf^7,  ^°'  *^^  preservation  of  the  spiritual  life  of  the 

oftre&h  nf"}r.^'°?^'  ^^'  ^^^'f  Z^  '^'  P^^^^^*  ^^y  i«  ^^^  ^^^  continuation 
01  tue  Church  of  the  wilderness.  Had  that  been  destroyed,  the  materials  of  which 
the  Saviour  at  His  coming  built  the  Church  of  the  New  Testament  would  not  We 

tenfold  'to  tr-n/^'!?P'^r^"'^  1^  '^'  ^^^  ''  *^«  ^°«P«1  would  have  hZ 
wnnii  V,  the  present  day  the  early  ruin  of  the  faith  of  God's  people  which 

r^e  i^7itL"1r^?ts'"v    t'  ^^""^^  *°^^^^*^°"  ''  *^^  Canaanites'Zld tive 

SYSLoifpAT     Av/^l.*  •   ^^^  DESTRUCTION   OF  THE  CanAANITES  HAS   A  DEEP 

SYMBOLICAL   AND   PRACTICAL   LESSON   FOR   US    ALL.      God   changes   not '   the  Sftma 

principles  direct  His  dealings  now  as  then.     The  flesh  must  l^1^or?med  and^^ 


232  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vii. 

dued.  See  Jesus,  our  Joshua,  stretches  forth  the  spear.  He  commands  the  conflict ; 
onward,  then,  and  conquer.  {G.  W.  Butler,  M.A.)  The  Christian  failure  and 
its  reasons  : — Though  the  Israelites  have  passed  out  of  Egypt  and  beyond  the  Red  Sea 
and  through  the  wilderness,  they  have  not  passed  beyond  the  domain  ot  struggles 
and  duty ;  they  must  go  on  to  possess  the  land.  In  its  south-eastern  border  dwell 
the  Moabites ;  north  of  them  are  the  Amorites,  strongly  intrenched ;  above  them 
the  Hittites ;  on  the  west  side,  beyond  the  Jordan,  are  the  Anakim  ;  above  these, 
a  mighty  nation,  the  Canaanites  ;  near  them  the  Perizzites,  &c.  I.  The  thing  to 
BE  DONE.  Too  much  is  our  Christianity  over-anxious  about  its  beginnings  and  too 
careless  about  its  subsequent  growth  and  reach.  We  are  all  the  time  seeking  just  to 
get  people  out  of  Egypt,  we  are  all  the  time  too  unconcerned  as  to  whether  these 
people  go  on  to  conquer  Canaan  for  the  Lord.  Having  **come  to  Jesus,"  the  reign 
of  Jesus  is  to  be  extended  inwardly  over  the  entire  soul,  outwardly  over  the  entire 
life.  Canaan  reached  was  not  Canaan  conquered.  The  converted  man  is  not  yet 
a  sanctified  man.  Evil  pride,  vanity,  jealousy,  covetousness,  passionateness,  dis- 
content, bad  habits,  &c. — Hittites,  Perizzites,  Canaanites  enough  are  yet  resident 
in  even  the  converted  soul.  II.  The  foece  by  which  this  conquest  is  to  be 
ACCOMPLISHED.  '*  And  thou  shalt  consume  all  the  people  which  the  Lord  thy  God 
shall  deliver  thee."  The  soul  and  God — these  are  the  forces  of  conflict.  III.  Some 
REASONS  FOR  THE  CHRISTIAN  FAILURE.  1.  Ceasing  of  battle.  After  a  while  some 
of  the  Israelites  stopped  struggling  against  the  aliens.  2.  Eear.  These  Israelites 
would  not  struggle  against  certain  of  the  aliens,  because  they  had  chariots  of  iron. 
So  some  bad  habit  frightens  a  Christian  from  struggle.  3.  Success  of  a  sort.  **  And 
it  came  to  pass  when  Israel  was  strong  they  put  the  Canaanites  to  tribute,  and  did 
not  utterly  drive  them  out."  Many  a  man,  professedly  Christian,  dares  not  attempt 
to  be  the  Christian  he  knows  he  ought  to  be  because,  successful  in  worldly  affairs, 
his  worldly  interests  will  not  let  him.  So  he  salves  his  conscience  by  putting  his 
questionable  gain  "under  tribute";  gives  it,  or  a  portion  of  it,  in  charity,  &c. 
IV.  Result.  '*  Will  be  a  snare  unto  thee."  Was, their  failure  not  a  snare  ?  Call 
to  mind  the  history  of  the  Israelites,  the  destructioii  of  the  ten  tribes.  The  only 
proof  of  a  real  Christianity  is  a  continually  advancing  self-conquest,  {ffomiletic 
Review.) 

Vers.  17,  18.  Thou  shalt  not  be  afraid  of  them :  but  shalt  well  remember  what 
the  Lord  thy  God  did  unto  Pharaoh. — Encouragement  for  the  Christian  warrior : — 
To  a  man  about  to  journey  into  a  strange  country  nothing  gives  more  comfort  or 
con6dence  than  if  there  be  put  into  his  hand,  by  way  of  guide  through  it,  a  book 
written  by  some  one  who  has  travelled  that  country  before  him.  He  will  read  that 
book  not  for  entertainment,  but  instruction  ;  that  he  may  learn  beforehand  how  to 
make  his  way,  what  to  take  with  him,  what  to  beware  of,  and  whither  to  betake 
himself  for  rest  and  refreshment  on  the  way.  In  like  manner  the  Bible  has  been 
given  us  to  make  us  acquainted  with  the  way  itself,  with  the  difficulties  and  the 
dangers  of  it,  with  the  enemies  that  we  shall  meet  with  in  it,  and  our  only  way  of 
overcoming  them.  I.  The  spiritual  state  here  represented.  The  Jewish 
Church  in  the  wilderness  may  be  here  regarded  as  a  type  or  figure  of  the  Church 
of  Christ  in  the  world,  and  the  case  of  each  member  of  the  one  as  prefiguring  in 
some  particulars  the  condition  of  each  believer  in  the  other.  But  like  as  Israel, 
though  free  from  Egypt  and  from  all  fear  of  being  carried  thither  again,  notwith- 
standing, had  not  overcome  all  enemies,  but  was  to  fight  his  way  against  them 
and  never  give  them  quarter,  but  fight  on  till  they  were  utterly  destroyed  ;  so  now 
is  the  believer  in  Christ  called  to  **  fight  the  good  fight  of  faith,  and  lay  hold  upon 
eternal  life."  We  may  perceive,  then,  that  the  situation  of  Israel  when  Moses 
addressed  them  in  the  words  of  the  text,  represents  to  us  the  present  state  of  the 
follower  of  Christ,  and  the  warfare  which  he  has  to  war  under  Christ  as  his  captain 
against  the  enemies  of  his  salvation.  II.  The  fears  which  commonly  attend 
this  state.  The  strength  and  number  of  the  enemies  whom  Israel  had  to  fight 
was  well  known  to  that  people ;  but  the  Lord  Himself  had  repeatedly  put  them 
in  mind  of  it,  saying  continually,  after  He  had  numbered  them  over,  that  they 
were  "seven  nations  greater  and  mightier  than  Israel."  But  why  did  God  say 
so?  Was  it  to  make  them  afraid  of  these  nations?  No;  but  to  enliven  their 
faith  and  exercise  their  dependence  upon  God.  It  was  quite  true,  and  a  notorious 
truth,  that  those  nations  were  in  point  of  strength  and  number  quite  an  over- 
match for  Israel;  so  that  it  was  impossible  for  him  in  his  own  ptrength  to 
dispossess  them.    It  was  also  true  that,  till  they  were  dispossessed,  the  knd  of 


CHAP.  VII.]  DEUTERONOMY.  23* 

promise  could  not  be  enjoyed  ;  so  that  these  two  considerations,  the  strength 
and  number  of  the  enemies  of  Israel  and  his  own  weakness,  were  the  more  imme« 
diate  causes  of  his  fears.  The  fears  often  felt  by  the  Christian  are  much  of 
the  same  kind.  His  enemies  are  of  three  kinds — the  world,  the  flesh,  and  the 
devil :  mighty  all  of  them,  and  many ;  for  the  world  and  the  flesh  and  the  devil 
have  marshalled  under  them  whole  hosts  of  enemies,  of  whom  any  one,  encoun- 
tered by  the  Christian  in  his  own  strength,  would  be  too  strong.  And  oh  !  should 
he  compare  himself  with  them,  what  painful  cause  has  he  for  the  acknowledgment, 
*' These  are  more  than  I!"  It  is  in  such  a  case  too  natural  for  him  to  look 
within  himself,  and,  pausing  upon  what  he  finds  there,  ask,  almost  in  despair, 
"How  can  I  dispossess  them?"  But  mark  how  graciously  the  Lord  anticipates, 
prevents  such  fears :  "  If  thou  shalt  say  in  thine  heart  (He  too  well  knows  His  people 
will  say  so),  These  nations  are  more  than  I :  how  can  I  dispossess  them  ? " — this 
is  their — III.  Encouragement.  "Thou  shalt  not  be  afraid  of  them  :  but  shalt  well 
remember,"  &c.  "What  God  had  done  to  Egypt  and  her  king,  Israel  had  seen  and 
knew :  it  was  because  of  this  that  they  were  then  where  they  were,  and  that  they 
were  not  in  Egypt  now ;  and  God  calls  upon  them  to  remember,  for  encourage- 
ment, what  they  had  been  in  time  past,  "Pharaoh's  bondmen  in  Egypt";  and 
what  had  been  done  for  their  deliverance,  and  who  had  been  the  doer  of  it.  Himself, 
the  Lord  their  God :  thus  every  word  appears  to  have  an  emphasis  intended  to 
encourage  them  against  their  fears.  Now,  this  encouragement,  which  God  addressed 
to  them,  may  serve  as  a  figure  of  that  which  forms  the  encouragement  of  every 
Christian  ;  for  it  is  now  the  privilege  of  every  Christian  to  look,  for  his  encourage- 
ment, at  the  redemption  wrought  for  him  by  Christ.  Under  all  his  fears  he  should 
remember  what  a  wretched,  lost  condition  Christ  redeemed  His  people  from,  and 
how  and  why  He  did  it.  That  state  is  thus  described  in  Eph.  ii.  1.  This  was 
the  state  of  every  one  of  us  by  nature.  And  how  were  they  set  free  from  it  ?  By 
no  less  an  act  of  love  than  the  death  of  God's  own  Son  in  His  dead  people's  stead 
(Rom.  V.  6).  "We  see,  then,  that  the  encouragement  of  a  true  Christian,  under  all 
his  fears  and  against  all  the  enemies  of  his  soul,  is  in  that  sure  covenant  and  rich, 
provision  of  all  things  his  soul  can  need,  through  that  redemption  which  is  in 
Christ  Jesus.  Does  he  find  the  world  too  strong  for  him  ;  does  he  dread  the  rage 
and  malice  of  its  children  who  are  set  against  him,  or  the  snares  and  perils  which 
the  God  of  this  world  sets  about  his  path  ?  Or  does  he  tremble  at  that  overwhelm- 
ing crowd  of  cares  which  comes  upon  him  daily  with  his  first  waking  thought  ? 
Let  him  not  be  afraid  of  these  things,  but  let  him  well  remember  what  Christ  did 
for  him  when  he  was  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins ;  and  thus  strong  in  the  Lord, 
and  in  the  power  of  His  might,  let  him  cast  all  his  care  on  God.  Does  he  dread  the 
power  of  his  own  corruptions,  and  ask,  "How  can  I  dispossess  them?  "Who  shall 
deliver  me  from  the  body  of  this  death?"  Let  him  faithfully  remember  the 
encouragement  suggested  by  the  text,  and  he  shall  soon  say  also  -with  the  apostle, 
"I  thank  God  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord."  Or  lastly,  is  he  troubled  by  the 
fear  of  death,  "the  last  enemy  that  shall  be  destroyed"?  Christ,  his  Redeemer, 
through  His  own  death,  hath  abolished  death  by  destroying  him  that  had  the 
power  of  death— that  is,  the  devil.  In  short,  the  Christian's  "life  is  hid,"  and  so 
kept  safe  from  every  enemy,  "with  Christ  in  God."    (i^.  F.  Clark,  B.A.) 

Ver.  20.  The  Lord  thy  God  wiU  send  the  hornet.  —  Secret  sins  driven  out  hy 
stinging  hornets ;— I.  Sins  which  are  left  and  hidden.  John  Bunyan  very  wisely 
describes  the  town  of  Mansoul  after  it  had  been  taken  by  Prince  Immanuel.  The 
Prince  rode  to  the  Castle  called  the  Heart  and  took  possession  of  it,  and  the  whole 
city  became  his ;  but  there  were  certain  Diabolonians,  followers  of  Diabolus,  who 
never  quitted  the  town.  They  could  not  be  seen  in  the  streets,  could  not  be  heard 
in  the  markets,  never  dared  to  occupy  a  house,  but  lurked  about  in  certain  old  dens 
and  caves.  Some  of  them  got  impudent  enough  even  to  hire  themselves  out  for 
servants  to  the  men  of  Mansoul  under  other  names.  There  was  Mr.  Covetousness, 
who  was  called  Mr.  Prudent  Thrifty,  and  there  was  Mr.  Lasciviousness,  who  was 
called  Mr.  Harmless  Mirth.  They  took  other  names,  and  still  lived  here,  much  to 
the  annoyance  of  the  town  of  Mansoul,  skulking  about  in  holes  and  comers,  and 
only  coming  out  on  dark  days,  when  they  could  do  mischief  and  serve  the  Black 
Prince.  Now,  in  all  of  us,  however  watchhil  we  may  be,  though  we  may  set 
Mr.  Pry  "Well  to  listen  at  the  door,  and  he  may  watch,  and  my  Lord  Mayor,  Mr. 
Understanding,  be  very  careful  to  search  all  these  out,  yet  there  will  remain  much 
hidden  sin.     I  think  we  ought  always  to  pray  to  God  to  forgive  us  sins  that  we  do 


234  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vir. 

not  know  anything  about.  "Thine  unknown  agonies,"  says  the  old  Greek  liturgy  ; 
and  there  are  unknown  sins  for  which  those  agonies  make  atonement.  Perhaps 
the  sins  which  you  and  I  confess  are  not  the  tithe  of  what  we  really  do  commit. 
There  are,  no  doubt,  in  all  of  us  Canaanites  still  dwelling  in  the  land,  that  will  be 
thorns  in  our  side.  II.  A  singular  means  for  their  destruction — "thy  God 
WILL  SEND  THE  HORNET  AMONG  THEM."  These  fellows  resorted  to  caves  and  dens. 
God  employed  the  very  best  means  for  their  destruction.  I  suppose  these  hornets 
were  large  wasps  ;  two  or  three  times,  perhaps,  as  large  as  a  wasp,  with  very  terrible 
stings.  It  is  not  an  unusual  historical  fact  to  find  districts  depopulated  by  means 
of  stinging  insects.  In  connection  with  the  journey  of  Dr.  Livingstone  we  can 
never  forget  that  strange  kind  of  guest  which  is  such  a  pest  to  the  cattle  in  any 
district,  that  the  moment  it  appeared  they  had  either  to  fly  before  it  or  to  die. 
The  hornet  must  have  been  a  very  terrible  creature  ;  but  it  is  not  at  all  extra- 
ordinary that  there  should  have  been  hornets  capable  of  driving  out  a  nation.  The 
hornet  was  a  very  simple  means  ;  it  was  no  sound  of  trumpet,  nor  even  the  glitter 
of  miracles,  it  was  a  simple,  natural  means  of  fetching  these  people  out  of  their 
holes.  It  is  well  known  that  insects  in  some  countries  will  sting  one  race  of  people 
and  not  another.  Sometimes  the  inhabitants  of  a  country  are  not  at  all  careful 
about  mosquitoes  or  such  creatures,  when  strangers  are  greatly  pestered  with  them. 
God  could  therefore  bring  hornets  which  would  sting  the  Hivites  and  the  Jebusites 
but  not  molest  the  Israelites,  and  in  this  way  the  Canaanites  were  driven  out  of 
their  holes  ;  some  died  by  the  stings  of  hornets,  and  others  were  put  in  the  way  of 
the  sharp  swords  of  the  men  of  Israel,  and  thus  they  died.  The  spiritual  analogy 
to  this  is,  the  daily  trouble  which  God  sends  to  every  one  of  us.  I  suppose  you 
have  all  got  your  hornets.  Some  have  hornets  in  the  family  ;  your  child  may  be  a 
hornet  to  you — your  wife,  your  husband,  your  brother,  the  dearest  friend  you  have, 
may  be  a  daily  cross  to  you  ;  and,  though  a  dead  cross  is  very  heavy,  a  living  cross 
is  heavier  far.  To  bury  a  child  is  a  great  grief,  but  to  have  that  child  live  and  sin 
against  you  is  ten  times  worse.  You  may  have  hornets  that  shall  follow  you  to 
your  bed-chamber — some  of  you  may  know  what  that  means — so  that  even  where 
you  ought  to  find  your  rest  and  your  sweetest  solace,  it  is  there  that  you  receive 
your  bitterest  sting  of  trouble.  The  hornet  will  sometimes  come  in  the  shape  of 
business.  You  are  perplexed — you  cannot  prosper — one  thing  comes  after  another. 
You  seem  to  be  bom  to  trouble  more  than  other  people.  You  have  ventured  on  the 
right  hand,  but  it  was  a  failure  ;  you  pushed  out  on  the  left,  but  that  was  a  break- 
down. Almost  everybody  you  trust  fails  immediately,  and  those  you  do  not  trust 
are  the  people  you  might  have  safely  relied  upon.  Others  have  hornets  in  their 
bodies.  Some  have  constant  headaches  ;  aches  and  pains  pass  and  shoot  along 
the  nerves  of  others.  If  you  could  but  be  quit  of  it,  you  think,  how  happy  you 
would  be  ;  but  you  have  got  your  hornet,  and  that  hornet  is  always  with  you.  But 
if  I  tried  to  get  through  the  whole  list  of  hornets  I  should  want  all  tlie  morning, 
for  there  is  a  particular  grief  to  every  man.  Each  man  has  his  own  form  of 
obnoxious  sting  which  he  has  to  feel.  There  is  one  point  I  want  you  to  notice  in 
the  text,  and  that  is,  we  are  expressly  told  the  hornets  came  from  God.  He  sent 
them.  "The  Lord  thy  God  will  send  the  hornet."  This  will  help  you,  perhaps,  to 
bear  their  stings  another  time.  God  weighs  your  troubles  in  scales,  and  measures 
out  your  afflictions,  every  drachm  and  scruple  of  them  ;  and  since  they  come, 
therefore,  directly  from  a  loving  Father's  hand,  accept  them  with  grateful  cheerful- 
ness, and  pray  that  the  result  which  Divine  Wisdom  has  ordained  to  flow  from 
them  may  be  abundantly  realised  in  your  sanctification,  in  being  made  like  unto 
Christ.  III.  A  very  suggestive  lesson  to  ourselves.  It  is  this.  What  is  my 
particular  besetting  sin  ?  Have  I  been  careful  in  self-examination  ?  If  not,  I 
must  expect  to  have  the  hornet.  God  never  punishes  His  children  for  sin  penally, 
but  He  chastens  them  for  it  paternally.  You  may  often  discover  what  your  sin  is 
by  the  punishment,  for  you  can  see  the  face  of  the  sin  in  the  punishment — the  one 
is  so  like  the  other.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Small  troubles: — It  seems  as  if  the 
insectile  world  were  determined  to  extirpate  the  human  race.  It  is  bombarding 
the  grain  fields,  and  the  orchards,  and  the  vineyards.  The  Colorado  beetle,  the 
Nebraska  grasshopper,  the  New  Jersey  locust,  the  universal  potato  bug  seem  to 
carry  on  the  work  which  was  begun  ages  ago,  when  the  insects  buzzed  and  droned 
out  of  Noah's  Ark  as  the  door  was  opened.  In  my  text  the  hornet  flies  out  on  its 
mission.  It  is  a  species  of  wasp,  swift  in  its  motion  and  violent  in  its  sting.  Its 
touch  is  torture  to  man  or  beast.  The  hornet  goes  in  swarms.  It  has  captains 
over  hundreds,  and  twenty  of  them  alighting  on  one  man  will  produce  certain. 


CHAP,  vii.]  DEUTERONOMY,  235 

death.  The  Persians  attempted  to  conquer  a  Christian  city,  but  the  elephants  and 
the  beasts  on  which  the  Persians  rode  were  assaulted  by  the  hornet,  so  that  the 
whole  army  was  broken  up,  and  the  besieged  city  was  rescued.  This  burning  and 
noxious  insect  stung  out  the  Hittites  and  the  Canaanites  from  their  country. 
What  gleaming  sword  and  ch?iriot  of  war  could  not  accomplish  was  done  by  the 
puncture  of  an  insect.  The  Lord  sent  the  hornet.  When  we  are  assaulted  by 
great  Behemoths  of  trouble,  we  become  chivalric,  and  we  assault  them  ;  we  get  on 
the  high-mettled  steed  of  our  courage,  and  we  make  a  cavalry  charge  at  them ; 
and,  if  God  be  with  us,  we  come  out  stronger  and  better  than  when  we  went  in. 
But,  alas  !  for  these  insectile  annoyances  of  life — these  foes,  too  small  to  shoot — 
these  things  without  any  avoirdupois  weight — the  gnats  and  the  midges,  and  the 
flies,  and  the  wasps,  and  the  hornets.  In  other  words,  it  is  the  small  stinging 
annoyances  of  our  life  which  drive  us  out  and  use  us  up.  In  the  best  conditioned 
life,  for  some  grand  and  glorious  purpose,  God  has  sent  the  hornet.  1.  I  remark, 
in  the  first  place,  that  these  small  stinging  annoyances  may  come  in  the  shape  of 
a  sensitive  nervous  organisation.  People  who  are  prostrated  under  typhoid  fevers 
or  with  broken  bones  get  plenty  of  sympathy ;  but  who  pities  anybody  that  is 
nervous  ?  2.  Again,  these  small  insect  annoyances  may  come  to  us  in  the  shape 
of  friends  and  acquaintances  who  are  always  saying  disagreeable  things.  There 
are  some  people  you  cannot  be  with  for  half  an  hour  but  you  feel  cheered  and 
comforted.  Then  there  are  other  people  you  cannot  be  with  for  five  minutes  before 
you  feel  miserable.  They  do  not  mean  to  disturb  you,  but  they  sting  you  to  the 
bone.  They  gather  up  all  the  yarn  which  the  gossips  spin,  and  peddle  it.  They 
gather  up  all  the  adverse  criticisms  about  your  person,  about  your  business,  about 
your  home,  about  your  church,  and  they  make  your  ear  the  funnel  into  which  they 
pour  it.  These  people  of  whom  I  speak,  reap  and  bind  in  the  great  harvest-field 
of  discouragement.  Some  days  you  greet  them  with  a  hilarious  "good-morning," 
and  they  come  buzzing  at  you  with  some  depressing  information.  "The  Lord 
sent  the  hornet."  3.  Perhaps  these  small  insect  annoyances  will  come  in  the  shape 
of  a  domestic  irritation.  The  parlour  and  the  kitchen  do  not  always  harmonise. 
To  get  good  service  and  to  keep  it  is  one  of  the  great  questions  of  the  country. 
4.  These  small  insect  disturbances  may  also  come  in  the  shape  of  business  irrita- 
tions. It  is  not  the  panics  that  kill  the  merchants.  Panics  come  only  once  in  ten 
or  twenty  years.  It  is  the  constant  din  of  these  everyday  annoyances  which  is 
sending  so  many  of  our  best  merchants  into  nervous  dyspepsia  and  paralysis  and 
the  grave.  5.  I  have  noticed  in  the  history  of  some  of  my  congregation  that  their 
annoyances  are  multiplying,  and  that  they  have  a  hundred  where  they  used  to  have 
ten.  The  naturalist  tells  us  that  a  wasp  sometimes  has  a  family  of  twenty 
thousand  wasps,  and  it  does  seem  as  if  every  annoyance  of  your  life  brooded  a 
million.  By  the  help  of  God  to-day  I  want  to  set  in  a  counter  current.  The 
hornet  is  of  no  use  ?  Oh  yes  !  The  naturalists  tell  us  they  are  very  important  in 
the  world's  economy  ;  they  kill  spiders  and  they  clear  the  atmosphere  ;  and  I  really 
believe  God  sends  the  annoyances  of  our  lives  upon  us  to  kill  the  spiders  of  the 
soul  and  to  clear  the  atmosphere  into  the  skies.  These  annoyances  are  sent  on  us, 
I  think,  to  wake  us  up  from  our  lethargy.  If  we  had  a  bed  of  everything  that  was 
attractive  and  easy,  what  would  we  want  of  heaven  ?  We  think  that  the  hollow 
tree  sends  the  hornet.  You  think  the  devil  sends  the  hornet.  I  want  to  correct 
your  theology.  "The  Lord  sent  the  hornet."  Then  I  think  these  annoyances 
come  on  us  to  culture  our  patience.  When  you  stand  chin -deep  in  annoyances  is 
the  time  for  you  to  swim  out  towards  the  great  headlands  of  Christian  attainment, 
and  when  your  life  is  loaded  to  the  muzzle  with  repulsive  annoyances — that  is  the 
time  to  draw  the  bead.  Nothing  but  the  furnace  will  ever  burn  out  of  us  the 
clinker  and  the  slag.  Now,  would  you  nut  ratlier  have  these  small  drafts  of 
annoyance  on  your  bank  of  faith  than  some  all-staggering  demand  upon  your 
endurance  ?  I  want  to  make  my  people  strong  in  the  faith  that  they  will  not 
surrender  to  small  annoyances.  In  the  village  of  Hamelin,  tradition  says,  there 
was  an  invasion  of  rats,  and  these  small  creatures  almost  devoured  the  town  and 
threatened  the  lives  of  the  population,  and  the  story  is  that  a  piper  came  out  one 
day  and  played  a  very  sweet  tune,  and  all  the  vermin  followed  him — followed  him 
to  the  banks  of  the  Weser,  and  then  he  blew  a  blast  and  they  dropped  in  and 
disappeared  for  ever.  Of  course  this  is  a  fable,  but  I  wish  I  could,  on  the  sweet 
flute  of  the  Gospel,  draw  forth  all  the  nibbling  and  burrowing  annoyances  of  your 
life,  and  play  them  down  into  the  depths  for  ever.  How  many  touches  did 
Mr.  Church  give  to  his  picture  of  "Cotopaxi"  or  his  "Heart  of  the  Andes"? 


236  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [ohap.  Vll. 

I  suppose  about  fifty  thousand  touches.  I  hear  the  canvas  saying,  "  Why  do  you 
keep  me  trembling  with  that  pencil  so  long?  Why  don't  you  put  it  on  in  one 
dash  ? "  "No,"  said  Mr.  Church,  *' I  know  how  to  make  a  painting.  It  will  take 
fifty  thousand  of  these  touches."  And  I  want  you  to  understand  that  it  is  these 
ten  thousand  annoyances  which,  under  God,  are  making  up  the  picture  of  your  life, 
to  be  hung  at  last  in  the  galleries  of  heaven,  fit  for  angels  to  look  at.  God  knows 
how  to  make  a  picture.  God  meant  this  world  to  be  only  the  vestibule  of  heaven, 
and  that  is  the  great  gallery  of  the  universe  towards  which  we  are  aspiring. 
We  must  not  have  it  too  good  in  this  world,  or  we  would  want  no  heaven. 
You  are  surprised  that  aged  people  are  so  willing  to  go  out  of  this  world.  I  will 
tell  you  the  reason.  It  is  not  only  because  of  the  bright  prospects  in  heaven,  but 
it  is  because  they  feel  that  seventy  years  of  nettlesomeness  is  enough.  They  would 
lie  down  in  the  soft  meadows  of  this  world  for  ever,  but  "  God  sent  the  hornet." 
{T,  De  Witt  Talmage.) 

Yer.  21.  Thou  shalt  not  be  afErighted  at  them  :  for  the  Lord  thy  God  is  among 
you,  a  mighty  Ctod  and  terrible. — Courage  and  humanity: — I.  The  complaint 
has  been  made  often  that  the  qualities  which  Christians  are  especially 

ENCOURAGED  TO  CULTIVATE  ARE  NOT  MANLINESS  AND  COURAGE  ;  that,    SO   far  aS 

the  Christian  ideal  is  set  continually  before  the  mind  of  a  nation  or  a  man,  that  mind 
is  likely  to  become  submissive,  not  energetic.  I  believe  that  the  courage,  which  is 
only  another  way  of  expressing  the  heart,  of  a  nation  is  liable  to  a  continual  weaken- 
ing and  decay ;  that  left  to  itself  it  will  certainly  wither  ;  that  some  religions  may 
hasten  its  death ;  but  that  by  doing  so  such  religion  will  prove  that  it  does  not 
come  from  God,  that  it  is  not  His  religion,  not  His  instrument  for  reforming  and 
regenerating  the  world.  II.  A  return  to  the  old  faith  that  courage  and 
humanity  are  not  enemies,  but  inseparable  companions,  has  certainly 
commenced  among  us.  The  misfortune  is  that  Christianity  is  supposed  to  be  not 
identical  with  humanity,  but  a  substitution  for  it.  And  this  opinion  is  closely 
connected  with  another  :  that  courage  is  a  heathen,  or  perhaps  the  heathen,  virtue, 
and  that  we  have  cherished  it  by  giving  our  children  a  semi-heathen  education. 
Consider  this  opinion  under  different  aspects.  III.  By  a  heathen  we  mean  one  who 
is  not  a  Jew.  That  is  the  simplest,  most  accurate  use  of  the  name.  Taking  it  in 
this  sense,  our  text  is  decisive  that  a  high  estimate  of  courage  was  not  con- 
fined TO  HEATHENS  ;  that  if  to  form  such  an  estimate  is  ungodly,  the  chosen  people 
were  as  ungodly  as  any.  The  Bible  tells  us  that  idolatry  is  the  great  destroyer  of 
courage,  reverence  for  the  true  God  and  an  abiding  sense  of  His  presence  and  pro- 
tection the  upholder  of  it.  Now  is  this  doctrine  compatible  with  the  fact  that  the 
most  illustrious  of  the  heathen  nations  were  singularly  brave  nations,  and  that  our 
forefathers  sought  to  kindle  English  courage  at  their  fires  ?  It  is  incompatible  if 
we  regard  a  heathen  merely  as  an  idolater.  It  is  perfectly  compatible  if  we  trace 
through  the  history  of  the  great  nations  that  worshipped  idols  a  continual  witness 
against  it.  Their  belief  in  courage,  as  a  quality  which  raised  them  above  the 
animals,  was  the  greatest  of  all  the  protests  which  the  conscience  of  heathens  was 
bearing  against  idolatry,  against  the  worship  of  visible  things,  which  is  directly 
connected  with  our  animal  instincts,  which  is  always  lowering  the  human  being  to 
the  level  of  that  which  he  should  rule.     lY.  The  courage  of  the  Hebrew  was 

DERIVED  FROM  HIS  TRUST  IN  THE  BeING  WHO  HAD  CHOSEN  HIM  TO  DO  HiS  WORK 
IN  THE  WORLD,  WHO  WOULD   ACCOMPLISH  THAT  WORK,  LET  WHAT   POWERS  WOULD 

UNITE  TO  DEFEAT  IT.  Christianity  is  not  a  denial  of  Judaism  or  a  denial  of  heath- 
enism, a  tertium  quid  which  excludes  all  that  is  strongest  and  most  vital  in  both, 
but  the  harmony  and  concentration  of  both,  the  discovery  of  Him  in  whom  the 
meaning  of  both  is  realised  and  raised  to  its  highest  power  ;  but  out  of  the  union 
and  reconciliation  of  apparent  opposites  in  the  faith  of  a  Father  and  a  Son,  of  a 
Spirit  proceeding  from  both,  to  quicken  men  and  make  them  the  voluntary,  cheerful 
servants,  because  the  sons,  of  God,  there  must  come  forth  a  courage  diviner  than  the 
Hebrew,  more  human  than  the  Greek,  more  pledged  to  a  continual  battle  with  dis- 
order than  the  Roman.  {F.  D.  Maurice^  M.A.)  Moses'  address  to  the  people : — 
The  manner  in  which  the  possession  of  Canaan  is  invariably  spoken  of  is  worthy  of 
notice.  Moses  never  supposes  it  impossible  that  they  should  reach  Canaan ;  the 
style  of  his  expression  is  uniformly  that  of  certainty  ;  he  does  not  say,  "If  the 
Lord,"  but  "when."  This  confidence  did  not  rest  on  human  grounds,  for  their 
enemies  were  in  themselves  formidable,  but  on  the  Divine  promise.  Those  who  have 
the  Lord's  promise  are  safe,  and  they  who  trust  in  it  are  happy.     But  another  fact 


CHAP.  VIL]  DEUTERONOMY.  237 

is,  that  the  Lord  condescends  to  the  state  of  His  people  ;  He  knovreth  their  frame, 
and  remembereth  they  are  dust  that  they  are  prone  to  fear.  True,  there  is  no  cause 
for  fear,  but  their  infirmity  may  lead  them  to  do  so.  Hence  He  anticipates  those 
fears,  provides  a  remedy,  and  suggests  every  consideration  calculated  to  encourage 
them.  I.  The  fears  vthich  they  were  in  danger  of  indulging.  1.  The 
superior  strength  of  their  enemies.  2.  The  consequent  diflSculty  of  dispossessing 
them.  A  few,  comparatively,  against  many  ;  the  weak  against  the  strong.  How  can 
1  dispossess  them  ?  Is  not  the  case  very  similar  now  ?  The  Christian  cannot  be 
blind  to  the  fact  that  his  enemies  are  greater  and  mightier  than  he  ;  the  hosts  of  hell 
are  marshalled  against  him.  Legion  is  their  name,  implying  unity,  order,  zeal, 
and  perseverance.  The  enemies  are  mighty,  and  have  overcome  their  thousands. 
There  are  few  who  have  not  been  tempted  to  consider  the  contest  hopeless,  and  to 
say,  "Surely  I  shall  one  day  perish."  Now  if  there  be  one  here  saying  this  in  his 
heart,  let  him  attend — IL  To  the  encouragements  provided  against  those 
FEARS.  1.  A  recollection  of  God's  past  dealings.  Thou  shalt  remember  well  what 
the  Lord  thy  God  did  unto  Pharaoh,  and  unto  all  Egypt.  The  diflSculties  there 
were  as  great  as  they  could  be  ; — Pharaoh  had  chariots  and  horsemen  ;  the  Israelites 
were  despised  slaves  ;  he  had  power,  and  was  determined  to  use  it  in  retaining  them  ; 
yet  the  Lord  brought  them  out,  and  therefore  they  need  not  fear  now.  2.  They 
were  instructed  as  to  the  Lord's  future  methods.  So  shall  the  Lord  do  unto  all  the 
people  of  whom  thou  art  afraid.  He  had  ten  thousand  ways  of  weakening  the 
power  of  the  enemy  ;  the  whole  kingdom  of  nature  was  at  His  command  ;  He  could 
send  the  hornet  among  them  ;  even  the  insect  tribe  shall  be  made  subservient  to  tlie 
accomplishment  of  God's  design  towards  them.  Joshua  records  the  fulfilment  of  this 
promise  (chap.  xxiv.  12).  But  this  conquest  was  to  be  gradual.  The  Lord  thy  God 
will  put  out  those  nations  by  little  and  little.  Immediate  and  entire  victory  would  have 
been  attended  with  undesirable  consequences  ;  God  therefore  gave  them  as  much  as 
in  their  circumstances  was  good  for  them.  3.  Assurance  was  given  of  final  victory. 
And  are  there  not  equal  encouragements  now,  to  every  one  anxious  to  attain  the 
heavenly  Canaan  ?  There  is,  however,  this  happy  difference  in  the  two  cases  :  that 
when  once  the  Christian  has  passed  over  the  Jordan  of  death,  every  difficulty  will 
be  over,  every  enemy  conquered,  he  will  have  the  land  in  possession.  In  conclu- 
sion, I  would  say — 1.  Let  no  one  expect  the  victory  who  fights  in  his  own  strength. 
2.  Let  no  one  despair  of  victory  who  fights  in  the  Lord's  strength.  {George  Breay, 
B.A.)  Christian  warfare:— I.  The  enemies  of  God's  people.  We  know 
that  the  inhabitants  of  Canaan  were  emphatically  idolaters.  This  was  their  special 
characteristic.  Now  it  is  idolatry,  in  some  shape  or  other,  that  draws  men  away 
from  the  service  of  God.  Some  make  pleasure  their  idol  ;  some  make  wealth  their 
idol.  But  their  enemies  are  many  in  number.  There  is  a  special  danger  in  the 
present  day  arising  from  those  false  doctrines  which  have  arisen  in  the  household 
of  faith  and  caused  hostile  parties  in  the  Church.  In  connection  with  this  I  may 
mention  a  contrary  error — latitudinarianism.  Again,  the  world  is  very  dangerous  ; 
the  example  of  those  who  live  in  it  is  most  seductive.  Again,  we  meet  with  those 
who  are  men  of  learning  and  great  talent,  and  we  are  exposed  to  danger  even  from 
them.  "We  hear  them  maintaining  opinions  which  are  not  scriptural,  but  we  think 
it  is  scarcely  possible  for  those  who  are  so  learned  to  be  wrong  ;  we  are  thus  left  to 
ask  in  perplexity,  "Who  is  in  the  right?"  We  forget  that  men  must  "become 
fools  that  they  may  be  wise"  as  respects  spiritual  knowledge.  But  there  are 
enemies  within.  And  here  I  must  not  omit  to  place  in  the  forefront  self,  in  all 
its  varied  forms  (2  Tim.  iii.  1-5).  Then,  again,  we  have  to  contend  against  the 
whole  army  of  lusts— "the  lust  of  the  flesh,  the  lust  of  the  eyes,  and  the  pride  of 
life."  All  these  are  of  the  world,  and  all  these  lust  against  the  Spirit,  so  that  we 
cannot  do  the  things  that  we  would.  II.  Now  let  us  inquire  what  are  the  weapons 
with  which  we  must  fight?  Scripture  teaches  us  (2  Cor.  x.  4)  that  "the  weapons 
of  our  warfare  are  not  carnal."  Amongst  our  defensive  weapons  I  may  mention, 
as  the  first  and  chiefest,  prayer.  With  this  we  must  join  faith  in  the  promises. 
And,  also,  we  must  remember  that  throughout  our  whole  life  we  shall  have  need 
of  active  watchfulness.  There  are  also  offensive  weapons  which  we  are  bound  to 
use.  The  first  of  these  which  I  will  mention  is  consistency.  Outward  consistency 
of  character  deters  many  from  attempting  their  proposed  assaults.  Nor  must  we 
forget  the  Word  of  God.  Here,  indeed,  is  our  great  weapon  ;  and  so  powerful  is 
it,  that  it  is  the  great  desire  of  Satan  to  keep  it  out  of  our  reach.  III.  But  I  own 
there  are  great  difficulties  in  the  way.  The  first  to  which  I  will  allude  is  that 
which  arises  from  our  peculiar  position  in  the  world.     We  must  be  in  the  world. 


238  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOH.  [chap.  vii. 


and  the  difficulty  at  the  same  time  is  to  take  care  that  we  are  not  of  the  world. 
To  have  a  wise  discerning  judgment  ;  to  distinguish  between  the  fulfilment  of  our 
duty  in  that  station  of  life  in  which  God  has  placed  ns,  and  the  yielding  to  the 
secret  subtle  snares  of  Satan,  is  often  a  work  of  great  difficulty  for  the  Christian. 
Again,  the  Christian's  difficulties  and  afflictions  are  not  all  at  once  removed.  Like 
the  enemies  of  the  Jews  they  are  put  down,  as  it  were,  "little  by  little."  It  is  a 
gradual  and  a  progressive  work.  But  assuredly  it  does  progress  towards  final 
victory.  But  numerous  as  are  our  enemies,  great  as  are  our  difficulties,  blessed  be 
God,  we  have— IV.  OuE,  encouragements  also.  And  first  among  these  we  know 
we  shall  have  the  victory.  The  promise  of  victory  has  been  given,  and  it  is  as  sure 
as  if  it  were  accomplished.  We  know  that  we  are  on  the  conquering  side.  The 
numbers  of  our  enemies,  then,  need  not  terrify  us.  "Greater  is  He  that  is  for  us 
than  all  they  that  are  against  us."  The  past  mercies  we  have  received  are  all 
pledges  of  future  mercies.  If  we  had  but  received  that  one  pledge  of  God's  love 
which  He  afforded  us  in  the  gift  of  His  Son  for  us,  this  would  of  itself  be  sufficient 
to  encourage  the  assurance  of  hope.  For  (Rom.  viii.  32)  we  have  nothing  to  fear 
from  present  weakness.  The  Lord  has  laid  help  upon  One  that  is  mighty  to  save. 
Though  our  gracious  Saviour  is  not  Himself  personally  present  He  has  told  us  the 
reason  (John  xvi.  7).  Still  He  is  spiritually  present  with  us.  His  Spirit  still 
abides  with  His  Church— and  therefore  with  us,  if  we  be  indeed  members  of  that 
Church— comforting  us,  assisting  us,  strengthening  us,  and  ensuring  us  victory  at 
the  last.  Furthermore,  the  Lord  is  on  our  side.  "  The  Lord  thy  God  will  do  this." 
{H.  M.  Villiers,  M.A.)  The  Almighty  Helper :— Tina  description  of  God  is  a 
terror  to  sinners,  but  an  encouragement  to  Christians.  His  mighty  presence  is — 
1.  Unmerited.  The  aid  we  get  from  earthly  friends  is  often  a  reciprocity  of  kindness 
— a  discharge  of  obligation.  But  our  goodness  extends  not  to  God.  We  have  done 
nothing  to  deserve  help.  2.  Unexpected.  In  most  extreme  danger  and  when  most 
unlikely,  comes  deliverance.  "Man's  extremity  is  God's  opportunity."  The  place 
of  fear  and  sorrow  becomes  one  of  joy  and  triumph.  3.  Singular.  God's  methods 
are  peculiar  to  Himself.  Events  which  appear  to  combine  to  work  our  ruin  bring 
our  salvation.  In  the  deliverance  from  Egypt  and  the  conquest  of  Canaan  God  was 
terrible  to  His  enemies.  4.  Timely.  We  think  He  has  forgotten  or  forsaken  us  if 
He  appears  not  when  we  wish  ;  but  He  knows  better  than  we  do  when  it  is  time  for 
Him  to  work.  "Too  late  "  can  never  be  said  of  His  mercy.  "A  very  present  help 
in  trouble."  5.  All-sufficient.  Earthly  friends  fail.  God  is  always  among  us,  " a 
mighty  God  and  terrible."  He  conquers  most  formidable  foes,  rescues  from  the 
greatest  dangers.     (/.   Wolfendale.) 

Ver.  22.  The  Lord  thy  God  will  put  out  those  nations. — God^s  expulsion  of  evil : — 
As  you  read  this  Scripture  you  will  instantly  remember  the  position  occupied  by  the 
Jews  at  the  time  these  words  of  promise  were  spoken  to  them.  The  forty  years  of 
wilderness  wandering  had  run  their  round.  The  narrow  stream  of  Jordan  was  all 
that  lay  between  them  and  the  land  of  promise,  and  in  a  few  days  they  would  cross 
the  swollen  flood,  and  take  possession  of  the  goodly  country  in  the  name  and  for 
the  glory  of  that  God  who  had  given  it  to  them  for  a  heritage  for  ever.  In  prospect 
of  the  work,  the  warfare  they  would  have  to  carry  on  in  their  conquest  of  Canaan, 
these  words  of  exhortation  were  addressed  to  them,  teaching  them  a  twofold  truth. 
First,  God  would  be  with  them  ;  God  would  work  for  them.  Therefore  they  might 
cherish  the  utmost  confidence  of  ultimate  success.  Secondly,  God  would  be  with 
them,  but  not  to  complete  the  work  for  them  at  a  single  stroke.  He  would  do  it 
surely  ;  but  He  would  do  it  slowly  also.  Therefore  they  might  have  quiet  contentment 
as  well  as  unfaltering  hope.  They  must  "rest  in  the  Lord,  and  wait  patiently  for 
Him."  This  was  no  new  arrangement  on  the  part  of  God  ;  it  was  no  new  revelation  to 
the  Jewish  people.  The  Lord  had  spoken  to  them  forty  years  before  in  the  self-same 
strain.  As  in  the  words  of  the  text,  so  in  those  of  the  twenty-third  chapter  of 
Exodus,  He  impressed  this  truth  upon  them,  that  they  must  both  labour  and  wait. 
The  words  then  set  before  us  :  Work  done  at  God's  command,  work  done  with  God's 
help,  work  done  successfully,  and  yet  work  progressing  slowly  towards  its  promised 
perfection  ;  the  slow  progress  not  because  of  human  indolence  and  faithlessness,  but 
because  of  Divine  ordinance.  Why  did  He  not  do  it  all  at  once  ?  How  easily  with 
the  breath  of  His  mouth  He  could  have  swept  the  land  clear  of  the  last  polluting 
remnant  of  the  Canaanites  and  their  idolatries  1  The  reason  for  the  delay  God 
gives.  It  was  no  use  for  the  people  to  gain  the  country  faster  than  they  could  fully 
occux>y  and  properly  cultivate  it.     This  was  one  reason,  though  doubtless  there  were 


€HAP.  VII.]  DEUTERONOMY.  239 

others  which  God  has  not  made  known  to  us.  Let  us  now  turn  from  Jewish  history 
to  our  own  Christian  circumstances,  and  to  our  own  work.  This  ancient  story 
throws  light  on  the  principles  and  processes  of  Divine  providence  in  all  ages.  It  is 
one  practical  proof  of  the  truth  that,  even  in  the  destruction  of  wrong  and  the 
re-establishment  of  right,  our  God  often  works  with  what  seems  to  us  a  strange 
elowness.  In  His  warfare  against  the  power  of  evil  which  is  so  alien  to  His  heart, 
so  hurtful  to  His  creatures,  so  contrary  to  His  will,  the  All-holy  One  does  not 
annihilate  it  with  a  word,  but  He  gradually  crumbles  it  to  fragments,  and  He  casts  it 
away  little  by  little.  There  is  the  work  of  individual  sanctification.  A  Christian 
man  does  not  find  his  nature  a  blank  sheet,  on  which  he  can  at  once  write  all  manner 
of  holy  sentences.  Nay,  but  it  has  already  been  written  upon.  There  are  unholy 
words,  which  to  deface  is  his  work,  and  which  to  entirely  remove  requires  more 
than  human  skill.  He  finds  that  his  nature  is  anything  but  an  empty  country,  in 
which  he  has  just  to  plant  his  standard  of  heaven,  and  of  which  he  has  just  to  take 
possession  in  the  name  of  God.  It  is  full  of  inhabitants— evil  passions,  thoughts, 
desires,  habits— and  thev  have  all  to  be  cast  out,  that  their  place  may  be  taken  by 
thoughts  and  desires  and  habits,  pure  and  holy,  God-pleasing  and  God-like.  And 
this  expulsion  of  the  Philistines,  this  filling  of  the  land  with  the  children  of  God, 
is  in  every  case  a  lifelong  work.  It  is  only  done  by  little  and  little.  This  is  one 
of  the  mysteries  of  our  present  position.  The  false  is  often  so  much,  and  the  true 
is  often  so  little ;  the  wrong  is  often  so  easy,  and  the  right  is  often  so  difficult. 
The  evil,  the  worldly,  and  the  devilish,  is  often  just  yielding  to  nature,  just  floating 
with  the  tide.  The  good,  the  heavenly,  the  God-like — to  follow  it  is  often  to  go 
against  tide  and  tempest,  against  flesh  and  blood,  against  all  manner  of  opposing 
forces.  Why  are  we  taught  to  see  the  beauty  and  to  appreciate  the  blessings  of  holi- 
ness, and  yet  are  left  to  wrestle  so  continually  with  sins  and  doubts  and  fears  ? 
Could  not  our  God  come,  and  at  once  sweep  every  defiling  thing  out  of  our  heart  for 
ever  ?  We  know  that  our  God  could  do  this  if  He  saw  it  to  be  wise  and  best ;  and 
this  must  be  our  comfort  under  the  fact  that  He  does  not  do  it.  He  does  not  abstain 
because  of  His  weakness.  He  does  not  abstain  because  of  His  unwillingness.  He 
sees  that  the  discipline  of  weakness  and  tears,  and  not  unfrequent  failures,  and 
success  only  partially  secured— He  sees  that  His  discipline  is  good  for  us.  He  knows 
how  it  will  prepare  us  for  higher  service  and  for  holier  joys  in  heaven  ;  and  so, 
while  we  are  sighing  for  instant  redemption.  He  grants  us  only  gradual  deliverance. 
(C  Vince.)  By  little  ajid  Utile.— Fidory  sure  but  gradual  .-—The  victory  over 
our  enemies,  that  is,  over  our  sins,  will,  in  general,  not  be  sudden,  but  gradual. 
Final  success  is  promised  :  the  first  attempt  to  resist  is  a  pledge  of  that  final  success  ; 
continued  resistance  is  a  continued  pledge  of  that  result ;  it  needs  only  to  persevere 
in  the  struggle,  and  the  victory  is  ours— ours  already  in  prospect.  We  must  be 
prepared,  therefore,  for  a  continuous  warfare.  Sometimes  we  shall  prevail  over  the 
temptation  of  the  day — then  we  shall  be  encouraged  ;  the  next  day,  perhaps,  we 
shall  be  defeated  by  it,  and  then  we  shall  be  humbled.  Sometimes  we  shall  look 
back,  and  feel  that  we  have  advanced.  At  other  times  we  shall  be  conscious  of 
a  loss  of  ground,  and  we  shall  betake  ourselves  afresh  to  humiliation  and  prayer. 
But,  on  the  whole,  there  will  be  no  doubt  so  long  as  we  continue  to  struggle, 
by  faith  not  in  ourselves  but  in  Christ,  that  we  are  making  progress.  Things 
which  once  seemed  impossible  will  have  become  easy ;  things  which  once  seemed 
irresistible  will  have  been  found  conquerable  in  the  name  of  Christ.  "By 
little  and  little"  our  foes  are  giving  way  before  us.  Yet  a  little  while,  and 
He  that  shall  come  will  come,  and  find  us  with  His  armour  on,  maintaining 
the  post  which  He  has  assigned.  Nor  is  this  an  arbitrary  arrangement,  but  one 
calculated  for  our  good.  "Thou  mayest  not  destroy  them  at  once,  lest  the  beasts 
of  the  field  increase  upon  thee."  The  sudden  and  final  discomfiture  of  our  foes 
at  the  moment  of  our  first  onset  would  not,  in  all  probability,  promote  but  defeat 
our  ultimate  good.  There  is  a  lesson  to  be  learned,  without  which  virtue  itself 
might  be  a  curse  and  not  a  blessing.  That  lesson  is  humility.  He  who  would 
see  God  must  be  a  humble  man ;  and  humility  is  a  grace  of  gradual  attainment. 
It  comes  by  difficulty,  sorrow,  conflict,  often  by  defeat.  Worse  than  any  fall 
is  that  pride  which  precedes  it — that  pride  which,  without  a  fall,  would  never  be 
humbled.  Was  there  danger  lest  the  beasts  of  the  field  should  increase  upon  Israel, 
if  their  enemies  should  fall  before  them  at  once  ?  So  the  heart  abruptly  cleared 
from  the  assaults  of  other  sins — of  ambition,  and  vanity,  and  selfishness,  and  lust — 
might  fall  an  easy  prey  to  the  ravenings  of  spiritual  pride  ;  and  the  last  end  of  that 
xuan  would  be  worse  than  the  first.     (Dean  Vaughan. )       By  liUle  and  little  .•— The 


240  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  vil. 

rule  of  heaven,  earth,  and  hell  is — "  By  little  and  little  !  "  "Whether  you  look  to  the 
outward  and  visible,  or  to  the  inward  and  invisible  ;  to  the  world  of  matter,  or  to 
the  world  of  spirit ;  to  the  kingdom  of  nature,  or  the  kingdom  of  grace, — you  will 
surely  find  this  rule  to  hold  good.  "  First  the  blade,"  &c.  Look  at  the  history  of 
yon  giant  oak.  There  is  a  little  bird,  and  in  his  beak  he  bears  a  tiny  acorn  along. 
Away  he  wings  his  flight,  over  hedge  and  ditch,  brier  and  brake,  until,  frightened 
by  a  hawk,  he  lets  his  little  aconi  fall  m  yon  pasture-field.  Oxen  are  grazing  there. 
The  ox  comes  by,  and  beneath  his  hoof  the  tiny  acorn  is  trodden  deep  down  into 
the  soil.  The  ox  passes  on  his  way.  The  acorn  remains,  uncared-for  and  for- 
gotten ;  but  "  by  little  and  little  "  it  bursts  its  shell ;  "by  little  and  little  "  it  takes 
root  downwards  and  bears  fruit  upwards  ;  "  by  little  and  little  "  the  tender  twigs  peep 
out  amid  the  surrounding  blades  of  grass,  and  thus  slowly  but  surely  it  rises  higher  and 
higher,  and  grows  broader  and  broader,  until  at  length  a  sturdy  oak  marks  now  the 
spot  where  years  before  the  little  acorn  fell.  My  object,  however,  is  to  point  you 
rather  to  the  world  of  spirit  than  to  that  of  nature.  Just  as  the  ancient  Israelites  were 
sure  of  the  Promised  Land  as  their  inheritance  ultimately,  but  still  could  not  secure  it 
without  a  struggle,  or  rather  a  series  of  struggles,  even  **  by  little  and  little  "  ;  just  so 
with  the  child  of  God,  although  from  the  moment  that  he  believes  in  Jesus,  as  the 
only  Saviour  of  his  soul,  he  by  that  very  act  secures  to  himself  the  right  to  enter 
heaven  ;  nevertheless  his  meetness  for  heaven  is  a  work  which  will  require  years  of 
stem  struggling  with  his  spiritual  enemies.  Now  we  may  rest  assured  that  the 
Master's  reasons  for  not  destroying  our  spiritual  enemies  at  once,  but  enabling  us 
to  overcome  "by  little  and  little,"  are  both  wise  and  all-sufficient.  That  we  cannot 
overcome  these  enemies  at  once,  will,  I  take  it,  be  acknowledged  to  the  full  if  I 
appeal  to  the  experience  of  any  Christian  man  or  woman.  Have  ye  never  been 
harassed  by  those  enemies  of  the  Christian's  peace,  even  by  the  nation  of  worldly 
cares  ?  This  nation  is  compared  by  the  Master  to  briers  and  thorns,  which  spring 
up,  and  unless  the  greatest  and  most  constant  care  be  taken  will  choke  the  good 
seed.  I  know  of  none  other  nation,  perhaps,  more  to  be  dreaded  than  these  worldly 
cares,  and  this  is  especially  the  case  in  these  days,  when  many  causes,  such  as  the 
great  competition  in  trade,  the  high  price  of  provisions,  and  an  ever-increasing 
population,  give  to  Satan  a  terrible  vantage-ground  wherefrom  to  attack.  Ye  have 
tried  to  shake  them  off  once  and  for  ever,  as  unworthy  of  the  child  of  God,  but  they 
will  not  be  shaken  oflf  at  once.  Still  strive  on,  and  the  Lord  thy  God  will  put  them 
out  before  you  ^  *  by  little  and  little. "  Again,  the  true  Israelite  is  worried  by  a  nation 
of  idle  and  wandering  thoughts.  Now  ye  must  not  be  discouraged  at  this  state  of 
things  ;  ye  must  not  incline  to  despair  because  unable  to  be  rid  of  these  vain  thoughts 
at  once.  Continue  to  strive  against  them,  and  God  will  put  them  out  before  thee 
"  by  little  and  little."  Thus  might  I  enumerate  enemy  after  enemy  that  will  harass 
and  impede  us  by  the  way.  I  might  remind  you  of  the  sickening  doubts  and  fears, 
of  the  lurking  treachery  of  that  poor  heart,  of  the  seducing  friends  and  the  too  frail 
flesh.  These  cause  you  frequent  and  fearful  pain,  and  ever  and  again  break  in 
upon  your  peace.  Still  in  any  moment  of  despair  I  would  point  you  to  the  truths 
of  the  text,  and  entreat  that  you  will  not  forget  how  that  God  has  ail-wisely  willed 
that  we  should  not  conquer  at  once,  not  become  perfect  at  once,  but  conquer  one 
foe  after  another,  and  become  perfect  only  "by  little  and  little."  And  as  this  is  the 
rule  of  heaven,  so  alas  !  is  it  also  the  rule  of  hell.  In  Gen.  iii.  we  read  that  ' '  the 
serpent  was  more  subtle  than  any  beast  of  the  field,"  and  surely  in  nothing  has  he 
manifested  his  cunning  more  than  in  the  cruel  way  wherewith  he  has  imitated  God 
in  dealing  with  men's  souls.  "I  see  that  in  saving  souls,"  he  would  seem  to  say, 
"  Jehovah  takes  not  the  sinner  out  of  his  sin  so  as  at  once  to  transform  him  into  a 
perfect  saint.  I  see  that  in  winning  souls  to  glory  He  woos  them  gradually  away 
from  earth,  and  by  little  and  little  makes  them  meet  to  be  for  ever  with  the  Lord. 
I  will  go  and  do  likewise.  In  seeking  the  eternal  ruin  of  souls,  my  principle  of 
action  shall  be  the  same.  I  will  not  try  to  make  a  man  a  tenant  meet  for  hell  at 
once,  but  step  by  step  I  will  lead  him  down.  I  will  first  coax  him  till  he  gives  up 
some  one  good  habit ;  I  will  then  tempt  him  till  he  indulges  in  some  one  sin,  and 
again  I  will  blunt  his  conscience  by  tempting  him  to  repeat  that  sin,  until  by  little 
and  little  I  shall  be  able  to  sap  the  very  foundations  of  his  character,  and  gradually 
make  him  fit  for  the  abode  of  the  lost."  I  adjure  you,  then,  as  you  value  your 
happiness  in  time  and  in  eternity,  beware  of  the  very  first  little  tendency  to  sin. 
It  is  here  the  danger  lies.  This  is  the  rule  of  hell's  attack.  (Z>.  P.  Morgan,  M.A.) 
Every  day  a  little: — 1.  Every  day  a  little  knowledge.  One  fact  in  a  day.  How 
small  is  one  fact !     Only  one.     Ten  years  pass  by.     Three  thousand  six  hundred 


CHAP.  VII.]  DEUTERONOMY,  241 

and  fifty  facts  are  not  a  small  thing.  2.  Every  day  a  little  self-denial.  The  thing 
that  is  difficult  to  do  to-day  will  be  an  easy  thing  to  do  three  hundred  and  sixty 
days  hence,  if  each  day  it  shall  have  been  repeated.  What  power  of  self-mastery 
shall  he  enjoy  who,  looking  to  God  for  grace,  seeks  every  day  to  practise  the  grace 
he  prays  for  !  3.  Every  day  a  little  helpfulness.  We  live  for  the  good  of  others, 
if  our  living  be  in  any  sense  a  true  living.  It  is  not  in  great  de^s  of  kindness 
only  that  the  blessing  is  found.  In  "  little  deeds  of  kindness, "  repeated  every  day, 
we  find  true  happiness.  {Anon.)  Theory  of  graduality : — My  text  is  representing 
the  gradual  process  by  which  God  will  exterminate  the  Canaanites  and  give  the  land 
into  the  possession  of  the  Israelites.  It  will  not  be  by  one  fell  blow,  or  instan- 
taneously, but  "by  little  and  little."  Indeed,  that  is  God's  usual  way.  Gradually 
the  world  was  peopled.  Gradually  the  rocks  wear  away.  Gradually  great  changes 
occur.  The  world  ages  in  being  built.  The  world  ages  in  being  redeemed. 
Eternity  is  the  lifetime  of  God.  We  hasten  and  worry  and  die,  but  God  waits, 
and  His  stupendous  projects  go  on  gradually,  slowly,  inch  by  inch,  "  by  little  and 
little."  This  theory  of  graduality  has  its  illustration  in  the  achievement  of 
spiritual  knowledge  and  character  and  the  driving  out  of  Canaanitish  ignorance 
and  Canaanitish  sin  from  the  heart.  The  most  accomplished  rhetorician  or  poet 
who  has  filled  a  whole  shelf  with  admirable  books  of  his  own  began  by  learning 
the  alphabet.  The  mightiest  mental  toil  in  which  we  ever  engaged  was  the 
learning  of  our  a-b-c's.  The  swiftest  reportorial  pen  failed  once  in  attempting  to 
make  a  perpendicular  stroke  on  the  boy's  copy-book.  The  printer,  whose  fingers 
move  with  electric  speed,  once  pulled  out  from  the  "case"  slowly,  cautiously, 
studiously,  type  by  type.  The  boy,  who  bounds  over  the  playground  with  so  much 
celerity  that  he  does  not  seem  to  touch  it,  once  poised  himself  cautiously  against 
the  wall,  and  could  not  be  tempted  to  cross  the  floor  until  he  saw  his  mother's 
arms  out  ready  to  catch  him  if  he  fell.  So  in  all  spiritual  knowledge,  it  is  by 
little  and  little  that  we  advance.  We  went  on  from  one  attainment  to  another. 
Each  of  the  attainments,  perhaps,  seemed  to  be  very  small  indeed,  but  they  came 
on — now  a  resolution  added  to  a  resolution,  hope  added  to  hope,  experience  added 
to  experience,  joy  to  joy,  struggle  to  struggle,  victory  to  victory.  They  did  not 
come  up  on  this  great  mount  of  Christian  excellency  by  one  great  athletic  stride, 
but  inch  by  inch,  step  by  step,  **by  little  and  little."  Paul  came  to  his  great 
attainments  in  piety  gradually.  He  had  to  take  a  course  of  mobs,  of  shipwrecks, 
of  scour^ings,  of  imprisonments,  of  execrations  before  he  came  to  the  rounding 
out  of  his  character,  and  every  Christian  now  must  come  through  ups  and  downs, 
and  losses,  and  slights,  and  blunders,  and  abuse,  and  struggles  to  that  rounding 
out  of  his  character.  A  merchant  tailor  takes  down  the  goods,  he  unrolls  them, 
he  makes  the  line  of  chalk-mark,  with  his  scissors  he  follows  the  chalk-mark  until 
the  garment  is  cut  out,  and  though  there  may  be  many  pieces,  the  whole  garment 
is  made  out  of  one  cloth.  But  it  is  not  so  in  the  putting  together  of  a  Christian 
character.  It  is  a  little  of  this  to  make  the  robe  of  character,  and  a  little  of  that, 
a  little  of  the  bright  -  coloured  prosperity,  and  a  little  of  the  dark-shadowed 
calamity.  It  is  a  sort  of  patchwork.  Little  by  little.  Conversion  is  an  instan- 
taneous work.  Believing  is  becoming  a  Christian.  But  there  is  a  great  difference 
between  conversion  and  sanctification.  Conversion  is  turning  around  from  the 
wrong  direction  and  starting  in  the  right  direction  ;  but  sanctification  is  keeping 
on  in  the  right  direction  after  you  have  started.  After  conversion,  oh  !  how  much 
work.  And  your  greatest  battles  with  the  world,  the  flesh,  and  the  devil  will  bo 
after  you  have  declared  against  them.  Men  think  after  they  are  converted  the 
work  is  done.  They  suppose  that  in  some  way  there  will  be  heaved  up  in  their 
souls  a  grand  Christian  character  as  an  earthquake  heaves  up  a  beautiful  island  in 
the  midst  of  the  sea.  No.  No.  "  By  little  and  little."  Troubles  will  help  you. 
There  is  no  such  thing  as  "  wrought-iron  "  without  passing  through  the  fire.  The 
seniors  in  Christ's  college,  of  course,  know  more  than  the  freshmen.  But  be 
accumulative  every  day.  A  handful  of  acorns  will  make  a  forest  of  oaks.  **  By 
little  and  little."  Again,  this  theory  of  graduality  has  its  illustration  in  the 
formation  of  bad  habits.  Look  at  that  habit  of  falsifying.  The  man  began  with 
what  is  called  a  "white  lie,"  or  a  "fib."  He  can  stand  in  his  store,  behind  his 
counter,  and  unblushingly,  deliberately,  calmly  say  that  which  he  knows  to  be 
false,  and  which  you  know  to  be  false.  There  are  hundreds  of  men  in  this  house 
to-day  who  would  confess  that  the  habit  is  injurious  to  them,  but  somehow  they 
cannot  stop.  How,  my  brother,  did  you  get  this  bondage  on  you  ?  In  one  day  I 
In  one  hour  ?  No.  "  By  little  and  little."  Again,  this  theory  of  graduality  is 
i6 


242  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vii. 

illustrated  in  the  right  kind  of  domestic  discipline,  and  the  driving  out  of 
Canaanitish  evil  from  the  child's  heart.  Family  government  is  by  fits  and  starts, 
but  it  is  worth  less  than  nothing  unless  it  be  calm,  deliberate,  continuous  all 
through  boyhood  and  girlhood.  Your  children  by  this  process  are  making 
character  noble  or  degraded.  "By  little  and  little."  To  the  nursery-story  and 
the  picture-book  of  the  first  four  years  must  be  added  the  influence  of  a  Christian 
fireside,  proper  improvement  of  anniversaries,  line  upon  line,  precept  upon  precept, 
here  a  little,  there  a  little,  here  a  smile,  there  a  look,  here  a  frown,  here  a  walk, 
here  a  ride,  here  a  flower  plucking,  here  this,  here  that.  "By  little  and  little." 
Once  more,  this  theory  of  graduality  has  its  illustration  in  the  conquest  of  the 
world  for  God  and  the  extermination  of  the  Canaanites  for  ever.  Would  it  not  be 
pleasant  if  in  one  day  all  the  race  could  be  evangelised,  and  the  Atlantic  cable 
could  thrill  with  the  news  that  Europe,  Asia,  and  Africa  are  converted  ?  Because 
it  is  not  done  rapidly,  Christian  people  get  discouraged.  They  say :  "  Nineteen 
centuries  since  Christ  came,  and  yet  the  world  not  saved."  Oh,  you  cavillers  ;  you 
do  not  realise  the  way  Cod  does  things.  God  is  not  in  a  hurry.  Many  generations 
are  to  have  joy  in  this  work  ;  you  shall  not  monopolise  it.  Your  children  and 
your  children's  children,  and  their  successors  innumerable,  shall  help  to  draw  on 
this  Gospel  chariot.  Let  God  control  the  great  afl'airs  of  the  univei-se.  Let  us  each, 
one  do  his  own  little  work.  The  hands  that  made  the  curtains  in  the  ancient 
tabernacle  did  their  work.  And  you  will  favour  the  work  in  one  way,  and  I  will 
favour  the  work  in  another  way.  Each  one  doing  his  own  work,  in  his  own  way, 
according  to  his  own  capacity.  *'  By  little  and  little."  Then  God  will  at  the  last 
gather  up  all  these  fragments  of  work,  and  in  the  great  day  of  eternity  we  shall 
see  it,  and  under  arches  of  light  and  in  bowers  of  beauty,  and  amid  the  battle-flags 
of  God's  great  host  of  the  r^eemed,  and  amid  the  blast  of  all  heaven's  trumpets, 
we  shall  see  the  consummation.  Amid  that  "great  multitude  that  no  man  can 
number,"  God  will  not  be  ashamed  to  announce  that  all  this  grandeur  and  glory 
and  triumph  were  achieved  "by  little  and  little."  {T.  De  Witt  Talmage,  D.D.) 
Tick  by  tick: — In  listening  to  the  sound  by  which  a  clock  or  watch  marks  the 
passing  of  the  diminutive  portions  of  time,  one  might  almost  fancy  that  deductions 
so  extremely  small  would  never  wear  away  the  whole  duration  of  a  long  life.  But 
it  has  been  by  such  minute  lapses  in  never  ceasing  succession  that  the  vast  series 
of  ages  since  the  creation  has  passed  away  ;  it  has  been  by  this  succession  of 
instants  that  all  our  ancestors  have  completed  their  sojourn  on  earth,  and  by  this 
it  will  be  that  we  shall  one  day  have  arrived  at  the  end  of  our  mortal  existence. 
Each  passing  moment,  then,  may  be  regarded  as  having  a  relation  to  the  end,  and 
everything  which  hints  to  us  that  moments  are  passing,  may  be  a  monition  to  us 
to  be  habitually  at  the  great  work  which  ought  to  be  accomplished  against  the 
period  when  the  last  of  them  shall  come.  {J.  Foster.)  The  progress  of  our  truest 
life : — We  have  watched,  on  a  summer's  day,  the  tide  coming  in  upon  the  shore. 
How  slow,  and  scarcely  perceptible  its  advance  !  Now  a  strong  onrush  ;  then  a 
temporary  ebb  ;  presently  a  further  advance  ;  so,  inch  by  inch,  the  ground  is 
gained.  Such  should  be  the  progress  of  our  truest  "life."  Steadily  the  tide  of 
purer,  stronger  feeling,  of  nobler  and  more  strenuous  endeavour  should  ripple  in, 
until  life  flows  to  its  height,  musical  as  the  sound  of  many  waters !  The  con- 
centration  of  the  little  : — The  weakest  living  creature,  by  concentrating  his  powers 
on  a  single  object,  can  accomplish  something  ;  the  strongest,  by  dispersing  his 
over  many,  may  fail  to  accomplish  anything.  The  drop,  by  continued  falling, 
bores  its  passage  through  the  hardest  rock — the  hasty  torrent  rushes  over  it  with  a 
hideous  uproar,  and  leaves  no  trace  behind.  The  conquest,  of  character  : — The 
boundary  line  between  legitimate  aspiration  and  a  reasonable  content  is  sometimes 
hard  to  find.  Contentment  may  be  construed  by  some  as  lack  of  enterprise,  and 
so  more  or  less  ignoble,  while  aspiration  may,  and  often  does,  become  mere  rest- 
lessness and  discontent.  But  all  depends  on  what  we  aspire  to  and  what  we  are 
content  with.  The  man  who  wants  to  be  a  little  better,  a  little  wiser,  a  little 
richer  than  he  is,  whose  aspiration  takes  the  form  of  gradual  growth  by  littles,  will 
probably  realise  his  desires.  And  if  he  refuses  to  fight  the  inevitable  and  the 
immutable  limitations  that  are  set  about  him,  even  while  constantly  bettering  his 
condition,  he  may  yet  be  content  and  happy.  Great  estates  are  built  up  by  slow 
and  gradual  accretion  running  through  the  years.  Great  scholarship  is  the  result 
of  constant  aspiration,  unflagging  industry,  and  tireless  diligence.  So  fine 
character  is  the  result  of  innumerable  conquests  over  self  and  selfishness  and  ease, 
and  evil  and  vicious  tendency.     It  is  built  up  as  the  coral  animal  builds  the  reefs. 


CHAP.  VII.]  DEUTERONOMY. 


243 


one  act  at  a  time,  and  a  great  many  of  them  going  to  the  erection  of  the  lofty 
structure.  Little  things  d<me  well : — Young  men  in  beginning  life  are  apt  to  be 
impatient  of  the  first  little  steps  that  apparently  make  no  advance,  forgetting  that 
seeming  "trifles  make  up  the  sum  of  life,"  just  as  in  building,  the  little  bricks 
laid  carefully  one  at  a  time,  side  by  side,  and  securely  cemented  together,  make  at 
last  the  great,  strong  structure.  A  young  man,  having  exhausted  his  patrimony  in 
obtaining  a  professional  education,  settled  himself  in  a  town  already  filled  with 
successful  lawyers,  to  practise  law.  One  day  one  of  these  older  lawyers  asked  him 
how,  under  such  circumstances,  he  expected  to  make  a  living.  "  I  hope  I  may  get 
ft  little  practice,"  was  the  modest  reply.  '*  It  will  be  very  little,"  said  the  lawyer. 
"  Then  I  will  do  that  little  well,"  answered  the  young  man  decidedly.  He  carried 
out  his  determination.  The  little  things  well  done  brought  larger  ones,  and  in 
time  he  became  one  of  the  most  distinguished  jurists  of  his  State.  Again,  a 
certain  old   bishop,  who  was  fond  of  finding  odd  characters  in  out-of-the-way 

E laces,  was  visiting  in  a  quiet  neighbourhood.  One  day,  in  a  walk  with  a  friend 
6  came  across  a  cross-roads  settlement  of  a  few  houses.  Among  them  was  a  snug 
little  shoe-shop,  kept  by  an  old  negro  man,  which  showed  signs  of  prosperity. 
Interested  in  the  old  cobbler,  the  bishop  stopped  for  a  chat.  **  My  friend,"  he 
said,  *'l  would  not  think  so  small  a  business  as  mending  shoes  would  pay  so  well." 
"Ah,"  said  the  gentleman  with  him,  "old  Cato  has  the  monopoly  of  shoe- 
mending  in  this  region.  No  one  else  gets  a  job."  *'  How  is  that,  Cato  ?"  asked 
the  bishop.  *•  Just  so,  master,"  replied  Cato.  **It  is  only  little  patches  put  on 
with  little  stitches  or  tiny  pegs.  But  when  I  takes  a  stitch  it  is  a  stitch,  and  when 
I  drive  a  peg  it  holds."  Little  things  well  done !  The  good  bishop  used  that 
reply  as  a  text  for  many  a  sennon  afterwards.     {Christian  Age.) 

Vot.  25.  Thon  shalt  not  desire  the  silver  or  zold..— Things  not  to  he  desired:^ 
Showing,  as  he  always  shows,  a  most  penetrating  mind,  Moses  points  to  a  very 
subtle  temptation  which  would  arise  in  connection  with  the  progress  of  Israel. 
The  graven  images  of  the  heathen  nations  were  to  be  burned  with  fire.  Moses 
says  in  the  twenty-fifth  verse  :  "Thou  shalt  not  desire  .  .  .  lest  thou  be  ensnared 
therein."  How  subtle  is  the  temptation  in  that  direction  !  Shall  we  cast  in  the 
hideous  gods  and  the  valuable  gold,  and  consume  them  both  in  the  unsparing  fire  ? 
How  much  better  first  to  strip  the  god  of  his  golden  coat  and  then  burn  the  wood 
or  clay  or  grind  the  stone  to  powder  !  Moses,  foreseeing  this  temptation,  and  by 
the  very  inspiration  of  God,  knowing  the  mysteries  of  human  nature,  said  :  "Touch 
not ;  taste  not ;  handle  not."  In  such  abstention  is  the  only  possible  safety  of  the 
Church.  The  temptation  operates  to-day.  Men  will  sustain  a  questionable  mode 
of  earning  a  livelihood  on  the  pretence  that  they  can  gather  from  the  forbidden 
trade  gold  and  silver  which  they  can  melt  down  and  mint  with  the  image  and 
superscription  of  God  ;  they  can  allow  the  devastating  traffic  to  proceed,  r'eekint/ 
like  the  pit  of  hell,  destroying  countless  thousands  of  lives,  and  yet  justify  the  con*^ 
tinuance  of  the  iniquity  by  taking  off  the  gold  and  the  silver  and  throwing  part  of 
it  into  the  coffers  of  the  Church.  Missions  so  sustained  are  dishonoured.  Tlie  gold 
torn  frona  any  evil  way  of  getting  a  livelihood  and  given  to  the  Church  is  an 
abomination  to  the  Lord  thy  God.  He  does  not  want  even  good  gold  stolen  for 
His  purposes,  or  gold  won  by  unholy  means  thrown  into  His  exchequer.  Let  us 
give  honest  money.  Let  us  eat  bread  unleavened  by  wrong-doing  ;  tliere  may  be 
little  of  it,  but  Christ  will  break  it  with  His  own  hands,  and  it  shall  be  more  than 
our  hunger  needs.  Marvellous,  too,  is  the  prevision  of  Moses  when  he  lays  down 
the  only  law  or  principle  by  which  all  these  abstentions  and  all  these  actions  can 
be  sustained.  Do  not  let  us  ascribe  these  regulations  to  the  prevision  of  Moses 
unless  we  understand  by  that  term  the  inspiration  of  God.  What  is  the  principle 
which  guarantees  safety  and  protects  the  soul  from  the  unclean  things  of  heathen 
nations?  That  principle  is  laid  down  in  the  twenty-sixth  verse.  Speaking  of 
heathen  abomination  Moses  says :  "  Thou  shalt  utterly  detest  it,  and  thou  shalt 
utterly  abhor  it."  There  is  no  middle  feeling  ;  there  is  no  intermediate  way  of 
dealing  with  bad  things.  "If  thy  right  hand  offend  thee,  cut  it  off";  "if  thy 
right  eye  offend  thee,  pluck  it  out."  "Abhor  that  which  is  evil ;  cleave  to  that 
which  18  good."    Thus  the  Testaments  are  one :  the  moral  tone  is  the  same  ;  the 

stem  law  never  yields  to  time— its  phrase  changes,  its  words  may  come  and  go  its .^ 

forms  may  take  upon  them  the  colour  of  the  transient  times,  but  the  inner  spirit    <    p,  '" 
of  righteousness  is  the  Spii-it  of  God,  without  beginning,  without  measure,  wijkli<Mt'^ 
end.     {J.  Parker^  D.D.)  .^tr  ~ 


C 


244  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vm. 


CHAPTER   VIII. 

Vers.  1,  2.  Remember  all  the  way  wMcli  the  Lord  thy  God  led  thee.-~ 

Remembering  arid  forgetting  (with  Phil.  iii.  ]  3) : — Thou  shalt  remember,  and  thou 
shalt  forget.  We  need  a  good  memory  and  a  good  forgettery.  I.  First,  then,  the 
PAST  ;  WE  ARE  TO  REMEMBER  IT.  The  old  lawgiver  sought  to  make  the  nation's 
great  history  sacramental.  Much  might  well  be  forgotten.  The  old  rebellions,  tixAy^ 
old  murmurings,  their  lapses  from  loyalty,  and  the  heavy,  hard  work  they  had 
made  for  their  great  spiritual  leader — they  had  better  break  with  much  of  this  un- 
savoury record.  But  they  must  remember  the  lessons  of  history.  Unfortunate  is  the 
man  or  the  nation  without  the  memories  of  great  providences,  that  has  never  known 
the  discipline  of  heaven.  We  are  never  to  forget  the  past :  the  fact  that  we  are  the 
product  of  the  past,  that  the  ground  on  which  we  stand  is  made  soil ;  that  if  you 
sink  your  pick  into  it  you  cut  into  the  layer  of  forty  or  fifty  centuries  ;  that  all  our 
sowing  is  upon  the  prepared  ground  and  top-dressing  contributed  by  all  the  older 
perio(fa.  God  has  been  working  and  good  men  have  been  building  at  all  the  sub- 
structures that  are  the  foundations  on  which  we  start  the  work  we  have  in  hand. 
Providence  is  not  the  mintage  of  yesterday,  and  God  has  not  been  waiting  for  us  to 
appear  on  the  scene  before  He  set  His  plough  in  the  furrow.  We  had  better  not  be 
too  ready  to  quit  with  the  past.  Foundations  have  been  made  for  us  ;  we  are  our- 
selves the  creations  of  the  past,  and  most  of  the  instruments  with  which  we  work 
are  contributions  from  the  past.  We  may  easily  exaggerate  our  abilities  and 
resources,  especially  our  originality.  We  are  a  little  inflated  just  now  with  our 
physical  resources.  The  greatest  moulders  of  men,  the  greatest  teachers  of  the  world 
are  not  any  of  them  above  ground,  when  we  come  to  think  of  it.  The  mightiest 
forces  that  reach  forth  their  transforming  energies  to  mould  human  life  come  to  us 
from  sources  back  of  all  contemporary  history.  For  our  greatest  literature,  for  the 
most  truly  constructive  forces  for  shaping  history,  and  for  our  religion  we  must  go 
to  the  past.  The  history  of  the  great  peoples  of  the  world  is  a  veritable  mine  of 
wealth  ;  we  could  better  afford  to  throw  all  our  gold  into  the  sea  than  to  lose  our 
past  and  the  past  of  the  divinely  led  nations  among  whom  God  has  been  so  visibly 
working.  We  had  better  remember  all  the  way  the  Lord  hath  led  us, — remember 
it  because  it  has  made  us  what  we  are,  and  because  God's  footprints  are  visible  upon 
it.  God  has  been  here  before  us  ;  has  been  forehanded  with  us ;  has  wrought 
at  the  basis  of  all  our  individual  and  national  life.  II.  The  first  word  is 
REMEMBER,  THE  SECOND  IS  FORGET.  We  are  to  remember  the  past  and  we  are 
to  forget  it.  The  made  soil  on  which  we  sow  is  an  inheritance  from  the  past,  but 
we  are  to  add  a  new  layer  of  soil  on  which  others  are  to  sow.  Our  best  use  of  the 
past,  Phillips  Brooks  tells  us,  is  to  get  a  great  future  out  of  it.  Many  people  and 
many  nations  overwork  their  past,  give  themselves  in  excess  to  retrospection,  build 
the  sepulchres  of  the  fathers,  and  give  themselves  to  criticism  of  their  own  age  and 
time.  They  behold  God  and  nature  through  older  eyes  alone,  forgetting  the 
individual  relation  of  each  personal  soul.  '*  Why,"  asks  Emerson,  "should  we  not 
enjoy  our  original  relation  to  the  universe  and  demand  our  own  works,  laws,  and 
worship  ?  The  past  is  for  us,  but  the  sole  terms  on  which  it  can  become  ours  are  its 
subordination  to  the  present."  *  And  so  one  way  of  forgetting  the  past  and  leaving 
the  things  that  are  behind  is  to  go  and  do  better  things.  Good  precedents  are 
good,  but  we  ought  to  improve  on  them.  We  ought  to  swing  clear  of  the  mistakes 
of  predecessors,  and  do  a  better  work  than  they  did.  We  need  in  the  interests  of 
personal  growth  to  forget  many  things  which  we  insist  on  loading  ourselves  with. 
It  is  very  human  to  blunder,  but  it  is  a  Divine  thing  in  imperfect  people  not  to 
repeat  blunders.  Past  sins  too,  if  repented  of,  are  gowl  things  to  forget.  And  old 
sorrows  we  had  better  leave  with  the  dead  yestei-days :  the  to-morrow  of  hope 
is  already  kindling  in  the  east.  Even  old  successes  had  better  be  left  with 
the  past,  if  we  are  making  them  the  limit  of  responsibility  and  the  end  of 
duty.  The  future  should  be  reserved  in  all  cases  for  constructive  work :  for 
new  undertakings,  for  larger  tasks,  for  better  fidelities.  Learn  new  things; 
do  new  things  every  week  you  live.  Our  life  stagnates  when  poised  on  the 
older  standards  of  duty  or  achievement.  {S.  H.  Howe,  D.D.)  Looking  back- 
ward:— I.  The  DIVINELY  GOVERNED  LIFE.  "Thou  shalt  remember  all  the  way 
which  the  Lord  thy  God  led  thee  these  forty  years  in  the  wilderness. "  Now,  it  is  not 
difficult  for  us  to  believe  in  the  Divine  government  when  we  look  up  into  the  mid- 
night sky.    Ten  thousand  times  ten  thousand  stars  moving  in  their  orbits,  and 


CHAP.  VIII.]  DEUTERONOMY.  245 

pursuing  from  age  to  age  their  march  of  light,  compel  us  to  believe  that  this  is  a 
divinely  governed  cosmos.  It  is  also  easy  to  believe  in  the  government  of  God 
when  we  look  upon  this  world  in  which  we  live.  This  planet  is  evidently  a  rational 
and  ordered  sphere.  The  form  of  the  argument  for  design  may  change,  but  the 
conviction  of  design  persists  in  the  consciousness  of  mankind.  They  leel  that  at 
the  back  of  earth  and  sea  is  an  Architect  building  with  a  plan  ;  an  Artist  working 
out  a  distinct  ideal  and  purpose  ;  a  Dramatist  fitting  j>erfectly  each  act  of  the  drama. 
Looking  on  the  beautiful  world,  it  is  easy  to  believe  this,  it  is  almost  impossible  to 
disbelieve  it.  Again,  it  is  not  diflBcult  to  believe  in  the  Divine  government  when 
you  consider  the  history  of  the  human  race.  It  is  as  difficult  to  resist  the  idea  of 
order,  progress,  purpose  in  contemplating  the  course  of  human  history  as  it  is  to 
resist  that  idea  in  surveying  nature.  There  is  a  doctrine  known  as  the  doctrine  of 
purposelessness,  a  doctrine  that  maintains  the  inconsequence  and  irrationality  of 
nature  and  history,  but  it  has  found  few  defenders.  And,  once  more,  it  is  not 
difficult  to  believe  in  a  Divine  government  when  we  mark  the  career  of  extraordinary 
men.  When  we  consider  Cyrus  and  Csesar,  St.  Paul  and  Luther,  it  is  easy  to  believe 
in  the  divinity  that  shapes  men's  ends.  The  real  difl[iculty  of  believing  in  a  super- 
natural order  arises  when  we  begin  to  think  of  a  Divine  government  ordering  the 
individual  lives  of  such  obscure  and  mediocre  beings  as  we  are.  Any  unbelief  here 
is  fatal  indeed  We  must  believe  that  the  same  infinite  knowledge  and  power 
which  shape  the  destinies  of  orbs,  races,  and  heroes,  shape  the  life-history  of  the  low- 
liest man  and  woman  on  the  face  of  the  earth.  What  did  our  Lord  teach  us  on  this 
very  matter?  "If  God  so  clothe  the  grass  of  the  field,  shall  He  not  much  more 
clothe  you  ? "  And  certainly  the  science  of  the  day  helps  us  to  the  same  conclusion. 
The  world  is  built  upon  the  atom  ;  the  microbe  in  many  ways  teaches  the  grandeur 
of  insignificance.  We  may  be  very  obscure  and  ordinary  people,  but  it  is  our  joy  to 
remember  that  we  are  certainly  embraced  by  the  government  of  God,  and  that  He 
ever  seeks  to  lead  us  and  guide  us  as  a  shepherd  guides  his  sheep.  And  have  we  not 
many  of  us  a  very  vivid  consciousness  of  this  overshadowing  Providence  ?  Do  you 
say,  *'  I  am  the  architect  of  my  own  fortune  "  ?  If  you  are,  you  are  the  architect  of 
a  precious  jei-ry  building.  If  your  life  is  really  rich  and  successful,  ye  are  God's 
husbandry,  ye  are  God's  building.  And  if  God  has  blessed  us  marvellously,  has  He 
not  also  wonderfully  kept  us  amid  the  temptations  and  perils  of  the  pilgrimage  ? 
The  man  who  congratulates  himself  upon  his  character  and  standing,  and  imputes  all 
to  his  own  strength,  and  caution,  and  skill,  is  strangely  blind  and  forgetful.  What 
would  you  think  if  an  ocean  liner  were  to  flatter  itself  because  it  had  found  its  way 
from  New  York  to  Liverpool  ?  *  *  How  cautiously  I  crept  through  that  fog  ;  how 
skilfully  I  kept  clear  of  those  icebergs  ;  how  cleverly  I  piloted  myself  past  those 
sandbanks ;  wliat  a  wide  berth  I  gave  those  rocks ;  how  delicately  I  threaded 
my  way  along  the  Mersey  ! "  Forgetting  all  the  time  the  captain  on  the  bridge. 
We  must  not  forget  the  Captain  on  the  bridge,  the  Captain  of  our  salvation. 
How  wonderfully  God  has  disappointed  our  fears  and  misgivings !  We  have 
often  looked  forward  with  solicitude  and  even  anguish  to  impending,  threatening 
trials,  and  yet  God  has  brought  us  safely  through.  God  has  been  with  us  through 
all  the  years,  filling  us  with  good  things,  delivering  us  in  the  evil  day,  scattering  our 
fears,  bringing  us  onward  to  the  appointed  rest.  II.  The  Divine  purpose  in  otje 
LIFE.  "To  humble  thee,  and  to  prove  thee,  to  know  what  was  in  thine  heart, 
whether  thou  wouldest  keep  His  commandments  or  no. "  The  moral  idea  is  the  grand 
end  to  which  God  governs  the  race,  the  nation,  and  governs  us.  God  seeks  to  bring 
men  to  the  knowledge  of  Himaelf,  to  purify  them  from  false  love  and  lusts,  to  teach 
them  obedience,  to  make  them  fit  for  their  great  and  holy  inheritance.  The 
Egyptian  historian,  the  Greek  historian,  the  Roman  historian  simply  gave  a  series 
of  grand  pictures  of  kings,  cities,  marches,  battles  won  and  lost,  and  ended  with  such 
pictures ;  but  the  Jewish  lawgivers  and  prophets  grasped  the  fact  of  the  moral 
character  and  aim  of  the  Divine  government.  The  aim  of  God's  government  is  not 
the  material  enrichment  of  men.  The  great  symbols  of  His  final  purpose  are  not 
L.  S.  D.  He  does  not  rule  the  world  to  create  rich  nations  or  individuals.  He  has 
not  led  you  for  forty  years  that  you  might  make  a  big  pile,  and  get  at  length  an 
embroidered  shroud.  And  the  final  idea  of  God  is  not  intellectual.  He  is  not 
satisfied  with  genius,  scholarship,  taste.  Some  seem  to  think  that  the  ultimate  pur- 
pose of  the  governing  Power  of  the  universe  is  to  produce  a  sensual  ra<e  with  a 
magnificent  environment  of  palaces  and  pictures,  like  Victor  Hugo's  duvil-fish  in  the 
enclianted  cave.  The  great  end  of  God's  government  is  stated  in  the  text.  For  forty 
jears  God  disciplined  Israel  in  the  wilderness,  that  they  might  pass  Irom  being  a 


246  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  viii. 

nation  of  coarse  slaves  into  a  nation  of  saints,  losing  their  sensuality  and  wilfulness, 
being  weaned  from  idols,  growing  into  righteousness  and  spirituality ;  and  it  is 
precisely  for  the  same  great  end  that  God  disciplines  us  to-day.  He  anticipates, 
disposes,  adjusts,  rules,  and  overrules,  so  that  we  may  taste  His  love,  keep  His  law, 
reflect  His  beauty,  and  be  prepared  to  see  His  face.  How  far  has  this  great  end  been 
answered  in  us  ?  God  has  greatly  blessed  us,  humbled  us  ;  what  is  the  result  ?  How 
do  we  bear  the  moral  test  ?  Some  of  us  are  in  many  worldly  respects  far  worse  off 
than  we  were  forty  years  ago.  Life  is  a  wonderful  process  for  spoiling  dreams  and 
frustrating  hopes,  and  some  of  you  feel  that  your  life  has  not  been  the  success  you 
expected,  that  you  have  been  sorely  disappointed,  that  life  ends  in  frustration,  if  not 
in  a  general  breakdown.  Are  you  at  last  humble,  spiritual,  godly,  looking  for  the 
mercy  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  unto  eternal  life  ?  Then  glorify  God  with  all  your 
ransomed  powers.  Blessed  humiliation  !  You  are  no  failure.  You  are  a  splendid, 
Divine,  eternal  success.  (W.  L.  Watkinson.)  Looking  backward : — Memory  is 
said  to  be  sometimes  quickened  to  an  unusual  activity  at  the  end  of  life.  The 
dying,  and  especially  the  drowning,  are  said  to  have  set  before  them  in  swift  pano- 
ramic view  the  varied  experiences  of  the  life  which  is  hurrying  to  a  close.  "Son, 
remember" — is  the  thrilling  admonition — "  that  thou,  in  thy  lifetime,  receivedst  thy 
good  things. "  It  is  in  a  more  merciful  and  hopeful  way  that  we  are  called  upon  to 
exertise  our  memory  to-day.  While  we  still  live  and  the  result  of  our  life  may  be 
influenced,  we  are  required  to  pass  it  in  review.  Occasionally  circumstances  arise 
which  seem  to  set  us  upon  this  duty  in  an  altogether  special  way.  You  pass  along 
a  road  where  you  have  not  been  for  fifteen  or  twenty  years.  You  see  a  face  that  you 
have  not  seen  since  you  were  a  child,  or  you  meet  a  man  that  was  your  friend  in 
youth.  Or  perhaps  it  is  some  particular  crisis  in  life,  or  the  return  of  some  birth- 
day, that  sets  the  past  in  review.  Life  is  here  regarded  as  a  discipline,  and  we  have 
set' before  us  first  of  all — L  The  Agent  of  this  discipline.  "The  Lord  thy 
God."  Think  of  the  multitude  of  influences  to  which  these  Israelites  were  exposed 
in  their  great  migration.  Moses  to  lead  them,  Korah,  Dathan,  and  Abiram  to  mis- 
lead them,  Aaron  to  do  sometimes  the  one  and  sometimes  the  other  ;  the  Red  Sea  to 
bar  their  way  at  the  beginning  of  their  journey,  and  the  Jordan  at  the  end  ;  famine 
and  pestilence,  quails  and  manna ;  Caleb  and  Joshua  to  encourage,  the  unfaithful 
spies  to  discourage,  the  Egyptians  to  drive  them,  Moabites,  Amorites,  and  the  rest 
to  harass  and  hinder  them.  Yet  as  they  look  back  they  are  taught  to  see  One 
Hand  at  work,  and  that  the  hand  of  the  Lord  their  God.  The  great  lesson  which 
this  old  Hebrew  history  has  to  teach  us  is  the  clear  recognition  of  God  in  everything. 
There  is  no  lesson,  surely,  which  our  strained  and  worried  modern  life  more  urgently 
requires  than  this.  If  our  lives,  and  lives  dearer  to  us  than  our  own,  are  to  be  the 
sport  of  every  malign  influence,  and  every  wilful  or  foolish  person;  if  we  are  at  the 
mercy  of  all  those  varied  calamities  and  deaths  which  ride  upon  the  breeze  and  lurk 
in  the  dust  and  lie  in  wait  at  every  point,  we  may  well  be  driven  to  distraction. 
II.  The  sphere  of  this  discipline.  ' '  In  the  wilderness. "  The  place  in  which  the 
discipline  was  conducted  was  not  without  its  bearing  on  the  result.  It  was  a  place 
in  which  the  influence  of  things  seen  was  as  weak  almost  as  it  could  be  upon  the 
earth.  If  you  wish  to  teach  a  child  a  specially  important  lesson  you  will  take  him 
into  some  quiet  room,  where  he  shall  not  be  interrupted,  and  where  in  the  room 
itself  there  shall  be  as  little  as  possible  to  distract  attention.  Such  a  school-room 
was  this  desert  place,  where  God  took  the  nation  to  Himself,  and  taught  them  the 
great  lessons  in  regard  to  His  nature  and  character  which,  through  them,  in  after 
ages  have  been  taught  to  the  world.  Our  life,  as  a  whole,  is  not  a  wilderness  ;  it  is 
rather  a  garden,  which  ever  tends  to  become  richer  and  more  fruitful  as  generation 
after  generation  toils  upon  it.  Yet  there  is  in  many  of  our  lives  what  may  be 
termed  a  wilderness  experience — a  time  of  affliction,  bereavement,  disappointment, 
perplexity ;  in  which  God  is  doing  for  us  in  a  briefer  period  what  He  did  for  the 
Israelites  during  this  long  forty  years.  If  God  does  give  us  a  taste  of  the  wilderness 
life,  let  us  remember  that  He  is  not  doing  it  without  a  purpose.  III.  The 
definite  teem  of  this  discipline.  "These  forty  years."  The  Israelites  were 
not  to  be  on  trial  for  ever.  At  the  end  of  forty  years  a  result  had  been  arrived  at 
and  ascertained  which  would  not  now  be  materially  altered.  There  is  a  loose  idea, 
only  too  common  nowadays,  that  probation  is  to  be  extended  indefinitely  into  the 
future.  People  allow  themselves  to  think  that  if  a  man  does  not  come  right  at  first 
he  is  to  be  kept  on  with  till  he  does  come  right,  so  that  the  drunkard,  the  Pharisee, 
and  the  miser,  though  they  grow  worse  and  worse,  and  pass  out  of  this  life 
drunken,   pharisaic,    or  miserly,    are  yet  by  some  unexplained  process    in    the 


CHAP.  VIII.]  DEUTERONOMY.  247 

indefinite  future  to  become  saints.  Now,  such  an  idea  not  only  sets  itself  squarely 
against  the  main  body  of  Scripture  teaching,  but  altogether  fails  to  commend  itself 
to  common  sense.  Indeed,  a  wide  observation  will  lead  us  to  this,  that  even  within 
this  life  character  tends  to  final  permanence,  so  that  forty  years,  for  example,  do  not 
pass  without  leaving  a  mark,  and  setting  character  into  a  form.  Professor  Drum- 
mond  has  said  that  a  man  cannot  alter  his  collar  after  he  is  forty,  much  less  his 
character.  IV.  The  purpose  of  this  discipline.  "To  humble  thee,  to  prove 
thee,  to  know  what  was  in  thine  heart,  whether  thou  wouldest  keep  His  command- 
ments  or  no."  It  was  to  humble  them,  that  is,  to  bring  them  by  means  of  privation 
and  distress  to  feel  their  need  of  His  help,  and  their  dependence  upon  Him.  To 
prove  them,  to  put  them,  that  is,  in  such  positions  as  would  drive  them  to  show 
what  was  in  them.  Times  come  to  us  also  when  we  are  obliged  to  speak  out,  and 
to  take  our  stand,  and  to  do  distinctly  either  right  or  wrong.  Young  people  at  the 
beginning  commonly  regard  life  mainly  or  chiefly  as  a  sphere  or  opportunity  of 
enjoyment.  And  we  must  not  be  unsympathetic.  It  is  natural,  and  perhaps 
unavoidable,  that  they  should  take  this  view  at  first.  This  aspect  of  life,  however, 
very  soon  turns  out  to  be  utterly  unsatisfactory.  Then,  after  the  thought  of  enjoy- 
ment there  often  comes  with  earnest  young  people  the  higher  and  better  thought  of 
achievement.  They  say :  I  will  accomplish  something  ;  I  will  make  a  mark  ;  I  will 
get  to  the  top  of  the  tree.  But  the  top  of  the  tree  is  so  hard  to  reach,  so  few  can 
teach  it,  those  who  do  reach  it  have  to  pay  such  a  heavy  price,  and  find  it,  after 
all,  such  a  barren  and  comfortless  elevation,  that  this  view  of  life  frequently  ends  in 
disappointment  too.  Then  it  is  that  the  Divine  view  of  life  comes  to  our  rescue. 
Enjoyment  is  not  left  out  of  the  account.  It  comes  in,  not  as  the  object  of  life,  but 
as  the  divinely  given  accompaniment  of  service.  Achievement  also  finds  its  proper 
place.  The  faithful  servant  shall  have  the  "Well  done."  But  above  the  thought 
either  of  enjoyment  or  achievement  there  rises  the  thought  of  discipline.  In  form- 
ing our  estimate  of  a  man  we  ask,  What  has  he  done  ?  God  asks.  What  has  he 
become?  There  is  no  subject  on  which  greater  mistakes  are  made  than  in  the 
matter  of  getting  on  in  the  world.  We  all  want  to  get  on,  and  for  our  children  to 
get  on,  but  few  have  the  right  idea  of  what  getting  on  really  is.  A  man  thinks  he 
is  getting  on  when  his  business  prospers,  and  everything  turns  to  gold  in  his  hands. 
Not  necessarily.  He  may  be  losing  ground  all  that  time.  No !  When  he  can 
stand  in  the  presence  of  temptation  without  yielding  to  it ;  when  he  can  bear 
humiliation  and  disappointment  without  murmuring ;  when  he  can  see  the  im- 
scrupulous  competitor  go  in  front  of  him,  and  yet  refuse  to  be  unscrupulous  hinaself, 
and  let  the  best  bargain  he  ever  saw  in  his  life  go  past  him,  rather  than  secure  it  by 
doing  or  saying  that  which  is  unworthy  ;  when  he  can  toil  all  day  and  accomplish 
very  little,  and  go  home  at  night  and  neither  scold  the  wife  nor  be  angry  with  the 
children,  that's  when  he  is  getting  on.  When  we  get  into  such  a  position  that  our 
word  is  always  listened  to  with  respect  and  deference,  and  "when  we  ope  our  lips  no 
dog  durst  bark,"  we  think  we  are  getting  on.  No  !  When  we  can  bear  hard  and 
cruel  speech,  and  not  resent  or  retaliate ;  when  we  can  give  the  soft  answer  that 
turneth  away  wrath,  or  even  be  reviled  and  not  revile  again,  that's  when  we  are 
getting  on.  A  woman  thinks  she  is  getting  on  when  she  is  moving  into  a  bigger 
house,  when  her  drawing-room  is  splendid  and  crowded,  and  she  a  gay  and  brilliant 
queen  in  the  midst  of  it.  But  it  is  quite  possible  that  she  may  be  suffering  loss  at 
such  a  time  as  that.  No  !  When  she  can  move  into  a  smaller  house,  and  make 
every  corner  of  it  radiant  with  her  smile  ;  when  she  can  work  in  narrowed  circum- 
stances without  becoming  soured,  or  meet  afiliction  and  distress  and  bear  it  like  a 
heroine,  that  is  when  she's  getting  on.  {Sidney  Pitt. )  The  power  of  memory  :— 
I.  The  agency  of  memory,  and  its  attendant  faculty  recollection  in  the 
WORK  of  spiritual  ADVANCEMENT.  1.  Among  the  faculties  with  which  God  has 
beneficently  endowed  man,  memory  ranks  with  the  most  important.  It  is  a  gallery 
lined  with  the  pictures  of  past  events,  and  with  scenes  on  which  we  have  gazed— a  gal- 
lery sometimes  vocal  with  sounds  that  fill  the  heart  with  gladness,  or  pierce  it  with 
keenest  pain.  It  is  memory  that  makes  the  record  to  which  conscience  points  when 
it  speaks  in  tones  of  menace.  It  is  in  memory  that  there  is  stored  up  the  treasures 
knowledge  has  patiently  amassed,  and  it  is  with  memory  we  take  counsel  when  we 
would  investigate,  or  must  decide.  (1)  If  the  record  is  so  perfect,  how  necessary  to 
avoid  sin  !  One  of  the  greatest  blessings  a  man  can  possess  is  an  unspotted  memory. 
How  many  of  us  are  humbled  at  the  record  of  our  memory  !  (2)  The  indestructi- 
bility suggests  one  pain  of  perdition.  He  who  passes  into  hell  with  a  record  of  sin, 
and  of  opportunities  wasted,  will  carry  with  him  his  own  chamber  of  torture.   There 


248  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  viil 

is  an  attendant  faculty  called  recollection.  The  curator  at  a  museum  or  library 
searches  for  the  object  you  want.  So  recollection.  2.  Illustrate  the  influence  on 
spiritual  work.  These  are  not  merely  intellectual  faculties.  These  have  a  moral 
work  to  do.  It  may  be  illustrated  in  the  aid  given  to  convince  Joseph's  brethren 
(Gen.  xlii.  21).  It  ever  presents  to  us  the  teachings  of  God's  dealings  with  us.  To 
lead  to  avoid  past  errors,  and  to  show  that  the  purpose  was  to  do  us  good  at  our 
latter  end.  II.  The  Iseablitb  who  thus  remembered  would  perceive  that 
God's  purpose  had  been  to  humble.  III.  To  prove  thee,  to  know  what  was 
IN  thine  heart.  Not  to  show  God,  but  to  show  us  our  faults.  The  great  gun  is 
taken  to  a  proof-house,  and  tried  with  the  great  charge,  and  if  some  crack  is 
revealed  men  say  it  was  well  it  did  not  burst  and  spread  dismay  at  some  crisis  of 
the  fight.  The  anchor  and  chain  is  tested  link  by  link,  to  see  if  any  flavi^  should  be 
revealed.  If  it  had  gone  untested,  how  great  the  peril !  {J.  R.  Hargreaves.) 
The  advafUages  of  a  devout  review  of  the  Divine  dispensations : — I.  Explain  the 
solemn  charge.  1.  The  object  of  remembrance  is  extensive  :  the  way — all  the  way 
which  the  Lord  our  God  has  led  us  ;  that  is,  the  whole  tenor  of  the  Divine  dispensa- 
tions toward  us — their  nature,  means,  seasons,  relatives,  tendencies,  and  actual 
effects.  2.  It  supposes  that  this  exercise,  interesting  and  beneficial  as  it  is,  we  are 
prone  to  neglect.  II.  Enforce  obedience  to  the  charge.  1.  An  enlightened  and 
devout  retrospect  of  the  dispensations  of  God  to  you  will  present  you  with  many 
impressive  displays  of  His  glory.  2.  This  devout  retrospection  will  supply  us  with 
many  affecting  displays  of  our  own  corruption.  3.  This  remembrance  will  supply  the 
saints  with  pleasing  discoveries  of  the  sanctified  tendencies  of  their  souls.  4.  This 
remembrance  will  confirm  our  faith  in  the  Scriptures  as  the  Word  of  God,  and 
improve  all  our  practical  views  both  of  things  seen  and  unseen.  {James  Stark. ) 
Remembrance  of  God's  dealings : — I.  On  the  duty  of  remembering  thk  dealings 
OF  God  towards  us.  Look  back  to  the  earliest  period  of  your  history — the  time 
and  place  of  your  birth — the  varied  circumstances  of  your  education — the  business 
or  the  profession  in  which  you  have  been  engaged — the  measure  of  prosperity  or 
adversity  you  have  experienced — the  various  connections  and  engagements  you  have 
formed — the  sicknesses,  accidents,  and  dangers  you  have  encountered,  and  the 
merciful  deliverances  which  you  have  received  ; — all  these  come  under  the  general 
idea  of  the  dealings  of  God  with  you,  which  it  becomes  you  to  remember.  But  this 
review  of  the  providential  dispensations  of  Almighty  God  should  lead  us  to  con- 
template also  that  grace  and  mercy  with  which  we  have  been  favoured.  Ever  let  us 
remember  that  we  were  not  born  in  Egyptian  darkness,  or  consigned  from  our  birth 
to  a  waste,  howling  wilderness.  We  v\  ere  born  in  a  highly  favoured  land,  brought 
by  Christiain  parents  and  pious  friends  to  the  house  of  God ;  early  baptized  in 
the  Saviour's  name  ;  accustomed  to  worship  God  in  His  house.  And  has  not  God 
graciously  vouchsafed  to  meet  with  and  hless  us  in  His  house,  and  under  those 
ordinances  which  through  His  mercy  have  been  administered  among  us  ?    II.  The 

MEANS  to  BB  adopted  IN  ORDER  TO  REMEMBER  THE  DiVINE  DEALINGS  TOWARDS 

US.  We  are  prone  to  forget  the  God  of  our  mercies,  to  lose  sight  of  His  dis- 
pensations, to  sink  into  carelessness  and  neglect,  to  regard  passing  events  as  matters 
of  course,  not  calling  for  any  special  recollection  or  acknowledgment.  Now,  to 
guard  against  this  forgetful  disposition  it  becomes  us  ofttimes  to  stir  up  ourselves, 
and  all  with  whom  we  are  connected,  to  record  and  remember  God's  mercies ; 
and  especially  to  improve  those  times  and  seasons  which  He  hath  set  apart  for  this 
purpose.  And  while  we  carefully  observe  seasons  which  are  especially  set  apart  in 
commemoration  of  the  Divine  dispensations,  we  should  also  diligently  improve 
the  ordinances  which  are  appointed  for  the  same  important  end.     III.  The  end 

which  this  remembrance  OF  THE  DiVINE  DISPENSATIONS  IS  CALCULATED  TO  PRO- 
DUCE : — Namely,  **to  humble  us,  to  prove  us,  to  show  what  is  in  our  hearts." 
When  we  observe  the  conduct  of  Israel  in  the  wilderness  we  are  compelled  to  feel 
how  foolish,  perverse,  and  ungrateful  that  people  were  ;  but  when  we  review  our  own 
conduct,  must  we  not  too  often  pronounce  the  same  sentence  upon  ourselves  ?  The 
remembrance,  therefore,  of  the  dealings  of  God  with  us  should  deeply  humble 
us  under  a  sense  of  our  unprofitableness  and  ingratitude.  When  duly  considered,  it 
will  show  us  what  has  been  in  our  hearts,  how  foolish,  how  vain,  how  deceitful  they 
are,  and  how  often  our  own  conduct  has  been  inconsistent  with  our  profession,  and 
what  need  we  therefore  have  of  pardon.  It  will  teach  us  the  fallacy  of  many  of 
those  excuses  which  we  have  made  for  the  neglect  of  duty,  and  evince  that  God  has 
teen  merciful  and  gracious  to  us  all  our  journey  through.  This  remembrance  of 
God's  dealings  with  us  is  especially  calculated  to  bring  us  afresh,  as  sinners,  to  our 


CHAP.  VIII.]  DEJJTERONOMY, 


249 


gracious  and  merciful  Saviour.  (T.  Webster,  B.D.)  A  protecting  prtyvidence  -^ 
This  18  emphatically  a  day  of  remembrance.  Parted  families  meet,  and  recount  the 
course  of  providence  since  they  were  last  together.  The  monuments  of  Divine  love 
are  crowded  so  closely  together  that  we  are  prone  to  pass  them  by  unnoticed.  The 
experience  of  all  of  us  is  so  much  alike  that  we  cease  to  marvel  at  it.  I.  In  helninff 
you  in  the  performance  of  this  duty,  I  would  first  ask  you  to  reflect  on  the 

AMOUNT  OF  HAPPINESS  WHICH  YOU  AS  AN  ASSEMBLY  REPRESENT.  There  is  pro- 
bably not  one  of  you  to  whom,  in  the  sight  of  God,  this  is  not  a  happy  day ;  not 
one  whose  glad  do  not  outnumber  his  regretful  thoughts.  How  many  sources  of 
happiness  flow  for  us !  In  a  thousand  ways  must  an  incessant  providence  watch 
guard  and  guide,  avert  peril,  and  bestow  aid,  in  each  of  our  households,  with  every 
new  day,  to  make  health  the  rule,  disease  and  death  the  rare  exception,— joy 
the  current,  gnef  the  transient  ripple  on  its  surface.  I  have  spoken  of  common 
blessings.  Have  we  not  each  special  mercies  which  we  would  own  with  devout 
gratitude,— mercies  adapted  to  our  peculiar  wants,  as  distinctly  marked,  so  to  speak 
with  our  names,  as  keepsakes  from  a  friend  might  be?  How  often  have  we 
received  the  very  favours  which  we  most  needed,  and  dared  not  anticipate  sent  in 
at  the  only  moment  and  in  the  only  mode  in  which  they  could  have  been  avail- 
mg !  In  this  connection  it  is  well  for  us  to  consider  how  little  we  can  do  for 
ourselves  We  are  too  prone  to  feel  as  if  our  own  industry,  energy,  and 
forethought  could  accomplish  much.  But  think  how  many  sources  of  joy  must 
all  flow  together,  how  many  departments  of  nature  and  of  being  must  all 
be  brought  into  harmony,  in  order  for  us  to  pass  a  single  hour  in   comfort. 

11.     WHAT    ARE    THE    DUTIES    TO    WHICH    THIS    REVIEW    CALLS    US?       Does    it    not 

make  the  gratitude  of  the  most  thankful  seem  cold  ?    What  but  unceasing  praise 
can  worthily  respond  to  this  incessant  flow  of  mercy?    And  yet,  do  not  some  ot 
us  live  ^^nthout  thanksgiving?    Oh,  that  every  soul  might  feel  the  love  in  which 
It  is  embosomed,    and  might  send  heavenward   the  blended  anthem  of  all  its 
powers    and    affections,   "Bless    the    Lord,    and    forget    not   all    His  benefits '  " 
in  these   mercies,    hear  we  not  also  the  voice  of  religious  exhortation     "My 
son,  give  Me  thy  heart"?     {A.   P.  Pedbody.)         The  common  levels    of   life--. 
The  forty  years   wanderings  !   What  remains  of  them  ?  A  list  of  unknown  names 
no  more.     The  dust  of  time  has  settled  on  the  stations ;  and  the  events,  big  at 
the  time  with  interests  to  millions,  are  without  a  note  in  history.     What  weary 
years  of  plodding  marches  through  a  dark  unheavenly  country  ;  what  dreads 
*?^  dangers,  what  wants  and  distresses,  what  keen  agonies  and  fierce  complaints 
that  oblivious  silence  covers  !  They  are  all  there,  days  of  fighting,  nights  of  weepine! 
years  of  trudging.  They  seemed  at  the  moment  as  if  they  were  burning  an  indelible 
mark  deep  into  life  records  ;  but  they  are  already  behind  us,  dim  in  the  distance  a 
softening  veil  has  fallen  over  the  whole  pilgrimage ;  a  broad  sense  of  pain  con- 
quered, shame  endured,  duty  done ;  the  consciousness  that  we  have  come  out  of 
the  wanderings  richer,  braver,  stronger,  more  earnest,  but  sadder,  than  when  we 
entered  the  desert,  is  all  that  is  left  to  us.     In  order  that  we  may  better  understand 
tne  method  of  God  m  ordenng  our  wilderness  marches  let  us  consider— I.  The 
REASON  OF  "THE  WANDERINGS."     Why  is  SO  large  a  portion  of  our  vears  spent 
under  the  yoke  of  undistinguished  duties,  leaving  no  record  but  "the  wanderings" 
behind?    Briefly,  because  a  few  critical  experiences  do  not  make  a  character  ;  a  few 
impassioned,  enthusiastic  moments  do  not  make  a  life.     The  inevitable  falling  off 
of  the  common  hours  and  experiences  seems  to  me  to  be  the  great  teaching  of 
this  passage  of  Israel's  history.     It  is  a  broad  fact  in  the  history  of  every  life  ;  in 
•  measure,  of  every  day's  life,  for  the  great  cycles  repeat  themselves  in  little,  as 
tne  organs  of  the  body  are  present  potentially  in  every  part.     But  these  narratives 
gather  up  the  scattered  incidents  of  our  moral  life  into  one  grand  incident,  and 
snow  us  with  a  large  dramatic  point  and  emphasis  what  we  are  daily  doing  under 
tne  eye  of  the  great  Leader,  which  makes  these  long,  dry,  unnoted  wanderings 
inevitable  ;  what  it  is  which  compels  Him  to  impose  what  I  have  called  the  yoke 
of  undistingiushed  duty,  and  to  lead  us  up  and  down  in  the  wilderness,  that  we 
may,  it  we  will  yield  ourselves  to  His  hand,  work  the  sublime  lessons,  which  we 
cannot  iearn  and  practise  in  a  moment,  into  the  common  daily  texture  of  life   that 
IS,  of  eternity.     II.  The  purpose  of  the  wanderings.     Briefly,  again,  to  work 
godly  principles  of  action  into  the  common  texture  of  our  daily  lives.     To  make 
It  a  matter  of  perpetual  quiet  choice  and  habit  to  square  every  action  by  the  rule  of 
themind  of  God.    III.  The  "wanderings,"  in  view  of  their  eternal  results 
Ihey,  obscure  and  unprofitable  as  they  may  seem,  are  the  builders  for  eternity 


250  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  viii. 

The  quiet,  undistinguished  years  decide  the  matter  for  the  moments  when  the 
election  is  finally  and  openly  made.  It  takes  years  to  give  a  form  and  bent  to 
a  character.  Temperament  we  are  bom  with,  character  we  have  to  make  ;  and 
that  not  in  the  grand  moments,  when  the  eyes  of  men  or  of  angels  are  visibly  upon 
us,  but  in  the  daily  quiet  paths  of  pilgrimage,  when  the  work  is  being  done  within 
in  secret,  which  will  be  revealed  in  the  daylight  of  eternity.  Habits,  like  paths, 
are  the  result  of  constant  actions.  It  is  the  multitude  of  daily  footsteps  which  go 
to  and  fro  which  shapes  them.  Let  it  light  up  your  daily  wanderings  to  know 
that  there — in  the  quiet  bracing  of  the  soul  to  uncongenial  duty,  the  patient 
bearing  of  unwelcome  burdens,  the  loving  acceptance  of  unlovely  companionship 
— and  not  on  the  gi-and  occasions,  you  are  making  your  eternal  future.  {J.  B. 
Brown,  B.A.)  The  journey  of  life : — I.  Life  is  a  journey.  "All  the  way." 
1.  Intricate.  Perplexities  and  diflficulties-in  every  stage  and  turn.  2.  Eventful. 
Changes  in  every  step.  All  is  shifting.  3.  Unretraceable.  4.  Perilous.  Poisonous 
streams,  noxious  herbs,  venomous  serpents.  5.  Solemn.  Leads  body  to  grave, 
and  spirit  to  heaven  or  hell.  II.  Life's  journey  has  a  guide.  "The  Lord  thy 
God  led  thee."  1.  The  guide'^oroughly  understands  the  way.  2.  The  guide  has 
resources  equal  to  all  possible  emergencies.  lU.  Life's  journey  can  never  be 
forgotten.  "Thou  shalt  remember."  1,  Some  memory  of  it  is  a  matter  of 
necessity.  2.  A  right  memory  is  a  matter  of  obligation.  Remember  it  so  as 
to  awaken  contrition  for  past  sins,  gratitude  for  past  mercies,  resolutions  for 
improved  conduct.  {Homilist. )  Human  life : — I.  A  divine  superintendence  of 
human  life.  1.  The  fact  of  this  superintendence.  "The  way  of  man  is  not  in  him- 
self." 2.  The  purpose  of  this  superintendence.  Moral  discipline.  II.  A  symbolic 
representation  of  human  life.  Morally,  we  are  all  in  a  wilderness,  intricate, 
perilous,  privational.  It  is  only  as  we  get  the  true  manna  from  heaven  that  we 
can  live  spiritually  in  the  wilderness  of  our  present  life.  III.  A  solemn  obliga- 
tion of  human  life.  "Remember."  1.  Man  does  remember  the  past.  Cannot 
help  it ;  linked  to  it  by  a  necessity  of  his  nature.  2.  Man  does  not  always 
remember  God  in  the  past.  This  is  the  duty  here  commanded — to  see  God  in  the 
past,  to  see  Him  in  all,  in  the  tempest  and  the  calm,  the  darkness  and  the  sunshine. 
IV.  An  eternal  necessity  of  human  life.  Bread  is  not  more  necessary  to  support 
material  life  than  the  Word  of  God  to  sustain  spiritual.  The  soul  can  only  live 
as  it  receives  communications  from  the  Great  Father  of  spirits.  {Ibid.)  The 
Christian  called  to  review  the  dealings  of  God  with  him : — I.  The  way  in  which  we 
are  led.  1.  The  way  of  providence.  2.  The  way  of  grace.  II.  The  end  for 
which  we  are  led  in  this  way.  1.  "To  humble  thee."  Consider  the  v^t 
importance  of  this  in  order  to  our  obtaining,  retaining,  and  increasing  in  grace 
(Matt.  y.  3,  4  ;  Isa.  Ivii.  15  ;  1  Pet.  v.  5,  6  ;  James  iv.  6,  10).  2.  "To  prove  thee." 
God  tries  the  genuineness  of  our  repentance  when  He  permits  temptations  to 
assault  us,  and  suffers  sin  to  wear  a  pleasing  dress.  Of  our  faith,  when  difiiculties 
seem  to  arise  in  the  way  of  His  fulfilling  His  declarations  and  promises.  Of  our 
trust  in  Him  when  dangers,  wants,  enemies,  distresses,  assault  us.  Of  our 
resignation  to  His  will,  in  reproach  and  affliction,  and  in  the  death  of  those  we 
love.  Of  our  patience,  in  long-continued  pain,  or  in  a  succession  of  calamities. 
Of  our  contentment  with  our  lot  in  poverty.  Of  our  meekness,  gentleness,  and 
forgiving  spirit  amidst  provocations  and  injuries.  Of  our  long-suftering  amidst 
the  follies  and  sins  of  those  round  about  us.  Of  our  love  to  mankind,  and  to  our 
enemies,  amidst  the  hatred  and  ill-will  of  others.  Of  our  love  to  God,  when  the 
world  courts  us,  and  we  must  of  necessity  abandon  one  or  the  other.  Of  our 
obedience  when  difficult  duties  are  enjoined,  and  we  are  called  to  deny  ourselves 
and  take  up  our  cross.  Of  our  hope  of  everlasting  life,  when  both  the  wind  of 
temptation  and  the  tide  of  our  corruption  are  strongly  against  us.  3.  "To  know 
what  was  in  thy  heart."  God,  who  searches  the  heart  and  knows  what  is  in 
man,  infallibly  knows  what  is  in  thine  heart ;  but  thou  must  know  thyself, 
and  discover  to  others  what  is  in  the  heart.  4.  "Whether  thou  wouldest  keep 
His  commandments  or  no."  Whether  thou  wouldest  be  brought  to  love  Him  with 
all  thy  heart,  as  thou  art  commanded  ;  to  serve  Him  with  all  thy  strength ;  to 
make  His  will  thy  rule  in  all  thy  actions ;  to  make  His  glory  thy  end,  and  not 
thy  own  honour,  or  interest,  or  pleasure.  (/.  Benson.)  The  way  of  the  past: — 
I.  The  way  of  providence.  1.  This  we  have  experienced  nationally.  2.  Socially. 
3.  Personally.  II.  The  way  of  privilege.  1.  We  have  possessed  the  Word  of 
God.  2.  All  have  been  welcome  to  the  house  of  God.  3.  As  Christians  we 
haye  enjoyed  fellowship  with  the  people  of  God.     III.  The  way  of  experience. 


CHAP.  VIII.]  DEUTERONOMY.  251 

1.  Each  of  us  has  had  his  share  of  conflict.  2.  To  each  has  come  deliverance 
in  times  of  perplexity.  3.  Even  in  the  midst  of  trial  we  have,  through  faith  in 
Christ,  realised  a  measure  of  peace.  4.  To  every  believer  there  has  been  vouch- 
safed spiritual  joy.  Application:  The  past  should  thus  be  remembered  (1)  with 
humility;  (2)  with  gratitude;  (3)  with  confidence.  {Lay  Preacher.)  Eemem- 
Irance  of  past  trials  .-—I.  The  duty  of  remembrance.  The  world  likes  to  forget. 
There  is  so  much  that  is  self- humiliating  in  the  past,  so  much  that  is  disagi-eeable, 
that  men  would  like  to  get  it  out  of  their  thoughts.  But  not  so  the  Christian. 
He  is  taught  that  it  is  his  duty  to  bear  in  mind  all  the  incidents  of  his  past.  It  is 
an  important  duty.  The  way  has  been  rough  and  varied,  but  it  has  been  fraught 
with  momentous  issues.  Have  all  the  varied  experiences  been  given  us  in  order 
that  they  might  at  once  pass  from  our  ken  ?  Some  forget  from  indifference  ;  they 
never  can  remember.  Go  through  what  they  may,  they  never  learn  experience. 
Some  forget  from  loose  habits  of  mind;  from  long  indolence.  Others  forget 
because  they  want  to  avoid  the  pain  of  remembrance.  But  none  of  them  realise 
that  remembrance  is  an  important  duty,  an  absolute  command  of  God.  It  is 
important  in  worldly  things,  for  it  does  much  to  form  our  human  character.  But 
it  is  still  more  important  in  spiritual  things,  for  it  does  still  more  to  form  our 
spiritual  character.  II.  The  profit  to  be  derived.  Our  past  lives  have  been 
directed  for  two  ends— 1.  To  humble  us.  How  insignificant  we  appear  to  our- 
selves in  the  light  of  the  past !  How  our  plans  have  been  thwarted,  our  ambition 
damped,  our  desires  crushed !  Where  is  our  pride  at  the  end  of  the  journey  of 
life  ?  2.  To  prove  us.  There  is  much  alloy  in  the  best  of  our  services,  much  sin 
even  in  holy  things.  III.  The  comfort  to  be  imparted.  At  first  sight  it  seems 
that  no  affliction  for  the  present  seemeth  light.  It  is  always  painful.  Nevertheless 
it  worketh  out  an  abundant  weight  of  glory.  Persecutors  mean  evil,  but  God 
causes  it  to  be  good.  Consider— 1.  The  future  good  more  than  counterbalances 
the  present  evil.  When  the  rod  is  removed  the  purified  soul  will  rejoice  in  the 
eternal  presence  of  God.  2.  Trials  by  the  way  are  proofs  of  Divine  love.  "Whom 
the  Lord  loveth  He  chasteneth."  God  sees  better  and  further  than  we  do. 
{Preacher's  Analyst.)  To  bring  to  remembrance:—!.  Why  we  are  to  re- 
member the  beginning.  It  was  almost  the  first  business  of  Moses,  in  giving 
this  long  address  which  we  have  in  Deuteronomy,  to  show  that  the  Israelites, 
for  want  of  remembering  all  the  way  the  Lord  had  led  them,  lost  the  promised 
land.  Let  us,  then,  take  a  threefold  view  of  the  beginning,  as  applicable  to  us 
spiritually.  1.  What  is  the  first  thing  that  we  shall  call  the  beginning?  That 
which  the  people  of  God  as  a  general  rule  come  to  last,  and  that  which  is 
almost  everywhere  despised.  The  beginning  was  a  manifestation  of  the  pure 
sovereignty  of  God.  In  Exodus  xi.  the  Lord  said  that  He  would  put  a  difference 
— as  the  margin  reads  it,  a  redemption— between  the  Egyptians  and  Israel ; 
referring  to  the  paschal  lamb.  Now,  how  did  the  Lord  begin  with  you  ?  Why,  by 
making  a  difference,  not  only  between  you  and  others,  but  by  making  us  some- 
thing very  different  from  what  we  had  been  before.  2.  Then  the  second  thing  in 
the  beginning  was  that  beautiful  circumstance  as  a  type  of  the  Saviour.  *'  When 
I  see  the  blood  I  will  pass  by  the  house,  and  the  sword  shall  not  come  near  to 
hurt  you."  Oh,  let  us  remember  that  the  original  way  of  escape  was  by  Jesus 
Christ  ;  if  we  were  left  of  the  sword,  it  was  by  the  blood  of  the  Lamb.  3.  Then 
the  third  thing  in  the  beginning  was  the  victory  which  was  wrought.  Look  at  the 
victory  the  Lord  gave  to  the  Israelites  ;  see  how  He  divided  the  sea.  God  did  in 
that  case  what  none  but  God  could  do.  Now  apply  this  closer  home.  Who  but 
the  God-man  Mediator  could  have  divided  a  greater  sea  ?  Who  but  the  God-man 
Mediator  could  bring  in  such  a  victory  as  Jesus  Christ  hath  brought  in  1  Who  but 
Jesus  Christ  could  penally  bear  our  sins  ?  II.  Why  we  are  to  remember  the 
PRESENT.  How  much  wilderness  experience  the  people'of  God  have  !  what  solitude  ! 
"Like  an  owl  of  the  desert,"  "like  a  sparrow  alone  upon  the  house-top"  ;  and 
"  that  He  will  hear  the  prayer  of  the  destitute,  and  not  despise  their  prayer  "  ;  and 
"  they  wandered  in  a  solitary  way,  and  found  no  city  to  dwell  in."  I  dare  say 
some  good  Christians  think  that  ministers  have  not  much  of  this  wilderness 
experience  ;  but  I  can  tell  you  this,  if  they  have  not,  they  will  not  be  of  much  use 
to  the  people.  They  may  pretend  to  weep  with  the  people,  but  they  cannot  feel  as 
they  would  if  they  had  these  experiences.  The  doctor  may  be  very  sympathising 
over  the  dying  patient,  but  the  doctor  cannot  feel  what  the  parent  feels,  the 
doctor  cannot  feel  what  near  and  dear  relatives  feel.  The  apostle  saith,  "We 
have  ten  thousand  instructors,  but  not  many  fathers."    For  a  minister,  therefore, 


252  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  Tin. 

to  be  of  that  sympathising  nature  that  he  shall  strengthen  the  diseased,  heal  the 
iiick,  bring  again  that  which  is  driven  away,  he  must  from  time  to  time  know  what 
tliis  wilderness  experience  is  ;  and  then  he  will  think  when  he  comee  into  the 
pulpit,  and  say  to  himself,  I  am  a  poor,  dark,  helpless  creature,  no  more  fit  to 
preach  the  Gospel  than  to  create  a  world  ;  and  thus  the  man  is  humbled  down  like 
a  little  child,  aud  the  Lord  knows  that  is  just  the  time  for  Him  to  come  ;  so  in  the 
Lord  steps,  the  man's  heart  is  warmed,  his  soul  is  enlarged,  Satan  flies  off,  and 
the  man  is  astounded  how  it  is  he  is  so  strong ;  and  one  thought  comes,  and 
another  ;  and  the  man  that  one  half  his  time  perhaps  is  little  more  than  a 
stammerer,  all  at  once  becomes  eloquent,  and  pours  forth  torrents  of  thoughts, 
aud  blessing  after  blessing,  until  the  people  lose  their  troubles  and  their  sorrows, 
and  he  loses  his.  III.  How  we  are  to  look  at  the  future.  With  confidence 
in  Him  who  has  been  so  gracious  to  us  up  to  the  present.  {J.  Wells.)  The 
retrospect : — I.  The  call  to  remembrance.  If  knowledge  is  important,  memory 
is  important  in  precisely  the  same  degree  ;  for  knowledge  is  nothing  unless  it  be 
applied,  and  it  cannot  be  applied  unless  it  be  remembered.  But  there  are  many 
who  resemble  the  workmen  in  the  days  of  Haggai,  who  received  wages  to  put  them 
into  a  bag  of  holes.  And  therefore  says  the  apostle  to  the  Ilf^brews,  "  Give  the 
more  earnest  heed  to  the  things  you  have  heard,  lest  at  any  time  you  should  let 
them  slip  "  ;  for  we  are  now  considering  memory  not  in  reference  to  the  scholar, 
or  the  man  of  business,  but  with  regard  to  religion  ;  and  it  is  remarkable  that  the 
whole  of  religion  is  expressed  by  the  word,  **  Remember  thy  Creator  in  the  days  of 
thy  youth."  One  thing,  however,  is  worthy  of  consideration — that  in  all  these 
instances  the  remembrance  is  to  be  considered,  not  as  a  speculation,  but  as 
experimental  and  practical.  The  sacred  writers  never  regard  remembrance  as  an 
eiiJ,  but  as  an  instrument ;  to  call  forth  such  feelings,  and  to  produce  such  actions 
as  will  correspond  to  the  things  we  are  required  to  remember.  As  they  consider 
knowledge  without  practice  to  be  no  better  than  ignorance,  so  they  consider 
remembrance  without  influence  and  efficiency  as  no  better  than  forgetful ness. 
II.  The  subject  to  be  reviewed.  1.  The  place— "the  wilderness."  .2.  Their 
conductor—"  the  Lord  thy  God."  God  guides  the  people  with  His  eye,  He  leads 
them  by  His  word  and  His  Spirit  and  Plis  providence.  He  is  a  very  present  help 
to  them  in  every  time  of  trouble,  and  He  Avill  never  leave  them  nor  forsake  them 
till  they  have  entered  the  promised  land.  3.  The  passages — "all  the  way." 
Not  that  everything  in  their  journey  was  equally  important  and  interesting ; 
this  could  not  be  ;  but  all  had  been  under  the  appointment  and  discipline  of  God, 
and  all  would  be  rendered  profitable.  4.  The  period — "these  forty  years." 
(  W.  Jay.)  The  advantages  of  a  frequent  retros2)ect  of  life  : — I.  The  way  which 
WE  ARE  here  called  ON  TO  REMEMBER,  is,  "all  the  way  which  the  Lord  our 
God  has  led  us "  ;  the  whole  course  of  His  dispensations  towards  us  from  the 
day  of  our  birth  to  the  present  hour.  Even  the  most  minute  occurrences  in 
our  history  have  had  some  influence  on  our  condition  and  character  ;  they  are 
affecting  us  now,  and  will  continue  to  affect  us  through  an  endless  eternity. 
But  while  all  the  events  of  our  life  ought  to  be  preserved  in  our  memories, 
those  events  ought  especially  to  be  treasured  up  there  which  are  more  imme- 
diately connected  with  the  way  that  is  leading  us  to  heaven.  1.  And  among 
these  the  means  by  which  we  were  first  brought  into  this  way  should  hold  a 
chief  place.  2.  We  are  called  on  to  remember  also  the  afflictions  with  which 
we  have  been  visited  since  we  have  been  walking  in  the  path  of  life.  8.  Neither 
must  our  mercies  be  forgotten  in  the  retrospect  of  our  lives.  4.  The  sins  we 
have  committed  in  the  midst  of  our  afflictions  and  blessings  must  also  be  often 
retraced  ;  not  merely  viewed  in  a  mass,  but,  like  our  mercies,  contemplated  one 
by  one  with  all  their  aggravations.  II.  The  remembrance  of  these  things,  how- 
ever, in  order  to  be  beneficial  to  us,  must  be  accompanied  with  a  lively  con- 
viction OF  the  overruling  providence  of  God  in  all  that  has  happened 
TO  us,  and  as  lively  a  sense  of  His  close  connection  with  us.  The  text  points  out 
to  us  the  ends  which  God  had  in  view  in  afflicting  the  Jews,  and  it  consequently 
affords  us  the  means  of  ascertaining  the  reasons  of  His  diversified  dispensa- 
tions towards  ourselves.  1.  They  are  intended  to  humble  us.  All  is  humility 
in  that  kingdom  where  God  dwells.  Here,  in  this  fallen  world,  the  meanest 
sinner  lifts  up  himself  against  Him  ;  but  there  the  loftiest  archangels  cast  down 
their  crowns  before  His  footstool.  Before  we  can  enter  that  glorious  world  we 
also  must  learn  to  abase  ourselves.  2.  The  various  changes  in  our  condition  have 
been  designed  also  to  prove  us.     3.  They  have  a  tendency  to  teach  us  the  insuf* 


CHAP,  viii.]  DEUTERONOMY.  253 

ficiency  of  all  worldly  things  to  make  ns  happy,  and  the  all -sufficiency  of  God 
to  bless  us.  III.  These,  then,  are  the  immediate  purposes  for  which  the  Lord  has 
led  us  through  so  many  trials  and  mercies  in  our  way  to  heaven.  There  are, 
however,  other  ends  which  they  have  been  designed  to  answer ;  and  that  these 
may  be  accomplished  He  commands  us  to  look  back  on  the  course  in  which  we 
have  walked,  and  has  connected  with  the  retrospect  many  spiritual  benefits. 
1.  A  review  of  the  past  is  calculated  to  confirm  our  faith  in  the  Bible,  Our  lives 
are  practical  illustrations  of  this  blessed  book.  Indeed  the  whole  world  and  all 
that  is  passing  therein  is  one  continued  commentary  on  it,  and  confirmation  of  its 
truth.  2.  A  retrospect  of  the  past  has  a  tendency  also  to  increase  our  knowledge 
of  ourselves.  3.  The  remembrance  enjoined  in  the  text  is  calculated  also  to 
strengthen  our  confidence  in  God.  It  brings  before  our  mind  the  help  we  have 
received  in  our  difficulties,  the  supplies  in  our  wants,  the  consolations  in  our 
troubles  ;  and  reasoning  from  the  past  to  the  future,  we  are  naturally  led  to  infer 
that  He  who  never  has  forsaken  us  never  will  forsake  us  ;  that  the  goodness  and 
mercy  which  have  followed  us  all  the  days  of  our  life  will  follow  us  still ;  that  no 
vicissitudes  in  our  condition,  no  tribulation,  no  distress,  no  persecution,  no  peril, 
"shall  be  able  to  separate  us  from  the  love  of  God,  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus  our 
Lord."  (C.  Bradley,  M.A.)  The  lesson  of  memory:—!.  What  we  should  bk  y 
MAINLY  occupied  WITH  AS  WE  LOOK  BACK.  Memory,  like  all  other  faculties,  may  •  ^ 
either  help  or  hinder  us.  As  is  the  man,  so  will  be  his  remembrance.  The  tastes 
which  rule  his  present  will  determine  the  things  that  he  likes  best  to  think  about 
in  the  past.  There  are  many  ways  of  going  wrong  in  our  retrospect.  Some  of  us, 
for  instance,  prefer  to  think  with  pleasure  about  things  that  ought  never  to  have 
been  done,  and  to  give  a  wicked  immortality  to  thoughts  that  ought  never  to  have 
had  a  being.  Such  a  use  of  the  gi-eat  faculty  of  memory  is  like  the  folly  of  the 
Egyptians  who  embalmed  cats  and  vermin.  Then  there  are  some  of  us  who  abuse 
memory  just  as  much  by  picking  out,  with  perverse  ingenuity,  every  black  bit  that 
lies  in  the  distance  behind  us,  all  the  disappointments,  all  the  losses,  all  the  pains, 
all  the  sorrows.  And  there  are  some  of  us  who,  in  like  manner,  spoil  all  the  good 
that  we  could  get  out  of  a  wise  retrospect  by  only  looking  back  in  such  a  fashion 
as  to  feed  a  sentimental  melancholy,  which  is,  perhaps,  the  most  profitless  of  all 
the  ways  of  looking  backwards.  Now  here  are  the  two  points  in  this  veree  of  my 
text  which  would  put  all  these  blunders  and  all  others  right,  telling  us  what 
we  should  chiefly  think  about  when  we  look  back.  "  Thou  shalt  remember  all  the 
way  by  which  the  Lord  thy  God  hath  led  thee."  Let  memory  work  under  the 
distinct  recognition  of  Divine  guidance  in  every  part  of  the  past.  That  is  the  first 
condition  of  making  the  retrospect  blessed.  Another  purpose  for  which  the  whole 
panorama  of  life  is  made  to  pass  before  us,  and  for  which  all  the  gymnastics  of  life 
exercise  us,  is  that  we  may  be  made  submissive  to  His  great  will,  and  may  keep 
His  commandments.  II.  And  now  turn  to  the  other  consideration  which  may 
help  to  make  remembrance  a  good,  namely,  the  issues  to  which  our  retrospect 

MUST   tend  if  it   IS   TO  BE    ANYTHING    MORE   THAN  SENTIMENTAL   RECOLLECTIONS. 

1.  Remember  and  be  thankful.  If  it  be  the  case  that  the  main  fact  about  things  is 
their  power  to  mould  persons  and  to  make  character,  then  there  follows,  very 
clearly,  that  all  things  that  come  within  the  sweep  of  our  memory  may  equally 
contribute  to  our  highest  good.  2.  Remember,  and  let  the  memory  lead  to  contri- 
tion. 3.  Let  us  remember  in  order  that  from  the  retrospect  we  may  get  practical 
wisdom.  4.  The  last  thing  that  I  would  say  is,  Let  us  remember  that  we  may 
hope.  The  forward  look  and  the  backward  look  are  really  but  the  exercise  of  the 
same  faculty  in  two  different  directions.  Memory  does  not  always  imply  hope  ;  we 
remember  sometimes  because  we  do  not  hope,  and  try  to  gather  round  ourselves 
the  vanished  past  because  we  know  it  never  can  be  a  present  or  a  future.  But 
when  we  are  occupied  with  an  unchanging  Friend,  whose  love  is  inexhaustible, 
and  whose  arm  is  unwearied,  it  is  good  logic  to  say,  "  It  has  been,  therefore  it  shall 
be."  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  A  call  to  remembrance: — When  Charles  I.  was  exe- 
cuted, January  30,  1649,  the  last  word  he  was  heard  to  utter  was  "Remember." 
Memory  is  a  power  that  may  be  vivid  to  the  last  moment  on  earth  ;  it  may  echo 
its  terrors  in  hell,  or  carry  its  blessed  lessons  and  reviews  to  the  heavenly  world. 
It  is  a  mighty  faculty  of  the  human  mind.  It  is  meant  to  be  useful  as  a  store- 
house of  information  and  a  granary  of  knowledge.  Again,  it  is  intended  to  remind 
us  of  the  lessons  gathered  by  experience  and  observation.  These  lessons  may  have 
been  dearly  learnt,  but  may  be  all  the  more  precious  as  they  serve  to  correct  our 
pride,   and  to    reveal  our    sinfulness  and  weakness.      I.  Mark  the  stages  op 


254  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  viii. 

Israel's  joueney,  1.  Border  of  Red  Sea.  2.  March.  3.  Elim.  4.  Wilderness 
of  sin.  5.  Rephidim.  6.  At  foot  of  Mount  Sinai.  II.  Makk  the  sugcestive- 
NESS  OF  that  journey  TO  TJS.  It  is  a  parable  of  the  journey  taken  by  God's 
children  by  faith  in  Jesus  Christ.  1.  They  also  leave  the  slavery  and  sin  of  Egypt. 
2.  They  too  must  go  forward  in  the  way  of  repentance  and  faith,  in  discharge  of 
Christian  duty,  in  cultivation  of  Christian  graces,  and  in  the  path  Providence  and 
grace  has  ordained.  3.  They  often  drink  the  bitter  w^aters  of  sorrow  and  trial ;  but 
these  waters  are  sweetened  by  Christ.  4.  They  drink  of  the  waters  of  Elim,  where 
they  find  joy  and  refreshment.  5.  They  also  have  to  learn  lessons  of  Divine  care 
and  Divine  trust.  6.  What  rich  supplies  of  the  water  of  life  flow  around  the  camp 
of  the  spiritual  Israel.  7.  Where  Israel  encamps  before  Sinai,  it  reminds  us  that 
the  law  written  on  tables  of  stone  is  by  the  covenant  of  grace  written  on  the  tables 
of  our  hearts,  and  we  are  to  remember  those  commandments  of  Jehovah  that  are  a 
rule  of  life  for  all  time,  even  the  Ten  Commandments.  III.  Great  facts  Israel 
"WOULD  REMEMBER.      1.  Surely  Israel  remembered  they  had  a  glorious  Guide. 

2.  Surely  they  would  remember  their  full  supplies.  No  good  thing  will  God  with- 
hold from  them  that  walk  uprightly.  3.  Israel  would  remember  with  sorrow  their 
sins,  and  so  must  we.  4.  They  were  to  remember  their  rebukes  and  chastise- 
ments. 5.  They  were  to  remember  their  conflicts.  6.  Surely  they  would  remem- 
ber the  devious  way  they  took.  7.  Surely  Israel  might  say,  Mercy  has  ever  been 
mingled  with  judgment.  8.  Would  not  Israel  remember  all  the  way  in  the  light 
of  the  glorious  end  then  in  view  ?  IV.  The  purpose  to  be  served  by  the  way 
that  Israel  journeyed.  1.  To  humble  the  people.  2.  To  prove  the  heart.  8.  To 
lead  to  God  and  heaven.  {F.  A.  Warmington.)  Divine  leading : — I.  The  way 
in  which  the  Lord  led  His  people.  1.  A  way  not  chosen  by  themselves.  Grace- 
freely  bestowed  (John  v.  16).  2.  A  trying  way.  Walking  by  faith,  not  sight 
(1  Pet.  i.  7).  3.  A  mysterious  way.  (1)  To  the  unregenerate  world,  who  know 
nothing  of  the  secret  dealings  of  God  with  the  quickened  soul.  (2)  To  the  Chris- 
tian. How  dark  sometimes  !  4.  A  discouraging  way  (Numb.  xxi.  4,  5).  So  the 
Christian  is  often  discouraged.  He  wants  to  feel  that  he  is  going  on  spiritually  ; 
but  he  feels,  more  and  more,  his  ovm.  helplessness.  Some  days  he  has  most 
cheering  and  delightful  thoughts  of  God  ;  on  others  he  feels  bereft  of  faith,  love, 
joy,  hope,  comfort,  and  every  spiritual  gift.  5.  A  way  of  tribulation  (John  xvi. 
33).  6.  A  way  in  which  God  went  before  them  (Exod.  xiii.  21,  22).  He  is  with 
every  one  of  His  people  every  moment,  to  keep  them  by  His  Almighty  power,  in 
the  way  of  grace.  II.  The  place  in  which  the  Lord  led  His  people.  ''  The  wil- 
derness." 1.  A  wild  place.  What  evil  and  depraved  thoughts  spring  up  from 
within,  which  terrify  and  alarm  the  Christian  !  2.  An  uncultivated  place.  The 
carnal  mind  is  only  kept  in  check  by  the  power  of  grace.  3.  A  solitary  place  (Psa. 
xliv.  23,  24).  4.  A  comfortless  place.  III.  The  purpose  for  which  the  Lord  led 
His  people  into  the  wilderness.  1.  To  humble.  In  order  that  He  may  magnify 
Christ  in  them.     2.  To  prove.     That  He  may  convince  them  of  their  own  weakness. 

3.  That  He  may  know  what  is  in  his  heart — its  secret  corruptions,  &c.  {J.  J.  East- 
mead.)  Human  life  a  pilgrimage : — I.  The  wandering  of  the  Israelites 
through  the  wilderness  to  Canaan  is  a  lively  image  and  representation 
OF  A  Christian's  passage  through  this  world  to  heaven.  1.  The  passage  of 
the  Israelites  through  the  wilderness  was  a  very  unsettled  state  ;  so  is  ours  through 
this  world.  If  we  do  not  continually  wander  about  from  place  to  place  as  the 
Israelites  did,  yet  we  are  far  from  having  any  fixed  and  constant  abode.  The 
perpetual  alterations  we  see  about  us,  either  in  our  friends,  our  neighbours,  or 
ourselves,  our  persons,  tempers,  estates,  families,  or  circumstances,  and  in  short,  the 
vast  change  which  the  compass  of  a  few  years  makes  in  almost  everything  around 
US,  is  sufficient  to  convince  us  that  we  are  in  no  settled  condition  here.  ^2.  The 
travel  of  the  Israelites  through  the  wilderness  was  a  troublesome  and  dangerous 
state.  Now,  here  is  finother  fit  emblem  of  a  Christian's  pilgrimage  througli  this 
world  which  to  him  is  not  only  a  barren  but  a  hostile  land.  From  the  very  nature 
of  things,  and  the  circumstances  of  his  present  state,  he  meets  with  many  incon- 
veniences and  suff"erings,  and  from  the  malice  of  his  enemies  more.  Setting  aside 
the  natural  evils  which  he  bears  in  common  with  others,  sickness,  pains,  crosses, 
disappointments,  personal  and  family  afflictions,  he  is  exposed  to  many  spiritual 
evils  and  dangers  as  a  Christian  which  create  him  no  small  concern ;  particularly 
frequent  instigations  to  sin,  from  a  depraved  nature,  from  an  ensnaring  and  delusive 
world,  and  from  a  wily  and  watchful  enemy  going  about  indefatigably  seeking  whom 
he  may  devour.     3.  In  the  wilderness  through  which  the  Israelites  travelled  to 


CHAP.  VIII.]  DEUTERONOMY.  255 

Canaan,  there  were  many  by-paths  or  devious  tracts  by  which  they  might  be  in 
danger  of  going  astray.  And  how  much  this  resembles  a  Christian's  walk  through 
this  world  is  very  apparent.  4.  Notwithstanding  all  the  by-paths  and  mndings  in 
the  wilderness,  the  Israelites  had  an  infallible  Guide  to  lead  them  in  the  way  they 
should  go.  5.  Though  the  Israelites  travelled  forty  years  in  the  wilderness,  yet 
they  were  all  that  while  not  far  from  the  promised  land.  We  have  here  another 
circumstance  of  similitude  to  a  Christian's  state  in  this  world.  If  he  be  in  the  right 
way  to  heaven,  he  is  never  far  from  it  ;  he  lives  on  the  borders  of  it.  A  very  little 
and  unexpected  incident  may  let  him  suddenly  into  the  eternal  world,  which  should 
every  day  therefore  be  in  his  thoughts.  6.  The  reason  why  the  children  of  Israel 
wandered  so  long  in  the  wilderness  before  they  reached  the  promised  land  is  given 
us  in  the  text.  Now,  whether  it  be  not  sometimes  by  way  of  punishment  that  God 
is  pleased  to  detain  some  of  his  people  from  their  state  of  rest  and  happiness  for 
a  long  time,  as  He  did  the  Israelites  from  the  land  of  Canaan,  I  will  not  take 
upon  me  to  say.  But  without  all  doubt,  this  world  is  a  state  of  trial  and 
temptation  to  them  all ;  in  which  they  are  detained  the  longer  that  they  may 
be  more  fit  for  and  more  ardently  desirous  of  the  heavenly  Canaan  when  they  are 
well  wearied  with  the  labours  and  difficulties  of  this  their  earthly  pilgrimage. 
And  there  are  three  graces  which  the  trials  of  life  are  very  proper  to  cultivate, 
and  to  the  exercise  of  which  the  Israelites  were  more  especially  called  during 
their  passage  through  the  wilderness.  And  they  are  faith,  hope,  and  patience : 
all  proper  to  a  state  of  suffering  and  mutually  subservient  to  each  other.  Faith 
keeps  its  eye  on  God  in  all  we  suffer  ;  looks  beyond  the  agency  of  second  causes  ; 
views  the  direction  of  the  Divine  hand  and  adores  it.  Patience,  under  the 
influence  of  faith,  submits  to  the  hand  of  God  in  all.  And  hope,  enlivened  by 
faith  and  confirmed  by  patience,  looks  beyond  all  to  that  future  and  better 
state  of  things  where  we  shall  meet  with  an  unspeakable  recompence  for  all  we 
can  go  through  to  obtain  it.  7.  In  order  to  keep  up  the  faith,  patience,  and 
hope  of  the  Israelites,  full  and  frequent  descriptions  were  given  them  of  the 
goodness  of  that  land  to  which  they  were  travelling.  Nor  are  our  faith  and 
patience  and  hope  without  the  like  supports  in  respect  to  the  heavenly  Canaan. 
Oh,  what  great  and  glorious  things  are  told  us  of  the  city  of  the  living  God,  the 
metropolis  of  the  universal  King  !  8.  When  the  Israelites  were  come  to  the  end  of 
their  pilgrimage,  before  they  could  enter  the  promised  land,  they  were  obliged 
to  pass  over  the  river  Jordan  which  separated  the  wilderness  from  Canaan.  Here 
lay  their  greatest  difficulty  at  the  very  end  of  their  journey.  Now  to  apply  this 
part  of  the  history  to  the  Christian's  life  and  pilgrimage.  The  last  enemy  he  is  to 
overcome  is  death.  And  as  it  is  the  last,  so  to  some  Christians  it  is  the  most 
terrible  of  all  their  trials  ;  and  all  their  faith  and  hope  and  patience  is  little 
enough  to  support  them  under  it.  But  there  is  no  arriving  at  the  heavenly  Canaan 
without  first  passing  through  the  fatal  Jordan.  And  as  the  Israelites  by  the  long 
and  frequent  exercise  of  their  faith  and  hope  and  trust  in  God  were  better  prepared 
for  this  last  difficulty  of  passing  over  Jordan,  so  the  more  these  graces  are  wrought 
into  a  lively  habit,  the  more  composed  will  the  soul  be  under  the  apprehensions  of 
approaching  death.  I  shall  now  conclude  this  with  a  few  reflections  :  1.  Let  these 
thoughts,  then,  be  improved  to  abate  our  desires  after  the  pleasures  of  the  present 
life  and  excite  them  after  those  of  a  better.  2.  What  reason  have  we  to  be  thankful 
that  we  have  so  sure  a  Guide  through  this  dangerous  desert !  The  Israelites  them- 
selves had  not  one  more  safe.  3.  Though  our  state  and  condition  in  this  world  be 
much  the  same  as  that  of  the  Israelites  was  in  the  wilderness,  let  us  however  take 
care  that  our  temper  and  disposition  be  not  the  same.  They  are  set  up  as  our  warn- 
ing, not  as  our  pattern.  4.  Whilst  we  are  in  this  wilderness  let  us  keep  the  heavenly 
Canaan  always  in  our  eye.  The  frequent  thoughts  of  it  will  speed  our  progress 
towards  it,  quicken  our  preparations  for  it,  and  be  a  sovereign  support  under  all 
the  trials  we  may  meet  with  in  our  way  to  it ;  will  soften  our  sorrows,  and  reconcile 
us  to  all  our  earthly  disappointments.  And  indeed,  what  is  there  which  a  man 
need  call  a  disappointment  whose  heaven  is  secure?  {John  Mason,  M.A.)  The 
way  to  improve  past  providences : — I.  I  AM  TO  specify  some  of  those  providential 

DISPENSATIONS  WHICH  Vi^E  OUGHT  IN  A  MORE  ESPECIAL  MANNER  TO  RECOLLECT  AND 

CONSIDER.  And  this  review  ought  to  be  universal.  We  should  not  willingly  let 
pass  any  of  the  ways  and  dispensations  of  Providence  towards  us  without  a  serious 
remark.  But  as  we  cannot  remember  them  all,  we  should  take  the  more  care  to 
retain  the  impression  of  those  that  are  more  remarkable,  as  a  testimony  of  our 
dutiful  acknowledgment  of  God  and  our  dependence  upon  Him  in  all  our  ways. 


256  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  viii. 

1.  Then  we  should  often  call  to  mind  God's  afflicting  and  humbling  providences. 
Have  we  been  afflicted  in  our  bodies  ?  let  us  remember  how  it  was  with  us  in  our 
low  estate  ;  what  thoughts  we  then  had  of  our  souls  and  another  world  ;  what 
serious  impressions  were  made  upon  our  minds  which  we  should  endeavour  to 
renew  and  retain.  Again,  have  we  been  afflicted  in  our  spirits  ?  By  sore  tempta- 
tions, grievous  dejections,  severe  conflicts  with  sin  and  Satan,  little  hopes,  great 
fears,  dreadful  doubts,  and  terrifying  apprehensions  concerning  the  state  of  our 
souls,  and  what  is  like  to  become  of  them  hereafter.  These  kinds  of  troubles  ought 
by  no  means  to  be  forgotten.  And  when  they  are  remembered,  our  proper  inquiry 
is,  How  we  got  rid  of  them?  For  there  is  a  very  wrong  and  dangerous  way  of 
getting  rid  of  such  spiritual  concern  of  mind.  If  stupidity  and  indolence,  neglect 
or  worldly-mindedness,  carnal  security  or  prevailing  vanity,  have  contributed  to 
overbear  and  drown  those  convictions,  and  banish  that  serious  thoughtfulness  and 
religious  sorrow  we  once  had,  our  state  is  really  worse  than  it  was  then  ;  and  we 
have  more  reason  now  to  be  concerned  than  we  had  before.  Again,  have  we  been 
afflicted  in  our  family  or  friends  by  the  death  of  some,  or  the  sickness  and  distress 
of  others,  let  us  not  soon  forget  these  kinds  of  afflictions  when  they  are  past  It  is 
possible  we  may  know  very  well  from  what  immediate  cause  they  flowed,  yet  let  ns 
not  overlook  the  sovereign  hand  of  God  therein.  And  if  they  have  in  any  degree 
been  owing  to  some  neglect  or  fault  in  us,  they  should  especially  be  remembered, 
to  humble  us  and  make  us  more  wise  and  cautious  for  the  future.  2.  We  should 
likewise  remember  the  merciful  providences  of  God  towards  us.  For  instance,  our 
temporal  mercies  should  be  frequently  remembered — the  health,  the  peace,  the 
prosperity,  and  the  worldly  advantages  we  enjoy  above  so  many  others.  Again, 
our  spiritual  mercies  and  religious  advantages  should  be  thankfully  recorded  by 
us,  and  especially  that  invaluable  one  of  a  good  and  pious  education.  Again, 
family  mercies  should  be  often  remembered  by  us — family  health,  peace  and 
prosperity,  the  comfort  of  relations,  the  blessing  of  children,  especially  if  they 
be  found  walking  in  the  way  of  truth.  And  so  should  public  mercies  ;  especially 
the  signal  interpositions  of  Providence  in  preserving  us  from  our  enemies  and 
restoring  to  us  the  blessings  of  national  prosperity  and  peace.  II.  Let  us  now 
consider  IN  what  manner  the  past  pkovidences  of  God  are  to  be  recollected 
AND  CONSIDERED  BY  US.  1.  We  should  revicw  them  very  intently  and  seriously, 
call  to  mind  as  many  particulars  as  we  can,  reflect  upon  them,  dwell  upon  the 
reflection  till  the  heart  be  deeply  impressed  with  it.  2.  We  should  review  past 
providences  with  thankfulness  (Eph.  v.  20).  What !  are  we  to  give  thanks  for 
afflictions,  pains,  and  crosses ;  for  those  humbling  providences  under  which  we 
mourn  ?  Yes  ;  there  is  no  providence,  though  ever  so  adverse,  in  which  a  Christian 
may  not  see  much  of  the  Divine  goodness,  and  for  which,  upon  the  whole,  he  will 
not  see  abundant  cause  to  be  thankful.  He  hath  reason  to  be  thankful  that  his 
afflictions  are  not  greater;  that  when  some  of  his  comforts  are  gone  he  hath  so 
many  others  left ;  that  some  honey  is  thrown  into  his  bitter  cup  ;  that  there  is  such 
a  mixture  of  mercy  with  judgment ;  that  his  supports  are  so  seasonable  and  effec- 
tual ;  that  under  these  strokes  he  can  eye  the  Father's  liand  and  look  upon  them 
as  the  effect  of  His  love,  for  He  chasteneth  every  son  He  loves.  But  especially 
are  kind  favourable  providences  to  be  gratefully  recorded.  It  is  not  to  be  supposed 
but  that  every  one  of  us  may  call  to  mind  many  a  merciful  providcTice  which  has 
contributed  greatly  to  the  comfort  of  our  lives,  and  laid  the  foundation  of  our 
present  happiness  and  future  hopes.  3.  Our  remembrance  of  the  past  providences 
of  God  should  be  improved  for  the  confirmation  of  our  hope  and  trust  in  Him.  By 
what  God  hath  done  for  us  we  see  what  He  is  able  to  do.  Our  experience,  then, 
should  support  our  hope,  and  past  mercies  establish  our  trust  in  God  for  future. 
4.  When  we  call  to  mind  the  past  ways  of  God  towards  us,  we  should  seriously 
reconsider  in  what  manner  we  behaved  under  them  and  what  good  we  have  gained 
from  them.  Every  providence  hath  a  voice,  some  a  very  loud  one  calling  us  in  a 
more  especial  manner  to  practise  some  particular  duty,  or  forsake  some  particular  sin. 
Have  merciful  providences  made  us  more  active,  diligent,  and  steadfast  in  the 
service  of  God  ?  and  together  with  greater  power  given  us  a  better  heart  to  do 
good  ?  Again,  what  eff'ect  have  providential  afflictions  had  upon  us  ?  And  all 
afflictions  are  to  be  deemed  such  excepting  those  that  are  the  genuine  eff'ects  of  our 
own  sin  and  folly.  Have  they  humbled  us  ?  mortified  our  worldly-mindedness  ? 
checked  our  false  ambition  ?  or  subdued  any  secret  lust  that  before  too  much 
prevailed  ?  Have  they  fixed  our  hope  and  dependence  on  God  ?  and  made  us  think 
more  seriously  of  death  and  another  world  ?  and,  in  a  word,  been  the  means 


CHAP.  VIII.]  DEUTERONOMY.  257 

of  making  ns  more  circumspect  and  better  Christians  ?  III.  I  am  now  to  lay 
before  you  some  of  those  considerations  that  are  most  proper  to  induce  us 
HEREUNTO.  1.  The  express  command  of  God  should  be  a  sovereign  motive  to  this 
duty.  2.  The  duty  recommended  in  the  text  is  necessary  as  subservient  to  the 
great  end  for  which  such  providences  are  intended — namely,  to  do  us  good  in  the  latter 
end.  So  that  if  we  seldom  or  superficially  reflect  upon  them,  we  frustrate  the  chief 
design  of  them,  and  lose  the  benefit  intended  thereby.  3.  This  is  a  very  pleasant 
as  well  as  useful  employment  of  the  mind  ;  and  a  very  happy  way  of  filling  up 
those  leisure  minutes  which,  through  the  vagrancy  and  dissipation  of  thought,  do 
so  frequently  run  to  waste.  4.  Such  a  serious  reflection  on  past  providences  may 
be  of  use  to  direct  us  in  our  future  conduct.  5.  The  shortness  and  uncertainty 
of  life  makes  this  duty  more  especially  nee  essavy.  What  is  past  we  know,  what 
is  to  come  we  know  not.  For  anything  that  we  know,  by  far  the  most  important 
periods  and  occurrences  of  life  may  be  past  with  us.  If  the  hand  of  Providence 
therein  hath  not  yet  been  properly  attended  to  and  improved  by  us,  it  is  high  time 
it  were.  (Ibid.)  RcimmUr  the  way  :—l.  What  it  was  that  God  did.  1.  God 
kept  the  children  of  Israel  wandering  in  the  wilderness  ten  times  longer  than  would 
be  necessary  for  a  man's  passing  through  it.  We  hasten  because  we  are  impatient, 
distrustful,  and  uncertain.  "  He  that  believeth  shall  not  make  haste."  We  do  not 
believe,  and  therefore  we  are  in  a  hurry.  We  see  only  brief  time  before  us  as  our 
day  in  which  to  work.  God  does  not  hasten,  for  eternity  is  before  Him  as  His 
working  day,  and  He  has  no  misgiving  about  accomplishing  His  purposes  :  for  He 
saith  to  Himself  and  of  Himself  continually,  "I  am  that  I  am"— "I  am  the 
Almighty  God."  The  great  question  with  our  God  is  not  our  getting  through  so 
much  of  our  course  as  quickly  as  possible,  but  our  so  passing  through  it  as  that  all 
things  shall  work  together  for  our  good.  A  man  is  in  a  hurry  to  secure  a  certain 
object  and  to  get  to  a  certain  position  ;  and  God  hedges  his  way  with  thorns  and 
there  he  stops,  and  a  voice  from  heaven  saith  to  him,  "  Be  still,"  and  he  is  obliged 
to  "be  still."  2.  God  exposed  the  people  to  much  difliculty  and  hardship,  but  He 
did  not  suffer  them  to  sink  under  their  troubles.  They  were  long  kept  back  from 
Canaan,  but  God  did  not  forsake  His  people.  The  glory,  the  pillar  of  cloud  and 
fire,  and  every  Divine  ordinance  were  as  so  many  tokens  and  symbols  of  His 
presence.  II.  What  did  God  mean  by  dealing  thus  with  the  people  ?  God 
has  a  meaning  in  everything.  You  know  one  great  design  embraces  our  whole  life, 
from  the  beginning  to  the  end  ;  and  then  a  still  larger  design  takes  in  the  lives  of 
all  living  things :  so  that  God  is  not  only  dealing  with  me  in  His  dispensations 
toward  me,  but  He  is  dealing  with  all  His  creatures  in  dealing  with  me.  There 
is  an  end  to  which  everything  that  happens  is  subjected.  What  did  God  mean  by 
dealing  as  He  did  with  the  people  before  us  ?  1.  He  treated  them  in  this  way  to 
humble  them.  They  thought  of  themselves  more  highly  than  they  ought  to  think. 
They  had  been  accustomed,  some  of  them,  to  stand  by  Him  as  though  the^  were 
on  a  level  with  Him,  and  to  ask  Him  what  He  did  this  for,  and  what  He  did  that 
for— not,  mark,  as  an  obedient  and  trustful  child,  but  as  a  rebel  would  inquire  of 
some  ruler  against  whom  he  had  risen  up.  Well,  the  people  had  been  accustomed 
in  this  way  to  ask  God,  "  Why  ? "  and  God  brought  them  down  from  this.  And 
we  say  that  this  is  a  sublime  spiritual  spectacle,  a  man  injuring  himself  by  pride, 
and  God  lowering  that  man's  estimate  of  himself.  There  is  something  sublime  in 
this— in  the  great  God  occupying  Himself  with  one  of  us  men,  having  our  abase- 
ment for  His  object,  and  so  ordering  all  things  as  that  our  pride  shall  be  laid  low. 
2.  God  dealt  with  the  people  thus  to  show  them  what  material  they  were  made  of. 
He  knew  them,  but  they  did  not  know  themselves,  and  He  would  have  them  know 
themselves.  Is  the  eye  evil  ?  Is  the  ear  deaf  ?  Is  the  tongue  fired  by  hell  ? 
Is  the  neck  an  iron  sinew  ?  Is  the  heart  stone  ?  God  knew  :  they  did  not— and 
He  dealt  with  them  as  He  did  to  show  them  what  they  were.  3.  God  dealt  thus 
with  them  to  show  them  further  what  He  could  do.  "  That  He  might  make  thee 
know  that  man  doth  not  live  by  bread  only,  but  by  every  word  that  proceedeth  out 
of  the  mouth  of  the  Lord."  4.  God's  end  in  His  dealings  with  Israel  was  instruction 
and  correction,  and  all  the  spiritual  advantages  to  be  derived  from  that  instruc- 
tion and  correction.  III.  What  God  requipvBs  in  respect  of  this  instruction  and 
correction.  What  a  mighty  effect  upon  life  memory  has  !  It  adds  the  past  to  the 
present.  Now  among  the  several  moral  and  religious  advantages  of  memory  is 
your  being  spared  the  toil  of  learning  the  same  lesson  over  and  over  again.  {S. 
MaHin,  D.D.)  The  duty,  benefits,  and  blessitvgs  of  remembering  Ood's  command- 
fnerUs : — I.  The  duty  of  remembrance.     "  Thou  shalt  remember,"  &c.     Here  we 

17 


258  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  viir. 

have  the  same  form  as  in  the  Ten  Commandments  :  "Thou  shalt  have  none  other 
God  but  Me  "  ;  "  thou  shalt  keep  holy  the  Sabbath,"  &c.  It  is,  therefore,  a  positive 
duty,  an  obligation  insisted  on,  to  remember  God's  dealings  with  us  and  those 
before  us.  But  now  what  is  the  general  course  of  the  world  about  this  important 
duty  ?  Altogether  opposed  to  it.  Some  persons  we  see  and  know  never  do 
remember.  Go  through  what  they  will,  sutfer  what  they  may,  they  never  learn 
experience,  or  what  is  called  common  sense.  They  continue  the  same  thoughtless, 
headstrong,  violent  people  they  ever  were.  They  never  remember.  Some  there 
be,  however,  whose  habit  of  mind  is  so  loose  from  long  indolence,  that  they  really 
find  it  difficult  so  to  do  ;  others  because  it  is  painful — the  thoughts  of  past  years 
have  so  much  pain  in  them.  There  are  the  false  steps  that  we  wilfully  made,  the 
neglected  opportunities  of  both  doing  and  getting  good,  old  instances  of  influence 
abused,  courses  of  sin  persevered  in,  misgivings  of  conscience  disregarded.  To  look 
back  on  all  these  is  contrary  to  that  peace  which  we  strive  to  say  to  ourselves  when 
there  is  no  peace.  Instead  of  meditating  and  examining  them'selves,  and  praying 
for  God's  grace  to  become  altered  characters,  these  men  shut  out  all  such  reasonings 
as  far  as  they  can,  and  go  on  with  self-willed  eagerness  in  their  old  plans :  some- 
times, if  driven  from  them,  they  go  on  only  in  other  courses  of  the  same  character, 
and  these,  too,  with  their  old  eagerness.  But  if  this  duty  of  remembrance  is 
important  in  a  worldly  point  of  view,  as  it  regards  our  mutual  relations^n  earth, 
it  is  of  far  greater  consequence  in  heavenly  things.  It  is  possible  to  get  through 
our  earthly  career,  though  never  happily,  without  remembering ;  but  heaven,  the 
city  of  our  God,  we  never  shall  attain  unless  we  do  remember  all  the  way  the  Lord 
our  God  hath  led  us.  We  must  remember  Him  in  our  ways,  bear  in  our  minds 
our  old  sins,  and  what  led  us  into  them.  Thence  we  shall  think  of  what  befell 
us  in  consequence ;  and,  calmly  weighing  these  over  in  our  minds,  we  shall  pray 
to  God  for  grace  in  the  future,  and  will  avoid  those  occasions  of  sin  which 
previously  tried  us.  II.  In  remembering  all  the  way  which  we  have  been  led,  WB 
SHALL  FIND  IT  HIGHLY  PROFITABLE  ;  becausc  cach  of  our  Hves  is  so  directed,  sooner 
or  later,  for  two  ends — to  humble  us,  and  to  prove  us  whether  we  will  serve  God 
or  no.  1.  Here  we  see,  first,  that  all  events  are  ordered  for  our  humiliation.  Is 
it  not  so  ?  Have  you  had  no  remarkable  turns  in  your  lives,  when,  yourself  or 
your  friends  intending  one  thing,  another  has  come  to  pass  ?  Have  you  had  no 
answers  to  prayer,  when,  in  your  helplessness  or  agony,  you  besought  God  and  He 
hearkened  ?  Look  back  to  your  youth  ;  how  He  controlled  your  self- wickedness, 
overruled  your  ignorance,  directed  your  forwardness.  It  may  be,  He  answered 
your  prayers  and  punished  your  inventions  ;  or  that  what  you  were  so  eager  for  and 
prayed  to  obtain  so  earnestly,  as  thinking  it  would  without  fail  make  you  happy, 
He  refused,  and  you  now  find  greatly  to  your  comfort.  You  must  bear  these  in 
mind  ;  they  were  so  ordained  to  humble  you.  We  hear  men  say  of  their  troubles 
that  they  are  humbling  ;  how  they  will  try  in  consequence  to  remove  them,  to  fling 
themselves  out  of  them.  They  are  thwarted  :  this  causes  irritation  ;  it  shows  them 
a  glimpse  of  what  they  really  are,  poor  and  weak,  blind  and  naked,  and  humbles 
them.  God  sends  these  troubles  for  this  purpose — to  humble  you.  Let  no  Chris- 
tian therefore  try,  for  it  is  a  vain  work,  to  shake  them  off ;  God  sends  them  to 
humble  him.  Let  the  prayer  of  this  man  rather  be,  Let  me  be  humbled.  God 
exalteth  the  humble,  but  casteth  away  the  proud.  2.  But  in  discussing  this  branch 
of  our  subject  we  have  another  end  also  laid  open  to  us  ;  this  is  to  prove  us. 
Christ,  by  Malachi,  says,  that  His  coming  will  have  the  same  eS"ect  on  the  world 
as  the  fire  of  the  refiner  on  silver.  And  as  all  the  multiplied  complications  of  our 
chequered  lives  are  ordered  to  fit  us  for  Christ's  kingdom,  we  may  well  suppose  they 
are  calculated  to  produce  this  same  eff'ect — that  of  refining  or  proving.  We  are  told 
that  God  will  do  this  in  several  passages  :  "I  will  thoroughly  purge  away  all  thy 
dross,  and  take  away  thy  tin :  I  will  refine  them  as  silver  is  refined  :  the  Lord 
your  God  proveth  you."  Now  there  is  so  much  alloy,  even  in  our  best  services,  that 
all  this  is  necessary.  III.  Do  these  things  seem  hard  ?  Listen  to  the  great 
comfort  to  be  derived  from  our  subject.  It  is  all — if  you  turn  to  ver.  16 — to  do  thee 
good  at  the  latter  end.  It  is  true,  enemies  mean  mischief  ;  false  friends  wish  con- 
fusion of  face  :  but,  as  Joseph  said  to  his  brethren  who  had  sold  him,  and  instru- 
men tally  had  brought  on  him  the  miseries  he  suffered  in  Egypt,  "  Ye  meant  it  for 
evil ;  but  lo,  God  hath  brought  it  to  good,"  so  with  Christians ;  the  different 
tribulations  and  unevenness  on  their  road,  are  the  spurs  which  should  quicken 
their  pace  to  Jerusalem  above,  the  mother  of  us  all.  {J.  D.  Day,  M.A.) 
Past  recollections : — I.  Those  words  were  addressed  by  God  Himself  to  the  Israelites, 


CHAP,  vni.3  DEUTERONOMY.  259 


God  has  a  right  to  call  on  each  one  of  us  to  remember  His  guidance.  Observe — 
II.  These  words  were  spoken  to  a  people,  the  great  majority  of  whom  were  ungodly, 
wicked  people.  God  has  been  leading  them.  They  do  not  think  so.  III.  In  calling 
us  to  remember,  God  has  the  most  important  practical  purposes  to  answer.  There 
is  a  moral  purpose  to  every  man's  life.  1.  Humility.  2.  Experience.  3.  Freedom. 
IV.  There  are  many  things  we  ought  to  remember.  Infancy.  Childhood. 
Opportunities  of  receiving  truth.  Trifling  with  religious  impressions.  V.  There 
must  come  a  time  when  we  shall  be  obliged  to  remember.  VI.  Remembrance  now 
will  save  us  from  all  this.  VII.  The  first  effort  to  remember  will  be  owned 
and  blessed  by  a  gracious  Saviour.  "I  will  arise,"  &c.  {W.  G.  Barrett,  M.A.) 
A  New  Year's  meditation  .-—I.  Let  us  emphasise  the  all,  for  on  that  word  the 
emphasis  of  the  sentence  truly  lies.  Survey  one  part,  and  then  not  only  the  whole, 
but  even  that  particular  portion  will  inevitably  be  misunderstood.  Take  it  all 
together.  The  very  principle  of  it  implies  a  wholeness,  a  continuity  of  purpose, 
which  can  only  be  fully  comprehended  in  the  result.  It  is  a  way  somewhither. 
No  way  explains  itself  at  every  step.  And  believe  that  a  Being  of  unerring  wisdom 
laid  the  plan  of  your  life-course,  the  nature  and  conditions  of  your  journey,  and 
the  certainty  that  that  was  the  straightest  way  to  your  home.  Believe  that  a  Father's 
wise  and  loving  eye  has  surveyed  the  whole  of  it ;  and  that  not  a  quagmire,  not  a 
perilous  passage,  not  a  torrent,  not  a  mountain  gorge,  not  a  steep,  rocky  path,  not 
a  bare,  sandy  plain,  has  been  ordained  that  could  have  been  spared.  Thou  shalt 
consider  all  the  way.  Consider— 1.  That  it  is  a  way.  That  the  character  of  the 
path  is  to  be  estimated  not  by  the  present  difficulty  or  danger,  but  by  the  import- 
ance of  the  end.  God  says  to  you,  as  you  would  say  to  every  traveller  along  a 
difficult  path,  *'  Look  up  ;  leave  caring  for  the  track  at  thy  feet ;  look  on  to  the  end 
that  is  already  in  sight.^'  Full  little  cares  the  weary  pilgrim  for  the  roughness  of 
the  path  or  its  peril ;  his  heart  strains  on— Rome,  Jerusalem,  will  reward  it  all.  Is 
the  end  worth  the  toil  ?  That  is  always  the  one  question.  2.  Consider  the  infinite 
variety  of  the  way,  the  many  rich  elements  and  influences  which  it  combines  to 
educate  your  life.  A  dead  and  dreary  monotony  is  no  part  of  the  plan  of  God  in 
the  education  of  His  sons.  If  you  want  to  see  vast  monotones,  broad  sand-tracks, 
boundless  plains,  go  to  Asia  and  Africa,  the  continents  of  slaves  and  tyrants.  If  you 
want  to  see  rich  variety,  hill  and  valley,  tableland  and  plain,  lakes,  rivers,  inland  seas, 
and  broken  coast-lines,  come  to  Europe,  the  home  of  civilisation,  the  continent  of 
freeborn  and  free-living  men.  And  manifold  in  beauty,  in  variety,  in  alternations  of 
scenes  and  experiences,  is  this  wilderness  way  by  which  God  is  leading  His  sons. 
The  valley,  remember,  is  part  of  the  mountain.  If  you  will  have  the  height  of  the 
one  with  its  exhilaration,  you  must  have  the  depth  of  the  other  with  its  depression. 
It  is  the  memory  of  the  depths  that  makes  the  heights  so  grand  and  inspiring. 

II.  Thou  shalt  consider  the  beauty  of  the  way.  I  believe  the  wilderness  to  have 
been  only  less  beautiful  than  Canaan.  In  many  points,  if  not  more  beautiful,  more 
striking  and  grand.  It  was  a  bright  contrast  to  the  dismal  monotony  and  fatness 
of  Egypt.  And  through  the  forty  years'  journey  that  people  had  spread  round  them 
all  the  pomp  and  splendour  of  Nature,  her  grandest  aspects,  her  most  winning, 
witching  smiles  :  "And  thou  shalt  consider  all  the  way  by  which  the  Lord  thy  God 
hath  led  thee."  Lift  up  thine  eyes  and  take  in  all  the  beauty  and  goodness  of  the 
world.  "0  Lord,  how  manifold  are  Thy  works,  how  beautiful ;  in  wisdom  and  in 
goodness  hast  Thou  made  them  all."  We  none  of  us  take  half  joy  enough,  the  joy 
we  have  a  right  to  take,  in  the  goodly  world  which  our  God  hath  built.  Poor  we 
may  be  and  struggling,  and  all  the  higher  interests  and  joys  of  life,  art,  literature, 
music,  may  be  tasted  but  rarely,  and  in  drops.  But  the  Great  Artist  has  taken 
thought  for  the  poor.  He  wills  that  their  joys  shall  not  be  scant.  The  beauty,  the 
glory,  which  art  at  its  highest  faintly  adumbrates,  is  theirs  in  profusion.  Thou 
shalt  consider  the  good  world  through  which  the  Lord  thy  God  hath  led  thee. 

III.  Thou  shalt  consider  the  bread  of  the  wilderness  (Exod.  xvi.  11-15).  This 
miracle  of  the  manna  is  a  very  wonderful  miracle,  repeated  every  day  before  our 
eyes.  The  God  who  made  the  manna  their  food  makes  bread  of  corn  your  food. 
It  is  good  sometimes  to  get  behind  all  the  apparatus  of  laws  which  hide  the  hand 
of  the  living  God  from  us,  and  take  our  daily  bread,  our  daily  breath,  as  the 
sparrows  and  the  lilies  take  their  food  and  their  beauty,  direct  from  the  hand  of 
our  Father  in  heaven.  IV.  Thou  shalt  remember  the  perils  of  the  wilderness. 
It  is  distinctly  by  a  perilous  path  God  leads  us,  that  we  may  see  as  well  as  dimly 
guess  at  our  dependence,  and  ascribe  our  deliverances  to  the  hand  from  which  they 
spring.     Life  is  one  long  peril.     Physiologists  say  that  if  we  could  but  see  the 


/ 

260  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  vm. 

delicate  tissues  which  are  strained  almost  to  bursting  by  every  motion,  every  breath, 
we  should  be  afraid  to  stir  a  step  or  draw  a  breath  lest  we  should  rupture  the  frail 
vessels  and  perish.  "Strange  that  a  harp  of  thousand  strings  should  keep  in  tune 
so  long."  But  it  does  keep  in  tune ;  it  is  in  full  tune  this  day.  Remember  the 
perils  of  the  way.  Remember  the  moments  of  sickness  and  agony,  when  death 
seemed  to  stand  over  you.  There  are  deadlier  perils  than  death  around  us  each 
moment,  perils  which  threaten  the  second  death.  Temptations  of  no  common 
strain.  Some  of  you,  by  a  wonderful  chain  of  providential  agencies,  have  been 
delivered  from  positions  which  you  felt  to  be  full  of  peril,  in  which,  had  you 
continued,  you  must  have  fallen  ;  but  the  net  was  broken  and  you  have  escaped. 
Thou  shalt  remember  the  sins  of  the  wilderness.  VI.  Thou  shalt  remember 
THE  CHASTISEMENTS  OF  THE  WAY,  and  consider  "that  as  a  man  chasteneth  his  son, 
80  the  Lord  thy  God  chasteneth  thee."  VII.  Thou  shalt  remember  the  Elims  of 
THE  WAY,  the  sunny  spots,  the  living  verdure,  the  murmuring  fountains,  the 
rustling,  shadowing  palms,  where  not  seldom  you  have  been  permitted  to  lie  down 
and  rest.  The  wilderness  had  nooks  as  fertile,  as  beautiful  as  Canaan.  Earth  has 
joys,  though  rare,  pure  and  deep  as  the  joys  of  heaven.  We  are  ever  moaning  over 
our  sorrows.  We  take  our  mercies  as  a  thing  of  course.  *'  The  people  came  down 
to  Elim,  where  were  springs  and  palms."  I  do  not  catch  the  notes  of  a  song  of 
praise.  Remember  the  way  and  count  the  Elims  by  which  it  has  been  gladdened, 
the  moments  of  rapture  in  which  the  full  heart,  sw'ollen  almost  to  bursting,  has 
murmured  out  its  thanksgiving,  and  realised  that  "it  is  a  blessed  thing  to  be." 
VIII.  Thou  shalt  consider  the  end  of  the  way.  Forget  that,  and  it  is  all  a 
mystery.  "Be  patient,  brethren,  and  see  the  end  of  the  Lord "(7-11).  "The 
Lord  doth  bring  thee  in."  Every  sorrow,  toil,  pain,  chastisement  He  sends  is  to 
bring  thee  in  with  joy,  with  glory  ;  to  make  thee  rich  for  eternity.  (/.  B.  Brown, 
B.A.)  Retrospect  exhilarating :— The  face  which  the  sculptor  chisels  or  the  artist 
paints  as  looking  backwards  is  usually  expressive  of  the  extreme  of  sadness.  Yet 
the  recollection  of  the  past  which  such  a  countenance  suggests  need  not  be  full  of 
gloom.  There  is  a  retrospect  which  only  adds  to  the  keenness  of  enjoyment.  A 
few  years  ago  a  party  crossed  the  backbone  of  Europe  by  one  of  the  most  picturesque 
of  the  passes  that  cleave  the  Alps.  It  was  a  steep  pathway.  Reflected  by  the 
rocky  walls,  the  sun  flung  into  his  glances  a  heat  like  a  tropic  day.  But  at  last 
they  reached  the  summit.  Before  descending  the  other  side  they  stopped  and 
looked  back  upon  the  way  they  had  already  climbed.  Winding  far  below,  the 
difficult  road  was  mapped  out  upon  the  shaggy  slope.  There  were  the  cliffs  they 
had  scaled,  the  precipices  along  the  edge  of  which  their  path  had  led,  the  dizzy 
chasms  spanned  by  bridges  seemingly  as  fragile  as  that  the  spider  builds.  And  to 
stand  upon  that  breezy  elevation,  to  look  back  on  such  a  pathway,  and  to  know 
that  over  such  obstacles  they  had  triumphantly  gained  the  very  summit,  was  to 
drink  the  wine-cup  of  mental  exhilaration.  So  do  men  generally  look  back  from 
the  summit  of  success.  Such  a  retrospect  is  the  ripest  sheaf  in  the  harvest  of  life. 
{Bishop  Cheney.)  Memory  a  scribe: — Aristotle  calls  it  the  scribe  of  the  soul. 
{T.  Watson.)  God's  leading : — However  quiet  your  life  may  have  been,  I  am  sure 
there  has  been  much  in  it  that  has  tenderly  illustrated  the  Lord's  providence,  the 
Lord's  deliverance,  the  Lord's  upholding  and  sustaining  you.  You  have  been, 
perhaps,  in  poverty,  and  just  when  the  barrel  of  meal  was  empty,  then  were  you 
supplied.  You  have  gone,  perhaps,  through  fire  and  water,  but  in  it  all  God's  help 
has  been  very  wonderful.  Perhaps  you  are  like  the  Welsh  woman,  who  said  that 
the  Ebenezers  which  she  had  set  up  at  the  places  where  God  had  helped  her  were 
so  thick  that  they  made  a  wall  from  the  very  spot  she  began  with  Christ  to  that 
she  had  then  reached.  Is  it  so  with  you  ?  Then  tell  how  God  has  led  you,  fed  you, 
and  brought  you  out  of  all  your  troubles.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  To  hamble  thee 
and  to  prove  thee. — The  stages  o/probatum : — I.  There  has  ever  been  A  struggle 
between  good  and  evil  proceeding  in  the  world — a  struggle  in  which  some 
have  arra^-ed  tliemselves  on  one  side,  some  on  another.  II.  Again,  the  world 
grows  in  experience,  increases  its  stores  of  knowledge,  and  its  power  over  matter. 
III.  But  now  to  come  to  a  more  definite  illustration  of  the  truth,  that  the  indi- 
vidual IS  but  the  species  in  miniature.  Ever  since  the  creation  of  man,  God 
has  been  proving  His  rational  creatures  by  various  dispensations.  1.  Man,  when 
ejected  from  Paradise,  had  a  certain  limited  degree  of  light  and  help.  2.  Man  was 
next  put  under  the  restraints  of  human  law — the  warrant  for  the  whole  compass  of 
human  law  being  contained  in  that  sentence,  "Whoso  sheddeth  man's  blood,  by 
man  shall  his  blood  be  shed."   This  was  a  new  help,  a  new  light.    Did  man  recover 


CHAP,  viii.l  DEUTERONOMY.  261 

himself  under  it  from  the  ruins  of  the  fall  ?  Alas,  no  !  Consider  that  one  saying 
to  Abraham,  "  The  iniquity  of  the  Amorites  is  not  yet  full."  It  shows  that  mighty 
nations  had  sprung  up  upon  the  earth's  surface  who  were  forgetful  of  God,  and 
among  whom  stalked  oppression  and  lust,  such  as  called  down  vengeance  from 
heaven.  3.  So  a  law  was  henceforth  to  be  revealed  from  heaven,  and  to  be  made 
plain  upon  tables  of  stone,  so  that  he  who  ran  might  read  it.  Surely  when  it  was 
so  explicit,  when  it  had  so  manifestly  the  attestation  of  heaven,  man's  evil  pro- 
pensities would  not  dare  to  break  through  its  restraints.  But  the  third  dispensa- 
tion failed,  as  the  two  preceding  ones  had  done.  3.  Subsequently  the  precepts 
of  the  law  were  expanded  and  spiritualised  by  the  prophets,  those  inspired 
preachers  raised  up  in  orderly  succession  to  bear  their  testimony  for  God  in  the 
midst  of  a  crooked  and  perverse  generation.  Still,  man  was  unreclaimed  :  walked, 
as  ever,  in  the  way  of  his  heart,  and  in  the  sight  of  his  eyes.  The  servants  who 
were  sent  to  receive  of  the  fruits  of  the  vineyard  were  sent  away  empty,  beaten, 
stoned,  slain.  5.  A  pause,  during  which  the  voice  of  prophecy  was  hushed,  and 
then  full  of  augury  and  hope,  the  new  dispensation,  with  its  covenant  of  pardoning 
mercy  and  sanctifying  grace,  broke  upon  a  world,  which  had  as  yet  been  stricken 
down  and  foiled  in  its  every  conflict  with  evil.  A  revealed  Saviour,  joining,  in  His 
mysterious  Person,  man  with  God— this  was  the  new  Light.  A  revealed  forgiveness 
through  His  blood,  of  every  transgression— this  was  the  new  encouragement.  A 
revealed  Sanctifier,  who  should  take  up  His  abode  in  the  abyss  of  the  human  will, 
and  there  meet  evil  in  its  earliest  germ— this  was  the  new  strength.  In  the  long- 
suffering  of  God  this  dispensation  is  still  running  its  course.  {Dean  Goulburrt.) 
Divine  providence  a  moral  discipline  .—I.  Let  us  regard  the  text  As  indicating  an 

ENLARGED  EXPERIMENT  UPON   HUMAN   NATURE,  AND  ILLUSTRATING  THE  MORALITY 

OF  Divine  providence.  The  moral  ends  of  providence  are  manifested  —  1.  In 
overruling  the  curse  pronounced  at  the  fall  of  man.  Affliction,  pain,  and  all  the 
various  ills  that  flesh  is  heir  to  are  the  means  of  bringing  men  to  their  right  mind, 
of  showing  them  the  vanity  of  earthly  things,  and  of  maturing  moral  virtues  and 
Christian  graces.  How  few  would  regard  their  spiritual  destitution  but  for  this 
discipline  !  Even  death  itself  is  made  a  moral  blessing.  Its  terrors  lead  men  to 
seek  Christ  and  a  preparation  for  heaven  ;  its  uncertainty  induces  watchfulness. 
2.  There  is  a  moral  lesson  in  the  present  usual  consequences  of  vice  and  virtue. 
The  vices  which  are  most  injurious  to  society  being  poverty  and  shame,  the  virtues 
which  are  most  conducive  to  the  welfare  of  society  are  most  favourable  to  the 
temporal  welfare  of  individuals.  Filthiness  of  the  flesh  usually  has  its  fit  punish- 
ment in  the  diseases  of  the  flesh  ;  filthiness  of  the  spirit,  its  appropriate  penal 
visitation  in  the  disappointments  and  vexations  of  the  spirit.  The  largest  amount 
of  temporal  misery  may  be  traced  to  idleness,  indecision,  improvidence,  and  trans- 
gression. And  * '  neglects  from  inconsiderateness,  not  looking  about  us  to  see  what 
we  have  to  do,  are  often  attended  with  consequences  altogether  as  dreadful,  as  from 
any  active  misbehaviour  from  the  most  extravagant  passion."  The  consequences 
tread  upon  the  heels  of  the  fault ;  and  indeed,  vice  generally  becomes  its  own 
punishment.  3.  Observe,  also,  the  encouragements  which  providence  furnishes  to 
seek  pardon  at  the  hand  of  God.  We  are  sinners,  and  have  forfeited  every  blessing 
and  enjoyment  but  such  things  as  are  essential  to  us  as  accountable  beings — 
necessary  to  endow  us  with  that  responsibility  in  which  the  law  of  God  contem- 
plates us.  Nevertheless,  God  continues  to  us  innumerable  forfeited  blessings  ;  and 
the  continued  bestowment,  notwithstanding  that  they  are  abused,  and  converted 
into  occasions  of  unthankfulness,  or  weapons  of  rebellion,  marks  a  forbearance 
admirably  calculated  to  "lead  men  to  repentance."  II.  The  particular  ends  op 
God's  providential  dispensations  towards  the  Church.  1.  Since  humility  is 
the  proper  counter- working  of  the  fall,  the  first  design  named  by  Moses  is  "  to  humble 
thee."  2.  A  second  great  object  of  the  discipline  of  providence  over  the  Church  is 
here  specified:  "To  prove  thee,  to  know  what  was  in  thine  heart,  whether  thou 
wouldest  keep  His  commandments  or  no."  Not  that  the  principles  and  fluctuating 
feelings  of  the  heart  are  not  fully  known  to  God,  but  that  we  know  not  our  own 
hearts.  It  belongs  essentially  to  probation  that  we  should  be  proved.  Something 
must  ever  be  left  as  a  test  of  the  loyalty  of  the  heart.  Every  day  offers  a  test  to 
some  part  of  our  character.  Some  duty  is  required  which  is  painful  or  disadvan- 
tageous to  our  temporal  interests  ;  or  we  are  placed  in  such  circumstances  that  our 
precise  duty  is  involved  in  considerable  obscurity,  and  requires  patient  thought 
and  a  conscientious  balancing  of  reasons  and  scrutiny  of  motives.  Thus  God 
proves  what  value  we  set  on  acts  of  disobedience  as  such,  and  shows  us  that  our 


262  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  viii 

virtue  is  to  be  estimated  by  the  amount  of  temptation  and  the  difficulties  of 
obedience.     {F.  A.  West.)  The  blessing  of  temptation: — It  is  the  privilege  of 

God's  people  "that  all  things  work  together  for  their  good."  St.  Paul,  when 
speaking  of  this,  speaks  of  it  as  a  certain  and  well-known  truth.  He  does  not  say, 
*' We  know  that  all  things  are  good";  but,  "that  all  things  work  together  for 
good."  Pain  and  sickness,  poverty,  contempt,  provocations,  wrongs  and  injustice, 
these  are  evils  to  the  believer  as  much  as  to  the  unbeliever.  But  though  evil  in 
themselves,  they  work  together  for  his  good  ;  like  the  storms  and  tempests,  the  cold 
frosts  and  piercing  winds — they  are  often  as  necessary  and  useful  to  the  harvest  as 
the  warm  dews  and  gentle  sunshine.  It  was  so  with  God's  Israel  of  old.  The 
words  of  the  text  show  us  this.  It  may  seem  strange  to  the  carnal  ear  to  affirm 
that  temptation  may  be  a  great  blessing  ;  and  even  the  believer,  when  hardly  tried, 
jiiay  scarcely  think  it  can  be  so  ;  yet  it  is  certainly  true  that  temptation  is  a  source 
of  blessing  to  the  real  Christian.  And  thus,  through  the  goodness  and  mercy  of 
Almighty  God,  even  Satan  himself  is  made  an  instrument  of  good  to  His  believing 
people.  1.  We  will  consider  now  God  peoves  us,  and  what  we  are  to  understand 
by  this  part  of  our  subject.  We  at  once  see  that  by  proving  us  the  Lord  must  mean, 
not  the  finding  out  what  we  are,  but  the  showing  it.  Man's  heart  is  not  like  a 
boxed  main-spring  of  a  watch,  all  but  wound  up  from  God's  sight,  as  it  is  from 
ours,  and  of  which  only  a  part  of  the  chain,  a  few  links  now  and  then,  may  be  seen 
moving  across  and  over  it,  as  the  chain  works  round  ;  but  there  is  no  covering  over 
the  main-spring  of  our  hearts  to  God's  eye :  glass  is  transparent,  and  hearts  are 
glass  to  God.  When  God  is  said  to  have  led  His  people  "forty  years  in  the  wilder- 
ness, to  prove  them  and  know  what  was  in  their  heart,"  it  was  to  show  them  and 
others  what  was  in  their  heart,  and  not  to  know  and  find  out  for  Himself.  During 
these  forty  years  He  sufifered  them  to  pass  through  a  variety  of  trials  and  tempta- 
tions, all  calculated  to  prove  and  show  which  among  them  would  keep  His 
commandments,  and  which  would  not.  So  is  it  still  with  the  professing  Church  of 
Christ.  We  must  be  proved  as  Israel  was  ;  for  only  they  that  are  proved  shall  enter 
the  heavenly  rest.  And  temptations  alone  can  prove  us.  Our  honesty  is  proved 
when  we  were  tempted  to  be  dishonest,  and  through  God's  grace  resisted  the 
temptation.  Our  truth  is  proved  when  we  might  have  gained  by  untruth,  and  yet 
were  enabled  to  overcome  the  temptation.  Our  chastity  is  proved  when  the 
allurements  to  sinful  lusts  were  thrown  in  our  way,  and  we  shrank  from  the  snare. 
Our  trust  in  God  is  proved  when  we  were  in  want  or  difficulties.  But  further, 
"They  also  help  to  make  known  what  is  in  our  hearts."  When  God's  grace  first 
comes  into  the  Christian's  soul  it  is  as  when  the  windows  of  some  old  ruined  house, 
long  shut  up  in  dust  and  neglect,  are  opened,  the  light  is  let  in  upon  the  rooms.  It 
is  as  when  those  who  have  undertaken  thoroughly  to  repair  it,  take  up  the  floor, 
and  take  down  the  skirtings,  and  examine  the  timbers,  and  lay  bare  the  drains. 
"Eo  one  could  have  thought,  even  from  the  outward  appearance,  that  such  a  mass 
of  rotten  timber,  such  a  heap  of  dust  and  filth,  and  so  many  vermin,  could  have 
got  together.  And  it  is  not  till  the  work  of  repairing  begins  in  our  hearts  that  we 
b.'gin  to  know  anything  of  their  real  condition.  While  there  is  no  light  of  God's 
Spirit  sliining  in  us,  we  know  nothing  of  our  inward  corruptions.  We  are  like 
persons  long  used  to  the  closo,  foul,  and  unhealthy  air  of  some  sick  room  ;  it  is  not 
till  we  have  left  it,  and  felt  the  freshness  and  sweetness  of  the  air  of  heaven,  that 
we  know  what  the  other  was.  We  cannot  know  what  our  heart  is  till  we  know 
what  is  in  our  heart ;  and  we  cannot  know  what  is  in  our  heart  till  that  which  is 
in  is  drawn  out ;  and  temptation  alone  can  draw  it  out.  It  is  temptation  which 
shows  us  what  is  in  our  hearts — that  brings  out  in  various  ways  the  miserable 
pride  and  self-conceit,  the  hypocrisy  and  dissimulation,  the  vain  self-confidence, 
the  impurity  and  uncleanness,  the  fear  of  man's  shame  and  love  of  man's  praise, 
the  envy  and  jealousy,  and  all  those  other  evil  tempers  and  dispositions  which  are 
in  every  soul  of  man  by  nature,  but  which  man  only  learns  to  know  and  feel  by 
grace  ;  and  the  great  object  of  all  the  various  trials  and  circumstances  through 
which  the  believer  is  made  to  pass,  as  Israel  through  the  wilderness,  is  "to  show 
him  what  is  in  his  heart."  II.  The  effect  of  all  this  is  "to  humble  him." 
The  self-righteous  sinner  is  always  a  proud  man  :  he  has,  indeed,  nothing  to  be 
proud  of,  and  everything  to  be  ashamed  of ;  but  because  he  is  blind  to  his  sins 
and  faults,  blind  to  the  real  character  of  his  heart,  and  ignorant  of  himself,  he  is 
proud.  Now,  no  proud  man  ever  came  to  Christ — no  man  that  thinks  himself 
righteous  ever  came  to  Christ.  He  may  call  himself  a  miserable  sinner ;  but  he 
does  not  feel  or  really  believe  what  he  says.    The  Christian  wishes  to  be  humble ; 


CHAP.  VIII.]  DEUTERONOMY,  263 

but  he  is  not  what  he  wishes  to  be.  He  wishes  *'  to  learn  of  Him  who  is  meek  and 
lowly  of  heart,"  and  be  is  a  learner  in  Christ's  school ;  but  he  is  often  humbled  for 
his  want  of  humility.  Still,  the  growing  experience  of  his  heart  is  humbling  him  : 
he  is  becoming  daily  better  acquainted  with  himself,  and  likes  himself  every  day 
less  and  less.  He  once  thought  that,  excepting  a  few  faults  (and  those  very  few  and 
very  excusable  and  natural),  there  dwelt  in  him  many  good  things.  Now  he  can 
say,  even  from  what  he  already  knows,  "  that  in  him  "  (that  is,  in  his  flesh)  "  there 
dwelleth  no  good  thing."    {TF.  W.  Champneys,  M.A.)  The  moral  discipline  of 

man : — I.  It  is  a  humbling  work.  To  bring  the  soul  down  from  all  its  proud 
conceits,  vain  imaginations,  and  ambitious  aims,  and  to  inspire  it  with  the  pro- 
foundest  sense  of  its  own  moral  unworthiness.  II.  It  is  a  self  revealing  work. 
**The  evil  principle  sleeps  in  the  spirit  as  the  evil  monster  in  the  placid  waters  of 
the  Nile  ;  and  it  is  only  the  hot  sun,  or  the  sweep  of  the  fierce  tempest,  that  can 
draw  or  drive  it  forth  in  its  malignant  manifestations."  III.  It  is  a  Divine  w^ork. 
God  alone  is  the  true  moral  schoolmaster ;  He  alone  can  effectually  discipline  the 
soul.  1.  By  the  dispensation  of  events.  2.  By  the  realities  of  the'Gospel.  3.  By 
His  influence  on  conscience.  IV.  It  is  a  slow  work.  Goodness  is  not  an  impres- 
sion, an  act,  or  even  a  habit ;  it  is  a  character,  and  characters  are  of  slow  growth. 
It  is  a  growth,  and  requires  cultivation — planting,  nourishing,  and  seasonal 
changes.     {Homilist.)  God    ^^ proves"  His  children: — The   suffering   you   see 

around  you  hurts  God  more  than  it  hurts  you,  or  the  man  upon  whom  it  falls. 
But  He  hates  things  that  most  men  think  little  of,  and  will  send  any  suffering 
upon  them  rather  than  have  men  continue  indifferent  to  them.  Mi-n  may  say, 
•*We  don't  want  suffering  :  we  don't  want  to  be  good."  But  God  says,  "  I  know 
My  own  obligations,  and  you  shall  not  be  contemptible  wretches  if  there  be  any 
resource  in  the  Godhead."  The  God  who  strikes  is  the  God  whose  Son  wept  over 
Jerusalem.     {George  Macdonald.)  The  discipline  of  life: — A  touching  story  vA-as 

told  of  a  young  man  whose  mother  and  father  died,  leaving  him  in  the  care  of  a 
guardian.  He  was  put  to  work  at  a  trade,  and  worked  faithfully  for  ye^rs.  When 
he  was  eighteen  a  companion  said  to  him,  "Why  do  you  work  so  hard?  Your 
father  was  rich,  worth  500,000  dols.,  and  your  guardian  is  keeping  the  money." 
The  young  man  then  began  to  entertain  hard  feelings  towards  his  guardian,  and 
stopped  calling  upon  him.  But  he  kept  on  working.  The  day  before  he  was 
twenty-one  he  was  invited  to  take  tea  with  his  guardian  and  his  wife.  Just  before 
supper  his  guardian  called  him  aside  and  said  to  him,  "  Before  your  father  died  he 
asked  me  to  be  your  guardian,  and  to  withhold  from  you  a  knowledge  of  his  circum- 
stances. He  wished  you  to  learn  a  trade  and  to  earn  your  own  subsistence.  I  was^^ 
only  to  assist  you  when  you  were  in  real  need.  He  wished  you  to  acquire  indus- 
trious habits."  The  young  man  was  broken  down.  He  wanted  to  explain.  But 
the  guardian  would  not  permit  it ;  no  explanation  or  forgiveness  was  needed.  So 
we  are  to  pass  through  the  discipline  of  life  patiently,  faithfully,  industriously, 
until  we  enter  into  the  inheritance  above.  That  He  might  humble  thee. — Afflictive 
dispensations  of  providence:— I.  The  afflictive  dispensations  of  providence  are 
intended  to  humble  believers  by  teaching  them  absolute  and  constant 
dependence  on  God  for  everything  that  they  enjoy.  II.  The  afflictive  dis- 
pensations of  providence  are  intended  to  prove  the  sincerity,  and  to  increase  y 
the  strength  of  religion  in  the  heart  of  the  godly.  'Tis  the  battle  that 
tries  the  soldier,  and  the  storm  the  pilot.  How  would  it  appear  that  Christians  can 
be  not  only  patient,  but  cheerful  in  poverty,  in  disgrace,  and  temptations,  and  per- 
secutions, if  it  were  not  often  their  lot  to  meet  with  these  ?  He  that  formed  the 
heart  knows  it  to  be  deceitful,  and  He  that  gives  grace  knows  the  weakness  and 
strength  of  it  exactly.  The  Word  of  God  speaks  to  men  ;  therefore  it  speaks  the 
language  of  men.  "  Now,"  said  the  Lord  to  Abraham,  "  I  know  that  thou  fearest 
God,  seeing  thou  hast  not  withheld  thy  son,  thine  only  son,  from  Me."  In  the 
wisdom  of  God,  believers  are  thus  put  in  possession  of  an  imdeniable  evidence  of  their 
own  sincerity,  and  which  goes  further  to  assure  them  of  their  final  salvation  than  a 
thousand  inward  feelings,  which  are  often  the  effect  of  imagination  alone.  It  is 
of  importance,  besides,  to  observe  that  every  such  trial  is  a  means  not  only  of  prov- 
ing the  reality  of  their  religious  principles,  but  of  confirming  and  increasing  them. 
It  is  with  the  mind  as  with  the  body.  Exercise  and  exertion  increase  its  vigour 
and  strength.  III.  Consider  the  ultimate  desire  and  effect  of  all  these  dis- 
pensations. "To  do  thee  good  at  thy  latter  end."  When  entered  into  heaven. 
their  knowledge  will  be  enlarged  and  perfected  ;  and  what  is  at  present  concealed 
from  them  will  burst  on  their  view  as  a  necessary  part  of  the  discipline  of  grace  ia 


264  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  viii. 

conducting  and  completing  their  everlasting  salvation.  They  will  then  perceive- 
that  by  poverty  they  were  guarded  from  the  dangers  to  which  wealth  would  have* 
exposed  them,  or  that  the  meanness  of  their  station  preserved  them  from  the  snares 
of  ambition,  or  that  sickness  was  the  means  of  correcting  their  tendency  to  the 
pursuit  of  sensual  pleasures  and  worldly  joys.  Penetrating  into  the  counsels  of 
the  Lord,  they  will  see  the  mercy  even  of  His  heaviest  judgments,  and  the  wisdom 
of  His  most  unsearchable  ways.  At  present  they  may  be  in  heaviness  through 
many  tribulations,  but  the  trial  of  their  faith  being  much  more  precious  than  that 
of  gold  which  perish eth,  though  it  be  tried  with  fire,  shall  be  found  to  praise  and 
honour  and  glory  at  the  revelation  of  Jesus  Christ.  (i>.  Dickinson,  D.D.)  The 
design  of  affliction : — There  is  a  twofold  design  of  chastening.  The  first  is  self- 
revelation,  ''to  know  what  was  in  thine  heart."  Some  things  can  only  be  got  at 
by  fire.  There  are  depths  in  our  consciousness  that  nothing  can  sound  but  pain, 
anguish,  bitterness,  sorrow.  And  these  are  not  all  bad  ;  sometimes  pain  works  its 
way  down  to  our  better  nature,  touches  into  gracious  activity  our  noblest  impulses, 
and  evokes  from  our  heretofore  dumb  lips  the  noblest  prayer.  Sometimes  we  see 
further  through  our  tears  than  through  our  laughter.  Many  a  man  owes  all 
that  he  knows  about  himself,  in  its  reality  and  in  its  best  suggestiveness,  not  to 
prosperity,  but  to  adversity  ;  not  to  light,  but  to  darkness.  The  angel  of  trouble 
has  spoken  to  him,  in  whispers  that  have  found  their  way  into  the  inmost  hearing 
of  the  heart.  The  next  design  of  affliction  given  in  this  quotation  is  ' '  whether 
thou  wouldest  keep  His  commandments  or  no."  Obedience  is  the  purpose  which 
God  has  in  view.  There  can  be  no  grand  life  until  we  have  learned  to  obey.  It 
is  good  for  a  man  to  have  to  obey.  It  is  a  continual  lesson,  a  daily  discipline.  He 
gathers  from  it  a  true  consciousness'  of  his  own  capacity  and  his  own  strength,  and 
he  begins  to  ask  questions  of  the  most  serious  intent.  From  the  beginning  God's- 
purpose  was  that  we  should  obey.  You  cannot  obey  in  any  good  and  useful  sense- 
the  spirit  of  evil.  You  only  get  good  from  the  exercise  of  obedience  when  that 
exercise  goes  against  your  own  will  and  chastens  it  into  gracious  submission.  Self- 
revelation  and  filial  obedience — these  are  part  of  God's  design  in  sending  afflictions 
upon  us.  Take  another  explanation:  **I  will  forsake  them,  and  I  will  hide  My 
face  from  them,  and  they  shall  be  devoured,  and  many  evils  and  troubles  shall 
befall  them,  so  that  they  will  say  in  that  day,  Are  not  these  evils  come  upon  us, 
because  our  God  is  not  among  us  ?  "  Sometimes  God's  withdrawments  evoke  from 
the  heart  conscious  of  His  absence  the  most  poignant  and  eager  prayers.  He  says, 
"I  will  go  away  that  they  may  miss  Me."  He  says,  "  I  will  withdraw  and  cause 
the  walls  of  their  security  to  tremble  and  the  roof  of  their  defence  to  let  the  storm 
pour  down  through  it,  in  order  that  they  may  begin  to  ask  great  questions."  He 
will  not  have  us  fretting  the  mind  with  little  inquiries  and  petty  interrogations. 
He  will  force  us  to  vital  questionings:  "Are  not  these  things  come  upon  us 
because  our  God  is  not  among  us?"  "Why  deal  with  symptoms  and  not  with  real 
diseases  ?  Take  another  answer :  **  They  shall  bear  the  punishment  of  their 
iniquity  .  .  .  that  the  house  of  Israel  may  no  more  go  astray  from  Me."  Punish- 
ment— meant  to  bring  men  home  again.  That  is  God's  weapon,  and  you  cannot, 
steal  it.  You  do  wrong,  and  the  scorpion  stings  you.  You  cannot  bribe  the 
scorpion,  or  tame  it,  or  please  it.  Do  w^hat  you  will,  it  is  a  scorpion  still.  You 
say  you  will  eat  and  drink  abundantly,  and  grow  your  joys  in  your  body,  and 
the  blood  saith,  "No!"  And  every  bone  says,  "No!"  And  the  head  and  the 
heart  say,  "  No  !  we  are  God's,  and  not  in  us  shall  you  grow  any  joy  that  is  not  of 
the  nature  of  His  own  purpose  and  will."  The  bones,  the  joints,  the  sinews,  the 
nerves,  the  whole  scheme  of  the  physical  constitution  of  man,  all  fight  for  God. 
What  is  God's  purpose  in  this  ?  To  bring  you  home  again,  and  nothing  else. 
Take  another  statement  of  the  cause  and  purpose  of  God  in  this  matter  of  afflicting 
men  :  "I  will  cause  you  to  pass  under  the  rod,  and  I  will  bring  you  into  the 
bond  of  the  covenant,  .  .  .  there  shall  ye  remember  your  ways,  and  all  your 
doings,  wherein  ye  have  been  defiled  ;  and  ye  shall  loathe  yourselves  in  your  own 
sight  for  all  your  evils  that  ye  have  committed."  There,  again,  is  the  internal 
mystery.  It  is  not  the  heart  that  needs  must  be  revealed.  You  cannot  argue  with 
a  man  who  is  running  down  to  hell  with  the  consent  of  all  his  powers.  Argue  with 
him  !  Your  argument  and  eloquence  would  be  thrown  away  upon  him.  You  must 
so  show  the  evil  of  his  doings  as  to  work  in  the  man  self-loathing.  You  may  show 
him  pictures  of  evil,  and  he  will  gaze  upon  them — nay,  he  will  buy  them  and  hang 
them  up  in  his  rooms  at  home  and  point  them  out  to  his  friends  as  works  of  vigour 
and  power  and  wondrous  artistic  skill.    He  will  not  regard  them  as  mirrors  reflecting; 


•CHAP.  VIII.]  DEUTERONOMY,  265 


his  own  image.     The  work  must  be  done  in  his  soul.     He  must  so  see  evil  as 
to  hate  himself— self-disgust  is  the  begiuning  of  penitence  and  amendment.     We 
all  have  affliction.     Yours  seems  to  be  greater  than  mine ;  mine  may  seem  to  be 
greater  than  yours.     But  let  us  know  that  there  cannot  be  any  affliction  in  our  life 
without  its  being  under  God's  control,  and  He  will  not  suffer  us  to  be  tried  above 
that  we  are  able  to  bear,  and  with  every  trial  He  will  make  a  way  of  escape.     He 
does  not  willingly  grieve  the  children  of  men.      He  is  pruning  us,   cutting  us, 
nursing  us,  purifying  us  by  divers  processes  to  the  end  that  He  may  set  us  in  His 
heavens — princes  that  shall  go  out  no  more  for  ever.     Let  us  next  consider  how 
variously,  as  to  spirit  and  interpretation,  affliction  may  be  received  at  the  hands  of 
God.     By  "affliction"  do  not  narrowly  understand  mere  bodily  suffering,  but  trial 
of  every  kind,  yea,  the  whole  burden  and  discipline  of  life.     We  must  go  to  history 
for  our  illustration,  and,  turning  to  history  for  my  first  illustration,  I  find  that 
the  discipline  of  life  may  be  received  impenitently.     Hear  these  words  in  solemn 
and  decisive  proof:  *'  If  ye  will  not  be  reformed  by  Me  by  these  things,  but  will 
walk  contrary  unto  Me,  then  will  I  also  walk  contrary  unto  you,  and  will  punish 
jou  yet  seven  times  for  your  sins."     I  warn  you,  God  will  not  give  way— God 
cannot  give  way.     The  one  thing  God  can  do  is  to  multiply  your  affliction  seven 
times,  and  to  cover  up  the  arch  of  the  sky  with  a  night  denser  than  has  yet 
blackened  the  firmament.     Turning  to  history  again,  I  find  that  affliction  may  be 
received  self-approvingly  or  self-excusingly,  and  so  may  fail  of  its  benign  purpose. 
The  proof  is  in  these  words  :  "In  vain  have  I  smitten  your  children  ;  they  re- 
eeived  no  correction.  .  .  .  Thou  sayest,  Because  I  am  innocent,  surely  His  anger 
ahall  turn  from  me."     The  correction  has  been  administered,  but  has  not  been 
received.     It  has  been  misunderstood.     It  has  been  taken  in  hardness.     It  has 
been  resented  as  an  injustice.     It  has  been  treated  as  if  it  came  from  an  enemy, 
md  not  from  a  friend.     The  deadly  sophism  of  your  innocence  must  be  rooted  out 
before  you  can  be  cured.     The  Pharisee  must  be  destroyed  before  the  man  can  be 
**ved.     Will  you  understand  that  ?    Turning  again  to  history  for  illustration  and 
-argument,  I  find  that  affliction  may  be  received  self-deceivingly.     The  proof  is  in 
these  words:  "They  have  not  cried  unto  Me  with  their  heart,  when  they  howled 
upon  their  beds."    Heart-crying  is  one  thing,  and  mere  howling  is  another.     Men 
come  to  us  with  sad  stories  of  distress,  and  they  make  long  moans  about  pain  and 
fear,  about  poverty  and  uselessness.     They  use  the  words  which  penitents  might 
iise,  but  not  in  a  contrite  spirit.     It  is  the  flesh  that  complains  ;  it  is  not  the  spirit 
that  repents.     When  a  bad  man  complains  of  his  head,  is  he  complaining  of  his 
:fiin?    Is  he  not  only  waiting  till  he  can  gather  himself  together  again  that  he 
may  renew  the  contest  .^.gainst  heaven,  and  endeavour  to  find  on  earth  a  rc^ot  that 
-was  never  planted  there  ?    One  more  point  there  is  which  I  dare  scarcely  touch. 
How  few  know  that  the  passage  is  in  the  Bible.     It  is  a  passage  that  proves  that 
affliction  may  be  received,  in  the  fourth  place,  despairingly.     Are  there  in  any 
poems  made  by  men  such  words  as  these  ?    Tell  me  if  any  poet  dare  write  such 
words  :  "They  gnawed  their  tongues  for  pain,  and  blasphemed  the  God  of  heaven 
"because  of  their  pains  and  their  sores,  and  repented  not  of  their  deeds."     "My 
soul,  come  not  thou  into  their  secret."     Some  man  wrote  these  words  who  had 
seen  hell.     Do  not  trifle  with  the  idea  of  future  punishment.     Whatever  it  be,  it 
is  the  last  answer  of  Omnipotence  to  rebellious  man.     "It  is  a  fearful  thing  to  fall 
into  the  hands  of  the  living  God."    This  is  not  a  question  to  be  argued.     When 
logician  and  speculist  have  accomplished  their  task  there  remains  the  unexplained 
word — hell!     How  are  we  receiving  our  afflictions?     "Come  now,  let  us  reason 
together."    Ephraim  of  old  was  described  as  a  "bullock  unaccustomed  to  the 
.yoke."     In  some  countries  the  bullock  is  used  for  ploughing  and  for  drawing 
vehicles.     The  poor  ox  is  yoked,  and,  being  unaccustomed  to  the  yoke,  it  chafes 
under  it.     Its  great  shoulders  protest  against  the  violation  of  liberty.     By  and  by 
the  bullock  becomes  accustomed  to  the  treatment,  and  submits  itself  to  the  service 
of  man.     Ephraim  receiving  the  discipline  of  God  was  "  as  a  bullock  unaccustomed 
to  the  yoke."    We  do  not  take  kindly  to  our  troubles,  afflictions,  distresses,  and 
losses.     It  is  not  natural  that  we  should  do  so  ;  but,  seeing  that  we  have  incurred 
them,  we  must  receive  them  at  God's  hand,  and  become  accustomed  to  the  dis- 
-ciplme,  and  eventually  submit  ourselves  to  the  service  of  God,  which  is  the  true 
liberty.     {J.  Parker,    D.D.)         Development  and  discipline :— The  point  of  com- 
parison brought  to  view  in  the  text  is  between  God's  treatment  of  the  Israelites  in 
the  wilderness  and  His  treatment  of  His  peculiar  people— or,  if  you  please    of  all 
xnankmd— in  this  world  of  probation.     I.  We  have  here  God's  providential  treat- 


266  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  viii, 

ment  of  men  in  this  world  set  forth  as  a  process  of  discovery.  "  God  led  them 
forty  years  in  the  wilderness,  to  prove  them,  and  to  know  what  was  in  their  heart." 
"Under  God's  providential  economy  earthly  and  practical  life  is  but  practical  develop- 
ment. Man's  business  on  this  sublunary  platform  is  to  work  out  his  hidden 
character  in  the  face  of  the  universe — to  make  manifest  his  secret  thoughts  even 
in  forms  of  materialism.  The  fashion  of  the  man's  garments,  the  furniture  of  his 
dwelling,  the  pictures  he  hangs  upon  his  walls,  the  volumes  he  places  in  his 
library,  the  places  of  his  favourite  recreation,  the  style  of  men  with  whom  he 
delighte  to  associate ;  yea,  his  very  bearing  as  he  mingles  with  men  and  walks  in 
the  market-place — are  all  but  the  visible  expression  of  the  quality  of  the  thoughts 
and  intents  of  the  heart.  And  this  practical  manifestation  of  character  in  life  is 
with  a  great  Divine  purpose.  In  the  case  of  the  Israelites  it  was  to  show  who,  of 
the  wanderers  in  the  Exodus,  were  proper  men  to  go  over  to  Canaan  ;  and  in  our 
case  it  is  to  show  who,  of  these  dwellers  upon  earth,  are  becoming  meet  for  the 
heavenly  inheritance.  Not  that  God  needs  to  learn  this,  but  that  He  would  have 
His  universe  know  that  He  is  just  when  He  judges  and  clear  when  He  condemns. 
And  this,  this  is  life !  The  development  in  actual  forms  of  the  hidden  things  of 
the  spirit !  This  making  known  to  a  universe  what  there  is  in  the  heart !  Oh, 
then,  how  awfully  solemn  a  thing  it  is  to  live— just  to  live  !  II.  And  it  brings  ns 
to  consider  this  other  providential  design — A  process  of  discipline.  "The  Lord 
God  led  them  forty  years  in  the  wilderness  to  humble  them."  Here,  by  a  common 
scriptural  figure,  the  great  grace  of  humility  is  put  metonymically  for  all  the  dis- 
tinguishing graces  of  Christian  character.  And  the  meaning  is,  that  God  led  them 
about  in  the  wilderness  as  in  a  state  of  pupilage  and  preparation  for  the  civil  and 
ecclesiastical  immunities  of  Canaan.  And  in  illustrating  this  thought  we  only  ask 
you  to  observe  how  earthly  trials  and  affliction  are  the  finest  means  of  sanctifica- 
tion.  You  perceive  at  once,  in  the  case  of  the  Israelites,  that  if  God  had  allowed 
them  to  pitch  a  permanent  encampment  in  some  fair  oasis  of  the  desert,  then, 
instead  of  becoming  more  humble,  they  would  have  waxed  worse  and  worse  in 
arrogance  and  carnality.  And  it  needed  the  burning  sun,  and  the  hot  sand,  and 
the  fiery  serpents,  and  the  constant  assaults  of  the  fierce  men  of  Amalek  and 
Moab  to  humble  them  before  God,  and  make  them  meet  for  a  citizenship  in  the 
theocracy  of  Canaan.  And  so  of  Christians  on  earth — a  moment's  consideration 
will  show  you  how  afflictions  are,  after  all,  the  finest  discipline  of  sanctification. 
Yes,  yes,  it  is  thus  God  sanctifies — He  takes  away  the  earthly,  that  the  heart  may 
rise  to  the  heavenly  ;  He  tears  the  bark  from  its  mortal  moorings,  that  it  may 
launch  forth  toward  the  eternal  haven  ;  He  stirs  up  the  nest  of  the  slumberous 
eagle,  that,  with  exulting  pinion,  it  may  soar  to  the  sun  !  (C,  Wadsworth.)  God's 
training  of  men  : — This  is  the  lesson  of  our  lives.  This  is  God's  training,  not  only 
for  the  Jews,  but  for  us.  We  read  these  verses  to  teach  us  that  God's  ways  with 
man  do  not  change  ;  that  His  fatherly  hand  is  over  us,  as  well  as  over  the  people 
of  Israel ;  that  their  blessings  are  our  blessings,  their  dangers  are  our  dangers ; 
that,  as  St.   Paul  says,  all  these  things  are  written  for  our  example.     I.  *  *  He 

HUMBLED  THEE,  AND  SUFFERED  THEE  TO  HUNGER. "      How  true  to  life  that  is  !      How 

often  there  comes  to  a  man,  at  his  setting  out  in  life,  a  time  which  humbles  him, 
when  his  fine  plans  fail  him,  and  he  has  to  go  through  a  time  of  want  and  struggle  ! 
His  very  want  and  struggles  and  anxiety  may  be  God's  help  to  him.  If  he  be 
earnest  and  honest,  patient  and  God-fearing,  he  prospers — God  brings  him  through  ; 
God  holds  him  up,  strengthens  and  refreshes  him,  and  so  the  man  learns  that  man 
doth  not  live  by  bread  alone,  but  by  every  word  that  proceedeth  out  of  the  mouth 
of  God.  II.  There  is  another  danger  which  awaits  us,  as  it  awaited  those  old 
Jews — THE  DANGER  OF  PROSPERITY  IN  OLD  AGE.  It  is  easy  for  a  man  who  has 
fought  the  battle  with  the  world,  and  conquered  more  or  less,  to  say  in  his  heart, 
as  Moses  feared  that  those  old  Jews  would  say,  **  My  might  and  the  power  of  my 
wit  hath  gotten  me  this  wealth,"  and  to  forget  the  Lord  his  God,  who  guided  him 
and  train^  him  through  all  the  struggles  and  storms  of  early  life,  and  so  to 
become  vainly  confident,  worldly  and  hard-hearted,  undevoted  and  ungodly,  even 
though  he  may  keep  himself  respectable  enough,  and  fall  into  no  open  sin.    III.  Old 

AGE    ITSELF    IS    A   MOST  WHOLESOME    AND   BLESSED   MEDICINE    FOR    THE    SOUL    OF 

MAN.  Anything  is  good  which  humbles  us,  makes  us  feel  our  own  ignorance, 
weakness,  nothingness,  and  cast  ourselves  on  that  God  in  whom  we  live,  and  move, 
and  have  our  being,  and  on  the  mercy  of  that  Saviour  who  died  for  us  on  the  Cross, 
and  on  that  Spirit  of  God  from  whose  holy  inspiration  alone  all  good  desires  and 
igood  actions  come,     {0.  Kingsley,  M.A.) 


CHAP.  VIII.]  DEUTERONOMY.  267 

Vers.  3-6.  He  humbled  thee,  and  suflFered  thee  to  hunger,  and  fed  thee  with 
manna. — The  pilgrims^  grateful  recollections : — I.  Let  rs  pass  in  review  the 
FAVOUES  OF  THE  LoRD,  taking  what  He  did  for  Israel  as  being  typical  of  what  He 
has  done  for  us.  1.  The  first  blessing  mentioned  is  that  of  humbling:  "And 
He  humbled  thee,  and  suffered  thee  to  hunger."  Not  very  highly  esteemed  among 
men  will  this  favour  be ;  and  at  first,  perhaps,  it  may  be  regarded  by  ourselves  as 
being  rather  a  judgment,  one  of  the  terrible  things  in  righteousness,  than  a  great 
favour  from  the  Most  High.  But  rightly  judged,  this  is  one  of  the  most  admirable 
proofs  of  the  Lord's  loving-kindness,  that  He  does  not  leave  His  people  in  their 
natural  pride  and  obstinacy,  but  by  acts  of  grace  brings  them  to  their  right  minds. 
Note  in  the  text,  that  the  humbling  was  produced  by  hunger.  What  makes  a  man 
so  humble  as  to  be  thoroughly  in  want  ?  Oh,  happy  season  when  He  stripped  me 
of  what  I  thought  my  glory,  but  which  were  filthy  rags  !  2.  Notice,  in  the  second 
place,  the  Divine  feeding.  "We  shall  now  see  ourselves  mirrored  in  the  case  of 
Israel  as  in  a  glass.  "He  humbled  thee,  and  suffered  thee  to  hunger,  and  fed 
thee."  How  sweetly  that  follows:  "suffered  thee  to  hunger  and  fed  thee";  the 
light  close  on  the  heels  of  the  darkness.  "  Blessed  are  ye  that  do  hunger  and  thirst 
after  righteousness,  for  ye  shall  be  filled."  That  "and"  in  the  text  is  like  a 
diamond  rivet,  none  can  ever  take  it  out  or  break  it.  "  He  suffered  thee  to  hunger 
and  fed  thee."  He  who  suffers  thee  to  hunger  will  be  sure  to  feed  thee  yet  upon 
the  bountiful  provisions  of  His  grace.  Be  of  good  cheer,  poor  mourning  soul. 
3.  The  third  favour  mentioned  is  the  remarkable  raiment.  "Thy  raiment  waxed 
not  old  upon  thee."  Though  subject  to  the  ordinary  wear  and  tear  incidental  to 
travelling,  their  garments  still  continued  to  be  as  good  at  the  end  of  forty  years  as 
they  were  when  first  they  left  the  land  of  Egypt.  I  believe  that  to  be  what  the  text 
means.  Anyhow,  spii'itually,  it  is  the  case  with  us.  You  cannot  point  me  to  a  stale 
promise  in  all  God's  book,  neither  can  you  find  me  a  worn-out  doctrine.  In  the 
way  of  perseverance  we  have  been  maintained  and  preserved.  Personally  I  admire 
the  grace  which  has  kept  me  in  my  course,  though  assailed  by  many  fierce  tempta- 
tions and  exposed  to  great  perils  in  my  position.  4.  The  next  blessing  for  which 
we  ought  to  be  grateful  is  that  sustained  personal  strength.  Our  spiritual  vigour  has 
not  decayed  during  our  sojourn  in  the  wilderness,  for  it  is  written,  "  Neither  did 
thy  foot  swell."  Up  till  now  you  have  held  on  :  have  confidence.  He  will  keep  you 
still.  Your  foot  has  not  swelled  in  the  way  of  perseverance.  Neither  have  you 
been  lamed  in  the  way  of  service.  Perhaps  you  have  been  called  to  do  much  work 
for  Christ,  yet  you  have  not  grown  tired  of  it,  though  sometimes  tired  in  it ;  still,  you 
have  kept  to  your  labour,  and  found  help  in  it.  So,  too,  your  foot  has  not  swollen 
in  the  way  of  faith.  Such  little  faith  you  had  at  first  that  you  might  well  have 
thought  it  would  all  die  out  by  now.  But  it  has  not  been  so.  God  has  not 
quenched  the  smoking  flax,  nor  broken  the  bruised  reed.  In  addition  to  all  this, 
your  foot  has  not  swollen  in  the  way  of  fellowship.  You  have  walked  with  God, 
and  you  have  not  grown  weary  of  the  holy  intercourse.  Moreover,  your  foot  has 
not  swollen  in  the  way  of  joy.     You  were  happy  young  men  in  Christ  Jesus,  and 

C.  are  happy  fathers  now.  The  novelty  has  not  worn  off,  or  rather  one  novelty 
been  succeeded  by  another,  fresh  discoveries  have  broken  out  upon  you,  and 
Jesus  is  still  to  you  the  dew  of  youth.  He  who  walks  with  God  shall  never 
weary,  though  through  all  eternity  he  continues  the  hallowed  march.  For  all  this 
we  give  to  God  our  thanks  yet  again.  5.  Notice  the  memorable  blessing  of  chastise- 
ment. "Thou  shalt  also  consider  in  thine  heart."  That  unswoUen  foot,  and  that 
unworn  garment,  you  need  not  so  much  value  as  this,  for  this  you  are  specially 
bidden  to  consider,  your  deepest  thoughts  are  to  be  given  to  it,  and,  consequently, 
your  highest  praises.  "  Consider  in  thine  heart,  that  as  a  man  chasteneth  his  son, 
so  the  Lord  thy  God  chasteneth  thee."  I  am  sure  I  have  derived  more  real  benefit 
and  permanent  strength  and  growth  in  grace,  and  every  precious  thing,  from  the 
furnace  of  affliction,  than  I  have  ever  derived  from  prosperity.  II.  The  inference 
FROM  ALL  THIS.  All  this  humbling,  feeding,  clothing,  strengthening,  chastening, 
what  of  it  all ?  "Why  this — "therefore  thou  shalt  keep  the  commandments  of  the 
Lord  thy  God,  to  walk  in  His  ways,  and  to  fear  Him."  Take  the  model  of  the 
text.  1.  Let  your  obedience  be  universal.  Keep  the  commandments  of  the  Lord, 
walk  in  His  ways.  2.  Let  your  obedience  be  entire.  In  nothing  be  rebellious. 
3.  Let  that  obedience  be  careful.  Doth  not  the  text  say,  "Keep  the  command- 
ments," and  doth  not  the  first  verse  say,  "Ye  shall  observe  to  do  "?  Keep  it  as 
though  you  kept  a  treasure,  carefully  putting  your  heart  as  a  garrison  round  it. 
Observe  it  as  they  do  who  have  some  difficult  art,  and  who  watch  each  order  of  the 


268  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vin. 

teacher,  and  trace  each  different  part  of  the  process  with  observant  eye,  lest  they 
fail  in  their  art  by  missing  any  one  little  thing.  Keep  and  observe.  Be  careful  in 
your  life.  Be  scrupulous.  You  serve  a  jealous  God,  be  jealous  of  yourself.  4.  Let 
your  obedience  be  practical.  The  text  says,  **Walk  in  His  ways."  Carry  your 
service  of  God  into  your  daily  life,  into  all  the  minutiae  and  details  of  it.  Whereas 
others  walk  up  and  down  in  the  name  of  their  God,  and  boast  themselves  in  the 
idols  wherein  they  trust,  walk  you  in  the  name  of  Jehovah,  and  glory  always  to 
avow  that  you  are  a  disciple  of  Jesus.  5.  Let  your  obedience  spring  from  principle, 
for  the  text  says,  **  Walk  in  His  ways,  and  fear  Him."  Seek  to  have  a  sense  of  His 
presence,  such  as  holy  spirits  have  in  heaven  who  view^  Him  face  to  face.  Remember 
He  is  everywhere  ;  you  are  never  absent  from  that  eye.  Tremble,  therefore,  before 
Him  with  that  sacred  trembling  which  is  consistent  with  holy  faith.  {C.  H, 
JSpurgeon.)  Man  doth  not  live  by  bread  only. — True  life  .—What  is  the  life  for 
which  we  seek  and  hope  ?  Mere  existence  ?  No.  But  conscious  happiness  —  a 
large  preponderance  of  success  over  disappointment,  and  joy  over  sorrow.  This  is 
what  all  desire  ;  but  they  seek  it  in  different  ways.  Our  text  suggests  two  theories 
of  life ; — the  one,  the  living  by  bread  alone ;  the  other,  by  obedience,  duty,  and 
love,  by  angels'  food,  by  the  manna  that  comes  down  from  heaven.  I.  Man  doth  not 
LIVE  BY  BREAD  ONLY.  Yet  multitudes  think  thus  to  live — by  things  outward  and 
earthly,  by  the  accumulation  of  material,  perishable  objects  of  enjoyment,  or  of 
wealth,  which  can  represent  and  command  them  all.  Can  wealth  sustain  or  comfort 
the  bereaved  husband  or  father  ?  When  the  strong  ties  of  natural  affection  are 
sundered,  is  it  a  solace  to  know  that  they  had  been  gilded  and  jewelled  ?  If 
they  were  not  strengthened  and  sanctified  by  Christian  communion,  by  the  fellow- 
ship of  heaven-seeking  souls — if  the  only  common  interests  have  been  adrdid,  then 
has  the  prosperity  enjoyed  together  left  the  survivor  only  the  heaviOT  burden  of 
remembrances  not  again  to  be  realised,  and  of  joys  for  ever  fled.  II.  What,  then, 
ARE  THE  ELEMENTS  OF  THIS  HIGHER  LIFE  ?  Siuce  man,  spiritually  speaking,  cannot 
live  by  bread  only,  by  what  is  he  to  live  ?  1.  First  by  faith — faith  in,  an  all -seeing 
Father,  whose  sceptre  ruleth  over  all,  and  who,  if  our  hearts  are  His,  will  cause  all 
things  outward  to  work  together  for  our  good — faith  in  a  Redeemer,  who  has  loved 
us  and  given  Himself  for  us  as  our  Saviour  from  sin,  and  our  Guide  to  duty  and 
heaven.  2.  Again,  man,  by  the  appointment  of  God,  is  to  live  by  hope — by  the 
hope  of  heaven,  which  alone  can  anchor  the  soul  amidst  the  fitful  fortunes  of  our 
earthly  pilgrimage.  3.  By  God's  appointment,  we  are  also  to  nourish  our 
souls  by  charity,  by  sympathy  with  our  brethren,  by  bearing  their  burdens 
and  helping  their  joys.  There  can  be  no  life  worth  living  without  brotherly 
love — without  a  ready  heart  and  hand  for  the  needy,  the  suffering,  and  the 
erring.  4.  Finally  our  true  life  must  be  connected  with,  and  flow  from,  the 
testimony  of  a  good  conscience,  which,  if  merited,  no  outward  condition  can 
suppress  or  pervert.  III.  Such  are  the  heaven  -  appointed  means  of  life  and 
growth  within  the  reach  of  all  of  us.  It  is  these  that  our  Saviour  proffers 
TO  us.  They  were  His  peace  and  joy.  They  are  the  fountain  still  flowing  at  the 
foot  of  His  Cross.  Other  streams  there  are,  sparkling,  attractive,  rolling  over  golden 
sands  and  beneath  a  brilliant  sky  ;  yet  there  is  a  voice  in  their  murmur,  ever  saying, 
— *'  He  that  drinks  of  us  shall  thirst  again,  and  thirst  as  often  as  he  comes  to  draw." 
But  from  the  mountain  of  the  beatitudes,  and  again  from  the  olive-shade  of  Geth- 
semane,  and  from  the  darkness  and  agony  of  Calvary,  I  hear  the  voice, — "If  any 
man  thirst  let  him  come  unto  Me  and  drink,  and  the  water  that  I  will  give  him 
shall  be  in  him  a  well  of  water  springing  up  unto  everlasting  life."  (A.  P.  Pedbody.) 
The  food  of  wun :  —If  this  be  true,  what  a  strange  comment  on  it  is  the  world 
around  us  at  this  hour  !  Turn  to  what  class  of  our  countrymen  you  like,  and  in 
every  variety  of  expression  upon  their  countenance  you  will  see  written  deep  their 
conviction,  in  every  changeful  accent  of  their  voices  you  will  hear  uttered  their 
practical  belief,  that  they  can  live  by  bread  alone.  It  is  for  bread — using  "bread  " 
in  the  largest  sense  as  meaning  all  material  things — that  men  toil,  and  exhaust 
their  finest  energies.  And  as  statesmen,  and  philosophers,  and  priests  behold 
these  things,  each  comes  forward  with  his  gospel  for  mankind,  I.  First,  we  have 
the  "gospel  of  education."  Let  us  take  care  that  each  child  learns  the  elementary 
principles  of  knowledge,  and  we  may  hope  that  the  coming  generation  shall  have 
a  higher  idea  of  national  and  of  social  life.  Well,  certainly  the  very  last  persons 
in  England  to  depreciate  the  blessings  of  secular  instruction  are  the  clergy. 
But  let  not  educational  enthusiasts  think  because  they  have  provided  partially 
against  material  deterioration  that  they  have  discovered  a  moral  cure.     It  may 


CHAP.  VIII.]  DEUTERONOMY,  269 


change  the  form  of  crime ;  it  will  not  touch  the  root  from  which  it  springs. 

II.  We  have  then  from  others  the  message  of  the  philosophers.  "  Let  us  eat  of 
this  tree,  and  live  for  ever."  Now,  while  we  gladly  acknowledge  all  the  past 
successes  of  science  and  of  philosophy,  and  while  we  thankfully  receive  every  new 
discovery  as  a  further  revelation  of  the  wisdom  and  the  love  of  the  Creator,  we 
say  this  is  not  the  bread  of  life  for  sorrowing,   sinning  humanity.     This  is  no 

fospel  for  all  mankind.  Clad  in  the  purple  of  her  pride,  and  the  white  linen  of 
er  fine-spun  theories,  philosophy's  few  cultured  friends  may  fare  sumptuously 
every  day  in  her  high  hall  of  state ;  but  humanity,  like  Lazarus,  with  hunger  in 
its  soul,  and  its  body  covered  with  festering  sores  of  sin,  lies  helpless  at  her  gate. 

III.  The  more  experience  I  have,  the  more  deeply  I  am  persuaded  that  the  power 
to  accomplish  it  is  the  preaching  of  a  personal  crucified  Christ.    That— the  .. 
incarnate  Word  of  God— is  still  and  ever  the  bread  by  wliich  nations  and  men 
must  live.     It  was  not  a  new  science,  it  was  not  an  advanced  thought,  it  was  not 
an  improved  philosophy,  it  was  not  a  merely  exalted  morality,  it  was  not  the  idyllic 
life   of  a   Galilean  peasant,  that  men  preached  in  the  early  days,  in  the  purple 
dawn  of  Christianity,   and  by  the  preaching  of  it  shook  the  Empire  and  revolu- 
tionised the  world.     And  it  is  not  by  any  such  means,  or  by  anything  which 
appeals  exclusively  to  the  intellect;  nay,  not  even  by  a  vague  ''accommodating 
theology"  with  no  doctrinal  articulation— which,  ix>lype-like,  floats  on  the  tides 
of  human    thought,   rising  as    they  rise,    falling  as  they  fall  — that  men  and 
nations  can  be  saved  now.     It  is  as  of  old— by  the  preaching  of  the  Word,  Jesus 
Christ,   and   Him  crucified.     "I  am  the  Bread  of  Life,"  said  Christ.     {T.  T. 
Shore,  M.A.)        The  staff  of  life:— I.  We  are  to  consider  what  our  peril  is.     In  , 
one  word,  it  is  the  peril  of  an  over-mastering  materialism.      Look  on  England  i 
to-day,    the  England  that  speaks    to    us    through    Liverpool    and    Manchester,   | 
through  Cabinet  and  Parliament,  her  stout  hand  not  upon  her  heart  but  upon   | 
her  pocket,  cold  towards  us,  sneeringly  indifl'erent  to  the  triumph  of  law,  order,    j 
and  right,  anxious  only  about  the  cargoes  of  cotton,  which  are  to  feed  her  whirling 
spindles.     Tell  us,  ye  British  statesmen,  tell  us,  ye  sordid  sons  of  heroic  sires,  are 
Constitutions  only   parchment?    Are  nations    only    herds  of   farmers,   artisans, 
and   traders?    Is   chartered   freedom   only  sounding    rhetoric?     Is  duty  only  a 
name  ?     Is  honour  dead  ?    And  is  there  nothing  for  us,  in  this  nineteenth  century, 
but  to  delve  and   spin  and  trade,  to  clutch   and  hoard,  to  eat  and  drink,  and 
bloat  and  rot  and  die,  and  make  no  sign?    II.  What  our  deliverance  must 
be.     Deliverance  is  what  we  want ;  not  mere  respite,  lifting  the  agony  from  our 
spirits  to  lay  it  over  upon  our  children  ;  deliverance,  complete  and  final.     What 
avails  it  in  a  raging  fever,  rapidly  nearing  its  crisis,  that  we  comfort  ourselves 
with  cooling  drinks,    while  the  disease  is  striking  boldly  at  our  vitals  ?     It  is 
written  in  God's  Word,  and  written  in  all  the  history  of  the  race  :  "  Man  shall  not  , 
live  by  bread  alone,  but  by  every  word  that  proceedeth  out  of  the  mouth  of  God."  \ 
Such  is  the  Divine  regimen  for  the  nations.     They  live,  if  they  live  at  all,  by  no   \ 
felicity  of  position,  soil,  or  climate,  by  no  abundance  of  material  good,  but  by  the    .; 
living  word  of  the  living  God.     Work  we  must,  and  shall,  and  should.     And  work    \ 
will  bring  us  wealth.     And  wealth  will  bring  us  power.     What  then  ?    Need  ^' 
wealth  be  idolised,  or  spent  upon  our  lusts  ?    Need  power  be  vaunted  and  abused  ? 
If  so,    we    perish,    as  Tyre  and   Sidon   perished ;    perish,    as   Carthage  perished ; 
perish,    as,   according  to  the   Indian   legend,   the  last  of  our  gigantic  mastodons 
perished,  smitten  down  by  the  thunderbolt  of  the  Great  Spirit.     Thank  God,  it 
need  not  be  so.     Nor  is  it  our  task  to  lay  our  feeble,  ineffectual  finger  upon  this 
vast  revolving  wheel,  which  carries  the  whole  machinery  of  our  earthly  life,  and 
bid  it  pause.     It  is  not  our  task  to  slay  this  giant  of  our  material  prosperity,  and 
stretch  his  huge  corpse  out  across   the   continent.     Ours  is  the  far  grander  task 
of  teaching  the  giant  wisdom,  and  subduing  his  earth-born  energies  to  Him  who 
has  told  us  that  "Man  shall  not  live  by  bread  alone."     How,  then,  shall  men  and 
nations  live  ?     "  By  every  word  that  proceedeth  out  of  the  mouth  of  God"  ;  so 
reads  our  text.     The  Hebrews  in  the  desert  had  no  need  of  bread  ;  they  were  fed 
with  manna  from  the  skies.     But  our  Lord  proved  that  there  was  no  need  even 
of  manna.     It  was  enough  for  Him,  as  the  Son  of  Man,  that  He  had  faith  in  God. 
On  this  He  feasted,  while  He  fasted,  the  forty  days.     It  was  God's  commandment, 
which  He  obeyed  in  fasting,  and  this  commandment,  thus  obeyed  in  faith,  was 
the  bread  He  ate.     The  commandments  of  God,  then,  are  the  bread  of  life  for  the 
nations.     If  a  Christian  people,  then  we  must  be  loyal  to  our  calling,  baptising  our 
unexampled  material  prosperity  into    the    name  of  Christ,   and  dedicating  our 


270  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap,  viil 


wealth,  with  a  wise  and  eager  generosity,  to  Christian  uses.     {R.  D.  Eitchcock,  D.D.) 
Bread  for  the  hungry ;— I.  Let  us,  that  we  may  get  the  meaning  of  this  text  with 
regard  to  providence,  reflect  upon  the  children  of  Israel  in  the  wilderness.     God 
has  proved  by  miracle,  that  although  He  chooses  to  act  usually  according  to 
certain  rules,  and  nourish  the  body  with  bread  and  with  meat,  yet  He  is  not  tied 
to  rules,  but  is  absolute  King  and  Master,  and  can  do  as  He  wills  ;  and  even  in  the 
subtle  processes  by  which  food  is  digested  and  assimilated  to  the  flesh  and  blood, 
and  bone  and  sinew,  He  can  work  without  the  means  of  ordinary  chemistries.     He 
can  dissolve  without  alembics,  and  fuse  without  crucibles.     But  you  say,  "  Ah ! 
but  that  cannot  concern  us,  for  He  never  works  miracles  now."    Ay,  but  I  reply, 
it  is  most   marvellous  for  God  to  be  able  to  do  a  miraculous  thing  without  a 
miracle.     I  have  seen  many  miracles,  which  were  not  miracles,  but  yet  all  the 
more   miraculous.     The   poor  have  lacked   bread ;   stones  were  not  turned  into 
bread   for  them,  but  they  had  their  bread  as  much  by  miracle  as  if  rocks  had 
crumbled  into  food.     We  have  seen  the  poor  merchant  reduced  to  distress,  and  he 
said,  "Now  I  cannot  see  any  hope  for  me.     God  must  rend  His  heavens,  and  put 
His  hand  through  the  very  windows  to  deliver  me."     No  heavens  were  rent,  but 
the  deliverance  came.     Now,  the  Lord  can  this  day  without  a  miracle  work  such  a 
miracle  that  we  shall  have  all  our  wants  supplied,  for  "man  doth  not  live  by  bread 
alone,  but  by  every  word  that  proceedeth  out  of  the  mouth  of  God."    You  have 
heard  the  story  of  the  martyr  who  was   condemned   to   die.     The  judge  said 
railingly :  "You  will  be  in  prison.     I  shall  make  you  no  allowance  for  food,  and 
what  can  your  God  do  for  you  ?    How  can  He  feed  you  ?  "     '*  Why,"  said  the  poor 
prisoner,  "  if  He  wills  it,  He  can  feed  me  from  your  table  "  :  and  it  was  so,  though 
unknown  to  his  cruel  judge  ;  for  until  his  day  of  burning  came,  the  wife  of  the 
judge,  touched  with  sympathy,  always  secreted  food  and  fed  him  abundantly  even 
from  the  persecutor's  board.     IL  The  spiritual  bearing  of  the  text.     Man  shall 
not  live  by  bread  alone  ;  that  does  but  nourish  the  mere  coarse  fabric  of  clay  ;  he 
lives  by  every  word  which  proceedeth  out  of  the  mouth  of  God — that  nourishes 
the  immortal  spirit ;  that  sustains  the  heavenly  flame  which  God  has  put  there  by 
the  work  of  regeneration  and  conversion.     1.  The  text  speaks  of  a  hunger  and  of 
its  consequences.     Very  many  of  you  understand  what  this  hunger  means.     There 
was  a  time  when  the  world  suited  us  well  enough.     But  suddenly  God  put  a  new 
life  into  us  ;  we  knew  not  how.     The  first  evidence  we  had  of  that  life  was  that 
we  began  to  hunger ;  we  were  not  satisfied  ;  we  were  unhappy.     The  soul  was 
conscious  of  sin,  and  himgered  for  pardon ;  conscious  of  guilt,  and  hungered  for 
purity ;  conscious  of  absence  from  God,    and  hungered  and   thirsted  after   His 
presence.     (1)  Now,  speaking  of  that  hunger,  you  know  that  it  was  a  most  painful 
thing  when  first  we  knew  it.     It  was  so  painful  to  some  of  us  that  we  could  not 
rest.     We  wanted  Christ.     (2)  Then  that  hunger,  moreover,  was  utterly  insatiable 
—nothing  could  stop  it.     Friends  said,   "You  must  take  worldly  amusement." 
The   legalist  said,    "You  must   perform   such   and   such   duties";   it  was   like 
attempting  to  fill  a  soul  with  bubbles.     Still  our  hunger  cried,  "Give,  give,  give 
us  something  more  substantial,  more  Divine  than  this."     (3)  Next,  this  hunger 
is  impetuous.     Sometimes  it  will  come  at  inconvenient  seasons.     Henry  Smith — 
an  old  preacher  at  St.  Paul's  Cross,   preaching  upon  the  text :    *  *  As  new-born 
babes  desire  the  sincere  milk  of  the  Word  that  ye  may  grow,  thereby  "—observes, 
*  "When  hunger  assails  infants,  they  neither  regard  leisure,  nor  necessity,  nor 
willingness  of  their  mothers,  but  all  excuses  and  business  set  apart,  so  soon  as 
they  cry  for  food  they  must  be  fed."     So  it  is  with  a  man  who  has  begun  to  feel 
the  need  of  Christ.     2.  Notice,  the  heavenly  bread  and  its  surprising  excellency. 
This  bread,  you  see,  is  the  Word  of  God.     Now,  the  Word  is  given  to  us  first  here 
in  the  Bible,  as  it  is  written  ;  it  is  given  to  us,  secondly,  from  the  lips  of  God's 
own  chosen  and  appointed  ambassadors.     He  that  despises  either  of  these  two, 
will  soon  find  himself  growing  lean  in  spirit.     But  now,  why  is  it  that  we  need 
this  food  at  all  ?    I  answer  first,  we  need  it  to  sustain  the  life  which  we  have 
received.     As  life  spiritual  depends  upon  God  to  give  it,  so  upon  God  to  sustain 
it.     Only  He  who  makes  us  Christians  can  keep  us  so.     We  need  this  Divine 
food  not  only  to  keep  us  barely  alive,  but  to  make  us  grow.     Besides,  this  food 
is  necessary  to  strengthen  us  wlien  we  have  grown  up.     How  can  we  wonder  that 
a  man  is  weak  if  he  does  not  eat  ?    It  is  no  wonder  if  Christians  find  themselves 
weak  in  prayer,  weak  in  suff'ering,  weak  in  action,  weak  in  faith,  and  weak  in  love, 
if  they  neglect  to  feed  upon  the  Word  of  God.     Moreover,  we  need  to  have  spiritual 
food  also  for  our  joy  as  well  as  for  our  strength.     How  often  do  you  see  a  man 


CHAP.  VIII.]  DEUTERONOMY,  271 

sad  and  troubled,  who,  if  he  had  sufficient  sustenance,  would  soon  have  sparkling 
eyes  and  a  shining  face  !  Many  Christians,  I  do  not  doubt,  are  very  low  and 
miserable  because  they  do  not  feed  upon  the  Word.  Are  you  starving  your  souls  ? 
If  so,  tliere  is  no  wonder  that  your  joys  are  dead,  and  hang  their  heads  like 
withered  things.  I  trust  many  of  us  know  what  it  is  to  feed  to  the  full  upon  the 
Word  of  God.  And  do  you  not  bear  me  witness  that  it  is  rich  food  ?  3.  A  great 
privilege  involving  a  consequent  duty.  We  have  been  made  to  eat  manna,  as 
angels'  food  which  we  did  not  know.  It  was  far  above  our  carnal  judgments,  yet 
they  who  feared  the  Lord  said  it  was  like  wafers  made  with  honey.  Israel  found 
it  to  be  very  sweet,  and  indeed  it  is  said  by  the  Rabbis  that  the  manna  had  such 
a  peculiarity  about  it,  that  it  was  always  the  flavour  that  a  man  wished  it  to  be, 
and  I  think  it  is  very  much  so  with  Gospel  preaching ;  if  a  man  chooses  it  to  be 
disagreeable  to  him,  it  will  be  ;  but  if  he  desires  it  to  be  sweet  to  him,  it  will  be  ; 
he  will  be  sure  to  be  fed  if  he  wants  to  be  fed.  For  so  is  it  with  the  precious 
Book ;  very  much  of  its  flavour  is  in  our  own  mouths,  and  when  our  mouths  are 
out  of  taste,  we  think  the  Bible  has  lost  its  savour.  It  is  often  your  ears  that  are 
to  blame,  not  the  preacher ;  do  not  be  so  quick  to  blame  him,  but  be  a  little  more 
rapid  in  examining  yourself.  "Neither  did  our  fathers  know."  By  nature, 
however  much  we  may  respect  them,  they  are  no  better  than  ourselves,  and  they 
knew  nothing  about  this  subtle,  mysterious,  munificent  way  by  which  God  supplies 
the  needs  of  the  souls  of  His  people.  Well  now,  if  God  has  given  us  such  food  as 
this,  I  think  the  least  thing  we  can  do  is  to  go  and  gather  it.  (C  H.  Spurgean.) 
The  true  life  of  man: — This  passage  is  composed  of  two  propositions,  a  negative 
and  an  aflSrmative.  The  verb  is  the  same  in  both,  and  therefore  can  only  have  ona 
and  the  same  meaning  in  both  propositions.  The  first  taken  literally  is  an  obvious 
truism.  The  second,  taken  literally,  is  unintelligible.  That  man  cannot  live  by 
"bread  alone  is  patent  to  all.  At  least  two  more  substances  are  needful  for  exist- 
ence, namely,  air  and  water.  Kor  can  air,  water,  and  bread  alone  suffice  for  human 
life.  Man  must  undergo  some  exertion  in  order  to  derive  nourishment  from  the  air, 
water,  and  bread,  and  he  needs  likewise  to  sleep  and  to  have  shelter  or  else  he  will 
die.  As  man  rises  in  the  scale  of  being,  many  more  things  become  necessary  to  life 
which  a  primitive  savage  never  thought  of.  The  second  proposition,  ' '  Man  doth 
live  by  every  word  that  proceedeth  out  of  the  mouth  of  the  Lord,"  taken  literally, 
is  manifestly  unintelligible.  We  can  understand  that  bread  eaten  and  assimilated 
is  one  of  the  many  things  required  to  support  human  life,  but  in  no  sense  can  we 
understand  the  process  of  eating  and  assimilating  to  be  applied  to  any  words  human 
or  Divine.  The  second  proposition  is  therefore  so  manifestly  figurative  that  the 
literal  interpretation  must  be  abandoned.  And  if  the  second  proposition  be  figura- 
tive, so  likewise  must  be  the  first ;  for  the  verb  which  gives  meaning  to  the  second 
is  the  same  in  both.  The  key  to  the  meaning  of  the  passage  lies  in  the  sense  given 
to  the  verb  "live  "  and  to  the  phrase  "every  word  that  proceedeth  out  of  the  mouth 
of  the  Lord."  The  author  used  this  term  "  live"  in  a  very  exalted  sense.  It  was 
much  more  than  mere  existence.  We  all  know  what  kind  of  torpid,  stupid  life 
we  mean  to  describe  by  the  term  "to  vegetate"  ;  a  life  of  motionless,  passionless 
inactivity — mere  existence  without  exertion,  without  animation.  A  higher  life  than 
this  belongs  in  common  to  all  animals  ;  but  a  mere  animal  life  was  not,  I  think, 
what  the  author  intended  when  he  said  "man  cannot  live  by  bread  alone."  Just 
as  we  use  the  term  "vegetate"  to  express  inactivity,  so  we  use  the  term 
"animalism"  to  express  a  brutish  kind  of  life  of  which  selfish  indulgence  is  the 
alpha  and  omega.  The  life  of  man  is  something  higher  than  the  life  of  the  beast, 
and  cannot  be  sustained  by  the  mere  supply  of  animal  wants.  Taking  the  word 
"bread"  to  embrace  typically  eveiy  possible  object  needful  for  animal  sustenance, 
vigour,  and  enjoyment,  man  wants  for  his  life  much  more  than  bread.  Man  cannot 
live  by  bread  alone.  If  he  lives  by  bread  alone,  he  has  either  never  been  a  man  at 
all  or  has  ceased  to  be  a  man,  he  is  only  an  animal.  And  this,  I  venture  to  say,  is 
one  lesson  that  has  to  be  re-learnt  in  our  own  times.  Whether  things  were  worse 
or  better  in  times  that  are  gone,  one  thing  is  most  obvious  now.  Many  men  and 
women  are  steeped  in  the  notion  that  it  is  only  by  bread  that  man  can  live  and  by 
nothing  else — that  is  to  .say  that  their  whole  lives  depend  upon  the  constant  and 
adequate  supply  of  those  things  which  go  to  furnish  animal  health,  animal  strength, 
animal  spirits,  and  general  animal  enjoyment ;  that  this  earthly  bread  is  aU  they 
ever  want,  or  all  that  they  need  ever  seek ;  that  when  these  things  are  provided, 
the  rest  of  everything  can  go  to  the  wall,  and  the  kingdom  of  God  along  with  it. 
Too  often  parents  by  precept  or  example  instil  this  animalism  into  the  minds  of 


272  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  tiii. 

their  children,  impressing  it  upon  them  by  word  and  deed  that  their  first  and  last 
duty  in  life  is  to  get  all  they  can  ;  or  else  they  tacitly  acquiesce  in  their  children's 
downward  tendency  and  take  no  pains  to  eradicate  their  selfishness  or  to  cultivate 
within  them  higher  pursuits.  It  takes  little  from  the  sadness  of  this  outlook  to 
know  that  in  a  very  large  measure  the  state  of  society  in  which  we  live  is  very  much  to 
blame  for  much  of  this  concentration  on  earthly  good.  On  the  one  hand  competition 
and  the  struggle  for  existence  has  made  it  very  hard  for  some  people  to  live  at  all, 
and  on  the  other  hand  luxurious  habits  have  not  only  grown  in  number  but  have 
gradually  taken  their  place  in  the  category  of  the  necessaries  of  life.  The  wisdom 
of  the  Stoic  which  commended  the  restraint  of  desire  as  a  means  of  conferring 
happiness  is  now  all  but  forgotten  ;  and  parents  and  children  together  seem  to  act 
as  if  the  attainment  of  desired  objects  was  the  whole  secret  of  happiness,  and  the 
multiplication  of  gratified  wishes  led  only  to  satisfaction.  It  is  a  wonder  they  do  not 
see  that  the  more  we  have  the  more  we  want ;  it  is  feeding  the  disease  of  longing  to 
gratify  wish  after  wish  ;  and  I  must  add  it  is  cruelty  to  the  young  to  let  them  grow 
up  with  the  idea  that  the  true  happiness  of  man's  life  consists  in  getting  all  we 
want  and  having  our  own  way.  If  the  course  of  Divine  Providence  with  Israel  be 
any  guide  to  parents  in  the  training  of  their  children — and  I  think  it  is  entitled  to 
that  place  by  those  words,  "Thou  shalt  remember  in  thine  heart  that  as  a  man 
chasteneth  his  son,  so  the  Lord  thy  God  chasteneth  thee" — we  may  well  lay  to 
heart  that  to  deny  our  children  some  longed-for  pleasure,  to  submit  them  to  mild 
privations  and  to  disappoint  them  in  the  execution  of  their  will  is  to  be  following  a 
Divine  example  which  seeks  the  truer,  higher,  and  more  enduring  happiness  of  His 
children  by  the  temporary  infliction  of  some  needful  chastisement.  But  no  parent 
can  do  this  with  judgment  or  moderation,  or  can  conduct  the  process  of  disappoint- 
ing his  children's  wishes  properly  unless  he  has  learnt  for  himself  the  lesson,  "Man 
cannot  live  by  bread  alone,"  unless  he  knows  by  experience  that  his  life  in  its  truest 
sense  "does  not  consist  in  the  abundance  of  things  which  he  possesseth,"  but  that 
his  troubles  and  cares  have  been  part  of  his  most  valuable  treasure,  and  that  his 
life  has  been  enriched  more  often  by  what  he  has  lost  than  by  what  he  has  gained. 
And  this  brings  us  to  consider  what  is  meant  by  the  assertion  of  the  text  that 
"man  doth  live  by  every  word  that  proceedeth  out  of  the  mouth  of  the  Lord."  This 
phrase  becomes  intelligible  to  us  the  moment  we  understand  what  is  meant  by  the 
term  "live."  The  truest  and  highest  life  of  man  is  not  mere  existence,  nor  the 
fullest  enjoyment  of  his  physical  nature,  but  the  highest  exercise  of  his  noblest 
functions  as  a  moral  and  spiritual  being,  as  a  member  of  the  great  brotherhood  of 
mankind,  as  a  child  of  God.  From  such  an  elevation,  the  wants  and  cares  of  this 
lower  life  lose  much  of  their  overwhelming  importance.  Gains  and  losses  are  less 
felt  as  changes  in  the  atmospheric  pressure  upon  the  soul.  Daily  bread  is  no 
longer  regarded  as  the  sum-total  of  aspiration,  as  the  sustenance  of  a  heaven-born 
spirit.  In  the  devout  language  of  Job,  "I  have  esteemed  the  words  of  His  mouth 
more  than  my  necessary  food."  Now  to  live  such  a  life  we  must  not  be  content 
with  bread,  or  with  the  most  ample  supply  of  all  our  physical  wants,  but  we  can 
only  live  it  by  the  word  of  God,  i.e.  by  following  the  higher  law  of  our  being,  by 
seeking  for  and  finding  all  possible  truth,  by  acting  in  harmony  with  the  known 
laws  of  Nature  and  with  the  known  laws  of  human  nature  which  are  moral  and 
spiritual  as  well  as  physical.  If  we  but  endeavour  to  have  God  in  all  our 
thoughts,  to  set  God  always  before  us,  then  our  life  will  be  a  human  life,  and  not 
the  life  of  the  vegetable  or  the  life  of  the  beast  that  perisheth.  Why,  even  for  the 
perfection  of  our  lower  life— the  purely  physical — we  must  attain  to  the  knowledge 
of  God's  good  laws,  and  follow  them  faithfully,  or  else  the  bread  of  life  vrill  fail  to 
nourish  us  ;  all  its  thousand  embellishments  will  destroy  and  not  promote  our 
happiness.  How  much  more,  then,  must  we  seek,  in  active  obedience  to  His 
good  laws,  that  perfection  of  moral  and  spiritual  health  in  which  alone  the 
highest  life  of  man  consists!  It  still  holds  good  that  "he  that  seeketh  his 
life  shall  lose  it,  and  he  that  loseth  his  life  the  same  shall  find  it."  Para- 
doxical as  it  may  sound,  the  law  of  self-denial  for  the  well-being  and  com- 
fort of  others  is  the  only  condition  in  which  our  own  well-being  and  comfort 
are  attainable,  or  when  attained  can  be  made  enduring.  (C.  Voysey,  M.A.) 
Spiritual  food : — A  few  years  ago  died,  at  one  of  the  missionary  stations  of  India, 
a  native  called  Brindelbund.  He  had  spent  sixty  or  seventy  years  in  the  service 
of  Satan.  Talking  to  his  Hindoo  brethren,  he  would  say,  "And  whom  do  you 
need  but  Him  whom  I  have  found  ? "  He  would  take  his  wallet  of  books,  and 
travel  two  or  thr^e  hundred  miles  to  distribute  them  ;  and  this  he  did  for  fourteen. 


CHAP.  VIII.]  DEUTERONOMY.  27$ 


or  fifteen  years.  Mrs.  Chamberlain,  in  his  last  days,  would  go  to  his  bedside,  and 
say,  "  Brindelbund,  shall  I  get  you  some  tea  ?  Can  you  eat  bread  ? "  He  would 
lay  his  hand  on  the  New  Testament ;  "  Sister,  this  is  my  tea— this  is  my  bread  ; 
man  was  not  made  to  live  by  bread  alone,  but  by  every  word  that  proceedeth  out 
of  the  mouth  of  God."  How  valuable  the  Gospel,  which  can  thus  give  happiness 
to  a  man  who  had  spent  the  greater  part  of  his  life  in  the  slavery  of  idolatry  • 
Feeding  on  the  Word:— In  her  autobiography  the  late  Frances  Ridley  Havergai 
says  that  after  giving  up  her  soul  to  the  Saviour,  "  For  the  first  time  my  Bible 
was  sweet  to  me,  and  the  first  passage  which  I  distinctly  remember  reading  in 
a  new  and  glad  light  was  the  fourteenth  and  following  chapters  of  St.  John's 
Gospel.  I  read  them  feeling  how  wondrously  loving  and  tender  they  were,  and 
that  now  I  too  might  share  in  their  beauty  and  comfort."  In  this  statement  we 
have  the  secret  of  that  lady's  symmetrical  piety  and  eminent  usefulness.  As  she 
began  her  spiritual  life  by  feeding  it  on  the  Divine  Word,  so  she  continued.  She 
made  it  her  daily  bread.  By  reading  it  constantly,  by  meditating  upon  it,  by 
implicitly  believing  it,  by  praying  for  light  upon  it,  and  by  claiming  its  promises 
as  her  own,  she  learned  to  see  and  to  know  God,  and  to  possess  in  very  large 
measure  that  "eternal  life"  which  consists  in  knowing  Him.  Hers  was,  there- 
fore, a  Scriptural  piety.  Her  faith  pushed  its  roots  deep  into  God's  Word.  And 
whoever  wishes  to  be  truly  and  actively  pious,  must,  like  her,  nourish  his  heart 
with  Scripture  truth,  since  no  Christian  ever  did,  or  ever  can,  attain  deep  piety 
who  does  not  learn  to  sip  sweetness  from  God's  words  as  bees  suck  honey  from 
the  flowers  of  the  field.  SpiriHal  assimilation :— In  a  town  in  Japan  I  once 
wanted  to  hold  a  meeting  in  the  hotel,  but  only  two  fishermen  came.  I  entered 
into  conversation  about  Christ  and  His  salvation  with  them  instead  of  preaching. 

I  told  them  that  all  men  were  descended  from  one  pair,  the  present  difference  in 
the  appearance  of  the  people  in  separate  countries  being  caused  by  the  climate, 
food,  and  water.  One  of  the  men  replied,  "I  understand  it  is  just  the  same  with 
fish  ;  if  they  feed  on  green  seaweed  they  become  green  themselves."  It  is  the 
same  with  Christians,  if  they  read  and  meditate  upon  the  Word  of  God,  they  will 
become  like  God.  If  they  follow  the  world  and  feed  upon  its  pleasures,  then 
they  will  become  like  the  world,  and  no  one  will  see  the  difference  between  them 
and  those  who,  without  disguise,  are  on  the  way  to  perdition.  {R.  Davison.) 
Living  by  bread  alone  .-—What  is  it,  therefore,  to  live  by  bread  alone  ?  Let  us 
contemplate  the  present  age.  Behold  a  workman  of  the  fields  always  looking 
down  upon  his  plough,  and  who  never  gives  himself  time  to  look  up  towards  the 
heaven  whence  fertility  descends ;  behold  a  workman  of  the  town  for  whom  all 
days  are  alike,  and  who  quits  his  trade  only  for  pleasure,  or  what  he  believes  to  be 
such  ;  behold  a  man  who  has  dividends,  and  who  lulls  himself  to  sleep  in  a  selfish 
indolence,  whence  he  awakes  only  twice  a  year  to  receive  them ;  behold  an 
employe,  that  is  to  say  a  man  who  during  his  life  gives  six  days  to  writings  of 
which  he  is  weary  and  the  seventh  to  amusements  of  which  he  will  become  weary 
also ;  behold  a  wealthy  man,  and  when  one  asks  what  is  his  occupation,  he  has 
only  one,  that  of  administering  his  fortune,  and,  if  possible,  augmenting  it ;  and  / 
those  savants  who  deal  only  in  science,  searching  unceasingly  into  the  truth  of 
facts,  and  forgetting  the  voice  which  said:  *'I  am  the  truth";  and  those  artists 
who  pursue  the  beautiful  whilst  forgetting  the  supreme  beauty  ;  and  those  literary 
inen,  who  seek  the  sublime,  whilst  forgetting  that  religion  is  the  chief  sublime  ; 
and  those  magistrates,  who  only  judge  or  administer ;  and  those  potentates  of  the 
earth,  who  only  skim  and  mle.  ...  All  those  men  are,  perhaps,  good  and  honour- 
able, incapable  of  staining  their  reputation,  of  dishonouring  themselves.  .  .  .  But 
they  live  by  bread  only  ;  the  earthly  life  rules  them,  carries  them  away,  pre-occupies 
them,  to  the  point  of  leading  them  to  egotism  and  indifference ;  they  are  so  mind- 
ful  of  themselves  that  they  forget  God  ;  of  the  world,  that  they  forget  heaven  ;  of 

II  I  T^^  7  ^^^^^^  ^®^*^  ^^^  immortality  ;  they  take  so  much  care  of  themselves 
that  they  take  none  of  their  neighbour ;  and  as  to  their  family,  they  dream  of  its 
advancement.  They  live  in  a  manner  most  honourable,  doubtless  ;  but  they  live  by 
bread  only  .  .  .  only,  and  this  is  their  folly  and  transgressiom.  (Athanase  Coquerel.) 
As  a  man  chasteneth  his  son,  so  the  Lord  thy  God  chasteneth  thee.— The  afflictions 
^  Gods  people  .—I.  The  afflictions  of  God's  people— however  complicated, 
however  prolonged,  of  whatever  materials  they  may  be  made— proceed  from  the 
PUREST  BENIGNITY  OF  OUR  Heavenly  Father.  Suffering  does  not  come  from  God 
at  all.  I  know  that  He  overrules  it,  and  that  He  makes  up,  if  I  may  so  speak,  of 
the  bnars  and  thorns  which  so  plentifully  grow  in  this  wilderness  a  hedge  by  which 

i8 


274  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  viii. 

His  cLildren  are  kept  in  and  restrain  ftd.  But  He  did  not  cause  your  suflferings. 
If  man  had  continued  in  his  primeval  state  of  innocence,  there  would  have  been 
no  aching  heart.  But  suffering  is  to  be  considered  as  destructive  or  as  corrective. 
Now,  where  it  is  destructive,  it  is  an  expression  of  displeasure.  We  know  that 
punishment  ultimately  inflicted  will  be  destructive  ;  but,  remember,  afflictions  may 
be  considered  also  as  corrective.  Then  they  issue  from  love.  Following  up  the 
beautiful  idea  of  the  text — that  of  parental  discipline — I  say  they  proceed  from  a 
solicitude  to  improve  the  child,  to  correct  many  vices,  to  form  the  character  of  the 
child  as  perfectly  as  it  can  be  formed.  Now,  remember,  that  the  love  of  your 
Heavenly  Father  regulates  all  this.  II.  Your  afflictions  are  p.rought  about  by 
Divine  wisdom — no  chance,  no  accident.  God  cannot  explain  Himself  to  you,  but 
before  Him  everything  is  arranged  in  the  most  exquisite  order,  in  the  most  lumin- 
ous combination.  Not  an  atom  floats  without  His  permission  ;  the  hairs  of  your 
head  are  all  numbered.  III.  All  afflictions  will  issue  in  your  highest  good. 
You  must  take  God's  word  ;  "All  things  work  together  for  good  to  them  that  love 
God."  This  is  the  secret — "to  them  that  love  God."  God  loves  you — you  love 
God;  what  is  the  consequence?  God  is  employing  His  attiibutes  for  you  ;  God  is 
taking  care  that  there  shall  be  nothing  hostile,  however  inexplicable  may  be  the 
circumstances  of  your  life.  They  shall  work  for  your  good — perhaps  not  for  your 
gratification.  The  physician's  prescriptions  do  not  work  for  the  pleasure  of  the 
party  ;  the  probing  instrument  of  the  surgeon  gives  the  patient  pain,  but  it  is  all 
for  good.  God  is  not  absent  from  you ;  He  is  present.  This  is  a  consolatory 
thought :  your  Father  never  leaves  you  for  a  moment ;  He  is  educating  you  for 
Himself.  {T.  Lessey.)  On  the  purposes  of  God  in  chastening  man : — I.  The  way 
in  which  God  tried  the  Israelites  in  the  wilderness  was  this  :  He  was  perpetually 

exposing  them  to  difficulties  and  DANGERS,  WHICH  WERE  CALCULATED  TO  TRY 
THE  STRENGTH  OF  THEIR  FAITH  AND  TRUST  IN  HiM.  II.  WhAT,  THEN,  WERE  THE 
DESIGNS  WHICH  GOD  HAD  IN  VIEW  IN  THUS  BRINGING  THE  ISRAELITES  IKTO  THESE 

DIFFICULTIES,  AND  IN  THUS  CORRECTING  THEM  ?  1.  The  first  was  that  they  might 
know  themselves,  to  know  their  hearts,  whether  they  would  keep  His  commandments 
or  no.  2.  But  the  second  point,  in  which  it  was  the  intention  of  God  to  instruct  the 
Israelites,  and  in  them  all  mankind,  was  their  absolute  dependence  upon  Himself. 
"He  fed  them  with  manna,  which  neither  they  nor  their  fathers  had  known,"  in 
order  that  He  might  make  them  know  that  men  do  not  live  by  bread  only,  but  by 
every  word  that  proceedeth  out  of  the  mouth  of  the  Lord  do  men  live.  More 
important  knowledge  than  this  of  the  providence  of  God  cannot  be  learned  by  men. 
"While  we  thus  practically  know  the  power  and  presence  of  God,  we  shall  feel  the 
dispositions  which  that  knowledge  ought  to  inspire  ;  we  shall  watch  over  our  conduct 
with  a  filial  dread  of  offending  Him  ;  we  shall  place  an  unbounded  confidence  in  His 
wisdom  to  direct.  His  power  to  strengthen.  His  providence  to  defend,  His  goodness 
to  bless  us.  III.  Having  thus  taken  a  view  of  the  purposes  of  God  toward  the 
Israelites  in  the  desert,  it  remains  that  we  consider  for  whose  instruction 
THESE  designs  WERE  ACCOMPLISHED.  1.  lu  the  first  placc,  He  makes  use  of 
afflictions  and  trials  to  prove  you,  as  He  did  the  Israelites  of  old.  These  trials  you 
have  doubtless  felt,  but  have  you  seen  the  hand  of  God  in  them  ?  2.  What,  then, 
is  His  aim?  It  is  to  teach  thee  to  know  thyself  and  Him.  To  know  thyself. 
You  will  tell  me,  perhaps,  you  do  not  know  yourself  sufficiently  ;  you  will  acknow- 
ledge you  are  a  weak,  sinful  .creature.  To  say  this  from  theory  only  is  a  very  diff'erent 
thing  from  saying  it  from  experience.  Self-knowledge  is  not  soon  taught.  You 
cannot  acquire  it  merely  by  reading  books,  or  by  meditating  on  it  in  your  study  ;  it 
must  be  the  result  of  long  and  painful  observation  of  your  own  heart.  3.  But  God 
designs  also  to  teach  you  to  know  Him.  You  are  amazed  at  the  stupidity  of  the 
Israelites ;  they  had  so  many  proofs  of  the  presence  of  God  !  And  have  not  you 
as  many?  {J.  Venn,  M.A.)  Divine  correction: — Divine  correction  may  be 
considered— I.  As  the  means  of  religious  improvement.  1.  Affliction  is  a 
restraint  from  evil,  without  which  we  should  frequently  fall  the  victim  of  our  folly 
and  impetuosity.  2  Affliction  is  an  excitement  to  duty.  3.  Affliction  is  a  needful 
ordeal.  4.  Affliction  is  a  seasonable  monitor.  II.  As  the  discipline  of  paternal 
REGARD.  A  father  corrects  his  children — 1.  With  reluctance.  Tries  everything 
else  first.  2.  With  wisdom.  3.  With  tenderness.  4.  With  design.  For  our 
good.  Ill,  As  THE  SUBJECT  OF  FILIAL  ATTENTION.  How  awful  is  it  when 
affliction  is  useless,  when  correction  hardens,  when  medicine  poisons !  Beware  of 
this — "Consider  in  thine  heart,"  &c.  1.  Acknowledge  His  hand.  Trace  your 
afflictions  to  their  proper  cause.     2.  Submit  to  His  authority.     Submission  is  the 


CHAP.  VIII.]  DEUTERONOMY.  275 

perfection  of  Christianity — the  submission  not  of  apathy,  but  sensibility.  Shall 
a  scholar  murmur  against  the  discipline  of  wisdom  and  goodness?  3.  Improve 
His  design.  This  must  be  known  to  be  improved.  You  cannot  know  each 
particular  design,  but  you  may  the  grand  and  ultimate  one.  {Sketches  of  Four 
Hundred  Sermons.)  Design  of  God's  chastisements: — This  is  the  manner  of 
God's  proceedings — to  send  good  after  evil,  as  He  made  light  after  darkness ;  to 
turn  justice  into  mercy,  as  He  turned  water  into  wine  ;  for  as  the  beasts  must  be 
killed  before  they  could  be  sacrificed,  so  men  must  be  killed  before  they  can  be 
sacrificed — that  is,  the  knife  of  correction  must  prune  and  dress  them,  and  lop  off 
their  rotten  twigs  before  they  can  bring  forth  fruit ;  these  are  the  cords  which  bind 
the  ram  unto  the  altar,  lest  when  he  is  brought  thither  he  should  run  from  thence 
again  ;  this  is  the  chariot  which  carrieth  our  thoughts  to  heaven,  as  it  did  Nebu- 
chadnezzar's. This  is  the  hammer  which  squareth  the  rough  stones  till  they  be 
plain  and  smooth  and  fit  for  the  temple.  {H.  Smith.)  God's  chastening: — A 
bystander  in  the  market-place  of  a  country  town  saw  a  group  of  boys  quarrelling 
and  fighting.  In  a  few  moments  he  observed  a  man  from  a  side  street  cross  the 
place,  enter  the  group,  bring  out  one  boy,  and  severely  rebuke  him.  The  bystander 
pondered,  his  thoughts  shaping  themselves  thus :  That  is  a  father,  selecting  his 
own  boy,  plucking  him  from  the  evil  out  of  fatherly  love,  and  dealing  with  him  in 
such  a  manner  as  to  make  him  fear  a  repetition  of  the  conduct.  "  We  are  chastened 
of  the  Lord  that  we  should  not  be  condemned  with  the  world."  This  is  the  paternal 
motive.  {Mrs.  Umpleby. )  Chastiscnunt  a  proof  of  love : — I  had  a  teacher,  when 
I  was  a  boy,  who  used  to  love  me  and  let  me  off  easy  in  my  lessons,  and  I  thought 
he  was  splendid.  I  had  another  teacher  who,  out  of  school  and  out  of  doors,  was 
almost  like  a  brother  and  a  father  to  me,  but  who  was  very  rigid  with  me  in  the 
mathematical  room— and  with  me  especially  ;  and  when  I  once  complained  to  him 
that  he  did  not  treat  any  otlier  boy  as  he  did  me,  he  said,  "No,  I  do  not,  for  I  do 
not  love  any  other  boy  as  much  as  I  do  you."  He  brought  the  screw  down  on  me 
tremendously,  but  it  was  the  only  thing  that  carried  me  through  mathematics.  At 
last  he  developed  in  me  an  energy  and  an  enterprise  in  that  direction  that  led  to 
results  that  I  never  should  have  achieved  under  any  other  culture  than  that. 
"Whom  the  Lord  loveth  He  chasteneth,  and  scourgeth  every  son  whom  He 
receiveth.  .  .  .  But  if  ye  be  without  chastisement,  whereof  all  are  partakers,  then 
are  ye  bastards,  and  not  sons,"  saith  the  Word  of  the  Lord.  (i^.  W.  Beecher.) 
God  the  best  Ruler: — Man  would  have  God  go  according  to  his  mind  in  chastening 
and  afflicting  him.  He  would  have  God  correct  him  only  in  such  a  kind,  in  such 
a  manner  and  measure  as  he  would  choose.  He  saith  in  his  heart :  "If  God  would 
correct  me  in  this  or  that,  I  could  bear  it,  but  I  do  not  like  to  be  corrected  in  the 
present  way."  One  saith  :  "If  God  would  smite  me  in  my  estate,  I  could  bear  it, 
but  not  in  my  body" ;  another  saith :  "If  God  would  smite  me  with  sickness,  I 
could  bear  it,  but  not  my  children";  or,  "If  God  would  afflict  me  only  in  such 
a  degree,  I  could  submit,  but  my  heart  can  hardly  submit  to  so  great  a  measure 
of  affliction."  Thus  we  would  have  it  according  to'our  minds  as  to  the  measure  of 
the  continuance  of  our  afflictions.  We  would  be  corrected  for  so  many  days,  but 
months  and  years  of  trouble  are  not  according  to  our  mind.  Man  would  have  God 
govern  not  only  himself,  but  the  whole  world,  according  to  his  mind ;  man  hath 
much  of  this  in  him.  Luther  wrote  to  Melanchthon  when  he  was  so  exceedingly 
troubled  at  the  providence  of  God  in  this  world  :  "Our  brother  Philip  is  to  be 
admonished  that  he  would  forbear  governing  the  world."  We  can  hardly  let  God 
alone  to  rule  that  world  which  Himself  alone  hath  made.  {J.  Caryl.)  Therefore 
thou  Shalt  keep  the  commandments  of  the  Lord  thy  God, — Incitements  to  the 
Divine  service : — Time  and  again  Israel  was  called  to  remember  that  God's  goodness 
to  them  was  designed  to  lead  to  more  faithful  service.  They  were  to  beware  lest 
forgetfulness  of  this  and  a  life  of  self-indulgence  should  lead  to  their  undoing.  In 
chap,  xxviii.  the  terrible  results  of  ingratitude  and  disobedience  were  set  before 
them.  See,  especially  in  vers.  63,  64  of  that  chapter,  a  graphic  picture  in  general 
outline  of  the  state  of  the  Jewish  race  for  the  past  eighteen  hundred  years.  For 
those  who  have  no  time  or  inclination  to  study  the  history  of  the  race,  the 
graphic  description  of  their  position  in  Scott's  Ivanhoe  and  the  historical  notes 
appended  to  that  work,  will  give  a  clear  conception  of  their  miserable  condition. 
The  passage  teaches  us  that  when  men  have  received  blessing  from  God  it  is 
fitting  for  them  to  render  Him  a  willing  service,  and  that  ingratitude  here  means 
destruction.  I.  The  reasonableness  of  rendering  a  grateful  service  to  God. 
I.  This  was  clearly  evident  in  the  case  of  Israel.     God  rightly  demands  as  the 


276  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  viii. 

Creator  obedience  and  service  from  all  men.  Surely,  then,  from  a  people  so  highly 
favoured  as  Israel !  Delivered  from  slavery ;  given  a  noble  system  of  laws  ;  brought 
under  the  direct  rule  of  Jehovah  in  the  theocracy  ;  and  given  in  promise  "a  lane*, 
flowing  with  milk  and  honey."  They  were  highly  favoured,  and  in  gratitude 
should  have  consecrated  themselves  to  the  Divine  service.  2.  If  they  had  reasons 
for  thankfulness,  &c.,  we  have  greater  reasons.  Contrast  the  state  of  our  native 
land  since  the  time  when  Columba,  Cuthbert,  Austin  of  Canterbury,  &c.,  began 
their  apostolic  labours  among  its  tribes  with  our  present  pre-eminence  among  the 
nations.  3.  As  individual  subjects  of  this  empire  we  have  great  reason  to  offer  to 
God  a  grateful  service.  How  blessed  our  lot  compared  with  that  of  many  peoples 
whose  manner  of  life  and  customs  have  been  portrayed  by  a  Livingstone,  Stanley, 
J.  G.  Paton,  and  others  !  Contrast  the  state  of  less  highly  favoured  peoples  with, 
our  own  individual  lives,  under  righteous  government,  religious  liberty,  even-handed 
justice,  &c.  There  are  many  reasons  why  we  should  render  to  God  gratitude,  praise, 
and  willing,  joyful  service.  II.  The  folly  of  the  sin  of  ingratitude  toward 
God.  1.  What  we  are  to  beware  of  is  the  danger  that  whilst  we  enjoy  the  gifts, 
the  gracious  Giver  should  be  forgotten — of  spending  all  our  time  and  energy  on  the 
acquisition  of  God's  gifts  to  be  used  for  our  own  pleasure  rather  than  in  seeking  the 
Divine  glory.  2.  Into  this  sin  the  Israelites  fell  once  and  again  in  the  course  of 
their  history.  Even  after  the  stern  lesson  of  the  Babylonian  exile  they  fell  into 
this  sin  (Hag.  i.,  &c.).  In  our  Lord's  time  this  sin  was  aggravated  by  hypocrisy. 
The  formal  religionists  drew  near  to  God  with  outward  devotion,  but  their  hearts 
were  far  from  Him.  The  self-pleasing,  worldly  agriculturist  of  the  parable  was, 
it  may  be  surmised,  a  typical  figure  (Luke  xii.  15-21).  3.  There  is  too  much  of 
this  spirit  in  our  own  time.  Among  all  classes  there  is  a  feverish  grasping  after 
riches  and  pleasure  ;  there  is  a  striving  after  wealth,  not  that  those  who  strive  may 
become  better  men  and  women,  and  be  better  enabled  to  serve  God,  but  that  they 
may  have  more  of  ease,  of  passing  pleasures.  Possessions  gained  and  received 
without  thankful  gratitude  to  God  and  more  earnest  effort  in  His  service  turn  to 
dust  and  ashes  in  the  using.  4.  This  results  from  the  failure  of  men  to  desire  first 
and  receive  God's  best  gifts  in  Jesus  Christ.  III.  The  effect  of  either  spirit  on 
national  and  individual  life.  1.  When  a  nation  rests  on^God  in  its  government 
and  institutions,  and  shows  grateful  loyalty  to  Him,  that  nation  will  grow  in 
righteousness  and  strength,  and  become  a  power  for  good  in  the  world.  2.  To  the 
individual  who  serves  Him  in  grateful  love  He  will  give  His  richest  blessings. 
Material  gifts  may  sometimes  be  withheld  as  not  for  their  good  ;  but  joyful  assur- 
ance of  His  presence  will  be  given  to  them,  and  of  the  certainty  of  His  promises. 
3.  Far  otherwise  will  it  be  with  those  who  forget  God.  Israel's  history  tells  how 
the  curse  has  fallen  (Isa.  i.  8).  God-forgetfulness  led  to  hardness  of  heart,  spiritual 
pride,  and  the  invocation  on  themselves  of  the  awful  sentence,  "  His  blood  be  on  us 
and  on  our  children."  4.  Are  there  not  many  among  us  who  fall  into  the  same  error 
— who  reap  luxuriant  fields,  who  amass  enormous  gains  without  any  thought  of 
gratitude  to  God,  or  any  effort  in  His  service  ?  Such  love  of  money — of  the 
possessions  of  this  life — "is  a  root  of  all  evil,"  leading  to  the  hardening  of  the 
heart  and  the  materialising  of  the  life.  5.  The  Divine  rule  is  the  only  safe  one : 
*'  Seek  ye  first  the  kingdom  of  God,"  &c.  "Through  Israel's  failure  to  render  God 
a  grateful  service  they  failed  to  carry  out  the  Divine  commission  confided  to  them 
as  a  nation,  i.e.  to  make  God's  name,  &c.,  known  (Psa.  Ixvii.).  Does  our  thankful 
gratitude  to  God  lead  us  to  do  so  ?    ( fVm.  Frank  Scott.) 

Vers.  7-9.  The  Lord  thy  God  bringeth  thee  into  a  good  Isuid.— The  Zand  of 
promise : — We  will  first  take  the  central  picture  which  is  presented  to  us,  and  we 
shall  then  notice  the  neighbouring  thoughts  held  up  to  us.  "  The  Lord  bringeth 
thee  into  a  good  land."  These  words  were  uttered,  as  you  know,  to  a  number  of 
people  who  had  never  seen  anything  but  the  wilderness.  They  had  not  an  actual 
knowledge,  but  they  had  only  heard  by  description,  by  their  fathers'  memory 
lingering  upon  what  they  had  once  enjoyed,  and  talking  of  them  to  their  children. 
And  their  children  had  grown  up  in  the  desert  and  wondered  what  those  nations 
could  be  of  which  they  had  heard  their  fathers  speak.  These  words  would  seem  to 
be  a  description  which  was  intended  to  convey  a  contrast  between  Egypt  and  the 
land  of  promise.  The  feeling  that  lingered  still  upon  their  minds  as  to  what 
Egypt  was  would  render  the  contrast  stronger  still  in  their  own  minds.  "The 
land  whither  thou  goest  in  to  possess  it  is  not  as  the  land  of  Egypt  from  whence 
ye  came  out.  where  thou  sowedst  thy  seed  and  wateredst  it  with  thy  foot.     But 


CHAP.  VIII.]  DEUTERONOMY.  277 

the  land  whither  ye  go  to  possess  it  is  a  land  of  hills  and  valleys,  and  is  watered 
by  the  rain  from  heaven."  Some  think  this  is  a  figure  of  speech  intended  to 
represent  human  labour,  that  the  country  had  to  be  watered  by  labour,  physical 
exertion  ;  others  seem  to  think  it  may  be  literal,  and  intended  to  apply  to  the  way 
either  in  which  by  mechanism  or  by  the  use  of  the  foot  the  water  was  raised  to  an 
elevation  ;  or  as,  perhaps,  very  likely,  afterwards  it  was  spread  abroad  over  the  land 
in  little  streams  ;  a  man  could  just  walk  from  place  to  place  and  with  his  foot  let 
it  out  into  different  streams.  In  the  land  of  promise,  instead  of  there  being  any 
process  of  human  labour,  or  any  contrivances  of  the  kind — "The  land  to  which  ye 
go,"  said  the  jirophet,  "  shall  be  watered  by  the  rain  from  heaven."  It  shall  come 
down  upon  it  like  a  gift  from  God.  For  in  Egypt  there  was  no  rain — and  in  the 
wilderness  nothing  but  sand,  nothing  but  desert.  There  is  also  the  suggestion,  you 
know,  of  green  hills.  Egypt  was  very  flat,  but  this  was  a  land  of  hills  and  valleys, 
of  valleys  and  hills.  "  A  land  of  wheat,  and  barley,  and  vines,  and  fig-trees  " — the 
staff  of  life,  all  that  is  necessary  for  support.  And  what  is  given  for  enjoyment — 
luxury?  "A  land  of  oil  olive,  and  honey.  A  land  wherein  thou  shalt  eat  bread 
without  scarceness."  They  had  been  living  on  manna,  and  their  souls  loathed  this 
light  bread.  They  were  to  have  bread  without  scarcity — "Thou  shalt  not  lack 
anything  in  it.  A  land  whose  stones  are  iion,  and  out  of  whose  hills  thou  mayest 
dig  brass."  This  was  a  fine  picture  set  before  these  people — setting  forth  the  love  of 
God  to  them,  His  Divine  purposes,  His  Fatherly  protection,  and  exciting  them  to 
devotion  to  His  will.  The  surrounding  words  also  suggest  a  grand  idea.  The  idea 
is  that  of  obedience,  at  all  times  and  under  all  circumstances.  In  the  desert,  in  the 
city,  whatever  be  your  circumstances  or  your  needs,  God's  law  is  to  be  recognised. 
He  is  lord  over  all.  God  hath  made  the  earth,  and  placed  man  upon  it,  and  hath 
given  him  everything  richly  to  enjoy.  And  so  he  presents  a  picture  of  discipline 
with  the  enjoyment  of  abundance.  There  is  the  suggestion  of  preparatory  disci- 
pline, in  order  that  a  man  may  be  fitted  for  the  right  appreciation  and  right  use  of 
these  sources  of  physical  enjoyment.  God  gives  you  all  things  richly  to  enjoy,  and 
you  may  enjoy  them  ;  but  there  can  be  nothing  in  the  present  world  and  in  the 
present  condition  of  our  nature — there  can  be  nothing  without  peril  and  moral 
danger.  There  is  danger  in  the  desert  surrounded  by  sterility  and  want ;  and  there 
is  danger  in  abundance,  surrounded  with  wheat  and  barley  and  vines  and  olives, 
and  all  these  luxuries.  God  had  led  them  through  scenes  of  preparatory  discipline  ; 
He  had  given  them  a  taste  of  sorrow  ;  He  had  disciplined  their  souls  by  labour  and 
by  want;  He  had  tested  them  that  it  might  be  seen  what  was  in  their  hearts. 
There  was  moral  danger  and  peril.  The  great  truth  which  the  whole  discipline  was 
intended  to  impress  upon  their  souls  was  this,  that  man  does  not  live  by  bread  alone. 
Of  far  more  importance  is  the  attainment  of  the  higher  and  diviner  life  than  to 
attend  merely  to  the  jihysical  life.  It  is  better  to  die  through  absolute  starvation 
and  want  than  to  supply  those  wants  by  anything  which  would  be  a  violation  of  the 
Divine  law.  And  there  is  set  forth  the  warning — warning  them  of  the  danger  and 
the  peril  which  they  had  to  encounter — '*  Beware  that  thou  forget  not  the  Lord  thy 
God,  in  not  keeping  His  commandments  and  His  statutes,  which  I  command  thee 
this  day,"  under  the  circumstances  in  which  thou  art  placed,  surrounded  by  abund- 
ance, "Lest  when  thou  hast  eaten  and  art  full,"  &o.  How  prone  is  man  to  forget 
God,  and  then  to  sink  into  worldliness  !  Oh,  what  a  fall  is  there  !  The  Great  Being 
excluded  from  his  thoughts,  and  the  poor  inflated  heart  filled  with  its  own  image, 
and  the  man  thinking  about  himself.  Foigetting God,  who  had  done  everything  in 
him  and  for  him,  then  looking  upon  God's  gifts  and  their  very  magnitude  and 
number,  hiding  God,  concealing  the  Giver,  and  man  tempted  to  say,  "My  own 
power  and  my  skill  have  gotten  me  all  this."  In  a  certain  sense  you  exercise 
skill,  but  God  gave  you  the  power.  It  is  through  Him  everything  is  done.  Thus 
our  religion  in  all  things  takes  us  from  ourselves  and  throws  us  back  upon  God. 
Then  comes  the  last  thought  of  all,  which  is  the  prophetic  denunciation,  "It  shall 
be  if  thou  do  at  all  forget  the  Lord  thy  God,  and  walk  after  other  gods,  and  serve 
them  and  worship  them,  I  testify  against  you  this  day  that  ye  shall  surely  perish." 
God  loved  your  fathers,  and  loves  you,  and  He  selected  you  for  a  great  mission,  has 
told  you  what  to  do  in  the  world.  He  sets  before  you  the  course  you  are  to  pursue ; 
but  if  the  heart  be  not  with  Him,  if  you  forget  Him  and  disobey  Him,  ye  shall  like- 
wise perish,  in  spite  of  God's  love  to  your  fathers  and  His  love  to  you  and  your 
children— ye  shall  utterly  perish  ;  He  will  find  others  to  do  the  work,  that  will  not 
stand  still.  I  merely  throw  out  these  few  tliou>ihts  to  guide  you.  There  are  prin- 
ciples embodied  here  of  a  general  and  universal  application  to  individuals  and 


278  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  vim 

nations.  In  the  reading  of  the  Bible  you  have  the  law  of  Divine  government  set 
forth.  A^'ou  not  only  hear  God  saying  to  an  individual  or  to  a  nation,  '*  At  a  par- 
ticular time  so  and  so  shall  be,"  but  in  consequence  of  having  the  whole  history  of 
the  other  nations  spread  out  before  you,  you  can  see  the  actual  workings  out  of  the 
law  in  history,  and  character,  and  fortunes  of  the  individual  or  nation.  Now,  if  you 
read  the  Bible  so,  then  I  take  it  there  are  great  moral  principles  in  this  chapter, 
which  it  would  be  very  easy  to  dwell  upon  in  relation  to  individuals  and  nations  ; 
it  is  God's  way  in  the  education  of  most  of  us.  Men  sometimes  have  a  great  deal 
to  bear  in  their  youth.  We  have  seen  men  go  through  very  severe  self-denial,  hard 
work  and  little  enjoyment,  harsh  words  and  disappointment.  Oh,  the  youthful  heart, 
and  the  heart  of  early  manhood — how  very  often  does  God  school  it,  and  set  it  a 
tremendously  hard  lesson  !  It  is  to  discipline  it.  And  how  very  often  do  we  see 
this  very  process  succeeding,  producing  submission,  peace,  industry,  integi'ity — 
these  are  the  virtues  which  spring  out  of  discipline  and  suffering,  and  they  have 
their  reward.  Then  there  comes  the  fruit  of  the  reward  :  in  the  middle  life  of  the 
man  you  may  see,  in  consequence  of  the  preparatory  discipline,  the  fruit  of  it 
springing  up — the  man  surrounded  with  riches  and  affluence  and  possessions,  and 
you  see  him  in  the  land,  which  is  not  like  the  land  of  Egypt,  the  land  of  his  youth, 
where  he  had  to  labour  and  suffer  ;  no,  he  has  his  wheat  and  his  barley  and  vines 
and  olive  oil  and  pomegranates,  and  all  things  about  him  like  the  good  land.  Then 
comes  the  rest.  Then  we  shall  see  what  is  in  the  man.  Ay,  and  how  very  often 
do  we  see  that  man  forget  the  rock  out  of  which  he  was  hewn,  and  the  pit  from 
which  he  was  digged — the  discipline  and  the  ways  through  which  God  led  him,  ay, 
and  the  lesson,  the  very  lesson  which  he  learned.  When  he  was  little  in  his  own 
eyes,  and  had  little  of  the  appliances  of  luxury  about  him,  he  had  his  mind  filled 
with  what  was  Divine.  And  now  he  has  fallen  upon  the  lap  of  earth,  and  it  is  very 
pleasant  to  the  flesh  to  lie  down  and  enjoy  ;  the  wings  of  his  spirit  are  clipped,  and 
he  has  fallen  down  into  the  mire  ;  the  man  becomes  sensual  and  worldly,  his 
heavenly  aspirations  have  departed,  he  has  forgotten  God,  and  is  filled  with  worldli- 
ness.  Sometimes  God  comes  down  upon  such  a  man  and  blasts  him.  He  was  like 
a  bay  tree,  and  in  a  moment  he  is  not.  We  look,  and  behold  he  cannot  be  found. 
Or  he  may  live  on  and  on,  but  he  shall  not  be  what  he  was  ;  he  is  doing  nothing 
for  God  or  man  ;  all  his  Divine  aspirations  are  dead,  and  he  dies,  and  his  name  is 
forgotten.  Nobody  has  anything  to  remember  of  him,  but  perhaps  the  few  to  whom 
his  property  comes,  which  comes  with  a  curse  rather  than  a  blessing.  But  in  the 
other  case,  where  the  individual  remembers  the  discipline,  the  lesson,  and  the 
hard  history  through  which  he  passed  when  he  was  rising  up  and  struggling 
nobly  with  circumstances,  and  then  when  his  position  changes  the  man's  inward 
and  better  life  keeps  up,  and  all  things  are  kept  in  their  proper  subordination, 
and  used  for  God.  When  men  hear  of  his  prosperity  they  bless  and  thank 
God  ;  his  righteousness  endureth  for  ever,  and  his  name  is  held  in  everlasting 
remembrance ;  he  has  the  blessings  in  relation  to  this  world  and  that  which  is 
to  come,  and  he  dies  amid  the  benedictions  of  his  children  and  the  blessings  of 
society.  These  principles  have  to  do  with  you.  Are  there  young  men  here 
who  sometimes  think  their  lot  is  hard,  and  perhaps  it  is ;  their  lot  may  be  very 
hard  ;  they  may  be  placed  in  circumstances  and  pressed  by  duties  that  may  be 
hard  to  bear  ;  but  still,  it  may  be  and  it  is  God,  it  is  God  teaching  you,  it  is  God 
disciplining  you,  and  if  you  will  accept  this  teaching  that  is  the  great  secret — 
accept  it,  take  it  lovingly,  and  then  half  the  difficulty  is  gone.  If  affliction  or  toil 
through  God's  providence  should  come  upon  you,  accept  it  cheerfully,  and  then  only 
half  the  burden  falls  upon  you.  It  is  only  half  what  it  was  as  soon  as  you  lovingly 
accept  it  and  say,  *'  I  take  it,  and  will  make  the  best  of  it ;  I  will  by  Thy  strength, 
bear  it  like  a  man. "  And  so  now,  if  there  are  many  young  men  here  who  have  to 
endure  a  great  many  hardships,  look  up  to  your  Father  and  bear  it  bravely ;  seek 
for  God's  strength,  and  depend  upon  it  that  this  very  hardness  and  the  discipline 
through  which  you  are  passing  now  is  a  sort  of  wilderness,  a  desert  which  will  lead 
you  to  the  good  land.  Only,  take  care  to  remember  the  lesson  that  you  are  learning 
now ;  in  whatever  circumstances  you  may  hereafter  be  placed  do  not  forget  God. 
{T.  Binney,) 

Ver.  10.  When  thou  hast  eaten  and  art  full,  then  thou  shalt  bless  the  Lord  thy 

CrOd. — Prosperity  a  test : — These  words  occur  in  Moses'  farewell  charge  to  the 
Israelites.  Moses  had  long  stood  to  his  people  in  the  relation  of  father  as  well  as 
general,  and,  like  a  father,  has  at  the  end  a  good  many  last  words  to  speak.    This 


CHAP.  VIII.]  DEUTERONOMY.  279 

whole  Book  of  Deuteronomy  is  made  up  of  last  words  ;  his  last  will  and  testament 
to  the  Hebrew  people.  He  wanted  to  clinch  the  instruction  that  had  been  given 
them  already.  His  anxiety  outran  his  responsibility.  He  had  been  their  saviour 
in  the  past,  and  now  would  like  to  take  out  a  policy  of  insurance  in  their  behalf  for 
the  time  to  come.  And  they  needed  everything  in  the  shape  of  counsel  and  insur- 
ance that  could  be  given  them.  They  had  hardly  earned  the  confidence  of  their 
leader.  He  did  not  much  believe  in  the  Israelites.  He  did  not  expect  with  any 
confidence  that  they  would  bless  the  Lord  when  they  had  eaten  and  were  full.  They 
had  hardly  been  a  match  for  adversity,  still  less  could  they  be  expected  to  be  for 
prosperity.  He  had  carried  them  forty  years,  and  been  one  of  them  a  hundred  and 
twenty.  He  understood  their  composition  and  drift.  They  were  a  nation  of  back- 
sliders. Their  history  was  full  of  ebb-tides.  They  were  not  to  be  trusted.  God 
had  kept  them  worn  down  into  manageableness  simply  by  force  of  disaster ;  had 
always  driven  them  with  a  curb  and  a  check.  Liberty  they  regularly  corrupted 
into  license.  The  point  is  reached  now,  however,  where  a  new  experiment  is  to  be 
tried  with  them.  There  are  some  elements  in  the  case  that  warrant  at  least  a  hope 
that  the  experiment  will  succeed.  The  wilderness  and  the  manna  are  now  put 
behind  them  ;  in  front  is  the  Jordan,  and  across  the  Jordan  cities  and  well-watered 
plains — a  land  flowing  with  milk  and  honey.  How  will  they  bear  the  longer,  laxer 
tether  of  plenty  and  prosperity  ?  It  lay  in  Moses'  thought  as  a  question.  It  is 
important  to  understand  that  it  is  God's  desire  for  His  people  to  load  them  as  heavily 
with  luxuries  and  gladnesses  as  they  can  bear.  Evil  and  suffering  are  all  around  us, 
but  it  is  a  part  of  our  faith  in  the  Fatherliness  of  God  to  believe  that  *'  He  doth  not 
afflict  willingly  nor  grieve  the  children  of  men  "  ;  and  to  say  with  the  Psalmist :  "  I 
know,  O  Lord,  that  Thy  judgments  are  right,  and  that  Thou  in  faithfulness  hast 
a,fflicted  me."  The  universe  is  in  the  interests  of  comfort  and  happiness  and  joy. 
It  is  God's  desire  that  we  should  eat  and  be  full.  Everything  looks  to  a  good  time 
coming.  Everything  is  contrived  to  bend  toward  a  blessing  ;  God  started  man  in 
Paradise — as  good  a  Paradise  as  he  could  bear,  and  a  good  deal  better  ;  and  all  that 
lies  after  Paradise  is  preparation  for  a  Paradise  improved.  There  is  no  sorrow  that 
has  not  lodged  in  it  the  possible  seed-kernel  of  fruition.  Faith  in  the  Fatherliness 
of  God  involves  all  this.  When  we  experience  vexation  and  tribulation  we  must 
always  bethink  ourselves  of  the  issue  to  which  in  our  Christian  faith  we  are  sure  it  is 
divinely  designed  to  conduct.  "Man's  chief  end  is  to  glorify  God  and  to  enjoy 
Him."  The  mountain-sermon  begins  with  the  promise  of  blessing.  A  whole  octave 
of  blessedness  ushers  in  the  Gospel.  This  is  a  wholesome  reflection  for  our  mind  to 
rest  in.  That  there  is  sin  in  the  world  and  sufl'ering  we  can  get  along  with  as  soon 
as  we  learn  to  interpret  them  instrumentally.  Sufl'ering  is  a  means  of  grace,  and  is 
education  toward  a  better  holiness.  It  is  a  singular  thing,  however,  that  although 
gladness  is  the  soul's  destination,  and  a  destination  that  God  is  concerned  to  have 
us  reach,  yet  the  fact  of  the  matter  with  us  is  that  gladness  is  itself  very  apt  to 
impair  our  capacity  for  gladness,  and  to  hinder  our  attainment  of  it.  We  are  in  this 
respect  like  a  sick  man  who  requires  nourishment,  but  has  not  the  power  to  digest 
it,  and  so  is  harmed  by  the  very  thing  he  needs.  Recognising,  as  we  do,  that  every 
good  gift  is  from  God,  it  would  certainly  seem  as  though  everything  we  obtained 
from  Him  would  be  a  fresh  reminder  of  Him  and  a  new  bond  to  bind  us  to  Him. 
But  we  know  how  it  works  with  children  sometimes,  whose  parents,  the  more  they 
do  for  their  children  the  less  are  they  regarded  and  loved  by  their  children.  This 
was  the  point  of  Moses'  anxiety  in  our  text.  This  fact  of  the  corrupting  power  of 
prosperity  is  a  practical  and  a  serious  one.  Prosperity  is  dangerous  :  dangerous  for 
a  man,  a  family,  a  country  ;  it  makes  men  indiff'erent,  infidel,  atheistic,  if  not  in 
their  creed,  at  least  in  their  life.  The  more  God  gives  us,  the  less,  as  a  rule,  we 
have  of  God.  It  is  not  easy  to  escape  being  injured  by  mercies.  It  is  easy  to  be 
ruined  by  success :  success  is  very  often  failure,  and  failure  success.  To  our  eye  God 
gets  eclipsed  by  His  own  bestowments.  We  bless  God  when  we  want  anything,  and 
congratulate  ourselves  when  we  get  it.  "When  thou  hast  eaten  and  art  full,  then 
thou  shalt  bless  the  Lord  thy  God."  It  takes  considerably  more  piety  to  make  a 
man  thankful  to  God  for  what  He  has  done  than  prayerfully  dependent  upon  God 
for  what  we  would  like  to  have  Him  do.  It  is  for  that  reason  that  thanksgiving 
forms  so  small  an  element  in  our  prayers  ;  and  one  reason,  most  likely,  why  our 
petitions  bring  us  so  little  that  is  new,  is  that  our  thanksgivings  so  scantily  recog- 
nise what  is  old.  It  is  the  tendency  of  the  heart  to  forget  God,  and  the  more  sun- 
shiny things  are,  the  more  likely  is  that  tendency  to  become  realised.  Our  thoughts 
and  regards  are  continually  slipping  away  from  Him,     Our  eyes  drop  from  God  to 


280  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  yiii. 

some  representation  of  Him,  and  we  become  idolaters  ;  from  God  to  some  theories 
of  Him,  and  we  become  philosophers  ;  from  God  to  the  gifts  He  confers,  and  in  our 
fulness  we  fondle  the  gift  and  ignore  the  Giver.  Sunshine  is  not  the  only  parent  of 
the  harvest  Men  fell  in  Paradise.  Angels  fell  in  heaven.  I  do  not  know  that 
there  is  any  good  thing  that  cannot  be  given  in  so  great  measure  as  to  alienate 
the  recipient  from  the  Giver.  The  fruits  of  the  Holy  Ghost  can  be  produced  in  us 
BO  profusely  as  to  work  disaster.  You  remember  how  when  the  Seventy  returned 
from  their  evangelistic  tour  they  commenced  to  parade  the  fact  of  the  submis- 
siveness  of  the  devils  unto  their  word.  And  the  Lord  rebuked  them,  and  bade  them 
rejoice  rather  that  their  names  were  written  in  heaven.  We  sometimes  think  it  is 
well  and  possible  for  us  to  have  all  the  grace  we  are  willing  to  receive.  I  am  not 
sure  of  that.  I  have  met  people  that  I  thought  had  more  grace  given  them  than 
they  had  grace  to  bear  ;  people  that  were  really  so  holy  as  to  be  conscious  of  it. 
Men  get  puffed  up  even  by  their  heavenly  enrichments.  Any  possession  or  power 
we  may  happen  to  have  stimulates  selt-cousciousuess,  and  that  alienates  us  from 
God.  I  once  heard  a  professor  in  one  of  our  popular  classical  schools  make  this 
petition  at  evening  prayers  :  "0  Lord,  Thou  to  whom  the  darkness  is  as  the  light, 
we  commit  ourselves  unto  Thee  for  the  night,  praying  that  Thou  wilt  care  for  us  in 
those  hours  when  we  cannot  so  well  take  care  of  ourselves. "  It  is  so  easy  to  think 
that  we  can  almost  get  along  alone,  and  should  hardly  need  to  put  our  trust  in  God 
were  it  not  for  dark  nights,  and  days  that  are  stormy.  It  is  such  facts  as  these  that 
explain  why  it  is  that  our  lives  have  sometimes  to  be  made  desolate  and  vacant. 
Read  the  entire  Book  of  Judges,  and  you  will  find  it  the  continuous  repetition  of  the 
same  sequence  of  events.  When  the  Israelites  had  gone  across  Jordan  and  tasted  the 
milk  ana  the  honey  and  were  full,  they  stopped  blessing  God,  just  as  Moses  told 
them  not  to  do,  but  as  he  feared  all  the  while  they  would  do.  Then  the  Lord  sent 
in  upon  them  an  invasion  of  Philistines,  or  of  Hivites,  or  Jebusites,  or  Moabites, 
or  Midianites,  or  Ammonites,  who  ground  them,  and  trampled  upon  them,  and 
devoured  them  till  they  were  willing  to  cry  unto  the  Lord  and  acknowledge  Him 
again.  This  gives  to  us  the  philosophy  of  disasters  in  national  life,  and  explains 
to  us  as  well  the  impoverishments  and  emptinesses  that  have  to  be  wrought  in  our 
individual  lives.  Men  are  quite  uniformly  disposed  to  be  devout  when  they  get  into 
difficult  places.  Men  are  like  certain  kinds  of  vegetation,  which  do  best  in  poor 
soil.  I  have  somewhere  met  with  this  illustration:  "The  Alpine  flower  does  not 
bear  transplanting,  and  can  only  thrive,  perhaps  like  some  souls,  amidst  wind  and 
tempest,  with  only  brief  summer  sunshine  and  heat. "  I  do  not  believe  there  is  any 
man  but  what  prays  when  there  is  nothing  else  left  that  he  can  do.  It  is  a  large 
part  of  the  philosophy  of  distress  that  it  makes  us  look  up.  We  ask  when  we  are 
hungry.  When  we  are  empty  we  are  devout,  "When  He  slew  them,  then  they 
sought  Him,"  said  the  Psalmist.  "In  their  affliction  they  will  seek  Me  early, 
wrote  Hosea.  The  prodigal  went  back  to  his  father  when  he  got  down  as  low  as  the 
husks.  The  bruised  flower  yields  the  sweetest  perfume,  and  the  finest  poetry  of  the 
Church  has  been  inspired  in  seasons  of  persecution.  Horace  Bushnell  once  said  :  "  I 
have  learned  more  of  experimental  religion  since  my  little  boy  died  than  in  all  my 
life  before."  It  was  he  also  who  wrote :  "  Deserts  and  stone  pillows  prepare  for  an 
open  heaven  and  an  angel-crowded  ladder."  St.  John  did  not  receive  his  revelations 
tUl  he  was  shut  up  in  a  little  sea-girt  Patmos.  St.  Paul's  most  jubilant  epistle  was 
written  in  gaol;  as  birds  sometimes  have  their  cage  darkened  in  order  to  teach  them 
to  sing.  I  trust  that  if  we  have  eaten  and  are  filled  with  the  pleasant  outward  gifts 
of  the  Lord,  we  are  able  still  to  live  in  distinct  and  hourly  recognition  of  Him  from 
whom  they  flow,  and  to  walk  with  Him  in  relations  of  reverent  but  friendly  intimacy. 
We  often  pray  that  God  would  enable  us  to  bear  adversity  ;  there  is  quite  as  much 
need  of  His  grace  to  keep  us  from  falling  in  seasons  of  prosperity.  (C.  H.  Park- 
hurst,  D.D.)  Thou  shalt  bless  the  Lord  thy  God  for  the  good  land. — Possession 
andpraise : — ^Now  that  there  is  no  longer  need  for  strenuous  effort,  Moses  fears  that, 
like  other  conquerors,  they  will  become  lax  in  their  moralitv  and  luxurious  in  their 
habits :  that  they  will  forget  the  help  they  have  received  from  God,  and  act  as 
though  their  own  strength  or  cleverness  had   secured  these  blessings.     I.  Thb 

NOVELTY   OF  NEW   POSSESSIONS   QUICKLY   PASSES   AWAY.      PerSOUS   who    SUffer  mis- 

fortune  often  think  they  must  be  happy  who  escape  it.  They  rejoice  at  the  first 
removal  of  such  misfortune,  but  soon  become  so  accustomed  to  their  new  freedom  as 
to  scarcely  give  it  a  thought.  The  pleasure  we  derive  from  new  joys  seldom  lasts 
longer  than  the  novelty.  On  the  other  hand,  troubles  are  ever  new.  II.  Posses- 
sions THAT  COST  LITTLE    PERSONAL    EFFOBT    ARE  BUT   LIGHTLY   VALUED.      It  iS 


CHAP.  VIII.]  DEUTERONOMY.  281 

proverbial  that  receivers  of  gifts  seldom  estimate  them  at  sufficient  value  ;  also,  that 
those  who  have  not  experienced  the  toil  and  self-denial  needful  in  acquiring  wealth, 
squander  that  for  which  their  fathers  laboured  long  years.  There  is  danger  that 
the  greatness  of  God's  gifts  shall  be  a  cause  of  ingratitude.  III.  Prosperity  is  a 
SEVERER  TEST  OF  FAITHFULNESS  THAN  POVERTY.  Then  wiU  be  the  time  to  see  if 
they  can  cling  to  the  Lord.  Many  a  man  serves  God  well  so  long  as  he  is  afflicted, 
but  forgets  Him  when  the  affliction  is  removed.  There  was  a  saying  of  the  heathen 
that  altars  rarely  smoke  on  account  of  new  joys.  Solomon  found  the  possession  of 
wealth  his  greatest  trial.  Temptations  could  be  resisted  in  days  of  strenuous  effort 
and  toil  which  were  yielded  to  in  days  of  ease  and  prosperity.  IV.  God  appreci- 
ates man's  GRATITUDE.  To  "  bless "  is  really  to  praise  in  worship.  Yet  the 
thought  underlying  the  conception  is  that  man  can  render  to  God  that  which  will 
add  to  His  joy.  Though  He  is  the  ever-blessed  God,  He  cares  for  the  love  of  His 
children.  His  nature  is  love,  and  therefore  He  both  gives  us  blessing  and  craves 
our  hearts  in  return,     (iv.  C.  Ford,  M.A.) 

Vers.  11-17.  Beware  that  thou  forget  not  the  Lord. — National  loealth: — Here 
we  have  Moses'  answer  to  the  first  great  question  in  politics — What  makes  a  nation 
prosperous?  To  that  wise  men  have  already  answered,  as  Moses  answered,  "Good 
government ;  government  according  to  the  laws  of  God."  But  the  multitude,  who 
are  not  wise  men,  give  a  different  answer.  They  say,  "What  makes  a  nation 
prosperous  is  its  wealth.     If  Britain  be  only  rich,  then  she  must  be  safe  and  right." 

1.  Moses  does  n-ot  deny  that  wealth  is  a  good  thing.  He  takes  for  granted 
that  they  will  grow  rich  ;  bat  he  warns  them  that  their  riches,  like  all  other  earthly 
things,  may  be  a  curse  or  a  blessing  to  them.  Nay,  that  they  are  not  good  in  them- 
selves, but  mere  tools  which  may  be  used  for  good  or  for  evil.  II.  And  herein  he 
fciHOWS  HIS  knowledge  OF  THE  HUMAN  HEART  ;  for  it  is  a  Certain  fact  that  when- 
ever any  nation  has  prospered,  then  they  have,  as  Moses  warned  the  Jews,  forgotten 
the  Lord  their  God,  and  said,  "  My  power  and  the  might  of  njy  hand  hath  gotten 
me  this  wealth."  And  it  is  true,  also,  that  whenever  any  nation  has  begun  to  say 
that,  they  have  fallen  into  confusion  and  misery,  and  sometimes  into  utter  ruin,  till 
they  repented  and  remembered  the  Lord  their  God,  and  found  out  that  the  strength 
of  a  nation  did  not  consist  in  riches,  but  in  virtue.  For  it  is  He  that  giveth  the 
power  to  get  wealth.  He  gives  it  in  two  ways.  First,  God  gives  the  raw  material ; 
secondly,  He  gives  the  wit  to  use  it.  This,  then,  was  what  Moses  commanded — to 
remember  that  they  owed  all  to  God.  What  they  had,  they  had  of  God's  free  gift. 
What  they  were,  they  were  by  God's  free  grace.  Therefore  they  were  not  to  boast 
of  themselves,  their  numbers,  their  wealth,  their  armies,  their  fair  and  fertile  land. 
They  were  to  make  their  boast  of  God  and  of  God's  goodness.  This  they  were  to 
remember,  because  it  was  true.  And  this  we  are  to  remember,  because  it  is  more 
or  less  true  of  us.  God  has  made  of  us  a  great  nation  ;  God  has  discovered  to 
us  the  immense  riches  of  this  land.  It  is  He  that  hath  made  us,  and  not  we 
ourselves.  III.  You  will  see  that  Moses  warns  them  that  if  they  forgot 
God  the  Lord,  who  brought  them  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt,  they  would  go 
after  other  gods.  He  cannot  part  the  two  things.  If  they  forget  that  God 
brought  them  out  of  Egypt,  they  will  turn  to  idolatry,  and  so  end  in  ruin.  And  so 
shall  we.  If  we  forget  that  God  is  the  living  God,  who  brought  our  forefathers  into 
this  land,  who  has  revealed  to  us  the  wealth  of  it  step  by  step  as  we  needed  it,  who 
is  helping  and  blessing  us  now,  every  day,  and  all  the  year  round— then  we  shall 
begin  worshipping  other  gods,  worshipping  the  so-called  laws  of  nature,  instead  of 
God  who  made  the  laws,  and  so  honouring  the  creature  above  the  Creator  ;  or  else 
we  shall  worship  the  pomps  and  vanities  of  this  world — pride  and  power,  money 
and  pleasure — and  say  in  our  hearts,  "These  are  our  only  gods  which  can  help  us, 
these  must  we  obey."  Which  if  we  do,  this  land  of  England  will  come  to  ruin  and 
shame,  as  surely  as  did  the  land  of  Israel  in  old  time.  (C.  Kingsley,  M.A.) 
Forgetful  of  God: — "Forget  not."  God  hates  forgetfulness  of  His  blessings 
— 1.  Because  He  has  commanded  that  we  should  not  forget  them  (Deut.  iv.  9). 

2.  Because  forgetfulness  is  a  sign  of  contempt.  3.  It  is  the  peculiarity  of  singular 
carelessness.  4.  It  springs  from  unbelief.  5.  It  is  the  greatest  mark  of  ingrati- 
tude. {Thos.  le  Blanc.)  Danger  of  riches  : — Mr.  Cecil  had  a  hearer  who,  when 
a  young  man,  had  solicited  his  advice,  but  who  had  not  for  some  time  had  an  inter- 
view with  him.     Mr.  C one  day  went  to  his  house  on  horseback,  being  unable 

to  walk,  and  after  his  usual  salutations,  addressed  him  thus  :  "I  understand  you 
are  very  dangerously  situated."    Here  he  paused,  and  his  friend  replied,  "  I  am  not 


282  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  viii. 

aware  of  it,  sir."  "  I  thought  it  was  probable  you  were  not,  and  therefore  I  have 
called  on  you.  I  hear  you  are  getting  rich  ;  take  care,  for  it  is  the  road  by 
which  the  devil  leads  thousands  to  destruction  ! "  This  was  spoken  with  such 
solemnity  and  earnestness,  that  it  made  a  deep  and  lasting  impression.  Pros- 
ferity  and  spiritual  ruin : — A  friend  recently  told  me  of  a  beautiful  elm  in  his 
garden  that  for  centuries  had  withstood  the  fury  of  winter's  storms.  On  one  still 
summer's  morning,  however,  he  was  startled  by  a  crash,  followed  by  the  rustling 
fall  of  a  huge  limb.  The  thing  was  unaccountable,  for  not  a  breath  of  air  was 
stirring,  and  the  broken  branch  was  perfectly  sound.  At  length  the  gardener 
gave  the  explanation.  It  was  the  calm  itself  that  had  wrought  or  occasioned  the 
mischief.  All  through  the  tranquil  night  copious  dews  had  fallen,  and  every  leaf 
had  caught  and  held  as  in  a  closed  chalice  the  copious  deposit,  whose  countless 
drops  bore  with  an  oppressive  weight  upon  the  branches  until  the  one  in  question 
could  no  longer  endure  the  strain.  Had  the  slightest  breath  of  air  been  stirring,  sa 
as  to  disturb  the  leaves  and  empty  their  tiny  reservoirs,  they  would  have  rained 
their  riches  of  moisture  upon  the  soil  beneath,  and  the  elm  would  have  continued 
to  flourish  in  unmutilated  majesty.  Prosperity  often  accomplishes  the  spiritual 
ruin  that  adversity  failed  to  efi'ect.  (/.  Halsey.)  God  forgotten  : — A  Glasgow 
minister  was  sitting  on  a  coach  beside  the  driver  on  a  lonely  Highland  road,  and 
saw  in  the  distance  an  old  woman,  who  looked  wistfully  towards  the  coach.  As  it 
came  near  her  face  showed  by  turns  anxiety,  hope,  and  fear,  and  as  the  coach 
passed,  the  driver,  with  downcast  eyes  and  sad  expression,  shook  his  head,  and  she 
returned  disappointed  to  her  cottage.  Being  much  affected  by  what  he  saw,  the 
minister  asked  an  explanation  of  the  driver.  The  driver  said  that  for  several  years 
she  had  watched  daily  for  the  coach,  expecting  either  to  see  her  son  or  to  receive  a^ 
letter  from  him.  The  son  had  gone  to  one  of  our  great  cities,  and  had  forgotten 
the  mother  who  loved  him  so  dearly.  But  the  mother  went  every  day  to  meet  the 
coach,  trusting  that  one  day  her  son  would  return  to  her.  Such  a  tale  makes  our 
heart  bleed  for  the  parent  who  was  cruelly  forsaken,  but  many  forget  how  badly 
they  are  treating  their  heavenly  Father  when  they  forsake  Him  and  refuse  to  return 
to  Him.  Foi'getfnlness  of  God : — Among  the  legends  of  Hindostan  is  this  : — Rawana, 
a  Brahmin,  was  offered  by  his  god  anything  that  he  might  name.  Rawana 
prayed  his  god  to  bestow  upon  him  the  government  of  the  world.  His  god  imme- 
diately granted  his  wish.  Then  he  prayed  for  ten  heads  with  which  to  see  and  rule 
the  world.  After  Rawanajhad  well  fortified  himself,  and  was  surrounded  by  riches, 
honours,  and  praise,  he  forgot  his  god  Ixora,  and  bade  all  the  people  worship  him, 
an  act  which  greatly  angered  the  god  Ixora,  and  he  destroyed  Rawana.  How- 
true  to  human  nature  was  the  course  of  Rawana  !  and  how  many  we  find  to- 
day that  have  forgotten  the  God  that  gave  them  all  they  possess  !  {J.  Bibb.) 
Who  led  thee  through  that  great  and  terrible  wilderness.  The  Christian 
aspect  and  use  of  politics : — It  is  a  common  saying  in  these  days  that  politics, 
as  the  phrase  is,  "run  high,"  and  are  likely  to  continue  to  run  high  for 
some  years  to  come.  And  this  is  perfectly  true,  so  far  as  the  present  is  con- 
cerned, and  is  likely  to  prove  true  in  the  future  also.  Great  issues  have  to  be 
fought  out.  The  area,  too,  over  which  the  interest  in  politics  is  felt  has 
been  widened  by  the  spread  of  education  and  the  extension  of  political  rights. 
Men's  convictions  and  affections  and  prejudices  and  passions  are  deeply  engaged 
in  the  questions  of  the  day.  They  feel  and  speak  warmly  on  one  side  and  on. 
the  other.  And  the  result  is  what  we  see,  and  perhaps,  to  a  certain  extent, 
suffer  from.  The  Christian  ministry  would  stand  self-condemned  if  it  had  not 
a  word  in  season  to  say  at  a  time  like  the  present.  To  bring  the  whole  subject 
to  the  purest  light,  which  is  the  light  of  Christ ;  to  lift  our  thoughts  to  the 
highest  point  of  view  ;  to  connect  present  trials  and  difl&culties  with  our  life  as  men, 
and  as  Christian  men,  so  that  they  may  become  no  longer  injurious  to  us,  but 
a  wholesome  discipline — this  is  the  object  of  the  present  discourse.  1.  A  time  of 
political  stir  and  agitation,  when  great  questions  are  being  discussed  and  settled,  is 
in  many  ways  much  better  than  a  time  of  apathy  and  stagnation.  If  it  calls  out 
some  of  the  fiercer  passions  of  our  nature,  it  calls  out  also  the  nobler  qualities.  It 
helps  to  make  the  political  atmosphere,  if  more  stormy,  yet  less  liable  to  become 
venal,  corrupt,  and  impure.  A  recent  traveller  in  America,  an  observer  of  much 
acuteness,  has  remarked  upon  the  gravity,  the  seriousness,  the  seeming  melancholy 
of  the  American  character.  Can  it  be  matter  of  surprise  that  it  should  be  so  ? 
Could  a  nation  pass  through  a  tremendous  crisis  like  that  of  the  still  recent  civil 
war  without  bearing  the  mark  of  it  upon  its  brow  for  many  a  long  year  after- 


CHAP.  VIII.]  DEUTERONOMY.  283 

wards  ?  Is  it  the  dream  of  a  visionary  or  of  an  enthusiast  to  hope  that  the 
critical  times  through  which  our  own  beloved  country  is  passing  may  leave  a 
permanent  impress  for  good  upon  the  national  character  ?  2.  But  this  view  of  the 
gain  which  may  accrue  to  all  true  manliness  of  character,  through  the  demand  at 
present  made  upon  it,  requires  to  he  extended  and  modified  by  an  additional  con- 
sideration. "We  must  not  forget  that  what  we  want  is  not  a  heathen,  but  a 
Christian  manliness.  And  this  involves  higher  qualities,  such  as  gentleness,  con- 
siderateness,  courtesy,  sympathy,  as  well  as  the  sterner  stuff  of  truth  and  courage 
and  endurance.  England's  gi-eat  need  at  the  present  day  is  of  wise  counsels  and 
of  gentle  hands,  to  heal  the  wounds  of  society,  to  interpret  the  various  sections 
and  classes  to  each  other,  and  to  unite  them  together,  so  that  all  may  seek  the 
common  good  and  feel  that  they  are  all  members  of  one  commonwealth.  Those 
wounds  of  society  are  deep  and  many.  Pauperism,  drunkenness,  crime,  ignorance, 
vice,  misery  ;  who  can  reflect  on  these  giant  evils,  these  horrible  sores,  of  our  social 
state,  without  feeling  that  the  triumph  of  a  party  is  not  worth  a  moment's  thought 
compared  with  the  removal  of  such  evils  and  the  cure  of  such  diseases  ?  3.  If  I 
were  to  look  for  a  motto,  which  I  might  take  it  upon  me  to  recommend  to  all  those 
who  are  in  any  way  engaged  or  interested  in  politics,  I  should  select  that  noble 
Christian  rule  which  St.  Peter  gives  us,  "Honour  all  men."  No  three  words  that 
I  know  of  cut  more  decisively  at  the  root,  whether  of  the  false  Toryism  which 
delights  in  patronising  and  domineering,  or  of  the  false  Liberalism  which  hates  all 
that  is  above  itself  and  longs  to  pull  it  down  to  its  own  level,  but  has  no  wish  to 
raise  what  is  below,  and  whose  ruling  spring  is  not  a  genuine  human  sympathy, 
but  pure  selfishness  and  scorn.  Yes,  "honour  all  men";  not  the  few  only  who 
are  above  us,  but  the  many  who  are  below  us.  The  grounds  of  this  noble  Christian 
motto  lie  deep  in  the  Gospel  of  Christ.  That  common  human  nature,  which  Christ 
Himself,  the  Son  of  God,  has  condescended  to  wear,  cannot  but  be  a  sacred  thing 
in  the  eyes  of  all  His  followers.  But  more  than  this,  it  stands  in  such  close 
fundamental  connection  with  Him,  and  He  with  it,  that  in  honouring  it  we  are 
in  fact  honouring  Him.  4.  In  sober  truth  and  earnest,  the  responsibility  which 
attaches  to  every  citizen,  even  the  humblest,  of  our  common  country  at  a  time  like 
this,  is  a  heavy  one,  and  might  well  avail  to  call  out  all  the  dignity,  honour,  and 
manliness  that  are  in  each,  though  too  often,  it  may  be,  latent  there.  Each  con- 
tributes something  by  word,  by  influence,  by  sympathy,  to  present  tendencies. 
Each  contributes  some  drop,  as  it  were,  to  the  mighty  tide,  which  is  bearing  us 
onwards  into  the  future.  Each  is' therefore  helping  now  to  determine  what  that 
future  shall  be  ;  our  own  future,  our  children's  future,  our  country's  future.  Act 
neither  from  fear  nor  favour.  Act  as  in  the  sight  of  God,  looking  to  Him  to 
purify  our  motives,  to  inspire  us  with  wisdom  and  courage,  to  make  us  tolerant, 
too,  and  conciliatory,  as  well  as  steadfast  and  resolute.  Then  we  shall  be  blessed 
ourselves,  and  our  country  will  be  blessed  also.  5.  Lastly,  let  it  never  be  forgotten 
by  us  that,  come  what  may,  God's  kingdom  is  over  all.  {Canon  D.  J.  Vaughan.) 
The  journey  towards  the  promised  land : — These  words  were  addressed  by  Moses  to 
the  Israelites  when,  having  at  length  reached  the  end  of  their  protracted  wander- 
ings through  the  wilderness,  they  were  on  the  point  of  taking  possession  of  the 
promised  land.  The  veteran  leader  exhorts  his  companions  in  toil  and  suffering  to 
cast  a  retrospective  glance  on  the  memorable  period  of  their  existence  which  is  now 
drawing  to  its  close,  and  to  consider  it  as  a  time  ^of  humiliation,  of  trial,  of 
providential  education,  necessary  to  fit  them  for  the  possession  of  Canaan  after 
the  thraldom  of  Egypt.  The  application  of  this  text  is  simple  :  Israel  is  the 
people  of  God.  Egypt,  that  house  of  bondage,  is  sin  ;  the  slavery  of  the  prince  of 
darkness.  Canaan,  that  promised  land,  is  heaven.  The  wilderness,  the  great  and 
howling  wilderness  through  which  God  leads  us,  is  the  world  of  sin  and  suffering,  in 
which  He  leaves  us  yet  awhile.  Let  us  consider  these  words  in  relation  to  our  past, 
present,  and  future,  and  endeavour  to  i.  understand  the  solemn  significance  and 
sublime  end  of  our  earthly  pilgrimage.  I.  The  past.  The  time  which  immedi- 
ately followed  the  rescue  of  Israel  from  Egypt  was  undoubtedly  one  of  the  grandest 
epochs  in  the  history  of  that  people.  With  one  voice  they  sang  that  magnificent 
song,  the  most  ancient  and  one  of  the  finest  monuments  of  that  noblest  of  all 
poetry  —  Hebrew  poetry  (Exod.  xv.).  But  alas!  how  shortlived  was  this 
enthusiasm  !  Deliverance  was  followed  by  protracted  trial.  Instead  of  the 
gates  of  Canaan  open  to  receive  them,  the  Israelites  found  only  a  great  and  terrible 
wilderness  through  which  God  led  them,  against  their  will,  towards  the  ultimate 
good  He  had  in  view  for  them.     Is  not  this  an  image  of  oxirselves  ?    Who  is  there 


284  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  viir. 

that  has  not  felt  similar  emotions  to  those  experienced  by  the  Israelites  on  the 
morrow  of  the  passage  of  the  Red  Sea  ?  On  the  high  road  to  the  promised  land, 
with  the  foretaste  of  eternal  life  in  our  hearts,  in  the  fervour  of  our  first  love,  in 
the  outburst  of  our  gratitude,  we  gladly  exclaim  with  Simeon  :  **  Now  lettest  Thou 
Thy  servant  depart  in  peace."  And  it  is  from  the  very  depths  of  our  heart  that, 
as  we  take  our  first  step  towards  the  fatherland,  we  renew  the  engagement  of  the 
Israelites  of  old,  and  promise  that,  "All  the  Lord  hath  spoken  we  will  do." 
But  the  descent  from  these  sublime  heights  soon  commeuces.  To  what  may  our 
experience  at  such  times  be  compared  ?  You  have  seen,  after  a  dark  night,  the 
sun  begin  its  daily  course  in  more  than  ordinary  radiance,  the  sky  is  a  glowing 
canopy  of  gold  and  purple,  the  earth  revels  in  floods  of  light  ;  .  .  .  tlien,  by 
degi-ees,  this  brightness  dims  ;  clouds,  at  first  almost  imperceptible,  thicken  and 
condense  in  the  atmosphere ;  the  sky  becomes  overcast,  and  the  horizon  is  dull 
and  cold  ;  the  rain  begms  to  fall,  thin,  uninterrupted,  penetrating,  and  the  heart 
grows  heavy  and  chill.  Such,  in  most  cases,  is  the  long  day  of  human  life  after 
the  transient  dawn  which  announces  or  precedes  conversion,  and  from  the  depths 
of  your  soul  do  you  not  call  this  a  great  and  terrible  wiLlerness  ?  Have  you  never 
murmured  or  asked  yourself  the  question  :  "  Wherefore  this  long  journey  through 
this  barren  land?"  II.  The  presbnt.  "The  Lord  thy  God  hath  led  thee." 
"What  memories  were  these  words  calculated  to  awaken  in  the  mind  of  the  Israelites? 
If  God  ever  manifested  the  providence  of  Omnipotence  in  a  striking  manner  upon 
earth,  it  certainly  was  during  the  wanderings  of  His  people  through  the  desert. 
And  though  the  Divine  providence  that  leads  us  on  in  our  turn  be  not  miraculous, 
as  during  the  journey  of  the  Hebrews,  it  is,  however,  none  the  less  real  and 
marvellous.  That  which  the  people  of  God  witnessed  by  the  eye  of  the  body 
may  yet  be  manifest  to  the  eye  of  faith.  The  mercies  of  former  days  are  pledges 
of  those  we  are  permitted  to  expect  in  the  present.  But  wherefore  this  wilderness  ? 
Why  not  immediate  peace,  triumph,  and  glory  I  Hear  the  answer  of  Him  whose 
every  act  tends  to  an  excellent  end  :  "  That  He  might  humble  thee,  to  prove  thee." 
The  purpose  of  the  Lord  was  to  bring  the  will  of  His  people  into  subjection,  to 
train  them  to  obedience,  to  sanctify  them  in  the  highest  and  noblest  sense  of  the 
word.  And  everything  down  to  the  minutest  details  was  chosen,  ordained,  calcu- 
lated with  a  view  to  the  ultimate  result.  Thus  it  is  with  us.  We  are  placed,  here 
below,  in  presence  of  a  maturity  to  be  attained  ;  and  no  fruit  can  ripen  unless  it 
has  felt  the  burning  rays  of  the  sun.  We  are  being  educated,  and  there  can  be  no 
thorough  education  without  stern  discipline.  We  are  going  towards  a  promised 
land,  but  the  path  to  it  lies  through  a  valley  of  tears.  Behveen  this  conception, 
which  is  that  of  faith  and  a  blind  fatalism,  the  very  thought  of  which  is  bewilder- 
ing, there  is  no  middle  course.  It  is  good  for  us  to  be  tried.  If  we  knew  naught 
of  "the  sufferings  of  this  present  time,"  should  we  know  "the  weight  of  glory 
which  shall  be  revealed  to  usward "  which  they  are  meant  to  bring  forth  ?  Let 
us  beware,  however,  lest  by  our  folly  w^e  add  to  our  measure  of  affliction,  and 
thus  constrain  the  Lord  to  humble  and  chasten  us  beyond  His  own  purpose. 
III.  The  FUTUEE.  "To  do  thee  good  at  thy  latter  end."  The  constant  end  of 
God  is  good.  Faith  reveals  to  us  and  the  Scriptures  declare  that  "  all  things  work 
together  for  good,"  &c.  Even  upon  earth,  whoever  remembers  all  the  way  which 
the  Lord  his  God  hath  led  him,  linds  at  the  end  of  each  trial  a  mature  fruit,  "the 
peaceable  fruit  of  righteousness,"  to  be  received  ultimately.  And  what  shall  it  be 
when  the  fashion  of  this  world  liath  passed  away,  and  all  the  ends  of  the  Lord 
Avith  a  view  to  the  final  good  of  His  saints  shall  be  manifested  ?  These  forty  years 
of  pilgrimage  through  the  wilderness  werp  a  sore  trial  for  Israel.  But  how  glorious 
was  the  day  when  at  length  they  reached  the  end,  and  obtained  the  reward  of  so 
much  toil  and  suffering  !  Who,  then,  remembered  the  weariness  of  the  road  save 
to  praise  Jehovah,  who  had  led  them  to  so  goodly  an  inheritance  ?  For  us  also 
there  shall  be  a  crossing  of  Jordan  and  an  entrance  into  the  heavenly  Canaan,  of 
which  the  earthly  was  but  a  feeble  type.  We,  too,  shall  have  our  day  of  triumph, 
a  day  when  the  sun,  which  marks  the  stages  of  our  journey,  shall  set  amid  the 
shadows  of  a  last  eventide,  to  rise  again  for  us  radiant  and  cloudless  for  evermore. 
God's  purpose  is  to  do  us  good  at  our  latter  end  !  Forward,  then,  in  peace  and 
hope  I  Soon  all  things  shall  become  new  !  Faith  to-day  ;  sight  to-morrow  ! 
Weariness  now  ;  rest  by  and  by  !  Here  the  desert ;  beyond  the  promised  land  I 
Forward!  Excelsior!  {Frank  Coulin,  D.D.)  Scorpions. — The  scorpion: — 
Our  subject  is  the  scorpion — a  dreadful  insect  which  is  as  full  of  lessons  as  it 
id  of  venom.    The  scorpion  is  iu  reality  a  terrible  kind  of  spider,  and  has  tho 


CHAP,  vni.]  DEUTERONOMY.  285 

venom  claw  at  the  end  of  its  body,  not  in  its  jaw.  Scorpions  do  not  look 
unlike  lobsters,  as  we  see  them  collected  in  a  basket  on  their  way  to  the  market. 
These  uncomfortable  creatures,  the  scorpions,  manage  in  some  way  to  secrete 
themselves  in  hidden  nooks  and  corners,  and  one  experienced  in  travelling  in 
the  East — where  scorpions  abound — will  be  careful  where  he  takes  his  seat  until 
he  has  discovered  whether  there  are  any  scorpions  or  venomous  spiders  hidden 
under  the  rocks  near  where  he  may  happen  to  be.  The  scorpion  has  a  peculiar 
venom,  some  of  the  larger  scorpions  being  able  to  make  a  man  very  ill,  and  even  to 
kill  him  if  he  should  be  one  subject  to  inflammation.  The  scorpions  were  so  much 
feared  by  the  early  Christians  and  the  apostles  of  our  Lord,  that  we  find  He  pro- 
mised them  safety  from  their  stings,  and  the  bite  of  poisonous  reptiles.  So  much, 
then,  for  the  scorpion.  Let  us  now  learn  the  lessons  which  this  venomous  creature 
teaches  us.  L  First  of  all,  we  leam  from  the  scorpion — the  lesson  of  the  hidden 
POWER  OF  VENOM.  Venomous  thoughts  are  thoughts  of  malice,  and  spite,  and 
malignity  j  that  is  why  we  always  want  to  kill  a  viper,  or  a  snake,  or  a  black 
spider,  because  we  know  that  it  is  filled  with  venom,  or  poison,  or  some  noxious 
material,  which  will  give  us  pain  or  perhaps  cause  our  death.  A  venomous  writer 
is  one  who  is  malignant  and  mischievous.  A  venomous  neighbour  is  one  who  is 
spiteful,  and  has  evil  designs  upon  us.  We  don't  know  how  it  is  that  we  have  this 
evil  wiUiin  us  ;  but  it  is  very  evident  that  in  some  way  venom  is  within  us,  just  as 
truly  as  it  is  within  the  poisonous  scorpion.  Let  us  beware  of  this  hidden  power 
of  venom  within  us,  for  the  poison  as  '  *  of  asps  "  is  indeed  under  our  lips.  II.  The 
second  lesson  we  leam  from  the  scorpion  is — the  lesson  of  the  poisoning  power 
OF  SIN.  The  following  illustrates  what  we  mean.  In  the  chemical  laboratories  of 
our  colleges  there  are  many  expeiiments  made  which  show  us  the  wonderful  power 
of  a  single  drop  of  poison.  A  great  bottle  of  colourless  water  will  become  a  thick 
and  clouded  white  in  an  instant  by  the  addition  of  a  single  drop  of  the  prepared 
chemical ;  and  one  drop  of  poison,  such  as  strychnia,  will  paralyse  in  an  instant  a 
living  being,  such  as  the  gold-fish,  turtles,  and  tadpoles  which  we  see  in  a  vase  of 
water.  But  none  of  these  poisons  is  so  powerful  as  the  poison  of  sin  (James  i.  15). 
I  was  reading,  some  time  ago,  a  story  which  shows  us  the  poisoning  power  of  sin. 
A  man  who  wished  to  buy  a  handsome  ring  went  into  a  jeweller's  in  Paris.  The 
jeweller  showed  him  a  very  ancient  gold  ring,  remarkably  fine,  and  curious  on  this 
account,  that  on  the  inside  of  it  were  two  little  lion's  claws.  The  buyer,  while 
looking  at  the  others,  was  playing  with  this.  At  last  he  purchased  another,  and 
went  away.  But  he  had  scarcely  reached  home,  when  first  his  hand,  then  his 
side,  then  his  whole  body  became  numb  and  without  feeling,  as  if  he  had  a  stroke 
of  palsy  ;  and  it  grew  worse  and  worse,  till  the  physician,  who  came  in  haste, 
thought  him  dying.  "You  must  have  somehow  taken  poison,"  he  said.  The  sick 
man  protested  that  he  had  not.  At  length  some  one  remembered  this  ring  ;  and  it 
was  then  discovered  to  be  what  used  to  be  called  a  death-ring,  and  which  was  often 
employed  in  those  wicked  Italian  States  three  or  four  hundred  years  ago.  If  a 
man  hated  another,  and  desired  to  murder  him,  he  would  present  him  with  one  of 
them.  In  the  inside  was  a  drop  of  deadly  poison,  and  a  very  small  hole  out  of 
which  it  would  not  make  its  way  except  when  squeezed.  When  the  poor  man  was 
wearing  it,  the  murderer  would  come  and  shake  his  hand  violently,  the  lion's  claw 
would  give  his  linger  a  little  scratch,  and  in  a  few  hours  he  was  a  dead  man. 
III.  The  third,  and  last,  lesson  that  we  learn  from  the  scorpion  is — the  lessox 
OF  THE  MISERY  OF  spiTEFULNESS.  There  is  nothing  in  life  so  miserable  and  con- 
temptible as  the  spirit  of  spitefulness ;  that  is,  the  spirit  of  envy  at  another's 
success.  There  is  something  spiteful  and  venomous  about  the  bite  of  an  insect 
or  reptile :  a  bite  from  a  mosquito,  a  spider,  or  a  snake  will  always  make  us 
think  of  the  spitefulness  of  the  creature  that  has  bitten  us.  {R.  Newton,  D.D.) 
Who  fed  thee  in  the  wilderness  with  manna. — The  manna  which  humbled  Israel : 
— What  was  there  in  God's  gift  of  manna  to  humble  Israel?  We  should  rather 
think  it  placed  them  in  a  high  and  distinguished  rank  among  nations.  Whom 
else  did  God  feed  thus  ?  It  did  exalt  Israel ;  it  did  point  him  out  and  distinguish 
him  far  above  the  Hittites  or  Jebusites,  or  even  the  voluptuous  and  powerful 
Egyptians  ;  and  yet  it  humbled  him.  To  humble  is  not  to  humiliate  ;  humility  is 
not  humiliation.  When  shall  humility  be  at  its  height  ?  When  tears  and  sighs 
and  sickness  and  poverty  have  brought  you  down  to  the  very  grave  ?  No  such 
thing.  When  death  has  paralysed  every  power  of  body,  and  perhaps  shaken  the 
mind  itself  into  a  wreck  ?  No  such  thing.  When  the  world  sneers  and  contemns 
your  piety,  and  calls  you  the  filth  and  offscouring  of  all  things !    No  such  thing. 


286  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  viii. 

But  look  onward !  look  upward !  Who  are  they  falling  down  before  Him  that 
sitteth  upon  the  throne,  and  casting  their  crowns  at  His  feet?  They  are  redeemed, 
and  crowned,  and  glorified  spirits  ;  they  are  the  most  humble  of  our  race  ;  humility 
is  made  perfect,  not  in  sorrows  and  scotfs,  but  there,  midst  harps  and  crowns  and 
palms  and  songs.  And  since  the  Lord  wiU  thus  perfect  your  humility  by  crowning 
you  and  receiving  you  to  heaven,  it  is  no  hard  matter  to  suppose  that  God  might 
give  Israel  manna  "to  humble"  them.  The  fact,  then,  is  certain  ;  but  how  is  it 
brought  about  ?  by  what  process  did  the  manna  humble  Israel  ?  First  of  all  it  did 
so  by  the  mystery  of  its  dispensation  ;  and  thus  Moses  distinctly  calls  it  ''manna 
which  thy  fathers  knew  not."  Neither  Abraham  nor  Isaac  nor  Jacob  had  seen  such 
a  thing;  the  oldest  Israelite  had  never  eaten  such  food;  it  was  "manna  which 
thy  fathers  knew  not."  And  the  Israelites  then  alive  were  equally  ignorant  of  its 
nature  ;  with  the  manna  actually  before  them  it  was  still  a  mystery  to  them.  They 
could  not  tell  how  it  came,  or  whence  it  came,  they  simply  could  say  they  gathered 
it.  And  then  there  was  the  gathering,  equally  unaccountable.  It  was  gathered  in 
the  morning,  yet  if  any  man  should  grudge  his  daily  labour  of  collecting  it,  and  his 
daily  recognition  of  Him  who  gave  it — if  any  man  should  try  to  make  one  morning's 
collection  do  for  two  days'  food,  behold  on  the  morrow  his  pot  of  manna  is  a  pot 
of  corruption,  and  instead  of  food  he  finds  worms.  And  then  if  any  Israelite 
should  dare  to  forget  or  to  outrage  the  Sabbath  by  not  collecting  a  double  portion 
on  the  sixth  day,  he  finds  the  ground  all  bare  ;  the  wilderness  is  arid  and  fruitless 
as  ever  ;  for  bread  he  finds  stones.  But  how  did  all  this  mystery  humble  them  ? 
"Why,  it  taught  them,  and  made  them  feel  their  own  ignorance.  Let  the  Jew  take 
up  that  "  small  round  thing  as  small  as  the  hoar  frost  on  the  ground,"  and  let  him 
tell  me  how  it  is  made  or  whence  it  came.  Not  all  the  subtle  learning  of  Egypt, 
which  some  of  them  doubtlessly  possessed,  could  teach  them  this  lesson  ;  that  grain 
of  food  is  a  puzzle  for  603,000  men  besides  the  Levites ;  the  manna  tended  to 
humble  them.  And  so  with  you.  True,  you  have  no  food  sent  and  gathered  in 
a  most  incomprehensible  manner  ;  but  every  mercy  you  have  which  you  do  not 
understand  takes  its  place  side  by  side  with  the  manna,  and  on  the  self-same 
principle  ought  to  humble  you.  How,  Christian,  wast  thou  born  again?  "The 
wind  bloweth  where  it  listeth,"  &c.  And  what  is  every  step  in  the  believer's  career 
but  a  mystery  of  love — a  mystery  of  grace  ?  ' '  Great  is  the  mystery  of  godliness  " — 
great  in  the  work  of  redemption  by  Christ — great  in  the  application  of  that  work 
by  His  Spirit — all,  all,  a  great  mystery  from  first  to  last.  And  shall  we,  standing 
as  we  do  amidst  the  crowd  of  deep  and  awful  truths — shall  we,  feeling  in  our  own 
hearts  that  love  "  which  passeth  knowledge,"  and  that  power  which  like  a  hidden 
magnet  draws  us  to  holiness  and  God — shall  we,  surrounded  by  the  ' '  deep  things 
of  God  " — shall  we  be  aught  else  than  nothing  in  our  own  sight  ?  But,  again,  the 
gift  of  manna  tended  to  produce  this  humbling  effect  by  its  greatness.  I  am  not 
disposed  to  elevate  the  importance  of  "the  meat  which  perisheth,"  or  to  prove  the 
vastness  of  God's  gift  to  Israel  by  the  fact  that  myriads  of  lives  depended  on  the 
regular  supply  of  this  food.  Neither  will  I  dwell  on  the  abundance  in  which 
manna  strewed  the  spot  of  Israel's  encampment ;  there  was  no  lack  in  any  tent  of 
Jacob  ;  the  patriarch  of  a  large  family  fared  as  well  as  though  he  had  been  childless 
and  alone.  Want  was  unknown  in  that  mighty  camp  ;  all  was  plenty.  Now  this 
abundance  alone  would  prove  the  greatness  of  God's  gift ;  but  we  may  rest  our 
proof  on  higher  grounds,  and  assert  that  whatever  the  nature  of  the  manna,  and 
whether  sparingly  or  profusely  given,  the  simple  fact  that  God  gave  it  makes  it  at 
once  a  great  and  unspeakable  gift.  A  present  from  a  great  man  is  esteemed  great 
from  the  very  greatness  of  the  donor.  If  the  King  were  to  give  you  some  token 
of  his  regard,  let  it  be  trifling  as  it  will — a  mere  baiible — yet  how  highly  would 
you  prize  it !  a  case  of  gold  is  not  too  precious  a  casket  for  it.  What,  then,  must 
be  a  gift  from  God  !  The  greatness  therefore  of  Him  who  gave  Israel  manna,  and 
the  love  which  the  provision  displayed,  made  it  a  great  gift.  But  how  did  its 
magnitude  tend  to  humble  Israel  ?  Why,  by  calling  to  Israel's  continual  remem- 
brance their  own  nnworthiness,  and  God's  matchless  and  free  mercy.  And,  surely 
the  bounty  of  your  Lord  afl'ects  you  in  the  same  way ;  it  must  teach  you  your 
nnworthiness.  "The goodness  of  God  leadeth  you  to  repentance"  ;  and  thus  Paul 
entreats  the  Romans,  "  I  beseech  you  by  the  mercies  of  God."  It  must  be  a  callous 
and  a  dead  heart  which  does  not  feel  its  baseness  whilst  filling  itself  with  new 
and  full  supplies  of  Divine  goodness.  The  son  may  be  hardened  by  rebuke  or  by 
punishment;  he  may  be  caUous  to  recollections  of  past  affection  and  care;  but 
often  as  he  holds  out  his  hand  to  receive  some  gift  of  his  pardoning  father,  that 


CHAP.  VIII.]  DEUTERONOMY.  287 

seared  conscience  speaks,  that  hard  heart  breaks,  that  rebellious  arm  trembles,  and 
he  who  could  dare  a  father's  curse  shrinks  and  quails  before  a  father's  gift,  his 
unworthiness  pressing  on  him  with  a  weight  he  never  felt  before,  and  mercy  accus- 
ing him  more  powerfully  than  all  the  reproaches  which  lips  could  utter.  And  in 
spirituals  you  will  find  there  is  nothing  which  impresses  the  soul  with  so  deep  a 
sense  of  guilt  as  a  sense  of  Divine  mercy.  I  may  reckon  up  a  long  catalogue  of 
your  sins  ;  I  may  tell  you  of  all  the  guilty  deeds  you  have  done  since  childhood  ; 
but  if  I  can,  by  the  grace  and  power  of  the  Spirit,  put  into  your  heart  one  evidence 
of  Christ's  love  for  sinners,  I  have  done  more  towards  your  conviction  of  guilt  than 
if  I  had  opened  the  two  tables  of  law,  and  tried  your  every  act  by  the  light  of 
judgment.  Sins  will  strike  a  man  low,  but  God's  mercies  will  gently  lay  him  lower 
still.  The  penitent  often  sinks  deeply  and  more  deeply  in  the  slough  of  despond  ; 
but  there  is  a  place  where  his  position  is  lower  still — it  is  the  Cross  of  Christ ;  and 
when  we  need  to  learn  or  teach  a  lesson  of  self-renunciation,  you  may  depend 
upon  it  the  best  subject  for  study  is  not  the  magnitude  and  the  multitude  of  your 
sins  alone,  but  the  magnitude  and  the  multitude  of  the  Lord's  mercies.  {D.  F. 
Jarman,  M.A.) 

Ver.  18.  Remember  the  Lord  thy  God,  for  it  is  He  that  giveth  thee  power  to  get 
wealth.— To  remember  God  is  the  way  to  get  wealth:— I.  The  duty  enjoined. 
Thou  shalt  remember  the  Lord,  &c.  1.  In  point  of  contemplation  to  remember 
Him,  that  is,  to  think  of  Him,  and  to  have  Him  often  in  our  minds.  There's  no 
man  that  forgets  his  treasure  ;  wherever  that  is,  there  will  be  also  his  heart,  as  our 
Saviour  tells  us.  We  need  not  call  upon  worldly  men  to  remember  their  gold  and 
silver  and  riches,  they  will  think  upon  these  of  their  own  accord,  and  all  because 
such  things  as  these  are  dear  with  them.  In  like  manner  will  it  be  with  us  to  God  ; 
if  He  be  our  treasure,  we  shall  remember  and  daily  think  of  Him,  as  it  is  fitting 
for  us  to  do.  2.  As  in  point  of  contemplation,  so  also  in  point  of  afiection.  We  are 
said  to  remember  any  one,  not  when  barely  we  think  upon  him,  but  when  we  think 
upon  him  with  respect,  when  he  is  not  only  in  our  thoughts  but  in  our  hearts.  And 
thus  likewise  are  we  said  to  remember  God.  3.  In  point  of  obedience  to  remember 
God  is  to  be  subject  to  Him,  and  to  do  that  which  He  requires.  Those  that  walk  in 
ways  of  opposition  and  contrariety  to  God,  they  are  said  to  forget  Him.  Consider 
this  ye  that  forget  God  (Psa.  1.  22).  4.  In  point  of  address  and  seeking  to  Him, 
and  reliance  and  dependence  upon  Him.  When  anything  is  to  be  done  by  us,  or 
for  us,  that  we  be  sure  to  call  upon  God  Himself  for  the  prospering  of  it  to  us 
(Prov.  iii.  5,  6).  5.  In  point  of  thankfulness  and  acknowledgment  we  are  then 
said  to  remember  God,  when  we  own  Him  in  all  the  mercies  which  we  enjoy  from 
Him.  This  is  the  proper  drift  of  this  present  Scripture,  as  we  may  see  by  the  con- 
text, in  vers.  10,  11,  &c.,  of  this  chapter.  When  thou  hast  eaten  and  art  full,  thou 
shalt  bless  the  Lord  thy  God  for  the  good  land  which  He  hath  given  thee.  Beware 
that  thou  forget  not  the  Lord  thy  God,  in  not  keeping  His  commandments  and  His 
judgments,  &c.  Because,  indeed,  it  is  that  which  we  are  naturally  and  commonly 
too  prone  and  subject  unto.  (1)  From  His  sovereignty,  that  He  is  the  Lord,  we 
should  remember  Him  for  that,  and  accordingly  yield  all  respect  and  acknowledg- 
ment to  Him.  (2)  From  the  word  of  propriety,  and  that  interest  which  He  has  in 
us  and  we  in  Him :  "Thy  God."  II.  The  reason  annexed.  For  it  is  He  that 
giveth  thee  power  to  get  wealth,  which  passage  may  be  considered  two  ways.  First, 
in  its  absolute  consideration  ;  and,  secondly,  in  its  connexion.  We  will  look  upon 
it  first  of  all  in  the  former  consideration,  as  it  is  absolute,  and  by  way  of  proposi- 
tion. 1.  Emphatically.  When  it  is  said  here  He  gives  power,  this  power,  it  may 
be  said,  laid  forth  according  to  sundry  explications.  (1)  He  gives  the  skill  and 
faculty  which  does  tend  and  conduce  hereunto.  All  your  arts  and  trades  of  your 
several  societies  in  the  city,  and  ability  for  the  managing  of  them,  God  is  the  author 
and  giver  of  them.  And  being  the  giver  of  them,  He  is  also  consequently  the  giver 
of  that  wealth  that  comes  by  them.  He  gives  thee  power  to  get  wealth,  while  He 
gives  thee  skill  and  understanding.  And  this  again  not  only  in  the  general  habit, 
but  also  as  to  the  particular  act  and  improvement  and  the  exercise  of  that  habit 
which  is  in  Him.  (2)  He  gives  thee  power  to  get  wealth,  that  is,  He  gives  thee 
occasion  and  opportunity  to  do  so.  Thus  in  a  way  of  husbandry,  there  is  the 
seasonableness  of  the  weather.  Thus  in  a  way  of  merchandise,  there  is  the 
favourableness  of  the  seas  and  waters  and  winds,  which  are  at  God's  command  and 
disposing.  (3)  The  power  of  success :  it  is  He  that  gives  this  likewise,  when  all 
things  are  prepared  in  the  means  as  much  as  can  be,  yet  there  is  a  further  blessing 


288  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  CcH.\i.  vin. 

which  is  required  for  the  perfecting  of  them.  And  this  is  also  from  God  Himself. 
It  is  the  blessing  of  the  Lord  that  makes  rich,  and  adds  no  sorrow  with  it,  as 
Solomon  tells  us  (Frov.  x.  22).  (4)  It  is  God  that  gives  thee  power  to  get  wealth  ; 
that  is,  that  gives  thee  grace,  and  makes  thy  gettings  to  be  lawful  to  thee.  To  get 
wealtli  in  God's  way  and  according  to  His  approbation  ;  this  is  power  to  get  wealth 
indeed.  And  this  also,  together  with  all  the  former,  is  the  gift  of  God.  2.  Exclus- 
ively. When  it  is  said  here  that  He  gives  this  power,  this  is  to  be  taken  not  only 
emphatically,  but  exclusively  ;  and  so  there  are  these  intimations  in  it.  (1)  That 
wealth  and  riches  and  great  estates  they  are  not  matters  of  mere  accident,  and 
casualty,  and  chance ;  but  that  there  is  a  special  hand  of  Providence  in  them. 
(2)  It  is  not  from  ourselves  neither,  that  we  do  any  time  come  to  be  rich  and  to 
increase  in  wealth.  It  is  the  gift  of  God.  (3)  It  is  not  from  other  men  neither, 
it  is  exclusive  of  them.  Parents  and  friends  and  progenitors,  and  such  as  these. 
Indeed,  Solomon  tells  us  in  one  place  that  houses  and  riches  are  the  inheritance 
of  fathers  (Prov.  xix.  14).  But  this  must  be  understood  so  far  as  they  are  able  to 
make  them,  which  is  not  absolutely,  but  with  its  restriction.  How  many  have 
there  been  in  the  world  who,  though  they  have  had  great  estates  left  them  by 
others,  yet  notwithstanding  have  been  poor  themselves ;  and  have  not  known 
either  how  to  increase  or  how  to  keep  that  which  has  been  left  them.  We  have 
seen  how  He  does  it  emphatically ;  He  is  not  wanting  in  doing  it ;  we  have  seen 
also  how  He  does  it  exclusively.  There  is  none  to  purpose  that  does  it  but  He. 
First,  He  gives  thee  power  to  keep  it ;  and,  secondly,  He  gives  thee  power  to  use  it. 
(T.  Horion,  D.D.)  The  theology  of  money : — What  a  blow  this  text  strikes  at  one 
of  the  most  popular  and  mischievous  fallacies  in  common  life,  namely,  that  man  is 
the  maker  of  his  own  money  I  Men  who  can  see  God  in  the  creation  of  worlds 
cannot  see  Him  suggesting  an  idea  in  business,  smiling  on  the  plough,  guiding  the 
merchant's  pen,  and  bringing  summer  into  a  brain  long  winter-bound  and  barren. 
Lebanon  and  Bashan  are  not  more  certainly  Divine  creations^than  are  the  wool  and 
flax  which  cover  the  nakedness  of  man.  To  the  religious  contemplation,  the  sancti- 
fied and  adoring  mind,  the  whole  world  is  one  sky-domed  church,  and  there  is 
nothing  common  or  unclean.  God  wishes  this  fact  to  be  kept  in  mind  by  His  people. 
In  this  instance,  as  in  many  others,  God  makes  His  appeal  to  recollection  :  "Thou 
fihalt  remember."  The  fact  is  to  be  ever  present  to  the  memory  ;  it  is  to  be  as  a 
star  by  which  our  course  upon  troubled  waters  is  to  be  regulated  ;  it  is  to  be  a 
mystic  cloud  in  the  daytime,  a  guiding  fire  in  the  night  season.  The  rich  memory 
should  create  a  rich  life.  An  empty  memory  is  a  continual  temptation.  Mark  the 
happy  consequences  of  this  grateful  recollection.  First  of  all,  God  and  wealth  are 
ever  to  be  thought  of  together.  *'  The  silver  and  the  gold  are  Mine."  There  is  but 
one  absolute  proprietor.  We  hold  our  treasures  on  loan  ;  we  occupy  a  stewardship. 
Consequent  upon  this  is  a  natural  and  most  beautiful  humility.  "  What  hast  thou 
that  thou  hast  not  received  ?  "  When  the  trader  sits  down  in  the  evening  to  count 
his  day's  gains,  he  is  to  remember  that  the  Lord  his  God  gave  him  power  to  get 
wealth.  When  the  workman  throws  down  the  instrument  of  his  labour  that  he 
may  receive  the  reward  of  his  toil,  he  is  to  remember  that  the  Lord  his  God  gave 
him  power  to  get  wealth.  When  the  young  man  receives  the  first  payment  of  his 
industry,  he  is  to  remember  that  the  Lord  his  God  gave  him  power  to  get  wealth. 
Thus  the  gettiug  of  money  becomes  a  sacred  act.  This,  then,  is  the  fundamental 
principle  upon  which  Christians  are  to  proceed,  namely,  that  God  giveth  man 
power  to  get  wealth,  and  consequently  that  God  sustains  an  immediate  relation  to 
the  property  of  the  world.  Take  the  case  of  a  young  man  just  entering  business. 
If  his  heart  is  uneducated  and  unwatched,  he  will  regard  business  as  a  species  of 
gambling  ;  if  his  heart  be  set  upon  right  principles,  he  will  esteem  business  as 
a  moral  service,  as  the  practical  side  of  his  prayers,  a  public  representation  of  his 
best  desires  and  convictions.  In  course  of  time  the  young  man  realises  money  on 
his  own  account.  Looking  at  his  gold  and  silver,  he  says,  "I  made  that."  There 
is  a  glow  of  honest  pride  on  his  cheek.  He  looks  upon  the  reward  of  his  industry, 
and  his  eyes  kindle  with  joy.  Whilst  he  looks  upon  his  first-earned  gold,  the  Bible 
says  to  him  gently  and  persuasively,  "Thou  shalt  remember  the  Lord  thy  God; 
for  it  is  He  that  giveth  thee  power  to  get  wealth."  Instantly  his  view  of  property 
is  elevated,  enlarged,  sanctified.  He  was  just  about  to  say  that  his  own  arm  had 
gotten  him  the  victory,  and  to  forget  that,  though  the  image  is  Caesar's,  yet  the  gold 
is  God's.  What,  then,  is  the  natural  line  of  thought  through  which  the  successful 
man  would  run  under  such  circumstances?  It  would  lie  in  some  such  direction  as 
this  :  What  can  be  the  meaning  of  this  word  "  remember  "  %    Does  it  not  call  me 


CHAP,  vm.]  DEUTERONOMY,  289 

to  gratitude  ?    Is  it  not  intended  to  turn  my  heart  and  my  eye  heavenward  ?    As 
God  has  given  me  "  power  to  get  wealth,"  am  I  not  bound  to  return  some  recogni- 
tion of  His  goodness  and  mercy  ?     "  Honour  the  Lord  with  thy  substance,  and  with 
the  first-fruits  of  all  thine  increase."    Supposing  this  to  be  done,  what  is  the  result 
which  is  promised  to  accrue  ?    That  result  is  stated  in  terms  that  are  severely 
logical  :  **So  shall  thy  barns  be  filled  with  plenty,  and  thy  presses  shall  burst  out 
with  new  wine."     The  text  has  called  us  to  an  act  of  remembrance,  and  in  doing 
so  has  suggested  the  inquiry  whether  there  is  any  such  act  of  remembrance  on  the 
part  of  God  Himself?    The  Scripture  is  abundant  in  its  replies  to  this  inquiry  : 
"For  God  is  not  unrighteous  to  forget  your  work  and  labour  of  love,  which  ye  have 
showed  towards  His  name,  in  that  ye  have  ministered  to  the  saints,  and  do  minis- 
ter."   Jesus  Christ  Himself  has  laid   down   the   same   encouiageraent  with  even 
minuter  allusion  :  "Whosoever  shall  give  to  drink  unto  one  of  these  little  ones  a 
cup  of  cold  water  only  in  the  name  of  a  disciple,  verily  I  sav  unto  you,  he  shall  in 
no  wise  lose  his  reward. "    {J.  Parker,  D.  D. )         The  inUloscyphy  of  worldly  success  ;— 
1.  How  worldly  success  is  to  be  obtained.     By  strict  obedience  to  God's  laws  ;  by 
this  only.     Work  is  what  He  demands,  and  work  is  the  only  condition  under  which 
the  prize  may  be  won.     2.  The  nature  of  the  profit  we  are  to  look  for.     Not  merely 
worldly  profit.     No  life  so  dreary,  so  deadly  as  that  of  the  mere  millionaire.     The 
joys  of  the  true  man's  life  he  cannot  taste  ;  the  holy  fellowships  of  spiritual  being 
he  cannot  enter  :  God  stamps  him  reprobate.     There  is  a  vast  wealth  of  faculty  in 
him,  "fusting"  from  want  of  use.     And  power  unused  soon  gets  acrid,  and  mor- 
dant, and  gnaws  and  wears  within.     3.  Why  we  should  remember  the  Lord  God. 
Because— (1)  It  will  bring  us  out  at  once  into  the  glad  sunlight,  and  will  make  even 
our  toil  lightsome.     (2)  It  will  spare  us  all  wearing  and  crushing  anxieties.     (3)  It 
will  save  us  the  shame  and  anguish  of  finding  ourselves  bankrupt  at  last  and  for 
ever.     (/.  B.  Brown,  B.A.)        God  acknowledged  .-—When  Speaker  Crook e  was 
presented  to  Queen  Elizabeth  in  the  House  of  Lords  on  the  occasion  of  his  election, 
he  said  that  England  had  been  defended  against  the  Spaniards  and  their  Armada 
by  Her  Majesty's  mighty  arm.     The  Queen  interrupted  him,  and  from  her  throne, 
said:  "  No  ;  but  by  the  mighty  hand  of  God,  Mr.  Speaker."        God  the  original 
source  of  wealth : — He  that  would  thus  critically  examine  his  estate  upon  interro- 
gatories, put  every  part  of  it  upon  the  rack  and  torture  to  confess  without  any 
disguise  from  whence  it  came,  whether  down  the  ladder  from  heaven,  or  up  out  of 
the  deep— for  there  it  seems  by  the  poets  Plutus  or  riches  hath  a  residence  also— 
by  what  means  it  was  conveyed,  by  whose  directions  it  travelled  into  that  coast, 
and  what  the  end  of  its  coming  is,  and  so  learn  the  genealogy  as  it  were  of  all  his 
wealth,  would  certainly  acknowledge  that  he  were  fallen  upon  a  most  profitable 
inquiry.     For  beside  that  he  would  find  out  all  the  ill-gotten  treasure,  that  gold  of 
Toulouse  that  is  so  sure  to  help  melt  all  the  rest,  that  which  is  gotten  by  sacrilege, 
by  oppression,  by  extortion,  and  so  take  timely  advice  to  purge  his  lawftil  inherit- 
ance from  such  noisome  unwholesome  acquisitions,  and  thrive  the  better  for  ever 
after  the  taking  so  necessary  a  purgation— he  will,  I  say,  over  and  above  see  the 
original  of  all  his  wealth,  all  that  is  worthy  to  be  called  such,  either  immediately  or 
niediately  from  God,  immediately  without  any  co-operation  of  ours,  as  that  which 
is  left  to  us  by  inheritance  from  honest  parents — our  fortunes  and  our  Christianity 
together,  mediately  as  that  which  our  lawful  labour,  our  planting  and  watering  hath 
brought  down  upon  us,  wholly  from  God's  prospering  or  giving  of  increase. 

Vers.  19,  20.  If  thou  do  at  aU  forget  the  Lord.— For getfulness  of  God,  destruction 
to  the  soul:— I.  What  is  that  forgetfulness  of  God  of  which  the  peesbnt 

EFFECTS  ON  OUR  MORAL  AND  RELIGIOUS  CHARACTER  ARE  SO  HIGHLY  INJURIOUS,  AND 
OF  WHICH  THE  FUTURE  CONSEQUENCES  IN  REGARD  TO  OUR  ETERNAL  PROSPECTS  ARE 

SO  DREADFULLY  FATAL.  1.  If  any  persous  can  rise  up  and  lie  down,  go  out  and 
^me  in,  dav  after  day,  and  week  after  week,  with  scarcely  a  transient  thought  of 
Sun  whose  hand  has  sustained  them,  whose  long-suffering  has  borne  with  them,  and 
whose  bountiful  goodness  has  supplied  their  various  wants,  those  persons  are 
clearly  chargeable  with  forgetfulness  of  the  Lord  their  God.  2.  The  same  guilt 
mxxat  also  he  at  our  door,  if  we  are  habitually  unmindful  of  the  attributes  of  God  ; 
and,  particularly,  of  His  omnipresence.  3.  The  same  may  justly  be  said  of  him 
who  allows  himself  to  think  of  his  Creator  under  a  different  character  from  that  ia 
which  He  has  revealed  Himself  to  mankind  in  His  holy  Word.     II.  The  fearful 

DOOM  WHICH  IS  denounced  IN  THE  WORDS  OP  THE  TEXT  AGAINST  THOSE  WHO  ARK 

ouiLTT  OF  THE  SINS  THERE  FORBIDDEN.    The  expression,  "  to  perish,"  when  used 

19 


290  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  viii. 

in  the  Scriptures  in  a  judicial  sense,  to  describe  the  punishment  of  sin,  does  not  mean 
the  suffering  of  temporal  death  only — it  further  signifies  the  spiritual  death  of  man's 
immortal  part.  (C.  Tovmsend,  M.A.)  A  caution  against  forgetfuhiess  of  God  : — 
I.  Men  are  liable  to  forget  God.  1.  We  infer  our  liability  to  forget  God,  from 
the  mysteriousness  of  His  nature.  2.  "We  infer  our  liability  to  forget  God,  from  the 
moral  dislike  we  have  to  Him.  3.  We  infer  our  liability  to  forget  God,  from 
the  facts  that  fall  under  our  notice.  4.  We  infer  our  liability  to  forget  God, 
from  the  testimonies  of  the  Scriptures  (Psa.  x.  4,  xiv.  1-3  ;  Job  xxi.  14,  15  ; 
Eom.  i.  28).  II.  Forgetfulness  of  God  is  an  evil  against  which  v7e  should 
BE  peculiarly  ON  OUR  GUARD.  This  is  the  intimation  in  the  text,  and  the  reasons 
on  which  it  is  founded  are — 1.  They  who  forget  God  must  necessarily  remain  ignorant 
of  Him.  2.  They  who  forget  God  must  necessarily  disobey  Him.  3.  They  who 
forget  God  must  necessarily  prove  ungrateful  to  Him.  4.  They  who  forget  God 
must  necessarily  be  punished  by  Him  (Psa.  ix.  17  ;  Judges  iii.  7,  8).     III.  Means 

SHOULD   BE  USED   FOR  THE  AVOIDANCE  OF   THIS  HEINOUS  CRIME.      This  is  the  obJBCt 

of  the  charge  :  "  Beware  that  thou  forget  not,"  &c.  1.  Serious  consideration  should 
be  exercised  on  all  the  things  that  belong  unto  our  peace.  2.  Fervent  and  unre- 
mitting prayer  should  be  offered  up  to  God  for  a  change  of  heart.  3.  We  should 
constantly  avoid  those  things  which  tend  to  exclude  God  from  our  thoughts. 
4.  Let  us  use  all  the  means  which  tend  to  turn  our  thoughts  towards  God.  Let 
us  associate  with  the  pious — frequent  religious  ordinances — read  God's  most  holy 
Word— contemplate  death,  judgment,  and  eternity.  In  conclusion — (1)  Inquire, 
Do  we  forget  God  ?  This  may  serve  as  a  discriminating  mark  of  moral  character. 
Christians  love  to  think  of  God— sinners  strive  to  forget  Him.  (2)  Exhort  those 
who  forget  God  to  consider  their  foUy,  their  ingratitude,  and  their  danger. 
{Sketches  of  Four  Hundred  Sermons.)  Gratitude  and  ingratitude  toward  God : — 
Such  a  passage  belongs  to  the  prophetico-historical  order.  The  warnings  are 
repeated  with  added  force  in  chap,  xxviii.  The  experience  of  Israel  brings  this 
general  lesson,  that  the  thought  of  the  Divine  goodness  should  lead  men  to  show 
thankful  gratitude  to  God,  and  to  offer  Him  a  willing  service.     Notice — I.  The 

BEASONABLENESS  OF  RENDERING  A  GRATEFUL  SERVICE  TO  GOD.      1.    In  the  Case  of 

Israel  the  propriety  for  such  a  grateful  service  is  clearly  seen.  All  men  owe 
obedience  to  God  ;  but  we  should  expect  a  highly-favoured  people  like  Israel  to 
render  it  in  a  high  degree.  Israel  had  been  brought  from  slavery  to  freedom,  and 
were  promised  and  received  as  their  inheritance  a  land  most  highly  favoured. 
2.  Above  all,  the  system  of  moral  law  and  social  order,  and  the  Divine  rule  of 
the  theocracy  elevated  them  far  above  surrounding  nations.  In  view  of  it  all, 
there  was  reason  that  the  people  should  yield  to  God  a  grateful  service.  3.  If  the 
Israelites  had  reason  for  this,  much  more  we.  What  was  Britain  when  Imperial 
Rome  held  sway  ?  What  is  it  now,  when  Rome  and  many  another  proud  dominion 
are  but  names  ?  Do  we  not  owe  our  higher  light  and  liberty  to  the  truth  and 
freedom  of  the  Gospel  ?  As  a  nation  we  owe  our  God  thankful  gratitude  and  service. 
4.  As  individual  members  of  a  great  Christian  people  we  owe  gratitude  to  God. 
Contrast  our  condition  with  the  savage  tribes  discovered  by  a  Livingstone  or 
Stanley ;  with  the  higher  yet  still  idolatrous  and  superstitious  Hindu  ;  with  a 
cannibal  of  the  race  so  graphically  described  by  a  John  G.  Paton  or  the  semi- 
barbarous  Chinaman  with  his  history  reaching  far  into  the  past  ages  before  our 
own  began,  but  who  yet  has  not  risen  above  the  grossest  superstition  and  a 
most  materialistic  idea  of  existence.  Contrast  our  blessings  alike  bestowed  on 
cottage  and  palace,  with  the  darkness  that  prevails  among  the  peoples,  and  reason 
will  be  found  for  the  exercise  of  grateful  service.  II.  The  sin  of  ingratitude. 
1.  The  passage  warns  us  against  the  danger  of  receiving  and  enjoying  the  gifts  at 
the  risk  of  forgetting  the  Divine  Giver  ;  all  thought  and  energy  are  not  to  be  applied 
to  the  acquisition  of  more  and  more  of  the  gifts  of  this  life  to  use  them  for  our  own 
use,  &c.  2.  Into  this  sin  Israel  fell.  They  became  practical  materialists.  Even 
after  the  return  from  Babylon  their  enthusiasm  for  God's  work  soon  faded 
(Hag.  i. ).  So  was  it  in  our  Lord's  day  ;  and  the  ingratitude  was  then  heightened 
by  hypocrisy  (Matt.  xxi.  33-46,  xxiii.  26-39).  Self  and  their  own  ease  and  glory 
were  to  them  in  reality,  first  ;  loving  service  toward  God  shown  in  works  of  love  to 
their  fellow-men  was  far  from  them.  3.  Is  not  this  the  spirit  of  too  many  in  our 
time  ?  There  is  a  perpetual  striving  after  the  gains  and  pleasures  of  time,  not  that 
they  may  better  serve  God  and  become  better  men  and  women,  but  that  they  may 
have  more  of  ease,  more  of  the  passing  fleeting  joys  of  this  brief  existence.  This 
feature  is  seen  in  every  class  of  the  community.     The  socialistic  schemes  of  tha 


CHAP.  IX.]  DEUTERONOMY,  291 

toiling  millions  are  simply  attempts  to  gain  the  kingdom  of  the  material.  But 
material  possessions  gained  and  received  without  due  thankfulness  to  God  and 
endeavours  in  His  service,  turn  to  dust  and  ashes  in  the  using.  Whereas  if 
received  with  thankful  hearts  and  used  in  His  service,  they  may  be  transmuted  and 
transfoi-med  into  spiritual  treasures,   eternally  enduring.      III.  The  effect  of 

CULTIVATING  THE  SPIRIT  OF  GRATITUDE  OR  ITS  OPPOSITE  ON  MATERIAL  AND  INDI- 
VIDUAL LIFE.  ].  When  a  nation,  in  its  government  and  institutions,  publicly 
acknowledges  its  indebtedness  to  God,  and  makes  public  profession  of  loyalty  to 
Hira,  God  shall  add  to  its  blessings.  Examples  are  not  wanting.  2.  So  with 
individuals.  God  may  not  send  material  wealth,  &c.  But  He  will  give  them 
reasons  for  the  joyful  assurance  that  He  is  with  them,  and  of  the  certainty  of  His 
promises.  Hope  for  time,  and  assured  hope  for  eternity.  The  effect  will  be  closer 
communion  and  more  consecrated  service.  3.  Far  other  is  the  effect  of  forgetting 
God  whilst  receiving  His  gifts.  Remember  how  it  was  with  Israel  (Isa.  i.  3  ; 
Matt,  xxiii.  38,  39).  Hardness  of  heart,  material  living,  God-forgetfulness,  idolatry 
— these  were  the  steps  of  descent.  Nothing  so  tends  to  harden  the  heart  and  quench 
the  spiritual  life  than  God-forgetfulness  and  ingratitude  in  using  the  Divine  gifts. 
There  are  still  too  many  who  reap  luxuriant  fields  without  due  gratitude  to  Him 
who  sent  sunshine  and  rain,  &c.,  who  attribute  their  success,  wealth,  &c.,  to  their 
own  skill  and  industry,  who  add  possession  to  possession  without  one  thought  of 
using  them  beyond  the  narrow  circle  of  their  own  lives.  4.  The  Divine  rule  is  the 
only  safe  one  :  "Seek  ye  first  the  kingdom  of  God,"  &c.  (Matt.  vi.  33).  Let  the 
soul  be  right  with  God  through  forgiveness,  &c.,  in  Christ,  then  we  shall  be  guided 
to  seek  and  enabled  to  find  what  is  best  for  our  mortal  life,  and  will  best  avail  us  in 
thankfully  doing  our  Heavenly  Master's  work.     (  Wm.  Frank  Scott.) 


CHAPTER  IX. 
Vers.  1-6.   Hear,    0    IstzxiL—The  call  to  attention  r— I.  He  represents  to 

THEM   THE   FORMIDABLE   STRENGTH   OF   THE   ENEMIES   WHICH   THEY   WERE   NOW  TO 

ENCOUNTER  (vers.  1,  2).  This  representation  is  much  the  same  with  that  which 
the  evil  spies  had  made  (Numb.  xiii.  28,  29,  31-33),  but  made  with  a  very  different 
intention- :  that  was  designed  to  drive  them  from  God,  and  to  discourage  their  hope 
in  Him  ;  this,  to  drive  them  to  God,  and  engage  their  hope  in  Him,  since  no  power 
less  than  that  which  is  almighty  could  secure  and  succeed  them.     II.  He  assures 

THEM    OF   VICTORY,  BY  THE  PRESENCE  OF  GOD  WITH  THEM,  NOTWITHSTANDING  THE 

STRENGTH  OF  THE  ENEMY  (ver.  3).  Observe,  "He  shall  destroy  them,"  and  then, 
"thou  shalt  drive  them  out."  Thou  canst  not  drive  them  out  unle&s  He  destroy 
them,  and  bring  them  down  ;  but  He  will  not  destroy  them,  and  bring  them  down, 
unless  thou  set  thyself  in  good  earnest  to  drive  them  out.  We  must  do  our 
endeavour  in  dependence  upon  God's  grace  ;  and  we  shall  have  that  grace,  if  we  do 
our  endeavour.     III.  He  cautions  them  not  to  entertain  the  least  thought 

OF   their   own  righteousness,  as  if  that  had  procured  them  this  FAVOUR  AT 

God's  hand  (vers.  4-6).  In  Christ  we  have  both  righteousness  and  strength  ;  in 
Him,  therefore,  we  must  glory,  and  not  in  ourselves,  or  any  sufiiciency  of  our  own. 
IV.  He  intimates  to  them  the  true  reasons  why  God  would  take  this 

GOOD  LAND   OUT   OF  THE  HANDS  OF  THE  CANAANITES,  AND  SETTLE  IT  UPON  ISRAEL. 

1.  He  will  be  honoured  in  the  destruction  of  idolaters  (vers,  4,  5).  2.  He  will  be 
honoured  in  the  performance  of  His  promise  to  those  that  are  in  covenant  with 
Him  (ver.  5).  {Matthew  Henry,  D.D.)  Thou  axt  to  pass  over  Jordan  this 
day. — The  Jordan: — "Be  the  day  weary,  or  be  the  day  long,  it  ringeth  at 
length  to  evensong."  So  the  weary  wanderings  of  God's  people,  long  though 
they  had  been,  were  coming  to  an  end  at  last.  It  has  been  a  weary  struggle 
to  reach  this  river — the  stream  which  lay  between  the  wilderness  and  the 
promised  land  ;  just  as,  for  that  part  of  mankind  who  do  not  die  young,  the 
river  of  death  is  gained  only  through  a  long  life,  in  which,  w^hile  joys  and 
sorrows  are  strangely  mixed  up,  the  sorrows  form  the  largest  portion.  Every 
one  ought  to  be  looking  forward  to  this  time  ;  a  time  when  all  personal  activities 
will  cease,  when  we  shall  have  to  loose  our  hold  on  those  things  which  engross 
us  now,   and  which  we  imagine  could  not  go  on  without  us.     And  one  great 


292  TEE  BIBLIQAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ix. 

value  of  tliis  looking  forward  to  our  death  will  be  that  we  must  at  the  same  tima 
look  to  our  life,  on  which  depends  our  death.  Here,  then,  we  are  helped  by  medi- 
tating on  the  record  which  is  left  us  of  Israel's  journeyings  towards  the  river  of 
Jordan.  Bear  in  mind  that  they  travelled  on,  filled  with  a  steadfast  faith  and  hope 
as  to  the  reality  of  the  promised  inheritance,  and  led  by  the  Spirit  of  God.  It  was 
not  ever  thus  with  them.  At  one  time  they  hankered  after  old  sins — after  the 
bondage  of  Egypt ;  they  thought  at  one  time  that  life  might  hold  joys  enough  for 
them,  without  the  future  hope.  But  God  quietly  taught  them  by  what  looked  like 
anger — but  which  was  really  love — the  vanity  of  all  earthly  things  ;  and  from  that 
time  forward  the  promised  land  was  their  loadstar,  which  guided  all  their  life.  Nor 
were  they  left  without  the  direct  guidance  of  the  law  of  God.  How  many  lives 
amongst  us  are  wrecked,  how  many  of  us  are  marching  in  a  circle,  because  we  have 
no  settled  principle  to  guide  us  !  Every  side-path,  every  enticing  glade,  invites  us 
to  leave  the  strait  way,  and  we  follow  it  and  find  ourselves  further  from  home  than 
ever.  Moreover,  in  addition  to  this  law  of  God,  Israel  had  the  guidance  of  the  ark, 
which  was  to  them  as  the  very  presence  of  God  Himself.  The  ark  was  to  Israel  as 
the  Church  of  Christ  is  to  ourselves,  interpreting  God's  will,  giving  point  to  His 
law,  making  that  law  not  merely  a  set  of  rules,  but  a  great  guiding  principle  in 
truest  touch  with  our  whole  lives.  And  Israel  had  all  this  time  battles  to  nght,  which 
in  their  varied  characteristics  fitly  represent  the  perpetual  conflicts  which  we  are 
called  to  endure.  But  while  Amalek  represents  the  attacks  of  the  world  and  Satan, 
which  all  must  expect  and  be  prepared  for,  Edom,  Israel's  "brother,"  who  comes 
against  him  with  a  great  force,  reminds  us  that  we  may  be  attacked  and  thwarted  in 
our  heavenward  course  by  those  who  should  speed  us  on  our  way.  It  is  no  new  or 
uncommon  thing  for  the  ardent  young  Christian  to  feel,  not  only  want  of  sympathy, 
but  positive  opposition  from  those  near  and  dear  to  him  in  earthly  relationship. 
Again,  in  the  attack  of  Moab  we  see  the  very  Word  of  God  attempted  to  be  used  as  a 
weapon  against  the  faithful  people.  And  is  it  not  true  that  many  a  young  Christian, 
whom  no  enticement  of  sin  can  influence,  who  cannot  be  tempted  to  rebel  against 
God's  moral  laws,  is  assailed  with  awful  efl"ect  by  some  one  who  comes  bringing 
God's  own  Word  in  his  band,  and  suggesting  doubts  and  difficulties  and  problems, 
which,  once  suggested,  cannot  be  ignored  by  a  truth-loving,  ardent  spirit  ?  Through 
all  these  trials,  there  was  ever  before  the  eyes  and  thoughts  of  Israel  the  entering 
on  the  promised  land — the  crossing  of  the  river.  As  they  wandered  on,  they  knew 
that  this  day  was  coming.  And  now  it  has  come.  "  Ye  are  to  pass  over  Jordan 
this  day."  A  day  is  at  hand  when  to  each  of  us  this  summons  wiU  come.  Go  J  will 
make  us  know,  unmistakably,  that  the  days  of  our  pilgrimage  are  at  an  end,  and 
that  we  are  to  enter  upon  our  inheritance.  There  will  be  no  more  time  for  prepara- 
tion. And  in  the  case  of  Israel  the  same  guiding  Presence  which  has  been  with 
them  from  the  first  will  be  with  them  still.  "The  ark  of  the  covenant  of  the  Lord 
of  all  the  earth  passeth  over  before  you."  All  that  made  the  wilderness  a  home 
shall  go  with  them,  so  that  they  shall  not  be  afraid,  though,  as  Joshua  says,  *'  ye 
have  not  passed  this  way  heretofore."  And  as  an  earnest  of  what  shall  be,  we  have 
in  our  last  hours  the  ministrations  of  Christ's  holy  Church  to  speed  us  on  our  way, 
even  as  the  ark  of  God  went  before  Israel.  On  this  side,  the  manna  to  support  us 
on  our  journey  ;  and  then  no  more  types,  but  the  "old  corn  of  the  land"— even 
Jesus  Himself,  the  very  true  Bread  of  Life.     {E.  Smithy  B.A.) 

Vers.  4,  6.  Not  for  thy  righteousness. — That  outward  success,  prosperity,  and 
greatness  in  the  world  is  no  true  evidence  of  grace : — I.  Men  aee  very  prone  to 

MAKE  THE  OUTWARD  PROSPERITY  AND  INCREASE  WHICH  GOD  GIVETH  THEM  AN  ARGU- 
MENT OF   THEIR  RIGHTEOUSNESS,  AND  SO    OF   GOD's  LOVE  TO  THEM,  TO  SAVE  THEM. 

They  think  it  impossible  that,  seeing  God  hath  so  blessed  them  here,  He  should 
damn  them  hereafter.  For  the  discovery  of  the  weakness  of  this  prop  take  notice 
first  of  these  particulars.  1.  Prosperity,  wealth,  and  success  are  in  themselves 
blessings,  mercies,  and  so  good  things  to  be  desired.  Hence  we  read  of  the  people 
of  God  praying  for  these  earthly  mercies,  and  we  have  a  direction  for  it  in  the 
Lord 's  Prayer,  when  we  pray  for  daily  bread.  It  is  true,  indeed,  the  very  petition 
doth  much  limit  our  desires,  for  it  is  after  the  great  things  that  belong  to  God's 
glory  ;  and  it  is  but  one  petition,  whereas  there  are  divers  for  spiritual  things,  so 
that  our  Saviour  would  have  us  to  be  above  these  earthly  things,  as  those  fowls  of 
the  heaven  are  which  on  a  sudden  fall  on  the  ground  for  their  food,  but  presently 
fly  uj»  to  heaven  again  ;  and  then  it  is  daily  food,  or  as  the  most  learned  expound  it, 
loo  J  convenient,  and  decent  for  our  place  and  calling,  not  superfluity.     2.  Although 


CHAP.  IX.]  DEUTERONOMY.  293 

these  are  blessings  and  mercies,  and  so  good  things,  yet  they  are  not  sanctifying  of 
those  that  have  them.  Dives  said  he  had  good  things  laid  up  in  store,  but  how 
were  they  good  which  made  him  bad  ?  How  were  they  good  which  could  not  keep 
him  out  of  hell  ?  Riches,  therefore,  are  neither  good  nor  bad,  but  indifferent 
in  their  nature.  Those  are  good  things  which  make  us  good.  3.  As  outward 
wealth  and  increase  are  blessings,  so  they  do  belong  by  promise  unto  godliness 
(1  Tim.  iv.  8).  I  do  not  say  with  some  divines  that  wicked  men  have  no  right  to 
their  goods,  that  they  are  usurpers,  and  shall  answer  for  every  bit  of  bread  they 
eat,  as  robbers  and  thieves.  No,  it  is  a  dangerous  position  to  hold  civil  dominion 
and  right  to  be  placed  upon  godliness.  The  earth  hath  He  given  to  the  children 
of  men,  saith  the  Psalmist,  to  all  men  as  well  as  to  the  godly  ;  but  as  there  is 
a  lawful,  civil  right,  so  there  is  a  sanctified  use,  and  this  only  the  godly  have. 

4.  Although  we  cannot  conclude  grace  by  outward  mercies,  yet  tnus  far  we  must  by 
Scripture  say,  that  God  out  of  a  general  love  in  a  providential  way  doth  give  many 
a  man  outward  prosperity  and  wealth  for  his  diligence,  industry,  upright  and 
honest  dealing  in  the  world.  Thus  Solomon  saith,  "The  hand  of  the  diligent 
maketh  rich,"  and  truth  and  justice  in  our  day  is  blessed  by  God  to  increase. 

5.  Some  go  into  another  extremity,  and  conclude  of  their  good  estate  and  holy  con- 
dition because  they  are  in  a  poor,  needy,  and  miserable  estate,  and  destitute  of  all 
earthly  comforts.  But  every  poor  man  is  not  a  Lazainis,  nay,  there  are  many 
times  none  more  wicked,  cursed,  profane,  and  enemies  to  all  goodness,  than  those 
that  are  in  a  low  and  miserable  condition.  A  woeful  thing  it  is,  indeed,  to  have 
nothing  but  misery  here,  and  nothing  but  torments  hereafter.  II.  Why  out- 
ward PROSPERITY  AND  BLESSINGS  DO  NOT  ARGUE  A  MAN'S  GOOD  ESTATE.      1.    It  may 

be  demonstrated  from  the  original,  or  fountain,  whence  they  flow.  It  is  not 
only  from  God's  love,  but  His  anger  also.  Sometimes  God  giveth  men  the 
outward  comforts  of  this  life  in  His  hot  displeasure.  2.  Therefore  may  not 
outward  plenty  and  mercies  be  made  a  sign  of  our  good  estate,  because  they  have 
always  in  corrupt  hearts  corrupt  and  sinful  operations.  As — (1)  Outward  com- 
forts in  the  plenty  of  them  are  apt  to  beget  pride  and  loftiness  of  heart,  so  as 
to  despise  and  contemn  those  that  are  under  them.  (2)  If  these  outward 
mercies  deaden  thy  heart  to  the  things  of  God,  or  the  exercise  of  those  means 
of  grace  God  hath  appointed,  oh,  thou  hast  cause  then  to  tremble  in  the 
increase  of  them.  (3)  Then  can  outward  abundance  be  no  comfortable  sign, 
when  the  means  to  get  it  and  the  way  to  preserve  it  are  unlawful,  and  such  as 
the  Scripture  condemneth.  3.  Therefore  may  we  not  trust  in  outward  pros- 
perity, because  God  many  times  giveth  a  man  all  the  good  things  he  shall  have 
in  this  life  only,  and  afterwards  there  is  nothing  but  everlasting  woe  and  misery. 
4.  Therefore  may  we  not  trust  in  these,  because  we  many  times  abuse  them  to 
a  contrary  end  for  which  God  gave  them  ;  He  gave  them  to  be  instruments  of 
much  glory  to  God  and  good  to  others.  Rich  men  are  the  greatest  men  in 
debt  of  aU  others ;  they  owe  much  to  God,  much  to  the  public,  much  to  others' 
necessities ;  now  what  comfort  canst  thou  take  if  God  bless  thee  with  these  things 
if  thou  dost  not  also  find  Him  making  thee  thereby  instrumental  to  His  glory  ?  ^  If 
thou  keepest  all  the  good  mercies  God  vouchsafeth  to  thee,  as  the  ants  and  pismires 
do  their  grain  and  com,  which  they  hide  in  their  little  hills,  and,  as  they  say,  bite 
it  that  it  may  not  grow.  5.  They  are  not  to  be  relied  on,  because  though  all  power 
to  get  wealth  and  prosper  in  the  world  argue  God  is  with  thee,  yet  He  may  be  only 
with  thee  providentially  and  powerfully,  not  graciously  ;  as  when  Nebuchadnezzar 
conquered  and  prevailed,  when  Alexander  became  great,  Augustus  happy.  God 
was  with  these  in  a  mighty,  providential  way,  but  not  graciously.  Use — 1.  Of 
reproof  to  those  who  desire  these  outward  good  things  more  than  inward  and 
spiritual.  Use — 2.  Of  instruction  to  those  who  meet  with  much  prosperity  and  out- 
ward encouragements  in  this  world.  Take  heed  of  thinking  that  God  doth  this  to 
thee  for  thy  righteousness,  for  thy  piety.  Use — 3.  Of  consolation  to  the  godly,  who, 
it  may  be,  want  many  of  those  outward  mercies  the  wicked  have.  Let  them  know 
they  are  no  arguments  of  true  godliness,  or  of  God's  dear  love  in  Christ.  {Anthony 
Burgess.)  The  vximings  of  Moses :— I.  Principles  of  God's  government. 
1.  Mark  the  assertion  that  God  governs  mankind.  2.  That  God  governs  by  law  in 
the  moral  as  in  the  material  world.  II.  They  point  out  a  national  danger— 
SELF-RIGHTEOUBNESS.  1.  A  subtlety  in  self-righteousness.  It  is  so  multiform. 
(1)  There  may  be  the  form  of  godliness,  &c.  (2)  A  power  to  criticise.  (3)  Freedom 
from  observable  faults.  (4)  Possession  of  some  great  virtues.  2.  And  its  danger 
is — (1)  To  mistake  the  outward  for  the  inward.     (2)  To  lose  sight  of  personal  sin 


294  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  ix. 

through  the  glorification  of  some  real  or  imaginary  virtue.  (3)  To  rest  on  privi- 
leges. (4)  To  simulate  virtues.  (5)  To  blind  the  soul  as  to  its  real  state  and  need. 
Application  —  1.  Self-righteousness  the  great  hindrance  to  the  reception  of  the 
Gospel  now  (Liike  xviii.  10  ;  Rom.  x.  3  ;  Eev.  iii.  17).  2.  Use  David's  prayer  (Psa. 
cxxxix.  23).  3.  Work  of  the  Holy  Spirit  (John  xvi.  8).  {H.  W.  Dearden,  M.A.) 
The  address  of  Moses: — I.  The  address  of  Moses  is  very  different  from  the 

ADDRESSES  OF  MOST    CAPTAINS  OF  ARMIES  UNDER  SIMILAR  CIRCUMSTANCES.       1.   He 

makes  no  attempt  to  underrate  the  power  of  the  enemies  with  whom  the  Israelites 
liad  to  contend.  He  begins  his  address  by  telling  the  people  that  they  are  that  day 
,to  pass  over  Jordan,  to  go  in  and  possess  nations  greater  and  mightier  than  them- 
selves. The  reason  for  his  giving  such  information  was  that  the  design  of  God  wag 
not  merely  to  conquer  the  Canaanites,  but  to  educate  Israel,  to  teach  them  that  by 
•God's  power  weakness  may  be  made  strength  and  the  mighty  vanquished  by  the 
feeble.  2.  Moses  assures  the  people  in  plain  language  that  no  righteousness  of 
ttheirs  had  gained  them  the  land.  They  might  be  ready  enough  to  admit  that  it 
was  not  their  own  courage  or  their  own  bodily  strength,  but  they  might  still  be 
disposed  to  think  that  they  had  deserved  God's  favour,  that  if  they  had  not  been 
deserving  of  the  victory,  God  would  not  have  given  it  to  them.  Self-flattery  is 
easy,  and  therefore  Moses  very  wisely  and  decidedly  protested  once  for  all  against 
such  a  view  of  God's  doings.  II.  The  principle  of  spiritual  life  with  our- 
selves IS  precisely  that  which  Moses  laid  down  as  the  principle  of  national 
life  for  the  Israelites.  God  gives  us  the  land  of  promise  for  no  righteousness 
of  our  own.  Everything  depends  on  God's  mercy,  God's  will,  God's  purpose  ;  the 
certainty  of  victory  depends,  not  upon  any  feelings  or  experiences  or  conflicts  of 
ours,  but  upon  the  ever-present  help  of  the  Almighty  God.  {Bp.  Harvey  Goodwin.) 
Heaven  and  glory  Tiot  the  reward  of  our  own  righteousness: — One  would  think 
this  too  obvious  to  be  disputed  in  the  mind  of  an  Israelite.  Then  I  ask  if  any  man 
or  woman,  taking  a  calm  retrospect  of  his  or  her  life,  has  not  to  say  the  same  ? 
I.  Let  us  inquire  to  what  subjects  this  principle  may  be  applied.  1.  To  our 
lot  in  life,  and  to  our  temporal  affairs.  ''The  earth  is  the  Lord's,  and  the  fulness 
thereof."  He  may  do  what  He  will  with  His  own.  In  the  independence  and 
infinite  sovereignty  of  His  government  He  sends  small  means  and  penury,  or  He 
dispenses  riches  and  honours,  according  to  His  own  good  pleasure,  and  to  accom- 
plish the  inscrutable  purposes  of  His  heavenly  providence.  2.  To  our  religious 
condition  and  privileges.  3.  To  success  in  the  ministry.  4.  To  the  rest  and  glory 
of  the  heavenly  world.  Eternal  life  is  the  gift  of  God.  II.  What  are  the  reasons 
FOR  which  we  shall  POSSESS  THE  LAND  ?  1.  The  choice  and  will,  the  purpose 
and  pleasure  of  the  Almighty.  2.  God's  justice  on  the  one  hand,  and  His  goodness 
on  the  other.  3.  The  faithfulness  of  God  to  His  promises.  III.  What  is  the  use 
OF  this  DOCTRINE  ?  1.  It  is  taught  us  that  we  may  understand  it.  Acknowledge 
your  own  poverty  and  God's  riches.  Submit  to  His  method  and  plan  of  justifica- 
tion and  acceptance  by  Christ.  Do  not  go  about  to  establish  your  own  righteous- 
ness, 2.  I  cannot  conclude  without  one  caution.  A  farthing  is  a  farthing,  and  a 
sixpence  is  a  sixpence  ;  so  of  an  ingot  of  gold  or  a  banknote.  And  a  farthing  will 
only  purchase  what  it  is  worth.  A  sixpence  will  not  buy  what  is  worth  a  hundred 
pounds.  But  let  it  buy  what  it  will.  If  you  want  an  estate  you  must  give  the 
ingots  and  the  banknotes.  So  let  the  work  of  Christ  alone,  the  costly  and  pro- 
digious sura,  secure  for  you  the  glory  and  the  heritage  of  heaven.  But  let  your 
own  righteousness  and  your  small  virtues  do  what  they  will.  You  cannot  purchase 
glory  with  them,  but  they  will  do  much  for  the  welfare  of  men  and  the  honour  of 
God,  and  they  will  show  forth  your  gratitude  and  love.  (/as.  Straiten. )  Mercy, 
not  merit : — Mercy,  not  merit,  is  the  cause  of  all  the  blessings  of  our  being. 

1.  This  is  true  of  our  secular  possessions.  If  we  say  that  our  comfortable  homes, 
our  freedom  from  temporal  anxiety,  and  our  possession  of  a  competency,  have 
come  to  us  as  the  result  of  industrious  eff'orts  and  economical  habits,  that  they  are 
our  reward  for  honest  labour :  the  reply  is — 1.  That  to  such  a  reward  we  have 
no  right.     We  are  sinners,  and  justly  deserve  not  only  destitution  but  destruction. 

2.  That  both  the  materials  of  labour,  and  the  power  to  labour,  which  have  brought 
us  these  comforts,  are  to  be  ascribed  to  God's  mercy.  II.  This  is  true  of  OUR 
religious  advantages.  Bibles,  sanctuaries,  religious  literature.  **The  tender 
mercies  of  our  God  have  visited  us."  III.  This  is  true  of  our  Christian" 
experience.  IV.  This  is  true  of  OUR  spiritual  usefulness.  "Not  by  might, 
nor  by  power,"  &c.  V.  This  is  true  of  our  heavenly  inheritance.  (Homilist.) 
The  favoured  jseopletf  of  the  earth : — There  are  favoured  peoples  in  all  commun- 


CHAP,  n:.]  DEUTERONOMY.  295 

ities — persons  specially  fayoured  by  their  healthful  constitutions,  vigorous  intellect, 
lofty  genius,  high  culture,  worldly  wealth.  I.  Whatever  favours  distinguish  one 
class  of  men  from  another  in  society,  they  are  the  gifts  of  God.  This  should 
teach  us — 1.  Not  to  be  proud  for  our  superiorities.  2.  To  thank  God  for  our 
superiorities.  3.  To  bless  men  by  our  superiorities.  II.  These  distinguished  gifts 
are  bestowed,  not  on  the  ground  of  any  special  moral  excellence.  III.  The 
fact  that  they  are  not  bestowed  on  the  ground  of  moral  superiority  should  be  well 
understood  by  men.  1.  Understand  it,  that  you  may  not  deceive  yourself.  Let 
no  man  conclude  because  he  is  prosperous  that  he  is  the  favoured  of  heaven. 
2.  Understand  it,  that  you  may  realise  your  responsibility.     {Ibid.) 

Ver.  7.  Remember  .  .  .  how  thou  provokedst  the  Lord.— Profitable  remeni' 
brance: — I.  The  fact  asserted  is  this:  we  have  provoked  the  Lord  our  God. 
Shall  we  call  to  mind  the  sins  of  our  youth  and  the  transgressions  of  our  riper 
years  ?  They  are  a  long  catalogue,  and  they  testify  strongly  against  us.  But  as 
professors  of  religion,  what  is  the  conviction  of  our  minds  ?  Have  not  our  provo- 
cations, since  we  commenced  this  profession,  been  numerous  and  great  ?  Pride : 
unbelief :  unchristian  tempers.  II.  The  evil  implied  in  the  text  is  our  proneness 
to  forget  this  fact.  "  Remember,  and  forget  not."  Why  this  injunction,  if  the  evil 
were  not  real  ?  But  how  is  this  proneness  to  forget  to  be  accounted  for  ?  1.  Inat- 
tention. 2.  Light  thoughts  of  sin.  3.  Love  of  self.  III.  The  duty  enjoined 
is:  that  we  remember  our  provocations.  "Remember,  and  forget  not."  There  is 
emphasis  in  this  repetition  ;  it  implies  not  only  a  proneness  to  forget,  but  the 
importance  of  not  forgetting,  and  having  impressed  on  the  heart  our  provocations 
against  God.     What  is  this  importance  and  its  utility  ?     1.  To  make  us  penitent. 

2.  To  keep  us  humble.  3.  To  preserve  us  thankful  for  mercies.  4.  To  help  our 
resignation  under  Divine  corrections.  5.  To  endear  the  Saviour  to  us.  6.  To  con- 
vince us  that  salvation  is  entirely  of  grace.  {T.  Kidd.)  God  provoked  at  Horeh 
(in  conjunction  with  Psalm  cvi.  7) : — To  provoke  is  an  expression  setting  forth  a 
more  than  ordinary  degree  of  misbehaviour,  and  seems  to  import  an  insolent 
resolution  to  offend.  A  resolution  not  contented  with  one  single  stroke  of  dis- 
obedience, but  such  as  multiplies  and  repeats  the  action  till  the  offence  rises  into 
an  affront ;  and  as  it  relates  to  God,  so  I  conceive  it  aimed  at  Him  in  a  threefold 
respect.  1.  It  rises  up  against  the  power  and  prerogative  of  God.  An  assault 
upon  God  sitting  upon  the  throne,  snatching  His  sceptre,  defiance  of  His  royalty 
and  supremacy.  He  that  provokes  God  dares  Him  to  strike  to  revenge  the  injury 
and  invasion  upon  His  honour — considers  not  the  weight  of  His  arm,  but  puffs  at 
all,  and  looks  the  terrors  of  revenging  justice  in  the  face.  2.  Provoking  God 
imports  an  abuse  of  His  goodness.  God  clothed  with  power  is  the  object  of  fear  ; 
but  as  He  displays  goodness,  of  love.  By  one  He  commands,  by  the  other  He 
courts  our  obedience.  An  affront  on  His  goodness  and  love  as  much  exceeds  an 
affront  of  His  power  as  a  wound  at  the  heart  transcends  a  blow  on  the  hand.  For 
when  God  works  miracles  of  mercy  to  do  good  upon  a  people  as  He  did  upon  the 
Israelites,  was  it  not  a  provocation  infinitely  base,  a  degree  of  ingratitude  higher 
than  the  heavens  struck  at,  and  deeper  than  the  sea  that  they  passed  through  1 

3.  Provoking  God  imports  an  affront  upon  His  long-suffering  and  His  patience.  The 
musings  of  nature  in  the  breast  tell  us  how  keenly  every  man  resents  the  abuse  of 
His  love  ;  how  hardly  any  prince,  but  one,  can  put  up  an  offence  against  His  mercy  ; 
and  how  much  more  affrontive  to  despise  majesty  ruling  by  the  golden  sceptre  of 
pardon,  than  by  the  iron  rod  of  penal  law.  But  patience  is  a  further,  a  higher 
advance  of  mercy — mercy  drawn  out  at  length,  wrestling  with  baseness,  and 
striving,  if  possible  even  to  weary  and  outdo  ingratitude  ;  therefore  sin  against  this 
is  the  highest  pitch  of  provocation.  For  when  patience  is  tired  let  all  the  inven- 
tions of  mankind  find  something  further  upon  which  to  hope,  or  against  which  to 
sin.  The  Israelites  sinned  against  God's  patience,  one  offence  following  upon 
another,  the  last  rising  highest,  until  the  treasures  of  grace  and  pardon  were  so  far 
drained  and  exhausted  that  they  provoked  God  to  swear  ;  and  what  is  more,  to 
swear  in  His  wrath,  and  with  a  full  purpose  of  revenge,  that  they  should  never 
enter  into  His  rest.     {R.  South,  D.D.) 

Ver.  22.  And  at  Taberah  ...  ye  provoked  the  Lord  to  wrath.—  Warninff 
examples: — In  the  histories  here  referred  to  we  have  examples  of  some  of  the 
methods  of  the  Divine  government  of  the  world  which  reappear  in  all  ages.     I.  God 

DOES  NOT  ALWAYS  LEAD  PEOPLES  AND  INDIVIDUALS  TO  REPENTANCE  BY  VISITATIONS 


296  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ix. 

OF  His  ooodkess.  He  sometimes  uses  the  rod.  1.  The  more  a  people  has  been 
blessed,  Ac,  so  much  the  more  certainly  will  God  visit  their  sins  with  judgment. 
2.  But  He  does  not  overthrow  at  onoe  and  without  warning.  Signal  fires  which  tell 
of  coming  danger  are  lighted  afar,  showing  what  is  coming.  3.  When  the  people 
repent,  then  His  wrath  against  sin  passes  them  by.  This  is  seen  in  all  the  incidents 
mentioned  here,  II.  Such  waening  examples  are  seen  in  all  the  history  of 
THE  Church  and  the  world.  1,  The  Reformation  was  a  time  of  blessing.  The 
light  of  knowledge  and  of  Divine  truth  shone  throughout  Christendom.  The  Gospel 
was  set  on  its  candlestick.  A  reformation  in  social,  political,  and  domestic  life 
occurred  in  conjunction  with  the  religious  movement.  2.  But  God's  ways  are 
ways  of  earnest  effort  and  quiet  waiting  through  endurance  and  self-sacrifice. 
Many  would  not  wait.  Progress  was  too  slow  for  them.  They  would  reform  the 
world  at  one  stroke.  Discontent  and  murmuring  broke  out  among  some  sections 
of  the  people.  Then  came  the  peasant  war.  Like  a  terrible  conflagration,  the  flames 
of  sedition  burst  out  and  threatened  to  destroy  the  stays  of  political  and  religious 
existence.  Yet  God  had  mercy,  as  on  Israel  in  the  wilderness.  He  permitted  only 
the  outermost  defences  to  be  destroyed  ;  and  there  was  left  behind  a  fire-swept  ruin 
to  remind  Christendom  whither  impatience,  murmuring,  discontent,  and  self-will 
lead.  3.  See  a  hundred  years  later.  Had  the  people  realised  with  thankfulness 
the  great  blessings  of  freedom  and  the  Gospel  divinely  given  them  ?  The  prophets 
of  the  Reformation  had  warned  men  what  the  result  of  such  ingratitude  would  be. 
"What  had  been  the  result  of  a  hundred  years'  preaching  of  the  Gospel  among  the 
peoples  and  their  rulers  ?  The  judgment  came.  The  Thirty  Years'  War,  with  its 
blind  passions,  sent  a  warning  column  of  flame  heavenward.  But  God  again  had 
mercy,  although  for  years  Germany  was  like  a  bumt-up  house.  Still,  the  holiest 
was  preserved,  and  a  new  time  began.  4.  Look  a  hundred  years  later.  Through 
the  whole  of  Europe  a  spirit  of  apostasy  had  spread.  It  swept  through  England  as 
Deism ;  as  scoflSng  in  France,  with  accompanying  libertinage.  In  Germany,  and 
indeed  in  all  Europe,  the  bonds  of  Christian  life  and  morality  were  unloosed.  Like 
a  shallow  but  broad  stream,  the  spiritual  revolution  overflowed  all  lands.  With  it 
came  the  outer  overturning.  Uneasiness  and  discontent  were  over  all.  The  flame  of 
revolt  broke  out  in  France,  and  Europe  was  enveloped.  But  God  again,  in  His  mercy, 
gave  space  for  repentance.  III.  The  lessons  to  our  time  of  these  incidents. 
1.  We  should  have  eyes  to  see  what  the  signs  of  our  time  mean.  If  the  spirit  of 
discontent,  rebellion,  &c.,  be  not  repressed,  whither  shall  it  lead  ?  Already  the 
flames  begin  to  appear — political  incendiarism,  audacity  in  speech,  universal  agita- 
tion. Men  who  look  for  no  hereafter  storm  fiilly  grasp  at  material  good.  How 
shall  it  be  when  the  Divine  patience  ends  ?  2.  At  the  beginning  of  Israel's  history 
those  warning  fire  columns  were  seen.  Fifteen  hundred  years  later  the  impenitent 
descendants  of  Israel  saw  the  temple  in  flames,  Jerusalem  destroyed,  the  nation  a 
ruin.  8.  Will  the  New  Testament  Zion  not  understand  those  warnings  1  A  people 
remained  to  God  even  after  Jerusalem  fell.  So  will  it  be  although  the  present  form 
of  Christendom  passes  ;  and  the  New  Testament  foretells  such  perilous  times.  4.  Let 
the  individual  learn  the  need  of  watchfulness.  Was  not  that  dangerous  sickness 
a  warning  signal  ?  But  in  mercy  He  spared,  and  life  and  health  are  yours.  Let 
those  signs  be  like  beacon  lights  on  your  life's  voyage.  Murmur  not,  cidtivate  con- 
tentment, learn  to  say :  "I  shall  go  as  God  leads  me,  without  seeking  to  choose  for 
myself;"    {W,  Grashof.) 

Ver.  24.  Ye  have  Toeen  rebellions. — Rebellion : — I.  The  source  of  rebellion. 
This  is  to  be  found  in  selfishness,  in  the  preference  by  men  of  their  own  will  over 
the  way  of  God.  When  men  choose  another  lord  than  the  Eternal  and  Holy  Ruler 
they  set  up  a  standard  of  rebellion,  and  are  in  revolt.  II.  The  sin  and  guilt  of 
rebellion.  This  appears  from  considering  the  righteous  character  of  God's 
government,  the  marvellous  forbearance  which  He  has  displayed  towards  sinners, 
and  the  obligation  of  all  men  to  Him  who  is  the  source  of  all  blessing,  of  every 
mercy.  God  cannot  and  He  will  not  treat  obstinate  rebels  as  if  they  were  loyal  and 
obedient  subjects.  He  will  maintain  His  honour  and  authority.  III.  The  pardon 
OF  rebellion.  1.  On  God's  side  this  is  provided  for  by  the  redemption  which  is 
by  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  2.  On  man's  side  this  benefit  is  appropriated  by  faith, 
under  the  guidance  and  by  the  prompting  of  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God.  The  penitent 
who  make  a  sincere  submission,  and  accept  forgiveness  on  God's  own  terms,  are 
assured  of  being  treated  not  as  rebels,  but  as  subjects  returned  to  their  allegiance, 
and  admitted  to  all  the  privileges  it  involves.     {Family  Churchman.) 


CHAP.  IX.]  DEUTERONOMY. 


297 


Vera.  26,  29.  I  prayed  therefore  unto  the  Lord,  and  said,  0  Lord  CJod.  destroy 
not  Thy  people.—^  covenant  people  :—'lhia  prayer  brines  out  in  its  greatest 
'^^^^Sti'^^^l'*  which  goes  through  the  Book  of  DeuteroSomy,  and  through  the 
whole  Bible.  The  Israelites  are  the  people  of  God,  His  inheritence,  redeenfed  by 
His  mighty  hand  They  are  stubborn,  stiff-necked,  wicked.  One'all-iiSZtant 
contrast  suggests  itself  the  moment  we  open  the  Scriptures.  They  do  not  sit  forth 
the  history  of  man  seeking  for  God,  but  of  God  seeking  for  menf    In  the  Book  of 

fh^vlZt  }Zir^  ^'^'""f  IT^^^^  f^'  "^".  °^  ^°«'«'  ^^*  "°  «««  «««ld  possibly 
think  that  it  was  the  object  of  that  book  to  give  us  a  biography  of  him  or  of  any 
otherman.  Moses  is  called  out  by  God  to  know  His  name  and  to  do  His  work  • 
i?^J?J  account  which  he  gives  of  himself.  This  was  his  holiness;  he  was 
separated  set  apart  by  God  to  act  as  His  minister.  He  who  set  him  apart  revealed 
to  him  His  character— showed  him  that  righteousness,  and  not  self-will  was 
§p]?v?ri^^.f  ft  ^?'^'^f.t:  To.8«P*>-a.l«  Moses  the  righteous  man  from  Moses  the 
h!i3  fnffln^  Jw  l'*f  ?  impossible  He  could  not  have  been  righteous  if  he 
had  not  fulfilled  that  task,  he  could  not  have  been  righteous  if  he  had  not  testified 
m  all^  his  acts  and  words  that  God,  not  he,  was  the  deliverer.  We  miss  the  whole 
meaning  of  the  story-the  saintship  of  Moses  disappears  altogether— if  we  trv  to 
conceive  of  him  apart  from  his  people.  It  wa.s  a  holy  nation  because  God  had 
called  It  out,  had  chosen  it  to  be  His,  had  put  His  name  upon  it.  The  family  of 
Abraham  was  signed  with  God's  covenant,  and  was  declared  to  be  holy.  Was  it 
not  so  actually?  Was  it  only  so  because  Jacob  was  the  head  of  it,  or  because 
Joseph  was  a  member  of  it?    The  Scripture  is  careftil  to  preserve  us  from  any 

fncfM  "^^^^T' J^'^^J-''^^  V?  *^  '^^  *^**  •Joseph  was  better  than  his  brethren, 
just  because  he  identified  himself  with  the  family,  and  they  acted  as  if  they  did  not 
belong  to  it ;  because  he  believed  that  God  had  chosen  it,  and  they  forgot  that  He 

it»  ih^'Tl  }l^  •'^'-  -^.^  ^^^7  ^^^  '^^^^  ^^1^^^«  '^  *o  be  holy.  The  nation  of  Israel 
WM  told  that  the  invisible  God  was  actually  their  king  ;  that  He  had  brought  them 
out  of  the  house  of  bondage  ;  that  He  was  with  them  in  the  wilderness  ;  that  He 
would  be  vnth  them  m  the  promised  land.  Supposing  any  Israelite  to  believe  this 
Tf^J  J  ?"^'  ^^*^®'  ^^®®  ™*°  '  be  could  overcome  the  enemies  of  his  land  :  he 
could  tread  his  own  underfoot.  See,  then,  how  reasonable  the  prayer  was  which 
I  have  taken  for  my  text  Because  Moses  regarded  the  Israelites  Is  a  holy  and 
chosen  people,  redeemed  by  God's  own  hand  ;  because  he  believed  that  this  descrip-' 
tion  belonged  to  the  whole  covenant  people  at  all  times ;  therefore  he  felt  with 
intense  anguish  their  stubbornness,  their  wickedness,  and  their  sin.  Had  thev 
not  been  a  holy  people  he  would  not  have  known  in  what  their  sin  consisted.  It 
SJLJ  •ii'^^^^i"^^'  ^^  ^^Z""  ^^^y  state-the  choice  of  another-which  he  con- 
fused with  such  shame  and  sorrow  before  God  ;  it  was  because  they  had  gone  out 
of  thenghtway,  forgetting  that  they  were  a  nation,  each  man  preferring  a  selfish 

^n7J'l^^^^";:T^*^'?^'?^.*^^^ ^®  ^^^  *°  interest  apart  from  his  neighbour, 
apart  from  the  body  to  which  he  belonged-that  they  needed  his  intercession  and 
Orod  s  renewing  and  restoring  mercy.  And  Moses  could  ask  for  that  restoring 
St^^^^^  •ii*\®  power  to  pray,  because  he  was  sure  that  he  was  asking  accord- 
wf=  i-^  ^  Vh^^?^^^^  ^®  "^^  ^^''^  *^**  ^«  ^^s  asking  that  that  which  resisted 
^^7^\r^^^  w  ^^^^^»^*y-  (^-  ^-  ^ciurice,  M.aT)  Moses  at  the  highest 
ti^.-^,-wT.'^'''-''^?''rf  T"^^  learn  what  Moses  was-in  spite  of  his  impSfec 
aX7f>,  f^  ''^^*  ?^  5^/"?  men;  and  to  what  place  of  honour  he  attained 
T^  f^l  ^\  ^^J  •  'S^'i^  ^^  witnesses  whose  Kves  pass  before  us  in  Scripture. 
JS*T  Inl  T^'^  ^^^^^  ^^'^^  ^®  recounts  he  stands  conspicuous.  I.  In  his 
L  tL  ?.U^^  ^''''''^  HONOUR.  1.  Moses  had  been  forty  days  and  nights  on  Sinai 
f«i  L?'^'''  P^^,^°^!'  receiving  revelations  of  God's  mind  knd  wiU.  The  people 
H^-l  -^  impatient,  had  forgotten  the  near  presence  of  God,  and  fell  away  from 
iVInuVrnvl  ""  Moses  came  near  the  camp,  on  descending  from  the  mount,  the 
itY.w  wvTl  *\^^T*  ^'l  ^'^  ^"^^^  ^^^  to  anger,  and  he  broke  the  tab  es  of 
Sll!  ^^^^i  ^^'°"S^*  ^^°"^  tbe  mount,  and  only  at  his  intercession  the 

people  were  saved.  2.  God  has  given  His  people  many  proofs  of  His  goodness 
and  e'^PnT'''  \'-  ^^^^^^^^  ^^«  ^^^J  evidences  of  languor,  of  lukewarmn  s  ,' 
^nd  Ztl^^T^  /^ ?ot  outwardly,  then  in  heart  man/have  tun.ed  back  from 
w  ;>,.!?  "i?*  a  holy  indignation  fiU  the  breasts  of  God's  true  servants  ;  should 
Z\^\^^^  -^T^""  ^'^°"S  t°  *^«  ^'^^d'  s*"^e  against  this  defection,  call  those 
r«t«  J  *^^^^"gbt  names,  &c.  ?  There  are  situations  in  which  such  a  eal  shoufd 
characterise  the  office-bearers  of  the  Church  and  all  true  members  of  the  same  II  In 
HIS  EARNEST  ENTREATY  FOR  HIS  PEOPLE.     1.   -  He  fell  down  before  the  Lord  •' 


298  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ix. 

&c.,  in  earnest  prayer  for  the  people,  as  he  had  often  done.  So  earnest  that  he 
asked  that  he  himself  might  be  blotted  out  of  the  book  God  had  written  if  their 
sins  were  not  forgiven  (Exod.  xxxii.  32).  And  his  "effectual  fervent  prayer"  was 
answered.  2.  How  like  in  spirit  to  the  great  apostle's  prayers  was  the  prayer  of 
Moses  !  (Rom.  ix.  3.)  If  we  go  through  the  books  of  holy  writ  we  see  what  may  be 
done  through  prayer.  The  prayers  of  a  Samuel,  Hezekiah,  Isaiah,  Daniel,  and  the 
prayers  of  our  Lord  (Heb.  v.  5-7)  all  encourage  to  earnest  prayer.  Oh,  that  we 
could  pray  as  earnestly  and  believingly  as  a  Monica,  a  Luther,  &c.,  or  as  Moses 
here  prayed  for  his  people  !  that  we  could  wrestle  in  prayer  for  the  lost  and  erring, 
for  every  soul  sunk  in  sin,  and  remind  God  of  His  gracious  promises,  &c. !  In  these 
days,  where  means  and  ways  must  be  considered  whereby  the  channels  of  a  true 
spiritual  and  moral  Hfe  may  be  laid  among  the  people,  prayer  and  supplication  are 
chief  means.     Let  us  use  them  earnestly.     {Albert  Kyphe.) 

Ver.  29.  Yet  they  axe  Thy  people  and  Thine  inheritance. — The  history  of  the 
Jews  a  convincing  argument  in  favour  of  Christianity : — It  is  related  of  a  certain 
royal  chaplain,  that  being  asked  offhand  by  his  sovereign  to  give  a  concise  and 
convincing  argument  in  favour  of  Christianity,  he  replied  in  two  words — "The 
Jews."  He  could  not  have  given  a  better  answer.  You  may  question,  if  you  will, 
every  single  prophecy  in  the  Old  Testament ;  but  the  whole  of  the  history  of  the 
Jews  is  one  continuous  prophecy,  more  distinct  and  more  articulate  than  all.  You 
may  deny,  if  you  will,  every  successive  miracle  which  is  recorded  therein  ;  but 
again,  the  history  of  the  Jews,  from  first  to  last,  remains  one  stupendous  miracle, 
more  convincing  than  all.  Look,  first,  at  the  capacities  of  the  people  themselves. 
They  had  no  remarkable  gifts  which  might  have  led  us  to  anticipate  for  them  this 
unique  distinction.  Nor  does  their  land  help  us  to  solve  the  enigma.  Palestine 
does,  indeed,  occupy  a  very  large  space  in  our  imagination,  but  it  is  a  very  minute 
and  insignificant  spot  in  the  map  of  the  world.  It  was,  moreover,  incapable  of 
expansion  ;  for  it  was  bounded  on  all  sides  either  by  the  sea  or  by  mountain  ranges, 
or  by  vast  and  impracticable  deserts.  It  is  largely  made  up  of  barren  and  stony 
mountains ;  and  even  this  meagre  and  contracted  territory  was  not  all  their  own. 
The  sea-coast  would  have  been  a  valuable  acquisition  to  a  people  gifted  with  com- 
mercial instincts ;  but  from  the  sea-coast  they  were  almost  wholly  excluded  ;  the 
Phoenicians  on  the  north,  the  Philistines  on  the  south,  occupied  all  the  most 
important  harbours.  And  this  territory,  so  small,  so  inexpansive,  so  unpromising, 
appears  at  a  still  greater  disadvantage  when  compared  with  the  surrounding  people. 
The  Jews  were  environed  on  all  sides  with  the  most  formidable  neighbours.  What 
chance  has  Israel?  Must  it  not  be  crushed,  ground  to  powder,  annihilated  by  its 
foes  ?  But,  at  all  events,  it  might  be  supposed  that  the  Israelites  would  at  least 
be  united  amongst  themselves ;  loyal  to  their  country ;  faithful  to  their  laws  and 
institutions  ;  true  to  their  God.  But  what  do  we  find  as  a  matter  of  fact  ?  Their 
national  history  is  one  continuous  record  of  murmurings,  of  rebellions,  of  internal 
fends,  of  moral  and  spiritual  defection.  Not  once  or  twice  only,  when  the  Almighty 
Archer  had  strung  His  weapon,  and  pointed  His  shaft,  His  aim  was  frustrated  by 
Israel's  disobedience.  His  chosen  instrument  swerved  in  His  hands,  "  starting  aside 
like  a  broken  bow."  So  then,  however  we  look  at  the  matter,  there  is  nothing 
which  affords  ground  of  hope  ;  and  when  we  question  the  actual  facts  we  find 
that  they  correspond  altogether  to  the  expectations  which  we  should  have  formed 
beforehand  from  the  character  and  position  of  the  people.  Never  has  any  people 
livod  on  this  earth  which  has  passed  through  such  terrible  disasters.  Never  has 
any  people  been  so  near  to  absolute  extinction  again  and  again,  and  yet  has 
survived.  Again  and  again  the  vision  of  the  prophet  has  been  renewed  ;  again  and 
again  the  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death  has  been  strewn  with  the  bones  of  carcases 
seemingly  extinct.  Again  and  again  lookers-on  have  despaired,  and  even  the  most 
hopeful,  when  challenged  by  the  Divine  call,  could  only  respond,  "0  Lord  God, 
Thou  knowest."  But  again  and  again  there  has  been  a  noise  and  a  shaking,  and  the 
bones  have  come  together  bone  to  bone,  and  they  have  been  strung  with  sinews 
and  clothed  with  flesh,  and  the  breath  has  been  breathed  into  them,  and  they  have 
lived,  and  stood  up  an  exceeding  great  army.  .  .  .  And  do  we  ask  what  it  was 
which  gave  to  the  Jewish  people  this  toughness,  this  vitality,  this  power  ?  The 
answer  is  simply,  "They  are  Thy  people,  and  Thine  inheritance."  It  was  the 
consciousness  of  their  close  relation  to  Jehovah,  the  omnipotent  and  ever-present 
God  ;  it  was  the  sense  of  a  glorious  destiny  marking  them  out  as  the  teachers  of  man- 
Idnd ;  it  was  the  conviction  that  they  were  possessoi-s  of  magnificent  truths,  and 


CHAP.  X.]  DEUTERONOMY,  299 

that  these  truths  must  in  the  end  prevail,  whatever  present  appearances  might 
suggest — this  was  the  secret  of  their  strength  notwithstanding  all  their  faults,  this 
was  the  ever-sustaining  breath  of  their  life  despite  all  their  disasters.  And  do  we 
ask,  again,  how  it  came  to  pass  that  when  Israel  called  to  the  Gentiles,  the  Gentiles 
responded  to  the  call,  and  flocked  to  the  standard  set  up  in  Zion  ?  Here,  again, 
the  answer  is  simple:  "Because  of  the  Lord  thy  God,  and  for  the  Holy  One  of 
Israel."  The  Gentiles  had  everything  else  in  profusion,  but  this  one  thing  they 
lacked — this  knowledge  of  God  their  Father  ;  and  without  this  all  their  magnificent 
gifts  could  not  satisfy  or  save  them.  Therefore  when  at  length  the  cry  went  forth, 
"Ho,  every  one  that  thirsteth,"  &c.,  they  hurried  to  the  fountain  of  salvation  to 
slake  their  burning  thirst.    {Bp.  Lightfoot,) 


CHAPTER  X. 

Ver.  1.  Two  tables  of  stone. — The  tables  of  stone—  What  do  they  symholisef— These 
were  made  before  any  part  of  the  tabernacle  furniture.  Their  history  heralds  forth 
their  transcendant  importance.  No  compend  of  moral  truth  may  pretend  to  com- 
pare with  them,  for  glory  and  grandeur  of  origin  ;  for  simplicity  and  completeness 
of  adaptation  to  man's  necessities,  or  for  sublime  exhibitions  of  the  Divine  perfec- 
tions. Such  an  illustrious  transcript  of  the  moral  attributes  of  God  and  His  claims 
upon  the  supreme  adoration  of  men,  and  of  their  obligations  to  one  another,  is 
sought  for  in  vain  amon^  the  records  of  human  wisdom.  Who  but  Jehovah  Him- 
self can  reveal  the  perfections  of  His  own  being  ?  Whose  right  is  it  to  dictate  law 
to  the  moral  universe,  if  not  its  Author  ?  But  Jehovah  exists  as  the  Elohim — the 
plurality  of  persons  in  the  essential  unity.  Has  the  issuance  of  these  ten  words 
any  special  reference  to  this  personality  ?  Certainly  ;  the  testimony  of  Jesus  is  the 
spirit  of  prophecy.  All  that  man  knows  truly  of  the  Divine  perfections,  he  knows 
through  the  teachings  of  the  second  person  in  the  Elohim — the  Divine  Logos,  by 
whom  the  world  was  made  and  without  whom  was  not  anything  made  that  was 
made.  It  was  the  voice  of  the  Word,  afterwards  made  flesh — the  same  Word  which 
said  Let  there  be  light,  and  there  was  light,  that  thundered  from  the  summit  of  the 
burning  mounta,in  these  ten  words,  and  afterwards  delivered  them  to  Moses  along  the 
ranks  of  angels.  This  will  be  evident  upon  a  comparison  of  a  f«w  Scriptures  (Psa. 
Ixviii.  17, 18,  20  ;  Eph.  iv. ;  Deut.  xxxiii.  2).  The  entire  system  of  ceremonial  observ- 
ances is  evangelical — all  relate  to  the  Gospel  scheme  of  salvation.  "For  unto  us," 
says  Paul  (Heb.  iv.  2),  "  was  the  Gospel  preached,  as  well  as  unto  them."  As  to  the 
kind  of  stone  used,  we  are  left  even  more  in  the  dark  than  as  to  the  wood,  and  there- 
fore infer  it  to  be  a  matter  of  no  consequence.  Only  this  is  plain,  that  they  were 
fragile,  being  shattered  to  pieces  when  thrown  from  Moses'  hands.  Nor  have  we 
anything  specific  as  to  their  size,  unless  it  be  that  Moses  seems  to  have  carried 
them  down  the  mount  (Exod.  xxxii.  19),  in  his  own  hands,  whence  we  may  infer  they 
were  not  very  thick,  and  they  could  not  have  been  more  than  forty-two  or  three  inches 
long,  and  twenty-six  wide.  The  first  suggestion  of  a  symbolical  meaning  is  durability. 
Engraving  on  stone  intimates  permanency.  Job,  in  his  sorrows,  exclaims  (chap, 
xix.  23),  "Oh,  that  my  words  were  now  written  !  oh,  that  they  were  printed  in  a 
book  !  that  they  were  graven  with  an  iron  pen  and  laid  in  the  rock  for  ever."  Then 
he  proceeds  to  express  his  faith  in  the  living  Redeemer,  and  his  hope  in  a  glorious 
resurrection  :  truths  these,  which  he  wished  to  perpetuate  for  ever.  The  first 
tables  represented  the  law  of  God  as  written  in  the  heart  of  man  at  his  creation  : 
or,  we  may  say,  human  race— Adam,  with  the  law  created  in  him.  The  breaking 
of  the  tables  sets  forth  the  fall  of  man  and  the  utter  defacement  of  God's  law  and 
image.  The  replacement  of  the  tables  by  Moses,  and  the  re-writing  of  the  law 
upon  them,  by  the  power  of  the  great  Redeemer,  forcibly  illustrates  His  entire  work 
of  restoring  man  to  the  full  dominion  of  the  holy  law,  or,  in  other  words,  the 
restoration  of  the  law  to  its  ruling  power  over  him  ;  or  may  we  not  say  the  second 
Adam,  the  pattern  of  all  the  redeemed.  The  bringing  of  man  under  the  power  of 
law,  the  protection  of  the  law  from  violence  and  profanation,  and  the  security  of  its 
rightful  dominion,  is  the  grand  idea  herein  set  forth.  All  around  it  is  encased 
within  its  golden  enclosure.  The  casket  indeed  is  precious,  costly,  and  beautiful, 
but  the  jewels  it  contains  are  the  priceless  treasure.    In  connection,  however,  with 


800  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  x. 

the  remarks  above,  that  the  ceremonial  ordinances  are  Gospel  ordinances,  it  is 
important  to  distinguish  them  from  the  legal  matter  of  the  old  covenant.  The  ten 
words  and  the  various  applications  of  their  principles  throughout  the  Pentateuch, 
are  quite  different  from  the  sacrifices,  the  lustrations,  the  incense  burnings,  the 
cities  of  refuge,  &c.  The  former  are  legal,  and  whenever  separated  from  the  latter 
become  a  law  of  works — the  very  covenant  made  with  Adam.  But  the  latter, 
coalescing  with  and  qualifying  and  pointing  out  the  way  of  fulfilling  the  former, 
transmute  the  whole  into  the  new  covenant,  or  true  Gospel,  which  was  revealed 
to  Adam  before  his  expulsion  from  Paradise.  {George  Junlem,  D.D.)  The 
7UW  tables: — I.  The  breaking  of  the  tables.  The  tables  themselves  were  in 
every  respect  most  remarkable.  Mark,  first,  that  they  were  "the  tables  of  the 
covenant."  God  said  :  **  These  are  My  commands,  keep  them,  and  I  am  your  God, 
I  will  be  a  glory  in  the  midst  of  you,  and  a  wall  of  fire  round  about  you  ;  break  My 
commands,  disobey  My  will,  there  is  an  infraction  of  the  covenant,  and  the  safety 
is  departed,  the  glory  gone."  Sin  was  the  violation  of  the  covenant ;  sin  wa.s  the 
overturning  and  the  breaking  to  pieces  of  the  covenant.  The  sin  being  committed, 
the  transgression  having  taken  place,  the  covenant  was  at  an  end.  This  is  indicated 
by  God  in  the  fact  that  Moses  breaks  the  tables  of  the  law,  because  Moses  in  this 
matter  acts  as  mediator  for  God ;  he  is  invested  with  the  Divine  authority,  and 
ordered  to  do  what  he  did  in  that  capacity  and  in  God's  name.  It  is  said  that  he 
was  in  great  anger,  his  anger  waxed  hot ;  but  it  was  a  holy  and  a  justifiable  anger, 
caused  by  great  and  elevated  zeal  for  truth  and  for  God,  and  so  no  censure  is 
pronounced  upon  it.  This  act  of  breaking  the  tables  resembled  figurative  actions 
performed  by  Hebrew  prophets  in  later  times.  It  is  like  Jeremiah  breaking  the 
bottle,  and  saying  to  the  elders  of  the  Jews,  **  Even  so  shall  this  people  and  this 
city  be  broken."  Or  when  he  is  commanded  to  take  a  girdle,  and  to  go  with  it  to 
the  river  Euphrates,  and  to  put  it  in  a  damp  place  until  it  becomes  rotten  and 
worthless:  then  it  is — "After  that  manner  you  shall  be  carried  captive  into 
Babylon."  Ezekiel,  in  like  manner,  is  ordered  to  take  the  goods  of  his  house,  his 
*' stuff,"  and  to  remove  it  upon  his  shoulders  from  one  dwelling  to  another  afar  off 
— a  figurative  action,  indicative  of  the  same  truth,  that  there  was  to  be  a  removal  of 
the  people  far  away.  And  we  have  one  instance  in  the  New  Testament  where  Paul's 
girdle  is  taken:  "Thus  shall  the  man  be  bound,"  it  was  said  by  Agabus,  "that 
owneth  this  girdle."  It  was  a  customary  mode  of  instruction,  ordained  on  the  part 
of  God  to  be  used  by  His  prophets  and  the  teachers  of  the  Hebrew  people  ;  and  I 
suppose  this  act  of  Moses  breaking  the  tables  is  the  most  striking  and  exemplary 
instance,  as  it  stands  at  the  head  and  is  apparently  the  first.  The  breaking  of  the 
tables  by  God's  mediator  signifies  to  the  people  on  God's  part  the  abrogation  of  the 
covenant,  and  that,  so  far  as  He  is  concerned.  He  is  not  their  God  any  longer,  and 
will  hide  His  face  from  them.  Precisely  the  same  in  essence,  I  think,  it  is  v<dth 
another  memorable  instance  recorded  in  the  New  Testament.  When  Christ  died, 
when  He  said  upon  the  Cross,  "  It  is  finished,"  "the  veil  of  the  temple  was  rent  in 
twain  from  the  top  to  the  bottom,"  and  God  said,  "Let  Us  go  hence ;  this  is  no 
longer  My  house  ;  this  people  is  no  longer  My  people."  As  there  had  been  violation 
of  the  covenant  by  sin,  there  is  repudiation  of  the  covenant  on  the  part  of  God. 
Finally,  I  think  it  intimates  that  the  covenant  upon  the  same  principle  should 
never  be  renewed,  for  the  tables  were  broken  in  pieces.  It  was  not  simply  in  two 
pieces  ;  they  were  probably  smashed  together  in  Moses'  hand  before  they  were 
dashed  upon  the  ground ;  they  were  broken  into  shivers,  so  that  the  parts  could 
not  be  brought  together  again.  It  was  one  offence  which  occasioned  the  expulsion 
from  the  garden — it  is  one  ofience  which  occasions  the  breaking  of  the  tables  of  the 
covenant ;  and  if  there  be  one  transgression  in  any  moral  agent,  innocence  is  gone, 
guilt  is  come,  and  justification  by  the  law  is  henceforth  and  for  ever  an  utter  and 
profound  impossibility.  II.  The  renewing  of  the  tables.  I  suppose  there  is  a 
mystery  in  it — that  there  is  more  intended  than  first  meets  the  eye.  Moses,  you 
observe,  is  commanded  to  prepare  fresh  tables,  and  to  come  up  to  the  mount  with 
them  in  his  hand.  He  is  represented  as  doing  this  according  to  the  Divine  com- 
mandment ;  and,  that  you  may  understand  the  mystery  and  see  the  point  distinctly 
which  I  am  attempting  to  open  to  you,  will  you  mark  first  the  things  that  preceded 
the  writing  of  the  Ten  Commandments  again  upon  the  tables  which  Moses  brought. 
They  were  these.  The  sin  of  the  people  was  forgiven  ;  Moses  interceded  on  their 
behalf,  and  God  said,  "I  have  pardoned  them  at  thy  word."  Before  the  law  ia 
rewritten  God  takes  the  tables  out  of  Moses'  hand  to  do  that  work  ;  He  forgives  the 
iniquity  of  His  people ;  and  I  suppose  that  act  of  indemnity,  that  forgiveness  on 


CHAP.  X.]  DEUTERONOMY,  301 


the  part  of  God,  was  in  connection  with  the  ulterior  and  remoter  sacrifice  to  be 
naade  for  sin  by  the  Son  of  God,  when  He  should  come  in  the  flesh  ;  and  when  He 
did  come  in  the  flesh  He  is  said  to  have  declared  the  justice  of  Deity,  in  the 
remission  of  sin.     The  Hebrew  believers  are  especially  said  to  have  received  the 
redemption  of  the  antecedent  ages,  the  forgiveness  of  their  transgressions  which 
they  had  committed  under  the  old  covenant,  when  Christ  died,  and  they  became 
established  in  the  everlasting  inheritance  in  consequence  of  that  great  truth  and 
principle :  and  so  sin,  I  think,  has  ever  been  remitted  of  God.     God  affirms  His 
sovereign  right— His  right  to  condemn  the  guilty,  His  right  to  reprieve  them 
according  to  His  own  infinite  and  glorious  will.     Here  is  forgiveness  of  sin  and  the 
aflSrmation  of  grace.     Here  is  the  promise  of  His  presence.     Moses  said,  "If  Thy 
presence  go  not  with  us,  carry  us  not  up  hence";  God  says,  "  My  presence  shall 
go  with  thee,  and  I  will  give  thee  rest."    You  will  find  this  in  the  chapter  which 
precedes  the  account  of  the  rewriting  of  the  law  by  the  Divine  finger  upon  the 
tables  of  stone.    Then  there  is  the  showing  of  Godhead.    Moses  said,  "I  beseech 
Thee,  show  me  Thy  face  "  ;  and  that  remarkable  vision  in  the  cleft  of  the  rock, 
Moses  being  put  into  it  by  God,  and  God  passing  by  him,  I  think  the  same  may  be 
said  of  it  as  was  said  in  after  ages  respecting  Isaiah's  vision  in  the  sixth  chapter  of 
his  prophecy — "  These  things  said  Moses,  when  he  saw  Christ's  glory  and  spake  of 
Hjm."    Then  there  is  the  proclamation  of  the  Divine  name — "  The  Lord,  the  Lord 
God,  pardoning  iniquity,  transgression,  and  sin  "  ;  and  when  that  announcement  is 
made  it  is  said,   "Moses  bowed  down  and  worshipped."    Then,  will  you  mark, 
here  is  the  forgiveness  of  sin,  aflBrmation  of  the  Divine  grace,  promise  of  the 
Divine  presence,  showing  of  Christ's  glory,  proclamation  of  that  amazing  name, 
antecedently  to  the  rewriting  of  the  tables  ?— which  proves,  I  think,  that  the 
rewriting  of  the  law  was  not  the  going  back  to  the  old  covenant,  or  making  a  second 
trial  of  that  principle  in  relation  to  the  Israelites,  but  that  it  was  upon  altogether 
different  principles— the  principles  which  are  enumerated— free  forgiveness,  revela- 
tion of  Christ,  His  presence  in  the  midst  of  His  people,  His  name  full  of  mercy  and 
love.     And  see  the  effect  of  this  :  He  writes  the  law  a  second  time  ;  and  upon  these 
principles  it  is  said,  "Well,  go  and  be  obedient."     For  it  strikes  me  that  that  is  the 
great  truth  which  comes  out  in  the  Gospel  revelation  and  economy— not  that  we 
are  to  obey  the  law,  and  then  make  our  appeal  to  God's  grace  and  mercy,  but  that 
God,  manifesting  His  grace  and  mercy  in  a  free  and  overflowing  salvation,  then 
says,  "  Let  My  law  be  rewritten  ;  go  and  obey  it."    Secondly,  what  was  done  with 
the  second  tables  ?     The  commands  were  unaltered ;   what  was  written  on  the 
tables  was  exactly  the  same ;  but  what  was  done  with  the  second  tables  ?    They 
were  not  exalted,  like  the  brazen  serpent,  upon  a  pole :  they  were  not  used  as  a 
banner,  floating  before  the  eyes  of  the  people  as  they  advanced  to  their  respective 
encampments— they  were  not,  as  Job  desired  his  words  might  be,  "written  with  an 
iron  pen,  and  graven  upon  a  rock  for  ever" ;  none  of  these  things  was  done,  and 
nothing  resembling  them  :  they  were  put  into  the  ark,  the  chest  of  which  we  read 
so  much,  and  which  was,  I  suppose,  the  very  first  article  prepared  by  Moses  under 
the  guidance  of  the  Holy  Ghost.     That  chest  represented,  I  think,  Christ.     The 
law,  never  kept  by  angels,  never  kept  by  man  in  his  innocence,  nor  by  man  in  his 
restoration,  nor  by  any  moral  beings  in  the  universe,  as  the  law  was  kept  by  God's 
own  Son  ;  the  law,  then,  was  put  into  the  ark.     Christ  obeyed  not  only  for  Himself 
in  person,  but  as  the  Surety  and  Representative  of  His  people  ;  "He  is  the  end  of 
the  law  for  righteousness  to  every  one  that  believeth."    As  I  put  the  finger  of  faith 
on  His  person  and  on  His  life,  I  feel  that  He  obeyed  the  law  and  kept  the  law  for 
me.     The  law  is  in  Christ  fulfilled,  and  fulfilled  for  them  whose  cause  He  espoused 
and  whose  interests  He  had  undertaken.      Mark  another  thing.     The  lid  upon  that 
sacred  chest  was  a  plate  of  pure  gold,  upon  which  the  blood  of  the  sacrifice  was  to 
be  sprinkled  according  to  the  Divine  command.      In  order  to  the  fulfilment  of  law, 
the  rendering  to  law  and  justice  everything  that  can  be  required,  there  are  but  two 
things.     The  first  is,  perfect  obedience.     If  there  be  perfect  obedience,  the  law  is 
^^r^  ic^iT  'J  ^"*  ^^  *^®  ^^^  ^®  broken,  the  next  thing  is  the  penalty  ;  and  if  the  penalty 
is  fulfalled,  the  law  is  satisfied  and  asks  no  more.      Penalty  and  obedience,  the  only 
two  things  with  which  the  law  is  conversant.      We  say  that  in  Christ  the  penalty 
was  paid  ;  we  say  that  the  iniquities  of  man  were  transferred  to  Christ,  and  that  He 
suffered  for  him— that  "we  have  redemption  through  His  blood."    So  I  come  to 
the  blood  of  Chnst  for  the  expiation  of  my  sins,  put  the  finger  of  faith  on  His 
sacrifice,  and  feel  that  I  am  secure.     Mark  once  more :  upon  this  lid  was  the  mercy- 
seat— or,  it  constituted  the  mercy-seat;   and  God  said  to  Moses,  "Come  to  the 


302  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  ie^ 

Mercy-seat," and  to  all  the  people,  "Come  to  the  Mercy-seat."    Through  that  every 
communication  was  made  from  them  to  God,  and  from  God  to  them  ;  and  from 
that  hour  to  this — or  to  the  days  of  Daniel  and  the  captivity — they  turned  their 
faces  when  they  prayed  towards  God's  presence,  exalted  and  enthroned  in  grace  and 
in  mercy  there.    It  betokened  the  great  principle — "faithful  and  just  to  forgive  us 
our  sins,  and  to  cleanse  us  from  all  unrighteousness "  ;  answering  prayer  in  the 
'exercise  of  consummate  rectitude  and  justice,  as  well  as  of  clemency,  condescension, 
mercy,  and  grace.      One  thing  more  I  notice  ;  and  that  is,  that  upon  either  end  of 
this  plate  of  pure  gold  was  the  cherubic  figure,  in  reference  to  which  the  Apostle 
Peter  says,  "which  things  the  angels  desire  to  look  into,  to  the  intent  that  to 
the  principalities  and  powers  in  the  heavenly  places  may  be  made  manifest  by  the 
Church  the  manifold  wisdom  of  God."     I  infer,  from  all  I  have  said,  that  the 
renewal  of  the  writing  of  the  tables  is  not  the  renewal  of  the  old  covenant,  but  a 
representation  of  God's  mercy  and  grace  in  Christ  Jesus,  as  antecedent  to  the  law 
being  rewritten,  and  written  upon  the  hearts  and  upon  the  consciences  of  men.      I 
only  note,  further,  what  followed.      After  the  rewriting  by  God's  own  finger  Moses 
came  down.     How  did  he  come  down  ?    With  the  glory  upon  his  face,  so  that  they 
could  not  steadfastly  look  upon  him  ;  and  the  apostle  says  it  intimated  that  there 
were  things  intended  which  the  Jews  had  not  the  capacity  at  that  time  to  under- 
stand.    It  was  not  proper  that  they  should  know  them.     The  veiling  of  Moses'  face 
intimated  the  veiling  of  certain  profound  principles  which  were  to  have  a  future  and 
after  manifestation.     Thus  in  the  same  way,  I  think,  the  breaking  of  the  tables  and 
the  renewing  of  them  intimates  that  the  law  never  would  be  fulfilled  but  in  Christ, 
and  that  it  could  not  be  safely  enforced  upon  man— at  least,  it  could  produce 
nothing  but  condemnation — irrespectively  of  Christ  and  the  obedience  which  He  has 
already  rendered.     But  what  followed  besides  ?    The  completion  of  the  tabernacle 
in  all  its  parts  and  proportions,  the  ordination  of  priests,  the  crossing  the  Jordan, 
the  entering  into  the  promised  land — of  which  things  we  cannot  now  speak  ;  but  it 
comes  out,  I  think,  in  most  beautiful  conclusion,  that  if  these  matters  preceded  the 
rewriting  of  the  tables,  and  the  tables  then  written  were  placed  in  the  peculiar 
circumstances  which  the  passage  represents,  and  if  such  things  transpired  when 
this  was  done,  then  it  is  not  the  old  covenant  of  works,  but  the  new  covenant  of 
grace,  mercy,  and  salvation  by  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ ;  and  so  "  the  law  is  a  school- 
master, bringing  unto  Christ."     {J.  Straiten.)         The  tables  of  the  law  :—-l.  In  the 
next  verse  it  is  said  that  Moses  "made  an  ark  of  shittim  wood  "  before  going  up  into 
the  mount  with  the  two  tables  in  his  hand  ;  whereas,  according  to  the  Book  of  Exodus 
(xxxvii.  1),  Bezaleel  is  said  to  have  made  the  ark.     Those  who  seek  to  trace  contra- 
dictions in  the  Scriptures,  or  variety  of  authorship,  of  course,  point  out  this 
"discrepancy."    The  obvious  remark  that  one  may  be  said  to  do  what  he  directs 
another  to  do  is  probably  a  suflBcient  reply  to  this  difficulty.     2.  It  is  not,  however, 
with  the  ark,  but  with  the  tables  of  the  law,  we  are  now  concerned.    3.  The  delivery 
of  the  law,  on  the  fiftieth  day,  according  to  the  Jews,  after  the  Exodus— an  event 
celebrated  by  the  Feast  of  Pentecost — reminds  us  of  the  contrast  between  the 
circumstances  under  which  the  old  and  the  new  law  were  promulgated.      The  thick 
cloud,  the  darkness,  the  thunder,  the  lightning,  filled  the  Israelites  with  alarm. 
How  very  different  are  the  approaches  to  God  in  the  New  Testament !     (Heb.  xii. 
18-24.)     But  the  same  moral  law  is  binding  in  both  ;  and  it  is  to  this  fact,  God's 
condescension  in  writing  a  second  time  the  words  of  the  Decalogue,  our  thoughts 
are  invited  in  the  lesson.      Let  us  consider  some  reasons  for  keeping  the  Ten 
Commandments  ;  and  then,  how  we  are  to  obey  them.    I.  Reasons  for  keeping  the 
COMMANDMENTS.      1.  They  come  from  God.     This  may  be  said  of  the  whole  law, 
ceremonial  and  judiciary,  as  well  as  moral.     But  surely  there  is  a  difference.     Not 
only  Avere  the  Ten  Commandments  promulgated,  as  a  French  writer  says,  "avec 
eclat,"  and  the  people  warned  to  prepare  for  the  solemn  event  (Exod.  xix.  10,  15), 
but  they  were  given  directly  by  God.     The  first  tables  were  "  the  work  of  God,  and 
the  writing  was  the  writing  of  God,  graven  on  the  tables."     The  second  tables  were 
the  work  of  man,  but  the  writing  was  still  the  writing  of  God  (Exod.  xxxiv.  1). 
They  stand  above  the  ceremonial  law,  as  an  abridgment  of  the  duties  of  man,  and 
are  of  lasting  obligation.      2.  They  agree  with  the  law  written  in  man's  heart. 
They  are  in  full  accord  with  our  moral  intuitions.      The  Divine  Law  was  not  a 
brand-new  code  of  ethics,  but  it  was  necessary,  if  man  was  to  attain  to  a  super- 
natural end.     Moreover,  man's  moral  sense  was  liable  to  be  tampered  with  and 
impaired,  so  as  at  last  to  give  an  uncertain  judgment :  neither  was  it  able  to  discern 
clearly  always  between  good  and  evil ;  nor  did  it  reach  into  the  sphere  of  thought 


CHAP.  X.]  DEUTERONOMY,  S03 

and  motive.  If  man  had  been  entirely  dependent  upon  a  written  law,  its  promulga- 
tion would  not  have  been  delayed  till  the  time  of  Moses.  It  is  altogether  a  mistake 
to  suppose  that  the  Decalogue  made  murder,  theft,  adultery,  and  the  like  sinful.  It 
forbade  them  because  they  were  sinful.  It  fixed  man's  moral  intuitions  so  that  they 
coold  not  be  dragged  down  by  human  passion  and  selfishness.  It  made  them  clearer 
and  more  distinct.  It  clothed  them  with  a  new  sanction  and  authority.  3.  We 
find,  when  we  examine  the  period  before  the  law  was  given,  a  sense  of  the  evil  of 
the  actions  which  it  forbids.  "Jacob  said,  Put  away  the  strange  gods  that  are 
among  you."  This  is  an  anticipation  of  the  First  Commandment.  Perhaps  the 
previous  observance  of  the  Sabbath  may  be  gathered  from  Exod.  xvi.  23.  So  the 
Sixth  Commandment  was  already  in  force  (Gen.  ix.  6).  Sins  against  purity  were 
abhorred  (Gen.  xxxiv.  31,  xxxviii.  24),  showing  that  the  Seventh  Commandment 
was  no  novelty.  Joseph's  brethren  were  shocked  at  being  charged  with  stealing 
the  cup  (Gen.  xliv.  7).  The  sin  of  coveting  "thy  neighbour's  wife  "  was  evidently 
recognised  by  Abimelech  as  "a  great  sin"  with  regard  to  Sarah  (Gen.  xx.  9).  All 
these  statements — and  there  are  others  before  the  giving  of  the  law — are  witnesses 
to  the  moral  light  which  God  has  given  to  man,  irrespective  of  external  guidance 
or  enactment.  4.  The  moral  law  did  not  make  sin  to  be  sin,  though  it  added  to  its 
malice  ;  but  it  clearly  revealed  the  amount  of  human  transgression,  whicli  was 
veiled  in  a  mist  before.  It  was  like  a  clinical  thermometer  which  measures 
the  height  of  the  fever,  which  might  have  been  unknown  before.  It  reveals  the 
temperature  of  the  patient,  and  so  the  seriousness  or  lightness  of  the  case.  "By 
the  law,"  says  the  apostle,  "is  the  knowledge  of  sin"  (Rom.  iii.  20).  5.  Further, 
obedience  to  the  moral  law  of  God  is  necessary  for  salvation.  "If  thou  wilt  enter 
into  life,  keep  the  commandments"  (Matt.  xix.  16,  17).  St.  Paul  declares  the  same 
(Rom.  xiii.  8,  9).  Again,  "  Circumcision  is  nothing,  and  uncircumcision  is  nothing, 
but  the  keeping  of  the  commandments  of  God  "  (1  Cor.  vii.  19).  St.  John  the 
same  (1  John  iii.  22,  24).  II.  How  are  we  to  keep  the  commandments  ?  1.  With 
the  help  of  Divine  grace.  The  law  cast  light  upon  the  sinful  principle  in  man, 
and  by  his  inability  to  overcome  it,  aroused  the  sense  of  need  and  longing  for  a 
Saviour.  Moses  gave  the  law  without  the  Spirit,  says  a  commentator,  but  Christ 
gave  both.  Whilst  on  the  one  hand  we  realise  that  we  can  do  nothing  without 
grace  ;  on  the  other,  we  must  remember  that  we  can  do  everything  with  it.  2.  We 
have  to  keep  all  the  commandments.  Not  nine  out  of  ten.  The  commandments 
are  not  isolated  precepts,  so  that  the  violation  of  one  does  not  touch  another  They 
form,  if  I  may  say  so,  an  organic  body  of  moral  truth,  as  the  Creed  an  organic  body 
of  dogmatic  truth.  "  Whosoever  shall  keep  the  whole  law,  and  yet  offend  in  one 
point,  he  is  guilty  of  all"  (James  ii.  10).  3.  Christians  have  to  read  the  command 
ments  in  the  light  of  "the  Sermon  on  the  Mount,"  and  so  to  see  how  deeply 
they  cut  They  not  only  touch  the  outward  action,  but  thought  and  motive. 
III.  Lessons  :  1 .  To  seek  by  meditation  upon  the  law  of  God  to  know  how  much 
that  law  demands  of  us  as  Christians.  2.  To  examine  the  conscience  by  the  Ten 
Commandments,  so  as  to  discover,  by  the  help  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  wherein  we  have 
broken  them — in  thought,  word,  deed,  or  omission.  3.  They  are  the  way  of  life. 
{Canon  HuUhingSy  M,A.) 

Ver.  9.  Tlie  lord  is  liis  inheritance.— jT^  Lord  the  Christian's  inheritance: — 
The  obvious  meaning  of  having  the  Lord  for  our  inheritance  is,  that  we  have 
dedicated  ourselves  to  His  service,  that  we  have  surrendered  ourselves  altogether  to 
Him,  the  energies  of  the  body  and  the  faculties  of  the  mind,  to  do  His  will  and 
advance  His  kingdom  and  glory  ;  again,  that  we  have  secured  Him  as  our  own  for 
ever,  that  we  are  attached  to  Him  as  a  man  to  a  possession  which  he  cannot 
alienate  ;  further,  that  we  have,  as  it  were,  the  use  of  the  Lord  God  Almighty,  that 
His  perfections  and  His  grace  are  guaranteed  to  us  to  be  employed  for  our  personal 
advantage  ;  and,  lastly,  that  we  are  in  the  actual  enjoyment  of  those  blessings  which 
belong  to  living  in  a  state  of  favour  with  the  righteous  Governor  of  the  universe. 
I.  In  life  the  true  believer  realises  the  promise,  and  has  the  Lord  for  his  inherit- 
ance. 1.  Because  he  deliberately  chooses  Him  in  preference  to  the  charms  and 
allurements  of  the  world.  In  proportion  as  he  is  separated  from  the  world,  doea 
the  Lord  become  his  inheritance  ;  he  is  more  closely  united  to  Him,  and  mora 
exclusively  employed  in  His  service ;  he  perceives  the  wisdom  of  his  choice,  tastes 
of  the  blessings  that  are  at  God's  right  hand,  and  finds  a  supply  of  all  his  wants 
from  the  fulness  that  is  in  Christ  Jesus  ;  that  the  Lord  is  his  portion  and  his 
Bole  inheritance,  he  has  taken  Him  for  his  own,  and  every  other  less  perfect  and 


304  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTBATOR.  [chap.  X. 


substantial  he  has  absolutely  and  utterly  renounced.  2.  The  Christian  has  the  Lord 
for  his  inheritance,  in  that  all  things  are  working  together  for  his  final  salvation. 

3.  Tlie  true  believer  has  the  Lord  for  his  inheritance,  because  lie  has  the  peace  of 
God  shed  abroad  in  his  heart.  The  voice  of  Christian  experience  is  unanimous. 
God  does  not  hide  Himself  from  those  whom  He  has  given  to  His  beloved  Son. 

4.  The  true  believer  has  surrendered  to  him  the  Lord  Christ  Himself  as  his  inherit- 
ance ;  he  has  Him  for  his  own.  It  is  the  assurance  of  St.  John  that  "he  that 
hath  the  Son  hath  life,  and  he  that  hath  not  the  Son  hath  not  life."  IL  But  not 
only  in  this  life,  but  also  after  death— not  only  in  time,  but  also  in  eternity,  has 
the  Christian  the  Lord  for  his  inheritance.  He  is  not  deprived  of  his  portion  by 
the  separation  of  soul  and  body,  by  the  change  of  scene,  nor  the  commencement  of 
a  spiritual  existence.     Not  only  is  it  his  own  now,  but  also  in  the  world  to  come. 

1.  For,  first,  He  is  eternally  with  him.  Wherever  is  the  heaven  where  Christ  lives 
and  reigns,  there  is  the  habitation  of  His  chosen  people.  They  are  with  Him 
where  He  is,  they  see  Him  as  He  is,  they  walk  in  the  light  of  His  countenance. 

2.  But  the  great  truth  stands  out  in  all  its  excellency  when  we  find  it  is  the 
presence  of  the  Lord  that  constitutes  the  believer's  happiness  and  joy.  Every  joy 
and  blessing  of  those  blessed  places  originates  in  the  fact,  that  we  are  to  dwell  in 
the  presence  of  the  Lord.  His  presence  is  the  fountain  and  spring  of  happiness  to 
every  individual  of  His  glorified  Church.  Conclusion:  Let  us  bear  in  mind — 
1.  That  whether  we  have  made  the  Lord  our  inheritance  must  be  the  criterion  of 
our  hopes.  To  have  no  part  in  Him  is  to  be  an  outcast  from  the  promises,  to  live 
with  the  bivine  wrath  upon  our  heads.  2.  Let  us  also  seriously  inquire,  what  will  be 
the  state  of  those  in  the  next  world  who  have  not  made  the  Lord  their  inheritance  ? 
Can  their  souls  be  conceived  in  any  way  capable  of  participating  in  heavenly  joy  ? 
Is  there  anything  in  the  circumstances  or  employments  of  redeemed  spirits  which 
can  fill  up  the  measure  of  their  cup,  and  make  them  perfectly  and  for  ever  blessed ! 
{H.  Hughes,  M.A.) 

Vers.  12,  13.  What  doth  the  Lord  thy  God  require  of  thee.— T7i«  true  life  of 
man : — The  true  life  of  man  is  the  life  of  practical  conformity  to  Divine  claims. 
All  is  summed  up  and  expressed  here.  I.  Loving  reverence.  1.  Fear  of  not 
acting  worthily  of  the  object  of  love.  2.  Fear  of  offending  the  object  of  love. 
IL    Practical  obedience.     1.   God  has  ''ways,"  that  is  methods  of  action — 

(1)  In  material  nature.      Acquaintance  with  these  is  what  is  called  "science." 

(2)  In  moral  mind.  Acquaintance  with  these  is  the  highest  knowledge.  Embodied 
in  the  life  ot  Christ.  2.  To  walk  in  God's  ways  is— (1)  The  only  righteous  walk. 
(2)  The  only  secure  walk.  (3)  The  only  elevating  walk.  III.  Hearty  service. 
1.  Perfect  freedom.  2.  Sunny  cheerfulness.  3.  Thorough  completeness.  All 
the  powers  fully  employed.  {Homilist. )  Educated  towards  spirituality : — That 
was  the  Divine  intention  from  the  very  beginning.  God  does  not  disclose  His 
purpose  all  at  once,  but  out  of  consideration  for  our  capacities  and  our  opportuni- 
ties and  our  necessities  He  leads  us  one  step  at  a  time,  as  the  wise  teacher  leads 
the  young  scholar.  What  wise  teacher  thrusts  a  whole  library  upon  the  dawning 
mind  of  childhood  ?  A  picture,  a  toy,  a  tempting  prize,  a  handful  to  be  going  on 
with,  and  all  the  rest  covered  by  a  genial  smile  :  so  the  young  scholar  passes  from 
page  to  page  until  the  genius  of  the  revelation  seizes  him,  and  life  becomes  a 
sacred  Pentecost.  This  thought  supplies  a  standard  by  which  to  measure  progress. 
What  are  we  ?  To  what  have  we  attained  ?  Are  we  still  among  the  beggarly 
elements?  Do  we  still  cry  out  for  a  kind  of  teaching  that  is  infantile  and  that 
ought  to  be  from  our  age  altogether  profitless  ?  Or  do  we  sigh  to  see  the  finer 
lines  and  hear  the  lower  tones  and  enter  into  the  mystery  of  silent  worship — so 
highly  sti-ung  in  all  holy  sensibilities  that  even  a  word  jars  upon  us  and  is  out  of 
place  under  circumstances  so  charged  with  the  Divine  presence  ?  Still  keeping  by 
this  same  line  of  thought,  notice  how  the  promises  were  adapted  to  the  mental 
condition  of  Israel.  What  promises  could  Israel  understand  ?  Only  promises  of 
the  most  substantial  kind.  Moses  addresses  himself  to  this  necessity  with  infinite 
skill  (chap.  x.  22,  xi.  11,  12).  Still  preserving  the  marvellous  consistency  of  the 
whole  economy,  we  cannot  fail  to  notice  how  beautifully  the  sacrifices  were 
adapted  to  the  religious  condition  of  the  people.  This  explains  the  sacrifices 
indeed.  What  was  the  religious  condition  of  the  people  ?  Hardly  religious  at  all. 
It  was  an  infantile  condition ;  it  was  a  condition  in  which  appeal  could  only  lie 
with  efl'ect  along  the  line  of  vision.  So  God  will  institute  a  worship  accordingly  ; 
He  will  say  to  Israel,  Bring  beasts  in  great  numbers,  and  kill  them  upon  the  altar ; 


CHAP.  X.]  DEUTERONOMY.  305 

take  censers,  put  fire  thereon  ;  spare  nothing  of  your  herds  and  flocks  and  corn 
and  wine  ;  have  a  continual  burnt  offering,  and  add  to  the  continual  burnt  offering 
other  oflFerings  great  in  number  and  in  value.     Israel  must  be  kept  busy ;  leisure 
will  be  destruction.      There  must  be  seven  Sabbaths  in  the  week,  and  seven  of 
those  seven  must  be  specialised  by  fast  or  festival  or  sacred  observance.      Give 
Israel  no  time  to  rest.     When  he  has  brought  one  bullock,  send  him  for  another ; 
when  he  has  killed  a  ram,  call  for  a  thousand  more ;  this  will  be  instructive  to 
him.     We  must  weary  him  to  a  higher  aspiration  ;  to  begin  this  aspiration  would 
be  to  beat  the  air,  or  to  speak  an  unknown  language,  or  to  propound  a  series  of 
spiritual  impossibilities.      Men  must  be  trained  according  to  their  capacity  and 
their  quality.     The  whole  ceremonial  system  of  Moses  constitutes  in  itself — in  its 
wisdom  so  rich,  its  marvellous  adaptation  to  the  character  and  temper  of  the 
times, — an  unanswerable  argument  for  the  inspiration  of  the  Bible.      So  far  the 
line  has  been  consistent  from  its  beginning,  what  wonder,  then,  if  it  culminate  in 
one  splendid  word  ?     That  word  is  introduced  here  and  there.     For  example,  in 
chapter  x.  12,  the  word  occurs  ;  in  chapter  xi.  1,  it  is  repeated.      What  is  that 
culminating  word  ?    How  long  it  has  been  kept  back  !    Now  that  it  is  set  down  we 
see  it  and  acknowledge  it ;  it  comes  at  the  right  time,  and  is  put  in  the  right 
place  :— "To  love  Him."    {J.  ParkeTy  D.D.)        Exhortation  to  serve  the  Lord:— 
Who  obeys  this  command  ?    A  part  of  my  hearers  obey  it  in  some  degree.    They 
esteem  God  above  every  other  object.     They  consider  His  glory  as  their  highest 
interest,   and  communion  with  Him  as  their  supreme  happiness.      It  is  their 
greatest  grief  that  their  treacherous  hearts  are  so  prone  to  wander  from  Him. 
Their  most  fervent  desires  pant  after  Him.     And  when  in  a  favoured  hour  they 
find  Him  whom  their  "soul  loveth,"  they  hold  Him  fast  and  will  not  let  Him  go. 
I  have  no  reproaches  for  these.     But  are  all  such  ?    Would  to  God  all  were.     But 
there  is  no  service  without  love.     "Love  is  the  fulfilling  of  the  law."    Supreme 
love  to  God  will  certainly  produce  self-denial  for  His  sake.    It  will  habitually  avoid 
everything  which  He  has  forbidden,  and  obey,  not  a  part,  but  all  He  commands. 
Supreme  love  will  seek  communion  with  its  object  more  than  any  worldly  pleasure. 
It  will  pant  after  Him  and  after  greater  conformity  to  Him  ;  it  will  seek  His  glory 
as  the  highest  interest ;  it  will  renounce  the  world  and  idols  and  cultivate  a 
heavenly  mind.     Unless  we  have  that  which  will  produce  all  these  effects,  we  have 
no  supreme  love  to  God  ;  and  if  we  have  no  supreme  love,  we  have  no  love  at  all ; 
and  if  we  have  no  love,  as  there  is  no  neutral  state,  we  are  His  enemies.     It  was 
God  that  made  you  what  you  are,  and  put  you  into  a  world  which  He  had  richly 
furnished  for  your  use.     Have  you  nothing  to  do  with  Him,  or  He  with  you  ?    Do 
you  imagine  that  He  created  you  and  raised  you  so  much  above  the  brutes,  and 
put  you  into  a  world  on  which  He  had  expended  so  much  labour,  that  you  might 
wander  from  Him  in  the  regions  of  darkness  ?  that  you  might  seek  your  happiness 
out  of  Him,  and  live  in  rebellion  against  Him  ?  that  you  might  spend  your  life 
only  in  preparing  to  live  in  this  transitory  state  ?  or  that  you  might  live  only  to 
eat  and  drink  ?    As  God  is  true,  He  sent  you  into  His  world  for  the  same  end  that 
a  master  8«nds  a  servant  into  his  vineyard — to  labour  for  Him.     He  has  sent  you 
into  the  field  abundantly  furnished  with  powers  and  means  to  serve  Him,  and  has 
strictly  commanded  you  to  use  these  talents  in  His  service.     Say  not  that  He  is 
too  far  above  you  to  be  apprehended.     He  has  brought  Himself  down,  and  spread 
Himself  out  before  you  in  His  works  and  word,  and  it  is  only  to  unbelief  that  He 
is  invisible.     Having  sent  you  into  His  vineyard,  He  looks  after  you  to  see  whether 
you  are  faithful  or  not     Has  He  nothing  to  do  with  you  ?    His  eyes  are  upon  you 
every  moment — upon  the  very  bottom  of  ^our  heart.    Did  your  Creator  turn  you 
loose  into  the  world,  to  run  wild  in  pursuit  of  your  own  imaginations,  without  law 
or  restraint,  intending  to  look  no  fui-ther  after  you,  but  to  throw  you  out  from  His 
care?    Woe  to  you  if  He  had  done  this;   though  this,  I  fear,  you  have  often 
wished.     But  He  did  no  such  thing.     His  intention  was  still  to  follow  you  with 
His  care,  as  beloved  creatures,  whom  His  own  hands  had  formed  —  to  exercise 
government  over  you— to  establish  eternal  communion  with  you— to  lead  your 
desires  up  to  Him — to  fill  you  with  His  own  sublime  happiness,  and  to  make  you 
a  part  of  an  harmonious,  blessed,  and  glorious  kingdom.     To  accomplish  these 
ends  He  put  you  under  law— a  law  admirably  calculated  to  unite  you  to  Him  and 
to  consummate  your  happiness.     The  unreasonable  will  complain  of  anything, 
and  murmurs  have  filled  the  world  because  this  law  requires  the  heart.     But  were 
it  otherwise— were  God  to  relinquish  His  ckims  on  the  heart  and  compound  for 
outward  service  only,  would  it  be  better  then  ?    Could  they  be  happy  here,  could 

20 


306  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  t. 

they  be  happy  in  heaven,  without  a  holy  heart?  They  had  better  never  been 
born  than  be  excused  from  loving  God.  Should  God  give  up  His  law,  still  they 
are  wretclies  to  eternity  without  love  to  Him.  The  law  enjoins  nothing  but  what 
in  the  nature  of  things  is  essential  to  happiness.  From  this  moment  you  must 
either  renounce  your  Bible,  or  understand  that  God  accounts  you  rebels  for  not 
loving  and  serving  Him  with  all  the  heart  and  soul.  He  admits  no  excuse.  Your 
plea  that  yon  cannot,  is  only  pleading  guilty.  A  heart  that  refuses  to  love  the 
Creator  and  Redeemer  of  the  world,  is  the  very  thing  for  which  God  condemns 
you — is  the  vilest  rebel  in  the  universe.  {E.  Griffin,  D.  D. )  God's  requirements : — 
God's  exactions,  if  we  be  Christians,  are  our  own  free-will  offerings.  What  God 
demands  is  what  thankful  hearts  should  gladly  give.  1.  First  of  all  "  to  fear  "  Him. 
Not  to  be  terrified,  that  is  the  natural  man's  relii^ion.  Unless  taught  of  God  men 
look  upon  Him  with  alarm.  Hence  religion  is  a  sepulchral  and  gloomy  thing 
to  them.  To  the  Christian  all  is  reverse.  He  has  no  alarm ;  he  courts  God's 
presence  and  feels  that  presence  to  be  the  inspiration  of  hope  and  joy.  2.  Next 
**to  walk  in  all  His  ways."  All  the  ways  proceed  from  one  source  and  terminate  in 
the  same  again.  There  are  varieties  of  expression,  but  one  religion.  A  way  of 
righteousness,  a  way  of  truth,  a  way  of  peace,  and  a  way  of  pleasantness.  3.  Then 
"  to  love  Him."  If  the  fear  enjoined  were  terror,  it  would  be  impossible  to  love. 
Love  is  the  germ  in  the  heart  that  blossoms  and  bursts  into  all  the  fragrant  fruits 
demanded  by  God's  holy  law.  The  law,  like  the  imperious  taskmaster,  says, 
"Give  me  fruit,"  and  you  cannot;  but  love  softly,  progressively,  originates  and 
develops  all  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit.  The  absence  of  this  love  is  the  absence  of 
Christianity.  This  love,  lost  in  the  Fall,  regained  by  the  Cross,  is  the  result  of 
seeing  God's  love  for  us.  The  measure  and  extent  is  "all  your  hearts."  Not 
cold,  calculating  preference  ;  but  warm,  cordial  attachment — attachment  not  blind 
and  unintelligible,  but  with  all  the  soul.  4.  Also  "to  serve"  Him,  service  in  the 
sense  of  worship.  The  word  liturgy  strictly  means  service ;  here  service  means 
adore,  pray,  and  praise ;  worship  outwardly,  publicly,  and  privately  with  all  the 
heart.  We  learn  the  essence  of  all  true  acceptable  worship  before  God.  Not 
material  gloiy,  ritual  spleadoiir ;  but  depth  of  sincerity,  intensity  of  love,  the 
supremacy  of  God  in  the  heart.  5.  What  is  the  end  of  all  this  ?  First,  God  asks 
this,  not  for  His  benefit,  but  for  our  good.  Is  there  no  benefit  in  meeting  together 
in  the  house  of  God,  in  unloading  the  thankful  heart  in  praise  ?  When  you  give 
the  greatest  glory,  worship,  and  homage  to  God,  the  reaction  of  it  is  showers  of 
blessings,  mercies,  and  privileges  upon  yourselves.  God  requires  this  in  His  Word, 
in  seasons  of  affliction  and  prosperity.  He  requires  it  that  holy  effects  may  be 
seen,  and  that  men  may  feel  that  religion  purifies.  It  is  also  good  for  the  world. 
The  best  evidence  that  you  are  Christians  is  in  what  you  feel,  suffer,  sacrifice,  and 
do  ;  not  as  servants  obeying  for  reward,  but  as  sons  serving  God  out  of  affection. 
{J.  Cumming,  D.D.)  An  imperative  demaiid: — Yea,  and  what  tioes  the  Lord 
require  of  us?  1.  Reverence — "But  to  fear  the  Lord  thy  God."  2.  Obedience — 
"  To  walk  in  all  His  ways."  To  go  when  He  tells  us,  and  to  take  the  way  He  has 
prepared  for  us.  Matthew  Henry  says,  "  It  ought  to  be  the  care  of  every  one  of  us 
to  follow  the  Lord  fully.  We  must,  in  a  course  of  obedience  to  God's  will,  and 
service  to  His  honour,  follow  Plini  universally,  without  dividing  ;  uprightly,  with- 
out dissembling  ;  cheerfully,  without  disputing  ;  and  constantly,  without  declining : 
and  this  is  following  Him  fully . "  3.  Love — "And  to  love  Him."  This  exhorte- 
tion  comes  in  beautifully  to  prevent  the  possibility  of  reverence  becoming  a  terror, 
and  obedience  servility.  4.  Service — "  And  to  serve  the  Lord  thy  God  with  all  thy 
heart  and  with  all  thy  soul."  Conviction,  principle,  truth,  sentiment,  and  emotion 
find  their  level  in  service,  as  the  waters  of  the  river  do  in  the  sea.  Life,  of  every 
kind,  is  energy  from  within  towards  an  outward  object.  5.  Diligence — "To  keep 
the  commandments  of  the  Lord  and  His  statutes,  which  I  command  thee  this 
day  for  thy  good."    {T.  Davies.) 

Vers.  14-16. — He  chose  .  .  .  you  above  all  people. — Election  arulTioliness: — I.  In 
SETTING  FORTH  ELECTION,  I  must  have  you  observe,  first  of  all,  its  extraordinary 
singularity.  God  has  chosen  to  Himself  a  people  whom  no  man  can  number,  out 
of  the  children  of  Adam.  Now  this  is  a  wonder  of  wonders,  when  we  come  to 
consider  that  the  heaven,  even  the  heaven  of  heavens,  is  the  Lord's.  If  God  must 
have  a  chosen  race,  why  did  He  not  select  one  from  the  majestic  order  of  angels,  or 
from  the  flaming  cherubim  and  seraphim  who  stand  around  His  throne  ?  Why  was 
not  Gabriel  fixed  upon  f    What  could  there  be  in  man,  a  creature  lower  than  th« 


CHAP.  X.]  DEUTERONOMY. 


307 


angels,  that  God  should  select  him  rather  than  the  angelic  spirits  ?    I  have  ^iven 
you,  then,  some  reason  at  starting,  why  we  should  regard  God's  Election  as  being 
singular.     But  I  have  to  offer  others.     Observe,  the  text  not  only  says,  "  Behold 
the  heaven,  even  the  heaven  of  the  heavens  is  the  Lord's,"  but  it  adds   "  the  earth 
also,  with  all  that  therein  ia."     Yet  one  other  thought  to  make  G^i's  Election 
marveUoiis  indeed.     God  had  unlimited  power  of  creation.     Now,  if  He  willed  to 
make  a  people  who  should  be  His  favourites,  who  should  be  united  to  the  person  of 
His  bon,  why  did  He  not  make  a  new  race  ?    When  Adam  sinned,  it  would  have 
been  easy  enough  to  strike  the  world   out  of   existence.     But  no  i     Instead  of 
A^^k  \^^^  people    a  pure  people  who  could  not  sin,  He  takes  a  fallen  people, 
and  lifts  these  up,  and  that,  too,  by  costly  means  ;  by  the  death  of  His  o\\^  Son 
by  the  work  of  His  own  Spirit;  that  these  might  be  the  jewels  in  His  crown  to 
reflect  His  glory  for  ever.     Oh,  singular  choice  !     My  soul  is  lost  in  Thy  depths 
and  I  call   only  pause   and  cry,    "Oh,   the  goodness,   oh,    the  mercy,  oh,  the 
sovereignty  of  God  s  grace.       Havmg  thus  spoken  about  its  singularity,  I  tu/n  to 
another  subject.     2.  Observe  the  unconstrained  freeness  of  electing  love      In  our 
text  this  IS  hinted  at  by  the  word  "only."    Why  did  God  love  their  fathers  ?    Why 
only  because  He  did  so.     There  is  no  other  reason.     I  come  to  the  hardest  pai-t  of 
my  task.     Election  in  its  justice.    Now,  I  shall  defend  this  gi-eat  fact,  that  God  has 
chosen  men  to  Himself,  and  I  shaU  regard  it  from  rather  a  different  point  of  view 
from  that  which  is  usuaUy  taken.     You  teU  me,  if  God  has  chosen  some  men  to 
eternal  life,  that  He  has  been  unjust.     I  ask  you  to  prove  it.     The  burden  of  the 
proof  lies  with  you.     For  I  would  have  you  remeuiber  that  none  merited  this  at  all 
God  injures  no  man  in  blessing  some.     I  defend  it  again  on  another  ground      To 
which  of  you  has  God  ever  refused  His  mercy  and  love,  when  you  have  sought  His 
face  ?    Doth  not  His  Woi-d  bid  you  come  to  Jesus  ?  and  doth  it  not  soleninly  say 
Whosoever  wiU,  let  him  come"  ?    You  say  it  is  unjust  that  some  should  be  lost 
Willie  others  are  saved.     Who  makes  those  to  be  lost  that  are  lost?    Did  God 
cause  you  to  sm  ?    Has  the  Spirit  of  God   ever  persuaded  you  to  do  a  wron^ 
thing?    Has  the  Word  of  God  ever  bolstered  you  up  in  your  own  self-rioL'teous- 
ness  ?      No ;   God    has  never    exercised    any  influence   upon    you   to    make    you 
go  the  wrong  way.     The  whole  tendency  of  His  Word,  the  whole  tendency  of  the 
preaching  of  the  Gospel,  is  to  persuade  you  to  turn  from  sin  unto  ligliteousncss 
from  your  wicked  ways  to  Jehovah.      II.  We  now  turn   to  Election    in   its 
PRACTICAL  INFLUENCES.     You  will  see  that  the  precept  is  annexed  to  the  doctrine  • 
God  has  loved  you  above  all  people  that  are  upon  the  face  of  the  earth  ;  therefore 
circumcise  the  foreskin    of  your  hearts  and  be  no  more  stiffnecked. "    It  is 
whispered  that  Election  is  a  licentious  doctrine.     It  is  my  business  to  prove  to  you 
that  it  is  the  very  reverse.    "  Well,  but,"  cries  one,  "  I  know  a  man  that  believes  in 
Jilection  and  yet  hves  m  sin."    Yes,  and  I  suppose  that  disproves  it.     So  that  if  I 
can  go  through  London  and  find  any  ragged,  drunken  fellow,  who    believes  a 
doctrine  and  lives  m  sin,  the  fact  of  his  believing  it  disproves  it.     Singular  logic 
that !     But  I  come  back  to  my  proof.     It  is  laid  down  as  a  matter  of  theory  that 
this  doctnne  is  licentious.     The  fitness  of  things  proves  that  it  is  not  so.     Election 
teaches  that  God  has  chosen  some  to  be  kiugs  and  priests  to  God.     When  a  man 
believes  ■*■"«>+  \\a  io  n\^t^an-ry  4-^  ■u^  _  u: u  -j.  1     i     •.•      .     .   « 


from 
sit  upon 


be  no  argument,  no  sense  m  it."  But  there  is  quite  as  much  sense  in  that  as  in 
your  supposition,  that  God  has  chosen  His  people  to  be  holy,  and  yet  that  a 
knowledge  of  this  fact  wiU  make  them  unholy.  No  1  the  man,  knowing  that 
a  peculiar  dignity  has  been  put  upon  him  by  God,  feels  working  in  his  bosom  a 
desu-e  to  live  up  to  his  dignity.  Again,  not  only  the  fitness  of  things,  but  the 
thing  Itself  proves  that  it  is  not  so.  Election  is  a  separation.  God  has  set  apart 
film  that  IS  godly  for  Himself,  has  separated  a  people  out  of  the  mass  of  mankind. 
Does  that  separation  allow  us  to  draw  the  inference  thus  :— "  God  has  separated  me 
therefore  I  will  live  as  other  men  live"?  No!  if  I  believe  that  God  has  dis- 
tinguished me  by  His  discriminating  love,  and  separated  me,  then  I  hear  the  cry 
Gome  out  from  among  them,  and  be  ye  separate,  and  touch  not  the  unclean  thing! 
and  I  will  be  a  Father  unto  you."  It  were  strange  if  the  decree  of  separation 
should  engender  an  unholy  union.  It  cannot  be.  (C.  H.  Spurgem. )  All  thinqs 
subserve  the  welfare  of  God's  tied  children:—!  see  a  mother  that,  as  the  twilight 
tails  and  the  baby  sleeps,  and  because  it  sleeps  out  of  her  arms,  goes  about 
gathering  from  the  floor  its  playthings,  and  carries  them  to  the  closet,  and  carries 


308  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x. 

away  the  vestments  that  have  been  cast  down,  and  stirring  the  fire,  sweeping  up 
the  hearth,  winding  the  clock,  aud  gathering  up  dispersed  books,  she  hums  to  her- 
self low  melodies  as  she  moves  about  the  room,  until  the  whole  place  is  once  again 
neat,  and  clean,  and  in  order.  Why  is  it  that  the  room  is  so  precious  to  her  ?  Is 
it  because  there  is  such  beautiful  paper  on  the  walls  ?  because  there  is  so  goodly  a 
carpet  on  the  floor  ?  because  the  furniture  in  the  room  is  so  pleasing  to  the  eye  ? 
All  these  are  nothing  in  her  estimation  except  as  servants  of  that  little  creature  of 
hers — the  baby  in  the  cradle.  She  says,  ' '  All  these  things  serve  my  heart  while  I 
rock  my  child."  The  whole  round  globe  is  but  a  cradle,  and  our  God  rocks  it,  and 
regards  all  things,  even  the  world  itself,  as  so  many  instruments  for  the  promotion 
of  our  welfare.  When  He  makes  the  tempest,  the  pestilence,  or  the  storm,  when 
He  causes  ages  in  their  revolutions  to  change  the  world,  it  is  all  to  serve  His  own 
heart  through  His  children — men.  When  we  are  walking  through  this  world,  we 
are  not  walking  through  long  files  of  laws  that  have  no  design  ;  we  are  walking 
through  a  world  that  has  natural  laws,  which  we  must  both  know  and  observe  :  yet 
these  must  have  their  master,  and  Christ  is  He.  And  all  of  these  are  made  to  be 
our  servants  because  we  are  God's  children.  {H.  W.  Beecher. )  God's  elective  call : — 
These  words  were  intended  to  make  it  plain  to  the  Israelites  how  greatly  they  had 
been  honoured  of  God  in  being  given  such  pre-eminence  among  the  nations.  So 
we  must  ever  keep  in  view  who  calls  us  through  the  Gospel  and  has  come  near  to  us 
in  it.  It  is  God,  whose  are  not  only  the  earth  but  the  heaven  of  heavens.  From 
these  words  of  Moses  we  may  gather — I.  How  great  and  mighty  is  the  God  who 
CALLS  us  TO  Himself— how  wise  and  solicitous  for  men's  good,  and  how  He  has 
proved  this  in  all  the  regions  of  the  creation  which  belongs  to  Him.     II.  He  who 

HOLDS  all  things  IN   HiS  HAND  AND  CARES  FOR  ALL,  CAN    HAVE  A  SPECIAL  AND 

PECULIAR  CARE  FOR  EACH  INDIVIDUAL :  and  thus  we  may  have  fullest  confidence 
in  Him.     III.  It  should  make  us  astonished  and  confused  beyond  measure 

TO    THINK    THAT    THE   GREAT    GOD    SHOULD    HAVE    CALLED    US    WEAK    AND    PUNY 

CREATURES  TO  SO  GREAT  GRACE  AND  FAVOUR  ;  that  He  should  even  have  sent  His 
Son  for  our  redemption,  and  that  He  would  have  us  become  temples  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 
Many  indeed,  find  it  inconceivable  that  God  should  have  destined  our  globe — one  of 
the  smallest  of  the  worlds — for  such  high  honour.  This  appears  to  them  so  absurd, 
that  on  this  account  they  would  throw  over  Christianity.  They  forget  that  the 
greatness  of  God  lies  in  this,  that  He  attends  to  and  cares  for  the  small  as  well  as  the 
great.  To  the  infinite  Jehovah  the  distinction  between  small  and  great  is  not  as 
it  appears  to  us.     Moses  understood  this.     IV.  In  these  words  there  appears 

THE  HINT  of  A  COMPREHENSIVE  DiVINE  PLAN  WHICH  GOD  DESIGNED  WITH  REGARD 
TO  THE  CREATION  THROUGH  THAT  WHICH  He  ACCOMPLISHED  TOWARD  THIS  LOWER 

PORTION  OF  IT.  So  had  He  already  proclaimed  to  that  people  chosen  before  all 
others.  ' '  As  truly  as  I  live,  saith  the  Lord,  all  the  earth  shall  be  filled  with  the 
glory  of  the  Lord  "  (Numb.  xiv.  21).  He  thus  proclaimed  that  through  the  choice 
of  Israel  He  had  in  view  the  salvation  of  all  the  peoples  ;  a  truth  already  revealed 
in  the  blessing  of  Abraham,  in  whose  seed  all  nations  are  to  be  blessed.  Even  so 
we  may  say  that,  in  the  choice  of  our  globe  for  this  special  design.  He  contemplates 
the  renewal  and  glorification  of  the  universe.  "In  Christ,  in  the  fulness  of  time. 
He  will  gather  together  all  things,  both  which  are  in  heaven  and  which  are  on  earth  " 
(Eph.  i.  10  ;  Col.  i.  20).  How  this  is  to  be  accomplished  we  must  leave  to  the  care 
of  Him  whose  are  "the  heaven  and  the  heaven  of  heavens."  V.  The  responsi- 
bility OF  THOSE  so  HIGHLY  FAVOURED  WILL  BE  THE  GREATER  IF  THEY  SHOULD 
TURN  AWAY  TO  UNBELIEF  AND  DISOBEDIENCE.  If  these  things  be  SO,  Moses'  words 
give  us  sufficient  inducement  to  hold  fast  with  decision  and  faithfulness  what  is 
offered  us  in  the  Gospel  and  in  the  revelation  of  God's  will.  Let  us  not  fail  in  our 
part,  as  we  may  be  assured  He  will  not  fail  who  has  come  down  so  far  in  Christ 
unto  us.  {J.  0.  Blunihardt.)  Circumcise  therefore  the  foreskin  of  your  heart, 
and  be  no  more  stiffaecked. —  Circumcision  as  compared  with  baptism, : — I.  Spiritual 
CIRCUMCISION — its  meaning.  1.  Declared  in  the  Old  and  New  Testaments,  as,  in 
the  text,  also  in  Jer.  iv.  4,  and  elsewhere.  2.  Spoken  of  as  a  seal  of  the  righteous- 
ness of  faith  (Rom.  iv.  11).  3.  Spoken  of  as  representing  the  renunciation  of,  and 
cutting  off  of,  the  superfluity  of  the  flesh  (Col.  ii.  11).  4.  Therefore  true  circum- 
cision is  of  everlasting  and  universal  obligation.  II.  Literal  circumcision. 
Temporary  and  preparatory.  1.  For  males  only.  2.  Superseded  by  baptism. 
III.  Circumcision  and  baptism.  1.  Two  points  in  which  they  differ.  (1)  Baptism, 
in  its  literal  sense,  taken  as  an  outward  rite,  is  of  universal  and  continual  obliga- 
tion—continual, that  is,  as  long  as  this  dispensation  lasts.     (2)  Taken  in  its  literal 


CHAP.  X.]  DEUTERONOMY.  8O9 


sense,  circumcision  was  the  initiatory  rite  of  the  old  covenant,  as  baptism  is  of 
the  new.     2.  Three  points  of  resemblance.     (1)  In  a  spiritual  sense,  both  have  the 
same  signification.    Both  point  to  the  renewal  of  heart  which  is  required  of  all. 
(2)  Neither  circumcision  nor  baptism  are  of  value  as  mere  ritfs,  unaccompanied  by 
the  spiritual  grace  which  they  typify  (Gal.  v.  6  ;  1  Pet.  iii.  21).    {Archbp.  Whateley.) 
The  cure  of  wilfulness :— It  is  a  thing  much  to  be  observed,  that  many  of  the  out- 
ward and  visible  signs,  which  God  has  ordained  His  people  to  use  in  worshipping 
Him,  have  somewhat  in  them  to  remind  us  in  some  way  of  suffering,  affliction,  pain 
self-denial,  death.     Thus  the  Holy  Communion  is  the  remembrance  of  our  Saviour's 
death,  His  violent  and  bitter  death.     But  of  all  Church  ceremonies,  there  is  none 
which  so  distinctly  sets  before  us  our  call  to  suffer,  as  that  which  has  from  the 
beginning  always  gone  along  with  baptism  ;  the  signing  the  newly  baptised  with  the 
sign  of  the  Cross.     The  Cross  is  the  very  height  and  depth  of  all  suffering.     Now 
such  as  the  baptismal  Cross  is  in  the  Christian  life,  such  was  circumcision  amono- 
God's  ancient  people.     It  was  His  mark,  made  tor  life,  in  the  very  flesh  of  those 
who  belonged  to  Him,  setting  them  apart,  in  a  manner,  for  siiff"eringand  self-denial. 
It  was  a  foretaste  of  the  Cross  ;  and,   as  such,   our  Saviour  Himself  received  it.* 
Thus,  whether  we  look  to  our  Lord's   own  example,  or  to  the  sacramental  ways 
which  He  has  ordained,  both  of  old  and  new,  to  bring  His  people  near  Him,  either 
way  we  are  taught  to  connt  them  happy  which  endure  ;  to  consider  aftliction  and 
trouble  as  God's  seal,  set  upon  those  who  particularly  belong  to  Him,  and  to  fear 
nothing  so  much  as  receiving  our  consolation  inthisworld.    Butifthisbeso,  then  just 
in  such  measure  as  we  are  going  on  prosperously  and  at  ease,  have  we  need  to  mortify 
ourselves,  and  keep  our  passions  in  order  ;  that  by  our  own  doing,  if  so  please  God, 
we  may  provide  for  ourselves  something  like  that  due  chastening,  which  our  afflicted 
brethren  really  have  to  endure.     This,  our  self-denial,  we  must  practise  in  little 
matters  :  it  should  accompany  us  in  our  everyday  walk,  as  every  Jew  bore  about 
with  him  the  mark  of  circumcision,  visibly  impressed  on  his  flesh.     We  must  not 
keep  our  patience  and  self-command  to  be  exercised  only  on  great  and  solemn  occa- 
sions ;  we  must  be  continually  sacrificing  our  own  wills,  as  opportunity  serves,  to 
the  will  of  others.     There  is  no  end,  in  short,  of  the  many  little  crosses  which   if 
quietly  borne  in  a  Christian  way,  will,  by  God's  grace,  do  the  work  of  affliction,  and 
help  to  tame  our  proud  wills  by  little  and  little.     I  say,  tame  our  proud  wills 
because  Holy  Scripture  sets  forth  this  as  one  of  the  particular  objects  for  which  cir- 
cumcision was  appointed,  that  God's  people  might  learn  by  it,  not  only  to  get  over 
what  are  commonly  called  the  lusts  of  the  flesh,  but  the  angry  and  envio^.s,  and 
proud  feehng  also  ;  as  the  text  seems  specially  to  hint :  Circumcise,  therefore  the 
foreskin  of  your  heart,    and  be  no   more  stiffnecked.     As  if  stubbornness 'and 
obstinacy,  and,  m  one  word,  wilfulness  (for  that  is  the  meaning  of  a  stiff"  neck),  were 
to  be  cured  by  the  same  kind  of  discipline  as  sensual  passions,  lust,  and  greediness. 
In  short,  it  is  not  hard  to  understand  how  the  bodv,  which  greatly  affects  the  mind* 
may  be  tamed  and  brought  into  subjection,  by  a  quiet  and  discreet  method  of  fast- 
ing, accompanied,  of  course,  with  alms  and  prayer.     And  a  little  consideration  will 
show  that  the  same  discipline  must  do  great  good  to  the  passions  of  the  soul  too 
If  we  abstain  from  indulging  our  bodily  appetites,  for  the  sake  of  pleasing  God  and 
obtaining  His  grace,  is  there  not  so  far  a  better  chance  of  our  remembering  Him,  when 
we  are  tempted  to  indulge  discontented,  unkind,  proud  thoughts,  wilful  tempers  of 
any  sort  ?     I  do  not  of  course  mean  that  this  benefit  follows  upon  the  mere  outward 
exercise  of  fasting,  but  only  if  a  person  sets  about  it  religiously,  in  the  fear  of  God 
in  (^sire  to  draw  near  to  Christ,  and  in  humble  obedience  to  His  will,  made  known 
m  His  Gospel  and  by  His  Church.     Otherwise  mere  fasting,  as  well  as  mere  prayer 
or  mere  reading,  or  mere  going  to  church,  may  be  turned  into  a  snare  of  the  devil' 
But  It  IS  not  therefore  to  be  omitted,  any  more  than  tliose  other  holy  exercises  ;  but 
practised,  as  I  said,  in  the  fear  of  God,  the  want  of  which  fear  alone  it  is,  which  can 
ever  make  any  person  easy  in  depending  on  one  or  other  holv  duty,  so  as  to  leave 
out  the  rest.     {Plain  Sermons  by  Contributors  to  "  Tracts for^the  Times.") 

Ver.  19.    Te   were    strangers.— T'Ae  stranger's  claim:— In    both    Jewish    and 
Clinstian  economy  special  kindness  was  to   be  shown  to  the  stranger.     I    The 

STRANGERS    CLAIM    DOES    NOT    REST    UPON    ANY    DOCTRINE    OF   ABSTRACT   RIGHT 

BUT  UPON  THE  DiHADVANTAOE  OF  HIS  POSITION.  He  Can  hardly  be  said  to  have  any 
nght  at  all.  He  is  a  foreigner.  He  comes  uninvited.  He  seeks  only  his  own 
advantage.  Why  should  I  befriend  him?  He  is  seeking  only  to  make  his  own 
way,  and  to  secure  a  footing,  probably  at  my  cost,  or  that  of  my  neighbour. 


310  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x. 

Besides,  it  is  impossible  to  befriend  him  without  risk.  Nothing  is  known  of  his 
history  or  his  character.  Why  did  he  leave  the  place  where  he  was  known  ?  If 
he  couldn't  succeed  there,  why  should  he  expect  to  succeed  here?  The  very  fact 
that  he  had  to  come  among  strangers  and  start  life  afresh  is  a  reason  for  caution  and 
reserve.  All  this  is  true.  Why  should  you  trouble  about  him  ?  Yet  you  must 
trouble.  And  the  simple  reason  is,  that  his  strangeness  places  him  at  a  terrible 
disadvantage.  In  the  Old  Testament  he  is  always  classed  with  the  widow  and  the 
orphan.  They  are  the  defenceless  class.  And  because  they  are  an  easy  prey  of  cun- 
ning and  wickedness,  God  makes  special  provision  for  them.  He  comes  into  a  com- 
munity ignorant  of  all  the  well-established  order  of  its  life.  The  common-places  of 
their  Hfe  are  novelties  to  him.  What  an  object  for  fleecing  !  The  sailor  on  shore,  and 
Young  Evergreen  on  the  turf,  are  striking  examples  of  the  readiness  with  which  the 
simple-minded  stranger  falls  a  victim  to  wUy  and  wicked  men.  The  same  thing 
happens  in  business  and  society.  Most  people  regard  it  as  quite  the  proper  thing  to 
make  the  stranger  pay  for  his  experience,  and  do  not  scruple  to  take  advantage  of 
his  ignorance.  The  glory  of  our  Jehovah  is  that  He  is  the  Defence  and  Champion 
of  the  helpless  and  oppressed.  The  world  bullies  the  widow,  exploits  the  poor,  and 
considers  the  stranger  fair  game  for  plunder.  But  God  says,  My  people  shall  protect 
the  weak,  provide  for  the  poor,  and  show  kindness  to  the  stranger.  One  reason  why 
they  were  to  show  kindness  to  the  stranger  was  because  he  is  especially  sensitive 
to  first  impressions.  His  loneliness  and  comparative  helplessness  lay  him  open  to 
the  first  influences  that  come  upon  him.  He  is  ready  to  enter  any  door  that  opens. 
How  much  depends  upon  those  first  influences  !  He  will  form  his  estimate  of  the 
new  community  firom  the  people  who  first  get  hold  of  him.  The  stranger's  first 
impressions  of  Israel  would  be  gathered  from  his  first  experiences  among  them. 
First  impressions  last.  God  was  jealous  for  His  name  among  the  heathen  and 
the  stranger.  The  stranger  is  nervous,  uncertain,  apprehensive.  He  is  easily 
off'ended,  and  apt  to  see  slights  where  they  do  not  exist.  But  he  is  just  as  easily 
pleased,  and  responds  readQy  to  kind  and  sympathetic  interest.  I  am  persuaded  our 
churches  have  sufi'ered  great  loss  in  our  towns  and  cities  through  their  neglect  of  the 
stranger.  It  would  be  safe  to  aflBirm  that  no  church  prospers  that  is  not  mindful  of 
the  stranger.  "Forget  not  to  show  love  unto  the  stranger."  He  is  altogether 
a  pathetic  figure.  Often  behind  him  is  a  history  full  of  tragedy ;  his  heart  is  sore, 
sometimes  even  unto  breaking ;  always  he  is  in  need  of  kindly  and  helpful 
sympathy.  II.  Our  duty  to  the  strangee.  Our  duty  runs  along  the  line  of 
his  need.  The  Old  Testament  law  protects  him  against  oppression,  wrong,  and 
vexation.  No  advantage  was  to  be  taken  against  him.  But  they  were  not  to  stand 
aloof,  and  let  him  severely  alone.  They  must  deal  hospitably  with  him.  He  with 
the  poor  was  to  have  the  gleanings  of  the  field,  that  he  might  secure  his  daily  bread. 
In  the  New  Testament  the  hospitality  is  extended.  To  care  for  the  stranger  was 
one  of  the  marks  of  Christian  character  (Rom.  xii.  13  ;  1  Tim.  v.  10).  He  was  to  be 
treated  both  in  the  Old  and  New  Covenant  as  home-born,  and  admitted  to  the 
privileges  of  national  and  social  life  (Lev.  xix.  33,  34).  The  reason  for  such 
generous  treatment  was  threefold.  1.  The  stranger's  need.  That  in  itself  ought  to 
be  sufficient.  The  Good  Samaritan  does  not  stop  to  inquire  into  the  merits  of  the 
man  naked  and  bleeding  on  the  roadside.  His  need  is  a  sufficient  passport  to 
sympathy.  Philanthropy  in  the  guise  of  a  detective  is  a  very  poor  thing.  The 
large-hearted  pity  of  Jesus  did  not  wait  for  a  certificate  of  merit  and  respectability 
before  it  healed  the  suff"erer  or  fed  the  hungry.  The  stranger's  hunger  is  for 
brotherliness,  rather  than  bread.  Feed  him,  then,  out  of  the  fulness  of  your  heart. 
2.  "Ye  know  the  heart  of  a  stranger."  One  would  think  such  would  need  no 
exhortation  to  be  considerate  to  strangers.  The  remembrance  of  a  fellow-feeling 
ought  to  make  them  kind.  But  it  does  not.  The  cruellest  slave-driver  is  the  man 
who  has  been  a  slave.  Suff'ering  unsanctified  by  grace  does  not  soften  and  sweeten  ; 
it  hardens  and  sours.  But  the  law  ought  to  hold  good.  If  suff'ering  does  not  make 
us  appreciate  the  troubles  of  those  who  may  afterwards  be  passing  through  the  same 
experience,  what  can  we  appreciate  ?  We  are  comforted  of  God,  that  we  in  turn  may 
comfort  others  in  like  affliction.  We  have  all  been  strangers,  for  we  began  life  as  *  'the 
little  stranger."  Recall  your  experiences,  and  when  you  see  a  stranger,  do  unto  him 
as  you  would  that  others  should  have  done  unto  you.  3.  God  loves  the  stranger. 
*'  The  Lord  your  God  is  God  of  gods,  the  Lord  of  lords,  a  great  God,  .  .  .  and  loveth 
the  stranger.  Love  ye  therefore  the  stranger  "  (Deut.  x.  17-19).  The  love  of  God  over- 
flows the  boundaries  of  the  elect.  It  compasses  the  heathen  as  well  as  the  Israelite. 
Be  ye  imitators  of  God.     Because  God  loves  him,  you  must  love  hiwi  for  God's  sake. 


^^^'  ^'1  DEUTERONOMY.  3U 


This  motive  is  greatly  strengthened  in  Jesus  Christ.  For  His  sake  we  are  debtor, 
unto  all  men  For  His  sake  we  must  take  up  our  cross  and  crucifyThe  flesh  wfth 
Its  narrow  affections  and  selfish  lust.  In  the  stranger  you  ma^nd  an  an^el  Not 
that  every  stranger  is  an  angel.  Some  are  sharks.  ^  Y Ju  are  /ot  asked  to  abandon 
the  ordinary  rules  of  prudence  and  common  sense.  There  is  all  the  difference "n  the 
world  between  being  kind  to  a  stranger  and  making  him  your  bosom  friend  straight 
f  Am  •  ^""^  '^  V''  1'^"^''  ^^''^  ^''  ^'^^  possibilities.  When  God  gaTe  H  s  S 
promise  unto  Israel  we  are  told  "they  were  few  men  in  number,  yea  very  few^Ind 
strangers  m  the  land  '  (Psa.  cv.  11,  12).  Only  a  few  feeble  stra  Je^!  buffi  o?» 
pat  promise.  Angels  have  a  trick  of  dwelling  in  unsuspected  places  they  deli/ht 
to  travel  m  disguise,  and  be  -entertained  unawares."  In  the  stLger  you  may  find 
appreciation  and  gratitude.  St.  Luke  tells  us  that  when  Jesus  healel  Ln  L^s  non« 
itiT^^i  im  *tf  1^'°'^'  '^''  only  he  who  was  a  Samaritan  andaTang^? 
n  hi^v^^J  T^;  J"  \^M*!^"„?fZ°^^yJ^?,^--^  *^-  -  angel,     You  may  fild 


■n^^^-.r.^f  ^^c«  ^     ou*       ^r^  y^>^n^vi,tv.)        jLjypenence  a  stimulus  to  generositv  ■ 

wherewith  to  keen  tbTd^^'i'^T^^^^.*^'^  ^J^P^^^  ^^  ^''  P°^'^«*  f«"^^  nothing 
n«  ^o  c  -11  C  ^v  *  f  \^'  7^'^^  ^®  'P^^*  wandering  about  Paris  and  its  precincts 
UndUHv  i  Tr.?!  ^!  ^'i  ^^?  *.°  ^''  ^^*^*«"'  ^«°t  to  bed  and  was  treX  by  hS 
landlady  to  a  little  toast  and  wine.  "That  day,"  he  told  a  friend  in  after  life  «'T 
swore  that  if  ever  I  came  to  have  anything,  I  woild  never  ?n  my  life  refuse  a  nool 
n^an  help  never  condemn  a  fellow-creatTS-i  to  a  day  so  painful  '^  kZdsIJox^ 
JCmdness  to  a  stranger :-A  Pittsburg  pastor  writes:  "It  w^at  theXe  of  the 
evening  service  last  Sunday  that,  according  to  my  wont,  I  8tt?>ped  do;^  from  the 

Pr  Lnt?fthr;l^'"w'  *^'  ^''l''  ^^^*  '^^  ^"«^^«  anrwelcomTs^aTgers? 
Presently  there  stood  before  me  a  shy,  intelligent-looking  lad,  who  ^rasned  mv 
hand  with  so  much  cordiality  that,  looking  him  in  the  facef  I  saidT  «Vhat  Vy^^ 
name  ?  Do  you  live  somewhere  near  by  ? '  *  My  name  '  <Jifi  h^  ^-fi,  «  *  v,  ^- 
accent,  'is  John  Silas.  I  do  not  live  Lre  ;  I  4?k  at' t^e  K-^^^Hotel  '  '^^^^^ 
tilZ^'U"'"'  ^^y^'''^  'I  looked  foryou  many  days,'  responded  the  boy  •  '1 
vnn  Jir>,   w  w^  one  year  ago-no  father,  no  mother.     I  meet  you  one  night 

you  preached  at  W (one  of  our  suburbs)  ;  you  shook  hands  with  me  and  faM 

you  were  glad  to  see  me,  and  I've  been  looking  for  your  church  ever^fice'  Th« 
incident  deeply  touched  several  who  were  standing  by.  and  Wteh^y  trstmn Jera 
will  seem  to  us  all  more  valuable  than  ever  before?'  ""spiiauty  to  strangers 

rZ^""'  ?\J^°^^  ^°^  ^^  *^®^®  ^®^*  ^^  terrible  things.— T^  great  doinas  of 
^t''7v  ^^  ,™T  r/  ^^^^'^  ^^^^«  «^  ^^^  CONSIST.  1.  In  Salvation  Gof 
who  dehvered  Israel  from  the  bondage  of  Egypt,  has  wrought  a  ^eat  work  of 
deliverance  on  behalf  of  the  human  race.     Grfater  than  any  deed  of  vengTance  is 

o?  sin'''°l  'TnX'^'^'^  ^^  ^^'^}  mankind  is  saved  from  the^enaltyarfhe  curse 
ot  sin.  2  In  the  supply  of  all  wants.  The  Lord,  who  gave  Israel  bread  from 
heaven  and  water  from  the  flint  rock,  has  made,  in  the  dispeTation  of  His  grac^ 
a  sufficient  supply  for  the  spiritual  needs  of  all  mankind.^  3.  irprotectfof  and 
deliverance  from  all  dangers,  and  from  the  assaults  of  every  foe  ^11  By  whIt 
r^V^T  ?^?'  ^^  ^^^  ^^^  PBOMPTED.  1.  By  the  speYtade  of  the  nLHhe 
S^Heart       ?  To'w.'f  °''"-     "'  ^^  '^^  ^''^  ^^^  lovW^indness  of  the  In! 

PR0FI?BY  THEM       TVnTf'f  ^^  ^"^T  "'^•^^^  ^fo,^^^   «««^^°   ^^^^  ^^^S^  ^HO 

sh^u  Remind  ^s^fTr/'l^™^  '^^°""  ^^°"^^  ^^*  -^^  awaken  gladne^^'^t^ 
ChurrhJTJ\  i  -^  '  claims  upon  us,  upon  our  love,  our  life,  our  all.  (Family 
pSrSod  forfr.'  ?f  ^^^^f?^^--He  who  would' serve  God  must  begiTby 
?^!  !  1?  f  '  A  a  grateful  heart  is  the  mainspring  of  obedience.  We  must  offer 
^e  salt  of  gratitude  with  the  sacrifice  of  obedience;  our  lives  should  beTnoinSd 
wall  Sth^eTAr  f  .o.V^^ankfulness.  As  soldiers'  march  to  music,  so  whXwe 
rirt,  S^^  il  righteousness  we  should  keep  step  to  the  notes  of  thanksghing 
Larks  smg  as  they  mount,  so  should  we  magnify  the  Lord  for  His  raeroS  ^^ 
we  are  winging  our  way  to  heaven.     Our  thanksgiving  is  not  a  swXw  which 

ani  on  ^.b  «^'  '^"'Tif.-  P?  ^^^^  ^^^^^^  our  bosom^sing  aUthryea7  round 
and  on  such  a  day  as  this  their  song  is  doubly  welcome.  The  fire  of  iaSi 
will  help  to  warm  us-heap  on  the  big  logs  of  loving  memori^  No  c^d  shall 
freeze  the  genial  current  of  our  soull   oSr  praise  shaU  flow  on  when  brooka 


312  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap  xi. 

and  rivers  are  bound  in  ice.    Let  us  see  who  among  us  can  best  rejoice  in  the 
Lord  in  all  weathers. 


CHAPTEE  XI. 

Ver.  1.  Love  the  Lord  thy  God,  and  keep  His  chaxge. — On  the  imperfection  of 
rigJUeousness  vnthout  religion: — In  the  expression,  "the  love  of  God,"  are  com- 
prehended admiration  of  Him,  and  delight  in  meditating  upon  Him,  reverence 
towards  Him,  desire  of  His  approbation,  and  a  fear  of  offending  Him,  gratitude  for 
His  benefits,  and  trust  in  Him  as  our  Father ;  for  perfect  goodness,  which  is  the 
object  of  this  love,  at  the  same  time  calls  for  the  exercise  of  all  these  affections  of 
soul.  And  this  inward  religion  is  the  sole  fountain  of  an  uniform  righteousness  "  of 
keeping  the  commandments  of  God  alway."  I.  The  influence  of  religion  upon 
RIGHTEOUSNESS  will  appear,  if  we  consider — 1.  That  God,  who  is  the  wise  and 
righteous  Creator  and  Governor  of  the  universe,  and  the  object  of  all  religion,  is 
also  the  perfect  pattern  of  all  excellence.  2.  As  loving  God  under  the  notion  of 
the  pattern  of  all  goodness,  naturally  transforms  a  devout  mind  into  the  Divine 
image,  by  a  secret  but  strong  sympathy  betwixt  God  and  the  pious  soul,  by  its 
essential  admiration  and  love  of  what  is  really  beautiftil,  rigliteous,  and  excellent, 
and  by  its  desire  of  possessing  what  it  so  much  admires  ;  so  the  same  view  of  God 
will  appear  to  work  the  same  effect  in  another  way.  Perfect  goodness,  which  is 
the  true  object  of  love,  is  an  awful  thing,  commanding  reverence  trom  every  mind, 
and  a  care  not  to  contradict  its  ordinances.  It  is  not  a  changing  principle,  but 
ever  holds  one  fixed  invariable  course.  Every  attentive  person  therefore  will  per- 
ceive that  the  only  way  to  be  acceptable  to  this  goodness  is  to  resemble  it,  and 
consent,  in  all  his  actions,  to  its  dictates.  This  must  be  a  natural  reflection  upon 
the  first  just  apprehension  of  the  Divine  goodness,  and  of  some  force  even  before 
love  towards  it  has  grown  strong  in  the  soul.  Can,  then,  a  man  who  really  loves 
the  perfect  goodness  of  God,  be  without  great  awe  of  Him  ?  Must  he  not  be  earnest 
for  God's  approbation,  and  be  afraid  to  do  anything  disagreeable  to  Him  ?  3.  The 
devout  Christian  looks  upon  himself  as  a  son  of  God  through  Jesus  Christ  the 
Redeemer  of  mankind ;  and  shall  he  not  be  animated  with  a  spirit  suited  to  the  dignity 
of  his  high  birth  and  origin  ?  4.  Must  not  the  soul  of  that  man  who  loves  God  be 
animated  by  a  strong  gratitude  towards  Him  ?  Can  he  behold  the  Almighty  con- 
tinually pouring  forth  His  bounty  on  himself  and  on  all  other  creatures,  without  feeling 
himself  moved  with  the  warmest  sentiments  of  gratitude  leading  him  to  keep  the 
charge  and  statutes  of  God  cheerfully  ?  II.  We  come  now  to  make  improvement 
of  all  that  has  been  said.  1.  Hence  we  may  see  how  much  we  are  indebted  to  our 
holy  religion,  which  has  given  us  so  amiable  a  character  of  God  as  naturally  invites 
our  love.  The  Gospel  has  opened  our  eyes  to  discern  the  beauties  of  His  holiness  ; 
it  has  banished  all  that  darkn«ss  which  overshadowed  the  nations,  and  all  those 
dreadful  opinions  of  the  Almighty,  which  were  fitted  only  to  excite  terror  in  the 
breasts  of  men.  2.  Considering  the  necessity  and  great  advantage  of  religion  and 
true  devotion,  whence  can  it  proceed  that  a  matter  of  such  moment  is  so  generally 
neglected  ?  It  is  very  observable  that  many,  who  bestow  little  thought  upon  GoS 
and  His  righteousness,  never  fail  to  applaud  every  instance  of  worth  and  righteous- 
ness amongst  men.  An  upright,  a  merciful,  a  generous  man  they  extol  with  the 
most  libeial  praises  ;  while  the  fountain  of  all  this  excellence  is  not  acknowledged, 
is  not  heeded.  What  can  occasion  this  egregious  contradiction  t  There  are  many 
causes  for  it ;  but  amongst  others  this  must  be  acknowledged  not  a  small  one.  That 
the  hypocrisy  and  sinful  lives  of  many  who  profess  piety  and  devotion,  bring  a 
strong  prejudice  against  religion  itself,  and  occasion  it  to  be  evil  thought  of  and 
«vi1  spoken  of.  3.  From  what  has  been  said,  let  us  all  be  persuaded  to  cultivate  a 
spirit  of  devotion,  and  strive  to  grow  in  the  love  of  God.  {John  DrysdaU,  D.D.) 
Ood  requires  our  love : — You  buy  a  camellia,  and  determine,  in  spite  of  florists,  to 
make  it  blossom  in  your  room.  You  watch  and  tend  it,  and  at  length  the  buds  appear. 
Day  by  day  you  see  them  swell,  and  fondly  hope  they  will  come  to  perfect  flower  ; 
Ijut  just  as  they  should  open,  one  after  another  they  drop  off,  and  you  look  at  it, 
-despairingly  exclaiming,  "All  is  over  for  this  year."  But  some  one  says,  **  What ! 
the  plant  is  healthy ;  are  not  the  roots,  and  branches,  and  leaves  good  \ "    "Yes," 


CHAP.  XL]  DEUTERONOMY.  318 


you  answer,  "  but  I  do  not  care  for  them,  I  bought  it  for  the  blossom."  Now  when 
we  bnng  God  the  roots,  and  branches,  and  leaves  of  morality,  He  is  not  satisfied 
He  wants  the  blossoming  of  the  heart,  and  that  is  love.  God  (he  only  object  of 
supreme  love  .—There  is  a  noble  economy  of  the  deepest  life.  There  is  a  watchful 
reserve  which  keeps  guard  over  the  powers  of  profound  anxiety  and  devoted  work 
and  refuses  to  give  them  away  to  any  first  applicant  who  comes  and  asks.  "Wealth 
rolls  up  to  the  door,  and  says,  **Give  me  your  great  anxiety" ;  and  you  look  up 
and  answer,  "No,  not  for  you;  here  is  a  little  half- indifferent  desire  which  is  all 
that  you  deserve."  Popularity  comes  and  says,  "Work  with  all  your  might  for 
nae  ;  and  you  reply,  "No;  you  are  not  of  consequence  enough  for  that.  Here 
is  a  small  fragment  of  energy  which  you  may  have,  if  you  want  it ;  but  that  is  all." 
Even  knowledge  comes,  and  says,  "Give  your  whole  soul  to  me"  ;  and  you  must 
answer  once  more,  "No  ;  great,  good,  beautiful  as  you  are,  you  are  not  worthy  of  a 
man's  whole  soul.  There  is  something  in  a  man  so  sacred  and  so  precious  that 
he  must  kecjp  it  in  reserve  till  something  even  greater  than  the  desire  of  knowledge 
demands  it.  '  But  then,  at  last,  comes  One  far  more  majestic  than  them  all— God 
comes  with  His  supreme  demand  for  goodness  and  for  character,  and  then  you  open 
the  doors  of  your  whole  nature  and  bid  your  holiest  and  profoundest  devotion  to 
come  trooping  forth.  Now  you  rejoice  that  you  kept  something  which  you  would 
not  give  to  any  lesser  lord.  Now  here  is  the  deep  in  life  which  can  call  to  the  deep 
m  you  and  find  its  answer. 

Ver.  6.  And  vhat  He  did  nnto  Dathaa  and  k\iiizm.—The  spirit  of  revolution:— 
Moses  recalls  the  revolt  against  his  authority  in  the  wilderness.  It  took  place  in 
conjunction  with  the  revolt  of  Korah  (Numb.  xvii.).  The  point  which  Moses 
emphasises  is  the  revolt  against  Divinely  constituted  authority,  and  the  result  thereof. 
At  the  head  of  the  civil  rebellion  were  the  sons  of  Reuben,  Dathan  and  Abiram. 
As  descendants  of  the  first-born  of  Israel  they  grudged  Moses  his  lofty  position. 
Ihey  allied  themselves  with  the  Levitical  revolt,  and  under  the  cloak  of  asserting 
the  universal  priesthood  of  the  people  (Numb.  xvi.  3)  led  many  to  follow  them  into 
the  vortex  of  revolution.  This  insurrection  against  the  Divinely  ordered  religious 
and  political  order  threatened  the  very  existence  of  Israel.  God  therefore  visited 
the  rebels  with  special  Divine  judgment,  and  the  nation  was  saved.  This  episode 
in  Israel's  history  gives  us  a  glimpse  of  the  motives  which  underlie  most  revolu- 
tionary movements.  In  these— I.  Vice  decks  herself  in  the  appearance  op 
VIRTUE.  1.  The  revolutionaries  profess  ardent  desires  for  the  commonweal,  for 
freedom— to  save  the  "  enslaved  community, "  &c.  Liberty,  equality,  &c.,  is  their 
cry,  war  against  tyranny  and  oppression.  They  seek  to  play  the  rdle  of  unselfish 
friends  of  the  people.  2.  But  in  their  depths  such  movements  are  mostly 
dominated  by  selfishness.  In  the  revolt  here  referred  to  Korah  was  simply  an 
ambitious  Levite,  hypocritical  and  selfish.  The  Reubenites  were  moved  by  tribal 
ambition.  Selfishness,  ambition,  special  interests  were  the  moving  springs  of  this 
as  of  other  revolutions.  3.  The  revolution  of  Dathan  and  Abiram  took  its  rise 
first  on  an  ecclesiastical  ground  ;  but  the  political  movement  was  not  far  behind  the 
ecclesiastical.  Men  with  widely  differing  opinions  joined  in  opposing  constituted 
authority.  ^^  The  cry  for  "illumination"  is  speedily  followed  by  that  for  so-called 
freedom.  4.  Revolution  is  not  accompanied  bv  penitence.  It  never  seeks  the 
ground  of  its  complaints  in  the  faults  of  the  peo'ple  themselves.  5.  Most  revolu- 
tions are  dominated  by  some  "phrase"  or  party  cry.  Here  it  was:  "All  the 
people  are  holy."  The  power  of  the  partial  truth  in  it  lay  in  God's  Word  :  "Ye 
*  ^  e/ J^^  Me  .  .  .  an  holy  nation."  But  God  had  appointed  leaders  in  Church 
and  btate,  therefore  it  was  against  His  authority  Dathan  and  Abiram  rebelled. 
II.  The  prophetic  significance  of  this  typical  event.  1.  The  deepest  fulfil- 
ment lies  m  the  future— in  the  days  of  antichrist.  Then  the  political  and  ecclesiastical 
order  will  be  overturned— when  antichrist  comes  offering  promise  of  deliverance 
trom  all  ecclesiastical  and  political  ills.  2.  But  the  punishment  meted  out  to 
Dathan^  and  Abiram  with  their  fellow-rebels  shall  fall  more  fiercely  on  antichrist 
(Kev.  XIX.  20).  3.  A  veil,  however,  overhangs  this  future.  StUl  there  are  experi- 
ences m  history  which  prepare  us  to  understand  what  shall  be.  The  French 
Revolution  is  a  striking  example.  It  was  not  merely  a  revolt  of  ruled  against 
rulers.  It  was  first  a  spiritual  revolution.  Scepticism  had  loosened  religious 
authority,  and  the  political  crisis  speedily  followed,  as  in  the  rebellion  of  Korah 
So  m  France  ambitious  leaders  shrieked  of  liberty,  &c.  The  whole  foundations  of 
order  were  overturned.    Then  from  the  Revolution  rose  one  who  had  no  law  but 


814  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xi. 

his  own  will.  He  trod  men  under  his  feet  ;  for  twenty-five  years  the  storm  raged. 
Here  was  a  faint  experience  of  what  will  be  in  the  times  of  antichrist.  A  respite 
has  been  given  ;  but  he  who  has  eyes  may  conceive  somewhat  of  the  trend  of  that 
great  future  revolt.  III.  What  shall  we  do  in  view  of  what  is  coming  ?  1.  Let 
us  ask,  guided  by  God's  "Word,  what  revolts  in  Church  and  State  will  lead  to. 
What  is  the  meaning  of  much  of  so-called  "progress"  and  "freedom"  ?  "If  the 
Son  shall  make  you  free,"  &c.  (John  viii.  36).  What  is  "culture"  if  not  found 
in  Christ's  Gospel? — this  is  the  only  "culture"  of  eternal  worth.  Modern  "pro- 
gress "  does  not  always  mean  progress  in  righteousness.  2.  Do  not  let  the  hollow 
"phrases"  of  the  modern  age  influence  us.  In  God's  Word  the  madness  of 
rebellion,  its  falseness  and  hypocrisy  are  seen,  and  its  terrible  end.  The  way  of 
righteousness  is  conformity  to  the  Divine  order.  The  sin  of  participation  in 
rebellion  must  be  shunned.  Those  who  stand  on  the  side  of  revolution,  of  the 
antichristian  age,  or  (in  the  future)  of  antichrist,  lay  themselves  open  to  the 
punishment  of  the  rebellious  Reubenites.     ( W.  Grashoff. ) 

Vers.  10-12.  Not  as  the  land  of  Eg^Tpt. — Canaan  on  earth: — Egypt  is  typical 
of  the  condition  of  the  children  of  God  while  they  are  in  bondage  to  the 
law  of  sin.  There  they  are  made  to  work  unceasingly,  without  wages  or 
profit,  but  continually  subject  to  pains.  The  coming  up  out  of  Egypt  is  the 
type  of  the  deliverance  which  every  one  of  God's  people  enjoys,  when  by 
faith  he  strikes  the  blood  of  Jesus  on  his  doorpost,  and  spiritually  eats  the 
paschal  lamb  ;  and  the  passage  through  the  wilderness  is  typical  of  that  state 
of  hoping,  and  fearing,  and  doubting,  which  we  usually  experience  between  the 
period  when  we  come  out  of  Egypt,  and  attain  unto  the  full  assurance  of  faith. 
Many  of  you  are  really  come  out  of  Egypt ;  but  you  are  still  wandering  about  in 
the  wilderness.  "We  that  have  believed  do  enter  into  rest"  ;  but  you,  though 
you  have  eaten  of  Jesus,  have  not  so  believed  on  Him  as  to  have  entered  into  the 
Canaan  of  rest.  I.  Tkue  eeligion  makes  a  difference  not  only  in  a  man,  but 
IN  A  man's  condition  ;  it  affects  not  only  his  heart,  but  his  state  ;  not  only 
his  nature,  but  his  very  standing  in  society.  The  Lord  thy  God  cares  not 
only  for  Israel,  but  for  Canaan,  where  Israel  dwells.  God  has  not  only  a  regard 
to  the  elect,  but  to  their  habitation,  and  not  only  so,  but  to  all  their  affairs  and 
circumstances.  My  habitation  is  now  guarded  by  Jehovah  ;  my  position  in  this 
world  is  no  longer  that  of  a  needy  mendicant ;  my  position,  which  was  that  of 
a  bondslave  in  Egypt,  is  now  become  that  of  an  inheritor  in  Canaan.  In  this 
difference  of  the  condition  of  the  Christian  and  the  worldling  we  shall  mark  three 
things.  1.  The  Christian's  temporal  condition  is  different  to  that  of  the  worldling, 
for  the  worldling  looks  to  secondary  causes ;  the  Christian  looks  to  heaven ;  he 
gets  his  mercies  thence.  2.  But  now  comes  the  second  distinction,  and  that  is,  a 
difference  in  the  toilsomeness  of  their  lives.  The  worldly  man,  just  like  the 
Israelites  in  Egypt,  has  to  water  his  land  with  his  foot.  Read  the  passage  :  * '  For 
the  land,  whither  thou  goest  in  to  possess  it,  is  not  as  the  land  of  Egypt,  from 
whence  ye  came  out,  where  thou  sowedst  thy  seed,  and  wateredst  it  with  thy  foot 
as  a  garden  of  herbs."  This  alludes,  possibly,  to  the  practice  amongst  all  eastern 
nations  where  the  land  is  irrigated,  of  letting  out  a  certain  quantity  of  water  into 
a  trench,  and  then  having  small  gutters  dug  in  the  gardens,  to  compel  the  water 
to  run  along  diflferent  parts  of  the  ground.  Sometimes  one  of  these  gutters  might 
be  broken,  and  then  the  gardener  would  press  the  mould  against  it  with  his  foot, 
to  keep  the  water  in  its  proper  channel.  But  I  am  inclined  to  think  that  the 
passage  alludes  to  the  method  which  those  eastern  countries  have  of  pumping  up 
the  water  by  a  tread- wheel,  and  so  watering  the  land  with  their  foot.  However 
that  may  be,  it  means  that  the  land  of  Egypt  was  watered  with  extraordinary 
labour,  in  order  to  preserve  it  from  sterility.  "But,"  says  Moses,  "the  land,  to 
which  ye  are  going,  is  not  a  land  which  you  will  have  to  water  with  your  foot 
The  water  will  come  spontaneously ;  the  land  wiU  be  watered  by  the  rain  of 
heaven.  You  can  sit  in  your  own  houses,  or  under  your  own  vine,  or  under  your 
own  fig-tree,  and  God  Himself  shall  be  your  irrigator.  You  shall  sit  still,  and  *  in 
quietness  shall  ye  possess  your  souls.' "  Now,  here  is  a  difference  between  the 
godly  and  ungodly — the  ungodly  man  toils.  Suppose  his  object  is  ambition  ;  he 
will  labour  and  spend  his  very  life,  until  he  obtains  the  desired  pinnacle.  Suppose 
it  is  wealth  ;  how  will  he  emaciate  his  frame,  rob  his  body  of  its  needed  sleep,  and 
take  away  the  nourishment  his  frame  requires,  in  order  that  he  may  accumulate 
riches  1    And  if  it  is  learning,  how  will  he  burn  his  eyes  out  with  the  flame  of  h» 


CHAP.  XI.]  DEUTERONOMY.  315 


hot  desire,  that  he  may  understand  all  knowledge  ;  how  will  he  allow  his  frame  to 
become  weak  and  wan  by  midnight  watchings  !     Men  will  in  this  way  labour,  and 
toil,  and  strive.     But  not  so  the  Christian.     Xo  ;   his  "strength  is  to  sit  still." 
He  knows  what  it  is  to  fulfil  the  command  of  Paul— "I  would  have  you  without 
carefulness."     We  can  take  things  as  God  gives  them,  without  all  this  toil  and 
labour.     I  have  often  admired  the  advice  of  old  Cineas  to  Pyrrhus.     Old  story 
Baith,  that  when  Pyrrhus,  king  of  Epirus,  was  making  preparation  for  his  intended 
expedition  into  Italy,  Cineas,  the  philosopher,  took  a  favourable  opportunity  of 
addressing   him    thus:    "The   Romans,   sir,    are  reported  to  be  a  warlike  and 
victorious  people  ;  but  if  God  permit  us  to  overcome  them,  what  use  shall  we  make 
of  the  victory?"     "Thou  askest,"  said  Pyrrhus,   "a  thing  that  is  self-evident. 
The  Romans  once  conquered,  no  city  will  resist  us  ;  we  shall  then  be  masters  of  all 
Italy."     Cineas  added,    "And  having  subdued  Italy,  what  shall  we  do  next?" 
Pyrrhus  not  yet  aware  of  his  intentions,  replied,  "Sicily  next  stretches  out  her  arms 
to  receive  us."     "That  is  very  probable,"  said  Cineas,  "but  will  the  possession  of 
Sicily  put  an  end  to  the  war?"      "God  grant  us  success  in  that,"  answered 
Pyrrhus,   "and  we  shall  make  these  only  the  forerunners  of  greater  things,  for 
then  Libra  and  Carthage  will  soon  be  ours ;  and  these  things  being  completed, 
none  of  our  enemies  can  offer  any  further  resistance."      "Very  true,"  added 
Cineas,  "for  then  we  may  easily  regain  Macedon,  and  make  absolute  conquest  of 
Greece;    and  when  all  these  are  in  our  possession,   what  shall  we  do  then?" 
Pyrrhus,  smiling,  answered,  "  Why  then,  my  dear  friend,  we  will  live  at  our  ease, 
take  pleasure  all  day,  and  amuse  ourselves  with  cheerfiil  conversation."     "Well, 
sir,"  said  Cineas,   "and  why  may  we  not  do  this  now,  and  without  the  labour 
and  hazard  of  an  enterprise  so  laborious  and  uncertain  ? "     So  says  the  Christian. 
3.  This  brings  us  to  the  last  difference  that  we  will  note,  and  that  is,  that  the 
unbeliever,  he  who  has  not  crossed  the  Jordan  and  come  to  full  confidence,  does 
not  understand  the  universality  of  God's  providence,  while  the  assured  Christian 
does.     In  Egypt  the  ground  is  almost  entirely  flat ;  and  where  it  is  not  flat,  it  is 
impossible,  of  course,  to  grow  anything,  unless  the  ground  is  watered  at  consider- 
able diflSculty  by  some  method  of  artificial  irrigation,  which  shall  force  the  water 
on  to  the  high  places.     "But,"  says  Moses,  "the  land,  whither  ye  go  to  possess  it, 
is  a  land  of  hills  and  valleys."     The  Egyptians  could  not  get  the  water  up  on  the 
hills,  but  you  can  ;  for  the  mountains  drink  in  the  rain,  as  well  as  the  valleys. 
Kow  look  at  a  worldling.     Give  him  comforts,  give  him  prosperity.     Oh !  he  can 
be  so  happy.     Give  him  everything  just  as  he  likes  it ;  make  his  course  all  a  plain, 
all  a  dead  valley  and  a  flat ;  he  can  fertilise  that,  and  water  it ;  but  let  him  have  a 
mountainous  trouble,  let  him  lose  a  friend,  or  let  his  property  be  taken  from  him 
—put  a  hill  in  his  way,  and  he  cannot  water  that,  with  all  the  pumping  of  his 
feet,  and  all  the  force  he  strives  to  use.     But  the  Christian  lives  in  "a  land  of 
hills  and  valleys  "  ;  a  land  of  sorrow  as  well  as  joys ;  but  the  hills  drink  the  water, 
as  well  as  the  valleys.     We  need  not  climb  the  mountains  to  water  their  heads,  for 
our  God  is  as  high  as  the  hills.     II.  We  must  consider  the  special  mercy.    We 
must  now  turn  away  altogether  from  the  allegoric,  and  come  to  this  special  mercy, 
which  is  the  lot  only  of  God's  people.     "  The  eyes  of  the  Lord  thy  God  are  always 
upon  it,  from  the  beginning  of  the  year  even  unto  the  end  of  the  year."    That  is, 
upon  the  lot  of  all  Christians  individually.     Do  not  pick  out  one  day  in  the  year, 
and  say  it  was  a  bad  day,  but  take  all  the  year  round.     "  Ah  !  bless  the  Lord !    He 
hath  done  all  things  well ;  my  soul,  and  all  that  is  within  me,  bless  His  holy 
name  !  '    And  you  know  why  all  things  have  been  well.     It  is  because  the  eyes  of 
the  Lord  have  been  upon  you  all  the  year.    Then  might  I  not  say  a  word  to  you 
concerning  the  eyes  of  the  Lord  having  been  upon  us  as  a  church  ?    Ought  we  to 
let  this  year  pass  without  rehearsing  the  works  of  the  Lord  ?    Hath  He  not  been 
^^i    ^-f^ceeding  abundantly,  and  prospered  us?     Some  old  writer  has  said, 
*  Every  hour  that  a  Christian  remains  a  Christian  is  an  hour  of  miracle."    It  is 
true ;    and  every  year  that  the  Church  is  kept  an  entire  Church  is  a  year  of 
nuracle.     "The  eye  of  the  Lord"  has  been  upon  us,  "from  the  beginning  of  the 
year  even  unto  the  end  of  the  year."     (C.  H.  Spurgem.)        The  Gospel  f(yr 
the  day— a  glad  word  for  the  New  Year:— I.  Notice  that  the  people  are 
REMINDED  OF  THE  PAST.     Confidence  in  God  for  the  future  is  to  grow  out  of 
the  memory  of  His  former  dealings  with  them.      **Your  eyes  have  seen  all  the 
great  acts  of  the  Lord  which  He  did."     "Think  of  your  almighty  Helper,"  cried 
Moses,  "  He  goeth  with  you  into  this  land :  He  careth  for  it."    And  so  let  us  call 
to  mind  the  greatness  and  the  glory  of  our  God.     What  tokens  of  His  love  to  us 


816  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap  xi. 

we  have !  What  pledges  of  His  care  for  us,  far  outpassing  all  that  Israel  ever 
looked  upon.  II.  Look  at  the  land  in  which  God  would  have  ur  to  live. 
Egypt  is  the  type  of  the  world,  the  world  that  knows  not  God.  "Who  is  the 
Lord  that  I  should  serve  Him?  I  know  Him  not."  This  is  the  language  of 
Pharaoh,  the  language,  too,  of  the  prince  of  this  world.  Egypt  is  the  land  where 
they  looked  down  for  their  supply — wateredst  it  with  thy  foot.  They  got  their 
harvests  by  their  own  toil  and  depending  upon  themselves  ;  they  knew  not  God. 
Israel  must  come  out  of  this  into  a  land  where  they  look  up  for  their  supply,  up 
into  the  hills  whence  cometh  their  help — a  land  of  hills  and  valleys  that  drinketh 
in  the  rain  of  heaven.  The  wilderness  between  the  two  was  the  school  where  the 
people  were  to  learn  the  first  lesson  of  their  dependence  upon  God.  We  have  long 
enough  been  fretting  and  murmuring  in  the  wilderness.  In  the  Lord's  name  arise 
and  enter  into  the  land  where  God's  presence  encircles  all,  the  eyes  of  the  Lord  are 
always  upon  it.  Rest  in  the  Lord.  Believe  in  His  power,  not  as  a  reserve  fund 
from  which  you  are  to  draw  when  your  strength  is  spent,  but  as  actively  engaged 
for  you,  interested  in  all  your  affairs,  ever  eager  to  help  and  guide.  III.  Notice 
THE  Lord's  promises  concerning  this  land  in  which  we  are  to  dwell.  "The 
land  whither  ye  go  to  possess  it  is  a  land  of  hills  and  valleys,  and  drinketh 
water  of  the  rain  of  heaven."  All  our  supply  is  to  come  from  the  Lord.  Here 
are  springs  that  shall  never  dry  ;  here  are  fountains  and  streams  that  shall  never 
be  cut  off.  Here,  anxious  one,  is  the  gracious  pledge  of  the  Heavenly  Father.  If 
He  be  the  Source  of  our  mercies,  they  can  never  fail  us.  Do  not  go  down  to  Egypt 
for  your  pleasure,  or  your  strength,  or  your  wisdom,  or  your  comfort.  Man  of 
God,  thy  place  is  Canaan,  the  land  that  the  Lord  careth  for.  Fetch  all  thy 
supplies  from  Him.  If  strength  is  needed,  who  can  help  thee  like  the  Lord  ? 
Who  else  can  give  thee  patience  or  who  so  tenderly  comfort  as  the  God  of  all 
consolation,  the  God  of  all  patience  ?  If  the  way  grow  tangled,  who  can  give  thee 
wisdom  as  He  can  1  There  is  the  land  to  live  in — the  land  that  drinketh  in  the 
rain  of  heaven.  IV.  Here  is  a  lesson  in  physical  geography.  The  land  is  a 
land  of  "hills  and  valleys."  That  is  all  we  are  told  of  it.  And  that  is  aU  we 
know  of  the  land  in  which  we  are  just  entering.  This  much  I  can  tell  of  your 
fortune  in  the  New  Year.  It  will  be  a  year  of  ups  and  downs,  of  hills  and  valleys. 
The  hills,  so  hard  to  climb,  that  make  you  sigh  and  wonder  why  they  are  sent — 
they  make  the  glad  and  fruitful  valleys.  If  life  were  all  one  dead  level  every 
pleasure  would  grow  wearisome,  the  dull  sameness  of  life  would  oppress  us.  We 
want  the  hills  and  valleys.  The  steep  climb  shows  us  the  landscape  that  we  could 
never  have  seen  otherwise.  The  little  vexations  make  the  pleasant  things  fresh  in 
their  pleasantness.  Only  he  who  has  tasted  the  bitterness  of  sorrow  for  sin  can 
taste  and  see  how  gracious  the  Lord  is.  The  beauty,  the  blessedness,  the  pleasure 
of  our  life  is  more  dependent  than  we  can  ever  know  on  the  hills  of  life.  The  land 
whither  thou  goest  is  a  land  of  hills  and  valleys.  "A  land  of  hills  and  valleys." 
Look  again.  The  hills  drink  in  the  rain  of  heaven  and  thereby  make  the  valleys 
fruitful.  The  desert  is  a  desert,  because  no  hills  rise  up  to  heaven  to  touch  the 
clouds  and  bring  down  blessings  on  the  thirsty  land  below.  The  hills  collect  the 
rain  for  a  hundred  fruitful  valleys.  Ah,  so  it  is  with  us.  It  is  the  hill  difficulty 
that  drives  us  to  the  throne  of  grace  and  fetches  down  a  shower  of  blessing.  It  is 
the  trial  that  sends  us  to  the  Lord  for  help.  The  hills,  the  bleak  hills  of  life  that 
we  wonder  at  and  perhaps  grumble  at,  bring  down  the  showers.  They  drink  in  the 
rain  from  heaven.  And  yet  again — the  hills  give  to  the  valleys  their  fruitfulness  and 
beauty  by  protecting  them.  They  rise  up  and  shut  back  bleak  winds  and  furious 
storms  :  then  in  the  sunny  shelter  the  valleys  shall  be  covered  over  with  corn,  the 
pastures  are  clothed  with  flocks.  So  is  the  land  whither  we  go  to  possess  it — a  land 
of  hills  and  valleys.  Ah,  how  the  soul  had  been  withered,  dead,  if  no  steep  hill  had 
risen  for  its  shelter.  How  many  have  perished  in  the  wilderness,  buried  under  its 
golden  sands,  who  would  have  lived  and  thriven  in  the  hill  coimtry.  We  cannot 
tell  what  loss  and  sorrow  and  trial  are  doing.  Do  not  judge,  much  less  grumble. 
Trust  only.  ( Jf.  G.  Pearse, )  The  land,  whither  ye  go  to  possess  it,  is  a  land 
of  hills  and  valleys. — The  land  of  hills  and  valleys: — 1.  Note  how  often  God  tells 
Israel  that  the  land  they  were  making  for  was  their  possession.  In  Egypt  they  had 
possessed  nothing ;  they  were  possessed.  Their  time,  their  children,  their  lives 
were  not  their  own  there.  Now  they  were  to  be  slaves  of  a  tyranny  no  more.  And 
every  man  who  is  living  his  life  well  is  marching  forward  in  the  track  of  Israel. 
There  is  a  sense  in  which  we  all  begin  by  being  possessed  ;  but  we  shall  end,  God 
helping  us,  possessing.     Sometimes  it  is  a  foolish  ambition  that  possesses  us ;  some- 


CHAP.  XL]  DEUTERONOMY.  317 


times  it  is  a  hereditary  curse  ;  or  a  habit,  or  sloth,  or  cowardice,  or  passion  ;  and  w<» 
are  not  our  own.     But  when  God  bieaks  that  bondage  of  the  soul,  far  off,  it  may  be, 
but  gleaming  in  the  morning,  we  see  the  peaks  of  a  land  that  shall  be  ours.    Gradu- 
ally, not  without  many  a  failure,  through  daily  effort,  and  prayer,  and  watching, 
we  come  to  a  country  where  we  are  not  slaves  but  kings.     2.  These  marchiug 
Israelites  had  been  told  what  the  land  was  to  be  like  in  outline.     It  was  to  be 
"a  land  of  hills  and  valleys."     How  high  the  hills  would  be,  they  did  not  know. 
Much  was  shrouded  in  impenotrable  dark.     And  do  you  say  that   the   future  is 
all  hidden  ?   There  is  a  deep  sense  in  wliich  that  is  true.    The  separate  secrets  of  the 
coming  days  are  lodged  and  locked  in  the  eternal  mind.     But  there  is  an  outline  of 
the  coming  year  that  God  makes  plain  to  every  child  of  man.     For,  what  your  past 
has  been,  and  what  your  God  has  been,  and  what  your  heart  is  eager  for  to-night- 
all  that  will  map  out  the  New  Year  for  you.     3.  There  was  to  be  no  monotony 
in  their  new  home.    It  would  be  ever  fresh  with  endless  charm.    Every  valley  would 
have  its  rushing  stream,  and  every  ridge  its  separate  vista.     And  is  there   ever 
monotony  where  God  conducts  ?     It  is  a  lie  to  say  that  being  good  takes  all  the 
charm  and  colour  out  of  life.     It  is  our  sins  that  grow  monotonous  ;  our  graces  are. 
dew-bespangled  till  the  end.     4.  I  wonder  how  long  it  took  the  Israelites  to  learn 
that  the  hills  were  necessary  to  the  valleys.    How  sweet  and  fertile  the  valleys  were, 
they  knew.     Life  was  a  joy  down  by  these  happj  meadows  ;  it  was  a  sweet  music| 
that  of  the  rustling  corn.     But  yonder,  towering  skyward,  were  the  hills,   and 
the  brigands  were  there,  and  over  them,  who  could  tell  what  tribes  there  were  ? 
And  there  was  an  element  of  tempest  too,  among  the  hills.     The  children  said  life 
would  be  perfect  here,  if  God  had  but  spared  us  those  barren  and  baneful  hills.    But 
halt !  these  rushing  brooks,  where  did  they  come  from  ?     Out  of  the  hills.     And 
where  were  the  sharp  sea-winds  that  would  have  blighted  the  vine  and  withered  the 
springing  corn  ?     It  was  the  barrier  of  mountains  that  kept  them  off.   The  children 
said,  we  hate  thase  ragged  hills,  and  we  wish  that  God  would  level  them  to  the 
ground ; — and  it  was  when  tliey  grew  to  men  and  women  that  they  knew  that  never 
a  vine  would  have  clustered  in  the  hollows,  and  never  a  harvest  turned  golden  in  the 
valleys,  but  for  the  mountains  that  they  wished  away.     Is  there  nothing  in  your  life 
you  wish  away  ?     Is  there  no  cross,  no  trial,  no  limitation  ?     Do  not  be  angry  with 
the  hills,  because  they  shut  you  in.    Fret  not.    Accept  them.    Is  there  no  lily  of  the 
valley  at  your  feet  ?     It  would  never  have  been  there  but  for  the  hills.     5.  But  the 
valley  does  not  always  speak  of  harvest.     It  is  not  always  ringing  with  the  vine- 
dresser's Hit.     There  are  valleys  in  which  we  catch  the  sound  of  weeping,  and  see 
the  rolling  mist  and  never  the  sunlight.     And  it  is  then  that  we  need  this  text 
graven  upon  our  heart.     For  in  the  valleys  we  sometimes  forget  the  hills.     In  the 
hour  of  mist  we  forget  that  the  sun  was  ever  shining.     You  would  think  there  had 
never  been  any  blue  sky  at  all,  we  are  so  utterly  disheartened  in  the  cloudy  day. 
Are  the  stars  not  there,  though  the  clouds  are  abroad  to-night  ?     Are  the  hills  not 
rising  heavenward  and  Godward,  though  I  am  in  the  valley  of  the  shadow  ?    Recall 
the  hours  of  vision  on  the  mount.     6.  Remember  the  valley  when  on  the  hill.    To 
stand  on  the  hill-top  is  an  exquisite  joy.     There  is  vision  in  it :  there  is  the  birth 
of  song.    And  to  be  strong  and  vigorous,  with  a  firm  grasp  of  oneself  and  one's  work, 
that  is  like  heaven  begim.     Only  remember,  the  day  of  the  valley  is  coming ;  the 
shadow,  the  mist,  and  parting  are  coming  ;  and  the  wise  man,  though  not  with 
noise  and  fu-s,  will  be  quietly  preparing  upon  the  hills  for  that.     {G.  H.  Morrison, 
M.A.)         Drmketh   water   of  tlje   rain   of  heaven.— T^ie   God  of  the  rain:— 
Beautiful,    simple,    noble,    true   words.      Who   would   change  them    for   all   the 
scientific  phiases  in  the  world  ?     The  eyes  of  the  Lord  were  upon  the  land.     It 
needed   His  care  ;    and  therefore  His   care   it  had.      Therefore  the  Jew  was  to 
understand   from   his    first    entry   into    the   land,    that  his   prosperity  depended 
utterly  on  God.     The  laws  of  weather,  by  which  the  rain  comes  up  off  the  sea,  were 
unknown  to  him.     They  are  all  but  unknown  to  us  now.     But  they  were  known  to 
God.     Not  a  drop  could  fall  without  His  providence  and  will ;  and  therefore  they 
were  utterly  in  His  power.     God  is  the  living  Judge,  the  living  overlooker,  rewarder, 
punisher  of  every  man,  not  only  in  the  life  to  come,  but  in  this  life.     His  providence 
is  a  special  providence.     But  not  such  a  poor  special  providence  as  men  are  too  apt 
to  dream  of  nowadays,  which  interferes  only  now  and  then  on  some  great  occasion 
or  on  behalf  of  some  very  favoured  persons,  but  a  special  providence  looking  after 
every  special  act  of  man,  and  of  the  whole  universe,  from  the  fall  of  a  sparrow  to 
the  fall  of  an  empire.     And  it  is  this  intense  faith  in  the  living  God,  which  can 
only  come  by  the  inspiration  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  which  proves  the  Old  Testament 


318  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xi. 

to  be  truly  inspired.  This  it  is  which  makes  it  different  from  all  books  in  the  world. 
This  it  is,  I  hold,  which  marks  the  canon  of  Scripture.  As  it  was  then,  so  may  it 
be  again.  There  may  come  a  time  in  this  land  when  people  shall  profess  to  worship 
the  word  of  God  ;  and  yet,  like  those  old  scribes,  make  it  of  none  effect  by  their 
own  commandments  and  traditions.  When  they  shall  command  men,  like  the 
scribes,  to  honour  every  word  and  letter  of  the  Bible,  and  yet  forbid  them  to  take 
the  Bible  simply  and  literally  as  it  stands,  but  only  their  interpretation  of  the  Bible ; 
when  they  shall  say,  with  the  scribes,  *'  Nothing  new  can  be  true.  God  taught  the 
apostles,  and  therefore  He  is  not  teaching  us.  God  worked  miracles  of  old  ;  but 
whosoever  thinks  that  God  is  working  miracles  now  is  a  Pantheist  and  a  blasphemer. 
God  taught  men  of  old  the  thing  which  they  knew  not ;  but  whosoever  dares  to  say 
that  He  does  so  now  is  bringing  heresy  and  false  doctrine,  and  undermining  the 
Christian  faith  by  science  falsely  so  called."  From  ever  falling  into  that  state  of 
stupid  lip-belief,  and  outward  religion,  and  loss  of  faith  in  the  living  God  :  Good 
Lord,  deliver  us.  (C.  Kingsley,  M.A.)  The  eyes  of  the  Lord  thy  God  axe  always 
upon  it. — Good  cheer  for  the  New  Year : — Observe  here  a  type  of  the  condition  of 
the  natural  and  the  spiritual  man.  In  this  world  in  temporals  and  in  all  other 
respects  the  merely  carnal  man  has  to  be  his  own  providence,  and  to  look  to  him- 
self for  all  his  needs.  Hence  his  cares  are  always  many,  and  frequently  they  become 
so  heavy  that  they  drive  him  to  desperation.  He  lives  in  Egypt,  and  he  knows  no 
joy.  But  the  spiritual  man  dwells  in  another  country ;  his  faith  makes  him  a 
citizen  of  another  land.  It  is  true  he  endures  the  same  toils,  and  experiences  the 
same  afflictions  as  the  ungodly,  but  they  deal  with  him  after  another  fashion,  for 
they  come  as  a  gracious  Father's  appointments,  and  they  go  at  the  bidding  of  loving 
wisdom.  I.  First,  we  will  consider  the  text  as  wb  find  it.  "The  eyes  of  the 
Lord."  What  is  meant  here  ?  Surely  not  mere  omniscience.  No,  there  is  love  in 
the  text  to  sweeten  observation.  "  The  Lord  knoweth  the  righteous  "  with  a  know- 
ledge which  is  over  and  above  that  of  omniscience.  The  eyes  of  the  Lord  are  upon 
the  righteous,  not  merely  to  see  them,  but  to  view  them  with  complacency  and 
delight.  1.  The  meaning  of  the  text  then  is,  first,  that  God's  love  is  always  upon 
His  people.  The  big  heart  of  Deity  is  set  upon  us  poor  insignificant,  undeserving, 
worthless  beings.  2.  The  expression  of  the  text  teaches  us  that  the  Lord  takes  a 
personal  interest  in  us.  It  is  not  here  said  that  God  loves  us,  and  therefore  sends  an 
angel  to  watch  over  us  ;  but  the  Lord  does  it  Himself.  3.  Further,  the  text  reminds 
us  of  the  unwearied  power  of  God  towards  His  people.  What,  can  His  eyes  be  always 
upon  us  ?  This  were  not  possible  if  He  were  not  God.  The  next  word  that  seems 
to  sparkle  in  the  text  is  that  word  "always."  "The  eyes  of  the  Lord  are  always 
upon  it."  And  it  is  added,  as  if  that  word  were  not  enough  for  such  dull  ears  as 
ours,  from  the  beginning  of  the  year  even  to  the  end  of  the  year.  I  tried  to  discover 
the  other  day  what  time  there  was  in  one's  life  when  one  could  best  afford  to  be 
without  God.    Perhaps  imagination  suggests  the  time  of  prosperity,  when  business 


prospers,  wealth  is  growing,  and  the  mind  is  happy.     Ah,  to  be  without  God  then, 

the  bridegroom,  it  would  be  the  day 
of  delight  and  no  delight,  a  sea  and  no  water  in  it,  day  and  no  light.     What !  aU 


why  it  would  be  like  the  marriage  feast  without  the  bridegroom,  it  would  be  the  da] 


these  mercies  and  no  God  ?  If  you  can  do  without  God  at  all,  it  certainly  is  not 
when  you  are  standing  on  the  pinnacle.  What  then  ?  Could  we  do  without  Him  in 
adversity  1  Ask  the  heart  that  is  breaking  !  Ask  the  tortured  spirit  that  has  been 
deserted  by  its  friend  !  Ask  the  child  of  poverty,  or  the  daughter  of  sickness  tossing 
by  night  and  day  on  that  uneasy  bed,  Couldst  thou  do  without  thy  God  ?  And  the 
very  thought  causes  wailing  and  gnashing  of  teeth .  With  God  pain  becomes  pleasure, 
and  dying  beds  are  elevated  into  thrones,  but  without  God — ah  !  what  could  we  do  ? 
Well  then,  is  there  no  period  ?  Cannot  the  young  Christian,  full  of  freshness  and 
vigour,  elated  with  the  novelty  of  piety,  do  without  his  God  ?  Ah,  poor  puny  thing, 
how  can  the  lamb  do  without  the  shepherd  to  carry  it  in  his  arms  ?  Cannot  the 
man  in  middle  life  then,  whose  virtues  have  been  confirmed,  do  without  his  God  ? 
He  tells  you  that  it  is  the  day  of  battle  with  him,  and  that  the  darts  fly  so  thick  in 
business  nowadays,  that  the  burdens  of  life  are  so  heavy  in  this  age  that  without 
God  a  man  in  middle  life  is  like  a  naked  man  in  the  midst  of  a  thicket  of  briars 
and  thorns— he  cannot  hope  to  make  his  way.  Ask  yon  grey  beard  with  all  the 
experience  of  seventy  years,  whether  at  least  he  has  not  attained  to  an  independence 
of  grace,  and  he  will  say  to  you  that  as  the  infirmity  of  the  body  presses  upon  him 
it  is  his  joy  that  his  inner  man  is  renewed  day  by  day,  but  take  away  God,  who  is 
the  spring  of  that  renewal,  and  old  age  would  be  utter  wretchedness.  Ah  !  there 
is  not  a  moment  in  any  one  day  that  you  or  I  have  ever  lived,  that  we  could  have 


CHAP.  XL]  DEUTERONOMY.  3I9 


afforded  to  dispense  with  the  help  of  God,  for  when  we  have  thought  ourselves 
strong,  as,  alas  !  we  have  been  fools  enough  to  do,  in  one  five  minutes  we  have 
done  that  which  has  cost  us  rivers  of  tears  to  undo  ;  in  an  unguarded  moment  we 
have  spoken  a  word  which  we  could  not  recall,  but  which  we  could  have  recalled  if 
we  should  have  had  to  bite  our  tongues  in  halves  to  have  had  it  unsaid.     The  next 
word  that  springs  from  the  text  is  that  great  word  "  Jehovah."    He  who  surveys  us 
with  love  and  care  is  none  other  than  the  one  and  indivisible  God,  so  that  we  may 
conclude  if  we  have  His  eyes  to  view  us  we  have  His  heart  to  love  us,  and  if  we  have 
His  heart  we  have  His  wings  to  cover  us,  we  have  His  hands  to  bear  us  up  ;  we  have 
all  the  attributes  of  Deity  at  our  command.     Oh,  when  God  says  that  He  always 
looks  at  you.  He  means  this,  that  He  is  always  yours,  there  is  nothing  which  is 
necessary  for  you  which  He  will  refuse  to  do  ;  there  is  no  wisdom  stored  up  in  Him 
which  He  will  not  use  for  you,  there  is  no  one  attribute  of  all  that  great  mass  of 
splendour  which  makes  up  the  Deity  which  shall  be  withheld  from  you  in  any 
measure,  but  all  that  God  is  shall  be  yours.     He  shall  be  your  God  for  ever  and 
ever.     He  will  give  you  grace  and  glory,  and  be  your  guide  even  unto  death.     Per-  • 
haps  the  sweetest  word  of  the  text  is  that  next  one— the  eyes  of  Jehovah  "thy  God." 
Ah,  there  is  a  blessed  secret  1     Why  ?    Ours  in  covenant,  our  God,  for  He  chose 
us  to  be  His  portion,  and  by  His  grace  He  has  made  us  choose  Him  to  be  our 
portion.     We  are  His  and  He  is  ours.     II.  We  are  now  to  turn  the  text  over  ; 
that  is  to  say,  we  will  misread  it,  yet  read  it  rightly.     Suppose  the  text  were  to  run 
thus — "The  eyes  of  the  Lord's  people  are  always  upon  Him  from  the  beginning  of 
the  year  to  the  end  of  the  year."     We  like  the  text  as  it  stands,  but  I  do  not  believe 
we  shall  ever  comprehend  the  fulness  of  it  unless  we  receive  it  as  I  have  now  altered 
it,  for  we  only  understand  God's  sight  of  us  when  we  get  a  sight  of  Him.     III.  In 
the  third  place,  we  will  imagine  that  we  blot  the  text  out  altogether.     We  are 
to  suppose  that  it  is  blotted  out,  to  imagine  that  you  and  I  have  to  live  all  the  year 
without  the  eyes  of  God  upon  us,  not  finding  a  moment  from  the  beginning  of  the 
year  in  which  we  perceive  the  Lord  to  be  caring  for  us  or  to  be  waiting  to  be  gracious 
to  us.     Imagine  that  there  is  none  to  whom  we  may  appeal  beyond  our  ovm  fellow- 
creatures  for  help.     Oh,  miserable  supposition  1     We  have  come  to  the  opening  of 
the  year,  and  we  have  to  get  through  it  somehow,  we  must  stumble  through  January, 
go  muddling  through  the  winter,  groaning  through  the  spring,  sweating  through 
the  summer,  fainting  through  the  autumn,  and  grovelling  on  to  another  Christmas, 
and  no  God  to  help  us  ;  no  prayer  when  God  is  gone,  no  promise  when  God  is  no 
more.     There  could  be  no  promise,  no  spiritual  succour,  no  comfort,  no  help  for  us 
if  there  were  no  God.     IV.  Let  us  close  with  using  the  text.     The  way  to  use  it  is 
this.     If  the  eyes  of  the  Lord  will  be  upon  us  His  people,  from  the  beginning  of  the 
year  to  the  end  of  the  year,  what  shall  we  do  ?    Why,  let  us  be  as  happy  as  we  can 
during  this  year.     You  have  your  trials— do  not  expect  that  you  will  be  free  from 
them.     The  devil  is  not  dead,  and  sparks  still  fly  upward.     Herein  is  your  joy,  the 
God  and  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  will  never  leave  you  nor  forsake  you.     Up 
with  your  standard  now  and  march  on  boldly  !     I  would  have  you  use  the  text  by 
the  way  of  seeking  greater  blessings  and  richer  mercies  than  you  have  ever  enjoyed. 
{C.  H.  Spurgeon.)        God's  care  for  His  Church  and  ^people  in  all  ages  .-—The  land 
which  the  Lord  thy  God  careth  for.     This  is  true  not  only  of  the  land  of  Canaan 
which  was  considered  in  the  proper  sense  of  it,  but  also  of  any  other  land  together 
with  it,  which  is  the  place  and  residence  of  the  Church,  and  ordinances,  and  people 
of  God.     This  is  reductively,  and  interpretatively,  and  proportionably  the  land 
which  the  Lord  thy  God  careth  for.     I.  When  it  is  said  here  that  He  careth 

for  IT,  THIS  WORD   CARE  MAY  ADMIT  OF  A  THREEFOLD  EXPLICATION.      First,  as  a 

word  of  respect.  He  cares  for  it— that  is,  He  regards  it.  Secondly,  as  a  word  of 
providence.  He  cares  for  it— that  is.  He  looks  after  it  and  takes  care  of  it.  Thirdly, 
Jf  a  word  of  solicitude.     He  cares  for  it,  is  anxious  about  it.     1.  As  a  word  of  respect. 

The  Church  of  God,  and  such  a  land  where  the  Church  resides.     God  cares  for  it 

that  is.  He  regards  it,  and  has  an  esteem  for  it.  It  is  precious  and  of  great  account 
with  Him.  _  2.  It  is  a  word  of  forecast  or  providence.  He  cares  for  it— that  is.  He 
looks  after  it,  and  inquires  into  the  state  of  it.  He  casts  about  what  may  be  best 
and  most  convenient  for  it,  and  answerably  does  bring  it  about.  3.  It  is  a  word  of 
solicitude  and  perplexity.  He  cares  for  it— that  is.  He  is  anxious  about  it  (Hosea 
xi.^  8).  There  is  no  man  can  express  more  affection  in  any  thing  whereof  he  is 
solicitous  as  to  the  welfare  of  it,  than  God  does  express  towards  His  Church,  as 
there  is  occasion  for  it.  It  is  the  land  which  the  Lord  cares  for  in  the  full  extent 
and  latitude  of  care.    Now  as  there  is  a  threefold  expression  of  God's  care  for  His 


320  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xi. 

Church  ;  so  there  is  a  threefold  account  also,  which  may  be  given  to  us  of  this  care, 
as  from  whence  it  does  proceed  in  Him.  1.  From  His  relation.  The  Church  is 
His  own  land  by  special  purchase  and  redemption,  and  so  He  takes  care  of  it  more 
particularly  in  that  respect.  2.  From  His  covenant.  It  is  the  land  that  He  cares 
for  upon  this  consideration  also.  Because  He  has  engaged  Himself  hereto.  3.  From 
His  interest  and  more  peculiar  concernment.  The  Lord  takes  care  of  His  Church  as 
that  which  He  receives  the  greatest  advantage  from  any  other  besides  ;  not  in  a 
strict  sense,  but  in  a  qualified,  and  as  He  is  pleased  to  account  it.  The  use  of  this 
point  to  ourselves  comes  to  this  purpose.  First,  as  it  serves  to  inform  us,  and  to 
satisfy  us  in  the  truth  of  this  point,  which  we  have  now  before  us,  that  we  be 
persuaded  of  it.  It  is  that  which  we  are  ready  sometimes  to  doubt  of  whether  God 
cares  for  His  Church  or  no.  Especially  according  to  the  circumstances  wherein  it 
may  be  as  Gideon  sometimes  reasoned  with  the  angel  (Judg.  vi.  13).  This  proposi- 
tion which  we  are  now  upon,  it  hath  both  an  inclusive  emphasis  and  an  exclusive. 
It  has  an  inclusive  emphasis  in  it,  as  it  does  signify  ;  that  God  does  indeed  take 
care  of  His  Church  and  land.  An  exclusive  emphasis,  as  it  does  signify  that  He 
does  care  of  it  both  in  the  denial  of  others'  care  for  it,  and  in  His  own  denial  of  care 
for  others.  And  so  now  I  have  done  with  the  first  general  part  of  the  text,  which 
is  the  interest  this  land  here  had  in  God's  affection  expressed  to  us  in  these  words, 
"The  land  which  the  Lord  thy  God  careth  for."  II.  The  second  is  the  interest 
WHICH  IT  HATH  IN  God's  INSPECTION  IN  THESE  WORDS.  The  cycs  of  the  Lord 
thy  God  are  always  upon  it,  from  the  beginning  of,  &c.  Wherein,  again,  we  have 
two  branches  more.  First,  the  privilege  itself,  and  that  is  of  being  under  the  eyes 
of  God  I  the  eyes  of  the  Lord  thy  God  are  upon  it.  Secondly,  the  continuation  of 
this  privilege,  and  that  is  expressed  in  two  words  more.  First,  in  the  word  of 
perpetuity,  and  that  is,  always.  Secondly,  in  the  words  of  extent.  From  the 
beginning  of  the  year  to  the  end  of  the  year.  1.  First,  we  will  take  notice  of  the 
former,  namely,  the  privilege  itself  here  mentioned.  And  that  is,  of  being  under 
God's  eye.  First,  an  eye  of  observation,  that  is  one  which  God  hath  upon  His 
Church,  He  does  mark,  and  mind,  and  take  notice  of  the  state  and  condition  in 
which  it  is.  Secondly,  an  eye  of  compassion  ;  He  has  an  eye  upon  it,  to  pity  it,  and 
to  comfort  it  in  the  state  in  which  it  is.  Thirdly,  an  eye  of  direction,  a  teaching 
eye  ;  God  has  such  an  eye  as  this  which  He  does  sometimes  vouchsafe  His  Church. 
There  is  a  great  matter  in  the  eye  to  such  a  purpose  as  this  is,  and  it  is  here 
considerable  of  us,  as  we  have  it  in  Psa.  xxxii.  8.  Fourthly,  an  eye  of  protection 
and  preservation  and  authority.  2.  Now  for  the  second,  which  is  the  continuation 
of  this  privilege,  that  is  exhibited  to  us  in  two  expressions  more.  First,  in  the 
word  of  constancy  or  perpetuity  ;  and  that  is  always.  Secondly,  in  the  words  of 
extent,  or  production.  From  the  beginning  of  the  year  to  the  end  of  the  year. 
First,  we  may  take  notice  of  the  continuance  of  the  privilege  he  mentioned  in  the 
word  of  constancy  or  perpetuity.  And  that  is  always.  It  hath  three  properties  in 
it,  which  are  here  particularly  considerable  of  us.  First,  it  is  a  quick  eye,  there 
are  many  persons  which  see  a  thing  at  last,  but  it  is  a  great  while  tirst  before  they 
come  to  do  so  ;  yea,  but  God  beholds  His  Church,  and  the  state  and  condition  of  it, 
as  soon  as  ever  there  is  need  for  Him  to  see  it.  Secondly,  it  is  a  fixed  eye.  He 
looks  upon  His  land,  as  if  He  would  in  a  manner  look  through  it  and  pierce  it 
with  His  eyes.  Thirdly,  it  is  a  frequent  eye.  His  eyes  are  never  off  it.  The 
second  is  the  words  of  extent  or  production.  From  the  beginning  of  the  year  to 
the  end  of  the  year.  Where  there  are  three  periods,  as  I  may  so  call  them,  of  the 
care  and  providence  of  God  towards  His  land  and  people.  There  is  the  initial, 
and  the  intermediate,  and  the  final.  First,  here  is  the  initial  point  of  God's 
providence,  taking  its  rise  from  the  beginning  of  the  year.  Thus  it  signifies  to 
us  God's  earliness,  and  readiness,  and  forwardness  in  His  goodness  towards  His 
people,  that  He  takes  the  very  first  season  and  opportunity  that  is  afforded  unto 
Him,  for  the  hastening  of  His  favours  upon  them.  Secondly,  here  is  the  inter- 
mediate point,  in  the  rising  or  progress  of  the  year,  that  is  also  included  as  joining 
both  terms  together  :  God  is  not  only  kind  a  little  at  first,  when  the  year  begins, 
and  so  making  a  good  entrance,  but  He  holds  on  and  proceeds  in  His  goodness 
as  the  year  itself  rises  and  gets  up.  This  is  God's  manner  of  dealing,  not  only  like 
some  misers,  perhaps,  to  make  a  feast  for  a  time,  and  once  a  year,  but  like  a 
liberal  and  free-hearted  person — that  keeps  open-house  all  the  year  long,  from  the 
beginning  of  the  year  to  the  end.  The  third  is  the  final  point  or  conclusive.  He 
ends  the  year  as  well  as  begins  it,  with  the  expressions  of  His  goodness  in  it ;  "  He 
crowns  the  year  with  His  goodness  "  (Psa.  Ixv.  11).     Thus  is  God  gracious  to  Hia 


CHAP.  XI.]  DEUTERONOMY,  321 

land  and  people,  in  all  points  and  periods  of  time,  from  the  beginning  of  the 
year  to  the  end  of  the  year ;  from  one  year  to  another :  yea,  from  one  age  to 
another.  Lord,  Thou  hast  been  our  dwelling-place  in  all  generations.  Lessons : 
1.  First,  in  a  way  of  thankfulness  and  acknowledgment,  where  we  have  at  any 
time  the  experience  of  this  made  good  to  us  in  our  own  particulars,  as  we  very 
much  have.  2.  In  a  way  of  faith  and  dependence,  let  us  make  use  of  it  also, 
that  so  we  who  have  had  experience  of  His  goodness  in  the  past  may  still  wait 
upon  Him  and  rest  comfortably  in  His  providence.  3.  In  a  way  of  fruitfulnesa 
and  obedience,  we  are  to  improve  this  point  so  likewise.  That  as  the  eyes  of  the 
Lord  our  God  are  upon  us,  in  this  extent  and  production,  so  our  eyes  may  be  upon 
Him  likewise  in  the  same  extent.  As  His  in  a  way  of  providence,  and  protection, 
and  preservation  ;  so  ours  in  a  way  of  obedience,  and  fruitfulness,  and  circum- 
spection. To  begin  the  year  with  Him,  as  He  does  with  us,  and  thereby  to  lay 
a  good  foundation  of  holy  conversation  to  ourselves  ;  to  set  ourselves  in  a  good 
way  at  first,  in  this  entrance  of  time.  If  we  have  hitherto  been  any  way  failing  in 
our  duty,  and  neglected  it,  let  us  now  at  least  and  at  last  keep  it.  Let  us  proceed 
also,  as  God  does  with  us.  He  begins,  and  He  goes  on  in  His  goodness,  Hia 
eyes  which  He  cast  upon  His  Church  and  people,  they  never  fail,  but  continue, 
and  hold  good  still.  So  should  our  eyes  be  also  upon  Him,  we  should  perfectly 
continue  in  goodness  ;  and  proceed  in  it,  from  one  degree  of  it  to  another.  As 
the  year  rises  in  the  light  of  it,  so  should  we  rise  also  in  the  improvement  of  it. 
Let  us  also  eud  well  ;  be  especially  careful  of  that.  {T,  Horton,  D.D.)  The 
Lord's  eyes  on  the  land : — Consider  Canaan,  with  its  privilege  of  being  ever  under 
the  open  eyes  of  the  Lord,  as  setting  forth  to  us,  in  a  very  real  manner,  the 
spiritual  condition  of  the  Church  of  Christ,   and  the  blessedness  of  that  state. 

1.  The  spiritual  ground  of  the  Christian  Church.  1.  The  freedom  of  the  new 
land,  thougli  Divinely  given,  was  to  be  acquired  and  retained  by  courageous  conflict 
and  endeavour.  2.  The  productiveness  of  the  new  land  was  to  be  a  blessing  to  the 
producer.  God  has  expended  His  Divine  treasures,  that  His  children  may  bring 
forth  the  rich  fruits  of  His  own  glorious  life.  3.  Purity  of  life  was  to  be  realised 
in  the  new  land.  The  Church  exists  to  promote  the  worship  of  the  Revealed 
Father  in  spirit  and  in  truth.  The  Church's  worship  is  the  drawing  forth  of  its 
strength  from  God — the  reception  of  the  Divine  life  into  the  human.  4.  The 
beauty  of  the  new  land  was  to  be  the  coimterpait  of  spiritual  beauty.  The  fruita 
and  flowers  of  earth  were  the  response  to  the  light  and  rains  of  heaven.  The 
Church  exists,  that  the  beauty  of  the  Lord  our  God  may  be  upon  us.  Nothing  in 
creation  is  more  beautiful  than  the  sight  of  consecrated  spirits  co-operating  in  the 
work  of  God  and  of  His  Christ.  II.  The  Divine  observation  of  the  Christian 
Church.     A  high  privilege  and  blessing.     1.   For  the  condemnation  of  wrong. 

2.  For  the  approbation  of  right.  No  encouragement  to  the  pursuit  of  goodness 
can  be  so  great  as  that  which  is  derived  from  the  truth  that  God  is  beholding  the 
fight  with  evil.  ( W.  R.  Percival. )  The  ideal  country : — Palestine  included 
everything  required  to  make  a  perfect  commonwealth,  an  earthly  paradise.  It  had 
— 1.  God's  special  husbandry.  God  cared  for  it.  (1)  A  free  land.  (2)  A  produc- 
tive land.  (3)  A  beautiful  land.  (4)  A  holy  land.  2.  The  perennial  watchfulness 
of  God.  (1)  The  land,  with  all  its  interests,  was  precious  to  Him.  (2)  The  pro- 
duce of  the  land  was  assured.  (3)  No  wrong-doer  could  be  uncondemned.  (4)  The 
right  had  His  approbation.  {Homiletic  Monthly.)  The  land  that  the  Lord  careth 
for:—I.  "A  land  which  the  Lord  thy  God  careth  for,"  says  the  Jewish  lawgiver. 
The  word  is  very  suggestive  to  us.  It  speaks  to  our  hearts  of  a  kind  and  loving 
oversight.  Our  age,  distinguished  as  it  has  been  by  scientific  advances  of  all  kinds, 
has  perhaps  in  nothing  made  more  rapid  strides  than  in  improved  methods  for  the 
cultivation  of  the  soil.  The  farmer  no  longer  rejoices  in  his  ignorance  ;  and  agricul- 
tural chemistry  has  taken  rank  among  the  established  studies  of  the  day.  But  what 
proof  are  all  such  appliances  against  the  continued  drought,  or  the  falling  blight,  or 
the  wasting  rains  ?  No  ;  we  must  be  taught,  as  Israel  was  taught,  that  fruitfulness 
was  not  so  much  the  happy  product  of  the  soil,  still  less  the  natural  requital  of  man's 
industry  and  skill,  but  an  immediate  eff"ect  of  the  Divine  blessing — a  consequence  of 
the  eyes  of  the  Lord  never  being  off  the  land,  but  ever  seeking  and  ever  caring  for  it 
to  do  it  good.  11.  But  the  evidence  that  we  are  a  cared-for  people,  and 
therefore  a  fresh  giound  for  our  devotedness  and  love,  is  to  be  found  in  the  time 
when  this  blessing  of  an  abundant  harvest  has  been  sent  to  us.  III.  But 
here  the  scoffer  may  interject,  "Why,  if  this  be  '  a  land  which  the  Lord  careth  for,' 
JS   IT   SUFFERED   TO  BE  DARKENED  HERE  AND  THERE 'BY  THE  OVERHANGING  PESTI- 

21 


322  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xi, 

LENOE,  or  drained  of  its  best  blood  to  keep  down  a  despot's  pride  ? "  Should  we  call 
that  a  cared-for  land  over  which  th^  ploughshare  had  never  passed,  neither  iron  had 
entered  to  break  up  the  fallow-ground  ?  Many  can  see  this  with  regard  to  the  wast- 
ing sickness,  who  find  it  hard  to  apply  to  the  case  of  a  tyrant's  misdoing.  But  we 
cannot  allow  a  Divine  purpose  to  the  pestilence,  and  refuse  a  heavenly  mission 
to  the  sword.  It  would  be  a  deep  enigma  in  Providence,  and  contrary  to  all  that  has 
been  hitherto  known  among  men,  if  the  desolating  scenes  which  are  now  taking 
place  in  the  East  should  be  without  some  great  moral — should  pass  away,  like  the 
dark  shapes  upon  a  storm-cloud,  and  leave  no  trace  behind.  All  God's  judgments, 
whatever  the  instrumentality  employed,  are  to  teach  men  righteousness.  It  is  so 
with  individuals  ;  it  is  so  with  nations.  {D.  Moore,  M.A.)  The  beginning  of  the 
year. — A  sermon  for  the  New  Year : — What  are  the  reflections  which  are  specially 
appropriate  to  "the  beginning  of  the  year  "  ?  It  occupies,  as  it  were,  a  middle  posi- 
tion between  the  year  which  has  just  closed,  and  which  you  cannot  recall,  and  that 
portion  of  time  of  equal  duration  on  which  you  have  entered ;  and  it  thus  invites  you 
to  look  back  to  the  one,  to  look  forward  to  the  other,  and  in  connection  with  both  to 
look  up  to  that  God  who  has  brought  you  safely  through  the  former,  and  who  alone 
can  determine  the  events  that  will  befall  you  diuing  the  course  of  the  latter.  I.  Look 
BACK  ON  THE  YEAR  WHICH  HAS  EXPIRED.  The  man  of  business  is  accustomed  at 
this  season  to  review  the  transactions  of  the  preceding  year,  that  he  may  ascertain 
the  amount  of  his  gains  and  losses.  And  it  becomes  you  as  rational,  as  immortal, 
and  as  accountable  beings,  to  reflect  seriously  on  all  that  you  have  received  and 
endured  and  done  during  the  past  year,  that  thus  you  may  be  able  to  correct  what 
has  been  wrong,  and  to  supply  what  has  been  wanting,  in  your  character  and  con- 
duct, so  as  to  be  better  prepared  for  the  trial  which  you  must  undergo  when 
you  leave  the  present  scene  of  activity.  1.  The  outward  blessings  you  have  received, 
and  the  manner  in  which  you  have  employed  them.  2.  The  spiritual  privileges  with 
which  you  have  been  favoured,  and  the  improvement  which  you  have  made  of  them. 

3.  The  trials  you  have  endured,  and  the  effect  which  they  have  had  upon  you. 

4.  The  sins  you  have  committed,  and  the  sentiments  and  feelings  which  they  have 
awakened  in  you.  Have  you  been  led  gradually  to  think  less  of  the  evil  involved  in 
them,  and  to  indulge  in  them  with  diminishing  repugnance  t  Or  have  you  been 
prompted  to  increased  vigilance,  in  avoiding  everything  that  has  a  tendency  to 
betray  you  into  them,  and  increased  care  to  keep  at  a  distance  from  them,  and  shun 
even  the  appearance  of  them  ?  In  the  one  case,  there  is  evidence  that  you  have  been 
making  a  mock  at  sin,  or  have  looked  on  it  as  a  trivial  thing,  which  ought  not  to 
awaken  in  you  any  deep  distress  ;  in  the  other,  there  is  ground  for  the  conclusion  that 
you  possess  the  broken  and  contrite  spirit  which  God  does  not  despise.  II.  Look 
FORWARD  TO  THE  YEAR  WHICH  HAS  COMMENCED.  I  do  not  mean  that  you  should 
look  forward  to  it  with  the  design  of  discovering  the  events  which  will  occur  in  your 
history,  or  the  vicissitudes  which  you  will  experience  during  its  course.  That 
would  be  a  vain  attempt ;  and  if  it  were  practicable,  it  would  be  unwise  in  you 
to  make  it.  But  your  ignorance  of  futurity  should  urge  you  to  seek  preparedness 
for  the  events  that  will  befall  you,  whatever  they  may  be.  You  ought  not,  indeed, 
to  conjecture  new  and  unusual  circumstances  in  which  it  is  possible  that  you  may  be 
placed,  and  to  distract  your  thoughts  from  present  duties,  by  considering  what  in  all 
probability  you  would  do,  were  these  conjectures  to  be  realised ;  for  the  grace,  or 
Divine  assistance,  which  the  Christian  is  encouraged  to  ask,  is  grace  for  present 
need,  and  not  present  grace  for  future  supposed  necessities.  Still,  however,  there  is 
a  state  of  habitual  preparedness  for  everything  that  may  occur  in  his  future 
life,  which  it  is  of  the  highest  importance  for  you  to  possess.  Now,  there  is  a  two- 
fold preparedness  for  death  which  you  should  desire  to  possess.  The  first  is  a  pre- 
paredness as  to  state,  which  imparts  a  title  to  eternal  blessedness.  And  the  second 
is  a  preparedness  as  to  character,  which  fits  or  capacitates  for  the  enjoyment  of 
eternal  blessedness.     III.  Look  upward  to  God,  in  connection  both  with  the 

RETROSPECT  OF  THE  PAST,  AND  WITH  THE  ANTICIPATION  OF  THE  FUTURE.     1.  "With 

self-dedication.  Cherish  a  sincere  desire  and  resolution  to  have  Jehovah  for  your 
God.  Enter  now  into  covenant  with  Him,  if  you  have  not  hitherto  done  so  ;  and  if 
in  past  times  you  have  chosen  Him  to  be  your  God,  renew  your  solemn  engagement 
to  Him.  2.  With  confession  of  sin,  and  engagement  to  holiness.  Let  your  contem- 
plation of  the  past  prompt  to  an  humble  acknowledgment  of  the  greatness  and  inex- 
cusableness  of  the  offences  by  which  you  have  provoked  the  Divine  displeasure,  and 
let  the  anticipation  of  the  future  be  accompanied  with  sincere  resolutions  of  new 
obedience.     3.  With  prayer  for  forgiveness  and  needed  grace.    Ask  God  in  His  great 


82S 


CHAP.  XI.]  DEUTERONOMY, 

mercy  to  pardon  the  sins  of  the  past  year,  and  to  grant  to  you  that  assistance  which 
will  enable  you  to  avoid  these  sins  during  the  year  that  has  commenced.  4.  With 
gratitude  and  confidence.  While  you  cherish  thankfulness  to  God  for  the  goodness 
which  He  has  manifested  to  you  during  the  past  year,  cherish  also  reliance  on  His 
kindness  and  care  for  the  year  that  is  to  come.     (Z).  Duncan. ) 

Vers.  16,  17.  Take  heed  .  .   .  that  your  heart  be  not  deceived.— i2e?z>wn  no 
humbug:— I.  Let  us  not  be  deceived  in  our  ideas  about  God.     1.  Let  us  not 
be  deceived  in  thinking  that  our  heavenly  Father  is  partly  good  and  partly  bad. 
2.  Let  not  your  heart  be  deceived  in  thinking  that  God  cannot  pardon  the  one  who 
supposes  himself  or  herself  to  be  the  worst.     We  all  do  wrong,  in  some  sense  or 
another ;  and  when  the  thought  of  our  sin  weighs  down  our  hearts,  let  us  feel 
persuaded  that  God  can  forgive  us.    But  do  not  mistake  His  pardon  by  thinking  that 
when  He  forgives  us,  there  is  an  end  of  it.   Here  is  a  careless  weaver  at  work,  throw- 
ing the  shuttle  containing  the  weft.     When  she  has  got  half  through  the  warp,  she 
finds  she  has  made  an  error  in  the  pattern,  and  when   the  overlooker  unwinds 
the  piece  he  discovers  the  flaw  running  through  the  whole.     Well,  what  is  to 
be  done  ?    She  says,  "  0,  do  forgive  me  ! "    He  replies,  "  Certainly  I  will ;  but  you 
know  it  must  be  undone."     It  is  weary  work  undoing  a  web  of  long  threads  ;  but 
nobody  would  buy  that  piece  as  it  is.    So  the  weaver  begins  with  the  last  thread  and 
pulls  it  out  from  side  to  side  and  begins  again.    Likewise,  though  the  Lord  forgives 
us,  we  must  undo  the  bad  life.   As  the  kindly  overlooker  stands  beside  the  weaver, 
saying,   "Let  me  help  you,"  so  the  Lord  stands  by  us  to  help  us  to  amend  the 
tangled  web  of  our  life.     While  God  forgives  us  and  inspires  our  heart,  the  rectifi- 
cation of  what  is  wrong  must,  however,  be  our  own  act.    We  must  undo  our  bad  life 
by  beginning  afresh.     IL  Do  not  be  deceived  in  tour  views  concerning 
religion.     Religion  is  not  a  theory  ;  it  is  the  living  spirit  of  usefulness.     Religion 
that  does  not  inspire  us  to  be  pure  ourselves  and  useful  to  others  is  not  the 
true  Christian  religion  ;  it  is  a  humbug.     Religion  will  comfort  your  own  heart  and 
make  you  a  blessing  wherever  you  go.     WhUe  it  teaches  you  to  fight  against  your 
evil  propensities,  it  trains  you  to  be  kind-hearted  at  home  and  peaceable-minded 
abroad.     In  leading  you  down  the  steps  of  true  humility,  it  exalts  you  to   the 
noblest  manhood  ;  and  while  constraining  you  to  surrender  your  will  to  the  Christ- 
spirit,  it  gives  you  the  glorious  power  of  God-likeness.     A  minister  was  on  one 
occasion  preaching  on  peaceableness,  having  special  reference  to  Messrs.  Pincher  and 
Stiggins,  two  of  his  deacons  who  had  long  been  at  daggers'  point.     Such  was 
his  faithful  earnestness  that  the  whole  congi-egation  was  moved,  and  when  the  bene- 
diction was  pronounced,  Mr.  Pincher  went  across  the  chapel  to  the  other,  and  with 
tears  in  his  eyes,  remarked,  "  Brother  Stiggins,  after  such  a  sermon  there  must  be 
peace  between  us.     Now,  I  can't  give  in,  so  you  must !"    The  other  replied,  "Well, 
Brother  Pincher,  if  you  won't  give  in,  I'm  blessed  if  I  will !  "     You  see,  they  were 
religious  in  theory  but  not  in  practical  life.     III.  We  should  not  be  deceived  in 
our  thoughts  about  the  invisible  world  called  heaven  and  hell.     If  you 
have  good  things  in  this  world,  and  do  not  care  for  the  destitute,  you  cannot  have 
good  things  in  the  other  world.  ( W.  Birch.)      A  caution  against  deception:—!.  An 
evil  anticipated.     That  of  having  the  heart  deceived.     1.  The  scantiness  and 
imperfection  of  human  knowledge.     2.  The  deceitfulness  of  the  heart.     3.  The 
deceitfulness  of  sin.     4.  The  deceitfulness  of  the  world.     5.  The  deceitfulness  of  the 
devil.     Such  are  the  reasons  we  have  for  believing  that  our  hearts  may  be  deceived. 
But  the  text  assumes  that  this  deception  is  an  evil  pregnant  with  very  pernicious 
consequences.     And  this  appears  from  the  consideration,  that  those  whose  hearts  are 
deceived  are  involved  in  a  state  of  the  most  palpable  error.     What  tradesman  would 
wish  to  make  errors  in  his  accounts  ?  What  scholar  would  not  guard  against  error  in 
his  sums?    But  these  errors  are  trivial,  when  compared  to  the  grievous  error  in 
which  those  are  involved  whose  hearts  are  deceived  concerning  their  salvation  and 
their  God.    Nor  is  this  all ;  those  whose  hearts  are  deceived,  are  exposed  to  extreme 
danger.   II.  The  caution  urged  against  this  deception.     "Take  heed  to  your- 
selves,   &c.     1.  Be  alive  to  a  sense  of  your  extreme  danger.     Let  us  consider  what 
we  are— how  deeply  fallen  !     Let  us  weigh  well  our  circumstances,  dangers,  and 
enemies  ;  this  will  lay  the  foundation  for  caution  and  circumspection.     2.  Seek  for 
the  illuminating  and  sanctifying  influences  of  the  Holy  Spirit.   0,  seek  His  influence 
by  fervent,  importunate  prayer.     "Take  heed  to  yomselves."    3.  By  the  constant 
practice  of  self-examination.     4.    By  watching  over    yourselves.     "Watch    and 
pray.       "Be  ye  therefore  sober,  and  watch  unto  prayer."     "Watch  thou  in  all 


324  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xi. 

things."    Watchfulness  will  lead  you  to  keep  a  strict  guard  over  your  thoughts, 
words,  actions.     {Sketches  of  Four  Hundred  Sermons.) 

Ver.  18.  Lay  up  these  my  wor^.— The  four  places  in  which  a  good  ma/n  keeps  God's 
truth: — ^The  four  places  are  here :  heart,  soul,  hand,  head  ;  or  put  it  another  way  : 
there  are  two  departments  of  the  religious  life — first,  the  truth  of  God,  the  reality  of 
religion  revealed  in  us,  that  is  in  the  heart  and  soul ;  and  second,  the  truth  of  God 
revealed  by  us,  that  is,  by  the  hand  and  by  the  head.  Even  as  it  is  said  there  were 
four  rivers  flowing  from  paradise,  so  also  there  are  four  rivers  which  flow  through  the 
paradise  of  a  good  man's  life.  They  are  love,  truth,  use,  beauty.  1.  The  fiest 
PLAOB  IS  THE  HEART.  1.  Lay  up  God's  words  like  treasure  in  a  chest ;  they  are  the 
family  plate  of  believers,  the  heirlooms  of  the  household  of  faith.  2.  Like  books  in 
a  library,  ready  for  reference.  "We  cannot  read  all  books  at  once  ;  we  cannot  read  the 
whole  Bible  at  one  time,  it  is  neither  necessary  nor  desirable.  In  a  very  large 
library  well  selected,  it  may  be  thought  there  are  no  books  useless,  every  book  has  its 
place  and  worth,  and  may  be  referred  to  again  and  agaiu  ;  but  it  is  laid  up  on  the 
shelf  against  the  time.  3.  Like  clothes  in  a  wardrobe,  ready  for  all  weathers  :  for 
summer's  sunshine,  and  for  winter's  storms.  The  truth  of  God  should  be  the  garment 
of  the  soul.  4.  Like  conserves  of  precious  fruit,  gathered  in  the  time  of  plenty  to  be 
eaten  in  the  snow  time  of  winter  scarcity  ;  as  of  Mary,  the  mother  of  our  Lord,  we 
read,  "  She  kept  all  these  sayings  and  pondered  them,"  she  laid  them  up  for  love  to 
brood  over.  5.  Like  knowledge  hidden  but  not  lost.  It  does  not  follow  always  that 
what  does  not  appear  does  not  exist.  A  capable  captain  on  shore  is  not  always  tell- 
ing you  how  he  would  manage  a  ship  in  difficulties  ;  an  accomplished  musician  may 
be  sitting  quite  still,  and  saying  nothing  of  the  art  he  loves  and  of  which  he  knows 
so  much  ;  but  in  both  of  these,  and  many  such  men,  the  knowledge  only  needs  the 
occasion  ;  it  is  there.  6.  Lay  them  up  in  the  heart  as  guides.  We  are  not  always 
studying  the  map,  but  if  we  desire  to  know  a  country,  it  is  useful  to  have  it ;  and 
these  words  are  for  use,  meditation,  and  memory.  7.  In  the  heart :  not  like  misers' 
hoards,  but  like  bankers'  gold,  which  turns  into  capital,  and  is  not  only  wealth 
itself,  but  a  means  of  creating  more.  II.  The  second  place  is  the  soul.  1.  The 
soul  is  the  seat  of  thought  or  understanding.  2.  The  soul  is  the  seat  and  place  of 
mind-life.  3.  The  soul  is  the  seat  of  conviction,  and  conviction  is  mental  activity 
and  independence.  III.  And  now  the  relations  of  the  text  change  ;  and  this  third 
head  brings  us  to  the  second  department.  I  said  at  the  first,  those  two  places 
to  which  I  have  referred  speak  of  the  truth  of  God  revealed  in  your  heart  and  soul 
— refer  to  the  moral  and  mental  power  of  man.  Now  in  this  third  particular 
religion  is  brought  into  notice ;  it  is  the  truth  of  God  revealed  by  ns,  "  therefore 

SHALL  YE  BIND  THESE  WORDS  FOR  A  SIGN  UPON  YOUR  HAND."      I  SUppOSe,  that  is  as 

much  as  to  say,  realise  them  in  your  life.  Religion  is  for  use,  fuel  is  for  fire,  wood 
cut  down  is  to  be  used,  bricks  are  to  build,  cloth  is  for  clothes,  religion  is  for  life.  If 
you  have  any  religion,  use  it.  Some  years  ago  there  was  a  sect  of  people  called  the 
Rosicrucians ;  they  were  a  very  remarkable  people.  It  was  said  of  them  that 
they  had  discovered  the  principle  of  an  ever-burning  flame  ;  but  then  nobody  was 
able  to  see  it ;  the  singularity  of  the  lamp  was,  that  it  only  shed  its  lustre  in  vaults, 
in  closely  sealed  and  concealed  tombs.  I  do  not  so  much  doubt  the  discovery,  as  I 
deny  the  use  of  such  a  flame  ;  open  the  door,  it  was  said,  and  instantly  the  light  was 
extinguished.  Why,  whatever  is  the  use  of  such  a  light  as  that — a  light  that 
nobody  ever  sees  ?  And  so  it  is  with  the  religion  of  some  people  ;  if  they  have  got  any, 
they  keep  it  all  to  themselves  as  in  a  vault  or  a  tomb.  *'  Therefore  bind  these  words 
as  a  sign  upon  the  hand."  1.  Like  a  glove,  on  the  hand  for  defence.  The  hedger 
and  ditcher  tears  up  many  a  weed,  and  encounters  fearlessly  many  a  prickly  thorn 
with  his  rough  glove,  which  he  would  be  fearful  to  grapple  with  his  ungloved  hand. 
2.  Like  a  gauntlet,  as  a  sign  of  challenge.  3.  Like  a  tool,  an  implement  of  labour, 
something  to  work  with,  to  build  with.  4.  Like  a  sword.  IV.  The  head.  ' '  Lay 
up  these  words  in  the  heart,  that  they  may  be  a  frontlet  to  the  eye,"  that  is,  before 
you  ;  what  you  possess  you  will  profess ;  in  a  word,  avow  the  Word  ;  do  not  be 
ashamed  of  it.  On  the  other  hand,  do  not  make  profession  of  it  before  you  possess 
it.  Thus — 1.  These  words  are  to  be  a  source  of  pride  ;  for  what  is  worn  on  the  head, 
or  between  the  eyes,  is  usually  a  source  of  pride,  or  a  manifestation  of  it.  Be  proud 
then,  not  of  yourself,  of  your  attainments,  but  of  that  which  has  been  conferred  upon 
you  in  the  possession  of  these  words.  2.  As  frontlets  between  the  eyes,  for  this 
implies  dignity,  giving  ornament,  rank,  elevation  ;  so  it  ought  to  be  if  these  words 
are  laid  up  in  heart  and  soul  and  are  manifested  in  the  life]  they  will  be  like 


325 


CHAP.  XL]  DEUTERONOMY. 

an  ornament  of  grace  to  the  head,  and  chains  about  the  neck  ;  they  will  be  wreathed 
into  a  coronet,  diadem,  a  tiara,  a  crown— all  these  a  e  worn  on  the  head  •  and 
I  cannot  imagine  religion  really  possessed  without  its  giving  beauty,  some  royalty 
and  elevation  to  character,  something  that  alike  dignifies  person  and  speech. 
3.  Ihat  they  may  be  as  frontlets  between  your  eyes,  that  they  may  be  a  source  of 
protection.  Wear  them  as  helmets  are  worn,  like  that  of  which  we  read  "  for  a 
helmet  the  hope  of  salvation."  And  is  not  this  also  in  the  words  of  God  ?  for  they 
constitute  not  only  the  ornament  or  character,  but  its  defence  too,  as  it  is  written 
"Thou  through  Thy  commandments  hast  made  me  wiser  than  my  enemies  for  they 
are  ever  with  me."  These  are  the  principles  of  a  religious  life— these  are  the  prin- 
ciples which  the  great  Hebrew  lawgiver  beheld  as  lying  at  the  foundation  of  all  pros- 
perous states,  and  aU  truly  noble  personal  character.  {The  Preacher's  Lantern  ) 
JntelledvMl  religion :— Yon  cannot  read  this  Book  without  perceiving  that  Moses 
delivers  himself  with  the  energy  and  affection  of  one  who  knew  tliat  though 
his  strength  was  unabated  and  his  eye  not  dimmed,  he  had  but  few  days  to  remain 
upon  earth,  and  who  therefore  desired  to  gather  into  a  parting  address  whatever  was 
most  calculated  to  arrest  the  attention  and  confirm  Israel  in  loyalty  to  Jehovah 
And  if  we  attach  a  more  than  ordinary  interest  to  the  last  words  of  distinguished 
individuals,  ought  we  not  to  listen  with  a  reverent  attention  to  the  lawgiver  with 
whom  God  had  spoken  face  to  face,  whilst  in  the  thought  of  a  speedy  dissolution  he 
pours  forth  lessons,  warns,  and  exhorts  ?  Now,  we  believe  that  in  our  own  day 
perhaps  more  than  in  any  other,  there  is  a  risk  of  men  being  satisfied  with  a  merely 
intellectual  religion.  Undoubtedly  the  character  of  the  age  wiil  tell  upon  the  character 
of  the  religion  of  the  age,  and  a  mere  head  knowledge  of  Christianity  will  satisfy 
many  of  the  admirers  and  cultivators  of  inteUect.  And  besides  this  possible  case  of 
surrendering  to  religion  an  intellectual  homage,  in  which,  from  the  beginning  to  the 
end  the  heart  has  no  share,  we  believe  that  with  those  who  are  really  converted  the 
head  very  often  outruns  the  heart,  and  that  many  truths  are  acknowledged  which 
are  not  at  all  felt.     I.  Now,  let  it  be  distinctly  observed,  that  there  is  a  great 

PROVINCE   FOR  THE   UNDERSTANDING  AS   WELL   AS   FOR  THE   AFFECTIONS    IN    THE 

MATTER  OF  TRUE  RELIGION.  It  is  the  busincss  of  reasou  to  scrutinise  the  claims  of 
the  bible  to  the  being  received  as  inspired  ;  and  there  can  be  no  proper  place  for  the 
exercise  of  faith  until  there  be  in  some  shape  this  exercise  of  reason  I  can 
never  ask  a  n.an  to  believe  that  the  Bible  is  God's  Word,  except  as  the  result 
of  a  pamstaking  inquiry ;  but  when  once  this  inquiry  has  be^n  made,  when 
once  the  conclusion  has  been  arrived  at,  that  the  Bible  is  inspired,  then  indeed 
we  expect  of  a  man  that  he  prostrate  his  reason  before  the  disclosures  of  the  Book' 
and  that,  whenever  these  disclosures  surpass  his  comprehension,  he  give  them  that 
unhesitating  admission  which  is  due  to  the  confessed  fact  that  they  are  communica- 
tions from  God.  And  over  and  above  this  employment  of  the  understanding  in 
determining  the  evidence  of  the  Volume,  and  therefore  the  veracity  of  the  doctrines 
a  man  is  to  read  Scripture  with  just  the  same  endeavour  to  gain  a  clear  and  intel- 
ligent acquaintance  with  its  statements  which  he  would  make  in  perusing  an 
ordinary  book.  There  is  no  fault  in  the  effort;  to  comprehend  whatever  comes 
within  the  range  of  a  finite  comprehension  ;  the  only  fault  is  in  the  refu.«,ing,  when 
a  point  is  reached  by  which  the  understanding  is  baffled,  to  receive  on  God's  Word 
what  we  cannot  clear  up  by  human  reason.  And  thus  the  intellect  is  to  be  no  idle 
agent  in  religion,  for  a  man  must  know  what  he  is  to  believe  before  he  can  believe 
It.  We  contend  that  faith  cannot  be  in  advance  of  the  understanding  ;  but  we  are 
equally  clear  tl.at  the  understanding  may  often  be  in  advance  of  faith.  We  are  not 
speaking  of  mere  historical  faith,  but  of  that  powerful  principle  which  the  Scrip- 
tures alone  recognise  as  faith  ;  and  we  say  that  faith  cannot  be  in  advance  of  the 
understanding,  for  according  to  the  foregoing  statements,  a  man  must  know  the 
object  of  faith  before  he  can  believe:  he  must  know  that  there  are  Three  Persons 
and  but  One  God.  ere  he  can  believe  a  Trinity  in  Unity.  But  then,  on  the  other 
hand,  the  understanding  may  be  very  far  in  advance  of  the  faith,  for  a  man  may 
have  knowledge  of  a  vast  variety  of  truths,  on  not  one  of  which  is  there  any 
influential  fastening  of  his  belief.  So  that  whilst  there  is  a  kind  of  necessity  that 
the  intellect  possesses  itself  of  doctrines  before  they  can  become  objects  of  faith 
It  by  no  means  follows  that  the  intellect  will  send  them  on  to  the  heart ;  on  th4 
contrary,  it  is  a  thing  of  most  common  occurrence,  that  the  intellect  will  retain 
them  as  merely  speculative  truths,  and  that  the  historical  uninfluential  assent  is 
the  highest  homage  which  they  shall  ever  obtain.  And  our  busines.s  is  to  endeavour 
to  show  you  the  danger  of  this  laying  up  of  religious  truth  within  the  confines  of 


326  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xi. 

the  intellect,  and  the  consequent  importance  of  attempting  all  obedience  to  the 
precept  of  our  text.  There  is  a  danger  to  those  who  are  unconverted ;  there  is  a 
danger  also  to  those  who  are  converted.  We  begin  with  the  former,  and  we  declare 
that  the  parties  on  whom  it  seems  hardest  to  make  a  moral  impression  are  those  who 
are  thoroughly  well  acquainted  with  the  letter  of  the  Gospel.  If  there  be  one  of  you 
who  knows  thoroughly  well  the  whole  plan  of  salvation,  but  who  has  nothing  more 
than  an  intellectual  religion,  we  should  like  to  look  over  what  may  be  called  the 
elements  of  his  knowledge,  and  see  whether  he  can  stand  acquitted  of  the  charge 
of  hindering  his  own  conversion.  It  is  a  part  of  your  knowledge  that  it  is  your 
duty  to  detach  yourselves  from  those  habits  and  associations  which  are  opposed  to 
God's  Word.  Do  you  labour  to  effect  this  detachment  ?  You  have  the  intellectual 
persuasion  that  you  must  be  lost,  unless  Christ  heal  your  moral  disease.  Do  you 
act  as  you  would  do,  if  you  had  the  intellectual  persuasion  that  you  must  speedily 
die  unless  you  betake  yourself  to  this  or  that  physician  ?  We  are  sure  that  if 
tliere  were  anything  of  candour  in  your  replies,  they  would  furnish  an  ample 
demonstration  that  man  is  himself  chargeable  with  detaining  truth  in  the 
intellect,  when  it  ought  to  go  forward  to  the  heart,  and  that  it  is  simply  through 
his  not  making  that  use  of  religious  knowledge  which  he  would  and  does  make 
use  of  any  other  sort  of  knowledge,  that  he  fails  to  become  spiritually  as  well  as 
intellectually  a  Christian.  Now,  up  to  this  point  we  have  confined  our  remarks  to 
the  case  of  unconverted  men  ;  and  it  may  be  thought  at  first  sight  that  intellectual 
religion  can  never  be  attributed  to  the  converted  ;  yet,  if  you  examine  with  a  little 
attention  you  will  perceive,  that  in  respect  of  every  man  there  is  a  likelihood  of 
the  understanding  outstripping  the  affections,  so  that  many  truths  may  be  held 
by  the  intellect  which  are  not  known  in  the  experience.  Now,  look,  for  example,  at 
the  priesthood  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  It  is  not  possible  that  a  renewed  man 
should  fail  to  give  his  unqualified  assent  to  the  truth  that  the  death  of  Christ  was 
an  expiation  for  sin,  so  that  he  will  unreservedly  hold  the  doctrine  of  the  atone- 
ment. But  all  this,  you  observe,  is  purely  intellectual.  The  truth  may  be  thus 
held,  but  yet  held  only  in  the  understanding  ;  and  tlie  question  is,  whether  the 
believer  lives  in  the  daily  experience  of  this  truth — whether  as  fast  as  sin  is  com- 
mitted it  is  carried  to  the  blood  of  the  atonement,  and  whether,  therefore,  the 
opening  of  a  fountain  for  human  defilement  is  a  fact  which  has  only  gained  the 
assent  of  the  intellect,  or  one  in  which  the  heart  feels  a  deep  and  abiding  concern. 
And  thus,  again,  there  must  be  with  every  real  Christian  an  intellectual  holding 
of  the  truth,  that  we  are  to  live  each  moment  in  a  realised  dependence  upon  God  ; 
that  we  are  to  cast  our  burdens  upon  the  Lord,  that  we  are  to  refer  to  Him  our 
every  care,  our  every  want,  our  every  anxiety.  But  we  want  to  know  whether,  in 
respect  of  the  providence  of  God,  as  well  as  of  the  priesthood  of  Christ,  the  intellect 
is  not  often  in  advance  of  the  experience.  There  may  be  an  unqualified  admission 
by  the  understanding  of  the  noble  tnith,  that  not  a  sparrow  falls  without  our 
Heavenly  Father.  But  unless  a  man  continually  act  on  the  admission — unless, 
indeed,  he  carry  his  every  concern  to  the  Almighty,  so  as  to  ask  His  counsel  in 
each  difficulty,  His  support  in  each  trial.  His  guardianship  in  each  danger,  why, 
we  contend  that  the  understanding  has  outstripped  the  heart — in  other  words, 
that  the  intellect  is  in  advance  of  the  experience.  And  there  are,  we  suppose,  but 
few  Christians  who  will  deny  that  they  are  chargeable  with  this  inequality  of  pace 
in  the  understanding  and  the  heart.     II.  We  will  just  show  you  what  we  think 

THE  CONSEQUENCES  OF  THE  INTELLECT  BEING  IN  ADVANCE  OF  THE  EXPERIENCE.       If 

you  know  a  doctrine  whose  power  and  preciousness  you  do  not  feel — and  this  is, 
in  other  words,  the  outstripping  of  the  heart  by  the  understanding — then  you  receive 
that  doctrine  only  as  an  unconverted  man  receives  it,  and  you  must  be  chargeable 
even  in  a  greater  degree  with  its  detention  in  the  intellect,  when  it  ought  to  be  sent 
on  to  the  affections  ;  and  there  must  be  produced  something  of  the  like  effect  in 
two  cases.  You  strip  the  doctrine  of  energy  by  allowing  it  to  remain  inert  in  the 
understanding ;  you  reduce  it  into  a  dead  letter,  and  thus  you  grieve  the  Holy 
Spirit,  who  intended  it  as  an  engine  by  which  you  might  carry  on  the  conflict  with 
the  world,  the  flesh,  and  the  devil ;  and  we  need  not  tell  you  that  what  grieves  the 
Spirit  must  sensibly  affect  your  well-being  as  Christians.  Besides,  in  all  your 
religious  intercourse  with  others,  the  probability  is  that  your  conversation  will 
take  its  measure  from  your  knowledge  and  not  from  your  experience.  Take  the 
case  of  a  preacher.  The  preacher,  and  we  suppose  it  to  be  his  duty,  will  press 
upon  his  congregation  the  amount  of  truth  which  is  known  to  himself,  whether  or 
not  it  be  felt  by  himself.     When  I  speak  up  to  the  extent  of  my  knowledge,  if 


XI.]  DEUTERONOMY.  327 


that  knowledge  outruns  my  experience,  I  represent  myself  as  attaching  value  to 
certain  truths  of  which,  after  all,  I  have  not  tasted  the  preeiousness.  And  what 
is  this  but  representing  myself  as  a  more  thorough  believer  than  I  am  ?  And 
what  again  is  this  but  the  playing  the  hypocrite,  though  I  may  have  no  distinct 
purpose  of  palming  a  false  estimate  upon  others?  And  if  the  excess  of  know- 
ledge over  experience  thus  makes  it  almost  certain  that  in  attempting  to  instruct 
others  we  shall  virtually  be  hypocrites,  you  have  only  to  remember  how  hateful 
is  hypocrisy  in  every  degree,  and  under  every  disguise,  to  the  Almighty,  and 
you  will  have  no  difficulty  in  discerning  the  signal  danger  of  allowing  the 
intellect  to  outstrip  the  heart.  It  is  true,  you  may  say,  we  will  avoid  the 
danger  by  abstaining  from  all  endeavour  to  instruct,  but  you  will  thus  again 
be  neglecting  a  positive  duty — and  is  not  this  perilous?  You  may  say,  "We 
will  never  speak  beyond  our  experience,"  and  this  will  secure  us  against  the 
alleged  risk  ;  but  since  your  experience  comes  not  up  to  your  knowledge,  you 
v\'C'uld  thus  be  guilty  of  keeping  back  truths  which  God  has  given  to  be  advanced, 
and  you  would  hardly  then  think  that  the  danger  which  you  incur  would  be  less 
than  the  danger  you  avoid.  If,  therefore,  any  one  of  you  as  a  true  Christian 
values  peace,  then  his  constant  aim  will  be,  that  whatever  of  religious  truth  finds 
its  way  into  the  understanding  may  be  sent  onward  at  once  to  the  affections, 
and  that  thus  the  precept  of  Moses  maybe  sedulously  obeyed — "Therefore  shall 
ye  lay  up  these  my  words  in  your  heart  and  in  your  soul."  {H.  Melvill,  B.D.) 
Attention  to  the  Scriptures: — Attention  to  the  Word  of  God  is  strongly  urged  ujion 
the  Israelites  in  my  text.  At  that  time,  however,  only  a  small  part  of  that  Word— 
the  five  books  of  Moses — had  been  given  by  God  to  man.  How  much  more  strongly, 
then,  is  our  attention  called  to  the  Holy  Scriptures,  now  that  every  part  of  the  Bible, 
containing  the  will  of  God,  is  made  known  to  us  !  I.  We  have  the  reason  given 
why  we  are  to  attend  to  the  words  of  the  Bible,  nami  ly,  because  they  are  the  words  of 
God  ;  THEKEFORE  SHALL  YE  LAY  UP  THESE  My  WORDS.  If  an  earthly  king  were  to 
write  a  book  for  his  subjects,  how  eagerly  would  it  be  read  !  In  proportion  to  his 
authority  would  be  the  attention  paid  to  what  he  wrote,  especially  if  he  were  a 
king  from  whom  his  subjects  had  received  great  blessings,  and  who  had  no  other 
object  in  view  than  their  real  good.  What  attention,  then,  ought  to  be  paid  to  the 
Bible  !  It  is  the  word  of  the  King  of  kings.  It  also  contains  treasures  worth  more 
than  thousands  of  worlds,  even  the  Gospel  of  salvation  to  perishing  sinners.  Yet, 
alas  !  nothing,  in  general,  is  more  neglected  than  the  Bible.  Or,  if  it  is  read,  it  is 
only  in  a  formal  manner,  as  a  matter  of  duty,  undertaken  in  order  to  work  out  a 
supposed  righteousness.  The  Bible  must  be  searched  into  as  for  hidden  treasures, 
by  all  that  are  really  anxious  for  the  salvation  of  their  souls ;  and  the  glorious 
truths  it  contains  must  be  laid  up  in  the  storehouse  of  the  heart.  II.  We  are  com- 
manded not  only  to  lay  up  the  Word  of  God  in  our  own  hearts,  but  also  to  teach 
IT  TO  THE  RISING  GENERATION.  "  And  ye  shall  teach  them  your  children."  We 
have  here  another  melancholy  proof  of  the  blindness  of  the  natural  man.  We 
see  children  taught,  indeed,  but  not  taught  the  Word  of  God.  We  see  boys 
taught  to  seek  after  the  good  things  of  this  life.  We  see  girls  taught  to  adorn 
their  perishing  bodies.  But  we  look  around,  almost  in  vain,  for  those  who  teach 
their  children  the  words  of  the  Lord.  All,  however,  to  whom  the  Word  of  God  is 
precious,  should  teach  it  to  the  rising  generation.  III.  The  next  command  given 
is  to  speak  of  the  words  of  God,  when  thou  sittest  in  thine  house,  and  when 

THOU  WALKEST  by  THE  WAY,  WHEN  THOU  LIEST  DOWN,  AND  WHEN  THOU  RISEST  UP. 

Alas !  there  is,  in  general,  no  subject  so  completely  banished  from  conversation  as 
religion.  To  hear  men  in  their  common  discourse,  we  might  suppose  that  God 
had  commanded  His  creatures  never  to  talk  of  His  words.  And,  surely,  if  the 
command  were  given  to  the  Israelites,  it  is  urged  with  far  greater  force  upon  us,  in 
proportion  as  the  reason  is  stronger.  The  Israelites  could  only  talk  of  the  wonders 
of  creation,  of  the  history  of  their  forefathers,  and  of  the  law  of  Moses — that  law 
which,  from  its  very  holiness,  is  a  law  of  sin  and  death  to  fallen  man.  But,  beside 
all  this,  we  can  talk  of  the  wonders  of  redemption,  and  of  the  gracious  dealings  of 
the  Lord  with  His  people  in  all  ages.  IV.  But  still  further,  the  words  of  God 
should  always  be  had  in  remembrance.  The  text  commands  the  Israelites  to 
WRITE  His  words  upon  the  doorposts  of  THEIR  HOUSES.  There  might  be  some 
reason  for  this,  when  printing  was  unknown,  and  therefore  copies  of  the  whole  Word 
of  God  scarce — but  that  reason  exists  not  now.  Through  the  mercy  of  God  tlie 
whole  of  His  Word  may  now  be  in  the  hands  of  every  one  who  wishes  it.  We 
therefore  must  enter  into  the  spirit  of  the  text.     We  should  have  the  precepts  and 


828  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  xr. 

promises  of  the  Bible  fastened  to  the  gates  of  our  hearts,  to  direct  our  actions, 
words,  and  thoughts.  V.  In  the  close  of  our  text  we  are  reminded  of  the  encour- 
agement given  to  obey  the  command— That  your  days  may  be  multiplied, 

AND  THE  DAYS  OF  YOUR  CHILDREN,  IN  THE  LAND  WHICH  THE  LORD  SWARE  UNTO 
YOUR  FATHERS  TO  GIVE  THEM,  AS  THE  DAYS  OF  HEAVEN  UPON  EARTH.   Those  who 

govern  their  lives  by  the  Word  of  God  are  the  only  really  happv  people  in  this 
world.  Faith  in  Christ  delivers  believers  from  the  hard  service  and  bondage  of  thia 
world,  and  leads  them  into  the  glorious  liberty  of  the  Gospel  of  Jesus  Christ. 
[H.  Gipps,  LL.B.) 

Vers.  19-21.  Teacli  them,  your  childreiL — Religious  education: — I.  This  is  thb 
SIMPLEST  NOTION  OF  EDUCATION,  for  Undoubtedly  he  is  perfectly  educated  who  is 
taught  all  the  will  of  God  concerning  him,  and  enabled  through  life  to  execute  it. 
And  he  is  not  well  educated  who  does  not  know  the  will  of  God,  or,  knowing  it, 
has  received  no  help  in  his  education  towards  being  inclined  and  enabled  to  do  it. 

II.  The  special  thing  meant  to  be  taught  to  the  Israelites  was  A  knowledge  OF 
God's  statutes  and  ordinances,  not  the  Ten  Commandmeuts  only,  nor  all  the 
early  history  of  their  forefathers  contained  in  the  Book  of  Genesis,  but  God's  law 
given  to  them  His  people,  His  will  respecting  them  moially  and  politi'ally,  His 
will  with  regard  to  all  the  relations  of  private  and  public  life  ;  all  this  was  laid 
down  in  their  law  ;  all  this  was  carefully  to  be  taught  them  in  their  youth,  that  so, 
in  whatsoever  line  of  life  they  might  be  thrown,  or  whatever  questions  might  be 
agitated,  they  might  know  what  was  God's  will,  and  therefore  might  know  and  do 
their  own  duty.  III.  For  the  Israelites  the  Bible  contained  both  tlie  rule  and  it« 
application  ;  for  us  it  contains  only  the  rule.  In  order,  therefore,  to  instinct 
our  children  fully  in  God's  will  and  enable  them  to  execute  it,  we  must  bring  in 
some  other  knowledge  and  other  studies,  not  to  be  found  in  the  Bible,  in  order  to 
make  up  for  that  part  of  the  Bible  which  gave  this  instruction  to  the  Israelites,  but 
which  gives  it  us  no  longer.  And  hence  it  is  clear  that  neither  is  the  Bible  alone 
sufficient  to  give  a  complete  religious  education,  nor  is  it  possible  to  teach  history 
and  moral  and  political  philosophy  with  no  reference  to  the  Bible  without  giving 
an  education  that  should  be  anti-religious.  For  in  the  one  case  the  rule  is  givea 
without  the  application  ;  in  the  other  the  application  is  derived  from  a  wrong  rule. 
{T.  Arnold^  D.D.)  Parents  the  divinely  appointed  teachers  of  their  families : — • 
I.  The  light  in  which  we  ought  to  regard  the  family  relation.  Parents 
should  never  forget  that  the  family  is  the  school  in  which  they  are  training  the  men 
and  women  of  the  future  age,  from  whom  the  world  will  gain  its  votaries,  the  church 
its  members,  heaven  its  redeemed  spirits,  and  hell  its  victims,  and  that  their 
examples  are  making  impressions  which  will  extend  their  blissful  or  baneful  influ- 
ence on  their  eternal  destiny.  II.  The  teachers  and  their  qualifications. 
Parents  are  constituted  the  teachers  of  their  children  by  the  express  appointment  of 
God,  and  any  arrangement  that  sets  aside  this  appointment  can  neither  be  wise 
nor  safe.  As  God  has  thus  clearly  defined  who  are  to  be  the  teachers,  so  He 
has,  in  the  text,  no  less  clearly  pointed  out  what  are  to  be  their  qualifications. 

III.  The  matter  and  the  manner  of  the  teaching  which  God  has  enjoined. 
Surely  nothing  is  so  worthy  of  engaging  the  first  recollections  of  the  mind  as 
''the  words  of  God,"  nor  anything  so  important  as  to  have  the  heart — before  it  is 
immersed  in  the  cares  of  life — fully  brought  under  the  guidance  of  God,  the  grace 
and  love  of  Christ,  and  the  attractions  of  heaven.  And  to  attain  this  should  elicit 
the  daily  efforts  and  the  daily  prayers  of  the  Christian  parent,  as  he  sits  in  his 
house,  or  walks  by  the  way,  or  lies  down,  or  rises  up.  IV.  The  happiness  which 
MAY  BE  expected  TO  RESULT  FROM  THIS.  There  are  those  who  would  make  us 
believe  that  these,  and  all  similar  promises  of  a  temporal  nature,  which  we  meet 
with  under  the  Old  Testament  dispensation,  have  no  place  under  the  new.  But  so 
long  as  it  is  true  that  "  in  the  keeping  of  God's  commands  there  is  a  great 
reward,"  and  that  "godliness  is  profitable  unto  all  things,  having  promise  of  the 
life  that  now  is,  as  well  as  of  that  which  is  to  come,"  and  that  there  is  a  natural 
adaptedness  in  a  life  of  piety  to  promote  the  universal  well-being  of  man,  I  cannot 
see  how  such  interpretations  of  Scripture  can  be  according  to  truth.  It  is  quite 
true,  however,  that  the  chief  and  most  glorious  part  of  "the  recompense  of 
reward"  is  spiritual,  and  such  as  can  be  fully  enjoyed  only  in  the  heavenly 
state.  {M.  T.  Adams.)  The  traii^i/ng  of  children: — The  most  powerful 
institution  that  abides  to-day  is  not  the  regal,  nor  the  noble ;  it  ia  not  polit- 
ical economy ;  it  is  not  industry,  nor  is  it  the  Church :   it  is  the  family,  the 


CHAP.  XT.]  DEUTERONOMY.  829 

household.  1.  In  rearing  children,  the  first  step  should  be  in  securing  health  ; 
and  for  this  sake  the  requirement  is  healthy  parents.  Children  that  bear  the 
sins  of  their  fathers  are  not  few,  and  miserable  are  they ;  but  taking  it  for 
granted  that  children  are  bom  with  fair  chances  of  life,  sound  in  every  part, 
and  well-tempered  together,  the  very  first  parental  duty  is  to  secure  for  them, 
from  year  to  year,  air,  exercise,  and  wholesome  food,  that  they  may  grow  up 
healthily.  Under  this  general  head  of  health  parents  need  instruction  against  the 
early  forcing  of  their  children.  See  that  your  children  are  kept  down  to  animal 
conditions,  so  that  the  brain  shall  not  destroy  them.  2.  iNext  to  health  in 
importance  in  the  family,  as  well  as  in  order,  is  obedience.  The  child  is  born  into 
a  world  of  infinite  subordinations,  where  the  business  of  life  itself  is  to  suppress 
one's  self,  and  to  give  way  here  and  there  to  strength,  to  social  arrangements,  to 
law.  There  can,  therefore,  be  nothing  less  wise  in  the  parent,  and  nothing  less 
beneficial  to  the  child,  than  that  questioning,  hesitating  obedience  which  finally 
dragged  into  an  unwilling  submission,  the  child  at  last  yields  ;  but  that  is  family 
government,  as  it  is  seen  in  many  households  ;  and  wherever  you  see  this — especi 
ally  if  you  see  it  in  your  own  house — understand  that  you  are  bringing  up  your 
children  to  disobey  God,  »nd  the  magistrate,  and  their  fellow-men,  by  teaching 
them  to  disobey  you,  or  to  give  only  a  grudging  instead  of  a  cheerful  and  prompt 
obedience.  It  may  be  said  that  this  is  to  break  the  will  of  the  child,  and  that  he 
needs  all  the  will  he  is  possessed  of  with  which  to  fight  his  way  through  life. 
Now  it  is  no  more  breaking  the  will  of  the  child  to  teach  him  to  obey  his  father 
and  mother,  than  it  is  the  breaking  of  the  bones  of  my  arms  to  teach  me  exactly 
how  to  use  them,  or  exactly  how  to  hold  my  hand  to  the  keyboard  of  a  piano.  It 
is  merely  teaching  the  child  how  to  use  his  will ;  and  without  teaching  of  that  kind 
we  are  all  brutes  and  barbarians.  3.  We  are  next  to  consider  that  our  children 
are  not  given  to  us  for  our  accommodation  and  our  pleasure.  They  are  not,  in  one 
sense,  our  own  children ;  they  are  lent  to  us ;  and  no  trust  was  ever  reposed  by 
king,  by  noble,  by  any  human  being  upon  another,  so  august,  and  of  wnich  the 
responsibilities  are  so  tremendous,  as  the  trust  of  a  child  placed  in  the  hands  of 
fallible,  feeble,  erring  men,  to  be  brought  up  for  his  destiny  in  this  life,  and  in 
the  life  which  is  to  come.  These  considerations  reach  backward.  The  laws  of 
taking  care  of  our  children  ought  to  go  back  further  than  the  birth  of  the  child, 
to  antecedent  conditions.  I  do  not  think  that  civilisation  will  ever  take  its  last 
flight,  or  that  religion  will  ever  universally  prevail,  until  physiological  laws  are 
observed  to  the  letter.  4.  Let  me  say  that  I  regard  a  happy  Christian  family, 
consisting  of  wise  parents  and  dutiful  children,  dwelling  together  in  love  as  Eden 
restored.  I  regard  the  development  of  love  in  the  family,  its  impartiality,  its 
pitifulness  to  the  weak,  its  watch  and  care,  its  patience,  its  suffering,  its  power 
to  suff"er,  its  stem  requisition,  its  discrimination  between  right  and  wrong,  its 
endurance  of  pain  for  the  objects  of  its  discipline,  as  the  grandest,  and  as 
the  only  perfect  revelation  of  Divine  moral  government.  {H.  W.  Beecher.) 
Have  the  Word  of  God  ready  for  use: — It  is  a  Word  directive,  explanative, 
consolatory,  inspirational,  redemptive.  It  is  God's  spoken  wisdom  for  man's 
active  guidance.  And  the  wise  man  will  ponder  well  these  Divine  revelations 
before  he  sets  out,  will  get  a  good  grip  of  heaven's  instructions  and  promises 
before  passing  on  to  the  stress  and  strain  of  conflict.  The  heart  has  need  to 
store  such  things  as  these  in  readiness.  They  are  not  easily  or  readily  found  if 
left  at  one  side  till  immediately  wanted.  It  is  an  easier  and  wiser  course  for  your 
railway  official  to  light  up  his  carriages  amid  broad  daylight  and  before  the  train 
starts  than  it  would  be  to  send  a  man  with  flaming  torch  along  the  roof  of  a 
speeding  train  after  it  had  dashed  into  the  darkness  of  a  tunnel.  The  ship  that 
sails  forth  well  equipped  does  not  put  her  lifeboats  in  the  hold  because  the  day  is 
fine — she  carries  them  taut,  furnished,  ready  fitted  for  immediate  use,  prepared 
beforehand  even  down  to  details  for  any  moment's  service.  So  must  we  equip 
ourselves  with  Divine  wisdom  for  life's  voyage.  "  Let  the  Word  of  Christ  dwell 
in  you  richly."  Let  it  be  a  perpetual  remembrance.  Its  interpretation  of  life's 
meaning  and  issue,  its  solution  of  the  ways  of  Providence,  its  new  and  chivalrous 
setting  of  old  moral  obligations,  its  bright-hued  promises,  above  all  its  message  of 
grace  to  the  needy  soul — let  us  take  a  lively  realisation  of  these  truths  with  us. 
(C.  A.  Berry,  D.D.)  Aids  to  memory  required : — The  Hebrew  prophet  anticipated 
the  difficulty  of  attaining  this  Divine  consciousness.  Our  natural  tendency  in 
respect  of  spiritual  verities  is  not  towards  remembrance  but  forgetfulness.  Great 
emotions,  bright  visions,  hours  of  keen  insight,  pass,  leaving  behind  only  a  vague. 


330  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  xi. 

occasional  reminiscence.  We  are  alive  at  so  many  sensuous  points,  and  there 
is  so  much  to  be  alive  to  in  the  intensity  of  our  worldly  life,  that  we  easily 
become  absorbed  in  what  is  passing,  our  thought  of  the  Divine  becomes  meagre, 
spasmodic,  feebly  influential — an  occasional  jerk,  not  a  constant,  steady,  regnant 
force.  Moses  foresaw  this  :  foresaw,  too,  that  the  only  way  to  check  this  and  to 
reverse  it  was  to  turn  the  outward  into  a  ministering  reminder  of  spiritual  things. 
In  the  first  place  he  asked  them  to  associate  everything  in  life  with  the  gracious 
words  of  God,  to  turn  their  surroundings  into  memory  helps,  recalling  to  the 
mind  the  great  lessons  of  heaven.  In  the  next  place,  observing  that  men  best 
learn  what  they  oftenest  teach,  he  directed  them,  in  relation  to  God's  Word,  to 
follow  a  course  of  pupil-teachership,  to  fix  in  themselves  by  imparting  to  others 
the  truths  and  promises  of  grace.  Our  first  step  towards  the  perpetual  remem- 
brance of  Christ  is  to  surround  ourselves  with  memorials  of  Him,  to  put  up  tokens, 
symbols,  writings,  which  shall  recall  past  lessons  and  experiences.  We  must  u.sa 
our  common-sense  in  this  matter.  We  must  give  to  the  soul  at  least  as  many 
helps  as  we  give  to  the  mind  in  our  efforts  to  produce  and  to  fix  great  impres- 
sions. When  I  go  into  a  schoolhouse  I  find  the  wise  teacher  calling  into  tha 
service  of  his  pupils'  memory  every  sense  with  which  they  are  gifted.  He  is  not 
content  to  repeat  a  thing,  nor  even  to  make  it  clear  :  he  seeks  thereafter  to  set 
up  a  sensuous  memorial  of  the  thing  taught.  Now  by  a  rhyme  which  captivates 
the  ear,  now  by  a  picture  or  demonstration  which  masters  the  eye,  he  endeavours 
to  render  permanent  the  instruction  of  the  hour.  Every  surrounding  of  life  is  thus 
turned  into  the  service  of  the  memory.  Things  are  made  vocal  of  ideas.  The  eye 
and  the  ear  are  made  daily  ministers  to  the  intellect  and  the  heart.  Memory  is 
built  up  of  memorials.  Every  Christian  home  should  be  well  furnished  with 
memorial  writings  and  suggestive  memory-helps.  Some  vivid  experience  has  lit 
up  for  you  the  full  meaning  and  graciousness  of  an  old  Scripture  promise. 
Put  up  that  promise  Avhere  it  shall  often  meet  the  eye,  and  through  the  eye 
you  shall  be  able  to  re-awaken  the  soul  to  that  old  and  blessed  experience.  A 
blessed  answer  to  family  prayer  has  saved  your  home  from  disaster,  has  brought 
back  to  you  a  wanderer,  has  delivered  you  from  the  loss  of  members  or  fortune. 
Set  up  in  the  midst  of  your  household  a  monument  of  that  great  answer.  So 
ought  it  to  be  with  all  the  cardinal  truths  and  promises  of  the  Gospel.  But  there 
is  suggested  another  help  to  the  realisation  of  Christ's  Word.  It  is  that  which 
springs  from  teaching  to  others  what  we  ourselves  have  learned.  "Teach 
them  your  children."  {Ibid.)  The  young  should  he  valued: — Value  the 
young.  How  precious  these  germs  are  !  These  spring  buds  are  lovely  to 
look  upon,  but  their  worth  is  greater  than  their  beauty.  An  immortal  life 
is  opening  there;  heed  it  well.  Proprietors  rear  strong  fences  round  young 
trees,  while  they  leave  the  aged  forests  to  take  their  chance.  Permit  not  tlie 
immortal  to  be  twisted  at  the  very  starting  of  its  growth  for  the  want  of  such 
protection  as  it  is  in  your  power  to  afford.  (TT.  Arnot.)  The  mind  of  a. 
child : — The  mind  of  a  child  is  not  like  that  of  a  grown  person,  too  full  and  too 
noisy  to  observe  everything :  it  is  a  vessel  always  ready  to  receive,  and  always 
receiving.  {Mrs.  Child.)  Scriptural  instruction  of  children: — Charles  Dickens 
once  addressed  a  letter  to  his  son  Henry  while  he  was  at  college,  advising  him  to 
keep  out  of  debt  and  confide  all  his  perplexities  to  his  father.  The  letter  con- 
cluded as  follows:  "I  most  strongly  and  affectionately  impress  upon  you  the 
priceless  value  of  the  New  Testament,  and  the  study  of  that  book  as  the  one 
unfailing  guide  in  life.  Deeply  respecting  it,  and  bowing  down  before  the  char- 
acter of  our  Saviour,  you  cannot  go  very  wrong,  and  will  always  preserve  at  heart 
a  true  spirit  of  veneration  and  humility.  Similarly,  I  impress  upon  you  the  habit 
of  saying  a  Christian  prayer  every  night  and  morning.  These  things  have  stood 
by  me  all  through  my  life,  and  remember  that  I  tried  to  render  the  New  Testament 
intelligible  to  you  and  lovable  by  you  when  a  mere  baby.  And  so  God  bless  you." 
That  your  days  may  be  multiplied. — A  long  life  and  a  ha-pi)!)  one : — I.  That 
experimental  godliness  has  a  tendency  to  add  length  of  days  to  man's  life. 
1.  Genuine  religion  engenders  and  fosters  states  of  mind  highly  conducive  to  physical 
health.  2.  Genuine  religion  stimulates  a  practical  regard  to  the  laws  of  human 
health.  II.  That  experimental  godliness  has  a  tendency  to  add  heaven  to  a  man's 
LIFE.  1.  It  gives  him  the  spirit  of  heaven.  2.  It  engages  in  the  service  of  heaven. 
3.  It  introduces  into  the  fellowship  of  heaven.  {Homilist.)  As  the  days  of 
beayen  upon  the  earth. — The  days  of  heaven  upon  the  earth : — The  text  implies  a 
very  deyated  principle,  that  we  should  spend  our  days  on  earth  as  the  days  are  spent 


CHAP.  XL]  DEUTERONOMY,  33I 


by  angels  and  the  spirits  of  the  just  in  heaven.  And,  without  doubt,  men  might 
be  incomparably  happier  than  they  are,  if  they  would.  There  is  no  hindrance  in 
11  i  -^  ^^  "°  obstacle  m  the  Divine  arrangements  ;  but  man  destroys  his  own 
well-bemg,  and  is  ofttimes  miserable,  amid  all  the  opportunities  of  the  sweetest 
peace  and  the  deepest  joy,  and  when  he  might  have  days  of  heaven  upon  the  earth. 
I.  What  are  the  days  of  heaven  ?  "  No  night  there."  1.  In  heaven  they  see 
the  tace  of  God.  Manifestations  of  the  excellence  and  glorv  of  the  Divine  per- 
fections :  satisfying,  felicitous,  transfoiming.  2.  In  heaven  "they  glorify  Christ 
and  celebrate  His  praise.  3.  In  heaven  they  are  full  of  knowledge.  4.  Full  of 
love.  5.  Prompt  and  perfect  in  obedience.  Their  delight  is  in  doing  God's  will  • 
they_  dwell  together  in  perfect  unity.  And  from  this  state  of  mind  and  nature 
unmmgled  satisfaction  flows,  like  Avaters  from  a  fountain.  Deep  and  ineffable 
happiness  is  realised.  The  pulsations  of  their  joy  produce  no  exhaustion,  but  for 
ever  increase  m  pleasantness  and  power.     II.  The  possibility  of  this,  and  the 

DUTY  of  attempting   TO  MAKE  OUR  DAYS  LIKE  THE  DAYS  OF   HEAVEN,  WHILST  WE 

T!¥OTS  EARTH.     1.  And,  first,  I  would  refer  to  the  elements  of  happiness  which 

I    noon   Qlfoo/lTT  ni-.n^iA^J  "D^ ^^i.: il.  - •-•j i       •     i    ,        n    ,t        -.-x^.-V  _ 


you  delight  in  the  complacency  of  God,  be  sure  that  His  favour  will  be  opened 
upon  you  as  the  sun  shining  in  his  strength.     Then,  as  to  glorifying  and  praising 
Christ ;  do  we  not  now  say,'." Unto  Him  that  loved  us,"  &c.?    And  have  we  not 
love  m  exercise  ?    Are  we  not  ready  to  do  the  will  of  God  ?    Do  we  not  dwell  in 
peace  ?    When  the  light  and  fire  of  the  Holy  Ghost  is  given  ;   when  our  best 
passions  are  kindled,  when  we  are  filled  with  the  celestial  communications  and 
communion,  there  is  a  near  resemblance  of  heaven  upon  the  earth.     2.  Let  me 
appeal  to  some  passages  of  Scripture  which  convey  the  same  truth.     The  Gospel 
dispensation  is  the  reign  of  heaven.     It  is  the  ascendency  of  holiness  in  the  heart 
and  mmd.     The  kingdom  of  God  is  within  you,  and  it  consists  of  righteousness 
and  peace,  and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost.     3.  Let  us  advert  to  some  of  the  recorded 
experiences  of  good  men  on  the  subject.     It  has  been  said,  ''  Grace  is  glory  in  the 
bud,  and  religion  in  the  soul  is  the  glory  of  the  soul."     "A  timorous  faith  will 
bring  a  man  safely  to  heaven,  but  a  strong  and  vigorous  faith  will  bring  heaven  to 
us  now,^^     And  I  was  startled  by  this  sentiment :  "  It  is  better  to  be  here  than  in 
heaven.  _     Yes,  so  long  as  it  shall  please  God  it  is  so,  and  to  think  the  contrary 
shows    msubmissiveness    to    His    will    and    discontent    with     His    providential 
arrangements.     III.  How  may  they  be  secured  to  us  ?    1.  Receive  the  Gospel. 
Christ  IS  our  life  ;  if  He  and  the  Father  come  and  abide  in  our  souls,  heaven 
IS  begun.      2.   Settle  the  possibility  of  it  in  your  own  mind.      3.   Observe  the 
ordinances  of  Christ.      4.  Avoid  all  known    causes  of   disquietude.      5.   Main- 
tain   your    self-possession.      Cultivate    tranquility    of    spirit.       6.    Take    care 
of   your    thoughts.      7.    Take    care    of   your    tongue.      8.    Take   care   of   your 
conscience.      9.    Do    not    harass    yourself    concerning    the    future.      10.    Study 
to  be  quiet,    and  to  attend  to  your  own   business.       11.    Do  good   every  day 
%o  some  one,   either  by  example,  instruction,  or  generosity.     {James  Straiten.) 
Meaven  upon  the  earth  .-—In  this  clause  extremes  meet.     Things  that  are  distant  are 
brought  together— "heaven  "  and  "  earth."     1.  We  know  something  of  the  "  days 
...  upon  the  earth."     If  we  told  our  story,  each  would  be  different  from  the 
other  ;  yet  there  would  be  a  wonderful  sameness.     It  would  be  a  story  of  light  and 
shade,  beauty  and  barrenness,  laughter  and  tears,  success  and  failure.     2.  We  have 
dreamed,  most  of  us,  of  "the  days  of  heaven  "  ;  when  the  sun,  no  longer  battling 
with  the  mists,  should  shine  in  the  glory  of  his  brightness  ;  when  fleecy  clouds,  like 
angel  chariots,  should  fleck  the  blue  expanse  ;  when  all  the  bustle  and  riot  should 
be  exchanged  for  unbroken  peace  and  perpetual  quiet ;  when  vision  should  be  no 
longer  blurred  by  the  uprising  vapours  of  evil.     3.  The  text  speaks  to  us  of  reali- 
sation  enjoyment,  benediction,  contentment.     It  contains  the  ideas  of  continuity 
and  felicity,  duration  and  fulness,  or  a  blending  of  these  ideas.     I.  The  text  finds 

A  pleasing  illustration  in  happy  CHILDHOOD  UNDER  KINDLY  PARENTAL  CON- 
TROL. 1.  Given  all  the  healthful  influences  of  a  home  where  judicious  training  is 
linked  \ntli  affectionate  yearning  ;  where  example  is  set  like  a  jewel  in  a  circlet  of 
gold,  and  the  parents  are  recognised  as  priest  and  priestess  of  the  home  sphere  •  I 
know  no  words  more  fittingly  appropriate  to  describe  that  period  of  life  than  these, 
As  the  days  of  heaven  upon  the  earth."  2.  The  child's  best  interests  are  secured 
by  obedience  and  subjection,  and  his  heaven  is  found  in  harmony  with  the  parental 


332  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap,  xl 

will.  Tlien  shall  his  course  be  crowded  with  sunny  memories,  for  his  way  shall  be 
illumined  by  the  father's  smile  ;  voices  shall  cheer  him  in  the  darkness  ;  while  from 
day  to  day  shall  be  added  mercies  new  and  many,  the  true  value  of  which  shall  only 
be  discovered  upon  review.  II.  The  text  is  sugoestive  of  the  new  epoch 
INAUGUKATED  AT  CONVERSION.  One  summer  morning  a  lady  I  knew  well  went  into 
her  garden.  She  looked  up  at  the  blue  sky,  she  gazed  at  the  trees,  she  bent  over 
the  flowers,  she  examined  everything  as  though  she  had  not  seen  anything  of  the 
kiud  before.  Her  sister  inquired,  "Why  are  you  looking  at  everything  thus  ? "  She 
replied  with  a  smile,  "  Well,  it  is  all  so  very  lovely,  and  seems  so  new."  She  had 
been  converted  the  previous  evening,  and  that  was  the  explanation  of  her  awakened 
interest  and  evident  admiration.     III.  View  the  text  as  the  epitome  of  the 

GRATEFrL  SOUL'S  ESTIMATE  OF  A  LIFE  THAT  OFTEN  SEEMS  ANYTHING  BUT  HEAVENLY. 

The  point  of  view  makes  all  the  difft^-ence  in  the  estimate  of  the  life  of  faith  on  the 
earth.  I  read  somewhere  of  one  who  had  moved  into  a  new  flat,  which  could  hardly 
be  described  as  cheerful  in  its  surroundings.  The  outlook  was  not  very  pleasant, 
and  the  building  had  not  what  the  Frenchman  called  **  a  sunny  exposition."  The 
ordinary  woman  would  have  regarded  it  but  as  a  dismal  shelter  from  the  frosts  of 
winter  or  the  rains  of  summer.  A  friend  called  one  da^,  and  was  asked  by  the 
cheerful  housewife  to  notice  the  pleasant  view  from  the  window.  "Yes,"  said  the 
friend,  "I  see  a  remarkably  fine  lot  of  chimney-pots."  "  Chimney-pots,"  said  her 
hostess  in  astonishment,  —  "why,  I  never  saw  any  chimney-pots  before.  I  looked 
over  the  chimneys,  and  saw  only  those  trees  which  form  the  line  on  the  horizon.  I 
thought  only  of  the  trees  and  the  sunsets. "  Happy  are  they  who  look  beyond  all 
which  tends  to  depress  and  distress  !     IV.  The  text  singles  out  the  eed-letter 

DAYS  in  the  spiritual  EXPERIENCE  OF  THOSE  WHOSE  FACES  ARE  HEAVENWARD 

SET.  Cannot  we  recall  seasons  of  elevation,  times  of  transport,  pieriods  of  excep- 
tional delight  ?  When  thoughtfully  reading,  when  quietly  meditating,  when  kneel- 
ing in  prayer,  when  gathered  for  worship,  w^hen  observing  the  ordinances  with  our 
fellow-believers,  have  we  not  often  been  lifted  out  of  and  above  ourselves  ?  Such 
experiences  are  not  to  be  forgotten.  The  record  of  them  must  be  deeply  engraven. 
{Isaac  0.  Stalberg. )  Days  of  heaven  upon  earth  : — The  text  shows  us  a  Divine 
method  in  providence  ;  a  law  for  individual  and  national  life,  and  for  tha 
larger  life  of  the  race  ;  a  law  borne  witness  to  by  the  history  of  the  people 
whose  history  is  a  light  for  all  time,  and  by  which  we  have  gleams  through 
experience  of  bitter  times,  earnests  of  the  inheritance  of  light,  periods  filled 
with  special  mercy  and  truth,  times  of  quickening  and  spiritual  growth,  days 
of  heaven  upon  earth.  I.  The  first  days  of  the  Christian  revelation 
were,  in  the  highest  and  most  absolute  sense,  days  of  heaven  upon  earth.  A 
light  began  to  shine  amid  the  dark  shadows  of  that  time,  and  a  Divine  life 
to  give  forth  sparks  and  gleams  of  a  better  world.  God  was  manifest.  He 
dwelt  with  men.  He  trod  the  common  paths  of  life.  Brief  though  the  days 
were,  all  the  great  days  of  human  history  which  preceded  them  had  led  up  to 
them  J  and  they  were  themselves,  while  they  lasted,  a  vision  of  heaven  for  all 
time,  an  actual  dawn  of  the  possibilities  to  which  Christ  is  conducting  His  Church, 
a  demonstration  of  the  power  of  that  life  of  Christ  in  His  people  which,  to-day  as 
then,  may  be  an  opener  of  blind  eyes,  and  a  raiser  of  the  dead,  and  may  still  go 
forth,  as  in  the  first  apostles,  to  conquer  the  world.  Those  days  were  sent  to  us 
to  create  new  days  in  our  daily  lives,  and  enable  us,  even  amid  the  shadows  and 
imperfections  of  our  earthly  life,  to  live  lives  of  heaven  upon  earth.  And  these  days 
still  return  to  us.  Times  of  revival  are  simply  repetitions  on  a  smaller  scale  of  the 
first  days  of  the  Church.  The  light  that  shines  upon  human  life  at  such  times  is 
light  from  heaven.  Christ  once  more  walks  among  men,  and  His  presence  seems 
to  encompass  them  wherever  they  go.  II.  The  times  when  the  soul  is  open  to 
THE  revelations  AND  OFFERS  OF  DiviNE  LIFE  are  days  of  heaven  upon  earth.  The 
dawns  and  sunsets  of  these  days  are  in  the  soul  itself.  These  are  the  blessed  times 
when  the  heart  is  still  impressible,  when  the  eyes  of  the  soul  are  undimmed,  when 
the  conscience  is  still  tender.  The  soul  is  face  to  face  with  the  claims  of  God,  It 
has  new  views  of  its  responsibilities,  of  its  aims,  and  of  its  destiny.  Christ's  word 
and  the  Spirit  of  God  and  our  own  conscience  work  together  to  range  us  on  the  side 
of  God.  New  visions  of  the  Divine  mercy  and  goodness  are  opened  up  to  us,  and 
we  are  placed  under  the  argument  of  the  love  that  died  for  us,  to  admit  that  love 
into  our  hearts.  III.  The  coming  of  Christ  into  a  life  is  the  beginning  of  days 
of  heaven  for  that  life.  We  are  not  our  true  selves  until  the  blood  of  the  Divine 
life  has  been  mingled  with  ours.     In  the  midst  of  natural  occasions  for  joy  we  are 


CHAP.  XI.]  DEUTERONOMY.  333 

not  glad.  Christ  enters  and  joy  begins.  The  long  absent  Friend  has  come — the 
life  is  heightened.  The  thougnts  flow  forth,  the  nature  expands,  the  eyes  kindle, 
and  the  whole  wide  worid  of  circumstance  and  relationship  takes  on  our  joy. 
IV.  Times  of  service  under  Christ  are  days  of  heaven  upon  eariih.  The  soul 
has  now  entered  into  loving  relations  with  the  Lord.  It  is  no  longer  its  own, 
but  His.  Its  joy  is  to  live  in  Him.  Its  life  is  a  daily  consecration  to 
His  service.  Sacrifice,  gifts,  labours,  worship  :  Christ  is  the  object  of  them  all. 
y.  The  beautiful  days  of  earth  are  types  and  sometimes  actual  realisations  of 
such  days.  On  such  days  every  river  becomes  an  emblem  of  the  river  of  life  ;  every 
tree,  of  the  tree  whose  leaves  are  for  the  healing  of  the  nations ;  and  the  glory  of 
the  sky  when  the  dawn  burns  into  the  perfect  day,  of  the  glory  which  is  to  lighten 
the  streets  of  the  New  Jerusalem,  and  clothe  the  nations  of  the  saved  who  shall 
walk  in  its  light.  I  recall  at  this  moment  such  a  day  of  heaven  upon  earth.  Here 
and  there,  all  up  the  sides  of  a  Highland  mormtain,  patches  of  corn  were  yellowing 
for  tlie  sickle.  These  literally  peeped  out,  so  small  they  were,  from  amid  great 
breadths  of  purple  heather.  Little  hollows  of  meadow  grass  shot  up  over  their 
edges  the  richest  green;  and,  at  irregular  intervals,  the  bare  rock  displayed  itself 
like  protruding  bones.  The  sun  was  setting.  His  rays  came  level  and  struck  all 
that  breast  of  colour  at  once,  and  seemed  to  touch  it  into  active  life.  It  expanded, 
it  swelled,  it  rose  upwards  until  clouds  of  colour  floated  about  all  the  mountain- 
side. The  whole  scene  glowed  with  coloured  light — yellow  and  green  and  purple. 
It  flamed  upwards,  outwards,  downwards,  casting  back  upon  the  naked  granite  an 
ethereal  brightness,  and  down  upon  the  spectator  a  glory  as  if  the  gates  of  heaven 
had  been  opened  to  his  view.  It  was  one  among  ten  thousand  glimpses  of  the 
glory  of  God  in  tlie  face  of  harvest.  To  them  who  were  present  it  was  a  day  of 
heaven  upon  earth.  VI.  Christ  is  the  light  which  makes  days  of  heaven- 
possible.  And  such  days  fail  of  their  purpose  if  they  fail  to  increase  our  joy  in 
Him.  Man  in  his  ordinary  state  can  neither  see  nor  enjoy  such  days.  He  is 
blinded  and  opjiressed  by  his  buidens — the  well-known,  the  universally  felt 
burdens,  which  only  Christ  can  remove — of  guilt  and  care  and  sorrow.  {A.  Mac- 
leod,  D.D.)  Days  of  heaven  : — I.  When  may  our  days  be  said  to  be  "as  the 
DAYS  OF  heaven  upoN  THE  EARTH  "  ?  When — 1.  We  enjoy  much  of  a  sense  of  the 
Divine  presence,  and  live  in  the  contemplation  of  the  glorious  perfections  of  God. 

2.  The  love  of  God  is  shed  abroad  in  our  hearts  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  3.  We  enjoy  a 
spirit  of  gratitude  and  praise.  4.  We  possess  brotherly  love  and  enjoy  the  happiness 
of  fellowship  with  the  saints.  5.  We  obtain  great  victories  over  sin  and  have  intense 
love  of  purity.  6.  We  cheerfully  obey  God's  commands.  7.  We  frequently 
meditate  on  the  heavenly  state.  II.  What  course  should  we  take  in  ordeii  that 
OUR  DAYS  MAY  BE  AS  SUCH  ?  We  must — 1.  Be  partakers  of  vital  faith  in  Christ,  and 
be  renewed  in  the  spirit  of  our  minds.     2.  Make  the  glory  of  God  our  highest  aim. 

3.  Wean  our  hearts  from  earthly  things.  4.  Watch  against  grieving  the  Holy 
Spirit.  5.  Be  perpetually  employed  for  God,  and  resign  our  wills  to  His. 
(J.  Rylavd.)  The  spirit  of  heaven  to  he  infused  into  the  prese^ii  life : — He  whose 
mind  is  here  absorbed  in  the  desire  for  the  distant  heaven  is  like  a  man  walking 
through  scenes  of  exquisite  loveliness,  and  fields  of  delicious  fruit,  with  his  eye  so 
fixed  on  a  mirage  scene  in  the  distance,  that  he  sees  no  beauty  on  his  way,  starves 
amid  the  exuberant  provisions  which  lie  about  his  path,  and  reaches  what  he  sees, 
an  exhausted  pilgrim,  to  find  the  object  of  his  search  vanish  into  air.  Infuse,  then, 
the  spirit  of  heaven  into  thy  present  life.  Moral  goodness  of  soul,  springing  from 
faith  in  Christ,  is  your  way  into  the  present  and  all  the  future  heavens  of  your 
being.  (i>.  Thomas,  D.D.)  Heaven  on  earth: — It  was  said  of  an  old  Puritan, 
that  heaven  was  in  him  before  he  was  in  heaven.  That  is  necessary  for  all  of  us 
— we  must  have  heaven  in  us  before  we  get  into  heaven.  If  we  do  not  get  to 
heaven  before  we  die,  we  shall  never  get  there  afterwards.  An  old  Scotchman  was 
asked  whether  he  ever  expected  to  get  to  heaven.  *'  Why,  man,  I  live  there,"  was 
his  quaint  reply.  Let  us  all  live  in  those  spiritual  things  which  are  the  essential 
features  of  heaven.  Often  go  there  before  you  go  to  stay  there.  If  you  come  down 
to-morrow  morning,  knowing  and  realising  that  heaven  is  yours,  and  that  you  will 
soon  be  there,  those  children  will  not  worry  yon  half  so  much.  When  you  go  out 
to  your  business  or  to  your  work,  you  wUl  not  be  half  so  discontented  when  you 
know  that  this  is  not  your  rest,  but  that  you  have  a  rest  on  the  hills  eternal, 
whither  your  heart  has  already  gone,  and  that  there  your  portion  is  in  the  ever- 
lasting dwellings.  "Lay  hold  on  eternal  life."  Get  a  hold  of  it  now.  It  is  a 
thing  of  the  future,  and  it  is  a  thing  of  the  present ;  and  even  your  part  of  it  that 


334  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRAZOR.  [chap.  xi. 

is  fatnre  can  be,  by  faith,  so  realised  and  grasped  as  to  be  actually  enjoyed  while 
you  are  yet  here.  (C  H.  Spurgeon.)  Days  of  heaven  on  earth: — A  minister  one 
dny  preached  on  heaven.  Next  morning  he  was  going  down  town,  and  he  met 
one  of  his  old  wealthy  members.  The  brother  stopped  the  preacher  and  said ; 
"  Pastor,  you  preached  a  good  sermon  about  heaven.  You  told  me  all  about 
heaven,  but  you  never  told  me  where  heaven  is."  "  Ah  !  "  said  the  pastor,  "  I  am 
glad  of  an  opportunity  this  morning.  I  have  just  come  from  the  hill-top  yonder. 
In  that  cottage  there  is  a  member  of  your  church.  She  is  sick  in  bed  with  fever  ; 
her  two  little  children  are  sick  in  the  other  bed,  and  she  has  not  got  a  bit  of  coal 
nor  a  stick  of  wood,  nor  flour,  nor  sugar,  nor  any  bread.  If  you  will  go  down  town 
and  buy  five  shillings'  worth  of  things — nice  provisions — and  send  them  up  to  her, 
and  then  go  up  there  and  say,  *  My  sister,  I  have  brought  you  these  nice  provisions 
in  the  name  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour,'  then  ask  for  a  Bible  and  read  the  twenty- 
third  Psalm,  and  get  down  on  your  knees  and  pray — if  you  don't  see  heaven  before 
you  get  all  through,  I'll  pay  the  bill."  The  next  morning  he  said  :  "  Pastor,  I  saw 
heaven,  and  I  spent  fifteen  minutes  in  heaven  as  certainly  as  you  are  listening," 

Vers.  26-29.  A  blessing  and  a  curse. — Two  mountains : — Mount  Ebal,  we  are 
told,  "  is  a  barren,  stony,  and  arid  crag"  ;  so  would  God  "  smite  the  apostates  with 
barrenness,  hunger,  and  misery."  Gerizim  was  "covered  with  luxuriant  verdure, 
streams  of  running  water  and  cool  and  shady  groves  "  ;  so  would  God  "bless  the 
faithful  Israelites  with  abundance,  beauty  and  peace,"  It  is  a  grand  prophecy  in 
landscape  of  the  judgments  of  God's  eternal  providence.  Henceforth  their  future, 
in  the  country  they  conquer  and  colonise,  is  in  their  own  hands.  The  two  ways  of 
national  and  individual  life,  to  ruin  or  to  glory,  part  plainly  before  their  eyes.  The 
things  shown  in  that  early  age  of  symbols  were  only  outward  patterns  of  what  goes 
on  in  facts  and  decisions  within  us.  Gerizim  and  Ebal  raise  their  significant  and 
speaking  summits  before  every  life.  I.  For,  in  other  words,  life  is  overspread, 
PERMEATED,  AND  BOUND  IN,  BY  God's  LAW.  That  law  occupies  every  inch  of  its 
extent  and  every  fibre  of  its  organisation.  Obey  and  be  blessed,  disobey  and  be 
accursed  ;  here  is  the  sharp  alternative  imprinted  on  every  department  of  our 
being.  Your  body,  your  business,  your  appetites,  your  affections,  your  intellect, 
your  memory,  your  judgment,  your  imagination,  your  household  manners,  your 
talk  at  the  t^ble  and  in  the  street,  your  practice  of  your  profession  or  per- 
formance at  your  trade,  your  levity  or  sobriety,  your  temper  and  your  tongue,  your 
bargains  and  your  salutations,  your  correspondence  and  your  meditation,  your 
action  and  your  reveries,  your  hands,  heart,  and  brain,  all  are  penetrated  and 
encircled  by  this  law,     II.  This  law  is  permanent  and  unchangeable,  as  its 

AUTHOR  is,  BIHNG  THE  UNIFORM  WILL  OF  AN  UNCHANGEABLE  MIND  ;   not  One  thing 

for  preachers  and  communicants,  but  for  persons  who  never  chose  to  confess  them- 
selves Christians  another  and  easier  thing  ;  not  strict  for  one  seventh  of  your  time 
and  lax  for  six  sevenths  ;  not  varying  with  situations  and  fluctuating  with  oppor- 
tunities for  concealment  or  degrees  of  temptation  ;  not  satisfied  to  be  respected  in 
the  dwellings  at  one  end  of  a  city  while  it  is  des.pised  in  the  warehouses  and  offices 
at  the  other  end.  III.  Again,  the  consequences  of  this  law  which  we  are  born 
and  live  under,  in  its  twofold  working,  whether  as  visiting  penalties  upon  its 
violators  or  peace  and  strength  upon  its  servants — are  not  to  be  prevented 
though  they  should  be  apparently  obscured  or  postponed.  This  truth 
requires  something  more  than  a  theoretic  admission.  How  many  of  us  realise  it — 
that  every  offence  against  the  Divine  Will  is  certain  to  bring  on,  at  last,  its  penal 
pain  and  sorrow — even  its  delay  aggravating  its  torment ;  that  every  faithful  or 
religious  act  or  feeling  must  yield  its  infallible  return  of  joy — the  very  hin- 
drance enhancing  its  richness  and  depth  ;  that  Gerizim  is  sure  of  the  fulfilment  of 
its  promise,  and  Ebal  sure  of  the  execution  of  its  warning  ?  1.  Helps  enough  are 
given  to  enable  us  to  realise  it.  Can  we  pretend  the  law  is  not  made  plain  ? 
2.  We  let  our  short-sightedness  be  deceived  by  the  slowness  of  its  operation  ;  and, 
because  sentence  against  our  evil  works  is  not  executed  speedOy,  suffer  our  hearts  tO' 
get  set  in  us  to  do  evil.  But  the  majestic  order  of  nature  is  not  really  so  stable  as 
the  moral  results  of  moral  choice,  from  greatest  to  least.  IV.  With  every  right- 
minded  Christian  it  must  be  a  very  earnest  and  very  constant  prayer,  that  he 
may  gain  larger  and  larger  apprehensions  of  the  extent  and  the  sanctity 
OF  this  law — the  law  that  puts  him  on  a  perpetual  choosing  between  holiness  and 
•worldliness,  at  between  blessing  and  cursing.     V.  Another  step  in  the  doctrine  is 

TO    TRACE   UP    THIS    COMMANDMENT    TO    ITS   CONSCIOUS    AND   PERSONAL   INFINITE 


CHAP.  XI.]  DEUTERONOMY.  335 

SOURCE.  The  law  has  its  seat  in  the  heart  of  God,  No  rigid,  unfeeling  abstraction 
is  it,  but  the  living  "Will  of  a  living  Father.  Choose  the  right  and  scorn  the 
wrong  ;  and  there  will  be  growing  within  you  a  sense  of  His  Almighty  Presence, 
without  whom  no  right  could  be,  and  all  would  be  Avrong.  But  remember  that 
moral  obedience  can  never  be  religious  till  it  has  God  for  its  object,  God's  Will  for 
its  guide,  and  communion  with  God  for  its  daily  inspiration.  VI.  And  thus  we 
are  led  up  by  this  order  of  our  subject  to  discover,  finally,  the  positive  grandeur 
OF  ALLEGIANCE  TO  THE  DiviNE  LAW.  That  grandeur  is  witnessed  both  by  its 
nature  and  its  effects.  1.  In  its  nature.  For  obedience  to  the  commandment  is  of 
itself  a  noble  and  valiant  element  in  character.  It  is  no  paradox  to  affirm  that  the 
obedient  mind  is  a  commanding  mind.  The  law  that  carries  blessings  in  its  right 
hand  and  curses  in  its  left  appeals  to  a  deeper  principle  than  selfishness.  The 
blessings  are  not  earthly  advantages,  but  those  spiritual  gifts  and  honours,  like 
confidence  and  holiness,  love  and  faith,  power  and  peace,  which  exclude  all  thought 
of  self,  and  are  kindred  with  the  glory  and  purity  of  heaven.  The  curses  are 
those  elements  of  spiritual  ruin — fear,  hatred,  passion,  jealousy,  despair,  which 
impoverish  the  whole  moral  creation.  The  law  does  not  reveal  its  encouragements 
and  threatenings  from  Gerizim  and  Ebal,  to  make  a  rich  or  famous  jieople,  but  a 
holy  people.  2.  So  the  effect  is  holiness  of  life.  The  commandment  is  holy,  just, 
and  good  ;  and  so  must  its  fruit  be.  {Bp.  F.  D.  Huntingto7i.)  Practical 
alternatives  : — Moses  does  not  divide  the  people  into  two  classes  :  he  sets  belbre 
them  alternative  courses  : — proceed  upon  the  line  of  obedience,  and  you  come  to 
blessing  ;  proceed  along  the  line  of  disobedience,  and  a  curse  is  the  inevitable 
necessity — not  a  threatening,  not  an  exhibition  of  fretful  vengeance,  but  a  spiritual 
necessity  ;  a  curse  follows  evil-doing,  not  as  an  arbitrary  punishment,  but  as  the 
effect,  which  can  never  be  changed,  of  a  certain,  positive,  operating  cause.  What 
if  everything  round  about  us  be  confirming  the  testimony  of  Moses  ?  What  if  the 
Decalogue  be  written  every  day  of  the  week  ?  What  if  in  the  operation  of  moral 
influence  it  can  be  distinctly  proved  that  the  Bible  is  true,  that  the  Word  of  the 
Lord  abideth  for  ever,  and  that,  whatever  changes  may  have  occurred,  obedience 
still  leads  to  blessing,  disobedience  still  leads  to  cursing,  and  it  is  not  within  the 
wit  or  the  strength  of  man  to  change  that  outgoing  of  law  and  consequence  ?  A 
very  precious  thing  it  is  that  we  have  only  to  obey.  At  first  it  looks  as  if  we  were 
humbled  by  this  course  of  service,  but  further  inquest  into  the  spiritual  meaning  of 
the  matter  shows  us  that  in  the  definition  of  right  and  wrong,  law  and  righteous- 
ness,  God  has  been  most  tenderly  pitiful  towards  us,  and  law  is  but  the  practical 
and  more  visible  and  measurable  aspect  of  love.  One  who  knows  the  universe, 
because  He  made  it,  and  all  eternity,  because  He  inhabits  it,  has  condescended  to 
tell  us  what  is  good,  what  is  true,  what  is  pure,  what  is  right.  If  we  were  inspired 
by  the  right  spirit  we  would  instantly  stand  up  in  thankfulness  and  bless  the 
Giver's  name,  and  ask  but  one  other  favour — that  we  might  have  eyes  to  see  the 
innermost  meaning  of  the  law,  and  hearts  trained,  disciplined,  and  sanctified  to 
accept  and  obey  it,  and  express  it  in  noble  behaviour.  Is  it  true,  within  limits 
that  we  know,  that  obedience  leads  to  blessing  and  disobedience  to  cursing  ?  Some- 
times we  have  to  interrupt  the  Divine  reasoning  that  we  may  assist  ourselves  in  its 
comprehension  by  the  study  of  analogy  upon  lower  ground.  Is  it  true  that  there  is 
a  seed-time,  which,  if  neglected,  will  be  followed  by  desolation  and  death  ?  .  .  . 
If  all  these  little  outside  Bibles  are  true  and  can  challenge  facts  to  prove  their 
truth,  it  is  not  difficult  to  rise  to  the  higher  level,  and  to  say.  There  may  be  a  Bible 
meant  for  the  soul  ;  there  may  be  a  revelation  addressed  to  the  reason,  and  to  the 
higher  reason  called  faith,  and  to  the  higher  self  called  the  spirit.  This  higher 
revelation  has  not  the  immediate  advantage  of  the  lower  Bibles,  because  they 
deal  with  earth,  body,  space,  time,  measurable  quantities  ;  but  the  higher  Bible 
deals  with  soul,  spirit,  thought,  will,  eternity.  He  who  operates  within  a  radius 
of  a  few  inches  can  be,  apparently,  quicker  in  his  movements,  more  precise  and 
determined  in  his  decisions,  than  the  man  who  claims  the  globe  as  the  theatre  of 
his  actions.  So  the  Bible,  having  the  disadvantage  of  dealing  with  spii'itual 
quantities,  must  be  judged,  so  far  as  we  can  approach  it,  by  the  spirit  of  the  lower 
laws,  or  the  laws  applying  to  the  lower  economy.  .  .  .  The  argument  is  this  :  seeing 
that  in  the  field,  in  the  body,  in  the  social  economy,  there  is  a  law  of  blessing 
and  a  law  of  cursing,  who  shall  say  that  this  same  reasoning  does  not  culminate 
in  a  great  revelation  of  heaven,  hell;  "the  right-hand,"  '*  the  left-hand"; 
eternal  life,  everlasting  penalty  ?  If  the  analogies  had  been  dead  against  that 
construction,  we  might  by  so  much  have  stood  in  doubt  and  excused   ourselves 


336  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  xr. 

from  completeness  of  service  ;  but  every  analogy  becomes  a  preacher :  all  nature 
take  up  her  parable  and  speaks  the  revelations  of  her  God  :  all  life  beats  with 
a  pulse  below  a  pulse,  the  physical  throb  being  but  an  indication  of  a  growing 
immortality.  We  stand  in  a  solemn  sanctuary.  "We  cannot  get  rid  of  law. 
The  spiritual  is  a  present  blessing  or  a  present  curse.  We  cannot  be  happy 
with  a  bad  conscience :  it  hardens  the  pillow  when  we  need  sleep  most,  it  upeeta 
all  our  arrangements,  or  makes  our  hand  so  tremble  that  we  cannot  clutch  our 
own  property ;  and  we  cannot  be  unhappy  with  a  good  conscience  :  without 
bread  we  are  still  in  fulness,  without  employment  we  are  still  inspired  by  hope, 
without  much  earthly  charity  or  largeness  of  construction  of  our  motive  and  force 
we  still  retire  within  the  sanctuary  of  an  approved  judgment  and  conscience. 
Blessing  is  not  a  question  of  posthumous  realisation,  nor  is  cursing.  Heaven  is 
here,  and  hell  in  germ,  in  outline,  in  hint,  in  quick,  burning  suggestion.  Even 
now  sometimes  men  know  not  whether  they  are  in  the  body  or  out  of  the  body 
by  reason  of  religious  entrancement  and  ecstasy ;  and  there  are  men  who,  if  they 
dare  put  their  feeling  into  words,  would  say,  *  *  The  pains  of  hell  gat  hold  upon 
me."  "  There  is  no  peace,  saith  my  God,  to  the  wicked  "  ;  "Though  hand  join  in 
hand,  the  wicked  shall  not  be  unpunished  "  ;  "  Be  sure  your  sin  will  find  you  out." 
Who  can  fight  God  and  win  the  battle?  [J.  Parker,  D.D.)  I%e  hlensing  and 
the  curse : — 1.  What  is  the  blessing  set  before  us  ?  The  blessing  of  him  whose 
sins  are  forgiven,  who  lives  in  God's  favour  and  dies  in  peace.  2.  What  is  the 
curse?  Just  this,  "The  soul  that  sins  shall  die."  '*  Cursed  is  every  one  that 
continuetli  not  in  all  things  written,"  &c.  3.  What  is  the  way  to  escape  the 
curse  ?  By  the  death  of  Christ  we  are  delivered  from  sin,  redeemed  from  the  curse, 
and  by  His  obedience  entitled  to  a  blessing.  4.  Which  will  you  choose  ?  Some 
people  think  they  can  make  a  compromise  ;  that  they  need  not  be  inten-sely 
Christian,  as  tliey  are  not,  and  will  not  be  intensely  worldly.  If  they  do  so,  it  is 
not  really  an  alteration  of  their  state,  but  a  deception  of  themselves.  You  must 
take  the  sunshine  or  the  shadow — the  evil  or  the  good — the  "Come,  ye  blessed, 
inherit  the  kingdom";  or  the  withering  sentence,  "Depart,  ye  cursed,  into  ever- 
lasting fire."     {J.  C.  Cumming,  D.D.) 

Ver.  31.  Ye  shall  pass  over  Jordan. — Jordan  and  Canaan  typical  of  death  and 
Jceaven  .—I.  The  anticipated  inheritance.  1.  A  land  of  promise.  2.  A  land 
of  abundance.     3.  A  holy  land.     4.  A  land  of  rest.     5.  Permanence  of  residence. 

5.  A  land  freely  given.  II.  The  manner  of  possession.  1.  The  streams  of 
Jordan  rolled  between  the  desert  and  the  land  of  Canaan.  So  does  the  river  of 
death  flow  between  earth  and  heaven.  2.  Jordan  separated  the  Israelites  from  the 
inhabitants  of  Canaan.  Death  separates  the  church  militant  and  the  church 
triumphant.  On  this  side  is  a  parent,  on  the  other  side  a  child.  3.  Jordan  was 
subject  to  the  command  of  God.  When  He  gave  the  word,  the  waters  rose  and 
stood  up  (Josh.  iii.  16).  Death,  too,  is  under  His  control.  Christ  "destroyed 
him  who  had  the  power  of  death  "  (Heb.  ii.  14,  15).  4.  Through  Jordan  was  a 
necessary  way  to  the  land  of  promise.  So  is  death,  however  painful  and  affecting. 
It  is  necessary  that  the  river  of  death  should  be  dark  and  formidable  to  render  ua 
content  with  the  present  state  of  existence.  5.  Jordan  was  the  last  river  they  had 
to  pass.  Death  will  be  the  last  conflict — the  last  enemy  with  which  the  saint  will 
have  to  struggle.  Observe  that  when  the  children  of  Israel  passed  over  Jordan  the 
following  thiHgs  were  observable.  (1)  They  were  required  to  sanctify  themselves 
previous  to  the  passage  (Josh,  iii,  5).  Before  death  Christ  must  be  made  unto  the 
believer  "  sanctification  "  (1  Cor.  i.  30).  (2)  The  priests  were  to  enter  the  river 
first.  So  Jesus  entered  the  river  before  us — as  our  Forerunner.  The  eye  of  faith 
in  the  dying  believer  beholds  His  foot-prints  at  the  bottom.  (3)  The  priests  stood 
firm  in  the  midst  of  Jordan  until  all  the  people  passed  over  (Josh.  iii.  17).  Christ 
stands  by  His  people  in  their  dying  moments,  and  they  "feel  the  bottom  of  the 
river,  for  it  is  good."  (4)  When  they  had  passed  over,  they  erected  memorials  of 
praise  (Josh.  iv.  5,  8,  20).  So  when  the  Christian  reaches  heaven  he  shall  utter  a 
song  of  praise.  "  We  went  through  fire  and  through  water,  but  Thou  broughtest 
us  out  into  a  wealthy  place"  (Psa.  xlvi.  12).     "Unto  Him  that  loved  us"  (Rev.  i. 

6,  6).  Application  :  1.  The  possession  of  the  heavenly  inheritance  is  certain  :  "Ye 
shall  possess  it."  "Faithful  is  He  who  hath  promised  it,  who  also  will  do  it." 
2.  Meditate  much  on  heaven  and  Christ  as  an  important  means  of  inducing  to 
preparation  for  the  last  conflict.  3.  All  sinners  will  be  overwhelmed  in  the 
swellings  of  Jordan.     {Eel^sf(yr  the  Puljjit.) 


CHAP.  XII.]  -  DEUTERONOMY,  -  337 


Ver.  32.  Observe  to  ^o.—Ohedierux  to  the  Divine  commands  .—I.  It  is  a  breach  of 
the  injunction  in  the  text  for  any  man  to  substitute  any  conteivance  or 

INVENTION   OF   HIS   OWN,    IN   THE   ROOM   OF   THAT    WHICH   GoD   HATH   PRESCRIBED 

IN  His  WORSHIP,  when  such  prescription  is  plain  and  express.  II.  By  virtue  of 
the  injunction  in  the  text,  we  are  bound  to  take  heed,  that  we  do  not  inter- 
pret ANY  PORTION  OF  SciilPTURE,  TO  SUCH  A  SENSE  AS  TO  PERVERT  IT  FROM  ITS 
TRUE  MEANING  AND  INTENTION.  III.  By  these  WOrds  WE  ARE  STRICTLY  PRO- 
HIBITED   FROM  PRETENDING   THAT  ANY   THING   IS   A   DiVINE   COMMAND,    ^VHICH  IS 

REALLY  NOT  SO.     IV.  But  though  we  must  not  add  anything  to  the  Word  of  God 
or   detract  anything  from  it,   pretending  that    any  such    alteration  is   of  Divine 
appointment,  yet  where  the  Lord  hath  not  spoken,  I  mean  in  such  things  as  may 
be    left   to   human    prudence   and   discretion,    the  lawful   magistrates,    and   the 

GOVERNORS  OF  THE  ChURCH  LAWFULLY  APPOINTED,  HAVE  AN  UNDOUBTED  RIGHT 
TO  ORDER  AND  APPOINT  SUCH  OBSERVANCES  AS  ARE  NECESSARY  AND  CONVENIENT 
FOR  EDIFICATION  AND   EXTERNAL  DECORUM  IN   THE  PUBLIC   WORSHIP  ;   and  to  take 

care  that  everything  be  done  decently  and  in  order  ;  and  so  far  as  their  commands 
are  not  m  opposition  or  contrary  to  the  Word  of  God,  it  becomes  the  duty  of  their 
people  to  comply  with  them.     {Alex.  Gh-ant,  D.D.) 


CHAPTER  XII. 

Ver.  2.  Destroy  aU  the  vl^ea.— Destruction  of  evU  .-—The  firsfthing  Israel  had  to 
do  appears  to  be  a  work  of  violence.  All  idols  were  to  be  destroyed.  Israel  could 
understand  no  other  language.  This  is  not  the  language  of  to-day  ;  but  the  thing 
inculcated  upon  Israel  is  the  lesson  for  the  present  time  :  words  change,  but  duties 
remain.  Violence  was  the  only  method  that  could  commend  itself  to  infantile 
Israeh  The  hand  was  the  reasouer ;  the  breaking  hammer  was  the  instrument  of 
logic  m  days  so  remote  and  so  unfavoured.  Forgetting  this,  how  many  people 
misunderstand  instructions  given  to  the  ancient  Church  ;  they  speak  of  the  violence 
of  those  instructions,  the  bloodthirstiness  even  of  Him  who  gave  the  instructions  to 
Israel.  Hostile  critics  select  such  expressions  and  hold  them  up  as  if  in  mid-air, 
that  the  sunlight  may  get  well  round  about  them  ;  and  attention  is  called  to  the 
barbarity,  the  brutality,  the  revolting  violence  of  so-called  Divine  commandments. 
It  IS  false  reasoning  on  the  part  of  the  hostile  critic.  We  must  think  ourselves 
back  to  the  exact  period  of  time  and  the  particular  circumstances  at  which  and 
under  which  the  instructions  were  delivered.  But  all  the  words  of  violence  have 
dropped  away.  "Destroy,"  "overthrow,"  "burn,"  "hew  down,"  are  words  which 
are  not  found  m  the  instructions  given  to  Christian  evangelists.  Has  the  law 
then  passed  away  ?  Not  a  jot  or  tittle  of  it.  Is  there  still  to  be  a  work  of  this  kind 
accomplished  in  heathen  nations  ?  That  is  the  very  work  that  must  first  be  done. 
This  IS  the  work  that  is  aimed  at  by  the  humblest  and  meekest  teacher  who 
shoulders  the  Gospel  yoke  and  proceeds  to  Christianise  the  nations.  Now  we 
destroy  by  reasoning,  and  that  is  a  far  more  terrible  destruction  than  the  supposed 
annihilation  that  can  be  wrought  by  manual  violence.  You  cannot  conquer  an 
enemy  by  the  arm,  the  rod,  or  the  weapon  of  war  ;  you  subdue  him,  overpower  him, 
or  impose  some  momentary  restraint  upon  him  ;  fear  of  you  takes  possession  of  his 
heart,  and  he  sues  for  peace  because  he  is  afraid.  That  is  not  conquest ;  there  is 
nothing  eternal  m  such  an  issue.  How,  then,  to  destroy  an  enemy  ?  By  converting 
him— by  changing  his  motive,  by  penetrating  into  his  most  secret  life,  and  accom- 
plishing the  mystery  of  regeneration  in  his  affections.  That  mystery  accomplished, 
the  conquest  is  complete  and  everlasting  ;  the  work  of  destruction  has  been  accom- 
plished ;  burning  and  hewing  down,  and  all  actions  indicative  of  mere  nolence 
have  disappeared.     {J,  Parker.  D.D.) 

T  X^*  ^'  ^'  ?^^  ™°  Habitation  shaU  ye  seek.— T^  Gospel  of  the  fioly  places  :^ 
I.  Uod  was  pleased  to  choose  out  certain  places  to  stand  in  a  special  relation  of 
HOLINESS  UNTO  HiMSELF  Under  the  Old  Testament.  This  holiness  of  places  was 
twofold,  either  transient  and  merely  for  the  present  time,  or  else  more  permanent. 
1.  The  transient  holiness  of  places  was  where  the  Lord  gave  visible  appearances  of 
liimself  m  His  glorious  majesty  to  the  eyes  of  His  servants  ;  such  places  were  holy 
23 


338  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xii. 

during  the  time  of  such  Divine  appearances  (Exod.  iii.  5,  xix.  11-25  ;  Josh.  v.  15  ; 
2  Pet.  i.  18).  2.  There  was  also  a  more  abiding  holiness  of  places  under  the  law. 
(1)  The  land  of  Canaan  (Zech.  ii.  12).  (2)  The  cities  of  refuge.  (3)  The  taber- 
nacle, the  temple,  the  ark,  and  all  the  places  where  they  came  (2  Chron.  viii.  11). 
(4)  Jerusalem  was  very  eminent  as  being  the  place  of  the  temple,  and  ark,  and  all 
the  public  worship  thereunto  belonging  (Psa.  Ixxvi.  2,  Ixxxvii.  2).      II.  What  is 

THE  GROUND  OF  THIS   HOLINESS  OF  THESE  PLACES,  AND  HOW  AKE  WE  TO   CONCEIVE 

OF  IT  ?  1.  The  Lord  is  said  to  choose  these  places  to  set  His  name  there,  and  there- 
fore they  are  called  His  habitation.  (1)  Here  were  the  standing  symbols  and  tokens 
of  His  presence.  (2)  In  these  places  were  visible  appearances  of  His  glory  upon 
special  occasions  (Exod.  xl.  34  ;  Numb.  xii.  5 ;  1  Kings  viii.  10,  11  ;  Isa.  vi.  1). 

(3)  These  places  had  their  typical  significations  of  Christ  and  Gospel  mysteries. 

(4)  These  places  were  appointed  by  God  to  be  parts,  yea,  principal  parts,  of  His  worship 
(Exod.  XX.  24  ;  Ezek.  xx.  40).  (5)  They  were,  by  God's  appointment,  the  seat  of 
all  the  public  church -worship  of  those  times.  2.  "  Thither  shalt  thou  seek,"  i.e. 
for  answers  and  oracles  from  the  holy  places,  and  from  the  priest  by  Urim  and 
Thuramim  (Exod.  xxv.  22;  Numb.  vii.  8,  9,  xxvii.  21).  3.  "Thither  shalt  thou 
come,"  i.e.  at  all  the  appointed  festivals,  three  times  a  year  (Exod.  xxiii.  14,  17), 
and  whensoever  they  offered  sacrifice  (ver.  6).  Lessons  :  1.  The  cessation  of  this 
holiness  of  places  under  the  New  Testament  (John  iv.  21-23;  Matt,  xviii.  22; 
1  Tim.  ii.  8  ;  Mai.  i.  11).  Every  place  is  now  a  Judaea,  every  house  a  Jerusalem, 
every  congregation  a  Zion.  2.  Learn  to  present  your  worship  unto  God  by  Jesus  Christ, 
for  He  is  the  true  Temple  and  Tabernacle  (Heb.  vii.  25  ;  1  Pet.  i.  21 ;  John  xiv.  6  ; 
Col.  iii.  17).  3.  Remember  that  there  is  a  church-worship  (Acts  ii.  42,  xx.  7). 
4.  Labour  every  one,  that  his  soul  may  be  a  habitation  for  the  Lord,  a  temple  of 
the  Holy  Ghost.     {S.  Mather.) 

Ver.  8.  Ye  shall  not  do  after  all  the  things  that  we  do  here  this  Cidij.— Restraint 
the  Christian's  blessing : — The  blessing,  of  which  it  is  now  proposed  to  speak  more 
particularly,  is  that  of  being  more  under  control — of  having  our  lives  and  ways  more 
exactly  ordered — than  as  if  we  were  not  Christians.  We  are  now  come  to  the  rest 
and  to  the  inheritance  which  the  Lord  our  God  was  so  long  preparing  for  us,  and 
therefore  we  are  no  longer  to  think  of  doing  every  man  what  is  right  in  his  own 
eyes.  And  therefore  the  gate,  into  which  we  must  strive  to  enter,  is  called  "strait," 
and  the  way  which  leadeth  unto  life,  "narrow."  And  our  Saviour,  inviting  us 
to  the  blessings  of  the  Gospel,  describes  them  as  a  yoke  and  a  burthen  ;  easy 
indeed,  and  light,  yet  still  a  yoke  and  a  burthen.  And  this  very  circumstance  He 
mentions  as  a  blessing  ;  as  the  very  reason  why,  coming  to  Him,  the  weary  and 
heavy  laden  might  find  rest  (Matt.  xi.  28).  So  that  it  appears  that  both  the  law 
and  the  Gospel,  both  Moses  and  Jesus  Christ,  consider  it  a  great  blessing,  a  great 
increase  of  comfort  and  happiness,  to  be  kept  under  strict  rules.  The  Gospel  was 
more  strict  than  the  law ;  and  on  that  very  account  its  subjects  were  happier. 
Canaan  was  a  place  where  men  could  not  do  what  pleased  themselves  so  much  as 
they  could  in  the  wilderness  :  and  it  was  the  more  entirely  and  truly  a  place  of  rest. 
But  now  this  way  of  thinking  is  by  no  means  the  way  of  the  world.  People  in 
general  like  nothing  so  much  as  having  their  owti  choice  in  all  things.  They  account 
it  a  burthen,  and  not  a  privilege,  to  be  under  the  government  of  others.  And  there 
is  not,  one  may  venture  to  say,  one  man  in  a  thousand  who  would  not  rather  be  rich 
than  poor,  for  this  very  reason — that  a  rich  man  is  much  more  his  own  master,  has 
much  more  of  his  own  way  in  choosing  how  to  spend  his  time,  what  company  to 
keep,  what  employments  to  follow,  than  a  poor  man  generally  can  have.  Again, 
every  one  has  observed,  I  might  say  has  experienced,  the  hurry  which  children  are 
usually  in  to  get  out  of  the  state  of  childhood  and  to  be  left  to  judge  and  act  for 
themselves.  But  the  worst,  and,  unfortunately,  the  most  common  instance  of  this 
ungovernable  temper  in  mankind  is,  our  unwillingness  to  let  God  choose  for  us,  and 
our  impatience  under  the  burthens  He  lays  upon  us.  How  very  commonly  does  it 
happen  that  the  very  condition  people  chose  beforehand,  the  very  place  they  wished 
to  live  in,  and  the  persons  they  wished  to  live  among,  being  obtained,  becomes  the 
ground  of  continual  complaint  and  vexation.  If  they  could  but  change  at  will,  they 
say?  they  should  like  their  situation  well  enough,  but  now  they  are  tied  down  to  it 
they  cannot,  that  is,  they  will  not,  help  being  fretful  and  impatient.  Yet  this  very 
circumstance  of  being  tied  down  to  rules  and  not  having  the  power  to  change  at 
will,  is,  as  we  have  seen,  reckoned  a  great  blessing,  both  in  the  Old  and  New  Testa- 
ment, both  by  Moses  and  Jesus  Christ.     And  the  contrary  (the  having  to  choose  for 


CHAP.  XII.]  DEUTERONOMY.  339 

ourselves,  and  to  do  what  is  right  in  our  own  eyes),  is  spoken  of  as  a  great  disad- 
vantage. So  diffeient  is  the  judgment  of  God  from  the  judgment  of  men.  To  have 
this  thought  steadily  fixed  within  us,  will  prove,  indeed,  the  greatest  of  all  blessings, 
both  as  to  our  rest  in  this  world,  and  as  to  our  inheritance  in  that  which  is  to  come. 
In  whatever  counsel  and  pursuit  we  are  sure  we  are  guided  by  God,  that,  we  are 
equally  sure,  must  turn  out  well  in  the  end  ;  and  soberly  speaking,  what  can  we  wish 
for  more  ?  Once  make  up  your  mind  to  this  most  certain  truth,  that  what  is 
right  in  God's  eyes  is  far  better  for  you  than  what  is  right  in  your  own  eyes,  and 
jou  will  have  but  one  care  in  the  whole  world,  i.e.  how  to  please  God  in  making 
the  best  use  of  the  present  time,  a  care  in  which,  by  His  gracious  assistance,  you 
are  sure  not  to  fail.  But  it  was  further  said,  that  this  temj)er  of  not  choosing  for 
ourselves  leads  directly  to  our  everlasting  inheritance  in  the  other  world,  as  well  as 
making  sure  of  our  rest  and  refreshment  in  this.  For  it  helps  us  greatly  in  the 
performance  of  our  duty,  because,  in  truth,  it  leaves  us  nothing  else  to  do.  It  pre- 
pares and  trains  us  for  everlasting  happiness  in  heaven.  For  the  very  secret  of  our 
enjoyment  there  will  be  that  God's  will  shall  be  ours.  We  shall  behold  His  works 
and  ways,  especially  the  glory  which  He  has  given  to  His  beloved  Son  our  Saviour, 
and  shall  rejoice  in  them  as  in  so  much  good  done  to  ourselves,  more  and  more 
thankfully  for  ever.  What  a  beautiful  and  comfortable  thought  is  this,  of  the  high 
and  noble  uses  to  which,  if  we  will,  we  may  turn  all  our  worst  disappointments — 
the  bitterest  thoughts  of  shame  and  remorse  which  ever  come  upon  us.  We  may 
consider  them  as  part  of  our  heavenly  Father's  way  of  breaking  us  in,  as  it  were, 
and  training  us  to  the  desire  and  enjoyment  of  His  own  blessed  presence  in  heaven. 
And  if  even  the  bitter  thought  of  our  past  sins  may  be  accompanied  with  so  much 
of  what  is  comfortable  and  hopeful,  surely  we  may  well  leave  it  to  Almighty  God  to 
do  what  He  will  with  us  in  every  other  respect.  {Plain  Sermons  by  Contributors  to 
*'  Tracts  for  the  Times.")  Life  a  transitional  state  of  being  : — "Ye  are  not  as  yet 
oome  to  your  rest."  The  present  is  a  temporary  and  provisional  state  of  things. 
Such  is  the  reason  (ver.  9)  assigned  by  the  great  lawgiver  of  the  Jews  for  the  non- 
observance  of  many,  and  the  imperfect  observance  of  nearly  all  the  statutes  and 
ordinances  which  he  was  delivering  to  them.  We  are  all,  he  says,  to  blame.  Your 
leader  is  no  more  exempt  from  human  infirmities  than  yourselves..  He  is  as  fond 
of  having  his  own  way,  of  doing  what  is  right  in  his  own  eyes,  as  any  of  you.  We 
have  all  done  amiss,  and  we  must  all  try  to  do  better  ;  and  so  prepare  ourselves  for 
that  entirely  altered  state  of  circumstances  which  awaits  us  as  soon  as  w^e  have 
orossed  the  narrow  dividing  stream  ;  you  of  Jordan,  I  of  death.  In  applying  these 
words  to  the  objects  of  Christian  instruction,  observe — I.  The  uniformity  of 
HUMAN  CHAKACTEE.  What  describes  the  natural  man  in  one  age  or  country  will 
suit  him  equally  well  at  all  times  and  in  all  countries.  What  were  the  Israelites  doing 
in  the  wilderness  ?  "  Every  man  whatsoever  was  right  in  his  own  eyes."  This  is 
liuman  nature.  We  like  to  have  our  own  way.  Restraint  is  irksome  to  us.  We 
seek  to  be  independent  in  our  circumstances,  in  order  that  we  may  be  so  in  our 
actions,  and  have  no  one's  wishes  or  feelings  to  consult  but  our  own.  But  if  human 
wilfulness  shows  itself  in  one  direction  more  than  another,  it  is  in  our  relations  to 
Ood.  Here  we  meet  with  no  such  checks  as  hem  us  in  on  every  other  side.  Here 
the  freedom  of  our  will  is  not  interfered  with  by  the  claims  of  family  or  the  obliga- 
tions  of  society.  The  world  looks  on,  but  never  thinks  of  interfering.  A  man's 
religion,  it  holds,  is  something  entirely  between  God  and  his  conscience.  In  the 
■concerns  of  the  soul  it  is  commonly  said  that  every  man  ought  to  do  whatever  is 
right  in  his  own  eyes,  without  any  regard  to  the  opinions  or  feelings  of  others. 
What  is  most  agreeable  to  our  feelings,  we  easily  persuade  ourselves,  is  most  profit- 
able to  our  souls  ;  and  where  we  are  most  profited,  where  we  "get  most  good,"  as 
it  is  called,  there  we  feel  sure  it  is  God's  will  that  we  should  go.  So  we  "wrap 
it  up"  (Micah  vii.  3).  We  settle  the  matter  nominally  between  God  and  our 
consciences,  but  really  between  ourselves  and  our  own  wayward  and  corrupt  wills. 
II.  The  impropriety  of  this  principle  of  doing  "every  man  whatsoever  is  right 
in  his  own  eyes."  No  day  passes  without  some  matters  arising  which  involve 
the  question  of  not  what  is  right  in  our  own  eyes,  but  what  is  right  in  itself, 
and  what  is  right  in  the  sight  of  God  and  man.  We  are  reasonable  and 
accountable  creatures.  There  is  a  sense  of  right  and  wTong  implanted  in  us 
by  nature.  We  cannot  act  contrary  to  it  without  violating  our  conscience,  and 
causing  a  sensible  disturbance  to  our  peace  of  mind.  Besides  moral,  there  is 
also  such  a  thing  as  positive  right,  arising  out  of  the  declared  will  of  God  ; 
and  this  is  just  as   binding    upon    our    consciences    as    the   other.      When   it 


340  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xii, 

pleased  God  to  promnlgate  the  Fourth  Commandment,  by  that  very  act  He  made 
it  a  right  thing  to  keep  holy  the  seventh  day,  and  a  wrong  thing  to  do  our 
ordinary  work  thereon,  in  the  eyes  of  every  man  who  believes  in  the  existence  and 
attributes  of  the  Creator  of  the  world.  Unhappily,  moral  disorder  is  not  attended 
with  the  same  inconveniences  as  civil.  Men  ma^  be  "lovers  of  their  own  selves, 
covetous,  boasters,  proud,  blasphemers,  disobedient  to  parents,"  and  many  other 
things  equally  offensive  to  piety  and  virtue,  without  any  particular  shock  to  the 
peaceful  and  prosperous  course  of  this  world.  Still,  "these  things  ought  not  so  to 
be."  Wrong  can  never  be  right.  There  is  one  Lawgiver,  and  one  holy  and  righteous 
and  perfect  law.  To  do  as  we  like  is  to  violate  the  fundamental  law  of  our  being. 
*'  For  none  of  us  liveth  to  himself,"  &c.  To  do  that  which  is  right  in  our  own  eyes 
is  too  often  to  do  that  which  is  abominable  in  the  sight  of  God.  III.  The 
NECESSARY  IMPERFECTION  OF  OUR  PRESENT  STATE  OF  BEING.  Perfect  Order  and 
perfect  happiness  are  not  to  be  found  on  earth,  but  are  reserved  for  that  eternal 
existence  to  which  this  world  is  but  a  passage.  1.  This  thought  will  reconcile  us, 
in  a  great  degree,  to  the  troubles  of  life.  2.  It  will  encourage  us  under  our  moral 
failings  and  imperfections.  It  may  be  a  poor  consolation,  but  a  consolation  it  cer- 
tainly is,  when  we  have  done  amiss,  to  know  that  "all  have  sinned,  and  come  short 
of  the  glory  of  God  "  ;  and  that  so  long  as  man  is  man  he  will  do  "whatsoever  is 
right  in  his  own  eyes."  Hereafter  it  will  be  otherwise.  In  another  world  "we 
shall  not  do  after  all  the  things  that  we  do  here  this  day."  3.  It  will  make  us 
tolerant  and  indulgent  to  the  failings  of  others.  "We  must  take  the  world  as  we 
find  it  We  must  deal  with  things  as  they  are,  not  as  they  ought  to  be.  To  bear 
and  to  forbear  is  no  small  part  of  our  trial.  And  we  cannot  be  required  to  show 
greater  forbearance  towards  others  than  God  is  continually  exercising  towards  us. 

IV.  There  is  no  sentiment  so  just  as  not  to  be  liable  to  perversion  and 
ABUSE.  The  necessary  imperfection  of  our  present  state  might  be  urged  as  an 
excuse  for  those  evils  and  disorders  which  need  not  exist,  and  therefore  are  inexcus- 
able. But  this  must  not  be  allowed.  Sin  must  always  be  protested  against.  Our 
nature  is  corrupt ;  but  that  is  a  reason  for  striving  against  it,  not  for  giving  way  to 
it.  We  live  in  a  wicked  world  ;  but  that  should  put  us  on  our  guard  against  an 
unreserved  association  with  the  world,  or  an  undue  compliance  with  its  ways.  Is 
this  all  that  is  required  of  us — to  contend  against  the  evil  of  our  own  hearts,  and  to 
keep  ourselves  unspotted  from  the  world  ?  Not  so.  A  Christian  has  a  higher  voca- 
tion :  to  make  the  world  better  ;  to  season  it  with  the  salt  of  a  pure  and  uncorrupt 
conversation  ;  to  set  an  example  of  that  self-denying,  self-sacrificing  spirit  which 
leads  to  conduct  the  very  opposite  of  that  described  in  the  text.  The  Christian 
must  be  continually  reminding  both  himself  and  others  that  what  we  are  all  doing 
here  this  day  may  be  excused  by  considerations  arising  out  of  the  frailty  of  human 
nature,  but  can  never  be  justified.  Let  us  take  every  oppoiibunity  of  mortifying 
those  deeds  of  the  body,  those  sinful  desires  and  depraved  inclinations  which,  if  they 
do  not  actually  deprive  us  of  "the  rest  and  the  inheritance  which  the  Lord  our  God 
giveth  us, "  cannot  but  make  us  less  fit  for  it.  Let  us  learn  the  pleasure  of  giving 
up  our  wills,  instead  of  indulging  them  ;  of  looking  "not  every  man  on  his  own 
things,  but  every  man  also  on  the  things  of  others"  ;  of  doing,  not  "every  man 
whatsoever  is  right  in  his  own  eyes, "  but  ever^  man  whatsoever  is  right  for  him 
to  do — what  religion  teaches,  what  conscience  justifies,  and  what  God  approves. 

V.  Let  us  learn  from  this  sub-ject  to  understand  more  perfectly,  and  to 

APPRECIATE  MORE  JUSTLY,    THE    GoSPEL   METHOD    OF    SALVATION.      MoseS,  We    are 

told,  "was  faithful  in  all  his  house"  ;  as  the  mediator  of  that  former  covenant,  he 
performed  his  part  on  the  whole  faithfully  and  well ;  but  that  was  all.  He  was  no 
redeemer;  he  could  not  "save  his  people  from  their  sins."  He  was  a  sinner  like 
themselves  :  the  things  which,  by  reason  of  their  frailty,  they  did  there  that  day, 
he  also  did.  Christ  alone  could  say,  "  Ye  shall  not  do  after  all  the  things  which  ye 
do  here  this  day  "  ;  ye,  not  vx, — excluding  Himself  from  the  number  of  those  who 
do  "  every  man  whatsoever  is  right  in  his  own  eyes."  Of  Himself  He  says,  "I  seek 
not  Mine  own  will,  but  the  will  of  the  Father  which  sent  Me."  "  I  do  always  those 
things  that  please  Him."  On  this  principle — of  seeking  God's  glory,  not  His  own 
— Reacted  through  life,  and  also  "became  obedient  unto  death."  Without  this 
act  we  should  never  have  come  to  that  rest,  never  have  attained  to  that  inheritance 
at  all.  We  should  have  continued  all  our  lives,  as  many  do  to  this  day,  doing 
**  every  man  whatsoever  is  right  in  his  own  eyes "  ;  because  we  should  have  had 
no  motive  or  inducement  to  do  otherwise.  If  we  have  learnt  better  things,  it 
is  only  because  we  have  learnt  Christ ;  learnt  Him  as  "  the  way,  the  truth,  and  the 


CHAP.  XII.]  DEUTERONOMY,  341 

life  "  ;  "heard  Him,  and  been  taught  by  Him,  as  the  truth  is  in  Jesus."  It  remains 
that  we  should  turn  our  lessons  into  practice,  by  "putting  off  the  old  man,"  &c. 
So  shall  we  leave  otf  by  degrees  to  "do  after  all  the  things  which  we  do  here  this 
day  "  ;  and  under  the  renewing  and  sanctifying  influence  of  the  Holy  Spirit  we 
shall  become  daily  more  and  more  "  meet  for  the  inheritance  of  the  saints  in  light/' 
and  ripe  for  that  "rest  which  remaineth  for  the  people  of  God."  {Frederick  Field, 
LL.D.) 

Ver.  9.  Ye  are  not  as  yet  come  to  the  rest  and  to  the  inheritance. — Not  as 

yet : — That  is  the  beginning — the  refrain — the  very  soul  of  a  hymn.  * '  Not  as  yet " 
— it  is  a  blossom-like  word — an  unfulfilled  prophecy.  "  Not  as  yet " — why,  then, 
it  may  be  some  day.  The  meaning  is  that  we  are  on  the  road  :  How  far  have  we 
travelled?  Are  we  home?  The  voice  answers  in  the  night.  Not  yet.  But  if  we 
were  on  the  wrong  road  the  voice  would  not  answer  so  ;  the  voice  would  then  say  : 
Home  :  why,  we  are  lost,  we  are  on  the  wrong  road  ;  every  mile  we  have  travelled 
these  last  two  days  has  been  a  mile  in  the  opposite  direction.  But  the  very  tone  of 
the  voice  itself  is  a  gospel.  "  Not  as  yet  "  :  presently  ;  nearer  and  nearer.  "  Not  as 
yet"  :  every  step  is  a  battle  won  ;  every  step  is  one  more  difficulty  past.  "  Not 
as  yet "  ;  but  sufficiently  near  to  be  getting  ready.  What  is  the  meaning  of  all  this 
stir  on  the  ship,  this  running  to  and  fro,  this  calling  out  from  one  to  another?  We 
have  passed  something,  we  have  passed  a  signal,  we  shall  land  to-night !  Getting 
ready,  saying  in  effect,  It  is  all  over  now,  what  remains  to  be  done  is  a  mere  matter 
of  detail ;  we  are  waiting,  and  presently  we  shall  be  there.  How  do  we  measure  our 
journey  ?  By  the  middle  mile.  We  seem  not  to  have  begun  the  journey  whilst  we 
are  on  the  first  half  of  it,  but  as  soon  as  we  get  in  the  middle  of  the  sea,  and  are  told 
that  the  middle  mile  has  been  passed,  we  say.  It  is  all  downhill  now.  Many  people 
are  more  than  half  way  through  life's  road  :  what  is  it  to  be  during  the  remainder 
of  the  days  ?  Are  we  leaving  heaven  behind  us,  or  are  we  going  to  it  ?  Many  men 
are  leaving  behind  them  the  only  heaven  they  have  ever  prepared  for  :  what  wonder 
if  they  do  not  sing  during  the  last  half  of  the  voyage  or  the  journey  ?  Others  have 
had  a  dreary  time,  a  melancholy  experience,  a  troubled  disciplinary  lot,  and  when 
they  are  told  about  half-way  through  tliat  it  is  all  home-going  and  the  distance  may 
in  some  unaccountable  way  be  shortened,  behold  their  faces  are  alight  with  a  new 
expression,  their  soul  has  come  up  to  look  out  of  the  window  to  see  if  it  be  even  so. 
I  heard  a  great  voice  from  heaven  saying  :  Blessed  are  the  dead  that  die  in  the 
Lord  :  for  they  shall  rest.  Rest  is  promised,  not  as  the  reward  of  selfishness  or  self- 
indulgence,  but  as  the  crown  of  service.  No  man  can  rest  who  has  not  toiled.  No 
man  can  have  real  joy  who  has  not  had  real  sorrow.  What  right  have  we  to  rest 
if  we  have  been  resting  all  the  time?  The  week  has  Sunday  in  front  of  it.  Cheer 
thee  !  It  is  Friday.  When  is  Sunday  ?  The  day  after  to-morrow.  Is  Sunday  in 
every  week  ?  Yes.  Herein  is  the  goodness  of  God.  We  need  frequent  Sabbaths, 
we  need  refreshment  by  the  road,  yea,  at  every  seventh  step  of  the  journey  we  must 
sit  down  awhile.  Sometimes  we  have  a  lift  by  the  way.  Does  the  Shepherd  not 
need  Himself  to  be  carried  sometimes?  No  :  because  He  is  not  a  shepherd,  one  of 
many,  but  The  Shepherd,  out  of  whose  shepherdliness  all  other  pastors  are  struck. 
The  little  candle  dies,  the  sun  burneth  evermore.  You  need  rest— why  not  have  it  ? 
You  are  a  very  little  one,  and  you  are  soon  tired,  and  He,  I  repeat,  carrieth  the 
lambs  in  His  bosom.  The  very  principle  that  Christ  went  upon  was  the  principle 
of  "Not  as  yet."  "A  little  while  "  is  the  length  of  time  Christ  gave  Himself.  He 
endured  the  Cross,  despising  the  shame,  because  He  looked  for  the  joy  that  lay 
beyond.  Men  draw  themselves  through  earth  by  laying  hold  of  heaven.  That  is 
how  the  earth  drags  itself  along  ;  it  is  all  looped  up  to  the  sun.  No  man  has  seen 
the  filaments,  the  threadlets,  but  the  sun  feeds  them  every  one.  The  tiny  earth  is 
hooked  on  by  invisible  tentacles  to  the  great  central  chariot.  It  is  so  that  life  is 
drawn  forward,  it  is  so  that  life  is  sanctified  ;  because  that  by  which  we  are  con- 
nected with  the  sun  is  that  through  which  the  centre  also  communicates  to  us. 
(/.  Parker,  D.D.)  The  imjyerfection  of  the  believer's  earthly  happiness: — I.  Let 
us  notice  the  terms  in  which  the  end  of  the  Israelites'  journey  is  spoken 
OF.  They  are  the  very  same  terms  which  are  used  in  the  New  Testament  as  applic- 
able to  the  Christian's  everlasting  home,  and  tliey  point  out  respectively  its  blessed- 
ness, its  certainty,  its  freeness.  1.  For  it  is  called  a  rest :  "Ye  are  not  as  yet  come 
to  the  rest."  And  this  it  is  well  known  St.  Paul  applies  to  our  eternal  home,  when 
he  says  to  the  Hebrews,  "There  remaineth,  therefore,  a  rest  to  the  people  of  God." 
And  in  this  expression,  I  repeat,  is  conveywi  to  us  the  great  blessedness  of  that  our 


342  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  xiL 

eternal  portion.  For  if  there  is  one  word  which  seems  to  contain  within  it  an  idea 
of  what  is  really  grateful  and  enjoyable  in  this  world,  it  is  the  word  •*  rest."  Con- 
demned, as  we  are,  to  eat  our  bread  by  the  sweat  of  our  brow,  "and  bein^  bom  to 
trouble,  as  the  sparks  fly  upward,"  rest  is  one  of  the  greatest  earthly  blessings  that 
God  can  bestow.  The  believer,  then,  is  one  day,  and  that  perhaps  no  distant  day, 
to  rest  completely  and  eternally  from  all  that  pains  and  grieres  him  here.  He  shall 
rest  from  suffering,  "  for  there  shall  be  no  more  pain  "  :  he  shall  rest  from  sorrowing, 
for  "there  shall  be  no  more  death,  neither  sorrow  nor  crying"  ;  but  above  all  he 
shall  rest  from  sin.  2.  But  there  is  another  expression  here  used,  which  the  New 
Testament  warrants  us  to  apply  to  the  rest  that  remaineth  to  the  people  of  God, 
namely,  "inheritance."  This  expression  denotes  the  certainty  of  the  believer's  por- 
tion. There  are  only  three  things  in  the  dealings  of  this  world  which  can  disappoint 
the  heir  of  his  inheritance  ;  and,  if  it  can  be  shown  that  these  cannot  take  place  as 
regards  the  believer,  the  case  is  clear.  For,  in  the  first  place,  in  earthly  things, 
the  parent  or  the  person  owning  the  property  may,  from  some  cause  or  other, 
change  his  mind,  and  cut  off  the  heir  from  the  inheritance.  But,  in  the  case  now 
before  us,  "  the  gifts  and  calling  of  God  are  without  repentance."  Or,  secondly, 
the  heir  may  rebel  or  run  away,  and  so  forfeit  and  give  up  all  claim  to  the  inherit- 
ance. But  in  this  case  this  is  provided  against ;  for  one  part  of  the  adoption  into 
the  family  of  God  is  the  gift  of  the  Spirit,  to  keep  the  heir  in  the  love  and  fear  of 
God,  according  as  it  is  written  :  "  I  will  put  My  fear  within  them,  that  they  shall 
not  depart  from  Me."  Or,  thirdly,  the  heir  may  die  before  the  time  appointed  of 
the  father,  and  so  be  disappointed.  But,  as  regards  the  heavenly  inheritance,  this 
can  never  be  :  "  The  soul  once  quickened  shall  never  die  "  :  "The  heirs  of  God  are 
kept  by  His  power  through  faith  unto  salvation  "  :  "I  give  unto  them  eternal  life, 
and  they  shall  never  perish"  :  "  Because  I  live,  ye  shall  live  also."  3.  But  there 
is  yet  another  expression  here  used,  which  appears  to  denote  the  freeness  with 
which  it  is  offered,  and  which  we  find  used  in  the  New  Testament  to  denote  the  same 
idea.  It  is  spoken  of  as  a  gift :  "Ye  are  not  come  to  the  rest  and  the  inheritance 
which  the  Lord  your  God  givethyou."  Now,  the  New  Testament  invariably  speaks 
of  this  as  a  gift.  St.  Paul  says,  particularly,  "The  wages  of  sin" — i.e.  the  just 
reward  of  sin — "  is  death  ;  but  the  gift  of  God  " — observe,  not  the  wages,  nor  the 
reward,  but  the  free,  undeserved  gift  of  God — "is  eternal  life,  through  Jesus  Christ 
our  Lord."  God  is  a  sovereign  :  He  has  a  right  to  do  what  He  will :  He  is  our 
Sovereign,  and  He  has  a  right  to  our  services :  He  is  our  Maker,  and  He  has  a  right 
to  ourselves.  And  there  is  no  obedience,  no  service,  which  it  is  in  our  power  to 
render  Him,  to  which  He  has  not  already  an  undoubted  right ;  and,  consequently,  we 
can  never  do  anything  for  which  God  is  bound  in  the  least  degree  to  bless  us.  All 
His  gifts,  therefore,  to  us  are  free  and  undeserved,  and  whatever  He  gives  He  gives 
of  His  own  free  and  sovereign  grace ;  and  as  such  we  must  receive  it  or  perish. 
II.  Such  being  the  terras  in  which  the  heavenly  inheritance  is  spoken  of,  let  us  turn 

to   THE  PEOOFS  WHICH   THE   ChEISTIAN   HAS  THAT   HE   HAS   NOT  YET  COME  TO  THE 

HEST  WHICH  IS  EESEEVED  EOE  HIM.  These  are  various,  but  we  will  take  only  a  few 
which  come  more  immediately  in  connection  with  the  text.  1.  The  imperfection 
and  vanity  of  every  thing  connected  with  this  life — its  sorrows,  disappointments, 
pain,  and  bereavements — all  these  things  are  enough  to  remind  us,  as  I  believe  they 
are  graciously  intended  to  remind  us,  that  this  is  not  our  home.  Thus  the  Israelites, 
wherever  they  rested,  wherever  they  went,  were  still  in  the  wilderness  :  turn  where 
they  would,  the  same  barren  scene  would  probably  present  itself,  and  remind  them 
that  this  is  not  Canaan,  this  is  still  the  wilderness.  Let  us  be  blessed  with  what- 
ever joy  or  advantage  we  will,  there  is  a  worm  at  the  root;  and,  with  all  its 
capabilities  of  affording  happiness,  still  it  is  not  permanent,  it  j^erishes  in  the  using. 
Friends  disappoint,  children  and  those  dear  are  removed,  health  decays,  riches 
make  to  themselves  wings,  and  fly  away ;  so  that,  with  all  our  earthly  comforts, 
and  they  are  not  few,  we  are  still  reminded  by  them,  and  it  is  the  crowning  mercy 
of  them  all  that  we  are  reminded  by  them,  that  this  is  not  our  resting-place, 
and  we  are  strangers  and  pilgrims  here.  2.  But  the  Israelites  would  be  reminded, 
from  time  to  time,  that  they  had  not  entered  into  rest,  by  the  continual  attacks  to 
which  they  were  exposed  from  their  enemies,  and  perhaps  also  by  the  continued 
murmurings  and  rebellions  which  arose  among  themselves.  True  it  is,  that  even  in 
Canaan,  the  nations  greater  and  mightier  than  they,  were  to  be  dispossessed  ;  still, 
even  on  their  road  they  would  feel  that  they  had  not  yet  attained  what  Moses  had 
promised  :  "  When  the  Lord  God  shall  have  given  you  rest  from  all  your  enemies 
round  abouL"    And  this  is  an  especial  mark  to  a  Christian  that  his  rest  and  his 


CHAP.  XII.]  DEUTERONOMY, 


343 


mhentance  IS  not  here.  Wherever  he  looks  the  enemy  meets  his  view  ;  whether  he 
look  around  or  within  him,  the  scene  is  the  same.  I  mean  not  that  he  takes  a 
gloomy  view  of  all  these  things,  but  he  cannot  deny  the  fact  that  »the  world  lieth 
m  wickedness  His  own  experience  tells  him  that  he  has  not  yet  reached  that 
place  or  that  state  where  ignorance  shaU  not  exist,  where  every  murmuring  disposi- 
tion shall  be  for  ever  hushed,  where  every  rebellious  feeling  shall  be  for  ever  slain 

t  .Tf'''7i''°''^^VJ.^?^^'i  S^^l^^  ^^°"g^*  ^^  complete  and  eternal  captivity 
to  the  obedience  of  Christ.  3.  But  I  think  it  may  be  slid  that  our  very  spiritu/l 
blessings  are  calculated  to  remind  us  of  this.  All  our  means  of  grace,  and  all  our 
privileges,  many  and  blessed  as  they  are,  are  yet  adapted  for  a  state  of  ignorance 
and  imperfection.  The  manna  which  the  Israelites  gathered  from  day  to  Say  and 
the  spiritual  Rock  that  followed  them, "  would  especially  remind  them  of  the  truth 
adverted  to  m  the  text  How  different  from  the  grapes  of  Eshcol  !  how  far  short 
of  tlie  land  flowing  with  milk  and  honey,  to  which  they  were  repeatedly  encouraged 
to  look  !  and  yet  they  were  marvellous  blessings  in  themselves.  And  so  it  is  with 
us  The  spiritual  life  is  but  a  small  foretaste  of  that  fulness  of  life  which  is  hid  in 
Christ  with  God  ;  and  the  very  supplies  of  the  Spirit  are  but  the  distant  branchings 
of  that  river  which  -  makes  glad  the  city  of  God,"  issues  from  the  Uving  fountains 
to  which  the  Lamb  shall  one  day  lead  His  people.  How  inferior,  too,  is  the  very 
wntten  or  preached  word  on  earth  to  what  the  believer  wiU  hear  in  glory  !  How 
inferior  the  worship  in  the  earthly  courts  to  the  worship  of  the  redelmed  !  How 
mfenor  is  that  feast  of  the  Lord's  Supper,  to  which  we  are  often  invited,  to  that 
supper  at  which  the  bnde  of  Christ  is  one  day  to  be  present.     IIL  What,  then  are 

THE  LESSONS   OF  WARNING,  OF   DUTY,  OR  OF   ENCOURAGEMENT  WHICH    WE    Afii  TO 

LEARN  FROM  THESE  CONSIDERATIONS  ?    1.  We  learn  a  lesson  of  warning,  not  to  fix 
our  habitation  here,  still  less  to  look  back  upon  the  world  which  we  have  left     God 
give  you  grace  to  be  wise  in  time,  that  you  may  be  happy  in  eternity.    2.  But.  'again 
we  learn  a  large  lesson  of  duty.     We  learn  that  we  must  not  lay  Lide  our  amouJ 
while  we  are  in  the  enemy  s  neighbourhood  ;  we  must  not  cease  our  watchfulness 
while  we  are  beset  by  foes  within  and  without ;  we  must  not  be  contemplating  the 
length  of  road  we  have  passed,  but  looking  on  to  what  remains.     3.  And,  l^tly 
let  us  learn  a  lesson  of  great  encouragement.     The  very  expression,  "  Ye  are  not  as 
yet  come,    seems  to  imply  that  the  day  is  at  hand  when  you  certainly  shall  come  • 
and  there  IS  nothing  so  encouraging  in  any  work  as  the  certain  conviction  of  success' 
JMow  you  know  of  your  heavenly  journey  what  you  know  of  no  other,  that  you  shall 
not  be  disappointed  ;  "your  labour  shall  not  be  in  vain  in  the  Lord."    Gird  un 
then,  the  loins  of  your  mind,  and  lay  hold  on  eternal  life.     (R.  Sankev    M.a\ 
Emxgrcdwn  to  a  hetUr  country  .--Emigration  may,  or  it  may  not,  be  a  very  wise  step 
I  lay  It  down  as  a  rule,  that  emigration  is  decidedly  the  best  thing  for  any  man 
whenever  the  following  propositions  are  true,  that  is-1.  When  he  cannot  see  an^ 
hope  of  supporting  himself  at  home.     2.  When  prospects  abroad  are  decidedly  good 

frnrn  i.'.^^.  f '''"i' wV^'Ji:  ^'  ^^'".  ^^'  ^^'^^^  ^^  P^^^^^^  ^«  performed  fre^ 
!nT  ^  w^  •  r  •  ^^'?-  *^'  "^'^^^  of  paying  the  emigration  expenses  are  secure  ; 
Ll";:^'  r  family  ties  are  of  such  a  sort  that  they  may  with  propriety  be 

severed,  or  when  those  dearest  to  you  can  accompany  you.  I  am  not  intending  to 
say  much  more  about  emigration.  Yet  I  have  some  valuable  advice  to  offer  you  u^on 
the  subject.  Agents,  from  various  motives,  often  deceive  men  about  the  goodness 
5  P^l?'!^""  rTl^'^V^'  ^^^  cheapness  of  the  voyage  by  their  ship,  or  the  Srtainty 
of  employment  at  high  wage  when  they  reach  the  place  of  destination.  You  need 
not  fear  deceit  m  this  case.  There  can  be  no  motive  for  any  deception.  I  say  then 
you  will  be  wise  to  go  thither,  for  these  two  reasons-(l)  Because  sooner  or  later' 
you  must  leave  here.  "  The  longest  life  is  but  a  lingering  death."  and  your  life 
^Y.lr}^^,  even  long  enough  to  prove  the  saying.  "This  is  not  your  rest." 
fo<l  f  !t,  ^  ^®^  come  to  the  mhentance,  which  the  Lord  your  God  giveth  you  " 
(2)  But  then  again  even  if  you  could  Kve  here  for  ever,  it  would  not  maktyou  hapny 
pp  W  Kff  u  •  '^  ^?"'  ^T  "^r,  prolonged,  you  could  not,  as  now  c^nstitutea' 
M  f^V.l  »  Vt'^^f  V  °^«i\^,«^°ly  sigl^t  to  see  an  aged  person  who  has  ouS 
his  fnends  and  kmsfolk,  and  the  manners  and  customs  of  his  age.  EverythL  J  k 
wrong  with  such  a  man.  No  sympathy  of  spirit,  no  word,  nS  feelinl^^^ 
common  with  him  He  stands  decaying  and  shrivelling,  like  th7  on?  oTd  ^k^ 
spared  when  the  forest  has  fallen,  only  to  look  more  dilar  as  the  sprightly  ^ew 
^ees  spnng  up  about  him      So  here  a/ain  is  another  good  reason  for^your  e^i^a 

?!.?;.  V^  ^r?  ^^^  ^  ^""^  '^  ^^  ^^^^^^  »^^  ^^^  everything,  renSo 
the  world  unfit  for  us,  and  ns  unfit  for  life;  because  we  ar«  "to  paL    therefore 


344  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xii. 

througli  the  grave  and  gate  of  death  to  our  joyful  resurrection  "  ;  and  so,  * '  ye  are- 
not  as  yet  come  to  the  rest  and  to  the  inheritance,  which  the  Lord  your  God  giveth 
you."  2.  It  may  be  necessary  to  emigrate  ;  but  are  the  prospects  good  elsewhere  ? 
Here  is  a  description  of  the  allotment  offered  to  emigrants.  It  is  called  an  inherit- 
ance, because  an  Elder  Brother  of  yours  has  ' '  gone  before  "  and  bought  it,  and  He^ 
says  " you  are  joint  heirs  with  Me."  It  is  called  "an  inheritance  incorruptible  and 
undefiled,  and  that  fadeth  not  away,  and  it  is  reserved,"  put  by,  kept  ready,  safe, 
all  prepared  "  for  you."  Yes,  all  this  in  prospect,  seen  by  faith,  heard  of  by  letter 
and  by  promise  !  But  remember,  "ye  are  not  yet  come  to  this  rest  and  inheritance 
which  the  Lord  your  God  giveth  you."  3.  It  may  be  needful  to  emigrate,  and  the 
prospects  beyond  seem  to  baffle  description  in  their  beauty  ;  but  that  swelling  flood, 
those  tossing  waters,  are  too  much  for  you — you  have  no  great  means  for  paying 
the  costlj'  freightage ;  and  then  there  is  the  constant  dread  lest  you  should  make 
shipwreck,  and  so  never  reach  the  land  whither  you  would  go.  The  prospects  are  all 
you  can  desire,  if  ouly  you  could  get  there.  I  have  read  the  terms  of  the  emigra- 
tion, and  I  am  confident  that  He  who  gives  the  inheritance  grants  a  perfectly  free 
passage  thither.  Christ  said,  when  here  on  earth,  "  I  am  the  Way,  the  Truth,  and 
the  Life.  No  man  cometh  to  the  Father  but  by  Me."  The  Saviour  of  sinners 
offers  them  a  home.  It  is  not  a  reformatory  or  a  prison,  but  a  home  with  Himself. 
He  tells  you  that  you  must  receive  it  as  a  gift,  and  not  make  bargains  about  it. 
And  His  law  upon  the  matter  is,  that  since,  from  first  to  last,  it  is  not  of  works,  but 
the  free  gift  of  Himself,  so  you  are  to  claim  the  inheritance  and  journey  thither 
entirely  at  His  cost.  Are  family  ties  of  such  a  character  as  to  hinder  you  from  emi- 
gration ?  I  answer.  Certainly  not,  because  they,  too,  both  friends  and  kinsfolk,  must. 
leave  this  place  and  go  elsewhere.  Therefore,  I  say,  your  course  is  plain.  Resolve 
that  you  will,  through  the  grace  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  pass  over  from  this  present 
world  of  sin  unto  the  future  inheritance  of  the  sons  of  God.  And  bring  your  kins- 
men with  you.     {S.  Venables.)         Our  rest  and  inheritance  beyond  : — I.  The  rest. 

1.  From  sin.  2.  From  temptation.  3.  From  enemies.  (1)  Physical.  It  is 
astonishing  beyond  measure  to  see  what  seemingly  refined  men  will  do  to  trip  a. 
Christian  to  whom  they  have  taken  a  dislike.  (2)  Spiritual  powers  of  darkness, 
&c.    4.  From  weariness.     6.  From  doubts.     II.  The  inheritance.    1.  Purchased. 

2.  Prepared.    3.  Pure.    4.  Sure.    5.  For  the  saints.     III.  Our  present  condition. 

1.  Not  a  condition  of  ceaseless  toil.  2.  Not  a  condition  of  entire  exclusion  from  our 
inheritance.  3.  We  here  enjoy  the  means  of  grace.  Lessons :  1.  In  view  of  all 
this  we  should  rejoice — (1)  Because  of  what  God  has  done  for  us.  (2)  Because  of 
what  God  is  doing  for  us  in  heaven.     (3)  Because  of  what  God  is  doing  in  us  now. 

2.  Are  we  being  fitted  for  that  rest  and  inheritance  ?  3.  Are  there  any  here  who 
are  seeking  their  rest  on  earth  ?  Oh  !  poor  miserable  souls,  ye  with  all  your  seeking 
have  not  rest  here,  and  will  not  have  rest  hereafter!  {Bp.  Courtney.)  The 
expected  rest  .-—I.  The  rest  which  awaits  believers.  1.  A  promised  rest.  2.  A 
complete  rest.  3.  Rest  in  the  possession  of  an  inheritance.  4.  An  eternal  rest. 
II.  Some  considerations  suggested  by  the  fact  that  we  are  not  yet  come  to  our  rest. 
And  this  fact  requires  us — 1.  To  endure  hardships.  2.  To  prize  comforts.  3.  To 
avoid  present  resting.  4.  To  be  seeking  the  rest  that  is  to  come.  All  things 
encourage  us  to  advance.  A  better  than  earthly  Canaan  before  us ;  a  greater  Leader 
than  Moses  to  guide  us ;  and  the  millions  of  the  glorified  invoking  us,  by  their 
reward,  to  imitate  their  example.  Oh  !  be  not  slothful,  but  followers  of  them,  who, 
through  faith  and  patience,  are  inheriting  the  promises.  We  may  infer — 1.  The 
infatuation  of  the  wicked,  who,  besides  not  having  come  to  this  rest,  are  sedulously 
shunning  it  by  a  contrary  course ;  and— 2.  The  happiness  of  the  righteous,  who, 
though  they  have  not  yet  come  to  this  rest,  are  hourly  coming  to  it,  and  whose  veiy 
bereavements  teach  not  more  strikingly  the  vanity  of  this  world  than  the  proximity 
of  a  better.     (Z>.  King.) 

Ver.  28.  That  it  may  go  "well  with  thee. — Blessings  for  the  obedient : — Though 
salvation  is  not  by  the  works  of  the  law,  yet  the  blessings  which  are  promised  ta 
obedience  are  not  denied  to  the  faithful  servants  of  God.  The  curses  our  Lord 
took  away  when  He  was  made  a  curse  for  us,  but  no  clause  of  blessing  has  been 
abrogated.  We  are  to  note  the  revealed  will  of  the  Lord,  giving  our  attention  not 
to  portions  of  it,  but  to  "all  these  words."  There  must  be  no  picking  and  choosing, 
but  an  impartial  respect  to  all  that  God  has  commanded.  This  is  the  road  of 
blessedness  for  the  father  and  for  his  children.  The  Lord's  blessing  is  upon  His 
chosen  to  the  third  and  fourth  generation.     If  they  walk  uprightly  before  Him,  He 


-CHAP.  XII.]  DEUTERONOMY.  345 


•will  make  all  men  know  that  they  are  a  seed  which  the  Lord  hath  blessed.  No 
blessing  can  come  to  us  or  ours  through  dishonesty  or  double  dealing.  The  ways 
■of  worldly  conformity  and  unholiness  cannot  bring  good  to  us  or  ours.  It  will  go 
well  with  us  when  we  go  well  before  God.  If  integrity  does  not  make  us  prosper, 
knavery  will  not.  That  which  gives  pleasure  to  God  will  bring  pleasure  to  us. 
(C  H.  Spurgeon.)  And  with  thy  children  after  thee.— Care  for  posterity ;— God 
is  concerned  for  posterity.  We  may  mock  the  suggestion,  and  put  foolish  questions 
concerning  the  generations  yet  to  come,  but  the  Book  of  God  is  as  careful  about 
the  child  unborn  as  about  the  old  pilgrim  born  into  the  higher  spaces.  God  does 
not  insulate  Himself  by  the  little  present ;  He  contemplates  the  end  from  the 
beginning.  All  souls  are  His.  He  also  puts  it  into  our  care  to  regard  the  welfare 
of  our  successors.  There  is  a  sense  in  which  we  all  have  a  posterity — some  in  a 
narrower,  some  in  a  larger  sense  ;  but  we  all  have  a  succession  :  we  are  influencing 
to-morrow  by  our  spirit  and  action  to-day.  How  mad  are  they,  and  how  guilty  of 
the  cruellest  murder,  who  go  on  indulging  every  desire,  sating  every  appetite,  satis- 
fying every  wish,  forgetting  that  they  are  involving  the  yet  unborn  to  pain,  weak- 
ness, incapacity,  and  dooming  them  to  lifelong  suffering  and  distress.  Here  is  the 
greatness  of  the  Bible,  the  noble  condescension  of  God,  the  infinite  solicitude  of 
the  eternal  Father.  His  speech  runs  to  this  effect :  take  care :  not  only  are  you 
involved,  but  your  child  and  child's  child,  for  generation  upon  generation :  your 
■drunkenness  will  reappear  in  the  disease  of  ages  yet  to  come ;  your  bad  conduct 
will  repeat  itself  in  a  long  succession  of  evil-minded  men  ;  your  behaviour  appears 
at  present  to  be  agreeable,  to  have  some  aspects  that  might  be  called  delightful, 
but  things  are  not  what  they  seem  :  actions  do  not  end  in  themselves  ;  every  bad 
thought  you  think  takes  out  some  spark  of  vitality  from  your  brain — robs  you, 
depletes  you  ;  be  careful  ;  have  some  regard  for  those  who  have  to  succeed  you  ; 
leain  from  those  who  went  before  you  how  evil  a  thing  it  is  to  have  sown  bad  seed, 
and  by  what  you  have  learned  from  them  conduct  yourself  aright ;  if  you  are  true, 
wise,  pure,  generous,  well-conducted  altogether,  generations  will  arise  to  bless  you  ; 
if  you  take  care  of  the  poor,  if  any  of  your  succession  be  doomed  to  poverty,  with 
what  measure  you  mete  it  shall  be  measured  to  you  and  them  again  ;  blessed  are 
the  merciful,  for  they  shall  obtain  mercy ;  with  what  judgment  ye  judge  ye  sliall 
be  judged.  Life  is  one  :  touch  it  where  we  may,  we  send  a  thrill,  a  vibration, 
along  all  the  vital  lines.  The  law  is  twofold  :  sow  evil,  and  re:ip  evil ;  sow  good, 
and  reap  good.  This  is  no  partial  law,  dealing  with  penalty  and  shame  only :  it 
is  an  impartial  righteousness,  dealing  with  reward  and  glory,  and  promising  delight 
vast  and  tender  as  the  heaven  of  God.     {J.  Farker,  D.D.) 

Ver.  30.  Take  heed  to  thyself  that  thou  be  not  snared  by  following  after  them. — 

Danger  of  a  corjj^uered  foe : — It  is  a  remarkable  fact,  and  is  proved  by  Dr.  Bell  (in 
his  History  of  British  Insects),  that  the  poison  of  the  rattlesnake  is  even  secreted 
after  death.  Dr.  Bell,  in  his  dissections  of  the  rattlesnakes  which  have  been  dead 
many  hours,  has  found  that  the  poison  continued  to  be  secreted  so  fast  as  to  require 
to  be  dried  up  occasionally  with  sponge  or  rag.  The  immoral  author,  like  these 
rattlesnakes,  not  only  poisons  during  his  lifetime,  but  after  death  :  because  his 
books  possess  the  subtle  power  of  secreting  the  venom  to  a  horrible  degree.  A 
moral  sponge  is  constantly  called  into  requisition  to  obliterate  his  poison  for  many 
years  after  he  himself  has  been  dead.  {Scientific  Illustrations.)  Revival  of  a 
conquered  sin : — As  the  bough  of  a  tree  bent  from  its  usual  course  returns  to  its 
old  position  as  soon  as  the  force  by  which  it  had  yielded  is  removed ;  so  do  men 
return  to  their  old  habits  as  soon  as  the  motives,  whether  of  interest  or  fear,  which 
had  influenced  them,  are  done  away.  "Nature,"  says  Lord  Bacon,  "is  often 
hidden,  sometimes  overcome,  seldom  extinguished.  Let  not  a  man  trust  his 
victory  over  his  nature  too  fai,  for  nature  will  lie  buried  a  great  time,  and  yet 
revive  upon  the  occasion  or  temptation  ;  like  as  it  was  with  uEsop's  damsel,  turned 
from  a  cat  to  a  woman,  who  sat  very  demurely  at  the  board's  end  till  a  mouse  ran 
before  her."  The  same  philosopher  gives  the  following  admirable  caution: — "A 
man's  nature  runs  either  to  herbs  or  weeds ;  therefore  let  him  seasonably  water  the 
one,  and  destroy  the  other. "  Need  for  watchfulness : — None  are  so  likely  to 

maintain  watchful  guard  over  their  hearts  and  lives  as  those  who  know  the  comfort 
of  living  in  near  communion  with  God.  They  feel  their  privilege  and  will  fear 
losing  it.  They  will  dread  falling  from  their  high  estate,  and  marring  their  own 
comfort  by  bringing  clouds  between  themselves  and  Christ,  He  that  goes  on  a 
joui-ney  with  little  money  about  him  takes  little  thought  of  danger,  and  cares  little 


346  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiii. 

how  late  he  travels.  He,  on  the  contrary,  that  carries  gold  and  jewels,  will  be  a 
cautious  traveller  ;  he  will  look  well  to  his  roads,  his  horses,  and  his  company,  and 
run  no  risks.  The  fixed  stars  are  those  that  tremble  most.  The  man  that  most 
fully  enjoys  the  light  of  God's  countenance,  wiU  be  a  man  tremblingly  afraid  of 
losing  its  blessed  consolations,  and  jealously  fearful  of  doing  anything  to  grieve  the 
Holy  Ghost     {Bjp.  Ryle.) 


CHAPTER  XIII. 


Vers.  1-3.  If  there  arise  amonff  you  a  prophet— Ow  the  criterion  of  a  fcUse 
miracle : — I.  The  evidence  drawn  from  miracles,  in  favour  of  any  Divine 
REVELATION,  rests  In  general  on  the  testimony  of  those  who  saw  the  miraclea 
performed.  But  in  addition  to  this,  it  is  important  to  inquire,  whether  some 
consideration  may  not  be  at  the  same  time  due  to  the  nature  and  tendency  of  the 
doctrines  themselves,  and  whether  there  may  not  be  in  them  some  internal  marks, 
which,  in  some  cases  at  least,  may  enable  us  to  distinguish  false  miracles  from  true. 
That  such  a  criterion  was  given  to  the  Jews  appears  plain  from  the  words  of  the  text, 
according  to  which,  though  a  miracle  should  actually  be  performed,  yet  if  its  inten- 
tion was  to  teach  the  doctrine  of  idolatry,  it  was  not  to  be  considered  as  a  miracle 
authorised  by  God.  II.  Yet  the  text  does  not  appear  to  be  confined  merely  to 
fictitious  miracles  of  human  contrivance,  but  to  extend  to  real  miracles 
ACTUALLY  PERFORMED,  either  by  men  permitted  so  to  act,  or  by  the  agency  of 
superior  intellectual  beings,  with  the  permission  indeed  of  God,  but  not  by  His 
authority.  Not  only  no  human  art  or  deception,  but  also  no  superior,  or  super- 
natural power  should  undermine  our  faith,  or  draw  us  from  the  allegiance  which 
we  owe  to  God.  III.  I  cannot  dismiss  the  subject  without  taking  notice  of  a  dif- 
ficulty WHICH  MAY  possibly  BE  THOUGHT  TO  ATTEND  THE  FOREGOING  THEORY. 

It  relates  to  the  assertion  that  no  internal  doctrine  can  be  brought  in  proof  of  a 
miracle.  For  it  may  be  said,  that  there  are  certain  doctrines  conveyed  by  the  heli) 
of  miracles,  which  no  human  reason  could  ever  have  discovered  ;  such  are,  that 
God  on  certain  conditions  will  freely  forgive  sins,  and  that  to  the  sincere,  penitent, 
and  faithful  believer  in  Jesus  Christ,  He  will  grant  life  eternal.  The  answer  is, 
that  though  the  truth  of  these  things  be  beyond  the  reach  of  the  human  reason 
to  discover,  yet  the  things  themselves  are  not  beyond  the  reach  of  the  human 
imagination  to  conceive.  Their  truth  therefore  must  depend  on  the  evidence  of  the 
miracles  which  were  wrought  in  their  support,  and  the  miracles  must  first  be 
distinctly  proved,  before  we  can  give  an  admission  to  the  doctrines.  (  W.  Pearce, 
D.D.)  The  objection,  of  the  Jews  to  Christ ianity,  as  f minded  on  this  2>assage, 

answered : — It  has  commonly,  and  wdth  justice,  been  thought,  that  the  two  great 
pillars  on  which  a  revelation  from  God  must  stand,  are  miracles  and  prophecies. 
Without  these  we  cannot  be  assured  that  any  discovery  which  may  have  been 
made  in  man  is  really  Divine.  We  must,  indeed,  inspect  the  matter  of  the 
thing  revealed  to  see  whether  it  be  worthy  of  Him  from  whom  it  is  said  to 
come  ;  and  from  its  internal  evidence  our  faith  will  derive  great  strength  ;  but 
still  in  the  first  instance  we  look  rather  to  external  proofs.  But  the  Jews 
imagine  that  they  are  precluded  from  judging  of  Christianity  on  such  grounds  as 
these,  since  Moses,  in  this  passage,  guards  them  against  any  such  inferences  as  we 
are  led  to  draw  from  the  prophecies  and  miracles  on  which  our  religion  is  founded. 
He  concedes  that  some  prophecies  may  be  uttered,  and  some  miracles  be  wrought 
in  favour  of  a  false  religion ;  and  that,  even  if  that  should  be  the  case,  the  Jews 
are  not  to  regard  any  evidences  arising  from  those  sources,  but  to  hold  fast  their 
religion  in  opposition  to  them.  First,  mark  the  supposition  here  made,  namely, 
that  God  may  permit  miraculous  and  prophetic  powers  to  be  exercised  even  in 
support  of  a  false  religion.  We  are  not  indeed  to  imagine  that  God  Himself  will 
work  miracles  in  order  to  deceive  His  people  and  to  lead  them  astray  ;  nor  are  wcf 
to  imagine  that  He  will  suffer  Satan  to  work  them  in  such  an  unlimited  way  as  to 
be  a  counterbalance  to  the  miracles  by  which  God  has  confirmed  His  own  religion  ; 
but  He  will,  for  reasons  which  we  shall  presently  consider,  permit  some  to  be 
wrought,  and  some  prophecies  to  come  to  pass,  notwithstanding  they  are  designed 
to  uphold  an  imposture.      The  magicians  of  Pharaoh,  we  must  confess,  wrought 


CHAP.  XIII.]  DEUTERONOMY,  347 


real  miracles.  They  were  permitted  to  do  so  much  as  should  give  Pharaoh  an 
occasion  for  hardening  his  own  heart,  but  not  sufficient  to  show  that  they  could  at 
all  come  in  competition  with  Moses.  In  every  age  there  were  also  false  prophets, 
who  endeavoured  to  draw  the  people  from  their  allegiance  to  God  ;  and  in  the 
multitude  of  prophecies  that  they  would  utter,  it  must  be  naturally  supposed  that 
some  would  be  verified  in  the  event.  Now  then,  in  the  next  place,  let  us  notice  the 
injunction  given  to  the  Jews  notwithstanding  this  supposition.  God  commands 
them  not  to  give  heed  to  that  prophet  or  that  dreamer  of  dreams,  even  though  his 
predictions  should  be  verified,  if  his  object  be  to  turn  them  from  Him  ;  for  that  He 
Himself  sufi'ers  these  illusions  to  be  practised  upon  them  in  order  that  their  fidelity 
to  Him  may  be  tried,  and  their  love  to  Him  approved.  It  may  seem  strange  that 
God  should  swtfer  such  stumbling-blocks  to  be  cast  in  the  way  of  His  people  ;  but 
it  is  not  for  us  to  say  what  Jehovah  mayor  may  not  do  ;  we  are  sure  that  "He 
tempteth  no  man,"  so  as  to  lead  him  into  sin  (James  i.  13),  and  that  the  "Judge 
of  all  the  earth  vnll  do  nothing  but  what  is  right."  But  it  is  a  fact  that  He  thus 
permitted  Job  to  be  tried,  in  order  that  he  might  approve  himself  a  perfect  man  ; 
and  in  like  manner  He  tried  Abraham,  in  order  that  it  might  appear,  whether  his 
regard  for  God's  authority  and  his  confidence  in  God's  Word  were  sufficient  to 
induce  him  to  sacrifice  his  Isaac,  the  child  of  promise  (Gen.  xxii.  1,  2,  12).  It  was 
for  similar  ends  that  God  permitted  His  people  to  be  tried  for  forty  years  in  the 
wilderness  (Deut.  viii.  2),  and  in  the  same  way  He  has  tried  His  Church  in  every 
period  of  the  world.  It  is  God's  express  design  in  the  whole  constitution  of  our 
religion  to  discover  the  secret  bent  of  men's  minds ;  and  whilst  to  the  humble  He 
gives  abundant  evidence  for  their  conviction,  He  has  left  to  the  proud  sufficient 
difficulties  to  call  forth  their  latent  animosity,  and  to  justify  in  their  own  appre- 
hensions their  obstinate  unbelief  (Luke  ii.  34,  35).  He  gave  originally  to  the  Jews, 
as  He  has  also  given  to  us,  sufficient  evidence  to  satisfy  any  candid  mind ;  and 
this  is  all  that  we  have  any  right  to  expect.  The  argument  founded  on  this 
injunction  comes  now  before  us  with  all  the  force  that  can  be  given  to  it.  A  Jew 
will  say,  "You  Christians  found  your  faith  on  prophecies  and  on  miracles;  and 
admitting  that  Jesus  did  work  some  miracles,  and  did  foretell  some  events  which 
afterwards  came  to  pass,  God  permitted  it  only  to  try  us,  and  to  prove  our  fidelity  to 
Him.  He  has  cautioned  us  beforehand  not  to  be  led  astray  from  Him  by  any  such 
things  as  these ;  and  therefore,  however  specious  your  reasonings  appear,  we  dare 
not  listen  to  them  or  regard  them."  Having  thus  given  to  the  objection  all  the 
force  that  the  most  hostile  Jew  can  wish,  I  now  come,  in  the  second  place,  to  offer 
what  we  hope  will  prove  a  satisfactory  answer  to  it.  It  cannot  but  have  struck  the 
attentive  reader  that  in  this  objection  there  are  two  things  taken  for  granted ; 
namely,  that  in  calling  Jews  to  Christianity  we  are  calling  them  from  Jehovah ; 
and  that  our  authority  for  calling  them  to  Christianity  is  founded  on  such  miracles 
as  an  impostor  might  work,  and  such  prophecies  as  an  impostor  might  expect  to 
see  verified.  But  in  answer  to.  these  two  points  we  declare,  first,  that  we  do  not 
call  them  from  Jehovah  but  to  Him  ;  and  next,  that  our  authority  is  not  founded 
on  such  miracles  and  prophecies  as  might  have  issued  from  an  impostor,  but  such 
as  it  was  impossible  for  an  impostor  to  produce  ;  and  lastly,  that,  in  calling  them 
to  Christ,  we  have  the  express  command  of  God  Himself.  1.  We  do  not  call  our 
Jewish  brethren  from  Jehovah,  but  to  Him.  We  worship  the  very  same  God  whom 
the  Jews  worship ;  and  we  maintain  His  unity  as  strongly  as  any  Jew  in  the 
universe  can  maintain  it.  As  for  idols  of  every  kind,  we  abhor  them  as  much  as 
Moses  himself  abhorred  them.  Moreover,  we  consider  the  law  which  was  written 
on  the  two  tables  of  stone  as  binding  upon  us,  precisely  as  much  as  if  it  were  again 
promulged  by  an  audible  voice  from  heaven.  With  respect  to  the  ceremonial  law, 
we  do  indeed  call  you  from  the  observance  of  that ;  and  we  have  good  reason  so  to 
do ;  for  you  yourselves  know  that  all  the  essential  part  of  your  religion  existed 
before  the  ceremonial  law  was  given ;  and  that  Abraham,  and  Isaac,  and  Jacob, 
who  lived  hundreds  of  years  before  the  ceremonial  law  was  given,  were  saved  simply 
and  entirely  by  faith  in  that  promised  "seed,  in  whom  all  the  nations  of  the  earth 
are  blessed."  If  you  ask,  Why  then  was  the  ceremonial  law  given  ?  I  answer,  To 
shadow  forth  your  Messiah,  and  to  lead  you  to  Him  ;  and  when  He  should  come  and 
fulfil  it  in  all  its  parts,  it  was  then  to  cease ;  and  you  yourselves  know  that  it  was 
intended  by  God  Himself  to  cease  at  that  appointed  time.  If  then  we  call  you  from 
the  outward  observances  of  the  law,  it  is  not  from  disrespect  to  that  law,  but  from  a 
conviction  that  it  has  been  fulfilled  and  abrogated  by  the  Lord  Jesus.  We  call  you 
only  from  shadows  to  the  substance.     We  call  you  to  Christ  as  uniting  in  Himself 


348  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  xiii. 

all  that  the  ceremonial  law  was  intended  to  shadow  forth.  I  am  aware  that  in 
calling  you  to  worship  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  we  appear  to  you  to  be  transferring  to 
Him  the  honour  due  to  God  alone.  But  if  you  will  look  into  your  own  Scriptures 
you  will  find  that  the  person  who  was  foretold  as  your  Messiah  is  no  other  than  God 
Himself.  Receive  Him  in  the  character  in  which  the  prophet  Isaiah  foretold  His 
advent,  as  "the  Child  born,  the  Son  given,  the  wonderful  Counsellor,  the  mighty 
God,  the  Prince  of  peace."  Call  Him,  as  another  prophet  instructs  you,  "Jehovah 
our  Righteousness,"  and  know  that  in  thus  **  honouring  Christ  you  will  honour  the 
Father  who  sent  Him."  2.  The  next  thing  which  we  proposed  to  show  was,  that 
our  authority  for  calling  you  thus  to  Christ  is  not  founded  on  such  prophecies 
or  miracles  as  might  have  issued  from  an  impostor,  but  on  such  as  it  was  impossible 
for  an  impostor  to  produce.  Consider  the  prophecies  ;  they  were  not  some  few  dark 
predictions  of  mysterious  import  and  of  doubtful  issue,  uttered  by  our  Lord  Him- 
self; but  a  continued  series  of  prophecies  from  the  very  fall  of  Adam  to  the  time  of 
Christ ;  of  prophecies  comprehending  an  almost  infinite  variety  of  subjects,  and 
those  so  minute,  as  to  defy  all  concert  either  in  those  who  uttered,  or  those  who  ful- 
filled them.  Consider  the  miracles  also  ;  these  were  beyond  all  comparison  greater 
and  more  numerous  than  Moses  ever  wrought.  The  whole  creation,  men,  devils, 
fishes,  elements,  all  obeyed  His  voice  ;  and  at  His  command  the  dead  arose  to  life 
again.  But  there  is  one  miracle  alone  which  in  particular  we  will  mention.  Jesus 
said,  *  *  I  have  power  to  lay  down  My  life,  and  I  have  power  to  take  it  again  "  ;  and 
the  former  of  these  He  proved  by  speaking  with  a  loud  voice  the  very  instant 
He  gave  up  the  ghost,  showing  thereby  that  He  did  not  die  in  consequence  of  His 
nature  being  exhausted,  but  by  a  voluntary  surrender  of  His  life  into  His  Father's 
hands.  And  at  the  appointed  time  He  proved  the  latter  also,  notwithstanding  all 
the  preparations  made  to  defeat  His  purpose,  all  which  proved  in  the  issue  the 
strongest  testimonies  to  the  truth  of  His  word.  We  therefore  confidently  call  you 
to  believe  in  Him,  and  to  embrace  the  salvation  which  He  offers  you  in  the  Gospel. 
But  there  is  one  great  argument  which  we  have  reserved  till  now,  in  order  that  it 
may  bear  upon  yon  with  the  greater  weight.  3.  We  declare  to  you,  then,  in  the  last 
place,  that  in  calling  you  to  Christ  we  have  the  express  command  of  God  Himself. 
Moses,  in  chap,  xiii.,  bids  you,  as  we  have  seen,  not  to  listen  to  any  false  prophet ; 
but  in  chap,  xviii.  18,  19,  he  most  explicitly  declares  that  a  prophet  should  arise,  to 
whom  you  should  attend.  Now  I  ask  you,  who  is  the  prophet  here  spoken  of? 
Where  was  there  ever,  besides  Moses,  a  prophet  that  was  a  Mediator,  a  Lawgiver,  a 
Ruler,  a  Deliverer  ?  Was  there  ever  such  an  one  except  Jesus  ?  And  was  not  Jesus 
such  an  one  in  all  respects  ?  Yes  ;  He  has  wrought  for  you  not  a  mere  temporal 
deliverance  like  Moses,  but  a  spiritual  and  eternal  deliverance  from  sin  and  Satan, 
death  and  hell  ;  He  has  redeemed  you,  not  by  power  only,  but  by  price  also,  even  the 
inestimable  price  of  His  own  blood.  When  therefore  you  plead  the  authority  of 
Moses,  we  join  issue  with  you,  and  say,  Be  consistent.  Renounce  false  prophets, 
because  he  bids  you  ;  but  believe  in  the  true  Prophet,  whom  God,  according  to  His 
Word,  has  raised  up  to  you,  because  He  bids  you.  Let  His  authority  weigh 
equally  with  you  in  both  cases ;  and  then  we  shall  not  fear,  but  that  you  will 
embrace  the  salvation  offered  you  in  the  Gospel,  and  be  the  spiritual  children,  as  ye 
already  are  the  natural  descendants  of  believing  Abraham.  {G.  Simeon,  M.A.) 
The  only  pulpit  worth  having : — L  That  no  instrumentality  is  of  any  real 

SERVICE   TO   man,  AS   MAN,  THAT  DOES    NOT  PROMOTE  IN   HIM  A  RIGHT  SOVEREIGN 

affection.  1.  Every  man  is  under  some  one  dominant  affection.  Love  of — 
(1)  Pleasure.  (2)  Money.  (3)  Power.  (4)  Knowledge.  Man's  loves  are  his  sovereign 
laws.  2.  A  wrong  dominant  afi'ection  in  a  man  will  neutralise  the  highest  services 
that  may  be  rendered  to  him.  IL  That  the  only  right  sovereign  affection  is 
supreme  love  for  the  supremely  good.  All  goodness  streams  from  God  as  all 
light  from  the  sun.  Ought  He  not,  then,  to  be  extremely  loved  ?  III.  That  the 
only  pulpit  that  is  of  any  real  service  to  man  is  that  which  generates 
AND  FOSTERS  THIS  SOVEREIGN  AFFECTION.  1.  It  is  the  pulpit  that  works  into  man 
the  conviction  that  God  loves  men,  though  sinners.  2.  It  is  the  pulpit  that 
exhibits  God  as  essentially  good  and  benevolent  in  Himself.  {Homilist.)  Danger 
and  security: — This  passage,  by  the  inspiration  of  God,  touches  upon  all  the 
possible  points  of  danger  in  a  religious  course.  I.  What  are  the  points  of  danger  ? 
1.  The  first  may  be  described  as  being  somewhat  after  a  philosophical  sort.  There 
is  nothing  rude  in  the  assault,  nothing  violent  or  startling,  from  a  merely  physical 
point  of  view ;  it  is  a  very  delicate  encroachment  upon  religious  thought ;  it  is 
impalpable  as  a  dream.     Surely  this  is  harmless :  it  is  more  than  harmless ;  it  is 


CHAP.  XIII.]  DEUTERONOMY.  349 

instructive  :  it  may  be  a  lesson  in  the  deeper  philosophy  ;  it  may  be  the  beginning  of 
a  widening  revelation.  The  mischief  is  this,  that  a  man  who  would  listen  to  such  a 
dreamer,  or  seer  of  visions,  and  allow  his  religion  to  be  affected  by  the  nightmare, 
would  turn  the  man  out  of  his  presence  if  he  attempted  to  offer  him  a  single  idea 
upon  any  practical  subject  under  heaven.  "We  are  easily  beguiled  from  the  religious 
point.  "0  foolish  Galatians,  who  hath  bewitched  you?"  It  would  seem  as  if  it 
Avere  easier  to  murder  the  soul  than  to  kill  the  body.  The  first  point  of  danger,  there- 
fore, is  thus  clouded  in  a  golden  veil ;  and  the  man  who  may  be  said  to  be  preparing 
for  that  danger  is  dreamy,  hazy-minded,  speculative,  always  looking  into  a  mist  if, 
liaply,  he  may  find  a  star  ;  such  a  gentle,  dozing  creature,  so  harmless,  and  really  so 
Tery  attiactive  in  many  qualities  of  his  character.  2.  What  is  the  second  point  of 
danger  ?  It  is  not  at  all  philosophical ;  it  may  be  ranked  among  the  social  forces  that 
are  constantly  operating  upon  life  (ver.  6).  Social  influences  are  constantly  operat- 
ing upon  our  faith.  The  youngest  member  of  the  family  has  been  reading  a  book, 
-and  has  invited  the  head  of  the  house  to  go  and  listen  to  some  new  speaker  of 
iht-'ories,  speculations,  and  dreams  ;  the  service  is  so  beautiful ;  the  idea  is  so  novel ; 
a  great  deal  of  the  rush  and  tumult  common  to  elementary  religious  life  is  totally 
escaped  ;  the  intellectual  brother — the  man  supposed  to  have  all  the  brains  of  the 
family — has  got  a  new  idea — an  idea  which  in  nowise  associates  itself  with  historical 
churches  and  traditional  creeds,  but  a  bran-new  idea,  altogether  sparkling  and 
daring,  and  whosoever  professes  it  will  at  once  take  his  place  in  the  synagogue 
of  genius  ;  or  the  darling  friend  has  caught  a  voice  down  some  byway,  and  he 
will  have  his  other  self  go  with  him  in  the  evening  to  hear  this  speaker  of 
anti- Christian  ideas — a  man  who  has  undertaken  to  reconstruct  so  much  of  the 
universe  as  will  allow  him  to  touch  it ;  a  person  of  exquisite  mind,  of  dainty  taste, 
and  of  quiet  latent  power.  The  subtle  purpose  is  to  draw  men  away  from  the  old 
altar,  the  old  Book,  the  God  of  deliverance  and  beneficence,  of  mercy  and  redemp- 
tion, to  another  God  who  will  condescend  to  be  measured  for  a  creed,  and  who  is  not 
above  sitting  for  his  portrait.  Do  not  follow  a  multitude  to  do  evil.  Do  not  always 
be  at  the  string  end,  led  about  by  those  who  are  of  more  forceful  and  energetic 
will  than  yourselves.  Be  sure  as  to  what  they  are  taking  you  to;  have  a  clear 
understanding  before  you  begin.  You  would  not  allow  those  persons  to  interfere 
with  anything  practical :  when  the  discussion  of  commercial  questions  arises,  you 
stand  at  the  front  and  say.  There  I  can  bear  testimony,  and  there  I  ought  to 
be  heard.  Why  claim  such  a  solemn  responsibility  in  the  settlement  of  nothing, 
and  allow  anybody  to  settle  for  you  the  great  questions  of  religious  truth  and  per- 
sonal destiny  ?  3.  What  is  the  third  point  of  danger  ?  It  is  not  philosophical ;  it  is 
not,  in  the  narrow  sense  of  the  term,  social ;  it  is  a  point  of  danger  which  may 
be  characterised  as  public  sentiment,  public  opinion — a  general  turning  round,  and 
a  wholesale  abandonment  of  old  theologies  and  old  forms  of  worship  (vers.  12,  13). 
Some  men  may  have  courage  to  laugh  at  the  dreamer;  others  may  have  virtue 
enough  to  resist  the  blandishments  of  the  nearest  friend  ;  but  who  can  resist  the 
current  or  tendency  of  public  opinion  1  II.  What  is  the  course  to  be  taken  under 
CIRCUMSTANCES  OF  DANGER  ?  Moses  had  no  difficulty  about  his  reply  :  let  us  see 
what  it  was,  and  consider  whether  we  can  adopt  it.  "And  that  prophet,  or  that 
dreamer  of  dreams,  shall  be  put  to  death"  (ver.  5).  The  seducer  in  the  family 
brings  upon  himself  this  penalty.  "Neither  shall  thine  eye  pity  him,  neither 
shalt  thou  spare,  neither  shalt  thou  conceal  him  :  but  thou  shalt  surely  kill  him  " 
<vers.  8,  9)  ;  "  thou  shalt  stone  him  with  stones,  that  he  die  "  (ver.  10).  And  as  for 
the  city— representative  of  public  opinion— "Thou  shalt  surely  smite  the  inhabit- 
ants of  that  city  with  the  edge  of  the  sword,"  &c.  (vers.  15-17).  That  was  a 
drastic  course  ;  there  is  no  touch  of  compromise  in  that  stern  provision  ;  there  is  no 
line  of  toleration  in  that  tremendous  answer.  The  same  course  is  to  be  taken 
to-day,  as  to  its  spiritual  meaning.  Physical  violence  there  must  be  none  ;  the  day 
of  physical  pains  and  penalties  for  spiritual  offences  has  closed  ;  but  the  great 
lesson  of  destruction  remains  for  ever.  What  penalty,  then,  shall  we  inflict  upon 
men  who  seek  to  destroy  our  faith  ?  I  hesitate  not  in  my  reply  :  Avoid  them  ;  pass 
by  them  ;  they  would  injure  your  soul.  (./.  Parker,  D.D.)  True  tests  are  unfail- 
ing discoverers: — Every  substance  is  discoverable  by  some  "test,"  which  usually 
neutralises  it,  or  rather,  by  uniting  with  it,  forms  a  new  compound.  The  whole 
fabric  of  chemistry  rests  upon  this  wonderful  principle  as  one  of  its  corner-stones. 
Thus  if  the  least  fragment  of  copper  be  dissolved  in  acid,  and  the  fluid  be  then 
diluted  with  water  until  no  trace  of  colour  remains,  so  potent,  nevertheless,  is  the 
afl^inity  of  the  well-known  fluid  called  "ammonia"  for  the  copper,  that  a  single 


350  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiir. 

drop  of  the  latter  fluid  will  immediately  reveal  the  presence  of  the  metal  by  uniting 
with  it  and  forming  a  new  substance  of  the  loveliest  violet  colour.  Similarly,  if  a 
morsel  of  lead  be  dissolved  in  acid,  and  the  acid  be  then  diluted  with  water,  a  single 
drop  of  a  solution  of  iodide  of  potassium  Mrill  turn  the  whole  to  a  brilliant  crocus- 
yellow.  The  presence  of  iron,  after  the  same  manner,  is  discovered  by  the  least 
drop  of  tincture  of  galls,  which  blackens  it  upon  contact ;  that  of  silver  by  a  little 
solution  of  common  salt,  which  causes  flakes  of  imitative  snow  to  make  their 
appearance ;  that  of  mercury  again  with  iodide  of  potassium,  which  turns  the 
fluid  containing  it  to  a  beautiful  red.     {Scientific  Illustrationt.) 

Ver.  4.  Ye  shall  walk  after  the  Lord  your  God.—  With,  before,  after  (with  Gen. 
V.  22,  and  xvii.  1) : — ^You  see  that  these  three  fragments,  in  their  resemblances  and  in 
their  differences,  are  equally  significant.  They  concur  in  regarding  life  as  a  walk — 
a  metaphor  which  expresses  continuity,  so  that  every  man's  life  is  a  whole,  which 
expresses  progress,  and  which  implies  a  goal.  They  agree  in  saying  that  God  must 
be  brought  into  a  life  somehow,  and  in  some  aspect,  if  that  life  is  to  be  anything 
else  but  an  aimless  wandering,  if  it  is  to  tend  to  the  point  to  which  every  Im-nan 
life  should  attain.  But  then  they  diverge,  and,  if  we  put  them  together,  tlu  y  say 
to  us  that  there  are  three  different  ways  in  which  we  ought  to  bring  God  into  our 
life.  "We  should  "walk  with"  Him,  like  Enoch  ;  we  should  "walk  before"  Him, 
as  Abraham  was  bade  to  do  ;  and  we  should  "walk  after"  Him,  as  the  command 
to  do  was  given  to  all  Israel.  I.  "  Enoch  walked  with  God. "  Two  men  travelling 
along  a  road  keep  each  other  company.  "  How  can  two  walk  together  except  they 
be  agreed  ? "  The  Companion  is  at  our  side  all  the  same,  though  the  mists  may  have 
come  down  and  we  cannot  see  Him.  Enoch  and  God  walked  together,  by  the 
simple  exercise  of  the  faith  that  fills  the  Invisible  with  one  great,  loving  face.  The 
one  thing  that  parts  a  man  from  God,  and  makes  it  impossible  for  a  heart  to 
expatiate  in  the  thought  of  His  presence,  is  the  contrariety  to  His  will  in  our  conduct. 
II.  And  now  take  the  other  aspect  suggested  by  the  other  little  word  God  spoke  to 
Abraham  :  "  I  am  the  Almighty  God,  walk  before  Me  and  be  thou  perfect."  That 
suggests,  as  I  suppose  I  do  not  need  to  point  out,  the  idea  not  only  of  communion, 
which  the  former  phrase  brought  to  our  minds,  but  that  of  the  inspection  of  our 
conduct.  "  As  ever  in  the  great  Taskmaster's  eye,"  says  the  stern  Puritan  poet, 
and  although  one  may  object  to  that  word  "Taskmaster,"  yet  the  idea  conveyed  is 
the  correct  expansion  of  the  commandment  given  to  Abraham.  Observe  how  "  walk 
with  Me  "  is  dovetailed,  as  it  were,  between  the  revelation  "  I  am  the  Almighty 
God"  and  the  injunction  "be  thou  perfect."  This  thought  that  we  are  in  that 
Divine  Presence,  and  that  there  is  silently,  but  most  really,  a  Divine  opinion  being 
formed  of  us,  consolidated,  as  it  were,  moment  by  moment  through  our  lives,  is 
only  tolerable  if  we  have  been  walking  with  God.  We  must  first  walk  "  with  God  " 
before  the  consciousness  that  we  are  walking  "  before  "  Him  becomes  one  that  we 
can  entertain  and  not  go  mad.  "When  we  are  sure  of  the  "  with  "  we  can  bear  the 
"  before."  A  master's  eye  maketh  diligent  servants.  "  "Walk  before  Me  "  and  you 
will  be  perfect.  "If  you  will  walk  before  Me  you  will  be  perfect."  III.  Lastly, 
take  the  other  relation,  which  is  suggested  by  the  third  of  my  texts,  where  Israel 
as  a  whole  is  commanded  to  "  walk  after  the  Lord  "  their  God.  In  harmony  with 
the  very  frequent  expression  of  the  Old  Testament  about  "going  after  idols,"  so 
Israel  here  is  to  "go  after  God."  What  does  that  mean?  Communion,  the  con- 
sciousness of  being  judged  by  God  will  lead  on  to  aspiration  and  loving,  longing 
effort  to  get  nearer  and  nearer  to  Him.  "  My  soul  folio weth  hard  after  Thee,"  said 
the  Psalmist,  "Thy  right  hand  upholdeth  me."  That  element  of  yearning  aspira- 
tion, of  eager  desire  to  be  closer  and  closer,  and  liker  and  liker,  to  God  must  be  in 
all  tru6  religion.  And  I  need  not  do  more  than  remind  you  of  another  meaning 
involved  in  this  same  expression.  If  I  walk  after  God,  then  I  let  Him  go  before  me 
and  show  me  my  road.  Do  you  remember  how,  when  the  ark  was  to  cross  Jordan, 
the  commandment  was  given  to  the  Israelites  to  let  it  go  well  on  in  front,  so  that 
there  could  be  no  mistake  about  the  course,  "  for  ye  have  not  passed  this  way  here- 
tofore." Do  not  be  in  too  great  a  hurry  to  press  upon  the  heels  of  God,  if  I  may 
so  say.  Do  not  let  your  decisions  outrun  His  providence.  Keep  back  the  impa- 
tience that  would  huiTy  on,  and  wait  for  His  ripening  purposes  to  ripen  and  His 
counsels  to  develop  themselves.  Walk  after  God,  and  be  sure  you  do  not  go  in 
front  of  your  Guide,  or  you  will  lose  both  your  way  and  your  Guide.  I  need  not 
say  more  than  a  word  about  the  highest  aspect  which  this  third  of  our  command- 
ments takes  :  "His  sheep  follow  Him,"  "leaving  us  an  example  that  we  should 


CHAP.  Xlii.]  DEUTERONOMY.  3ul 

follow  in  His  steps."  {A.  Madaren,  D.D.)  The  ladder  of  attainmerd  :—YTom 
these  words  we  gather  that  many  expressions  were  needed  to  describe  the  true 
disposition  and  attitude  of  the  mind  of  Israel  toward  God.  Each  expression 
denotes  something  different,  and  each  seems  to  make  a  progressive  advance.^ 
I.  Yb  shall  walk  after  the  Lord  your  God.  This  means  "follow  Him," 
♦'.«.  go  whither  He  would  have  you  go.  We  must  follow  as  the  sheep  follows  the 
shepherd.  But,  again,  we  are  not  simply  like  sheep.  When  Israel  came  out  of 
Egypt  the  trumpets  were  blown,  and  all  followed  in  order  behind  them.  This  is 
of  the  first  importance,  that  men  should  joyfully  obey  the  cry.  Follow  Him— 
follow  after  Jesus  !  II.  Fear  Him.  Those  who  resolve  to  follow  Him  must  so  do 
it  that  they  shall  honour  Him  and  remember  that  He  has  power  to  withstand  those 
who  oppose  Him.  God's  people  must  be  filled  with  a  sense  of  His  greatness, 
majesty,  and  righteousness  as  revealed  in  the  Redeemer.  Without  the  sense  of 
this,  we  lose  the  attitude  of  mind  in  which  we  can  best  honour  Him.  Those  who 
seek  to  follow  Him  without  this  fear  are  likely  in  time  to  become  rebels  in  His 
kin<niom.  III.  Ye  shall  keep  His  commandments.  God  has  given  commands— 
"Thou  shalt"  ;  "Thou  shalt  not."  The  fear  of  God  impels  to  the  keeping  of 
these.  Not  a  cringing  dread  is  this  fear.  This  would  make  the  keeping  of  the 
commandments  merely  a  secondary  matter.  God  must  be  so  feared  that  what  He 
has  commanded  shall  be  our  delight  to  perform.  IV.  Ye  shall  obey  His  voice. 
Even  when  His  way  seems  enigmatic,  and  also  when  He  gives  special  intimations 
of  His  will  besides  the  commands  laid  down,  just  as  He  led  Israel  by  ways  they 
knew  not,  &c.  On  the  way  of  life  we  must  ever  be  on  our  guard  so  that  we  may 
find  the  right  way,  so  much  the  more  as  snares  are  laid  in  our  way  by  the  adver- 
sary— from  which  we  cannot  deliver  ourselves,  but  which  we  shall  be  able  to  avoid 
if  we  listen  to  the  voice  of  the  Spirit,  who  teaches  us  to  be  circumspect,  and  points 
out  the  way  to  us.  Y.  Ye  shall  serve  Him,  i.e.  we  must  not  be  autocrats,  but 
servants  of  God  only.  Thus  we  learn  to  please  Him  in  self-denial,  and  in  a  jealous 
care  for  His  glory.  Then,  too,  we  shall  gladly  be  found  where  the  honour  due  to 
Him  is  offered  with  prayer  and  adoration.  VI.  Ye  shall  cleave  unto  Him,  i.e. 
ye  shall  seek  His  presence  with  burning  desires,  and  with  deepest  love  and  warmth 
of  heart  and  spirit.  When  we  have  reached  thus  far,  that  we  cleave  to  Him  and 
grow  up  in  Him,  as  the  branch  in  the  vine  stem,  great  shall  be  our  gain !  Then 
may  it  be  said  of  us,  "Where  I  am,  there  shall  also  My  servant  be!"  {J.  C. 
Blwrrihardt.) 

Vers.  6-11.  If  tliy  brother  .  .  .  entice  VOi^e.— Temptation  to  idolatry  from 
kindred : — I.  It  is  the  policy  of  the  tempter  to  send  his  solicitations  by 
THE  HAND  OF  THOSE  WE  LOVE,  whom  we  least  suspect  of  any  ill  design  upon  us, 
and  whom  we  are  desirous  to  please,  and  apt  to  conform  ourselves  to.  Satan 
tempted  Adam  by  Eve,  and  Christ  by  Peter.  We  are  therefore  concerned  to  stand 
upon  our  guard  against  an  ill  proposal,  when  the  person  that  proposeth  it  can 
pretend  to  an  interest  in  us,  that  we  may  never  sin  against  God  in  compliment  to 
the  best  friend  we  have  in  the  world.  2.  The  temptation  is  supposed  to  be  private  : 
he  will  "entice  thee  secretly"  ;  implying  that  idolatry  is  a  work  of  darkness,  which 
dreads  the  light  and  covets  to  be  concealed  ;  and  which  the  sinner  promiseth 
himself,  and  the  tempter  promiseth  him,  secrecy  and  security  in.     II.  It  is  our 

duty    to    PREFER    GOD    AND    RELIGION    BEFORE    THE   BEST  FRIENDS   WE   HAVE    IN 

THE  WORLD.  1.  We  must  not  in  compliance  to  our  friends  break  God's  law 
(ver.  8).  2.  We  must  not  in  compassion  to  our  friends  obstruct  the  course  of 
God's  justice  (ver.  9).  Those  are  certainly  our  worst  enemies  that  would  thrust 
us  from  God,  our  best  friend  ;  and  whatever  draws  us  to  sin  separates  between  us 
and  God  ;  it  is  a  design  upon  our  life,  and  to  be  resented  accordingly.  {Matthew 
Henry,  D.D.) 

Ver.  17.  There  shall  cleave  nought  of  the  cursed  thing.— Destroy  the  cursed 
thing  .—IsYSie]  must  conquer  idolatrous  cities,  and  destroy  all  the  spoil,  regarding 
all  that  had  been  polluted  by  idolatry  as  an  accursed  thing  to  be  burned  with  fire. 
Now,  sin  of  all  sorts  must  be  treated  by  Christians  in  the  same  manner.  We  must 
not  allow  a  single  evil  habit  to  remain.  It  is  now  war  to  the  knife  with  sins  of  all 
sorts  and  sizes,  whether  of  the  body,  the  mind,  or  the  spirit.  We  do  not  look  upon 
this  giving  up  of  evil  as  deserving  mercy,  but  we  regard  it  as  a  fmit  of  the  grace 
of  God,  which  we  would  on  no  account  miss.  When  God  causes  us  to  have  no 
mercy  on  our  sins,  then  He  has  great  mercy  on  us.     When  we  are  angry  with  evil, 


352  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiv. 

God  is  no  more  angry  with  ua.     When  we  multiply  our  efiforts  against  iniquity,  the 
Lord  multiplies  our  blessings.     (C  H.  Spurgeon.) 


CHAPTER  XIV. 

Vers.  1-3.  Ye  are  the  children  of  the  Lord  your  God. — Israel's  relatioii,ship  to 
God: — Moses  here  tells  Israel— I.  How  God  had  dignified  them,  as  a  peculiar 
PEOPLE,  WITH  THREE  DISTINGUISHABLE  PRIVILEGES,  which  Were  their  honour,  and 
figures  of  those  spiritual  blessings  in  heavenly  things  with  which  God  has  in  Christ 
blessed  us.  1.  Here  is  election.  "The  Lord  hath  chosen  thee"  (ver.  2) ;  not  for 
their  own  merits,  or  for  any  good  works  foreseen,  but  because  He  would  magnify 
the  riches  of  His  power  and  grace  among  them.  And  thus  were  believers  chosen 
(Eph.  i.  4).  2.  Here  is  adoption.  "Ye  are  the  children  of  the  Lord  your  God" 
(ver.  1) ;  formed  by  Him  into  a  people,  owned  by  Him  as  His  peojile,  nay,  His 
family,  a  people  near  unto  Him,  nearer  than  any  other.  Every  "  Israelite  indeed  " 
is  a  child  of  God  ;  partaker  of  His  nature  and  favour,  His  love  and  l)lessing. 
3.  Here  is  sanctification.  "Thou  art  an  holy  people "  (ver.  2)  ;  separated  and  set 
apart  for  God,  devoted  to  His  service,  designed  for  His  praise,  governed  by  a  holy 
law,  graced  by  a  holy  tabernacle  and  the  holy  ordinances  relating  to  it.     II.  How 

THEY  OUGHT  TO  DISTINGUISH  THEMSELVES  BY  A  SOBER  SINGULARITY  FROM  ALL  THE 

NATIONS  THAT  WERE  ABOUT  THEM.  1.  In  their  moumiug.  "Ye  shall  not  cut 
yourselves"  (ver.  1).  (1)  They  are  forbidden  to  deform  or  hurt  their  own  bodies 
upon  any  account.  This  is  like  a  parent's  charge  to  his  children  that  are  foolish, 
careless,  and  wilful.  The  true  meaning  of  such  commandments  is,  do  yourselves 
no  harm  ;  and  this  is  also  the  design  of  those  providences  which  most  cross  us,  to 
remove  from  us  those  things  by  which  we  are  in  danger  of  doing  ourselves  injury. 
The  body  is  for  the  Lord,  and  is  to  be  used  accordingly.  (2)  They  are  forbidden  to 
disturb  and  afflict  their  own  minds  with  inordinate  grief  for  the  loss  of  near  and 
dear  relations.  If  your  father  die,  "ye  shall  not  cut  yourselves,"  you  shall  not 
sorrow  more  than  is  meet,  for  you  are  not  fatherless,  you  have  a  Father  who  is 
great,  living  and  permanent,  even  the  holy,  blessed  God,  whose  children  ye  are. 
2.  In  their  meat.  Their  observance  of  this  law  would  make  them  to  be  taken  notice 
of  in  all  mixed  companies  as  a  separate  people,  and  preserve  them  from  mingling 
themselves  with  their  idolatrous  neighbours.  (1)  It  is  plain,  in  the  law  itself,  that 
these  precepts  belonged  only  to  the  JeAvs,  and  were  not  moral  nor  of  perpetual  use, 
because  not  of  perpetual  obligation  (ver.  21).  (2)  It  is  plain,  in  the  Gospel,  that 
they  are  now  antiquated  and  repealed  (1  Tim.  iv.  4).     {Matthew  Henry,  D.D.) 

Vers.  4-20.  The  beasts  which  ye  shall  eat. — God's  provision  for  man's  table : — 
I.  Provision,  Divine  in  its  source.  Israel  could  not  have  procured  it  and  would 
not  have  known  without  Divine  teaching  what  was  good  for  them.  Recognise  that 
power  which  can  "  furnish  a  table  in  the  wilderness  "  (Psa.  Ixxviii.  19).  II.  Provi- 
sion GOOD  IN  quality.  Nothing  unclean,  nothing  unwholesome,  was  specified. 
Not  anything  was  to  be  eaten  apt  to  stimulate  sensual  passions,  or  to  foster 
coarse  tastes  and  degrading  habits.  III.  Provisions  abundant  in  quality. 
There  was  no  stint  in  beasts,  birds,  or  fish.  The  articles  of  food  were  nutritious 
and  abundant.  God's  legislation  for  our  lower  reminds  us  of  His  care  for  our  higher 
nature.  There  is  no  lack  anywhere.  Let  us  remember  our  Benefactor,  for  we  can- 
not put  a  morsel  of  food  into  our  mouths  till  God  puts  it  into  our  hands — discern 
kindness  not  only  in  prescribing,  but  in  prohibiting,  and  be  grateful  to  ' '  the  living 
God  who  giveth  us  richly  all  things  to  enjoy  "  (1  Tim.  vi.  17).  For  a  man  may  be 
blessed  with  riches,  wealth,  and  honour  ;  want  nothing  ;  "yet  God  giveth  him  not 
power  to  eat  thereof"  (Eccles.  vi.  2).  (Ibid.)  Food  provided : — In  this  provision 
of  food  we  see — 1.  A  mark  of  Divine  condescension.  If  kings  legislated  for  the 
diet  of  their  people,  is  it  beneath  the  King  of  Israel  to  appoint  the  food  for  His 
chosen  people  ?  "  All  that  we  know  of  God,"  says  Dr.  Gumming,  "in  creation,  in 
providence,  in  redemption,  leads  us  to  see  that  He  takes  as  much  care  of  what  the 
world  calls,  in  its  ignorance,  little  things,  as  He  does  of  what  the  world  thinks,  in 
equal  ignorance,  great  and  weighty  things."  2.  A  proof  of  Divine  benevolence.  It 
is  kind  to  provide  at  all.     But  what  thought  indicated,  in  the  choice  of  animals 


CHAP.  XIV.]  DEUTERONOMY.  353 

which  multiplied  slowly,  which  were  not  difficult  to  obtain,  found  without  leaving 
the  camp,  and  without  danger  and  contact  with  heathens  around  them  !  All  this 
Intended  to  reclaim  and  bless.  {Ihid.)  Every  creeping  thing  that  flieth  is 
unclean. — Gilded  sin: — 1.  There  is  a  natural  disgust  in  every  one  to  the  idea  of 
eating,  or  even  handling,  a  creeping  worm  or  caterpillar.  However  difficult  this 
feeling  may  be  to  analyse,  God  has  given  it  to  the  race  for  some  purpose.  All 
things  that  are  abhorrent  to  our  human  instincts— things  which  we  call  repulsive — 
are  so  many  indications  of  the  great  truth  that  we  are  to  make  distinctions 
between  clean  and  unclean,  good  and  evil,  right  and  wrong.  2.  Now  God  saw  fit  to 
incorporate  this  natural  instinct  of  man,  which  He  had  implanted,  in  the  law  for 
His  people.  He  forbade  their  eating  these  repulsive,  crawling  things.  We  know 
how  the  natural  instinct  is  often  overcome  by  wilful  habits,  and  we  find  degraded 
men  tiaking  pleasure  in  those  articles  of  food  which  the  human  palate  originally 
and  instinctively  rejects.  Hence  the  necessity  of  a  law  behind  the  instinct,  when 
God  would  teach  by  it  His  great  spiritual  lesson.  3.  He  would  teach  us  that  we 
may  in  conscience  shrink  from  gross  sins,  and  yet  gradually  blunt  conscience  and 
indulge  in  sins  we  formerly  abhorred ;  and  that,  therefore,  a  Divine  law  must  be 
made  the  norm  of  our  lives,  and  not  simply  the  protests  of  natural  conscience. 
4.  We  desire  to  call  your  attention  to  a  different  class  of  dalliers  with  sin — not  the 
gross  and  vulgar,  but  the  refined  and  elegant.  Their  refinement  is  such  that  gross 
forms  of  sin  repel  them — not  because  they  are  sin,  but  because  they  are  gross. 
The  nauseous  caterjjillar  has  dressed  itself  up  as  a  beautiful  butterfly,  and  in  this 
form  they  sport  with  the  creature.  But  what  does  God's  law  say?  **  Every 
creeping  thing  that  flieth  is  unclean  unto  you."  The  wings  and  pretty  colours 
have  not  altered  the  nature  of  the  vermin.  The  same  uncleanness  is  there  as 
before.  How  many  there  are  who  would  shrink  with  dismay  from  overt  sensuality, 
and  yet  will,  in  the  privacy  of  the  chamber,  gloat  over  a  licentious  novel !  It  is  the 
very  same  crawling  thing — only  now  it  has  pretty  wings.  5.  One  of  the  most 
successful  cloaks  for  sin  at  the  present  day  is  so-called  art.  Art  is  something 
very  lovely  and  refined.  It  is  a  grand  thing  for  the  young  to  know  all  about  art. 
It  shows  liigh  breeding  to  admire  and  criticise  art.  Now,  there  is  a  grain  of  wheat 
and  a  bushel  of  chaff  in  all  this  talk.  To  one  genuine  artist  who  only  looks  to  the 
art,  there  are  a  thousand  hypocrites,  who  know  nothing  about  art,  and  only  adopt 
the  language  of  art  to  hide  their  sinful  tendencies.  In  the  name  of  art  they  go  to 
see  the  public  performances  of  a  loose  woman,  and  watch  the  movements  of  a  play 
that  makes  light  of  the  marriage  relation.  In  the  name  of  art  they  fill  their 
parlours  with  nudities,  in  voluptuous  form  and  colour,  by  which  the  youth  of  the 
families  are  stimulated  to  sensuality  and  debauchery  ;  and,  in  the  name  of  art, 
the  yoimg  artist  sits  before  his  nude  model  for  her  destruction  and  his.  6.  In 
every  way  luxury  can  devise,  passions  are  inflamed,  and  then  modesty  is  called 
prudery.  Indecent  dressing,  lascivious  dances,  immoral  innuendo  in  conversation, 
form  part  of  this  refined  system  of  destroying  the  soul,  in  which  Christians  engage 
because  they  must  be  in  the  fashion.  The  creeping  thing  down  in  a  dance-house 
in  Water  Street  they  would  exclaim  against ;  but  the  winged  creeping  thing  that 
flies  in  the  uptown  parlour  they  delight  in  ;  yet  it  is  the  same  venomous  beast. 
7.  Is  it  right  for  those  who  are  washed  in  the  blood  of  Christ,  and  who  seek  the 
sanctifying  influences  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  to  enter  wilfully  into  a  social  life  where 
books  and  pictures  and  statuary  and  entertainments  are  most  unblushingly  pro- 
motive of  sensuality  and  vicious  thought?  Is  it  right  to  become  accustomed  to 
such  gilded  filth,  so  that  we  lose  our  Christian  delicacy  and  reserve,  and  at  last 
make  impurity  a  fashionable  virtue  ?  Satan  is  cunning  in  his  temptations.  He 
does  not  come  to  us  in  a  vulgar  form  and  so  disgust  us.  He  puts  the  many- 
coloured  wings  on  the  slimy  crawler,  and  so  fascinates  us  into  his  service.  "Beware !  '* 
{H.  Crosby,  D.D.) 

Ver.  21.  Thou  shalt  not  seetbe  a  kid  in  its  mother's  vc^iI\^—CultivcUion  of  the 
feelings  a  Christian  duty  :—l.  That  which  commentators  upon  Scripture  have  found 
intricate  and  uncertain,  writers  of  a.  more  secular  character  have  seized 
UPON  AND  read  RIGHTLY.  Some  of  you  may  remember  the  use  made  of  it  in  one  of 
those  classical  works  of  fiction  of  which  Englishmen  are  so  justly  proud  ;  where 
the  intended  victim  of  a  deep-laid  plot  is  lured  to  her  destruction  by  an  imitation 
of  her  husband's  signal,  and  one  of  the  conspirators  says  to  his  more  guilty 
accomplice,  "Thou  hast  destroyed  her  by  means  of  her  best  affections.  It  is  a 
fieething  of  the  kid  in  the  mother's  milk !  "    A  just  and  thrilling  application  of  the 

23 


854  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xit. 

inspired  charge  ;  of  which  the  simplest  meaning  is  the  true  one.  Thou  shalt  not 
blunt  thy  natural  feelings,  or  those  of  others,  by  disregarding  the  inward  dictate  of 
a  Divine  humanity:  human  nature  shrinks  from  the  idea  of  using  that  which 
ought  to  be  the  food  of  a  new-born  animal,  to  prepare  that  animal  to  be  man's 
food  ;  of  applying  the  mother's  milk  to  a  purpose  so  opposite  to  that  for  which  God 
destined  it :  harden  not  thy  heart  against  this  instinct  of  tenderness  on  the  plea 
that  it  matters  not  to  the  slain  animal  in  what  particular  way  it  is  dressed,  or  that 
the  living  parent,  void  of  reason,  has  no  consciousne^  of  the  inhumanity :  for 
thine  own  sake  refrain  from  that  which  is  hardhearted  ;  from  that  which,  though 
it  inflicts  not  pain,  springs  out  of  selfishness,  indicates  a  spirit  unworthy  of  man 
and  forgetful  of  God,  and  tends  still  further  to  blunt  those  moial  sensibilities 
■which  once  lost  are  commonly  lost  for  ever,  and  with  them  all  that  is  most  beautiful 
and  most  attractive  in  the  human  character.     II.  The  text  seems  to  teach  us  most  of 

all  THE  WICKEDNESS  OF  USING  FOR  SELFISH  OR  WRONG  PURPOSES  THE  SACKED  FEEL- 
INGS OF  ANOTHER  ;  of  availing  ourselves  of  the  knowledge  of  another's  affections  to 
make  him  miserable  or  to  make  him  sinful ;  of  trifling,  in  this  sense,  with  the  most 
delicate  workings  of  the  human  mechanism,  and  turning  to  evil  account  that 
insight  into  character  with  which  God  has  endowed  us  all,  in  different  degrees,  for 
purposes  wholly  beneficent,  pure,  and  good.  III.  In  proportion  as  you  learn  and 
practise  early  that  regard  for  others'  feelings  which  is  almost  synonymous  with 
Christian  charity,  in  that  same  degree  will  you  become,  not  effeminate,  but  in  the 
BEST  OF  ALL  SENSES  MANLY  ;  having  put  away  childish  things,  and  anticipated  the 
noblest  qualities  of  a  Christian  maturity.  We  pray  in  the  Litany,  **  From  hard- 
ness of  heart,  good  Lord,  deliver  us."  Hardness  of  heart  has  two  aspects ; 
towards  man,  and  towards  God.  Towards  God  it  is  brought  about  by  acts  of 
neglect,  leading  to  habits  of  neglect ;  by  a  disregard  of  His  word  and  command- 
ments, issuing  in  what  is  called  in  the  same  petition,  a  "contempt"  of  both. 
Towards  man,  it  is  produced  in  us  in  a  similar  way  ;  by  repeated  acts  of  disregard, 
leading  to  a  habit  of  disregard  ;  by  blinding  ourselves  to  others'  feelings,  and 
saying  and  doing  every  day  things"  which  wound  them,  till  at  last  we  become 
unconscious  of  their  very  existence,  and  think  nothing  real  which  is  not,  in  some 
manner,  our  own.  That  is  hardness  of  heart  in  its  full  growth  ;  selfishness  unre- 
strained and  unlimited.  Many  people  are  walking  about  in  that  state  ;  with 
a  heart  hardened  utterly  both  towards  man  and  towards  God.  And  they  pass  for 
respectable  men  too  :  in  them  religion  and  charity,  worship  and  almsgiving,  have 
become  alike  workings  of  selfishness,  regulated  by  calculations  of  self-interest,  and 
never  looking  beyond  earth  for  their  reward.  That  you  may  not  become  thus  seared, 
you  must  watch  and  pray,  while  you  can,  against  hardness  of  heart.  You  must 
practise  its  opposite.  Try  to  think  more  than  you  do  of  others,  and  less  than  you 
do  of  yourselves.  Enter  into  the  feelings  one  of  another.  Think  not  only  what  is 
your  right,  or  what  you  can  get,  or  what  you  are  used  to,  in  such  and  such  a 
matter ;  but  also  what  others  would  like,  what  would  give  pleasure,  what  would 
make  their  life  happy,  in  small  things  or  great ;  and  sometimes  do  that ;  form  the 
habit  of  doing  that.     {Dean  Vaughan. ) 

Vers.  22-29.  Tithe  all  the  increase  of  thy  seed. — Systematic  provision/or  hme- 
Jicent  work : — I.  The  duty  of  God's  people.  In  Jewish  law  God  claimed  tithes  and 
gifts  for  the  worship  of  the  sanctuary  and  the  necessities  of  the  poor.  Conspicuous 
features  of  these  demands  are — the  priority  of  God's  claim — that  provision  for  it  be 
made  before  man's  self-enjoyment,  that  it  bear  some  suitable  proportion  to  the 
Divine  glory  and  grace,  and  that  for  fullness  and  power,  system  is  essential ;  i.e. 
that  the  work  of  God  be  provided  for  before  man's  indulgence  (Lev.  xix. ;  Numb,  xviii. ; 
Deut.  xiv.).  The  New  Testament  has  also  its  plan  of  meeting  God's  claim,  con- 
taining the   same  elements  of  priority,   certainty,    proportion   and   system.     See 

1  Cor.  xvi.  2,  sustained  and  illustrated  by  the  weighty  arguments  and  motives  of 

2  Cor.  viii.,  ix.  II.  The  financial  law  of  Christ.  Christ  is  sole  King  in  His 
Church.  The  constitution  of  this  Church  is  Christian,  not  Jewish.  "As  I  have 
given  order  to  the  Churches  of  Galatia,  even  so  do  ye."  The  method  taught  by  the 
apostle  to  provide  the  revenues  of  the  Church  is  an  expansion  of  Jewish  and 
Pentecostal  church  systems,  an  example  for  us,  an  implied  and  inferential  obliga- 
tion sustained  by  cumulative  and  presumptive  argument.  New  Testament  institu- 
tions are  not  given  with  Sinaitic  form  and  severity.  They  meet  us  as  sacred 
provisions  for  urgent  occasions.  They  appeal  to  a  willing  heart  more  than  to  a 
legal  mind.     Christ  rules  in  love,  but  His  will  should  not  have  less  authority  or 


CHAP.  XV.]  DEUTERONOMY,  355 

constraining  power  on  that  account  (John  vii.  17).  III.  The  necessity  of  the 
AGE.  The  present  age  needs  loftiness  of  aim,  seriousness  of  feeling,  and  ardour  of 
devotion.  Faithful  consecration  of  substance  to  God,  elevated  by  Christian  love  to 
a  financial  rule  of  life,  would  nourish  every  moral  and  spiritual  principle  in  the 
soul.     Storing  the  Lord's  portion  is  the  necessity  of  the  age,  from  its  tendency. 

1.  To  check  the  idolatry  of  money  and  to  strengthen  the  love  of  God  in  the  heart. 

2.  To  meet  adequately  the  demands  of  religion  and  humanity.  3.  To  exhibit  the 
power  and  beauty  of  godliness.  By  fostering  simplicity  of  life  and  personal 
fidelity  to  God.  By  liberally  sustaining  the  honour  of  Christ  in  the  sight  of  men. 
{Jolm  Iio8$,) 


CHAPTER  XV. 

Vers.  1,  2.  At  the  end  of  every  seven  years  ...  a  release. — Economical  laws: — , 
One  of  the  things  that  strikes  a  reader  of  Deuteronomy,  and  indeed  of  the  Old 
Testament  in  general,  is  the  way  in  which  all  kinds  of  subjects  are  brought  under 
the  scope  of  religion.  The  modern  mind  is  ready  with  distinctions,  and  classifies 
subjects  as  religious,  moral,  political,  scientific,  economical,  and  so  forth  ;  but  the 
Israelitish  lawgivers,  men  with  the  prophetic  spirit  in  them,  subordinate  politics, 
economics,  and  morals  alike  to  religion.  Laws,  to  whatever  department  of  life  they 
are  applicable,  are  to  be  made  and  administered  in  the  Spirit  of  God  ;  they  are  not 
an  end  in  themselves  ;  their  one  end  is  to  enable  people  so  to  live  as  that  the  pur- 
poses may  be  fulfilled  for  which  God  has  called  them  into  being  and  constituted 
them  into  societies.  This  high  point  of  view  must  always  be  retained.  If  we  know 
bettor  than  the  Israelites  the  life  which  God  intends  human  beings  to  live,  we  shall 
have  a  higher  standard  for  our  legislation  than  they  ;  we  shall  be  more  hound  than 
they  to  remember  that  law  is  an  instrument  of  religion,  a  means  to  a  spiritual  end, 
and  that  it  rests  with  us  who  make  our  own  laws  to  adapt  them,  over  the  whole 
area  of  national  life,  to  the  ends  which  God  sets  before  us.  1.  In  the  first  place, 
there  is  legislation  regarding  land.  It  proceeds  upon  the  idea  that  the  land  belongs 
to  God,  and  has  been  given  by  Him  to  the  nation  that  on  it  as  a  foundation  it  may 
live  that  life  of  labour,  of  health,  and  of  natural  piety  to  which  He  has  called  it. 
Strictly  speaking,  there  is  no  such  thing  as  unrestricted  private  property  in  land. 
An  individual  does  not  have  the  power  of  alienating  any  part  of  it  for  ever.  One 
result,  and  no  doubt  one  purpose  of  this  was,  to  prevent  a  single  worthless  person 
from  ruining  his  posterity  by  parting  for  ever  with  what  he  really  held  in  trust  for 
them  ;  another,  was  to  prevent  the  accumulation  of  great  masses  of  landed  property, 
which  was  then  the  only  kind  of  property,  in  the  hands  of  individuals.  Such 
accumulations,  in  the  circumstances,  and  in  most  circumstances,  could  only  lead 
to  the  practical  enslavement  of  those  who  tilled  the  land  to  those  who  owned  it. 
These  aims  of  the  land  laws  in  Israel  will  very  generally  be  acknowledged  as  worthy 
of  approval.  I  suppose  there  is  not  a  statesman  in  Europe  who  would  not  give  a 
great  deal  to  resettle  on  the  land  hundreds  of  thousands  of  those  who  have  been 
driven  or  drawn  into  the  towns.  There  is  not  one  but  sees  that  private  property  in 
land  must,  if  the  moral  ends  for  which  society  exists  are  to  be  attained,  be  limited 
somehow.  Similarly,  legislation  is  justifiable— that  is,  it  is  in  the  line  of  a  Divine 
intention — which  aims  at  making  it  hard  to  beggar  the  poor,  and  hard  to  heap  up 
wealth  without  limit.  It  is  not  a  morally  healthy  situation  in  which  one  man  of 
enormous  wealth  has  thousands  practically  at  his  mercy.  It  is  not  good  for  him — 
I  mean  for  his  soul ;  it  is  not  good  for  their  souls  either  ;  and  the  law  may  properly 
aim,  by  just  methods,  at  making  it  hard  to  create  such  a  situation  and  impossible 
to  perpetuate  it.  Unhappily,  in  most  new  countries  the  need  of  bribing  settlers 
and  capital  has  proved  a  temptation  too  strong  to  be  resisted  ;  and  land  has  been 
parted  with  in  masses,  to  individuals,  on  terms  which  have  simply  sown  for  future 
generations  the  seed  of  all  the  trouble  under  which  older  countries  labour.  The 
instinct  for  gain  has  proved  stronger  than  the  devotion  to  ideal  moral  ends.  The 
future  has  been  sacrificed  to  the  present,  the  moral  interests  of  the  community  to 
the  material  interests  of  a  few.  2.  Besides  the  land,  the  Book  of  Deuteronomy  con- 
tains a  variety  of  laws  regarding  money,  and  particularly  the  lending  of  money. 
To  begin  with,  the  lending  of  money  for  interest  was  absolutely  forbidden.  The 
Israelites  were  not  a  commercial,  but  a  farming  people,  and  when  a  man  borrowed. 


356  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xv. 

it  was  not  to  float  a  venture  too  great  for  his  own  means,  but  because  he  had  got 
into  difficulties,  and  wauted  relief.  To  assist  a  brother  in  difficulty  was  regarded  as 
a  case  of  charity  ;  he  was  to  be  relieved  readily  and  freely  ;  it  were  inhuman  to  take 
advantage  of  his  distress  to  get  him  into  one's  power,  as  a  moneylender  does  his 
victim.  It  may  be  said,  of  course,  that  the  effect  of  this  law  would  be  to  discourage 
lending  altogether  ;  people  would  not  be  too  ready  to  part  with  their  money  without 
some  hope  of  profit.  Probably  this  might  be  so,  and  to  some  extent  with  good 
effect.  There  are  some  people  who  borrow,  and  who  ought  not  to  do  so.  They 
ought  not  to  have  money  lent  to  them.  It  is  a  mercy  not  to  lend  him  money  :  it  is 
a  special  mercy  to  protect  him,  as  this  law  does,  against  the  moneylenders.  But 
I  am  not  sure  that  the  law  which  prohibits  lending  money  for  interest  has  not 
another  moral  idea  at  the  heart  of  it.  As  distinguished  from  agriculture,  commerce, 
which  depends  so  much  more  upon  credit,  i.e.  upon  money  lent  for  interest,  has  a 
much  larger  element  of  speculation  in  it ;  and  speculation  is  always  to  be  dis- 
couraged, on  moral  grounds.  Every  one  knows  that  there  are  persons  with  little 
money  of  their  own  who  contrive  to  make  a  livelihood  by  watching  the  ups  and 
downs  in  the  price  of  shares.  This  is  a  vocation  which  depends  for  its  very  exist- 
ence on  the  lendiug  of  money  for  interest,  and  no  one  will  say  that  it  is  morally 
wholesome,  or  that,  whatever  sensitiveness  it  may  develop  in  certain  of  the  intel- 
lectual faculties,  it  is  elevating  for  the  whole  man.  It  would  be  far  better  for 
him  to  be  doing  field  labour.  But  there  is  more  still  in  this  law.  As  it  stands, 
I  do  not  believe  it  is  applicable  to  the  vastly  different  conditions  of  modern  life, 
especially  in  a  trading  community  ;  here,  to  lend  a  trustworthy  person  money  to 
carry  on  or  extend  his  business  may  be  what  the  law  intended  all  lendiug  to  be,  an 
act  of  charity.  But  the  lender  must  consider  his  own  position — I  mean  his  moral 
position.  His  whole  income  may  come — in  many  cases  it  does  come — from  invest- 
ments. He  lives  on  the  interest  of  money  he  has  lent.  He  takes  no  care  of  it, 
except  to  see  at  first  that  the  investments  are  sound.  He  does  no  work  in  con- 
nection with  it.  He  is  largely  ignorant  of  the  use  made  of  the  power  which  it 
bestows.  I  am  not  going  to  say  that  no  one  should  live  on  such  terms  :  for  many, 
life  would  be  impossible  otherwise.  For  many  it  is  the  proper  reward  of  a  life  of 
labour :  they  are  only  reaping  the  fruit  of  their  toils  in  earlier  years.  To  such  it 
is  not  likely  to  do  any  harm.  But  those  who  have  inherited  such  a  situation  are 
undoubtedly  exposed  to  moral  perils  of  which  they  may  easily  become  unconscious. 
They  can  live  without  needing  to  make  their  living  ;  and  there  are  very  few  people 
in  a  generation  good  enough  to  stand  such  a  trial.  Those  who  labour  with  the 
money  are  conscripts  ;  let  those  who  lend  it  be  volunteers  in  all  the  higher  services 
which  society  requires  from  its  members.  Let  them  be  leaders  in  all  philanthropies 
and  charities,  in  all  laborious  duties  which  have  it  as  their  object  to  raise  the  moral 
and  spiritual  status  of  men.  3.  A  third  class  of  economical  laws  which  bulks 
largely  in  the  Book  of  Deuteronomy,  and  to  which  special  attention  is  due,  is 
occupied  with  the  care  of  the  poor.  This  fifteenth  chapter  has  a  number  of  enact- 
ments bearing  on  this  subject.  The  first  is  rather  obscure,  "At  the  end  of  every 
seven  years  thou  shalt  make  a  release."  In  the  Book  of  Exodus  (xxiii.  10)  this  law 
refers  to  the  land,  and  its  meaning  is  that  every  seventh  year  it  is  not  to  be  cropped. 
Here,  there  is  a  year  of  release  established  for  debts,  though  it  is  not  clear  whether 
it  means  that  a  debt  due  seven  years  was  to  be  irrecoverable  by  legal  process,  or 
that  every  seventh  year  there  should  be  a  period  of  gi-ace,  during  which  iio  debt 
should  be  recoverable  by  law.  Then,  in  the  laws  about  lending,  the  duty  of  charity 
is  strongly  enforced.  The  forgotten  sheaf  in  the  field,  or  the  gleanings  of  the  vine- 
yard and  the  olive  are  not  to  be  too  carefully  gathered  in  ;  they  are  to  be  left  for 
the  stranger,  the  fatherless,  and  the  widow,  "that  the  Lord  thy  God  may  bless 
thee  in  all  the  works  of  thine  hand."  God  is  interested  in  humanity  ;  He  sees  such 
consideration  and  rewards  it,  just  as  He  sees  inhumanity  and  judges  it.  But  the 
most  striking  thing  in  these  ancient  poor  laws  is  the  way  in  which  they  realise  the 
actual  conditions  of  the  life  of  the  poor,  and  consider  them.  The  lender  is  allowed 
to  take  a  pledge,  but  if  he  takes  the  upper  garment  of  the  borrower  he  must  not 
keep  it  all  night.  It  is  not  only  the  poor  man's  cloak,  but  his  blanket ;  he  has 
nothing  else  to  cover  himself  with,  and  God  is  angry  with  the  man  who  inhumanly 
leaves  his  poor  brother  to  shiver  in  the  cold  night  air.  So,  too,  no  one  may  take 
the  hand-mill  or  the  upper  millstone  as  a  pledge  ;  that  is  to  rob  the  poor  of  the 
means  of  grinding  the  handful  of  corn  with  which  he  keeps  the  breath  in  his  body. 
We  see  from  laws  like  these  how  excessively  poor  they  were,  yet  the  lawgiver  who 
lias  the  Spirit  of  God  in  him  enters  into  this  deep  poverty,  realises  the  conditions  of 


CHAP.  XV.]  DEUTERONOMY.  357 

life  under  it,  and  insists  on  due  consideration  for  them.  Business  is  business,  of 
course  ;  but  humanity  is  also  humanity,  and  it  is  an  interest  which  no  consideration 
of  business  will  ever  displace  before  God.  And  to  refer  in  this  connection  to  only 
one  point  more,  what  could  be  more  beautiful  than  the  law  we  find  in  verses  10  and 
11  of  Deuteronomy  xxiv.  ?  It  is  a  mean  and  inhuman  temper,  which  is  here 
reproved  by  God.  The  poor  man  is  not  to  be  insulted  because  he  is  in  distress  ;  he 
is  to  beHreated  by  the  lender  as  courteously  and  respectfully  as  if  he  were — what  he 
is — his  equal.  The  sacredness  of  his  home  is  to  be  respected  ;  he  is  not  to  be  need- 
lessly affronted  before  his  children  by  having  an  unfeeling  or  insolent  stranger  walk 
into  the  house  and  carry  off  what  he  pleases.  Laws  like  these  move  us  to  reflection 
on  the  provision  which  we  ourselves  make  for  the  poor.  On  what  a  large  scale 
poverty  exists  in  the  great  cities  !  The  practical  difficulties  of  relieving  distress 
without  doing  moral  injury  are  undeniably  very  great,  but  I  do  not  believe  they 
will  be  overcome  by  men  whom  habitual  contact  with  dishonesty  and  incapacity  has 
rendered  hard  and  inhuman.  Those  who  have  the  care  of  the  poor  should  care  for 
them  with  humanity.  They  should  care  for  their  feelings  too,  and  respect  the 
common  nature  which  is  in  them.  If  they  do  not,  they  suffer  for  it  themselves, 
and  one  can  hardly  find  a  more  odious  type  of  human  being  than  the  man  who  has 
been  hardened  and  brutalised  by  the  administration  of  charity.  There  is  one  kind 
of  criticism  which  has  often  been  passed,  and  will  no  doubt  continue  to  be  passed, 
on  such  laws  as  these.  It  is  this  :  they  have  never  been  kept.  There  is  no  evidence, 
for  instance,  that  the  law  of  the  jubilee  year,  when  all  property  returned  to  its 
original  owners,  was  ever  observed  in  Israel :  as  a  means  for  preventing  the  dissi- 
pation of  family  property,  or  its  accumulation  in  a  few  hands,  it  was  a  failure.  So 
have  all  laws  been  which  attempted  to  regulate  the  business  of  lending  money, 
either  by  prohibiting  interest  altogether,  or  by  fixing  a  maximum  rate  of  interest. 
No  law  written  in  a  book  can  ever  compete  with  the  living  intellect  of  man,  with 
his  cunning  and  greed  on  the  one  hand,  with  his  distress,  his  passions,  or  his 
stupidity  on  the  other.  There  is  a  certain  quantity  of  truth  in  this ;  but  taken 
without  qualification  it  is  only  a  plea  for  anarchy — an  invitation  to  give  up  the 
whole  of  the  economical  side  of  social  existence  to  the  conflict  of  ability,  selfishness, 
and  capital  with  incompetence,  need,  and  passion.  Surely  there  is  a  moral  ideal 
for  this  side  of  existence  ;  and  surely  if  there  is,  it  must  find  some  expression,  how- 
ever inadequate,  some  assistance,  however  feeble,  from  the  laws.  We  cannot  by  law 
protect  people  against  the  consequences  of  their  vices  or  their  follies  ;  but  we  can 
provide  in  the  law  a  safeguard  for  those  interests  which  are  higher  than  private 
gain  or  loss.  We  can  make  it  impossible  for  any  one  in  the  pursuit  of  private 
gain  to  trample  humanity  under  foot.  {James  Denney,  D.D.)  Proclamation  of 
release : — My  text  was  intended  as  an  especial  law  to  the  ancients,  and  prefigured 
to  all  ages  Gospel  forgiveness.  The  fact  is  that  the  world  is  loaded  down  with  a 
debt,  which  no  bankrupt  law  or  two-third  enactment  can  alleviate.  The  voices  of 
heaven  cry,  * '  Pay  !  Pay  ! "  Men  and  women  are  frantic  with  moral  insolvency. 
What  shall  be  done  ?  A  new  law  is  proclaimed,  from  the  throne  of  God,  of 
universal  release  for  all  who  will  take  advantage  of  that  enactment.  1.  In  the 
first  place,  why  will  you  carry  your  burden  of  sin  any  longer?  *'  The  blood  of 
Jesus  Christ  cleanseth  from  sin."  Cut  loose  the  cables  which  hold  your  trans- 
gressions, and  let  them  fall  off.  Spiritual,  infinite,  glorious,  everlasting  release  ! 
"  Blessed  is  the  man  whose  transgressions  are  forgiven  and  whose  sins  are  covered." 
2.  Some  of  you,  also,  want  deliverance  from  your  troubles.  God  knows  you  have 
enoiigh  of  them.  Physical,  domestic,  spiritual,  and  financial  troubles.  How  are 
you  going  to  get  relief?  The  Divine  Physician  comes,  and  He  knows  how  severe 
the  trouble  is,  and  He  gives  you  this  promise  :  "  Weeping  may  endure  for  a  night, 
but  joy  cometh  in  the  morning."  Does  it  not  take  effect  upon  you  ?  Here,  then. 
He  pours  out  more  drops  of  Divine  consolation,  and  I  am  sure  this  time  the  trouble 
will  be  arrested  :  '*  All  things  work  together  for  good  to  those  who  love  God."  All 
the  Atlantic  and  Pacific  oceans  of  surging  sorrow  cannot  sink  a  soul  that  has  asked 
for  God's  pilotage.  The  difficulty  is,  that  when  we  have  misfortunes  of  any  kind, 
we  put  them  in  God's  hand,  and  they  stay  there  a  little  while  ;  and  then  we  go  and 
get  them  again,  and  bring  them  back.  A  vessel  comes  in  from  a  foreign  port.  As 
it  comes  near  the  harbour  it  sees  a  pilot  floating  about.  It  hails  the  pilot.  The 
pilot  comes  on  board,  and  he  says  :  **  Now,  captain,  you  have  had  a  stormy  passage. 
Go  down  and  sleep,  and  I  will  take  the  vessel  into  New  York  harbour. "  After 
a  while  the  captain  begins  to  think  :  * '  Am  I  right  in  trusting  this  vessel  to  that 
pilot?    I  guess  I'll  go  up  and  see."    So  he  comes  to  the  pilot,  and  says  :    "Don't 


358  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xv. 

you  see  that  rock  ?  Don't  you  see  those  headlands  ?  You  will  wreck  the  ship. 
Let  me  hold  the  helm  for  a  while  myself,  and  then  I'll  trust  to  you."  The  pilot 
becomes  angry,  and  says  :  * '  I  will  either  take  care  of  this  ship  or  not.  If  you  want 
to,  I  will  get  into  my  yawl  and  go  ashore,  or  back  to  my  boat."  Now  we  say 
to  the  Lord  :  "0  God,  take  my  life,  take  my  all,  in  Thy  keeping."  "We  go  along 
for  a  little  while,  and  suddenly  wake  up,  and  say  :  "  Things  are  going  all  wrong. 
0  Lord,  we  are  driving  on  these  rocks,  and  Thou  art  going  to  let  us  be  shipwrecked." 
God  says  :  "You  go  and  rest ;  I  will  take  charge  of  this  vessel,  and  take  it  into  the 
harbour."  It  is  God's  business  to  comfort,  and  it  is  our  business  to  be  comforted. 
"At  the  end  of  seven  years  thou  shalt  make  a  release."  3.  But  what  is  our  pro- 
gramme for  the  coming  years  ?  It  is  about  the  same  line  of  work,  only  on  a  more 
intensified  and  consecrated  scale.  Ah,  we  must  be  better  men  and  women.  (T. 
De  Witt  Talmage.)  A  new  chance: — God  is  putting  lines  of  mercy  amid  all  the 
black  print  of  the  law.  It  would  seem  as  if  wherever  God  could  find  a  place  at 
which  He  might  utter  some  word  of  pity  or  compassion,  He  filled  up  that  place  with 
an  utterance  of  His  solicitude  for  the  welfare  of  man.  Flowers  look  lovely  every- 
where, but  what  must  be  the  loveliness  of  a  flower  to  the  wanderer  in  a  desert  ? 
So  these  Gospel  words  are  full  of  charm  wherever  we  find  them,  but  they  have  double 
charmfulness  being  found  in  connection  with  institutions,  instructions,  precepts,  and 
commandments  marked  by  the  severest  righteousness.  In  the  midst  of  time  God 
graciously  puts  a  year  of  release.  We  find  in  this  year  of  release  what  we  all  need 
— namely,  the  principle  of  new  chances,  new  opportunities,  fresh  beginnings.  To- 
morrow, said  the  debtor  or  the  slave,  is  the  day  of  release,  and  the  next  day  I 
shall  begin  again :  I  shall  have  another  chance  in  life ;  the  burden  will  be  taken 
away,  the  darkness  will  be  dispersed,  and  life  shall  be  young  again.  Every  man 
ought  to  have  more  chances  than  one,  even  in  our  own  life.  God  has  filled  the 
sphere  of  life  with  opportunities.  But  moral  releases  can  only  be  accomplished  by 
moral  processes.  The  man  who  is  in  prison  must  take  the  right  steps  to  get  out  of 
it.  What  are  those  right  steps  ? — repentance,  contrition,  confession — open,  frank, 
straightforward,  self-renouncing  confession  ;  then  the  man  must  be  allowed  to  begin 
again  ;  God  will,  in  His  providence,  work  out  for  such  a  man  another  opportunity  ; 
concealment  there  must  be  none,  prevarication  none,  self-defence  none.  Where 
the  case  lies  between  the  soul  and  God — the  higher  morality  still — there  must 
be  an  interview  at  the  Cross — a  mysterious  communion  under  the  blood  that 
flows  from  the  wounded  Christ.  All  this  being  done  on  the  part  of  the  creditor 
and  the  owner,  what  happens  on  the  side  of  God  ?  The  answer  to  that  inquiry  is : 
**  The  Lord  shall  greatly  bless  thee  in  the  land  which  the  Lord  thy  God  giveth  thee 
for  an  inheritance  to  possess  it  "  (ver.  4).  God  never  allows  us  to  obey  the  law 
without  immediate  and  large  compensation.  We  cannot  obey  the  laws  of  health 
without  instantly  being  the  healthier  ;  we  cannot  obey  the  laws  of  cleanliness  with- 
out the  flesh  instantly  thanking  us,  in  stronger  pulsations  and  wider  liberties,  for 
what  we  have  done  to  it.  A  blessing  is  attached  to  all  obedience,  when  the  obedi- 
ence is  rendered  to  law  Divine  and  gracious.  The  reward  is  in  the  man's  own 
heart :  he  has  a  reward  which  no  thief  can  take  away  from  the  sanctuary  in  which 
it  is  preserved ;  heaven  is  within.  None  can  forestall  God,  or  outrun  God,  or 
confer  upon  God  an  obligation  which  He  cannot  repay  ;  He  takes  the  moisture 
from  the  earth  only  that  He  may  return  it  in  copious  showers.  No  man  can  serve 
<jrod  for  nought.  (/.  Parker y  D.D.)  The  year  of  release: — I  propose  to  consider 
death  as  the  Christian's  release,  and  then  you  will  easily  perceive  what  pleasure  it 
must  give  to  the  believer,  who  is  waiting  for  his  discharge,  to  be  told  that  the  year 
of  release  is  at  hand.  I.  FoK  they  shall  be  released  from  all  labour  and 
SORROW.  1.  From  labour  (Rev.  xiv.  13).  They  know  little  of  religion  who  think 
that  a  Christian  has  nothing  to  do.  When  Christ  first  calls  us.  He  says  :  "  Go, 
work  to-day  in  My  vineyard."  There  is  not  only  a  great  variety  of  employments, 
but  that  which  requires  much  application  and  labour.  To  mortify  sin  is  difficult 
work.  But  courage.  Christians,  the  year  of  release  is  at  hand.  In  heaven  there 
will  be  much  service,  but  no  kind  of  labour.  They  rest  not,  day  nor  night,  from 
rapturous  adorations,  and  yet  feel  no  fatigue,  for  the  joy  of  the  Lord  is  their 
strength.  2.  But  I  said  also  that  you  shall  be  released  from  sorrow  as  well  as 
from  labour.  The  sources  of  present  grief  are  almost  innumerable.  There  are 
personal,  family,  and  national  troubles  ;  and  these  sometimes  follow  one  another 
so  quickly,  that  many  have  tears  for  their  meat,  night  and  day.  But  courage, 
Christians,  the  year  of  release  is  at  hand,  when  they  that  sow  in  tears  shall  reap 
in  joy.     II.  There  will  be  a  release  from  sin.     Though  you  go  out  of  this  world 


CHAP.  XV.]  DEUTERONOMY.  35a 

lamenting  your  numerous  infirmities,  you  shall  be  presented  before  the  throne  of 
God  without  spot  or  wrinkle  or  any  such  thing.  III.  It  will  be  a  release  from 
TEMPTATION.  Within  the  gates  of  the  New  Jerusalem  you  shall  be  free  from  all 
assaults  and  troubles  whatever,  and  be  proclaimed  more  than  conquerors  through 
Him  that  loved  you.  IV.  There  will  be  a  release  from  this  state  of  exilb 
AND  confinement.  Mysterfes  of  Providence  will  then  be  unfolded,  and  the  most 
delightful  discoveries  made  of  the  infinite  wisdom  and  goodness  of  God.  The 
much  greater  mysteries  of  grace  shall  be  also  laid  open  ;  and  fill  our  hearts  with 
love  and  admiration,  and  our  mouths  with  never-ending  praises.  (*S'.  Lavington.) 
Forgiveness,  freedom,  favour : — I.  The  release  which  the  Lord  desired  His 
people  to  give.  I.  They  were,  at  the  end  of  every  seven  years,  to  release  every 
man  his  debtor  from  tbe  debt  which  he  had  accumulated.  A  man  might  pay  if 
he  could,  and  he  should  do  so.  A  man  might,  at  some  future  time,  if  his  circum- 
stances altered,  discharge  the  debt  which  had  been  remitted  ;  but,  as  far  as  the 
creditor  was  concerned,  it  was  remitted.  2.  They  were  never  to  exact  that  debt 
again.  The  moral  claim  might  remain,  and  the  honest  Israelite  might  take  care 
that  his  brother  Israelite  should  not  lose  anything  through  him  ;  but,  still,  accord- 
ing to  the  Divine  command,  there  was  to  be  no  exacting  of  it.  None  but  a  generous 
Lawgiver  would  have  made  such  a  law  as  this.  It  is  noble-hearted,  full  of  loving- 
kindness  ;  and  we  could  expect  that  none  but  a  people  in  whose  midst  there  was 
the  daily  sacrifice,  in  the  midst  of  whom  moved  the  high  priest  of  God,  would  be 
obedient  to  such  a  precept.  3.  They  were  to  do  this  for  the  Lord's  sake  :  **  because 
it  is  called  the  Lord's  release."  It  is  not  enough  to  do  the  correct  thing  ;  it  must 
be  done  in  a  right  spirit,  and  with  a  pure  motive.  A  good  action  is  not  wholly 
good  unless  it  be  done  for  the  glory  of  God,  and  because  of  the  greatness  and  good- 
ness of  His  holy  name.  The  most  powerful  motive  that  a  Christian  can  have  is 
this,  "For  Jesus'  sake."  You  could  not  forgive  the  debt,  perhaps,  for  your 
brother's  sake  ;  there  may  be  something  about  him  that  would  harden  your  heart ; 
but  can  you  not  do  it  for  Jesus'  sake  ?  This  is  true  charity,  that  holy  love  which 
is  the  choicest  of  the  graces.  And  then,  like  the  Israelites,  we  may  look  believingly 
to  the  gracious  reward  that  God  gives.  We  do  not  serve  God  for  wages  ;  but  still 
we  have  respect  unto  the  recompense  of  the  reward,  even  as  Moses  had.  We  do 
not  run  like  hirelings  ;  but  yet  we  have  our  eye  upon  the  prize  of  our  high  calling 
in  Christ  Jesus.  They  were  not  only  to  perform  this  kindness  once,  but  they 
were  to  be  ready  to  do  it  again.  It  is  the  part  of  Christians  not  to  be  weary  in 
well  doing  ;  and  if  they  get  no  reward  for  what  they  have  done  from  those  to  whom 
it  is  done,  still  to  do  the  same  again.  Remember  how  gracious  God  is,  and  how 
He  giveth  to  the  unthankful  and  the  evil,  and  maketh  His  rain  to  fall  upon  the 
field  of  the  churl  as  well  as  upon  the  field  of  the  most  generous.  5.  While  they 
were  to  forgive  and  remit,  on  this  seventh  year,  the  loans  which  remained  unpaid, 
they  were  also  to  let  the  bondman  go.  It  was  not  to  be  thought  a  hardship  to  part 
with  a  servant  man  or  woman.  However  useful  they  might  have  been  in  the  house 
or  field,  however  much  they  were  felt  to  be  necessary  to  domestic  comfort  or  farm 
service,  they  were  to  be  allowed  to  go ;  and,  what  was  more,  they  were  not  to  go 
empty  handed,  but  they  were  to  receive  a  portion  out  of  every  department  of  the 
master's  wealth.  6.  Further,  this  setting  free  of  their  brother  at  the  specified  time 
was  to  be  done  for  a  certain  reason  :  "  Thou  shalt  remember,"  &c.  How  can  you 
hold  another  a  bondman  when  God  has  set  you  free  ?  How  can  you  treat  another 
with  unkindness  when  the  Lord  has  dealt  so  generously  with  you  ?  Down  at  Olney, 
when  Mr.  Newton  was  the  rector  of  the  parish,  he  put  in  his  study  this  text  where 
he  could  always  see  it  when  he  lifted  his  eyes  from  his  text  while  preparing  his 
sermon,  "Remember  that  thou  wast  a  bondman  in  the  land  of  Egypt,  and  the 
Lord  thy  God  redeemed  thee."  Would  it  not  do  many  Christians  good  if  they  had 
that  text  often  before  their  eyes  ?  Would  it  not  excite  gratitude  to  their  Redeemer, 
and  tenderness  towards  those  who  happened  to  be  in  subjection  to  them,  tenderness 
to  every  sinner  that  is  a  bondslave  under  the  law,  tenderness  to  the  myriads  that 
swarm  these  streets,  slaves  to  sin  and  self,  and  who  are  perishing  in  their  iniquity  ? 
7.  The  spirit  of  this  release  of  the  Lord  is  this,  "Never  be  hard  on  anybody."  It 
is  true  that  the  man  made  the  bargain,  and  he  ought  to  keep  to  it ;  but  he  is  losing 
money,  and  he  cannot  afford  it ;  he  is  being  ruined,  and  you  are  being  fattened 
by  his  mistake.  Do  not  hold  him  to  it.  No  Christian  man  can  be  a  sweater 
of  workers  ;  no  Christian  man  can  be  a  grinder  of  the  poor ;  no  man,  who  would 
be  accepted  before  God,  can  think  that  his  heart  is  right  with  Him  when  he 
treats  others  ungenerously,  not  to  say   unjustly.     II.  The  release  which  thb 


360  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  xv. 

Lord  gives  to  rs.  1.  Let  me  proclaim  to  every  sinner  here,  who  owns  his 
indebtedness  to  God,  and  feels  that  he  can  never  discharge  it,  that  if  you  will  come, 
and  put  your  trust  in  Christ,  the  Lord  promises  oblivion  to  all  your  debt,  forgive- 
ness of  the  whole  of  your  sins.  2.  This  release  shall  be  followed  up  by  a  non- 
exacting  of  the  penalty  for  ever.  3.  God  will  do  all  this  far  thee  on  the  ground  of 
thy  poverty.  See  the  fourth  verse:  "Save  when  there  shall  be  no  poor  among 
you."  When  you  cannot  pay  half  a  farthing  in  the  pound  of  all  your  great  de^t  of 
sin,  when  you  are  absolutely  bankrupt,  then  may  you  believe  that  Jesus  Christ  is 
your  Saviour.  4.  I  may  be  addressing  a  soul  here  that  says,  "  I  like  that  thought, 
I  wish  I  could  catch  hold  of  it ;  but  I  feel  myself  to  be  such  a  slave  that  I  cannot 
grasp  it."  Well,  the  Lord  may  allow  a  soul  to  be  in  bondage  for  a  time  ;  indeed, 
it  may  be  needful  that  He  should.  The  Hebrew  might  be  in  bondage  six  years, 
and  yet  he  went  free  when  the  seventh  year  came.  Tliei^e  are  reasons  why  the 
Spirit  of  God  is  to  some  men  a  Spirit  of  bondage  for  a  long  time.  Hard  hearts 
must  be  melted,  proud  stomachs  must  be  brought  down.  5.  Tlie  man  was  set  free 
at  the  end  of  the  sixth  year,  paying  nothing  for  his  liberation.  Though  not  free- 
born,  nor  yet  buying  his  liberty  with  a  great  sum,  yet  he  was  set  free.  0  Lord,  set 
some  soul  free  to-night !  6.  And  when  the  Lord  sets  poor  souls  at  liberty,  He 
always  sends  them  away  full-handed.  He  gives  something  from  the  flock,  and 
from  the  threshing-floor,  and  from  the  wine-press.  7.  This  act  never  seems  hard  to 
the  Lord.  He  says  to  the  Hebrew,  in  the  eighteenth  verse,  "  It  shall  not  seem 
hard  unto  thee,  when  thou  sendest  him  away  free."  It  never  seems  hard  to  Christ 
when  He  sets  a  sinner  free.  8.  One  thing  I  feel  sure  of,  and  that  is,  if  the  Lord  sets 
us  free,  we  shall  want  to  remain  His  servants  for  ever.  We  will  go  straight  away 
to  the  door-post,  and  ask  Him  to  use  the  awl ;  for,  though  we  are  glad  to  be  free, 
we  do  not  want  to  be  free  from  Him.     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Vers.  4-11.  Save  when  there  shall  be  no  poor  among  you. — Rural  poverty  : — 
These  two  sentences  (vers.  4  and  11)  seem,  at  first  sight,  to  contradict  one  another. 
There  are  three  ways  of  reading  the  fourth  verse.  * '  Save  when  there  shall  be  no 
poor  among  you,"  says  the  text.  '*  To  the  end  that  there  be  no  poor,"  reads  the 
margin.  **  Howheit,  there  shall  be  no  poor  with  thee,"  runs  the  Revised  Version. 
The  explanation  may  be  briefly  put  thus  :  There  would  always  be  poor  people 
among  them  ;  "howbeit,"  they  must  not  let  them  be  poor,  i.e.  not  let  them  sink 
down  in  poverty.  I.  The  existence  of  poverty.  My  own  experience  has  been 
that  those  who  are  most  hurt  cry  out  least.  The  most  deserving,  and  generally  the 
most  pitiful,  cases  of  distress  have  to  be  looked  for.  But,  say  some,  is  it  not  their 
own  fault  that  they  are  so  badly  off  ?  No  doubt  it  often  is  so.  Idleness,  drink, 
waste,  folly,  incapableness  may  all  cause  poverty  ;  but  what  of  that  ?  We  cannot 
stand  by  and  see  people  starve.  It  would  be  easier  to  die  by  hanging  than  hunger  ; 
but  we  do  not  even  hang  people  except  for  high  treason  or  murder.  Much  more 
must  we  not  by  any  sin  of  omission  condemn  the  innocent  to  suffer  with  the  guilty 
— the  hardworking  wife  or  the  helpless  children  for  the  sake  of  the  worthless 
husband  or  father.  The  fact  is  that  poverty  is  largely  the  consequence  of  an 
unequal  struggle  between  the  strong  and  the  weak.  II.  The  duty  of  kelieving 
POVERTY.  Look  at  what  Moses  taught  the  Israelites.  1.  That  prevention  is  better 
than  cure.  There  was  never  to  be  a  "bitter  cry  of  outcast"  Canaan.  (1)  We 
may  use  our  influence  to  encourage  better  education.  With  the  next  genera- 
tion more  intelligent,  temperate,  and  capable,  pauperism  will  be  less.  (2)  We  may 
exert  our  influence  towards  giving  the  labourer  a  heartier  interest  in  the  land  he 
tills.  (3)  We  may  inculcate  a  love  of  independence.  Poverty  is  no  sin,  but 
pauperism  is  a  reproach,  and  should  be  felt  as  such.  2.  That  each  nation,  or 
community,  or  church,  should  care  for  its  own  poor.  3.  That  charity  should  be 
systematic.  The  time  was  precise — every  third  year  ;  the  quantity  was  precise — 
one  tenth  ;  the  object  was  precise — "  thy  poor  brother."  Contrast  with  these 
laws  of  Moses  the  teaching  of  Christ.  1.  The  law  of  Moses  aimed  at  preventing 
poverty.  Christ  came  and  found  men  poor.  He  did  more  than  prevent  ;  He  cured. 
To  heal  sickness  is  a  harder  task  than  to  maintain  health.  To  deliver  the  needy 
when  he  crieth  is  often  more  difficult  than  to  preserve  him  before  he  has  had 
occasion  to  cry.  Moses  provided  for  keeping  people  up  who  were  not  overthrown  ; 
Christ  actually  went  down  to  the  low  dark  depths,  and  raised  those  who  were  sunk 
there.  2.  Moses  taught  that  each  nation,  or  community,  or  church,  should  care 
for  its  own.  To  go  beyond  that  was  permitted,  but  not  enjoined.  Christ  taught  a 
much  broader  truth  than  that — charity  without  distinction.    Our  neighbour  is  no6 


CJHAP.  XV.]  DEUTERONOMY.  361 

the  person  who  lives  next  door  to  us,  or  who  has  most  affinity  with  us ;  but  the 
person  who  is  nearest  to  our  helping  hand,  even  though  he  be  a  Jew  and  we  are 
Samaritans.  Our  first  duty  is  to  our  own,  but  not  our  last.  Charity  begins  at 
home,  but  does  not  end  there.  3.  Moses  was  systematic,  but  Christ  was  above 
systems.  There  was  no  fixed  standard  with  Him,  except  this  :  "Sell  all  that  thou 
ha.st,  and  distribute  unto  the  poor."  There  was  no  stint  in  His  giving.  It  was  not 
certain  objects  of  His  kindness  whom  He  blessed:  "Whosoever  will,  let  him 
come."  It  was  not  every  few  years  merely  that  He  was  benevolent ;  but  "yester- 
day, to-day,  and  for  ever."  {Charles  T.  Price.)  The  poor-laws  of  the  Bible  ;  or, 
rules  and  reasons  for  the  relief  of  the  distressed : — I.  The  rules  that  are  here 
SUGGESTED  FOR  THE  RELIEF  OF  THE  POOR.  1.  Contiguity.  It  is  the  poor  "iw 
thy  land."  Those  living  nearest  us,  other  things  being  equal,  have  the  first  claim 
on  our  charity.  Let  it  bless  as  it  goes ;  work  as  the  leaven  in  the  meal,  from 
particle  to  particle,  until  it  gives  its  spirit  to  the  mass.  2.  Heartiness.  '  *  Thou 
shalt  not  harden,"  &c.  The  heart  must  go  with  the  deed.  3.  Liberality.  **Open 
thine  hand  wide  unto  him."  The  liberality  of  men  is  not  to  be  judged  by  the  sums 
they  subscribe,  but  by  the  means  they  possess.  II.  The  reasons  that  are  herb 
SUGGESTED  FOR  THE  RELIEF  OF  THE  POOR.  1.  Your  relationship  to  the  poor. 
"  He  is  thy  brother."  He  has  the  same  origin,  the  same  nature,  the  same  great 
Father,  the  same  moral  relationships,  as  thyself.  2.  The  imprecation  of  the  poor. 
**  And  he  cry,"  &c.  3.  The  blessedness  insured  to  the  friend  of  the  poor.  4.  The 
Divine  plan  as  to  the  permanent  existence  of  the  poor.  {Homilist.)  General 
Gordon's  benevolence : — A  poor  dragoman  told  me  that  General  Gordon  used  to  come 
often  to  his  house  in  Jerusalem  when  he  and  his  wife  lay  ill,  and  that  he  would  take 
any  cusliion  or  mat  and  put  it  on  the  floor  as  a  seat,  there  being  no  chairs  or  furni- 
ture, and  sit  down  with  his  Testament  to  read  and  speak  to  them  about  Christ.  But 
his  zeal  did  not  end  with  such  easy  philanthropy.  Ascertaining  that  a  doctor's 
account  had  been  incurred  to  the  amount  of  three  pounds,  he  went  off  secretly  and 
paid  it.  Far  away  at  Khartoum,  he  still  thought  of  one  whom  he  had  thus  striven 
to  lead  into  the  fold  of  Christ,  and  sent  a  letter  to  him  which  reached  Jerusalem 
almost  at  the  same  time  as  the  news  of  its  writer's  death.  "  That  letter,"  said  the 
poor  Copt,  "I  would  not  part  with  for  all  that  is  in  the  world.  General  Gordon  was 
a  real  Christian.  He  gave  away  all  he  had  to  the  poor  in  Jerusalem  and  the  villages 
round,  and  the  people  moui-n  for  him  as  for  their  father."  Kindness  to  the 
poor : — A  poor  sewing-girl,  who  went  to  the  late  Dr.  John  F.  Gray  for  advice,  was 
given  a  phial  of  medicine  and  told  to  go  home  and  go  to  bed.  *'  I  can't  do  that, 
doctor,"  the  girl  replied,  "for  I  am  dependent  on  what  I  earn  everyday  for  my 
living."  "If  that's  so,"  said  Dr.  Gray,  "  I'll  change  the  medicine  a  little.  Give 
me  back  that  phial."  He  then  wrapped  around  it  a  ten-dollar  bill,  and  returning 
it  to  her,  reiterated  his  order,  "Go  home  and  go  to  bed,"  adding,  "take  the 
medicine,  cover  and  all."  He  who  takes  account  of  the  cups  of  cold  water  will  not 
forget  such  deeds  of  kindness  and  charity.  Oh  to  hear  Him  say  at  the  last,  "Ye 
have  done  it  unto  Me!"  The  misery  of  a  niggardly  spirit:— In  Rochester 
there  lived  a  wealthy  man  who  made  a  great  profession  of  religion  ;  he  knelt 
at  communion  seasons  and  attended  church  with  great  regularity,  but  he  would 
not  give  one  shilling  to  the  poor,  nor  to  any  other  person.  In  the  year  1862  I 
asked  a  trifle  of  money  from  him  to  relieve  some  families  whojiwere  in  great 
distress,  but  he  refused,  saying,  "I  am  a  poor  man,  sir;  I  am  a  poor  man." 
Listen  to  what  this  thorny-ground  hearer  said,  as  he  lay  with  glazing,  dying 
eyes,  to  a  clergyman  who,  noticing  his  lips  move,  bent  down  to  catch  the  whisper, 
"Ninety  thousand  pounds,  and  I  must  leave  it  all  behind  me!"  If  there  be 
among  you  a  poor  man  of  one  of  thy  hiethren.— Brotherly  love  .-—As  God  had 
chosen  all  Israel,  so  He  desired  that  they  should  love  as  brethren.  Each  was  to 
stand  by  the  other,  and  all  were  to  be  zealous  for  the  Divine  honour.  Thus  they 
would  bear,  in  contradistinction  to  the  heathen,  the  character  of  a  people  conse- 
crated to  God.  But  even  in  Israel  there  were  rich  and  poor,  happy  and  unhappy. 
Wherever  men  went  the  poor  and  afflicted  would  be  met  with.  Therefore  the 
people  were  exhorted  to  hold  heart  and  hand  open — not  to  harden  the  heart  nor 
shut  the  hand.  Each  was  to  be  ready  to  stand  by  his  fellow  to  see  that  his  brother 
should  not  sutTer.  I.  God's  people  ever  have  sympathy  with  their  brethren. 
1.  If  we  belong  to  the  people  of  God — if  this  were  so  in  Israel,  much  more  should  it 
be  among  Christians — then  there  will  be  in  our  hearts  a  tender  feeling  toward  our 
fellow-men— a  feeling  implanted  by  God  Himself.  The  heart  will  say :  '♦  This  is 
thy  brother ;  help  him."    This  results  from  God's  love  in  the  heart,  which  leada 


362  THE  BIBLIQAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  xy. 

the  brethren  to  *'  love  one  another."  2.  But  this  tender-heartedness  can  be  destroyed 
and  the  heart  be  hardened,  even  among  Christians,  and  this  against  the  light  of 
conscience.  They  often  do  as  it  is  rumoured  the  New  Zealanders  did  with  their 
children.  They  pressed  down  the  necks  of  the  children  under  a  flinty  stone  in 
order  to  harden  them,  so  Christians  make  their  hearts  sometimes  hard  as  flints 
through  avariciousness.  The  avaricious  heart  ever  thinks:  *'This  belongs  to  me 
and  to  no  one  else,  and  none  shall  share  it."  3.  This  is  not  well-pleasing  to  God. 
He  sees  that  by  covetousness  men  are  led  to  destruction,  and  to  reject  His  love 
toward  them.  For  when  men  are  so  hard-hearted,  how  can  they  have  the  love 
of  God  in  them?  II.  The  hearts  and  hands  of  God's  people  are  open 
TOWARD  THEIR  BRETHREN.  1.  When  this  is  SO,  then  the  love  of  God  has  full 
scope  in  their  hearts ;  and  thus  He  causes  through  those  open  hands  and  hearts 
much  good  to  flow  out  into  this  evil  world.  For  to  His  children  who  are  ever 
ready  to  give  to  those  who  need  He  will  give  yet  more,  so  that  from  their 
increased  store  they  may  give  yet  more  fully  to  others,  and  that  thus  these  also 
may  learn  to  praise  God.  2.  Therefore  he  who  has  a  kind  heart  and  open  hand 
will  experience  and  receive  a  blessing.  As  he  gives,  so  he  receives.  It  is  with 
such  as  with  Cornelius:  "Thy  prayers  and  thine  alms  are  come  up  before  God." 
Thus,  too,  the  way  is  made  open  for  the  reception  of  God's  gifts  both  temporal 
and  spiritual.  Let  us  all,  then,  endeavour  to  preserve  a  tender  heart,  and  not  let 
our  heart  be  hardened.  (/.  C.  Blumhardt. )  And  he  cry  unto  the  Lord  against 
thee. — The  cry  of  the  poor : — The  poor  cry  to  heaven — from  the  scenes  of  oppressive 
labour,  from  wretched  hovels,  from  beds  of  straw,  shivering  in  the  cold,  from  the 
depths  of  starvation,  they  cry  !  Many  a  poor  mother  in  these  blood -freezing  nights 
hugs  to  her  shivering  bosom  her  starving  infant,  and  tries  to  hush  its  cries  of  cold 
and  hunger  with  the  wails  of  her  own  broken  heart.  God  alone  knows  the  cries 
that  rise  and  pierce  the  heavens  every  night  from  this  "great  country" — as  the 
cant  is.  Alas  !  alas  !  that  from  this  land,  overflowing  with  luxuries  and  burdened 
with  wealth,  such  wails  of  wretchedness  should  rise  !  Against  whom  do  they  cry  ? 
Against  their  Maker  ?  No  !  The  most  unobservant  of  them  can  scarcely  fail  to 
discover  that  He  sends  food  enough  for  all.  Besides,  deep  and  ineradicably  rooted 
in  the  heart  of  all  is  the  sentiment  that  God  is  good — a  sentiment  this,  which  seems 
to  me  the  core  of  conscience.  Against  the  overreaching  monopolist,  the  iron- 
hearted  miser,  the  ruthless  oppressor,  the  man  who  has  the  power  to  help  but  not 
the  heart.  Against  all  selfish  men  and  unrighteous  laws  that  grind  the  people 
down,  they  cry — and  cry  with  imremitting  vehemence  too.  Will  He  hear  ?  Is 
the  ear  of  Him  who  heard  of  old  the  cries  of  the  enslaved  millions  in  Egypt, 
and  interposed  with  avenging  thunders  for  their  rescue,  grown  heavy?  Nay, 
modern  oppressor !  Those  cries  shall  be  answered  ;  not  a  solitary  wail  shall 
die  away  unheeded.  Woe  to  the  nation  that  oppresses  the  poor  !  Woe  I  and 
again,  woe  !  when  retribution  comes,  as  come  it  must.  {Homilist, )  The  poor 
shall  never  cease  out  of  the  land. — God's  ordinance  of  rich  and  poor: — I.  The 
PERPETUAL  EXISTENCE  OF  THE  POOR  AMONGST  US.  You  must  become  reconciled 
to  your  poverty.  And  if  you  would  become  really  reconciled  to  it  do  not  regard  it 
as  something  inflicted  by  the  misgovemment  or  the  management  of  your  fellow- 
men.  Put  it  before  you  in  the  light  this  text  puts  it,  as  God's  ordinance  and 
God's  will  concerning  you ;  as  something  that  rulers  and  governors  can  no  more 
drive  out  of  the  world  than  they  can  drive  midnight  out  of  it,  or  sickness,  or  pain, 
or  sorrow.  Poverty  is  to  be  alleviated,  and  it  is  to  be  removed  if  honest  industry 
will  remove  it ;  but  if  not  so,  it  is  to  be  welcomed  and  borne.  I  could  tell  you 
where  it  often  comes  from.  From  the  poor  man's  own  idleness,  improvidence, 
intemperance,  and  waste ;  from  the  foolish  indulgence  of  children ;  from  the 
still  more  criminal  indulgence  of  self.  But  even  then  it  is  from  God  ;  it  is  God's 
way  of  showing  displeasure  against  these  things.  And  when  it  comes  not  from 
these  things,  where  does  it  come  from  ?  Often  from  a  love  that  neither  you  nor  I, 
nor  any  angel  above  us,  can  measure.  The  same  love  that  provided  a  Saviour  and 
built  a  heaven  for  sinners  now  sends  poverty  often  to  sinners,  to  turn  them  to  that 
Saviour  and  heaven.  II.  Our  duty  towards  the  poor.  Now  if  we  looked  only 
at  the  declaration  in  the  first  part  of  the  text,  and  were  disposed  to  reason  on  it, 
we  might  say,  Be  our  duty  to  the  poor  what  it  may,  we  must  not  interfere  with 
their  poverty  ;  it  is  God's  will  they  should  be  poor,  and  we  must  not  interfere  with 
His  will.  This  would  be  like  saying,  God  has  sent  sickness  amongst  us,  and  we 
must  not  make  use  of  any  means  to  cure  or  relieve  it ;  or.  He  has  made  the  winter, 
and  we  will  do  nothing  to  mitigate  the  rigour  of  it ;  or,  He  has  created  the  dark- 


CHAP.  XV.]  DEUTERONOMY. 


ness,  and  it  is  wrong  to  have  lights  in  our  dwelling  to  enlighten  it.     Many  of  what 
we  call  the  evils  of  our  condition  are  designed  of  God  to  bring  into  lawful  and 
healthy  action  the  powers  of  man's  mind  and  the  feelings  of  mans  heart,  and  this 
evil  of  poverty  among  the  number.      "  The  poor  shall  never  cease  out  of  the  land     ; 
that  is  My  will,  says  God.     "  Therefore  I  command  thee  "—what  ?  to  let  the  needy 
alone  in  their  poverty?    No;  I  have  placed  them  in  the  land  to  call  forth  and 
exercise  thy  bounty.     The  painful  work  is  Mine-I  have  ordained  poverty  ;  the 
pleasant  work  shall  be  thine— thou  shalt  relieve  it.     "Thou  shalt  open  thine  hand 
wide  unto  thy  brother,  to  thy  poor  and  to  thy  needy  in  thy  land.'      It  is  a  touching 
circumstance  that  not  only  is  the  general  duty  of  what  we  call  chanty  to  the  poor 
enioined  in  Scripture,  but  so  great  is  the  interest  God  takes  m  it  that  the  measure 
and  manner  of  it  are  strongly  enjoined.     Here  we  are  told,  m   the  first  place, 
that  it  must  be  liberal.     "Thou  shalt  open  thine  hand  wide  unto  thy  brother. 
And  it  must  be  extensive  charity  ;  that  is,  as  extensive  as  we  can  make  it.        1 
will  not  give  my  money,"  we  sometimes  say,   "to  this  man  or  that ;  he  has  no 
claim  on  me  ;  I  must  keep  the  little  I  have  to  spare  for  those  who  have  claims  on 
me  "     But  look  again,  "Thou  shalt  open  thine  hand  wide  unto  thy  brother    —to 
" thv  brother"  first,  to  those  who  from  relationship  or  from  some  other  cause  seem 
to  have  claims  on  thee  ;  but  not  to  "thy  brother"  only,  "to  thy  poor  and  to  thy 
needy  in  thy  land."     The  words  are  multiplied;   to  those  who  have  no  claims 
whatever  on  thee  but  their  poverty  and  their  need.     And  it  must  be  also  a  cheerful 
charity.     III.  We  may  go  on  now  to  the  motives  by  which  we  are  urged  to  the 
EXERCISE  OF  THIS  GRACE.     For  these,  some  of  you  may  be  ready  to  say,  I  must  turn 
to  the  Gospel.     But  no,  the  God  of  the  Gospel  is  the  God  of  the    aw  also,  the  God 
of  the  Christian  Church  was  the  God  of  the  ancient  Church,  and  there  is  no  motive 
urged  now  on  us  in  these  Gospel  days  which  was  not  urged  m  substance  on  the 
Jews  in  the  days  of  old.     1.  For  instance,  to  begin,  our  own  mercies  are  made  use 
of  under  the  Gospel  to   impel  us   to   show  mercy  to   others.        Freely  ye   have 
received,"  our  Lord  says,  "freely  give."     Now  look  at  this  chapter.        Thou  shalt 
open  thine  hand  wide  unto  thy  brother,  to  thy  poor  and  to  thy  needy   -why  ? 
"For  the  Lord  thy  God,"  the  sixth  verse  says,  is   opening  His  hand  wide  unto 
thee  ;  He  "is  blessing  thee,"  and  blessing  thee  as  abundantly  as  He  said  He  would  ; 
-  the  Lord  thy  God  blesseth  thee  as  He  promised  thee."     2.  But  again,  the  special 
love  of  God  to  the  poor  is  another  reason  why  our  hands  should  be  opened  to  them. 
Of  all  the  books  that  were  ever  written,  no  book  manifests  such  care  tor  the  poor 
as  the  Bible.     This  has  often  been  noticed  by  those  who  have  closely  studied  this 
book,  and  many  others  with  it,  as  one  of  the  many  internal  evidences  of  its  Divme 
original.     But  turn  to  the  tenth  chapter  of  the  part  of  it  now  before  us,  the  nine- 
o.,  .cr XI e 4.T,\  „^-..„-r,«o^  "  OQTTC!  nrr\A      A Ti H  whv?    Ye  vour- 


teenth  verse. 


15UT;  turn  to  Uie   teuui  i;iicipuci  ui    uiiv.  ^.cxv  ^x   .v^^.^     J     V     ,'   ^7 

se.  "  Love  ye  therefore  the  stranger,"  says  God.  And  why  ?  Ye  your- 
selves. He  adds,  "were  strangers  in  the  land  of  Egypt."  But  this  is  not  the  only 
reason  ;  read  what  goes  before.     The  Lord  Himself  "  loveth  the  stranger.  The 

Lord  loveth  the  stranger,"  "love  ye  therefore  the  stranger,  says  God.  And  this 
appHes  with  much  greater  force  to  the  widow  and  fatherless.  If  natural  feeling,  as 
we  caU  it-if  our  own  parental  feelings-do  not  incline  us  to  open  our  hand  to 
them,  let  the  feelings  of  God  towards  them  incline  us  to  do  so.  I  love  the  fatherless. 
He  says  ;  let  us,  for  His  sake,  because  He  loves  them,  love  them  also.  3.  But  here  is 
a  third  motive  pressed  on  you  ;  this  ' '  opening  of  our  hand  "  to  the  poor  will  lead  the 
Lord  to  open  His  hand  to  us.  "For  this  thing,"  we  read  m  the  verse  before  the 
text- "for  this  thing  the  Lord  thy  God  shall  bless  thee  in  all  thy  works,  and  m  all 
that  thou  puttest  thine  hand  unto. "  This  is  the  legal  promise,  you  may  say.  And 
true,  it  is  ;  but  the  Lord  is  not  less  bountiful  or  less  generous  under  the  Gospel  than 
under  the  law.  (C.  Bradley,  M.A.)  Duty  of  the  Church  towards  the  poor .— ton- 
sider-I.  That  poverty  is  areal  evil  which,  without  any  impeachment  of  the  goodness 
or  wisdom  of  providence,  the  constitution  of  the  world  actually  admits.  11.  that 
providential  appointment  of  this  evil  in  subservience  to  the  genejal  good,  brings  a 
particular  obligatioi.  upon  men  in  civilised  society  to  concur  for  the  immediate 
extinction  of  the  evil  wherever  it  appears.  {Bp.  fforsley. )  Poverty  no  accident  ;- 
"The  poor  shall  never  cease  out  of  the  land."  That  is  a  remark  which  is 
not  understood.  Poverty  is  not  an  accident ;  there  is  a  moral  mystery  connected 
with  poverty  which  has  never  yet  been  found  out.  The  sick-chamber  makes  the 
housef  the  infirm  member  of  the  family  rules  its  tenderest  thinking.  Poverty  has  a 
<Teat  function  to  work  out  in  the  social  scheme,  but  whilst  we  admit  this  we  must 
not  take  the  permanence  of  poverty  as  an  argument  for  neglect ;  it  is  an  argument  tor 
solicitude,  it  is  an  appeal  to  benevolence,  it  is  an  opportunity  to  soften  the  heart  and 


364  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xv, 

cultivate  the  highest  graces  of  the  soul.  It  is  perfectly  true  that  the  bulk  of  poor 
people  may  have  brought  their  poverty  upon  themselves,  but  who  are  we  that  we 
should  make  rough  speeches  about  them  ?  What  have  we  brought  upon  ourselves  ? 
If  we  are  more  respectable  than  others,  it  is  still  the  respectability  of  thieves  and 
liars  and  selfish  plotters.  We,  who  are  apparently  more  industrious  and  virtuous 
and  regardful,  are  not  made  of  different  clay,  and  are  not  animated  by  a  different 
blood.  It  is  perfectly  true  that  a  thousand  people  may  have  brought  to-day's 
poverty  upon  themselves,  and  they  will  have  to  suffer  for  it ;  but  beyond  all  these 
accidents  or  incidents  there  is  the  solemn  fact  that  poverty  is  a  permanent  quantity, 
for  moral  reasons  Avhich  appeal  to  the  higher  instincts  of  the  social  commonwealth. 
We  have  that  we  may  give,  we  are  strong  that  we  may  support  the  weak,  we 
are  wise  that  we  may  teach  the  ignorant.  "Let  this  mind  be  in  you,  which 
was  also  in  Christ  Jesus."  No  man  has  the  slightest  occasion  or  reason  for 
reproaching  any  other  man,  except  in  relation  to  the  immediate  circumstance.  If 
the  assize  were  on  a  larger  scale,  and  we  were  all  involved  in  the  scrutiny,  the 
issue  would  be  this,  "There  is  none  righteous,  no,  not  one."  {J.  Parker,  D.D.) 
Open  thine  hand  wide  unto  thy  brother. — The  duty  of  Christian  charity : — I.  It 
IS  DTJE  TO  THE  CONSTITUTION  OF  SOCIETY.  "The  poor  always  ye  have  with  you." 
We  shall  perhaps  think  correctly  on  the  subject  if  we  admit  as  the  will  of  God  that 
in  every  state  of  society  there  shall  be  poor,  and  that  a  provision  for  the  production 
of  this  fact  is  laid  in  the  gifts  of  His  providence,  in  the  constitution  of  men,  and 
in  the  scheme  of  His  moral  government.  II.  Charity  is  due  to  ourselves.  It 
is  due  to  ourselves,  as  we  would  wish  with  uprightness  to  discharge  the  duties  of 
that  station  in  which  we  are  placed.  To  administer  relief  to  the  poor  is  graciously 
connected  with  our  present  comfort  and  our  future  well-being.  The  very  act  of 
charity  is  accompanied  with  the  most  refined  complacency ;  it  is  answering  that 
sympathy  which  is  born  in  the  heart  of  every  man,  and  which,  unless  stifled  by 
unnatural  discipline,  calls  loudly  for  gratification.  They  are  happy  who  are  the 
objects  of  your  bounty,  but  ye  who  have  experienced  it  can  tell  that  "it  is  more 
blessed  to  give  than  to  receive."  Connected  with  this  is  that  blessing  over  our 
worldly  concerns  "which  maketh  rich,  and  to  which  is  added  no  sorrow."  And 
let  it  be  remembered,  that  prosperity  is  but  for  a  season  ;  now,  therefore,  it  is  time 
to  lay  up  a  store  of  good  deeds,  the  remembrance  of  which  shall  be  the  best 
support  when  misfortune  overtakes  the  prosperous.  Let  it  be  remembered  yet 
again  that  what  possessions  men  have  are  not  their  own,  but  are  the  property  of 
their  Master,  who  hath  committed  it  to  their  stewardship.  All  their  opportunities, 
and  all  their  means  of  doing  good,  must  be  accounted  for.  III.  It  is  due  to 
religion — to  a  religion  which  is  in  its  origin,  its  effects,  its  principle,  and  its  pre- 
cepts a  system  of  charity ;  a  religion  which,  originating  in  the  love  of  God,  proposes 
to  restore  to  happiness  and  dignity  those  who  are  "poor,  and  miserable,  and 
wretched,  and  blind,  and  naked."  They  to  whom  mercy  is  shown  should  be 
merciful.  This  is  what  Christianity  requires,  nay,  what  it  affirms  to  be  the 
amount  and  the  criterion  of  a  genuine  profession.  IV.  It  is  due  to  the  poor. 
As  a  something  voluntary  is  implied  in  the  idea  of  charity,  it  may  sound  para- 
doxical to  speak  of  the  rights  of  the  poor  on  the  charity  of  the  rich.  But  the 
incongruity  is  only  in  sound,  for  it  is  an  acknowledged  maxim  of  civil  economy 
that  the  poor  (the  industrious  poor,  of  whom  only  I  now  speak)  have  an  absolute 
right  to  be  supported  by  the  State,  whose  agriculture,  commerce,  and  manufactures 
have  benefited  by  their  exertions.  Further,  the  poor  have  a  right  as  brethren, 
and  this  is  a  right  which  the  heart  of  a  Christian  cannot  deny.  V.  It  is  due  to  the 
AGE  in  which  we  LIVE — an  age  characterised  for  beneficence,  an  age  distinguished 
above  all  others  for  the  magnitude  of  its  political  events,  for  the  advancement  of 
science,  for  the  general  diffusion  of  literature,  and  more  especially  for  a  spirit 
that  has  amalgamated  all  classes  of  society,  the  most  opposite  ranks  and  pro- 
fessions, into  one  mass,  and  stamped  the  whole  with  benevolence.  {A.  Waugh, 
M.A.)  The  best  mode  of  charity : — It  is  of  importance  not  only  that  we  should 
do  good,  but  that  we  should  do  it  in  the  best  manner.  A  little  judgment  and  a 
little  reflection  added  to  the  gift  does  not  merely  enhance  the  value,  but  often  gives 
to  it  the  only  value  which  it  possesses,  and  even  prevents  that  mischief  of  which 
thoughtless  benevolence  is  sometimes  the  cause.  1.  Mankind,  can  never  be  too 
strongly  or  too  frequently  cautioned  against  self-deception.  If  a  state  of  vice  be  a 
state  of  misery,  a  state  of  vice  of  which  we  are  ignorant  is  doubly  so,  from  the 
increased  probabQity  of  its  duration.  It  is  surprising  how  many  men  are  cheated 
by  flighty  sentiments  of  humanity  into  a  belief  that  they  are  humane,   how 


CHAP.  XV.]  DEUTERONOMY.  365 

frequently  charitable  words  are  mistaken  for  charitable  deeds,  and  a  beautiful 
picture  of  misery  for  an  effectual  relief  of  it.  2.  Another  important  point  in  the 
administration  of  charity  is  a  proper  choice  of  the  objects  we  relieve.  To  give  pro- 
miscuously is  better,  perhaps,  than  not  to  give  at  all,  but  instead  of  risking  the 
chance  of  encouraging  imposture,  discover  some  worthy  family  struggling  up 
against  the  world,  a  widow  with  her  helpless  children,  old  people  incapable  of 
labour,  or  orphans  destitute  of  protection  and  advice  ;  suppose  you  were  gradually 
to  attach  yourselves  to  such  real  objects  of  compassion,  to  learn  their  wants,  to 
stimulate  their  industry,  and  to  correct  their  vices  ;  surely  these  two  species  of 
charity  are  not  to  be  compared  together  in  the  utility  or  in  the  extent  of  their 
effects,  in  the  benevolence  they  evince  or  in  the  merits  they  confer.  3.  The  true 
reason  why  this  species  of  charity  is  so  rarely  practised  is  that  we  are  afraid  of 
imposing  such  a  severe  task  upon  our  indolence,  though,  in  truth,  all  these  kinds 
of  difficulties  are  extremely  overrated.  When  once  we  have  made  ourselves 
acquainted  with  a  poor  family,  and  got  into  a  regular  train  of  seeing  them  at 
intervals,  the  trouble  is  hardly  felt  and  the  time  scarcely  missed  ;  and  if  it  is 
missed,  ought  it  to  be  missed?  4.  These  charitable  visits  to  the  poor,  which  I 
have  endeavoured  to  inculcate,  are  of  importance,  not  only  because  they  prevent 
imposture  by  making  you  certain  of  the  misery  which  you  relieve,  but  because 
they  produce  an  appeal  to  the  senses  which  is  highly  favourable  to  the  cultivation 
of  charity.  He  who  only  knows  the  misfortunes  of  mankind  at  second  hand  and 
by  description  has  but  a  faint  idea  of  what  is  really  suffered  in  the  world.  We 
feel,  it  may  be  said,  the  eloquence  of  description,  but  what  is  all  the  eloquence  of 
art  to  that  mighty  and  original  eloquence  with  which  nature  pleads  her  cause  ; 
to  the  eloquence  of  paleness  and  of  hunger  ;  to  the  eloquence  of  sickness  and  of 
wounds;  to  the  eloquence  of  extreme  old  age,  of  helpless  infancy,  of  friendless 
want !  What  pleadings  so  powerful  as  the  wretched  hovels  of  the  poor,  and  the 
whole  system  of  their  comfortless  economy  !  5.  You  are  not,  I  hope,  of  opinion 
that  these  kinds  of  cares  devolve  upon  the  clergy  alone,  as  the  necessary  labours 
of  their  profession,  but  upon  every  one  whose  faith  teaches  and  whose  fortune 
enables  him  to  be  humane.  6.  Nor  let  it  be  imagined  that  the  duties  which 
I  have  pointed  out  are  much  less  imperative  because  the  law  has  taken  to  itself 
the  protection  of  the  poor  ;  the  law  must  hold  out  a  scanty  relief,  or  it  would 
encourage  more  misery  than  it  relieved  :  the  law  cannot  distinguish  between  the 
poverty  of  idleness  and  the  poverty  of  misfortune  ;  the  law  degrades  those  whom 
it  relieves,  and  many  prefer  wretchedness  to  public  aid  ;  do  not,  therefore,  spare 
yourselves  from  a  belief  that  the  poor  are  well  taken  care  of  by  the  civil  power,  and 
that  individual  interference  is  superfluous.  Many  die  in  secret, — they  perish  and 
are  forgotten.  7.  Remember  that  every  charity  is  short-lived  and  inefficacious 
which  flows  from  any  other  motive  than  the  right.  There  is  a  charity  which 
originates  from  the  romantic  fiction  of  humble  virtue  and  innocence  in  distress, 
but  this  will  be  soon  disgusted  by  low  artifice  and  scared  by  brutal  vice.  The 
charity  which  proceeds  from  ostentation  can  exist  no  longer  than  when  its  motives 
remain  undetected.  There  is  a  charity  which  is  meant  to  excite  the  feelings  of 
gratitude,  but  this  will  meet  with  its  termination  in  disappointment.  That  charity 
alone  endures  which  flows  from  a  sense  of  duty  and  a  hope  in  God.  This  is  the 
charity  that  treads  in  secret  those  paths  of  misery  from  which  all  but  the  lowest 
of  human  wretches  have  fled  ;  this  is  that  charity  which  no  labour  can  weary,  no 
ingratitude  detach,  no  horror  disgust ;  that  toils,  that  pardons,  that  suffers,  that  is 
seen  by  no  man,  and  honoured  by  no  man,  but,  like  the  great  laws  of  nature,  does 
the  work  of  God  in  silence,  and  looks  to  future  and  better  worlds  for  its  reward. 
{Sydney  Smith,  31. A.) 

Vers.  12-18.  Remember  tliat  thou  wast  a  hondman. — Eemember: — In  an  auto- 
biography of  William  Jay  we  read  that  on  one  occasion  he  called  to  see  the  famous 
Mr.  John  Newton  at  Olney,  and  he  observed  that  over  the  desk  at  which  he  was 
accustomed  to  compose  his  sermons  he  had  written  up  in  very  large  letters  the 
following  words :  ' '  Remember  that  thou  -wast  a  bondman  in  the  land  of  Egypt, 
and  the  Lord  thy  God  redeemed  thee."  To  my  mind  this  story  invests  the  text 
with  considerable  interest ;  it  was  most  fitting  that  such  a  remarkable  convert  as 
he  should  dwell  upon  such  a  theme,  and  place  such  a  text  conspicuously  before  his 
cwn  eyes.  Might  it  not  with  great  propriety  be  placed  in  a  similar  position  by 
each  one  of  us  ?  Mr.  Newton  lived  and  acted  under  the  influence  of  the  memory 
which  the  text  commands,  as  was  seen  that  very  morning  in  his  conversation  with 


S66  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTRATOR.  [chap.  xv. 

Mr.  Jay.  "Sir,"  said  Mr.  Newton,  "I  am  glad  to  see  you,  for  I  have  a  letter  just 
come  from  Bath,  and  you  can  perhaps  assist  me  in  the  answer  to  it.  Do  you 
know  anything  of  So-and-so  (mentioning  the  name)  ? "  Mr.  Jay  replied  that  the 
man  was  an  awful  character,  had  once  been  a  hearer  of  the  Gospel,  but  had  become 
a  leader  in  every  vice.  **  But,  sir,"  said  Mr.  Newton,  "  he  writes  very  penitently ; 
and  who  can  tell!  Perhaps  a  change  may  have  come  over  him."  "Well,"  said 
Mr.  Jay,  "I  can  only  say  that  if  ever  he  should  be  converted  I  should  despair  of 
no  one."  **  And  I,"  said  Mr.  Newton,  "never  have  despaired  of  anybody  since  I 
was  converted  myself."  So,  you  see,  as  he  thought  of  this  poor  sinner  at  Bath 
he  was  remembering  that  he  also  was  a  bondman  in  the  land  of  Egypt,  and  the 
Lord  his  God  had  redeemed  him  ;  and  why  should  not  the  same  redemption  reach 
6ven  to  this  notorious  transgressor  and  save  him  ?  The  memory  of  his  own  gracious 
change  of  heart  and  life  gave  him  tenderness  in  dealing  with  the  erring,  and  hope- 
fulness with  regard  to  their  restoration.  I.  First  let  us  consider  our  bondage. 
It  was  exceedingly  like  the  bondage  of  the  children  of  Israel  in  Egypt.  1.  First, 
when  we  were  unregenerate,  and  sold  under  sin,  we  were  enslaved  to  a  mighty 
power  against  which  we  could  not  contend.  If  man  had  been  capable  of  his  own 
redemption  there  would  never  have  descended  from  heaven  the  Divine  Redeemer ; 
but  because  the  bondage  was  all  too  dire  for  man  to  set  himself  free,  therefore  the 
eternal  Son  of  God  came  hither  that  He  might  save  His  people  from  their  sins. 
The  prince  of  the  power  of  the  air,  the  spirit  that  now  worketh  in  the  children 
of  disobedience,  held  us  beneath  his  iron  sway,  and  sin  exercised  a  tyi-annical 
dominion  over  us,  from  which  we  could  not  break.  2.  Our  slavery  had  so  degraded 
us  that  we  had  no  heart  to  desire  an  escape.  One  of  the  worst  points  of  slavery 
is,  that  it  frequently  degrades  men  into  contentment  with  their  condition.  That 
would  be  thought  by  some  to  be  a  benefit,  but  it  is  a  giant  evil,  for  a  man  has 
no  right  to  be  satisfied  in  slavery.  Such  contentment  is  an  ensign  of  debased 
manhood.  3.  Remember  again,  that  you  were  in  a  bondage  similar  to  that  of 
Egypt,  for  while  in  that  condition  you  toiled  hard  and  found  that  all  the  service 
wherein  Satan  made  you  to  serve  was  with  rigour.  The  Israelites  built  treasure 
cities  for  Pharaoh,  and  they  are  supposed  to  have  erected  some  of  the  pyramids  ; 
but  their  wage  was  very  small,  and  their  taskmasters  were  brutal.  Uould  not 
many  a  sinner  tell  of  horrible  nights  and  woeful  mornings,  when  under  the  power 
of  his  passions  ?  Who  hath  woe  ?  who  hath  redness  of  the  eyes  ?  who  is  filled 
with  dread  of  death  ?  who  flees  when  no  man  pursueth  ?  Of  all  tyrants,  sih  arid 
Satan  are  the  most  cruel.  If  men  were  but  in  their  senses,  drunkenness,  gambling, 
gluttony,  wantonness,  and  many  otKer  vices  would  be  rather  punishments  than 
pleasures,  and  yet  they  abide  in  them.  4.  There  was  a  time  when,  in  addition  to 
our  hard  toil,  our  bondage  brought  us  misery.  Do  you  not  remember  when  you 
dared  not  think  a  day's  conduct  over  for  the  life  of  you  ?  I  recollect  also  when  a 
sense  of  sin  came  over  me  ;  and  then,  indeed,  my  life  was  made  bitter  with  hard 
bondage.  5.  All  this  while  our  enemy  was  aiming  at  our  destruction.  This  was  what 
Pharaoh  was  driving  at  with  Israel ;  he  intended  to  cut  off  the  nation  by  severe 
tasks,  or  at  least  to  reduce  its  strength.  As  his  first  policy  did  not  succeed,  he  set 
about  to  destroy  the  male  children  ;  and  even  so  Satan,  when  he  has  men  under  his 
power,  labours  by  all  means  utterly  to  destroy  them  ;  for  nothing  short  of  this  will 
satisfy  him.  Every  hopeful  thought  he  would  drown  in  the  river  of  despair,  lest  by 
any  means  the  man  should  shake  oflf  his  yoke.  The  total  overthrow  of  the  soul  of 
man  is  the  aim  of  the  great  enemy.  What  a  mercy  to  have  been  redeemed  out  of 
the  hand  of  the  enemy !  6.  And  like  Israel  in  Egypt,  we  were  in  the  hands  of  a 
power  that  would  not  let  us  go.  Your  sins  captivated  you.  Then  came  the  reading 
of  the  Scriptures,  or  a  mother's  exhortation,  or  another  earnest  sermon,  and  again 
the  voice  was  heard,  "Thus  saith  the  Lord,  let  My  people  go."  You  began  to  feel 
uneasy  in  your  condition,  and  to  venture  somewhat  into  the  border  country,  but 
you  could  not  escape,  the  iron  had  entered  into  your  soul,  your  heart  was  captive. 
Blessed  was  the  day  when  the  strong  man  armed  that  kept  you  as  a  man  keeps  his 
house  was  overcome  by  a  stronger  than  he  and  cast  out  for  ever.  Then  Jesus  took 
possession  of  your  nature,  never  to  leave  it,  but  to  hold  His  tenancy  world  with- 
out end.  We  were  bondmen  in  Egypt,  but  the  Lord  our  God  redeemed  us,  and  let 
His  name  be  praised.  II.  The  blessed  fact  of  our  redemption  :  "  The  Lord  thy 
God  redeemed  thee."  Here  again  there  is  a  parallel.  1,  He  redeemed  us  first  by 
nrice.  Israel  in  E^pt  was  an  unransomed  nation.  God  claimed  of  that  nation  the 
Urstborn  to  be  His.  That  portion  had  been  His  claim  from  the  first,  and  the  law  was 
afterwards  carried  out  by  the  setting  apart  of  the  Levitical  tribe  to  take  the  place 


CHAP.  XV.]  DEUTERONOMY.  367 

of  the  firstborn ;  but  Israel  in  Egypt  had  never  set  apart  its  firstborn  at  all,  and 
was  therefore  an  unredeemed  people.  How  was  all  that  indebtedness  to  be  made 
up?  The  nation  must  be  redeemed  by  a  price,  and  that  price  was  set  forth  by  the 
eymbol  of  a  lamb  which  was  killed,  and  roasted,  and  eaten,  while  the  blood  was 
emeared  upon  the  lintel  and  the  two  side-posts.  You  and  I  have  been  redeemed  . 
■with  blood  (Rev.  v.  9  ;  1  Pet.  i.  18).  2.  But  there  would  not  have  been  a  coming*^ 
out  of  Egypt  unless  there  had  been  a  display  of  power  as  well  as  a  payment  of 
price,  for  with  a  high  hand  and  an  outstretched  arm  the  Lord  brought  forth  His 
people.  Greater  than  Moses'  rod  was  Christ's  pierced  hand.  Our  tyrant  hath 
no  more  power  to  hold  us  in  chains,  for  Christ  hath  vanquished  him  for  ever. 
3.  Another  form  of  redemption  was  also  seen  by  Israel,  namely,  in  the  power  exerted 
over  themselves.  I  think  suflBcient  stress  has  never  been  laid  upon  this.  That  they 
should  have  been  willing  to  come  out  of  Egypt  was  no  small  thing, — universally 
■willing,  so  that  not  a  single  person  remained  behind.  Marvellous  display  of 
power  this  ;  and  so  we  will  tell  it  to  the  praise  of  God  this  day,  that  He  made 
us  willing  to  come  out  of  the  Egypt  of  our  sin  to  which  we  were  rooted  ;  and 
making  us  willing,  He  made  us  able  too;  the  power  of  the  Spirit  came  upon  us 
and  the  might  of  His  grace  overshadowed  us,  and  we  did  arise  and  come  to  our 
Father.  Let  grace  have  all  the  glory.  Shall  I  need  to  press  upon  you,  then,  to 
let  your  minds  fly  back  to  the  time  when  you  realised  your  redemption,  and  came 
up  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt?  (1)  It  was  Divine  interposition.  "The  Lord  thy 
God  redeemed  thee."  (2)  And  it  was  personally  experienced,  for  "The  Lord 
thy  God  redeemed  thee."  It  was  a  matter  of  clear  consciousness  to  your  own  soul. 
Thou  wast  a  bondman  ;  thou  didst  know  it  and  feel  it :  the  Lord  thy  God 
redeemed  thee,  and  thou  didst  know  it  and  feel  that  also.     III.  The  influemce 

•WHICH     THIS     DOUBLE     MEMORY     OUGHT    TO     HAVE     UPON     YOU.        1.    We     should 

naturally  conclude,  without  any  reference  to  Scripture,  that  if  a  Christian  man 
kept  always  in  mind  his  former  and  his  present  state  it  would  render  him 
humble.  Thou  wouldst  have  been  in  hell  now  if  it  had  not  been  for  sovereign 
grace ;  or  if  not  there,  perhaps  thou  wouldst  have  been  among  drunkards 
and  swearers,  and  lewd  men  and  women,  or  at  least  among  the  proud,  self- 
righteous  Pharisees.  When  thou  art  honoured  of  the  Lord  and  happy  in  the  full 
assurance  of  faith,  still  remember  that  thou  wast  a  bondman,  and  walk  humbly 
with  thy  God.  2.  In  the  next  place,  be  grateful.  If  you  have  not  all  the  temporal 
mercies  that  you  would  desire,  yet  you  have  received  the  choicest  of  all  mercies, 
liberty  through  Jesus  Christ,  therefore  be  cheerful,  happy,  and  thankful.  3.  Being 
grateful,  be  patient  too.  If  you  are  suffering,  or  if  sometimes  your  spirits  are 
cast  down,  or  if  you  are  poor  and  despised,  yet  say  to  yourself,  ' '  Why  should 
I  complain  ?  My  lot  may  seem  hard,  yet  it  is  nothing  in  comparison  with  what 
it  would  have  been  if  I  had  been  left  a  prisoner  in  the  land  of  Egypt.  Thank 
God,  I  am  no  longer  in  bondage  to  my  sins. "  4.  Next,  be  hopeful.  What  may 
you  not  yet  become  ?  "It  doth  not  yet  appear  what  we  shall  be."  You  were  a 
bondman,  but  grace  has  set  you  free.  Who  knows  what  the  Lord  may  yet  make 
of  you  ?  5.  Then  be  zealous.  Here  earnestness  should  find  both  fire  and  fuel ; 
we  were  bondmen,  but  the  Lord  has  redeemed  us.  What,  then,  can  be  too  hard 
for  us  to  undertake  for  His  sake?  John  Newton  persisted  in  preaching  even 
when  he  was  really  incapable  of  it,  for  he  said,  "  What,  shall  the  old  African 
blasphemer  leave  off  preaching  Jesus  Christ  while  there  is  breath  in  his  body  ? 
No,  never."  He  felt  that  he  must  continue  to  bear  testimony,  for  our  text  was 
always  before  him,  "  Remember  that  thou  wast  a  bondman  in  the  land  of  Egypt, 
and  the  Lord  thy  God  redeemed  thee."  6.  But  now  follow  me  while  I  show  you 
the  Lord's  own  use  of  this  remembrance ;  and  the  first  text  I  shall  quote  will  be 
found  in  chap.  v.  14.  You  were  a  bondman.  What  would  you  have  given  for 
rest  then  ?  Now  that  the  Lord  has  given  you  this  hallowed  day  of  rest,  guard  it 
sacredly.  Rest  in  the  Lord  Jesus  yourself,  but  endeavour  to  bring  all  your  family 
into  the  same  peace,  "that  thy  manservant  and  thy  maidservant  may  rest  as  well 
as  thou."  In  chap.  vii.  we  have  another  use  of  this  remembrance.  Here  the 
chosen  people  are  commanded  to  keep  separate  from  the  nations.  They  were  not 
to  intermarry  with  the  Canaanites,  nor  make  alliances  with  them.  Israel  was  to 
be  separated,  even  as  Moses  said,  "thou  art  a  holy  people  unto  the  Lord  thy 
God.  And  the  reason  he  gives  in  the  eighth  verse  is  this:  "the  Lord  redeemed 
thee  out  of  the  house  of  bondmen."  Ah,  if  we  are  redeemed  from  among  men, 
then  as  the  specially  blood-bought  ones  we  are  under  solemn  obligations  to  come 
out  from  the  world  and  to  be  separate  from  it.     In  the  eighth  chapter  redemption 


368  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xt. 

is  used  as  an  argument  for  obedience,  and  they  are  exhorted  not  to  forget  the  laws 
and  statutes  of  the  Lord,  and  above  all  warned  lest  in  the  midst  of  prosperity  their 
heart  should  be  lifted  up  so  as  to  forget  the  Lord  their  God,  who  brought  them 
forth  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt,  from  the  house  of  bondage.  The  same  argument 
runs  through  the  eleventh  chapter,  and  is  a  very  clear  one.  We  ought  to  render 
glad  obedience  to  Him  who  has  wrought  us  so  great  a  deliverance.  We  find  in 
the  thirteenth  chapter  that  the  redemption  from  bondage  is  used  as  an  argument 
for  loyal  attachment  to  the  one  and  only  God.  Our  own  text  is  set  in  the  follow- 
ing connection.  If  a  man  entered  into  forced  servitude,  <jf  came  under  any  bonds 
to  his  fellow-man  among  the  Jews,  he  could  only  be  so  held  for  six  years,  and  on 
the  seventh  he  was  to  go  free.  The  Lord's  people  should  be  considerate  of  those 
who  are  in  their  employment.  The  recollection  of  their  own  bondage  should 
make  them  tender  and  kind  to  those  who  are  in  subservience  to  themselves,  and 
never  should  a  Christian  man  be  ungenerous,  illiberal,  severe,  churlish  with  his 
servant,  or  with  any  who  are  dependent  upon  him.  There  should  be  in  a  man 
redeemed  with  the  blood  of  Christ  something  like  nobility  of  soul  and  benevolence 
to  his  fellow-men,  and  so  even  this  stern  book  of  law  teaches  us.  I  remind 
you  that  they  were  bound  to  keep  the  Passover  because  of  their  deliverance  from 
Egypt  as  we  find  in  the  sixteenth  chapter  at  the  first  verse.  So  let  us  also  take 
heed  unto  ourselves  that  we  keep  all  the  statutes  and  ordinances  of  the  Lord 
blamelessly.  Let  us  keep  the  ordinances  as  they  were  delivered  unto  us,  and 
neither  alter  nor  misplace  them.  Again,  in  the  sixteenth  chapter,  verses  10  to  12, 
you  have  the  great  redemption  used  as  an  argument  for  liberality  towards  the 
cause  of  God  :  they  were  to  give  unto  the  Lord  rejoicingly  of  that  which  the  Lord 
had  given  to  them.  "Every  man  shall  give  as  he  is  able,  according  to  the 
blessing  of  the  Lord  thy  God  which  He  hath  given  thee  "  ;  and  that  because  of  the 
twelfth  verse,  "Thou  shalt  remember  that  thou  wast  a  bondman  in  Egypt:  and 
thou  shalt  observe  and  do  these  statutes."  In  the  twenty-sixth  chapter  the  same 
teaching  is  reduced  to  a  set  form,  for  they  were  there  commanded  to  bring  each 
one  a  basket  of  first  fruits  and  oifer  it  unto  the  Lord,  saying,  "The  Lord  brou.t^ht 
us  forth  out  of  Egypt,"  &c.  Last  of  all,  in  the  twenty-fourth  chapter  there  remains 
one  more  lesson.  We  are  there  exhorted  to  be  careful  concerning  the  fatherless 
and  the  widow  (chap.  xxiv.  17).  A  generous  spirit  was  to  be  exhihited  towards 
the  poor.  Be  ye  thoughtful  of  all  your  fellow-men.  You  that  have  been 
redeemed  with  price,  be  ye  tender-hearted,  full  of  compassion,  putting  on 
bowels  of  mercy.  In  spiritual  things  take  care  that  you  never  rake  the  corners 
of  your  fields.  Do  not  rob  the  Gospel  of  its  sweetness.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The 
release  of  bond-servants: — In  this  ordinance  we  may  see — I.  An  encouraging 
EMBLEM.  It  represents — 1.  The  redemption  which  God  vouchsafes  to  His  people. 
2.  The  mercy  which  He  exercises  towards  His  redeemed.  II.  An  instructive 
LESSON.  We  are  to  regard  God's  mercies  as — 1.  A  pattern  for  our  imitation. 
2.  A  notice  for  our  exertion.     (0.  Simeon,  M.A.) 

Ver.  20.  Eat  it  before  the  Lord  thy  God  year  by  year. — Memorial  days : — "Year 
by  year."  It  might  seem  at  first  sight,  antecedent  to  experience,  a  surprising  thing 
that  the  mere  mechanical  movement  of  the  earth  through  the  heavens  should  have 
any  special  relationship  to  man's  mind  and  spirit.  Yet  we  know  that  it  has.  Our 
memory  associates  special  experiences  with  certain  seasons  and  days.  As  the 
season  or  day  returns  the  event  is  recalled,  and  sometimes  the  impressions 
awakened  by  it  have,  apparently,  all  their  original  sharpness.  So,  in  this  regard, 
the  course  of  the  heavens  comes  to  be,  as  it  were,  a  colossal  memorandum-book. 

1.  There  is  a  sure  evidence  of  the  event  seen  in  the  fact  of  its  commemoration. 

2.  We  are  taught  how  comparatively  rare  are  these  conspicuous  and  startling 
events  which  punctuate  our  public  and  private  life.  It  is  well  for  the  sanity  of 
the  human  mind  that  life  is  not  filled  with  startling  events.  It  would  be  like 
substituting  pyrotechnics  for  the  moonlight,  or  the  stars  for  the  silent  skies. 
It  is  in  the  ordinary  quiet  on-going  of  life  that  we  find  healthfulness  of  heart. 

3.  Life  is  always  serious.  For  we  are  ever  treading  on  the  edge  of  something 
unexpected,  it  may  be  something  terrible.  Let  us  walk  circumspectly,  and  realise 
that  we  may  always  dwell  under  the  shield  of  God's  providence  and  under  the  light 
of  His  promises.  4.  We  see  the  innate  superiority  of  mind  to  all  temporary  events. 
You  recall  perhaps  your  wedding  day,  the  hour,  the  place,  the  guests,  the  joy, 
through  a  score  of  years,  a  half  century  ago.  Intervals  of  time  fade  from  view  in 
presence  of  this  supreme  experience,  just  as  you  look  from  one  lofty  peak  to 


CHAP.  XVI.]  DEUTERONOMY.  369 


another  and  think  not  of  field,  valley,  and  river  between.  You  see  those  shining 
points  of  life  when  you  were  at  twenty,  forty,  or  sixty  years  of  age,  and  lesser 
experiences  are  hidden.  The  mind  itself  is  superior  to  mere  measurements  of 
time,  and  so  is  constituted  for  immortality ;  is  akin  to  Him  to  whom  a  thousand 
years  are  but  as  yesterday.  5.  How  deep  in  us  is  the  element  of  aflFection  which 
has  its  expression  in  the  anniversary  or  festival.  As  we  review  the  past  our 
memory  clings  to  those  experiences  in  which  the  heart  has  a  part,  those  which 
have  touched  its  springs  of  joy  and  grief.  We  properly  cultivate  intellectual 
strength,  power  of  will  and  endurance,  but,  after  all,  it  is  love  that  is  supreme. 
Love  brings  us  nearer  Him  who  is  perfect  love.  6.  A  sweet  illustration  of  the 
grace  of  God  in  the  Gospel  is  furnished  in  the  fact,  with  which  every  believer 
is  familiar,  that  in  these  remembered  events  sorrow  loses  its  sting  and  joy  comes 
to  be  even  more  full  in  reminiscence  than  it  was  at  first.  Our  sorrow  only  makes 
more  glorious  the  preciousness  and  amplitude  of  Divine  grace  and  sympathy,^  just 
as  the  glory  of  the  sun,  shot  through  a  dark  cloud,  illumines  and  transfigures  it  by 
its  splendour  and  its  peace.  7.  Wliat  a  rest  it  is  to  the  aged  to  recall  the  past 
when  they  are  released  from  life's  active  and  strenuous  struggles !  They  are  like 
ships  home  from  long  voyages,  moored  in  a  quiet  harbour,  where  the  memory  of 
storms  that  are  past  only  enhances  the  serenity  and  peace  enjoyed.  ^  8.  Whatever 
measurements  may  hereafter  be  had  as  to  time  and  eternity  in  our  immortal  life, 
one  thing  is  certain  :  we  will  keep  one  point  in  vivid  remembrance— that  of  our 
entrance  into  life,  when  we  first  knew  the  joys  eternal.     {R.  S.  Storrs,  D.D.) 


CHAPTER  XVI. 


Vers.  1-8.  Keep  the  Passover.— TAg  yearly  festivals :— The  darker  side  of  the 
Jewish  religion  was  more  than  relieved  by  its  outlets  for  joy.  It  identified  in  a 
marvellous  manner  the  holy-day  and  the  holiday  (see  the  two  words  translated 
"feast"  in  Lev.  xxiii.,  meaning  the  one  "holy  convocation,"  the  other  "festival"), 
showing  that  the  people  with  deepest  religious  feelings  are,  after  all,  the  happiest 
people.  The  three  great  yearly  feasts  were— 1.  The  Passover,  in  the  middle  of  Abib 
(nearly  our  April) ;  2.  Seven  weeks  after,  Pentecost,  or  the  Feast  of  Weeks  ;  and 
3.  The  Feast  of  Tabernacles,  or  of  Ingathering,  in  the  end  of  autumn  (October). 
Notice  of  all  three— I.  Their  origin.  They  have  their  root  in  the  weekly  Sabbath. 
The  Sabbath  itself  is  the  first  of  the  feasts  (Lev.  xxiii.  2,  3),  in  which  respect  it  also 
is  a  joyful  day  (Psa.  cxviii.  24 ;  Isa.  Ivi.  7,  Iviii.  14).  And  the  great  feasts  are 
framed  upon  its  model.  They  are  ruled  by  the  sabbatical  number,  seven.  They 
begin  and  generally  end  on  the  seventh  day.  Two  of  them  last  for  seven  days  each, 
and  there  are  seven  days  of  "  holy  convocation  "  in  the  year.  Pentecost  takes  place 
seven  weeks— a  sabbath  of  weeks — after  the  Passover.  The  seventh  month  is 
specially  distinguished  (vers.  23-36).  Moreover,  every  seventh  year  is  of  the  nature 
of  a  Sabbath,  and  seven  times  seven  years  bring  the  Jubilee.  Smaller  festivals 
formed  connecting  links  between  the  Sabbath  and  the  yearly  feasts.  There  was  the 
Feast  of  Months,  distinguishing  the  first  Sabbath  of  each  month  with  special 
sacrifices  (Numb,  xxviii.  11),  and  with  blowing  of  trumpets  (Numb.  x.  10),  which 
trumpets  were  used  again  on  the  first  day  of  the  seventh  month — the  "Feast  of 
Trumpets"  (Lev.  xxiii.  24,  25).  Our  Sabbaths,  like  those  of  the  Jews,  form  the 
backbone  and  safeguard  of  our  own  national  festivities.  II.  Their  purpose.  They 
accomplished  on  a  larger  scale  what  was  already  aimed  at  by  the  weekly  Sabbath. 
1.  They  called  away  from  the  round  of  yearly  duty  to  the  public  recognition  of  God. 
In  spring  and  summer  and  autumn  they  presented  anew  to  the  people's  conscious- 
ness, through  the  most  impressive  vehicle  of  national  festivals,  their  covenant 
relation  to  Jehovah.  2.  They  had  a  most  important  educational  function.  They 
were  a  compendium  in  dramatic  form  of  early  Israelitish  history,  "What  mean  ye 
by  this  service?"  (Exod.  xii.  26.)  Moreover,  they  gave  opportunity  for  special 
religious  instruction.  (Josiah's  Passover,  2  Chron.  xxxiv.  29fiF. ;  and  Ezra's  Feast 
of  Tabernacles,  Neh.  viii. )  3.  They  subserved  important  ends  not  directly  religious. 
They  promoted  the  national  unity  of  the  Israelites,  stimulating  their  patriotism. 
(See  the  action  of  Jeroboam,  1  Kings  xii.  26.)  III.  Their  regulations.  1.  The 
males  from  all  parts  of  the  country  must  assemble  to  the  three  feasts  (Deut.  xvi.  16) ; 

24 


570  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  xvi. 

for  which  purpose  all  ordinary  labour  ceases.  2.  The  worshippers  are  to  bring  con- 
tributions (Deut.  xvi.  16,  17),  both  for  the  necessary  sacrifices  of  themselves  and 
others,  and  for  hospitality  (Neh.  viii.  10).  3.  The  people  are  to  rejoice  in  their 
feasts.  So  Lev.  xxiii.  40  commands  for  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles,  and  Deut.  xvi. 
11,  15  for  the  Feasts  of  Pentecost  and  Tabernacles.  Ezra  tells  of  the  joy  at  the 
Feast  of  the  Passover  (Ezra  vi.  22) ;  and  Nehemiah  of  the  "  very  great  gladness  "  at 
the  Feast  of  Tabernacles  (Neh.  viii.  17).  But  where  is  happiness  to  be  found  if  not 
in  the  recognition  of  God's  relation  to  us  ?  Special  protection  was  promised  during 
the  celebration  of  the  feasts.  There  are  frequent  promises  that  the  fruits  of  the 
earth  will  not  suflFer,  as  Deut.  xvi.  15.  And  it  was  specially  promised  that  the 
absence  of  its  defenders  would  not  expose  the  country  to  invasion  (Exod.  xxxiv.  24). 
In  short,  Israel's  compliance  with  God's  will  here  as  everywhere  was  to  be  to  the 
advantage  even  of  his  worldly  prosperity.  A  truth  for  all  times  and  all  peoples 
(Psa.  i.  3,  xcii.  13-15).  {W.  Roberts,  M.A.)  The  yearly  festivals  .—Looking  to 
these  festivals  separately,  we  find  that  a  threefold  meaning  attaches  to  each  of 
them — 1.  A  present  meaning  in  nature  ;  2.  A  retrospective  meaning  in  history  ;  and 
3.  A  prospective  meaning  in  grace.  Moreover,  in  each  of  these  three  respects  the 
three  feasts  stand  in  progressive  order :  the  Passover,  the  first  at  once  in  nature, 
history,  and  grace  ;  the  Pentecost,  in  all  three  respects  the  second  or  intermediate  ; 
and  me  Tabernacles,  in  all  three  respects  the  consummation  of  what  has  gone 
before.  I.  The  Feast  of  the  Passover,  occurring  about  the  beginning  of  April. 
1.  Its  natural  meaning  was  necessarily  an  afterthought  or  addition  of  the  wilderness 
legislation.  Looking  forward  to  the  settlement  in  Canaan,  and  placed  at  early 
harvest,  it  marked  the  beginning  of  a  people's  enrichment  in  the  fruits  of  the  earth, 
and  recognised  in  that  the  gift  of  a  covenant  God.  Its  place  was  "when  thou 
beginnest  to  put  the  sickle  to  the  corn"  (Deut.  xvi.  9).  And  hence  the  special 
provisions  of  Lev.  xxiii.  10-14.  2.  What  was  first  in  nature  was  also  first  in 
history.  The  Passover  night  marked  the  beginning  of  Israel's  national  life.  The 
month  in  which  it  occurred  was  henceforth  to  be  the  fij-st  of  the  year  (Exod.  xii.^  2), 
and  to  be  pennanently  observed  (Exod.  xii.  14  ;  Deut.  xvi.  1).  Some  modifications 
necessarily  arose  in  the  permanent  observance  of  the  Passover  ;  the  blood  was  now 
to  be  sprinkled  on  the  altar ;  and  the  lamb  was  to  be  slain  in  the  one  place  of 
sacrifice  (Deut.  xvi.  5-7  ;  2  Chron.  xxx.  15,  16).  The  eating  with  unleavened 
bread  and  bitter  herbs  remained,  as  pointing  to — 3.  The  prospective  and  spiritual 
reference  of  the  Passover.  The  observance  of  the  Passover  touched  closely  the 
spiritual  welfare  of  the  Israelites.  It  distinguished  the  reigns  of  Josiah  aiid 
Hezekiah  and  the  return  of  the  Jews  from  captivity.  And  here  we  have  the  third 
and  greatest  beginning,  the  beginning  of  the  kingdom  of  God,  in  the  world's 
deliverance  from  sin.  And  we  must  deal  with  Christ  as  the  Jews  with  the  Paschal 
Lamb,  taking  Him — "eating"  Him,  as  He  Himself  puts  it — in  His  entireness  as  a 
Saviour,  with  the  bitter  herbs  of  contrition  and  the  unleavened  bread  of  a  sincere 
obedience.  II.  The  Feast  of  Pentecost — called  also  the  Feast  of  Weeks,  inas- 
much as  seven  weeks  were  to  be  reckoned  between  Passover  and  Pentecost.  And 
this  distance  of  a  Sabbath  of  weeks  rules  in  all  three  meanings  of  this  feast.  1.  Its 
natural  reference  was  to  the  completion  of  the  harvest.  It  was  the  "Feast  of 
harvest."  Now,  two  loaves  baked  of  the  first-fruits  are  to  be  waved  before  the  Lord, 
with  accompanying  offerings  (Lev.  xxiii.  17-20).  In  addition  to  which,  a  free-will 
offering,  in  recognition  of  God's  blessing,  is  to  be  brought,  and  the  people  are  called 
on  specially  to  rejoice  (Deut.  xvi.  10,  11).  2.  Its  historical  reference  is  a  matter  of 
inference.  The  seven  weeks  between  Passover  and  Pentecost  are  paralleled  by  the 
seven  weeks  actually  occurring  between  the  deliverance  from  Egypt  and  the  giving 
of  the  law  from  Sinai  ;  and  as  the  Passover  commemorates  the  first,  it  is  reasonable 
to  infer  that  Pentecost  commemorates  the  second.  Moreover,  the  fulfilment  which 
in  nature  Pentecost  gives  to  the  promise  of  the  Passover  is  paralleled  by  the  fulfil- 
ment which  the  Sinaitic  law  actually  gave  to  the  promise  of  the  Exodus.  For  God's 
first  object  and  promise  was  to  meet  His  people  and  reveal  Himself  to  them  in  the 
wilderness.  And  this  connection  becomes  greatly  more  remarkable  when  we  notice 
— 3.  The  prospective  meaning  of  this  feast  in  the  realm  of  grace.  Under  the 
Christian  dispensation  Pentecost  has  become  even  more  illustrious  than  the 
Passover.  Again  God  numbered  to  Himself  seven  weeks,  and  signalised  Pentecost 
by  the  gift  of  the  Spirit.  And  what  the  Pentecost  was  to  the  Passover,  that  the 
gift  of  the  Spirit  is  to  the  atonement  of  Christ.  Look  at  the  natural  meaning  of  the 
two  feasts.  In  the  sheaf  of  corn  the  Passover  furnished  the  material  for  food  ;  in 
the  wave  loaves  Pentecost  presented  God's  gift  in  the  shape  in  which  it  could  be 


CHAP.  XVI.]  DEUTERONOMY.  371 


used  for  food.     So  the  Passover  atonement  furnishes  a  material  for  salvation  which 
becomes  available  only  through  the  gift  of  the  S])ivit.     Or  look  at  the  historical 
meaning  of  the  feasts  :  the  Passover  atonement  came  to  effect  spiritually  and  for  the 
world  what  the  Paschal  Lamb  effected  for  the  Jewish  i^ation.     And  the  Holy  Spirit 
came  to  do  for  the  dead  law  what  Christ  in  His  atonement  did  for  the  Pasdial  Lamb. 
He  came  to  write  universally  on  men's  hearts  what  of  old  had  been  written  for  the 
Israelites  on  stone  (Heb.  viii.  8,  10  ;  2  Cor.  iii.  3).     As  the  end  of  harvest  was  the 
fruition  of  its  beginning,  and  the  law  the  fruition  of  the  exodus,  so  the  pentecostal 
Spirit  was  the  fruition  of  the  atonement.     Should  not  we  who  live  under  the 
dwpensation  of  the  Spirit  maintain  our  pentecostal  joj  ?  ^IH-  The   Feast   of 
Tabernacles,  in  the  seventh  month,  or  our  October— called  also  the  ieast  of 
Ingathering      1.  Its  natural  meaning.     It  came  after  the  harvest  of  the  vineyards 
and  oliveyards.     It  marked  the  close  of  the  year's  labours  and  their  cumulative 
results,  and  was  therefore  the  most  joyous  of  the  feasts  (Lev.  xxiii.  40  ;  Deut.  xvi. 
14)  •  but— 2.  The  historical  meaning  of  the  feast  gives  us  deeper  insight  mto  its  joy. 
There  is  a  special  provision  made  in  view  of  the  coming  settlement  in  Canaan,  and 
made  in  order  that  the  hardships  of  the  wilderness  may  be  kept  fresh  m  the  people  s 
memory  (Lev.  xxiii.  40,  42,  43).     That  memorial  was  to  emphasise  God  s  goodness 
in  the  protection  of  the  fathers  and  in  the  settlement  of  their  posterity.      The 
Feast  of  Tabernacles  therefore  marked  the  consummation  of  God  s  covenant  and 
called  for  highest  gratitude  and  joy.     Specially  interesting  is  the  celebration  of  this 
feast  by  the  Jews  on  their  return  from  Babylon,  where  God  s  goodness  in  bringing 
their  forefathers  through  the  wilderness  had  been  a  second  time,   and  no  less 
wondrously,  manifested  to  them  (Neh.  viii.   13-17;   Psa.   cxx^n.).     But-3.  The 
fullest  meaning  of  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles  is  in  the  kingdom  of  grace.     Tlie  wonder 
of  God's  goodness  finds  last  and  hi-liest  manifestation  in  the  final  home^bringing  of 
His  universal  Church.     The  anti-type  is  the  ingathering  of  God's  good  gram  mto 
the  heaveiily  garner.      Canaan  after  the  wilderness,  Jerusalem  after  Babylon,  are 
paralleled  and  fulfilled  in  the  multitude  that  have  come  out  of  great  tribulation. 
(Walter  Eoherts,  M.A.)        Jewish  commemorative  feasts  .-—The  Scriptures  record 
two  chief  outbursts  of  miraculous  power  :   one  at  the  foundation  of  the  Hebrew 
commonwealth   at   the    exodus    from    Egypt,   and  one    at    the    time    of    Christ  s 
appearing  and  the  foundation  of  Christianity.     It  is  a  matter  of  infinite  importance 
to   every  man  to  ascertain  whether  these  great  miracles  of  the   exodus   and   of 
Christ's  first  advent  were  really  wrought.     I.  The  facts  of  the  case  are  these  : 
(1)  The  Hebrew  people  and  the  ancient  Hebrew  books  now  exist,  and  they  throw 
Ught  on  one  another.     (2)  Wherever  the  Jewish  people  exist  they  celebrate  in  the 
spring  the  festival  of  the  Passover,  which  they  universally  regard  as  a  historical 
memorial   of   the   deliverance   of  their   forefathers    from    Egypt,    about    tourteen 
hundred    years    before    Christ,    by    the    supernatural    intervention    of    God    the 
Almighty      II.  In  the  same  manner,  the   feast  of  Pentecost,   or   the  festival   of 
the   wheat-harvest,    fifty   days  after   the  Passover,    came    to    be    regarded    as    A 
memorial  of  the  giving  of  the  law  on  Mount  Sinai  on  the  fiftieth  day  after 
the  Exodus.     In  like  manner,  the  autumnal  festival  of  Succoth,  or  Booths,  called 
••The  Feast  of  Tabernacles,"  is  now  celebrated  just  as  universally  as  the  Pass- 
over in  the  spring,   as  a  memorial  of  the  children  of  Israel  dwelling  in  huts 
or  booths.     These  festivals  and  commemorations  have  been  celebrated  now  for 
more  than  three  thousand  years.     III.  The  rule  is  that  national  celebrations 

AND  PUBLIC  MONUMENTS  MAINTAIN  THE   REMEMBRANCE   OF   REAL  EVENTS   IN  PAST 

AGES.  It  may  be  objected  that  if  Athens,  with  aU  its  wisdom,  could  celebrate 
the  fictitious  history  of  Minerva,  why  may  we  not  believe  that  the  Jews  were 
capable  of  commemorating  things  that  happened  only  in  the  imagination  of  later 
writers  and  poets  ?  To  this  we  answer  :  (1)  that  even  in  the  festivals  of  mythology 
there  has  been  a  strange  interweaving  of  historical  truth  and  a  constant  tendency 
to  give  this  element  prominence  in  the  lapse  of  time;  (2)  that  the  Jews  were 
utterly  destitute  of  the  dramatic  imagination  of  the  Greeks :  to  them  the  origina- 
tion of  a  myth  like  that  of  the  Exodus,  if  it  were  a  myth,  would  be  an  uncongenial 
exercise,  its  adoption  as  history  an  impossibility.  {E.  While.)  Conditions  of 
worship  .—The  time  is  specified,  and  the  reason  is  given.  Every  month  has  a 
memory,  every  day  has  a  story,  every  night  has  a  star  all  its  own.  Selected 
instances  help  us  to  ascertain  general  principles.  Acting  upon  these  instances, 
we  become  familiar  with  their  spirit  and  moral  genius,  so  much  so  that  we  begin 
to  ask,  are  there  not  other  memorable  events?  Are  there  not  other  times  of 
deUverance  ?    Have  we  been  brought  out  of  Egypt  only  ?    Are  not  aU  the  daya 


372  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xvi. 

storied  with  providential  love  ?  If  God  is  so  careful  about  time,  has  He  any 
regard  for  place  ?  (Vers.  5,  6. )  This  is  morally  consistent  with  God's  claim  for 
gracious  recollection  of  definite  times.  May  we  not  slay  the  Passover  where 
we  please  ?  Certainly  not.  May  we  not  insulate  ourselves,  and  upon  little  church 
appointments  of  our  own  creation  carry  out  the  ceremony  of  our  worship? 
Certainly  not.  We  should  strive  to  move  in  the  direction  at  least  of  unity, 
commonwealth,  fellowship,  solidarity.  The  sacrifice  is  the  same,  the  man  who 
oflFers  it  is  the  same;  bat  because  it  is  not  offered  at  the  place  which  God  has 
chosen  the  sacrifice  and  the  sacrificer  go  for  nothing.  That  is  in  harmony  with 
all  the  social  arrangements  which  experience  has  approved.  There  are  fit  places 
for  all  things,  as  weU  as  fit  times.  The  time  having  been  fixed  and  the  place 
determined,  what  remains?  (Ver.  10.)  Here  is  the  beginning  of  another  kind  of 
liberty.  A  wonderful  word  occurs  in  this  verse:  "a  freewill  offering."  How 
wonderfully  God  educates  the  human  race :  He  will  insist  upon  definite  claims 
and  obligations  being  answered,  and  yet  He  will  also  give  opportunity  for  freewill 
action,  as  if  He  had  said, — Now  we  shall  see  what  you  will  do  when  left  to  your- 
selves ;  the  law  no  longer  presses  you ;  the  great  hand  is  lifted,  and  for  the  time 
being  you  shall  do  in  this  matter  as  it  may  please  your  own  mind  and  heart. 
That  is  an  element  in  the  Divine  education  of  the  human  race.  God  give«  us 
opportunities  of  showing  ourselves  to  ourselves.  He  only  would  count  the  gift : 
no  one  should  know  what  had  been  done  :  the  sweet  transaction  should  lie  between 
the  one  soul  and  the  living  Lord.  Another  singular  word  occurs  in  this  tenth 
verse: — ** a  tribute."  The  literal  meaning  is  that  the  gift  is  to  be  proportional. 
It  would  have  been  easy  to  throw  a  dole  to  the  Lord  that  had  no  reference  whatever 
to  what  was  left  behind :  that  would  be  a  broad,  easily-opened  gate  to  heaven ; 
but  such  is  not  the  condition  stated  in  the  bond.  Even  the  freewill  offering  is  to 
be  tributary :  it  is  to  be  based  upon  the  original  substance,  the  actual  property, 
whatever  is  in  the  hand  as  momentary  possession.  Thus,  sacrifice  is  to  be 
calculated  ;  worship  is  to  be  the  result  of  forethought ;  nothing  is  to  be  done  of 
mere  constraint  or  as  consultative  of  ease  and  indulgence.  A  word  of  taxation 
touches  the  very  poetry  and  pathos  of  oblation.  "And  thou  shalt  rejoice  before 
the  Lord  thy  God,"  &c.  (ver.  11).  This  gives  us  the  joyous  aspect  of  religion. 
An  ancient  Jewish  annotator  has  made  a  beautiful  remark  upon  this  verse,  to  the 
effect  that  "thy  four,  0  Israel,  and  My  four  shall  rejoice  together."  "Thy  son, 
and  thy  daughter,  and  thy  manservant,  and  thy  maidservant " — let  them  rejoice, 
let  them  be  glad  in  response  to  music,  and  let  them  call  for  more  music  to  express 
their  ever-increasing  joy ;  but  God's  four  must  be  there  also — the  Levite,  the  stranger, 
the  fatherless,  and  the  widow ;  they  represent  the  Divine  name  as  authority  for 
admission  to  the  feast.  The  religious  servant,  the  poor  stranger,  the  orphan,  and 
the  widow — they  sit  down,  in  seats  divinely  claimed  for  them,  at  the  festive  board. 
So  the  company  shall  be  representative : — son,  daughter,  manservant,  maidservant ; 
priest,  stranger,  orphan,  widow  ; — this  is  the  typical  company  sitting  down  at  the 
symbolical  feast.  God  will  not  have  our  small  house-parties,  made  up  of  people 
of  one  class,  equally  well-dressed  and  accosting  one  another  in  the  language  of 
equality;  He  will  have  a  large  feast.  {J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Unleavened  bread: — 
What  does  this  unleavened  bread  mean  ?  Two  things,  I  think.  1.  First,  Christ ; 
for  He  is  the  believer's  food.  The  unleavened  bread  sets  forth  Christ  in  one  aspect, 
as  much  as  the  lamb  sets  Him  forth  in  another.  In  the  Israelite  feeding  upon 
unleavened  bread,  we  have  presented  to  us  the  believer  drawing  his  strength  from 
Jesus,  the  spotless  and  Holy  One — the  unleavened  bread.  "  I  am  the  bread  of 
life."  2.  But  there  is  another  meaning  of  the  unleavened  bread,  and  that  is 
holiness,  uprightness,  singleness  of  eye.  Just  as  the  bread  was  not  the  main  staple 
of  the  Passover  feast,  but  the  lamb,  so  holiness  is  the  accompaniment  rather  than 
the  principal  portion  of  the  Christian  feast.  In  the  case  of  every  believer  the 
unleavened  bread  must  accompany  feeding  upon  Christ  as  the  lamb.  God  has 
joined  these  two  things  together,  let  us  not  put  them  asunder.  If  we  are  redeemed 
by  the  blood  of  the  lamb,  let  us  live  upon  the  unleavened  bread  ;  let  us  show  forth  the 
sincerity  and  truth  which  God  requires  in  our  life.  "For  even  Christ  our  passover 
was  sacrificed  for  us ;  therefore  let  us  keep  the  feast,  not  with  old  leaven,  neither 
with  leaven  of  malice  and  wickedness,  but  with  the  unleavened  bread  of  sincerity 
and  truth  "  (1  Cor.  v.  7).     {S.  A,  Blackwood.) 

Vers.  9-12.  Keep  the  feast  of  weeks.— T^  Feast  of  Pentecost  (a  Harvest  Thanks- 
giving sermon) : — I.  The  sacred  charactee  of  the  harvest.     Indicated  by 


CHAP.  XVI.]  DEUTERONOMY,  873 

time  appointed  for  it — fiftieth  day  after  Passover.  As  God  hallowed  the  seventh 
day,  so  He  hallowed  the  harvest-fields  of  the  world.  II.  The  great  trouble 
God  took  to  impress  His  people  with  the  significance  and  meaning  of 
COMMON  things.  We  walk  along  streets  of  gold,  set  with  jewels,  as  though  they 
were  granite  cubes.  In  the  hand  of  Him  who  saw  the  kingdom  of  God  everywhere 
and  in  everything,  a  grain  of  corn  contained  in  its  suggestiveness  the  deepest 
mysteries  of  the  kingdom.     III.  This  feast  was  a  providential  mirror  in  which 

TO   SEE   again   all   THE   WAY   IN   WHICH   THE    LORD    THEIR    GOD    HAD   LED   THEM. 

Happy,  thrice  happy,  is  the  man  who,  in  the  land  of  plenty,  has  a  wilderness 
history  on  which  to  look  back.  There  is  nothing  more  sublime  to  the  mariner  in 
the  haven  of  rest  than  the  conflicts  with  the  tempests  in  mid-ocean  through  which 
he  passed.  IV.  This  feast  was  a  new  bond  of  brotherhood  forged  in  the 
FIRES  of  the  ever-new  AND  NEVER-CEASING  LOVE  OF  GoD.  They  Were  to  call 
the  Levite,  the  stranger,  the  fatherless,  and  the  widow.  Plenty  in  some  natures 
petrifies,  but  this  is  not  its  legitimate  efl'ect.  It  should  enlarge  the  heart,  and 
broaden  and  deepen  the  sympathies  of  a  mau.     V.  This  feast  was  to  be  a  time  op 

GREAT  MORAL  AND  SPIRITUAL  RECTIFICATION  ON  THE  PART  OF  THE  PEOPLE.  Repent- 
ance. Thanksgiving.  {H.  Simon,  Ph.D.)  Harvest  home  a  national  festival: 
— Harvest  to  the  Jews  was  an  event  of  great  and  general  interest.  It  was  the 
occasion  of  one  of  their  grand  national  festivals.  This  feast  was  called  by  different 
names — the  Feast  of  Weeks,  the  Feast  of  Harvest,  and  the  Feast  of  First-fruits.  From 
commencement  to  close,  their  harvest  festivities  included  seven  weeks.     I.  The 

HARVEST    HOME   WAS    A    SEASON    FOB    NATIONAL    GRATITUDE.      What  they    offered 

conferred  no  favour  on  God,  it  was  His  own ;  but  it  expressed  the  sense  of  their 
obligation  and  the  depth  of  their  gratitude.  Three  things  are  necessary  to  the 
very  existence  of  gratitude  towards  the  giver.  1.  That  the  gift  should  be  felt  to  be 
valuable.  2.  A  belief  that  the  favour  is  benevolently  bestowed.  3.  A  consciousness 
that  the  favour  is  undeserved.  II.  The  harvest  home  is  a  season  for  national 
REJOICING.  Where  there  is  gratitude,  there  is  joy,  will  be  joy  ;  gratitude  is  praise, 
and  praise  is  heaven.  The  revelation  of  the  Creator  in  the  harvest-field  may  well 
make  human  hearts  exult.  The  God  of  the  harvest  there  appears,  mercifully  con- 
siderate of  the  wants  of  His  creatures  ;  as  a  loving  Father,  with  a  bountiful  hand, 
furnishing  the  table  with  abundant  supplies  for  His  children.  There  He  appears 
punctual  to  the  fulfilment  of  His  promise.  There  He  appears  rewarding  human 
labour.  III.  The  harvest  home  is  a  season  for  national  philanthropy  (see 
chap.  xxiv.  19-21).  1.  Where  God  gives  liberally.  He  demands  liberality.  2.  The 
liberality  demanded  is  to  be  shown  to  the  poor.  God  has  planted  the  poor 
amongst  all  peoples,  in  order  that  the  benevolence  of  the  rich  may  have  scope  for 
development,  {ffomilist.)  Rejoice  before  the  Lord  thy  God. — Thanksgiving 
Day : — I.  We  may  be  thankful  for  this  day  of  thanksgiving,  on  account  of  its 
HAPPY  religious  INFLUENCE.  It  is  a  day  which,  in  all  its  appropriate  exercises 
and  enjoyments,  presents  to  us  our  life  as  a  blessing,  and  our  God  as  a  Benefactor  ; 
the  seasons  as  a  circle  of  elemental  adaptations  to  our  comfort,  and  the  Regulator 
of  the  seasons  as  the  Almighty  Being  who  takes  care  for  our  varied  good  ;  the 
course  of  our  rolling  days,  as  a  series  of  lessons  and  opportunities,  and  the  Ever- 
lasting and  Uncreated  One  as  the  Friend  who  crowns  our  days  with  His  loving- 
kindness.  Thus  a  great  deal  is  aone  every  year,  by  a  common  and  hearty 
expression  of  thankfulness,  to  break  up,  or  at  least  to  modify  the  alliance  brought 
about  by  several  causes  in  many  minds,  between  religion  and  great  strictness  and 
gloominess.  We  find  that  "it  is  a  good  thing  to  give  thanks  unto  the  Lord  ; 
yea,  a  joyful  and  a  pleasant  thing  it  is  to  be  thankful " ;  for  when  we  dwell  on 
the  causes  of  thankfulness,  our  gratitude  must  needs  flow  naturally  and  spon- 
taneously out  of  our  bosoms,  and  go  to  swell  the  general  stream  of  praise  and 
gladness  which  spreads  over  the  land.  And  we  find  that  it  is  not  at  all  incon- 
sistent with  thankfulness  to  God  for  the  bounties  of  His  providence,  that  we  should 
enjoy  those  bounties  freely  and  honestly  and  smilingly.  II.  We  have  reason  to 
rejoice  in  our  feast,  on  account  of  its  happy  domestic  influence.  The  day  is 
peculiarly  a  domestic  day ;  a  day  for  the  reunion  of  families.  The  houses  of  the 
land  are  glad  on  this  day.  III.  Our  festival  is  to  be  honoured,  ON  account  of 
ITS  HAPPY  political  INFLUENCE.  If  it  cxcrts  a  happy  influence  on  our  religions 
sentiments  and  on  our  domestic  relations,  it  cannot  but  act  with  a  benign  power  on 
those  relations  which  hold  us  all  together  in  one  community.  A  genial  nationality 
is  fostered  by  that  mingling  together  of  prayers,  and  common  interests,  and  pleasant 
hospitalities,  which  occurs  on  this  day.     And  so  far  as  our  nationality  is  brought 


374  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xvi. 

about  in  this  manner,  there  is  nothing  repulsive  or  exclusive  in  it.  {F.  W,  F. 
Greenwood,  D.D.) 

Vers.  13-15.  Thou  shalt  observe  the  feast  of  tabernacles  seven  days,  after  that 
thou  hast  gathered  in  thy  com  and  thy  wine.— Harvest  home: — The  Feast  of 
Tabernacles  was  the  harvest  home  of  Israel.  Where  is  the  antitype  of  the  festival 
of  Tabernacles?  The  vision  of  the  "great  multitude  which  no  man  could 
number"  is  a  vision  throughout  of  a  heavenly  Feast  of  Tabernacles;  the  harvest 
home  of  the  Church  triumphant.  I.  These  festivals  are  occasions  of  hospitality 
AND  OF  KETJNION.  A  sclfish  life  is  an  unchristian  life.  A  man  might  possibly 
remember  God  in  solitude,  a  monastery  has  ere  now  fostered  devotion  :  but  there  is 
one  virtue  which  cannot  be  practised  in  seclusion — charity ;  the  Gospel  virtue — 
without  which  we  are  nothing.  The  very  exertion  which  it  costs  some  men  to  come 
out  is  salutary.  If  some  are  made  frivolous  by  the  love  of  society,  some  are  made 
selfish  by  isolation  from  their  kind.  II.  Two  things  were  especially  required  of  the 
Israelites  when   they  assembled  for  their  three   annual  feasts  :   first,  that  they 

SHOULD  NOT  APPEAR  BEFORE  THE  LORD  EMPTY  ;  SeCOudly,  that  CHILDREN  AND 
SERVANTS,  THE  LeVITE  AND  THE  STRANGER,  THE  FATHERLESS  AND  WIDOW,  SHOULD 

BE  ALLOWED  TO  REJOICE  WITH  THEM.  The  feast  only  becomes  a  blessing  when  it 
remembers  God,  and  remembers  man.  III.  The  Law  of  God  was  read  over, 
once  in  seven  years,  to  the  assembled  Israelites  at  their  Feast  of  Tabernacles.  If 
there  be  a  time  when  we  remember  duty,  surely  it  should  be  when  our  hands  are 
full  of  gifts.  A  time  of  feasting,  nay,  a  time  of  prosperity,  nay,  a  time  of  unmarked, 
of  average  sufficiency,  brings  its  own  peculiar  risk  of  practical  ungodliness.  IV.  Yet 
we  recognise  in  this  festival  the  comforting  side  of  true  religion.  God's  voice 
never  comes  to  make  us  miserable.  If  it  condemns,  it  is  that  we  may  rise  out  of 
condemnation  into  a  state  altogether  joyous.  A  harvest  home  is  a  glimpse  of  the 
love  and  of  the  peace  and  of  the  joy  of  the  Gospel.  V.  It  is  also  a  memento  of 
THE  PLACE  OF  THANKFULNESS  IN  THE  GosPEL.  Is  there  any  test  so  condemning  as 
that  which  touches  us  on  the  point  of  gratitude  ?  Who  really  gives  God  thanks  for 
life,  for  health,  for  motion,  for  speech,  for  reason  ?  Well  may  we  have  one  day  in 
the  year  set  apart  for  the  work  of  simple  praise.     VI.  Recognise  in  this  celebration 

THE  identification  OF   THE   GOD    OF   NATURE   AND    PROVIDENCE    WITH    THE    GOD 

OF  REVELATION  AND  OF  THE  GosPEL.  The  things  that  are  seen  become  a  very 
sign  and  sacrament  of  the  things  that  are  not  seen.  The  harvest  of  the  natural 
world  indicates  to  us,  by  its  marvellous  yet  now  familiar  phenomena,  the  working 
of  the  same  power  which  alone  can  melt  the  heart  of  stone,  and  impress  upon  a 
trifling  soul  the  realities  of  a  life  and  a  home  in  heaven.  VII.  Finally,  let  the 
service  which  gives  thanks  for  an  earthly  harvest  carry  your  thoughts  to  that 
GREAT  "reaping  AFTER  SOWING,"  which  is  before  every  one  of  us,  in  the  resur- 
rection of  the  body  and  in  the  eternity  which  is  yet  beyond  (Matt.  xiii.  39  ;  Gal. 
vi.  7,  8).  God  grant  us  all  a  place  in  that  ingathering,  the  close  of  a  world's 
labour,  the  inauguration  of  a  heavenly  rest !     {Dean  Vaughan. ) 

Vers.  16,  17.  Three  times  in  a  year. — The  command  respecting  festivals  :—'We 
are  informed  by  ancient  writers  that  the  Egyptians  kept  many  stated  festivals  and 
religious  assemblies  in  honour  to  the  gods,  and  that  they  held  no  less  than  six 
every  year  at  different  places.  It  is  probable  that  this  custom  was  of  great 
antiquity,  and  observed  when  Israel  dwelt  in  Egypt.  Therefore,  when  Moses  went 
to  Pharaoh,  and  asked  leave  for  the  Hebrews  to  celebrate  a  feast  to  the  Lord,  the 
Egyptians  could  not  say  that  it  was  an  imreasonable  request,  since  they  accounted 
it  a  duty  to  do  the  like.  This  opens  to  us  one  reason  for  which  these  festivals 
were  appointed  in  the  law,  namely,  in  compliance  with  the  inclinations  of  the 
people,  who  doubtless  were  desirous  to  have  their  feasts  and  assemblies,  as  weU  as 
the  Egyptians  with  whom  they  had  dwelt.  I.  The  work  or  action  enjoined — to 
appear  before  the  Lord.  God  condescended  to  take  uj)on  Him  the  government  of 
the  Jewish  nation,  and  is  here  represented  as  their  King ;  and  they,  as  dutiful 
subjects,  and  required  to  come  and  salute  Him,  and  present  themselves  before  Him 
at  certain  times.  The  same  respect  which  other  nations  showed  to  their  princes, 
the  Jews  were  to  show  to  God,  as  He  was  their  King,  Thus  far  it  was  a  civil  or 
political  duty.  But  as  their  King  was  also  the  Almighty,  to  appear  before  Him  was 
a  religious  duty  ;  it  was  to  serve  and  worship  Him  in  a  public  manner  ;  and  herein 
this  law  is  moral,  imiversal,  and  everlasting.  11.  The  persons  who  were  to 
APPEAR  at  these  solemn  feasts.     "All  thy  males  shall  appear  before  the  Lord." 


CHAP.  XVI.]  DEUTERONOMY.  375 

These  words  are  to  be  understood  not  as  excluding  the  females  from  being  present  at 
these  assemblies,  but  as  giving  them  leave  of  absence,  and  intimating  that  it  might 
sometimes  be  more  proper  for  them  to  stay  at  home.  The  reasons  for  which  the 
females  had  an  exemption  from  this  solemn  duty  seem  to  have  been  these :  first, 
the  weakness  of  the  sex,  not  so  fit  to  bear  the  fatigue  of  these  fi-equent  journeys  ; 
secondly,  the  care  of  their  children  and  families,  which  could  not  be  thus  wholly 
abandoned ;  and,  thirdly,  the  dangers  to  which  they  would  be  exposed  in  such  a 
numerous  and  mixed  assembly.  The  Egyptians,  when  they  repaired  to  the  feasts, 
sailed  together  upon  the  river  Nile  in  large  companies,  men  and  women,  and  many 
indecencies  were  committed,  which  this  law  seems  to  have  been  intended  to  prevent. 
Thus  were  they  excused  from  these  religious  journeys  when  it  was  inconvenient. 
But  at  other  times,  and  on  other  occasions,  they  frequented  the  places  appointed 
for  instruction  and  for  the  worship  of  God  ;  as  we  may  conclude  from  such 
examples  as  are  recorded  in  Scripture,  and  from  that  piety  and  gratitude  which 
are  usually  more  observable  in  them  than  in  the  other  sex.  III.  The  place  wherb 
THE  MEN  vv^ERE  TO  APPEAR — in  the  place  which  the  Lord  shall  choose,  namely,  in 
the  place  where  the  ark  and  the  tabernacle  of  God  should  be,  which  at  the  first  was 
at  Shiloh,  in  the  country  of  Samaria  and  tribe  of  Ephraim,  and  afterwards  at 
Jerusalem  in  the  tribe  of  Judah,  where  David  erected  a  tabernacle,  and  Solomon 
built  a  magnificent  temple.  One  reason  for  which  these  festivals  were  appointed, 
and  appointed  at  one  place,  was  to  keep  up  peace  and  friendship  and  unity,  both 
in  Church  and  State.  Nothing  is  more  likely  to  conduce  to  this  end  than  a  religious 
association  and  intercourse,  and  a  partici}  ation  of  the  same  sacred  rites.  IV.  The 
TIME  when  the  Jews  were  to  meet  together — it  was  thrice  in  the  year ;  in  the 
Feast  of  Unleavened  Bread,  in  the  Feast  of  Weeks,  and  in  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles. 
From  these  religious  institutions  it  may  be  observed  that  the  hallowing  unto  God 
more  days  in  the  week  than  one  is  not,  as  some  have  fancied,  against  the  design 
and  meaning  of  the  Fourth  Commandment.  For  by  these  three  solemn  feasts,  which 
were  each  of  them  of  a  week's  continuance  at  least,  it  is  manifest  that  "Six 
days  thou  shalt  labour  "  was  no  commandment,  but  expressed  only  an  ordinary 
permission  of  working  ;  and  to  think  that  God  would  contradict  His  own  law  by  a 
contrary  ordinance  is  inconceivable.  As,  therefore,  when  He  commanded  the  Jews 
to  give  Him  the  tenth  part  of  their  increase,  He  forbade  not  free-will  offerings  ;  so, 
when  He  enjoined  them  to  keep  holy  one  day  in  seven,  this  hindered  not  but  that 
they  might  hallow  unto  Him  other  days  even  of  the  six.  Hence  it  is  concluded  that 
the  Christian  Church  hath  likewise  a  power  to  set  apart  days  for  the  more  solemn 
service  of  God.  But  this  should  be  done  sparingly,  discreetly,  and  cautiously  ;  it 
should  rather  be  recommended  than  required,  and  never  without  manifest  reasons. 
V.  A  PARTICULAR  DUTY  REQUIRED  of  all  the  people  when  they  came  to  worship  God 
at  these  feasts,  namely,  not  to  appear  empty.  It  was  a  custom  in  those  parts  of 
the  world  when  subjecte  came  before  their  king,  to  make  him  a  present ;  and  even 
a  little  fruit,  or  a  single  flower,  was  favourably  accepted  from  one  who  was  not  in 
circumstances  to  off'er  more.  The  Jews  were  commanded  to  bring  a  present ;  not 
a  burnt-off'ering  or  a  sacrifice  by  fire ;  for  these,  though  at  the  same  time  they 
were  also  required,  yet  were  of  another  nature,  and  for  another  end  ;  but  a  heave- 
oflfering,  a  freewill-offering,  which  was  a  tribute  of  thankfulness  to  God,  and  like- 
wise an  acknowledgment  of  His  supreme  lordship  and  dominion  over  all.  (/. 
Jortin,  D.D.)  They  shall  not  appear  before  the  Lord  empty.— T^  law  of  gifts 
in  the  Pentateuch : — Empty  in  one  sense,  empty  of  blessing,  none  of  us  can  appear 
before  the  Lord,  or  our  prayer  has  mocked  Him,  and  our  praise.  Crowned  with 
His  goodness,  you  have  come  up  hither  ;  crown  His  goodness  in  return  with  praise. 
I.  A  leading  feature,  the  leading  feature  of  the  Old  Testament  revelation  is,  that 

LIFE  AND  ALL  THAT  CROWNS  IT — its  CrOWn  of  blcssiugs— IS  THE  GIFT  OF  A  LIVING 
INTELLIGENT  BeING,  AND  COMES  TO  US  BEARING  THE  SEAL  OF  HiS  LOVE.      The  JeWS 

were  separated  to  this  end,  that  God's  methods  and  purposes  with  all  men  might 
be  laid  bare ;  that  for  once  the  Hand  might  be  clearly  manifest  which  is  busy 
about  every  life.  II.  The  motive  which  is  pleaded  for  all  the  noblest  human 
EFFORT  IS  God's  example.  God  has  done  thus  and  thus  for  you  :  "Go  ye  and  do 
likewise"  for  your  fellow-men.  It  is  the  plea  which  is  constantly  urged  in  the 
Old  Testament,  which  we  accuse  of  low  and  material  views,  both  of  man  and  of 
God.  It  is  the  highest  witness  to  man's  essential  God-likeness  which  can  be  con- 
ceived. Man's  nature  only  finds  free,  that  is  joyful  play,  when  it  is  doing  God-like 
things,  when  it  is  striving  to  think,  will,  and  act  like  God.  The  only  complete 
form  of  man's  life  is  the  life  which  is  also  Divine.     III.  The  exhortations  of  thb 


376  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap,  xvl 

SOEIPTIJBE  ARE  AMPLY  SUSTAINED  BY  OUR  OWN  EXPERIENCE  OF  LIFE.      There  is  nO 

joy  that  tills  man's  heart  which  is  comparable  with  that  which  he  shares  ^vith  God. 
He  who  does  a  deed  purely  unselfish,  who  yields  free  play  to  the  most  generous, 
heavenly  impulses.  IV.  Part  of  this  God-like  duty  finds  expression  in  the  text. 
"None  shall  appear  before  the  Lord  empty."  The  Lord  has  filled  you  with 
good;  you  are  "fearfully  and  wonderfully  made,"  and  in  fearful  and  wonderful 
harmony  with  the  world.  Your  organs,  exquisitely  fashioned,  and  all  the  beauty 
and  splendour  of  the  creation,  form  a  concord  which  at  ouce  expresses  God's  loving- 
kindness,  and  is  to  you  a  fountain  of  intense  delight.  And  there  is  an  inner 
harmony  which  He  is  striving  to  develop  by  uniting  your  heart  to  fear  His  name, 
which  will  make  this  great  universe  a  Father's  house,  and  the  awful  future 
an  eternal  home.  Help  God,  for  His  great  mercy's  sake,  to  help  the  world. 
V.  Another  great  thought  of  the  Old  Testament  is  the  help  which  it  is  in  man's 
power  to  render  to  God.  His  ends  can  never  be  reached  without  us,  in  the  way 
in  which  His  wisdom  has  ordered  the  world.  He  might  have  ruled  as  a  despot ;  He 
has  chosen  to  seek  rather  to  rule— as  the  Bishop  of  Argyll  has  happily  phrased  it — 
as  a  constitutional  king.  {J,  B.  Brovm^  B.A.)  Is  giving  a  help  or  a  hindrance? 
— L  Every  individual  is  addressed.  1.  All  have  been  blessed  ;  all  are  under 
obligations  to  recognise  this  fact  by  giving.  Every  one  should  help.  It  is  the 
mites  that  make  the  great  aggregations.  2.  Giving  in  accordance  with  God's  com- 
mand is  husbanding — it  is  investing.  Said  a  great  millionaire  when  asked,  "Where 
can  I  safely  invest  my  money?"  "Give  to  God's  cause,  where  I  have  put  un- 
counted thousands,  and  I  find  that  the  interest  due  is  always  promptly  paid,  and  the 
investment  is  perfectly  safe.  I  shall  meet  it  beyond  the  river,  laid  up  in  heaven, 
and  shall  enjoy  it  for  ever."  II.  This  command  requires  us  to  give  as 
necessity  requires,  and  according  to  blessings  received.  Give,  because  you 
have  received.  Bless,  because  you  have  been  blessed.  Love,  because  you  have  been 
loved.  Help,  because  you  have  been  helped.  Be  liberal,  because  you  thus  glorify 
your  Benefactor.  The  great  giver  is  a  great  gatherer.  He  gathers  love,  power, 
influence,  and  revels  in  the  smile  of  God.     {J.  D.  Fulton,  D.D.)  An  offeriTig  of 

gratitvde : — One  day  an  Indian  asked  Bishop  Whipple  to  give  him  two  one-dollar 
bills  for  a  two-dollar  note.  The  Bishop  asked,  "  Why?"  He  said,  "One  dollar 
for  me  to  give  to  Jesus,  and  one  dollar  for  my  wife  to  give."  The  Bishop  asked  him 
if  it  was  all  the  money  he  had.  He  said,  "Yes."  The  Bishop  was  about  to  teU 
him,  "  It  is  too  much,"  when  an  Indian  clergyman  who  was  standing  by  whispered, 
"  It  might  be  too  much  for  a  white  man  to  give,  but  not  too  much  for  an  Indian  who 
has  this  year  heard  for  the  first  time  of  the  love  of  Jesus."  Giving  according  to 
conscience : — A  minister  was  about  to  leave  his  own  congregation  for  the  purpose  of 
visiting  London,  on  what  was  by  no  means  a  pleasant  errand — to  beg  on  behalf  of 
hia  place  of  worship.  Previous  to  his  departuie  he  called  together  the  principal 
persons  connected  with  his  charge,  and  said  to  them,  "  Now,  I  shall  be  asked 
whether  we  have  conscientiously  done  all  that  we  can  for  the  removal  of  the  debt. 
What  answer  am  I  to  give  ?  Brother  So-and-so,  can  you  in  conscience  say  that  you 
have  given  all  you  can  ? "  "  Why,  sir,"  he  replied,  "  if  you  come  to  conscience,  I 
don't  know  that  I  can."  The  same  question  he  put  to  a  second,  and  a  third,  and  so 
on,  and  similar  answers  were  returned,  until  the  whole  sum  required  was  subscribed, 
and  there  was  no  longer  any  need  for  their  pastor  to  wear  out  his  soul  in  going  to 
London  on  any  such  unpleasant  excursion.     {Christian  Age.) 

Yer.  19.  Thou  Shalt  not  respect  persons,  neither  take  a  gift. — Equality  before 
the  law: — I.  Some  facts  and  tendencies  in  legal  administration.  1.  The 
sentence  pronounced  against  a  poor  man  is  often  very  heavy,  and  that  against  a  rich 
man  very  light.  In  New  Jersey  a  poor  man  was  sentenced  to  five  years  of  hard 
labour  in  prison  for  stealing  a  ham  ;  in  the  same  court  a  rich  banker,  who  had 
ruined  two  banks  and  stolen  the  money  of  hundreds  of  people,  received  the  same  sen- 
tence. 2.  After  conviction  rich  convicts  receive  favours.  In  the  case  just  cited  the 
poor  man  and  the  rich  man  went  to  the  same  prison.  But  the  poor  man  was  put  at 
hard  labour  ;  the  rich  man  was  made  clerk  in  the  prison  library.  3.  Rich  men  have 
an  unfair  advantage  over  poor  men  when  brought  to  trial.  The  big  fee  that  hires 
the  eloquent  pleader  "  buys  out  the  law."  4.  Even  judges  are  sometimes  corrupt. 
5.  Juries  are  accused  of  taking  bribes.  II.  The  perils  of  these  forms  of 
injustice,  1.  They  threaten  the  property  and  lives  of  the  poor.  2.  They  weaken 
the  spirit  of  obedience  (Numb.  xxii.  23).  3.  They  develop  the  communistic  spirit  of 
destiuction.    4.  We  are  all  unsafe  when  one  poor  wretch  is  unsafe  only  because  he 


CHAP.  XVI.]  DEUTERONOMY.  377 

lacks  money  or  friends.  III.  The  eemedies  for  existing  evils.  1.  More  and 
better  teaching,  in  home,  school,  and  church,  on  God's  law  of  equality.  2.  Wiser 
conversation  on  such  matters  when  citizens  meet  together.  It  is  dangerous  and 
unpatriotic  to  treat  the  miscarriage  of  justice  as  a  jest.  3.  A  sound  public  opinion 
should  be  cultivated  by  press,  pulpit,  and  platform.  4.  Our  social  power  may  be 
used  to  condemn  a  triumph  over  the  law.  5.  Seek  to  associate  in  all  minds  the  idea 
of  obedience  to  God  with  that  of  just  judgment.     {Homiletic  Monthly.)  An 

upright  judge:— ^M^ge  Sewall,  of  Massachusetts,  went  into  a  hatter's  shop  in  order 
to  purchase  a  pair  of  shoe-brushes.  The  master  of  the  shop  presented  him  with 
a  couple.  "What  is  your  price  ? "  said  the  judge.  "  If  they  will  answer  your  pur- 
pose," replied  the  other,  "you  may  have  them  and  welcome."  The  judge,  upon 
hearing  this,  laid  them  down,  and  bowing,  was  leaving  the  shop  ;  upon  which  the 
hatter  said  t»  him,  "Pray,  sir,  your  honour  has  forgotten  the  principal  object 
of  your  visit."  "  By  no  means,"  answered  the  judge  ;  "  if  you  please  to  set  a  price, 
I  am  ready  to  purchase  ;  but  ever  since  it  has  fallen  to  my  lot  to  occupy  a  seat  on  the 
bench,  I  have  studiously  avoided  receiving  to  the  value  of  a  single  copper,  lest  at 
some  future  period  of  my  life  it  might  have  some  kind  of  influence  in  determining 
my  judgment."  Th^  acceptance  of  bribes  discouraged : — In  the  Soudan,  he  said,  he 
had  £6000  a  year,  as  Governor,  but  he  brought  nothing  out  of  the  country  when  he 
returned  to  England.  He  spent  his  income  in  adding  to  the  insufficient  salaries  of 
the  officials,  to  keep  them  from  accepting  bribes,  and  thus  to  secure  justice  for  the 
people  at  large.     {Memoir  of  General  Gordmi.) 

Ver.  20.  Tlxat  whicli  is  altogether  Just  shalt  thou  foUow.— Justice  the  decorum  of 
the  character  of  jicdges  (preached  at  the  Assizes) :— The  duties  which  are  incumbent 
upon  us  may  be  very  properly  divided  into  two  classes—such  as  are  incumbent  upon 
all  men,  and  such  as  are  incumbent  upon  particular  ranks  of  men.  I.  Justice  is 
immediately  connected  with  the  end  of  that  office  which  magistrates, 
JUDGES,  AND  EULERS  BEAR.  The  exercise  of  justice  itself  is  the  proximate  means  of 
answering  the  purposes  of  government  and  judgment.  One  of  the  principal  ways  in 
which  other  virtues  promote  these  purposes  is  by  contributing  to  the  steady  and 
vigorous  exercise  of  incorruptible  justice.  Injustice,  directly  and  of  itself,  defeats 
these  purposes,  and  is  in  every  instance  absolutely  inconsistent  with  them.  Other 
vices  obstruct  them  sometimes  very  strongly,  but  always  more  remotely  and 
indirectly,  often  by  preparing  the  way  to  injustice.    II.  Rulers  and  judges  have, 

FROM   their   office,    OPPORTUNITY   FOR   MANY    EXERTIONS    OF    JUSTICE    WHOLLY 

PECULIAR  TO  THEMSELVES.  On  this  account  also  justice  may  be  considered  as  in  a 
special  manner  the  virtue  of  their  character  and  station.  The  poor  man,  who  cannot 
himself  resist  the  oppression  of  the  great ;  the  peaceable  man,  who  is  harassed  by  the 
encroachments  of  the  man  of  violence  ;  the  orphan,  whose  rights  are  invaded  by 
him  that  hath  no  bowels,  claim  the  protection  of  the  judge,  and  can  obtain  redress 
only  by  bringing  their  cause  under  his  cognisance.  DiflFerences  arising  from  the 
ignorance  or  the  self-partiality  of  persons  well  disposed  can  be  determined  only  by 
the  superior  knowledge  and  unbiassed  justice  of  the  judge.  When  individuals  are 
injured  or  the  public  disturbed  by  crimes,  it  is  to  the  integrity  of  the  judge  that 
they  must  look  up  for  help.  How  extensive,  then,  is  the  sphere  of  public  justice 
which  is  peculiar  to  the  ruler  and  the  judge  !  In  every  instance  of  public  justice  he 
must  make  conscience  of  doing  what  is  right,  else  he  forfeits  the  character  of  a  just 
and  honest  man,  in  the  very  same  way  as  another  person  would  forfeit  it  by  being 
convicted  of  a  transgression  of  private  justice.  III.  Justice  may  be  considered  as  in 
a  peculiar  manner  belonging  to  rulers,  judges,  and  magistrates  because  they  are 
UNDER  PECULIAR  OBLIGATIONS  TO  IT.  Every  act  of  injustice  brings  positive  hurt 
on  the  person  who  is  affected  by  it ;  but  an  unjust  judgment  hurts  with  the  cutting 
aggravations  of  its  being  done  under  form  of  law,  and  of  its  impeaching  the  person 
whom  it  injures,  as  if  lie  had  been  injurious.  Private  persons  are  connected  only 
with  a  few,  and  therefore  only  a  few  can  be  hurt  by  their  injustice  j  but  the  injustice 
of  a  judge  is  of  more  extensive  consequence,  it  hurts  all  who  are  subject  to  his 
jurisdiction.  Private  injustice  may  be  checked  or  redressed  by  the  righteousness 
of  the  judge ;  but  if  the  judge  be  unrighteous,  by  whom  shall  his  injustice  be 
restrained  ?     {Alex.  Gerard,  D.D.)  Civil  justice  .-—That  which  the  air  is  in  the 

elementary  world,  the  sun  in  the  celestial,  the  soul  in  the  intelligible,  justice  is  the 
same  in  the  civil.  It  is  the  air  which  all  afflicted  desire  to  breathe  ;  the  sun  which 
dispelleth  all  clouds  ;  the  soul  whi(  h  giveth  life  to  all  things.  Tlie  unhappiness  is, 
it  is  more  found  on  the  paper  of  writers  than  in  the  manners  of  the  living.     To  be 


378  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  xvii. 

just  is  to  be  all  that  which  an  honest  man  may  be,  since  justice  is  to  give  every  one 
what  appertaineth  to  him.  {N.  Caussin.)  Justice  in  small  things : — Nouschirvan, 
the  Persian  king,  having  been  hunting,  and  desirous  of  eating  some  of  the  venison 
in  the  field,  several  of  his  attendants  went  to  a  neighbouring  village,  and  took  away 
a  quantity  of  salt  to  season  it.  The  king  suspecting  how  they  had  acted,  ordered 
that  they  should  immediately  go  and  pay  for  it ;  then  turning  to  his  attendants,  he 
said,  "  This  is  a  small  matter  in  itself,  but  a  great  one  as  it  regards  me  :  for  a  king 
ought  ever  to  be  just,  because  he  is  an  example  to  his  subjects  ;  and  if  he  swerves  in 
trifles,  they  will  become  dissolute.  If  I  cannot  make  all  my  people  just  in  the 
smallest  things,  I  can,  at  least,  show  them  it  is  possible  to  be  so. " 

Vers.  21,  22.  Thou  shalt  not  plant  tliee  a  grove.  —  Idolatry  forbidden: — 
I.  Idolatry  is  enticing.  This  on  many  accounts.  1.  By  its  prevalence.  In  some 
form  or  other  it  is  the  most  popular  religion  in  the  world.  Men  bow  down  to  the 
idols  of  luxury,  ambition,  pleasure,  and  avarice.  "For  all  people  will  walk  every 
one  in  the  name  of  his  god  "  (Mic.  iv.  5).  2.  By  its  use.  We  naturally  forsake  God 
and  cling  to  sin.  Evil  inclination  leads  to  wrong  choice,  and  men  choose  darkness 
rather  than  light.  II.  Idolatry  is  treason  against  God.  God  is  the  sum  of 
all  moral  qualities,  the  proprietor  of  all  resources,  and  the  giver  of  all  existences. 
"What  more  rational  than  to  worship  Him  ?  Nothing  belies  God  nor  degrades  man 
like  the  worship  of  images  and  statues.  III.  Idolatry  must  be  utterly  for- 
saken. We  must  neither  join  the  worshippers  nor  sanction  the  worship.  Plant  no 
grove  of  trees,  for  truth  loves  light  and  reproves  darkness.  {J.  Wolfeiidale.) 
Neither  shalt  thou  set  up  any  image. — Images  forbidden : — Thus  imagery  is  for- 
bidden—even religious  imitation  and  attempted  reproduction  of  things  Divine  and 
inexpressible.  We  are  prone  to  do  something  to  show  our  handiwork  in  God's 
sanctuary  ;  it  pleases  us  to  try  to  add  something  to  the  circle  ;  it  delights  us  to  run 
one  rim  of  gilt  around  the  refined  gold  which  burns  with  the  image  and  superscrip- 
tion of  God.  We  are  told  not  to  interfere  ;  we  must  keep  our  hands  off  everything. 
We  must  learn  to  stand  still ;  sometimes  to  do  everything  by  doing  nothing  ;  and  we 
must  learn  to  rebuke  our  inventive  faculty  and  become  learned  in  the  utterance  of 
simple  prayer.  God  will  have  His  altar  untouched  :  He  will  have  human  attention 
undistracted  by  any  human  devices.  The  altar  is  to  stand  alone  in  its  simple 
dignity — most  adorned  when  unadorned.  There  must  be  no  attempt  to  link  true 
religion  and  false  religion,  inspired  worship  and  idolatrous  worship,  groves  humanly 
planted  and  altars  Divinely  built.  The  Lord  will  have  a  time  for  Himself,  and 
place  for  Himself,  a  gift  for  Himself,  an  altar  for  Himself.  Why  for  Himself? 
Because  He  is  the  Lord,  and  because  He  means  to  train  the  human  mind  and  heart 
without  distraction  towards  the  highest  sublimity  of  law.  Who  will  not  set  up  his 
reason  against  the  altar,  and  delight  because  his  religion  is  rational  ? — as  well  hold 
up  a  candle  to  the  sun,  because  all  fire  is  of  the  same  quality  ;  because  there  is  but 
one  fire  in  the  universe,  and  that  is  God.  The  sun  says,  Thou  shalt  not  light 
a  candle  in  my  presence.  We  do  it,  but  the  candle  is  literally  of  no  service  in  the 
presence  of  the  midday  sun.  Jesus  Christ  is  the  Light  of  the  world — the  Sun 
of  the  great  firmament  of  the  soul — and  He  alone  can  light  the  space  that  is  to  be 
illumined.  Who  will  not  throw  the  little  flower  of  self-approval  upon  the  altar,  say- 
ing, I  am  not  as  other  men  :  I  fast,  I  pay  tithes,  I  do  not  practise  extortion  :  I  am 
not  as  the  publicans  are  ?  The  Lord  has  forbidden  all  groves  and  all  images  and  all 
distractions.  Only  one  man  is  permitted  near  the  altar  ;  only  one  soul  is  heard  in 
heaven.     His  name  ? — the  broken-hearted  sinner  !    {J.  Parker^  D.D,) 


CHAPTER  XVII. 


Vers.  14,  15.  Set  him  king  over  thee,  whom  the  Lord  thy  God  shall  choose. — 
Christ  our  Brother  and  our  King : — What  I  desire  now  to  lay  before  you  is  the 
counsel  of  God  in  Christ,  which  is  set  forth  to  us  in  these  words.  What  is  contained 
in  them  is  that  we  are  to  have  a  king  over  us,  and  that  this  king  is  to  be  our 
brother  ;  by  which  is  expressed  the  reigning  of  love.  It  is  exceedingly  important 
that  we  be  taught  to  feel  that  our  place  is  that  of  being  reigned  over— that  it  does 
not  belong  to  us  to  be  independent  or  to  be  our  own  masters  ;  and  again,  that  the 


CHAP,  xvii.]  DEUTERONOMY.  379 

control  under  which  we  are  to  be  is  one  which  is  to  govern  us  through  the  heart — 
that  the  obedience  which  is  to  be  rendered  is  to  be  the  obedience  of  the  will — not  an 
outward  obedience,  an  obedience  in  word  or  in  action,  but  an  inward  obedience,  an 
obedience  in  our  will.  To  this  end  it  is  needful  that,  in  obeying,  we  should  have 
that  confidence  in  him  whom  we  obey,  and  that  understanding  of  the  principle  of 
his  government,  and  that  consenting  to  it,  which  will  carry  our  hearts  along  with 
his  requirements  ;  and  this  our  God  has  considered  in  giving  us  a  brother  to  reign 
over  us.  When  it  is  here  said  that  God  will  not  give  us  a  king  who  is  not 
our  brother,  that  we  are  not  in  any  wise  to  have  a  stranger  to  reign  over  us,  we  are 
taught  the  great  truth,  which  is  the  foundation  of  our  religion,  that  Christ  took  our 
very  nature  and  became  in  very  truth  our  very  Brother,  so  that  there  is  nothing  in 
the  whole  of  our  human  nature  with  which  He  has  not  personal  acquaintance.  The 
knowledge  which  our  Creator  has  of  us,  as  our  Creator,  is  a  knowledge  that  we  can- 
not comprehend.  But  when  we  see  Christ  having  our  nature,  then  we  see  how  He 
should  have  this  knowledge  of  us.  We  might  have  felt  as  if  God  were  a  stranger — 
we  might  have  said  to  ourselves.  How  very  different  are  His  circumstances  from 
ours  :  He  is  the  Creator  of  all  things — He  is  independent — He  is  not  at  the  mercy  of 
any  outward  thing,  and  therefore  He  can  have  no  sympathy  with  us— He  cannot 
know  what  our  situation  is — this  language  we  might  have  held,  in  our  ignorance  of 
God,  were  not  God  revealed  in  Christ  as  our  Brother.  God  says  thou  mayest  not 
set  a  stranger  over  thee  which  is  not  thy  brother ;  and  He  says  also,  ' '  I  am 
the  Lord  thy  God,  thou  shalt  have  no  other  god  before  Me."  And  thus  when  our 
God  says  that  we  shall  have  no  stranger  to  reign  over  us,  and  yet  that  He  Avill  reign 
over  us,  He  teaches  us  that  He  is  not  a  stranger — that  there  is  no  lack  of  interest 
and  sympathy  in  His  heart  with  all  the  evil  of  our  state.  I  shall  now  occupy  your 
attention  with  the  acquaintance  and  sympathy  with  our  condition  which  Christ  has 
as  our  Brother.  He  has,  in  truth,  no  sympathy  with  man  in  his  natural  state, 
while  He  has  a  perfect  understanding  of  our  natural  condition.  He  knows 
thoroughly  the  flesh  which  we  have,  but  has  no  symjDathy  whatever  with  our  feel- 
ings in  sowing  to  it.  But,  considered  as  regenerate  persons,  contending  with  the 
flesh,  then  we  are  in  the  condition  in  which  Christ  not  only  knows  our  state  but  has 
perfect  sympathy  with  it.  It  is  of  much  importance  that  you  should  see  where 
Christ's  sympathy  begins  ;  that  it  is  in  our  experience  as  living  in  the  Spirit.  What 
is  the  principle  of  our  being  judged  by  our  equals  ?  It  is  not  needful  that  they 
should  have  any  fellowship  in  that  respecting  which  they  are  to  judge — that  they 
should  have  themselves  transgressed  ;  but  that  they  be  in  a  condition  fairly  to 
estimate  the  circumstances  of  those  upon  whom  they  sit  in  judgment,  because  they 
are  their  own.  The  acquaintance  which  Christ  has  with  us,  as  our  Brother,  while  it 
does  not  justify  us  in  holding  that  He  has  any  sympathy  with  the  workings  of  the 
carnal  heart,  justifies  us  in  holding  that  He  is  deeply  alive  to  the  evil  of  being  under 
the  power  of  the  carnal  heart — that  He  knows  what  it  is,  with  such  a  knowledge 
as  enables  Him  fully  to  estimate  what  an  awful  condition  it  is  to  be  sowing  to  the 
flesh.  Now  this  in  our  Lord  is  a  source  of  exceeding  great  comfort.  To  show  what 
comfort  it  is,  I  just  press  on  you  that,  as  truly  as  the  will  of  Christ  was  opposed  to 
sin  in  His  own  flesh,  so  truly  is  it  opposed  to  sin  in  our  flesh,  because  there  is  but 
one  flesh — that  Christ  as  truly  wills  my  sanctification  as  He  willed  His  own — 
as  truly  wills  that  I  should  be  holy,  in  this  body  of  sin  and  death,  as  He  willed  Him- 
self to  be  holy  in  it.  Now  while  this  is  a  source  of  exceeding  great  comfort,  when 
we  consider  that  it  is  the  strength  of  Christ  that  is  to  give  us  the  victory,  it  is  also 
a  source  of  exceeding  great  self-reproach,  because  it  shows  us  how  we  have  grieved 
Christ.  For  what  must  it  be  to  Him  to  see  in  the  members  of  His  body  that 
rebellion  against  the  Father  which  He  never  had  in  Himself,  while  He  has  in  Him 
all  that  is  needful  for  us,  and  is  longing  to  impart  it  all  to  us,  that  He  should  see 
us  choosing  to  live  in  the  flesh — choosing  to  live  in  sin,  rather  than  to  receive  out 
of  that  full  provision  for  holiness  which  we  have  in  Him  !  And  while  we  con- 
sider Christ's  understanding  of  our  condition,  for  comfort  in  our  conflict  with 
sin,  and  for  self-reproach  in  the  consciousness  of  sinning,  let  us  consider  how 
His  being  our  Brother  prepares  Him  for  being  our  Judge.  There  is  ever  a 
voice  in  the  flesh  off"ering  to  excuse  sin.  There  is  ever  proceeding  from  the 
Lord  a  voice  condemning  sin— a  voice  declaring  that  sin  is  altogether  a 
thing  that  need  not  be  ;  and  I  beseech  you  consider  what  an  entire  putting 
down  it  is  of  all  unbelief  that  Christ  was  holy  in  our  nature.  The  will 
that  Christ  has  as  to  us,  in  our  condition  of  sowing  to  the  flesh,  is  a  holy  will 
that  we  should  be  holy;  but  it  is  also  the  will  of  love— of  love  to  us.     It  is 


380  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOn,  [chap.  xvn. 

exceedingly  important  that  we  should  never  lose  sight  of  this,  that  the  person  is  not 
forgotten.  It  is  not  the  sin  simply  that  is  considered  by  Christ,  but  the  person  who 
sins.  Just  as  it  is  with  a  good  man  who  has  a  son  that  is  a  prodigal.  Inasmuch  as 
he  is  a  righteous  man,  the  exhibition  of  evil  in  his  son  is  a  source  of  pain 
to  him ;  but  inasmuch  as  he  is  his  son,  it  is  a  peculiar  source  of  pain  to  him, 
seeing  that  he  has  an  interest  in  the  person  apart  from  the  character  altogether, 
and  that  this  interest  is  not  destroyed  by  the  evil  of  the  character,  but  that 
both  work  on  him  jointly.  Christ's  having  a  personal  tie  to  us,  as  well  as  an 
acquaintance  with  our  condition,  is  a  part  of  the  revelation  of  God  which  is  in  Him  ; 
and  is  that  first  part  of  the  truth  concerning  our  God  which  addresses  itself  to  our 
desire  of  salvation  ;  and  is  therefore  to  be  kept  in  the  foreground,  that  men,  con- 
vinced of  God's  interest  in  them,  may  give  heed  to  the  things  that  the  Lord  has 
spoken.  There  is,  indeed,  in  the  word  "brother,"  viewed  apart  from  the  word 
"king,"  only  a  partial  expression  of  the  character  of  God.  But  I  must  consider 
what  it  expresses  still  further.  First,  there  is  actual  sympathy  for  us  in  Christ 
our  Brother.  In  this  word  "sympathy"  there  is  contained  the  idea  of  a  person — 
the  idea  of  one  being  feeling  along  with  another  being  :  and  so  knowing  Christ's 
sympathy,  and  ever  turning  to  it,  we  learn  personal  communion  with  God,  which 
is  that  which  His  heart  longs  for  ;  for  His  heart  has  not  the  fulfilment  of  its  desire 
for  us,  but  in  our  having  this  personal  communion  with  Him.  Oh,  be  very  jealous 
of  reposing  your  hearts  in  any  other  bosom  than  that  of  God  :  be  very  jealous  of 
telling  your  grief  to  any  other  ear  than  God.  Oh,  be  very  jealous  for  Christ,  that 
He  should  have  the  confidential  trust  of  every  heart.  But  Christ's  sympathy  in  our 
conflict  is  the  sympathy  of  one  who  can  succour  us.  This  is  a  part  of  what 
properly  belongs  to  His  character  as  King.  It  belongs  to  His  character  as  King  to 
be  strong  in  us,  to  supply  our  need  and  sustain  our  weakness.  I  would,  therefore, 
now  consider  what  we  are  taught  in  this  Brother's  being  a  King.  Why  is  it  not 
enough  to  tell  us  that  He  is  our  Brother  ?  Why  must  we  have  a  King  ?  Now,  this 
word  "king,"  taken  along  with  the  word  "brother,"  is,  to  my  mind,  what  is 
expressed  in  God's  being  a  Father,  and  brings  out  to  us  the  necessity  that  there  is 
for  our  being  in  a  subordinate  place,  learning  the  will  of  another,  and  receiving 
that  will  to  be  our  will.  Our  service,  to  be  a  right  service,  must  be  a  free-will 
service ;  but  still,  in  announcing  His  will,  God  announces  it  as  King.  In  short, 
the  sceptre  is  held  out,  and  we  are  called  to  bow  to  it ;  and  the  love  is  revealed  in 
order  that  the  heart  may  bow  to  that  sceptre  ;  but  it  is  as  a  sceptre  that  it  is  held 
out.  Now,  in  Christ  as  King,  there  is  the  provision  for  strength,  as  well  as  the 
provision  for  authority.  Our  King  is  one  who  has  power,  not  merely  to  be  used 
against  us  if  we  refuse  Him  to  reign  over  us,  but  to  be  used  for  us  in  our  submitting 
to  Him.  He  is  a  King  to  minister  to  our  need,  to  supply  the  wants  of  the  poor  and 
needy.  The  true  king  is  one  in  respect  of  whom  we  have  nothing,  but  to  whom  we  are 
altogether  debtors.  And  this  Brother,  who  is  to  be  our  King,  we  do  not  see  rightly 
as  King  if  we  see  him  merely  as  exercising  a  control  without  us.  We  must  see 
Him  as  the  fountain  of  power  within  us  ;  one  who  is  to  act  in  us  by  His  might  in 
the  conflict  with  that  evil  with  which  we  are  contending,  in  assurance  of  His 
sympathy.  This  is  the  influence  of  the  knowledge  that  He  is  King,  that  it  makes 
His  sympathy  strength,  as  that  of  one  of  whom  we  know  that  He  has  strength  for 
us.  There  is  another  blessedness  besides  that  of  conscious  dependence  on  God 
which  is  connected  with  realising  the  Kingship  of  Christ,  that  thus,  and  thus 
alone,  can  we,  as  intelligent  beings,  meditating  on  the  wide  universe,  have  peace 
as  to  its  government.  Unless  we  had  the  omniscience  of  God  we  could  not  have 
the  peace  of  God  directly  ;  but  we  may  have  the  peace  of  God,  without  the 
omniscience  of  God,  indirectly  :  that  is,  we  may  have  the  peace  of  God  through 
the  knowledge  of  God,  and  confiding,  in  regard  to  what  we  know  not,  in  the 
character  of  Him  whom  we  know  to  be  King.  In  this  way  there  is  blessedness  in 
having  a  Brother  as  a  King,  in  respect  of  ourselves  and  in  respect  of  all  things ; 
for  it  is  when  we  see  the  Lamb  in  the  midst  of  the  throne,  having  seven  horns  and 
seven  eyes,  which  are  the  seven  Spirits  of  God — it  is  then  that  we  can  have 
perfect  peace  about  all  things,  because  then  we  see  the  character  of  Him  who 
governs,  and  can  say  that  all  must  be  well.  But  what  I  am  so  desirous  that  you 
should  seek  to  realise  is  the  sweetness  of  being  reigned  over — the  blessedness  of 
having  to  do  with  a  King  ;  and  that  it  is  not  the  sympathy  of  the  Brother,  as 
reconciling  to  the  condition  of  being  reigned  over,  that  you  are  to  learn,  but  that 
while  learning  the  character  of  the  King  in  the  Brother  you  are  to  learn  that 
being  reigned  over  is  itself  a  blessedness.     (/.  M.  Campbell.) 


CHAP.  XTii.]  DEUTERONOMY.  381 


Ver.  16.  Te  shall  henceforth  return  no  more  that  •wa.j.— Never  again!— 
Touching  and  Bad  is  the  last  look  of  the  emigrant  leaving  his  old  home  and  the 
white  cliffs  of  his  native  land.  Some  partings  have  in  them  more  than  sorrow. 
Never  again  !  is  a  mournful  utterance.  It  has  in  it  warning,  admonition,  and 
counsel.  1.  The  ways  of  youth  are  not  to  be  trodden  by  us  again.  We  are  ever 
entering  into  new  paths.  Personality  is  ever  changing,  while  individual  identity 
remains  the  same.  2.  The  ways  of  possible  improvement  in  the  past  cannot  be 
trodden  again.  The  capabilities  of  the  organ  are  limited  by  its  compass  and  the 
number  of  its  stops.  But  within  the  necessary  limits  what  marvellous  varieties 
of  music  can  be  brought  out  of  it !  Our  life,  with  measured  capacities,  is  the 
instrument,  and  we  the  players.  In  the  exercise  of  responsible  will  we  can  bring 
out  heavenly  harmonies,  or  unearthly  discords.  How  the  great  player  wishes  the 
audience  could  come  back  and  hear  what  he  feels  he  can  do  now.  But  the  chance 
is  gone.  Nothing  can  be  done  with  the  past.  3.  If  the  past  cannot  be  lived  over 
again,  it  is  our  duty  to  make  the  best  of  our  present.  There  is  much  to  be  done 
for  ourselves  and  others.  {Preacher's  Monthhj.)  Ome/or  all  .-—If  I  can  pass  this 
way  no  more,  then— I.  I  cannot  do  v^hat  I  then  missed  doing.  1.  What  thought 
I  of  myself?  2.  Did  I  seek  God's  way  or  my  own?  II.  I  cannot  undo  what 
I  HAVE  DONE.  What  manner  of  tracks  did  I  leave  in  the  way  ?  1.  Oaths. 
2.  Drunkenness.  3.  Temptations  to  others  to  do  wrong.  III.  In  view  of  this, 
HOW  SHOULD  I  WALK  ?  1.  Confessing  my  past  sins.  2,  Repenting  of,  and  forsaking 
them.  3.  Exercising  a  cheerful  faith.  4.  Doing  good  to  all  men  as  opportunity 
offers.  Lessons  :  1.  Sad  and  solemn  things  are  in  the  past.  2.  Eternal  things 
are  before  us.  (B.  Knepper.)  Never  this  way  again  : — We  are  told  that  at  one  of 
those  splendid  pageants  in  Berlin,  not  long  ago,  the  wife  of  the  English  ambassador 
unfortunately  unfastened  the  necklace  she  was  wearing,  and  lost  a  costly  pearl 
somewhere  in  the  roadway.  Perhaps  it  might  have  been  regained  if  a  serious 
search  had  been  in  order  at  such  a  time.  But  the  grand  procession  must  hurry 
along,  and  a  lost  place  in  the  rank  was  of  more  account  than  a  lost  pearl.  They 
did  not  return  by  the  same  way.  We  may  be  in  equal  peril  if  an  accident  should 
occur  in  this  ceaseless  rush  of  our  years.  An  admonition  in  it  for  the  close  of  the 
year.  I.  It  is  now  a  most  significant  time  for  the  taking  of  spiritual  stock. 
Most  religions  people  would  be  glad  to  know  just  where  they  are,  Hnd  how  the 
balance  stands.  It  is  well  to  have  a  clearing  out,  even  if  one  is  afraid  he  may  be 
suffocated  with  the  lifted  dust.  II.  Then,  again,  this  is  a  good  time  for  uk  to 
give  over  lackadaisical  complainings  about  short  chances  in  the  past.  You 
will  not  have  to  take  the  same  chances  again.  "Ye  shall  henceforth  return  no  more 
by  that  way  "  of  youth.  But  does  anybody  really  want  to  do  that  ?  Victor  Hugo 
confessed  to  his  close  friends  that  the  most  disagreeable  advance  in  age  to  him  had 
been  that  from  thirty-nine  to  forty.  "  But,"  said  his  companion,  "  I  should  think  "^ 
it  a  great  deal  brighter  to  be  forty  than  fifty."  "  Not  at  all,"  replied  Hugo,  gaily  ; 
"  forty  years  is  the  old  age  of  youth,  while  fifty  is  the  youth  of  old  age."  Ah,  just 
think  how  many  fine  chances  yet  wait  for  a  brave  heart  in  the  beautiful  future 
which  we  hope  to  enter  on  after  next  New  Year's  day  !     III.  It  is  best  for  us  now, 

ALSO,  to  keep  a  clear  LOOK-OUT  FOR  WHAT  IS  STILL  AHEAD.      Almost  all  of  US  have 

some  past  worth  looking  over.  But  the  glory  of  every  true  life  is  in  the  time  to 
come.  God  has  not  yet  exhausted  Himself  in  apocalypses  of  splendid  radiance  to 
His  waiting  people.  There  certainly  is,  in  the  distance,  that  which  "  eye  hath  not 
seen  nor  ear  heard."  And  wise  men,  while  the  years  chime  on,  might  well  think 
of  readiness  to  make  the  great  journey  and  meet  the  revelations.     IV.  Once  more  ; 

BY   THIS  TIME  WB  OUGHT  TO  LEARN   TO  ESTIMATE  RESULTS  AND  FORGET  PROCESSES. 

We  do  really  respect  hills  that  we  have  climbed  painfully  over  ;  but  it  awakes  no 
emotion  in  others  when  we  keep  rehearsing  the  steps  which  we  took,  and  the  snows 
we  met,  and  the  winds  that  we  resisted.  Wiser  is  it  always  to  let  the  dead  past 
bury  its  dead  out  of  sight,  "  Ye  shall  henceforth  return  no  more  that  way  "  ;  and 
to  some  the  past  year  has  been  a  year  of  conflict ;  and  who  wants  to  go  over  all 
that  again  ?  Please  remember,  moments  of  success  are  not  always  moments  of 
happiness;  much  depends  on  what  the  success  has  cost.  ''Ye  shall  henceforth 
return  no  more  that  way  "  ;  to  some  the  past  year  has  been  one  of  self-discipline. 
How  much  it  costs  just  to  make  a  slender  progress  in  Divine  things  !     V.  Finally, 

THIS  IS  THE  TIME  IN  WHICH  TO  INQUIRE  AFTER  WORK  YET  LEFT  UNFINISHED.       We 

should  bring  our  unfulfilled  resolutions  to  God,  and  ask  Him  to  gi-aut  us  time  to* 
complete  them.  {C.  S.  Robinson,  D.D.)  The  irrevocable  past ;  or,  no  going  haclc: 
— I.   "  Ye  shall  henceforth  return  no  more  that  way,"  to  undo  evil.     It  matters  not 


382  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xvii. 

how  black  may  have  been  your  deed,  nor  how  terrible  soever  its  burden,  it  must 
stand.  It  cannot  be  undone.  It  is  man's  dread  prero.f^ative  to  do  ;  but  he  cannot 
undo.  In  the  drift  of  a  far-off  period  in  the  geological  ages,  long  before  Adam  was 
created,  we  lind  the  feet-marks  of  gigantic  fowls.  The  mud,  once  soft,  hardened 
into  rock,  and  became  the  permanent  record  of  life  and  activity  now  extinct  from 
the  globe.  The  effects  of  human  action  are  as  unchangeable.  This  it  is  that 
makes  sin  so  terrible  :  when  it  has  gone  forth  we  cannot  recall  it.  Sin  is  a 
monument  of  everlasting  shame.  A  single  careless  miner,  by  a  momentary  act  of 
foUv,  can  do  what  can  never  be  undone,  and  in  an  instant  fill  a  land  with  sorrow, 
and  hundreis  of  homes  with  the  tears  of  widows  and  orphans.  The  shocking  gap 
in  human  life  and  relationship  nothing  can  repair.  Reparation  may  be  effected 
only  within  narrow  limits  ;  and  then  the  wrong  done  cannot  in  the  most  trivial 
instance  be  wholly  undone.  11.  "  Ye  shall  henceforth  return  no  more  that  way," 
TO  MAKE  IMPERFECT  GOOD  BETTER.  The  merchant  who  has  been  slothful,  inattentive, 
cannot  live  over  again  the  months  that  are  gone.  The  transactions  and  figures  in 
his  books  are  unalterable.  He  cannot  transport  industry  into  past  idleness,  nor 
introduce  a  single  item  of  gain  into  past  losses.  Not  a  stroke  of  work  is  possible  in 
time  that  is  over,  not  a  sixpence  of  profit  can  be  added  to  the  accounts  which  are 
closed.  It  is  the  same  thing  with  the  student.  When  his  examinations  are  over, 
if  his  session  has  been  indolent,  unsuccessful,  he  cannot  improve  the  work  which 
has  been  unsatisfactorily  performed.  Hb  may  be  grieved  and  ashamed  that  his 
time  has  been  so  little  devoted  to  his  vocation.  But  the  insufficiency  of  the  past  is 
beyond  his  reach.  The  culture  of  the  field  and  the  vineyard  exhibits  the  same  law. 
If  there  has  been  neglect  or  inadequate  tillage,  when  harvest-time  arrives  there  is 
DO  going  back  to  re-sow  or  re-tend.  There  must  be  scanty  crops,  dwimlled  grain 
and  fruit,  and  only  half-filled  ears  and  half-laden  boughs.  These  laws  have  their 
fulfilment  in  the  domain  of  spiritual  life.  In  the  day  of  reckoning  you  cannot 
number  profits  where  there  have  been  no  gains,  nor  number  victories,  if  no 
achievements  have  been  won.  The  popular  proverb  says,  "It  is  never  too  late  to 
mend."  True,  it  is  never  too  late  to  mend  in  the  present,  but  always  too  late  to 
mend  in  the  past.  The  path  of  time  gone  by  is  closed.  III.  "  Ye  shall  henceforth 
return  no  more  that  way,"  to  use  neglected  opportunity.  Christian,  thou  hast 
had  thine  opportunities.  Perhaps,  when  thou  wert  blind — blinded  by  thy  tears^ 
thy  opportunities  were  the  nearest  to  thee.  The  Lord,  it  may  be,  laid  Himself  out 
with  parental  tenderness  to  purify  thee  by  disappointment,  crosses,  and  suffering. 
Yet  thou  sawest  no  bright  avenues  crossing  the  path  of  thy  shade,  and  conducting 
to  beauty  and  peace.  Has  seed  been  put  into  thy  hand,  and  hast  thou  not 
sown  it  ?  Has  fruit  hung  within  thy  reach,  and  hast  thou  not  plucked  it  ? 
Has  blessing  been  committed  to  thy  solemn  trust,  and  hast  thou  not  scattered 
it  ?  To  all  neglecters,  opportunity  is  a  narro^ving  path,  which  at  length  vanishes 
in  trackless  -wilds  ;  to  the  obedient,  it  is  an  ever-expanding,  ascending,  and 
illumined  career,  and  into  it  all  courses  run  which  lead  to  glory,  honour,  and 
immortality.  Every  precious  opportunity  of  each  departed  year  is  now  dead  to 
thee,  dead  to  thine  effort  and  industry.  IV.  "Ye  shall  henceforth  return  no  more 
that  way,"  to  encounter  past  trial,  guilt,  and  suffering.  Do  manifold 
imperfection  and  unwoi'thiness  bow  thee  down  ?  Have  they  cost  thee  tears  ?  Are 
they  the  burden  of  thy  prayers  ?  Dost  thou  daily  struggle  for  the  mastery  of  self, 
and  sin,  and  Satan  ;  and  yet  do  thy  besetments  discourage  thee  ?  In  the  years  now 
behind  thee,  has  the  firmament  of  thy  soul  often  been  dull  and  sunless,  and  even 
louring  and  tempestuous?  Thou  wilt  never  tread  that  path  any  more.  New 
ground  is  before  thee,  and  every  step  is  towards  the  light.  Conclusion  :  1.  The 
peculiar  character  of  the  Gospel  is  due  to  the  fact  that  we  cannot  undo  the  past. 
Sin  remains.  Moral  laws  are  immutable  in  their  foundations,  and  their  penalties 
are  irrepealable.  But  the  Lord  Jesus  has  effected  a  saving  work.  He  stands 
between  the  sinner  and  the  woe  that  pursues  him.  He  fulfils,  honours,  and  satisfies 
broken  laws,  and  covers  the  defenceless  head  of  the  contrite,  and  turns  aside  the 
merited  destruction  which  was  sweeping  towards  him.  2.  Since  what  is  done 
cannot  by  you  be  undone,  are  you  to  sit  down  and  weep  the  tears  of  despair  ?  My 
message  is  salvation,  but  not  salvation  which  you  can  effect  in  time  that  is  gone. 
The  great  lesson  is.  Act  in  the  present.  3.  Let  the  sincere  Christian  be  comforted. 
The  Lord  has  borne  your  sins.  Your  holy  life  is  watched  and  guarded  by  His 
sheltering  love.  Ponder  what  you  have  done.  Throw  away  no  lessons  which  it 
offers.  Be  true  to  your  past  experience  and  conviction.  But  brood  not  over 
bygone  evil.     4.  Let  us  be  up  and  doing  ;  for  all  things  pure  and  beautiful  sweep 


CHAP.  XVII.]  DEUTERONOMY.  383 


along  the  ux»ward  groove  of  progress  to  perfection.  The  movement  of  every  world 
and  sun  and  system  is  onward.  5.  In  a  few  more  breaths  thy  life  may  close.  The 
Lord  may  be  saying  with  the  most  literal  emphasis,  "Ye  shall  henceforth  return  no 
more  that  way" — "no  more"  the  way  to  business,  "no  more"  the  way  to  the 
house  of  thy  friend,  "  no  more  "  the  way  to  the  church,  "no  more  "  the  way  to  thy 
family  and  home,  "no  more"  the  way  from  the  grave  whither  thou  thyself  shalt 
have  been  carried.     {H,  Batchelor. )         The  past  irrevocable  .—I.  I  can  conceive  that 

TO  SOME  OF  us   THERE   MAY   BE   RELIEF   AND   EVEN   COMFORT   IN   THIS   ASSURANCE. 

The  experiences  through  which  we  have  come  may  have  been  such  that  we  cannot 
wish  for  their  renewal.  The  path  over  which  we  have  passed  may  have  been  so 
rough  and  steep  and  dangerous  that  we  cannot  contemplate  traversing  it  again  with- 
out a  shudder.  When  I  was  in  Chamounix,  last  summer,  a  friend  who  had  crossed 
the  glacier  and  come  down  by  the  "  Mauvais  Pas,"  on  which  the  iron  railing  put  for 
the  safety  of  travellers  had  parted  from  its  fastenings  in  his  grasp,  assured  me  that 
he  would  not  go  through  that  experience  again  for  all  that  earth  could  give.  And 
there  may  be  not  a  few  among  us  who  feel  just  in  the  same  way  concerning  some 
chapters  in  our  last  year's  life.  We  are,  perhaps,  thankful  to  be  through  them, 
but  we  do  not  wish  to  repeat  them.  We  feel  regarding  them  as  one  does  who  has 
come  safely  out  of  a  terrible  railway  accident,  or  who  sets  his  foot  on  land  after  a 
dangerous  and  tempestuous  voyage.  We  are  glad  that  we  have  escaped,  but,  even 
although  we  should  escape  another  time,  we  do  not  desire  to  be  again  m  the  same 
peril.  Some,  too,  may  have  had  such  a  time  of  labour  and  anxiety  that  they  are 
glad  to  think  that  it  is  now  behind  them  and  not  to  be  renewed.  And  some  there 
are  who  have  had  such  a  fierce  fight  with  temptation,  and  have  come  out  of  it, 
victorious  indeed,  yet  with  such  exhaustion  that  they  cannot  but  rejoice  in  the 
thought  that  now  it  is  all  behind  them  in  "the  irrevocable  past."  They  are  glad 
for  the  result,  but  they  would  not  willingly  go  back  into  the  agony  of  the  conflict. 
So  this  text,  taken  as  an  assurance,  that  we  cannot  re-live  our  lives,  or  go  again 
through  the  experiences  of  the  past,  has  in  it  an  element  of  comfort.  It  is  a  rehef 
to  know  that  some  things  are  over  and  done  with.     11.  But  there  is  another  side 

TO  THE  SUBJECT,  AND  THAT  IS  FULL  OF  SOLEMNITY,  NOT  UNATTENDED  WITH  SORROW. 

For  in  the  past  there  are  many  things  which  now  we  wish  had  been  otherwise. 
Our  afterthought  has  shown  us  much  to  which  our  forethought  was  blind  ;  but  we 
cannot  alter  anything  now.  The  past  is  always  seen  more  coiTcctly  after  it  has 
become  the  past  than  it  was  when  it  was  present.  Lost  opportunities  cannot  be 
recalled,  and  no  cement  of  human  device  can  mend  a  broken  vow.  Ah  !  what  a 
sad  reflection  have  we  here  !  You  cannot  recall  the  profane  word  ;  you  cannot 
wipe  out  the  impure  act ;  you  cannot  undo  the  sins  you  have  committed.  What 
then  ?  What  is  to  be  done  with  it  ?  I  answer,  that  if  we  cannot  cancel  it,  we  can 
confess  the  evil  that  is  in  it,  and  seek  through  Jesus  Christ  forgiveness  for  that. 
If  we  please,  we  can  obtain,  through  the  gi-eat  atonement,  acceptance  with  God 
notwithstanding  our  sins.  The  sting  of  our  guilt  may  be  extracted,  and  the  past 
may  cease  to  be  a  clog  upon  our  spiritual  progress.  III.  And  then,  turning  the 
thought  which  the  words  of  my  text  express,  we  may  make  it  full  of  admonition 
TO  ourselves  for  the  future.  We  are  about  to  enter  upon  a  path  in  which  there 
will  be  no  possibility  of  retracing  our  steps  ;  let  us  be  very  careful,  therefore,  where 
we  plant  our  feet.  We  have  only  once  to  live  ;  therefore  let  us  live  to  purpose.  The 
day  that  dawned  this  morning  will  never  dawn  again.  So  let  us  seize  every 
moment  as  it  comes,  and  use  it  as  we  shall  wish  we  had  done  when  we  look 
back  upon  it  from  eternity.  Remember,  the  year  does  not  come  to  you  all  at  once, 
in  twelve  months  at  a  time,  nor  even  in  twelve  distinct  instalments  c.f  a  month 
each  ;  no,  nor  yet  in  three  hundred  and  sixty-five  separate  portions  of  a  day  apiece  : 
but  in  individual  moments.  Do  not,  therefore,  lose  the  moments  m  thinking  that 
you  will  secure  the  year ;  but  consider  that  the  year  is  to  be  redeemed  by  the 
consecration  of  each  moment  to  the  Lord  Jesus.  Fill  every  day  w^th  His  service. 
{JV.  M.  Taylor,  D.D.) 

Vers.  18,  19.  He  shall  read  therein.— How  we  may  read  the  Scriptures  with  most 
spiritual  profit  .—The  Holy  Scrii^ture  is,  as  Austin  saith,  a  golden  epistle  sent  to 
us  from  God.  This  is  to  be  read  diligently.  "Ignorance"  of  Scripture  is  "the 
mother  of"  error,  not  "devotion."  "Ye  do  err,  not  knowing  the  Scriptures 
(Matt.  xxii.  29).  We  are  commanded  to  "search  the  Scriptures"  (John  v.  39). 
The  Greek  word  signifies  to  search  as  for  a  vein  of  silver.  How  diligently  doth  a 
child  read  over  his  father's  wiU  and  tesUment,  and  a  citizen  peruse  his  charter ! 


384  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xvii. 

With  the  like  diligence  should  we  read  God's  "Word,  which  is  our  Ma^a  Charta  for 
heaven.  It  is  a  mercy  the  Bible  is  not  prohibited.  Trajan,  the  emperor,  forbade 
the  Jews  to  read  in  the  book  of  the  law.  But  there  is  no  danger  of  touching  this 
tree  of  Holy  Scriptures  ;  if  we  do  not  eat  of  this  tree  of  knowledge  we  shall  surely 
die.  I.  Remove  those  things  which  will  hindeb  your  peofitino.  1.  Remove 
the  love  of  every  sin.  The  body  cannot  thrive  in  a  fever  ;  nor  can  the  soul  under 
the  feverish  heat  of  lust.  2.  Take  heed  of  the  thorns  which  will  choke  the  Word 
read.  A  covetous  man  is  a  pluralist ;  he  hath  such  diversity  of  secular  employ- 
ments, that  he  can  scarce  find  time  to  read  ;  or  if  he  doth,  what  solecisms  doth  he 
commit  in  reading  !  "While  his  eye  is  upon  the  Bible,  his  heart  is  upon  the  world  ; 
it  is  not  the  writings  of  the  apostles  he  is  so  much  taken  with,  as  the  writings  in 
his  account-book.  Is  this  man  likely  to  profit  ?  You  may  as  soon  extract  oils  and 
syrups  out  of  a  flint,  as  he  any  real  benefit  out  of  Scripture.  3.  Take  heed  of 
jesting  with  Scripture.  This  is  playing  with  fire.  II.  Preparb  your  hearts  to 
THE  reading  of  THE  "WoRD.  The  heart  is  an  instrument  that  needs  putting  in 
tune.  This  preparation  to  reading  consists  in  two  things — 1.  In  summoning  our 
thoughts  together  to  attend  that  solemn  work  we  are  going  about.  The  thoughts 
are  stragglers  ;  therefore  rally  them  together.  2.  In  purging  out  those  unclean 
affections  which  do  indispose  us  to  reading.  Many  come  rashly  to  the  reading  of 
the  Word  ;  and  no  wonder,  if  they  come  without  preparation,  that  they  go  away 
without  profit.  III.  Read  the  Scripture  with  reverence.  Think  every  line 
you  read  God  is  speaking  to  you.  "When  Ehud  told  Eglon  he  had  a  message  to 
him  from  God,  he  arose  from  his  throne  (Judg.  iii.  20).  The  "Word  written  is  a 
message  to  us  from  Jehovah  ;  with  what  veneration  should  we  receive  it !  I"V.  Read 
THE  BOOKS  OF  ScRiPTURE  IN  ORDER.  Though  occurreuccs  may  sometimes  divert 
our  method,  yet  for  a  constant  course  it  is  best  to  observe  an  order  in  reading. 
Order  is  a  help  to  memory  :  we  do  not  begin  to  read  a  friend's  letter  in  the  middle. 
V.  Get  a  right  understanding  of  Scripture  (Psa.  cxix.  73).  If  the  "Word  shoot 
above  our  head,  it  can  never  hit  our  heart.  VI.  Read  the  Word  with  seriousness. 
Well  may  we  be  serious  if  we  consider  the  importance  of  those  truths  which  are 
bound  up  in  this  sacred  volume.  "  It  is  not  a  vain  thing  for  you,  because  it  is  your 
life  "  (chap,  xxxii.  47).  If  a  letter  were  to  be  broken  open  and  read,  wherein  a 
man's  whole  estate  were  concerned,  how  serious  would  he  be  in  reading  of  it !  In 
the  Scripture  our  salvation  is  concerned  ;  it  treats  of  the  love  of  Christ,  a  serious 
subject  (Titns  iii.  4).  "VII.  Labour  to  remember  what  you  read.  The  memory 
should  be  like  the  chest  in  the  ark,  where  the  law  was  put.  Some  can  better 
remember  a  piece  of  news  than  a  line  of  Scripture  ;  their  memories  are  like  those 
ponds  where  the  frogs  live,  but  the  fish  die.  VIII.  Meditate  upon  what  you 
READ.  Meditation  is  the  bellows  of  the  affections  :  "While  I  was  musing  the  fire 
burned  "  (Psa.  xxxix.  3).  The  reason  we  come  away  so  cold  from  reading  the 
Word  is,  because  we  do  not  warm  ourselves  at  the  fire  of  meditation.  IX.  Come  to 
THE  reading  of  Scripture  WITH  HUMBLE  HEARTS.  An  arrogant  person  disdains 
the  counsels  of  the  Word,  and  hates  the  reproofs  ;  is  he  likely  to  profit  ?  ' '  God  giveth 
grace  unto  the  humble  "  (James  iv.  6).  The  most  eminent  saints  have  been  but  of  low 
stature  in  their  own  eyes  ;  like  the  sun  in  the  zenith,  they  showed  least  when  they 
were  at  the  highest.  X.  Give  credence  to  the  Word  written.  Believe  it  to  be  of 
God  ;  see  the  name  of  God  in  every  line.  The  Romans,  that  they  might  gain  credit 
to  their  laws,  reported  that  they  were  inspired  by  the  gods  at  Rome.  Believe  the 
Scripture  to  be  "  Divinely  inspired. "  Whence  should  the  Scripture  come,  if  not 
from  God  ?  1.  Sinners  could  not  be  the  authors  of  Scripture.  Would  they  indite 
such  holy  lines  ?  or  inveigh  so  fiercely  against  those  sins  which  they  love  ? 
2.  Saints  could  not  be  the  authors  of  Scripture.  How  could  it  stand  with  their 
sanctity  to  counterfeit  God's  name,  and  put  "Thus  saith  the  Lord"  to  a  book  of 
their  ovra.  devising?  3.  Angels  could  not  be  the  authors  of  Scripture.  "What 
angel  in  heaven  durst  personate  God,  and  say,  "I  am  the  Lord"?  Believe  the 
pedigree  of  Scripture  to  be  sacred,  and  to  come  from  the  "Father  of  lights." 

XI.  Highly  prize  the  Scriptures  (Psa.  cxix.  72).  St.  Gregory  calls  the  Bible 
"the  heart  and  soul  of  God."  It  is  the  library  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  It  is  the 
compass  by  which  the  rudder  of  our  wheel  is  to  be  steered  ;  it  is  the  field  in  which 
Christ,  the  Pearl  of  price,  is  hid  ;  it  is  a  rock  of  diamonds  ;  it  is  a  sacred  "eye- 
salve  "  ;  it  mends  their  eyes  that  look  upon  it ;  it  is  a  spiritual  optic-glass  in  which 
the  glory  of  God  is  resplendent;   it  is  the   "universal  medicine"   for  the   soul. 

XII.  Get  an  ardent  love  to  the  Word.  Prizing  relates  to  judgment,  love  to 
the  affections.    "Consider  how  I  love  Thy  precepts "  (Psa.  cxix.  159  ;  Rom.  vii.  22). 


CHAP.  XVIII.]  DEUTERONOMY,  385 

He  is  likely  to  grow  rich  who  delights  in  his  trade  ;  "a  lover  of  learning  will  be  a 
scholar."  St.  Austin  tells  us,  before  his  conversion  he  took  no  pleasure  in  the 
Scriptures,  but  afterwards  they  were  his  "chaste  delights."  XIII.  Come  to  the 
BEADING  OF  THE  WoRD  WITH  HONEST  HEABTS.  1.  Willing  to  know  the  whole  counsel 
of  God.  2.  Desirous  of  being  made  better  by  it.  XIV.  Leabn  to  apply  Sceiptube. 
Take  every  word  as  spoken  to  yourselves.  XV.  Observe  the  pbeceptive  part  of 
the  Word,  as  well  as  the  permissive.  Such  as  cast  their  eye  upon  the  promise, 
with  a  neglect  of  the  command,  are  not  edified  by  Scripture  ;  they  look  more  after 
comfort  than  duty.  The  body  mav  be  swelled  with  wind  as  well  as  flesh  :  a  man  may 
be  filled  with  false  comfort,  as  well  as  that  which  is  genuine  and  real.  XVI.  Let 
youb  thoughts  dwell  upon  the  most  material  passages  of  Scripture. 
The  bee  fastens  on  those  flowers  where  she  may  suck  most  sweetness.  Though 
the  whole  coutexture  of  Scripture  is  excellent,  yet  some  parts  of  it  may  have  a 
greater  emphasis,  and  be  more  quick  and  pungent.  XVII.  Compare  yourselves 
WITH  the  Word.  See  how  the  Scripture  and  your  hearts  agree,  how  your  dial  goes 
with  this  sun.  Are  your  hearts,  as  it  were,  a  transcript  of  Scripture  ?  Is  the  Word 
copied  out  into  your  hearts  ?  XVIII.  Take  special  notice  of  those  Scriptures 
WHICH  speak  to  your  PARTICULAR  CASE.  Were  a  consumptive  person  to  read 
Galen  or  Hippocrates,  he  would  chiefly  observe  what  they  writ  about  a  consumption. 
Great  regard  is  to  be  had  to  those  paragi-aphs  of  Scripture  which  are  most  apposite 
to  one's  present  case.  I  shall  instance  only  in  three  cases — 1.  Affliction.  2.  Deser- 
tion. 3.  Sin.  XIX.  Take  special  notice  of  the  examples  in  Scripture.  Make 
the  examples  of  others  living  sermons  to  you.  1.  Observe  the  examples  of  God's 
judgments  upon  sinners.  Thev  have  been  hanged  up  in  chains  in  terrorem, 
2.  Observe  the  examples  of  God's  mercy  to  saints.  Jeremy  was  preserved  in  tha 
dungeon,  the  three  children  in  the  furnace,  Daniel  in  the  lions'  den.  These  exaroplea 
are  props  to  faith,  spurs  to  holiness.     XX.  Leave  not  off  reading  in  the  Bible 

TILL  you  find  your  HEARTS  WARMED.       XXI.  SeT   UPON   THE   PRACTICE  OF  WHAT 

YOU  READ.  "I  have  done  Thy  commandments"  (Psa.  cxix.  166).  A  student  in 
physic  doth  not  satisfy  himself  to  read  over  a  system  or  body  of  physic,  but  he  falls 
upon  practising  physic  :  the  life-blood  of  religion  lies  in  the  practical  part.  So,  in 
the  text:  "He  shall  read"  in  the  book  of  the  law  "all  the  days  of  his  life  ;  that 
he  may  learn  to  keep  all  the  words  of  this  law  and  these  statutes,  to  do  them." 
Christians  should  be  walking  Bibles.  XXII.  Make  use  of  Christ's  prophetical 
office.  He  is  "the  Lion  of  the  tribe  of  Judah,"  to  whom  it  is  given  "to  open 
the  book  "  of  God,  "and  to  loose  the  seven  seals  thereof"  (Rev.  v.  5).  Christ  doth 
so  teach  as  He  doth  quicken.  XXIII.  Tread  often  upon  the  threshold  of  the 
SANCTUARY.  Ministers  are  God's  interpreters  ;  it  is  their  work  to  expound  dark 
places  of  Scripture.  We  read  of  "pitchers,  and  lamps  within  the  pitchers" 
(Judg.  vii.  16).  Ministers  are  "earthen"  pitchers  (2  Cor.  iv.  7).  But  these 
pitchers  have  lamps  within  them,  to  light  souls  in  the  dark.  XXIV.  Pray  that 
God  WILL  MAKE  YOU  PROFIT.  "  I  am  the  Lord  thy  God,  which  teacheth  thee  to 
profit"  (Isa.  xlviii.  17).  Make  David's  prayer:  "Open  Thou  mine  eyes,  that  I 
may  behold  wondrous  things  out  of  Thy  law  "  (Psa.  cxix.  18).  Pray  to  God  to  take 
oflF  the  veil  on  the  Scripture,  that  you  may  understand  it ;  and  the  veil  on  your 
heart,  that  you  may  believe  it.  Pray  that  God  will  not  only  give  you  His  Word  as 
a  rule  of  holiness,  but  His  grace  as  a  principle  of  holiness.  I  shall  conclude  all  with 
two  corollaries— 1.  Content  not  yourselves  with  the  bare  reading  of  Scripture,  but 
labour  to  find  some  spiritual  increment  and  profit  Get  the  Word  transcribed  into 
ywir  hearts :  "  The  law  of  his  God  is  in  his  heart "  (Psa.  xxxvil  31).  Never  leave 
till  you  are  assimilated  into  the  Word.  Such  as  profit  by  reading  of  the  Book  of 
God  are  the  best  Christians  alive ;  they  answer  God's  cost,  they  credit  religion, 
they  save  their  souls.  2.  You  who  have  profited  by  reading  the  Holy  Scriptures, 
adore  God's  distinguishing  grace.     {T,  Watson,  M.A.)  ^        f        . 


CHAPTER  XVIIL 


Vkr8.  9-14.  Thou  Shalt  not  learn  to  do  after  the  abomlnationa  of  those  nations. 
— Heathen  abominations  avoided:— One  reason  to  shxin  the  jwactices  of  idolatry 
springs  from  the  nature  of  the  evils  themselves.     1.  They  are  cruel     Children 
25 


386  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xviii. 

"pass  throu^'h  tlie  fire."  "Cruelty  is  one  of  the  highest  scandals  to  piety,"  says 
Seeker.  "  The  dark  places  of  the  earth  are  full  of  the  habitations  of  cruelty — home- 
steads of  viclence"  (Psa.  Ixxiv.  20).  2.  They  are  enticing.  Divination,  enchanter, 
and  witch  have  their  spells.  Idolatry,  "a  shameful  creed  of  craft  and  cruelty," 
delights  in  what  fills  the  sensuous  imagination.  "  Who  hath  bewitched  (fascinated) 
you,  that  ye  should  not  obey  the  truth?"  (Gal.  iii.  1.)  3.  They  are  defiling 
""abominations."  Paintings  and  sculptures,  laws  and  legends,  reveal  the  awful 
corruptions  of  the  heathen  world.  4.  They  are  destructive.  "Because  of  these 
abominations  the  Lord  doth  drive  them  out."  Sin  drives  away  from  God  here 
and  from  heaven  hereafter.  The  fruit  of  idolatry  and  superstitions  is  death 
(Lev.  XX.  23).      (J.    Wolfendale.)  That  useth  divination. — Magical  arts  aiid 

divination: — 1.  Different  names  are  here  assigned  to  persons  dealing  in  the  arts  of 
magic.  "One  that  useth  divination";  professing  to  gain  power  and  knowledge 
more  than  human.  "One  that  practiseth  augury"  or  covert  arts.  "An  en- 
chanter " :  the  original  suggesting  the  serpent,  and  implying  the  practice  of 
charming  serpent,  yet  always  connected  with  the  arts  of  divination.  "A  sorcerer  "  : 
the  Hebrew  word  signifying  one  who  mutters  incantations,  but  only  in  the  bad 
sense  of  seeking  help  from  others  than  God.  "A  charmer":  a  word  which 
suggests  binding  as  with  the  spell  of  enchantment.  "A  consulter  with  a  familiar 
spirit " :  the  English  phrase  signifies  spirits  who  stand  in  such  a  relation  to  the 
performer  that  they  come  at  his  call.  Of  course  it  is  pretended  that  these  spirits  are 
other  and  greater  than  human.  The  original  Hebrew  (Ob)  comes  down  to  us  in  the 
African  "Obe-man,"  who  still  follows  the  same  profession,  by  means  of  similar  arts. 
"A  wizard"  is  one  who  claims  superhuman  wisdom,  the  old  English  accurately 
translating  the  Hebrew;  the  distinctively  vnse  one.  The  word  is  restricted  in 
usage  to  superior  wisdom  gained  by  the  arts  of  magic.  "A  necromancer": 
precisely  the  spiritist  of  modern  times,  or  rather  of  all  time,  who  claims  to  have 
communion  with  the  spirits  of  dead  men.  2.  This  analysis  of  the  original  words 
may  aid  toward  some  just  conception  of  the  associated  ideas  which  cluster  roimd 
the  magic  arts  of  the  Hebrew  age.  Their  name  and  their  arts  are  legion.  Think 
of  so  many  classes— professions— of  men  and  women  naturally  shrewd,  sharp, 
cunning  ;  practising  upon  the  superstitions  and  fears  of  the  million  ;  working  upon 
their  imagination,  haunting  them  with  the  dread  of  unknown  powers,  bringing  up 
to  them  ghosts  from  the  invisible  world,  claiming  to  give  auguries  of  the  future, 
playing  in  every  way  upon  their  fears  and  hopes,  to  extort  theu-  money  or  to  make 
sport  of  their  fears  or  to  gratify  their  own  or  others'  malice.  A  system  so  near 
akin  in  spirit  and  influence  to  idolatry,  which  so  thoroughly  displaces  God  from  the 
hopes  and  fears  of  men,  and  which  seeks  so  successfully  to  instal  these  horrible 
superstitions  in  His  place — a  system  which  perverts  the  powers  of  the  world  to 
come  to  subserve  ungodliness,  and  which  practically  rules  out  the  blessed  God  from 
the  sphere  of  men's  homage,  fears,  and  hopes — this  system  has  always  been 
'worked  by  wicked  and  never  by  good  men,  has  always  subserved  all  iniquity,  but 
piety  and  morality  never — this  has  been  a  master-stroke  of  Satan's  policy,  and 
one  of  the  most  palpable  fields  of  his  triumph  through  all  the  ages.  {U.  Cowles, 
D.D.)  The  Lord  thy  God  hath  not  suffered  thee  so  to  do. — The  deterring  power 
of  Divine  grace : — It  is  recognised  as  a  principle  amongst  legislators  and  magis- 
trates, that  the  great  end  of  punishment  is  the  prevention  of  crime.  And  there 
is  no  doubt  that,  up  to  a  certain  point,  this  object  is  gained.  The  public 
execution  will  strike  terror  into  many,  though  numbers,  again,  more  hardened  in 
wickedness,  will  depart  from  the  spectacle,  and  perhaps  commit  the  very  crime  for 
which  they  have  just  seen  a  fellow-creature  die.  It  is  not,  however,  that  they 
actually  set  at  nought  the  punishment ;  it  is  rather  that  there  are  always  so  many 
chances  of  escape,  the  men  transgress  in  the  hope  that  they  shall  elude  detection. 
The  fearfulness  of  a  threatening,  even  though  combined  with  the  certainty  of 
execution,  will  not  always,  nor  even  commonly,  deter  men  from  violating  the  com- 
mandments of  God.  There  is  no  need  for  having  recourse  to  imagination  for  the 
destruction  of  a  people  on  account  of  their  wickedness,  and  their  inheritance  passing 
into  the  possession  of  others.  This  is  only  what  actually  occurred  in  the  instance 
of  the  land  of  Canaan,  whose  inhabitants  were  exterminated  because  of  their 
crimes,  and  it  was  then  handed  over  to  a  new  population,  There  was  here  what 
might  strictly  be  called  a  public  execution.  There  was  no  giving  a  secret  commis- 
sion to  the  angel  of  death  to  move  through  the  doomed  ranks,  and  lay  them  low  ; 
which  might  perhaps  have  left  it  doubtful  whether  or  not  there  had  been  any 
judicial  interference  ;  but  the  Israelites  were  put  visibly  into  the  place  of  public 


CHAP    XVIII.]  DEUTERONOMY.  887 

executioners,  being  charged  with  the  terrible  commission — **  Thou  shalt  smite  them, 
and  utterly  destroy  them  ;  thou  shalt  make  no  covenant  with  them,  nor  show 
mercy  unto  them."  They  were  sent  expressly  to  punish  a  guilty  and  condemned 
population.  And  the  first  memorable  tiling,  if  you  examiue  the  Scriptural  record, 
is  that  God  Himself  placed  no  dependence  on  the  influence  and  effect  of  the  public 
execution  ;  for  His  Word  is  full  of  warning  to  the  Israelites,  that  they  would  fall 
under  the  like  condemnation  if  they  imitated  the  practices  of  those  whom  they 
destroyed.  So  far  from  its  being  reckoned  on  as  an  insupposable  or  even  an 
improbable  thing,  that  they  who  had  been  commissioned  to  slay  multitudes  on 
account  of  their  sin  would  themselves  practise  the  sin  so  fearfully  and  openly 
visited,  there  is  the  frequent  repetition  of  energetic  denunciations  of  that  sin  ;  and 
Moses  is  directed  to  urge  the  Israelites,  with  all  earnestness  and  affection,  to  take 
heed  that  they  provoke  not  the  Lord  by  following  the  example  of  their  predecessors 
in  the  land.  You  must  be  further  aware,  that  so  far  from  having  been  unnecessary, 
the  warning  actually  failed  in  deterring  the  Israelites  from  the  accursed  practices  ; 
so  that  it  was  not  against  improbable  danger  that  Moses  directed  his  parting 
admonitions.  For  when  the  Israelites  had  destroyed  the  Canaanites,  and  taken 
possession  of  their  land,  they  quickly  gave  in  to  the  very  abominations  which  had 
been  visited  with  all  the  fearfulness  of  a  public  execution.  You  read  of  them  in 
the  earliest  period  of  their  settlement — "They  forsook  the  Lord,  and  served  Baal 
and  Ashtaroth."  And  their  whole  history,  up  to  the  time  when  God  was  provoked 
to  let  loose  against  them  the  power  of  the  Assyrian,  is  a  record  of  rebellion  under 
those  special  and  flagrant  forms  which  had  marked  the  guilty  career  of  the  tribea 
which  had  perished  by  their  sword.  Where,  then,  was  the  supposed  influence  of  a 
public  execution  ?  What  ground  is  there  for  the  imagination,  that  even  were  the 
Almighty  visibly  to  interfere,  and  in  His  character  of  moral  Governor  of  the 
univeraeto  anticipate  in  certain  cases  those  judgments  which  shall  hereafter  be 
poured  out  on  the  impenitent,  there  would  be  wrought  any  permanent  eff'ect  on 
the  great  mass  of  men  ? — as  though  the  thing  wanted  in  order  to  repress  the  actings 
of  unrighteousness  were  only  a  more  open  and  express  demonstration  that  punish- 
ment is  to  follow  upon  sin.  And  now  you  may  be  disposed  to  ask  with  what  view 
we  have  endeavoured  to  show,  that  even  what  might  be  called  a  public  execution, 
the  present  visible  descent  of  the  vengeance  of  God  on  the  perpetjators  of  certain 
sins,  would  probably  be  ineff"ectual  in  deterring  others  from  the  practice  of  those 
sins — ineffectual  even  in  regard  of  such  persons  as  had  the  best  means  of  knowing 
that  the  infliction  was  the  direct  and  judicial  consequence  of  the  crime.  W^e  have 
but  one  object ;  not  that  of  merely  presenting  a  severe  and  repulsive  picture  of 
the  depravity  of  our  nature,  but  that  of  shutting  you  up  to  the  conviction  of  the 
necessit3%  the  indispensableness  of  the  Divine  grace,  in  order  to  your  being  with- 
held from  the  commission  of  sin.  We  would  withdraw  you,  if  we  could,  from  all 
reliance  on  anything  but  the  immediate  workings  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  when  the 
matter  in  question  is  the  being  able  to  resist  this  or  that  temptation,  or  to  keep  one- 
self undefiled  by  this  or  that  wickedness.  We  would  teach  you,  however  harsh  the 
teaching  may  sound,  that  there  is  no  wickedness  of  which  you  are  not  capable, 
and  that  if  you  think  yourselves  secure  against  a  sin  just  because  the  sin  may  be 
held  in  abhorrence,  or  because  you  may  be  thoroughly  aware  of  God's  purpose 
of  visiting  it  with  extraordinary  vengeance,  you  display  a  confidence  in  your  own 
resolution  and  strength  which,  as  savouring  of  pride,  can  only  be  expected  to  issue 
in  defeat.  This  is  virtually  the  doctrine  of  our  text.  For  you  will  perceive  that 
God  ascribes  it  wholly  to  Himself  that  the  Israelites  were  preserved  from  the 
abominations  of  the  heathen.  "  These  nations  hearkened  unto  observers  of  times, 
and  unto  diviners  ;  but  as  for  thee,  the  Lord  thy  God  hath  not  suffered  thee  so  to 
do."  They  would  have  been  just  as  bad  had  they  been  left  to  themselves  ;  but 
God  had  not  suffered  them  to  fall  into  such  flagrant  transgression.  He  had  so 
acted  upon  them  by  His  grace  as  to  preserve  them  from  sins,  of  which  they  had 
the  seeds  in  their  hearts,  just  as  much  as  others,  in  whom  those  seeds  were  allowed 
to  bring  forth  their  fruits.  And  though  the  text  speaks  only  of  the  past,  making 
mention  of  preventing  grace  as  having  hitherto  wrought  upon  the  Israelites,  it  is 
clearly  implied  in  the  fact  of  a  remonstrance  against  any  future  imitation  of  the 
heathen,  that  there  would  be  no  security  for  them  except  in  their  being  still  with- 
held by  the  influences  of  God's  Spirit.     {H.  Melvill,  B.D.) 

Ver.  15.    A  Prophet  .  .  .  like  unto  me. — Christ  the  greatest  of  the  prophets: — 
I.  The  office  of  a  peophet  in  ancient  Israel.    He  was  the  voice  of  God  to  the 


388  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xviii. 

nation.  1.  Prophets  are  found  from  the  earKest  times  in  Israel  (Gen.  xx.  7  ;  Psa. 
cv.  15).  In  the  times  of  the  Judges  (chap.  iv.  4,  6, 14,  vi.  7).  Samuel  the  founder 
of  a  settled  order  of  prophets  (Acts  iii.  24).  Continued  now  in  Christian  ministry. 
2.  Note  that  God  appoints  prophets  (or  speakers),  not  the  priests,  as  His  represen- 
tatives and  specially  commissioned  messengers.  3.  The  awful  responsibility  of  the 
speaker  for  God  to  say  only  what  God  has  commanded.  4.  The  word  of  the  pro- 
phet was  to  be  tested  by  its  fulfilment  (ver.  22).  II.  The  peomisk  of  the  text 
PEEMANENTLY  FULFILLED  IN  Cheist.  Applied  by  Christ  and  His  apostles  (Acts 
iii.  22,  V.  37  ;  John  v.  46).  1.  Christ  and  Moses  alike  in  some  points.  (1)  Both 
founders  of  God's  kingdom.  (2)  Both  received  God's  will  from  immediate  and 
direct  communion  with  God  ;  not  in  visions,  dreams,  &c.,  like  the  other  prophets. 
2.  Christ  and  Moses  contrasted  in  other  respects.  (1)  Moses  a  sinful  man  ;  Christ 
absolutely  holy.  (2)  Moses  gave  the  law  which  kills  ;  Christ  brought  grace  and 
truth,  which  take  away  sin.  (3)  Moses  founded  an  outward  worldly  theocracy, 
which  could  only  be  imperfect  and  temporary  ;  Christ  a  spiritual  kingdom  of  Grod, 
which  overcomes  sin  and  death,  and  is  eternal.  (4)  The  relations  of  God  to  Moses 
were  given  among  the  terrors  of  Sinai,  which  men  could  not  bear.  Christ  came 
veiling  the  splendours  of  God  in  His  lowly  humanity,  and  drawing  men  to  Him. 
III.  Impeeativb  duty  to  heaeken  to  Cheist  (Matt.  xvii.  5).  {Cunningham 
Geikie,  D.D.)  The  similarity  between  Moses  and  Christ : — As  Moses,  in  the  early 
part  of  his  career,  refused  the  Egyptian  monarchy,  because  it  could  be  gained  by 
him  only  by  disloyalty  to  God,  so  Jesus  turned  away  from  the  kingdoms  of  the 
world  and  the  glory  of  them,  because  they  were  offered  on  condition  that  He  would 
fall  down  and  worship  Satan.  As  Moses  became  the  emancipator  of  liis  people  from 
their  house  of  bondage,  so  Jesus  lived  and  died  that  He  might  save  His  people  from 
their  sins  ;  as  Moses,  penetrating  to  the  soul  of  the  symbolism  of  idolatry,  intro- 
duced a  new  dispensation  wherein  symbolism  was  allied  to  spirituality  of  worship, 
so  Jesus,  seizing  the  spirituality  of  the  Mosaic  system,  freed  it  from  its  national 
restrictions,  and  ushered  in  the  day  when  neither  at  Jerusalem  nor  at  Gerizim  would 
men  seek  to  localise  the  service  of  Jehovah,  but  the  true  worshipper  would  worship 
the  Father  anywhere,  believing  that  the  character  of  the  worship  is  of  infinitely 
higher  importance  than  the  place  where  it  is  offered  ;  as  Moses  was  pre-eminently  a 
lawgiver,  so  Jesus  speaks  with  authority,  and  has,  in  His  Sermon  on  the  Mount, 
laid  down  a  code  which  not  only  expounds,  but  expands  and  glorifies,  or,  in  one 
word,  fulfils  the  precepts  of  the  Decalogue  ;  as  Moses  stood  the  mwiiator  of  a 
covenant  between  God  and  Israel,  representing  God  to  the  people,  and  representing 
the  people  to  God,  interceding  for  them  when  they  sinned,  while  at  the  same  time 
he  admitted  and  condemned  their  guilt,  so  Jesus  is  the  Mediator  of  the  New 
Covenant,  standing  between  God  and  man,  and  bridging,  by  His  atonement  and 
intercession,  the  gulf  between  the  two.  We  cannot  wonder,  therefore,  that,  in  the 
vision  of  the  Apocalypse,  they  who  have  gotten  the  victory  over  the  beast  and  his 
image  are  represented  as  singing  **  the  song  of  Moses  the  servant  of  God,  and  the 
song  of  the  Lamb."    {W.  M.  Taylor,  D.I).)        The  prc^het  like  unto  Moses: — 

1.  The  necessity  for  a  Mediator.  1.  There  was  a  necessity  for  a  mediator  in  the 
case  of  the  Israelites,  first,  because  of  the  unutterable  glory  of  God,  and  their  own 
inability  to  endure  that  glory,  either  with  their  eye,  their  ear,  or  their  mind. 

2.  This  sufiicient  reason  is  supported  by  another  most  weighty  fact,  namely,  that  God 
cannot  commune  with  men  because  of  their  sin.  II.  The  peeson  of  the  appointed 
Mediator.  Dwell  upon  this  fact,  that  our  Lord  Jesus  was  raised  up  from  the 
midst  of  us,  from  among  our  brethren.  In  Him  is  fulfilled  that  glorious  prophecy, 
"I  have  exalted  One  chosen  out  of  the  people."  He  was  not  one  who  boasted 
His  descent,  or  gloried  in  the  so-called  blue  blood,  or  placed  Himself  among  the 
Porphyro-genili,  who  must  not  see  the  light  except  in  marble  halls.  He  was  born 
in  a  common  house  of  entertainment  where  all  might  come  to  Him,  and  He  died 
with  His  arms  extended  as  a  pledge  that  He  continued  to  receive  all  who  came  to 
Him.  The  main  point,  however,  upon  which  I  want  to  dwell  is,  that  Jesus  is  like 
to  Moses.  There  had  been  no  better  mediator  found  than  Moses  up  to  Moses'  day  ; 
the  Lord  God,  therefore,  determined  to  work  upon  that  model  with  the  great 
prophet  of  His  race,  and  He  has  done  so  in  sending  forth  the  Lord  Jesus.  1.  I 
can  only  mention  in  what  respects,  as  a  Mediator,  Jesus  is  like  to  Moses,  and 
surely  one  is  found  in  the  fact  that  Moses  beyond  all  that  went  before  him  was 
peculiarly  the  depositary  of  the  mind  of  God.  2.  Moses,  to  take  another  point,  is 
the  first  of  the  prophets  with  whom  God  kept  up  continuous  revelation.  To  other 
men  He  spake  in  dreams  and  visions,  but  to  Moses  by  plain  and  perpetual  testi- 


CHAP.  XVIII.  3  DEUTERONOMY, 


mony.  3.  Moses  is  described  as  a  prophet  mighty  in  word  and  deed,  and  it 
is  singular  that  there  never  was  another  prophet  mighty  in  word  and  deed  till 
Jesus  came.  4.  Moses,  again,  was  the  founder  of  a  gi-eat  system  of  religious 
law,  and  this  was  not  the  case  with  any  other  but  the  Lord  Jesus.  5.  Moses 
was  faithful  before  God  as  a  servant  over  all  His  house,  and  so  was  Jesus  as 
a  Son  over  His  own  house.  He  is  the  faithful  and  true  Witness,  the  Prince 
of  the  kings  of  the  earth.  6.  Moses,  too,  was  zealous  for  God  and  for  Hia 
honour.  Remember  how  the  zeal  of  God's  house  did  eat  him  up.  When  he 
saw  grievous  sin  among  the  people,  he  said,  "Who  is  on  the  Lord's  side?"  and 
there  came  to  him  the  tribe  of  Levi,  and  he  said,  "Go  in  and  out,  and  slay  ye 
every  one  his  men  that  were  joined  to  Baal-peor."  Herein  he  was  the  stem 
type  of  Jesus,  who  took  the  scourge  of  small  cords,  and  drove  out  the  buyers  and 
sellers,  and  said,  * '  Take  these  tilings  hence :  it  is  written,  My  Father's  house 
shall  be  a  house  of  prayer,  but  ye  have  made  it  a  den  of  thieves  "  ;  for  the  zeal  of 
God's  house  had  eaten  Him  up.  7.  Moses,  by  Divine  grace,  was  very  meek,  and 
perhaps  this  is  the  chief  parallel  between  him  and  Jesus.  I  have  said,  **  by  Divine 
grace,"  for  I  suppose  by  nature  he  was  strongly  passionate.  There  are  many 
indications  that  Moses  was  not  meek,  but  very  far  from  it,  until  the  Spirit  of  God 
rested  upon  him.  He  slew  the  Egyptian  hastily,  and  in  after  years  he  went  out 
from  the  presence  of  Pharaoh  "in  great  anger."  Once  and  again  you  find  him 
very  wroth  :  he  took  the  tables  of  stone  and  dashed  them  in  pieces  in  his  indigna- 
tion, for  "  Moses' anger  waxed  hot";  and  that  unhappy  action  which  occasioned 
his  being  shut  out  of  Canaan  was  caused  by  his  "  being  provoked  in  spirit  so  that 
he  spake  unadvisedly  with  his  lips."  Divine  grace  had  so  cooled  and  calmed  him 
that  in  general  he  was  the  gentlest  of  men.  But  what  shall  I  say  of  my  Master  ? 
Let  Him  speak  for  Himself !  "  Come  unto  Me,  all  ye,"  &c.  8.  Our  Lord  was  like 
to  Moses  in  meekness,  and  then  to  sum  up  all — Moses  was  the  mediator  for  God 
with  the  people,  and  so  is  our  blessed  Lord.  Moses  came  in  God's  name  to  set 
Israel  free  from  Pharaoh's  bondage,  and  he  did  it :  Jesus  came  to  set  us  free  from 
a  worse  bondage  still,  and  He  has  achieved  our  freedom.  IIL  The  authority  of 
our  great  Mediator  ;  and  let  this  be  the  practical  lesson — Hear  ye  Him.  If  sin  had 
not  maddened  men  they  would  listen  to  every  word  of  God  through  such  a 
Mediator  as  Jesus  is.  Alas  !  it  is  not  so  ;  and  the  saddest  thing  of  all  is  that 
some  hear  of  Him  as  if  His  story  were  a  mere  tale  or  an  old  Jewish  ballad  of  eighteen 
hundred  years  ago.  Yet,  remember,  God  speaks  by  Jesus  still,  and  every  word  of 
His  that  is  left  on  record  is  as  solemnly  alive  to-day  as  when  it  first  leaped  from 
His  blessed  lips.  Note  how  my  text  puts  it.  It  saith  here,  "  Whosoever  shall  not 
hearken  unto  My  words  which  He  shall  speak  in  My  name,  I  will  require  it  of  him." 
To-day  God  graciously  requires  it  of  some  of  you,  and  asks  why  you  have  not 
listened  to  Ch list's  voice.  You  have  not  accepted  His  salvation.  Why  is  this  ? 
You  know  all  about  Jesus,  and  you  say  it  is  true,  but  you  have  never  believed  in 
Him:  why  is  this?  God  requires  it  of  you.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Of  Christ's 
prophetical  office  : — This  passage  foretells  the  Saviour  ;  it  is  spoken  of  Christ.  There 
are  several  names  given  to  Christ  as  a  Prophet :  He  is  called  "the  Counsellor  "  : 
in  Christ  alone  the  angel  of  the  Covenant  is  completed;  "the  Messenger  of  the 
covenant,"  "  a  Lamp,"  "  the  Morning  Star."  Jesus  Christ  is  the  great  Prophet  of 
His  Church.  I.  How  doth  Christ  teach  ?  1.  Externally,  by  His  Word  (Psa. 
cxix.  105).  2.  Christ  teaches  these  sacred  mysteries  inwardly  by  the  Spirit  (John 
xvi.  13).  II.  What  are  the  lessons  Christ  teaches?  1.  He  teaches  us  to  see 
into  our  own  hearts.  The  heart  of  man  is  a  great  deep,  which  is  not  easily 
fathomed.  But  Christ,  when  He  teacheth,  removes  the  veil  of  ignorance,  and 
lights  a  man  into  his  own  heart ;  and  now  he  sees  swarms  of  vain  thoughts.,  he 
blusheth  to  see  how  sin  mingles  with  his  duties,  his  stars  are  mixed  with  clo\'ds, 
he  prays,  as  Austin,  that  God  would  deliver  him  from  himself.  2.  He  shows  us 
the  vanity  of  the  creature.  A  natural  man  sets  up  his  happiness  here,  worships  the 
golden  image,  but  he  that  Christ  hath  anointed  with  His  eye-salve  hath  a  spirit 
of  discerning,  he  looks  upon  the  creature  in  its  night-dress,  sees  it  to  be  empty  and 
unsatisfying,  not  commensurate  to  a  heaven-born  soul.  3.  The  excellency  of  the 
things  unseen.  Christ  gives  the  soul  a  sight  of  glory,  a  prospect  of  eternity. 
III.  How  DOES  Christ's  teaching  differ  from  other  teaching  ?  1.  Christ 
teaches  the  heart.  All  that  the  dispensers  of  the  Word  can  do  is  but  to  work  know- 
ledge, Christ  works  grace  ;  they  can  but  give  you  the  light  of  the  truth,  Christ  gives 
you  the  love  of  the  truth  ;  they  can  only  teach  you  what  to  believe,  Christ  teaciieth 
how  to  believe.     2.  Christ  gives  us  a  taste  of  the  Word.    The  light  of  knowledge  is 


390  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xvni. 

one  thing,  the  savour  another.  Christ  makes  us  taste  a  savouriness  in  the  Word. 
3.  Christ,  when  He  teaches,  makes  us  obey.  4.  Christ  teaches  easily.  He  can 
with  the  least  touch  of  His  Spirit  convert ;  He  can  say,  *'  Let  there  be  light "  ; 
with  a  word  He  conveys  grace.  5.  Christ,  when  He  teacheth,  makes  men 
willing  to  learn.  6.  Christ,  when  He  teacheth,  doth  not  only  illuminate,  but 
animate.  He  doth  so  teach,  as  He  doth  quicken.  Use — 1.  See  here  an  argument 
of  Christ's  Divinity:  had  He  not  been  God  He  could  never  have  known  the 
mind  of  God,  or  revealed  to  us  those  secrets  of  heaven,  those  deep  mysteries, 
which  no  man  or  angel  could  find  out.  Who  but  God  can  anoint  the  eyes 
of  the  blind,  and  give  thee  not  only  light  but  sight  ?  2.  See  what  a  cornucopia^ 
or  plenty  of  wisdom  is  in  Christ,  who  is  the  great  Doctor  of  His  Church,  and 
gives  saving  knowledge  to  all  the  elect.  The  body  of  the  sun  must  needs  be 
full  of  clarity  and  brightness,  which  enlightens  the  whole  world  :  Christ  is  the 
great  luminary,  "in  whom  are  hid  all  treasures  of  knowledge. "  3.  Seethe  misery 
of  man  in  the  state  of  nature.  4.  See  the  happy  condition  of  the  children  of  God, 
they  have  Christ  to  be  their  Prophet :  *  *  all  thy  children  shall  be  taught  of  the 
Lord":  *' God  is  made  to  us  wisdom."  Labour  to  have  Christ  for  your  Prophet; 
He  teacheth  savingly.  He  is  an  interpreter  of  a  thousand.  He  can  untie  those  knots 
which  puzzle  very  angels.  Till  Christ  teach,  we  never  learn  any  lesson  ;  till  Christ 
is  made  to  us  wisdom,  we  shall  never  be  wise  to  salvation.  IV.  What  shall  we 
DO  TO  HAVE  Cheist  FOR  OUR  Teacher  ?  1.  See  your  need  of  Christ's  teaching. 
You  cannot  see  your  way  without  this  Morning  Star.  2.  Go  to  Christ  to  teach 
you.  And  that  we  may  be  encouraged  to  go  to  our  great  Prophet — (1)  Jesus 
Christ  is  very  willing  to  teach  us.  Why  else  did  He  enter  into  the  calling  of 
the  ministry  but  to  teach  the  mysteries  of  heaven  ?  (2)  There  are  none  so  dull  and 
ignorant  but  Christ  can  teach  them.  Every  one  is  not  fit  to  make  a  philosopher's 
scholar  of^a  Mercury  is  not  made  out  of  every  block  of  wood  ;  but  there  is  none  so 
dull  but  Christ  can  make  a  good  scholar  of.  Even  such  as  are  ignorant,  and  of  low 
parts,  Christ  teacheth  them  in  such  a  manner,  that  they  know  more  than  the  great 
sages  and  wise  men  of  the  world.  (3)  Wait  upon  the  means  of  grace  which  Christ 
hath  appointed.  Though  Christ  teacheth  by  His  Spirit,  yet  He  teacheth  in  the  use 
of  ordinances.  Wait  at  the  gates  of  wisdom's  door.  (4)  If  you  would  have  the 
teachings  of  Christ,  walk  according  to  that  knowledge  which  you  have  already.  Use 
your  little  knowledge  well,  and  Christ  will  teach  you  more.  {T.  WcUsmi.)  Our 
great  Prophet  : — I.  First,  consider  the  prophetic  office  of  Christ  in  His 
Church,  for  which  He  was  pre-eminently  qualified  ;  and  the  first  feature  of  His 
qualifications  for  that  office  which  we  shall  mention  is  His  Divine  prescience.  He 
sees  the  end  from  the  beginning.  Moreover,  orthodox  teaching  pertains  to  the 
prophet's  office,  and  here  also  our  blessed  Lord  hath  the  pre-eminence,  for  He  taught 
as  one  having  authority,  and  not  as  the  scribes.  The  sum  of  His  teaching  when  on 
earth,  as  well  as  by  His  Spirit  to  this  day,  is  life  in  Himself  alone.  II.  Now  proceed 
to  the  union  and  affinity  described  ;  "like  unto  Moses,  and  of  their  brethren." 
This  sets  forth  Moses  eminently  a  type  of  Christ,  and  we  will  name  a  few  particulars 
in  which  the  type  and  antitype  are  alike,  though  the  latter  infinitely  surpasses  the 
former.  Moses  was  a  man  of  fame,  he  was  proclaimed  **king  in  Jeshurun,  when 
the  heads  of  the  people  and  the  tribes  of  Israel  were  gather^  together."  Jesus 
was  proclaimed  King  of  Zion  by  God  the  Father,  saying,  "  I  have  set  My  King  upon 
My  holy  hill  of  Zion,"  and  there  He  must  reign  until  He  has  put  all  enemies  under 
His  feet ;  but  here  the  antitype  infinitely  exceeds  the  type,  for  Moses  could  only 
reign  over  the  people,  but  Jesus  reigns  both  over  and  in  their  hearts.  Moses  was 
famed  as  a  warrior,  and  Amalek  and  Moab  felt  his  prowess — Sihon  and  Og  fell  before 
him ;  but  Jesus,  as  the  Captain  of  our  salvation,  has  ' '  spoiled  principalities  and 
powers,  and  made  a  show  of  them  openly,  triumphing  over  them,"  yea,  He  has 
vanquished  death,  hell,  and  the  grave,  and  is  still  going  forth  upon  His  white  horse 
(Gospel  truth)  from  conquering  to  conquer.  Moses  was  famed  for  meekness  (Numb, 
xii.  3).  Jesus,  our  Prophet,  was  like  imto  Moses,  meek  and  lowly,  and  His  meek- 
ness never  failed,  even  when  He  endured  the  contradiction  of  sinners  against  Him- 
self. The  faithfulness  of  Moses  is  also  recorded  by  the  apostle  to  his  honour, 
"  Moses,  verily,  was  faithful  in  all  His  house  as  a  servant."  He  was  faithful  to  God 
for  his  people,  and  he  was  faithful  to  the  people  for  God.  So  our  glorious  Prophet 
was  like  him,  and  far  surpassed  him,  as  a  Son  over  His  own  house  :  His  very  name 
is  "  Faithful  and  True,"  as  the  Holy  Ghost  tells  us  in  the  Apocalypse  ;  and  by  His 
servant  Isaiah  He  says,  "  Faithfulness  is  the  girdle  of  His  reins."  III.  Notice  His 
BEING  raised  UP  suPEENATURALLY — "The  Lord  thy  God  "raised  Him  up.     Iil 


CHAP.  XVIII.]  DEUTERONOMY,  391 


fact,  everything  pertaining  to  Christianity  must  of  necessity  be  supernatural ;  and 
all  that  religion  which  originates  with  fallen  nature,  and  which  fallen  nature  can 
comprehend,  must  be  spurious.  The  question  which  our  Lord  put  to  the  Jews 
respecting  the  ministry  of  John  fixes  the  standard  of  real  religion — "  Is  it  from 
heaven,  or  of  men  ? "  "  Every  good  gift,  and  every  perfect  gift,  is  from  above,"  and, 
consequently,  is  supernatural— every  act  of  faith,  as  well  as  the  gift  of  it,  is  super' 
natural ;  yea,  the  very  life  of  godliness  in  the  soul  is  supernatural  life.  IV.  This 
brings  us  to  show  that  our  great  Prophet  is  entitled  to  obedience,  tea 
THAT  it  is  demanded,  *'  Uuto  Him  ye  shall  hearken."  Without  this  we  cannot 
be  reckoned  among  His  sheep,  for  He  says,  "My  sheep  hear  My  voice"  ;  when  He 
speaks  in  His  Word,  by  His  ministers,  or  in  the  secret  whispers  of  His  love ;  they 
hearken  to  Him  in  these  communications,  whether  they  be  for  instruction,  reproof, 
or  comfort.  As  a  Prophet  He  hath  graciously  said,  **  I  will  instruct  thee,  and 
teach  thee  in  the  way  which  thou  shalt  go."  It  is,  therefore,  our  privilege,  and 
must  be  our  wisdom,  to  sit  at  His  feet  and  hearken  to  His  words.  By  hearkening 
to  Him  I  understand  the  embracing  of  His  embassy,  as  the  sent  of  God  the  Father 
on  the  great  errand  of  salvation  ;  and  this  will  include  the  receiving  of  every  doctrine 
He  preached— every  privilege  He  bestows— and  every  precept  He  enjoins  ;  all  which 
requires  great  grace  from  Him.  Again,  in  embracing  His  embassy,  and  so  hearken- 
ing to  this  Prophet,  there  will  be  a  settled  reliance  upon  His  person  and  work  as  the 
great  subject  of  Old  Testament  prophecy ;  so  that  whoever  reads  the  prophecies 
without  an  eye  to  Jesus,  will  find  them  but  a  dead  letter  without  spirit  or  life. 

(/.  Irons. )        The  need  of  a  Mediator  between  God  and  manfdt  and  acknowledged : 

I.  On  this  great  occasion  God  was  dealing  with  the  children  of  Israel  as 
the  moral  Governor  of  men,  the  Lawgiver  and  Judge  of  His  accountable 

CREATURES.  II.  ThIS  GRAND  PUBLICATION  OP  God's  HOLY  LAW  AND  SOVEREIGN 
WILL  TO  THE  ASSEMBLED  ISRAELITES,  WAS  ACCOMPANIED  WITH  SUITABLE  ATTEND- 
ANT CIRCUMSTANCES  OF  AWE  AND  MAJESTY.  III.  ThE  ISRAELITES,  BY  THESE 
SYMBOLS  OF  AWFUL  POWER  AND  HOLINESS,  WERE  FILLED  WITH  SOLEMN  DREAD, 
AND  MADE  APPLICATION  TO  MoSES,  THAT  IMMEDIATE  COMATUNICATIONS  FROM  GOD 
MIGHT  NO  MORE  BE  GIVEN  ;  BUT  THAT  HE  WOULD  BE  THEIR  MEDIATOR,  RECEIVE 
THE  COMMANDS  OF  GOD,  AND  DECLARE  THEM  TO  THE  PEOPLE.  IV.  OBSERVE  God'S 
APPROVAL   OF  THE  APPLICATION   OF  THE   PEOPLE,    AND  HiS   COMPLIANCE  WITH   IT. 

{Essex  Eemembrancer.)  The  resemblance  between  Moses  and  Christ : — I.  Consider 
MosES  AS  A  LEADER  AND  LAWGIVER.  You  are  to  obscrve  that  both  Moses  and 
Christ  proved  their  commission  by  miracles— a  thing  that  cannot  be  aflBrmed 
of  any  among  the  prophets  of  Israel.  They  both  came  to  an  enslaved  race  ;  they 
both  set  loose  the  prisoners  ;  and,  when  proof  of  their  authority  was  demanded, 
they  both  wrought  wonders  beyond  human  power— wonders  which  equally  showed 
their  dominion  over  the  elements,  and  over  life  and  death.  Though  one  used 
his  might  in  destroying,  and  the  other  only  in  works  of  benevolence,  yet  there 
was  much  the  same  opposition  raised  against  the  one  and  the  other— the  magicians 
contending  with  Moses,  and  evil  spirits  contending  with  Christ.  And  the  deliver- 
ances effected  by  the  two  were  singularly  alike,  bearing  evidently  the  one  towards 
the  other,  the  relation  of  type  and  antitype.  Moses  broke  the  yoke  from  the 
necks  of  the  captive  people  ;  Christ  the  yoke  from  the  necks  of  the  whole  human 
race.  But  when  Moses  made  a  passage  for  Israel  out  of  Egypt,  all  danger  was 
not  escaped,  nor  all  diflSculties  surmounted.  The  former  tyrants  pursued  the 
free  tribes,  and  sought  to  recover  the  ascendency  they  had  lost ;  and  though  Christ 
hath  redeemed  us  from  the  power  of  Satan,  and  opened  the  kingdom  of  heaven  to 
all  believers,  who  knows  not  that  evil  spirits,  eager  to  regain  their  former  dominion, 
pursue  those  that  follow  the  Captain  of  Salvation,  and  strive,  with  ceaseless  energy 
to  prevent  their  final  escape  ?  When  Moses  led  Israel  out  of  Egypt,  he  did  indeed 
Jell  them  of  a  rich  and  goodly  land,  which  God  appointed  as  their  inheritance,  but 
he  did  not  at  once  put  them  in  possession  of  it ;  on  the  contrary,  he  conducted 
them  into  a  dreary  wilderness,  where  they  were  exposed  to  continual  trials,  and 
harassed  with  various  afflictions.  Is  it  not  thus,  also,  with  regard  to  our  redemption  ? 
By  Christ  we  hear  of  a  mighty  Canaan,  reserved  for  the  followers  of  the  Kedeemer, 
but  there  is  not  an  immediate  entrance ;  a  wide  desert  has  to  be  traced,  set  with 
snares  and  peopled  with  enemies,  and  it  is  only  through  much  tribulation  that  we 
can  take  possession  of  the  heritage.  It  is  not  only  as  a  leader,  but  equally  as  a  law- 
giver, that  Moses  bears  a  striking  resemblance  to  Christ.  II.  But  we  do  not  think 
that  it  was  in  his  capacity  as  a  leader  and  a  lawgiver  that  Moses  most  eminently 
typified  Christ.     We  go  on  to  observe  that  Moses  acted  as  a  mediator  between 


892  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  xviiL 

God  and  the  Israelites ;  and  if  as  mediator,  then  was  he  indeed  like  the  Lord  onr 
Redeemer.  The  name  of  mediator  is  expressly  given  by  St.  Paul  to  Moses  ;  for  you 
will  remember  that,  in  writing  to  the  Galatians,  he  says,  * '  The  law  was  ordained 
by  angels  in  the  hand  of  a  mediator. "  The  reference  here  is  unquestionably  to  Moses  ; 
and,  therefore,  his  claim  to  being  reckoned  a  mediator  rests  upon  evidence  which 
admits  of  no  dispute.  III.  Observe,  more  minutely,  the  particulars  of  Moses* 
LIFE.  With  regard  to  the  very  infancy  of  the  two  whom  we  wish  to  set  before  you 
as  type  and  antitype,  you  will  remember  that  Moses  was  wonderfully  preserved 
when  in  childhood — preserved  from  Pharaoh's  order  ;  and  thus  was  Christ  preserved 
when  Herod  slew  all  the  children  in  Bethlehem.  Moses  fled  from  his  country 
to  escape  the  wrath  of  the  king,  and  then  there  came  to  him  a  message,  "Go, 
return  into  Egypt:  for  all  the  men  are  dead  which  sought  thy  life."  Christ 
fled  in  like  manner,  and  then  there  came  a  message,  in  almost  the  same  words, 
to  Joseph,  "  Return,  for  they  are  dead  which  sought  the  young  child's  life."  Moses, 
as  we  before  said,  contended  with  the  magicians,  and  forced  them  to  acknowledge 
his  power — Christ  contended  with  evil  spirits,  and  obtained  from  them  a  similar 
confession.  Immediately  before  the  emancipation  of  Israel,  Moses  instituted  the 
Passover — immediately  before  redeeming  mankind,  Christ  instituted  the  Lord's 
Supper.  When  Moses  had  to  appoint  elders,  he  appointed  seventy — when  Christ 
chose  His  disciples,  He  also  chose  seventy.  Into  the  land  that  was  to  be  con- 
quered Moses  sent  twelve  men  as  spies — when  the  world  was  to  be  subdued,  Christ 
sent  twelve  men  as  apostles.  How  did  Moses  overcome  Amalek  ?  By  extending 
both  his  arms,  and  keeping  them  stretched  out.  How  did  Christ  subdue  all 
men  ?  Only  by  suffering  His  hands  to  be  nailed  to  the  Cross.  As  a  prophet, 
Moses  had  to  deal  with  a  barbarous  generation,  who  were  not  to  be  won  over  to 
the  obeying  of  God  ;  and  who,  consequently,  with  the  exception  of  two,  all  perished 
in  the  wilderness,  in  forty  years.  And  was  not  Christ  sent  to  an  obdurate  people  ? 
Moses  had  to  endure  ill-treatment  from  his  own  family — his  brother  Aaron  and  his 
sister  Miriam  rebelled  against  him  ;  and  we  are  told  of  Christ,  ' '  Neither  did  His 
brethren  believe  on  Him."  Moses  fed  the  people  miraculously  in  the  wilderness  ; 
Christ  fed  thousands  miraculously  in  the  desert.  And,  in  making  a  covenant  of 
blood  between  God  and  the  people,  did  he  not  again  represent  the  Redeemer,  who, 
by  His  own  blood,  hath  "brought  nigh  those  who  were  sometime  afar  off"?  It 
was  not  until  Moses  was  dead  that  the  people  could  enter  the  promised  land ;  it 
was  only  by  the  death  of  Christ  that  the  kingdom  of  heaven  was  opened  to  believers. 
It  was,  in  one  sense,  for  the  iniquities  of  the  people  that  Moses  died  :  "  The  Lord 
was  angry  with  me  for  your  sakes,  and  sware  that  I  should  not  go  over  Jordan,  and 
that  I  should  not  go  in  unto  that  good  land,  which  the  Lord  thy  God  giveth  thee 
for  an  inheritance  ;  but  I  must  die. "  We  need  not  tell  you  that  it  was  for  the  sins 
of  the  world  that  Christ  poured  out  His  soul  unto  death,  in  the  fulness  of  His 
strength,  when  His  eye  was  not  dim  nor  His  natural  force  abated.  Did  Moses  go 
up  in  the  sight  of  the  people  to  the  top  of  Mount  Nebo,  on  purpose  to  die  ?  and 
when  Christ  was  yet  in  the  flower  of  His  age,  unworn  by  any  sickness,  did  He  go 
up  in  the  presence  of  the  nation,  to  the  summit  of  Calvary,  on  purpose  to  endure 
death  ?  Before  he  went  up  to  die,  Moses  comforted  the  disconsolate  tribes  with  an 
assurance  that  God  would  raise  them  up  another  prophet ;  before  He  went  up  to 
die,  Christ  said  to  His  desponding  disciples,  "I  will  not  leave  you  comfortless ;  I 
will  pray  the  Father,  and  He  shall  give  you  another  Comforter."  And,  to  add  but 
another  point  of  correspondence,  Moses  was  buried,  but  no  one  knew  where  his  body 
lay ;  Christ  was  buried,  and  yet  were  not  His  remains  in  vain  sought  for  by  the 
Jews?  {H.  MelviU,  B.D.)  The  prophetic  office  of  Christ:—!.  The  prophetio 
oflSce  of  Christ  is  one  of  a  peculiarly  gracious  and  encouraging  nature  to  sinners. 
2.  The  prophetic  office  of  Christ  is  one  of  infinite  dignity,  inasmuch  as  He  trans- 
acted in  it  with  God  for  our  salvation,  and  was  able  to  sustain  that  manifestation 
of  the  Divine  glory  and  holiness  which  no  mere  man  can  behold  and  live.  3.  The 
text  presents  us  with  an  interesting  view  of  the  security  and  blessedness  of  all  who 
enjoy  an  interest  in  the  benefits  of  Christ's  mediation.  They  shall  not  hear  God's 
voice  nor  see  His  face  as  the  holy,  and  righteous,  but  deeply  offended  arbiter  of  the 
destinies  of  the  moral  universe,  taking  vengeance  upon  His  enemies— they  shall 
not  have  to  encounter  a  conflict  with  His  outraged  holiness,  and  violated  justice, 
and  insulted  power ;  but  as  He  shall  look  upon  them  through  the  medium  of  a 
Saviour's  imputed  righteousness  and  merits,  so  shall  they,  on  the  other  hand,  see 
Him  in  the  attractive  and  winning  light  of  a  Saviour's  compassion,  benignity,  and 
love.     {J.  Forbes,  D,D.)        Moses  the  type  of  Christ : — I.  If  we  survey  the  general 


CHAP.  XVIII.]  DEUTERONOMY,  893 

history  of  the  Israelites,  we  shall  find  that  it  is  a  picture  of  man's  history  as  tho 
Gospel  displays  it  to  us,  and  that  in  it  Moses  takes  the  place  of  Christ. 
II.  Christ  reveals  to  us  the  will  of  God,  as  Moses  did  to  the  Israelites. 
He  is  our  Prophet  as  well  as  our  Redeemer.  Favoured  as  he  was,  Moses  saw  not  the 
true  presence  of  God.  Flesh  and  blood  cannot  see  it.  But  Christ  really  saw,  and 
ever  saw,  the  face  of  God,  for  He  was  no  creature  of  God,  but  the  only-begotten  Son, 
who  is  in  the  bosom  of  the  Father.  Christ  has  brought  from  His  Father  for  all  of 
us  the  full  and  perfect  way  of  life.  HI.  Moses  was  the  great  intercessor  when 
the  Israelites  sinned.  In  this  he  shadows  out  the  true  Mediator  between  God 
and  man,  who  is  ever  at  the  right  hand  of  God  making  intercession  for  us.  Moses 
was  excluded  from  the  Promised  Land,  dying  in  sight,  not  in  enjoyment,  of 
Canaan,  while  the  people  went  in  under  Joshua.  This  was  a  figure  of  Him  that 
was  to  come.  Our  Saviour  Christ  died  that  we  might  live  ;  He  consented  to  lose 
the  light  of  God's  countenance  that  we  might  gain  it.  Moses  suffered  for  his  own 
sin  ;  Christ  was  the  spotless  Lamb  of  God.  His  death  is  meritorious  ;  it  has  really 
gained  our  pardon.  {J.  H.  Nevmxm,  D.D.)  Moral  and  typical  character  of 
Moses : — I.  Consider  Moses  in  his  moral  excellencies.  1.  His  vigorous  faith 
in  the  declarations  of  God.  2.  His  cheerful  obedience  to  the  commands  of  God. 
3.  He  was  distinguished  for  a  spirit  of  fervent  devotion.  4.  He  was  distinguished 
for  enlarged  and  unwearied  benevolence.  5.  He  was  celebrated  for  astonishing 
meekness.  6.  His  religion  was  characterised  by  its  constancy  and  perseverance. 
II.  Consider  Moses  as  an  illustrious  type  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  1.  The 
wonderful  preservation  of  both  in  infancy.  2.  The  intellectual  qualifications  of  both. 
8.  The  voluntary  poverty  and  reproach  of  both.  4.  The  offices  which  both 
sustained.  5.  The  signs  and  miracles  which  both  wrought.  6.  Both  fasted  forty 
days  and  forty  nights.  There  are  many  other  traits  of  likeness  between  Moses  and 
Jesus,  but  the  above  must  suffice.  In  many  things  there  was  a  great  disparity 
between  them.  (1)  Moses  was  a  frail  man,  he  had  his  infirmities.  Jesus  was  free 
from  all  sin,  and  guile  was  never  found  in  His  mouth.  (2)  Moses  was  a  servant ; 
Jesus  a  son.  (3)  Moses  received  power  from  God  to  do  the  works  he  did  ;  Jesus 
possessed  all  power  both  in  heaven  and  earth.  (4)  The  spirit  of  prophecy  dwelt 
largely  in  Moses,  but  wholly  in  Christ.  (5)  Moses  was  a  leader,  but  Christ  a 
Saviour.  (6)  The  rewards  Moses  principally  offered  were  temporal  ;  Christ's 
spiritual  and  eternal.  (7)  Moses  established  a  perishing  economy,  one  that  waxed 
old,  and  is  now  abrogated.  Christ's  kingdom  is  an  everlasting  kingdom,  and  of  His 
rule  there  shall  be  no  end.  Application  :  1.  We  may  admire  Moses  ;  but  Jesus 
demands  our  supreme  love.  2.  We  may  read  the  law  of  Moses,  but  believe  and 
trust  in  the  Gospel  of  Christ.  3.  It  is  well  to  contemplate  the  moral  excellencies 
and  official  engagements  of  Moses ;  but  it  is  better  to  meditate  upon  the  scene  on 
the  holy  mount  of  transfiguration,  where  Moses  and  Elias  both  did  homage  to  Jesus, 
and  conversed  of  His  decease,  which  He  was  to  accomplish  at  Jerusalem,  and  where 
the  voice  from  the  excellent  glory  was  heard,  "This  is  My  beloved  Son,  in  whom 
I  am  well  pleased,  hear  ye  Him."  (J.  Bums,  D.D.)  Moses  a  type  of  Christ: 
— I.  The  peculiar  circumstances  connected  with  their  birth.  II.  Their 
voluntary  abasement  and  humiliation.  III.  Both  were  especially 
appointed  to  be  the  deliverers  of  the  afflicted  and  the  oppressed. 

IV.  Both  of  them  delivered  the  laws  and  mind  of  God  to  the  people. 

V.  Both  of  them  were  appointed  leaders  of  the  people.    VI.  Both  of 

THEM  acted  as  MEDIATORS  BETWEEN  GOD  AND  THE  PEOPLE.  VII.  BOTH  OF 
THEIR    ENGAGEMENTS  WERE    CONNECTED    WITH    THE    MINISTRATIONS    OF    ANGELS. 

VIII.  Both  were  distinguished  for  high  moral  endowments.     IX.  Both 

WERE  eminent  prophets  OF  THE  MoST  HiGH  GOD.  X.  BOTH  OBTAINED  UNSPEAK- 
ABLY valuable  BLESSINGS  FOB  THE  PEOPLE.  XI.  BOTH  LIVED  AND  LABOURED  FOR 
THE  WELL-BEING  OF  OTHERS.  XII.  BOTH  WERE  TREATED  WITH  INGRATITUDE  BY 
THOSE   WHOSE  WELFARE    THEY  LIVED   TO    PROMOTE.      Application  :     1.    MoSCS   Wa8 

the  head  of  that  dispensation  which  was  legal  and  ceremonial,  and  which  passed 
away.  Jesus  is  the  head  of  that  economy  which  is  spiritual,  gracious,  and  abiding. 
2.  Let  us  rejoice  that  we  are  not  come  to  Sinai,  but  Zion  ;  not  under  the  law,  but 
under  grace  ;  not  the  followers  of  Moses,  but  the  disciples  of  Christ.  3.  If  dis- 
obedience to  Moses  and  his  law  was  visited  with  God's  displeasure,  how  shall  those 
escape  who  neglect  Christ's  salvation,  and  obey  not  His  Gospel?  {Ibid.)  The 
resemblance  of  Jesm  to  Moses :— I.  These  words  principally  contain  a  prophecy 
OF  the  Messiah.  First,  the  word  "  prophet "  is  expressed  in  the  singular  number, 
and  intimates  plainly  the  raising  up  of  a  certain  illustrious  prophet  at  a  fixed  time, 


394  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xviii. 

rather  than  a  constant  succession  of  prophets.  Moses  expressly  adds,  "like  unto 
me,"  that  is,  in  the  principal  part  of  his  character — one  who  should  not  only  be  a 
prophet,  but  also  a  legislator.  But,  from  the  time  of  Moses  to  the  days  of  our 
Saviour,  there  was  no  prophet  who  had  the  same  authority  as  Moses  had,  for  the 
succeeding  prophets  were  only  interpreters  of  the  Mosaic  law,  they  only  exhorted 
the  people  to  obey  the  law  of  Moses  ;  reproved  the  transgressors  of  it ;  and,  by  fore- 
telling punishments  to  be  inflicted  upon  them  by  God,  awakened  them  to  return 
to  the  obedience  of  this  law.  Jesus  appeared  in  the  world  at  that  period  when  the 
Jewish  nation  had  the  highest  expectation  of  the  coming  of  their  Messiah.  There 
is  no  doubt  but  the  ancient  Jews  acknowledged  this  text  to  be  particularly  applic- 
able to  the  Messiah  (Acts  iii.  22,  vii.  37).     II.  The  description  here  given 

EXACTLY  CORRESPONDS  TO  JeSUS  OF  NaZARETH  ;  AND  He  RESEMBLED  MOSES  IN 
MORE  RESPECTS  THAN  ANY  OTHER  PROPHET  EVER  DID.  III.  ThE  JeWISH  NATION 
HAVE  BEEN,  AND  STILL  ARE,  SEVERELY  PUNISHED  FOR  THEIR  DISOBEDIENCE  TO  THIS 

PROPHET.  IV.  Concluding  inferences.  1.  We  may  see  that  Christianity  is 
indeed  near  as  old  as  the  creation.  The  two  dispensations  resemble  a  building  sup- 
ported by  two  pillars,  joined  and  cemented  together,  Jesus  Christ  being  the  chief 
comer-stone  whom  God  has  placed  in  Zion  ;  so  that  if  you  remove  either  of  the  two, 
the  whole  must  fall  to  the  ground.  2.  We  may  see  that  the  infidelity  of  the  Jewish 
nation  is  unreasonable  and  inexcusable.  3.  We  may  see  the  folly  and  inevitable  ruin 
of  such  as  reject  Jesus  Christ,  whose  mission  God  has  attested  by  so  many  proofs. 
4.  We  may  see  the  just  foundation  all  true  Christians  have  for  zealously  promoting 
the  interests  of  the  Gospel.  {James  Robertson,  M.A.)  Moses  a  type  of  Christ: — 
I.  Christ  is  a  prophet  like  unto  Moses  ;  and  He  is  so  in  tvto  respects  :  first,  as 
to  His  teaching  ;  and  secondly,  as  to  His  predictions.  The  oflBce  of  the 
prophet  was  twofold  ;  he  not  only  revealed,  by  the  inspiration  of  God,  the  things 
which  should  be  hereafter  ;  but  he  also,  by  the  same  inspiration,  declared  unto 
the  people  the  mind  and  will  of  God,  as  well  as  their  duty  towards  Him  :  be  was 
a  preacher  as  well  as  a  prophet.  It  was  so  in  the  case  of  Moses.  He  made 
known  to  the  people  of  Israel  the  glorious  character  of  the  Most  High — His  holiness, 
His  majesty,  His  mercy,  His  justice.  But  not  only  did  Moses  deliver  to  Israel 
heavenly  doctrine,  and  gave  them  precepts  for  their  guidance ;  but  he  foretold 
their  future  fortunes,  yea,  he  foretold  that  they  would  disobey  those  very  precepts. 
"I  know,"  he  says,  "that  after  my  death  ye  will  utterly  corrupt  yourselves, 
and  turn  aside  from  the  way  which  I  have  commanded  you ;  and  evil  will  befall 
you  in  the  latter  days,  because  ye  will  do  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord,  to  provoke 
Him  to  anger  with  the  work  of  your  hands."  But  let  us  turn  from  Moses  to 
Christ,  "a  Prophet  mighty  in  word  and  deed  before  God  and  all  the  people"  ; 
that  greater  Prophet,  whom  Moses  himself  foretold,  and  of  whom  he  was  but  a 
type.  We  find  in  our  blessed  Lord  the  same  union  of  the  two  qualifications  of 
the  prophet.  He  is  our  great  Teacher ;  and  He  also  foretold  things  to  come. 
Christ  is  our  great  Teacher;  and  "who  teacheth  like  Him?"  The  teaching  of 
Christ  is  so  full,  so  important,  and  so  adapted  to  promote  our  real  welfare,  that 
it  demands  our  most  intense  and  diligent  study.  Let  us  just  glance  at  some 
of  the  truths  which  His  teaching  conveys  to  us.  Moses  revealed  to  the  children 
of  Israel  only  just  so  much  of  the  character  of  God  as  God  saw  fit  to  make  known 
to  him ;  but  our  Divine  Teacher  comes  from  the  very  bosom  of  the  Father  ;  He 
is  the  Revealer  of  the  Father  to  the  sons  of  men  ;  yea.  He  is  Himself  "  Immanuel, 
God  with  us.  "  Moses  gave  to  Israel  precepts  whereby  they  might  live ;  but  the 
blessings  attached  to  them  were  but  temporal :  the  great  truths  connected  with 
the  life  to  come  were  but  obscurely  revealed  to  them.  But  our  great  Teacher  has 
"brought  life  and  immortality  to  light."  He  teaches  us  the  necessity  of  a  change 
of  heart,  if  we  would  dwell  for  ever  in  the  realms  of  holiness  and  peace  :  ' '  Except 
a  man  be  bom  again,  he  cannot  see  the  kingdom  of  God."  He  has  told  us  of  the 
absolute  necessity  that  our  sins  should  be  forgiven,  if  we  would  obtain  everlasting 
life,  and  the  way  by  which  we  are  to  obtain  that  forgiveness.  And  He  does  what 
Moses  could  never  do  :  He  sends  His  Holy  Spirit  to  write  His  law  upon  our  hearts. 
Moses  gave  to  Israel  the  law  of  the  Ten  Commandments,  as  well  as  the  ceremonial 
law  ;  but  our  Teacher  has  made  known  to  us  the  Gospel.  The  moral  law  was 
Indeed  glorious,  its  holiness  was  its  glory :  but  it  could  not  save :  it  could  but 
convince  of  our  sins,  and  condemn  us  for  our  disobedience.  But  Jesus  has  come 
to  us  with  better  tidings :  He  tells  us  how  we  may  escape  the  condemnation  of 
the  law.  "He  hath  redeemed  us  from  its  curse,  being  made  a  curse  for  us." 
Christ  oiiT  Prophet  also  foretells  things  to  come.      He  foretold,  as  Moses  did. 


CHAP.  XIX.]  DEUTERONOMY.  395 


the  destruction  of  the  city  of  the  Jews,  and  of  their  magnificent  temple  ;  and, 
in  the  prospect  of  the  inconceivable  misery  which  they  were  about  to  suffer, 
His  heart  was  filled  with  anguish.  II.  Other  points  of  resemblance  between 
Moses  and  Christ  are  presented  to  us  in  the  text.  We  are  told,  "The  Loed 
THY  God  will  raise  up  unto  thee  a  Peophet  like  unto  me."  Moses  was 
commissioned  by  God  as  a  prophet  to  Israel ;  and  he  came  to  them  with  all  the 
authority  of  such  high  commission.  His  words  were  as  though  they  had  been 
spoken  by  God  Himself;  and  it  was  at  their  peril  that  the  Israelites  refused  to 
hear  him.  So  also  is  Christ  sent  unto  us  by  God.  The  same  almighty  Being  who 
created  the  heavens  and  the  earth,  who  formed  the  spirit  of  man  within  him,  our 
Creator,  Benefactor,  and  Preserver,  has  sent  unto  us  Jesus,  to  be  our  great  Teacher. 
What  greater  inducement  can  we  have  to  hearken  to  His  voice  ?  III.  Moses  was 
a  prophet  raised  up  in  Israel  feom  among  themselves.  God  sent  not  an  angel 
to  be  their  instructor,  but  a  man  of  like  passions  with  themselves;  one  who 
could  sympathise  and  bear  with  them,  and  one  whom  they  might  approach  without 
fear.  So  also  was  Christ  raised  up  to  us  from  among  our  brethren  ;  forasmuch  as 
the  children  were  partakers  of  flesh  and  blood.  He  also  Himself  likewise  took  part 
of  the  same.  IV.  Again,  Moses  prophesied  that  the  Lord  would  raise  up  this 
mighty  Prophet  unto  Israel  ;  and  it  is  true  that  Jesus  came  to  preach  salvation 
first  to  the  Jew.  He  said,  "  I  am  not  sent  but  unto  the  lost  sheep  of  the  house  of 
Israel."  But  there  is  a  spiritual  Israel,  the  seed  of  Abraham  by  faith,  even  the 
company  of  all  true  believers  ;  and  unto  them  Christ  was  raised  up  to  be  a  Prophet, 
the  great  Prophet  of  His  Church.  {M.  T.  Spencer,  M.A.)  The  acceptance  of 
Christ  as  a  Prophet  .-—What  strikes  one  perhaps  most  of  all  in  looking  at  the  old 
castles  in  England  is  the  meagre  openings  that  they  have  for  light.  How  did  the 
people  inside  of  them  contrive  to  live  and  read  and  write  ?  With  these  apertures 
and  passages  out  to  the  glorious  day  no  bigger  than  the  barrel  of  a  gun,  how  did 
they  manage  their  existence  ?  What  incomparable  comforts  men  have  to-day  in 
the  great  windows  that  open  back  and  front,  and  often  on  the  sides,  out  into  God's 
ample  and  beautiful  world  !  Those  old  castles,  with  the  stray  beams  struggling  in 
upon  broken-down  halls  and  dungeons,  with  the  glorious  floods  of  light  forbidden 
to  enter,  are  a  picture  of  the  men  who  shut  out  the  Lord.  The  rejection  of  Christ 
is  the  refusal  to  let  in  the  light,  is  the  shrinking  back  into  the  dark  castle,  into  the 
rude  home  of  barbarism  and  privation.  The  acceptance  of  Christ  is  the  acceptance 
of  modern  life  in  its  highest  meaning,  giving  a  welcome  to  its  ideas,  its  spirit  of 
reform,  its  determination  to  conquer  the  world.  It  is  a  coming  out  of  the  dark 
prison  of  self-containment  into  an  utter  openness  toward  the  infinite  God.  {George 
A.  Oordon.) 


CHAPTER  XIX. 

Vebs.  1-13.  That  every  slayer  may  flee  thither.— Ct<i«s  of  refuge :— I.  Theee 
ABE  MANY,  besides  the  murderer  of  Uriah,  who  have  need  to  cey  with  him, 
•'Deliver  me  from  bloodguiltiness,  0  God."  1.  And,  first,  since  a  preacher 
must  address  his  own  conscience,  as  well  as  those  of  the  hearers,  I  cannot  forget 
the  fearful  applicability  which  this  charge  of  bloodguiltiness  may  have  to  Christian 
ministers.  If  ministers  neglect  to  warn  the  wicked,  if  they  keep  back  from  the 
people  any  part  of  the  counsel  of  God,  either  doctrinal  or  practical,  and  do  not  declare 
it;  if  they  omit  in  their  teaching  either  "repentance  towards  God,"  which  is 
the  beginning  of  the  Gospel,  or  "faith  towards  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,"  which  is  the 
body  and  substance  of  it— blood  lieth  at  their  door,  the  angel  of  Divine  vengeance 
is  abroad  in  pursuit  of  them  :  blood  for  blood,  life  for  life,  this  is  His  legal  require- 
ment ;  His  eye  shall  not  pity,  neither  shall  it  spare  ;  tlie  manslayer's  life— not  the 
life  of  his  body,  but  the  life  of  the  soul— is  justly  forfeit,  unless,  indeed,  there  be, 
under  the  economy  of  gi-ace,  some  si)iritual  city  of  refuge  appointed  for  him,  into 
which  he  may  flee  and  be  safe.  2.  Consider,  then,  I  pray  you,  that  subtle,  unde- 
finable  thing,  conveyed  in  a  single  remark,  or  in  a  single  glance,  or  even  sometimes 
in  a  single  gesture,  called  influence.  Consider  how  it  propagates  itself,  and  runs 
along  like  beacon  fires— how  alarmingly  contagious  and  infectious  its  nature  is. 
3.  But  the  influence  which  all  people  professing  religion  exercise  on  society  at  large, 
and  claim  to  exercise,  is  too  important  to  go  without  some  remark.     II.  The 


896  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xix. 

sinner's  spiritual  refuge,  I  NEED  NOT  TELL  YOU,  IS  Jesus  Christ,  who  repre- 
sents also  the  merciful  elders  and  the  anointed  high  priest ;  and  the  road  bj  which 
vre  flee  to  Christ  spiritually  is  the  road  of  faith.  1.  First,  he  must  fly  to  Christ, 
as  if  for  his  life,  as  a  man  flies  from  a  falling  house  or  a  beleaguered  town — as 
righteous  Lot  was  directed  to  flee  from  the  cities  of  the  plain.  2.  As  impedimenta 
were  removed  out  of  the  manslayer's  way,  and  the  road  was  made  as  easy  and 
obvious  to  him  as  possible,  so  it  is  a  very  simple  thing  to  believe  in  Christ,  and 
thus  to  flee  to  our  spiritual  City  of  Refuge — so  much  so,  that  its  extreme  simplicity 
sometimes  puzzles  us,  and  makes  us  look  with  distrust  upon  faith,  as  if  so  very 
obvious  a  thing  could  not  be  the  appointed  way  of  coming  to  God.  3.  When  the 
merciful  Elder,  Jesus  Christ,  comes  to  the  gate  of  the  city  of  refuge,  what  have  we 
to  plead  with  Him  ?  We  have  nothing  to  plead  but  our  own  sin  and  misery,  and 
the  Divine  covenant  which  was  ratified  by  His  blood— the  Divine  assurance  that 
He  is  able  to  save  to  the  uttermost  those  who  come  unto  God  by  Him.  We  must 
insist  upon  our  right  to  receive  a  "strong  consolation"  for  our  troubled  con- 
science, even  because  we  have  in  God's  appointed  way  "fled  for  a  refuge  to  lay 
hold  on  the  hope  set  before  us"  in  Him.  And  surely  the  merciful  Elder  will 
receive  and  comfort  us,  and  give  us  a  place  that  we  may  dwell  with  Him. 
4.  Again,  the  manslayer  was  to  abide  in  the  city  of  his  refuge — and  so  must  we 
abide  in  ours,  if  we  would  be  safe.  The  justice  of  God  may  arrest  us  the  moment 
we  are  out  of  Christ.  III.  Such,  then,  are  some  of  the  points  of  analogy 
"between  the  Jewish  city  of  refuge  and  its  New  Testament  Antitype.  There 
ARE  two  points  OF  GLORIOUS  CONTRAST.  1.  The  city  of  refuge  was  permanently 
available  only  to  such  manslayers  as  had  acted  without  any  evil  intent.  Not  so  our 
City  of  Refuge !  Christ  is  able  to  save  to  the  uttermost.  2.  The  manslayer  was 
to  remain  in  the  city  until  the  high  priest  died.  But  our  High  Priest  never  dies. 
**  He  ever  liveth  to  make  intercession  for  us."    IV.  Do  we  wish  to  know  whether 

WE  ARE   ABIDING    IN   THIS  CiTY  OF   ReFUGE,  UNDER  THE   WING   OF  THE   MERCIFUL 

Elder,  under  the  auspices  of  the  great  High  Priest  ?  There  is  only  one  safe 
test  of  this,  and  it  is  very  easily  applied.  **  He  that  saith  he  abideth  in  Him  ought 
himself  also  so  to  walk  even  as  He  walked";  and  again,  "Whosoever  abideth  in 
Him,  sinneth  not"  ;  and  again,  "He  that  keepeth  His  commandments  dwelleth 
in  Him."  As  the  evidence  of  our  being  in  Christ  at  all  is  our  bearing  fruit,  so  the 
evidence  of  our  abiding  in  Him  is  our  bearing  much  fruit;  "He  that  abideth  in 
Me,  and  I  in  him,  the  same  bringeth  forth  much  fruit."  And  the  fruit  is  this: 
"love,  joy,  peace,  long-sufl"ering,  gentleness,  goodness,  faith,  meekness,  temperance, 
against  which  there  is  no  law."  {Dean  Goulbum.)  Deliver  him  into  the  hand 
of  the  avenger. — No  refuge  for  a  man-hater : — The  universe  was  not  constituted 
to  give  security  to  murderers  :  there  is  no  shelter  for  a  man-hater.  He  may  get 
into  a  city  of  refuge,  but  he  is  to  be  dragged  out  of  it :  the  evil-doer  may  make 
a  profession  of  religion,  but  his  cloak,  though  of  velvet  and  gold-braided,  must 
be  torn  from  his  shoulders.  The  universe  has  no  lodgment  for  the  man  of  malicious 
heart  and  murderous  spirit ;  the  city  of  refuge  in  Israel  was  not  built  for  him  ;  he 
has  no  right  iu  it ;  to  pity  him  is  to  despise  the  law  ;  to  pity  the  murderer  is  to 
forget  the  murdered.  The  eyes  of  justice  are  fixed  upon  both  points  in  the  case. 
It  is  an  evil  sentiment  that  spares  the  wrong-doer  and  forgets  the  wrong-endurer, 
the  sufferer  of  wrong.  There  is  one  place  appointed  for  the  murderer.  Who  is  the 
murderer  ?  Not  the  shedder  of  blood  :— whoso  hateth  his  brother  without  a  cause 
is  a  murderer.  This  is  the  great  law,  not  of  Israel  only,  but  of  the  Church  of 
Christ  in  all  ages.  Beware  of  malice !  It  does  not  always  begin  in  its  broadest 
form,  or  leap  at  once  in  all  its  intensity  into  human  action  :  it  begins  in  little  frets 
and  spites  and  jealousies  ;  it  starts  out  of  a  root  of  criticism,  of  fault-finding,  and 
investigations  into  consistency  ;  it  may  begin  as  a  clever  action,  showing  the  spirit 
of  judgment,  and  proving  itself  to  be  equal  to  the  analysis  of  the  most  hidden 
motive  ;  ,but  it  grows  ;  disappointed,  it  begins  to  justify  itself ;  foiled  in  its  attempts 
to  succeed,  it  retires  that  it  may  increase  the  supposed  evidence  that  is  at  com- 
mand ;  then  it  returns  to  the  onslaught ;  it  grows  by  what  it  feeds  on  ;  at  last, 
philanthropy — love  of  man — dies,  and  misanthropy — hatred  of  man — takes  its 
place.  Then  is  the  soul  a  murderer ;  and,  thank  God,  there  is  no  city  of  refuge 
for  the  murderer  of  life,  of  hope,  of  love,  of  trust ! — open  the  door  and  thrust  ye 
the  unprofitable  servant  into  outer  darkness ! — the  sun  will  not  spare  a  beam  to 
bless  the  murderer.  Christ  is  not  a  refuge  in  the  sense  of  a  criminal  being  able  to 
outrun  justice.  The  picture  in  Israel  was  the  picture  of  a  man  fleeing  for  refuge 
and  an  avenger  fleeing  after  him  ;  and  if  the  avenger  were  swifter  of  foot,  the  man- 


CHAP.  IX.]  DEUTERONOMY.  897 

slayer  might  be  killed  outside  the  city.  There  is  no  such  picture  in  Christianity. 
In  Christ  we  do  not  outrun  justice :  justice  itself,  by  a  mystery  we  can  neither 
understand  nor  explain,  has  been  satisfied  by  Christ.     {J.  Parker ^  D.D.) 

Ver.  14.  Thou  shalt  not  remoye  thy  neighbour's  landmark.— ^nct^i^  landmarks 
removed : — Stones  indicating  boundaries  might  easily  be  removed.  Ditches  could 
he  secretly  levelled.  This  would  materially  affect  property,  and  be  a  great  evil  in 
land  where  territory  was  distributed  by  lot.  Removal  would  be — I.  To  disregard 
ANCIENT  CUSTOM.  " They  of  old  have  set,"  with  care  and  justice.  "Custom  ia 
held  as  law."  Fixed  law  and  fixed  boundaries  should  be  respected.  But  many 
scorn  ancient  landmarks  as  relics  of  bygone  days.  Impatient  of  restraint,  they 
seek  wider  range  of  thought  and  action,  indulge  in  novelties,  and  cry,  Down  with 
temples,  and  away  with  creeds  and  the  i3ible  !  II.  To  violate  the  law  of  God. 
Heathen  nations  held  every  landmark  as  sacred.  God,  as  the  proprietor  of  all  the 
earth,  set  bounds  for  Israel,  allotted  their  lands  which  they  held  in  trust,  and 
bound  them  in  terms  imposed  by  His  will  (chap,  xxvii.  17).  Hence  removal  of 
landmarks  is  violation  of  His  command,  and  direct  insult  to  His  authority.  III.  To 
DEFRAUD  our  NEIGHBOUR.  Landmarks  were  witnesses  of  the  rights  of  each 
man.  Removal  was  selfish  and  unjust  invasion  of  property.  To  enlarge  your  own 
estate  at  the  expense  of  your  neighbour's  is  theft.  Each  one  should  know  his  own, 
and  not  defraud  another  by  concealment,  forgery,  or  robbery.  *'  Thou  shalt  not 
defraud  thy  neighbour,  neither  rob  him  "  (Lev.  xix.  13 ;  Mark  x.  19  ;  1  Thess. 
iv.  6).  IV.  To  EXPOSE  to  a  dreadful  curse.  The  execration  of  men  is  something, 
but  who  can  bear  the  curse  of  God  ?  The  field  of  the  fatherless  is  under  Almighty 
protection.  The  poor  may  seem  helpless,  but  special  warning  is  given  against  their 
oppression.  * '  Remove  not  the  old  landmark,  and  enter  not  into  the  fields  of  the 
fatherless"  (by  acts  of  violence  or  removal  of  boundaries),  "  for  their  Redeemer  is 
mighty  to  vindicate  outraged  innocence"  (Prov.  xxiii.  10,  11).  This  in  after- 
times  was  the  great  affront  of  national  provocation  (Hos.  v.  10).     (/.  Wolfendale.) 


CHAPTER  XX. 

Vers.  1-4.  When  thou  goest  out  to  battle. — Righteous  war: — I.  Undertaken  to 
ACCOMPLISH  THE  PURPOSE  OF  GoD.  "  In  the  name  of  our  God  we  will  set  up  our 
banners."  II.  Sanctioned  by  the  will  of  God.  1.  God's  will  is  ascertained  by 
His  presence.  2.  God's  will  is  declared  by  His  servants.  HI.  Conducted  by  the 
precepts  of  God.  {J.  Wolfendale. )  Christian  life  a  warfare : — I.  This  war- 
fare IS  against  mighty  enemies.  1.  Great  in  number.  2.  Terrible  in  equip- 
ment. II.  In  this  warfare  right  men  are  wanted.  1.  Good  leaders.  2.  Good 
soldiers.  (1)  Soldiers  conscious  of  right.  (2)  Soldiers  willing  to  serve.  (3)  Soldiers 
full  of  courage.  III.  In  this  warfare  we  should  not  be  disheartened. 
1.  God's  providence  encourages  us.  **  Brought  thee  up  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt." 
There  is  constant  reference  to  this  deliverance  most  striking  and  instructive.  History 
unfolds  Divine  providence ;  abounds  with  proofs  of  omnipotence,  and  pledges  of 
help.  Examples  are  cited  to  animate  to  fortitude  and  virtue.  2.  God's  presence 
is  with  us.  "The  Lord  thy  God  is  with  thee."  Not  merely  as  commander,  but 
**goeth  with  you"  into  the  greatest  danger.  Not  as  a  spectator,  like  Xerxes,  who 
viewed  the  conflict  from  on  high,  but  "to  fight  for  you"  with  the  determination 
"  to  save  you."  "  The  Lord  thy  God,  He  it  is,"  not  a  common  general,  "  that  doth 
go  with  thee  ;  He  will  not  fail  thee,  nor  forsake  thee."  {Ibid.)  Be  not  afraid. 
— Fear  forbidden : — Israel  had  seen  little  of  war,  only  a  few  brushes  in  their  journey 
with  inferior  adversaries.  Things  would  soon  become  more  serious.  Hence  alarm 
and  need  of  admonition  and  encouragement.  All  Christians  are  soldiers,  and  wage 
a  good  warfare.  It  is  a  necessary  and  trying  warfare — continues  through  every 
season  and  in  every  condition.  The  forces  of  their  enemies  may  be  superior  in 
number,  vigilance,  wisdom,  and  might.  Hence  danger  of  alarm  and  need  of  forti- 
tude in  the  warrior.  None  have  better  grounds  for  courage  than  we  ;  not  in  our- 
selves, for  then  we  must  fail.  I.  The  Divine  presence  :  "For  the  Lord  thy  God 
is  with  thee."  Antigonus  said  to  his  troops,  dismayed  at  the  numbers  of  the  foe, 
"  How  many  do  you  reckon  me  for  ? "     But  God  is  all- wise  and  almighty.     "  They 


S98  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xx. 

that  be  with  us  are  more  than  they  that  be  with  them."  **  Greater  is  He  that  is  in 
us  than  he  that  is  in  the  world."  II.  His  agency  :  "  Who  brought  thee  up  out  of 
the  land  of  Egypt."  To  a  Jew,  this  was  not  only  a  proof,  but  a  pledge  ;  not  only 
showed  what  He  could  do,  but  was  a  voucher  of  what  He  would  do.  He  is  always 
the  same,  and  never  suffers  what  He  has  done  to  be  undone.  Strange  would  it  have 
been,  after  opening  a  passage  through  the  sea,  to  have  drowned  them  in  Jordan. 
"What  would  have  been  thought  of  His  great  name,  after  placing  Himself  at  their 
head  to  lead  them  to  Canaan,  if  He  had  suffered  them  to  be  overcome  by  the  way  ? 
He,  who  begins  the  work,  is  not  only  able  to  finish,  but  begins  it  for  the  very 
purpose.  *'  He  that  spared  not  His  own  Son,  but  delivered  Him  up  for  us  all,  how 
shall  He  not  with  Him  also  freely  give  us  all  things  ? "    {W.  Jay. ) 

Vers.  5-9.  Let  him  go  and  return  to  liis  house. — The  exemptions  in  war: — 
Soldiers  must  be  as  free  from  care  and  cowardice  as  possible.  Wellington  declared 
"that  the  power  of  the  greatest  armies  depends  upon  what  the  individual  soldier 
is  capable  of  doing  and  bearing."  Four  classes  are  here  exempted : — I.  Those 
INVOLVED  IN  BUSINESS.  The  soldicr  leaves  his  private  business  when  he  enlists  to 
serve  his  country.  The  farmer  leaves  his  plough,  the  mechanic  his  shop,  and  the 
merchant  his  store.  In  Israel  those  were  not  called  to  serve  who,  from  circumstances 
and  prospects,  would  feel  most  keenly  the  hardship.  1.  Those  engaged  in  dedicating 
a  house.  They  must  return  to  their  house  lest  another  dedicate  it.  2.  Those 
engaged  in  planting  a  vineyard  must  enjoy  the  fruit  of  it.  Building  and  planting 
are  good  and  needful  for  the  community,  but  encumber  the  soldier.  II.  Those 
HiNDEKED  BY  SOCIAL  TIES.  **  What  man  hath  betrothed  a  wife  and  not  taken  her  " 
(ver.  7,  xxiv.  5).  "  It  was  deemed  a  great  hardship  to  leave  a  house  unfinished,  a 
new  property  half-cultivated,  and  a  recently  contracted  marriage  unconsummated, 
and  the  exemptions  allowed  in  these  cases  were  founded  on  the  principle  that  a  man's 
heart  being  deeply  engrossed  with  something  at  a  distance,  he  would  not  be  very 
enthusiastic  in  the  public  service."  In  an  army  there  should  be  one  heart,  one 
purpose,  and  one  desire  to  please  the  commander.  In  the  corps  of  Christian 
soldiers  there  is  entire  obedience  to  the  will  of  the  Captain  of  our  Salvation. 
III.  Those  deficient  in  personal  qualifications.  The  fearful  and  faint-hearted 
were  not  permitted  to  war.  1.  In  moral  qualifications.  Some  think  that  the  fear 
named  arose  from  an  evil  conscience,  which  makes  a  man  afraid  of  danger  and 
death.  Men  of  loose  and  profligate  lives  are  often  cowards  and  curses  to  an  army. 
Hence  those  conscious  of  guilt  were  to  be  sent  away.  '*  A  guilty  conscience  needs 
no  accuser."  "Conscience  makes  cowards  of  us  all."  2.  In  natural  qualification. 
The  allusion  seems  to  be  natural  cowardice.  Men  reverence  bravery,  but  cowards 
are  objects  of  scorn.  Wellington  said  of  some  foreigners  who  ran  away  from  the 
field  of  Waterloo,  "  Let  them  go  ;  we  are  better  without  them."  There  must  be  no 
fear  in  officers  or  men.  No  cowards  in  the  ranks  lest  the  army  flee  before  the 
enemy.  {J.  Wolfendale.)  Fearful  and  faint-hearted.— i^am^A«ar<«rfng5S;— The 
army  might  thus  be  greatly  reduced  ;  we  must  remember,  however,  that  reduction 
anay  mean  increase.  We  do  not  conquer  by  number  but  hy  quality.  One  hero  is 
worth  ten  thousand  cowards.  Caesar  is  in  himself  more  than  all  his  legions. 
Quality  counts  for  everything  in  the  greatest  battles  and  the  most  strenuous 
moments  of  life.  Given  the  right  quality,  and  the  issue  is  certain.  Quality  never 
gives  in  ;  quality  is  never  beaten  ;  quality  flutters  a  challenge  in  its  dying  moments, 
and  seems  to  say,  "  I  will  rise  again  and  continue  the  fight  from  the  other  side." 
So  the  army  was  reduced,  and  yet  the  army  was  increased  in  the  very  process  of 
reduction.  To-day  the  great  speech  is  made  over  again—"  What  man  is  there  that 
is  fearful  and  faint-hearted  ?  let  him  go  and  return  unto  his  house,  lest  his  brethren's 
heart  faint  as  well  as  his  heart."  We  cannot  deny  the  fact  that  most  Christian 
professors  are  faint-hearted  ;  they  are  not  heroic  souls.  What  is  the  explanation  of 
faint-heartedness  ?  Want  of  conviction.  Given  a  convinced  Church,  and  a  heroic 
Church  is  the  consequence ;  given  a  Church  uncertain,  unconvinced,  and  you  have 
a  Church  that  any  atmosphere  can  affect  and  any  charlatan  can  impose  upon.  We 
must,  therefore,  return  to  foimdations,  to  central  principles,  to  primary  realities ; 
and  having  made  sure  of  these  the  rest  will  arrange  itself.  Where  is  conviction  ? 
There  may  be  a  good  deal  of  concession :  there  may  be  a  strong  indisposition  to 
object  to,  or  to  deny,  or  to  bring  into  discredit,  theological  problems  and  religious 
usages,  but  what  is  needed  is  something  more — clear,  well-reasoned,  strongly- 
grounded  conviction ;  and  where  this  rules  the  mind  every  faculty  is  called  into 
service,  and  the  battle  of  life  is  conducted  with  heroic  decision  and  chivalrous  self- 


CHAP. 


XX.  j  DEUTERONOMY,  399 


forgetfulnesa.  It  was  well  understood  in  Israel  that  the  faint-hearted  man  does 
more  harm  than  he  supposes  he  does.  It  is  the  same  all  the  world  over  and  all 
time  through.  The  timid  man  says,  "I  will  sit  behind."  Does  his  retirement 
behind  mean  simply  one  man  has  gone  from  the  front  ?    It  means  infinitely  more 

it  is  a  loss  of  influence,  a  loss  of  sympathy,  a  loss  of  leadership.     A  Christian 

professor  is  not  at  liberty  to  say  he  will  abide  in  the  shade  ;  he  will  allow  the 
claims  of  others  ;  any  place,  how  obscure  soever,  \n\\  do  for  him.  Have  no  patience 
with  men  who  tell  such  lies !  They  have  no  right  to  be  behind ;  their  mission 
should  be  to  find  the  best  place,  and  to  wake  up  every  energy— to  stir  up  the  gift 
that  is  in  them ;  and  every  man  should  feel  that  the  battle  depends  upon  him^ 
The  discouraging  influence  of  faint-heartedness  it  is  impossible  to  describe  in 
words.  Better  have  a  congregation  of  six  souls  of  light  and  fire  and  love,  than 
have  a  great  crowd  without  conviction,  easy-going,  flaccid  in  sentiment  and  thought 

without  central  realities  and  foundations  that  can  be  relied  upon.     **  What  man 

is  there  that  is  fearful  and  faint-hearted  ?  Let  him  go " :  he  is  not  a  loss— his 
going  is  the  gain  of  all  who  are  left  behind.  How  marvellously  faint-heartedness 
shows  itself!  In  one  case  it  is  fear  of  heresy.  In  another  case  it  is  fear  of 
criticism.  What  will  the  people  next  door  say  ?  What  will  the  adjoining  Church 
think  ?  What  will  other  men  declare  their  judgment  ?  In  another  case  it  is  fear 
of  sensation.  We  must  not  advertise,  because  some  people  might  misunderstand 
it ;  we  must  not  have  too  much  music,  because  there  are  persons  unable  to  follow 
the  mystery  of  praise  ;  we  must  not  have  anything  unusual.  To  have  such  faint- 
hearted men  in  the  Church  is  the  bitterest  trial  that  Christ  has  now  to  undergo. 
There  is  another  faintness  which  is  rather  to  the  credit  of  the  man  who  experiences 
it— a  faintness  arising  from  great  service,  long-continued  eff"ort,  and  noble  sacrificial 
consecration.  When  a  man  pours  out  his  life  for  the  cause  he  may  well  be  faint 
now  and  then.     A  beautiful  sentiment  in  Scripture  describes  his  condition :  "  faint. 


again  :  let  me  rest  awhile  ;  do  not  take  my 

will  be  at  the  front  of  the  fight."    That  is  a  faintness  which  may  be  the  beginning 

of  great  strength.     So  God  is  gracious  to  us ;  having  no  sympathy  with  timidity 

and  fear  and  cowardliness,  He  has  infinite  compassion  upon  those  who,  having 

worn  themselves  out  in  service,  need  space  and  time  for  breathing.     {J.  Parker^ 

D.D.) 

Vers.  16-18.  THou  shalt  save  alive  nothing  that  \iiedXkei\h.— Extermination  of 
Cajuumitis  .—Is  not  this  fierce  irruption  in  Canaan  with  fire  and  sword  precisely 
similar  to  the  wave  of  Mahomedan  conquest?  Is  it  any  way  different  from  the 
most  pitiless  of  heathen  invasions?  How  can  we  justify  such  an  acquisition  of 
territory  as  this,  whilst  we  are,  at  least  in  theory,  so  scrupulous  about  adding  one 
acre  of  unjustly  acquired  land  to  our  dominions,  and  cannot  let  one  drop  of  blood 
be  shed,  even  in  a  conquered  race,  without  inquiry  ?  The  key  to  this  difliculty  was 
given  in  the  very  first  confirmation  of  the  grant  made  to  Abraham.  When  the  land 
of  Canaan  was  made  over  to  him  and  his  descendants,  he  was  told  that  they  could 
not  at  once  enter  on  possession,  "because  the  iniquity  of  the  Amorites  was  not 
full."  The  transference  of  territory  was  thus  from  the  first  viewed  and  treated  as 
a  judicial  transaction.  God  reserves  to  Himself  the  right  which  all  sovereigns 
must  and  do  reserve— the  right  of  removing  offenders  from  the  earth,  and  of  con- 
fiscating their  goods.  In  other  respects  this  invasion  finds  a  parallel  in  almost 
every  century  of  history,  and  in  every  part  of  the  world.  It  is,  in  point  of  fact,  by 
conquest  that  civilisation  has  spread  and  is  spreading  upon  earth,  and  m  the 
career  of  progress  the  nations  whose  iniquities  are  full— that  is  to  say,  which  have 
fallen  too  low  for  national  redemption— have  been  swept  away  by  the  purer  and 
stronger  races.  In  this,  therefore,  there  is  no  difference  between  the  conduct  of 
Israel  and  the  conduct  of  other  great  nations.  The  difference  consists  in  this— 
that  while  other  nations  have  pushed  their  conquests  for  love  of  gain  or  glory,  or 
through  pride  in  their  leader  or  mere  lust  of  adventure,  Israel  entered  Canaan  as 
God's  servant,  again  and  again  warned  that  they  were  merely  God's  sword  of 
justice,  and  that  if  they  forgot  this,  and  began  to  think  it  was  their  own  might  that 
had  emptied  the  land  for  them,  they  should  themselves  suffer  the  like  extermina- 
tion. Between  this  and  many  other  outwardly  similar  conquests  there  was,^  in 
short,  all  the  difference  which  there  is  Ijetween  a  righteous  execution  which  rejoices 
the  hearts  of  all  good  men,  and  a  murder  which  makes  us  ashamed  of  our  nature. 


400  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xx. 

{Marcus Dods,  D.D.)  Unselfish  eonqxust : — The  difference  between  the  Jews  and 
other  people  is  precisely  this : — All  the  great  nations  that  we  read  of  have  effected 
extensive  and,  on  the  whole,  salutary  conquests.  Their  triumphs  have  been  the 
means  of  spreading  law,  government,  civilisation,  where  they  would  otherwise  not 
have  reached.  They  have  swept  away  feeble,  corrupt,  sensualised  people,  who  had 
become  animal- worshippers  or  devil-worshippers,  and  had  lost  all  sense  of  their 
human  dignity.  But  we  feel  that  the  nations  who  have  done  these  works  have  done 
them  in  great  part  for  their  own  glory,  for  the  increase  of  their  territory,  at  the 
instigation  and  for  the  gratification  of  particular  leaders.  All  higher  and  more 
bles;^  results  of  their  success,  which  it  is  impossible  not  to  recognise,  have  been 
stained  and  corrupted  by  the  ignoble  and  selfish  tendencies  which  have  mixed  with 
them,  and  been  the  motives  to  them  ;  so  that  we  are  continually  perplexed  with  the 
question,  what  judgment  we  shall  form  of  them,  or  what  different  causes  we  can 
find  for  such  opposite  effects.  There  is  one  nation  which  is  taught  from  the  very 
first  that  it  is  not  to  go  out  to  win  any  prizes  for  itself,  to  bring  home  the  silver  or 
gold,  the  sheep  or  the  oxen,  the  men-servants  or  the  women-servants  ;  that  it  is  to 
be  simply  the  instrument  of  the  righteous  Lord  against  those  who  were  polluting 
His  earth,  and  making  it  unfit  for  human  habitation.  {F.  D.  Maurice,  M.A.) 
The  commMnd  to  extirpate  the  Canaanites : — This  command  to  extirpate  the 
Canaanites  is  regarded  by  many  as  one  of  the  chief  difficulties  in  the  Old  Testa- 
ment. The  difficulty  lies  not  so  much  in  the  thing  itself,  as  in  our  defective  views 
of  God,  or  of  man's  relation  to  Him,  or  of  the  supernatural  character  of  the  revela- 
tion made  to  Moses.  The  objection,  it  will  be  observed,  is  grounded  (or  it  has  no 
force)  upon  the  supposed  inconsistency  of  this  command  with  the  Divine  righteous- 
ness and  equity.  Yet  there  are  other  acts  of  God,  equally  terrible  and  equally 
indiscriminate  in  their  effects,  which  we  never  presume  to  call  in  question.  When, 
for  example,  the  Almighty  sends  an  earthquake  or  a  pestilence,  there  is  no  com- 
plaint of  injustice  ;  and  yet  earthquake  and  pestilence  spare  neither  age  nor  sex  nor 
rank,  but  involve  all  in  the  same  ruin.  Do  fire  or  famine  or  cholera  discriminate 
between  the  sexes,  or  spare  the  aged  or  the  young?  If  the  sword  of  Israel  was 
commissioned  to  destroy  all  that  breathed  of  the  Canaanites,  it  certainly  was  not 
more  indiscriminate  than  these  other  judgments  of  God.  If  we  dare  not  assert  or 
even  insinuate  injustice  in  the  case  of  the  one,  neither  can  we  rationally  do  so  in 
the  case  of  the  other  ;  nor  can  we  deny  to  the  Almighty  the  right  to  choose  this  or 
that  method  of  chastising  a  guilty  people,  whether  earthquake  or  famine,  pestilence 
or  war.  We  may  further  remember  that  the  annihilation  of  a  people  is  so  far  from 
being  a  new  or  an  unexampled  occurrence,  that  similar  events  in  the  overruling 
wisdom  of  God  have  been  continually  taking  place  ever  since  the  dawn  of  history. 
For  an  example  of  it  we  need  not  travel  beyond  our  own  shores.  Where  are  the 
original  inhabitants  of  England?  The  Briton  was  subdued  by  the  Saxon,  the 
Saxon  was  driven  out  by  the  Norman  and  the  Dane,  each  race  leaving,  however, 
some  trace  of  itself  in  the  stock  and  blood  of  the  country.  Yet  tlie  original  race 
has  been  more  completely  extirpated  than  ever  the  Canaanitish  races  were  during 
the  Hebrew  occupancy  of  Palestine.  Still  more  complete  has  been  the  disappearance 
of  the  North  American  Indians.  The  red  man  has  been  driven  farther  and  farther 
towards  the  setting  sun,  till  the  race  seems  threatened  with  absolute  extermination, 
and  is  actually  extinct  over  an  area  twenty  times  as  great  as  that  of  Palestine.  It 
appears  to  be  an  unvarying  law,  that  the  savage  recedes  before  the  civilised  man. 
We  cannot  justify  all  the  means  by  which  this  result  is  accomplished,  or  palliate 
the  dark  and  monstrous  crimes  which  have  been  perpetrated  in  the  name  of 
civilisation  ;  yet  it  is  an  evident  fact  that  the  Ruler  of  nations  is  pleased  to  ordain, 
or  to  permit,  that  nations  should  be  driven  from  their  ancestral  inheritance,  and 
their  places  filled  by  others.  Thus  we  see  that  what  happened  to  the  Canaanites  is 
happening  continually  in  the  history  of  nations.  In  this  view  the  phenomenon  of 
the  destruction  of  the  Canaanite  nations  does  not  stand  alone.  It  can  be  referred 
to  a  class.  And  there  is  no  more  ground  for  disputing  the  Divine  justice  in  regard 
to  the  destruction  of  those  people  than  in  regard  to  the  disappearance  of  scores  and 
perhaps  hundreds  of  other  ancient  races  from  the  face  of  the  earth ;  for  it  cannot 
be  contended  that  there  is  any  difference,  as  it  regards  justice  and  equity,  whether 
a  nation  be  extirpated  by  war,  destroyed  by  famine  or  pestilence,  or  left  to  perish, 
like  the  aborigines  of  Australia,  by  hopeless  and  helpless  exhaustion.  {L.  H. 
Wiseman y  M.A.) 

Ver.  19.  Thou  shalt  not  destroy  the  trees.— Cutting  doton  fruit  trees ;— It  will  be 


CHAP.  XX.]  DEUTERONOMY.  401 

observed  that  this  instruction  is  given  to  the  Jews  in  the  event  of  their  going  to  war 
against  any  city.  No  question  of  mere  horticulture  arises  in  connection  with  this 
injunction.  It  is  wantonness  that  is  forbidden  ;  it  is  not  art  that  is  decried.  Trees 
that  did  not  bear  fruit  were  of  course  available  for  war,  but  trees  that  could  be  used 
for  purposes  of  sustaining  human  life  were  to  be  regarded  as  in  a  sense  sacred  and 
inviolable.  A  prohibition  of  this  kind  is  charged  with  lofty  moral  significance. 
When  men  go  to  war  they  are  in  hot  blood  ;  everything  seems  to  go  down  before  the 
determination  to  repulse  the  enemy  and  to  establish  a  great  victory.  But  here  men 
in  their  keenest  excitement  are  to  discriminate  between  one  thing  and  another,  and 
are  not  to  permit  themselves  to  turn  the  exigencies  of  war  into  an  excuse  for 
wantonness  or  for  the  destruction  of  property  that  bears  an  intimate  relation  to 
human  sustenance.  Dropping  all  that  is  merely  incidental  in  the  instruction,  the 
moral  appeal  to  ourselves  is  perfect  in  completeness  and  dignity.  Civilisation  has 
turned  human  life  into  a  daily  war.  We  live  in  the  midst  of  contentions,  rivalries, 
oppositions,  and  fierce  conflicts  of  every  kind,  and  God  puts  down  His  law  in  the 
very  midst  of  our  life,  and  calls  upon  us  to  regulate  everything  by  its  sacredness. 
God  has  not  left  human  life  in  a  state  of  chaos  ;  His  boundaries  are  round  about 
it ;  His  written  and  unwritten  laws  constitute  its  restraints,  its  rewards,  and  its 
penalties  ;  and  even  war  in  its  most  violent  form  is  not  to  blind  our  eyes  to  the 
claims  of  God.  Men  say  that  all  is  fair  in  love  and  war,  but  this  proverbial 
morality  has  no  sanction  in  Holy  Scripture.  We  are  too  apt  to  plead  the  exigency 
of  circumstances  in  extenuation  of  acts  that  would  not  have  otherwise  been  com- 
mitted. It  is  evident  that  there  are  points  in  life  at  which  circumstances  must 
triumph  or  law  must  be  maintained.  Thus  an  appeal  is  made  to  reason  and 
conscience  nearly  every  day.  When  the  human  or  the  Divine  must  go  down,  the 
Christian  ought  to  have  no  hesitation  as  to  his  choice.  Victories  may  be  bought  at 
too  high  a  price.  He  who  gives  fruit-bearing  trees  in  exchange  for  his  triumphs 
may  be  said  to  have  paid  his  soul  for  the  prizes  of  this  world.  The  young  life, 
boastful  of  its  energy,  insists  upon  having  its  pleasures,  cost  what  they  may,  and 
the  old  man  is  left  to  ruminate  that  in  his  youth  he  won  his  victories  by  cutting 
down  his  fruit-trees.  Two  views  may  be  taken  of  the  circumstances  and  objects  by 
which  we  are  surroimded  ;  the  one  is  the  highest  view  of  their  possible  uses,  and 
the  other  the  low  view  which  contents  itself  with  immediate  advantages.  The 
wood  of  the  frait-tree  might  be  as  useful  as  any  other  wood  for  keeping  back  an 
enemy  or  serving  as  a  defence  ;  but  the  fruit-tree  was  never  meant  for  that  purpose, 
and  to  apply  it  in  that  direction  is  to  oppose  the  intention  of  God.  We  are  to 
look  at  the  highest  uses  of  all  things — a  fruit-tree  for  fruit ;  a  flower  for  beauty ; 
a  bird  for  music ;  a  rock  for  building.  Power  and  right  are  not  co-equal  terms. 
We  have  the  power  to  cut  down  fruit-trees,  but  not  the  right ;  we  have  the  power 
to  mislead  the  blind,  but  not  the  right ;  we  have  the  power  to  prostitute  our  talents, 
but  not  the  right.  The  right  is  often  the  more  difficult  course  as  to  its  process,  but 
the  difficulty  of  the  process  is  forgotten  in  the  heaven  of  its  issue.  To  have  the 
power  of  cutting  down  fruit-trees  is  to  have  the  power  of  inflicting  great  mischief 
upon  society.  A  man  may  show  great  power  in  cutting  down  a  fruit-tree,  but  he 
may  show  still  greater  power  in  refusing  to  do  so.  The  first  power  is  merely 
physical,  the  second  power  is  of  the  [nature  of  God's  omnipotence.  Forbearance  is 
often  the  last  point  of  power.  To  love  an  enemy  is  to  show  greater  strength  than 
could  possibly  be  shown  by  burning  up  himself  and  his  house,  and  leaving  nothing 
behind  but  the  smoking  ashes.  There  are  times  when  even  fruit-trees  are  to  be  cut 
down.  Perhaps  this  is  hardly  clear  on  the  first  putting  of  it.  The  meaning  is  that 
a  fruit-tree  may  cease  to  be  a  fruit-tree.  When  Jesus  came  to  the  fig-tree  and 
found  on  it  nothing  but  leaves.  He  doomed  it  to  perpetual  barrenness,  and  it 
withered  away.  Even  the  husbandman  pleaded  that  if  the  fruit-tree  did  not  bear 
fruit  after  one  more  trial  it  should  be  cut  down  as  a  cumberer  of  the  ground.  Fruit- 
trees  are  not  to  be  kept  in  the  ground  simply  because  in  years  long  past  they  did 
bear  fruit.  Trees  are  only  available  according  to  the  fruit  which  they  bear  to-day. 
"Herein  is  My  Father  glorified,  that  ye  bear  much  fruit."  {J,  Packer,  D.D.) 
Fruit  or  timber : — A  fruit- tree  may  be  used  for  timber,  or  it  may  be  kept  for  fruit. 
In  the  legislation  of  Moses  there  is  a  command  which  directs  the  Hebrews  to  spare 
the  fruit-trees  of  the  Promised  Land.  Moses  knew  that  the  land  would  be  occupied 
by  conquest.  The  Hebrews  would  have  to  besiege  many  of  its  towns  and  cities 
before  they  could  enter  them.  For  the  siege  they  would  require  timber,  and  would 
be  apt  to  destroy  the  groves  of  olives  and  palms  and  oranges,  which  have  always 
been  the  wealth  of  Palestine.  Inasmuch  as  they  were  expecting  to  find  their  hornet 
26 


402  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cHA?.  xxi. 

in  these  conquered  towns  and  cities,  it  was  very  important  that  the  finiit-trees 
should  be  preserved.  1.  Life's  opportunities  and  institutions  are  our  fruit-trees. 
They  may  be  used  for  timber,  or  they  may  be  preserved  for  fruit.  It  is  possible  to 
exhaust  their  power  and  vitality  now,  or  they  may  be  protected  and  developed,  and 
made  to  yield  fruit  from  generation  to  generation.  The  law  of  Moses — and  his 
words  here,  or  elsewhere,  are  confirmed  by  other  portions  of  Holy  Scripture — com- 
mands men  to  regard  the  future.  Life's  advantages  are  designed  for  those  who 
shall  come  after  us,  as  well  as  for  those  who  now  enjoy  them.  We  are  only 
stewards.  Our  interest  is  but  a  life  interest.  The  future  must  not  be  sacrificed  to 
the  present.  2.  Yet  how  often  this  sacrifice  is  witnessed  !  When  I  see  a  man  who 
is  making  a  fortune  by  dishonest  practices,  I  feel  that  he  is  converting  fruit-trees 
into  timber  ;  when  I  see  a  young  Christian,  who  is  absorbed  in  all  the  gaieties  of 
social  life,  eager  for  the  dance  and  the  card-party  and  the  race,  I  feel  that  he  is 
turning  his  fruit-trees  into  timber  ;  when  I  see  a  schoolboy  who  refuses  the  educa- 
tion which  his  father  offers  him,  I  feel  that  he  is  raising  an  axe  against  the  fruit- 
trees  ;  when  I  hear  a  man  say  that  his  business  will  be  ruined  if  he  becomes  a 
Christian,  I  look  about  me  to  see  what  he  is  building  with  the  timber  of  his  fruit- 
trees  ;  when  I  meet  with  individuals  who  are  neglecting  the  salvation  of  their  souls 
for  the  sake  of  worldly  pleasure,  I  tremble  for  the  fruit-trees  ;  when  I  hear  distant 
nations  calling  in  vain  for  the  Gospel,  and  then  realise  that  the  Church  has  wealth 
and  influence,  I  wonder  if  the  fruit-trees  are  used  for  timber.  3.  There  are  many 
ways  of  violating  this  law.  The  axe  is  busy  all  the  time.  Our  fruit-trees  are  con- 
stantly sacrificed.  For  men  too  often  prefer  a  present  gratification  to  a  future 
good  ;  and  they  try  and  gain  the  whole  world,  even  at  the  risk  of  losing  their 
immortal  souls.  The  rich  man  of  the  parable  did  so,  and  Lazarus  did  not.  And 
by  and  by  the  one  was  comforted  and  the  other  was  tormented.  4.  In  our  r^ard 
for  the  Sabbath  this  principle  has  place  and  importance.  The  Sabbath  is  a  fruit- 
tree.  It  may  be  converted  into  timber.  If  you  have  a  journey  to  make,  you  can 
use  the  Sabbath  ;  if  you  have  any  work  to  accomplish,  you  can  employ  the  hours  of 
holy  time  ;  if  you  wish  to  live  for  pleasure,  you  can  count  the  days  of  pleasure  in  a 
week  seven  instead  of  six.  A  present  and  temporary  advantage  may  thus  be  gained. 
But  how  about  the  future  ?  Is  it  right  or  wise  to  break  in  upon  the  sanctity  of  the 
Sabbath  ?  Can  we  prosper,  can  the  nation  prosper,  without  this  holy  day  ?  Yet  if 
we  secularise  the  day  now,  there  isall  soon  be  no  Sabbath  left ;  and  when  the 
Sabbath  disappears,  will  not  freedom  disappear  also,  and  will  not  the  comfort  of 
our  happy  homes  be  gone  ?    {H.  M.  Booth.) 


CHAPTER  XXL 


Vers.  1-9.  If  one  be  found  slain. — God's  value  of  individual  life : — "This  narra- 
tive," says  one,  "sets  forth  the  preciousness  of  human  life  in  the  sight  of  God." 
Dr.  Jamieson  believes  this  singular  statute  concerning  homicide  is  far  superior  to 
what  is  found  in  the  criminal  code  of  any  other  ancient  nation,  and  is  undoubtedly  the 
origin  or  germ  of  the  modern  coroners'  inquests.  I.  Discovered  in  the  loss  op 
ONE  MAN.  Only  one  missing  !  But  God  counts  men  as  well  as  stars,  and  "gathers 
one  by  one."  Ancient  philosophy  and  modern  socialism  overlook  personality,  and 
legislate  for  men  in  a  mass.  The  individual  exists  only  for  the  race,  has  no  rights, 
and  becomes  a  tool  or  slave  of  society.  Christianity  does  not  belittle  man,  but 
recognises  and  renews  individuals,  exalts  them  to  responsibility,  and  appeals  to  them 
for  right.  "Adam,  where  art  thou?"  II.  Discovered  in  the  injury  to  one 
MAN.  One  man  was  missing,  but  he  was  murdered.  His  blood,  like  that  of  Abel, 
was  crying  for  justice.  Society  was  wounded  in  one  of  its  members.  An  inquiry 
was  demanded,  and  the  reproach  must  be  wiped  away.     III.  Discovered  in  the 

INTEREST    WHICH    THE    COMMUNITY    SHOULD    TAKE    IN    ONE    MAN.       "  Am     I     my 

brother's  keeper  ? "  Formerly  heavy  fines  were  inflicted  on  districts  to  prevent  the 
murder  of  Danes  and  Normans  by  exasperated  Englishmen.  We  are  members  one  of 
another ;  related  one  to  another,  and  none  of  us  can  turn  away  like  Cain.  IV.  Dis- 
covered IN  the  provision  made  FOR  EVERY  man's  SALVATION.  Christ  died 
for  one  and  for  all.  It  is  not  the  will  of  God  "  that  one  of  these  little  ones  should 
perish."    If  one  sheep  goes  astray,  the  ninety  and  nine  are  left  by  the  shepherd. 


CHAP.  XXII.]  DEUTERONOMY,  403 

He  seeks  the  one  that  is  lost,  and  its  restoration  brings  greater  joy  than  over  all 
the  remainder.  "Dost  thou  believe?"  {J.  Wolfendale.)  Ecpiating  imJcnoton 
murder : — We  shall  endeavour — I.  To  explain  the  ordinance.  In  doing  this  we 
must  notice — 1.  Its  general  design.  God  intended  by  this  law— (1)  To  prevent  the 
commission  of  murder.  (2)  To  provide  means  for  removing  guilt  from  His  land. 
2.  Its  particular  provisions :  the  victim,  the  death,  the  place  ;  the  protestations 
and  petitions  of  the  elders.  II.  To  point  out  some  lessons  which  may  be 
learned  from  it.  1.  The  importance  of  preventing  or  puiushing  sin.  2.  The 
comfort  of  a  good  conscience.  3.  The  efl&cacy  of  united  faith  and  prayer.  {C. 
Simeon,  M.A.) 

Vers.  15-17.  The  right  of  the  firstborn. — I.  The  rights  of  primogeniture 
DEFINED.  "A  double  portion  of  all  that  he  hath."  As  head  of  the  family,  the 
eldest  son  would  be  put  into  power  and  privilege,  be  heir  of  his  father's  rank  and 
wealth.  He  was  not  to  be  limited  in  his  allowance,  nor  deposed  from  his  authority. 
The  Divine  Ruler  entrusts  him  with  possessions  and  entails  them  by  His  wiU. 
II.  The  rights  of  primogeniture  upheld.  Individual  preferences  and  partialities 
are  not  to  set  aside  the  rights  of  the  firstborn.  1.  Rights  upheld  through  succes- 
sive marriage.  When  an  Israelite  had  two  wives  together  or  in  succession,  one 
might  be  loved  and  the  other  hated  (ver.  15).  God  might  tolerate  polyganiy,  but 
right  must  be  upheld.  2.  Rights  upheld  against  human  partiality.  The  influence 
of  the  second  wife  was  later  and  more  permanent.  Justice  must  not  bend  to  per- 
sonal like  or  dislike.  Amid  divided  affections  and  divided  authority,  God  and  not 
caprice  must  rule.  3.  Rights  upheld  hj  Divine  injunction.  Man  is  changeable  ; 
ent^s  discord,  fend,  and  litigation  in  his  family ;  but  God  is  just  and  impartiaL 
He  will  protect  our  rights  and  vindicate  our  character.     {J.  Wolfendcde.) 

Vers.  22,  23.  He  that  is  hanged  is  accursed  of  God.— Hangiiig ;— I.  Hanging  a 
disgraceful  punishment.  The  body  was  exposed  to  insult  and  assault.  Shame- 
ful deeds  were  kept  in  public  memory,  and  the  dead  was  a  spectacle  to  the  world. 
It  was  only  inflicted  on  most  infamous  offenders.  Cicero  calls  it  a  nameless  wicked- 
ness.  Its  pain  and  disgrace  were  extreme.  II.  Hanging  a  defilement  of  the 
LAND.  "  That  thy  land  be  not  defiled."  The  vices  of  the  living  and  the  bodies  of 
the  dead  defiled  the  land  (Numb.  xxxv.  34).  1.  Physically  it  would  be  defiled.  In 
the  hot  climate  its  decomposition  would  injure  the  health  and  peril  the  life  of 
others.  2.  Morally,  as  the  land  of  Jehovah,  it  would  be  polluted.  Remembrance 
of  crime  would  harden  the  heart  and  breed  familiarity.  III.  Hanging  a  warning 
to  others.  The  punishment  was  designed  to  deter  others.  They  saw  the  terrible 
consequences  of  guilt.  Alas!  ''hanging  is  no  warning,"  and  men  leave  the  very 
gibbet  or  the  gallows  to  commit  their  crimes.  IV.  Hanging  a  type  of  the  death 
of  Christ  (Acts  v.  35  ;  Gal.  iii.  13).  1.  He  became  our  substitute.  2.  He  was 
buried  in  the  evening  (John  xix.  31).  3.  As  the  land  was  cleansed  by  removal  of 
curse,  so  the  conscience  and  the  Church  purified  by  Christ.  {J.  Wolfendale.) 
The  accursed  tree  .-—I.  A  shameful  death  awaits  abominable  crime.  "  Worthy 
of  death,"  lit.,  if  there  be  on  a  man  a  right  of  death,  "  he  was  hanged  upon  a  tree.  ' 
II.  Public  ignominy  expressed  in  this  shameful  death.  Penalty  for  crime, 
detestation  of  the  perpetrator,  and  the  curse  of  God.  III.  The  desirability  op 
TAKING  AWAY  THE  MEMORY  OF  THIS  SHAME.  "He  shall  not  remain  all  night," 
take  him  down  from  the  tree  and  bury  him  ;  blot  out  his  name  and  remove  the 
curse.  IV.  Christ  alone  removes  the  curse.  The  best  of  men  treated  as  one 
of  the  vilest,  died  the  just  for  the  unjust,  "who  His  own  self  bare  our  sins  in  His 
own  body  on  the  tree."    {Ibid.) 


CHAPTER  XXII. 


Vers.  1-4.  Thy  brother's  ox  or  his  sheep. — Restoration  of  stray  cattle  and  lost 
goods : — Mcses  urges  right  action  in  manifold  relations  of  national  life,  and  teaches 
Israel  to  regard  all  arrangements  of  God  as  sacred.  They  were  never  to  cherish  any 
bitterness  or  hostility  towards  a  neighbour,  but  restore  stray  animals  and  lost  goods. 
I.  An  indication  of  God's  providence.     "Doth  God  care  for  oxen \ "    Yes  ;  and 


404  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  i^tii. 

observes  them  go  astray,  or  fall  beneath  their  heavy  burden.  He  legislates  for 
them,  and  our  treatment  of  them  is  reverence  or  disobedience  to  His  command. 
"Thou  shalt  not  see,"  Ac.  II.  An  opportunity  of  neighbourly  kindness. 
"  Thy  brother  "  comprehends  relatives,  neighbours,  strangers,  and  enemies  even 
(Exod.  xxiii.  4).  The  property  of  any  person  which  is  in  danger  shall  be  protected 
and  restored.  Love  should  rule  in  all  actions,  an'i  daily  incidents  afford  the  chance 
of  displaying  it.  1.  Kindness  regardless  of  trouble.  "If  tliy  brother  be  not  nigh 
unto  thee,  and  if  thou  know  him  not,"  seek  him  out  and  find  him  if  possible. 

2.  Kindness  regardless  of  expense.  If  really  unable  to  find  the  owner,  feed  and  keep 
it  for  a  time  at  thine  own  expense.  "Then  thou  shalt  bring  it  unto  thine  own 
house,  and  it  shall  be  with  thee  until  thy  brother  seek  after  it."  If  such  care  must 
be  taken  for  the  ox,  what  great  anxiety  should  we  display  for  the  temporal  and 
spiritual  welfare  of  our  neighbour  himself!  III.  An  expression  of  humanity. 
**  Thou  shalt  not  hide  thyself."  Indifference  or  joy  in  the  misfortune  would  be 
cruelty  to  dumb  creatures  and  a  violation  of  the  common  rights  of  humanity.  1.  In 
restoring  the  lost.  Cattle  easily  go  astray  and  wander  over  the  fence  and  from 
the  fold.  If  seen  they  must  be  brought  back  and  not  hidden  away.  2.  In  helping 
up  the  fallen.  The  ass  ill-treated  and  over-laden  may  fall  down  through  rough  or 
slippery  roads.  Pity  must  prompt  a  helping  hand.  "Thou  shalt  surely  help  him 
to  lift  them  up  again."  Thus  common  justice  and  charity  are  taught  by  the  law 
of  nature  and  enforced  by  the  law  of  Moses.  Principles  which  anticipate  the  Gospel 
and  embody  themselves  in  one  of  its  grandest  precepts,  "Love  your  enemies." 
{J.  Wolfendale.)  Fraternal  respomibilities : — The  word  ** brother"  is  not  to  bo 
read  in  a  limited  sense,  as  if  referring  to  a  relation  by  blood.  That  is  evident  from 
the  expression  in  the  second  verse,  "If  thou  know  him  not."  The  reference  is 
general— to  a  brother-man.  In  Exodus  the  term  used  is  not  brother,  but  "enemy  " 
— "If  thine  enemy's  ox,  or  ass,  or  sheep  .  .  ."  It  is  needful  to  understand  this 
clearly,  lest  we  suppose  that  the  directions  given  in  the  Bible  are  merely  of  a 
domestic  and  limited  kind.  "Thou  shalt  not  see  thy  brother's  ox  or  his  sheep  go 
astray."  That  is  not  the  literal  rendering  of  the  term  ;  the  literal  rendering  would 
be,  '  *  Thou  shalt  not  see  thy  brother's  ox  or  his  sheep  driven  away  " — another  man 
behind  them,  and  driving  them  on  as  if  he  were  taking  them  to  his  own  field.  We 
are  not  to  see  actions  of  this  kind  and  be  quiet :  there  is  a  time  to  speak  ;  and  of 
all  times  calling  for  indignant  eloquence  and  protest  there  are  none  like  those  which 
are  marked  by  oppression  and  wrong-doing.  Adopting  this  principle,  how  does  the 
passage  open  itself  to  our  inquiry  ?  Thus — 1.  If  we  must  not  see  our  brother's  ox 
being  driven  away,  can  we  stand  back  and  behold  his  mind  being  forced  into  wrong 
or  evil  directions?  It  were  an  immoral  morality  to  contend  that  we  must  be 
anxious  about  the  man's  ox  but  care  nothing  about  the  man's  understanding.  We 
do  not  live  in  Deuteronomy  :  we  live  within  the  circle  of  the  Cross  ;  we  are  followers 
of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ ;  our  morality  or  our  philanthropy,  therefore,  does  not  end 
in  solicitude  regarding  ox,  or  sheep,  or  ass  :  we  are  called  to  the  broader  concern, 
the  tenderer  interest,  which  relates  to  the  human  mind  and  the  human  soul.  Take 
it  from  another  point  of  view.  2.  If  careful  about  the  sheep,  is  there  to  be  no  care 
concerning  the  man's  good  name  ?  We  are  told  that  to  steal  the  purse  is  to  steal 
trash — it  is  something — nothing  ;  'twas  mine,  'twas  his — a  mere  rearrangement  of 
property  ;  "  but  he  that  filches  from  me  my  good  name  robs  me  of  that  which  not 
enriches  him,  and  makes  me  poor  indeed. "  We  are  the  keepers  of  our  brother : 
his  good  name  is  ours.  When  the  reputation  of  a  Christian  man  goes  down  or  is 
being  driven  away,  the  sum-total  of  Christian  influence  is  diminishwi  ;  in  this  sense 
we  are  not  to  live  unto  ourselves  or  for  ourselves  ;  every  soul  is  part  of  the  common 
stock  of  humanity,  and  when  one  member  is  exalted  the  whole  body  is  raised  in  a 
worthy  ascension,  and  when  one  member  is  debased  or  wronged  or  robbed  a  felony 
has  been  committed  upon  the  consolidated  property  of  the  Church.  Thus  we  are 
led  into  philanthropic  relations,  social  trusteeships,  and  are  bound  one  to  another ; 
and  if  we  see  a  man's  reputation  driven  away  by  some  cruel  hand — even  though  the 
reputation  be  that  of  an  enemy — we  are  to  say,  "Be  just  and  fear  not," — let  us 
know  both  sides  of  the  case  ;  there  must  be  no  immoral  partiality ;  surely  in  the 
worst  of  cases  there  must  be  some  redeeming  points.     Take  it  from  another  point. 

3.  *'In  like  manner  shalt  thou  do  with  ...  his  raiment."  And  are  we  to  be 
careful  about  the  man's  raiment,  and  care  nothing  about  his  aspirations?  Is  it 
nothing  to  us  that  the  man  never  lifts  his  head  towards  the  wider  spaces,  and 
wonders  what  the  lights  are  that  glitter  in  the  distant  arch  ?  Is  it  nothing  to  us 
that  the  man  never  sighs  after  some  larger  sphere,  or  ponders  concerning  some  nobler 


CHAi    XXII.]  DEUTERONOMY.  405 

possibility  of  life  ?  Finding  a  man  driving  himself  away,  we  are  bound  to  arouse 
him  in  the  Creator's  name  and  to  accuse  him  of  the  worst  species  of  suicide.  4.  Can 
we  see  our  brother's  ass  being  driven  away  and  care  nothing  what  becomes  of  his 
child  ?  Save  the  children,  and  begin  your  work  as  soon  as  possible.  It  is  sad 
to  see  the  little  children  left  to  themselves  ;  and  therefore  ineffably  beautiful  to 
mark  the  concern  which  interests  itself  in  the  education  and  redemption  of  the 
young.  A  poet  says  he  was  nearer  heaven  in  his  childhood  than  he  ever  was  in 
after  days,  and  he  sweetly  prayed  that  he  might  return  through  his  yesterdays  and 
through  his  childhood  back  to  God.  That  is  chronologically  impossible— locally 
and  physically  not  to  be  done  ;  and  yet  that  is  the  very  miracle  which  is  to  be  per- 
formed in  the  soul — in  the  spirit ;  we  must  be  "  born  again."  It  is  a  coward's  trick 
to  close  the  eyes  whilst  wrong  is  being  done  in  order  that  we  may  not  see  it.  It  is 
easy  to  escape  distress,  perplexity,  and  to  flee  away  from  the  burdens  of  other  men  ; 
but  the  whole  word  is,  "  Thou  shalt  not  hide  thyself,"  but  "thou  shalt  suiely  help 
him."  Who  can  undervalue  a  Bible  which  speaks  in  such  a  tone  ?  The  proverb 
"Every  man  must  take  care  of  himself"  has  no  place  in  the  Book  of  God.  We 
must  take  care  of  one  another.  Christianity  means  nothing  if  it  does  not  mean  the 
unity  of  the  human  race,  the  common  rights  of  humanity  :  and  he  who  fails  to 
interpose  in  all  cases  of  injustice  and  wrong-doing,  or  suffering  which  he  can  relieve, 
may  be  a  great  theologian,  but  he  is  not  a  Christian.  {J.  Parker,  D.D.)  A  kind 
Jieart: — One  day  President  Lincoln  was  walking  out  with  his  secretary,  when  sud- 
denly he  stopped  by  a  shrub  and  gazed  into  it.  Stooping  down  he  ran  his  liand.-i 
through  the  twigs  and  leaves  as  if  to  take  something.  His  secretary  inquired  what 
he  was  after.  Said  Mr.  Lincoln,  *'  Here  is  a  little  bird  fallen  from  its  nest,  and  I 
am  trying  to  put  it  back  again."  True  kindness  ever  springs  instinctively  from 
lives  permeated  with  goodness.  "  Kind  hearts  are  more  than  coronets."  Help- 
ing up : — We  have  lately  been  doing  a  blessed  work  amongst  the  cabmen  of  Man- 
chester, many  of  whom  have  signed  the  pledge.  I  heard  the  other  night  tliat  one 
of  them  had  broken  his  pledge,  and  I  went  to  the  cab  rooms  to  look  a.ter  him.  I 
saw  him  there,  but  he  tried  to  avoid  me.  He  was  ashamed  to  face  me.  I  followed 
him  up,  and  at  last  he  presented  himself  before  me,  wearing  a  most  dejectel  look. 
I  said  to  him,  "When  you  are  driving  your  cab,  and  your  horse  falls  down,  what 
do  you  do  ? "     "I  jumps  off  the  box  and  tries  to  help  him  up  again. "     "That  is  it. 


my  friend,"  I  replied.  "  I  heard  you  had  fallen,  and  so  I  got  off  my  box  to  help 
youup.^  Will  you  get  up  ?  There  is  my  hand."  He  caught  hold  of  it  with  a  grasp 
like  a  vice,  and  said,  "I  will,  sir ;  before  God,  and  under  His  own  blue  heavens,  I 


promise  yon  that  I  will  not  touch  a  drop  of  strong  drink  again  ;  and  you  will  never 
have  to  regret  the  trouble  you  have  taken  with  me."  Oh,  Christian  friends,  there 
are  many  poor  drunkards  who  have  fallen  down.  "Will  you  not  get  off  the  box, 
and  help  them  up  ? "     (C.  GarreU.) 

Ver.  6.  The  -woman  shall  not  wear  that  which  pertaineth  unto  a  man. — 
Dominion  of  fashion : — God  thought  womanly  attire  of  enough  importance  to  have 
it  discussed  in  the  Bible.  Just  in  proportion  as  the  morals  of  a  country  or  an  age 
are  depressed  is  that  law  defied.  Show  me  the  fashion-plates  of  any  century  from 
the  time  of  the  Deluge  to  this,  and  I  will  tell  you  the  exact  state  of  public  morals. 
Ever  and  anon  we  have  imported  from  France,  or  perhaps  invented  on  this  side 
the  sea,  a  style  that  proposes  as  far  as  possible  to  make  women  dress  like  men. 
The  costumes  of  the  countries  are  different,  and  in  the  same  country  may  change, 
but  there  is  a  divinely  ordered  dissimilarity  which  must  be  for  ever  observed.  Any 
divergence  from  this  is  administrative  of  vice,  and  runs  against  the  keen  thrust 
of  the  text.  In  my  text,  as  by  a  parable,  it  is  made  evident  that  Moses,  the 
inspired  writer,  as  vehemently  as  ourselves,  reprehends  the  effeminate  man  and  the 
masculine  woman.  1.  My  text  also  sanctions  fashion.  Indeed,  it  sets  a  fashion! 
There  is  a  great  deal  of  senseless  cant  on  the  subject  of  fashion.  A  woman  or  man 
who  does  not  regard  it  is  unfit  for  good  neighbourhood.  The  only  question  is,  what 
is  right  fa-shion  and  what  is  wrong  fashion.  Fashion  has  been  one  of  the  most 
potent  of  reformers,  and  one  of  the  vilest  of  usurpers.  Sometimes  it  has  been  an 
angel  from  heaven,  and  at  others  it  has  been  the  mother  of  abomination.  As  the 
world  grows  better  there  will  be  as  much  fashion  as  now,  but  it  will  be  a  righteous 
fasliion.  In  the  future  life  white  robes  always  have  been  and  always  will  be  in  the 
fashion.  The  accomplishments  of  life  are  in  no  wise  productive  of  effeminacy  or 
enervation.  Good  mannera  and  a  respect  for  the  tastes  of  others  are  indis- 
pensable.     The  Good  Book  speaks  favourably  of  those  who  are  a   "peculiar" 


406  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxii. 

people ;  but  that  does  not  sanction  the  behaviour  of  queer  people.  There  is  no 
excuse,  under  any  circumstances,  for  not  being  and  acting  the  lady  or  gentleman. 
Eudeness  is  sin.  As  Christianity  advances  there  will  be  better  apparel,  higher 
styles  of  architecture,  more  exquisite  adornments,  sweeter  music,  grander  pictures, 
more  correct  behaviour,  and  more  thorough  ladies  and  gentlemen.  But  there  is 
another  story  to  be  told.  2.  Wrong  fashion  is  to  be  charged  with  many  of  the 
worst  evils  of  society,  and  its  path  has  often  been  strewn  with  the  bodies  of  the 
slain.  It  has  often  set  up  a  false  standard  by  which  people  are  to  be  judged.  Our 
common  sense,  as  well  as  all  the  Divine  intimations  on  the  subject,  teach  us  that 
people  ought  to  be  esteemed  according  to  their  individual  and  moral  attainments. 
The  man  who  has  the  most  nobility  of  soul  should  be  first,  and  he  who  has  the 
least  of  such  qualities  should  stand  last.  Truth,  honour,  charity,  heroism,  self- 
sacrifice  should  win  highest  favour;  but  inordinate  fashion  says,  "Count  not  a 
woman's  virtues  ;  count  her  adornments."  "Look  not  at  the  contour  of  the  head, 
but  see  the  way  she  combs  her  hair."  3.  "Wrong  fashion  is  productive  of  a  most 
ruinous  strife.  The  expenditure  of  many  households  is  adjusted  by  what  their 
neighbours  have,  not  by  what  they  themselves  can  afford  to  have ;  and  the  great 
anxiety  is  as  to  who  shall  have  the  finest  house  and  the  most  costly  equipage. 

4.  Again,  wrong  fashion  makes  people  unnatural  and  untrue.  It  is  a  factory  from 
which  has  come  forth  more  hollow  pretences  and  unmeaning  flatteries  than  the 
Lowell  mills  ever  turned  out  shawls  and  garments.  Fashion  is  the  greatest  of  all 
liars.  It  has  made  society  insincere.  You  know  not  what  to  believe.  When  people 
ask  you  to  come,  you  do  not  know  whether  or  not  they  want  you  to  come.  When 
they  send  their  regards,  you  do  not  know  whether  it  is  an  expression  of  their  heart 
•or  an  external  civility.     We  have  learned  to  take  almost  everything  at  a  discount. 

5.  Again,  wrong  fashion  is  incompatible  with  happiness.  Those  who  depend  for 
their  comfort  upon  the  admiration  of  others  are  subject  to  frequent  disappointment. 
Somebody  will  criticise  their  appearance  or  surpass  them  in  brilliancy,  or  will 
receive  more  attention.  Oh,  the  jealousy  and  detraction  and  heartburnings  of 
those  who  move  in  this  bewildered  maze  !  Poor  butterflies  !  Bright  wings  do  not 
always  bring  happiness.  6.  Again,  devotion  to  wrong  fashion  is  productive  of  physical 
disease,  mental  imbecility,  and  spiritual  withering.  Apparel  insuflficient  to  keep 
out  the  cold  and  the  rain,  or  so  fitted  upon  the  person  that  the  functions  of  life  are 
restrained  ;  late  hours  filled  with  excitement  and  feasting  ;  free  draughts  of  wine 
that  make  one  not  beastly  intoxicated,  but  only  fashionably  drunk  ;  and  luxurious 
indolence — are  the  instruments  by  which  this  unreal  life  pushes  its  disciples  into 
valetudinarianism  and  the  grave.  Wrong  fashion  is  the  world's  undertaker,  and 
drives  thousands  of  hearses  to  churchyards  and  cemeteries.  7.  But,  worse  than 
that,  this  folly  is  an  intellectual  depletion.  What  is  the  matter  with  that  woman 
wrought  up  into  the  agony  of  despair  ?  Oh,  her  niuff"  is  out  of  fashion  !  8.  Worse 
than  all,  this  folly  is  not  satisfied  until  it  has  extirpated  every  moral  sentiment 
and  blasted  the  soul.  A  wardrobe  is  the  rock  upon  which  many  a  soul  has  been 
riven.  The  excitement  of  a  luxurious  life  has  been  the  vortex  that  has  swallowed 
up  more  souls  than  the  maelstrom  off  Norway  ever  destroyed  ships.  What  room 
for  elevating  themes  in  a  heart  filled  with  the  trivial  and  unreal  ?  {T.  De  Witt 
Tahnage. ) 

Vers.  6,  7.  If  a  bird's  nest  chance  to  be  before  thee. — How  to  take  a  bird's  nest : 
— Does  God  take  thought  for  birds,  then  ?  Yes,  even  for  birds.  They  sow  not, 
neither  do  they  reap  ;  yet  our  heavenly  Father  feedeth  them.  Christ  cared  for 
birds,  then  ;  and  therefore  we  may  be  sure  that  God  cares  for  them.  And  this  God, 
says  Jesus,  is  your  "  Father."  He  loves  you  even  more  than  He  loves  the  birds,  and 
guards  you  with  a  more  watchful  care.  You  would  laugh  if  I  were  to  ask  you. 
What  does  your  mother  love  best,  the  canary  that  sings  in  the  cage,  or  the  little 
girl  who  sits  in  her  lap  ?  And  you  may  be  quite  as  sure  that  you  are  "better  "  to 
your  Father  in  heaven  "than  many  sparrows"  ;  yes,  and  better  than  all  the  birds 
He  ever  made.  But  if  you  are  so  dear  to  God,  your  Father,  should  you  not  love 
Him  because  He  loves  you,  and  prove  your  love  by  caring  for  what  He  cares  for  ? 
Well,  He  cares  for  birds.  He  marks  the  trees  "where  the  birds  build  their  nests," 
and  "sing  among  the  branches  "  ;  and  He  shows  us,  in  one  of  the  Psalms  (civ.  12, 
17),  that  He  observes  what  kinds  of  trees  the  difterent  birds  select  for  use  ;  does  He 
not  say,  "  As  for  the  stork,  the  fir-trees  are  her  house  "  ?  Now,  I  dare  say  some  of 
you  boys  are  pleased  to  find  that  there  is  such  a  law,  or  rule,  as  this  in  the  Bible. 
You  have  not  been  quite  sure  in  your  minds,  perhaps,  whether  it  was  right  or 


CHAP.  XIII.]  DEUTERONOMY.  407 

wrong  to  take  a  bird's  nest,  or  even  to  take  the  eggs  from  the  neat.  And,  I  dare 
say,  when  you  heard  me  read  my  text  you  thought,  "  Well,  that's  a  capital  rule  ! 
If  I  mustn't  take  the  old  bird,  at  least  I  may  take  the  young  ones  or  the  eggs." 
But  are  you  sure  that  that  is  the  right  way  to  read  the  Kule  ?  But,  to  be  honest 
with  you,  I  am  afraid  it  is  wrong.  As  God  loves  the  birds  and  takes  care  of  them, 
so  will  you,  if  you  are  good  children  of  our  Father  who  is  in  heaven.  And  is  it 
taking  care  of  them  to  rob  them  of  the  beautiful  little  houses  which  they  have  spent 
so  much  toil  in  building  ?  Of  course,  if  we  really  want  eggs  or  birds  we  may  take 
them,  whether  we  want  them  as  food  for  the  body  or  food  for  the  mind  ;  for  God 
has  put  them  all  at  our  service.  But  to  take  them  wantonly,  without  thought, 
without  necessity,  simply  for  the  fun  of  it,  is  to  wrong  creatures  whom  God  loves. 

I,  It  set  a  limit  to  the  natural  geeed  of  men.  What  would  be  the  first 
impulse  of  a  Jew  who  found  the  nest  of  a  quail,  or  a  partridge,  with  the  mother- 
bird  sitting  on  the  young  ones  or  the  eggs  ?  Of  course,  his  first  impulse  would  be 
to  take  all  he  could  get,  the  old  bird  as  well  as  the  eggs  or  the  young.  But  to  do 
that  might  be  very  poor  thrift,  and  very  poor  morality.  For  in  destroying  the 
parent-bird  with  the  young  the  man  might  be  helping  to  destroy  a  whole  breed  of 
valuable  birds.  He  would  get  a  dinner  for  to-day,  but  he  would  be  lessening  his 
chance  of  finding  one  to-morrow.  He  would  be  helping  himself,  but  he  might  also 
be  injuring  his  neighbour.  "  Don't  be  greedy,"  then,  is  the  first  lesson  we  find  in 
our  bird's  nest.     "  Don't  snatch  at  all  you  can  for  to-day,  careless  about  to-morrow." 

II.  Another  lesson  taught  by  this  law  about  a  bird's  nest  is  this — It  brings  thk 
law  of  God  into  the  little  things  of  life.  And  that  is  just  where  we  most 
need  it,  and  are  most  apt  to  forget  it.  HI.  But  this  rule  about  birds-nesting 
teaches  us  that  all  love  is  sacred  ;  and  this  is  the  most  beautiful  lesson  I  have 
found  in  it.  Now,  think.  If  you  were  to  find  a  nest,  and  saw  the  mother-bird 
with  a  brood  of  young  ones  under  her  wings,  what  would  it  be  that  would  give  you 
a  good  chance  of  catching  her  ?  It  would  simply  be  her  love  for  her  nestlings.  If 
she  cared  only  for  herself  she  could  fly  away  out  of  your  reach.  But  if  the  love  of 
a  bird  is  sacred,  how  much  more  sacred  is  the  love  of  a  boy  or  a  girl,  of  a  woman  or 
a  man  !  All  love  is  sacred.  It  is  base  and  wicked  to  take  advantage  of  it,  to  turn 
it  against  itself,  to  use  it  for  selfish  ends.  I  would  have  you  think,  therefore,  how 
great  a  power  love  gives  you,  and  how  base  and  wrong  it  is  to  abuse  that  power. 
Love  is  the  strongest  thing  in  the  world.  People  will  do  for  love  what  they  would 
do  for  nothing  else.  And  there  are  those  who  know  that,  and  who  take  such  base 
advantage  of  it  that  they  sometimes  ruin  the  character  and  spoil  the  life  of  those 
who  love  and  trust  them.  There  is  nothing  in  the  world  so  wicked,  so  base,  so  vile. 
If  you  have  parents,  or  brothers  and  sisters,  or  young  companions  and  friends,  who 
love  you  dearly,  oh  take  heed  what  you  do  !  Their  love  will  be  the  comfort  and  joy 
of  your  lives  if  you  retain  and  respond  to  it.  But  that  love  puts  them  in  your 
power.  You  may  hurt  them  through  it,  and  grieve  them  through  it,  and  make 
them  go  wrong  when,  but  for  you,  they  would  have  gone  right.  And  if  you  do, 
you  will  be  scorned  by  all  good  men  and  women.  If  you  do,  what  will  you  say  to 
the  God  of  all  love,  and  what  will  He  say  to  you,  when  you  stand  before  Him  ? 
And  that  brings  me  to  the  very  last  word  I  have  to  say  to  you.  Who  is  it  that 
loves  you  best  of  all  ? — most  purely,  most  forgivingly,  most  tenderly  ?  And  perhaps 
you  are  abusing  God's  love.  {S.  Cox,  D.D.)  The  law  of  the  Urd's  nest:— Does 
God  think  it  worth  while  to  make  mention  of  the  nest  of  a  bird  ?  Yes,  He  does. 
In  those  old  Hebrew  days,  if  the  people  saw  a  lad  coming  with  a  bird's  nest,  and 
bringing  the  old  bird  as  well  as  the  young,  they  could  tell  him  that  his  father  and 
mother  would  most  likely  live  to  attend  his  luntral  I  He  would  not  live  to  be  a 
grey-headed  man.  No  ;  length  of  days  went  with  obedience.  Birds'  nests  are 
much  more  wonderful  things  than  many  people  think.  What  labour,  skill,  and 
patience  each  little  builder  displays  before  he  has  a  home  for  his  bride  !  Has  it 
ever  occurred  to  you  that  each  kind  of  bird  builds  its  own  kind  of  nest  ?  The  thrush 
makes  his  home  very  like  the  blackbird,  only  always  pai)ers  it.  By  a  clever  mixture 
of  decayed  wood  and  clay  he  puts  a  lining  inside  the  home.  But  it  is  in  foreign 
lands,  where  birds  have  other  enemies  besides  men  to  fear,  that  greater  ingenuity  is 
displayed.  Some  build  their  little  homes  so  as  to  hang  from  the  bough  of  a  tree 
right  over  a  sheet  of  water,  so  that  if  the  monkey  finds  the  nest  he  cannot  get  at  it, 
because  his  weight  would  sink  him  into  the  water.  The  entrance  to  the  nest  of 
others  is  made  at  the  bottom,  and  the  little  house  is  suspended  from  the  branch  of  a 
tree.  There  is  one  kind  of  bird  called  the  tailor,  who  sews  two  leaves  together  so 
as  to  deceive  the  eye,  for  they  look  like  one  leaf  and  not  two.     We  should  think  it  a 


408  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxu. 

■wonderful  thing  if  we  saw  a  horse  building  its  own  stable,  yet  this  is  not  more 
■wonderful  than  the  bird  building  its  own  dwelling.  God  has  shown  His  wisdom 
and  power  in  putting  the  skill  into  the  life  of  the  bird,  and  this  skill  gives  him 
rights.  We  always  count  it  due  to  originality  that  it  should  be  benefited  by  its 
productions.  Invention  gives  rights.  If  this  be  so,  does  not  God's  originality  give 
Him  a  claim?  What  I  am  anxious  to  teach  is  this:  Where  you  see  the  mark  of 
God's  hand,  listen  for  His  voice.  Where  creation  comes,  kingly  claims  must  be 
met.  Let  this  rule  be  followed,  and  what  a  change  would  come  over  the  world ! 
None  but  God  can  make  things  grow.  Ought  He  not,  then,  to  be  revered  and 
obeyed  wherever  He  creates  ?  Who  but  God  could  have  designed  the  horse,  so 
strong  and  fleet  ?  What  a  marvellous  combination  of  muscular  and  nervous  force 
there  is  in  the  noble  animal  !  Did  the  Creator  endue  this  splendid  beast  with  this 
vigour  and  activity  that  men  should  meet  by  the  thousand  to  win  or  lose  money  1 
But  it  is  time  we  considered  "the  law  of  the  bird's  nest. "  If  you  saw  the  mother- 
bird  sitting,  you  might  take  eggs  or  young  birds,  but  you  must  "let  the  dam  go." 
Why  ?  Because  God  sees  that  it  is  not  wise  to  take  all  that  is  within  your  reach. 
Let  the  old  bird  fly  ;  she  will  live  to  have  another  brood.  This  law  acts  beneficially 
on  all  sides.  If  George  III.  had  known  this,  he  would  not  have  been  so  greedy  with 
the  settlers  in  America.  He  strove  to  grasp  all,  and  lost  the  United  States.  What 
might  not  that  land  have  been  under  the  Union  Jack  ?  It  is  a  great  nation,  but  not 
•what  it  might  have  been.  And  how  it  would  have  nourished  England,  instead  of 
being  her  rival !  Many  a  family  would  have  been  saved  irritation  and  heart-break 
if  grasping  at  all  had  not  been  the  rule.  Taking  all  within  reach  often  means  that 
affection  is  slain  by  selfishness,  and  duty  driven  away  for  want  of  knowing  that  God 
"Wants  you  to  leave  something  for  others  to  enjoy.  When  will  Capital  and  Labour 
learn  that  to  take  all  you  can  is  to  injure  self?  To  grasp  at  too  much  is  to  lose 
greatly.  When  men  have  learned  to  let  the  old  bird  go,  strikes  and  lock-outs  wiU 
be  no  more.  Commerce  flourishes  by  not  grasping  at  too  much.  One  of  the 
cleverest  tr«idesmen  I  ever  knew  told  me  that  one  secret  of  his  success  was  the  way 
he  bought  his  stock.  He  had  great  skiU  in  this  matter,  and,  said  he,  "  When  I  buy 
well,  I  say,  how  much  of  this  extra  profit  can  I  give  to  my  customers  ? "  Is  it  any 
wonder  that  his  shop  had  a  name  for  good  stuff"  at  a  low  price,  and  that  he  made 
money  when  others  lost  it  ?  When  men  have  learned  to  let  the  old  bird  go  they 
"will  keep  the  Sabbath  day  holy.  God  gives  men  six  days  but  claims  the  seventh. 
But  we  shall  fail  to  get  all  the  good  taiight  in  the  text  if  we  do  not  see  that  here 
we  have  God's  tribute  to  maternal  affection.  It  is  wonderful  how  brave  a  little  timid 
bird  will  become  in  the  defence  of  her  young.  She  will  sit  there,  and  not  try  to 
save  herself  in  her  anxiety  for  the  helpless  brood  which  nestles  under  her  wings.  Is 
there  some  poor  woman  reading  this  who  wonders  how  she  is  to  provide  for  the 
children,  now  that  her  husband  is  no  more  ?  Poor  widow,  dost  thou  not  see  that  if 
God  cares  for  the  bird's  nest  He  cares  for  thy  home,  and  if  He  would  protect  the 
thrush  or  the  wren  He  will  not  forget  thy  little  ones  ?  Does  not  God  S2>eak  to 
young  people  here  ?  If  He  thinks  so  much  of  a  mother's  love  as  to  mark  the  affec- 
tion of  a  bird  for  her  young,  how  does  He  feel  when  He  sees  us  treat  our  parents 
with  neglect  or  cruelty  ?  It  is  an  old,  and  we  fear  true,  proverb,  that  "The  old  cat 
catches  mice  for  the  kittens,  but  the  kitten  never  brings  the  old  cat  one."  Should 
that  old  saying  apply  to  us  ?  Yes,  God  has  shown  His  approval  here  of  a  mother's 
affection.  Do  not  let  any  of  us  feel  as  some  men  feel  when  they  are  summoned  to 
see  their  mother  die.  I  don't  want  you  to  feel  as  a  man  did  who  had  been  sent  for 
to  bid  his  mother  good-bye.  She  had  worked  hard  for  her  large  family ;  washed 
and  baked  and  wrought  to  bring  them  up  and  save  a  bit  of  money  to  start  them  in 
the  world  ;  and  just  when  she  ought  to  have  been  in  her  prime  she  broke  down  and 
had  to  die.  As  the  young  man  looked  at  her  face,  wrinkled  and  faded,  he  thought 
of  the  way  she  had  toiled  for  her  children,  he  remembered  that  he  had  never  shown 
her  any  attention,  had  not  even  kissed  her  since  he  was  a  little  child,  and  the  tears 
came  into  his  eyes !  He  bent  down  and  put  his  lips  to  hers,  lovingly  though 
awkwardly,  and  said,  "  You  have  been  a  good  mother  to  us,  you  have  t^t !  "  She 
looked  at  him  as  though  she  could  not  understand  the  kiss  and  the  words  of 
appreciation,  and  said  with  a  sigh,  "Eh,  John,  I  wish  thou  had  said  so  before  !'* 
(T.  Chamjcmess.)  The  bird's  nest : — We  are  very  much  struck  with  this  law,  not 
because  it  has  to  do  with  a  matter  apparently  trifling,  but  because  there  is  annexed 
to  it  the  same  promise  as  to  commandments  of  the  highest  requirement.  The 
commandment  may  have  to  do  with  a  trivial  thing :  but  it  is  evident  enough  that 
it  cannot  be  a  trivial  commandment ;  indeed,  no  commandment  can  be  which  pro- 


CHAP.  XXII.].  DEUTERONOMY. 


409 


ceeds  from  God.   Let  us  endeavour  to  ascertain  on  what  principles  the  precept  before 
us  is  founded,  what  dispositions  it  inculcates,  and  we  shall  find  that  there  is  no 
cause  for  surprise  in  the  annexment  of  a  promise  of  long  life  to  obedience  to  the 
direction,  "  If  a  bird's  nest  chance  to  be,"  &c.     Now,  you  will  see  at  once  that,  had 
the  precept  been  of  a  more  stringent  character,  it  might,  in  some  sense,  have 'been 
more  easily  vindicated  and  explained.     Had  it  forbidden  altogether  the  meddling 
with  the  nest,  had  it  required  that  not  only  should  the  mother-bird  be  let  go,  but 
that  neither  the  young  birds  nor  the  eggs  should  be  taken,  it  would  at  once  have 
been  said  that  God  was  graciously  protecting  the  inferior  creation,  and  forbidding 
man  to  act  towards  them  with  any  kind  of  cruelty.     But  the  precept  permits  the 
taking  the  nest ;  it  does  not  even  hint  that  it  might  be  better  to  let  the  nest  alone  ; 
it  simply  confines  itself  to  protecting  the  parent-bird,  and  thus  allows,  if  it  does  not 
actually  direct,  what  may  be  thought  an  inhuman  thing,  the  carrying  ofi"  the  young 
to  the  manifest  disappointment  and  pain  of  the  mother.    It  should  not,  however,  be 
unobserved  that  the  precept  does  not  touch  the  case  in  which  there  is  an  actual  look- 
ing for  the  nest.    It  is  not  a  direction  as  to  what  should  be  done  if  a  nest  were  found 
after  diligent  search,  but  only  as  to  what  should  be  done  if  a  nest  were  found 
by  mere  chance  or  accident.     Without  pretending  to  argue  that  God  would  have 
forbidden  the  searching  for  the  nest,  it  is  highly  probable  that  there  was  something 
significant  in  this  direction  as  to  taking  the  nest,  in  the  particular  case  when  that 
nest  had  been  unwisely  placed.     We  are  sure,  from  various  testimonies  of  Scripture, 
that  God  has  designed  to  instruct  us  in  and  through  the  inferior  creation,  the  birds 
of  the  air  and  the  beasts  of  the  field  being  often  appealed  to  when  men  have  to  be 
taught  and  admonished.     And  we  know  not,  therefore,  that  there  can  be  anything 
far-fetched  in  supposing  that,  by  sanctioning  a  sort  of  injury  to  the  bird,  which  had 
built  its  nest  in  an  insecure  place,  God  meant  to  teach  us  that,  if  we  will  not  take 
due  precautions  for  our  own  safety  we  are  not  to  expect  the  shield  of  His  protection. 
But  now  as  to  the  permission  itself.     Were  not  the  Israelites  here  taught  to  be 
moderate  in  their  desires?    It  was  like  giving  a   lesson  against  covetousness,  a 
lesson  so  constructed  as  to  be  capable  of  being  reproduced  in  great  variety  of  circum- 
stances, when  the  finder  of  a  prize,  who  might  fancy  himself  at  liberty  to  appropriate 
the  whole,  was  required  to  content  himself  with  a  part.     There  was  also  in  the  pre- 
cept a  lesson  against  recklessness  or  waste.     It  required  man,  whilst  supplying  his 
present  wants,  to  have  due  regard  to  his  future  ;  yea,  and  to  the  wants  of  others  as 
well  as  to  his  own.     You  may  apply  the  principle  to  a  hundred  cases.     Whenever 
men  live  upon  the  capital,  when  the  interest  would  suffice  ;  whenever  they  recklessly 
consume  all  their  earnings,  though  those  earnings  might  enable  them  to  lay  some- 
thing by ;  when,  so  long  as,  by  eager  grasping,  they  can  secure  what  they  like  for 
themselves,  they  are  utterly  indifferent  as  to  interfering  with  the  supplies  and 
enjoyments  of  others— in  every  such  case  they  are  violating  the  precept  before  us  ; 
they  are  taking  the  old  bird  with  the  young :  as,  on  the  other  hand,  by  treating  as 
a  sin  anything  like  wastefulness,  by  a  prudent  management  of  the  gifts  and  mercies 
of  God,  by  such  a  wise  husbandry  of  resources  as  shall  prove  a  consciousness  that 
the  Divine  liberality,  in  place  of  sanctioning  extravagance,  should  be  a  motive  to 
economy,  they  may  be  said  to  be  virtually  obeying  the  precept ;  they  are  taking  the 
young,  but  letting  the  dam  go.    But  now  let  us  look  more  narrowly  into  the  reasons 
of  the  precept :  we  shall  probably  find,  if  we  examine  the  peculiarities  of  the  case, 
that  the  commandment  before  us  has  a  yet  more  direct  and  extensive  application. 
It  could  only  be,  you  will  observe,  the  attachment  of  the  mother-bird  to  its  young 
which,  for  the  most  part,  would  put  it  in  the  power  of  the  finder  of  the  nest  to  take 
both  together.     And  when  you  bring  this  circumstance  into  the  account  you  can 
hardly  doubt  that  one  great  reason  why  God  protected  the  mother-bird  by  an 
express  commandment  was,  that  He  might  point  out  the  excellence  of  parental 
affection,  and  teach  us  that  we  were  not  to  take  advantage  of  such  an  afifection,  in 
order  to  any  injury  to  the  parties  who  displayed  it.     You  must  be  all  quite  aware 
that  the  affection  which  one  party  bears  to  another  may  be  taken  advantage  of,  and 
that,  too,  to  his  manifest  detriment.     For  example,  circumstances  place  the  child  of 
another  in  your  power  ;  you  are  about  to  oppress  or  ill-use  that  child  ;  the  parent 
entreats ;  you  agree  to  release  the  child,  but  only  on  conditions  with  which  the 
parent  would  never  have  complied  had  it  not  been  for  the  strong  pleadings  of 
natural  affection— what  do  you  do  in  such  a  case  but  make  use  of  a  power,  derived 
solely  from  the  parent's  love,  to  effect  the  parent's  injury  ?  you  seize,  so  to  speak, 
the  mother-bird,  when  it  is  only  her  being  the  mother-bird  which  has  given  you  the 
opportunity  of  seizure.     But  evidently  the  involved  principle  is  of  very  wide  appli- 


410  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  chap.  xxii. 


cation.  A  parent  may  take  improper  advantage  of  a  child's  love,  a  child  of  a 
parent's.  A  parent  may  work  on  the  affections  of  a  child,  urging  the  child,  by  the 
love  which  he  bears  to  a  father  or  mother,  to  do  something  wrong,  something 
against  which  conscience  remonstrates  ;  this  is  a  case  in  which  improper  advantage  is 
taken  of  affection,  or  injurious  use  is  made  of  a  power  which,  as  in  the  case  of  the 
bird  and  her  young,  nothing  but  strong  affection  has  originated.  But  our  text  has 
yet  to  be  considered  under  another  point  of  view.  We  have  hitherto  contended 
that,  though  it  be  apparently  an  insignificant  matter  with  which  the  commandment 
before  us  is  concerned,  principles  are  involved  of  a  high  order  and  a  wide  applica- 
tion,  so  that  there  is  no  reason  for  surprise  at  finding  long  life  promised  as  the 
reward  of  obedience.  But  we  will  now  assume  the  Jews'  opinion  to  have  been  cor- 
rect ;  they  were  wont  to  say  of  this  commandment,  that  it  was  the  least  amongst  the 
commandments  of  Moses.  Admit  it  to  have  been  so  ;  yet  is  there  any  cause  for 
wonder  that  such  a  blessing  as  long  life  should  be  promised  by  way  of  recompense  to 
obedience  ?  God  enjoins  a  certain  thing  ;  but  we  can  hardly  bring  ourselves  to  obey, 
simply  because  He  has  enjoined  it.  We  have  our  inquiries  to  urge— why  has  He 
enjoined  it?  if  it  be  an  indifferent  thing,  we  want  to  know  why  He  should 
have  made  it  the  subject  of  a  law  ;  why  not  have  let  it  alone  ?  Why  not  ?  Because, 
we  may  venture  to  reply,  He  wishes  to  test  the  principle  of  obedience  ;  He  wishes  to 
Bee  whether  His  will  and  His  word  are  sufficient  for  us.  In  order  to  this.  He  must 
legislate  upon  things  which  in  themselves  are  indifferent,  neither  morally  good  nor 
bad  ;  He  must  not  confine  laws  to  such  matters  as  robbing  a  neighbour's  house,  on 
which  conscience  is  urgent :  He  must  extend  them  to  such  matters  as  taking  a  bird's 
nest,  on  which  conscience  is  silent.  It  is  the  same  as  with  a  child.  He  is  walking 
in  a  stranger's  garden,  and  you  forbid  his  picking  fruit ;  he  knows  that  the  fruit  is 
not  his,  and  therefore  feels  a  reason  for  prohibition.  But  he  is  walking  on  a  cona- 
mon,  and  you  forbid  his  picking  wild  flowers  ;  he  knows  that  no  one  has  property  in 
these  flowers,  and  therefore  he  cannot  see  any  reason  for  your  prohibition.  Suppose 
him,  however,  to  obey  in  both  cases,  abstaining  alike  from  the  flowers  and  the 
fruit,  in  which  case  does  he  show  most  of  the  principle  of  obedience,  most  of  respect 
for  your  authority  and  of  submission  to  your  will  ?  Surely,  when  he  does  not  touch 
the  flowers,  which  he  sees  no  reason  for  not  touching,  rather  than  when  he  does  not 
gather  the  fruit,  which  he  feels  that  he  can  have  no  right  to  gather.  It  is  exactly 
the  same  with  God  and  ourselves.  He  may  forbid  things  which  we  should  have  felt 
to  be  wrong,  even  had  they  not  been  forbidden ;  He  may  forbid  things  which  we 
should  not  have  felt  wrong,  nay,  which  would  not  have  been  wrong  unless  He  had 
forbidden  them.  But  in  which  case  is  our  obedience  most  put  to  the  proof?  Not, 
surely,  as  to  the  thing  criminal  even  without  a  commandment ;  but  as  to  the  thing 
indifferent  till  there  was  a  commandment.     {H.  Melvill,  B.D.)  Bird's  nest: — 

A  singular  word  to  be  in  a  Book  which  we  might  have  expected  to  be  wholly  occupied 
with  spiritual  revelation.  Men  are  anxious  to  know  something  about  the  unseen 
world,  and  the  mystery  which  lies  at  the  heart  of  things  and  palpitates  throughout 
the  whole  circle  of  observable  nature,  and  yet  they  are  called  upon  to  pay  attention 
to  the  treatment  of  birds'  nests.  Is  this  any  departure  from  the  benevolent  and 
redeeming  spirit  of  the  Book  ?  On  the  contrary,  this  is  a  vivid  illustration  of  the 
minuteness  of  Divine  government,  and  as  such  it  affords  the  beginning  of  an  argu- 
ment which  must  for  ever  accumulate  in  volume  and  force,  on  the  ground  that  if 
God  is  so  careful  of  a  bird's  nest  He  must  be  proportionately  careful  of  all 
things  of  higher  quality.  Jesus  Christ  so  used  nature.  "If,  then,  God  so  clothe 
the  grass,"  said  He,  "how  much  more  will  He  clothe  you,  0  ye  of  little 
faith?"  So  we  may  add,  If  God  is  so  careful  of  birds'  nests,  what  must 
He  be  of  human  hearts,  and  human  homes,  and  the  destinies  of  the  human 
family?  God's  beneficence  is  wonderfully  displayed  in  the  care  of  the  birds' 
nests.  God  is  kind  in  little  things  as  well  as  in  great.  The  quality  of  His 
love  is  one,  whether  it  be  shown  in  the  redemption  of  the  race,  in  num- 
bering the  hairs  of  our  head,  in  ordering  our  steps,  or  giving  His  beloved  sleep. 
Did  we  but  know  it,  we  should  find  that  all  law  is  beneficent — the  law  of  restriction 
as  well  as  the  law  of  liberty.  The  law  which  would  keep  a  man  from  doing  injury 
to  himself,  though  it  may  appear  to  impair  the  prerogative  of  human  will,  is  pro- 
foundly l4neficent.  Was  not  man  to  have  dominion  over  the  fowls  of  the  air? 
Truly  so,  but  dominion  is  to  be  exercised  in  mercy.  The  treatment  of  birds'  nests 
is  a  sure  indication  of  the  man's  whole  character.  He  who  can  wantonly  destroy  a 
bird's  nest  can  wantonly  do  a  hundred  other  things  of  the  same  kind.  To  be  cruel 
at  all  is  to  be  cruel  all  through  and  through  the  substance  and  quality  of  the 


CHAP.  XXII.]  DEUTERONOMY.  411 

character.  Men  cannot  be  cruel  to  birds'  nests  and  gentle  to  children's  cradles.  The 
man  who  can  take  care  of  a  bird's  nest  because  it  is  right  to  do  so — not  because  of 
any  pleasure  which  he  has  in  a  bird's  nest — is  a  man  who  cannot  be  indifferent  to 
the  homes  of  children  and  the  circumstances  of  his  fellow-creatures  generally.  It 
is  a  mistake  to  suppose  that  we  can  be  wanton  up  to  a  given  point,  and  then  begin 
to  be  considerate  and  benevolent.  We  are  all  apt  scholars  in  a  bad  school,  and 
learn  more  in  one  lesson  theie  than  we  can  learn  through  much  discipline  in  the 
school  of  God.  The  little  tyrannies  of  childhood  often  exj.lain  the  great  despotism 
of  mature  life.  Is  not  kindness  an  influence  that  penetrates  the  whole  life,  having 
manifold  expression,  alike  upward,  downward,  and  laterally,  touching  all  human 
things,  all  inferiors  and  dependants,  and  every  harmless  and  defenceless  life  ?  On 
the  other  hand,  we  are  to  be  most  careful  not  to  encourage  any  merely  pedantic 
feeling.  Hence  the  caution  I  have  before  given  respecting  the  purpose  for  which  a 
man  considerately  handles  even  a  bird's  nest.  Every  day  we  see  how  possible  it  is 
for  a  man  to  be  very  careful  of  his  horse,  and  yet  to  hold  the  comfort  of  his  servant 
very  lightly.  We  have  all  seen,  too,  how  possible  it  is  for  a  man  to  be  more  careful 
of  his  dogs  than  of  his  children.  But  the  care  which  is  thus  lavished  upon  horse 
or  dog  is  not  the  care  dictated  by  moral  considerations,  or  inspired  by  benevolence  ; 
it  is  what  I  have  termed  a  pedantic  feeling,  it  is  a  mere  expression  of  vanity,  it  is  not 
an  obedience  to  conscience  or  moral  law.  There  are  men  who  would  not  on  any 
account  break  up  a  bird's  nest  in  the  garden,  who  yet  would  allow  a  human  creature 
to  die  of  hunger.  The  bird's  nest  may  be  regarded  as  an  ornament  of  the  garden, 
or  an  object  of  interest,  or  a  centre  around  which  various  influences  may  gather  ; 
so  whatever  care  may  be  bestowed  upon  it,  it  is  not  to  be  regarded  as  concerning  the 
conscience  or  the  higher  nature.  We  must  beware  of  decorative  morality ;  calcu- 
lated consideration  for  inferior  things  ;  for  selfishness  is  very  subtle  in  its  operation, 
and  sometimes  it  assumes  with  perfect  hypocrisy  the  airs  of  benevolence  and 
religion.  What  if  in  all  our  carefulness  for  dumb  animals  we  think  little  of  break- 
ing a  human  heart  by  sternness  or  neglect  ?  Kindness  to  the  lower  should  become 
still  tenderer  kindness  to  the  higher.  This  is  Christ's  own  argument :  when  He  bids 
us  behold  the  fowls  of  the  air,  that  in  their  life  we  may  see  our  Father's  kindness, 
He  adds,  "Are  ye  not  much  better  than  they  ?"  When  He  points  out  how  care- 
fully a  man  would  look  after  the  life  of  his  cattle.  He  adds,  "  How  much,  then,  is  a 
man  better  than  a  sheep  ?  "  It  ought  to  be  considered  a  presumptive  argument  in 
favour  of  any  man's  spirit  that  he  is  kind  to  the  inferior  creatures  that  are  around 
him  ;  if  this  presumption  be  not  realised  in  his  case,  then  is  his  kindness  bitterest 
wrong.     {J.  Parker,  D.D.) 

Ver.  8.  Make  a  battlement  for  thy  roof. — Prudential  assurance  .-—A  careful 
study  of  the  tone  and  teaching  of  Deuteronomy  can  hardly  fail  to  impress  the 
reader  with  its  profound  ethical  and  religious  spirit.  What  an  emphasis  is  laid 
upon  the  unity  and  the  uniqueness  of  the  Godhead !  What  an  insistence  upon 
the  love  of  God  as  the  motive  of  all  actions  !  Humanity,  philanthropy,  and 
benevolence  are  insisted  upon.  Forbearance,  equity,  and  forethought  underlie  all 
regulations.  The  preceding  precept  as  to  the  bird's  nest  and  the  sitting  dam  are  a 
striking  example  of  the  humanity  of  the  Jewish  law.  When  a  man  built  a  new 
house,  a  battlement  or,  as  we  should  say,  a  parapet  was  an  almost  necessary  pro- 
tection.  It  would  prevent  accidents.  Some  through  carelessness  or  foolhardiness, 
others  through  short-sightedness  or  a  slip  of  the  foot,  might  fall  off;  such  a  tumble 
would  certainly  fracture  limbs,  and  in  some  cases  be  fatal  to  life.  A  selfish  man 
might  say,  ' '  I  shall  always  remember  that  there  is  no  battlement,  and  keep  well 
away  from  the  sides.  It  is  very  unlikely  that  any  will  fall  over  if  I  leave  the  sides 
unprotected.  If  any  accident  should  occur  it  can  only  be  through  gross  careless- 
ness. I  see  no  reason  why  I  should  be  put  to  this  expense."  The  superior  person 
might  say,  "  I  will  have  no  battlement  on  this  roof.  I  have  nothing  but  contempt 
for  fashion.  Why  should  I  do  a  thing  because  other  people  do  it  ?  I  will  leave  my 
roof  unprotected,  if  only  to  show  my  superiority  to  the  caprice  and  tyranny  of 
custom."  Now,  the  spirit  of  this  law  is  recognised  in  all  civilised  communities. 
Private  tastes  and  individual  eccentricities  are  not  allowed  to  imperil  public  safety 
or  destroy  public  comfort.  Private  persons  cannot  build  houses  without  public 
authorities  approving  the  plans.  So  this  precept  of  the  Jewish  law  is  found,  in 
spirit  at  least,  in  our  modern  legislation.  We  are  to  be  alive  to  a  sense  of  danger, 
we  are  not  to  forget  the  duty  of  prudence,  we  are  to  take  all  reasonable  precautions 
against  injury  to  ourselves  and  others.     But  there  is  a  sense  in   which  we  ar© 


412  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  xxii. 

builders.  "We  found  families,  we  make  fortunes,  we  acquire  reputations,  we  form 
friendships,  we  embark  on  undertakings,  we  profess  moral  principles,  we  bold 
religious  views— in  regard  to  all  it  is  well  for  us,  nay,  for  all  Christians  it  is  a 
duty,  to  make  a  battlement  to  their  roof.  Let  us  in  imagination  walk  round  the 
house.  1.  First  of  all  here  is  the  economic  wing.  In  the  economic  management  of 
life,  a  battlement  to  the  roof  is  a  duty.  "We  build  our  houses,  we  settle  in  life,  we 
make  a  home  for  ourselves,  we  set  up  an  establishment.  Of  course,  it  must  bear 
some  proportion  to  our  means.  But  now  many  do  it  on  such  an  imprudent,  not  to 
say  extravagant  scale,  that  there  is  nothing  left  for  a  battlement !  They  spend  all 
that  they  have.  They  are  the  victims  of  expensive  habits  and  large  ideas  of  things. 
They  bum  incense  to  the  demon  of  respectability.  They  sink  their  all  in  building 
up  the  roof-line,  and  leave  no  margin  for  prudent  provision  against  possible  mis- 
fortune or  untimely  death.  How  many  have  brought  blood  upon  their  houses, 
how  many  have  inflicted  suffering  on  their  own  children  and  loss  on  others,  by 
neglecting  to  build  a  parapet  of  thrift  out  of  the  materials  of  simplicity  of  taste, 
moderation  in  appetite,  and  prudence  in  management !  Thrift  is  the  very  gospel 
that  some  people  need,  and  some,  too,  who  bear  the  Christian  name,  and  aspire  after 
a  Christian  reputation.  "What  renders  this  a  matter  of  really  spiritual  concern  ia 
that  often  the  battlement  goes  unbuilt  from  causes  that  are  not  only  irreligious  but 
antichristian  :  a  thirst  for  social  distinctions,  for  recognition  and  patronage  by 
some  more  highly  placed  than  ourselves.  2.  But  we  pass  to  another  wing.  How 
necessary  it  is  for  Christian  people  in  their  social  life  to  make  a  battlement  to  the 
roof.  The  power  of  social  influence  is  immense,  you  can  hardly  over-estimate  it. 
No  character  can  defy  the  subtle  influences  that  flow  in  upon  them  from  others. 
No  man  is  absolutely  impervious  to  social  pressure.  Therefore  this  is  one  of  those 
points  on  which  Christian  people  should  exercise  conscientious  care  and  prudence. 
They  will  erect  a  battlement  to  their  social  life  by  choosing  friends  from  those  who 
will  be  a  help  rather  than  a  hindrance  to  a  godly  life.  In  this  we  think  not  of  our- 
selves only,  but  of  our  children.  "We  may  be  able  to  run  risks  with  comparative 
immunity,  because  our  principles  are  strong  and  our  characters  fixed.  "We  can  walk 
on  the  unprotected  roof  with  safety.  But  are  not  our  children  very  liable  to  fall  ? 
Surely  the  prime  duty  of  Christian  parents  in  the  culture  of  their  children's  minds 
and  hearts,  and  the  discipline  of  their  habits,  is  to  deepen  in  them  a  sense  of  the 
inviolable  sanctity  of  goodness.  "The  friendship  of  the  world  is  enmity  with  God." 
The  world  puts  gentility  before  character.  It  does  not  inquire  too  closely  into  the 
morals  of  those  who  have  birth  and  wealth.  If  we  are  wise  and  faithful  we  shall 
rightly  estimate  the  importance  of  social  forces.  "We  shall  discriminate  between 
those  fighting  on  Christ  s  side  and  those  that  are  fighting  against  Him.  "We  shall 
leave  no  one  in  doubt  as  to  our  affinities  and  alliances.  "We  shall  put  up  a  battle- 
ment to  the  roof  of  our  social  life.  There  is  a  kind  of  separation  from  the  world 
which  is  as  impracticable  as  it  is  undesirable ;  there  is  another  which  is  simply 
essential  if  we  are  to  save  our  own  souls  and  help  to  save  others.  A  battlement  to 
the  roof  of  our  social  life  fortifies  the  sanctity  and  simplicity  of  our  homes.  3.  But 
there  is  another  wing  to  this  house.  It  is  the  moral,  it  is  the  sphere  of  character. 
He  who  builds  well  and  wisely,  sees  that  the  roof  here  has  a  battlement,  namely, 
the  battlement  of  religion.  "  By  the  fear  of  the  Lord  men  depart  from  evil." 
"When  the  heart  has  been  touched  by  the  love  of  God  in  Christ,  when]  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  has  been  admitted  to  its  throne,  there  is  a  defence  and  proof  against 
the  assaults  of  the  evil  one.  It  is  just  here  that  some  question  the  need  of  a  battle- 
ment. They  are  building  the  structure  of  character,  they  are  morally  sensitive, 
they  are  anxious  and  careful  in  doing  what  is  right,  but  they  have  no  religion,  no 
personal  concern  for  or  interest  in  the  redemption  of  Jesus  Christ.  They  have 
builded  their  house,  but  there  is  not  a  battlement  to  the  roof.  Now,  far  be  it  from 
us  to  shut  our  eyes  to  the  fact  that  even  those  who  have  the  battlement  do  some- 
times fall.  The  parapet  itself  may  be  out  of  repair,  the  stones  may  have  fallen  out 
and  not  been  replaced.  Now,  a  battlement  out  of  repair  may  be  more  dangerous 
than  to  have  none.  But  these  cases  are  the  exception  and  not  the  rule.  There 
was  one  Judas  among  the  twelve  apostles.  But  what  candid  and  fair-minded  man 
will  deny  that  the  fear  of  God  is  the  greatest  of  all  restraints  from  evil  ?  "  The  fear 
of  the  Lord  is  the  treasure  of  the  godly,"  for  "He  is  able  to  keep  us  from  falling, 
and  to  present  us  faultless  before  the  throne  of  His  glory,  with  exceeding  joy." 
4.  But  there  is  yet  one  other  wing  to  the  house.  Here  the  social  and  religious 
wings  join.  Our  religious  life  itself  needs  a  battlement.  Here  is  a  word  for  those 
who  are  giving  their  heart  to  God,  who  are  determining  the  great  ends  and  principles 


CHAP.  xxiL]  DEUTERONOMY.  413 

that  are  to  rule  their  life.  "When  thou  buildest  a  new  house,  then  thou  shalt 
make  a  battlement  for  thy  roof."  Now,  the  Episcopalian  contends  that  in 
order  to  be  completely  furnished  unto  all  good  works  our  religious  life  needs 
something  in  addition  to  God,  the  Bible,  and  Christ  Himself,  namely,  the  Church. 
We  entirely  agree  with  him.  Until  a  man  is  in  the  Church  he  has  not  built  a 
battlement  to  his  house.  It  brings  individual  believers  into  actual  and  visible 
association  with  those  who  have  taken  the  same  holy  vows  and  enlisted  in  the  same 
holy  warfare.  It  will  be  good  for  the  Church  that  he  shall  do  so,  but  will  it 
not  be  good  for  him  ?  Will  he  not  be  a  stronger  and  better  Christian  if  he  "  stir  up 
the  gift  of  God "  that  is  in  him,  and  add  it  to  the  totality  and  variety  of  the 
spiritual  forces  that  operate  in  the  world  ?  Will  he  not  be  encouraged  by  the 
fellowship  of  otheis  ?  We  contend  that  the  Church  is  the  battlement  of  the 
religious  life,  not  its  foundation,  "other  foundation  can  no  man  lay  than  hath 
been  laid,  Jesus  Christ."  By  some  it  is  regarded  as  putting  a  restraint  and  impos- 
ing a  limit.  So  it  does.  The  purpose  of  a  parapet  or  battlement  is  to  prevent  you 
falling  over.  If  your  foot  slips  on  the  edge  of  a  precipice,  what  you  want  is  some- 
thing to  catch  hold  of.  But  remember,  anything  that  is  inconsistent  in  the  Church 
member  is  equally  so  in  the  Christian,  though  he  be  outside  the  Church.  If  you 
are  holding  back  from  a  duty  to  Christ  for  the  sake  of  liberty  to  do  things  incon- 
sistent with  Church  membership,  you  are  imperilling  your  soul  by  doing  them  now. 
{R.  B.  Brindley.)  Battlements  round  the  roofs:  —To  understand  the  primary 
significance  of  these  words,  you  have  simply  to  remember  two  things.  First,  that 
the  houses  referred  to  were  covered  with  flat  roofs,  and,  secondly,  that  on  these  roofs 
amusements,  business,  conversation,  and  worship  were  frequently  carried  on. 
There  is  the  suggestion  of  great  principles— principles  which  abide.  I.  What  are 
THESE  PBINCIPLES?  1.  One  is,  the  sacredness  of  human  life.  The  great  reason 
assigned  in  the  text  for  the  building  of  the  balustrade  round  the  roof  was  this : 
*'  that  thou  bring  not  blood  upon  thine  house."  If  human  life  were  a  thing  of  no 
account,  no  battlement  would  be  necessary— let  a  man  or  a  child  fall  over,  what 
matters  it  ?  Now,  that  is  a  principle  which  in  a  general  way  we  all  recognise,  but 
which  in  our  commercial  life  is  continually  violated  by  that  which  calls  itself  "the 
trade"  pre-eminently.  2.  But  another  principle  underlying  the  text  is  this, 
the  inhumanity  of  selfishness.  Observe,  the  builder  of  a  house  might  have 
reasoned  thus  with  himself:  "Why  should  I  make  a  parapet  about  the  roof  of 
my  house  ?  I  am  in  no  danger  of  falling  over,  and  when  my  friends  and  neigh- 
bours come  to  see  me,  let  them  take  care  of  themselves."  Every  man  for  him- 
self !  Is  that  the  principle  on  which  society  can  hold  together  ?  If  I  am  a  man, 
nothing  that  is  human  will  be  alien  to  me.  If  I  consult  only  my  own  safety 
and  comfort  and  well-being,  I  am  worse  than  a  brute  !  3.  For  another  principle 
suggested  here,  closely  allied  to  that  of  which  I  have  just  spoken,  is,  our  responsi- 
bility in  relation  to  others.  If  any  man  fell,  the  blood  was  upon  the  owner's  house. 
They  could  not  say— "It  was  the  man's  fault  who  met  with  the  accident.  He 
should  have  been  more  careful.  He  ought  to  have  kept  away  from  the  edge  of  the 
roof."  Yes,  perhaps  so,  but  that  was  no  excuse  for  him  who  had  failed  to  set  up  the 
balustrade.  II.  Now,  having  set  before  you,  in  a  general  way,  the  principles  under- 
lying this  text,  I  want  to  look  at  its  teaching  as  it  applies  more  particularly 

TO  THE   BOYS  AND  GIRLS   OF  OUR  HOMES  AND   OF   THE   COMMUNITY  AT   LARGE.      The 

making  of  the  battlement  is  not  to  be  an  after-consideration  ;  it  must  be  part  of  the 
original  plan.  The  house  is  not  complete  without  it.  There  is  to  be  no  waiting 
until  someone  has  fallen  over.  The  building  of  the  battlement  is  intended  to  be 
preventive  of  harm  from  the  very  beginning.  And  is  not  that  the  line  on  which 
we  work  when  we  seek  to  train  our  boys  and  girls  in  the  principles  of  total 
abstinence  ?  1.  And  will  yuu  allow  me  to  say  that  one  of  these  protections— a 
battlement  for  their  safety— is  the  protection  of  the  law.  2.  Then  another  battle- 
ment to  be  reared  about  the  young  life  of  our  country  may  perhaps  be  summed  up 
in  the  word  education.  3.  But  I  come  back  to  the  home  again,  and  I  say  that 
around  your  own  household,  you,  father,  mother,  must  rear  the  balustrade  of  your 
own  example.  (Josiah  Flew. )  Building  battlements  .—Many  are  building  homes 
which  immortal  souls  are  filling.  Are  the  homes  made  safe  ?  1.  Our  homes  ought 
to  have  every  moral  and  spiritual  safeguard  that  God's  Word  and  the  best  experi- 
ence suggests.  2.  The  guards  are  most  needed  where  there  are  pleasant  places,  the 
heights  from  which  it  is  so  easy  to  fall.  3.  When  evil  comes  through  neglect  of  these 
safeguards,  the  builder's  soul  is  stained  with  blood.  Builder  of  a  home,  do  your 
duty,  let  not  the  blood  of  dear  ones  stain  your  soul.    {F.    W.  Lewis.)        House- 


414  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxii. 

luilding : — We  are  all  builders — building  character,  building  for  eternity.  The 
text  gives  an  important  principle — that  prevention  is  better  than  cure.  Better  put 
up  the  barrier  above,  than  have  to  pick  up  the  mangled  body  from  the  pavement 
below.  Better  prevent  the  formation  of  bad  habits  than  attempt  their  eradication 
later  in  life.     I.  Notice  some  of  the  battlements  which  need  to  be  beared 

ABOUT    OUR    soul-life,     AND    ABOUT    THE    LIFE    OF   SOCIETY.        1.    The    Chlistian 

Sabbath,  one  of  the  oldest  balustrades  reared  for  man's  protection.  A  week  without 
a  Sabbath  is  a  year  without  a  summer,  a  summer  without  flowers,  a  night  without 
a  morn.  2.  Family  prayer.  Some  are  ready  to  talk  in  meeting,  whose  lips  are 
dumb  in  prayer  at  home.  The  devoutness  of  heathen  rebukes  such  prayerlessness. 
Pericles,  before  an  oration,  used  to  plead  with  the  gods  for  guidance,  and  Scipio, 
before  a  great  undertaking,  went  to  pray  in  the  temple  of  Jupiter.  3.  Reverence  for 
God's  Word.  Men  of  real  culture,  though  not  believers,  well  know  that  all  that  is 
noblest  in  art,  sweetest  in  song,  and  most  inspiring  in  thought,  had  its  source  in 
this  volume.  4.  Gospel  temperance.  Guard  the  young.  Keep  them  pure.  Even 
the  blood  of  Christ  cannot  wash  out  the  memory  of  sin.  It  mars  and  pollutes  the 
soul.  5.  The  all-inclusive  battlement  is  personal  faith  in  Jesus  Christ.  II.  The 
battlement  of  old  was  for  ornament  and  for  protection.  Through  the  lower  part 
an  arrow  could  be  shot,  and  in  later  years  a  bullet.^  So  religion  serves  this  double 
purpose.  See  to  it  that  your  house  is  thus  built,  and  when  this  earthly  tabernacle 
is  taken  down,  you  will  have  another,  not  built  with  hands,  eternal  in  the  heavens. 
{R.  S.  Mc Arthur,  D.D.)  Battlements: — Not  only  is  this  an  extraordinary  in- 
struction, it  is  the  more  extraordinary  that  it  appears  in  a  book  which  is  supposed 
to  be  devoted  to  spiritual  revelations.  But  in  calling  it  extraordinary,  do  we  not 
mistake  the  meaning  which  ought  to  be  attached  to  the  term  "spiritual  revela- 
tions "  ?  Are  not  more  things  spiritual  than  we  have  hitherto  imagined  ?  This 
instruction  recognises  the  social  side  of  human  life,  and  that  side  may  be  taken  as  in 
some  sense  representative  of  a  Divine  claim  ;  it  is  not  the  claim  of  one  individual 
only,  but  of  society  ;  it  may  be  taken  as  representing  the  sura-total  of  individuals  ; 
the  larger  individual — the  concrete  humanity.  Socialism  has  its  beneficent  as  well 
as  its  dangerous  side.  Socialism,  indeed,  when  rightly  interpreted,  is  never  to  be 
feared  ;  it  is  only  when  perverted  to  base  uses,  in  which  self  becomes  the  supreme 
idol,  that  socialism  is  to  be  denounced  and  avoided.  The  social  influences  continu- 
ally operating  in  life  limit  self-will,  develop  the  most  gracious  side  of  human  nature, 
and  purify  and  establish  all  that  is  noblest  and  truest  in  friendship.  There  are 
certain  conditions  under  which  an  instruction  such  as  is  given  in  the  text  may 
excite  obvious  objections.  Suppose,  for  example,  that  a  man  should  plead  that  his 
neighbour  calls  upon  him  only  occasionally,  and  should  upon  that  circumstance 
raise  the  inquiry  whether  he  should  put  up  a  permanent  building  to  meet  an  excep- 
tional circumstance.  The  inquiry  would  seem  to  be  pertinent  and  reasonable.  On 
the  other  hand,  when  closely  looked  into,  it  will  be  found  that  the  whole  scheme  of 
human  life  is  laid  out  with  a  view  to  circumstances  which  are  called  exceptional. 
The  average  temperature  of  the  year  may  be  mild,  for  most  of  the  twelve  months 
the  wind  may  be  low  and  the  rain  gentle ;  why  then  build  a  house  with  strong 
walls  and  heavy  roofs  ?  Our  neighbour  may  call  to-morrow — see  then  that  the 
battlement  be  ready  !  But  ought  not  men  to  be  able  to  take  care  of  themselves 
when  they  are  walking  on  the  roof  without  our  guarding  them  as  though  they  were 
little  children  ?  This  question,  too,  is  not  without  a  reasonable  aspect.  It  might 
even  be  urged  into  the  dignity  of  an  argument,  on  the  pretence  that  if  we  do  too 
much  for  people  we  may  beget  in  them  a  spirit  of  carelessness  or  a  spirit  of  depend- 
ence, leading  ultimately  to  absolute  disregard  and  thoughtlessness  in  all  the 
relations  of  life.  We  are,  however,  if  students  of  the  Bible,  earnestly  desirous  to 
carry  out  its  meaning,  bound  to  study  the  interests  even  of  the  weakest  men. 
This  is  the  very  principle  of  Christianity.  ' '  Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbour  as 
thyself."  By  thinking  of  one  another  we  lay  claim  upon  the  aff"ection  and  trust 
of  neighbour  and  friend.  We  are  not  to  reason  as  if  this  action  were  all  upon  our 
own  side.  Whilst  we  build  our  battlement  for  the  sake  of  another  man  we  must 
remember  that  that  other  man  in  building  his  house  builds  a  battlement  for  our 
sake.  All  services  of  this  kind  are  reciprocal ;  no  man,  therefore,  is  at  liberty  to 
stand  back  and  decline  social  responsibilities  :  in  every  sense,  whether  accepted  or 
rejected,  no  man  liveth  unto  himself.  The  Christian  application  of  this  doctrine  is 
clear.  If  we  are  so  to  build  a  house  as  not  to  endanger  the  men  who  visit  us,  are 
we  at  liberty  to  build  a  life  which  may  be  to  others  the  very  snare  of  destruction  ? 
Is  there  not  to  be  a  battlement   around    our   conduct  ?      Are  our  habits  to  be 


CHAP.  XXII.}  DEUTERONOMY. 415 

formed  without  reference  to  the  social  influence  which  they  may  exert  ?    Remember 
that  children  are  looking  at  us,  and  that  strangers  are  taking  account  of  our  ways, 
and  that  we  maybe  lured  from  righteousness  by  a  licentiousness  which  we  call 
Uberty.     Is  the  Christian,  then,  to  abstain  from  amusements  and  delights  which 
he  could  enioy  without  personal  injury  lest  a  weaker  man  should  be  tempted  to  do 
that  which  would  injure  him  ?    Precisely  so.     That  is  the  very  essence  of  Christian 
self-denial.     How  many  life-houses  there  are  which  apparently  want  but  some  two 
or  three  comparatively  little  things  to  make  them  wholly  perfect !     In  one  case 
perhaps  only  the  battlement  is  wanting,  in  another  case  it  may  be  but  some  sign 
of  spiritual  beauty,  in  another  case  there  may  be  simply  want  of  grace,  courtesy, 
noble  civility,  and  generous  care  for  the  interests  of  others.     Whatever  it  may  be 
examination  should  be  instituted,  and  every  man  should  consider  himself  bound  not 
only  to  be  faithful  in  much,  but  faithful  also  in  that  which  is  least ;  and  being  so 
he  will  not  only  see  that  there  is  strength  in  his  character  but  also  beauty,  and 
upon  the  top  of  the  pillars  which  represent  integrity  and  permanence  will  be  the 
lilywork  of  grace,  patience,  humbleness,  and  love.     (/.    ParTcer,  D-D.)         Battle- 
ments:—I.  God  has  battlemented  His  own  house.     There  are  high  places  in 
His  house,  and  He  does  not  deny  His  children  the  enjoyment  of  these  high  places 
but  He  makes  sure  that  they  shall  not  be  in  danger  there.     He  sets  bulwarks  round 
about  them  lest  they  should  suffer  evil  when  in  a  state  of  exaltation.     God  in  Mis 
house  has  given  us  many  high  and  sublime  doctrines.     Timid  minds  are  afraid  ot 
these,    but   the  highest  doctrine  in  Scripture  is   safe   enough    because   God   has 
battlemented  it.     Take  the  doctrine  of  election.     God  has  been  pleased  to  set 
around  that  doctrine  other  truths  which  shield  it  from  misuse.      It  is  true  He 
has  chosen  people,  but  ''  by  their  fruit  ye  shall  know  them.       "  Without  holiness 
no  man  shall  see  the  Lord."     Though  He  has  chosen  His  people,  yet  He  has  chosen 
them  unto  holiness  ;  He  has  ordained  them  to  be  zealous  for  good  works.     Ihen 
there  is  the  sublime  truth  of  the  final  perseverance  of  the  saints.     What  a  noble 
height  is  that !     A  housetop  doctrine  indeed  !     "The  Lord  will  keep  the  feet  of 
His  saints."     ''The  righteous  also  shall  hold  on  his  way,  and  he  that  hath  clean 
hands  shaU  be  stronger  and  stronger."     It  will  be  a  great  loss  to  us  if  we  are  unable 
to  enjoy  the  comfort  of  this  truth.      There  is  no  reason  for  fearing  presumption 
through  a  firm  conviction  of  the  true  believer's  safety.     Mark  well  the  battlements 
which  God  has  buUded  around  the  edge  of  this  truth  !     He  has  declared  that  if 
these  shall  fall  away,  it  is  impossible  "to  renew  them  again  unto  repentance  ;  seeing 
they  crucify  to  themselves  the  Son  of  God  afresh,  and  put  Him  to  an  open  shame. 
Take  another  view  of  the  same  thought.     The  Lord  has  guarded  the  position  of 
His  saints  if  endowed  with  wealth.     Some  of  God's  servants  are,  in  His  providence, 
called  to  very  prosperous  conditions  in  life,  and  prosperity  is  fruitful  m  dangers. 
Yet  be  well  assured  that,  if  God  shall  call  any  of  you  to  be  prosperous  and  place 
you  in  an  eminent  position,  He  will  see  to  it  that  grace  is  given  suitable  for  your 
station,   and  affliction  needful  for  your  elevation.     That  bodily  infirmity,  that 
want  of  favour  with  the  great,  that  sick  child,  that  sufi-ering  wife,  that  embarrassmg 
partnership— any  one  of  these  may  be  the  battlements  which  God  has  budt  around 
your  success,  lest  you  should  be  lifted  up  with  pride,  and  your  soul  should  not  be 
upright  in  you.     Does  not  this  remark  cast  a  light  upon  the  mystery  of  many  a 
painful  dispensation  ?     "  Before  I  was  afflicted  I  went  astray,  but  now  have  I  kept 
Thy  word."    The  like  prudence  is  manifested  by  our  Lord  towards  those  whom  Me 
has  seen  fit  to  place  in  positions  of  eminent  service.     You  may  rest  assured  that  if 
God  honours  you  to  win  many  souls,  you  will  have  many  stripes  to  bear,  and  stripes 
you  would  not  like  to  tell  another  of,  they  will  be  so  sharp  and  humblmg.     L>o  not, 
therefore,  start  back  from  qualifying  yourself  for  the  most  eminent  position,  or 
from  occupying  it  when  duty  calls.     He  will  uphold  thee  ;  on  the  pinnacle  thou  art 
as  secure  as  in  the  vallev,  if  Jehovah  set  thee  there.     It  is  the  same  with  regard  to 
the  high   places  of  spiritual   enjoyment.     Even   much   communion   with   Christ, 
though  in  itself  sanctifying,   may  be  perverted,  through   the  folly  of  our  flesh 
into  a  cause  of  self-security.     Lest  a  soul  should  be  beguiled  to  live  upon  itselt, 
and  feed  on  its  frames  and  feelings,  and  by  neglect  of  watchfulness  fall  into  pre- 
sumptuous sins,  battlements  are  set  round  about  all  hallowed  joys,  for  which  in 
eternity  we  shall  bless  the  name  of  the  Lord.     Too  many  of  the  Lord's  servants  feel 
as  if  they  were  always  on  the  housetop— always  afraid,  always  full  of  doubts  and 
fears.     They  are  fearful  lest  they  shall  after  all  perish,  and   of  a  thousand  things 
besides.     To  such  we  say  you  shall  find  when  your  faith  is  weakest,  when  you  are 
just  about  to  fall,  that  there  is  a  glorious  battlement  all  around  you  ;  a  glonoua 


416  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ch.vp.  xxii. 

promise,  a  gentle  word  of  the  Holy  Spirit  shall  be  brought  home  to  your  soul,  so 
that  you  shall  not  utterly  despair.  II.  From  the  fact  of  Divine  carefulness  we 
proceed  by  an  easy  step  to  the  consideration  that,  as  imitators  of  God,  we  should 
exercise  the  like  tenderness  ;  in  a  word,  we  ought  to  have  ottr  houses 
BATTLEMENTED.  A  man  who  had  no  battlement  to  his  house  might  himself 
fall  from  the  roof  in  an  unguarded  moment.  Those  who  profess  to  be  the  children  of 
God  should,  for  their  own  sakes,  see  that  every  care  is  used  to  guard  themselves 
against  the  perils  of  this  tempted  life  ;  they  should  see  to  it  that  their  house  is 
carefully  battlemented.  If  any  ask,  *'  How  shall  we  do  it  ? "  we  reply — 1.  Every 
man  ought  to  examine  himself  carefully  whether  he  be  in  the  faith,  lest  professing 
too  much,  taking  too  much  for  granted,  he  fall  and  perish.  Lest  we  should  be,  after 
all,  hypocrites,  or  self-deceivers  ;  lest,  after  all,  we  should  not  be  born  again,  but 
should  be  children  of  nature,  neatly  dressed,  but  not  the  living  children  of  God,  we 
must  prove  our  own  selves  whether  we  be  in  the  faith.  2.  Better  still,  and  safer  by 
far,  go  often  to  the  Cross,  as  you  think  you  went  at  first.  3.  Battlement  your  soul 
about  well  with  prayer.  Go  not  out  into  the  world  to  look  upon  the  face  of  man 
till  you  have  seen  the  face  of  God.  4.  Be  sure  and  battlement  yourself  about  with 
much  watchfulness,  and,  especially,  watch  most  the  temptation  peculiar  to  your 
position  and  disposition.  III.  As  each  man  ought  to  battlement  his  house  in  a 
spiritual  sense  with  regard  to  himself,  so  ought  each  man  to  carry  out  the 
KULE  with  regard  TO  HIS  FAMILY.  In  the  days  of  Cromwell  it  is  said  that  you 
might  have  gone  down  Cheapside  at  a  certain  hour  in  the  morning  and  you  would 
have  heard  the  morning  hymn  going  up  from  every  house  all  along  the  street,  and 
at  night  if  you  had  glanced  inside  each  home  you  would  have  seen  the  family 
gathered,  and  the  big  Bible  opened,  and  family  devotion  offered.  There  is  no  fear 
of  this  land  if  family  prayer  be  maintained,  but  if  family  prayer  be  swept  away, 
farewell  to  the  strength  of  the  Church.  A  man  should  battlement  his  house  for 
his  children's  sake,  for  his  servants'  sake,  for  his  own  sake,  by  maintaining  the 
ordinance  of  family  prayer.  We  ought  strictly  to  battlement  our  houses,  as  to 
many  things  which  in  this  day  are  tolerated.  I  shall  not  come  down  to  debate  upon. 
the  absolute  right  or  wrong  of  debatable  amusements  and  customs.  If  profe^ssors 
do  not  stop  till  they  are  certainly  in  the  wrong,  they  vrill  stop  nowhere.  It  is  of 
little  use  to  go  on  till  you  are  over  the  edge  of  the  roof,  and  then  cry,  "  Halt."  It 
would  be  a  poor  affair  for  a  house  to  be  without  a  battlement,  but  to  have  a  network 
to  stop  the  falling  person  half-way  down  ;  you  must  stop  before  you  get  off  the  solid 
standing.  There  is  need  to  draw  the  line  somewhere,  and  the  line  had  better  be 
drawn  too  soon  than  too  late.  IV.  The  preacher  would  now  remind  himself  that  this 
church  is,  as  it  were,  his  own  house,  and  that  he  is  bound  to  battlement  it  round 
ABOUT.  Many  come  here.  Sabbath  after  Sabbath,  to  hear  the  Gospel.  Ah  !  but  it  is  a 
dreadful  thinsf  to  remember  that  so  many  people  hear  the  Gospel,  and  yet  perish  under 
the  sound  of  it.  Now,  what  shall  I  say  to  prevent  anyone  falling  from  this  blessed 
Gospel — falling  from  the  house  of  mercy — dashing  themselves  from  the  roof  of  the 
temple  to  their  ruin  ?  What  shall  I  say  to  you  ?  I  beseech  you  do  not  be  hearers 
only.  Be  dissatisfied  with  yourselves  unless  ye  be  doers  of  the  word.  Rest  not 
till  you  rest  in  Jesus.  Remember,  and  I  hope  this  will  be  another  battlement,  that 
if  you  hear  the  Gospel,  and  it  is  not  blessed  to  you,  still  it  has  a  power.  If  the  sun 
of  grace  does  not  soften  you  as  it  does  wax,  it  will  harden  you  as  the  sun  does  clay. 
Do  not  die  of  thirst  when  the  water  of  life  is  before  you  !  Let  me  remind  you  of 
what  the  result  will  be  of  putting  away  the  Gospel.  You  will  soon  die  ;  you  cannot 
live  for  ever.  The  righteous  enter  into  life  eternal,  but  the  ungodly  suiTer  punish- 
ment everlasting.  Oh,  run  not  on  in  sin,  lest  you  fall  into  hell  !  I  would  fain  set  up 
this  battlement  to  stay  you  from  a  dreadful  and  fatal  fall.  Once  more.  Remember 
the  love  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus.  He  cannot  bear  to  see  you  die,  and  He  weeps  over 
you,  saying,  "  How  often  would  I  have  blessed  you,  and  you  would  not ! "  Oh,  by 
the  tears  of  Jesus,  wept  over  you  in  effect  when  He  wept  over  Jerusalem,  turn  to 
Him.  Let  that  be  a  battlement  to  keep  you  from  ruin.  (C.  H.  Sjmrgeon.)  Put- 
ting up  parapets : — There  is  a  most  lamentable  waste  of  power  in  the  Christian 
Church  ;  in  fact,  among  the  best  elements  of  society.  This  waste  arises  from  mis- 
direction. The  power  is  applied  at  the  wrong  time  and  in  the  wrong  quarter. 
Instead  of  being  applied  in  the  way  of  prevention,  which  would  commonly  be  cer- 
tain, it  is  applied  in  the  eff'ort  to  reform  and  restore,  which  is  always  difficult,  and 
often  impossible.  An  ounce  of  prevention  is  worth  a  ton  of  cure.  This  principle 
is  happily  illustrated  in  an  ancient  regulation  among  the  Jews.  The  regulation  was 
this  :  "When  thou  buildest  a  new  house,  then  thou  shalt  make  a  battlement  [or 


CHAP.  XXII.]  DEUTERONOMY.  417 


*  parapet  *]  for  thy  roof,  that  thou  bring  not  blood  upon  thy  house  if  any  man  fall 
from  thence."     No  intelligent  reader  need  be  told  that  the  roofs  of  Oriental  houses 
are  perfectly  flat,  and  that  they  are  constantly  used  for  promenading,  for  rest,  for 
drying  fruits,  for  sleeping,  and  often  (as  in  Peter's  case)  for  religious  devotions.      It 
required  but  small  expenditure  of  time  and  money  to  build  the  parapet.     When 
that  measure  of  precaution  has  been  taken,  the  little  children  may  romp  there  with 
impunity  ;  good  old  grandfather  may  walk  there,  without  danger  of  stumbling  over, 
through  dimness  of  vision.     But  if  the  inviting  roof  was  left  unprotected,  and  even 
a  single  child  was  pitched  into  the  street  below,  what  skill  could  restore  the  mangled 
form  ?    This  Oriental  law  of  the  parapets  teaches  that  prevention  is  well-nigh  cer- 
tain, iDut  cure  is  exceedingly  difficult.     Often  all  attempts  in  that  direction  are  well- 
nif^h  hopeless.     The  percentage  of  inebriates  wlio  are  reformed  by  any  method  is 
pitiably  and  painfully  small.     "  Inebriate  asylums"  do  not  cure  one  half  of  those 
who  are  sent  there.    Of  the  converted  drunkards  who  are  received  into  our  churches, 
nearly  all  have  had  one  or  more  temporary  lapses  into  drinking,  and  every  man  of 
them  is  in  constant  danger  to  their  dying  day.     Such  men  as  Gough,  and  Sawyer, 
and  McAuley  are  only  upheld  by  the  omnipotent  grace  of  God.     Yet  all  the  multi- 
tudes of  victims  of  the  bottle  who  have  gone  down  to  darkness  and  their  doom  might 
have  been  saved  by  the  very  simple  process  of  prevention.     If  one-twentieth  part  of 
the  effort  which  is  put  forth  in  attempted  reformation  of  the  dissipated  had  been 
spent  in  persuading  them  never  to  drink  at  all,  how  different  would  have  been  the 
result !     The  right  time  to  put  up  the  parapet  of  total  abstinence  is  in  childhood  or 
early  youth.      The  right  place  to  plant  the  parapet  is  at  home  and  in  the  Sabbath- 
school.     1.  But  there  are  other  lessons  taught  by  the  Jewish  battlements  besides 
those  which  apply  to  the  bottle.    One  lesson  is  that  wilful  neglect  is  as  fatal  as  wilful 
crime.    Not-doing  is  twin  brother  to  wrong-doing.    Many  a  father  and  mother  have 
had  their  hearts  broken  by  the  disgraceful  sins  of  a  son  ;  and  yet  the  blame  of  the 
boy's  ruin  rested  on  themselves.      They  had  either  set  him  a  most  pernicious 
example,  or  else  they  had  left  him  to  drift  into  bad  practices  unrestrained.    Building 
battlements  after  our  children  have  broken  their  own  necks  and  our  hearts  is  a  sort 
of  posthumous  precaution  that  comes  to  nothing.     2.  It  is  from  the  neglect  of  the 
cultured,  influential  classes  in  our  towns  that  the  terrible  harvests  of  the  streets  (in 
the  shape  of  thieves,  rioters,  and  criminals)  are  constantly  reaped.     If  tenement- 
houses  reek  with  filth  and  debauchery,  if  the  young  are  unreached  by  any  mission 
school  or  church,  or  any  kind  of  purifying  agency,  what  else  can  we  expect  than 
wholesale  demoralisation  among  "the  masses"?     Prisons,  pauperism,  and  gibbets 
are  God's  assessments  upon  society  for  neglecting  the  children.     If  society  fails  to 
put  up  parapets,  society  must  "foot  the  bill."    These  are  the  very  times  for  parapet- 
building.    The  Bible  furnishes  plenty  of  good  precepts  with  which  to  build  parapets. 
The  Fifth  Commandment  and  the  Eighth  are  peculiariy  good  timber.     Happy  is 
the  man  whose  daily  life  is  walled  around  with  a  Bible  conscience.      His  religion  is 
a  prevention.     Half  of  his  life  is  not  lost  in  attempting  to  cure  the  effects  of  the 
other  half.     {T.  L.  Cuyler.)        The  duty  of  the  strong  .—There  is  a  mixture  here 
of  the  temporary  and  the  permanent.     The  symbol  is  temporary  and  local ;  but  the 
principle  symbolised  is  eternal  and  universal.      "  When  thou  buildest  a  new  house." 
It  is  not  to  be  an  after-thought ;  the  battlements  are  to  be  in  the  original  plan. 
The  man  is  not  to  wait  until  an  accident  occurs  and  the  necessity  for  the  battle- 
ments is  proved,  but  he  is  to  take  precautionary  measures.    He  has  to  do  with  human 
life,  which  is  too  sacred  to  be  experimented  with  in  order  to  find  out  the  percentage 
of  probabilities.     But  I  can  imagine  the  selfish  man  saying,  "  Nay,  I  will  not  build 
battlements  to  my  house.     I  can  walk  the  flat  roof  of  my  house  without  any  danger 
of  falling,  and  why  should  I  provide  for  others  ?    I  am  perfectly  safe."    The  same 
argument  is  used  with  regard  to  abstinence.     "Erect  battlements  so  that  others 
may  not  fall  over?    Nay,"  says  one,  ♦*  I  am  in  no  danger.     I  can  take  my  glass  of 
beer  or  wine,  and  feel  perfectly  safe  ;  and  why  should  I  abstain  for  the  sake  of  those 
who  know  not  how  to  control  their  appetites  ? "    Now  just  look  at  that.     By  the 
law  of  self-preservation  the  man  would  build  battlements  to  prevent  danger  to  him- 
self ;  as  there  is  none  for  him  he  will  not  build  those  battlements  ;  so  that,  after 
all,  the  highest  impulse  in  that  man's  life  is  just  this--8elf-preservation.      Are  you 
prepared  to  say,  "Nay,  I  will  not  abstain  from  intoxicating  drinks,  and  thus  erect 
a  battlement,  a  balustrade,  simply  because  I  know  I  am  perfectly  safe  myself"  ? 
If  there  is  any  danger  to  another,  and  it  is  in  your  power,  by  your  example,  to  erect  a 
barrier  which  shall  prevent  the  fall  of  another,  then  it  is  your  evident  duty  to  do  it. 
But  the  cjmc  comes  forward  and  says,  "Yes,  I  know  it  is  possible  for  a  man  to  fall 

27 


418  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxii. 

over,  but  it  must  be  through  culpable  neglect  or  very  exceptional  weakness,  and  am  I 
to  conform  to  such  conditions  ?      Am  I  to  build  a  balustrade  or  abstain  from  intoxi- 
cating drinks  merely  because  of  the  weaklings  by  whom  I  am  surrounded  ?      Am  I 
to  take  account  of  them  ? "     God's  law  does,  and  human  law,  in  so  far  as  it  is  Chris- 
tian, does.    It  is  the  duty  of  the  strong  to  deny  themselves  for  the  sake  of  the  weak  ; 
we  who  are  strong  ouglit  not  to  please  ourselves.    .   .   .  Now  the  question  is  not 
whether  you  can  with  safety  to  yourself  indulge  in  intoxicants,   but  whether  by 
taking  your  glass  you  encourage  another  who  is  weaker  to  take  his  glass  also,  and 
who  in  due  time  may  become  a  drunkard  and  a  prey  to  the  passion  from  which  you 
are  so  happily  free.  .  .  .  But  there  is  the  self-assertive  man  who  says  :  *'  I  am  not 
going  to  give  up  my  liberty ;  it  is  a  limitation  to  my  personal  liberty."    That  cry  is 
as  fallacious  as  it  is  selfish.    Personal  liberty  must  ever  run  parallel  with  the  well-being 
of  the  community.     {D.  Davies. )         Modern  battlements : — Obviously  the  letter  of 
this  precept  applies  only  to  the  flat-roofed  houses  of  the  East.     There  the  housetop 
has  always  been  a  place  of  resort.     Kahab  took  the  scouts  to  the  top  of  her  house  in 
Jericho,  where  her  flax  was  spread  out,  and  hid  them  there.    King  David  walked  on. 
the  housetop  at  the  hour  of  evening.     Our  Lord  spoke  to  the  Twelve  of  preaching 
"upon  the  housetops."     It  is  not  improbable  that  even  in  our  climate  more  use 
may  hereafter  be  made  of  the  housetops  than  heretofore.     The  pressure  of  crowded 
cities  may  lead  to  this.     Already  the  plan  of  having  recreation-ground  for  children 
on  the  flat  roof  of  a  school-house  has  been  tried,  where  a  playground  could  not 
otherwise  be  obtained ;  and  it  has  been  found  to  answer  well.     In  any  such  case  the 
need  of  a  strong  balustrade  is,  of  course,  as  imperative  as  it  was  in  Palestine.     God 
requires  that  human  life  shall  not  be  trifled  with.     Precaution  should  be  taken  that 
it  be  not,    even  through  inadvertence,    sacrificed.     And  this  principle    belongs 
peculiarly  to  our  holy  religion.     Other  forms  of  religion  have  breathed  a  cruel 
spirit,  and  a  contempt  for  human  life.     We  can  imagine  an  Israelite  chafing  at  such 
a  command  as  this.     "Religion,"  he  might  say,  "is  religion.     Sacrifice  is  sacrifice. 
Prayer  is  prayer.     But  business  also  is  business,  and  has  its  own  necessities.     May 
not  a  man  build  a  house  as  he  likes  with  his  own  money?"      But  he  might 
be  answered  thus :  * '  There  is  no  such  separation  as  you  desire  between  piety  and 
conduct.      Religion  does  not  consent  to  be  shut  up  in  tabernacle,   temple,   or 
synagogue.      It  must  couie  out  into  the  streets  and  highways,   a    witness  for 
righteousness  and  love.     It  absolutely  denies  your  right  to  build  or  to  do  anything 
whatever  just  as  you  like.     The  question  is  not  what  you  choose,  but  what  you 
ought  to  do."    That  God  of  order  and  of  mercy  who  gave  directions  about  stray 
sheep,  an  ox  or  ass  that  had  fallen  by  the  way,  and  even  about  the  eggs  in  a  bird's 
nest,  did  not  omit  to  legislate  against  fatal  accidents  to  men,  women,  and  children. 
Now,  this  is  our  God  ;  and  what  He  deemed  worthy  of  His  notice,  and  even  of  His 
legislation  in  the  time  of  Moses,  is  certainly  not  forgotten  or  disregarded  by  Him 
now.     He  will  not  hold  any  man  guiltless  who  builds  a  house,  whether  for  his  own 
residence  or  to  be  let  or  sold  to  another,  and  does  not  in  the  building  guard  against 
whatever  is  perilous  to  human  life.     A  house  built,  or  run  up  with  defective  sup- 
ports, damp  walls  or  bad  drainage,  violates  this  law.     It  is  a  structure  unsafe 
or  pernicious  for  man,  and  therefore  displeasing  to  God.     Let  the  owners  of  house 
property  look  to  it.     The  spirit  of  the  enactment  suggests  other  and  wider  applica- 
tions.    Religion  has  something  serious  to  say  to  those  who  possess  and  those  who 
manage  mines  and  railways,  and  those  who  send  ships  to  sea.     Calamities  will 
happen  even  in  the  most  carefully  excavated  and  managed  mines,  on  the  most  skil- 
fully built  and  regulated  railways,  and  in  the  stoutest  and  best  found  ships ;  but 
when  they  occur  through  parsimony,  or  through  recklessness,  the  parties  who  are 
really  responsible,  whether  or  not  made  answerable  to  human  justice,  incur  the 
heavy  displeasure  of  God.     He  requires  that  all  precautions  which  are  possible 
shall  be  taken  to  prevent  a  wanton  sacrifice  of  life.     Precaution  is  not  an  interesting 
word.     It  has  not  a  heroic  soimd  ;  but  it  denotes  a  thing  that  is  wise  and  that 
pleases  God.     A  dashing  rescue  of  men  out  of  deadly  peril  attracts  more  admira- 
tion; but  he  does  well  who  prevents  them  from  falling  into  the  danger.     Neglect  of 
due  precaution  is,  in  fact,  the  mother  of  all  sorts  of  mischief.    No  harm  is  intended, 
but  a  little  indolence  or  heedlessness  grudges  the  trouble,  or  parsimony  grudges  the 
expense  of  preventive  measures  ;  and  so  harm  is  done,  which  no  skill  can  remedy. 
The  watertight  doors  between  the  compartments  of  the  ship  are  left  open  on  the  very 
night  when  she  is  struck,  and  it  is  too  late  to  close  them  when  the  water  rushes  from 
stem  to  stem  and  she  begins  to  settle  down  into  the  hungry  sea.     Often  a  man  falls 
short  ia  his  precautionary  duty  through  overmuch  confidence  in  himself.     He  needs 


CHAP.  XXII.]  DEUTERONOMY.  419 

no  parapet  to  protect  him.  It  is  thus  that  men  ungenerously  disregard  the  moral 
safety  of  others.  One  has  what  is  called  a  "strong  head."  Whether  it  be  from 
strength  or  sluggishness,  he  can  drink  much  wine  or  strong  drink  with  apparent 
impunity  ;  and  on  this  account  he  laughs  at  abstinence.  But  his  own  son  may  be 
unable  to  govern  himself.  Far  be  it  from  us  to  disparage  the  remedial  efforts  that 
in  any  measure  bless  the  world.  The  Gospel  itself  is  the  announcement  of  a  Divine 
remedy  for  human  sin  and  woe  ;  and  men  act  in  the  spirit  of  the  Gospel  when  they 
bring  cleansing  and  healing  to  those  who  have  fallen.  But  what  folly  it  is  to  let 
things  go  wrong  in  order  to  right  them  again  !  Surely  the  first  duty  is  to  prevent 
preventable  evils.  Towards  such  objects  a  good  deal  has  been  done  by  modern 
English  legislation,  and  by  the  action  of  philanthropic  societies  and  institutions. 
The  influence  of  the  Christian  family,  of  Church,  and  of  Sunday  school  ought  to 
form  a  still  better  parapet  to  guard  the  youth  of  England.  Is  the  relation  to  the 
Lord  which  is  implied  in  their  baptism  seriously  and  intelligently  explained  to 
children  ?  Are  the  claims  of  the  Saviour  on  their  love  and  allegiance  unfolded 
to  them  ?  Without  any  premature  strictness  being  forced  upon  the  young,  a  moral 
parapet  might  be  quietly  and  insensibly  raised  around  them  by  the  prayer  of  faith, 
the  charm  of  good  example,  and  a  careful,  patient  training  in  upright  speech  and 
conduct.  Alas  !  there  are  those  who  will,  in  their  infatuation,  leap  over  every  such 
battlement  and  throw  their  lives  away.  But  it  is  none  the  less  desirable  that  the 
battlement  should  be  there.  It  will  save  some,  though  not  all.  It  is  a  check, 
though  not  a  panacea.  It  gives  time  for  reason,  for  conscience,  for  reflection,  for 
self-respect ;  above  all,  for  the  grace  of  God,  to  act,  and  preserve  men  from  moral 
self-destruction.  Possibly  some  of  you  have  fallen  and  are  broken.  No  parapet  was 
placed  round  their  heedless  youth,  or  if  there  was  a  battlement,  they  laughed  at  it 
and  jumped  over.  They  had  taken  their  own  way,  done  their  own  will  and 
pleasure,  ridiculed  the  scruples  of  their  best  friends ;  and  let  us  hope  they  at 
last  begin  to  recognise  their  own  folly,  and  are  bruised,  and  sore,  and  self-vexed. 
The  mercy  of  God  is  for  them.  They  have  destroyed  themselves,  but  in  Him  is  their 
help.  Jesus  Christ,  the  Son  of  the  Highest,  is  the  Good  Physician.  He  has  come 
to  heal  the  broken  and  to  save  the  lost.     {D.  Eraser,  D.D.)  The  law  of  home 

life : — I.  The  sacredness  of  human  life.  Of  all  the  earthly  blessings  which 
man  enjoys,  he  considers  life  the  greatest.  So  highly  does  he  appreciate  it  that  he 
will  part  with  all  things  else  in  order  to  retain  it.  Yet  notwithstanding  these  facts 
there  seems  to  be  a  growing  disregard  for  human  life.  II.  The  importance  of 
FAMILY  LIFE.  The  Jews  were  a  nation  of  home-makers  and  home-lovers.  If  the 
family  was  an  important  institution  among  the  Jews,  it  is  no  less  important  to  us  as 
a  nation.  No  one  doubts  that  the  State  is  necessary  to  our  welfare  as  a  people.  We 
must  have  laws,  and  we  must  have  them  executed,  if  we  maintain  a  civil  govern- 
ment. And  no  one  doubts  that  the  Church  is  necessary  imto  our  national  existence. 
But  important  as  are  the  State  and  the  Church,  it  is  generally  conceded  that 
the  family  is  more  important  than  either.  It  has  to  do  with  the  physical,  the 
social,  the  moral,  and  the  spiritual  well-being  of  each  member  of  the  household.  In 
view  of  the  fundamental  position  and  character  of  the  family,  and  in  view  of  its  vast 
importance,  it  becomes  us  more  highly  to  appreciate  it,  and  more  earnestly  to  strive 
for  its  preservation  and  perpetuity.  III.  Some  safeguards  w^hich  should  be 
PLACED  ABOUT  THE  HOME.  Natural  instinct,  parental  love,  and  the  Divine  Word 
demand  this  of  them.  1.  One  such  means  is  good  reading  in  the  homes. 
2.  Another  safeguard  to  the  family  is  making  the  home  pleasant :  making  it 
the  happiest  place  on  earth.  Seemingly  the  trend  of  modern  life  is  away  from 
the  home.  3.  Another  safeguard  to  the  family  is  religious  instruction.  {E.  L. 
Bachman,  D.D.) 

Ver.  10.  Thou  shalt  not  plow  with  an  ox  and  an  ass  together. — A  law  for 

the  ox  and  the  ass : — There  was  a  reason  for  this  prohibition.  The  step  of  an  ox  and 
an  ass  being  different,  they  could  not  pull  together  without  causing  one  another 
much  exertion  and  weariness.  The  work  would  be  nearly  twice  as  hard  for  the  ox 
and  the  ass  as  it  would  be  for  two  oxen  or  two  asses.  The  law  teaches  us  to  consider 
difi'erences  in  human  beings,  and  not  to  yoke  those  who  differ  from  one  another  to 
the  same  tasks.  The  law  forbidding  the  people  to  plough  with  an  ox  and  an  ass 
applies  to  children.  Injury  is  done  to  children  when  they  are  treated  as  though 
they  had  precisely  the  same  bodily  and  mental  capabilities.  Children  are  so 
variously  constituted,  that  what  one  boy  can  do  with  ease  in  school- work  is  to 
another  boy  a  difficult  labour.     The  sum  in  arithmetic  which  is  to  one  a  pleasure  is 


420  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  fcHAP.  xxii. 

to  another  a  tortiire.  The  seemingly  dull  boy  is  not  to  be  reproached  because  he 
cannot  do  what  his  bright  companion  can  do.  Some  day  the  apparently  stupid 
fellow  may  awake  to  intellectual  activity,  and  get  a  long  way  before  the  boy  who, 
for  a  time,  made  rapid  progi-ess  in  scholarship.  The  ass,  which  could  not  keep  pace 
with  the  ox  in  dragging  the  plough,  has  sometimes  developed  into  a  steed  grand  as 
the  war-horse  described  in  the  Book  of  Job.  Children  should  not  be  put  to  trades 
irrespective  of  their  gifts  and  preferences.  The  timid,  shrinking  boy  should  not  be 
mated  with  the  bold,  adventurous  type  in  employments  needing  a  daring  spirit. 
The  bold,  adventurous  boy,  Avhose  heart  is  already  on  the  ship's  deck,  and  who 
dreams  day  and  night  of  voyages  over  great  spaces  of  ocean  to  the  region  of  the 
walrus  and  white  bear,  or  to  the  clime  of  the  palm  and  the  tamarind,  should  not  be 
kept  behind  a  grocer's  counter.  "What  is  right  for  one  is  not  necessarily  right  for 
another.  Fathers  and  mothers  should  honour  individuality  in  their  boys  and  girls, 
and  not  fret  because  their  children  do  not  pull  together  in  the  same  yoke.  The  law 
forbidding  the  Israelites  to  plough  with  an  ox  and  an  ass  applies  to  young  people. 
They  are  not  to  be  treated  religiously  as  though  they  were  all  in  the  same  con- 
dition, and  had  all  to  pass  through  a  like  process  to  become  disciples  of  Christ. 
Hard  theologians  and  unthinking  revivalists  have  done  harm  to  such  young  people 
by  passing  on  them  a  sweeping  condemnation,  and  insisting  that  there  is  no  true 
conversion  without  agonies  of  repentance  and  ecstasies  of  joy.  No  distinction  has 
been  made  between  them  and  those  guilty  of  flagrant  sins,  and  they  have  been 
cruelly  yoked  with  the  very  worst  of  mankind.  The  law  forbidding  the  Israelites 
to  plough  with  an  ox  and  an  ass  applies  to  men  and  women.  All  the  members  of 
the  Church  are  not  to  be  expected  to  manifest  their  religion  precisely  in  the  same 
way.  Some  are  naturally  lively  and  joyful ;  before  their  conversion  they  were 
noted  for  their  cheerful  disposition.  It  is  as  impossible  for  them  to  be  dull  as  it  is 
for  the  sun  to  be  dull  when  shining  in  the  blue  of  an  unclouded  sky.  It  is  as 
impossible  for  them  to  be  silent  as  it  is  for  larks  and  linnets  to  be  silent  when  May 
is  kissing  the  April  buds  into  flower.  It  would  be  as  bad  as  yoking  the  ox  and  the 
ass  together  to  insist  that  they  must  repress  their  jubilant  feelings  and  be  quiet  as 
Christians  whose  voices  are  never  heard  in  religious  demonstration.  It  would  be 
equally  cruel  to  insist  that  those  quiet  Christians  must  break  through  their  natural 
gravity,  and  manifest  the  enthusiasm  which  is  ever  pealing  out  song  after  song, 
hallelujah  after  hallelujah.  Violence  is  not  to  be  done  to  natural  feeling  by  forcing 
every  one  to  the  same  kind  of  Christian  work.  The  timid  and  retiring  are  not  to  be 
compelled  to  pull  in  the  same  yoke  with  the  brave  and  bold.     {J.  MarrcU.) 

Ver.  11.  Thou  slialt  not  wear  a  garment  of  divers  sorts.— 7^  moral  and  (he 
positive  in  file  dutus  of  life : — I.  That  this  precept  exhibits  a  "positive"  duty. 
The  ground  of  this  ordinance  is  to  bo  sought  for,  not  in  the  nature  of  things,  but  in 
the  will  of  God.  II.  That  as  the  inculcation  of  a  positive  duty  the  precept 
OF  the  text  was  not  so  binding  upon  the  Jews  as  those  duties  which  were 
wholly  moral,  a  Jew  might  be  reduced  to  the  alternative  either  of  wearing  no 
garment  at  all,  or  of  wearing  one  woven  of  woollen  and  linen  together.  The  preserva- 
tion of  health  is  a  moral  duty,  and  therefore  more  important  than  the  observance 
of  a  ritual  precept.  III.  That  we,  who  live  under  the  Gospel  dispensation, 
ARE  not  bound  TO  OBSERVE  THIS  PRECEPT  AT  ALL.  Neither  sowing  your  fields 
with  wheat  and  rye  together,  nor  ploughing  with  hoi-ses  and  oxen  together,  nor 
wearing  a  garment  of  wool,  or  of  linen,  or  of  divers  sorts,  availeth  anything,  "  but 
a  new  creature."    IV.  That  while  we  are  under  no  manner  of  obligation 

TO  OBSERVE  THIS  PRECEPT  IN  ITS  LITERAL  MEANING,  STILL  THE  MORAL  PRINCIPLE 
WHICH  UNDERLIES  THAT  MEANING,  AND  WHICH  IT  WAS  INTENDED  TO  ILLUSTRATE, 
IS  AS  BINDING  NOW  AS  EVER — AS  BINDING  UPON  US  AS  IT  WAS  UPON  THE  JeWS.     This 

prohibition,  in  its  primary  application  to  the  Israelites,  was  doubtless  intended  to 
show  that  they  were  not  to  mingle  themselves  with  the  heathen,  nor  to  weave  any  of 
the  usages  of  the  Gentiles  into  the  ordinances  of  God.  This  is  the  spirit  of  the  precept, 
and  it  is  as  binding  upon  us  as  it  was  upon  them.  We  are  to  avoid  an  accom- 
modating way  of  dealing  with  the  Divine  law.  We  are  not  to  alter  its  sacred 
principles  to  suit  the  temper  of  the  times,  and  the  habits  of  the  world.  {R.  Harley.) 
The  robe  of  ChrisCs  righteousness ,  and  the  sin  of  vxaring  anything  with  it : — I.  Thb 
hobe  OF  RIGHTEOUSNESS  WHICH  ALL  God's  PEOPLE  MUST  WEAR.  It  may  perhaps 
be  said,  that  as  the  text  merely  forbids  our  interweaving  woollen  and  linen  together, 
it  leaves  it  at  our  choice  whether  the  garment  of  our  salvation  shall  be  woollen  or 
linen.    But  it  is  not  so.    It  must  be  of  linen,  and  of  fine  linen  only  (Rev.  xix.  7,  8). 


CHAP.  XXII.]  DEUTERONOMY.  421 

This  robe  of  righteousness  is  for  two  purposes.  1.  For  their  justification.  The  robe 
of  righteousness  must  not  only  be  such  as  Jehovah  can  accept,  but  it  must  be  such 
as  He  cannot  reject — it  must  be  the  pure,  perfect,  supernatural,  Divine  righteousness 
of  an  incarnate  Gocl.  2.  And  this  robe  of  righteousness  is  not  only  for  our  justifica- 
tion, but  for  our  sanctification  also.  The  man  who  has  the  robe  of  Christ's  righteous- 
ness upon  him,  must  have  the  influences  of  Christ's  Spirit  within  him,  for  it  is  only 
by  our  sauctification  that  we  can  prove  the  reality  of  our  justification.  There  is  a 
renewing  process  as  well  as  a  reconciling  one.  II.  The  offensiveness  of  all 
ATTEMPTS  TO  WEAVE  ANYTHING  WITH  IT.  1.  It  is  an  insult  to  God  the  Father,  who 
has  determined  that  every  child  of  His  family  shall  be  habited  in  the  one  robe  of 
the  family— the  perfect  spotless  garment  of  His  only  begotten  Son,  "  unto  and  upon 
all  them  that  believe."  How,  then,  must  that  man  expect  to  be  dealt  with,  who,  in 
the  wantonness  of  his  resistance  to  God's  method  of  salvation,  shall  refuse  to  rest 
solely  on  the  righteousness  of  God's  own  Son,  or  shall  dream  of  adding  thereto  his 
own  imperfect  and  perishable  doings  ?  The  consequence  can  only  be,  that  all  the 
sanctions  and  severities  of  God's  unchanging  law  will  be  let  loose  upon  him  in  all 
their  force,  if  he  ventures  either  on  his  own  merits  only,  in  a  woollen  garment,  or 
conjointly  on  his  own  and  on  the  Saviour's  in  a  garment  of  linen  and  woollen 
together,  and  thus  refuse  his  undivided  reliance  on  Him  alone,  who  magnified  the 
law  and  made  it  honourable.  2.  Nor,  assuredly,  is  there  less  insult  offered  to  God 
the  Son,  in  this  attempt  to  combine  works  and  grace  in  the  matter  of  salvation. 
For  what  purpose  was  His  mission  to  our  world  ?  Did  He  not  pour  out  His  soul 
an  offering  for  sin,  and  by  His  obedience  unto  death  bring  in  everlasting  righteous- 
ness ?  Think  you,  then,  that  this  great  and  gracious  Saviour  will  consent  to  be 
insulted  by  men's  attempts  to  join  their  works  with  His,  and  to  "wear  a  garment 
of  divers  sorts,  as  of  woollen  and  linen  together,"  when  the  tine  linen  only  of  His 
finished  work — dyed  in  His  precious  blood — is  the  righteousness  of  the  saints  ? 
Know  ye  not  that  He  lays  an  absolute  claim  to  all  the  honour  of  our  salvation  ? 
That  He  will  suffer  no  righteousness  to  be  put  in  competition  with  His  ?  That  He 
will  not  give  His  glory,  nor  the  least  degree  of  it,  to  another  ?  {R.  C.  Dillon,  D.D.) 
The  linsey-tooolsey  garment: — The  woollen  garment  in  the  text  is  a  shadow  of  the 
righteousness  of  the  law  or  the  righteousness  of  works  ;  the  linen  also  is  a  shadow 
of  the  righteousness  of  faith,  or  Christ's  righteousness.  To  speak  after  the  manner 
of  the  Gospel,  the  text  teacheth  us  not  to  blend  both  together.  There  are  three 
sorts  of  preachers  who  receive  the  Scripture  and  confess  the  God  of  Abraham, 
1.  The  first  are  such  as  preach  the  law  alone,  and  these  are  generally  Jews,  and 
men  of  their  spirit.  2.  "The  second  sort  are  evangelists  or  true  Gospel  preachers, 
ministers  of  the  New  Testament,  who  preach  only  the  Lord  our  righteousness,  and 
who  will  know  nothing  among  their  congregations,  and  souls  committed  to  their 
charge,  but  Jesus  Christ  and  Him  crucified.  3.  There  are  others  who  sin  against 
the  law,  and  against  the  Gospel,  blending  both  together,  and  teaching  the  people  to 
wear  the  garment  of  linen  and  woollen,  of  all  which  I  intend  to  speak  freely.  I  do 
not  wonder  that  St.  Peter  calls  the  law  a  yoke,  which  neither  they  nor  their  fathers 
could  bear,  because  it  must  have  been  so  to  them  who  heard  not  plainly  of  Jesus 
and  His  salvation.  Who,  under  the  law,  could  have  any  comfort  when  he  knew  he 
was  under  the  curse  as  long  as  he  continued  not  in  all  things  of  the  book  of  the 
law  to  do  them  ?  The  more  sincere  the  more  unhappy  such  were  who  served  under 
the  law,  and  heard  of  no  way  to  heaven  but  a  perfect  obedience  to  all  the  ordinances 
of  God.  The  true  Christian  preacher  is  one  whom  the  God  of  the  whole  earth,  the 
Lord  who  gave  the  law,  has  taught,  and  who  is  convinced  that  the  law  was  given  to 
make  sin  known,  and  to  make  it  more  exceedingly  sinful,  and  that  righteousness 
comes  not  by  that  means,  but  by  Christ  Jesus,  who  is  become  righteousness  to 
every  one  that  believeth  ;  and  having  heard  the  Gospel  with  ears  to  hear,  and  having 
understood  the  gracious  sayings  of  Jesus,  and  been  a  witness  himself  both  of  the 
deplorable  estate  under  the  law  and  the  deliverance  by  the  merits  and  Cross  of  the 
Lamb,  deternnines  only  to  know  and  preach  Him  crucified  everywhere.  This  is  the 
only  white  linen,  the  only  righteousness  which  the  saints  wear  above,  and  which 
can  make  them  beautiful  and  fair  in  the  eyes  of  God  Almighty,  and  in  the  sight  of 
His  holy  angels.  There  are  yet  other  preachers  who,  in  a  measure,  preach  the  law, 
and  seem  as  if  they  believed  morality  and  obedience  were  the  only  cause  of  our 
being  accepted  with  God.  They  insist  upon  the  necessity  of  making  ourselves 
righteous,  but  lest  they  should  awaken  the  consciences  of  those  who  hear  them, 
they  tell  them,  When  you  have  done  all  you  can,  Christ  will  do  the  rest ;  He  will 
make  perfect  your  good  works  with  His  righteousness ;  you  must  begin  and  set 


422  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxiii. 

about  tie  work  by  repenting  and  living  a  religious  life  ;  and  if  that  is  not  sufficient, 
when  you  come  to  die  He  will  supply  the  deficiency  and  make  it  up  witli  His  merits. 
This  is  the  device  of  man  entirely,  and  cannot  be  found  in  all  the  Scripture.  This 
is  crying  peace  when  there  is  no  peace,  and  healing  the  wound  slightly.  This  is 
mingling  the  woollen  and  linen  together,  and  making  the  commandment  of  God 
void  by  the  traditions  of  men.  However  the  Lord  approves  of  the  faithfulness  of 
His  people,  and  will  greatly  reward  their  good  works  and  labours  of  love  which  have 
been  done  for  His  name's  sake,  and  blames  such  whose  works  were  faulty  ;  yet 
that  righteousness  which  saves  the  soul,  and  is  the  only  proper  righteousness,  is 
the  obedience,  sufferings,  and  merits  of  our  crucified  God  and  Lord  Jesus  Christ ; 
and  this  is  imputed  to  us  by  believing  in  Him.  This  was  the  way  in  which  the 
father  of  the  faithful  found  righteousness,  and  was  justified  in  the  sight  of  God, 
and  in  this  only  a  soul  can  be  clothed  at  the  great  day.  Have  you  never  made  any 
show  of  religion,  but  have  lived  altogether  without  seeking  righteousness  hitherto  ? 
Now  let  it  be  so  no  more  ;  come  now  to  Jesus,  the  Friend  of  publicans  and  sinners, 
and  He  who  hanged  naked  on  the  Cross  will  hide  your  shame.  Or,  are  you  devout 
and  religious  ?  Have  you  attempted  by  the  law  and  striven  by  works  to  become 
righteous,  and  when  ye  failed  patched  up  your  rags  with  Christ's  merits,  God's 
mercy,  and  the  like  ?  Have  ye,  to  quiet  your  conscience,  mingled  the  woollen  and 
linen  together?  Now,  then,  throw  away  the  linsey-woolsey  cloth,  the  forbidden 
garment,  the  unclean  and  illegal  dress,  and  approach  naked  to  Him  who  clothes 
the  lilies  of  the  field,  and  He  will  be  your  covering,  and  you  shall  appear  at  His 
wedding  in  linen  clean  and  white.     {John  Cennick. )        The  unmixed  garment : — 

1.  Such  a  command  may  seem  very  strange  to  us — that  they  were  not  to  mix  wool 
and  linen  in  the  same  garment ;  but  after  mature  reflection,  we  are  led  to  see  the 
infinite  care  God  has  over  the  smallest  interests  of  His  people  ;  it  shows,  also,  that 
God  sees  an  infinite  fitness  of  things  which  is  too  fine  for  our  gross  apprehension. 

2.  Scripture  has  its  only  true  and  pre-eminent  meaning  when  applied  to  the  inner 
moral  robing  of  Christians.  "We  are  not  to  have  our  soul's  garniture  mixed,  partly 
of  the  wool  of  carnality  and  partly  of  the  linen  of  spirituality.  Grant  that  the 
great  majority  of  believers,  or  more  strictly  half-believers,  are  sadly  mixed  in  their 
religious  character  and  experience ;  grant  also  that  every  Christian  is  mixed — 
partly  spiritual  and  partly  carnal — in  the  first  stage  of  grace,  yet  the  only  and 
universal  standard  in  the  Scriptures  of  Divine  truth  is  unmixedness  of  moral 
character,    {ff,  Daniel,) 


CHAPTER  XXni. 


Ver.  5.  The  Lord  thy  God  turned  the  curse  into  a  hlessins.— Balaam's  curse 
turned  into  a  blessing  by  God : — Here  a  difficult  question  meets  us.  Was  there  any 
reality  whatever  in  Balaam's  curse  ?  Or  was  it  altogether  a  harmless  thing — in 
fact,  nothing  at  all  ?  If  there  was  nothing  in  it,  why  should  it  have  been  averted  ? 
Why  should  it  be  said  that  God  "  would  not  hearken  unto  Balaam  "  ?  Why  not  let 
it  be  pronounced  ?  The  result  would  have  shown  that  there  was  no  power  or  reality 
in  it.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  difficult  to  suppose  that  such  power  could  reside  in 
a  curse,  especially  when  spoken  by  such  a  man  as  Balaam.  One  thing  is  certain, 
that  God  Himself  never  did  give  false  prophets  power  to  curse.  Could  they,  then, 
derive  it  from  any  other  quarter  ?  Why  not  from  Satan  ?  No  creature  is  absolutely 
independent ;  all  are  instruments  in  the  hands  of  another.  If  through  grace  we 
have  been  placed  in  the  kingdom  of  light,  then  we  are  instruments  in  the  hands  of 
God.  If  we  are  in  the  kingdom  of  darkness,  we  can  only  be  instruments  in  the 
hands  of  Satan  ;  a  curse  and  not  a  blessing  to  others.  Now,  heathenism  is  one 
great  territory  of  Satan's  power — one  chief  part  of  his  kingdom  of  darkness.  He 
reigns  supreme  there.  We  believe,  then,  that  within  the  sphere  of  his  kingdom  of 
darkness  Satan  has  power  to  employ  false  prophets  as  his  instruments — has  power 
to  enable  them  to  curse,  and  to  fulfil  their  curse  when  pronounced.  The  conflict 
here,  then,  was  not  merely  one  between  the  king  of  Moab  and  Israel,  but  between 
the  kingdom  of  light  in  Israel  and  the  kingdom  of  darkness  in  Moab  and  Midian. 
Balaam's  curse  would  have  been  the  utterance  of  the  power  of  darkness ;  but  he  was 
oblige^,  however  reluctantly,  to  confess  his  impotency  before  God.     It  was  an  act  of 


CHAP.  XXIII.]  DEUTERONOMY,  423 

Divine  power  when  God  turned  the  curse  into  a  blessing.  It  showed  His  watchful 
care  and  love  towards  His  people.  And  what  is  it  that  God  is  accomplishing  now 
by  the  gift  of  His  son  and  the  power  of  His  grace,  but  turning  the  curse  into  a 
blessing?  Oh,  there  is  a  widespread  curse,  which  has  long  been  resting  upon  this 
guilty  world,  the  curse  pronounced  on  man's  disobedience;  and  what  makes  it  so 
awful  is,  that  it  is  a  righteous  curse.  Wherever  we  look  we  see  its  tokens — man 
doomed  to  a  life  of  weary  labour,  suffering  from  different  kinds  of  sickness,  and  at 
last  seized  with  the  irresistible  hand  of  death  ;  so  that  St.  Paul  says,  "The  whole 
creation  groaneth  and  travaileth  in  pain  together  until  now."  But  to  the  children 
of  God  this  threefold  curse  is  changed  by  the  grace  of  God  into  a  blessing.  Look  at 
the  lowest  element  of  the  curse,  that  of  labour,  according  to  the  sentence,  *'  In  the 
sweat  of  thy  face  shalt  thou  eat  bread."  How  wearisome  is  ceaseless  toil  in  itself  1 
But  to  the  true  Christian  how  different  is  toil  and  labour  !  He  consecrates  his 
powers  to  Him  who  has  redeemed  him  with  His  precious  blood  !  Or  look  at  sickness. 
What  is  it  but  the  visible  reflection  of  a  spiritual  disease  within  ?  If  the  image  of 
God  had  not  been  obliterated  from  the  soul  by  sin  there  would  have  been  no  sickness 
or  sorrow  in  the  world.  No  miracle  is  exerted  to  exempt  the  Christian  from  this 
trial.  But  its  nature  is  changed  ;  there  is  no  longer  any  curse  in  it.  How  many 
can  bless  God  for  it,  painful  as  it  may  have  been — can  bless  God  for  His  sanctifying 
and  sustaining  power — for  the  near  communion  with  Jesus  which  they  then  enjoyed 
— for  the  hallowed  impressions  made  upon  their  souls ;  and,  most  of  all,  for  the 
manifestations  of  God's  faithfulness  and  tenderness — of  His  power  and  gentleness. 
But  of  all  the  elements  of  the  curse  the  most  manifest  and  the  most  awful  is  death 
— so  universal  in  its  reign — so  tremendous  in  its  power — so  mysterious  in  its  nature. 
We  can  scarcely  stand  by  a  dying  bed  without  the  question  pressing  itself  upon  our 
thoughts — oh,  why  this  convulsion  ?  Why  this  distressing  and  humiliating  close 
to  our  life  here?  One  answer  can  only  be  given — It  is  because  of  sin.  "Death 
passed  upon  all  men  in  that  all  have  sinned."  To  the  Christian  its  sting  is  drawn. 
It  is  but  the  rending  of  the  veil  which  separates  his  soul  from  the  visible  presence  of 
his  Eedeemer.     {G.  Wagner.) 

Ver.  14.  The  Lord  thy  God  walketh  in  the  midst  of  thy  camp.— Camp  law  and 
eamp  life:— I.  An  instructive  comparison.  The  Church  of  God  is  in  many 
respects  comparable  to  a  camp.  1.  It  is  a  camp  for  separation.  We  are  crusaders, 
and  are  separated  from  the  mass  for  the  service  of  the  Cross  which  we  bear  on  our 
hearts.  We  are  in  an  enemy's  country,  and  we  must  keep  ourselves  to  ourselves 
very  much,  or  else  we  shall  certainly  fail  of  that  holy  military  discipline  which  the 
Captain  of  our  salvation  would  have  us  strictly  enforce.  2.  It  is  a  camp,  because  it 
is  on  the  defensive.  3.  It  is  a  camp,  especially,  because  it  is  always  assailing  the 
powers  of  darkness.  We  have  a  world  to  conquer,  and  we  cannot  afford  to  loiter. 
We  have  a  kingdom  to  set  up  for  the  Lord  of  hosts,  and  we  must  not  sleep,  for  the 
adversaries  of  the  Lord  are  raging.  We  are  an  army,  sworn  to  war  against  the 
Canaanites  of  error  and  sin,  to  cast  down  their  walled  cities,  to  break  their  idols, 
and  to  cut  down  their  groves.  4.  It  is  a  camp,  because  we  are  on  the  march.  We 
ought  to  be  advancing  in  grace,  in  knowledge,  in  earnestness,  in  holiness,  in  use- 
fulness, and  if  not  we  scarcely  realise  the  figure  of  a  camp.  5.  Yet,  once  more,  no 
doubt,  a  camp,  as  formed  for  temporary  purposes,  was  a  token  of  the  Church  ;  for 
although  the  Church  stands  stOl  and  abides,  yet  in  her  individual  members  she  is 
subject  to  the  same  law  of  decay,  and  death,  and  change  as  the  rest  of  the  world. 
Soon  shall  the  camp  cease,  and  the  soldiers  become  citizens,  and  the  tents  be 
exchanged  for  mansions.  II.  A  special  privilege.  1.  God  is  present  in  the 
camp  of  His  people  with  a  special  presence  of  love.  The  Church  is  the  garden  of 
the  Lord,  His  paradise.  Where  is  a  father  most  at  home  but  with  his  children  ? 
2.  God  is  present  in  the  camp  of  His  people  with  a  special  presence  of  observation. 
He  sees  all  things  ;  but  His  eyes  are,  in  the  first  place,  fixed  on  His  Church.  With 
burning  glance  He  searches  the  very  heart  of  professors.  3.  The  peculiar  privilege 
of  Israel  is  to  have  a  special  presence  of  salvation.  "The  Lord  thy  God  walketh  in 
the  midst  of  thy  camp  to  deliver  thee."  God  is  with  His  people,  to  help  them  in 
their  times  of  trouble,  to  rescue  them  out  of  danger,  to  answer  their  cries  in  their 
necessity,  to  save  them  in  the  hour  of  temptation.  4.  The  Lord  is  with  the  camp 
of  His  people,  as  a  special  presence  for  victory.  5.  It  is  a  special  presence  in 
covenant.  "The  Lord  ^^j/ God."  III.  A  corresponding  conduct.  1.  This  rule, 
that  the  camp  be  holy,  applies  to  the  commonest  places  wherein  we  are  found.  The 
Holy  Spirit  arrays  you  in  the  white  raiment  of  holiness,  that  you  may  shine  out 


424  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxiii. 

"bright  and  clear  and  distinct  before  the  sons  of  men.  2.  While  this  holiness 
pertained  to  their  commonest  things,  it  was  also  ordered  that  every  unclean  thing 
was  to  be  put  from  them.  Let  us  come  continually  to  the  washiug-place— even  to 
the  fountain  opened.  Let  us  beseech  the  cleansing  Spirit  to  operate  as  with  fire, 
and  burn  His  purifying  way  through  and  through  our  souls.  3.  Note  well  the 
fearful  warning  which  is  added.  If  there  be  in  the  camp  an  unclean  thing  tolerated 
and  delighted  in,  and  He  see  it— if  it  becomes  conspicuous  and  grievous  to  Him, 
then  the  worst  consequences  will  follow — "Lest  He  turn  away  from  thee,"  Oh! 
what  would  happen  to  us  if  the  Lord  were  to  turn  away  from  us  as  a  Church  ? 
(C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Vers.  15,  16.  Thou  Shalt  not  deliver  unto  his  master  the  servant  which  is 
escaped. —  The  escaped  slave: — A  Flemish  artist  was  painting  a  picture  when  two 
friends  noticed  the  high  finish  of  a  broom  which  was  only  an  insignificant  item  in 
the  composition.  He  told  them  he  should  spend  three  more  days  in  working  on 
the  broom,  intending  to  be  mindful  of  detail  in  the  general  effect  of  his  picture. 
Moses  gave  grand  laws  to  the  Israelites.  His  legislation  as  to  the  religious  duties 
of  the  people  is  sublime.  But  he  was  not  indifferent  to  regulations  touching  their 
common  life,  and  bent  his  mind  to  the  task  of  showing  the  minute  as  well  as  the 
vast  in  the  order  of  right-doing.  The  word  servant  as  used  by  Moses  meant  slave. 
Remembering  what  the  Israelites  had  to  endure  in  their  Egyptian  bondage,  he  had 
great  sympathy  with  those  who  were  held  in  servitude  and  compelled  to  work 
without  remuneration.  He  could  well  understand  that  a  man  or  woman  in  slavery, 
badly  treated,  and  with  no  hope  of  an  ameliorated  lot,  would,  if  possible,  get  away 
from  the  cruel  owner  and  make  a  desperate  rush  for  liberty.  He  did  not  blame  the 
slave  for  stealing  away  from  the  owner.  If  technically  there  was  theft  in  such  an 
action,  there  was  no  dishonesty.  The  slaves  who  at  one  time  escaped  from  southern 
plantations  to  Canada  did  no  wrong.  The  masters  suffered  loss,  but  they  lost  what 
did  not  belong  to  them  by  any  righteous  law.  There  is  a  moral  and  spiritual 
application  of  this.  Many  people  are  in  slavery.  It  is  true  they  have  not  lost 
their  civil  liberty  ;  they  have  not  been  sold  in  any  slave-market ;  they  know 
nothing  of  literal  chains,  scourges,  and  labour  for  which  there  is  no  payment. 
They  are  proud  of  the  freedom  which  is  one  of  the  glories  of  their  native  land.  But 
they  are  slaves,  for  they  are  in  bondage  to  evils  which  they  have  allowed  to  obtain 
mastery  over  their  souls.  There  are  powers  in  them  which  make  them  feeble  for 
action  when  they  would  do  good,  and  almost  force  them  to  transgression  of  Divine 
law.  They  have  a  right  to  break  loose  from  the  enthralling  powers  of  sin,  for  sin 
holds  nothing  by  legal  proprietorship.  Every  sinner  has  a  right  to  freedom,  and  is 
urged  to  rush  to  Jesus  as  a  refuge  from  tyranny.  The  escaped  slave  was  to  be  kept 
from  the  pursuer.  When  in  the  morning  the  master  called  for  the  slave,  and  thei-© 
was  no  answer,  and  looked  for  him,  but  could  not  find  him,  he  would  conclude  at 
once  that  the  slave  had  gone  away.  Making  inquiries,  the  master  would  ascertain 
the  direction  the  fugitive  had  gone,  and  follow  him  until  he  found  the  place  in 
which  he  was  hiding.  He  would  say  to  the  elders  :  "My  slave  is  here,  and  I  must 
have  him.  Give  him  up  to  me."  "  No,  no"  was  to  be  the  reply  ;  "  we  shall  never 
give  him  up,  and  so  long  as  these  walls  stand  the  poor  man  shall  be  kept  out  of 
your  hands."  We  rejoice  that  our  country  has  long  been  what  the  Israelitish  village 
and  city  were  to  be  to  the  escaped  slave  in  the  old  time.  The  footprint  of  the  slave 
on  British  soil  is  the  certificate  of  his  manumission.  When  the  slaves  of  sin  get 
loose  from  their  bonds,  and  escape  into  Immanuel's  land,  they  at  once  experience 
the  blessedness  there  is  in  the  liberty  of  the  children  of  God.  Christ  never  gives  up 
to  any  old  master  those  who  have  fled  for  refuge  to  His  land ;  He  loves  them  so 
much  that  He  does  not  wish  to  have  them  out  of  His  sight  ;  and  to  defend  them 
from  the  powers  which  would  tear  them  back  to  sin  He  throws  around  them  the 
awful  grandeur  and  radiant  blaze  of  His  own  perfections.  The  escaped  slave  was 
to  be  kindly  treated.  The  man  who  had  made  a  rush  for  freedom  was  not  to  rush 
into  a  new  slavery.  Those  to  whom  he  fled  for  refuge  were  not  to  take  advantage 
of  his  necessities  and  use  him  in  compulsory  labour  for  their  own  profit ;  no  service 
or  tax  was  to  be  levied  on  him  as  the  price  of  security  from  his  old  master.  He 
was  to  be  treated  as  a  free  Israelite,  and  to  be  allowed  to  live  and  work  where  he 
liked.  The  sinner  who  escapes  from  slavery  to  Immanuel's  land  is  to  be  welcomed 
and  cared  for  by  members  of  the  Church.  He  is  to  be  recognised  as  having  a  claim 
to  brotherly  love,  and  to  all  the  dignities  and  privileges  that  distinguish  the 
Christian  life.     Even  if  members  of  the  Church  do  look  shyly  on  a  newly  converted 


CHAP.  XXIII.]  DEUTERONOMY,  425 

sinner,  Jesus  does  not,  but  bids  him  welcome  to  the  palace  of  love,  and  opens  to  him 
immensities  of  blessing.     {J.  MarrcU.) 

Ver.  22.  If  thou  shalt  forbear  to  rovr.— Extraordinary  and  particular  vows 
considered  as  not  necessary  wider  the  Mosaic  or  expedient  under  the  Christian  institu- 
tion .—I.  The  natuke  of  vows  under  the  Jewish  dispensation  :  which,  as 
they  are  particularly  voluntary  engagements,  we  ought  to  observe  when  made, 
though  we  cannot  infer  a  necessity  of  making  them  from  the  Divine  law  or  the 
nature  of  things.  It  would  seem  but  an  ill  consequence  should  we  thus  argue  :  God 
has  commanded  us  in  general  to  lionour  Him  with  our  substance,  and  therefore  we 
ought  to  make  ourselves  liable  to  His  judgments,  if  in  such  a  particular  case,  at 
such  a  particular  time,  and  to  such  a  particular  degree  we  do  it  not.  This  I  say 
would  be  but  an  ill  consequence,  though  there  may  be  some  fit  reasons  assigned 
why  such  particular  vows  were  used  by  good  and  pious  men  under  the  circumcision 
(Gen.  xxviii.  20  ;  Judg.  xi.  20,  31  ;  2  Sam.  xv.  7,  8).  Hence  we  observe  that 
things  consecrated  or  desecrated,  though  they  are  in  a  vulgar  sense  styled  devoted, 
are  not  always  reducible  imder  the  general  nature  of  a  vow,  in  the  proper  and 
scriptural  sense  of  the  word,  and  there  seems  to  be  a  greater  diflerence  than  is 
commonly  apprehended  between  them.  Thus  much  may  suffice  to  determine  the 
notion  of  vows  as  they  are  distinguished  from  other  sacrifices  under  the  Jewish 
dispensation  ;  but  it  will  still  be  more  clear  from  some  further  reflections  upon  the 
lawful  matter  of  them.  For  this  we  need  only  in  general  observe  that  everything 
which  was  not  appropriated  to  God,  which  was  not  profaned,  or  which  was  not 
properly  under  the  right  or  arbitrament  of  another,  was  the  subject  matter  of  them. 
From  whence  it  follows  that  tenths  in  the  first  place  were,  under  the  Mosaic  law, 
excluded  from  it,  and  that  these  could  not  be  vowed  to  the  Almighty,  or  be 
accepted  by  Him  as  a  freely  promised  off'ering,  because  they  were  properly  His 
before  both  by  prescription  and  command.  Again,  nothing  which  was  profaned  or 
unclean,  unless  as  it  was  redeemable,  could  be  the  matter  of  a  vow.  The  heathens, 
for  the  generality,  had  more  exalted  notions  than  to  think  their  gods  would  be 
gratified  with  such  sacrifices  as  were  held  in  contempt  by  themselves,  and  were  in 
their  kind  of  least  estimation  with  them.  Lastly,  whatsoever  was  under  the  right 
and  power  of  another  was  excluded  from  the  matter  of  a  vow,  and  therefore  those 
who  were  subject  to  the  authority  of  fathers  or  husbands  were  by  the  law  not 
obliged  to  the  performance  of  vows  made  without  their  consent  during  their  right 
and  power  over  them.  II.  Under  the  Gospel  the  Christian's  vows  are  com- 
prehended UNDER  the   sacramental,   AND  THEREFORE  PARTICULAR  VOWS  ARE 

NEITHER  NECESSARY  NOR  EXPEDIENT.  It  may  be  proper  to  give  a  fit  instance  or 
two  of  particular  vows  in  order  to  settle  what  are  so.  We  are,  in  general,  by  our 
baptismal  covenant,  obliged  to  renounce  all  the  sinful  lusts  of  the  flesh,  and  in 
consequence  of  this  are  obliged  to  make  use  of  the  means  prescribed,  suppose 
mortitication  by  fasting.  But  should  we  by  a  solemn  promise  to  God  Almighty 
oblige  ourselves  to  abstain  such  a  number  of  days  or  hours,  this  circumstance 
nowhere  enjoined  would  make  it  a  particular  vow.  Again,  we  are  obliged  by  our 
general  vow  to  acts  of  charity  and  piety  ;  but  should  we  make  a  voluntary  promise 
to  God  to  bestow  at  such  a  future  time  such  a  certain  sum  to  such  an  assigned  use 
in  view  of  such  a  desired  blessing,  this  would  also  be  a  particular  vow.  And  these 
are  the  vows  which  I  undertake  to  prove  neither  necessary  nor  expedient.  If  they 
had  been  necessary,  we  might  reasonably  suppose  that  as  our  Saviour  appointed 
that  grand  one  for  the  initiation  of  His  followers,  He  would  also  have  prescribed  the 
other,  either  by  precept  or  practice,  for  the  perfection  of  them,  that  so  the  use  of 
them  might  have  been  derived  by  authority  to  the  Christian  Church,  as  it  was  to  the 
Jews  from  the  patriarchs.  But  we  have  no  instance  of  this  kind,  either  from  our 
Saviour,  His  apostles,  or  followers,  in  the  New  Testament.  And  if  we  take  them,  under 
the  general  notion,  as  acts  of  gratitude,  by  which  the  good  Christian  promises  to  God 
the  acknowledgment  of  a  blessing  by  a  suitable  offering  and  oblation,  though  it  is 
lawful  and  not  absurd,  as  Calvin  expresses  it,  to  enter  into  such  engagements,  yet 
what  advantage  this  method  of  acknowledgment  has  above  others  is  not  easily 
discerned.  Should  the  pious  Christian  be  made  a  peculiar  favourite  of  heaven,  and 
blessed  with  extraordinary  advantages,  either  in  prospect  or  possession,  he  may  by 
his  free  gifts  and  offerings  give  a  more  noble  and  generous  instance  of  his  pious 
resentment,  which  under  the  law  were  always  deemed  the  most  acceptable  sacrifices, 
and  must  recommend  to  the  favour  of  the  Almighty,  who  loveth  a  cheerful  giver, 
whereas  he,  who  lays  a  constraint  upon  himself,  may  give  afterwards  with  an 


426  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxiv. 

unwilling  mind,  and  thougli  he  pays  the  vow,  may  not  answer  the  end  of  it.  And 
it  is  for  these  reasons,  I  presume,  that  the  Jewish  doctors  discouraged  and  deterred 
their  scholars  from  such  kind  of  vows.  But  were  they  ever  so  expedient,  the  ill 
use  which  has  been  made  of  the  doctrine  of  particular  vows  by  the  Church  of  Rome 
would  be  enough  to  give  us  a  prejudice  against  them.     {^T.  SUvester,  M.A.) 

Vers.  24,  25.  Thou  mayest  eat  grapes. — Grapes  and  ears  of  com  free : — Thus  a 
privilege  was  granted,  but  one  strictly  limited.  A  man  who  was  thirsty  might 
help  himself  to  as  many  grapes  as  he  cared  to  eat,  but  he  was  not  to  take  any  away. 
A  man  who  was  hungry  might  pluck  ears  of  corn,  as  the  disciples  of  Jesus  did,  and 
eat  the  grains,  but  he  was  not  to  carry  a  sheaf  from  the  field.  In  this  manner 
property  was  guarded.  This  is  in  harmony  with  the  biblical  law  of  property 
generally  honoured  at  the  present  time.  Even  those  who  denounce  individual 
property  in  land  and  minerals,  and  wish  to  nationalise  them,  do  not  advocate  such 
nationalisation  without  payment  to  the  proprietors.  If  ownership  in  land  were  set 
aside,  the  poor  might  lose  the  farm  or  the  field  bequeathed  for  their  benefit.  If 
ownership  in  money  or  goods  were  set  aside,  the  widow  might  lose  her  small  annuity, 
and  even  have  to  give  up  the  old  watch  she  values  as  having  belonged  to  her 
husband,  and  the  treasured  curiosities  brought  by  her  sailor  son  fi*om  a  foreign  land. 
Still,  the  best  property  human  beings  possess  is  the  mental  and  spiritual  wealth 
they  carry  in  their  mind  and  heart.  In  other  words,  they  may  have  history, 
biography,  poetry,  religion  as  the  treasures  of  their  inner  life.  The  owners  of 
property  are  not  to  be  greedily  selfish.  Nothing  was  said  by  Moses  to  the 
proprietor  or  tenant  of  the  vineyard  or  corn-field,  but  much  was  implied.  If  he 
saw  a  man,  woman,  or  child  pulling  a  cluster  of  grapes,  he  was  not  to  be  in  a 
tempest  of  wrath,  as  though  some  great  wrong  had  been  done  him,  or  to  threaten 
the  intruder  with  a  criminal  action.  The  man  was  rather  to  be  glad  that  out  of  his 
abundance  thirsty  and  hungry  wayfarers  could  have  their  needs  so  readily  supplied. 
Those  who  have  are  to  be  generous  to  those  who  have  not.  Every  rich  man  in  the 
country  who  does  not  value  his  riches  as  power  to  do  good  is  an  enemy  to  himself 
and  the  country.  The  limitation  of  privilege  in  the  vineyard  and  the  corn-field 
enjoined  by  Moses  was  an  implied  exhortation  to  industry.  Grapes  might  be  eaten 
in  the  vineyard,  but  no  vessel  was  to  be  filled  with  them  and  carried  away.  Those 
who  wanted  grapes  for  the  wine-press  were  to  grow  grapes.  Ears  of  corn  might  be 
plucked,  but  the  sickle  was  not  to  be  used  in  the  field.  Those  who  wanted  corn  to 
grind  were  to  plough,  to  sow,  and  reap  in  their  own  fields  ;  there  was  to  be  no 
greedy  appropriation  of  the  fruit  for  which  other  men  had  laboured.  It  is  much 
better  for  human  beings  to  act  for  themselves  than  indolently  to  lean  on  others. 
There  is  no  food  so  good  as  that  which  a  man  earns  with  his  own  hands.  Labour  is 
the  law  of  the  spiritual  as  well  as  of  the  temporal  sphere.  Those  who  wish  to  attain 
a  good  degree  in  the  Church,  and  to  win  the  eulogiums  pronounced  on  Christ's 
faithful  servants,  must  work  hard  for  themselves,  that  they  may  learn  how  to  work 
hard  for  others.  They  must  read  much,  think  much,  pray  much.  In  one  of  his 
hooks  Lord  Beaconsfield  represents  a  youth  as  saying,  ' '  I  should  like  to  be  a  gi'eat 
man."  The  counsel  given  him  was:  "You  must  nourish  your  mind  with  great 
thoughts."  Those  who  wish  to  rank  high  in  Christ's  service  must  appropriate 
great  thoughts,  and  make  them  their  own  by  reflection  and  meditation.  There 
is  no  way  to  usefulness  except  by  ardent  toil.  It  is  only  by  setting  ourselves 
to  work  that  we  shaU  be  able  to  aflord  grapes  and  corn  to  famishing  souls. 
(J.  Marrat.) 


CHAPTER  XXIV. 


Ver.  6.  Free  at  home. — Home : — Some  words  contain  a  history  in  themselves, 
and  are  the  monuments  of  great  movements  of  thought  and  life.  Such  a  word  is 
"home."  With  something  like  a  sacramental  sacredness  it  enshrines  a  deep  and 
precious  meaning  and  a  history.  That  the  English-speaking  people  and  their  con- 
geners alone  should  have  this  word,  indicates  that  there  are  certain  peculiar  domestic 
and  social  traits  of  character  belonging  to  them.  When  we  study  their  history  we 
find  that  from  the  very  first  they  have  been  distinguished,  as  Tacitus  tells  us,  by  the 
manlj  and  womanly  virtues  of  fidelity  and  chastity ;  by  the  faithful  devotion  of 


CHAP.  XXIV.]  DEUTERONOMY.  427 

wife  to  husband  and  husband  to  wife  ;  by  the  recognised  headship  and  guardianship 
of  the  married  man  as  indicated  in  the  old  word  "husband,"  and  the  domestic 
dignity  and  function  of  the  married  woman  as  indicated  in  the  old  word  "wife," 
betokening  the  presence  of  those  home-making,  home-keeping,  home-loving  qualities 
of  mind  and  heart  which  have  always  belonged  to  this  sturdy  race.  And  when  upon 
these  qualities  the  vitalising,  sanctifying  influence  of  Christianity  was  brought  to 
bear,  the  outcome  has  been  the  building  up  of  the  noblest  of  all  the  institutions  of 
the  Christian  life.  No  man  is  poor,  no  matter  what  storms  of  ill-fortune  have 
beaten  upon  him,  who  can  still  find  refuge  beneath  its  sacred  shelter  ;  and  no  man 
is  rich,  no  matter  how  splendid  his  fortune  or  his  lot,  who  cannot  claim  some  spot  of 
earth  as  his  home.  My  purpose,  however,  is  neither  philological  nor  ethnological ; 
it  is  rather  to  speak  of  the  function  of  Christianity  in  the  home.  It  is  upon  God's 
special  enactment  that  this  great  institution  rests.  Its  function  is  to  carry  out  His 
purposes  in  training  and  ennobling  men  to  do  His  will.  Its  perfection  is  the  reflec- 
tion of  His  love  in  the  majestic  order  of  His  Godhead  with  fatherhood,  sonship,  life; 
its  beatitude  is  the  maintenance  on  earth  of  the  peace  and  purity  of  heaven.  Tak- 
ing the  Christian  home  as  we  know  it,  then,  there  are  certain  broad  features  of  its 
economy,  the  mention  of  which  will  serve  to  bring  out  its  character.  I.  The  first  of 
these  is  its  unity  of  orderly  administration,  in  the  supreme  headship  of  one 
man,  the  husband  ;  the  supreme  dignity  of  one  woman,  the  wife  ;  the  providence  of 
parental  love  in  the  nurture  of  children,  and  the  natural  piety  of  children  in  their 
reverence  and  obedience  to  their  parents.  1.  First,  with  reference  to  the  discipline  of 
the  home,  it  is  to  be  remembered  that  there  is  a  home  discipline  to  which  all  the 
members  thereof  are  subject — the  father  and  mother  not  less  than  the  children. 
The  husband  and  father,  the  wife  and  mother,  while  they  are  the  source  of  authority 
in  the  home,  are  themselves  under  the  authority  of  the  God  and  Father  of  all,  of 
whose  great  economy  they  are  the  earthly  representatives.  2.  The  only  basis,  for 
instance,  on  which  the  headship  of  the  husband  can  securely  rest  is  in  its  con- 
formity to  the  headship  of  Christ  over  His  Church.  From  Christ  he  learns  that  all 
his  true  authority  is  derived  from  self-surrender,  all  his  real  power  from  self-sacrifice. 
Nor  is  the  wife,  the  husband's  consort,  exempt  from  this  discipline  of  self-sacrificing 
love.  Such  service,  indeed,  the  fond  mother-heart  of  woman  is  quick  to  render,  and 
therein  lies  the  hiding  of  her  power.  But  this  service  is  due  not  to  children  only, 
but  to  the  husband  as  well.  And  this  is  to  be  shown  not  only  in  those  gentle 
ministries  of  the  home  which  every  good  wife  is  glad  to  render,  and  in  the  rendering 
of  which  her  true  queenship  lies"  but  it  is  to  be  shown  likewise  in  the  rever- 
ence which  she  ought  always  to  feel  towards  the  husband.  Whensoever  the  wife  acts 
on  this  principle,  she  calls  out  what  is  noblest  in  her  husband.  To  such  parental 
authority  I  need  not  say  that  children  ought  to  be  altogether  obedient  in  all  things. 
Obedience  is  the  crown  and  grace  of  childhood,  without  which  no  child  can  learn  to 
be  strong  and  great ;  without  which  no  child  can  be  lovable  or  lovely.  II.  In  the 
next  place,  let  me  speak  of  three  dangers  that  beset  the  Cheistian  home — 
care,  worldliness,  and  passion.  1.  First,  care.  The  lives  of  all  earnest  men  are  full 
of  care.  Men  have  to  toil  and  struggle  to  keep  their  place  while  the  busy  world  is 
moving.  There  is  one  thing  that  can  be  done,  however,  and  that  is,  we  can  keep 
care  away  from  the  sacred  precincts  of  the  home.  2.  Even  more  fatal  to  the  peace 
and  safety  of  the  home  is  worldliness — the  worldliness  of  the  husband  which  takes 
him  away  from  his  home  in  the  calm  evenings.  But  even  worse  is  the  worldliness  of 
the  wife.  No  woman  is  fit  to  be  the  queen  she  ought  to  be  in  her  own  household 
who  does  not,  no  matter  what  her  station  may  be,  find  her  chief  pleasure  and 
count  her  chief  delight  in  the  employments  and  endearments  of  her  home.  3.  And 
lastly,  passion.  Not  to  speak  of  its  darker  aspects — the  fretful,  peevish,  ungovern- 
able temper,  the  hasty  word,  the  harsh  unloving  look,  the  little  unkindnesses — oh, 
how  often  do  these  break  up  the  peace,  and  finally  desolate  the  home  !  Therefore 
there  is  need  of  prayer  in  the  home.  Therefore  there  is  need  that  the  fire  of  sacri- 
fice should  be  always  kept  burning  on  its  altars.  But  when  this  is  so,  then  we  see 
the  blessedness  of  a  Christian  home.  Beneath  its  shelter  alone  can  the  care-worn 
toiler  and  thinker  lay  his  heavy  burden  down  ;  in  its  calm  haven  alone  can  the  weary 
or  storm-tossed  spirit  find  rest.    {Bp.  S.  S.  Harris. ) 

Ver,  6.  No  man  shaU  take  the  nether  or  the  upper  miUstone  to  pledge.— T^A^  law 

respecting  millstones: — The  Jewish  law  was  important  to  that  people  as  their 
national  code.  Its  enactments  were  wisely  adapted  to  their  condition  and  the 
land  they  inhabited,  and  were  calculated  to  secure  their  prosperity.     But  these 


428  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxiv. 

considerations  alone  would  not  have  justified  its  adoption  in  the  Word  of  God.  The 
Divine  mind  aims  at  higher  objects  than  those  which  are  included  in  this  world's 
prosperity.  Who  c^n  imagine,  with  a  worthy  idea  of  infinite  wisdom,  the  laws  of 
this  and  the  two  foregoing  chapters  to  have  come  from  God,  unless  besides  the  letter 
in  which  they  served  the  Jews,  they  have  some  deeper  import  by  which  they  can 
give  wisdom  to  Christians  1  Before  jiroceeding  further  with  the  subject  before  us, 
let  me  remind  you  of  tbat  most  important  fact,  which  is  equally  true  in  vegetable 
growth  and  in  the  growth  of  religion,  that  all  progress  is  gradual.  It  is  **  first  the 
blade,  then  the  ear,  and  then  the  full  corn  in  the  ear."  But  corn,  before  it  is  fit  for 
human  food,  must  be  brought  to  the  mill  and  ground  ;  and  this  operation  is  more 
especially  connected  with  the  subject  before  us.  I.  The  use  of  grinding  is  two- 
fold :  FIRST,  THE  SEPARATION  OF  THE  HUSK  AND  LESS  NUTRITIOUS  PORTION  FROM 
THE  RICHER  INTERIOR  SUBSTANCE  OF  THE  CORN  ;  AND  SECONDLY,  THE  TRITURA- 
TION AND  PULVERISING,  WHICH  REDUCES  THE  GRAIN  TO  FLOUR,  AND  THUS  PRE- 
SENTS  IT  FULLY  PREPARED  FOR  THE  SUSTENTATION  OF  MAN.       Both  these   essential 

services  are  done  by  the  mill.  In  ancient  times  each  family  had  its  own  mill,  and 
the  flour  for  daily  use  was  ground  each  day.  The  mill  was  composed  of  two  circular 
flat  stones ;  one  the  upper,  the  other  the  lower.  In  the  upper  one  there  was  a  hole, 
in  which  a  wooden  handle  was  fixed,  by  which  it  was  made  to  go  round.  The  per- 
sons grinding  sat  to  their  work,  and  frequently  when  women  did  it  there  would  be 
two,  and  one  passed  the  handle  round  to  the  other,  and  so  the  work  went  on.  To 
this  our  blessed  Lord  alludes  when  He  says,  at  the  end  of  the  Church,  meant  by  the 
end  of  the  age,  or  world  :  "Two  women  shall  be  grinding  at  the  mill,  the  one  shall 
be  taken  and  the  other  left"  (Matt.  xxiv.  41).  These  circumstances  all  guide  us  to 
the  correspondence.  Corn  corresponds  to  the  good  in  life  to  which  truth  leads. 
The  virtues  which  our  views  of  religion  open  up  to  us  are  a  harvest  of  graces  ;  but, 
as  general  principles,  they  are  not  quite  ready  for  daily  use.  They  require  to  be 
rationally  investigated,  to  be  stripped  of  the  forms  in  which  we  learned  them,  and 
to  be  accommodated  to  our  own  wants  and  circumstances.  This  is  one  of  the  works 
of  the  rational  faculty  in  man.  In  this  respect  it  is  a  spiritual  mill.  To  know  and 
understand  tlie  truth,  that  we  may  love  and  practise  it,  this  is  the  spirit  in  which  to 
read  and  hear  the  Word.  The  wisdom  Ave  understand  enters  into  the  mind,  the 
wisdom  we  love  enters  into  the  heart.  "The  opening  of  Thy  words  giveth  light,  it 
giveth  understanding  unto  the  simple"  (Psa.  cxix.  130).  The  words  which  remain 
in  the  memory,  and  do  not  enter  the  intellect,  leave  us,  and  have  left  the  world, 
unenlightened  aud  unedified.  The  grand  use  of  the  rational  faculty,  then,  as  a 
spiritual  mill  is  evident.  May  we  never  surrender  it,  or  barter  it  away.  But  the 
mill  had  two  stones,  an  upper  and  a  nether  millstone.  Stones  represent  truths  of 
doctrine,  especially  in  relation  to  the  firmness  they  aff'ord  as  a  foundation  and  a 
defensive  wall  to  our  faith.  In  this  sense  stones  are  constantly  employed  in  the 
Word  (Isa,  xxviii.  16  ;  Matt.  vii.  24,  25  ;  Luke  xx.  17  ;  1  Pet  ii.  5).  The  two  stones 
of  which  the  mill  consists  represent  the  two  grand  truths  into  which  the  whole 
Word  divides  itself :  those  which  teach  love  to  God  and  love  to  man.  The  upper 
stone  is  the  symbol  of  the  first  and  gi-eat  commandment.  Our  Lord  refers  to  this 
when  answering  the  question,  "Master,  which  is  the  great  commandment  in  the 
law  ?  Jesus  said  unto  him.  Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God  with  all  thy  heart, 
and  with  all  thy  soul,  and  with  all  thy  mind  "  (Matt.  xxii.  36-38).  The  two  tables 
of  stone,  upon  which  the  Ten  Commandments,  the  first  and  the  essential  principles 
of  all  the  Divine  Word,  were  WTitten,  were  intended  to  represent  the  same  twofold 
division  of  all  heavenly  lessons.  The  mill,  then,  with  its  two  stones,  represents  the 
rational  faculty  when  it  is  furnished  with  these  two  grand  truths.  With  these  two 
universal  principles  it  can  do,  and  is  intended  to  do,  the  utmost  service  to  man. 
Everything  that  enters  the  mind  should  be  submitted  to  its  inspection  and  action. 
Whatever  is  taught  in  relation  to  God  which  is  inconsistent  with  love  to  God 
and  love  to  man  should  be  rejected  ;  whatever  is  in  harmony  with  both  should  be 
received.  All  that  love  would  do  God  will  do,  for  God  is  love  ;  all  that  love  would 
reject,  God  will  reject,  for  God  is  love.  So  in  relation  to  man.  Our  duty  in 
all  things  is  to  measure  our  conduct  by  the  great  law,  "  Whatsoever  ye  would  that 
men  should  do  to  you,  do  ye  even  so  to  them  ;  for  this  is  the  law  and  the  prophets  " 
(Matt.  vii.  12).  Such  is  the  spiritual  mill,  and  such  is  its  operation.  What  a  wide 
field  of  use  it  has  ;  and  how  essential  is  that  use  !  To  try  to  sift,  to  discriminate, 
to  adapt  all  that  we  learn,  so  that  fallacy  and  mere  appearance  may  be  rejected,  and 
only  what  is  really  conducive  to  salvation  and  blessing  be  retained  :  "  What  is  the 
chaff  to  the  wheat?  saith  the  Lord."     II.  With  this  view  of  the  important  objects 


CHAP.  XXIV.]  DEUTERONOMY,  429 

and  indispensable  character  of  the  millstones,  seen  in  their  correspondence,  we  shall 
be  prepared  to  see  in  spiritual  light  the  keason  of  the  command  in  our  text  : 
"No  man  shall  take  the  nether  or  the  upper  millstone  to  pledge :  for  he  taketh  a 
man's  li.e  to  pledge."  The  rational  faculty,  and  its  two  grand  essential  principles, 
must  never  be  parted  with,  nor  even  be  placed  in  abeyance.  Oh  !  that  this  great 
truth  that  we  ought  never  to  suspend,  never  to  forego  the  use  of  this  grand 
principle,  our  rational  faculty,  were  engraven  on  every  heart.  In  this  sublime  por- 
tion of  our  nature  the  essential  means  of  manhood  reside.  He  will  never  become  a 
man  who  never  thoughtfully  dares  to  reason  for  himself;  who  never  strives  to  pene- 
trate the  appearances  of  things,  and  see  with  a  single  eye  Divine  realities.  Here  is 
the  judgment-seat  for  each  mind.  How  poor  a  being  he  becomes  who  fears  to  use 
this  glorious  capability,  let  degenerate  millions  answer.  He  has  not  the  fixed 
instincts  of  brutes  and  their  obedience  to  the  laws  of  their  order,  and  while  he 
is  bom  with  debased  affections,  he  does  not  use  this  grand  means  of  rising  for 
ever  higher.  Without  that  we  cannot  free  ourselves  from  our  own  passions  and  pre- 
judices, much  less  from  the  domination  of  other  men.  Without  that  we  cannot  rise 
to  the  freedom  of  citizens  of  heaven.  We  are  things,  not  men.  Let,  then,  no  man 
take  your  mill ;  it  is  your  life.  But  neither  the  lower  nor  the  upper  millstone  must 
be  taken.  The  two  grand  essential  truths,  upon  which  all  others  hang,  must  neither 
of  them  be  given  up.  Whatever  is  not  in  harmony  with  them  ought  not  to  be 
received.  Whatever  is  unworthy  of  our  love  to  God,  whatever  would  lessen  our  love 
to  man,  should  be  rejected  at  once.  How  great  a  source  of  elevation  should  we  con- 
stantly have,  if  in  all  our  hearing  and  reading  we  should  bring  our  spiritual  com  to 
the  mill,  furnished  with  these  spiritual  stones  !  HI.  Finally,  let  me  earnestly  impress 
upon  you  all  the  importance  of  using  the  mill.  There  is  no  possibility  of  true 
manhood  being  attained  without  a  conscientious  use  of  reason  in  receiving  the  things 
of  God.  Have  no  fear  in  employing  the  glorious  faculties  Divine  mercy  has  blessed 
you  with.  Oh  !  that  men  would  rise  manfully  to  the  dignity  of  their  high  character, 
as  rational  and  immortal  beings  capable  of  receiving  the  truth,  judging  of  it,  loving 
it,  and  making  it  their  own  by  practice.  Reject  every  attempt  to  place  this  heavenly 
mill  in  pledge,  for  it  is  your  real  manhood,  your  l^e,  that  is  wished  to  be  taken, 
when  you  are  told  to  forego  the  use  of  your  reason.  Above  all,  let  us  see  well  that 
our  mill  is  ever,  in  good  condition,  the  nether  and  the  upper  stones.  Let  us 
receive  no  instruction  that  is  inconsistent  with  love  to  our  neighbour,  the  spiritual 
nether  millstone.  Let  no  sectarian  sentiments,  no  idea  that  heaven  was  made  just 
for  this  small  party  who  think  with  us,  or  that  gain  our  assent.  Let  us  unite  with 
men  of  love  and  virtue,  of  every  name,  assured  that  "of  such  is  the  kingdom 
of  heaven."  Let  not  the  upper  millstone  go  into  pledge.  Let  us  unceasinj^ly  try 
every  sentiment  proposed  to  us  as  true  by  the  great  supreme  law  of  love  to  God 
above  all  things.     (/.  Bayley,  Ph.D.) 

Ver.  18.  Remember  that  thou  wast  a  bondman  in  Egypt.— Impoi-tant  recollec- 
tion .—The  admonition  may  seem  needless,  but  we  are  prone  to  forget  God's  works 
and  wonders.  We  have  need  to  be  stirred  up  to  remembrance  for  four  purposes. 
1.  For  the  purpose  of  humility.  We  think  more  highly  of  ourselves  than  we  ought 
to  think.  With  the  lowly  is  wisdom.  If  wise,  we  were  once  foolish  ;  if  justified,  we 
were  once  condemned  ;  if  sons  of  God,  we  were  once  servants  of  sin.  Look  to  the  rock 
from  whence  hewn.  2.  For  the  purpose  of  gratitude.  If  affected  by  kindness  from 
our  fellow-creatures,  should  we  overlook  our  infinite  Benefactor  ?  We  have  no  claims 
upon  Him  and  should  be  thankful  for  all  His  benefits.  But  herein  is  love.  Blessed 
be  the  God  of  Israel,  for  He  hath  visited  and  redeemed  His  people.  3.  For  the  pur- 
pose of  confidence.  David  argued  from  the  past  to  the  future.  Because  Thou  hast 
been  my  help,  therefore  under  the  shadow  of  Thy  wings  will  I  rejoice.  Here 
we  have  peculiar  reason  for  encouragement.  What  were  we  when  He  first  took 
knowledge  of  us  ?  Was  the  want  of  worthiness  a  bar  to  His  goodness  then  ?  Will 
it  be  so  now  ?  Is  there  variableness  or  shadow  of  turning  with  Him  ?  Is  there  not 
the  same  power  in  His  arm  and  the  same  love  in  His  heart?  Did  He  p&rdon 
me  when  a  rebel,  and  will  He  cast  me  off  now  that  He  has  made  me  a  friend  ?  "  He 
that  spared  not  His  own  Son  but  delivered  Him  up  for  us  all,"  &c.  4.  For  the  pur- 
pose of  piety  and  zeal.  How  many  round  about  you  in  the  gall  of  bitterness  and  in 
the  bond  of  iniquity  ready  to  perish?  You  know  the  state  they  are  in,  and 
the  blessedness  of  deliverance  from  it.  You  are  witnesses  of  what  God  is  able  and 
willing  to  do.  Invite  the  prisoners  of  hope  to  turn  to  Him— you  can  speak  from 
experience.     ( JF.  Jay. )       Remembrance  of  the  past ;— I.  The  exercise  of  mkktaTj 


430  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxrv. 

ACTIVITY.  II.  The  particular  object  of  consideration.  1.  Our  original 
state.  2.  Our  redeemed  condition.  III.  The  especial  gain  to  be  derived  from 
THIS  consideration.  1.  It  will  make  us  humble.  2.  It  will  render  us  grateful. 
3.  It  should  give  us  confidence  and  faith.  4.  It  should  kindle  our  piety  and  zeal. 
(HomilisL)  The  necessary  remembrance: — I.  The  Christian's  original  state. 
1.  Degraded,  2.  Oppressed.  3.  Helpless.  II.  The  Christian's  happy  deliver- 
ance. "Redeemed."  God  redeemed  Israel  by  His  mighty  arm.  Our  redemption, 
like  theirs — 1.  Originated  in  God's  free  compassion.  Without  claim  or  merit.  He 
saw  our  self-procured  ruin,  and  exercised  His  infinite  mercy  towards  us.  2.  "Was 
effected  by  the  mission  and  work  of  His  Son.  3.  Is  connected  with  faith  and 
obedience  to  our  great  Deliverer.  III.  The  Christian's  obligation  to  remember 
his  redemption.  But  can  we  forget  ?  "Why,  the  Israelites  did.  Our  own  hearts 
are  prone  to  forget ;  the  cares  of  the  world  choke  the  soul,  and  cause  us  to  forget 
God.  Satan,  by  his  temptations,  would  seduce  us  from  this  remembrance.  1.  We 
should  remember  it  with  intentness  of  soul  and  gratitude  of  heart.  Such  love  and 
goodness  should  never  be  obliterated.  A  lively  remembrance  will  keep  the  flame 
of  gratitude  burning  on  the  altar  of  our  hearts.  2.  We  should  remember  it 
with  feelings  of  humility  and  contrition.  If  self-righteousness  would  spring  up, 
if  we  would  glory  at  all  in  ourselves,  this  remembrance  will  lead  us  back  to  our 
original  state,  and  then  all  boasting  will  be  slain.  3.  We  should  remember  that 
we  may  feel  for  those  around  who  are  still  in  the  gall  of  bitterness  and  the 
bonds  of  iniquity.  The  love  of  Christ  to  us  should  fill  us  with  love  to  our  fellow- 
men.  4.  We  should  especially  remember,  when  in  the  means  of  grace,  and  at  the 
table  of  the  Lord.  {J.  Burns,  D.D.)  The  memorable  deliverance: — I.  The 
deliverance  obtained.  1.  From  the  curse  of  the  law.  2.  From  the  bondage  of 
sin.  3.  From  the  tyranny  of  Satan.  4.  From  the  evils  of  the  world.  II.  The 
Deliverer  described.  1.  Redemption  originally  proceeds  from  the  mercy  and 
love  of  God.  2.  Redemption  is  meritoriously  procured  by  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 
3.  Redemption  is  personally  realised  by  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  III.  The 
REMEMBRANCE  ENJOINED.  This  commaud  is  applicable  to  the  people  of  God  in  every 
age,  and  extends  to  all  the  blessings  we  receive.  As  it  regards  our  redemption,  we 
nmst  cherish — 1.  A  grateful  remembrance.  We  should  frequently  call  to  mind 
the  deplorable  state  from  which  we  are  redeemed,  the  inestimable  privileges  with 
which  we  are  honoured,  and  the  ineffable  felicities  to  which  we  are  entitled.  Such 
pious  reflections  will  always  be  profitable,  and  associated  with  deep  humility, 
devoted  admiration,  unfeigned  gratitude,  and  fervent  praise  (Psa.  ciii.  1-4  ;  Isa. 
xii.  1).  2.  An  affectionate  remembrance.  A  consciousness  of  the  unspeakable 
love  of  God  to  us  should  deeply  interest  and  inspire  our  souls  with  a  reciprocation 
of  love  to  Him.  Our  love  to  God  must  be  supreme,  vigorous,  manifest,  and  pro- 
gressive. It  must  be  the  ruling  principle  of  the  heart,  and  the  actuating  motive  of 
the  life  (Matt.  xxii.  37,  38  ;  Rom.  v.  5  ;  1  John  v.  3,  5).  3.  An  obedient  remembrance. 
This  is  the  specific  argument  of  the  text :  "Thou  shalt  remember,  theretore  I  com- 
mand thee  to  do  this  thing."  Their  obedience  was  demanded  on  the  ground  of 
Divine  goodness.  4.  A  perpetual  remembrance.  Redeeming  grace  deeply  involves 
our  immortal  interests,  and  therefore  should  never  be  forgotten.  {SketcJies  of  Four 
Hundred  Sermons.) 

Vers.  19-21.  It  shall  be  for  the  stranger. — Care  for  others: — This  beautiful 
passage  speaks  of  the  harvest,  of  the  olive,  and  of  the  grape.  You  say,  "Well, 
I  am  not  a  farmer,  I  know  nothing  of  the  hai'vest.  Olives  do  not  grow  in  this  cold 
country.  And  it  is  only  a  few  people  in  England  who  can  grow  grapes.  What  is 
the  meaning  of  this  ? "  I  ^vill  tell  you  what  it  means,  because  when  God  tells  us 
to  deal  in  this  way  with  the  stranger,  and  the  fatherless,  and  the  widow,  He  means 
us  to  do  it.  You  know  what  the  harvest  means.  It  was  the  in-gathering  of  the 
corn,  and  you  know  what  that  was  for — to  be  made  into  bread.  And  you  know 
what  bread  was  for — to  give  strength.  The  olive  was  a  symbol  of  fruitfalness,  and 
the  grape  typified  joy.  So  that  the  three  things  God  teaches  us  here  to  do,  are  to 
give  strength  and  peace  and  joy  to  the  stranger,  the  fatherless,  and  the  widow. 
How  can  we  do  that  ?  Turn  to  Proverbs  xii.  25,  and  let  us  see  how  we  can  do  it  for 
the  Master.  (I  am  going  to  take  the  very  lowest  thing  it  is  possible  for  a  child 
of  God  to  do.  I  am  not  going  to  speak  to  those  who  can  give  their  hundreds  and 
thousands  of  pounds  and  be  none  the  poorer  ;  but  let  the  very  poorest  of  us  here 
to-day  see  if  we  cannot  be  the  means  of  bringing  strength  and  peace  and  joy  to 
those  who  need  it,)     "Heaviness  in  the  heart  of  man  maketh  it  stoop."     We  all 


CHAP.  XXV.]  DEUTERONOMY.  431 

know  that  is  true.  What  is  going  to  make  it  glad  ?  A  fifty-pound  note  ?  No  ! 
"But  a  good  word  maketh  it  glad."  It  is  not  only  the  wealth  or  the  riches  that 
God  speaks  about.  Here  it  is  a  kind,  loving  word,  "  a  good  word,"  that  makes  the 
heart  glad.  I  was  thinking  only  to-day  about  the  words  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
and  about  the  works,  the  miracles  of  Christ.  Why,  the  Lord  Jesus  accomplished 
more  by  His  words  than  by  His  miracles.  And  He  wants  us  to  be  imitators 
of  Him.  When  He  was  here  He  had  no  long  purse,  but  He  had  a  kind  word  for 
everybody  except  the  self-satisfied,  the  self-righteous,  the  Scribes  and  Pharisees. 
We  too  can  give  these  and  be  none  the  poorer  for  it.  Turn  to  Isa.  1.  4  :  "The 
Lord  God  hath  given  me  the  tongue  of  the  learned,  that  I  should  know  how  to 
speak  a  word  in  season  to  him  that  is  weary."  Perhaps  you  say,  "Oh,  I  would 
like  to  have  the  tongue  of  the  learned  to  show  people  how  clever  I  am  ! "  The 
Lord  Jesus  had  "the  tongue  of  the  learned"  for  one  purpose,  and  that  was  to 
know  how  to  speak  a  word  in  season  to  him  that  was  weary.  Here  again  it  is  the 
word  ;  it  is  not  the  power  or  the  miracle.  Read  also  in  Colossians  iii.  17  :  "What- 
soever ye  do  in  word  or  deed,  do  all  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  giving  thanks 
to  God  and  the  Father  by  Him."  Has  it  ever  struck  you  that  this  is  a  very  strange 
way  of  putting  it,  "Whatsoever  ye  do  in  word  or  deed"  ?  We  may  be  disposed 
to  think  it  ought  to  have  been,  "  Whatsoever  ye  say  in  word  or  do  in  deed."  But 
it  is  not  so  :  "  Whatsoever  ye  do  in  word  or  deed."  As  if  God  said,  "  Every  word 
you  speak  for  Me  is  a  good  work."  And  what  we  want  is  to  have  "  the  tongue  of 
the  learned,"  to  know  how  to  speak  a  word  to  those  that  are  weary.  If  we  want  to 
be  happy,  if  we  want  to  be  joyful  and  glad,  let  us  try  to  make  others  glad.  Let  us 
try  to  give  them  strength  and  peace  and  joy.  The  most  miserable  man  here  to-day 
is  the  man  who  lives  for  self ;  the  happiest  man  is  the  one  who  forgets  self,  and 
lives  for  others.  What  a  sweet  thing  it  is  to  know  that  God  has  told  us,  "  What- 
soever ye  do  in  word,"    Up  yonder  He  is  keeping  a  record  of  it.     (JT.  Moorhov^e.) 


CHAPTER  XXV. 


Vers.  13-16.  Thou  shalt  have  a  perfect  and  just  weight  .  .  .  measure.— TA^ 

Christian  in  commerce:—!.  Endeavour  to  point  out  what  Christianity  re- 
quires OF  a  man  in  his  dealings  in  business  with  his  fellow-men.  1.  The 
most  rigid  adherence  to  the  principles  of  moral  integrity.  Truth.  Honesty.  2.  The 
exercise  of  love  and  kindness.     3.  That  a  man  should  preserve  his  soul  in  peace  and 

fatience.  4.  That  commerce  be  consecrated  and  elevated  by  the  spirit  of  holiness. 
I.  Having  described  what  a  Christian  should  be  in  commerce  briefly  show  why 
he  should  be  it.  All  considerations  by  which  religion  and  morality  are  com- 
mended and  enforced  are  applicable  here.  The  course  pointed  out  is  right  in  itself, 
what  we  owe  to  God  and  connected  with  eternal  destiny.  It  is  necessary  to  inherit 
the  kingdom  of  heaven.  It  is  presented  to  us  in  the  example  of  Christ,  whom  all 
disciples  should  imitate.  In  one  word,  Christianity  requires  it ;  all  its  precepts, 
principles,  blessings,  and  prospects  require  it.  {A.  J.  Morris.)  Fluctuation  of 
trade: — Trade  is  a  fluctuating  thing;  it  passed  from  Tyre  to  Alexandria,  from 
Alexandria  to  Venice,  from  Venice  to  Antwerp,  from  Antwerp  to  Amsterdam  and 
London — the  English  rivalling  the  Dutch  ;  the  French  are  now  rivalling  both.  All 
nations,  almost,  are  wisely  applying  themselves  to  trade,  and  it  behoves  those  who 
are  in  possession  of  it  to  take  the  greatest  care  that  they  do  not  lose  it.  ^  It  is  a  plant 
of  tender  growth  ;  it  requires  sun  and  soil  and  fine  seasons  to  make  it  thrive  and 
flourish.  It  will  not  grow  like  the  palm-tree,  which,  with  the  more  weight  and 
pressure,  rises  the  more.  Liberty  is  a  friend  to  that,  as  that  is  a  friend  to  liberty. 
But  the  greatest  enemy  to  both  is  licentiousness,  which  tramples  upon  all  law  and 
lawful  authority,  encourages  riots  and  tumults,  sticks  at  nothing  to  support  its 
extravagance,  practises  every  art  of  illicit  gain,  ruins  credit  and  trade,  and  will  ruin 
liberty  itself.  Neither  kingdoms,  commonwealths,  public  companies,  nor  private 
persons,  can  long  carry  on  a  beneficial  and  flouiishing  trade  without  virtue  and 
what  virtue  teaches — sobriety,  industry,  frugality,  modesty,  honesty,  punctuality, 
humanity,  charity,  the  love  of  our  country,  and  the  fear  of  our  God.  {Bp.  Nervton.) 
Justice  : — From  these  specific  instances  of  justice  let  us  extend  our  views  to  justice  in 
jreneral ;  let  us  consider  its  true  nature  and  importance  to  human  society  j  the  obliga- 


432  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxvi. 

tions  we  are  nnder  to  adhere  to  it  inviolably  ;  and  the  fatal  consequences  of  every 
deviation.  Justice  is  that  virtue  which  teaches  us  to  respect  the  rights  of  others,  and 
to  refrain  from  all  injurious  acts  or  purposes.  1.  Some  rights  men  are  bom  to — such 
as  the  use  of  their  own  limbs,  the  free  and  uncontrolled  exercise  of  their  faculties  of 
body  and  mind — these  faculties,  derived  from  the  Author  of  life,  sufficiently  speak  the 
intention  of  the  Giver — that  they  should  be  freely,  but  at  the  same  time  innocently 
used — this  is  the  equal  birthright  of  every  man.  2.  Again,  if  every  human  being 
that  God  has  made  has  a  right  to  live,  to  breathe,  to  move,  to  think — he  must  also 
have  a  just  claim  to  the  product  of  his  labour  and  his  thought.  3.  Another  source 
of  right  springs  from  mutual,  voluntary  engagements  —  expressed,  or  implied  — 
which  ought  all  to  be  candidly  interpreted,  and  conscientiously  fulfilled.  4.  Of  all 
obligations  the  most  binding  and  indispensable  is  to  do  no  wrong  to  any  ;  to  hold 
the  rightful  claims  of  our  fellow-creatures  sacred.  First,  all  restraint  upon  personal 
liberty  exercised  by  one  man  upon  another — uucompelled  by  previous  aggression — 
tends  wantonly  to  defeat  man's  whole  destination  ;  and  is  therefore  a  daring  outrage 
against  the  Author  of  his  being.  Equally,  or  rather  more  unjust  and  more  criminal 
is  it,  to  forge  chains  for  the  mind — to  prohibit  the  use  of  reason — to  compel  men  to 
violate  their  conscience.  Next  to  the  undisturbed  use  of  our  bodily  and  mental 
faculties,  the  fruits  of  their  exertion,  justice  maintains  inviolable — ana  consequently 
enjoins — the  exact  observance  of  those  civil  laws  by  which  the  disposal  of  property 
is  regulated,  "not  merely  for  wrath,  but  for  conscience  sake."  Moreover,  inde- 
pendently of  government  and  laws,  that  those  contracts  which  are  entered  into  for 
mutual  aid  and  benefit,  and  without  which  mankind  could  not  act  collectively  and 
in  concert,  are  to  be  formed  on  fair  and  upright  principles,  and  fulfilled  with 
punctuality — is  as  evident  as  that  man  was  created  to  be  a  social  being,  and  that 
no  one  should  undermine  that  mutual  confidence  and  that  willingness  to  combine 
and  to  co-operate  together,  on  which  the  common  good  so  manifestly  depends. 
Nor  do  commercial  or  pecuniary  concerns  form  the  only  province  of  justice.  She 
is  equally  solicitous  to  render  unto  all  their  dues  of  every  kind.  She  abstains  as 
carefully  from  violating  another's  reputation  as  his  property ;  of  which,  indeed,  it 
often  constitutes  the  most  valuable  part ;  and  as  scrupulously  shuns  taking  any 
unfair  advantage  in  the  most  secret  transaction,  as  in  the  sight  of  all  the  world. 
"Who  is  not  sensible  of  the  discordant  and  tumultuous  state  into  which  mankind 
would  fall  were  justice  to  take  her  flight  ?  Selfishness  and  rapine  on  all  sides  pre- 
vailing— in  a  short  time  little  would  remain  for  the  one  to  covet  or  the  other  to 
prey  upon  and  monopolise.  Justice  is  essential  not  only  to  the  comfort,  but  to  the 
subsistence  of  the  species.  But  where  neither  the  eye  of  man  can  penetrate,  nor 
the  hand  of  man  can  reach — there  the  claims  of  justice  are  felt  by  the  truly  upright ; 
the  reasonable  expectations  of  their  fellow-creatures  weighed  in  an  impartial  scale, 
and  answered  with  the  same  conscientious  care  and  unswerving  rectitude,  as  if 
they  were  defined  by  the  strictest  statutes,  and  enforced  by  the  severest  penalties. 
Far  beyond  all  formal  compacts,  all  legal  obligations,  is  the  demand  of  reason  and 
conscience  on  the  just  man.  In  comparing  his  own  rights  with  those  of  others,  his 
justice  stretches  into  the  domain  of  generosity  ;  in  comparing  the  claims  of  others 
between  themselves  his  generosity  never  deviates  from  impartial  justice.  So  im- 
perceptible are  the  shades  of  difference  that  separate  justice  from  generosity  — 
whether  we  consider  their  motives,  obligations,  or  effects  —  that,  amongst  the 
ancient  philosophers  justice  was  the  common  name  assigned  to  both  ;  and  denoted 
the  general  principle  of  all  the  social  virtues— and  our  Saviour  comprehends  all 
that  is  equitable  and  all  that  is  kind  and  disinterested  in  one  and  the  same  precept 
— *'  Do  unto  others,  as  ye  would  that  they  should  do  unto  you."  I  shall  only  add, 
that  as  justice  is  that  virtue  which  is  most  essential  to  every  social  state,  and  that 
state  which  is  reserved  for  the  spirits  of  the  just  will  be  pre-eminently  social  ;  so  the 
habits  of  justice,  which  have  in  this  world  been  interwoven  with  all  their  sentiments 
and  actions,  must  there  attain  their  highest  perfection  and  produce  the  happiest  issue. 
(P.  Houghton,) 


CHAPTER  XXVI. 


Ver.  5.  A  S3nrian  ready  to  perish  was  my  father. — Humiliation  in  connection 
with  gratitude : — Such  was  the  confession  required  of  every  priest  of  Israel  when  he 


CHAP.  XXVI.]  DEUTERONOMY,  433 

presented,  before  the  altar,  the  offering  of  first-fruits.  It  was,  therefore,  in  the 
midst  of  abundance,  a  memorial  of  former  destitution,  and  an  acknowledgment  of 
utter  unworthiness,  under  circumstances  of  peculiar  obligation.  The  text  is  capable 
of  divers  renderings  ;  but  take  whichever  we  may,  the  lesson  is  the  same.  It  teaches 
us,  that  when  the  Divine  promises  are  all  fulfilled,  and  our  salvation  is  complete, 
we  are  still  to  remember  the  past  (Isa.  li.  1).  The  connection  between  acceptable 
thanksgiving  and  profound  humiliation  is  a  fact  which  none  but  a  Pharisee  v  ould 
dare  to  disregard,  and  which  it  behoves  the  Christian  to  bear  in  mind  in  all  his 
devout  meditations  and  relitrious  exercises.  Should  pride  ever  rise  within  his  bosom 
— "Who  maketh  thee  to  differ?"  is  a  consideration  which  may  suffice  to  put  it 
down  :  nor  will  he,  if  walking  in  the  fear  of  God,  and  in  the  comfort  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  when,  by  virtue  of  his  "royal  priesthood,"  he  has  "boldness  to  enter  into 
the  holiest  by  the  blood  of  Jesus,"  forget  to  say  there — "  A  Syrian  ready  to  perish 
was  my  father."  The  natural  philosopher  may  rejoice  that  he  is  not  a  brute,  and  a 
pagan  may  glory  in  the  attributes  peculiar  to  man,  but  the  devout  student  learns 
some  very  humbling  facts  concerning  the  position  of  our  race.  Amoug  the  rest  is 
this,  that,  of  intelligent  beings,  man  is  probably  the  lowest  in  the  scale.  That 
angels  excel  us  in  strength  is  obvious  from  everything  we  know  concerning  them  ; 
and  that  devils  have  far  greater  intellectual  power  than  belongs  to  man,  none 
acquainted  with  their  devices  will  be  disposed  to  question.  To  boast  of  our  mental 
superiority,  then,  is  but  to  mingle  ignorance  with  pride.  The  humiliation  which 
these  considerations  may  be  supposed  to  engender  is  deepened  by  the  recollection, 
that  our  case  is  not  one  of  poverty  alone,  but  of  degradation.  Whatever  may  have 
been  man's  original  glory,  that  glory  has  long  since  departed.  His  boast  of  heraldry 
is  vain  ;  traced  back  to  its  earliest  antiquity,  it  bespeaks  his  ruin.  His  crest  is  an 
inverted  crown.  And  this  is  his  motto — "Man  that  was  in  honour  abode  not.'* 
The  grace  of  God  works  wonders.  It  copes  with  depravity,  and  subdues  it.  It 
rescues  the  sinner  from  his  degradation,  and  renders  him  meet  to  be  a  partaker  of 
the  inheritance  of  the  saints  in  light.  But  it  also  teaches  him  never  to  forget,  even 
amidst  the  splendours  of  the  heavenly  temple,  to  which  it  ultimately  introduces 
him,  the  ancient  acknowledgment  of  the  adoring  Israelite — "A  Syrian  ready  to 
perish  was  my  father."     (Z>.  E.  Ford.) 

Ver.  11.  Thou  shalt  rejoice  in  every  good  thing. — Rejoice  in  every  good  thing : — 
It  is  our  duty  to  give  unstinted  welcome  to  every  visit  of  enjoyment  with  which  we 
may  be  favoured.  We  frequently  allow  streams  of  refreshment  or  exhilaration  to  run 
past  us  without  dipping  into  or  tasting  them ;  we  blunderingly  overlook  many  a  cup 
of  soothing  and  pleasing  that  is  offered  to  us  as  we  go  trudging  by.  We  are  slow  to 
discover  and  seize  our  golden  chances,  and  hardly  know  how  to  make  the  most  of 
them.  At  times  we  are  afraid,  it  would  seem,  pausing  now  and  then  to  squeeze  a 
drop  or  two  of  severe  or  melancholy  reflection  into  the  goblet,  as  if  there  might  be  sin 
in  having  it  too  rich  and  sweet.  The  angel  descending  to  solace  us  in  our  Gethsemane 
with  a  brief  pleasant  thrill,  with  a  brief  glimpse  and  gust  of  pleasure,  flashes  by 
under  the  sombre,  wailing  olives  in  vain,  is  allowed  to  vanish  unharboured  and  un- 
utilised.    I.  Never  turn,  in  your  bitterness  of  spirit,  from  any  ministry  of 

TEMPORAL  ENJOYMENT  THAT  MAY  INTER\T:NE  ;  NEVER  BE  SO  WEDDED  TO  YOUR  WOES, 
SO  SHUT  UP  AND   SUNK  DOWN  IN  THEM,  THAT  YOU  CANNOT  ISSUE  FORTH  TO  ACCEPT 

SUCH  MINISTRY.  For,  remember,  we  want  to  be  made  joyful  for  our  education  quite 
as  much  as  we  need  to  be  tried  and  troubled.  To  laugh,  to  luxuriate,  to  ripple  and 
glow  with  delight,  at  times  is  just  as  essential  for  us  as  it  is  at  times  to  weep  and 
suffer.     II.  At  times  some  of  us  may  have  had  the  feeling  that  there  is  so 

MUCH  misery  in  THE  WORLD  THAT  IT  IS  HARDLY  RIGHT  TO  IGNORE  AND  FORGET   IT 

FOR  A  MOMENT  IN  REJOICING.  But  let  US  reflect  that,  since  God  is  our  Father  and  we 
His  children,  we  are  justified  in  losing  sight  of  trouble  for  a  time  when  He  gives  us 
a  joy  to  taste.  Being  only  a  child,  however,  I  must  feel  about  His  world,  and  share 
in  His  travail  concerning  it ;  I  need  not  be  afraid  at  intervals  to  cast  the  entire  load 
upon  Him  and  let  Him  carry  it  alone.  Souls  must  turn  aside  at  times  to  bask  in 
what  sunshine  they  can  find,  and  be  mellowed,  and  warmed,  and  raised  with  it,  in 
order  to  be  of  service  in  the  darkness  and  to  help  to  soften  and  relieve.  {S.  A, 
Tijyple.)  Rejoice  vnth  a  rejoicing  universe : — Rejoice  with  the  morning  stars,  and 
let  your  adoring  spirit  march  to  the  music  of  hymning  spheres.  Rejoice  with 
the  jocund  spring  in  its  gush  of  hope,  and  its  dancing  glory,  with  its  swinging 
insect-clouds  and  its  suffusion  of  multitudinous  song ;  and  rejoice  with  golden 
autumn,  as  he  rustles  his  grateful  sheaves,  and  clasps  his  purple  hands,  as  he 

28 


434  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxvii. 

breathes  his  story  of  fruition,  his  anthem  of  promises  fulfilled  ;  as  he  breathes  it 
softly  in  the  morning  stillness  of  ripened  fields,  or  flings  it  in  j3Eolian  sweeps  from 
lavish  orchards  and  from  branches  tossing  bounty  into  mellow  winds.  Rejoice 
with  infancy,  as  it  guesses  its  wondering  way  into  more  and  more  existence,  and 
laughs  and  carols  as  the  field  of  pleasant  life  enlarges  on  it,  and  new  secrets  of 
deliglit  flow  in  through  fresh  and  open  senses.  Rejoice  with  the  second  youth  of 
the  heaven-born  soul,  as  the  revelations  of  a  second  birth  pour  in  upon  it,  and  the 
glories  of  a  new  world  amaze  it.  Rejoice  with  the  joyful  believer  when  he  sings, 
"0  Lord  !  I  will  praise  Thee ;  though  Thou  wast  angry  with  me,  Thine  anger  is 
turned  away,  and  Thou  comfortedst  me.  Behold,  God  is  my  salvation."  Rejoice 
with  him  whose  incredulous  ecstasy  has  alighted  on  the  great  Gospel-secret,  whose 
eye  is  beaming  as  none  can  beam  save  that  which  for  the  first  time  beholds  the 
Lamb  ;  whose  awe-struck  countenance  and  uplifted  hands  are  evidently  exclaiming, 
"This  is  my  beloved,  and  this  is  my  friend."  Rejoice  with  saints  and  angels,  as 
they  rejoice  in  a  sight  like  this.  Rejoice  with  Immanuel,  whose  soul  now  sees  of 
its  travail.  Rejoice  with  the  ever  blessed  Three,  and  with  a  heaven  whose  work  is 
joy.  "Be  glad  in  the  Lord,  and  rejoice,  ye  righteous;  and  shout  for  joy,  all  ye 
that  are  upright  in  heart."    (/.  Hamilton.) 


CHAPTER  XXVIL 


Vers.  2,  3.  That  thou  Shalt  set  up  great  stonea — Memorial  pillars ;— On  the 
boundary  line  between  European  and  Siberian  Russia  there  is  a  square  pillar  of  brick 
bearing  on  one  side  the  coat-of-arms  belonging  to  the  province  of  Perm  in  Europe, 
and  on  the  other  side  the  coat-of-arms  belonging  to  the  province  of  Tobolsk  in  Asia. 
That  pillar  has  more  sorrowful  associations  than  any  other  pillar  in  the  world.  For 
many  years  the  exiles  to  Siberia  had  to  pass  it,  and  there  bade  a  long  farewell  to 
home  and  country.  Strong  men  wept ;  some  pressed  their  faces  to  the  loved  soil 
they  were  leaving,  some  collected  a  little  earth  to  take  with  them  to  their  new 
abodes,  and  some  passionately  kissed  the  European  side  of  the  pillar.  The  plaister 
on  the  bricks  was  covered  with  inscriptions,  plaintive  and  pathetic  as  the  epitaphs 
in  a  graveyard.  Moses  thought  of  pillars  which  were  to  have  not  a  mournful,  but 
a  joyful  significance.  The  stones  were  afterwards  set  up  by  the  people  as  memorials 
of  God's  work  on  their  behalf.  The  stones  were  to  be  a  perpetual  memorial  of 
indebtedness  to  God  for  rescue  from  slavery  and  guidance  to  prosperity  and  honour. 
The  disciples  of  Christ  have  experienced  a  change  wonderful  as  that  experienced  by 
the  Israelites.  They  have  passed  from  bondage  to  liberty,  from  darkness  to  light, 
from  moral  debasement  to  spiritual  glory.  They  are  not  to  boast  as  if  by  their  own 
endeavours  they  had  wrought  out  the  salvation  in  which  they  rejoice,  but  gratefully 
to  confess  that  God  has  made  them  what  they  are.  They  are  themselves  to  be 
monuments  of  God's  power  such  as  all  can  see  and  understand.  Something  more 
is  needed  from  them  than  activity  in  setting  up  great  stones  as  abiding  witnesses  of 
the  great  revolution  in  their  life.  They  are  to  stand  before  the  world  as  witnesses 
of  God's  saving,  hallowing  work  in  the  human  soul.  The  stones  the  Israelites  were 
to  set  up  were  to  be  plaistered,  and  the  law  written  on  the  plaister.  There  was  a 
deep  significance  in  the  words  thus  inscribed.  The  people  would  be  reminded  by 
them  that  though  they  were  out  of  the  wilderness  they  had  not  ceased  to  be  under 
the  law.  The  horrors  of  Egyptian  slavery  would  have  been  better  for  them  than 
luxurious  life  in  Canaan  unrestricted  by  Divine  precepts.  The  written  stones  were 
an  attestation  of  God's  supremacy  over  them,  and  as  a  restraint  from  the  moral  laxity 
to  which  they  would  be  tempted  when  at  ease  amid  "  the  limpid  wells  and  orchards 
green  "  and  all  the  other  charms  of  the  land  "  where  Abraham  fed  his  flock  of  yore." 
The  disciples  of  Christ  are  to  be  as  pillars  inscribed  with  the  law  of  the  Lord.  They 
do  not  bear  the  words  of  the  ceremonial  law,  nor  are  they  under  direct  obligation 
to  bear  those  of  the  social  law  enacted  in  the  wilderness.  It  is  the  moral  law  they 
bear  as  a  sacred  inscription  on  their  life.  Special  prominence  is  to  be  given  to 
the  two  great  commandments,  love  to  God  and  love  to  man,  which,  according  to 
the  teaching  of  Jesus,  include  the  whole  of  the  Decalogue.  Faith  in  Christ  does 
not  mean  freedom  from  the  law  as  a  rule  of  life.  Truth,  honesty,  amiability  are 
as  much  required  in  members  of  the  Church  as  if  those  qualities  were  the  sole 


CHAP.  XXVII.  3  DEUTERONOMY,  435 


condition    of   salvation :    evangelical    righteousness    implies    practical    righteous- 
ness.    (/.  Marrat.) 

Vers.  9,  10.  Otey  the  voice  of  the  Lord  thy  God. — Of  obedience  to  God's  revealed 
wi7; ;— I.  What  is  the  rule  of  oi'edience  ?    The  written  Word.     11.  What  are 

THE  right  ingredients  IN  OUR  OBEDIENCE  TO  MAKE  IT  ACCEPTABLE  ?      1.  Obedience 

must  be  free  and  cheerful,  else  it  is  penance,  not  sacrifice  (Isa.  i.  19).  Willingness 
is  the  soul  of  obedience ;  God  sometimes  accepts  of  willingness  without  the  work, 
but  never  of  the  work  without  willingness.  Cheerfulness  shows  that  there  is  love 
in  the  duty ;  and  love  doth  to  our  services,  as  the  sun  doth  to  the  fruits,  mellow  and 
ripen  them  and  make  them  come  off  with  a  better  relish.  2  Obedience  must  be 
devout  and  fervent :  the  heart  must  boil  over  with  hot  affections  in  the  service  of 
God.  3.  Obedience  must  be  extensive,  it  must  reach  to  all  God's  commands  (Psa. 
cxix.  6).  True  obedience  runs  through  all  duties  of  religion,  as  the  blood  through 
all  the  veins,  or  the  sun  through  all  the  signs  of  the  zodiac.  4.  Obedience  must  be 
sincere— namely,  we  must  aim  at  the  glory  of  God  in  it,  in  religion  the  end  is  all. 
The  end  of  our  obedience  must  not  be  to  stop  the  mouth  of  conscience,  or  to  gain 
applause,  but  that  we  may  grow  more  like  God,  and  bring  more  glory  to  God. 
6.  Obedience  must  be  in  and  through  Christ,  "  He  made  us  accepted  in  the  Beloved.' 
6.  Obedience  must  be  constant,  "Blessed  is  he  who  doeth  righteousness  at  all 
times."  True  obedience  is  not  like  an  high  colour  in  a  fit,  but  it  is  a  right  sanguine ; 
it  is  like  the  fire  on  the  altar  which  was  always  kept  burning.  III.  Whence  is  it 
THAT  MEN  DO  NOT  OBEY  GoD  ?  1.  The  not  obeying  of  God  is  for  want  of  faith  :  "Who 
hath  believed  our  report? "  Did  men  believe  sin  were  so  bitter  that  hell  followed 
at  the  heels  of  it,  would  they  go  on  in  sin  ?  Did  they  believe  there  were  such 
a  reward  for  the  righteous  that  godliness  were  gain,  would  they  not  pursue  it  ? 
2.  The  not  obeying  God  is  for  want  of  self-denial.  God  commands  one  thing,  and 
men's  lusts  command  another,  and  they  will  rather  die  than  deny  their  lusts  ;  now, 
if  lust  cannot  be  denied  God  cannot  be  obeyed.  IV.  What  are  the  great  argu- 
ments OR  INCENTIVES  TO  OBEDIENCE  ?  1.  Obedience  makes  us  precious  to  God  ; 
we  shall  be  His  favourites  (Exod.  xix.  5  ;  Isa.  xliii.  3).  2.  There  is  nothing  lost 
by  obedience.  To  obey  God's  wnll  is  the  way  to  have  our  will.  {T.  Watson.) 
Implicit  obedience  .-—Implicit  obedience  is  our  first  duty  to  God,  and  one  for  which 
nothing  else  will  compensate.  If  a  lad  at  school  is  bidden  to  cipher,  and  chooses 
to  write  a  copy  instead,  the  goodness  of  the  writing  will  not  save  him  from  censure. 
We  must  obey  whether  we  see  the  reason  or  not ;  for  God  knows  best.  A  guide 
through  an  unknown  country  must  be  followed  without  demur.  A  captain,  in 
coming  up  the  Humber  or  Southampton  Water,  yields  complete  authority  to  the 
pilot.  A  soldier  in  battle  must  fight  when  and  where  he  is  ordered  ;  when  the 
conflict  is  over  he  may  reflect  upon  and  perceive  the  wisdom  of  his  commander  in 
movements  that  at  the  time  of  their  execution  were  perplexing.  The  farmer  must 
obey  God's  natural  laws  of  the  seasons  if  he  would  win  a  harvest ;  and  we  must 
all  obey  God's  spiritual  laws  if  we  would  reap  happiness  here  and  hereafter.  Obe- 
dience proceeding  from  love  .-—The  son  of  a  poor  man  that  hath  not  a  penny  to  give 
or  leave  him,  yields  his  father  obedience  as  cheerfully  as  the  son  of  a  rich  man 
that  looks  for  a  great  inheritance.  It  is,  indeed,  love  to  the  father,  not  wages  from 
the  father,  that  is  the  ground  of  a  good  child's  obedience.  If  there  were  no  heaven 
God's  children  would  obey  Him  ;  and  though  there  were  no  hell  yet  would  they 
do  their  duty  ;  so  powerfully  doth  the  love  of  the  Father  constrain  them.  {J, 
Spencer,) 

Vers.  15-26.  Cursed  be  he  that  removeth  his  neighhour's  landmark.— :7'A«  land- 
marks of  faith  .-—The  landmarks  of  faith  are  just  the  truth  which  God  has  revealed 
to  men,  and  the  duty  which  He  requires  of  them.  Among  the  sins,  the  criminality 
of  which  it  was  the  will  of  God  should  be  deeply  impressed  on  the  minds  of  the 
children  of  Israel,  that  of  removing  the  ancient  landmarks  was  one.  The  reference 
manifestly  is  to  landmarks  that  were  set  up,  when  the  land  of  Canaan  was  divided 
among  the  tribes  and  families  of  Israel,  to  determine  the  boundaries  of  the  portion 
belonging  to  each  individual  family,  or  tribe.  This  is  a  kind  of  crime  which  is 
spoken  of  and  pointedly  prohibited  in  other  parts  of  Scripture  as  well  as  that  quoted 
above.  (Prov.  xxii.  28. )  God  saw  meet  to  employ  men  of  high  character  in  the  division 
made  of  the  land,  and  that  division  He  so  sanctioned  that  it  was  His  will  that  it 
should  be  maintained  throughout  the  successive  generations  of  Israel.  But  however 
great  a  crime  it  was  to  remove  any  of  these  landmarks,  the  criminality  of  the  removal 


436  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxvii. 

of  such  landmarks  and  its  evil  consequences  were  exceedingly  small  compared  with 
the  guilt  that  has  been  and  is  being  contracted  by  the  removal  of  the  landmarks 
of  faith.  The  dishonour  done  to  God,  and  the  injury  to  society  by  the  one  form  of 
wickedness,  is  as  nothing  compared  with  the  other.  Of  this  there  is  ample  illus- 
tration and  confirmation  furnished  in  the  past  history  of  our  fallen  world.  The 
landmarks  of  faith  were  set  up  progressively  by  God  Himself  in  the  special  revelation 
which  He  was  pleased  to  give  to  men  regarding  His  own  character  and  will  in 
relation  to  doctrine  and  practice  ;  to  the  truth  to  be  believed  and  the  duty  to  be 
performed  to  Him  and  to  one  another.  In  most  cases,  though  not  in  all,  the 
removal  of  those  Divinely  erected  landmarks  has  been  a  gradual  process.  Of  Abra- 
ham God  said,  "  I  know  him,  that  he  will  command  his  children  and  his  household 
after  him,  and  they  shall  keep  the  way  of  the  Lord,  to  do  justice  and  judgment" 
(Gen.  xviii.  19).  By  this  patriarch  we  can  have  no  doubt  the  landmarks  of  faith  as 
to  truth  and  duty  were  faithfully  set  up  in  his  household,  both  by  precept  and 
instruction,  commended  by  the  best  example.  But  except  in  the  line  of  Jacob,  how 
speedily  did  these  come  to  be  removed  among  all  the  other  branches  of  his  posterity. 
His  son  Ishmael,  and  bis  children  by  Ketiirah,  as  well  as  Isaac,  were  no  doubt 
highly  favoured  in  their  early  years  with  the  advantages  of  earnest  paternal  counsel. 
Reminiscences  of  this  behoved  to  follow  them  to  their  respective  places  of  sojourn 
and  location.  But  the  light  which  might  thus  shine  for  a  time  became  gradually 
more  and  more  obscure,  till  at  length  there  was  scarcely  anything  left  to  distinguish 
them  from  the  other  branches  of  Noah's  descendants,  who  had  at  an  earlier  date 
sunk  into  that  state  of  moral  debasement  which  is  inseparable  from  idolatry.  How 
brief  the  time  during  which  these  landmarks  stood  up  erect  in  the  days  of  David 
and  the  first  years  of  the  reign  of  his  son  Solomon  !  In  the  history  of  Judah  we  see 
the  same  issues  realised  so  far  as  a  similar  course  was  pursued  in  that  kingdom  ;  and 
in  the  conduct  of  the  Jews  after  their  restoration  from  the  Babylonish  captivity, 
when  the  landmarks  of  faith  were  set  up  anew  among  them — by  such  notable  instru- 
ments as  Ezra  and  Nehemiah — and  to  which  they  bound  themselves  to  adhere  by 
solemn  covenant.  How  soon  did  they  also  fall  back  and  become  hardened  in 
unbelief.  Again,  at  the  era  of  the  glorious  Reformation  from  Popery,  God  graciously 
interposed  for  a  blissful  restoration  of  the  widely  obliterated  landmarks  of  faith  in 
a  number  of  the  nations  of  Europe.  Distinguished  instruments  were  simultaneously 
raised  up  in  different  countries,  by  whom  these  were  anew  set  up  in  a  remarkable 
degree  of  conformity  to  the  Divine  pattern.  These,  alas,  have  been,  to  a  very 
lamentable  extent,  practically  removed  in  all  the  Reformed  Churches  on  the  Con- 
tinent— in  France,  Switzerland,  Holland,  and  Germany.  {Original  Secession  Maga- 
zine.) Amen. — A7nen:—l.  A  lesson  of  acquiescence  in  the  Divine  law. 
"Amen  "  is  understood  to  denote  truth  or  certainty.  Such,  without  doubt,  was  its 
signification  here.  The  leading  principles  of  the  moral  law  were  then  being  enun- 
ciated, in  the  hearing  of  all  the  people,  and  in  token  that  these  met  with  their 
acquiescence,  they  were  to  superadd  the  emphatic  *'Amen."  Now,  every  Ijeliever 
knows  that  the  God  in  whom  we  live  and  move,  is  a  God  of  infinite  holiness,  and 
that  the  Scripture  is  fiiUed  with  precepts  which  every  responsible  creature  is  bound 
to  carry  into  hourly  practice.  "Be  ye  holy,  for  I  am  holy" — "Cursed  is  every  one 
that  continueth  not  in  all  things  written  in  the  book  of  the  law  to  do  them " — 
"Except  your  righteousness  shall  exceed" — such  are  precepts  whose  import  may 
not  be  misunderstood,  leaving  it  as  one  of  the  clearest  and  most  intelligible  of 
Gospel  maxims  that  to  God's  moral  law  the  Cliristian  is  called  upon  to  append  his 
sanction — his  solemn  "Amen."  1.  The  Christian  Church  is  not  placed  under  the 
law,  as  a  covenant  of  works.  An  acquiescence,  therefore,  in  the  moral  law,  or  of 
our  saying  "Amen"  to  every  one  of  its  precepts,  does  not  imply  that  we  have 
elevated  these  to  be  the  conditions  of  our  salvation,  or  the  grounds  of  an  acceptance 
before  God.  2.  This  does  not  stand  in  the  way  of  an  acknowledging  the  surpassing 
excellency  of  every  such  precept.  The  law  may  in  itself  be  good  and  holy,  although 
we  cannot  keep  it— just  as  the  light  of  the  sun's  meridian  splendour  may  be  pure 
and  glorious,  although  there  are  eyes  too  weak  to  bear  it.  And  this  we  affirm. 
3.  We  must  consider  the  law  as  still  the  rule  of  our  life.  Our  inability  to  realise  the 
lofty  standard  of  holiness  indicated  in  the  Decalogue,  no  more  releases  us  from  our 
obligation  to  perform  it,  than  the  mere  declaration  of  bankruptcy  cancels  a  debt, 
discharges  the  conscience  from  the  duty  of  paying  it,  should  there  be  ability  to  da 
so  at  any  future  time,  or  authorises  a  man  to  contract  fresh  obligations  with  the 
secret  purpose  of  getting  quit  of  them  by  a  similar  process.  4.  As  Christians,  we 
are  necessarily  anticipating  a  restoration  to  that  moral  perfection  which  the  law 


CHAP.  XXVII.]  DEUTERONOMY.  437 

requires.  II.  A  lesson  of  conformity  to  the  Divine  method  of  salvation. 
Momentous,  of  course,  are  the  effects  which  ensue  upon  the  acceptance  or  rejection, 
but  every  one  who  listens  to  the  overtures  of  the  Gospel  does  so  in  tlie  attitude  of 
an  independent  and  rational  being.  There  is  no  restraint,  no  compulsion.  *'My 
son,  give  Me  thine  heart,"  is,  indeed,  the  impressive  demand  ;  but  we  ought  to 
know,  that  if  we  choose  to  risk  the  fearful  consequences  of  embracing  the  alter- 
native, there  is  no  constraining  influence  compelling  us  to  believe  against  our  will. 
The  thing,  indeed,  is  impossible.  Faith  is  a  voluntary  act ;  and  this  is  the  most 
important  principle  suggested  by  the  text,  that  to  God's  method  of  salvation,  our 
heart,  in  the  hour  of  regeneration,  must  respond  with  an  unreserved  and  cordial 
"Amen."  III.  A  lesson  of  submission  to  God's  providential  dispensations. 
It  is  obvious  to  even  the  natural  judgment  of  man,  that,  of  all  methods  of  meeting 
the  calamities  which  flesh  is  heir  to,  the  worst  is  to  murmur  and  oppose.  Not  only 
does  this  involve  the  turpitude  of  virtual  rebellion  against  the  authority  of  heaven  ; 
it  positively  adds  to  and  renders  more  poignant  the  distresses  we  are  called  upon  to 
endure.  It  were  folly  to  imagine,  for  a  single  instant,  that  affliction  can  be  thereby 
either  mitigated  or  removed.  The  dying  soldier  may  cherish  the  fiercest  resentment 
against  the  enemy  who  has  smitten  him,  but  that  resentment  will  not  heal  the  deadly 
wound.  The  chances  are  that  death  will  be  thereby  precipitated.  So  is  it  with  our 
calamities.  Whether  we  will  or  no,  these  will  descend  upon  us  ;  and  our  spiritual 
enemies  can  desire  no  greater  victory  over  us  than  that  these  should  crusli  and  drive 
lis  to  despair.  Submission,  then,  is  the  lesson  inculcated  upon  us  by  the  afllictive 
dispensations  of  God.  Whatever  these  may  be,  let  the  tendency  of  the  Christian's 
heart  be  to  acknowledge  them  with  a  cordial  "Amen."  Peace  will  be  his  in  the 
present.  He  will  experimentally  know  the  meaning  of  that  apostolic  paradox, 
"Sorrowful,  yet  always  rejoicing  '  ;  in  the  world's  chastisements  realise  a  pledge  of 
his  heavenly  Father's  love  ;  and  anticipate  with  gladness  unspeakable  the  approval 
of  that  blissful  era  when  "God  the  Lord  shall  wipe  away,"  &c.  IV.  A  lesson  of 
confidence  in  the  Divine  promises,  and  of  assurance  regarding  the 
execution  of  the  Divine  purposes,  {James  Cochrane,  M.A.)  That  maketh 
the  blind  to  wander  out  of  the  way. — Agahist  imposing  on  the  ignorant  .—In  this 
chapter,  curses  are  pronounced  against  several  heinous  crimes,  such  as  idolatry, 
contempt  of  parents,  murder,  rapine,  and  the  like ;  and  amongst  these  crimes  is 
mentioned  this,  of  causing  the  blind  to  go  out  of  their  way  ;  a  wickedness  of  a 
singular  nature,  and  which  one  would  not  expect  to  find  in  this  list  of  vicious 
actions.  It  is  a  crime  which  is  seldom  committed  ;  there  are  few  opportunities 
for  it ;  there  is  little  temptation  to  it :  it  is  doing  mischief  for  mischief's  sake, 
an  enormity  to  which  few  can  easily  bring  themselves.  We  may  therefore  reason- 
ably suppose  that  more  is  intended  than  barely  to  condemn  those  who  should  lead 
a  blind  man  out  of  his  way.  And  what  that  may  be,  it  is  not  difficult  to  dis- 
cover. Blindness  in  all  languages  is  put  for  error  and  ignorance  ;  and,  in  the  style 
of  the  Scriptures,  ways  and  paths,  and  walking,  running,  going,  wandering  astray, 
stumbling,  falling,  mean  the  actions  and  the  behaviour  of  men.  These  obvious 
observations  will  lead  us  to  the  moral,  mystical,  spiritual,  and  enlarged  sense  of 
the  law,  or  commination  ;  and  it  is  this  :  Cursed  is  he  who  imposeth  upon  the 
simple,  the  credulous,  the  unwary,  the  ignorant,  and  the  helpless ;  and  either 
hurts,  or  defrauds,  or  deceives,  or  seduces,  or  misinforms,  or  misleads,  or  perverts, 
or  cornipts  and  spoils  them.  1.  As  to  the  ministers  of  the  Gospel,  they  may  be  said 
to  mislead  the  blind  when,  instead  of  endeavouring  to  instruct  and  amend  their 
hearers,  they  deal  in  false  opinions,  or  unintelligible  doctrines,  or  unprofitable  dis- 
putes, or  uncharitable  reproofs,  or  personal  reflections,  or  flattery,  or  in  any  subjects 
foreign  from  religion  and  void  of  edification ;  much  more  when  they  te.ich  things 
of  an  evil  tendency,  and  whicli  may  have  a  bad  influence  on  the  minds  and  manners 
of  the  people.  2.  In  all  our  worldly  affairs  and  intercourse  with  others,  as  we  ought 
to  act  fairly,  justly  towards  every  per-on,  so  more  especially  ought  we  to  behave 
towards  those  whom  we  miglit  injure  with  imjmnity,  that  is,  without  danger  of  being 
called  to  account  for  it  in  this  life.  3.  As  nations  subsist  by  trade,  so  trade  sub- 
sists by  integrity.  In  commerce  upright  dealing  is  an  indispensable  duty,  and 
defrauding  is  a  vice.  But  if  it  be  a  fault  to  make  unreasonable  advances  in  our 
dealings  even  with  those  who  are  skilful  as  ourselves,  it  is  far  worse  to  impose  upon 
the  ignorant  and  the  necessitous,  and  to  wrens'  those  who  have  a  good  opinion  of 
us,  and  place  an  entire  confidence  in  us.  4.  Of  the  same  bad  nature  is  giving  wrong 
counsel  and  hurtful  advice,  knowingly  and  willully,  to  those  who  have  an  opinion 
of  our  superior  skill,  and  apply  to  us  for  direction.     As  likewise  all  dishonesty  in 


438  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxviii. 

offices  of  trust  and  confidence.  5.  To  take  bad  courses,  to  keep  bad  company, 
to  be  vicious  amongst  the  vicious,  dissolute  amongst  the  dissolute — this  is 
confessedly  a  great  fault.  But  yet  there  is  a  greater,  which  is,  to  seek  out  the 
weak,  the  young,  the  ignorant,  the  unsteadfast,  to  instil  bad  principles  into  them, 
to  entice  them  to  sin,  to  spoil  an  honest  disposition,  to  seduce  an  innocent  mind,  to 
rob  an  unspotted  person  of  virtue,  of  honour  and  reputation,  of  peace  of  mind,  of  a 
quiet  conscience,  and  perhaps  of  all  happiness  present  and  future.  This  is  not  an 
ordinary  offence  ;  it  is  to  be  agents  and  assisters  to  the  devil,  and  to  do  his  work 
and  imitate  his  example.  It  is  a  crime  attended  with  this  terrible  circumstance, 
that  even  repentance  itself  can  be  attended  with  no  suitable  reparation  to  the 
injured  person.     {J.  Jortin,  D.D.) 


CHAPTER  XXVIII. 


Ver.  3.  Blessed  shalt  thou  be  in  the  city.— Blessed  in  the  city : — The  city  is  full 
of  care,  and  he  who  has  to  go  there  from  day  to  day  finds  it  to  be  a  place  of  great 
wear  and  tear.  It  is  fall  of  noise,  and  stir,  and  bustle,  and  sore  travail :  many  are 
its  temptations,  losses,  and  worries.  But  to  go  there  with  the  Divine  blessing  takes 
off  the  edge  of  its  difficulty  ;  to  remain  there  with  that  blessing  is  to  find  pleasure 
in  its  duties,  and  strength  equal  to  its  demands.  A  blessing  in  the  city  may  not 
make  us  gi'eat,  but  it  will  keep  us  good  ;  it  may  not  make  us  rich,  but  it  will  pre- 
serve us  honest.  Whether  we  are  porters,  or  clerks,  or  managers,  or  merchants,  or 
magistrates,  the  city  will  afford  us  opportunities  for  usefulness.  It  is  good  fishing 
where  there  are  shoals  of  fish,  and  it  is  hopeful  to  work  for  our  Lord  amid  the 
thronging  crowds.  We  might  prefer  the  quiet  of  a  country  life ;  but  if  called  to 
town,  we  may  certainly  prefer  it  because  there  is  room  for  our  energies.  To-day  let 
us  expect  good  things  because  of  this  promise,  and  let  our  care  be  to  have  an  open 
ear  to  the  voice  of  the  Lord,  and  a  ready  hand  to  execute  His  bidding.  Obedience 
brings  the  blessing.  "  In  keeping  His  commandments  there  is  great  reward."  {C. 
H.  Spurgeon. )  City  life : — We  have  accustomed  ourselves  so  long  to  think  that 
the  glory  and  beauty  displayed  on  the  open  fields  of  the  country,  where  life  lies 
palpitating  and  warm  with  the  impress  of  His  creative  hand,  and  where  all  the 
works  of  the  Lord  are  ceaselessly  singing  His  praise,  must  in  itself  impress  more 
vividly  those  who  linger  amid  its  beauties,  and  do  their  work  in  the  glow  of  its 
magnificence,  than  do  the  streets  and  lanes  and  the  visible  signs  of  man  which 
stretch  out  through  the  city.  And  yet  we  do  not  seek  from  the  hard-working  farmer 
the  highest  appreciation  of  nature  as  such,  nor  from  the  toiling  agricultural  labourer 
the  keenest  poetic  sentiment.  Men  are  crowded  into  the  city,  the  villages  become 
more  and  more  depleted.  What  does  it  mean  ?  Ask  them,  and  they  would  tell  you 
that  they  are  going  to  see  life.  To  the  labourer  town  life  means  a  more  stirring 
existence,  he  thinks  he  sees  there  a  wider  field,  a  quicker  return,  a  more  brilliant 
career,  and  too  often  he  is  bitterly  disappointed  in  these  hard  times.  To  the 
pleasure-seeker  the  city  is  the  great  lamp  towards  which  he  flies  with  outstretched 
wings  to  flicker  for  a  short  space  around  it,  to  scorch  his  wings,  to  burn  himself  in 
the  nearest  approach  to  nothingness.  But  life  is  a  very  real  tiling  to  seek  for.  In 
the  city  there  are  gathered  together  vaiious  forms  of  excellence.  Here  art  treasures 
are  collected,  and  art  studies  are  at  their  fullest  perfection  ;  here  music  receives  its 
fullest  development ;  here  perfection  of  all  kinds  tends  to  aggregate  ;  here  the 
blood  courses  fuller  and  stronger  ;  here  might  be  realised  that  which  we  speak  of  so 
often  in  the  Creed — "the  communion  of  saints."  {Canon  Neioholi.)  Blessed  shalt 
thou  be  in  the  field. — Blessed  in  the  field : — So  was  Isaac  blessed  when  he  walked 
therein  at  eventide  to  meditate.  How  often  has  the  Lord  met  us  when  we  have  been 
alone!  The  hedges  and  the  trees  can  bear  witness  to  our  joy.  We  look  for  such 
blessedness  again.  So  was  Boaz  blessed  when  he  reaped  Lis  harvest,  and  his  work- 
men met  him  with  benedictions.  May  the  Lord  prosper  all  who  drive  the  plough  ! 
Every  farmer  may  urge  this  promise  with  God,  if,  indeed,  he  obeys  the  voice  of  the 
Lord  God.  We  go  to  the  field  to  laliour  as  father  Adam  did  ;  and  since  the  curse 
fell  on  the  soil  through  the  sin  of  Adam  the  first,  it  is  a  great  comfort  to  find  a 
blessing  through  Adam  the  second.  We  go  to  the  field  for  exercise,  and  we  are 
happy  in  the  belief  that  the  Lord  will  bless  that  exercise,  and  give  us  health,  which 


CHAP.  XXVIII.]  DEUTERONOMY.  439 


we  will  use  to  His  glory.  We  go  to  the  field  to  study  nature,  and  there  is  nothing 
in  a  knowledge  of  the  visible  creation  which  may  not  be  sanctified  to  the  highest 
uses  by  the  Divine  benediction.  We  have  at  last  to  go  to  the  field  to  bury  our  dead  ; 
yea,  others  will  in  their  turn  take  us  to  God's  acre  in  the  field  :  but  we  are  blessed, 
whether  weeping  at  the  tomb  or  sleeping  in  it.     (C.  H.  Sturgeon.) 

Yer.  5.  Blessed  shall  be  thy  basket  and  thy  store.— -4  blessing  on  basket  and 
store  .-—Obedience  brings  a  blessing  on  all  the  provisions  which  our  industry  earns 
for  us.  That  which  comes  in  and  goes  out  at  once,  like  fruit  in  the  basket  which 
is  for  immediate  use,  shall  be  blessed  ;  and  that  which  is  laid  by  with  us  for  a  longer 
season  shall  equally  receive  a  blessing.  Perhaps  ours  is  a  hand-basket  portion. 
We  have  a  little  for  breakfast,  and  a  scanty  bite  for  dinner  in  a  basket  when  we 
go  out  to  our  work  in  the  morning.  This  is  well,  for  the  blessing  of  God  is  promised 
to  the  basket.  If  we  live  from  hand  to  mouth,  getting  each  day's  supply  m  the 
day,  we  are  as  well  off  as  Israel ;  for  when  the  Lord  entertamed  His  favoured  people 
He  only  gave  them  a  day's  manna  at  a  time.  What  more  did  they  need  ?  What 
more  do  we  need  ?  But  if  we  have  a  store,  how  much  we  need  the  Lord  to  bless  it ! 
For  there  is  the  care  of  getting,  the  care  of  keeping,  the  care  of  managing,  the  care 
of  using  ;  and,  unless  the  Lord  bless  it,  these  cares  will  eat  into  our  hearts,  till 
our  goods  become  our  gods,  and  our  cares  prove  cankers.  0  Lord,  bless  our 
substance.  Enable  us  to  use  it  for  Thy  glory.  Help  us  to  keep  worldly  thmgs  m 
their  proper  places,  and  never  may  our  savings  endanger  the  saving  of  our  souls. 
(C  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Ver.  12.  The  Lord  shall  open  unto  thee  His  good  treasure.— 2Vw  Lord's  trea- 
^re  .-—This  refers  first  to  the  rain.  The  Lord  will  give  this  in  its  season.  Ram  is 
the  emblem  of  all  those  celestial  refreshings  which  the  Lord  is  ready  to  bestow  upon 
His  people.  Oh,  for  a  copious  shower  to  refresh  the  Lord's  heritage  !  We  seem  to 
think  that  God's  treasury  can  only  be  opened  by  a  great  prophet  like  Elijah,  but  it 
is  not  so,  for  this  promise  is  to  all  the  faithful  in  Israel,  and,  mdeed,  to  each  one  of 
them  0  believing  friend,  *'the  Lord  shall  open  unto  thee  His  good  treasure. 
Thou  too,  may  est  see  heaven  opened,  and  thrust  in  thy  hand  and  take  out  thy  por- 
tion yea,  and  a  portion  for  all  thy  brethren  round  about  thee.  Ask  what  thou  wilt, 
and  thou  shalt  not  be  denied,  if  thou  abidest  in  Christ,  and  His  words  abide  m  thee. 
As  yet  thou  hast  not  known  all  thy  Lord's  treasures,  but  He  shall  open  them  up  to 
thy  understanding.  Certainly  thou  hast  not  yet  enjoyed  the  fulness  of  His  covenant 
riches,  but  He  will  direct  thy  heart  into  His  love,  and  reveal  Jesus  in  thee.  Only 
the  Lord  Himself  can  do  this  for  thee  ;  but  here  is  His  promise,  and  if  thou  wilt 
hearken  diligently  unto  His  voice,  and  obey  His  will,  His  nches  m  glory  by  Christ 
Jesus  shall  be  thine.     (C.  E.  Spurgeon.) 

Yer.  13.  The  head,  and  not  the  tail. — The  saints  leading  the  way  ;— If  we  obey 
the  Lord  He  wiU  compel  our  adversaries  to  see  that  His  blessing  rests  upon  us. 
Though  this  be  a  promise  of  the  law,  yet  it  stands  good  to  the  people  of  God  ;  for 
Jesus  has  removed  the  curse,  but  He  has  established  the  blessmg.  It  is  for  saints 
to  lead  the  way  among  men  by  holy  influence  :  they  are  not  to  be  the  tail,  to  be 
dragged  hither  and  thither  by  others.  We  must  not  yield  to  the  spirit  of  the  age, 
but  compel  the  age  to  do  homage  to  Christ.  If  the  Lord  be  with  us  we  shall  not 
crave  toleration  for  religion,  but  we  shall  seek  to  seat  it  on  the  throne  of  society. 
Has  not  the  Lord  Jesus  made  His  people  priests  ?  Surely  they  are  to  teach,  and 
must  not  be  learners  from  the  phHosophies  of  unbelievers.  Are  we  not  in  Christ 
made  kings  to  reign  upon  the  earth  ?  How,  then,  can  we  be  the  servants  of  custom, 
the  slaves  of  human  opinion  !  Have  you  taken  up  your  true  position  for  Jesus  1  Too 
many  are  silent  because  diffident,  if  not  cowardly.  Should  we  allow  the  name  of 
the  Lord  Jesus  to  be  kept  in  the  background  ?  Should  our  religion  drag  along  as  a 
tail  ?  Should  it  not  rather  lead  the  way,  and  be  the  ruling  force  with  ourselves  and 
others  1    {0.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Yers.  15-19.  IfthouwUt  not  heaxiien.— Blessing  and  cursing— an  Ash  Wednes- 
day sermon  .-—Does  the  Commination  Service  curse  men  ?  Are  these  good  people 
(who  are  certainly  right  in  their  horror  of  cursing)  right  m  the  accusations  which 
they  bring  against  it  ?  I  cannot  but  think  that  they  mistake  when  they  say  that 
the  Commination  Service  curses  men.  For  to  curse  a  man  is  to  pray  that  God  may 
vent  His  anger  on  the  man  by  punishing  him.     But  I  find  no  such  prayer  and  wish 


440  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxviii. 

iaany  word  of  the  Commination  Service.  Its  form  is  not  "  Cursed  he  he  that  doeth 
such  and  such  tilings,"  but  "Cursed  is  he  that  doeth  them."  Does  this  seem 
to  you  a  small  difference  ?  A  fine-drawn  question  of  words  ?  Is  it,  then,  a  small 
difference  whether  I  say  to  my  fellow-man,  I  hope  and  pray  that  you  may  be  stricken 
with  disease,  or  whether  I  say.  You  are  stricken  with  disease,  whether  you  know  it 
or  not?  I  warn  you  of  it,  and  I  warn  you  to  go  to  the  physician  !  For  so  great, 
and  no  less,  is  the  difference.  I.  We  know  that  the  wokds  of  the  text  came 
TRUE.  We  know  that  the  Jews  did  perish  out  of  their  native  land,  as  the  author  of 
this  book  foretold,  in  consequence  of  doing  that  against  which  Moses  warned  tliem. 
We  know  also  that  they  did  not  perish  by  any  miraculous  intervention  of  providence, 
but  simply  as  any  other  nation  would  have  perished — by  profligacy,  internal 
weakness,  civil  war,  and,  at  last,  by  foreign  conquest.  We  know  tliat  their  destruc- 
tion was  the  natural  consequence  of  their  own  folly.  Why  are  we  to  suppose  that 
the  prophet  meant  an^'thing  but  that  ?  He  foretells  the  result.  Why^  are  we  to 
suppose  that  he  did  not  foresee  the  means  by  which  that  result  would  happen  ? 
For  even  in  this  life  the  door  of  mercy  may  be  shut,  and  we  may  cry  in  vain  for 
mercy  when  it  is  the  time  for  justice.  This  is  not  merely  a  doctrine  :  it  is  a  fact  ; 
a  common,  patent  fact.  Men  do  wrong,  and  escape,  again  and  ac,'ain,  the  just 
punishment  of  their  deeds  ;  but  how  often  there  are  cases  in  which  a  man  does  not 
escape  ;  when  he  is  filled  with  the  fruit  of  his  own  devices,  and  left  to  the  misery 
which  he  has  earned  ;  when  the  covetous  and  dishonest  man  ruins  himself  past  all 
recovery  ;  when  the  profligate  is  left  in  a  shameful  old  age,  with  w^oru-out  body  and 
defiled  mind,  to  rot  into  an  unhonoured  grave ;  when  the  hypocrite  who  has 
tampered  with  his  conscience  is  left  without  any  conscience  at  all.  They  have 
chosen  the  curse,  and  the  curse  is  come  upon  them  to  the  uttermost.  So  it  is.  Is 
the  Commination  Service  uncharitable,  is  the  preacher  uncharitable,  when  they  tell 
men  so  ?  II.  Truly  terrible  and  heart-searuhing  for  the  wrong-dokr  is 
the  message — God  does  not  curse  thee  :  thou  hast  cursed  thyself.  God  will 
not  go  out  of  His  way  to  punish  thee  ;  thou  hast  gone  out  of  His  way,  and  thereby 
thou  art  punishing  thyself.  Just  as,  by  abusing  the  body,  thou  bringest  a  curse 
upon  it ;  so  by  abusing  thy  soul.  God  does  not  break  His  laws  to  punish  drunken- 
ness or  gluttony.  The  laws  of  nature,  the  beneficent  laws  of  life,  nutrition,  growth, 
and  health,  they  punish  thee  ;  and  kill  by  the  very  same  means  by  which  they  make 
alive.  And  so  with  thy  soul,  thy  character,  thy  humanity.  III.  Let  us  believe 
that  God's  good  laws  and  God's  good  order  are  in  themselves  and  of  them- 
selves the  curse  and  punishment  of  every  sin  of  ours  ;  and  that  Ash  Wed- 
nesday, returning  year  after  year,  whether  we  be  glad  or  sorry,  good  or  evil,  bears 
witness  to  that  most  awful  and  yet  most  blessed  fact.  (C  Kingsley,  M.A.)  The 
prophecy : — 1.  Look,  first,  at  the  intensity  of  the  sufferings  which  it  denounces 
upon  the  Jewish  race.  The  prophet  seems  to  labour  under  the  weight  of  the  theme, 
and  strives  to  give  it  adequate  expression,  as  though  it  were  beyond  his  power. 
There  is  scarcely  anything  that  could  go  to  heighten  human  anguish  bodily  and 
mental  that  is  not  thrown  into  the  frightful  conglomeration,  to  make  up  such  an 
assemblage  of  miseries  as  was  hardly  ever  elsewhere  known  or  imagined.  Dante's 
pictures  are  territic,  but  they  are  dispersed  and  distributed  into  portions,  and  every 
man  has  his  own  torment,  from  which  other  sufferers  are  exempt.  But  Moses 
concentrates  his,  and  pours  them  all  in  one  terrible  mixture  on  the  same  devoted 
head.  War,  pestilence,  and  famine  in  their  extremest  terrors  combine  to  swell  the 
bitter  grief,  until  they  rise  to  those  intolerable  anguishes  in  which  the  bonds  of 
society  are  dissolved,  human  sympathies  are  quenched,  natural  affection  obliterated, 
and  society  transformed  into  a  herd  of  ravening  wolves,  preying  on  one  another 
without  conscience  and  without  pity.  And  this  horrid  state  of  things  is  to  be 
without  respite,  affording  no  moment  of  relief;  so  that  men  are  driven  to  madness, 
and  rave  with  the  frantic  incoherence  of  despair.  And  now,  if  we  turn  to  the  page 
of  history,  we  find  the  correspondence  exact  to  a  wonderful  degree.  No  more 
revolting  picture  of  human  misery,  and  of  the  demoralisation  and  unhumanising 
effect  of  extreme  distress  is  anywhere  to  be  found  in  the  annals  of  the  world  than 
that  which  is  exhibited  in  the  last  days  of  Jerusalem  as  the  accounts  of  it  have 
come  down  to  us.  What  in  the  prophecy  might  have  seemed  antecedently  imposs- 
ible, the  faithful  record  of  history  has  shown  to  be  possible,  because  actual. 
2.  Look  next  at  their  dispersion,  almost  as  wonderful  as  their  miseries.  This,  too, 
Moses  explicitly  foretells  (vers.  64,  65).  Alone  of  peoples  that  inhabit  the  earth, 
foreigners  everywhere,  having  no  country  that  they  call  their  own,  and  dwelling  in 
aU  countries  as  a  distinct  element  in  their  society,  nay,  always  a  society  that 


CHAP,  xxviii.]  DEUTERONOMY.  441 

adheres  to  general  society  only  by  a  kind  of  parasitical  life,  sucking  strength  from 
its  substance  without  assimilating  to  its  character,  it  is  a  sort  of  mistletoe  that 
drapes  the  branches  of  trees,  and  lives  upon  their  sap,  but  sends  no  roots  into  the 
earth  to  draw  from  the  soil  a  life  of  its  own.  3.  And  now,  finally,  look  at  his  preser- 
vation. I  mean  his  preservation  as  a  Jew.  His  physiognomy  everywhere  tells  the 
tale  of  his  lineage.  And  yet  never  was  a  people  so  unfavourably  situated  for  the 
preservation  of  its  identity.  They  did  not  go  out  in  colonies  to  any  considerable 
extent.  Units  they  have  been,  floating  like  waifs  and  strays  upon  the  great  ocean 
of  human  society.  Yet  wherever  he  strays,  there  is  the  Jew,  unabsorbed,  unamalga- 
mated,  unmistakably  a  Jew.  National  bounds  hedge  in  nations,  and  with  some 
admixtures  preserve  substantially  national  marks  and  qualities.  But  this  is  a  nation 
that  has  no  such  protection,  without  a  country,  without  a  home.  Yet  it  remains 
a  nation  ;  and  there  is  not  another  nation  in  all  the  limits  of  civilisation  to-day 
that  can  boast  so  pure  a  blood,  so  unmixed  and  genuine  a  pedigree.  1.  A  lesson  of 
danger.  If  the  Israelites  were  punished  beyond  other  men,  it  was  because  they  had 
been  favoured  beyond  other  men.  Privilege  and  responsibility  are  correspondent 
and  parallel.  The  sins  of  Christians  are  far  worse  than  the  like  sins  of  heathens, 
more  criminal,  more  dangerous  (Rom.  xi.  20,  21).  2.  A  lesson  of  duty.  None  can 
look  upon  the  ancient  people  of  God  in  their  fallen  condition,  it  might  seem,  with- 
out sensibility  and  compassion.  God  has  made  their  fall  an  occasion  of  benefit  to 
the  Gentile  world.  **  We  have  obtained  mercy  through  their  unbelief."  The  fall 
broke  tlirongh  the  wall  that  threatened  to  confine  Christianity  within  the  narrow 
precincts  of  Jewish  pride  and  prejudice,  and  gave  it  to  "have  free  course  and  be 
glorified,"  Surely,  however,  it  becomes  us  not  to  look  coldly  or  scornfully  on  the 
disfranchised  heir.  {R.  A.  Hallam,  D.D.)  The  dispersion  of  the  Jews : — Davison, 
in  his  Discourses  on  Prophecy,  uses  the  following  beautiful  illustration  when 
speaking  of  modem  Jews.  Present  in  all  countries,  with  a  home  in  none ;  inter- 
mixed, and  yet  separated  ;  and  neither  amalgamated  nor  lost,  but,  like  those  moun- 
tain streams  which  are  said  to  pass  through  lakes  of  another  kind  of  water,  and 
keep  a  native  quality  to  repel  commixture  ;  they  hold  communication  without  union, 
aud  may  be  traced  as  rivers  without  banks,  in  the  midst  of  the  alien  element  which 
surrounds  them. 

Ver.  47.  Because  thou  servedst  not  the  Lord. — Right  service  :—T\i^  text  brings 
before  us  a  subject  essentially  important— that  as  the  service  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  must  be  such  as  answered  the  great  end  that  was  to  be  brought  about,  and 
did  answer  it,  so  the  object  of  the  service  of  the  people  of  God  is  to  bring  them  into 
possession  of  what  the  Lord  has  for  them.  Let  us  take  a  twofold  view  of  this  ser- 
vice. 1.  First,  then,  the  true  service  of  the  Lord  ;  it  must  be  by  faith  in  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ.  Let  us  hear  what  the  Scriptures  say  upon  this,  for  it  is  a  most  essen- 
tial matter  :  either  we  are  serving  God  as  Abel  did,  acceptably  ;  or  as  Cain  did,  not 
acceptably.  We  cannot  serve  God  by  the  works  of  the  law  ;  for  the  apostle  saith, 
**  Whatsoever  the  law  saith  " — and  I  may  mention  two  things  which  it  saith  :  first, 
that  '•  he  that  offendeth  in  one  point  is  guilty  of  the  whole."  Now,  that  one  thing 
said  by  the  law  is  enough  to  stop  the  mouth  of  any  one.  Then  again,  it  saith, 
"Cursed  is  he  that  continueth  not  in  all  things  written  in  the  book  of  the  law  to 
do  them."  There  are  three  things  especially  essential  to  serve  God  acceptably; 
these  must  be  knowledge,  faith,  and  love.  You  cannot  do  without  these  three.  It 
is  true,  there  are  many  other  excellencies  arising  from  them.  2.  Now,  a  word 
or  two  upon  this — to  serve  Him  with  joy  fulness  and  with  gladness  of  heart.  I 
think  we  need  the  spirit  of  prayer  upon  this  subject.  So  then  may  the  Lord  give 
us  the  spirit  of  prayer,  that  we  may  pray  to  be  quickened,  and  to  be  made  more 
and  more  lively  in  the  service  and  ways  of  the  Lord  ;  for  it  is  sure  well  to  repay  us  ; 
as  saith  David,  '  *  In  keeping  His  ways  there  is  indeed  great  reward  "  ;  a  reward  that 
far  surpasseth  gold,  even  much  fine  gold  ;  and  there  is  a  sweetness  therein  sweeter 
than  honey  and  the  honeycomb.  So,  I  say,  we  need  the  spirit  of  prayer  for  the 
Lord  to  keep  us  more  and  more  in  His  blessed  ways.     {J.  Wells.) 

Ver.  67.  Would  God  it  were  even  l—Sufferings  of  the  Israelites  :^Thia  chapter  is 
an  awful  communication  :  it  threatens  the  Israelites  with  every  conceivable  evil  if 
they  departed  from  serving  the  Lord  their  God  ;  it  leaves  them  absolutely  without 
hope  unless  they  turned  with  all  their  hearts,  and  repented  them  of  their  disobedi- 
ence. So  the  Israelites  entered  Canaan  and  took  the  lands  oi  the  heathen  into 
possession,  not  without  much  to  sober  their  pride,  and  to  make  them  not  high- 


442  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxviii. 

minded,  but  fear.  The  severe  judgments  spoken  of  in  this  chapter  declare  also 
another  great  law  of  God's  providence,  that  "  to  whomsoever  much  is  given,  of  him 
shall  much  be  required."  It  was  because  the  Israelites  were  God's  rejieemed  people, 
because  He  had  borne  them  on  eagle's  wings  and  brought  them  to  Himself ;  because  He 
had  made  known  to  them  His  will,  and  promised  them  the  possession  of  a  goodly  land, 
flowing  with  milk  and  honey  ;  it  was  for  these  very  reasons  that  tlieir  punishment 
was  to  be  so  severe  if  they  at  last  abused  all  the  mercies  which  had  ])een  shown  to 
them.  For  theirs  was  to  be  no  sudden  destruction,  to  come  upon  them  and  sweep 
them  away  for  ever :  it  was  a  long  and  lingering  misery,  to  endure  for  many  genera- 
tions, like  the  bush  which  burned,  but  was  not  consumed.  We  know  that  Ammon, 
Amalek,  Moab,  Assyria,  and  Babylon  have  long  since  utterly  perished  ;  the  three 
former,  indeed,  so  long  ago,  that  profane  history  does  not  notice  them  ;  its  begin- 
nings are  later  than  their  end.  But  Israel  still  exists  as  a  nation,  however  scattered 
and  degraded  ;  they  have  gone  through  for  ages  a  long  train  of  oppressions,  visited 
on  them  merely  because  they  were  Jews.  Nay,  even  yet  the  end  is  not ;  however 
much  their  condition  is  bettered,  still,  taking  them  the  world  through,  they  have 
even  now  much  to  bear ;  their  hope  is  still  deferred,  and  as  far  as  their  national 
prospects  are  concerned,  the  morning  dawns  on  them  with  no  comfort,  the  evening 
descends  upon  them  and  brings  no  rest.  This  is  one  remarkable  part  in  their  his- 
tory ;  and  there  is  another  which  deserves  notice.  It  is  declared  in  this  chapter 
that  amongst  the  other  evils  they  should  suffer  for  disobedience,  they  should  endure 
so  long  a  siege  from  their  enemies  as  to  suffer  the  worst  extremities  of  famine  (ver. 
56).  Now,  this  has,  in  fact,  befallen  them  twice  over.  Of  the  siege  of  Jerusalem 
by  Nebuchadnezzar  we  have,  indeed,  no  particulars  given  ;  it  is  only  said,  in 
general  terms,  that  after  the  city  had  been  besieged  for  eighteen  months  the  famine 
prevailed  in  it,  and  there  was  no  bread  for  the  people  of  the  land,  so  that  the  king 
and  all  the  fighting  men  endeavoured  to  escape  out  of  the  town  as  the  only  resource 
left  them.  But  of  the  second  siege,  by  Titus  and  the  Romans,  we  have  the  full 
particulars  from  Josephus,  a  Jew,  who  lived  at  the  time,  and  had  the  best  authority 
for  the  facts  which  he  relates.  And  he  mentions  it  as  a  horror  unheard  of  amongst 
Greeks  or  barbarians,  that  a  mother,  named  Mary,  the  daughter  of  Eleazar,  from 
the  country  beyond  Jordan,  was  known  to  have  killed  her  own  child  for  her  food, 
and  to  have  publicly  confessed  what  she  had  done.  Now,  we  know  that  the  horrors 
of  war  have  been  felt  by  many  nations  ;  but  such  an  extremity  of  suffering  occur- 
ring twice  in  the  course  of  its  history,  and  under  circumstances  so  similar,  as  in 
the  two  sieges  of  Jerusalem,  there  is  hardly  another  nation,  so  far  as  I  am  aware, 
that  has  experienced.  Indeed,  the  history  of  the  calamities  of  the  last  siege  of 
Jerusalem,  as  given  by  Josephus,  is  well  worthy  of  our  attentive  consideration  :  it  is 
a  full  comment  on  our  Lord's  words  (Luke  xxiii.  28,  30  ;  Matt.  xxiv.  22).  Eleven 
hundred  thousand  Jews  perished  in  the  course  of  the  siege,  by  the  sword,  by  pestil- 
ence, or  by  famine.  I  do  not  believe  that  the  history  of  the  world  contains  any 
record  of  such  a  destruction  within  so  short  a  time,  and  within  the  walls  of  a  single 
city.  I  said  that  this  dreadful  story  was  well  worth  our  studying ;  and  it  is  so 
for  this  reason.  These  miseries,  greater  than  any  which  history  mentions,  fell  upon 
God's  Church,  upon  His  chosen  people,  with  whom  He  was  in  covenant,  to  vvhom 
He  had  revealed  His  name,  while  all  the  rest  of  the  world  lay  in  darkness.  To  us, 
each  of  us,  belongs  in  the  strictest  sense  the  warning  of  the  text.  For  us,  each  of  us,— 
if  we  do  fail  of  the  grace  of  God,  if  Christ  has  died  for  us  in  vain,  if,  being  called 
by  His  name,  we  are  not  walking  in  His  Spirit, — there  is  reserved  a  misery  of  which, 
indeed,  the  words  of  the  text  are  no  more  than  a  feeble  picture.  There  is  a  state 
in  which  they  who  are  condemned  to  it  shall  for  ever  say  :  "In  the  morning  would 
God  it  were  even,"  &c.  There  is  a  state  in  which  the  tender  and  delicate  woman 
shall  hate  those  whom  once  she  most  loved  ;  in  which  they  who  lived  together  here 
in  friendship  wherein  God  was  no  party,  will  have  their  eyes  evil  against  one 
another  for  ever.  For  when  selfishness  has  wrought  its  perfect  work,  and  the  soul  is 
utterly  lost,  there  love  is  perished  for  ever,  and  the  intercourse  between  such  persons 
can  be  only  one  of  mutual  reproaches  and  suspicion  and  hatred.  An  eternal  restless- 
ness and  eternal  evil  passions.mark  the  everlasting  portion  of  the  enemies  of  God  ;  just 
as  an  eternal  rest  and  a  never-ending  life  of  love  and  peace  are  reserved  for  those 
who  remain  to  the  end  His  true  children.     {T.  Arnold^  D.D.) 


CHAP.  XXIX.]  DEUTERONOMY.  443 


CHAPTER  XXIX. 

Yer.  4.  The  Lord  hatli  not  given  you  an  heart  to  perceive. — Men  without  hearty 
sight,  or  hearing : — Feeling,  sight,  hearing  !  What  wonderful  things  these  are  ! 
If  we  could  exist  without  tliem,  what  a  wretched  condition  ours  would  be  !  The 
outer  world  would  be  unknown  to  us  if  the  gates  of  the  senses  were  shut,  and  the 
soul  would  be  famished,  like  Samaria  when  it  was  straitly  shut  up,  and  there  was 
no  going  in  nor  coming  out.  When  any  one  of  the  senses  is  gone  it  involves  great 
deprivation,  and  subjects  the  person  enduring  it  to  the  pity  of  his  fellows,  but  if 
all  were  absent  what  wretchedness  must  ensue  !  Transfer  your  thoughts  now  from 
these  external  senses  by  which  we  become  conscious  of  the  external  world  to  those 
spiritual  senses  by  which  we  perceive  the  spiritual  world,  the  kingdom  of  heaven, 
the  Lord  of  that  kingdom,  and  all  the  powers  of  the  world  to  come.  There  is  a 
heart  which  should  be  tender,  by  which  we  perceive  the  presence  of  God  and  feel 
His  operations,  and  even  behold  the  Lord  Himself,  as  it  is  written,  "Blessed  are 
the  pure  in  heart,  for  they  shall  see  God."  There  is  a  spiritual  eye  by  which  the 
things  invisible  are  discerned  ;  blessed  are  they  to  whom  the  Lord  has  given  to  see 
the  things  of  His  kingdom,  which  to  the  unrenewed  remain  hidden  in  parables. 
There  is  a  spiritual  ear  by  which  we  hear  the  gentle  whispers  of  the  Spirit,  which 
frequently  come  to  us  internally,  without  the  medium  of  sounds  that  can  affect 
the  ear.  Blessed  are  those  who  have  the  ear  which  the  Lord  has  purged,  and 
cleansed,  and  opened,  so  that  it  listens  to  the  Divine  call.  But  there  is  no  blessed- 
ness in  the  case  of  men  devoid  of  spiritual  feeling,  sight,  and  hearing.  Theirs  is 
a  miserable  plight.  I.  We  shall  think  upon  a  mournful  fact.  Here  was  a 
whole  nation,  with  but  very  few  exceptions,  of  whom  their  leader,  who  knew 
and  loved  them  best,  was  obliged  to  say,  "The  Lord  hath  not  given  you  a  heart 
to  perceive  unto  this  day."  1.  The  mournful  part  of  it  was,  that  this  was  the 
nation  that  had  been  specially  favoured  of  God  above  all  others.  2.  Note  again, 
that  not  only  were  they  a  highly  favoured  people,  but  they  had  seen  very  wonder- 
ful acts  performed  by  the  Lord  Himself.  3.  In  addition  to  this,  these  people  had 
passed  through  a  very  remarkable  experience.  4.  In  addition  to  all  this  sight  and 
experience,  the  Israelites  had  received  remarkable  instruction.  5.  One  thing  else 
is  worth  notice,  that  these  people  had  been  associated  with  remarkable  characters. 
They  were  not  all  blinded,  there  were  a  few  among  them  who  were  gracious,  and  so 
were  made  to  perceive.  Caleb  and  Joshua  were  there,  and  Aaron  and  Miriam ; 
but  chiefly  there  was  Moses,  grandest  of  men,  true  father  of  the  nation  II.  Let 
us  note  THE  MOURNFUL  REASONS  FOR  ALL  THIS.  1.  The  rcasons  for  their  incapacity 
to  see  and  perceive  lay,  first,  in  the  fact  that  these  people  never  believed  in  their 
own  blindness.  They  had  no  heart  to  perceive,  and  they  did  not  perceive  their 
absence  of  perception  ;  they  had  no  eyes  wherewith  to  detect  their  own  dimness  of 
vision.  They  were  such  fools  as  to  dote  on  their  own  wisdom,  so  poor  as  to  think 
themselves  rich,  so  hypocritical  as  to  profess  to  be  sincere.  Pride  is  the  great 
creator  of  darkness  ;  like  Nahash,  the  Ammonite,  it  jmts  out  the  right  eye.  Men 
seek  not  the  light,  because  they  boast  that  they  are  the  children  of  the  day  and 
need  no  light  from  above.  2.  More  than  this,  these  men  never  asked  for  a  heart 
to  perceive,  and  eyes  to  see,  and  ears  to  hear.  No  man  hath  ever  asked  for  these 
things  and  been  refused ;  no  soul  has  cried  in  its  blindness  and  darkness,  "Open 
Thou  mine  eyes,"  but  what  a  gracious  answer  has  always  come.  It  is  the  pre- 
rogative of  the  Lord  Jesus  to  open  the  blind  eyes  ;  but  this  He  is  ever  ready  to 
do  whenever  men  call  upon  His  name.  Then,  moreover,  what  little  light  they 
did  have  they  resisted.  When  they  were  forced  to  see,  it  was  only  for  a  moment 
that  they  would  be  instructed,  and  then  they  shut  their  eyes  again.  III.  What 
was  THE  MOURNFUL  RESULT  of  these  people  being  so  highly  favoured,  and  yet  not 
seeing  their  God  ?  1.  The  result  was,  first,  that  they  missed  a  happy  portion.  I 
can  hardly  imagine  how  happy  the  children  of  Israel  might  have  been.  They  left 
Egypt  with  a  high  hand  and  an  outstretched  arm,  their  ears  were  hung  with 
jewels,  and  their  purses  were  filled  with  riches,  while  around  them  manna  dropped 
from  heaven,  and  cool  streams  flowed  at  their  side.  They  might  have  made  a 
quick  march  to  the  promised  land,  and  at  once  entered  their  rest,  for  their  God 
who  had  sent  the  hornet  before  them  would  soon  have  driven  out  their  adversaries. 
They  would  have  known  no  invading  enemy,  and  felt  neither  blast,  nor  blight,  nor 
mildew  ;  in  fact,  they  would  have  been  the  happiest  nation  under  heaven  :  "He 
should  have  fed  them  also  with  the  finest  of  the  wheat :  and  with  honey  out  of  the 


444  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxix. 

rock  shonld  I  have  satisfied  thee."  They  flung  all  this  on  one  side  :  they  would 
not  have  God,  and  so  they  could  not  have  prosperity.  They  walked  contrary  to 
Him,  and  He  walked  contrary  to  them ;  they  would  not  obey  Him,  and  therefore 
His  anger  smoked  against  them.  2.  Think,  moreover,  what  a  glorious  destiny 
they  threw  aside.  Had  they  been  equal  to  the  occasion,  by  God's  grace  they  might 
have  been  a  nation  of  kings  and  priests,  they  might  have  been  the  Lord's  mis- 
sionaries to  all  lands,  the  light-bearers  to  all  peoples.  3.  Another  result  was  that 
while  they  missed  so  high  a  position,  they  went  on  sinning.  As  they  did  not  learn 
the  lesson  God  was  teaching  them,  namely,  that  He  was  God,  and  that  to  serve 
Him  was  their  joy  and  their  prosperity,  they  went  from  one  evil  to  another,  pro- 
voking the  Lord  to  jealousy.  4.  Hence  they  frequently  suffered.  A  plague  broke 
out  at  one  time,  and  a  burning  at  another  ;  at  one  time  they  Avere  visited  with 
fever,  and  anon  the  earth  opened  beneath  them  ;  one  day  the  Amalekites  smote 
them,  another  day  fiery  serpents  leaped  up  from  the  sand,  and  they  died  by 
thousands,  being  poisoned  by  their  bites.  They  suffered  much  and  often,  and  in 
all  their  trials  they  did  but  reap  what  they  had  sown.  5.  At  last  this  evil  ended 
terribly.  The  Lord  lifted  His  hand  to  heaven,  and  swore  that  the  rebellious 
generation  should  not  enter  into  His  rest,  and  they  began  to  die  by  wholesale  till 
Moses  cried,  "We  are  consumed  by  Thine  anger,  and  by  Thy  wrath  are  we 
troubled."  Not  one  of  the  men  that  came  out  of  Egypt,  save  only  Joshua  and 
Caleb,  reached  the  promised  land.  (C.  H.  Sjmrgeon.)  A  perceiving  heart  the 
gift  of  God: — To  complete  the  sense  of  the  words,  we  must  have  recourse  to  the 
two  precedent  verses ;  which,  being  compared  to  the  text,  present  us  with  a 
description  of  such  a  brutish  temper  as  is  not  to  be  found  in  any  people  mentioned 
throughout  the  whole  Book  of  God,  or  any  history  whatsoever.  L  What  is  meant 
BY  God's  giving  to  the  soul  a  perceiving  heart  ?  We  have  grace  here  set  out 
by  such  acts  as  are  properly  acts  of  knowledge  ;  as  understanding,  seeing,  hearing  ; 
not  because,  as  some  imagine,  grace  is  placed  only  in  the  understanding,  which, 
being  informed  with  such  a  principle,  is  able  to  govern,  and  practically  to  deter- 
mine the  will,  without  the  help  of  any  new  principle  infused  into  that.  For  grace 
is  a  habit  equally  placed  in  both  these  faculties,  but  it  is  expressed  by  the  acts  of 
the  xmderstanding : — 1.  Because  the  understanding  has  the  precedency  and  first 
stroke  in  holy  actions,  as  well  as  in  others ;  it  is  the  head  and  fountain  from 
whence  they  derive  their  goodness,  the  leading  faculty  :  and  therefore  the  works  of 
all  the  rest  may,  by  way  of  eminence,  be  ascribed  to  this,  as  the  conquest  of  an 
army  is  ascribed  to  the  leader  only,  or  general.  2.  Because  the  means  of  grace 
are  chiefly  and  most  frequently  expressed  by  the  word  "truth"  ;  1  Tim.  i.  15,  "This 
is  a  faithful  (or  a  true)  saying,  that  Christ  came  into  the  world  to  save  sinners." 
And  in  John  iii.  33,  "He  that  believeth  hath  set  to  his  seal  that  God  is  true." 
And  in  John  xvii.  17,  "Thy  Word  is  truth."  From  hence,  therefore,  I  collect — 
(1)  That  to  understand  and  receive  the  Word,  according  to  the  letter  and  notion,  by 
a  bare  assent  to  the  truth  of  it,  is  not  to  have  a  heart  to  perceive  nor  an  ear  to  hear  : 
because  it  is  evident,  both  from  Scripture  and  ordinary  observation,  that  such  a 
reception  of  the  means  of  grace  is  not  always  attended  with  these  spiritual  effects  : 
as,  for  instance,  the  Jews  heard  Christ  and  admired  Him,  but  afterwards  they 
rejected  His  doctrine  and  crucified  His  person.  To  hear  the  Word  of  God,  and  to 
hear  God  speaking  in  His  Word,  are  things  vastly  different.  (2)  Therefore,  in  the 
second  place,  to  have  a  perceiving  heart  and  a  hearing  ear  is  to  have  a  spiritual 
light  begot  in  the  mind  by  an  immediate  overpowering  work  of  the  Spirit,  whereby 
alone  the  soul  is  enabled  to  apprehend  the  things  of  God  spiritually,  and  to  practise 
them  effectually :  and  without  this  we  may  see  and  see,  and  never  perceive,  and 
hear  again  and  again  and  never  understand.     II.  Whence  it  is  that,  without 

THIS  gift  of   a   perceiving   HEART,  THE   SOUL   CANNOT   MAKE   ANY  IMPROVEMENT 

OF  THE  MEANS  OF  GRACE.  It  arises  from  these  two  reasons — 1.  From  its  exceeding 
impotence  and  inability  to  apprehend  these  things.  2.  From  its  contrariety  to 
them.  And  there  are  two  things  in  the  soul  in  which  this  contrariety  chiefly 
consists.  (1)  Carnal  corruptions.  (2)  Carnal  wisdom.  III.  Although  upon 
God's  denial  of  a  perceiving  heart  the  soul  does  inevitably  remain 
unprofitable  under  the  means  of  grace,  so  as  not  to  hear  nor  perceive  ; 
yet  this  hardness,  or  unprofitableness,  cannot  at  all  be  ascribed  to  god 
AS  THE  AUTHOR  OF  IT.  In  Order  to  the  clearing  of  this  we  know  that  God's  "  not 
giving  a  heart  to  perceive  "  may  admit  of  a  double  acceptation.  1.  As  it  implies 
only  a  bare  denial  of  grace.  2.  As  it  does  also  include  a  positive  act  of  induration. 
IV.  How  God  can  justly  reprehend  men  foe  not  hearing  noe  peeceiving* 


CHAP.  XXIX.]  DEUTERONOMY,  445 

WHEN,  UPON  His  denial  of  a  heakt,  there  is  a  necessity  lying  upon  them 
TO  do  neither.  Now,  there  can  be  no  just  reprehension  but  for  sin,  and  nothing 
can  be  sin  but  that  which  is  voluntary  and  free,  and  how  can  that  be  free  for  a  man 
to  do  or  not  to  do  which  from  necessity  he  cannot  do?  Application — 1.  This 
doctrine  speaks  refutation  to  that  opinion  that  states  a  sufficiency  of  grace  in  the 
bare  proposal  of  things  to  be  believed  and  practised,  without  a  new  powerful  work 
of  the  Spirit  upon  the  heart,  that  may  determine  and  enable  it  to  believe  and  accept 
of  these  things.  2.  Is  of  exhortation  ;  that  in  the  enjoyment  of  the  means  of  grace 
we  should  not  terminate  in  the  means,  but  look  up  to  God,  who  alone  is  able  to 
give  a  heart  to  improve  them.  {R,  South,  D.D.)  Men's  blindness  in  spiritual 
things : — Consider  this  complaint — I.  As  uttered  by  Moses  against  the  people 
OF  HIS  charge.  They  had  "seen"  with  their  bodily  eyes  all  the  wonders  that 
had  been  wrought  for  them.  They  understood  not.  1.  The  true  character  of  that 
dispensation.  2.  The  obligations  which  it  entailed  upon  them.  II.  As  applicable 
to  ourselves  at  this  day.  1.  By  the  great  mass  of  nominal  Christians  the 
nature  of  the  Gospel  is  very  indistinctly  seen.  2.  The  effects  of  it  are  very  partially 
experienced.  Address — (1)  Those  who  are  altogether  blind.  (2)  Those  who  think 
they  see.     (3)  Those  whose  eyes  God  has  opened.     {C.  Simeon,  M.A.) 

Vers.  10-13.  Ye  stand  .  .  .  before  the  Lord  your  God.— On  covenanting  with 
God  .-—I.  That  covenanting  with  God,  and  that  publicly,  is  not  an  unprece- 
dented thing  in  the  Church  of  God,  but  has  been  usual  in  former  ages. 

II.  What  is  the  nature  of  that  covenant  into  which  the  people  of  God 

HAVE  entered,  AND  INTO  WHICH  WE  ARE  CALLED  TO  ENTER  WITH  HiM  ?  AND  HOW 

DO  WE  ENTER  INTO  IT  ?  The  Christian  covenant  is  foimded  "upon  better  promises  " 
(Heb.  viii.  6).  Its  ceremonies  are  only  two,  baptism  and  the  Lord's  Supper,  both 
most  significant.  Its  conditions  or  duties  are  most  reasonable,  necessaiy  in  the 
nature  of  things,  and  easy.  Its  worship  is  pure  and  spiritual,  and  confined  to 
neither  time  nor  place.  Its  privileges  and  blessings  are  spiritual  and  eternal.  Now, 
this  covenant  can  only  be  entered  into  by  a  Mediator  (Gal.  iii.  19  ;  Heb.  vii.  22-28). 

III.  The  end  for  which  we  should  enter  into  or  renew  our  covenant. 
"That  He  may  establish  thee  for  a  people  to  Himself."  1.  A  believing  people, 
receiving  in  faith  all  His  truths  and  promises.  2.  A  loving  people  (Deut.  xxx.  6, 
16,  20),  esteeming,  desiring,  grateful  to,  and  delighting  in  Him.  3.  An  obedient 
people  (Deut.  xxx.  20).  [J.  Benson.)  On  standing  before  God: — 1.  Surely  there 
is  a  warning — for  the  forgetful  a  startling,  for  tlie  guilty  a  terrible,  even  for  the 
good  man  a  very  solemn  warning — in  the  thought  that  not  only  our  life  in  its  every 
incident,  but  even  our  heart  in  its  utmost  secrets,  lies  naked  and  open  before  Him 
with  whom  we  have  to  do.  2.  The  thought  that  we  stand  before  God  involves  not 
only  a  sense  of  warning,  but  a  sense  of  elevation,  of  ennoblement.  It  is  a  sweet  and 
a  lofty  doctrine,  the  highest  source  of  all  the  dignity  and  grandeur  of  life.  3.  A 
third  consequence  of  life  spent  consciously  in  God's  presence  is  a  firm,  unflinching, 
unwavering  sense  of  duty.  A  life  regardful  of  duty  is  crowned  with  an  object, 
directed  by  a  purpose,  inspired  by  an  enthusiasm,  till  the  very  humblest  routine 
carried  out  conscientiously  for  the  sake  of  God  is  elevated  into  moral  grandeur, 
and  the  very  obscurest  office  becomes  an  imperial  stage  on  which  all  the  virtues 
play.  4.  The  fourth  consequence  is  a  sense  of  holiness.  God  requires  not  only 
duty,  but  holiness.  He  searcheth  the  spirits  ;  He  discerneth  the  very  reins  and 
heart.  5.  This  thought  encourages  us  with  a  certainty  of  help  and  strength.  The 
God  before  whom  we  stand  is  not  only  our  Judge  and  our  Creator,  but  also  our 
Father  and  our  Friend.  {Dean  Farrar.)  On  the  covenant  of  God  with  His 
people : — This  is  a  covenant  day  between  God  and  us.  This  is  the  design  of  our 
sacraments,  and  the  particular  design  of  the  Holy  Supper  we  have  celebrated. 
This  being  understood,  we  cannot  observe  without  astonishment  the  slight  attention 
most  men  pay  to  an  institution,  of  which  they  seem  to  entertain  such  exalted 
notions.  One  grand  cause  of  this  defect  proceeds,  it  is  presumed,  from  our  having, 
for  the  most  part,  inadequate  notions  of  what  is  called  contracting  or  renewing 
our  covenant  with  God.  The  covenant  God  contracted  with  the  Israelites  by  the 
ministry  of  Moses,  and  the  covenant  He  has  contracted  with  you,  differ  only  in 
circumstances,  being  in  substance  the  same.  Properly  speaking,  God  has  contracted 
but  one  covenant  with  man  since  the  Fall,  the  covenant  of  grace  upon  Mount  Sinai. 
The  Israelites,  to  whom  Moses  addresses  the  words  of  my  text,  had  the  same 
sacraments  (1  Cor.  x.  2,  3),  the  same  appellations  (Exod.  xix.  5),  the  same  promises 
(Heb.  xi.  13).     On  the  other  hand,  amid  the  consolatory  objects  which  God  displays' 


446  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  xxix. 

towards  us  at  this  period,  in  distinguished  lustre,  and  amid  the  abundant  mercy 
we  have  seen  displayed  at  the  Lord's  table,  if  we  should  violate  the  covenant  He 
has  established  with  us,  you  have  the  same  cause  of  fear  as  the  Jews.  We  have 
the  same  Judge,  equally  awful  now  as  at  that  period  (Heb.  yii.  29).  We  have  the 
same  judgments  to  apprehend  (1  Cor.  x.  5-10).  Further  still,  whatever  superiority 
our  condition  may  have  over  the  Jgavs  ;  in  whatever  more  attracting  manner  He 
may  have  now  revealed  Himself  to  us,  will  serve  only  to  augment  our  misery  if  we 
prove  unfaithful  (Heb.  ii.  2,  3,  xii.  18-25).  Hence  the  principle  respecting  the 
legal  and  evangelical  covenant  is  indisputable.  The  covenant  God  formerly  con- 
tracted with  the  Israelites  by  the  ministry  of  Moses  and  the  covenant  He  has  made 
with  us  in  the  sacrament  of  the  Holy  Supper  are  in  substance  the  same.  And 
what  the  legislator  said  of  the  first,  in  the  words  of  my  text,  we  may  say  of  the 
second,  in  the  explication  we  shall  give.  I.  Moses  requires  the  Israelites  to  con- 
eider  THE  SANCTITY  OF  THE  PLACE  IN  WHICH  THE  COVENANT  WAS  CONTRACTED  WITH 

God.  It  was  consecrated  by  the  Divine  presence.  ' '  Ye  stand  this  day  all  of  you 
before  the  Lord."  The  Christians  having  more  enlightened  notions  of  the  Divinity 
than  the  Jews,  have  the  less  need  to  be  apprised  that  God  is  an  Omnipresent  Being, 
and  unconfined  by  local  residence.  But  let  us  be  cautious  lest,  under  a  pretence  of 
removing  some  superstitious  notions,  we  refine  too  far.  God  presides  in  a  peculiar 
manner  in  our  temples,  and  in  a  peculiar  manner  even  where  two  or  three  are  met 
together  in  His  name  :  more  especially  in  a  house  consecrated  to  His  glory  ;  more 
especially  in  places  in  which  a  whole  nation  come  to  pay  their  devotion.  The 
more  solemn  our  worship,  the  more  is  God  intimately  near.  And  what  part  of  the 
worship  we  render  to  God  can  be  more  august  than  that  we  have  celebrated  in 
the  Lord's  Supper  ?  In  what  situation  can  the  thought,  "  I  am  seen  and  heard  of 
God,"  be  more  affecting?  II.  Moses  required  the  Israelites,  in  renewing  their 
covenant  with  God,  to  consider  the  universality  of  the  contract.  "  Ye  stand 
all  of  you  before  the  Lord."  Would  to  God  that  your  preachers  could  say,  on  sacra- 
mental occasions,  as  Moses  said  to  the  Jews,  "Ye  stand  all  of  you  this  day  before 
the  Lord  your  God  ;  the  captains  of  your  tribes,  your  elders,  your  officers,  your  wives, 
your  little  ones,  from  the  hewer  of  wood  to  the  drawer  of  water."  But  alas  !  how 
defective  are  our  assemblies  on  these  solemn  occasions  !  There  was  a  time,  among 
the  Jews,  when  a  man  who  should  have  had  the  assurance  to  neglect  the  rites  which 
constituted  the  essence  of  the  law,  would  have  been  cut  off  from  the  people. 
This  law  has  varied  in  regard  to  circumstances,  but  in  essence  it  still  subsists, 
and  in  all  its  force.  III.  Moses  required  the  Israelites,  in  renewing  their  covenant 
with  God,  TO  consider  what  constituted  its  essence  :  which,  according  to 

THE  VIEWS  OF   THE   LAWGIVER,  WAS  THE   RECIPROCAL   ENGAGEMENT.      Be  attentive 

to  this  term  reciprocal  ;  it  is  the  soul  of  my  definition.  What  constitutes  the 
essence  of  a  covenant  is  the  reciprocal  engagements  of  the  contracting  parties.  This 
is  obvious  from  the  words  of  my  text,  "that  thou  shouldest  (stipulate  or)  enter." 
Here  we  distinctly  find  mutual  conditions ;  here  we  distinctly  find  that  God 
engaged  with  the  Israelites  to  be  their  God  ;  and  they  engaged  to  be  His  people. 
We  proved  at  the  commencement  of  this  discourse  that  the  covenant  of  God  with 
the  Israelites  was  in  substance  the  same  as  that  contracted  with  Christians. 
This  being  considered,  what  idea  ought  we  to  form  of  those  Christians  (if  we  may 
give  that  name  to  men  who  can  entei'tain  such  singular  notions  of  Christianity) 
who  venture  to  affirm  that  the  ideas  of  conditions  and  reciprocal  engagements 
are  dangerous  expressions,  when  applied  to  the  evangelical  covenant :  tliat  Avhat 
distinguishes  the  Jews  from  Christians  is,  that  God  then  promised  and  required, 
whereas  now  He  promises  and  requires  nothing  ?  IV.  Moses  required  the  Israelites 
to  consider,  in  renewing  their  covenant  with  God,  the  extent  of  the  engage- 
ment :  "That  thou  shouldest  enter  into  covenant  with  the  Lord  thy  God, 
and  into  His  oath  ;  that  He  may  establish  thee  to-day  for  a  people  unto  Himself ; 
and  that  He  may  be  unto  thee  a  God."  This  engagement  of  God  with  the  Jews 
implies  that  He  would  be  their  God  ;  or,  to  comprehend  the  whole  in  a  single  word, 
that  He  would  procure  them  a  happiness  correspondent  to  the  eminence  of  His 
perfections.  Cases  occur  in  which  the  attributes  of  God  are  at  variance  with  the 
happiness  of  men.  It  implies,  for  instance,  an  inconsistency  with  the  Divine 
perfections,  not  only  that  the  wicked  should  be  happy,  but  also  that  the  righteous 
should  have  perfect  felicity,  while  their  purity  is  incomplete.  There  are  miseries 
inseparable  from  our  imperfection  in  holiness  ;  and,  imperfections  being  coeval 
with  life,  our  happiness  will  be  incomplete  till  after  death.  On  the  removal  of 
this  obstruction,  by  virtue  of  the  covenant,  God  having  engaged  to  be  our  God, 


CHAP,  xxix.]  DEUTERONOMY,  447 


we  shall  attain  supreme  felicity.  When  God  engaged  with  the  Israelites  the 
Israelites  engaged  with  God.  Their  covenant  implies  that  they  should  be 
His  people  ;  that  is,  that  they  should  obey  His  precepts  so  far  as  human  frailty 
would  admit.  By  virtue  of  this  clause,  they  engaged  not  only  to  abstain  from 
gross  idolatry,  but  also  to  eradicate  the  priuciple.  It  is  not  enough  to  be 
exempt  from  crimes,  we  must  exterminate  the  principle.  For  examp  e,  m  theft 
there  is  both  the  root  and  the  plant  productive  of  wormwood  and  galL  There  is 
theft  gross  and  refined  ;  the  act  of  theft,  and  the  principle  of  theft.  To  steal  the 
goods  of  a  neighbour  is  the  gross  act  of  theft ;  but  to  indulge  an  exorbitant  Avish 
for  the  acquisition  of  wealth,  to  make  enormous  charges,  to  be  indelicate  as  to  the 
means  of  gaining  money,  to  reject  the  mortifying  claims  of  restitution  is  refined 
fraud  or  if  you  please,  the  principle  of  fraud  productive  of  wormwood  and  gall. 
V  Moses  lastly  required  the  Israelites  to  consider  the  oath  and  execration  with 

WHICH  THEIR  ACCEPTANCE  OF  THE  COVENANT  WAS  ATTENDED  :   that  thoU  shouldcst 

enter  into  covenant,  and  into  this  oath.  What  is  meant  by  their  entering  into 
the  oath  of  execration?  That  they  pledged  themselves  by  oath  to  fulfil  every 
clause  of  the  covenant,  and,  in  case  of  violation,  to  subject  themselves  to  ail  the 
curses  God  had  denounced  against  those  who  should  be  guilty  of  so  perfidious  a 
crime  The  words  which  we  render,  ' '  that  thou  shouldest  enter  into  covenant,  have 
a  peculiar  energy  in  the  original,  and  signify  that  thou  shouldest  pass  into  covenant. 
The  interpreters  of  whom  I  speak,  think  they  refer  to  a  ceremony  formerly  practised 
in  contracting  covenants.  On  immolating  the  victims,  they  divided  the  flesh  into 
t^o  parts,  placing  the  one  opposite  to  the  other.  The  contracting  parties  passed  m 
the  o>en  space  between  the  two,  thereby  testifying  their  consent  to  be  slaughtered 
as  those  victims  if  they  did  not  religiously  confirm  the  covenant  contracted  m  so 
mysterious  a  manner.  Perhaps  one  of  my  hearers  may  say  to  himself  that  the 
terrific  circumstances  of  this  ceremony  regarded  the  Israelites  alone  whom  God 
addressed  in  lightnings  and  thunders  from  the  top  of  Smai.  What !  was  there 
no  victim  immolated  when  God  contracted  His  covenant  with  us?  Does  not 
St.  Paul  expressly  say,  that  without  the  shedding  of  blood  there  is  no  remission  of 
sins  t  (Heb.  ix.  22.)  What  were  the  lightnings,  what  were  the  thunders  of  Smai  ? 
What  were  all  the  execrations,  and  all  the  curses  of  the  law?  They  were  the  just 
punishments  every  sinner  shall  suffer  who  neglects  an  entrance  into  favour  with 
God.  Now,  these  lightnings,  these  thunders,  these  execrations,  these  ciirses,  did 
thevnot  all  unite  against  the  slaughtered  victim  when  God  contracted  His  cove- 
nant  with  us-I  would  sav,  against  the  head  of  Jesus  Christ?  Sinner  here  is  the 
victim  immolated  on  contracting  thy  covenant  with  God  !  Here  are  the  sufferings 
thou  didst  subject  thyself  to  endure,  if  ever  thou  shouldest  perfidiously  violate  it ! 
Thou  hast  entered,  thou  hast  passed  into  covenant,  and  into  the  oath  of  execration 
which  God  has  required.  Application:  No  man  should  presume  to  disguise  the 
nature  of  his  engagements  and  the  high  characters  of  the  Gospel.  To  enter  into 
covenant  with  God  is  to  accept  the  Gospel  precisely  as  it  was  delivered  by  Je^us 
Christ,  and  to  submit  to  all  its  stipulations.  This  Gospel  expressly  declares  that 
fornicators,  that  liars,  that  drunkards,  and  the  covetous  shall  not  inherit  the 
kincrdom  of  God.  Therefore,  on  accepting  the  Gospel,  we  submit  to  be  excluded  the 
kingdom  of  God  if  we  are  either  drunkards,  or  liars,  or  covetous,  or  fornicators, 
and  if  after  the  commission  of  any  of  these  crimes,  we  do  not  recover  by  repentance. 
And  what  is  submission  to  this  clause  if  it  is  not  to  enter  into  the  oath  of  execra- 
tion, which  God  requires  of  us  on  the  ratification  of  His  covenant  ?  Let  us  be 
sincere,  and  He  will  give  us  power  to  be  faithful.  Let  us  ask  His  aid,  and  He  will 
not  withhold  the  grace  destined  to  lead  us  to  this  noble  end.     {J.  bawnn.) 

Ver  18  A  root  that  beaxeth  gaJl  aiid  wonnwood.—r;i«  roo«  «7ia<  Jeare^worw- 
wood:—l.  Sin  is  the  root  which  beareth  gall  and  wormwood.  1.  That  this 
was  true  in  the  case  of  the  Israelites  is  very  manifest.  Their  history  tells  us  the 
whole  generation  which  came  up  out  of  Egypt  died  in  the  wilderness  because  of 
their  sms.  Their  sin  then  was  a  root  which  bore  to  them  the  poisonous  hemlock, 
for  they  left  a  line  of  graves  along  their  line  of  march  as  a  sad  memorial  to  their 
iniquities,  and  only  Joshua  and  Caleb  ever  entered  into  the  promised  land.  2.  Again, 
not  only  does  the  history  of  the  Jews  prove  that  sin  is  a  root  of  bitterness,  but 
our  iudgment  tells  us  that  it  is  most  fitting  it  should  be  so.  If  sin  were  m  the 
long  run  pleasurable,  and  really  produced  advantage  to  man,  it  would  be  a  very 
strange  arrangement  in  the  Divine  economy.  Sin  is  a  root  which  ha^  not  always 
budded  and  blossomed  in  this  life,  but  which  will  bud  and  blossom  and  bring  forth 


448  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxix. 

its  fruit  in  the  life  to  come,  and  the  fruit  of  sin  will  be  more  bitter  than  hemlock 
and  wormwood.  I  gather  this  from  my  reason.  Let  an  intelligent  person  only 
think  a  minute,  and  I  am  sure  he  will  be  convinced  that  there  must  be  a  terrible 
punishment  for  sin.  Reflect,  there  are  other  laws  in  the  world  besides  moral  laws : 
there  are  what  is  called  by  the  philosopher  physical  laws,  that  is  to  say,  laws  which 
concern  matter  rather  than  mind.  Now,  if  men  break  these  laws,  does  any  ill 
result  follow  from  the  violation  ?  For  instance,  the  law  of  attraction,  or  gravita- 
tion, that  certain  bodies  shall  attract  other  bodies,  can  that  be  infringed  without 
risk  ?  If  you  rebel  against  gravitation,  it  will  just  crush  you  up  as  a  man  would  a 
beetle,  or  a  fly,  and  without  a  particle  of  pity  will  avenge  its  insulted  authority. 
Again,  we  are  not  left  to  this  argument  alone,  for  there  is  one  out  of  the  Ten 
Commandments,  to  which  I  can  only  allude,  which  involves  more  especially  the 
bodies  of  men.  Now,  when  a  man  ofi^ends  against  the  one  command,  we  shall  see 
if  God  does  really  punish  sin  ;  we  shall  see  in  the  man's  body  whether  or  not  sin 
does  produce  gall  and  wormwood.  I  allude,  of  course,  to  the  command,  '*  Thou  shalt 
not  commit  adultery,"  which  forbids  all  classes  of  lasciviousness  and  imcleanness. 
The  men  or  women  who  violate  this  precept  soon  find  that  they  have  not  only  done 
wrong  to  God,  but  wrong  to  themselves.  Our  hospitals  and  asylums  could  tell  you 
into  what  a  fearful  state  men  have  brought  themselves  by  sins  of  the  flesh.  Now, 
if  the  violation  of  this  one  command,  which  happens  to  touch  the  body,  does 
beyond  all  doubt  make  men  smart  for  it,  why  not  with  the  rest !  3.  But  we  are 
not,  happily,  left  to  our  reason  about  it ;  we  can  turn  to  the  Book  of  God,  and  call 
up  the  witnesses.  Ask  Noah,  as  he  looks  out  of  his  ark,  "Does  sin  bring  bitter- 
ness ?  "  and  he  points  to  the  floating  carcases  of  innumerable  thousands  that  died 
because  of  sin.  Turn  to  Abraham ;  does  sin  bear  bitterness  ?  he  points  to  the 
smoke  of  Sodom  and  Gomorrah  that  God  destroyed  because  of  their  wickedness. 
Listen  to  James,  or  Jude,  or  Peter,  and  you  hear  them  speak  of  chains  of  darkness 
and  flaming  fire.  Let  the  Saviour  Himself  speak  to  you.  He  cries,  "These  shall 
go  away  into  everlasting  punishment."  IL  Is  there  such  a  root  as  this  grow- 
ing IN  THE  HEART  OF  ANY  ONE  OF  US  HERE  ?  Some  have  this  root  that  will  bear 
gall  and  wormwood  in  them  who  are  not  actually  gross  outward  sinners  :  they  are 
described  as  those  who  forget  God.  1.  The  non-loving  of  the  Most  High,  even 
though  you  never  curse  or  swear,  even  though  you  do  not  break  the  Sabbath,  is 
that  root  that  will  bear  gall  and  wormwood.  2.  Next  we  read  of  "  men  seeking  after 
another  God."  Are  you  loving  some  one  better  than  God?  Are  you  living  for 
money — is  that  your  great  object  ?  Is  there  no  one  here  who  is  living  for  self?  If 
so,  though  you  may  be  outwardly  most  respectable  people,  if  you  are  living  for  any- 
thing but  God,  that  root  will  bring  forth  gall  and  wormwood.  3.  Again,  this  root 
is  in  every  man  who  disbelieves  the  penalty.  The  verse  following  the  text  vspeaks 
of  one  who  said,  "  I  shall  have  peace  though  I  walk  after  my  own  heart."  Are  you 
saying  that  ?  If  so,  you  have  the  evil  root  in  your  heart.  There  is  no  more  sure 
sign  of  reprobation  than  callousness  and  carelessness.  III.  The  last  point  was  to 
be,  HOW  ARE  WE  TO  GET  RID  OF  IT  ?  Is  there  a  possibility  of  being  delivered  from 
the  gall  and  wormwood  ?  There  is.  As  many  as  trust  in  Christ  shall  be  rid  of  the 
gall  and  wormwood.     (C  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Ver.  19.  To  add  drunkenness  to  thirst. — The  sin  of  drunkenness: — Among  the 
vices  which  stamp  upon  human  nature  its  fallen  condition,  there  is  not  one  which 
causes  such  misery,  or  which  leads  on  to  such  reckless  crime,  as  drunkenness.  1.  It 
is  a  most  selfish  as  well  as  degrading  vice :  it  debases  man,  created  in  the  image 
of  God,  lower  than  the  brute  creation.  God  denounces  this  sin  most  strongly  in  His 
Holy  Word.  Under  the  law  of  Moses,  the  son  who  would  not  obey  the  voice  of  his 
father,  but  gave  himself  up  to  gluttony  and  drunkenness,  was  put  to  death  by 
stoning  ;  and,  in  the  Gospel,  drunkenness  is  classed  with  murder,  as  one  of  the 
works  of  the  flesh,  of  which  it  is  said  they  which  do  such  things  shall  not  inherit 
the  kingdom  of  God.  Drunkenness  is  a  vice  which  destroys  soul  and  body.  It 
weakens  the  intellect,  making  a  man  a  madman  in  his  rage,  and  an  idiot  in  his 
sober  moments.  It  ruins  the  health,  producing  the  most  painful  diseases,  and 
causing  premature  decay  and  death.  It  involves  his  family  in  poverty  and 
misery.  There  is  no  |)eace  in  the  drunkard's  home.  Who  can  describe  all 
the  misery  which  follows  in  the  train  of  drunkenness,  all  the  crime  to  which 
it  leads,  all  the  sorrow  which  it  causes  to  others  ?  How  fitly  the  words  of  the 
text  describe  it,  when  Moses  warns  the  Israelites  to  beware  "lest  there  should 
be  among  them  a  root  that  beareth  gall  and  wormwood "  ;  or,  as  the  marginal 


CHAP.  XXIX.]  DEUTERONOMY.  449 

reading  is,  a  poisonful  herb.  Never  did  Satan  plant  a  more  fearful  seed  in  the 
human  heart  than  the  love  of  strong  drink.  Drunkenness  is,  indeed,  a  root  which 
beareth  gall  and  wormwood  ;  nothing  sweet,  or  pleasant,  or  excellent,  or  beautiful  can 
spring  from  it,  or  grow  in  the  heart  beside  it.  Like  the  deadly  upas  tree,  it  poisons 
all  which  rests  under  its  shade,  or  comes  near  to  it.  The  drunkard  cannot  be  a 
high-principled,  virtuous,  or  amiable  man.  In  his  sober  moments  the  testimony 
of  every  drunkard  must  be,  that  the  root  of  that  fatal  passion  beareth  gall  and 
wormwood— that  it  is  a  poisonful  herb.  2.  The  next  particular— which  the  text 
points  out— is  the  deceptive  nature  of  the  vice.  Of  all  self-deceivers,  the  drunkard 
is  the  most  deluded,  the  most  blinded.     "And  it  come  to  pass,  when  he  heareth 


difficult  to  convince  of  his  folly  and  sinfulness  as  the  drunkard,  and  no  man  so 
hard  to  turn  away  from  his  evil  course.  Satan's  most  powerful  weapon  against  our 
holy  religion  is  drunkenness.  A  drunkard  cannot  be  a  true  Christian,  a  child  of 
God.  He  is  more  often  an  infidel,  a  blasphemer,  and  he  is  on  the  high  road  to  every 
kind  of  sin  and  crime.  Let  us  not  stretch  forth  our  hand  to  save  the  far-off  heathen 
idolater,  and  remain  indifferent  and  eflFortless  about  the  drunkard  dwelling  close  to 
us,  and  even  one  admitted  into  the  fellowship  of  the  same  holy  faith  as  ourselves. 
{S.  Charlesworth.)  Degradation  of  drunkenness : — Drunkenness  is  the  shame  of 
nature,  the  extinguisher  of  reason,  the  shipwreck  of  chastity,  and  the  murder  of 
conscience.  Drunkenness  is  hurtful  to  the  body ;  the  cup  kills  more  than  the 
cannon  ;  it  causes  dropsies,  catarrhs,  apoplexies  ;  it  fills  the  eye  with  fire,  and  the 
legs  with  water,  and  turns  the  body  into  an  hospital.     {T.  Watson.) 

Ver.  29.  The  secret  thin^  belong  unto  the  Lord,— Things  secret  and  things 
revealed: — Man  has  always  had  a  quarrel  with  God  over  secret  things.  In  the 
Garden  of  Eden  there  was  one  prohibition — "  Thou  shalt  not  eat  of  the  tree  of  the 
knowledge  of  good  and  evil  "—and  in  the  Garden  of  Eden  began  the  quarrel  with 
God.  Now  there  are  certain  secrets  to  be  left  unto  God,  and  they  may  be  classified 
under  five  headings.  1.  Secrets  in  the  nature  of  God  Himself.  One  of  the  first 
things  that  a  man  has  to  learn  is  that  his  mind  has  not  the  capacity  of  that  of 
God.  Just  a^  well  might  you  expect  a  tiny  cup  to  embrace  the  boundless  ocean  as 
to  get  God  within  the  compass  of  man's  mind.  And  this  is  the  very  proof  of  God's 
supeiiority  to  man.  If  we  understood  God  we  should  be  equal  to  God.  If  we 
could  explore  the  mysteries  of  this  world  we  could  have  made  it.  If  we  found  no 
difficulties  in  the  Bible  we  could  have  written  it.  2.  Those  mysteries  which  lie  in 
the  will  of  God.  A  parent  always  shows  his  or  her  wisdom  by  their  reserve. 
There  are  many  things  which  a  child  ought  not  to  know,  and  these  are  withheld  by 
a  wise  parent.  Eventually  the  child  has  growth,  and  then  the  knowledge  comes 
in.  Now,  God  is  the  universal  Father,  and  there  are  some  things  that  God  sees  which 
would  be  unwise  for  Him  to  communicate.  3.  Secrets  that  have  to  do  with  the 
nature  of  truth.  Truth  is  a  sphere.  In  other  words,  you  cannot  see  it  all  at  once. 
It  is  a  great  globe  which  has  two  aspects.  Looked  at  from  one  side,  only  half  is 
seen,  the  other  part  is  hidden.  Now,  man  can  only  see  one  hemisphere  at  a  time. 
If  he  could  only  learn  that  truth  is  greater  than  his  vision  takes  in  at  a  glance,  he 
would  at  once  surmount  many  difficulties.  Now,  many  apparent  contradictions 
are  found  in  the  Bible,  but  there  is  no  attempt  on  the  part  of  the  writers 
to  reconcile  them.  The  reason  is,  that  no  matter  how  many  explanations  we 
received,  we  could  never  take  in  the  grandeur  of  God's  purpose.  4.  Secrets  that 
have  to  do  with  the  nature  of  man.  6.  Secrets  that  have  to  do  with  the  nature  of 
language.  Words  represent  things.  If  we  do  not  understand  a  word,  we  can  have 
no  conception  of  the  thing  which  it  represents.  When  we  hear  the  words  "tree,'* 
**  cloud,  "and  "sun,"  immediately  these  objects  are  presented  to  our  imagination. 
But  if  I  use  a  word  which  you  have  never  heard  of,  it  would  have  no  signification 
to  you  whatever.  Now  when  God  describes  a  thing  which  we  have  never  seen,  He 
is  obliged  to  use  words  that  are  familiar  to  us,  no  matter  how  insufficient  they  may 
be.  When  Robert  Moffat  was  in  Africa  he  came  across  a  tribe  that  had  never 
seen  an  ox-waggon.  With  great  curiosity  they  examined  the  wheels,  axles,  and 
other  parts.  But  most  of  all  they  were  taken  with  his  kettle.  Their  curiosity  was, 
however,  turned  to  wonder  when  Dr.  Moffat  told  them  that  "in  England  they 
placed  on  the  ground  iron  rods,  and  on  these  tied  in  a  row  several  ox-waggons,  put 
a  big  steam-kettle  at  their  head,  and  away  they  went  J "  You  see.  he  had  to  take 
29 


450  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxix. 

something  which  the  natives  had  seen  in  order  to  describe  what  they  had  not  seen  ; 
they  then  readily  caught  some  idea  of  the  original.  Did  it  ever  occur  to  you  that 
when  God  tries  to  make  known  to  us  the  mysteries  of  heaven  and  the  heavenly  life, 
that  He  is  obliged  to  use  \n  ords  which  are  familiar  to  us,  but  do  not  even  touch  the 
reality  ?  Heaven  is  described  as  having  pearly  gates,  streets  of  gold,  and  jasper 
walls.  God  is  obliged  to  thus  describe  it  because  no  thoughts  of  man  could  possibly 
reach  to  the  reality.  Now,  what  are  the  things  revealed  ?  1.  Facts.  We  know 
that  there  is  such  a  thing  as  sin,  and  we  know  that  we  can  have  salvation  if  we 
only  seek  it ;  but  the  mysteries  of  these  are  not  understood.  Christ's  death  and 
resurrection  are  well  attested — they  are  facts,  but  the  mystery  surrounding  them 
cannot  be  explained.  You  cannot  understand  these  mysteries,  but  you  can  accept 
the  facts.  Admit  these  facts,  and  then  adapt  your  own  conduct  to  the  fact. 
2.  Laws.  The  law  is  the  express  will  of  the  sovereign.  There  may  be  ten  thousand 
things  which  you  do  not  understand,  but  there  is  not  a  single  law  in  the  Bible 
which  a  little  child  cannot  understand,  and  a  willing  child  obey.  The  laws  of  God, 
which  once  belonged  to  Him,  now  "belong  unto  us  and  to  our  children  for  ever." 
What  is  the  lesson  ?  First,  we  must  learn  humility.  We  should  all  find  out  and 
limit  the  extent  of  our  knowledge.  The  province  of  reason  is  not  to  explore  the 
mysteries  of  God,  but  to  answer — 1.  Is  this  the  law  of  God  ?  2.  What  does  this 
law  mean  ?  3.  What  does  it  require  of  me  ?  When  these  have  been  answered,  all 
that  reason  demands  is  satisfied.  When  we  go  beyond  the  reach  of  reason,  Faith 
must  take  its  place.  In  addition,  we  are  taught  Obedience.  This  should  be 
imquestioning  and  unhesitating.  Finally,  we  have  the  lesson  of  Blessedness.  The 
blessedness  of  the  man  who  keeps  the  law  of  God  is  only  just  inferior  to  the 
blessedness  of  the  angels  themselves.  (/.  Pierson,  D.D.)  Mystery  and  revela- 
tion : — The  fact  that  there  are  some  mysteries  which  are  insoluble  is  attested — 

I.  By  the  long  and  painful  experience  of  mankind.  2.  By  the  teaching  of  the 
materialistic  thinkers  of  the  day.  The  text  recognises  alike  the  spirit  of  uninquir- 
ing  reverence  and  of  rational  freedom.  I.  Some  men  say,  "We  cannot  accept 
REVELATION.  We  acccpt  the  excellent  moral  teachings  of  the  Bible,  because  they 
commend  themselves  to  our  reason  and  to  the  reason  of  the  race  ;  but  what  we 
cannot  accept  are  these  mysteries  which  are  revealed  in  the  New  Testament."  In 
answer  to  this  we  reply,  A  mystery  is  not  a  revelation.  It  is  the  very  opposite  of  a 
revelation.  We  freely  admit  that  there  are  mysteries  confronting  us  in  the  Old  and 
New  Testaments.  Truths  are  intimated,  suggested,  pointed  at,  dimly  outlined, 
like  a  mountain  castle  scarce  seen  through  the  mists  of  evening  which  fill  the 
valley  ;  but,  inasmuch  as  they  are  not  clear,  to  that  extent  they  cannot  be  said  to 
be  revealed.  These  things  are  beyond  us.  They  are  Divine  mysteries,  which  it  is 
reverent  for  us  to  place  with  the  secret  things  which  belong  unto  the  Lord  God. 

II.  There  are  those  who  say  they  cannot  receive  a  revelation  on  the 

GROUND  that  IT  IS  SUPERNATURAL,  THAT  THEY  ONLY  KNOW^  THAT  WHICH  COMES 
THROUGH  THE  MIND  OF  MAN  AND  IS  CAPABLE  OF  JUSTIFYING  ITSELF  TO  THE  HUMAN 

REASON.  Now  we  aflBrm  that  the  Bible  revelations  have  come  through  the  mind  of 
man.  They  were  convictions,  certainties,  in  some  man's  mind,  which  he  declared 
to  his  fellows.  A  truth  of  inspiration  is  no  truer  than  a  truth  of  induction  or 
demonstration.  Truth  is  simply  truth,  wherever  it  may  come  from,  or  however  it 
may  be  demonstrated.  Revelation  is  natural  and  at  the  same  time  supernatural. 
It  comes  from  the  mind  of  man  ;  it  comes  according  to  the  mind  and  demonstration 
of  God.  III.  The  one  ever-speaking  revelation  of  the  mind  of  God  is  the 
HISTORY  of  man.  "  If  wc  miss  the  truth,"  says  Jeremy  Taylor,  "it  is  because  we 
will  not  find  it,  for  certain  it  is  that  all  the  truth  which  God  hath  made  necessary  He 
hath  also  made  legible  and  plain  ;  and  if  we  will  open  our  eyes  we  shall  see  the  sun, 
and  if  we  will  walk  in  the  light  we  shall  rejoice  in  the  light."  (  W.  Page  Roberts, 
M.A.)  Divine  secrets : — I.  That  there  are  in  the  universe  certain  domains 
accessible  to  none  but  God.  This  holds  true  in  reference  to — 1.  Material  creation. 
Secrets  of  nature.  2.  The  decrees  of  Providence.  "  Clouds  and  darkness  are  round 
about  Him."  Social  inequalities.  3.  The  mysteries  of  redemption.  "  Great  is  the 
mystery,"  &c.  II.  That  impenetrable  secrecy  is  compatible  with  paternal 
benevolence.  1.  All  nature  proves  this.  2.  Family  mercies  prove  this.  3.  Never 
make  God's  secrets  a  plea  for  neglecting  His  bounties.  III.  That  Divine  secrbicy 
is  no  argument  for  human  disobedience.  "Those  things  which  are  revealed 
belong  unto  us."  1.  An  acknowledgment  of  a  Divine  revelation.  2.  The  confession 
of  our  relationship  to  God.  3.  An  implication  of  our  power  to  obey  the  Divine 
requirements.     IV.  That  inquisitiveness  into  secret  things  JS  a  fruitful 


CHAP.  XXIX.]  DEUTERONOMY.  451 


CAUSE  or  scKPTicisM.  Let  us  leave  God  to  deal  with  His  own  d.>crees,  to  manage 
the  boundless  realm  of  causes,  and  to  work  out  His  inconceivable  purposes. 
(/  Parker  D  D.)        Of  mysteries :— I.  That  it  is  a  vain  and  foolish  cukiosity 

TO  INQUIRE  INTO  THINGS  THAT  WE  CANNOT  COMPREHEND,  AND  WITH  RESPECT  TO 
WHICH  WE   HAVE   NO   LIGHT  TO   DIRECT  US,  EITHER   FROM  REASON  OR   REVELATION. 

II  That  there  are,  properly  speaking,  no  mysteries  in  religion.  The 
secret  things  belong  unto  the  Lord  our  God,  and  only  things  revealed,  things  that 
are  intelligible,  belong  to  us.  III.  That  the  great  end  of  revelation  is 
practice  the  PRAf  tice  OF  SUBSTANTIAL  VIRTUE  ;  that  wc  may  do  all  the  works 
of  this  law.  From  whence  it  necessarily  follows— IV.  That  no  doctrines  which 
IN  the  least  encourage  immorality  can  be  parts  of  a  Divine  revelation. 
V  That  the  importance  of  the  several  doctrines  of  revelation  is  to  be  judged  of  by 
this  rule,  namely,  their  tendency  to  promote  and  establish  a  becoming 
regard  to  purity  and  true  goodness.  {James  Foster.)  Mysteries  no  real 
objection  to  the  truth  of  Christiamity  :-\.  The  difficulty  or  impossibility  of 
conceiving  the  sacred  mysteries  of  our  faith  is  no  reasonable  objection 
to  the  truth  of  them.  Not  a  thing  in  the  whole  compass  of  nature,  were  we  to 
pursue  our  inquiries  to  the  utmost,  but  would  puzzle  the  wisest.  Can  we  wonder, 
then  at  our  inabUity  to  understand  the  world  of  spirits  ?  II.  In  matters  so  vastly 
beyond  the  reach  of  our  capacities,  it  is  not  only  needless  but  dangerous 

presumption,  to  be  too  curious  and  inquisitive  concerning  them.      That  it  IS 

needless,  appears  from  the  difficulty  to  understand  them  ;  and  that  it  is  dangerous, 
the  many  heresies  and  errors  which  have  sprung  up  in  the  Christian  Church  may 
abundantly  convince  us.  III.  There  are  other  matters  of  much  greater 
consequence  to  employ  our  meditations,  which  it  is  our  duty  to  study  and 
examine.  Revelation  discovers  to  us  many  secrets  of  nature,  many  great  designs 
of  Providence,  many  engaging  motives  to  the  practice  of  our  duty,  which  would 
otherwise  have  been  concealed  from  us.     III.  This  and  all  other  knowledge 

will  BE  VAIN  AND   INSIGNIFICANT   UNLESS   IT    HAS   AN    INFLUENCE    ON    OUR   LIVES 

AND  MANNERS.  (J.  Littleton.)  Secret  and  revealed  things .— I.  Tr^  secret 
THINGS  ARE  THE  Lord's.  1.  In  nature.  Science  has  its  bounds.  2.  In  Providence. 
3  In  religion.  11.  "  Those  things  which  are  revealed  belong  to  us  and  to 
our  children  for  ever."  1.  God  has  revealed  them  that  we  might  be  profited 
by  them.  Where  are  these  revealed  things  ?  In  the  Bible.  2.  God  has  made  revela- 
tions to  man  elsewhere.  In  the  different  departments  of  science  and  discovery. 
3.  These  revealed  things  belong  to  us  and  to  our  children.  4.  It  is  the  Church  s  duty 
to  foster  the  education  of  the  whole  people.  {D.  L.  Anderson.)  Secret  things 
and  things  revealed:—!.  Let  us  endeavour  to  illustrate  the  first  truth  here  stated— 
"  Secret  things  belong  unto  the  Lord  our  God."  1.  In  reference  to  the  nature, 
character,  and  perfections  of  the  Deity,  there  are  many  secret  things  which  belong 
exclusively  to  the  Lord  our  God.  It  is  true  that  God  has  told  us  something  of  His 
own  nature  ;  but  it  is  equally  true  that  there  is  much  more  that  He  has  not  told  us. 
Something  He  has  revealed  ;  but  much  still  remains  concealed.  2  Not  only  m  the 
doctrines  of  revelation,  but  in  science,  in  natural  operations,  and  m  the  ordinary 
occurrences  of  life,  we  find  many  things  which  exceed  the  comprehension  of  reason, 
and  which  we  must  class  among  the  secret  things  belonging  to  the  Lord  our  God. 
3.  In  the  dispensations  of  Divine  Providence  there  are  many  things  secret  and 
mysterious.  To  this  subject  we  may  apply  those  declarations :  Thy  judgments 
are  a  great  deep";  "  The  Lord  reigneth";  "  Clouds  and  darkness  are  round  about 
Him  ;  righteousness  and  judgment  are  the  habitation  of  His  throne.  4.  All  those 
events  which  lie  in  futurity  are  to  us  secret  things.  We  have  the  means  of  acquir- 
ing some  knowledge  of  things  past  and  of  things  present ;  but  we  have  no  faculty 
by  which  we  can  penetrate  into  the  future.  We  know  not  what  a  day  will  bring 
forth  ;  we  know  not  what  shall  be  on  the  morrow.  5.  'S^  e  may  very  properly 
inquire,  ''  Wliy  is  our  knowledge  confined  within  such  narrow  limits  ?  Why  are  so 
many  things  kept  secret  from  us,  and  reserved  for  the  exclusive  cognmnce  of  the 
Lord  our  God  ? "  (1)  To  this  inquiry  it  may  be  replied.  Such  a  mode  of  treatment 
is  proper  and  necessary  in  reference  to  creatui-es  like  us,  who  are  at  present  in  the 
mere  infancy  of  our  being.  (2)  These  secret  things  are  also  designed  to  exercise 
our  faith.  (3)  By  keeping  many  things  secret,  the  Almighty  designs  to  humble  us, 
under  a  consciousness  of  our  ignorance  and  weakness.  (4)  Finally,  it  is  our 
heavenly  Father's  purpose  in  keeping  these  secret  things  to  Himself,  to  teach  us 
that  we  should  be  diligent  and  faithful  in  the  discharge  of  the  various  duties 
incumbent  on  us,  and,  at  the  same  time,  should  be  in  a  state  of  habitual  preparation 


452  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxix. 

for  death  and  eternity.     II.  Let  us  turn  our  attention,  therefore,  to  the  second  truth 
stated  in  our  text,  namely,  "The  things  that  are  revealed  belonq  unto  us 

AND  TO  OUR  CHILDREN  FOR  EVER,  THAT  WE  MAY  DO  ALL  THE  WORDS  OF  THIS  LAW." 

1.  Among  the  *'  things  revealed"  we  are  to  include  the  whole  of  the  sacred  Scrip- 
tures. This  Divinely-inspired  volume  comprehends  all  that  God  has  been  pleased 
to  reveal  to  man.  And,  oh  !  what  a  cause  of  gratitude  is  it  that  we  possess  this 
heavenly  treasure  !  Possessing  the  Word  of  God,  we  are  laid  under  the  most  solemn 
obligations  to  read  it,  so  that  we  may,  by  Divine  assistance,  understand  its  mean- 
ing, apply  its  principles,  and  obey  its  precepts.  2.  *  *  Those  things  which  are 
revealed,  says  the  man  of  God  in  our  text,  "  belong  unto  us  and  to  our  children 
for  ever."  It  was  Jehovah's  design  that  the  deposit  of  Divine  truth  with  which 
the  Jews  were  favoured  should  be  carefully  guarded  and  transmitted  from  parents 
to  children,  from  one  generation  to  another,  as  long  as  that  dispensation  continued. 
And  professed  Christians  are  under  equal  obligations  to  perpetuate  the  knowledge 
and  influence  of  Divine  truth  from  age  to  age,  by  instructing  their  children  in  these 
revealed  things.  ( W.  P.  Burgess. )  Mans  relation  to  the  unrepealed : — I.  There 
ARE  SECRET  THINGS.  The  world  IS  full  of  mysteries.  Man  is  not  the  measure  of 
the  universe  ;  and  certainly  the  mere  understanding  is  not  the  measure  of  the 
man.  There  are  things  to  which  faith  is  the  anchor  and  hope  the  hand  ;  there  are 
scenes  which  eye  cannot  see  nor  heart  imagine ;  there  are  truths  which  science 
cannot  discover  nor  reason  utterly  explore.  II.  These  secrets  belong  to  God. 
1.  Consider  that  great  secret  of  the  coincidence  of  the  human  and  the  Divine  will. 
"Who  shall  say  that  there  is  no  profound  mystery  there  ?  How  have  the  eyes  of 
men's  spirits  ached  as  they  peered  into  this  thick  darkness !  You  know  the  old 
legend  of  the  ancients :  that  one  of  the  mortals  stole  fire  from  heaven,  and  the 
terrible  punishment  of  the  eagle  gnawing  his  vitals  was  inflicted  by  the  angry  Jove. 
What  is  it  but  a  symbol  of  that  heedlessness  which  has  made  man  seek  to  prove 
himself  one  of  the  ooimsellors  of  heaven,  and  in  dreadful  retribution  has  his  error 
recoiled  upon  himself.  2.  Another  mystery  which  is  often  brought  up  as  an  argu- 
ment against  the  Divine  revelation  is  the  presence  of  evil  and  sin  in  the  world. 
The  wise  and  devout  will  abstain  from  pronouncing  any  judgment  on  the  question. 
And  let  not  the  man  of  science,  or  the  philosopher,  despise  the  preacher  who 
would  speak  of  things  not  seen,  not  felt,  but  trusted  in.  Are  there  no  mysteries  in 
science  ?  Can  the  most  skilful  observer  explain  the  great  series  of  events  that  we 
term  life  ?  And  what  of  our  philosopher  ?  Can  he  answer  all  the  profound  ques- 
tionings of  the  moral  nature  of  man  ?  Lessons :  1.  The  fact  that  there  are  these 
great  mysteries,  that  there  is  something  more  than  we  can  know,  that  there  is  a 
Being,  a  Personality,  to  whom  these  truths  are  clear,  to  whom  all  things  are 
known ;  these  facts  ought  to  make  us  careful  to  live  in  the  light  of  these  unseen 
realities,  and,  whilst  engaged  in  earthly  service,  not  to  forget  our  heavenly  destiny. 
Have  you  never  known  a  man  in  whose  life  there  seemed  the  unseen  Divinity? 
He  had  filled  himself  with  God.  His  life  was  passed  in  the  continual  thought  of 
God.  That  man  awes  his  fellows.  His  life  is  a  power  everywhere.  2.  Another 
result  of  this  faith  in  the  unseen  will  be  not  only  to  give  fulness  to  this  life,  and 
satisfaction  to  the  higher  wants  of  nature,  but,  believing  that  secret  things  belong 
to  God,  we  shall  never  allow  merely  intellectual  difficulties  to  overwhelm  our 
spiritual  powers.  Doubt  is  difficult,  I  know  ;  but  there  is  no  sword  like  life  to  cut 
the  knot.  live  down  your  doubts.  3.  There  is  another  frame  of  mind  that  the 
perfect  knowledge  and  obedience  of  the  truth  will  produce,  and  that  is  complete 
submission  to  the  will  of  God.  {L.  D.  Bevan,  LL.B.)  The  secret  things  of  God : 
— I.  Let  us  begin  with  God  Himself.  The  doctrine  of  the  Divine  existence,  if  put 
to  popular  vote  the  world  over,  would  be  pronounced  impregnable.  Plato  was 
right  in  calling  atheism  a  disease.  And  yet  when  we  come  to  ask  for  an  d,  priori 
demonstration,  when  we  would  make  it  certain  to  ourselves  that  there  is  a  personal 
God,  in  the  same  sense  and  to  the  same  degree  that  we  are  certain  of  some  mathe- 
matical propositions,  our  logic  is  not  triumphant.  We  have  only  to  require  some 
sensible  assurance,  or  some  incontestable  demonstration  of  the  Divine  existence, 
and  our  faith  inevitably  dies.  God  will  take  His  leave  of  us.  We  shall  soon  see 
no  footprint  and  hear  no  rustling  of  Him.  That  God  might  have  made  atheism 
absolutely  impossible  by  an  instant  impression  of  Himself  ujwn  our  minds,  render- 
ing Himself  every  whit  as  palpable  to  the  spiritual  vision  as  material  objects  are  to 
the  bodily  vision,  cannot  be  questioned.  The  human  soul  might  have  been  so 
fashioned  as  to  see  God,  just  as  our  eyeballs  see  the  sun  in  the  firmament.  Our 
intuitions,  about  which  philosophy  is  still  in  doubt  whether  they  give  us  not  the 


453 


CHAP.  XXIX.]  DEUTERONOMY. 

absolute  only,  but  also  and  equally  the  personality  of  the  absolute,  might  surely 
have  been  so  vivid  and  so  peremptory  as  to  leave  no  room  for  doubt.  But  such  is 
not  the  established  economy  ot  things.  Not  as  the  eagle  gazes  at  the  sun  gaze  we 
on  God.  We  are  required  rather  to  turn  our  backs  upon  this  intolerable  lio-ht  see 
it  by  reflecti(-n,  and  judge  of  all  other  objects,  in  their  Divine  relations,  %y' the 
shadows  which  they  cast.  The  three  sources  of  proof  on  which  mainly  we  rely  to 
establish,  for  popular  effect,  the  Divine  existence  and  perfections  are,  accordingly, 
the  material  Avorld  around  us,  the  moral  world  within  us,  and  the  general  consent 
of  men.  Insufficient,  doubtless,  if  counsel  be  taken  of  mental  arrogance,  and 
absolute  scientific  assurance  be  asked  for  ;  but  altogether  sufficient  if  knowledge  be 
pursued  with  reverent  docility  as  the  condition  and  gateway  to  holiness.  II.  Let 
us  now  turn,  in  the  second  place,  to  take  note  of  man.  We  pass  here  at  one 
bound  from  the  infinite  to  the  finite.  Philosophy  asks  for  some  bridge  between 
them  ;  but  thus  far  alwnys  in  vain.  That  there  should  be  Divine  Sovereignty  is 
plain  enough  ;  and  equally  plain  is  it  that  there  should  be  human  freedom.  But 
the  two  united  are  an  enigma.  The  things  revealed  are  the  facts  themselves 
unreconciled;  on  the  one  side,  a  Divine  efficiency,  which  seems  to  clasp  the 
universe  as  with  iron  arms  ;  on  the  other  side,  a  human  freedom,  which  seems  to 
threaten  riot  and  anarchy.  These  two  elements  we  must  accept,  and  hold  them 
together  as  we  can,  denying  neither,  and  abating  the  force  of  neither.  And  as  to 
the  harmony  between  them,  let  us  despair  of  finding  it  in  this  world.  Let  us 
rather  leave  it,  and  leave  it  cheerfully,  till  we  stand  on  higher  summits,  in  a  clearer 
light.  For  the  present,  let  us  take  care  only  that  God  be  honoured,  and  our  own 
destiny  happily  accomplished.  If  God  only  is  great,  man  surely  is  responsible. 
III.  It  remains  for  us  to  consider  now,  in  the  third  place,  the  new  relation  of 

GEACE  WHICH  HAS  BEEN  ESTABLISHED  BETWEEN  GoD  AND  MAN.      From  sin  We  paSS 

on  to  redemption  as  the  great  radiant  centre,  not  less  of  all  knowledge  than  of  all 
hope.  If  the  Scriptures  reveal  no  speculative  solution  of  the  mystery  of  evil,  they 
do  yet  propound  a  practical  solution  of  it  in  the  proffered  deliverance  of  men'  from 
its  power  and  curse.  And  yet  this  deliverance  opens  up  yet  other  mysteries,  and 
at  every  point  we  come  across  these  secret  things  of  God,  which  belong  unto  Him 
and  not  to  us  or  our  children.  Human  philosophy,  in  its  pride  and  self-reliance, 
comes  along  discoursing  of  culture.  It  understands  a  change  of  purpose  accom'- 
plished  by  moral  suasion.  It  comprehends  what  is  meant  by  a  moral  improvement 
and  progress.  It  believes  in  growing  better.  But  it  has  no  conception  of  that 
radical  transformation  of  character  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  which  is  described  as  the 
new  birth,  the  passing  from  death  unto  life,  Christ  in  us  the  hope  of  glory. 
Speech  of  such  things  sounds  fanatical.  The  new  birth  is  a  stupendous  mystery 
of  life,  which  can  be  known  only  by  being  experienced.  Consider  the  revelations 
of  Scripture  in  regard  to  the  future  life.  Definite  and  comforting  beyond  all  the 
guesses  of  unaided  reason  ;  and  yet,  as  compared  with  what  we  sometimes  pine  to 
know,  how  meagre.  So  also  of  the  life  that  now  is  in  its  duties  and  its  discipline. 
The  great  human  duties  are  Prayer  and  Work  :  Prayer  for  every  needed  blessing, 
and  Work  to  realise  it ;  Prayer,  as  though  God  must  do  the  whole,  and  Work,  as 
though  we  must  do  it  all  ourselves.  These  are  the  two  poles  of  the  great  galvanic 
battery.  But  who  that  waits  to  know  the  philosophy  of  answered  prayer  will  ever 
pray  ?  And  who  that  waits  to  be  sure  there  shall  be  no  mistake  will  ever  work  ? 
The  hand  that  beckons  us  to  glory  waves  at  us  out  of  impenetrable  clouds.  Partial 
revelation,  then,  is  the  method,  and  obedience  the  end.  In  the  practicable  improve- 
ment of  our  subject,  it  may  be  remarked— 1.  First  of  all,  we  are  taught  a  lesson  of 
humility,  and  that,  too,  at  the  very  point  where  we  most  net-d  it.  There  is  no 
pride  on  earth  like  the  pride  of  intellect  and  science.  A  modest  confession  of 
Ignorance  is  the  ripest  and  last  attainment  of  philosophy.  But  childlike  docility 
is  of  the  very  essence  of  religion,  required  of  us  all  at  the  very  threshold  of  our 
Christian  experience.  And  in  order  to  this,  no  better  discipline  could  be 
imagined  than  the  discipline  to  which  we  are  actually  subjected  under  the  exist- 
ing economy  of  revelation.  The  secret  things  do  so  vastly  outnumber  the  things 
which  are  revealed  !  The  greater  portion  of  all  our  inquiries  and  all  our  reasonings 
must  always  have  for  their  issue,  "  Even  so,  Father  ;  for  so  it  seemed  good  in  Thy 
sight."  2.  We  may  learn  to  distinguish  the  more  vital  articles  of  our  faith. 
Controversy  is  apt  to  rage  the  hottest  about  the  subordinate  points.  But  the 
stress  of  revelation  is  on  the  grand  essentials.  The  very  design  of  the  Book 
necessitates  this  feature.  What  the  Bible  is  fullest  of  is  therefore,  of  course, 
most  vital.     3.  And  finally,  our  shortest  way  to  the  end  of  doubt  and  controversy 


454  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxix. 

is  by  the  path  of  an  humble  obedience.  {R.  D.  Hitchcock.)  Of  the  desire  of 
Jciioivledge  .—I.  There  is  naturally  in  man  a  very  strong  desire  after 

KNOWLEDGE.  II.  ThIS  OUR  DESIRE  OF  KNOWLEDGE  OUGHT  TO  BE  REGULATED 
AND   LIMITED   BY   THE   CONDITION   OF    OUR   NATURE   AND   BY  THE   WORD   OF    GOD. 

1.  We  ought  not  to  be  ambitious  of  that  knowledge  which  the  condition  and 
circumstances  of  our  nature  make  it  impossible  for  us  to  obtain.  2.  As  we  ought 
not  to  be  ambitious  of  what  it  is  impossible  for  us  to  attain,  so  neither  ought  we 
to  be  solicitous  after  that  which  it  is  unlawful  for  us  to  desire.  And  here  that 
which  the  Scripture  determines  in  respect  of  our  desire  after  knowledge  is  this — 
(1)  That  we  ought  not  to  endeavour  to  penetrate  into  things  too  deep  for  us,  such 
as  are  the  hidden  and  secret  counsels  or  unrevealed  decrees  of  God.  (2)  The 
Scripture  further  forbids  the  desire  of  that  knowledge,  the  means  of  obtaining 
which  are  unlawful.  (3)  The  Scripture  forbids  us  so  to  search  after  the  know- 
ledge  of  anything  else  whatever  as  in  the  too  earnest  pursuit  of  that  to  neglect 
the  study  of  the  law  of  God.  Those  Divine  truths  wMch  influence  our  practice, 
which  furnish  our  mind  with  worthy  notions  of  God  and  charitable  dispositions 
towards  our  neighbours,  and  make  men  wise  unto  salvation,  are  the  things  which 
God  has  proposed  to  fix  our  thoughts  and  our  studies  upon.  III.  To  show  how- 
great  A  SIN  IT  IS  not  TO  REGULATE  OUR  DESIRES  OF  KNOWLEDGE  BY  THE  FORE- 
MENTIONED  RULES.  And — 1.  To  determine  dogmatically  in  things  not  clearly 
revealed,  and  to  take  delight  in  imposing  upon  each  other  such  determinations,  is 
in  effect  directly  striving  against  that  order  and  constitution  of  things  which  God 
has  appointed,  and  endeavouring  to  make  ourselves  what  God  has  not  made  us. 

2.  The  not  regulating  this  desire  by  the  forementioned  rules  was  the  occasion  of  our 
first  parents'  fall.  This  appears  from  the  description  of  the  tree  of  the  knowledge  of 
good  and  evil  (Gen.  iii.  6).  It  is  also  evident  from  the  description  of  the  manner 
of  the  temptation  (ver.  5).  A  desire  of  knowledge  not  regulated  by  the  rules 
before  set  down  is  very  apt  to  put  men  upon  unlawful  practices  to  attain  what  they 
so  desire.  For  that  which  is  not  to  be  attained  but  by  unwarrantable  practices,  the 
desire  of  it  cannot  but  be  also  sinful.  From  what  has  been  said  it  follows — 
(1)  That  the  vain  desire  of  knowing  beforehand  things  to  come  is  such  a  desire  of  the 
knowledge  of  secret  things  as  is  not  permitted  us  by  the  present  circumstances  and 
condition  of  our  nature,  or  by  the  Word  of  God.  (2)  That  a  desire  of  prying  into 
the  unrevealed  decrees,  counsels,  and  purposes  of  God,  and  desiring  to  impose  upon 
others  our  opinions  concerning  them,  is  also  such  a  desire  of  the  knowledge  of  secret 
things  as  is  not  permitted  us  by  the  law  of  our  nature,  or  by  the  Word  of  God. 
(3)  An  over-earnest  desire  of  knowing  things  subtle  and  unnecessary  to  be  known, 
so  as  in  the  pursuit  of  the  knowledge  of  these  things  to  neglect  the  study  of  that 
which  more  nearly  concerns  us,  is  also  a  sort  of  that  search  after  knowledge  which 
is  forbidden  in  the  Scripture.  {S.  Clarke,  D.D.)  Things  secret  and  things 
revealed :— I.  What,  then,  are  those  secret  things  which  belong  unto  the 
Lord  God  ?  A  moment's  thought  will  bring  many  such  deep  matters  to  our  minds. 
Look  at  God  Himself,  and  we  are  lost  at  once  !  Who  can  understand  His  nature  ? 
Who  can  comprehend  His  ways  ?  And  look  at  what  we  call  "  His  dwelling-place  !  " 
(^h,  who  can  say  what  heaven  is— what  kind  of  world— what  sorts  of  beings  are 
those  angels  who  inhabit  it  ?  And  think  of  that  world  of  wretchedness  beneath  ! 
But  let  us  turn  to  our  own  selves,  and  we  shall  find  mysteries  enough  even  here. 
How  long  are  you  and  I  to  live  ?  What  is  to  be  the  hour,  the  day,  the  month, 
the  year  of  our  departure  from  this  world  ?  Are  we  to  die  suddenly  or  slowly  ?  by 
accident  or  by  disease  ?  And  it  is  just  the  same  with  respect  to  those  events  that 
may  occur  in  the  mean  season.  Such,  then,  are  some  amongst  "the secret  things " 
which  belong  unto  the  Lord  our  God.  And  what,  then,  should  be  our  conduct  with 
respect  to  tliem  ?  Are  we  to  try  to  lift  the  curtain  up  ?  Alas  !  fain  would  our 
proud  hearts  teach  us  so  !  We  are  naturally  more  inclined  to  know  our  fortune,  as 
we  call  it,  than  to  know  our  duty,  and  would  rather  satisfy  a  forbidden  curiosity 
than  search  those  treasures  which  God  hath  laid  before  our  eyes.  But  it  becomes 
us  to  be  willingly  ignorant  of  what  our  God  hath  been  unwilling  to  communi- 
cate. III.  So  MANY  ARE  THE  THINGS  WHICH  GOD  HATH  REVEALED  THAT  ALL 
I    SHALL   ATTEMPT   TO   DO   IS   JUST   TO   TOUCH   UPON   A   FEW   OF   THEM.       I   observed 

that  our  great  God  Himself  is  the  greatest  of  all  mysteries  to  minds  like  ours. 
He  hath  uncovered  so  much  of  His  perfections  to  us,  He  hath  so  far  "laid  bare  " 
tons  "His  holy  arm,"  and  made  known  the  thoughts  He  thinketh  with  regard 
to  us,  that  His  people  may  say,  in  some  measure,  "we  know  Him  and  we  have 
seen  Him."    Only  look  at  Christ,  and  say  whether  the  love  and  mercy  of  our  God 


CHAP.  XXIX.]  DEUTERONOMY.  455 

are  not  among  "the  things  revealed"  to  us  !  I  have  said  that  we  know  little 
or  nothing  about  heaven.  But  observe,  our  gracious  God  has  revealed  to  us  as 
much  about  heaven  as  "belongs  to  us  and  to  our  children."  We  observed  that 
the  duration  of  our  lives  is  kept  a  secret  from  us.  Yes,  but  our  blessed  Lord  has 
told  us  that  which  does  concern  us,  namely,  how  to  be  prepared  for  death  when- 
ever and  howsoever  it  approaches  us.  We  know  not  what  is  to  happen  to  us 
in  this  life.  No;  that  is  a  "secret  thing  belonging  to  the  Lord."  But  this 
is  a  ** revealed  thing,"  that  "all  things  work  together  for  good  to  those  that 
love  God."  III.  And  now,  for  the  use  we  are  to  make  of  these  "  things 
WHICH  ARE  revealed  TO  US."  What  says  our  text  of  the  reasons  why  they  are 
revealed  ?  "  The  things  that  are  revealed  belong  unto  us  and  to  our  children,  that 
we  may  do  all  the  words  of  this  law."  It  is  not,  then,  to  fill  our  heads  with 
notions  that  God  hath  revealed  to  us  the  things  we  read  of  in  our  Bibles.  If  He 
hath  told  us  of  the  path  of  life,  it  is  that  we  might  rise  up  and  walk  in  it.  Let 
us  not  err,  then  ;  let  us  not  mistake  knowledge  for  religion  ;  let  us  not  suppose 
ourselves  enlightened  men  merely  because  we  can  talk  well  about  the  Gospel. 
Better  not  to  know  the  way  of  righteousness  at  all  than  to  know  it  and  be  idle. 
{A.    Roberts,  M.A.)  The  presicmpiion  of  prying  into  religious  mysteries: — 

I.  That  we  should  never  pry  into  matters  which  infinite  wisdom  hath 
CONCEALED.  For  we  shall  seldom,  if  at  all,  be  wiser  for  such  inquiries  ;  we  shall 
never  be  happier  or  better  ;  and  we  shall  usually  be  more  wretched,  and  less  inno- 
cent. In  what  reason  or  experience  discovers  to  us,  further  speculations  may 
produce  new  discoveries.  But  of  articles  depending  on  mere  revelation,  as  we  could 
have  discerned  nothing  without  it,  we  shall  be  able  to  discern  very  little  of  anything 
beyond  it.  In  the  shortest,  and  seemingly  most  obvious,  consequences  drawn 
concerning  subjects  that  lie  naturally  out  of  our  reach,  we  must  be  exceedingly 
liable  to  mistakes  ;  and  venturing  far  into  the  dark  is  the  sure  way  to  stumble. 
Another  state  may  probably  withdraw  the  veil,  and  acquaint  us  clearly  with  what 
now  perplexes  our  reasonings  and  wearies  our  conjectures.  Let  us  wait,  then,  con- 
tentedly for  the  time,  which  of  necessity  we  must  wait  for.  II.  The  next  rule 
which  Moses  gives  is,  that  we  should  receive  with  attentive  humility 
WHATEVER  INFINITE  WISDOM  COMMUNICATES  TO  US.  For  those  things  which  are 
revealed  belong  to  us  and  to  our  children  for  ever.  III.  The  last  rule  implied  in 
the  text  is,  that  we  should  allow  every  Divine  truth  its  due  influence 
ON  our  behaviour.  For  we  are  to  learn  them,  that  we  may  do  all  the  words  of 
this  law.  Indeed,  merely  receiving  the  truth  in  the  love  of  it  is  a  moral  act,  and  in 
some  cases  may  be  one  of  great  virtue.  When  our  Saviour  saith  of  St.  Thomas, 
"  Blessed  are  they  that  have  not  seen  and  yet  have  believed."  Blessed  in  propor- 
tion to  the  integrity  of  their  judgment,  not  the  positiveness  of  their  persuasion. 
But  scarce  will  it  be  found  that  any  article  of  faith  is  proposed  for  the  probation  of 
this  only.  Each  hath  its  practical  consequences,  either  flowing  of  necessity  from  it 
or  built  with  propriety  upon  it.  {Archbishop  Seeker. )  Secret  and  revealed  things : — 
I.  Secret  things  are  the  Lord's.  II.  Revealed  things  belong  to  us  and  to 
our  children.  Now  notice — 1.  That  the  Holy  Scriptures  contain  these  revealed 
things  (2  Tim.  iii.  16  ;  2  Pet.  i.  19-21).  2.  The  things  revealed  we  could  not  have 
known  without  the  Scriptures.  (1)  We  could  not  have  known  God.  (2)  We  could 
not  have  known  the  nature  and  evil  of  sin.  (3)  We  could  not  have  known  the  way 
of  salvation  (Rom.  x.  14).  (4)  We  could  not  have  known  of  the  eternity  before  us  ; 
whether  it  be  an  everlasting  sleep,  or  what  ?  3.  The  things  revealed  meet  all  the 
demands  of  the  mind  of  man.  4.  The  things  revealed  are  adapted  to  every  state 
and  variety  of  condition.  5.  The  things  revealed  are  to  be  regarded  as  a  sacred 
deposit  from  God  to  man.  We  are  responsible  for — 1.  Their  reception.  (2)  Read- 
ing and  understanding  them.  (3)  Their  diffusion.  Application — 1.  Let  the  subject 
teach  us  to  avoid  presumptuous  curiosity.  2.  Let  the  subject  teach  us  the  true 
test  of  all  doctrines,  ordinances,  and  duties.  3.  We  shall  have  to  give  an  account 
of  revealed  things  at  the  last  day.     {J.  Burns,  D.D.)  Secret  thiiigs  .-—These 

words  remind  us  that  in  scanning  God's  works  and  ways  there  is  a  limit  beyond 
which  we  cannot  go.  Consequently,  true  wisdom  is  to  be  contented  with  that 
degree  of  knowledge  which  God  gives  of  Himself  and  His  works.  In  this  world, 
and  with  infinite  capacities,  we  must  remain  in  the  dark  as  to  many  mysteries,  both 
in  nature  and  in  heavenly  things,  which  we  should  exceedingly  like  to  know  more 
about.  We  cannot  be  surprised  at  this.  Our  minds  are  too  small  to  grasp  the 
mind  and  thoughts  of  the  Infinite.  Besides,  God  conceals  some  things  which 
perhaps  we  could  understand  on  purpose  to  test  and  try  our  faith.     We  must  take 


456  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxix. 

Him  on  trust,  and  feel  sure  where  He  is  silent  it  is  best  for  us  to  be  satisfied,  and 
remain  ignorant.  But  this  is  not  easy  to  men  of  great  minds  and  powers  of  thought. 
Man  in  his  natural  condition  resists  these  limitations.  He  would  fain  be  wiser 
than  God  would  have  him.  This  desire  becomes  disastrous  in  its  results  to  many. 
Man  becomes  **  vain  in  his  imaginations,  and  professing  to  be  wise,  becomes  a 
fool."  Man,  not  being  permitted  to  know  all,  refuses  to  accept  the  little  he  is  per- 
mitted to  know  if  he  seeks  to  learn  in  God's  own  way.  Yet,  after  all,  how  little  do 
we  know  of  all  the  things  around  us  and  about  us  and  within  us  !  We  are  limited 
on  every  side.  We  are  mysteries  to  ourselves,  being  fearfully  and  wonderfully 
made.  The  union  between  body  and  mind,  between  reasoning  powers  and  the 
matter  or  substance  on  which  they  act,  "  such  knowledge  is  too  wonderful  for  me, 
I  cannot  attain  unto  it."  The  action  of  electricity  ;  the  movement  of  the  needle 
towards  the  pole  ;  the  maintenance  of  the  vital  spark  within  us  ;  the  atmosphere  in 
which  God  makes  us  "  live,  move,  and  have  our  being  "  ;  the  gravitation  of  every- 
thing to  the  centre  of  the  earth,  and  the  way  the  same  principle  acts  on  all  the 
heavenly  bodies  ;  those  heavenly  orbs  themselves — all  these  are  mysteries  of  which 
we  know  next  to  nothing  beyond  the  fact  of  their  existence  and  something  about 
their  action.  Can  we  wonder  that  those  spiritual  things  which  are  not  visible  to 
the  human  eye,  and  those  eternal  verities  concerning  the  great  and  almighty 
Creator  of  all,  should  be  shrouded  in  mysteries  beyond  our  power  to  unravel  ?  Can 
we  be  surprised  to  be  continually  met  with  the  prohibition  from  on  high,  "Thus 
far,  and  no  farther  "  ?  Secret  things  belong  to  God  ;  the  things  that  are  revealed 
are  for  us,  and  even  for  our  very  babes,  to  understand.  God  has  in  a  measure  and 
in  a  way  revealed  Himself  to  us.  Created  things  reveal  His  "eternal  power  and 
Godhead."  The  eye  of  faith  sees  Him  in  Christ.  Having  this  knowledge  to  begin 
with,  the  other  revealed  truths  become  plain,  and  bring  contentment  as  to  all  God 
keeps  close  in  His  own  bosom.  We  are  content  to  wait.  We  know  enough  of  God 
as  in  Christ  to  make  us  love  Him  with  all  our  hearts,  to  make  us  sure  He  is  acting 
wisely  and  lovingly  in  all  that  befalls  us.  We  know  for  certain  that  we  need  lack 
no  good  thing  here,  and  certainly  shall  not  want  anything  hereafter  that  makes 
for  eternal  happiness.  (C.  Holland,  M.A,)  Secret  things: — 1.  Amongst  the 
things  which  are  secret  may  be  placed  a  complete  knowledge  of  nature,  of  the  visible 
world,  and  of  the  effects  of  matter  and  motion.  2.  Amongst  the  things  pertaining 
to  religion  which  have  occupied  the  minds  of  men  to  no  purpose,  we  may  reckon 
what  has  been  called  absolute  predestination,  or  the  everlasting  decrees  of  God  con- 
cerning the  salvation  and  destruction  of  particular  persons.  3.  Another  secret  is 
an  accurate  knowledge  of  God,  of  His  nature  and  perfections.  He  is  infinite  and 
eternal,  and  we  are  limited  both  in  time  and  place,  and  there  is  something  in 
infinity,  eternity,  and  absolute  perfection  which  perplexes  us  and  involves  us  in 
difficulties.  4.  Amongst  the  things  which  we  must  not  expect  thoroughly  to 
understand  la  God's  providence,  the  manner  in  which  He  presides  over  rational 
beings,  the  reasons  of  His  conduct,  the  ends  which  He  proposes,  and  the  methods 
by  which  He  accomplishes  them,  and  how  far  He  is  assisting,  hindering,  or  per- 
mitting in  all  events.  5.  Under  this  head,  which  concerns  the  mysteries  of 
providence,  may  be  placed  the  reasons  for  which  God  bestows  prosperity  upon  one 
and  adversity  upon  another.  6.  The  future  condition  of  the  righteous  and  of 
the  wicked  is  one  of  those  things  of  which  we  cannot  have  a  distinct  and  particular 
knowledge.  7.  Amongst  those  things  which  are  hidden  from  us  we  may  place 
many  difficult  parts  of  the  Scriptures.  8.  There  are  some  parts  of  Scripture  which 
seem  to  be  designedly  concealed  from  us,  and  they  are  those  prophecies  which  are 
as  yet  unfalfilled,  for  which  many  reasons  might  be  assigned.  As  the  prophecies 
concerning  Christ  were  never  perfectly  understood  till  He  came  and  fulfilled  them, 
80  those  predictions  which  relate  to  future  ages  and  have  not  received  their  com- 
pletion are  dark  to  us,  and  will  continue  so  till  the  day  itself  unfolds  them  ;  and  all 
attempts  to  interpret  them  have  been  unsuccessful.  Indeed,  it  concerns  us  very 
little  to  know  what  shall  be  done  upon  earth  after  we  are  gone  from  it,  and  we 
might  as  well  be  solicitous  to  learn  what  passed  a  thousand  years  before  man  was 
created.  9.  Lastly,  the  knowledge  of  things  to  come,  of  the  good  and  evil  which 
will  befall  us  in  this  life,  and  of  the  time  when  our  life  will  end,  are  secrets  which 
God  hath  concealed  from  us.  {J.  Jortin,  D.D.)  The  revealed  will  of  God  the  ordy 
rule  of  duty : — I.  Consider  what  the  secret  will  of  God  respects.  Before 
the  foundation  of  the  world  He  formed  in  His  own  mind  a  complete  scheme 
of  His  own  conduct  through  all  future  ages.  This  scheme  comprehended  all 
things  that  ever  have  been  and  ever  will  be  brought  into  existence.      It  was 


CHAP.  XXIX.]  DEUTERONOMY.  457 

His  seciet  will  that  not  only  holiness  and  happiness,  but  that  sin  and  misery 
also  should  take  place  among  His  intelligent  creatures.  Though  He  loved  only 
holiness  and  happiness,  and  perfectly  hated  sin  and  misery,  yet  He  determined  that 
both  should  take  place.  II.  Consider  what  the  revealed  will  of  God 
RESPECTS.  It  respects  what  is  right  and  wrong,  what  is  good  and  evil,  or  what 
is  duty  and  sin,  without  any  regard  to  the  taking  place  of  these  things.  III.  Shows 
THAT  God's  revealed  will,  and  not  His  secret  will,  is  the  rule  of  duty. 
1.  That  God  has  revealed  His  will  in  His  Word  for  the  very  purpose  of  giving 
us  a  rule  of  duty.  No  secret  purpose,  intention,  or  design  of  the  Deity  can  annul 
or  diminish  our  obligation  to  obey  this  His  revealed  will.  2.  The  will  of  God 
revealed  in  His  Word  is  a  complete  rule  of  duty.  The  obligation  of  a  child  to 
do  what  his  parent  requires  does  not  depend  upon  his  knowing  the  secret  will  of 
his  parent,  or  the  reason  why  he  commands  him  to  do  this  or  that  lawful  thing. 
The  obligation  of  a  subject  to  do  what  a  civil  ruler  requires  him  to  do  does  not 
depend  upon  his  knowing  the  reasons  of  state,  or  why  the  civil  ruler  requires  certain 
acts  of  obedience.  So  the  obligation  of  creatures  to  obey  the  revealed  will  of  their 
Creator  does  not  depend  upon  their  knowing  His  secret  will  or  the  reasons  of  His 
commands.  It  is  the  revealed  will  of  God,  therefore,  and  not  His  secret  will,  which 
is  our  infallible  rule  of  duty.  2.  God's  secret  or  decretal  will  cannot  be  known,  and 
for  that  reason  cannot  be  a  rule  of  duty  to  any  of  His  creatures.  4.  Supposing  God 
should  reveal  to  us  all  His  purposes  respecting  all  His  intelligent  creatures  in  every 
part  of  the  universe,  this  knowledge  of  His  decretal  will  would  be  no  rule  of  duty  to 
us.  His  decretal  will  is  only  a  rule  of  conduct  for  Himself :  our  knowing  what  it 
becomes  Him  to  do  cannot  inform  us  what  it  is  becoming  us  to  do.  5.  That  the 
secret  will  of  God  cannot,  if  it  were  known,  be  a  rule  of  duty,  because  it  is  entirely 
destitute  of  both  precept  and  penalty,  and  consequently  of  all  Divine  authority. 
Improvement — 1.  If  God's  secret  will  respects  one  object,  and  His  revealed  will 
respects  another  object,  thm  there  is  no  inconsistency  between  His  secret  and 
revealed  will.  2.  It  appears  from  the  representations  which  have  been  given  of  the 
secret  and  revealed  will  of  God  that  our  text  has  often  been  perverted  and  mis- 
applied. 3.  If  God's  secret  will  respects  the  taking  place  of  future  events,  then  all 
uninspired  men  who  pretend  to  reveal  God's  secret  will,  or  to  foretell  future  events, 
are  guilty  of  both  folly  and  falsehood.  For  secret  things  belong  to  God  only,  and 
He  only  can  reveal  them.  4.  If  God's  secret  will  cannot  be  known,  then  it  can  have 
no  influence  upon  the  actions  of  men.  5.  But  if  God  has  a  secret  will  respecting  all 
future  events,  and  will  always  act  according  to  His  secret  will,  then  it  is  easy  to  see 
the  real  cause  why  mankind  are  generally  so  much  opposed  to  the  doctrine  of  Divine 
decrees.  It  is  entirely  owing  to  their  fears  that  He  will  execute  His  decrees,  or 
bring  to  pass  whatever  He  has  decreed.  6.  If  God  will  certainly  execute  His  wise 
and  holy  secret  will,  then  all  His  friends  have  a  constant  source  of  joy  under  all 
circumstances  of  life.  For  He  has  assured  them  that  in  executing  His  secret  will 
He  will  cause  all  things  to  work  together  for  their  good.  7.  If  God's  secret  will 
be  His  governing  will,  and  respects  the  existence  of  everything  that  comes  to  pass, 
then  it  is  very  criminal  in  any  to  deny  or  to  complain  of  His  secret  will.  It  is  the 
same  thing  as  to  deny  that  God  governs  the  world,  or  to  complain  that  He  does  not 
govern  it  in  the  wisest  and  best  manner.  {N.  Emmons,  D.  D. )  The  heTievolence  of  the 
Divine  secrecy : — We  have  come  to  associate  secrecy  with  selfishness,  yet  all  nature 
proves  that  in  Divine  administration  secrecy  and  benevolence  may  co-exist.  As 
rapidly  as  we  are  pointed  to  the  mystery  we  should  direct  our  eyes  to  the  father- 
hood.  Do  men  say  that  God  keeps  to  Himself  the  mystery  of  the  sun  ?  Our 
answer  should  be  that  He  turns  upon  us  the  fidl  revelation  of  the  light.  Does  God 
keep  to  Himself  the  secret  of  germination  ?  On  the  other  hand.  He  gives  us  the 
revelation  of  golden  harvests ;  the  spring  kept  the  secret  of  her  heart,  but  the 
autumn  has  lilled  our  barns  with  plenty.  Thus  enough  is  kept  back  to  prove  the 
power,  and  enough  is  given  to  establish  the  mercy.  It  is  not  only  right,  it  is  neces- 
sary that  the  father  should  know  more  than  the  child.  Is  a  father  less  a  father 
because  of  his  superior  knowledge  ?  Is  not  his  very  superior  knowledge  one  of  his 
highest  qualifications  for  discharging  his  duty  as  a  father  ?  Mystery  is  the  seal  of 
the  infinite,  yet  benevolence  is  perpetually  present  in  the  providence  which  guides 
human  life.  You  have  seen  a  blind  man  led  along  the  highway  by  a  little  child,  to 
whose  young  bright  eyes  he  commits  himself  in  faith  and  hope.  Man  is  that  poor 
blind  wanderer  througli  the  way  of  God's  mysteries,  and  that  little  guide  represents 
the  benevolence,  the  mercy,  the  tenderness  with  which  God  leads  us  from  day  to 
day,  and  will  lead  until  the  time  of  the  larger  revelation.     The  commonest  mercy 


468  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxix. 

of  the  daytime  flames  up  into  a  fire  colimin  that  lights  men  through  the  gloom  and 
trouble  of  the  night.  We  must  not  look  at  the  mystery  and  forget  the  benevolence. 
The  very  wealth  of  God  makes  us  covetous.  Does  poverty  provoke  envy  ?  We 
look  not  so  much  at  what  God  has  given  as  what  He  might  have  given.  We  read 
the  love  through  the  mystery,  rather  than  the  mystery  through  the  love.  Men  like 
to  penetrate  into  the  hidden.  They  flatter  it,  they  exalt  it,  they  say  it  is  good  for 
food,  and  pleasant  to  the  eyes,  and  a  tree  to  be  desired  to  make  one  wise  ;  and 
having  wrought  themselves  up  into  this  delusive  appreciation  of  its  value,  they  put 
forth  the  thievish  hand,  and  the  fancied  blessing  turns  to  a  scorpion's  sting.  We 
are  not  to  anticipate  our  course  of  study  ;  the  volumes  will  be  handed  to  us  one  by 
one.  Let  us  understand  what  we  now  can,  and  in  doing  so  let  us  increase  in  know- 
ledge ;  understand  that  in  all  the  wastes  of  folly  there  could  be  no  greater  fool  than 
he  who  would  not  believe  his  father's  telegram  because  he  cannot  understand  the 
mystery  of  the  telegraph.  {J.  Parker,  D.  D. )  Tlie  limitation  of  human  powers : — 
One  of  the  most  sad  and  saddening  aspects  of  modern  life  is  the  lack  of  a  humble 
acknowledgment  of  the  limitations  of  human  powers.  There  has  been  engendered 
a  pride  and  even  arrogance  of  thought  which  knows  not  how  to  veil  its  face  in  the 
presence  of  the  infinite  God,  and  of  Truth  which  is  as  infinite  as  He.  There  is  an 
audacity  of  speculation  which  will  acknowledge  no  mystery,  and  which  rejects  all 
that  transcends  the  limits  of  reason.  And  especially  is  this  the  case  in  those 
departments  of  truth  which  relate  to  the  moral  and  spiritual  government  of  God. 
Concerning  the  material  world,  there  is  no  such  presumptuous  daring.  Men  feel 
that  as  yet  of  this  they  know  but  in  part — and  in  small  part.  No  man  of  science 
will  step  forth  and  profess  a  universal  acquaintance  with  the  universe.  He  would 
be  regarded  as  a  laughing-stock.  He  might  as  soon  pretend  that  he  can  hold  the 
waters  in  the  hollow  of  his  hand,  or  that  he  can  mete  out  heaven  with  a  span,  or 
comprehend  the  dust  of  the  earth  in  a  measure,  or  weigh  the  mountains  in  scales 
and  the  hills  in  a  balance.  Slowly  and  patiently  do  men  of  science  work,  winning 
now  the  knowledge  of  one  fact,  and  then  another,  but  feeling  as  Newton  felt  when 
he  had  achieved  even  his  noblest  discoveries,  that  they  have  but  picked  up  a  shell 
or  a  pebble  on  the  great  shore  of  truth,  while  the  vast  ocean  lies  yet  imdiscovered 
before  them.  The  map  of  science  is  filled  in  here  and  there,  but  over  the  greatest 
portion  of  it  are  written  the  words  "  unknown  land."  Year  by  year  a  little  more  is 
filled  in,  and  yet  a  little  more,  but  when  shall  the  whole  be  defined,  and  when  shall 
the  map  itself  be  large  enough  to  include  the  whole  material  creation  which  stretches 
inimitably  around  us  on  every  hand  ?  There  is  no  discovery  that  has  yet  been 
made  which  has  not  immediately  suggested  new  mysteries,  and  the  wisest  men  are 
those  who  feel  that  the  disproportion  seems  ever  growing  between  the  limits  of 
human  mind  and  the  boundlessness  of  the  creation  which  it  seeks  to  explore. 
(Enoch  Mellor,  D.D.)  Mystei-y  and  its  mission: — I.  The  universe  is  crowded 
WITH  MYSTERIES.  1.  Physical  nature  is  full  of  the  mysterious.  2.  The  Divine 
Providence  is  full  of  the  mysterious.  3.  The  sacred  Scriptures  are  full  of  the 
mysterious.     II.  The  objections  of  the  modern  spirit  to  the  Christian 

/MYSTERIES  WEIGHED  IN  THE  BALANCE.  III.  ThE  MISSION  OF  MYSTERY.  1.  It 
strongly  suggests  the  superhuman  origin  of  Christianity.  2.  It  is  the  mission 
of  mystery  to  fill  us  with  the  spirit  of  genuine  humility.  3.  It  is  the  mission  of 
mystery  to  inspire  human  activity.  4.  It  is  the  mission  of  mystery  to  keep  our 
faith-faculty  in  constant  exercise.  5.  It  is  the  mission  of  mystery  to  keep  alive  our 
spirit  of  adoration.  6.  It  is  the  mission  of  mystery  to  intensify  the  enjoyments  of 
heaven.     {J.  Ossian  Davles.)        A  wise  agnosticism: — We  are  all  conscious  of  the 

/immense  inquisitiveness  of  the  human  mind  and  the  limitations  of  liuman  know- 
ledge. The  desires  to  be,  to  know  and  to  become  are  the  strongest  desires  of 
human  nature.  In  the  first  ardour  of  life  we  are  sensible  of  no  law  of  limitation  in 
our  powers.  Life  is  boundless,  and  our  power  of  knowing  seems  boundless  too.  But 
sooner  or  later  we  are  all  apt  to  be  overcome  by  the  humiliating  sense  of  the 
limitation  of  our  faculties.  We  ask  questions  for  which  there  are  no  replies.  In  the 
true  sense  of  the  word,  we  are  all  agnostics,  and  the  term  really  expresses  humility  of 
mind  rather  than  stubborn  pride  of  reason.  We  have  all  of  us  to  say  upon  a 
thousand  matters  :  "  I  do  not  know  ;  I  have  no  means  of  knowing  !  "  Agnosticism 
is  merely  another  term  for  the  limitations  of  human  knowledge.  But  because  we  are 
ignorant  of  many  things  it  does  not  follow  that  we  are  absolutely  sure  of  none.  We 
may  be  ignorant  of  the  laws  of  light,  but  we  know  there  is  light ;  we  cannot  explain 
the  origin  of  life,  but  we  know  there  is  such  a  thing  as  birth.  Thus  we  may  have 
*  sufficient  working  knowledge  of  a  subject  without  Imowiug  much  about  it,  just  as  a 


CHAP.  XXIX.]  DEUTERONOMY.  469 

man 
able 

that  for  the  working  business  of  life,  if  one  may 
is  needed.     And  it  is  so  in  religion.     We  may  be  bad  theologians,  and  yet  good 
Christians ;   agnostics  in   intellect,  yet  believers  in   spirit.     Granting   the   fact  of 
judc^ment,  we  are  troubled  by  our  incompetence  to  imderstand  its  method,  and  we 
say°with  the  Israelite,  "Wherefore  hath  the  Lord  done  this  unto  this  land  ?    What 
meaneth  the  heat  of  this  great  anger?"     And  as  we  ponder  the  problem  we  can 
start  a  hundred  questions  for  which  we  have  no  reply.     Why,  if  this  were  a  judg- 
ment, did  it  not  come  before  ?    Why  has  it  never  been  repeated  ?    The  one  thing  for 
us  to  learn  is  the  thing  that  is  revealed,  and  that  is  that  sin  is  punished,  and  terribly 
punished.     Learn  that,  and  for  you  the  judgment  is  justified.     So  again,  with  the 
secret  of  character  and  destiny.     When  we  begin  to  examine  character  in  the  light 
of  destiny,  how  perplexed  are  we  !    Who  has  not  met  a  type  of  church-gomg  good- 
ness which  has  repelled  and  disgusted  him,  and  a  type  of  natural  piety  which  has 
allured  and  satisfied  him ?    And  then  we  ask,  "Which  are  the  sheep  and  which  the 
goats  ?  "     And  here,  throughout  the  world,  are  thousands  of  men  and  women  whom 
you  cannot  classify  on  any  rigid  method.     They  pass  out  of  the  world  with  what 
seem  to  us  indeterminate  characters  ;  they  have  never  refused  the  truth,  but  rather 
have  simply  stood  outside  the  sphere  of  the  spiritual  ;  and  as  our  thoughts  pierce 
into  the  dim  profound  of  that  unseen  world,  out  of  the  darkness  the  words  ring  back 
upon  us :   "And  what  of  these  ?"     Every  step  deepens  the  mystery,  increases  the 
bewilderment.     Why  try  to  reduce  to  definiteness  that  which  the  Bible  has  left 
mercifully  indefinite  ?     Is  not  this  part  of  God's  secret,  and  is  there  nothing  revealed 
to  us  clearly  that  we  cannot  fail  to  understand  it  ?    Yes,  this  much  at  least  is  clear : 
Whether  there  be  probation  or  not  hereafter,  there  is  probation  now.     Passing  on  to 
the  Discipline  of  Sorrow  in  Life,  the  same  truth  applied.     God  did  not  ask  us  to  say 
that  "  All  was  for  the  best."     For  the  best  that  little  children  shall  be  left  mother- 
less !     All  God  asks  that  we  shall  say,  "  Thy  will  be  done,"  leaving  the  secret  with 
Him,  and  taking  to  ourselves  the  lesson  of  obedience  and  trust.     But  still  more 
forcibly  does  the  lesson  apply  to  the  great  mysteries  of  Christian  truth.     For  whoso- 
ever approaches  Jesus  Christ  is  met  by  four  great  secrets  of  Christianity,  four  great 
mysteries  of  the  faith :  the  Incarnation,  the  Resurrection,  the  Atonement,  and  the 
promise  of  Immortality  and  Redemption  through  the  death  of  Christ.      We  are 
unable  to  grasp  these  mysteries.     Is  there  any  theologian  who  has  actually  explained 
either,  or  made  them  possible  to  the  human  intellect  ?    The  keener  the  intellect 
which  applies  itself  to  the  task,  the  more  certain  is  it  of  failure,  because  the  more 
numerous  will  be  the  difficulties  which  it  will  discern.     And  that  is  precisely  where 
men  make  so  fatal  a  mistake  ;  they  try  to  force  themselves  into  faith  by  a  process  of 
reason,  to  apprehend  intellectually  that  which  can  only  be  spiritually  discerned. 
I  may  be  alive  without  knowing  anything  of  physiology ;    my  heart  may  beat 
though  I  cannot  tell  how  it  beats,  and  have  never  heard  of  the  circulation  ot 
the  blood.     I  may  be  conscious  without  understanding  the  philosophy  of  con- 
sciousness ;  I  may  think  without  knowing  how  thought  is  generated  ;  I  may  be  a 
good  citizen  with  but  small  knowledge  of  my  country's  law ;  and  a  good  soldier 
with  small  understanding  of  imperial  politics.     And  so  I  may  be  a  good  Christian 
though  I  can   prove  neither  to  my  own  nor  any  other  person's  satisfaction  the 
credibility  of  the  Incarnation,  the  Resurrection,  or  the  Atonement.     It  is  not 
stubbornness  of  intellect,  but  humility,  that  says  in  such  a  case,  "  I  do  not  know. 
The  working  knowledge  that  we  need  for  the  Christian  life  is   relatively  small. 
Christianity  is  not  a  thing  of  high  philosophies  and  subtle  inferences ;  it  moves 
along  the  plane  of  common  life  ;  it  proves  itself  by  the  silent  revelation  of  its  power 
to  save  within  the  heart.     It  asks  of  us  nothing  more  than  to  do  our  duty  in  the 
sight  of  God.     {W.  J.  Dawson.)        Seo-et  and  revealed  things:—!.  The  secret 
THINGS  THAT  BELONG  TO  GoD.     Probably  there  are  many  material  existences  of 
which  we  know  nothing,  and,  indeed,  can  know  nothing.     There  are  perhaps  many 
properties  of  mind  of  which  we  can  form  no  notions  in  our  present  state.     Probably 
there  are  many  kinds  of  moral  government  displayed  in  the  universe  under  the 
control  of  God  of  which  we  have  no  conception.     Yet  it  is  certain  that  from  objects 
of  this  kind  no  temptation  to  pry  into  them  too  curiously  can  arise.     All  that  we 
can  affirm  is,  probably  other  objects  besides  those  with  which  we  are  acquainted  do 
exist ;  but  we  know  too  little  of  them  to  excite  any  curiosity.     There  is  no  unholy 
prying.     With  respect  to  them  all  is  distant  and  all  is  dark.     Another  class  of 
objects  from  which  we  are  more  in  danger  of  indulging  the  curiosity  reproved  ia  the 


460  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxix. 

text  are  those  which  are  partly  hidden  and  partly  revealed  ;  partly  found  exposed  in 
the  revelations  of  this  book,  shining  with  different  degrees  of  light ;  but  in  all  their 
reasons  and  detail  considerably  obscure.  Part  is  prominent  on  the  sacred  page; 
«nd  part  is  hidden  under  a  veil  which  Divine  wisdom  has  not  seen  proper  to  remove. 
With  respect  to  objects  of  this  kind,  we  are  in  more  danger  of  penetration  into  God's 
^secrets.  We  ask,  **  Where  is  the  harm  in  indulging  in  these  speculations  ?  Is  it  not 
a  part  of  our  duty,  a  part  of  the  glory  of  our  nature,  to  cultivate  religious  know- 
ledge ?  "  I  answer,  This  is  true  to  a  certain  extent ;  but  how  many  persons  forget 
what  it  is  important  to  remember,  that  one  great  part  of  our  moral  discipline  on 
•earth  is  to  submit  in  matters  of  faith  to  God  !  Religion  must  have  its  secrets.  It 
cannot  be  supposed  that  a  religion  which  is  so  intimately  connected  with  the 
character  of  the  infinite  God,  whose  perfections  even  angel  minds  cannot  com- 
prehend, on  the  abyss  of  which  they  must  ever  stand  and  cry,  "Oh,  the  depth,  both 
of  the  wisdom  and  knowledge  of  God  !  how  unsearchable  are  His  judgments,  and 
His  ways  past  finding  out !  should  be  without  mysteries.  They  belong  to  God — 
1.  Because  He  knows  them.  They  are  His  secrets.  Of  these  secrets  He  is  completely 
the  master.  It  matters  not  whether  we  discern  the  whole  truth  clearly  or  not ;  it  is 
enough  that  we  discover  what  concerns  our  salvation,  and  that  the  rest,  however 
cloudy  to  us,  burns  with  brightness  in  the  bosom  of  God.  2.  They  are  His,  because 
they  are  the  reserves  He  has  made  in  communicating  knowledge  to  man.  God  haa 
«  right  to  determine  in  what  manner,  and  where,  and  to  what  extent  He  will  com- 
anunicate  knowledge.  All  we  have  to  do  is  to  say  (thankful  for  what  we  have  and 
«re),  "  Even  so,  Father  ;  for  so  it  hath  seemed  good  in  Thy  sight."  3.  They  belong 
to  Him  in  another  sense  ;  they  are  His  property.  As  they  are  His  secrets,  it  is  an 
act  of  great  boldness  for  any  man  to  pry  into  them.  II.  The  things  kevealed. 
1.  A  revelation  of  God.  2.  A  revelation  of  man.  3.  It  is  a  revelation  of  Christ. 
Here  the  peculiar  character  of  the  Gospel  scheme  comes  forth  in  all  its  glory.  In 
fact,  both  the  Old  and  New  Testaments  are  a  revelation  of  Christ  in  different  modes. 
4.  It  is  a  revelation  of  a  future  state,  and  of  the  means  to  secure  final  happiness. 
Of  what  importance  is  the  Gospel  in  this  respect !  It  has  brought  life  and  immor- 
tality to  light.  It  has  dissipated  the  gloom  ;  it  has  burst  the  involving  cloud  ;  and 
all  is  day.  {R.  Watnon. )  Things  secret  and  revealed : — There  are  two  spheres  of 
spiritual  things — a  secret  or  hidden  sphere  and  a  revealed  sphere.  Time  was,  how- 
ever, when  there  was  only  the  one  sphere,  and  that  the  secret  one.  Away  back  in 
the  primal  ages,  when  as  yet  man  had  not  been  called  into  existence,  there  was  no 
sphere,  and  could  not  be,  of  things  revealed.  It  was  not  till  man  had  opened  his 
eyes  upon  this  fair  earth,  and  by  his  side  beheld  the  kindly  face  of  God,  that  the 
sphere  of  things  revealed  had  its  beginning.  Then  did  God  lift  up  the  tiniest 
corner  of  the  great  curtain  which  covered  the  spiritual  world,  and  so  gave  rise  to  a 
new  sphere  of  spiritual  things — the  revealed.  Thence  did  the  sphere  of  revealed 
things  begin  to  grow  apace.  The  number  of  revealed  things  is  growing  every  day 
larger,  and  the  number  of  secret  things  every  day  smaller.  Not  that  we  can  expect 
the  secret  things  to  disappear  altogether.    I.  There  are  many  things  which  God 

ONLY  PARTLY  KEEPS   SECRET,  AND   EVIDENTLY   WITH   NO   ULTIMATE   INTENTION  OF 

KEEPING  SECRET  AT  ALL.  These  are  such  things  as  the  Inspiration  of  the  Scriptures, 
the  Trinity,  the  Atonement,  Prayer,  Providence,  and  the  like.  In  these  cases  God 
may  be  said,  generally  speaking,  to  have  revealed  the  fact,  but  to  have  kept  the 
explanation  secret.  Why  should  we  not  understand  God  as  saying  to  us  :  "Here 
is  the  fact  of  Inspiration  ;  find  out  the  theory  of  it"  ;  "Here  is  the  fact  of  the 
Trinity  and  the  Atonement ;  search  out  the  explanations  of  them  " ;  "  Here  is  the 
fact  that  prayer  is  efficacious,  and  that  providence  is  always  beneficent ;  see  if  you 
cannot  sweep  away  the  difficulties  of  the  one  position,  and  unravel  the  mysteries  of 
the  other"  ?  The  only  condition  that  God  seems  to  lay  down  is  this  :  that  we  are 
to  make  these  inquiries  reverently,  and  that  we  are  to  take  on  trust  what- 
ever we  cannot  explain,  remembering  that  it  is  the  fact  of  things,  and  not 
the  theory,  which  is,   after  all,   the  important   matter.     II.  There  are  some 

THINGS    THAT    GOD    SEEMS     INTENTIONALLY   TO    KEEP    SECRET.      These   are   things 

which  to  pry  into  is  apt  to  bring  us  some  kind  of  natural  punishment  rather 
than  reward.  1.  His  time  of  bringing  any  event  to  pass.  2.  The  way  by  which  He 
means  to  lead  His  people.  It  is  in  mercy  that  He  always  keeps  this  secret.  Put  it 
to  yourselves,  if  you  could  have  come  all  the  way  you  have  come  in  the  event  of  your 
knowing  beforehand  what  it  was  to  be  like.  Would  you  not  have  shrunk  back  from 
entering  upon  the  journey  of  life  ?  But  when  you  cannot  see  beyond  the  first  bend 
of  the  way — when  all  beyond  this  is  God's  secret — you  are  emboldened  to  step  out 


CHAP.  XXIX.]  DEUTERONOMY.  461 


riglit  manfully  or  right  womanfully.     III.  There  are  many  things  whech  God 
HA8  FULLY  REVEALED.     God  has  fullj  revealed  all  that  is  necessary  both  for  our 
weal  here  and  for  our  wealth  hereafter.     {D.  Hobhs,  M.A.)        Limit  to  theological 
knowledge  .—Everything  now  unknown  is  not  to  be  considered  as  belonging  to  the 
secret  things  of  God,  and  unfathomable  by  man.     Every  day  is  revealing  to  us  some 
things  and  facts  of  which  we  were  ignorant.     We  have  the  largest,  the  freest,  the 
most  highly  trained  intellects  everywhere  exploring  nature  on  the  soundest  philo- 
sophical principles,  and  with  the  aid  of  mechanical  and  scientific  appliances  un- 
known to  the  men  of  ancient  times.     The  discoveries  of  the  last  half-century  have 
propelled  civilisation  with  a  speed  which,  if  it  had  been  predicted  to  our  ancestors, 
would  have  been  deemed  fabulous.      And  yet  we  are  only  learning  the  letters  of  the 
alphabet  of  unknown  knowledge.     God  has  created,  and  will  yet  create,  men  whose 
genius,  constitutional  temperament,  and  gigantic  intellect  shall  explore  and  explain 
the  unknown  parts  and  races  of  our  own  planet,  investigate  still  further  the  laws  of 
the  universe,  bring  everything  that  has  had  life  (not  excluding  man),  and  every- 
thing that  has  not  had  life,  either  under  anatomical,  telescopic,  microscopic,  or 
chemical  investigation,  and  every  revelation  that  the  explorer  can  give  to  us,  based 
upon  facts,  will  illustrate  the  wisdom,  power,  and  goodness  of  the  Creator,  and  con- 
tribute to  the  well-being  and  advancement  of  mankind.     But  there  are  yet  secret 
things,  known  only  to  God,  which  men  have  employed  themselves  for  ages  to 
discover,  and  have  failed.     One  is,  the  essence  and  nature  of  God.     We  speak  of 
God  as  the  First  Cause,  the  absolute  Being,  the  infinite  One,  but  the  discussion  even 
of  these  terms  soon  places  before  us  contradictions  necessarily  involved  in  their  use. 
The  soul  of  man,  its  origin,  varied  power,  and  duration,  is  another  secret  thing, 
known  only  to  God.     The  moral  evil,  the  physical  suffering,  the  mental  degrada- 
tion and  moral  debasement  of  the  races  of  mankind  for  thousands  of  years,  under 
the  dominion  and  rule  of  a  benevolent  and  merciful  God — these  are  secrets  the 
reason  of  whose  existence  we  have  no  power  to  reveal.     Our  text  tells  us  there  are 
things  which  are  revealed,  and  that  they  belong  to  us  and  to  our  children  for  ever. 
The  first  great  doctrine  of  revelation  is  the  oneness  of  God.     The  incomprehensible 
God,  the  Creator  and  Ruler  of  all  worlds,  we  adore  and  love.     It  is  the  sm-render  of 
the  mind,  the  culture  of  the  affections,  and  a  life  obedient  to  the  will  of  heaven  that 
are  required  of  us,  and  though  we  often  fail,  even  our  failures  may  be  expressive  of 
progress,  and  of  our  earnest  desire  to  lead  a  spiritual  and  holy  life  such  as  Christ 
lived.     It  is  also  revealed  to  us  that  "God  so  loved  the  world  that  He  gave  His  only 
begotten  Son,"  Ac.     In  the  Gospels  we  have  the  history,  the  doctrines,  the  com- 
mandments of  Jesus,  and  His  relationship  to  mankind.    There  must  be  no  selfishness 
in  our  reception  of  Christianity.     If  we  embrace  it  cordially,  if  we  believe  the 
Christian  faith  to  be  the  truest,  purest,  and  most  powerful  ;  if  it  will  give  light  to 
the  understanding,  love  and  piety  to  the  heart,  integrity  to  the  life  ;  if  it  will  make 
man  benevolent,  generous,  unselfish,  self-sacrificing,  and  will  lead  him  to  God  for 
the  forgiveness  of  his  sins,  then  it  is  a  faith,  a  Divine  religion,  which  we  ought  not 
only  to  embrace,  but  to  propagate  by  every  means  we  possess.      We  have  also  other 
revelations  ;  one  is  of  law,  summed  up  by  Jesus  in  the  love  of  God  and  of  our  neigh- 
bour.    The  physical  and  moral  penalties  of  violating  the  laws  of  our  nature  and  the 
laws  of  God  are  also  revealed  to  us.     The  fact  of  a  Divine  Providence  over  mankind 
and  all  creatures,  and  over  all  human  affairs,  was  plainly  revealed  by  Jesus  Christ. 
And  the  fact  of  its  existence  is  almost  all  we  know  of  it.     Other  facts  and  doctrines 
are  disclosed  to  us,  and  the  great  purpose  is,  to  bring  our  hearts  and  lives  under  the 
authority  of  God,  that  we  may  be  the  children  of  our  Father  who  is  in  heaven. 
This  was  the  aim  and  end  of  Christ's  teaching,  example,  prayers,  and  of  His  life 
and  death.     Nothing  less  than  conformity  to  the  spirit,  the  love,  the  virtue  and 
holiness,   and   the  benevolent  deeds  of  Jesus,  can  make  us  worthy  to  bear  His 
honoured  name.     The  inference  drawn  by  the  writer  of  the  text  from  the  subject 
under  consideration  was  this  :  "  that  we  may  do  all  the  words  of  this  law."     We 
have  habitually  to  recognise  the  fact  that  secret  things  belong  unto  the  Lord  our 
God.     Whatever  belongs  to  the  infinite,  which  is  not  revealed,  is  far,  far  beyond 
us  ;  and  it  is  not  profitable  to  spend  our  time  habitually  on  that  which  is  and  ever 
must  be  beyond  our  grasp.     Thank  God,  the  path  of  life  and  the  path  of  duty  are 
both  equally  plain  and  intelligible.     In  doing  all  the  words  of  this  law,  we  must 
remember  that  satisfaction  and  happiness  may  be  attained  from  the  Christianity  we 
m  common  profess.     The  Bible  contains  solace  for  the  troubled  heart  and  comfort 
for  the  wounded  spirit.     {R.  Ainslie.)         The  presumption  of  prying  into  religious 
mysteries  .-—It  is  one  material  consideration,  amongst  many,  in  favour  of  the  Jewish 


462  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxix. 

and  Christian  Scriptures,  that  they  preserve  throughout  so  due  a  medium  in  the 
discoveries  which  they  make  of  Divine  truths,  as  to  direct  the  faith  and  practice  of 
men  without  indulging  their  curiosity.     I.  That  we  should  never  pry  into 

MATTERS  which   INFINITE   WISDOM   HATH    CONCEALED.      For  WC  shall  seldom.  If  at 

all,  be  wiser  for  such  inquiries  :  we  shall  never  be  happier  or  better  ;  and  we  shall 
usually  be  more  wretched,  and  less  innocent.     II.  That  we  should  receive  with 

ATTENTIVE   HUMILITY   WHATEVER   INFINITE  WISDOM    COMMUNICATES   TO   US.      For 

that  God  is  able  to  communicate  many  important  truths  to  us,  which  we  have  no 
means  of  knowing  otherwise,  concerning  His  own  nature,  His  designs  and  dispensa- 
tions concerning  the  inhabitants  of  the  invisible  world,  and  our  future  state  in  it, 
can  no  more  be  doubted  than  whether  we  ourselves,  according  to  our  various  know- 
ledge of  men  and  things,  are  able  to  give  unexpected  and  serviceable  notices  one  to 
another.  And  that  we  should  understand  nothing  further  of  His  secrets  than  is 
unfolded  to  us,  nor  be  capable  of  answering  many  questions  that  may  be  asked  about 
them,  otherwise  than  by  confessing  our  ignorance,  is  so  far  from  being  a  plea  against 
their  being  really  His,  that  it  is  a  necessary  consequence  of  it :  so  far  from  being 
strange  in  supernatural  things,  that  it  is  common  in  natural  ones.     III.  That  we 

SHOULD  ALLOW  EVERY  DiVINE  TRUTH  ITS  DUE  INFLUENCE  ON  OUR  BEHAVIOUR.     In 

proportion  as  we  know  God,  we  are  to  glorify  Him  as  God  :  according  to  every  par- 
ticular which  the  Scripture  hath  manifested  concerning  Him.  And  the  several 
obligations  incumbent  on  us  towards  Him,  ought  not  to  be  estimated,  however 
commonly  they  are,  by  their  influence  on  the  aff'airs  of  our  present  life,  but  by  the 
stress  which  He,  who  alone  knows  the  proper  one,  hath  laid  upon  them.  Our  per- 
formance of  these  obligations,  as  it  was  the  true  motive  to  the  delivery  of  each 
article,  is  the  just  measure  of  our  belief  in  it.  If  we  know  enough  of  the  mysterious 
doctrines  in  religion  to  fulfil  those  duties,  of  which  they  are  each  respectively  the 
foundation,  our  knowledge,  however  imperfect,  is  sufficient.  And  If  those  duties 
remain  unfulfilled,  the  completest  knowledge  will  not  avail  us.  {Archbishop  Seeker. ) 
Follow  the  road  that  is  -visible  : — The  other  day  I  was  walking  across  the  Northum- 
berland Fells  to  call  at  a  shepherd's  house  that  lay  distinctly  enough  before  me  on 
the  Fellside.  The  directions  I  received  from  a  Fellsider,  whom  I  had  just  left,  after 
the  manner  of  those  who  live  every  day  in  the  midst  of  ample  space,  were  vague 
indeed.  The  rutty,  half-formed  road  on  which  I  was  walking  was  plain  enough 
immediately  before  me,  but  when  I  strove  to  trace  the  course  of  the  road  a  greater 
distance  ahead,  it  became  blended  with  the  frowsy  bracken  and  bronzed  heather  and 
was  utterly  lost  to  view.  To  have  struck  boldly  out  across  country  to  reach  my 
destination  by  what  seemed  the  shortest  route,  would  have  entangled  me  among 
the  spongy  bogs  and  numerous  streams  with  which  the  hillside  was  intersected. 
However,  by  carefully  following  the  road  that  was  visible  before  me,  I  managed  to 
pick  my  way,  and  arrived  at  my  calling-place  in  safety.  So  is  it  in  our  daily 
search  after  the  knowledge  of  the  Divine  will.  When,  in  our  impatient  eagerness, 
we  wish  to  look  too  far  into  the  future,  all  is  indistinct  and  hazy  ;  but  if  we  care- 
fully note  what  is  near  and  sufficiently  revealed,  we  shall  be  led  up  infallibly  to 
safety  and  rest.  The  difficulty  of  explanation  .-—The  Rev.  E.  A.  Stuart  remarks, 
A  little  child  was  playing  in  the  garden,  and  the  crabbed  old  gardener  came  up  to 
her  and  said,  "Cissie,  your  father  is  going  to  kill  a  man  to-morrow."  "Oh  no, 
William,  I  am  sure  he  is  not !  "  "  Yes,  he  is,  to-morrow  morning,  at  eight  o'clock, 
up  there  on  the  hill  close  to  the  grey  old  prison."  "  Oh  no,  William,  I'm  sure  he 
is  not !  My  father  is  too  good  and  kind  and  gentle  to  do  that."  ..."  Father,  it 
is  not  true,  is  it  ?  You  are  not  going  to  kill  a  man  to-morrow  ?  William  says  you 
are."  The  father  was  sheriff  for  the  county,  and  had  to  superintend  next  morning 
the  execution  of  a  murderer,  and  it  had  been  haunting  him  like  a  nightmare  for  the 
last  three  weeks.  He  was  angry  with  the  man  who  had  so  cruelly  slandered  him  to 
his  child,  and  yet  he  saw  it  was  quite  impossible  for  him  to  explain  his  duty  to  the 
little  one,  so  he  simply  said,  "Cissie,  can't  you  trust  father? "  and  the  little  one 
smothered  all  her  doubts  in  her  father's  breast.  And  so  when  men  come  and 
perplex  me  with  life's  mysteries,  I  simply  answer,  **  I  can  trust  my  Father,  and 
throw  myself  upon  His  character."  Those  tilings  which  are  revealed. — Revealed 
things: — I.  The  things  that  are  revealed.  1.  The  state  of  man.  Perverted 
and  depraved.  Incapable  of  purifying  himself.  Turning  away  from  the  things  of 
God,  and  seeking  the  things  of  man.  2.  The  means  by  which  man  may  be  delivered 
from  the  threatened  evil.  Gospel  of  Christ.  3.  In  what  way  man  is  to  be  interested 
in  the  Saviour.  II.  For  what  end  these  things  are  revealed.  "  That  we  may 
do,"  Ac.    Right  thinking,  right  feeling,  right  action.    {J.  Burnet.)       Man's  relation 


CHAP.  XXIX.]  DEUTERONOMY.  463 

to  the  revealed: — I.  There  are  things  revealed.  There  are  two  ways  in  which  weare 
able  to  get  hold  of  the  unknown — either  by  the  exercise  of  human  faculties  and  capaci- 
ties, or  through  some  supernatural  revelation.  TheFramerof  naturehasarranged  means 
for  the  conveyance  of  knowledge  to  the  human  mind.  Sensation  and  reflection  are 
the  two  powers  whereby  man  comes  to  know  the  facts  and  laws  of  the  internal 
world — the  facts  and  laws  of  his  own  mind.  Now,  beyond  the  utmost  sweep  of 
the  human  intellect  there  lies  a  vast  universe  into  whose  awful  depths  we  are  ever 
striving  to  penetrate.  But  there  are  limits  beyond  which  the  human  mind  acknow- 
ledges it  is  not  competent  for  it  to  pass.  Now,  it  is  here  that  the  Bible  comes  to 
man's  assistance.  God  interposes,  and  reveals  to  man.  The  Divine  nature  and 
affections,  the  future  condition  of  man,  and  the  work  of  Christ  for,  and  His  relation  to 
the  human  family,  are  the  three  great  topics  on  which  the  Bible  treats.  II.  These 
REVEALED  THINGS  BELONG  TO  MAN  FOR  EVER.     1.  They  are  objccts  of  interest. 

2.  They  are  objects  of  knowledge.      Our  faith  should  have  an  intelligent  basis. 

3.  This  revelation  is  a  solemn  trust.     It  is  our  duty  to  hand  it  on.     III.  These 

THINGS  ARE  REVEALED  THAT  WE  MAY  DO  ALL  THE  WORDS  OF  THIS  LAW.    This  is  the 

key  to  revelation.  The  Bible  read  in  the  light  of  this  truth  :  that  it  reveals  in  order 
that  men  may  be  changed  and  turned  to  God  ;  and  that  it  reveals  that  men 
may  do  the  words  of  God's  law — the  Bible  thus  considered  will  everywhere  exhibit 
consistency,  and  never  seriously  harass  and  disquiet  by  difficulties  of  comprehen- 
sion and  harmony.  {L.  D.  Bevan,  LL.B.)  The  things  revealed: — There  is  a 
valuable  property  which  Christians  possess  on  earth,  and  which,  in  the  enjoyment 
of  it,  may  be  counted  as  an  earnest  of  that  better  and  enduring  substance  which  is 
reserved  in  heaven  for  the  believer.  This  property  of  the  people  of  God  is  spoken  of 
in  the  words  before  us.  It  is  here  called  "those  things  which  are  revealed  "  ;  these, 
it  is  said,  "belong  unto  us  and  to  our  children."  I.  The  significant  expres- 
sion BY  WHICH  this  PROPERTY  OF  CHRISTIANS  IS  HERE  DESIGNATED.        "ThoSe 

things  which  are  revealed" — revelation  and  mystery  are  correlative  terms,  hence 
we  are  reminded — 1.  Of  the  original  mystery  connected  with  these  things.  They 
are  still  "revealed  mysteries,"  but  without  revelation  they  had  indeed  been  a 
mystery  in  the  most  unrestricted  sense  of  the  word.  Man's  dim  eye  never  pene- 
trated them,  his  feeble  mind  never  comprehended  them,  his  puny  intellect  never 
grasped  them.  2.  Of  their  source.  If  these  things  were  originally  superior  to  man's 
research,  if  they  lay  beyond  an  angel's  ken,  then  surely  we  are  at  no  loss  to 
ascertain  their  origin.  We  perceive  at  once  that  they  are  an  emanation  of  the 
Infinite  mind — a  brightsome  ray  from  the  throne  of  glory.  If  we  consider  the  love 
they  display,  it  bears  the  impress  of  heaven  ;  the  wisdom  they  proclaim,  it  bears 
the  impress  of  heaven  ;  the  mystery  they  bespeak,  it  bears  the  impress  of  heaven. 
3.  Of  the  importance  of  "those  things  which  are  revealed."  If  it  be  true  that 
these  things  were  a  mystery,  but  have  been  revealed — that  God  is  their  author, 
and  that  He  hath  made  them  known  unto  us,  then  without  controversy  they  are 
clothed  with  a  transcendent  importance.  Yes,  it  is  important  that  those  who  are 
far  removed  from  God  should  be  brought  back  and  restored  to  His  image.  It  is 
imjKjrtant  that  those  over  whom  the  leprosy  of  sin  hath  diff"used  its  loathsome 
disease,  should  be  washed,  clothed,  and  be  brought  to  sit  in  their  right  mind  at  the 
feet  of  Jesus.  It  is  important  that  the  soul  should  be  snatched  from  the  fearful 
doom  that  threatens  the  sinner,  and  prepared  for  that  blissful  reward  which  awaits 
those  "who  by  patient  continuance  in  well-doing,  seek  for  glory,  and  honour,  and 
immortality."    II.  The  remarkable  adaptation  of  those  things  which  are 

REVEALED  TO  THE  CIRCUMSTANCES  OF  THOSE  TO  WHOM  THEY  BELONG,  EVEN  "UNTO 

rs  AND  TO  OUR  CHILDREN."  1.  Man  is  a  sinner,  and  because  he  is  a  sinner, 
conscience  upbraids  him.  Now,  behold  how  beautifully  the  "things  which  are 
revealed  "  harmonise  with  man's  circumstances  in  this  respect.  Here  we  are  told — 
"God  was  in  Christ  reconciling  the  world  unto  Himself"  ;  here  we  are  assured 
that  the  blessing  of  reconciliation  is  to  be  secured  on  the  simple  terms — "only 
believe."  Thus  moved  by  a  sense  of  our  own  weakness,  and  encouraged  by  the 
revelation  thus  made,  we  raise  the  silent  cry,  "Lord,  give  us  of  this  faith,"  teach 
us  how  to  believe,  "Lord,  save  or  we  perish!"  2.  Man  being  a  sinner  is  in 
circumstances  of  present  suffering.  But  when  we  turn  to  the  "things  which  are 
revealed,"  we  learn  at  once  the  Author,  the  cause,  and  the  end  of  all  that  comes 
upon  us.  3.  Man  being  a  sinner  is  exposed  to  death.  Death  natural.  This  is  in 
consequence  of  sin,  and  this  cometh  to  all,  "to  the  good,  and  to  the  clean,  and  to 
the  unclean  ;  to  him  that  sacrificeth,  and  to  him  that  sacrificeth  not."  This  con- 
stitutes part  of  the  curse  so  solemnly  pronounced  on  the  apostasy  (Gen.  ii.  17, 


464  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxix, 

iii.  17-19).  But  in  the  case  of  the  believer  the  curse  is  converted  into  a  blessing.  Revela- 
tion has  made  known  the  cheering  truth  that  the  death  of  Christ  has  drawn  the  sting 
of  death,  and  now  "blessed  are  the  dead  that  die  in  the  Lord."  {J.  GasJcin,  M.A.) 
Man's  rights : — I.  Let  us  attend  to  the  character  of  our  rights.  * '  The  things 
that  are  revealed."  1.  It  conducts  us  to  the  mysterious  nature  of  our  rights.  They 
are  revealed  things  ;  they  are  not  the  result  of  human  reasonings,  however  deeply 
pursued — however  long  continued.  They  are  revealed  things ;  things,  therefore, 
of  a  Divine  and  mysterious  nature.  Now,  they  are  called  "the  purposes  of  God  "  ; 
then,  "the  mystery  of  His  will":  at  one  time,  "the  deep  things  of  God";  at 
another,  "the  will  of  God"  ;  and  again,  "the  wisdom  of  God  in  a  mystery."  If 
we  look  at  the  being  and  attributes  of  God — a  trinity  in  unity — the  God  man 
Mediator — His  sacrifice  and  atonement — the  effects  of  faith  in  that  atonement — the 
doctrine  of  a  future  resurrection — and  all,  in  fact,  that  is  called  revelation — we 
shall  see  how  much  they  are  above  the  level  of  mere  human  intellect.  "The 
things  that  are  revealed  !  "  I  love  this  designation  ;  because — 2.  It  marks  our 
religious  immunities  in  the  glory  of  their  manifestation.  If  tliey  be  revealed,  let 
us  remember  that  God  only  could  reveal  them  ;  and  that  He  has.  They  are  truly- 
revealed,  or  manifested  things.  The  whole  has  been  the  scene  of  Divine  mani- 
festations from  the  beginning.  The  Bible  is  a  history  of  manifestations.  3.  It 
points  out  the  transcendent  importance  of  them.  They  are  "revealed  things." 
II.  The  validity  of  our  claims  to  these  immunities.  They  "belong  unto 
us  "  ;  so  it  is  said  in  the  text.  But  what  is  the  ground  of  our  claim  to  the  things 
that  are  revealed  ?  It  cannot  be  natural  to  us,  considering  us  abstractedly,  as 
men.  It  is  true,  indeed,  that  there  began  to  be  a  system  of  revelation  and  com- 
munication from  the  first,  to  sinless  and  innocent  man.  But  the  things  which 
are  revealed  to  us  contain  much,  certainly,  which  was  not  adapted  to  man  in 
his  first  state.  This  revelation  could  not  belong  to  man,  then,  as  he  was  created. 
And  though  we  are  sinners,  and  this  revelation  is  made  to  us  as  sinners,  still, 
the  fact  of  our  sinfulness  could  give  us  no  claim  to  such  a  revelation ;  no  claim 
to  a  revealed  God — to  a  revealed  Saviour — to  a  revealed  heaven — to  a  revealed 
immortality.  No  ;  we  can  support  no  claim,  either  natural  or  meritorious.  How, 
then,  are  these  things  ours  ?  Simply  because  of  the  sovereign  will  of  God.  But, 
beside  this,  we  have  other  collateral  grounds  of  claim.  In  proof  that  the  things 
that  are  revealed  belong  unto  us,  I  would  appeal — 1.  To  their  astonishing  adapta- 
tion to  our  circumstances.  2.  To  the  legitimated  means  of  their  transmission. 
God  has  not  left  the  truths  of  revelation  to  themselves,  to  make  their  own  way, 
and  subdue  the  world  to  obedience.  3.  To  the  wonderful  preservation  of  these 
things.  How  wonderfully  God  has  taken  care  to  preserve  His  trnth  pure  and 
unadulterated,  notwithstanding  the  prevalence  of  error,  the  tyranny  of  passion, 
and  the  cruelty  of  persecution.  4.  To  the  influence  of  these  things  upon  the 
nature  of  Man.  Think  on  what  would  have  been  the  state  of  the  world  if 
these  things  had  not  been  revealed.  {J.  Anderson.)  The  things  that  are  re- 
vealed:— The  words  invite  us  to  contemplate  our  heritage — "the  things  that  are 
revealed "  ;  our  title  to  that  heritage — they  "belong  unto  us  and  to  our  children  for 
ever."  1.  Many  are  the  designations  given  of  Holy  Scripture.  Those  designations 
are  all  of  them  expressive  and  beautiful.  When  studied,  they  each  present  to  us 
some  new  aspect  of  God's  Word.  But  the  designation  in  this  passage  is  exceed- 
ingly striking  and  plain.  It  is,  "Those  things  which  are  revealed."  By  being 
"revealed,"  then,  or  by  revelation,  is  meant  opening  up,  uncurtaining,  disclosing  ; 
bringing  to  view  what  was  not  seen  or  known,  or  only  partially  or  imperfectly  seen 
and  known.  This  is  done  by  the  Spirit  of  God.  Man's  intellect  did  not  discover 
these  things  ;  man's  diligence  and  science  did  not  find  them  out  ;  man's  wit  and 
skill  did  not  arrive  at  them.  They  are  not  the  results  of  logic,  or  of  philosophy,  or 
of  genius  ;  but  they  are  the  disclosures  of  God's  own  Spirit.  So  that  ' '  all  Scrip- 
ture," all  revelation,  "  is  given  by  inspiration  of  God."  2.  These  "  things  that  are 
revealed,"  how  manifold,  how  marvellous,  how  gracious,  how  glorious  they  are  ! 
"  Eye  "  had  "  not  seen  them,"  "  ear  "  had  "  not  heard  them  "  ;  it  had  "  not  entered 
into  the  heart  of  man  to  conceive  them."  Without  this  revelation,  how  dark,  how 
desolate,  how  desperate  were  the  lot  of  fallen  man  !  Take  the  sun  from  the  sky, 
what  would  become  of  the  world  ?  Take  the  Bible  from  the  Church,  what  would 
become  of  the  Church  ?  3.  Amongst  the  "  things  that  are  revealed  "  are  the  things 
of  God,  and  amongst  the  "things  that  are  revealed"  are  the  things  of  man; 
amongst  the  "  things  that  are  revealed"  is  the  past  in  this  world,  and  amongst  the 
"  things  that  are  revealed  "  are  the  things  to  come,  not  only  of  this  world  but  in 


CHAP.  XXIX.  3  DEUTERONOMY.  466 

the  world  of  eternity.  4.  And,  therefore,  we  are  bound  to  sum  up  and  say,  the 
**  things  that  are  revealed,"  how  glorious  they  are  !  how  inconceivable,  and  yet  how 
clear  !  how  incomprehensible,  and  yet  how  simple  !  how  inscrutable,  and  yet  how 
level  to  us  all !  How  wonderful  in  their  adaptation  to  our  wants  !  how  gracious  in 
their  condescension  to  our  infirmities!  "Those  things  which  are  revealed  belong 
unto  us  and  to  our  children  for  ever. "  Our  little  ones  have  a  claim.  ''  From  a  child 
thou  hast  known  the  Holy  Scriptures,  which  are  able  to  make  thee  wise  unto  salva- 
tion, through  faith  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus."  {H.  Stowell,  M.A.)  The  education 
of  the  young : — Let  me  open  my  subject  with  the  thoughts  of  a  great  man  of  science. 
"Supposing,"  he  says,  "  that  the  life  and  fortune  of  every  one  of  us  would  one  day 
depend  on  his  mnning  or  losing  a  game  of  chess,  don't  you  think  that  we  should  all 
consider  it  a  primary  duty  to  learn,  at  least,  the  names  and  moves  of  the  pieces,  to  have 
a  notion  of  a  gambit,  and  a  keen  eye  for  all  the  means  of  giving  or  taking  a  check  ? 
Do  you  not  think  that  we  should  look  with  a  disapprobation  almost  amounting  to 
scorn  upon  the  father  who  allowed  his  son,  or  on  the  State  which  allowed  its 
members  to  grow  up  without  knowing  a  pawn  from  a  knight  ?  Yet  it  is  a  very  plain 
and  elementary  truth  that  the  life,  the  fortune,  and  the  happiness  of  every  one  of 
us  depend  on  our  knowing  something  of  the  rules  of  a  game  infinitely  more  compli- 
cated than  chess.  It  is  a  game  which  has  been  played  by  the  human  race  for 
untold  ages,  every  man  and  woman  of  us  being  one  of  the  two  players  in  a  game  of 
his  or  her  own.  The  player  on  the  other  side  is  hidden  from  us.  We  know  that  His 
play  is  always  fair  and  patient ;  but  we  know  to  our  cost  that  He  never  overlooks  a 
mistake,  or  makes  the  smallest  allowance  for  culpable  ignorance.  Well,  what  I 
mean  by  education  is  learning  the  laws  of  that  mighty  game — in  other  words, 
education  is  the  instruction  of  the  intellect  in  the  laws  of  nature,  under  which 
name  I  include,  not  merely  things  and  their  forces,  but  men  and  their  ways,  and 
the  fashioning  of  the  affections  and  the  will  into  an  earnest  and  living  desire  to 
move  in  harmony  with  those  laws."  Now,  I  will  not  criticise  this  passage,  nor 
expand  its  suggestive  metaphor,  nor  point  out  the  elements  in  which  it  is  wanting. 
Education  is  surely  something  very  much  more  and  deeper  than  merely  training  the 
intellect  in  the  laws  of  nature.  Its  alpha  and  its  omega  should  be  rather  to  train  the 
spirit  in  the  knowledge  of  God.  But  leaving  the  passage  and  its  general  suggestive- 
ness,  I  will  try  to  point  out  something  of  what  we  are  neglecting  and  of  what  we 
are  doing,  some  of  the  ends  at  which  we  now  aim  in  our  schools,  and  some  at 
which  we  should  aim  more  and  more.  To  begin  with,  we  ought  undoubtedly  to 
connect  all  our  higher  education  with  the  development  of  health,  the  happiness  of 
the  children,  and  the  welfare  of  the  nation.  1.  Firstly,  we  too  much  neglect  physical 
vigour.  It  depends  on  health  ;  and  if  we  injure  the  health  of  the  children  of  the 
nation,  we  blight  their  whole  lives.  Our  system  is  certainly  too  rigid  and  too 
mechanical.  It  tends  to  keep  back  the  gifted  and  the  eager,  and  to  oppress  the 
weak  and  the  dull.  It  expects  the  same  polish  from  the  slate  as  from  the  agate.  It 
makes  but  scant  allowance  for  differences  of  ability  and  circumstance.  2.  Then, 
secondly,  how  woefully  do  we  fail  to  train  the  sense  of  beauty  which  God  has  given 
us,  and  which  He,  for  His  part,  has  endeavoured  amply  to  satisfy  !  Our  school- 
rooms, instead  of  being,  as  they  almost  everywhere  are,  dingy,  dirty,  stuffy,  and 
generally  repellent,  ought  to  be  the  airiest,  happiest  places  in  each  parish  ;  fresh 
and  clean,  and  with  flowers  in  them,  and  with  beautiful  pictures  and  simple  works 
of  art,  and  most  of  all  in  cities  like  this,  where  our  children  live,  for  the  most  part, 
in  a  wilderness  of  squalor  and  ugliness.  3.  Then,  thirdly,  as  to  the  cultivation  of 
special  gifts.  A  gift  is  a  very  rare  and  sacred  thing,  and  it  would  be  well  if  we 
could  have  the  gifts  of  our  children  watched  for  and  trained.  Far  too  much  have 
we,  as  a  nation,  confused  the  notion  of  education  with  the  infructnous  cramming  of 
so  much  reproducible  knowledge.  "What  is  the  education  of  thelnajority  of  the 
world?"  asked  Edmund  Burke.  "Reading  a  parcel  of  books?  No  !  Restraint 
and  discipline,  examples  of  virtue  and  of  justice — these  are  what  form  the  education 
of  the  world."  4.  And,  fourthly,  we  have,  as  a  nation,  I  am  convinced,  great  need 
to  pay  attention  to  the  subject  of  technical  training.  This  is  a  most  serious  national 
question,  for,  amid  the  imiversal  competition  of  nations,  the  empire  of  British 
commerce  is  being  seriously  threatened.  They  who  watch  over  the  future  interests 
of  England,  and  not  merely  its  present  comforts,  point  to  facts  like  these.  The  web 
of  lace  curtains  is  made  in  England,  but  before  they  can  be  sold  they  have  to  be 
sent  to  France  and  Belgium  to  have  a  pattern  put  on  them,  because  we  have  not  the 
requisite  machinery.  The  steamers  built  on  the  Clyde  for  the  Germans,  as  soon  as 
they  can  float,  are  manned  by  German  crews  and  sent  over  to  that  country  to  have 
30 


466  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxix. 

their  interiors  completed,  because  that  can  be  done  better  and  more  cheaply  in 
Germany  than  in  England.  "We  have  too  much  book-work,  depend  upon  it,  and 
too  little  exercise  for  the  powers  and  faculties  of  the  body  ;  and  I  feel  sure  that  even 
the  book-work  would  be  the  better  if  our  system  were  more  human  and  more 
humane,  if  there  were  less  grinding  routine  and  more  activity  of  soul.  Our  present 
wooden  system  tends  at  once  to  quench  the  glow  and  enthusiasm  of  many  teachers, 
and  the  brightness  and  animation  of  many  a  child.  Here,  then,  you  have  the  fact 
which  constitutes  the  central  use  and  inestimable  blessing  of  such  schools  as  these 
you  are  asked  to  support,  and  to  support  with  generous  liberality,  to-day — they  are 
religious  schools,  or  they  are  nothing.  In  these  schools  at  least  we  have  a  moral 
education  that  endeavours  to  form  the  judgment  and  the  character,  which  are  too 
often  neglected  by  official  pedagogy.  Here,  at  least,  we  do  try  to  get  the  saving 
facts  and  saving  doctrines  of  Christianity  apprehended  and  appropriated  by  our 
school  children.  "The  aim  of  teaching,"  says  a  great  schoolmaster,  "is  to  train 
generally  all  who  are  born  men  to  all  that  is  human."  Let  us  do  our  best,  and 
leave  the  rest  to  God.  On  the  tombstone  of  one  Frobel,  the  great  loving  German 
teacher,  are  carved  the  words  :  "  Come  let  us  live  for  the  children."  I  would  say 
the  same  to  you.  If  we  neglect  them,  depend  upon  it,  the  devil  will  not.  Let  us 
teach  our  children,  on  the  other  hand,  that  the  end  of  all  education  is  to  learn  that 
all  happiness  depends,  not  on  external  good,  but  on  inward  blessings,  because  the 
kingdom  of  God  is  within  them,  let  them  be  educated  in  such  a  way  as  to  know 
that  education  is  not  to  have  and  to  rest,  but  to  grow  and  to  become,  forgetting 
all  the  evil  behind  and  reaching  forward  to  all  the  good  that  is  before ;  that  the 
true  end  of  life  is  not  selfishness  but  beneficence,  looking  not  every  man  on  his  own 
things,  but  every  man  on  the  things  of  others  ;  that  life,  true  life,  is  to  be  found  in 
Christ  and  Christ  alone,  and  consisteth  not  in  the  multitude  of  things  we  possess. 
{Dean  Farrar. )  Revealed  knowledge,  our  heritage  : — Revealed  knowledge  may 
be  said  to  "belong  to  us" — I.  Because  it  is  level  to  our  understandings. 
All  that  is  needful  for  us  to  know  of  "the  common  salvation"  is  so  plain  in  itself, 
and  so  plainly  declared,  that  he  who  runs  may  read.  On  this  point  we  may  safely 
appeal  to  general  experience.  If  the  Bible  be,  generally  speaking,  a  hard  book,  how 
is  it  that  it  has  made  its  way  into  every  house  where  a  reader  is  to  be  found  ?  How 
does  it  happen  that  the  most  fond  and  delighted  readers  of  it  are  those  whose 
understandings  have  had  tbe  least  assistance  frona  education  ?  Such  persons  prefer 
the  Bible  even  to  other  devotional  books  in  which  the  same  things  are  professed  to 
be  set  forth  ;  partly,  perhaps,  from  habit,  but  in  a  great  measure  because,  with 
respect  to  the  most  interesting  religious  truths,  they  cannot  be  more  plainly  set 
forth  than  is  there  done  already ;  they  are  rather  obscured  than  otherwise  by  a 
multitude  of  words  and  subtle  reasonings  and  human  illustrations.  And  what  is 
the  nature  of  those  truths  ?  For,  if  they  were  not  in  themselves  easy  to  be  under- 
stood, no  plainness  of  speech  could  make  them  so.  But  now,  what  are  they  ? 
"God  is,  and  is  a  rewarder,"  &c.  "  All  flesh  have  corrupted  their  way."  "Jesus 
Christ  came,"  &c.  "Repent,  and  believe  the  Gospel."  II.  Because  it  concerns 
us.  The  Bible  is  about  us,  and  our  aff'airs.  Open  it  where  you  will,  you  are  the 
person  spoken  to  ;  and  you,  or  some  other  of  like  passions  with  you,  are  the  person 
spoken  of.  Of  God  Himself,  only  so  much  is  revealed  as  relates  to  His  dealings 
with  man  ;  and  how  small  a  part  is  that  of  what  might  be  known  of  the  Author  of 
the  universe !  Of  the  angels,  their  natures,  orders,  powers,  and  past  history,  we 
know  next  to  nothing ;  only  a  few  individuals  of  them  are  introduced  to  us,  as 
ascending  and  descending  between  God  and  man  ;  and  we  are  told  of  them  in 
general,  that  they  are  "all  ministering  spirits,"  &c.  Nay,  even  of  Jesus  Christ 
Himself,  whatever  is  revealed  strictly  concerns  us  and  the  scheme  of  our 
redemption.  Of  man,  his  origin,  nature,  history,  condition,  duties,  destiny,  every 
page  of  the  Bible  tells  us  something  ;  and  the  whole  together  gives  us  such  a  full 
and  luminous  account  as  leaves  nothing  to  be  desired.  With  reference  to  its  author, 
we  call  the  Bible  God's  Book,  but  in  respect  to  use  and  advantage  it  is  our  book, 
and  none  but  ours.  Suppose  it  to  be  put  into  the  hands  of  a  quite  different  order 
of  creatures,  inhabiting  some  other  world  :  of  what  service  would  it  be  to  them  ? 
Would  they,  who  perhaps  had  never  sinned,  feel  any  interest  beyond  that  of  mere 
curiosity  in  the  fall  of  man,  or  in  the  succession  of  the  Divine  dispensations  for  his 
recovery  ?  To  them  it  would  be  as  a  letter  mis-sent.  But  when  we  open  this  letter 
we  see  at  once  that  it  "belongs  to  us "  ;  and  we  put  it  by,  only  to  refer  to  it  again 
and  again,  and  prepare  ourselves,  "that  we  may  do,"  &c.  III.  Because  we  do,  in 
fact,  possess  it.     Was  it  not  "written  for  our  learning"?  delivered  to  us  at  the  ' 


CHAP.  XXX.]  DEUTERONOMY.  467 

first,  and  handed  down  by  a  providential  arrangement,  for  our  benefit  ?  Let  this 
suflRce.  Where  there  is  no  other  elaimatjt,  possession  alone  is  a  valid  title.  This  is 
an  acknowledged  maxim  in  regard  to  other  kinds  of  property  ;  and  so  it  would  be  in 
regard  to  this,  were  it  not  for  one  consideration,  namely,  that  we  do  not  see  men  using 
and  enjoying  this  part  of  their  possessions  as  they  do  the  rest.  What  should  we 
think  if  we  saw  the  supposed  owner  of  a  large  landed  property  carefully  abstaining 
from  the  usufruct  of  it?  either  letting  it  remain  unproductive,  or  storing  up  the 
produce  of  it  from  year  to  year,  or  by  any  other  means  taking  good  care  that  he 
himself  shall  derive  no  benefit  from  it?  Should  we  not  say  at  once,  "The  estate  is 
not  legally  vested  in  that  person.  There  is  some  flaw  in  his  title,  and  he  fears  to 
apply  the  proceeds  to  his  own  use,  lest  the  real  owner  should  presently  appear  and 
call  him  to  account "  ?  Now,  apply  this  to  the  case  before  us.  "Those  things  which, 
are  revealed  belong  unto  us  and  to  our  children  for  ever,  that  we  may  do  all  the 
words  of  this  law."  That  is  the  use  of  this  property — to  "do  all  the  words,"  &c. 
It  is  the  absence  of  that,  and  nothing  else,  that  casts  a  suspicion  upon  our  real  title 
to  the  property.  If  men  were  always  seen  doing  those  things  which  are  contained 
in  the  Bible — obeying  its  precepts,  copying  its  examples,  believing  its  truths, 
appropriating  its  promises  ;  in  short,  living  and  feeding  upon  the  oracles  of  God, 
instead  of  remaining  all  their  lives  "hearers  only,  deceiving  their  own  selves," — 
there  would,  there  could  be,  no  question  as  to  their  right  of  possession.  {^Frederick 
Field,  LL.D.) 


CHAPTER  XXX. 


Ver.  2.  And  shalt  retum  unto  the  Lord  tliy  God. — The  proper  signs  of  repent- 
ance: —Moses  is  here  dealing  with  the  signs  of  "  repentance, "  which  begin  in  the 
humiliation  of  the  heart,  and  end  in  the  reformation  of  the  life.  In  the  New 
Testament  there  are  two  words  translated  by  our  English  word  "repentance": 
one  of  them  conveys  specially  the  notion  of  being  sorry  for  having  done  wrong  ; 
the  other  conveys  specially  the  notion  of  changing  one's  mind  as  to  things — seeing 
things  in  a  different  ligbt,  and  then  shaping  one's  conduct  accordingly.  But  it  is 
necessary  for  us  to  distinguish  even  between  sorrow  for  sin  and  repentance.  Sor- 
row has  two  results  ;  it  may  end  in  spiritual  life  or  in  spiritual  death  ;  and,  in 
themselves,  one  of  these  is  as  natural  as  the  other.  Sorrow  may  produce  two  kinds 
of  reformation — a  transient  or  a  permanent  one.  Sorrow  is  in  itself,  therefore, 
a  thing  neither  good  nor  bad  ;  its  value  depends  on  the  spirit  of  the  person  on 
whom  it  falls.  Fire  will  inflame  straw,  soften  iron,  or  harden  clay  ;  its  eff"ects  are 
determined  by  the  object  with  which  it  comes  in  contact.  Warmth  develops  the 
energies  of  life,  or  helps  the  progress  of  decay.  It  is  a  great  power  in  the  hot- 
house, a  great  power  also  in  the  coffin  :  it  expands  the  leaf,  matures  the  fruit,  adds 
precocious  vigour  to  vegetable  life  ;  and  warmth,  too,  develops  with  tenfold  rapidity 
the  weltering  process  of  dissolution.  So  too  with  sorrow.  There  are  spirits  in 
which  it  develops  the  seminal  principle  of  life  ;  there  are  others  in  which  it 
prematurely  hastens  the  consummation  of  irreparable  decay.  Repentance  is  a 
state  of  mind  and  heart,  but  it  may  be  merely  a  cherished  sentiment,  in  which, 
as  a  mere  sentiment,  the  man  hopes  to  find  his  satisfaction.  Such  repentance  is, 
and  it  always  must  be,  ineflective.  It  is  self-centred  ;  it  is  disguised  pride.  By  its 
fruits  you  must  know  it.  The  repentance  that  does  nothing  is  nothing.  This  is 
our  constant  difficulty — men  are  perpetually  trying  to  sever  sentiment  from  con- 
duct. They  want  to  keep  the  two  spheres  separate,  and  hope  to  be  right  towards 
God  in  heart,  and  to  do  what  they  like  in  their  life.  This  self-delusion  God's 
Word  persistently  resists.  Religion  cannot  keep  only  in  the  heart-sphere.  It 
must  come  out  and  show  itself  in  the  life.  It  will  be  white  and  frail  as  a  plant 
growing  in  a  dungeon  if  it  be  kept  wholly  within.  Every  element  of  the  religious 
life  must  act,  must  speak.  Shut  it  up  and  it  will  fade  away.  And  now  let  us  see 
if  we  can  trace  the  stages  of  the  Divine  dealing  still,  with  individuals,  in  Moses' 
foreshadowings  of  God's  dealings  with  His  people  Israel.  1.  God's  will,  as  He  has 
been  pleased  to  reveal  it,  controls  heart  and  conduct ;  and  enables  each  man  to 
judge  and  appraise  himself.  When  Job  came  into  the  full  sense  of  God,  what  could 
he  do  but  exclaim,  "I  abhor  myself,  and  repent  in  dust  and  ashes."  2.  Man's 
self-will,  resisting  the  Divine  will,  brings  man  into  sin.     Pollok  pictures,  in  hia 


468  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cHAr.  xxx. 

poem,  the  misery  of  lost  souls  as  this,  that  they  see  the  words  wherever  they  turn, 
"Ye  knew  your  duty,  and  ye  did  it  not."  That  is  sin.  3.  Sinful  man  comes  under 
Divine  discipline,  which  may  take  the  ordinary  forms  of  the  natural  consequences 
of  transgression,  or  which  may  be  special  afflictive  Divine  dispensations.  The 
prodigal  son  only  came  into  the  sufferings  and  humiliations  that  always  follow 
a  life  of  vice.  4.  The  aim  sought  to  be  reached  by  Divine  discipline  is  the  con- 
viction of  sin,  self-humiliation  on  account  of  sin,  and  the  earnest  desire  to  recover 
from  sin.  The  sufferings  following  sin  may  bring  remorse,  but  that  is  no  holy 
feeling.  God  would  work  the  godly  sorrow  of  repentance.  Remorse  keeps  a  man 
away  from  God,  hugging  to  himself  his  bitterness.  Repentance  leads  a  man  to 
God,  dissolves  him  in  the  tears  of  confession,  and  yet  kindles  a  new  hope  in  the 
soul.  And  now — 5.  We  come  to  the  point  of  our  text.  When  a  penitent  comes 
back  to  God,  He  looks  for  the  signs  of  the  penitence.  He  finds  them  partly  in  that 
very  return  to  seek  His  forgiveness  ;  but  He  looks  for  it  also  in  the  steadfast 
endeavour  of  the  penitent  henceforth  to  obey.  {The  Weekly  Pulpit.)  Repent- 
ance necessary : — We  have  heard  much  of  the  Gospel  containing  comfort  for  the 
mere  sinner,  and  if  by  the  mere  sinner  be  meant  one  that  has  nothing  to  plead  but 
the  mercy  of  God,  through  the  atonement,  like  the  publican  in  the  parable,  it  is  for 
such,  and  only  such,  that  the  Gospel  contains  consolation.  But  if  by  the  mere 
sinner  be  meant  the  impenitent,  though  distressed  sinner,  it  has  no  comfort  for 
such  in  their  present  state.  Repentance  is  necessary  to  forgiveness,  in  the  same 
sense  as  faith  is  necessary  to  justification  ;  for  it  is  not  possible  for  a  sinner  either 
to  embrace  the  Saviour,  or  prize  the  consolations  of  the  Gospel,  while  insensible  to 
the  evil  of  sin.  There  is  no  grace  in  the  Gospel,  but  upon  the  supposition  that 
God  is  in  the  right,  and  that  sin  is  exceedingly  sinful,  and,  consequently,  none  to 
be  perceived  or  prized.  [Andrew  Fuller. )  Thoroughness  in  repentance : — In  the 
War  Cry  there  was  a  picture  of  a  man  kneeling  at  a  table  and  praying,  "Lord, 
make  a  good  job  of  me."  The  words  are  rough  enough,  but  the  meaning  is,  in 
many  respects,  admirable.  The  poor  man  feels  that  he  is  a  failure,  and  that  he 
needs  new  making.  His  feeling  is  that  none  but  the  Lord  can  accomplish  the 
necessary  renewal.  His  fear  is  lest  he  should  not  have  the  full  work  wrought  upon 
him,  and  that  his  conversion  should  not  be  thorough  and  complete.  He  has  no 
need  to  fear  that  the  Lord  would  not  operate  effectively,  for  the  great  Worker  never 
leaves  His  work  half  done.  Still,  the  very  fear  of  being  but  partly  sanctified  shows 
his  earnestness  and  his  desire  to  be  truly  and  fully  converted  from  the  error  of  his 
ways.  Lifeless,  questionable  religion  is  poor  stuff.  Oh,  that  the  Lord  would  make 
a  good  job  of  us.  ((7.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Repentance: — Repentance  is  neither  base 
nor  bitter,  it  is  good  rising  up  out  of  evil.  It  is  the  turning  of  the  soul  from  the 
way  of  midnight  to  the  point  of  the  coming  sun.  Darkness  drops  from  the  face, 
and  silver  light  dawns  upon  it.  True  regret  for  wrong  never  weakens,  but  always 
strengthens  the  heart.  As  some  plants  of  the  bitterest  root  have  the  whitest  and 
sweetest  blossoms,  so  the  bitterest  wrong  has  the  sweetest  repentance,  which, 
indeed,  is  only  the  soul  blossoming  back  to  its  better  nature.  Whole-hearted-ness 

in  religion : — A  dealer  in  pictures  who  makes  it  his  business  to  find  as  many  new 
painters  as  possible,  both  in  this  country  and  abroad,  was  asked  recently  in  regard 
to  his  methods  of  selecting  pictures  to  buy.  He  was  very  frank  in  his  talk,  and 
one  thing  which  he  said  is  shrewd  enough  to  be  worth  quoting.  "  Of  course,"  he 
said,  "with  my  experience  I  am  able  to  judge  whether  there  is  promise  in  a 
painter's  work,  but  I  never  buy  with  any  idea  of  putting  the  painter  on  my  list  until 
I  have  seen  the  man  and  talked  with  him  myself.  I  always  watch  him  closely,  and 
I  never  buy  his  pictures  unless  his  eye  lights  up  when  I  talk  to  him  about  his  work 
and  about  his  profession."  The  artist  whose  heart  was  really  in  his  work  could 
not  discuss  it  without  kindling,  and  the  man  who  did  not  paint  from  the  heart  was 
not  the  one  whose  pictures  the  dealer  wanted.  And  so  God  desires  whole-hearted 
obedience  to  His  commands. 

Ver.  6.  Circumcise  thine  heart. — Circumcision : — Circumcision  was  the  sign  of  the 
covenant  God  made  with  Abraham,  mention  of  which  we  have  in  Gen.  x\di. ,  and 
which  the  first  martyr,  St.  Stephen,  quoted  in  that  remarkable  address  in  Acta 
vii.  8,  where  he  said,  "And  He  gave  him  the  Covenant  of  Circumcision  :  and  so 
Abraham  begat  Isaac,  and  circumcised  him  the  eighth  day."  And  St.  Paul  in 
writing  to  the  Romans  (iv.  11),  speaking  of  Abraham,  says,  "And  he  received  the 
sign  of  circumcision,  a  seal  of  the  righteousness  of  the  faith  which  he  had  yet  being 
uncircumcised  :  that  he  might  be  the  father  of  all  them  that  believe,  though  they  b« 


CHAP.  XXX.]  DEUTERONOMY,  469 

not  circumcised  ;  that  righteousness  might  be  imputed  unto  them  also."  This  sign 
was  also  made  with  Abraham's  seed — that  is,  Christ — as  St.  Paul  tells  us  in  Gal. 
iii.  16.  This  was  then  the  Covenant  of  Grace,  the  Gospel  which  preceded  the  law. 
To  Israel  this  covenant  was  an  outward  sign  that  God  would  give  them  rest  in 
Caanan  ;  and  to  all  of  us  it  is  a  sign  continued  in  Christian  baptism,  and  a  seal 
that  "God  is  not  ashamed  to  be  called  their  God,  for  He  hath  prepared  for  them  a 
city,"  This  rite  of  circumcision  was  performed  by  the  cutting  off  of  the  flesh  of 
the  foreskin  ;  this  was  cut  off  and  cast  away,  to  show  tliat  the  body  of  the  sins  of 
the  flesh  must  be  put  off;  a  list  of  what  some  of  these  are  we  have  in  Col.  iii.  5. 
On  this  account  we  are  told  in  Deut.  x.  16,  "Circumcise  the  foreskin  of  your  hearts," 
and  in  the  text,  "  Circumcise  thine  heart."  Ishmael  was  circumcised  although  the 
covenant  was  made  with  Abraham  and  Isaac,  for  the  children  of  believing  parents 
must  be  sealed  with  its  seal  for  the  reasons  given  by  St.  Paul  in  1  Cor.  vii.  14. 
The  act  of  circumcising  the  male  child  was  a  painful  ceremony,  and  was  full  of 
meaning,  suggesting  then  what  the  New  Testament  teaches  now,  ' '  Your  body  is 
the  temple  of  the  Holy  Ghost."  This  rite  of  circumcision  was  administered  to  a 
child  who  could  know  nothing  except  pain.  What  good  was  it  ?  How  unreasonable  ! 
and  how  cruel — we  would  be  prompted  to  ask.  Following  our  own  reason,  no  child 
would  have  received  the  rite;  but  we  should  remember  what  Locke  says,  "What- 
ever is  Divine  revelation  ought  to  overrule  all  our  opinions,  prejudices,  and  interests, 
and  hath  a  right  to  be  received  with  full  assent.  Such  a  submission  as  this  of  our 
reason  to  faith,  takes  not  away  the  landmarks  of  knowledge,  this  shakes  not  the 
foundations  of  reason,  but  leaves  us  that  use  of  our  faculties  for  which  they  were 
given  us."  But  God's  commands  upon  this  subject  far  outstrip  man's  reason  and 
man's  feelings  upon  the  subject.  For  there  was  a  penalty  attached  to  disobedience  ; 
the  child  not  circumcised  was  to  be  cut  off  from  his  people,  he  was  to  die.  In  Col. 
ii.  11,  12,  we  are  told  this  of  baptism,  which  now  answers  to  the  rite  of  circum- 
cision, "In  whom  also  ye  are  circumcised  with  the  circumcision  made  without 
hands  in  putting  off  the  body  of  the  sins  of  the  flesh  by  the  circumcision  of  Christ. 
Buried  with  Him  in  baptism,  wherein  also  ye  are  risen  with  Him,  through  the  faith 
of  the  operation  of  God,  who  hath  raised  Him  from  the  dead."  This  rite  of  baptism 
is  equally  for  babes  as  well  as  for  those  of  mature  years,  even  for  those  only 
a  few  weeks  old.  Parents  ought  to  see  that  their  children  receive  it.  I  shall 
now  endeavour  to  show  you  in  what  two  points  circumcision  differs  from  baptism. 

1.  Baptism  in  its  literal  sense,  taken  as  an  outward  rite,  is  of  universal  and  continual 
obligation,  that  is,  as  long  as  this  dispensation  (the  dispensation  of  the  Spirit)  lasts, 
though  it  is  only  in  the  first  of  these  that  it  differs  from  circumcision.  2.  Taken 
in  its  literal  sense,  circumcision  was  the  initiatory  rite  of  the  old  covenant,  as  baptism 
is  of  the  new  ;  both  are  placed  at  the  threshold  of  church  privileges.  In  circum- 
cision a  man  was  pledged  to  keep  the  whole  law  (Gal.  v.  3),  whereas  in  baptism  a 
man  is  pledged  to  put  on  Christ.  The  case  of  the  Ethiopian  eunuch.  As  there  are 
two  points  of  difference  between  circumcision  and  baptism,  there  are  on  the  other 
hand  three  points  of  resemblance.  1.  In  a  spiritual  sense  both  have  the  same 
signification,  both  point  to  the  renewal  of  the  heart,  which  is  requind  of  all. 

2.  Neither  circumcision  nor  baptism  are  of  value  as  mere  rites,  unaccomjjanied  by 
the  spiritual  grace  which  they  typify  ;  "For  in  Christ  Jesus  neither  circum- 
cision availeth  anything,  nor  un circumcision,   but  faith  which  worketh  l>y  love." 

3.  "  Baptism  doth  also  save  us  (not  the  putting  away  of  the  filth  of  the  flesh,  but  the 
answer  of  a  good  conscience  towards  God)  by  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ.'* 
Above  all,  the  Spirit  of  God  is  all  essential.  The  truths  which  circumcision  teach 
us,  and  the  blessings  of  which  it  was  the  pledge,  are  the  birthright  of  every  real 
child  of  God.  It  taught  what  baptism  now  teaches  us,  the  total  dejiravity  of  the 
human  nature,  its  inability  to  please  God,  and  its  unfitness  to  partake  of  His 
mercy.  Circumcision  was  also  like  onr  initiatory  sacrament  baptism — a  sign  and 
pledge  of  the  remedy  which  infinite  love  has  devised  for  the  depravity  of  the  heart. 
"  A  new  heart  will  I  give  you,  and  a  new  spirit  will  I  put  within  you."  "  I  will 
be  their  God,  and  they  shall  be  My  people."  All  these  blessings  are  now  com- 
municated to  every  genuine  member  of  the  Christian  Church.  Our  blessed  Lord 
therefore  submitted  to  the  rite  of  circumcision.  It  was  riglit  that  He  should  bear 
the  evidence  of  being  a  descendant  of  Abraham  according  to  the  flesh.  Although 
He  had  no  personal  pollution  to  put  off,  yet  His  submitting  to  circumcision  was 
an  essential  part  of  His  humiliation,  and  of  the  obedience  by  which  He  fulfilled  all 
righteousness.  It  was  also  one  of  those  sacred  actions  in  which  He  sustained  the 
character  of  the  representative  of  His  people.     Now,  ynhaX  are  we  to  learn  from 


470  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxx. 

all  this,  and  more  especially  those  that  are  parents  and  guardians  ?  As  circum- 
cision was  originally  an  admission  unto  covenant  relationship  with  God,  Jesus,  the 
Son  of  the  Highest,  submitted  to  it  the  eighth  day,  when  Joseph  exercised  his 
parental  right  over  Jesus,  as  man,  in  giving  Him  His  name,  and  by  His  baptism 
by  St.  John,  He  fulfilled  the  law  by  obedience.  From  the  manger  at  Bethlehem  to 
the  Cross  on  Calvary,  He  did  the  will  of  God  till  it  was  finished.  What  an  example 
for  us  all  to  follow  in  His  blessed  steps.  In  order  to  do  so,  we  must  see  that  our 
hearts  are  circumcised.  In  like  manner  baptism  as  the  covenant  of  grace,  of  which 
it  is  the  symbol,  is  higher  than  that  of  the  law,  with  greater  privileges  and  blessings. 
How  shall  we  escape  if  we  neglect  so  great  salvation  ?  The  last  act  of  grace  is,  as 
the  promise  under  our  consideration  implies,  ensured  by  the  first  act  of  grace.  The 
primary  change  of  heart  effected  by  the  operation  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  is  the  pledge 
of  the  final  accomplishment  of  the  purposes  of  sovereign  love.  "The  Lord  thy  God 
will  circumcise  thy  heart  that  thou  mayest  live."  (C.  T.  Buchanan.)  The 
circumcision  of  the  heart :  a  description  of  true  religion : — I.  The  purity  of  its 
CHAKACTER  :  "The  Lord  thy  God  wiU  circumcise  thine  heart,"  &c.  Circumcision 
was  originally  instituted  to  ratify  the  covenant  which  the  Lord  made  with  Abraham 
His  faithful  servant  (Gen.  xvii.  10,  11).  It  subsequently  became  a  distinguishing 
and  standing  rite  in  the  Jewish  Church.  It  was  an  outward  and  typical  sign  of 
an  internal  and  spiritual  grace.  Hence  we  read  of  **  the  circumcision  of  the  flesh 
made  with  hands,"  and  also  of  "the  heart  made  without  hands,"  by  Jesus  Christ. 
Circumcision,  therefore,  of  the  heart  implies  —  1.  The  renovation  of  its  moral 
powers.  Human  nature  is  totally  depraved,  and  every  man's  heart  is  "  desperately 
wicked."  Hence  we  must  be  spiritually  circumcised  and  made  holy,  or  we  can- 
not enter  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven  (Heb.  xii.  14).  This  inward  circumcision 
includes  a  deliverance  from  the  power  and  pollution  of  sin,  and  an  actual  par- 
ticipation of  the  Divine  nature.  2.  The  special  result  of  Divine  operation.  "The 
Lord  thy  God  will,  &c.,  and  the  heart  of  the  seed,"  who  shall  believe  in  His 
name.  He  only  is  able  to  achieve  this  great  and  glorious  change.  II.  The 
EXCELLENCY  OF  ITS  PRINCIPLE:  " To  love  the  Lord  thy  God,"  &c.  Purity  of 
heart  is  invariably  accompanied  with  the  principle  of  Divine  love.  When  grace 
becomes  predominant,  it  sways  the  whole  empire  of  the  soul,  and  reigns  through 
righteousness  unto  eternal  life.  The  object  which  the  believer's  love  embraces, 
"The  Lord  thy  God."  1.  His  essential  character  demands  our  love.  He  is 
the  Lord — the  uncreated,  infinite,  and  eternal  Jehovah.  2.  His  relative  character 
also  demands  our  love.  He  is  thy  God — not  only  Creator,  Legislator,  Bene- 
factor, but  also  Redeemer,  Saviour,  Portion.  Thine  by  innumerable  obligations, 
relations,  and  endearments :  by  right,  by  purchase,  by  covenant,  by  adoption, 
by  enjoyment,  by  profession,  and  by  anticipation.  3.  The  degree  to  which  the 
believer's  love  extends.  "With  all  thy  heart,  and  with  all  thy  soul."  (1)  It 
must  be  sincere,  and  not  in  word  and  tongue  only,  but  in  deed  and  in  truth. 
(2)  Intense,  not  a  lukewarm  and  languishing  desire,  but  a  vigorous  and  hallowing 
flame,  ever  burning  on  the  altar  of  the  heart.  (3)  Supreme,  admitting  no  rival,  but 
refining  and  regulating  all  subordinate  attachments  to  inferior  objects.  (4)  Entire 
in  its  character,  casting  out  all  tormenting  fear,  reaching  to  all  the  faculties  of  the 
soul,  and  engaging  all  the  powers  and  energies  of  the  mind.  (5)  Progressive, 
"abounding  yet  more  and  more  in  knowledge,  and  in  all  judgment,  being  rooted 
and  grounded  in  love,  and  filled  with  all  the  fulness  of  God  "  (Eph.  iii.  17-19). 
III.  The  FELICITY  OF  ITS  SUBJECTS.  "That  thou  mayest  live."  This  assertion 
aSbrds  both  instruction  and  encouragement.  It  plainly  intimates  the  destruc- 
tive tendency  of  sin,  and  the  quickening  and  saving  efiicacy  of  Divine  grace. 
1.  The  misery  of  the  impenitent  is  fairly  implied.  Life's  opposite  is  death  :  and 
those  who  lose  the  former  must  endure  the  latter.  The  -wicked  are  already  legally 
dead  by  the  condemning  sentence  of  the  law,  are  spiritually  dead  in  trespasses  and 
sins  ;  and  except  they  speedily  repent,  they  will  eternally  perish.  2.  The  reward 
of  the  righteous  is  Divinely  promised :  "That  thou  mayest  live."  This  gracious 
promise  is  very  comprehensive.  It  not  merely  includes  a  negative  deliverance  from 
a  death  of  sin,  but  is  also  expressive  of  the  peculiar  excellency  and  perpetuity 
of  religion  as  a  principle  of  spiritual  and  eternal  life.  We  may  conclude  by  observ- 
ing— 1.  The  necessity  of  personal  purity,  without  which  the  external  ordinances  of 
Christianity  are  insufficient  and  unprofitable.  And — 2.  The  exalted  character  and 
blessedness  of  the  pious,  as  participants  of  saving  grace,  and  heirs  of  the  glorious 
"inheritance  of  the  saints  in  light."  {Sketches  of  Four  Hundred  Sermons.)  Cir- 
cumcision of  heart  .—I.  The  blessing  to  be  bestowed — circumcision  of  heart. 


CHAP.  XXX.]  DEUTERONOMY,  471 

I.  The  truths  which  circumcision  taught,  and  the  blessings  of  which  it  was  the 
pledge,  are  the  birthright  of  every  real  child  of  God.  2.  All  these  blessings  are 
communicated  to  every  genuine  member  of  the  Christian  Church  through  Christ. 
A  circumcised  Saviour  affords  a  pledge  of — (1)  A  perfect  obedience  on  behalf  of  His 
people.  (2)  The  putting  away  of  the  guilt  of  sin.  (3)  The  personal  and  internal 
circumcision  which  distinguishes  all  the  real  children  of  God.  3.  God,  as  sovereign, 
retains  to  Himself  the  application  of  these  blessings.  4.  Their  extension  to  the  seed 
of  those  who  partake  of  this  spiritual  circumcision  is  a  further  illustration  of  God's 
sovereignty  and  benignity  towards  His  people.  II.  Its  immediate  result  :  love 
TO  God.  1.  The  source  of  this  love  :  God  Himself.  2.  The  ground  on  which  He 
lays  claim  to  it — (1)  His  absolute  excellencies.  (2)  His  particular  relations.  3.  Its 
extent  and  intensity.  "We  must  love  God  with  all  our  heart.  III.  Its  ultimate 
ISSUE  ;  everlasting  life.  A  life  of — 1.  Enjoyment.  2.  Activity.  3.  Growth. 
4.  Permanency.  Learn — 1.  The  due  distinction  between  the  symbolical  and 
spiritual.  2.  The  blessed  character  of  true  religion.  {J.  HUl,  M.A.)  The  tribe 
circumcision: — I.  The  Author  of  it.  "The  Lord  thy  God."  He  alone  can  deal 
effectively  with  our  heart,  and  take  away  its  carnality  and  pollution.  II.  Where 
IT  IS  wrought.  It  is  not  of  the  flesh,  but  of  the  spirit.  It  is  the  essential  mark  of 
the  covenant  of  grace.  III.  The  result.  "That  thou  mayest  live."  To  be 
carnally  minded  is  death.  In  the  overcoming  of  the  flesh  we  find  life  and  peace. 
(C  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Yers.  11-14.  Tills  commandment  ...  is  not  Mdden. — Three  characteristics  of 
salvation: — I.  Clearness.  "With  the  heart  man  believeth  unto  righteousness." 
"Ah,"  you  say,  "  there  it  comes  in  again.  Whenever  we  go  elsewhere  the  intellect 
is  exalted."  And  then  you  feel  that  the  Church  is  to  be  condemned.  But  a  man's 
brains  are  not  the  wisest  part  of  him  ;  there  is  a  great  deal  about  a  man  that  is  wiser 
than  his  brains.  Thank  God  for  that !  He  has  insights,  intuitions,  sympathies, 
that  are  as  reliable  as  the  testimony  of  the  senses  or  the  inferences  of  logic.  We 
cannot  know  God  intellectually.  "  God  is  great,"  as  Job  says,  "  and  we  know  Him 
not. "  Are  we  then  to  be  Agnostics  ?  Oh,  no  !  There  is  another  way  of  interpre- 
tation. John  Bunyan  had  a  blind  daughter.  She  lived  much  with  him  ;  he  was 
very  fond  of  her.  They  said  he  would  not  let  the  wind  blow  on  her.  She  never  saw 
Bunyan  ;  it  was  impossible  for  her  to  comprehend  his  genius  ;  she  was  pathetically 
incapable  of  reading  his  books.  But  will  anybody  in  this  place  tell  me  that  that 
blind  girl  did  not  know  Bunyan  ?  She  did  not  know  him  visually,  did  not  know 
him  historically  or  technically,  but  she  knew  Bunyan ;  she  knew  the  man,  and 
looked  into  his  heart.  With  the  heart  man  knows  God.  And  so  Paul  says  it  is  by 
the  heart  that  you  are  to  understand  the  redemption  that  is  in  Christ.  You  are  not 
to  follow  it  out  as  a  scholar,  not  to  master  it  as  a  reasoner,  but  with  the  instinct  of 
the  soul  you  are  to  grasp  the  love  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus.  "  Ah,"  you  say,  "  it  is 
the  old  thing  over  again.  Whenever  we  go  to  a  school,  to  an  institution,  it  is  the 
old  intellect,  it  is  science;  but  as  soon  as  ever  we  come  here,  it  is  sympathy." 
What !  you  understand  nature  by  science  ?  You  understand  nature  a  long  while 
before  you  are  a  scientist,  and  a  great  many  people  have  a  wonderful  delight  in 
nature  who  have  never  had  a  tincture  of  science.  A  little  child  gets  at  it,  and  the 
poet,  the  painter,  without  any  technical  knowledge  or  mastery  whatever.  I  tell  you, 
there  are  thousands  of  people  in  this  country  who  enjoy  the  sunshine— when  they 
get  it — but  they  do  not  know  anything  about  astronomy.  Their  heart  leaps  up 
when  they  behold  a  rainbow  in  the  sky,  but  they  do  not  know  anything  about 
optics.  And  just  as  it  is  with  your  apprehension  of  nature,  so  it  is  with  your 
apprehension  of  God,  of  Christ,  of  the  mercies  that  have  been  declared  in  Christ 
Jesus  to  perishing  men.  Why,  there  is  no  greater  mistake  than  for  a  man  to  preach 
Christianity  philosophically  and  theologically.  When  I  look  at  the  sky  I  can  see  it 
is  the  sky  ;  there  is  the  sun,  the  moon,  and  the  stars,  it  is  superb.  But  when  I  take 
an  astronomical  book  down  and  look  at  the  sky  they  have  covered  the  page 
•with  strange  figures.  There  is  the  Ship,  and  the  Whale,  and  the  Swan,  and  the 
Little  Bear,  and  the  Great  Bear,  and  a  good  many  other  things,  and  I  should  not 
know  it  was  the  sky  if  they  were  not  to  write  underneath,   "This  is  the  sky." 

II.  Nearness.  All  the  best  things  are  near  us,  as  your  poet  tells  you, — a  man's  best 
things  are  nearest  to  him,  close  about  his  feet.  The  things  that  you  cannot  get  are 
the  things  you  do  not  need.  I  do  like  that  idea  of  the  country  people,  to  the  effect 
that  if  there  is  any  disease  in  a  neighbourhood  there  is  sure  to  be  a  remedy  if  you 
have  only  the  wit  to  find  it.     They  say  that  the  bane  and  the  antidote  always 


472  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxx, 

go  together.  Whether  it  is  a  marshy  district,  a  mountain-side  or  a  flowing  river, 
they  say  that  the  plant  always  grows  close  by  that  cures  the  diseases  peculiar 
to  the  district.  Some  of  our  scholars  of  late  years  have  given  a  good  deal  of  atten- 
tion to  the  sacred  books  of  the  Orientals — the  Hindu,  the  Greek,  and  the  Persian — 
and  I  daresay  have  done  it  with  great  advantage,  but  mind  you,  there  is  no 
necessity  for  us  to  go  to  any  Oriental  oracle  for  God's  last  words  on  the  greatest 
questions.  I  noticed  that  a  traveller  who  had  been  in  Algiers  said  the  other  day  that 
the  natives  of  the  Sahara  have  a  curious  idea  that  Europe  is  a  waterless  waste,  and 
the  reason  why  travellers  go  to  the  Sahara  is  that  they  may  find  a  spring  of  water. 
Of  course,  if  they  had  lived  here  a  little  lately  they  would  have  known  better ! 
What  with  our  flowing  rivers,  our  weeping  skies,  and  our  brimming  reservoirs,  we 
do  not  need  to  go  to  Algerian  deserts  for  a  spring  of  water.  And  I  tell  you  that 
whatever  purpose  may  be  served  by  our  great  scholars  going  to  Oriental  countries, 
we  need  not  go  there  for  the  vital  truth  that  saves  ;  for,  blessed  be  God,  here,  close 
by  us,  is  a  Fountain  of  living  water,  of  which,  if  a  man  shall  drink,  he  shall  never 
thirst  again.  You  know  that  when  the  bad  weather  comes  all  our  rich  people 
leave  us.  They  go  for  the  good  of  their  health,  let  us  hope,  and  if  you  are  rich  you 
are  pretty  nearly  sure  to  have  bad  health,  and  then  leave  us  !  They  go  to 
Algiers,  they  go  to  Egypt,  they  go  to  Malta,  they  go  to  the  Nile,  they 
go  to  the  South  of  France,  and  they  leave  us  to  the  fogs  of  London, 
and  we  have  to  get  on  as  best  we  may.  We  have  not  the  leisure  nor  the 
resources  to  go  away.  But  what  a  lovely  thing  it  is  when  we  come  to  need 
a  spiritual  specific,  when  we  need  a  remedy  for  the  wrong  of  our  spirits,  that 
we  need  not  cross  the  sea,  for  it  is  here.  "  Lo,  God  is  here,  and  I  knew  it  not."  He 
has  been  talking  to  you  for  years,  persuading  you  to  a  nobler  life.  Your  great 
diflSculty  has  not  been  to  find  Christ,  your  great  difficulty  has  been  to  keep  Him  out. 
Did  you  not  notice  when  I  read  the  lesson  that  the  apostle  speaks  of  men  who  go 
about  seeking  to  establish  their  own  righteousness,  go  about  restless,  dissatisfied, 
wandering  ?  You  never  knew  a  flower  go  a-gypsying  to  find  the  sun.  A  flower  never 
goes  on  a  voyage  of  circumnavigation  to  look  after  a  bee  or  a  butterfly.  It  never 
strikes  its  tent  and  wanders  about  looking  for  the  dew.  Everything  comes  to  it,  and 
all  that  the  flower  has  to  do  is  to  open  its  heart  and  take  in  the  sweet  influences  of 
the  sky,  and  everything  that  you  want,  the  light  to  illuminate,  the  grace  to  save, 
the  power  to  perfect,  the  peace  that  passeth  all  understanding,  the  hope  that  is  full 
of  glory — everything  is  near  to  you,  and  all  that  you  have  to  do  at  this  very 
moment  is  to  open  your  heart  and  take  it  in.  III.  Freeness.  (  W.  L.  Watkinson. ) 
The  basis  of  belief: — The  writer  of  this  book — the  second  giving  of  the  law — 
declares,  then,  that  the  law  is  primarily  in  the  heart  of  man.  It  is  not  outside  of 
him — brought  to  him ;  it  is  within  him.  As  the  printer  takes  the  white  sheet 
of  paper,  on  which  nothing  is  written,  and  presses  it  against  the  bosom  of  the  type 
and  lifts  it  oflf,  and  there  is  written  what  was  on  the  type,  so  the  heart  of  man  is 
pressed  against  the  bosom  of  Almighty  God,  and  on  the  heart  of  humanity  itself  is 
written  the  Divine  law  transferred  thereto.  And  what  is  true  of  the  law  of  God  is 
true  of  the  Gospel  of  God  and  of  all  religious  truth.  Not  all  the  truth  that 
is  educed  from  religion,  but  all  religious  truth,  is  in  the  heart  of  humanity,  and 
brought  out  from  the  heart  of  humanity  by  the  providence,  the  influence,  or 
the  ministry  of  God.  We  know  some  things  by  reason  of  our  external  observation. 
They  are  not  proved  to  us,  they  are  brought  to  us  by  our  senses.  But  all  that 
science  can  do  is  to  examine,  to  classify,  to  investigate,  to  arrange,  to  study 
the  phenomena  that  are  thus  brought  to  us  by  our  observation.  Our  eyes  bring  to 
us  the  trees  and  the  flowers :  out  of  them  science  makes  botany.  Our  observation 
brings  to  us  the  stairs :  out  of  them  science  educes  astronomy.  In  an  analogous 
method,  the  soul's  eyes  bring  to  us  knowledge  of  great,  transcendent  facts  which 
lie  in  the  inner  world.  Theology  (which  is  the  science  of  religion)  cannot  create 
them,  any  more  than  natural  science  can  create  natural  phenomena.  All  that 
theology  can  do  is  to  examine,  to  investigate.  We  know  the  facts  of  the  inner  life 
by  the  inner  testimony,  as  we  know  the  facts  of  the  outer  life  by  the  outer  testi- 
mony. If  we  do  not  know,  it  is  because  w6  are  dead.  If  a  man  does  not  know  there 
are  trees  and  flowers,  he  is  blind.  What  he  wants  is  not  argument,  but  an  oculist. 
All  that  the  logical  faculty  can  do  is  to  deal  with  the  facts  which  the  observation 
"witliout  or  the  observation  within  brings  to  our  cognisance.  It  is  thus  that  we 
know  that  there  is  a  difference  between  right  and  wrong.  We  know  that  there  is 
righteousness  and  unrighteousness,  as  we  know  that  there  is  the  beautiful  and  the 
Ugly,  the  true  and  the  false.     This  is  a  fundamental  fact     It  is  not  brought  to  us 


CHAP.  XXX.]  DEUTERONOMY.  473 

by  any  external  revelation  ;  it  is  not  in  the  heaven  above  and  brought  down  to  us  • 
it  is  not  across  the  sea  and  brought  over  to  us ;  it  is  within  the  soul  and  heart 
of  man— he  knows  it.     Knowing  this,  he  may  analyse,  he  may  study,  the  nature  of 
the  diflFerence.     This  is  the  anchor-ground   of  religion— we  know  that  there  is 
righteousness.     It  is  the  foundation  on  which  everything  else  is  built.    In  precisely 
the  same  way,  the  great  majority  of  men  have  some  inward  consciousness  of  Goa. 
They  have  some  inward  consciousness  of  a  help  on  which  they  can  lay  hold  and  by 
which  they  can  be  aided.     This  consciousness  does  not  define  God  to  them.     This 
consciousness  of  God  within  us  we  analyse,  we  examine,  and  the  result  of  our 
investigations,  we  call  theology.     It  is  our  creed.     It  may  be  right.     It  may  be 
wrong.     As  a  tree  is  something  different  from  a  definition  of  a  tree,  and  a  flower  is 
something  difll"erent  from  a  definition  of  a  flower,  and  a  star  is  something  different 
from  the  description  of  a  star,  so  God  is  different  from  our  theological  definitions  of 
God.     And  we  have  not  to  go  back  four  thousand  years  to  get  the  testimony  of 
Moses  that  there  was  a  God.     Our  belief  in  Christ  is  something  more  than  a 
historical  or  theological  belief.     We  believe  in  righteousness,  and  when  we  read  this 
life  of  Christ  we  see  there  righteousness  luminous  and  eloquent.     We  believe  in 
God,  and  as  we  read  this  life  we  see  the  masked  God  withdrawing  His  mask,  and 
letting  His  own  face  shine  through.    The  world  thought  power  was  Divine,  majesty 
was  Divine,  justice  was  Divint^,  greatness  was  Divine  ;  and  then  there  came  One  upon 
the  earth,  without  power,  and  without  external  majesty,  and  without  the  signs  and 
symbols  of  greatness  ;  but  He  was  patient,  gentle,  heroic,  sympathetic— nay,  more, 
He  rejoiced  to  bear  not  only  the  sorrows  but  the  sins  of  others.     And  when  that  life 
was  held  up  before  humanity,  humanity  said.  That  is   the   Divinest  yet ;   there 
is  more  majesty  in  love  than  in  power,  there  is  more  strength  in  patience  than 
in   force.     The   heart   of  htimanity   answered   to   the   portraiture   of  Christ,  and 
responded  to  it.     If,  when  that  life  is  held  up  before  a  man,  he  says,  "  I  do  not  see 
anything  beautiful  in  that  life  ;  there  is  nothing  in  it  that  attracts  me.     I  would 
have  liked  Him  better  if  He  had  made  a  fortune  ;  I  would  have  thought  more  of  Him 
if  He  had  organised  an  army  ;  I  should  have  some  admiration  for  Him  if  He  had  lived 
the  life  of  a  statesman  ;  I  do  not  care  for  Christ ;  give  me  Napoleon  Bonaparte,"  you 
cannot  argue  with  him.     In  him  is  lacking  moral  life,  not  understanding.     There 
are  not  a  few  in  our  time  who  are  asking  for  the  evidence  of  immortality.     They 
study  nature,  and  evolution,  and  the  Scriptures,  and  buttress,  by  these  methods,  a 
frail  faith  in  immortality.     The  witness  is  in  ourselves.     Not  a  witness  that  we  are 
going  to  live  for  ever.     That  is  not  immortality.   The  witness  is  in  ourselves  that  we 
are  something  more  than  the  physical  organisation  which  we  inhabit.     What  is  the 
fundamental  evidence  of  immortality?    To  live  a  life  that  is  worth  being  immortal. 
If  we  are  living  in  the  sphere  of  the  immortal,  we  know  where  we  are  living.     W« 
know  what  we  are  if  we  are  living  in  the  realm  of  faith,  and  hope,  and  love.     We 
know  that  this  spiritual  life  does  not  depend  on  the  physical  organisation.     So  our 
faith  in  the  Bible,  in  its  foundation,  is  this  :  There  is  that  in  us  which  answers  to 
that  which  is  in  the  Bible.     If  there  is  nothing  in  us  which  answers  to  that  which 
is  in  the  Bible,  we  shall  not  get  a  faith  in  the  Bible  by  argument.     We  need  a  new 
life.     The  moral  life  in  us  responds  to  the  record  of  the  moral  life  in  this  Old  Testa- 
ment and  this  New  Testament ;  and  if  there  is  nothing  in  us  which  does  respond,  it 
is  life  that  is  lacking.     We  are  not  to  go  up  into  the  heavens  to  bring  down 
the  message,  nor  to  cross  the  sea  to  search  for  it.     In  our  own  hearts  we  are  to  find 
the  witness  of  God.     {Lyman  Abbott,  D.D.)  The  Bible  in  itself  .-—The  Bible  is 

more  acknowledged  than  believed  ;  and  where  it  is  believed,  in  the  ordinary 
acceptation  of  the  word,  it  seldom  gives  that  decision  to  our  purposes,  that  spring  to 
our  actions,  which  it  ought  to  give.     I.  First,  then,  as  to  the  closeness  with 

WHICH  IT   addresses   THE  SOUL,  AND   THE    PATERNAL  FAMILIARITY  OF  ITS  STYLE. 

Why  is  it  that  sensible  persons  rejoice  in  having  a  pious,  well-informed  and 
accessible  neighbour?  It  seems  almost  childish  to  ask.  But  the  answer  is, 
"Because  his  word  is  very  nigh  unto  them":  because  they  have  the  benefit  of 
his  counsel,  his  stock  of  knowledge,  which  is  freely  and  benevolently  open  to  them, 
and  they  are  sure  that  at  all  times  he  will  be  influenced  by  upright  and  con- 
scieritious  motives  in  advising  them.  But  there  is  more  than  this  in  it.  They  look 
to  his  example — to  his  thoughts  and  sayings  carried  out  in  his  actions.  They  are 
conscious  of  its  influence  on  themselves  and  those  around  them  ;  and  they  value  it. 
And  the  nearer  it  is  to  them — the  more  available  it  also  is  to  them  and  the 
more  influential;  yes,  even  when  through  perversity  they  struggle  against  its 
influence.     Now,  the  Word  of  God  is  such  a  neighbour,  only  of  infinite  instead 


474  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxx. 

of  finite,  of  Divine  instead  of  human  wisdom,  goodness,  and  power  of  exhortation. 
It  is,  as  the  text  says,  "very  nigh  unto  us.  "  I  do  not  take  the  words  figuratively. 
I  mean  that  it  is,  by  its  very  cast  and  structure,  by  its  very  form  and  style,  nigh  to 
us,  at  hand  to  our  hearts  and  minds,  to  our  understandings  and  feelings.  It  is  nigh 
as  a  teacher  :  it  is  nigh  as  a  counsellor  :  it  is  nigh  as  a  setter  forth  of  example.  Con- 
sider how  largely,  too,  God  speaks  in  the  Bible  to  man  by  man  ;  I  do  not  mean 
merely  through  the  pen  of  man,  for  that,  of  course,  is  true  of  all  Scripture,  but  by 
the  speech  of  man  as  man,  partaking  of  all  our  natural  views,  feelings,  hopes,  fears. 
What  a  familiar  tone,  without  lowering  any  of  its  dignity,  does  the  Word  of  God 
thus  take  with  us  !  How  "very  nigh"  it  comes  to  us  !  II.  The  second  I  would 
take  occasion  to  illustrate  from  the  words  "  in  thy  mouth"  :  "The  Word  is  very 
nigh  thee,  in  thy  mouth."  It  was  said  that  this  indicates  that  the  Word  of  God  waa 
to  be  avowedly  our  counsellor.  We  were  intended  to  cite  it  as  commandment  and 
promise  to  us,  as  our  law  and  Gospel.  This  is  clearly  laid  down  and  exemplified.  It 
will  be  remembered  how  emphatically  it  was  charged  Joshua  :  "This  book  of  the  law 
shall  not  depart  out  of  thy  mouth  "  (Josh,  i.  8  ;  Psa.  cxix.  46).  What  was  the  con- 
viction which  sustained  the  martyrs  of  old  in  their  freedom  of  speech,  in  bonds,  and 
at  the  stake  ?  Was  it  not  this,  that  it  was  not  their  own  word,  but  the  Word  of 
God,  which  they  had  in  their  mouths  ?  III.  The  next  clause  in  our  text  descends  to 
WHERE  THAT  POWER  CENTRES  AND  FIXES  ITSELF  :  "And  in  thy  heart."  Again  the 
Psalmist  is  our  expounder :  "Thy  Word  have  I  hid  in  my  heart"  (Psa.  cxix.  11) ; 
"Thy  law  is  within  my  heart"  (Psa.  xl.  8).  The  patriarch  Job  had  counselled 
this  :  ' '  Lay  up  God's  words  in  thy  heart "  (Job  xxii.  22).  And  here  seems  to  be  the 
place  in  which  we  may  aptly  refer  to  the  application  of  our  text  by  the  same  apostle 
writing  to  the  Romans  (chap.  x.  6-10).  Yes,  it  is  to  be  heart- work— the  Word  "in 
the  heart " — else  it  will  be  of  no  purpose  that  it  be  in  the  mouth.  But  is  it  so  con- 
stituted as  to  speak  to  the  heart,  to  go  to  the  heart  ?  That  is  the  question  to  our 
present  purpose.  It  is  ;  after  an  inimitable  manner,  and  with  inimitable  force.  So 
then  is  the  Word  of  inspiration  framed  to  be  embraced  by  aff"ections  though  they 
may  be  debased,  and  to  dwell  in  them  though  they  be  yet  enslaved.  IV.  Now,  in 
the  last  place,  the  emphatical  passage  which  is  guiding  our  reflections  asserts  that 
"the  Word  is  very  nigh  unto  us  that  we  may  do  it."  This  pronounces  obedience 
to  it  to  be  the  necessary  proof  of  a  believing  reception  of  it.  Most  amply  is  this 
test  elsewhere  recognised  in  it.  "Ye  have  seen  that  I  have  talked  with  you  from 
heaven"  (Exod.  xx.  22),  said  the  Lord  to  the  children  of  Israel:  "Ye  shall  there- 
fore keep  My  statutes  and  My  judgments"  (Lev.  xviii.  5).  And  they  said,  "All 
that  the  Lord  hath  spoken  we  will  do  "  (Exod.  xix.  8).  "  Be  ye  doers  of  the  Word, 
and  not  hearers  only"  (James  i.  22),  is  a  precept  as  ancient  as  the  Word  itself. 
But  our  inquiry  is,  whether  it  be  invested  with  any  impressiveness,  exclusively 
its  own,  of  a  practical  tendency.  For,  if  so,  in  this  most  important  respect,  too, 
the  Bible  will  be  its  own  witness.  The  answer  is.  Come  and  see !  Who  indeed 
is  he  that  overcometh  the  world,  but  he  that  believeth  that  Jesus  is  the  Son  of 
God?  (1  John  v.  5.)  Now  "faith  cometh  by  hearing,  and  hearing  by  the  Word 
of  God  "(Rom.  x.  17).  I  have  thus  endeavoured  to  show  that  the  Bible  in  itself, 
being  an  inspired  composition,  is  thereby  endued  with  an  influential  bearing, 
close  and  direct,  upon  the  affections  and  conduct,  as  well  as  on  the  profession, 
of  all  who  really  study  it,  or  listen  to  it  with  any  willingness,  even  a  passive 
willingness,  to  profit  by  it.  The  Bible,  as  those  who  are  most  grateful  for  it 
will  most  readily  own,  is  but  the  instrument  of  God's  Holy  Spirit.  And 
it  is  not  an  instrument  that  will  act  mechanically  on  the  soul :  there  must 
be  prayer,  continual  prayer,  as  the  Bible  itself  teaches,  for  its  progressive 
operation  upon  us.     {W.   Dalby,  M.A.)  Plain  Gospel  for  plain  people : — 

What  is  meant  by  these  words  is  this — that  the  way  of  salvation  is  plain 
and  clear;  it  is  not  concealed  among  the  mysteries  of  heaven.  But  the  way 
of  salvation  is  brought  home  to  us,  given  to  us  in  a  handy  form,  and  laid  within 
grasp  of  our  understanding.  It  is  a  household  treasure,  not  a  foreign  rarity.  It  is  not 
so  remote  from  ns  that  only  they  can  know  it  who  travel  far  to  make  discoveries, 
neither  is  it  so  sublimely  difficult  that  only  they  can  grasp  it  who  have  soared 
to  heaven  and  ransacked  the  secrets  of  the  book  sealed  with  seven  seals.  It  is 
brought  to  our  doors  like  the  manna,  and  flows  at  our  feet  like  the  water  from  the 
rock.  I.  The  way  of  salvation  is  plain  and  simple.  As  saith  Moses  in  the  last 
verse  of  the  previous  chapter :  "The  secret  things  belong  unto  the  Lord  our  God  ;  but 
those  things  which  are  revealed  belong  unto  us  and  to  our  children  for  ever."  1.  I 
think  we  might  have  expected  this  if  we  consider  the  nature  of  God,  who  has  made 


CHAP.  XXX.]  DEUTERONOMY.  475 

this  wonderful  revelation.  When  God  speaks  to  a  man  with  a  view  to  his  salvation, 
it  is  hut  natural  that  in  His  wisdom  He  should  so  speak  as  to  be  understood.  God, 
who  is  infinitely  wise,  would  not  give  to  us  a  revelation  upon  the  vital  point  of 
salvation,  and  then  leave  it  so  much  in  the  dark  that  it  was  impossible  for  common 
minds  to  comprehend  it  if  they  desired  to  do  so.  God  adapts  means  to  ends,  and 
does  not  allow  men  to  miss  of  heaven  from  lack  of  plainness  on  His  part.  We 
expect  a  plain  and  simple  revelation,  because  God  has  made  a  revelation  perfectly 
adapted  for  its  end,  upon  which  no  improvement  can  be  made.  You  might  have 
expected  this  from  God,  because  of  His  gracious  condescension.  When  He  deigns 
to  speak  with  a  trembling  seeker,  it  is  not  after  the  manner  of  the  incompre- 
hensible doctor,  but  after  the  manner  of  a  father  with  his  child,  desirous  that  his 
child  should  at  once  know  his  father's  mind.  He  breaks  doAvn  His  great  thoughts 
to  our  narrow  capacities  :  He  has  compassion  on  the  ignorant,  and  He  becomes  the 
Teacher  of  babes.  2.  We  might  also  expect  simplicity  when  we  remember  the 
design  of  the  plan  of  salvation.  God  aims  distinctly  by  the  Gospel  at  the  salvation 
of  men.  It  had  need  be  a  simple  Gospel  if  it  is  to  be  preached  to  every  creature. 
Moreover,  we  might  expect  the  Gospel  to  be  very  plain,  because  of  the  many  feeble 
minds  which  else  would  be  unable  to  receive  it.  What,  think  you,  would  become  of 
the  dying  if  the  Gospel  were  intricate  and  complex  ?  How  would  even  the  saints 
derive  consolation  in  death  from  a  labyrinth  of  mysteries  ?  We  should  expect, 
therefore,  from  the  design  of  the  Gospel  to  save  the  many,  and  to  save  even 
the  least  intelligent  of  men,  that  it  should  be  very  simple ;  and  so  we  find  it. 
3.  Furthermore,  we  see  that  it  is  so,  if  we  look  at  its  results.  God's  chosen  are 
usually  a  people  of  honest  and  candid  mind,  who  are  willing  rather  to  believe  than 
to  dispute.  The  Holy  Spirit  has  opened  their  hearts  ;  He  has  not  made  them  subtle 
and  quibbling.  4.  But  I  need  not  argue  from  what  we  expect  or  see ;  I  bid  you 
look  at  the  revelation  itself,  and  see  if  it  be  not  nigh  unto  us.  Even  in  the  days  of 
Moses,  how  plain  some  things  were  !  It  must  have  been  plain  to  every  Israelite 
that  man  is  a  sinner,  else  why  the  sacrifice,  why  the  purgations  and  the  cleansings  ? 
Not  a  day  passed  without  its  morning  and  evening  lambs.  Equally  clear  it  must 
have  been  to  every  Israelite  that  the  faith  which  brings  the  benefit  of  the  great 
sacrifice  is  a  practical  and  o})erative  faith  which  affects  the  life  and  character. 
Continually  were  tbey  exhorted  to  serve  the  Lord  with  their  whole  heart.  So  that, 
dim  as  the  dispensation  may  be  considered  to  have  been  as  compared  with  the 
Gospel  day,  yet  actually  and  positively  it  was  suflSciently  clear.  Even  then  "the 
word  was  nigh"  to  them,  "in  their  mouth  and  in  their  heart."  5.  If  I  may  say 
this  much  of  the  Mosaic  dispensation,  I  may  boldly  assert  that  in  the  Gospel  of 
Christ  the  truth  is  now  made  more  abundantly  manifest.  Moses  brought  the 
moonlight,  but  in  Jesus  the  sun  has  risen,  and  we  rejoice  in  His  meridian  beams. 
II.  The  Woed  has  come  veky  near  to  us.  To  us  all  the  Gospel  has  come  very 
near  :  to  the  inhabitants  of  these  favoured  isles  it  is  emphatically  so.  If  you  perish 
it  is  not  for  want  of  plain  speaking.  The  Word  is  on  your  tongue.  Moses  also 
added,  "and  in  thy  heart."  By  the  heart,  with  the  Hebrews,  is  not  meant  the 
affections,  but  the  inward  parts,  including  the  understanding.  You  can  under- 
stand the  Gospel.  That  whosoever  believes  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  shall  be 
saved,  is  not  a  dark  saying.  III.  The  design  of  this  simplicity  and  near- 
ness OF  the  Gospel  is  that  we  should  receive  it.  Observe  how  the  text 
expressly  words  it — "  The  Word  is  very  nigh  unto  thee,  in  thy  mouth  and  in  thy 
heart,  that  thou  mayest  do  it."  1.  The  Gospel  is  not  sent  to  men  to  gratify  their 
curiosity,  by  letting  them  see  how  other  people  get  to  heaven.  Christ  did  not 
come  to  amuse  us,  but  to  redeem  us.  His  Word  is  not  written  for  om-  astonish- 
ment, but,  * '  These  are  "WTitten,  that  ye  may  believe  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ,  the 
Son  of  God  ;  and  that  believing,  ye  may  have  life  through  His  name."  Ever  has 
the  Gospel  a  present,  urgent,  practical  errand.  It  says  to  each  man,  "I  have  a 
message  from  God  unto  thee."  Observe  again  how  the  text  puts  its  last  address  in 
the  singular.  You  can  hear  it  in  the  plural — "  That  we  may  hear  it,  and  do  it  "  ; 
but  the  actual  doing  is  always  in  the  singular — "  That  thou  mayest  do  it."  2.  As 
the  Word  of  the  Lord  is  not  sent  to  gratify  curiosity,  so  also  it  is  not  sent 
coolly  to  inform  you  of  a  fact  which  you  may  lay  by  on  the  shelf  for  future  use. 
God  does  not  send  you  an  anchor  to  hang  up  in  your  boathouse  ;  but,  as  you  are 
already  at  sea,  He  puts  the  anchor  on  board  for  present  Qse.  The  Gospel  is  sent 
us  as  manna  for  to-day,  to  be  eaten  at  once.  It  is  to  be  our  spending  money  as  well 
as  our  treasure.  3.  It  is  not  sent  to  thee  merely  to  make  thee  orthodox  in  opinion 
as  to  religious  matters,  although  many  persons  seem  to  think  that  this  is  the  one 


476  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxx. 

thing  needful.  Remember  that  perdition  for  the  orthodox  will  be  quite  as  horrible 
as  eternal  ruin  for  tlie  heterodox.  It  will  be  a  dreadful  thing  to  go  to  hell  with  a 
sound  head  and  a  rotten  heart.  Alas  !  I  fear  that  some  of  you  will  only  increase 
your  own  misery  as  you  increase  your  knowledge  of  the  truth,  because  you  do  not 
practise  what  you  know.  "That  thou  mayest  do  it!  "  What  is  to  be  done? 
There  are  two  things  to  be  done.  (1)  First,  that  tliou  believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  as  thy  Saviour.  (2)  The  second  thing  is  that  thou  confess  thy  Lord  with 
thy  mouth.  Avow  thyself  to  be  a  beli(3ver  in  Jesus,  and  a  follower  of  Him.  But 
let  thy  confession  be  sincere  ;  do  not  lie  unto  the  Lord.  Confess  that  thou  art  His 
follower,  because  thou  art  indeed  so  ;  and  henceforth  all  thy  life  bear  thou  His 
Cross  and  follow  Him.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  "V&tj  nigh  unto  thee. — Personal 
religion : — Much  is  said  of  the  importance  of  personal  religion,  as  what  alone  is 
pleasing  to  God,  or  can  secure  human  salvation.  We  should  know  the  precise  meaning 
intended  in  this  expression  ;  and  my  object  will  be  to  define  it.  And,  first,  an  idea 
is  given  in  the  text  and  the  circumstances  connected  with  it — the  idea  that  religion 
consists  in  nothing  external  and  formal,  nor  in  any  sudden  impressions  made  from 
without  upon  the  mind.  Great  revivals  may  bear  away  thousands  on  a  torrent  of 
sympathy  ;  but  it  is  all  in  vain,  if  men  do  not  retire  from  the  tumult  to  the  silent 
culture  of  every  right  disposition  and  the  quiet  practice  of  every  duty  ;  unless  they 
hear  a  still  voice  in  the  soul,  and  retain  a  steady  warmth  there  when  the  noise  has 
ceased  and  the  flames  have  died  away,  as  on  the  ancient  mount  of  revelation.  But 
there  is  yet  a  stricter  meaning  in  the  phrase,  "personal  religion."  Our  duties  may 
be  divided  into  two  great  classes  ;  those  belonging  to  social  connections,  and  those 
included  in  the  mind  itself.  To  the  latter,  personal  religion  has  primary  respect. 
But  there  is  a  third  and  still  closer  view  of  religion,  as  a  personal  thing,  to  which  I 
invite  your  thoughts.  I  believe  it  is  the  Creator's  design,  that  religion  should  be  in 
every  soul  a  peculiar  acquisition,  and  have  a  solitary,  unborrowed  character  ;  so  that 
Christians  should  not  be,  as  we  commonly  suppose  them,  mere  copies  of  each  other, 
but  possess  each  one  an  original  character.  As  the  principle  of  beauty  in  nature 
shows  itself  in  no  monotonous  succession  of  similar  objects,  but  is  displayed  in  a 
thousand  colours  and  through  unnumbered  forms,  so  should  the  principle  of  piety 
ever  clothe  itself  in  some  fresh  trait  and  aspect.  I  say  this  is  the  Creator's  design. 
The  view  I  offer  may  be  made  more  clear  by  considering  some  of  the  proofs  of  this 
design.  1.  The  first  proof  that  each  individual  should  reach  a  peculiar  excellence  is, 
that  each  has  received  a  peculiar  constitution.  Use  faithfully  the  materials  put  into 
your  liands.  Despise  not  nor  faint  before  what  in  them  may  seem  rugged  and  un- 
promising. You  shall  find  nothing  in  them  so  rough  and  hard,  that  patient  toil 
will  not  transform  it  into  shapes  of  wondrous  beauty.  The  house  built  of  light 
materials,  though  soon  erected,  ^vill  not  stand  the  blast  like  that  of  marble,  hewn 
with  long,  exhausting  labour.  Obey  the  maxim  on  the  ancient  oracle,  "  Know 
thyself,"  and  you  will  not  fail  of  tliat  personal  religion  for  which  you  were  made. 
2.  But  again  :  God's  design,  that  every  spirit  should  reach  a  peculiar  excellence, 
is  seen  in  the  dispensations  of  Providence,  as  well  as  in  the  facts  of  creation. 
While  the  general  fortunes  of  humanity  are  the  same,  every  man  receives  his 
peculiar  discipline  from  the  hand  of  God.  Whatever  your  state,  sickness  or  health, 
prosperity  or  misfortune,  view  it  with  no  atheistic  eye,  but  accept  and  use  it  in  the 
culture  of  that  personal  religion  for  which  you  were  made.  3.  Once  more  :  God's 
design,  that  every  soul  should  reach  a  peculiar  and  unborrowed  excellence,  appears 
in  the  fact  that  all  spiritual  exercises,  to  be  genuine,  must  have  a  peculiar  character. 
No  man  can  perform  any  exercise  for  another  in  religion.  Who,  then,  in  view  of 
these  considerations,  has  made  religion  a  personal  thing  ?  He  only  who  knows  his 
own  nature,  and  brings  all  its  powers  and  dispositions  to  contribute  to  the  building 
up  of  a  good  character.  He  only  who  makes  all  the  dispensations  of  Providence,  all 
events  of  joy  and  grief,  conspire  to  guide  him  towards  his  perfection.  He  only 
whose  spiritual  exercises  are  genuine  and  sincere,  consisting  not  in  profession  or 
appearance,  but  expressing  real  convictions,  springing  from  a  strong  consciousness 
of  want,  and  moving  the  deep  places  of  the  soul.  The  man  who  has  formed  these 
habits  will  continually  make  progress  in  strong,  unborrowed  excellence  ;  and  when 
his  time  to  depart  shall  come,  while  earth  loses  a  precious  possession,  it  is  not  too 
much  to  say  that  heaven  itself  shall  gain  a  new  treasure,  inasmuch  as  it  will 
receive  a  character  of  fresh,  original  strength  and  beauty.  But  what  is  the  reliance 
of  those  multitudes  that  make  their  preparation  for  another  world  in  no  such  strict 
and  solemn  way  as  I  have  described  ?  Every  one  must  die  by  himself,  and  go  to  the 
great  bar  alone  ;  and  there  all  the  excellence  of  friends,  all  the  fame  of  forefathers, 


CHAP.  XXX.]  DEUTERONOMY.  477 

will  avail  him  nothing.  The  traveller  in  a  foreign  land  often  feels  sorely  the  loss  of 
that  character  given  him  by  accidental  relations  at  home.  Everything  adventitious 
being  stripped  off,  he  is  thrown  back  upon  his  personal  qualities,  and  must  stand  or 
fall,  according  to  the  judgment  passed  upon  those.  Now,  how  much  more  surely 
must  such  things  forsake  us,  when  we  proceed,  each  one  in  his  own  time,  attended 
by  no  companion,  leaning  on  no  arm  of  flesh,  a  solitary  pilgrim,  on  our  last  journey 
to  the  skies  !  The  heir  of  rich  estates  shall  leave  behind  the  splendour  of  wealth 
and  the  flattery  of  retainers.  Thus  for  every  one  the  question  at  last  will  be,  not  of 
outward  connections,  but  of  personal  character  ;  not  merely  what  religious  institu- 
tions have  you  supported,  but  how  far  have  you  made  religion  itself  a  personal 
thing.  (C.  A.  Bartol.)  Instruction  nigh  at  hand: — A  blacksmith's  wife  in 
Tennessee  recently  handed  to  a  physician  of  the  village  where  she  lived  a  diamond 
ring,  worth  £300,  which  her  husband  had  found  in  the  hoof  of  the  doctor's  horse. 
In  paring  down  the  hoof  to  prepare  it  for  a  new  shoe  his  knife  touched  something 
hard,  which,  on  being  dislodged,  proved  to  be  a  ring,  and  the  honest  man  sent  his 
wife  with  it  to  the  owner  of  the  horse.  It  appeared  that  the  doctor's  daughter  had 
dropped  the  ring  while  out  riding,  and  it  had  lodged  between  the  horse's  hoof  and 
the  shoe,  and  had  remained  there.  She  had  ridden  to  and  fro  many  times  over 
the  road  searching  for  the  lost  gem,  yet  it  had  been  near  her  all  the  time.  The 
search  reminds  us  of  men  who  go  hither  and  thither  consulting  priests,  and  who  read 
theological  treatises  to  find  the  way  to  heaven,  when  all  the  time  instruction  is  nigh 
at  hand.  Moral  teaching  nigh  at  hand : — In  the  original  constitution  of  things,  it 
is  wisely  ordered  that  happiness  should  be  found  everywhere  about  us.  We  do  not 
need  to  have  a  rock  smitten  to  supply  the  thirst  of  the  soul  ;  it  is  not  a  distant 
good  ;  it  exists  in  everything  above,  around,  and  beneath  our  feet ;  and  all  we  want 
is  an  eye  to  discern,  and  a  heart  to  feel  it.  Let  any  one  fix  his  attention  on  a 
moral  truth,  and  it  spreads  out  and  enlarges  its  dimensions  beneath  his  view,  till 
what  seemed  at  first  as  barren  a  proposition  as  words  could  express,  appears  like  an 
interesting  and  glorious  truth,  momentous  in  its  bearings  on  the  destinies  of  men. 
And  so  it  is  with  every  material  thing  ;  let  the  mind  be  intently  fixed  upon  it, 
and  hold  it  in  the  light  of  science,  and  it  gradually  unfolds  new  wonders.  The 
flower  grows  even  more  beautiful  than  when  it  first  opened  its  golden  urn  and 
breathed  its  incense  on  the  morning  air  ;  the  tree,  which  was  before  thought  of  only 
as  a  thing  to  be  cut  down  and  cast  into  the  fire,  becomes  majestic,  as  it  holds  its 
broad  shield  before  the  summer  sun,  or  when  it  stands  like  a  ship,  with  its  sails 
furled,  and  all  made  fast  about  it,  in  preparation  for  the  winter  storm.  {North 
American  Review.) 

Vers.  15-20.  I  have  set  before  thee  this  day  life  and  good,  and  death  and 
evil. — Life  and  good,  death  and  evil : — 1.  The  matter  propounded.  Life  as  the 
end,  good  as  the  means  leading  to  life  ;  or  else,  life,  that  is,  the  enjoyment  of 
God  ;  and  good,  the  felicity  following  it.  2.  The  manner  of  proposing.  Here  is 
good  and  evil,  life  and  death,  put  together,  that  we  may  embrace  the  one  and 
eschew  the  other.  As  the  poets  feign  of  Hercules  when  he  was  young,  virtue 
and  vice  came  to  woo  and  make  court  to  him  ;  virtue,  like  a  sober  chaste  virgin, 
offering  him  labours  with  praise  and  renown  ;  vice,  like  a  painted  harlot,  wooing 
him  with  the  blandishments  of  pleasure.  The  word  exciting  attention,  "See  "  ;  I 
have  done  this  in  order  to  choice  ;  for  so  it  is,  ver.  19,  "Choose  life,  that  both  thou 
and  thy  seed  may  live."  It  is  the  duty  of  the  faithful  servants  of  the  Lord  in  a 
lively  manner  to  set  before  the  people  life  and  death  as  the  fruit  of  good  and  evil. 
Our  work,  the  matter  of  it,  and  the  manner  in  which  we  are  to  propound  it  to  you. 

I.  The  matter  :  we  must  set  befoee  the  people — 1.  Life  and  good.  2.  Death 
and  evil.  This  I  shall  open  in  these  propositions — First,  that  there  is  a  distinction 
between  good  and  evil,  vice  and  virtue.  He  that  doth  not  acknowledge  it  is 
unworthy  the  name,  not  only  of  a  Christian,  but  of  a  man.  Secondly,  the 
matching  these  two,  death  and  evil,  life  and  good.  And  here  I  shall  speak — (1)  of 
the  suitableness  of  the  connection  between  them.  (2)  The  greatness  of  both. 
(3)  The  certainty  of  both  these,   life  and  death,  as  the  fruit  of  good  and  evil. 

II.  The  mannee  how  this  is  to  be  done.  It  must  be  set  forth  with  all  evidence 
and  conviction  as  to  the  reason  of  men,  with  all  earnestness  and  affectionate 
importunity  to  awaken  their  affections.  Use  of  exhortation.  1.  Suffer  us  to 
discharge  our  duty  in  this  kind  (Heb.  xiii.  22).  Would  you  have  us  compound 
with  you,  and  deceive  your  souls  with  a  false  hope,  which  will  leave  you  ashamed 
•when  you  most  need  the  comfort  of  it  ?    Men  would  live  with  the  carnal,  die  with 


478  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap  xxx. 

the  sincere ;  therefore  suffer  us  to  be  earnest  with  you.  2.  The  next  thing  that 
we  exhort  you  to  is  to  believe  the  certainty,  consider  the  weight  and  importance 
of  these  truths,  that  there  is  a  difference  between  good  and  evil,  that  the  fruit  of 
the  one  is  death,  of  the  other  life  ;  and  consider  how  irrational  it  is  for  a  man  to 
love  death  and  refuse  life.  No  man  in  his  right  wits  can  make  a  doubt  which 
to  choose.  {T.  Manton,  D.D.)  Life  or  death: — I.  The  alternative  placed 
BEFORE  ALL  MEN.  Life  01  death — good  or  evil  (Psa.  cvi.  4,  5  ;  1  Cor.  ii.  9  ;  John 
xiv.  1,2;  Isa,  xxxv.  10).  1.  A  choice  must  be  made.  Death  decides  for  us  when 
it  comes  (Luke  xvi.  22,  23  ;  Heb.  ix.  27),  and  it  may  come  in  an  hour  (Mark  xiii. 
35,  37).  2.  The  undecided  are  really  decided  against  God:  therefore  against  "life 
and  good"  (John  v.  40,  iii.  19 ;  2  Tim.  iii.  4,  5  ;  Prov.  i.  24-27).  3.  The  choice, 
however  made,  is  final  and  eternal.  On  the  one  hand  life,  love,  and  happiness 
for  evermore  (John  x.  28).  On  the  other  death  and  evil  eternally  (1  Sam.  ii.  9  ; 
Matt.  V.  41).  n.  The  result  of  decision  for  God  (Heb.  vi.  18-20  ;  1  Tim.  vi. 
12).  1.  Life  (ver.  19).  First  temporal,  as  under  the  law  (Exod.  xx.  12)  ;  then  life 
etenial  (John  x.  10,  xiv.  19  ;  Heb.  vii.  16)  ;  for  Christ,  "who  is  our  life,"  is  eternal 
(Col.  iii.  4).  2.  Love  (ver.  20;  1  John  iv.  8,  16).  "God  is  love,"  therefore  if 
God's  life  be  in  us,  as  John  x.  28,  then  God's  love  must  also  be  in  us.  3.  Obedi- 
ence, "that  thou  mayest  obey  His  voice"  (ver.  20).  Yielding  to  our  Father  the 
obedience  of  love  (2  Thess.  i.  8  ;  Rom.  i.  5  ;  1  Pet.  i.  2 ;  James  i.  23).  4.  To 
dwell  in  the  land  of  promise  (ver.  20).  A  shadow  of  a  better  land — of  an  inlierit- 
ance  that  fadeth  not  (John  xiv.  1,  2  ;  1  Pet.  i.  4,  5).  All  these  blessings  resulting 
from  decision  for  God  and  good  are  not  for  ourselves  only,  but  also  for  our  children 
(ver.  19  ;  Acts  ii.  39).  IIL  The  power  of  this  new  life.  "He  is  thy  life" 
(ver.  20).  He  is  "the  resurrection  and  the  life"  (John  xi.  25,  26).  He  is  "the 
Prince  of  Life  "  (Acts  iii.  15).  "With  Him  is  "  the  fountain  of  life."  Hence  Christ 
Himself  is  the  power  of  the  new  life  (1  John  v.  12).  He  alone  can  by  His  Spirit 
quicken  (John  v.  26).  If  therefore  we  desire  the  life  that  never  fails,  that  cannot 
be  dissolved  (Heb.  vii.  16),  we  must  come  to  Him,  that,  like  St.  Paul,  we  too  may 
say,  "  I  am  crucified  with  Christ,  nevertheless  I  live :  yet  not  I,  but  Christ  liveth 
in  me  "  (Gal.  ii.  19,  20  ;  John  xiv.  6 ;  Heb.  x.  19,  20  ;  see  also  vers.  11-14,  and 
Rom.  X.  4-9).  {H.  Linton,  M.A.)  Th.e  good  choice: — Moses  said  these  words 
first  to  Israel.  But  God  says  them  to  each  of  us,  to  every  one  who  has  a  con- 
science, a  sense  of  right  and  wrong,  and  sense  to  see  he  ought  to  do  right  and  shun 
wrong.  I  have  heard  a  great  man  call  this  the  granite  on  which  all  other  spiritual 
beliefs  rest,  and  so  it  is.  It  is  taken  for  granted  and  built  on  in  all  God's  revela- 
tion, in  all  Christ's  atoning  work,  in  all  the  Holy  Spirit's  operation.  This  is  a 
choice  we  must  each  make,  not,  like  the  fabled  one,  for  once,  but  day  by  day, 
continually.     It  is  the  resultant  of  all  our  life.     I.  This  daily  endeavour  to  be 

HOLY,  TO  BE  LIKE  ChRIST,  WILL  BE  A  SPRING  OF  INTEREST  WHICH  WILL  NEVER 
FAIL,  WHEN   OTHER  INTERESTS   FAIL  WITH  OUR  FAILING   SELVES.      II.  If  We  choOSB 

well,  WE  MUST  END  WELL.  If  wc  grow  here  fit  for  a  better  place,  pure,  kind,  hard- 
working, unselfish,  we  cannot  be  a  failure.  III.  It  is  not  for  ourselves  only,  either 
here  or  hereafter,  that  God  bids  us  choose  good.     We  have  got  in  our  keeping 

THE  WORLDLY  PEACE  OF  OTHERS.  IV.  LoVE  TO  THE  REDEEMER,  WHO  DIED  FOR  US 
AND   LIVES    FOR    US,    IS    THE    GREAT    SPRING    OF    ALL    RIGHT-DOING.       Only  by   the 

grace  of  God  can  we  choose  good.  {A.  K.  H.  Boyd,  D.D.)  The  law  of  God  sets 
before  us  good  and  evil: — I.  As  A  matter  of  information,  to  show  us  the 

REAL   difference  THAT   IS   BETWEEN   THEM,   AND   THE   DIFFERENT   CONSEQUENCES 

WHICH  THEY  PRODUCE.  1.  The  Word  of  God  sets  before  us  this  difference,  in  so 
plain  convincing  terms  that,  though  we  may  be  perverted  by  evil,  yet  it  is  hard  for 
us  to  be  mistaken.  Though  God  has  sent  us  into  this  wilderness  of  a  world,  where 
there  are  many  intricate  passages  to  perplex  us,  and  much  variety  of  objects  to 
distract  our  thoughts,  yet  He  has  not  left  us  without  a  guide,  nor  Himself  without  a 
witness.  He  has  given  us  His  Word,  as  a  perfect  rule,  by  which  we  shall  certainly  be 
tried  at  last :  and  therefore  by  this  rule  we  ought  to  try  our  own  actions  now.  2.  Con- 
science, when  it  comes  to  speak  for  itself,  as  it  will  sometimes  do,  is  as  convincing 
as  any  revelation,  and  as  obliging  as  any  law  ;  it  is  a  witness  that  will  not  be 
silenced,  and  a  judge  that  cannot  be  suborned.  It  is  this  that  makes  us  look  upon 
some  actions  with  abhorrence,  and  upon  others  with  delight ;  and  according  to  this 
inward  relish  or  disgust  so  we  learn  to  discover  the  difference  between  good  and 
evil,  and  find  that  every  action  of  man  has  an  indelible  character  stamped  upon  it, 
by  which  its  value  is  easy  to  be  known.  II.  As  an  object  of  your  choice. 
When  things  of  so  very  different  natures  are  set  before  us,  one  would  think  it  an 


CHAP.  XXX.]  DEUTERONOMY,  479 

easy  matter  to  be  determined.  If  our  notions  of  good  and  evil  are  too  weak  to  work 
upon  ns,  and  hold  our  minds  for  some  time  in  suspense  ;  yet  surely  life  and  death 
admit  of  no  dispute.  One  is  the  sole  delight,  and  the  other  the  utter  abhorrence  of 
our  nature,  and  a  powerful  instinct  within  us  always  inclines  us  to  the  better  part. 
What  indefatigable  pains  do  we  take  to  gratify  our  foolish  lusts,  when  with  half 
the  pains  we  might  learn  to  live  much  happier  without  them.  "What  violence  do 
we  use  upon  ourselves,  to  lay  our  souls  and  consciences  asleej^,  for  fear  the  beautiful 
prospect  of  life  should  tempt  us  to  be  virtuous,  or  the  dismal  apparitions  of  death 
should  affright  us  from  our  vice,  when  half  that  force  employed  against  our  vanities 
and  corruptions  would  suflSce  to  take  heaven  itself  by  violence,  and  make  us  for 
ever  happy.  {0.  Hickman,  D.D.)  Choose  death  or  life: — The  central  thought 
of  the  text  lies  in  the  word  choose.  The  Israelites  are  on  the  point  of  entering  the 
promised  land,  and  Moses  entreats  them  to  choose  between  idolatiy  and  the  religion 
of  Jehovah.  A  similar  alternative  is  before  us  now.  I.  The  choice  is  personal 
AND  FREE.  These  words  which  were  addressed  to  Israel  as  a  people,  applied  to 
each  individual  in  particular  ;  for  the  individual  alone  is  tree  and  responsible.  To 
each  human  being  the  command  is  given,  "Choose."  The  power  of  making  such 
a  choice  is  ours,  else  the  words  of  the  text  had  in  them  no  meaning.  It  has  been 
said  that  religion  enthrals  conscience  and  thought,  and  that  it  must  be  rejected  in 
the  name  of  Hberty.  That  is  false.  The  Bible,  on  the  contrary,  reveals  and  holds 
out  to  us  that  glorious  liberty  of  the  children  of  God  which  is  inseparable  from 
holiness ;  and  freedom  of  choice  is  affirmed  in  its  pages  as  the  primary  condition 
and  starting-point  of  our  enfranchisement.  There  can  be  no  more  energetic  appeal 
thaji  that  contained  in  the  word  '  *  Choose  !  "  But  the  Bible  never  separates  the  idea 
of  fiberty  from  that  of  responsibility.  The  liberty  of  which  it  tells  is  that  which 
takes  the  Divine  law  as  its  binding  yet  not  coercive  rule.  Such  a  religion  is,  more 
than  any  other,  fitted  to  form  strong  characters  and  free  nations.  Together  with 
human  liberty,  the  Bible  teaches  that  mutual  dependence  which  unites  all  the  sons 
of  Adam,  and  which  we  call  human  solidarity.  A  thousand  influences,  over  which 
we  have  no  control,  act  upon  us ;  yet,  however  numerous  and  powerful  these  may 
be,  they  do  not  affect  our  liberty.  We  can  resist  them,  and  it  is  our  duty  to  do  so. 
Again,  the  Bible  speaks  of  supernatural  powers  that  are  brought  to  bear  upon  our 
will,  but  without  enchaining  or  destroying  it.  There  is  an  enemy  that  prowls 
around  you  ;  but  if  you  resist  him  he  Will  flee  from  you.  You  have  a  God  who 
loves  you,  but  He  will  not  save  you  against  your  will.  You  have  a  Saviour,  but 
if  you  will  not  open  your  hearts  to  Him,  He  will  not  enter  them  by  force.  In 
relation  to  God  and  in  relation  to  Satan,  you  are  free.  There  is  one  thing,  however, 
that  you  are  not  free  to  do :  you  cannot  refuse  to  make  your  choice.  And  this 
choice,  whether  good  or  bad,  is  the  one  essential  business  of  life.  11.  This  choice 
IS  TO  BE  MADE  BETWEEN  TWO  OPPOSITE  COURSES.  **I  have  Set  before  you  life 
and  death."  Jesus  Christ  speaks  of  the  broad  and  of  the  narrow  way :  no  middle 
course  or  third  way.  This  classification  does  not  exclude  certain  differences  of 
degree  which  morally  exist  between  men.  In  the  broad  as  well  as  the  narrow  way 
various  stages  may  have  been  reached  ;  but  there  are  only  two  courses  leading  to  two 
opposite  ends.  At  this  hour  you  are  standing  at  the  junction  of  these  two  ways, 
but  henceforth  you  shall  be  walking  in  one  or  the  other  of  them.  Your  destinies 
will  vary  infinitely,  but  all  outward  diversities  are  as  nothing  in  comparison  of  the 
moral  difference  which  shall  result  from  your  personal  choice.  Each  day  you  will 
take  a  step  further  in  either  of  these  two  paths  ;  the  greater  your  progi-ess,  the  riper 
shall  you  be  for  salvation  or  for  condemnation.  Whilst  this  choice  is  still  possible 
and  comparatively  easy,  choose  life  !  III.  This  choice  must  be  made  to-day. 
In  the  life  of  individuals  as  well  as  in  that  of  nations  there  are  certain  decisive 
moments  that  determine  their  future.  Such  a  time  was  it  when  Adam  was  subjected 
to  the  trial  that  involved  issues  of  such  moment  for  the  human  family.  He  chose. 
He  disobeyed,  and  by  the  disobedience  of  one  man  sin  entered  into  the  world.  We 
find  such  another  hour  in  the  life  of  Jesus.  He  is  tempted  in  the  wilderness.  He 
chooses,  and  by  the  obedience  of  one  man  we  have  eternal  life.  Would  you  know 
what  a  moment  of  blind  folly  may  cost  a  family,  an  individual,  a  nation  ?  Remem- 
ber Lot  casting  a  covetous  eye  on  the  plain  of  Sodom  ;  Esau  selling  his  birth- 
right ;  the  Jews  shouting:  "Not  this  man,  but  Barabbas"  ;  Felix  putting  off  his 
conversion,  "Go  thy  way,  and  when  I  have,"  &c.  Would  you  know,  on  the  contrary, 
how  fruitful  in  blessing  may  a  moment  of  fidelity  be  ?  Remember  Abraham  obeying 
the  Divine  call  ;  Moses  preferring  the  affliction  of  his  people  to  the  delights  of  sin  ; 
Solomon  praying  for  wisdom  ;  the  disciples  of  Jesus  leaving  all  to  follow  Him. 


480  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ckap.  xxx. 

Will  you  follow  the  first  of  these  examples  or  the  last  ?  Choose.  IV.  The  wit- 
nesses OF  YOUR  CHOICE.  "I  Call  heaven  and  earth  to  witness  against  you  this 
day."  The  witnesses  that  surround  you  are  not  against  you  but  for  you.  They  are 
parents,  pastors,  the  Church,  the  angels.  And  who  can  tell  if  among  the  invisible 
witnesses  there  are  not  some  for  whom  you  mourn  !  These  witnesses  might  one 
day  rise  up  against  you  and  exclaim  :  ' '  We  were  present  on  such  a  day,  at  such  an 
hour,  in  such  a  place  ;  the  exhortations  of  the  preacher  were  pressing  ;  the  Christian 
life  presented  itself  to  this  young  man,  with  its  duties,  its  joys,  its  sorrows  ;  Jesus 
was  there,  ready  to  forgive  the  past  and — that  young  man  would  not  !  "  To  this 
outward  testimony  will  be  added  that  of  your  own  conscience  :  "That  is  true,"  it 
will  say  ;  ' '  you  might  have  decided  for  God. "  Oh  !  how  overpowering  shall  be  the 
confusion  of  the  hardened  sinner  !  There  is  but  one  way  of  escaping  it.  Choose 
life  to-day.  V.  The  consequences  of  this  choice.  "  Blessing  or  cursing,  life 
or  death."  Many  will  find  these  words  too  stern.  They  are  Divine.  They  are 
logical.  The  sinner  cannot  be  blessed,  else  God  would  cease  to  be  holy.  There 
are  two  ways  open  before  you.  If  you  choose  the  straight  way  you  shall  be 
blest  in  your  youth,  in  your  manhood,  in  your  profession,  in  your  family,  in 
your  days  of  joy  and  of  sorrow,  in  eternity.  If  you  choose  the  broad  way, 
whatever  be  your  lot  here  below,  you  shall  not  be  blest.  What  shall  you  become 
when  Christ  shall  say  to  you  :  *  *  I  know  you  not ! "  Choose  life  !  {Boniufon. )  The 
service  of  God  chosen : — I.  The  service  of  God  is  ever  a  matter  of  free  personal 
choice.  Surely  irresistible  grace  is  contrary  to  Scripture  and  experience.  It 
reduces  religious  service  to  mechanism,  and  destroys  that  free-willingness  which 
gives  worth  to  all  religious  actions.  True,  that  exemption  from  compulsion  is  not 
release  from  obligation,  and  that  it  is  man's  bounden  duty  to  serve  God.  To  man 
God's  grace  should  be  indeed  irresistible.  Yet  if  man  turn  from  God  the 
responsibility  is  with  man,  and  not  God.  II.  Further,  the  address  of  Moses 
demonstrated  that  the  service  of  God  is  based  upon  reasonable  considera- 
tions. If  they  turned  from  God,  then  upon  them  would  fall  His  judgments,  but  if 
they  cleaved  unto  Him  they  would  know  His  blessing.  Religion  is  "our  reasonable 
service,"  and  careful  thought  ever  leads  to  the  conclusion  that  to  choose  God  is 
— 1.  To  obey  conscience  ;  2.  To  follow  wisdom.  (1)  To  choose  God  is  to  obey 
conscience.  Woe  be  to  man  if  the  voice  of  conscience  he  disregards.  (2)  To  choose 
God  is  to  follow  wisdom.  That  is  demonstrated  in  the  history  of  Israel,  and  of 
every  nation  and  individual.  If  self  is  served,  server  and  served  are  ruined  (Pro v. 
iii.  17).  (3)  To  choose  God  is  to  express  the  gratitude  we  should  feel  towards  Him. 
III.  Lastly,  the  address*  of  Moses  was  made  forceful  by  his  noble  personal 
EXAMPLE.  No  desire  to  please  the  people  led  him  to  qualify  his  words.  The 
experience  of  a  long  life  spent  in  the  service  of  God  had  convinced  him  of  the  glory 
of  God's  service,  and  from  that  conviction  he  would  not  swerve.  (C.  E.  Walters.) 
Choosing  life: — I.  The  solemn  alternative  which  is  offered  to  every  soul. 
Now,  young  people  come  into  life,  and  as  you  look  forward,  it  has  roseate  tints,  and 
there  is  a  natural  buoyancy  in  living  by  impulse,  which  is  one  of  God's  best  gifts  to 
you,  and  which  I  would  be  the  last  man  to  try  to  darken  ;  but  what  I  would  press 
on  you  is  that  life,  as  it  is  opening  before  you,  is  no  pleasure-ground,  still  less  a 
factory,  or  a  shop,  or  a  warehouse,  least  of  all  a  place  for  dissipation.  But  that  it  is 
set  before  every  one  of  you — a  tremendous  "either  .  .  .  or,"  which  you  have  to 
deal  with  whether  you  will  or  no.  You  have  the  alternative  of,  on  the  one  hand, 
a  life  of  sense,  and  on  the  other  hand  a  life  of  spirit.  Is  it  to  be  sense,  or  is  it  to  be 
spirit  ?  Is  it  to  be  the  lower  needs  of  your  nature  gratified,  and  the  higher  ones 
starved  ?  Is  it  to  be  licence  or  self-control, — which  ?  To  gather  it  all  into  one,  the 
choice  which  every  son  of  man  has  to  make  is  between  self  and  God.  Now,  mind  ! 
it  is  an  alternative  ;  that  is  to  say,  you  cannot  ride  the  two  horses  at  once.  There 
are  plenty  of  us  that  try  to  do  that.  If  we  have  religion  at  all  it  must  be  the 
uppermost  thing  in  us,  and  must  rule  us.  If  it  does  not,  we  do  not  really  possess 
it  in  any  measure.  Further,  let  me  remind  you  of  the  issues  which  are  wrapped 
up  in  this  sharp  alternative.  Remember  my  text:  "life  or  death,  blessing  or 
cursing,"  said  Moses.  You  say,  "Oh,  I  surely  may  indulge  in  these  natural 
requirements  of  my  corporeal  nature."  Yes!  But  in  electing  whether  you  will 
live  for  sense  or  spirit,  for  self  or  God,  make  clear  to  yourself  that  the  one  is  life, 
the  other  is  death  ;  the  one  is  blessed,  the  other  is  cursed.  Eternal  issues  of  the 
gravest  sort  hang  upon  your  relation  to  Jesus  Christ,  and  you  cannot  alter  that 
fact.  II.  The  need  for  a  deliberate  act  of  decision.  An  enormous  number 
of  us  do  not  live  by  the  deliberate  choice  of  our  wills,  but  are  content  to  take  our 


CHAP.  XXX.]  DEUTERONOMY.  481 

colour  from  circumstances,  like  some  lake  that,  when  the  sky  ahove  it  is  blue,  is  all 
sparkling  and  sunny,  and  when  the  great  clouds  are  drawn  over  the  azure  is  all  dull 
and  sad.  So  hosts  of  us  have  never  once  deliberately  sat  down  to  look  realities  in 
the  face,  or  said  to  ourselves,  in  regard  to  the  deepest  things  of  our  lives,  "I  see 
these  alternatives  before  me,  and  here  I  now,  deliberately,  make  my  choice,  and 
take  this,  and  reject  that."  Circumstances  rule  us.  There  are  fishes  that  change 
the  hue  of  their  spots  according  to  the  colour  of  the  bed  of  the  stream.  How  many 
of  you  owe  your  innocence  simply  to  not  having  been  tempted  ?  How  many  of  you 
are  respectable  people  for  no  other  reason  than  because  you  have  always  lived 
amongst  such,  and  it  is  the  fashion  of  your  circle  to  be  like  that  ?  Now,  you  cannot 
get  away  from  the  influence  of  your  surroundings,  and  it  is  no  use  trying,  but  you 
can  determine  your  attitude  to  your  surroundings.  And  you  can  only  do  that  by 
bringing  a  resolved  will  to  bear  upon  them  as  the  result  of  a  deliberate  choice. 
Now,  remember  that  any  man  who  lives  by  anything  else  than  deliberate  choice 
and  resolve  is  degrading  himself  by  the  act.  Have  you  not  got  reason,  judgment, 
common  sense — call  it  what  you  like — which  is  meant  to  be  your  pilot  ?  And  have 
you  not  got  a  conscience  which  is  meant  to  be  your  compass  ?  And  what  becomes 
of  the  ship  if  the  pilot  goes  to  sleep  and  lashes  the  helm  right  away  up  on  one 
side,  and  puts  a  cover  over  the  binnacle  where  the  compass  is,  and  never  looks  at 
the  chart  ?  Let  me  remind  you,  still  further,  that  unless  you  make  for  the  great 
things  of  life,  the  deliberate  choice  of  the  better  part,  you  have  in  effect  made  the 
disastrous  choice  of  the  worse.  The  "policy  of  drift"  always  ends  in  ruin  for  a 
nation,  for  an  army,  for  an  individual.  To  go  down  stream  is  easy,  but  there  is  a 
Niagara  at  the  far  end.  You  choose  the  worse  when  you  do  not  deliberately  choose 
the  better.  I  do  not  suppose  that  any  of  you  have  deliberately  said  to  yourselves, 
"I  do  not  mean  to  have  anything  to  do  with  Jesus  Christ,"  but  you  have  drifted. 
You  have  not  resolved  that  you  will  have  something  to  do  with  Him.  Not 
choosing,  you  have  chosen.  It  is  that  widespread  indifference,  and  not  either 
intellectual  or  any  other  kind  of  opposition  to  Christianity,  that  I  for  one  am  afraid 
of,  and  into  which  so  many  of  you  have  fallen.  And  so  there  is  need  for  decision, 
"If  the  Lord  be  God,  follow  Him;   and  if  Baal,  then  follow  him."     III.  Some 

EEASONS    WHY    THAT    DECISION    SHOULD   BE   MADE    NOW.       1.    I    pray  yoU  to   make 

choice  of  Jesus  Christ  for  your  Saviour  and  your  King  now,  because  this  is  your 
plastic,  formative  time.  The  metal  is  running  fluid,  as  it  were,  out  of  the  furnace 
when  you  are  young.  Its  gets  hardened  into  heavy  bars  when  you  get  a  little  older, 
and  it  needs  a  great  deal  of  hammering  in  order  to  bring  it  into  other  shape  than 
that  which  it  has  taken.  2.  Let  me  remind  you,  too,  of  another  reason  for 
immediate  decision — that  you  need  a  Guide,  Your  desires,  longings,  passions  are 
strong.  They  were  meant  to  be.  Your  experience  is  little.  You  need  a  Guide  ; 
you  will  never  need  Him  more.  Take  Him  now.  3.  Another  reason  is,  because 
you  will  save  yourselves  from  a  great  deal  of  pain,  and  sorrow,  and  disappointment, 
and  perhaps  remorse,  if  you  now  begin  your  life  as  a  disciple  of  Jesus  Christ. 
4.  And  the  last  reason  that  I  suggest  to  you  is  this,  that  every  moment  that  you  put 
off  decision,  and  every  appeal  which  you  leave  unobeyed,  will  make  it  harder  for 
you  if  ever  you  do  choose  Jesus  Christ.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  TJie  choice  of  life : 
— What  an  awful  alternative — if  it  were  true  !  Who,  where  are  they  who  would  not 
choose  life,  if  the  choice  were  really  offered  them  ?  The  martyr  has  chosen  death, 
but  we  shudder  at  the  cruel  times  which  have  demanded  such  self-sacrifice ;  the 
devotee  has  chosen  death,  and  chooses  it  to-day,  but  we  pity  his  fanatic  faith ; 
the  maniac  has  chosen  death,  but  only  because  bereft  of  reason  ;  the  suicide  is  the 
remaining  exception— and  his  example  "proves  the  rule."  But  this  alternative  is 
not  true.  Life  and  death,  in  this  physical  sense,  are  not  matters  of  rational  choice. 
We  are  started  on  our  journey,  and  spontaneously  and  rightly  we  do  all  that  we  can 
to  keep  in  the  way  until  the  bodily  machinery  either  breaks  down  at  some  weak 
point,  or  wears  out  generally,  and  all  our  endeavours  are  at  an  end.  Duty  and 
instinct  compel  us  in  the  same  direction  ;  there  is  no  choice  here.  Let  us  pass  from 
the  physical  to  the  spiritual,  which  is  also  the  scriptural  sense.  I  have  set  before 
thee  this  day  life  and  good,  and  death  and  evil,  the  blessing  and  the  curse  ;  there- 
fore choose  the  inner  life  of  goodness  on  which  the  blessing  is  pronounced,  and  not 
the  inward  deadness  which  destroys  your  true  being.  And  again  we  say — What  an 
alternative,  if  it  were  true  !  What  a  crowning  choice — if  it  were  indeed  ours  !  But 
actual  life— spiritual  life— this  true  inward  life,  cannot  be  chosen  or  cast  aside  at 
once  and  for  ever,  with  our  eyes  wide  open,  and  our  minds  made  up,  and  our  wills 
jprepared  to  take  all  the  consequences — the  blessing  or  the  curse.     For  us  life  does 

31 


482  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxx. 

not  concentrate  its  chances  and  hazard  all  its  prospects  at  one  only  point ;  it  is  not 
even  a  series  of  points,  at  each  of  which  this  chance  is  renewed.  It  is  not  a  single, 
nor  yet  an  occasional,  game  of  "touch  and  go."  Rather  is  it  an  ever-varying, 
many- winding  river,  its  course  now  this  way,  now  that ;  its  waters  muddy  or  clear, 
shallow  or  deep,  at  one  time  swollen  and  turgid,  at  another  peacefully  gliding 
through  quietest  scenes— but  never  at  rest,  always  advancing  resistlessly  on,  and 
often  luriug  us  by  its  motion  into  drowsy  content.  We  wend  our  way  through 
"the  everydayness  of  this  week-day  world"  attended  by  associations,  painful  or 
pleasant,  which  touch  us  at  every  point,  surrounded  by  interests  of  varying  import, 
and  more  numerous  than  we  can  name,  with  our  plans  in  one  direction,  then  new 
hopes  in  another— before,  behind,  on  either  side  is  this  ever-shifting  scenery,  this 
crowded  landscape  of  circumstance,  through  which  we  float  for  evermore — this  is 
what  life  means  to  us.  Where  is  there  space,  or  chance,  or  stopping- point  for  that 
single  choice  between  two  things  only,  as  though  all  the  rest  would  vanish  at  a 
word?  This  is  a  very  plausible  plea,  especially  for  busy  men.  But  however 
admissible  in  a  general  sense,  there  are  several  cases  which  it  does  not  cover. 
There  are  times  in  human  experience  when  the  vast  difference  between  these  two 
only  things  is  brought  so  bluntly  before  men — when  that  unlovely  blank  between 
what  has  been  and  what  might  be  seems  to  cover  so  completely  their  whole  horizon, 
that  they  are  impelled  to  "pull  up,"  to  face  a  choice  of  two  conditions,  and  to 
decide  abidingly  for  one  or  the  other.  Then  the  single,  final  alternative— "life  or 
death  " — is  placed  before  them,  and  it  is,  moreover,  felt  to  be  absolute  and  exclusive. 
When  Paul  heard  the  voice  say,  "Saul,  Saul,  why  persecutest  thou  Me?"  and 
straightway  transformed  himself  from  persecutor  to  preacher  ;  when  Augustine  was 
stayed  by  the  childlike  tones  chanting,  "  Tolle,  lege,"  and  opened  at  words  which  to 
him  were  salvation ;  when  Bunyan  was  suddenly  stopped  at  his  game  by  the 
warning  appeal  in  his  heart,  "  Wilt  thou  leave  thy  sins  and  go  to  heaven,  or  have 
thy  sins  and  go  to  hell?"  this  difference  was  realised,  this  alternative  accepted. 
But  if  these  times,  in  which  we  are  compelled  to  face  an  inner  alternative,  are  rare, 
there  are  other  times,  happily  less  rare,  when  we  are  not  compelled,  but  quietly 
prompted  to  face  our  choice.  We  are  not  forced,  but  asked,  to  look  into  our  hearts. 
Our  better  self  makes  a  secret  suggestion  that  all  there  is  not  as  it  might  be,  that 
the  lower  self  is  allowed  far  too  much  prerogative,  that  one  can  only  triumph  by 
the  other's  fall,  and  that,  in  fact,  we  must  know  our  own  mind  and  say  deliberately 
which  it  shall  be.  "Choose,"  whispers  the  secret  voice  :  "shake  oflf  all  seeming, 
put  away  your  coloured  spectacles  of  prejudice,  strip  yourself  of  every  proud  thought, 
whether  of  wealth  or  position  or  ability,  lay  aside  your  little  worldly  triumphs, 
pray  to  be  shown  your  transgressions  as  they  truly  are  ;  and  then  look  at  yourself 
in  the  light  of  heaven,  as  a  child  of  God."  Such  a  time,  surely,  is  the  opening  of  a 
New  Year.  It  is  no  mere  return  of  habit,  but  a  resistless  instinct  that  invests  this 
time  with  a  special  significance.  A  New  Year,  if  it  means  anything  beyond  an 
altered  almanac,  means  new  life  to  every  one  amongst  us,  but  it  will  mean  that 
only  so  far  as  w^e  are  faithful  to  our  inner  light.  It  may  mean,  and  ought  to 
mean,  the  awakening  of  holier  desires,  the  birth  of  higher  ideals,  the  death 
or  defeat  of  a  whole  army  of  little  sins  and  shallow  ways,  the  oft-convicted 
traitors  to  our  true  being.  It  may  be  —  let  it  be — "a  secret  anniversary  of 
the  heart "  on  which  we  take  stock  of  ourselves,  clear  our  accounts  if  we  can, 
and  start  afresh.  It  is  indeed  a  charge  upon  our  weak  wills  that  we  need  such 
outward  promptings  to  attempt  utterly  the  thing  that  is  in  us  to  be.  The 
true  Christlike  life  is  an  even  progress  towards  perfection,  not  a  series  of  jumps, 
or  starts,  or  sudden  ascents.  But  so  long  as  our  very  weakness  itself  cries 
out  for  these  helps,  so  long  as  these  times  of  renewal  are  offered  to  us,  let  us 
not  pass  them  by  without  hearing  their  message.  "Take  them  lest  the  chain 
be  broken,  ere  thy  pilgrimage  be  done."  {F,  K.  Freeston.)  Freedom  of  man's 
will;  or,  the  great  decision: — Two  orders  of  men  are  generally  fatalists — the 
eminently  successful  and  the  supereminently  unfortunate.  The  former  regard  them- 
selves as  the  children  of  destiny,  for  whom  a  place  in  the  temple  of  the  ages  has 
been  prepared,  and  without  whom  its  glory  would  be  incomplete.  To  this  class 
belong  the  Csesars,  the  Napoleons,  and  Mahomets,  whose  wonderful  abilities  were 
only  equalled  by  their  complacent  confidence  in  their  own  guiding  star.  In  the 
ranks  of  the  second  are  to  be  found  many  of  those  unhappy  ones  who  have  failed  in 
life's  battle,  with  whom  everything  has  fallen  out  badly,  and  who  have  steadily  ^ 
gone  from  loss  to  loss,  or  from  crime  to  crime.  Such  people  seem  to  derive  comfort 
from  the  belief  that  they  are  the  victims  of  fate;  that  they  too  would  have 


CHAP.  XXX.]  DEUTERONOMY,  483 

succeeded  if  the  Supreme  Power  had  only  been  propitious  ;  and  that,  consequently, 
drcumstances  or  something  else  beyond  their  control   and  J^^*  ^^^^l^^f ',  W  i, 
blame  for  the  disasters  attending  their  career      It  is  not  to  be  denied  that  there  is 
much  in  tlie  philosophical  speculations  and  the  religious  creeds  of  mankind  to 
^courage  such  opinions.     In  India,  in  Greece   in  Arabia   as  well  as  among  Western 
nations,  the  most  ancient  faiths  affirmed  the  doctrine  of  necessity.     Back  of  gods 
and  men,  and  above  them,  in  the  Greek  mythology  reigned  the  unspeakable  and 
unchangeable  Fates,  to  whom  the  oppressed,  like  Prometheus,  could  appeal,  and  on 
whose  final  decisions  everything  from  Olympus  down  to  Hades  absolutely  depended 
Buddha,  also,  and  with  him  the  .visest  Eastern  sages,  regarded  the  race  as  practically 
in  bondage  to  a  Sovereign  Soul,  and  as  sweeping  along  ^  pre-ordained  course  to  its 
final  goal      He  had  no  logical  place  in  his  system  for  will-freedom   and  was  as  far 
from  §oing  justice  to  its  phenomena  as  Spinoza  or  Mr.  Buckle      This,  however,  is 
not  the  doctrine  of  the  Scriptures.     The  Bible  not  only  directly  affirms  the  moral 
liberty  of  God's  inteUigent  creatures,  but  its  e^^tire  revelation  proceeds  on  the 
Gumption  that  they  are  free  to  choose.     Eden's  garden  and  the  Fall  lose  their 
Seance  unless  A^dam  was  free.      So  when  we  come  to  studv  redemption  the 
B^le  does  not  hesitete  to  teach  that  its  efficacy  depends  on  tte  volition  of  the 
sinner,  and  that  he  is  really  able  to  accept  or  reject  eternal  life.     On  what  other 
hySesis  can  such  passages  as  these  be  explamed  :  "See,  I  have  set  before  thee 
th^  day  life  and  goodf  and  death  and  evil."    The  material  universe  which  He  has 
Se  cLnot  but?bey  His  law.     From  age  to  age,  and  through  aU  dispensations 
the  sun  rises  and  sets,  the  stars  peep  out  at  night,  the  seasons  come  and  go  m  their 
order,  and  the  tides  of  the  sea  throb  and  surge  with  an  exactness  and  regularity 
which  precludes  the  possibility  of  derangement      Not  one  of  ^^^^^^  P°°,^«^^^^«  ^^^^^^"^ 
these  Titanic  forces  has  chosen  the  service  which  it  renders.     Bhnd,  unknowing, 
uncaring,  winds  and  waves  below,  and  planet  and  constellation  above  app^y  tW 
selves  to  their  allotted  work.     No  wonder  that  a  heart  like  the  heart  of  God  full  of 
fatherhood  and  brotherhood,  should  yearn  to  develop  among  these  enthralled 
masses  an  order  of  service  different  from  theirs-a  service  that  should  be  fieely 
offered  and  which  should  be  preferred  beyond  all  others.     The  guilty  must  choose  to 
be  saved,  and  must  choose  to  be  saved  in  the  way  acceptable  to  the  Almighty. 
Doubtless  this  interpretation  of  the  Bible  will  to  some  mmds  be  regarded  as  mconi- 
natible  with  what  it  seems  to  teach  concerning  God's  sovereignty.     Unquestionably 
there  is  an  appearance  of  contradiction  ;  and  yet  I  do  not  think  it  is  as  serious  as 
many  suppose!     We  know  that  even  among  men  a  great  many  wills  come  into  play, 
andthatfrequently  they  coincide  without  infringing  on  each  other;  and  why  may 
not  the  same  be  possible  on  th*  part  of  the  Creator  and  the  creature      But  when  we 
meditate  on  this  subject  we  should  remember  that  we  tread  the  border-land  of  two 
worlds-the  natural  and  the  supernatural-and  that,  like  all  other  domains,  it  is 
next  to  impossible  to  tell  how  and  where  they  flow  into  each  other.  ^  Scientists  find 
it  difficult  to  trace  the  exact  boundaries  between  the  vegetable  and  animal  kingdoms ; 
they  cannot  tell  exactly  where  the  one  ends  and  the  other  begins,  and  neither  can 
they  explain  how  and  why  they  interpenetrate  each   other.      Psychologist^   are 
equally  perplexed.     They  are  constrained  to  admit  the  relations  between  mind  and 
bJain  to  be  inexplorable.     No  one  can  successfully  deny  the  movement  of  history  m 
which  the  Divine  has  been  manifest  in  the  human-as  m  the  Incarnation,  the 
founding  of  Christianity,  and  in  those  surprising  providences  which  have  vindicated 
right  and  confounded  wrong-and  yet  no  one  can  explain  their  harmony  with  the 
human,  or  prove  that  they  in  any  way  intrenched  upon  its  freedom.     1  he  meeting- 
place  is  veiled  from  us.     Neither  can  we  see  in  the  apphcation  of  redemption  where 
these  twain  meet,  how  they  interact  on  each  other,  and  how  they  do  so  without 
limiting  the  power  of  the  one  or  controlling  the  freedom  of  the  other.     Contact  and 
interi^enetration  here  is  like  contact  and  interpenetration  in  other  departments  of 
God's  wonderful  cosmos,  an  unsearchable  mystery,  a  mist^covered  ocean  where  only 
wreck  awaits  us  if  we  insist  on  braving  its  darkness.     Were  not  the  Scriptures  as 
decisive  as  they  are  on  this  general  subject,  I  should  be  inclined  to  the  doctrine 
already  set  forth  by  considerations  of  the  weightiest  character.     What  these  are  I 
shall  briefly  set  before  you,  that  you  may  be  delivered  from  the  illusions  of  modern 
fatalism,  if  unhappily  you  have  been  caught  in  their  wiles.     I  would  first  of  all 
remind  you  that  some  of  the  profoundest  philosophers,  such  as  Kant,  Jacobi,  ana 
Hamilton,  contend  that  consciousness  is  the  most  reliable  witness  of  what  we  are, 
and  that- it  testifies  to  our  moral  freedom.     Analyse  your  own  nature,  and  see 
whether  it  does  not  confirm  the  report  which  these  thinkers  give  of  its  dignity.     Do 


484  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxx. 

you  not  find  that  it  discriminates  between  the  voluntary  and  the  involuntary,  and 
that  it  attaches  responsibility  to  the  one  and  irresponsibility  to  the  other  ?  Let  any 
man  look  within  himself,  and  he  will  hear  many  voices  declaring  that  he  is  free. 
Conscience,  as  it  reproves  him  for  Avrong-doing,  says,  or  there  is  no  meaning  in  its 
voice,  ' '  Thou  art  free "  j  Remorse,  dogging  his  footsteps  and  driving  him  from 
place  to  place,  thunders  in  his  ear,  or  his  terror  is  absurd,  "Thou  art  free"; 
Deliberation,  as  it  ponders  two  paths  and  balances  the  reasons  in  favour  of  each, 
whispers  distinctly,  or  this  care  and  forethought  are  superfluous,  "Thou  art  free"  ; 
and  Desire,  as  it  sways  him  and  develops  in  his  soul  tierce  contests  with  convic- 
tions of  right  or  of  prudence,  proclaims  above  the  battle,  "Thou  art  free  !  "  Thus 
he  has  the  witness  in  himself,  and  if  he  doubts  its  reliability  he  may  easily  satisfy 
it  by  appealing  from  within  to  without.  "What  says  society,  what  say  its  leaders, 
what  its  members?  Hegel,  having  taken  a  comprehensive  view  of  humanity  as 
revealed  in  history,  gives  utterance  to  the  profound  sentiment :  ' '  Freedom  is  the 
essence  of  spirit,  as  gravitation  is  the  essence  of  matter. "  That  is,  there  could  be  no 
spirit  without  freedom,  even  as  there  could  be  no  matter  without  gravitation. 
Society  is  organised  on  this  principle.  Its  laws,  its  duties,  its  penalties,  its 
censures  and  its  praises,  all  centre  in  and  derive  their  significance  from  the  firm 
belief  that  whatever  else  man  may  or  may  not  be,  he  is  free.  And  the  course  of 
history,  which  influenced  the  thought  of  Hegel,  confirms  this  judgment.  It  is 
seen  that  no  mechanical  theory,  no  doctrine  of  averages  and  of  hard  necessity,  can 
be  reconciled  with  its  singular  and  eccentric  movements,  or  its  surprising  and 
revolutionary  changes.  This  Mr.  Froude  has  clearly  and  admirably  set  forth  in  a 
paper  reviewing  Mr.  Buckle.  In  opposition  to  that  gentleman's  so  called  "Science 
of  History,"  Froude  reminds  us  that  the  first  result  of  real  science  is  the  power  of 
foresight,  that  when  knowledge  on  any  subject  is  systematised  we  can  as  accurately 
speak  of  its  future  as  of  its  past.  Thus,  because  astronomy  is  a  true  science,  we  can 
calculate  eclipses  and  anticipate  the  most  striking  occurrences.  But,  he  argues, 
when  we  come  to  the  field  of  human  endeavour  certainty  disappears,  and  we  cannot 
tell  what  man  will  do  to-morrow.  He  insists  that  such  phenomena  as  Buddhism 
and  Mohammedanism  could  not  have  been  foretold,  and  he  adds  :  "Could  Tacitus 
have  looked  forward  nine  centuries  to  the  Rome  of  Gregory  VII.,  could  he  have 
beheld  the  representative  of  the  majesty  of  all  the  Caesars  holding  the  stirrup  of  the 
Pontifi"  of  that  vile  and  execrated  sect,  the  spectacle  would  scarcely  have  appeared 
to  him  the  fulfilment  of  a  rational  expectation  or  an  intelligible  result  of  the  causes 
in  operation  around  him."  We  cannot  anticipate  the  future  of  the  world.  Our 
soberest  calculations  may  be  deranged  in  a  moment,  and  some  unforeseen  circum- 
stances may  frustrate  all  our  expectations.  Why  ?  Why  can  we  not  as  accurately 
predict  the  social  convulsion  that  may  be  as  the  eclipse  which  cannot  fail  to  be  ? 
Because  in  the  domain  of  the  stars  there  is  no  volition,  while  in  that  of  history 
liberty  of  will  is  a  controlling  force.  The  freedom  of  man's  will  is  vitally 
associated  with  the  idea  of  morality.  They  are  inseparable.  Kant  has  exerted 
himself  to  show  that  they  stand  or  fall  together,  and  enters  with  so  much  zeal  upon 
his  task  that  he  sometimes  makes  them  appear  synonymous.  He  says,  "We  have 
now  reduced  the  Idea  of  Morality  to  that  of  Freedom  of  Will,"  and  in  another  place 
he  writes,  "Autonomy  of  Will  is  the  alone  foundation  of  Morality."  Hamilton 
likewise,  following  the  sage  of  Koningsberg,  declares  that  "virtue  involves  liberty  "  ; 
"that  the  possibility  of  morality  depends  on  the  possibility  of  liberty  ;  for  if  man 
be  not  a  free  agent  he  is  not  the  author  of  his  actions,  and  has  therefore  no 
responsibility— no  moral  responsibility —at  all."  In  opposition  to  this  position  we 
find  Spencer  {Data  of  Ethics,  p.  127)  asserting  that  "the  sense  of  duty  or  moral 
obligation  is  transitory  "  ;  and  he  has  certainly  allowed  no  permanent  place  for  it  in 
his  system.  Now,  I  agree  that  we  find  here  one  of  the  strongest  reasons  for  uphold- 
ing the  doctrine  of  free  will.  Under  the  declining  sense  of  its  truthfulness  the  colour 
and  meaning  are  disappearing  from  the  idea  of  duty.  Indeed,  we  rarely  hear  a  word 
now  about  "duty,"  but  endless  talk  about  rights.  We  are  ready  to  fight  and  con- 
tend for  " rights "  ;  but,  alas  !  our  zeal  for  "duties "  groweth  cold.  I  insist  on  this 
doctrine,  as  it  is  the  key  to  man's  greatness.  It  shows  that  he  is  endowed  with  a 
wonderful  and  real  power  of  conquering  what  to  the  faint-hearted  seems  the  uncon- 
querable. Hamilton  teaches  that  man  "is  capable  of  carrying  the  law  of  duty  into 
effect  in  opposition  to  solicitations,  the  impulsions  of  his  material  nature  "  ;  and  he 
declares  that  liberty  is  "capable  of  resisting  and  conquering  the  counteraction  of 
our  animal  nature."  Kant  likewise  says  :  "The  instincts  of  man's  physical  nature 
give  birth  to  obstacles  which  hinder  and  impede  him  in  the  execution  of  his  duty. 


CHAP.  XXX.]  DEUTERONOMY.  485 


They  are,  in  fact,  mighty  opposing  forces  which  he  has  to  go  forth  and  encounter." 
What  a  grand  conception  is  here  presented  of  the  will  striving  with  inner  enemies 
and  overcoming  their  hostility.  And  if  it  can  subdue  inner  foes,  can  it  not  resist 
and  repel  outer  antagonists  ?  I  do  not  claim  that  your  volition  can  change  your 
nature,  but  I  do  claim  that  you  are  accountable  for  it,  as  your  volition  decides 
whether  your  nature  shall  be  brought  within  the  influence  of  heaven's  grace  or  not. 
Mere  volition  never  built  a  ship,  or  a  house,  won  a  battle,  or  accomplished  a  voyage ; 
and  neither  did  it  ever  sanctify  a  soul.  There  is  a  difference  between  "will"  and 
"power."  The  "will"  to  be  saved  is  of  man,  "the  power"  is  of  God.  But 
whosoever  wills  cannot  fail  to  find  the  power  ;  for  He  has  promised  to  confer  on  all 
such  the  water  of  life  freely.  For  your  choice,  then,  you  are  accountable,  and  your 
eternal  destinies  hang  on  your  volition.  {G.  Loriiner,  D.D.)  The  offer  of  life 
and  death:— I.  The  two  courses  specified.  "Life  and  good,  and  death  and 
evil."     We  shall  take  the  latter  first ;  that  is,  "  death  and  evil."     Now,  we  observe 

1.  That  this  is  the  course  in  which  all  njen  are  involved  by  nature  and  practice. 

2.  This  state  is  one  of  extreme  wretchedness  and  misery.  3.  It  is  only  the  shadow 
of  the  woes  which  await  the  sinner  in  the  eternal  world.  Now,  that  is  the  dark 
side  of  the  text.  Let  us  look  at  the  other  course  specified,  "life  and  good." 
1.  Life  is  presented  to  us.  For  we  are  already  dead,  and  life  is  the  first  essential 
blessing  we  need.  Now,  the  life  offered  to  us  is— (1)  Freedom  from  the  sentence 
of  death.  (2)  Regeneration  of  spirit.  2.  Good  is  also  presented  to  us.  The  favour 
of  God  the  chief  good  ;  the  love  of  God  in  the  soul ;  the  good  providence  of  God  ; 
the  good  promises  of  God  ;  the  good  enjoyments  of  God  ;  and  last  of  all,  in  eternity, 
pure  unmixed  good  for  ever  and  ever— fulness  of  joy.  II.  These  things  are  set 
BEFORE  U8.  1.  Where  are  they  set  before  us  ?  (1)  In  the  Word  of  God.  In 
the  Law,  in  the  Prophets,  the  Gospels,  Epistles,  &c.  (2)  In  the  ministry  of  the 
Gospel.  See  the  gi-eat  commis.sion  :  it  is  to  publish  these  great  truths.  _  (3)  In 
the  influence  of  God's  truth  on  the  conscience.  Do  you  not  feel  an  internal 
something  speaking  to  you,  &c.,  warning,  &c.  ?  2.  For  what  are  they  set  before 
us  ?  (1)  For  our  solemn  consideration.  (2)  For  our  own  determination  and  choice. 
Application— 1.  The  way  of  life  and  good  is  easy  and  free  to  you  all.  Repentance 
towards  God,  and  faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  God  is  the  willing  Saviour  of 
all  men  2.  None  can  perish  but  those  who  willingly  choose  death  and  evil. 
Every  lost  soul  has  destroyed  itself.  3.  The  necessity  of  now  choosing  life  and 
good.  Did  you  ever  know  the  diseased  man  to  choose  death  ;  the  condemned 
man,  the  shipwrecked  man,  &c.  ?  {J.  Bums,  D.D,)  Life— I.  What  is  life, 
AND  WHO  18  the  AUTHOR  OF  IT?  1.  The  life  spoken  of  here  is  threefold. 
(1)  Natural,  which  consists  in  the  union  of  the  soul  and  body.  (2)  Spiritual,  which 
consists  in  the  union  of  Christ  and  the  soul.  (3)  Eternal,  which  consists  in  the 
communion  of  the  soul  and  body  with  the  Triune  God  through  eternity.  2.  God 
alone  is  the  Author  of  this  life,  for— (1)  It  is  He  who  hath  made  us,  and  not  we 
ourselves.  (2)  He  infuses  the  Spirit  of  His  Son  in  our  hearts,  and  He  is  life. 
(3)   By  His  grace   and  power  He  supports  and  brings  believers  to   eternal  life. 

II.  What  is  implied  in  this  life  ?  1.  Knowledge.  2.  Feeling.  3.^  Tasting. 
4.  Movement.     5.  Speech.     6.  Hearing.     All  faculties  exercised  in  God's  service. 

III.  How  are  WE  TO  obtain  SPIRITUAL  AND   ETERNAL   LIFE?      1.    Through  JcSUS 

Christ.  2.  Patient  continuance  in  well-doing,  watching,  praying,  fasting,  &c. 
{W.  Stevens.)  The  blessing  and  the  curse  .-—These  woids  were  spoken  by  Mosea 
to  all  the  Israelites  shortly  before  his  death.  He  had  told  them  that  they 
owed  all  to  God  Himself ;  that  God  had  delivered  them  out  of  slavery  in  Egypt ; 
God  had  led  them  to  the  land  of  Canaan  ;  God  had  given  them  just  laws  and 
right  statutes,  which  if  they  kept  they  would  live  long  in  their  new  home,  and 
become  a  great  and  mighty  nation.  Then  he  calls  heaven  and  earth  to  witness 
that  he  had  set  before  them  life  and  death,  blessing  and  cursing.  If  they 
trusted  in  the  one  true  God,  and  served  Him,  and  lived  as  men  should,  then  a 
blessing  would  come  on  them  and  their  children,  on  their  flocks  and  herds,  on 
their  land  and  all  in  it.  But  if  they  forii^t  God,  and  began  to  worship  the  sun 
and  the  moon,  then  they  would  die  ;  they  would  grow  superstitious,  cowardly,  lazy, 
and  profligate,  and  therefore  weak  and  miserable,  like  the  wretched  Canaanites 
whom  they  were  going  to  drive  out ;  and  then  they  would  die.  Then  he  says — 
I  call  heaven  and  earth  to  witness  again.nt  you  this  day,  that  I  have  set  be  ore  you 
life  and  death,  blessing  and  cursing.  He  called  heaven  and  eanh  to  witness, 
That  was  no  empty  figure  of  speech.  If  you  will  recollect  the  s'oiy  of  the 
Israelitea   you  will  see  plainly  enough  what  Moses  meant.      The   heaven  would 


486  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  xxx. 

witness  against  them.  The  same  stars  which  would  look  down  on  their  freedom 
and  prosperity  in  Canaan  had  looked  down  on  all  their  slavery  and  misery  in 
Egypt,  hundreds  of  years  before.  They  would  seem  to  say — Just  as  the  heavens 
above  you  are  the  same,  wherever  you  go,  and  whatever  you  are  like,  so  is  the 
God  who  dwells  above  the  heaven  :  unchangeable,  everlasting,  faithful,  and  true, 
full  of  light  and  love,  from  whom  comes  down  every  good  and  perfect  gift,  in 
whom  is  neither  variableness  nor  shadow  of  turning.  Do  you  turn  to  Him  con- 
tinually, and  as  often  as  you  turn  away  from  Him :  and  you  shall  find  Him 
still  the  same  ;  governing  you  by  unchangeable  law,  keeping  His  promise  for 
ever.  And  the  earth  would  witness  against  them.  That  fair  land  of  Canaan 
whither  they  were  going,  with  its  streams  and  wells  spreading  freshness  and 
health  around ;  its  rich  corn  valleys,  its  uplands  covered  with  vines,  its  sweet 
mountain  pastures,  a  very  garden  of  the  Lord,  cut  off  and  defended  from  all  the 
countries  round  by  sandy  deserts  and  dreary  wildernesses  ;  that  land  would  be 
a  witness  to  them,  at  their  daily  work,  of  God's  love  and  mercy  to  their  fore- 
fathers. The  ruins  of  the  old  Canaanite  cities  would  be  a  witness  to  them,  and 
say — Because  of  their  sins  the  Lord  drove  out  these  old  heathens  from  before 
you.  Copy  their  sins,  and  you  will  share  their  ruin.  Does  not  the  heaven 
above  our  heads,  and  the  earth  beneath  our  feet,  witness  against  us  here  ?  Do 
they  not  say  to  us — God  has  given  you  life  and  blessing  ?  If  you  throw  that 
away,  and  choose  instead  death  and  a  curse,  it  is  your  own  fault,  not  God's. 
Look  at  the  heaven  above  us.  Does  not  that  witness  against  us  ?  Has  it  not  seen, 
for  now  fifteen  hundred  years  and  more,  God's  goodness  to  us,  and  to  our  fore- 
fathers ?  All  things  have  changed  :  language,  manners,  customs,  religion.  "We 
have  changed  our  place,  as  the  Israelites  did  ;  and  dwell  in  a  different  land 
from  our  forefathers :  but  that  sky  abides  for  ever.  The  same  sun,  that 
moon,  those  stars  shone  down  upon  our  heathen  forefathers,  when  the  Lord 
chose  them,  and  brought  them  out  of  the  German  forests  into  this  good  land  of 
England,  that  they  might  learn  to  worship  no  more  the  sun,  and  the  moon,  and 
the  storm,  and  the  thunder-cloud,  but  to  worship  Him,  the  living  God,  who 
made  all  heaven  and  earth.  And  shall  not  the  earth  witness  against  us  ?  Look 
round  upon  this  noble  English  land.  Why  is  it  not,  as  many  a  land  far  richer 
in  soil  and  climate  is  now,  a  desolate  wilderness  ;  the  land  lying  waste,  and  few 
men  left  in  it,  and  those  who  are  left  robbing  and  murdering  each  other,  every 
man's  hand  against  his  fellow,  till  the  wild  beasts  of  the  field  increase  upon 
them  ?  Why  but  because  the  Lord  set  before  our  forefathers  life  and  death, 
blessing  and  cursing  ;  and  our  forefathers  chose  life,  and  lived  ;  and  it  was  well 
with  them  in  the  land  which  God  gave  to  them,  because  they  chose  blessing, 
and  God  blessed  them  accordingly  ?  In  spite  of  many  mistakes  and  shortcomings 
— for  they  were  sinful  mortal  men,  as  we  are — they  chose  life  and  a  blessing  ; 
and  clave _unto  the  Lord  their  God,  and  kept  His  covenant ;  and  they  left  behind, 
for  us  their  children,  these  churches,  these  cathedrals,  for  an  everlasting  sign  that 
the  Lord  was  with  us,  as  He  had  been  with  them,  and  would  be  with  our  children 
after  us.  And  then  when  one  reads  the  history  of  England  ;  when  one  thinks  over 
the  history  of  any  one  city,  even  one  country  parish  ;  above  all,  when  one  looks 
into  the  history  of  one's  own  foolish  heart :  one  sees  how  often,  though  God  has 
given  us  freely  life  and  blessing,  we  have  been  on  the  point  of  choosing  death  and 
the  curse  instead  ;  of  saying — We  will  go  our  own  way,  and  not  God's  way.  The  land 
is  ours,  not  God's  ;  our  souls  are  our  own,  not  God's.  We  are  masters,  and  who  is 
master  over  us  ?  That  is  the  way  to  choose  death,  and  the  curse,  shame  and 
poverty  and  ruin  ;  and  how  often  we  have  been  on  the  point  of  choosing  it !  What 
has  saved  us  from  ruin  ?  I  know  not,  unless  it  be  for  this  one  reason,  that  into 
that  heaven  which  witnesses  against  us,  the  merciful  and  loving  Christ  is  ascended  ; 
that  He  is  ever  making  intercession  for  us.  Yes.  He  ascen(ied  on  high,  that  He 
might  send  down  His  Holy  Spirit ;  and  that  Spirit  is  among  us,  working  patiently 
and  lovingly  in  many  hearts — would  that  I  could  say  in  all — giving  men  right 
judgment ;  putting  good  desires  into  their  hearts,  and  enabling  them  to  put  them 
into  good  practice.  (C.  Kingsley,  M.A.)  Choosing  life  or  death : — I.  The  per- 
sonal and  FREE  CHARACTER  OF  THE  CHOICE    TO   BE  MADE.      The  religion  of  the 

Bible  is  the  religion  of  liberty.  I  know  of  no  bolder  affirmation  of  the  free  will 
than  that  which  is  contained  in  mj'  text.  But  the  Bible  never  separates  the  idea 
of  liberty  from  that  of  responsibility  ;  the  liberty  of  which  it  speaks  is  that  which 
takes  the  law  of  God  as  its  rule,  not  coercive  but  obligatory,  and  of  which  we 
shall  have  to  give  an  account  on  the  judgment  day.      II.  Free  and  personal 


CHAP.  XXX.]  DEUTERONOMY.  487 

CHOICE  IS  BETWEEN  TWO  PAKTIES,  BETWEEN  TWO  OPPOSITE  DIRECTIONS.      TwO,  Said 

I  ;  not  three,  nor  a  greater  number.  "I  have  set  before  you  life  and  death, 
blessing  and  cursing."  Thus  also  the  Lord  Jesus  speaks  of  two  ways,  the  narrow 
way  and  the  broad  way ;  and  in  the  picture  He  draws  of  the  last  judgment  H« 
calls  some  "blessed,"  and  the  others  "cursed"  ;  nowhere  does  He  speak  of  an 
intermediate  class.  This  moral  dualism  runs  through  the  whole  of  Scripture. 
III.  Now  IS  THE  TIME  TO  CHOOSE.  Would  you  know  how  much  an  hour  of  blind- 
ness, of  impiety,  may  involve  of  malediction  for  an  individual,  a  family,  a  nation  ? 
— Kemember  Esau  selling  his  birthright,  and  afterwards  shedding  useless  and  bitter 
tears  on  the  consequences  of  his  shameful  bargain  ;  the  Jews  crying  in  blind  fury, 
**  Not  this  man,  but  Barabbas "  ;  the  governor  Felix,  placed  by  providence  in 
contact  with  St.  Paul,  and  putting  a  stop  to  conversation  which  troubles  him,  by 
the  plea  in  bar  so  common  and  fatal,  "Go  thy  way  for  this  time ;  when  I  have  a 
convenient  season  I  will  call  for  thee."  Would  you  know,  on  the  contrary,  how 
fruitful  in  blessings  may  be  one  hour  of  fidelity,  one  generous  and  heroic  choice  ? — 
Remember  Abraham,  obedient  to  the  Divine  calliug  and  deserving  to  be  called 
*'  the  father  of  the  faithful"  ;  Moses,  "choosing  rather  to  suffer  affliction  with  the 
people  of  God,  than  to  enjoy  the  pleasures  of  sin  for  a  season."  The  decisive  hour 
has  come.  IV.  The  witnesses  of  the  choice.  Our  text  tells  us  of  witnesses, 
sublime  though  speechless,  heaven  and  earth  :  "  I  call  heaven  and  earth  to  record 
against  you,"  says  the  Lord.  Faithful  to  the  Spirit  of  the  New  Covenant,  we  shall 
tell  you  that  the  witnesses  you  are  surrounded  by  are  not  against  you,  but  for  you. 
Those  witnesses  are,  in  the  first  place,  parents  who  ardently  desire  to  see  their 
children  walk  faithfiilly  in  the  ways  of  the  Lord ;  ministers,  whose  greatest  joy 
would  be  to  see  you  walking  in  the  ways  of  piety  and  truth ;  the  Church  that 
presents  you  to  God  as  its  fondest  hope  ;  the  holy  angels  who  rejoice  over  every 
sinner  who  repents  and  gives  himself  truly  to  God.  V.  The  consequences  of  the 
CHOICE.  ** Blessing  or  cursing;  life  or  death."  If  you  choose  life  you  shall  be 
blessed.  You  shall  be  blessed  in  your  youth  and  in  your  manhood ;  blessed  in 
your  career,  be  it  long  or  short,  obscure  or  brilliant ;  blessed  in  your  family,  present 
and  future ;  blessed  in  your  successes  and  in  your  reverses ;  blessed  in  your  joys 
and  in  your  griefs.  At  the  end  Christ  will  place  you  amongst  those  to  whom  He 
will  say,  "  Come,  ye  blessed  of  My  Father,"  &c.  If  you  do  not  choose  life,  I  know 
not  what  may  be  your  lot  on  earth.  One  thing  is  certain — you  shall  not  be  blessed. 
What  will  you  do  when,  to  all  those  who  will  not  have  done  the  will  of  His  Father, 
He  will  say,  '  *  I  know  you  not "  ?  It  does  not  behove  me  to  decide  what  will  be  the 
end  of  such  a  way,  the  result  of  such  a  choice,  but  you  have  heard  those  two  words 
of  my  text,  "  Cursing  !  Death  !  "  Choose  life  !  {C.  Bdbut,  B.D.)  The  decisive 
choice: — I.  **I  call  heaven  and  earth  to  record  against  yoh,"  says  Moses. 
This  was  no  idle  rhetorical  formula.  The  open  sky  over  his  head  was  the  witness 
and  pledge  of  permanence,  the  sign  that  in  the  midst  of  perpetual  change  there  is 
that  which  abides.  The  earth  at  his  feet  had  been  given  to  man  that  he  might 
dress  it  and  keep  it,  and  bring  food  for  his  race  out  of  it.  The  one  said  to  man, 
"Thou  art  meant  to  look  above  thyself.  Only  in  doing  so  canst  thou  find  endur- 
ance, illumination,  life."  The  other  said,  "Thou  art  meant  to  work  here.  Thou 
must  put  forth  an  energy  which  is  not  in  me,  or  I  will  not  yield  thee  my  fruits." 

II.  But  Moses  says,  "I  have  set  before  thee  life  and  death,"  &c.  There  is 
no  hint  given  to  the  Israelite  upon  which  he  can  build  a  dream  of  security  ;  he 
is  warned  in  the  most  fearful  language  against  forgetting  the  things  his  eyes  had 
seen.  But  all  the  terrible  warnings  and  prophecies  of  what  he  and  his  descendants 
may  do  hereafter  imply  that  he  is  in  a  blessed  condition,  and  that  they  will  be. 

III.  And  therefore  he  goes  on,  "  Choose  life."  Say  deliberately  to  thyself,  "I  do 
not  mean  to  give  up  the  ground  on  which  I  am  standing.  God  has  placed  me  on 
it ;  all  that  is  contrary  to  God  will  not  prevail  against  God,  and  therefore  need  not 
prevail  against  me."  "Choose  life"  is  still  the  command  at  all  times.  IV.  The 
great  reward  of  choosing  life  is,  "that  thou  matest  love  the  Lord  thy  God," 
&c.  The  growth  of  love  and  knowledge  is  always  proclaimed  in  Scripture  as  the 
reward  and  prize  of  a  man  who  walks  in  the  way  in  which  God  has  set  him  to 
walk,  who  chooses  life,  and  not  death.  V.  "That  it  may  go  well  with  thee 
AND  WITH  thy  SEED  AFTER  THEE."  The  great  Icsson  that  the  fathers  are  to  teach 
their  children  is,  that  God  will  be  the  present  and  living  Guide  of  each  succeeding 
race  as  much  as  He  has  been  of  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob.  {F.  D.  Maurice,  M.J.) 
For  He  is  thy  life,  and  the  length  of  thy  dajs.— The  God  of  our  life: — I.  Upon 
"WHAT  account  IS  GoD  SAID  TO  BE  CUE  LIFE  1    1.  God  gives  life.     He  is  the  Author 


488  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxxt 

and  Fountain  of  our  being.  All  living  creatures  have  their  life  from  God  (Acts  xvii. 
25  ;  Psa.  civ.  30)  ;  but  especially  man  (Isa.  xlii.  5),  who  is  the  object  of  His 
peculiar  care.  2.  God  maintains  life.  Life  in  man  is  like  a  lamp  kindled,  which 
wastes  and  consumes,  and  will  be  soon  extinguished,  without  fresh  supplies  of  oil. 
And  this  supply  is  from  God,  who  doth  not  only  light  the  lamp  at  first,  but  keeps  it 
burning.  How  liberal  is  God  to  the  benefit  and  comfort  of  man  ;  other  creatures  die 
that  we  may  live.  3.  God  preserves  life.  He  doth  not  only  maintain  and  keep  it 
from  inward  wasting,  by  daily  supplies,  but  doth  also  preserve  and  keep  it  from 
outward  dangers  in  daily  protections.  He  holdeth  our  soul  in  life  (Psa.  Ixvi.  9). 
His  daily  visitation  preserveth  our  spirits  (Job  x.  12).  4.  God  sweetens  life.  "VVe 
have  not  only  life  from  Him,  but  all  the  comforts  of  life,  which  tend  to  make  life 
pleasant  and  delightful  ;  and  without  which  it  would  be  little  better  than  a 
continuing  death.  5.  God  prolongs  life.  Long  life  is  very  frequently  in  Scripture 
spoken  of  as  a  special  gift  of  God.  6.  God  restores  life.  Elijah,  Elisha,  Christ, 
and  His  a{>06tles,  have  done  it.  And  He  will  do  it  for  all  mankind  at  the  general 
resurrection  at  the  great  day  (John  xi.  25  ;  1  Cor.  xv.  42  ;  1  Thess.  iv.  16  ;  John  v. 
26-28).  7.  God  is  the  sovereign  Lord  of  life.  The  life  of  all  the  creatures  is 
entirely  at  the  dis[>osal  of  the  living  God.  IL  The  explication  and  illustration  of 
such  truths  as  those  doth  all  aim  at  the  application  of  them.  What  fruit,  then, 
may  we  gather  from  this  tree  of  life  ?  1.  The  greatness  and  goodness  of  God.  If 
God  be  our  life,  then  He  is  a  great  God.  2.  The  wisdom  and  happiness  of  the 
saints.  Their  wisdom,  to  choose  this  God  to  be  theirs,  and  to  be  solicitous  to  keep 
themselves  in  His  favour.  3.  The  evil  of  sin,  and  misery  of  sinners.  Exhortation — 
1.  Own  and  acknowledge  your  dependence  upon  God.  2.  Make  God  your  Mend, 
and  be  very  careful  also  to  keep  yourself  in  His  love.     {Matthew  Henry,) 


CHAPTER  XXXI. 


Vers.  1-8,  Josbua,  lie  shall  g:o  over  before  tixem.— Joshua : — Joshua's  taking 
possession  of  the  land  of  Canaan  is  the  figure  of  our  entering  into  the  promised 
kingdom  on  the  descent  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  But  the  courage  of  Joshua  speaks  of 
something  far  more  deep  and  extensive  than  this ;  as  the  apostle  in  explaining 
Joshua  and  Canaan  as  the  true  rest  to  be  foimd  in  Christ,  adds,  ' '  Let  us  therefore 
come  boldly  unto  the  throne  of  grace,  that  we  may  obtain  mercy  and  find  grace 
to  help."  It  is  not,  then,  of  boldness  in  battle  that  God  would  teach  us  by 
Joshua,  but  it  is  altogether  a  figure  of  something  else,  of  a  brave  courage  in  Christ ; 
for  "we  wrestle  not  against  flesh  and  blood,"  but  against  spiritual  powers;  our 
weapons  are  not  carnal,  but  mighty  through  God.  Such  is  our  Joshua,  who  hath 
taken  upon  Him  not  the  nature  of  angels,  but  the  seed  of  Abraham.  But  as 
for  all  warfare  the  requisite  is  courage,  so  Joshua  represents  in  particular  that 
courage  of  heart  which  is  a  great  ingredient  in  the  "faith  that  overcometh  the 
world,"  and  in  that  "  perfect  love  "  which  "casteth  out  fear."  Joshua  speaks  not 
of  human  virtue  and  affection,  but  of  power ;  not  of  man's  disposition,  but  of 
victory  in  God.  And  what  is  this  but  of  God  in  Jesus  Christ?  The  one  lesson, 
therefore,  is  that  in  all,  and  beyond  all,  His  saints,  we  are  to  look  to  Jesus,  remem- 
bering that  He  is  God  as  well  as  man ;  that  it  is  altogether  different  to  that  of 
looking  to  the  example  of  any  man,  on  account  of  His  Godhead,  His  atonement, 
the  gift  of  His  Spirit ;  we  look  to  Him  and  have  power,  we  have  power  by  looking ; 
nay,  by  looking,  as  the  apostle  says,  we  "are  changed  into  the  same  image,  even 
as  by  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord."  His  example,  indeed,  seems  in  some  sense  to  set  us 
afar  off;  for  He  is  all  perfection,  we  full  of  imperfections.  He  is  at  such  an 
infinite  distance  that  we  cannot  approach  Him.  But  the  name  of  Joshua  brings  us 
near ;  for  by  that  we  know  He  has  power  to  put  His  own  mind  into  us,  and  to 
make  us  like  Himself.  And  the  reason  of  this  is,  because  we  can  never  look  to 
Him  merely  as  our  Example  without  remembering  at  the  same  time  that  He  is  in 
manifold  ways  unspeakably  more.  It  is  when  we  believe  in  Him  as  our  God  that 
His  example  itself  becomes  profitable  to  us  in  a  way  perfectly  different  from  any 
example  of  good  men.  {Isaac  WilliamSy  B.D.)  Be  strong  and  of  a  good 
couraige. — Strength  and  courage : — Strength  and  courage  are  inseparable,  and  the 
injunction  to  be  strong  is  nearly  equivalent  to  the  injunction  to  be  courageous. 


CHAP.  XXXI.]  DEUTERONOMY.  489 

"Be  strong"  can  only  mean,  "Rally  the  strength  you  have."  **Be  courageous" 
means,  "  Concentrate  your  strength  against  danger  or  difficulty."  Courage,  then,  ia 
the  application  of  manly  force  in  confronting  obstacles.  Courage  is  strong-hearted- 
ness.  Etymologically,  it  suggests  that  the  heart  is  the  innermost  centre,  "the 
rallying-ground,"  of  the  forces  of  moral  manhood.  Of  one  who  does  not  or  cannot 
rally  his  resources  of  strength  we  say  that  he  is  discouraged,  disheartened,  has  lost 
heart.  We  are  dealing,  therefore,  with  a  rational  rather  than  with  an  animal 
quality.  It  is  a  virtue  in  so  far  as  it  involves  a  rational,  self-determined  effort  in 
confronting  the  contradictions  of  life.  It  is  a  quality  of  character  rather  than  a  con- 
dition of  nerve  or  muscle.  It  is  the  courage  of  intelligence  and  freedom,  the  courage 
of  self-determined  moral  purpose,  the  courage  of  moral  strength,  and  it  has  many 
forms.  1.  Such  courage  is  pre-eminently  the  courage  of  a  rational  faith.  In  every 
struggle,  physical,  political,  moral,  whatever  it  may  be,  a  man  needs  good  footing. 
The  moral  athlete  who  makes  a  successful  stand  against  the  difficulties  of  life  must 
have  a  good  standing-ground.  Faith  gives  us  footing.  Scepticism  is  a  sapper  and 
miner.  It  takes  the  ground  from  under  our  feet.  In  any  difficulty  or  danger  the 
mind  must  be  in  a  positive  attitude  of  confidence.  There  is  nothing  but  moral 
imbecility  in  perpetual  distrust  or  doubt.  An  over-sceptical  habit  of  mind  involves 
moral  paralysis.  Faith  is  vantage-ground  for  the  battle.  A  man  may  find  a 
certain  standing-ground  in  himself.  "Well,  God  has  put  strength  into  manhood, 
and  He  gives  men  ample  opportunity  to  test  it,  and  a  man  ought  to  be  able  to 
believe  in  himself.  To  distrust  one's  self  in  a  pinch  is  to  invite  defeat.  It  is  not 
safe  to  suspend  one's  self  in  the  uncertainty  of  self-distrust.  One  must  trust 
other  men  also.  No  one  can  stand  alone.  We  are  obliged  to  believe  in  our  fellow- 
men.  A  surrender  of  faith  in  God  and  providence  would  leave  the  world  in  the 
imbecility  of  despair.  And  I  question  if  there  be  not  in  all  rational  faith  in  per- 
sonal manhood,  in  fellow-men,  and  in  the  world  in  which  we  live  a  certain  latent  or 
implicit  confidence  in  a  higher  power  and  in  a  moral  order  that  has  a  rational  and 
moral  beginning  and  goal.  Certain  it  is  that  when  men  begin  to  think  ethically 
and  rationally  they  are  obliged  to  postulate  the  reality  of  God  as  a  basis  of  con- 
fidence in  the  ultimate  victory  of  life.  This  courage  of  faith  in  God  is  the  old 
Hebrew  courage.  The  same  stress  is  put  upon  faith  in  the  ethics  of  the  Christian 
life.  And  this  is  no  insignificant  thing  as  related  to  the  moral  conflict  of 
life.  Faith  is  a  fundamental  virtue  in  the  battle  of  life,  because  it  is  only  unto 
faith  that  we  shall  add  a  manly  courage.  It  is  the  God  of  redemption  that  is  com- 
mitted to  us  and  will  see  us  through  the  struggle  of  life.  2.  It  is  the  courage  of 
rational  moral  conviction.  Conviction  involves  the  action  of  truth  in  the  conscience. 
It  gets  lodged  there  in  the  way  of  moral  conquest.  Moral  truth  is  well  intrenched 
only  when  it  is  intrenched  in  an  intelligent  conscience,  and  the  only  valiant  soldier 
in  its  army  is  the  man  who  carries  it  about  with  him  in  his  moral  conviction  as  a 
man  carries  his  life  and  force  in  the  blood  of  his  heart.  The  man  who  is  morally 
mastered  by  the  truth  is  himself  masterful.  Moral  realities  do  not  get  very  deep 
root  in  the  soil  of  the  mind  alone.  Convince  and  persuade  a  man,  and  he  may  not 
remain  convinced  or  persuaded.  The  truth  must  get  below  the  mind  and  below 
emotion,  that  only  transiently  dominates  the  will.  But  it  has  won  a  great  victory 
when  it  gets  hold  of  the  conscience  and  wins  men  to  its  intelligent  service.  When 
a  man  invests  with  moral  sacredness  what  he  holds  for  truth  he  will  maintain  it 
against  all  comers  and  will  advance  with  it  in  the  face  of  all  opposition.  Men  do 
not  sacri6ce  much  for  nor  stand  by  what  they  hold  indifferently.  But  the  quality 
of  correctness  is  not  enough.  Living  things  hold  by  the  root,  and  they  need  good 
soil.  Rational  moral  soil  is  the  only  soil  that  is  fit  for  the  truth  one  holds  with 
tenacity  and  defends  with  courage.  The  passive  virtue  of  humility  is  indeed  a 
Christian  virtue,  but  it  is  a  humility  that  should  be  matched  by  the  most  heroic 
and  aggressive  boldness.  That  was  a  brave  Church,  that  Apostolic  Church.  They 
did  not  stop  to  balance  dangers  against  duties.  They  spoke  and  acted  and  took  the 
consequences,  and  they  won  a  victory  unmatched  in  human  history.  It  was  not 
temporising,  it  was  not  political  trimming,  it  was  not  partisan  cowardice,  that 
founded  Christianity.  Strength  is  what  this  world  is  looking  for,  and  what  it  is 
sure  to  respect.  Not  too  bold,  not  shallow  audacity ;  the  sober  courage  of  strong 
moral  conviction — this  is  Christian  courage,  and  this  is  what  the  world  needs 
to-day.  3.  A  rational  devotion  also  lies  at  the  foundation  of  strong  and  courageous 
character.  Devotion  implies  an  object  to  be  attained,  upon  which  one  concentrates 
his  energies.  There  is  a  goal  to  be  reached.  It  lies  beyond  all  intervening  obstacle, 
difficulty,  or  danger,  and  to  reach  it  one  concentrates  efifort  upon  it.     ^y  sort  of 


490  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxxi. 

devotion,  even  the  commonest,  involves  a  rallying  of  one's  personal  forces  about  a 
central  and  commanding  purpose  to  reach  the  desired  object  at  all  hazard  and 
despite  all  difficulty.  And  here  is  the  rallying-ground  of  courage.  In  fact,  what 
is  courage  but  devotion  to  a  desired  object  in  the  face  of  all  obstacles  ?  Now,  all 
concentrated  and  persistent  effort  in  the  Avork  of  life  must  rally  about  this  central 
purpose,  and  this  purpose  will  successfully  meet  all  difficulty  that  lies  scattered 
along  the  entire  life-path.  Such  a  life  must  be  a  strong  and  courageous  life.  It  is 
the  life  of  one  who  puts  the  object  of  his  striving  far  over  and  beyond  the  farthest 
mountain  peak  of  earthly  difficulty,  and  who  has  an  inclusive  and  commanding 
purpose  to  go  over,  mastering  every  barrier  till  he  compass  the  object  of  his  life. 
This  mighty  purpose  to  reach  the  goal  of  life  is  a  species  of  devotion.  The  moral 
life  of  the  world  is  dependent  on  personal  relations.  Some  form  of  piety  is  neces- 
sary to  morality.  It  is  pre-eminently  true  in  the  higher  domain  of  religion.  The 
constraint  of  Christ's  love  is  the  heart  of  Christian  devotion.  And  what  is  Chris- 
tian courage  but  the  soul's  trusting  and  loving  self-preservation  for  the  tasks  of  life, 
in  face  of  all  difficulty  and  obstacle  and  danger,  out  of  a  sentiment  and  principle  of 
gratitude  to  Him  who  is  of  right  the  Lord  and  Master  of  life  ?  4.  To  a  rational 
faith,  conviction,  and  devotion  there  should  be  added  a  rational  hope  as  the  crown 
and  completion  of  a  strong  and  courageous  Christian  life.  What  we  strive  for  must 
be  attainable  in  some  measure  and  form  at  least,  or  strength  and  courage  fail.  If 
hope  should  fail  the  battle  of  life  would  end.  All  over  the  field  men  would  drop 
and  rise  no  more.  The  powers  of  manhood  would  fail,  and  the  end  would  be  a 
universal  wail  of  despair.  Therefore  you  hope,  and  therefore  you  have  courage  for 
the  battle  of  life.  And  there  is  always  an  abundant  stock  of  hope  on  hand  for  the 
world  at  large.  All  over  the  world  we  see  its  conquests.  The  heart  of  man  in  a 
struggling  life  is  demonstration  that  good  lies  behind  and  before.  It  is  God's 
witness.  That  it  is  possible  amid  life's  mountain  barriers  is  intimation  that  good 
is  the  law  of  life  and  good  its  final  goal.  What  a  world  it  is,  and  what  a  life  is  this 
human  life  !  If  this  small  fragment  of  it  were  the  end  it  sometimes  seems  as  if  no 
power  of  last  defeat  could  crush  the  energies  of  this  strange  struggling  creature,  man. 
It  is  clear  enough  that  the  world  was  built  for  conquest  by  him,  even  material  con- 
quest. But  it  was  built,  too,  for  moral  conquest,  and  what  we  need  is  hope  for 
moral  conquest.  To  conquer  the  world  is  not  to  conquer  the  untrained  forces  of  the 
soul,  nor  to  conquer  sin,  nor  to  conquer  death.  We  are  conquering  the  material 
world  in  this  nation  of  ours,  but  materialism  and  animalism  and  sordid  selfishness 
are  conquering  us.  But  not  all  men  are  conquering  in  the  battle  of  material  life. 
The  notes  of  discontent  all  about  us  are  bodeful.  They  may  portend  the  desolation 
of  a  coming  tempest.  Many  give  up  the  struggle.  What  shall  we  do  with  the 
baffled  ?  After  all,  is  it  not  the  larger  number  with  whom  the  world  goes  ill  ? 
And  there  is  a  little  joyous  section  of  this  struggling  world,  weighted  with  the 
common  sorrows,  but  joyful  still,  that  for  almost  nineteen  centuries  has  been  sing- 
ing the  song  of  hope  to  keep  the  weary  brotherhood  and  sisterhood  in  heart.  The 
literature  of  hope  is  very  rich.  And  it  suggests  how  much  the  song  of  hope  is 
needed  in  the  bafflings  of  life.  The  true  goal  of  life  is  ' '  where  beyond  these  voices 
there  is  peace."  We  need  a  Divine  hand  to  tear  away  the  darkness  of  life  and  dis- 
close the  crown  that  glitters  for  the  conqueror  amid  the  glories  of  the  perfected 
kingdom  of  redemption.  The  song  of  the  redemption  hope  is  a  new  song  for  earth. 
It  is  this  hope  of  eternal  redemption  that  holds  the  soul  to  its  heavenly  inheritance. 
Courage  for  the  moral  conflict  of  life,  courage  to  meet  the  power  of  sin  and  of  the 
last  great  enemy,  is  the  courage  of  Christian  hope.  (Z.  0.  Braseow,  D.D.)  The 
lord,  He  it  is  that  doth  go  before  thee.— 77ie  new  year ;— I.  "The  Lord."  Lord- 
ship, kingship,  governorship— call  it  what  you  may,  the  central  authority  of  any 
order  of  government  embodies  a  truth  which  is  universally  desired,  a  power  which 
can  hold  in  control  other  powers,  and  round  which  they  can  centre.  I  can  see 
along  the  untrodden  path  terrible  threatening,  defying,  resisting  foes  within  and 
without.  Sorrow,  suffering,  sin,  and  temptation ;  a  prosperity  when  we  may 
forsake  Him,  an  adversity  when  we  may  forget  Him.  Is  there  any  one  who  can 
lord  it  over  all  these  ?  It  is  in  the  finding  of  that  lordship  that  the  happiness,  the 
safety  of  the  year  is  ensured.  Keep  that  word,  "The  Lord,"  before  you  all 
through  the  year ;  take  orders  from  Him  for  the  daily  march  ;  report  yourself  to 
Him  each  night.  The  Lord  reigneth !  II.  "He  it  is  that  doth  go  befoee." 
You  have  a  year  before  you.  You  cannot  live  without  thinking  of  the  future. 
The  error  lies  in  thinking  of  to-morrow  without  thinking  of  to-morrow's  God.  God 
lias  gone  before  you.     III.  "  Hb  will  bb  with  thee."     Out  of  providence  grows 


CHAP.  XXXI.]  DEUTERONOMY.  491 

the  desire  of  fellowship— companionship.  I  do  not  doubt  that  God  finds  some 
pleasure  in  being  with  us  ;  but  surely  the  greater  pleasure  should  be  in  our  being 
with  Him.  He  knows  that,  and  He  meets  our  wishes  for  fellowship.  IV.  "He 
WILL  NOT  FAIL  THEE. "  How  little  do  we  believe  in  the  omnipotence  of  God,  which 
backs  all  His  love  !  We  cannot  exhaust  His  resources.  In  no  possible  jwsition  can 
we  be  placed  where  He  cannot  assist  us.  V.  "Neither  forsake  thee."  Then 
fear  not,  neither  be  dismayed  !  (A.  D.  Spong. )  Courage,  with  God  as  our  leader : — 
Think  what  a  difference  it  makes  to  men  in  meeting  difficulties,  privations,  dangers 
if  their  eyes  are  set  on  a  leader  whom  they  know  and  trust,  even  though  he  be  but 
a  man  like  themselves.  I  shall  always  remember  a  description  given  to  me  once  of 
a  body  of  English  troops  charging  up  a  slope  under  heavy  fire  to  gain  a  strong 
position.  As  they  charged  on,  and  when  the  enemy's  fire  had  begun  to  tell  seriously 
on  them,  they  came  for  a  while  under  shelter  ;  the  losses  and  the  danger  ceased,  and 
they  stopped  to  pull  themselves  together.  But  then  came  the  real  trial ;  beyond  the 
shelter  there  was  another  open  stretch  of  slope,  fully  exposed  ;  they  had  found  out 
what  advancing  under  fire  meant,  and  they  saw  it  would  be  worse  than  ever  on 
there.  It  was  one  of  those  moments  that  bring  out  in  men  the  natural  love  of  life, 
that  make  it  hardest  to  keep  straight  and  firm.  It  was  the  starting  again  that  went 
so  much  against  the  grain  ;  starting  again,  with  the  experience  of  past  loss,  to  the 
certainty  of  more  loss — no  one  quite  liked  to  begin, — and  they  were  already  staying 
under  the  shelter  a  bit  longer  than  was  needed  ;  it  seemed  almost  as  if  they  might 
refuse  to  come  out  and  go  on.  And  then,  by  one  man's  act,  through  God's  grace, 
it  all  came  right  again  ;  a  young  officer  sprang  out  on  to  the  mound  at  the  edge  of 
the  shelter,  and  with  a  cheer  the  men  followed  him  unfalteringly.  It  was  the  lead 
they  wanted,  the  sense  of  some  one  going  before  them,  the  sense  of  having  some- 
one to  follow  loyally — unto  death  if  need  be.  That  call  to  follow  one  we  trust, 
that  sense  of  one  who  goes  before  us  :  it  is  a  wonderful  help  for  courage  and 
perseverance,  when  things  are  hard  with  us.  And  there  is  one  fight  in  which  we 
all  want  it,  in  which  we  all  may  have  it  :  the  fight,  the  very  real,  stiff  fight 
against  our  temptations  to  do  wrong.  "The  Lord,  He  it  is  that  doth  go  before 
thee. "  It  is  hard  to  face  being  laughed  at,  being  scored  off,  being  looked  down  on 
for  doing  what  is  right.  But  Christ  has  gone  before  us  on  that  road  ;  He  was 
despised,  mocked,  laughed  at ;  we  have  a  Leader  to  follow  when  we  are  tried  that 
way.  It  is  hard  to  put  up  with  injustice,  to  forgive  quite  heartily  one's  enemies  > 
but  He  has  gone  before  ns  there  :  He  prayed  for  the  men  who  were  driving  the 
nails  through  His  hands  on  Calvary.  It  is  hard  to  give  up  pleasures,  to  say  "No " 
to  one's  natural  desires,  to  keep  one's  body  in  subjection  ;  but  He  has  gone  before 
us  in  that :  He  fasted  forty  days  ;  He  spent  whole  nights  in  prayer  upon  the  hills  ; 
He  had  nowhere  to  lay  His  head.  It  is  hard  to  bear  pain  patiently,  or  to  go  on 
with  the  same  weary  burden  day  after  day ;  but  we  can  never  have  so  much  to 
bear  as  He  bore.  It  will  be  hard,  perhaps,  to  face  death  rightly,  calmly,  when  the 
time  comes ;  but  on  that  mysterious  journey  also  He  has  gone  before  us,  and 
thousands  upon  thousands  of  His  soldiers  have  quietly  and  fearlessly  advanced  to 
die,  because  they  were  sure  He  would  not  fail  or  forsake  them.  It  is  wonderful  to 
think  of  the  great  army  that  has  followed,  that  is  following  Him  who  has  gone 
before  upon  that  way  of  truth  and  loyalty  and  patience.  Some  in  one  sort  of 
work,  and  some  in  another,  they  have  set  themselves  to  pass  on  up  that  rough, 
weary  road ;  stumbling  often,  it  may  be,  but  not  falling  out  ;  sticking  to  it  day 
after  day,  to  keep  a  pure  unselfish  purpose,  and  to  do  their  duty.  Men  and 
women,  rich  and  poor,  young  and  old,  soldiers,  students,  statesmen,  labourers,  men 
of  business :  temptation  comes  on  them,  and  weakness  hinders  them,  and  past  sins, 
it  may  be,  shame  them  ;  but  they  seek  His  pardon  and  they  humbly  long  that  any- 
how He  will  not  cast  them  off,  or  leave  them  desolate  in  the  darkness.  And  so 
they  struggle  on,  nearer,  it  may  be,  all  the  while  than  they  at  all  imagine,  to  Him 
who  goes  before  them  ;  surer  year  by  year  of  His  constant  care  and  love  for  them  ; 
surer  that  for  all  the  roughness  and  steepness  there  is  no  way  like  His  :  no  other 
way  in  which  a  man  so  grows  in  manliness  and  strength,  so  learns  to  love  both  God 
and  man.  {Bishop  Paget.)  Fear  not,  neither  be  dismayed.— iVo /ear; — Glorious 
words  of  encouragement  to  a  people  going  forth  to  meet  opposing  forces,  terrible  foes, 
and  unknown  dangers.  I.  The  Assurer.  "The  Lord."  The  veij  word  implies 
kingship,  governorship,  authority,  power.  II.  The  assurance.  Three  promises. 
1.  Prevision.  "Go  before."  2.  Fellowship.  "Be  with  thee."  3.  Constancy. 
"Will  not  faC"  III.  The  inference.  Our  Father  never  sleeps,  never  tires  ;  and 
if  He  is  all  that  He  promises,  how  can  we  fear  ?    {Homilist.) 


492  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap,  xxxl 

Vers.  10-12.  Thou  shalt  read  this  la^r. — The  public  reading  of  the  law : — Direc- 
tions here  given  for  public  reading  of  the  law.  1.  To  be  read  at  *'  tlie  feast  of 
tabernacles, '  the  greatest  of  all  their  festivals,  when,  harvest  and  vintage  being 
completed,  they  had  most  leisure  to  attend  to  it.  This  feast  was  celebiated  in  "  the 
year  of  release,"  the  most  proper  time  that  could  be  chosen  for  reading  the  law ; 
for  then  the  people  were  freed  from  debts,  troubles,  and  cares  of  a  worldly  natvire, 
and  at  liberty  to  attend  to  it  without  distraction.  2,  The  law  was  to  be  read  by 
Joshua,  chief  governor,  and  by  others  who  had  the  charge  of  instructing  the  people. 
Thus  Joshua  himself  read  to  the  congregation  (Josh.  viii.  34,  35) ;  Josiah  and 
Ezra  (2  Chron.  xxxiv.  30 ;  Neh.  viii.  2).  But  Jehoshaphat  employed  priests  and 
Levites  (2  Chron.  rvii.  9).  ITiis  public  reading  was  in  part  the  duty  of  the  king, 
the  Jews  say,  who  began  it,  and  that  afterwards  it  was  taken  up  by  the  priests. 
3.  The  law  was  to  be  read  in  the  hearing  of  all  Israel  (ver.  11).  (1)  Pious  Jews  who 
had  copies  doubtless  read  in  their  own  houses.  (2)  Some  portion  was  read  in  the 
synagogue  every  Sabbath  day  (Acts  xv.  21).  (3)  In  Jehoshaphat's  time  it  was  read 
by  his  command  in  the  different  cities  of  Judah,  and  the  people  were  instructed 
out  of  it  by  the  priests  and  Levites,  but  (2)  at  every  year  of  release  the  law  was 
read,  not  only  publicly  to  all  the  people,  but  throughout,  and  read  from  an  original 
copy,  which  served  as  a  standard  by  which  all  other  copies  were  ti-ied.  4.  The 
whole  congregation  must  assemble  to  hear  the  law.  Hence  learn — 1.  That  when 
our  debts  are  remitted,  and  we  are  brought  into  the  liberty  of  God's  children,  wo 
shall  then  delight  to  hear  and  obey  our  delivering  Lord  in  every  call  of  duty. 
2.  The  "Word  of  God,  being  our  only  rule,  should  be  read  and  known  of  all ;  how  cruel 
the  attempt,  and  how  contrary  to  the  Divine  will,  to  keep  it  locked  up  from  the  people 
in  an  unknown  tongue,  and  to  establish  ignorance  by  law  !  3.  Nothing  should  engage 
us  more  solicitously  than  the  early  instruction  of  our  children  in  the  knowledge  of 
the  Holy  Scriptures,  which  alone  can  make  them  wise  unto  salvation.      {J.    Wilson.) 

Yer.  13.  That  their  children  .  .  .  may  hear,  and  learn  V  fear  the  Lord. — Early 

piety : — I.  Godliness  in  children  is  accounted  by  Christians  generally  to  bb 

EXTRAORDINARY,    OR  AT  LEAST  UNCOMMON  ;    AND  PERHAPS  THERE  ARE  BUT  FEW 

GODLY  CHILDREN.  C/Ompared  with  the  number  of  children  who  are  blessed  with 
godly  parentage,  and  taught  in  Christian  schools,  who  are  present  when  the  public 
ordinances  of  Christ's  Church  are  administered,  the  children  who  manifest  true 
piety  are  certainly  not  many.  If  our  observation  be  accurate,  Christian  parents 
and  teachers  and  pastors  do  not,  with  sufficient  confidence,  look  for,  or  expect  to 
find,  godliness  in  children.  If  we  employ  those  means  which  are  divinely  ordained 
for  the  conversion  of  human  beings  in  our  efforts  on  behalf  of  children,  why 
should  we  not  expect  immediate  and  early  results  ?    II.  It  is  true  that  the  sighs 

OF  A  CHILD  ARE  NOT  HEAVY  J  THEY  ARE  NOT,  AS  IN  THE  SOUL  OF  MANHOOD  AND 
WOMANHOOD,  OCEAN  WAVES,  BUT  THEY  ARE  RATHER  LIKE  THE  RIPPLE  UPON  THB 

WATERS  OF  SOME  SHELTERED  LAKE.  It  is  true  that  the  emotions  of  a  child  are  not 
the  hardy  blossoms  of  a  sturdy  fruit-tree,  but  the  tender  and  delicate  bloom  of  a 
tree  that  has  as  yet  yielded  little  more  than  promise  of  fruit.  Nevertheless,  that 
blossom,  which  winds  will  tear  and  shake,  is  the  outflowing  of  life  ;  that  ripple  on 
the  lake  shows  susceptibility  in  the  water  towards  its  sister  element,  air  ;  and  those 
dewdrop  tears  show  that  earth  and  heaven,  man  and  God,  are  working  upon  the 
child's  nature.  If  the  understanding  of  a  child  be  less  enlightened,  the  soul  is  more 
sensitive  ;  if  the  judgment  be  less  formed,  the  conscience  is  more  tender  ;  if  there  be 
but  little  strength  of  purpose,  the  heart  is  less  hardened  by  the  deceitfulness  of  sin. 
III.  If  decided  piety  be  within  reach  of  a  child,  how  is  it  that  the  absence  op 

GODLINESS  FROM  CHILDREN  DOES  NOT  MORE  DISTRESS  US,  AND  THAT  PIETY  IN 
CHILDREN  IS  NOT  MORE  OUR  AIM  AND  HOPE,  AND  THAT  IT  IS  NOT  MORE  FREQUENTLY 

THE  BURDEN  OF  OUR  PRAYER  ?  Why,  as  some,  always  suspect  a  child  who  professes 
to  be  godly  ?  Godly  children  are  God's  workmanship,  created  by  Jesus  Christ,  and 
if  we  would  be  the  means  of  leading  children  into  true  godliness,  we  must  bid  them 
look  to  our  Saviour  Jesus.  I  say  to  Him,  not  at  Him,  There  is  a  vast  difference 
between  these  things.  The  child  looks  at  the  King  when  he  goes  to  see  him  proceed 
in  state  to  open  the  Parliament ;  but  he  looks  to  his  mother  when  he  relies  on  her 
for  the  supply  of  his  daily  wants.  {S.  Martin^  D.D.)  Susce2)tible  periods  of 
life  : — In  fresco  painting  it  is  necessary  to  throw  on  the  colours  while  the  plaster  to 
be  decorated  is  damp.  The  rule  is,  "Work  while  the  moisture  remains";  hence 
the  need  in  this  particular  branch  of  art  of  a  definite  plan  of  well-mixed  colours, 
and  of  a  swift  and  steady  hand.     The  principle  has  a  wider  application.     There  are 


CHAP.  XXXI.]  DEUTERONOMY.  493 

times  when  the  human  character  is  especially  susceptible  to  impression,  such  as  the 
l>criod  of  early  youth,  the  occasion  of  a  great  sorrow,  a  great  joy,  or  a  great  change 
— times  when  the  influence  you  exert  will  be  received  readily  and  sink  deeply. 
Would  you  stamp  lives  and  hearts  around  you  with  the  beauty  of  heavenly  patterns, 
make  them  glow  with  the  hues  of  heavenly  grace  ?  Be  sure  of  your  plan,  have  your 
materials  ready,  and  paint  while  the  plaster  is  wet.     {W.  A.  Gray,) 

Ver.   14.    Thy  dajrs  approach  that  thou  nmst  die.— TA*  approach  of  death : 

I.  Those  who  live  chiefly  foe  this  world  try  not  to  think  of  death, 

BECAUSE  they  WOULD  LIKE  NOTHING  BETTER  THAN  TO  LIVE  ON  HERB  FOR  EVER. 

But  the  shutting  of  our  eyes  to  the  approach  of  death  does  not  make  him  turn  away 
from  us,  and  therefore  our  wisest  and  safest  course  is  to  prepare  for  his  coming, 
whether  it  be  near  or  far  off.  II.  Death  does  not  occupy  that  place  in  thh 
Word  of  God  which  it  does  occupy  in  that  religion  of  ours  which  pro- 
PESSES  to  be  derived  FROM  THE  WoRD  OF  GoD.  In  the  New  Testament  death  is 
simply  treated  as  an  abolished  thing.  The  second  coming  of  Christ  is  always,  in 
the  exhortations  of  the  New  Testament,  substituted  for  death.  Death,  in  the  eye  of 
faith,  is  not  the  end,  but  the  beginning,  of  all ;  it  is  the  commencement  of  the 
*'life  that  knows  no  ending."    III.  If  Christ  has  robbed  death  of  its  sting,  it 

DOES  not  behove  US  TO  LOOK  AT  DEATH  AS  IF  He  HAD  NOT  DONE  80.      Let  US  vieW 

the  approach  of  death  as  something  which  He  means  should  bring  us  nearer  to  Him. 
We  must  pray  Him,  since  the  days  approach  in  which  we  must  die,  that  death  may 
not  find  us  unprepared.  And  as  we  look  forward  to  the  future  we  must  commit  our 
way  and  ourselves  into  His  keeping.  {F.  E.  Paget.)  Nearing  the  end  :— There  is 
no  day  fixed  ;  it  is  an  "approach  "  that  is  spoken  of.  The  word  may  therefore  be 
addressed  to  every  man  well  advanced  in  life.  There  is  a  period  at  which  the  road 
becomes  a  slope  downwards,  and  at  the  foot  of  the  hill  is  the  last  earthly  resting- 
place.  This  is  the  way  of  God.  He  tells  them  that  the  end  is  "approaching." 
Now  and  again  He  seems  to  cut  them  off  suddenly  as  with  an  unexpected  stroke  ; 
yet  perhaps  the  suddenness  is  in  appearance  rather  than  in  reality.  To  be  bom  is 
to  have  notice  to  quit ;  to  live  is  to  die.  Every  sin  takes  out  of  us  some  portion  of 
life  ;  we  cannot  have  an  evil  thought  without  the  quantity  of  life  within  us  being 
diminished.  We  cannot  think  a  noble  thought,  or  find  a  free  way  in  our  hearts 
for  a  sublime  impulse,  without  increasing  the  sum-total  of  our  life — without 
beginning  our  immortality.  Thus  is  a  man  stronger  after  prayer  than  before  ;  thus 
does  every  sweet  and  holy  hymn  send  a  thrill  of  gladness  through  the  soul  that 
sings.  Let  every  man  take  notice  that  he  must  die.  From  a  literary  point  of  view 
that  is  a  pitiful  commonplace  ;  but  from  the  point  of  view  of  actual  experience  and 
all  the  issues  of  death  it  is  a  sublime  and  an  appalling  announcement.  But  Moses 
must  die.  We  have  never  associated  the  idea  of  death  with  Moses.  He  has  always 
been  so  strong  :  the  camp  never  halted  because  of  his  ill-health  ;  he  was  always  at 
the  head  ;  his  voice  was  clear  and  mellow  ;  his  eye  was  bright  and  darting,  and  yet 
so  genial— as  if  it  could  not  conceal  the  smile  that  was  in  his  heart.  Yet  the 
strongest  trees  yield  to  silent  time  ;  the  mightiest  strength  bows  down  itself  in 
weakness  and  trouble :  Samson  dies,  Hercules  becomes  but  a  figure  in  ancient 
history  ;  there  is  no  man  who  abideth  for  ever.  Now  that  Moses  is  walking  up  the 
mountain,  we  cannot  but  think  of  the  life-long  hardship  he  has  endured.  Read 
the  history  of  his  association  with  Israel,  and  say  if  there  is  one  "Thank  you"  in 
all  the  tumultuous  story.  Does  one  man  speak  out  of  the  host  and  say,  In  the 
name  of  Israel  I  give  thee  thanks  ?  We  do  not  know  some  men  until  we  see  them 
wandering  away  from  us.  What  a  strain  there  was  also  upon  the  religious  side  of 
his  nature  !  He  had  no  recreation  :  the  bow  was  never  unbent ;  he  was  always 
being  called  up  to  hear  the  Lord  communicate  some  new  law,  some  new  charge  or 
address.  To  his  veneration  a  continual  appeal  was  addressed.  What  wonder  if 
his  face  wore  the  aspect  of  solemnity  ?  What  wonder  if  his  eye  was  alight  with 
the  very  splendours  he  had  beheld  ?  Then  is  Moses  not  to  see  Canaan  ?  Moses 
would  not  care  now  to  see  any  land  flowing  with  milk  and  honey.  He  shall  see  the 
upper  Canaan — the  happy  land  where  the  flowers  never  wither,  where  the  summer 
is  guaranteed  to  last  eternally.  Thus  God  educates  men.  Moses  goes  upon  the 
mountain  to  die.  It  is  well ;  such  a  man  ought  to  die  upon  a  mountain.  The 
scene  is  full  of  symbolism  ;  it  is  quick  with  spiritual  suggestiveness.  Men  may  die 
upon  mountains  if  they  will ;  or  men  may  perish  in  dark  valleys  if  they  like.  To 
die  upon  the  mountain  is  to  die  into  heaven.  The  place  of  our  death,  as  to  its 
significance  and  honour,  will  be  determined  by  the  Ufe  we  lead.     We  (He  just  as  wo 


494  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxxi. 

live,  and,  so  to  say,  where  we  live.  Moses  lived  a  mountain  life  :  he  was  a  high- 
lander  ;  he  lived  on  the  hills,  and  on  the  hills  he  died.  May  it  not  be  so  with  ns  ? 
By  well-done  duty,  by  well-endured  affliction,  by  well-tested  patience,  by  complete 
self-surrender,  by  continual  imitation  and  following  of  Christ,  we  may  die  on  some 
lofty  hill,  cool  with  dew  or  bright  with  sunshine,  the  point  nearest  to  the  skies.  To 
die  at  such  an  elevation  is  to  begin  to  live.     {J.  Parker,  D.D.) 

Vers.  22-30.  Moses  therefore  wrote  this  song. — The  last  song: — The  old  man 
whom  we  have  known  so  long  dies  singing.  All  men  should  die  so  ;  all  men  may  so 
die  ;  God  is  not  sparing  in  His  gift  of  song  or  privilege  of  music  ;  music  was  in  His 
purpose  long  before  speech  ;  all  things  are  to  end  in  a  great  song.  There  are  songs 
without  words  ;  there  is  singing  without  articulate  and  audible  voice  :  we  may 
sing  with  the  spirit  and  with  the  understanding.  Blessed  are  they  who,  before 
going  up  to  Nebo  to  die,  sing  in  the  valley,  and,  so  to  say,  pass  out  of  sight  with 
their  singing  robes  around  them  ;  to  this  end  we  are  invited  in  Christ,  and  in 
Christ  this  is  the  only  possible  end — namely,  triumph,  song ;  the  rapture  of 
expectancy  and  the  inspiration  of  hope.  The  song  was  to  be  a  "witness"  for 
God  "against"  the  children  of  Israel — say,  rather,  as  between  Himself  and  the 
children  of  Israel.  Witness  does  not  always  imply  accusation ;  it  quite  as  fre- 
quently implies  confirmation,  approval.  It  embodies  in  itself  a  sure  testimony, 
strong  because  of  its  indisputableness.  Moses  wrote  the  song  "the  same  day." 
We  speak  of  our  efforts  of  genius  and  the  time  required  for  the  elaboration  of  this 
or  that  attempt  to  serve  the  sanctuary  ;  but  if  you  can  write  a  song  at  all  you  can 
•write  it  at  once.  Herein  the  great  French  poet's  dictum  is  true  :  said  one  to  Victor 
Hugo,  "  Is  it  not  difficult  to  write  epic  poetry  ? "  "  No,"  said  the  great  genius  of 
his  day — "no,  easy  or  impossible."  What  are  the  characteristics  of  a  great  songi 
1.  The  first  most  noticeable  characteristic  of  this  song  is  that  it  is  intensely 
theological.  The  keyword  is  GOD — in  His  majesty,  in  His  compassion,  in  His 
righteousness,  in  His  tears — God  is  a  species  of  incarnation  thousands  of  years 
before  the  event  of  Bethlehem.  2.  Another  characteristic  of  the  song  is  its  broad 
human  history.  Read  the  thirty- second  chapter  from  end  to  end,  and  you  will 
find  it  a  record  of  historical  events.  Facts  are  the  pedestals  on  which  we  set 
sculptured  music.  We  must  know  our  own  history  if  we  would  know  'le  highest 
religious  arguments,  and  apply  with  unquestionable  and  beneficent  skill  great 
Christian  appeals.  The  witness  must  be  in  ourselves  :  we  must  know,  and  taste, 
and  feel,  and  handle  of  the  Word  of  Life,  and  live  upon  it,  returning  to  it  as 
hunger  returns  to  bread  and  thirst  flies  swiftly  to  sparkling  fountains.  When  you 
are  doubtful  as  to  religious  mysteries,  read  your  own  personal  record  :  when  meta- 
physics are  too  high  or  too  deep,  peruse  facts,  put  the  pieces  of  your  lives  together, 
see  how  they  become  a  shape — a  house  not  made  with  hands,  a  temple  fashioned  in 
heaven.  The  days  are  not  to  be  detached  from  one  another,  they  are  to  be  linked 
on  and  held  in  all  the  symbolism  and  reality  of  their  unity.  3.  Hence,  another 
characteristic  of  the  song  is  its  record  of  providence.  God  found  Jacob  "in  a  desert 
land,  and  in  the  waste  howling  wilderness  ;  He  led  him  about,"  &c. ;  and  then  comes 
all  the  detail  of  providential  care  and  love,  and  all  the  sublime  appeal  arising  out 
of  the  undisputed  goodness  of  God.  We  do  not  need  providence  to  be  proved  by 
wordy  argument,  for  we  ourselves  are  living  illustrations  of  God's  nearness,  and 
greatness,  and  love.  We  must  never  give  up  this  arm  of  our  panoply  ;  this  weapon 
is  a  weapon  strong  and  keen  ;  we  must  in  the  use  of  it  testify  what  we  have  seen 
and  known,  and  we  must  magnify  God  by  facts  that  have  occurred  within  the 
limits  of  our  own  observation  and  experience.  Every  Christian  man  is  a  miracle ; 
every  Christian  life  is  a  Bible  ;  every  devout  experience  is  a  proof  of  the  possi- 
bility of  inspiration.  4.  The  song  is  also  accusatory:  "Jeshurun  waxed  fat,  and 
kicked  ;  thou  art  waxen  fat,"  &c.  When  a  song  accuses,  how  terrific  is  the  indict- 
ment !  Who  expects  a  song  to  double  back  upon  the  singer  and  accuse  him  of 
ingratitude,  presumption,  or  forgetfulness  ?  Our  hymns  are  witnesses  for  us  and 
against  us ;  our  very  music  has  some  plain  things  to  tell  us  ;  even  in  song  we  do 
not  escape  justice.  The  songs  of  the  Bible  are  not  mere  sentiments  melodised 
and  turned  into  a  species  of  aesthetic  luxury  :  Bible  songs  are  Bible  theology,  Bible 
statutes,  Bible  precepts.  Divine  interventions  and  providences.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.) 
Farewell  song  of  Moses : — A  most  noticeable  and  outstanding  feature  of  this  great 
song  is  its  series  of  pictures  for  the  popular  imagination,  and  its  long  array  of 
vivid  figures,  to  school  and  chasten  a  stiff-necked  people.  There  is  nothing  here 
of  abstract  reasoning  or  cold  analysis.      Everything    is    presented    in    concrete 


CHAP.  XXXI.]  DEUTERONOMY,  495 


form  as  to  a  nation  still  in  its  spiritual  childhood.  This  is  the  educative  song 
of  Israel.  In  tone  it  is  both  tender  and  terrifying.  Its  imagery,  sometimes 
winning,  sometimes  startling,  lends  itself  to  warmest  expostulations  and  appeals. 
How  graphic  and  memorable  are  its  emblems !  The  Divine  words  are  at  the 
outset  likened  to  the  gentle  rain  and  dew ;  God  Himself  is  the  Rock,  for  stability 
and  faithfulness ;  His  training  of  Israel,  like  the  eagle  with  its  fledglings ; 
the  people,  an  intractable  and  stubborn  ox  resentful  of  the  yoke  ;  their  aj^state 
conduct,  that  of  a  faithless  wife  ;  the  Divine  love  glowing  and  gleaming  about 
them  like  the  fire  of  spousal  jealousy,  and  His  indignation  like  an  armed 
host— these  ^  and  other  figures  follow  in  quick  succession,  many  of  them  derived 
from_  Israel's  wilderness  experiences.  For  it  is  the  poetry  of  the  desert  that 
dominates  the  song.  But  while  the  imagery  is  derived  from  the  past,  the  song 
itself  reaches  out  to  the  future.  It  is,  in  fact,  a  prophetic  outline  of  Jewish 
history,  designed  to  lodge  in  the  nation's  heart  the  solemn  truth  that 

*'  Sorrow  track eth  wrong, 
As  echo  follows  song." 

This  is  the  primitive  or  moral  prophecy,  the  type  and  canon  of  all  future  prophetic 
work,  as  Moses'  first  song  was  the  type  of  all  that  was  to  be  spiritually  poetic. 
{A.  H.  DrysdcUe,  M.A.)        The  farewell  ode:—¥ov  poetic  sublimity,  for  devout 
piety,  for  holy  expostulation,  and  for  solemn  warning,  this  farewell  ode  has  never 
been  surpassed,  and  it  furnishes  an  incidental  proof  of  the  fact  that,  unlike  most 
other  men,  Moses  continued,  to  the  very  end  of  his  long  life,  to  grow  in  those  qual- 
ities of  imagination  and  fiery  enthusiasm  which  are  usually  regarded  as  the  special 
characteristics  of  youth.     There  is  in  it  a  wondrous  combination  of  the  strength 
of  manh©od  with  the  experience  of  old  age,  and  of  the  imaginative  force  of  youth 
with  the  wisdom  which  increasing  years  supply.     Nor  is  this  all  :   there  is  a 
marvellous  interblending   of   the    various    relationships    in    which    Moses   stood 
at  once  to  God  and  to  the  people.     He  praises  Jehovah  with  the  fervour  of  a 
seraph,  and  he  pleads  with  the  people  with  the  tenderness  of  a  father.     He  deals 
with  national  subjects  in  the  spirit  of  a  statesman,  and  warns  of  coming  doom 
with  the  sternness  of  a  prophet.     Now  the  strains  are  soft  and  low,  as  if  they 
came  from  the  cords  of  an  iEolian  harp  stirred  by  the  breeze  of  a  gentle  summer 
eve  ;  anon  they  are  loud  and  stormful,  as  if  some  gust  of  passionate  intensity  had 
come  sweeping  over  his  spirit;   now  they  are  luminous  with  the  recollection  of 
God^s  mercies,  and  again  they  are  lowering,  as  if  laden  with  the  electric  burden  of 
God's  coming  wrath.     Of  course,  in  all  he  spoke  as  he  was  moved  by  the  Holy 
Ghost ;  but,  as  the  Spirit  used  not  the  vocal  organs  only,  but  the  soul  of  the  man, 
this  ode  conclusively  proves  that  if  Moses  had  not  been  the  grandest  lawgiver 
and  statesman  of  his  nation,  and  even  of  the  world,  he  might  have  been  one  of 
the  noblest  poets.     It  shows,  too,  that  there  was  in   him   the  exceedingly  rare 
alliance  of  a  mind  which  was  alive  to  the  importance  of  the  minutest  details  of 
legislation,  with  a  soul  whose  wings  could  soar  into  the  loftiest  regions  of  thought 
and  feeling.     With  undimmed  eye  he  looked  on  more  trying  light  than  that  of  the 
common  sunshine,  and  with  unabated  force  he  ascended,  even  at  the  age  of  six- 
score  years,  a  more  ethereal  height  than  that  of  Pisgah  ;  so  that,  if  this  ode  had 
been  found  elsewhere  than  in  the  Bible,  mere  literary  critics  would  have  risen 
into  ecstasies  over  its  exquisite    manifestation   of  beauty  in  the  lap  of  teiTor. 
{W.  M.  Taylor,  D.D.)        The  dying  sang  of  Moses :— The  subject  of  the  song  is 
Jehovah  and  His  people,  and  the  substance  of  it  is  given  in  xxxii.  3-6.     The  faith- 
fulness of  Jehovah,  the  God  of  truth,  the  Rock  of  salvation,  and  the  unfaithfulness 
of  His  fickle  and  foolish  people  —  such  are  clearly  to  be  the  main  ideas  of  the 
song.     In  the  after  developments  there  are  three  things  very  powerfully  set  forth. 
I.  What  Iseael  owes  to  God  (vers.  7-14).     Here  the  great  things  which  God 
had  done  for  them  are  brought  out  in  a  few  bold  delineations,  mingling  strength 
and  pathos  in  a  marvellous  degree.     He  shows  how  from  the  beginning  God  had 
set  His  regardful  eyes  upon  them,  how  He  had  guided  the  history  of  all  other 
nations  in  a  manner  subservient  to  their  welfare,  making  them  and  their  develop- 
ment the  historic  centre  of  the  ancient  world  ;  how  He  had  found  them  poor, 
helpless  wanderers  in  the  wilderness,  and  formed  them  into  a  people  there— His 
own  people,  whom  He  had  fed  and  led  and  trained  as  a  tender  mother  might— 
and  at  last  brought  into  the  goodly  land  He  had  promised  them,  exalting  them 
high  among  the  nations  of  the  earth,  and  giving  them  richly  all  things  to  enjoy. 


496  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  ixxi. 

II.  How  WILL  Israel  pat  the  debt  ?  To  this  question  the  prophetic  song  gives 
a  sad  answer.  Israel  will  pay  her  debt  of  gratitude  to  God  by  base  ingratitude, 
beginning  with  self-indulgence,  and  going  on  to  neglect  of  Jehovah  and  the  worship 
of  strange  gods.  Such  is  the  sad  prophetic  picture  in  verses  15-18.  Thus  Israel 
requites  GcS.  III.  How  will  God  requite  Israel  ?  Almost  all  that  remains  of 
the  song  is  taken  up  with  the  fearful  answer  to  this  question,  setting  forth  how 
God  takes  notice  of  it  first,  and  is  filled  with  indignation ;  how  He  hides  His 
face  and  leaves  His  people  to  themselves  and  to  the  bitter  fruits  of  their  ingrati- 
tude ;  how  He  takes  their  precious  privileges  from  them,  and  gives  them  to  those 
who  till  then  had  been  "no  people"  ;  how,  finally,  He  lets  loose  on  them  all  the 
fury  of  His  vengeance,  and  utterly  destroys  their  place  and  nation.  All  this  we 
find  realised  in  history.  The  entire  history  of  the  founding  of  the  Christian 
Church,  especially  in  the  light  in  which  it  is  put  by  the  great  apostle,  who  again 
and  again  quotes  the  words  of  this  song  in  connection  with  the  calling  of  the 
Gentiles,  is  a  fulfilment  of  these  warning  words  of  Moses.  All  this  is  very  dark  ; 
but  it  is  dark  only  to  those  who  "forsake  God,  and  lightly  esteem  the  Rock 
of  their  salvation "  (ver.  15).  The  very  faithfulness  of  God  to  His  most  terrible 
threatenings  is  an  additional  reason  why  those  who  believe  in  Him  should  exercise 
most  unshaken  confidence  in  Him.  Then,  too,  if  you  examine  the  song  through- 
out, yon  will  find  it  full  of  evidence  of  the  goodness  and  long-suffering  of  the  Lord. 
Though  there  is  inflexible  justice,  both  in  the  prophecy  itself  and  in  its  fulfilment, 
yet  throughout  all  it  is  evident  that  He  speaks  and  acts,  "who  delighteth  not  in 
the  death  of  him  that  dieth"  ;  who  "  willeth  not  that  any  should  perish,  but  that 
all  should  turn  unto  Him  and  live."  We  have  looked  at  this  song  as  a  witness 
against  Israel.  This  was  doubtless  its  original  design  ;  but  its  scope  is  far  wider. 
This  song  was  written  for  a  witness  against  all  who  enjoy  Israel's  privileges  and 
follow  Israel's  sins.  Even  among  the  Gentiles,  though  all  are  alike  welcome,  and 
exclusive  privileges  are  now  done  away  entirely  in  Christ  Jesus,  there  have  been 
and  are  those  who  are  far  in  advance  of  others  in  respect  to  the  advantages  they 
enjoy.  First  came  the  Greek  and  Latin  races,  united  in  the  mighty  Roman 
Empire.  To  them  fii-st,  among  the  Gentiles,  the  Gospel  was  preaclied ;  and  by 
them  first,  as  a  nation  and  race,  was  the  Gospel  received.  Three  hundred  years 
had  not  passed  away  from  the  death  of  "Jesus  of  Nazareth"  till  the  faith  of 
"  that  same  Jesus "  was  the  established  religion  of  the  Roman  Empire ;  and  not 
long  thereafter  the  privileges  of  the  Gospel  were  within  reach  of  almost  the  whole 
of  that  vast  population.  What  a  change  from  the  martyr  days,  the  days  of  hiding 
in  the  catacombs !  Was  it  not  as  true  of  the  Christians  of  the  Roman  Empire  as 
it  was  of  ancient  Israel,  that  God  had  "found  them  in  a  desert  land,"  had  "led 
them  about,"  had  "kept  them  as  the  apple  of  His  eye,"  and  had  at  last  "made 
them  ride  upon  the  high  places  of  the  earth,"  and  given  them  to  "eat  the  increase 
of  the  fields  "  ?  Well,  how  did  the  favoured  people  then  pay  their  debt  of  grati- 
tude ?  Was  it  not  the  old  story  over  again?  "  Jeshurun  waxed  fat  and  kicked." 
They  * '  waxed  fat,  grew  thick,  were  covered  with  fatness  ;  then  they  forsook  God, 
and  lightly  esteemed  the  Rock  of  their  salvation."  They  became  self-indulgent, 
"earthly,  sensual,  devilish."  Corruption  of  manners  and  corruption  of  doctrine 
set  in  "like  a  flood";  they  turned  to  "strange  gods";  they  worshipped  saints 
and  relics,  and  bowed  down  to  images ;  they  adored  the  consecrated  wafer.  The 
very  light  that  was  in  them  became  darkness,  and  "how  great  was  that  dark- 
ness ! "  And  as,  before,  the  heritage  of  truth  and  blessing  had  passed  from  the 
Jew  to  the  Gentile,  so  now  it  passed  from  the  Roman  to  the  Teuton.  These 
Teutonic  races  of  the  north  had  been  "no  people"  in  the  eyes  of  the  empire  of 
Rome.  They  had  been  known  only  as  barbarians,  both  in  the  Greek  and  Latin 
tongues.  Yet  these  "no  people,"  these  "barbarians,"  who  had  fallen  one  by  one 
before  the  all-conquering  might  of  Rome,  became  the  very  people  who  fell  heirs  to 
the  legacy  of  Divine  truth,  and  the  great  blessings  which  accompany  its  posses- 
sion. For,  though  the  first  reformation  seemed  for  a  time  to  work  among  the 
Latin  races  also,  it  was  only  for  a  time  ;  the  hold  of  corruption  was  too  firm  for  it 
to  last,  and  they  all  relapsed  into  the  darkness  from  which  at  first  they  had 
seemed  ready  to  emerge,  while  among  the  Germanic  races  the  light  of  truth 
continued  to  shine  and  to  diffuse  itself  over  a  widening  area.  And  now  it  is  the 
Teutonic  races  who  are  in  the  position  of  Israel  of  old,  and  principally  those  who 
speak  the  English  language.  Who  can  tell  what  we  who  speak  the  English  tongue 
owe  to  Jehovah,  "the  Rock  of  our  salvation"?  Where  did  He  "find  "us?  Was 
it  not  "in  a  desert  land "  indeed — a  very  howling  wilderness ?    See  what  the  early 


CHAP,  xxxii.]  DEUTERONOMY.  497 

Britons  were  when  first  they  heard  Jehovah's  name.  And  how  has  the  Lord 
"led  "  them  since  then  I  How  tenderly  did  He  "  bear  "  our  fathers  on,  teaching 
them  by  degrees  the  use  of  that  liberty  which  has  grown  with  Britain's  growth, 
and  strengthened  with  her  strength.  And  how  has  He  now  "made  us  to  nde 
upon  the  high  places  of  the  earth,"  and  given  "us  the  increase  of  the  fields  ! 
For  is  it  not  a  patent  fact  that  the  destinies  of  the  world  are  at  this  moment, 
under  God,  swayed  by  those  who  speak  our  mother  tongue,  while  the  great  mass 
of  the  world's  wealth  is  in  their  hands?  And  all  this  we  owe  to  Him  who  la 
"Head  over  all  things."  Not  only  our  rich  spiritual  privileges,  but  even  our 
temporal  greatness,  our  position  and  power  and  wealth  in  the  world,  we  owe  to 
Jehovah,  God  of  Israel,  "the  Rock  of  our  salvation."  Well,  how  do  we  "requite 
the  Lord"?  Is  it  not  very  much  in  the  old  way?  Is  not  wealth  breeding  self- 
indulgence  and  luxury  ;  and  are  not  these  leading  us,  as  a  people,  to  forget  God, 
and  "lightly  to  esteem  the  Rock  of  our  salvation"?  Are  there  not  many 
"strange  gods"  among  us  :  Mammon,  Fashion,  Pleasure?  And  what  of  this  sad 
revival  of  Middle- Age  superstition  ?  Has  not  the  sign  of  Rome  been  written  with  a 
pen  of  iron  and  the  point  of  a  diamond  ?  And  why  this  haste  to  be  partakers 
again  of  her  sin  and  of  her  plagues  ?  Oh,  is  not  this  song  a  witness  against  us 
too  «  God  is  long-suffering  indeed,  and  it  is  well  that  He  is,  or  where  should 
we  English-speaking  people  be  to-day?  But  His  long-sufifering  has  a  limit,  as  is 
evident  from  the  past.     (/.  M.  Gibson,  D.D.) 

Ver.  27.  Thy  stiff  neck.— Stiff  necks  .—There  are  many  stiff-necked  people.  They 
are  met  with  in  the  workshop,  in  the  office,  and  almost  everywhere.  I  shoiJd  not 
be  surprised  at  all  if  we  had  many  in  this  assembly  whose  necks  are  as  stiff  as  it 
is  possible  to  be.  There  are  a  great  many  necks  stiff  with  pride  and  selfishness. 
There  are  some  men  who  are  saving  monev ;  who  live  in  their  freehold  cottages ; 
whose  necks  are  too  stiff  to  see  that  they  ought  to  pay  the  rent  of  the  cottage 
in  which  their  poor  old  parents  live,  who,  perchance,  in  some  country  viHage  are 
getting  parish  relief.  There  are  other  kinds  of  stiff  necks.  From  our  childhood 
most  of  us  have  been  taught  to  love  the  Saviour,  to  trust  in  God,  and  do  good.  Yet 
I  am  afraid  that  a  great  many  of  us  have  disregarded  the  advice  of  those  who  loved 
us,  and  we  have  grown  so  unwise  that  many  of  us  have  stiffened  our  necks  against 
religion.  There  is  a  tendency,  now  and  again,  to  sneer  at  religion,  and  to  talk 
about  it  as  if  it  were  all  nonsense.  There  are  a  great  many  men  who  stiffen  their 
necks.  This  is  unwise.  Take  the  New  Testament  and  study  that  life  of  Jesus 
Christ,  as  sensible  men.  Look  at  the  book,  examine  its  pages,  and  learn  ita 
religion.  Do  not  stiffen  your  necks  against  God,  against  purity,  against  holiness. 
{CJMiies  Leach.) 


CHAPTER  XXXII. 


Vees.  1,  2.  Give  ear,  0  ye  heavens,  and  I  will  speak.— ifosw*  adj'uration.'^ls&i&h 
makes  a  similar  sublime  commencement  to  his  prophecies,  apostrophising  heaven 
and  earth  in  nearly  identical  language.  Moses  had  already  used  the  same  senti- 
ment in  simple  didactic  form  when  he  said,  "I  call  heaven  and  earth  to  witness 
this  day,  that  I  have  set  before  thee  life  and  death,  the  blessing  and  the  curse,  '  and 
thereby  he  explains  the  meaning  of  this  more  highly  poetic  style  of  adjuration. 
Such  an  adjuration  indicates  great  intensity,  elevation,  and  sincerity  of  feeUn^, 
while  calling  attention  to  the  solemn  importance  of  what  is  about  to  be  said.  It  is 
like  a  herald's  cry,  the  sound  of  the  tocsin,  or  the  summoning  of  an  assize.  For 
heaven  and  earth  had  both  of  them  been  witnesses  of  the  covenant  and  giving  of 
the  law.  By  a  sudden  but  suggestive  transition  we  are  introduced  to  the  style  and 
theme  of  the  song.  The  change  is  from  the  awe-inspiring  to  the  tenderest  of  moods  ; 
but  it  is  made  without  derogating  from  the  loftiness  of  the  thought  The  imagery 
of  the  gentle  rain  and  the  softly  distilling  dew  is  a  fit  sequel  to  the  opening  appeal 
to  heaven  and  earth,  and  bespeaks  attention  to  the  source,  the  quality,  and  the 
design  of  the  song.  1.  Its  source.  The  reference  to  dew  and  rain  implies,  first  of 
all,  that  the  whole  subject,  suggestion,  and  origin  of  the  song  is  from  above.  Nothing 
but  a  voice  Divine  will  ever  avail  to  soften  human  nature,  come  home  to  the  con^ 
acience,  subjugate  the  will  and  reign  in  the  affections.     "Ascribe  ye  greatness," 

3« 


498  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxxir. 

therefore,  that  is,  authoritativeness,  "  nnto  our  God."  2.  Its  quality,  **  My  doctrine 
shall  drop  as  the  rain,  my  speech  shall  distil  as  the  dew."  The  song  is  just  the 
pith  and  substance  of  the  Book  of  Deuteronomy  ;  the  distilled  quintessence  of  the 
Deuteronomic  law  and  covenant.  It  is  a  protestation  that  no  community  can  ever 
thrive,  surmount  their  dangers  and  slough  off  their  corruptions,  by  simply  con- 
fining their  attention  to  earthly  relations  and  requisitions.  They  need  a  higher 
motive  and  spirit  of  life  as  a  sustaining  and  self-cleansing  principle — in  one  word, 
a  Gospel  of  God.  3.  Its  design.  "As  the  small  rain  upon  the  tender  grass,  and  as 
the  showers  upon  the  herb  "  ;  gentle,  yet  copious  and  penetrative  ;  soft,  seasonable 
and  saturating  ;  not  like  a  sudden  but  soon  spent  thunderstorm,  nor  the  beating  of 
hail  that  dashes  where  it  alights ;  rather  like  small  rain,  the  softer  it  falls  the 
deeper  it  sinks  ;  or  like  the  dew,  the  more  insinuating  it  is,  the  more  fertilising  and 
lastingly  effective.  {A.  H.  Drysdale,  M.A.)  My  speech  shall  distil  as  the  dew. 
— Qod's  doctrine  as  the  dew : — What  a  representation  of  gentleness  !  The  doctrine 
shall  not  fall  in  toiTcnts,  but  it  shall  drop  ;  the  speech  shall  not  even  be  felt  in  its 
descent,  for  it  shall  distil.  Yet  who  is  it  employs  this  gentlest  of  all  gentle  imagery  ? 
It  is  Moses :  the  self-same  man  who  had  pronounced  the  terrific  judgments  on 
Egypt.  He  had  promulgated  a  system  which  was  given  forth  in  thunder,  and 
lightning,  and  thick  darkness,  and  a  terrible  tempest ;  the  publication  of  this  law- 
was  attended  with  the  severest  penalties.  Notwithstanding  every  appearance  to 
the  contrary,  it  was  true  of  every  word  which  God  spake  by  Moses,  as  well  as  of 
every  word  which  Jesus  spoke,  that  His  doctrine  dropped  like  the  rain,  and  distilled 
like  the  dew.  "We  need  scarcely  tell  you  that  the  term  "doctrine  "  includes  all  God's 
teaching  in  every  portion  of  His  revelation  to  man.  It  matters  not  whether  truth 
be  found  in  direct  assertions  of  great  principles,  or  whether  it  be  wrapped  up  in  the 
imagery  of  poetry,  the  shadows  of  the  types,  the  facts  of  history,  or  the  allegories  of 
parables ;  it  is  all  the  same  truth.  Thws  not  only  is  every  form  of  God's  Word 
"doctrine,"  but  in  its  fertilising  effects  on  the  soul  may  most  appropriately  be  com- 
pared to  the  dropping  rain  and  distilling  dew.  But  in  order  to  understand  this 
gentle  character  ascribed  by  Moses  to  God's  doctrine,  you  must  take  heed  that  you 
do  not  fall  into  several  errors  which  will  perplex  your  belief  in  the  dew-like  influ- 
ence of  Divine  truth.  The  first  of  these  errors  is  to  confound  the  effect  of  doctrine 
itself  with  that  outward  teaching  by  which  it  may  often  be  set  forth.  The  mere 
manner  of  teaching  is  no  just  criterion  of  the  matter  of  teaching.  There  are  differ- 
ences of  character  which  even  demand  differences  of  outward  instruction.  But, 
secondly,  we  must  warn  you  against  supposing  that  God  does  not  sometimes  adopt 
an  internal  as  well  as  an  external  mode  of  teaching,  which  may  appear  to  conflict 
with  the  statements  of  our  text.  How  often  do  the  threatenings  of  Divine  wrath 
seem  to  lay  hold  on  the  spirit,  and  for  a  time  keep  it  shrinking  beneath  the  pro- 
spect of  inevitable  destruction  !  But  notwithstanding  these  modes  of  teaching 
which  God  may  often  employ,  yet  we  maintain  that  the  substance  of  that  teaching 
is  what  Moses  describes  it — gentle  as  the  dropping  rain,  the  distilling  dew,  the 
small  rain,  the  soft  shower.  You  will  remark  that  the  sacred  writer  declares  that 
his  doctrine  is  to  be  like  "small  rain  on  the  tender  herb  "  ;  and  this  sentence  it  is 
which  explains  the  entire  seeming  anomaly  we  have  noticed.  God's  truth  does  not 
fall  like  small  rain  on  the  hardy,  tough,  strong  herb,  but  like  small  rain  on  the 
tender  herb.  There  must  be  a  preparation — a  softening  of  the  soul  to  receive  the 
gentle  influences  of  the  Gospel.  And  not  only  at  our  first  conversion  to  God,  but 
even  afterwards,  the  herb  may  become  hardened,  and  require  occasional  softening, 
before  the  small  rain  is  given.  The  advanced  Christian  sometimes  complains  of 
waves  and  billows  ;  he  hears  deep  calling  to  deep  at  the  noise  of  God's  waterspouts. 
But  the  sole  reason  of  this  is  that  there  is  some  deficiency  in  the  tenderness  of  the 
herb — some  setting  up  of  the  head  which  needs  the  blast  of  the  storm  to  bring  it 
low.  God  loves  not  to  see  a  proud  look  ;  He  loves  not  a  stiff-necked  obedience  ;  He 
loves  not  to  find  His  servant  chafing  against  the  bit ;  He  must  have  the  herb  tender. 
The  ground  being  thus  prepared,  the  doctrine  of  the  Lord  always  drops  as  the  rain 
and  distils  as  the  dew.  But  let  us  glance  at  a  few  brief  practical  truths  which  the 
imagery  of  our  text  suggests.  1.  If  you  are  watered  by  this  heavenly  dew,  it  must 
be  all-pervading.  Look  at  the  gi-ass  after  the  dew  has  fallen  ;  it  is  thoroughly 
covered  with  moisture  ;  nothing  saturates  it  so  completely  ;  a  storm  would  not  wet 
it  half  so  effectually ;  the  plant  is  all  over  the  same  ;  no  leaf  but  it  sparkles  with 
dewdrops  ;  no  blade  escapes  ;  all  are  steeped  in  dew.  Now,  is  it  the  same  with 
you  ?  The  operation  of  the  Spirit  is  always  total  and  entire.  All  things  become 
new  where  He  works.     2.  Then,  secondly,  recollect  that  another  of  the  character- 


CKA^.  XXXII.]  LEUTERONOMY.  499 

istics  of  this  dew  is  its  diffusiveness.  Not  only  is  the  dew  the  most  equal  and  general 
giver  of  moisture,  but  the  plants  which  receive  it  pass  it  on  to  others.  From  leaf 
to  leaf,  and  from  blade  to  blade  it  falls,  so  that  if  you  pass  through  a  forest  on  a 
dewy  morning  it  is  one  constant  dropping.  So  must  it  be  with  the  Christian. 
He  is  not  only  to  be  influenced  by  the  Spirit  himself,  but  by  the  aid  of  the  same 
Spirit  he  must  pass  on  that  influence  to  others.  3.  Thirdly,  still  another  feature 
of  this  dew  is  its  fertilising  eff'ects.  It  often  falls  most  heavily  at  times  of  the  year 
when  drought  prevails,  and  when  the  plants  would  otherwise  be  scorched  and 
withered.  Its  final  efl*ect  is  not  superficial ;  it  does  not  merely  wet  the  leaves  and 
flowers,  but  it  percolates  to  the  very  root.  The  dew  thus  develops  itself  in  fruits  : 
it  waters  the  plant,  and  makes  it  bring  forth  abundantly.  And  so  with  our  dew. 
"Whenever  the  influences  of  the  Spirit  are  felt,  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit  are  seen. 
4.  But,  lastly,  another  feature  of  this  dew  is  that  it  will  prove  specially  and  abundantly 
operative  in  the  time  of  trial.  It  is  not  when  the  sun  shines  that  the  dew  falls  ;  it 
principally  descends  when  the  day  is  wrapped  in  evening  shades  or  when  the  morn- 
ing is  still  hidden  in  twilight,  or  when  dark  night  has  already  set  in :  so  likewise 
is  sorrow  a  time  of  special  dew  falling.  "When  have  the  promises  and  love  of  God 
so  gentle  and  yet  powerful  an  influence  as  in  affliction's  sad  hour  ?  "When  are  His 
cheering  truths  so  sweet  as  when  trouble  embitters  the  soul  1  {D.  F.  Jarman,  M.A.) 
The  dew  of  the  ^Torc?.—"  Distil  as  the  dew."  Who  hears  the  dew  fall?  What 
microphone  could  reveal  that  music  to  our  "gross  un  purged  ears"?  1.  The  dew 
distils  in  silence.  So  does  the  speech  of  God.  In  stillness  God's  love  is  condensed 
into  dewlike  communications ;  not  read,  nor  heard,  but  known  by  direct  power  of 
the  Spirit  upon  the  soul.  Not  much  in  noise,  turmoil,  and  bustle.  2.  The  dew 
distils  in  darkness.  You  look  out  some  dark  night :  there  is  no  storm,  no  rain,  not 
the  least  token  to  your  senses  of  what  is  going  on.  In  the  morning  you  see  every 
blade  and  leaf  tipped  with  a  dewdrop,  everything  revived  and  freshened,  prepared 
for  the  heat  of  the  day.  So  His  words  fall  on  your  souls  in  darkness,  not  with 
sensible  power  ;  nothing  flashes  out  from  the  page,  nothing  shines  to  shed  pleasant 
light  on  your  path.  You  do  not  hear  sound  of  abundance  of  rain,  but  the  words 
are  distilling  as  the  dew  and  preparing  you  for  day.  3.  The  dew  falls  not  in  one 
mass  of  water,  but  innumerable  little  drops.  What  one  drop  does  not  reach  another 
does.  It  is  not  one  overwhelmingly  powerful  word  which  does  this  holy  night  work 
in  the  soul,  but  the  unrealised  influences  of  many,  dropping  silently  on  the  plants  of 
the  Lord  ;  one  resting  here,  another  there  ;  one  touching  an  unrecognised  need, 
another  reaching  an  unconsciously  failing  grace.  "Each  drop  uncounted  hath  its 
own  mission,  and  is  duly  sent  to  its  own  leaf  or  blade."  4.  Sometimes  God's  dew 
goes  on  falling  many  hours  of  night.  Watches  seem  long,  and  starlight  does  not 
reveal  it.  But  none  is  lost ;  some  is  already  doing  hidden  work  as  it  falls  around 
the  very  roots  of  our  being,  some  ready  to  be  revealed  in  sparkling  brightness  when 
the  night  is  over  ;  lessons  learnt  among  the  shadows  to  be  lived  out  in  the  sun- 
shine. 5.  The  object  of  the  dew  is  to  maintain  life  in  dry  places  and  seasons.  In 
rainless  regions  this  is  better  understood.  Any  dry  week  in  summer  we  see  enough 
to  understand  the  beauty  of  the  figure.  This  speech  is  spirit  and  life  to  souls,  how- 
ever feebly,  yet  really  alive  to  God.  Dew  does  nothing  for  stones,  nor  a  dead  leaf. 
It  falls  on  little  fading  plants,  whose  leaves  absorb  life,  renewing  moisture,  and 
closed  blossoms  open  out  again  with  fresher  fragrance  than  before.  Dryness  is 
more  to  be  dreaded  than  darkness.  {F.  R.  Havergal.)  Genuine  religious  teach- 
ing : — I.  Genuine  religious  teaching  is  gentle.  Descends  on  the  soul  as  the  dew 
and  small  rain.  The  great  religious  teachers  have  been  quiet  talkers.  II.  Genuine 
religious  teaching  is  penetrating.  Goes  down  through  the  intellect  into  the  con- 
science and  heart.  III.  Genuine  reKgious  teaching  is  refreshing.  Descends  with 
quickening  influence  into  the  soul.  {Homilist.)  Soothing  nature  of  Christian 
doctrine : — The  lovely  gentleness,  the  refreshing  and  cheering  nature,  of  Divine 
doctrine  is  here  most  beautifully  set  forth.  And,  indeed,  very  useful  is  it  that  the 
amiable  character  of  our  blessed  religion  should  be  as  much  as  possible  presented 
to  the  view  of  men.  For  could  they  once  see  it  they  would  be  so  in  love  with  its 
beauty  that  their  whole  soul  would  be  ravished  with  delight  in  thinking  of  it,  and 
would  teem  with  desire  to  be  eff"ectually  possessed  of  it.  But  how  is  the  beauty  of 
religion  to  be  shown  to  men  ?  It  canuot  be  really  apprehended  but  by  experience. 
Wherefore  ofl'er  a  fervent  prayer  to  heaven  for  giace  to  dispose  your  hearts  to 
receive  this  Word.  We  cannot  be  sm-prised  at  finding  the  "yoke  easy  and  the 
burden  light"  of  that  Master  who  is  thus  "meek  and  lowly  in  heart,"  He 
graciously  promises  that  if  we  take  this  yoke  upon  us  we  shall  "find  rest  to  ou? 


600  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxxil. 

souls."  This  doctiine  does,  indeed,  drop  upon  the  souls  of  troubled  sinnei-s  with 
the  softness  of  a  gentle  rain  falling  upon  a  fleece  of  wool.  Is,  then,  all  forgiven  ? 
Am  I  clennsed  from  all  my  sin,  relieved  from  all  my  guilt  ?  Am  I  at  peace  with 
God  ?  Do  I  partake  of  His  love  ?  "  Blessed  is  he  whose  unrighteousness  is  forgiven, 
and  whose  sin  is  covered."  But  when  we  come  to  consider  the  new  life,  the  service 
of  Christ,  which  must  follow  if  we  are  to  walk  in  favour  with  God,  shall  we  then 
find  this  comfort  and  gentleness  of  Christian  doctrine  ?  Most  assuredly  we  shall  in 
the  doctrine  itself.  The  resistance  which  our  passions  and  inclinations  make  to 
the  Divine  law  causes  all  the  discomfort  and  painfulness  in  submitting  our  hearts  to 
be  ruled  by  it.  But  it  may  be  acknowledged  that  holiness  of  heart  and  life  when 
attained  may  be  comfortable,  delightful ;  and  yet  a  man  may  say,  Doubtless  it 
would  be  good  for  me  to  give  up  my  unchaste  and  intemperate  manner  of  living, 
but  I  cannot  endure  the  self-denial  necessary  for  it.  A  man  may  say,  It  would  be 
good  indeed  for  me  to  be  a  devoted  servant  of  Jesus,  but  I  don't  know  how  to  tear 
myself  from  my  old  habits,  and  leave  my  former  companions.  Could  I  see  all  this 
done,  see  myself  become  a  new  creature,  and  become  associated  with  religious  people, 
I  believe  that  I  could  be  happy.  But  now  think  of  this  one  thing.  What  kind  of 
Master  are  you  called  upon  to  serve  ?  Is  it  not  Jesus  Christ,  the  kind  and  forbear- 
ing? Will  not  He  be  a  gentle  Master  to  you  ?  With  what  gentleness  is  He  repre- 
sented administering  spiritual  food  to  the  souls  of  His  people !  How  considerate 
is  He  set  forth  of  the  different  spiritual  condition  and  circumstances  of  men,  how 
tender  to  those  who  are  in  weakness,  or  in  a  great  trial  and  difficulty  !  By  the  gentle 
influences  of  the  Holy  Spirit  He  can  convert  the  soul,  and  change  all  its  disposi- 
tions and  aff'ections.  Thus  will  Jesus,  in  the  most  gentle  and  yet  the  most 
powerful  manner,  lead  those  who  commit  themselves  to  Him.  (R.  L.  Cotton,  M.A.) 
Doctrine  cts  rain;  speech  as  dew: — ^The  earth  without  rain  cannot  grow  one  tiny 
grass-blade ;  when  the  clouds  keep  away  the  flowers  hang  down  their  heads,  and 
shrivel  and  bum,  and  represent  the  very  spirit  of  necessity  and  pain.  We  must 
have  the  black  clouds ;  how  welcome  they  are  after  a  time  of  drought  and  scorch- 
ing, when  the  earth  is  opening  its  mouth  and  asking  for  a  draught  of  water  !  So 
God's  doctrine  is  to  be  poured  out  upon  thirsty  souls,  burnt  and  scorched  lives, 
ruined  and  unproductive  natures.  The  rain-plash  is  a  sweet  music,  a  tender  appeal, 
a  liquid  persuasion.  The  rain  will  accommodate  itself  to  all  forms  and  shapes, 
and  it  will  impartially  visit  the  poor  man's  little  handful  of  garden  and  the  great 
man's  countless  acres.  Such  is  the  Gospel  of  Christ :  it  is  impartial,  gentle,  neces- 
sary ;  it  finds  the  heart  when  the  heart  is  scorched,  and  asks  to  heal  its  burning, 
and  to  make  the  barren  land  of  the  inner  life  beautiful  with  summer  flowers.  We 
cannot  tell  how  the  Word  gets  into  the  heart — how  softly,  how  silently  :  it  is  there, 
and  we  knew  it  not ;  we  expected  it,  and  at  the  very  time  we  were  looking  out  for 
it,  it  was  already  there ;  it  is  the  secret  of  the  Lord,  and  it  moves  by  a  noble 
mystery  of  action,  so  that  no  line  can  be  laid  upon  it,  and  no  man  may  arbitrarily 
handle  the  wealth  of  gold.  **  As  the  small  rain  upon  the  tender  herb,  and  as  the 
showers  upon  the  grass."  There  shall  be  adaptation  between  the  one  and  the  other : 
if  the  herb  is  "tender  "  the  rain  must  be  "  small."  Do  not  thunder  upon  us  with 
Thy  great  power  ;  do  not  plead  against  us  with  all  the  winds  of  Thine  eloquence,  for 
who  could  stand  against  the  storm  ?  On  the  other  hand,  the  tenderer  the  grass  the 
better  it  can  bear  even  the  scudding  shower  and  the  heavy  downpour.  Great  trees 
are  torn,  or  wrenched  from  their  roots,  or  are  thrust  down  in  contempt,  but  all  the 
grass  of  the  meadow  is  but  the  greener  for  the  winds  which  have  galloped  over  it, 
or  the  great  rivers  that  have  poured  themselves  upon  the  emerald  bed.  Jesus 
will  bless  the  meek,  the  merciful,  the  pure  in  heart,  the  peace-loving ;  but  as  for 
those  who  in  heathen  vanity  set  themselves  up  against  Him,  He  will  dash  them  in 
pieces  like  a  potter's  vessel.  The  Word  does  not  always  produce  an  instantaneous 
effect :  the  Word  has  sometimes  to  filter  well  down  into  the  thought  and  into  the 
heart  and  life ;  and  the  Word  does  not  report  itself  in  the  mere  quantity  of  the 
doctrine,  but  in  the  greenness  of  the  young  grass,  in  the  beauty  and  fruitfulness  of 
the  tender  herb :  no  statistical  return  shall  be  made  of  the  number  of  discourses 
heard,  or  the  number  of  chapters  read,  but  the  life  shall  be  the  more  verdant  in 
spring-like  beauty,  and  the  more  splendid  in  all  the  colouring  of  summer.  (/. 
Parker,  D.D.)  As  the  small  rain  upon  the  tender  herb. — Small  rain  for  tender 
herbs : — The  highest  power  is  consistent  with  the  lowliest  tenderness.  He  that  is 
mightiest  in  word  is  mighty,  not  so  much  in  thunder,  and  earthquake,  and  fire,  as 
in  a  silent  persuasiveness.  I.  Moses  meant  to  be  tender.  Moses  intended,  in 
the  sermon  he  was  about  to  preach,  to  be  exceedingly  gentle.     He  would  water 


CHAP.  XXXII.]  DEUTERONOMY.  501 


minds  as  tender  herbs,  and  water  them  in  the  same  fashion  as  the  small  rain  does. 
He  would  not  be  a  beating  hail,  nor  even  a  down -pouring  shower,  but  he  would  be 
"as  the  small  rain  upon  the  tender  herb."     1.  And  this  is  the  more  remarkable, 
because  he  was  about  to  preach  a  doctrinal  sermon.    Does  he  not  say,  "  My  doctrine 
shall  drop  as  the  rain  "  ?    2.  It  is  equally  remarkable  that  this  discourse  of  Moses 
was  a  sermon  of  rebuke.     He  rebuked  the  people,  with  no  small  degree  of  sternness, 
when  he  said,  "  Jeshurun  waxed  fat,  and  kicked ;  thou  art  waxen  fat,  thou  art 
grown  thick;  then  he  forsook  God  which  made  him."    He  warned  the  people  of 
their  great  sin,  and  he  did  not  hesitate  to  say,  "They  are  a  nation  void  of  counsel, 
neither  is  there  any  understanding  in  them."    Yet  he  felt  that  he  had  rebuked 
with  the  utmost  meekness,  and  had  still  been  as  the  soft  dew  and  gentle  rain. 
Upbraiding  must  be  done  in  tenderness.     3.  Furthermore,  his  style  of  speech  was 
compassionately  considerate,  even  as  the  dew  seems  to  consider  the  withered  grass, 
and  the  small  rain  to  adapt  itself  to  the  tender  herb.     In  his  teaching  he  evidently 
thought  of  the  feebler  sort,  and  suited  himself  to  those  depressed  by  grief.     4.  Fur- 
thermore, note  well  that  the  truth  which  our  Lord  spoke  had  always  a  refresh- 
ing effect  upon  those  who  were  spiritually  alive.     Our  blessed  Master's  sermons 
were  "as  the  small  rain  upon  the  tender  herb,"  not  merely  for  the  softness  of 
their  descent,  but  for  the  wondrous  efficacy  with  which  they  came.     His  words  fell 
not  as  fire  flakes  to  destroy,  nor  as  the  dust  from  the  wilderness  to  defile,  but  ever 
as  the  warm  shower  to  cherish.     So  we  learn  that  Moses  meant  to  be  tender,  and 
Jesus  was  tender.      What  else  do  we  learn  ?      5.   Why,   that  all  the  servants  of 
Jesus  Christ  ought  to  be  tender ;  for  if  Moses  was  so,  much  more  should  we  be.^ 
II.  Moses  hoped  to  be  penetrating  :  "  as  the  small  rain  upon  the  tender  herb. 
Now,  small  rain  is  meant  to  enter  the  herb,  so  that  it  may  drink  in  the  nourish- 
ment and  be  truly  refreshed.     The  rain  is  not  to  drench  the  herb,  and  it  is  not  to 
flood  it ;  it  is  to  feed  it,  to  revive  it.    This  was  what  Moses  aimed  at.    That  is  what 
all  true  preachers  of  Christ  aim  at.     Why  is  it  some  people  never  seem  to  take  m 
the  Word,  "as  the  small  rain  upon  the  tender  herb"?     1.  I  suppose  it  is,  first, 
because  some  of  it  may  be  above  their  understanding.     If  you  hear  a  sermon,  and 
you  do  not  know  at  all  what  the  good  man  is  about,  how  can  it  benefit  you  ? 
2.  Many  do  not  drink  in  the  sacred  Word  because  it  seems  to  them  too  good  to  be 
true.     This  is  limiting  the  goodness  of  God  :  God  is  so  good  that  nothing  can  be 
too  good  to  be  looked  for  from  Him.     3.  Many  persons  do  not  receive  the  Gospel 
promise  to  the  full  because  they  do  not  think  it  is  true  to  them  ;  anybody  else  may 
be  blessed  in  that  way,  but  they  cannot  think  it  probable  that  they  shall  be. 
Though  the  Gospel  is  particularly  directed  to  sinners,  yet  these  good  folks  think, 
"  Surely  grace  could  never  reach  to  us."     Oh,  how  we  lose  our  labour,  and  fail  to 
comfort  men,  because  of  the  unbelief  which  pretends  to  be  the  child  of  humility,  but 
is  really  the  offspring  of  pride  !    The  small  rain  does  not  get  at  the  tender  herb, 
because  the  herb  shrinks  from  the  silver  drops  which  would  cherish  it.      4.  No 
doubt  many  miss  the  charming  influences  of  heavenly  truth  because  they  do  not 
think  enough.     Is  it  not  strange  that  pople  should  think  sermons  worth  hearing, 
but  not  worth  meditating  upon  ?     It  is  as  foolish  as  if  a  man  thought  a  jomt  of 
meat  worth  buying,  but  not  worth  cooking  ;  for  meditation  is,  as  it  were,  a  sort  of 
holy  cookery  by  which  the  truth  is  prepared  to  be  food  for  the  soul.     5.  And,  once 
more,  we  ought  to  pray  that  when  we  hear  the  Word  we  may  be  prepared  to  receive 
it :  it  is  of  great  importance  that  we  should  open  the  doors  of  our  soul  to  let  the 
Gospel  enter  us.     Hospitality  to  truth  is  charity  to  ourselves.     III.  Moses  hoped 
TO  see  results.     "  As  the  small  rain  upon  the  tender  herb."     Now,  observe,  in 
looking  about  among  mankind,  that  whenever  wise  men  expect  any  result  from 
their  labours,  they  always  go  to  work  in  a  manner  adapted  to  the  end  they  have  m 
view.     Finding  the  people  to  be  comparable  to  tender  herbs,  he  adapted  his  speech 
to  them,  and  made  it  like  the  small  rain.     Now,  what  will  be  the  result  if  we  do 
the  same  ?      It  will  come  to  pass  there  will  be  among  us  young  converts   hke 
tender  herbs,  newly  planted,  and  if  we  speak  in  tenderness  we  shall  see  the  result, 
for  they  will  take  root  in  the  tiuth,  and  grow  in  it.      Paul  planted,  and  then 
Apollos  watered.     Why  did  Apollos  water  ?     Because  you  must  water  plants  after 
you  have  planted  them,  that  they  may  the  more  readily  strike  into  the  earth. 
Happy  shall  you  he  if  you  employ  your  greater  experience  in  strengthening  those 
whose  new  life  is  as  yet  feeble  !     Next,  when  a  man's  discourse  is  like  small  rain  to 
the  tender  herb,  he  sees  the  weak  and  perishing  one  revive  and  lift  up  his  head. 
The  herb  was  withering  at  first,  it  lay  down  faint  and  ready  to  die  ;  but  the  small 
rain  came,  and  it  seemed  to  say,    "Thank  you,"  and  it  looked  up,  and  lifted  its 


502  THE  BIBLICAL  ILL  USTRA  TOR.  [chap,  xxxir. 

head,  and  recovered  from  its  swoon.  You  will  see  a  reviving  eflFect  produced  \^  m 
faint  hearts  and  desponding  minds.  You  will  be  a  comforter,  you  will  cheer  a\vay 
the  fears  of  many,  and  make  glad  the  timid  and  fearful.  What  a  blessing  it  is 
when  you  see  that  result,  for  there  is  so  much  the  more  joy  in  the  world,  and  God 
is  so  much  the  more  glorified  !  When  you  water  tender  herbs,  and  see  them  grow, 
you  have  a  further  reward.  It  is  delightful  to  watch  the  development  and  increase 
of  grace  in  those  who  are  under  our  care.     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Ver.  3.  Ascribe  ye  greatness  unto  our  God. — The  greatness  of  God  :—l.  Oitr 

PRIMARY  CONCERN   SHOULD   BE   TO   ATTEMPT   TO    REALISE   THE   GREATNESS  OF   GOD, 

however  inadequate  all  our  conceptions  may  be.  1.  His  underived,  independent, 
and  eternal  existence.  In  this  His  nature  stands  out  in  distinction  from  all  created 
being.  2.  The  infinitude  of  His  knowledge.  There  is  no  evading  His  glance,  no 
travelling  beyond  the  reach  of  His  omniscience,  no  baffling  His  skill,  no  frustrating 
His  plans,  "no  searching  of  His  understanding."  3.  The  boundlessness  of  His 
power  and  dominion.  "Great  is  the  Lord,  and  of  great  power."  Take  the 
microscope,  and  all  the  orders  of  existence  which  it  reveals  are  embraced  in  His 
providence.  Take  the  telescope,  and  as  worlds  on  worlds  pass  before  your  vision, 
you  only  survey  other  parts  of  His  great  and  boundless  empire.  4.  The  grandeur 
of  His  moral  perfections.  His  holiness  is  unspotted,  the  standard  and  ])attern  of 
righteousness  to  all  creatures  and  to  all  worlds.  His  goodness  is  vast  and  unutter- 
able. It  gave  us  "  His  unspeakable  gift."  His  faithfulness  endure th  to  all 
generations,  giving  stability  to  the  world  which  He  created.     II.  The  practical 

LESSONS  ENFORCED  IN  THE  CALL  TO    "ASCRIBE   GREATNESS   TO   OUR   GOD."      1.   OuT 

adoration  is  a  fitting  tribute  to  His  greatness  and  majesty.  "  Whoso  offereth  praise 
glorifieth  Me."  It  is  the  acknowledgment  on  our  part  of  His  natural  and  moral 
perfections.  2.  It  is  not  only,  however,  by  the  direct  exercise  of  adoration  that  we 
are  to  fulfil  the  exhortation  of  the  text,  but  by  cultivating  a  humbling  impression  of 
the  Divine  Majesty  ever  on  our  hearts.  What  humility  should  we,  as  creatures, 
cherish  in  the  presence  of  the  greatness  of  God  !  What  lowliness  of  spirit  should 
there  be  in  our  supplications  and  pleadings  with  God  !  How  unseemly  is  all  that  is 
irreverential  before  Him  !  3.  Whilst  the  Divine  greatness  should  humble  us,  how- 
ever, it  may  also  inspire  us  with  confidence,  if  living  and  walking  before  Him. 
What  a  friend  and  helper  is  He  to  those  who  loyally  serve  Him  !  It  is  related  of 
one  of  the  greatest  of  the  French  preachers  that,  when  called  to  preach  a  funeral 
discourse  for  Louis  XIV.  before  a  crowded  audience  and  in  the  presence  of  the  French 
Court,  he  broke  the  hushed  silence  of  the  vast  assembly  when  he  entered  the  pulpit 
and  began  to  speak,  by  the  exclamation,  "There  is  nothing  great  but  God  !"  and 
then,  having  nerved  himself  for  his  work,  addressed  himself  to  his  subject.  In 
sorest  bereavements  He  can  sustain,  and  in  the  solemn  void  which  they  have  created 
can  make  His  own  presence  all  the  more  realisingly  felt.  Specially  let  us  cherish 
such  confidence  in  reference  to  the  interests  of  religion  in  the  world,  and  look 
forward  to  a  great  future  for  the  Church  of  God,  though  earth  and  hell  oppose. 
{E.  T.  Prust.)  The  Great  Supreme: — I.  A  caution.  Inasmuch  as  Moses  had 
said,  "  Ascribe  ye  greatness  unto  our  God,"  he  intended  to  hint  to  us  that  we 
ought  to  ascribe  greatness  to  none  else.  1.  If  I  worship  a  created  being,  if  I  seek 
the  intercession  of  any  save  the  one  Person  who  is  ordained  to  be  the  Mediator 
between  God  and  man,  the  Man  Christ  Jesus,  I  do  in  that  degree  derogate  from  the 
greatness  of  God.  2.  Though  we  do  not  bow  down  and  worship  images,  yet,  I  am 
sorry  to  say,  there  is  scarce  a  congregation  that  is  free  from  that  error  of  ascribing 
greatness  to  their  minister.  If  souls  are  converted,  how  very  prone  we  are  to  think 
there  is  something  marvellous  in  the  man.  We  are  but  your  servants  for  Christ's 
sake.  3.  Pay  deference  unto  authorities  as  ye  should  do  ;  but  if  in  aught  they 
swerve,  remember  your  knee  must  bow  to  God,  and  to  God  alone.  If  in  aught  there 
be  anjrthing  wrong,  though  it  should  have  a  sovereign's  name  attached  to  it, 
remember  one  is  your  Master  and  King.  4.  In  the  case  of  those  who  are  in  the 
employ  of  masters,  it  is  but  right  that  they  should  render  unto  their  masters  that 
"which  is  their  due  ;  but  when  the  master  commands  that  which  is  wrong,  allow  me 
solemnly  to  caution  you  against  giving  to  him  anything  which  you  are  not  bound  to 
do.  Your  master  tells  you  you  must  break  the  Sabbath.  You  do  it  because  he  is 
your  master  ;  ye  have  violated  this  command,  for  it  is  said,  *  *  Ascribe  ye  greatness 
unto  God."  5.  This  text  has  a  bearing  upon  certain  philosophic  creeds  which  I  will 
just  hint  at.  Some  men,  instead  of  ascribing  greatness  to  God,  ascribe  greatness  to 
the  laws  of  nature,  and  to  certain  powers  and  forces  which  they  believe  govern  the 


CHAP.  XXXII.  J  DEUTERONOMY.  503 

universe.  They  look  up  on  high  ;  their  eyes  see  the  marvellous  orbs  walking  in 
their  mystery  along  the  sky.  They  say,  "  What  stupendous  laws  are  those  which 
govern  the  universe  !  "  And  ye  will  see  in  their  writings  that  they  ascribe  every- 
thing to  law  and  nothing  to  God.  Now,  all  this  is  wrong.  Law  without  God  i3 
nothing.  God  puts  force  into  law,  and  if  God  acts  by  laws  in  the  government  of 
the  material  universe,  yet  it  is  the  force  of  God  which  moves  the  worlds  along  and 
keeps  them  in  their  places.  Law  without  God  is  nullity.  Reject  every  philosophy 
that  does  not  ascribe  greatness  to  God,  for  there  is  a  worm  at  the  root  of  it,  and  it 
yet  shall  be  destroyed.  IL  A  command.  1.  This  command  comes  to  the  sinner 
when  he  first  begins  seriously  to  consider  his  position  before  God.  When  you  look 
at  your  sins  ascribe  greatness  to  God's  justice.  2.  Let  the  sinner  who  is  already 
convinced  of  this  ascribe  greatness  to  God's  mercy.  3.  Further,  let  me  appeal  to 
the  Christian,  "Ascribe  ye  greatness  unto  our  God."  Thou  art  in  trouble;  thou 
art  wearied  with  the  hardness  of  thy  journey  ;  thy  poverty  has  got  hold  of  thee. 
It  is  a  dark  night  with  thee  just  now  ;  thou  seest  not  thy  signs  ;  thou  hast  no  sweet 
promise  to  light  upon.  '*  Ascribe  ye  greatness  unto  our  God."  Great  as  your 
troubles  are,  remember  He  is  greater.  And  when  the  devil  tempts  you  to  believe 
that  God  cannot  help  you,  tell  him  that  you  think  better  of  Him  than  that  ;  you 
ascribe  greatness  to  the  Almighty,  and  you  believe  He  is  great  enough  to  deliver 
you  from  all  your  sorrows.  (C.  H.  Sjniryeon.)  The  greatness  of  God : — L  Offer 
A  FEW  REMARKS  ON  THE  NATURE  OF  God's  GREATNESS.  1.  Greatuess  is  not  a  dis- 
tinct attribute  of  the  Divine  nature,  but  an  excellency  which  belongs  to  all  His 
attributes.  Whatever  is  in  God  is  great.  He  is  great  in  His  wisdom,  power, 
justice,  goodness,  and  truth.  There  is  such  a  mixture  of  greatness  and  goodness 
in  God,  that  those  who  know  Him  best  will  fear  and  love  Him  most ;  and  even 
devils  are  constrained  to  believe  and  tremble.  2.  There  is  an  essential  and  also  a 
relative  greatness  in  God,  a  greatness  interwoven  in  the  whole  of  His  character, 
and  appearing  in  all  His  works.  Is  He  our  Father  ?  He  is  our  Father  who  is  in 
heaven,  dwelling  in  the  most  exalted  state  of  majesty  ;  demanding  our  reverence 
and  exciting  our  highest  hopes  (Eccles.  v.  2).  Is  He  a  King  ?  He  is  a  great  King, 
the  King  of  kings.  3.  The  greatness  of  God  is  unsearchable  and  incomprehensible. 
With  increasing  knowledge  we  shall  have  an  increasing  sense  of  our  own  deficiency, 
II.  Inquire  in  what  manner  we  are  to  ascribe  "  greatness  to  God."  1.  We 
are  to  ascribe  greatness  to  our  God  by  acknowledging  and  declaring  His  greatness 
and  His  glory.  2.  In  ascribing  greatness  to  the  Lord,  we  are  to  do  it  practically  ; 
not  only  with  our  lips,  but  in  our  lives.  3.  In  approaching  to  God  with  reverence 
and  holy  fear  we  ascribe  to  Him  the  glory  due  unto  His  name,  striving  against 
wandering  thoughts  and  vain  imaginations,  and  cherishing  a  deep  sense  of  our  own 
unworthiness.  The  higher  we  rise  in  our  apprehensions  of  God,  the  lower  we  shall 
fall  in  our  own  esteem.  4.  By  entertaining  the  most  enlarged  expectations  from 
God  we  in  eff'ect  ascribe  greatness  to  Him.  Great  faith  ought  to  be  exercised 
towards  a  great  God  ;  nor  should  we  say,  ' '  Can  He  pardon  ?  can  He  help  ?  or  can 
He  save  ? "  for  what  can  He  not  do  ?  What  wants  are  so  great  that  He  cannot 
supply  ?  what  works  so  great  that  He  cannot  enable  us  to  perform  ?  what  burdens 
so  great  that  He  cannot  support  us  imder  ?  what  dangers  so  great  that  He  cannot 
deliver  us  out  of  them  ?  5.  If  we  ascribe  greatness  to  the  Lord,  that  greatness  will 
be  to  us  a  matter  of  joy  and  gladness,  and  we  shall  glory  in  His  holy  name. 
6.  Fearing  to  offend  against  God,  and  dreading  His  displeasure,  are  included  in  the 
duty  prescribed.     {B.  Beddome,  M.A.) 

Ver.  4.  He  is  the  Rock. — TTie  Rock  and  its  associations : — Seven  times  does  this 
strong  figure  the  Rock  occur  in  the  song.  The  metaphor  is  self-explanatory,  the 
stability  of  rock  being  a  fit  emblem  of  the  Divine  immutability  of  purpose,  and  of 
God  being  faithful  to  His  covenant  and  promises.  This  is  the  ruling  and  recurring 
idea  of  the  song,  coming  in  like  a  refrain,  and  giving  unity  to  the  whole.  And 
how  deeply  did  this  image  of  God,  the  Rock,  take  hold  upon  the  mind  of  Israel ! 
Here  it  stands  in  the  very  forefront ;  the  first  word  in  the  construction,  to  mark 
the  importance  we  must  assign  to  it.  For,  besides  its  native  significance  of  impreg- 
nable strength  and  security,  an  additional  depth  of  meaning  was  imparted  to  the 
emblem  from  Moses'  own  history  and  experience  (Exod.  xvii.  6,  xxxiii.  21,  22).  It 
gradually  passes  upwards  from  an  objective  to  a  subjective  or  experimental  appli- 
cation, when  not  only  the  nature  of  the  rock,  but  its  various  uses,  afforded  fresh 
and  serviceable  emblems.  The  Gospel  to  the  Old  Testament  Church  was  not 
merely,  **God  is  a  rock,  firm  and  faithful,"  but  "  He  is  the  Rock,"  with  all  the 


504  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOIL  [chap,  xxxii. 

precious  associations  and  all  the  realised  practical  value  added  to  tlie  term,  whether 
it  were  employed  for  a  hiding-place  and  protection  or  for  shade — **  the  shadow  of  a 
great  rock  in  a  weary  land  " — or,  most  significantly  of  all,  suggested  by  the  smitten 
rock  in  Horeb,  a  source  and  guarantee  of  suitable  and  sufficient  supply  in  case  of 
dire  necessity  to  the  perishing.  It  is  emphatically  a  covenant  made,  and  speaks 
the  language  of  redemption.  The  song  proceeds  to  develop  the  applicability  of  the 
word  in  a  threefold  direction,  attaching  it  at  once  to  God's  woik,  His  ways,  and 
His  character.  "The  Rock — 1.  His  work  is  perfect."  It  is  not  as  artificer,  but  as 
architect,  we  are  here  to  regard  His  work  as  perfect.  He  has  a  providential  and 
redemptive  plan,  complete  in  all  its  details  ;  having  no  need  for  after- thoughts,  and 
not  requiring  reconstruction  or  amendment.  In  this  respect  "  His  work  is  perfect"  ; 
and  when  fully  accomplished  will  justify  and  vindicate  itself.  2.  To  understand 
the  Divine  plan  or  speak  of  it  aright,  we  must  wait  till  then.  *  *  For  all  His  ways 
are  judgment,"  nothing  being  subject  to  caprice  or  arbitrariness.  His  is  an  immut- 
ability of  counsel,  carried  into  execution  by  the  goodwill  He  hath  purposed  in 
Himself.  What  a  contrast  to  the  feeble,  vacillating,  arbitrary  ways  of  man  ! 
3.  But,  above  all,  He  Himself  in  His  own  character  is  the  Rock.  This  confidence  in 
the  Divine  nature  itself ;  in  Jehovah's  absolute  truth  and  equity  ;  in  His  unerring 
rectitude  and  all-wise  faithfulness — this  is  the  supreme  resting-place.  It  is  also 
set  forth  here  as  the  high  well-spring  of  all  dutiful  submission,  of  all  loyal -hearted 
allegiance,  and  of  all  uncorruptness  in  religion  and  piety.  In  it  the  singer  finds 
the  strongest  ground  for  rebuke,  remonstrance,  and  reproach  to  the  people.  {A.  H. 
Drysdale^  M.A.)  God  as  a  Rock : — "He  is  the  Rock,"  a  Rock  indeed.  If  we 
speak  of  strength,  lo.  He  is  strong  ;  if  of  stability,  He  is  the  Lord,  and  clianges  not — 
the  Ancient  of  Days.  Hast  not  thou  heard  and  considered  this,  that  the  Almighty 
faints  not,  and  wearies  not  ?  He  holds  forth  Himself  in  such  a  name  to  His 
people,  a  ready,  all-sufficient,  and  enduring  Refuge  to  all  that  trust  in  Him  ;  and 
this  is  the  foundation  that  the  Church  is  built  on,  against  which  the  gates  of  hell 
shall  not  prevail.  God's  omnipotency  for  defences,  His  eternity,  faithfulness,  and 
unchangeableness  to  make  that  sure,  His  mercy  and  goodness  make  a  hole  in  that 
Rock  to  enter  in,  a  ready  access  for  poor  shipwrecked  and  broken  men,  who  have 
no  other  refuge.  This  is  our  Rock,  on  which  the  Church  is  built,  Jesus  Christ 
(1  Cor.  X.  4  ;  Matt.  xvi.  18).  God  were  inaccessible  in  Himself— an  impregnable 
Rock  ;  how  would  sinners  overcome  Him,  and  enter  into  Him  to  be  saved  from 
wrath  ?  Oh,  how  sad  is  the  secret  reproof  contained  in  this  commendation  of  God  ! 
He  hath  been  a  Rock  to  us,  our  Refuge  tliat  we  fled  unto,  and  found  sure,  yet  have 
we  left  our  Rock,  gone  out  from  our  Strength  ;  He  offers  Himself  a  Rock  unto  us — 
His  all-sufficiency — and  yet  we  leave  the  Fountain  of  living  waters  and  dig  broken 
cisterns  ;  had  i-ather  choose  our  own  broken  ship  to  toss  up  and  down  into.  He 
abides  for  ever  the  same  ;  though  we  change,  He  changes  not.  How  may  it  reprove 
our  backslidings,  that  we  depart  from  our  Rock,  and  where  shall  we  find  a  refuge 
in  the  day  of  indignation  ?  Is  there  any  created  mountain,  but  some  floods  will 
cover  ?  Therefore  it  is  folly  and  madness  to  forsake  this  Rock.  {H.  Binning.) 
His  work  is  perfect. — Gocf  s  works  perfect : — As  He  doth  not  trouble  Himself  when 
all  is  troubled  about  Him,  so  He  keeps  him  all  in  perfect  peace  whose  mind  is 
stayed  on  Him  ;  so  also  what  He  doth  among  men,  though  it  cannot  pass  Avithout 
man's  censure,  yet  it  is  in  itself  perfect,  comi)lete,  without  defect.  1.  His  works 
are  perfect  in  relation  to  the  beginning  and  original  of  them — His  own  everlasting 
purpose.  Men  often  bring  forth  works  by  guess,  by  their  pur,  ose,  so  no  wonder  it 
answer  not  their  desire  ;  but  known  to  Him  are  all  His  works  from  the  beginning, 
and  so  He  doth  nothing  in  time  but  what  was  His  everlasting  pleasure.  Often  we 
purpose  well,  and  resolve  perfectly,  hut  our  practice  is  a  cripple — execution  of  it  is 
maimed  and  imperfect ;  but  all  His  works  are  carved  out  and  done  just  as  He 
designed  them,  without  the  least  alteration  ;  and,  if  it  had  not  been  well,  would 
He  have  thought  on  it  so  and  resolved  it  beforehand  ?  2.  His  works  are  perfect  in 
relation  to  the  end  to  which  He  appointed  them.  It  may  be  it  is  not  perfect  in 
itself— a  blind  eye  is  not  so  perfect  as  a  seeing  eye  ;  nay,  but  in  relation  to  the 
glory  of  His  name,  who  hath  a  purpose  to  declare  His  power  by  restoring  that 
sight,  it  is  as  perfect.  And  in  this  sense  all  the  imperfection  of  the  creatures  and 
creation,  all  of  them  are  pertect  works,  for  they  accomplish  the  end  wherefor  they 
were  sent ;  and  so  the  night  declares  His  name,  and  utters  a  speech  as  well  as  the 
day,  the  winter  as  the  summer,  the  wilderness  as  the  fruitful  field  ;  for  what  is  the 
perfection  of  the  creature  but  in  as  far  as  it  accomplishes  His  ])urpose  as  the  Maker 
of  it  T    And  therefore  all  His  work  is  perfect,  for  it  is  all  framed  in  wisdom  to  His 


CHAP.  XXXII.]  DEUTERONOMY,  505 

own  ends,  in  number,  measure,  and  weight ;  it  is  so  exactly  agreeing  to  that,  that 
you  could  not  imagine  it  better.  3.  Again,  His  work  is  perfect  if  we  take  it 
altogether,  and  do  not  cut  it  in  parcels  and  look  on  it  so.  Letters  and  syllables 
make  no  sense  till  you  conjoin  them  in  words,  and  words  in  sentences.  Even  so  it 
is  here  :  if  we  look  on  the  day  alone,  the  light  of  it  being  perpetual  would  weary 
us,  the  night  alone  would  be  more  so  ;  but  the  interchange  of  them  is  pleasant. 
Day  and  night  together  make  a  distinct  language  of  God's  praise.  So  God  has  set 
prosperity  and  adversity  the  one  over  against  the  other  ;  one  of  them,  it  may  be, 
seems  imperfect ;  nay,  but  it  is  a  perfect  work  that  is  made  up  of  both.  Spots  in 
the  face  commend  the  beauty  of  the  rest  of  it.  If  you  would,  then,  look  upon 
God's  work  aright,  look  at  it  in  the  sanctuary's  light,  and  you  shall  say,  '  *  He  hath 
done  all  well."  4.  Entertain  this  thought  in  your  heart,  that  He  hath  done  all 
well  ;  let  not  your  secret  thoughts  so  much  as  call  them  in  question.  If  once  you 
question,  you  will  quickly  censure  them.  Hold  this  persuasion,  that  nothing  can 
be  better  than  what  He  doth.  5.  Let  this  secretly  reprove  your  hearts,  the  perfec- 
tion of  His  works  stains  our  works.  Oh,  how  imperfect  are  they  !  And  which  is 
worse,  how  bold  are  we  to  censure  His  and  absolve  our  own  !  If  He  have  a  hand  in 
our  work,  yet  these  imperfect  works  are  perfect  in  regard  of  Him  ;  as  we  have  a  hand 
in  His  perfect  works,  yet  His  perfect  works  are  imperfect  in  regard  of  us.  {Ibid.) 
All  His  -ways  are  Judgment. — God's  ways  perfect  .—This  is  to  the  same  purpose — 
His  ways  and  His  works  are  one  ;  and  this  is  the  perfection  of  His  work,  that  it  is 
all  right  and  equal.  "Whether  they  be  in  justice  or  mercy,  they  are  all  righteous 
and  holy — no  iniquity  in  them.  His  ways  are  straight  and  equal,  exact  as  if  they 
were  measured  by  an  exact,  even  rule  ;  but  because  we  make  application  of  a 
crooked  rule  to  them,  we  do  imagine  that  they  are  crooked — as  the  blind  man 
judges  no  light  to  be  because  he  sees  it  not.  How  may  the  Lord  contend  and  plead 
with  us,  as  with  the  people  ?  (Ezek.  xviii.  25.)  And  yet  behold  the  iniquity  of 
men's  hearts  ;  there  is  a  secret  reflection  of  our  spirits  upon  His  majesty  as  if  His 
ways  were  not  equal,  whenever  we  repine  against  them.  Behold,  the  Lord  will 
assert  His  own  ways,  and  plead  with  all  flesh  this  controversy,  that  all  Hia  pro- 
ceedings are  full  of  equity  ;  He  walks  according  to  a  rule,  though  He  be  not  tied  to 
a  rule.  But  we  walk  not  according  to  a  rule,  though  we  be  bound  to  a  rule,  and  a 
rule  full  of  equity.  Here  is  the  equity  of  His  ways  ;  the  Gospel  holds  it  forth  in 
a  twofold  consideration.  1.  If  any  man  turn  from  his  iniquity,  and  flee  unto  My 
Son  as  the  City  of  Refuge,  he  shall  live.  Iniquity  shall  not  be  his  ruin,  although  he 
hath  done  iniquity.  Oh  !  "  who  is  a  God  like  unto  Thee,  that  pardoneth  iniquity  ? " 
Is  not  this  complete  mercy  ?  And  on  the  other  hand,  whosoever  continueth  in 
sin,  though  he  appear  to  himself  and  others  never  so  righteous,  shall  not  he  die 
in  his  iniquity  ?  Is  there  any  iniquity  in  this,  that  he  receive  the  wages  of  his 
works,  that  he  eat  of  the  fruit  of  his  own  ways,  and  drink  of  his  own  devices  ? 
2.  This  way  of  the  Lord  is  equal  and  right  in  itself,  but  it  is  not  so  to  every  one  ; 
the  just  man  shall  walk  in  it,  and  not  stumble — as  in  an  even  way  ;  nothing  shall 
off'end  him  (Hos.  xiv.  9).  Yet,  equal  and  straight  as  it  is,  many  other  trans- 
gressors shall  fall  therein  ;  they  stumble  even  in  the  noonday  and  highway,  where 
no  offence  is.  By  all  means  embrace  the  "Word,  and  be  satisfied  with  it,  when  you 
do  not  comprehend  His  work ;  it  teaches  as  much  in  general  as  may  put  us  to 
quietness.  All  His  ways  are  judgment ;  just  and  true  in  all  His  ways  is  the  King 
of  saints.  If  I  do  not  comprehend  how  it  is,  no  wonder,  for  He  makes  darkness 
His  covering ;  He  spreads  over  His  most  curious  pieces  of  workmanship  a  veil  of 
darkness  for  a  season.  Therefore  let  us  hearken  to  His  Word,  and  believe  its 
sentence  on  His  work,  when  reason  cannot  comprehend  it.  (Ibid.)  A  God  of 
trntli. — The  truth  of  God : — I.  "What  we  are  to  undebstand  by  the  truth  of 
God.  Not  only  His  veracity,  but  His  faithfulness.  II.  That  this  perfection- 
belongs  TO  God.  And  this  I  shall  endeavour  to  prove.  1.  From  the  dictates  of 
natural  light.  Natural  light  tells  us  that  truth  and  faithfulness  are  perfections, 
and  consequently  belong  to  the  Divine  nature ;  and  that  falsehood  and  a  lie  are 
imperfections,  and  to  be  removed  from  God.  2.  From  Scripture.  The  Scripture 
doth  very  frequently  attribute  this  to  God  (2  Sam.  vii.  28  ;  Psa.  xxv.  10,  xxxi.  5  ; 
Rev.  iii.  7,  vi.  10  ;  Psa.  xv.  3,  xvi.  7).  And  the  Scripture  doth  not  only  in  general 
attribute  this  perfection  to  God,  but  doth  more  particularly  assure  us  of  His 
sincerity  and  truth  and  faithfulness.  Of  His  sincerity,  that  He  deals  plainly  with 
us  and  speaks  what  He  intends,  that  His  words  are  the  image  of  His  thoughts  and 
a  true  representation  of  His  mind.  And  as  the  Scripture  assures  us  of  His  sincerity, 
so  of  His  truth  and  faithfulness  in  the  accomplishment  of  Hia  predictions  and 


506  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap,  xxxii. 

performance  of  His  promises.  I  come  now  to  the  last  thing  I  proposed,  to  make 
some  use  of  this  doctrine.  I.  If  God  be  a  God  of  truth,  then  this  gives  us  assurance 
that  He  doth  not  deceive  us,  that  the  faculties  which  He  hath  given  us  are  not 
false,  but  when  they  have  clear  perceptions  of  things,  they  do  not  err  and  mistake. 
2.  If  God  be  a  God  of  truth,  then  there  is  reason  why  we  should  believe  whatever 
we  are  satisfied  is  revealed  to  us  by  God.  A  Divine  revelation  is  a  sufficient 
ground  for  the  most  firm  assent ;  for  this  very  thing,  that  anything  is  revealed  by 
God  is  the  highest  evidence,  and  ought  to  give  us  the  most  firm  assurance,  of  the 
truth  of  it.  Hence  it  is  that  the  Word  of  God  is  called  the  Word  of  truth,  yea,  and 
truth  itself :  "  Thy  Word  is  truth  "  (John  xvii.  17).  3.  If  God  be  a  God  of  truth, 
and  faithful  in  performing  His  promise,  then  here  is  a  firm  foundation  for  our 
hope  and  trust.  4.  The  truth  of  God  is  matter  of  terror  to  the  wicked.  5.  Let  us 
propound  to  ourselves  the  truth  of  God  for  our  pattern  and  imitation.  Would  you 
be  like  God  ?  be  true  and  faithful.  {Ahp.  Tillotson.)  A  God  of  truth : — Strange 
it  is  that  His  Majesty  is  pleased  to  clothe  Himself  with  so  many  titles  and  names 
for  us.  He  considers  what  our  necessity  is,  and  accordingly  expresses  His  own 
name.  I  think  nothing  doth  more  hold  forth  the  unbelief  of  men  and  atheism  of 
our  hearts  than  the  many  several  titles  God  takes  in  Scripture  ;  there  is  a  necessity 
for  a  multitude  of  them,  to  make  us  take  up  God,  because  we,  staying  upon  a 
general  notion  of  God,  rather  frame  in  our  imaginations  an  idol  than  the  true  God. 
Needed  there  any  more  to  be  said  but  "I  am  your  God,  I  am  God,"  if  our  spirits 
were  not  so  far  degenerated  into  atheism  and  unbelief?  Therefore  wonder  at  these 
two  when  you  read  the  Scriptures,  God's  condescension  to  us  and  our  unbelief  of 
Him.  There  is  not  a  name  of  God  but  it  gives  us  a  reproach.  This  name  is  clear- 
He  is  a  God  of  truth  ;  not  only  a  true  God,  but  Truth  itself,  to  note  His  eminency 
in  it.  It  is  Christ's  name — "  I  am  the  Truth,"  the  substantial  Truth,  in  whom  all 
the  promises  are  truth,  are  yea  and  amen.  His  truth  is  His  faithfulness  in 
performing  His  promises  and  doing  what  His  mouth  hath  spoken  :  and  this  is 
established  in  the  very  heavens  (Psa.  Ixxxix.  2).  His  everlasting  purpose  is  in 
heaven,  where  He  dwells,  and  therefore  there  is  nothing  done  in  time  that  can 
impair  or  hinder  it.  He  may  change  His  commands  as  He  pleases,  but  He  may 
not  change  His  promise.  This  puts  an  obligation  on  Him,  as  He  is  faithful  and 
true,  to  perform  it  ;  and  when  an  oath  is  superadded,  oh !  how  immutable  are 
these  two  ! — when  He  promises  in  His  truth  and  swears  in  His  holiness.  Is  there 
any  power  in  heaven  and  earth  can  break  that  double  cord  ?  (Matt.  v.  18  ;  Heb.  vi. 
18.)  There  is  no  name  of  God  but  it  is  comfortable  to  some,  and  as  terrible  to 
others.  What  comfort  is  it  to  a  godly  man  that  trusts  in  His  Word,  He  is  a  God 
of  truth  !  You  who  have  ventured  your  souls  on  His  Word,  you  have  an  unspeakable 
advantage  :  His  truth  endures  for  ever,  and  it  is  established  in  the  heavens ;  the 
ground  of  it  is  without  beginning,  the  end  of  it  without  end.  Mercy  made  so  many 
precious  promises,  and  truth  keeps  them.  Mercy  is  the  fountain  of  our  consolation, 
and  truth  and  faithfulness  convey  it  to  us,  and  keep  it  for  us.  It  is  these  two 
that  go  before  His  face  when  He  sits  on  a  throne  of  majesty  and  makes  Himself 
accessible  to  sinners  (Psa.  Ixxxix.  14),  and  so  they  are  the  pathway  He  walks  in 
towards  those  who  seek  Him  (Psa.  xiv.  10).  But  this  precious  name,  that  is  as 
ointment  poured  forth  to  those  who  love  Him,  how  doth  it  smell  of  death  to  those 
who  walk  contrary  to  Him  !  He  is  a  God  of  truth,  to  execute  His  threatenings  on 
those  who  despise  His  commands  ;  and  though  you  flatter  yourselves  in  your  own 
eyes,  and  cry,  "Peace,  peace,"  even  though  you  walk  in  the  imagination  of  your 
heart,  yet  certainly  He  is  a  God  of  truth.  It  was  unbelief  of  God's  threatening 
that  first  ruined  man  ;  it  is  this  still  that  keeps  so  many  from  the  remedy  and 
makes  their  misery  irrecoverable.  But  if  any  man  have  set  to  his  seal  that  God  is 
true  in  His  threatening,  and  subscribed  unto  the  law,  then,  I  beseech  you,  add  not 
the  unbelief  of  the  Gospel  unto  your  former  disobedience.  You  have  not  kept  His 
commands,  and  so  the  curse  is  come  upon  you.  Do  you  believe  that  ?  If  you  do, 
then  the  Gospel  speaks  unto  you,  the  God  of  truth  has  one  word  more — "He  that 
believes  shall  be  saved,"  notwithstanding  all  his  breaking  of  the  law.  If  you  do 
not  set  your  seal  to  this  also,  then  you  say  He  is  not  a  God  of  truth  ;  you  say  He  is 
a  liar.  And  as  for  you  who  have  committed  your  souls  to  Him,  as  to  a  faithful 
keeper,  and  acquiesced  unto  His  word  of  promise  for  salvation,  think  how  unsuit- 
able it  is  for  you  to  distrust  Him  in  other  lesser  things,  {ff.  Binning. )  Without 
iniquity. — Man's  sinfulness  as  contrasted  with  God's  infinite  perfections : — There  are 
none  can  behold  their  own  vileness  as  it  is  but  in  the  sight  of  God's  glorious 
Jioliuess.     Sin  is  darkness,  and   neither  sees  itself  nor  anything  else  j  therefore 


CHAP.  XXXII.]  DEUTERONOMY,  507 

must  His  light  shine  to  discover  this  darkness.  Among  all  the  aggravations  of  sin, 
nothing  doth  so  demonstrate  the  madness  of  it  as  the  perfection,  goodness,  and 
absolute  unspottedness  of  God.  It  is  this  that  takes  away  all  pretence  of  excuse  ; 
and  therefore  it  is  that  Moses,  when  he  would  convince  this  people  of  their  ways 
and  make  them  inexcusable,  he  draws  the  parallel  of  God's  ways  and  their  ways, 
declares  what  God  is,  how  absolutely  perfect  in  Himself  and  in  His  works,  and  had 
given  no  cause  for  provocation  to  them  to  depart  from  Him.  And  then  how  odious 
must  their  departing  be  !  When  both  are  painted  on  a  board  before  their  eyes,  it 
makes  sin  become  exceeding  sinful.  There  are  two  things  in  sin  that  exceedingly 
abuse  the  creature,  the  iniquity  of  it  and  folly  of  it.  It  is  contrary  to  all  equity 
and  reason  to  depart  from  Him  that  hath  made  us  and  given  us  a  law,  to  whom 
we  are  by  so  many  obligations  tied.  But  what  is  the  madness  of  it,  to  depart  from 
the  Fountain  of  living  waters  and  dig  broken  cisterns  that  can  hold  none  !  This  is 
a  thing  that  the  heavens  may  be  astonished  at ;  and  if  the  earth  had  the  sense  to 
understand  such  a  thing,  the  whole  fabric  of  it  would  tremble  for  horror  at  such 
folly  of  reasonable  souls.  And  this  evil  hath  two  evils  in  it — we  forsake  life  and 
love  death,  go  from  Him  and  choose  vanity.  It  is  great  iniquity  to  depart  without 
an  offence  on  His  part.  He  may  appeal  to  all  our  consciences,  and  let  them  sit 
down  and  examine  His  way  most  narrowly.  "What  iniquity  have  ye  found  in 
Me  ?  What  cause  have  ye  to  leave  Me  ? "  But  when  withal  He  is  a  living 
Fountain,  He  is  our  glory,  He  is  a  fruitful  land,  a  land  of  light,  our  ornament  and 
attire  ;  in  a  word,  our  life  and  our  consolation,  our  happiness  and  our  beauty. 
What  word  shall  be  found  to  express  the  extreme  madness  of  men  to  depart  from 
such  an  one,  and  change  their  glory  into  that  which  doth  not  profit  ?  If  either  He 
were  not  a  Fountain  of  living  waters,  or  if  there  were  any  fountain  beside  that 
could  yield  water  to  satisfy  the  unsatiable  desires  of  men,  it  were  more  excusable  ; 
but  what  shadow  shall  be  found  to  cover  such  an  iniquity,  that  is  both  infinite  sin 
and  incomparable  loss?  Oh,  that  men  would  consider  how  good  the  blessed  Lord 
is,  how  He  is  alone  and  nothing  beside  Him  in  heaven  and  earth  ;  all  broken 
cisterns,  all  unprofitable  ;  He  only  self-sufficient,  all  others  insufficient,  and  there- 
fore a  proportioned  good  for  our  necessity  and  desires  ;  and  I  am  sure  you  would 
be  constrained  to  cry  out  with  David,  * '  Whom  have  I  in  heaven  with  Thee,  or  in 
earth  beside  Thee  ?  It  is  good  for  me  to  draw  near  to  God."  You  would  look  on 
drawing  near  and  walking  with  Him  and  before  Him  not  only  as  the  most  reason- 
able thing,  but  the  best  thing,  most  beautiful  for  you,  most  profitable  for  you,  and 
all  other  ways  would  be  looked  on  as  the  ways  of  death.  {Ihid. )  Just  and  right 
is  He. —  The  justice  of  God: — By  the  justice  of  God  we  understand  that  universal 
rectitude  of  His  nature  whereby,  in  His  government  of  the  world,  He  does  all 
things  with  perfect  righteousness,  giving  to  every  one  his  due.  1.  We  are  to 
consider  God,  not  only  as  the  Maker  and  Preserver  of  men,  but  as  their  Governor 
also.  He  who  made  man  has  an  unbounded  right  to  prescribe  laws  for  his  conduct, 
and  to  enforce  the  laws  by  rewards  and  punishments  ;  and  in  so  doing  He  consults 
the  good  of  His  creatures  as  well  as  His  own  glory.  2.  God  is  just  in  punishing 
disobedience  to  His  holy  law.  3.  If  we  consult  the  Scriptures  we  shall  find  that 
God  has  displayed  His  justice,  in  many  awful  instances,  by  the  punishment  of 
sinners.  4.  But  the  most  affecting  display  of  Divine  justice  was  made  in  the 
sufferings  and  death  of  our  Saviour,  Jesus  Christ.  {G.  Burder.)  The  justice  of 
God:— I.  Let  us  think  of  justice  as  residing  from  eternity  in  the  Divine 
Being,  and  as  operating  independently  of  the  existence  of  created  beings. 
1.  In  this  view,  justice  must  be  contemplated  as  rising  out  of  the  very  existence  of 
Deity.  Justice  exists  necessarily  and  infinitely  in  the  glorious  Godhead.  2.  It 
may  be  viewed  as  operating  within  the  Divine  Being  itself,  distinctly  from  every 
prospect  of  the  future  existence  of  a  universe  of  creatures,  in  such  ways  as  these  : 
in  a  righteous  valuing  and  honouring  of  the  distinct  preciousness  of  other  Divine 
excellencies,  such  as  power,  holiness,  goodness,  &c. ;  in  a  fair  arrangement,  union, 
and  well-adjusted  harmony  of  all  the  other  Divine  perfections  ;  and  in  the  mutual 
acknowledgments  of  the  equal  rights,  dignity,  and  relations  of  each  of  the  Three 
Persons  in  the  Godhead.     II.  Let  us  think  of  the  nature  of  moral  good  and 

EVIL,  AS   FOUND  IN   CREATURE  AGENTS,  WHICH   IS  THE  PROPER  OBJECT  OF   JUSTICE. 

1.  Such  agents  possess  the  natural  image  of  God,  in  spirituality,  in  intelligence,  in 
capacity  of  choice,  in  voluntary  activity,  in  discernment  of  good  and  evil.  These 
things  are  necessary  to  the  existence  of  either  moral  good  or  moral  evil.  It  may  be 
asked,^  What  is  the  meaning  of  these  words  ?  2.  Moral  good  and  evil  are  opposite 
qualities  of  such  creatures,   as  to  their  dispositions  and  actions.     3.  The  chief 


508  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxxii. 

moral  good  and  evil  must  be  found  in  the  dispositions  and  actions  of  the  creature 
towards  God  Himself.  Here  must  be  the  greatest,  the  noblest  beauty,  or  the 
foulest  deformity,  the  richest  flavoured  sweetness  or  the  most  poisonous  bitterness. 
4.  There  is  a  wide  range  of  good  and  of  evil,  in  disposition  and  in  action,  relative 
to  man  made  in  the  image  of  God.  6.  There  is  a  general  importance  in  all  moral 
good  and  evil,  even  in  their  most  ordinary  and  tranquil  movements ;  for  they  are 
the  acts  of  a  creature  endowed  with  the  natural  image  of  the  great  God,  to  whom 
also  these  acts  and  qualities  have  an  ultimate  reference.  6.  In  connection  with 
these  things  we  have  to  think  of  the  vast  multitude  of  moral  agents,  men  and 
angels,  whom  we  know  with  certainty,  and  of  the  vast  variety  of  circumstances  and 
events,  and  also  the  long  flight  of  ages,  before  the  final  judgment ;  besides  the 
numberless  worlds  of  intelligent  agents  which  may  lie  behind  an  impenetrable 
veil  of  obscurity  and  uncertainty.  And  thus  we  have  some  view  of  that  awful, 
wide-extended,  moral  empire,  the  direct  object  of  the  cognisance  and  procedure  of 
Divine  justice,  and  of  which  every  one  who  now  thinks  on  this  subject  is  an 
interested  and  important  part.  Application — 1 .  How  contrary  to  this  whole  doctrine 
of  the  justice  of  God  is  that  spirit  of  frivolous,  presumptuous  ease  and  gaiety  which 
generally  reign  in  the  world !  2.  Let  us  consider  the  majesty  and  power  of  the 
justice  of  God  as  the  guardian  attribute  of  all  the  other  excellencies  of  Divinity. 

3.  Who  can  sufficiently  estimate  the  preciousness  of  deliverance  from  the  wrath  to 
come  by  the  sufferings  and  blood  of  Jesus,  the  Son  of  God  ?    III.  The  nature  of 

THIS  GLORIOUS  JUSTICE,  AND  OF  ITS  EXERCISE  RESPECTING  GOOD  AND  EVIL.      1.  His 

penetrating  and  transcendently  perfect  inspection  of  moral  good  and  evil  (Isa.  iii. 
8  ;  2  Chron.  xvi.  9  ;  Rev.  i.  14).  2.  His  approbation  of  moral  good,  and  His  com- 
placency and  delight  therein.     8.  His  honouring  and  rewarding  moral  goodness. 

4.  Let  us  think  of  the  aspect  and  procedure  of  this  great  Judge  against  moral 
evil,  by  rejection,  disapprobation,  and  vengeance.  Application — 1.  In  review  of 
the  things  spoken  on  this  subject,  the  glorious  justice  of  Jehovah,  it  is  of  import- 
ance to  notice  the  place  which  this  excellency  holds  among  the  other  perfections 
of  Deity.  It  is,  in  some  respects,  a  consequence  of  the  general  rectitude  of  the 
Divine  Being  and  of  some  other  particular  excellencies  of  God.  But  it  is  specially 
to  be  remarked  that  to  justice  belongs  the  high  character  of  the  guardian  attribute, 
both  in  relation  to  the  glory  of  all  that  is  Divine,  and  in  reference  to  the  rights  and 
interests  of  created  beings  among  one  another.  2.  It  demands  our  most  serious 
consideration,  that  it  is  not  without  very  great  difficulty  that  an  apostate  creature 
can  attain  genuine  and  powerful  views  of  the  attribute  of  justice.  3.  How  solemn 
are  the  exercises  of  an  awakened  believing  soul,  making  express  application  to  God 
for  reconciliation  and  peace  by  the  blood  of  Jesus  !  4.  How  perfect  is  the  glory  of 
the  sacrifice  and  righteousness  of  Jesus,  the  Son  of  God!  {John  Love,  D.D.) 
The  justice  nf  God: — I.  The  excellence  of  His  nature  proves  it.  If  "he  that 
ruleth  over  men  must  be  just,"  if  human  rulers  must  be  just,  how  much  more  must 
He  be  who  requires  them  to  be  so,  the  Governor,  the  Maker  of  all  the  world  !  And 
if  it  suits  His  office  that  He  should  be  so,  what  is  there  to  induce  Him  to  depart 
from  His  character  ?  II.  His  own  Word  shows  it  (Jer.  ix.  24  ;  Psa.  xix.  9, 
cxlv.  17  ;  Acts  xvii.  31).  III.  His  commandments  to  men  prove  it.  The 
qualities  He  requires  in  them  are  those  which  exist  in  Himself,  and  the  end  of  man*s 
obedience  is  to  be  likened  to  his  Maker.  IV.  His  dealings  with  men  show  it. 
To  them  He  declares  Himself  to  be  eminently  holy  and  just ;  that  He  will  by  no 
means  clear  the  guilty,  and  that  He  will  finally  render  to  every  man  according  to 
the  things  he  has  done.  V.  The  necessity  of  His  very  nature  shows  it.  It 
is  utterly  impossible  that  a  being  holy,  good,  and  wise  as  the  Deity  should  be  indif- 
ferent to  the  actions  of  His  creatures,  or  that  having  given  a  law  for  their  guidance. 
He  should  be  indifferent  as  to  the  measure  of  their  obedience  to  it.  What,  then, 
do  we  mean  when  we  speak  of  the  justice  of  God  ?  It  means  that  He  will  execute 
His  whole  law  ;  that  He  will  fulfil  His  word,  and  render  to  every  one  according  to 
his  works.  To  make  this  justice  perfect,  as  all  the  attributes  of  God  must  be 
supposed  to  be,  it  will  descend  to  every  particular  in  our  conduct  ;  nothing  will  be 
too  small  to  be  noted  ;  nothing  can  be  concealed  from  Him  ;  nothing  will  be  over- 
looked by  Him.  To  make  it  consistent  with  the  spiritual  character  of  His  nature, 
and  with  that  spiritual  holiness  which  He  requires  in  His  people,  it  will  extend 
to  every  thought,  to  every  purpose,  to  every  hidden  wish  of  the  heart,  as  well  as  to 
every  work  and  to  every  action.     {H.  Baikes,  M.A.) 

Ver.  5.  They  have  corrupted  themselves. — Man  corrupting  his  vxty : — If  wo 


CHAP.  XXXII.]  DEUTERONOMY,  609 


consider  what  this  people  seemed  once  to  be,  and  thought  themselves  to  be,  we 
may  easily  know  how  they  corrupted  themselves.  If  ye  look  on  them  at  one  time 
(Exod.  xix.  8  ;  Deut.  v.  27)  ye  would  call  them  children.  There  was  never  a  fairer 
undertaking  of  obedience.  But  compare  all  this  people's  practice  with  this  pro- 
fession, and  you  shall  find  it  exceeding  contrary  ;  they  indeed  corrupted  them- 
selves, though  they  got  warning  to  take  heed  of  it  (chap.  iv.  15).  But,  alas  !  it  was 
within  them  that  destroyed  them  ;  there  was  not  such  a  heart  in  them  as  to  hear 
and  obey  ;  but  they  undertake,  being  ignorant  of  their  own  deceitful  hearts,  which 
were  desperately  wicked.  And  therefore  behold  what  corruption  followed  upon 
such  a  professed  resolution:  they  never  sooner  promised  obedience  but  they 
disobeyed  ;  they  did  abominable  works  and  did  no  good,  and  this  is  to  corrupt  their 
way  (Psa.  xiv.  1).  We  may  make  this  song  our  own.  We  have  corrupted  our- 
selves. Once  we  had  a  fair  show  of  zeal  for  God,  of  love  and  desire  of  reformation 
of  life,  many  solemn  undertakings  were  that  we  should  amend  our  doings.  But  • 
what  is  the  fruit  of  all  ?  Alas !  we  have  corrupted  ourselves  more  than  Israel 
promised,  but  we  vowed  to  the  most  High  amendment  of  life.  Lay  this  rule  to  our 
practices,  and  are  we  not  a  perverse  generation?  Oh!  that  we  were  more 
affected  with  our  corruptions,  and  were  more  sensible  of  them  ;  then  we  could  not 
choose  but  mourn  for  our  own  and  the  land's  departing  from  God.     There  is  a 

Sreat  noise  of  a  public  reformation  of  ordinances  and  worship ;  but,  alas  !  the 
eformation  of  life  and  practice  outcries  all  that  noise.     Every  man  useth  to  impute 
his  faults  to  something  beside  himself.     Ere  men  take  with  their  own  iniquity, 
they  will  charge  God  that  gave  no  more  grace.     But  if  men  knew  themselves,  they 
would  deduce  their  corruption  and  destruction  both  from  one  fountain,  that  is, 
from    themselves.     What  was    the    fountain    of   this    people's    corruptions    and 
apostatising  from  their  professions?     The  Lord  hints  at  it  (Deut.  v.  25).     Oh, 
that  they  had  such  a  heart !    Alas  !  poor  people,  ye  know  not  yourselves  that  speak 
so  well ;  I  know  thee  better  than  thou  dost  thyself.     I  will  declare  unto  thee  thy 
own  thought :  thou  hast  not  such  a  heart  as  to  do  what  thou  sayest.     If  thou 
knewest  this  fountain  of  original  corruption  thou  wouldst  despair  of  doing,  and  say, 
I  cannot  serve  the  Lord.     Why  is  our  way  corrupted  ?    Because  our  hearts  within 
were  not  cleansed,  and  because  they  were  not  known.     If  we  had  dried  up  the 
fountain,  the  streams  had  ceased  ;  but  we  did  only  dam  it  up,  and  cut  off  some 
streams  for  a  season.     We  set  up  our  resolutions  and  purposes  as  an  hedge  to 
hold  it  in,  but  the  sea  of  the  heart's  iniquity,  that  is  above  all  things,  hath  over- 
flowed it,  and  defiled  our  way  more  than  in  former  times.     Times  do  not  brmg 
evils  along  with  them,  they  do  but  discover  what  was  hid  before.     All  the  evils  and 
corruptions  you  now  see  among  us,  where  were  they  in  the  day  of  our  first  love, 
when  we  were  as  a  beloved  child  ?    Have  all  these  risen  up  of  late  ?    No,  certainly  ; 
all  that  you  have  seen  and  found  were  before,  though  they  did  not  appear.     Before 
they  were  in  the  root,  now  you  see  the  fruit.     Now,  so  it  is  with  us ;  we  have 
corrupted  ourselves  still  more.     Backsliding  cometh  on  as  grey  hairs,  here  and 
there,  and  is  not  perceived  by  beholders.     No  man  becometh  worst  at  first.     There 
are  many  steps  between  that  and  good.     Corruption  comes  on  men's  way  as  in 
fruits ;  some  one  part  beginneth  to  alter,  and  then  it  groweth  worse,  and  putnfieth 
and  corrupteth  the  rest  of  the  parts.     An  apple  rots  not  all  at  once,  so  it  is  with 
us.     Men  begin  at   leisure,  but  they  run  post  or  all  be  done.     {H,    Binning.) 
Not  the  apot  of  ffis    children.— T^e  secret  spot:— There    are    frequently  great 
difficulties  in  identifying  the  persons  of  men,  even  when  they  have  been  distinctly 
seen.     Our  police  courts  have  given  us  most  serious  evidence  that  men  may  be 
utterly  deceived  as  to  the  identity  of  individuals.     Turning  to  the  moral  universe, 
identity  there  is  far  more  difficult  to  be  made  out,  for  both  the  moral  and  religious 
world  swarm  with  pretenders.     You  cannot  know  to  a  certainty  who  among  your 
acquaintances  is  a  Christian  and  who  is  not.     You  see  the  text  talks  about  certain 
secret  spots.     These  are  tokens  in  which  men  cannot  so  readily  deceive  as  to  their 
identity.     The  mother  will  be  able  to  tell  whether  this  is  her  child  or  not  by  the 
spot  which  is  known  to  none  but  herself.    The  pretender  may  be  very  like  her 
child  :  the  voice  may  be  the  voice  of  Jacob,  and  the  hands  may  not  be  dissimilar, 
and  he  rtiay  be  able  to  relate  many  things  concerning  his  youth  which  it  would 
seem  that  none  but  the  real  child  could  know  ;  btrt  the  mother  recollects  that  there 
was  a  secret  spot,  and  if  that  be  not  there,  she  turns  aside  the  pretender  ;  but  if 
she  discovers  that  private  token,  she  knows  the  claimant  to  be  her  child.  ^  There 
are  secret  marks  upon  every  Christian,  and  if  we  have  not  the  spot  of  God's  child 
too,  it  will  little  avail  us  how  fairly  in  our  outward  garb  and  manner  we  may 


510  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxxii. 

conform  ourselves  to  the  members  of  the  heavenly  family.  1.  First,  then,  at  the 
mention  of  private  spots  which  are  to  be  the  insignia  of  the  regenerate,  there  are 
thousands  who  say,  "  We  do  not  shirk  that  examination.  Truly,  the  signs  of 
saints  are  in  us  also  !  Are  others  Israelites  ?  so  are  we :  we  challenge  an  investi- 
gation." Be  it  so,  then  !  Let  us  commexce  a  minute  examination.  I  am  not 
now  to  deal  with  anything  that  is  public.  We  are  not  speaking  now  about 
actions  or  words,  but  concerning  those  secret  things  which  men  have  judged  to  be 
infallible  marks  of  their  being  saved.  Here  is  a  friend  before  us,  and  as  he  lays 
bare  his  heart  he  indicates  to  us  the  spot  which  he  thinks  proclaims  him  to 
be  a  child  of  God.  I  will  describe  it.  The  man  has  embraced  sound  doctrine. 
Wherever  he  goes,  his  whole  talk  is  of  his  favourite  Shibboleth,  "The  truth  !  The 
truth  !  "  Not  that  the  aforesaid  truth  has  ever  renewed  his  nature  ;  not  that  it 
has  at  all  made  him  a  better  husband  or  a  kinder  father  ;  not  that  it  influences 
him  in  trade.  Now,  sir,  we  do  not  hesitate  to  say  concerning  you,  although  you 
will  not  be  best  pleased  with  us  for  it,  that  your  spot  is  not  the  spot  of  the  children 
of  God.  No  form  of  doctrine,  however  Scriptural,  can  ever  save  the  soul  if  it  be 
only  received  by  the  head,  and  does  not  work  in  its  mighty  energy  upon  the  heart. 
"Ye  must  be  born  again,"  is  the  Saviour's  word  ;  and  unless  ye  be  born  again, 
your  carnal  nature  may  hold  the  truth  in  the  letter  without  discerning  the  spirit  ; 
and  while  the  truth  shall  be  dishonoured  by  being  so  held,  you  yourself  shall  not 
be  benefited  thereby.  II.  What  is  the  true  secret  spot  which  infallibly 
BETOKENS  THE  CHILD  OF  GoD  ?  "  As  many  as  received  Him,  to  them  gave  He  power 
to  become  the  sons  of  God,  even  to  them  that  believe  on  His  name."  Here  it  is, 
then :  if  I  have  received  Christ  Jesus  into  my  heart,  then  I  am  a  child  of  God. 
That  reception  is  described  in  the  second  clause  as  a  believing  on  the  name  of 
Jesus  Christ.  If,  then,  I  believe  on  Jesus  Christ's  name,  I  am  a  member  of  the 
family  of  the  Most  High.  III.  The  discrimination  of  defiling  spots.  The  term 
"spot "  as  used  in  the  text  will  not  be  read  usually  as  we  have  read  it.  It  will, 
no  doubt,  to  most  readers  suggest  the  idea  of  sin,  and  very  properly  so — then  the 
text  would  run  thus  :  the  sin  of  the  people  mentioned  here  is  not  the  sin  of  God's 
people.  There  is  a  difference  between  their  guilt  and  the  offences  of  the  Lord's 
chosen.  There  is  a  discrimination  to  be  made,  even  as  to  sinful  spots.  God  forbid 
that  you  should  imagine  that  I  wish  to  excuse  the  sins  of  believers.  In  some  views, 
when  a  believer  sins,  his  sin  is  worse  than  that  of  other  men,  because  he  offends 
against  greater  light ;  he  revolts  against  greater  love  and  mercy ;  he  flies  in  the 
teeth  of  his  profession;  he  does  despite  to  the  Cross  of  Christ,  and  he  brings 
dishonour  upon  the  name  of  Jesus.  Believers  cannot  sin  cheaply.  The  very  least 
speck  on  a  Christian  is  more  plainly  seen  than  the  foulest  blot  on  the  ungodly,  just 
as  a  white  dress  shows  the  dirt  the  sooner.  Sin  is  a  horrible  thing,  and  it  is  above 
all  things  detestable  when  it  lurks  in  a  child  of  God  ;  yet  the  sins  of  God's  people  do 
differ  from  the  sins  of  other  men  in  many  important  respects  :  they  do  not  sin  with 
cool  determination,  meaning  to  sin  and  sinning  for  its  own  sake.  A  sinner  in  his 
sins  is  a  bird  in  the  air,  but  the  believer  in  sin  is  like  the  fish  that  leaps  for  a  while 
into  the  air,  but  must  be  back  again  or  die.  Sin  cannot  be  satisfactory  to  an 
immortal  spirit  regenerated  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  If  you  sin,  you  "have  an  advocate 
with  the  Father,  Jesus  Christ  the  righteous  "  ;  but  if  you  sin  and  love  sin,  then  you 
are  the  servant  of  sin,  and  not  the  child  of  God.  Again,  the  child  of  God  cannot 
look  back  upon  sin  with  any  kind  of  complacency.  The  ungodly  man  has  this  spot, 
that  after  the  sin  he  even  boasts  of  it ;  he  will  tell  to  others  that  he  enjoyed  himself 
greatly  in  his  wicked  sport.  "Ah,"  saith  he,  "  how  sweet  it  is  !  "  But  no  man  of 
God  ever  sins  without  smarting.  IV.  An  exhortation.  To  make  sure  work  for 
eternity,  and  to  make  it  clear  to  your  own  consciences  that  you  are  the  children  of 
God.  A  famous  case  is  now  pending,  in  which  a  person  claims  to  be  the  son  of  a 
deceased  baronet.  Whether  he  be  or  not  I  suppose  will  ere  long  be  decided  by  the 
highest  authorities  ;  meanwhile  the  case  is  pending,  a  very  weighty  case  for  him,  for 
upon  the  decision  will  hang  his  possession  or  non-possession  of  vast  estates  and 
enormous  property.  Now,  in  your  case  you,  many  of  you,  profess  to  be  the  children 
of  God,  and  heaven  hangs  upon  the  question  of  the  truthfulness  of  your  profession. 
A  child  of  God  !  Then  your  portion  is  eternal  life.  An  heir  of  wrath,  even  as 
others !  Then  your  heritage  will  be  eternal  death.  Is  it  uncertain  now  whether 
you  are  a  child  of  God  or  not  ?  Is  it  uncertain  now  whether  your  spot  is 
the  spot  of  God's  children?  Then  let  not  an  hour  pass  over  your  head  till 
you  have  said,  "Search  me,  0  God,  and  know  my  heart:  try  me,  and  know  my 
thoughts  :  and  see  if  there  be  any  wicked  way  in  me,  and  lead  me  in  the  way  ever- 


CHAP.  XXXII.]  DEUTERONOMY.  511 

lasting  !"  (C  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  children  and  the  spots: — I.  God's  children 
HAVE  their  spots  IN  THIS  LIFE.  How  many  spots  does  the  holy  eye  of  God  observe 
upon  us  every  day  !  II.  There  is  an  essential  difference  between  the  spots 
OF  God's  children  and  the  spots  of  the  tjnregenerate.  Certainly  in  the  sight 
of  God  there  is  no  difference  in  sin.  Its  nature  is  the  same.  And  sin  upon  one  of 
God's  children,  abstractedly  considered,  is  hateful.  1.  Unregenerate  men  sin 
deliberately  and  habitually.  When  did  you  find  a  good  man  that  was  an  habitual 
sinner  ?  2.  Unregenerate  men  sin  freely  :  there  is  no  principle  in  their  heart  which 
stands  opposed  to  sin.  3.  In  unregenerate  minds  there  is  always  a  love  to  some  par- 
ticular sin  ;  but  in  the  regenerate  there  is  no  one  sin  but  he  desires  the  death  of  it. 
4.  How  different  are  the  feelings  of  the  regenerate  and  unregenerate,  after  having 
committed  the  same  sin,  both  alike  in  the  sight  of  men  !  An  unregenerate  man  may 
weep  bitterly  :  what  is  the  cause  ?  Shame  !  Men  know  it ;  he  is  afraid  of  punish- 
ment. But  what  produces  the  grief  which  a  believer  feels  ?  Because  he  has  given 
blasphemy  among  men  ;  because  he  has  offended  his  God,  and  has  built  up  a  wall 
between  God  and  his  soul.  If  a  child  of  God  has  fallen,  it  will  render  him  watchful 
and  prayerful :  if  a  wicked  man  gain  peace,  he  will  go  his  way,  and  sin  on.  {John 
Hyatt.)  The  spot  of  God's  children  .-—I.  God's  people  have  their  spot,  or  dis- 
tinctive SYMBOL.  The  term  spot  is  here  plainly  employed  in  allusion  to  the 
distinctive  badge  which  idolaters  were  wont  to  receive  upon  their  foreheads,  faces  or 
hands,  to  show  what  God  they  worshipped  (Rev.  xx.  4).  Now,  the  Lord's  worshippers 
have  their  distinct  mark,  impressed  not  upon  their  persons,  but  upon  their  spirit,  . 
temper,  principles,  conversation,  and  behariour,  which  is  holiness  unto  the  Lord 
(Jer.  ii.  3).  This  has  been  the  mark  of  God's  people  from  the  beginning,  and  is  so 
still  (Zech.  xiv.  20).  II.  The  dishonour  of  those  avho  have  "not  the  spot  of 
His  children."  The  marginal  reading  gives  a  remarkably  important  turn  to  the 
meaning  of  the  text.  "They  are  not  His  children,  this  is  their  blot."  That  all  are 
not  His  children  who  are  so  accounted,  will  be  readily  admitted,  seeing  the  visible 
Church  embraces  many  who  do  not  exhibit  the  distinguishing  mark.  And,  if  within 
the  pale  of  the  Church  are  found  those  who  are  not  God's  children,  what  estimate 
shall  we  form  of  those  who  are  without  ?  And  if  all  who  are  not  God's  children 
might  be  if  they  would,  what  a  fearful  blot  is  this  upon  their  character  !  1.  ^Yhat 
a  reflection  on  any  man's  understanding  to  think  lightly  of  so  great  a  benefit ! 
2.  Again,  what  must  be  his  peril  who  is  living  in  this  state  ?  What  his  misery  who 
is  without  hope  and  God  in  the  world  ?  Shall  such  a  blot  remain  long  upon  any 
of  us?    {J.  Burdsall.) 

Ver.  6.  Do  ye  thus  requite  the  Lord. — Magnitude  of  the  Divine  favours: — 

1.  What  God  has  done  for  us.  Everything.  We  are  indebted  to  Him  for  our  being, 
and  our  well-being  ;  for  all  our  present  comforts,  and  future  hopes.  The  goodness 
of  God  is  a  boundless  sea,  without  either  bottom  or  shore.  His  favours  for  multi- 
tude, diversity,  and  splendour,  resemble  the  stars  of  heaven,  which  the  more 
attentively  they  are  viewed,  appear  the  more  numerous,  and,  were  we  not  so 
immensely  distant  from  them,  would  equally  astonish  us  with  their  magnitude 
and  order.  1.  Creation.  2.  Preservation.  3.  Redemption.  4.  The  Gospel.  5.  The 
Holy  Spirit.  II.  How  we  ought  in  reason,  duty,  and  interest^  to  requite 
the  Lord  for  His  gifts.  1.  If  we  ourselves  are  the  creatures  of  God's  power,  and 
have  no  faculty  of  soul,  no  member  of  body,  no  endowment  of  any  kind,  but  what 
we  have  received  from  Him,  surely  it  ill-becomes  us  to  boast  of  anything  that  we 
have,  as  though  we  received  it  not ;  or  to  value  ourselves  on  account  of  what  is 
not  our  own,  but  only  lent  us  for  a  little  time,  and  to  be  redemanded  soon  with  usury. 

2.  This  leads  me  to  a  second  inference,  that  the  many  mercies  of  God  have  laid 
an  indispensable  obligation  upon  us  unfeignedly  and.  gratefully  to  praise  Him. 

3.  But  again,  may  we  not  infer,  from  the  preceding  observations,  that  it  is  no  less 
our  duty  to  trust  in  God  than  it  is  humbly  to  praise  Him  ?  The  many  and 
wonderful  things  which  He  hath  done  for  us  leave  no  room  to  doubt  either  of  His 
goodness   or  power;    either  of  His   inclination   or  ability  to   help  and  save  us. 

4.  The  loving-kindness  of  the  Lord  to  us-ward,  so  wonderfully  displayed,  so 
inces:santly  exercised,  notwithstanding  our  ingratitude,  certainly  demands  returns 
of  love,  and  lays  us  under  an  indispensable  obligation  to  serve  and  glorify  Hiuj. 
(/.  Benson.)  An  appeal  to  the  conscience  .—No  arrow  is  so  sharp  as  a  well-timed 
and  well-directed  question,  winged  with  such  precision  a,s  this.  It  goes  straight  to 
the  conscience  ;  and  whatever  else  religion  deals  with,  it  must  deal  primarily  with 
the  conscience.     The  song  proceeds  to  make  appeal  to  the  imagination,  the  memory, 


612  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xixir. 

the  judgment,  the  heart,  but  all  with  the  view  of  getting,  through  them,  at  the 
conscience.  Its  grand  purpose  is  to  bring  the  Lora  into  contact  with  the  people's 
conscience;  and  as  there  are  no  more  effective  grappling-hooks  with  which  to 
seize  the  conscience  and  moor  it  closely  alongside  of  Him  than  a  series  of 
questions,  we  hare  them  here  in  a  triple  array  :  **  Do  ye  thus  requite  the  Lord,  0 
foolish  people  and  unwise  ?  Is  not  He  thy  Father  that  hath  bought  thee  ?  "  that 
is,  hath  paid  for  thine  emancipation  out  of  Egypt,  so  that  you  inic(ht  get  away 
scathless  and  free  I  **  Hath  not  He  made  and  established  thee  ?  "  Made  a  people 
and  nation  of  thee,  given  thee  a  name  and  place  of  unprecedented  distinction 
among  surrounding  tnbes,  established  law  and  settled  institutions  in  your  midst, 
advanced  you  to  peculiar  privileges,  and  put  you  into  the  condition  of  an  orderly 


and  well-regulated  Church  and  State?  It  was  a  fit  time  to  recall  the  past,  to 
remember  their  original  nothingness,  to  take  a  review  of  what  they  once  were,  and 
what  they  had  even  already  become.  {A.  H.  Drysdale,  M.A.)  Mans  ungrateful 
requital  to  God : — I  have  sometimes  had  the  misfortune  to  sit  in  concerts  where 
persons  would  chatter  and  giggle  and  laugh  during  the  performance  of  the  pro- 
foundest  passages  of  the  symphonies  of  the  great  artists  ;  and  I  never  fail  to  think, 
at  such  times,  '  *  I  ask  to  know  neither  you,  nor  your  father  and  mother,  nor  your 
name  :  I  know  what  you  are,  by  the  way  you  conduct  yourself  here — by  the  want 
of  sympathy  and  appreciation  which  you  evince  respecting  what  is  passing  around 
you."  We  could  hardly  help  striking  a  man  who  should  stand  looking  upon 
xJiagara  Falls  without  exhibiting  emotions  of  awe  and  admiration.  If  we  were  to 
see  a  man  walk  through  galleries  of  genius,  totally  unimpressed  by  what  he  saw, 
we  should  say  to  ourselves,  *'  Let  us  be  rid  of  such  an  unsusceptible  creature  as 
that."  Now  I  ask  you  to  pass  upon  yourselves  the  same  judgment.  What  do  you 
suppose  angels,  that  have  trembled  and  quivered  with  ecstatic  joy  in  the  presence 
of  God,  think  when  they  see  how  indifferent  you  are  to  the  Divine  love  and  good- 
ness in  which  you  are  perpetually  bathed,  and  by  which  you  are  blessed  and 
sustained  every  moment  of  your  lives  ?  How  can  they  do  otherwise  than  accuse 
you  of  monstrous  ingratitude  and  moral  insensibility  which  betokens  guilt  as  well 
as  danger  ?  {H.  W.  Beecher. )  Is  not  He  thy  Father  that  hath  bought  thee  ? — 
God's  paternal  relation  and  claim: — I.  God  as  the  Father  of  His  people. 

1.  He  has  redeemed  them  by  Christ  (1  Pet.  i.  18,  19).  2.  He  is  the  Author  of  their 
spiritual  existence  (Eph.  ii.  10).  3.  He  has  made  paternal  provision  for  them 
(Phil.  iv.  19).  4.  He  grants  parental  protection  to  them  (Psa.  xci.  4).  5.  He 
imparts  paternal  instruction  (Isa.  liv.  13).  6.  He  takes  great  delight  in  them 
(Isa.  Ixvi.  13).  7.  He  administers  fatherly  correction  (Jer.  xxx.  11).  8.  He  has 
made  paternal  provision  for  them  (Psa.  xxxi.  19).  II.  The  claims  which  He  has 
TTPON  His  children.     1.  He  ought  to  have  our  highest  reverence  (Heb.  xii.  28). 

2.  He  ought  to  have  our  supreme  affection  (Deut.  vi.  5).  3.  He  should  possess  our 
unwavering  confidence  (Isa.  xii.  2).  4.  He  should  have  our  cheerful  obedience 
(2  Cor.  X.  4-6).  5.  Our  continual  gratitude  and  praise  (1  Pet.  ii.  9).  {T.  B.  Baker.) 
The  parental  character  of  God : — The  term  "father  "  implies  all  that  is  most  tender 
and  affectionate.  The  love  of  a  father  is  immeasurable.  It  extends  to  everything 
which  can  affect  the  welfare  of  his  offspring.  Is  not  God  your  Father  ?  1.  Did  not 
He  create  you  ?  Was  it  not  He  who,  having  created  you,  committed  you  to  the 
charge  of  your  earthly  parents,  and  disposed  their  minds  to  watch  with  unceasing 
care  over  your  welfare  ?  Is  it  not,  therefore,  in  a  secondary  sense  only  that  we  are 
to  ascribe  the  term  of  father  to  our  earthly  parent,  while  the  primary  and  full 
meaning  of  the  word  belongs  only  to  our  Creator?  Let  us  remember  that,  in 
having  God  for  our  Father,  we  possess  the  highest  honour  and  the  noblest  privilege 
which  any  created  beings  can  enjoy.  2.  There  is  another  sense  in  which  the  title 
of  Father  is  justly  claimed  by  God.  He  is  the  Father  who  hath  bought  us.  When 
I  have  reflected  upon  the  signal  proofs  which  God  has  given  of  His  paternal  feelings 
towards  us,  I  have  often  been  surprised  that  those  whose  gratitude  to  their  earthly 
parents  is  unbounded,  should  show  so  little  affection  to  their  heavenly  Father,  and 
rely  so  little  on  His  love  and  mercy.  The  reasons  of  this  inconsistency  appear  to 
me  to  be  the  following.  1.  The  undue  attachment  which  we  are  apt  to  place  on 
objects  of  sense.  We  see  and  converse  with  an  earthly  parent,  but  our  bodily 
senses  do  not  inform  us  of  the  presence  of  God.  Yet  the  proofs  of  His  presence 
are  actually  more  strong  and  numerous  than  those  which  attest  the  existence  of 
any  material  object.  2.  Through  the  weakness  of  the  human  understanding  we 
continually  entertain  an  undue  estimation  of  second  causes.  We  do  not  feel  the 
extent  of  our  obligations  to  our  heavenly  Father,  because  many  of  the  blessings 


3HAP.  xxxii.]  DEUTERONOMY,  618 

which  He  bestows  are  communicated  to  us  by  some  instrument  appointed  for  that 
end.  It  will  probably,  however,  be  generally  acknowledged,  that  the  character  of 
God  is  good  and  gracious.  It  is  in  the  practical  use  of  such  knowledge  that  we  are 
chiefly  apt  to  fail.  This  is,  therefore,  the  end  to  which  I  now  shall  direct  your 
attention.  1.  You  ought  to  entertain  the  highest  reverence  for  His  laws.  Bead 
the  Bible  constantly  as  containing  the  will  of  your  heavenly  Father.  2.  This  view 
of  the  character  of  God  as  our  Father  gives  a  ju.st  idea  of  the  true  nature  of 
religion.  Religion  is  the  homage  which  you  pay  to  your  heavenly  Father.  It  is 
the  regulation  of  your  lives  by  His  holy  "Word.  It  is  the  enjoyment  of  the 
innumerable  benefits  offered  to  mankind  through  His  beloved  Son.  Religion  must 
bear  the  stamp  and  character  of  its  Author.  3.  Is  God  our  Father?  Then  we 
ought  to  maintain  an  intercourse  with  Him  by  frequent  }>rayer,  and  to  praise  Him 
daily  for  His  innumerable  mercies.  4.  Is  God  our  Father  ?  Let  us  then  place  a 
generous  confidence  in  Him.  (/.  Venn,  M.A.)  The  paternal  character  of 
God:— I.  God  as  the  Father  of  His  people.  1.  God  is  the  Author  of  their 
spiritual  existence.  2.  He  makes  paternal  provision  for  His  children.  3.  He 
affords  parental  protection  to  His  children.  4.  He  imparts  paternal  instruction. 
5.  He  takes  paternal  delight  in  His  children.  6.  He  administers  paternal  correc- 
tion to  His  children.  7.  He  lays  up  a  paternal  provision  for  His  children.  II.  Thk 
CLAIMS  WHICH  He  HAS  UPON  His  CHILDREN.  1.  He  Ought  to  receive  from  us  the 
highest  reverence.  We  should  cultivate  His  fear.  2.  He  ought  to  have  our  supreme 
affections.  "Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God,"  &c.  3.  He  should  possess  our 
unwavering  confidence.  Trust  in  Him  at  all  times.  4.  He  should  have  our  cheer- 
ful obedience.  "  Be  ye  followers  of  God  as  dear  children,"  &c.  5.  He  shall  receive 
from  us  our  most  exalted  praises.     {J.  Burns,  D.D.) 

Vers.  7,  8.  Remember  the  days  of  old. — Particular  instances  of  God's  kindness : — 
1.  Some  were  ancient ;  and  for  proof  of  them  he  appeals  to  the  records.  The 
authentic  histories  of  ancient  times  are  of  singular  use,  especially  the  history  of  the 
Church  in  its  infancy.  2.  Others  were  more  modem ;  and  for  proof  of  them  he 
appeals  to  their  fathers  and  elders  that  were  now  alive  and  with  them.  Parents 
must  diligently  teach  their  children  not  only  the  Word  of  God,  His  laws  (Deut.  vi. 
7),  and  the  meaning  of  His  ordinances  (Exod.  xii.  26),  but  His  works  also,  and  the 
methods  of  His  providence  (Psa.  Ixxxvii.  3,  4,  6,  7).  And  children  should  desire 
the  knowledge  of  those  things  which  will  be  of  use  to  engage  them  to  their  duty, 
and  to  direct  them  in  it.  3.  Three  things  are  here  enlarged  upon  as  instances  of 
God's  kindness  to  His  people,  and  strong  obligations  upon  them  never  to  forsake 
Him.  (1)  The  early  designation  of  the  land  of  Canaan  for  their  inheritance  ;  for 
herein  it  was  a  type  and  figure  of  an  heavenly  inheritance,  that  it  was  of  old 
ordained  and  prepared  in  the  Divine  counsels.  (a)  The  wisdom  of  God  has 
appointed  the  bounds  of  man's  habitation,  and  determined  both  the  place  and  time 
of  our  living  in  the  world  (Acts  xvii.  26).  (6)  Infinite  wisdom  has  a  vast  reach,  and 
designs  beforehand  what  is  brought  to  pass  long  after  (Acts  xv.  18).  (c)  The  great 
God,  in  governing  the  world  and  ordering  the  affairs  of  states  and  kingdoms,  has  a 
special  regard  to  His  Church  and  people,  and  consults  their  good  in  all  (2  Chron. 
xvi.  9  ;  Isa.  xlv.  4).  (2)  The  forming  of  them  into  a  people,  that  they  might  be 
fit  to  enter  upon  this  inheritance,  like  an  heir  of  age,  at  the  time  appointed. 
Herein  also  Canaan  was  a  figure  of  the  heavenly  inheritance ;  for  as  it  was  fix)m 
eternity  proposed  and  designed  for  all  God's  spiritual  Israel,  so  they  are  in  time 
(and  it  is  a  work  of  time)  fitted  and  made  meet  for  it  (Col.  i.  12).  (3)  The  settling 
of  them  in  a  good  land,  (a)  Glorious  victories  over  their  enemies,  {b)  Plenty  of 
good  things.  {MaUhew  Henry,  D.D,)  Ask  thy  father,  and  he  will  shew  thee; 
thy  elders,  and  they  will  tell  thee. — Advantages  of  inquiry : — There  is  much  truth 
in  the  proverb.  He  that  will  learn  of  none  but  himself  is  sure  to  have  a  fool  for  his 
master.  The  way  to  advance  in  knowledge  is  to  be  sensible  of  our  own  deficiencies, 
and  willing  to  avail  ourselves  of  assistance.  '*  If  any  of  you  lack  wisdom,  let  him 
ask  of  God,"  &c.  There  are  others  that  may  be  subordinately  consulted ;  they 
possess,  and  can  impart  a  little  of  His  judgment :  for  in  His  light  they  see  light. 
The  priest's  lips  should  keep  knowledge ;  and  they  should  seek  the  law  at  his 
mouth  :  for  he  is  the  messenger  of  the  Lord  of  Hosts.  And  not  only  ministers,  but 
private  Christians  may  be  useful.  We  were  designed  to  live  in  a  state  of  connection 
with,  and  dependence  upon  each  other :  and  while  the  old  need  the  strength  and 
activeness  of  the  young,  the  young  need  the  prudence  and  counsel  of  the  old.  But 
what  advantage  do  we  derive  from  writing  and  printing !    The  birds  and  beasts  ar« 

33 


514  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap,  xxxii. 

no  wiser  now  than  when  they  went  to  Noah  for  shelter,  and  to  Adam  for  names. 
It  is  nearly  the  same  with  savage  life :  knowledge  is  not  preserved,  transmitted,  and 
increased,  for  want  of  books.  But  in  consequence  of  these  helps,  the  improvements 
of  one  age  flow  into  another,  and  the  stream  is  continually  enlarging  by  the  influx 
of  additional  discoveries.  ( W.  Jay. )  When  the  Most  High  divided  to  the  nations 
their  inheritance. — The  nations  divided: — 1.  God  originally  divided  the  nations 
their  inheritance.  When,  after  the  deluge,  He  gave  the  new  earth  to  the  children 
of  men.  He  did  not  throw  it  in  among  them,  so  to  speak,  for  a  kind  of  scramble, 
that  each  might  seize  what  he  could  :  but  He  assigned  them  their  several  portions, 
that  the  discontented  might  not  invade  the  peaceful,  nor  the  mighty  prey  upon  the 
weak.  God  permits  what  He  does  not  approve  :  but  nothing  can  be  more  contrary 
to  His  design  and  pleasure  than  for  powerful  states  to  invade  and  incorporate  little 
ones.  And  the  crime  generally  punishes  itself.  Such  unjust  and  forced  accessions 
become  sources  of  uneasiness,  corruption,  and  revolt.  2.  In  the  arrangement  of  the 
limits  and  conditions  of  mankind  He  had  an  especial  reference  to  the  future  com- 
monwealth of  Israel.  For  they  were  by  far  the  most  important  detachment  of  the 
human  race.  They  were  the  depositaries  of  revealed  religion — the  heirs  of  the 
righteousness  which  is  by  faith,  &c.  One  thing  is  to  be  observed.  They  were  not 
intended  to  engross  the  Divine  favour,  but  to  be  the  diff'users  of  it.  They  were  not 
only  to  be  blessed,  but  to  be  blessings.  3.  While  we  here  see  that  there  is  nothing 
like  cliance  in  the  government  of  the  world,  there  is  what  may  be  called  a  peculiar 
providence  in  particular  instances.  And  we  cannot  help  thinking  of  our  own 
country.  No  country  on  earth  bears  such  a  comparison  with  Judea,  in  privilege 
and  design.  4.  The  economies  of  heaven  on  earth  have  always  been  regulated  by 
one  end— the  cause  of  the  Messiah :  and  could  we  view  things  as  God  does,  we 
should  perceive  how  all  the  revolutions  of  the  world  ;  the  changes  of  empire  have 
affected  this  cause — immediately  or — remotely — in  a  way — of  achievement — or 
preparation — of  purification  or — increase — of  solidity  or — diffusion  :  and  that  all 
things  are  going  on,  not  only  consistently  with  it,  but  conducively  to  it.     {Ibid.) 

Ver.  9.  The  Lord's  portion  is  His  people. — A  choice  portion: — 1.  The  text 
teaches  us  that  the  Church  of  God  is  the  Lord's  own  peculiar  and  special  property. 
"The  earth  is  the  Lord's,  and  the  fulness  thereof:  the  world,  and  they  that  dwell 
therein."  By  creation,  as  well  as  by  providence,  Jehovah  is  the  Sovereign  possessor 
of  the  entire  universe.  Let  none  venture  to  dispute  His  claims,  or  say  that  He 
is  not  the  great  owner  of  all  things,  for  thus  saith  the  Lord,  * '  Behold,  all  souls 
are  Mine. "  But  He  has  a  special  property  in  His  Church.  As  a  king  may  have 
ample  possessions,  to  all  of  which  he  has  undoubted  right,  but  still  he  has  royal 
crown-lands  which  are  in  a  very  special  sense  his  own  ;  so  hath  the  Lord  of  all  a 
peculiar  interest  in  His  saints.  As  Osborne,  and  Balmoral,  and  Windsor  belong  to 
our  sovereign  by  a  tenure  which  differs  from  his  title  and  claim  to  the  United 
Kingdom,  so  the  Church  is  the  peculiar  heritage  of  the  King  of  kings.  "The 
Lord's  portion  is  His  people."  How  are  they  His?  (1)  We  answer,  first,  by  His 
own  sovereign  choice.  He  did  so  ordain  to  make  His  chosen  and  set  His  love  upon 
them.  (2)  They  are  not  only  His  by  choice,  but  by  purchase.  (3)  They  are  also 
His  by  conquest.  Old  Jacob,  when  he  lay  a-dying,  gave  to  Joseph  one  portion  above 
his  brethren,  which  he  had  taken  out  of  the  hand  of  the  Amorite  with  his  sword 
and  with  his  bow.  The  Lord  Jesus  can  truly  say  of  His  people,  that  He  hath  taken 
them  out  of  the  hand  of  the  Amorite  with  His  sword  and  with  His  bow.  Thy 
conquering  hand,  0  Jesus,  when  nailed  to  the  Cross,  rent  away  Thy  children's 
chains.  We  are  indeed  the  conquered  captives  of  His  omnipotent  love.  2.  In 
the  second  place,  the  text  shows  that  the  saints  are  the  objects  of  the  Lord's 
especial  care.  "The  eyes  of  the  Lord  run  to  and  fro  throughout  the  whole  earth," 
— with  what  object? — "to  show  Himself  strong  in  the  behalf  of  them  whose 
heart  is  perfect  toward  Him."  The  wheels  of  providence  are  full  of  eyes  ;  but  in 
what  direction  are  they  gazing?  Why,  that  all  things  may  "work  together  for 
good  to  them  that  love  God,  to  them  who  are  called  according  to  His  purpose." 
3.  The  text  includes  the  idea  that  the  Church  is  the  object  of  the  Lord's  special 
joy,  for  a  man's  portion  is  that  in  which  he  takes  delight.  See  what  terms  He 
uses;  He  calls  them  His  dwelling-place.  "In  Jewry  is  God  known,  His  name  is 
great  in  Israel,  in  Salem  also  is  His  tabernacle,  and  His  dwelling-place  in  Zion." 
"  For  the  Lord  hath  chosen  Zion  ;  He  hath  desired  it  for  His  habitation."  Where 
is  a  man  most  at  ease  ?  Why,  at  home.  We  are  expressly  told  that  the  Church  is 
the  Lord's  rest.     "  This  is  My  rest  for  ever,  here  will  I  dwell,  for  I  have  desired  it." 


CHAP,  xxxii.]  DEUTERONOMY,  615 


As  if  all  the  world  beside  were  His  workshop,  and  His  Church  His  rest.  In  the 
boundless  universe  He  is  busy  marshalling  the  stars,  riding  upon  the  wings  of 
the  wind,  making  the  clouds  His  chariot ;  but  in  His  Church  He  is  at  rest,  in  Zion 
the  Everlasting  One  spends  His  Sabbaths.  Yet  further,  there  is  an  unrivalled 
picture  in  the  Word  where  the  Lord  is  even  represented  as  singing  with  joy  over 
His  people.  Who  could  have  conceived  of  the  Eternal  One  as  bursting  forth  into 
a  song  ?  Yet  it  is  written,  "  He  will  rejoice  over  thee  with  joy.  He  will  rest  in  His 
love.  He  will  joy  over  thee  with  singing."  As  He  looked  upon  the  world.  He  spoke 
and  said,  "It  is  very  good,"  but  He  did  not  sing.  And  as  He  vieweth  the  works 
of  providence,  I  hear  not  that  He  sings  ;  but  when  He  gazes  on  you,  the  purchase 
of  Jesus'  blood.  His  own  chosen  ones,  the  great  heart  of  the  Infinite  restrains 
itself  no  longer,  but,  wonder  of  wonders,  God,  the  Eternal  One,  sings  out  of  the 
joy  of  His  soul.  Truly,  "the  Lord's  portion  is  His  people."  4.  Our  text  teaches 
us  that  God's  people  are  His  everlasting  possession.  He  will  never  sell  His 
children  at  a  price ;  nor  if  He  could  have  better  people  instead,  would  He  change 
them.  They  are  His,  and  they  shall  be  His  while  time  lasts  ;  and  when  time  ends, 
and  eternity  rolls  on,  He  never  can,  He  never  will  cast  away  His  chosen  people. 
Let  us  in  this  rejoice  and  be  exceeding  glad.  "  The  Lord's  portion  is  His  people." 
{C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  Lord's  people  —I.  What  is  said  of  the  Lord's  PEorLE  ? 
1.  They  are  a  chosen  people.  2.  They  are  a  renewed  people.  3.  They  are  a 
people  of  faith.  4.  They  are  a  justified  people.  5.  They  are  a  people  who  per- 
form good  works.  II.  Where  God  finds  His  people  when  He  calls  them. 
1.  Alienated  from  God.  2.  Ignorant  of  God.  3.  As  wanderers,  going  astray. 
4.  Strangers  to  themselves.  5.  Willing  slaves  to  Satan.  6.  Dead  in  sins. 
III.  The  special  care  which  the  Lord  takes  of  His  people.  1.  He  leads 
them— (1)  To  Christ  for  salvation.  (2)  To  see  further  into  the  plague  of  their 
own  heart.  (3)  Into  the  furnace  of  spiritual  affliction.  2.  He  instructs  them 
—(1)  In  the  plan  of  salvation.  (2)  In  the  doctrine  of  the  Trinity.  (3)  In  the 
efficacy  of  Christ's  death.  (4)  In  the  endearing  relationship  which  God  sustains 
to  His  people,  as  their  Father,  &c.  (5)  In  all  the  blessings  of  the  covenant.  {J.  J. 
Easimead. )  God's  people  His  portion  .-—The  word  ' '  portion  "  signifies  a  possession 
which  a  man  claims  as  his  own,  which  he  highly  prizes,  and  in  which  he  greatly 
delights.  We  cannot  say  that  the  English  are  the  people  of  God,  or  the  French, 
or  the  Germans,  or  the  Russians ;  but  we  may  say  that  God  has  a  people  in 
England,  and  in  France,  and  in  Germany,  and  in  Russia  ;  and  so  on.  For  His 
real  people  are  no  longer  known  as  Jew  or  Gentile,  barbarian,  Scythian,  bond  or 
free  ;  but  those  in  every  nation  under  heaven  are  His  who  worship  Him  in  the 
Spirit,  and  rejoice  in  Christ  Jesus,  and  have  no  confidence  in  the  flesh.  These  are 
His  people  ;  He  has  pleasure  in  them,  and  counts  them  His  portion— a  possession 
dear  to  Him  above  all  others.  Of  course,  we  speak  of  earth.  In  heaven  He  may 
have  what  is  dearer  still :  but  when  He  looks  down  on  earth.  He  sees  nothing  so 
precious  as  those  whom  He  has  chosen  to  be  His  people,  the  lot  of  His  inheritance. 
Let  us,  then,  see  on  what  grounds  it  is  that  He  so  highly  values  them.  These  are 
three :  they  are  dear  to  Him— as  bought  by  so  costly  a  price ;  as  regenerated  by 
His  grace  on  earth  ;  as  hereafter  to  be  glorified  in  heaven.     I.  Now,  when  a  man 

PAYS  A  great  price  FOR  ANYTHING,  HE  MUST  HAVE  ESTEEMED  IT  VERY  VALUABLE 

BEFORE  HE  COULD  BE  INDUCED  TO  GIVE  SO  MUCH  FOR  IT  ;  and  in  like  manner,  we 
argue  very  correctly  when  we  say  that  the  fact  of  God's  giving  His  Son  to  save 
the  world  was  a  proof  how  strongly  His  boAvels  yearned  over  manhood,  how  precious 
they  were  in  His  sight.  But  this  is  not  the  exact  feature  of  the  case  before  us, 
which  we  are  proposing  to  consider.  We  are  not  speaking  of  that  love  of  God  to 
the  world  which  led  Him  to  give  His  Son  to  save  it ;  but  of  His  love  to  those  who 
are  so  purchased  and  saved.  And  here  also,  if  we  look  at  the  manner  of  men,  we 
well  know  that  what  a  man  has  laboured  hard  for,  and  purchased  dear,  he  prizes 
accordingly ;  he  surveys  the  acres  which,  at  the  expense  of  much  toil,  he  has 
made  his  own,  with  very  diff"erent  feelings  from  those  of  his  heir,  into  whose 
hands  they  fall  without  any  care  or  expense  on  his  part,  and  who  perhaps  dissipates 
what  his  predecessor  had  acquired.  It  is  this  latter  case  which  illustrates  the  love 
that  God  bears  to  His  people.  He  loves  them  because  so  much  has  been  paid  for 
them  ;  He  would  not  that  the  souls  should  perish  for  which  Christ  died  ;  His  soul 
would  be  grieved  at  the  loss  of  that  which  the  counsels  of  His  wisdom  and  the 
treasures  of  His  love  had  been  expended  to  procure.  II.  When  a  man,  at  a  very 
high  price,  has  purchased  a  tract  of  waste  land,  which,  on  account  of  the  scenery, 
the  air,  and  the  capabilities  of  the  soil,  he  destines  for  his  future  residence, 


516  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap,  xxxii. 

HB  SUEVEYS  WHAT  HAS  NOW  BECOME  HIS  PROPERTT  WITH  MUCH  INTEREST.      But  in 

its  present  state  he  cannot  view  it  with  entire  satisfaction  ;  he  cannot  dwell  in  the 
morass,  nor  take  up  his  abode  in  the  one  mean  hovel  that  stands  on  the  premises  ; 
hut  he  will  not  let  the  large  sum  which  he  has  paid  be  lost.  He  therefore  causes 
the  whole  to  be  surveyed,  lays  down  a  plan  of  improvement,  and  fixes  on  the  site 
of  his  intended  dwelling.  After  a  while  the  scene  is  changed,  the  bog  is  reclaimed, 
furze  and  brushwood,  and  all  unsightly  objects  are  swept  away,  trees  are  planted, 
the  grounds  are  tastefully  laid  out,  and  a  beautiful  mansion  is  erected.  The 
proprietor  now  looks  at  it  with  other  eyes  than  before,  is  delighted  with  the  loveli- 
ness which  he  beholds,  and  gladly  fixes  his  abode  there.  It  is  thus  that  the  Lord 
at  first  beholds  those  whom  He  has  purchased  by  the  death  of  His  Son.  The  mere 
fact  of  Christ's  having  died  for  them  makes  no  more  change  in  their  character 
than  a  man's  having  paid  the  purchase  of  a  bleak  common  converts  it  into  a  scene 
of  loveliness.  No  ;  much  has  to  be  done  with  the  soil  of  the  heart,  as  well  as 
with  the  soil  of  the  ground  ;  and  He  who  undertakes  the  work  is  a  skilful  operator, 
and  is  sure  to  succeed.  But  here  the  parallel  ceases  ;  our  illustration  leaves  us — 
it  can  help  us  no  further.  How  man  acts  upon  the  inert  soil,  we  can  understand  ; 
but  cannot  understand  how  God  acts  upon  the  mind.  The  process  of  education 
comes  the  nearest  to  it ;  for,  as  we  teach  children  by  books,  and  stimulate  them  by 
rewards  and  punishments,  so  God  deals  with  His  people  in  a  way  of  instruction 
and  discipline.  III.  If,  then,  the  people  of  God  is  His  portion  here  below  ;  if 
such  is  the  excellence  of  real  holiness,  that,  imperfect  as  their  holiness  is,  their 
heavenly  Father  sees  nothing  to  be  compared  to  it,  nothing  worthy  to  be  mentioned 
with  it,  in  the  whole  compass  of  our  globe — what  a  portion  will  His  ransomed 

ONES   BE  TO   Him,  WHEN  EVERY   REMAINDER  OF  SIN  SHALL  BE   DONE   AWAY  ;   when 

He  shall  see  in  them  the  full  resemblance  of  their  elder  Brother,  His  well-beloved 
Son,  and  be  well  pleased  with  them,  even  as  He  is  well  pleased  with  Hira  !  And 
now  let  me,  in  conclusion,  show  you  that  all  the  considerations  which  move  God  to 
take  us  for  His  portion  should  be  so  many  arguments  to  induce  us  to  follow  after 
holiness.  1.  In  the  first  place,  the  price  paid  for  us.  Did  Christ  die  to  redeem 
us  from  this  present  evil  world?  and  shall  we  be  conformed  to  the  world  which 
crucified  Him  ?  2.  Further,  consider  how  excellent  true  holiness  is.  If  the  Lord's 
people  are  His  portion,  it  is  because  they  are  a  holy  people.  He  rejoices  over 
them  on  account  of  their  holiness.  Think,  then,  what  a  real  dignity  and  sterling 
worth  there  must  be  in  that  which  God  Himself  approves.  3.  But  look  beyond 
the  end  of  your  days  here  below — look  to  those  days  which  will  know  no  end. 
Think  of  the  sanctity  and  blessedness  of  that  state  for  which  God  is  training  you, 
and  be  content  to  be  led  and  disciplined  for  it  in  the  way  that  He  pleases,  {J. 
Fawcett^  M.A.)  Good  men  as  the  property  of  Ood: — I.  They  are  amongst  His 
MOST  VALUABLE  PROPERTY.  1.  They  have  souls.  One  soul  is  more  valuable  than 
the  whole  world.  Souls  can  think  of  and  love  God  ;  the  material  universe  cannot. 
2.  Redeemed  souls.  II.  They  are  amongst  His  most  gratifying  property. 
{Homilist.)  The  Church  the  portion  of  God: — By  this  it  is  not  intimated  that 
God  needs  us,  or  any  creature,  to  add  anything  to  His  blessedness  ;  it  is  impossible 
to  suppose  it.  "We  cannot  be  necessary  to  the  Lord  otherwise  than  as  we  supply 
Him  with  opportunities  of  displaying  His  grace  and  all-sufficiency.  But  though 
it  implies  not  anything  so  derogatory  to  Gwi,  it  means  something  of  the  greatest 
consequence  to  us.  1.  In  the  first  place,  it  implies  tender  care.  A  man's  portion 
is  the  most  valuable  part  of  his  substance,  which  he  is  solicitous  above  all  things 
to  preserve :  and  if  it  be  at  any  time  in  danger,  he  is  indefatigable  till  it  be  secur^. 
In  like  manner  is  the  Church,  and  every  particular  member  of  it,  the  charge  of 
the  providence  of  God.  2.  A  portion  is  an  object  of  delight.  With  what  pleasure 
does  the  worldling  survey  his  possessions !  He  leaves  his  intimate  friend,  and 
agreeable  company,  to  count  his  beloved  treasure.  He  walks  over  his  fields  each 
day  with  fresh  pleasure ;  and  every  time  sees,  or  thinks  he  sees,  new  beauties  in 
the  prospect  around  him.  Yet  this  very  imperfectly  represents  the  delight  which 
the  Lord  is  described  as  taking  in  His  people.  Jewels,  treasure,  heritage,  children 
are  the  endearing  appellations  by  which  they  are  distinguished.  3.  A  portion 
implies  expectation.  Where  much  is  given,  much  will  be  required.  Where  He 
has  distinguished  any  with  peculiar  marks  of  regard.  He  expects  works  of  faith 
and  labours  of  love  ;  fruitfalness  in  every  good  work,  and  increase  in  the  knowledge 
of  God.  He  expects  that  His  people  should  be  essentially  different  from  the  rest 
of  the  world  ;  that  they  shine  as  lights  in  the  world,  and  adorn  the  doctrine  of 
God  their  Saviour  in  all  things ;  and  that  their  progress  in  grace  and  holiness  be 


CHAP,  xxxii.]  DEUTERONOMY. 617 

proportionable  to  their  various  advantages.  4.  I  might  here  particularly  show  you 
how  we  came  to  be  the  portion  of  God.  (1)  But  let  us  now,  from  what  has  been 
said,  consider  how  lamentable  it  is  that  the  Lord's  portion  is  so  small ;  that,  among 
all  the  human  race,  there  should  be  so  few  to  whom  the  words  of  the  text  may  be 
properly  applied.  (2)  How  solicitous  should  we  be  to  know  whether  we  be  the 
Lord's  portion  or  not !  (3)  "  Let  us  walk  worthy  of  the  vocation  wherewith  we 
are  called."  (4)  Finally,  let  us  rejoice  in  the  prospect  of  that  glorious  period, 
when  the  Lord  will  fully  possess  His  portion,  and  we  shall  fully  possess  ours.  (-S'. 
Lavington.) 

Ver.   10.   He  found  him  in  a  desert  land.— G^otf  and  Eis  people ;— I.  Now, 
althou'crh  one  of  the  chief  objects  of  this  discourse  will  be  to  adapt  this  portion 
of  Scrfpture  to  our  own  times,  it  will  be  well  to  offer  some  few  remarks  m  regard 
to  THEIR  PRIMAEY   APPLICATION;   and   they  may  be  considered  as  containing  a 
summary  of  all   that  had   been  suffered   by  the  Israelites,  of  all  that  had  been 
wrought  by  God  on  their  behalf,  of  their  departure  from  the  bondage  of  Egypt, 
the  perils  of  their  journey,  and  the  might  of  their  deliverance.     IL  I  would  now 
speak  on  three  states  and  conditions  of  believers  which  the  text  appears 
TO  depict.     1.  We  behold  the  believer  or  spiritual  Israelite  in  his  natural  state— 
"A  desert  laud,  a  waste  howling  wilderness."     We  must  be  humble  ;  for  the  idea 
of  a  "good  heart,"  which  is  so  much  prated  about,  is  just  like  a  cankerworm  m 
the  sout.     Whatever  the  consolations  of  faith  are,  it  is  not  possible  that  Christ 
should  be  all,  unless  man  actually  feels  himself  to  be  nothing.     2.  Our  text  depicts 
the  believer  in  a  regenerate  state.     Found  of  God,   led  and  instructed  by  (^od. 
Here  are  the  several  stages  of  Christian  experience.     Man  is  found  of  God,  rather 
than  God  is  sought  of  man.     The  work  of  redemption  is  Divine  in  its  commence- 
ment, as  well  as  its  consummation  ;   and  the  Holy  Spirit,  through  whose   opera- 
tions alone  the  soul  is  prepared  for  final  glory,  gives  the  first  impulse,  and  excites 
the  glorious  aspiration.      "I  was  found  of  them  that  sought  Me  not"  ;  and,  how- 
ever these  words  may  especially  allude  to  the  calling  of  the  Gentile  Church,  you 
observe  that  they  are  descriptive  of  every  believer's  individual  experience.     "Found 
of  God."     This,  then,  is  the  commencement  of  spiritual  life;  and  although  when 
the  arrow  of  conviction   first  enters  into  the  conscience  the  sinner  exclaims,  as 
Ahab  did  to  Elijah,  "  Hast  thou  found  me,  0  my  enemy  !  "     Yet  presently  the  soul 
rejoices  in  its  deliverance.     A  sense  of  the  burthen  of  sin  gives  way  before  the 
manifestation  of  Christ :  and  the  man  that  is  thus  found  of  God  finds  his  guilty 
burthen  removed,  and  a  full  salvation  amply  provided  and  ensured.     But  whilst 
religion's  "ways  are  ways  of  pleasantness,  and"  all  her  paths  are  peace,"  yet  the 
course  of  God's  dealings  with  His  people  is  never  one  of  undeviating  serenity ;  it 
is,  on  the  contrary,  "through  much  tribulation"  that  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is 
entered  ;  and  the  path  which  a  Christian  travels  is  generally  so  circuitous  that  it 
can  only  be  described  by  saying,  God  led  him  about— from  gardens  smiling  with 
the  flowers  of  hope,  to  deserts  stript  of  leaves,  of  foliage,  of  beauty.     3.  He  who 
is  in  a  regenerate  state  is  also  in  a  secured  and  guarded  state,  which  is  the  last 
condition  our  text  depicts  ;  God  keeps  true  believers  "as  the  apple  of  His  eye." 
{H.  Melvill,  B.D.)        The  journey  throtcgh  the  wilderness:—!.   God's  dealings 
-with  His  ANCIENT  PEOPLE.     God  "found"  Israel.     Of  His  own  inscrutable  love, 
God  chose  to  take  this  people  to  Himself ;  He  found  them,  and  made  them  into  a 
nation  for  His  praise.     And  it  is  said,  "  He  found  him  in  a  desert  land,  and  in  the 
waste  howling  wilderness."     I  apprehend  that  this  expression  may  relate  as  well 
to   the  position   in  which   the  children  of  Israel  were  at  first  found  of  God,  in 
slavery  in  Egypt,   as  to  their  position  during  their  forty  years'   sojourn  in  the 
wilderness.     'J'hen  it  is  said  further,  that  "  He  led  him  about."    This  is  in  allusion 
to  the  circumstance  that  God  did  not  lead  the  people  by  a  straight  path  through 
the  wilderness,  from  the  margin  of  tlie  Red  Sea  towards  the  promised  land  ;  but 
in  place  of  this,  forty  years  were  occupied  in  a  circuitous  route.     And  as  He  thus 
led  the  people  about,   "He  instnmted  "  them.     He  instructed  them  by  many  a 
type,  by  many  a  providential  dealing,  by  many  statutes  and  ordinances  such  as 
were  given  to  no  other  nation  besides.     He  instnicted  them  by  mercies,  by  warn- 
ings, by  judgments ;  He  instructed  them  by  many  a  token  of  loving- kindness,  by 
many  an  interposition  of  power,  by  many  a  signal  manifestation  of  His  determina- 
tion to  bless  the  obedient  and  to  punish  the  transgressors.     And  during  the  whole 
period,  it  is  further  said,    "  He  kept  him  as  the  apple  of  His  eye."     He  shielded 
them  by  His  power,  made  it  plain  to  all  their  enemies  that  the  broad  shield  of 


518  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxxii. 

Omnipotence  was  thrown  over  them,  and  that  He  was  determined  to  protect  them 
from  peril,  and  to  put  them  in  possession  of  the  land  which  He  had  promised  to 
their  lathers  that  He  would  give  them.  II.  Such  is  the  literal  application  of  the 
words.  N'ow,  let  us  look  at  their  spiritual  accommodation — their  accommodation 
TO  THE  spiiiiTUAL  IsFvAEL  OF  GoD.  1.  First,  here  is  the  believer  "  found  "  of  God. 
"We  love  Him  because  He  first  loved  us."  Where  does  God  find  him?  "In  a 
desert  land,"  &c.  There  is  nothing  in  creation  from  which  we  can  obtain  the 
supply  of  the  soul's  spiritual  wants.  And  even  after  a  person  has  been  found  of 
God  the  description  still  holds.  We  have  no  fixed  habitation  upon  earth  ;  and  we 
are  in  constant  danger  from  enemies.  But  oh  !  it  is  a  blessed  thing  to  know,  that 
just  as  God  of  old  found  His  people  Israel  in  the  waste  howling  wilderness  and  in 
the  desert  land,  so  He  finds  His  people  still ;  and  the  proof  of  His  finding  them  is 
that  He  leads  them.  And  here,  too,  the  description  given  in  the  text  is  very- 
accurate,  for  it  is  said,  "He  led  him  about."  2.  Often  manifold  trials  enter  into 
the  dealings  of  God  with  His  people ;  He  permits  them  to  encounter  sharp  afflic- 
tions, unexpected  trials,  it  may  be  heartrending  bereavements ;  He  takes  from 
them  the  earthly  prop  upon  which  they  were  wont  to  lean  too  fondly.  But  of  this 
be  assured  :  however  God  may  lead  His  people  about.  He  leads  them  by  the  right 
■way.  3.  Then,  again ;  all  the  while  God  is  thus  leading  His  people  about,  He  is 
"instructing  them."  Have  you  not  experienced  this?  A  Christian  has  to  grow 
in  knowledge  as  well  as  in  grace.  As  God  continues  His  providential  dealings 
towards  us,  we  come  to  take  a  wider  survey  of  the  love  and  faithfulness  and  goodness 
of  God  in  all  His  dealings  with  us.  God  instructs  us  in  our  own  weakness  and 
His  all-sufficiency,  our  corruption  and  His  grace,  our  own  frailty  and  His  con- 
stancy, our  unbelief,  and  His  unwavering  faithfulness  to  His  Word.  And  thus  the 
believer  is  instructed ;  and  he  comes  to  take  a  bolder  step,  and  to  feel  his  stand 
more  secure,  as  being  anchored  upon  the  Rock  of  Ages,  and  putting  his  trust  in 
the  sure  Word  of  God.  4.  And  then  we  must  notice,  further,  that  it  is  said,  •  *  He 
kept  him  as  the  apple  of  His  eye."  What  a  beautiful  metaphor  this  is !  Of  all 
the  bodily  organs  that  God  has  given  to  us,  the  eye  is  the  most  exquisitely  tender 
and  sensitive.  You  know  how  the  tiniest  particle  of  dust  will  irritate  and  distress 
the  delicate  fibres  of  this  tender  and  sensitive  organ  ;  yet  of  all  the  organs  of  our 
body  it  is  the  most  exquisitely  provided  for  ;  and  the  very  guards  that  God  has 
placed  about  it  are  so  sensitive  and  so  quick  to  the  perception  of  danger,  that  the 
very  eye  itself  may  be  defended.  Now,  this  is  the  figure  that  God  makes  use  of  in 
order  to  present  His  watchful  guardianship  over  His  saints.  "He  kept  him  as  the 
apple  of  His  eye,"  watched  him  with  unceasing  vigilance,  placed  around  him 
unnumbered  guards,  defended  him  with  the  utmost  possible  precaution  for  his  real 
welfai-e,  and  thus  shielded  and  protected  him  from  approaching  danger.  God  thus 
guards  and  defends  His  people.  It  is  said  they  are  "kept  by  the  power  of  God 
through  faith  unto  salvation."  And  is  there  a  man  who  walks  this  earth  so  happy, 
fio  truly  blessed  as  the  man  who  is  thus  under  the  guardianship  of  God  ?  {Bp.  R. 
^ickersteth.)  The  goodness  of  God  to  Israel : — I.  The  state  in  vv^hich  God  finds 
His  servants.  "In  a  desert  land,  in  the  waste  howling  wilderness."  1.  Their 
condition,  therefore,  if  viewed  as  a  picture  of  the  original  condition  of  man,  teaches 
us  that  the  people  of  God  were  by  nature  at  a  great  distance  from  Him.  The 
enemies  of  God  by  wicked  works  ;  the  willing  slaves  of  Satan  ;  tied  and  bound  with 
the  chain  of  a  thousand  lusts  ;  with  all  their  affections  fixed  on  sin,  and  all  their 
desires  turned  from  God — how  shall  they  find  Him,  how  approach  Him  ?  2,  A 
desolate  condition.  Let  us  look  back  to  the  days  that  are  past.  We  imagined  that 
we  had  need  of  nothing,  but  what  was  our  real  condition  ?  We  were  wretched  and 
miserable,  poor  and  naked,  ready  to  perish.  The  world  appeared  fair  before  us  ;  it 
promised  us  much,  and  we  were  willing  to  credit  it.  Fools  that  we  were,  we  tried 
it  ;  but  what  could  it  do  for  us  ?  It  gave  us,  among  its  briars  and  thorns,  a  few- 
flowers  to  amuse  us,  but  it  left  us  starving  for  want.  It  brought  us  no  pardon  for 
our  guilt,  no  peace  for  an  accusing  conscience,  no  deliverance  from  the  grave,  no 
refuge  from  hell.  It  left  us  destitute,  forlorn,  and  wretched.  3.  A  state  of  danger. 
The  territory  of  an  enemy.  II.  In  what  manner  the  Lord  acts  towards  His 
people  amid  their  wretchedness  and  dangers.  "As  an  eagle,"  &c.  This 
beautiful  similitude  strikingly  illustrates  the  tenderness  with  which  the  Almighty 
led  Israel  from  Egypt  to  Canaan,  and  the  loving-kindness  which  He  still  manifests 
towards  all  who  seek  Him  in  the  wilderness  of  this  world.  It  shows  us  what  He 
does  for  them,  and  how  He  does  it.  1.  It  shows  us  what  God  does  for  His  people. 
It  tells  us  that  He  afflicts  them,  guides  them,  and  preserves  th^n.     2.  But  in  what 


CHAP.  XXXII.]  DEUTERONOMY.  519 

manner  does  the  Lord  thus  afflict,  guide,  and  defend  His  servants  ?  He  exercises 
His  mercy  towards  them  constantly,  patiently,  with  delight.     (C.  Bradley,  M.A.) 

Vers.  11,  12.  As  an  eagle  stirreth  up  her  nest. — The  spiritual  discipline  of 
humanity : — I.  The  great  end  of  the  spiritual  discipline  of  humanity  is  to  secure 
THE  BIGHT  ACTION  OF  OUR  POWERS.  What  is  right  action  ?  1.  A  constitutionally 
befitting  action.  We  are  made  to  love,  study,  and  serve  God.  2.  A  self-reliant 
action.  This  is  the  condition  of  progress,  and  implies  a  trust  in  moral  principles 
and  in  God.  3.  A  Divinely  prompted  action.  II.  The  means  of  the  spiritual 
discipline  of  humanity  involve  a  variety  of  Divine  action.  1.  A  stimulating 
action.  God  takes  health,  property,  friends,  children  away,  to  stir  us  up.  2.  An 
exemplary  action.  In  Christ  we  see  how  we  can,  and  ought  to,  act.  3.  A  pro- 
tecting action.  III.  The  genius  of  the  spiritual  disciple  of  humanity  is  ever  that 
of  parental  affection.  1.  There  should  be  on  our  part  a  cordial  acquiescence.  / 
Our  Father  knows  what  is  best,  and  what  we  require.  2.  There  should  be  on  our  "'^ 
part  an  endeavour  to  realise  the  end  of  discipline  (Job  xxiii.  10  ;  Psa.  Ixvi.  10-12). 
{Homilist. )  Taught  by  the  eagle : — We  are  taken  out  to  the  solitudes  where  <^^ 
some  cliff,  with  ragged,  splintered  crown  uplifts  its  giant  form  into  the  air,  and 
has  at  base,  let  us  suppose,  the  wave-washed  rock  and  ever-heaving  mass  of  ocean 
waters.  Far  above,  perched  on  a  ledge  forming  its  eyrie,  sits  the  monarch  of  the 
air,  the  eagle,  representative  of  all  that  is  graceful  and  powerful  in  the  bird 
creation.  The  nest,  built  of  rudely  arranged  sticks,  is  so  protected  by  its  inaccess- 
ibility tliat  you  at  once  see  that  nothing  but  the  deep  instincts  of  the  bird  could 
have  taught  it  to  make  so  savage  a  place  its  home.  It  is,  however,  so  near  the 
cliff's  edge  that  when  their  offspring  are  ready  for  flight,  the  parent  birds  may 
have  the  less  difficulty  in  tempting  their  new-fledged  offspring  to  the  skies.  Two 
things  are  taken  for  granted  here,  and  we  need  go  no  further  until  we  bring  them 
under  notice.  These  are  that  God  is  our  Father,  and  the  powers  by  which  we 
serve  Him  are  slumbering  within  us.  I.  God  is  our  Father.  Does  a  hearer  say, 
"There's  nothing  in  this"  ?  So  much,  my  friend,  that  the  day  you  realise  this, 
salvation  has  entered  your  dwelling.  I  am  perfectly  aware  that  this  at  times  is 
hard  to  believe,  that  when  a  fellow-mortal  is  laid  on  a  bed  of  pain  and  sees  wife 
and  helpless  children  sobbing  at  his  bedside,  and  death  steadily  advancing  to 
embrace  him,  I  know  it  is  hard  for  him  to  think  that  behind  all  this  discipline 
there  is  a  God  and  Father's  affection.  But  recollect,  we  only  see  the  beginning  of 
things  here.  The  end  lies  yonder.  Yonder  lie  the  explanations  and  the  true 
home-bringing.  Borrowing  an  illustration  from  an  art  we  all  know  something 
about,  the  art  of  photography,  we  remind  you  that  if  the  camera-glass  be  so  small 
that  the  photographer  can  only  partially  cover  a  coveted  view,  say  some  lofty, 
wide-stretching  mountain  range,  he  photographs  part  by  part  until  he  has  com- 
pleted the  whole  view,  and  then,  piecing  his  views  together,  is  able  to  present  a 
faultless  and  accurate  picture  of  the  whole.  So  must  it  be  with  us  in  our  life  and 
in  our  judgment  of  God's  Fatherhood.      II.  The  second  thing  assumed  is,  that 

THE  powers   by  WHICH   GOD'S   CHILDREN  SERVE  HiM   ARE   WITHIN  US.      Think  of 

our  illustration.  The  wings  by  which  the  eagle's  offspring  soar  into  the  skies  do 
not  require  to  be  created.  They  simply  wait  to  be  exercised ;  so  is  it  with  men. 
We  have  reminded  you,  then,  that  God  is  our  Father,  and  that  the  powers  by 
which  we  serve  Him  are  within  us.     III.  If  we  are  all  the  children  of  God,  then  we 

DARE  NOT  expect  TO   LIVE  WITHOUT   BEING  EDUCATED   BY  HiM.      Nor  CaU  We,  and      !f\ 

from  the  illustration  supplied  us  here  we  learn  how  the  Great  Father  trains  us  for  ^ 
His  higher  service.  His  method  is  twofold,  and  we  are  now  to  have  this  double 
method  graphically  illustrated  for  us.  1.  The  first  is  the  educative  method.  The 
cliff  now  rises  before  us.  The  rudely  constructed  nest  of  sticks  is  there,  the  yawning 
abyss  beneath,  the  eaglets  and  the  parent  bird.  See  !  She  is  now  about  to  begin 
her  course  of  instruction.  Dozing,  blinking,  shivering,  her  offspring  perch  upon  the 
ragged  summit  of  the  cliff.  Like  a  thunderbolt  the  mother  j^lunges  into  the  gulf 
below.  She  swoops  round  and  round,  backwards  and  forwards,  before  her  tiniid 
children.  She  desires  them  to  follow  her  example.  She  pursues  this  course  ;  but 
no  !  they  will  not ;  they  are  faint-hearted  ;  the  experience  is  new.  With  one  bold 
sweep  she  has  rounded  to  and  perched  beside  them.  Here  let  her  tarry  for  a  brief 
space  while  we  ask  each  other  what  spiritual  meaning  can  we  possibly  attach  to 
this  ?  ^  It  is  the  leading  the  way — the  showing  others  how  to  do  anything  by  first  of 
all  doing  it  yourself.  Every  master  knows  its  value,  when  he  bids  some  bungling 
servant  stand  aside  and  see  how  it  ought  to  be  done.     The  poorest  mother  in  all  the 


620  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  scxii. 

land  knows  the  value  of  this  imitative  method  when,  at  nightfall,  she  kneels  in 

?rayer  by  the  side  of  her  child  and  teaches  the  little  one  how  to  lisp  "  Our  Father." 
'he  oflficer  knows  the  value  of  this  rule,  who  plunges  his  spurs  into  his  charger's 
sides  and  leads  the  way  'mid  clash  of  steel  and  crack  of  musketry.  This,  then,  ia 
the  imitative  method,  and  we  all  know  its  value  more  or  less  ;  but  not  sufficiently, 
unless  we  have  imitated  the  noblest  exponent  of  this  simple  art — Jesus  the  Christ. 
He  knew  the  full  value  of  this  plan,  and  the  world  has  never  known  a  nobler 
follower  of  it.  But  what  if  the  reverential  spirit  in  a  person  refuse  to  be  quickened  ? 
What  if  the  religious  faculty  remain  still  una  wakened  ?  If  the  soul  of  man  will  not 
yield  to  God's  peaceable,  gentle  method  of  education,  then  observe  what  our  text 
tells  us.  2.  God  has  recourse  to  His  second  rule  for  educating  us,  the  prohibitive 
method.  Let  the  text  tell  us  what  this  is.  Again  we  wander  foi-th  to  the  wilds,  and 
now  we  shall  see  the  parent  bird  calling  yet  a  second  device  to  her  aid  in  order  to 
compel  her  timorous  children  to  take  wing  and  cleave  the  air.  They  have  refused 
to  be  taught  by  gentle  ways,  they  shall  be  instructed  now  by  sterner  rules. 
Impatiently  she  flits  backwards  and  forwards,  then  swoops  up  beside  them.  There 
they  still  sit,  dozing  and  shivering  beside  the  old  nest.  In  an  instant  (and 
naturalists  tell  us  this  is  strictly  true),  literally  in  the  words  of  Scripture,  "She 
stirreth  up  the  nest."  She  scatters  the  sticks.  She  prohibits  their  remaining  longer 
in  a  state  of  infancy  and  weakness.  The  sticks  are  scattered  and  again  she  plimgea 
into  the  yawning  gulf  below.  Now,  see  what  our  God  and  Father  is  doing.  Our 
hearts  in  their  folly  will  fondly  cling  to  the  hope  that  on  earth  we  have  all  we 
require  ;  we  try  to  settle  down  here.  We  say  to  our  souls,  we  shall  have  a  long  and 
a  merry  time  of  it.  But  the  unseen  hand  of  God  is  holding  us  ;  behold  the  working 
of  that  baud !  He  has  withdrawn  the  old  familiar  landmarks,  one  after  another. 
School  days  and  school  companions,  where  are  they  ?  He  has  scattered  our  school- 
fellows, tliey  are  spread  over  the  face  of  the  globe,  its  length  and  breadth,  and  many 
this  day  sleep  their  last  sleep,  "by  moimt  and  stream  and  sea."  The  happy  band 
of  laughing  school  lads  all  scattered.  The  company  is  broken.  He  has  disappointed 
us.  He  has  plunged  some  of  us  into  the  cold,  dark  waters  of  bereavement,  and 
taught  some  of  us  that  this  world  is  one  gigantic  vanity  and  the  earth  a  vale 
of  tears.  And  what  does  it  all  mean  1  What  but  that  we  are  destined  for 
another  world  ?  This  is  only  the  school.  Are  we  to  remain  children  all  our 
days  ?  Are  our  powers  of  soul  never  to  be  developed  by  prayer  and  faith  ?  Is 
the  spiritual  side  of  our  nature  to  remain  asleep  or  dead  ?  Nay  !  Life  is  like 
the  eaglets'  nest ;  and  if  we  will  not  learn  by  the  imitative,  God  will  continue 
to  apply  to  us  His  prohibitive  method.  3.  But  observe,  if  we  refuse  to  be  trained 
either  by  imitation  or  prohibition,  if  the  life  of  Christ  be  nothing  to  a  man,  and  the 
waves  of  affliction  washing  over  his  soul  but  harden  him  in  impenitence,  I  ask  you, 
has  the  infinite  mercy  of  God  no  means  of  retaliating  ?  There  shall  be  no  retaliation, 
but  our  text  as  we  have  it  again  speaks  to  us  ;  the  only  course  left  open  to  the 
Almighty  love  is  to  leave  him  alone.  There  is  no  compulsion.  No  will  is  forcibly 
bent  to  submission.  (Z>.  D.  F.  Mcicdanald,  M.A.)  The  eagle  ;  a  parable  of  God  : 
— I.  The  Divine  aim.  Spiritual  education.  1.  Its  character.  Educing  the  latent 
energies  and  powers  of  the  soid.  2.  Its  importance.  Character.  Higher  attain- 
ment. Nobler  enjoyment.  3.  Its  difficulty.  We  love  the  nest  of  ease,  and  are 
satisfied  with  slender  attainments,  or  none.  II.  The  Divine  method.  1.  Dis- 
turbance. The  ministry  of  affliction.  2.  Example.  3.  Aid.  {J.  F.  Allen,  M.A.) 
The  eagle's  nest : — 1.  God's  care  in  providing  beforehand  for  the  wants  and  destinies 
of  His  people.  2.  The  discipline  to  which  God  subjects  His  people  for  their  good. 
3.  The  instruction  God  gives  His  people  by  precept  and  example.  4.  The  protection 
and  support  God  extends  to  His  people.  Lessons — 1.  A  lesson  of  encouragement  to 
begin  a  Christian  life.  Your  soul  has  wings  ;  stretch  them.  Learn  to  fly  by  flying. 
2.  A  lesson  of  comfort.  Fear  not  (Isa.  xl.  31).  3.  A  lesson  of  hope  for  all  the 
future.  That  which  has  been  shall  be.  {H,  J.  Vandyke,  D.D.)  Unity  of 
jirovidence : — The  text  suggests  the  course  of  God's  dealings  with  His  chosen  people 
— the  fact  that,  throughout  the  shifting  scenes  of  their  pilgrimage,  God  alone  is 
their  Guide  and  Protector.  The  whole  strain  of  the  passage  is  on  the  word  "  alone," 
and  presents  to  us,  not  so  much  the  idea  of  providence  itself,  as  the  unity  of 
providence.  I.  This  xmity  is  not  always  perceived  in  this  life.  1.  One  reason 
of  this  is  to  be  found  in  the  nature  and  extent  of  man's  present  capabilities.  Man 
learns  bit  by  bit.  2.  Another  reason  is  found  in  the  variety  of  the  circumstances  of 
providence.  Life  is  made  up  of  lights  and  shades,  sweets  and  bitters,  with  their 
endlessly  arranged  gradations.     We  cannot  see  how  these  crooked,  angular  chippiuga 


CHAP.  xxxiL]  DEUTERONOMY. B21 

can  be  so  placed  as  to  represent  the  picture  sketched  by  God  of  His  own  glory  and 
our  welfare.  3.  The  apparently  trivial  nature  of  some  events  in  life  hides  this  unity 
from  us.  But  can  there  be  anything  trivial  in  God's  dealings  with  us  t  Who  can 
say  one  event  of  his  life  is  of  more  importance  than  another  ?  II.  This  unity  finds 
AN  ANALOGY  IN  man's  OWN  GENERAL  PROCEDURE.  God  often  placcs  a  heavenly 
principle  under  earthly  arrangements.  "  Like  as  a  father  pitieth  his  children,"  &c. 
III.  This  unity  will  be  perceived  in  a  future  period.  In  providence  there  is  a 
twofold  unity.     1.  The  perfection  of  humanity  and  restoration  to  the  Divine  image. 

2  The  promotion  of  the  glory  of  God.  These  two  unite ;  neither  can  be  without 
the  other.  When  this  is  accomplished,  Christ's  idea  of  unity  will  be  realised.  (C. 
Oowaifd,  M.A.)  God  stirs  up  His  people  .—I.  Some  of  the  reasons  why  it  is 
necessary  that  God  should  stir  up  His  people.  1.  There  is  a  strong  tendency 
to  spiritual  indolence  in  mankind.  2.  The  danger  of  "  settling  down  on  the  lees 
is  an  ever-present  one.  The  air  must  be  kept  in  constant  motion  or  it  will  lose 
its  life  :  the  ocean  must  flow  and  heave  unceasinj^ly  or  its  waters  become  stagnant. 

3  The  heart  of  man  is  naturally  timid,  fearful,  like  the  birdlmg,  and  must  be 
taught  of  God  in  a  way  similar  to  that  described  in  the  text.  4.  It  is  trial, 
experience,  discipline  only  that  can  counteract  these  tendencies,  dispel  these  fears 
and  doubts,  and  give  exercise,  development,  and  strength  to  our  powers  gifts, 
advantages,  and  thereby  enable  us  to  soar  aloft  in  the  blue  empyrean  like  the 
mother  eagle.  II.  Some  of  the  ways  in  which  God  stirs  up  His  people. 
1.  The  Word  and  ordinances.  2.  Special  and  extraordinary  means.  (1)  Revivals. 
(2)  National  judgments.  (3)  Personal  visitation— sickness,  bereavement,  losses, 
trials,  temptations,  discipline.  {J.  M.  Sherwood,  D.D.)  The  eagle  stirring  up 
jigr  nest  —1.  The  discipline  which  God  uses.  He  knows  our  tendency  to  make 
this  earth  our  rest,  and  He  disturbs  our  nest  to  teach  us  to  rise  on  the  wings  of 
faith  towards  the  enduring  realities  of  heaven.  How  often  does  God  take  away 
our  earthly  comforts  when  He  sees  that  we  cling  too  fondly  to  them.  Perhaps 
something  upon  which  we  placed  the  utmost  reliance,  upon  which  seemed  to  rest 


some  large  mercantile  firm,  or  the  failure  of  a  bank,  may  involve  numbera  in 
ruin,  and  plunge  many  families  in  misery  hitherto  unknown.     How  many  have 
had  occasion,  from  these  and  similar  causes,  to  mourn  over  altered  circumstances. 
Marvel  not  if  it  be  thus  with  you  ;  it  is  God  stirring  up  your  nest  to  teach  you 
to  wing  your  flight  to  heaven.     How  many  of  us  will  have  to  praise  God  that 
ever  He  stirred  up  our  nest  by  the  dispensations  of  His  providence.     Let  us 
notice— II.  The  affection  which  God  exhibits.     "As  an  eagle  fluttereth  over 
her  young,"  or  broodeth   over  them,  that  she  may  communicate  vital  warmth. 
God  is  here  represented  as  manifesting  the  same  affection  towards  His  people  as  the 
parent  bird  exhibits  towards  her  young,  nurturing  and  warming  them.      III.  The 
guardian  care  which  God  exercises.      "As  an  eagle  spreadeth  abroad  her 
wings,  taketh  them,  beareth  them  on  her  wings."     It  would  be  difficult  to  picture 
a  more  touching  representation  of  God's  care  over  His  people.     1.  He  teaches  them 
the  way  they  should  go.     2.  He  sustains  them  when  weary.     The  afl^ection  ot  the 
parent  bird  referred  to  in  the  text  is  so  great  that  she  takes  her  young  ones  and 
bears  them  on  her  wings,  and  so  shields  them  that  no  arrow  can  reach  them  but 
through  the  parent's  heart.      And  is  not  God  thus  a  Father  to  us  ?      Did    He 
not  bear  us  up  from  the  ruin  of  the  fall,  and  beyond  the  reach  of  threatening 
vengeance  ?    Did  not  the  Son  of  God,  who  is  one  in  essence  with  the  Father  assume 
our  nature  and  bear  our  sins  in  His  own  body  on  the  tree?     (Jf-  J-  Brock,  B.A.) 
Divine  expulsions  .—I.  Divine  incitements.     It  is  wonderful  how  happy  men 
become  sometimes  in   the   worldly  nest.     A   man  gets  the  wife  he  wants.     The 
children  come,    and   prosperity,   and  kindliness,    and  health,   and  comfort,    and 
reputation— and  he  says  in  his  heart,    "  I  shall  die  in  my  nest  after  living  in 
it  for  long  happy  years."     When  lo  !  there  comes  somehow,  and  from  some  quarter, 
a    "stirring    up"   of   the  nest— incitements,    surprises,   changes,    losses,    contro- 
versies,  sorrows.     The  young  birds  are  growing,  and  the  nest  is  too  small,  and 
they  crowd   against   each   other,    and   that  makes   a   stirring  up.     Or  there   are 
griefs  and  losses  that  crush   the   unportioned   heart  and  shake  it  all  trembling 
out   of  its  security.      It  were  useless  to   attempt   to   desciibe   all  the  ways  by 
which   God   can   shatter  what  man   builds,   drive  away  what  man  gathers,   take 
what  man  in  vain  tries  to  hold.     The  thing  to  be  done  is  to  persuade  ourselves 


522  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap,  xxxii, 

that  all  this  is  indeed  sent  for  our  good.  The  eagle  does  not  stir  up  its  nest 
with  any  ill  design.  God  does  not  bring  His  forces  of  change  and  trouble  upon 
men  with  a  view  to  grieve  and  ruin  them.  He,  too,  has  only  good  intent.  His 
voices,  His  strokes,  seem  to  say  to  men,  "What  mean  ye,  ye  sleepers? 
Awake.  You  have  enough  of  that.  You  have  in  the  creature  no  abiding  portion  ; 
seek  it,  and  you  will  find  it  in  Me.*'  II.  Divine  example.  •'  As  an  eagle  stirreth 
up  her  nest,  fluttereth  over  her  young "  ;  as  showing  them  the  way  to  fly  ;  so 
God  sets  before  us  the  examples  of  the  good,  the  strivings  of  the  great,  the 
lives  of  the  saints,  and  chiefly  the  perfect  life  of  His  incarnate  Son.  He  is 
always  showing  us  the  way ;  always  rising  into  the  purer  air,  that  we  may 
follow  ;  always  showing  new  paths,  and  pointing  to  high  places ;  and  never  yet 
have  the  poor  passing  pleasures  of  earth  been  made  to  look  so  fair  as  God  makes 

foodness  seem,  shining  in  the  lives  of  His  holy  ones  and  perfectly  in  Himself. 
II.  Divine  protection.  "The  eagle  spreadeth  abroad  her  wings."  This,  indeed, 
may  be  no  more  than  the  full  expansion  of  the  meaning  of  the  former  phrase, 
the  spreading  abroad  of  the  wings  being  the  complete  example  of  the  method  of 
flying.  But  the  probability  rather  seems  to  be  that  the  spreading  of  the  wings  is 
the  promise  of  protection  to  the  young  birds,  both  while  in  the  nest  and  while 
attempting  to  fly.  God  protects— whom  ?  Not  lazy,  selfish  creatures  whose  chief 
aim  is  to  make  the  world  a  nest.  God  protects— what  ?  Not  indolence,  cowardice, 
selfishness,  fear,  indiff'erence.  He  protects  those  who  stir  themselves  when  the 
nest  is  stirred  ;  those  who  spread  the  wing  in  answer  to  the  outspread  wings 
above  them  ;  those  who  work  ;  those  who  stay  by  the  task ;  those  who  refuse  to 
leave  the  field  of  duty  ;  those,  in  a  word,  who  try,  at  least,  to  mount  upon  wings 
as  eagles,  to  run  without  being  weary,  to  walk  without  fainting.  IV.  Divine 
compulsion.  "As  an  eagle  .  .  .  taketh  them,"  if  they  will,  in  helpfulness:  if 
they  will  not,  in  compulsion  ;  in  one  way  or  another,  they  must  be  got  out  of  the 
nest.  I  have  seen,  not  an  eagle  indeed,  but  a  bird  of  some  size,  give  a  motherly 
or  fatherly  push  to  a  strong  young  creature  sitting  on  the  edge  of  the  nest  engaged 
in  a  general  survey  of  the  world  below.     "It  is  time,"  said  the  mother,  "that  you 


very 

of  the  stronger  kind.  His  expulsions.  His  banishments.  Then  He  is  always 
ready  with  suitable  and  sufficient  helps  to  those  who  are  thus  completely  launched 
and  started  upon  the  new  life.  "As  an  eagle  .  .  .  beareth  them  on  her  wings.'* 
The  mother  eagle  comes  beneath  her  young  one  in  the  air  when  it  is  about  to 
sink,  through  fear  or  weakness,  bears  it  up  on  her  own  outspread  wings  and 
carries  it  back  to  the  nest  or  along  through  the  air,  until  weakness  is  recruited  and 
fear  is  overcome.  {A,  Raleigh,  D.D.)  The  eagle's  nest:— It  is  no  mere  fanciful 
accommodation  of  my  text,  but  indeed  a  fair  interpretation  of  it,  which  finds  in  it 
a  description  of  the  calling  and  training  of  human  souls  for  the  glorious  "  inherit- 
ance of  the  saints  in  light."  I.  There  is  needful  dislodgement.  The  eagle 
"stirreth  up  her  nest,"  making  it  disagreeable  to  her  young;  so  the  Lord  does 
with  those  whom  He  calls  to  Himself.  In  the  day  of  our  worldly  comfort  and 
business  affluence  we  think  little  of  God  ;  we  care  little  for  the  concerns  of  our 
souls ;  we  are  not  in  the  very  least  attracted  to  the  heavenly  land.  But  when  a 
reverse  comes  upon  us,  when  poverty,  or  sickness,  or  bereavement,  or  affliction  of 
any  sort  attacks  us,  then  we  are  compelled  to  confront  the  great  soul  problem, 
"What  must  I  do  to  be  saved?"  and  as  that  anxious  cry  is  crushed  out  of  our 
heart,  we  find  the  Lord  near  us  with  His  deliverance.  It  is  no  true  blessing, 
therefore,  for  a  man  to  have  unbroken  prosperity.  It  fosters  a  false  security ;  it 
generates  pride ;  it  is  apt  to  make  the  individual  feel  that  he  is  independent  even 
of  God.  Hence  the  Psalmist  has  said,  "Because  they  have  no  changes,  therefore 
they  fear  not  God."  He  is  the  really  unfortunate  man,  therefore,  who  has  never 
known  adversity.  II.  But  I  find  in  this  figure,  in  the  second  place,  perfect 
EXAMPLE.  As  the  eagle  fluttereth  over  her  young,  so  the  Lord  did  with  His  people. 
There  is  a  passage  in  Sir  Humphry  Davy's  Salmonia  (a  book  dear  to  every 
lover  of  the  angler's  craft)  which  may  well  illustrate  this  portion  of  my  text.  He 
says,  "  I  once  saw  a  very  fine  and  interesting  sight  above  one  of  the  crags  of  Ben 
Weevis,  near  Strathgarve.  Two  parent  eagles  were  teaching  their  offspring — two 
young  birds — the  manoeuvres  of  flight.  They  began  by  rising  from  the  top  of  a 
mountain  in  the  eye  of  the  sun  (it  was  about  midday,  and  bright  for  this  climate). 


CHAP.  XXXII.]  DEUTERONOMY, 523 

They  at  first  made  small  circles,  and  the  young  birds  imitated  them  ;  they  paused 
on  their  wings  waiting  till  they  had  made  their  first  flight,  and  then  they  took  a 
second  and  larger  gyration,  always  rising  toward  the  sun  and  enlargmg  their  circle 
of  flight  so  as  to  make  a  gradually  ascending  spiral.  The  young  ones  still  slowly 
followed,'  apparently  flying  better  as  they  mounted,  and  they  continued  this 
sublime  kind  of  exercise,  always  rising,  till  they  became  mere  points  m  the  air, 
and  the  young  ones  were  lost,  and  afterwards  their  parents,  to  my  aching  sight. 
Now  could  anything  be  finer  tlian  that  as  an  illustration  of  the  method  by  which, 
through  the  example  which  He  sets  before  us,  God  teaches  us  to  live  ?  He  is  not 
content  ^dth  laying  down  the  law  for  us,  but  in  His  own  dealings  with  us  He  shows 
us  the  law  glorified  and  brightened  by  His  actions.  Does  He  command  us  to  be 
merciful?  He  is  Himself  "rich  in  mercy  to  all  that  call  upon  Him.  Does  He 
enioin  us  to  be  benevolent?  He  has  Himself  "loaded  us  with  His  benefits. 
Does  He  require  us  to  forgive?  He  has  Himself  "multiplied  to  pardon.  Look 
at  that  youth  with  his  brush  and  palette  in  his  hands,  standing  before  the  master- 
piece of  the  great  Italian.  He  is  studying  every  minutest  feature  of  the  superb 
original,  and  at  length  he  becomes  possessed,  as  it  were,  by  the  spell  of  the  genius 
that  is  looking  down  upon  him  from  the  silent  canvas.  Then  he  sets  to  work  for 
himself,  and  though  his  earliest  efforts  are  about  as  awkward  as  the  first  tiinid 
flutterings  of  the  eaglet,  yet  he  tries  again  and  again,  lessening  each  time  the 
interval  between  him  and  his  model,  until  at  last  he  stands  out  before  the  world 
recognised  as  one  who  has  caught  the  fervour  and  the  inspiration  of  his  master. 
So  let  it  be  with  us,  and  the  perfect  pattern  which  the  great  Redeemer  has  left  us. 
III.  It  is  effectual  help.  Mr.  Philip  Henry  Gosse,  the  weU-known  naturalist, 
in  his  interesting  work  on  the  birds  of  Jamaica,  speaking  of  the  red-tailed  buzzard, 
which  is  closely  allied  to  the  eagle,  tells  us  that  a  friend  of  his,  who  was  not  likely 
ever  to  have  heard  of  the  verses  before  us,  "once  witnessed  the  emergence  ot  two 
young  ones  from  a  nest  near  the  top  of  an  immense  cotton-tree,  and  their  first 
attempt  at  flight.  He  distinctly  saw  the  mother  bird,  after  the  first  young  one 
had  flown  a  little  way  and  was  beginning  to  flutter  do\ynward,  fly  beneath  it  and 
present  her  back  and  wings  for  its  support.  He  could  not  say,  indeed,  that  the 
young  one  actually  rested  on,  or  even  touched,  the  parent;  perhaps  its  confidence 
returned  on  seeing  support  so  near,  so  that  it  managed  to  reach  a  high  tree,  when 
the  other  little  one,  invited  by  its  parent,  tried  its  infant  wings  in  like  manner. 
This,  at  any  rate,  is  plain  :  the  parent  bird  is  ever  near  the  struggling  eaglet  and 
is  ready  in  a  moment  with  eff-ectual  aid,  and  so  God  has  said  to  each  of  His 
children,  "I  will  never  leave  thee,  nor  forsake  thee."  "  My  grace  is  sufficient  for 
thee."  1.  In  the  first  place,  it  is  not  intended  to  supersede  our  own  exertions.  A 
man  is  not  carried  helplessly  into  the  new  life  any  more  than  the  Israelites  were 
carried  over  the  Red  Sea.  He  Hves  when  he  chooses  to  believe,  and  that  believing, 
however  much  Divine  agency  may  be  concerned  with  it,  is  his  own  act.  AVait  not, 
therefore,  for  any  one  to  spread  for  you  the  faith-wing  on  which  you  are  to  rise, 
but  make  the  eff"ort  to  expand  it  for  yourself,  and  you  will  find  beside  you  the 
guiding  and  sustaining  Saviour.      2.  This  Divine  assistance  is  always  near.     Ihe 

Sarent  eagle  kept  ever  hovering  near  its  young  one,  and  in  its  moment  ot  extremity 
arted  in  beneath  it  with  speedy  assistance.  So  God  is  ever  nigh  to  them  that  need 
Him.  There  is,  indeed,  no  one  so  near  to  us  as  Jehovah  is.  3.  This  Divine  help  is 
all  sufficient.  It  meets  our  every  need.  There  are  two  practical  thoughts— (1)  Let  us 
Bee  in  this  subject  the  key  to  the  right  understanding  of  God's  providential  discipline 
of  His  people.  It  seems  a  paradox  to  say  that  afflictions  are  an  indication  that 
God  loves  us ;  or,  in  the  figure  of  my  text,  they  stir  the  nest  and  push  us  over, 
that  we  may  be  urged  to  use  our  faith-wings,  and  soar  aloft  m  the  service  of  our 
God.  (2)  Let  us  learn  from  this  subject  how  we  should  proceed  wisely  and  tenderly 
to  train  others  for  God.  We  should  be  to  those  whom  we  desire  to  benefit  as  near 
as  possible  what  God  has  been  to  us.  (  W.  M.  Taylor,  D.D. )  Dimne  discipline:— 
Without  attaching  any  mystic  meaning  to  this  figure  of  the  eagle,  we  may  readily 
discover  the  great  principles  of  God's  action  that  it  was  mtended  to  illustrate. 
I.  The  Divine  discipline  of  life  is  designed  to  awaken  man  to  the  develop- 
ment OF  HIS  OWN  POWERS.  The  instinct  of  the  eagle  in  breaking  up  her  nest  is  to 
arouse  the  native  energies  of  her  young.  The  power  of  flight  is  in  them,  but  unknow^, 
because  it  has  never  been  called  into  play  ;  it  is  a  slumbering  faculty,  and  must  be 
awakened  into  action.  Man's  soul  is  formed  into  God's  image  by  the  right  action 
of  his  spiritual  powers,  and  these  powers  are  only  awakened  by  the  activity  of  God. 
1.  The  great  purpose  of  all  spiritual  discipline  is  to  render  men  Divine.     By  the 


524  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap,  xxxii. 

very  constitution  of  the  soul,  the  Godlike  image  must  be  formed  by  awakening  the 
energies  that  lie  smouldering  within.  The  soul  contains  in  itself  the  germinal 
forces  of  the  life  it  mav  possess  in  the  future  ages.  2.  The  image  of  the  text 
suggests  two  methods  oi  Divine  action :  the  stimulating  and  the  exemplary.  The 
eagle  breaks  up  her  nest,  and  is  not  the  voice  of  life's  experience  God's  summons 
to  man  to  rise  and  live  to  Him  ?  God  sends  a  shock  of  change  through  our  circum- 
stances, and  rouses  us  from  repose.     II.  Discipline  attains  its  end  only  when 

PvEGARDED  AS  UNDER  THE  CONTEOL  OF  A  FATHER.      It  is  obvioUS  that  the  instinct  of 

the  eagle  is  that  of  parental  affection.  1.  Believe  in  the  Father,  and  you  submissively 
accept  the  mysterious  in  life.  2.  Believe  in  the  Father,  and  you  shall  strive  to 
realise  the  purpose  of  this  discipline.  "We  have  no  impulse  to  any  spiritual  aspira- 
tion, to  any  true  self-sacrifice,  to  the  exertion  of  any  spiritual  energy,  which  is  not 
awakened  by  the  touch  of  the  Eternal  Spirit.  Let  us,  then,  awake  out  of  sleep. 
God  is  breaking  up  our  material  resting-places  in  order  that  we  may  aspire  towards 
the  imperishable  and  the  immortal.  {E.  L.  Hull.)  \  Education  of  bereavetnent : — 
What  a  startling  thought— that  the  breaking  up  o^  the  nest  is  an  act  of  God's 
benevolence  !  I  always  looked  upon  it  as  a  calamity.  "We  are  all  familiar  with  the 
experience  of  the  breaking-up  of  home.  We  remember  the  glad  circle  round  the  old 
fire,  and  how  it  grew  thinner  and  thinner.  One  went  to  the  colonies  ;  one  went  out 
to  be  a  governess  ;  one  departed  with  a  stranger  to  a  house  of  lier  own  ;  more  than 
one  passed  into  the  silent  land.  I  always  thought  it  a  subject  for  tears.  But  here 
is  an  old  writer  who  makes  it  a  subject  for  praise,  blesses  God  for  it,  declares  it  to  be 
the  first  step  of  my  education  !  I  can  understand  God's  love  in  many  things.  I  can 
understand  why  I  should  praise  Him  for  His  gifts  to  body  and  soul.  But  I  lose  my 
breath  in  surprise  when  I  am  asked  to  make  the  first  stanza  of  my  hymn  the  adora- 
tion of  His  mercy  in  loosing  the  ties  of  home  !  Nay,  my  soul,  it  is  to  strengthen 
these  ties  that  thy  Father  breaks  up  the  nest.  It  is  not  to  get  rid  of  home  He 
would  teach  thee  to  fly.  It  is  that  thou  mayest  learn  by  travel  that  thy  home  is 
wider  than  thy  nest.  He  would  have  thee  learn  that  in  thy  Father's  house  are 
many  mansions,  of  which  thy  nest  is  only  one.  He  would  tell  thee  of  a  brother- 
hood in  Christ  which  includes,  yet  transcends,  thy  household  fires.  He  would  tell 
thee  of  a  family  altar  which  makes  thee  brother  to  the  outcast,  sister  to  the  fiiend- 
less,  father  to  the  homeless,  mother  to  the  sick,  son  to  the  feeble,  daughter  to  the 
aged— in  kinship  to  all.  Thy  Father  has  given  thee  wings  in  the  night,  wings  in 
the  breaking  of  thy  ties.  Thou  hast  soared  by  thy  sorrow  ;  thou  hast  loved  by  thy 
loss  ;  thou  hast  widened  by  thy  weeping  ;  thou  hast  grown  by  thy  grief ;  thou  hast 
broadened  in  being  broken;  thou  hast  enlarged  thy  sympathy  by  emptying  out  thy 
treasures.  The  storm  that  shook  thy  nest  taught  thee  to  fly.  {G.  McUfuson,  D.D.) 
The  eagle  stirring  up  Tier  v,est : — I.  God  corrects  His  people.  "When  the  young 
eagles  are  strong  enough  to  fly,  but  shew  no  inclination  to  do  so,  the  mother  bird 
"stirreth  up  her  nest."  Special  reference  is  here  made  to  the  "nest"  which  God 
provided  for  the  seventy  souls  who  went  down  into  Egypt  (Gen.  xlvii.  6).  "  Their 
cattle  throve,  they  had  fine  possessions,  and  a  monarch's  favour."  At  length  Joseph 
died,  and  his  services  were  forgotten.  The  once  favoured  people  came  to  be 
regarded  as  little  better  than  beasts  of  burden.  They  were  hemmed  in  by  forts ; 
they  were  set  to  hard  labour.  Their  nest  became  so  uncomfortable  towards  the 
close  of  the  four  hundred  and  thirty  years  in  Goshen,  that  they  resolved  to  try  their 
wings,  and  soar  away  to  the  "promised  land."  1.  "Wealth,  houses,  costly  furniture, 
and  pictures  make  a  comfortable  nest,  and  are  harmless  so  long  as  they  do  not 
tempt  us  to  spiritual  indolence.  Alas,  how  few  know  how  to  use  this  world  without 
abusing  it !  Care  for  his  earthly  comfort  has  been  cultivated  to  such  an  extent  as 
to  almost  take  away  all  relish  for  spiritual  things.  2.  God,  in  mercy,  often  stirs  up 
the  nests  of  such  people.  Business  fails,  and  their  resources  are  cut  off.  As  one 
said,  "  God  took  the  man's  son  from  his  hearthstone,  but  that  led  him  to  seek  com- 
fort in  the  only  begotten  Son  of  God."  In  the  midst  of  his  anguish  he  learned  this 
lesson,  "  God  is  love."  He  took  away  little,  but  He  gave  him  much.  If  God  did  not 
stir  up  some  people's  nests,  they  would  sink  down  into  utter  worldliness.  II.  God 
compassionates  His  people.  "She  fluttereth  over  her  young."  Let  us  ever 
remember  that  God  is  more  compassionate  than  the  tenderest  mother.  A  religion 
bom  of  terror  can  never  be  a  healthy,  vigorous  religion.  When  you  come  to  God 
for  salvation,  and  when  you  look  to  Him  for  help  to  do  life's  work  and  to  face  life's 
diflBculties,  don't  come  to  Him  as  though  He  were  a  God  who  is  always  looking  for 
faults,  and  anxious  to  find  them.  III.  God  trains  His  people.  The  Israelites 
spent  forty  years  in  the  wilderness,  and  they  might  have  fared  worse.    That  journey 


CHAP,  xxxu.]  DEUTERONOMY.  525 


had  other  advantages  besides  leading  them  to  Canaan.  Its  long  marches  and  desert 
sands  developed  powers  of  endurance  which  had  lain  dormant  amid  the  fleshpots 
of  Egypt.  There  are  in  most  people  faculties  and  energies  imprisoned,  pent  up.  _. 
IV.  God  pkotects  His  people.  The  parent  bird,  while  training  her  young,  protects 
them.  If  a  storm  is  brewing,  or  a  fowler  points  at  her  young  ones,  does  she  abandon 
them  without  an  effort  to  save  them?  {H.  Woodcock,)  God's  jparental  care: — 
I.  The  Lord  "stirreth  up  our  nest"  by  sending  us  discomforts  and  afflic- 
tions. We  are  naturally  like  the  slothful  eaglets,  who  would  rather  doze  away 
their  life  in  their  comfortable  home  than  try  their  unsteady  wings  in  flight  towards 
heaven.  But  God  is  kinder  to  us  than  we  would  be  to  ourselves.  He  "stirs  up  our 
nest "  :  He  breaks  up  those  comforts  which  we  love  too  dearly.  Ah  !  who  would  fly 
towards  heaven,  who  would  seek  a  fairer  and  a  better  world,  if  it  were  not  that  God 
from  time  to  time  "stirreth  up  our  nest  "  in  one  or  other  of  these  ways?  II.  Our 
text  reminds  us,  by  a  very  lively  image,  of  God's  love  and  tender  solicitude 
FOR  His  people.  He  is  compared  to  an  eagle  "fluttering"  over  her  brood,  watch- 
ing and  encouraging  them  in  their  endeavours  to  fly.  God  watches  with  the  most 
aff"ectionate  interest  our  weakest  efforts  to  rise  above  the  world  and  worldly  things. 
Your  feeblest  attempt  at  prayer,  your  most  awkward  endeavour  at  self-examination, 
your  most  unintelligent  perusal  of  the  Scriptures,  if  entered  upon  sincerely,  will  be 
most  kindly  welcomed  and  aided  by  Him.  He  does  not  despise  the  beginnings  of 
sincere  piety.  He  listens  with  delight  to  the  very  first  sigh  of  sincere  repentance. 
III.  But,  beyond  this,  we  are  reminded  that  God  has  given  us  all  instruction 
P.Y  EXAMPLE  :  even  as  the  eagle  by  "  spreading  abroad  her  wings  "  teaches  her  young 
how  to  fly,  God  has  taken  upon  Him  our  nature,  and  has  lived  upon  earth,  in  order 
to  teach  us  how  to  live.  Jesus  Christ  was  "  God  manifest  in  the  flesh  "  ;  and  His 
whole  life  was  spent  in  teaching  His  disciples  the  ways  of  holiness  and  peace.  "  His 
whole  life  is  our  rule  ;  not  indeed  His  miraculous  works  ;  His  footsteps  walking  on 
the  sea,  and  such  like  ;  they  are  not  for  us  to  follow  ;  but  His  obedience,  holiness, 
and  humility  are  our  copy,  which  Ave  should  continually  study."     IV.  The  speedy 

AND   sufficient   HELP  WHICH  GOD  GIVES   HiS   PEOPLE   IN   THE   HOUR   OF   NEED    OR 

difficulty.  The  eagle  is  represented  as  "taking"  her  offspring,  and  "bearing  , 
them  on  her  wings."  When  the  eagle  has  prevailed  upon  her  young  to  fly  from  the 
dizzy  crag  on  which  her  nest  is  seated,  their  faltering  pinions  might  give  way,  and 
they  might  drop  helplessly  to  the  ground,  did  she  not  dart  to  their  help  the 
moment  their  stiength  failed,  and  support  them  with  her  own  wings  in  time  to 
save  them.  Thus  God  acts  to  the  believer.  Though  you  tremble  you  shall  not 
fall ;  though  you  faint  you  shall  not  be  lost.  It  is  said  by  some  writers  that,  when 
the  young  eagles  are  attacked  by  the  fowler,  the  mother-bird  will  fly  under  them, 
and  place  herself  between  them  and  their  enemy,  so  that  his  arrows  cannot  hurt 
them  unless  they  first  pierce  through  her.  Whether  this  be  true  or  not,  it  may 
serve  as  an  affecting  emblem  of  Christ's  love  to  His  people.  He  has  gone  between 
us  and  our  enemy.  He  has  received  in  His  own  bosom  the  arrows  which  were 
meant  for  us  :  our  wounds  have  been  endured  by  Him  :  He  has  shed  His  life's  blood 
for  us,  to  save  us  from  destruction.  V.  That  the  Lord  is  our  only  help.  "The 
Lord  alone  did  lead  him  ;  and  there  was  no  strange  god  with  Him."  {John  Tagg, 
M.A.)  Divine  education : — The  nest  of  the  eagle  is  commonly  constructed  on  the 
verge  of  a  precipice  (Job  xxxix.  28,  29).  Hence  Jeremiah,  foretelling  the  downfall  of 
Edom,  says  (Jer.  xlix.  16).  The  Old  Testament  contains  many  beautiful  similitudes 
drawn  from  the  natural  history  of  the  eagle.  The  days  of  man  are  compared  to  an 
eagle  hastening  to  the  prey.  Riches  are  said  to  take  unto  themselves  wings,  and  to 
fly  away  as  an  eagle  towards  heaven.  The  righteous  are  said  to  mount  up  with 
wings  as  eagles  ;  and  the  rage  of  persecution  is,  because  of  its  hastening  to  destroy, 
compared  to  the  rapidity  of  the  eagle's  flight.  But  perhaps  the  most  beautiful 
allusion  to  the  habits  of  the  eagle  is  this  in  the  text.  It  is  a  well  authenticated 
fact  in  natural  history  that,  when  the  mother  sees  her  brood  capable  of  flight,  she 
urges  them  to  exercise  in  the  way  referred  to.  I.  She  stirreth  up  the  nest.  She 
either  entirely  demolishes  it,  or  by  reversing  its  well  adjusted  materials,  makes  it  so 
uncomfortable  that  the  young  ones  are  glad  to  escape  from  it.  The  natural  instinct 
which  she  possesses  leads  her  to  urge  them  on  the  wing  ;  and  for  this  purpose  she 
finds  it  needful  to  make  their  first  habitation  inconvenient  and  troublesome.  And 
thus,  the  text  tells,  did  the  Almighty  with  the  Israelites.  They  had  had  their  nest 
in  Egypt ;  and  He  desired  them  to  leave  it  for  Canaan.  If  they  had  suffered  no 
inconvenience  there,  they  would  have  shown  no  inclination  to  emigrate  to  a  better 
country.     Adversity  is  the  grand  instrument  by  which  men  are  awakened  to  higher 


526  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxxii. 

purposes  and  aims.  They  are  taught  the  inconveniences  of  the  tents  of  Kedar,  in 
order  that  they  may  seek  for  the  peaceful  habitations  of  the  just.  In  every  blighted 
prospect  of  ambition — in  every  disappointed  hope  of  success— in  every  visitation  of 
sickness — in  every  stroke  of  bereavement,  our  God  is  doing  for  us  what  the  parent 
eagle  does  for  her  young  when  she  stirreth  up  the  nest.  Thus  does  He  remind  us 
that  we  were  bom  for  higher  enjoyments,  and  fitted  for  higher  destinies.  Thus 
does  He  teach  us  that  it  is  high  time  to  forsake  the  amusements  of  a  childhood  state, 
and  pursue  objects  worthy  of  our  powers.     II.  This  similitude  may  be  applied  also 

to  THE  GRACIOUS  DISCIPLINE  WHICH  GOD  EXERCISES  IN  AWAKENING  THE  CON- 
SCIENCE. We  naturally  love  the  nest  of  carnal  security  and  self-righteousness.  We 
(^  are  unwilling  to  be  disturbed  out  of  it.  We  esteem  him  our  enemy  who  tells  us  the 
-^  truth,  that  we  are  miserable  and  blind  and  naked.  We  are  pleased  with  the 
flatterer  who  cries  "Peace,  peace"  to  us  when  there  is  no  peace.  This  self- 
complacency  would  be  most  ruinous  to  our  best  interests.  So  long  as  it  is  indulged, 
the  strong  man  keeps  his  palace  and  his  goods  in  peace.  Now,  this  false  peace  must 
be  broken  before  the  peace  of  God  can  rule  the  heart.  And  therefore  it  is  that,  by 
sharp  application  of  the  word  of  truth,  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God  convinces  the  mind 
of  sin,  of  righteousness,  and  of  judgment.  You  will  never  get  a  man  to  see  his  need 
of  a  Saviour  until  he  is  made  aware  of  the  purity,  strictness,  and  extensiveness  of  the 
law  which  he  has  broken.  You  must  convince  him  of  sin  before  you  can  hope  to 
persuade  him  of  the  excellence  of  salvation.  III.  This  similitude  may  be  applied 
to  the  case  of  the  good  man  about  to  leave  the  world.  There  is  lodged  in  the 
human  bosom  an  inborn  horror  of  death.  Even  good  men,  who  have  strong  reason 
to  believe  and  hope  that  it  will  be  well  with  them  in  a  future  state,  have  attach- 
ments and  sympathies  which  bind  them  to  the  earth.  They  cannot,  without  a 
strong  effort,  reconcile  themselves  to  the  thought  of  closing  their  eyes  to  all  beneath 
the  sun— of  being  shut  out  from  the  joys  of  friendship,  and  of  being  confined  in  the 
narrow  house,  where  neither  business  is"  transacted  nor  work  done.  But,  to  conquer 
this  natural  reluctancy,  the  Almighty  is  graciously  pleased  to  make  them  feel  the 
inconveniences  of  this  mortal  life,  and  so  to  beget  in  them  a  longing  desire  for  that 
in  which  there  is  no  sorrow  nor  crying.  The  pains  of  sickness  are  thus  instrumental 
in  quickening  their  desires  for  that  healthier  state  of  being  where  the  inhabitant 
never  says  "I  am  sick."  The  disquietudes  and  decrepitudes  of  age  are  so  many 
arguments  for  resigning  themselves  to  that  severe  but  transient  stroke  which  is  to 
introduce  them  to  a  region  of  immortal  youth.  Lover  and  friend  they  see  put  far 
from  them,  and  their  acquaintance  into  darkness ;  and  the  thought  arises,  Why 
should  we  wish  to  linger  ?  let  us  go  to  them,  for  they  will  not  return  to  us.  {J.  L. 
Adamson.)  The  eagle  and  its  brood: — ^The  sentence  should  read  thus  :  "As  an 
eagle  stirreth  up  his  nest,  fluttereth  over  his  young.  He  spreads  abroad  His  wings," 
&c.,  the  person  spoken  of  in  the  last  clauses  being  God  Himself.  I.  A  grand 
thought  about  God.  What  he  brings  into  view  are  the  characteristics  common 
to  the  eagle  and  the  vulture  :  superb  strength  in  beak  and  claw,  keenness  of  vision 
almost  incredible,  magnificent  sweep  of  pinion,  and  power  of  rapid,  unwearied 
flight.  And  these  characteristics  have  their  analogues  in  the  Divine  nature,  and  the 
emblem  not  unfitly  shadows  forth  one  aspect  of  the  God  of  Israel,  who  is  strong  to 
destroy  as  well  as  to  save,  whose  all-seeing  eye  marks  every  foul  thing,  and  who 
often  pounces  on  it  swiftly  to  rend  it  to  pieces.  But  the  action  described  in  the 
text  is  not  destructive,  terrible,  or  fierce.  The  monarch  of  the  sky  busies  itself 
with  tender  cares  for  its  brood.  Then  there  is  gentleness  along  with  the  terrible- 
ness.  The  strong  beak  and  claw,  the  eye  that  can  see  so  far,  and  the  mighty 
spread  of  wings  that  can  lift  it  till  it  is  an  invisible  speck  in  the  blue  vault,  go 
along  with  the  instinct  of  paternity ;  and  the  fledglings  in  the  nest  look  up  at 
the  fierce  beak  and  bright  eyes,  and  know  no  terror.  The  impression  of  this 
blending  of  power  and  gentleness  is  greatly  deepened  if  we  notice  that  it  is 
the  male  bird  that  is  spoken  about.  Modern  tendencies,  legitimately  recoiling 
from  the  one-sidedness  of  a  past  generation,  are  now  turning  away  far  too 
much  from  the  Old  Testament  conceptions  of  Jehovah,  which  are  concentrated 
in  this  metaphor.  And  thereby  we  destroy  the  love  in  the  name  of  which 
we  scout  the  wrath.  "  Infinite  mercy,  but  I  wish  as  infinite  a  justice  too."  "  As 
the  vulture  stirreth  up  her  nest" — that  is  the  Old  Testament  revelation  of  the 
terribleness  and  gentleness  of  Jehovah.  "How  often  would  I  have  gathered 
thy  children  together,"  &c.  That  is  the  New  Testament  modification  of  the 
image.  But  you  never  could  have  had  the  New  unless  you  first  had  the  Old.  And 
yon  are  foolish  if,  in  the  name  of  the  sanctity  of  the  New,  you  cast  away  the  teaching 


CHAP,  xxxii.]  DEUTERONOMY,  527 

of  the  Old.  Keep  both  the  metaphors,  and  they  will  explain  and  confirm  each 
other.  II.  An  illuminating  thought  of  the  meaning  of  life.  What  is  it  all 
for  ?  To  teach  us  to  fly,  to  exercise  the  half-fledged  wings  in  short  flights,  that  may 
prepare  us  for  and  make  it  possible  to  take  longer  ones.  Every  event  that  befalls  us 
has  a  meaning  beyond  itself ;  and  every  task  that  we  have  to.  do  reacts  upon  us,  the 
doers,  and  either  fits  or  hinders  us  for  larger  work.  Life  as  a  whole,  and  in  its 
minutest  detail,  is  worthy  of  God  to  give,  and  worthy  of  us  to  possess,  only  if 
we  recognise  the  teaching  that  is  put  into  picturesque  form  in  this  text — that  the 
meaning  of  all  which  God  does  to  us  is  to  train  us  for  something  greater  yonder. 
Life,  as  a  whole,  is  full  of  sound  and  fury,  and  signifies  nothing  unless  it  is  an 
apprenticeship  training.  What  are  we  here  for  ?  To  make  character  ;  to  get  experi- 
ence ;  to  learn  the  use  of  our  tools.  Character  may  be  manifested  in  the  great 
moments,  but  it  is  made  in  the  small  ones.  So  life  is  meant  for  discipline,  and  unless 
we  use  it  for  that,  however  much  enjoyment  we  get  out  of  it,  we  misuse  it.  III.  A 
calming  thought  as  to  the  variety  of  God's  methods  with  us.  To  "stir 
up  the  nest "  means  to  make  a  man  uncomfortable  where  he  is  ; — sometimes  by  the 
prickings  of  his  conscience,  which  are  the  voices  of  God's  Spirit  often  ;  sometimes  by 
changes  of  circumstances,  either  for  the  better  or  for  the  worse  ;  and  oftentimes  by 
sorrows.  The  straw  is  pulled  out  of  the  nest,  and  it  is  not  so  comfortable  to  lie  in  ; 
or  a  bit  of  it  develops  a  sharp  point  that  runs  into  the  half- feathered  skin,  and 
makes  the  fledgeling  glad  to  come  out  into  the  air.  We  all  shrink  from  change. 
What  should  we  do  if  we  had  it  not  ?  We  should  stiffen  into  habits  that  would 
dwarf  and  weaken  us.  We  all  recoil  from  storms.  What  should  we  do  if  we  had 
not  them  ?  Sea  and  air  would  stagnate,  and  become  heavy  and  putrid  and  pestilen- 
tial, if  it  was  not  for  the  wild  west  wind  and  the  hurling  storms.  So  all  our 
changes,  instead  of  being  whimpered  over ;  and  all  our  sorrows,  instead  of  being 
taken  reluctantly,  should  be  recognised  as  being  what  they  are,  a  loving  summons  to 
eff'ort.  Then  their  pressure  would  be  modified,  and  their  blessing  would  be  secured 
when  their  purpose  was  served.  But  the  training  of  the  father- eagle  is  not  confined  to 
stirring  up  the  nest.  What  is  to  become  of  the  young  ones  when  they  get  out  of  it, 
and  have  never  been  accustomed  to  bear  themselves  up  in  the  invisible  ether  about 
them?  So  "he  fluttereth  over  his  young."  It  is  a  very  beautiful  word  that  is 
employed  here ;  the  same  word  that  is  used  in  Genesis  about  the  Spirit  of  God 
"brooding  on  the  face  of  the  waters."  And  it  suggests  how  near,  how  all-protect- 
ing, with  expanded  wings,  the  Divine  Father  comes  close  to  the  child  whose  restful- 
ness  He  has  disturbed.  A  vile  piece  of  Greek  mythology  tells  how  Jove  once,  in  the 
guise  of  an  eagle,  bore  away  a  boy  between  his  great  wings.  It  is  foul  where 
it  stands,  but  it  is  blessedly  true  about  Christian  experience.  If  only  we  lay  our- 
selves on  God's  wings — and  that  not  in  idleness,  but  having  ourselves  tried  our  poor 
little  flight — He  will  see  that  no  harm  comes  to  us.  {A.  Madaren,  D.D.)  On 
God's  vnnQy  and  under  it  (with  Psa.  Ivii.  1) : — Here  we  have  two  experiences  strik- 
ingly different  and  yet  closely  related  to  each  other.  I.  We  have  God's  assurance 
that  in  His  dealings  with  His  people  during  their  sojourn  through  the  wilderness  He 

HAD  ACTED  TOWARDS  THEM  AS  AN  EAGLE  TOWARDS  HER  YOUNG   WHEN   SHE   WOULD 

TEACH  THEM  HOW  TO  FLY.  This  illustration  enforces  an  important  truth,  namely, 
the  training  of  the  Jews  by  God  to  the  healthful  exercise  of  the  growing  powers  jlf) 
within  them,  and  the  supplementing  of  such  by  His  own  great  might,  so  that  those 
who  were  "no  people "  should  become  "a  people  among  the  nations  of  the  world." 
That  was  a  marvellous  training  by  which  Israel  was  taught  how  to  fly,  a  degraded 
people  how  to  become  a  mighty  nation.  This  represents  God's  method  of  dealing 
with  His  people — the  process  of  training  through  which  you  and  I  are  called  to  pass 
if  we  are  His.  God  in  each  case  begins  with  a  pitiable  object,  a  poor  sinner  broken 
down  in  heart  and  purpose,  one  who  has  no  spirit  left  in  him,  and  who  withal  may 
have  fallen  into  the  lowest  depths  of  sin.  Even  though  he  be  degraded  to  the 
greatest  possibilities  of  human  degradation,  God  will  take  up  that  poor  man 
shattered  in  hope  and  expectation,  and  he  will  yet  be  borne  up  as  on  the  wings  of 
eagles.     II.  We  have  another  aspect  of  God's  dealings  with  His  people,  namely, 

THAT  OF  SHELTERING  THEM  UNDER  HiS  WINGS,  AS  THE  MOTHER-BIRD  DOES  HER 

BROOD  IN  THE  HOUR  OF  STORM  AND  DANGER.     "  Yea,  in  the  shadow  of  Thy  wings,"    ,>55v 
&c.     There  are  some  of  us  who  know  what  it  is  to  be  on  God's  wings  when  He  takes    v^ 
us  in  flight,  when  He  inspires  us  with  courage  and  teaches  us  to  use  our  wings. 
There  are  others  of  us  who  have  come  to  that  experience  when  after  all  the  flying, 
after  all  the  doing,  all  the  enduring,  we  are  weary  at  heart,  and  we  seek  shelter  imder 
His  wings,  just  as  the  eagle  after  her  flight  with  her  little  ones  takes  them  back  into 


528  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [CHAP.  XXXIL 

her  shelter,  and  in  effect  says,  '*  You  are  tired  now,  I  will  put  the  wings  which  hare 
borne  you  when  wearied  in  flight  all  round  you  to  protect  you  alike  against  the 
storm  and  the  foe. "  Thus  the  little  ones  will  not  even  hear  the  storm  witiiout. 
They  have  felt  the  hard  side  of  the  wing :  they  feel  the  soft  feathery  side  of  it  now, 
and  the  mother's  love,  like  her  warmth,  goes  through  every  young  bird  that  gathers 
under  her  wings.  The  Psalmist  knows  what  it  is  to  have  been  on  the  wing  of  God, 
borne  upon  the  storm  so  that  he  might  learn  how  to  fly  ;  but  now  he  thanks  God 
that  when  he  has  become  weary  of  the  storm,  because  it  is  too  much  for  his  strength, 
he  is  taken  back  into  the  nest,  under  the  warmth  and  shelter  of  that  wing  which 
formerly  sustained  him.  There  are  some  of  you  who  are  almost  always  in  the 
shadow  of  God's  wings.  The  day  is  drawing  to  a  close,  all  the  activities  of  life  are 
almost  over,  and  God,  ere  He  takes  you  to  His  heaven,  bids  you  come  and  shelter 
yourselves  beneath  His  feathers.  (Z>.  Dairies.)  God's  dealings  with  men : — I.  The 
WAYS  OF  God  cannot  fail  to  appear  strange  and  unaccountable  to  the 
EYES  OF  MEN.  A  grateful  recognition  of  this  is  the  secret  of  a  strong  and  a  con- 
tented mind.  That  my  life  and  destiny  are  not  in  my  own  hands  ;  that  the  glorious 
dream  of  a  "Divinity  shaping  our  ends,  rough-hew  them  how  we  may,"  is  some- 
thing more  than  a  dream ;  that  there  is  an  intelligence  and  a  wisdom  greater  than 
our  own,  presiding  over  the  eyrie  of  every  human  life, — is  there  anything  but  dumb 
despair  staring  us  in  the  face  in  the  abandonment  of  a  faith  such  as  that  ?  II.  Unin- 
terrupted PROSPERITY  AND  EASE  IS  GOOD  FOR  NO  MAN.  It  engenders  a  false 
security.  It  blinds  a  man  to  the  slenderness  of  that  thread  on  which  all  things 
human  hang.  It  creates  a  boldness  that  is  not  of  God,  that  leads  away  from  God, 
and  sometimes  lower  things  still  follow  in  its  train.  How  proud,  how  intolerant, 
how  unsympathetic  a  protracted  run  of  success  can  make  a  man  !  Is  unalloyed  pro- 
sperity good  for  a  nation  ?  This  wonderful  history  of  Israel,  the  true  image  and 
picture  of  all  histories,  answers  "No."  The  records  of  that  people  almost  resolve 
themselves  into  this :  a  succession  of  prosperities,  and  a  succession  of  lapses  into 
idolatry  and  sin.  Visitation  after  visitation  is  necessary  to  stir  up  their  idle  nest. 
Is  unalloyed  prosperity  good  for  a  fatnily  ?  Do  you  invariably  find  the  moral 
and  religious  tone  high  ?  Are  the  children  thoughtful  and  unselfish  ?  Is  life  an 
earnest  thing  ?  Or  is  not  this  too  often  the  characteristic  of  the  home  :  family  self- 
absorption,  family  selfishness?  which  may  be  just  as  real,  and  is  just  as  heinous,  as 
class  or  personal  selfishness.  No,  the  mere  nest-life  of  changeless  comfort,  or  of 
unbroken  happiness,  is  good  for  nobody.  So  the  Almighty  has  ways  of  stirring  it  up 
lest  any  of  His  children — who  should  be  like  eagles,  cleaving  the  air  and  facing  the 
storm,  and  looking  into  the  very  eye  of  the  sun — should  be  lying  snug  and  comfort- 
able, decrepit  and  useless,  in  their  nest  at  home.  1.  Remark  on  the  method  of  the 
Divine  operations.  It  is  characteristic  of  this  king  of  birds  that  it  rises  before  its 
little  ones,  and  bids  them  follow.  At  first  the  parent-bird  performs  small  circles, 
widening  and  making  them  larger,  however,  as  they  rise  ;  but  always  keeping  ahead 
and  in  sight,  save  when  compelled  to  descend  and  carry  an  exhausted  fledgeling  to  a 
place  of  safety.  Is  that  God's  method  too  ?  Is  it  not  ?  2.  In  the  greatest  sorrow 
into  which  you  may  be  thrown,  God  is  near  and  in  sight.  Take  care  that  no  mur- 
muring or  rebellious  spirit  hides  Him  from  your  view  when  you  need  Him  most.  {J. 
Thew.)  Aroused  from  nestling : — We  have  seen  something  like  this,  in  the  first 
place,  in  the  domestic  and  secular  life  round  about  us.  Parents  rear  up  their 
children  by  the  hearthstone  of  the  family.  And  I  pity  the  home  which  has  no 
family  altar.  The  fireside  is  pleasant  in  the  family  home,  the  society  of  brothers 
and  sisters  exceedingly  delightful ;  but  the  nest  is  full — it  wiU  not  hold  them. 
They  cannot  always  be  boys  and  girls,  earning  nothing  and  consuming  much  ;  that 
would  bring  idleness  and  want.  So  prudent  fathers  stir  up  the  nest.  The  eldest  fly 
out  and  try  to  shift  for  themselves.  At  first  it  is  hard  work  and  sad.  For  a  boy  to 
push  out  from  some  sweet  rural  home  into  such  a  vast  world  as  this  has  terrors  in 
it.  The  lad  is  about  to  fly  for  himself.  At  first  he  sinks  and  is  torn  by  the  briars  ; 
but  at  length,  by  the  blessing  of  God,  he  rises.  He  has  strong  arms  to  work,  and 
a  healthy  brain  to  think.  He  has  some  failures,  perhaps,  but  failures  are  rather 
blessings,  for  they  discipline  one  to  skill  and  trust  in  God.  But  with  the  aid  of  the 
strong  arm  of  Him  who  helps  those  who  help  themselves  he  rises.  By  and  by 
he  builds  his  nest  among  the  cliffs  with  the  true  eagle  spirit.  He  becomes  a  thrifty 
merchant,  a  useful  citizen.  Best  of  all,  it  is  when  parental  prayers  are  remembered,  and 
by  God's  grace  he  reaches  that  highest  style  of  man — a  fervent  Christian.  Now,  in 
the  next  place,  let  us  look  at  the  spiritual  aspect  of  the  conditions.  God  deals  with 
Christians  as  an  eagle  deals  with  her  young.     He  sees  we  are  all  trying  to  nestle. 


CHAP.  XXXIL]  DEUTERONOMY.  529 


"We  fill  these  earthly  nests  for  ourselves — fill  them  with  all  manner  of  comforts — 
and  then  settle  down  and  fix  our  aflfections  on  them.  Wealth  increases,  ambition 
grows.  The  old  residence  is  given  up,  and  a  new  one  is  built.  Earnest,  benevolent 
work  for  Christ — prayer-meetings,  and  all  that  style  of  godliness — come  to  be  as 
much  tabooed  in  that  luxurious  home  as  a  leper  would  be  tabooed  in  London.  If 
bankruptcy  is  allowed  to  bring  that  splendid  estate  to  the  hammer,  do  you  wonder  ? 
And  if  death  comes  in,  and  writes  paleness  on  some  cheek  of  roses,  do  you  wonder  ? 
God  saw  His  children  were  beginning  to  nestle,  and  determined,  for  their  souls' 
good,  to  stir  them  up.  And  so  He  stirred  up  the  nest— not  in  revenge,  not  in 
cruelty  ;  He  did  it  in  love — love  to  the  sinner  and  love  to  the  immortal  souls  of  those 
who  were  flinging  away  theii'  life  in  self-indulgence.  The  third  part  of  this  prolific 
text  is  this  :  when  an  immortal  soul  nestles  down  in  sinful  joy  or  worldly  posses- 
sions, awakened,  unconverted,  is  not  that  a  terrible  calamity  ?  Can  a  worse  curse 
come  upon  any  such  soul  than  to  be  let  alone  ?  If  it  is  true  that  a  young  eagle,  left 
alone,  would  become  a  mere  weakling,  starved,  and  never  able  to  fly,  how  much 
more  true  is  it  that  every  soul,  if  left  to  itself,  will  come  to  ruin  !  It  is  Divine  love 
that  first  awakens  the  sinner,  even  if  it  be  at  the  cost  of  making  the  heart  bleed. 
Nobody  likes  to  be  wakened  up  from  a  comfortable  sleep  at  midnight.  But  if  you 
hear  the  fire  alarm,  and  see  the  smoke  belching  out  from  the  opposite  neighbour's 
house,  and  somebody  rushes  out  through  the  suffocating  smoke  into  your  hall  and 
cries  "  Fire  !  fire  !  "  you  do  not  strike  him  ;  you  drop  on  your  knees  and  tremblingly 
thank  him  with  all  your  heart.  He  roused  you,  but  saved  you.  When  one  of  our 
Arctic  companies  of  explorers  went  to  search  years  ago  for  Sir  John  Franklin  among 
snow  and  icebergs — alcohol  froze  in  a  bottle  by  their  side,  and  the  thermometer  went 
to  seventy  degrees  below  freezing-point — the  poor  fellows,  overcome  with  cold,  lay 
down  to  sleep.  Warm  homes  and  delightful  firesides  mingled  with  their  visions. 
But  the  leader  knew  that  half  an  hour  more  of  that  delusive  sleep  would  leave 
every  one  of  them  corpses  on  the  ice.  He  roused  them  up.  They  said,  "  We  are  not 
cold  ;  we  only  want  a  little  rest."  Half  an  hour  more  would  have  left  them  stiff.  So 
their  leader  struck  them,  boxed  them,  bruised  them— anything  to  drive  them  off  the 
slumber.  Poor  fellows  !  they  staggered  down  into  the  cabin,  but  they  were  saved. 
The  arm  that  roused  them  was  the  arm  that  saved  them.  {T.  L.  Cuyler,  D.D.) 
God's  training  of  Israel : — Here  we  see  the  explanation  of  that  strange  and  round- 
about chapter  of  Israel's  history  ;  the  dislodging  and  disquieting  touches  in  Egypt 
are  followed  by  the  leading  of  them  round  and  round  in  their  desert  wanderings  for 
forty  years.  They  were  a  carnal,  earthly,  and  self-pleasing  people  among  the  flesh- 
pots  of  Egypt,  and  under  oppression  were  sinking  into  all  the  vices,  weaknesses,  and 
suf>erstition8  of  their  slavish  condition.  God  will  not  settle  His  land  with  such  ; 
and  no  mere  sudden  stroke  will  drive  the  evils  out  of  them.  It  must  be  done  by  a 
lengthened  educative  progress  of  mingled  tenderness  and  severity — 

*'Even  as  a  bird  each  fond  endearment  tries, 
To  tempt  its  new-fledged  offspring  to  the  skies." 

By  rudimentary  instructions,  by  type  and  symbol,  by  the  elements  of  law  and 
prophecy,  by  passing  them  through  sifting  ordeals,  by  marching  them  about  and 
about,  so  as  to  ventilate  their  low  proclivities,  and  get  rid  of  their  baser  qualities. 
He  sought  to  winnow  them  of  their  chaff,  letting  multitudes  of  them  die,  and  others 
be  born  into  a  new  state  of  things,  until  at  last  they  became  quite  a  different  people, 
with  other  aims  and  capacities.  The  eaglets'  wings  are  grown.  Their  first  feeble 
flight  and  earthly  flutterings  have  changed  into  a  bolder  and  higher  swoop.  The 
Lord  had  stirred  them  and  weaned  them  from  their  nest ;  often,  too.  He  left  them 
to  themselves,  then  came  timeously  to  their  rescue,  bare  them  on  His  pinions,  and 
carried  them  all  the  days  of  old— a  process  still  familiar  in  the  experience  of  His 
graciously  taught  people,  weak  and  slow  in  their  heavenward  flight.  {A.  H.  Drys- 
daUy  M.A.)  Eagle  nurture  .—The  power  of  aerial  flight,  of  leaving  the  earth  and 
traversing  the  fields  of  circumambient  air  by  the  use  of  wings,  is  the  most  perfect 
mode  of  locomotion  we  know  of,  and  one  of  the  most  wonderful  of  physical  preroga- 
tives. It  is  the  one  that  man  most  desires  and  covets,  and  yet  that  has  most  defied 
attainment  or  imitation.  It  is  doubtless  this  longing  for  a  life  of  ampler  freedom 
and  wider  scope  that  has  given  birth  to  the  idea  that  the  power  of  volantation  will 
be  a  human  attribute  in  another  stage  of  existence.  But,  though  denied  to  man  as 
a  physical  attribute,  the  power  of  aerial  flight  seems  more  fitly  than  any  other  to 
illustrate  the  activities  and  movements  of  the  soul.     We  speak  of  the  flight  of 

34 


fe 


530  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxxii. 

thought,  scarcely  conscious  of  the  use  of  metaphor.  The  eagle  possesses  this 
physical  power  in  the  highest  degree.  But  the  eagle's  power  of  flight  needs 
strenuous  nurture.  The  position  of  the  eyrie  where  the  young  are  reared  enhances 
the  difficulty  of  this  training.  It  is  usually  on  a  le'lge  of  some  precipitous  rock, 
or  shelving  escarpment  beneath  the  beetling  brow  of  a  craggy  cliff.  The  eagle's 
young  cannot,  therefore,  be  lured  or  driven  forth  from  the  nest  and  allowed  to 
flutter  to  the  ground  as  the  young  birds  of  lower  nest  and  habitat.  They  must 
be  led  forth  with  judicious  care,  lest  their  first  flight  prove  their  last.  I.  The 
first  truth  with  which  this  inspired  object-lesson  impresses  us  is — The  essential 

GREATNESS   AND    STUPENDOUS    POSSIBILITIES   OF    OUR    NATURE.       Man   is   not  a  low 

creature,  with  no  potencies  to  be  developed,  no  noble  aptitudes  to  be  brought  into 
play,  no  faculties  in  which  the  prophecy  of  high  achievement  lies.  He  is  an  object 
of  Divine  regard  and  care  ;  and  he  is  that  because,  far  above  every  other  terrestrial 
creature,  he  is  a  sharer  of  the  Divine  nature,  and  capable  of  a  life  that,  in  all  save 
infinity  of  scope,  reflects  the  life  of  God.  He  is  infantile— a  mere  fledgeling  as  yet ; 
but  it  is  the  infancy  of  a  glorious  being,  with  a  possibility  of  growth  of  which  an 
immortal  existence  is  the  only  adequate  term.  He  is  a  fledgeling,  but  a  fledgeling 
of  an  eagle's  nest.  II.  Another  truth  which  this  striking  object-lesson  illustrates 
is — ^The  strenuousness  of  THE  Divine  nurture.  The  eagle  stirreth  up  her  nest, 
and  fluttereth  over  her  young,  not  that  she  may  delight  her  young  in  the  nest, 
make  them  content  therewith,  and  detain  them  there,  but  that  she  may  lead  them 
forth,  induct  them  into  a  life  of  grander  scope,  and  make  them  actually  the  great, 
free,  competent  creatures  they  were  meant  to  be.  There  is  an  appearance  of  harsh- 
ness and  severity  in  this  until  we  realise  what  it  all  means.  How  can  the  parent 
eagle  take  the  young  ones  forth  on  such  perilous  adventure,  and  even  stir  up  the 
nest  and  lure  them  forth  to  do  it  ?  So  is  it  with  the  Divine  training  of  our  souls. 
God  loves  us  with  a  love  so  deep  and  true  that  it  can  aff'ord  to  be  severe  ;  yea,  that 
must  and  will  be  severe,  as  the  unfolding  of  our  nature  and  the  shaping  of  our  life 
may  require.  The  love  that  only  indulges  and  does  not  nurture  is  rebuked  even 
by  the  instinctive  care  of  lower  creatures.  But  God's  love  transcends  all  the  love 
of  finite  beings,  and  the  finest  effects  of  either  instinctive  or  intelligent  love  only 
dimly  reflect  its  surpassing  and  perfecting  grandeur.  To  a  merely  sentimental 
view  God's  nurture  of  His  children  does  seem  severe.  We  deem  our  safety  and 
weal  to  consist  in  remaining  in  the  nest,  but  God  knows  otherwise ;  and  He  acts 
on  His  sure  knowledge,  not  upon  our  misapprehending  ignorance.  He  will  not 
allow  us  to  remain  callow  and  crude.  The  nesting  life  may  be  beautiful,  but  it 
must  be  brief,  for  it  is  inceptive.  He  breaks  up  the  nest  of  authoritative  instruc- 
tion and  easy  and  implicit  faith.  "We  build  for  ourselves  nests  of  faith,  but  neither 
can  these  abide  ;  and  we  build  and  build  again,  but  always  with  the  same  merely 
temporary  result.  In  hours  of  spiritual  exaltation  and  vigour  wondrous  vision  is 
accorded,  and  wonderful  disclosures  are  made.  We  see  the  centring  Christ.  And 
straightway  we  propose  to  build  our  tabernacles  and  there  abide  till  faith  is  changed 
to  sight.  Yea,  we  say  that  we  can  never  doubt  again.  The  nest  is  stirred  as  soon 
as  we  begin  to  live  supinely  therein,  and  faith  must  encounter  new  trials  that  it 
may  exult  in  new  triumphs.  So  is  it,  too,  with  our  nests  of  experience.  How 
sweet  these  are  !  How  deep  the  peace,  how  rich  the  joy,  how  intense  the  delight 
which  they  afford  !  What  clear  and  permanent  gain  they  seem  to  denote  !  And 
how  confidently  we  assert  that  life  can  never  more  be  the  same,  can  never  more 
move  on  the  old  levels,  or  know  the  old  ungladdened  struggle,  and  sterility  of  joy. 
But  these  experiences  are  to  gird  us  for  the  struggles  that  are  to  be,  as  well  as  to 
crown  the  struggles  through  which  we  have  passed.  Their  best  result  is  attained 
when  this  is  realised,  but,  whether  it  be  realised  or  not,  the  nest  is  stirred.  And 
so  it  is  also  with  our  nests  of  achievement  and  of  satisfaction  therewith.  What 
gladness  comes  to  us  sometimes  in  our  work,  what  sense  of  achievement,  what 
evidence  of  acceptance  and  success  !  But  even  these  nests,  substantial  as  they 
seem,  abide  not.  Sometimes  they  last  for  a  very  little  while,  not  even  from  morning 
to  evening  service  on  the  Sabbath  Day.  So  God  stirs  up  the  nest  in  which  His 
children  would  live  a  supine  or  circumscribed  life.  Men  are  not  for  nests,  but  for 
flight.  God  does  indeed  give  us  nests,  but  He  gives  us  also  wings  ;  and  the  wings 
are  the  richer  gift.  But  God  does  not  leave  us  alone  when  He  leads  us  forth  from 
the  nest.  He  is  with  us  in  all  the  adventurous  essays  to  which  He  constrains  us. 
These  times  of  nest-stirring  are  the  epochs  of  spiritual  advancement.  The  past  is 
annulled  and  a  grander  future  opens.  Life  becomes  more  real,  acquires  grander 
range,  wider  scope,  and  sublimer  pitch.     III.  The  agencies  which  God  employs 


CHAP.  XXXII.]  DEUTERONOMY.  53i 

IN  THIS  NEST-STIERING.  They  are  sorrow,  disappointment,  vicissitude,  opportunity, 
voice,  vision,  inward  rest,  and  other  things  which  cannot  be  tabulated.  IV.  One 
DAY  God  WILL  BREAK  UP  OUR  LAST  EARTHLY  NEST.  Death  is  a  mounting  upward. 
It  is  a  necessary  fulfilment  of  the  present  life.  Here  we  never  reach  the  sun  toward 
which  we  soar.  We  cannot  even  steadily  gaze  upon  it ;  it  burns  and  blinds  us ; 
but  we  shall.  The  eagle's  fabled  flight  to  the  sun  is  a  pagan  prophecy  of  our 
destiny.  And  God  will  be  with  us  in  that  last  long  flight.  {J.  W.  Earnshaw.) 
God's  care  illustrated  by  the  eagle : — In  describing  His  dealings  with  His  people, 
the  Lord  often  makes  use,  in  Scripture,  of  similitudes  taken  from  the  natural  world. 
A  more  vivid  impression  is  thus  made  upon  our  minds  of  what  He  intends  us  to 
know,  than  if  He  had  just  employed  mere  didactic  precepts ;  and  besides,  we  are 
taught  to  associate  thoughts  of  spiritual  wisdom  with  the  circumstances  and  events 
which  pass  before  our  natural  eyes.  I.  The  origin  of  God's  care  is  exhibited  in 
THE  former  part  OF  THE  TEXT  :  "  The  Lord's  portion  is  His  people  ;  Jacob  is  the 
lot  of  His  inheritance.  He  found  him  in  a  desert  land,  and  in  a  waste  howling 
wilderness."  It  was  unmerited  kindness,  not  earned  by  any  deservings,  which 
influenced  the  Lord  in  His  choice  of  Israel  as  His  own  peculiar  inheritance.  It  was 
not  for  their  goodness  that  God  revealed  Himself  to  Abraham  and  Isaac  and  Jacob 
as  their  God  ;  but  it  was  in  consequence  of  that  revelation,  it  was  a  result  of  His 
sovereign  love  as  the  cause.  Now,  this  is  admirably  descriptive  of  the  first  cause 
of  every  believer's  salvation,  which  the  apostle  expresses  in  plain  unmetaphorical 
language,  when  he  says,  "Not  that  we  loved  God,  but  that  He  loved  us."  II.  The 
MODE  in  V7HICH  GoD  EXERCISES  His  CARE.  God  does  uot  treat  men  as  mere 
machines.  It  is  true  He  works  in  us  both  to  will  and  to  do,  and  without  His  aid 
we  can  do  nothing ;  but  then  He  would  have  us  fellow- workers  with  Him,  yea,  to 
work  out  our  own  salvation.  His  object  is  to  draw  out  our  faculties  and  powers,  so 
that  they  may  be  consecrated  to  His  service,  and  show  forth  all  His  praise.  "  "The 
eagle  stirreth  up  her  young. "  And  so  God  rouses  and  stirs  up  His  people.  There  is 
a  work  to  be  done,  there  are  talents  to  be  employed,  there  is  labour  to  be  under- 
gone. They  must  not,  therefore,  lie  like  children  in  the  lap  of  quiet  indulgence. 
The  eagle  "  fluttereth  over  her  young. "  And  so  God  allures  His  people  onwards. 
The  eagle  "  spreadeth  abroad  her  wings,  taketh  them,  beareth  them  upon  her  wings." 
When  actually  taken  out  of  the  nest,  she  supports  them  that  they  may  not  fall,  and 
flies  underneath  them  to  keep  them  from  falling.  And  so  God  interposes  betwixt 
His  people  and  destruction  :  He  bears  their  burdens ;  yea.  He  carries  them  with 
sustaining  and  encouraging  love.  Such  is  the  mode,  as  indicated  by  the  text,  in 
which  God  exercises  His  care  over  His  people  :  how  much  at  heart  He  has  their 
welfare  in  this  may  be  seen  from  the  expression,  "  He  kept  him  as  the  apple  of  His 
eye."  So  jealously  did  He  watch  over  Israel  of  old,  that  He  would  suff"er  no  weapon 
formed  against  them  to  prosper.  III.  The  practical  lessons  we  may  deduce 
FROM  THE  subject.  1.  The  first  is  a  lesson  of  humility  :  we  stand  by  faith  :  we  must 
not  be  high-minded,  but  fear.  I  have  already  shown  you  that  the  first  beginnings 
of  godliness  are  the  gift  and  operation  of  God.  I  may  add  that  we  every  day  need 
His  watchful  care  to  keep  us  whereto  we  have  already  attained.  No  creatures  can 
be  more  helpless  or  destitute,  if  deprived  of  a  parent's  care,  than  the  young  of  any 
bird.  And  therefore  the  similitude  of  the  text  gives  us  a  lively  idea  of  our  con- 
tinued dependence  on  the  Lord  for  all  the  strength  and  blessing  we  require.  Were 
He  to  leave  us  we  could  not  take  a  single  step  aright :  our  safety,  therefore,  and 
our  comfort,  depend  upon  our  close  and  humble  waiting  upon  Him.  This  is  a 
lesson  hard  to  learn  :  it  is  indeed,  in  general,  acquired  only  by  painful  experience. 
Men  will  not  practically  keep  in  view  the  humbling  truth  that  without  Christ  they 
can  do  nothing.  2.  We  may  also  learn  a  lesson  of  caution.  They  were  not  all 
Israel  which  were  of  Israel ;  for  there  were  many  disobedient  and  estranged  from 
God,  even  in  the  nation  particularly  called  by  His  name.  And  therefore  we  are  not 
to  take  for  granted  that  the  privileges  of  which  I  have  been  speaking  belong  to  us, 
or  that  the  care  I  have  described  is  exercised  over  us,  unless  we  can  discover  the 
genuine  marks  in  ourselves  of  reconciliation  with  God.  3.  I  observe,  again,  we 
learn  hence  a  lesson  of  childlike  and  imjilicit  faith.  It  is  not  Avise,  it  is  not  grate- 
ful in  God's  people  to  be  continually  questioning,  as  they  are  very  apt  to  do.  His 
power  or  His  love.  Such  conduct  is  a  walking  not  by  faith  but  by  sight.  4.  Lastly, 
I  would  say,  we  here  have  a  lesson  of  a  more  devoted  love.  What  cold  and  slothful 
hearts  must  we  have,  if  they  are  not  moved  by  a  recital  of  such  tenderness  as  the 
text  unfolds  !  (/.  Ayre,  M.A.)  The  inauguration  of  Ghridian  experience : — The 
inauguration  of  a  Christian  experience  is  the  inauguration  of  a  new  life.     A  man 


532  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxxir. 

moves  out  into  a  new  element.  Walking  by  faith  instead  of  by  sight  is  a  good  de^l 
what  trying  to  fly  is  to  the  young  eaglet.  He  shrinks  from  it.  He  looks  longingly 
back  at  the  nest.  And  hence  the  complete  change  of  sphere,  this  detachment  of 
old  formulas  of  thought,  old  habits  of  life,  old  desires,  old  principles  of  action,  old 
aims,  is  a  literal  stirring  up  of  the  nest.  God  wants  him  where  He  alone  can  lead 
him.     \m.  Vincent,  D.D.) 

Vers.  18,  14.  He  made  him  ride  on  the  high  places  of  the  earth. — God's  dealings 
with  His  people: — Everything  about  the  Jewish  people  was  significant  and  em- 

Jihatically  prophetic.      Canaan  itself  was  a  type  of  the  condition  both  here  and 
lereafter  of  the  disciples  of  Christ.     Whatsoever,  therefore,  the  terms  in  which  the 
richness  of  the  literal  Canaan  is  described,  we  may  justly  suppose  that  these  terms, 
metaphorically  taken,  are  expressive  of  the  provision  made  "in  Christ"  for  His 
Church,  and  of  the  privileges  appertaining  to  those  living  and  trusting  in  Him, 
' '  with  all  the  heart,  and  all  the  soul,  and  all  the  strength. "     It  would  seem  rather 
indicated  by  the  text  that  a  great  straggle  should  precede  the  possession  of  the  rich 
produce  of  Canaan.     And  this  we  wish  you  particularly  to  observe — that  "riding 
on  the  high  places  of  the  earth"  is  in  order  to, — is  preparatory  to  the  "eating  of 
the  increase  of  the  fields"  ;  as  though  that  "eating"  were  in  recompense  for  the 
mastery  won  over  the  strongholds  of  the  enemy.     I.  Christianity,  as  it  was  not  set 
Tip  at  once  in  the  world,  but  was  left  to  make  its  way  by  slow  and  painfiil  stniggle 
towards  the  dominion  which  it  has  not  yet  attained,  so  is  it  progressive,  and  not 
instantaneous  in  acquiring  empire  in  individual  cases.     There  may  be  no  inconsider- 
able analogy  between  the  history  of  Christianity  in  the  world  and  its  history  in  the 
individual.     Christianity  when  first  published  made  rapid  way,  as  though  but  few 
years  could  elapse  ere  every  false  system  would  vanish  before  it.     But  there  came 
interruptions  —  backsliding,   degeneracy,    and    afterwards    repentance   and   partial 
reformation.     But  the  consummation  is  still  a  thing  only  of  hope,  and  Christ  must 
"  re-appear  in  power  and  great  majesty  "  ere  His  religion  shall  prevail  in  every 
household  and  every  heart.     In  like  manner,  the  converted  individual  devotes  him- 
self at  first  with  the  greatest  ardency  to  the  duties  of  religion  ;  but  after  a  while, 
too  commonly,  the  ardency  decKnes,  and  duties  are  partially  neglected,  or  languidly 
performed.     Then  the  man  is  roused  afresh,  and  labours  in  bitterness  of  spirit  to 
recover  the  ground  so  unhappily  lost.     Though  on  the  whole  he  advances,  there 
remains  much  languor,  and  it  will  not  be  before  the  day  of  the  Lord  that  he  will  be 
sanctified,  holy  in  body,  soul,  and  spirit.     Nevertheless,  the  true  characteristic  of 
religion  in  both  cases  is  that  of  progi-essiveness,  or  rather,  perhaps  we  should  say,  of 
an  inability  to  be  stationary.     There  is  such  a  thing,  according  to  the  apostle,  as 
continuing  in  infancy,  and  being  ' '  fed  with  milk. "    There  is  also  such  a  thing  as 
advancing  to  manhood,  and  being  fed  with  meat.     This  is  but  another  typical  repre- 
sentation of  what  seems  suggested  in  our  text,  that  some  merely  eat  of  what  the  field 
yields  of  itself,  whilst  the  richer  increase  is  reserved  for  such  as  toil  earnestly  at 
cultivating  the  land.     Not,  indeed,  that  the  richer  truths  are  wholly  different  from 
the  others  ;  for  Christ  must  be  the  staple  in  all  truths  to  the  soul  ;  they  are  rather 
the  same  truths  in  a  more  refined  and  exquisite  state  prepared  for  those  who  have 
toiled  here  to  secure  a  portion  in  the  world  to  come.     11.  We  now  proceed  to  con- 
sider the  second  part  of  the  prophecy,  or  promise  of  our  text — for  it  is  either  ;  that 
which  has  to  do  with  the  obtaining ""  honey  from  the  rock,  and  oil  from  the  flinty 
rock."    This  part,  perhaps,  goes  even  further  than  the  first  in  connecting  the  bless- 
ing with  the  diligence  of  those  on  whom  it  is  conferred.     If  "honey"  be  obtained 
from  the  "rock,"  the  "rock"  must  be  climbed  ;  and  since  it  will  not  lie  on  the 
surface,  the  clefts  or  fissures  must  be  carefully  explored  ;  so  that  the  promise  appears 
to  pre-suppose  labour,  and  therefore  bears  out  what  we  have  all  alon^  argued,  that 
the  text  belongs  peculiarly  to  those  who  are  working  out  their  salvation  with  more 
than  ordinary  earnestness.    But,  however  it  may  be  supposed  that  bees  might  swarm 
in  the  clefts  of  the  rock,  and  thus  there  might  be  literally  the  obtaining  "honey 
from  the  rock,"  there  would  seem  to  be  a  sort  of  op^xtsition  intended  between  the 
thiuj^  ;)roduced  and  the  place  that  produces  it.     The  little  apparent  likelihood  of 
the  ' '  rock  "  yielding  * '  honey  "  is  paralleled  by  the  certainty  of  the  fact  that  Christ 
conquered  by  yieMing,  and  subdued  death  by  dying.     And  if  you  take  the  * '  rock  " 
as  meaning  that  typical  rock  which  was  smitten  by  Moses  at  Horeb,  then  the 
promise  of  honey  from  the  rock  may  be  as  much  a  promise  of  peculiar  privileges  to 
such  as  are  diligent  in  righteousness,  as  that  of  the  "eating  of  the  increase  of  the 
fields."      Every  believer  di-aws  water  from  the  rock,  but  the  honey  may  be  reserved 


CHAP.  XXXII.]  DEUTERONOMY.  533 

for  those  "who  by  patient  contimiance  in  well  doing  show  forth  eminently  the  praise 
of  Him  who  bore  our  sins  in  His  own  body  on  the  tree."     And  there  is,  indeed,  a 
hidden  preciousness  in  the  Saviour,  in  that  "Rock  of  Ages  cleft  for  us,"  which  i3 
appreciated  more  and  more  as  the  believer  goes  on  to  acquaintance  with  Christ, 
striving  to  magnify  Him  in  all  the  actions  of  his  life.     It  is  not  merely  a  general 
sense  of  the  sufficiency  of  the  atonement  which  such  men  obtain— the  persuasion 
that  there  is  provision  made  by  the  Mediator  for  the  wants  of  sinners,  even  the 
very  chief;  they  go  deeper  than  this  ;  they  find  in  Christ  such  stores  of  consolation, 
such  treasures  of  wisdom  and  knowledge,  that  they  are  never  weary  of  searching  as 
they  are  never  able  to  exhaust.     Every  necessity  as  it  arises  is  supplied  from  these 
stores   of  Christ ;    every  cloud   scattered   by  His  brightness  ;   every  desire   either 
satisfied,  or  satisfaction  guaranteed  by  the  unsearchable  riches  of  His  work  of  media- 
tion.    And  this  "  honey  "  is  from  the  "  rock  "—from  the  clefts  of  the  rock.    I  must 
go,  as  it  were,  to  the  wounds  of  the  Saviour  if  I  would  obtain  this  precious  and  ever 
multiplying  provision.     I  must  be  much  with  Him  in  the  garden  and  at  the  cross. 
Surely  we  may  confidently  say,  that  if  there  be  a  fulness  and  preciousness  in  the 
Redeemer,  that  is  ascertained  though  left  unexhausted  as  His  mighty  sacrifice  is 
contemplated,  and  the  lessons  which  it  furnishes  wrought  into  practice  ;  if  there  be 
this  reward  to  meet  constant  persevering  piety,— that  it  finds  deeper  and  deeper 
abundance  in  the  Saviour— a  sweetness  and  a  richness  in  His  office  which  give 
indescribable  emphasis  to  the  Scriptural  expression— "  Chiefest  among  ten  thousand 
and  altogether  lovely  "  ;  and  if,  moreover,  it  be  Christ  as  bruised  and  broken,  pierced 
and  riven  like  a  vast  mass  of  stone  on  which  the  thunderbolt  has  fallen,  who  yields 
these  rich  treasures,  then  it  must  be  true  that  "  the  soul  which  hungers  and  thirsts 
after  righteousness  "  shall  not  only  "  eat  of  the  increase  of  the  fields,"  but  be  per- 
mitted to  "draw  honey  from  the  rock,  and  oil  from  the  flinty  rock."     III.  This  idea 
is  put  yet  more  strongly,  you  see,  in  the  concluding  words  of  our  text—"  and  oil  out  of 
the  flinty  rock  "  ;  the  addition  of  the  word  "flinty  "  giving  a  stronger  image  of  rocki- 
ness,    and  therefore  making  the  place   less  promising  for   such  rich  and  delicate 
productions.     What  is  denoted  by  the  metaphor  thus  interpreted,  if  not  that  afflic- 
tion is  made  by  God  to  comfort  His  people  ;  so  that  when  they  are  brought  by  His 
providence  into  wild  and  rough  places,  they  are  enabled  to  find  there  even  richer 
provisions  than  in  verdant  and  cultivated  spots  ?     We  need  not  adduce  any  length- 
ened proof  that  the  promise  thus  interpreted  is  verified  to  the  very  letter  in  the 
experience  of  the  Church.     The  testimony  of  believers,  in  every  age  of  the  world, 
has  been,  that  the  season  of  affliction  has  proved  a  season  of  rich  communications 
from  above— a  season  when  God's  faithfulness  and  love  have  been  more  realised  than 
they  ever  were  before— a  season  in  which  texts  of   Scripture  have  assumed  new 
and  deeper  meaning,  and  truths  hitherto  dwelt  on  only  in  the  head  have  made 
their  way  to   the  heart,  and  diff'used  there  a  "peace  passing  all  understanding." 
IV.  And  perhapa,  even  yet,  our  text  may  not  have  been  fully  expounded,  for  if  in  its 
primary  application  to  the  Jews  it  denoted  the  sustenance  to  be  aff'orded  them  in 
Canaan,  as  applied  to  ourselves  it  may  relate  to  provision  laid  up  for  us  in  heaven, 
of  which  Canaan  was  the  type,  when  God  shall  have  made  us  "ride  on  the  high 
places  of  the  earth,"  and  exalted  us  to  His  kingdom,  where  the  promise  before  us 
may  be  always  receiving  accomplishment.     God  shall  be  always  communicating 
supplies  from  His  own  fulness,  as  age  after  age  of  expansion  or  enlargement  passes 
over  the  redeemed  ;  and  these  supplies  may  still  be  supplies  of  honey  from  the  rock. 
There  will  be  no  exhausting  of  Christ  and  redemption.     Never  shall  glorified  spirits 
be  weary  of  searching  into  the  mysteries  of  grace,  or  consider  those  mysteries  as 
thoroughly  explored.     Keep  up,  if  you  will,  the  metaphor  of  our^  text.     Eternity 
shall  be  spent  in  contemplating  and  examining  the  "  Rock  of  Ages  "  ;  every  moment 
shall  discover  a  fresh  depth  ;  the  clefts  in  this  rock,  most  strange,  but  most  true, 
fitting  it  to  bear  up  the  universe,  and  every  fresh  cleft  yielding  fresh  stores  of  honey, 
satisfying  desires  which  shall  but  grow  with  their  supply.      {H.  Melvill,  B.D.) 
The  joy  of  Israel  in  the  wilderness  /—The  ordinary  view  of  the  lot  of  Israel  in  the 
\rilderness  is  that  it  was  one  of  hardship  and  of  unbroken  tribulation.     In  contesting 
this  view  we  do  not  maintain  that  their  lot  was  one  of  unmixed  happiness.     Such  is 
not  the  state  of  mankind  under  any  conditions.      1.  A  large  part  of  their  happiness 
came  from  the  sense  of  the  grandeur  of  the  movement  of  the  Divine  providence  of 
which  they  were  the  immediate  subjects.     2.  Another  source  of  their  joy  came 
from  their  liberated  condition.      3.  Another  was  the  sensible  evidence  oi   God's 
goodness.     4,  Another  was  from  the  new  phases  of  natural  scenery  by  which  they 
were  constantly  saluted.      5.  Another  was  from  the  abundance  and  richness  ot  their 


634  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxxii. 

temporal  supplies,  6.  Another  was  their  faith  in  the  promises  of  the  covenant. 
7.  Their  social  and  domestic  enjoyments.  They  had  homes  ;  and  they  knew  their 
children  had  glorious  prospects.  Conclusion — 1.  God  wants  us  all  to  be  happy,  and 
always  happy.  Take  stock  of  your  joys.  2.  Some  of  the  greatest  promises  of  God's 
Word  are  for  the  Jew.     {B.  F.  Rawlins,  D.D.) 

Ver.  15.  Jeshunm  waxed  fat,  and  Mcked. —  Worldly  prosperity : — I.  A  com- 
munity REALISING  WOELDLY  PKOSPEEiTY.  Worldly  prosperity  sometimes  comes  to 
a  man — 1.  Irrespective  of  his  efiForts.  2.  By  his  honest  efforts.  3.  By  his  dishonest 
efforts.  II.  A  community  abusing  worldly  prosperity.  1.  In  sympathy  thev 
withdrew  from  God.  2.  In  life  they  disregarded  God.  (1)  A  great  wrong.  (2)  A 
common  wrong.  {Homilist.)  On  the  dangers  of  prosperity : — ^Two  main  themes 
run  through  this  song,  strongly  contrasted,  like  a  cord  of  bright  gold  and  a  black 
cord  twined  together.  The  one  which  takes  the  lead  is  the  gracious  kindness  of 
the  Lord  to  Israel  in  the  wonderful  works  wrought  for  their  deliverance  and 
exaltation,  and  the  benefits  of  all  kinds  bestowed  upon  them.  Then  over  against 
this  stands  Israel's  gross  raisimprovement  of  these  blessings,  Israel's  ingratitude 
and  apostasy,  with  the  judgments  which  naturally  followed  their  unfaithfulness. 
The  text  is  the  turning-point  of  this  wonderful  composition.  Up  to  this  verse  the 
strain  has  been  (in  the  main)  exultant  and  cheering,  celebrating  the  lofty  distinc- 
tion to  which  Israel  had  been  raised  ;  now  it  becomes  sad,  threatening,  and 
bewailing  an  unparalleled  declension.  How  did  this  come  about  ?  It  is  all  con- 
tained in  these  few  words,  which  have  a  solemn  warning  for  ourselves  :  "  Jeshurun 
waxed  fat,  and  kicked."  Jeshurun,  "the  upright  one,"  the  people  who  had  been 
called  and  set  apart  to  be  "a  holy  nation,"  aiming  at  righteousness,  and  who 
hitherto  had  been  distinguished  by  a  measure  of  integrity,  became  corrupted 
thi-ough  prosperity.  I.  Let  us  regard  men  in  their  social  capacity,  and  with 
respect  to  their  general  worldly  interests,  and  observe  how  they  are  commonly 
AFFECTED  BY  ABUNDANT  }'E0SPERiTY.  History  )s  full  of  instances  to  show  how 
national  character  has  deteriorated  as  the  wealth  and  power  of  a  nation  have 
increased.  A  people,  while  struggling  for  existence  and  contending  for  liberty, 
have  displayed  all  the  virtues  of  industry  and  frugality,  of  energy  and  courage,  of 
public  spirit  and  self-denying  regard  for  the  common  good.  Thus  they  establish 
their  commonwealth  and  grow  strong  and  powerful.  Then  riches  flow  in  ;  luxury 
follows  in  their  train ;  the  sons  soon  forget  the  virtues  of  their  fathers,  or  despise 
them  ;  tlien  parties  are  formed  ;  each  class,  each  individual,  is  ambitious  to  cope 
with  or  outsliine  the  other.  All  the  petty  passions  of  our  nature  soon  spring  up 
into  rank  activity.  Selfishness  reigns,  the  general  good  is  forgotten,  and  principles 
which  once  were  held  in  honour  are  derided  and  spurned.  II.  Turn  from  those 
aspects  of  the  subject  which  are  national  and  social  to  those  that  concern  our 
Churches.  Here  it  is  that  such  an  evil  is  most  perilous,  and  most  to  be  con- 
demned. Nations,  societies,  even  classes  of  men,  undoubtedly  have  relations  to 
God  ;  they  stand  indebted  to  Him  for  the  rich  benefits  of  His  providence  ;  and  they 
are  verily  guilty  when  they  abuse  these  by  self-indulgence  and  forgetfulness  ot 
Him.  But  their  guilt  is  far  less  than  that  of  Churches,  societies  of  professing 
Christians,  who  decline  from  the  love  and  allegiance  they  owe  to  their  Lord.  Now, 
that  is  the  aggravation  that  is  here  insisted  on  by  the  very  use  of  the  title 
"Jeshurun" — the  Upright.  What  a  base  part  for  those  who  should  be  dis- 
tinguished by  this  excellence  to  turn  the  abundance  of  the  ministries  of  grace 
into  the  occasion  of  pride,  self-confidence,  and  carelessness  !  Yet  this  has  happened 
again  and  again.  In  various  forms  this  wanton  temper,  this  self-satisfied,  self- 
indulgent  spii'it  shows  itself.  Sixty  or  seventy  years  ago  it  came  out  in  Anti- 
nomianism,  which  made  the  Gospel  all  privilege  and  no  duty,  under  the  pretence 
of  zeal  for  the  freeness  of  Divine  grace.  This  delusion,  which  ruined  many  souls 
and  grievously  weakened  the  energies  of  the  Churches,  has  vanished  to  a  large 
extent;  but  the  spirit  of  it — the  spirit  of  carnal  indolence  and  complacency — 
lingers  still.  Self- flattery  can  assume  many  shapes,  slipping  its  neck  out  of  the 
gentle  yoke  of  Christ.  But  the  besetting  temptation  now  is  the  pride  of  enlighten- 
ment, the  conceited  notion  that  we  have  attained  to  larger  and  more  liberal  views 
of  Christianity  ;  and  so  the  great  doctrines  of  grace  are  explained  away,  or  so 
diluted  as  to  be  robbed  of  their  strength.  III.  Having  thus  shown  the  injurious  influ- 
ence of  continued  prosperity,  let  me  now  indicate  how  this  injurious  tendency 
may  be  corrected.  1.  By  a  constant  and  grateful  recollection  of  the  Source  and 
Giver  of  our  prosperity.     This  will  keep  us  in  our  proper  place  as  lowly  recipients 


CHAP.  XXXII.]  DEUTERONOMY.  535 

and  debtors,  dependents  on  His  bounty.  2.  Let  us  use  our  resources  and  advantages 
as  God  intends  they  should  be  useci,  and  as  He  Himself  sets  us  an  example. 
God  is  constantly  bestowing.  He  keeps  nothing  to  Himself.  3.  Let  us  not  desire 
prosperity   for  itself.      {A.    Thompson,   M.A.)  The  danger  of  being  worse  by 

'mercies : — First,  prove  it  to  you,  that  even  the  best  men  are  in  danger  to  become  the 
worse  for  mercies  :  for  outward  mercies,  even  for  spiritual  mercies.  ^  Secondly,  give 
some  grounds  and  reasons  to  demonstrate  the  truth  thereof,  how  it  comes  to  pass 
that  there  should  be  so  much  danger  that  a  people  should  become  the  worse  for 
mercies.  L  For  the  proof,  that  you  may  understand  the  more  distinctly,  let  me 
lay  it  down  in  a  double  distinction  of  mercy.  Mercies  are  eitlier  privative  or 
positive :  privative,  that  is  deliverances,  presei-vations  from  varieties  of  evils  and 
dangers,  which  otherwise  we  were  liable  unto  ;  our  privative  mercies  are  greater  and 
more  than  our  positive  mercies  are,  though  we  perceive  them  not :  the  dangers  that 
we  are  delivered  from  are  more  than  the  present  mercies  we  do  enjoy.  Now  let  us 
see  whether  privative  mercies  make  men  the  worse  ;  when  men  are  delivered,  do  they 
grow  the  worse  for  their  deliverance  ?  Look  to  this  (Deut.  xxxii.  26),  the  Lord  speaks 
of  a  great  privative  mercy.  What  good,  now,  did  this  deliverance  do  this  people  ? 
In  the  thirty-second  verse.  Their  vine  is  the  vine  of  Sodom,  and  their  grapes  are  the 
grapes  of  Gomorrah.  Here  is  the  fruit  now  that  these  men  brought  forth  of  their 
privative  mercies, that  the  Lord  did  not  give  them  into  their  enemies'  hands,  for  all 
that  the  people  grew  more  wicked  under  these,  and  their  grapes  were,  &c.  In  this 
manner  they  improved  their  corruptions.  In  Psnlm  Ixxviii.  38,  Many  a  time  he 
turned  His  wTath  away,  and  would  not  suffer  His  whole  displeasure  to  arise.  Were 
the  people  the  better  for  it  afterwards  ?  No,  they  grew  so  much  the  more  rebel- 
lious. Thus  privative  mercies  may  make  men  gi'ow  the  worse.  And  men  may 
be  delivered,  and  a  nation  delivered,  and  they  growing  worse  for  it,  the  Lord  may 
reserve  them  to  further  plagues.  Secondly,  there  are  positive  mercies,  and  they 
are  of  two  sorts,  and  men  are  in  danger  of  growing  worse  by  both  of  them.  Either 
temporal  or  spiritual  mercies,  as  if  the  Lord  give  men  the  Scriptures,  they  are  in 
danger  to  wrest  them  to  their  own  destruction  (2  Pet.  iii.  6)  ;  if  God  give  them  His 
Gospel,  they  are  in  danger  to  turn  His  grace  into  wantonness  (Jude,  ver.  4).  Not 
the  word  of  grace,  but  the  privileges  of  grace  ;  if  God  give  men  the  ordinances,  they 
say,  The  temple  of  the  Lord,  the  temple  of  the  Lord.  And  we  are  delivered  to 
commit  all  this  abomination  (Jer.  vii.  8,  9),  and  so  in  Hebrews  vi.  7,  8,  There  is  the 
ground  that  drinks  in  the  rain  of  ordinances  and  influences,  and  yet  brings  forth 
briars  and  thorns.  So  if  men  receive  spiritual  privileges,  they  may  be  the  worse 
for  them  (Matt.  iii.  9).  Nay,  spiritual  divination,  and  be  in  danger  to  be  the  worse 
for  it :  Paul  was  so  (2  Cor.  iii.  7).  Nay,  spiritual  motions  and  operations  (Heb.  vi. 
5,  6).  II.  But  you  will  say.  What  is  the  reason  ?  are  the  mercies  of  God  of  such  a 
malignant  nature  that  they  make  men  grow  the  worse  ?  A  man  would  think,  if 
anything  would  make  men  the  better,  mercies  would  ;  it  is  true,  had  men  ingenuous 
natures  as  grace  brings.  But  there  are  four  great  reasons  why  it  is  a  dangerous 
thing  for  a  person  or  people  to  enjoy  mercy,  and  not  be  the  worse  for  mercy. 
1.  First,  is  from  the  corruption  that  is  in  the  heart  of  man  ;  it  is  true,  the  mercy  of 
God  is  not  a  cause  why  men  grow  the  worse  :  for  it  infuses  no  malignant  disposition 
into  the  soul  of  man.  But  the  mercy  of  God  is  an  occasion,  though  it  be  not  the 
cause  ;  as  it  is  said  of  the  law  of  God  (Rom.  vii.  11).  2.  Secondly,  from  the  general 
curse  that  by  reason  of  sin  is  come  upon  all  the  creatures,  and  all  God's  provi- 
dential dispensations.  3.  Thirdly,  from  the  especial  malice  of  the  devil  against 
mercy.  It  is  true,  he  is  an  enemy  to  all  the  creatures,  and  he  would  destroy  them 
all  as  creatures  out  of  his  enmity  to  God.  But  in  a  more  especial  manner  the  devil 
is  an  enemy  to  the  mercy  of  God  more  than  to  any  other  creature  of  God.  Why  ? 
because  the  devil's  sin  is  direct  enmity,  and  malice  and  revenge.  God  looks  for 
most  glory  from  His  mercy,  and  therefore  of  all  other  things  the  devil  hath  the 
greatest  envy  to  that,  that  God  may  be  dishonoured  by  them.  4.  Fourthly,  there 
are  some  mercies  that  God  hath  given  to  persons  and  people  out  of  a  particular  dis- 
pleasure ;  you  heard  of  the  general  curse  that  came  upon  all  the  creatures  before. 
But  now  I  say,  there  are  some  mercies  that  God  gives  out  of  peculiar  displeasure, 
and  they  prove  a  more  peculiar  curse.  I  conceive  that  will  appear  plain  to  you  in 
Zech.  V.  3.  No  wonder  these  men  grow  the  worse  for  mercies,  because  it  is  out  of 
a  peculiar  displeasure  that  the  Lord  gives  them,  as  Austin  saith  of  God's  hearing 
prayers.  He  hears  wicked  men's  prayers  and  gives  them  things  they  ask,  though  not 
properly  as  an  answer  to  prayer.  God  hears  prayers  with  revenge.  Gives  the 
things  prayed  for,  but  out  of  a  peculiar  displeasure.      God  doth  as  much  rain  snarea 


536  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxxii. 

on  men  in  mercy,  as  in  any  other  of  His  dispensations  whatsoever,  and  therefore  look 
to  it ;  it  is  a  dangerous  thing  for  a  people  to  receive  mercy  if  they  do  not  improve 
it.  III.  I  shall  now  speak  a  few  words  of  application  ;  there  are  two  uses  that  I 
would  make  of  it.  First,  of  examination.  Look  back  upon  all  the  mercies  that 
you  have  received  from  God — temporal  and  spiritual  mercies  ;  privative,  positive 
mercies.  Indeed,  it  is  your  duty  (Psa.  Ixviii.  26).  Not  only  for  late  mercies 
received,  but  look  to  the  Foimtain  from  whence  all  mercies  did  first  flow  (Mic. 
vi.  5),  it  is  from  the  first  beginning  of  mercy  to  the  latter  end  of  them,  ask  but  the 
question  now  of  your  own  hearts,  look  to  your  own  personal  mercies  every  one  in 
private  family  mercies,  and  the  public  mercies  that  God  hath  afforded  the  nation, 
and  tell  me,  are  you  the  better  or  the  worse  for  them,  have  you  brought  forth  fruit 
answerable  to  the  mercy  ?  There  are  six  things  that  are  the  ordinary  ways  by 
which  men  do  appear  to  be  the  worse  for  mercy.  And  pray  let  us  see  whether  all 
these  be  not  to  be  found  amongst  us  ;  this  is  a  day  wherein  you  should  lay  your- 
selves naked  before  God.  First,  the  ordinary  abuse  of  mercy  is  forgetfulness  of 
God  (Deut.  vi.  14).  Secondly,  when  they  are  settled  upon  them,  and  satisfied  with 
them.  Let  them  but  keep  this  mercy,  and  it  will  be  well  with  them.  Let  us 
enjoy  this,  and  all  is  well.  Thirdly,  when  men  grow  refractory  unto  duty,  and 
oppose  the  things  of  godliness  with  a  higher  hand.  Fourthly,  when  a  people  da 
begin  to  dote  upon  their  own  beauty,  God  sets  them  in  a  good  condition,  and  they 
begin  to  rest  in  it,  that  evil  was  the  fruit  of  their  mercy  (Ezek.  xvi.  15).  Fifthly, 
when  men  ascribe  mercy  to  themselves,  and  would  take  the  glory  from  God  (Hab. 
i.  16).  Lastly,  when  men  employ  all  to  their  own  use,  when  all  men's  mercies  do 
but  serve  their  lusts  ;  one  man  saith,  we  have  obtained  this  mercy,  therefore  I  will 
be  rich  ;  now  I  must  sit  at  the  stern,  saith  another ;  the  management  of  all  the 
negotiations  of  the  State  is  in  my  hands ;  as  much  as  to  say,  God  hath  given  all 
these  mercies  to  serve  me  :  remember  that  place  in  Isaiah  xxix.  1.  There  is  a 
second  use  of  caution  and  admonition  ;  do  you  take  heed  seeing  it  is  so  dangerous 
a  thing,  that  the  same  thing  be  not  justly  said  of  you,  and  charged  on  you  as  was 
here  upon  Jeshurun  :  that  they  were  the  worse  for  their  mercies  ;  the  mercies  they 
received  did  but  ripen  their  sins  and  hasten  their  ruin  ;  take  heed  you  bring  forth 
fruits  worthy  of  the  mercy  you  receive.  First,  the  proper  fruit  of  mercy  is  an 
humble  acknowledgment  of  our  own  un worthiness.  Secondly,  the  proper  fruit  of 
mercy  by  which  a  man  may  be  said  to  be  the  better  for  it  is  when  they  ascribe  all 
mercy  to  God.  Thirdly,  when  mercies  do  bring  a  man's  sins  to  remembrance,  the 
soul  stoops  under  the  apprehension  of  mercy :  what,  will  God  show  mercy  to  me  ! 
one  so  rebellious  and  disobedient  as  I  !  and  then  the  soul  reads  over  the  guilt  of 
his  sin  with  new  remorse.  Fourthly,  when  mercies  lay  upon  the  man  the  stronger 
obligations,  and  a  man  makes  this  use  of  it ;  looks  upon  himself  as  more  firmly 
bound  to  God  ;  that  is  the  use  they  make  of  mercy  in  Ezra  ix.  13.  Fifthly,  when 
the  sold  studies  what  he  shall  return  to  God  for  all  His  mercies  :  you  know  that 
God  not  only  expects  returns,  but  proportionable  returns.  And  I  desire  you  would 
take  notice  of  it  (2  Chron.  xxxii.  26).  Lastly,  that  soul  is  the  better  for  mercy 
when  it  loves  God  the  more  for  it  (Psa.  xviii.  1).  But  how  shall  I  know  that  I 
am  the  better  for  mercies?  Pray  observe  these  four  rules.  First,  thy  mercies 
will  never  make  thee  the  better,  unless  they  be  mercies  that  proceed  from  a 
covenant  right  and  interest.  Secondly,  when  a  man,  as  he  receives  all  from  God, 
doth  direct  all  to  God.  Thirdly,  consider,  this  is  the  mercy  that  doth  you  good, 
when  it  makes  thy  soul  prosperous.  Lastly,  wherein  your  prayers  to  God  are 
dra\vn  forth  more  for  a  sanctified  use  of  the  mercy  than  for  the  mercy  itself. 
{Wm.  Strong.)  Vnsanctified  prosperity :— I.  That  every  one  is  under  the 
MOST  solemn  oblications  TO  LOVE  AND  OBEY  GoD.  1.  He  is  our  Creator  and 
absolute  Proprietor.  2.  He  is  the  Author  of  our  salvation.  II.  That,  not- 
withstanding THESE  obligations,  MANY  PERSONS  FORSAKE  GoD.  1.  By  mere 
forgetfulness.  2.  By  neglecting  the  ordinances  of  religion.  3.  By  inattention 
to  relative  duties.  III.  That  unsanctified  prosperity  is  very  often  the 
CAUSE  of  these  EVILS.  It  is  quite  possible  to  be  very  prosperous,  and  very 
religious  too— but,  though  possible,  it  is  very  difficult  (Jer.  xx.  21).  Con- 
clusion— 1.  One  way  of  preventing  these  evils  is  to  remember  the  uncertainty 
of  earthly  things.  2.  Another  way  is  to  be  earnest  in  prayer  to  God  for  His 
upholding  grace.  (  W.  G.  Barrett.)  Enervated  by  prosperity  : — Amid  the  luxuri- 
ous ease  of  the  valley  men  degenerate,  but  among  the  mountains  we  find  a  brave 
and  hard  race,  for  there  the  dangers  of  the  crags  and  the  cold  of  winter  brace  nerve 
and  muscle  tUl  each  becomes  vigorous,  and  men  are  fit  for  acts  of  valour  and 


CHAP.  XXXII.]  DEUTERONOMY.  637 

deeds  of  heroism.     It  is  in  battle  and   service  that  veteran  soldiers  are  bred. 
{C.  E.  Spurgeon.) 

Ver.  17.  They  sacrificed  unto  devils. — Devil  worship : — I.  The  devil  of  sensu- 
ality. This  includes  intemperance,  debauchery,  and  the  gratification  of  all  the 
lower  animal  appetites.  Do  not  men  everywhere  sacrifice  intellect,  genius,  time, 
money,  health,  and  even  life  itself  at  its  infernal  shrine?  II.  The  devil  of 
AVARICE.  Greed  of  gain,  desire  for  wealth,  is  the  inspiration  of  millions  in  this 
mercenary  age.  Truth,  honesty,  conscience,  self-respect,  moral  freedom,  peace, 
and  honour  are  all  sacrificed  to  this  grim  deity.  III.  The  devil  of  vanity.  Love 
of  show,  desire  for  popular  applause.  Fortunes  are  sacrificed  to  this  devil. 
IV.  The  devil  of  sectarianism.  A  greater  devil  than  this  can  scarcely  be  found. 
To  it  men  sacrifice  truth,  charity,  moral  nobleness.     {Romilist.) 

Ver.  18.  Of  the  Rock  that  begat  thee  thou  art  unmindful. — Forgetful  of  the  Rock : 
— How  is  it  that  men  soon  forget  the  solid,  the  real,  the  substantial  ?  What  is  it 
that  delights  men  in  spluttering  rockets,  in  coloured  fountains,  in  lamps  swinging 
upon  trees  that  are  offended  by  their  presence?  See  the  great  seething  crowd 
waiting  for  the  coloured  fountains  to  spring  up,  and  for  all  the  little  electric  lamps 
confined  in  tinted  globes  to  shine  among  swaying  branches  !  What  exclamations 
of  idiotic  delight !  How  stunned  is  modern  intelligence  at  the  marvellous  display 
of  colour  !  Who  heeds  the  quiet  moon  that  looks  on  with  unutterable  amazement, 
and  that  in  her  motherly  heart  is  saying.  Oh,  that  they  were  wise,  that  they  were  less 
given  to  toy-worship  and  playfulness  of  that  kind  !  Here  I  have  been  shining  ages 
upon  ages — who  heeds  me  ?  Which  of  all  the  sweltering,  overfed  throng  turns  a 
bleared  eye  to  my  course  to  watch  me  in  my  gentle  sovereignty  ?  And  the  stars, 
too,  look  down  upon  the  coloured  fountains  without  being  moved  to  envy  by  their 
momentary  blush  and  by  their  unheard  splash  !  We  forget  the  Rock  so  soon  ;  we 
prefer  the  toy ;  we  want  something  light,  something  that  can  be  spoken  trippingly 
on  the  tongue — an  easy  fluent  nothing.  We  do  not  care  to  bow  down  the  head  to 
study,  to  criticism,  to  the  examination  and  estimation  of  evidence,  and  commit 
ourselves  to  the  acceptance  of  sound  conclusions.  Can  we  go  anywhere  to  see  a 
coloured  fountain  ?  Men  who  do  not  travel  half  a  mile  to  the  greatest  pulpit  in 
the  world,  or  the  greatest  altar  ever  built  to  the  God  of  heaven,  would  put  them- 
selves and  their  families  to  any  amount  of  inconvenience  and  expense  to  gaze  with 
the  admiration  of  idiocy  upon  a  coloured  fountain  !  Blessed  are  they  who  love 
the  permanent  stars,  the  lamps  of  heaven,  and  who  set  their  feet  broadly  and 
squarely  on  God's  everlasting  Rock.  Let  us  turn  to  the  real,  to  the  substantial,  to 
the  very  revelation  of  God's  truth,  and  abide  there  ;  the  coloured  fountain  can 
only  come  now  and  again,  but  the  eternal  heavens  are  always  full  of  light  or  rich 
with  beauty.     {J.  Parker,  D.D.) 

Ver.  20.  A  very  froward  generation. — The  frowardness  of  unbelief: — 1.  Unbelief 
is  a  very  froward  thing,  because,  in  the  first  place,  it  gives  God  the  lie.  Can  any- 
thing be  worse  than  this  ?  God  saith,  **  Believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  and  thou 
shalt  be  saved,"  and  the  unbeliever  replies,  "  I  cannot  believe  that  Jesus  will  save 
me."  Oh,  soul,  can  you  dare  to  look  up  to  the  Cross  of  Jesus  and  say,  "There  is 
no  life  in  a  look  at  the  Crucified  One  for  me  "  ?  Can  you  even  think  of  the  Holy 
Spirit,  and  then  say  that  He  has  no  power  to  change  a  heart  so  black  and  hard  as 
yours?  2.  Again,  unbelief  is  great  frowardness,  because  it  refuses  God's  way  of 
salvation.  No  man  can  read  the  Scriptures  without  seeing  that  God's  way  of  salva- 
tion is  not  by  work  nor  by  feelings,  but  by  trusting  in  the  Son  of  God,  who  has 
offered  a  full  atonement  for  sin.  Now  the  sinner  says,  "Lord,  I  would  do  or  suffer 
anything  if  I  might  thereby  be  saved."  3.  Unbelief  is  a  very  froward  thing,  again, 
because  it  very  often  makes  unreasonable  demands  of  God.  When  Thomas  said, 
"Except  I  put  my  finger  into  the  print  of  the  nails,  and  thrust  my  hand  into  His 
side,  I  will  not  believe,"  he  was  speaking  very  frowardly.  I  have  heard  the  sinner 
say,  "Oh,  sir,  if  I  could  have  a  dream,  if  I  could  be  broken  down  with  anguish,  or 
if  I  could  enjoy  some  remarkable  revelation,  then  I  would  believe  God  "  ;  this  also 
is  frowardness.  4.  Unbelief  is  very  froward,  next,  because  it  indulges  hard 
thoughts  of  God.  Do  you  say  that  "Salvation  by  faith  is  too  good  to  be  true"? 
Is  anjrthing  too  good  to  come  from  God,  who  is  infinitely  good?  5.  And  yet 
again,  unbelief  is  a  very  froward  thing  because  it  disparages  the  Lord  Jesus.  Oh, 
soul,  dost  thou  doubt  the  infinite  virtue  of  the  Divine  sacrifice  ?    Dost  thou  question 


538  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxxii. 

the  power  of  the  intercession  of  the  risen  Lord!  6.  And  do  you  not  think  it 
is  another  instance  of  great  frowardness  that  unbelief  casts  reflections  upon  the 
Holy  Spirit  ?  Not  save  thee  ?  Who  art  thou  that  thou  shouldst  stand  out  against 
the  witness  of  the  Spirit  of  truth  ?  Wilt  thou  refuse  the  threefold  witness  of  the 
Spirit,  the  water,  and  the  blood?  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  CMLdren  in  whom  is  no 
faith. — Faith  in  Us  higher  sense : — Do  not  misunderstand  that  word  "  faith."  It  is 
a  Christian  word;  here  it  does  not  occur  in  its  spiritual  or  Christian  sense. 
"Faith"  is  a  word  which  belongs  to  Christ,  not  to  Moses.  The  word  "faith" 
here  means  covenant-keeping,  reality,  honesty  to  vows.  They  have  signed  a 
paper,  but  they  will  break  the  bond :  they  are  children  in  whom  is  no  faith,  no 
reliance,  no  trust.  This  is  not  the  "sixth  sense,"  this  is  not  reason  on  wings  ;  this 
is  simple  truthfulness  and  covenant-keeping  honour.  Faith  is  not  bom  yet  in  the 
Bible,  as  to  name  and  definite  influence— though  many  a  man  in  the  old  book  was 
moved  by  faith  who  could  not  account  for  his  own  motives  and  impulse.  We  are  called 
to  faith  in  its  highest  sense ;  and  in  being  called  to  faith  in  its  highest  sense,  we 
are  not  called  upon  to  renounce  reason.  Should  I  say  to  a  child,  Dear  little  one, 
your  two  hands  are  not  strong  enough  to  take  up  that  weight,  even  of  gold,  but  I 
could  find  you  a  third  one,  and  with  that  you  could  lift  it  easily,  and  with  that  it 
would  be  no  weight ;  you  could  carry  it  always  without  weariness  and  without 
fatigue — do  I  dishonour  the  other  hands?  Do  I  put  the  child  to  some  humiliation? 
Do  I  ignore  what  little  power  it  has  ?  Certainly  not :  I  increase  it,  I  magnify  it, 
I  honour  it ;  so  does  the  great  and  loving  One,  who  wishes  us  to  pray  without 
ceasing,  magnify  reason  by  saying,  It  wants  faith ;  faith  magnifies  the  senses  by 
saying,  They  are  five  in  number,  and  I  can  make  them  six  ;  do  not  dispense  with 
any  one  of  them,  keep  them  all  in  their  integrity,  but  you  want  the  sixth  sense 
that  lays  hold  upon  the  invisible  and  the  eternal.  We  cannot,  therefore,  keep 
covenants  and  honour  vows  in  the  sense  in  which  the  word  "faith"  is  used  here, 
with  any  completeness,  until  we  are  inspired  by  the  higher  faith — that  all- encom- 
passing trust  in  God,  that  marvellous  sixth  sense  which  sees  God.  Lord,  increase 
our  faith !  May  our  prosperity  never  interfere  with  our  prayer !  Give  us  what 
Thou  wilt — poverty,  riches,  health,  disease,  strength,  or  weakness,  but  take  not 
Thy  Holy  Spirit  from  us.  (/.  Parker,  D.D.)  The  faithless  generation: — 
"Without  faith  it  is  impossible  to  please  God," — impossible  to  do  that  which  is 
the  proper  end  of  our  being  ;  in  which,  if  we  should  fail,  it  were  far  better  for  us 
that  we  had  never  been  born.  The  like  is  not  said  of  charity,  or  any  other 
Christian  gi-ace,  but  faith  only.  Not  that  we  can  expect  to  please  God,  if  any  of 
the  ornaments  of  a  meek,  gentle,  and  Christian  spirit  be  wanting  in  our  character  ; 
but  because  there  is  a  peculiar  necessity  for  the  addition  of  faith,  which  entitles  it 
to  this  mark  of  distinction.  There  is  not  a  single  link  in  the  chain  of  evangelical 
virtues  and  graces  which  can  be  said  to  be  unnecessary ;  but  that  link  is  necessary 
above  all  which  is  the  end  of  the  chain,  and  which  connects  it  with  God  Himself. 
In  the  text,  God  complains  of  the  provoking  of  His  sons  and  daughters,  the 
rebellious  seed  of  Abraham  ;  and  He  lays  all  the  faults  of  their  character  to  this 
capital  defect,  that  they  are  "children  in  whom  is  no  faith."    I.  The  want  of 

FAITH    IN    THE    PRESENT    STATE    OF    THE    ChEISTIAN    WORLD.      1.    The    exceSsive 

attention  bestowed  upon  mere  earthly  and  sensible  objects.  The  common  phrase 
"Seeing  is  believing "  is  a  plain  confession  that  we  walk  by  sight,  not  by  faith. 
The  sum  of  our  creed  is  this :  that  the  good  things  of  this  world  are  solid  and 
substantial ;  those  of  the  next  world,  visionary  and  chimerical.  2.  The  pre- 
vailing and  increasing  neglect  of  ordinances.  This  springs  out  of  the  faithless 
and  infidel  notion  that  they  are  not  material,  that  they  are  mere  ceremonies,  that 
there  is  no  virtue  in  them.  Here  is  a  direct  denial  of  faith.  3.  The  general  shyness 
and  reserve  which  prevails  among  religious  persons.  If  it  cannot  be  said  of  us,  as 
of  the  ungodly  and  profane,  that  God  is  not  in  all  our  thoughts,  it  cannot  surely  be 
denied  that  He  is  not  in  all  our  talk.  The  want  of  faith  is  at  the  bottom  of  this. 
We  are  not  fully  persuaded  in  our  own  minds,  and  therefore  we  feel  an  awkwardness 
and  reserve  in  communicating  our  thoughts  to  each  other.  4.  The  carelessness  and 
indifference  which  generally  prevails  in  regard  to  the  sacraments  of  the  Church. 
II.  What  is  the  natural  conclusion  of  all  this  ?  If  the  want  of  faith  be  the 
cause  of  all  our  disorders,  the  plain  remedy  is  to  go  where  we  may  get  more  faith  ; 
to  take  what  little  we  have,  and  to  throw  ourselves  at  the  feet  of  Christ,  saying, 
"Lord,  I  believe;  help  Thou  mine  unbelief."  And  your  minister,  as  in  all  your 
prayers,  will  go  before  you  in  this  likewise.  "  Lord,  increase  my  faith  ;  that  I 
may,  both  by  my  life  and  doctrine,  set  forth  Thy  true  and  lively  Word,  and  rightly 


CHAP,  xxxii.]  DEUTERONOMY.  539 

and  duly  administer  Thy  holy  sacraments.  Increase  the  faith  of  this  congi-egation  ; 
that  with  meek  heart  and  due  reverence  they  may  hear  and  receive  Thy  holy  Word, 
truly  serving  Thee  in  holiness  and  righteousness  all  the  days  of  their  life.  Increase, 
once  more,  the  faith  of  this  people  and  nation,  that  we  may  put  away  from  us  our 
national  sins,  and  avert  Thy  national  judgments  ;  and  that,  along  with  the  increase 
of  faith,  the  natural  fruits  of  it — peace  and  happiness,  truth  and  justice,  religion 
and  piety— may  be  established  among  us  for  all  generations."  {Frederick  Fields 
LL.D.) 

Vers.  21-28.  A  fire  is  kindled  in  Mine  anger. — Divine  love  for  Israel  like  the  Jire 
of  spousal  jealousy ;— I.  Note  the  natuee  and  cause  of  the  Divine  jealousy. 
It  means  that  burning  holy  zeal  for  the  sacred  betrothment  by  which  He  claims  an 
exclusive  right  to  the  aft'ection  of  His  people,  brooking  no  rival  and  admitting  of  no 
competitor  in  His  presence.  With  poor,  ignorant,  envious  humanity,  jealousy 
involves  suspicion,  and  is  the  mark  often  of  a  weak,  warped,  and  narrow  nature. 
But,  on  the  other  hand,  there  is  a  noble  jealousy  which,  eliminating  these  evil 
elements,  shows  itself  in  an  earnest  concern  for  others'  fidelity,  joined  with  some 
degree  of  fear  for  them,  or  of  indignation  at  their  giving  to  any  a  just  ground  for 
suspecting  their  faithfulness  in  the  least  degree.  II.  Note  how  the  Divine  love 
IN  its  dealing  with  Israel  is  like  the  fiee  of  spousal  jealousy.  With  their 
"no  gods" — their  worship  of  material  images  and  their  profaning  the  Divine  name 
by  associating  it  with  horrible  rites  and  unnatural  orgies — the^  have  provoked  Me 
to  jealousy,  that  is,  to  the  exercise  and  manifestation  of  a  holy  indignation  and  zeal 
for  Mine  own  honour  and  the  vindication  of  Mine  own  name  ;  so  will  I  rouse  them 
to  a  jealousy  about  themselves  by  favouring  others  that  they  deem  a  "no-nation," 
and  by  bestowing  My  regards  on  what  they  contemptuously  look  down  on  and  des- 
pise as  no  people  at  all.  Is  not  this  one  of  the  great  wheels  by  which  God  moves 
forward  the  atfairs  of  His  providential  government ;  rousing  one  nation  to  vie  with 
another  which  it  has  hitherto  despised,  but  which  is  now  seen  to  be  outstripping 
it ;  or  one  community  to  become  emulous  of  another,  or  one  Church  to  bestir  itself, 
so  as  not  to  be  outdone  by  a  little-esteemed  rival  ?  Thus  energies  are  brought  into 
play  which  had  otherwise  lain  dormant ;  and  weapons  of  the  spiritual  warfare  are 
sharpened  and  utilised  that  had  previously  been  lying  rusty  and  unused.  III.  Note 
THAT  God's  jealousy  for  His  name  and  honour  is  the  ultimate  salvation 
OF  His  people.  This  is  the  real  secret  of  Israel  not  being  utterly  swept  away  and 
destroyed.  Their  final  extinction  as  a  people  would  have  been  their  proper  fate  had 
they  been  left  to  reap  of  their  own  way  and  been  filled  with  the  fruit  of  their  own 
devices.  That  the  Lord  did  not  make  a  complete  end  of  them,  as  He  did  of  other 
tribes  and  peoples,  was  owing  entirely  to  the  regard  He  had  for  His  own  gracious 
purposes  which  they  had  been  raised  up  and  qualified  to  subserve.  What  else  could 
account  for  His  forbearance  and  long-suflfering,  patient  striving  with  them?  "I 
said,  I  would  scatter  them  afar,  I  would  make  the  remembrance  of  them  to  cease 
from  among  men  ;  were  it  not  that  I  feared  the  provocation  of  the  enemy  "  (that 
is,  anticipated  the  bad  results  of  their  sarcasms  and  reproaches) :  lest  their  adver- 
saries should  mistakenly  explain  the  terrible  dispersion,  and  allege  it  was  all  owing  to 
their  own  prowess,  and  there  was  no  Divine  meaning  or  judgment  in  it  at  all.  He 
was  resolved  so  to  manage  the  final  catastrophe  of  Israel,  that  the  world  at  large 
would  be  constrained  to  say,  ' '  The  finger  of  God  is  there  ;  the  whole  matter  is  a 
just  retribution,  bearing  the  seal  and  stamp  of  a  Divine  ordering.  '  For  they  are 
a  nation  void  of  counsel,  and  there  is  no  understanding  in  them.'"  The  lesson 
■would  therefore  be  forced  on  them  from  without ;  and  so  they  would  at  last 
acquiesce  in  what  the  whole  world  would  be  found  saying  about  them.  For  by 
terrible  things  in  righteousness  would  this  experience  be  conveyed.  {A.  E. 
Drysdale,  M.A.) 

Ver.  29.  That  they  wonld  consider  their  latter  end. — Religious  thoughifulTiess : — 
I.  A  SUI3JECT  OF  supreme  IMPORTANCE.  The  power  of  thought  distinguishes  man 
from  the  brute,  and  it  is  that  faculty  by  which  he  either  makes  or  ruins  himself. 
According  to  the  subjects  and  modes  of  his  thought,  his  character  is  formed.  If  ha 
wishes  to  become  a  true  man  he  must  think  on  religious  subjects,  he  must  meditate 
on  God,  man,  duty,  destiny.  1.  In  order  to  realise  these  subjects.  While  we  muse 
the  fire  burns.  2.  In  order  to  appropriate  these  subjects.  "As  I  thought  of  my 
ways,  I  turned  my  steps  to  Thy  statutes."  II.  A  subject  lamentably  neglected. 
1.  Men's  minds  are  preoccupied  with  other  subjects.     2.  Men  have  an  inner  dread 


540  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxxu. 

of  these  solemn  things.     {Homilist.)        Considering  the  latter  end : — I.  An  implied 

LAMENTATION.      II.  A  DESCRIPTION  OF  TRUE  FOLLY.      III.  An  ALL-IMPORTANT  DUTY. 

Considering  our  latter  end — 1.  Reminds  us  of  its  certainty.  2.  Urges  preparation. 
3.  Will  prevent  us  from  being  taken  by  surprise.  {Ibid.)  On  the  rememhranct  of 
death: — I.  In  the  first  place,  death,  were  it  seriously  attended  to,  would  direct 

OUR  JUDGMENT  AND  CORRECT  THOSE  FALSE  THINGS  WHICH  ARE  THE  GREAT  SOURCES  OF 

ALL  OUR  MISTAKES  IN  LIFE.  Would  it  not  lower  our  opinion  of  temporal  enjoyments 
if  this  sentiment  were  familiar  to  our  minds  that  we  must  shortly  be  torn  from 
them  ?  How  Avould  it  raise  our  esteem  of  Christian  dispositions  !  In  what  lively 
colours  would  we  see  the  evil  of  sin,  and  the  danger  of  practising  it,  did  we  live 
in  the  remembrance  of  that  awful  event  which  will  fix  our  eternal  condition ! 
Would  we  not  see  the  great  importance  of  time,  and  the  absolute  necessity  of  im- 
proving it,  if  we  thought  that  it  is  short  and  uncertain,  and  that  eternity  depends 
upon  it  ?  II.  The  serious  contemplation  of  death,  besides  correcting  our  mistaken 
notions,  would  help  to  moderate  our  unruly  passions,  which  are  so  difficult 
TO  BE  RESTRAINED.  At  the  lively  idea  of  death  all  the  passions  subside  and  leave 
the  soul  in  a  state  of  serious  tranquillity.  Pride  falls  ;  vanity  is  extinguished  ;  envy 
dies ;  resentment  cools  ;  and  the  fond  admiration  of  worldly  things  decays  ana 
vanishes.  III.  An  habitual  attention  to  our  latter  end,  as  it  would  wean  our  affec- 
tions from  the  things  of  time  and  sense,  would  fix  them  upon  objects  of  a 
SPIRITUAL  AND  ETERNAL  NATURE.  The  great  virtucs  of  the  Christian  life,  such  as 
love  to  God  and  love  to  man,  are  not,  like  worldly  possessions,  of  a  perishing  kind. 
They  continue  after  this  life ;  they  are  the  qualifications  for  admission  into  the 
kingdom  of  glory  ;  nay,  they  constitute  the  very  temper  of  heaven  itself,  and  are 
the  essential  ingredients  of  future  and  eternal  happiness.  Death  guides  the  imagina- 
tion forward  into  futurity ;  it  gives  the  rewards  and  punishments  of  the  world  to 
come  their  full  weight  and  impression  upon  us.  Thus,  by  suggesting  the  most  power- 
ful motives  to  a  godly  life,  it  will  naturally  deter  men  from  sin  and  enforce  the 
practice  of  holiness  and  virtue.  It  will  engage  them  to  avoid  that  course  of  life 
which  would  expose  them  to  the  future  punishment.  And  it  will  excite  them,  by 
a  patient  continuance  in  well  doing,  to  seek  for  glory,  honour,  and  immortality  in 
the  kingdom  of  heaven.  As  death,  from  the  consideration  of  its  awful  conse- 
quences, enforces  a  holy  life  ;  so  by  representing  the  shortness  and  uncertainty  of 
time,  it  would  lead  us  instantly  to  set  about  the  great  business  of  human  life,  and 
to  pursue  it  with  unremitting  attention.  Why  do  men  allow  themselves  the  con- 
tinued practice  of  vice  ?  It  is  because  they  flatter  themselves  with  the  hopes  of 
living  still  longer,  and  with  designs  of  futui'e  repentance  :  and  thus  the  great  busi- 
ness of  eternity  is  frequently  put  off,  from  day  to  day,  till  sickness  or  death  over- 
takes them.  Now  there  is  not  a  surer,  there  is  not  a  more  effectual,  way  of  avoiding 
this  fatal  mistake,  than  by  remembering  our  latter  end.     IV.  It  would  cause  us 

TO  TAKE  heed  LEST  AT  ANY  TIME  WE  SHOULD  BE  OVERCHARGED  WITH  SURFEITING 
AND  DRUNKENNESS  AND  CARES  OF  THIS  WORLD,  AND  THUS  THE  DART  OF  DEATH  COME 

UPON  US  UNAWARES.  It  is  onc  of  the  great  advantages  of  considering  death  that  it 
would  help  to  keep  our  temper  even  and  composed  in  every  condition  of  life.  As  in 
prosperity,  it  would  preserve  us  from  insolence,  so  under  adversity,  from  dejection  of 
mind.     V.  In  the  last  place,  by  frequently  meditating  on  our  latter  end,  we  might 

MAKE  THE  IDEA  OF  DEATH  FAMILIAR  TO  OUR  MINDS,  AND   OVERCOME   THE   FEAR   OP 

IT.  The  awe  which  it  naturally  strikes  upon  the  mind  wears  off  in  proportion  aa 
we  increase  our  acquaintance  with  it.  But  instead  of  cultivating  this  acquaintance, 
we  industriously  avoid  it ;  and  the  surprise  must  add  to  the  horror  of  its  appear- 
ance whenever  it  constrains,  as  sometimes  it  will  constrain,  our  attention.  There 
are  certain  occasions  on  which  it  is  impossible  for  us  to  shun  the  remembrance  of 
death.  {Andrew  Donnan.)  The  consideration  of  death: — I.  What  it  is  for  a 
MAN  TO  consider  HIS  LATTER  END.  By  the  latter  end  of  a  particular  person  I 
imderstand  the  same  that  Balaam  does  in  his  wish  (Numb,  xxiii.  10),  where 
it  is  plain  by  his  last  end  he  means  the  time  of  his  death,  which  Solomon,  in 
Eccles.  vii.  2,  calls  **the  end  of  all  men."  And  so  indeed  it  is,  as  to  all  the 
concerns  of  this  life  and  opportimiLies  of  providing  for  another.  It  puts  an 
end  to  all  the  projects,  the  labours,  the  cares  of  the  men  of  this  world  for 
the  obtaining  of  the  good  things  of  it,  and  to  the  satisfaction  they  take  in  the 
enjoying  those  they  have  gotten.  It  puts  an  end  to  the  work  of  good  men,  to 
all  the  hardships  and  their  conflicts  with  their  spiritual  enemies.  Finally,  it 
puts  an  end  to  all  that  good  or  bad  can  do  or  suffer,  which  shall  come  into  their 
future  account.     But  though  a  man's  latter  end  be  the  dissolution  of  the  present 


CHAP.  XXXII.]  DEUTERONOMY.  541 

union  of  soul  and  body,  and  puts  a  final  period  to  all  the  actions  of  this  life,  yet  is 
it  the  opening  of  a  new  scene,  the  entrance  upon  another  state.  Before  I  proceed 
to  show  what  is  implied  in  the  word  "consider,"  it  may  not  be  amiss  to  form  some 
propositions  of  our  "latter  end,"  which  may  be  the  objects  of  your  consideration. 
As — 1.  That  it  is  very  certain  that  such  a  time  as  this  will  once  happen  to  every  one 
of  us.  2.  That,  though  it  be  certain  that  such  a  time  will  once  come,  it  is  not 
certain  when  it  will  come.  3.  That  as  it  is  certain  that  such  a  time  will  once 
happen  to  every  one  of  us,  but  uncertain  when,  so  it  is  sure  that  it  cannot  be  long 
first ;  for  what  is  our  life — the  longest  life  that  any  one  arrives  to  ?  This  is  to  be 
the  object  of  our  consideration,  which  implies  three  things.  (1)  An  undoubting 
assent  to  the  truth  of  it,  for  propositions,  however  true  in  themselves,  if  they  are 
not  so  to  me,  can  make  no  great  impression  upon  me.  (2)  A  frequent  reflecting 
upon  and  revolving  in  my  mind  ;  for  propositions  which  I  have  assented  to,  if  I 
think  not  of  them,  are  not  like  to  have  much  more  influence  upon  me  than  those 
which  I  deny  or  question.  (3)  And  chiefly,  a  diligent  application  of  it  to  the  govern- 
ment of  my  life,  and  the  conducting  it  by  such  measures  as  that  belief  will  suggest ; 
for  only  such  a  practical  consideration  of  this  latter  end  will  make  a  man  wise. 

II.  How  WISE  IT  WILL  MAKE  HIM  ;    WHAT  WISE   PRACTICES   WILL   BE  THE  EFFECTS 

OF  SUCH  CONSIDERATION.     And  surcly  it  will  be  allowed  that  it  wiU  make  him  very 
wise  if  it  makes  him  wise  for  this  world  and  the  next  too.     1.  As  to  this  world, 
that  is  certainly  true  wisdom  which  will  carry  a  man  most  quietly  through  it  with  the 
least  vexation.     Now,  most  of  the  disturbances  and  uneasiness  we  meet  with  here 
arise  either  from  our  own  false  notions  and  imprudent  pursuit  of  the  good  things  of 
this  world,  or  from  those  evils  which  befall  us  by  the  permission  of  providence  ;  and 
the  consideration  of  our  latter  end  will  go  a  great  way  towards  the  preventing  or 
removing  the  former,  and  the  alleviating  and  supporting  us  under  the  latter.     2.  But 
the  greatest  advantage  of  the  consideration  of  our  latter  end  is  that  it  makes  us 
wise  for  the  other  world.     (1)  To  be  frugal  of  our  time,  and  husband  it  to  the  best 
advantage.     This  short  day  is  all  the  season  of  working  ;  when  the  night  comes  no 
one  can  work.     Have  I  a  great  work  to  do  in  that  short  time  ?     Does  my  eternal 
bliss  or  woe  depend  upon  my  finishing  that  work  ?    And  can  I  be  so  foolish  as 
to  squander  away  this  time  in  idleness  or  riot,  in  vain  recreations  and  loose  conver- 
sation ?     Shall  I  suffer  sleep  and  pleasure  and  sin  to  share  it  among  them  ?     (2)  Not 
to  defer  our  repentance.      (3)  To  make  use  of  all  the  means  of  grace  that  are 
off"ered  us,  and  not  neglect  one  opportunity  that  is  put  into  our  hands  of  waiting 
upon  God  in  His  holy  ordinances,  or  of  doing  good  to  our  neighbour  according  to 
our  power.     (4)  To  go  on  with  the  work  and  service  of  God,  and  persevere  to  the 
end  with  alacrity  ;  for  it  shows  me  these  two  things— (a)  That  my  service  can  be 
but  short.     And— (6)  That  I  shall  quickly  receive  my  wages.     {Bp.  Wm.   Talbot.) 
Memento  mori : — Some  years  ago  a  celebrated  author — Drelincourt — wrote  a  work 
on  Death,  a  valuable  work  in  itself,  but  it  commanded  no  sale  whatever.     Anything 
men  will  think  of  rather  than  death— any  fiction,  any  lie.     But  this  stern  reality, 
this  master  truth,  he  puts  away,  and  will  not  sufi'er  it  to  enter  his  thoughts.     The 
older  Egyptians  were  wiser  than  we  are.     We  are  told  that  at  every  feast  there  was 
always  one  extraordinary  guest  that  sac  at  the  head  of  the  table.     He  ate  not,  he 
drank  not,  he  spake  not,  he  was  closely  veiled.     It  was  a  skeleton  which  they  had 
placed  there  to  warn  them  that  even  in  their  feastings  they  should  remember  there 
would  be  an  end  of  life.     Yet  our  text  tells  us  that  we  should  be  wise  if  we  would 
consider  our  latter  end.     And  certainly  we  should  be,  for  the  practical  effect  of  a 
true  meditation  of  death  would  be  exceedingly  healthful  to  our  spirits.     It  would 
cool  that  ardour  of  covetousness,  that  fever  of  avarice,  if  we  did  but  remember  that 
we  should  have  to  leave  our  stores.      It  would  certainly  help  us  to  sit  loose  by  the 
things  which  we  here  possess.     Perhaps  it  might  lead  us  to  set  our  aff'ections  upon 
things  above,  and  not  upon  the  mouldering  things  below.     At  any  rate,  thoughts 
of  death  might  often  cheek  us  when  we  are  about  to  sin.     I.  Consider  death. 
1.  Its  origin.     Man  is  a  suicide.     Our  sin,  the  sin  of  the  human  race,  slays  the  race. 
We  die  because  we  have   sinned.     How  this  should  make  us  hate  sin !     2.    Its 
certainty.     Die  I  must.     There  is  a  black  camel  upon  which  Death  rides,  say  the 
Arabs,  and  that  must  kneel  at  every  man's  door.     I  must  cross  that  river  Jordan. 
I  may  use  a  thousand  stratagems,  but  I  cannot  escape.     Even  now  I  am  to-day  like 
the  deer  surrounded  by  the  hunters  in  a  circle,  a  circle  which  is  narrowing  every 
day  ;  and  soon  must  I  fall  and  pour  out  my  life  upon  the  ground.     Let  me  never 
forget,  then,  that  while  other  things  are  uncertain,  death  is  sure.     3.  Then,  looking 
a  little  further  into  this  shade,  let  me  remember  the  time  of  my  death.     To  God  it 


B42  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxxii. 

is  fixed  and  certain.  He  has  ordained  tlie  hour  in  which  I  must  expire.  But  to 
me  it  is  quite  uncertain.  I  know  not  when,  nor  where,  nor  how  I  shall  breathe  out 
jny  life.  Oh,  let  us  bethink,  then,  how  uncertain  life  is.  Talk  we  of  a  hair  ;  it  is 
something  massive  when  compared  with  the  thread  of  life.  Speak  we  of  a  spider's 
■web  ;  it  is  ponderous  compared  with  the  web  of  life.  "We  are  but  as  a  bubble  ;  nay, 
less  substantial.  As  a  moment's  foam  upon  the  breaker,  such  are  we.  Oh,  let  us, 
then,  prepare  to  meet  our  God,  because  when  and  how  we  shall  appear  before  Him 
is  quite  unknown  to  us.  4.  The  terrors  which  surround  death.  To  the  best  men  in 
the  world,  dying  is  a  solemn  thing — a  launching  on  an  unknown  sea.  Farewell !  to 
that  house  which  I  have  so  fondly  called  my  home.  Farewell !  to  her  who  has 
shared  my  life  and  been  the  beloved  one  of  my  bosom.  Farewell  all  things— the 
estate,  the  gold,  the  silver.  Farewell. !  earth.  The  fairest  beauties  melt  away,  thy 
most  melodious  strains  die  in  the  dim  distance.  I  hear  no  more  and  see  no  more. 
No  church  bell  now  shall  summon  me  to  the  house  of  God.  If  I  have  neglected 
Christ  I  shall  hear  of  Christ  no  more.  No  grace  presented  now  ;  no  strivings  of  the 
Spirit.  5.  The  results  of  death.  For,  verily,  its  results  and  terrors  to  the  wicked 
are  the  same.  Oh,  that  ye  were  wise  to  consider  them  !  Let  me,  however,  remind 
the  Christian  that  death  to  him  should  never  be  a  subject  upon  which  he  should 
be  loath  to  meditate.  To  die ! — to  shake  off  my  weakness  and  to  be  girded  with 
omnipotence.  Say  unto  them  your  warfare  is  accomplished,  your  sin  is  pardoned, 
and  you  shall  see  your  Lord's  face  without  a  veil  between.     II.  I  desire  you  now 

to  CONSIDER  THE  WARNING  WHICH   DEATH  HATH  ALREADY   GIVEN  TO   EACH   ONE   OF 

ITS.  Death  hath  been  very  near  to  many  of  us  ;  he  has  crossed  the  ecliptic  of  our 
life  many  and  many  a  time.  That  baleful  planet  has  often  been  in  close  conjunction 
with  us.  Let  us  just  observe  how  frequently  he  has  been  in  our  house.  Think, 
again,  what  solemn  and  repeated  warnings  we  have  had  of  late,  not  in  our  families, 
but  in  the  wide,  wide  world.  Here,  there,  everywhere,  0  Death  !  I  see  thy  doings. 
At  home,  abroad,  on  the  sea,  and  across  the  sea,  thou  art  doing  marvels.  Death 
has  given  home-strokes  to  all  of  us.  Put  thy  finger  in  thy  own  mouth,  for  thou 
hast  Death's  mark  there.  What  mean  those  decaying  teeth,  those  twitching  pains 
in  the  gums  ? — an  agony  despised  by  those  alone  who  feel  it  not.  "Why  do  some 
parts  of  the  house  tremble  and  huiTy  to  decay  ?  Because  the  rottenness  that  is  in 
the  teeth  is  in  the  whole  body.  You  talk  of  a  decayed  tooth  :  remember  it  is  but 
part  of  a  decayed  man.  What  mean  those  lungs  that  are  so  soon  exhausted  of  their 
breathing  if  you  travel  up  a  flight  of  stairs  to  your  bed  ?  Why  is  it  you  need  your 
optic  glasses  to  your  eyes,  but  that  they  that  look  out  of  the  windows  are  darkened  ? 
Why  that  affected  hearing  ?  III.  And  now  will  you,  in  the  last  place,  picture 
YOURSELF   AS   DYING   NOW.      (C.    H.    Spurgeou.)  True   wisdom  desirable: — 

I.  Lack  of  wisdom.  "  Wisdom  "  is  sometimes  used  for  religion,  and  the  connection 
between  them  is  very  close.  Sin  is— (1)  Ignorance  of  self.  (2)  Ignorance  of  God. 
(3)  Ignorance  of  future  consequences.  And  ignorance  is  folly — inasmuch  as  it  is 
the  cause  of  folly,  the  spirit  of  folly,  and  the  seed  of  folly.  II.  A  neglected 
DUTY.  The  "  latter  end  "  is  the  great  crisis  of  existence.  Why  do  men  neglect  its 
consideration  ?  (1)  Because  the  prospect  is  not  pleasant.  (2)  Because  of  the 
natural  buoyancy  of  human  life.  (3)  To  look  at  our  latter  end  will  give  us  a  true 
estimate  of  our  own  worth.  (4)  To  look  at  our  latter  end  will  cause  us  to  use  the 
time  that  remains  for  the  highest  ends.  {Homilist. )  The  habitual  consideration 
of  death  : — I.  The  event  that  is  to  be  contemplated.  This  is  his  last  end  :  no 
other  changes  shall  happen  to  him  on  earth  ;  no  more  shall  he  be  visible  among  the 
children  of  men  ;  no  more  shall  he  be  occupied  in  its  business,  encumbered  by  its 
cares,  entangled  by  its  temptations,  and  fettered  by  its  engagements.  It  is  all 
gone  and  past.  II.  The  consideration  which  it  demands.  1.  We  are  to 
consider  that  this  change  must  happen  to  us  all.  2.  We  are  to  consider  that  this  may 
happen  at  any  time.  It  may  happen  to  you  in  manhood,  amidst  all  the  cares  and 
duties  of  life.  It  may  happen  to  you  in  youth.  It  may  appear  to  you  in  childhood. 
Death  waits  not  for  confirmed  age  and  trembling  years  to  realise  his  triumphs,  but 
smites  when  and  where  he  will.  3.  We  are  to  consider  our  latter  end  so  as  to 
ascertain  whether  we  are  prepared  to  meet  it.  Are  you  ready  to  renounce  the 
things  of  the  present  life  ?  4.  Then  consider  not  only  whether  you  are  prepared 
to  renounce  the  things  of  this  life,  but  whether  you  are  prepared  for  the  events 
which  will  immediately  follow.  Scripture  teaches  us  that  two  great  events  will 
follow  immediately  upon  this  latter  end  of  our  life  ;  we  must  meet  God,  and  we 
must  stand  in  judgment.  5.  We  are  not  only  to  consider  whether  we  are  prepared 
for  the  great  change,   but  we  are  deeply  to  ponder  the  consequences  of  being 


CHAP.  XXXII.]  DEUTERONOMY.  543 

unprepared  to  meet  it.  6.  Then  consider  the  method  by  which  alone  we  can  be 
prepared  to  meet  this  last  end.  Happily  we  are  blessed  with  a  revelation  from 
God  ;  happily  that  revelation  contains  within  itself  the  grand  preparation  of 
redeeming  and  recovering  mercy  ;  and  happily  this  is  the  only  sovereign  remedy, 
whilst  all  others  are  excluded  from  our  confidence  and  our  hope.  The  method, 
therefore,  by  which  we  can  expect  to  meet  God  in  peace  is  the  method  of  His  own 
device  ;  devised  by  His  infinite  wisdom,  and  accomplished  by  a  power  also  infinite, 
becoming  the  proof  of  a  love  also  infinite.  Consider  that  your  hope  and  security 
lie  in  not  devising  your  own  method  of  happiness,  but  in  accepting  God's  method 
of  happiness,  in  bowing  to  God's  proposition,  and  believing  in  God's  dear  Son. 
{A.  Reed.)  On  death  : — I.  In  what  manner  should  vv^e  consider  our  latter 
END !  1.  Thoroughly  ;  I  mean  with  judgment  and  understanding,  so  as  to  form 
just  and  regular  apprehensions  concerning  its  causes  and  consequences.  2.  Season- 
ably. It  must  be  thought  of  and  provided  for  beforehand.  II.  The  wisdom  and 
advantage  of  considering  our  latter  end.  1.  It  would  help  us  to  form  a 
truer  estimate  of  life.  2.  It  would  dispose  us  to  reason  and  to  act.  {S.  Lavington.) 
The  latter  end : — I.  Reflect  upon  this  consideration  as  a  course  of  wisdom.  Man's 
comparative  wisdom  in  the  affairs  of  this  life  is  wholly  estimated  by  his  disposition 
to  anticipate  the  results  of  his  own  actions,  and  his  ability  to  calculate  upon  those 
results  with  success.  II.  Reflect  upon  the  circumstances  connected  with  this 
lATTER  END,  WHICH  ARE  ESPECIALLY  TO  BE  CONSIDERED.  Consider  the  trials 
which  will  be  involved  in  it,  the  peculiar  wants  which  it  will  manifest,  the  results 
which  must  flow  from  it,  the  provisions  which  it  will  require.  III.  Upon  the 
authority  of  the  truths  which  have  been  thus  presented  to  you,  I  trust  I  may  now 
URGE  you  to  a  PRACTICAL  FULFILMENT  OF  THIS  DUTY.  When  you  considcr  the 
latter  end  of  others,  and  contrast  together  the  various  issues  of  their  lives  ;  when 
you  behold  the  piety  of  youth  and  active  life  rising  into  the  joy  and  peace  of  a 
Christian's  departure,  and  mark  the  final  triumph  of  a  soul  which  has  wisely 
considered  and  provided  for  its  whole  responsibility,  you  cannot  fail  to  see  how 
much  has  been  gained  by  adopting  the  Gospel  as  the  powerful  and  practical 
principle  of  conduct  in  the  morning  of  man's  day  of  grace.  {S.  H.  Tyng,  D.D.) 
The  consideration  of  death  : — That  there  is  very  generally  a  strange  want  of  reflec- 
tion and  concern  respecting  our  condition  as  mortal  is  most  apparent  in  many  plain 
familiar  truths.  Perhaps  nothing  in  the  world  that  appears  so  out  of  consistency 
is  so  obvious.  The  fact  of  a  whole  race  dead,  from  the  beginning  of  time  to  the 
present  generation,  comes  with  but  little  impression  on  us,  except  at  occasional 
moments.  In  surveying  history  it  is  with  the  men  of  past  ages  as  living  that  our 
thoughts  are  busy.  But  there  is  no  need  of  illustrations  of  such  wide  reference. 
The  insensibility  may  be  shown  in  more  familiar  exemplifications.  Persons 
inhabiting  a  house  of  considerable  age — how  often  are  they  reminded  tbat  persons 
formerly  occupying  its  apartments,  treading  its  avenues,  are  dead,  with  a  pointed 
application  of  this  thought  to  themselves  ?  And  so  of  places  of  worship,  and  of 
other  resort.  But  there  is  still  more  immediate  evidence.  How  little  efl'ect,  in  the 
way  of  reflection  on  ourselves,  appears  to  be  produced  by  the  instances  and 
spectacles  of  actual  mortality  ;  the  termination  of  a  life  in  our  near  neighbourhood, 
or  among  those  whom  we  well  knew  !  Persons  frequently  and  officially  conversant 
with  circumstances  of  death  are  often  very  remarkably  estranged  from  reflection 
upon  it,  as  applied  to  themselves.  Consider,  again,  how  little  and  seldom  we  are 
struck  with  the  reflection,  how  many  things  we  are  exposed  to  that  might  cause 
death  !  what  little  things  might  be  fatal !  But  we  go  forward  just  as  if  none  of 
these  smaller  poisoned  arrows  of  death  were  flying,  or  of  the  greater  darts  either. 
Observe,  too,  how  soon  a  recovery  from  danger  sets  aside  the  serious  thought  of 
death.  Observe,  again,  how  schemes  are  formed  for  a  long  future  time,  with  as 
much  interest  and  as  much  anticipating  confidence  as  if  there  were  no  such  thing 
in  the  world  as  death.  And  when  it  is  asked,  "  And  how  comes  this  to  be  ? "  the 
general  explanation  is  that  Avhich  accounts  for  everything  that  is  wrong — namely, 
the  fearful  radical  depravity  of  our  nature.  But  to  assign  this  general  cause  does 
not  suffice  to  the  inquiry.  There  doubtless  are  special  causes,  through  which  that 
great  general  one  operates,  availing  itself  of  them.  1.  One  of  these  may  be  the 
perfect  distinctness  of  life  and  death.  They  do  not  partially  co-exist  in  the 
individual  like  imperfect  health  with  a  degree  of  illness.  We  have  life  absolutely, 
and  death  not  at  all ;  so  that  we  can  make  no  experimental  comparison  between 
them  ;  we  cannot  know  by  means  of  the  one  what  the  other  is.  2.  Again,  we  think 
that  even  the  certainty  and  the  universality  of  death  may  be  numbered  among  th© 


544  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxxir. 

causes  tending  to  withdraw  men's  thoughts  from  it.  3.  "We  might  specify  another 
thing  as  one  of  the  causes  sought  for  ;  that  is,  the  utter  inability  to  form  any 
defined  idea  of  the  manner  of  existence  after  death.  The  thoughts  sent  onward  to 
that  boundary  of  life  cannot  stop  there  ;  the  mere  termination  itself  is  nothing  ; 
they  look  beyond  ;  but  beyond  is  thickest  darkness,  as  often  as  they  go  there  ;  so 
that  there  is,  as  it  were,  nothing  shown  to  draw  the  mind  thither  to  look  over  the 
limit.  But,  after  all,  the  chief  causes  that  there  is  so  little  thought  and  concern  on 
this  great  subject  are  of  a  much  more  obvious  kind,  and  involving  guilt.  4.  One 
is  a  general  presumption  of  having  long  to  live.  In  each  stage  of  life  still  this 
beguiled  confidence  is  indulged.  5.  Another  great  cause  of  the  thoughtlessness  and 
insensibility  (indeed,  it  is  both  cause  and  effect)  is  that  men  occupy  their  whole  soul 
and  life  with  things  to  preclude  the  thought  of  its  end.  6.  We  may  add  to  these 
causes  an  inadequate,  contracted  notion  of  what  is  necessary  as  a  preparation  for  the 
event.  7.  And  to  give  full  force  to  all  these  causes,  there  is,  in  a  large  proportion 
of  men,  a  formal,  systematic  endeavour  to  keep  off  the  thought  of  death.  A  strong 
action  to  turn  the  thoughts  in  another  direction — an  amusing  book  seized,  or  a 
hasty  recourse  to  occupation,  or  an  excursion,  or  a  going  into  a  gay  circle,  possibly 
a  plunge  into  intemperance.  And  all  the  unfortunate  things  that  may  have 
befallen  have  not  been  a  measure  of  calamity  equal  to  that  involved  in  the 
success  of  this  endeavour  !  We  have  hardly  a  moment  left  for  the  topics  of 
admonition  and  remonstrance  against  indulging  such  a  habit  of  the  soul.  But  let 
it  be  impressed  upon  us  that  to  end  our  life  is  the  mightiest  event  that  awaits  us  in 
this  world.  And  it  is  that  which  we  are  living  but  to  come  to.  It  holds  out  a 
grand  protest  against  being  absorbed  and  lost  in  this  world.  It  is  the  termination 
of  a  period  confessedly  introductory  and  probationary.  Without  thinking  of  it, 
often  and  with  deep  interest,  there  is  no  possibility  that  our  scheme  and  course  of 
life  should  be  directed  to  the  supreme  purpose  of  life.  To  have  been  thoughtless 
of  it,  then,  will  ultimately  be  an  immense  calamity  ;  it  will  be  to  be  in  a  state 
unprepared  for  it.  {J.  Foster.)  Of  the  consideration  of  our  latter  end,  and  the 
henefits  of  it : — 1.  Men  are  not  willing  to  entertain  this  unwelcome  thought  of  their 
own  latter  end  ;  the  thought  whereof  is  so  troublesome  a  guest,  that  it  seems  to  dis- 
parage all  those  present  enjoyments  of  sense  that  this  life  affords.  2.  A  vain  foolish 
conceit  that  the  consideration  of  our  latter  end  is  a  kind  of  presage  and  invitation 
of  it.  3.  A  great  difficulty  that  ordinarily  attends  oiu-  human  condition,  to  think 
other\\'ise  concerning  our  condition  than  what  at  present  we  feel  and  find.  4.  It  is 
true,  this  is  the  way  of  mankind  to  put  from  us  the  evil  day,  and  the  thoughts  of  it ; 
but  this  oui-  way  is  our  folly,  and  one  of  the  greatest  occasions  of  those  other  follies 
that  commonly  attend  our  lives  ;  and  therefore  the  great  means  to  cure  this  folly, 
and  to  make  us  wise,  is  wisely  to  consider  our  latter  end.     I.  The  consideration 

OF  OUR  LATTER  END  DOTH  IN  NO   SORT  MAKE  OUR  LIVES   THE  SHORTER,  BUT   IT  IS  A 

GREAT  MEANS  TO  MAKE  OUR  LIVES  THE  BETTER.  1.  It  is  a  great  monitiou  and 
warning  of  us  to  avoid  sin,  and  a  great  means  to  prevent  it.  When  I  shall  consider 
that  certainly  I  must  die,  and  I  know  not  how  soon,  why  should  I  commit  those 
things,  that  if  they  hasten  not  my  latter  end,  yet  they  ^vill  make  it  more  uneasy  and 
troublesome  by  the  reflection  upon  what  I  have  done  amiss  ?  I  may  die  to-morrow  ; 
why  should  I  then  commit  that  evil  that  will  then  be  gall  and  bitterness  unto  me  ? 
Would  I  do  it  if  I  were  to  die  to-morrow  ?  why  should  I  then  do  it  to-day  ? 
Perchance  it  may  be  the  last  act  of  my  life,  and  however  let  me  not  conclude  so  ill ; 
for,  for  aught  I  know,  it  may  be  my  concluding  act  in  this  scene  of  my  life.  2.  It 
is  a  great  motive  and  means  to  put  us  upon  the  best  and  most  profitable  improve- 
ment of  our  time.  3.  Most  certainly  the  wise  consideration  of  our  latter  end,  and 
the  employing  of  ourselves,  upon  that  account,  upon  that  one  thing  necessary, 
renders  the  life  the  most  contenting  and  comfortable  life  in  the  world  :  for  as  a  man, 
that  is  aforehand  in  the  world,  hath  a  much  more  quiet  life  in  order  to  externals, 
than  he  that  is  behindhand  ;  so  such  a  man  that  takes  his  opportunity  to  gain  a 
stock  of  j^race  and  favour  \\dth  God,  that  hath  made  his  peace  with  his  Maker 
through  Christ  Jesus,  hath  done  a  great  part  of  the  chief  business  of  his  life,  and  is 
ready  upon  all  occasions,  for  all  conditions,  whereunto  the  Divine  Providence  shall 
assign  him,  whether  of  life  or  death,  or  health  or  sickness,  or  poverty  or  riches ; 
he  is,  as  it  were,  aforehand  in  the  business  and  concern  of  his  everlasting,  and  of  his 
present  state  also.  II.  As  thus  this  consideration  makes  life  better,  so  it 
MAKES  death  EASY.  1.  By  frequent  consideration  of  death  and  dissolution,  he  is 
taught  not  to  fear  it ;  he  is,  as  it  were,  acquainted  with  it  aforehand,  by  often 
preparation  for  it.     2.  By  frequent  consideration  of  our  latter  end,  death  coiaes  to 


CHAP.  XXXII.]  DEUTERONOMY, W5 

be  no  surprise  unto  us.     3.  The  greatest  sting  and  terror  of  death  are  the  un- 
repented  sins  of  the  past  Hfe;  the  reflection  upon  these  is  that  which  is  the  strength, 
thVvenom  of  death  itself.     He,  therefore,  that  wisely  considers  his  latter  end,  takes 
care  to  make  his  peace  with  God  in  his  lifetime  ;  and  by  true  faith  and  repentance 
to  get  his  pardon  sealed  ;  to  husband  his  time  in  the  fear  of  God  ;  to  observe  His 
will  and  keep  His  laws ;  to  have  his  conscience  clean  and  clear.     And  being  thus 
prepared,  the  malignity  of  death  is  cured,  and  the  bitterness  of  it  healed,  and  the 
fear  of  it  removed.     4.  But  that  which,  above  all,  makes  death  easy  to  such  a  con- 
siderin^  man  is  this  :  that  by  the  help  of  this  consideration,  and  the  due  improve- 
ment of  it,  as  is  before  shown,  death  to  such  a  man  becomes  no thmg  else  but  a  gate 
unto  a  better  Ufe.   Not  so  much  a  dissolution  of  his  present  life  as  a  change  of  it  for 
a  far  more  glorious,  happy,  and  immortal  life     So  that  though  the  body  dies  the 
man  dies  not ;  for  the  soul,  which  is  indeed  the  man,  makes  but  a  transition  from 
her  life  in  the  body  to  a  life  in  heaven.     I  shall  now  add  some  cautions  that  are 
necessary  to  be  annexed  to  this  consideration.     We  are  to  know,  that  although  death 
be  thus  subdued,  and  rendered  rather  a  benefit  than  a  terror  to  good  men  ;  yet- 
1   Death  is  not  to  be  wished  or  desired,  though  it  be  not  an  object  to  be  feared,  it  is 
a  thing  not  to  be  coveted  ;  for  certainly  life  is  the  greatest  temporal  blessing  in  this 
world.      2.  As  the  business  and  employments  of  our  life  must  not  estrange  us 
from  the  thought  of  death,  so  again  we  must  be  careful  that  the  overmuch  thought 
of  death  do  not  so  possess  oui-  minds  as  to  make  us  forget  the  concerns  of  our  life, 
nor  neglect  the  business  which  that  portion  of  time  is  allowed  us  for.     As  the  business 
of  fitting  our  souls  for  heaven  ;  the  sober  businesses  of  our  callings  relations  places 
stations  ?    Nay,  the  comfortable,  thankful,  sober  enjoyments  of  those  honest  lawful 
comforts'  of  our  life  that  God  lends  us ;  so  as  it  be  done  with  great  sobriety  and  modera- 
tion  as  in  the  presence  of  God,  and  with  much  thankfulness  to  Him  ;  for  this  is  part  of 
that  very  duty  we  owe  to  God  for  those  very  external  comforts  and  blessings  we  enjoy. 
(Sir  M  Hale.)        The  wisdom  of  considering  our  latter  end  ;-I.  The  duty  here 
MENTIONED.      To  Consider  our  latter  end  is-1.  To  familiarise  our  miuds  to  the 
thought  of  death,  and  of  that  eternal  state  on  which  death  is  the  entrance.     2.  To 
consider  how  we  may  provide  for  our  welfare  m  our  latter  end.      3.  To  devote 
ourselves  mainly  to  the  great  work  of  providing  for  our  welfare  m  our  latter  end. 
II   The  wisdom  of  attending  to  it.     1.  Because  such  attention  is  pleasing  to  the 
Most  High.     2.  Because  the  neglect  of  it  will  infallibly  expose  us  to  the  tremendous 
eflFects  of  God's  righteous  indignation.     3.  Because  it  serves  to  facilitate  our  victory 
over  the  delusions  of  the  world.     4.  Because  it  tends  to  administer  support  under 
every  affliction  which  assaHs  us.     5.  Because  it  will  be  the  means  of  givmg  us  a  good 
hope  in  death.     {J.  Katt,  B.D.)        The  close  of  the  year  .—The  wish  which  Moses 
here  utters  for  the  congregation  of  Israel  is  a  wish  to  which  a  mmister  of  the 
Gospel  may  also  give  utterance  in  behalf  of  his  congregation    more  especially  at 
the  present  season      For  surely  it  behoves  us  also-who  have  been  brought  to  the 
knowledge  of  Christ,  and  of  the  power  of  His  resuirection-to  consider  our  latter 
end  :  and  so  much  the  more  as  we  have  received  a  fuller  and  clearer  assurance  of 
what  that  end  is  to  be,  both  of  the  glory  to  which  we  are  caUed,  and  of  the  misery 
which  we  may  draw  down  on  our  souls.      The  advance  of  time  itself  is  unseen, 
unfelt.     Its  footsteps  faU  so  lightly  that  they  do  not  strdie  on  any  of  our  senses 
Drop  after  drop  bubbles  up  from  the  sightless  fountam  of  eternity  ;  and  yet  their 
bubbling  is  not  heard.     Wave  roUs  on  after  wave  m  never-resting,  i^ever-endmg 
flow  ;  and  yet  there  are  no  sounds  of  thefr  breakmg  against  the  shore      Time  never 
halts  so  that  we  should  catch  hold  of  it,  has  no  voice  that  we  should  hear  it,  no 
outward  form  or  body  that  we  should  see  it.     But  man  for  his  o^v-n  prposes  has 
gathered  it  up  into  hours  and  days  and  weeks  and  months  and  years  ;  inasmuch  as 
without  such  measures  of  time  none  of  the  busmess  of  this  world  could  be  earned 
on.     Hardly  without  them  could  we  hold  any  intercourse  wath  our  neighbours,  or 
have  any  orderly  knowledge  whatsoever.     This  division  of  time,  it  is  true,  is  little 
heeded  by  most  persons,  except  with  reference  to  the  concerns  of  their  worldly  life. 
Yet  none  who  have  a  right  notion  of  the  importance  of  good  housekeeping  for  the 
management  of  our  heavenly,  no  less  than  of  our  earthly  concerns,  will  fail  to  do 
that  with  regard  to  their  spiritual  life,  without  which  there  can  be  no  good  house- 
keeping  anywhere.     At  the  end  of  every  day  they  who  are  anxious  to  do  well  and  to 
prosper  in  this  world  will  cast  their  thoughts  over  what  they  have  done,  and  will 
consider  what  they  have  left  undone  that  they  ought  to  have  done  ;  they  will 
calculate  what  they  have  spent,  what  they  have  sold,  what  they  have  gamed,  what 
they  have  lost,  and  will  strike  a  balance.     At  the  end  of  a  week  they  take  m  a  wider 

35 


546  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxxii. 

field  ;  they  cast  up  the  accounts  of  the  whole  week,  and  estimate  its  profit  and  its 
loss.  But  at  the  close  of  the  year  the  range  is  a  great  deal  wider  still ;  then  the 
accounts  of  the  whole  year  are  to  be  got  in,  and  put  in  order  and  cast  up  and 
settled.  No  one  who  has  any  portion  of  the  riches  of  this  world,  and  who  desires 
to  keep  out  of  diflSculties  will  neglect  this ;  no  one  who  ia  engaged  in  the  traffic  of 
this  world  can  neglect  it  without  bringing  on  certain  ruin.  This,  too,  is  the  very 
work  which  you  ought  now  to  be  engaged  in.  The  old  year  is  on  its  last  legs,  and 
will  soon  be  laid  with  the  multitude  of  those  that  have  passed  away  before  it.  That 
we  have  all  of  us  been  far  too  forgetful  of  God  during  the  past  year,  no  one  will 
deny.  The  very  best  and  godliest  amongst  us  will  be  the  first  to  acknowledge  this. 
Others  may  make  the  acknowledgment  carelessly ;  but  the  pious  wiU  be  stricken 
with  grief  and  shame.  Yet  surely  there  is  something  very  strange  in  this  forgetful- 
ness.  For  would  it  not  be  strange  if  a  servant  were  to  forget  his  master,  in  whose 
house  he  was  living  and  who  fed  and  clothed  him  ?  Would  it  not  be  strange  if 
a  son  were  to  forget  his  father,  to  whom  he  owed  his  life,  his  nurture  and  support, 
his  education,  all  that  he  has  and  all  that  he  knows  ?  Now,  God  is  in  a  far  higher 
sense  our  Master  and  Father,  and  has  done  far  more  for  us  than  any  earthly  master 
ever  did  for  his  servants,  or  any  earthly  father  for  his  children.  What  I  wish  to 
urge  upon  you  is  the  pressing  importance  of  undertaking  a  strict  and  solemn 
examination  of  the  whole  frame  and  fashion  of  your  life  during  the  last  year  of 
your  actions,  of  your  feelings,  of  your  thoughts.  Take  care  that  the  account  be  a 
true  one  ;  it  is  a  matter  of  life  and  death.  Try  your  heart  at  the  bar  of  your  con- 
science, as  though  before  a  judge ;  and  do  not  exercise  your  subtilty  in  trying 
to  diminish  or  excuse  or  conceal  your  offences,  but  lather  in  drawing  them  forth  to 
the  light,  in  uncovering  their  nakedness  and  exposing  their  enormity.  Endeavour 
to  look  into  your  hearts  with  the  same  eye  with  which  God  looks  into  them  ;  and 
then  to  confess  all  your  sins  to  God.  Throw  youi^self  ou  the  mercy  of  your  Saviour; 
beseech  Him  to  forgive  you  ;  beseech  Him  to  heal  you  ;  beseech  Him  to  grant  you 
His  Spirit,  that  you  may  be  purified  from  these  your  sins.  Reckon  up  the  list  of 
them,  and  write  it  on  your  hearts,  that  it  may  ever  be  before  you  to  put  you  on 
your  guard  in  the  hour  of  temptation.  Weigh  your  actions  with  reference,  not  to 
the  fruit  they  are  to  bear  in  this  world,  but  to  the  fruit  they  are  to  bear  in  the  next 
world  ;  and  in  all  your  plans  and  purposes,  in  all  your  hopes  and  wishes,  whatever 
their  immediate  purposes  may  be,  consider  your  latter  end.  {J.  0.  Hare,  M.A.) 
The  usefulness  of  consideration,  in  order  to  repentance : — I.  That  God  doth  eeallt 

AND  HEARTILY  DESIRE  THE  HAPPINESS  OF  MEN,  AND  TO  PREVENT  THEIR  MISERY  AND 

RUIN.  For  the  very  design  of  these  words  is  to  express  this  to  us,  and  it  is  done  in 
a  very  vehement  and,  as  I  may  say,  passionate  manner.     II.  That  it  is  a  great 

POINT  OF  WISDOM  TO  CONSIDER  SERIOUSLY  THE  LAST  ISSUE  AND  CONSEQUENCE  OF 

OUR  ACTIONS,  whither  they  tend,  and  what  will  follow  upon  them.  And  therefore 
wisdom  is  here  described  by  the  consideration  of  our  latter  end.     III.  That  this  is 

AN  EXCELLENT  MEANS  TO  PREVENT  THAT  MISERY  WHICH  WILL  OTHERWISE  BEFALL 

TJS.  And  this  is  necessarily  implied  in  this  wish,  that  if  they  would  but  consider 
these  things  they  might  be  prevented.  IV.  That  the  want  of  this  considera- 
tion IS  THE  GREAT  CAUSE  OF  men's  RUIN.  And  this  is  likewise  implied  in  the 
words,  that  one  great  reason  of  men's  ruin  is  because  they  are  not  so  wise  as  to 
consider  the  fatal  consequences  of  a  sinful  course.  This  is  the  desperate  folly  of 
mankind,  that  they  seldom  think  seriously  of  the  consequence  of  their  actions,  and 
least  of  all  such  as  are  of  greatest  concernment  to  them,  and  have  the  chief  influence 
upon  their  eternal  condition.  They  do  not  consider  what  mischief  and  inconveniency 
a  wicked  life  may  plunge  them  into  in  this  world,  what  trouble  and  disturbance  it 
may  give  them  when  they  come  to  die.  1.  That  consideration  is  the  proper  act  of 
reasonable  creatures,  and  that  whereby  we  show  ourselves  men.  So  the  prophet 
intimates  (Isa.  xlvi.  8).  2.  Whether  we  consider  it  or  not,  our  latter  end  will  come ; 
and  all  those  dismal  consequences  of  a  sinful  course,  which  God  hath  so  plainly 
threatened,  and  our  own  consciences  do  so  much  dread,  will  certainly  overtake  us 
at  last ;  and  we  cannot  by  not  thinking  of  these  things  ever  prevent  or  avoid  them. 
(Archbishop  Tillotson.)  The  wise  manfor futurity : — I.  Some  circumstances  of 
OUR  latter  end  which  it  BECOMES  US  TO  CONSIDER.  1.  Death  will  part  asunder 
the  body  and  the  soul.  2.  Death  will  dissolve  all  our  earthly  ties.  3.  Death  will 
strip  us  of  all  our  titles,  and  of  that  office,  power,  and  influence  which  they  imply. 
4.  Death  will  level  all  distinctions.  5.  Death  will  strip  us  of  our  earthly  possessions. 
6.  Death  must  bring  all  our  schemes  to  a  close.  7.  Death  will  finisn  our  period 
of  usefulness.     8.  Death  will  finish  our  character,  and  close  our  accounts  for  th» 


€HAP.  XXXII.]  DEUTERONOMY.  547 

judgment  II.  The  wisdom  of  properly  considering  the  circumstances  of  our 
LATTER  END.  1.  God  has  pronounced  it  wise  to  consider  our  latter  end,  and  act 
with  constant  and  careful  reference  to  the  life  to  come.  2.  The  wisdom  of  such  a 
course  is  inferred  from  the  fact  that  in  all  other  things  we  consider  it  indispensable. 
3.  To  make  death  a  matter  of  previous  calculation  is  necessary  to  the  promotion 
of  our  temporal  interest  and  that  of  our  heirs.  4.  To  well  consider  our  latter  end 
will  tend  to  forward  our  preparation  for  the  scenes  of  death.  {D.  A.  Clark.) 
The  inevitable  beyond : — Most  impractical  must  every  man  appear  who  genuinely 
believes  in  the  things  that  are  unseen.  The  man  called  practical  by  the  men  of 
this  world  is  he  who  busies  himself  building  his  house  in  the  sand,  while  he  does 
not  even  bespeak  a  lodging  in  the  inevitable  beyond.  ( George  Macdonald. )  Living 
without  thought  of  death: — In  a  good  pasture  where  many  good  oxen  are,  the 
butcher  comes  and  fetcheth  away  one  and  kills  it ;  next  day  he  fetcheth  away 
another,  and  kills  that  too.  Now,  those  which  he  leaves  behind  feed  and  fat  them- 
selves till  they  are  driven  to  the  slaughter,  not  considering  what  is  become  of  their 
fellows  or  what  shall  become  of  themselves.  So  when  death  coming  amongst  a 
multitude  of  men,  here  taking  one,  and  there  another,  we  pamper  up  ourselves  till 
he  overtakes  us  also  ;  we  live  as  though,  like  Adam  and  Abel,  we  never  saw  a  man 
die  before  us,  whereas  every  churchyard,  every  age,  every  sickness  should  be  a 
preacher  of  mortality  unto  us.    {J.  Spevicer.) 

Yer.  31.  For  their  rock  Is  not  as  onr  Rock,  even  our  enemies  themselves  heln^ 
Judges. — The  testimony  of  infidels  to  the  truth  of  Christianity : — We  profess  to 
believe  that  the  system  of  doctrine  and  ethics  set  forth  in  Scripture  is  true.  It  is 
our  business  to  prove  it.  1.  We  may  use  a  priori  method  ;  that  is,  we  may  take  an 
antecedent  probability  and  proceed  to  verify  it.  If  there  is  a  God,  He  would  pro- 
bably reveal  Himself,  2.  The  a  posteriori  method  ;  that  is,  reasoning  from 
facts  to  conclusions.  There  are  certain  facts  for  which  it  is  impossible  to  account 
otherwise  than  by  attributing  a  supernatural  power  to  religion.  3.  Our  case  may 
be  substantiated  by  external  evidence.  4.  Internal  evidence  or  personal  experience. 
5.  In  demonstrating  the  truth  of  Christianity  we  may  use  the  testimony  of  its 
friends.  An  army  of  such  witnesses  is  ever  marching  past.  6.  There  is  still 
another  view-point,  however,  to  wit,  the  testimony  of  the  enemy.  It  is  our  purpose 
to  pursue  a  brief  argument  from  the  concessions  made  by  unbelievers  as  to  the 
divineness  of  Jesus  and  the  power  of  the  religion  which  has  its  living  centre  in  Him. 
I.  Our  first  witnesses  shall  be  A  group  of  three  who  were  able  to  testify  from 

MORE   or  less   intimate    ACQUAINTANCE    WITH   THE    LIVING    ChRIST.       1.    Pilate. 

*'I  am  innocent  of  the  blood  of  this  just  person."  The  word  rendered  "just 
person  "  is  used  by  Plato  in  characterising  the  ideal  man.  2.  The  Centurion  who 
had  charge  of  the  crucifixion  of  Jesus.  "Truly  this  was  the  Son  of  God  !  "  He 
knew  the  hopes  of  Israel  respecting  the  coming  of  Messiah,  one  of  whose  distinctive 
titles  was  "the  Son  of  God,"  and  he  was  persuaded  that  those  hopes  were  realised 
in  this  Jesus  whom  they  had  sentenced  to  the  accursed  tree.  3.  Judas.  "  I  have 
betrayed  innocent  blood  !  "  II.  We  now  come  to  the  post-apostolic  period,  and 
SUMMON  A  coterie  OF  STALWART  ENEMIES  OF  Christ.  1.  Joscphus,  the  Jewish 
historian,  who  wrote  in  the  first  century  of  the  Christian  era.  In  his  Antiquities 
he  says,  "About  this  time  lived  Jesus,  a  wise  man — if  it  be  proper  to  call  Him  a 
man,  for  He  was  a  doer  of  wonderful  works.  He  was  a  teacher  of  such  men  as 
receive  the  truth.  He  was  called  the  Christ.  And  when  Pilate,  at  the  instigation 
of  our  principal  men,  had  condemned  Him  to  the  Cross,  those  who  had  loved  Him  did 
not  forsake  Him.  And  He  appeared  to  them  alive  again  on  the  third  day,  the 
prophets  of  old  having  foretold  these  and  many  other  wonderful  things  concerning 
Him.  And  the  sect  of  Christians,  so  named  after  Him,  is  not  extinct  unto  this 
day."  2.  Celsus,  a  Greek  philosopher  of  the  second  century,  who  wrote  vigorously 
against  the  sect  of  Galileans.  He  quotes  liberally  from  the  New  Testament,  and 
concedes  the  genuineness  of  the  miracles  of  Christ.  3.  Porphyry,  of  the  second 
century,  a  Neo-Platonist,  who  wrote  fifteen  volumes  against  Christianity.  He  says, 
in  speaking  of  the  oracles,  "  The  goddess  Hecate  hath  declared  Jesus  to  be  a  most 
pious  man,  His  soul,  like  the  souls  of  other  pious  men,  favoured  with  immortality 
after  death.  The  Christians  do  mistakingly  worship  Him,  And  when  we  asked  at 
the  oracle,  'Why  then  was  He  condemned  ?  *  she  answered,  'The  body  is  liable  to 
suffering,  but  the  soul  of  the  pious  dwells  in  heavenly  mansions.'  He  hath  indeed 
been  the  occasion  of  error  in  leading  others  away  from  the  acknowledgment  of  the 
immortal  Jove ;  but,  being  Himself  pious,  He  is  gone  to  the  dwelling  of  the  gods." 


548  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap,  xxxir. 

4.  Julian,  the  apostate  emperor  of  the  fourth  century.  He  was  a  bitter  enemy  of 
Christianity.  In  a  campaign  against  the  Persians  he  fell,  pierced  with  a  spear. 
Clutching  the  dust  in  his  agony,  he  cried,  "Galilean,  Thou  hast  conquered  !  "  He 
says,  "Jesus,  having  persuadedf  a  few  of  the  baser  sort  of  Galileans  to  attach  them- 
selves to  Him,  has  now  been  celebrated  about  three  hundred  years.  He  did  nothing 
in  His  lifetime  worthy  of  fame,  unless  it  be  counted  a  great  work  to  heal  lame  and 
blind  people  and  exorcise  demoniacs."  A  splendid  tribute,  this,  to  the  beneficent 
work  of  Christ !  III.  We  leap  a  thousand  years,  and  cojie  to  another  group 
OF  UNBELIEVERS.  Wc  are  now  in  the  midst  of  influences  which  are  ultimately  to 
provoke  a  social  and  political  upheaval  throughout  the  civilised  earth.  1.  Spinoza. 
He  is  referred  to  as  the  father  of  modern  pantheism.  He  did  not  believe  in  the 
personality  of  God,  but  regarded  Him  as  an  all-pervading  something  with  the 
attributes  of  extension  and  thought.  As  to  this  God,  however,  he  says  that  "Jesus 
Christ  was  the  temple.  In  Him  God  has  most  fully  revealed  Himself."  2.  Thomas 
Chubb,  a  leader  of  the  modern  deists.  He  was  a  tallow-chandler  in  his  early  life, 
and  his  sympathies  were  with  the  common  people.  Though  he  rejected  the  divine- 
ness  of  the  Gospel,  yet  he  was  pleased  to  compliment  it  as  a  religion  for  the  poor. 
He  says,  "In  Christ  we  have  an  example  of  a  quiet  and  peaceable  spirit,  of  a 
becoming  modesty  and  sobriety— just,  honest,  upright,  and  sincere,  and  above  all, 
of  a  most  gracious  and  benevolent  temper  and  behaviour — one  who  did  no  wrong,  no 
injury  to  any  man,  in  whose  mouth  was  no  guile  ;  who  went  about  doing  good,  not 
only  by  His  ministry,  but  also  in  curing  all  manner  of  diseases  among  the  people. 
His  life  was  a  beautiful  picture  of  human  nature  in  its  own  purity  and  simplicity, 
and  showed  at  once  what  excellent  creatures  men  might  be  under  the  influence  of 
His  Gospel."  IV.  And  now  we  present  three  malignant  spirits,  than  whom  no  others 
in  history  have  probably  exercised  a  more  disastrous  influence  on  human  thought,  the 
master-spirits  of  the  PERIOD  OF  THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION.  1.  Didcrot,  father  of 
the  Encyclopedic,  which  was  the  dragon's  tgg  of  the  Reign  of  Terror  In  a  conversa- 
tion with  the  Baron  de  Holbach  he  is  represented  as  saying,  "  For  a  wonder, 
gentlemen,  I  know  nobody,  either  in  France  or  elsewhere,  who  could  write  as  these 
Scriptures  are  written.  This  is  a  Satan  of  a  book.  I  defy  any  one  to  prepare  a  tale 
so  simple,  so  sublime  and  touching,  as  that  of  the  passion  of  Jesus  Christ.''  2.  Jean 
Jacques  Rousseau,  brilliant,  erratic,  inconsistent.  Here  is  a  remarkable  saying  of 
his  :  "I  will  confess  to  you  that  the  majesty  of  the  Scriptures  strikes  me  with 
admiration,  as  the  purity  of  the  Gospel  has  its  influence  on  my  heart.  Peruse  the 
works  of  our  philosophers,  with  all  their  pomp  of  diction — how  mean,  how  con- 
temptible are  they  compared  with  the  Scriptures !  Is  it  possible  that  a  book  so 
simple  and  at  once  so  sublime  should  be  merely  the  work  of  man  ?  Is  it  possible 
that  the  sacred  personage  whose  history  it  contains  should  be  Himself  a  mere  man  ? 
What  sweetness,  what  purity  in  His  manner  !  What  an  affecting  gracefulness  in 
His  instructions !  What  sublimity  in  His  maxims  !  What  profound  wisdom  in 
His  discourses  !  What  presence  of  mind,  what  subtlety,  what  fitness  in  His  replies  ! 
Where  is  the  man,  where  the  philosopher,  who  could  so  live  and  so  die  without 
weakness  and  without  ostentation  ?  When  Plato  describes  his  imaginary  just  man, 
loaded  with  all  the  punishments  of  guilt,  yet  meriting  the  highest  rewards  of  virtue, 
he  describes  exactly  the  character  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  the  resemblance  is  so  striking 
that  all  the  Church  Fathers  perceived  it.  The  death  of  Socrates,  peacefully 
philosophising  among  his  friends,  appears  the  most  agreeable  that  one  could  wish  : 
while  that  of  Jesus  expiring  in  agonies,  abused,  insulted,  and  accused  by  a  whole 
nation,  is  the  most  horrible  that  one  could  fear.  Socrates,  indeed,  in  receiving  the 
cup  of  poison,  blessed  the  weeping  executioner  who  administered  it :  but  Jesus,  amid 
excruciating  tortures,  prayed  for  His  merciless  tormentors.  Yes,  verily,  if  the  life 
and  death  of  Socrates  were  those  of  a  sage,  the  life  and  death  of  Jesus  were 
those  of  a  God."  3.  Voltaire.  No  man  ever  lived  who  wrote  more  bitterly  of  the 
Christian  religion  than  he  ;  yet  hear  this  letter,  the  last  he  ever  wrote,  expressed 
in  an  honest  hour,  and  worthy  of  consideration  as  the  utterance  of  a  dying  man  :  "  I, 
the  underwritten,  do  declare  that  for  these  four  days  past,  having  been  afflicted  with, 
vomiting  of  blood— at  the  age  of  eighty-four — and  not  being  able  to  drag  myself  to 
church,  the  reverend  Rector  of  Sulpice  having  been  pleased  to  add  to  his  many 
favours  that  of  sending  me  the  Abb6  Gautier,  I  did  confess  to  him,  that  if  it  please 
God  to  dispose  of  me,  I  would  die  in  the  Church  in  which  I  was  bom.  Hoping  that 
the  Divine  mercy  will  pardon  my  faults,  I  sign  myself  in  the  presence  of  Abb6 
Mignon,  my  nephew,  and  Marquis  de  ViUeville,  my  friend,  Voltaire.  March  2, 
1778."    V.  We  here  introduce  A  witness  who  stands  alone,  the  most  colossal 


CHAP.  XXXII.]  DEUTERONOMY,  54flf 

FIGURE  IN  HISTORY.  Napoleon.  If  not  an  unbeliever  in  the  radical  sense,  he  was 
certainly  a  fatalist.  His  star  of  destiny  was  his  only  providence.  On  one  occasion, 
during  his  exile,  Gen.  Bertrand  said  to  him,  **  I  cannot  conceive,  sire,  how  a  great 
man  like  you  could  believe  that  a  Supreme  Being  could  exhibit  Himself  to  man  in 
human  guise."  Napoleon  answered,  "I  know  men;  and  I  teJl  you  that  Jesus 
Christ  was  not  a  man.  Superficial  minds  see  a  resemblance  between  Christ  and  the 
founders  of  empires  and  the  gods  of  other  religions.  That  resemblance  does  not 
exist.  There  is  between  Christianity  and  whatever  other  religions  the  distance  of 
infinity.  Everything  in  Christ  astonishes  me.  His  spirit  overawes  me,  and  His 
will  confounds  me.  Between  Him  and  whoever  else  in  the  world  there  is  no  possible 
term  of  comparison.  He  is  truly  a  being  by  Himself.  His  ideas  and  His  senti- 
ments, the  truth  which  He  announces,  and  His  manner  of  convincing  are  not 
explained  either  by  human  organisation  or  by  the  nature  of  things.  His  birth 
and  the  history  of  His  life ;  the  profundity  of  His  doctrine,  which  grapples  the 
mightiest  difficulties,  and  which  is  of  those  difficulties  the  most  admirable  solution  ; 
His  Gospel,  His  apparition.  His  empire,  His  march  across  the  ages  and  the  realms 
— everything  is  for  me  a  prodigy,  a  mystery  insoluble,  which  plunges  me  inta 
reveries  which  I  cannot  escape  ;  a  mystery  which  is  there  before  my  eyes,  a 
mystery  which  I  can  neither  deny  nor  explain.  Here  I  see  nothing  human.  .  .  . 
And  what  a  mysterious  symbol,  the  instrument  of  punishment  of  the  Man-God  1 
His  disciples  were  armed  with  it.  'The  Christ,'  they  said,  '  God  has  died  for  the 
salvation  of  men.  *  What  a  strife,  what  a  tempest,  these  simple  words  have  raised 
around  the  humble  standard  of  the  punishment  of  the  Man-God  !  On  the  one  side 
we  see  rage  and  all  the  furies  of  hatred  and  violence  :  on  the  other  there  are  gentle- 
ness, moral  courage,  infinite  resignation.  Everywhere  Christians  fell,  and  every- 
where they  triumphed.  You  speak  of  Caesar,  of  Alexander,  of  their  conquests, 
and  of  the  enthusiasm  which  they  enkindled  in  the  hearts  of  their  soldiers  ;  but  can 
you  conceive  of  a  dead  man  making  conquests,  with  an  army  faithful  and  entirely 
devoted  to  his  memory  ?  .  .  .  Now  that  I  am  at  St.  Helena,  now  that  I  am 
alone,  chained  upon  this  rock,  who  fights  and  wins  empires  for  me  ?  who  are  the 
courtiers  of  my  misery  and  misfortunes  ?  who  thinks  of  me  ?  who  makes  effort  for 
me  in  Europe  ?  Where  are  my  friends  ?  What  an  abyss  between  my  deep  misery 
and  the  eternal  reign  of  Christ,  which  is  proclaimed,  loved,  adored,  and  which  is 
extending  over  all  the  earth  !  Is  this  to  die  ?  is  it  not  rather  to  live  ?  The  death 
of  Christ— it  is  the  death  of  God."  VI.  We  summon  now  two  witnesses  from 
AMONG  THE  POETS,  both  of  whom,  gifted  with  extraordinary  genius,  rejected  the 
Gospel  of  Christ.  1.  Goethe.  **  I  consider  the  Gospels  to  be  thoroughly  genuine, 
for  in  them  is  the  effective  reflection  of  the  sublimity  which  emanates  from  Jesus, 
and  this  is  as  Divine  as  ever  the  Divine  appeared  on  earth."  2.  Jean  Paul  Kichter, 
worshipper  of  the  beautiful.  *'  Jesus  of  Nazareth  is  the  purest  among  the  mighty, 
the  mightiest  among  the  pure,  who  with  His  pierced  hand  has  raised  empires  from 
their  foundations,  turned  the  stream  of  history  from  its  old  channel,  and  still  con- 
tinues to  rule  and  guide  the  ages."  VII.  The  two  who  are  now  to  appear  and  bear  testi- 
mony ARE   REPRESENTATIVE   LEADERS   OF   THE  RIGHT  AND  LEFT  WINGS  OF  MODERN 

Unitarianism.  1.  Dr.  Channing,  leader  of  the  conservatives,  says,  *'  I  maintain 
that  this  is  a  character  wholly  remote  from  human  conception.  To  imagine  it  to 
be  the  production  of  imposture  or  enthusiasm  shows  a  strange  unsoundness  of 
mind.  I  contemplate  it  with  a  veneration  second  only  to  the  profound  awe  with 
which  I  look  upward  to  God.  It  bears  no  mark  of  human  invention.  It  belongs  to 
and  manifested  the  beloved  Son  of  God.  I  feel  as  if  I  oould  not  be  deceived. 
The  Gospels  must  be  true.  They  were  drawn  from  a  living  original.  The  character 
of  Jesus  is  not  a  fiction.  He  was  what  He  claimed  to  be,  and  what  His  followers 
attested.  Nor  is  this  all.  Jesus  not  only  was,  He  is  still,  the  Son  of  God,  the 
Saviour  of  the  world.  He  has  entered  the  heaven  to  which  He  always  looked 
forward  on  earth.  There  He  lives  and  reigns.  Let  us,  then,  by  imitation  of  His 
virtues  and  obedience  to  His  Word,  prepare  ourselves  to  join  Him  in  those  pure 
mansions  where  He  is  surrounding  Himself  with  the  good  and  the  pure,  and  will 
communicate  to  them  for  ever  His  own  spirit  and  power  and  joy."  2.  Theodore 
Parker,  leader  of  the  radicals,  says,  "Jesus  combines  in  Himself  the  sublimest 
precepts  and  divinest  practices,  thus  more  than  realising  the  dream  of  prophets  and 
sages.  He  puts  away  the  doctoi-s  of  the  law,  subtle,  learned,  irrefragable,  and  pours 
out  a  doctrine  beautiful  as  the  light,  sublime  as  heaven,  and  true  as  God.  Shall 
we  be  told  that  such  a  man  never  lived  ?  Suppose  that  Newton  never  lived.  But 
who  did  his  works  ?  and  thought  his  thoughts  ?    It  takes  a  Newton  to  forge  a 


650  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxxir. 

Newton.    What  man  could  have  fabricated  a  Jesus  ?    None  but  Jesus."    VIII.  The 

TWO  WITNESSES  WHO  REMAIN  HAVE  BEEN  FOREMOST  LEADERS  OF  MODERN  UN- 
BELIEF. 1.  David  Strauss,  the  author  of  the  mythical  theory  of  the  story  of 
Jesus— perhaps  the  most  conspicuous  figure  in  recent  German  thought.  A  few  years 
ago  he  was  buried  without  a  prayer  or  word  of  Christian  song.  He  says,  "  If  in  Jesus 
the  union  of  self-consciousness  with  the  consciousness  of  God  has  been  real,  and 
expressed  not  only  in  words  but  actually  revealed  in  all  the  conditions  of  His  life, 
He  represents  within  the  religious  sphere  the  highest  point,  beyond  which  humanity 
cannot  go — ^yea,  whom  it  cannot  equal,  inasmuch  as  every  one  who  hereafter  should 
climb  to  the  same  height  could  only  do  so  with  the  help  of  Jesus  who  first  attained 
it.  He  remains  the  highest  model  of  religion  within  our  thought,  and  no  perfect 
piety  is  possible  without  His  presence  in  the  heart. "  2.  Ernest  Renan,  author  of  the 
legendary  theory.  He  rejected  the  supernatural  from  the  Gospel  record.  His 
romantic  biography  of  Jesus  concludes  in  these  words,  "  Repose  now  in  Thy  glory, 
noble  Founder  !  Henceforth,  beyond  the  reach  of  frailty,  Thou  shalt  witness,  from 
the  heights  of  Divine  peace,  the  infinite  results  of  Thy  work.  For  thousands  of 
years  the  world  will  defend  Thee  !  Thou  shalt  be  the  banner  about  which  the 
hottest  battle  will  be  given.  .  .  .  Whatever  may  be  the  surprises  of  the  future, 
Jesus  will  never  be  surpassed.  His  worship  will  grow  young  without  ceasing  ;  His 
legend  will  call  forth  tears  without  end  ;  His  sufferings  will  melt  the  noblest  hearts  ; 
all  ages  will  proclaim  that  among  the  sons  of  men  there  is  none  born  greater  than 
Jesus."  Conclusion — In  view  of  these  concessions  made  by  the  leading  repre- 
sentatives of  xmbelief  all  along  the  centuries,  it  is  submitted  that  thoughtful  people 
cannot  pause  in  a  partial  or  qualified  rejection  of  Jesus  Christ.  1.  As  to  His  person. 
Was  He  man  ?  Ay,  grandly  so.  But  He  was  either  less  than  a  true  man  or  more. 
His  enemies  themselves  being  witnesses.  He  was  either  an  impostor  or  the  Divine 
Man,  as  He  claimed  to  be.  2.  As  to  His  character.  He  was  the  one  bright 
particular  star  in  a  firmament  of  imperfect  lights.  He  alone  is  worthy  to  be  the 
exemplar  of  character,  for  He  alone  meets  the  conditions  of  the  ideal  manhood. 
3.  As  to  His  teaching.  There  have  been  other  sacred  teachers — Seneca,  Confucius, 
Zoroaster,  Sakya-Muni — but  these  were  in  comparison  with  Him  as  glow-worms  to 
the  noon-day  sun.  Never  man  spake  like  this  Man.  4.  As  to  His  work.  * '  He 
went  about  doing  good."  And  since  His  crucifixion  He  has  continued  the  building 
up  of  a  kingdom  of  truth  and  righteousness  on  earth.  Its  outward  form  is  the 
Church,  "fair  as  the  moon,  clear  as  the  sun,  and  terrible  as  an  army  with  banners." 
5.  As  to  the  manner  of  His  death.  Ah,  here  the  mystery  thickens !  Under  His 
Cross  we  learn  the  truth,  justice,  holiness,  and  mercy  of  the  living  God.  And  here 
Christ  comes  into  vital  relation  with  our  souls.  Our  God  is  the  God  of  salvation. 
What,  therefore,  shall  we  say  ?  As  for  me,  I  do  believe  this  Jesus  is  destined  to 
reign  even  unto  the  ends  of  the  earth.  The  story  of  His  Church  is  an  unbroken 
record  of  triumph.  The  government  is  upon  His  shoulders.  He  is  King  over  all 
and  blessed  for  ever.  What  more  ?  As  for  me,  this  Christ  shall  be  my  Saviour. 
Shall  He  be  yours?  {D.  J.  Burrell,  D.D.)  Suhpcmaed  witness  to  the  worth 
of  Christianity: — When  Moses  speaks  of  a  rock  he  intends  that  in  which 
men  seek  for  security,  repose,  refreshment.  By  ''our  rock,"  he  means  the 
living  God  in  whom  the  saints  trust — He  is  the  impregnable  strength  of  His 
people  ;  amid  the  weariness  of  life  He  is  the  rest  of  their  soul,  in  Him  they 
find  sweet  delight.  By  "  their  rock  "  Moses  meant  the  idols,  the  religious  systems, 
the  worldly  things,  the  lying  vanities  in  which  the  natural  man  places  his  hope. 
The  outside  world  often  concedes  the  superiority  of  Christian  hope.  It  is  true,  that 
the  verdict  given  in  our  favour  by  worldly  and  imbelieving  men  is  not  always  verbal 
and  direct ;  it  is  often  unintentional,  implied,  and  indirect,  but  such  concessions  have 
a  great  value — in  some  respects  they  are  more  significant  than  are  direct  and  verbal 
testimonies.  And  there  is  another  objection  we  may  anticipate.  It  may  be  said 
that  the  testimony  of  worldly  and  sceptical  men  to  the  superiority  of  the  Christian 
faith  can  have  little  sincerity  in  it  if  they  do  not  follow  up  their  admission  by 
accepting  that  faith.  But  a  creed  may  have  the  sanction  of  a  man's  understanding 
and  conscience,  and  yet  he  may  refuse  to  adopt  it.  There  is  the  power  of  prejudice, 
of  worldly  interest,  there  is  the  tyranny  of  passion  and  appetite,  there  is  the  pride 
of  life,  there  is  the  want  of  inclination  to  believe  and  obey,  there  is  the  unwillingness 
of  men  to  pay  the  price  for  a  great  ideal.  I.  The  Acknowledgments  of  worldli- 
NESs.  The  million  trust  in  gold,  pleasure,  position,  and  in  certain  hours  they  are 
very  confident  and  scornful.  The  flowery  rock  of  pleasure  is  the  true  rock ;  the 
design  of  life  is  the  gratification  of  the  senses ;  sunshine,  roses,  and  song  are  the 


CHAP,  xxxn.]  DEUTERONOMY.  551 


desirable  things.     To  others  the  golden  rock  is  the  true  rock.     Safety,  leisure, 
honour,  greatness,  and  the  fulness  of  joy  are  guaranteed  by  the  golden  reef;  laying 
up  treasure  in  heaven  is  a  silly  illusion  of  the  saints.     Others  declare  the  proud  rock 
of  position  is  the  true  rock.     He  who  builds  a  palace  has  reached  life's  hope  and 
glory  ;  there  is  no  religion  but  the  religion  of  success,  and  the  children  of  advantage 
and  renown  look  with  pity  on  men  whose  only  distinction  is  goodness  and  faith. 
Flushed  with  pleasure,  intoxicated  with  health  and  wealth,  blinded  by  the  pride  of 
life,  they  cry  frantically  :  *' Great  is  Diana  of  the  Ephesians."    But  the  days  come 
when  they  think  very  little  of  Diana.     Having  served  fame,  pleasure,  appetite, 
pride,  mammon,  they  declare  that  they  have  been  betrayed  and  mocked,  and  they 
look  sympathetically  and  longingly  to  the  religious  life  they  have  neglected.     They 
do  not  find  under  their  rock  the  sweetness  they  expected  ;  m  the  days  of  health,  of 
opulence,  of  pleasure,  they  are  disappointed  ;  the  honey  out  of  their  rock  is  poisoned 
and  its  waters  are  bitter.     They  extol  the  apple  of  Sodom,  and  make  a  face  whilst 
they  eat  it.      They  do  not    find  the  rest    for  which    they  hoped.      Life  is  a 
weariness,   the  burden  and  heat  of  the  day  is  too  great  to  be  borne.      They 
do  not  find    the    security    and    peace    they    desire.      They    quarrel    with  ^  their 
rock  whilst  they  live  ;    they  mistrust  it  at  the  grave,    for  in  their  lips  is  the 
cry  of  Balaam  :  "Let  me  die  the  death  of  the  righteous,"  &c.     II.  The  acknow- 
ledgments OF  UNBELIEF.     1.  The  sccptical  world  makes  intellectual  concessions  to 
our  creed.     In  our  day  we  have  witnessed  a  remarkable  sight  in  the  sceptical  world. 
We  have  seen  a  great  sceptic  make  a  new  rock,  and  we  have  seen  how  slavishly  he 
has  copied  our  rock.     No  one  can  study  that  most  wonderful  modern  system  of 
secularism  known  as  positivism  without  being  struck  with  its  close  resemblance  to 
the  Christian  doctrine,  worship,  and  hope.     A  story  is  told  of  one  of  our  painters 
that,  having  painted  a  picture  with  a  fine  rock  in  it,  he  went  to  see  another  picture 
painted  by  a  brother  artist  in  which  also  a  rock  was  a  prominent  feature  ;  immedi- 
utely  he  saw  it,  the  original  artist  broke  out,  "  He  has  stolen  my  rock,  he  has  stolen 
ray  rock!  "     When  I  read  the  French  sceptic's  multitudinous  pages  I  find  the  same 
cry  again  and  again  coming  to  my  lips.     Of  course,  I  soon  see  that  it  is  not  my  rock, 
not  the  granite  foundation,  not  the  Rock  of  Ages,  but  only  plaster  of  Pans,  on  which 
can  be  built  no  house  of  salvation.     Nevertheless  it  is  a  great  concession  to  Christi- 
anity that  unbelief  should  thus  follow   its  lines,   imitate  its  dogmas,   worship, 
fellowship,  and  hope.     In  nature  there  is  a  phenomenon  known  as  "  mimicry,    it  is 
a  curious  fact  on  which  our  modern  scientists  have  written  largely,  namely,  that  one 
class  of  insects  or  birds  acquire  characteristics  which  belong  to  another  class,  they 
come  closely  to  resemble  creatures  with  which  they  have  no  real  affinity.     But  mmd 
this  it  is  always  the  weak  and  inferior  creature  that  apes  the  stronger  and  higher, 
never  the  superior  that  imitates  the  inferior.     2.  UnbeUef  makes  many  practical 
concessions  to  our  creed.     (1)  Such  an  acknowledgment  of  the  preciousness  of  our 
faith  comes  from  the  domestic  circle  in  the  indisposition  of  the  unbeliever  to  make 
sceptics  of  his  family.     Men  wish  to  do  their  best  for  their  families.     (2)  Such  an 
acknowledgment  comes  from  the  business  world.     Scepticism  may  be  considered  a 
virtue  in  literary  circles,  but  it  is  hardly  accepted  as  such  in  the  practical  world  even 
by  irreligious  men.     I  saw  once  an  advertisement  for  a  clerk  :  "  Freethinker  pre- 
ferred."    I  do  not  know  what  kind  of  business  was  transacted  m  that  office,  or  what 
came  of  that  advertisement,  but  how  strangely  it  sounded  !     I  have  seen  it  only 
once— significant  fact.     (3)  Such  an  acknowledgment  comes  from  the  political  sphere. 
The  validity  of  religion  is  denied  in  theory,  but  the  men  who  deny  its  truth  and 
authority  confess  that  politically  it  is  useful,  nay,  indispensable— they  agree  to 
regard  it  as  a  useful  superstition.     Gibbon,  infidel  as  he  was,  attacking  the  Christian 
religion  with  learning,  eloquence,  and  satire,  yet  went  to  church,  because  he  confessed 
that  he  felt  that  government  and  order  would  be  impossible  unless  the  common 
people  were  awed   by  the  supernatural.     When  later  a  rationalist  like  Edmond 
About  said,  **  What  France  needs  is  ten  millions  of  Protestants,"  he  gave  utterance 
to  the  same  thought— that  a  spiritual  faith  is  essential  to  order,  to  civilisation,  to 
progress.     And  many  able  unbelievers  of  late  years  have  looked  with  the  deepest 
misgiving  on  the  spread  of  infidel  opinion— they  believed  that  the  opinion  was 
correct,  yet  that  socially  and  politically  it  was  perilous.     To  discredit  religious  faith 
was  to  loosen  the  bands  of  order  and  government.     III.  The  Acknowledgments  of 
HEATHENISM.     1.  The  heathen  are  deeply  impressed  with  our  superior  civilisation, 
which  has  its  roots  in  our  faith.     We  do  not  go  to  them  with  an  abstract  faith,  but 
with  a  creed  attested  by  many  powerful  and  conspicuous  demonstrations.     We 
possess  a  marvellous  science,  a  vast  commerce,  a  splendid  literature— power,  wealth, 


552  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap,  xxxii. 

cultare,  liberty  almost  unexampled.  Christianity  can  say  with  its  author  :  *'  Believe 
me  for  the  very  works'  sake."  This  spectacle  of  a  supreme  civilisation  in  many  ways 
affects  the  thought  of  the  pagan  when  he  considers  the  merit  of  our  faith.  He  looks 
round  on  the  backwardness,  the  weakness,  the  ignorance,  the  poverty,  the  subordina- 
tion of  his  own  land,  and  feels  there  is  something  seriously  amiss  with  his  gods, 
temples,  and  scriptures.  **  Their  rock  is  not  as  our  Rock,  even  our  enemies  them- 
selves being  judges."  The  heathen  is  deeply  impressed  by  our  philanthropy,  which 
is  also  a  fruit  of  our  faith.  In  a  recent  article  on  '  *  The  Amelioration  of  the  Condition 
of  Hindu  Women,"  which  appeared  in  a  native  newspaper  in  India,  called  The  Hindu, 
occur  these  words  :  "  We  by  no  means  approve  of  the  attempts  of  the  evangelists  to 
Christianise  India.  We  believe  in  the  Hindu  religion,  and  in  the  suitability  of  its 
doctrines  to  the  people  of  this  land,  .  .  .  but  it  is  impossible  not  to  admire  and 
feel  thankful  for  the  good  work  the  missionaries  are  doing.  It  is  a  matter  of  standing 
reproach  to  us  that  we  are  not  able  to  do  for  our  countrymen  and  women  half  as  much 
as  the  Christian  missionaries  are  doing  for  us."  ( W.  L.  JVcUkmson. )  The  pathetic 
side  of  infidelity : — Modern  infidelity  has  many  tones  and  many  voices.  Some  of 
these  are  insolent  and  arrogant, — they  drive  us  at  once  to  a  distance.  There  is  just 
one  which  is  deeply  pathetic.  It  is  that  which  confesses  that  its  rock  is  not  as  our 
Kock ;  that  its  reasonings  and  its  discoveries  have  not  enriched  but  impoverished. 
"Our  Rock"  is  the  God  of  the  Christian  revelation.  Our  enemy's  rock  is  a 
divinity  of  man's  construction,  however  many  or  however  few  it  may  admit  of  the 
characteristics  of  the  other.  Let  me  name  one  or  two  of  the  attributes  of  our  Rock. 
1.  The  Divine  personality.  Man  wants,  and  must  have,  some  one  above  himself 
to  worship,  trust,  love.  II.  The  forgiveness  of  sins.  It  is  very  well  to  say  that 
sin  is  not  sinful  ;  or  to  say,  on  the  other  hand,  that  sin  must  be  left  as  it  is,  to  bear 
its  finiit  in  consequence,  and  to  know  no  other  cure  but  forgetfulness  :  this  does  not 
meet  the  case,  does  not  heal  the  remorse,  does  not  repair  the  mischief,  does  not  set 
the  sinner  free  to  work,  because  it  sets  him  not  free  to  hope.  Forgiveness  is  a  name 
not  yet  named  :  till  it  is  named,  I  am  helpless  still.  But  forgiveness  of  sins  is  named 
in  revelation.  It  is  the  keystone  of  the  Gospel.  III.  The  lawfulness,  reality, 
AND  EFFICACY  OF  PRAYER.  How ready  to  hand  are  the  old  cavils  !  How  shall  man 
stay  or  guide  the  hand  of  God  ?  IV.  Life  and  immortality  brought  to  light  by 
THE  Gospel.  What  has  *'  their  rock  "  to  tell  of  a  world  beyond  death  ?  A  guess,  a 
j>eradventure — at  best,  a  recognition  of  angel  faces  loved  and  lost — at  best,  a  resump- 
tion, in  some  spoilt  and  damaged  form,  of  relationships  formed  here  and  broken — 
at  best,  an  absorption  into  the  great  ocean  or  fountain  of  being,  impassive, 
impersonal,  unconscious,  irresponsive.  {Dean  Vaughan.)  Hostile  homage  to  th« 
supremacy  of  the  Christian  faith: — The  enemies  with  whom  we  are  familiar 
in  these  times,  the  enemies  with  whose  rock  we  come  into  contact,  are  not 
worshippers  of  idols  nor  votaries  of  any  of  the  grosser  forms  of  superstition. 
On  these  they  admit  Christianity  to  be  a  great  advance.  They  would  scorn 
the  notion  of  resorting  to  superstition  and  idolatry  as  the  true  solution  of 
man's  spiritual  need.  In  comparison  with  these  they  admit  the  Christian 
faith  to  be  both  purer  and  loftier,  still  it  is  not  their  rock.  They  claim 
to  have  advanced  beyond  Christianity.  Now  I  propose,  in  the  spirit  of  these 
words  of  Moses,  to  compare  the  Christian  faith  with  the  principles  of  those 
who  differ  from  it,  and  to  show  how  its  superiority  must  be  and  is  acknow- 
ledged even  by  its  enemies.  I.  The  formation  of  character.  It  is 
commonly  allowed  that  the  Christian  faith  produces  the  very  highest  type 
of  character.  There  has  never  appeared  upon  earth  a  being  whose  character 
could  be  placed  alongside  that  of  Jesus  Christ.  No  doubt  it  is  possible  to  find 
outside  of  the  ranks  of  Christians  not  a  few  who  are  not  only  inoffensive  in  their 
manner  of  life,  and  have  characters  unstained  by  any  decided  vice,  but  also  men  of 
conspicuous  honour  and  adorned  with  virtue  in  a  degree  which  puts  many  a 
professed  Christian  to  shame.  But  in  reference  to  such  it  is  to  be  noticed,  first,  that 
the  qualities  by  which  such  men  are  distinguished  are  precisely  those  which 
Christianity  teaches  men  to  value  and  to  practise,  and  that  it  is  just  in  the  degree 
in  which  they  have  developed  the  virtues  of  Christianity  that  they  are  held  in 
honour ;  and  secondly,  it  is  to  be  remembered  that  it  is  hard  to  say  how  far  these 
virtues,  when  manifested  within  the  pale  of  Christendom,  are  not  attributable  to 
Christian  influences.  II.  The  inward  satisfaction  and  peace  which  they 
yield  to  the  soul.  There  is  a  craving  in  the  human  heart  which  seeks  something 
it  cannot  itself  provide,  a  thirst  which  does  not  find  in  the  heart  which  feels  it  any 
well  at  which  it  may  be  quenched.     There  are  outside  of  the  Christian  faith  endlesa 


CHAP.  XXXII.]  DEUTERONOMY.  663 

methods  of  ministering  to  that  thirst — the  delights  of  love,  the  fellowship  of  kindred 
minds,  the  pursuit  of  knowledge,  the  gratifying  of  the  desires  of  the  mind  and  heart, 
the  excitement  of  pleasure,  and  many  others  besides,  but  is  there  any  one  of  them 
all  which  meets  this  inward  craving  of  the  human  heart  so  directly  or  so  completely 
as  it  is  met  in  the  gift  of  a  new  and  everlasting  life  in  God  through  Jesus  Christ  our 
Lord  ?  Dig  what  wells  you  will  in  this  wilderness  world  ;  hew  out  what  cisterns  you 
choose  to  gather  up  in  them  your  little  stores  of  earth-drawn  pleasure — do  they  yield 
you  anything  to  be  compared  to  the  streams  of  living  water  flowing  from  the  smitten 
rock  ?  Have  they  ever  furnished  you  a  heart  satisfaction  to  be  compared  as  to 
quality  and  permanency  with  the  heart  satisfaction  felt  by  the  Cnristian  in 
realising  the  love  of  God  towards  him,  and  his  own  entrance  into  the  Divine  life  in 
Christ  ?  Again,  there  are  dark  and  difficult  problems  which  present  themselves  to 
the  soul  when  pondering  its  present  position  and  future  destiny ;  and  although 
there  are  some  who  preach  that  it  is  the  highest  duty  of  man  to  go  foinvard  in  his 
appointed  path  with  only  an  awful  sense  of  the  darkness  surrounding  him,  and  the 
mystery  before  him,  is  it  not  a  better  position  far  to  feel  that  the  most  important 
questions  have  been  answered,  that  the  proper  goal  of  man  has  been  revealed,  and 
tiiat  the  path  which  leads  to  it  has  been  made  clear  ?  III.  The  support  afforded 
IN  THE  EMERGENCIES  OF  LIFE.  1.  In  seasons  of  danger,  in  the  hour  when  shipwreck 
seems  inevitable,  or  sudden  illness  seizes  on  the  trembling  body,  or  pestilence  is 
perilously  near,  who  manifests  the  greatest  sense  of  safety  ?  2.  Or  again,  in  times  of 
aeep  distress,  when  earthly  disappointment  has  impoverished  you,  or  affliction  has 
weakened  and  wasted  you,  or  bereavement  has  left  you  mourning  and  lonely,  do  you 
know  of  any  stay  which  you  would  then  so  much  desire,  as  that  possessed  by  the 
Christian  ?  3.  Lastly,  who,  think  you,  is  so  well  prepared  to  die  as  he  who  has 
committed  his  soul  to  the  care  and  keeping  of  Christ  ?  Is  he  as  likely  to  be  troubled 
with  dying  regrets  as  you  who  have  not  done  so  ?  Do  you  think  that  he  will  lament 
in  that  hour  the  time  spent  in  prayer  and  in  study  of  God's  Word,  his  days  of 
humiliation  and  repentance,  his  strivings,  self-denials,  and  sacrifices  for  Christ,  and 
the  labour  put  forth  to  win  conformity  to  the  mind  of  Christ  ?  {G.  Hobson,  D.D.) 
The  true  rock  of  life  :—l.  A  man's  God  is  the  rock  of  his  being.  1.  Because  He 
is  the  most  settled  object  to  him.  Souls  cling  to  their  religion  as  limpets  to  the 
rocks ;  the  more  furious  the  billows  the  faster  their  hold.  2.  Because  He  is  the 
object  most  relied  upon  by  him.  In  Him  the  soul's  affections  centre,  on  Him  its 
highest  hopes  are  based.  II.  The  God  of  the  Bible  is  the  best  rock  of  souls. 
1.  He  is  the  grandest  Rock.  All  others  are  vanities  and  lies.  2.  He  is  the  most 
durable.  All  others  decay.  3.  He  is  the  most  accessible.  Always  within  reach 
even  of  those  most  distant  from  Him.  III.  The  superiority  of  this  rock  is 
well  attested — 1.  By  those  who  have  tried  it.  2.  By  those  who  reject  it. 
"What  says  Rousseau  ?  "The  majesty  of  the  Scriptures  strikes  me  with  admiration, 
as  the  purity  of  the  Gospel  hath  its  influence  on  my  heart.  Review  the  works  of 
our  philosophers,  and  with  all  their  pomp  of  diction,  how  mean,  how  contemptible 
are  they  compared  with  Scripture!"  {ffomilist.)  Testimony  to  Christianity 
wrwngfrom  its  enemies : — The  great  lawgiver,  forbidden  to  enter  the  promised  land, 
takes  a  leave  the  most  affectionate  of  those  whom  he  had  led  through  the  wilderness ; 
and  bequeaths  them,  as  his  best  legacy,  exhortations  to  steadfastness  in  obeying 
the  true  Jehovah.  There  were  gathered  within  the  range  of  his  vision  the  future 
fortunes  of  Israel  ;  and  he  alternately  rejoiced  and  lamented,  as  with  prophetic  gaze 
he  marked  the  advancement  and  depression  of  God's  chosen  people.  Nothing  but 
their  own  waywardness  and  rebellion  could  interfere  with  their  prosperity  and 
happiness  ;  and  therefore,  when  he  observed  how  the  imagery  of  disaster  crowded  the 
yet  distant  scene,  he  brake  into  the  exclamation:  "How  should  one  chase  a 
thousand,  and  two  put  ten  thousand  to  flight,  except  their  Rock  had  sold  them  and 
the  Lord  had  shut  them  up?"  He  saw  that  in  place  of  carrying  themselves 
successfully  in  the  battle,  the  Israelites  would  yield  to  an  inconsiderable  force,  but 
why  was  this,  unless  because  wickedness  had  provoked  God  to  withdraw  His 
protection  and  His  strength  ?  Was  it  because  the  false  deities  of  the  heathens  were 
mightier  than  the  Jehovah  of  Israel  ?  Indeed,  the  very  adversaries  themselves  did 
not  advance  such  an  assertion.  They  knew,  and  they  confessed,  that  their  sources 
of  strength  were  inferior  to  those  to  which  the  Israelites  might  apply,  and  would 
not  therefore  themselves  refer  their  success  to  the  greater  prowess  of  the  power  they 
adored.  "  Their  rock  is  not  as  our  Rock,  even  our  enemies  themselves  being 
judges."  And  well  then  might  the  lawgiver,  whilst  just  on  the  point  of  being 
gathered  to  his  fathers,  expostulate  indignantly  with  Israel  on  the  madness  of  that 


554  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxxii. 

idolatry  into  which  he  foresaw  they  would  run.  We  regard  as  emphatically  the 
enemies  of  Christianity  those  who  absolutely  reject  revelation,  and  those  who  (pro- 
fessedly receiving  it)  explain  away  its  chief  mysteries.  The  first  is  the  Deist,  who 
will  have  nothing  but  what  he  is  pleased  to  call  natural  religion,  and  who  denies 
that  God  has  made  any  disclosure  to  His  creatures  but  what  is  given  in  the  universe 
or  on  the  tablet  of  conscience  ;  the  second  is  the  philosophising  Christian,  whether 
he  style  himself  the  Arian  or  the  Socinian  or  the  Unitarian,  who  in  some  way  or 
other  impugns  the  doctrine  of  a  Trinity,  and  therefore  removes  from  the  Bible  the 
great  article  of  an  atonement  for  sin.  We  say  these  are  the  chief  enemies  of 
Christianity,  and  it  is  from  these  we  are  to  seek  a  testimony  to  the  excellence  of  that 
creed  which  we  ourselves  profess  to  have  adopted.  And  therefore  through  the 
remainder  of  our  discourse  there  will  be  two  great  truths  at  whose  illustration  we 
must  labour — the  first,  that  the  rock  of  the  Deist  "is  not  as  our  Rock,"  the  Deist 
"himself  being  judge"  ;  and  the  second,  that  the  rock  of  the  Unitarian  "  is  not  as 
our  Rock,"  the  Unitarian  "himself  being  judge."  1.  Now,  we  shall  begin  with  an 
argument  which  is  applicable  to  every  species  of  infidelity,  whether  it  take  the  form 
of  a  total  or  only  of  a  partial  rejection  of  Scripture.  We  should  have  no  Deism,  if 
the  contents  of  revelation  were  not  designed  to  humble  us  and  produce  self-denial  ; 
we  should  have  no  Socinianism,  if  the  doctrine  of  a  Trinity  in  unity  demanded  not 
the  unqualified  submission  of  our  reason.  But  then  it  ought  to  be  evident,  that  no 
religious  system  would  be  adapted  to  our  nature  and  condition  which  did  not  set 
itself  vigorously  against  our  pride  and  our  passions  ;  it  ouglit  to  be  evident,  that 
without  some  great  moral  renovation,  a  thorough  change  in  the  dispositions  and 
tendencies  with  which  we  are  born,  we  cannot  be  fitted  for  intercourse  with  such  a 
Being  as  God  must  necessarily  be,  nor  for  the  enjoyment  of  such  happiness  as  can 
alone  be  looked  for  as  His  gift  to  His  creatures.  It  ought  therefore  to  commend 
itself  to  us  as  an  incontrovertible  truth,  that  Christianity  ia  worth 3^  our  credence 
and  our  veneration,  in  exact  proportion  as  it  tends  to  the  production  of  humility  and 
of  holiness  ;  and  if  in  any  way,  whether  direct  or  indirect,  there  be  put  forth  a 
confession  that  Christianity  is  more  adapted  than  some  other  system  to  the  subduing 
the  haughtiness  and  corruption  of  our  nature,  we  may  affirm  of  such  confession  that 
it  amounts  to  a  direct  testimony  of  the  superiority  of  our  religion.  And  we 
maintain  that  this  very  confession  is  furnished  by  the  rejection  of  Christianity.  We 
find  the  causes  of  rejection  in  the  humiliating  and  sanctifying  tendencies  of  the 
religion.  We  trace  Deism  and  Socinianism,  and  under  these  every  form  of  infidelity, 
to  a  cherished  dislike  to  truth,  which  demands  the  subjugation  of  self  and  the 
prostration  of  reason.  What,  then,  does  the  rejection  prove,  but  that  the  embraced 
system  is  more  complacent  to  pride  and  more  indulgent  to  passion  ?  And  if  it  prove 
this,  it  is  itself  nothing  less  than  a  testimony  on  the  side  of  Christianity.  We  can 
challenge  the  very  adversaries  to  bear  testimony  ;  we  can  wring  a  witness  for  the 
superiority  of  Christianity  as  an  engine  adapted  for  the  exigencies  of  a  disorganised 
creation,  from  the  secret,  yet  discernible,  reasons  which  cause  a  land  to  be  deformed 
by  so  many  shapes  of  infidelity.  Oh  !  knowing  that  those  reasons  have  to  do  with 
the  humbling,  the  sanctifying  tendencies  of  the  religion  of  Jesus,  and  that  con- 
sequently what  is  substituted  for  this  religion  must  less  tend  to  humble  and  less 
tend  to  sanctify,  and  therefore  be  less  fitted  for  such  beings  as  ourselves,  we  can 
triumphantly  look  our  opponents  in  the  face,  and  unflinchingly  declare  that  "  their 
rock  is  not  as  our  Rock,  our  enemies  themselves  being  judges."  We  draw,  then,  a 
contrast  between  what  was  effected  towards  the  amelioration  of  human  condition 
•jrhile  heathenism  had  the  world  to  itself,  and  what  has  been  done  since  Christianity 
gained  partial  sway.  We  are  not  afraid  to  refer  it  to  the  decision  of  the  most 
inveterate  opponent  of  Christianity,  whether  civilisation  has  not  advanced  with  a 
most  rapid  march  wheresoever  the  Gospel  has  gained  a  footing,  and  whether  the 
institutions  of  a  country  professedly  Christian  could  be  exchanged  for  those  of  the 
most  renowned  in  heathen  times,  without  the  loss  of  what  we  hold  dearest  in  our 
charter  and  the  surrender  of  what  sheds  its  best  beauty  around  our  homes.  We 
have  never  heard  of  so  thorough  and  consistent  an  advocate  of  the  sufficiency  of 
reason,  that  he  would  contend  for  the  superior  civilisation,  the  finer  jurisprudence, 
the  greater  civil  liberty,  the  pm-er  domestic  happiness,  attained  to  whilst  reason  was 
not  interfered  with  by  communications  which  avouched  themselves  from  God.  And 
this  is  enough  to  warrant  our  claiming  him  as  a  witness  to  the  superiority  of  our 
Rock.  We  contend  that  in  the  possession  of  Christianity  alone  lies  the  difference 
between  ourselves  and  the  nations  whom  we  have  vastly  outstripped.  We  do  not 
excel  them  in  the  fire  of  genius  and  the  vigour  of  intellect.     The  agency  of  reasoa 


CHAP.  XXXII.]  DEUTERONOMY. 555 

alone  is  in  no  degree  comparable  to  that  of  revelation,  when  the  ends  proposed  are 
those  eagerly  sought  by  every  foe  of  evil  and  every  ftiend  of  man.     And  oh  !  then 
is  it  not  a  confession  vvhich  warrants  us  in  affirming  when  opposing  such  as  reject 
the  Gospel  of  Christ— ''Their  rock  is  not  as  our  Rock,  our  enemies  themselves  being 
ludges  "  «     2.  But  we  are  aware  that  in  this  last  argument  we  have  not  taken  the 
highest  ground  which  we  are  entitled  to  occupy.     We  have  striven  to  show  you 
that  an  acknowledgment  may  be  wrung  from  the  Deist  to  the  worth  of  Christianity, 
considered  in  regard  to  its  power  to  promote  the  well-being  of  society  ;  but  this  is 
not  the  most  important  point  of  view  under  which  we  have  to  consider  Christianity. 
The  excellence  of  a  religion  should  be  tried  by  its  power  of  preparing  man  for  death  ; 
it  is  in  directing  us  how  to  provide  for  the  future  that  a  religious  system  is  valuable  ; 
and  though  it  may  confer  collateral  benefits  and  improve  the  tempoi-al  condition  of 
a  people,  we  can  form  no  estimate  of  its  worth  as  a  religion  till  we  have  examined 
it  as  a  guide  for  immortaHty.     And  if  Deism  and  Christiamty  are  to  be  compared 
on  a  deathbed,  we  shaU  readily  gain  the  testimony  which  is  asserted  in  our  text. 
It  wiU  not  then  be  denied,  that  persons  of  every  age  and  of  every  rank  in  life  are 
continually  meeting  death  with  calmness  and  even  with  joy,  the  principles  of 
Christianity  being  those  by  which  they  are  sustained,  and  its  hopes  those  by  which 
they  are  animated.     There  are  few  histories  more  thrilling  or  fuller  of  horror  than 
those  of  the  last  hours  of  Paine  or  Voltaire.     And  where  there  has  been  neither 
affected   indifference  nor   excruciating   dread,    there    has  been   an  utter   want  of 
tranquillity  and  gladness.     Oh  !  we  shall  wait  in  vain  to  have  these  produced  from 
the  deathbed  of  the  Deist.     We  are  willing  that  the  records  of  Deism  sl^^^ld  be 
searched ;  but  we  are  confident  that  not  an  instance  can  be  found  m  ^^ic  i  the 
dying  unbeliever  could  exclaim  with  rapture  or  even  with  serenity-    O  death, 
where  is  thy  sting  ?    0  grave,  where  is  thy  victory  ? '      And  therefore  is  the  Deist  a 
witness  to  the  worth  of  Christianity  ;  therefore  do  we  appeal  to  him,  in  evidence 
that  the  religion  of  reason  is  not  to  be  compared  with  the  religion  of  reve  ation. 
3.  Now,  we  consider  that  most,  if  not  all,  of  this  latter  reasoning  is  as  applicable 
to  the  case  of  the  Unitarian  as  that  of  the  Deist.     We  believe  that  where  there 
has  been  rejection  of  the  fundamental  doctrine  of  Christianity,  the  doctrine  of  an 
atonement  for   sin,  there  is  never  any  of  that  calmness  and  confidence  m  dymg 
which  may  continually  be  seen  where  the  trust  rests  on  the  great  Propitiation. 
*'Therock"  of  the  Unitarian  "  is  not  as  our  Eock,"  the  Unitarian   'himself  being 
iudge  "  •  for  the  man  who  thinks  to  be  his  own  peacemaker  with  God  can  exhibit 
none  of  that  assurance  when  passing  into  eternity  which  the  very  Aveakest  possess 
who  know  that  their  sins  have  been  laid  on  a  Surety.     The  Unitarian  looks  to  be 
saved  by  his  repentance  and  obedience,  no  respect  being  had  to  the  merits  ot  a 
Mediator.     Now,  repentance  and  obedience  are  an  important  part  of  our  system,  as 
well  as  that  of  the  Unitarian  ;  we  hold,  as  well  as  he,  that  no  man  can  be  saved 
unless  he  repent  and  do  "works  meet  for  repentance"  ;  and  it  were  absurd  to  say 
that  the  motive  to  good  Mving  is  not  at  the  least  as  strong  to  those  who  trust  m 
Christ,  as  to  those  who  trust  in  themselves  ;  so  that  our  system  embraces  all  which 
that  of  the  Unitarian  embraces,  whilst  it  adds  doctrines  which,  if  true  cannot  be 
omitted  without  ruin,  and  which,  if  false,  serve  only  to  strengthen  us  m  that  system 
on  which  our  acceptance  is  to  rest.     If  then  the  Unitarian  be  right,  he  has  no 
advantage  over  us-repentance  and  obedience  being  presented  at  least  equally  under 
both  systems ;  but  if  the  Unitarian  be  wrong,  we  have  unspeakably  the  advantage 
over  him  ;  we  have  a  Surety,  in  whose  perfect  satisfaction  to  find  refuge  when  the 
worthlessness  of  all  that  man  can  effect  for  himself  is  bemg  proved  before  the  Judge 
of  quick  and  dead.     What  then  has  the  Unitarian  to  say  of  our  Rock,  except  that 
it  is  stronger  than  his  own  ?    We  have  been  engaged  in  showing  you  how  arguments 
in  favour  of  Christianity  may  be  wrested  from  our  advei-saries  ;  it  behoves  us  to  take 
heed  that  arguments  against  it  be  not  derivable  from  ourselves.     {H.  MelviU,  B  D.) 
The  superiority  of  the  real  Christian:—!.  There  is  a  difference  between  the  people  of 
God  and  others,  which  the  latter  discover  ;  a  difference  of  chaeacter  and  condition 
of  which  they  are  aware,  and  which  they  are  sometimes  forced  to  acknowledge.     I 
do  not  say  that  this  distinction  is  visible  in  all  professors  of  religion.     How  should 
it  be  ?     It  is  not  real  in  aU.     There  are  those  who  differ  from  others  only  in  pro- 
fessing to  be  diff"erent  from  them.     Nor  do  I  say  that  this  distinction  is  as  mam  test 
in  all  real  Christians  as  it  is  in  some  ;  nor  in  these  equally  manifest  at  all  times  ; 
but  there  exists,  and  sinners  see  that  there  exists,  a  class  of  persons  in  the  world 
who   in  their  spirit,  and  principles,  and  consistent  acting  m  accordance  with  then- 
principles,  in  their  desires,  aversions  and  aims,  and  in  all  that  goes  to  constitute 


556  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxxii. 

character,  are  different  from  them  and  from  the  generality  of  mankind  ;  as  also  in 
their  hopes,  consolations,  supports,  and  sources  of  enjoyment.  An  intelligent  and 
accomplished  young  man,  on  his  deathbed,  told  a  clergyman  who  visited  him  that 
he  had  been  an  inti.iel  and  a  profligate,  ami  that  in  the  whole  course  of  his  infidelity 
there  was  but  one  thing  that  disturbed  him,  and  he  could  answer  every  argument 
for  Christianity  but  one,  and  that  was  the  pious  example  and  prayers  of  a  believing 
mother.  The  perception  of  this  difference  exerts  this  power,  because  sinners  discern 
that  in  so  far  as  Christians  are  different  from  them,  they  are  superior  to  them,  have 
the  decided  advantage  over  them.  I.  In  point  of  character,  sinners  see  and  admit 
the  superiority  of  the  real  Christian.  Compare  John  the  Baptist  with  Herod,  or 
Mary,  the  sister  of  Lazarus,  with  Herodias  or  her  daughter  Salome,  the  dancing  girl. 
Look  first  at  Paul,  and  then  at  Festus  or  even  Agrippa.  You  see  what  the  difference 
is,  and  where  the  superiority  lies.  Or  look  at  some  living  Christian  and  then  at 
yourself,  and  make  a  comparison.  Look  at  his  spirit  and  then  at  your  own  ;  his 
spirit  of  meekness  and  yours  of  resentment  ;  his  humility  and  your  pride  ;  his 
disinterestedness  and  your  selfishness.  His  aim  is  to  do  good,  yours  to  get  good. 
To  enrich,  gratify,  or  aggrandise  yourself  is  your  object.  His  is  to  glorify  God 
and  bless  mankind.  The  love  of  Christ  constrains  him  ;  but  it  is  not  so  with  you. 
Now,  whose  spirit  is  the  more  excellent?  whose  principles  of  action  the  more 
worthy?  which  character  the  superior?  Do  you  not  feel  your  own  inferiority! 
Yes,  and  sinners  do  often  secretly  despise  themselves  for  it.  Here  they  see  one 
denying  and  labouring  to  subdue  his  appetites,  while  they  to  all  theirs  are  ^ving 
the  rein  ;  and  the  time  that  they  spend  in  vanity,  they  see  others  occupying  in 
visits  of  charity  and  offices  of  kindness  to  the  poor  and  neglected  ;  and  they  know 
that  they  are  wrong,  and  that  the  others  are  right.  Look  at  the  devotional  part 
of  the  Christian's  character.  He  consecrates  a  portion  of  each  day  to  secret 
communion  with  God,  to  prayer,  confession  of  sin  and  contrition  for  it,  to  the 
grateful  recollections  of  God's  goodness  to  him,  to  the  serious  reading  of  the  Word 
of  God,  to  meditation  and  self-examination,  and  to  intercession  for  you  and  others. 
Now,  you  have  no  such  habits  of  devotion.  You  live  without  God  in  the  world. 
Here  is  a  diflerence  between  you  and  the  Christian.  On  which  side  is  the  superiority  ? 
Do  you  not  decide  that  the  conduct  of  the  Christian  is  the  more  filial,  the  more 
affectionate,  grateful,  reasonable,  and  worthy?  Look  now  at  the  Christian  in  his 
family  ;  and  recollect  then  what  you  are  in  yours.  Hear  the  expression  of  thanks- 
giving and  the  invocation  of  blessing,  accompanying  the  reception  of  the  bounties 
of  Divine  providence.  See  night  and  morning  the  household  assembled  to  hear 
the  "Word  of  God,  and  to  unite  in  the  offering  of  prayer  and  praise.  Is  not  this 
manner  of  conducting  the  affairs  of  a  family  preferable  to  yours  ?  II.  I  pass  on  to 
THE  CONDITION  of  the  Christian.  If  he  is  better  than  his  neighbour,  so  it  is  better 
with  him.  (1)  In  regard  to  safety,  is  not  the  condition  of  the  Christian  superior  ? 
Have  not  you  something  to  apprehend,  but  has  he  any  cause  for  fear,  to  whom  God 
says,  "  Fear  thou  not,  for  I  am  with  thee,  be  not  dismayed  for  I  am  thy  God  "  ?  He 
who  has  God  for  him  is  safer  from  natural  evil  than  any  other  ;  and  safer  from  sin 
surely  is  he  to  whom  it  is  promised,  ' '  Sin  shall  not  have  dominion  over  you,  My 
grace  is  sufficient  for  you."  (2)  In  regard  to  peace,  I  would  ask  if  the  Christian  has 
not  the  advantage  of  you  ?  If  the  testimony  of  God  is  to  be  relied  on,  he  has  all  the 
advantage  implied  in  the  difference  between  great  peace  and  no  peace,  for  "great 
peace  have  they  who  love  Thy  law,"  it  is  said  in  one  place  ;  and  in  another,  "there 
is  no  peace,  saith  my  God,  to  the  wicked  "  ;  he  being  justified  by  faith  has  peace 
with  God,  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ ;  and  the  peace  of  God  that  passes 
understanding  keeps  his  heart  and  mind  through  Jesus  Christ.  Do  you  know  any- 
thing of  such  tranquillity  ?  Is  not  this  far  before  the  philosophic  calm  ?  How  is  it 
that  in  seasons  of  danger,  in  the  hour  of  apprehended  shipwreck,  in  the  sudden 
invasion  of  sickness,  or  in  the  time  of  impending  pestilence,  men  fall  upon  their 
knees,  betake  themselves  to  the  Bible,  and  ask  an  interest  in  the  prayers  of  Chris- 
tians ?  Do  they  not  thereby  testify  that  the  rock  of  their  reliance  is  not  as  our 
Eock  ?  (3)  In  point  of  consolation  in  affliction,  and  suppoi-t  under  the  trials  of  life, 
has  not  the  Chiistian  an  acknowledged  advantage  over  every  other  ?  Underneath 
him  are  the  everlasting  arms.  What  equal  support  have  you  ?  Have  you  any,  any 
refuge  to  run  into  for  shelter  when  the  storms  of  sorrow  beat  furiously  upon  you  ? 
Any  voice  like  that  of  the  Son  of  Man,  to  say  to  you  in  your  desponding  moments, 
**  be  of  good  cheer  "  ?  Do  you  think  that  you  are  as  well  prepared  to  die  as  he  who 
has  committed  his  soul  to  the  care  and  keeping  of  Christ  ?  Do  you  think  that  he 
is  as  likely  to  be  troubled  with  dying  regrets  as  you  ?    (4)  Shall  we  go  on  one  step 


CHAP,  irxxii.]  DEUTERONOMY.  557 

further  1  That  brings  us  to  the  bar  of  God.  In  what  character,  think  you,  will  it 
be  most  desirable  for  you  to  appear  there?  {W.  Naims,  D.D.)  The  believer's 
Rock: — Who  Israel's  Rock  was,  we  know — Christ.  And  He  is  our  Rock  too, — for 
strength,  for  protection,  for  spiritual  supplies,  for  a  refuge  to  hide  in, — we  have  no 
other.  And  He  will  be  ours  upon  the  terras  upon  which  He  was  willing  to  be  a 
Rock  unto  Israel ;  namely,  upon  a  preserved  covenant,  a  separation,  a  keeping 
ourselves  wholly  unto  Him,  a  forsaking  of  all  forbidden  alliances,  a  renouncing  of 
all  other  trusts.  The  words  will  suggest  to  be  considered,  not  only  the  sufficiency 
of  the  believer's  Rock  in  itself,  but  also  its  confessed  superiority  over  all  other 
dependencies.  And  first,  as  to  the  image  itself.  The  comparison  of  God  to  a  rock 
is  of  frequent  occurrence  in  Scripture.  The  reason  for  the  selection  of  this  image 
no  doubt  is  to  be  found  in  the  natural  scenery  of  Palestine,  which  is  often  a  key 
to  the  right  understanding  of  much  Scripture  poetry.  The  Israelites  both  loved 
and  were  justly  proud  of  their  rocks.  They  stood,  as  it  were,  the  guardians  of  their 
rich  and  fertile  valleys,  they  were  the  source  of  their  rivers  whose  water  refreshed 
their  fields,  and  amidst  the  strong  munitions  of  these  rocks  they  found  a  refuge 
from  invading  foes.  The  walls  and  fortresses  of  their  cities,  and  in  later  days  the 
glorious  temple  itself,  rested  on  the  strength  of  those  deep  foundations.  The  moral 
associations,  therefore,  which  would  be  called  up  in  the  mind  of  a  pious  Jew  by  the 
image  of  a  rock,  would  be  those  of  stability,  permanence,  protection,  blessing.  He 
could  not  look  on  the  hills  as  they  stood  round  about  Jerusalem,  or  upon  the  rocks 
as  they  frowned  ruggedly  on  his  native  shore,  without  seeing  in  them  types  of  that 
invisible  presence  wtich  compassed  him  on  every  side,  without  remembering  that 
God  was  his  Rock,  and  that  the  Most  High  God  was  his  Redeemer.  And  like 
happy  associations  are  called  up  in  the  Christian  mind  when  we  think  of  Christ 
as  our  Rock.  Thus  the  image  suggests  the  security,  strength,  and  firm  foundation 
for  our  religious  trust  and  hope.  These  announcements  are  very  welcome  to  the  first 
feelings  of  our  religious  nature.  In  matters  relating  to  our  salvation  we  all  feel 
the  need  of  a  sure  footing.  "We  like  not  to  build  our  house  for  heaven  on  the 
sand  ;  on  a  yielding,  treacherous,  shifting  basis  of  rational  conjecture,  or  not  very 
improbable  hypothesis.  We  must  have  our  goings  set  upon  a  Rock,, and  this  Rock 
we  have  in  Christ.  He  must  have  lain  in  the  bosom  of  the  Father,  who  could 
reveal  such  things,  and  yet  He  must  be  no  intangible  thing,  no  irrational  thing, 
no  mere  phantom  from  the  spirit  world  ;  He  must  be  God  manifest  in  the  flesh. 
Again,  in  having  Christ  for  their  Rock,  believers  feel  they  have  a  sure  defence 
against  all  their  enemies.  Against  their  temptations,  lest  they  should  prevail ;  or 
their  fears,  lest  they  should  enslave  ;  or  their  trials,  lest  they  should  oppress  and 
cast  down.  The  rocks  of  Palestine  abounded  in  deep  hollows  or  caverns,  in  which 
the  people  often  betook  themselves  for  shelter  against  the  invading  foe.  And  the 
same  idea  is  employed  in  Scripture  to  describe  a  spiritual  refuge.  Thus  David 
exclaims, — "But  the  Lord  is  my  defence,  and  my  God  is  the  Rock  of  my  refuge." 
Whilst  Isaiah  in  a  passage  strikingly  expressive  of  the  good  man's  safety  under  all 
outward  temptations  says,  —  "He  dwelleth  on  high,  his  place  of  defence  is  the 
munitions  of  rocks."  The  Rock  of  our  salvation,  then,  in  things  spiritual.  Is  also 
the  Rock  of  our  defence  in  things  temporal.  Godliness  hath  the  promise  of  both 
worlds,  and  though  it  be  true  that  the  storms  of  time  and  adversity  may  come  upon 
us,  and  breach  upon  breach  may  shake  the  strong  foundations  of  our  spiritual  trust ; 
yet  even  against  these  outward  ills  God  condescends  to  be  our  Rock.  He  knows 
that  our  souls  would  faint  if  some  merciful  limit  were  not  placed  to  the  power  of 
our  enemies  to  hurt  us,  or  to  the  strength  of  our  temptations  to  overcome  us,  or 
to  the  grievousness  of  the  chastening  which  tries  our  spirit,  or  to  the  greatness  of 
the  fears  which  affright  our  souls ;  and  therefore  in  all  our  trials  and  adversities, 
whensoever  they  oppress  us,  He  bids  us  to  our  refuge,  leads  us  to  the  Rock  that  is 
higher  than  we  are,  and  higher  than  our  dangers  too.  And  there  we  dwell  safely  ; 
we  feel  as  those  who  are  drawn  up  into  God's  secret  place,  covered  with  His  feathers, 
screened  under  His  shadow,  hidden  in  the  hollow  of  His  hand.  "And  a  man  shall 
be  as  a  hiding-place  from  the  wind,  and  a  covert  from  the  tempest;  a  river  of 
water  in  a  dry  place,  and  the  shadow  of  a  great  rock  in  a  weary  land."  Once  more, 
we  contemplate  the  text  as  showing  that  there  is  in  Christ  our  Rock  a  rich  provision 
for  all  spiritual  comforts  and  necessities.  Three  kinds  of  produce  are  mentioned  in 
Scripture  as  coming  from  the  rocks  of  Judea,  which  it  can  be  no  strain  to  regard 
as  strikingly  emblematical  of  what  we  have  in  Christ.  The  first  is  water.  **He 
brought  streams  out  of  the  rocks,"  it  is  said  in  the  seventy-eighth  Psalm,  "and 
caused  water  to  run  down  like  rivers."    Then  another  produce  of  the  rock  was 


558  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxxir. 

honey  and  oil.  **  He  made  him  suck  honey  out  of  the  rock,  and  oil  out  of  the 
flinty  rock."  There  is  not  much  in  the  present  physical  geography  of  Palestine  to 
say  much  upon  this  allusion  ;  however,  it  may  suffice  for  general  accuracy  of  illus- 
tration to  observe,  that  olive-trees  were  wont  to  thrive  most  on  rocky  soils,  and  the 
aromatic  plants  and  shrubs  to  which  bees  are  naturally  attracted,  abounded  in  the 
mountainous  parts  of  Judea,  and  it  has  been  suggested  that  nothing  is  more  possible 
than  that  deposits  of  honey  should  sometimes  be  found  in  the  cavities  of  the  rocks. 
"Who  sees  not  the  aptness  of  the  emblem  to  represent  Christ  ?  **  How  sweet  are  Thy 
words  unto  my  mouth  ;  yea,  sweeter  than  honey  unto  my  taste."  Gold,  and  silver, 
and  precious  stones  were  among  the  produce  of  these  rocks.  "Surely,"  says  Job, 
"  there  is  a  vein  for  the  silver,  and  a  place  for  the  gold,  where  they  find  it ";  but  how 
deep  must  men  dig  into  the  heart  of  the  natural  rock  before  they  will  find  such  treasures 
as  David  found.  **I  love  Thy  commandments  ;  more  to  be  desired  are  they  than 
gold,  yea,  than  much  fine  gold."  "The  law  of  Thy  mouth  is  better  unto  me  than 
thousands  of  gold  and  silver."  Yes,  wisdom  may  be  found  of  us,  but  it  must  be 
searched  for  as  for  hid  treasure;  "and  this  treasure  is  hid  in  Christ."  Whatever 
connects  man  with  God,  or  the  sinner  v\  ith  his  hope,  everything  comes  to  us  from 
the  rock  of  Christ.  And  yet  the  half  of  its  affluent  and  hidfden  stores  has  not  been 
laid  open  to  us.  But  we  must  not  pass  over  without  noticing  the  compared  view 
with  the  believer's  Rock  here  suggested,  or  rather  its  confessed  superiority  over  all 
other  dependencies.  "  For  their  rock  is  not  as  our  Rock,  even  our  enemies  themselves 
being  judges."  Of  course,  the  primary  allusion  here  is  to  the  gods  of  idolatry,  the 
blocks  of  wood  and  stone  worshippea  of  heathen  nations.  But  the  principle  of 
comparison  will  manifestly  admit  of  being  applied  much  further,  and  so  made  to 
embrace  the  trusts  of  all  who  know  not  God,  or  who  reject  the  merciful  overture 
of  His  Gospel.  The  comparison  to  be  instituted,  therefore,  may  be  said  to 
be  generally  between  Christ  as  the  revealed  medium  and  method  of  a  sinner's 
justification  on  the  one  hand,  and  any  of  the  unauthorised  methods  of  acceptance 
which  men  may  have  invented  for  themselves  on  the  other.  (D.  Moore,  M.A.) 
Testimony  to  Christianity  lorung  from  its  enemies: — I.  The  "kock"  of  a  man  is 

THAT  ON  WHICH  HE  BUILDS  HIS  HOPE  ;  THAT  IN  WHICH  HE  SEEKS  HIS  SAFETY  ;  that 

in  which  he  finds  his  rest ;  that  from  which  he  looks  for  his  satisfaction  and  his 
pleasure.  The  world  has  many  "rocks,"  but  they  are  all  distinguished  by  this 
one  characteristic — they  are  "of  the  earth,  earthy."  They  are  in  the  world,  and  of 
the  world  ;  and  with  the  world  they  terminate.  Men  set  up  for  themselves  various 
rocks.  The  rich  man's  stronghold  is  his  wealth  ;  the  great  man's  confidence  is  his 
power  ;  the  self-righteous  man's  vain  trust  is  his  own  fancied  goodness.  But  all 
agree  in  this,  that  it  is  something  other  than  God,  something  short  of  God,  on  which 
they  repose.  God  is  not  Himself  the  Rock  of  their  confidence.  They  look  not  to 
Him  for  the  portion  of  their  souls,  the  joy  of  their  hearts.  If  in  trouble,  they  turn 
to  the  creature ;  God,  their  Creator,  Preserver,  Redeemer,  is  left  out  in  all  their 
schemes  of  happiness,  and  in  all  their  anticipations  of  future  good.  But  it  is  not  so 
with  those  whom  God  hath  taught.  He  hath  taught  them  as  the  first  fundamental 
lesson  in  the  school  of  true  wisdom,  that  their  souls  need  an  infinite  portion,  in  order 
that  they  may  be  filled  with  good.  He  has  taught  them,  that  that  infinite  portion 
was  originally  Himself,  but  that  they  lost  that  portion  when  they  fell  from  their  God. 
He  has  taught  them,  that  in  themselves  and  of  themselves  they  are  ' '  poor,  and 
blind,  and  miserable,  and  wretched,  and  naked."  They  have  no  righteousness  in 
which  to  appear  before  His  pure  eyes  ;  they  have  no  means  in  themselves  to  provide 
either  against  life's  vicissitudes  or  eternity's  disclosures.  II.  Having  thus  the  Rock 
of  the  believer,  and  the  rocks  of  the  unbeliever,  side  by  side,  suffer  us  to  challenge 
the  whole  world  to  the  controversy  ;  and  upon  their  own  showing  we  will 

PROVE  the  TRANSCENDENCY  OF  OUR  RoCK  AS  COMPARED  WITH  THEIRS.      Were  We 

indeed  to  take  the  testimony  of  those  who  have  tried  and  proved  the  Rock  of  salva- 
tion— and  those  who  have  tried  and  proved  it  can  surely  best  estimate  its  worth  ; 
vrere  we  to  take  the  testimony  of  the  ransomed  spirits  of  the  just,  that  now  surround 
the  Rock  of  their  salvation  in  heaven,  they  would  with  one  voice  and  with  one 
spirit  declare,  "There  is  none  in  heaven  in  comparison  with  Him  ;  none  is  worthy 
of  a  thought,  or  a  hope,  or  an  affection,  in  comparison  with  Him."  1.  We  bring 
forward,  then,  the  indirect  and  undesigned  testimony  of  the  world  in  favour  of  the 
Rock  of  our  salvation,  in  the  first  instance,  in  that  the  world  gives  to  that  Rock  a 
measure  of  respect  and  reverence  wholly  inconsistent  with  the  manner  in  which,  in 
their  heart  and  life,  they  treat  that  Rock.  Why  is  it  that  you  find  that  for  the 
most  part  the  men  who  never  give  their  hearts  to  Christ,  nor  their  lives  to  His 


CHAP.  XXXII.]  DEUTERONOMY.  559 

service,  yet  render  to  Him  an  indirect  and  reluctant  homage  ?  They  pay  certain 
reverence  to  His  day,  certain  regard  to  His  sanctuary,  certain  homage  to  His  ordin- 
ances and  His  laws.  They  will  "do  many  things  "  on  behalf  of  the  religion  of 
Jesus  Christ ;  and  yet,  in  the  face  of  all  these  concessions,  they  withhold  from  Him 
their  heart,  and  they  "will  not  have  Him  to  reign  over  them."  They  themselves, 
ttien,  "  being  the  judges,"  they  admit  to  the  religion  of  Christ,  that  there  is  in  it  a 
power  and  a  truth  and  a  majesty  that  they  cannot  wholly  overcome  or  repudiate. 
2.  This,  too,  is  the  more  strikingly  shown  when  we  further  bring  forward  that 
respect  and  homage  which  they  often  pay  to  the  worth  and  to  the  excellency  of  the 
true  servants  of  Clirist.  Where,  too,  is  the  bold,  daring  scofiFer  that  has  not  often- 
times felt  an  inward  conviction  of  the  worth  and  excellency  of  the  servants  of  Christ, 
even  though  he  has  been  able  to  stifle  the  expression  of  his  inward  feeling  ?  "  Them- 
selves being  judges, "  the  man  of  God  had  an  elevation,  a  purity,  a  dignity  that  they 
knew  not,  and  yet  the  worth  and  the  power  of  which  they  could  not  but  feel.  3.  And 
much  more  is  this  indirect  tribute  of  the  enemies  of  *  *  our  Rock "  to  the  Eock 
of  our  salvation  often  rendered  when  the  servants  of  God  have  passed  to  their  rest, 
and  their  obnoxious  proximity  and  their  rebuking  example  no  more  disturb  the  false 
peace  of  the  men  of  this  world.  Over  the  grave  of  the  true  and  undissembled 
servant  of  God,  how  seldom,  even  from  the  lips  of  the  bad,  you  hear  anything  but 
respect  and  love  !  "The  memory  of  the  just  is  blessed."  4.  But  we  have  another 
testimony  rendered  by  the  worldly  and  the  wicked  to  the  Rock  of  the  Christian 
that  is  more  striking  ;  and  that  is,  the  high  standard  that  they  set  up  for  the 
righteous  to  observe.  What  is  more  common  than  to  find  men  of  the  world  seeing 
with  an  eagle  eye  any  little  defection  or  deviation  from  high  principle  in  the  soldier 
of  the  cross  ? — saying — '  *  It  would  not  have  mattered  if  he  had  not  professed  to  be 
religious  ;  but  for  one  who  calls  himself  a  Christian  thus  to  behave,  it  is  intolerable." 
5.  But  further  than  this  :  you  find  the  world  again  and  again  bringing  forward 
against  Christians  charges,  that  if  they  had  been  incurred  by  any  of  their  own  com- 
pany, they  would  never  have  thought  of  doing  so  much  as  adduce.  What  they 
would  regard  in  the  world  as  almost  evidence  of  spirit  and  of  high-mindeduess,  they 
cannot  tolerate  in  the  Christian.  6.  But  there  is  a  further  testimony,  that  the 
world  cannot  withhold  in  spite  of  itself— which  it  is,  thank  God,  daily  giving  ;  and 
that  is,  the  multitudes  who  are  brought  out  of  the  world,  and  brought  to  the  Rock 
of  our  hope.  The  Redeemer  draws  one  and  another  to  Himself ;  and  that,  not  by 
holding  out  to  them  earthly  bribes  and  temporal  inducements,  but  in  the  face  of  the 
world's  scoff  and  frown,  and  often  of  the  loss  of  reputation  and  of  every  earthly 
advantage.  How  many  a  time  has  the  messenger  of  Christ  been  summoned  to  the 
bed  of  sickness  !  how  many  a  time  has  the  trembling  and  dying  man  then  begun  to 
cry — "  Lead  me  to  the  Rock  that  is  higher  than  I  !  "  Happy  for  him  if  he  hath 
not  begun  too  late,  and  if  the  house  of  his  confidence  is  not  falling  in  ruins  around 
him,  when  it  is  too  late  to  "fly  for  refuge  to  the  hope  set  before  him."  {H.  Stowell, 
M.A.)  Our  Bock:— 1.  What  is  meant  by  these  eespective  "rocks"?  Of 
course,  it  is  clear  to  you  that  one  refers  to  the  rock  of  the  world,  and  the  other  to 
the  Rock  of  the  Christian.  1.  What  is  the  rock  of  the  world  ?  What  is  it  that  the 
world  seems  to  depend  upon  ?  There  are  a  great  many  people  in  the  world  who  are 
very  indifferent  to  God  ;  that  is,  they  "do  not  have  God  in  all  their  thoughts, "and 
do  not  seek  to  please  God  in  all  their  works.  And  there  are  a  great  many  people 
who  seem  to  think  that  God  is  altogether  indifferent  to  them  ;  and  therefore  they 
live  and  they  die,  careless  and  regardless  of  God  their  Saviour.  "Tush,  how  shall 
God  know  it  ? "  Now,  this  is  one  of  the  rocks  of  unconverted  men.  But  there  are 
others  who  take  a  different  view  of  the  matter.  These  persons  do  not  deny  that 
God  sees  everything,  that  He  knows  the  heart,  that  "from  Him  no  secrets  are 
hid  "  ;  and  therefore  they  seek  for  another  rock,  and  begin  at  once  to  magnify  God's 
mercy  :  "God  is  merciful ;  He  never  meant  to  condemn  the  world."  That  is  true  ; 
but  not  as  they  say  it.  A  third  class  will  not  venture  to  deny  this,  but  declare — 
"No  man  is  infallible  ;  every  man  is  liable  to  mistake  ;  why  should  it  be  supposed 
that  you  who  are  advocating  such  strictness  of  living,  such  holiness  of  life,  should 
be  right  when  there  are  such  multitudes  that  hold  a  contrary  opinion  ? "  In  other 
words,  these  persons  say  :  "What  so  many  people  think  cannot  be  wrong."  Now, 
does  not  the  Scripture  most  plainly  tell  us,  that  the  way  to  heaven  is  the  way  in 
which  very  few  people  go — that  it  is  a  "narrow  "  road,  and  that  the  great  bulk  of 
men  go  in  the  wide  road  which  leads  to  hell  ?  And  therefore  what  is  the  use  of 
talking  of  what  numbers  do  ?  If  you  had  five  thousand  of  your  acquaintance  in 
hell  with  youi-selves,  it  would  only  add  to  your  misery  and  not  help  your  happi- 


560  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ch^ 

ness  ;  and  if  you  stood  with  only  one  in  heaven,  whom  you  never  saw  before,  your 
happiness  would  not  be  the  less.  Then  again,  there  are  many  who  acknowledge 
that  it  must  be  an  individual  question  after  all ;  and  therefore,  instead  of  consider- 
ing what  other  people  do,  they  dwell  entirely  upon  what  they  do  themselves.  Hence 
we  find  a  great  body  of  people  declaring  that  they  have  done  no  harm, — thus  build- 
ing upon  their  morality,  and  thinking  to  raise  upon  it  such  a  temple  as  the  Lord 
will  dwell  in.  How  very  moral  were  the  Scribes  and  Pharisees  !  There  is  some- 
thing more  necessary  than  mere  outward  moral  conduct.  1.  Instead  of  dwelling 
longer  upon  the  rocks  of  the  world,  let  me  turn  at  once  to  that  which  is  intended  by 
the  "  Rock  "  of  the  believer.  Christ  is  that  Rock.  But  it  may  be  well  to  examine 
into  the  special  benefits  of  this  Rock.  In  the  first  place,  it  is  in  Christ  that  we 
really  learn  the  nature  of  sin.  So  great  is  sin  that  God  could  only  pardon  it  by  the 
death  of  His  dear  Son ;  in  Christ,  therefore,  I  see  the  exceeding  sinfulness  of  sin, 
engraved  as  on  a  rock,  even  in  the  side  whence  flowed  the  water  and  the  blood. 
Further  :  I  read  also  God's  mercy — not  man's  mercy,  but  the  tender  mercy  of  our 
God,  tempered  with  His  justice.  "Mercy  and  truth  are  met  together  ;  righteous- 
ness and  peace  have  kissed  each  other,"  in  Christ.  "What  claims,  then,  has 
this  Rock  upon  our  attention?  II.  Wherein  the  difference  between 
THESE  TWO  ROCKS  MAY  BE  SAID  TO  CONSIST.  I  might  mention  that  all  other 
rocks  end  in  doubt,  but  this  in  certainty.  None  of  the  rocks  to  which  I  have 
referred  can  give  us  security  in  the  last  day ;  but  the  Saviour  has  told  us,  that 
''whosoever  trusteth  in  Him  shall  never  be  ashamed."  There  is  no  disappointment 
for  those  who  are  really  in  Christ.  And  we  will  not  stay  to  consider  what  it  shall 
be  hereafter,  but  we  may  consider  what  it  is  now.  Under  any  other  circumstances 
than  that  of  seeing  clearly  our  interest  in  Christ,  our  present  life  must  be  a  life  of 
constant  anxiety,  if  it  be  accompanied  with  any  thought  concerning  the  future. 
But  as  regards  the  believer,  he  has  peace,  and  it  is  an  abiding  peace.  "Thou  shalt 
keep  him  in  perfect  peace  whose  mind  is  stayed  on  Thee,  because  he  trusteth  in 
Thee."  Once  more,  I  may  say,  there  will  be  none  of  that  disappointment  which  we 
so  constantly  find  happening  among  men  of  the  world,  who  have  chosen  as  their 
rock  some  of  the  pleasures,  or  outward  circumstances  of  life  ;  for  we  know  that  in 
Christ  we  have  all  that  we  can  require.  **  All  things  are  ours  ;  for  we  are  Christ's, 
and  Christ  is  God's."  But  just  observe  that  there  are  others  who  are  called  upon  to 
testify  of  these  facts.  **  For  their  rock  is  not  as  our  Rock,  even  our  enemies  them- 
selves being  judges."  Our  enemies  are  constrained  to  acknowledge  that  they  wish 
they  believed  as  we  believe,  for  then  they  would  be  happy.  {H.  M.  VUliers,  M.A.) 
The  excelleiicy  of  Israel's  Rock: — I.  Jehovah  is  supremely  worthy  of  our 
CONFIDENCE  AND  DEVOTION.  1.  He  is  the  sourcc  of  our  being  (Psa.  c.  3  ;  Acts  xvii. 
29).  The  supporting  as  well  as  the  producing  cause  of  created  existence.  2.  The 
source  of  blessing.  (1)  Redemption.  (2)  Sustenance.  (3)  Instruction.  (4)  Safety. 
3.  He  deserves  our  most  humble  and  hearty  respect  and  confidence.     II.  Jehovah's 

GRACIOUS    DEALINGS    FURNISH    A    PROPER    THEME    FOR     HiS     SERVANTS'    PRAISE. 

1.  Their  benefit  only  is  intended,  not  God's,  in  His  dispensations  towards  them. 

2.  They  only  are  benefited,  not  God,  who  needs  nothing,  and  can  receive  no  favour 
from  them.  3.  They  deserve  not  such  benefits,  either  in  whole  or  in  part.  4.  They 
can  make  no  adequate  return  to  cancel  even  the  smallest  part  of  their  obliga- 
tions. 5.  Gratitude  is  their  proper  feeling,  and  praise  the  proper  expression  of  it. 
III.  Jehovah's  excellence  extorts,  and  shall  extort,  the  homage  and 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT  OF  EVEN  His  ENEMIES.  Hear  what  is  recorded  in  the  case  of 
the  Egyptian  magicians  (Exod.  viii.  18,  19,  and  ix.  11) ;  of  Pharaoh  (Exod.  ix.  27, 
28,  and  x.  16,  17) ;  of  Pharaoh's  host  (Exod.  xiv.  25) ;  of  Balaam  (Numb,  xxiii.  7, 
8,  18-24) ;  of  the  Philistines  (1  Sam.  iv.  8) ;  of  Baal's  worshippers  (1  Kings  xviii. 
39) ;  of  Nebuchadnezzar  (Dan.  iii.  29,  and  iv.  28-37)  ;  of  Darius  (Dan.  vi.  26,  27). 
Conclusion — 1.  The  subject  suggests  serious  inquiry.  Is  the  Rock  of  Ages  our  Rock  ? 
Do  we  esteem  Him,  trust  Him,  devote  ourselves  to  Him,  &c.  ?  2.  The  subject  offers 
serious  admonition  (ver.  4).  3.  The  subject  gives  us  a  solemn  warning — (1)  Against 
rebellion  (vers.  32-35).  (2)  Against  indifference  (vers.  46,  47).  (3)  Against 
apostasy  (vers.  15-25).  4.  The  subject  encourages  humble  confidence  and 
invigorating  hope  (ver.  43 ;  see  Deut.  xxxiii.  25-29).  {Sketches  of  Four  Hwndred 
Sermons. )  No  Rock  like  the  God  of  Israel : — I.  Illustrate  the  metaphor. 
1.  When  we  speak  of  God  as  a  Rock  in  reference  to  Himself,  the  ideas  are  such  as 
these — (1)  Strength.  (2)  Stability.  (3)  Perpetuity.  2.  Consider  the  metaphor  in 
reference  to  what  God  is  to  His  believing  children.  (1)  The  Rock  of  their  defence. 
(2)  The  Rock  of  their  foundation.     They  rely  on  and  trust  in  Him.     (3)  Their  Rock 


CHAP.  XXXII.]  DEUTERONOMY.  561 

of  shelter  and  shade.  (4)  The  Rock  of  their  supplies.  II.  The  triumphant  com- 
PAEISON  WHICH  IS  INSTITUTED.  To  the  pagan,  infidel,  sensualist,  &c.,  your  rock 
is  not  as  our  Rock.  You  have  not  the  security,  the  sensible  enjoyments,  the 
supplies — in  one  word,  the  happiness  which  the  people  of  God  possess.  1.  We 
appeal  to  your  experience.  What  changes  do  you  profess  to  have  experienced  ? 
What  evils  removed  ?  What  principles  implanted  ?  2.  We  appeal  to  your  enjoy- 
ments. What  peace — what  comfort — what  hope— what  real  bliss  ?  3.  We  appeal 
to  your  practice.  From  what  follies  and  sins  have  you  been  delivered  ?  Are  your 
principles  more  pure?  Spirit,  conversation,  temper,  tc.  4.  We  appeal  to  our 
advantages  in  sickness  and  death.  What  security — what  ecstasies — what  clear 
enrapturing  prospects  I    You  know  that  your  Rock  is  not,   &c.     Application — 

I.  Invite  the  sinner  to  choose  the  Lord  for  the  Rock  of  his  salvation.  Flee  to  Him 
by  repMitance.  Build  on  Him  by  faith  in  Christ  Jesus.  2.  Let  the  Christian  be 
satisfied  with  his  choice.  The  everlasting  God  is  his  refuge.  {Sketches  of  Sermons.) 
Testimony  of  unbelievers  to  Christianity : — 1.  We  find  sceptics  and  unbelievers 
generally  very  loud  in  praise  of  the  progress  of  our  modern  world.  They  talk 
largely  of  the  migbty  strides  science,  knowledge,  and  practical  wisdom  have  made 
in  these  last  times.  What  is  this  but  the  concession  that  their  rock  is  not  as  our 
Rock  ?  2.  Again,  how  striking  is  the  testimony  which  they  give  in  their  behaviour 
in  trial  and  when  brought  face  to  face  with  death  !  Who  has  ever  known  a  sound 
and  faithful  Christian  to  change  his  religion  in  the  last  exti'emities  of  life  ?  But  it 
is  quite  otherwise  with  those  who  build  on  some  other  than  the  Christian  Rock. 
Then  the  gay  Lord  Chesterfield  sympathises  with  the  words  of  Solomon,  that  all 
this  world  is  vanity  and  vexation  of  spirit.  Then  Byi'on  acknowledges  that  whatever 
he  had  been,  "'Twere  something  better  not  to  be."  Then  Talleyrand  confesses 
that  he  has  nothing  left  "except  great  fatigue  of  body  and  mind,  a  profound 
sentiment  of  discouragement  for  the  future  and  disgust  for  the  past."  Then 
Hobbes  declares,  "Were  I  master  of  the  world,  I  would  give  it  all  to  live  one  day 
longer."  Then  Volney  kneels  in  despair  to  invoke  the  help  of  the  God  whose 
existence  he  denied.  Then  Paine  in  his  dreadful  loneliness  lifts  his  wild  cry  to  that 
Jesus  whom  he  blasphemed.  Then  Yoltaire  sends  for  a  priest,  curses  his  brethren 
in  imbelief  as  contributors  to  his  wretchedness,  and  dies  in  dread  complaint  of 
abandonment  by  God  and  man.  Then  Hume  cannot  bear  to  be  alone,  because  of  the 
terrors  that  torment  him  in  the  absence  of  his  jesting  friends.  3.  In  like  manner  I 
might  refer  to  the  myriads  of  conversions  from  the  sceptical  and  unbelieving  world 
to  the  reverent  acceptance  of  our  Christian  faith  and  hope.  The  bloody  Saul  of 
Tarsus  ;  the  wayward,  sensual  Augustine,  &c.  We  think  of  Lord  Littleton  and 
Gilbert  West  sitting  down  to  write  essays  in  confutation  of  certain  great  events 
recorded  in  the  New  Testament,  and  becoming  so  thoroughly  convinced  by  their 
examinations  that  they  surrendered  all  their  scepticism  and  turned  their  essays  into 
noble  treatises  in  vindication  of  the  Christian  cause.  5.  Christians,  you  have  made 
no  mistake  in  giving  your  hearts'  confidence  to  the  religion  of  Jesus.  You  have 
planted  your  foundations  on  the  solid  Rock.  Only  maintain  your  hold  and 
dependence  on  it ;  and  when  the  revilers  of  Newton's  faith  are  hopelessly  crying, 
"God  of  Sir  Isaac  Newton,  have  mercy  upon  me  ! "  you  shall  be  saying  with  the 
dying  Payson :  "  I  swim— I  swim— in  a  flood  of  glory  1 "    {J.  A.  Seiss,  D.D.) 

Ver.  35.  Their  foot  shall  slide  in  due  time,— T^  awakening  of  svnners ;— This  is 
the  culmination  of  the  most  dreadful  denunciation  of  sinners  to  be  found  in  the 
Bible.  ^  L  The  insecurity  of  the  sinner.  A  sense  of  sin  and  impending  punish- 
ment is  ever  present  in  man's  heart.  Heathen  nations  of  the  old  and  of  the  new 
world  recognised  it,  and  established  forms  of  religious  worship  in  order  to  avoid  it. 
But  the  Bible  makes  assurance  doubly  sure,  and  issues  solemn  warnings  of  the  fact. 

II.  The  certainty  of  the  result.  Human  life  knows  no  such  thing  as  remain- 
ing in  one  place.  Man  is  ever  going  forward  or  backward — which  depends  upon 
himself.  Men  shut  their  eyes  and  fancy  themselves  secure.  None  plunge  headlong 
into  the  extremities  of  sin  at  once.  Nearly  every  one  can  recollect  the  first  false- 
hood, the  first  profane  word,  the  first  dishonest  act,  after  they  have  reached  depths 
of  depravity  of  which  they  never  dreamed.  They  took  the  devil  for  their  master, 
and  he  presses  them  hard  at  every  turn.  The  down-slide  is  governed  by  an 
inexorable  law.  III.  Consider  where  they  are  sliding.  Away  from  virtue, 
away  from  peace,  away  from  good  company,  away  from  God!  Men  watch  the 
downward  process  of  the  drunkard  with  pity  and  disgust  The  wilful  wrecking  of 
«11  that  ifl  noble  in  man  seems  incomprehensible.    (/.  0.  Feck,  D.D.) 

36 


562  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxxir. 

Ver.  36.  For  the  Lord  shall  judge  His  people.— Po«;«r  for  the  powerless  .—I.  The 
PEOPLE  WHOM  Jehovah  owns  and  claims  as  "His  people"  and  "His 
t^KRVANTS,"  God  has  a  people  peculiarly  His  own.  You  must  be  blind,  indeed, 
when  looking  into  your  Bible,  not  to  see  that  this  fact  is  one  of  the  most  prominent 
tilings  set  forth  in  the  Book  of  God.  Moreover,  this  people,  whom  Jehovah  calls 
"His  people"  and  "  His  servants,"  are  held  by  Him  as  His  especial  property,  as 
His  own  inheritance.  "  The  Lord's  portion  is  His  people."  What  a  portion  !  One 
might  easily  understand  the  Psalmist,  and  the  prophet  too,  when  they  said,  "The 
Lord  is  my  portion,  saith  my  soul "  ;  and  a  blessed  portion  it  is  for  a  poor  ruined 
sinner  to  have  the  covenant  God  as  his  portion.  But  reverse  it,  and  see  how  God 
claims  His  people,  and  calls  them  "  His  portion,"  as  if  they  were  worth  something 
— as  if  they  were  of  some  value.  I  must  not,  however,  overlook  the  second  term 
employed  in  our  text — "servants."  "His servants  ye  are  to  whom  ye  obey."  If, 
then,  vour  life,  your  heart,  your  soul,  and  all  your  powers  are  wholly  at  the  service 
of  God  ;  if  that  service  is  your  delight,  and  you  meet  Him  in  it,  surely  you  may 
come  to  the  conclusion  that  you  belong  to  His  servants.  But  there  is  another  point : 
that  His  people  and  His  servants  essentially  differ  from  all  people  beside.  They 
were  separated  from  among  the  nations.  God's  people  and  God's  servants  differ 
from  the  world  in  their  life,  in  their  language,  and  in  their  laws.  IL  The 
EXIGENCIES  TO  WHICH  THEY  WEEB  REDUCED.  They  are  Said,  in  my  text,  to  be 
seen  by  their  own  God  as  having  lost  all  their  power,  and  "none  shut  up  or  left" — 
a  most  affecting  description  of  God's  chosen  people  under  the  ruined  condition 
into  which  sin  has  brought  them  ;  and  also  of  the  extremity  to  which  they  are 
reduced  in  personal  experience,  before  God's  deliverance  appears  on  their  behalf. 
"What  a  marked  description  of  man's  ruin  under  the  fall,  and  by  actual  sin ! — so 
utterly  undone  as  to  have  no  power  !  God  saw  that  their  power  was  gone.  "When 
the  poor  sinner  is  first  awakened  by  the  grace  of  God,  and  begins  to  feel  the  import- 
ance of  obtaining  salvation,  he  does  not  believe  that  he  has  no  power,  but  sets  to 
immediately  to  put  forth  his  power,  determines  upon  reading  much,  hearing  much, 
praying  much,  avoiding  much  that  is  evil,  and  doing  much  that  is  good.  Moreover, 
in  the  language  of  my  text,  the  people  and  servants  of  God  are  to  be  expelled  from 
all  false  refuges,  "None  shut  up  or  left."  There  are  exigencies  in  the  believer's 
experience  with  regard  to  things  spiritual  and  to  things  providential  that  answer 
exactly  to  this  description — "none  shut  up  or  left"— as  regards  experience,  not  a 
hope  left ;  not  a  vestige  of  supposed  strength — not  a  false  refuge  but  will  be  swept 
aAvay  as  a  refuge  of  lies  ;  not  a  helper  left.  Moreover,  it  may  imply,  in  spiritual 
experience,  no  comfort  shut  up  or  left,  no  reserve,  nothing  to  fall  back  upon,  not  a 
promise  to  cling  to,  not  a  sermon  which  he  is  supposed  to  have  heard  to  profit,  but 
rises  up  in  judgment  against  him  !  What  !  none  of  his  holier  feelings  ?  No,  none 
of  them.  What,  none  of  his  earnest  prayers  and  his  believing  confidence  ?  No, 
none  of  them — "none  shut  up  or  left."  Now,  whether  as  to  the  spiritual  experi- 
ence, or  the  providential  experience  of  His  people,  He  frequently,  to  show  His 
wisdom.  His  grace,  His  power.  His  love  and  condescension,  strips  man  of  his  all, 
that  He  Himself  may  become  his  all,  and  that  Christ  may  be  found  to  be  all  in  all 
to  him.^  in.  By  the  Lord's  judging  His  people  I  understand  His  judging  for 
them  ;  judging  His  enemies  on  account  of  their  cruelty  ;  judging  for  them  so  as  to 
decide  that  they  are  His  owti — that  the  chastisement  has  been  carried  on  long 
enough,  and  that  their  enemies  shall  then  be  punished,  as  in  the  preceding  verse, 
"To  Me  belongeth  vengeance."  This  is  what  I  understand  by  His  judging  His 
people.  The  other  phrase,  "repent  Himself  for  His  servants,"  means  an  alteration, 
of  course,  in  the  events  of  Providence,  and  in  His  manner  of  dealing  with  His  people  ; 
that  He  changes  the  order  of  things.  From  this  we  derive  the  spiritual  truth,  that 
however  the  Lord  chastises  His  people,  and  however  lontr  the  chastisement  may 
continue,  there  will  come  a  moment  when  the  Lord  will  "repent  Himself,"  or 
change  His  course,  and  say,  "Their  affliction  is  at  an  end,  and  I  will  not  afflict  or 
grieve  My  people  any  more."  Then  shall  the  froward  Ephraim  be  spoken  to  as  by 
the  prophet,  "  I  have  seen  his  ways,  and  I  will  heal  him."  God  is  a  never- failing 
Deliverer  to  His  people  ;  and  we  will  glance  at  a  few  things  in  which  this  is  mani- 
fested. The  first  is,  that  His  covenant  faithfulness  is  called  forth  when  His 
people's  faithlessness  has  arisen  to  its  utmost  height  and  been  chastised.  If  you  ask 
me  what  pertains  to  a  Christian  in  himself,  I  should,  for  one,  confess,  after  all  the 
years  I  have  known  of  the  Lord,  that  one  word,  "faithlessness,"  would  mark  all. 
If  I  am  asked  what  constitutes  the  character  and  conduct  of  the  Deity  towards  His 
Church  and  people  in  every  age,  amidst  all  their  afflictions,  and  when  they  are 


CHAP,  xxxii.]  DEUTERONOMY,  663 

reduced  to  the  lowest  ebb,  I  should  say,  "  Righteousness  is  the  girdle  of  His  loins, 
and  faithfulness  the  girdle  of  His  reins."  One  word  more  ;  entire  deliverance  is 
certain  when  God  interferes.  He  who  has  delivered  will  deliver  ;  and  be  assured, 
poor  tried  soul,  whoever  thou  art,  and  in  whichever  of  those  exigencies  thou  art 
placed — ^be  assured  of  this  one  thing,  that  if  the  Lord  has  begun  to  judge  for  you, 
has  changed  che  course  and  order  of  His  proceedings  for  you,  has  created  a  ray  of  hope 
and  given  you  spiritual  desires  which  you  did  not  before  possess,  has  communicated 
the  ability  to  pour  out  your  soul  in  pleading  with  Him,  and  to  hang  upon  Him  though 
it  appears  as  it  were  by  a  thread,  He  will  perfect  your  deliverance  in  due  time. 
Every  enemy  shall  be  vanquished.  Every  difficulty  shall  disappear.  {J.  Irons.) 
Man's  extremity,  GocCs  opportunity : — To  ungodly  men  the  time  of  their  fall  is  fatal ; 
there  is  no  rising  again  for  them.  They  mount  higher  and  higher  upon  the  ladder 
of  riches  ;  but  at  last  they  can  climb  no  higher,  their  feet  slide,  and  all  is  over. 
This  calamity  hasteneth  on  (ver.  35).  It  is  not  so  with  three  characters  of  whom 
we  will  now  consider  :  they  are  judged  in  this  world  that  they  may  not  be  condemned 
hereafter  (1  Cor.  xi.  32  ;  Psa.  xxxvii.  24).  I.  The  Lord's  own  Church,  1.  A 
Church  may  be  sorely  tried — "power  gone,  none  left."  (1)  By  persecution.  (2)  By 
removals,  death,  poverty.  (3)  By  the  lack  of  a  faithful  ministry.  (4)  By  general 
falling  oflF  of  members.  Various  circumstances  may  scatter  a  people — internal 
dissension,  pestilent  heresy,  lack  of  spiritual  life.  2.  But  it  may  then  cry  to  God. 
(1)  If  indem  His  people,  the  covenant  stands,  and  He  will  judge  them.  (2)  If  still 
His  servants,  the  bond  holds  on  His  side,  and  He  will  repent  Himself  for  them. 

(3)  His  eye  is  ever  upon  them,  and  their  eye  should  be  up  to  Him.  3.  He  will 
return  and  revive  His  own  Church  (ver.  39).     4.  Meanwhile  the  trial  is  permitted — 

(1)  To  find  out  His  servants  and  drive  out  hypocrites  (Isa.  xxxiii.  14).  (2)  To  test 
the  faith  of  sincere  saints,  and  to  strengthen  it.  (3)  To  manifest  His  own  grace  by 
supporting  them  under  the  trying  times,  and  by  visiting  them  with  future  blessing. 

(4)  To  secure  to  Himself  the  glory  when  the  happier  days  are  granted.  II.  The 
TRIED  BELIEVER.  1.  His  power  may  be  gone.  Bodily  health  fails,  prudence  is 
baffled,  skill  is  taken  away,  courage  sinks,  even  spiritual  force  departs  (Sam.  iii. 
17,  18).  2.  His  earthly  help  may  fail.  A  man  without  a  friend  moves  the  com- 
passion of  God.  3.  He  may  be  assailed  by  doubts  and  fears,  and  hardly  know  what 
to  do  with  himself  (Job  iii.  23-26).  4.  His  hope  lies  in  the  compassion  of  God  :  He 
has  no  pleasure  in  putting  His  people  to  grief  (Micah  vii.  19).  5.  Such  sharp  trials 
may  be  sent  because  —  (1)  Nothing    less  would  cure  the  evil    hidden  within. 

(2)  Nothing  less  might  suffice  to  bring  the  whole  heart  to  God  alone.  (3)  Nothing 
less  might  affect  the  believer's  future  life.  (4)  Nothing  less  might  complete  his  experi- 
ence, enlarge  his  acquaintance  with  the  Word,  and  perfect  his  testimony  for  God. 
III.  The  CONVINCED  sinner.  He  is  cleaned  out  of  all  that  wherein  he  prided 
himself.  1.  His  self-righteousness  is  gone.  2.  His  ability  to  perform  acceptable 
works  is  gone.  3.  His  secret  hopes  which  were  shut  up  are  now  all  dead  and 
buried.  4.  His  proud  romantic  dreams  are  gone.  5.  His  worldly  delights,  his  bold 
defiance,  his  unbelief,  his  big  talk,  his  carelessness,  his  vain  confidence,  are  all  gone. 
6.  Nothing  is  left  but  the  pity  of  God.  When  the  tide  has  ebbed  out  to  the  very 
uttermost,  it  turns.  The  prodigal  had  spent  all  before  he  returned.  Empty- 
handed  sinners  are  welcome  to  the  fulness  of  Christ.     (C.  H.  Sjmrgeon.) 

Vers.  39-41.  See  now  that  I,  even  I,  am  He,  and  there  is  no  Gk)d  with  Vie.— The 
royal  prerogative: — I.  None  but  the  Lord  can  wound  or  heal.  1.  The  Lord 
alone  can  spiritually  wound.  It  is  the  Holy  Spirit's  work  to  convince  of  sin,  and 
until  He  puts  forth  His  power  the  preacher  may  preach  himself  dumb  with  weari- 
ness and  blind  with  weeping,  but  no  result  can  possibly  follow.  2.  None  but  the 
Lord  can  heal.  Gospel  truth  is  sufficient  in  itself  to  comfort  all  that  mourn,  but  it 
will  comfort  nobody  so  long  as  the  natural  unbelief  of  the  heart  remains.  Get  a 
hold  of  a  lacerated  spirit,  torn  with  unbelief,  and  try  what  you  can  do.  Say, 
"Trust  in  the  Lord,  my  friend,"  and  he  replies,  "  I  cannot  trust. "  Tell  him  Christ 
Jesus  came  into  the  world  to  save  sinners  ;  and  he  says  he  knows  that,  but  he 
cannot  get  hold  of  it.  Do  your  duty  %vith  him,  for  whether  you  can  heal  him  or 
not  you  are  bound  to  set  the  Gospel  before  him  :  but  you  shall  find  that  you  have 
worked  in  vain  if  you  have  gone  in  your  own  strength.  God  can  use  you  to  heal  a 
broken  heart,  but  you  cannot  do  it  yourself.  II.  The  Lord  can  wound  and  He 
CAN  HEAL.  I.  The  Lord  can  wound.  He  can  pierce  the  most  unlikely  heart. 
Therefore,  despair  of  none.  The  wretch  who  is  the  nearest  approach  to  an  incarnate 
devil  may  yet  become  as  an  angel  of  God.     2.  What  a  very  sweet  side  of  th&-ti^li 


564  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUrTRATOR.  [chap,  xxxii. 

is  the  second  part  of  it — ^namely,  that  He  can  heal.  There  are  some  awful  cases  of 
bleeding  wounds  !  I  have  known  the  heart  bleed  as  though  it  would  bleed  to  death 
beneath  the  sword  of  conviction.  Some  are  driven  to  despair,  and  have  been  ready 
to  lay  violent  hands  upon  themselves  in  the  bitterness  of  their  souls.  Let  it  ring 
out  like  a  trumpet,  that  these  poor  despairing  ones  may  hear  it,— the  Lord  can 
heal.  There  is  no  case  so  desperate  but  what  Jehovah-Jesus  can  recover  it. 
Despair !  thou  must  let  thy  captive  go.  Despondency  1  thou  must  open  thy  prison- 
house  when  Jesus  comes.  III.  The  Lord  does  wound  and  does  heal.  1.  I  have 
a  bundle  of  arrows  which  I  have  seen  shot  at  different  times  from  the  bow  of  God  so 
as  to  wound  men.  (1)  The  arrow  of  continual  gentleness.  Augustine  tells  of  one  to 
whom  God  was  so  wonderfully  kind,  and  the  man  was  so  wonderfully  bad,  that  at 
last  he  grew  astonished  at  God's  goodness,  and  since  the  Lord  continued  to  load  him 
with  benefits,  he  turned  round  and  cried,  "Most  benignant  God,  I  am  ashamed  of 
being  Thine  enemy  any  longer.  I  confess  my  sin  and  repent  of  it."  (2)  "God 
is  angry  with  the  wicked  every  day."  Surely  this  should  cut  you  to  the  quick. 
(3)  "  He  that  believeth  not  is  condemned  already."  (4)  "The  wicked  shall  be  turned 
into  hell,"  &c.  (5)  "Thou  hast  destroyed  thyself. "  (6)  "  You  are  dead  in  sin.  You 
have  destroyed  yourself,  but  you  cannot  save  youi-self."  2.  Now,  I  will  hold  up 
before  you  the  bottle  of  balm.  When  a  soul  is  wounded,  the  Lord  applies  His 
sacred  surgery  to  the  heart.  He  has  healed  some  of  us,  (1)  The  particular  bottle 
of  balm  which  He  used  in  healing  me  is  one  which  I  know  well,  and  shall  never 
forget.  This  was  the  label,  "Look unto  Me  and  be  ye  saved,  all  ye  ends  of  the  earth, 
for  I  am  God,  and  beside  Me  there  is  none  else."  Why,  do  you  know?  I  was 
afraid  of  God  until  I  heard  that  God  was  in  Christ,  and  that  I  was  to  look  to  God  in 
Christ,  and  that  the  very  God  whom  I  dreaded  would  save  me.  That  revelation 
came  home  with  Divine  power  to  my  soul !  The  preacher  said,  "Look.  This  is  all 
that  is  wanted."  "There,"  he  said,  "a  fool  can  look  ;  a  little  child  can  look;  a 
half  idiot  can  look ;  a  dying  man  can  look."  "Look,"  said  he,  "and  it  is  done." 
Did  I  really  imderstand  him — that  I  was  only  to  look  to  Christ  dying  on  the  Cross 
for  me,  and  see  God  making  an  atonement  for  my  sin  in  the  person  of  His  Son — that 
I  was  only  to  look,  and  I  should  live  at  once  ?  It  was  even  so,  and  I  did  look.  My 
burden  passed  away.  (2)  Here  is  another  drop  of  balm, — When  a  man  is  wounded 
he  feels  that  he  cannot  help  himself ;  but  then  there  comes  in  this  precious  truth — 
that  the  Spirit  of  God  can  do  it.  0  you  wounded  ones,  may  the  great  Spirit  show 
you  at  this  time  the  person  of  the  dear  Son  of  God — God  and  man.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
Neither  is  there  any  that  can  deliver  out  of  My  hand. — The  undeliverableness  of 
7na/n  from  the  hand  of  Ood : — 1.  The  continuance  of  every  man's  existence  rests 
entirely  upon  the  Divine  will.  2.  The  preservation  of  every  sinner's  existence  must 
be  ascribed  to  Divine  forbearance.  3.  The  well-being  of  a  moral  intelligence  is  im- 
possible apart  from  supreme  sympathy  with  God.  All  moral  hells  and  heavens  are 
in  the  loathing  or  the  loving.  What  then  is  our  duty  and  interest !  To  cherish 
supreme  love  for  the  Absolute.     {Homilist. ) 

Yers.  46,  47.  Ck)nmiand  your  children  to  observe  to  do  all  the  words  of  this  law. 

— The  advaTitage  of  a  right  education:—!.  The  advantages,  and  indeed  neces- 
sity, OP  RIGHT  education.  Other  creatures  arrive,  without'their  own  care,  at  the 
small  perfection  of  which  they  are  capable,  and  there  stop  ;  but  the  whole  of  man's 
existence,  it  appears,  is  a  state  of  discipline  and  progression.  Youth  is  his  prepara- 
tion for  maturer  years ;  this  whole  life  for  another  to  come.  Nature  gives  the 
abilities  to  improve  ;  but  the  actual  improvement  we  are  to  have  the  pleasure  and 
the  reward  of  giving  ourselves  and  one  another.  Some  minds,  indeed,  as  some  soils, 
may  be  fruitful  without  cultivation  ;  others  barren  with  it ;  but  the  general 
necessity  is  the  same  in  both  cases  ;  and  in  both,  the  richest,  and  most  capable  of 
producing  good  fruit,  will  be  overrun,  if  neglected,  with  the  rankest  and  worst 
weeds.  Regular  cultivation  of  the  understanding,  then,  is  what  good  education 
begins  "with.  The  earliest  branch  of  this,  acquaintance  with  useful  languages, 
unlocks  the  treasures  of  ancient  learning,  and  makes  the  improvements  of  every  age 
and  climate  our  own.  Then  the  politer  parts  of  literature  most  agreeably  open 
the  faculties,  and  form  the  taste  of  young  persons  ;  adorn  our  discourse,  and  endear 
our  company,  in  riper  years  ;  give  a  grace  to  wisdom  and  virtue  ;  relieve  the  fatigue 
of  our  busy  hours,  and  elegantly  fill  up  the  leisure  of  our  vacant  ones.  At  the  same 
time,  the  art  of  just  reasoning  opportunely  comes  in,  to  curb  the  licence  of  imagina- 
tion, and  directs  its  force  ;  to  fix  the  foundations  of  science  ;  ascertain  the  degrees  of 
probability,  and  unveil  specious  error.     With  this  guide  we  proceed  surely.     Know- 


CHAP,  xxxii.]  DEUTERONOMY.  565 

ledge  of  nature  opens  the  universe  to  our  view  ;  enables  us  to  judge  worthily  of  the 
constitution  of  things  ;  secures  us  from  the  weakness  of  vulgar  superstitions ;  and 
contributes,  in  many  ways,  to  the  health  and  security,  the  convenience  and  pleasure 
of  human  life.  If  from  hence  we  go  on  to  survey  mankind  :  a  contemplation  of  their 
different  states  in  different  ages,  and  especially  of  their  ancient  regulations  and  laws, 
the  public  wisdom  of  brave  and  great  nations  will  furnish  variety  of  useful  reflec- 
tions to  the  mind  ;  often  teaching  us  to  improve  our  own  con<litions,  often  to  be 
happy  in  it.  But  if  education  stop  here,  it  hath  only  given  abilities  and  powers,  the 
direction  of  which  to  right  or  wong  purposes  is  greatly  uncertain  still.  He  that 
knows  not  the  proper  use  of  his  own  being ;  what  is  man,  and  whereto  serveth  he ;  what 
is  his  good,  and  what  is  his  evil  (Ecclus.  xviii.  8),  may  easily  employ  his  other 
knowledge  so  as  to  be  much  the  worse  for  it.  This  inquiry,  then,  is  the  important 
one.  And  when  should  the  science  of  life  be  taught,  but  in  the  beginning  of  hfe,  before 
evil  habits  are  added  to  original  depravity  ;  whilst  the  natural  regard  to  truth  and 
right,  the  only  inward  restraint  of  incautious  youth,  remains  comparatively  un- 
corrupt,  and  the  seeds  of  sin  lie  yet  somewhat  loose  on  the  surface  oi  the  mind  ;  much 
harder  to  be  cleared  away  when  once  they  have  taken  root,  and  twisted  themselves 
strongly  about  the  heart.  This,  therefore,  is  the  favourable  opportunity,  in  which 
authority  and  reason  must  exert  at  once  their  joint  force.  For  discipline  without 
instruction  is  mere  tyranny  ;  and  instructi(m  without  discipline,  little  better  than 
useless  talk.  But  the  most  serious  part  of  education  is  wanting  still:  the  part 
which  leads  us,  by  the  esteem  of  moral  excellence,  to  honour  and  love  that  Being  m 
whom  the  perfection  of  it  dwells  ;  and  extends  our  inward  sense  of  duty,  suggested 
first  by  the  low  and  short-Uved  relations  between  us  and  our  fellow-creatures,  to  the 
highest  possible  and  eternal  object  of  it,  the  Creator  and  Ruler  of  this  universe. 
II.  All  persons  concerned  should  endeavour,  with  united  care,  in  their 

STATIONS,  that  THESE  ADVANTAGES  MAY  BE  EFFECTUALLY  OBTAINED.      To  yoU  who 

are  parents,  nature  itself  hath  given  a  tender  concern  for  your  children's  welfare  as 
your  ewn  ;  and  reminds  you  justly,  that  as  you  have  brought  them  into  the  dangers 
of  life,  your  business  it  is  to  provide  that  they  get  well  through  them.  You  may  be 
negligent  of  your  son's  instruction  ;  but  it  is  on  you,  as  well  as  himself,  that  his 
ignorance  and  contemptibleness  will  bring  both  reproach  and  inconvenience.  You 
may  be  regardless  of  his  morals  ;  but  you  may  be  the  person  who  will  at  last  the 
most  severely  feel  his  want  of  them.  You  may  be  indifferent  about  his  religion  ;  but 
remember,  dutifulness  to  you  is  one  great  precept  of  religion  ;  and  all  the  rest  pro- 
mote such  habits,  as  you  may  bitterly  repent,  when  it  is  too  late,  your  omission  to 
cultivate  in  him  ;  and  live  and  die  miserable  on  his  account,  whom  timely  care 
would  have  made  your  joy  and  honour.     {Archbishop  Seeker.) 

Ver.  47.  For  it  is  not  a  vain  thing  for  you ;  because  it  is  your  ^e.—Beligion  a 
necessity  .—Religion  is  not  a  luxury,  but  a  necessity  of  our  being.  It  is  not  a  vain 
service,  because  it  is  our  life.  Immersed  as  men  are  in  the  world,  and  conversant 
with  material  interests,  it  is  difficult  for  them  to  feel  this  reality  and  absolute 
necessity  of  religion  for  their  best  life.  There  has  been  too  much  colour  given  to 
the  presumption  that  religion  was  not  deeply  grounded  and  mlaid  m  our  nature,  but 
was  a  gift  from  without,  a  factitious  culture  and  experience  supennduced  upon  it, 
not  the  true  working  of  the  utmost  being  with  all  its  powers.  For  religion  has  been 
offered  to  man  too  much  as  a  strange,  unnatural,  and  special  thing,  not  as  the  real 
light  of  Ufe.  It  has  been  enveloped  in  mystery,  surrounded  by  a  formidable  array 
of  pains  and  penalties,  inculcated  as  supernatural,  not  only  m  the  sanction  and 
revelation  of  its  truths,  but  in  their  incorporation  and  assimilation  to  the  soul. 
The  first  thing  to  be  done,  therefore,  is  to  create  in  men  a  behef  that  religion  is  not  a 
manufactured  want,  but  a  natural  necessity  of  our  being  ;  that,  instead  ot  its  bemg 
an  innate  grace  of  temperament  and  constitution  which,  like  genius,  some  have 
and  others  have  not,  and  many  do  without,  it  is  the  bread  of  life  for  all.     1.  iHB 

NATURE  OF  MAN  BEARS  UNEQUIVOCAL  TESTIMONY  TO  THE  NECESSITY  OF   RELIGION. 

*♦  In  scepticism,"  said  Goethe,  • '  is  no  good  thing."  Religion  is  a  later  development, 
as  wisdom  in  general  is,  but  just  as  normal  as  any  other  mamfestation  of  our  nature, 
art,  or  invention,  or  calling  of  life.  All  the  elements  are  m  man.  Thus  he 
naturally  believes.  He  may  not  always  believe  alike,— sometimes  in  Moses,  m 
Mahomet,  or  in  Christ,— but  uniformly  he  has  faith  in  something.  Thus,  too,  he 
naturally  makes  distinctions  of  right  and  wrong  ;  his  decisions  on  these  points  may 
not  always  be  coincident  in  every  nature,  and  under  diflerent  systems  of  culture. 
In  Sparta  one  set  of  things,  in  England  another,  is  wrong  or  right.     But  that  does 


566  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxxii. 

not  militate  against  the  fact  of  a  moral  sense,  for  no  people  has  yet  been  found  sunk 
so  low  that  they  do  not  make  the  distinction  somewhere.  So  in  regard  to  the 
future,  hope,  aspiration,  anticipation,  work  in  all  human  bosoms  in  different 
d'-^grees  of  intensity,  and  towards  varying  ends  and  objects  in  the  boundless  future, 
but  always,  everywhere,  towards  some  euds,  towards  some  high  ideals,  throned  and 
veiled  by  the  cloud-curtain  of  the  future.  II.  The  condition  of  man  cor- 
roborates THE  VIEW  DRAWN  FROM  HIS  NATURE  ;  for  his  condition  is  his  nature  in 
progression,  in  continuity.  If  we  go  over  the  catalogue  of  items  of  this  condition, 
fioui  the  time  he  lies  helpless  in  the  cradle  till  he  lies  helpless  again  in  the  coffin, 
\^  e  trace  an  unbroken  line  of  religious  wants.  It  is  a  great  and  continual  hunger. 
For  at  every  point,  at  every  time,  under  every  combination  of  surrounding  circum- 
stances, we  detect  the  demand  for  that  peculiar  quantity  and  unknown  value  Avith- 
out  which  we  cannot  work  the  equation  of  life  aright,  or  solve  with  certainty  its 
great  problem.  Human  life,  for  instance,  is  a  condition  of  formation,  growth, 
education,  and  yet  we  see  at  once  that,  if  this  process  is  not  carried  on  according  to 
the  primal  principles  which  are  involved  in  the  plan  of  the  Chief  Husbandman,  we 
shall  have  crude  windfalls  and  stunted  growths,  not  the  golden  fruit.  Human 
life  is  a  state  of  exposure  to  great  and  trying  temptations,  plucking  at  our  virtue, 
and  dragging  down  our  aims  and  acts,  until  we  go  the  way  of  all  the  earth.  The 
commanding  truths  and  the  vivid  sentiments  and  the  impressive  promises  of  religion 
can  alone  disperse  this  unhallowed  brood,  and  exorcise  the  evil  spirits  from  possess- 
ing mind  and  heart.     III.  The  destiny  of  man  strengthens  all  the  previous 

ARGUMENTS   FOR  THE   REALITY   AND   NECESSITY  OF  RELIGION.       If  man  is  created  in 

the  image  of  the  Everlasting  God,  and  called  to  the  inheritance  of  a  conscious  being 
through  all  the  unending  ages  of  the  future, — if,  even  in  this  morning  of  his  days, 
he  is  filled  with  aspirations,  dim  it  may  be,  but  vast,  grand,  and  exalting,  for  sweeter 
joys,  for  purer  delights,  a  serener  happiness,  a  more  thrilling,  inward,  and  abiding 
bliss,  than  the  rarest  moments  of  this  life  have  given  ;  if  such  is  the  realm  of  being 
to  which  man  is  on  his  way,  and  to  whose  celestial  city  he  is  already  lifting  up  his  eyes, 
what,  we  ask,  shall  best  fit  him  for  such  a  sublime  career  ?  What  is  adequate  to  pre- 
pare him  to  live  for  ever  ?  Only  what  is  of  the  same  kind  with  itself  can  meet  the  wants 
of  an  immortal  spirit,  namely,  an  immortal  religion,  an  immortal  Saviour,  an  eternal 
God.  Power,  and  fame,  and  learning  even,  and  some  of  the  lower  of  man's  attain- 
ments, even  in  the  moral  and  intellectual  sphere,  are  but  freezing  comforters  to  the 
bereaved,  sick,  and  dying.  But  in  these  critical  seasons  of  our  being,  when  man  is 
driven  in  from  the  outworks  to  the  centre  and  substance  of  his  nature,  religion  utters 
her  grand  tones  of  courage,  promise,  and  eternity,  and  vindicates  herself  as  the  soul's 
supreme  necessity,  the  one  thing  needful  which,  once  possessed,  can  never  be  taken 
away,  but  will  grow  dearer  and  brighter  and  diviner  for  ever.  {A.  A.  Livermore.) 
Religion — a  reality : — The  Christian  dispensation  is  one  which  requires  much  faith 
to  receive  it.  We  walk  not  by  sight,  but  by  faith  alone  ;  and  it  is  little  marvel 
that  when  ungodly  men  see  the  righteous  afflicted,  and  discover  that  their  comfort 
lies  in  matters  which  only  faith  can  apprehend,  they  should  cry  out,  "It  is  a  vain 
thing,"  and  should  turn  aside  from  the  ordinances  of  God.  Besides,  to  confess  the 
iruth,  there  have  been  so  many  counterfeits  of  true  religion,  that  it  is  not  remarkable 
that  unconverted  men  should  consider  even  the  geimine  article  to  be  but  a  vain 
thing.  I.  The  true  religion  of  Christ,  which  consists  in  a  vital  faith  in  His  person. 
His  blood,  and  His  righteousness,  and  which  produces  obedience  to  His  commands 
and  a  love  to  God,  is  not  a  fiction.  1.  The  objects  of  true  religion  are,  to  those 
who  believe  in  Jesus,  no  fiction.  (1)  God  the  Father.  (2)  Christ  Jesus.  (3)  The 
Holy  Spirit.  2.  The  experience  which  true  religion  brings  is  no  fiction.  (1)  Re- 
l^entance.  (2)  Joy  and  peace  in  believing.  3.  There  is  a  reality  in  the  privileges  of 
religion.  (1)  Prayer.  (2)  Communion  with  Christ.  (3)  Christian  love  towards  one 
another.  4.  The  religion  of  Christ  is  evidently  not  a  vain  thing  if  you  look  at  its 
effects.  5.  To  the  man  who  really  possesses  it,  it  is  his  life.  His  religion  is  not 
like  a  man's  regimentals,  which  he  can  take  off  and  go  in  undress  ;  it  is  inside  of 
him  ;  it  is  woven  right  through  and  through  him.  II.  It  is  no  trifle.  1.  It 
deals  with  your  souls.  2.  It  connects  you  with  God.  3.  Those  who  have  ever 
known  anything  of  it  tell  you  it  is  no  child's  play.  4.  Sinners,  when  they  are 
in  their  senses,  find  it  no  trifle.  5.  True  ministers  of  God  feel  it  to  be  no  trifle. 
III.  It  is  no  folly.  If  you  would  accomplish  the  proudest  feat  of  human  intellect, 
it  is  to  attain  to  the  knowledge  of  Christ  crucified.  Here  the  man  whose  mind  makes 
him  elephantine  may  find  depth  in  which  he  may  swim.  Here  the  most  recondite 
learning  shall  find  itself  exhausted.     Here  the  most  brilliant  imagination  shall  find 


CHAP.  XXXII.]  DEUTERONOMY.  567 

its  highest  flights  exceeded.  Here  the  man  who  understands  history  may  crown 
his  knowledge  by  the  history  of  God  in  the  world  ;  here  men  who  would  know  the 
secret,  the  greatest  secret  which  heaven  and  earth  and  hell  can  tell,  may  find  it 
out,  for  the  secret  of  the  Lord  is  with  them  that  fear  Him,  and  He  will  show  them 
His  covenant.  All  the  learning  of  man  is  doubtless  folly  to  the  angels,  but  the 
foolishness  of  God  in  the  Gospel  is  wisdom  to  cherubim  and  seraphim,  and  by  the 
Church  shall  be  made  known  to  them  in  ages  to  come  the  manifold  wisdom  of  God. 
IV.  It  is  no  speculation.  People  sometimes  ask  us  what  we  think  about  the 
heathen,  whether  they  will  be  saved  or  not.  Well,  sirs,  there  is  room  for  difference 
of  opinion  there  ;  but  I  should  like  to  know  what  you  think  about  yourselves — will 
you  be  saved  or  not  ? — for  after  all,  that  is  a  question  of  a  deal  more  importance  to 
you.  Now,  the  religion  of  Christ  is  not  a  thing  that  puts  a  man  into  a  salvable  state, 
but  it  saves  him.  It  is  not  a  religion  which  offers  him  something  which  perhaps 
may  save  him  ;  no,  it  saves  him  out  and  out,  on  the  spot.  It  is  not  a  thing  which 
says  to  a  man,  "Now,  I  have  set  you  a-going,  you  must  keep  on  yourself."  No,  it 
goes  the  whole  way  through,  and  saves  him  from  beginning  to  end.  Fle  that  says 
**  Alpha  "  never  stops  till  He  can  say  "  Omega  "  over  every  soul.  (C.  H.  Sjntrgeon.) 
Religion  not  a  vain  thing : — I.  The  object  to  which  Moses  refers.  1.  Personal 
religion.  (1)  Imperative  in  its  nature.  (2)  Comprehensive  in  its  requirements. 
(3)  Universal  in  its  extent.  (4)  Perpetual  and  eternal  in  its  obligation.  Set  your 
hearts  to  consider  the  nature  of  this  law.  Set  your  hearts  to  pray  for  that  grace 
which  will  enable  you  to  love  the  law  of  the  Lord.  Set  your  hearts  to  expect  the 
accomplishment  of  that  promise  (Deut.  xxx.  6).  2.  Family  religion.  (1)  Parental 
duty  must  be  regulated  by  the  law  of  God.  (2)  Parental  duty  is  authorised  by  the 
command  of  God.  II.  The  affirmation  which  he  makes  concerxing  it.  1.  It 
is  not  (1)  an  empty,  airy,  unsubstantial  thing  ;  (2)  not  a  vain,  deceitful  thing  ; 

(3)  not  a  foolish,  senseless  thing  ;  (4)  not  a  fruitless,  unproductive  thing.  2.  It  is 
**  your  life."  To  the  Jews  especially  it — (1)  was  the  means  of  prolonging  their  life  ; 
(2)  added  to  the  happiness   of  their  life  ;  (3)  promoted   the  utility  of  their   life  ; 

(4)  prepared  them  for  eternal  life.  Concluding  inferences — 1.  Religion  consists  in 
setting  your  heart  to  know  and  to  keep  the  commandments  of  God.  2.  Religion  is 
not  a  vain  thing.  Thousands  deceive  themselves.  Some  treat  it  with  sovereign 
contempt.  Others  profess  to  know  it,  but  their  conduct  belies  their  profession. 
3.  Religion  is  your  life.  Then  seek  to  know,  love,  and  serve  God.  {^Sketches  of  Four 
Hundred  Sermons.) 

Vers.  49-52.  Get  thee  up  into  this  mountain  .  .  .  and  die  in  the  mount. — Moses 
commanded  to  ascend  the  mount  and  die : — I.  The  apparently  hard  providence 
which  befell  Moses  on  this  occasion.  1.  It  was  death  in  the  presence  of 
unaccomplished  work — a  work  to  which  Moses  had  consecrated  his  life,  for  which  he 
had  sacrificed  much,  and  to  which  he  had  proved  pre-eminently  faithful.  2.  It  was 
a  death  amid  shattered  plans  and  unfulfilled  hopes.  3.  It  came  to  Moses  when, 
although  old,  he  was  yet  vigorous.  II.  But  it  was  also  a  wise  and  loving 
PROVIDENCE.  1.  It  was  the  assertion  of  Divine  impartiality.  2.  It  was  a  striking 
illustration  of  a  man's  sin  following  him  in  its  results  even  when  the  sin  itself  has 
been  forgiven.  3.  It  supplied  a  proof  of  the  Divine  adaptation  of  means  towards  the 
desired  end.  4.  It  taught  men  that  God  was  not  dependent  even  upon  the  greatest 
and  most  honoured  of  His  servants  for  the  final  triumph  of  His  cause.  {D.  Davies.) 
The  scene  and  circumstances  of  Noses'  death : — I.  The  loneliness  of  the  death 
ON  Nebo.  Moses  was  strong  in  faith,  and  its  strength  was  tested  here.  It  had  often 
been  tried  before,  and  had  stood  the  trial.  In  battles,  in  contentions  with  his  people, 
it  had  been  tested,  and  had  stood  the  test.  But  what  is  death,  when  the  blood  is 
heated  and  the  passions  up,  compared  with  death  alone,  apart  from  friends  and 
friendly  sympathy,  with  no  kindly  eyes  and  no  sounds  of  loving  words  !  There 
was  great  courage  here.  You  have  read  of  men  who,  in  the  excitement  of  battle, 
when  death  was  strewing  the  red  plain  with  human  clay,  rejoiced  with  a  joy  that 
knew  no  fear,  and  through  the  hell  of  carnage  hewed  their  way  to  victory.  In  such 
cases  death  was  met  with  great  courage  ;  but  it  was  met  with  greater  in  the  case  of 
him  who,  with  "  eye  undimmed  and  natural  force  unabated,"  quitted  a  high  post 
of  command,  abandoned  an  enterprise  when  on  the  eve  of  accomjilishment,  without 
understanding  the  why  or  wherefore,  and  with  life  vigorous  and  strong  Avithin  him, 
alone,  unaccompanied,  and  by  human  eye  unseen,  calmly  awaited  death.  II.  The 
Nebo  mystery— one  sows  and  another  reaps.  Have  you  never  known  a  man  whose 
youth  and  early  manhood  have  been  industriously  spent  in  preparation  for  the 


568  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxxir. 

serious  work  of  life,  in  whose  breast  noble  aspirations  burned,  of  whom  it  was 
evident  that  the  world  would  be  the  better  for  him,  and  who,  with  extensive 
acquirements,  mature  culture,  confirmed  principles,  and  thorough  training,  was 
about  to  step  thus  equipped  into  the  arena  of  life,  resolved  to  leave  his  mark  for  good 
on  his  age  and  time,  when  the  command  came,  ' '  Get  thee  up  into  the  mountain, 
and  die  there,"  &c.  ?  And  the  magnificent  prospect  of  his  life  passed  ;  the  tree  that 
many  a  sun  had  ripened  and  many  influences  of  earth  and  sky  had  cherished,  fell  as 
its  mass  of  blossom  was  passing  into  fruit.  Have  you  never  known  a  mother  who, 
after  a  long  and  faithful  training  of  her  children,  after  patient  watch  and  ward  for 
many  a  year,  during  which  she  has  considered  no  labour  too  great,  no  struggle  too 
hard,  no  suffering  and  pinch  too  severe  to  equip  them  for  the  competition  of  life — as 
she  is  about  to  enter  into  the  reward  of  her  long  and  patient  work,  and  to  see  in  the 
success  and  gratitude  of  her  children  the  recompense  of  many  an  anxious  day  and 
sleepless  night,  hears  the  command,  sharp  and  sudden,  from  the  Master  of  life, 
"Get  thee  up,"  &c.  ?  Have  you  never  known  a  merchant  who,  after  many  a  year 
of  ceaseless  toil,  during  which,  by  shrewdness  and  patience,  he  had  amassed  fortune 
enough  to  give  him  ease  and  comfort  for  the  remainder  of  his  life,  when  about  to 
enter  his  Canaan  of  rest,  is  suddenly  struck  down,  the  command  having  come,  "Get 
thee  up,"  &c.?  III.  The  ingredient  of  joy  that  was  mingled  in  the  cup. 
"  Be  gathered  unto  thy  people."  These  words  imply  a  social  heaven — not  heaven 
as  a  dim,  vague,  ethereal  scene, — but  as  a  communion,  a  fellowship.  Were  it  not  so, 
our  whole  nature  and  instincts  would  require  to  l)e  changed  on  entering  it.  "As 
Aaron  thy  brother  died."  Why  this  allusion,  if  not  to  give  comfort  to  the  old 
man  ?  if  not  to  intimate  that  his  death  would  be  meeting  with  his  brother  ?  This 
prospect  must  have  taken  at  least  one  pang  from  death,  and  infused  at  least  one 
drop  of  joy  into  the  bitter  cup  he  was  called  to  drink.  IV.  The  scene  and 
PROSPECT  WHICH  MosES  WAS  PERMITTED  TO  ENJOY.  {John  Stuart,  D.D.) 
The  sin  and  punishment  of  Moses: — It  is  a  remarkable  circumstance,  not  without  an 
obvious  moral,  that  the  greatest  favourites  of  the  Almighty  have  been  among  the 
persons  most  severely  dealt  with  by  His  providence.  Not  to  mention  our  Saviour 
Himself— the  only  sinless,  yet  the  most  grievously  afflicted  of  men — Abraham,  "  the 
friend  of  God,"  was  put  to  a  trial ;  the  afflictions  of  Jacob  were  also  great  ;  Job's 
are  proverbial ;  the  painful  vicissitudes  of  David's  life  outnumber  its  successes ; 
and  St.  Paul,  the  most  heroic  servant  of  God  in  New  Testament  times,  was 
subject  to  a  long  course  of  calamities.  The  real  cause  of  the  affliction  is 
always  sin.  If  it  be  asked — How  can  this  be  consistent  with  the  fact  that 
the  sufferings  of  the  most  distinguished  in.struments  of  God's  glory  have  been 
severe  beyond  the  common  lot  of  mortals  ?  the  answer  is — that  either  we  may 
observe  in  such  persons  great  crimes  set  against  signal  virtues  ;  or,  at  least,  sin 
against  peculiar  light,  and  in  spite  of  unusual  grace :  moreover,  such  are  to  be 
raised  to  remarkable  heights  of  perfection  ;  and  this  is  not  to  be  done  but  by 
means  of  chastisement  and  the  stern  discipline  of  affliction.  Pass  we,  however, 
from  general  considerations  to  the  individual  instance  before  us.  I.  The  circum- 
stances WHICH  gave  occasion  TO  THE  DiVINE  DECREE  AGAINST  MoSES— that  he 

should  not  live  to  enter  the  promised  land  (see  Numb.  xx.).  The  ground  of  the 
whole  transgression  seems  to  have  been  a  hasty  yielding  to  carnal  passions ; 
which  in  this  case,  as  it  ever  does,  shut  out  faith  and  reliance  on  God,  and  sub- 
stituted distrust  and  self-confidence.  And  the  criminality  of  this  conduct  was 
doubtless  increased  by  the  eminent  dignity  and  great  endowments  of  the  offenders. 
It  was  for  the  head  and  legislator,  and  for  the  anointed  High  Priest,  to  set  an 
example  to  the  people  of  meekness  and  patient  confidence.     II.  The  doctrinal 

AND    SPIRITUAL   MEANING,   AND   RESULTS,    OF   THIS  EVENT.      1.  The  inclination  of 

the  Israelites  to  idolatrous  worship,  imbibed  chiefly  in  that  nursery  of  supersti- 
tions, Egypt,  was  strong  at  all  early  periods  of  their  history.  Profound,  also, 
must  have  been  their  veneration  for  that  man  of  wonderful  gifts,  who  had  brought 
them  with  the  arm  of  God  out  of  the  house  of  bondage,  and  for  forty  years  had 
led  them  in  the  wilderness.  Hence  if  Moses  had  finished  his  great  work  in  his  own 
person,  and,   together  with  the  Israelites  of  this   generation,   the  children  and 

f  rand-children  of  his  early  contemporaries,  had  taken  possession  of  Canaan  as  the 
esign  and  completion  of  the  enterprise,  it  is  most  probable  that  he  would,  in  spite 
of  himself,  have  been  deified  by  his  superstitious  countrymen  ;  and  either  sub- 
stituted for,  or  confounded  with,  the  Divine  Liberator,  whose  vicegerent  he  was. 
2.  That  the  commission  to  lead  into  Canaan  the  children  of  the  people  whom  Moses 
hj  the  Divine  power  had  freed  from  Egypt,  now  devolved  upon  Joshua— or,  as  he 


CHAP.  XXXII.]  DEUTERONOMY.  66» 

is  called  in  the  New  Testament,  Jesus — is  an  instance  which  I  cannot  wholly  pass 
by  in  silence,  of  the  typical  character  of  all  Bible  history.  Mosea  was  a  type  of 
Christ,  iu  his  office  and  character,  as  the  deliverer,  leader,  and  pastor  of  God's 
flock,  through  the  mingled  trials  and  mercies  of  the  wilderness  ;  but  Joshua  was 
more  remarkably  so,  in  prefiguring  our  Lord's  going  before  His  people  into  heaven, 
at  His  ascension,  to  take  possession  for  and  with  them  of  the  celestial  inheritance. 
3.  There  is  an  obvious  and  sublime  sense,  in  the  fact  of  Moses,  the  giver  of  the  Law 
— the  administrator  of  that  imperfect  and  temporary  dispensation,  not  going  over 
into  the  Promised  Land.  His  work  was  now  done — his  function  was  at  an  end. 
The  conducting  of  the  people  was  now  handed  over  to  another — to  Joshua,  the 
type  of  Christ  as  ascending  up  on  high  and  entering  into  His  rest  ;  **  the  law  was 
given  by  Moses,  but  grace  and  truth  came  by  Jesus  Christ."  IIL  This  severity 
OF  God  towards  His  servant  Moses,  so  favoured  and  "faithful  in  all  His 
HOUSE, "  PRESENTS  A  VERY  AFFECTING  CIRCUMSTANCE.  It  admonishes  US,  how  much 
of  the  good  consequences  of  a  life  may  be  defeated  by  one  act  of  prevarication  and 
disobedience.  It  admonishes  us  to  be  careful  how  we  "finish  our  course,"  lest  we 
"lose  these  things  which  we  have  wrought,"  even  within  sight  of  '*  the  prize  of  our 
liigh  calling."  {R.  CattermoU,  B.D.)  What  dying  is:— I  am  standing  upon  the 
seashore.  A  ship  at  my  side  spreads  her  white  sails  to  the  morning  breeze  and 
starts  for  the  blue  ocean.  She  is  an  object  of  beauty  and  strength,  and  I  stand  and 
watch  her  until  at  length  she  hangs  like  a  speck  of  white  cloud  just  where  the  sea 
and  sky  come  down  to  meet  and  mingle  with  each  other.  Then  some  one  at  my 
side  says  :  "There  !  she's  gone  !  "  Gone  where  ?  Gone  from  my  sight,  that  is  all. 
She  is  just  as  large  in  the  mast  and  hull  and  spar  as  she  was  when  she  left  my  side, 
and  just  as  able  to  bear  her  load  of  living  freight  to  the  place  of  her  destination. 
Her  diminished  size  is  in  me,  and  not  in  her.  And  just  at  that  moment,  when 
some  one  at  my  side  says,  "There!  she's  gone!"  there  are  other  eyes  that  are 
watching  for  her  coming  and  other  voices  ready  to  take  up  the  glad  shout,  "  There 
she  comes  !  "  And  that  is — dying.  {Episcopal  Recorder. )  Yet  thou  shalt  see  the 
land  before  thee. — Good  cheer  from  Qod: — I.  A  message  for  Christian  workers. 
Seed  we  have  sown  shall  bear  fruit  when  the  hand  that  scattered  it  is  at  rest. 
Behind  every  Christian  worker  is  God.  Much  of  the  work  is  hidden  as  yet,  as  Moses 
could  not  see  the  homesteads  of  the  land,  the  divisions  of  the  tribes,  &c.,  but  he 
could  see  the  land.  So  can  we  by  faith  see  in  broad  outlines  the  goal  to  which 
the  Christian  Church  is  travelling  year  by  year.  The  evening  of  life  shall  be  better 
than  the  morning.  II.  A  message  to  the  Christian  in  his  pilgrimage. 
The  Jews  could  not  think  without  regret  of  their  life.  Nor  can  we.  What  sublime 
mercy  on  God's  part  !  Gratitude  itself  grows  dumb  in  silent  wonder.  We  can 
only  say,  "Forgive."  But  look  forward  now — what  do  you  see?  Many  a  failure, 
&c.,  yet  the  steady  growth  of  the  will  of  God  in  you — therefore  the  future  shall  be 
better  than  the  past.  Life  ripening  like  harvest  under  the  summer  sun.  "At 
evening  tide  it  shall  be  light " — and  lighter  still  when  the  veil  of  flesh  is  torn  from 
the  spirit.  III.  A  message  to  those  who  are  not  Christians.  "The  people 
sitting  in  darkness  have  seen  a  great  light," — it  is  turned  upon  you  that  you  may 
see  the  land  before  you.  (i?.  Belts.)  The  happy  people  :  who  and  why? — We  are 
wont  to  note  the  sayings  of  dying  men.  The  testimony  both  of  the  godly  and 
the  ungodly  is  more  valuable  and  reliable  at  such  a  time.  Moses  was  specially 
fitted  to  give  an  estimate  of  Israel's  past  experience  and  future  prospects.  He  had 
been  intimately  connected  with  them  for  a  lengthened  period.  I.  Who  is  Israel  ? 
1.  A  perverse  people.  They  are  often  rebellious,  they  murmur  often,  they  bring 
upon  themselves  punishment  because  of  their  obstinacy.  They  are  slow  to  learn 
and  obey.  The  type  and  the  antitype  correspond.  The  people  of  God  are  often  so  ; 
and  the  world  often  sees  it.  Their  leader  and  they  do  not  always  agree.  ^  2.  A 
peculiar  people.  They  are  different  from  the  nations  around  them.  3.  A  pilgrim 
people.  They  were  yet  in  the  wilderness  when  Moses  spoke  of  them.  4.  A  pro- 
testing people.  They  were  raised  up  for  this  very  purpose.  "  Ye  are  My  witnesses." 
5.  A  persecuted  people.  They  were  met  by  the  Amalekites  almost  as  soon  as  they 
had  crossed  the  Red  Sea.  They  had  to  encounter  enmity  and  opposition  all  the 
way.  II.  Wherein,  then,  consists  Israel's  happiness?  Not  certainly  in  their 
worldly,  external,  visible  circumstances.  There  is  nothing  in  these  to  draw  forth 
the  rapturous  enthusiasm  of  Moses.  No  ;  but  his  vision  and  his  voice  extend 
beyond  things  seen  and  temporal.  Their  happiness  arises  out  of  their  relation  to 
God,  the  only  true  God.  1.  They  are  chosen  by  His  grace.  Underneath  them  are 
the  everlasting  arms.     2.  They  are  redeemed  by  His  arm.     3.  They  are  guided  by 


570  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxxiii. 

His  eye.  He  goes  before  them  ;  He  is  their  rereward.  4.  They  are  kept  by  His 
power.  He  is  their  refuge  and  their  strength.  Jehovah-nissi :  the  Lord  is  my 
banner.  5.  They  are  cheered  by  His  presence,  His  promise,  and  His  purpose. 
III.  There  is  no  happiness  like  Israel's.  1.  Because  none  conies  from  so  good 
a  source.  With  Thee  is  the  Fountain  of  Life.  From  this  fountain  flows  the  river  of 
the  water  of  life.  Other  sources  fail ;  they  are  broken  cisterns.  2.  Because  none 
can  be  enjoyed  with  so  much  security.  The  promise  of  God  is  the  best  security 
which  we  can  possibly  possess.  3.  Because  none  is  so  satisfactory  in  its  own 
character.  Out  of  Christ  there  is  no  happiness  to  be  enjoyed  worthy  of  the  nature 
with  which  we  are  endowed.  4.  Because  none  is  so  beneficial  in  its  effects.  The 
world,  with  its  pleasures  and  pursuits,  degrades  and  hardens  the  heart  that  is 
engrossed  with  them.  5.  Because  none  is  so  permanent  in  its  duration.  "That 
knave,  Death,"  as  John  Knox  said,  will  take  it  all  away — will  mar  the  beauty,  spoil 
the  treasure,  and  bring  the  tenure  to  an  end.  (/.  Smith,  M.A.)  The  happy 
jieople  : — L  Happy  in  their  name.  "  Israel  "  signifies— 1 .  That  God  has  chosen 
and  prepared  them  to  be  His  people.  2.  That  He  has  privileged  them  with  com- 
munion with  Himself.  II.  Happy  in  their  salvation.  Delivered  from  Satan's 
yoke  and  dominion,  &c.  III.  Happy  in  their  Divine  help.  1.  Protection. 
2.  Security.  3.  Strength.  IV.  Happy  in  the  prospect  of  a  complete  conquest 
over  all  their  enemies.  V.  Happy  in  their  ultimate  arrival  in  the  land 
of  Canaan.  {Homilist.)  Thine  enemies  shall  be  found  liaxs  unto  thee. — 
The  devil  a  liar : — That  arch-enemy,  the  devil,  is  a  liar  from  the  beginning  ;  but  he 
is  so  very  plausible  that,  like  mother  Eve,  we  are  led  to  believe  him.  Yet  in  our 
experience  we  shall  prove  him  a  liar.  1.  He  says  that  we  shall  fall  from  grace, 
dishonour  our  profession,  and  perish  with  the  doom  of  apostates  ;  but  trusting  in 
the  Lord  Jesus,  we  shall  hold  on  our  way  and  prove  that  Jesus  loses  none  whom  His 
Father  gave  Him.  2.  He  tells  us  that  our  bread  will  fail,  and  we  shall  starve  with 
our  children  ;  yet  the  Feeder  of  the  ravens  has  not  forgotten  us  yet,  and  He  will 
never  do  so,  but  will  prepare  us  a  table  in  the  presence  of  our  enemies.  3.  He 
whispers  that  the  Lord  will  not  deliver  us  out  of  the  trial  which  is  looming  in  the 
distance,  and  he  threatens  that  the  last  ounce  will  break  the  camel's  back.  What  a 
liar  he  is  !  For  the  Lord  will  never  leave  us,  nor  forsake  us.  "Let  Him  deliver 
him  now  !  "  cries  the  false  fiend  ;  but  the  Lord  will  silence  him  by  coming  to  our 
rescue.  He  takes  great  delight  in  telling  us  that  death  will  prove  too  much  for  us. 
"How  wilt  thou  do  in  the  swelling  of  Jordan?"  But  there  also  he  shall  prove  a 
liar  unto  us,  and  we  shall  pass  through  the  river  singing  psalms  of  glory.  (C.  H, 
Spurgeon.) 


CHAPTER  XXXIII. 


Vers.  1-5.  This  is  the  blessing  wherewith  Moses,  the  man  of  God,  blessed  the 
children  of  Israel  before  his  death. — The  blessing  of  the  tribes : — The  many  succes- 
sive "blessings  "  of  Israel  were  a  necessary  consequence  of  his  Divine  election.  In 
that  seed  all  families  of  the  earth  were  to  be  blessed.  Therefore  it  was  fitting  that 
formal  and  repeated  blessings  should  be  pronounced  upon  the  bearer  of  such  high 
destinies,  that  none  of  the  issues  of  his  history  might  seem  to  be  by  chance,  and  that 
he  and  all  men  might  know  what  was  "the  hope  of  his  calling,  and  what  the  riches 
of  the  glory  of  his  inheritance  among  the  saints,  and  what  is  the  exceeding  greatness 
of  God's  power  towards  us  who  believe."  The  notion  of  a  distinct  continuity  in 
calling  and  in  privilege  between  Israel  and  the  Christian  Church  is  no  fancy  of  an 
antiquated  theology.  It  springs  out  of  the  very  root  idea  of  the  Bible,  the  principle 
which  rightly  leads  us  to  speak  of  so  many  Scriptures,  written  at  sundry  times  and 
in  divers  manners,  as  one  book  and  one  revelation.  The  first  utterance  of  blessing 
upon  the  chosen  people  proceeded  from  the  lips  of  God  Himself,  and  was  renewed  in 
nearly  the  same  form  of  language  to  each  of  the  three  great  patriarchs,  Abraham, 
Isaac,  and  Jacob.  It  can  hardly  be  by  an  accident  that  the  record  in  Genesis  of 
this  initial  benediction  is  sevenfold.  Seven  times  exactly  did  God  declare  His 
purpose  to  bless  the  seed  of  Abraham  in  the  line  of  Isaac  and  of  Jacob  ;  and  having 
thus  established  His  covenant  as  by  an  oath,  He  spake  no  more  by  a  like  direct 
communication,  but  He  used  the  lips  of  inspired  men  to  enlarge  the  scope  of  His 
and  to  give  definiteness  to  its  first  and  necessarily  somewhat  vague 


CHAP.  XXXIII.]  DEUTERONOMY.  571 

generalities.  The  blessing  of  Moses  was  evidently  founded  upon  the  earlier  utter- 
ance of  the  dying  Jacob  concerning  the  future  of  his  twelve  sons.  But  the  differ- 
ences between  the  two  blessings  are  far  more  suggestive  than  their  resemblances.  There 
are  parts  of  Jacob's  discourse  to  which  the  notion  of  "blessing"  is  altogether 
foreign.  Simeon  and  Levi  are  stricken  in  it  with  an  absolute  curse  ;  the  prediction 
concerning  Issachar  is  at  least  equivocal  in  its  reference  to  willing  servitude  ;  and 
for  Reuben  there  is  nothing  but  a  mournful  foreclosure  of  his  natural  birthright 
(Gen.  xlix.  3-7,  14,  15).  But  the  prophecy  of  Moses  is  really  a  benediction  upon 
every  tribe  that  is  named  therein.  It  is  couched  throughout  in  the  language  of 
unfeigned  attection,  intercession,  and  giving  of  thanks  for  what  is  or  for  what  may 
be  unequivocally  good.  Careful  readers  will  observe  that  the  tribes  of  Israel  are 
arranged  in  different  order  in  the  two  blessings  by  Jacob  and  by  Moses.  The 
natural  order  of  age  and  of  maternal  parentage  is  followed  by  Jacob  ;  but  Moses  at 
first  sight  seems  to  adopt  an  altogether  arbitrary  arrangement,  three  times  putting 
a  younger  before  an  elder  son,  separating  children  of  the  same  mother,  and  omitting 
one  name  altogether.  This  fact,  however,  is  itself  one  of  our  clues  to  the  right 
understanding  of  the  blessing  as  a  whole,  for  its  only  possible  explanation  depends 
upon  the  typical  character  of  Israel's  national  history.  The  place  which  Divine 
Providence  assigned  to  each  tribe  in  the  temporal  commonwealth  of  Israel  at  differ- 
ent stages  of  its  development  was  meant  to  illustrate  some  permanent  principle  of 
God's  spiritual  kingdom  which  Moses  foresaw  in  its  continuance  to  our  own  day. 
The  thirty-third  chapter  of  Deuteronomy  has  a  prologue  and  an  epilogue,  which 
may  not  be  passed  over  in  silence.  The  blessings  of  the  children  of  Israel  are 
embraced  between  them  intentionally,  for  the  inspired  author  wished  to  set  forth 
the  unalterable  conditions  of  blessing  in  God's  kingdom,  and  the  inseparable  con- 
nection which  subsists  between  obedience,  happiness,  and  faith  towards  God.  No 
grander  description  of  the  Divine  covenant  with  Israel  was  ever  given  than  is 
contained  in  the  opening  verses  of  this  chapter,  nor  has  the  law  from  Sinai  been 
anywhere  else  depicted  so  awfully  and  yet  so  attractively  in  its  character  of  "the 
inheritance"  of  Jehovah's  "congregation."  That  law,  in  its  outward  form,  has  no 
doubt  passed  away  for  Christians,  but  the  obligation  of  its  spirit  is  perpetual,  and 
the  blessing  of  each  citizen  of  God's  new  covenant  kingdom  depends  upon  a  loving 
acceptance  of  that  obligation.  Not  Moses,  but  Christ,  has  "commanded  us  a  law." 
He  is  our  "king,"  and  we  are  "not  without  law  to  God,  but  under  the  law  to 
Christ. "  {T.  G.  Rooke,  B.A.)  The  end  in  sight ;  or  last  works  and  dying songs^ : — 
There  is  not  a  more  illustrative  example  of  the  benefits  of  early  training  and  religious 
culture  than  Moses.  Whether  we  think  of  the  depth  of  his  religious  convictioms, 
the  purity  of  his  personal  character,  the  clearness  of  his  spiritual  insight,  the 
sagacity  of  his  legislation,  or  the  rectitude  of  his  administration,  we  cannot  but 
wonder  at  the  manifold  perfection  of  his  human  greatness  and  the  closeness  of  his 
walk  with  God.  But  in  one  respect  he  stands  pre-eminent.  He  was  transcendent 
in  moral  glory  when  age  had  wrinkled  his  brow  and  whitened  his  head,  when  the 
sun  began  to  go  down  in  the  golden  west,  and  the  shadows  were  casting  their  long 
lengths  of  darkness  round  him.  "His  eye  was  not  dim,  nor  his  natural  force 
abated."  Neither  was  his  mind  obscured,  nor  were  his  sympathies  narrowed,  nor 
his  heart  soured.  The  shadow  of  a  great  disappointment  was  trailing  over  his  path 
and  clouding  his  future  ;  yet,  to  his  fellows,  the  radiance  of  his  spirit  was  un- 
dimmed,  and  the  clear  shining  of  his  intellect  was  as  sparkling  as  the  morning  dew. 

1.  The  end  in  sight  and  the  last  works  of  the  man  of  God.  1.  He  knew  his 
death  was  certainly  near.  God  hardly  ever  allows  men  to  wear  the  crown  of  com- 
pleted undertakings  in  this  world— "that  no  flesh  should  glory  in  His  presence." 

2.  Faithful  in  his  house,  he  set  everything  in  order,  under  the  influence  of  this 
certainty.  3.  The  characteristics  of  the  last  work  of  his  pen  are  worthy  of  special 
study.  There  is  a  rich  and  glowing  beauty  about  these  last  words.  There  are  in 
them  some  of  the  most  marvellous  predictions  of  the  Old  Testament.  * '  The  Prophet 
like  unto  himself"  finds  its  fulfilment  in  Him  who  was  both  Prophet  and  Redeemer. 
There  is  also  a  forecast  of  the  Hebrew  history  and  the  Hebrew  doom,  which  cannot 
be  read  without  wonder  at  its  truth,  and  awe  in  presence  of  certain  Divine  judg- 
ments disclosed.  His  burdened  heart  looks  down  the  vista  of  ages,  and  sees,  with 
but  too  clear  a  vision,  the  sad  departures  from  the  true  line  of  spiritual  duty  and 
obedience,  which  were  only  too  possible.  Side  by  side  with  ritual  and  ceremonial 
requirements,  he  lays  down  the  principle  that  spiritual  consecration,  that  loving 
devotion  to  God,  is  the  only  safety.  He  is  not  a  Jew,  even  to  Moses,  who  is  one 
outwardly.     Even  here  *' love  is  the  fulfilling  of  the  law."    But  he  uses,  especially, 


572  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  xxxiii, 

**the  terrors  of  the  Lord"  to  fortify  them  against  the  unfaithfulness  and  unbelief 
vhich  were  their  danger.  As  Dean  Milman  says,  "The  sublimity  of  these  denuncia- 
tions surpasses  anything  which  has  ever  been  known  in  the  oratory  or  poetry  of  the 
whole  world.  Nature  is  exhausted  in  furnishing  terrific  images  ;  nothing  except  the 
real  horrors  of  Jewish  history,  the  miseries  of  their  sieges,  the  cruelty,  the  contempt, 
the  oppressions,  the  persecutions,  which  for  ages  this  scattered  ana  despised  nation 
have  endured,  can  approach  the  tremendous  maledictions  which  warned  them 
against  the  violation  of  their  law."     II.  His  dying  songs  ;    or  the  thoughts 

WHICH    ANIMATED    THE    GREAT    LAWGIVER    IN    THE    NEAR    PROSPECT    OF    DEATH. 

1.  Here  is  his  faith  in  Divine  relations  to  those  who  were  to  come  after  him.  Nothing 
is  more  diflScult  to  an  old  man  than  the  gi'aceful  resignation  of  the  power  and 
authority  which  have  come  to  him  through  his  origination  of  offioe  or  business,  and 
through  the  long  experience  of  active,  ruling  life.  Abdication  is  the  most  difficult 
act  of  sovereign  authority.  But  Moses  has  supreme  confidence  in  God.  2.  Not  only 
was  there  this  confidence  in  God  for  those  who  were  to  succeed  him,  there  was  a 
supreme  consciousness  of  the  Divine  glory.  There  is  here  a  singular  absence  of  self- 
glorying  ;  a  marvellous  prominence  given  to  the  Divine  ideas  which  underlie  true 
life.  Jehovah  appears  in  almost  every  line  of  his  dying  song  ;  Mosea  never.  The 
song  of  the  dying  believer  is  always  one  which  celebrates  distinguishing,  elective, 
and  redeeming  grace.  When  the  spirit  gets  close  to  the  realities  of  things,  it  is  the 
Divine  that  is  felt  to  be  uppermost,  the  human  which  sinks  and  fades  away.  When 
John  Owen,  greatest  of  the  Puritan  theologians,  the  Nonconformist  Vice- Chancellor 
of  Oxford,  was  dying,  he  said  to  Charles  Fleetwood,  * '  I  am  going  to  Him  whom  my 
soul  has  loved,  or  rather,  who  has  loved  me  with  an  everlasting  love,  which  is  the 
whole  ground  of  all  my  consolation.  I  am  leaving  the  ship  of  the  Church  in  a 
storm  ;  but  while  the  Great  Pilot  is  in  it,  the  loss  of  a  poor  under-rower  will  be 
inconsiderable.  Live,  and  pray,  and  hope,  and  wait  patiently,  and  do  not  despond  ; 
the  promise  stands  invincible,  and  He  will  never  leave  us  nor  forsake  us."  3.  There 
was  calm  trust  in  a  faithful  God  and  in  His  faithful  promises.  These  were  the  most 
powerful  of  his  inspirations,  and  they  poured  themselves  out  in  his  glowing  song. 
There  is  not  one  of  the  blessings  but  has  this  basis  ;  and  they  have  also  a  deep, 
inner,  spiritual,  religious,  redemptive  sense.  Dr.  Watts,  after  the  scholarly  labours 
of  a  long  and  devoted  life,  said  :  "  I  find  it  is  the  plain  promises  of  the  Gospel  that 
are  my  support.  And  I  bless  God,  they  are  plain  promises  that  do  not  require  much 
labour  and  pains  to  understand  them,  for  I  can  do  nothing  now  but  look  into  my 
Bible  for  some  simple  promise  to  support  me,  and  I  live  upon  that.  I  bless  God, 
I  can  lie  down  with  comfort  at  night,  not  being  solicitous  whether  I  awake  in  this 
world  or  another."  **  Underneath  are  the  Everlasting  Arms  !  "  So  Guthrie  felt  that  it 
was  the  simpler,  fundamental  truths  and  facts  which  inspired  dying  trust  and  hope, 
and  said  :  "Sing  me  a  bairn's  hymn,"  and  fell  asleep  on  the  bosom  of  the  Eternal. 
So  Benjamin  Parsons  said:  "My  head  is  resting  very  sweetly  on  three  pillows: 
infinite  power,  infinite  love,  and  infinite  wisdom."  Horace  Bushnell,  one  of  the 
great  teachers  of  our  age,  but  recently  departed,  woke  up  in  the  night  and  said, 
"Oh,  God  is  a  wonderful  Being  !"  And  when  his  daughter  replied,  "Yes  ;  is  He 
with  you  ?"  the  old  man  replied,  "  Yes,  in  a  certain  sense  He  is  with  me  ;  and  I 
have  no  doubt  He  is  with  me  in  a  sense  I  do  not  imagine."  So  He  is.  It  is  "  above 
all  we  ask  or  think  "  !  Then  the  old  man  eloquent  said  :  "Well,  now  we  are  all 
going  home  together  ;  and  I  say,  tlie  Lord  be  with  you — and  in  grace— and  peace — 
and  love— and  that  is  the  way  I  have  come  along  home  ! "     ( W.  H.  Damson.) 

Vers.  2-5.  From  His  right  hand  went  a  fiery  law  for  them.  Yea,  He  loved  the 
people. — The  law  of  antagonism : — At  first  sight  the  text  might  seem  to  involve 
a  contradiction,  but  closer  consideration  will  show  that  it  expresses  a  great  truth, 
namely,  that  the  severity  of  human  life  is  an  expression  of  the  Divine  goodness. 
I.  In  NATURE.  The  fiery  law  published  at  Sinai  is  proclaimed  from  every  mountain- 
top  ;  it  burns  and  blazes  through  all  t^e  earth  ;  the  sea  also  is  crystal  mingled  with 
fire.  Nature  knows  nothing  of  indulgence  ;  she  makes  no  concessions  to  ignorance, 
folly,  or  weakness.  Nature  is  imperative,  uncompromising,  terrible.  In  our  day 
the  severity  of  nature  has  been  recognised  as  "  the  struggle  for  existence,"  and 
students  have  shown  with  great  clearness  and  power  how  full  the  world  is  of  antag- 
onism and  suffering  ;  yet  these  same  students  distinctly  perceive  that  the  struggle 
for  existence  is  at  bottom  merciful,  and  that  whenever  nature  chooses  an  evil  it  is  a 
lesser  evil  to  prevent  a  greater.  1.  They  see  the  advantage  of  severity  so  far  as  all 
sound  and  healthy  things  are  concerned.     If  the  conditions  of  life  are  in  any  degree 


CHAP.  XXXIII.]  DEUTERONOMY,  573 

softened,  it  is  to  the  detriment  of  the  noble  organisms  concerned.  2.  They  see  also 
the  advantage  of  severity  so  far  as  defective  things  are  concerned.  It  is  better  for 
the  world  at  large  that  weak  organisms  should  be  eliminated,  otherwise  the  earth 
would  be  filled  with  imperfection  and  wretchedness ;  it  is  better  for  the  creatures 
concerned  that  they  should  perish,  for  why  should  a  miserable  existence  be  indefin- 
ately  prolonged  ?  II.  In  civilisation.  It  is  not  by  gentle  yielding  restrictions, 
by  pliant  understandings,  by  soft  phrases,  by  light  penalties  easily  remitted,  by 
facility  and  complaisance,  by  the  coddling  of  the  individual,  and  the  pampering  of 
the  nations,  but  by  laws  most  exacting  and  rigorous,  that  God  governs  the  race  and 
conducts  it  to  ultimate  perfection.  And  yet  once  more  we  may  see  that  the  fiery 
law  is  only  a  definition  of  love.  1.  Take  the  struggle  of  man  with  nature.  The 
tropical  sun  bums  us  ;  the  Arctic  cold  freezes  us  ;  in  temperate  regions  the  change- 
ability of  the  weather  troubles  us ;  everywhere  we  experience  the  fury  of  the 
elements.  All  climates  and  countries  have  their  special  inconveniences,  inhospit- 
alities,  and  scourges.  But  is  not  this  conflict  with  nature  part  of  the  inspiration 
and  programme  of  civilisation  ?  Contending  with  the  globe,  we  are  like  Jacob 
wrestling  with  the  angel.  The  fight  is  long  and  hard  amid  the  mystery  and  the 
darkness,  and  the  great  Power  seems  reluctant  to  bless  us  ;  but  the  breaking  of  the 
day  comes,  and  we  find  ourselves  blest  with  corn,  wine,  oil,  purple,  feasts,  flowers. 
Ah  !  and  with  gifts  far  beyond  those  of  basket  and  store — ripened  intelligence,  self- 
reliance,  courage,  skill,  manliness,  virtue.  2.  Take  the  struggle  of  man  with  man. 
Society  is  a  great  system  of  antitheses.  There  are  international  rivalries — a  relent- 
less competition  between  the  several  races  and  nations  for  power  and  supremacy. 
The  various  peoples  watch  each  other  across  the  seas  ;  the  earth  is  full  of  feuds, 
stratagems,  competitions.  And  within  the  separate  communities  what  complex  and 
unceasing  emulations  and  antagonisms  exist !  But  this  social  rivalry  brings  its  rich 
compensations.  Solicitude,  fatigue,  difficulty,  danger,  hunger,  these  are  the  true 
king-makers  ;  and  the  misfortune  with  many  rich  families  to-day  is,  that  they  are 
being  gradually  let  down  because  they  are  losing  sight  of  the  wolf.  The  wolf  not 
merely  suckled  Romulus  ;  it  suckles  all  kings  of  men.  The  wolf  is  not  a  wolf  at  all ; 
it  is  an  angel  in  wolves'  clothing,  saving  us  from  rust,  sloth,  effeminacy,  cowardice, 
baseness,  from  a  miserable  superficiality  of  thought,  life,  and  character.  III.  In 
CHARACTEK.  When  we  are  called  upon  to  perform  duties  utterly  repugnant  to  flesh 
and  blood,  to  suffer  grievous  losses,  to  experience  bitterest  disappointments,  to  bleed 
under  social  humiliations,  to  be  tortured  by  pain,  to  lose  those  whose  love  was  our 
life,  to  endure  the  great  fight  of  afflictions  which  sooner  or  later  comes  upon  us  all, 
we  may  rationally  and  consolingly  murmur  to  ourselves,  **  This  is  a  lesser  evil  to 
prevent  a  greater. "  For  as  the  catastrophes  of  nature  are,  after  all,  but  partial  and 
temporary,  preventing  immeasurably  greater  calamities,  so  our  physical  pain,  im- 
poverishment, social  suffering,  severe  toil,  bereavement,  and  all  our  terrestrial  woes 
are  the  lesser  evils,  saving  us  from  the  infinitely  greater  one  of  the  superficiality, 
corruption,  misery,  and  ruin  of  the  soul.  And  not  only  is  the  fiery  law  a  wall  of 
fire  securing  our  salvation  from  the  abyss ;  it  is  also  a  call  unto  a  high  and  splendid 
perfection.  It  shows  the  way  to  the  dignities,  freedoms,  treasures,  felicities,  perfec- 
tions, of  the  highest  universe  and  the  unending  life.  1.  Let  us  not  reject  the  law  of 
Sinai  because  of  its  severity.  The  musician  with  the  harp  believes  in  strait-lacing, 
and  it  is  only  when  the  strings  are  stretched  nigh  to  the  breaking  that  he  brings  out 
the  finest  music.  So  in  human  Kfe,  caprice,  licence,  abandonment  mean  disson- 
ance and  misery  ;  only  through  obligation,  duty,  discipline  do  all  the  chords  of  our 
nature  become  tuned  to  the  music  of  a  sweet  perfection.  2,  Let  us  not  reject  the 
Lord  Jesus  because  He  comes  to  us  with  a  cross.  To  attain  the  highest,  we  must 
be  crucified  with  Christ.  3.  Let  us  not  shrink  from  the  tribulations  of  life. 
"  Beloved,  think  it  not  strange  concerning  the  fiery  trial  which  is  to  try  you,  as 
though  some  strange  thing  happened  unto  you  :  but  rejoice,"  &c.  The  whole  case 
is  here.  We  must  not  consider  the  fiery  trial  "a  strange  thing."  It  is  the  univer- 
sal order.  We  witness  it  in  all  nature  ;  we  discern  it  in  all  the  history  of  civilisa- 
tion ;  it  is  the  common  experience.  The  fiery  trial  is  not  some  ordeal  peculiar  to 
the  Christian  saints  ;  it  is  appointed  to  the  wliole  of  humanity.  We  must  not  con- 
sider the  fiery  trial  an  uncompensated  thing.  The  cross  we  carry  is  no  longer 
a  pitiless  and  crushing  burden  ;  we  look  to  its  ultimate  design,  and  know  it  as  the 
rough  but  precious  instrument  of  our  purification  and  perfecting.  (  W.  L.  WatJcinson. ) 
All  His  saints  are  in  Thy  hand.— /S'am;;.?  in  the  Lord's  hand  .-—These  holy  ones  are 
distinguished  by  many  things  from  each  other.  Some  of  them  are  in  public  life 
and  some  in  private.    Some  are  rich  and  some  poor.    Some  are  young  and  some  old.  V 


574  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxxiii. 

But  all  are  equally  dear  to  God  ;  and  partakers  of  the  common  salvation ;  in 
whicli  there  is  neither  Jew  nor  Greek,  for  we  are  all  one  in  Christ  Jesus.  Tliis 
honour  have  all  His  saints — "  All  His  saints  are  in  His  hand."  1.  In  His  fashioning 
hand.  They  are  the  clay,  He  is  the  potter  ;  and  He  makes  them  vessels  of  honour, 
prepared  unto  every  good  work.  2.  In  His  preserving  hand.  For  now  they  are 
precious,  they  are  the  more  exposed.  They  are  called  a  crown  and  a  diadem  ;  and 
the  powers  of  darkness  would  gladly  seize  it.  3.  In  His  guiding  hand.  Though 
God,  says  Bishop  Hall,  has  a  large  family,  none  of  His  children  are  able  to  go  alone  : 
they  are  too  weak,  as  well  as  too  ignorant.  But  fear  not,  says  God  :  I  will  strengthen 
thee,  yea,  I  will  help  thee,  yea,  I  will  uphold  thee  with  the  right  hand  of  My  right- 
eousness. 4.  In  His  chastening  hand.  {IV.  Jay,)  God  and  His  saints : — I.  The 
Divine  love  which  is  the  foundation  of  all.  "  He  loved  the  people."  The 
word  used  here  is  probably  connected  "with  words  in  an  allied  language,  which  mean 
"the  bosom,"  and  "a  tender  embrace"  ;  so  the  picture  we  have  is  of  the  great 
Divine  Lover  folding  "the  people"  to  His  heart,  as  a  mother  her  child,  and 
cherishing  them  in  His  bosom.  2.  The  word  is  in  a  form  which  implies  that  the  act 
is  continuous  and  perpetual.  Timeless,  eternal  love — always  the  same.  3.  Mark 
the  place  in  the  son^  where  this  comes  in.  It  is  the  beginning  of  everything.  This 
old  singer,  with  the  mists  of  antiquity  round  him,  who  knew  nothing  about  the 
Cross  or  the  historic  Christ,  who  had  only  that  which  modern  thinkers  tell  us  is  a 
revelation  of  a  Avi-athful  God,  somehow  or  other  rose  to  the  height  of  the  evangelical 
conception  of  God's  love  as  the  foundation  of  the  very  existence  of  a  people  who 
are  His.  4.  If  the  question  is  asked,  Why  does  God  thus  love  ?  the  only  answer  is, 
Because  He  is  God.  The  love  of  God  is  inseparable  from  His  being,  and  flows 
forth  before,  and  independent  of,  anything  in  the  creature  which  could  draw  it  out. 
It  is  like  an  artesian  well,  or  a  fountain  springing  up  from  unkno^vn  depths  in 
obedience  to  its  own  impulse.  II.  The  guardian  care  extended  to  all  those 
that  answer  love  by  love.  "  All  His  saints  are  in  Thy  hand."  1.  A  saint  is  a 
man  that  answers  God's  love  by  his  love.  The  root  idea  of  sanctity  or  holiness  is 
not  moral  character,  goodness  of  disposition  and  action,  but  separation  from  the 
world  and  consecration  to  God.  As  surely  as  a  magnet  applied  to  a  heap  of  mis- 
cellaneous filings  will  pick  out  every  little  bit  of  iron  there,  so  surely  will  that  love 
which  God  bears  to  the  people,  when  it  is  responded  to,  draw  to  itself,  and  there- 
fore draw  out  of  the  heap,  the  men  that  feel  its  impulse  and  its  preciousness. 
2.  The  saints  lie  in  God's  hand.  (1)  Absolute  security  ;  for,  will  He  not  close  His 
fingers  over  His  palm  to  keep  the  soul  that  has  laid  itself  there  ?  (2)  Submission. 
Do  not  try  to  get  out  of  God's  hand.  Be  content  to  be  guided,  as  the  steersman's 
hand  turns  the  spokes  of  the  wheel  and  directs  the  ship.  III.  The  docile 
obedience  of  those  that  are  thus  guarded.  "They  sat  down  at  Thy  feet ; 
every  one  shall  receive  of  Thy  words."  These  two  clauses  make  up  one  picture,  and 
one  easily  understands  what  it  is.  It  presents  a  group  of  docile  scholars,  sitting  at 
the  Master's  feet.  He  is  teaching  them,  and  they  listen  open-mouthed  and  open- 
eared  to  what  He  says,  and  will  take  His  words  into  their  lives,  like  Mary  sitting 
at  Christ's  feet,  whilst  Martha  was  bustling  about  His  meal.  But  perhaps,  instead 
of  "  sitting  dowTi  at  Thy  feet,"  we  should  read  "followed  at  Thy  feet."  That  sug- 
gests the  familiar  metaphor  of  a  guide  and  those  led  by  him  who  without  him  knew 
not  their  road.  As  a  dog  follows  his  master,  as  the  sheep  their  shepherd,  so,  this 
singer  felt,  will  saints  follow  the  God  whom  they  love.  Religion  is  imitation  of 
God.  They  "follow  at  His  foot."  That  is  the  blessedness  and  the  power  of 
Christian  morality,  that  it  is  keeping  close  at  Christ's  heels,  and  that,  instead  of  its 
being  said  to  us,  "  Go,"  He  says,  "Come"  ;  and  instead  of  us  being  bade  to  hew  out  for 
ourselves  a  path  of  duty.  He  says  to  us,  "  He  that  followeth  Me  shall  not  walk  in 
darkness,  but  shall  have  the  light  of  life."  They  "  receive  His  words."  Yes,  if  you 
will  keep  close  to  Him,  He  will  turn  round  and  speak  to  you.  If  you  are  near 
enough  to  Him  to  catch  His  whisper  He  will  not  leave  yoii  without  guidance. 
That  is  one  side  of  the  thought,  that  following  we  receive  what  He  says,  whereas 
the  people  that  are  away  far  behind  Him  scarcely  know  what  His  will  is,  and  never 
can  catch  the  low  whisper  which  will  come  to  us  by  providences,  by  movements  in 
our  own  spirits,  through  the  exercise  of  our  faculties  of  judgment  and  common 
sense,  if  only  we  will  keep  near  to  Him.     {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.) 

Ver.  6.  Let  Reuben  live,  and  not  die. — Reuben : — The  name  of  Reuben  stands  first 
in  the  blessing  of  Moses,  but  this  recognition  of  his  natural  place  among  the  tribes  is 
almost  sadder  in  its  suggestiveness  than  would  have  been  the  putting  of  his  name 


€HAP.  XXXIII.]       DEUTERONOMY, 675 

farther  down.     When  the  substance  of  a  high  and  ancient  dignity  has  been  with- 
drawn,  the  continuance  of  its  hollow  outward  semblance  becomes  a  pitiable  spectacle. 
Reubek  had  outraged  the  most  sacred  principles  of  patriarchal  law  and  pnmitive 
morality.     Moses  could  not  disregard  the  curse  which  behaviour  so  flagrant  had 
provoked.     Nay,  in  Reuben  and  his  tribe  Moses  recognised  an  inherent  vice  which 
forbade  them  ever  to  "excel."     He  could  therefore  only  pray  that  Reuben  might 
"live  and  not  die  "—not  become  extinct  and  cast  out  from  Jehovah  s  inheritance, 
as  it  seemed  only  too  likely  he  might  become.     The  fatal  A^^  .^l^,i«^,^°«^^V^^^^^ 
discerned  in  the  fortunes  of  Jacob's   firstborn   arose  from    the  instability  of  his 
character  ;  a  fault  which  seems  by  no  means  to  have  been  corrected,  but  rather  to 
have  been  perpetuated  and  confirmed  in  the  character   of  his  descendants       A 
practical  lesson  of  warning  for  ourselves  is  surely  not  far  to  seek      The  impul^ve 
yet  irresolute  disposition  of  Reuben  is  painful  y  common  ^^^rigst  ourselves      Too 
many  a  young  man,  the  excellency  of  his  father's  dignity,  and  the  centre  of  highest 
hopes,  both  for  this  world  and  the  next,  is  at  this  moment  the  subject  of  sorely 
anxious  prayers,  such  as  this  which  Moses  uttered       And  too  many  a  airistian 
convert,  Iho  has  been  baptized  like  Reuben  unto  God's  high  calhng,  ^  the  cloud 
and  in  the  sea,  is  seeming  at  this  moment  to  bis  pastor  to  be  coming  short  of  the 
promised  reward,  because  of  his  unstable  will,  and  his  fickle  yielding  to  influences 
that  lie  outside  the  boundaries  of  Jehovah's  covenant      Not  even  the  Ijvmg  inter- 
cessions  of  a  Moses  can  deliver  such  souls  from  death,  i    they  make  not  an  end  of 
their  wavering  and  indecision,  and  engage  not  themselves  to  seek  the  Me  of  God 
with  all  their  hearts.     God  Himself  can  only  mourn  over  them,  s^png,      What 
shall  I  do  unto  thee  ?  for  thy  goodness  is  like  the  morning  cloud,  and  like  the  dew 
Xh  early  goeth  away."     {T.  G.  Rooke,  B.A.)        The  omission  of  Simem :-Th^ 
Ilexandrian  manuscript  of  the  Greek  Old  Testament  conteins  a  ^em^rkable  inter- 
polation  in  the  clause  of  Reuben's  blessing.     It  introduces  the  name  of  Sirneon,  and 
Jefers  to  that  tribe  the  prayer  of  Moses  that  "his  men  may  not  be  few       The 
suggestion  cannot  possibly  be  entertained  ;  although,  if  it  be  rejected,  the  very 
sSar  f^ct  stares  us  in  the  face  that  the  tribe  of  Simeon  is  passed  over  m  absolute 
sfence      This  omission  has  been  used  to  support  the  theory  of  a  later  origin  of  the 
Book  of  Deuteronomy.      It  has  been  said  that  the  Simeon ites  had  disppeared  from 
fhe  soil  of  Canaan  in  the  reign  of  Josiah,  and  that  therefore  the  writer  thought  it 
needless  to  make  allusion  to  them.     But  the  same  reason  would  have  caused  hini  to 
pass  over  all  the  tribes  comprised  in  the  northern  kingdom  of  Israel ;  for  they  had 
E  recently  rooted  out  of  their  possessions  in  the  ^t  llT}T^t"'iJ:Z^. 
away  captive  into  Assyria.     Moreover,  as  a  matter  of  historical  fact   there  were 
flour^ishing  settlements  of  the  Simeonites  within  the  territory  of  Judah  so  near  to 
JosYah's  tfme  as  the  reign  of  Hezekiah  (1  Chron.  iv.  34-43),  and  the  heroine  of  the 
apocryphal  book  of  Judith  was  a  daughter  of  Simeon  :  a  fact  which   even  with  all 
aUowInce  for  the  license  of  historic  fiction,  obliges  us  to  recognise  the  continuance 
of  Simeon  as  a  tribe  in  the  very  latest  period  of  Jewish  national  existence      The 
true  reason  why  Simeon's  name  is  passed  over  m  this  blessing  was  the  deep  and 
rShteous  indignation  which  the  inspired  prophet  felt  m  regard  to  the  recent  sin  of 
Is?ael  at  Shittim.     Simeon  had  headed  the  foul  apostasy  which  cast  t^e  glory  of 
Jehovah's  chosen  people  at  the  feet  of  Moab's  vilest  idol  ;    and  the  bulk  of  the 
twenty-four  thousand  victims  of  God's  avenging  plague  were  men  of  this   guilty 
tribe.     With  such  recollections  fresh  in  his  mmd,  it  was  impossible  fo^  Moses  to 
utter  words  of  blessing  upon  Simeon,  or  to  mitigate  m  any  sense  the  curse  which 
Jacob  had  already  pronounced  upon  his  posterity  (Gen.  xlix.  5-7;.     \io%a.) 

Ver.  7.  And  thus  is  the  blessing  of  Judah.-J-i.rfci^  .—The  name  "Judah"  was 
given  to  Jacob's  fourth  son  in  memory  of  his  mother's  grateful  utterance  of  praise  to 
God  when  this  child  was  vouchsafed  to  her.  It  is  the  Hebrew  word  meaning 
"praised,"  and  had  reference  originally  to  Jehovah,  upon  whom  Leah  m  her  joy 
conferred  that  title,  saving,  "  Now  will  I  praise  the  Lord  (Gen.  xxix.  35).  But 
bv  a  very  natural  change,  the  praise  which  this  name  implied  came  to  be  attributed 
to  the  individual  who  bore  it ;  and  Jacob's  dying  blessing  embodies  that  new 
application  of  the  idea:  "Judah,  thou  art  he  whom  thy  brethren  shall  praise. 
The  blessing  of  Jacob  goes  on  to  disclose  the  great  reasons  for  Judah  s  exaltation  in 
the  esteem  of  men.  He  was  to  be  the  royal  tribe  in  Israel ;  from  him  was  to  spring 
the  Prince  of  Peace,  the  promised  Messiah,  "unto  whom  shall  be  the  obedience  of 
the  peoples"  (Gen.  xlix.  8,  10).  A  third  part  of  his  eldest  brother  Reuben  s  birth- 
right  was  conferred  upon  him,— and  this,  not  by  his  father  s  caprice,  but  by  God  s 


576  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [tirA".  xxxiir. 

deliberate  appointment  ;  so  that  the  refusal  of  his  brethren  to  a«knowledge  Judah  as 
their  leader  would  have  been  nothing  less  than  rebellion  against  Jehovah.  The  sons 
of  Jacob,  however,  seem  to  have  acknowledged  this  leadership  very  willingly  from 
the  first  Eeuben,  Simeon,  and  Levi  yielded  the  place  of  honour  to  Jndah  without 
a  murmur,  so  far  as  the  sacred  record  sufiFers  us  to  judge.  Only  one  tribe  submitted 
with  ill-concealed  impatience  and  reluctance  to  the  divinely  appointed  leadership  of 
Judah.  This  was  Ephraim,  which  had  come  to  represent  Joseph,  the  favourite  of 
Jacob  and  the  inheritor  of  another  third  part  of  Reuben's  forfeited  birthright.  The 
first  settlement  of  Canaan  after  its  conquest  by  Joshua  shows  us  the  secret  rivalry 
between  these  two  tribes,  and  also  allows  us  to  see  how  completely  these  two  had 
cast  all  the  others  into  the  shade.  For  Judah  and  Joseph  divided  the  whole 
conquered  territory  between  themselves ;  so  that  the  central  mountain  ridge  of 
Palestine  received  a  permanent  name  from  the  one  tribe  in  its  southern  portion,  and 
from  the  other  tribe  in  its  northern  continuation.  It  was  not  until  some  few  years 
had  elapsed  that  the  murmurs  of  seven  other  tribes,  for  which  no  landed  possessions 
had  been  allotted,  shamed  Judah  and  Ephraim  into  a  more  equitable  division  of 
their  spoils,  and  led  to  the  well-known  partition  of  Canaan  into  nine  lots,  instead  of 
the  original  two  (Joshua  xv.,  xvi.,  xvii.,  xviii.  2-7).  But  about  one  hundred  years 
later  the  old  dual  division  reappeared  in  more  pronounced  and  permanent  form. 
The  seceding  kingdom  of  Israel  was  established  through  the  union  of  eight  tribes  or 
fragments  of  tribes  under  Ephraim,  who  now  for  the  second  time  ruled  over  the 
whole  northern  half  of  the  Promised  Land ;  whilst  Judah  retained  dominion  over 
the  south,  in  which  part  of  the  country  Benjamin,  Simeon,  and  Dan  had  found 
settlements  un4er  the  wing  of  their  stronger  brother.  From  that  time  forth  the 
name  of  "Jew"  (that  is,  "man  of  Judah")  was  given  to  every  subject  of  the 
kingdom  of  David's  house,  whether  he  belonged  to  the  tribe  of  Judah  or  not.  The 
second  clause  of  this  blessing  may  seem  at  first  sight  a  little  obscure ;  but  the 
traditional  Jewish  interpretation  will  probably  commend  itself  to  every  one  who 
bears  in  mind  that  peculiar  position  of  Judah  among  his  brethren  which  has  been 
already  described.  The  royal  tribe  was  also  the  *  *  champion  "  tribe,  bound  to  go 
before  all  the  rest  in  the  path  of  warfare  and  of  danger.  The  third  and  fourth 
clauses  of  the  blessing  bring  out,  on  the  one  hand,  Judah's  valiant  and  unselfish 
discharge  of  the  honourable  task  assigned  him  ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  they  con- 
template the  serious  hindrances  which  would  oppose  his  work.  He  would  have 
many  adversaries,  not  only  from  among  the  surrounding  Gentile  nations,  but  also 
from  amongst  his  own  brethren,  some  of  whom  would  envy  him,  and  set  up  a  rival 
kingdom  and  championship  to  his.  But  if  God  would  be  his  helper,  these  rivalries 
and  oppositions  would  only  serve  to  make  his  glorious  destiny  more  manifest.  The 
Lord  would  set  His  anointed  One  king  upon  His  holy  hill  of  Zion  ;  there  He 
should  rule  in  the  midst  of  His  enemies.  The  opening  words  of  Judah's  blessing  are, 
however,  the  most  suggestive  in  regard  to  the  actual  history  of  the  tribe  and  to  the 
typical  application  of  that  history  to  our  own  circumstances.  Judah's  triumph  and 
rest  and  help  were  to  come  from  God  in  answer  to  the  uplifting  of  Judah's  voice. 
Distinct  as  was  God's  purpose  to  bless  him  and  to  make  him  a  blessing.  He  would 
yet  be  inquired  of  for  this ;  prayer  and  supplication  on  the  part  of  His  chosen 
I>eople  were  to  be  the  condition  of  their  efiectual  blessing.  The  Apostle  Paul  has 
taught  us  that  '  *  in  everything  by  prayer  and  supplication  with  thanksgiving  "  our 
**  requests  "  should  "be  made  known  unto  God  "  (Phil.  iv.  6).  This  oft-forgotten  but 
important  truth  is  forcibly  suggested  in  the  wording  of  Judah's  blessing  :  * '  Hear, 
Lord,  the  voice  of  Judah  "  ;  for,  as  already  explained,  that  name  was  given  by  Leah 
in  token  of  the  debt  of  praise  which  was  owing  on  .Judah's  account  to  God.  The 
history  of  the  reign  of  Jehoshaphat  furnishes  a  notable  commentary  upon  the  point 
which  is  thus  suggested.  Moab,  and  Ammon,  and  Edom  had  become  confederate 
against  that  prince;  and  in  his  fear  "he  set  himself  to  seek  the  Lord;  and  all 
Judah  gathered  together  to  seek  help  from  the  Lord  "  (2  Chron.  xx.  1-4).  The 
answer  which  was  given  to  this  cry  for  help  required  from  the  king  and  from  the 
people  no  ordinary  display  of  faith,  and  no  easy  sacrifice  of  praise.  But  Judah  was 
strengthened  to  stand  the  test  (2  Chron.  xx.  21-28).  Perhaps  this  hint  from  the 
meaning  of  Judah's  name  may  be  the  most  needed  and  the  most  profitable  teaching 
of  the  blessing  of  Judah  for  some  one  who  now  reads  it.  It  is  no  unfrequent 
experience  when  a  Christian's  prayer  fails  to  be  answered  from  God,  simply  because 
it  was  conceived  in  a  querulous,  ungrateful,  and  complaining  spirit.  No  element  of 
praise  mingled  with  its  petitions.  It  was  wholly  occupied  with  requests  for  some- 
thing that  seemed  lacking ;  whilst  God  was  expecting  a  thankful  acknowledgment 


CHAP.  XXXIII.]  DEUTERONOMY,  677 


of  countless  mercies  which  His  selfish  servant  had  received  in  silence,  or  even  with 
discontented  depreciation.  Let  not  the  offerer  of  such  defective  prayers  expect  any 
share  in  the  blessings  which  Moses  invoked  on  Judah.  The  voice  of  rejoicing  and 
of  thanksgiving  was  in  his  tabernacles  ;  therefore  the  right  hand  of  the  Lord  did 
valiantly  for  him.  For  thus  saith  the  Hope  of  Israel,  the  Lion  of  the  tribe  of 
Judah  (Psa.  L  23).     (T.  G.  Mooke,  B.A.) 

Vers.  8-11.  And  of  Levi  tie  said. — Levi : — Levi  was  the  third  son  of  Jacob  and 
Leah,  and  his  name  commemorated  the  desire  and  hope  of  his  mother,  that  her 
husband's  heart  would  be  "closely  joined"  to  her  now  that  she  had  borne  him 
three  sons  (Gen.  xxix.  34).  The  Hebrew  word  from  which  *<Levi"  is  derived 
means  "to  adhere,"  or  "to  be  closely  joined. "  An  undesigned  prediction  lay  hid 
in  the  name  thus  given ;  for  Levi  was  ordained  by  God  to  be  the  official  link  of 
union  betwixt  the  whole  nation  of  Israel  and  its  spiritual  Head.  Through  the 
Levitical  priesthood  the  descendants  of  Jacob  were  to  be  joined  unto  God  in  a 
peculiar  covenant ;  and  this  fact  is  distinctly  connected  with  the  meaning  of  Levi's 
name  by  an  inspired  utterance  recorded  in  Numbers  xviii.  2.  Yet,  during  the  life- 
time of  Levi  himself,  this  high  spiritual  destiny  of  his  tribe  could  scarcely  have 
been  guessed  ;  for  this  third  son  of  Jacob  was  joined  to  his  elder  brother  Simeon  in 
deeds  of  violence  and  cruelty  that  drew  upon  them  a  common  curse,  which  in 
Simeon's  case,  as  we  have  seen,  made  every  "blessing"  of  the  tribe  impossible. 
The  dying  patriarch  Israel,  speaking  by  the  spirit  of  prophecy,  formally  disinherited 
both  these  men  from  their  natural  share  in  the  promised  land  of  Canaan.  They 
were  to  be  "divided"  and  "scattered"  (Gen.  xlix.  7).  And  this  curse  was  never 
recalled  in  its  terms,  nor  abolished  in  the  case  of  Levi  any  more  than  it  was  in  the 
case  of  Simeon  ;  only  the  wonder-working  providence  of  God  converted  it  into  an 
occasion  of  blessing  and  honour  for  the  one  tribe,  whilst  leaving  it  in  its  original 
force  of  a  punishment  for  the  other  tribe.  The  exclusion  of  the  Levites  from  a 
landed  inheritance,  and  their  dispersion  amongst  the  other  tribes  of  Israel,  became 
the  highest  tokens  of  the  Divine  favour  towards  them,  and  the  means  by  which 
they  were  recognised  as  the  channels  of  heavenly  grace  to  all  the  nation.  This 
remarkable  change  of  a  curse  into  a  blessing  deserves  to  be  studied  and  remembered 
by  those  who  are  conscious  of  having  brought  themselves  under  the  inevitable 
penalties  of  past  wrong-doing.  Those  penalties  cannot  perhaps  be  recalled,  but 
they  can  be  convert^  into  marvellous  opportunities  of  good  in  a  circle  far  wider 
than  has  been  affected  by  the  former  evil.  And  for  such  a  miracle  of  grace  to  be 
accomplished,  it  is  only  needful  that  human  repentance  and  self-consecration  should 
work  together  with  the  providence  of  heaven.  (T.  G.  Booke,  B.A.)  Urim  and 
Thummim ;— In  the  blessing  of  Levi  by  Moses,  the  usual  order  of  these  two 
mysterious  words  is  reversed,  and  Thummim  is  put  before  Urim.  There  is  probably 
a  reason  for  this,  namely,  to  suggest  that  Levi's  zeal  for  the  "  right  and  perfect 
way  "  of  God,  amid  the  general  defection  at  Horeb,  was  his  real  title  to  the  honour- 
able office  of  interpreting  God's  "light"  and  God's  "truth  "  from  His  holy  oracles. 
This  supreme  devotion  of  himself  to  "right"  was  indeed  the  sole  condition  of  his 
blessing  and  of  the  Divine  election  which  it  declared.     {Ibid.) 

Ver.  12.  Of  Benjamin  lie  said.  The  beloved  of  the  Lord  shall  dwell  in  safety  by 
Him.— T^  safety  of  the  Lord's  beloved.— I.  He  was  the  special  object  of  thk 
Divine  affection.  God  especially  loves  His  spiritual  children  with  a  love  of — 
1.  Approbation.  2.  Manifestation.  3.  Distinction.  II.  He  was  to  dwell  near 
to  the  Lokd.  1.  By  grace.  2.  In  providence.  3.  In  reference  to  His  ordinances. 
4.  With  regard  to  the  prevailing  impressions  of  the  mind.  III.  He  was  to  abide 
IN  perfect  security.  God's  chosen  dwell  in  safety  from— 1.  The  curses  of  the 
Divine  law.  2.  The  powers  of  darkness.  3.  The  perils  of  life.  4.  The  terrors  of 
death  and  the  judgment  day.  (J.  Bums,  D.D.)  Benjamin  .-—The  blessing  of 
the  tribes  by  Moses  consisted  largely  in  a  prophetic  foreshadowiag  of  the  lots  which 
these  tribes  were  severally  to  occupy  in  the  conquered  territory  of  Canaan.  The 
first  distinct  example  of  this  fact  meets  us  in  the  case  of  Benjamin,  who,  although 
he  was  the  youngest  of  all  the  sons  of  Jacob,  stands  fourth  in  this  significant 
enumeration  which  the  man  of  God  was  inspired  to  make  before  his  death.  It  has 
been  suggested  that  the  spirit  of  prophecy  caused  Moses  to  look  far  beyond  the 
merely  temporal  aspect  of  the  history  of  Israel,  and  to  recognise  its  typical  relations 
with  the  spiritual  kingdom  of  Messiah  ;  and  that  the  peculiar  arrangement  of  the 
namee  was  partly  meant  to  indicate  certain  of  these  hidden  mysteries.    Such  an 

37 


578  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxxiii. 

opinion  would  be  fully  confirmed  by  a  review  of  the  order  in  whiob  the  tribes  have 
been  marshalled  thus  far.  Reuben  is  mentioned  first,  not  so  much  by  courtesy  and 
in  remembrance  of  his  birthright,  as  to  mark  with  emphasis  the  mournful  lessons  of 
his  fall.  The  real  leader  and  head  of  Israel  is  Judah,  and  the  blessing  makes  haste 
to  rest  on  him  with  the  first  of  its  utterances  in  which  no  ambiguity  lies.  But  the 
royal  destinies  of  Judah  are  incomplete  if  separated  from  the  priestly  destinies  of 
Levi.  Messiah,  that  seed  for  whose  sake  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob  had  received 
their  divine  election,  was  to  be  a  "priest  upon  his  throne"  ;  and  therefore  the 
blessing  of  the  third  son  is  made  by  Moses  to  follow  immediately  upon  the  blessing 
of  his  sceptred  brother.  So  the  keynote  of  the  entire  prediction  is  struck  in  a 
spiritual  rather  than  in  a  temporal  sense ;  remembering  which  fact,  we  cease  to 
wonder  at  finding  the  name  of  Benjamin  next  in  the  enumeration  to  that  of  Levi. 
For  the  local  centre  of  Jehovah's  spiritual  kingdom  in  Israel  was  fixed  in  the  lot  of 
Benjamin.  The  famous  temple  of  Solomon  was  built  upon  the  hill  between  the  city 
of  David  and  the  Mount  of  Olives ;  and  was  wholly  in  the  territory  of  Benjamin, 
though,  according  to  the  Rabbins,  a  part  of  its  outer  courts  fell  within  the  lot  of 
Judah.  This  fact  furnishes  the  most  exact  and  beautiful  explanation  of  all  the 
peculiar  expressions  which  meet  us  in  Benjamin's  blessing.  For  the  God  and  King 
of  Israel  may  be  said  literally  to  have  thus  dwelt  between  the  two  mountain  ridges 
which  formed  the  extremity  of  the  lot  of  this  tribe,  and  Benjamin  dwelt  **  along- 
side "  the  holy  spot ;  not  "around "  it,  but  stretching  out  from  it  as  from  the  point 
where  his  safety  and  honour  had  their  origin  ;  all  which  is  implied  in  the  pre- 
position which  Moses  uses  when  he  says,  * '  The  beloved  of  the  Lord  shall  dwell  in 
safety  by  Him."  Further,  the  phrase,  "  He  will  cover  him  all  the  day  long,"  may 
very  fairly  be  taken  as  referring  to  the  cloud  of  glory  which  was  inseparably  asso- 
ciated with  the  earthly  dwelling-place  of  Jehovah,  and  which  in  the  wilderness  had 
been  spread  for  a  covering  over  all  the  tribes.  That  sign  of  the  Divine  protection 
was  now  to  rest  specially  over  Benjamin  ;  and  beneath  the  shadow  of  the  Almighty 
he  was  to  abide  securely  day  and  night.  The  history  of  the  tribe  of  Benjamin  from 
the  time  when  the  Temple  was  built  upon  his  frontier  hill  of  Moriah  yields  a  very 
complete  commentary  upon  the  splendid  promise  of  his  blessing.  This  member  of 
the  Hebrew  commonwealth  did  dwell  in  safety  that  was  all  the  more  noteworthy  by 
contrast  with  the  calamities  which  befell  not  only  the  tribes  which  cast  in  their  lot 
with  Ephraim,  but  also  the  outlying  portions  of  the  kingdom  of  Judah.  A  kind  of 
charmed  circle  of  peace  and  security  was  drawn  around  the  towers  of  Salem,  and  all 
the  land  of  Benjamin  seemed  to  be  within  that  happy  region.  Egypt  might  come 
up  against  Israel  from  the  south,  and  Syria  might  invade  his  territory  from  the 
north  ;  the  tents  of  Edom  and  the  Ishmaelites,  Moab  and  the  Hagarenes,  might  be 
confederate  to  assault  it  from  the  east ;  and  these  hostile  floods  more  than  once 
filled  all  the  breadth  of  Immanuel's  land  ;  but  the  tableland  of  Benjamin  was  ever 
the  last  to  be  overflowed,  and  often  escaped  even  the  spray  of  the  angry  tide.  The 
spiritual  application  of  this  blessing  must  be  self-evident  to  every  one  who  has 
received  the  assurance  of  God's  love  toward  himself  in  Jesus  Christ.  The  Christian 
has  joined  himself  to  the  Lord's  anointed  King,  even  as  Benjamin  chose  to  unite  his 
lot  with  Judah,  and  to  acknowledge  the  right  of  David's  house  to  rule  over  him. 
He  has  accepted  Christ  to  be  his  head,  and  has  prepared  Him  a  dwelling-place 
in  a  nobler  house  than  that  of  Moriah,  even  in  his  own  renewed  and  adoring 
heart.  Therefore  does  the  Spirit  of  Christ  bear  witness  to  him  of  his  adoption 
as  God's  well-beloved  child.  He  has  found  a  dwelling-place  under  the  shadow  of  the 
Almighty  ;  Jehovah's  truth  has  become  his  shield  and  buckler.  {T.  G.  Rooke,  B.A.) 
Benjamin  as  a  figure  of  the  true  Church: — 1.  In  his  birth — hard  travail,  sorrow, 
pain,  and  death,  preceded  and  accompanied  his  birth.  So  in  the  spiritual  birth,  in 
the  regeneration  of  the  soul,  there  is  great  pain,  sorrow,  and  anguish  of  mind,  and 
even  the  death  of  all  self-righteousness  and  legal  hope  in  bringing  the  soul  to 
spiritual  birth.  2.  In  his  name.  The  believer,  in  his  moments  of  conviction, 
humiliation,  and  sorrow  for  sin,  calls  himself  Benoni,  the  son  of  sorrow,  but  the 
Lord  calls  him  Benjamin,  the  son  of  my  right  hand  ;  witness  Ephraim  bemoaning 
himself,  and  the  Lord's  declaration  concerning  him  (Jer.  xxxi.  18,  20).  3.  In  the 
description  given  of  him,  "the  beloved  of  the  Lord  "  ;  loved  from  eternity,  freely, 
indissolubly,  everlastingly.  4.  In  his  security.  He  shall  dwell  in  safety  by  Him, 
or  through  His  protecting  hand  and  power  ;  in  battle  the  Lord  shall  cover  him,  as  a 
hen  covereth  her  chickens — as  with  a  shield,  and  he  shall  dwell,  his  resting  place 
shall  be,  between  the  shoulders,  in  the  heart  of  his  covenant  God.  {A.  Hewlett, 
M.A.)        Safety  near  Ood : — 1.  There  is  no  safety  like  that  which  comes  of  dwelling 


CHAP.  XXXIII.]  DEUTERONOMY.  579 


near  to  God  For  His  best  beloved  the  Lord  can  find  no  surer  or  safer  place. 
O  Lord,  let  me  always  abide  under  Thy  shadow,  close  to  Thy  wounded  side.  Nearer 
and  nearer  would  I  come  to  Thee  ;  and  when  once  specially  near  Thee,  I  would 
abide  there  for  ever.  2.  What  a  covering  is  that  which  the  Lord  gives  to  His 
chosen  '  Not  a  fair  roof  shall  cover  him,  nor  a  bomb-proof  casement,  nor  even  an 
angel's  wing,  but  Jehovah  Himself.  Nothing  can  come  at  us  when  we  are  thus 
covered.  This  covering  the  Lord  will  grant  us  all  the  day  long,  however  long  the 
day  Lord,  let  me  abide  this  day  consciously  beneath  this  canopy  of  love,  this 
pavilion  of  sovereign  power.  3.  Does  the  third  clause  mean  that  the  Lord  m  His 
temple  would  dwell  among  the  mountains  of  Benjamin,  or  that  the  Lord  would  be 
where  Benjamin's  burden  should  be  placed,  or  that  we  are  borne  upon  the  shoulders 
of  the  Eternal  ?  In  any  case,  the  Lord  is  the  support  and  strength  of  His  saints. 
Lord,  let  me  ever  enjoy  Thy  help,  and  then  my  arms  will  be  sufficient  for  me. 
(C.  H.  Spur  gem.) 

Vers  13-17    Of  Joseph  he  said,  Blessed  of  the  Lord  be  his  IxnA.— Joseph  .— 
The  character  of  Joseph  is  not  often  correctly  apprehended,  although  it  comes  out 
very  distinctly  in  the  picture  which  Scripture  has  given  us  of  the  boy,  the  youth, 
and  the  man.     Its  most  conspicuous  quality  was  firm  resolution  and  indomitable 
strength  of  will.     There  was  nothing  weak  or  undecided  m  him  ;  and  trom  this 
sterling  root  of  character,  sanctified  as  it   was  by  true  piety,  sprang  the  virtues 
which  °  11  can  recognise  in  Joseph's  behaviour  throughout  his  chequered  experiences  ; 
a  master  sense  of  duty,  clieerful  courage,  and  perseverance  under  misfortune,  rigid 
justice,  and  indefatigable  diligence  in  all  to  which  he  set  his  hand.     Ephraim  w^s 
evidently  the  true  son  of  Joseph  in  all  his  natural  force  of  character  ;  and,  m  the 
history  of  the  Hebrew  nation,  we  find  him  practically  absorbing  the  individuality 
of  his  elder  brother  Manasseh.     But,  unlike  his  father,  Ephraim  seems  to  have  been 
proud  and  selfish  and  overbearing,  asserting  his  claim  to  supremacy  without  regard 
to  the  feelings  or  the  rights  of  others,  and  angrily  resenting  every  sign  of  resistance 
to,   or  questioning  of,  his  right  to  the  chief  place  among  his  brethren.     Such  a 
character  is  sure  to  secure  its  ambitious  ends,  at  least,  for  a  time,  if  only  it  is  backed 
by  the  ability  to  rule  ;  and  in  this  way  alone  we  might  account  for  the  tacit  sub- 
niission  of  all  Israel  to  Ephraimitish  dictation  from  the  days  of  Joshua  the  greatest 
hero  of  the  tribe,  and  a  man  who  reproduced  all  the  spotless  virtues  of  Joseph  him- 
self, until  the  disastrous  ''  day  of  battle,"  when  'Hhe  glory  departed  from  Israel, 
and  when  Shiloh,   the  former  centre  of  Joseph's  dominion  and  of  the  religious 
worship  of  all  his  brethren,  ceased  to  be  God's  chosen  dwellmg-place,  and  was 
turned  even  into  "  a  curse  to  all  the  nations  of  the  earth."     But  something  more 
than  the  mere  ancestral  force  of  the  Ephraimitish  character  explains  this  long- 
continued  supremacy  of  the  tribe  in  Israel.     The  distinction  which  Joseph  claimed 
among  his  brethren  seemed  to  be  invested  with  an  almost  sacred  authority  by  the 
traditions  of  his  father's  express  appointment,  which,  moreover,  Moses  appears  to 
acknowledge  in  the  blessing  which  is  now  before  us.     His  richly  coloured  phrase- 
ology is  reproduced  in  part  by  Moses  in  Deuteronomy,  whilst  the  thought  which 
underlay  the  words  of  the  older  prophecy  is  manifestly  present  to  the  mind  of  the 
later  seer.     Now  what  that  thought  really  was  is  revealed  m  a  brief  incidental  passage 
of  1  Chronicles.    We  are  told  by  the  author  of  these  annals  that  Jacob  transferred  froni 
Reuben  to  Joseph  the  birthright  of  the  first-bom  son  ;  that  birthright  consisting  of 
a  double  portion  of  the  patrimonial  estate,  as  well  as  of  titular  headship  m  the 
family,  such  as  the  father  himself  exercised  until  his  death.     Jacob  assuined  the 
liberty  to  take  away  this  high  distinction  from  his  eldest  son,  who  had  justly  for- 
feited it  by  gross  misconduct,  and  to  confer  it  upon  the  latest-born  but  one,  whom 
he  had  already  singled  out  for  other  peculiar  privileges  when  the    ads  were  young 
and  living  together  at  home.      And  further,  as  if  to  emphasise  the  liberty  of  prefer- 
ence wliich  he  thus  assumed,  the  dying  patriarch  singled  out  the  younger  of  Joseph  s 
two  children  as  the  special  inheritor  of  this  transferred  birthright.      But  some  will 
very  naturally  doubt  whether  he  did  not  go  beyond  other  limits  which  his  recogni- 
tion of  the  Divine  decrees  ought  most  distinctly  to  have  set  before  his  mmd.     For 
God  had  assigned  the  headship  of  His  cliosen  people  to  Judah,  and  Jacob  was  not 
i.'norant  of  this  arrangement,  but  had  given  utterance  to  it  m  his  prediction  con- 
cerning the  royal  sceptre  which  his  fourth  son  was  to  stretch  forth  over  his  enemies 
and  his  father's  sons  alike.      Perhaps  he  may  have  drawn  some  subtle  distinction  m 
his  thoughts  between  this  regal  honour,  which  also  had  a  certain  spiritual  aspect, 
and  the  temporal  substance  of  the   birthright  which  he  desired  to  transmit  to 


580  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxxiii. 

Joseph.  And  this  theory  was  very  likely  present  to  the  mind  of  Moses  when  he 
adopted  so  much  of  Jacob's  former  blessing,  and  seemingly  confirmed  it  absolutely 
to  Joseph.  But  this  was  a  judgment  after  the  flesh,  and  not  after  the  spirit ;  and 
in  Jacob's  case  the  assumption  of  a  right  to  judge  at  all  in  such  a  matter  was 
specially  unwarrantable,  and  is  all  the  more  surprising  because  he  had  been  so  often 
punished  for  former  acts  of  similar  self-willed  interference  with  the  course  and 
directions  of  God's  providence.  Could  the  patriarch  have  foreseen  all  th«  evil  con- 
sequences of  what  he  did,  he  would  surely  never  have  attempted  to  advance  the 
tribe  of  Joseph  into  the  place  of  pre-eminence  which  God  had  reserved  for  Judah. 
It  was  in  the  death-chamber  of  Jacob  in  E^rpt  that  birth  was  first  given  to  that 
disastrous  rivalry  which  for  more  than  a  thousand  years  weakened  the  house  of 
Israel,  aud  which  still  points  a  mournful  proverb  for  the  Church  of  the  living  God. 
One  is  tempted  to  linger  over  the  very  serious  lessons  which  are  suggested  by  this 
striking  instance  of  the  conflict  which  may  arise  between  Divine  election  and  human 
self-will,  and  of  the  well-marked  differences  in  the  fortunes  and  character  of  those 
whose  inheritance  is  chosen  of  God,  and  of  those  whose  inheritance  is  derived  from 
men.  How  often  do  we  think  to  do  good  to  our  friends  or  to  our  children  by- 
setting  apfirt  for  them  special  gifts  or  asking  specific  requests  for  them  from  God, 
when,  in  truth,  we  are  only  procuring  them  evil  and  a  curse  ;  whereas,  if  we  had 
left  them  in  faith  to  God,  and  taught  them  to  submit  cheerfully  in  all  things 
to  His  sovereign  will,  they  would  indeed  have  been  blest  more  richly  than  we 
could  have  desired  or  conceived  !  And  how  often  do  we  congratulate  ourselves  upon 
the  proud  advantages  which  human  aff"ection  or  policy  has  conferred,  forgetting 
that  there  is  only  one  inheritance  which  avails  eternally  and  truly — that  which 
pertains  to  the  children  of  Divine  election,  "who  were  bom,  not  of  blood,  nor  of 
the  will  of  the  flesh,  nor  of  the  will  of  man,  but  of  God"  (John  i.  13).  {T.  G. 
RooTce,  B.A.)  By  the  fountain  (with  Gen.  xlix.  22) : — I.  This  figure  describes 
Joseph's  character.  1.  He  was  in  clear  and  constant  fellowship  with  God,  and 
therefore  God  blessed  him  greatly.  How  can  we  fail  to  be  fruitful  if  we  draw  our 
life  and  all  its  vigour  from  the  Lord  Jesus  ?  2.  Because  Joseph  lived  near  to  God, 
he  received  and  retained  gracious  principles.  "We  need  an  instructed  people  if  we 
are  to  have  a  fraitful  people.  3.  Joseph  showed  his  character  throughout  the  whole 
of  his  life.  Always  the  Lord  his  God  is  the  star  of  Joseph.  4.  This  abiding  near 
to  God  made  Joseph  independent  of  externals.  If  you  are  not  living  in  God  on 
your  own  account,  your  religion  may  as  well  fail  you  at  once  ;  for  it  will  ultimately 
do  so.  5.  Joseph  was  very  conscious  of  his  entire  dependence  upon  God.  Take 
the  well  away,  and  where  was  the  fruitful  bough  ?  II.  This  is  of  itself  a  great 
BLESSING.  It  is  a  high  favour  to  know  the  deep  things  of  God,  and  to  eegoy  the 
far-down  securities,  enjoyments,  and  privileges  of  the  children  of  heaven.  1.  In 
deep  union  with  God  are  to  be  found  the  very  truth  and  life  of  godliness.  A  man 
may  possess  the  catalogue  of  a  library,  and  yet  be  without  a  book  ;  and  so  may  you 
know  a  list  of  doctrines,  and  yet  be  a  stranger  to  truth.  2.  When  a  man  like  Joseph 
can  be  compared  to  a  fruitful  tree  by  a  well,  because  he  is  rooted  in  fellowship  with 
(xod,  he  has  the  blessedness  of  drawing  his  supplies  from  secret,  but  real,  sources. 
His  life  is  hid,  and  the  support  of  his  life  is  hidden  too.  The  world  knoweth  him 
not ;  but  the  secret  of  the  Lord  is  with  him.  There  is  the  tree,  and  there  is  the 
fruit,  these  can  be  seen  by  all ;  but  none  can  see  the  roots  which  are  the  cause  of 
the  clusters,  nor  the  deep  that  lieth  under,  from  which  those  roots  derive  their 
supply.  8.  The  supplies  of  such  a  man  are  inexhaustible.  Infinite  mercy  is  a 
storehouse  for  a  starving  world.  4.  The  man  who  dwells  near  to  God  has  supplies 
which  can  never  be  cut  off.  We  have  heard  of  cities  which  have  been  surrounded 
by  armies,  and  were  never  captured  by  assault,  but  were  compelled  to  surrender 
because  the  besiegers  cut  off  the  water-courses,  broke  down  the  aqueducts,  and  so 
subdued  them  by  thirst.  Jerusalem  was  never  thus  captured,  for  there  were  deep 
wells  within  the  city  itself  which  never  ceased  to  flow.  Ah,  he  that  hath  a  well  of 
living  water  within  him  is  beyond  the  enemy's  power.  5.  Supplies  gained  by  near- 
ness to  God  Himself  are  constant.  Grace  is  not  a  landspring,  but  a  well.  I  do  not 
say  that  your  root  can  always  take  in  the  same  measure  of  water  from  the  well  of 
life  ;  but  I  do  say  that  it  will  always  be  there  for  you  to  take  ;  aud  I  think,  also, 
that  to  a  large  extent  you  will  be  able  to  partake  of  it  with  constancy.  6.  The 
supplies  of  the  believer  who  dwells  deep  are  pure  as  well  as  full.  Draw  your 
supplies  at  first  hand.  III.  This  brings  with  it  other  ble.*<sings.  1.  If  you 
are  by  the  well,  sending  your  roots  into  waters,  you  will  obtain  frnitfulness. 
2.  Unselfishness.    3.  Fixedness.    4.  Safety.    5.  Enrichment.    Notice  how  Moses  puts 


CHAP.  XXXIII.]  DEUTERONOMY,  581 

it :  he  mentions  quite  a  treasury  of  jewels.  The  best  pearls  come  out  of  deep  seas. 
He  mentions  the  precious  things  of  heaven,  the  precious  fruit  brought  forth  by  the 
sun,  the  precious  things  put  forth  by  the  moon,  the  chief  things  of  the  ancient 
mountains,  the  precious  things  of  the  earth,  and  the  fulness  thereof,  and  the  good- 
will of  Him  that  dwelt  in  the  bush.  All  these  blessings  came  upon  the  top  of  the 
head  of  him  who  was  a  fruitful  bough  by  a  well.  The  best  wines  in  God's  house 
are  in  the  cellar.  Those  who  never  go  downstairs  have  no  idea  of  the  secret  sweet- 
ness. A  deep  experience  is  a  precious  exj)erience.  The  Lord  fills  certain  of  His 
people  with  pain  and  grief,  that  they  may  know  His  choicer  consolations.  We  are 
too  apt  to  let  our  roots  run  along  just  under  the  surface,  and  so  we  get  no  firm 
rootage  ;  but  trouble  comes,  and  then  we  grow  downward,  rooted  in  humility  ;  then  we 
pierce  the  treasures  of  darkness,  and  know  the  deep  things  of  God.  (C.  H.  Spnrgeon. ) 
The  precious  tilings  of  heaven. — Thiiigs  that  are  precious :  —  Happy  is  the  man 
who  aspires  to  possess  precious  things.  We  need  not  be  poor,  blind,  miserable, 
naked.  There  is  available  for  us  a  hoard  of  precious  things — things  earthly  and 
heavenly,  present  and  future,  temporal  and  eternal.  I.  The  gift  of  life.  Are 
you  using  it  well  ?  Is  yours  a  sanctified  life,  fruitful  of  wise  thoughts  and  worthy 
deeds  ?  Do  not  say  that  if  you  were  somewhere  else,  or  in  some  other  employment, 
or  in  an  entirely  different  condition  of  life,  you  would  then  live  a  truer  and  more 
splendid  life.  "The  trivial  round,"  &c.  II.  The  pkomises  of  God  and  our 
Saviour  Jesus  Christ.  There  are  more  than  three  thousand  of  these.  Promises  of 
guidance,  food,  raiment,  defence,  consolation,  mercy,  peace,  health,  pro.sperity,  honour, 
glory,  immortality,  eternal  life,  endless  joy  in  heaven,  &c.  Rest,  then,  in  the  Lord. 
Be  quiet,  be  patient.  He  is  faithful  that  promised.  The  Scripture  cannot  be 
broken.     All  the  promises  of  the  heavenly  Father  are  yea  and  amen  in  Clirist  Jesus. 

III.  Real,  personal,  blessed  communion  w^ith  God,  our  Faiher,  through  the 
MEDIATION  OF  OUR  LoRD  Jesis  Christ.  Remember  the  Divine  method  of  prayer. 
There  is  the  way,  and  it  is  written  plainly  in  the  Scriptures.  Listen,  and  be  glad  : 
"For  thus  saith  the  high  and  lofty  One,"  &c.  Listen  and  learn:  "If  any  man 
sin,"  &c.  Listen  and  obey :  "If  I  regard  iniquity,"  &c.  Listen  and  trust :  "The 
Spirit  itself  helpeth,"  &c.      Listen  and  rejoice:    "Be  careful  for  nothing,"  &c. 

IV.  A  GOOD  NAME,  "Rather  to  be  chosen  than  great  riches."  They  flourish  like 
the  palm-tree.  Think  of  the  names  of  Martin  Luther,  George  Washington,  David 
Livingstone,  Richard  Cobden,  and  the  Prince  Consort.  They  are  like  pillars  of 
white  marble,  to  remind  us  that  we  may  be  great  and  good.  Yes,  the  names  of  the 
saints  are  immortal.  V.  The  beauty  of  earth  and  heaven.  Make  this 
use  of  eternal  beauty  and  grandeur.  Look  at  the  mountains,  and  think  of  God's 
strength  ;  the  flowers,  and  think  of  His  love  ;  and  the  sun,  and  think  of  His 
glory.  Go  into  the  fields  to  find  God,  to  the  sea  to  worship  Him.  In  the  rich 
emblazonment  and  embroidery  of  nature,  see  the  vesture  of  the  Almighty,  and  know 
Him  as  thy  Father  in  heaven,  and  thou  shalt  feel  a  sense  of  dignity  and  blessedness 
unknown  before.  [G.  W.  McCree.)  The  precious  things  of  the  earth. — Theprecious 
things  of  the  earth: — It  is  the  poetic  sense  which  perceives  beauty  in  the  things  of 
the  natural  world,  where  the  purely  prosaic  mind  would  see  nothing  to  attract  or 
impress.  What  we  call  the  "poetry  of  nature"  is,  in  fact,  that  view  of  nature 
which  is  in  the  eye  of  the  poet-observer.  Dr.  Shairp  has,  indeed,  claimed  that  poetry 
itself  is  as  true  a  form  of  thinking  as  is  science  in  its  estimate  of  external  nature  ; 
and  that  the  place  of  poetry  in  the  present  order  of  things  in  our  universe  was  not 
made  by  the  conceit  of  man,  but  was  intended  by  the  Maker  of  this  order.  He  is 
sure  that,  as  Wordsworth  claims,  poetry  is  "the  breath  and  finer  spirit  of  all 
knowledge,"  and  "immortal  as  the  mind  of  man."  The  poetic  spirit  invests  the 
things  of  nature  with  the  emotions  of  the  human  heart ;  looking  down  through  that 
which  is  seen,  into  that  which  is  thought  and  felt.  There  are  associations  of  scenery 
which  grow  out  of  the  lessons  of  history  ;  and  just  in  proportion  as  the  man  of 
poetic  soul  is  informed  in  these  lessons  is  the  scenery  about  him  transfused  with 
their  glory  and  imbued  with  their  inspirations.  The  arid  wastes  of  desolated  Egypt 
have  fullest  meaning  to  him  who  reads  in  the  mighty  monuments  which  tower  above 
these  wastes  the  story  of  the  Pharaohs  and  the  shephei-d  kings ;  of  the  priests  of 
Isis  and  Osiris ;  of  all  the  legendary  rulers  of  the  land  of  Mizraini  from  Menes  to 
the  Ptolemies.  The  fields  of  Marathon  and  of  Marston  Moor  and  of  Waterloo  have  a 
meaning  in  the  light  of  their  history  which  makes  the  scenery  about  them  vocal 
with  the  praise  of  noble  deeds.  And  who  could  look  upon  the  scenery  of  Palestine 
but  in  the  glow  of  its  sacred  history  ?  But  history  is  never  so  dear  to  us  as  memory. 
"So  associations  with  those  of  whom  we  know  only  in  story  can  so  vocalise  the 


682  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap,  xxxiii. 

poetry  of  our  surroundings  as  do  the  recollections  of  our  own  former  days  of  joy  or 
sadness  in  that  locality,  and  of  our  fellowship  there  with  those  whom  we  loved, 
and  from  whom  we  are  now  separated.  But,  after  all,  the  best  associations  of 
natural  scenery  are  the  associations  of  truth  ;  the  associations,  not  of  history  or  of 
memory  merely,  but  of  truth — of  immutable  truth  that  takes  hold  of  the  past,  the 
present,  and  the  future.  There  is  truth  pictured  in  all  nature,  even  in  the 
commonest  phases  of  nature ;  and  poetry  is  the  heart's  view  of  truth.  There 
are  associations  of  God's  presence  with  every  phase  of  natural  scenery  ;  and  he 
who  looks  at  mountain,  or  forest,  or  ocean,  or  plain,  without  recognising  and 
rejoicing  over  these  associations,  lacks  the  true  poet's  soul  and  the  true  poet's 
eye.  On  the  contrary,  he  who  notes  and  heeds  them  finds  comfort,  as  well  as 
poetry,  in  them  everywhere.  {H.  C.  Trumbull.)  The  goodwill  of  win^  that 
dwelt  in  the  bush.— r^  goodwill  of  Christ  the  best  of  blessings : — I.  What  this 
GOODWILL  IS,  AND  WHOSE  IT  IS.  It  is  the  lovc  and  free  favour  of  Christ  to  all 
His  covenant  people :  that  grace  of  His,  in  which  there  is  continuance,  which  He 
ever  bears  towards  them  that  are  His.  1.  Christ  ever  bears  a  goodwill  towards  His 
people.  They  are  precious  and  honourable  in  His  sight,  they  are  highly  favoured  ; 
His  thoughts  towards  them  are  thoughts  of  peace,  and  so  they  were  from  eternity 
(Micah  V.  2).  The  Church  is  His  spouse,  His  body.  His  fair  one.  Every  dispensa- 
tion of  Providence  is  for  our  good  ;  the  sorest  strokes  that  befall  us  come  in  love  ; 
when  persecuted,  forsaken,  made  a  shame  of  before  men.  His  heart  stands  towards 
us  the  same  as  ever  ;  underneath  are  His  everlasting  arms  :  we  endure  the  fire,  and 
come  purged  and  refined  out  of  it.  2  This  favour  and  goodwill  Christ  is  pleased 
to  discover  to  His  people  for  their  edification  and  comfort  (Cant.  ii.  4).     II.  "Why 

THIS    GOODWILL   IS  THUS   PAETICULARLY    DESCRIBED  AS  "THE  GOODWILL  OF   HiM 

THAT  DWELT  IN  THE  BUSH  "  (Exod.  iii.  12).  1.  Because  the  fire  in  the  midst  of  the 
bush  was  a  type  of  the  incarnation  and  sufferings  of  Christ.  For  man's  nature  is  a 
poor,  despicable  thing,  like  a  dry  bramble-bush  that  would  be  soon  fired,  as  it  were, 
and  utterly  consumed  by  the  approach  of  God  ;  but  the  Son  of  God  dwells  in  this 
bush,  and  though  the  flame  is  seen,  the  bush  is  not  burnt.  2.  Because  God  revealed 
His  covenant  to  Moses  at  the  time  of  His  glorious  appearance.  God  is  a  fire  to 
consume,  not  to  enlighten,  warm,  and  refresh  ungodly  sinners,  such  as  have  not 
made  a  covenant  with  Him  by  sacrifice.  3.  This  appearance  of  the  angel  in  the 
bush  sets  forth  the  love  and  care  of  Christ  to  His  Church,  even  in  their  greatest 
troubles  and  dangers.  All  Christ's  mercy,  wisdom,  power,  love,  and  grace  are  for 
us  ;  yea,  His  very  life  is  on  our  behalf  (John  xiv.  19).  It  is  good  to  remember 
former  deliverances  even  in  the  want  of  present  mercies.  4.  Because  Moses  had  at 
this  season  the  most  special  experience  of  the  love  and  goodwill  of  Christ ;  it  is  one 
of  the  top  manifestations  of  the  Redeemer's  fulness  and  grace  to  his  own  soul. 
There  is  a  great  deal  of  emphasis  in  my  text,  * '  And  for  the  favourable  acceptation 
of  my  dweller  in  the  bush."  As  if  Moses  had  said,  "Then  He  revealed  Himself 
to  be  mine,  I  saw  His  glory  as  my  Surety,  my  Redeemer,  my  God  manifest  in  the 
flesh,  and  to  my  soul  He  sealed  all  the  love  and  grace  of  the  everlasting  covenant." 
Our  first  views  of  God  and  Christ  are  often  exceeding  precious  ones.  This  was 
Christ's  first  visible  appearance  to  Moses  that  we  read  of ;  now  the  visions  of  God 
began  ;  and  what  so  sweet  an  introduction  to  his  after-communion  with  Him  as  a 
eight  of  the  second  person  in  the  Godhead  united  to  flesh,  and  in  our  nature  trans- 
acting all  the  concerns  of  salvation  ?  III.  How  or  in  what  manner  this  good- 
will IS  to  be  sought.  1.  Seek  this  goodwill  of  Christ,  His  free  grace  and  favour, 
as  a  blessing  distinct  from  and  over  and  above  what  God  the  Father  hath  promised 
on  His  own  part  in  the  everlasting  covenant.  2.  This  goodwill  of  God-man  mediator 
is  to  be  sought,  as  what  alone  can  give  life  and  liberty  to  the  believer  in  all  acts  of 
Gospel-worship.  Take  away  the  person  of  Christ  as  God-man,  and  the  object  of 
worship  is  as  it  were  lost,  for  there  is  no  going  to  the  Father  but  by  Him.  What 
can  sinners  do  with  an  absolute  God  ?  Take  away  Christ's  sufferings,  merit, 
righteousness,  and  intercession,  what  plea  can  there  be  for  faith  ?  And  believers, 
when  they  go  in  Christ's  name,  yet  if  their  spirits  are  not  taken  up  in  the 
exercise  of  faith  on  His  goodwill,  grace,  and  acceptation,  there  is  no  nearness 
to  God.  Christ's  presence  is  our  life,  we  have  none  in  ourselves  ;  Gospel-liberty 
is  Christ's  purchase  and  gift.  3.  This  goodwill  is  to  be  sought  with  great 
expectation  and  hope.  Jesus  loves  a  fear  which  produces  watchfulness  in  the 
soul,  but  He  hates  those  fears  which  breed  torment.  The  goodwill  of  my 
dweller  in  the  bush,  says  Moses  ;  the  goodwill  of  my  Lord  and  God,  say  thou. 
Keep  in  view  the  sense  thou  hast  had  of  past  grace  and  favour  under  thy  burden. 


CHAP.  XXXIII.]  DEUTERONOMY.  583 

and  grieve  for  want  of  present  tokens  of  it.  4.  This  goodwill  is  to  be  sought 
in  its  higher  manifestations,  and  a  sweeter  experience  of  it  from  day  to  day. 
Moses  leaves  the  decree  wherein  this  goodwill  should  be  shown  to  Joseph,  to  the 
sovereignty  of  Him  in  whom  it  dwells ;  but  withal,  the  manner  of  expression  he 
uses  shows  that  it  was  no  small  portion  he  asks  of  it  for  him,  the  goodwill  of  my 
dweller  in  the  bush.     IV.  Wherein  consists  the  greatness  of  the  blessing, 

WHICH   renders   it   SO   WELL  WORTHY   OF   ALL   OUR   SEEKING.       1.  The  goodwill  of 

Christ,  who  of  old  dwelt  in  the  bush,  lies  at  the  foundation  of  every  other  blessing. 
The  day  is  coming  when  none  but  Christ,  an  whole  Christ,  will  be  deemed  a  portion 
sufficient  for  an  immortal  soul.  Seek  first  the  kingdom  of  God  and  His  righteous- 
ness :  this  is  the  one  thing  needful.  2.  Every  other  blessing  is  comprehended  in 
this.  If  Christ  be  thine,  all  is  thine.  3.  This  is  needful  to  make  our  other  blessings 
blessings  indeed.  The  whole  world  cannot  satisfy  a  soul  mthout  this  :  men  may  be 
in  straits  in  the  abundance  of  their  possessions  ;  have,  and  never  enjoy  ;  be  crying, 
"Who  will  show  me  any  good  ?  They  see  nothing  worth  calling  so  in  what  they 
have  already.  Now,  whence  is  this  ?  It  arises  from  a  want  of  God,  and  Christ, 
and  covenant  love,  and  goodwill,  to  put  a  sweetness  and  relish  into  creature- com- 
forts, and  to  make  up  all  creature  deficiencies.  4.  This  is  a  blessing  infinitely 
better  than  all  outward  blessings,  and  makes  up  the  loss  of  all.  {John  Hill.) 
At  the  bush: — I  think  this  is  the  only  reference  in  the  Old  Testament  to  that  great 
vision  which  underlay  Moses'  call  and  Israel's  deliverance.  There  seems  a  peculiar 
appropriateness  in  this  reference  being  put  into  the  mouth  of  the  ancient  lawgiver, 
for  to  him  even  Sinai,  with  all  its  glories,  cannot  have  been  so  impressive  and  so 
formative  of  his  character  as  was  the  vision  granted  to  him  solitary  in  the  wilderness. 
It  is  to  be  noticed  that  the  characteristic  by  which  God  is  designated  here  never 
occurs  elsewhere  than  in  this  one  place.  It  is  intended  to  intensify  the  conception 
of  the  greatness,  and  preciousness,  and  all-sufficiency  of  that  "goodwill."  If  it  is 
that  "  of  Him  that  dwelt  in  the  bush,"  it  is  sure  to  be  all  that  a  man  can  need.  So 
then  here,  first,  is  a  great  thought  as  to  what  for  us  all  is  the  blessing  of  blessings — • 
God's  goodwill.  "Goodwill" — the  word,  perhaps,  might  bear  a  little  stronger 
rendering.  "  Goodwill "  is  somewhat  tepid.  A  man  may  have  a  good  enough  will, 
and  yet  no  very  strong  emotion  of  favour  or  delight,  and  certainly  may  do  nothing 
to  carry  his  goodwill  into  action.  It  is  more  than  "goodwill"  ;  it  is  more  than 
"favour"  ;  perhaps  "delight"  would  be  nearer  the  meaning.  It  implies,  too,  not 
only  the  inward  sentiment  of  complacency,  but  also  the  active  purpose  of  action  in 
conformity  with  it  on  God's  part.  If  I  might  dwell  for  a  moment  upon  scriptural 
passages,  I  would  just  recall  to  you,  as  bringing  up  very  strongly  and  beautifully 
the  all-sufficiency  and  the  blessed  effects  of  having  this  delight  and  loving  purpose 
directed  toward  us  like  a  sunbeam,  the  various  great  things  that  a  chorus  of  psalmists 
say  it  will  do  for  a  man.  Here  is  one  of  their  triumphant  utterances  :  * '  Thou  wilt 
bless  the  righteous  ;  with  favour  wilt  Thou  compass  him  as  with  a  shield. "  That 
crystal  battlement,  if  I  may  so  vary  the  figure,  is  round  a  man,  keeping  far  away 
from  him  all  manner  of  real  evil,  and  filling  his  quiet  heart  as  he  stands  erect  behind 
the  rampart,  with  the  sense  of  absolute  security.  That  is  one  of  the  blessings  that 
"the  favour,"  or  goodwill,  will  secure  for  us.  Again,  we  read  :  "By  Thy  favour 
Thou  hast  made  my  mountain  to  stand  strong."  He  that  knows  himself  to  be  the 
object  of  the  Divine  delight,  and  who  by  faith  knows  himself  to  be  the  object  of  the 
Divine  activity  in  protection,  stands  firm,  and  his  purposes  will  be  carried  through, 
because  they  will  be  purposes  in  accordance  with  the  Divine  mind,  and  nothing  needs 
to  shake  him.  So  he  that  grasps  the  hand  of  God,  not  because  of  his  grasp,  but 
because  of  the  hand  that  he  holds,  can  say,  "  the  Lord  is  at  my  right  hand  ;  I  shall 
not  be  greatly  moved."  And  again,  in  another  analogous  but  yet  diversified  repre- 
sentation, we  read  :  "In  Thee  shall  we  rejoice  all  the  day,  and  in  Thy  favour  shall 
our  horn  be  exalted."  That  is  the  emblem,  not  only  of  victory,  but  of  joyful  con- 
fidence, and  so  he  that  knows  himself  to  have  God  for  his  friend  and  his  helper  can 
go  through  the  world  keeping  a  sunny  face,  whatever  the  clouds  may  be.  So  the 
goodwill  of  God  is  the  chiefest  good.  Now,  if  we  turn  to  the  remarkiiLle  designation 
of  the  Divine  nature  which  is  here,  look  what  rivers  of  strt-ngth  and  of  blessedness 
flow  out  of  the  thought  that  for  each  of  us  "  the  goodwill  of  Him  that  dwelt  in  the 
bush  "  may  be  ours.  What  does  that  pregnant  designation  of  God  say  ?  That  was 
a  strange  shrine  for  a  God.  That  poor,  ragged,  dry  desert  bush,  with  apparently  no 
sap  in  its  grey  stem,  prickly  with  thorns,  with  no  beauty  that  we  should  desire  it, 
fragile  and  insignificant — yet  that  is  God's  house.  Not  in  the  cedars  of  Lebanon, 
not  in  the  great  monarchs  of  the  forest,  but  in  the  forlorn  child  of  the  desert  did  He 


584  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxxiii. 

abide.  "  The  goodwill  of  Him  that  dwelt  in  the  bush  "  may  dwell  in  you  and  me. 
Never  mind  how  small,  never  mind  how  sapless,  never  mind  how  lightly  esteemed 
among  men,  never  mind  though  we  make  a  very  poor  show  by  the  side  of  the  oaks  of 
Bashan  or  the  cedars  of  Lebanon.  It  is  all  right ;  the  fire  does  not  dwell  in  them. 
"  Unto  this  man  will  I  come,  and  with  him  will  I  dwell  who  is  of  a  humble  and  a 
contrite  heart,  and  who  trembleth  at  My  word."  Let  no  sense  of  poverty,  weakness, 
unworthiness  ever  draw  the  faintest  film  of  fear  across  our  confidence,  for  even  with 
us  He  will  sojourn.  Again,  what  more  does  that  name  say  ?  He  that  **  dwelt  in  the 
bush  "  filled  it  with  fire,  and  it  burned  "  and  was  not  consumed."  Our  brethren  of 
the  Presbyterian  Churches  have  taken  the  Latin  form  of  the  words  in  the  incident  for 
their  motto — Nee  Tamen  Consumebatur.  But  I  venture  to  think  that  is  a  mistake  ; 
and  that  what  is  meant  by  the  symbol  is  just  what  is  exi)ressed  by  the  verbal 
revelation  which  accompanied  it,  and  it  is  this  :  " I  am  that  I  am."  The  fire  that 
did  not  burn  out  is  the  emblem  of  the  Divine  nature  which  does  not  tend  to  death 
because  it  lives,  nor  to  exhaustion  because  it  energises,  nor  to  emptiness  because  it 
bestows,  but  after  all  times  is  the  same ;  lives  by  its  own  energy  and  is  independent. 
**  I  am  that  I  have  become,"  that  is  what  men  have  to  say.  "  I  am  that  I  once  was 
not,  and  again  once  shall  not  be,"  that  is  what  men  have  to  say.  **  I  am  that  I  am '* 
is  God's  name.  And  this  eternal,  ever-living,  self-sufficing,  absolute,  independent, 
unwearied,  inexhaustible  God  is  the  God  whose  favour  is  as  inexhaustible  as  Himself, 
and  eternal  as  His  own  being.  "Therefore  the  sons  of  men  shall  put  their  trust 
beneath  the  shadow  of  Thy  wings."  What  more  does  the  name  say?  He  "  that 
dwelt  in  the  bush  "  dwelt  there  in  order  to  deliver  ;  and,  dwelling  there,  declared  '*  I 
have  seen  the  affliction  of  My  people,  and  am  come  down  to  deliver  them."  So, 
then,  if  the  goodwill  of  that  eternal,  delivering  God  is  with  us,  we  too  may  feel  that 
our  trivial  troubles  and  our  heavy  burdens,  all  the  needs  of  our  prisoned  wills  and 
captive  souls,  are  beknown  to  Him,  and  that  we  shall  have  deliverance  from  them  by 
Him.  The  goodwill,  the  delight  of  God,  and  the  active  help  of  God,  may  be  ours, 
and  if  it  be  ours  we  shall  be  blessed  and  strong.  Do  not  let  us  forget  the  place  in 
this  blessing  on  the  head  of  Joseph  which  my  text  holds.  It  is  preceded  by  an 
invoking  of  the  precious  things  of  heaven,  and  "  the  precious  fruits  brought  forth  by 
the  sun  ...  of  the  chief  things  of  the  ancient  mountains,  and  the  precious 
things  of  the  lasting  hills,  and  the  precious  things  of  the  earth  and  the  fulness 
thereof"  They  are  all  heaped  together  in  one  great  mass  for  the  beloved  Joseph. 
And  then,  like  the  golden  spire  that  tops  some  of  those  campaniles  in  Italian  cities, 
and  completes  their  beauty,  above  them  all  there  is  set,  as  the  shining  apex  of  all, 
*•  the  goodwill  of  Him  that  dwelt  in  the  bush."  That  is  more  precious  than  all  the 
precious  things  ;  set  last  because  it  is  to  be  sought  first ;  set  last  aij  in  building  some 
great  structure  the  top  stone  is  put  on  last  of  all ;  set  last  because  it  gathers  all 
others  into  itself.  So  the  upshot  of  my  homily  is  just  this — Men  may  strive  and 
scheme,  and  wear  their  finger-nails  down  to  the  quick,  to  get  lesser  good,  and  fail 
after  all.  You  never  can  be  sure  of  getting  the  little  good.  You  can  be  quite  sure 
of  getting  the  highest.  You  never  can  be  certain  that  the  precious  things  of  the 
earth  and  the  fulness  thereof  will  be  yours,  or  that  if  they  were,  they  would  be  so 
very  precious  ;  but  you  can  be  quite  sure  that  the  "  goodwill  of  Him  that  dwelt  in 
the  bush  "  may  be  like  light  upon  your  hearts,  and  be  strength  to  your  limbs.  And 
so  I  commend  to  you  the  words  of  the  apostle  :  "  Wherefore  we  labour  that,  whether 
present  or  absent,  we  may  be  well-pleasing  to  Him."    {A,  Maclaren,  D.D,) 

Vers.  18,  19.  Rejoice,  Zebulun,  in  thy  going:  out— 1%«  Messing  of  Zebulun  and 
Issachar  considered: — I.  The  different  circumstances  and  occupations  in 
WHICH  MEN  ARE  PLACED.  It  is  owing  to  God's  directing  the  inclinations  of  men 
that  some  are  fond  of  the  country  and  some  of  the  town  ;  that  some  love  the  noise 
and  bustle  of  cities  and  sea-ports,  the  fatigue  and  hazard  of  navigation  and  travelling  ; 
while  others  prefer  the  retiredness  and  silence  of  the  country.  Some  choose  to  dwell 
with  Zebulun  at  the  haven  for  ships ;  others  with  Issachar  in  the  tents  of  the 
country,  among  the  bleatings  of  the  flocks.  Nor  is  this  different  choice  entirely 
owing  to  education  and  habit,  since  it  is  frequently  seen  that  young  people  choose  a 
different  occupation  from  their  fathers  ;  and  some  are  uneasy  till  they  have  changed 
that  to  which  they  were  brought  up.  This  diversity  of  inclination  is  by  appointment 
and  influence  of  God,  the  supreme  sovereign  of  every  community.  Further,  His 
hand  is  to  be  owned  and  adored  in  giving  men  ability  and  skill  to  pursue  their 
several  occupations,  in  giving  them  the  use  of  their  limbs  and  senses,  health  of  body, 
and  capacities   of  mind.    II.  The   duties   incumbent   upon   men,   however 


CHAP.  XXXIII.]  DEUTERONOMY.  585 

DIFFERENT  THEIR  OCCUPATIONS  BE.  1.  To  be  Content  and  cheerful  with  their 
lot  and  calling.  Every  calling  hath  its  conveniences  and  inconveniences.  A  dislike 
to  the  business  to  which  a  man  hath  been  brought  up  generally  ariseth  from  pride, 
ignorance,  or  an  inordinate  love  of  wealth  or  eavse  ;  and  if  the  discontented  person 
were  to  have  his  wish,  and  change  with  the  person  he  envies,  in  all  probability  he 
would  repent  it  speedily,  and  wish  he  had  continued  as  he  was.  But  prudence, 
diligence,  and  good  economy  will  gradually  lessen  the  difficulties  of  any  employment, 
and  piety  and  humility  reconcile  the  mind  to  them.  We  are  to  guard  against  that 
excessive  application,  hurry,  and  fatigue,  on  the  one  hand,  which  men  of  ambitious 
and  covetous  spirits  impose  upon  themselves,  so  that  they  can  have  no  real  pleasure 
in  the  enjoyment  of  life.  On  the  other  hand,  we  are  to  guard  against  a  trifling, 
indolent,  extravagant  disposition,  by  which  men  first  lose  their  trade,  and  then 
complain  of  the  deadness  or  unprofitableness  of  it.  2.  To  make  religion  their  chief 
business  and  greatest  concern.  Those  who  pretend  that  they  cannot  find  time  for 
religion  can  find  time  for  pleasure,  and  spend  more  in  unnecessary  sleep,  idle  chat 
with  their  neighbours,  or  other  amusements  than  would  be  necessary  for  the  acts  of 
religious  worship,  secret  and  social.  Where  a  person's  disposition  is  serious  and 
spiritual,  and  when  his  great  aim  is  to  please  God  and  save  his  soul,  there  will  be  no 
difficulty  at  all  to  find  time  for  religion.  3.  To  endeavour  to  promote  religion  in 
others.  Thus  it  is  said  in  the  text,  "They,"  that  is  both  Zebulun  and  Issachar, 
**  shall  call  the  people  to  the  mountain  "  ;  to  the  house  of  God,  which  Moses  foresaw, 
by  a  spirit  of  prophecy,  would  be  built  upon  a  mountain.  The  tribes  spoken  of  in 
the  text,  though  their  employments  were  so  ditferent,  were  to  unite  in  promoting 
the  interests  of  religion.  Thus,  though  Christ  hath  appointed  pastors  and  teachers 
in  His  Church,  yet  it  is  the  duty  of  every  one  of  His  disciples  to  "do  good  to  all 
men"  as  they  "have  opportunity,"  to  "seek  the  things  of  Jesus  Christ,"  and  to 
"exhort  one  another  daily."  Let  merchants  and  tradesmen,  then,  improve  their 
commerce  to  spread  the  knowledge  of  God  and  religion,  and  to  promote  piety, 
justice,  and  charity.  Let  farmers  improve  their  business  and  connections  with  others 
to  the  same  good  purpose.  Let  those  of  you  whose  labours  God  hath  prospered 
"honour  the  Lord  with  your  substance,"  and  cheerfully  concur  in  any  good  design 
for  promoting  the  happiness  of  all  around  you,  supplying  the  needy,  and  relieving 
the  afflicted  ;  and  thus,  according  to  that  expression  of  the  prophet,  "consecrate 
your  gain  unto  the  Lord  and  your  substance  unto  the  Lord  of  the  whole  earth  " 
(Micah  iv.  13).  But  the  great  thing  you  are  to  be  solicitous  about  is  to  promote  the 
salvation  of  one  another's  souls.  {Job  Orton,  D.D.)  Joy  in  gomg  out: — The 
blessings  of  the  tribes  are  ours,  for  we  are  the  true  Israel  who  worship  God  in  the 
spirit,  and  have  no  confidence  in  the  flesh.  Zebulun  is  to  rejoice  because  Jehovah 
will  bless  his  "going  out  "  ;  we  also  see  a  promise  for  ourselves  lying  latent  in  this 
benediction.  When  we  go  out  we  will  look  out  for  occasions  of  joy.  We  go  out  to 
travel,  and  the  providence  of  God  is  our  convoy.  We  go  out  to  emigrate,  and  the 
Lord  is  with  us  both  on  land  and  sea.  We  go  out  as  missionaries,  and  Jesus  saith, 
**Lo,  I  am  with  you  unto  the  end  of  the  world."  We  go  out  day  by  day  to  our 
labour,  and  we  may  do  so  with  pleasure,  for  God  will  be  with  us  from  morn  till  eve. 
A  fear  sometimes  creeps  over  us  when  starting,  for  we  know  not  what  we  may  meet 
with  ;  but  this  blessing  may  serve  us  right  well  as  a  word  of  good  cheer.  As  we 
pack  up  for  moving,  let  us  put  this  verse  into  our  travelling  trunk  ;  let  us  drop  it 
into  our  hearts,  and  keep  it  there  ;  yea,  let  us  lay  it  on  our  tongue  to  make  us  sing. 
Let  us  weigh  anchor  with  a  song,  and  jump  into  the  carriage  with  a  psalm.  Let  us 
belong  to  the  rejoicing  tribe,  and  in  our  every  movement  praise  the  Lord  with  joyful 
hearts.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Zebulun  and  Issachar .—Tvfo  tribes  are  joined 
together  in  this  common  blessing  and  prediction  ;  and  there  was  a  long- established 
reason  for  close  community  of  interest  between  them.  Their  ancestors  were  sons  of 
the  same  mother,  Leah,  and  were  bom,  in  close  succession  of  time,  under  circum- 
stances which  made  it  almost  inevitable  that,  as  they  grew  up,  they  should  form  a 
little  group  by  themselves.  Yet  the  two  brothers  were  far  from  being  alike.  Both 
in  character  and  in  personal  appearance  they  presented  contrasts  that  were  strongly 
marked.  The  Rabbinical  traditions  on  these  points  simply  confirm  the  hints  which 
we  gather  from  Scripture,  and  which  lead  us  to  picture  Issachar  as  a  large  made, 
heavy,  and  slugc,dsh  man,  not  over  bright  in  intellect,  but  honest,  good-natured,  and 
full  of  plodding  industry  ;  whilst  Zebulun  is  distinctly  mentioned  as  one  of  the  five 
"men  of  activity"  whom  Joseph  selected  from  among  his  brethren  and  brought 
before  Pharaoh,  to  give  the  best  possible  idea  of  their  intelligence  and  cleverness. 
Issachar  was  the  elder,  yet  Zebulun  is  almost  invariably  named  before  him  :  a  clear 


586  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxxin. 

sign  that  the  younger  had  taken  precedence  of  the  elder  by  virtue  of  his  natural 
superiority  in  energy.  The  characters  of  Zebulun  and  of  Issachar  seem  in  many 
respects  to  have  been  complementary,  and,  with  the  wisdom  which  springs  from  true 
affection,  they  seem  to  have  made  aU  their  possessions  and  resources  complementary 
also,  holding  their  lots  in  Canaan  as  a  sort  of  partnership  estate,  by  which  each, 
should  be  benefited  alike.  Zebulun  gave  himself  mainly  to  the  exciting  tasks  for 
■which  his  adventurous  nature  fitted  him,  and  sought  to  win  the  harvests  of  that 
capricious  field,  the  broad  salt  sea.  Issachar,  more  stolid  by  his  tastes,  held  con- 
tentedly by  the  tamer  toils  of  one  who  tills  the  bosom  of  mother  earth  ;  but  both 
brothers  rejoiced  in  common  over  the  gains  of  each,  and  each  grew  richer  because  his 
labour  and  his  chosen  employment  nourished  the  other  s  store.  This  idea  is  con- 
cealed in  the  "parallelism"  of  verse  18,  which,  in  its  poetic  way,  describes  the 
united  life  of  the  two  linked  tribes  in  the  mutually  helpful  aspects  of  work  and  rest ; 
and,  lest  any  superficial  reader  should  imagine  that  one  tribe  was  to  monopolise 
active  toils  and  the  other  the  comforts  procured  thereby,  the  next  verse  significantly 
mingles  both  sides  of  the  common  picture,  saying,  "they,"  i.e.  both  of  them  and  all 
of  them,  without  distinction  of  private  property  or  of  original  right  to  the  gains — 
"  they  shall  suck  of  the  abundance  of  the  seas,  and  of  treasures  hidden  in  the  sand." 
Thus  also  it  ought  to  be  with  Christian  brethren  in  their  handling  of  the  diverse 
opportunities  and  gifts  which  God  may  have  severally  bestowed.  True  Christians 
count  it  a  holy  duty  to  combine  their  talents  ;  and  when  gain  accrues  from  their  united 
efforts  they  rejoice  together,  and  no  one  member  grudges  another  his  praise  or  his 
honour  in  the  result,  even  though  he  himself  has  no  share  therein.  ( T.  G.  Eooke,  B.A.) 

Ver.  19.  They  shall  call  the  people  unto  the  mountain,  there  they  shall  offer 
sacrifices  of  righteousness. — The  seaman's  return : — I.  Theie  privilege.  To 
*'suck  the  abundance  of  the  sea"  is  a  metonymical  expression,  signifying  as  much 
as  to  be  enriched  with  the  wares  and  merchandise  imported  by  sea  to  them.  The 
sea,  like  an  indulgent  mother,  embraces  those  that  live  upon  it  in  her  bosom,  and 
with  full  flowing  breasts  nourisheth  them,  and  feeds  them  as  a  mother  doth  the 
infant  that  sucks  and  depends  for  its  livelihood  upon  her  breasts.  And  these  breasts 
do  not  only  afford  those  that  hang  upon  them  the  necessaries  of  life,  bread,  raiment, 
&c.,  but  the  riches,  ornaments,  and  delights  of  life  also.  This  was  the  blessing  of 
the  tribe  of  Zebulun,  whose  cities  and  villages  were  commodiously  situated  upon  the 
seashore  for  merchandise  (Josh.  xix.  11).  II.  Their  duty  to  which  these  mercies 
and  privileges  obliged  them:  "They  shall  call  the  people  to  the  mountain, "  &c. 
By  the  "mountain,"  we  are  here  to  understand  the  temple,  which  Moses,  by  the 
spirit  of  prophecy,  foresaw  to  be  upon  Mount  Sion  and  Mount  Moriah  ;  which  two 
were  as  the  shoulders  that  supported  it  (ver.  12).  Here  was  the  worship  of  God  ; 
the  sacrifices  were  here  offered  up  to  Him.  And  hither  Zebulun,  in  the  sense  of 
God's  mercies  to  them,  should  call  the  people,  i.e.  say  some,  their  o\sti  people,  their 
families,  and  neighbours ;  or  as  others,  the  strangers  that  were  among  them  for 
traffic;  saying,  as  Isa.  ii.  3.  And  here  they  shall  "offer  the  sacrifices  of 
righteousness."  By  which  we  are  to  understand  their  thank-offerings  for  the  mercies 
they  had  received  of  the  Lord.  1.  The  nature  of  the  duty  needs  opening  ;  for  few 
understand  what  it  is.  Alas  !  it  is  another  manner  of  thing  than  a  customary, 
formal,  cold  God  be  thanked.  Now,  if  we  search  into  the  nature  of  this  duty,  we 
shall  find  that  whoever  undertakes  this  angelic  work,  must — (1)  Be  a  heedful 
observer  of  the  mercies  he  receives.  This  is  fundamental  to  the  duty.  Where 
no  observations  of  mercies  have  been  made,  no  praises  for  them  can  be  returned. 

(2)  Particularly  consider  them  in  their  natures,  degrees,  seasons,  and  manner 
of  conveyance ;  there  is  much  of  God's  glory  and  our  comfort  lost  for  want  of 
this  (Psa,  cxi.  2).  And  indeed,  there  is  no  employment  in  all  the  world  that 
yields  more  pleasure  to  a  gracious  soul  than  the  anatoraising  of  providence  doth. 

(3)  Duly  estimate  and  value  his  mercies.  It  is  impossible  that  man  can  be  thankful 
for  mercies  he  little  esteems.  (4)  Faithfully  record  His  mercies,  else  God  cannot  have 
His  due  praise  for  them  (Psa.  ciii.  2).  Forgotten  mercies  iDear  no  fruit :  a  bad 
memory  in  this  case  makes  a  barren  heart  and  life.  (5)  Be  suitably  affected  with 
the  mercies  he  receives.  It  is  not  a  speculative,  but  an  affectionate  remembrance 
that  becomes  us  :  then  God  hath  His  glory,  when  the  sense  of  His  mercies  melts  our 
hearts  into  holy  joy,  love,  and  admiration.  (6)  Order  his  conversation  suitably  to 
the  engagements  that  his  mercies  have  put  him  under.  When  we  have  said  all,  it 
is  the  life  of  the  thankful  that  is  the  very  life  of  thankfulness.  Obedience  and 
eervice  are  the  only  real  manifestations  of  gratitude.     2.  The  groimds  and  reasons  of 


CHAP.  XXXIII.]  DEUTERONOMY,  587 

this  duty  ;  why  you  are  obliged  after  the  reception  of  mercies  to  such  a  thankful 
return  of  praises.  (1)  God  requires  and  expects  it.  As  great  landlords  oblige  their 
tenants  to  a  homage  and  service,  when  they  make  over  their  estates  to  them,  and 
reserve  a  quit-rent  to  themselves,  which  they  value  at  a  high  rate  ;  so  God,  when 
He  bestows  deliverances  of  mercies  upon  us,  still  reserves  an  acknowledgement  to 
Himself :  and  this  is  dear  to  Him,  He  will  not  endure  to  be  defrauded  of  it ;  much 
less  that  it  be  given  to  another.  (2)  You  are  under  manifold  engagements  to  render 
it  to  the  Lord.  Common  ingenuity  obliges  to  a  due  acknowledgment  of  favours 
freely  received  ;  and  unthankfulness  on  that  score  is  the  odium  of  mankind.  The 
examples  of  the  very  heathens  will  condemn  you.  They  praised  their  gods,  which 
yet  were  no  gods,  when  they  received  any  deliverance  (Judg.  xvi.  24).  Many  of 
you  have  formally  and  expressly  obliged  your  souls  to  it,  by  solemn  vows  and 
promises  in  the  day  of  your  distress  :  and  yet  will  you  deal  perfidiously  with  God  ? 
(3)  Your  ingratitude  is  the  ready  way  to  deprive  you  of  the  mercies  you  have,  and 
to  withhold  from  you  the  mercies  you  might  have  in  your  future  distresses  and 
wants.  Use  1.  Is  it  your  unquestionable  duty  to  return  praises  upon  every  receipt  of 
mercies  ?  Then,  in  the  first  place,  bear  your  shame  and  just  reproof  for  your 
manifest  unthankfulness.  Mourn  heartily  for  thy  unkindness  to  thy  best  friend, 
"The  God  that  hath  done  thee  good  all  thy  life  long,  and  deserves  other  returns 
from  thee  than  these."  2.  It  calls  upon  you  all  to  be  thankful  for  your  mercies. 
Chrysostom  once  wished  for  a  voice  like  thunder,  that  all  men  might  hear  him. 
O  that  I  could  so  call  you  to  this  duty,  tliat  some  of  you  might  effectually  hear 
God's  call  in  this  exhortation  !  Argument  1.  How  freely  have  all  your  mercies 
streamed  to  you  from  the  Fountain  of  grace  !  There  was  nothing  in  you  to  engage 
it.  2.  How  seasonably  your  mercies  have  been  bestowed  upon  you  in  the  very  point 
of  extremity  and  dauger  !  3.  How  special  and  distinguishing  have  some  of  your 
mercies  been  !  God  hath  not  dealt  with  every  one  as  He  hath  vidth  you.  4.  Did 
not  your  mercies  find  you  under  great  guilt  ?  Surely  such  mercies  have  a 
constraining  power  in  them,  upon  all  sensible  souls.  5.  To  conclude  ;  if  all  the 
goodness  of  God  which  hath  passed  before  your  eyes  does  indeed  prevail  upon  you 
to  love  the  Lord,  and  fear  to  offend  Him  ;  if  it  really  constrains  you  to  give  up 
yourselves,  and  all  you  have,  to  be  His  ;  then  all  this  is  but  the  beginning  of 
mercies,  and  you  shall  see  yet  greater  things  than  these.  God  hath  more  mercies 
yet  behind,  and  those  of  a  higher  kind  and  more  excellent  nature  than  these 
temporal  mercies  are.  Happy  souls,  if  these  deliverances  do  in  any  measure  prove 
introductive  to  the  great  salvation.     {John  Flavel.) 

Vers.  20,  21.  Blessed  be  He  that  enlaxgeth  Gad. — Gad:—^Q  are  able  to  form  a 
more  than  usually  distinct  idea  of  the  personal  character  which  pertained  to  Gad, 
and  which  he  transmitted  to  his  descendants.  Scripture  hints  and  Jewish 
traditions  bear  one  another  out  in  suggesting  that  this  man  was  wild  and  turbulent 
and  headstrong  above  his  brethren  ;  and  that,  being  by  no  means  content  with  the 
peaceful  occupations  of  pastoral  life  which  belonged  to  his  family,  he  threw  himself 
with  ardour  into  the  fierce  forays  which  then,  as  now,  kept  the  land  of  Canaan  in  a 
state  of  chronic  warfare  and  unsettlement.  It  was  to  this  feature  that  Jacob 
probably  referred  in  his  dying  prophecy,  in  which  he  introduces  a  characteristic 
play  upon  the  name  which  Leah  had  bestowed — 

"Gad,  a  plundering  troop  is  plundering  him, 
But  he  is  plundering  at  their  heels." — Gen.  xlix.  19. 

"When  the  children  of  Israel  went  out  of  Egypt,  Gad  marched  and  encamped,  not 
as  we  might  have  expected  with  his  whole  brother  Asher,  but  with  Reuben  and  with 
Simeon,  two  tribes  which  closely  resembled  his  own  in  character  and  occupation. 
All  these  three  retained  the  nomad  habits  of  their  father's  earUer  life  in  a  marked 
degree,  and  had  not,  like  some  other  Hebrew  tribes,  settled  down  in  Egypt  into  the 
ways  of  an  organised  and  civilised  nation.  They  still  preferred  to  live  in  tents  as 
did  the  unreclaimed  Ishmaelites  of  the  desert.  All  their  wealth  consisted  in  huge 
flocks  and  herds  of  cattle.  All  their  sympathies  were  with  the  freebooting  mode  of 
life  which  lies  on  the  border  line  between  civilisation  and  barbarism.  Thus,  when 
Canaan  was  settled,  although  Simeon  parted  from  his  former  companions  and 
sought  his  fortunes  alone  in  the  dry  south  land  of  Judah,  Gad  and  Reuben  kept 
their  alliance  fast,  and  took  possession  of  the  country  east  of  Jordan,  where  alone 
there  was  room  for  their  immense  flocks,  and  opportunity  for  predatory  raids.     In 


688  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap,  xxxiir. 

this  alliance  Reuben  seems  to  have  willingly  yielded  the  first  place  to  his  younger 
brother,  whose  character  was  evidently  stronger  than  his  own  ;  and  it  is  curious  to 
notice  how  invariably  Gad  speaks  and  acts  as  the  leader  in  all  the  transactions  that 
attended  this  settlement.  We  recognise  the  same  masterful  character  in  all  the  men 
who  rise  up  before  us  in  the  after  history  of  the  Bible  as  members  of  the  tribe  of 
Gad  ;  namely,  Jephthah,  the  eleven  heroes  who  joined  David  at  the  most  critical  period 
of  his  fortunes,  and  Elijah  the  Tishbite,  in  whose  rude  strength  and  fearlessness 
we  seem  to  behold  the  Gadite  type  in  its  best  development,  and  to  recognise  the 
noblest  aspect  of  the  comparison  which  Moses  had  instituted  in  his  blessing  between 
this  tribe  and  the  shaggy  forest-lord  **  which  is  mightiest  among  beasts,  and  turneth 
not  away  for  any."     {T,  G.  Booke,  B.A.) 

Ver.  22.  Dan  is  a  lion's  whelp. — Dan  ;  or  activity  in  conflict : — 1.  The  section  in 
Moses'  blessing  devoted  to  Dan  offers  three  significant  points  of  contrast  with  all  the 
other  sections  of  the  poem.  (1)  It  is  the  shortest  of  all.  This  sudden  economy  of 
his  utterances  is  all  the  more  noticeable  because  of  the  lavish  scattering  of  his 
choicest  flowers  of  eloquence  upon  the  three  preceding  blessings.  (2)  There  is  no 
indication  in  the  case  of  Dan  as  to  the  local  inheritance  which  he  should  occupy  in 
Canaan.  In  the  case  of  the  other  tribes,  from  Benjamin  onwards,  Moses  paints  for 
us  a  kind  of  bird's-eye  view  of  the  portions  which  God  was  about  to  assign  to  them 
in  the  promised  land  ;  but  although  the  lot  of  Dan  invited  this  pictorial  treatment 
as  well  as  did  any  other,  we  have  no  description  of  any  of  its  well-known  features, 
its  fertile  cornlands,  its  sandy  seaboard,  or  its  gently  swelling  hills  towards  the  east, 
where  Sorek  and  Zorah  gave  their  names  to  the  choicest  vintages  of  southern 
Palestine.  (3)  There  is  no  mention  of,  or  allusion  to,  the  Divine  name  in  what 
Moses  says  concerning  Dan.  No  word  is  used  that  could  suggest  any  special 
relation  as  subsisting  between  this  tribe  and  Israel's  covenant  God.  In  this  respect 
Dan  stands  absolutely  alone  amongst  all  his  brethren.  2.  Nor  does  the  history  of 
the  tribe  do  ought  but  confirm  the  unhappy  suggestion  which  flows  from  all  these 
features  of  brevity  and  of  omission  in  Moses'  words.  That  history  is  exceedingly 
meagre,  and  records  very  little  to  the  credit  of  the  Danites.  The  character  of  their 
ancestor,  which  seems  also  to  have  been  transmitted  to  the  tribe,  was  crafty, 
deceitful,  and  cruel.  In  the  Book  of  Judges  this  tribe  has  no  small  space  appropri- 
ated to  its  doings,  but  the  narrative  is  one  of  shame  and  of  inexcusable  sin  against 
both  universal  laws  of  justice,  humanity,  and  truth,  and  the  special  obligations  of 
the  Hebrew  nation.  Moreover,  two  incidental  notices  which  we  find  in  the  later 
historical  books  suggest  that  the  Danites  disregarded  the  law  of  Moses,  which 
forbade  intermarriages  with  heathens,  and  that  they  fell  very  early  into  the 
idolatrous  practices  of  their  Phoenician  and  Philistine  neiglibours  (2  Chron.  ii. 
14;  1  Kings  xii.  28-31;  Judg.  xviii.,  xiv.  1-5).  3.  When  we  have  noted  the 
uniform  tenor  of  these  glimpses  into  the  character  and  conduct  of  the  tribe  of  Dan, 
we  can  hardly  be  surprised  to  find  that  no  members  of  that  tribe  cared  to  return 
with  Judah  into  the  land  of  promise  when  the  captivity  in  Babylon  ended.  No 
Danite  name  occurs  in  the  lists  which  Ezra  and  Nehemiah  compiled  in  reference  to 
the  returned  exiles  of  Israel  ;  and  the  only  conclusion  which  can  be  drawn  from 
that  omission  is,  that  all  the  tribe  of  Dan  despised  or  neglected  the  opportunity  of 
temporal  redemption  which  God  had  given  to  His  people  as  the  earnest  of  a  better 
spiritual  blessing  when  Messiah  should  appear.  How  sad  in  its  inferences  is  this 
single  fact !  But  the  sadness  of  the  omen  is  increased  when  we  read  the  list  of  the 
sealed  in  the  Book  of  Revelation  and  find  no  mention  in  it  of  the  tribe  of  Dan. 
The  only  interpretation  which  can  be  put  upon  it  is,  that  Dan  had  somehow 
forfeited  his  right  to  the  blessings  of  Israel's  covenant,  and  that,  for  his  special 
unfaithfulness  and  sin,  his  very  name  had  been  blotted  out  of  the  Lamb's  book  of 
life  (Exod.  xxxii.  33).     {T.  G,  Rooke,  B.A.) 

Ver.  23.  And  of  Naphtali  lie  said. — Naphtali: — It  may  seem  to  any  one  who 
looks  upon  a  map  of  Canaan  as  divided  amongst  the  tribes,  that  this  definition  of 
locality  is  far  enough  from  corresponding  with  the  facts.  Simeon's  lot  would  better 
answer  to  the  description  here,  for  he  did  occupy  the  south-west  corner  of  the 
Promised  Land  ;  whilst  Naphtali's  territory  was  in  the  extreme  north,  and  had 
another  tribe,  Asher,  on  its  western  border.  Hence  it  is  probable  that  the  Hebrew 
word  translated  "west"  should  have  here  another  meaning  which  very  frequently 
belongs  to  it,  and  should  be  rendered  **sea,"  referring  to  the  well-known  sea  of 
Chinnereth,  or  Gennesaret.    This  interpretation  would  agree  very  happily  with  the 


CHAP,  xixiii.]  DEUTERONOMY.  589 

actual  boundaries  of  Naphtali  upon  the  map  ;  for  by  far  the  greater  portion  of  this 
famous  lake  belonged  to  the  tribe,  and  its  southern  border  stretched  in  a  right  line 
westward  from  the  sea  until  it  met  the  frontier  of  Asher's  lot.  The  most  ancient 
Jewish  interpreters  adopt  this  explanation  of  the  blessing,  and  point  out  how  well  the 
appearance  and  resources  of  Naphtali's  portion  justify  the  enthusiastic  language  of 
congratulation  which  Moses  has  employed.  In  the  days  when  they  wrote,  the  plain 
of  Gennesaret  and  the  great  inland  district  of  Galilee  which  stretched  northward  to 
the  roots  of  Lebanon,  were  the  most  populous  and  flourishing  parts  of  Palestine. 
The  firstfruits  were  brought  to  the  temple  at  Jerusalem  from  Mount  Naphtali  before 
they  were  ripe  for  gathering  anywhere  else ;  so  that  the  men  of  this  tribe  were 
always  the  first  to  receive  the  benediction  of  Jehovah's  priests  upon  each  new 
harvest.  Solomon  drew  from  this  same  region  the  largest  supplies  of  food  for  the 
expensive  entertainment  of  his  court ;  and  in  David's  time,  Naphtali,  with 
Zebulun's  aid,  was  able  to  feast  all  Israel  abundantly  for  three  days  with  stores 
which  they  brought  up  to  Hebron  "on  asses,  and  on  camels,  and  on  mules,  and  on 
oxen."  This  was  an  ample  fulfilment  in  temporal  things  of  the  blessing  which 
Moses  pronounced  upon  the  tribe.  But  there  is  a  passage  in  Isaiah  (Isa.  ix.  1,  2  ; 
comp.  Matt.  iv.  1)  which  seems  to  intimate  that  there  was  a  hidden  sf)iritual 
reference  in  the  lavish  outpouring  of  "  favour  "  from  the  Lord  of  which  Naphtali  is 
here  assured.  The  firstfruits  of  Messiah's  ministry  were  to  be  vouchsafed  to  this 
same  highly-favoured  region,  a  city  of  which,  Capernaum,  was  indeed  chosen  by  the 
Lord  Jesus  as  His  dwelling-place  for  one  whole  "accei)table  year."  Too  little, 
indeed,  did  the  men  of  Galilee  understand  their  high  privilege  ;  and  though  they 
might  have  been  satiated  with  the  spiritual  blessings  which  were  thus  brought  to 
their  door,  they  suffered  the  day  of  visitation  to  pass  by  them  unused.  Therefore 
the  failure  of  their  blessing  in  its  highest  sense  serves  now  as  a  warning  to  the  men 
who  have  received  still  better  promises  from  God  through  Christ.  Many  of  these 
are  ready  to  boast  that  they  are  "full,"  and  that  they  "reign  as  kings,"  being 
"rich,  and  increased  with  goods,  and  in  need  of  nothing"  ;  yet  is  there  only  one 
substantial  ground  on  which  to  buOd  these  confident  professions.  In  Christ  are  hid 
all  treasures  of  spiritual  blessing.  He  who  has  Christ  is  more  than  satisfied,  but  he 
who  rejects  Christ,  or  who  lets  Christ  dwell  near  him  unrecognised  and  unappro- 
priated in  His  great  salvation,  is  empty  and  beggared,  though  all  riches  of  corn  and 
wine  may  be  increased  to  him  (1  Cor.  iii.  21-23,  iv.  8  ;  Rev.  iii.  17-20).  (T.  G. 
Jtooke,  B.A.) 

Ver.  24,  25.  Let  Asher  be  blessed. — Asher: — "  Asher  "  signifies  "  happiness,"  or 
"prosperity,"  and  was  given  by  Leah  to  the  son  of  her  handmaid  Zilpah,  in  token 
of  the  joy  which  this  new  gift  of  God  had  brought  to  her  wounded  heart  (Gen.  xxx. 
13).  In  this  blessing  of  Moses  there  is  manifestly  a  play  upon  the  name  thus  given. 
It  is  treated  as  a  good  and  true  omen  concerning  Asher's  temporal  lot.  The  next 
line,  "Let  him  dip  his  feet  in  oil,"  isa  prediction  of  the  exceeding  richness  and 
fertility  of  Asher's  territory  in  the  promised  land.  Jacob  had  already  foretold  the 
same  thing  in  his  dying  prophecy  (Gen.  xlix.  20).  Fatness  is  to  an  Oriental  the 
quality  which  chiefly  recommends  any  viand.  Olive  oil,  "butter  of  kine,"  and  the 
animal  fat  which  is  lodged  in  the  curiously  overgrown  tail  of  a  Syrian  sheep,  are 
to  this  day  the  peculiar  dainties  of  Eastern  cookery,  and  all  of  these  were  produced 
in  abundance  on  the  land  which  fell  by  lot  to  this  favoured  tribe  (Deut.  viii,  7-9). 
The  figure  by  which  Asher  is  here  said  to  "  dip  his  foot  in  oil "  is  a  familiar  Eastern 
idiom  to  describe  the  overflowing  abundance  of  all  these  natural  productions  of  the 
soil.  Job  uses  it  in  precisely  the  same  way  (Job  xxix.  6).  The  fourth  line  of  the 
blessing  is  certainly  meant  to  be  parallel  with  the  third  line  in  its  reference  to  some 
natural  feature  of  the  territory  reserved  for  Asher  in  Canaan  ;  but  the  exact  force  of 
the  reference  is  still  a  matter  of  dispute  amongst  the  learned.  Some  w^ould  read  the 
line  as  it  stands  in  the  margin  :  "Under  thy  shoes  shall  be  iron  and  brass  {i.e. 
copper) "  ;  and  this  would  be  a  perfectly  true  description  of  the  mineral  wealth  of  a 
part  of  the  mountain  range  which  Asher  ought  to  have  occupied,  but  which  he 
abandoned  to  the  Zidonians,  who  very  diligently  dug  out  the  metals  above  named 
from  their  subterranean  veins,  Moses  had  noted  this  feature  of  the  soil  of  Canaan 
(Deut.  viii.  9).  But  in  all  likelihood  the  notion  of  "shoes"  is  quite  foreign  to  the 
true  interpretation  of  this  part  of  the  blessing  ;  and  the  Hebrew  word  which 
suggested  it  alike  to  the  Septuagint  and  English  translators  should  properly  be 
rendered  "thy  bars,"  or,  "  thy  bolts."  Here,  again,  we  find  a  very  graphic  poetical 
description  of  Asher's  lot  in  the  promised  land.      His  boundary  is  traced  on  its 


590  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxxiii. 

landward  side  by  strongly -marked  mountain  ridges  ;  and  on  the  west  these  barriers 
run  out  into  the  sea  in  successive  capes,  that  resemble  the  traverses  of  some  titanic 
fortification,  and  which  are  as  rugged  and  ironbound  in  aspect  as  the  inland  region 
which  they  protect  is  smiling  and  soft.  If  this  allusion  be  recognised  in  Moses' 
blessing,  the  intention  will  plainly  be  to  suggest  the  security  of  Asher  in  the  portion 
which  God  was  about  to  bestow  upon  him.  There  he  should  be  fenced  in,  as  it  were, 
by  bolts  of  iron  and  bars  of  brass,  which  no  envious  foe  should  be  able  to  break 
through  with  hostile  or  thievish  intent.  This  interpretation  of  the  fourth  line  in  the 
blessing  would  almost  lead  us  to  prefer  the  following  amongst  the  many  renderings 
that  have  been  given  of  the  fifth  line  ;  "According  to  thy  life  shall  be  thy  rest"  ; 
that  is,  Asher's  repose  from  warlike  labours  and  alarms  should  continue  as  long  as  his 
tribal  existence.  But  the  associations  which  long  attached  to  the  rendering  as  given 
in  the  English  Bible  will  probably  make  most  readers  reluctant  to  give  up  the 
thought  which  many  a  sermon  and  hymn  will  have  endeared  and  familiarised  :  "As 
thy  days  shall  be  thy  strength  " — that  is,  the  strength  of  him  whom  God  favours 
shall  always  be  in  proportion  to  his  need  (1  Cor.  x.  13  ;  2  Cor.  xii.  9).  One  could 
wish  that  the  actual  history  of  Asher  furnished  a  happy  comment  upon,  and 
illustration  of,  his  blessing  as  thus  interpreted  ;  but  in  truth  the  comparison  of 
prophetic  poetry  and  prosaic  fact  in  this  particular  instance  is  full  of  suggestive"  dis- 
appointment. Asher  did  dwell  securely  for  a  certain  period  within  his  mountain 
barriers,  and  his  sons  seem  to  have  enjoyed  a  long  season  of  material  prosperity ; 
but  this  was  not  through  their  trust  in  Divine  protection,  but  through  their  own 
subtle  worldly  policy,  which  involved,  alas,  the  faithless  surrender  of  their  highest 
duty  to  God.  The  men  of  Asher  deemed  it  too  hard  a  task  to  drive  out  the 
Phoenicians  and  Canaanites  whom  they  found  in  possession  of  the  strong  cities  and 
fat  valleys  of  their  portion.  God  would  indeed  have  helped  them  utterly  to 
exterminate  their  heathen  rivals  ;  but  they  preferred  to  make  a  cowardly  truce  and 
compromise,  by  virtue  of  which  they  dwelt  peaceably  "  among  the  Canaanites,  the 
inhabitants  of  the  land  "  ( Judg.  i.  31,  32).  Nor  did  Asher  from  that  time  forward 
ever  redeem  the  shame  of  his  dishonourable  compact  with  foes  whom  he  ought  to 
have  destroyed.  The  very  name  of  the  tribe  almost  vanishes  from  the  page  of 
Hebrew  history,  and  it  had  better  have  been  absent  altogether  than  conspicuous  as  it  is 
in  the  bitterly  scornful  allusion  of  Deborah  (Judg.  v.  17,  18).  Yet  the  name  of  Asher 
is  not,  like  that  of  Dan,  blotted  with  hopeless  ignominy  from  the  list  of  God's 
redeemed.  A  woman  of  this  tribe,  Anna,  the  centenarian  prophetess  of  Jerusalem, 
was  among  the  first  to  hail  the  infant  Saviour,  and  to  give  thanks  for  His  salvation 
unto  the  Lord  (Luke  ii.  36-38).  Though  the  majority  of  the  tribe  perished  through 
worldly  conformity  and  ease-loving  apostasy  from  the  covenant  of  God,  yet  the  bless- 
ing of  Moses  upon  Asher  was  not  wholly  forfeited  nor  unfulfilled.  Let  the  lesson 
of  this  story  be  for  our  instruction  in  the  dangers  of  temporal  prosperity,  even  for 
the  Lord's  elect,  and  no  less  in  the  meaning  of  those  reverses  of  earthly  fortune  by 
which  the  backslidings  of  the  chosen  people  are  continually  chastised.  When  Asher 
forgets  the  covenant  of  his  Redeemer,  * '  the  Lord,  the  Lord  of  hosts,  will  send  among 
his  fat  ones  leanness,  and  under  his  glory  He  will  kindle  a  burning  like  the  burning 
of  a  fire  "  ;  but  even  in  those  experiences  of  well-deserved  correction  and  adversity, 
the  soul  that  God  has  favoured  and  pronounced  "blessed  "  shall  not  be  abandoned 
to  utter  ruin.     As  his  days,  so  his  strength  shall  be  (Isa.  x.  16-21).     {T.  G.  Rooke^ 

Ver.  25.  Thy  shoes  shall  be  iron  and  brass. — Shoes  of  iron,  and  strength  sufficient  : 
a  mw  year's  promise : — I.  Thv  shoes  shall  be  iron  and  brass.  The  passage  has 
several  translations,  which  may  serve  as  divisions  in  opening  up  the  meaning.  The 
Lord's  promises  are  true  in  every  sense  they  will  fairly  bear.  A  generous  man  will 
allow  the  widest  interpretation  of  his  words,  and  so  will  the  infinitely  gracious  God. 
1.  That  Asher  should  have  treasures  under  his  feet — mines  of  iron  and  copper. 
(1)  The  Word  of  God  has  mines  in  it.  There  are  treasures  upon  the  surface  of  the  Word 
which  we  may  pick  up  very  readily  :  even  the  casual  reader  will  find  himself  able  to 
understand  the  simplicities  and  elements  of  the  Gospel ;  but  the  Word  of  God  yields 
most  to  the  digger.  We  waste  too  much  time  upon  the  pretentious,  poverty- 
stricken  literature  of  the  age  ;  and  some,  even  Christians,  are  more  taken  up  with 
works  of  fiction  than  they  are  with  this  great  Book  of  everlasting  fact.  Remember 
that  God  has  given  to  us  to  have  treasures  under  our  feet ;  but  do  not  so  despise  His 
gifts  as  to  leave  the  mines  of  revelation  unexplored.  (2)  You  will  find  these 
treasures  not  only  in  the  Word  of  God,  but  everywhere  in  the  providence  of  God,  if 


CHAP,  xxxiii.]  DEUTERONOMY.  591 

you  will  consider  the  ways  of  the  Lord,  and  believe  that  God  is  everywhere  at  work. 
2.  E.  V.  :  "  Thy  bars  shall  be  iron  and  brass  " — there  shall  be  protection  around  him. 
Peace  from  all  assaults,  safety  under  all  alarms,  shutting  in  from  all  attacks — this  is 
a  priceless  boon.  3.  He  shall  have  protection  for  his  feet.  It  is  no  objection  that 
shoes  of  iron  and  brass  would  be  unusual,  for  the  protection  which  God  gives  His 
people  is  unusual.  Theirs  are  no  common  equipments,  for  they  are  no  common 
people.  You  have  peculiar  difficulties,  you  are  a  peculiar  people,  you  traverse  a 
peculiar  road,  you  have  a  peculiar  God  to  trust  in,  and  you  may  therefore  find  a 
peculiar  consolation  in  a  peculiar  promise.  We  want  to  have  shoes  of  iron  and 
brass — (1)  To  travel  with.  We  are  pilgrims,  journeying  along  a  road  which  has  not 
been  smoothed  by  a  steam-roller,  but  remains  rough  and  rugged  as  the  path  to  an 
Alpine  summit.  (2)  To  fight  with.  These  shoes  are  meant  for  trampling  upon 
enemies.     (3)  For  climbing.     We  ought  not  to  be  satisfied  till  we  reach  the  liighest 

E laces  of  knowledge,  experience,  and  practice.  (4)  For  perseverance.  Since  the 
lOrd  has  shod  you  in  this  fashion,  it  is  a  warning  to  you  that  the  way  is  long  and 
weary,  and  the  end  not  by-and-by.  11.  As  thy  day,  so  shall  thy  strength  be. 
The  words  carry  a  tacit  hint,  that  we  have  no  strength  of  our  own,  but  have  need  of 
strength  from  above.  Come  down  from  your  self-esteem  :  stoop  from  the  notion  of 
your  own  natural  ability  :  divest  yourself  of  the  foolish  idea  that  you  can  do  any- 
thing in  and  of  yourself,  and  come  now  to  the  Strong  for  strength,  and  ask  your  Lord 
to  fulfil  this  promise  in  your  experience.  1.  Strength  to  abide  through  days.  Not 
for  to-day  only,  but  for  to-morrow,  and  for  every  day  as  every  day  sh;ill  come. 
2.  Strength  to  be  given  daily.  A  day's  burden  and  a  day's  help,  a  day's  sorrow  and 
a  day's  comfort.  A  storage  of  gi-ace  would  turn  into  self-sufficiency.  3.  It  will  be 
given  to  us  proportionately.  A  day  of  little  service,  little  strength  ;  a  day  of  little 
suffering,  little  strength  ;  but  in  a  tremendous  day — a  day  that  needs  thee  to  play 
the  Samson — thou  shalt  have  Samson's  strength.  4.  Our  strength  continuing  as 
our  days  continue.  (C.  R.  Spurgeon.)  Iron  shoes  for  roiigh  roads : — Turning  this 
old-time  word  into  a  promise  for  ourselves  as  we  set  out  on  a  ncAv  year's  journey,  it 
suggests  to  us  that  we  may  have  some  rugged  pieces  of  road  before  we  get  to  the  end. 
If  not,  what  need  would  there  be  for  iron  shoes  ?  If  the  way  is  to  be  flower-strewn, 
velvet  slippers  would  do.  No  one  can  live  nobly  and  worthily  without  struggle, 
battle,  self-denial.  Then  we  may  have  special  trials  or  sorrows  this  year.  We  shall 
need  our  iron  shoes.  It  is  said  there  was  a  compensation  in  Asher's  rough  portion  ; 
his  rugged  hills  had  iron  in  them.  This  law  of  compensation  runs  through  all  God's 
distribution  of  gifts.  One  man's  farm  is  hilly  and  hard  to  till,  but  deep  down 
beneath  its  ruggedness,  buried  away  in  its  rocks,  are  rich  minerals.  One  person's  lot 
in  life  is  hard,  with  peculiar  obstacles,  difficulties,  and  trials,  but  hidden  in  it  there 
are  compensations  of  some  kind.  One  young  man  is  reared  in  affluence  and  luxury. 
He  never  experiences  want  or  self-denial,  never  has  to  struggle  with  obstacles  or 
adverse  circumstances.  Another  is  reared  in  poverty,  and  has  to  toil  and  suffer 
privation.  The  latter  seems  to  have  scarcely  an  equal  chance  in  life.  But  we  all 
know  where  the  compensation  lies  in  this  case.  It  is  in  such  circumstances  that 
grand  manhood  is  grown,  while,  too  often,  the  petted,  pampered  sons  of  luxury  come 
to  nothing.  In  the  rugged  hills  of  toil  and  hardship  life's  finest  gold  is  found. 
Shoes  of  iron  are  promised  only  to  those  who  are  to  have  rugged  roads.  There  is  a 
comforting  suggestion  here  for  all  who  find  peculiar  hardness  in  their  life.  God  will 
provide  for  the  ruggedness.  There  is  a  most  delicate  connection  between  earth 
and  heaven's  grace.  There  is  yet  another  suggestion  in  this  old-time  promise. 
The  Divine  blessing  for  every  experience  is  folded  up  in  the  experience  itself, 
and  will  not  be  received  in  advance.  The  iron  shoes  would  not  be  given  until 
the  rough  roads  were  reached.  There  was  no  need  for  them  until  then,  and  besides, 
the  iron  to  make  them  was  in  the  rugged  hills  themselves,  and  could  not  be  gotten 
until  the  hills  were  reached.  Some  people  are  for  ever  unwisely  testing  themselves 
by  questions  like  these  :  "Could  I  endure  sore  bereavement  ?  Have  I  grace  enough 
to  bow  in  submission  to  God  if  He  were  to  take  away  my  dearest  treasure  ?  Or 
could  I  meet  death  without  fear?"  Such  questions  are  unwise,  because  there  is  no 
promise  of  grace  to  meet  trial  when  there  is  no  trial  to  be  met.  Grace  for  dying  is 
nowhere  promised  while  death  is  yet  far  off  and  while  one's  duty  is  to  live.  There 
is  a  story  of  a  shipwreck  which  yields  an  illustration  that  comes  in  just  here.  Crew 
and  passengers  had  to  leave  the  broken  vessel  and  take  to  the  boats.  The  sea  was 
rough,  and  great  care  in  rowing  and  steering  was  necessary,  in  order  to  guard  the 
heavy-laden  boats,  not  from  the  ordinary  waves,  which  they  rode  over  easily,  but 
from  the  great  cross-seas.     Night  was  approaching,  and  the  hearts  of  all  sank  as 


592  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxxiir. 

they  asked  what  they  should  do  in  the  darkness  when  they  would  no  longer  be  able 
to  see  these  terrible  waves.  To  their  great  joy,  however,  when  it  grew  dark,  they 
discovered  that  they  were  in  phosphorescent  waters,  and  that  each  dangerous  wave 
rolled  np  crested  with  light  which  made  it  as  clearly  visible  as  if  it  were  midday. 
So  it  is  that  life's  dreaded  experiences  when  we  meet  them  carry  in  themselves  the 
light  which  takes  away  the  peril  and  the  terror.  The  night  of  sorrow  comes  with  its 
own  lamp  of  comfort.  The  hour  of  weakness  brings  its  secret  of  strength.  When 
we  come  to  the  hard,  rough,  steep  path  we  find  iron  for  shoes.  "How  can  I  get 
shoes,  and  where  ? "  one  asks.  Do  you  remember  about  Christ's  feet,  that  they  were 
pierced  with  nails  ?  Why  was  it  ?  That  we  might  have  shoes  to  wear  on  our  feet, 
and  that  they  might  not  be  cut  and  torn  on  the  way.  Dropping  all  figure,  we 
cannot  get  along  on  this  year's  pilgrimage  without  Christ ;  but  having  Christ,  we 
shall  be  ready  for  anything  that  the  year  may  bring  to  us.  {J.  R.  Miller y  D.D.) 
And  as  thy  days,  so  shall  thy  stren^h  be. — Strength  according  to  the  days: — 1.  It 
is  not  the  design  of  these  words  to  suppress  forelooking  and  foreplanning  in  secular 
things.  2.  It  is  not  designed  to  teach  men  that  God  will  maintain  a  providence 
of  miracles  in  their  behalf.  3.  We  cannot  know  beforehand  what  help  will  spring 
up  from  our  circumstances.  4.  Anxiety  for  the  future  is  labour  lost.  6.  Applica- 
tion— (1)  To  those  who  follow  conscience  against  their  worldly  interests.  (2)  To 
those  who  wish  to  reform  from  evil  habits,  but  fear  they  will  not  be  able  to  hold 
out.  (3)  To  those  who  look  wistfully  on  a  Christian  life,  but  doubt  if  they  would 
be  able  to  maintain  it.  (4)  To  those  who  are  troubled  exceedingly  in  regard  to 
expected  events.  (5)  To  those  who  are  troubled  about  relative  afflictions.  (6)  To 
those  who  are  troubled  about  their  own  death.  {H.  W.  Beecher.)  Thy  strength 
03  thy  days: — What  a  picture  of  boundless  variety  is  called  up  by  "thy  days" — 
even  the  days  of  a  single  life  !  Who  shall  delineate  the  manifold,  chequered,  ever- 
changing  lights  and  shadows  of  the  days  of  man  ?  Yet  amidst  all  the  varieties, 
there  is  a  general  unity.  There  are  gi*eat  interests  that  are  common  to  all  lives, 
and  which  bind  up  in  unity  all  the  days  of  each  individual  life,  weaving  all  its 

Sarts into  one  texture.     This  opens  to  us  a  plain  distinction  among  the  days.     "Thy 
ays  "  may  be  viewed  collectively,  as  the  sum  of  thy  life — all  the  days  of  thy  life, 
— or  they  may  be  viewed  distributively,  as  special  days,  distinctive  days.     I.  Thy 

DAYS  ARE  ALL  THE  DAYS  OF  THY  LIFE,  HAVING  GREAT  RELATIONS,  PURPOSES, 
OR    INTERESTS,     TO    WHICH    THE    STRENGTH    IS    ADJUSTED.       1.  Thy   daVS    are    for 

salvation,  and  thy  strength  shall  be  proportioned  to  thy  days'  task.  The  days  of 
life  are  the  steps  of  the  ladder  by  which  we  are  to  ascend  the  skies.  2.  Thy  days 
are  for  spiritual  progress,  and  thy  strength  shall  be  proportioned  to  the  task.  Days 
are  given  to  us  on  earth  to  educate  us  for  heaven,  for  the  acquisition  of  suitable 
excellence.  Let  us  therefore  go  on  to  larger  acquisitions.  We  shall  never  have 
cause,  like  the  world's  conqueror,  to  sit  down  and  weep  that  there  are  no  more 
worlds  to  conquer.  3.  Thy  days  are  for  service  and  duty,  and  thy  strength  shall 
be  proportioned  to  thy  service.  II.  Thy  days  are  special,  distinctive  days, 
DEMANDING  SPECIAL  STRENGTH.  Thy  days  may  be  special,  as  affected  by  events 
which  can  only  be  met  by  strength  from  the  Fountain  of  strength,  and  the  strength 
shall  be  proportioned  to  the  emergency.  That  is  not  an  assurance  which  man  of 
himself  could  give.  For  life  is  so  full  of  startling  events,  that  we  dare  not,  from 
all  we  see  and  experience,  promise  ourselves  strength  to  cope  with  all  possible 
events.  No  doubt  some  lives,  in  comparison  of  others,  are  tranquil  to  outward 
appearance,  without  almost  any  change,  like  some  mountain  tarn,  now  bright,  now 
clouded,  but  showing  the  same  features  through  all  the  seasons  ;  and  others  are 
like  the  ocean,  never  resting,  often  tossed  by  terrible  tempests  ;  but  to  all  the 
promise  applies — "As  thy  days,  so  shall  thy  strength  be."  1.  There  are  days  dark 
with  care,  not  merely  selfish,  but  generous  care.  "Cast  thy  burden  on  the  Lord," 
&c.  2.  Then  there  are  days  dark  with  sorrow,  when  a  man  must  sit  alone  under 
God's  hand.  And  the  strength  is  not  mere  endurance.  There  is  a  kind  of  dogged 
endurance  of  all  the  trials  and  ills  of  life,  to  which  a  man  can  accustom  himself. 
He  may  not  die  under  them,  but  he  comes  out  of  them  with  no  increased  capacity 
for  action,  for  comfort,  for  hope.  But  we  cannot  suppose  the  Divine  promise 
fulfilled  in  such  a  case.  The  strength  promised  will  not  only  turn  off  the  edge  of 
calamities,  but  will  make  us  more  than  conquerors  over  them,  and  turn  their  power 
into  a  tributary  to  our  own  enlargement.  3.  Last  of  all,  there  is  the  day  of  our 
death.  Not  only  in  stormy  seas  or  devouring  fires  does  it  need  strength  to  master 
one's  self,  but  on  the  most  ordinary  commonplace  deathbed.  Ah  !  it  needs  God- 
given  strength  to  enable  the  father  or  mother  dying  to  leave  their  little  helpless 


CHAP.  XXXIII.]  DEUTERONOMY,  593 

children  in  a  cold  and  wicked  world.     (J".  Riddell.)        Strength  proportioned  to  tJie 
^a,y  .—I.  To  WHOM  IS  THIS  PROMISE  MADE  ?    Soms  of  the  promises  in   God's 
Word  are  of  universal  application  (Gen.  iii.  15,  viii.  21,  22,  xxii.  17,  18).     But 
there  are  promises  which  are  special,  and  have  regard  to  separate  and  distinct 
classes  of  persons  :  e.g.,  to  the  wicked  (Isa.  Iv.  7) ;  to  the  poor  (Isa.  xli.  17) ;  to 
the  penitent  (Psa.  li.  17) ;  to  the  young  (Prov.  vui.  17)  ;  to  the  aged  (Isa.  xlvi.  4). 
In  the  text,  Asher  is  the  person  to  whom  the  promise  is  made ;  and  if  your  char- 
acter is  similar  to  that  of  Asher,  the  promise  is  to  you.     1.  Asher  received  Christ, 
and  believed  the  oracles  of  God.     Do  you  answer  to  this  description  ?    2.  Asher 
attended  the  Divine  ordinances.     God  will  strengthen  us  in  His  sanctuary.     It  is 
in  the  Lord's  house,  on  the  Lord's  day,  that  we  receive  light,  instruction,  and 
vigour.     3.  Asher  must  have  been  diligent  in  his  proper  vocation ;  else  he  would 
not  have  dipped  his  foot  in  oil.     We  are  to  be  diligent  in  business,  fervent  in  spirit, 
actively  serving  our  generation,  according  to  the  will  of  God.     4.  Asher  desired  the 
lot  of  the  inheritance.     He  looked  for  his  place  in  the  promised  Canaan.     So  we 
are  to  look  for  our  place  in  the  inheritance  which  is  incorruptible,  undetiled,  and 
that  fadeth  not  away.     There  is  eternal  life  in  the  promise.     II.  What  is  the 
MEANING  OF  THIS  PROMISE?    There  are  ordinary  days,  which  have  in  them  no 
signal  event,  no  remarkable  calamity  or  disaster,  no  striking  prosperity  or  success. 
They  roll  round  in  the  even  tenor  of  their  course.     Perhaps  the  great  majority  of 
our  days  are  of  this  character.     But  in  all  the  ordinary  days,  have  we  not  found 
corresponding  resources  of  help,  and  strength,  and  mercy,  and  supplies  according 
to  our  need  ?    There  are  days  of  prosperity,  and  seasons  when  everything  goes  well 
with  us.     Then,  too  often,  our  goodness  is  like  the  morning  cloud  and  the  early 
dew.     But  if  even  then  a  man  is  kept  humble  and  conscious  of  his  responsibility  ; 
if  he  wishes  to  do  good,  and  is  concerned  to  be  a  blessing  ;  where  all  this  is  accom- 
plished, moral  and  spiritual  resources  are  supplied  according  to  our  day.     You  may 
think  the  difficulty  to  be  deeper  in  adversity  ;  when  the  tide  ebbs  ;  when  there  are 
changes,  over  turnings,  bereavements,  desolation,  &c.     To  pass  through  the  rivers, 
and  say,  I  am  not  overflown  ;  to  pass  through  the  furnace,  and  say,  I  am  not 
burned  ;  this  is  by  the  secret  sustaining  hand  of  the  Almighty.     If  we  are  humble 
and  patient  when  He  seems  severe,  it  is  by  the  grace  of  God.     There  may  be  days 
of  personal  temptation,  when  the  adversary  cometh  in  like  a  flood.     The  dark  and 
evil  day  may  arrive,  when  we  have  to  stand  in  the  firmness  of  opposition.     If  we 
triumph,  it  is  by  the  grace  of  God.     There  are  days  of  duty,  which  seem  to  be 
beyond  our  strength  ;  as  when  the  scholar  has  to  pass  through  his  examination  ;  or 
when  the  minister  ascends  the  pulpit  and  asks,  "Who  is  sufficient  for  these  things?' 
III.  Where  is  our  security  ?    1.  It  is  in  the  power  and  faithfulness  of  God. 
Remember  that  one  of  His  titles  is,   "The  Strength  of  Israel"  ;  then  it  follows, 
"He  will  not  lie";— here  is  power  and  faithfulness  in  its  loftiest  form.     God  is 
able  to  keep  us  from  falling  ;  and  He  has  sworn  by  two  immutable  things,  that  we 
might  have  strong  consolation.     No  conjuncture  shall  arise,  in  which  the  strength 
of  heaven  shaU  not  make  us  victorious.     2.  We  are  also  assured  by  the  word  and 
sympathy  of  Jesus.     "The  promises  are  yea  and  amen  in  Christ  Jesus"  ;  that  is, 
they  are  ratified  in  His  blood,  and  established  in  His  mediation  ;  and  He  is  a  High 
Priest  touched  with  the  feeling  of  our  infirmities.     3.  There  is  our  own  experience 
in  the  past.     Hitherto  the  Lord  hath  helped  us.     IV.  If  we  receive  the  promise 
of  our  text,  what  should  be  the  effect  upon  our  LIVES  ?    We  answer. 
Dismiss  all  anxieties  and  fears.     {J.  Straiten.)        Strength  as  the  days  :—l.  What 
THIS  promise  IS  NOT.     1.  It  has  no  direct  relation  to  the  past— no  power  of 
retrieval  and  recovery.     Negligence  is  negligence,  and  no  spiritual  alchemy  can 
change  it  into  diligence.     This  only  may  be  done :  precious  lessons  may  be  drawn 
out  of  that  which  has  been  ;  and  thus  the  moral  continuity  of  the  results  of  what 
was  evil  may  be  in  a  measure  interrupted,  and  good  drawn  out  of  the  evil.     2.  It  does 
not  bring  us  into  any  immediate  connection  with  the  future.     No  doubt  there  is 
what  may  be  called  grace  in  stock ;  in  capital  if  you  will,  in  the  existence  and 
operation  of  gracious  principles  and  dispositions.     You  may  reckon  with  certainty 
on  getting  large  interest  from  these.     But  even  that  is  on  condition  of  continued 
faithfulness,  and  in  order  to  secure  that  God  gives  by  the  day.     It  is  only  in  the  day 
itself— in  the  dispensation— in  the  duty— in  the  melting  of  the  heart-grief ;  in  the 
bitterness  of  the  disappointment,  or  in  the  fierceness  of  the  temptation,  that  you 
can  fully  know  what  strength  you  will  require— and  only  then,  in  the  nature  of 
things,  can  you  receive  it.     II.  What  this  promise  is.    You  are  going  some 
distanoe  to  a  banquet.    It  will,  of  course,  be  pleasant  if  the  sun  shines  by  the  way, 

38 


594  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap,  xxxiii. 

and  all  the  world  looks  fair.  But  if  the  clouds  hang  heavy,  and  the  air  is  cold, 
you  will  go  to  the  banquet  just  the  same.  You  are  going  across  the  sea  to  claim 
a  property,  and  you  are  to  sail  in  a  ship  that  cannot  sink.  It  will  be  pleasant  if 
there  is  only  the  ripple  of  quiet  waters  from  the  prow  of  the  ship,  and  the  flashing 
of  the  sunlight  from  the  scarcely-crested  waves.  But  if  even  there  should  come  the 
roar  and  burly  of  the  storm,  and  the  dash  of  the  angry  waves  against  the  sides  of 
the  vessel,  until  the  very  masts  are  white  with  spray,  you  will  none  the  less,  and 
probably  even  none  the  later,  see  and  claim  your  good  estate.  If  a  man  lives  well  each 
day — die  well  he  must,  whatever  his  feeling  be.  Death  will  be  to  him  a  very  chariot 
of  fire  to  take  him  to  the  banquet  of  heaven  ;  or  a  ship  that  turns  back  for  no 
weather,  nor  ever  strikes  sail  till  she  enters  the  harbour.  Lessons — 1.  Do  not  be 
managing  and  masterful  over  circumstances  and  providence  ;  hammering  and  hew- 
ing at  the  "days"  to  compel  them  into  a  certain  shape.  Take  them  as  they 
come  ;  for  they  come  as  they  are  sent,  arrayed  darkly  or  brightly  by  the  hand  of 
God,  and  filled  with  such  elements  as  His  wisdom  and  goodness  have  put  into 
them.  2.  Do  not  be  timorous  and  fearful  and  full  of  anxious  care  ;  you  see  how  little 
need  there  is  for  it,  how  well  you  are  provided  for !  3.  Such  a  subject,  and  such 
a  promise  is  surely  a  call  to  diligence.  For  here  you  see  is  an  unlimited  promise 
of  strength — strength  to  match  the  "days" — that  is  God's  side  of  it.  Our 
part  is  to  try  to  raise  the  "days"  to  match  the  strength.  {A.  Raleigh,  D.D.) 
As  thy  days,  so  shall  thy  strength  he: — When  we  have  seen  the  hills  clad  with 
verdure  to  their  summit,  and  the  seas  laving  their  base  with  a  silver  glory ;  when 
we  have  stretched  our  eye  far  away,  and  have  seen  the  widening  prospect  full  of 
loveliness  and  beauty,  we  have  felt  sad  that  the  sunlight  should  ever  set  upon  such 
a  scene,  and  that  so  much  beauty  should  be  shrouded  in  the  oblivion  of  darkness. 
But  how  much  reason  have  we  to  bless  God  for  nights  !  for  if  it  were  not  for  nights 
how  much  of  beauty  never  would  be  discovered.  Night  seems  to  be  the  great  friend 
of  the  stars  :  they  must  be  all  unseen  by  eyes  of  men,  were  they  not  set  in  the  foil 
of  darkness.  It  is  even  so  with  winter.  Much  of  God's  marvellous  miracles  of  hoar 
frost  must  have  been  hidden  from  us,  if  it  had  not  been  for  the  cold  chill  of  winter, 
which,  when  it  robs  us  of  one  beauty,  gives  us  another, — when  it  takes  away  the 
emerald  of  verdure,  it  gives  us  the  diamond  of  ice — when  it  casts  from  us  the  bright 
rubies  of  the  flowers,  it  gives  us  the  fair,  white  ermine  of  snow.  Well  now,  translate 
those  two  ideas,  and  you  will  see  why  it  is  that  even  our  sin,  our  lost  and  ruined 
estate,  has  been  made  the  means,  in  the  hand  of  God,  of  manifesting  to  us  the 
excellencies  of  His  character.  If  you  and  I  had  been  without  trouble,  we  never 
could  have  had  such  a  promise  as  this  given  to  us — "As  thy  days,  so  shall  thy 
strength  be."  I.  The  self- weakness  hinted  at  in  the  text.  To  keep  to  my 
figure,  if  this  promise  be  like  a  star,  you  know  there  is  no  seeing  the  stars  in  the 
daytime  when  we  stand  here  upon  the  upper  land  ;  we  must  go  down  a  deep  well, 
and  then  we  shall  be  able  to  discover  them.  Now,  as  this  is  daytime  with  our 
hearts,  it  will  be  necessary  for  us  to  go  down  the  deep  well  of  old  recollections  of 
our  past  trials.  We  must  first  get  a  good  fair  idea  of  the  great  depth  of  our  own 
weakness,  before  we  shall  be  able  to  behold  the  brightness  of  this  rich  and  exceed- 
ing precious  promise.  1.  Ye  children  of  God,  have  ye  not  proved  your  own 
weakness  in  the  day  of  duty  ?  The  Lord  has  spoken  to  you,  and  He  has  said,  "Son 
of  man,  run,  and  do  such  and  such  a  thing  which  I  bid  thee  "  ;  and  you  have  gone 
to  do  it,  but  as  you  have  been  upon  your  way,  a  sense  of  great  responsibility  has 
bowed  you  down,  and  you  have  been  ready  to  turn  back  even  at  the  outset,  and  to 
cry,  *  *  Send  by  whomsoever  Thou  wilt  send,  but  not  by  me."  Reinforced  by  strength, 
you  have  gone  to  the  duty,  but  wliile  performing  it,  you  have  at  times  felt  your 
hands  hanging  exceeding  heavy,  and  you  have  had  to  look  up  many  a  time  and  cry, 
"0  Lord,  give  me  more  strength,  for  without  Thy  strength  this  work  must  be 
unaccomplished  ;  I  cannot  perform  it  myself."  And  when  the  work  has  been  done, 
and  you  have  looked  back  upon  it,  you  have  either  been  filled  with  amazement  that 
it  should  have  been  done  at  all  by  so  poor  and  weak  a  worm  as  yourself,  or  else  you 
have  been  overcome  with  horror  because  you  have  been  afraid  the  work  was  marred, 
like  the  vessel  on  the  potter's  wheel,  by  reason  of  your  own  want  of  skilfulness. 

2.  We  prove  our  weakness,  perhaps  more  visibly,  when  we  come  into  the  day  of 
sufiFering.  There  it  is  that  we  are  weak  indeed.  Ah  !  people  of  God,  it  is  one 
thing  to  talk  about  the  furnace  ;  it  is  another  thing  to  be  in  it.  It  is  one  thing  to 
look  at  the  doctor's  knife,  but  quite  another  thing  to  feel  it.  That  man  has  never 
been  sick  who  does  not  know  his  weakness,  his  want  of  patience,  and  of  endurance. 

3.  Again,  there  is  another  thing  which  will  very  soon  prove  our  weakness,   if 


CHAP,  xxxiii.]  DEUTERONOMY.  595 

neither  duty  nor  suffering  will  do  it— namely,  progress.  Let  any  of  you  try  to 
grow  in  grace,  and  seek  to  run  the  heavenly  race,  and  make  a  little  progress,  and 
you  will  soon  find,  in  such  a  slippery  road  as  that  which  we  have  to  travel,  that  it 
is  very  hard  to  go  one  step  forward,  though  remarkably  easy  to  go  a  great  many 
steps  backward.  4.  See  what  thou  art  in  temptation.  I  have  seen  a  tree  in  the 
forest  that  seemed  to  stand  fast  like  a  rock  ;  I  have  stood  beneath  its  wide-spreading 
branches,  and  have  sought  to  shake  its  trunk,  to  see  if  I  could,  but  it  stood 
immovable.  The  sun  shone  upon  it,  and  the  rain  descended,  and  many  a  winter's 
frost  sprinkled  its  boughs  with  snow,  but  it  still  stood  fast  and  firm.  But  one 
night  there  came  a  howling  wind  which  swept  through  the  forest,  and  the  tree  that 
seemed  to  stand  so  fast  lay  stretched  along  the  ground,  its  gaunt  arms  which  once 
were  lifted  up  to  heaven  lying  hopelessly  broken,  and  the  trunk  snapped  in  twain. 
And  so  have  I  seen  many  a  professor  strong  and  mighty,  and  nothing  seemed  to 
move  him  ;  but  I  have  seen  the  wind  of  persecution  and  temptation  come  against 
him,  and  I  have  heard  him  creak  with  murmuring,  and  at  last  have  seen  him  break 
in  apostasy,  and  he  has  lain  along  the  ground  a  mournful  specimen  of  what  every 
man  must  become  who  maketh  not  the  Lord  his  strength,  and  who  relieth  not  upon 
the  Most  High.  We  have  all  our  tender  points.  When  Thetis  dipped  Achilles  in 
the  Styx,  you  remember  she  held  him  by  the  heel ;  he  was  made  invulnerable 
wherever  the  water  touched  him,  but  his  heel  not  being  covered  with  the  water, 
was  vulnerable,  and  there  Paris  shot  his  arrow,  and  he  died.  It  is  even  so  with  us. 
We  may  think  that  we  are  covered  with  virtue  till  we  are  totally  invulnerable,  but 
we  have  a  heel  somewhere  ;  there  is  a  place  where  the  aiTow  of  the  devil  can  make 
way:  hence  the  absolute  necessity  of  taking  to  ourselves  "the  whole  armour  of 
God,"  so  that  there  may  not  be  a  solitary  joint  in  the  harness  that  shall  be 
unprotected  against  the  arrows  of  the  devil.  IL  The  great  peomise— "As  thy 
days,  so  shall  thy  strength  be."  1.  Thife  is  a  well-guaranteed  promise.  There  is 
enough  bullion  in  the  vaults  of  Omnipotence  to  pay  off  every  bill  that  ever  shall 
be  drawn  by  the  faith  of  man  or  the  promises  of  God.  Now  look  at  this  one— 
"As  thy  days,  so  shall  thy  strength  be."  God  has  a  strong  reserve  with  which 
to  pay  off  this  promise  ;  for  is  He  not  Himself  omnipotent,  able  to  do  all  things  ? 
Remember  what  He  did  in  the  days  of  old,  in  the  former  generations.  Remember 
how  He  spake,  and  it  was  done  ;  how  He  commanded,  and  it  stood  fast.  He  hangeth 
the  world  upon  nothing  ;  He  fixed  the  pillars  of  heaven  in  silver  sockets  of  light, 
and  thereon  He  hung  the  golden  lamps,  the  sun  and  the  moon ;  and  shall  He 
that  did  all  this  be  unable  to  support  His  children  ?  Shall  He  be  unfaithful  to  His 
word  for  want  of  power  in  His  arm  or  strength  in  His  will  ?  Remember  again,  thy 
God,  who  has  promised  to  be  thy  strength,  is  the  God  who  upholdeth  all  things  by  the 
word  of  His  hand.  Who  feedeth  the  ravens  ?  Who  supplies  the  lions  ?  Doth  not 
He  do  it  ?  And  how  ?  He  openeth  His  hand  and  supplieth  the  want  of  every  living 
thing.  He  has  to  do  nothing  more  than  simply  to  open  His  hand.  Who  is  it  that 
restrains  the  tempest  ?  Doth  not  He  say  that  He  rides  upon  the  wings  of  the  wind, 
that  He  maketh  the  clouds  His  chariots,  and  holds  the  water  in  the  hollow  of  His 
hand?  Shall  He  fail  thee?  2.  It  is  a  limited  promise.  "What!"  says  one, 
"limited!  Why  it  says,  'As  thy  days,  so  shall  thy  strength  be.'"  Ay,  it  is 
limited.  I  know  it  is  unlimited  in  our  troubles,  but  still  it  is  limited.  Fii-st,  it 
says  our  strength  is  to  be  as  or  days  are  ;  it  does  not  say  our  strength  is  to  be  as 
our  desires  are.  Oh  !  how  often  have  we  thought,  "  How  I  wish  I  were  as  strong  as 
So-and-so  "—one  who  had  a  great  deal  of  faith.  Ah  !  but  then  you  would  have 
rather  more  faith  than  you  wanted  ;  and  what  would  be  the  good  of  that  ?  "  Still," 
says  one,  "if  I  had  faith  like  So-and-so,  I  think  I  should  do  wonders."  Yes,  biit 
you  would  get  the  glory  of  them.  God  does  not  want  you  to  do  wonders.  That  is 
reserved  for  God,  not  for  you, — "He  only  doeth  wondrous  things."  Once  more,  it 
does  not  say,  our  strength  shall  be  as  our  fears.  God  often  leaves  us  to  shift  alone 
with  our  fears, — never  with  our  troubles.  The  promise  is  "As  thy  days,  so  shall 
thy  strength  be."  "When  your  vessel  gets  empty  then  will  I  fill  it;  I  will  not 
give  you  any  extra,  over  and  above.  When  you  are  weak  then  I  will  make  you 
strong  ;  but  I  will  not  give  you  any  extra  strength  to  lay  by  :  strength  enough  to 
bear  your  sufferings,  and  to  do  your  duty  ;  but  no  strength  to  play  at  matches  with 
your  brethren  and  sisters  in  order  to  get  the  glory  to  yourselves."  Then,  again, 
there  is  another  limit.  It  says,  "As  thy  days,  so  shall  thy  strength  be."  It  does 
not  say,  "  as  thy  weeks,"  or  "months,"  but  "as  thy  days."  You  are  not  going  to 
have  Monday's  grace  given  you  on  a  Sunday,  nor  Tuesday's  grace  on  a  Monday. 
No ;  "as  thy  days,  so  shall  thy  strength  be."     3.  What  an  extensive  promise  this 


696  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxxiii, 

is !  "As  thy  days,  so  shall  thy  strength  be."  Some  days  are  very  little  things  ; 
in  our  pocket-book  we  have  very  little  to  put  down,  for  there  was  nothing  done  of 
any  importance.  But  some  days  are  very  big  days.  Ah  !  I  have  known  a  big  day 
— a  day  of  great  duties,  when  great  things  had  to  be  done  for  God — too  great,  it 
seemed,  for  one  man  to  do ;  and  when  great  duty  was  but  half  done  there  came 
great  trouble,  such  as  my  poor  heart  had  never  felt  before.  Oh  !  what  a  great  day 
it  was  !  there  was  a  night  of  lamentation  in  this  place,  and  the  cry  of  weeping,  and 
of  mourning,  and  of  death.  Ah  1  but  blessed  be  God's  name,  though  the  day  was 
big  with  tempest,  and  though  it  swelled  with  horror,  yet  as  that  day  was,  so  was 
God's  strength.  4.  What  a  varying  promise  it  is  !  I  do  not  mean  that  the  promise 
varies,  but  adapts  itself  to  all  our  changes.  "As  thy  days,  so  shall  thy  strength 
be."  Here  is  a  fine  sunshiny  morning  ;  all  the  world  is  laughing  ;  everything  looks 
glad;  the  birds  are  singing,  the  trees  seem  to  be  all  alive  with  music.  "My 
strength  shall  be  as  my  day  is, "  says  the  pilgrim.  Ah  !  pilgrim,  there  is  a  little 
black  cloud  gathering.  Soon  it  increases ;  the  flash  of  lightning  wounds  the 
heaven,  and  it  begins  to  bleed  in  showers.  Pilgrim,  "As  thy  days,  so  shall  thy 
strength  be."  The  birds  have  done  singing,  and  the  world  has  done  laughing ;  but 
"as  thy  days,  so  shall  thy  strength  be."  Now  the  dark  night  comes  on,  and 
another  day  approaches — a  day  of  tempest,  and  whirlwind,  and  storm.  Dost  thou 
tremble,  pilgrim? — "As  thy  days,  so  shall  thy  strength  be."  5.  "What  a  long 
promise  this  is !  You  may  live  till  you  are  never  so  old,  but  this  promise  will 
outlive  you.  When  thou  comest  into  the  depths  of  the  river  Jordan,  "as  thy  days, 
so  shall  thy  strength  be  "  ;  thou  shalt  have  confidence  to  face  the  last  grim  tyrant, 
and  grace  to  smile  even  in  the  jaws  of  the  grave.  And  when  thou  shalt  rise  again 
in  the  terrible  morning  of  the  resurrection,  "as  thy  days,  so  shall  thy  strength  be  "  ; 
though  the  earth  be  reeling  with  dismay  thou  shalt  know  no  fear ;  though  the 
heavens  are  tottering  with  confusion  thou  shalt  know  no  trouble.  ' '  As  thy  days, 
so  shall  thy  strength  be."  And  when  thou  shalt  see  God  face  to  face,  though  thy 
weakness  were  enough  to  make  thee  die,  thou  shalt  have  strength  to  bear  the 
beatific  vision  :  thou  shalt  see  Him  face  to  face,  and  thou  shalt  live  ;  thou  shalt  lie 
in  the  bosom  of  thy  God  ;  immortalised  and  made  full  of  strength,  thou  shalt  be 
able  to  bear  even  the  brightness  of  the  Most  High.  III.  What  inference  shall  I 
draw  except  this  ?  Children  of  the  living  God,  be  rid  of  your  doubts,  be  rid  of  your 
trouble  and  your  fear.  Young  Christians,  do  not  be  afraid  to  set  forward  on  the 
heavenly  race.  You  bashful  Christians,  that,  like  Nicodemus,  are  ashamed  to  come 
out  and  make  an  open  profession,  don't  be  afraid :  "  As  your  day  is,  so  shall  your 
strength  be."  (C.  H,  Spurgeon.)  Kept  of  God:—l.  If  God  prosper  His  people  He 
will  still  keep  them  humble.  He  ever  plants  some  thorn  in  the  flesh,  sends  some 
messenger  of  Satan  to  buffet  them,  that  thus  they  may  be  kept  mindful  that  the 
present  life  is  not  their  home,  nor  the  present  enjoyments  their  heaven.  An 
nnpolished  partner,  or  a  vicious  son,  or  a  sickly  constitution,  or  some  other 
unpropitious  circumstance,  has  ever  preyed  upon  the  spirits  of  the  prosperous 
believer.  And  these  mixtures  of  bitter  ingredients  in  his  cup  of  blessings,  have 
kept  him  from  selling  his  birthright  for  the  perishing  and  contemptible  objects  of 
sense.  2.  If  God  afiQict  His  people.  He  will  bestow  those  comforts  which  will  keep 
them  happy,  and  make  them  thankful.  Hope  is  a  grace  which  God  is  as  much, 
resolved  to  cherish  in  His  people  as  humility.  Hence,  if  He  pain  them,  He  is  sure 
to  preserve  them  from  despair.  While  there  is  the  deep  conviction  that  His  strokes 
are  fewer  than  their  crimes,  and  lighter  than  their  guilt,  there,  too,  is  clear  discovery 
of  a  parental  hand  which  wields  the  rod,  and  a  parental  eye  which  smiles  througn 
every  cloud  that  covers  them.  Remarks — 1.  How  safe  and  happy  are  the  Lord's 
people.  They  are  not  exempt  from  trials,  but  are  permitted  to  know  that  their 
strength  shall  be  proportioned  to  their  burdens.  2.  Their  present  strength  and 
courage  do  not  decide  how  they  shall  appear  in  the  hour  of  conflict,  or  what  shall 
be  their  future  condition.  It  is  absurd  that  the  believer  should  yield  his  hope 
because  he  does  not  find  himself  prepared  for  trials  which  have  not  yet  come.  He 
expects,  in  this  case,  a  mercy  never  promised.  God  will  prepare  him  when  He  tries 
him,  will  give  him  strength  when  He  calls  him  to  the  onset.  Our  strength  is  not 
to  be  greater  than  our  day,  but  equal.  Should  it  be  greater,  we  should  become 
proud  ;  should  it  be  less,  we  should  be  discouraged.  If,  then,  we  find  our  strength 
equal  to  our  present  conflicts,  we  have  nothing  to  fear.  Our  courage  will  kindle  as 
the  battle  thickens,  and  our  strength  increase  as  we  march  on  to  the  more  desperate 
onset.  If  our  present  strength  is  suflScient  for  our  present  purpose,  this  is  all  that 
God  has  promised,  and  is  enough.     Here  is  the  test  by  which  we  are  to  try  our 


CHAP.  XXXIII.]  DEUTERONOMY.  597 

character.  Do  we  submit  cheer  fully  to  present  disappointments,  and  exhibit  a  right 
temper  under  all  the  present  little  corroding  incidents  of  this  conflicting  world  ? 
{D.  A.  Clark.)  Seasonable  strength: — Dr.  Doddiidge  was  one  day  walking, 
much  depressed,  his  very  heart  desolate  within  him.  But,  says  he,  passing  a  cottage 
door  open,  I  happened  at  that  moment  to  hear  a  child  reading,  "As  thy  days,  so 
shall  thy  strength  be."  The  effect  on  ray  mind  was  indescribable.  It  was  like  life 
from  the  dead.  And  what  does  this  word  say  to  us  ?  "As  thy  days,  so  shall  thy 
strength  be."  There  is  strength  bodily.  The  continuance  of  this  is  a  mercy.  How 
easily  can  it  be  crushed,  so  that  we  may  be  made  to  possess  months  of  vanity  ;  and 
endure  wearisome  nights ;  and  feel  every  exertion  a  difficulty,  and  every  duty  a 
burden  !  But  there  is  strength  spiritual.  This  is  very  distinguishable  from  the 
former,  and  often  found  separate  from  it.  The  Lord  does  not  always  give  His 
people  a  giant's  arm,  or  an  iron  sinew  ;  but  His  strength  is  made  perfect  in  weak- 
ness. This  is  the  strength  here  spoken  of.  For  two  purposes  His  people  will  find 
it  necessary :  service  and  suffering.  Every  Christian  has  a  course  of  duty  common 
to  him  as  a  man  ;  which  is,  to  provide  for  his  outward  wants,  and  the  support  of 
his  family.  And  this  is  done  by  labour,  in  which  he  is  required  not  to  be  slothful. 
But  there  is  a  series  of  duties  pertaining  more  immediately  to  him  in  his  religious 
character ;  to  believe,  to  pray,  to  deny  ungodliness  and  worldly  lusts,  and  to  live 
soberly,  righteously,  and  godly  in  the  present  evil  world.  Suffering  is  commonly 
connected  with  service  in  the  Divine  life.  It  was  so  invariably  in  the  beginning  of 
the  Gospel.  Then  it  was  deemed  impossible  for  any  one  to  live  godly  in  Christ 
Jesus  and  not  suffer  persecution.  Therefore,  no  sooner  was  Paul  converted,  than  he 
was  told  how  great  things  he  had  to  suffer.  As  real  religion  is  always  the  same, 
some  degree  of  the  same  opposition  may  be  always  looked  for  ;  and  the  hatred  of  the 
world  will  be  shown  as  far  as  they  have  liberty  to  express  it,  and  are  not  restrained 
by  law,  or  the  usages  of  civilised  life.  But  when  the  Christian  has  rest  from  such 
trials  as  these,  God  can  subserve  their  purpose,  by  personal  and  relative  afflictions, 
which  are  often  severer  than  even  the  endurings  of  a  martyr.  They  are  called 
chastenings  and  rebukes,  which  he  is  neither  to  despise,  nor  faint  under.  Now  the 
prospect  of  all  this,  when  he  looks  forward  into  life,  is  enough  to  awaken  the 
Christian's  anxifty  ;  and  nothing  can  effectually  encourage  him  but  the  discovery  of 
strength  equal  to  his  exigencies.  And  this  he  finds  not  in  himself.  The  natural 
man  has  no  sensibility  of  his  weakness,  because  he  is  not  earnestly  engaged  in  those 
applications  which  require  spiritual  strength.  The  Christian  is.  He  knows  that 
he  is  as  destitute  of  strength  as  he  is  of  righteousness.  He  feels  himself  entirely 
insufficient  for  all  the  duties  and  trials  of  the  Divine  life.  And  the  consciousness, 
instead  of  diminishing,  grows  with  the  experience  of  every  day.  And  he  need  not 
be  afraid  of  this.  Rather,  let  him  cherish  it ;  for  when  he  is  weak,  then  is  he 
strong.  What  he  wants  is  provided  and  ensured  by  the  promise  of  a  God  who 
cannot  lie.  (  W.  Jay. )  Strength  grovnng  with  days : — We  generally  hear  these 
words  misquoted,  and  put  into  the  shape,  "As  thy  day,  so  shall  thy  strength  be," 
as  if  the  substance  of  the  promise  was  strength  proportioned  to  the  special  exigencies 
of  each  movement.  That  is  very  beautiful,  and  may  well  be  deduced  from  the 
words,  but  it  fails  to  take  into  account  that  little  "  s  "  at  the  end  of  the  word  "day," 
which  obliges  us  to  understand  the  promise  as  meaning  :  "  As  thy  days"  (increase) 
"thy  strength  shall"  (increase).  The  older  a  Christian  is,  the  stronger  Christian 
he  ought  to  be.  Then  there  is  another  thing  to  be  noted,  and  that  is  that  in  their 
original  connection  the  words  are  a  promise,  not  to  an  individual,  but  to  a  com- 
munity. It  is  the  last  of  the  series  of  promises  to  the  various  tribes  of  Israel 
which  occupy  this  chapter  of  Deuteronomy.  I.  Increase  of  strength  with 
INCREASE  OF  AGE.  In  its  application  to  the  individual  life.  Here  is  a  promise 
dead  in  the  teeth  of  nature,  because  all  living  things  that  belong  to  the  material 
universe  come  under  the  law  of  growth,  which  ultimately  passes  into  decay.  The 
same  sea  of  Time  that  flings  up  its  spoils  on  some  shores,  and  increases  the  land, 
when  you  get  round  the  promontory  is  eating  away  the  coast.  And  so,  the  years, 
which  at  first  bring  us  strength,  very  soon  begin  to  reverse  their  action.  Nor  is  it 
only  the  physical  life  which  dwindles  as  the  days  increase,  but  also  much  of  the 
inner  life  is  modified  by  the  external,  so  that  the  old  man's  memory  becomes  less 
retentive,  and  the  old  man's  impulses  less  strong.  But  "af  thy  days,  so  shall  thy 
strength  be,"  and  when  the  eyes  become  dim,  it  is  possible  tnat  they  n>ay  be  longer- 
sighted,  and  see  the  things  that  are,  just  in  proportion  as  they  begin  to  fail  to  see 
"the  things  that  do  appear."  They  may  he  able  to  discern  more  clearly  what  is 
above  them,  as  they  see  less  clearly  the  things  on  their  own  level.     It  is  possibki 


598  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxxiii. 

that  as  the  days  increase,  and  the  strength  drawn  from  externals  decreases,  the  power 
of  the  Spirit,  the  maturity  of  the  soiS,  the  insight  into  the  Eternal,  the  Qirist- 
likeness  and  assimilation  to  that  which  we  more  clearly  behold,  as  the  clouds 
thin  themselves  away,  may  all  increase.  And  so,  in  all  that  makes  the  Chris- 
tian life,  it  is  possible  that  there  shall  be  increase  with  the  increase  of  our 
days.  Why  so?  Just  because  the  Christian  life  is  a  supernatural  life  that  has 
nothing  to  do  with  dependence  on  physical  conditions.  If  it  were  not  so,  if  my 
Christian  vitality  stood  exactly  on  the  same  plane  as  my  vigour  of  intellect,  my 
retentiveness  of  memory,  my  energy  of  purpose,  or  other  capacities,  which  make  up 
the  non-material  part  of  my  being — the  "soul,"  as  people  call  it — then  it,  too, 
would  share  in  the  decrepitude  and  decay.  We  sometimes  see  people,  in  the  measure 
in  which  their  physical  strength  decays,  drawing  into  themselves  more  and  more  of 
that  supernatural  and  Divine  strength  which  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  material 
or  the  external.  Is  that  not  a  reason  for  believing  that  that  life  which  thus  obeys 
a  law,  as  I  said,  dead  in  the  teeth  of  nature,  is  a  Hfe  altogether  independent  of  this 
bodily  existence,  and  our  connection  with  this  material  universe?  There  is  no 
better  proof  of  immortality,  if  you  except  the  fact  of  the  resurrection,  than  the  way 
in  which,  right  up  to  the  edge  of  the  grave,  and  even  when  a  man's  foot  is  on  its 
threshold,  there  bums  in  his  soul,  brighter  and  brightening  as  the  darkness  falls, 
all  that  makes  the  Christian  Hfe.  But  if  this  contradiction  of  nature  by  a  super- 
natural Hfe  is  to  be  ours,  as  it  may  be,  let  us  not  forget  that  this  promise,  like  all 
God's  promises,  is  a  promise  with  conditions.  They  are  not  stated  here,  but  we 
know  them.  "The  youths  shall  faint  and  be  weary  ;  the  young  men  shall  utterly 
fall ;  but  they  that  wait  on  the  Lord  shall  renew  their  strength  " — they,  and  only 
they.  God  does  not  give  gifts  to  men  who  He  sees  are  wasting  them,  and  the  gift  of 
growing  strength  that  is  promised  to  us  is  strength  that  is  to  be  used  for  His  service. 
Has  my  strength  grown  with  years  ?  Let  me  say  one  word,  and  it  shall  be  but  a 
word,  about  the  other  application  of  this  great  thought.  As  I  said,  it  is  a  tribal 
benediction,  and  all  the  benedictions  of  all  the  tribes  have  passed  over  to  the  great 
community  of  New  Testament  believers.  The  Church  is  heir  to  the  Divine  promise 
that  as  its  days  increase  its  strength  increases.  And  though,  of  course,  there  have 
been  fearful  instances  to  the  contrary,  and  churches,  like  other  institutions,  are  apt 
to  stififen  and  decay  in  their  old  age,  yet  the  only  institution  in  the  world  that  has 
lasted  so  long,  and  kept  up  so  much  vitality  through  centuries,  is  the  Christian 
Church.  Why  ?  If  there  were  not  a  supernatural  life  in  it,  it  would  have  been 
dead  long  ago.  "As  the  Church's  days  increase,  so  will  her  strength  grow."  But 
the  promise  of  our  text  is  susceptible  of  another  application,  though  that  is  not  its 
true  signification,  and  may  be  taken  as  meaning  the  necessities  of  the  days  shall 
determine  the  nature  of  the  strength  given.  And  that  adaptation  of  supply  to  need 
wiU  be  true  in  many  directions.  It  will  be  true  if  we  consider  the  tasks  imposed  by 
each  succeeding  day.  For  God  never  sets  His  servants  to  work  or  warfare  beyond 
the  limits  of  the  strength  which  they  have  or  may  have,  if  they  will.  Again,  this 
adaptation  wiU  shape  the  day's  strength  according  to  the  day's  wants.  The 
"matter  of  a  day  in  its  day"  will  be  given.  There  will  be  daily  bread  for  daily 
hunger.  God  makes  no  mistakes,  sending  furs  for  June  or  muslin  for  December, 
His  gifts  are  never  belated,  nor  arrive  after  the  need  for  them  is  past.  That  adapta- 
tion takes  effect  for  us  on  the  same  condition  as  the  increase  does,  of  which  we  have 
been  speaking,  namely,  on  condition  of  our  waiting  on  God.  (A.  MaclareUy  D.D.) 
Equipped: — I.  Man's  emergency.  1.  Man's  journey  is  along  a  rough  and  thorny 
road.  2.  Conscious  experience  of  wear  and  tear:  "As  thy  days,  so  shall  thy 
strength  be."  Fresh  obligations  of  unfolding  life,  and  hence  increasing  pressure. 
At  first  we  only  dream  of  bliss  and  peace  from  religion  ;  at  length  we  realise  in  it 
fidelity,  obligations,  responsibilities,  sacrifices,  conflicts.  How  real  to  every  true 
man  is  the  "wear  and  tear  "  of  a  religious  life,  the  necessary  exhaustion  from  duty. 
When  the  business  and  the  bustle  of  life  come  in  conflict  with  religion  and  pious 
reflection.  When  the  conflict  for  principle  leaves  us  consciously  weaker,  even  if 
making  us  truer  at  heart.  No  conflict,  however  its  success  and  triumph,  without 
reaction.  Such  man's  emergency.  II.  God's  provision.  1.  For  the  rough 
journey,  the  shoes  of  iron  and  brass.  Equipment  proportionate  to  need.  Thus  in 
illustrations  of  the  Christian  life  :  "  Conflict " — armour  (Eph.  vi.  12-17).  "  Duty  " 
— conviction  (2  Cor.  i.  12).  "Journey" — "shoes  of  iron  and  brass"  (Deut.  viii. 
2-4).  With  the  same  and  yet  higher  provision  men  make  against  emergency  does 
God  provide  for  His  people  :  The  Arctic  whaler  is  built  for  her  voyage,  no  pleasure 
yacht  for  a  summer's  day.    The  soldier  is  equipped  for  service,  not  decorated  for  a 


CHAP.  XXXIII.]  DEUTERONOMY,  599 

holiday  parade.  Thus  with  God  for  us.  Against  every  rough  pebble  there  is  a 
nail  in  the  shoes  of  grace.  2.  For  the  "wear  and  tear" — the  supply:  "As  thy 
day,  so,"  &c.  Note — God's  communications  of  grace  never  anticipative  but  always 
sufficient.  Men  paralyse  their  energies  in  the  anticipation  of  possible  emergencies. 
"What  shall  I  do,"  says  a  man,  "if  so-and-so  should  happen?"  and  he  forgets 
how  he  does  now — the  once  future  of  anticipated  forebodings.  God  gives  not  to  the 
heart,  unembarrassed  by  worldly  cares  and  anxieties,  and  rejoicing  in  its  gladsome- 
ness,  the  strength  for  the  hour  of  care  and  worry  that  may  or  may  never  come  to 
it.  God's  provisions  are  economic.  Waste  has  no  part  in  the  laws  of  God's 
moral  government.  "As  thy  days,  so,"  &c.  But  God's  provision  is  in  the 
presence  of  man's  emergency.  God  gives  us  our  desires  as  fully  in  giving  us 
strength  for  the  rough  journey,  as  in  smoothing  the  way  for  us  and  strewing  the 
path  with  flowers.  And  more.  For  the  effort  of  manhood,  assisted  by  grace, 
results  in  a  bettering  of  manhood  for  ourselves  ;  while  the  interpositions  of  grace 
merely — kindly,  gracious  though  they  be — leave  us  as  we  were  before,  * '  afraid  of 
that  which  is  high,"  and  faltering  in  the  presence  of  difficulties.  How  a  man  that 
has  overcome  gains  confidence.  "I  have  met  a  trouble  before,"  says  he,  when 
trouble  lies  ahead,  "and  by  God's  grace  I  can  meet  this  one."  Results  are  more 
from  efforts  than  helps.  It  is  from  "the  swing  of  the  heavy  sledge,  week  in, 
week  out,  from  morn  to  night,  that  the  muscles  of  the  brawny  arm  are  strong  as 
iron  bands."  And  God  assures  us  that  the  effort  of  our  manhood  will  have  His 
support.  "  As  thy  days,  so  shall  thy  strength  be."  ( W.  Henderson.)  Help  for 
the  hard  places : — 1.  Consider  the  width  of  the  promise — thy  days,  that  is,  all 
thy  days.  2.  Consider  the  specificalness  of  the  promise — each  one  of  thy  days. 
3.  Consider  the  adaptedness  of  the  promise — for  every  sort  of  day.  For  the  day 
of  dull  routine.  For  the  day  of  weariness.  For  the  day  of  disappointment.  For 
the  day  of  sorrow.  For  the  day  of  diflScult  duty.  For  the  day  of  death.  4.  Con- 
sider the  maker  of  the  promise.  He  makes  the  promise  who  knows  all  our  days 
(Psa.  exxxix.  1-6).  He  makes  the  promise  who  measures  our  days  (Psa.  xxxi.  15). 
He  makes  the  promise  who  is  with  us  through  all  the  days  (Matt,  xxviii.  20), 
Therefore  1.  Be  sure  of  a  specific  and  caring  Providence.  2.  Do  not  fear. 
3.  Make  alliance  with  God.     {Homiletic  Review,) 

Vers.    26-29.    There  is  none  like  unto  the  God  of  Jeshumn. — The  God   of 

Jeshumn: — Are  we  to  understand  this  passage  as  revoking  all  the  threatened 
judgments  previously  denounced  against  Israel  ?  No.  But  Moses  saw,  amidst  all 
the  rebellion  with  which  Israel  as  a  nation  was  to  be  chargeable,  and  amidst  all  the 
reverses  which  they  were  consequently  to  experience,  that  the  true  Israel  would  be 

f  reserved,  defended,  and  cared  for.  That  in  these  words  Moses  addresses  the  true 
srael,  the  spiritual  seed  of  Abraham,  is  evident  from  the  name  he  gives  them— 
Jeshurun,  "  upright,"  or  "  righteous."  He  begins  by  exalting  the  God  of  Jeshurun 
above  all  other  gods  ;  and  he  does  so  in  language  fitted  to  impress  them  with  a  con- 
viction of  the  utter  impotency  of  the  gods  of  the  nations.  1.  The  description 
conveys  the  idea  of  glorious  majesty,  absolute  sovereignty,  power  infinitely  beyond 
comprehension  or  resistance.  But  while  thus  reminding  them  of  this  view  of  the 
Divine  character,  he  introduces  it  in  a  connection  fitted  to  awaken  confidence.  He 
does  not  merely  tell  them  that  the  God  of  Jeshurun  rideth  on  the  heaven,  but  that 
He  does  so  as  Jeshurun's  help  ;  and  that  if  He  revealed  His  own  excellence  and  glory, 
it  was  in  working  out  their  deliverance,  and  making  bare  His  holy  arm  for  their 
protection.  "There  is  none  like,"  &c.  What  peace  should  this  truth  inspire! 
What  patience  should  it  inspire  !  What  confidence  should  it  awaken  and  keep  alive, 
even  in  circumstances  the  most  gloomy  and  perplexing !  If  it  does  not  produce 
this  effect,  must  it  not  be  because  they  are  remaining  contentedly  in  doubt 
whether  they  have  really  been  justified  and  accepted  with  God,  or  are  culpably  insen- 
sible to  the  value  of  their  privileges  in  having  all  their  best  interests  bound  up 
with  the  manifestation  of  His  own  glory  ?  2.  The  security  of  God's  justified  people 
is  still  further  set  forth.  God  is  declared  to  be  their  refuge,  or  rather  dwelling-place 
— ^not  a  temporary,  but  a  perpetual  refuge  ;  and  they  are  reminded  that  He  is  the 
eternal  God,  unchangeable  in  His  being,  and  equally  unchangeable  in  His  purpose. 
They  might  feel  at  times  as  if  they  were  altogether  unequal  to  any  new  conquest 
over  the  adversaries  which  still  remained  to  be  subdued  ;  but  God  Himself  was  to 
thrust  out  the  enemy  from  before  them,  and  to  say,  "Destroy  them."  So  it  is, 
and  has  always  been,  in  regard  to  the  spiritual  conflict  of  believers.  The  Scripture 
saints,  in  relating  their  experience — their  fears  and  hopes,  dangers  and  deliverances. 


600  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxxiii. 

seasons  of  depression  and  times  of  triumph,  painful  struggles  with  temptation  and 
the  strength  by  which  they  successfully  resisted  it — employ  the  very  language  which 
might  have  been  appropriately  used  to  describe  the  conflicts  and  conquests  of 
Israel  in  Canaan  (Psa.  xxvii.  3,  5,  xci.  1-4).  To  all  who  know  anything  experi- 
mentally of  the  spiritual  warfare  of  the  believer,  such  language  will  be  not  only 
intelligible,  but  faithfully  descriptive  of  what  they  have  experienced,  and  in  so  far 
as  they  have  been  enabled  to  contend  successfully  with  the  risings  ot  a  corrupt  nature 
within,  the  temptations  of  a  sinful  world  without,  the  suggestions  of  Satan — with 
everything  that  would  have  brought  their  spiritual  interests  into  jeopardy,  every- 
thing that  would  have  marred  their  peace  and  robbed  them  of  their  comfort— and  in 
so  far  as  they  can  now  cherish  the  good  hope  of  ultimately  gaining  the  victory 
over  all  these,  their  spiritual  enemies,  it  is  because  they  have  experienced  the  faith- 
fulness of  this  declaration.  3.  From  this  description  of  the  conflict  of  God's 
people,  Moses  proceeds  to  foretell  their  final  and  glorious  triumph.  "Israel  then 
shall  dwell,"  &c.  Viewing  this  prediction  merely  as  referring  to  the  settlement  of 
Israel  in  Canaan,  it  was,  in  the  first  instance  at  least,  only  partially  fulfilled. 
Israel  did  not  so  conquer  the  land  as  to  dwell  either  in  safety  or  alone.  Through 
their  unbelief,  the  command,  **  Destroy,"  which  otherwise  would  have  been  accom- 

Eanied  by  a  Divine  power,  was  not  fully  carried  into  effect.  But  even  had  Israel 
terally  dwelt  alone  and  in  safety,  yet  it  would  have  been  but  a  type  of  the  still 
more  glorious  state  of  things  to  which  Moses  was  instructed  to  direct  the  faith  and 
hope  of  the  Church.  Nothing  short  of  the  glory  of  the  latter  day  can  exhaust  the 
meaning  of  this  passage.  Many  generations,  indeed,  have  passed  away,  aud  we,  too, 
may  follow  them,  and  still  the  prediction  remain  unfulfilled.  Hut  we  have  in  J^Ioses 
an  example  of  the  satisfaction  and  delight  with  which  the  saints  of  old  contem- 
plated the  future  prosperity  of  the  Church,  even  when  they  should  be  gathered  to 
their  fathers  ;  for  though  he  was  not  to  enter  on  the  promised  land,  or  participate 
in  the  rich  blessings  which  awaited  Israel  there,  yet  could  any  one  of  them,  even 
the  man  who  had  the  prospect  of  sharing  the  longest  and  the  most  largely  in  these 
blessings,  have  expressed  himself  more  joyously  and  with  warmer  gratitude  in  that 
prospect  than  Moses  did  in  his  last  words  to  Israel  ?  {R.  Gordon,  D.D.) 
IsraeVs  God  and  God's  Israel : — I.  Israel's  God.  Truly,  when  Moses  looked  upon 
the  gods  of  Egypt — a  country  so  superstitious  that  the  satirist  wrote  of  them,  **  O 
happy  nation,  whose  gods  grow  in  their  own  gardens  " — when  he  heard  the  wild 
mythology  of  their  idolatry,  he  might  well  say,  **  There  is  none  among  them  that  is 
like  unto  the  God  of  Jeshurun."  Perhaps  Moses  had  seen  those  vast  catacombs  of 
idolised  animals  which  Egyptian  discoverers  have  lately  opened,  where  the  croco- 
diles, cats,  and  birds,  which  had  been  worshipped  in  life,  were  afterwards  carefully 
consigned.  Wise  as  Egypt  professed  to  be,  she  preserved  her  dead  gods  in  myriads. 
Truly,  the  fancies  of  the  most  civilised  nations  have  invented  no  deity  comparable 
for  a  moment  to  the  living  God  who  made  the  heavens  and  the  earth.  Moses,  in 
the  particular  words  here  used,  seems  to  intimate  that  there  is  none  like  the  God  of 
Jeshurun  as  the  ground  of  our  confidence.  Now,  ye  who  have  trusted  in  God, 
remember  there  is  room  for  you  to  trust  Him  still  more  ;  and  the  more  you  shall 
confide  in  Him,  the  more  emphatically  will  you  declare,  **  There  is  none  like  unto 
the  God  of  Jeshurun."  If  we  rely  upon  men,  we  put  trust  in  fickleness  itself  Fall 
back  upon  yourselves,  lean  upon  your  fellow-creatures,  trust  upon  earth-born  con- 
fidences, and  ye  fall  upon  a  rotten  foundation  that  shall  give  way  beneath  you  ;  but 
rest  upon  your  God  alone,  and  the  stars  in  heaven  shall  fight  for  you,  and  things 
present  and  things  to  come,  and  heights,  and  depths,  and  all  the  creatures  subserv- 
ient to  the  will  of  the  omnipotent  Creator,  shall  work  together  for  good  to  you,  seeing 
that  you  love  God  and  are  depending  upon  His  power.  II.  Israel's  safety.  "The 
eternal  God  is  thy  refuge,  and  underneath  are  the  everlasting  arms. "  Two  sentences, 
with  a  little  variation  of  expression,  containing  essentially  the  same  sense.  God  is  first 
said  to  be  the  refuge  of  His  people,  that  iSj  when  they  have  strength  enough  to  fly 
to  Him  He  protects  them  ;  but  it  is  delightfully  added,  "underneath  are  the  ever- 
lasting arms,"  that  is,  when  they  have  not  strength  enough  to  flee  to  Him,  but 
faint  where  they  stand,  there  are  His  arms  ready  to  bear  them  up  in  their  utmost 
extremity.  I  will  mention  some  times  when  a  Christian  needs  these  arms  peculiarly. 
These  are  when  he  is  in  a  state  of  great  elevation  of  mind.  Sometimes  God  takes 
His  servants  aud  puts  them  on  the  pinnacle  of  the  temple.  Satan  does  it  sometimes  ; 
God  does  it  too — puts  His  servants  up  on  the  very  pinnacle,  where  they  are  so  full 
of  joy  that  they  scarce  know  how  to  contain  themselves,  '*  whether  in  the  body  or 
out  of  the  body  they  cannot  tell."    Well,  now,  suppose  they  should  fall !  for  it  is  so 


CHAP.  XXXIII.]  DEUTERONOMY.  601 

easy  for  a  man,  when  full  of  ecstasy  and  ravishment,  to  make  a  false  step  and  slip. 
Ah  !  but,  in  such  moments,  "  underneath  are  the  everlasting  arms."  They  are  safe 
enough,  as  safe  as  though  they  were  in  the  valley  of  humiliation,  for  underneath 
are  the  arms  of  God.  Sometimes  He  puts  a  man  in  such  a  position  in  service — 
there  must  be  leaders  in  the  Lord's  Church,  captains  and  mighty  men  of  war — and 
the  Lord  sometimes  calls  a  man  and  says  to  him,  **  Now,  be  Moses  to  this  people." 
Such  positions  are  fraught  with  temptation  ;  but  is  God's  servant  in  gi-eater  danger 
than  an  ordinary  Christian  ?  Yes,  he  is,  if  left  to  himself ;  but  he  will  not  be  left 
to  himself,  for  God  does  not  treat  His  captains  as  David  treated  Uriah,  and  put  them 
in  the  forefront  of  the  battle,  to  leave  them,  that  they  may  be  slain  by  the  enemy. 
No,  if  our  God  calls  a  man  to  tread  the  high  places  of  the  field,  that  man  shall  say 
with  Habakkuk,  "He  will  make  my  feet  like  hinds'  feet,  and  He  will  make  me  to 
walk  upon  mine  high  places."  *'  Underneath  are  the  everlasting  arras."  Another 
period  of  great  need  is  after  extraordinary  exaltations  and  enjoyments,  when  it  often 
happens  that  God's  servants  are  greatly  depressed.  In  the  wilaemess,  all  alone,  you 
hear  Elijah  cry,  "  Let  me  die,  I  am  no  better  than  my  fathers."  Yes,  the  man  who 
never  was  to  die  at  all,  prayed  that  he  might  die.  Just  so,  high  exaltations  involve 
deep  depressions.  But  what  was  under  Elijah  when  he  fell  down  in  that  fainting  fit 
under  the  juniper  tree  ?  Why,  underneath  were  the  everlasting  arms.  So  shall  it 
be  with  you  who  are  called  thus  to  fall  into  the  depths  of  depression  ;  the  eternal  arms 
shall  be  lower  than  you  are.  IIL  Israel's  future.  You  have  seen  a  man  in  our 
streets  with  a  telescope,  through  which  you  may  see  Venus,  or  Saturn,  or  Jupiter. 
Now,  if  that  gentleman,  instead  of  revealing  the  stars,  could  fix  up  a  telescope,  and 
undertake  that  everybody  who  looked  through  it  coiild  see  his  future  life,  I  will  be 
bound  to  say  he  would  make  his  fortune  very  speedily,  for  there  is  a  great  desire 
amongst  us  all  to  know  something  of  the  future.  Yet  we  need  not  be  so  anxious, 
for  the  great  outlines  of  the  future  are  very  well  known  already.  We  have  it  on  the 
best  authority,  that  in  the  future  as  in  the  past,  we  shall  meet  with  difficulties,  and 
contend  with  enemies.  My  text,  like  the  telescope,  reveals  to  those  who  trust  in 
God  what  will  become  of  their  difficulties,  and  we  see  that  they  are  to  be  overcome. 
God  will  work,  and  you  will  work.  He  shall  thrust  out  your  enemies,  and  He  shall 
say  to  you,  "Destroy  them."  It  is  a  grand  thing  to  go  straight  on  in  the  path  of 
duty,  believing  that  God  will  clear  the  road.  Like  the  priests,  when  they  came  to 
the  edge  of  Jordan,  and  saw  the  billows  rolling  up,  yet  on  they  went,  and  not  so 
much  as  one  of  them  was  touched  by  the  waves,  for  as  they  put  down  their  feet 
the  waters  receded.  Oh,  it  must  have  been  grand  to  be  the  first  man  in  that 
march — to  see  the  waters  flow  away  before  your  feet  !  So  shall  it  be  with  you  :  the 
water  shall  come  up  to  where  you  are,  yet  it  shall  not  touch  you  ;  you  shall  find  it 
disappear  as  you  by  faith  advance.  IV.  Israel's  blessedness.  1.  "Israel  then 
shall  dwell  alone."  Dwelling  with  God  in  communion,  having  with  Him  one 
object,  one  afl'ection,  one  desire,  we  dwell  apart  from  the  rest  of  mankind,  coming 
out  daily  more  and  more  from  them,  and  desiiing  to  be  nearer  and  nearer  to  Christ, 
and  farther  and  farther  from  men.  Here  we  dwell  safely ;  nowhere  safe  except 
when  alone  with  God,  but  always  safe  then.  2.  Abundant  provision.  "The 
fountain  of  Jacob  shall  be  upon  a  land  of  corn  and  wine."  God's  people  are  to  be 
supplied  from  a  fountain,  and  around  that  fountain  there  shall  always  be  a  super- 
abundance of  corn  for  their  necessities,  and  of  wine  for  their  comfort  and  their 
luxury.  Those  who  come  to  God  receive  no  stinted  allowance,  they  are  gentlemen 
commoners  upon  the  bounty  of  God.  There  is  a  daily  portion  allotted  to  them,  and 
it  is  measured  on  a  princely  scale,  equal  to  the  dignity  of  the  new  birth.  We  drink 
from  an  ever  overfloAving  fountain.  3.  Celestial  unction.  "Also  His  heavens  shall 
drop  down  dew."  How  we  want  this!  How  dry  we  get,  how  dull,  how  dead, 
unless  the  Lord  visit  us  !  The  Oriental  knew  the  value  of  dew.  When  he  saw  the 
green  pastures  turn  brown  and  at  last  dry  up,  till  they  were  nothing  but  dust  and 
powder,  how  he  sought  for  the  shower,  and  the  dew  ;  and  when  it  came,  how 
thankful  was  he !  When  that  dew  of  the  Holy  Spirit  is  gone  from  us,  what  dead 
prayers,  what  miserable  songs,  what  wearisome  preaching,  what  wretched  hearing  ! 
Oh,  there  is  death  everywhere  when  the  Holy  Spirit  is  denied  us  ;  but  we  need  not 
be  without  Him,  for  He  is  in  the  promise — "His  heaven  shall  drop  doviTi  dew." 
The  words  read  as  if  there  were  much  dew,  superabundance  of  moisture.  So, 
indeed,  we  may  have  the  Holy  Spirit  most  copiously  if  we  have  but  faith  enough. 
(C    H.    Spurgcon.)  The   God   of  JeshAcrun: — I.  The   appellation  given  to 

Jehovah.  The  term  Jeshurun  is  a  collective  term  used,  just  as  Israel,  Jacob,  &c., 
to  designate  the  covenant  people — the  people  who,  like  Israel  of  old,  have  received 


e02  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxxiii. 


a  Divine  call  to  come  out  from  the  world  and  be  separate  ;  who,  in  obedience  to  this 
Divine  call,  have  separated  themselves  unto  the  Lord,  and  have  entered  into  a 
solemn  and  public  covenant  with  Him  in  which  they  have  engaged  to  be  His,  and 
in  which  He  has  been  graciously  pleased  to  receive  them,  so  that  they  now  consti- 
tute His  peculium.  Jeshurun  is,  in  other  words,  a  symbolical  designation  of  the 
Church.  The  text,  therefore,  represents  God  as  sustaining  to  those  who  are  members 
of  the  Church  a  relation  that  He  does  not  and  cannot  sustain  to  one  who  is  outside 
its  fold.  But  there  must  be  special  reason  for  using  this  particular  term  to  designate 
the  Church.  Viewed  etymologically  we  find  Jeshurun  seems  to  be  the  plural 
diminutive  of  the  word  upright.  It  may,  therefore,  probably  be  best  translated  the 
children  of  uprightness.  This  is  God's  designation  of  the  Church,  indicative  of  its  true 
character  and  mission  in  the  world.  Its  mission  is  through  the  power  of  Divine  grace  to 
set  upright  that  which  has  fallen.  Its  first  work  is  to  lift  truth  out  of  the  dust ;  to 
free  it  from  the  incubus  of  error  and  superstition  under  which  it  has  been  borne 
down ;  to  vindicate  it,  to  defend  it  against  all  assaults  of  error,  and  to  preserve  it 
pure  from  all  the  inventions  and  sophistries  of  men.  Broader,  even  yet,  is  the 
mission  of  the  Church  in  establishing  and  maintaining  uprightness  in  the  earth. 
It  is  designed  of  God  to  be  the  great  conservator  of  virtue,  the  great  bulwark  of 
morality,  the  efficient  safeguard  of  the  rights  and  liberties,  of  the  intelligence  and 
virtue,  of  the  beneficence  and  charity  that  now  beautify  and  gladden  the  world. 
II.  The  ACTION  ascribed  to  Jehovah.  "Whorideth  upon  the  heaven."  It  is 
the  same  bold  figure,  so  often  used  by  the  inspired  Psalmist,  as  when  he  represents 
Jehovah  as  "  making  the  clouds  His  chariot,"  or  as  *'  riding  upon  the  wings  of  the 
wind."  It  is  the  glory  of  natural  law  that  it  is  the  power  which  God  wields,  the 
chariot  upon  which  God  rides.  The  more  majestic  modern  science  shows  it  to  be, 
the  more  do  our  hearts  rejoice  in  it  as  a  fitting  vehicle  for  the  triumphant  progress 
of  our  King.  Let  the  agnostic  blindly  worship  the  material  chariot  if  he  will,  his 
eye  dazzled  with  the  effulgence  of  its  glittering  wheels,  and  his  ear  fascinated  with 
its  music  as  it  glides  over  the  celestial  pavement  ;  be  it  ours  to  pay  our  homage  to 
Him  who  rides  upon  it,  whose  eye  of  intelligence  looks  down  into  ours,  whose  heart 
of  love  beats  in  sympathy  with  ours,  and  whose  firm  hand  upon  the  rein  assures  us 
that  all  things  are  working  together  for  our  eternal  good.  III.  The  object  op 
Jehovah  in  thus  doing.  This  riding  of  the  God  of  Jeshurun  upon  the  heaven  is 
"in  His  people's  help."  The  chariot  was  the  most  formidable  of  all  the  imple- 
ments of  ancient  warfare.  The  celerity  with  which  it  swept  across  the  field  of 
action  ;  the  momentum  with  which  it  crushed  its  way  over  the  prostrate  forms  of 
opposing  hosts ;  the  vantage  it  afforded  to  the  warrior  by  its  elevated  platform 
and  protecting  rail,  and  the  carnage  wrought  by  the  sharp  blades  upon  its  axles  as 
they  hewed  their  way  through  the  masses  like  scythes  through  the  ripened  grain  : 
these  made  it  of  all  engines  of  war  the  most  effective  and  the  most  terrible.  The 
children  of  Israel  fled  in  dismay  as  they  heard  the  rumble  of  Pharaoh's  chariot 
wheels.  When  intercepted  by  the  waters  of  the  Red  Sea  they  stood  cowering  with 
affright  as  they  saw  the  gleam  of  the  chariots  in  the  sunlight.  Moses,  therefore, 
introduces  an  element  of  encouragement  peculiarly  appropriate  to  the  circumstances 
and  experiences  of  the  people  when  he  represents  Jehovah  as  an  infinite  charioteer 
riding  majestically  forth  upon  the  heaven,  keeping  ever  near  His  people  in  their 
wilderness  journey,  and  ready  in  the  hour  of  their  conflict  and  peril  to  appear  for 
their  relief  and  for  the  discomfiture  of  their  foes.  It  was  just  the  assurance  needed 
by  a  host  who  felt  the  inferiority  of  their  equipment  and  resources  to  those  of  the 
enemies  with  whom  they  would  have  to  contend.  But  without  discarding  from  our 
view  the  special  symbolism  of  the  text,  what  can  be  more  inspiring  to  the  Church 
in  this  age,  and  in  the  midst  of  her  present  conflicts,  than  this  thought  of  her 
Jehovah- Jesus,  sitting  upon  the  circle  of  the  heavens,  holding  in  His  hands  the  reins 
of  God's  providential  government ;  keeping  pace  in  the  march  of  His  providence 
with  the  progress  of  the  Church  ;  then  always  nearest  when  she  is  in  her  times  of 
greatest  peril  ;  holding  all  the  powers  of  heaven,  earth,  and  hell  in  subjection  to 
Himself,  and  plucking  His  grandest  victories  over  the  powers  of  darkness  out  of  the 
very  jaws  of  apparent  defeat  ?  {T.D.  Witherspoon,  D.  D. )  God  and  the  true : — 1 .  The 
last  words  of  a  truly  great  man.     2.  Referring  to  subjects  of  the  highest  moment. 

I.  The  incomparable  God  of  the  good.  1.  His  activity.  Never  slumbers  or 
sleeps.     The  universe  moves  because  He  moves.     2.  His  grandeur.     3.  His  eternity. 

II.  The  incomparable  blessedness  of  the  good.  1.  None  are  so  well  protected 
from  the  perils  of  life.  2.  None  are  so  well  supported  under  the  trials  of 
life.    8.  None  are  so  certain  of  conquering  the  enemies  of  life.     4.  None  are 


CHAP.  XXXIII.]  DEUTERONOMY.  603 

80  enriched  with  the  enjoyments  of  life.  These  they  shall  possess — (1)  in 
safety  ;  (2)  in  rich  variety  ;  (3)  under  the  guardianship  of  God.  {Homilist.) 
The  last  words  of  Moses : — Moses  the  man  of  God  (who  had  as  much  reason  as  ever 
any  mere  man  had  to  know  both)  with  his  last  breath  magnifies  both  the  God  of 
Israel  and  the  Israel  of  God.  They  are  both  incomparable  in  his  eye  ;  and  we  are 
sure,  in  this  his  judgment  of  both,  his  eye  did  not  wax  dim.  I.  No  God  like  the 
God  of  Israel.  1.  This  was  the  honour  of  Israel.  Every  nation  boasted  of  its 
God,  but  none  had  such  a  God  to  boast  of  as  Israel  had.  2.  It  was  their  happiness 
that  they  were  taken  into  covenant  with  such  a  God.  Two  things  he  notes  as  proofs 
of  the  incontestable  pre-eminence  of  the  God  of  Jeshurun — (1)  His  sovereign  power 
and  authority  (ver.  26).  (2)  His  boundless  eternity  (ver.  27).  II.  No  people  like 
THE  Israel  of  God.  1.  Never  was  people  so  well  seated  and  sheltered  (ver.  27). 
2.  Never  was  people  so  well  supported  and  borne  up.  The  "  everlasting  arms  "  shall 
support — (1)  The  interests  of  the  Church  in  general,  that  they  should  not  sink  or  be 
run  down.  (2)  The  spirits  of  particular  believers  ;  so  that,  though  they  may  be 
oppressed,  they  shall  not  be  overwhelmed  by  any  trouble.  8.  Never  was  people  so 
well  commanded  and  led  on  to  battle.  4.  Never  was  people  so  well  secured  and  pro- 
tected (ver.  28).  ' '  Israel  then  shall  dwell  in  safety  alone. "  (1 )  Though  alone  ;  though 
they  contract  no  alliances  with  their  neighbours,  nor  have  any  reason  to  expect  help 
or  succour  from  any  of  them,  yet  they  shall  dwell  in  safety,  they  shall  really  be 
safe,  and  they  shall  think  themselves  so.  (2)  Because  alone  ;  they  shall  dwell  in 
safety  as  long  as  they  continue  pure  and  unmixed  with  the  heathen,  a  singular  and 
peculiar  people.  Their  distinction  from  other  nations,  though  it  made  them  like  a 
speckled  bird  (Jer.  xii.  9),  and  exposed  them  to  the  ill-will  of  those  about  them,  yet 
it  was  really  their  preservation  from  the  mischief  their  neighbours  wished  them,  as 
it  kept  them  under  the  Divine  protection.  All  that  keep  close  to  God  shall  be  kept 
safe  by  Him.  It  is  promised  that  in  the  kingdom  of  Christ  Israel  shall  dwell 
safely  (Jer.  xxiii.  6).  5.  Never  was  people  so  well  provided  for.  The  fountain  of 
Jacob,  i.e.  the  present  generation  of  that  people,  which  is  as  the  fountain  to  all  the 
streams  that  shall  hereafter  descend  and  be  derived  from  it,  shall  now  presently  be 
fixed  upon  a  good  land.  The  eye  of  Jacob  (so  it  might  be  read,  for  the  same  word 
signifies  a  fountain  and  an  eye)  is  upon  the  land  of  com  and  wine,  i.e.  where  they 
now  lay  encamped  they  had  Canaan  in  their  eye  ;  it  was  just  before  their  faces,  on 
the  other  side  the  river ;  and  they  would  have  it  in  their  hands  and  under  their 
feet  quickly.  6.  Never  was  people  so  well  helped  (ver.  26).  They  that  are  added 
to  the  Gospel-Israel  are  such  as  shall  be  saved  (Acts  ii.  47).  7.  Never  was  people  so 
well  armed.  God  Himself  was  the  shield  of  their  help,  by  whom  they  were  armed 
defensively,  and  sufficiently  guarded  against  all  assailants  j  and  He  was  the  sword  of 
their  excellency,  by  whom  they  were  armed  offensively,  and  made  both  formidable 
and  successful  in  all  their  wars.  God  is  called  the  sword  of  their  excellency, 
because,  in  fighting  for  them.  He  made  them  to  excel  other  people  ;  or,  because  in 
all  He  did  for  them  He  had  an  eye  to  His  sanctuary  among  them,  which  is  called 
the  excellency  of  Jacob  (Psa.  xlvii.  4  ;  Ezek.  xxiv.  21  ;  Amos  vi.  8).  Those  in  whose 
hearts  is  the  excellency  of  holiness,  have  God  Himself  for  their  shield  and  sword, 
are  defended  by  the  whole  armour  of  God  ;  His  word  is  their  sword,  and  faith  in  it 
is  their  shield  (Eph.  vi.  16,  17).  8.  Never  was  people  so  well  assured  of  victory 
over  their  enemies.  They  shall  be  found  liars  unto  thee,  i.e.  shall  be  forced  to 
submit  to  thee  sore  against  their  will,  so  that  it  will  be  but  a  counterfeit  submission. 
Yet  the  point  shall  be  gained,  for  thou  shalt  tread  upon  their  necks  (so  the 
Seventy),  which  we  find  done  (Josh.  x.  24).     {Matthew  Henry,  D.D.) 

Ver.  27.  The  eternal  God  is  thy  refage,  and  underneath  are  the  everlasting  arms. 

— Man's  refuge  and  support : — I.  Man  needs  a  refuge  and  a  support.  We  make 
mistakes,  and  men  misunderstand  and  misinterpret  them,  and  a  word  or  a  look  fans 
the  flame  and  makes  a  foe,  and  our  heart  craves  for  some  one  to  fly  to  who  knows 
our  sincerity  and  will  look  kindly  on  our  error.  We  feel  the  din  and  bustle,  the 
agitation,  and  anxiety,  and  restlessness  of  active  life  ;  our  spirits  often  are  fretted 
by  it,  our  hands  hang  down  and  are  weary,  and  we  want  One  by  our  sides,  ever 
present,  ever  powerful,  and  ever  loving,  to  cheer,  uphold,  and  encourage  us.  We 
realise  daily  our  own  weakness.  Resolutions  are  made  and  broken.  Where  shall  I 
find  a  refuge  from  self,  a  refuge  from  sin,  a  refuge  from  an  accusing  conscience,  a 
refuge  from  coming  wrath,  in  the  hour  of  death,  in  the  day  of  judgment,  and 
through  the  ages  of  eternity  ?  II.  Just  such  a  refuge  as  man  needs  is  pro- 
vided for  him  by  God.     III.  What  such  a  need,  and  such  an  offer,  demand 


604  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  xxxiii. 

OF  US.  1.  Your  first  step  is  to  fly  to  Jesus  as  your  refuge.  Do  you  ask  how  ?  Have 
you  not  read  or  heard  of  the  homeless  poor  in  London,  and  the  refugee  prepared  for 
them  ?  Numbers  who  have  no  home  to  cover  their  heads  and  no  morsel  of  food  to 
sustain  their  fainting  bodies,  hasten  all  shivering  amidst  the  storm,  night  after 
night,  and  wait  hours  at  the  door  of  some  rooms  prepared  by  Christian  charity  to 
receive  them  for  a  night's  lodging  and  a  night's  food.  Tliey  have  no  recommenda- 
tion but  their  poverty.  Go  thus  to  Jesus,  realising  your  spiritual  poverty,  and 
pleading  your  spiritual  need.  2.  Your  next  step  is  to  rest  in  Him,  as  an  everlasting 
support.  {Cancm  Morse.)  The  everlasting  arms: — In  one  of  the  old  classic 
fables  of  our  schooldays,  we  used  to  read  of  the  giant  Sisyphus,  condemned  to  go 
on  for  ever  and  ever,  rolling  a  mighty  stone  up  a  mountain,  wliose  summit  was  for 
ever  becoming  more  distant  and  out  of  reach.  Can  such  a  fable  be  in  any  wise 
emblematic  of  the  task  of  human  life  ?  Can  it  be  that  life  is,  after  all,  one  long  and 
meaningless  rolling  of  an  eternal  stone  up  an  eternal  hill  ?  Let  the  venerable  law- 
giver make  answer  to  our  questionings ;  let  him  teach  us  faith ;  let  him  show  us 
the  true  meaning  and  dignity  of  our  life  on  earth.  L  The  Eternal  God  is  thy 
REFUGE.  It  is  an  impressive  figure ;  one,  moreover,  we  well  can  understand,  in 
the  mouth  of  Moses.  The  idea  is  borrowed,  doubtless,  from  that  wild  and  awful 
mountain  scenery  of  which  the  aged  lawgiver  had  seen  so  much  in  his  experience 
of  the  Sinai  peninsula.  There,  amid  those  lonely  and  tremendous  heights,  with 
here  and  there  some  majestic  rock  standing  isolated  from  the  rest,  like  a  solitary 
watch-tower  and  frontier  fortress  of  the  desert ;  amid  such  scenes  as  this,  as  all 
travellers  can  tell,  the  mind  of  man  is  over-mastered  with  a  sense  of  human 
insignificance.  What  more  natural  than  that  Moses  should  draw  from  these  Titanic 
battlements  and  buttresses  a  picture,  however  inadequate,  of  the  omnipotence  of  the 
Creator  ;  a  parable  of  the  Kock  of  Ages  ;  an  emblem  of  the  Divine  Power  Himself; 
a  similitude  of  that  Tremendous  and  Ineffable  Being,  who  is  indeed  the  only  abiding 
Eefuge  and  Stronghold  of  the  soul  of  man ;  the  Rock,  the  Fortress,  the  Castle,  the 
Tower  of  Strength,  the  House  of  Defence,  to  which  it  may  always  resort  1  II.  "And 
UNDERNEATH  ARE  THE  EVERLASTING  ARMS."  The  idea  Suggested  here  goes  much 
further  than  the  bare  notion  of  protection  from  storms  and  troubles  without ;  it 
suggests  also  that  God  offers  to  the  soul  of  man  the  comfort  of  His  love,  the  welcome 
to  a  Father's  heart ;  it  reminds  us,  irresistibly,  of  the  unwearying  pity  of  the  Good 
Shepherd,  rescuing  the  sheep  that  was  lost,  bearing  it  in  the  strong  arms  of  His 
everlasting  love,  receiving  the  little  ones  into  His  enfolding  embrace,  gathering  the 
lambs  with  His  arm,  carrying  them  in  His  bosom,  {ff.  B.  Ottley,  M.A.)  The 
only  refuge: — "The  Eternal  God  is  thy  refuge" — from  what?  The  word  itself 
implies  the  existence  of  peril  and  distress ;  and  God,  if  we  seek  Him,  will  be  our 
refuge  from  every  form  of  peril  and  distress — the  only  sure  refuge  from  every  one 
of  the  many  ills  of  which  our  life  would  otherwise  be  the  helpless  prey.     I.  From 

THE   ILLUSIONS,    THE    DISAPPOINTMENTS,    THE    INEXORABLE    WEARINESS    OF    LIFE. 

"Vanity  of  vanities,"  saith  the  Preacher,  "all  is  vanity."  "Few  and  evil  have 
been  the  days  of  the  years  of  my  pilgrimage."  Each  man  soon  finds  for  himself  that 
these  are  not  common-places,  but  sad  realities.  God  has  two  ways  of  leading  men 
to  Him  through  the  narrow  gate  of  disappointment — one  by  refusing  our  desires,  to 
show  us  that  they  are  not  according  to  righteousness  ;  the  other,  by  granting  them, 
and  sending  leanness  withal  into  our  souls.  I  hardly  know  which  of  the  two 
experiences  causes  the  most  bitter  disappointment.  And  yet  to  be  led  by  these 
facts  into  gloom  or  pessimism  is  entirely  to  misunderstand  their  nature,  and  would 
be  the  most  fatal  of  all  errors.  For  why  does  God  deal  thus  with  us  ?  It  is  simply 
His  way  of  convincing  us  that  this  earth  is  not  our  home,  that  here  we  have  no 
abiding  city,  that  if  we  are  in  any  way  to  fulfil  the  true  law  of  our  life  we  must  set 
our  affections  on  things  above,  and  not  on  things  on  the  earth.  II.  From  the 
INSOLUBLE  MYSTERIES  OF  LIFE.  We  cry  aloud  for  surer  knowledge,  and  while  to 
the  froward  and  presumptuous  there  comes  back  no  answer  except  the  echo  of  their 
own  voice,  even  for  humbler  and  faithful  questioners  there  is  only  the  whisper, 
"What  I  do  thou  knowest  not  now,  but  thou  shalt  know  hereafter."  There  is 
silence  and  there  is  darkness.  Our  vaunted  science  cannot  break  that  silence  and 
cannot  dissipate  that  gloom.  Yes  ;  but  faith  can  speak  to  us  even  though  there  be 
neither  voice  nor  language,  and  can  shed  upon  our  path  a  light  which  is  not  of  earth. 
We  see  not,  nevertheless  we  believe.  The  mystery  ceases  to  be  so  oppressive  when 
humility  accepts  it  and  hope  enlightens  it,  for  then  we  soon  realise  that,  after  aU, 
we  know  all  that  it  imports  us  to  know.  Though  the  walls  of  an  impenetrable 
darkness  are  around  us,  the  lamp  of  conscience  is  in  our  hand,  and  it  shines  on  the 


CHAP.   XXXIII.] 


DEUTERONOMY.  605 


clear  though  narrow  path  of  duty.     III.  From  sin,  from  our  evil  selves,  from 

THE  GUiTt  OF  THE  PAST.  FROM  THE  WEAKNESS  OF  THE  PRESENT,  FROM   THE   PRE  AD 

SrTHEFUTURl      For  ich  true  penitent  the  ha^dwritiug  of  ovd.nances  that  was 
against  us  is  torn  asunder  and  nailed  to  Christ's  Cross,  and  there  will  be  granted  t.> 
uf  not  only  pardon  for  the  past,  but  also  strength  and  grace  to  help  in  tuue  of 
Seed      An/when,  at  last,  each  of  us  is  laid  on  the  bed  of  death,  and  th.^  mon.ei^t  has 
come  when  we  must  enter  into  the  presence  of  God  and  see  our  souls,  w)th  every  n. ask 
of  hypocrisy,  conscious  or  unconscious,  torn  away- what  can  help  us  t^ien  ?        The 
Etem^GoTis  our  refuge,  and  underneath  are  the  everlasting  arms."    [Dean  FarraT.) 
Present  pHvilege  and  future  favwir  :-l.  The  present  blessing.     1.  God  is  His 
mSsSer      (1)  Even  when  they  are  under  the  yoke.     Even  some  of  those  who 
Se  never  converted,  have  sense  enough  to  feel  at  times  that  the  service  of  Satan  is  a 
W  one,  gelding  but  little  pleasure,  and  involving  awful  risks.     S<,me  men  cannot 
long  go  on  making  bricks  without  straw,  without  being  more  or  less  conscious  that 
thef  areTn  the  house  of  bondage.     (2)  When  captivity  is  led  captive,  Gpd  becomes 
the  refuge  of  His  people  from  their  sins.     (3)  He  is  also  their  refuse  m  times  of 
want      (4)  When  their  enemies  rage.     (5)  When  their  falls  into  sin  had  cursed  the 
people  of  God,  and  provoked  the  Most  High,  so  that  He  sent  fiery  serpents  among 
them  even^en  the^Etemal  God  was  their  refuge.     When  we  are  conscious  that  sin 
has^rought  n^  into  any  mischief  or  sorrow,  we  are  apt  to    eel-'  I  must  not  ^o  to 
God  w?th  tills,  because  it  is  clearly  the  natural  and  inevitable  result  of  W  sin,  it  i^ 
a  rod  of  mv  o^  making."    Yes,  but  we  may  go  even  with  that,  for  if  the  Lord 
should  ^Jdrdry  sipents,  still,  you  must  fly  into  the  arms  of  that  very  God 
who  has  sent  the  serpents  to  bite  you;  for  it  is  He,  and  He  a^ one,  who  can  lift 
up  the  brazen  serpent^efore  your  tearful  eye,  and  give  you  life  through  looking 
thereon      2.  God  is  our  mansion,  our  dwelling,  our  abiding-place.     (1)  At  home  one 
feels  ^fe      So  when  we  get  to  our  God,  not  bolts  of  brass  nor  gates  of  iron  could 
luard  G^'s  Aple  so  well  as  that  wall  of  fire  which  Jehovah  is  to  all  His  chosen 
t2)  At  home  we  take  our  rest.     When  I  get  to  my  God,  no  servile  work  have  I  to 
do  no  hewing  of  wood  and  drawing  of  water,  like  a  Gibeonite,  in  God  s  house  ;  but 
here  I  am,  His  servant,  happy  in  His  service,  and  finding  sweet  rest  in  what  I  do 
for  Him.     (3)  At  home  we  let  our  hearts  loose.     We  fee  at  ease.     So  is  it  when  we 
are  w^Sl  our  God.     I  dare  tell  Him  what  I  dare  not  tell  any  one  else  ;  there  is  no 
secret  of  my  heart  which  I  would  not  pour  into  His  ear  ;  there  is  no  wish  that  nii^ht 
be  deemed  foolish  or  ambitious  by  others,  which  I  would  not  communicate  to  Him  , 
for  surely  if  ''the  secret  of  the'^Lord  is  with  them  that  fear  Him  'the  secrets  of 
them  tha\  fear  Him  ought  to  be,  and  must  be,  ^ath  their  Lord.     (4)  It  ^  at  h^me 
if  anywhere,  that  a  man  is  thoroughly  happy  and  delighted.     He  takes  hs  soul  s 
best  solace  there  :  his  eyes  sparkle  most  at  his  own  hreside  ;  whatever  the  man 
may  ^abroaS,  with  al/his  cLes  and  his  troubles,  he  looks  to  getting  home   as 
going  to  the  place  of  his  delight.     So  I  trust  it  is  with  us  and  our  God.     (5)  It  is 
for  home  that  a  man  works  and  labours.     3.  God  is  our  support,  and  our  support 
ust  when  we  be-in  to  sink.     (1)  At  certain  seasons  the  Christian  sinks  very  low  m 
humriiat?on      But  the  great  atonement  is  still  under  all.     (2)  The  Christian  some- 
Ks^nks  very  deep  in  sore  trial  from  without.     Loss  of  property.     Bereavement 
Y^u  cannot  sT4so^low  in  distress  and  affliction,  but  what  the  covenant  grace  of 
an  ever-faithful  God  will  be  still  lower.     (3)  Possibly  you  are  ^^n^i^S  .^ff^  ^^^P 
down,  under  trouble  from  within.    You  have  felt  such  vexations  of  spmtasyou 
never  thought  you  could  have  known  ;  you  have  waged  such  a  ^^^A^^t  ^ /J^^  "f^^f 
Sreamed  of;  the  fountains  of  the  great  deep  have  been  broken  up  5  *"d,  as  a  deluge 
sin  threatens  to  cover  your  spirit,  and  drown  all  the  1^^^  "^ ,7,°"^^^^^^;^-   .  JjJ^ 
cannot  even  there  be  brought  so  low  as  Christ  was  for  what  did  He  say-    My 
God,  My  God,  why  hast  Thou  forsaken  Me  ? "    (4)  This  also  ^J^^y^^^^UZ^^Xl 
of  comfort,  in  any  weary  labours  in  which  you  may  be  engaged.     (5)  At  last,  when 
death  comes,  the%romise  shall  still  hold  good.     11.  The  future.     1- Here  is  a 
Divine  work.    Before  you  get  to  your  difficulties,  your  God  ^^IJ, ^^^^.^^^^^^^  ^^JJ^; 
2   A  Divine  word.     Whatever  sins  we  have,  there  is  only  one  thing  to  be  done  with 
them,  and  that  is,  to  "  destroy  them."     (C.  H  Spurgeon)         UruiernecUh :-The 
words  are  placed  at  the  end  of  Moses'  song,  and  they  are  its  crown  and  climax.     He 
had  wound  himself  up  to  the  highest  pitch  of  poetic  excitement  and  spiritual 
fervour,  and  this  passage  is  the  result.     He  had  spoken  grandly  before  concerning 
the  separate  tribes,  and  the  words  which  fell  from  his  lips  are  unspeakably  rich  ; 
but  now  he  is  about  to  close,  and  therefore  he  pours  forth  his  loftiest  strains  and 
Utters  fall  and  deep  meanings,  the  ripest  and  choicest  fruit  of  a  lifetime  of  com- 


606  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxxiii. 

munion  with  God.  As  our  Lord  ascended  to  heaven  blessing  His  disciples,  so  did 
His  servant  Moses,  before  climbing  to  Pisgah,  pour  out  a  torrent  of  benedictions  full 
and  deep,  inspired  by  the  Divine  Spirit.  I.  Where?  "Underneath"  is  a  region 
into  which  we  cannot  see.  We  associate  the  subterranean  with  all  that  is  dark  and 
hidden,  and  because  of  this  it  is  often  regarded  as  terrible.  Life  will  soon  end : 
■what  is  death  ?  What  is  the  immediate  result  of  death  ?  What  shall  we  feel  when 
we  are  traversing  those  tracks  unknown,  and  finding  our  way  to  the  judgment  seat 
of  God  ?  Not  knowing,  except  that  little  which  has  been  revealed  to  us,  we  are  all 
too  apt  to  conjecture  terrors  and  invent  horrors,  and  so  to  begin  trembling  concern- 
ing that  which  we  do  not  understand.  What  a  comfort  it  is  to  be  told  by  the  voice 
of  inspiration  that  "Underneath  are  the  everlasting  arms  "  !  "Underneath  " — the 
word  arouses  thought  and  inquiry.  Everything  ought  to  be  sound,  solid,  and  sub- 
stantial  there.  "  Underneath"  must  be  firm,  for  if  that  fails  we  fail  indeed.  We 
have  been  building,  and  our  eyes  have  been  gladdened  with  the  rising  walls,  and 
with  the  towering  pinnacles ;  but  what  if  something  should  be  rotten  ' '  under- 
neath "  ?  Great  will  be  the  fall  thereof,  if  we  have  built  as  high  as  heaven,  if  the 
sand  lie  underneath,  yielding  and  shifting  in  the  day  of  flood.  Let  us  look  more 
closely  into  this  most  important  matter.  "  Underneach  are  the  everlasting  arms." 
1.  That  is,  first,  as  the  foundation  of  everything.  If  you  go  down,  down,  to  discover 
the  basement  upon  which  all  things  rest  you  come  ere  long  to  "the  everlasting 
arms. "  The  things  which  are  seen  are  stayed  up  by  the  invisible  God.  He  is  the 
foundation  of  creation,  the  fountain  and  source  of  being,  the  root  and  basement  of 
existence.  "Underneath"  everything  "are  the  everlasting  arms."  Most  true  is 
this  with  regard  to  His  Church.  He  chose  her  and  redeemed  her  to  Himself :  the 
very  idea  of  a  church  is  from  the  Lord  alone.  2.  "  Underneath  are  the  everlasting 
arms,"  in  the  sense  of  being  the  bottom  and  end  and  object  of  everything.  Under- 
neath the  best  events  are  the  arms  of  love  to  make  them  good,  and  underneath  the 
worst  that  can  happen  are  the  selfsame  everlasting  arms  to  moderate  and  overrule 
them.  As  the  design,  and  object  of  all,  "underneath  are  the  everlasting  arms." 
3.  I  take  the  text,  "Underneath  are  the  everlasting  arms,"  to  mean  next  that  the 
arms  of  God  are  there  as  the  preservation  of  His  people.  Holiness,  strength  of  faith, 
and  ultimate  perfection  are  the  things  which  we  must  daily  aim  at,  but  it  is  a 
blessed  consolation  that  when  through  infirmity  or  carelessness  we  do  not  fully 
maintain  our  consecrated  walk  we  are  not  therefore  cast  away  for  ever,  for  it  is 
written,  "Though  he  fall,  he  shall  not  be  utterly  cast  down:  for  the  Lord 
upholdeth  him  with  His  hand."  "  Underneath  are  the  everlasting  arms."  4.  The 
everlasting  arms  are  the  rest  of  His  people.  If  these  everlasting  arras  are  always 
outstretched  to  preserve  me  lest  I  totter  in  weakness  and  fall  into  destruction,  then 
on  those  arms  let  me  lean  my  whole  weight  for  time  and  for  eternity.  That  is  the 
practical  lesson  of  this  choice  word.  5.  The  text  gives  a  promise  of  exaltation. 
The  merciful  God  is  great  at  a  deadlift.  II.  What  is  it  which  is  beneath  us  ? 
The  everlasting  arms.  1.  The  arms  of  everlasting  purpose.  We  have  to  deal  with 
one  whose  gifts  and  calling  are  without  repentance.  2.  The  arms  of  everlasting 
love.  Love  has  hands  and  arms  with  which  it  draws  us,  and  these  are  at  this 
moment  imderlying  all  the  dealings  of  God  with  us.  3.  The  arms  of  power. 
Strength  is  needed  to  uphold  the  people  of  God  lest  they  fall  to  their  confusion,  and 
that  strength  is  always  ready,  nay,  it  is  always  in  exercise.  He  is  able  to  keep  thee 
from  falling  and  to  present  thee  faultless,  and  He  will  do  it.  4.  The  arms  of 
immutability.  5.  The  arms  of  everlasting  blessing.  III.  When  ?  The  only 
answer  is  now  and  for  evermore.  1.  Now ;  at  this  moment,  the  everlasting  arms 
are  underneath  us.  The  life  of  a  Christian  is  described  as  walking  by  faith,  and  to 
my  mind  walking  by  faith  is  the  most  extraordinary  miracle  ever  beheld  beneath 
the  sun.  Walking  on  the  waves,  as  Peter  did,  is  a  type  of  the  life  of  every 
Christian.  I  have  sometimes  likened  it  to  ascending  an  invisible  staircase  far  up 
into  the  clouds.  You  cannot  see  a  step  before  you,  but  you  wind  up  towards  the 
light.  When  you  look  downward  all  is  dark,  and  before  you  lies  nothing  visible 
but  cloud,  while  beneath  you  yawns  a  fathomless  abyss.  Yet  we  have  climbed, 
some  of  us,  now  for  years  up  this  perpetually  ascending  stair,  never  seeing  an  inch 
before  us.  We  have  often  paused  almost  in  horror,  and  asked  in  wonder,  "What 
next,  and  what  next  ? "  Yet  what  we  thought  was  cloud  has  proved  to  be  solid 
rock  ;  darkness  has  been  light  before  us,  and  slippery  places  have  been  safe.  2.  So 
it  shall  be  for  ever  and  for  ever,  for  the  arms  are  everlasting  in  their  position  as  well 
as  their  power.  Now  thou  hast  come  to  die  ;  thou  hast  gathered  up  thy  feet  in  the 
bed  ;  the  death  sweat  stands  upon  thy  brow  :  thou  art  sinking  so  far  as  this  life  is 


CHAP.  XXXIII.]  DEUTERONOMY.  607 

concerned  among  the  sons  of  men,  but  underneath  thee  shall  then  be  the  everlasting 
arms.  Beautifully  has  Bunyan  described  confidence  in  death,  when  he  pictures  the 
pilgrims  passing  the  river.  Christian  cried  out  to  young  Hopeful,  "  I  sink  in  deep 
waters,  the  billows  go  over  my  head,  all  his  waves  go  over  me."  Then  said  Hope- 
ful, "Be  of  good  cheer,  my  brother,  I  feel  the  bottom,  and  it  is  good."  Thus 
shall  it  be  witli  you.  You  shall  feel  the  bottom  of  death's  chill  river,  but  you 
shall  say  "it  is  good"  ;  for  underneath  are  the  everlasting  arms.  Then  comes 
the  last  plunge,  and  we  shall  be  as  when  a  man  stands  on  the  edge  of  a  precipice  and 
leaps  over  into  the  clouds  below  him.  You  need  not  fear  to  take  your  last  farewell 
and  drop  into  your  Father's  arms,  for  underneath  you  shall  be  the  everlasting  arms  ; 
and  oh,  how  sweetly  shall  you  be  caught  up  together  with  the  Lord  in  the  air, 
pressed  to  the  bosom  of  the  great  Father,  and  borne  upward  into  the  heaven  of 
heavens.  IV.  What  then  ?  1.  Let  us  look  underneath.  It  is  well  to  look  under- 
neath an  outward  providence  when  it  frowns  darkly  upon  you,  for  it  conceals  the 
eternal  purpose  of  love.  2.  Let  us  lean  heavily.  God  loves  His  children  to  treat 
Him  with  entire  confidence.  Your  load  is  no  burden  to  Him.  3.  Let  us  rise  con- 
fidently. Be  not  afraid  of  high  doctrines,  or  high  enjoyments,  or  high  attainments 
in  holiness.  Go  as  high  as  you  like,  for  underneath  you  are  the  everlasting  arms. 
It  would  be  dangerous  to  speculate,  but  it  is  safe  to  believe.  4.  Let  us  dare 
unhesitatingly,  and  be  very  courageous  for  our  God.  Are  you  called  upon  to  lose 
everything  for  Christ  ?  Go  on  and  leap  like  Curtius  into  the  gulf  for  your  Lord 
Jesus,  for  underneath  you  are  the  everlasting  arras.  Does  your  Master  call  you  to 
an  enterprise  which  seems  impossible  ?  Nevertheless,  if  God  has  called  you  to  it, 
attempt  it,  for  He  rendereth  to  every  man  according  to  his  work.  Remember  what 
the  negro  said  :  "  If  Massa  Jesus  say  to  me,  *  Sam,  you  jump  through  that  brick  wall,' 
I  jump.  It  is  Sam's  business  to  jump :  it  is  Massa's  work  to  make  me  go  through  the 
wall. "  So  it  is  with  you.  It  is  yours  to  leap  forward  when  the  captain  gives  the  watch- 
word, and  in  confidence  to  attempt  what  mere  nature  cannot  achieve,  for  the  super- 
natural is  still  with  us.  Underneath  us  are  the  everlasting  arms.  {Ihid. )  The 
everlasting  arms : — This  short  passage  is  found  in  the  midst  of  a  mass  of  gold, 
sentences  containing  the  richest  treasures  of  truth.  All  this  spiritual  wealth  is  the 
heritage  of  the  people  of  God.  Notice,  in  vers.  26-29,  how  near  God  is  said  to  be  to 
His  people.  Above,  before,  around,  and  in  the  text  beneath  us.  I.  The  quarter  that 
IS  THUS  HONOURABLY  SECURED.  "  Underneath."  1.  The  point  of  mysterious  assault. 
You  may  be  tempted  by  Satan,  but  it  shall  only  be  in  a  measure  ;  God  will  not  let 
him  put  forth  all  his  diabolical  strength.  2.  The  place  of  our  daily  pilgrimage. 
Some  of  you  go  forth  to  your  daily  labours,  and  you  find  the  place  of  your  service 
to  be  a  real  wilderness,  full  of  trial  and  everything  that  is  unpleasant  to  you.  Yet 
look  again,  with  eyes  touched  with  heaven's  eye-salve,  and  instead  of  seeing  the 
bitter  poverty,  and  the  grinding  toil,  and  the  daily  trial,  you  will  begin  to  see  that 
God  is  in  it  all,  and  "underneath  are  the  everlasting  arms."  3.  The  place  of  perilous 
descent.  You  cannot  go  so  low  but  that  God's  arms  of  love  are  lower  still.  4.  A 
matter  of  intense  concern.  Examine  your  foundations.  5.  The  secret  of  singular 
discoveries  that  will  yet  be  made.  Perhaps  some  of  us  are  in  sore  perplexity  ;  we 
cannot  understand  the  Lord's  providential  dealings  with  us.  He  does  not  always 
tell  us  the  reason  for  His  actions  ;  we  might  not  understand  if  He  did,  but  we  may 
rest  assured  that  He  is  working  out  purposes  of  infinite  love.  He  ceases  not  to  care 
for  us  even  when  things  appear  to  be  at  their  very  worst.  I  bear  my  willing  witness 
to  the  faithfulness  of  God  ;  I  am  not  so  old  as  some,  but  I  am  old  enough  to  have 
gone  through  fire,  and  through  water,  and  I  am  here  to  testify  that  I  have  not  been 
burned  by  the  one,  nor  drowned  by  the  other.  Cannot  many  of  you  say  the  same  ? 
In  your  sorest  trials,  and  in  your  hottest  furnaces,  has  He  not  been  specially  present 
with  you,  and  bestowed  great  blessings  upon  you  ?  II.  The  manner  in  which 
THIS  quarter  is  SECURED.  1.  God  Himself  is  close  to  us,  guaranteeing  the  eternal 
safety  of  all  who  trust  in  Him.  Even  the  false  prophet,  Mahomet,  had  a  strong 
faith  in  God, — in  Allah,— and  when  he  fled  for  the  first  time,  and  hid  in  a  cave 
with  only  one  friend,  his  companion  said  to  him,  "  Our  pursuers  are  after  us,  and 
there  are  only  two  of  us."  "Stop,"  exclaimed  Mahomet,  "there  are  three,  for 
Allah  is  here  !  "  It  was  the  utterance  of  a  brave  and  grand  faith  ;  would  that  his 
whole  career  had  been  in  harmony  with  it !  Wherever  there  are  two  of  God's 
people,  there  is  Another  with  them,  for  God  is  there.  Mr.  Wesley  said,  as  he  died, 
"  The  best  of  all  is,  God  is  with  us  "  ;  and  that  is  the  best  of  all,  is  it  not  %  2.  The 
Lord's  immutable  purpose  is  being  fulfilled.  Where  God's  arms  are.  He  is  at  work, 
and  He  is  at  work  accomplishing  His  purposes  of  grace.     3.  His  inexhaustiblo 


608  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap,  xxxiir. 

patience  is  waiting  its  time.  "Underneath  are  the  everlasting  arms, "  bearing  up 
thy  load,  sustaining  it  with  long  endurance,  while  He  keeps  on  working  for  thee — 
invisible,  yet  active  on  thy  behalf.  III.  There  are  times  when  this  text  is  very 
PRECIOUS  to  believers.  1.  When  we  are  very  sick  and  verv  feeble.  It  is  delight- 
ful to  feel  that  our  feebleness  impinges  on  Omnipotence ;  that,  just  when  there  is 
nothing  left  to  us,  then  God  comes  in  with  His  fulness,  and  bears  us  up.  2.  When 
burdened  with  sore  trouble,  or  oppressed  with  heavy  labours.  The  most  wonderful 
joys  that  ever  were  felt  by  mortal  hearts,  have  been  felt  by  men  who,  on  the  morrow, 
were  to  be  burned  at  the  stake  ;  but  whose  very  souls  have  danced  within  them 
because  of  the  unspeakable  delight  which  the  presence  of  God  has  given  to  them. 
I  think  it  was  Socrates  who  said  that  '  *  Philosophers  could  be  merry  without  music.  '* 
I  take  the  statement  from  his  mouth,  and  alter  it,  and  say.  Christians  can  be  happy 
without  happy  circumstances  ;  they  can  sometimes,  like  nightingales,  sing  best  in 
dark  nights.  Their  joy  is  not  mere  outward  mirth.  Sorrows  fall  upon  them  ;  yet, 
from  the  deep  that  lieth  underneath,  wells  up  yet  more  exceeding  joy.  3.  When 
trembling  and  shaking.  Your  wing-feathers  will  grow  by  your  very  attempt  to  fly  ; 
the  possibilities  of  grace  are  boundless  ;  leave  yourself  to  them.  Be  not  always 
weak  and  trembling  ;  God  help  you  to  become  as  a  David,  and  you  who  are  as 
David  to  become  as  an  angel  of  the  Lord  !  4.  The  hour  will  come  when  everything 
will  begin  to  melt  away  beneath  your  feet.  Earthly  comforts  will  fail  you,  friends 
will  be  unable  to  help  you  ;  they  can  wipe  the  clammy  sweat  from  your  brow,  and 
moisten  your  lips  with  a  drop  of  water,  but  they  cannot  go  with  you  on  the  great 
voyage  upon  which  you  are  about  to  be  launched.  When  heart  and  flesh  fail,  then 
may  the  Lord  speak  to  you  the  sweet  words  before  us,  "Underneath  are  the  ever- 
lasting arms "  !  It  will  be  a  sinking  to  the  flesh,  but  a  rising  to  the  spirit. 
(Ibid.)  In  the  everlasting  arms: — There  are  two  sides  to  a  religious  life.  One 
is  the  active  side.  We  are  urged  to  faithfulness  in  all  duty,  to  activity  in  all 
service,  to  victoriousness  in  all  struggle,  to  work  out  our  own  salvation  with  fear  and 
trembling.  But  there  is  another  side.  We  are  to  trust,  to  have  quietness  and  con- 
fidence, to  repose  on  God.  The  picture  suggested  is  that  of  a  little  child,  lying  in 
the  strong  arms  of  a  father  who  is  able  to  withstand  all  storms  and  dangers.  God 
comes  to  us  first  in  our  infancy,  in  our  mothers,  who  bear  us  in  their  arms.  Yet 
they  are  only  dim  revealings  of  God  for  a  time.  They  leave  us  after  teaching  us  a 
little  of  God's  tenderness,  but  God  Himself  remains  when  they  are  gone,  and  His 
arms  never  unclasp.  The  thought  of  the  embracing  arms  is  very  suggestive.  The 
figure  is  to  be  interpreted  by  what  it  would  mean  in  human  friendship.  1.  One 
meaning  is  protection.  A  father  puts  his  arm  about  his  child  when  it  is  in  danger. 
God  protects  His  children.  "Thou  hast  with  Thine  arm  redeemed  Thy  people." 
"Be  Thou  their  arm  every  morning."  "  His  arm  brought  salvation."  2.  Another 
meaning  is  affection.  The  father's  arm  drawn  about  a  child  is  a  token  of  love.  The 
child  is  held  in  the  father's  bosom,  near  his  heart.  The  shepherd  carries  the  lambs 
in  his  bosom.  John  lay  on  Jesus'  breast.  The  mother  holds  the  child  in  her  bosom 
because  she  loves  it.  This  picture  of  God  embracing  His  children  in  His  arms  tells 
of  His  love  for  them.  His  love  is  tender,  close,  intimate.  He  holds  them  in  the 
place  of  affection.  3.  Another  thought  suggested  by  an  arm  is  strength.  A  mother's 
arm  may  be  frail  physically,  but  love  makes  it  strong.  When  it  is  folded  about  a 
feeble  child,  all  the  power  of  the  universe  cannot  tear  the  child  away.  We  know 
what  it  is  in  human  friendship  to  have  one  upon  whose  arm  we  can  lean  with  con- 
fidence. There  are  some  people  whose  mere  presence  seems  to  give  us  a  sense  of 
security.  We  believe  in  them.  In  their  quiet  peace  there  is  a  strength  which 
imparts  itself  to  all  who  lean  upon  them.  Every  true  human  friend  is  more  or  less 
a  strength  to  us.  Yet  the  surest,  strongest  human  strength  is  but  a  fragment  of 
the  Divine  strength.  This  is  Omnipotence.  "In  the  Lord  Jehovah  is  everlasting 
strength."  4.  Another  suggestion  is  endurance.  The  arms  of  God  are  "everlast- 
ing." Human  arms  grow  weary  even  in  love's  embrace  ;  they  cannot  long  press  the 
child  to  the  bosom.  Soon  they  lie  folded  in  death.  So  pathetic  is  human  life  with 
its  broken  affections,  its  little  moments  of  love,  its  embraces  that  are  torn  away  in 
one  hour.  But  these  are  everlasting  arms— these  arms  of  God.  They  shall  never 
unclasp.  5.  There  is  another  important  suggestion  in  the  word  "underneath." 
Not  only  do  the  arms  of  God  embrace  the  child,  but  they  are  underneath — ever 
underneath.  That  means  that  we  can  never  sink,  for  these  arms  will  ever  be 
beneath  us,  wherever  we  may  be  cast.  We  cannot  sink  below  them  or  out  of  their 
clasp.  And  when  death  comes,  and  every  earthly  thing  is  gone  from  beneath  us, 
and  we  sink  away  into  what  seems  darkness  and  the  shadow  of  death — out  of  all 


CHAP,  xxxiii.]  DEUTERONOMY,  609 

iuman  love,  out  of  warmth  and  gladness  and  sweet  life,  into  the  gloom  and  strange 
mystery  of  death,  still  it  will  be  only  into  the  everlasting  arms.  {J.  R.  Miller,  D.D.) 
The  everlasting  arms — a  thought  for  the  new  year: — "  Underneath  are  the  everlast- 
ing arms," — that  was  the  repeated  burden  of  the  great  men  of  Israel.  They  lived 
in  the  midst  of  national  calamities  and  distresses.  They  were  defeated,  puzzled, 
baffled.  The  way  looked  dark.  Then  they  fall  back  on  the  one  great  re-establish- 
ing thought :  after  all,  it  is  God's  world.  It  is  not  going  to  ruin.  Changes  which 
seemed  tremendous  are  not  fatal  or  final.  Israel  dwells  in  safety,  for  God  holds  us 
in  His  arms.  We  need  some  such  broad,  deep  confidence  as  we  enter  a  new  year. 
"We  get  involved  in  small  issues  and  engrossed  in  personal  problems,  and  people  some- 
times seem  so  malicious,  and  things  seem  to  be  going  so  wrong  that  it  is  as  if  we 
heard  the  noise  of  some  approaching  Niagara,  Then  we  fall  back  on  the  truth  that 
after  all  it  is  not  our  worhl.  We  can  blight  it  or  help  it,  but  we  do  not  decide  its 
issues.  In  the  midst  of  such  a  time  of  social  distress,  Mr.  Lowell,  in  one  of  his 
lectures,  wrote  :  "  I  take  great  comfort  in  God.  I  think  He  is  considerably  amused 
sometimes,  but  on  the  whole  loves  us  and  would  not  let  us  go  at  the  matchbox  if 
He  did  not  know  that  the  frame  of  the  universe  was  fireproof."  That  is  the  modern 
statement  of  the  underlying  faith  and  self-control  and  patience  which  come  of  con- 
fessing that  in  this  world  it  is  not  we  alone  who  do  it  all.  "Why  so  hot,  little 
man  ? "  says  Mr.  Emerson,  "  I  take  great  comfort  in  God,"  says  Mr.  Lowell ;  and 
the  Old  Testament,  with  a  much  tenderer  note,  repeats,  "Underneath  are  the  ever- 
lasting arms."     {Frof.  F.  G.  Peahody.) 

Ver.  29.  Happy  art  thou,  0  IsraeL — The  peerless  nation: — The  word  "Israel" 
never  grows  old.  It  is  a  name  that,  though  it  figures  on  the  page  of  history  as  a 
name  of  long,  long  ago,  still  lives,  and  lives  to  represent  a  living  people  at  this  day. 
When  Daniel  interpreted  Nebuchadnezzar's  dream,  he  said  (Dan.  ii.  44).  That 
kingdom  is  the  kingdom  of  Immanuel.  It  is  composed  of  those  who  love  and  trust 
and  serve  the  once  despised  Jesus.  These  are  the  true  "Israel."  The  true  Israel, 
like  the  Israel  of  old,  have  been  saved  out  of  Egypt.  Egypt  represents  darkness, 
bondage,  misery,  idolatry,  the  whip  of  the  task-master,  the  toilsome  mockery  of  vain 
labour — bricks  without  straw.  Again  Israel  to-day,  like  the  Israel  of  old,  is  a 
separate  and  distinctive  people.  Those  ancient  people  were  altogether  different  from 
the  various  nations  who  dwelt  around  them,  and  through  whose  territories  they 
passed.  They  were  subjected  to  singular  laws,  such  as  none  other  people  would 
acknowledge  or  obey.  They  had  a  religion,  had  customs  unlike  those  of  any  other 
race  or  tribe.  Their  fashion  of  dress,  their  mode  of  speech,  their  manner  of  worship, 
their  acknowledgment  of  a  King  unseen,  a  sceptre  superhuman — all  these  proclaimed 
them  to  be  peculiar,  separate,  distinct,  alone.  All  the  world  besides  were  Gentiles  ; 
they  alone  were  Jews.  That  is  the  unchanging  characteristic  of  the  real,  spiritual 
Israel  of  God  to-day.  This  distinction  does  not  now  refer  to  any  special  external 
sign.  It  is  not  a  matter  of  dress,  of  language,  or  of  manners.  It  is  a  difference  in 
moral  allegiance,  a  difference  in  heart,  a  difference  in  motives,  a  difference  in  aims 
and  ends  ;  a  difference  made  evident  by  a  godly  and  a  consecrated  life,  "Come  ye 
out  from  among  them  !  "  says  the  Book,  prompt  and  peremptory.  Where  it  is  so, 
then,  "happiest  is  Israel,  saved  of  the  Lord."  Our  Israel,  Hke  Israel  of  old,  is 
a  pilgrim  people.  From  the  Egypt  of  bondage  the  former  marched,  without  long- 
abiding  resting-place,  to  the  land  of  promise  that  lay  beyond.  So  the  Saviour's 
Israel  goes  forward,  forward  towards  holiness,  forward  towards  heaven.  "This  is 
not  their  rest,"  and  they  know  it ;  and  so  they  will  not  set  their  affections  on  things 
of  the  earth  ;  will  not  clog  and  trammel  themselves  with  aught  that  will  hinder 
their  march,  or  risk  their  ultimate  inheritance.  Each  one  grips  his  staff,  and  girds 
his  loins  and  goes  on  his  pilgrim  way,  ' '  Westward  ho, "  and  often  sees  the  distant 
hills  of  Canaan  tinged  with  the  glow  of  the  setting  sun.  Happy  thus,  I  tell  you,  is 
Israel,  for  he  is  the  saved  of  the^  Lord,  and  the  crowning  glory  of  that  salvation 
shines  brightly  on  before.  Again,  Israel,  like  the  Israel  of  old,  is  a  tried  and 
tempted  people.  They  had  hardships  and  sufferings,  they  had  perils  and  pains. 
The  more  they  were  loyal  to  God  and  their  leader,  the  more  they  were  plagued  by 
the  hostilities  of  men.  It  is  so  with  Israel  still.  They  can  buy  a  little  transient 
ease,  bv  cringing  to  custom,  toying  with  expediency,  shirking  duty  and  coquetting 
with  the  world  ;  but  it  is  dearly  bought ;  and  as  with  the  former  Israel,  such 
alliances  bring  a  harvest  of  thorns.  "  In  the  world  ye  shall  have  tribulation,  but  in 
Me  shall  ye  have  peace,"  and  with  that  compensation,  the  very  trials  of  the  way 
become  triumphs,  and  the  crosses  are  transformed  to  crowns.     "  Behold,  we  count 

39 


610  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap,  xxxiii. 

them  happy  that  endure."  "  Count  it  all  joy  when  ye  fall  into  divers  temptations." 
0  yes,  Moses  speaks  the  simple  truth,  Israel,  Immanuel's  Israel  is  happy  !  He  is 
chosen  of  God.  **  I  have  loved  thee,"  He  says,  "  with  an  everlasting  love."  **  With 
loving  kindness  have  I  chosen  thee,  my  jewel,  my  portion,  my  delight ! "  He  is 
redeemed  !  Out  of  what  bondage,  what  darkness,  what  slavish  toil  his  God  hath 
brought  him !  Out  of  what  deadly  peril  He  hath  snatched  him  !  Out  of  what 
dread  and  doubt  and  fear  and  sad  distress  He  hath  uplifted  him  !  "  His  own  right 
hand  and  holy  arm  hath  gotten  Him  the  victory  !  "  Besides,  Israel  is  led  by  His  hand, 
guarded  by  His  arm,  cheered  by  His  presence.  He  appoints  Israel's  every  place  and 
circumstance.  He  marks  out  all  their  way.  He  keeps  their  foot  from  perilous  bye- 
ways,  and  like  Greatheart  with  the  pilgrims,  goeth  with  drawn  sword  before  them 
all  the  way.  (/.  J.  Wray.)  The  happiness  of  God's  chosen  people : — I.  The  guid- 
ance OF  A  Divine  Leader.  Two  elements  here  meet  in  the  special  knowledge 
which  is  supplied  for  the  guidance  of  the  Christian  Israel ;  elements  which  in  know- 
ledge are  of  supreme  value.  There  is  the  element  of  importance  and  the  element  of 
certainty.  Christ  has  not  come  into  the  world  to  lead  His  Israel,  without  the  need 
and  the  capacity  to  make  the  most  important  of  all  questions  known.  The  pardon 
of  sin  and  the  way  in  which  it  is  to  be  secured  ;  the  standard  of  duty  and  the  means 
of  being  raised  up  to  it ;  the  existence  of  a  life  beyond  the  grave  and  the  possibility 
of  reaching  it ;  these,  and  all  that  is  included  in  these,  are  the  points  on  which  the 
God  of  Israel  through  His  Son  has  showed  His  people  light ;  and  therefore  the  glad 
strain  is  everywhere  heard,  **  Blessed  are  the  people  that  know  the  joyful  sound  ! " 
But  the  certainty  of  this  knowledge  is  equal  to  its  importance.  It  is  often  said, 
How  can  a  professed  revelation  which  deals  with  matters  of  history,  and  history  too, 
now  hundreds  of  years  old,  bring  with  it  certainty,  original  and  soul-satisfying 
certainty  ?  Now  I  am  prepared  to  take  up  this  challenge,  and  to  show  that  Christians 
have  an  original  and  soul-satisfying  certainty  in  regard  to  Christ  and  His  salvation, 
such  as  men  have  not  in  regard  to  many  of  the  operations  of  their  daily  life.  How  much, 
of  your  most  needful  knowledge  in  ordinary  life  is  second-hand  !  But  in  regard  to 
salvation,  the  highest  and  saving  knowledge  must  be  repeated  by  everyone  in  direct 
contact  with  the  living  God,  who  carries  the  testimony  of  His  Word  home  to  the  soul 
by  the  voice  of  conscience  and  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  Surely,  then,  those  are  blessed 
to  whom  a  fountain  of  certainty  is  thus  opened,  which  flows  with  ever-increasing 
stream.  II.  The  memory  of  a  great  deliverance.  The  Christian,  awakened  to 
the  ruin  of  his  state  through  sin,  has  stood  as  on  the  brink  of  a  Ked  Sea  of  guilt, 
formed  by  the  swelling  of  his  own  trespasses,  with  the  avenger  behind,  and  no 
possible  escape  before.  But  behold,  the  Cross  of  Christ,  stretched  out  with  a 
mightier  power  than  the  rod  of  Moses,  has  opened  a  way  through  the  depths,  and  he 
has  passed  safely  over  into  the  land  where  the  ransomed  and  pardoned  dwell,  and 
shall  never  come  into  condemnation.  He  sees  his  grand  enemy  and  all  his  host 
defeated  and  destroyed,  while  the  prey  is  taken  from  the  mighty,  and  the  lawful 
captive  delivered.  It  is  a  rescue  not  for  time  only,  but  for  eternity ;  and,  with 
unutterable  joy  mingled  with  trembling,  he  sings,  not  the  song  of  Moses,  but  of  the 
Lamb  :  **  0  Lord,  I  will  praise  Thee  with  all  my  heart,  and  I  will  glorify  Thy  name 
for  ever,  for  great  is  Thy  mercy  towards  me,  and  Thou  hast  delivered  my  soul  from 
the  lowest  hell ! "  The  rescue  is  once  for  all ;  but  as  Israel  by  disobedience  entailed 
repeated  enslavement,  so  do  Christians,  alas  !  by  renewed  sin,  incur  once  and  again 
the  painful  sense  of  loss  and  danger  ;  and  as  deliverance  again  comes,  with  the 
assurance  of  pardon  :  "I  have  blotted  out  as  a  thick  cloud  thy  transgi-essions,  and 
as  a  cloud  thy  sins ;  return  unto  Me,  for  I  have  redeemed  thee  ! "  the  voice  of 
penitent  Israel  renews  the  grateful  strain  :  "  Sing,  0  ye  heavens,"  &c.  (Isa.  xliv.  23). 
III.  The  prospect  of  certain  victory.  Our  warfare  is  on  God's  side  with 
rebellion  against  God,  with  the  temples  of  idolatry,  superstition,  and  false  religion, 
with  the  dark  embattled  hosts  of  pride  and  lust,  of  avarice  and  cruelty  from  one  end 
of  the  world  to  the  other.  Wherever  * '  the  Canaanite  is  still  in  the  land  "  ;  wher- 
ever there  is  that  within  us  or  without  us,  that  exalts  itself  against  God,  there  must 
our  deadly  strife  be  to  bring  it  down  ;  and  every  high  thought  must  be  brought 
into  captivity  to  the  obedience  of  Christ. "  The  range  of  our  spiritual  geography 
is  very  limited.  There  ''remains  much  land  to  be  possessed."  But  this  is  our 
great,  our  arduous,  our  world-wide  mission,  impossible  to  ourselves,  but  possible  with 
God,  and  made  by  Him  at  once  our  duty  and  our  happiness.  IV.  A  glorious 
INHERITANCE.  The  conqucsts  of  Israel  became  their  own  possessions.  The  warrior 
was  turned  into  the  colonist.  The  army  of  invasion  was  turned  into  a  peaceful  army 
of  occupation,  dispersed  amidst  the  scenes  of  their  exploits  over  hill  and  valley. 


CHAP.  XXXIII.]  DEUTERONOMY.  6U 

sitting  each  under  his  vine  and  fig-tree  with  none  to  make  him  afraid.  In  the 
centre  was  the  tabernacle  of  Jehovah  ;  and  the  pillar  which  had  led  them  to  battle,  and 
sent  out  its  guiding  light  on  their  path,  now  diffused  its  mild  and  gracious  beams 
over  the  abodes  of  rest  and  worship  to  the  extremities  of  the  land.  Here  was  an 
emblem  of  the  Christian  Church  translated  to  heaven.  But  how  feeble  and  defective 
a  figure  after  all  are  these  "sweet  fields  beyond  the  swelling  flood,"  of  the  heavenly- 
Canaan  !  With  the  outward  victory  of  Israel,  redemption  was  still  incomplete  aud 
waited  for  a  higher  stage  ;  God  was  still  distant,  dwelling  in  one  selected  spot,  and 
leaving  the  rest  in  comparative  shadow  ;  Canaan  itself,  the  joy  of  all  lands,  might 
be  deteriorated,  as  it  has  been,  to  sterility  and  barrenness ;  and  the  people,  thus 
divinely  settled,  might  for  their  sins  be  rooted  up  and  scattered  among  the  nations  ! 
What  a  contrast  have  we  here  to  that  inheritance,  yet  future,  on  which  the  hop« 
of  the  Christian  rests,  and  by  which  all  the  toils  and  conflicts  of  earth  are  to  be 
crowned  !  Redemption  has  now  reached  its  limit.  The  great  Captain  has  come, 
and  has  led  all  faithful  souls  to  the  sky  !  Heaven  is  itself  the  "end,"  so  long 
waited  for,  the  glory  no  longer  *'  to  be  revealed. "  No  more  does  God  withdraw  to  any 
local  centre,  to  any  inner  sanctuary  even  in  the  one  chosen  place.  All  heaven  is  Hia 
temple.  In  conclusion,  let  me  urge,  that  the  blessedness  of  Israel,  though  guarded 
and  defined,  is  not  exclusive.  The  question  "  Who  is  like  unto  thee  ? "  does  not 
indicate  anything  restricted  and  unattainable.  Even  in  ancient  days,  the  sons  of 
the  stranger  might  come  bending  to  take  hold  on  Israel's  God,  and  claim  the  bless- 
ings of  His  covenant ;  and  how  much  more  in  Gospel  times,  when  every  wall  of  parti- 
tion is  broken  down,  and  all,  who  see  Christ  with  Abraham's  faith,  "are  Abraham's 
seed,  and  heirs  according  to  the  promise."  Yes !  however  far  off  you  may  have 
been,  you  may  now  be  made  nigh  by  the  blood  of  Christ!  {John  Cairns,  D.D.) 
Happiness :  the  privilege  and  duty  of  Christians : — When  you  praise  a  man's  position, 
it  is  the  next  thing  to  flattering  the  man  himself,  for  most  men  do  not  divide 
between  themselves  and  their  condition,  but  read  a  commendation  of  their  condition 
as  a  commendation  of  themselves,  though  it  be  not  so.  Hence  one  has  sometimes 
to  be  very  chary  of  calling  men  happy  ;  and  all  the  more  so  because  we  cannot 
generally  be  sure  that  they  are  happy  ;  external  circumstances  being  but  a  poor 
means  of  judgment.  Yet  Moses  speaks  thus  openly  to  Israel  without  a  word  of 
qualification.  We  are  sure  he  did  not  speak  ignorantly  or  rashly.  Israel  was 
happy.  The  people  were  favoured,  and  it  was  right  for  them  to  be  told  so.  I  think 
that  Moses  eulogised  the  nation  to  console  them  for  his  departure.  "  I  climb  the 
mount  to  go  away  to  God,  but  happy  art  thou,  0  Israel :  whether  Moses  be  with 
thee  or  not,  God  is  with  thee."  I  think  also  that  he  had  in  his  mind's  eye  the  fact 
that  they  were  now  about  to  face  new  diflaculties.  "  Happy  art  thou,  0  Israel :  thou 
art  about  to  throw  thyself  into  the  midst  of  ferocious  tribes  who  will  all  conspire  to 
cut  thee  off ;  but  thou  art  a  people  saved  of  the  Lord  ;  thine  enemies  shall  be  found 
liars  unto  thee,  and  thou  shalt  tread  upon  their  high  places. "  So,  then,  it  is  right  to 
commend  a  man's  condition,  if  you  have  a  wise  motive  for  it,  and  can  either  console 
him  under  trouble  or  inspire  him  for  future  service.  I.  The  happy  condition  of 
God's  people.  If  you  have  been  born  again  and  saved,  you  are  the  pick  and  choice 
of  aU  God's  creatures,  and  He  has  indulged  you  with  a  measure  of  love  and  kindness 
such  as  He  has  shown  to  none  else.  Would  you  barter  grace  for  gain  ?  Gold  cannot 
lighten  the  heavy  heart  or  cool  the  burning  brow  ;  far  oftener  it  cankers  the  soul, 
and  lies  like  a  weight  upon  the  spirit.  Turn  you,  if  you  will,  to  those  famous  for 
knowledge,  men  of  skill,  and  wit,  and  research  ;  yet  among  these  there  are  none  to 
be  found  comparable  in  happiness  to  Christians.  Wealth,  rank,  learning,  fame, 
pleasure,  and  all  else  that  man  holds  dear,  we  would  gladly  renounce  for  the  joy  of 
our  Lord.  Israel  knew  what  it  was  to  be  saved  in  many  ways,  and  so  do  we.  We 
have  been  blessed  with  all  spiritual  blessings  in  Christ  Jesus,  fed  with  the  bread  of 
heaven,  and  made  to  drink  of  water  from  the  Rock  of  Ages  ;  and  as  for  our  adversaries, 
they  have  not  been  able  to  harm  us,  for  the  Lord  has  saved  us  unto  this  day. 
II.  The  eestjlt  of  realising  ouk  blessed  estate.  Upon  this  subject  there  ought 
to  be  no  need  to  dilate,  for  each  heir  of  heaven  should  live  in  the  hourly  enjoyment  of 
his  divine  inheritance  ;  but,  alas,  few  are  doing  so.  Surely  spiritual  blessings  are 
the  only  ones  men  decline  to  enjoy.  You  should  enjoy  your  privileges  and  be 
happy,  because — 1.  It  tends  to  keep  our  allegiance  to  God  unshaken.  It  is  because 
you  lose  the  sweet  flavour  of  the  waters  of  the  flowing  fountain  that  you  dabble 
in  those  muddy,  stagnant  gatherings  which  linger  in  the  broken  cisterns,  2.  It 
will  create  enthusiasm  and  a  grateful  love  within  your  bosom.  3.  It  will  give 
you  confidence  to  expect  other  blessings.     Gratitude  for  the  past  inspires  with 


612  TES  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap,  xxxir. 

courage  for  the  future.  4.  It  will  give  you  strength  for  bearing  all  your  burdens 
and  courage  for  facing  all  your  enemies.  5.  For  Christians  to  be  happy  is  one  of 
the  surest  ways  to  set  them  seeking  the  salvation  of  others.     (C.  H,  Spurgeon.) 


CHAPTER  XXXIV. 


Vers.  1-4.  The  Lord  shewed  liim  aU  the  lajid.— Unrealised  visions:— The  great 
parable  of  Israel's  wanderings  has  one  of  its  profoundest  applications  in  the  death 
of  its  two  great  leaders  :  men  above  all  others  entitled  to  enter  the  land  of  promise  ; 
neither  falling  in  battle  nor  dying  a  natural  death  ;  both  doomed  to  die  by  the 
sentence  of  Jehovah  whom  they  served,  and  under  whom  they  were  leading  the 
people.  I.  The  unrealised  hope  of  human  life.  Every  life  is  a  pilgrimage 
seeking  its  goal  in  some  Canaan  of  rest.  We  picture  it,  struggle  for  it,  and  some- 
times seem  on  the  verge  of  realising  it.  "We  "see  it  with  our  eyes"  ;  but,  in  the 
mysterious  providence  of  life,  are  "forbidden  to  go  over."  Our  purposes  are  broken 
off,  we  are  disappointed,  and  resent  if  faith  prevent  not.  Learn — 1.  Success  is  not 
the  chief  nobility  of  life.  2.  The  chief  blessedness  of  life  is  capability  of  service. 
3.  It  is  a  blessed  thing  to  die  when  the  work  has  been  so  far  done  that  it  justifies 
the  worker,  demonstrates  his  character,  vindicates  his  nobleness  ;  so  that  he  is  not 
ashamed  to  leave  it  for  completion  ;  so  that  his  friends  are  proud  of  its  unfinished 
fragments.  4.  The  formal  denial  of  our  hopes  may  be  the  means  of  perfecting  our 
character.  6.  If  in  our  service  we  have  sinned  against  right  methods  and  tempers 
of  service,  sinned  against  Him  whom  we  serve,  it  is  well  that  His  disapproval  of  our 
sin  should  be  manifested.     6.  The  prohibition  comes  with  manifest  mitigations. 

(1)  What  greater  grace  wrought  in  a  man  than  acquiescence  in  such  a  mandate  ? 

(2)  Moses  is  permitted  to  prepare  for  departure.  (3)  He  is  permitted  to  see  his 
successor.  7.  God  honours  His  faithful  servant  by  Himself  preparing  his  sepulchre. 
8.  God  fulfilled  His  promises  and  the  hopes  of  His  servant  in  a  deeper  and  higher 
way  than  he  anticipated.  II.  The  visions  which  may  inspire  human  life,  its 
unrealised  hopes  notwithstanding.  To  men  who  live  greatly,  God  gives  visions 
through  this  very  idealism  of  life,  which  are  glorious  inspirations  and  strength  ; 
visions  of  a  great  faith  and  a  bright  hope  ;  of  rest  through  the  toil,  of  triumph  while 
they  fight,  of  heavenly  perfection  and  blessedness.  Many  glorious  visions  had  been 
given  to  Moses.  Who  knows,  but  to  his  lofty  soul  Canaan  would  have  been  a  dis- 
enchantment. Many  of  our  realised  hopes  are.  In  the  better  country,  no  short- 
coming, no  disappointment.  Canaan  may  suffice  for  a  suggestive  prophecy ;  only 
God's  heaven  can  be  a  satisfactory  fulfilment.  A  great  thing  for  faith  to  climb  ou 
heights  to  survey  the  heritage  of  God.  And  the  nearer  Jordan,  the  more  glorious 
the  prospect  The  goodly  land  is  revealed.  All  earthly  lights  pale  before  the 
great  glory,  all  things  here  seem  little  and  unimportant  in  that  great  blessedness. 
(E.  Allon,  D.D.)  Pisgdh;  or,  a  picture  of  a  life  .-—I.  Life  ending  in  the  midst  op 
labour.  The  farmer  leaves  his  field  half  ploughed  ;  the  artist  dies  with  unformed 
figures  on  the  canvas  ;  the  tradesman  is  cut  down  in  the  midst  of  his  merchandise  ; 
the  statesman  is  arrested  with  great  political  measures  on  his  hand  ;  and  ministei-s 
depart  with  many  schemes  of  instructive  thought  and  plans  of  spiritual  usefulness 
undeveloped.  1.  There  should  be  cautiousness  as  to  the  work  pursued.  A  sad 
thing  to  die  in  the  midst  of  unholy  labour.  2.  Earnestness  in  the  prosecution  of 
our  calling.  Time  short.  3.  Attention  to  the  moral  influence  of  our  labour,  both 
on  ourselves  and  others.  We  should  make  our  daily  labour  a  means  of  grace  ; 
every  secular  act  should  express  and  strengthen  those  moral  principles  over  which 
death  has  no  power.     All  labour  should  have  but  one  spirit — the  spirit  of  goodness. 

II.  Life  ending  in  the  midst  of  earthly  prospects.  If  men  die  amidst 
prospects  of  good  they  never  realise,  then — 1.  Human  aspirations  after  the  earthly 
should  be  moderated.     2.  Human  aspirations  after  the  spiritual  should  be  supreme. 

III.  Life  ending  in  the  midst  of  physical  strength.  1.  Death  at  any  time 
is  painful — painful  when  the  physical  machinery  has  worn  itself  out ;  when  the 
senses  are  deadened,  the  limbs  palsied,  and  the  current  of  life  flows  coldly  and 
tardily  in  the  veins.  But  far  more  so,  when  it  comes  in  the  midst  of  manly 
vigour  and  a  strong  zest  for  a  prolonged  existence.  2.  Does  not  this  view  of  life — > 
ending  in  the  midst  of  important  labour,  bright  earthly  prospects,  and  manly 


CHAP.  XXXIV.]  DEUTERONOMY. 


613 


«Z!^^""^''??A ''J  *  ^i^S- "■  '?*'  ?J  ^'^°S  ^°^  humanity  beyond  the  grave  ?  (H  P 
Bowen.)  The  top  of  Fisgah:-Uoses,  the  servant  of  the  Lord,  now  takes  hif  iaTi 
journey.  He  has  been  more  or  less  a  pilgrim  all  his  life  arul  iSo  lolf  •  ^^^.^*?* 
perfect  harmony  with  all  his  previous  ofes  for  it  ?s  teke^- ^ 

ntwn.  J^   7'^^"''  ■'t*!'*'",  y""'' J°y  """^  refreshmeot  in  life,  shall  be  your  w^W 

looking  for  one  hundred  and  twenty  years,  and  such  nower  fW  lf«  o.,fu  i  i 
north,  south,  east,  and  west,  and  viiw  the  whole  land      And  wh«f^l  ^  ^''''^ 

the  mountains  swelling  like  mighty  billows  of  the  sea  all  struck  iito  stilW 

^Ttr^T\^'A\'  ^"^^'^  "uP"^  '^''^'   «°°^«  angel-voice  whS^ered  Tn  his  ear* 
Ihere  will  stand  Jerusalem  the  citv  of  neace      Tlfpvp  chnll  Kn  AJ T       i       i       * 

r^l  T  ^?'i"\'P''^  '°  *^^  landscape,  a  Cross  shall  one  day  stand  and  the  Sor,nf 
?a'i^b  «'^^  ^\"- *°  ^r/¥  r'l"^''  ^"^  ^^^^««  tl^«  beautifulind  he  might  peZps 
th^wMtTiSlvff  *°^'^  ^^-r  Mediterranean,  or  at  least  have  discovered  whe?e 
«rL   f  u^  ^""I"^  ^^^''^  '^  waters."    And  then,  sweetly  emblematical  ^  it 

seems  to  me,  beneath  were  the  sullen  waters  of  the  Dead  Sea      Oh   w^fr,  n?i  /I 

appeared,,  and  he  who  had  known  his  Lord  r^e  ^S^  nottoows  whatl/is  to 
text  ^1?'"'^  "'.""""  ?  ^'.''^twe™-  There  jou  have  tie Lttog  of  oir  Httle 
n^.  ;.„  T^  T  at  once  the  climaji  and  the  close  of  a  character  and  I  career  In 
Z!!^ti^ot^"^BX^\''°TT;!^  ^"Sah's  top  it  maybe  said   "ShoM 

mipauence.  He  strnck  the  rock  twice,  is  visited  with  the  severe  aentppr-P  «*TT,«» 
Moses,  Shalt  not  pass  over  the  Jordan  into  the  land."    Sah's  ton  ha^  all    T 

Tf    SPIRITUAL    LIFE        m^  ^^^^«  ^   BEAUTIFUL  IIllUSTKAT. ON 

from  which  mi^hthp  ^  L^^  if ''^^^  ^  ^*  ""^^  *°  eminence  in  the  wilderness 
bronX  TTi-«^  1  ^^^  J,^^  ^"^^  ^^*^^"^  ^f  the  salvation  of  God.  When  God 
and  f  bllSi    S^Fn  ^""^  °^.  ^^^P^'  ««  ^^^^  «°  ^^  ^'^^r  to  bring  them  into  Canaan 

lenith  and  brLth  of  theland      Tr  I V^-    p-      ^°^/«"  «*""ot  see  tlie  whole 


614  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxxiv. 

hear.  And  the  second  absolute  necessity  is  solitude  with  God.  Moses  did  not  get 
the  vision  when  he  was  in  a  mob.  He  got  it  when  he  was  alone.  It  is  not  enough 
for  us  to  have  a  critical  knowledge  of  Scripture.  "Spiritual  wisdom  "is  needed. 
I  would  sooner  accept  the  interpretation  of  some  pauper  woman  in  the  workhouse, 
if  she  is  full  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  than  the  interpretation  of  the  ablest  critic  who  has 
not  the  "spiritual"  wisdom.  We  need  revelation  as  well  as  elevation.  It  is  not 
enough  for  us  simply  to  be  on  Pisgah's  top.  God  must  do  for  us  what  He  did  for 
Moses.  **  And  the  Lord  showed  him."  II.  Do  you  not  also  think  that  Pisgah  may 
:serve  as  A  pkophect  of  the  dying  hour  ?  Moses  was  lost  to  the  camp.  I  hear 
them  say  one  to  another,  "  He  is  going ;  he  is  going.  He  has  got  beyond  our 
reach  now."  They  cannot  see  him.  He  is  high  up  there.  Have  you  known  what 
it  is  to  stand  by  the  side  of  a  dying  one  who  has  got  so  far  that  he  cannot  speak 
to  you  ?  He  has  become  unconscious  of  all  surroundings.  As  far  as  you  are  con- 
cerned, he  has  gone.  Yes,  and  perhaps  Israel  was  saying,  "Poor  Moses  !  We  pity 
him  in  having  thus  to  die "  ;  and  whilst  they  were  pitying  him  he  was  seeing 
visions  of  God.  I  dare  not  speak  dogmatically,  but  I  do  say  that  there  is  a  con- 
sensus of  evidence  that  cannot  be  put  on  one  side  that  the  dying  very  often  do  see 
far  more  than  the  living.  We  often  say  of  a  departing  one,  "  Oh,  he  is  practically 
dead  now,  for  he  is  unconscious."  Yes,  he  may  be  unconscious  to  those  standing 
tound  the  bedside,  but  oh,  how  conscious  of  God  !  Oh,  how  conscious  of  a  spiritual 
environment !  I  do  not  know  whether  Moses  bad  a  thought  about  the  camp  which 
he  had  left.  I  do  not  suppose  that  he  had.  He  was  looking  at  that  which  God 
showed  him.  The  spiritual  world  is  not  a  mere  unsubstantial  dream.  No,  it  is 
real,  and  round  about  us  all  are  the  hosts  of  heaven.  After  all,  Pisgah's  top  was 
only  the  starting-point  for  the  upward  flight.  It  seems  high  up  to  us  because  we  are 
dwelling  down  in  the  plain  of  Moab.  But  when  Moses  was  on  the  top  of  Pisgah  he 
was  only  just  on  the  "departure  "  platform,  not  the  "  arrival."  From  Pisgah's  top 
I  view  my  home,  then  take  my  flight.  The  sight  of  Canaan  did  not  long  linger  on 
his  eyes.  Lebanon  melts  away.  The  Dead  Sea  becomes  a  mist.  The  rolling  fields 
of  golden  corn  become  indistinct.  Canaan  vanishes.  Another  vision  comes  ;  and 
the  man  of  God  is  face  to  face  with  his  Lord.  0  child  of  God,  so  shall  it  be 
with  thee.  If  thou  diest  in  the  Lord's  embrace,  thy  head  on  His  breast,  thou  mayest 
see  much  in  that  dying  hour.  But  thou  shalt  see  more  afterwards.  {A,  G,  Brown.) 
The  frontier  of  the  promised  land : — Each  of  us  is  a  Moses,  not  as  regards  mission, 
glory,  or  virtue,  but  as  regards  this  last  feature  of  his  career.  We  are  all  standing 
on  the  frontier  of  a  promised  land  which  we  shall  not  enter.  I.  Yes  ;  we  are  on 
the  frontier,  on  the  threshold,  at  the  very  door  of  a  land  of  promise,  and  we  shall 
die  before  entering  it.  Keason  is  made  for  truth,  and  seeks  it ;  but  who  is  there 
that  knows  all  he  would  know  ?  Ignorance  has  reached  this  point :  in  its  instinc- 
tive regrets  it  stands  still,  gazing  mournfully  upon  mysteries  which  it  cannot 
penetrate,  upon  depths  of  knowledge  of  which  it  has  an  instinctive  perception,  but 
which  it  cannot  fathom.  Science  has  reached  this  point :  all  science  ends  in  a  final 
effort  which  it  fails  to  accomplish,  in  a  final  secret  which  it  is  inefficient  to  discover, 
in  a  final  word  which  it  is  unable  to  utter.  Unbelief  has  reached  this  point. 
Ilemember  the  sceptical  astronomer  who  endeavoured  daily  to  explain  the  first 
movement  of  the  planets  without  admitting  that  they  had  been  set  in  motion  by  a 
Divine  hand,  and  who  dismissed  his  pupils  day  after  day,  bidding  them  "come 
again  to-morrow  "  !  Faith,  too,  has  reached  this  point.  Faith  which  knows  that  it 
cannot  be  changed  into  sight,  and  that  "no  man  hath  seen  God,"  that  "none 
knoweth  the  Father  but  the  Son,"  that  "great  is  the  mystery  of  godliness,"  that 
even  the  angels  tremble  as  they  look  into  it.  Yes ;  reason  and  faith  behold  a 
promised  land  stretching  out  before  their  eyes,  but  ever  do  they  hear  the  stern  and 
mighty  voice  saying,  "  Thou  shalt  not  go  over  thither."  II.  And  what  of  happi- 
ness ?  Is  it  not  true  that  we  are  always  on  its  limits  ?  The  desire  for  happiness 
is  natural  ;  more  than  this,  it  is  lawful,  it  is  religious.  Every  individual  entertains 
it,  notwithstanding  his  experience  of  life.  We  see  it  sometimes  near,  oftener  at  a 
distance  ;  but  this  world  is  so  fashioned  that  we  are  unable  to  cross  the  border  and 
enter  it.  III.  Without  peace  there  can  be  no  true  happiness.  Who  is  there 
that  has  not  dreamed  of  a  life  of  peace,  harmony,  and  love  ?  But  no  :  the  machinery 
of  life  seizes  upon  us  ;  competition  lays  a  barrier  across  our  path  ;  we  have  rights 
which  we  must  defend,  for  the  sake  of  those  we  love,  if  not  for  our  own  ;  we  must 
adopt  as  ours  the  maxim  of  Paul :  "  If  it  be  possible,  as  much  as  lieth  in  you,  live 
peaceably  with  all  men."  In  the  very  domain  of  religion,  we  are  called  to  defend 
our  faith,  to  stand  out  against  the  calumnies  of  intolerance  ;  we  would  gladly  pray 


CHAP.  XXXIV.]  DEUTERONOMY.  615 

and  communicate  with  all,  bnt  we  are  repulsed  ;  we  long  for  an  asylum  of  peace  and 
rest,  and  the  terrible  voice  is  heard,   "Thou  shalt  not  enter  into  it !"     IV.  This 

STATE  OF  THINGS   INFLUENCES  THE  WHOLE   OF   OITK  EXISTENCE,  the  progress  of  OUF 

soul,  the  entire  labour  of  our  life.  Where  is  the  man  who  brings  all  his  enterprises 
to  a  successful  issue,  or  realises  all  his  plans  ?  Where  is  the  man  who  attains  a 
perfect  equilibrium  in  his  desires,  faculties,  sentiments,  and  duties  ?  Where  is  the 
man  who,  in  a  moral  and  Christian  sense,  realises  his  ideal  ?  How  many  unfinished 
tasks  !  The  world  is  full  of  them.  Death  comes  and  prevents  their  completion. 
When  we  examine  ourselves,  how  far  we  are  from  sanctification  !  Alas  !  the  perfect 
fulfilment  of  the  plans  of  life,  and  of  the  progress  of  the  soul,  is  a  promised  land, 
concerning  which  each  of  us  is  told,  "  Thou  shalt  not  go  over  thither  !  "  Who  is 
He  that,  of  all  the  human  race,  alone  has  entered  His  promised  land  ?  Who  ?  Jesus. 
In  Jesus  Christ  we  are  enabled  to  march  towards  the  goal,  to  increase  in  knowledge 
and  faith,  in  happiness  and  peace,  to  achieve  greater  works,  and  to  progress  on  our 
way  until  the  last  stage  of  the  journey  be  reached — eternity.  (A.  Coquerel.) 
I  have  caused  thee  to  see  it  with  thine  eyes,  but  thou  shalt  not  g^  over  thither. 
■ — Comfort  amid  failure  of  hopes : — There  must  have  been  in  Moses'  mind,  when  he 
thought  over  his  life,  a  strong  consciousness  of  the  opportunities  of  inward  and 
spiritual  culture  which  God  had  opened  to  him  even  in  and  through  the  failure  of 
his  plan  of  life.  In  his  repentance  and  confession  of  personal  sin  he  had  come 
nearer  to  Jehovah  than  ever  before,  and  now,  as  the  result  of  all,  a  patient,  loving 
confidence  in  God ;  a  deep  distrust  of  himself ;  a  craving  for  inner  purity  more 
than  for  any  outward  glory;  a  pure,  deep  love  overrunning  with  gratitude  for 
forgiveness,  which  had  deepened  with  every  deepening  appreciation  of  the  sin, — all 
this  was  filling  his  heart  as  he  went  forth  with  God,  pondering  the  failure  of  his  life. 
And  this  same  richness  of  comfort  has  come  to  many  a  man  out  of  the  failure  of  his 
hopes.  You  come  up  to  the  certainty  that  joxx.  are  not  going  to  accomplish  that 
wmch  you  once  meant  to  do,  that  you  might  have  done  if  you  had  not  wilfiilly 
sinned.  You  take  your  last  fond  look  on  the  Canaan  of  accomplishment  which 
you  are  not  to  enter.  You  say,  "  I  shall  never  do  what  I  dreamed  of  doing,"  but 
at  the  same  time  there  rises  up  in  you  another  strong  assurance, — **  God  has  done 
in  me  what  I  do  not  see  how  He  could  have  done  except  out  of  my  broken  hopes 
and  foiled  endeavours."  You  are  not  glad  that  you  have  sinned  ;  you  are  sure  all 
the  time  that,  if  you  could  have  stood  sinless,  some  nobler  character  would  have 
been  trained  in  you,  but  you  never  can  think  of  your  sin  without  feeling  alongside 
of  it  all  that  God  has  done  for  you  through  it.  The  culture  of  penitence  is  there, 
the  dearer,  nearer  sense  of  God,  which  has  come  from  so  often  going  to  Him  with 
a  broken  heart,  the  yearning  for  an  hourly  dependence  on  Him,  the  craving,  almost 
agonising  knowledge  of  the  goodness  of  holiness,  which  only  came  to  you  when  you 
lost  it,  the  value  of  spiritual  life  above  all  visible  and  physical  delight  or  comfort, 
and  a  gratitude  for  forgiveness  which  has  turned  the  whole  Hfe  into  a  psalm  of 
praise  or  a  labour  of  consecration, — these  are  the  cultures  by  which  God  bears 
witness  of  Himself  to  numberless  lives  that  have  failed  of  their  full  achievement. 
But  take  another  thought.  The  whole  question  of  how  much  Moses  knew  of 
immortality  is  very  indistinct,  but  it  is  impossible  to  think  that  in  this  supreme 
moment  his  great  soul  did  not  attain  to  the  great  universal  human  hope.  It  must 
have  come  to  him  that  this  which  seemed  like  an  end  was  not  an  end  ;  that  while 
the  current  of  the  Jewish  history  swept  on  without  him,  for  him,  too,  there  was  a 
future,  a  life  to  live,  a  work  to  do  somewhere,  with  the  God  who  took  him  by  the 
hand  and  led  him  away.  And  here  must  always  be  the  final  explanation,  the  com- 
plete and  satisfying  explanation  of  human  failures.  Without  this  truth  of  another 
life  there  can  be  no  clearness  ;  all  is  dreary  darkness.  A  man  has  failed  in  all  the 
purposes  of  his  life.  What  is  there  left  for  him  ?  He  dwells  upon  the  culture  which 
has  come  to  him  in  and  from  his  failure  ;  but  what  of  him, — this  precious  human 
being,  this  single  personal  existence,  the  soul,  with  all  its  life  and  loves  ?  Is  that, 
indeed,  just  thrown  aside  like  a  dead  cinder,  out  of  which  all  the  power  has  been 
burnt  ?  Then  comes  Christ's  truth  of  immortality.  Not  so  !  This  failure  is  not 
final.  The  life  that  has  so  fallen  short  is  not  yet  done.  It  has  been  tried  and  found 
wanting.     But  by  its  own  consciousness  of  weakness  it  is  made  ready  for  a  new 

trial  in  a  higher  strength.     {Bp.  Phillips  Brooks. )        Moses  and  the  promised  land : 

There  are  in  history  few  characters  whose  grandeur  equals  that  of  Moses,  and 
I  know  not  whether  the  Old  Testament  contains  an  account  more  sublime  or  more 
touching  than  that  of  his  death.  Nearly  a  century  had  passed  since,  in  the  palace 
of  Pharaoh,  where  he  had  grown  up  in  the  midst  of  the  delights  of  Egypt  and 


616  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  xxxiv» 

of  royal  splendour,  the  thought  of  the  oppression  of  his  people  had  seized  upon  his 
soul  to  give  him  no  more  repose.  At  last  he  reached  the  goal,  so  long  desired,  of  all 
his  thoughts.  The  promised  land  was  there  before  him,  and  the  waves  of  Jordan 
alone  separated  him  from  it.  The  promised  land  !  Oh,  bow  often  he  called  for  and 
contemplated  it  beforehand  in  his  solitary  dreams  during  the  long  nights  of  the 
desert,  when,  under  the  starry  heaven,  he  conversed  with  Jehovah  !  From  the 
silent  summit  of  Mount  Nebo  the  overworked  old  man  directs  his  eager  looks  before 
him  and  in  every  direction :  he  sees  all  the  country  from  Gilead  to  Dan  ;  there 
stretches  out  Jericho,  the  city  of  palm  trees  ;  there  the  rich  palms  of  Naphtali, 
of  Ephraim,  and  of  Manasseh  ;  there  Judah  ;  there,  beyond,  towards  the  distant 
horizon,  the  Mediterranean  Sea.  Yes,  it  is  certainly  the  Promised  Land  ;  but— he 
is  forbidden  to  enter  it !  For  a  moment  his  heart  bends  under  its  load  of  anguish  ; 
but,  losing  sight  of  himself,  he  thinks  of  the  future  of  Israel ;  he  contemplates  with 
emotion  tbose  places  in  which  God  will  establish  His  sanctuary,  those  valleys  from 
whence  there  will  issue  one  day  the  salvation  of  the  world  ;  on  the  north  the  distant 
mountains  of  Galilee  ;  on  the  south,  Bethlehem,  Moriah,  and  the  hill  where  the  Cross 
in  which  we  glory  was  to  be  erected.  Then,  having  embraced  with  one  last  look  that 
land,  so  long  desired,  Moses  bows  his  head  and  dies.  From  this  grand  scene  there 
flows  for  us  a  grand  lesson.  Whoever  you  may  be,  have  you  not  dreamed  here  below 
of  a  promised  land  ;  have  you  not  desired  it,  have  you  not  thought  to  reach  it,  and 
has  not  a  voice  been  heard  telling  you  also  :  "  Thou  shalt  not  enter  it  at  all  I  "  I 
want  to  inquire  to-day  why  God  refuses  us  what  we  ask  on  earth  ;  I  want  to  plead 
His  cause,  and  justify  His  ways.  Yes,  we  all  dream  here  below  of  a  promised  land. 
There  is  not  one  of  us  who  has  not  expected  much  of  life,  and  not  one  whom  life  has 
satisfied.  Do  not  trust  appearance,  do  not  depend  on  the  outward  joy,  the  absence 
of  care  painted  on  so  many  countenances.  All  that  is  the  mask — underneath  is  the 
real  being,  who,  if  he  is  sincere,  will  tell  you  what  he  seeks  and  what  he  suffers.  Is 
the  promised  land  which  you  seek  that  renewed  earth  where  righteousness  will 
dwell  ?  Is  it  the  reign  of  the  Lord  realised  among  men !  Is  it  Gc^  loved,  adored, 
holding  the  first  place  in  hearts  and  minds  t  Is  it  the  Gospel  accepted,  the  Church 
raised  up  again,  souls  converted,  the  Cross  victorious  ?  WeU  !  need  I  say  it  to  you  % 
You  will  not  possess  that  promised  land  here  below,  although  in  the  ardour  of  your 
faith  you  had  thought  to  enter  it.  You  had  thought  by  some  certain  signs  to  dis- 
cover in  our  epoch  a  time  of  renovation  ;  you  had  seen  the  shaken  nations  throw  off 
their  sleep  of  death,  the  Church  rise  up  at  the  voice  of  God,  and  awake  to  the  feel- 
ing of  its  magnificent  destinies  ;  you  had  seen  the  Holy  Spirit  descending,  as  on  the 
day  of  Pentecost,  and  inflaming  hearts.  Thus,  in  the  primitive  Church,  believers 
expected  on  the  ruins  of  the  heathen  world  the  triumphant  return  of  Christ.  Yes,  it 
was  there  that  the  promised  land  was.  Alas  !  the  world  has  continued  its  progress, 
the  kingdom  of  God  does  not  come  with  show,  the  work  of  the  Spirit  proceeds 
mysteriously  and  in  secret,  and,  whilst  that  brilliant  vision  of  a  renewed  earth 
moves  before  your  troubled  eyes,  a  voice  murmurs  in  your  ear:  "Thou  shalt 
not  enter  it ! "  Yes,  let  us  not  flatter  ourselves.  Those  are  seldom  met  with  in  our 
days  who,  devoured  by  hungering  for  truth  and  righteousness,  long  ardently  after 
the  reign  of  God.  You  had  dreamed  of  a  grand  and  beautiful  existence  on  earth,  for 
it  was  not  towards  vile  pleasures  that  your  nature  carried  you.  God  had  given  you 
talents,  brilliant  faculties,  the  knowledge  of  everything  that  is  noble  and  fair.  With 
what  joy  you  bounded  forth  on  your  career  !  How  all  good  causes  appealed  to  you  ! 
Every  day  was  to  render  you  both  better  and  stronger.  To  know,  to  love,  to  act, 
was  your  aim.  All  those  enchanted  ways  opened  before  you,  covered  with  that  haze 
of  the  morning  through  which  one  preaicts  in  spring  the  serene  clearness  and  the 
heat  of  a  fine  day.  The  promised  land  was  there  in  your  eyes  ;  you  contemplated  it 
with  eager  looks,  you  were  going  to  enter  it.  AU  at  once  misfortune  came,  disease 
broke  your  strength,  your  property  vanished  from  you,  you  were  obliged  to  begin  to 
gain  by  the  sweat  of  your  brow  your  daily  bread ;  crushing  cares  have  come  to  over- 
whelm your  heart  and  blight  your  hopes  ;  selfishness  and  the  harshness  of  men  have 
given  you  bitter  and  cruel  surprises,  and  whilst  others  got  before  you  in  the  race  and 
ran  towards  the  prospects  of  happiness  which  remained  closed  to  you,  the  austere  voice 
of  trial  murmured  in  your  ear :  "Thou  shalt  not  enter  it  I "  You  had,  my  sister, 
dreamed  on  earth  of  the  happiness  of  shared  affections  ;  the  course  of  life  appeared  to 
vou  pleasant  to  follow,  supported  on  a  manly  arm  and  a  loyal  heart.  What  joy  to 
be  able  every  day  to  pour  your  thoughts  and  your  affections  into  a  soul  which  would 
comprehend  yours !  The  promised  land  was  there  to  you ;  and  now,  you  are 
irtdowed,  and  you  go,  a  solitary  one,  in  that  path,  the  asperities  of  which  no  on© 


CHAP.  XXXIV.]  DEUTERONOMY.  617 

smooths  in  your  case.  Or,  what  is  much  worse  still,  you  have  seen  infidelity,  false- 
ness, and,  perhaps,  a  cold  indifference  penetrate  between  you  and  the  heart  of  him 
whose  name  you  bear.  To  others  God  has  spared  that  trial.  You  have  seen  a 
joyous  family  circle  form  around  you— you  have  prepared  for  life  the  children  whom 
God  ga\e  you.  With  what  happiness  have  you  followed  the  first  intimations  of 
intelligence  in  them,  with  what  anxiety  their  temptations  and  their  sufferings,  with 
what  gratitude  their  victories  and  their  progress  !  At  last  you  had  almost  attained 
your  object.  They  were  ready  for  the  struggles  of  life  ;  all  that  a  vigilant  love  could 
sow  in  their  hearts  you  had  shed  abroad.  It  was  to  you  the  promised  land.  Alas  ! 
how  lately  was  it  true.  But  a  day  came— a  day  of  anxiety  and  fearful  forebodings, 
ending  in  a  reality  still  more  frightful.  From  your  desolated  abode  a  funeral  pro- 
cession has  passed,  and  to-day  it  is  in  Heaven  that  your  wavering  faith  has  to  seek 
an  image  which  floats  before  your  troubled  eyes.  Shall  I  remind  you  of  those  works 
—long  pursued  with  self-denial,  with  love— at  the  end  of  which  you  gathered 
unsuccess  and  ingratitude,  and  have  seen  your  best  intentions  misunderstood  and 
calumniated  ?  Vain  desires !  barren  illusions  !  the  world  cries  to  us,  and  in  the 
name  of  its  selfish  philosophy  it  preaches  to  us  forgetfulness  and  dissipation.  But 
do  you  desire  that  forgetfulness  ?  No,  it  is  better  still  to  suffer  and  to  have  known 
these  desires,  these  affections,  these  hopes  ;  it  is  better  to  bear  about  with  one  these 
holy  images  and  sacred  recollections ;  the  torment  of  a  soul  which  believes,  and  of  a 
heart  which  loves,  is  better  than  the  stupid  and  base  frivolity  of  the  world.  It  is 
better,  0  Moses  !  after  forty  years  of  fatigue  and  of  suffering,  to  die  in  view  of  the 
coasts  of  Canaan  than  to  lead  in  the  palaces  of  Egypt  the  stupid  and  shameful  servi- 
tude of  pleasure  and  of  sin  !  And  yet  before  that  rigorous  law,  which  closes  to  us 
here  below  the  promised  land,  our  troubled  heart  turns  trembling  to  God ;  we  ask 
Him,  that  God  of  love,  the  secret  of  His  ways  which  astonish  us  and  now  and  then 
confound  us.  "  Why  ? "  we  say  to  Him,  "why ! "  We  shall  never  here  below  fully 
know  the  cause  of  the  ways  of  God.  There  are,  particularly  in  suffering,  mysteries 
which  go  beyond  all  our  explanations.  Nevertheless  it  is  written  that  the  secret  of 
the  Lord  is  with  them  that  fear  Him.  Let  us  try  then  to  explain  something  of  it. 
If  Moses  does  not  enter  into  the  promised  land,  it  is  certainly,  in  the  first  place, 
because  Moses  sinned.  What !  you  will  tell  me,  could  God  not  forget  the  faults  of 
His  servant?  So  long  as  Moses  remains  on  earth  he  will  undergo  the  visible 
consequences  of  his  transgression  in  former  times.  As  he  sinned  in  presence  of  the 
people,  it  is  in  presence  also  of  the  people  that  he  will  be  smitten.  Now,  that  is 
what  we  have  a  diflBculty  in  comprehending  to-day.  To-day  the  sentiment  of  God's 
holiness  is  effaced.  God  is  love,  we  say  with  the  Gospel,  and  forget  that  the  Gospel 
never  separates  His  love  and  His  holiness  !  We  forget  it  in  face  of  Gethsemane,  in 
face  of  Calvary,  in  face  of  those  sorrows,  without  name,  which  remind  us  that  par- 
don does  not  annihilate  justice,  and  that  Divine  righteousness  demands  an  expia- 
tion. Yes,  God  is  love  ;  but  have  you  reflected  on  this,  that  what  God  loves  before 
everything  else  is  that  which  is  good  ?  Can  God  love  His  creatures  more  than  He 
loves  goodness?  That  is  the  question.  Our  age  resolves  it  in  the  sense  which 
pleases  its  feebleness.  God,  it  tells  us,  loves  before  everything  His  creatures ;  and 
saying  that,  the  whole  Gospel  is  reversed ;  for  it  is  evident  that  if  God  loves 
His  creatures  more  than  He  loves  what  is  good,  He  will  save  them,  be  their  corrup- 
tion and  their  incredulity  what  they  may.  Then  heaven  is  assured  to  all— to  the 
impenitent,  to  the  proud,  to  the  rebellious,  as  well  as  to  penitent  and  broken 
hearts.  This  is  not  all.  If  God  can  thus  place  what  is  good  in  the  second  rank, 
can  He  not  put  it  there  always  ?  What  becomes,  then,  of  holiness  ?  What  are  we 
told  of  His  law,  since  that  law  gives  way  when  He  chooses  ?  I  go  further.  What 
are  we  told  of  redemption,  and  what  does  the  Cross  of  Calvary  say  to  us,  if  you 
efface  the  idea  of  a  sacrifice  demanded  by  Divine  justice  ?  But  admit,  on  the  con- 
trary, with  Scripture,  that  God  loves  what  is  good  before  everything  ;  that  holiness 
is  His  very  essence ;  and  you  will  see  that,  if  face  to  face  with  sinners.  His  name  is 
love,  face  to  face  with  sin.  His  name  is  justice ;  that  suffering  willed  by  Him  is 
inseparably  united  with  evil.  You  asked  why  life  did  not  keep  its  promises  to  you— 
why  your  dreams,  your  plans  of  happiness  were  pitilessly  destroyed — why,  in  pres- 
ence of  the  promised  land,  an  inexorable  voice  came  to  you  :  *'  Thou  shalt  not  enter 
it ! "  Scripture  answers  you— because  you  are  sinners ;  because  this  earth,  which 
evil  has  defiled,  cannot  be  for  you  the  land  of  repose  and  of  happiness  ;  because  God 
would  warn  you  and  prepare  you  to  meet  Him.  You  asked,  0  ye  redeemed  by  the 
Gospel,  why,  after  having  believed  the  pardon  of  God,  His  love,  and  His  promises, 
you  were  treated  by  Him  with  rigour  which  confounds  you  I  Ah  I  it  is  because  Grod, 


i 


618  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxxiv. 

•who  made  you  His  children,  would  further  make  you  partakers  of  His  holiness  ;  it  is 
because  He  would  that  the  suffering  attached  to  your  earthly  li'e  should  remind  you 
every  day  of  what  you  formerly  were,  and  of  what  you  would  be  without  Him. 
Thus,  at  all  times,  God  acts  towards  those  very  ones  who  have  most  loved  Him.  Ask 
Moses  why  he  does  not  enter  Canaan.  Does  he  murmur  ?  does  he  couiplain  ?  does 
he  accuse  Divine  justice  ?  No  ;  he  bows  his  head  and  adores.  Ask  Jacob  why 
his  hoary  hairs  go  down  with  sorrow  to  the  grave.  Does  he  accuse  God  ?  No  ; 
he  remembers  his  deceits  of  a  former  time,  his  conduct  towards  Isaac,  his  perfidy 
towards  Esau.  Thus  He  accomplishes  the  word,  that  juilgment  commences  at  His 
own  house.  Thus  God  reminds  those  whom  He  has  pardoned  and  saved,  that 
if  they  are  the  children  of  a  God  of  love,  they  ought  to  become  the  children  of 
a  holy  God.  But  in  refusing  us,  as  Moses,  admission  here  to  the  promised  land,  God 
has  yet  another  aim — that  of  strengthening  our  faith.  Let  us  suppose  that  it  had 
been  given  us  to  realise  our  desires  on  earth,  to  see  our  designs  accomplished,  our 
sacrifices  recompensed,  to  gather  here,  in  a  word,  all  that  we  have  sowed.  What 
would  soon  happen  ?  That  we  should  walk  by  sight  and  no  longer  by  faith — 
pleasant  and  easy  course,  where  every  effort  would  be  followed  with  its  result,  every 
sacrifice  with  its  recompense.  Who  would  not  like  to  be  a  Christian  at  that  price  ? 
Who  would  not  seek  that  near  and  visible  blessing?  Ah  !  do  you  not  see  that  the 
selfish  spirit  of  the  mercenary  would  come,  like  a  cold  poison,  to  mingle  with  our 
obedience  ?  Do  you  not  see  that  our  hearts,  drawn  to  earth  by  all  the  weight 
of  our  happiness,  would  soon  forget  the  invisible  world  and  their  true,  their  eternal 
destiny  ?  What  would  the  life  of  faith  then  become ;  that  heroic  struggle  of  the 
soul  which  tears  itself  from  the  world  of  sight  in  order  to  attach  itself  to  God  t 
What  would  that  noble  heritage  become,  which  all  believers  of  the  past  have  trans- 
mitted to  us  ?  Now,  God  expects  from  us  better  things.  That  is  why  He  refuses 
you  here  below  the  repose,  and  the  peace,  and  the  sweet  security  of  heart,  and  those 
"oys  in  which  you  would  like  to  rest ;  and  why,  when  the  world  has  caused  to  pass 
eforeyou  that  promised  land  of  happiness  which  enchants  and  attracts  you,  His 
inexorable  voice  says  to  you  :  "Thou  shalt  not  enter  it."  But,  know  well.  He  does 
not  deceive  you,  for  true  repose  and  true  happiness  still  await  you.  Ah  !  better  to 
die  on  Mount  Nebo,  for  God  has  reserved  for  thee  a  better  heritage,  a  promised  land 
into  which  thou  shalt  enter  in  peace.  There,  sin  is  no  more  ;  there,  pure  voices  pro- 
claim the  glory  of  the  Lord  ;  there.  His  sanctuary  is  reared  in  light  ineffable  and  in 
an  ideal  beauty ;  there,  repose  on  the  bosom  of  Infinite  Love  all  those  who,  like 
thyself,  have  combated  for  righteousness ;  there,  God  reigns,  surrounded  with  the 
multitude  without  number  of  His  worshippers.  Close  thine  eyes,  0  wearied  pilgrim, 
thou  wilt  open  them  again  in  light,  in  the  celestial  Canaan,  on  the  holy  Sion,  in  the 
heavenly  Jerusalem  !  Lastly,  if  God  refuse  us,  as  He  did  Moses,  what  we  should 
have  liked  to  possess  on  earth,  it  is  that  our  heart  may  belong  to  Him,  and  be  given 
to  Him  for  ever,  I  think  I  hear  your  protestations.  You  answer  me  :  *'  Yes,  faith 
and  holiness  can  be  taught  in  that  rude  school ;  but  is  it  right  that  God  should 
obtain  love  in  this  way  ? "  And  you  add  :  *'  Should  we  have  loved  Him  less  if  He 
had  left  us  those  treasures  which  His  jealous  hand  so  soon  carried  otf  from  us  ? 
Should  we  have  loved  less  if  our  heart,  instead  of  falling  back  sadly  upon  itself,  had 
been  able  to  bloom  and  breathe  freely  in  all  the  confidence  of  happiness  ? "  Less  ! 
ah,  we  are  witnesses  to  it.  To-day,  if  what  we  have  lost  could  be  returned  to  us  ; 
if  our  youth,  our  life,  our  hopes  could  be  bom  again  to-day,  there  would  not  be 
words  in  the  language  of  men  to  testify  to  Him  our  gratitude  and  our  love.  I  under- 
stand you  ;  but  take  care,  you  have  said,  ^Ho-day,^'  and  you  are  right ;  for  yesterday, 
alas  ! — for  formerly — when  you  possessed  those  treasures,  when  your  life  was  happy, 
where  was  that  gratitude,  that  love,  which  should  have  overflowed?  On  that 
earth,  blessed  and  decked  with  all  your  joys,  did  you  think  God  Himself  was  mis- 
understood and  treated  as  a  stranger  ?  Did  you  reflect  that  His  cause  was  forgotten, 
His  Gospel  attacked,  His  Church  feeble  and  divided  ?  Did  you  think  of  those 
thousands  of  souls  groaning  under  the  burden  of  ignorance,  of  misery,  and  of  sin  ? 
Did  you  ask  for  the  earth  where  righteousness  dwells  ?  No  ;  in  order  to  reveal  all 
that  to  you  there  was  need  of  sorrow.  We  have  seen  how  God  educates  us  ;  we  have 
seen  how  He  prepares  us  for  the  promised  land,  which  is  not  here  below  but 
in  heaven.  Happy  the  one  who  does  not  wait  for  the  blows  of  trial  in  order  to  steer 
his  course  to  it ;  but,  happy,  also,  the  one  whose  bonds  trial  has  broken,  and  who 
has  entered  upon  the  journey  home.        {E.  Bersier,  D.D.) 

Yer.  6.  So  Moses,  the  servaat  of  the  Lord,  died.— TA«  death  of  Moses :— I.  Thb 


CHAP.  XXXIV.]  DEUTERONOMY.  619 

GREATEST  OF  MEN  AEE  BUT  INSTRUMENTS  IN  God's  HANDS,  and  He  Can  afford  to  lay 
them  aside  when  He  chooses.  Let  this  thought — 1.  Dispel  fears  for  future  of  Church 
of  God.     2.  Ahate  personal  pride.     3.  Calm  fears  for  loved  ones.     II.  The  time  and 

MANNER  OF  EACH   MAN'S  REMOVAL  FROM  EARTH  ARE  FIXED  BY  GOD.      Ill,  WhEN 

God  removes  His  servants  from  earth  it  is  that  He  may  take  them  to 
HEAVEN.    IV.  Until  God  calls  us  away,  let  us  be  diligent  in  doing  good. 
V.  God  frequently  gives  intimation  to  men  that  He  is  about  to  call  them 
TO  Himself.     VI.  God  will  remove  all  difficulties  in  our  heavenward 
journey.     {Preacher's  Monthly.)        The  death  of  Moses :— I.  The  best  must  die. 
II.  The  best  may  die  in  the  zenith  of  their  greatness.     III.  The  best  may  die 
WHEN  apparently  INDISPENSABLE.     IV.  The  best  may  die  where  they  little 
EXPECT.     V.  But  all  die  when  and  where  God  decrees.     {R.  A.   Griffin.) 
The  death  of  Moses : — There  is  nothing  more  sublime  in  the  history  of  Moses  than  the 
story  of  his  death.     Tried  by  a  worldly  standard,  it  seems  a  poor  and  shameful 
ending  of  such  a  life.     Who  so  fit,  we  might  ask,  to  lead  the  children  of  Israel  into 
the  promised  land  as  he  who  had,  for  their  sakes,  defied  the  wrath  of  Pharaoh,  who 
led  them  out  of  Egypt,  and  shared  with  them  the  wanderings  of  the  wilderness  ? 
"Who  is  the  nobler  man  ?  he  who  rejoices  in  the  fulfilment  of  his  hopes,  or  he  who 
knows  how  to  endure,  and  see  the  fruit  of,  disappointment  ?    I.  The  perils  of  a 
call  to  SERVICE.     1.  There  are  perils  in  its  graces.     Godly  men  will  transgress  just 
where  they  seem  most  secure,  will  yield  to  the  temptations  against  which  they  seem 
to  be  best  armed.     In  a  moment  the  old  nature  flashfs  up  ;  the  sin  of  a  moment 
startles  out  of  the  self-complacency  of  many  years.     2.  There  are  perils  belongiug  to 
the  gifts  of  a  high  calling.     Those  are  not  to  be  envied  who  are  most  richly  endowed, 
and  can  do  most  for  men.     They  have  to  be  constantly  warned  against  pride  and 
self-sufficiency  ;  to  be  often  chastened  and  humiliated  for  relying  on  their  gifts  instead 
of  on  the  Giver.     3.  There  are  perils  incident  to  the  fulfilment  of  a  high  calling. 
II.  God's  earnestness  in  the  accomplishment  of  His  will.    Was  Moses  startled 
after  he  had  spoken  his  rash  words  to  the  people,  and  smitten  the  rock  in  his  anger  ? 
shocked  to  think  that  he  had  been  so  easily  led  into  sin,  and  that  his  sin  was  great 
in  that  he  had  not  sanctified  God  in  the  eyes  of  the  children  of  Israel  ?    If  so,  the 
words  in  which  the  Lord  rebuked  him  must  have  fallen  blessedly  upon  his  ears. 
Our  first  foolish  thought  is  the  wish  to  hide  our  sin  from  God  ;  our  second  wiser 
thought  is  to  rejoice  that  He  has  seen  and  marked  it,  for  He  alone  can  put  our  sins 
away.     Our  first  foolish  impulse  is  to  offer  our  excuses  and  plead  that  we  be  not 
chastised ;  our  second  wiser  impulse  is  that  of  the  spiritual  man  within  us,  which 
welcomes  all  the  fatherly  discipline  by  which  we  may  be  purged.     Our  first  foolish 
thought  is  to  blame  the  responsibilities  of  our  position,  and  even  to  desire  to  be 
relieved  of  them  ;  our  second  wiser  persuasion  is  that  responsibilities  are  the  honours  of 
heaven,  and  that  it  is  cause  of  gratitude  when  God  will  make  us  worthy  to  fulfil  them. 
{A.  Mackennal,  D.D.)        The  death  of  Moses:  what  do  we  think  about  it? — "We 
roust  needs  die."    So  spake  the  widow  of  Tekoah.     But  why  must  we  needs  die? 
Why  is  it  that  after  so  many  years  of  healthy,  vigorous  life  the  signs  of  feebleness, 
decay,  and  coming  dissolution  show  themselves  1    There  is,  so  far  as  we  know,  only 
one  satisfactory  answer  :  it  is  God's  will.     "  It  is  appointed  unto  men  once  to  die." 
*'  The  Lord  gave,  and  the  Lord  hath  taken  away."    But  the  death  of  Moses  was  not 
the  result  of  decayed  powers  and  the  infirmities  of  old  age.     He  was  equal  to  his 
work,  and  if  spared,  would  soon  have  completed  it,  for  the  people,  whose  leader  the 
Lord  had  appointed  him,  were  now  on  the  borders  of  the  promised  land.     There  was 
only  the  Jordan  to  cross.     Why,  then,  should  God,  just  at  this  point,  have  taken 
him  away  ?    I.  In  the  death  of  Moses  we  have  w^itness  to  the  severity  of 
God.     "  God  is  love."     That  is  His  nature,  but  it  is  qualified  by  justice,  righteous- 
ness, and  faithfulness.     "  Behold,"  says  Paul,  "the  goodness  and  severity  of  God." 
He  is  Father,  and  in  all  His  ways  most  fatherly.     But  He  is  also  King,  and  is  most 
kingly  too.     God  is  not  to  be  trifled  with.     His  laAvs  cannot  be  disregarded  with 
impunity.     Sin  ever  is,  and  must  be,  punished.     Bless  His  name,  there  is  forgiveness 
with  Him.     Our  sins  may  not  shut  us  out  of  heaven.     They  may  not  prevent  us 
from  enjoying  the  life  to  be,  with  its  unsullied  glory.      But  they  do  hinder  the 
enjoyment  of  the  present.     They  haunt  us  like  an  ugly  dream.     The  scars  they  have 
left  are  ever  painful.     You  cannot  sin  with  impunity.     Sin  is  what  clings  to  a  maa 
and  curses  him.     It  is  not  like  a  coat  you  can  put  on  and  take  off  at  your  pleasure. 
It  is  poison  which,  if  it  don't  kill,  will  pain  you  for  years.     Or  it  will  act  in  the  same 
way   in   which   it  acted   in  relation  to  Moses.      It  prevented  him  from  entering 
.  Canaan,  and  so  there  is  many  a  sweet  land,  many  a  happy  experience  we  might  enter 


620  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxxir. 

upon,  but  our  sin — ^in  imprudent  act  or  speech— prevents.  II.  In  the  death  of 
Moses  theee  is  witness  to  God's  desire  that  men  should  put  their  trust,  not 
IN  MAN,  BUT  IN  HiM.  The  book  from  which  our  text  is  taken  ends  as  no  other  does, 
either  in  the  Old  Testament  or  in  the  New.  It  closes  with  a  high  eulogium  upon 
Moses.  We  do  not  know  whose  hand  wrote  the  eulogium ;  but  we  doubt  not  it 
expressed  the  universal  feeling  of  Israel  after  his  death.  If  he  had  been  spared  to 
bring  them  into  the  land,  there  might  have  been  the  temptation  to  enthrone  the 
creature  in  place  of  the  Creator,  and  to  their  great  peril  they  might  have  placed  in 
the  man  that  trust  which  ought  to  be  put  in  God  and  in  Him  alone.  This  they 
could  not  do  without  inflicting  great  self-injury.  Let  them  do  it,  and  they  would 
be  sure  to  reap  vexation,  disappointment,  and  misery.  But  by  the  removal  of  Moses 
just  at  the  very  time  when  they  probably  felt  they  could  so  ill  spare  him,  they  were 
taught  the  salutary  lesson  that  their  trust  should  not  be  put  in  man,  but  in  God.  It 
is  only  the  confidence  that  clings  to  God  which  is,  without  fail,  rewarded.  The 
mind  of  God  is  set  upon  men  finding  this  out  for  themselves,  and  as  it  is  for  their 
eternal  interest  so  to  do,  by  many  a  painful  providence  He  works  out  His  will. 
III.  In  the  death  of  Moses  there  is  witness  to  the  kindness  of  God.  The 
Lord  declared  that  Moses  should  not  enter  the  land,  and  He  strictly  kept  His  word. 
But  He  tempered  His  severity  with  kindness.  He  would  not  tread  the  land,  but  he 
would  be  permitted  to  see  it.  How  very  fatherly  this  was.  Your  child  forfeits  a 
certain  privilege.  You  won't  break  your  word  and  give  it  him.  But  in  your 
fatherly  relentings  you  substitute  some  other  privilege  for  it.  Thus  in  His  kindness 
dealt  the  Lord  with  Moses.  And  if  we  project  our  minds  into  the  future,  his  removal 
seems  to  be  all  of  kindness.  He  was  now  an  old  man,  and  his  life  had  been  hard, 
disappointing,  and  sad.  Surely  it  was  kind  to  call  him  home,  to  rest  and  to 
blessedness  beyond  his  utmost  hopes,  and  to  joys  unspeakable  and  full  of  glory. 
Death  was  to  him  not  the  call  to  destruction,  but  to  a  higher  and  better  life.  As  his 
Lord  the  Most  High  declared,  he  must  die  ;  as  his  Father,  He  '*  gathered  "  him 
unto  his  people.  There  was  another  thing  in  connection  with  his  death  that 
expressed  the  kindness,  or  the  kindliness,  of  the  Lord.  We  know  we  must  die,  and, 
knowing  this,  we  have  the  wish  to  die  among  our  own ;  to  be  tended  in  our  last 
moments  by  our  dearest  ones  on  earth ;  and  when  all  is  over  to  be  hdd  beside  our 
kindred. 

"  As  if  the  quiet  bones  were  blest 
Among  familiar  names  to  rest." 

And  whilst  this  is  true,  it  is  also  as  true  we  have  a  wish  that,  should  any  of  our 
household  be  **  sick  unto  death,"  they  should  die  with  ns.  If  you  should  hear  ot 
your  absent  child  being  dangerously  ill,  your  first  thouglit  would  be  to  get  him  home, 
and  if  too  ill  to  be  removed,  you  would  then  arrange  to  go  to  him  and  nurse  him, 
wherever  he  might  be,  until  death  relieved  you  of  your  sad  but  loved  charge.  I 
heard  a  daughter  say,  not  long  since,  speaking  of  her  mother's  long  and  fatal  iUness, 
**  I  am  so  thankful  I  was  able  to  nurse  her,  and  do  everything  for  her  with  my  own 
hands  all  the  way  through  to  the  end."  And  when  she  spoke  the  words  it  was 
quite  evident  the  facts  she  stated  gave  her  the  deepest  satisfaction  and  joy.  So 
Moses  was  well  cared  for  in  his  death,  for  God,  as  a  comforting  mother,  took  him  into 
His  own  care,  and  laid  him  down  to  rest.  IV.  In  the  death  of  Moses  we  have 
witness  to  the  glory  of  the  grace  of  God.  Shakespeare  says  of  one  of  his 
characters : — 

"Nothing  in  his  life 
Became  him  like  the  leaving  it "  ; 

and  with  truth  we  might  say  the  same  of  Moses.  At  the  last  he  was  at  his  best. 
The  forty  years  in  Midian  were  doubtless  all  needed  to  prepare  him  for  his  work  on 
earth  ;  the  forty  years  of  hard  service  and  discipline  in  the  wilderness  were  as  surely 
necessary  to  meeten  him  for  the  higher  life  and  service  of  heaven.  But  now,  when 
they  had  come  and  gone,  he  was  quite  ready,  through  God's  grace,  and  thus  his 
death,  so  beautiful  in  its  spirit  of  entire  self-abnegation,  was  a  witness  to  the  glory  of 
that  wonder-working  grace.  This  morning  I  went  into  my  garden.  The  seeds  sown 
a  few  weeks  ago  were  showing  themselves  in  new  life  and  form  above  the  ground. 
*'This,"  said  I,  "is  the  sun's  doing.  How  wonderful  is  the  power  of  the  sun!" 
But  I  looked  forward.  There  should  come  a  day  when  the  plants  around  me  should 
be  ripe  and  ready  for  the  use  of  my  family.  The  sun  should  thus  do  greater  things — • 
by  augmented  heat  and  power  it  should  perfect  the  life  it  had  quickened.    So  is  it 


CHAP.  XXXIV.]  DEUTERONOMY.  621 

with  the  grace  of  God.     It  diminishes  not,  but  increases  as  it  shines  upon  the  heart 
it  has  quickened  until  perfection  is  reached  ;   and  so  the  end  is  better  than  the 
beginning.     {Adam  Scott.)        The  death  of  good  men: — ^The  honourable  character 
here  given  to  Moses  is  equal  to  that  of  angels,  the  highest  order  of  creatures.     As  a 
servant  he  was  faithful  in  all  the  house  of  God  (Heb.  iii.  5).     Having  been  faithful 
to  the  death,  he  went  to  receive  the  crown  of  life.     The  memory  of  the  just  is  blessed. 
I.  How  THE  WILL  OF  GOD  IS  CONCERNED  IN  OUK  DEATH.     1.  The  general  sentence  of 
mortality  is  fixed  by  God  (Gen.  iii.  19  ;  Eccles.  xii.  7  ;  Heb.  ix.  27).     It  is  the  common 
lot  of  all  men.     2.  Death  receives  its  peculiar  commission  from  God.     It  cannot 
strike  but  by  His  order  or  permission.     Life  and  death  are  in  His  hand.     3.  The 
time  is  fixed  by  His  will.     All  the  care  and  skill  of  man  cannot  prolong  life  for  a 
moment,     4.  The  place  where  is  fixed  by  His  will.     Some  die  by  sea,  others  on  land  ; 
every  one  in  his  place  according  to  the  will  of  God.     5.  The  means  of  death,  natural, 
violent,  or  casual,  are  all  under  His  direction.     What  appears  chance  or  accident  to 
us  is  all  certain  and  determined  with  Him.     6.  The  manner  and  circumstances  of  our 
death  are  all  determined  by  the  will  of  God.      Some  are  taken  away  suddenly, 
and    by    surprise,    others    slowly    and    by    degrees ;    some    with    strong    pain, 
others    with    great    ease.      II.   What    sort    of    obediencb    we    ought    to 
YIELD  TO  the  WILL  OF  GoD  IN  DYING.      1.  There  are  many  things  not  incon- 
sistent with  this  obedience  to  the  will  of  God.     (1)  Every  one's  life  is  a  charge 
committed  by  God  to  him,  and  he  must  account  for  his  care  in  preserving  it. 
Therefore  he  is  bound  by  all  lawful  means  to  cherish  and  support  it.     (2)  Conditional 
requests  for  sparing  mercy  are  not  inconsistent  with  obedience  to  the  will  of  God 
(Luke  xxii.  42  ;   Psa.  xxxix.  13).     (3)  A  due  care  in  settling  our  worldly  affairs 
before  we  die  is  consistent  with  our  obedience  to  the  will  of  God  in  taking  us  away. 
It  was  the  command  of  God  Himself  to  Hezekiah  (Isa.  xxxviii.  1).     (4)  A  zealous 
pursuit  of  religious  concerns  to  the  last  well  consists  with  our  obedience  to  the  will 
of  God  in  dying.     (5)  The  strugglings  of  nature  against  the  bitterness  of  death  may 
consist  with  our  obedience  in  dying.     2.  Having  seen  what  is  not  inconsistent  with 
the  obedience  here  exemplified,  let  us  next  consider  what  it  implies — (1)  A  quiet 
expecting  and  waiting  for  God's  call.     The  circumstances  of  a  person's  life  may  be 
so  tormenting  that  he  would  be  glad  to  find  the  grave  and  seek  refuge  in  death. 
Here  God  cuts  out  work  for  patience,  and  this  being  the  last  trial   patience  may 
here  find  its  perfect  work.     (2)  An  humble  bearing  of  God's  fatherly  displeasure,  if 
there  should  be  any  tokens  of  it  upon  us  in  our  death.     (3)  A  final  farewell  to  the 
world,  and  particularly  to  those  things  that  render  a  stay  in  it  most  desirable.    (4)  A 
quitting  this  mortal  flesh  in  hopes  of  a  happy  resurrection.     (5)  A  willing  surrender 
of  our  soul  into  His  hands  from  whom  it  originally  came.     (6)  An  awful  and  serious 
preparation  to  give  an  account  of  ourselves  rmto  God.     (7)  A  thankful  entertainment 
of  our  dismission  from  the  body  as  a  real  privilege.     (8)  A  vigorous  exercise  of  faith 
with  respect  to  an  unseen  state,  when  God  is  leading  us  on  to  it  (Heb.  xi.  8). 
III.  Why  we  ought  to  yield  the  obedience  that  has  been  explained. 
1.  God  is  our  supreme  and  absolute  Lord,  who  hath  an  indisputable  right  to  our 
obedience,  and  we  hold  our  life  by  no  other  tenure  but  His  will.     2.  Consider  we 
are  His  servants,  and  contradict  our  own  profession  if  we  die  not  according  to  His 
will.     3.  Consider  the  example  that  our  Lord  hath  given  us  in  this.     Should  a 
believer  in  Christ  be  backward  to  follow  Him,  or  seek  another  road  to  heaven  than 
that  which  He  hath  taken  ?    4.  Another  reason  why  we  should  yield  obedience  to 
the  wiU  of  God  in  dying  is,  that  God's  time  is  the  fittest  and  best.     5.  This  is  the 
finishing  act  of  our  obedience  to  God  in  this  world  ;  it  is  but  holding  out  a  little 
longer,  and  then  our  work  goes  with  us,  and  our  reward  is  before  us  (Rev.  xiv.  13). 
6.  Dying  with  resignation  to  the  good  will  of  God  will  have  the  greatest  influence  on 
those  we  leave  behind  us.     7.  This  is  an  act  of  obedience  from  which  the  chiefest 
favourites  of  heaven  are  not  exempted.    Abraham  is  dead.    Moses  and  the  prophets 
are  dead.     We  are  not  better  than  our  fathers  who  are  dead.     Application — 1.  If 
it  be  our  duty  to  be  obedient  even  unto  death,  how  much  more  to  submit  to  all 
those    evils   that    precede    it !     2.  If  dying  according  to  the  will  of  God  is  so 
necessary  an  act  of  obedience,  it  is  an  act  of  great  goodness  in  God  to  spare  us  ;  to 
allow  time  to  prepare  those  who  are  not  ready.     3.  Here  we  may  see  that  they  finish 
a  good  life  with  an  honourable  death  who  die  in  obedience  to  the  will  of  God,  and 
leave  a  grateful  remembrance  behind  them.     Let  us  then  be  exhorted — (1)  To  make 
death  familiar  to  our  minds  by  frequent  forethought.     (2)  To  look  upon  all  the 
enjoyments  of  life  with  a  holy  indiff"erence,  and  respect  them  no  further  than  as 
mere  conveniences  appointed  by  God  to  help  us  on  in  our  work  and  way  to  a  better  t 


622  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxxiv. 

■world.  (3)  To  live  upon  the  death  of  Christ  as  the  only  foundation  of  our  hope. 
(  TV.  Beat.)  The  death  of  Moses : — I.  The  Sovereign  of  the  world  can  carry 
ON  His  purposes  in  it  without  the  help  of  man.  Moses  was  taken  away  from 
Isvat^l  just  at  the  time  when  he  seemed  most  necessary  to  them.  How  mysterious 
was  this  dispensation  !  And  yet  the  occurrences  of  every  day  are  involved  in  almost 
cq^u.il  mystery.  Do  we  ask  why  He  acts  thus  ?  To  teach  us  our  nothingisess  and 
His  greatness  ;  to  show  the  world  that  although  He  is  pleased  to  employ  human 
instruments,  He  does  not  need  them  ;  to  let  Flis  creatures  see  that,  even  if  the  hosts 
of  heaven  should  cease  to  obey  His  word.  He  could  form  other  hands  to  do  His  work, 
or  accomplish  His  purposes  without  any  instrument  at  all.     II.  Sin  is  exceedingly 

HATEFUL   in   THE   SIGHT   OF   GoD,  AND    He  WILL   MARK  IT  WITH   HiS  DISPLEASURE 

EVEN  IN  His  MOST  BELOVED  SERVANTS.  Remember  that  one  transgression  excluded 
the  faithful  Moses  from  Canaan  ;  what  then  will  be  your  doom,  laden  as  you  are 
with  so  many  sins,  and  so  hardened  in  guilt  ?  III.  The  afflicted  servant  op 
God  is  generally  enabled  to  submit  with  resignation  to  the  chastisements 
OF  his  heavenly  Father.  It  is  not  indeed  wrong  to  feel  the  smart  of  afflictions. 
Insensibility  under  them  is  not  only  unnatural,  but  sinful,  for  it  subverts  the 
purposes  for  which  they  were  sent  to  us.  Moses  felt  sorrow  and  pain  when  he  was 
forbidden  to  enter  Canaan  ;  and  a  greater  than  Moses  had  His  soul  troubled  at  the 
thought  of  approaching  suffering.  Neither  is  it  wrong  to  beseech  the  Almighty  to 
withdraw  from  us  the  chastisements  with  which  He  has  visited  us.  Moses  besought 
the  Lord  that  he  might  be  allowed  to  go  over  Jordan  ;  and  what  was  the  language 
of  the  suffering  Jesus  ?  (Matt.  xxvi.  39.)  We  see  no  insensibility  here,  no  despising 
of  the  chastening  of  the  Lord.  We  see,  on  the  contrary,  the  Liveliest,  the  deepest 
feeling.  But  then  this  feeling  is  attended  with  a  spirit  of  entire  submission. 
IV.  The  death  of  the  servants  of  God,  with  all  the  circumstances  connected 
with  it,  is  ORDERED  BY  THE  LoRD.  Our  Bibles  tell  us  that  He  disposes  of  the 
meanest  and  smallest  concerns  of  our  life  ;  how  much  more  then  of  life  itself !  V.  The 
PEOPLE  of  God  may  confidently  expect  from  Him  support  and  comfort  in 
THE  HOUR  OF  DEATH.  In  such  an  hour,  flesh  and  heart  must  fail ;  the  soul  must 
need  support  ;  and  they  who  fear  the  Lord  shall  find  all  the  grace  and  help  they 
need.  He  who  was  with  Moses  will  be  with  them,  as  "the  strength  of  their  heart 
and  their  portion  for  ever."  (C  Bradley,  M.A.)  The  death  of  Moses:— A.  cloud 
of  mystery  and  awe  envelops  the  death  of  this  great  prophet  and  lawgiver.  No 
other  death  recorded  in  Scripture  approaches  it  or  is  parallel  to  it.  Through  the 
mystery  we  feel  that  no  other  death  would  have  been  so  fitting  ;  and  why  ?  1.  All 
his  life  Moses  had  been  a  solitary  man,  alone  in  the  world,  with  no  one  to  share  his 
great  thought  and  responsibilities.  He  had  lived  alone  with  God  ;  it  was  fitting 
that  he  should  die  alone  with  God.  2.  His  had  been  an  utterly  humble,  un- 
selfish life ;  he  had  always  sacrificed  himself  for  the  good  of  the  people ;  he  left 
his  greatness  to  join  his  countrymen  in  their  degrading  servitude  ;  he  forgot  himself 
to  avenge  their  wrongs.  3.  Of  every  other  great  leader  of  Israel  we  read  that  "  he 
was  buried  with  his  fathers" — with  loving,  reverent  hands  laid  in  the  sepulchre  of 
his  fathers — and  that  a  tomb  was  raised  over  him  which  recalled  the  memory  of  his 
greatness  through  long  genera,tions.  Moses,  the  greatest  of  them  all — warrior, 
statesman,  poet — was  buried  far  away  from  his  brethren.  No  loving  human  hands 
laid  him  in  his  last  aboie  ;  the  very  place  of  it  was  unknown.  4.  Moses  is  the 
noblest  example  of  unselfish  religion — of  unselfish  love  to  God  and  man — to  be 
found  in  the  Bible,  nay,  I  believe,  in  the  whole  history  of  man.  Such  self-forget- 
fulness  and  unselfishness  is  never  sad  and  disappointed.  Such  a  soul  does  not  seek 
happiness  ;  it  finds  happiness.  It  is  morbidness,  it  is  self- introspection,  which  makes 
men  melancholy  and  disappointed.  God  and  love  are  heaven.  (E.  J.  Rose,  M.A.) 
The  death  of  Moses : — His  thoughts  would  naturally  be  of  two  kinds.  One  class  of  them 
would  make  him  reluctant  to  die  ;  the  other  would  tend  to  reconcile  him  to  death. 
I.  He  WOULD  BE  unwilling  to  die  because — 1.  He  had  nearly,  but  not  quite, 
accomplished  a  great  work.  Many  a  patriot,  many  a  philanthropist,  many  a  leader 
of  thought,  has  felt  that  life  was  of  value  to  him  only  as  it  enabled  him  to  carry  to 
completion,  or  to  place  on  a  secure  footing,  the  one  work  of  his  life.  2.  He  was 
still  in  the  possession  of  health  and  vigour.  The  work  he  had  in  hand  was  of  the 
noblest  order.  He  seemed  to  be  the  only  man  capable  of  doing  it.  And  he  felt 
himself  still  adequate  to  fts  demands.  3.  Think,  too,  of  the  prospect  that  lay 
stretched  out  before  him,  and  judge  what  death  must  have  seemed  to  him  at  such  a 
moment.  Never  had  he  seen  this  earth  so  fair  or  so  glorious.  After  all  the  toils 
and  perils  of  the  wilderness,  is  he  not  to  grasp  the  prize,  the  hope  of  which  had  so 


CHAP.  XXXIV.  3  DEUTERONOMY.  623 

much  strengthened  him  to  bear  them  ?  4.  Still  more  unwelcome  would  the  summons 
be  to  quit  the  world  thus  early,  because  it  was  a  sign  of  God's  displeasure  with  him 
(Numb.  XX.  10-12  ;  Deut.  xxxii.  48-52).  "  The  sting  of  death  is  sin."  Moses  knew 
that  but  for  the  displeasure  of  God  he  might  have  continued  to  Uve,  and  might 
have  died  long  hence  under  happier  auspices.  5.  He  had  to  die  alone.  II.  Things 
THAT  WOULD  GO  FAR  TO  RECONCILE  HIM  TO  DEATH.  1.  He  had  the  favour  and 
presence  of  God.  His  fault  was  forgiven.  Moreover,  the  presence  of  God  was 
granted  him.  2.  His  work,  unfinished  as  it  seemed,  was  really  done.  His  suc- 
cessor was  already  named  and  consecrated.  3.  He  is  leaving  all  sorrow,  especially 
all  sin,  behind  him.  To  die  was,  to  him,  gain.  4.  He  is  about  to  enter  a 
brighter  world  than  that  which  he  is  leaving.  {B.  P.  Pratten,  B.A.)  The 
death  of  Moses:  —  I.  A  lonely  death.  All  death  to  a  great  extent  must 
necessarily  be  so.  There  is  only  one  Friend  who  can  go  through  the  death  valley, 
and  if  He  is  with  us  we  may  make  it  ring  with  the  voice  of  triumph.  II.  A 
peaceful  death.  Death  always  may  be  encountered  without  dread  when  heaven 
caa  be  anticipated  without  fear.  III.  Probably  a  sudden  death.  To  the 
worldly  man  there  is  something  peculiarly  shocking  in  a  sudden  death  ;  to  the 
Christian  it  is  often  the  reverse.  How  much  is  he  spared  !  Korniloff,  the  Russian 
general,  who  fell  at  the  capture  of  Sebastopol,  said  it  was  a  pleasant  thing  to  die 
when  the  conscience  was  quiet.  But  that  can  alone  be  through  the  blood  of  Jesus. 
IV.  A  DEATH  preceded  BY  PiSGAH  GLANCES.  This  is  oftcu  the  casc  with  the  truly 
good  man.  Says  Dr.  Payson,  when  approaching  the  end  of  life:  "The  celestial 
city  is  full  in  view.  Its  glories  beam  upon  me  ;  its  breezes  fan  me  ;  its  odours  are 
wafted  to  me  ;  its  sounds  strike  upon  my  ears  ;  and  its  spirit  is  breathed  into  my 
heart.  Nothing  separates  me  from  it  but  the  river  of  death,  which  now  appears  as 
an  insignificant  rill  that  may  be  crossed  at  a  single  step  when  God  gives  permission. 
The  Sun  of  Righteousness  is  gradually  drawing  nearer,  appearing  larger  and  brighter 
as  He  approaches  ;  and  now  He  fills  the  whole  hemisphere,  pouring  forth  a  flood  of 
glory  in  which  I  seem  to  float  like  an  insect  in  His  beams ;  exulting,  yet  almost 
trembling  whilst  I  gaze  on  this  excessive  brightness,  and  wonder  with  unutterable 
wonder  why  God  should  thus  deign  to  shine  on  a  sinful  worm."  {G.  Short,  B.A.) 
The  death  of  Moses: — I.  According  to  the  warning  of  the  Lord.  1.  His  death 
was  long  foreseen.  Have  not  we  also  had  many  warnings  ?  2.  It  was  exceedingly 
disappointing.  Are  we  ready  to  say  as  to  our  most  cherished  hope,  **  Thy  will  be 
done "  ?  Are  we  holding  our  life's  dearest  purpose  with  a  loose  hand  ?  It  will 
be  our  wisdom  so  to  do.  3.  Apparently  it  was  a  severe  chastisement.  God  will  be 
sanctified  in  them  that  come  near  to  Him.  4.  It  seemed  a  great  calamity.  He  had 
been  tutored  by  a  long  experience,  chastened  by  a  marvellous  discipline,  and  elevated 
by  a  sublime  intercourse  with  God  ;  and  yet  must  he  die.  5.  It  was  a  sentence  not 
to  be  averted  by  prayer.  II.  According  to  the  Divine  appointment.  1.  All 
the  details  of  the  death  of  Moses  had  been  ordered  by  the  Lord.  2.  According  to 
an  appointment  which  is  very  general  amongst  God's  people.  Most  men  have  to 
sow  that  others  may  reap.  Let  us  be  content  to  do  our  part  in  laying  the  founda- 
tion. 3.  For  a  deep  dispensational  reason.  The  law  may  bring  us  to  the  borders  of 
the  promise,  but  only  Joshua  or  Jesus  can  bring  us  into  grace  and  truth.  We  also 
shall  in  life  and  death  answer  some  gracious  purpose  of  the  Lord.  Are  we  not  glad 
to  have  it  so  ?  III.  According  to  the  loving  wisdom  of  the  Lord.  1.  By  so 
doing  he  preserved  his  identity  with  the  people  for  whom  he  had  cared.  For  their 
sakes  he  had  forsaken  a  princedom  in  Egypt,  and  now  for  their  sakes  he  loses  a 
home  in  Palestine.  Are  not  we  satisfied  to  take  our  lot  with  the  holy  men  and 
women  who  already  sleep  in  Jesus  ?  2.  He  was  thus  released  from  all  further  trial. 
Do  you  grieve  that  the  battle  is  fought,  and  the  victory  is  won  for  ever  ?  We  also 
in  our  deaths  shall  find  the  end  of  toil  and  labour,  and  the  rest  will  be  glorious. 
3.  He  was  relieved  from  a  fresh  strain  upon  him,  which  would  have  been  involved 
in  the  conquest  of  Canaan.  He  would  have  crossed  the  Jordan  not  to  enjoy  the 
country  but  to  fight  for  it :  was  he  not  well  out  of  so  severe  a  straggle  ?  You  think 
of  the  clusters  of  Eshcol,  but  I  am  thinking  of  the  sieges  and  the  battles.  Was  it 
80  very  desirable  to  be  there  ?  Would  Moses  really  have  desired  that  dreadful  fray  ? 
IV.  The  way  in  which  he  died  abundantly  displays  the  grace  of  God.  1.  After 
Moses  had  been  well  assured  that  he  must  die,  you  never  hear  a  complaint  of  it,  nor 
even  a  prayer  against  it.  2.  Most  fitly  the  old  man  called  forth  all  his  energies  to 
finish  his  work.  Is  not  this  a  fine  fruit  of  grace  ?  Oh,  that  we  may  bear  it  !  3.  He 
did  all  that  remained  to  be  done,  and  then  went  willingly  to  his  end.  As  flowers 
before  they  shed  their  leaves  pour  out  all  their  perfumes,  so  let  us  pour  out  our 


624  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxxir. 

souls  unto  the  Lord.  V.  Accokdinq  to  the  Divine  favour.  His  death  leaves 
nothing  to  regret ;  neither  is  any  desirable  thing  lacking.  Failing  to  pass  over 
Jordan  seems  a  mere  pin's  prick,  in  presence  of  the  honours  which  surrounded  his 
departing  hours.  He  now  saw  that  he  had  fulfilled  his  destiny,  and  was  not  as  a  pillar 
broken  short.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon. )  The  death  of  Moses  : — I.  Entire  resignation 
10  the  will  of  God.  "We  are  making  the  voyage  of  life  like  passengers  in  a  ship. 
Sleeping  or  waking,  they  are  proceeding  towards  their  destined  port ;  and  will  soon 
reach  it,  whether  they  shall  have  crossed  a  calm  or  a  stormy  ocean.  The  zealous 
servant  of  his  God  and  Saviour  will  be  occupied  in  his  post  of  duty,  committing 
the  period  of  his  removal  to  the  appointment  of  that  providence  which  allows  not  a 
hair  of  his  head  to  fall  unnoticed  to  the  ground.  II.  The  full  exercise  of  faith 
AND  hope.  Sinking  nature,  indeed,  will  tremble  at  the  prospect  of  dissolution, 
although  faith  may  feel  the  support  of  the  everlasting  arms  :  as  he  who  stands  upon 
a  lofty  tower  may  shudder  at  the  depths  below  him,  although  the  battlements 
effectually  prevent  his  fall.  But  if  that  God  and  Saviour,  whom  by  a  deliberate  act 
of  faith  he  has  chosen  as  his  heritage,  be  with  him,  he  will  feel  no  evil,  though  he 
walk  through  the  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death.  The  higher  the  sun  rises  above 
the  earth  the  more  perfectly  does  it  scatter  the  clouds  and  darkness  which  have 
usurped  the  sky.  And  the  more  firmly  the  hope  of  the  Gospel  is  established  within 
the  soul,  the  more  surely  will  it  be  submissive  to  that  decree  which  comes  to 
remove  it  into  the  awful  realities  of  the  invisible  world — the  more  effectually  will  it 
triumph  over  the  last  assault,  in  that  confidence  of  hope  which  the  grace  of  faith 
can  alone  bestow.  III.  A  resignation  thus  arising  from  faith  and  hope  enabled 
Moses  to  ascend  Mount  Nebo,  and  to  die  in  peace  and  comfort.  He  who 
passes  a  life  of  faith,  and  usefulness,  and  holiness,  like  Hooker,  will  usually  be  per- 
mitted to  adopt  his  language  at  the  approach  of  death.  *'I  have  long  been  pre- 
paring  to  leave  this  world,  and  gathering  comfort  for  the  dreadful  hour  of  making 
my  account  with  God,  which  I  now  apprehend  to  be  near,  and  though  I  have  by 
His  grace  loved  Him  in  my  youth,  and  feared  Him  in  my  age,  and  laboured  to  have 
a  conscience  void  of  off'ence  to  Him  and  to  all  men,  yet,  if  Thou,  0  Lord,  be  extreme 
to  mark  what  I  have  done  amiss,  who  can  abide  it  ?  And  therefore  where  I  have 
failed,  Lord  show  mercy  unto  me  ;  for  I  plead  not  my  righteousness,  but  the  forgive- 
ness of  my  unrighteousness,  for  His  merits  who  died  to  purchase  a  pardon  for 
penitent  sinners.  I  am  at  peace  with  all  men,  and  God  is  at  peace  with  me  ;  from 
which  blessed  assurance  I  feel  an  inward  joy  which  this  world  can  neither  give  nor 
take  away."  IV.  The  dying  moments  of  Moses  were  distinguished  by  earnest 
zeal  for  the  welfare  of  Israel  and  the  glory  of  God.  {R.  P.  Buddicorn, 
M.A.)  Loneliness  in  death  : — Moses  had  often  been  above  before,  and  alone  with 
God  ;  so  was  prepared  for  this  loneliness  in  facing  eternity.  A  mountain  is  at  once 
a  natural  scene  and  fit  emblem  of  solitude.  I.  His  absolute  solitude  in  death. 
He  dies  in  the  very  midst  of  robustness  and  vigour,  and  so  consciously  feels  the  ties 
of  life  all  breaking  ;  and,  with  the  sense  of  separation  from  all  that  was  seen  and 
familiar,  steps  consciously  into  the  unseen  and  the  unknown.  II.  The  real 
solitariness  in  every  death.  In  death  men  are,  and  ever  must  be,  alone  ; 
because  of— 1.  The  senses  that  are  lost.  Dim  eye,  dull  ear,  numbed  touch, 
inarticulate  tongue,  distance  the  dying  from  all  around,  however  faithful  and  loving. 
2.  The  faculties  gained  keenness  of  intuition.  There  is  an  elevation  in  the  death  of 
many  a  Christly  one  that  as  much  separates  them  from  the  living,  as  does  the 
dimming  of  the  senses  by  which  they  were  wont  to  commune  with  them.  Lessons — 
1.  Learn  in  life  by  occasional  solitude  to  be  independent  of  men.  Then,  when  in 
dying,  human  help  is  gone,  there  will  be  no  sudden  terrible  surprise.  2.  Seek  in 
life  companionship  with  God  in  solitude.  Then,  having  often  been  alone  with  God 
before,  loneliness  with  Him  in  death  will  be  no  terrifying  experience,  but  the 
repetition  and  consummation  of  some  of  the  best  experiences  of  life.  {V.  R. 
Thomas.)  Saintset  on  Neho :■ — We  have  here  a  picture  of  how  good  men  die. 
1.  They  go  to  death.  Not  driven  or  dragged.  Feel  it  to  be  a  call  from  God  to  go  and 
meet  Him,  and,  being  prepared,  go  forth  willingly  and  with  joy.  2.  They  go  up  to 
death.  Not  a  leap  in  the  dark.  They  spring  up  into  life  and  light,  holiness  and 
heaven.  3.  They  go  up  alone  to  death.  Have  to  leave  nearest  and  dearest  earthly 
friends  behind.  I.  What  would  the  closing  scene  in  the  life  of  Mobes 
teach  him  ?  1.  That  his  life,  though  faulty,  had  not  been  a  failure.  God  accepted 
it,  and  admitted  him  to  the  rest  and  recompense  of  the  skies.  2.  That  though  he 
had  incurred  the  Divine  displeasure,  yet  he  had  not  forfeited  the  Divine  favour. 
We  may  suffer  disadvantage  all  through  life,  and  loss  at  close  of  it  by  wrong-doing ; 


CHAP.  XXXIV.]  DEUTERONOMY.  625 

"but  if  we  repent  of  the  wrong,  and  are  restored  to  God's  favour,  and  retained  in 
His  service,  He  will  still  lead  us  on,  and  take  us  by  the  hand  at  last,  and  give  us  an 
abundant  entrance  into  His  everlasting  joy.  3.  That  amid  all  his  fears  and  anxieties 
he  need  not  dread  entering  upon  the  solemn  and  nearing  future.  II.  What 
3>0ES  THE  CLOSING  SCENE  IN  THE  LIFE  OF  MosES  TEACH  US  ?  1.  The  incomplete- 
ness of  human  life.  2.  The  illusiveness  of  human  life.  We  go  in  quest  of  rest 
and  reward,  and  we  know  we  shall  secure  them  if  we  are  firm  and  faithful  ;  but  how 
the  goal  we  are  seeking  seems  frequently  to  recede  from  us,  and  the  prize  we  would 
secure  seems  to  elude  our  grasp  !  3.  The  inscrutableness  of  human  life.  The 
unexpected  and  apparently  untimely  departure  of  good  and  useful  men  fills  us  with 
wonder  and  dismay.  We  looked  for  continuation  and  completion  of  service  ;  but  lo, 
we  have  seen,  instead,  the  deserted  post  and  the  vacant  chair.  [F.  TV.  Brown.) 
The  last  stcuje  of  a  long  journey  : — I.  Climbing  the  mountain.  Slowly  he  ascends 
the  mountain,  climbing  alone,  while  the  tear-dimmed  eyes  of  Israel  watch  his 
ascent.  Up  !  up  !  up  !  he  goes.  Every  step  takes  him  from  those  he  loves.  Every 
step  carries  him  into  a  region  of  divinest  mysteries.  But  what  thoughts  surge  and 
rush  in  his  mind  as  he  upward  toils  1  He  is  leaving  Israel,  the  nation  whose  cradle 
he  has  tended,  whose  ill-humours  and  impetuosities  he  has  borne.  Only  God  knows 
what  he  has  suffered  for  those  people  through  these  forty  long  years.  If  I  ask  any 
mother  or  father  here  about  the  children  they  have  lost,  I  shall  be  told  that 
the  ohild  for  whom  they  lost  most  rest — the  child  for  whom  they  sacrificed  the 
most — was  the  one  that  got  most  about  their  heart-strings.  So  Moses  finds,  it 
is  awful  to  tear  himself  away  at  that  Divine  behest  and  leave  them  there,  while  he 
goes  up  yonder  to  die.  He  is  leaving  his  life-work.  It  is  an  awful  thing  to  feel 
that  your  life-work  is  done !  How  does  Moses  feel  as  he  climbs  those  slopes  ? 
Some  one  else  is  stepping  into  his  place  that  now  is  his  no  more.  God  has  super- 
annuated him  !  Of  course,  there  are  people  who  are  not  concerned  about  all  this. 
They  belong  to  the  regiment  of  the  lazies  !  and  a  tremendously  strong  regiment  it 
is.  They  know  nothing  about  these  troubles.  They  know  not  the  agony  of  leav- 
ing a  Sunday  school  class,  or  of  being  compelled  to  abandon  preaching.  Such 
people  cannot  enter  into  the  feelings  of  Moses  at  this  time.  II.  Viewing  the 
LAND.  III.  The  OPENED  EYES.  Instead  of  dusky  Arabs,  he  sees  a  company  of 
white-robed  angels,  and  his  ear  begins  to  catch  the  music  of  their  song.  And  old 
Jericho,  which  had  seemed  common-place  enough,  now  seems  larger,  brighter  than 
before.  Its  walls  are  sparkling  with  jewels  ;  its  gates  gleam  pearly  white  ;  and  the 
amethystine  glory  comes  streaming  over  its  turrets.  The  land  seems  full  of  light, 
and  joy,  and  oliss.  The  angel-band  is  swelling  in  numbers.  The  distant  hills  are 
radiant  with  eternal  light.  The  glory  heightens.  God  is  opening  his  eyes,  and  the 
transient  things  of  earth  arc  giving  way  to  the  things  which  are  eternal.  There 
stands  the  "city  whose  Builder  and  Maker  is  God."  His  soul  flutters  as  a  caged 
bird  that  struggles  to  get  free.  And  God  is  releasing  that  noble  soul.  The 
physical  senses  are  being  supported  by  the  spiritual.  Insensibly  God  carries  him 
over  the  border.  He  knows  not  the  moment  when  he  ceases  to  be  mortal,  and 
becomes  like  the  angels  of  God.  All  the  horror  of  the  thing,  which  makes  the 
heart  sick,  he  misses.  He  enters,  at  God's  bidding,  a  larger  and  more  satisfying 
life,  by  a  path  that  is  glorious  with  the  Divine  presence.  With  Him  conversing,  he 
forgets  that  this  is  death.  IV.  In  memoeiam.  Mosee  has  gone,  but  in  every 
generation  God  keeps  up  the  succession  of  His  saints,  who  minister  to  Him  here 
awhile  in  our  sight,  and  then  pass  to  the  higher  ministries  of  Jerusalem  above.  (F. 
Denton.)  The  death  of  Moses : — Moses  had  endured  to  the  full  the  loneliness  which 
is  the  penalty  of  greatness.  His  lofty  spirit,  austere  and  firm,  like  the  granite  peak 
of  Sinai,  rose  solitary,  like  it,  above  the  lower  heights,  and  was  often  swathed,  like 
it,  in  the  separating  cloud,  the  symbol  of  a  present  God.  Now  Miriam  was  gone, 
«nd  Aaron  slept  on  Hor,  and  all  the  old  familiar  faces  were  memories.  The  sum- 
mons to  come  up  to  Pisgah  and  die  would  not  be  unwelcome.  He  had  lived  alone  ; 
alone  he  climbed  the  mountain,  with  natural  force  unabated,  the  people  watching 
him  as  he  went  up  ;  alone  he  is  to  die, — a  fitting  close  to  such  a  life.  He  had  livea 
on  the  heights,  he  shall  not  die  on  the  plain.  He  had  lived  leaning  on  God  only ; 
God  only  shall  be  with  him  at  last.  1.  Note,  then,  the  vision  to  the  dying  leader  of 
the  unattained  country,  which  had  been  his  goal  in  all  his  work.  How  wistful  and 
long  would  be  the  gaze  !  The  sublime  and  rigid  self-repression  of  his  life  would  not 
desert  him  at  the  last ;  and  we  may  well  believe  that  regret  at  his  own  exclusion 
would  be  swallowed  up  in  thankfmness  that  the  prize  was  so  near  and  so  rich. 
"  Nojr  letteet  Thou  Thy  servant  depart  in  peace,  for  mine  eyes  have  seen  Thy  salva- 
40 


626  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxxiv, 

tion,"  would  be  the  voice  of  his  heart.  God  did  not  show  him  the  land  to  tantalise 
him  with  the  vision  of  what  he  had  missed  for  himself,  but  to  cheer  him  with  the 
assurance  of  what  he  had  won  for  his  people.  Moses  had  his  portion  when  he  saw 
the  land,  and  was  satisfied.  That  Pisgah  sight  has  become  the  type  of  the  large 
visions  of  the  future  which  God  often  gives  to  solace  His  faithful  servants  at  last. 
"There  must  be  wisdom  with  great  death,"  and  when  the  dust  of  conflict  is  laid  the 
prospect  widens,  and  the  cleared  eye  sees  the  goodly  land  to  which  the  devious 
marches  have  been  leading  more  hopefully  and  truly  than  while  yet  busied  in  look- 
ing to  the  dangers  of  the  present,  and  picking  firm  ground  for  the  next  step.  All 
epoch-making  men  have  the  fate  of  Moses.  They  spend  their  lives  in  leading 
rebellious  and  reluctant  feet  towards  some  fair  ideal,  and  die  when  apparently  on 
the  verge  of  realising  it.  In  our  own  little  lives  the  same  law  holds  good.  "One 
soweth,  and  another  reapeth."    Rarely  does  any  man  complete  his  life's  purpose. 

2.  Note  the  solitary  death  and  hidden  grave.  The  lawgiver,  whose  message  was 
"The  wages  of  sin  are  death,"  does  himself,  in  the  very  manner  of  his  own  death, 
exemplify  its  two  characteristics  which  smite  most  upon  the  heart, — its  mystery  and 
its  solitude.  And  the  same  lessons  are  taught  by  that  hidden  grave.  As  Thomas 
Fuller  says  somewhere,  "God  first  buried  him,  and  then  buried  his  grave."  Some 
say  that  the  intention  was  to  prevent  idolatrous  reverence  by  the  Israelites ;  but 
there  is  no  sign  that,  amid  all  their  aberrations,  they  ever  had  any  tendency  that 
way.  The  graves  of  the  patriarchs  at  Hebron  and  of  the  kings  at  Jerusalem  were 
left  undistinguished,  and  apparently  little  regarded.  Some  have  thought  that  the 
mystery  of  his  sepulchre  points  to  his  resurrection,  or  translation,  and  have  found 
confirmation  in  the  story  of  his  appearance  with  Elijah  at  the  transfiguration.  But 
that  is  pure  imagination.  "Was  the  hiding  of  the  grave  a  purpose  of  God's,  or 
simply  a  result  of  his  being  laid  to  rest  outside  the  promised  land,  which  had 
no  further  intention?  He  was  not  to  enter  it,  not  even  in  death.  The  bones 
of  Joseph  were  carried  up  thither,  but  Moses  was  to  lie  where  he  died,  amid 
foreigners,  of  course ;  then,  years  passed  before  Israel  could  again  venture  into 
Moab;  and  even  if  any  had  ever  known  the  spot,  the  knowl^ge  would  not  be 
transmitted.  That  lonely  and  forgotten  grave  among  the  savage  cliffs  was  in  keep- 
ing with  the  whole  character  and  work  of  him  who  lay  there.  Contrast  that  grave 
with  the  sepulchre  in  the  garden  where  Jesus  lay,  close  by  a  city  wall,  guarded  by 
foes,  haunted  by  troops  of  weeping  friends,  visited  by  a  great  light  of  angel  faces. 
The  one  was  hidden  and  solitary,  as  teaching  the  loneliness  of  death  ;  the  other 
revealed  light  in  the  darkness,  and  companionship  in  the  loneliness.  The  one  faded 
from  men's  memory  because  it  was  nothing  to  any  man  ;  no  impulses,  nor  hopes, 
nor  gifts  could  come  from  it.  The  other  for  ever  draws  hearts  and  memories, 
because  in  it  was  wrought  out  the  victory  in  which  all  our  hopes  are  rooted. 

3.  Note  how  soon  the  place  of  the  leader  is  filled.  A  month  finishes  the  mourning. 
The  new  generation  could  not  be  expected  to  feel  to  him  as  to  men  of  their  own  time. 
To  them  his  death  would  seem  natural,  and  not  difficult  to  bear.  He  had  lingered 
long,  like  some  harder  peak  which  survives  the  weathering  that  crumbles  softer  rook 
around.  But,  none  the  less,  the  young  life  round  him  would  feel  that  he  belonged 
to  the  past.  It  is  the  fate  of  all  who  outlast  their  generation.  New  work  called  for 
new  men.  We  cannot  fancy  the  lawgiver  wielding  the  commander's  sword,  any 
more  than  Joshua  grasping  Moses'  rod.  Smaller,  rougher  instruments  were  best  for 
the  fresh  phase  of  service.  A  plain  soldier,  true  and  keen  as  his  own  sword,  but 
incapable  of  the  large  revelations  which  the  spirit  of  the  legislator  had  been  capacious 
enough  to  receive,  was  the  man  wanted  now.  So  Moses  goes  home  and  takes  his 
wages,  and.  Joshua  steps  into  his  place.  The  smaller  man  completes  the  mighty 
torso  which  the  greater  man  left  half  hewn.  God  has  all  sorts  of  tools  in  His  great 
tool-chest.  Each  is  good  for  one  bit  of  the  work,  and  is  put  away  when  that 
is  done,  and  all  are  wanted  before  it  is  finished.  The  greatest  has  his  limitations 
and  his  period  of  service.  There  is  but  one  name  which  endures  forever.  Moses 
dies  on  Pisgah,  and  Aaron  on  Hor ;  but  Christ  lives  for  ever,  and  is  able  to  lead  all 
generations,  and  finish  God's  work.  4.  Note  that,  after  all,  the  place  of  the  great 
leader  remains  empty.  "We  do  not  know  when  the  last  words  of  Deuteronomy  were 
written  ;  but  the  lower  down  they  are  brought,  the  more  significant  is  their  witness 
to  the  unapproachable  superiority  of  Moses.  After-ages  looked  back  to  him  as  the 
high-water  mark  of  God's  communications  to  men,  and  found  none  in  all  the  long 
series  of  kings,  priests,  psalmists,  or  even  prophets  who  had  stood  so  close  to  God, 
or  heard  such  messages  from  Him,  or  wrought  such  deeds  by  Him.  Others  had  but 
developed  his  teachings  or  restored  his  law.     {A.  Maclaren,  D,D.)  ' 


CHAP.  XXXIV.]  DEUTERONOMY.  627 

Yers.  6-12.  He  buried  liiin, .  .  .  but  no  man  knowethofhis  sepulchre.— TAe  6 wriaJ 
of  Moses : — I.  God  will  have  no  one,  living  or  dead,  to  stand  between  His 

CREATURES  AND  HiMSELF.  II.  GOD  WISHES  MEN  TO  SEE  SOMETHING  MORE  LEFT  OF 
His  SERVANTS  THAN  THE  OUTWARD  SHRINE.  III.  GOD  TAKES  THE  HONOUR  OF  HiS 
SERVANTS  11^  TO  HiS  OWN  KEEPING.  IV.  GOD  WOULD  TEACH  MEN  THAT  He  HAS  A 
RELATION  TO  HiS  SERVANTS  WHICH  EXTENDS  BEYOND  THEIR  DEATH.  V.  GOD 
WOULD  TEACH  MEN  FROM  THE  VERY  FIRST  THAT  HiS  REGARD  IS  NOT  CONFINED  TO 
ANY  CHOSEN  SOIL.      VI.  ThE  SEEMING  FAILURE  IN  A  TRUE  LIFE  MAY  HAVE  AT  LAST 

A  COMPLETE  COMPENSATION.  {John  Ker,  D.D.)  Divine  burial : — The  same  God 
that,  by  the  hands  of  His  angels,  carried  up  the  soul  of  Moses  to  his  glory,  doth 
also,  by  the  hand  of  His  angels,  carry  his  body  down  into  the  valley  of  Moab  to  his 
sepulchre.  Those  hands  which  had  taken  the  law  from  Him,  those  eyes  that  had 
seen  His  presence,  those  lips  that  had  conferred  so  oft  with  Him,  that  face  that  did 
so  shine  with  the  beams  of  His  glory,  may  not  be  neglected  when  the  soul  is  gone. 
He  that  took  charge  of  his  birth,  and  preservation  in  the  reeds,  takes  charge  of  his 
carriage  out  of  the  world.  The  care  of  God  ceaseth  not  over  His  own,  either  in 
death,  or  after  it.  How  justly  do  we  take  care  of  the  comely  burials  of  our  friends, 
when  God  Himself  gives  us  this  example  !  {Bp.  Jose'ph  HalL)  The  burial  of 
Moses : — Never  had  any  man  a  more  wonderful  burial.  No  human  hands  assisted 
at  it.  It  was  not  left  for  the  winds  to  cover  with  the  dust  of  the  mountain  the 
stalwart  form  of  the  eagle-eyed  leader  ;  nor  for  the  dew  and  the  rain  to  moisten  it ; 
nor  frr  the  sunshine  to  waste  and  bleach  it.  It  was  not  left  unburied.  Moses  died, 
accoi-ding  to  the  word  of  the  Lord,  and  He  buried  him  in  a  valley  in  the  land  of 
Moab.  {Alexander  JR.  Thompson,  D.D.)  So  the  days  of  weeping  and  mourning 
for  Moses  were  ended. — The  worker  removed — the  work  continued: — And  when 
these  days  were  ended,  straightway  the  career  of  Joshua  opens,  the  tide  of  things 
rolls  forward,  and  the  march  of  events  sweeps  on.  And  is  this  the  end  of  it  all  so 
far  as  Moses  is  concerned  ?  We  cannot  think  it.  In  some  churchyards  we  see  the 
broken  column,  and  that  we  always  understand  as  the  emblem  of  a  broken  life. 
Where  are  the  lives  which  are  not  broken  ?  And  over  what  graves  shall  the  broken 
colimin  not  be  raised  ?  "Moses,  the  servant  of  the  Lord,  died  there,"  &c.  That 
life  falls  ;  but  the  thread  of  its  conjunction  with  the  eternal  purpose  is  not  broken  ; 
that  does  not  fall  with  the  life.  The  streamlet  fails,  but  the  mighty  river  rolls  on. 
Moses  dies,  and  is  buried,  but  Joshua  takes  up  the  staff  and  stretches  forth  the  hand. 
What  is  the  life  of  Moses,  or  any  other  life  ?  It  is  safe  with  God,  if  in  purpose,  at 
least,  and  intention  and  drift  it  be  lived  in  Him  and  for  Him— safe  with  God  while 
its  mortal  courses  are  running,  and  safe  with  Him  when  they  are  stayed.  But  while 
they  are  rimning  He  works  by  them,  and  when  they  are  stayed  He  works  without 
them,  and  by  other  lives.  And  it  is  when  the  soul  of  the  man  is  in  harmony  with 
this  fact,  and  governs  itself  by  it,  as  the  soul  of  Moses  was  in  harmony  with  it — it  is 
then  that  the  true  life  will  be  lived,  and  no  shadow  of  fear  will  rest  upon  the  future. 
But  indeed  it  is  a  great  thing  of  which  we  speak,  this  harmony  of  mind  with  the 
purpose  of  God.  It  is  the  highest  life  of  man.  It  is  the  fruit  of  long  patience  and 
much  strife,  and  the  triumph  of  the  grace  of  the  Almighty  Spirit  within  the  human 
soul.  {D.  Wright,  M.  A.)  Joshua  .  .  .  wasfullof  the  spirit  of  wisdom.— cTbsAwcs 
and  Moses : — We  have  here  a  very  honourable  encomium  both  of  Moses  and  Joshua  ; 
each  has  his  praise,  and  should  have.  It  is  ungrateful  so  to  magnify  our  living 
friends  as  to  forget  the  merits  of  those  that  are  gone,  to  whose  memories  there  is  a 
debt  of  honour  due.  All  the  respects  must  not  be  paid  to  the  rising  sun  ;  and  on 
the  other  hand,  it  is  unjust  so  to  cry  up  the  merits  of  those  that  are  gone,  as  to  despise 
the  benefit  we  have  in  those  that  survive  and  succeed  them.  Let  God  be  glorified  in 
both  as  here.  1.  Joshua  is  praised  as  a  man  admirably  well  qualified  for  the  work 
to  which  he  was  called.  (1)  God  fitted  him  for  it.  Herein  he  was  a  type  of  Christ, 
in  whom  are  hid  the  treasures  of  wisdom.  (2)  Moses  by  the  Divine  appointment 
had  ordained  him  to  it ;  he  had  laid  his  hands  upon  him,  so  substituting,  him  to  be 
his  successor,  and  praying  to  God  to  qualify  him  for  the  service  to  which  He  had 
called  him.  And  this  comes  in  as  a  reason  why  God  gave  him  a  more  than 
ordinary  spirit  of  wisdom,  because  his  designation  to  the  government  was  God's  own 
act;  and  those  whom  God  employs.  He  will  in  some  measure  make  fit  for  the 
employment.  When  the  bodily  presence  of  Christ  withdrew  from  His  Church,  He 
prayed  the  Father  to  send  another  Comforter ;  and  obtained  what  He  prayed  for. 
(3)  The  people  cheerfully  owned  him,  and  submitted  to  him.  An  interest  in  the 
affections  of  the  people  is  a  great  advantage,  and  a  great  encouragement  to  those 
that  are  called  to  public  trusts  of  what  kind  soever.     It  was  also  a  great  mercy  to 


628  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxxiv. 

the  people,  that  when  Moses  was  dead  they  were  not  as  sheep  having  no  shepherd. 
Moses  is  praised  (vers.  10,  11,  12),  and  with  good  reason.  (1)  He  was  indeed  a  very 
great  man  npon  two  accounts :  among  others— (a)  His  intimacy  with  the  God  of 
nature ;  God  knew  him  face  to  face,  and  so  he  knew  God  (Numb.  xii.  8).  '  He 
saw  more  of  the  glory  of  God  than  any  (at  least)  of  the  Old  Testament  saints  ever 
did  ;  he  had  more  free  and  frequent  access  to  God  ;  and  was  spoken  to,  not  in  dreams 
and  visions  and  slumberings  on  the  bed,  but  when  he  was  awake,  and  standing 
before  the  chenibims.  {h)  His  interest  and  power  in  the  kingdom  of  nature.  He 
was  greater  than  any  other  of  the  prophets  of  the  Old  Testament ;  though  they 
were  men  of  great  interest  in  heaven,  and  great  influence  upon  earth,  yet  they  were 
none  of  them  to  be  compared  with  this  great  man  ;  none  of  them  either  evidenced 
or  execnted  a  oommission  from  heaven  so  as  Moses  did.     {Matthew  Henry ^  D.D.) 


Princeton  Theological  Seminary-Speer  Library 


1    1012  01128  4777 


^ 

p 

Date  Due 

«Sr.y  ^ 

^      -**** 

'»/     % 

?i^**v. 

M  A    "38 

^AclffPK 

C/r   / 

"^^•^i  /^y 

n^Z  '41 

gi  li  n  iTi 

liwws^f.^ 

1 

(ASS. 

1 

ne- 

■-""  ■ 

"-     ^  ^-    1 

t 

y 

i 

i 

\A\'mt^  "'  " 

> 

'.'T'^' 

\\  *  *  :f^^^ 

*%     '  ^l 

f> 

e 


,w: 


